===== Internet Archive OCR: sketchofreligiou00wils_djvu.txt =====

^M 

t^l^V^Tf^^^-^: 

i# 

m^-' 

m 

\::.' 

^m 

/r:.-:  -- 

^■^ 

p 

^' 

k^'BC^^^^^ 

s^ 

r 


OF  THE 

Theological   Seminary 

PRINCETON,    N.  J. 

Division 


case,.  :S)L,i20\ 


o      No 
Boofc,, CO.DY..C, 


BL1245 

.Al 

W7  4 

1846 

Wilson 

,.  H 

.  H. 

(Horace 

Hayman 

), 

1786-1860 

. 

Sketch 

of 

the 

reliaious 

sects  ( 

Df 

the  Hindus. 

SKETCH 


OF    THE 


RELIGIOUS  SECTS  OF  THE  HINDUS. 


BY  H.  H.  WILSON,  L.L.D.,  F.R.S. 

BODEN      SANSCRIT     PROFESSOR,    OXFORD. 


FROM    THE    "   ASIATIC    RESEARCHES,       VOLS.    XVI.    XVII. 


CALCUTTA : 
BISHOP'S    COLLEGE    PRESS. 

M.DCCC.XLVI. 


INDEX. 


WiLVt  E. 

Brahma  Sampradayis,  or  Madhwacharis, 

Charan  Dasis,  

Dadu  Paat'his, 

Harischandis,  Sadhna  Pant'his,  and  Madhavis 

Kabir  Paat'his 

Khakis,        

Maluk  Dasis,  ....         •••         •...         ....         .... 

Mira  Bais,  • 

Nagas,         

Present  divisions  of  the  Hindus,  and  of  the  Vaishnavas  in  particular, 

Radha  Vallabhis,....  • 

Kai  Dasis,  

Kamanandis,  or  Ramawats, •         

Rudra  Sampradayis,  or  Vallabhacharis,     

Sakhi  Bhavas,  

Sanakadi  Sampradayis,  or  Nimawats,  

Sanyasis,  Vairagis,  &c.  ,.,'        

Sena  Pant'his,    ....         •.*.         ..••         ....         ••t*         •••. 

Sketch  of  the  Religious  sects  of  ihe  Hindus,     

State  of  the  Hindu  Religion,  anterior  to  its  present   condition, . . 

Vairagis, 

Vaishnavas,  and  Sri  Sampradayis,  or  Ramanujas,  ....         .... 

Vaishnavas  of  Bengal, 


Pages. 
....     87 

112 

....     68 

113 

....     44 

G5 

66 
....     85 

117 

....     2Q 

108 

....     70 

31 

....     74 

Hi 

....     94 

115 

....     73 

1 

....       8 

....   116 

23 

....     95 


Part  HI. 

Pages. 

Aghoris,        ....          148 

Baba  Lalis 222 

Dakshinas,  or  Bhaktas,             160 

Dandis  and  Dasnamis,       ....         ....         ....          ....         ....         ....          ....  121 

Ganapatyas, .. ..         ....         ....         ....         ..••         ••.•  172 

Ganj  Bakhshis,    ....         ....         ....         ....         ....         ....         ....         ....  177 

Govind  Sinhis,            ....         ....         ....          ....         ....         ....         ....  178 

Gudaras, 150 

Hymn, 175 

Jains, , 180 

Jangamas,     ....          ....          ....         ....          ....         ....         ....         k...  1.38 

Kancbeliyas,        ....         ....         ■...         ....         ....         ....         ....         ....  170 

Kara  Lingis,     ..         ....         ....         ....         ....          ....         ....         ....  151 

Kerari 179 

Lifeof  Mahavira 189 

Miscellaneous  Sects,          171 

Nagas 152,179 

Nanak  Shahis, 173 

Nirmalas,      ....          ....          ....          ....          ....          ....          ....          ....  179 

Paramahansa,      147 

Pran  Nathis, 226 

Ramrayis,             ....         ....         ....         ....         ...•         ....         ....         ....  177 

Kukharas,  Sukharas,  and  Ukliaras 151 

Sadhs, 227 

Saktas, 154 

Sakti  Sodliana 166 

Saivas,           119 

Sanyasis,  Brahmacharis,  and  Avadhutas,     151 


Satnamis,     ....         ....         ....  „„^ 

230 

haurapatas,  or  Sauras 

Siva  Narayanais,       ....  ....         .... 

'*         ••••          ....         ....         ....  231 

Sunyabadis,        ....  ^^ 

SJuthreh  Shahis,         *   ,..„ 

177 

Udasis,....  ....  ....         ....         ^^^^  ^_^^ 

Urddhabahus,  Akas  Mukhis,  and  Nakhis,            ,40 

Vamis,  or  Vamacharis, ,^^ 

••••         ••••         • . ••         ....   106 

Yogis  or  Jogis,          j^g 


A  SKETCH 


RELIGIOUS  SECTS  OF  THE  HINDUS. 


Introductory    Observations. 

The  Hindu  religion  is  a  term,  that  has  been  hitherto  employed  in  a 
collective  sense,  to  designate  a  faith  and  worship  of  an  almost  endlessly 
diversified  description :  to  trace  some  of  its  varieties  is  the  object  of  the 
present  enquiry. 

An  early  division  of  the  Hindu  system,  and  one  conformable  to  the 
genius  of  all  Polytheism,  separated  the  practical  and  popular  belief,  from 
the  speculative  or  philosophical  doctrines.  Whilst  the  common  people 
addressed  their  hopes  and  fears  to  stocks  and  stones,  and  multiplied  by 
their  credulity  and  superstition  the  grotesque  objects  of  their  veneration, 
some  few,  of  deeper  thought  and  wider  contemplation,  plunged  into  the 
mysteries  of  man  and  nature,  and  endeavoured  assiduously,  if  not  success- 
fully, to  obtain  just  notions  of  the  cause,  the  character  and  consequence 
of  existence.  This  distinction  prevails  even  in  the  Vedas,  which  have 
their  Karma  Kdnda  and  Jnydna  Kdnda,  or  Ritual  and  Theology. 

The  worship  of  the  populace  being  addressed  to  different  divinities, 
the  followers  of  the  several  gods,  naturally  separated  into  different 
associations,  and  the  adorers  of  Brahma',  Vishnu,  and  Siva,  or  other 
phantoms  of  their  faith,  became  distinct  and  insulated  bodies,  in  the 
general  aggregate :  the  conflict  of  opinion  on  subjects,  on  which  human 
reason  has  never  yet  agreed,  led  to  similar  differences  in  the  philosophical 
class,  and  resolved  itself  into  the  several  Dersanas,  or  schools  of  philo- 
sophy. 


It  may  be  supposed,  that  some  time  elapsed  before  the  practical  wor- 
ship of  any  deity  was  more  than  a  simple  preference,  or  involved  the 
assertion  of  the  supremacy  of  the  object  of  its  adoration,  to  the  degra- 
dation or  exclusion  of  the  other  gods  :*  in  like  manner  also,  the  conflict- 
ing opinions  were  matters  rather  of  curiosity  than  faith,  and  were  neither 
regarded  as  subversive  of  each  other,  nor  as  incompatible  with  the  public 
worship;  and  hence,  notwithstanding  the  sources  of  difference  that 
existed  in  the  parts,  the  unity  of  the  whole  remained  undisturbed :  in 
this  condition,  indeed,  the  apparent  mass  of  the  Brahmanical  order  at 
least,  still  continues  :  professing  alike  to  recognise  implicitly  the  autho- 
rity of  the  Vedas,  the  worshippers  of  Siva,  or  of  Vishnu,  and  the  main- 
tainers  of  the  Sdnk'hya  or  Nydya  doctrines,  consider  themselves,  and 
even  each  other,  as  orthodox  members  of  the  Hindu  community. 

To  the  internal  incongruities  of  the  system,  which  did  not  affect  its 
integral  existence,  others  were,  in  time,  superadded,  that  threatened  to 
dissolve  or  destroy  the  whole  :  of  this  nature  was  the  exclusive  adoration 
of  the  old  deities,  or  of  new  forms  of  them  ;  and  even  it  may  be  presumed, 
the  introduction  of  new  divinities.  In  all  these  respects,  the  Purdnas 
and  Tantras  were  especially  instrumental,  and  they  not  only  taught  their 
followers  to  assert  the  unapproachable  superiority  of  the  gods  they  wor- 
shipped, but  inspired  them  with  feelingsf  of  animosity  towards  those 

*  One  division  of  some  antiquity,  is  the  preferential  appropriation  of  the  four  chief 
divinities  to  the  four  original  castes;  thus  Siva  is  the  Adideva  of  the  Brahmans, 
Vishnu  of  the  Kshettriyas,  Brahma'  of  the  Faisyas,  and  Ganesa  of  the  Sudras. 

t  Thus  in  the  Bhagavat : 

^TTsrft^'T^'^  ^^^  ^^IW^fTTTf^^T:  II 

Those  who  profess  the  worship  of  Bhava,  (Siva,)  and  those  who  follow  their  doc- 
trines, are  heretics  and  enemies  of  the  sacred  Sdstras. — Again, 


who  presumed  to  dispute  that  supremacy  :  in  this  conflict  the  worship 
of  Brahma'  has  disappeared,*  as  well  as,  indeed,  that  of  the  whole  pan- 
theon, except  Vishnu,  Siva,  and  Sakti,  or  their  modifications ;  with 
respect  to  the  two  former,  in  fact,  the  representatives  have  borne  away 
the  palm  from  the  prototypes,  and  Krishna,  Ra'ma,  or  the  Linga,  are 
almost  the  only  forms  under  which  Vishnu  and  Siva  are  now  adored 
in  most  parts  of  India. f 

Those  desirous  of  final  emancipation,  abandoning  the  hideous  gods  of  the  devils, 
pursue  their  devotions,  calm,  blameless,  and  being  parts  of  Na'ra'yana. 
The  Padma  Purdna  is  more  personal  towards  Vishnu. 

ftr^'f T^^5^^%T  ^^^  ^Tf?r  ^T^^  I 

From  even  looking  at  Vishnu,  the  wrath  of  Siva  is  kindled,  and  from  his  wrath, 
we  fall  assuredly  into  a  horrible  hell;  let  not,  therefore,  the  name  of  Vishnu  ever  be 
pronounced.  The  same  work  is,  however,  cited  by  the  Vaishnavas,  for  avery  op- 
posite doctrine. 

d  ^  \» 

He  who  abandons  Va'sudeva  and  worships  any  other  god,  is  like  the  fool,  who  being 
thirsty,  sinks  a  well  in  the  bank  of  the  Ganges— The  principle  goes  still  further,  and 
those  who  are  inimical  to  the  followers  of  a  deity,  are  stigmatised  as  his*  personal  foes — 
thus  in  the  Adi  Purdna,  Vishnu  says: 

fTriT^T  ^^1  ^TftfT  ^r^  ^r^  ^JfW^  M 

He  to  whom  my  votary  is  a  friend,  is  my  friend— he  who  is  opposed  to  him,  is  no 
friend  of  mine— be  assured,  Dhananjaya,  of  this  : 

*  Siva  himself,  in  the  form  of  Ka'la  Bhairava,  tore  off  Brahma''s  fifth  head, 
for  presuming  to  say,  that  he  was  Brahmk,  the  eternal  and  omnipotent  cause  of  the 
world,  and  even  the  creator  of  Siva,  notwithstanding  the  four  Vedas  and  the  personi- 
fied Omkdra,  had  all  given  evidence,  that  this  great,  true  and  indescribable  deity  was 
Siva  himself.  The  whole  story  occurs  in  the  A'a«  ifii'Aawd  of  the  Skdnda  Purdna, 
and  its  real  signification  is  sufficiently  obvious. 

t  The  great  text- book  of  the  Vaishnavas  is  the  Bhligavat,  with  which  it  may  be 
supposed  the  present  worship,  in  a  great  measure,  originated,  although,  the  Mahabharat 
and  other  older  works  had  previously  introduced  this  divinity.  The  worship  of  the 
Lingam  is,  no  doubt,  very  ancient,  although  it  has  received,  within  a  few  centuries,  its 
present  degree  of  popularity  :  the  Kasi  K' hand  was  evidently  written  to  enforce  it,  and 
at  Benares,  its  worship  entirely  overshadows  every  other  ritual. 


The  varieties  of  opinion  kept  pace  with  those  of  practice,  and  six 
heretical  schools  of  philosophy  disputed  the  pre-eminence  with  their 
orthodox  brethren  :  we  have  little  or  no  knowledge  of  these  systems, 
and  even  their  names  are  not  satisfactorily  stated  :  they  seem,  however, 
.to  be  the  Saugata  or  Bauddha,  Arhata,  or  Jain,  and  Vdrhaspatya,  or 
Atheistical,  with  their  several  sub- divisions.* 

Had  the  difference  of  doctrine  taught  in  the  heretical  schools  been 
confined  to  tenets  of  a  merely  speculative  nature,  they  would,  probably, 
have  encountered  little  opposition,  and  excited  little  enmity  among  the 
Brahmanical  class,  of  which,  latitude  of  opinion  is  a  very  common 
characteristic.  The  founder  of  the  Atheistical  school,  however, 
Vrihaspati,  attacks  both  the  Vedas  and  the  Brahmans,  and  asserts 
that  the  whole  of  the  Hindu  system  is  a  contrivance  of  the  Priesthood,  to 
secure  a  means  of  livelihood  for  themselves, f  whilst  the  Bauddhas  and 
Jainas,  equally  disregarding  the  Vedas  and  the  Brahmans,  the  practice 
and  opinions  of  the  Hindus,  invented  a  set  of  gods  for  themselves, 
and  deposed  the  ancient  pantheon :  these  aggressions  provoked  re- 
sentment :  the  writings  of  these  sects  are  alluded  to  with  every 
epithet  of  anger  and  contempt,  and  they  are  all  anathematised  as 
heretical  and  atheistical :  more  active  measures  than  anathemas,  it 
may  be  presumed,  were  had  recourse  to  :  the  followers  of  Vrihaspati, 
having  no  worship  at  all,  easily  eluded  the  storm,  but  the  Bauddhas 
of  Hindustan  were  annihilated  by  its  fury,  and  the  Jainas  apparently 
evaded  it  with  difficulty,  although  they  have  undoubtedly  survived  its 
terrors,  and  may  now  defy  its  force. 


*  In  a  work  written  by  the  celebrated  Mddhava,  describing  the  different  sects  as 
they  existed  in  his  day,  entitled  the  Sarva  Darsana  ;  the  Vdrhaspatyas,  Lokuyatas, 
and  Chdrvukas  are  identified,  and  are  really  advocates  of  an  atheistical  doctrine, 
denying  the  existence  of  a  god,  or  a  future  state,  and  referring  creation  lo  the  aggre- 
gation of  but  four  elements.  The  Bauddhas,  according  to  the  same  authority,  admit 
of  four  sub-divisions,  the  Madhyamikas,  Yogdchdras,  Sautrdntikas,  and  Vaibhushicas. 
The  Jains  or  Arhats,  as  still  one  of  the  popular  divisions,  we  shall  have  occasion  to 
notice  in  the  text. 

t  Vrihaspati  has  the  following  texts  to  this  effect: 


The  varieties  thus  arising  from  innovations  in  practice  and  belief, 
have  differed,  it  may  be  concluded,  at  different  eras  of  the  Hindu  wor- 
ship. To  trace  the  character  of  those  which  have  latterly  disappeared, 
or  to  investigate  the  remote  history  of  some  which  still  remain  and  are 
apparently  of  ancient  date,  are  tasks  for  which  we  are  far  from  being  yet , 
prepared  :  the  enquiry  is  in  itself  so  vast,  and  so  little  progress  has  been 
made  in  the  studies  necessary  to  its  elucidation,  that  it  must  yet  remain 
in  the  obscurity  in  which  it  has  hitherto  been  enveloped ;  so  ambitious  a 
project  as  that  of  piercing  the  impenetrable  gloom  has  not  instigated  the 
present  attempt,  nor  has  it  been  proposed  to  undertake  so  arduous  a 
labour,  as  the  investigation  and  comparison  of  the  abstruse  notions  of 
the  philosophical  sects.*  The  humbler  aim  of  these  researches  has  been 
that  of  ascertaining  the  actual  condition  of  the  popular  religion  of 
the  inhabitants  of  some  of  the  provinces  subject  to  the  Bengal  Govern- 
ment ;  and  as  a  very  great  variety  prevails  in  that  religion,  the  subject 
may  be  considered  as  not  devoid  of  curiosity  and  interest,  especially  as 
it  has  been  left  little  better  than  a  blank,  in  the  voluminous  composi- 
tions or  compilations,  professing  to  give  an  account  of  the  native  coun- 
try of  the  Hindus. 

The  description  of  the  different  sects  of  the  Hindus,  which  I  propose 
to  offer,  is  necessarily  superficial :  it  would,  indeed,  have  been  impossible 
to  have  adopted  the  only  unexceptionable  method  of  acquiring  an  accurate 

"  The  Agnihotra,  the  three  Vedas,  the  Tridanda,  the  smearing  of  ashes,  are  only  the 
livelihood  of  those  who  have  neither  intellect  nor  spirit."  After  ridiculing  the  Sraddha, 
shrewdly  enough,  he  says  : 

Hence  it  is  evident,  that  it  was  a  mere  contrivance  of  the  Brahmans  to  gain  a  live- 
lihood, to  ordain  such  ceremonies  for  the  dead,  and  no  other  reason  can  be  given  for 
them.    Of  the  Vedas,  he  says  : 

The  three  Authors  of  the  Vedas  were  Buffoons,  Kogues,  and  Fiends- and  cites  texts 
in  proof  of  this  assertion. 

*  Something  of  this  has  been  very  well  done  by  Mr.  Ward,  in  his  account  of  the 
Hindus:  and  since  this  Essay  was  read  before  the  Society,  the  account  given  by  H. 
T.  Colebrooke,  Esq.  in  the  first  part  of  the  Transactions  of  the  iioyal  Asiatic  Society, 
of  the  Sankhya  and  Nyaya  Systems,  has  left  little  more  necessary  on  this  subject. 


knowledge  of  their  tenets  and  observances,  or  of  studying  the  numerous 
works  in  Sanscrit,  Persian,  or  the  provincial  dialects  of  Hindi,  on  which 
they  are  founded.  I  have  been  obliged  to  content  myself,  therefore,  with 
a  cursory  inspection  of  a  few  of  those  compositions,  and  to  depend  for 
much  of  my  information  on  oral  report,  filling  up  or  correcting  from  these 
two  sources,  the  errors  and  omissions  of  two  works,  on  this  subject 
professedly,  from  which  I  have  derived  the  groundwork  of  the  whole 
account. 

The  works  alluded  to  are  in  the  Persian  language,  though  both  were 
written  by  Hindu  authors  :  the  first  was  compiled  by  Si'tal  Sink,  Munshi 
to  the  Raja  of  Benares ;  the  second  by  Mathura'  Na'th,  late  librarian 
of  the  Hindu  College,  at  the  same  city,  a  man  of  great  personal  respect- 
ability and  eminent  acquirements  :  these  works  contain  a  short  history  of 
the  origin  of  the  various  sects,  and  descriptions  of  the  appearance,  and 
observances,  and  present  condition  of  their  followers :  they  comprise  all 
the  known  varieties,  with  one  or  two  exceptions,  and,  indeed,  at  no  one 
place  in  India  could  the  enquiry  be  so  well  prosecuted  as  at  Benares.* 
The  work  of  Mathura'  Na'th  is  the  fullest  and  most  satisfactory,  though 
it  leaves  much  to  be  desired,  and  much  more  than  I  have  been  able  to 
supply.  In  addition  to  these  sources  of  information,  I  have  had  frequent 
recourse  to  a  work  of  great  popularity  and  extensive  circulation,  which 
embodies  the  legendary  history  of  all  the  most  celebrated  Bhaktas  or 
devotees  of  the  Vaishnava  order.  This  work  is  entitled  the  Bhakta  Mdld. 
The  original,  in  a  difficult  dialect  of  Hindi,  was  composed  by  Na'bha'ji, 
about  250  years  ago,  and  is  little  more  than  a  catalogue,  with  brief  and 
obscure  references  to  some  leading  circumstances  connected  with  the  life 
of  each  individual,  and  from  the  inexplicit  nature  of  its  allusions,  as  well 
as  the  difficulty  of  its  style,  is  far  from  intelligible  to  the  generality  even 
of  the  natives.     The  work,  in  its  present  form,  has  received  some  modifi- 

*  The  acknowledged  resort  of  all  the  vagabonds  of  India,  and  all  who  have  no  where 
else  to  repair  to :  so,  the  Kasi  K'hand, 

^¥r«T  ITTlTTnfTT^TTftff  ^^t^TTTW^^f?T;  1 1 

"  To  those  who  are  strangers  to  the  Sruti  and  Smriti,  (Religion  and  Law) ;  to  those 
who  have  never  known  the  observance  of  pure  and  indispensable  rites;  to  those  who 
have  no  other  place  to  repair  to  ;  to  those,  is  Benares  an  asylum." 


cations,  and  obvious  additions  from  a  later  teacher^  Na'ra'yan  Da's, 
whose  share  in  the  composition  is,  no  doubt,  considerable,  but  cannot  be 
discriminated  from  Na'bha'ji's  own,  beyond  the  evidence  furnished  by  the 
specification  of  persons  unquestionably  subsequent  to  his  time. — Na'- 
ra'yan  Da's  probably  wrote  in  the  reign  of  Sha'h  Jeha'n.  The  brevity 
and  obscurity  of  the  original  work  pervade  the  additional  matter,  and  to 
remedy  these  defects,  the  original  text,  or  Mula,  has  been  taken  as  a  guide 
for  an  amplified  notice  of  its  subjects,  or  the  Kkd  of  Krishna  Da's  ;  and 
the  work,  as  usually  met  with,  always  consists  of  these  two  divisions. 
The  Tikd  is  dated  Samvat,  1769  or  A.  D.  1713.  Besides  these,  a  trans- 
lation of  the  Tikd,  or  a  version  of  it  in  the  more  ordinary  dialect  of  Hin- 
dustan, has  been  made  by  an  anonymous  author,  and  a  copy  of  this 
work,  as  well  as  of  the  original,  has  furnished  me  with  materials  for  the 
following  account.  The  character  of  the  Bhakta  Mdld,  will  best  appear 
from  the  extracts  of  translations  from  it  to  be  hereafter  introduced :  it 
may  be  sufficient  here  to  observe,  that  it  is  much  less  of  a  historical  than 
legendary  description,  and  that  the  legends  are  generally  insipid  and 
extravagant :  such  as  it  is,  however,  it  exercises  a  powerful  influence  in 
Upper  India,  on  popular  belief,  and  holds  a  similar  place  in  the  supersti- 
tions of  this  country,  as  that  which  was  occupied  in  the  darkest  ages 
of  the  Roman  Catholic  faith,  by  the  Golden  Legend  and  Acts  of  the 
Saints.* 


*  In  further  illustration  of  our  text,  with  regard  to  the  instrumentality  of  the  Purd- 
nas  in  generating  religious  distinctions  amongst  the  Hindus,  and  as  affording  a  view  of 
the  Vaishnava  feelings  on  this  subject,  we  may  appeal  to  the  Padma  Purana.  In  the 
Uttara  Khanda,  or  last  portion  of  this  work,  towards  the  end  of  it,  several  sections 
are  occupied  with  a  dialogue  between  Sita  and  Pa'bvati',  in  which  the  former  teaches 
the  latter  the  leading  principles  of  the  Vaishnava  faith.  Two  short  sections  are  devoted 
to  the  explanation  of  who  are  heretics,  and  which  are  the  heretical  works.  All  are 
Pdshandas,  Siva  says,  who  adore  other  gods  than  Vishnu,  or  who  hold,  that  other 
deities  are  his  equals,  and  all  Brahmans  who  are  not  Vaishnavas,  are  not  to  be  looked 
at,  touched,  nor  spoken  to: — 


SECTION  IL 


State  of  the  Hindu  Religion,  anterior  to  its  present  condition. 

Although  I  have  neither  the  purpose  nor  the  power  to  enter  into  any 
detail  of  the  remote  condition  of  the  Hindu  faith,  yet  as  its  present 
state  is  of  comparatively  very  recent  origin,  it  may  form  a  not  unneces- 
sary, nor  uninteresting  preliminary  branch  of  the  enquiry,  to  endeavour 
to  determine  its  existing  modifications,  at  the  period  immediately  pre- 
ceding the  few  centuries,  which  have  sufficed  to  bestow  upon  it  its 
actual  form  :  it  happens,  also,  that  some  controversial  works  exist,  which 
throw  considerable  light  upon  the  subject,  and  of  which  the  proximity 
of  their  date,  to  the  matters  of  which  they  treat,  may  be  conjectured 
with  probability  or  positively  ascertained.  Of  these,  the  two  principal 
works,  and  from  which  I  shall  derive  such  scanty  information  as   is 


Siva,  in  acknowledging  that  the  distinguishing  marks  of  his  votaries,  the  skull, 
tiger's  skin,  and  ashes,  are  reprobated  by  the  Vedas  (Srutigerhitam)  states,  that  he 
was  directed  by  Vishnu  to  inculcate  their  adoption,  purposely  to  lead  those  who  as- 
sumed them  into  error.— Namuchi  and  other  Daityas  had  become  so  powerful  by  the 
purity  of  their  devotions,  that  Indra  and  the  other  gods  were  unable  to  oppose  them. 
The  gods  had  recourse  to  Vishnu,  who,  in  consequence,  ordered  Siva  to  introduce  the 
Saiva  tenets  and  practices,  by  which  the  Daityas  were  beguiled,  and  rendered  "  wicked, 
and  thence  weak." 

In  order  to  assist  Siva  in  this  work,  ten  great  Sages  were  imbued  with  the  Tdmasa 
property,  or  property  of  darkness  and  ignorance,  and  by  them  such  writings  were  put 
forth  as  were  calculated  to  disseminate  unrighteous  and  heretical  doctrines,  these  were 
Kana'da,  Gautama,  Sakti,  Upamanyu,  Jaimini,  Kapila,  Durva'sas,  Mrikan- 
da',Vrihaspati,  and  Bha'rgava. 

By  Siva  himself,  the  Pdsupata  writings  were  composed  ;  Kana'da  is  the  author  of 
the  Vaisheshika  Philosophy.  The  iVz/ayo  originates  with  Gautama.  Kapila,  is  the 
founder  of  the  Sdnkhya  school,  and  Vhihaspati  of  the  Churvaka.  Jaimini,  by  Siva's 
orders,  composed  the  Mimdnsa,  which  is  heretical,  in  as  far  as  it  inculcates  works  in 
preference  to  faith,  and  Siva  himself,  in  the  disguise  of  a  Brahman,  or  as  Vya'sa, 
promulgated  the  Vedanta,  which  is  heterodox  in  Vaishnava  estimation,  by  denying 


attainable,  are  the  Sankara  Digvijaya  of  Ananda  Giri,  and  the  Sarva 
Dersana  Sangraha  of  Ma'dhava'cha'rya,  the  former  a  reputed  disciple 
of  Sankara  himself,  and  the  latter  a  well  known  and  able  writer,  who 
lived  in  the  commencement  of  the  fourteenth  century. 

the  sensible  attributes  of  the  deity.  Vishnu,  as  Buddha,  taught  the  Bauddha  Sdstra, 
and  the  practices  of  going  naked,  or  wearing  blue  garments,  meaning,  consequently,  not 
the  Bauddhas,  but  the  Jainas,  (^  Tlf3[TW^^?^T"^  «Tir5fl^^JT  f^^ff  |) 
The  Puranas  were  partly  instrumental  in  this  business  of  blinding  mankind,  and  they 
are  thus  distinguished  by  our  authority  and  all  the  Vaishnava  works. 

The  Mdtsya,  Kaurma,  Lainga,  Saiva,  Skdnda  and  Agneya,  are  Tdmasa,  or  the 
works  of  darkness,  having  more  or  less  of  a  Saiva  bias. 

The  Vishnu,  Ndradiya,  Bhdgavat,  Gdrura,  Pddma  and  Vdrdha,  are  Sdtwika,  pure 
and  true;  being,  in  fact,  Vaishnava  text-books. 

The  Brahmdnda,  Brahma  Vaivertta,  Mdrkandeya,  Bhaviskya,  Vdmana  and  Brdh- 
ma,  are  of  the  Rdjasa  caste,  emanating  from  the  quality  of  passion.  As  far  as  I  am  ac- 
quainted with  them,  they  lean  to  the  Sukta  division  of  the  Hindus,  or  the  worship 
of  the  female  principle.  The  Mdrkandeya  does  so  notoriously,  containing  the  famous 
Chandi  Path,  or  Durgd  Mdhdtmya,  which  is  read  at  the  Durga  Pujd  ;  the  Brahma 
Vaivertta,  is  especially  dedicated  to  Krishna  as  Govinda,  and  is  principally  occupied 
by  him  and  his  mistress  Ha'dha'.  It  is  also  full  on  the  subject  of  Prakriti  or  personi- 
fied nature. 

A  similar  distinction  is  made  even  with  the  Smritis,  or  works  on  law.  The  codes 
of  Vasishtha  HA'pa'xA,  Vya'sa,  Para'sara,  Bharadwaja  and  Kasyapa,  are  of 
the  pure  order.  Those  of  Yajnawalkya,  Atri,  Tiitiri,  Daksha,  Ka'tya'yana 
and  Vishnu  of  the  Rdjasa  class,  and  those  of  Gautama,  Vrihaspati,  Samvartta, 
Yama,  Sankha  and  Usanas,  are  of  the  Tdmasa  order. 

The  study  of  the  Puranas  and  Smritis  of  the  Sdtwika  class,  secures  Mukti,  or  final 
emancipation,  that  of  those  of  the  Rdjasa  obtains  Swerga,  or  Paradise  ;  whilst  that  of 
the  Tdmasa  condemns  a  person  to  hell,  and  a  wise  man  will  avoid  them. 

The  Vaishnava  writers  endeavour  to  enlist  the  Vedas  in  their  cause,  and  the  follow- 
ing texts  are  quoted  by  the  Tatparya  Nirnaya  : 

Na'ra'yana  alone  was,  not  Brahma'  nor  Sankara. 


\  was  before  this  (universe),  not  BRAHMA'nor  Sankara. 
cite  the  Vedas  too,  as 


10 

The  authenticity  of  the  latter  of  these  two  works,  there  is  no  room  to 
question  ;  and  there  is  but  little  reason  to  attach  any  doubt  to  the  former. 
Some  of  the  marvels  it  records  of  Sankara,  which  the  author  professes 
to  have  seen,  may  be  thought  to  affect  its  credibility,  if  not  its  authentici- 
ty, and  either  Ananda  Giri  must  be  an  unblushing  liar,  or  the  book  is 
not  his  own  :  it  is,  however,  of  little  consequence,  as  even,  if  the  work 
be  not  that  of  Ananda  Giri  himself,  it  bears  internal  and  indisputable 
evidence  of  being  the  composition  of  a  period,  not  far  removed  from  that 
at  which  he  may  be  supposed  to  have  flourished,  and  we  may,  therefore, 
follow  it  as  a  very  safe  guide,  in  our  enquiries  into  the  actual  state  of 
the  Hindu  Religion  about  eight  or  nine  centuries  ago. 

The  various  sectaries  of  the  Hindu  Religion  then  existing,  are  all 
introduced  to  be  combated,  and,  of  course,  conquered,  by  Sankara  : 
the  list  is  rather  a  long  one,  but  it  will  be  necessary  to  go  through  the 
whole,  to  ascertain  the  character  of  the  national  faith  of  those  days, 
and  its  present  modifications,  noticing,  as  we  proceed,  some  of  the 
points  of  difference  or  resemblance  between  the  forms  of  worship  which 
then  prevailed,  and  which  now  exist.  The  two  great  divisions  of 
Vaishnavas  and  Saivas  were  both  in  a  flourishing  condition,  and  each 
embraced  six  principal  subdivisions  :  we  shall  begin  with  the  former, 
who  are  termed  ;  Bhdktas,  Bhdgavatas,  Vaishnavas,  Chakrinas,  or 
Panchardtrakas,  Vaik'hdnasas  and  Karmahinas. 

But  as  each  of  these  was  subdivided  into  a  practical  and  speculative, 
or  Kerma  and  Jnydna  portion,  they  formed,  in  fact,  twelve  classes  of 
the  followers  of  Vishnu,  as  the  sole  and  supreme  deity. 

The  Bhdktas  worshipped  Vishnu  as  Va'sudeva,  and  wore  no  charac- 
teristic marks.  The  Bhdgavatas  worshipped  the  same  deity  as  Bhagavat, 
and  impressed  upon  their  persons  the  usual  Vaishnava  insignia,  repre- 
senting the  discus,  club,  &c.  of  that  divinity  ;  they  likewise  reverenced 
the  Sdlagrdm  stone,  and  I'm fasi' plant,  and  in  several  of  their  doctrinal 

The  Lord  who  pervades  all  things,  is  thence  termed  the  omnipresent  Siva, 
liudra  is  but  one,  and  has  no  second— 

These  citations  would  scarcely  have  been  made,  if  not  authentic  ;  they  probably  do 
occur  in  the  Vedas,  but  the  terms  Nardyana  and  Fdsudeva,  or  Siva  and  Rudra,  are 
not  to  be  taken  in  the  restricted  sense,  probably,  which  their  respective  followers  would 
assign  them. 


11 

notions,  as  well  as  in  these  respects,  approach  to  the  present  followers 
of  Ra'ma'nuja,  although  they  cannot  be  regarded  as  exactly  the  same. 
The  authorities  of  these  three  sects  were  the  Upanishads  and  Bhagavad 
Gitd.  The  names  of  both  the  sects  still  remain,  but  they  are  scarcely 
applicable  to  any  particular  class  of  Vaishnavas  :  the  term  Bhakta,  or 
Bhagat,  usually  indicates  any  individual  who  pretends  to  a  more  rigid 
devotion  than  his  neighbours,  and  who  especially  occupies  his  mind 
with  spiritual  considerations :  the  Bhdgavat  is  one  who  follows  parti- 
cularly the  authority  of  the  Sri  Bhdgavat  Pur  ana. 

The  Vaishnavas  adored  Vishnu  as  Na'ra'yana,  they  wore  the  usual 
marks,  and  promised  themselves  a  sort  of  sensual  paradise  after  death, 
in  Vaikunfha,  or  Vishnu's  heaven  ;  their  tenets  are  still  current,  but  they 
can  scarcely  be  considered  to  belong  to  any  separate  secL 

The  Chakrinas,  or  Panchardtrakas  were,  in  fact,  Sdktas  of  the  Vaish- 
nava  class,  worshipping  the  female  personifications  of  Vishnu,  and 
observing  the  ritual  of  the  Panchardtra  Tantra :  they  still  remain,  but 
scarcely  individualised,  being  confounded  with  the  worshippers  of 
Krishna  and  Ra'ma  on  the  one  hand,  and  those  of  Sakti  or  Devi  on  the 
other. 

The  Vaik'hdnasas  appear  to  have  been  but  little  different  from  the 
Vaishnavas  especially  so  called;  at  least  Ananda  Giri  has  not  particu- 
larised the  difference  ;  they  worshipped  Na'ra'yana  as  supreme  god,  and 
wore  his  marks.  The  Karmahmas  abstained,  as  the  name  implies,  from 
all  ritual  observances,  and  professed  to  know  Vishnu  as  the  sole  source 
and  sum  of  the  universe,  ^^c^  f%?nRT2i'  ^iffT  |  ^^^Y  ^^"  scarcely  be 
considered  as  an  existent  sect,  though  a  few  individuals  of  the  Rdmanuji- 
ya  and  Rdmdnandi  Vaishnavas  may  profess  the  leading  doctrines. 

The  Vaishnava  forms  of  the  Hindu  faith,  are  still,  as  we  shall  here- 
after see,  sufficiently  numerous ;  but  we  can  scarcely  identify  any  one 
of  them  with  those  which  seem  to  have  prevailed  when  the  Sankara  Vi- 
jaya  of  Ananda  Giri  was  composed.  The  great  divisions,  of  Ra'ma'nuja 
and  Ra'ma'nand — the  former  of  which  originated,  we  know,  in  the  course 
of  the  eleventh  century,  are  unnoticed,  and  it  is  also  worth  while  to  ob- 
serve, that  neither  in  this,  nor  in  any  other  portion  of  the  Sankara  Vijaya, 
is  any  allusion  made  to  the  separate  worship  of  Krishna,  either  in  his 
own  person,  or  that  of  the  infantine  forms  in  which  he  is  now  so  pre- 


12 

eminently  venerated  in  many  parts  of  India,  nor  are  the  names  of  R'ama 
and  Sita',  of  Lakshmana  or  Hanuma'n,  once  particularised,  as  enjoying 
any  portion  of  distinct  and  specific  adoration. 

The  Saiva  sects  are  the  Saivas,  Raudras,  Ugras,  Bhdktas,  Jangamas, 
and  Pdsupatas.  Their  tenets  are  so  blended  in  the  discussion,  that  it  is 
not  possible  to  separate  them,  beyond  the  conjectural  discrimination 
which  may  be  derived  from  their  appellations :  the  text  specifies  merely 
their  characteristic  marks  :  thus  the  Saivas  wore  the  impression  of  the 
Linga  on  both  arms  ;  the  Raudras  had  a  Trisula,  or  trident,  stamped  on 
the  forehead  ;  the  Ugras  had  the  Damaru,  or  drum  of  Siva  on  their  arms, 
and  the  Bhdktas  an  impression  of  the  Li?iga  on  the  forehead — the  Jan- 
gamas carried  a  figure  of  the  Linga  on  the  head,  and  the  Pdsupatas  im- 
printed the  same  object  on  the  forehead,  breast,  navel,  and  arms.  Of 
these  sects,  the  Saivas  are  not  now  any  one  particular  class — nor  are  the 
Raudras,  Ugras,  or  Bhdktas,  any  longer  distinct  societies  :  the  Jangamas 
remain,  but  they  are  chiefly  confined  to  the  south  of  India,  and  although 
a  Pdsupata,  or  worshipper  of  Siva  as  Pasupati,  may  be  occasionally 
encountered,  yet  this  has  merged  into  other  sects,  and  particularly  into 
that  of  the  Kanp'hata  Jogis :  the  authorities  cited  by  these  sects,  accord- 
ing to  Ananda  Giri,  were  the  Siva  Gitd,  Siva  Sanhitd,  Siva  Rahasya,  and 
Rudra  Ydmala  Tantra :  the  various  classes  of  Jogis  are  never  alluded  to 
and  the  work  asserts,  what  is  generally  admitted  as  a  fact,  that  the  Dan- 
dis,  and  Dasndmi  Gosains  originated  with  S  Ankara  Acha'rya. 

Worshippers  of  Brahma,  or  Hiranyagarbha,  are  also  introduced  by 
Anaxda  Giri,  whom  now  it  might  be  difficult  to  meet  with  :  exclusive 
adorers  of  this  deity,  and  temples  dedicated  to  him,  do  not  now  occur 
perhaps  in  any  part  of  India  ;  at  the  same  time  it  is  an  error  to  suppose 
that  public  homage  is  never  paid  to  him.  Brahma  is  particularly  reve- 
renced at  Pokher,  in  Ajmer,  also  at  Bithdr,  in  the  Doab,  where,  at  the 
principal  Ghat,  denominated  Brahmavertta  Ghat,  he  is  said  to  have 
offered  an  Aswamedha  on  completing  the  act  of  creation  :  the  pin  of  his 
slipper  left  behind  him  on  the  occasion,  and  now  fixed  in  one  of  the 
steps  of  the  Ghat,  is  still  worshipped  there,  and  on  the  full  moon  of 
Agrahayana  (Nov. -Dec.)  a  very  numerously  attended  Mela,  or  meeting, 
that  mixes  piety  with  profit,  is  annually  held  at  that  place. 

The  worshippers  of  Agni  no  longer  form  a  distinct  class  :  a  few 
Agnihotra   Brahmans,  who  preserve  the  family  fire,  may  be  met  with, 


13 

but  in  all  other  respects  they  conform  to  some  mode   of  popular   devo- 
tion. 

The  next  opponents  of  Sankara  Acharya  were  the  Sauras,  or  wor- 
shippers of  the  sun,  as  the  creator  and  cause  of  the  world  :  a  few 
Sauras,  chiefly  Brahmans,  still  exist  as  a  sect,  as  will  be  hereafter  no- 
ticed ;  but  the  divisions  enumerated  by  Ananda  Giri,  are  now,  it  is 
believed,  unknown:  he  distinguishes  them  into  the  following  six  classes. 

Those  who  adored  the  rising  sun,  regarding  it  as  especially  the  type 
of  Brahma'  or  the  creative  power.  Those  who  worshipped  the  meridian 
sun  as  IswARA,  the  destructive  and  regenerative  faculty  ;  and  those  who 
reverenced  the  setting  sun,  as  the  prototype  of  Vishnu,  or  the  attribute 
of  preservation. 

The  fourth  class  comprehended  the  advocates  of  the  Trimurti,  who 
addressed  their  devotions  to  the  sun  in  all  the  preceding  states,  as  the 
comprehensive  type  of  these  three  divine  attributes. 

The  object  of  the  fifth  form  is  not  quite  clearly  stated,  but  it  appears 
to  have  been  the  adoration  of  the  sun  as  a  positive  and  material  body, 
and  the  marks  on  his  surface,  as  his  hair,  beard,  &c.  The  members  of 
this  class  so  far  correspond  with  the  Sauras  of  the  present  day,  as  to 
refrain  from  food  until  they  had  seen  the  sun. 

The  sixth  class  of  Sauras,  in  opposition  to  the  preceding,  deemed  it 
unnecessary  to  address  their  devotions  to  the  visible  and  material  sun  : 
they  provided  a  mental  luminary,  on  which  they  meditated,  and  to 
which  their  adoration  was  offered  :  they  stamped  circular  orbs  on  their 
foreheads,  arms,  and  breasts  with  hot  irons  ;  a  practice  uniformly  con- 
demned by  Sankara,  as  contrary  to  the  laws  of  the  Vedas,  and  the  res- 
pect due  to  Brahmanical  flesh  and  blood. 

Ganesa,  as  well  as  Surya,  had  formerly  six  classes  of  adorers  ;  in  the 
present  day  he  cannot  boast  of  any  exclusive  worship,  although  he  shares 
a  sort  of  homage  with  almost  all  the  other  divinities  :  his  followers  were 
the  worshippers  of  Ma  ha'  Ganapati,  of  Haridra  Ganapati,  or  Dhun- 
Di  Raj,  who  is  still  a  popular  form  of  Ganesa,  of  Uch'chishtha  G,  of 
Navani'ta  G,  of  SwERNA  G,  and  of  Santa'na  G.  The  left  hand  sub- 
division of  the  Uch'chishtha  Ganapati'  sect,  also  called  Hairamba, 
abrogated  all  obligatory  ritual  and  distinction  of  caste. 

The  adorers  of  the  female  personifications  of  divine  power,  appear  to 
have  been  fully  as  numerous  as  at  present,  and  to  have  worshipped  the 


14 

same  objects,  or  Bhava'ni',  Maha'  Lakshmi',  and  Saraswati'  ;  even  as 
personifications  of  these  divinities,  however,  the  worship  of  Sita'  and 
Ra'dha',  either  singly,  or  in  conjunction  with  Ra'ma  and  Krishna, 
never  makes  its  appearance.  The  worshippers  of  Sakti  were  then,  as 
now,  divided  into  two  classes,  a  right  and  left  hand  order,  and  three 
subdivisions  of  the  latter  are  enumerated,  who  are  still  well  known — 
the  Purndbhishiktas,  Akritdrthas,  and  Kritdkrityasamas. 

There  can  be  little  doubt,  that  the  course  of  time  and  the  presence  of 
foreign  rulers,  have  very  much  ameliorated  the  character  of  much  of  the 
Hindu  worship  :  if  the  licentious  practices  of  the  Sa'ktas  are  still  as 
prevalent  as  ever,  which  may  well  be  questioned,  they  are,  at  least, 
carefully  concealed  from  observation,  and  if  they  are  not  exploded, 
there  are  other  observances  of  a  more  ferocious  description,  which  seem 
to  have  disappeared.  The  worship  of  Bhairava,  still  prevails  amongst 
the  Sdktas  and  the  Jogis  ;  but  in  Upper  India,  at  least,  the  naked 
mendicant,  smeared  with  funeral  ashes,  armed  with  a  trident  or  a 
sword,  carrying  a  hollow  skull  in  his  hand,  and  half  intoxicated  with 
the  spirits  which  he  has  quaffed  from  that  disgusting  wine-cup,  prepar- 
ed, in  short,  to  perpetrate  any  act  of  violence  and  crime,  the  Kdpdlika 
of  former  days,  is  now  rarely,  if  ever,  encountered.  In  the  work  of 
Ananda  Giri,  we  have  two  of  these  sectaries  introduced,  one  a  Brah- 
man by  birth,  is  the  genuine  Kdpdlika :  he  drinks  wine,  eats  flesh,  and 
abandons  all  rites  and  observances  in  the  spirit  of  his  faith,  his  emi- 
nence in  which  has  armed  him  with  supernatural  powers,  and  rendered 
Bhairava  himself,  the  reluctant,  but  helpless  minister  of  his  will.  The 
other  Kdpdlika  is  an  impostor,  the  son  of  a  harlot,  by  a  gatherer  of  Tari, 
or  Palm  juice,  and  who  has  adopted  the  character  as  an  excuse  for  throw- 
ing oflf  all  social  and  moral  restraint.  The  Kdpdlikas  are  often  alluded 
to  in  controversial  works,  that  appear  to  be  the  compositions  of  a  period 
at  least  preceding  the  tenth  century.* 

The  next  classes  of  sectaries,  confuted  by  Sank  aha,  w^ere  various 
infidel  sects,  some  of  whom  avowedly,  and  perhaps  all  covertly,  are  still  in 
being  ;  the  list  is  also  interesting,  as  discriminating  their  opinions  which, 
in  the  ignorance  subsequent  to  their  disappearance  from  Hindustan, 
have  very  commonly  been,  and,  indeed,  still  are  frequently  confounded. 

*  See  the  Prabodha  Chandrika,  translated  by  Dr.  Taylor. 


15 

These  are  the  Chdrvdkas,  or  Siinya  Vddis,  the  Saugatas,  the  Kshapana- 
kas,  the  Jainas,  and  the  Bauddhas. 

The  Chdrvdkas  were  so  named  from  one  of  their  teachers,  the  Muni 
Cha'rva'ka.  From  Vrihaspati — some  of  whose  dogmas  have  been  quot- 
ed from  the  work  of  Ma'dhava,  they  are  termed  dX^oVdrhaspatyas .  The 
appellation  Sunya  Vddi,  implies  the  asserter  of  the  unreality  and  empti- 
ness of  the  universe,  and  another  designation,  Lokdyata,  expresses  their 
adoption  of  the  tenet,  that  this  being  is  the  Be-ail  of  existence  :  they 
were,  in  short,  the  advocates  of  materialism  and  atheism,  and  have  existed 
from  a  very  remote  period,  and  still  exist,  as  we  shall  hereafter  see. 

The  Saugatas  are  identified  even  by  Ma'dhava  with  the  Bauddhas, 
but  there  seems  to  have  been  some,  although  probably  not  any  very 
essential  difference  :  the  chief  tenet  of  this  class,  according  to  Ananda 
GiRi,  was  their  adopting  the  doctrine  taught  by  Sugata  Muni, 
that  tenderness  towards  animated  nature  comprehends  all  moral  and 
devotional  duty,  a  tenet  which  is,  in  a  great  measure,  common  to  both 
the  Bauddha  and  Jaina  schisms  :  it  is  to  be  feared,  that  the  personal 
description  of  the  Saugata,  as  a  man  of  a  fat  body  and  small  head, 
although  possibly  intended  to  characterise  the  genus,  will  not  direct 
us  to  the  discovery  of  its  origin  or  history.  The  Kshapanaka  again  has 
always  been  described  by  Hindu  writers  as  a  Bauddha,  or  sometimes 
even  a  Jaina  naked  mendicant :  in  the  work  before  us  he  appears  as  the 
professor  of  a  sort  of  astrological  religion,  in  which*  time  is  the  prin- 
cipal divinity,  and  he  is  described  as  carrying,  in  either  hand,  the  imple- 
ments of  his  science,  or  a  Gola  Yantra,  and  Turya  Yantra,  the  former 
of  which  is  an  armillary  sphere,  and  the  latter  a  kind  of  quadrant, 
apparently  for  ascertaining   time  ;t  from   the  geographical  controversy 

*  Time  is  the  Supreme  Deity.  Iswara  cannot  urge  on  the  present.  He  who 
knows  time  knows  Brahme.      Space  and  time  are  not  distinct  from  God. 

The  Turya  Yantra,  is  the  fourth  part  of  an  orb. 


16 

that  occurs  between  him  and  Sankara,  it  appears  that  he  entertains 
the  doctrine  regarding  the  descent  of  earth  in  space,  which  is  attributed 
by  the  old  astronomers  to  the  Bauddhas,  and  controverted  by  the  author 
of  the  Surya  Siddhdnta,^  and  subsequently  by  Bha'skara  :  the  former 
is  quoted  by  Sankara,  according  to  our  author.  These  doctrines,  the 
commentators  on  Bha'skara's  work,  and  even  he,  himself,  comment- 
ing on  his  own  text,  say,  belong  to  the  Jainas,  not  to  the  Bauddhas ; 
but,  possibly,  the  correction  is  itself  an  error,  it  does  not  appear  that 
the  Kshapanaka  of  Ananda  Giri  argues  the  existence  of  a  double  set 
of  planetary  bodies,  which  is,  undoubtedly,  a  Jaina  doctrine,t  and  the 
descent  of  the  earth  in  space  may  have  been  common  to  all  these  sects. 

The  Jainas  that  existed  in  the  time  of  Ananda  Giri,  appear  as  Digam- 
baras  only  ;  he  does  not  notice  their  division  into  Digamharas  and  Swetdm- 
baras,  as  they  at  present  are  found,  and  existed  indeed  prior  to  the  age  of 
Ma'dhava.  The  Bauddhas  are  introduced  personally,  although  it  may  be 
questioned  whether  they  w^ere  very  numerous  in  India  in  so  comparatively 
modern  a  period :  according  to  Ananda  Giri,  a  persecution  of  this  sect,  and 
of  the  Jainas,  took  place  in  one  part  of  the  peninsula,  the  state  of  Rudrapur, 
during  Sankara's  life  time,  but  he,  as  well  as  Ma'dhava, J  excludes  San- 
kara from  being  at  all  concerned  in  it.  He  ascribes  its  occurrence  to  the 
same  source,  the  instigation  of  a  Bhatta,  from  the  north,  or,  in  fact,  of  Cu- 
ma'ril  Bhatta,  a  Bengali,  or  MaithiH  Brahman. 

A  long  series  of  sectaries  then  ensues,  of  a  more  orthodex  description, 
and  who  only  err  in  claiming  primeval  and  pre-eminent  honors  for  the 
objects  of  their  adoration — none  of  these  are  to  be  found  ;  and,  al- 
though, to  a  certain  extent,  the  places  of  some  of  them  may  be  supplied 
by  the  local  deities  of  the  villagers,  and  by  the  admission  of  others  to  a 
participatiom  in  the  worship  paid  to  the  presiding  deities  of  each  sect, 


Fixing  above  it  two  pins,  and  looking  between  them,  the  time  is  ascertained  by 
science. 

*  A.  R.  XU.  229. 

t  A.  R.  IX.  321. 

X  Preface  to  Wilson's  Sanscrit  and  English  Dictionary. 


17 

yet  there  can  be  little  doubt,  that  a  large  portion  of  the  Hindu  Pan- 
theon formerly  enjoyed  honours,  which  have  for  some  centuries  past  been 
withheld.  In  this  predicament  are  Indra,  Kuveua,  Yama,  Varuna, 
Garu'da,  Sesha,  and  Soma,  all  of  whom,  in  the  golden  age  of  Hindu 
idolatry,  had,  no  doubt,  temples  and  adorers  :  the  light  and  attractive 
service  of  the  god  of  love,  indeed,  appears  to  have  been  formerly  very 
popular,  as  his  temples  and  groves  make  a  distinguished  figure  in  the* 
tales,  poems,  and  dramas  of  antiquity  :  it  is  a  feature  that  singularly 
characterises  the  present  state  of  the  Hindu  religion,  that  if  in  some 
instances  it  is  less  ferocious,  in  others,  it  has  ceased  to  address  itself 
to  the  amiable  propensities  of  the  human  character,  or  the  spontaneous 
and  comparatively  innocent  feelings  of  youthful  natures.  The  buffoonery 
of  the  Holi,  and  barbarity  of  the  Cherak  Puja,  but  ill  express  the  sym- 
pathies which  man,  in  all  countries,  feels  with  the  vernal  season,  and 
which  formerly  gave  rise  to  the  festive  Vasanotsava  of  the  Hindus,  and 
the  licentious  homage  paid  to  Sakti  and  Bhairava,  has  little,  in  common 
with  the  worship,  that  might  be  supposed  acceptable  to  Ka'ma  and  his 
lovely  bride,  and  which  it  would  appear  they  formerly  enjoyed. 

Besides  the  adorers  of  the  secondary  divinities,  we  have  a  variety  of 
sects  who  direct  their  devotions  to  beings  of  a  still  lower  rank,  and  of 
whom  none,  at  present,  exist  as  distinct  bodies,  although  individuals 
may  be  found,  either  detached  or  comprehended  in  other  classes,  who, 
more  or  less,  reverence  similar  objects.  Thus,  the  worship  of  Akds,\ 
or  Ether,  as  the  supreme  deity,  is  still  occasionally  met  with  :  all  classes 
pay  daily  homage  to  the  Pitris  or  Manes,  and  a  few  of  the  Tdntrikas 
worship  the  Siddhas,  or  Genii,  in  the  hope  of  acquiring  super-human 
powers  :  the  same  class  furnishes  occasional  votaries  of  the  Vasus, 
Yakshas,  and  Gandharhas,  and  even  of  the  Vetdlas  and  Bhutas,  or  gob- 
lins and  ghosts,  and  the  latter  also  receive  still,  from  the  fears  of  the 
villagers,  propitiatory  adoration.  It  does  not  appear,  that  in  any  form, 
the  worship  of  the  moon  and  stars,  of  the  elements,  and  divisions  of 
the  universe,  rs  still  practised,  although  that  of  the  Tirthas,  or  holy 
places  and  rivers,  is  as  popular  as  ever. 

*  In  the  Vrihat  Kathd—Dasa  Kumdra,  Mdlati  Mddhava,  Mrichch' hakati,  S^c. 
t  I  have  encountered  but  one  Professor,  however,  of  this  faith,  a  miserable  mendi- 
cant, who  taught  the  worship  of  Ether,  under  the  strange  name  of  Baghela. 

D 


18 

We  have  thus  completed  the  enumeration  of  the  sects  as  described 
by  the  author  of  the  Sankara  Vijaya,  and  have  had  an  opportunity  of 
observing,  that,  although  the  outlines  of  the  system  remain  the  same, 
the  details  have  undergone  very  important  alterations,  since  the  time  at 
which  this  work  was  composed  :  the  rise  of  most  of  the  existing 
modifications,  we  can  trace  satisfactorily  enough,  as  will  hereafter 
appear,  and  it  is  not  improbable,  that  the  disappearance  of  many 
of  those,  which  no  longer  take  a  part  in  the  idolatry  of  the  Hindus, 
may  be  attributed  to  the  exertions  of  Sankara.  and  his  disciples  : 
his  object,  as  appears  from  the  work  we  have  hitherto  followed, 
was  by  no  means  the  suppression  of  acts  of  outward  devotion,  nor  of  the 
preferential  worship  of  any  acknowledged  and  pre-eminent  deity  :  his 
leading  tenet  is  the  recognition  of  Brahme  Para  Brahme,*  as  the  sole 
cause  and  supreme  ruler  of  the  universe,  and  as  distinct  from  Siva, 
Vishnu,  Brahma',  or  any  individual  member  of  the  pantheon  :  with 
this  admission,  and  in  regard  to  the  weakness  of  those  human  faculties, 
which  cannot  elevate  themselves  to  the  conception  of  the  inscrutable 
first  cause,  the  observance  of  such  rites,  and  the  worship  of  such 
deities,  as  are  either  prescribed  by  the  Vedas,  or  the  works  not  in- 
compatible with  their  authority,  were  left  undisturbed  by  this  teacher  ;t 
they  even  received,  to  a  certain  extent,  his  particular  sanction,  and  the 
following  divisions  of  the  Hindu  faith  were,  by  his  express  permission, 
taught  by  some  of  his  disciples,  and  are,  consequently,  regarded  by  the 
learned  Brahmans  in  general,  as  the  only  orthodox  and  allowable  forms 
in  the  present  day.|     The   Saiva  faith  was  instituted  by  Paramata 


*  As  in  these  texts  of  the  Vedas   ^"^^^Y^^Tf^    ^T^fT  |    and    ^1rW[ 

Ordinances  founded  on  the  Tantras,  the  Puruns,  or  historical   record,  are  admissi- 
ble if  accordant  with  the  Vedas  ;  they  must  be  rejected  if  repugnant. 


19 

Ka'la'nala,  who  is  described  as  teaching  at  Benares,  and  assuming  the 
insignia  that  characterise  the  Dandis  of  modern  times.  The  Vaishnava 
worship  was  taught  at  Kdnchi,  or  Conjeveram,  by  Lakshmana  Acha'- 
RYA  and  Hasta'malaka  ;  and  the  latter  seems  to  have  introduced  a  modi- 
fied adoration  of  Vishnu,  in  the  character  of  Krishna.  The  Saura 
sect  was  continued  under  the  auspices  of  Diva'kara,  Brahmdchdri,  and 
the  Sdkta,  under  those  of  the  Sanyasi,  Tripurakuma'ra  :  the  Gdnapatya 
were  allowed  to  remain  under  the  presidence  of  Girijaputra,  and  from 
such  persons  as  had  not  adopted  either  of  the  preceding  systems, 
Batukanath,  the  professor  of  the  Kdpdlika,  or  Bhairava  worship,  was 
permitted  to  attract  followers  ;  all  these  teachers  were  converts  and 
disciples  of  Sankara,  and  returned  to  his  superintending  guidance, 
when  they  had  effected  the  objects  of  their  missions. 

The  notice  that  occurs  in  the  Serva  Dersana  of  any  of  the  sects 
which  have  yet  been  mentioned,  has  been  already  incidentally  adverted 
to  :  this  work  is  less  of  a  popular  form  than  the  preceding,  and.  contro- 
verts the  speculative  rather  than  the  practical,  doctrines  of  other  schools  : 
besides  the  atheistical  Bauddha  and  Jaina  sects,  the  work  is  occupied 
chiefly  with  the  refutation  of  the  followers  of  Jaimini,  Gautama,  and  Pa- 
tanjala,  and  we  have  no  classes  of  worshippers  introduced  but  those  of  the 
Vaishnavas  vj\io  ioWow  Ra'ma'nuja,  and  Madhwdchdrya,  of  the  Saivas, 
the  Pdsupatas,  the  followers  of  Abhinava  Gupta,  who  taught  the  Mantra 
worship  of  Siva ;  and  the  alchemical  school,  or  worshippers  of  Siva's 
type  in  quicksilver,  and  the  Rasendra  Linga  :  most  of  these  seem  to 
have  sprung  into  being  in  the  interval  between  the  tenth  and  thirteenth 
centuries,  and  have  now  either  disappeared,  or  are  rapidly  on  the  decline  : 
those  which  actually  exist,  we  shall  recur  to  in  the  view  we  are  now 
prepared  to  take  of  the  actual  condition  of  the  Hindu  faith. 

In  the  present  impure  age,  the  bud  of  wisdom  being  blighted  by  iniquity,  men 
are  inadequate  to  the  apprehension  of  pure  unity  ;  they  will  be  apt,  therefore,  again 
to  follow  the  dictates  of  their  own  fancies,  and  it  is  necessary  for  the  preservation  of 
the  world,  and  the  maintenance  of  civil  and  religious  distinctions,  to  acknowledge 
those  modifications  of  the  divine  spirit  which  are  the  work  of  the  Supkeme.  These 
reflexions  having  occurred  to  Sankaha,  he  addressed  his  disciples,  &c. 


20 


SECTION  III. 


Present  divisions  of  the  Hindus,  and  of  the  Vaishnavas  in  particular. 

The  classification  adopted  by  the  works,  I  especially  follow,  if  not 
unexceptionable,  is  allowable  and  convenient,  and  may,  therefore,  re- 
gulate the  following  details  :  it  divides  all  the  Hindus  into  three  great 
classes  or  Vaishnavas,  Saivas,  and  Sdktas,  and  refers  to  a  fourth  or  mis- 
cellaneous class,  all  not  comprised  in  the  three  others. 

The  worshippers  of  Vishnu,  Siva,  and  Sakti,  who  are  the  objects 
of  the  following  description,  are  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  orthodox 
adorers  of  those  divinities  :  few  Brahmans  of  learning,  if  they  have  any 
religion  at  all,  will  acknowledge  themselves  to  belong  to  any  of  the 
popular  divisions  of  the  Hindu  faith,  although,  as  a  matter  of  simple 
preference,  they  more  especially  worship  some  individual  deity,  as  their 
chosen,  or  Ishta  Devata :  they  refer  also  to  the  Vidas,  the  books  of  law, 
the  Puranas,  and  Tantras,  as  the  only  ritual  they  recognise,  and  regard 
all  practices  not  derived  from  those  sources  as  irregular  and  profane  : 
on  the  other  hand,  many  of  the  sects  seem  to  have  originated,  in  a 
great  measure,  out  of  opposition  to  the  Brahmanical  order  :  teachers  and 
disciples  are  chosen  from  any  class,  and  the  distinction  of  castes  is,  in  a 
great  measure,  sunk  in  the  new  one,  of  similarity  of  schism :  the 
ascetics  and  mendicants,  also,  in  many  instances,  aflfect  to  treat  the 
Brahmans  with  particular  contempt,  and  this  is  generally  repaid  with 
interest  by  the  Brahmans.  A  portion,  though  not  a  large  one,  of  the 
populace  is  still  attached  to  the  Smdrta  Brahmans,  as  their  spiritual 
guides,  and  are  so  far  distinct  from  any  of  the  sects  we  shall  have  to 
specify,  whilst  most  of  the  followers,  even  of  the  sects,  pay  the  ordinary 
deference  to  the  Brahminical  order,  and  especially  evince  towards 
the  Brahmans  of  their  own  fellowship,  of  whom  there  is  generally 
abundance,  the  devotedness  and  submission  which  the  original  Hindu 
Code  so  perpetually  inculcates. 


21 

Excluding,  therefore,  those  who  may  be  regarded  as  the  regular  wor- 
shippers of  regular  gods,  we  have  the  following  enumeration  of  the  several 
species  of  each  class  : 

Vaishnavas. 

1  Ramanujas,  or  Sri  Sampradayis,  or  Sri  Vaishnavas. 

2  Ramanandis,  or  Ramawats. 

3  Kabir  Pan  this. 

4  K'hakis. 

5  Maluk  Dasis. 

6  Dadu  Pant'his. 

7  Ray  a  Dasis. 

8  Senais. 

9  Vallabhacharis,  or  Rudra  Sampradayis. 

10  Mira  Bais. 

1 1  Madhwacharis,  or  Brahma  Sampradayis. 

12  Nimawat,  or  Sanakadi  Sampradayis. 

13  The  Vaishnavas  of  Bengal. 

14  Radha  Vallabhis. 

15  The  Sak'hi  Bhavas. 

1 6  Charan  Dasis. 

17  Harischandis. 

18  Sadhna  Panthis. 

19  Madhavis. 

20  Sanyasis,  Vairagis  and  Nagas. 

Saivas. 

1  Dandis  and  Dasnamis. 

2  Jogis. 

3  Jangamas. 

4  Paramahansas. 

5  Urdhaba'hus,  Akas  Muk'his,  and  Nak'his, 

6  Giidaras. 

7  Ruk'haras,  Suk'haras  and  Uk'haras. 

8  Kara  Lingis. 

9  Sanyasis,  &c. 

Sa'ktas. 

1  Dakshinis. 

2  Vamis. 


22 

3  Kancheliyas. 

4  Kararis. 

Miscellaneous  Sects. 

1  Ganapatyas. 

2  Saurapatas. 

3  Nanak  Shahis  of  seven  classes. 

1  Udasis. 

2  Ganjbakhshis. 

3  Ramrayis. 

4  Suthra  Shahis. 

5  Govind  Sinhis. 

6  Nirmalas. 

7  Nagas. 

4  Jainas  of  two  principal  orders. 

1  Digambaras. 

2  Swetambaras. 

5  Baba  Lalis, 

6  Pran  Nathis. 

7  Sadhs. 

8  Satnamis. 

9  Siva  Narayinis. 
10  Sunyabadis. 

These  will  be  regarded  as  varieties  enough,  it  may  be  presumed,  es- 
pecially when  it  is  considered,  that  most  of  them  comprise  a  number  of 
sub- divisions,  and  that  besides  these  acknowledged  classifications,  many 
individual  mendicants  are  to  be  found  all  over  India,  who  can  scarcely 
be  included  within  the  limits  of  any  of  them,  exercising  a  sort  of 
independence  both  in  thought  and  act,  and  attached  very  loosely,  if 
at  all,  to  any  of  the  popular  schismatical  sects.* 

*  Some  of  the  popular  works  adopt  a  different  classification,  and  allude  to  96 
Pdshandas,  or  heresies,  which  are  thus  arranged  : — 

Amongst  the  Brahmans, 24 

Sanysais, 12 

Vairkgis, 12 

Sauras, 18 

Jangamas, , 18 

Jogis,   » 12 


23 


VAISHNAVAS. 


1  Sri  Sampraddyis,  or  Rdmdnujas. 

Amongst  other  divisions  of  less  importance,  the  Vaishnavas  are  usually 
distinguished  into  four  principal  Sampraddyas,  or  sects  ,-*  of  these,  the 
most  ancient  and  respectable  is  the  Sri  Sampraddya,  founded  by  the 

*  Thus  the  Bhakta  Maid,  ^T^^    IfWT    "%fK    ^^  ^^^  riPt*    "^r^T, 

jpgji^  "^fXl^f'^J'Tf^  I  "  Hari,  in  preceding  ages,  assumed  twenty-four  principal 
shapes,  but  four  were  manifest  in  the  Kali  Yug  :  the  magnanimous  Rdmunuja,  a.  trea- 
sure of  Ambrosia  and  terrestrial  tree  of  plenty  :  the  ocean  of  kindness  and  transporter 
across  the  sea  of  the  universe,  Vishnu  Swami :  Madhu  Achurj,  a  rich  cloud  in  the 
autumnal  season  of  piety  :  and  Nimbdditya,  a  sun  that  illumined  the  cave  of  igno- 
rance ;  by  them  acts  of  piety  and  obligation  were  divided,  and  each  sect  was  severally 
established."  There  are  also  Sanscrit  texts  authorising  the  difiFerent  institution,  and 
characteristic  term  of  each  Sampraddya,  one  of  these  is  from  the  Padma  Purdna. 

"  Those  Mantras,  which  belong  to  no  system,  are  of  no  virtue  ;  and,  therefore,  in  the 
Kali  age,  there  shall  be  followers  of  four  sects.  Sri,  Mddhwi,  Rudra  and  Sanaka, 
shall  he  the  Vaishnavas,  purifying  the  world,  and  these  four,  Devi,  (5im  speaks,) 
shall  be  the  institutors  of  the  Sampraddyas  in  the  Kali  period."  We  may  here  observe 
in  passing,  that  if  this  text  is  genuine,  the  Padma  Purdna  must  be  very  modern: 
another  similar  text  is  the  following  : 

■^f\  f^i^Tf^r^WgW^:  II 

••  Lakshmi'  selected  Rdmdnuja  ;  Brahma.  Madhwdchdrya  ;  Rudra  gave  the  pre- 
ference to  Vishnu  Sw6mi,  and  the  four  Sanakas  to  Nimbaditya."  The  cause  of  the 
election  is  not  very  evident,  as  the  creeds  taught  by  those  teachers,  have  little  con- 
nexion with  the  deity  who  lends  the  appellation  to  the  sects. 


24 


Vaishnava  reformer  Rdmdnuja  Achdrya,  about  the  middle  of  the  twelfth 


* 


century 

The  history  of  Ra'ma'nuja,  and  his  first  followers,  is  well  known  in 
the  south  of  India,  of  which  he  was  a  native,  and  is  recorded  in  va- 
rious legendary  tracts  and  traditional  narratives. 

According  to  the  Bhdrgava  Upapurdna,  Ra'ma'nuja  is  said  to  have  been 
an  incarnation  of  the  serpent  Sesha,  whilst  his  chief  companions  and  disci- 
ples were  the  embodied  Discus,  Mace,  Lotus,  and  other  insignia  of  Vishnu. 
In  a  Kanara  account  of  his  life,  called  the  Divya  Charitra,  he  is  said  to 
have  been  the  son  of  Sri  Kesava  Achdrya  and  Bhumi  Devi;  and,  as  before, 
an  incarnation  of  Sesha.  He  was  born  at  Perumbur,  and  studied  at  Kdn- 
chi,  or  Conjeveram,  where  also  he  taught  his  system  of  the  Vaishnava 
faith.  He  afterwards  resided  at  Sri  Rang  a,  worshipping  Vishnu  as  Sri 
Ranga  'Ndfha,  and  there  composed  his  principal  works  :  he  then  visited 
various  parts  of  India,  disputing  with  the  professors  of  different  creeds, 
overcoming  them  of  course,  and  reclaiming  various  shrines,  then  in  pos- 
session of  the  Saivas,  for  the  worshippers  of  Vishnu,  particularly  the 
celebrated  temple  of  Tripeti. 

On  his  return  to  Sri  Ranga,  the  disputes  between  the  Vaishna- 
va and  Saiva  religions,  became  exceedingly  violent,  and  the  Chola 
monarch,  who,  according  to  some  accounts,  was  at  that  time  Keri- 
ka'la  Chola,  subsequently  named  Krimi  Konda  Chola,  being  a 
devout  worshipper  of  Siva,  commanded  all  the  Brahmans  in  his  do- 
minions to  sign  an  acknowledgement  of  the  supremacy  of  that  divi- 
nity, bribing  some  of  the  most  refractory,  and  terrifying  others  into  ac- 
quiescence. Ra'ma'nuja,  however,  was  impracticable,  and  the  king  sent 
armed  men  to  seize  him.  With  the  assistance  of  his  disciples,  he  effect- 
ed his  escape,   and  ascending  the   Ghats,    found  refuge   with  the  Jain 


*  The  Smriti  Kdla  Taranga  places  the  date  of  Ra'ma'nuja's  appearance  in 
Saka  —  \0\'^  or  a.d.  1127.  A  note  by  Colonel  Mackenzie  on  an  inscription,  given  in 
the  Asiatic  Researches  9,  270,  places  the  birth  of  Ra'ma'nuja  in  a.d.  1U08  :  various 
accounts,  collected  by  t)r.  Buchanan,  make  it  1010  and  1025  (Buchanan's  Mysore, 
2,  80)  and  1019  (Ibid,  3,  413.)  Inscriptions  make  him  alive  in  1128,  (Ibid)  which 
would  give  him  a  life  of  more  than  a  century  :  according  to  Col.  Wilks,  indeed, 
(History  of  Mysore,  1,41,  note  and  appendix),  he  was  alive  in  1183.  The  weight  of 
authority  seems  to  be  in  favour  of  the  more  recent  date,  and  we  may  conclude  that 
he  was  born  about  the  end  of  the  eleventh  century,  and  that  the  first  half  of  the  twelfth 
century  was  the  period  at  which  his  fame,  as  a  teacher,  was  established. 


25 

sovereign  of  Mysore,  Vitala  Deva,  Veldla  Rdya.  In  consequence  of 
rendering  medical  service  to  the  daughter  of  this  prince,  or  in  the  terms 
of  the  legend,  expelling  an  evil  spirit,  a  Brahma  Rdkshasa,  by  whom 
she  was  possessed,  he  obtained  the  monarch's  grateful  regard,  and  final- 
ly converted  him  to  the  Vaishnava  faith.  Tiie  Raja  assumed  the  title 
of  Vishnu  Verddhana.  Ra'ma'nuja  remained  several  years  in  Mysore,  at 
a  temple  founded  by  the  Raja  on  Yddava  Giri,  now  known  as  Mail 
Cotay,  for  the  reception  of  an  image  called  Chavala  Rdya,  a  form  of 
Ranachhor,  or  Krishna,  which  the  local  traditions  very  ridiculously  pre- 
tend he  obtained  from  the  Mohammedan  sovereign  of  Delhi.  Ra'ma'- 
nuja resided  here  twelve  years,  but  on  the  death  of  his  persecutor,  the 
Chola  king,  he  returned  to  Sri  Ranga,  on  the  Kdveri,  and  there  spent 
the  remainder  of  his  life  in  devout  exercises  and  religious  seclusion. 

The  establishments  of  the  Ramanujiyas  are  numerous  in  the  Dekhin 
still,  and  the  same  country  comprehends  the  site  of  the  Gaddi,  the 
pillow  or  seat  of  the  primitive  teacher  ;  his  spiritual  throne,  in  fact,  to 
which  his  disciples  are  successively  elevated.*  This  circumstance 
gives  a  superiority  to  the  Achdryas  of  the  Dekshina,  or  South,  over  those 
of  the  Uttara,  or  North,  into  which  they  are  at  present  divided. 

The  worship  of  the  followers  of  Ra'ma'nuja,  is  addressed  to  Vishnu 
and  to  Lakshmi,  and  their  respective  incarnations,  either  singly  or 
conjointly  ;  and  the  Sri  Vaishnavas,  by  which  general  name  the  sect  is 
known,  consist  of  corresponding  subdivisions,  as  Na'ra'yana',  or 
Lakshmi,  or  Lakshmi  Na'ra'yan,  or  Ra'ma  or  Sita,  or  Sita  Ra'ma,  or 
Krishna,  or  Rukmini,  or  any  other  modifications  of  Vishnu,  or  his  con- 
sort, is  the  preferential  object  of  the  veneration   of  the  votary. f     The 


*  According  to  information  obtained  by  Dr.  Buchanan,  Ra'ma'nuja  founded  700 
Mutts,  of  which  four  only  remain  ;  one  of  the  principal  of  these  is  at  Mail  Cotay,  or 
Dakshina  Badarikdsrama,  the  Badari  station  of  the  South.  Ra'ma'nuja  also  esta- 
blished 74  hereditary  Guruships  amongst  his  followers,  the  representatives  of  which 
still  remain  and  dispute  the  supremacy  with  the  Sanyasi  members  of  the  order  ;  these 
last,  however,  are  generally  considered  of  the  highest  rank,  (  Buch.  Mysore,  2,75). 
In  another  place  (I,  144),  he  says  that  89  Guruships  were  established,  5  in  the  Sanyasi 
class,  and  84  in  the  secular  order  :  the  Matams  of  the  five  former  are  Ahobalem, 
Toiddri,  Rameswara,  Sri  Rangam,  and  Kanji. 

t  Mr.  Colebrooke,  A.  R.  7,  says  the  Rdmdnujas  are  of  three  classes,  those  who  wor- 
ship Ra'ma  alone,  Sita  alone,  and  Sita  and  Ra'ma  conjointly.  One  of  my  authorities, 
Mathura  Ndth,  says,  they  worship  Mahd  Lakihmi,  and  other  information  agrees  with 

E 


26 

Sri  Vaishnava  worship  in  the  north  of  India,  is  not  very  popular,  and 
the  sect  is  rather  of  a  speculative  than  practical  nature,  although  it  does 
not  require,  in  its  teachers,  secession  from  the  world  :  the  teachers  are 
usually  of  the  Brahmanical  order,  but  the  disciples  may  be  of  any 
caste.* 

Besides  the  temples  appropriated  to  Vishnu  and  his  consort,  and 
their  several  forms,  including  those  of  Krishna  and  Ra'ma,  and  those 
which  are  celebrated  as  objects  of  pilgrimage,  as  Lakshmi-Balaji,  Rdm- 
ndth,  and  Rangandth,  in  the  south  ;  Badarinat'h,  in  the  Himalaya,  Jagan- 
ndt'h,  in  Orissa,  and  Dwdrakd,  on  the  Malabar  Coast,  images  of  metal 
or  stone  are  usually  set  up  in  the  houses  of  the  private  members  of  this 
sect,  which  are  daily  worshipped,  and  the  temples  and  dwellings  are  all 
decorated  with  the  Sdlagrdma  stone  and  Tulasi  plant. 

The  most  striking  peculiarities  in  the  practices  of  this  sect,  are  the 
individual  preparation,  and  scrupulous  privacy  of  their  meals  :  they  must 
not  eat  in  cotton  garments,  but  having  bathed,  must  put  on  woollen  or 
silk  :  the  teachers  allow  theijf  select  pupils  to  assist  them,  but,  in  general, 
all  the  Rdmdnujas  cook  for  themselves,  and  should  the  meal  during  this 
process,  or  whilst  they  are  eating,  attract  even  the  looks  of  a  stranger, 
the  operation  is  instantly  stopped,  and  the  viands  buried  in  the  ground  : 
a  similar  delicacy,  in  this  respect,  prevails  amongst  some  other  classes  of 
Hindus,  especially  of  the  Rajaput  families,  but  it  is  not  carried  to  so 
preposterous  an  extent. f 


his;  from  the  texts  quoted  in  the  Sarva  DersanaSangraha,  Vishnu  as  Va'sudeva,  is 
the  deity  to  be  worshipped,  but  no  doubt  all  the  varieties  exist :  without,  however,  af- 
fectinij  the  identity  of  the  sect,  the  real  object  of  whose  devotion  is  Vishnu,  as  the  cause 
and  creator  of  the  world,  and  any  of  his,  or  his  Sakti's  more  especial  manifestations,  are 
consequently  entitled  to  reverence.  The  term  Sri  Vaishtiavas,  most  commonly  applied 
to  them,  denotes  an  original  preference  of  the  female  deity  or  Mahd  LaJcshmi  :  the 
worship  of  Ka'ma  is  more  properly  that  of  the  Kdmunandis,  and  they  may  be  the 
persons  intended  by  Mr.  Colebrooke's  informants,  as  those  of  the  Rdmdnujiyas  who 
worship  Ra'ma  only,  (A.  R.  7,  '281 ).  It  may  also  be  observed,  that  the  Rdmanujiyas 
unite  with  Krishna,  Rukmini,  not  Rddhd,  the  latter  being  his  mistress  only,  not  his 
wife,  and  being  never  named  in  the  Bhdgavat,  except  in  one  ambiguous  passage. 

*  The  iV/awira,  and  mark,  are  never  bestowed  on  any  person  of  impure  birth. — Buch. 
Mysore,  1,  146. 

t  It  is  said,  however,  that  there  are  two  divisions  of  the  sect,  one  called  Avarani, 
from  Avarana,  screening,  or  surrounding,  and  the  other  Andvarini,  from  the  members 
not  observing  such  punctilious  privacy. 


27 

The  chief  ceremony  of  initiation  in  all  Hindu  sects,  is  the  commu- 
nication by  the  teacher  to  the  disciple  of  the  Mantra,  which  generally 
consists  of  the  name  of  some  deity,  or  a  short  address  to  him ;  it  is 
communicated  in  a  whisper,  and  never  lightly  made  known  by  the  adept 
to  profane  ears.  The  Mantra  of  the  Ra'ma'nuja  sect  is  said  to  be  the 
six  syllable  Mantra — or  Om  Rdmaya  namah ;  or  Om,  salutation  to 
Ra'ma.* 

Another  distinction  amongst  sects,  but  merely  of  a  civil  character,  is 
the  term  or  terms  with  which  the  religious  members  salute  each  other 
when  they  meet,  or  in  which  they  are  addressed  by  the  lay  members. 
This  amongst  the  Rdmdnujas  is  the  phrase,  Ddsosmi,  or  Ddsdham ;  I  am 
your  slave  ;  accompanied  with  the  Prandm,  or  slight  inclination  of  the 
head,  and  the  application  of  the  joined  hands  to  the  forehead.  To  the 
AcharyaSt  or  supreme  teachers  of  this  sect,  the  rest  perform  the  Ashtanga 
Dandawat  or  prostration  of  the  body,  with  the  application  of  eight  parts — 
the  forehead,  breast,  hands,  knees,  and  insteps  of  the  feet,  to  the  ground. 

The  Hindu  sects  are  usually  discriminated  by  various  fantastical 
streaks  on  their  faces,  breasts,  and  arms  :  for  this  purpose,  all  the  Vaish- 
navas  employ  especially,  a  white  earth  called  Gopichandana,  which,  to 
be  of  the  purest  description,  should  be  brought  from  Dwdrakd,  being 
said  to  be  the  soil  of  a  pool  at  that  place,  in  which  the  Gopi's  drown- 
ed themselves  when  they  heard  of  Krishna's  death.  The  common 
Gopichandana,  however,  is  nothing  but  a  magnesian  or  calcareous 
clay. 

The  marks  of  the  Rdmdnujas  are  two  perpendicular  white  lines, 
drawn  from  the  root  of  the  hair  to  the  commencement  of  each  eye-brow, 
and  a  transverse  streak  connecting  them  across  the  root  of  the  nose ;  in 
the  centre  is  a  perpendicular  streak  of  red,  made  with  red  Sanders,  or 
Roli,  a  preparation  of  turmeric  and  lime;  they  have  also  patches  of 
Gopichandana,  with  a  central  red  streak  on  the  breast,  and  each  upper 
arm :  the  marks  are  supposed  to  represent  the  Sank'h,  Chakra,  Gadd, 


*  In  giving  the  Mantras,  as  they  have  been  communicated  to  me,  it  may  be  necessary 
to  suggest  a  doubt  of  their  accuracy  :  a  Hindu  evades  what  he  dislikes  to  answrer,  and 
will  not  scruple  a  falsehood  to  stop  enquiry  ;  men  above  prej  udice,  in  other  respects,  find 
it  so  difficult  to  get  over  that  of  communicating  the  Mantra,  that  when  they  profess  to 
impart  it,  even  their  sincerity  can  scarcely  be  admitted  with,out  a  doubt. 


28 

and  Padma,*  or  Shell,  Discus,  Club,  and  Lotus,  which  Vishnu  bears  in 
his  four  hands,  whilst  the  central  streak  is  Shi,  or  LAKSHMi.f  Some 
have  these  objects  carved  on  wooden  stamps,  with  which  they  impress 
the  emblems  on  their  bodies,  and  others  carry  their  devotion  so  far  as 
to  have  the  parts  cicatrized  with  heated  metallic  models  of  the  objects 
they  propose  to  represent,  but  this  is  not  regarded  as  a  creditable 
practice  :J  besides  these  marks,  they  wear  a  necklace  of  the  wood  of  the 
Tulasi,  and  carry  a  rosary  of  the  seeds  of  the  same  plant,  or  of  the  Lotus. 

*  The    Vaishnava    is  thus  described  in  the  Bhakta  Mala,  the  text  is  probably  that 
of  the  Bhdyavat  — 

^^  I 

*'  They  who  bear  the  Tulasi  round  the  neck,  the  rosary  of  Lotus  seeds,  have  the  shell 
and  discus  impressed  upon  their  upper  arm,  and  the  upright  streak  along  the  centre  of 
the  forehead,  they  are  Vaishnavas,  and  sanctify  the  world." 

t  The  efficacy  of  these  marks  is  very  great :  we  are  told  in  the  Kdsi  Khand,  that 
Yam  A  directs  his  ministers  to  avoid  such  as  bear  them,  and  the  same  work  observes, 
that  no  sin  can  exist  in  the  individuals  who  make  use  of  them,  be  they  of  whatever 
caste. 

'FtMt^'^H  1%TrTFf  gtt^Tif^  ^ff;  II 

X  The  Vrikat  Ndradiya  Parana  sentences  every  Brahman  adopting  the  practice  to 
endless  degradation,  and  even  to  the  infernal  regions. 

The  reason  also  occurs-'^T'^tSnE^f     ^g^^if     ^c^^*TTiTTf^f(T  I     ^T 

^f^rTTf^fTT  TT^R  f%5^^5TT^%   ^2y?r  ||  Ihe  body  of  a  Brahman 

is  the  abode  of  all  the  gods ;  if  that  is  consumed,  where  shall  we  abide  ?  It  appears, 
however,  that  stamping  the  mark  with  a  hot  iron,  is  commonly  in  use  in  ihe  Dekhin.  A 
similar  practice  seems  to  have  been  known  to  some  of  the  early  Christians,  and  baptiz- 
ing with  fire,  was  stamping  the  cross  on  the  forehead  with  a  hot  iron. 


29 

The  principal  authorities  of  this  sect,  are  the  comments  of  the  founder 
on  the  Sutras  of  Vya'sa,  and  other  Vaidika  works  :  they  are  written  in 
Sanscrit,  and  are  the  Sri  Bhdshya,  the  Gttd  Bhdshya,  the  Veddrtha  San- 
graha,  Vedanta  Pradipa,  and  Veddntd  Sdra :  besides  these,  the  works  of 
Venkdta  Achdrya,  are  of  great  repute  amongst  them,  as  the  Stotra 
Bhdshya,  and  Satadushini,  and  others  :  the  Chanda  Mdruta  Vaidika,  and 
Trinsatadhydnam,  are  also  works  of  authority,  as  is  the  Panchardtra 
of  Nareda  :  of  the  Purdnas  they  acknowledge  only  six  as  authorities, 
the  Vishnu,  Ndrediya,  Garura,  Padma,  Vardha  and  the  Bhdgavat :  the 
other  twelve  are  regarded  as  Tdmasi,  or  originating  in  the  principles  of 
darkness  and  passion,  as  we  have  already  observed.  Besides  these,  the 
Rdmdnujas  have  a  variety  of  popular  works  in  the  dialects  of  the  South, 
one  of  which,  the  Guru  Para,  containing  an  account  of  the  life  of  Ra'- 
ma'nuja,  was  procured  by  Dr.  Buchanan,  in  the  course  of  his  statistical 
researches  in  Mysore. 

The  chief  religious  tenet  of  the  Rdmdnujas,  is  the  assertion  that  Vishnu 
is  Brahme  ;  that  he  was  before  all  worlds,  and  was  the  cause  and  the 
creator  of  all.     Although  they  maintain  that  Vishnu  and  the  universe 
are  one,  yet,  in  opposition  to  the  Vedanta  doctrines,  they  deny  that  the 
deity  is  void  of  form  or  quality,  and  regard  him  as  endowed  with  all  good 
qualities,  and  with  a  two- fold  form  :  the  supreme  spirit,  Paramdtmd,  or 
cause,  and  the  gross  one,  the  effect,  the  universe  or  matter.    The  doctrine 
is  hence  called  the   Visishthddwaita,    or   doctrine  of  unity  with  attri- 
butes.    In  these  assertions  they  are  followed  by  most  of  the  Vaishnava. 
sects.     Creation  originated  in  the  wish    of  Vishnu,  who  was   alone, 
without  a  second,  to  multiply  himself :  he  said,  I  will  become  many  ; 
and  he  was  indivi4ually  embodied  as  visible  and  etherial  light.     After 
that,  as  a  ball  of  clay  may  be  moulded  into  various  forms,  so  the  grosser 
substance  of  the  deity  became  manifest  in  the  elements,  and  their  com- 
binations :  the  forms  into   which  the  divine  matter  is  thus  divided,  are 
pervaded  by   a  portion  of  the  same  vitality  which  belongs  to  the  great 
cause  of  all,  but  which  is  distinct  from  his  spiritual  or  etherial  essence  ; 
here,    therefore,   the    Rdmdnujas   again    oppose    the    Veddntikas,    who 
identify  the  Paramdtmd  and  Jiidimd,  or  etherial  and  vital  spirit  :   this 
vitality,   though  endlessly   diffusible,   is  imperishable  and  eternal,  and 
the  matter  of  the   universe,   as  being  the  same  in  substance  with  the 
Supreme  Being,  is  alike  without  beginning  or  end  :  Purushottama,  or 


30 

Na'ra'yan,  after  having  created  man  and  animals,  through  the  instru- 
mentality of  those  subordinate  agents  whom  he  willed  into  existence  for 
that  purpose,  still  retained  the  supreme  authority  of  the  universe  :  so 
that  the  Rdmdnujas  assert  three  predicates  of  the  universe,  comprehend- 
ing the  deity  :  it  consists  of  Chit,  or  spirit,  Achit,  or  matter,  and 
Iswara,  or  god,  or  the  enjoyer,  the  thing  enjoyed,  and  the  ruler  and 
controuler  of  both.  Besides  his  primary  and  secondary  form  as  the 
creator,  and  creation,  the  deity  has  assumed,  at  different  times,  parti- 
cular forms  and  appearances,  for  the  benefit  of  his  creatures  :  he  is,  or 
has  been,  visibly  present  amongst  men,  in  five  modifications  :  in  his 
Archa',  objects  of  worship,  as  images,  &c.  ;  in  the  Vibhdvas,  or 
Avatdras,  as  the  fish,  the  boar,  &c.  ;  in  certain  forms  called  Vydhas,  of 
which  four  are  enumerated,  Va'sudeva,  or  Krishna,  Balara'ma,  Pra- 
DYUMNA,  and  Aniruddha  ;  fourthly,  in  the  Sukshma  form,  which,  when 
perfect,  comprises  six  qualities  :  Viraja,  absence  of  human  passion  ;  Vi- 
mrityu,  immortality  ;  Visoka,  exemption  from  care  or  pain  ;  Vijighatsd, 
absence  of  natural  wants  ;  Satya  kama,  and  Satya  sankalpa,  the  love 
and  practice  of  truth  ;  and  sixthly,  as  the  Antardtma,  or  Antarydmi, 
the  human  soul,  or  individualised  spirit  :  these  are  to  be  worshipped 
seriatim,  as  the  ministrant  ascends  in  the  scale  of  perfection,  and  ado- 
ration therefore  is  five-fold  ;  Abhigamanam,  cleaning  and  purifying  the 
temples,  images,  &c.  Updddnam,  providing  flowers  and  perfumes  for  re- 
ligious rites  ;  Ijyd,  the  presentation  of  such  offerings,  blood  offerings 
being  uniformly  prohibited,  it  may  be  observed,  by  all  the  Vaishnavas ; 
Swddhydya,  counting  the  rosary  and  repeating  the  names  of  the  divinity, 
or  any  of  his  forms  ;  and  Yoga,  the  effort  to  unite  with  the  deity  :  the 
reward  of  these  acts  is  elevation  to  the  seat  of  Vishnu,  and  enjoyment 
of  like  state  with  his  own,  interpreted  to  be  perpetual  residence  in 
Vaikunt'ha,  or  Vishnu's  heaven,  in  a  condition  of  pure  ecstasy  and  eter. 
nal  rapture. 

The  Rdmdnujas  are  not  very  numerous  in  the  North  of  India,  where 
they  are  better  known  as  Sri  Vaishnavas ;  they  are  decidedly  hostile  to 
the  Saiva  sect,  and  are  not  on  very  friendly  terms  with  the  modern 
votaries  of  Krishna,  although  they  recognise  that  deity  as  an  incarna- 
tion of  Vishnu.* 

*  Dubois,  in  his  8th  Chapter,  has  some  details  of  the  Vaishnava  mendicants,  as 
met   with   in  the  Dekhin :  his  account,  however,  does  not  apply  to  the  Rdma?ivja,  or 


31 


RAMANANDIS,  OR  RAMAWATS. 


The  followers  of  Ra'ma'nand  are  much  better  known  than  those  of 
Ra'ma'nuja  in  Upper  Hindustan  :  they  are  usually  considered  as  a  branch 
of  the  Ra'ma'nuja  sect,  and  address  their  devotions  pecuharly  to  Ra'ma- 
CHANDRA,  and  the  divine  manifestations  connected  with  Vishnu  in  that 
incarnation,  as  Sita,  Lakshmana,  and  Hanuma'n. 

Ra'ma'nand  is  sometimes  considered  to  have  been  the  immediate  dis- 
ciple of  Ra'ma'nuja,  but  this  appears  to  be  an  error :  a  more  particular 
account  makes  him  the  fifth  in  descent  from  that  teacher,  as  follows — 
The  pupil  andsuccessor  of  Ra'ma'nuja  wasDEVA'NANDA;  of  Deva'nanda, 
Harinanda  ;  of  Harinanda,  Ra'ghava'nand,  and  of  this  last,  Ra'ma'- 
nand, an  enumeration  which,  if  correct,  would  place  Ra'ma'nand  about 
the  end  of  the  thirteenth  century  :*  there  is  great  reason,  however,  to 
doubt  his  being  entitled  to  so  remote  a  date,  and  consequently  to  question 
the  accuracy  of  his  descent  from  Ra'ma'nuja  ;  we  shall  have  occasion  to 
infer,  hereafter,  from  the  accounts  given  of  the  dates  of  other  teachers, 
that  Ra'ma'nand  was  not  earlier  than  the  end  of  the  fourteenth,  or  be- 
ginning of  the  fifteenth,  century. 

According  to  common  tradition,  the  schism  of  Ra'ma'nand  originated 
in  resentment  of  an  affront  offered  him  by  his  fellow  disciples,  and 
sanctioned  by  his  teacher.  It  is  said,  that  he  had  spent  some  time  in 
travelling  through  various  parts   of  India,  after  which  he  returned  to 


any  other  Vaishnava  sect,  as  known  in  these  provinces  although  a  few  of  the  particu- 
lars may  be  true,  if  confined  to  the  Vaishnava  Vairagis— the  Dekhini  Faishnavas  must 
be,  therefore,  a  very  different  class  from  those  that  are  met  with  in  any  other  part  of 
India,  or  the  Abbe  must  have  mixed,  as  is  not  unusual  with  him,  a  small  quantum  of 
truth,  with  a  very  large  portion  of  error  :  it  is,  indeed,  impossible  to  think  him  correct, 
when  he  states,  that  "  the  sectaries  of  Vishnu  eat  publicly  of  all  sorts  of  meat,  except 
beef,  and  drink  spirituous  liquors  without  shame  or  restraint,  and  that  they  are  re- 
proached with  being  the  chief  promoters  of  that  abominable  sacrifice,  the  Sakti  Puja  ;" 
now,  it  is  not  true  of  any  sect  in  Upper  India,  that  the  practices  the  Abbe  mentions 
occur  at  all,  except  in  the  utmost  privacy  and  secrecy,  and  if  even  in  that  way  they 
do  occur,  it  is  certainly  not  amongst  the  Vaishnava  Vairugis,  but  with  very  different 
sects,  as  we  shall  hereafter  see. 

*  The  enumeration  in  the  Bhakta  Mala  is  different  :  it  there  occurs  1  Ra'ma'nuja, 
2  Deva'cha'rj,  3  Ka'gha'vanand,  4  Ra'ma'nand;  making  him  the  fourth. 


32 

the  Mat'h,  or  residence  of  his  superior :  his  brethren  objected  to  him, 
that  in  the  course  of  his  peregrinations,  it  was  impossible  he  could  have 
observed  that  privacy  in  his  meals,  which  is  a  vital  observance  of  the 
Rdmdnuja  sect,  and  as  Ra'ghava'nand  admitted  the  validity  of  the  ob- 
jection, Ra'ma'nand  was  condemned  to  feed  in  a  place  apart  from  the 
rest  of  the  disciples  :  he  was  highly  incensed  at  the  order,  and  retired 
from  the  society  altogether,  establishing  a  schism  of  his  own. 

The  residence  of  Ra'ma'nand  was  at  Benares,  at  the  Pancha  Gangd 
Ghdt,  where  a  Mat'h,  or  monastery  of  his  followers  is  said  to  have  ex- 
isted, but  to  have  been  destroyed  by  some  of  the  Musselman  princes  : 
at  present  there  is  merely  a  stone  plat-form  in  the  vicinity,  bearing  the 
supposed  impression  of  his  feet,  but  there  are  many  Mat'hs  of  his  fol- 
lowers, of  celebrity,  at  Benares,  whose  Panchait,  or  council,  is  the  chief 
authority  amongst  the  Rdmdwats  in  Upper  India  :  we  shall  have  fre- 
quent occasion  to  mention  these  Mat'hs,  or  convents,  and  a  short  ac- 
count of  them  may,  therefore,  here  be  acceptable. 

Most  of  the  religious  sects  of  which  we  have  to  give  an  account,  com- 
prise various  classes  of  individuals,  resolvable,  however,  especially  into 
two,  whom  ( for  want  of  more  appropriate  terms)  we  must  call,  per- 
haps, Clerical  and  Lay:  the  bulk  of  the  votaries  are  generally,  but 
not  always,  of  the  latter  order,  whilst  the  rest,  or  the  Clerical  class,  are 
sometimes  monastic,  and  sometimes  secular  :  most  of  the  sects,  especially 
the  Vaishnavas,  leave  this  distinction  a  matter  of  choice  :  the  Valla- 
bhdchdris,  indeed,  give  the  preference  to  married  teachers,  and  all  their 
Gosains  are  men  of  business  and  family  :  the  preference,  however,  is 
usually  assigned  to  teachers  of  an  ascetic  or  coenobitic  life,  whose  pious 
meditations  are  not  distracted  by  the  affections  of  kindred,  or  the  cares 
of  the  world  :  the  doctrine  that  introduced  similar  unsocial  institutions 
into  the  Christian  Church,  in  the  fourth  century,  being  still  most  tri- 
umphantly prevalent  in  the  east,  the  land  of  its  nativity  ;  the  establish- 
ments of  which  we  are  treating,  and  the  still  existing  practices  of  soli- 
tary mortification,  originating  in  the  "  specious  appearance  and  pompous 
sound  of  that  maxim  of  the  ancient  philosophy,  that  in  order  to  the 
attainment  of  true  felicity  and  communion  with  God,  it  was  necessary 
that  the  soul  should  be  separated  from  the  body  even  here  below,  and 
that  the  body  was  to  be  macerated  and  mortified  for  that  purpose." 
{Mosheim.i.  378.) 


33 

Of  the  coenobitic  members  of  the  different  communities,  most  pursue 
an  erratic  and  mendicant  life  :  all  of  them,  indeed,  at  some  period  have 
led  such  a  life,  and  have  travelled  over  various  parts  of  India  singly  or 
in  bodies,  subsisting  by  alms,  by  merchandise,  and  sometimes,  perhaps, 
by  less  unexceptionable  means,  like  the  Sarabaites  of  the  east,  or  the 
mendicant  friars  of  the  Latin  Church  ;  they  have,  however,  their  fixed 
rallying  points,  and  are  sure  of  finding,  in  various  parts  of  their  pro- 
gress, establishments  of  their  own,  or  some  friendly  fraternity  where  they 
are  for  a  reasonably  moderate  period  lodged  and  fed.  When  old  or 
infirm,  they  sit  down  in  some  previously  existing  Mat'h,  or  establish 
one  of  their  own. 

The  Mat'ks,  Asthals,  or  Akdras,  the  residences  of  the  monastic  com- 
munities of  the  Hindus,  are  scattered  over  the  whole  country  :  they  vary 
in  structure  and  extent,  according  to  the  property  of  which  the  proprie- 
tors are  possessed  ;  but  they  generally  comprehend  a  set  of  huts  or 
chambers  for  the  Mahant,^  or  Superior,  and  his  permanent  pupils  ;  a 
temple,  sacred  to  the  deity  whom  they  worship,  or  the  Samddh,  or 
shrine  of  the  founder  of  the  sect,  or  some  eminent  teacher  ;  and  a 
Dharma  Sdld,  one  or  more  sheds,  or  buildings  for  the  accommodation  of 
the  mendicants  or  travellers,  who  are  constantly  visiting  the  Mafh  : 
ingress  and  egress  is  free  to  all  ;  and,  indeed,  a  restraint  upon  personal 
liberty  seems  never  to  have  entered  into  the  conception  of  any  of  the 
religious  legislators  of  the  Hindus. 

The  Mafh  is  under  the  entire  controul  of  a  Mahant,  or  Superior, 
with  a  certain  number  of  resident   Chelas,  or  disciples  ;    their  number 

*  The  following  description  of  the  residence  of  M  and  an  a  M  is  r  a,  from  the  5'flHA:«ra 
Vijaya  of  Ananda  Giri,  is  very  applicable  to  a  modern  Mat'h. 

«'  At  the  distance  of  four  Yoj  anas,  west  from  Hastinapur,  was  a  square  plot  of  ground, 
extending  a  cos  on  each  side  ;  in  the  centre  of  it  stood  a  large  mansion,  constructed  of 
the  timber  of  the  Tal,  and  exactly  facing  it  another  a  hundred  cubits  in  length  ;  upon 
the  top  of  this  last,  were  many  cages  full  of  parrots,  and  within  it  resided  five  hundred 
pupils,  occupied  in  the  study  of  various  Sastras  :  the  first  was  the  dwelling  of  the  Teach- 
er, like  Brahma  with  four  heads,  like  the  Serpent  King,  with  a  thousand  faces,  and 
Rudra,  with  a  five-fold  head,  amongst  his  disciples  like  the  waves  of  the  ocean,  and 
enabling  them  to  overcome  the  universe  in  unparalleled  profundity  and  extent  of  know- 
ledge :  he  was  attended  by  numerous  slaves  of  both  sexes  :  attached  to  his  dwelling,  were 
wells  and  reservoirs,  and  gardens  and  orchards,  and  his  person  was  pampered  with  the 
choicest  viands  procured  daily  by  his  disciples.  In  his  court-yard  were  two  Temples, 
on  a  circular  mound,  for  the  worship  of  the  Viswadevas  and  the  SulagrAm,  in  the  form 
oi  Lakshmi  NdTuyana. 


34 

varies  from  three  or  four  to  thirty  or  forty,  but  in  both  cases  there  are 
always  a  number  of  vagrant  or  out-members  :  the  resident  CMlas  are 
usually  the  elders  of  the  body,  with  a  few  of  the  younger  as  their  at- 
tendants and  scholars  ;  and  it  is  from  the  senior  and  more  proficient  of 
these  ascetics,  that  the  Mahant  is  usually  elected. 

In  some  instances,  however,  where  the  Mahant  has  a  family,  the 
situation  descends  in  the  line  of  his  posterity  :  where  an  election  is  to 
be  effected,  it  is  conducted  with  much  solemnity,  and  presents  a  curious 
picture  of  a  regularly  organised  system  of  church  policy,  amongst  these 
apparently  unimportant  and  straggling  communities. 

The  Mat'hs  of  various  districts  look  up  to  some  one  of  their  own  order 
as  chief,  and  they  all  refer  to  that  connected  with  their  founder,  as  the 
common  head  :  under  the  presidence,  therefore,  of  the  Mahant  of  that 
establishment,  wherever  practicable,  and  in  his  absence,  of  some  other 
of  acknowledged  pre-eminence,  the  Mahants  of  the  different  Mat'hs 
assemble,  upon  the  decease  of  one  of  their  brethren,  to  elect  a  successor. 
For  this  purpose  they  regularly  examine  the  Chelas,  or  disciples  of  the 
deceased,  the  ablest  of  whom  is  raised  to  the  vacant  situation  :  should 
none  of  them  be  qualified,  they  choose  a  Mahant  from  the  pupils  of 
some  other  teacher,  but  this  is  rarely  necessary,  and  unless  necessary, 
is  never  had  recourse  to.  The  new  Mahant  is  then  regularly  installed, 
and  is  formally  invested  with  the  cap,  the  rosary,  the  frontal  mark,  or 
Tikd,  or  any  other  monastic  insignia,  by  the  president  of  the  assembly. 
Under  the  native  Government,  whether  Mohammedan  or  Hindu — the 
election  of  the  superior  of  one  of  these  establishments  was  considered  as 
a  matter  of  sufficient  moment,  to  demand  the  attention  of  the  Governor 
of  the  province,  who,  accordingly,  in  person,  or  by  his  deputy,  presided 
at  the  election  :  at  present,  no  interference  is  exercised  by  the  ruling 
authorities,  and  rarely  by  any  lay  character,  although  occasionally,  a 
Raja  or  a  Zemindar,  to  whose  liberality  the  Mat'h  is  indebted,  or  in 
whose  lands  it  is  situated,  assumes  the  right  of  assisting  and  presiding 
at  the  election. 

The  Mahants  of  the  sect,  in  which  the  election  takes  place,  are  gene- 
rally assisted  by  those  of  the  sects  connected  with  them  :  each  is  attended 
by  a  train  of  disciples,  and  individuals  of  various  mendicant  tribes  repair 
to  the  meeting ;  so  that  an  assemblage  of  many  hundreds,  and  some- 
times of  thousands,  occurs :  as  far  as  the  resources  of  the  Mat'h,  where 


35 

they  are  assembled,  extend,  they  are  maintained  at  its  expense; 
when  those  fail,  they  must  shift  for  themselves  ;  the  election  is  usually 
a  business  of  ten  or  twelve  days,  and  during  the  period  of  its  con- 
tinuance, various  points  of  polity  or  doctrine  are  discussed  in  the  as- 
sembly. 

Most  of  the  Mat'hs  have  some  endowments  of  land,  but  vi'ith  the 
exception  of  a  few  established  in  large  cities,  and  especially  at  Benares, 
the  individual  amount  of  these  endowments  is,  in  general,  of  little  value. 
There  are  few  Mat'hs  in  any  district  that  possess  five  hundred  bigahs 
of  land,  or  about  one  hundred  and  seventy  acres,  and  the  most  usual 
quantity  is  about  thirty  or  forty  bigahs  only  :  this  is  sometimes  let  out 
for  a  fixed  rent ;  at  other  times,  it  is  cultivated  by  the  MaCh  on  its  own 
account ;  the  highest  rental  met  with,  in  any  of  the  returns  procured,  is 
six  hundred  and  thirty  rupees  per  annum.  Although,  however,  the 
individual  portions  are  trifling,  the  great  number  of  these  petty  establish- 
ments renders  the  aggregate  amount  considerable,  and  as  the  endowed 
lands  have  been  granted  Mafi,  or  free  of  land  tax,  they  form,  altogether, 
a  serious  deduction  from  the  revenue  of  each  district. 

Besides  the  lands  they  may  hold,  the  Mat'hs  have  other  sources  of  sup- 
port :  the  attachment  of  lay  votaries  frequently  contributes  very  liberally 
to  their  wants  :  the  community  is  also  sometimes  concerned,  though,  in 
general,  covertly,  in  traffic,  and  besides  those  means  of  supply,  the 
individual  members  of  most  of  them  sally  forth  daily,  to  collect  alms 
from  the  vicinity,  the  aggregate  of  which,  generally  in  the  shape  of  rice 
or  other  grains,  furnishes  forth  the  common  table  :  it  only  remains  to 
observe,  that  the  tenants  of  these  Mat'hs,  particularly  the  Faishnavas, 
are  most  commonly  of  a  quiet  inoffensive  character,  and  the  Mahants 
especially  are  men  of  talents  and  respectability,  although  they  possess, 
occasionally,  a  little  of  that  self-importance,  which  the  conceit  of  supe- 
rior sanctity  is  apt  to  inspire :  there  are,  it  is  true,  exceptions  to  this 
innocuous  character,  and  robberies  and  murders  have  been  traced  to 
these  religious  establishments. 

The  especial  object  of  the  worship  of  Ra'ma'nanda's  followers  is  Vish- 
nu, as  Ra'ma'chandra  :  they,  of  course,  reverence  all  the  other  incar- 
nations of  Vishnu,  but  they  maintain  the  superiority  of  Ka'ma,  in  the 
present  or  Kali  Yug ;  hence  they  are  known  collectively  as  Rdmdwats, 
although  the  same  variety  prevails  amongst  them,  as  amongst  the  Rd- 
mdnujas,  as  to  the  exclusive  or  collective  worship  of  the  male  and  female 


36 

members  of  this  incarnation,  or  of  Rama  and  Sitd,  singly,  or  jointly,  or 
Sitd  Rama  ;*  individuals  of  them  also  pay  particular  veneration  to  some 
of  the  other  forms  of  Vishnu,  and  they  hold  in  like  estimation,  as  the 
Rdmdnujas,  and  every  Vaishnava  sect,  the  Sdlagrdm  stone  and  Tulasi 
plant :  their  forms  of  worship  correspond  vi^ith  those  of  the  Hindus  gene- 
rally, but  some  of  the  mendicant  members  of  the  sect,  who  are  very 
numerous,  and  are  usually  known  as  Vairdgis,  or  Viraktas,  consider  all 
form  of  adoration  superfluous,  beyond  the  incessant  invocation  of  the 
name  of  Krishna  and  Ra'ma. 

The  practices  of  this  sect  are  of  a  less  precise  nature  than  those  of 
the  Ra'ma' NUJ AS,  it  being  the  avowed  object  of  the  founder  to  release 
his  disciples  from  those  fetters  which  he  had  found  so  inconvenient  : 
in  allusion  to  this,  indeed,  he  gave,  it  is  said,  the  appellation  Avadhuta, 
or  Liberated,  to  his  scholars,  and  they  admit  no  particular  observances 
with  respect  to  eating  or  bathing.f  but  follow  their  own  inclination,  or 
comply  with  the  common  practice  in  these  respects.  The  initiatory 
Mantra  is  said  to  be  Sri  Rdma — the  salutation  is  Jaya  Sri  Rdma, 
Jaya  Ram,  or  Sitd  Rdm  :  their  marks  are  the  same  as  those  of  the 
preceding,  except  that  the  red  perpendicular  streak  on  the  forehead 
is  varied,  in  shape  and  extent,  at  the  pleasure  of  the  individual,  and 
is  generally  narrower  than  that  of  the  Ra'ma'nujas. 

Various  sects  are  considered  to  be  but  branches  of  the  Rdmdnand\ 
Vaishnavas,  and  their  founders  are  asserted  to  have  been  amongst  his 
disciples :  of  these  disciples,  twelve  are  particularised  as  the  most  emi- 
nent, some  of  whom  have  given  origin  to  religious  distinctions  of  great 
celebrity,  and,  although  their  doctrines  are  often  very  different  from 
those  of  Ra'ma'nand,  yet  the  popular  tradition  is  so  far  corroborated, 
that  they  maintain  an  amicable  intercourse  with  the  followers  of  R'ama'- 
nand,  and  with  each  other. 

The  twelve  chief  disciples  of  Ra'ma'nand,  are  named,  as  follows — 
Asa'nand,  Kabir,  the  weaver,  Raeda's,  the  Chamdr,  or  currier,  Pi'pa, 
the  Rajaput,  Sursura'nand,  Sukha'nand,  Bha'vanand,  Dhanna,  the 
Jdt,  Sena,  the  barber — Maha'nand,  Parama'nand,  and  Sria'nand,J  a 

*  Amongst  the  temples  of  this  sect  at  Benares,  are  two  dedicated  to  Rddhd  Krishna, 
although  attached  to  Mat'hs  belonging  to  the  Jidmdvat  order,  and  not  at  all  connected 
with  the  followers   of  Vallabha,  or  of  Chaitanya  and  Nitya'nand. 

t  The  Vairdgis  oi  this  sect,  and  some  others,  eat  and  drink  together,  without  regard 
to  tribe  or  caste,  and  are  thence  called  Kulatiit,  or  Vernatut. 

X  The  Bhakta  Mdld  has  a  rather  different  list :    1  Raghuna'th,  '2  Anani  a'nand, 


37 

list  which  shews,  that  the  school  of  Ra'ma'nand  admitted  disciples  of 
jevery  caste  :  it  is,  in  fact,  asserted  in  the  Bhakta  Mdld.  that  the  distinc- 
tion of  caste  is  inadmissible  according  to  the  tenets  of  the  Rdmdnandis  : 
there  is  no  difference,  they  say,  between  the  Bhagava'n  and  the 
Bhakt,  or  the  deity  and  his  worshipper  ;  but  Bhagava'n  appeared  in  in- 
ferior forms,  as  a  Fish,  a  Boar,  a  Tortoise,  &c.,  so  therefore  the  Bhakt 
may  be  born  as  a  Chama,  a  Kori,  a  Ch'hipi,  or  any  other  degraded 
caste. 

The  various  character  of  the  reputed  disciples  of  Ra'ma'nand,  and  a 
consideration  of  the  tenets  of  those  sects  which  they  have  founded, 
lead  to  a  conclusion,  that  this  individual,  if  he  did  not  invent,  gave  fresh 
force  to  a  very  important  encroachment  upon  the  orthodox  system  : 
he,  in  fact,  abrogated  the  distinction  of  caste  amongst  the  religious  or- 
ders, and  taught,  that  the  holy  character  who  quitted  the  ties  of  nature 
and  society,  shook  olF,  at  the  same  time,  all  personal  distinction — this 
seems  to  be  the  proper  import  of  the  term  Avad'huta,  which  Ra'ma'- 
nand is  said  to  have  affixed  to  his  followers,  and  they  were  liberated 
from  more  important  restraints  than  those  of  regimen  and  ablution  : 
the  popular  character  of  the  works  of  this  school,  corroborates  this 
view  of  Ra'ma'nanda's  innovation  ;  Sankara  and  Ra'ma'nuja,  writing 
to  and  for  the  Brahmanical  order  alone,  composed  chiefly,  if  not  solely, 
Sanscrit  commentaries  on  the  text  of  the  Vedas,  or  Sanscrit  expositions 
of  their  peculiar  doctrines,  and  the  teachers  of  these  opinions,  whether 
monastic  or  secular,  are  indispensably  of  the  Brahmanical  caste —  it 
does  not  appear  that  any  works  exist  which  are  attributed  to  Ra'ma'- 
nand himself,  but  those  of  his  followers  are  written  in  the  provincial 
dialects,  and  addressed  to  the  capacity,  as  well  as  placed  within  the  reach, 
of  every  class  of  readers,  and  every  one  of  those  may  become  a  Vairdgi, 
and  rise,  in  time,  to  be  a  Guru  or  Mahant. 

We  shall  have  occasion  to  speak  again  particularly  of  such  of  the 
above  mentioned  disciples  of  Ra'm'anand,  as  instituted  separate  sects, 
but  there  are  several  who  did  not  aspire  to  that  distinction,  and  whose 
celebrity  is,  nevertheless,  still  very  widely  spread  throughout  Hindustan  ; 

3  Kabih,  4  Suk'ha'sur,  5  Jiva,  6  Padma'vat,  7  Pi'pa,  8  Bhava'nand,  9  Raida's, 
10  Dhanna,  11  Seva,  12Sursuha.  His  successors,  again,  were  somewhat  different, 
or  1  Haghuna'th,  2  Ananta'nand,  Joga'nand,  Ka'mda's,  Ski  Kanja,  and 
Narahaki, 


38 

there  are  also  several  personages  belonging  to  the  sect  of  particular  note, 
and  we  may,  therefore,  here  pause,  to  extract  a  few  of  the  anecdotes 
which  the  Bhakta  Maid  relates  of  those  individuals,  and  which,  if  they 
do  not  afford  much  satisfactory  information  regarding  their  objects,  will 
at  least  furnish  some  notion  of  the  character  of  this  popular  work. 

Pi'pA,  the  Rajaput,  is  called  the  Raja  of  Gangaraon  :  he  was  originally 
a  worshipper  of  Devi',  but  abandoned  her  service  for  that  of  Vishnu, 
and  repaired  to  Benares  to  put  himself  under  the  tuition  of  Ra'ma'nand. 
Having  disturbed  the  sage  at  an  inconvenient  season,  Ra'ma'nand  angri- 
ly wished  that  he  might  fall  into  the  well  of  his  court-yard,  on  which 
Pi'pA,  in  the  fervour  of  his  obedience,  attempted  to  cast  himslf  into  it  to 
accomplish  the  desire  of  the  saint.  This  act  was  with  difficulty  pre- 
vented by  the  by-standers,  and  the  attempt  so  pleased  Ra'ma'nand  that 
he  immediately  admitted  the  Raja  amongst  his  disciples. 

Pi'pA,  after  some  time  abandoned  his  earthly  possessions,  and  accom- 
panied by  only  one  of  his  wives,  named  Sita',  as  ardent  a  devotee  as 
himself,  adopting  a  life  of  mendicity,  accompanied  Ra'ma'nand  and  his 
disciples  to  Dwdrakd.  Here  he  plunged  into  the  sea  to  visit  the  submarine 
shrine  of  Krishna,  and  was  affectionately  received  by  that  deity :  after 
spending  some  days  with  him,  Pi'pa  returned,  when  the  fame  of  the 
occurrence  spread,  and  attracted  great  crowds  to  see  him.  Finding 
them  incompatible  with  his  devotions,  Pi'pa  left  Dwdrakd  privately : 
on  the  road  some  Patans  carried  off  his  wife,  but  Ra'ma  himself  rescued 
her,  and  slew  the  ravishers.  The  life  of  this  vagrant  Raja  is  narrated 
at  considerable  length  in  the  Bhakta  Mala,  and  is  made  up  of  the  most 
absurd  and  silly  legends.  On  one  occasion  the  Raja  encounters  a  furious 
lion  in  a  forest ;  he  hangs  a  rosary  round  his  neck,  whispers  the  Mantra 
of  Rama,  and  makes  him  tranquil  in  a  moment ;  he  then  lectures  the 
lion  on  the  impropriety  of  devouring  men  and  kine,  and  sends  him  away 
penitent,  and  with  a  pious  purpose  to  do  so  no  more. 

Of  Sursura'nand  we  have  a  silly  enough  story  of  some  cakes  that 
were  given  to  him  by  a  Mlechch'ha  being  changed  when  in  his  mouth 
into  a  Tulasi  leaf.  Of  Dhana,  it  is  related  that  a  Brahman,  by  way  of 
a  frolic,  gave  him  a  piece  of  stone,  and  desired  him  to  offer  to  it  first, 
whatever  he  was  about  to  eat.  Dhana  obeyed,  looking  upon  the  stone 
as  the  representative  of  Vishnu,  who  being  pleased  with  his  devotion, 
appeared,  and  constantly  tended  the  cattle  of  the  simple  Jdt :  at  last 


39 

he  recommended  his  becoming  the  disciple  of  Ra'ma'nand,  for  which 
purpose  he  went  to  Benares,  and  having  received  the  Mantra,  returned 
to  his  farm.  Raghuna'th,  or  in  the  text  Asa'nand,  succeeded  Ra'ma'- 
nand in  the  Gaddi,  or  the  pillow  of  the  Mahant.  Narahari  or  Harya'- 
NANU  was  also  a  pupil  of  Ra'ma'nand,  whom  it  is  difficult  to  identify 
with  any  one  in  the  list  above  given :  we  have  a  characteristic  legend  of 
him. 

Being  one  day  in  want  of  fuel  to  dress  his  meat,  he  directed  one  of 
his  pupils  to  proceed  to  a  neighbouring  temple  of  Devi',  and  bring 
away  from  it  any  portion  of  the  timber  he  could  conveniently  remove  : 
this  was  done,  to  the  great  alarm,  but  utter  helplessness,  of  the  goddess, 
who  could  not  dispute  the  authority  of  a  mortal  of  Harya'nand's  sanctity. 
A  neighbour  who  had  observed  this  transaction  laboured  under  a  like 
want  of  wood :  at  the  instigation  of  his  wife,  he  repaired  also  to  the 
temple,  and  attempted  to  remove  one  of  the  beams,  when  the  goddess, 
indignant  at  his  presumption,  hurled  him  down  and  broke  his  neck :  the 
widow  hearing  of  her  husband's  fate,  immediately  hastened  to  the  temple, 
and  liberally  abused  the  vindictive  deity.  Devi'  took  advantage  of  the 
business  to  make  a  bargain  for  her  temple,  and  restored  the  man  to  life, 
on  condition  that  he  would  ever  afterwards  buy  fuel  for  Harya'nand. 

The  legends  of  such  other  disciples  of  Ra'ma'nand  as  occur  in  the 
BJiakta  Mala  will  be  given  in  their  proper  places,  and  it  will  be  sufficient 
here  to  confine  our  further  extracts  from  that  authority  to  Na'bha'ji, 
the  author,  Sur  Da's,  and  Tulasi  Da's,  to  whose  poetical  talents  the 
late  version  of  it  is  largely  indebted,  and  Jayadeva,  whose  songs  have 
been  translated  by  Sir  William  Jones. 

Na'bha'ji,  the  author  of  the  Bhakta  Mala,  was  by  birth  a  Dom,  a 
caste  whose  employ  is  making  baskets  and  various  sort  of  wicker  work. 
The  early  commentators  say  he  was  of  the  Hanumdn  Bans,  or  Monkey 
tribe,  because,  observes  the  modern  interpreter,  Bdner,  a  monkey,  sig- 
nifies in  the  Marwar  language,  a  Dom,  and  it  is  not  proper  to  mention 
the  caste  of  a  Vaishnava  by  name  :  he  was  born  blind,  and  when  but 
five  years  old,  was  exposed  by  his  parents,  during  a  time  of  scarcity,  to 
perish  in  the  woods  ;  in  this  situation  he  was  found  by  Agrada's  and 
Ki'l,  two  Vaishnava  teachers  :  they  had  compassion  upon  his  helpless- 
ness, and  Ki'l,  sprinkled  his  eyes  with  the  water  of  his  Kamandalu,  or 
water-pot,   and  the  child  saw  :  they  carried  Na'bha'ji  to  theh-  Mafh, 


40 

where  he  was  brought  up,  and  received  the  initiatory  Mantra  from 
Agradas  :  when  arrived  at  maturity,  he  wrote  the  Bhakta  Mala  by 
desire  of  his  Guru.  The  age  of  Na'bha'ji  must  be  about  two  centuries, 
or  two  and  a  half,  as  he  is  made  cotemporary  with  Ma'n  Sinh,  the 
Raja  of  Jaynagar,  and  with  Akber.  He  should  date  much  earlier,  if 
one  account  of  his  spiritual  descent  which  makes  him  the  fourth  from 
Ra'ma'nand*  be  admitted,  but  in  the  Bhakta  Maid,  Krishna  Da's,  the 
second  in  that  account,  does  not  descend  in  a  direct  line  from  Ra'ma'- 
nand, but  derives  his  qualifications  as  teacher  from  the  immediate  in- 
structions of  Vishnu  himself  :  there  is  no  necessity,  therefore,  to  con- 
nect Na'bha'ji  with  Ra'ma'nand.  The  same  authority  places  him 
also  something  later,  as  it  states  that  Tulasi  Da's,  who  was  cotem- 
porary with  Shah  Jehan,  visited  Na'bha'ji  at  Vrindavan.  It  is  proba- 
ble, therefore,  that  this  writer  flourished  at  the  end  of  Akber's  reign, 
and  in  the  commencement  of  that  of  his  successor. 

The  notices  we  have  of  Sur  Da's  are  very  brief  :  he  was  blind,  a 
great  poet,  and  a  devout  worshipper  of  Vishnu,  in  whose  honour  all 
his  poems  are  written  :  they  are  songs  and  hymns  of  various  lengths, 
but  usually  short,  and  the  greater  number  are  Padas,  or  simply  stanzas 
of  four  lines,  the  first  line  forming  a  subject,  which  is  repeated  as  the 
last  and  the  burthen  of  the  song,  Padas  being  very  generally  sung, 
both  at  public  entertainments,  and  the  devotional  exercises  of  the 
Vaishnava  ascetics.  Sur  Da's  is  said  to  have  composed  125,000  of 
these  Padas  :  he  is  almost  entitled  to  be  considered  as  the  founder  of 
a  sect,  as  blind  beggars  carrying  about  some  musical  instruments,  to 
which  they  chaunt  stanzas  in  honour  of  Vishnu,  are  generally  termed 
Silr  Ddsis.  The  tomb  of  Sur  Da's,  a  simple  mound  of  earth,  is  consi- 
dered to  be  situated  in  a  tope  near  Sivpur,  a  village  about  two  miles  to 
the  North  of  Benares.  There  is  also  an  account  of  a  saint  of  the  same 
name  in  the  Bhakta  Mala,  who  is  possibly  a  different  person  from 
the  blind  bard.  This  was  a  Brahman,  Amin,  or  collector  of  the  Pergun- 
nah  of  Sandila,  in  the  reign  of  Akber,  and  who  with  more  zeal  than 
honesty  made  over  his  collections  to  the  shrine  of  Madana  Mohana,  a 
form  of  Krishna,  at   Vrindavan,  and  sent  to  the  treasury  chests  filled 


*  1  Ra'Xia'nand,  2  Asa'nand,  3  Krishna    Da's,  4  Ki'l  and    Agrada's,  5  Na'- 
iha'ji.     See  the  next  division  of  this  section. 


41 

with  stones  :*  the  minister  Toder  Mull,  however,  although  a  Hindu, 
was  not  disposed  to  confirm  this  transfer,  and  he  had  the  defaulter 
arrested  and  thrown  into  prison.  Sur  Da's  then  applied  to  Akber, 
and  the  good-natured  monarch,  who  probably  thought  his  collector 
more  fool  than  knave,  set  him  at  liberty.  He  retired  to  Vrindaban,  and 
there  continued  to  lead  a  religious  and  ascetic  life. 

The  account  of  Tulasi  Da's  in  the  Bhakta  Maid,  represents  him  as 
having  been  incited  to  the  pecuhar  adoration  of  Ra'ma  by  the  remon- 
strances of  his  wife,  to  whom  he  was  passionately  attached  :  he  adopted 
a  vagrant  life,  visited  Benares,  and  afterwards  went  to  Chitrakuta, 
where  he  had  a  personal  interview  with  Hanumdn,  from  whom  he  re- 
ceived his  poetical  inspiration,  and  the  power  of  working  miracles :  his 
fame  reached  Dehli,  where  Shah  Jeha'n  was  emperor  :  the  monarch  sent 
for  him,  and  desired  him  to  produce  the  person  of  Ra'ma,  which  Tulasi 
Da's  refusing  to  do,  the  king  threw  him  into  confinement ;  the  people  of 
the  vicinity,  however,  speedily  petitioned  for  his  liberation,  as  they  were 
alarmed  for  their  own  security  :  myriads  of  monkies  having  collected 
about  the  prison,  and  begun  to  demolish  it,  and  the  adjacent  buildings. 
Shah  Jeha'n  set  the  poet  at  liberty,  and  desired  him  to  solicit  some 
favour  as  a  reparation  for  the  indignity  he  had  suffered :  Tulasi  Da's, 
accordingly  requested  him  to  quit  ancient  Dehli,  which  was  the  abode 
of  Ra'ma,  and  in  compliance  with  this  request  the  emperor  left  it,  and 
founded  the  new  city,  thence  named  Shah  Jehdndbdd.  After  this,  Tulasi 
Da's  went  to  Bindraban,  where  he  had  an  interview  with  Na'bha'ji  : 
he  settled  there ;  and  strenuously  advocated  the  worship  of  Slid  Rdma, 
in  preference  to  that  of  Rddhd  Krishna. 

Besides  these  legendary  tales  of  this  celebrated  writer,  whose  works 
exercise  more  influence  upon  the  great  body  of  Hindu  population,  than 
the  whole  voluminous  series  of  Sanscrit  composition,  we  have  other  no- 
tices of  him  collected  from  his  own  works,  or  preserved  by  tradition,  that 

*  He  accompanied  them  also  with  the  following  rhyme :  f^^^    ^TT'sr    ^"^1^ 

J^  ^2^'^  II  which  may  be  thus  renderegl ; 

The  Saints  have  shared  Sandilas  taxes, 
Of  which  the  total  thirteen  lacks  is, 
A  fee  for  midnight  service  owen, 
By  me  Sur  Das  to  Madan  Mohen. 


42 

differ  in  some  respects  from  the  above.  From  these  it  appears,  that 
TuLASi  Da's  was  a  Brahman  of  the  Serwariah  branch,  and  a  native  of 
Hdjapur,  near  Chitrakuta ;  M^hen  arrived  at  maturity,  he  settled  at  Bena- 
res, and  held  the  office  of  Dewan  to  the  Raja  of  that  city  :  his  spiritual 
preceptor  was  Jaganna'th  Da's,  a  pupil,  as  well  as  Na'bha'ji  of  Agra- 
da's  :  he  followed  this  teacher  to  Goverdhan,  near  Bindrahan,  but  after- 
wards returned  to  Benares,  and  there  commenced  his  Hindi  version  of 
the  Rdmdyana,  in  the  year  of  Samvat  1631,  when  he  was  thirty-one 
years  of  age— besides  this  work,  which  is  highly  popular,  Tulasi  Da's  is 
the  author  of  a  Sat  Sai,  or  collection  of  one  hundred  stanzas  on  various 
subjects :  of  the  Ram  Gundvali,  a  series  of  verses  in  praise  of  Ra'ma, 
of  a  Gitdvali,  and  Finaya  Patrikd,  poetical  compositions  of  a  devotional 
or  moral  tendency,  and  of  a  great  variety  of  Hymns— as  Rdgas,  Kavits, 
and  Padas,  in  honour  of  his  tutelary  deity  and  his  consort,  or  Ra'ma  and 
Sita'.  Tulasi  Da's  continued  to  reside  at  Benares,  where  he  built 
a  temple  to  Sitd  Rdma,  and  founded  a  Matli  adjoining,  both  which  are 
still  in  existence :  he  died  in  the  year  of  the  Samvat  era,  1680,  or  A.  D. 
1624,  in  the  reign  of  Jeha'ngir,*  and  the  legendary  story  therefore,  of 
his  intercourse  with  Shah  Jeha'n,  is  consequently  an  anachronism. 

Jayadeva  was  an  inhabitant  of  a  village  called  Kinduvilwa,  where  he 
led  an  ascetic  life,  and  was  distinguished  for  his  poetical  powers,  and  the 
fervour  of  his  devotion  to  Vishnu.  He  at  first  adopted  a  life  of  con- 
tinence, but  was  subsequently  induced  to  marry.  A  Brahman  had  de- 
dicated his  daughter  to  Jaganna'th,  but  on  his  way  to  the  shrine  of  that 
deity  was  addressed  by  him,  and  desired  to  give  the  maiden  to  Jayadeva, 
who  was  one  with  himself.  The  saint,  who  it  should  appear  had  no 
other  shelter  than  the  shade  of  a  tree,  was  very  unwilling  to  burthen  him- 
self  with  a  bride ;  but  her  father  disregarded  his  refusal,  and  leaving  his 
daughter  with  him,  departed.  Jayadeva  then  addressed  the  damsel,  and 
asked  her  what  she  proposed  to  do,  to  which  she  replied ;  "  Whilst  I  was 
in  my  father's  house,  I  was  obedient  to  his  will ;  he  has  now  presented 
me  to  you,  and  I  am  subject  to  your  pleasure;  if  you  reject  me, 
what  remains  for  me  but  to  die."      The  saint  finding  there  was  no  help, 

*  According  to  this  memorial  verse— 

^^fT  ^^^  ^^  ^^  'rfTT^  ffl?;  I     '^T^W  ^IfT  ^Tf^  5^€t 


43 

turned  householder,  and  removed  the  image  he  had  worshipped  in  the 
air  into  his  dwelling,  by  desire,  it  is  said,  of  the  object  of  his  adoration. 
In  his  new  condition  he  composed  the  Gitci  Govinda,  in  which  Krishna 
himself  assisted,  for  on  one  occasion,  Jayadeva  being  puzzled  how  to 
describe  the  charms  of  Ra'dha',  laid  down  the  paper  for  a  happier  mo- 
ment, and  went  to  bathe.  Krishna,  assuming  his  person,  entered  his 
house,  and  wrote  the  requisite  description,  much  to  the  poet's  astonish- 
ment on  his  return  home. 

Of  the  Gitd  Govinda  it  is  said,  that  the  Raja  of  Nildchala  (Orissa) 
composed  a  poem  similarly  named,  but  when  the  two  works  were  placed 
before  Jaganna'th,  he  took  the  work  of  Jayadeva  to  his  bosom,  and 
threw  that  of  the  Raja  out  of  his  temple.  It  is  also  said,  that  the 
Gitd  Govinda  was  sung  in  the  court  of  Vikrama,  thus  assigning  to  it 
an  antiquity  which  there  is  no  reason  to  suspect  it  can  justly  claim. 

Jayadeva  being  desirous  of  performing  a  particular  rite  for  his  idol, 
resumed  his  erratic  habits,  and  succeeded  in  collecting  a  considerable 
sum  of  money  for  this  purpose  :  on  the  road,  he  was  attacked  by  Thegs, 
or  thieves,  who  robbed  him,  and  cut  off  his  hands  and  feet.  In  this 
state  he  was  found  by  a  Raja,  who  took  him  home,  and  had  his  wounds 
healed.  Shortly  afterwards  the  thieves,  disguised  as  religious  mendi- 
cants, came  to  the  court  of  the  Raja.  Jayadeva  recognized  them,  and 
overwhelmed  them  with  benefits.  On  their  departure,  two  of  the  Raja's 
people  were  sent  to  attend  them  to  the  confines  of  the  Raj,  who  on 
their  way  asked  them  how  they  had  merited  the  saint's  particular 
regard.  To  this  they  replied,  that  they  had  been  his  fellows  in  the 
service  of  a  Raja,  who  had  ordered  them  to  put  him  to  death  :  they 
however  only  mutilated  him,  and  his  gratitude  for  their  sparing  his  life 
was  the  reason  he  had  treated  them  so  kindly.  They  had  no  sooner 
uttered  these  words,  than  the  earth  opened  and  swallowed  them.  The 
servants  of  the  Raja  returned,  and  reported  the  occurrence,  when  a  fresh 
miracle  took  place — the  hands  and  feet  of  Jayadeva  sprouted  forth 
again.  The  Raja  being  filled  with  astonishment,  requested  the  saint  to 
explain  these  events,  which  he  did  by  narrating  what  had  befallen  him. 

After  remaining  some  time  with  the  Raja,  where  he  restored  to  life 
his  own  wife  Padma'vati,  who  had  voluntarily  put  an  end  to  herself,  he 
returned  to  Kinduvilwa.  Here  the  Ganges,  which  was  then  eighteen  cos 
distant,  and  to  which  he  went  daily  to  bathe,  requested  him  not  to 


44 

undergo  so  much  fatigue,  as  she  would  rather  come  to  him.  The  pro- 
posal was  accepted  by  the  saint,  and,  according  to  our  guide,  the  river 
now  runs  close  to  the  village. 

The  ascetic  and  mendicant  followers  of  Ra'ma'nand,  known  indis- 
criminately as  Rdmdnandis  or  Rdmdwats,  are  by  far  the  most  numerous 
class  of  sectaries  in  Gangetic  India  :  in  Bengal  they  are  comparatively 
few  :  beyond  this  province,  as  far  as  to  Allahabad,^  although  perhaps 
the  most  numerous,  they  yield  in  influence  and  wealth  to  the  Saiva 
branches,  especially  to  the  Atits :  hence,  however,  they  predominate, 
and  either  by  themselves,  or  their  kindred  divisions,  almost  engross  the 
whole  of  the  country  along  the  Ganges  and  Jumna  :  in  the  district  of 
Agra,  they  alone  constitute  seven-tenths  of  the  ascetic  population.  The 
Rdmdnandis  have  very  numerous  votaries,  but  they  are  chiefly  from  the 
poorer  and  inferior  classes,  with  the  exception  of  the  Rdjaputs  and  mili- 
tary Brahmans,  amongst  whom  the  poetical  works  of  Sur  Da's  and 
TuLASi  Da's,  maintain  the  pre-eminence  of  Rdma  and  his  Bhakts. 


KABIR  PANT'HIS. 


Amongst  the  twelve  disciples  of  Ra'ma'nand,  the  most  celebrated  of 
all,  and  one  who  seems  to  have  produced  directly  or  indirectly,  a  greater 
effect  on  the  state  of  popular  belief  than  any  other,  was  Kabir  :  with  an 
unprecedented  boldness  he  assailed  the  whole  system  of  idolatrous  wor- 
ship, and  ridiculed  the  learning  of  the  Pandits,  and  doctrines  of  the 
Sastras,  in  a  style  peculiarly  well  suited  to  the  genius  of  his  country- 
men to  whom  he  addressed  himself,  whilst  he  also  directed  his  composi- 
tions to  the  Musselman,  as  well  as  to  the  Hindu  faith,  and  with  equal 
severity   attacked   the   Mulla   and   Koran.   The   effect   of   his    lessons, 

*  Some  of  the  principal  Mat'hs  at  Benares  are  the  following  :  Ramjit,  Mahant, 
a  temple  of  Ra'ma.  Ma'ya  Ram,  Mahant,  a  temple  of  Ra'ma.  Ra'ma'nuja,  Khaki, 
Mahant,  a  temple  of  Sita'  Ra'm.  Purushottama  Da's,  Khdki,  Mahant,  di  temple  of 
Ra'ma.  Pita'mbara  Da's,  Mahant,  S ltd  Ram  ;  this  is  the  Mandir  of  Tulasi  DaS. 
GoviND  Da's,  Mahant,  Rudhd  Krishna.     Ra'macharan,  ditto  ditto. 

At  a  late  meeting  (1820)  to  elect  a  Mahant  of  one  of  the  Vaishnava  Mat'hs,  in  the 
vicinity  of  Benares,  about  5000  mendicants  of  the  various  branches  of  the  sect  attend- 
ed ;  of  these,  at  least  3000  were  Rdmawats,  the  rest  wore  Sri  Faishnavas,  Kabir 
PanVhis,  and  others. 


45 

as  confined  to  his  own  immediate  followers,  will  be  shewn  to  have  been 
considerable,  but  their  indirect  effect  has  been  still  greater  ;  several 
of  the  popular  sects  being  little  more  than  ramifications  from  his  stock, 
whilst  Ndnak  Shah,  the  only  Hindu  reformer  who  has  established  a 
national  faith,  appears  to  have  been  chiefly  indebted  for  his  religious 
notions  to  his  predecessor  Kabir.*  This  sect  therefore  claims  particular 
attention. 

The  origin  of  the  founder  of  this  sect  is  variously  narrated,  although 
in  the  main  points,  the  traditions  are  agreed  :  the  story  told  in  the 
Bhakta  Mala,  is,  that  he  was  the  son  of  the  virgin  widow  of  a  Brah- 
man, whose  father  was  a  follower  of  Ra'ma'nand:  at  his  daughter's 
repeated  request,  he  took  her  to  see  Ra'ma'nand,  and  that  teacher, 
without  adverting  to  her  situation,  saluted  her  with  the  benediction  he 
thought  acceptable  to  all  women,  and  wished  her  the  conception  of  a 
son :  his  words  could  not  be  re-called,  and  the  young  widow,  in 
order  to  conceal  the  disgrace  thus  inflicted  on  her,  contrived  to  be 
privately  delivered,  and  exposed  the  child  :  it  was  found  by  a  weaver  and 
his  wife,  and  brought  up  as  their  own. 

The  followers  of  Kabir  do  not  admit  more  than  the  conclusion  of 
this  legend :  according  to  them,  the  child,  who  was  no  other  than  the 
incarnate  deity,  was  found  floating  on  a  Lotus  in  Lahartaldb,  a  lake,  or 
pond  near  Benares,  by  the  wife  of  a  weaver,  named  Nima',  who,  with 
her  husband  Nuri,  was  attending  a  wedding  procession  :  she  took  the 


*  Malcolm  says,  that  Nanak  constantly  referred  to  the  writings  of  the  celebrated 
Mohammedan  Cabir,  (A.  R.  XI.  267,)  and  the  iTafcir  Poni' Aw  asserts,  that  he  has 
incorporated  several  thousand  passages  from  Kabir's  writings.  As  to  Kabir's  being  a 
Mohammedan,  I  shall  allude  to  the  improbability  of  this,  1  may  say  impossibility,  in 
the  text,  nor  is  Col.  Malcolm  more  accurate  when  he  calls  him  a  celebrated  Sufi,  for 
his  doctrines  have  nothing  in  common  apparently  with  that  sect ;  indeed  1  think  it  not 
at  all  improbable  that  no  such  person  as  Kabir  ever  existed,  and  that  his  name  is  a 
mere  cover  to  the  innovations  of  some  free-thinker  amongst  the  Hindus:  perhaps  some 
one  of  those  considered  as  his  principal  disciples:  his  names  are  very  suspicious,  and 
Jnyuni,  the  sage,  or  Kabir,  the  greatest,  are  generic  rather  than  individual  denomina- 
tions: at  any  rate,  even  if  the  individual  were  distinct,  we  must  suppose  that  the 
name  which  occurs  in  his  writings  is  nothing  more  than  the  Tak'hallus  or  assumed 
name,  under  which  both  Musselman  and  Hindii  poets  have  been  accustomed  to  send 
their  compositions  into  the  world.  To -return,  however,  to  the  obligations  which  the 
popular  religions  owe  to  the  real  or  supposed  Kabir,  1  find  him  avowedly  or  unavow- 
edly  cited  by  Bdba  Lid,  and  in  the  writings  of  the  Sddhs,  the  Satndmis,  the  Sri 
Nardinis  and  Sunydbddis,  and  1  am  told  that  the  Dudu  Pant'his,  and  Derya  Dusis 
are  equally  indebted  to  him. 


46 

child  up,  and  shewed  it  to  her  husband,  who  being  addressed  by  the 
child,  and  desired  to  take  him  to  Kasi,  fled  with  terror,  thinking  they 
had  got  hold  of  some  incarnate  demon :  after  having  run  to  the  distance 
of  about  a  mile,  he  was  surprised  to  find  the  child  before  him,  by  whom 
his  fear  was  tranquillised,  and  he  was  persuaded  to  return  to  his  wife, 
and  bring  up,  without  anxiety  or  alarm,  the  infant  they  had  so  marvel- 
lously discovered. 

All  traditions  concur  in  making  Kabir  the  disciple  of  Ra'ma'nand, 
although  various  stories  are  narrated  of  the  method  by  which  he  obtained 
that  distinction,  and  overcame  the  objections  started  to  him  as  a  man 
of  low  caste,  or,  according  to  very  general  belief,  of  the  Mohammedan 
persuasion  :  he  succeeded  at  last  by  surprise,  having  put  himself  in  the 
way  of  that  teacher  on  the  steps  of  the  ghat  down  which  he  went  at 
daybreak  to  bathe,  so  as  to  be  struck  with  his  foot,  on  which  Ra'ma'- 
NAND  exclaimed  Rdm,  Ram,  words  that  Kabir  assumed,  and  Ra'ma'- 
NAND  acknowledged  to  be  the  initiatory  Mantra,  which  forms  the  bond 
of  union  between  a  Guru  and  his  disciple. 

The  story  of  Kabir's  being  a  disciple  of  Ra'ma'nand,  however  told, 
and,  although  perhaps  not  literally  true  in  any  fashion,  may  be  so  far 
correct,  that  Kabir  was  roused  by  the  innovations  of  that  sectary  to 
adopt  and  extend  the  schism,  and  seems  to  place  at  contiguous  periods 
the  eras  at  which  they  flourished  :  according  to  the  Kabir  Pant'his, 
their  founder  was  present  in  the  world  three  hundred  years,  or  from 
1149  to  1449,*  but  of  these  dates  we  cannot  admit  the  accuracy  of 
more  than  one  at  most,  and  as  the  latter  is  the  more  recent,  it  is  the 
more  probable  :  agreeable  to  this,  is  the  connexion  of  Kabir's  writings 
with  the  faith  of  Na'nak  Shah,  who  began  to  teach  about  1490,  and  it 
also  confirms  a  particular  account,  current  amongst  his  followers,  of 


*  ^^n  ^T^^^^  ^  ^t^  ^T  ^T5fr  f^^^  t%^TT  I  ^T^ 
^if^  ^^IZ  ^^  ^5^  ^^   Z^mx  II  ^?Wff   ^^^'f^^   ^^ 

^T  ^^«T  II      In  the  Sambat  1205  Jnya'ni  meditated,  was  manifest  at  Kusi,  and 

declared  the  text  called  Taksdr  :  in  the  Sambat  1505  he  journeyed  to  Magar,  and  on 
the  lithof  the  light  fortnight  oi  Aghan,  air  mixed  with  air. 


47 

his  openly  vindicating  his  doctrines  before  Sekander  Shah,*  in  whose 
time  Ferishta  has  noticed,  that  some  religious  disputes,  possibly  con- 
nected with  the  history  of  Kabir,  or  that  of  some  of  his  disciples,  did 
occur. 

These  circumstances,  connected  with  the  acknowledged  date  of  his 
death,  render  it  exceedingly  probable  that  Kabir  flourished  about  the 
beginning  of  the  15  th  century  ;  and  as  it  is  also  not  unlikely  that  his 
innovations  were  connected  with  the  previous  exertions  of  Ra'ma'nand, 
consequently  that  teacher  must  have  lived  about  the  end  of  the  14th. 

According  to  one  account,  Kabir  was  originally  named  Jnydni,  the 
knowing  or  wise.  The  Musselmans,  it  is  said,  claim  him  as  one  of 
their  persuasion,  but  his  conversancy  with  the  Hindu  Sdstras,  and  evi- 
dently limited  knowledge  of  the  Mohammedan  authorities  in  matters 
of  religion,  render  such  a  supposition  perfectly  unwarrantable  :  at  any 
rate  tradition  represents  it  to  have  occasioned  a  contest  between  them 
and  the  Hindus  respecting  the  disposal  of  his  corpse,  the  latter  insist- 
ing on  burning,  the  Musselmans,  on  burying  it ;  in  the  midst  of  the 

*  There  is  a  Ramaini  to  that  effect,  and  the  following  story  is  told,  with  the  usual 
marvellous  embellishments,  in  the  Bhakta  Mdla ;  in  that  work  it  is  said,  his  mother 
complained  to  Sekander  Padshah  of  her  son's  having  deserted  the  true  faith,  on 
which  the  king  sent  for  him  :  he  appeared  with  the  Tika  and  Mala,  and  when  told  to 
make  the  customary  Saldm,  he  replied,  "  I  know  none  but  Ram,  what  use  is  there 
in  prostrating  myself  to  a  monarch."  Enraged  at  his  behaviour,  the  king  ordered  him 
to  be  chained  hand  and  foot,  and  thrown  into  the  river.  The  water  bore  him  to  shore. 
He  then  commanded  him  to  be  cast  into  fire,  but  the  flames  played  harmless  round 
him.  He  then  directed  him  to  be  trodden  to  death  by  an  elephant,  but  as  soon  as  the 
animal  saw  the  sage,  he  turned  tail  and  ran  away.  The  king  mounted  his  own  ele- 
phant, resolved  to  execute  his  commands  in  person;  but  when  he  approached,  Kabir 
transformed  himself  into  a  lion.  The  monarch  then  convinced  of  his  divine  character 
alighted,  and  falling  at  his  feet,  offered  him  any  lands  and  villages  he  might  chuse  : 
these  offers  he  declined,  saying,  "  Ka'm  is  my  wealth  :  of  what  avail  are  worldly 
possessions,  but  to  set  father,  and  son,  and  brother,  at  deadly  variance."  He  returned 
to  his  abode,  and  remained  unmolested. 

Colonel  Malcolm  in  the  note  before  cited,  places  him  in  the  reign  of  Shir  Shah  ; 
this  is,  however,  at  variance  with  his  own  statements;  Na'nak  was  in  the  height 
of  his  career  in  1527,  (A.  R.  XI.  206,)  then  imparting  to  Baber,  tenets  which  he 
had  partly  borrowed  from  the  writings  of  Kabir,  and  which  must  consequently  have 
been  some  time  previously  promulgated  :  but  Shir  Shah  did  not  commence  his  reign 
till  1542,  and  it  was  therefore  impossible  for  Kabir  to  have  lived  in  his  reign,  and  at 
the  same  time  to  have  instigated  by  his  own  innovations,  the  more  successful  ones 
of  Na'nak.  Kabir's  being  contemporary  with  Sekander,  is  also  mentioned  in 
Priya  Dasa's  expansion  of  the  Bhakta  Mdld  :  it  is  likewise  stated  in  the  Kholasset 
al  tawurikh,  and  is  finally  establisheded  by  Abulfazl,  who  says  that  Kabir  the 
Unitarian  lived  in  the  reign  of  Sultan  Secander  Lodi,  {Ay.  Ac,  2.  38.) 


48 

dispute,  Kabir  himself  appeared  amongst  them,  and  desiring  them  to 
look  under  the  cloth  supposed  to  cover  his  mortal  remains,  immediately 
vanished  :  on  obeying  his  instructions,  they  found  nothing  under  the 
cloth,  but  a  heap  of  flovi^ers  :  one  half  of  these  Ban'ar  Raja  or  Birsinha 
Raja,  then  Raja  of  Benares,  removed  to  that  city,  where  they  were 
burnt,  and  where  he  appropriated  the  spot  now  called  the  Kabir  Chaura, 
to  the  reception  of  their  ashes,  whilst  Bijili  Khan  Patau,  the  head  of 
the  Mohammedan  party,  erected  a  tomb  over  the  other  portion  at  Magar 
near  Gorakhpur,  where  Kabir  had  died.  This  latter  place  was  endow- 
ed by  Mansur  Ali  Khan  with  several  villages,  and  it  divides  with  the 
Chaura  the  pilgrimage  of  the  followers  of  this  sect. 

The  Kabir  Panfhis  in  consequence  of  their  master  having  been  the 
reputed  disciple  of  Ra'ma'nand,  and  of  their  paying  more  respect  to 
Vishnu,  than  the  other  members  of  the  Hindu  triad,  are  always  included 
amongst  the  Vaishnava  sects,  and  maintain  with  most  of  them,  the 
Rdmdwats  especially,  a  friendly  intercourse  and  political  alliance  :  it  is 
no  part  of  their  faith,  however,  to  worship  any  Hindu  deity,  or  to 
observe  any  of  the  rites  or  ceremonials  of  the  Hindus,  whether  orthodox 
or  schismatical ;  such  of  their  members  as  are  living  in  the  world  con- 
form outwardly  to  all  the  usages  of  their  tribe  and  caste,  and  some  of 
them  even  pretend  to  worship  the  usual  divinities,  although  this  is  con- 
sidered as  going  rather  farther  than  is  justifiable.  Those  however  who 
have  abandoned  the  fetters  of  society,  abstain  from  all  the  ordinary 
practices  and  address  their  homage,  chiefly  in  chanting  hymns,  ex- 
clusively to  the  invisible  Kabir  :  they  use  no  Mantra  nor  fixed  form  of 
salutation  ;  they  have  no  peculiar  mode  of  dress,  and  some  of  them  go 
nearly  naked  without  objecting  however  to  clothe  themselves  in  order 
to  appear  dressed,  where  clothing  is  considered  decent  or  respectful — 
the  Mahants  wear  a  small  scull  cap  :  the  frontal  marks,  if  worn,  are 
usually  those  of  the  Vaishnava  sects,  or  they  make  a  streak  with  san- 
dal, or  Gopichandan  along  the  ridge  of  the  nose,  a  necklace  and  rosary  of 
Tulasi  are  also  worn  by  them,  but  all  these  outward  signs  are  considered 
of  no  importance,  and  the  inward  man  is  the  only  essential  point  to  be 
attended  to.* 


*  To  avoid  unnecessary  contention,  and  its  probable  concomitant  in   other  days, 
persecution,  was  tlie  object  probably  of  the   lollowing  prudent  maxim,   one  of  the 


49 

The  doctrines  of  Kabir  are  taught  in  a  great  variety  of  works  in  dif- 
ferent dialects  of  Hindi ;  they  are  the  acknowledged  compositions  of  his 
disciples  and  successors,  but  they  are  mostly  in  the  form  of  dialogues, 
and  profess  to  be  of  his  utterance,  either  in  his  own  words,  with  the 
phrase,  Kahdhi  Kabir,  '  Kabir  verily  says,'  or  to  the  same  substance, 
which  is  marked  by  the  qualification,  Kahai  Kabir,  '  Kabir  has  said,' 
or  they  are  given  in  the  language  of  his  followers,  when  the  expression 
Das  Kabir,  the  slave  of  Kabir,  is  made  use  of.  The  style  of  all  their 
works  is  very  peculiar,  they  are  written  in  the  usual  forms  of  Hindi 
verse,  the  Doha,  Choupai  and  Samai  ;  and  are  very  voluminous  as  may 
be  inferred  from  the  following  collection,  preserved  as  the  Khcis  Granthn, 
or  The  Book  at  the  Chaura. 

1.  Suk'h  Nidhdn. 

2.  Gorakndt'hki  Goshthi. 

3.  Kabir  Pdnji. 

4.  Balak'hki   Ramaini. 

5.  Rdmdnandki  Goshthi. 

6.  Anand  Ram  Sdgara. 

7.  Sabddvali,  containing   1000  Sabdas,  or  short  doctrinal  exposi- 
tions. 

8.  Mangala,    100  short  poems,  amongst  which   is   the  account  of 
Kabir's  discovery  as  given  above. 

9.  Vasant,  100  hymns  in  that  Rdga. 

10.  Holi,  200  of  the  songs,  called  Holi. 

11.  R^k'htas,  100  odes. 

12.  Jhulanas,  500  odes,  in  a  different  style. 

13.  Kahdras,  500  odes,  in  a  different  style. 

5TT^  I  ^t  ^  'ir  ^  ^^^  t%l%R  ^^  ^T^^  ^T^  II  "  Associate 
and  mix  with  all,  and  take  the  names  of  all  ;  say  to  every  one,  Yes  sir,  yes  sir. 
Abide  in  your  own  abode." — They  do  not  admit  that  taking  the  names  of  all,  implies 
the  invocation  of  the  illusory  deities  of  the  Hindu  Pantheon,  but  means  that  they 
should  reply  as  they  are  addressed,  whether  the  phrase  be  Bandagi,  Danddwat, 
or  Rum  Ram  :  the  proper  salutation  of  an  inferior  to  a  superior  amongst  them,  if  any 
be  particularly  proper,  is  Bandagi  Sahib,  Service  Sir;  to  which  the  latter  replies, 
Guru  ki  Dayd,  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  be  upon  you. 


50 

14.  Hindolas,  12  odes,  in  a  different  style.  The  subject  of  all  these 
odes,  or  hymns,  is  always  moral  or  religious. 

15.  Bdrah  Mdsa,  the  )2  months  in  a  religious  view,  agreeably  to 
Kabir's  system. 

16.  Chancharas  22. 

17.  Chautisas  2  :  the  34  letters  of  the  Nagari  alphabet,  with  their 
religious  signification. 

18.  Ale/ndmah,  the  Persian  alphabet,  in  the  same  manner. 

19.  Ramainis,  short  doctrinal  or  argumentative  poems. 

Sdk'his  5000  ;  these  may  be  considered  as  texts,  consisting  of  one 
stanza  each. 

20.  The  Vijek,  in  654  Sections.* 

There  are  also  a  variety  of  stanzas,  called  Agams,  Bdnis,  8(C.  compos- 
ing a  very  formidable  course  of  study  to  those  who  wish  to  go  deep 
into  the  doctrine  of  this  school,  and  one  in  which  the  greatest  proficients 
amongst  the  Kabir  Pant'his  are  but  imperfectly  versed.  A  few  Sdk'his, 
Sabdas  and  Rekh'tas,  with  the  greater  portion  of  the  Fijek,  constituting 
their  acquirements  :  these,  however,  they  commit  to  memory,  and  quote 
in  argument  with  singular  readiness  and  happiness  of  application  ;  the 
Gosht'his,  or  disputations  of  Kabir  with  those  opposed  to  him,  as 
GoRAKHNATH,  Ra'ma'nand  aud  cvcu  iu  spite  of  chronology  with 
Mohammed  himself,  are  not  read  till  more  advanced,  whilst  the  Suk'h 
Nidhdn,  which  is  the  key  to  the  whole,  and  which  has  the  singularity 


*  There  are  two  Bijeks,  however,  only  differing  in  the  occasional  omission  of  some 
passages  and  introduction  of  others ;  the  longer  of  the  two,  they  say,  was  communi- 
cated by  Kabir  himself  to  the  Raja  of  Benares.  I  rather  suspect,  however,  that  the 
varieties  are  only  those  common  to  most  Hindu  Manuscripts,  and  that  many  more 
than  two  varieties  are  to  be  found.  A  curious  Italian  work  on  the  Kabir  Pant'his,  en- 
titled, but  not  accurately,  Mulapanci,  intending  no  doubt  Mulapant' hi,  or  Radical 
disciple,  not  as  rendered,  Delia  Radice,  is  published  in  the  third  volume  of  the  Mines 
of  the  East  :  it  was  found  amongst  the  papers  of  the  Propaganda,  and  is  communicated 
by  Monsignore  Munter,  Bishop  of  Zealand,  in  Denmark;  an  eminent  scholar,  the 
author  of  a  valuable  work  on  the  Sahidic  Version  of  the  N.  T.  &c.  It  is  to  be  pre- 
sumed that  it  is  intended  to  be  a  translation  of  some  Kabiui  work,  but  how  correctly 
it  deserves  this  character,  may  be  questioned  ;  much  of  the  phraseology  of  the  sect  is 
indeed  closely  followed,  but  the  minute  and  ridiculous  details  of  its  cosmogony  are, 
with  very  few  exceptions,  exceedingly  different  from  those  notions  entertained  by  the 
followers  of  Kabir,  as  explained  in  the  Bijeks,  or  Suk'h  Nidhdn.  The  extract  pub- 
lished in  the  Mines,  appears  to  be  a  portion,  the  second  book,  of  some  work,  thus  des- 
cribed "  II  libro  primario  dei  Cabiristi  (Specie  di  riforma  della  gentilita,)  si  chiama 
Satnam  Kabir :  questo  libro  e  fra  le  carte  di  Propaganda." 


51 

of  being  quite  clear  and  intelligible,   is  only  imported  to  those  pupils 
whose  studies  are  considered  to  approach  perfection. 

The  author  or  compiler  of  the  Bijek  or  Vijek,  was    Bhagodas*  one 
of  Kabir's  immediate  disciples  :   it  is  the  great  authority  amongst  the 
Kabir  Pant'his  in  general  ;  it  is  written  in  very  harmonious  verse,  and 
with  great  ingenuity  of  illustration  :  its  style,  however,  is  more  dogma- 
tical than  argumentative,  aad  it  rather  inveighs  against  other  systems 
than  explains  its  own  :  in  the  latter  respect  it  is,  indeed,  so  inexplicit 
and  obscure,  that  it  is  perhaps  impossible  to  derive  from  it  any  satisfac- 
tory conclusion  as  to  the  real  doctrines  of  Kabir.     The  followers  of 
the  Sect  admit  this  obscurity,  and  much  difference  of  opinion  prevails 
amongst  them  in  the   interpretation  of   many  passages  :   some  of  the 
teachers  have  a  short  work  professedly  written  as  a  key  to  the  most 
difficult   parts,    but   this   is   in   the   hands   of  a   chosen  few  :  it  is  of 
no  great  value,  however,  as  it  is  little  less  puzzling  than  the  original,  of 
a  few  passages  of  which  the  following  translations  will  best  exemplify 
the  description  thus  given  : 

Ramaini  the  1st. — God,  light,  sound,  and  one  woman;  from  these 
have  sprung  Hari,  Brahma',  and  Tripura'ri,  Innumerable  are  the 
emblems  of  Siva  and  Bhava'ni,  which  they  have  established,  but  they 
know  not  their  own  beginning  nor  end :  a  dwelling  has  been  prepared 
for  them :  Hari,  Brahma',  and  Siva,  are  the  three  headmen,  and  each 
has  his  own  village :  they  have  formed  the  Khandas  and  the  e^g  of 
Brahmd,  and  have  invented  the  six  Dersanas,  and  ninety- six  Pdshandas  : 
no  one  has  ever  read  the  Vedas  in  the  womb,  nor  has  any  infant  been 
born  a  member  of  Islam.  *  The  woman,'  relieved  from  the  burthen  of 
the  embryo,  adorned  her  person  with  every  grace.  I  and  you  are  of  one 
blood,  and  one  life  animates  us  both ;  from  one  mother  is  the  world  born  ; 
what  knowledge  is  this  that  makes  us  separate,  no  one  knows  the  varie- 
ties of  this  descent,  and  how  shall  one  tongue  declare  them  ;  nay,  should 
the  mouth  have  a  million  of  tongues,  it  would  be  incompetent  to  the 
task,  Kabir  has  said,  I  have  cried  aloud  from  friendship  to  mankind  ; 
from  not  knowing  the  name  of  Ra'ma,  the  world  has  been  swallowed 
up  in  death. 

In  this  Ramaini,  the  first  passage  contains  an  allusion  to  the  notions 
of  the  sect  regarding  the  history  of  creation.     God  is  called  Anter, 

*  Of  the  shorter  work  :  it  is  undoubtedly  the  one  most  generally  current. 


52 

Inner,  that  which  was  in  all,  and  in  which  all  was,  meaning  the  first  self- 
existent  and  all  comprehensive  being.  Jyotish  is  the  luminous  element, 
in  which  he  manifested  himself,  and  Sabda,  the  primitive  sound  or  word 
that  expressed  his  essence — the  woman,  is  Maya,  or  the  principle  of 
error  and  delusion :  the  next  passage  relates  to  the  impotence  of  the 
secondary  gods,  and  the  unnatural  character  of  religious  distinctions  : 
"  the  woman,"  is  Ma'ya'  the  self-born  daughter  of  the  first  deity,  and  at 
once  the  mother  and  wife  of  Brahma',  Vishnu,  and  Siva.  "  /  and  you, 
SfC."  is  addressed  by  her  to  them,  "  no  one  knows,  8(C."  is  an  allusion  to 
the  blindness  of  all  worldly  wisdom,  and  the  passage  winds  up  with  a 
word  of  advice,  recommending  the  worship  of  Ra'ma,  implying  the  true 
god,  agreeably  to  the  system  of  Kabir. 

The  style  of  the  whole  Btjek  is  of  this  kind  :  straggling  allusions  to 
the  deceits  of  Mdyd,  to  the  errors  of  other  sects,  and  the  superiority 
of  their  own,  being  strung  together  with  very  little  method:  it  will 
not,  however,  be  necessary  to  analyse  any  more  of  the  passages,  and 
they  will  become  clear  by  reference  to  the  general  view  of  the  system, 
with  which  we  shall  be  furnished  from  the  Suk'h  Nidhdn :  it  may  be 
sufficient  here  to  observe,  that  the  doctrines  of  Kabir,  are  said  to  be 
conveyed  in  four-fold  language,  or  that  of  Mdyd,  Atmd,  Man  or  intel- 
lect, and  the  V4das. 

Ramainithe  6th. — (Ma^a'^  account  of  the  first  being,  and  of  herself.) 
What  is  his  colour,  form,  and  shape  ;  what  other  person  has  beheld 
him  :  the  Omkdra  did  not  witness  his  beginning,  how  then  can  I  explain 
it ;  can  you  say  from  what  root  he  sprang :  he  is  neither  the  stars,  nor 
sun,  nor  moon  ;  he  has  neither  father  nor  mother ;  he  is  neither  water 
nor  earth,  nor  fire,  nor  air :  what  name  or  description  can  I  give  of 
him  :  to  him  is  neither  day  nor  night,  nor  family  nor  caste  ;  he  resides  on 
the  summit  of  space ;  a  spark  of  his  substance  was  once  manifest,  of 
which  emanation  I  was  the  bride  ;  the  bride  of  that  being  who  needs  no 
other. 

Sabda  the  56th. — To  Ali  and  Ra'ma  we  owe  our  existence,  and 
should,  therefore,  shew  similar  tenderness  to  all  that  live ;  of  what  avail 
is  it  to  shave  your  head,  prostrate  yourself  on  the  ground,  or  immerse 
your  body  in  the  stream  ;  whilst  you  shed  blood  you  call  yourself  pure, 
and  boast  of  virtues  that  you  never  display  :  of  what  benefit  is  cleaning 
your  mouth,  counting  your  beads,  performing  ablution,  and  bowing 
yourself  in  temples,  when,  whilst  you  mutter  your  prayers,  or  journey 


53 

to  Mecca  and  Medina,  deceitfulness  is  in  your  heart.  The  Hindu  fasts 
every  eleventh  day,  the  Musselman  during  the  Ramazan.  Who  formed 
the  remaining  months  and  days,  that  you  should  venerate  but  one  ?  If 
the  Creator  dwell  in  tabernacles,  whose  residence  is  the  universe  ?  Who 
has  beheld  Rama  seated  amongst  images,  or  found  him  at  the  shrine  to 
which  the  pilgrim  has  directed  his  steps  ?  The  city  of  Hara  is  to  the 
east,  that  of  Ali  to  the  west ;  but  explore  your  own  heart,  for  there  are 
both  Rama  and  Karim.  Who  talks  of  the  lies  of  the  Veds  and  Tebs ; 
those  who  understand  not  their  essence.  Behold  but  one  in  all  things,  it 
is  the  second  that  leads  you  astray.  Every  man  and  woman  that  has 
ever  been  born  is  of  the  same  nature  with  yourself.  He,  whose  is  the 
world,  and  whose  are  the  children  of  Ali  and  Ram,  he  is  my  Guru,  he 
is  my  Pir. 

The  following  Sabda,  is  peculiarly  illustrative  of  the  mystical  and  un- 
intelligible style  of  parts  of  the  Bijek;  the  explanation  of  the  terms  is 
taken  from  the  key  above  referred  to,  but  the  interpreter  is,  perhaps,  the 
most  unintelligible  of  the  two. 

Sabda  the  69th. — Who  is  the  (1)  magistrate  of  this  city,  (2)  the 
meat  (3)  is  exposed,  and  the  (4)  vulture  sits  guarding  it;  the  (5) 
rat  is  converted  into  a  (6)  boat,  and  the  (7)  cat  is  in  charge  of  the 
helm ;  the  (8)  frog  is  asleep,  and  the  (9)  snake  stands  sentinel ;  the 
(10)  ox  bears,  the  (11)  cow  is  barren,  and  the  (12)  heifer  is  milked 
thrice  a  day;  the  (13)  rhinoceros  is  attacked  by  the  (14)  jackal :  very 
few  know  the  (15)  station  of  Kabir.  (16) 

Key.  1.  Man  the  pride  of  intellect.  2.  The  body.  3.  The  Vedas,  or 
scriptural  writings  of  any  sect,  which  teach  the  true  nature  of  God. 
4.  The  Pandit,  or  worldly  expounder  of  divine  truths.  5.  Man  or  intel- 
lect. 6.  A  mere  vehicle  for  the  diifusion  of  7.  Maya,  illusion  and 
falsehood.  8.  The  Siddha  or  saint.  9.  Parameswara,  the  supreme  being. 
10.  Vishnu.  11.  M ay d  ox  Devi.  12.  faram^swara,  the  supreme.  13. 
A  holy  man.  14.  Intellectual  or  doctrinal  pride.  15.  The  divine  nature. 
16.  God  identified  with  man  and  nature. 

The  Sdk'his  of  Kabir  deserve,  perhaps,  a  more  copious  exemplification  : 
they  are  very  gradually  current  even  amongst  those  not  his  followers, 
they  contain  much  curious  matter,  and  they  have  often  been  referred  to 
without  their  character  being  duly  understood  ;  there  are  some  thousands 
of  them,  of  which  the  Bijek  comprehends  between  three  and  four  hundred  : 


54 

one  hundred  will  be  sufficient,  as  a  specimen  of  the  whole  :  they  are 
taken  with  one  or  two  exceptions,  from  the  Bijek  of  the  Kahir  Chaura, 
in  the  order  in  which  they  occur. 

Sdk'hais. 

1 .  When  man  springs  from  the  womb,  he  is  void  of  every  care  :  pass 
but  the  sixth  day,  and  he  feels  the  pains  of  separation. 

2.  My  word  is  of  the  word  :  hear  it,  go  not  astray ;  if  man  wishes  to 
know  the  truth,  let  him  investigate  the  word. 

3.  My  word  is  from  the  first:  the  word  has  been  deposited  in  life; 
a  basket  has  been  provided  for  the  flowers  ;  the  horse  has  eaten  up  the 
ghee. 

4.  My  word  is  from  the  first :  meditate  on  it  every  moment ;  you  will 
flourish  in  the  end  like  the  Joar  plant,  which  shews  externally  but  beards 
and  leaves. 

5.  Without  hearing  the  word,  it  is  utter  darkness  :  say,  whither  shall 
any  one  go ;  without  finding  the  gateway  of  the  word,  man  will  ever  be 
astray. 

6.  There  are  many  words,  but  take  the  pith  of  them :  he  who  takes 
not  the  essence,  saith  Kabir,  will  live  a  profitless  life. 

7.  For  the  sake  of  the  word,  some  have  died,  and  some  have  resigned 
dominion :  he  who  has  investigated  the  word,  has  done  his  work. 

8.  Lay  in  your  provender,  and  provide  your  carriage  ;  for  if  your  food 
fail,  and  feet  be  weary,  your  life  is  in  the  hands  of  another. 

9.  Lay  in  provender  sufficient  for  the  road,  whilst  time  yet  serves: 
evening  comes  on ;  the  day  is  flown,  and  nothing  will  be  provided. 

10.  Now  is  the  time  to  prepare,  henceforth  the  path  is  difficult:  the 
travellers  all  hasten  to  purchase  where  there  is  neither  trade  nor  market. 

11.  He  who  knows  what  life  is,  will  take  the  essence  of  his  own; 
such  as  it  is  now,  he  will  not  possess  it  a  second  time. 

12.  If  you  know  how  mankind  pass  their  lives,  you  will  live  according 
to  your  knowledge  :  fetch  water  for  your  own  drinking,  nor  demand  it 
from  others  and  drink. 

1 3.  Why  go  about  to  off^er  water  ;  there  is  abundance  in  every  house  : 
when  man  is  really  thirsty,  he  needs  no  solicitation,  but  will  drink  by 
force. 

14.  The  goose  (the  world  or  life)  sells  pearls ;  a  gold  vessel  is  full  of 
them ;  but  with  him,  who  knows  not  their  value,  what  can  be  done. 


.55 

15.  The  goose  abandons  the  lake  ;  the  body  is  withered  and  dry  :  Kabir 
has  called  aloud,  here  is  a  path,  there  is  a  resting  place  ! 

16.  The  goose  abandons  the  lake,  and  lodges  in  a  water  jar  :  Kahir 
calls  aloud,  repair  to  your  village,  nor  demolish  your  habitation. 

17.  The  goose  and  the  paddy  bird  are  of  one  colour,  and  frolic  in 
the  same  pool ;  the  goose  extracts  the  milk  from  the  water,  and  the 
paddy  bird  drinks  the  mire. 

18.  Why  comes  the  feeble  doe  to  the  green  pool  ;  numerous  foes  lie 
in  wait  for  her  :  how  should  she  escape. 

19.  The  three  worlds  form  a  cage  ;  vice  and  virtue  spread  a  net :  life 
is  the  prey,  and  time  the  fowler. 

20.  The  half  of  a  Sdk'hi  is  sufficiently  arduous,  if  duly  investigated  ; 
of  what  avail  are  the  books  of  the  Pandit,  or  incessant  study. 

21.  Having  combined  the  five  elements,  I  found  one  offspring  ;  now 
I  ask  the  Pandit,  whether  life  or  the  word  be  the  greater. 

22.  Of  the  five  elements,  the  body  was  formed  :  when  the  body  was 
formed  what  was  done  :  subservient  to  action,  it  is  called  life  ;  but  by 
action,  life  is  destroyed. 

23.  The  offspring  of  the  five  elements  is  called  Man  ;  if  one  element 
be  withdrawn,  the  whole  compound  is  destroyed. 

24.  With  the  five  elements  is  the  abode  of  a  great  mystery  ;  when 
the  body  is  decomposed,  has  any  one  found  it  ;  the  word  of  the  teacher 
is  the  guide. 

25.  Colour  proceeds  from  colour,  yet  behold  all  are  but  one  :  of  what 
colour  then  is  life  :  think  well  of  this. 

26.  Life  is  wakefulness  :  the  word  is  like  borax,  white :  who  has 
seen  the  yellow  drop,  saith  Kabir,  that  has  turned  the  water  of  that 
colour. 

27.  There  is  a  mirror  in  the  heart  ;  but  the  face  is  not  visible  in  it  : 
then  only  will  the  face  be  reflected  there,  when  doubleness  of  heart 
shall  disappear. 

28.  The  dwelling  of  Kabir  is  on  the  peak  of  a  mountain,  and  narrow 
path  leads  to  it ;  an  ant  cannot  put  its  foot  upon  it,  but  the  pious  man 
may  drive  up  an  ox. 

29.  The  bhnd  man  talks  of  a  district,  which  he  has  not  seen  ;  they 
are  possessed  of  a  salt  pit,  and  offer  camphor  for  sale. 

20.  The  road  that  Sanaka  and  his  brethren,  that  Brahma',  Vishnu, 


56 

and  Mahesa  have  travelled,  is  still  traversed  by  mankind  :  what  advice 
can  1  bestow. 

31.  The  plough  ascends  the  hill  ;  the  horse  stops  in  the  village  :  the 
bee  seeks  for  honey,  where  there  are  no  flowers  :  declare  the  name  of 
the  plant. 

32.  Sandal  !  restrain  thy  fragrance  :  on  thy  account,  the  wood  is  cut 
down  ;  the  living  slay  the  living,  and  regard  only  the  dead. 

33.  The  sandal  (the  soul,)  is  guarded  by  serpents,  (passion  ;)  what 
can  it  effect  ?  Every  hair  is  impregnated  with  venom  ;  where  shall 
ambrosia  enter. 

34.  The  seizer  (death,)  lets  not  go  his  hold  ;  though  his  tongue  and 
beak  be  scorched  :  where  it  deems  a  dainty,  the  Chakor  devours  the 
burning  coals. 

35.  The  Chakor  (hill  partridge,)  in  its  passion  for  the  moon,  digests 
the  burning  coal ;  Kabir  declares  it  does  not  burn  him,  such  is  the  fer- 
vour of  his  affection. 

36.  The  village  is  on  the  top  of  a  mountain,  and  so  is  the  abode  of 
the  stout  man.  Choose,  Kabir,  one  for  your  protector,  who  can  really 
give  you  an  asylum. 

37.  The  crowd  has  taken  the  road  travelled  by  the  Pandit  :  Kabir 
has  ascended  the  steep  defile,  where  lies  the  abode  of  Ra'm. 

38.  What,  ho  !  Kabir,  descend,  together  with  your  car  and  proven- 
der :  your  provender  will  fail,  your  feet  will  grow  weary,  and  your  life 
will  be  in  the  hands  of  another. 

39.  From  the  contest  of  swinging  and  being  swung,  no  one  has  escap- 
ed.  Gorak'h  (the  founder  of  the  Jogis,)  was  stopped  at  the  city  of 
time  ;  who  shall  be  called  exempt. 

40.  Gorak'h,  enamoured  as  he  was  of  Ra'ma,  is  dead  ;  his  body  was 
not  burnt  :  (the  Jogis  bury  the  dead,)  the  flesh  has  decayed,  and  is 
turned  to  clay,  and  such  rank  as  the  Kauravas  enjoy,  does  he  obtain 
(bodily  annihilation.) 

41.  The  young  camel  flying  from  the  wood,  has  fallen  into  the 
stream  ;  how  shall  the  animal  proclaim  its  misfortune,  who  shall 
learn  it  ? 

42.  After  a  search  of  many  days,  an  empty  shrine  is  raised  :  the 
camel's  calf  has  strayed  into  a  pit,  and  repents  its  heedlessness,  when 
assistance  is  far  off. 


57 

43.  Kabir  (mankind)  has  not  escaped  error,  he  is  seized  in  various 
forms  :  without  knowledge  of  its  lord  the  heart  will  be  but  ashes. 

44.  Although  not  subject  to  line,  a  heavy  fine  has  been  imposed  upon 
the  world  :  it  has  proved  unprofitable  :  avarice  has  disposed  of  it  ;  the 
juice  of  the  cane  yields  both  clayed  and  candied  sugar. 

45.  In  the  confines  of  the  Malaya  Mountain  (where  Sandal  grows) 
the  Palds  (Butea)  tree  acquires  fragrance ;  were  the  Bamboo  to  grow 
there  for  ages,  it  would  never  gain  perfume. 

46.  In  the  woods  of  the  Malaya  Mountain  grow  trees  of  every  kind  ; 
they  may  be  called  Sandal,  but  they  yield  not  the  Sandal  of  Malaya. 

47.  Walking,  walking  still,  the  feet  are  weary  ;  the  city  is  yet  far  off, 
a  tent  is  erected  by  the  road  side  :  say,  who  is  to  blame. 

48.  The  end  of  the  journey  is  sunset,  but  night  comes  on  mid-way  : 
it  is  from  the  embrace  of  many  lovers  that  the  wanton  is  barren. 

49.  Man  (the  pride  of  intellect)  enquires,  when  may  I  be  allowed  to 
go  ;  the  heart  asks  when  shall  I  go :  the  village  (truth)  that  I  have 
been  these  six  months  in  quest  of  (investigating  in  the  six  Dersanas,  or 
systems),  is  not  half  a  mile  remote. 

50.  He  has  left  his  dwelling  as  an  ascetic,  and  goes  to  the  thickets 
to  practise  penance  :  tired  of  the  Paw-box,  he  beats  the  betle-vender, 
and  eats  split  pease. 

51.  When  a  man  (intending,  however,  here  a  Jogi)  becomes  ac- 
quainted with  the  name  of  Ra'm,  his  body  becomes  a  mere  skeleton ;  his 
eyes  taste  no  repose  ;  his  limbs  retain  no  flesh. 

52.  He  who  sows  Ra'm,  never  puts  forth  the  buds  of  wrath :  he 
attaches  no  value  to  the  valueless ;  he  knows  neither  pleasure  nor 
pain. 

53.  The  cut  mango  will  not  blossom,  the  slit  ear  cannot  be  reunit- 
ed ;  whose  loss  is  it,  if  they  apply  not  the  philosopher's  stone,  that 
Gorak'h  had. 

54.  They  have  not  regarded  good  advice,  but  have  determined  for 
themselves.  Kabir  says  and  cries  aloud,  the  world  has  passed  away  like 
a  dream. 

55.  When  fire  (evil)  burns  amidst  the  ocean,  (the  world)  no  one 
sees  the  smoke  :  he  is  conscious  of  the  fire  who  lighted  it,  and  he  who 
perishes  in  the  flame. 

56.  The  incendiary  orders  the  fire  to  be  kindled,  and  he  who  lights 


58 

it  singes  his  wings  :  he  expiates  his  own  act  :  the  thatch  escapes,  but 
the  house  is  burned. 

57.  When  fire  (truth)  burns  in  the  ocean  (the  mind),  as  it  burns,  it 
clears  away  the  rubbish  (worldly  care) .  Pandits  from  the  east  and  from 
the  west  have  died  in  the  discussion. 

58.  When  fire  blazes  in  the  ocean,  the  thatch  of  the  house  falls  to 
pieces.  Mankind  weep  as  they  resign  their  breath,  and  the  inestimable 
jewel  is  lost. 

59.  That  a  drop  falls  into  the  ocean,  all  can  perceive ;  but  that  the 
drop  and  the  ocean  are  but  one,  few  can  comprehend. 

60.  The  poison  still  remains  in  the  soil,  although  the  latter  has  been 
a  hundred  times  sprinkled  with  ambrosia — man  quits  not  the  evil 
practices  to  which  he  has  been  long  addicted. 

61.  The  bellows  is  applied  to  the  damp  wood,  which  calls  aloud  with 
pain :  if  again  it  is  caught  in  the  blacksmith's  forge,  it  will  be  burned 
the  second  time. 

62.  The  soul  that  pines  in  absence,  vainly  flies  to  medicaments  for 
relief ;  sigh  follows  sigh :  it  faints  repeatedly  and  recovers,  to  exist, 
restless  and  distressed. 

63.  The  separated  (spirit)  is  like  the  moist  fuel  which  smokes  and 
blazes  by  fits :  then  only  will  it  be  exempted  from  pain,  when  all  is  ut- 
terly consumed. 

64.  An  invitation  has  been  issued  in  metre,  and  no  one  has  under- 
stood the  stanza ;  fortunate  is  the  scholar  who  comprehends  the  word. 

65.  Take  the  true  word  of  Ka6z>  to  your  heart;  the  mind  has  re- 
ceived, but  not  understood  it,  although  it  has  been  divulged  throughout 
the  four  ages. 

66.  If  you  are  a  true  dealer,  open  the  market  of  veracity ;  keep  clean 
your  inward^man,  and  repel  oppression  to  a  distance. 

67.  The  house  is  of  wood,  fire  is  all  around  it ;  the  Pandit,  with  his 
learning  is  burnt :  the  prudent  man  makes  his  escape. 

68.  Drops  fall  from  heaven  on  the  verdure  of  Srdvan :  all  the  world 
are  Vaishnavas,  no  one  listens  to  the  teacher. 

69.  The  bather  dives  nor  comes  up  again;  I  think  within  myself, 
should  sleep  surprise  him  in  the  stream  of  fascination,  what  will  befall 
him. 

70.  The  Sdkhi  (text)  is  uttered,  but  not  obeyed ;  the  road  is  pointed 


59 

out,  but  not  followed  :  the  stream  of  fascination  sweeps  him  away ;  he 
finds  no  place  to  put  his  feet. 

71.  Many  there  are  that  talk,  but  few  that  take  care  to  be  found: 
let  him  pass  on  without  regard,  who  practices  not  what  he  professes. 

72.  One  by  one,  let  each  be  considered,  and  adhered  to,  so  shall  error 
be  stopped  :  he  who  is  double-faced  like  a  drum,  shall  be  slapped  (like 
a  drum)  on  both  cheeks. 

73.  He  who  has  no  check  upon  his  tongue,  has  no  truth  in  his 
heart ;  keep  him  not  company  :  he  will  kill  you  on  the  highway. 

74.  Life  has  been  destroyed  by  the  repeated  falsehoods  of  the  tongue  ; 
it  has  strayed  the  path  of  pride,  and  been  whirled  in  the  swing  of  time. 

75.  Put  a  check  upon  the  tongue  ;  speak  not  much  :  associate  with 
the  wise ;  investigate  the  words  of  the  teacher. 

76.  The  body  is  wounded  by  a  spear,  the  head  is  broken  oiF,  and  left 
in  the  flesh ;  it  cannot  be  extracted  without  the  loadstone :  a  thousand 
other  stones  are  of  no  avail. 

77.  At  first  the  ascent  is  difficult,  but  afterwards  the  way  is  easy  ;  the 
beauty  is  behind  the  curtain,  far  from  the  pregnant  woman. 

78.  Worldly  existence  is  the  season  for  reflecting  what  is  the  Yoga  : 
the  season  is  passing  away ;  think,  ye,  who  have  understanding. 

79.  Doubt  has  overcome  the  world,  and  no  one  has  triumphed  over 
doubt :  he  will  refute  doubt,  who  has  investigated  the  word. 

80.  The  eyes  see  dimly  from  incessant  babbling.  Kabir  cries  aloud, 
and  says,  understand  the  word  that  is  spoken* 

8 1 .  Life  is  the  philosopher's  stone,  the  world  is  of  iron  :  Pdrsi  (MdydJ 
comes  from  Paras  (God,)  the  mintage  is  of  the  former. 

82.  Aff"ection  is  the  garment  in  which  man  dresses  for  the  dance  : 
consign  yourself  hand  and  foot  to  him,  whose  body  and  soul  are  truth. 

83.  In  the  concavity  of  the  mirror,  the  image  is  formed  :  the  dog 
seeing  his  likeness,  barks  at  it  till  he  dies. 

84.  But  as  a  man  viewing  his  reflexion  in  a  mirror,  knows  that  it  and 
the  original  are  but  one,  so  should  he  know  that  this  element  is  but  that 
element,  and  that  thus  the  world  proceeds. 

85.  Kabir  cries  aloud  to  his  fellows,  ascend  the  sandal  ridge; 
whether  there  be  a  road  prepared  or  not,  what  matters  it  to  me. 

86.  Truth,  provided  there  be  truth  in  the  heart,  is  the  best  of  all; 
there  can  be  no  happiness  without  truth,  let  man  do  as  he  will. 


60 

87-  Let  truth  be  your  rate  of  interest,  and  fix  it  in  your  heart ;  a 
real  diamond  should  be  purchased,  the  mock  gem  is  waste  of  capital. 

88.  Truth  is  the  best  of  all,  if  it  be  known  for  truth — when  truth 
combines  with  truth,  then  a  real  union  is  effected. 

89.  No  act  of  devotion  can  equal  truth ;  no  crime  is  so  heinous  as  ^ 
falsehood  :  in  the  heart  where  truth  abides,  there  is  my  abode. 

90.  The  net  of  error  catches  the  heron ;  the  simpleton  falls  into  the 
snare  :  Kabir  declares,  that  he  will  escape  the  toils,  who  has  discrimina- 
tion in  his  heart. 

9 1 .  Like  the  harlot  companion  of  the  minstrel  is  life,  {Jiv)  associat- 
ed with  intellect,  {Man)  at  his  command,  she  dances  various  steps,  and 
is  never  separated  from  him. 

92.  This  pride  of  intellect  is  manifold  ;  now  a  swindler,  now  a  thief; 
now  a  liar,  now  a  murderer  :  men,  sages,  gods,  have  run  after  it  in 
vain  :  its  mansion  has  a  hundred  gates. 

93.  The  snake  of  separation  has  attached  itself  to  the  body,  and 
darted  its  fangs  into  the  heart  :  into  the  body  of  the  Sdd'h,  it  finds  no 
admission :  prepare  yourself  for  what  may  happen. 

94.  How  is  it  possible  to  reach  the  city  when  the  guide  cannot  point 
out  the  road :  when  the  boat  is  crazy,  how  shall  the  passengers  get 
clear  of  the  ghdt. 

95.  When  the  master  is  blind,  what  is  to  become  of  the  scholar  : 
when  the  blind  leads  the  blind,  both  will  fall  into  the  well. 

96.  Yet  the  master  is  helpless  when  the  scholar  is  unapt :  it  is  blow- 
ing through  a  bambu,  to  teach  wisdom  to  the  dull. 

97.  The  instruction  of  the  foolish  is  waste  of  knowledge  ;  a  maund 
of  soap  cannot  wash  charcoal  white. 

98.  The  tree  bears  not  fruit  for  itself,  nor  for  itself  does  the  stream 
collect  its  waters  :  for  the  benefit  of  others  alone,  does  the  sage  assume 
a  bodily  shape. 

99.  I  have  wept  for  mankind,  but  no  one  has  wept  with  me  ;  he  will 
join  my  tears,  who  comprehends  the  word. 

100.  All  have  exclaimed,  master,  master,  but  to  me  this  doubt  arises  ; 
how  can  they  sit  down  with  the  master,  whom  they  do  not  know. 

The  preceding  will  serve  as  exemplifications  of  the  compositions  of 
tliis  school :  they  are  necessarily  unsatisfactory,  as  amongst  some  hun- 
dreds of  similar  passages,  the  business  of  selection,  when  confined  to  the 


61 

few  admissible  in  this  place,  is  unavoidably  perplexing  and  incom- 
plete :  they  are,  however,  sufficient  for  the  present  purpose,  as  the 
perusal  of  the  entire  work  from  which  they  have  been  selected,  would 
not  convey  any  more  positive  notions  of  the  doctrines  of  Kabir :  these 
we  shall  now  proceed  to  state  according  to  the  authority  of  the  Suk'h 
Nidhdn. 

The  Suk'h  Nidhdn  is  supposed  to  be  addressed  by  Kabir  himself  to 
Dhermadds  his  chief  pupil,  and  follower  of  Rdmdnand's  doctrines  ;  it  is 
said  to  be  the  work  of  Srutgopal,  the  first  of  Kabir's  disciples. 

From  this  authority  it  appears,  that  although  the   Kabir  Panfhis 
have  withdrawn,  in  such  a  very  essential  point  as  worship,  from  the 
Hindu  communion,  they  still  preserve  abundant  vestiges  of  their  primi- 
tive source  ;  and  that  their  notions  are  in  substance  the  same  as  those  of 
the  Pauranic  sects,  especially  of  the  Vaishnava  division.     They  admit  of 
but  one  God,  the  creator  of  the  world ;  and  in  opposition  to  the  Veddnta 
notions  of  the  absence  of  every  quality  and  form,  they  assert  that  he 
has  body,  formed  of  the  five  elements  of  matter,  and  that  he  has  mind 
endowed  with  the  three  Gunas,  or  qualities  of  being ;    of  course  of 
ineffable  purity  and  irresistible  power  :  he  is  free  from  the  defects  of 
human  natures,  and  can  assume  what  particular  shape  he  will :  in  all 
other  respects  he  does  not  differ   from  man,  and  the  pure  man,  the 
Sadh  of  the  Kabir  sect,  is  his  living  resemblance,  and  after  death  is  his 
associate  and  equal ;    he  is  eternal,  without  end  or  beginning,  as  in 
fact  is  the  elementary  matter  of  which  he  consists,  and  of  which  all 
things  are  made  residing  in  him  before  they  took  their  present  form,  as 
the  parts  of  the  tree  abide  in  the  seed,  or  flesh,  blood  and  bone,  may  be 
considered  to  be  present  in  the  seminal  fluid  :  from  the  latter  circum- 
stance, and  the  identity  of  their  essential  nature,  proceeds  the  doctrine, 
that  God  and  man  are  not  only  the  same,  but  that  they  are  both  in  the 
same  manner,   every   thing  that  lives   and  moves  and  has  its  being  : 
other   sects   have  adopted  these  phrases  literally,  but  the  followers  of 
Kabir  do  not   mean  by   them   to   deny  the  individuality  of  being,  and 
only   intend  these  texts  as  assertions  of  all  nature  originally  participat- 
ing in  common  elementary  principles. 

The  Paramapurusha  was  alone  for  seventy-two  ages,  for  after  the 
Pauraniks  the  Kabir  Pant' his  maintain  successive  and  endless  creations  : 
he  then  felt  a  desire  to  renew  the  world,  which  desire  became  manifest 


62 

in  a  female  form,*  being  the  Mdyd,  from  whom  all  the  mistaken  notions 
current  amongst  mankind  originate  :  with  this  female  the  Adi  Bhavdni, 
Prakriti  or  Sakti,  the  Parama  Purusha,  or  first  male,  cohabits,  and 
begets  the  Hindu  triad,  Brahma,  Vishnu  and  Siva :  he  then  disappears, 
and  the  lady  makes  advances  to  her  own  sons :  to  their  questions  of  her 
origin  and  character,  she  tells  them,  she  was  the  bride  of  the  first  great 
invisible  being,  without  shape  and  void,  and  whom  she  describes  agree- 
ably to  the  Veddnta  notions ;  that  she  is  now  at  liberty,  and  being  of 
the  same  nature  as  themselves,  is  a  fit  associate  for  them :  the  deities 
hesitate,  and  Vishnu,  especially  putting  some  rather  puzzling  queries  to 
Mdyd,  secured  the  respect  of  the  Kabir  Panfhis,  and  excited  the  wrath 
of  the  goddess  :  she  appears  as  Maha  Mdyd,  or  Durgd,  and  frightens 
her  sons  into  a  forgetfulness  of  their  real  character,  an  assent  to  her 
doctrines,  and  compHance  with  her  desires :  the  result  of  this,  is  the 
birth  of  Saraswati,  Lakshmi  and  Umd,  whom  she  weds  to  the  three 
deities,  and  then  establishing  herself  at  Jwdlamuk'hi,  leaves  the  three 
wedded  pairs  to  frame  the  universe,  and  give  currency  to  the  different 
errors  of  practice  and  belief  which  they  have  learnt  from  her. 

It  is  to  the  falsehood  of  Mdyd  and  her  criminal  conduct  that  the 
Kabir  Pant'his  perpetually  allude  in  their  works,  and  in  consequence 
of  the  deities  pinning  their  faith  upon  her  sleeve,  that  they  refuse  them 
any  sort  of  reverential  homage  :  the  essence  of  all  religion  is  to  know 
Kabir  in  his  real  form,  a  knowledge  which  those  deities  and  their 
worshippers,  as  well  as  the  followers  of  Mohammed,  are  all  equally 
strano-e  to,  although  the  object  of  their  religion,  and  of  all  religions  is 
the  same. 

Life  is  the  same  in  all  beings,  and  when  free  from  the  vices  and 
defects  of  humanity  assumes  any  material  form  it  pleases  :  as  long  as 
it  is  ignorant  of  its  source  and  parent,  however,  it  is  doomed  to  trans- 
migration through  various  forms,  and  amongst  others  we  have  a  new 
class  of  them,  for  it  animates  the  planetary  bodies,  undergoing  a  fresh 
transfer,  it  is  supposed,  whenever  a  star  or  meteor  falls :  as  to  heaven 
and  hell,  they  are  the  inventions  of  Mdyd,  and  are  therefore  both  ima- 

*  These  notions  are  common  to  the  whole  Hindu  system — diversified  according  to 
the  favourite  object  of  worship,  but  essentially  the  same  in  all  sects;  we  shall  have 
occasion   to   discuss   them   more   fully  under  the  division  Sdktas,  or  worshippers  of 

bAKTl. 


63 

ginary,  except  that  the  Swerga  of  the  Hindus,  and  Bihisht  of  the 
Musselmans,  imply  worldly  luxury  and  sensual  enjoyment,  whilst  the 
Narak  and  Jehannam  are  those  cares  and  pains  which  make  a  hell  upon 
earth. 

The  moral  code  of  the  Kabir  PanVhis  is  short,  but  if  observed  faith- 
fully is  of  a  rather  favourable  tendency.  Life  is  the  gift  of  God,  and  must 
not  therefore  be  violated  by  his  creatures.  Humanity  is,  consequently,  a 
cardinal  virtue,  and  the  shedding  of  blood  whether  of  man  or  animal,  a 
heinous  crime.  Truth  is  the  other  great  principle  of  their  code,  as  all 
the  ills  of  the  world,  and  ignorance  of  God,  are  attributable  to  original 
falsehood.  Retirement  from  the  world  is  desirable,  because  the  passions 
and  desires,  the  hopes  and  fears  which  the  social  state  engenders,  are 
all  hostile  to  tranquillity  and  purity  of  spirit,  and  prevent  that  undisturb- 
ed meditation  on  man  and  God  which  is  necessary  to  their  comprehen- 
sion. The  last  great  point  is  the  usual  sum  and  substance  of  every 
sect  amongst  the  Hindus,*  implicit  devotion  in  word,  act,  and  thought 
to  the  Guru,  or  spiritual  guide  :  in  this,  however,  the  characteristic 
spirit  of  the  Kabir  Pant' his  appears,  and  the  pupil  is  enjoined  to 
scrutinize  his  teacher's  doctrines  and  acts,  and  to  be  first  satisfied  that 
he  is  the  sage  he  pretends  to  be,  before  he  resigns  himself  to  his  con- 
troul.  This  sect,  indeed,  is  remarkably  liberal  in  this  respect,  and  the 
most  frequently  recurring  texts  of  Kabir  are  those  which  enforce  an 
attentive  examination  of  the  doctrine,  that  he  offers  to  his  disciples.  The 
chief  of  each  community  has  absolute  authority  over  his  dependants  : 
the  only  punishments  he  can  award,  however,  are  moral,  not  physical 
— irregular  conduct  is  visited  by  reproof  and  admonition  ;  if  the  offender 
does  not  reform,  the  Guru  refuses  to  receive  his  salutation  ;  if  still  in- 
curable, the  only  further  infliction  is  expulsion  from  the  fraternity. 

The  doctrine  of  outward  conformity,  and  the  absence  of  visible  ob- 
jects of  worship  have  prevented  this  sect  from  spreading  very  generally 

*    The  Bhagavat  declares  the  Deity  and  Guru  to  be  the  same. 

?5"o^^^?f5rrT"^J  II  Na'bha'ji  declares  the  Deity,  Guru,  worshipper,  and  wor- 
ship, to  be  four  names  and  one  substance.  ^Tf^H^HT^fT  T^  ^fT^TTT  ^T 
^^  II 


64 

throughout  India  :  it  is,  however,  very  widely  diffused,  and  as  I  have 
observed,  has  given  rise  to  many  others,  that  have  borrowed  its  phra- 
seology, and  caught  a  considerable  portion  of  its  spirit ;  the  sect  itself 
is  split  into  a  variety  of  subdivisions,  and  there  are  no  fewer  than 
twelve  branches  of  it  traced  up  to  the  founder,  between  which  a  differ- 
ence of  opinion,  as  well  as  descent  prevails  :  the  founders  of  these 
twelve  branches,  and  the  position  of  their  descendants,  are  the  follow- 
ing :— 

1.  Srutgopal  Da's,  the  author  of  the  Suk'h  Nidhdn  :  his  successors 
preside  over  the  Chaura  at  Benares,  the  Samddh  at  Magar,  an  establish- 
ment at  JaganndVh,  and  one  at  Dwdrakd. 

2.  Bhago  Das,  the  author  of  the  Bijek ;  his  successors  reside  at 
Dhanauii. 

3.  Narayan  Das,  and 

4.  Churdman  Das :  these  two  were  the  sons  of  Dherma  Da's,  a  mer- 
chant of  the  Kasaundhya  tribe,  of  the  Sri  Vaishnava  sect,  and  one  of 
Kabir's  first  and  most  important  converts  ;  his  residence  was  at  Bandho 
near  Jabbelpur,  where  the  Mat'hs  of  his  posterity  long  remained  :  the 
Mahants  were  family  men,  thence  termed  Bans  Gurus  :  the  line  of 
Na'ra'yan  Da's  is  extinct,  and  the  present  successor  of  Churdman, 
beinf  the  son  of  a  concubine,  is  not  acknowledged  as  a  Mahant  by  all 
the  other  branches. 

5.  Jaggo  Dds,  the  Gaddi  or  Pillow  at  Cuttack. 

6.  Jivan  Dds,  the  founder  of  the  Setndmi  sect,  to  whom  we  shall 
asain  have  occasion  to  advert. 

7.  Kamdl. — Bombay :  the  followers  of  this  teacher  practise  the  Yoga. 
Kamal  himself,  is  said  to  have  been  the  son  of  Kabir,  but  the  only 
authority  for  this  is  a  popular  and  proverbial  phrase  * 

8.  Tak  Sdli. — Baroda. 

9.  Jnydni. — Majjhni  near  Sahasram. 

10.  Saheb  Dds. — Cuttack:  his  followers  have  also  some  distinct 
notions,  and  form  a  sect  called  Mula  Pan f  his. 

1 1 .  Nitydnand. 

*  ^^T  #^^fl^  ^T  ^T^TT^fT  JfT  ^^ra  II  "The  race  of  KaUr 
became  extinct  when  his  son  Kama'l  was  born,"  Kama'l  adopting,  on  principle,  a  life 
of  celibacy,  or  being  a  person  of  worldly  appetites.— Roebuck's  Proverbs,  2.  1.  656. 


65 

12.  Kamal  Ndd :  these  two  settled  somewhere  in  the  Dekhin,  but 
ray  informant  could  not  tell  me  exactly  where.  There  are  also  some 
popular,  and  perhaps  local  distinctions  of  the  sect,  as  Hansa  Kabiris, 
Dana  Kabiris,  and  Mangrela  Kabiris,  but  in  what  respect,  except  appel- 
lation, they  differ  from  the  rest  has  not  been  ascertained. 

Of  these  establishments  the  Kabir  Chaura,  at  Benares,  is  pre-eminent 
in  dignity,  and  it  is  constantly  visited  by  wandering  members  of  the 
sect,  as  well  as  by  those  of  other  kindred  heresies  :  its  Mahant  receives 
and  feeds  these  visitors  whilst  they  stay,  although  the  establishment 
has  little  to  depend  upon,  except  the  occasional  donations  of  its  lay 
friends  and  followers.  Balwant  Sink,  and  his  successor,  Cheit  Sink, 
were  great  patrons  of  it,  and  the  latter  granted  to  the  Chaura  a  fixed 
monthly  allowance.  Cheit  Sinh  also  attempted  to  form  some  estimate 
of  the  numbers  of  the  sect,  and  if  we  may  credit  the  result,  they  must 
be  very  considerable  indeed,  as  at  a  grand  meeting,  or  Mela,  which  he 
instituted  near  Benares,  no  fewer  than  35,000  Kabir  Pant'his  of  the 
Monastic  and  Mendicant  class  are  said  to  have  been  collected.  There  is 
no  doubt  that  the  Kabir  Pant'his,  both  clerical  and  lay,  are  very  nume- 
rous in  all  the  provinces  of  Upper  and  Central  India,  except,  perhaps,  in 
Bengal  itself:  the  quaker-like  spirit  of  the  sect,  their  abhorrence  of  all 
violence,  their  regard  for  truth,  and  the  inobtrusiveness  of  their  opini- 
ons, render  them  very  inoffensive  members  of  the  state :  their  mendi- 
cants also  never  solicit  alms,  and  in  this  capacity  even  they  are  less 
obnoxious  than  the  many  rehgious  vagrants,  whom  the  rank  soil  of 
Hindu  superstition  and  enervating  operation  of  an  Indian  climate  so 
plentifully  engender. 


KHAKIS. 


This  division  of  the  Vaishnavas  is  generally  derived,  though  not 
immediately,  from  Ra'ma'nand,  and  is  undoubtedly  connected  in  its 
polity,  and  practice,  with  his  peculiar  followers.  The  reputed  founder 
is  Ki'l,  the  disciple  of  Krishnada's,  whom  some  accounts  make  the  dis- 
ciple of  Asa'nand,  the  disciple  of  Ra'ma'nand  ;  but  the  history  of  the 
Khaki  sect  is  not  well  known,  and  it  seems  to  be  of  modern  origin,  as 


66 

no  notice  of  it  occurs  in  the  Bhakta  Maid,  or  in  any  other  work  that  has 
been  consulted :  the  sectaries,  though  believed  to  be  rather  numerous, 
appear  to  be  either  confined  to  a  few  particular  districts,  or  to  lead  wholly 
an  erratic  life,  in  which  latter  character  they  are  confounded  with  the 
class  of  Bairdgis :  as  no  written  accounts  have  been  procured,  and  the 
opportunities  of  obtaining  oral  information  have  been  rare  and  imperfect, 
a  very  brief  notice  of  this  sect  is  all  that  can  here  be  offered. 

The  Khakis,  as  the  name  implies,  are  distinguished  from  the  other 
Vaishnavas,  by  the  application  of  clay  and  ashes  to  their  dress  or 
persons :  those  who  reside  in  fixed  establishments  generally  dress  like 
other  Vaishnavas,  but  those  who  lead  a  wandering  life,  go  either  naked 
or  nearly  so,  smearing  their  bodies  with  the  pale  grey  mixture  of  ashes 
and  earth,  and  making,  in  this  state,  an  appearance  very  incompatible 
with  the  mild  and  decent  character  of  the  Vaishnava  sects  :  the  Khdkis 
also  frequently  wear  the  Jatd,  or  braided  hair,  after  the  fashion  of  the 
votaries  of  8iva,  and,  in  fact,  it  appears  that  this  sect  affords  one  of 
the  many  instances  of  the  imitative  spirit  common  amongst  the  Hindu 
polytheists,  and  has  adopted,  from  the  Saivas,  some  of  their  charac- 
teristic practices,  blending  them  with  the  preferential  adoration  of 
Vishnu,  as  Raghundth  or  Rama:  the  Khdkis  also  worship  Sita',  and  pay 
particular  veneration  to  Hanuma'n. 

Many  Khdkis  are  established  about  Farakhabad,  but  their  principal 
seat  on  this  side  of  India  is  at  Hanuman  G4rh,  near  Ayudhya,  in  Oude  : 
the  Samddh  or  spiritual  throne  of  the  founder,  is  said  to  be  at  Jaypur : 
the  term  Samddh  applied  to  it,  however,  would  seem  to  indicate  their 
adopting  a  like  practice  with  the  Jogis,  that  of  burying  their  dead,  as 
the  word  is  more  generally  used  to  express  a  tomb  or  mausoleum.* 


MALUK  DASIS. 


The  Maluk   Ddsis  form  another  subdivision  of  the  Rdmdnandi   Vaish- 
navas, of  comparatively  uncertain  origin  and  limited  importance  :  they 

*  The  little    information  given  in  the  text,  was  obtained  from  the  Superior  of  a 
small,  but  neat   establishment  on  the  bank   of  the  river,  above  Bisrdnta  Ghat,  at 


67 

are  generally  traced  from  Rdmdnand  in  this  manner  :  1 ,  Rdmdnand.  2, 
Asdnand.  3,  Krishna  Das.  4,  KU.  5,  Maiuk  Dds ;  making  the  last,  con- 
sequently, contemporary  with  the  author  of  the  Bhakta  Mala,  and 
placing  him  in  the  reign  of  Akber,  or  about  250  years  ago. 

We  had  occasion,  in  the  notice  taken  of  Na'bha'ji,  to  shew  that  the 
spiritual  genealogy  now  enumerated  could  scarcely  be  correct,  for  as 
Ra'ma'nand  must  have  flourished  prior  to  the  year  1400,  we  have  but 
three  generations  between  him  and  the  date  even  of  Akber's  succession 
1555,  or  a  century  and  a  half :  it  was  then  mentioned,  however,  that 
according  to  the  Bhakta  Mala,  Krishna  Da's  was  not  the  pupil  of 
Asa'nand,  and  consequently  the  date  of  succession  was  not  necessarily 
uninterrupted  :  we  might  therefore  place  Malu'k  Da's  where  there  is 
reason  to  place  Na'bha'ji,  about  the  end  of  Akber's  reign,  as  far  as 
this  genealogy  is  to  be  depended  upon,  but  there  is  reason  to  question 
even  its  accuracy,  and  to  bring  down  Malu'k  Da's  to  a  comparatively 
recent  period  :  the  uniform  belief  of  his  followers  is  indeed  sufl[icient 
testimony  on  this  head,  and  they  are  invariably  agreed  in  making  him 
contemporary  with  Aurengzeb. 

The  modifications  of  the  Vaishnava  doctrines  introduced  by  Malu'k 
Da's,  appear  to  have  been  little  more  than  the  name  of  the  teacher,  and 
a  shorter  streak  of  red  upon  the  forehead  :  in  one  respect  indeed  there 
is  an  important  distinction  between  these  and  the  Rdmdnandi  ascetics, 
and  the  teachers  of  the  Maluk  Basis  appear  to  be  of  the  secular  order, 
Grihasthas,  or  house-holders,  whilst  the  others  are  all  coenobites  :  the 
doctrines,  however,  are  essentially  the  same  :  Vishnu,  as  Ra'ma,  is  the 
object  of  their  practical  adoration,  and  their  principles  partake  of  the 
spirit  of  quietism,  which  pervades  these  sects  :  their  chief  authority  is 
the  Bhagavat  Gita,  and  they  read  some  small  Sanscrit  tracts,  containing 
the  praise  of  Rama :  they  have  also  some  Hindi  Sdk'his,  and  Vishnu 
Padas  attributed  to  their  founder  as  also  a  work  in  the  same  language, 
entitled  the  Dasratan  :  the  followers  of  this  sect  are  said  to  be  numerous 


Farakhabad.  The  Ghat  and  Mat'h  had  beea  recently  erected  by  a  merchant  of 
Lucknow  :  the  tenants,  three  or  four  in  number,  were  a  deputation  from  Ayudhya, 
in  Oude,  and  were  but  little  acquainted  with  their  own  peculiarities,  although  not 
reluctant  to  communicate  what  they  knew  ;  other  K'hakis  encountered  here  were 
Ndffus  and  Brahmacharis,  with  whom  no  satisfactory  communication  was  attainable  ; 
there  were  other  establishments,  but  time  did  not  permit  their  being  visited. 


68 

in  particular  districts,  especially  amongst  the  trading  and  servile  classes, 
to  the  former  of  which  the  founder  belonged.* 

The  principal  establishment  of  the  Maliik  Ddsis  is  at  Kara  Manikpur, 
the  birth-place  of  the  founder,  and  still  occupied  by  his  descendants  ;t 
the  present  Mahant  is  the  eighth  in  descent  from  him  :  the  series  is 
thus  enumerated. 

1,  Malu'k  Da's,  2,  Ra'msana'hi.  3,  Krishnasna'hi.  4,  Thakur 
Da's.  5,  Gopa'l  Da's.  6,  Kunj  Beha'ri.  7,  Ramsa'hu'.  8,  Seopre= 
sa'd  Da's.     9,  Ganga'  Presa'd  Da's,  the  present  Mahant. 

The  Mafh  at  Kara  is  situated  near  the  river,  and  comprises  the  dwell- 
ings of  the  Mahant,  and  at  the  time  it  was  visited,  of  fifteen  resident 
Chelas,  or  disciples,  accommodations  for  numerous  religious  mendi- 
cants who  come  hither  in  pilgrimage,  and  a  temple  dedicated  to  Rdma- 
chandra :  the  Gaddi,  or  pillow  of  the  sect,  is  here,  and  the  actual  pillow 
originally  used  by  Malu'k  Da's,  is  said  to  be  still  preserved.  Besides 
this  establishment,  there  are  six  other  MaChs  belonging  to  this  sect, 
at  Allahabad,  Benares,  Bindrahan,  Ayudhya,  Lucknow,  which  is  mo- 
dern, having  been  founded  by  Gomati  Das,  under  the  patronage  of 
Asef  al  Daula,  and  Jaganndth,  which  last  is  of  great  repute  as  ren- 
dered  sacred  by  the  death  of  Malu'k  Da's. 


DADU  PANT'HIS. 


This  class  is  one  of  the  indirect  ramifications  of  the  Rdmdnandi 
stock,    and   is    always  included   amongst  the   Vaishnava  schisms :    its 

*  A  verse  attributed  to  Malu'k  Da's  is  so  generally  current,  as  to  have  be- 
come proverbial,  it  is  unnecessary   to  point  out  its   resemblance   to    Christian   texts 

D-g*  ajT  PTH'T  TTH"  II     The  snake  performs  no  service,  the  bird  discharges  no 

duty.     Malu'k  Da'3  declares,  Ra'm  is  the  giver  of  all. 

t  There  is  some  variety  in  the  accounts  here,  Mat'hura  Na'th  says,  the  Tomb 
is  at  Kara  ;  Purdn  Das  asserts,  that  it  is  at  Jaganndth,  and  the  birth-place  at  Kara 
—he  has  been  at  both :  the  establishment  at  Jaganndth  is  of  great  repute  ;  it  is  near 
toa  Mai'Aof  Kabir  Pant'h is,  and  all  ascetics  who  go  to  this  place  of  pilgrimage, 
consider  it  essential  to  receive  the  Maliik  Dds  ka  Tukra,  from  the  one,  and  Kahir  ka 
Tarani,  from  the  other,  or  a  piece  of  bread  and  a  spoonful  of  sour  rice-water.  This  and 
most  of  the  other  particulars,  were  procured  for  me  from  the  present  Mahant,  by  a 
young  officer,  Lieut.   Wilton,  stationed  for  a  short  time  at  Kara. 


69 

founder  is  said  to  have  been  a  pupil  of  one  of  the  Kabir  Pant'hi 
teachers,  and  to  be  the  fifth  in  descent  from  Ra'ma'nand,  according  to 
the  following   genealogy  : — 


1. 

Kabir. 

4. 

Bimal. 

2. 

Kamdl. 

5. 

Buddhan 

3. 

Jamdl, 

6. 

Dddu. 

The  worship  is  addressed  to  Rdma,  but  it  is  restricted  to  the  Japa, 
or  repetition  of  his  name,  and  the  Rdma  intended  is  the  deity,  nega- 
tively described  in  the  Veddnta  theology  :  temples  and  images  are  pro- 
hibited. 

Dddu  was  a  cotton  cleaner  by  profession  :  he  was  born  at  Ahme- 
dahad,  but  in  his  twelfth  year  removed  to  Sambher,  in  Ajmer  :  he  thence 
travelled  to  Kalydnpur,  and  next  removed  to  Naraina,  in  his  thirty 
seventh  year,  a  place  four  cos  from  Sambher,  and  twenty  from  Jaypur. 
When  here,  he  was  admonished,  by  a  voice  from  heaven,  to  addict 
himself  to  a  religious  life,  and  he  accordingly  retired  to  Baherana 
mountain,  five  cos  from  Naraina,  where,  after  some  time,  he  disap- 
peared, and  no  traces  of  him  could  be  found.  His  followers  believe  he 
was  absorbed  into  the  deity.  If  the  list  of  his  religious  descent  be 
accurate,  he  flourished  about  the  year  1600,  at  the  end  of  Akber's  reign, 
or  in  the  beginning  of  that  of  Jehangir.  The  followers  of  Dddu  wear 
no  peculiar  frontal  mark  nor  Mdld,  but  carry  a  rosary,  and  are  further 
distinguished  by  a  peculiar  sort  of  cap,  a  round  white  cap,  according 
to  some,  but  according  to  others,  one  with  four  corners,  and  a  flap  hang- 
ing down  behind ;  which  it  is  essential  that  each  man  should  manufac- 
ture for  himself. 

The  Dddu  Pant'his  are  of  three  classes :  the  Viraktas,  who  are  re- 
ligious characters,  who  go  bare-headed,  and  have  but  one  garment 
and  one  water-pot.  The  Nagas,  who  carry  arms,  which  they  are  wil- 
ling to  exercise  for  hire,  and,  amongst  the  Hindu  princes,  they  have 
been  considered  as  good  soldiers.  The  third  class  is  that  of  the  Bister 
Dhdris,  who  follow  the  occupations  of  ordinary  life.  A  further  sub- 
division exists  in  this  sect,  and  the  chief  branches  again  form  fifty-two 
divisions,  or  Thambas,  the  peculiarities  of  which  have  not  been  ascer- 
tained. The  Dddu  Pant'his  burn  their  dead  at  dawn,  but  their  reli- 
gious  members   not  unfrequently   enjoin,  that  their  bodies,  after  death, 


70 

shall  be  thrown  into  some  field,  or  some  wilderness,  to  be  devoured 
by  the  beasts  and  birds  of  prey,  as  they  say,  that  in  a  funeral  pile  insect 
life  is  apt  to  be  destroyed. 

The  Dddu  Pant'his  are  said  to  be  very  numerous  in  Marwar  and 
Ajmer :  of  the  Ndga  class  alone,  the  Raja  of  J  ay  pur  is  reported  to 
entertain  as  soldiers  more  than  ten  thousand  :  the  chief  place  of  worship 
is  at  Naraina,  where  the  bed  of  Dddu,  and  the  collection  of  the  texts 
of  the  sect  are  preserved  and  worshipped :  a  small  building  on  the  hill, 
marks  the  place  of  his  disappearance — a  Mela,  or  fair,  is  held  annually, 
from  the  day  of  new  moon  to  that  of  full  moon  in  Phalgun,  (Feb.- 
March)  at  Naraina.  The  tenets  of  the  sect  are  contained  in  several 
Bhdsha  works,  in  which  it  is  said  a  vast  number  of  passages  from  the 
Kabir  writings  are  inserted,  and  the  general  character  of  which  is  cer- 
tainly of  a  similar  nature.*  The  Dddu  Pant'his  maintain  a  friendly 
intercourse  with  the  followers  of  Kabir,  and  are  frequent  visitors  at 
the  Chaura. 


RAI  BASIS. 


Ra'i  Da's  was  another  of  Ha'ma'nand's  disciples,  who  founded  a  sect, 
confined,  however,  it  is  said,  to  those  of  his  own  caste,  the  Chamars, 
or  workers  in  hides  and  in  leather,  and  amongst  the  very  lowest  of 
the  Hindu  mixed  tribes  :  the  circumstance  renders  it  difficult,  if  not 
impossible  to  ascertain  whether  the  sect  still  exists  :  the  founder  must 
once  have  enjoyed  some  celebrity,  as  some  of  his  works  are  included  in 
the  Adi  Grant'h  of  the  Sikhs  ;  he  is  there  named  Ra'bi  Da'sa,  which  is 
the  Sanscrit  form  of  his  name  :  some  of  his  compositions  also  form 
part  of  the  collection  of  hymns  and  prayers  used  by  that  sect  at 
Benares  :  there  appears  to  be  but  little  known  of  him  of  any  authentic 
character,  and  we  must  be  contented  with  the  authority  of  the  Bhakta 

*  I  had  prepared  a  list  of  the  contents  of  one  of  their  manuals,  and  a  translation  of 
a  few  passages,  but  the  Manuscript  has  been  mislaid.  The  work,  was  lent  me  for  a 
short  time  by  one  of  the  sect,  who  would  on  no  account  part  with  it.  The  above 
notice  was  taken  partly  from  a  statement  in  Hindi  procured  at  Naraina  by  Lieut. 
Colonel  Smith,  and  partly  from  verbal  information  obtained  at  Benares.  Dadu  is  not 
mentioned  in  the  Bhakta  Mala,  but  there  is  some  account  of  him  in  the  Dabistan, 


Mala,    where   he   makes    a   rather   important  figure  :  the  legend  is  as 
follows  :  — 

One  of  Ra'ma'nand's  pupils  was  a  Brahmdchdri,  whose  daily  duty  it 
was  to  provide  the  offering  presented  to  the  deity  :  on  one  of  these 
occasions,  the  offering  consisted  of  grain,  which  the  pupil  had  received 
as  alms  from  a  shop-keeper,  who  supplied  chiefly  the  butchers  with 
articles  of  food,  and  his  donation  was,  consequently,  impure  :  when 
Ra'ma'nand,  in  the  course  of  his  devotions,  attempted  to  fix  his  mind 
upon  the  divinity,  he  found  the  task  impracticable,  and  suspecting 
that  some  defect  in  the  offering  occasioned  such  an  erratic  imagina- 
tion, he  enquired  whence  it  had  been  obtained  :  on  being  informed,  he 
exclaimed,  Hd  Chamdr,  and  the  Brahmdchdri  soon  afterwards  dying, 
was  born  again  as  Rai  Da's,  the  son  of  a  worker  in  hides  and  leather. 

The  infant  Rai  Da's  retained  the  impression  left  upon  his  mind  by 
his  old  master's  anger,  and  refused  to  take  any  nourishment :  the 
parents,  in  great  affliction,  applied  to  Ra'ma'nand,  who,  by  order  of  the 
deity,  visited  the  child,  and  recognising  the  person  at  once,  whispered 
into  his  ear  the  initiating  Mantra  :  the  effect  was  instantaneous  :  the 
child  immediately  accepted  the  breast,  and  throve,  and  grew  up  a  pious 
votary  of  Ra'ma. 

For  some  time  the  profits  of  his  trade  maintained  Rai  Da's,  and  left 
him  something  to  divide  amongst  the  devout ;  but  a  season  of  scarcity 
supervening,  reduced  him  to  great  distress,  when  Bhagavdn,  in  the 
semblance  of  a  Vaishnava,  brought  him  a  piece  of  the  philosopher's 
stone,  and  shewing  him  its  virtue,  made  him  a  present  of  it.  Rai  Da's 
paid  little  regard  to  the  donation,  replying  to  the  effect  of  the  following 
Pada,  as  since  versified  by    Sur  Dds. 

Pada.  "  A  great  treasure  is  the  name  of  Hari  to  his  people  :  it  mul- 
tiplieth  day  by  day,  nor  doth  expenditure  diminish  it ;  it  abideth  secure- 
ly in  the  mansion,  and  neither  by  night  nor  by  day,  can  any  thief  steal 
it.  The  Lord  is  the  wealth  of  Sur  Dds,  what  need  hath  he  of  a  stone." 
The  miraculous  stone  was  thrown  aside,  and  when,  thirteen  months 
afterwards,  Vishnu  again  visited  his  votary,  he  found  no  use  had  been 
made  of  it :  as  this  expedient  had  failed,  the  deity  scattered  gold  coin 
in  places  where  Rai  Da's  could  not  avoid  finding  it  :  the  discovery  of 
this  treasure  filled  the  poor  Currier  with  alarm,  to  pacify  which  Krishna 
appeared  to  him  in  a  dream,  and  desired  him    to   apply    the  money 


72 

either  to  his  own  use  or  that  of  the  deity,  and  thus  authorised,  Rai 
Da's  erected  a  temple,  of  which  he  constituted  himself  the  high  priest, 
and  acquired  great  celebrity  in  his  new  character. 

The  reputation  of  Rai  Da's  was  further  extended  by  its  attracting  a 
persecution,  purposely  excited  by  Vishnu  to  do  honour  to  his  worship- 
per, the  deity  well  knowing  that  the  enmity  of  the  malignant  is  the 
most  effective  instrument  for  setting  open  to  the  world,  the  retired 
glory  of  the  pious  :  he  therefore  inspired  the  Brahmans  to  complain 
thus  to  the  king. 

Sloka  (Sanscrit  stanza).  "Where  things  profane  are  reverenced, 
where  sacred  things  are  profanely  administered,  there  three  calamities 
will  be  felt,  famine,  death,  and  fear." 

A  Chamdr,  oh  king,  ministers  to  the  Sdlagrdm,  and  poisons  the  town 
with  his  Prasad  ;*  men  and  women,  every  one  will  become  an  outcast ; 
banish  him  to  preserve  the  honour  of  your  people. 

The  king  accordingly  sent  for  the  culprit,  and  ordered  him  to  resign 
the  sacred  stone.  Rai  Da's  expressed  his  readiness  to  do  so,  and  only 
requested  the  Rajas  presence  at  his  delivery  of  it  to  the  Brahmans,  as, 
he  said,  if  after  being  given  to  them  it  should  return  to  him,  they  would 
accuse  him  of  stealing  it.  The  Raja  assenting,  the  Sdlagrdm  was 
brought,  and  placed  on  a  cushion  in  the  assembly.  The  Brahmans  were 
desired  to  remove  it,  but  attempted  to  take  it  away  in  vain  :  they 
repeated  hymns  and  charms,  and  read  the  VMas,  but  the  stone  was 
immoveable.     Rai  Da's  then  addressed  it  with  this  Pada  : — 

Pada.  "  Lord  of  lords,  thou  art  my  refuge,  the  root  of  Supreme 
happiness  art  thou,  to  whom  there  is  none  equal :  behold  me  at  thy 
feet :  in  various  wombs  have  I  abided,  and  from  the  fear  of  death  have  I 
not  been  delivered.  I  have  been  plunged  in  the  deceits  of  sense,  of 
passion,  and  illusion  ;  but  now  let  my  trust  in  thy  name  dispel  appre- 
hension of  the  future,  and  teach  me  to  place  no  reliance  on  what  the 
world  deems  virtue.  Accept,  oh  God,  the  devotions  of  thy  slave  Rai 
Da's,  and  be  thou  glorified  as  the  Purifier  of  the  sinful. 

The  saint  had  scarcely  finished,  when  the  Sdlagrdm  and  cushion  flew 
into  his  arms,  and  the  king,  satisfied  of  his  holy  pretensions,  command- 

*  The  Prasad  is  any  article  of  food  that  has  been  consecrated  by  previous  pre- 
sentation to  an  Idol  after  which  it  is  distributed  anaongst  the  worshippers  on  the  spot, 
or  sent  to  persons  of  consequence  at  their  own  houses. 


73 

ed  the  Brahmans  to  desist  from  their  opposition.  Amongst  the  dis- 
ciples of  Rai  Da's  was  Jhali,  the  Rani  of  Chitore  ;  her  adopting  a 
Chamdr,  as  her  spiritual  preceptor,  excited  a  general  commotion  amongst 
the  Brahmans  of  her  state,  and,  alarmed  for  her  personal  safety,  she 
wrote  to  Rai  Da's  to  request  his  counsel  and  aid.  He  repaired  to  her, 
and  desired  her  to  invite  the  Brahmans  to  a  solemn  feast :  they  accepted 
the  invitation,  and  sat  down  to  the  meal  provided  for  them,  when  be- 
tween every  two  Brahmans,  there  appeared  a  Rai  Da's.  This  miracu- 
lous multiplication  of  himself  had  the  desired  effect,  and  from  being  his 
enemies  and  revilers,  they  became  his  disciples. 

Such  are  the  legends  of  Bhakta  Mdld,  and  whatever  we  may  think  of 
their  veracity,  their  tenor,  representing  an  individual  of  the  most  abject 
class,  an  absolute  outcast  in  Hindu  estimation,  as  a  teacher  and  a  saint, 
is  not  without  interest  and  instruction. 


SENA  PANT'HIS. 


Sena',  the  barber,  was  the  third  of  Rdmdnand's  disciples,  who  esta- 
blished a  separate  schism ;  the  name  of  which,  and  of  its  founder,  are 
possibly  all  that  now  remain  of  it.  Sena'  and  his  descendants  were, 
for  sometime,  however,  the  family  Gurus  of  the  Rajas  of  Bandhogerh, 
and  thence  enjoyed  considerable  authority  and  reputation  :  the  origin  of 
this  connexion  is  the  subject  of  a  ludicrous  legend  in  the  Bhakta  Mdld. 

Sena',  thebarber  of  the  Raja  of  Bandhogerh,  was  a  devout  worshipper 
of  Vishnu,  and  a  constant  frequenter  of  the  meetings  of  the  pious :  on 
one  of  these  occasions,  he  suffered  the  time  to  pass  unheeded,  when  he 
ought  to  have  been  officiating  in  his  tonsosial  capacity,  and  Vishnu, 
who  noticed  the  circumstance,  and  knew  the  cause,  was  alarmed  for  his 
votary's  personal  integrity.  The  god,  therefore,  charitably  assumed 
the  figure  of  Sena',  and  equipping  himself  suitably,  waited  on  the 
Raja,  and  performed  the  functions  of  the  barber,  much  to  the  Raja's 
satisfaction,  and  without  detection,  although,  the  prince  perceived  an 
unusual  fragrance  about  his  barber's  person,  the  ambrosial  odour  that 
indicated  present  deity,  which  he  supposed  to  impregnate  the  oil  used 


74 

in  lubricating  his  royal  limbs.  The  pretended  barber  had  scarcely- 
departed,  when  the  real  one  appeared,  and  stammered  out  his  excuses: 
his  astonishment  and  the  Raja's  were  ahke,  but  the  discernment  of  the 
latter  was  more  acute,  for  he  immediately  comprehended  the  whole 
business,  fell  at  his  barber's  feet,  and  elected  for  his  spiritual  guide,  an 
individual  so  pre-eminently  distinguished  by  the  favour  and  protection 
of  the  deity. 


RUDRA  SAMPRADAYIS,  OR 

Vallahhdchdris, 

The  sects  of  Vaishnavas  we  have  hitherto  noticed,  are  chiefly  confined 
to  professed  ascetics,  and  to  a  few  families  originally  from  the  South 
and  West  of  India,  or  as  in  the  case  of  the  Rdmdwats  and  Kabir  Pant'his, 
to  such  amongst  the  mass  of  society,  as  are  of  a  bold  and  curious  spirit ; 
but  the  opulent  and  luxurious  amongst  the  men,  and  by  far  the  greater 
portion  of  the  women,  attach  themselves  to  the  worship  of  Krishna 
and  his  mistress  Ra'dha',  either  singly,  or  conjointly,  as  in  the  case  of 
Vishnu  and  Lakshmi,  amongst  the  Ramdnujas,  and  Sita'  and  Ra'm, 
amongst  the  Rdmdwats.  There  is,  however,  another  form,  which  is  per- 
haps more  popular  still,  although  much  interwoven  with  the  others. 
This  is  the  Ba'la  Gopa'la,  the  infant  Krishna,  the  worship  of  whom 
is  very  widely  diffused  amongst  all  ranks  of  Indian  society,  and  which 
originated  with  the  founder  of  the  Rudra  Sampraddyi  sect,  Vallabha 
Acha'rya  ;  it  is,  perhaps,  better  known,  however,  from  the  title  of  its 
teachers,  as  the  religion  of  the  Gokulast'ha  Gosains. 

The  original  teacher  of  the  philosophical  tenets  of  this  sect,  is  said  to 
have  been  Vishnu  Swa'mi,  a  commentator  on  the  texts  of  the  V^das, 
who,  however,  admitted  disciples  from  the  Brahmanical  caste  only,  and 
considered  the  state  of  the  Sanydsi,  or  ascetic,  as  essential  to  the 
communication  of  his  doctrines.  He  was  succeeded  by  Jnya'na  Deva, 
who  was  followed  by  Na'ma  Deva  and  Trilochana,  and  they, 
although  whether  immediately  or  not  does  not  appear,  by  Vallabha 
Swa'mi,  the  son  of  Lakshmana  Bhatt,  a  Tailinga  Brahman :  this 
Sanydsi  taught  early  in  the  sixteenth  century :  he  resided  originally  at 


75 

Gokul,  a  village  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Jumna,  about  three  cos  to  the 
East  of  Mathura :  after  remaining  here  sometime,  he  travelled  through 
India  as  a  pilgrim,  and  amongst  other  places  he  visited,  according  to 
the  Bhakta  Mala,  the  court  of  Krishna  Deva,  king  of  Vijayanagar. 
apparently  the  same  as  KRISH^fA  Rayalu,  who  reigned  about  the  year 
1520,  where  he  overcame  the  Smdrta  Brahmans  in  a  controversy,  and 
was  elected  by  the  Vaishnavas,  as  their  chief,  with  the  title  of  AchdrJ : 
hence  he  travelled  to  Ujayin,  and  took  up  his  abode  under  a  Pipal  tree, 
on  the  banks  of  the  Sipra,  said  to  be  still  in  existence,  and  designated 
as  his  Beit'hek,  or  station.  Besides  this,  we  find  traces  of  him  in  other 
places.  There  is  a  Beit'hek  of  his  amongst  the  Ghats  of  Muttra,  and 
about  two  miles  from  the  fort  of  Chunar,  is  a  place  called  his  well, 
AchdrJ  kuan,  comprising  a  temple  and  Mat'h  in  the  court-yard  of  which 
is  the  well  in  question  ;  the  Saint  is  said  to  have  resided  here  sometime. 
After  this  peregrination,  Vallabha  returned  to  Vrindavan,  where,  as  a 
reward  for  his  fatigues  and  his  faith,  he  was  honoured  by  a  visit  from 
Krishna  in  person,  who  enjoined  him  to  introduce  the  worship  of 
Bala  Gopdl,  or  Gopdl  Ldl,  and  founded  the  faith  which  at  present  exists 
in  so  flourishing  a  condition.  Vallabha  is  supposed  to  have  closed 
his  career  in  a  miracle  :  he  had  finally  settled  at  Jet'han  Ber,  at  Benares, 
near  which  a  Mat'h  still  subsists  ;  but  at  length,  having  accomplished 
his  mission,  he  is  said  to  have  entered  the  Ganges,  at  Hanumdn  Ghat, 
when,  stooping  into  the  water,  he  disappeared :  a  brilliant  flame  arose 
from  the  spot,  and,  in  the  presence  of  a  host  of  spectators,  he  ascended 
to  heaven,  and  was  lost  in  the  firmament. 

The  worship  of  Krishna  as  one  with  Vishnu,  and  the  Universe, 
dates  evidently  from  the  Mahdbhdrat,*  and  his  more  juvenile  forms  are 
brought  pre-eminently  to  notice  in  the  account  of  his  infancy,  contained 
in  the  Bhdgavat,\  but  neither  of  these  works  discriminates  him  from 
Vishnu,  nor  do  they  recommend  his  infantine  or  adolescent  state  to 
particular  veneration.  At  the  same  time  some  hints  may  have  been 
derived  from  them,  for  the  institution  of  this  division  of  the  Hindu 

*  The  well  known  passage  in  the  Bhdgavad  Gitd,  in  which  Arjuna  sees  the  uni- 
verse in  the  mouth  of  Krishna,  establishes  this  identity. 

t  Particularly  in  the  tenth  book,  which  is  appropriated  to  the  life  of  Krishna. 
The  same  subject  occupies  a  considerable  portion  of  the  Hari  Bans  section  of  the 
Mahahharat,  of  the  Pdtdla  section  of  the  Padma  Purdna,  the  sixth  section  of  the 
Vishnu  Purdna,  and  the  whole  of  the  Adi  Upapurdna. 


76 

faith.*  In  claiming,  however,  supremacy  for  Krishna,  the  Brahma 
Vaivertta  Purdna  is  most  decided,  and  this  work  places  Krishna  in  a 
heaven,  and  society  exclusively  his  own,  and  derives  from  him  all  the 
objects  of  existence. 

According  to  this  authority,  the  residence  of  Krishna  is  denominat- 
ed Goloka  ;  it  is  far  above  the  three  worlds,  and  has,  at  five  hundred 
millions  of  Yojanas  below  it,  the  separate  Lokas  of  Vishnu  and  Siva, 
Vaikuntha,  and  Kailds.  This  region  is  indestructible,  whilst  all  else 
is  subject  to  annihilation,  and  in  the  centre  of  it  abides  Krishna,  of 
the  colour  of  a  dark  cloud,  in  the  bloom  of  youth,  clad  in  yellow  rai- 
ment, splendidly  adorned  with  celestial  gems,  and  holding  a  flute.  He 
is  exempt  from  Mdyd,  or  delusion,  and  all  qualities,  eternal,  alone, 
and  the  Paramdtmd,  or  supreme  soul  of  the  world. 

Krishna  being  alone  in  the  Goloka,  and  meditating  on  the  waste  of 
creation,  gave  origin  to  a  being  of  a  female  form  endowed  with  the 
three  Gunas,  and  thence  the  primary  agent  in  creation.  This  was 
Prakriti,  or  Mdyd,  and  the  system  so  far  corresponds  with  that  of  the 
other  Vaishnavas,  and  of  the  Puranas  generally  speaking.  They  having 
adopted,  in  fact,  the  Sdnkhya  system,  interweaving  with  it  their  peculiar 
sectarial  notions. 

Crude  matter,  and  the  five  elements,  are  also  made  to  issue  from 
Krishna,  and  then  all  the  divine  beings.     Na'ra'yana,  or  Vishnu  pro- 

*  Thus  in  the  Vana  Parva  of  the  Mahubhdrat ;  Ma'rkandeya  Muni,  at  the 
time  of  a  minor  destruction  of  the  world,  sees,  "  amidst  the  waters,  an  Indian  fig  tree 
of  vast  size,  on  a  principal  branch  of  which  was  a  bed  ornamented  with  divine  cover- 
ings, on  which  lay  a  child  with  a  countenance  like  the  moon,"  The  Saint,  though  ac- 
quainted with  the  past,  present,  and  future,  cannot  recognise  the  child,  who  therefore 
appears  of  the  hue,  and  with  the  symbols,  of  Krishna,  and  desires  the  Sage  to  rest 
within  his  substance  from  his  weary  wanderings  over  the  submerged  world. 

In  the  Bhagavat  it  is  stated,  that  when  first  born,  Vasudeva  beheld  the  child  of 
the  hue  of  a  cloud,  with  four  arms,  dressed  in  a  yellow  garb,  and  bearing  the  weapons, 
the  jewels,  and  the  diadem  of  Vishnu. 


And  the  same  work  describes  Yasoda',  his  adoptive  mother,  as  seeing  the  universe  in 
the  mouth  of  the  child. 


77 

ceeds  from  his  right  side,  Maha'deva  from  his  left,  Brahma'  from  his 
hand,  Dharma  from  his  breath,  Saraswati'  from  his  mouth,  Lakshmi' 
from  his  mind,  Durga'  from  his  understanding,  Ra'dha'  from  his  left 
side.  Three  hundred  millions  of  Gopis,  or  female  companions  of 
Ra'dha',  exude  from  the  pores  of  her  skin,  and  a  like  number  of  Gopas, 
or  companions  of  Krishna,  from  the  pores  of  his  skin :  the  very  cows 
and  their  calves,  properly  the  tenants  of  Goloka,  but  destined  to  inhabit 
the  Groves  of  Vrindavan,  are  produced  from  the  same  exalted  source. 

In  this  description  of  creation,  however,  the  Deity  is  still  spoken  of  as 
a  young  man,  and  the  Purdna  therefore  affords  only  indirect  authority 
in  the  marvels  it  narrates  of  his  infancy,  for  the  worship  of  the  child. 
Considering,  however,  that  in  this,  or  in  any  other  capacity,  the  acts  of 
the  Divinity  are  his  Lild,  or  sport,  there  is  no  essential  difference  be- 
tween those  who  worship  him  either  as  a  boy  or  as  a  man,  and  any  of 
his  forms  may  be  adored  by  this  class  of  Vaishnavas,  and  all  his  princi- 
pal shrines  are  to  them  equally  objects  of  pilgrimage.  As  the  elements 
and  chief  agents  of  creation  are  thus  said  to  proceed  from  the  person  of 
Krishna,  it  may  be  inferred  that  the  followers  of  this  creed  adopt  the 
principles  of  the  Veddnta  philosophy,  and  consider  the  material  world  as 
one  in  substance,  although  in  an  illusory  manner  with  the  Supreme. 
Life  is  also  identified  with  spirit,  according  to  the  authority  of  a  popular 
work.*  None  of  the  philosophical  writings  of  the  chief  teachers  of  this 
system  have  been  met  with. 

Amongst  other  articles  of  the  new  creed,  Vallabha  introduced  one, 
which  is  rather  singular  for  a  Hindu  religious  innovator  or  reformer :  he 


*  According  to  the  Vurttd,  Vallabha  advocated  this  doctrine  with  some  reluc- 
tance, by  the  especial  injunction  of  the  juvenile  Krishna. 


'•  Then  Acharj  Ji  said,  '  you  know  the  nature  of  life,  it  is  full  of  defects,  how  can  it 
be  combined  with  you:'  to  which  Sri  Thdkur  Ji  (Kkishna)  replied;  'do  you  unite 
Brahme  and  life  in  what  way  you  will,  I  shall  concur,  and  thence  all  its  defects 
will  be  removed.'  " 


78 

taught,  that  privation  formed  no  part  of  sanctity,  and  that  it  was  the 
duty  of  the  teachers  and  his  disciples  to  worship  their  Deity,  not  in 
nudity  and  hunger,  but  in  costly  apparel  and  choice  food ;  not  in  soli- 
tude and  mortification,  but  in  the  pleasures  of  society,  and  the  enjoy- 
ment of  the  world.  The  Gosains,  or  teachers,  are  almost  always  family 
men,  as  was  the  founder  Vallabha,  for  after  he  had  shaken  off  the  re- 
strictions of  the  monastic  order  to  which  he  originally  belonged,  he  mar- 
ried, by  the  particular  order,  it  is  said,  of  his  new  god.  The  Gosains 
are  always  clothed  with  the  best  raiment,  and  fed  with  the  daintiest  vi- 
ands by  their  followers,  over  whom  they  have  unlimited  influence :  part 
of  the  connexion  between  the  Guru  and  teacher,  being  the  three-fold 
Samarpan,  or  consignment  of  Tan,  Man,  and  Dhan ;  body,  mind, 
and  wealth,  to  the  spiritual  guide.  The  followers  of  the  order  are  espe- 
cially numerous  amongst  the  mercantile  community,  and  the  Gosains 
themselves  are  often  largely  engaged,  also,  in  maintaining  a  connexion 
amongst  the  commercial  establishments  of  remote  parts  of  the  country, 
as  they  are  constantly  travelling  over  India,  under  pretence  of  pilgrimage, 
to  the  sacred  shrines  of  the  sect,  and  notoriously  reconcile,  upon  these 
occasions,  the  profits  of  trade,  with  the  benefits  of  devotion  :  as  religious 
travellers,  however,  this  union  of  objects  renders  them  more  respectable 
than  the  vagrants  of  any  other  sect. 

The  practices  of  the  sect  are  of  a  similar  character  with  those  of 
other  regular  worshippers :  their  temples  and  houses  have  images  of 
GoPAL,  of  Krishna  and  Ra'dha',  and  other  divine  forms  connected 
with  this  incarnation,  of  metal  chiefly,  and  not  unfrequently  of  gold : 
the  image  of  Krishna  represents  a  chubby  boy,  of  the  dark  hue  of 
which  Vishnu  is  always  represented :  it  is  richly  decorated  and  sedu- 
lously attended  ;  receiving  eight  times  a  day  the  homage  of  the  votaries. 
These  occasions  take  place  at  fixed  periods  and  for  certain  purposes, 
and  at  all  other  seasons,  and  for  any  other  object,  except  at  stated  and 
periodical  festivals,  the  temples  are  closed  and  the  Deity  is  invisible. 
The  eight  daily  ceremonials  are  the  following : — 

1.  Mangala  :  the  morning  levee.  The  image  being  washed  and  dress- 
ed, is  taken  from  the  couch,  where  it  is  supposed  to  have  slept  during 
the  night,  and  placed  upon  a  seat,  about  half  an  hour  after  sunrise  : 
slight  refreshments  are  then  presented  to  it,  with  betel  and  Pan  :  lamps 
are  generally  kept  burning  during  this  ceremony. 


79 

2.  Sringdra :  the  image  having  been  anointed  and  perfumed  with 
oil,  camphor,  and  sandal,  and  splendidly  attired,  now  holds  his  public 
court :  this  takes  place  about  an  hour  and  a  half  after  the  preceding, 
or  when  four  Gheris  of  the  day  have  elapsed. 

3.  Gwala  :  the  image  is  now  visited,  preparatory  to  his  going  out  to 
attend  the  cattle  along  with  the  cow-herd  ;  this  ceremony  is  held  about 
forty-eight  minutes  after  the  last,  or  when  six  Gheris  have  passed. 

4.  Raja  Bh6ga :  held  at  midday,  when  Krishna  is  supposed  to 
come  in  from  the  pastures,  and  dine  ;  all  sorts  of  delicacies  are  placed 
before  the  image,  and  both  those,  and  other  articles  of  food  dressed  by 
the  ministers  of  the  temple,  are  distributed  to  the  numerous  votaries 
present,  and  not  unfrequently  sent  to  the  dwellings  of  worshippers  of 
some  rank  and  consequence. 

5.  Utthdpan:  the  calling  up.  The  summoning  of  the  god  from  his 
siesta :  this  takes  place  at  six  Gheris,  or  between  two  and  three  hours 
before  sunset. 

6.  Bhoga  ;  the  afternoon  meal :  about  half  an  hour  after  the  preceding. 

7.  Sandhya;  about  sunset:  the  evening  toilet  of  the  image,  when 
the  ornaments  of  the  day  are  taken  off,  and  fresh  unguent  and  perfume 
applied. 

8.  Sayan;  retiring  to  repose:  the  image,  about  eight  or  nine  in  the 
evening,  is  placed  upon  a  bed,  refreshments  and  water  in  proper  vases, 
together  with  the  betel- box  and  its  appurtenances,  are  left  near  it,  when 
the  votaries  retire,  and  the  temple  is  shut  till  the  ensuing  morning. 

Upon  all  these  occasions  the  ceremony  is  much  the  same,  consisting 
in  little  more  than  the  presentation  of  flowers,  perfumes,  and  food  by 
the  priests  and  votaries ;  and  the  repetition,  chiefly  by  the  former,  of 
Sanscrit  stanzas  in  praise  of  Krishna,  interspersed  with  a  variety  of 
prostrations  and  obeisances.  There  is  no  established  ritual,  indeed, 
in  the  Hindu  religion,  for  general  use,  nor  any  prescribed  form  of  public 
adoration. 

Besides  the  diurnal  ceremonials  .described,  there  are  several  annual 
festivals  of  great  repute  observed  throughout  India  :  of  these,  in  Bengal 
and  Orissa,  the  Rath  Jdtra,  or  procession  of  Jaganna'th  in  his  car,  is 
the  most  celebrated,  but  it  is  rarely  held  in  Upper  India,  and  then 
only  by  natives  of  Bengal,  established  in  the  provinces  :  the  most 
popular  festival  at   Benares,   and   generally    to  the  Westward,   is  the 


80 

Janamashtami,  the  nativity  of  Krishna  on  the  eighth  day  of  Bhddra, 
(August.*)  Another  is  the  Rds  Ydtra,  or  annual  commemoration  of 
the  dance  of  the  frolicksome  Deity  with  the  sixteen  Gopis.  This 
last  is  a  very  popular  festival,  and  not  an  uninteresting  one :  vast 
crowds,   clad  in  their  best  attire,  collecting  in  some   open    place  in 

*  Great  di£Ference  of  practice  prevails  on  occasion  of  this  observance.  Krishna 
was  born  on  the  eighth  lunar  day  of  the  waning  moon  of  Bhddra,  at  midnight,  upon 
the  moon's  entrance  into  Rohini,  in  commemoration  of  which  a  fast  is  to  be  held  on 
the  day  preceding  his  birth,  terminating,  as  usual,  in  a  feast ;  but  the  day  of  his  birth 
is  variously  determinable,  according  to  the  adoption  of  the  civil,  the  lunar,  or  lunar- 
sydereal  computations,  and  it  rarely  happens  that  the  eighth  lunation  comprises  the 
same  combination  of  hours  and  planetary  positions,  as  occurred  at  Krishna's  birth. 
Under  these  circumstances,  the  followers  of  the  Smriti,  with  the  Saivas  and  Sdktas, 
commence  their  fast  with  the  commencement  of  the  lunation,  whenever  that  takes 
place  :  the  Rdmanujas  and  Mddhwas,  observe  such  part  of  the  eighth  day  of  the 
moon's  age  as  includes  sunrise,  and  forms  the  eighth  day  of  the  calendar,  or  civil  day, 
whilst  some  of  the  Rdmanujas,  and  the  Nimdwats  regulate  the  duration  of  their  fast 
by  the  moon's  passage  through  the  asterism  Rohini.  The  consequence  is,  that  the 
Smartas  often  fast  on  the  7th,  one  set  of  Vaishnavas  on  the  8th,  and  another  on  the 
9th,  whilst  those  who  affect  great  sanctity,  sometimes  go  thirty  hours  without  food.  An 
extract  from  last  year's  calendar  will  very  well  exemplify  these  distinctions. 

"3rd  Bhadra,  17th  August  1825,  Tuesday,  Saptami,  10  Dandas,  17  Palas.  The 
Janmashtami  Vrata  and  a  fast. 

"  4th  Bhadra,  18th  August,  Wednesday,  Ashtami,  9  Dandas,  18  Palas.  Fast  ac- 
cording to  the  Vaishnavas  of  Vruj. 

"  5th  Bh&dra,  19th  August,  Thursday,  Navami,  7  Dandas,  4  Palas.  Rohini  Naks- 
shatra,  till  10  Dandas,  52  Palas,  at  which  hour  Phrana,  the  end  of  the  fast." 

Now  the  3rd  day  of  the  Solar  Bhddra  was  the  7lh  of  the  Lunar  month,  but  it  com- 
prised little  more  than  ten  Dandas  or  four  hours  of  that  lunation  :  as  it  included  sun- 
rise, however,  it  was  the  7th  of  the  calendar,  or  civil  day.  The  eighth  Tithi,  or  luna- 
tion, therefore,  began  about  that  time,  or  four  hours  after  sunrise,  and  the  Smartas, 
Saivas,  and  Sdktas,  observed  the  fast  on  that  day  ;  they  began  with  sunrise,  however, 
as  there  is  a  specific  rule  for  the  Sankalpa,  or  pledge,  to  perform  the  usual  rite  at 
dawn.   This  Ashtami  comprised  midni^jht,  and  was  the  more  sacred  on  that  account. 

The  4th  of  Bhadra  was  the  Ashtami,  or  eighth  of  the  Vaishnavas,  although  the 
lunation  only  extended  to  9  Dandas,  or  less  than  four  hours  after  sunrise,  but  they 
are  particularly  enjoined  to  avoid  the  Saptami,  or  the  Ashtami  conjoined  with  it,  and 
therefore  they  could  not  commence  their  fast  earlier,  although  they  lost  thereby  the 
midnight  of  the  eighth  lunation,  which  they  were,  consequently,  compelled  to  extend 
into  the  night  of  the  ninth.  They  fasted  till  the  next  morning,  unless  they  chose  to 
eat  after  midnight,  which,  on  this  occasion,  is  allowable. 

The  5th  of  Bhadra  was  the  Navami,  or  ninth  of  the  calendar,  but  it  included  a 
portion  of  the  moon's  passage  through  i?o>^i;i/,  and  the  strict  Foi^^nava^  of  the  dif- 
ferent sects  should  not  have  performed  the  Parana,  the  close  of  the  fast,  earlier,  or 
before  10  Dandas  and  52  Palas  after  sunrise,  or  about  nine  o'clock.  Those  Vaishna- 
vas, however,  who  wholly  regulate  their  observance  by  the  Asterism,  and  referring 
also  to  the  necessity  of  commencing  it  with  sunrise,  would  only  have  begun  their  fast 
on  the  calendar  Navami,  and  have  held  the  Pdrana  on  Friday  the  10th,  the  third  day 
after  the  proper  birth-day  of  their  Deity. 


81 

the  vicinity  of  the  town,  and  celebrating  the  event  with  music,  sing- 
ing, and  dramatic  representations  of  Krishna's  sports :  all  the  public 
singers  and  dancers  lend  their  services  on  this  occasion,  and  trust  for  a 
remuneration  to  the  gratuities  of  the  spectators  :  at  Benares,  the  Rds 
Ydtra  is  celebrated  at  the  village  of  Sivapur,  and  the  chief  dancers  and 
musicians,  ranging  themselves  under  the  banners  of  the  most  celebrated 
of  the  profession,  go  out  in  formal  procession  :  tents,  huts,  and  booths 
are  erected,  swings  and  roundabouts  form  a  favourite  amusement  of 
the  crowd,  and  sweetmeats  and  fruits  are  displayed  in  tempting  profu- 
sion :  the  whole  has  the  character  of  a  crowded  fair  in  Europe,  and  pre- 
sents, in  an  immense  concourse  of  people,  an  endless  variety  of  rich  cos- 
tume, and  an  infinite  diversity  of  picturesque  accompaniment,  a  most 
lively  and  splendid  scene.  The  same  festival  is  held  from  the  tenth 
day  of  the  light  half  of  Kuar  (Sept. -Oct.),  to  the  day  of  the  full  moon, 
at  Bindraban,  where  a  stone  plat-form,  or  stage,  has  been  built  for  the 
exhibition  of  the  mimic  dance,  in  a  square  near  the  river  side.  Besides 
their  public  demonstrations  of  respect,  pictures  and  images  of  Gopa'la 
are  kept  in  the  houses  of  the  members  of  the  sect,  who,  before  they  sit 
down  to  any  of  their  meals,  take  care  to  offer  a  portion  to  the  idol. 
Those  of  the  disciples  who  have  performed  the  triple  Samarpana,  eat 
only  from  the  hands  of  each  other  ;  and  the  wife  or  child  that  has  not 
exhibited  the  same  mark  of  devotion  to  the  Guru,  can  neither  cook  for 
such  a  disciple,  nor  eat  in  his  society. 

The  mark  on  the  forehead  consists  of  two  red  perpendicular  lines, 
meeting  in  a  semicircle  at  the  root  of  the  nose,  and  having  a  round 
spot  of  red  between  them.  The  Bhaktas  have  the  same  marks  as  the 
Sri  Vaishnavas  on  the  breasts  and  arms,  and  some  also  make  the  cen- 
tral spot  on  the  forehead  with  a  black  earth,  called  Sydmabandi,  or  any 
black  metallic  substance  :  the  necklace  and  rosary,  are  made  of  the 
stalk  of  the  Tulasi.  The  salutations  amongst  them  are,  Srikrishna 
and  Jaya  Gopdl. 

The  great  authority  of  the  sect  is  the  Bhdgavat,  as  explained  in  the 
Subodhini,  or  Commentary  of  Vallabha'cha'rya  :  he  is  the  author 
also  of  a  Bhdshya  on  part  of  Vya'sa's  Sutras,  and  of  other  Sanscrit 
works,  as  the  Siddhdnta  Rahasya,  Bhdgavat  Lild  Rahasya,  and  Ekdnta 
Rahasya ;  these,  however,  are  only  for  the  learned,  and  are  now  very 
rare.     Amongst  the  votaries  in  general,  various  works  upon  the  history 


82 

of  Krishna  are  current,  but  the  most  popular  are  the  Vishnu  Padas, 
stanzas  in  Bhdsha,  in  praise  of  Vishnu,  attributed  to  Vallabha. 
himself ;  the  BruJ  Bilas,  a  Bhdkha  poem  of  some  length,  descriptive  of 
Krishna's  life,  during  his  residence  at  Vrindaban,  by  Bruj  Ba'si  Da's  ; 
the  Ash'ta  Chhdp,  an  account  of  Vallabha's  eight  chief  disciples,  and  the 
Vdrtd,  or  Bdrtd,  a  collection  in  Hindustani  of  marvellous  and  insipid 
anecdotes  of  Vallabha  and  his  primitive  followers,  amounting  to  the 
number  of  eighty- four,  and  including  persons  of  both  sexes,  and  every 
class  of  Hindus.  The  Bhakta  Maid  also  contains  a  variety  of  legends 
regarding  the  different  teachers  of  this  sect,  but  it  is  less  a  text-book 
with  this  sect  than  any  other  class  of  Faishnavas,  as  the  Bdrtd  occupies 
its  place  amongst  the  worshippers  of  Gopdl.  The  following  are  speci- 
mens of  this  work,  and  by  no  means  the  most  unfavourable  : — 

Da'modar  Da's,  of  Kanoj,  was  a  disciple  of  Sri'  Acha'rya,  (Valla- 
bha'cha'rya.)  Like  the  rest  of  the  members  of  this  sect,  he  had  an 
image  of  Krishna  in  his  house.  One  day  it  was  exceedingly  hot, 
and  when  night  came,  Sri  Thdkur  Ji  (the  image,)  woke  the  maid  ser*- 
vant,  and  desired  her  to  open  the  doors  of  his  chamber,  as  it  was  very 
warm.  She  obeyed,  and  taking  a  pankha,  fanned  him — early  in  the 
morning  Da'modar  Da's  observed  the  doors  of  the  chamber  open, 
and  enquired  how  this  had  happened  :  the  girl  mentioned  the  circum- 
stance, but  her  master  was  much  vexed  that  she  had  done  this,  and 
that  Sri  Thdkur  Ji  had  not  called  him  to  do  it.  Sri  Thdkur  Ji, 
knowing  his  thoughts,  said ;  '  I  told  her  to  open  the  doors,  why  are 
you  displeased  with  her ;  you  shut  me  up  here  in  a  close  room,  and 
go  to  sleep  yourself  on  an  open  and  cool  terrace.'  Then  Da'modar 
Da's  made  a  vow,  and  said,  '  I  will  not  taste  consecrated  food  until  I 
have  built  a  new  temple  :'  but  his  wife  advised  him,  and  urged,  '  this 
is  not  a  business  of  five  or  six  days,  why  go  without  the  consecrated 
food  so  long.'  Then  he  said,  '  I  will  not  partake  of  the  consecrated 
sweetmeats,  I  will  only  eat  the  fruits  ;'  and  so  he  did,  and  the  tem- 
ple was  completed,  and  Sri  Thdkur  Ji  was  enshrined  in  it,  and  Da'modar 
Da's  distributed  food  to  the  Vaishnavas,  and  they  partook  thereof. 

Sri  Thdkur  Ji  had  a  faithful  worshipper  in  a  Mahratta  lady,  whom, 
with  the  frolicsomeness  of  boyhood,  he  delighted  to  tease.  One  day,  a 
woman  selling  vegetables  'having  passed  without  the  Bai  noticing  her, 
Sri  Thdkur  7/ said  to  her, '  will  you  not  buy  any  vegetables  for  me  to-day  :' 


i 


83 

she  replied,  '  whenever  any  one  selling  them  comes  this  way,  I  will  buy 
some ;'  to  which  he  answered,  '  one  has  just  now  passed.'  The  Bai 
replied  ; '  no  matter  if  one  has  gone  by,  another  will  presently  be  here  :' 
but  this  did  not  satisfy  the  little  deity,  who  leaping  from  his  pedestal, 
ran  after  the  woman,  brought  her  back,  and,  after  hagghng  for  the  price 
with  her  himself,  made  his  protectress  purchase  what  he  selected. 

As  Ra'na'vya's  and  Jaganna'th,  two  of  Vallabha'cha'rya's  disci- 
ples, were  bathing,  a  woman  of  the  Rajput  caste  came  down  to  the  river  to 
burn  herself  with  her  husband  ;  on  which  Jaganna'th  said  to  his  com- 
panion, '  what  is  the  fashion  of  a  woman  becoming  a  Sati  :*  Ra'na'vya's 
shook  his  head,  and  said,  'the  fruitless  union  of  beauty  with  a  dead 
body.'  The  Rajputani  observing  Ra'na'vya's  shake  his  head,  her  pur- 
pose  at  that  moment  was  changed,  and  she  did  not  become  a  Sati,  on 
which  her  kindred  were  much  pleased.  Some  time  afterwards,  meeting 
with  the  two  disciples,  the  Rajputani  told  them  of  the  effect  of  their  for- 
mer interview,  and  begged  to  know  what  had  passed  between  them. 
Ra'na'vya's  being  satisfied,  that  the  compassion  of  Srt  AchdrJ  was  ex- 
tended to  her,  repeated  what  he  had  said]  to  Jaganna'th,  and  his  regret 
that  her  charms  should  not  be  devoted  to  the  service  of  Sri  Thdkur  Ji, 
rather  than  be  thrown  away  upon  a  dead  body.  The  Rajputani  enquired 
how  the  service  of  Thdkur  Ji  was  to  be  performed,  on  which  Ra'na'vya's, 
after  making  her  bathe,  communicated  to  her  the  initiating  prayer,  and 
she  thenceforth  performed  the  menial  service  of  the  deity,  washing  his  gar- 
ments, bringing  him  water,  and  discharging  other  similar  duties  in  the 
dwelling  of  Ra'na'vya's  with  entire  and  fervent  devotion,  on  which 
account,  she  obtained  the  esteem  of  Sri  AchdrJ,  and  the  favour  of  the 
deity. 

Ra'm  Da's  was  married  in  his  youth,  but  adopting  ascetic  principles, 
he  refused  to  take  his  wife  home  :  at  last,  his  father-in-law  left  his 
daughter  in  her  husband's  dwelling,  but  Ra'm  Da's  would  have  nothing 
to  say  to  her,  and  set  off  on  a  pilgrimage  to  Dwdrakd  :  his  wife  followed 
him,  but  he  threw  stones  at  her,  and  she  was  compelled  to  remain  at  a 
distance  from  him.  At  noon,  he  halted  and  bathed  the  god,  and  pre- 
pared his  food,  and  presented  it,  and  then  took  the  Prasdd  and  put  it  in 
a  vessel,  and  fed  upon  what  remained  ;  but  it  was  to  no  purpose,  and  he 
was  still  hungry.  Thus  passed  two  or  three  days,  when  Ranachhor 
appeared   to  him  in  a  dream,  and  asked  him  why  he  thus  ill-treated  his 


84 

wife.  He  said,  he  was  Virakta,  (a  coenobite),  and  what  did  he  want 
with  a  wife.  Then  Ranachhor  asked  him,  why  he  had  married,  and 
assured  him  that  such  an  unsocial  spirit  was  not  agreeable  to  Sri 
Achdrya,  and  desired  him  to  take  his  wife  unto  him  ;  for  Ranachhor 
could  not  bear  the  distress  of  the  poor  woman,  as  he  has  a  gentle  heart, 
and  his  nature  has  been  imparted  to  the  Achdrya  and  his  disciples. 
When  morning  came,  Ra'm  Da's  called  to  his  wife,  and  suffered  her  to 
accompany  him,  by  which  she  was  made  happy.  When  the  time  for 
preparing  their  food  arrived,  Ra'm  Da's  prepared  it  himself,  and  after 
presenting  the  portion  to  the  image,  gave  a  part  of  it  to  his  wife.  After 
a  few  days,  Ranachhor  again  appeared,  and  asked  him,  why  he  did 
not  ailow  his  wife  to  cook,  to  which  Ra'm  Da's  replied,  that  she  had 
not  received  the  initiating  name  from  Sri  Achdrya,  and  was,  therefore, 
unfit  to  prepare  his  food.  Ranachhor,  therefore,  directed  him  to 
communicate  the  Nam  (the  name)  to  his  wife,  and  after  returning  to 
the  Achdrya,  get  him  to  repeat  it.  Accordingly,  Ra'm  Da's  initiated 
his  wife,  and  this  being  confirmed  by  the  Achdrya,  she  also  became  his 
disciple,  and,  with  her  husband,  assiduously  worshipped  Sri  Thdkur  Ji. 

Vallabha  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Vittala  Na'th,  known  amongst 
the  sect  by  the  appellation  of  Sri  Gosain  Ji ;  Vallabha's  designation 
being  Sri  Achdrj  Ji.  Vittala  Na'th,  again,  had  seven  sons,  Girdhari 
Rai,  Govind  Rai,  Ba'la  Krishna,  Gokiil  Na'th,  Raghuna'th,  Yadu- 
na'th,  and  Ghanassya'ma  ;  these  were  all  teachers,  and  their  follow- 
ers, although  in  all  essential  points  the  same,  form  as  many  different 
communities.  Those  of  Gokul  na'th,  indeed,  are  peculiarly  separate 
from  the  rest,  looking  upon  their  own  Gosains  as  the  only  legitimate 
teachers  of  the  faith,  and  withholding  all  sort  of  reverence  from  the 
persons  and  Mat'hs  of  the  successors  of  his  brethren :  an  exclusive 
preference  that  does  not  prevail  amongst  the  other  divisions  of  the 
faith,  who  do  homage  to  all  the  descendants  of  all  Vittala  Na'th's 
sons. 

The  worshippers  of  this  sect  are  very  numerous  and  opulent,  the 
merchants  and  bankers,  especially  those  from  Guzrat  and  Malwa,  be- 
longing to  it :  their  temples  and  establishments  are  numerous  all  over 
India,  but  particularly  at  Mathura  and  Bindraban,  the  latter  of  which 
alone  is  said  to  contain  many  hundreds,  amongst  which  are  three  of 
great  opulence.     In  Benares  are  two  temples  of  great  repute  and  wealth. 


one  sacred  to  Ldl  Ji,  and  the  other  to  Purushottama  Ji.^  Jaganndth 
and  Dwdrakd,  are  also  particularly  venerated  by  this  sect,  but  the  most 
celebrated  of  all  the  Gosain  establishments  is  at  Sri  Ndth  Dwdr,  in 
Ajmer.  The  image  at  this  shrine  is  said  to  have  transported  itself  thi- 
ther from  Mathurd,  when  Aurengzeb  ordered  the  temple  it  vi^as  there 
placed  in  to  be  destroyed.  The  present  shrine  is  modern,  but  richly 
endowed,  and  the  high  priest,  a  descendant  of  Gokul  Na'th,  a  man 
of  great  wealth  and  importance. f  It  is  a  matter  of  obligation  with  the 
members  of  this  sect  to  visit  Sri  Ndth  Dwdr,  at  least  once  in  their 
lives ;  they  receive  there  a  certificate  to  that  effect,  issued  by  the  head 
Gosain,  and,  in  return,  contribute  according  to  their  means  to  the  en- 
riching of  the  establishment:  it  is  not  an  uncurious  feature  in  the 
notions  of  this  sect,  that  the  veneration  paid  to  their  Gosain  is  paid  solely 
to  their  descent,  and  unconnected  with  any  idea  of  their  sanctity  or 
learning ;  they  are  not  unfrequently  destitute  of  all  pretensions  to  in- 
dividual respectability,  but  they  not  the  less  enjoy  the  homage  of  their 
followers :  the  present  chief,  at  Srindth  Dwdr,  is  said  not  to  under- 
stand the  certificate  he  signs. 


MIRA  BAIS. 


These  may  be  considered  as  forming  a  subdivision  of  the  preceding, 
rather  than  a  distinct  sect,  although,  in  the  adoption  of  a  new  leader, 
and  the  worship  of  Krishna  under  a  pecuHar  form,  they  differ  essen- 
tially from  the  followers  of  Vallabha  :  at  the  same  time,  it  is  chiefly 
amongst  those  sectarians,  that  Mi'ra'  Bai  and  her  deity,  Ranachhok, 
are  held  in  high  veneration,  and,  except  in  the  West  of  India,  it  does  not 
appear  that  she  has  many  immediate  and  exclusive  adherents. 


*  Many  of  the  bankers  of  this  city,  it  is  said,  pay  to  one  or  other  of  the  temples  a 
tax  of  one-fourth  of  an  ana,  on  every  bill  of  exchange,  and  the  cloth  merchants,  half 
an  ana  on  all  sales. 

t  Every  temple  is  said  to  have  three  places  of  offering;  the  image,  the  pillow  of  the 
founder,  and  a  box  for  Sri  Ndth  Dwdr, 


86 

Mi'ra'  Bai  is  the  heroine  of  a  prolix  legend  in  the  Bhakta  Maid,  which 
is  a  proof  at  least  of  her  popularity  :  as  the  author  of  sacred  poems  address- 
ed to  the  deity,  as  Vishnu,  she  also  enjoys  a  classical  celebrity,  and  some 
of  her  odes  are  to  be  found  in  the  collections  which  constitute  the  ritual 
of  the  deistical  sects,  especially  those  of  Ndnak  and  Kabir  :  according 
to  the  authority  cited,  she  flourished  in  the  time  of  Akbar,  who  was 
induced,  by  her  reputation,  to  pay  her  a  visit,  accompanied  by  the 
famous  musician  Tan  Sen,  and  it  is  said,  that  they  both  acknowledged 
the  justice  of  her  claim  to  celebrity. 

Mi'ra'  was  the  daughter  of  a  petty  Raja,  the  sovereign  of  a  place 
called  Mertd ;  she  was  married  to  the  Rdna  of  Udayapur,  but  soon 
after  being  taken  home  by  him,  quarrelled  with  her  mother-in-law,  a 
worshipper  of  Devi,  respecting  compliance  with  the  family  adoration  of 
that  goddess,  and  was,  in  consequence  of  her  persevering  refusal  to 
desert  the  worship  of  Krishna,  expelled  the  Rana's  bed  and  palace  : 
she  appears  to  have  been  treated,  however,  with  consideration,  and  to 
have  been  allowed  an  independent  establishment,  owing,  probably, 
rather  to  the  respect  paid  to  her  abilities,  than  a  notion  of  her  personal 
sanctity,  although  the  latter  was  attested,  if  we  may  believe  our  guide, 
by  her  drinking  unhesitatingly  a  draught  of  poison  presented  to  her  by 
her  husband,  and  without  its  having  the  power  to  do  her  harm.  In  her 
uncontrouled  station,  she  adopted  the  worship  of  Ranachhor,  a  form  of 
the  youthful  Krishna  ;  she  became  the  patroness  of  the  vagrant  Vaish- 
navas,  and  visited,  in  pilgrimage,  Bindraban  and  Dwdrakd :  whilst  at 
the  latter,  some  persecution  of  the  Vaishnavas,  at  Udayapur,  appears 
to  have  been  instituted,  and  Brahmans  were  sent  to  bring  her  home 
from  Dwdrakd  :  previously  to  departing,  she  visited  the  temple  of  her 
tutelary  deity,  to  take  leave  of  him,  when,  on  the  completion  of  her 
adorations,  the  image  opened,  and  Mi'ra'  leaping  into  the  fissure,  it 
closed,  and  she  finally  disappeared.  In  memory  of  this  miracle  it  is 
said,  that  the  image  of  Mi'ra'  Bai  is  worshipped  at  Udayapur,  in  con- 
junction with  that  of  Ranachhor.  The  Padas  that  induced  this 
marvel,  and  which  are  current  as  the  compositions  of  Mi'ra'  Bai,  are 
the  two  following  : 

Pada  1. — Oh,  sovereign  Ranachhor,  give  me  to  make  Dwdrakd 
my  abode  :  with  thy  shell,  discus,  mace,  and  lotus,  dispel  the  fear  of 
Yama  :   eternal  rest  is  visiting  thy  sacred  shrines  ;  supreme  delight  is 


87 

the  clash  of  thy  shell  and  cymbals  :  I  have  abandoned  my  love,  my 
possessions,  my  principality,  my  husband.  Mi'ra',  thy  servant,  comes 
to  thee  for  refuge  :  oh,  take  her  v^^hoUy  to  thee. 

Pada  2. — If  thou  knowest  me  free  from  stain,  so  accept  me :  save 
thee,  there  is  none  other  that  will  show  me  compassion  :  do  thou,  then, 
have  mercy  upon  me  ;  let  not  weariness,  hunger,  anxiety,  and  restless- 
ness, consume  this  frame  with  momentary  decay.  Lord  of  Mi'ra', 
GiRDHARA  her  beloved,  accept  her,  and  never  let  her  be  separated  from 
thee. 


BRAHMA  SAMPRADAYIS,  or  MADHWACHARIS. 


This  division  of  the  Vaishnavas  is  altogether  unknown  in  Gangetic 
Hindustan.  A  few  individuals  belonging  to  it,  who  are  natives  of 
Southern  India,  may  be  occasionally  encountered,  but  they  are  not 
sufficiently  numerous  to  form  a  distinct  community,  nor  have  they 
any  temple  or  teachers  of  their  own.  It  is  in  the  peninsula,  that  the 
sect  is  most  extensively  to  be  found,  and  it  is  not  comprised,  therefore, 
in  the  scope  of  this  sketch  :  as,  however,  it  is  acknowledged  to  be  one  of 
the  four  great  Sampradayas,  or  religious  systems,  such  brief  notices  of 
it  as  have  been  collected  will  not  be  wholly  out  of  place. 

The  institution  of  this  sect  is  posterior  to  that  of  the  Sri  Vaishnavas, 
or  Ramanujas  :  the  founder  was  Madhwa'charya,*  a  Brahman,  the  son 
of  Madhige,  Bhatta,  who  was  born  in  the  Saka  year  1 121  (a.  d.  1 199,) 
in  Tuluva :  according  to  the  legendary  belief  of  his  followers,  he  was  an 
incarnation  of  Vdyu,  or  the  god  of  air,  who  took  upon  him  the  human 
form,  by  desire  of  Na'ra'yana,  and  who  had  been  previously  incarnate 
as  Hanumdn  and  Bhima,  in  preceding  ages.  He  was  educated  in  the 
convent  established  at  Ananteswar,  and,  in  his  ninth  year,  was  initiated 
into  the  order  of  Anchorets,  by  Achyuta  Pracha,  a  descendant  of 
Sanaka,  son  of  Brahma.     At  that  early  age  also  he  composed  his 

*  In  the  Sarvadersana  Sangraha,  he  is  cited  by  the  name  Puma  Prajna—a,  work 
is  also  quoted  as  written  by  him  under  the  name  of  Medhya  Mandira.  Reference  is 
also  made  to  him  by  the  title,  most  frequently  found  in  the  works  ascribed  to  him,  of 
Ananda  Tirlha. 


88 

Bhdshya,  or  Commentary  on  the  Gitd,  which  he  carried  to  Badarikds- 
rama,  in  the  Himalaya,  to  present  to  Vedavyasa,  by  whom  he  was 
received  with  great  respect,  and  presented  with  three  Sdlagrdms,  which 
he  brought  back  and  estabUshed  as  objects  of  worship,  in  the  Mat'hs  of 
Udipi,  Madhyatala,  and  Subrahmanya — he  also  erected  and  consecrated 
at  Udipi,  the  image  of  Krishna,  that  was  originally  made  by  Arjuna, 
of  which  he  became  miraculously  possessed. 

A  vessel  from  Dwdrakd,  trading  along  the  Malabar  coast,  had  taken 
on  board,  either  accidentally  or  as  ballast,  a  quantity  of  Gopichandana, 
or  the  sacred  clay,  from  that  city,  in  which  the  image  was  immersed  : 
the  vessel  was  wrecked  off  the  coast  of  Tuluva,  but  Madhwa,  receiving 
divine  intimation  of  the  existence  of  the  image,  had  it  sought  for,  and 
recovered  from  the  place  where  it  had  sunk,*  and  established  it  as  the 
principal  object  of  his  devotion  at  Udipi,  which  has  since  continued  to 
be  the  head-quarters  of  the  sect.  He  resided  here  for  some  time 
himself,  and  composed,  it  is  said,  thirty-seven  works. f  After  some 
time,  he  went  upon  a  controversial  tour,  in  which  he  triumphed  over 
various  teachers,  and  amongst  others,  it  is  said,  over  Sankara  Achdrya 
— he  finally,  in  his  79th  year,  departed  to  Badarikdsrama,  and 
there  continues  to  reside  with  Vya'sa,  the  compiler  of  the  Vedas  and 
Puranas. 

Before  his  relinquishing  charge  of  the  shrine  he  had  established, 
Madhwa'cha'rya  had  very  considerably  extended  his  followers,  so  that 
he  was  enabled  to  establish  eight  different  temples,  in  addition  to  the 
principal  temple,  or  that  of  Krishna,  at  Udipi :  in  these  were  placed 
images  of  different  forms  of  Vishnu, %  and  the  superintendence  of  them 
was  entrusted  to  the  brother  of  the  founder,  and  eight  Sanaydsis,  who 
were  Brahmans,  from  the  banks  of  the  Godaveri.  These  establishments 
still  exist,  and,  agreeably  to  the  code  of  the  founder,  each  Sanydsi,  in 
turn,  officiates  as  superior  of  the  chief  station  at  Udipi  for  two  years, 

*  This  story  is  rather  differently  told  by  the  late  Colonel  Mackenzie  in  his  account 
of  the  Marda  Gooroos,  published  in  the  Asiatic  Annual  Register,  for  1804. 

t  The  principal  of  these  are — the  Gita  Bhsahya,  Sutra  Bhsahya,  Rig-Bhashya,  De- 
sopanishadh  Bhashya — Anuvakanunaya  Viverna,  Anuvedanta  Rasa  Frakarana,  Bharata 
Tatparya  Nirnaya,  Bhagavat-tatparya,  Gitat&.tparya — Krishnamrita  Maharnava,  Tan- 
tra  Sara. 

J  Rama  with  Sita — 2.  Sita  and  Lakshman— 3.  Kaliya  Mardana,  with  two  arms— 4. 
Kaliya  Mardana,  with  four  arms — 5.  Suvitala — 6.  Sukara — 7.  Nrisinha — 8.  V'asanta 
Vitala. 


89 

or  two  years  and  a  half.  The  whole  expense  of  the  establishment 
devolves  upon  the  superior  for  the  time  being,  and,  as  it  is  the  object  of 
each  to  outvie  his  predecessor,  the  charges*  are  much  heavier  than  the 
receipts  of  the  institution,  and,  in  order  to  provide  for  them,  the 
Sanydsis  employ  the  intervals  of  their  temporary  charge  in  traveUing 
about  the  country,  and  levying  contribution  on  their  lay  votaries,  the 
amount  of  which  is  frequently  very  large,  and  is  appropriated  for  the 
greater  part  to  defray  the  costs  of  the  occasional  pontificate. 

The  eight  Mat'hs  are  all  in  Tuluva,  below  the  Ghats.f  but,  at  the 
same  time,  Madhwa'cha'rya  authorised  the  foundation  of  others  above 
the  Ghats,  under  Padmana'bha  Tirtha,  to  whom  he  gave  images  of 
Ra'ma,  and  the  Vydsa  Sdlagrdm,  with  instructions  to  disseminate  his 
doctrines,  and  collect  money  for  the  use  of  the  shrine  at  Udipi :  there 
are  four  establishments  under  the  descendants  of  this  teacher  above  the 
Ghats,  and  the  superiors  visit  Udipi  from  time  to  time,  but  never  offici- 
ate there  as  pontiffs. 

The  superiors,  or  Gurus  of  the  Mddhwa  sect,  are  Brahmans  and 
Sanydsis,  or  profess  coenobitic  observances  :  the  disciples,  who  are  do- 
mesticated in  the  several  Mat'hs,  profess  also  perpetual  celibacy.  The 
lay  votaries  of  these  teachers,  are  members  of  every  class  of  society, 
except  the  lowest,  and  each  Guru  has  a  number  of  families  hereditarily 
attached  to  him,  whose  spiritual  guidance  he  may  sell  or  mortgage  to  a 
Brahman  of  any  sect. 

The  ascetic  professors  of  Madhwa'cha'rya's  school,  adopt  the  exter- 
nal appearance  of  Dandis,  laying  aside  the  Brahmanical  cord,  carrying  a 
staff  and  a  water-pot,  going  bare-headed,  and  wearing  a  single  wrapper 
stained  of  an  orange  colour  with  an  ochry  clay  :  they  are  usually  adopt- 
ed into  the  order  from  their  boyhood,  and  acknowledge  no  social  affini- 
ties nor  interests.  The  marks  common  to  them,  and  the  lay  votaries 
of  the  order,  are  the  impress  of  the  symbols  of  Vishnu,  upon  their 
shoulders  and  breasts,  stamped  with  a  hot  iron,  and  the  frontal  mark, 
which  consists  of  two  perpendicular  lines  made  with  Gopichandana, 
and  joined  at  the  root  of  the  nose  like  that  of  the  Sri  Vaishnavas ;  but 
instead  of  a   red   line   down   the   centre,    the   Mddhwdchdris  make  a 

*  Buchanan  states  them  at  13,000  rupees  at  least,  and  often  exceeding  20,000. 
t  They  are  at  Kanur,  Pejawer,  Admar,  Phalamar,  Krisbnapur,  Sirur,  Sode,  and 
Putti. 


90 

straight  black  line,  with  the  charcoal  from  incense  offered  to  Ndrdyana, 
terminating  in  a  round  mark  made  with  turmerick. 

The  essential  dogma  of  this  sect,  like  that  of  the  Vaishnavas  in 
general,  is  the  identification  of  Vishnu  with  the  Supreme  Spirit,  as  the 
pre- existent  cause  of  the  universe,*  from  whose  substance  the  world 
was  made.f  This  primeval  Vishnu,  they  also  affirm  to  be  endowed 
with  real  attributes,  J  most  excellent,  although  indefinable  and  in- 
dependent. As  there  is  one  independent,  however,  there  is  also  one 
dependent,  and  this  doctrine  is  the  characteristic  dogma  of  the  sect,  dis- 
tinguishing its  professors  from  the  followers  of  Ra'ma'nuja  as  well  as 
Sankara,  or  those  who  maintain  the  qualified  or  absolute  unity  of  the 
deity.  The  creed  of  the  Mddhwas,  is  Dwaita,  or  duality. §  It  is  not, 
however,  that  they  discriminate  between  the  principles  of  good  and 
evil,  or  even  the  difference  between  spirit  and  matter,  which  is  the 
duality  known  to  other  sects  of  the  Hindus.  Their  distinction  is  of  a 
more  subtle  character,  and  separates  the  Jivdtmd  from  the  Paramdtmd, 
or  the  principle  of  life  from  the  Supreme  Being.  Life,  they  say,  is  one 
and  eternal,  dependent  upon  the  Supreme,  and  indissolubly  connected 
with,  but  not  the  same  with  him.|l       An  important  consequence  of  this 

*  In  proof  of  these  doctrines,  they  cite  the  following  texts  from  the  Sruti,  or 
Vedas:     •^[c^  STKT^Tir  ^T^fT  ^  ^'WT    5T    ^  ^^T:   I       ^ardyana 

alone  was ;  not  Brahma  nor  Sankara.    "^T'T*^  ^^^^T^  ^T^^ITT*^^* 
X[^l  I  Happy  and  alone  before  all  was  Naruyana  the  Lord. 

t  The  whole  world  was  manifest  from  the  body  of  Vishnu,    TW^^OTT^^T^^T 

X  Vishnu  is  independent,  exempt  from  defects,  and  endowed  with  all  good  quali- 
ties.- ra/u;a  Vivek,      l^f^  '9f{J[^Vf{f^mT^^T^Vk^  ^%W   I 

§  Independent  and  dependent,  is  declared  to  be  the  two-fold  condition  of  being.-— 


Tatwa  Vivek. 


II     As  the  bird  and   the  string,   as  juices   and  trees,  as  rivers  and  oceans,  as  fresh 
water  and  salt,  as  the  thief  and  his  booty,  as  man  and  objects  of  sense,  so  are  God  and 

Life  distinct,  and  both  are  ever  indefinable.— A/oAo/?anwAa<.       ^^J    tf'^^iJI.^*"^ 


91 

doctrine  is  the  denial  of  Moksha,  in  its  more  generally  received  sense, 
or  that  of  absorption  into  the  universal  spirit,  and  loss  of  independent 
existence  after  death.  The  Yoga  of  the  Saivas,  and  Sdyujyam  of  the 
Faishmvas,  they  hold  to  be  impracticable.* 

The  Supreme  Being  resides  in  Faikuntha,  invested  v^rith  ineffable 
splendour,  and  with  garb,  ornaments,  and  perfumes  of  celestial  origin, 
being  the  husband  also  of  Lakshmi,  or  glory,  Bhumi,  the  earth,  and 
Nild,  understood  to  mean  Dev\,  or  Durgd,  or  personified  matter.  In 
his  primary  form,  no  known  qualities  can  be  predicated  of  him,  but 
when  he  pleases  to  associate  with  Mdyd,  which  is  properly  his  desire, 
or  wish,  the  three  attributes  of  purity,  passion,  or  ignorance,  or  the 
Satwa,  Raja  and  Tama  Gunas,  are  manifested,  as  Fishnu,  Brahmd,  and 
Siva,  for  the  creation,  protection,  and  destruction  of  the  world.  These 
deities,  again,  perform  their  respective  functions  through  their  union 
with  the  same  delusive  principle  to  which  they  owed  their  individual 
manifestation.  This  account  is  clearly  allegorical,  although  the  want 
of  some  tangible  objects  of  worship  has  converted  the  shadows  into 
reaUties,  and  the  allegory,  when  adapted  to  the  apprehensions  of  ordi- 
nary intellects,  has  been  converted  into  the  legend  known  to  the  fol- 
lowers of  Kabir,  of  the  Supreme,  begetting  the  Hindu  Triad  by  Ma'ya'. 
and  her  subsequent  union  with  her  sons.t     Other  legends   are  current 


*     In  confirmation  of  which  they  adduce  texts  from  the  Pnr&nas  and  Vedas. 
"  From  the  difference  between  Omniscience  and  partial  knowledge,  Omnipotence 
and  inferior  power,  supremacy  and  subservience,  the  union  of  God  and  Life  cannot 

take  place.' -GarMm  Parana.      ^o^^};^'^S^^r^^c^^'^^^^f^^\    | 

^fTT'g^KfTTg^^t  ^WiiT^^Wt^^T:  I  ^t  JT  II     "  ^P^^^  is  Supreme, 
and  above  qualities;  Life  is  feeble  and  subordinate."— ^Aa^^awo^a  Upanishad. 

'^TrJTfl  ^^iT^fr^1%5'^^n^^fW^^fT'gt  I  ^t  II 

t  Colonel  MacKenzie,  in  his  account  of  the  sect,  gives  this  legend  in  a  different 
and  rather  unusual  form,  and  one  that  indicates  some  relation  to  the  Saiva  sects.  It  is 
not,  however,  admitted  as  orthodox  by  those  members  of  the  sect  whom  I  have  en- 
countered, nor  do  any  traces  of  it  appear  in  the  works  consulted. 

♦'  The  Lord  of  the  Creation,  by  whose  supremacy  the  world  is  illuminated,  and  who 
is  infinitely  powerful,  creating  and  destroying  many  worlds  in  a  moment,  that  Almighty 
Spirit,  in  his  mind,  contemplating  the  creation  of  a  world  for  his  pleasure,  from  his 
wishes  sprung  a  goddess,  named  Itcha  Sacktee  ;  at  her  request,  he  directed  her  to 
create  this  world.  Then  the  Sacktee,  by  the  authority  of  God,  immediately  created 
three  divine  persons,  generally  called  by  Hindus,  the  Moortee-trium,  by  their  several 


92 

amongst  the  Ma'dhwas,  founded  on  this  view  of  the  creation,  in  which 
Brahma  and  Siva,  and  other  divinities,  are  described  as  springing  from 
his  mind,  his  forehead,  his  sides,  and  other  parts  of  his  body.  They 
also  receive  the  legends  of  the  Vaishnava  Purdnas,  of  the  birth  of 
Brahma  from  the  Lotus,  of  the  navel  of  Vishnu,  and  of  Rudra,  from 
the  tears  shed  by  Brahma'  on  being  unable  to  comprehend  the  mystery 
of  creation. 

The  modes  in  which  devotion  to  Vishnu  is  to  be  expressed,  are  declar- 
ed to  be  three,  Ankana,  Ndmdkarana,  and  Bhajana,  or  marking  the  body 
with  his  symbols,*  giving  his  names  to  children,  and  other  objects 
of  interest,  and  the  practice  of  virtue  in  word,  act,  and  thought ;  truth, 
good  council,  mild  speaking,  and  study  belong  to  the  first ;  liberality, 
kindness,  and  protection,  to  the  second ;  and  clemency,  freedom  from 
envy,  and  faith,  to  the  last.  These  ten  duties  form  the  moral  code 
of  the  Mddhwas. 

The  usual  rites  of  worship,!  as  practised  by  the  Vaishnavas  of  this 
sect,  are  observed,  and  the  same  festivals.     In  the  Pujd,  however,  there 

names  of  Brahma,  Vishnu  and  Siva,  committing  to  them  separately,  their  respective 
charges  in  the  expected  world  ;  Surstee,  Sthutee  and  Sayom,  or  the  power  of  creating, 
nourishing,  and  destroying.  When  she  had  made  these  three  lords,  she  requested  of  one 
after  the  other,  that  they  might  be  her  consort  ;  but  Brahma  and  Vishnu,  disapproving 
of  her  request,  she  consumed  them  with  the  fire  of  her  third  eye,  and  proposed  the  same 
thing  to  Siva  ;  then  Sadaseevu,  considering  in  his  mind  that  her  demands  were  not 
agreeable  to  the  divine  law,  replied  that  he  could  not  be  her  consort,  unless  she 
granted  her  third  eye  to  him.  The  goddess  was  pleased  with  his  prudence,  and  adorn- 
ed him  with  her  third  eye.  So  soon  as  Siva  was  possessed  of  that,  he  immediately 
destroyed  her  by  a  glance  of  the  flaming  eye,  and  revived  Brahma  and  Vishnu,  and 
of  her  ashes  made  three  goddesses,  Saraswatee,  Latchmi,  and  Paravatee,  and  united 
one  of  them  to  each  of  the  Trimoortee." 

[Account  of  the  Marda  Goor  cos. —Asiatic  Annual  Register,  1804] 

This  legend  is  probably  peculiar  to  the  place  where  it  was  obtained,  but  the  ideas 
and  the  notions  adverted  to  in  the  text  appear  to  have  been  misunderstood  by  Dr. 
Buchanan,  who  observes,  that  the  Mardas  believe  in  the  generation  of  the  gods,  in 
a  literal  sense,  thinking  Vishnu  to  be  the  father  of  Brahma,  and  Bkahma  the 
father  of  Siva,— Mysore,  vol.  i.  14. 

*  Especially  with  a  hot  iron,  which  practice  they  defend  by  a  text  from  the  Vedas 

Whose  body  is  not  cauterised,  does  not  obtain  liberation.  ^ rj  5[fT*T*f fT'5'T'Tt  WT 
^♦nr  I  '^0  which,  however,  Sankardcharya  objects,  that  Tapta  does  not  mean  cau- 
terised, but  purified  with  Tapas,  or  ascetic  mortification. 

t  The  daily  ceremonies  at  Udipi  are  of  nine  descriptions  :  Malavisarjana,  cleaning 
the  temple;  2,  Upasthdna,  awaking  Krishna;  8,  Panchdmrita,  bathing  him  with  milk, 
&c.  4,  Vdverttana,  cleaning  the  image;  5,  Tirttha  Pujd,  bathing  it  with  holy  water ; 
6,  Alankara,  putting  on  his  ornaments  ;  7,  Avritta,  addressing  prayers  and  hymns  to 


93 

is  one  peculiarity  which  merits  notice,  as  indicative  of  a  friendly  leaning 
towards  the  Saiva  sects ;  the  images  of  Siva,  Durga',  and  Ganesa,  are 
placed  on  the  same  shrine  with  the  form  of  Vishnu,  and  partake  in 
the  adoration  offered  to  his  idol.  Rites  are  conducive  to  final  happi- 
ness only,  as  they  indicate  a  desire  to  secure  the  favour  of  Vishnu. 
The  knowledge  of  his  supremacy  is  essential  to  the  zeal  with  which  his 
approbation  may  be  sought,  but  they  consider  it  unnecessary  to  attempt 
an  identification  with  him  by  abstract  meditation,  as  that  is  unattain- 
able.* Those  who  have  acquired  the  regard  of  Vishnu  are,  thereby, 
exempted  from  future  birth,  and  enjoy  felicity  in  Vaikuntha  under  four 
conditions,  as  Sdrupya,  similarity  of  form,  Sdlokya,  visible  presence, 
Sdnnidhya,  proximity,  and  Sdrsht'hi,  equal  power. 

Besides  the  writings  of  the  founder,  the  following  works  are  considered 
as  forming  the  Sdsira,  or  scriptural  authority  of  this  sect.  The  four 
Vedas,  the  Mahdbhdrat,  the  Pdnchardtra,  and  the  genuine  or  original 
Rdmdyana. 

It  seems  not  improbable,  that  the  founder  of  the  Mddhwa  sect  was, 
originally,  a  Saiva  priest,  and,  although  he  became  a  convert  to  the 
Vaishnava  faith,  he  encouraged  an  attempt  to  form  a  kind  of  compromise 
or  alliance  between  the  Saivas  and  Vaishnavas.  Ma'dhwa  was  first 
initiated  into  the  faith  of  Siva,  at  Ananteswar,  the  shrine  of  a  Linga, 
and  one  of  his  names,  Ananda  Tirt'ha,  indicates  his  belonging  to  the 
class  of  Dasndmi  Gosains,  who  were  instituted  by  Sankara'cha'rya  ; 
one  of  his  first  acts  was  to  establish  a  Sdldgram,  a  type  of  Vishnu,  at 
the  shrine  of  Subrahmanya,  the  warrior  son  of  Siva,  and,  as  observed 
above,  the  images  of  Siva  are  allowed  to  partake,  in  the  Mddhwa  tem- 
ples, of  the  worship  offered  to  Vishnu.  The  votaries  of  the  Mddhwa 
Gurus,  and  of  the  Sankardchari  Gosains,  offer  the  Namaskdr,  or  reve- 
rential obeisance,  to  their  teachers  mutually,  and  the  Sringeri  Mahant 
visits    Udipi,   to   perform  his  adorations  at  the  shrine  of  Krishna.     It 

him  ;  8,  Mahapuja,  presenting  fruits,  perfumes,  &c.  with  music  and  singing;  9,  Rdtri 
Piija,  nocturnal  worship,  waving  lamps  before  the  image,  with  prayers,  offerings,  and 
music. 

*  Emancipation  is  not  obtained  without  the  favour  of  Vishnu.  His  favour  is  ob- 
tained from  knowledge  of  his  excellence,  and  not  from  a  knowledge  of  his  identity. 
—Sruti. 


94 

is  evident,  therefore,  that  there  is  an  affinity  between  these  orders,  which 
does  not  exist  between  the  Saivas  and  Vaishnavas  generally,  who  are 
regarded  by  the  Mddhwas,  even  without  excepting  the  Rdmdnujas,  as 
Pdshandis,  or  heretics,  whether  they  profess  the  adoration  of  Vishnu  or 
of  Siva. 


SANAKADl  SAMPRADAYIS,  OR  NIMAWATS. 


This  division  of  the  Vaishnava  faith  is  one  of  the  four  primary  ones, 
and  appears  to  be  of  considerable  antiquity  :  it  is  one  also  of  some 
popularity  and  extent,  although  it  seems  to  possess  but  few  charac- 
teristic peculiarities  beyond  the  name  of  the  founder,  and  the  sectarial 
mark. 

Nimba'ditya  is  said  to  have  been  a  Vaishnava  ascetic,  originally 
named  Bhdskara  Achdrya,  and  to  have  been,  in  fact,  an  incarnation  of 
the  sun,  for  the  suppression  of  the  heretical  doctrines  then  prevalent :  he 
lived  near  Vindrdvan,  where  he  was  visited  by  a  Dandi,  or,  according 
to  other  accounts,  by  a  Jaina  ascetic,  or  Jati,  whom  he  engaged  in 
controversial  discussion  till  sunset :  he  then  offered  his  visitant  some 
refreshment,  which  the  practice  of  either  mendicant  renders  unlawful 
after  dark,  and  which  the  guest  was,  therefore,  compelled  to  decline  : 
to  remove  the  difficulty,  the  host  stopped  the  further  descent  of  the 
sun,  and  ordered  him  to  take  up  his  abode  in  a  neighbouring  Nimb  tree, 
till  the  meat  was  cooked  and  eaten  :  the  sun  obeyed,  and  the  saint  was 
ever  after  named  Nimbdrka,  or  Nimbdditya,  or  the  Nimb  tree  sun. 

The  Nimdwats  are  distinguished  by  a  circular  black  mark  in  the 
centre  of  the  ordinary  double  streak  of  white  earth,  or  Gopichandan  : 
they  use  the  necklace  and  rosary  of  the  stem  of  the  Tulasi ;  the  objects 
of  their  worship  are  Krishna  and  Ra'dha'  conjointly  :  their  chief 
authority  is  the  Bhdgavat,  and  there  is  said  to  be  a  Bhdshya  on  the 
Vedas  by  Nimba'rka  :  the  sect,  however,  is  not  possessed  of  any 
books  peculiar  to  the  members,  which  want  they  attribute  to  the  des- 
truction of  their  works  at  Mathura  in  the  time  of  Aurengzeb. 

The  Nimdwats  are  scattered  throughout  the  whole  of  Upper  India. 
They   are   met  with  of  the  two   classes   coenobitical  and  secular,   or 


95 

Viraktas  and  Grihasthas,  distinctions  introduced  by  the  two  pupils  of 
Nimba'rka,  Kesava  Bhatt,  and  Hari  Vya's  :  the  latter  is  considered 
as  the  founder  of  the  family  which  occupies  the  pillow  of  Nimba'rka 
at  a  place  called  Dhruva  Kshetra,  upon  the  Jumna  close  to  Mathura : 
the  Mahant,  however,  claims  to  be  a  lineal  descendant  from  Nimba'rka 
himself,  and  asserts  the  existence  of  the  present  establishment  for  a 
past  period  of  1400  years  :  the  antiquity  is  probably  exaggerated:  the 
Nmdwats  are  very  numerous  about  Mathura,  and-  they  are  also  the 
most  numerous  of  the  Vaishnava  sects  in  Bengal,  with  the  exception 
of  those  who  may  be  considered  the  indigenous  offspring  of  that  pro- 
vince. 


VAISHNAVAS  OF  BENGAL. 


The  far  greater  number  of  the  worshippers  of  Vishnu,  or  more  pro- 
perly of  Krishna,  in  Bengal,  forming,  it  has  been  estimated,  one-fifth 
of  the  population  of  the  province,*  derive  their  peculiarities  from  some 
Vaishnava  Brahmans  of  Nadiya  and  Santipur,  who  flourished  about 
the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century.  The  two  leading  men  in  the  innova- 
tion then  instituted,  were  Adwaita'nand  and  Nitya'nand,  who,  being 
men  of  domestic  and  settled  habits,  seem  to  have  made  use  of  a  third, 
who  had  early  embraced  the  ascetic  order,  and  whose  simplicity  and 
enthusiasm  fitted  him  for  their  purpose,  and  to  have  set  up  Chaitanya 
as  the  founder  and   object  of  a  new  form  of  Vaishnava  worship. 

The  history  of  Chaitanya  has  been  repeatedly  written,  but  the 
work  most  esteemed  by  his  followers  is  the  Chaitanya  Charitra  of 
Vrinda'van  Da's,  which  was  compiled  from  preceding  works  by  Mura'ri 
Gupta  and  Da'modara,  who  were  the  immediate  disciples  of  Chaita- 
nya, and  who  wrote  an  account,  the  first  of  his  life  as  a  Grihastha, 
or  the  Adi  LUd,  and  the  second  of  his  proceedings  as  a  pilgrim  and 
ascetic,  or  the  Madhya  and  Anta  Lild.  An  abridgement  of  the  composi- 
tion of  Vrinda'van  Da's,  under  the  title  of  Chaitanya  Charitdmrita,  was 
made  by  Krishna  Da's  about  1590:  although  described  by  the  author 
as  an  abridgement,   it  is  a  most  voluminous  work,  comprising,  besides 

*  Ward  on  the  Hindus,  2.  175.     In  another  place  he  says  five-sixteenths,  p.  448. 


96 

anecdotes  of  Chaitanya  and  his  principal  disciples,  the  expositions  of 
the  doctrines  of  the  sect :  it  is  written  in  Bengali,  but  it  is  interspersed 
most  thickly  with  the  Sanscrit  texts  on  which  the  faith  is  founded,  and 
which  are  taken  from  the  Brahma  Sanhitd,  the  Vishnu  Purdn,  the  Bhd- 
gavat  Gitd,  and,  above  all,  the  Sri  Bhdgavat,  the  work  that  appears 
about  this  period  to  have  given  a  new  aspect  to  the  Hindu  faith,  through- 
out the  whole  of  Hindustan  :  the  accounts  we  have  to  offer  of  Chaitanya 
and  his  schism,  are  taken  from  the  Chaitanya  Char  it  dmr  it  a. 

Chaitanya  was  the  son  of  a  Brahman  settled  at  Nadiya,  but  ori- 
ginally from  Srihatta,  or  Silhet.  His  father  was  named  Jaganna'th 
MisRA,  and  his  mother  Sachi  :  he  was  conceived  in  the  end  of  Magha 
1484,  but  not  born  till  Phalgun  1485,  being  thirteen  months  in  the 
womb  :  his  birth  was  accompanied  by  the  usual  portentous  indications 
of  a  super-human  event,  and,  amongst  other  circumstances,  an  eclipse 
of  the  moon  was  terminated  by  his  entrance  into  the  world.  Chaitanya 
was,  in  fact,  an  incarnation  of  Krishna,  or  Bhagavdn,  who  appeared 
for  the  purpose  of  instructing  mankind  in  the  true  mode  of  worshipping 
him  in  this  age  :  with  the  like  view  he  was,  at  the  same  time,  incarnate 
in  the  two  greater  teachers  of  the  sect  as  principal  Ansas,  or  portions 
of  himself,  animating  the  form  of  Adwaita'nand,  whilst  Nitya'nand 
was  a  personal  manifestation  of  the  same  divinity,  as  he  had  appeared 
formerly  in  the  shape  of  Balara'ma  :  the  female  incarnation  was  not 
assumed  on  this  occasion,  being,  in  fact,  comprised  in  the  male,  for 
Ra'dha',  as  the  Purna-Sakti,  or  comprehensive  energy,  and  Krishna, 
as  the  Puma-  Saktimdn,  or  possessor  of  that  energy,  were  both  united  in  ■ 
the  nature  of  the  Nadiya  saint. 

The  father  of  Chaitanya  died  in  his  son's  childhood,  and  his  elder 
brother,  Viswaru'ta,  had  previously  assumed  the  character  of  an  asce- 
tic :  to  take  care  of  his  mother,  therefore,  Chaitanya  refrained  from 
following  his  inclinations,  and  continued  in  the  order  of  the  Grihastha, 
or  householder,  till  the  age  of  twenty-four,  during  which  time  he  is  said 
to  have  married  the  daughter  of  Vallabha'cha'rya.  At  twenty-four,* 
he  shook  off  the  obligations  of  society,  and  becoming  a  Bairdgi,  spent 
the  next  six  years  in  a  course  of  peregrinations  between  Mathura  and 
Jaganndth,  teaching  his  doctrines,   acquiring  followers,  and  extending 

*  Not  forty,  as  stated  by  Mr.  Ward,  (2.  173.)  his  whole  life  little  exceeded  that 
age,  as  he  disappeared  at  forty-two. 


97 

the  worship  of  Krishna.  At  the  end  of  this  period,  having  nominated 
Adwaita'cha'rya  and  Nitya'nand  to  preside  over  the  Faishnavas  of 
Bengal,  and  Rupa  and  Sana'tana  over  those  of  Mathura,  Chaitanya 
settled  at  Nildchal,  or  Cuttack,  where  he  remained  twelve  years,  en- 
gaging deeply  in  the  worship  of  Jaganndth,  to  whose  festival  he  seems 
at  least  to  have  communicated  great  energy  and  repute.*  The  rest  of 
his  time  was  spent  in  tuition  and  controversy,  and  in  receiving  the 
visits  of  his  disciples,  who  came  annually,  particularly  the  Bengalis, 
under  Adwaita  and  Nitya'nand,  to  Nildchal,  in  the  performance  of 
acts  of  self-denial,  and  in  intent  meditation  on  Krishna  :  by  these  latter 
means  he  seems  to  have  fallen,  ultimately,  into  a  state  of  imbecility 
approaching  to  insanity,  which  engendered  perpetually  beatific  visions 
of  Krishna,  Ra'dha',  and  the  Gopis :  in  one  of  these,  fancying  the  sea 
to  be  the  Jumna,  and  that  he  saw  the  celestial  cohort  sporting  in  its 
blue  waters,  he  walked  into  it,  and  fainting  with  ecstasy,  would  have 
been  drowned,  if  his  emaciated  state  had  not  rendered  him  buoyant  on 
the  waves :  he  was  brought  to  shore  in  a  fisherman's  net,  and  recovered 
by  his  two  resident  disciples,  Swarupa  and  Ra'ma'nand  :  the  story  is 
rendered  not  improbable,  by  the  uncertain  close  of  Chaitanya's  career  : 
he  disappeared  ;  how,  is  not  known  :  of  course  his  disciples  suppose 
he  returned  to  Faikunt'ha,  but  we  may  be  allowed  to  conjecture  the 
means  he  took  to  travel  thither,  by  the  tale  of  his  marine  excursion, 
as  it  is  gravely  narrated  by  Krishna  Da's  :  his  disappearance  dates 
about  A.  D.  1527. 

Of  Adwaita'nand  and  Nitya'nand,  no  marvels,  beyond  their  divine 
pervasion,  are  recorded  :  the  former,  indeed,  is  said  to  have  predicted 
the  appearance  of  Krishna  as  Chaitanya  ;  a  prophecy  that  probably 
wrought  its  own  completion  :  he  sent  his  wife  to  assist  at  the  birth  of 
the  saint,  and  was  one  of  his  first  disciples.  Adwaita'nand  resided  at 
Santipur,  and  seems  to  have  been  a  man  of  some  property  and  respecta- 
bility :  he  is  regarded  as  one  of  the  three  Prabhus,  or  masters  of  the 

*  It  may  be  observed,  that  in  the  frequent  descriptions  of  the  celebration  of  the 
Rath  Ydtra,  which  occur  in  the  work  of  Krishna  Da's,  no  instance  is  given  of  self- 
sacrifice,  amongst  the  numerous  votaries  collected,  neither  is  there  any  passage  that 
could  be  interpreted,  as  commendatory  of  the  practice  :  it  is,  in  fact,  very  contrary  to 
the  spirit  of  Vaishnava  devotion,  and  is  probably  a  modern  graft  from  Saiva  or  Sdkta 
superstition.  Abulfazl  does  not  notice  the  practice,  although  he  mentions  that  those 
who  assist  in  drawing  the  car,  think  thereby  to  obtain  remission  of  their  sins. 

0 


98 

sect,  and  his  descendants,  who  are  men  of  property,  residing  at  Santipur, 
are  the  chief  Gosains,  or  spiritual  superiors,  conjointly  with  those  of 
Nitya'nand,  of  the  followers  of  this  faith.  Nitya'nand  was  an  in- 
habitant of  Nadiya,  a  Rdrhiya  Brahman,  and  a  householder  :  he  was  ap= 
pointed  especially  by  Chaitanya,  the  superior  of  his  followers  in  Bengal, 
notwithstanding  his  secular  character,  and  his  being  addicted  to  mundane 
enjoyments  :*  his  descendants  are  still  in  existence,  and  are  divided 
into  two  branches  :  those  of  the  male  line  reside  at  Kharda,  near  Bar- 
rackpore  ;  and  those  of  the  female  at  Bdlagor,  near  Suk'hsdgar  :  there 
are  other  families,  however,  of  nearly  equal  influence  in  various  parts 
of  Bengal,  descended  from  the  other  Gosains,  the  Kavirdjas  and  ori- 
ginal Mahants. 

Besides  the  three  Prabhus,  or  Chaitanya,  Adwaita,  and  Nitya'nand, 
the  Vaishnavas  of  this  order  acknowledge  six  Gosains  as  their  original 
and  chief  teachers,  and  the  founders,  in  some  instances,  of  the  families 
of  the  Gosains  now  existing,  to  whom,  as  well  as  to  the  Gokulast'ha 
Gosains,  hereditary  veneration  is  due.  The  six  Gauriya,  or  Bengal  Go- 
sains, appear  to  have  all  settled  at  Vrindavan  and  Mathura,  where  many 
of  their  descendants  are  still  established,  and  in  possession  of  several 
temples  :  this  locality,  the  agreement  of  dates,  and  the  many  points  of 
resemblance  between  the  institutions  of  Vallabha  and  Chaitanya, 
render  it  extremely  probable  that  their  origin  was  connected,  and  that 
a  spirit  of  rivalry  and  opposition  gave  rise  to  one  or  other  of  them. 

The  six  Gosains  of  the  Bengal  Vaishnavas,  are  Ru'pa,  Sana'tan,  Jiva, 
Raghuna'th  Bhatt,  Raghuna'th  Da's,  and  Gopa'l  Bhatt.  Ru'pa 
and  Sana'tan,!    were  brothers  in    the  employ  of  the    Mohammedan 

*  Thus,  according  to  Kkishna.  Da's,  when  Kaghunath  Da's  visits  him,  he 
finds  him  at  a  feast  with  his  followers,  eating  a  variety  of  dainties ;  amongst  others  a 
dish  called  Pulina,  and  when  he  good  humouredly  notices  it,  Nitya'nand  replies  : 

"  1  am  of  the  Gopa  caste,  (i.  e.  fig  :  a  companion  of  Krishna,  the  cow-herd,)  and 
am  amidst  many  Gopas,  and  such  as  we  are,  consider  Pulina  a  delicacy,"  A  verse  is 
also  ascribed  to  him,  said  to  have  become  proverbial ;  5T^^^i<3[  C^t^T  ^fST^^ 
C^t«r  I  ^t^C'J?  C^t?t^C^  ^?^f?  C^\\  II  Let  all  enjoy  fish,  broth,  and 
woman's  charms— be  happy,  and  call  upon  Hari. 

t  From  the  indistinct  manner  in  which  they  are  conjointly  described  in  the  Bhakta 
Mdlu,    it  might  be  thought  that  Hupa  Sanutana  was  but  a  single  individual  ;  but,  in 


99 

governor  of  Bengal,  and  were  hence  regarded  as  little  better  than 
Mlech'has,  or  outcasts,  themselves  :  the  sanctity  of  Chaitanya's  life  and 
doctrine  induced  them  to  become  his  followers,  and  as  it  was  a  part  of 
his  system  to  admit  all  castes,  even  Mussulmans,  amongst  his  disciples, 
they  were  immediately  enlisted  in  a  cause,  of  which  they  became  the 
first  ornaments  and  supports :  they  were  men  of  learning,  and  were 
very  indefatigable  writers  as  we  shall  hereafter  see,  and  the  foundation 
of  two  temples  at  Vindraban,  the  most  respectable  reliques  of  the  Hindu 
faith  existing  in  Upper  Hindustan,  is  ascribed  to  their  influence  and 
celebrity.*  Jiva  was  the  nephew  of  the  preceding,  the  son  of  their 
younger  brother  :  he  was  likewise  an  author,  and  the  founder  of  a  temple 
at  Vindraban,  dedicated  to  Rddhd  Ddmodara.  Raghuna'th  Bhatt 
and  Raghuna'th  Da's  were  both  Brahmans  of  Bengal,  but  they  esta- 
blished themselves  in  the  vicinity  of  Mathura  and  Vindraban.  Gopal 
Bhatt  founded  a  temple  and  establishment  at  Vindraban,  which  are 
still  maintained  by  his  descendants :  the  presiding  deity  is  Ra'dha' 
Ramana. 

Next  to  the  six  Gosains,  several  learned  disciples  and  faithful  compa- 
nions of  Chaitanya  are  regarded  with  nearly  equal  veneration  :  these  are 
Sriniba's,  Gada'dhar  Pandit,  Sri  Swaru'pa,  Ra'ma'nand,  and  others, 
including  Hari  Da's  :  the  last,  indeed,  has  obtained  almost  equal 
honour  with  his  master,  being  worshipped  as  a  divinity  in  some  places  in 
Bengal — it  is  recorded  of  him,  that  he  resided  in  a  thicket  for  many  years, 
and  during  the  whole  time  he  repeated  the  name  of  Krishna  three 
hundred  thousand  times  daily.  In  addition  to  these  chiefs,  the  sect 
enumerates  eight  Kavi  Rajas,  or  eminent  and  orthodox  bards,  amongst 

one  passage,  the  work  indicates  their  being  two  brothers,  conformably  to  the  Charitd- 
mrita,  and  the  tradition  in  general  currency. 

*  The  temples  of  Govind  Deva  and  Madanmohan,  both  in  ruins ;  a  Sanscrit 
inscription  in  the  former,  however,  attributing  it  to  Man  Sinh  Deva,  a  descendant  of 
Prithu  Rao,  is  dated  Sambat  1647,  or  A. D.  1591.  Besides  the  authority  of  KiiisH- 
NA  Da's,  for  these  two  brothers  being  cotemporary  with  Chaitanya,  who  died  in 
1527,  I  have  a  copy  of  the  Vidagdha  Mudhava,  of  which  Rupa  is  the  author,  dated 
1525;  it  is  not  therefore  likely,  that  Sanatan  actually  founded  the  temple  of  Govind 
Deva,  although  he  may  have  been  instrumental  to  its  being  undertaken.  The  interior 
of  this  temple  is  far  superior  to  any  of  the  religious  structures  to  be  met  with  along 
the  Ganges  and  Jumna,  and  may  almost  be  considered  handsome:  the  exterior  of  that 
of  Madanmohan  is  remarkable  for  its  being  built  something  after  the  plan  of  the 
pyramidical  temples  of  Tanjore  ;  or  rather  its  exterior  corresponds  with  that  of  the 
temples  at  Bhuvamswara  in  Cuttack.  As.   Res.  vol.  xv.  plate. 


lOO 

whom  is  Krishna  Da's,  the  author  of  the  Chaitanya  Charitdmrita,  and 
they  also  specify  sixty-four  Mahantas,  or  heads  of  religious  establish- 
ments. 

The  object  of  the  worship  of  the  Chaitantas  is  Krishna  :  according 
to  them  he  is  Paramdtmd,  or  supreme  spirit,  prior  to  all  worlds,  and 
both  the  cause  and  substance  of  creation  :  in  his  capacity  of  creator, 
preserver,  and  destroyer,  he  is  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Siva,  and  in  the 
endless  divisions  of  his  substance  or  energy,  he  is  all  that  ever  was  or 
will  be  :  besides  these  manifestations  of  himself,  he  has,  for  various  pur- 
poses, assumed  specific  shapes,  as  Avatars,  or  descents ;  Ansas,  or  por- 
tions ;  Ansansas,  portion  of  portions,  and  so  on  ad  infinitum  :  his  prin- 
cipal appearance,  and,  in  fact,  his  actual  sensible  manifestation,  was  as 
Krishna,  and  in  this  capacity  he  again  was  present  in  Chaitanya,  who 
is  therefore  worshipped  as  the  deity,  as  are  the  other  forms  of  the  same 
god,  particularly  as  Gopa'l,  the  cow-herd,  or  Gopina'th,  the  lord  of 
the  milk-maids  of  Vindraban ;  his  feats,  in  which  juvenile  characters  are 
regarded,  are  his  Lild,  or  sport. 

It  is  not  worth  while  to  enter  upon  the  prolix  series  of  subtle  and 
unmeaning  obscurities  in  which  this  class  of  Krishna's  worshippers 
envelop  their  sectarial  notions  :  the  chief  features  of  the  faith  are  the 
identification  of  Vishnu  with  Brahme,  in  common  with  all  the  Vaishnava 
sects,  and  the  assertion  of  his  possessing,  in  that  character,  sensible  and 
real  attributes,  in  opposition  to  the  Vedanta  belief  of  the  nagative  pro- 
perties of  God  :  these  postulates  being  granted,  and  the  subsequent  iden- 
tity of  Krishna  and  Chaitanya  believed,  the  whole  religious  and  moral 
code  of  the  sect  is  comprised  in  one  word,  Bhdkti,  a  term  that  signifies 
a  union  of  implicit  faith  with  incessant  devotion,  and  which  as  illustrat- 
ed by  the  anecdote  of  Hari  Da's,  above  given,  is  the  momentary  repeti- 
tion of  the  name  of  Krishna,  under  a  firm  belief,  that  such  a  practice 
is  sufficient  for  salvation. 

The  doctrine  of  the  efficacy  of  Bhdkti  seems  to  have  been  an  import- 
ant innovation  upon  the  primitive  system  of  the  Hindu  religion.  The 
object  of  the  Vedas,  as  exhibiting  the  Vedanta,  seems  to  have  been  the 
inculcation  of  fixed  religious  duties,  as  a  general  acknowledgement  of 
the  supremacy  of  the  deities,  or  any  deity,  and,  beyond  that,  the  neces- 
sity of  overcoming  material  impurities,  by  acts  of  self-denial  and  pro- 
found meditation,   and   so  fitting  the  spiritual  part  for  its  return  to  its 


101 

original  sources  ;  in  a  word,  it  was  essentially  the  same  system  that 
was  diffused  throughout  the  old  pagan  world.  But  the  fervent  adoration 
of  any  one  deity  superseded  all  this  necessity,  and  broke  down  practice 
and  speculation,  moral  duties,  and  political  distinctions.  Krishna  him- 
self declares,  in  the  Bhdgavat,  that  to  his  worshipper,  that  worship  pre- 
sents whatever  he  wishes — paradise,  liberation,  godhead,  and  is  infi- 
nitely more  efficacious  than  any  or  all  observances,  than  abstraction, 
than  knowledge  of  the  divine  nature,  than  the  subjugation  of  the  pas- 
sions, than  the  practice  of  the  Yoga,  than  charity,  than  virtue,  or  than 
any  thing  that  is  deemed  most  meritorious.*  Another  singular  and 
important  consequence  results  from  these  premises,  for  as  all  men  are 
alike  capable  of  feeling  the  sentiments  of  faith  and  devotion,  it  follows, 
that  all  castes  become  by  such  sentiments  equally  pure.  This  con- 
clusion indeed  is  always  admitted,  and  often  stoutly  maintained  in 
theory,  although  it  may  be  doubted  whether  it  has  ever  been  acted 
upon,  except  by  Chaitanya  himself  and  his  immediate  disciples,  at 
a  period  when  it  was  their  policy  to  multiply  proselytes. f     It  is  so 

^m^  W  iT^iT^f^?^  ^  f^  ^T5=i^  1 1     bhdgavat,  1 1  th  Section. 

t  Chaitanya  admitted  amongst  his  followers  five  PaVhans—Viho  purposed  to 
attack  and  plunder  him,  but  were  stopped  by  his  sanctity,  and  converted  by  his  argu- 
ments :  one  of  these,  who  was  a  Pir,  he  new-named  Ra'm  Da's  ;  another,  their  leader, 
was  a  young  prince  (a  Rdjakumdr,)  whom  he  named  Bijjili  Khan.  Chaitanya 
communicated   the  Upadesa,  or  initiating   Mantra  to   them,  and  they  all  became 

famous  Vaishnavas;  ^t^t"*^  C?^^f^O^»f  ^t^^/tf^  l|  Chaitanya  uniformly 
maintains  the  pre-eminence  of  the  faith  over  caste  :  the  mercy  of  God,  he  says,  regard 
neither  tribe  nor  family  ;     ^'^C^  <p9f-J^f^  ^5f iTlf^  3JtC*r  ||        Krishna  did 

not  disdain  to  eat  in  the  house  of  Vidura,  a  Sudra,        f^^C<I5  ^<(  ^^  ^f^^ 

C«t'Sf»r  II    and    he  cites    Sanscrit    texts    for    his    authority— as    '^^f^^^f^ 

f^TTTftr:  ^i^^TfrT  ^^«T^:  I     W^T  ^zf^W^J  ^T^sft  ^^ 

"^("ifxT  ^rif^fT'^fl*  II  "  '^^^  Chdnddla,  whose  impurity  is  consumed  by  the 
chastening  fire  of  holy  faith,  is  to  be  reverenced  by  the  wise,  and  not  the  unbelieving 

expounder  of  the  Vedas."     Again  ;     if  3?  HW^?T^^  ^^W*  I'W^.'f'T^r;  | 


102 

far  observed,  however,  that  persons  of  all  castes  and  occupations  are 
admitted  into  the  sect,  and  all  are  at  liberty  to  sink  their  civil  differences 
in  the  general  condition  of  mendicant  and  ascetic  devotees,  in  which 
character  they  receive  food  from  any  hands,  and  of  course  eat  and  live 
with  each  other,  without  regard  to  former  distinctions.  As  followers 
of  one  faith,  all  individuals  are,  in  like  manner,  equally  entitled  to 
the  Prasad,  or  food  which  has  been  previously  presented  to  the 
deity,  and  it  is  probably  the  distribution  of  this,  annually,  at  Jagan- 
ndth,  that  has  given  rise  to  the  idea,  that  at  this  place  all  castes  of 
Hindus  eat  together:  any  reservation,  however,  on  this  head  is  foreign 
to  the  tenets  of  this  sect,  as  well  as  of  the  Rdmdnandi  Vaishnavas,^  and 
in  both,  community  of  schism  is  a  close  connecting  link,  which  should, 
in  deed,  as  well  as  word,  abrogate  every  other  distinction. 

The  Bhakti  of  the  followers  of  this  division  of  the  Hindu  faith  is 
supposed  to  comprehend  five  Rasas  or  Ratis,  tastes  or  passions :  in  its 
simplest  form  it  is  mere  Santa,  or  quietism,  such  as  was  practised  by 
the  Yogendras,  or  by  sages,  as  Sana k a  and  his  brethren,  and  other 
saints :  in  a  more  active  state,  it  is  servitude,  or  Ddsya,  which  every 
votary  takes  upon  himself ;  a  higher  condition  is  that  of  Sdkhya,  a  per- 
sonal regard  or  friendship  for  the  deity,  as  felt  by  Bhi'ma,  Arjuna,  and 
others,  honoured  with  his  acquaintance.  Bdtsalya,  which  is  a  higher 
station,  is  a  tender  affection  for  the  divinity,  of  the  same  nature  as  the 
love  of  parents  for  their  children*  and  the  highest  degree  of  Bhakti  is  the 
Mddhurya,  or  such  passionate  attachment  as  that  which  pervaded  the 
feelings  of  the  Gopis,  towards  their  beloved  Krishna. 

The  modes  of  expressing  the  feelings  thus  entertained  by  his  vota- 
ries towards  Krishna,  do  not  differ  essentially  from  those  prevalent 
amongst  the  followers  of  the  Gokulasfha  Gosains :  the  secular  worship- 
pers, however,  pay  a  less  regular  homage  in  the  temples  of  Krishna, 
and  in  most  parts  of  Bengal,  his  public  adoration  occurs  but  twice  a 
day,  or  between  nine  and  twelve  in  the  morning,  and  six  and  ten  at 
night:  occasionally,  however,  it  does  take  place  in  a  similar  manner, 
or  eight  times  a  day.      The   chief   ritual  of   the   Bengal    Vaishnavas 

Vedas  is  not  my  disciple  ;  the  faithful  Chunddla  enjoys  my  friendship  ;  to  him  be 
given,  and  from  him  be  received  :  let  him  be  reverenced,  even  as  I  am  reverenced. 
These  passages  are  from  the  Chaitanya  Charitdmrita,  where  many  others  of  similar 
purport  may  be  found. 

*  See  remark  on  the  Rdmdnandi  Faishnavas  ;  page  37. 


103 

of  the  class  is  a  very  simple  one,  and  the  Ndma  Kirt'tana,  or  constant 
repetition  of  any  of  the  names  of  Krishna,  or  his  collateral  modifica- 
tions, is  declared  to  be  the  peculiar  duty  of  the  present  age,  and  the 
only  sacrifice  the  wise  are  required  to  offer ;  it  is  of  itself  quite  sufficient 
to  ensure  future  felicity  :  however,  other  duties,  or  Sddhanas,  are  en- 
joined, to  the  number  of  sixty-four,  including  many  absurd,  many 
harmless,  and  many  moral  observances  ;  as  fasting  every  eleventh  day, 
singing  and  dancing  in  honour  of  Krishna,  and  suppressing  anger, 
avarice,  and  lust.  Of  all  obligations,  however,  the  Guru  Padclsraya, 
or  servile  veneration  of  the  spiritual  teacher,  is  the  most  important  and 
compulsory  :  the  members  of  this  sect  not  only  are  required  to  deliver 
up  themselves  and  every  thing  valuable  to  the  disposal  of  the  Guru, 
they  are  not  only  to  entertain  full  belief  of  the  usual  Vaishnava  tenet, 
which  identifies  the  votary,  the  teacher,  and  the  god,  but  they  are  to 
look  upon  the  Guru  as  one  and  the  present  deity,  as  possessed  of  more 
authority  even  than  the  deity,  and  as  one  whose  favour  is  more  to  be 
courted,  and  whose  anger  is  more  to  be  deprecated,  than  even  that  of 
Krishna  himself.*  We  have  already  had  occasion  to  observe  that  this 
veneration  is  hereditary,  and  is  paid  to  the  successor  of  a  deceased 
Gosain,  although,  in  the  estimation  perhaps  of  his  own  worshippers, 
he  is  in  his  individual  capacity  more  deserving  of  reprobation  than 
of  reverence.  This  blind  and  extravagant  adoration  of  the  Guru  is, 
perhaps,  the  most  irrational  of  all  Hindu  irrationalities,  and  it  is  but 
justice  to  the  founders  of  the  system  to  acquit  them  of  being  immediately 

*    On    this  subject,  the  following  text  occurs    in    the     Updsana    Chandrdmrita, 
^3T^:    ^5^:  ^T^TrT  ^  5^:  ^  1|"fTW^  II     '^he  Mantra  is  manifest 

in  the  Guru,  and  the  Guru  is  Hari  hinaself.     IfU9T^7T^<  ^T^^^fT^^^  <R"5?T"" 

^    ♦  •s. 

^c^  I   "  First,  the  Guru  is  to  be  worshipped,  then  I  am  to  be  worshipped."     Tf^;]^^ 

cffjl^fi^;  I  "The  Guru  is  always  to  be  worshipped  :  he  is  most  excellent  from 
being  one  with  the  Mantra.  Hari  is  pleased  when  the  Guru  is  pleased  ;  millions  of 
acts  of  homage  else  will  fail  of  being  accepted."  Again,  '^"'CT  ^"'^  T'^^nffTT 
jy^  "^^  «T^'^*r«  I  "  ^hen  Hari  is  in  anger,  the  Guru  is  our  protector;  when 
the  Guru  is  in  anger,  we  have  none."     These  are  from  the  Bhajandmrita. 


104 

the  authors  of  this  folly.  The  earliest  works  inculcate,  no  doubt,  ex- 
treme reverence  for  the  teacher,  but  not  divine  worship  ;  they  direct  the 
disciple  to  look  upon  his  Guru  as  his  second  father,  not  as  his  God  : 
there  is  great  reason  to  suppose,  that  the  prevailing  practice  is  not  of 
very  remote  date,  and  that  it  originates  chiefly  with  the  Sri  Bhdgavat : 
it  is  also  falling  into  some  disrepute,  and,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  a 
whole  division  of  even  Chaitanya's  followers  have  discarded  this  part 
of  the  system.  , 

Liberation  from  future  terrestrial  existence  is  the  object  of  every  form 
of  Hindu  worship.  The  prevailing  notion  of  the  means  of  such  eman- 
cipation is  the  re-union  of  the  spiritual  man,  with  that  primitive  spirit, 
which  communicates  its  individual  portions  to  all  nature,  and  which 
receives  them,  when  duly  purified,  again  into  its  essence.  On  this 
head,  however,  the  followers  of  Chaitanya,  in  common  with  most  of 
the  Vaishnava  sects,  do  not  seem  to  have  adopted  the  Veddnta  notions  ; 
and,  although  some  admit  the  Sdyujya,  or  identification  with  the  deity, 
as  one  division  of  Mukti,  others  are  disposed  to  exclude  it,  and  none 
acknowledge  its  pre-eminence  ;  their  Moksha  is  of  two  kinds  ;  one, 
perpetual  residence  in  Swerga,  or  Paradise,  with  possession  of  the  divine 
attributes  of  supreme  power,  &c.  and  the  other,  elevation  to  Vaikunt'ha 
— the  heaven  of  Vishnu,  which  is  free  from  the  influence  of  Mdyd,  and 
above  the  regions  of  the  Avatars,  and  where  they  enjoy  one  or  all  of 
the  relations  to  Krishna,  which  have  been  enumerated  when  speaking 
of  the  followers  of  Ra'ma'nuja  and  Madhwa'cha'rya. 

The  doctrines  of  the  followers  of  Chaitanya  are  conveyed  in  a  great 
number  of  works,  both  in  Sanscrit  and  Bengali.  The  sage  himself,  and 
the  two  other  Mahdprabhus,  Nitya'nand  and  Adwaita,  do  not  appear 
to  have  left  any  written  compositions,  but  the  deficiency  was  amply 
compensated  by  Ru'pa  and  Sana'tan,  both  of  whom  were  voluminous 
and  able  writers.  To  Ru'pa  are  ascribed  the  following  works  :  the 
Vidagdha  Mddhava,  a  drama  ;  the  Lalitd  Madhavd,  Ujjala  Nilamani, 
Ddna  Keli  Kaumudi,  poems  in  celebration  of  Krishna  and  Ra'dha'  ; 
Bahustavdvali,  hymns;  Ashtddasa  LUd  Khdnd ;  Padmdvali,  Govinda 
Viruddvali,  and  its  Lakshana,  or  exposition  ;  Mathura  Mdhdtmya, 
panegyrical  account  of  Mathurd,  Ndtaka  Lakshana,  Laghu  Bhdgavat,  an 
abridgement  of  the  Sri  Bhdgavat,  and  the  Vruja  Vilds  Vernanam,  an 
account  of  Krishna's  sports  in  Vrinddvan.  San'atan  was  the  author  of 


105 

the  Hart  Bhakti  Vilds,  a  work  on  the  nature  of  the  deity  and  devotion, 
the  Rdsdmrita  Sindhu,  a  work  of  high  authority  on  the  same  subjects, 
the  Bkdgavat  Amrita,  which  contains  the  observances  of  the  sect,  and 
the  Siddhdnta  Sara,  a  commentary  on  the  10th  Chapter  of  the  Sri 
Bhdgavat.  Of  the  other  six  Gosains,  Jiva  wrote  the  Bhdgavat  Sander- 
bha,  the  Bhakti  Siddhdnta,  Gopdla  Champu,  and  Upadesdmrita,  and 
Raghunath  Da's,  the  Manassikshd  and  Gunalesa  Suk'hara.  These 
are  all  in  Sanscrit.  In  Bengali,  the  Rdga  Maya  Kdna,  a  work  on 
subduing  the  passions,  is  ascribed  to  Ru'pa,  and  Rasamaya  Kalikd,  on 
devotedness  to  Krishna,  to  Sana'tan.  Other  Sanscrit  works  are  enu- 
merated amongst  the  authorities  of  this  sect,  as  the  Chaitanya  Chandro- 
daya,  a  drama,  Stava  Maid,  Stavdmrita  Lahari,  by  Viswana'th  Chakra- 
vERTi  ;  Bhajandmrita,  Sri  Smarana  Derpana,  by  Ramchandra  Kavird- 
ja  ;  the  Gopipremdmrita,  a  comment  on  the  Krishna  Kemdmrita,  by 
Krishna  Da's  Kavirdja  ;  and  the  Krishna  Kirtana,  by  Govind  Da's 
and  Vidya'pati.  The  biographical  accounts  of  Chaitanya  have  been 
already  specified  in  our  notice  of  the  Chaitanya  Charitdmrita,  and  besides 
those,  there  enumerated,  we  have  the  Chaitanya  Mangala,  a  history  of 
the  saint,  by  Lochana,  and  the  Gauragandddesa  dipikd,  an  account  of 
his  chief  disciples.  The  principal  works  of  common  reference,  and 
written  in  Bengali,  though  thickly  interspersed  with  Sanscrit  texts,  are 
the  Updsandchandrdmrita,  a  ritual,  by  La'l  Da's,  the  Premdbhdkti  Chan- 
drikd,  by  Thakur  Gosain,  the  Pdshanda  Dalana,  a  refutation  of  other 
sects,  by  Ra'dha'ma'dhava,  and  the  Vaishnava  Verddhana,  by  Daivaki 
Nandana.  There  are  no  doubt  many  other  works  circulating  amongst 
this  sect,  which  is  therefore  possessed  of  a  voluminous  body  of  literature 
of  its  own  * 

The  Vaishnavas  of  this  sect  are  distinguished  by  two  white  perpen- 
dicular streaks  of  sandal,  or  Gopichandana,  down  the  forehead,  uniting 
at  the  root  of  the  nose,  and  continuing  to  near  the  tip  ;  by  the  name 
of  Rddhd  Krishna  stamped  on  the  temples,  breast  and  arms  ;  a  close 
necklace  of  Tulasi  stalk  of  three  strings,  and  a  rosary  of  one  hundred 
and  eight  or  sometimes  even  of  a  thousand  beads  made  of  the  stem 
of  the   Tulasi ;  the  necklace  is  sometimes  made  of  very  minute  beads, 

*  The  particulars  of  the  above  are  taken  chiefly  from  the  Chaitanya  Charita'- 
MRiTA,  others  from  the  Updsana  Chandrdmrita,  and  a  few  from  the  list  given  by 
Mr.  JFarcf— Account  of  the  Hindus,  Vol,  2.  448. 


106 

and  this,  in  upper  India,  is  regarded  as  the  characteristic  of  the  Chai- 
tanya  sect,  but  in  Bengal  it  is  only  worn  by  persons  of  the  lowest  class. 
The  Chaitanya  sectaries  consist  of  every  tribe  and  order,  and  are  govern- 
ed by  the  descendants  of  their  Gosains.  They  include  some  Uddsmas, 
or  Vairdgis,  men  who  retire  from  the  world,  and  live  unconnected 
with  society  in  a  state  of  celibacy  and  mendicancy  :  the  religious 
teachers  are,  however,  married  men,  and  their  dwellings,  with  a  temple 
attached,  are  tenanted  by  their  family  and  dependants.  Such  coenobitical 
establishments  as  are  common  amongst  the  Rdmdnandis  and  other  asce- 
tics, are  not  known  to  the  great  body  of  the  Chaitanya  Faislmavas. 

Besides  the  divisions  of  this  sect  arising  from  the  various  forms 
under  which  the  tutelary  deity  is  worshipped,  and  thence  denominated 
Rddhdramanis,  Rddhipdlis,  Vihdriji  and  Govindji,  and  Yugala  Bhaktas, 
and  which  distinctions  are  little  more  than  nominal,  whilst  also  they  are 
almost  restricted  to  the  Bengal  Vaishnavas  about  Mathura  and  Vindra- 
van,  there  are  in  Bengal  three  classes  of  this  sect,  that  may  be  regarded 
as  seceders  from  the  principal  body,  these  are  denominated  Spashtha 
Ddyakas,  Karta  Bhajas  and  Sahujas. 

The  Spashtha  Ddyakas  are  distinguished  from  perhaps  every  other 
Hindu  sect  in  India  by  two  singularities — denial  of  the  divine  character, 
and  despotic  authority  of  the  Guru,  and  the,  at  least  professedly,  platonic 
association  of  male  and  female  coenobites  in  one  conventual  abode.* 

The  secular  followers  of  this  sect  are,  as  usual,  of  every  tribe,  and  of 
the  Grihasfha,  or  householder  order  :  the  teachers,  both  male  and 
female,  are  Uddsina,  or  mendicants  and  ascetics,  and  lead  a  life  of 
celibacy  :  the  sectarial  marks  are  a  shorter  Tilaka  than  that  used  by  the 
other  Chaitanyas,  and  a  single  string  of  Tulasi  beads  worn  close  round 
the  neck :  the  men  often  wear  only  the  Kaupina,  and  a  piece  of  cloth 
round  the  waist,  like  an  apron,  whilst  the  women  shave  their  heads, 
with  the  exception  of  a  single  slender  tress  :  those  amongst  them  who 
are  most  rigid  in  their  conduct,  accept  no  invitations  nor  food  from  any 
but  persons  of  their  own  sect. 

The  association  of  men  and  women  is,  according  to  their  own  asser- 
tions, restricted  to  a  residence  within  the  same  inclosure,  and  leads  to 
no  other  than  such  intercourse  as  becomes  brethren  and  sisters,  or  than 

*  Like  the  brethren  and  sisters  of  the  free  spirit,  who  were  numerous  in  Europe  in 
the  13th  century— See  Mosheim  3.  379. 


107 

the  community  of  belief  and  interest,  and  joint  celebration  of  the  praise 
of  Krishna  and  Chaitanya,  with  song  and  dance ;  the  women  act  as 
the  spiritual  instructors  of  the  females  of  respectable  families,  to  whom 
they  have  unrestricted  access,  and  by  whom  they  are  visited  in  their 
own  dwellings  :  the  institution  is  so  far  political,  and  the  consequence  is 
said  to  be  actually,  that  to  which  it  obviously  tends,  the  growing  diiFu- 
sion  of  the  doctrines  of  this  sect  in  Calcutta,  where  it  is  especially 
established. 

The  Karta  Bhajas,  or  worshippers  af  the  Creator,  are  a  sect  of  very 
modern  origin,  having  been  founded  no  longer  than  thirty  years  ago  by 
Ra'ma  Saran  Pa'la,  a  Gwdla,  an  inhabitant  of  Ghcspara,  a  village 
near  Sukh  Sagar,  in  Bengal.*  The  chief  peculiarity  of  this  sect,  is  the 
doctrine  of  the  absolute  divinity  of  the  Guru,  at  least  as  being  the 
present  Krishna,  or  deity  incarnate,  and  whom  they  therefore,  relinquish- 
ing every  other  form  of  wroship,  venerate  as  their  Ishta  Devata,  or 
elected  god  :  this  exclusive  veneration  is,  however,  comprehended  within 
wide  limits  :  we  have  seen  that  it  prevails  amongst  the  followers  of 
Ghaitanya  generally,  and  it  need  scarcely  have  been  adopted  as  a  schis- 
matical  distinction  :  the  real  difference,  however,  is  the  person,  not  the 
character  of  the  Guru,  and  the  innovation  is  nothing,  in  fact,  but  an 
artful  encroachment  upon  the  authority  of  the  old  hereditary  teachers  or 
Gosains,  and  an  attempt  to  invest  a  new  family  with  spiritual  power : 
the  attempt  has  been  so  far  successful,  that  it  gave  affluence  and 
celebrity  to  the  founder,  to  which,  as  well  as  his  father's  sanctity,  the 
son,  Ra'mdula'l  Pa'l  has  succeeded.  It  is  said  to  have  numerous 
disciples,  the  greater  proportion  of  whom  are  women.  The  distinctions 
of  caste  are  not  acknowledged  amongst  the  followers  of  this  sect,  at 
least  when  engaged  in  any  of  their  religious  celebrations,  and  they  eat 

t  See  Mr.  Ward's  account  of  this  sect,  Vol.  2.  175.  ;  in  a  note  he  has  given  a 
translation  of  the  Mantra,  "  Oh  !  sinless  Lord— Oh  !  ijreat  Lord,  at  thy  pleasure  I 
go  and  return,  not  a  moment  am  I  without  thee,  1  am  even  with  thee,  save,  Oh  !  great 
Lord  :"  the  following  is  the  original  : 

Solah  ana  Mantra,  the  Neophyte  paying  that  sum,  or  sixteen  annas  for  it  :  it  is, 
perhaps,  one  singularity  in  the  sect,  that  this  Mantra  is  in  Bengali,  a  common  spoken 
language— in  all  other  cases  it  is  couched  in  Sanscrit,  the  language  of  the  gods. 


108 

together  in  private,  once  or  twice  a  year  :  the  initiating  Mantra  is  sup- 
posed to  be  highly  efficr.cious  in  removing  disease  and  barrenness,  and 
hence  many  infirm  persons  and  childless  v^omen  are  induced  to  join  the 
sect. 

The  remaining  division  of  the  Bengal  Vaishnavas  allow  nothing  of 
themselves  to  be  known  :  their  professions  and  practices  are  kept  secret, 
but  it  is  believed  that  they  follow  the  worship  of  Sakti,  or  the  female 
energy,  agreeably  to  the  left  handed  ritual,  the  nature  of  which  we  shall 
hereafter  have  occasion  to  describe. 

The  chief  temples  of  the  Bengal  Vaishnavas,  besides  those  which  at 
Vwdrakd  and  Vrindavan,  and  particularly  at  Jaganndth,  are  objects  of 
universal  reverence,  are  three,  one  at  Nadiya,  dedicated  to  Chaitanya, 
one  at  Amhikd,  to  Nitya'nand  and  the  same,  and  one  at  Agradwipa, 
dedicated  to  Gopina'th  :  at  the  latter  a  celebrated  Mela,  or  annual 
fair,  %  held  in  the  month  of  March,  at  which  from  50  to  100,000 
persons  are  generally  collected. 


RADHA  VALLABHIS. 

Although  the  general  worship  of  the  female  personifications  of  the 
Hindu  deities  forms  a  class  by  itself,  yet  when  individualised  as  the 
associates  of  the  divinities,  whose  energies  they  are,  their  adoration 
becomes  so  linked  with  that  of  the  male  power,  that  it  is  not  easy,  even 
to  their  votaries,  to  draw  a  precise  line  between  them  ;  they,  in  fact, 
form  a  part  of  the  system,  and  Lakshmi  and  Sitd  are  the  preferential 
objects  of  devotion  to  many  of  the  followers  of  Ra'ma'nuja  and  Ra'- 
ma'nand,  without  separating  them  from  the  communion  of  the  sect. 

In  like  manner  Ra'dha',  the  favourite  mistress  of  Krishna,  is  the 
object  of  adoration  to  all  the  sects  who  worship  that  deity,  and  not 
unfrequently  obtains  a  degree  of  preference  that  almost  throws  the 
character  from  whom  she  derives  her  importance  into  the  shade :  such 
seems  to  be  the  case  with  the  sect  now  noticed,  who  worship  Krishna 
as  Rddhd  Vallabha,  the  lord  or  lover  of  Ra'dha'. 

The  adoration  of  Ra'dha'  is  a  most  undoubted  innovation  in  the 
Hindu  creed,  and  one  of  very  recent  origin.     The  only  Ra'dha'  that  is 


109 

named  in  the  Mahdbhdrat  is  a  very  different  personage,  being  the  wife 
of  Duryodhana's  charioteer,  and  the  nurse  of  Kerna.  Even  the 
Bhdgavat  makes  no  particular  mention  of  her  amongst  the  Gupis  of 
Vrindavan,  and  we  must  look  to  the  Brahma  Vaivertta  Purdna,  as  the 
chief  authority  of  a  classical  character,  on  which  the  pretensions  of 
Ra'dha'  are  founded  ;  a  circumstance  which  is  of  itself  sufficient  to  in- 
dicate the  comparatively  modern  date  of  the   Purdna. 

According  to  this  work,  the  primeval  being  having  divided  himself 
into  two  parts,  the  right  side  became  Krishna,  and  the  left  Ra'dha', 
and  from  their  union,  the  vital  airs  and  mundane  egg  were  generated. 
Ra'dha'  being,  in  fact,  the  Ich'chd  Sakti,  the  will  or  wish  of  the  deity, 
the  manifestation  of  which  was  the  universe. 

Ra'dha'  continued  to  reside  with  Krishna  in  Goloka,  where  she  gave 
origin  to  the  Gopis,  or  her  female  companions,  and  received  the 
homage  of  all  the  divinities.  The  Gopas,  or  male  attendants  of  Krish- 
na, as  we  have  formerly  remarked,  were  in  like  manner  produced 
from  his  person.  The  grossness  of  Hindu  personification  ascribes  to 
the  Krishna  of  the  heavenly  Goloka,  the  defects  of  the  terrestial  cow- 
herd, and  the  Ra'dha'  of  that  region  is  not  more  exempt  from  the  causes 
or  effects  of  jealousy  than  the  nymph  of  Vrindavan.  Being  on  one 
occasion  offended  with  Krishna  for  his  infidelity,  she  denied  him  access 
to  her  palace,  on  which  she  was  severely  censured  by  Suda'ma',  a  Gopa, 
and  confidential  adviser  of  Krishna.  She  therefore  cursed  him,  and 
doomed  him  to  be  born  on  earth  as  an  Asura,  and  he  accordingly  ap- 
peared as  Sankhachura.  He  retaliated  by  a  similar  imprecation,  in 
consequence  of  which  Ra'dha'  was  also  obliged  to  quit  her  high  station, 
and  was  born  at  Vrindavan  on  earth,  as  the  daughter  of  a  Vaisya, 
named  Vrishabha'nu,  by  his  wife  Kalavati.  Krishna  having,  at 
the  sp-me  time,  become  incarnate,  was  married  to  her  at  Vrindavan, 
when  he  was  fourteen,  and  she  was  twelve  years  of  age  :  as  a  further  re- 
sult of  the  imprecation,  she  was  separated  from  him  after  he  attained 
maturity,  until  the  close  of  his  earthly  career ;  when  she  preceded  him 
to  the  celestial  Goloka,  and  was  there  re- united  with  him.  The  fol- 
lowing is  a  further  illustration  of  the  notions  of  Ra'dh./  entertained 
by  this  sect.  It  is  the  address  of  Ganesa  to  her,  in  the  Brahma  Vai- 
vertta Purdna,  after  she  had  set  the  example  of  presenting  offerings 
to  him. 


110 

*'  Mother  of  the  universe,  the  worship  thou  hast  offered  affords  a 
lesson  to  all  mankind.  Thou  art  of  one  form  with  Brahme,  and 
abidest  on  the  bosom  of  Krishna.  Thou  art  the  presiding  goddess  of 
his  life,  and  more  dear  than  life  to  him,  on  the  lotus  of  whose  feet  medi- 
tate the  gods  Brahma,  Siva,  Sesha,  and  the  rest,  and  Sanaka  and  other 
mighty  munis,  and  the  chiefs  of  the  sages,  and  holy  men,  and  all  the 
faithful.  Ra'dha'  is  the  created  left  half,  and  Ma'dhava  the  right,  and 
the  great  Lakshmi,  the  mother  of  the  world,  was  made  from  thy  left 
side.  Thou  art  the  great  goddess,  the  parent  of  all  wealth,  and  of  the 
Vedas,  and  of  the  world.  The  primoeval  Prakriti,  and  the  universal 
Prakriti,  and  all  the  creations  of  the  will,  are  but  forms  of  thee.  Thou 
art  all  cause  and  all  effect.  That  wise  Yogi,  who  first  pronounces  thy 
name,  and  next  that  of  Krishna,  goes  to  his  region ;  but  he  that  re- 
verses this  order,  incurs  the  sin  of  Brahminicide.*  Thou  art  the  mo- 
ther of  the  world.  The  Paramdtmd  Hari  is  the  father.  The  Guru  is 
more  venerable  than  the  father,  and  the  mother  more  venerable  than  the 
Guru.  Although  he  worship  any  other  god,  or  even  Krishna,  the 
cause  of  all,  yet  the  fool  in  this  holy  land  who  reviles  Ra'dhika',  shall 
suffer  sorrow  and  pain  in  this  life,  and  be  condemned  to  hell,  as  long 
as  the  sun  and  moon  endure.  The  spiritual  preceptor  theaches  wis- 
dom, and  wisdom  is  from  mystical  rites  and  secret  prayers ;  but  they 
alone  are  the  prayers  of  wisdom,  that  inculcate  faith  in  Krishna  and  in 
you.  He  who  preserves  the  Mantras  of  the  gods  through  successive 
births,  obtains  faith  in  Durga',  which  is  of  difficult  acquisition.  By  pre- 
serving the  Mantra  of  Durga',  he  obtains  Sambhu,  who  is  eternal 
happiness  and  wisdom.  By  preserving  the  Mantra  of  Sambhu,  the 
cause  of  the  world,  he  obtains  your  lotus  feet,  that  most  difficult  of 
attainments.  Having  found  an  asylum  at  your  feet,  the  pious  man  never 
relinquishes  them  for  an  instant,  nor  is  separated  from  them  by  fate. 
Having  with  firm  faith  received,  in  the  holy  land  of  Bharata,  your 
Mantra  (initiating  prayer,)  from  a  Vaishnava,  and  adding  your  praises 
(StavaJ  or  charm,  (Kavacha)  which  cleaves  the  root  of  works,  he  deli- 
vers himself  (from  future  births)  with  thousands  of  his  kindred.  He  who 
having  properly  worshipped  his  Guru  with  clothes,  ornaments,  and 
sandal,  and  assumed  thy  Kavacha,  (a  charm  or  prayer,  carried  about 

*  Accordingly  the  formula  used  by  the  Radhd  Vallabhi  sect,  and  the  like,  is  always 
Ha'dha'  KmsHNA,  never  Kiushn a  Ka'dha'. 


Ill 

the  person  in  a   small  gold  or   silver   casket,)    is   equal   to   Vishnu 
himself." 

In  what  respect  the  Rddhd  Vallahhis  differ  from  those  followers  of 
the  Bengali  Gosains,  who  teach  the  worshp  of  this  goddess  in  con- 
junction, with  Krishna,  does  not  appear,  and  perhaps  there  is  little 
other  difference  than  that  of  their  acknowledging  separate  teachers. 
Instead  of  adhearing  to  any  of  the  hereditary  Gosains,  the  members  of 
this  sect  consider  a  teacher  named  Hari  Vans,  as  their  founder.  This 
person  settled  at  Vrindavan,  and  established  a  Math  there,  which  in 
1822  comprised  between  40  and  50  resident  ascetics.  He  also  erected 
a  temple  there  that  still  exists,  and  indicates,  by  an  inscription  over 
the  door,  that  it  was  dedicated  to  Sri  Rddhd  Vallabha  by  Hari  Vans, 
in  Samvat  1641,  or  A.D.  1585.  A  manual,  entitled  Rddhd  Sudha 
Nidhi,  which  is  merely  a  series  of  Sanscrit  verses  in  praise  of  Ra'dha', 
is  also  ascribed  to  the  same  individual.  A  more  ample  exposition  of 
the  notions  of  the  sect,  and  of  their  traditions  and  observances,  as 
well  as  a  collection  of  their  songs  or  hymns,  is  the  Seva  Sakhi  Vdni,  a 
work  in  Bhdkha,  in  upwards  of  forty  sections.  There  are  other  works 
in  the  vernacular  dialects,  and  especially  in  that  of  BruJ,  or  the 
country  about  Mathura  and  Vrindavan,  which  regulate  or  inspire  the 
devotion  of  the  worshippers  of  Rddhd  Vallabha. 


SAKHI  BHAVAS. 


The  sect  is  another  ramification  of  those  which  adopt  Krishna  and 
Ra'dha'  for  the  objects  of  their  worship,  and  may  be  regarded  as  more 
particularly  springing  from  the  last  named  stock,  the  Rddhd  Vallahhis. 
As  Ra'dha'  is  their  preferential  and  exclusive  divinity,  their  devotion 
to  this  personification  of  the  Sakti  of  Krishna  is  ridiculously  and  dis- 
gustingly expressed.  In  order  to  convey  the  idea  of  being  as  it  were 
her  followers  and  friends,  a  character  obviously  incompatible  with  the 
difference  of  sex,  they  assume  the  female  garb,  and  adopt  not  only 
the  dress  and  ornaments,  but  the  manners  and  occupations  of  women  ; 
the  preposterous  nature  of   this   assumption  is  too   apparent,   even  to 


112 

Hindu  superstition,  to  be  regarded  with  any  sort  of  respect  by  the  com- 
munity, and,  accordingly,  the  Sak'hi  Bhdvas  are  of  little  repute,  and 
very  few  in  number :  they  occasionally  lead  a  mendicant  life,  but  are 
rarely  met  with  :  it  is  said  that  the  only  place  where  they  are  to  be 
found,  in  any  number,  is  Jaypur :  there  are  a  few  at  Benares,  and  a  few 
in  Bengal. 


CHARAN  DASIS. 


Another  Vaishnava  sect  conforming  with  the  last,  in  the  M^orship  of 
Rddhd  and  Krishna,  was  instituted  by  Charan  Da's,  a  merchant  of  the 
Dhusar  tribe,  who  resided  at  Dehli  in  the  reign  of  the  second  Alemgir. 
Their  doctrines  of  universal  emanation,  are  much  the  same  as  those  of 
the  Vedanta  school,  although  they  correspond  with  the  Vaishnava 
sects  in  maintaining  the  great  source  of  all  things,  or  Brahme,  to  be 
Krishna  :  reverence  of  the  Guru,  and  assertion  of  the  pre-eminence  of 
faith,  above  every  other  distinction,  are  also  common  to  them  with 
other  Vaishnava  sects,  from  whom,  probably,  they  only  differ  in  requir- 
ing no  particular  qualification  of  caste,  order,  nor  even  of  sex,  for  their 
teachers  :  they  affirm,  indeed,  that  originally  they  differed  from  other 
sects  of  Vaishnavas,  in  worshipping  no  sensible  representations  of  the 
deity,  and  in  excluding  even  the  Tulasi  plant  and  Sdlagrdm  stone 
from  their  devotions  :  they  have,  however,  they  admit,  recently  adopted 
them,  in  order  to  maintain  a  friendly  intercourse  with  the  followers  of 
Ra'ma'nand  :  another  peculiarity  in  their  system  is  the  importance  they 
attach  to  morality,  and  they  do  not  acknowledge  faith  to  be  independent 
of  works  :  actions,  they  maintain,  invariably  meet  with  retribution  or 
reward :  their  moral  code,  which  they  seem  to  have  borrowed  from  the 
Mddhwas,  if  not  from  a  purer  source,  consists  of  ten  prohibitions.  They 
are  not  to  lie,  not  to  revile,  not  to  speak  harshly,  not  to  discourse 
idly,  not  to  steal,  not  to  commit  adultery,  not  to  offer  violence 
to  any  created  thing,  not  to  imagine  evil,  not  to  cherish  hatred, 
and  not  to  indulge  in  conceit  or  pride.  The  other  obligations  enjoined, 
are,  to  discharge  the  duties  of  the  profession  or  caste  to  which  a  person 
belongs,  to  associate  with  pious  men,   to  put  implicit   faith  in   the 


113 

spiritual  preceptor,  and  to  adore  Hari  as  the  original  and  indefinable 
cause  of  all,  and  who,  through  the  operation  of  Ma'ya',  created  the 
universe,  and  has  appeared  in  it  occasionally  in  a  mortal  form,  and  parti- 
cularly as  Krishna  at  Vindravan. 

The  followers  of  Charan  Da's  are  both  clerical  and  secular  ;  the 
latter  are  chiefly  of  the  mercantile  order  ;  the  former  lead  a  mendicant 
and  ascetic  life,  and  are  distinguished  by  wearing  yellow  garments, 
and  a  single  streak  of  sandal,  or  Gopichandana,  down  the  forehead ;  the 
necklace  and  rosary  are  of  Tulasi  beads :  they  wear  also  a  small  pointed 
cap,  round  the  lower  part  of  which  they  wrap  a  yellow  turban. 
Their  appearance  in  general  is  decent,  and  their  deportment  decorous  ; 
in  fact,  although  they  profess  mendicity,  they  are  well  supported  by 
the  opulence  of  their  disciples ;  it  is  possible,  indeed,  that  this  sect, 
considering  its  origin,  and  the  class  by  which  it  is  professed,  arose  out 
of  an  attempt  to  shake  off  the  authority  of  the  Gokulast'ha  Gosains. 

The  authorities  of  the  sect  are  the  Sri  Bhdgavat  and  Gitd,  of  which 
they  have  Bhdsha  translations  :  that  of  the  former  is  ascribed,  at  least  in 
parts,  to  Charan  Da's  himself :  he  has  also  left  original  works,  as  the 
Sandeha  Sdgar  and  Dharme  Jihdj,  in  a  dialogue  between  him  and  his 
teacher,  Sukh  Deva,  the  same,  according  to  the  Charan  Basis,  as  the 
pupil  of  Vyas,  and  narrator  of  the  Purdnas.  The  first  disciple  of  Charan 
Da's  was  his  own  sister,  Sahaji  Bai,  and  she  succeeded  to  her  brother's 
authority,  as  well  as  learning,  having  written  the  Sahaj  Prakds  and 
Solah  Tat  Nirnaya :  they  have  both  left  many  Sahdas  and  Kavits :  other 
works,  in  Bhdsha,  have  been  composed  by  various  teachers  of  the  sect. 

The  chief  seat  of  the  Charan  Basis  is  at  Belhi,  where  is  the  Samddh, 
or  monument  of  the  founder  :  this  establishment  consists  of  about  twenty 
resident  members  :  there  are  also  five  or  six  similar  Mat'hs  at  Behli, 
and  others  in  the  upper  part  of  the  Boah,  and  their  numbers  are  said  to 
be  rapidly  increasing. 


harischandis,  sadhna  pant'his,  and  madhavis. 

These  sects  may  be  regarded  as  little  more  than  nominal.       The  two 
first  have  originated,  apparently,  in  the  determination  of  some  of  the 

Q 


114 

classes  considered  as  outcaste,  to  adopt  new  religious  as  well  as  civil 
distinctions  for  themselves,  as  they  were  excluded  from  every  one 
actually  existing.  The  Harischandis  are  Doms,  or  sweepers,  in  the 
western  provinces  :  their  name  bears  an  allusion  to  the  Paurdnik  prince 
Harischandra*  who,  becoming  the  purchased  slave  of  a  man  of  this 
impure  order,  instructed  his  master,  it  is  said,  in  the  tenets  of  the  sect. 
What  they  were,  however,  is  not  known,  and  it  may  be  doubted  whether 
any  exist. 

Sadhna,  again,  was  a  butcher,  but  it  is  related  of  him,  that  he  only 
sold,  never  slaughtered  meat,  but  purchased  it  ready  slain.  An  ascetic 
rewarded  his  humanity  with  the  present  of  a  stone,  a  Sdldgram,  which 
he  devoutly  worshipped,  and,  in  consequence,  Vishnu  was  highly 
pleased  with  him,  and  conferred  upon  him  all  desires.  Whilst  on  a 
pilgrimage,  the  wife  of  a  Brahman  fell  in  love  with  him,  but  he  replied 
to  her  advances,  by  stating,  that  a  throat  must  be  cut  before  he  would 
comply,  which  she  misinterpreting,  cut  off  her  husband's  head  :  finding 
Sadhna  regarded  her  on  this  account  with  increased  aversion,  she  ac- 
cused him  of  the  crime,  and  as  he  disdained  to  vindicate  his  innocence, 
his  hands  were  cut  off  as  a  punishment,  but  they  were  restored  to 
him  by  Jaganna'th.  The  woman  burnt  herself,  on  her  husband's 
funeral  pile,  which  Sadhna  observing,  exclaimed  ;  "  No  one  knows  the 
ways  of  women,  she  kills  her  husband,  and  becomes  a  Sati,"  which 
phrase  has  passed  into  a  proverb.  What  peculiarity  of  doctrine  he 
introduced  amongst  the  Vaishnavas  of  his  tribe,  is  no  where  parti- 
cularised. 

Ma'dho  is  said  to  have  been  an  ascetic,  who  founded  an  order  of  men- 
dicants called  Mddhavis  :  they  are  said  to  travel  about  always  with  a 
Saroda  or  Balian,  stringed  instruments  of  the  guitar  kind,  and  to  ac- 
company their  solicitations  with  song  and  music  :  they  are  rarely  if  ever 
to  be  met  with,  and  their  peculiarity  of  doctrine  is  not  known.  The 
founder  appears  to  be  the  same  with  the  Ma'dhoji  of  the  Bhakta  Maid, 
who  was  an  inhabitant  of  Garagerh,  but  there  are  several  celebrat- 
ed ascetics  of  the  same  name,  especially  a  Ma'dho  Da's,  a  Brahman  of 
Kanoj,  who  was  a  man  of  considerable  learning,  and  spent  some  time 
in  Orissa  and  Vrindavan.     He  was   probably  a  follower  of  Chaitanta. 

*  See  the  Story  oi  Harischandra  in  Ward,  Vol.  1,  p.  16.  Note. 


115 
SANYASIS,  VAIRAGIS,  &c. 


Much  confusion  prevails  in  speaking  of  the  mendicant  and  monastic 
orders  of  the  Hindus,  by  the  indiscriminate  use  of  the  terms  prefixed  to 
this  division  of  our  subject,  and  from  considering  them  as  specific 
denominations.  They  are,  on  the  contrary,  generic  terms,  and  equally 
apphcable  to  any  of  the  erratic  beggars  of  the  Hindus,  be  they  of  what 
religious  order  they  may :  they  signify,  in  fact,  nothing  more  than  a 
man,  who  has  abandoned  the  world,  or  has  overcome  his  passions,  and 
are  therefore  equally  suitable  to  any  of  the  religious  vagrants  we  meet 
with  in  Hindustan  :  the  term  Fakir  is  of  equally  general  application  and 
import,  although  it  is  of  Mohammedan  origin,  and  in  strictness,  more 
descriptive  of  the  holy  beggars  of  that  faith. 

Although,  however,  Sanydsis  and  Vairdgis,  and  other  similar  deno- 
minations are  used,  and  correctly  used  in  a  wide  acceptation,  yet  we 
occasionally  do  find  them  limited  in  meaning,  and  designating  distinct 
and  inimical  bodies  of  men.  When  this  is  the  case,  it  may  be  generally 
concluded,  that  the  Sanydsis  imply  the  mendicant  followers  of  Siva, 
and  the  Vairdgis  those  of  Vishnu. 

The  distinction  thus  made  requires,  at  its  outset,  a  peculiar  excep- 
tion, for  besides  the  indiscriminate  application  of  the  term  Sanydsi  to  the 
Vaishnavas,  as  well  as  other  mendicants  ;  there  is  a  particular  class  of 
them  to  whom  it  really  appertains,  these  are  the  Tridandis,  or  Tridandi 
Sanydsis. 

The  word  Danda  originally  imports  a  staff,  and  it  figuratively  signi- 
fies moral  restraint ;  exercised  in  three  ways  especially,  or  in  the  control 
of  speech,  body,  and  mind;  or  word,  deed,  and  thought :  a  joint  refer- 
ence to  the  literal  and  figurative  sense  of  the  term  has  given  rise  to  a 
religious  distinction  termed  Danda  Grahanam,  the  taking  up  of  the 
staff,  or  adopting  the  exercise  of  the  moral  restraints  above-mentioned, 
and  carrying,  as  emblematic  of  such  a  purpose,  either  one,  or,  as  in  the 
present  instance,  three  small  wands  or  staves.  Tridandi  designates  both 
these  characteristics  of  the  order. 

Tridandi  Sanydsis  are  such  members  of  the  Rdmdnuja,  or  Sri  Vaishnava 
sect,  as  have  past  through  the  two  first  states  of  the  Brahmanical  order, 
and  entered  that  of  the  Sanydsi,  or  the  ascetic  life  :  their  practices  are, 
in  some  other  respects,  peculiar  :  they  never  touch  metals  nor  fire,  and 


116 

subsist  upon  food  obtained  as  alms  from  the  family  Brahmans  of  the 
Sri  Vaishnava  faith  alone  :  they  are  of  a  less  erratic  disposition  than 
most  other  mendicants,  and  are  rarely  met  with  in  upper  India  :  they 
are  found  in  considerable  numbers,  and  of  high  character,  in  the  South  : 
in  their  general  practices,  their  religious  worship,  and  philosophical 
tenets,  they  conform  to  the  institutes  and  doctrines  of  Ra'ma'nuja. 


VAIRAGIS. 


llie  term  Vairdgi  implies  a  person  devoid  of  passion,*  and  is  there- 
fore correctly  applicable  to  every  religious  mendicant,  who  affects  to 
have  estranged  himself  from  the  interests  and  emotions  of  mankind. 
Virakta,  the  dispassionate,  and  Avadhuta,  the  liberated,  have  a  similar 
import,  and  are  therefore  equally  susceptible  of  a  general  application  : 
they  are,  indeed,  so  used  in  many  cases,  but  it  is  more  usual  to  attach 
a  more  precise  sense  to  the  terms,  and  to  designate  by  them  the  mendi- 
cant Vaishnavas  of  the  Rdmdnandi  class,  or  its  ramifications,  as  the 
disciples  of  Kabir,  Dadu,  and  others. 

The  ascetic  order  of  the  Rdmdnandi  Vaishnavas,  is  considered  to  have 
been  instituted  especially  by  the  twelfth  disciple  of  Ra'ma'nand,  Ski 
Anand  :  they  profess  perpetual  poverty  and  continence,  and  subsist 
upon  alms  :  the  greater  number  of  them  are  erratic,  and  observe  no 
form  of  worship,  but  they  are  also  residents  in  the  Mafhs  of  their  res- 
pective orders,t  and  the  spiritual  guides  of  the  worldly  votaries  ;  it  is 
almost  impossible,  however,  to  give  any  general  character  of  these 
Vairdgis,  as,  although  united  generally  by  the  watch-word  of  Vishnu, 
or  his  incarnations,   there  are  endless  varieties  both  of  doctrine  and 

*  From  Vi  privative  prefix,  and  RAga  passion. 

t  The  Ramunandi  Vairugis,  although  indigenous  in  upper  India,  have  established 
themselves  in  the  Dekhin,  as  mentioned  by  Buchanan,  (Mysore,  2.  76.)  the  account 
he  gives  there  of  the  Dekhini  Vairdgis,  is  an  excellent  illustration  of  the  confusion  that 
prevails  respecting  the  application  of  the  term;  as  he  has  blended  with  the  Rdmdnandi 
ascetics,  who  are  accurately  entitled  to  the  designation,  a  variety  of  religious  vagrants, 
to  some  of  whom  the  name  is  rarely,  and  to  others  never  applied  :  as  Paramahansas, 
Digambaras,  or  Nugas,  Vrddhavdhus,  and  even  Aghoris ;  the  latter  are  not  named, 
but  they,  or  similar  Saiva  mendicants  are  the  only  individuals  "  who  extort  compas- 
sion by  burning  themselves  with  tourches,  and  cutting  themselves  with  swords." 


117 

practice  amongst  them  :  those  who  are  collected  in  Mat'hs,  are  of  more 
fixed  principles  than  their  vagrant  brethren,  amongst  whom  individuals 
are  constantly  appearing  in  some  new  form  with  regard  to  the  deity 
they  worship,  or  the  practices  they  follow.* 


NAGAS. 


All  the  sects  include  a  division  under  this  denomination.  The  Ndgas 
are  of  the  same  description  as  the  Vairdgis,  or  Sanydsis,  in  all  essential 
points,  but  in  their  excess  of  zeal,  they  carry  their  secession  from  ordinary 
manners  so  far,  as  to  leave  oflp  every  kind  of  covering,  and,  as  their  name 
signifies,  go  naked ;  there  are,  however,  other  points  in  which  they  diflfer 
from  the  general  character  of  Hindu  mendicants,  and  they  are  unques- 
tionably the  most  worthless  and  profligate  members  of  their  respective 
religions. 

A  striking  proof  of  their  propensities  is  their  use  of  arms.  They  always 
travel  with  weapons,  usually  a  matchlock  and  sword  and  shield,  and  that 
these  implements  are  not  carried  in  vain  has  been  shewn  on  various 
occasions  :  the  sanguinary  conflicts  of  opposite  sects  of  Hindu  mendi- 

*  Such  are  the  Sitd  Padres,  Ramati  Rams,  and  others;  also  the  new  and  scarcely 
yet  known  sects  Gulal  Ddsis,  and  Derya  Ddsis  :  mention  is  also  made  in  the  Dahis- 
tan,  of  a  number  of  Hindu  mendicants,  who  are  no  longer  numerous,  if  ever  to  be  en- 
countered. It  is  not  possible  in  general,  however,  to  discriminate  the  classes  to  which 
they  belong,  as  in  the  descriptions  given  by  the  writer,  he  usually  confines  himself 
to  a  few  peculiarities  of  practice  that  afford  no  guide  to  the  principles  of  the  sect,  and 
as  in  the  case  of  the  Dhers,  he  confounds  the  distinction  of  caste,  or  occupation  with 
that  of  religious  belief.  Many  of  the  vagrant  ascetics  whom  he  notices  belong  also  rather 
to  the  Mohammedan,  than  the  Hindu  religion,  as  in  the  followers  of  Sheikh  Bedia  al 
Din  Medau— who,  although  they  credit  the  divine  mission  of  Mohammed,  disregard 
the  established  forms  of  the  Musselman  faith,  chew  Bheng,  and  go  naked,  smearing 
their  bodies  with  Vibhut,  or  the  ashes  of  burnt  cow-dung,  and  twisting  their  hair  into 
the  Jatd,  or  braid  worn  by  Hindu  ascetics— except  as  professed  worshippers  of 
Niranjan,  or  the  indescribable  deity,  and  a  belief  in  magic,  these  mendicants  have 
little  in  common  with  the  Hindu  religion,  or  perhaps  with  any,  although,  with  a 
facility  of  which  innumerable  instances  occur  in  Hindustan,  they  have  adopted  many 
of  the  Hindu  practices.  The  tomb  of  Skeikh  Medar  is  still  to  be  seen  at  Makhenpur, 
near  Firozahad,  in  the  Doab — where,  at  the  time  of  the  Dahistan,  an  annual  meeting 
of  his  disciples  was  held.  The  tomb  is  an  extensive  building,  though  in  decay.  The 
Dahistan,  although  it  contains  many  curious,  and  some  correct  notices  of  the  Hindu 
religion,  affords  too  loose  and  inaccurate  a  description  to  be  consulted  with  advantage. 


118 

cants,  have  been  described  in  several  publications,  with  the  customary- 
indistinctness  as  to  the  parties  concerned :  these  parties  are  the  Vaish- 
nava  and  Saiva  Ndgas  chiefly,  assisted  and  probably  instigated  by  the 
Vairdgi  and  Sanydsi  members  of  those  two  sects,  and  aided  by  abandon- 
ed characters  from  all  the  schisms  connected  respectively  with  the  one 
or  the  other  :*  it  would,  however,  be  doing  an  injustice  to  the  mendi- 
cant orders  of  any  sect,  to  suppose  that  they  are  universally  or  even 
generally  implicated  in  these  atrocious  affrays. 

*  As.  Res.  vi.  317,  and  xii.  455  ;  an  occurrence  of  a  similar  nature  is  recorded  by 
the  author  of  the  Dabistan,  who  mentions,  that  in  1050  of  the  Hijra,  a  severe  conflict 
took  place  at  Dwaraka,  between  a  set  of  Vaishnava  ascetics  termed  Mundis,  from 
shaving  their  heads,  and  the  Sanydsis,  in  which  a  great  number  of  the  former  were 
slain. 


PART    SECOND. 


SAIVAS. 


In  the  former  communication  on  this  subject,  which  I  had  the 
honour  to  lay  before  the  Society,  I  attempted  to  convey  a  notion  of  the 
different  classes  amongst  which  the  numerous  worshippers  of  Vishnu 
are  distributed.  In  my  present,  I  propose  to  complete  my  task,  and 
commencing  with  the  followers  of  Siva  and  of  Sakti,  conclude  with 
those  sects  which  are  of  a  miscellaneous  and  less  orthodox  description. 

The  worship  of  Siva  in  the  districts  along  the  Ganges,  presents 
itself  under  a  very  different  aspect  from  that  of  Vishnu,  and  with  some 
singular  anomalies.  It  appears  to  be  the  most  prevalent  and  popular 
of  all  the  modes  of  adoration,  to  judge  by  the  number  of  shrines  dedi- 
cated to  the  only  form  under  which  Siva  is  reverenced,  that  of  the 
Linga ;  yet  it  will  be  generally  observed,  that  these  temples  are  scarcely 
ever  the  resort  of  numerous  votaries,  and  that  they  are  regarded  with 
comparatively  little  veneration  by  the  Hindus.  Benares,  indeed,  fur- 
nishes exception,  and  the  temple  of  Visweswara^  is  thronged  with  a 
never-ceasing  crowd  of  adorers.  There  is,  however,  little  solemnity  or 
veneration  in  the  hurried  manner  in  which  they  throw  their  flowers  or 

*  "  The  Lord  of  all,"  an  epithet  of  Siva,  represented  as  usual  by  a  Linga.  It  is 
one  of  the  twelve  principal  emblems  of  this  description,  and  has  been,  for  many  cen- 
turies, the  chief  object  of  veneration  at  Kasi  or  Benares.  The  old  temple  was  par- 
tially destroyed  by  the  Mohammedans  in  the  reign  of  Aurengzeb  :  the  present  was 
built  by  Ahalya  Baf,  the  Mahratta  Princess,  and  although  small  and  without  pre- 
tension to  magnificence,  is  remarkable  for  the  minute  beauty  of  its  architectural 
embellishments. 


120 

fruits  before  the  image  ;*  and  there  are  other  temples,  the  dwellings  of 
other  divinities,  that  rival  the  abode  of  Visweswara  in  popular  attraction. 

The  adoration  of  Siva,  indeed,  has  never  assumed,  in  upper  India,  a 
popular  form.  He  appears  in  his  shrines  only  in  an  unattractive  and 
rude  emblem,  the  mystic  purpose  of  which  is  little  understood,  or  regard- 
ed by  the  uninitiated  and  vulgar,  and  which  offers  nothing  to  interest 
the  feelings  or  excite  the  imagination.  No  legends  are  recorded  of 
this  deity  of  a  poetic  and  pleasing  character  ;  and  above  all,  such  legends 
as  are  narrated  in  the  Puranas  and  Tantras,  have  not  been  presented  to 
the  Hindus  in  any  accessible  shape.  The  Saivas  have  no  works  in  any  of 
the  common  dialects,  like  the  Rdmdyana,  the  Bdrtta,  or  the  Bhakta  Mdld. 
Indeed,  as  far  as  any  enquiry  has  yet  been  instituted,  no  work  whatever 
exists,  in  any  vernacular  dialect,  in  which  the  actions  of  Siva,  in  any 
of  his  forms,  are  celebrated.  It  must  be  kept  in  mind,  however,  that 
these  observations  are  intended  to  apply  only  to  Gangetic  Hindustan, 
for  in  the  South  of  India,  as  we  shall  hereafter  see,  popular  legends 
relating  to  local  manifestations  of  Siva,  are  not  uncommon. 

Corresponding  to  the  absence  of  multiplied  forms  of  this  divinity, 
as  objects  of  worship,  and  to  the  want  of  those  works  which  attach 
importance  to  particular  manifestations  of  the  favourite  god,  the  people 
can  scarcely  be  said  to  be  divided  into  diff"erent  sects,  any  farther  than 
as  they  may  have  certain  religious  mendicants  for  their  spiritual  guides. 
Actual  divisions  of  the  worshippers  of  Siva  are  almost  restricted  to 
these  religious  personages,  collected  sometimes,  in  opulent  and  nu- 
merous associations ;  but  for  the  greater  part  detached,  few,  and  in- 
digent.    There  are  no  establishments   amongst   the    Saivas   of   Hin- 

*  A  Hindu  temple  comprises  an  outer  court,  usually  a  quadrangle,  sometimes 
surrounded  by  a  piazza;  and  a  central  edifice  constituting  the  shrine.  This,  which  in 
upper  India  is  generally  of  small  dimensions,  is  divided  into  two  parts,  the  Sabha, 
or  vestibule ;  and  the  Garhhagriha,  or  adytum,  in  which  the  Image  is  placed.  The 
course  of  worship  is  the  circumambulating  of  the  temple,  keeping  the  right  hand  to 
it,  as  often  as  the  devotee  pleases:  the  worshipper  then  enters  the  vestibule,  and  if  a 
bell  is  suspended  there,  as  is  commonly  the  case,  strikes  two  or  three  times  upon  it. 
He  then  advances  to  the  threshhold  of  the  shrine,  presents  his  offering,  which  the 
officiating  Brahman  receives,  mutters  inaudibly  a  short  prayer,  accompanied  with 
prostration,  or  simply  with  the  act  of  lifting  the  hands  to  the  forehead,  and  departs. 
There  is  nothing  like  a  religious  service,  and  the  rapid  manner  in  which  the  whole  is 
performed,  the  quick  succession  of  worshippers,  the  gloomy  aspect  of  the  shrine,  and 
the  scattering  about  of  water,  oil,  and  faded  flowers,  inspire  any  thing  but  feelings 
of  reverence  or  devotion. 


121 

dustan,  like  those  of  Srindth  or  Puri ;  no  individuals  as  wealthy  as 
the  Gokulastha  Gosains,  nor  even  as  influential  as  the  descendants  of 
Adwaita  and  Nitya'nand.  There  are  no  teachers  of  ancient  repute 
except  Sankara  Acha'rya,  and  his  doctrines  are  too  philosophical 
and  speculative  to  have  made  him  popular. 

The  worship  of  Siva  continues,  in  fact,  to  be  what  it  appears  to  have 
been  from  a  remote  period,  the  religion  of  the  Brahmanas."^  Sambou 
is  declared,  by  Menu,  to  be  the  presiding  deity  of  the  Brahmanical 
order,  and  the  greater  number  of  them,  particularly  those  who  practice 
the  rites  of  the  Vedas,  or  who  profess  the  study  of  the  Sastras,  receive 
Siva  as  their  tutelary  deity,  wear  his  insignia,  and  worship  the  Linga, 
either  in  temples,  in  their  houses,  or  on  the  side  of  a  sacred  stream, 
providing,  in  the  latter  case,  extempore  emblems  kneaded  out  of  the 
mud  or  clay  of  the  river's  bed.  The  example  of  the  Brahmans,  and  the 
practice  of  ages,  maintain  the  veneration  universally  offered  to  the  type 
of  Siva  ;  but  it  is  not  the  prevailing,  nor  the  popular  condition  of  the 
Hindu  faith,  along  the  banks  of  the  Ganges.  We  shall  now  proceed  to 
specify  the  different  classes  into  which  the  worshippers  of  Siva,  as  dis- 
tinct from  the  mass  of  Brahmans,  may  be  distinguished. 


DANDIS  AND  DASNAMIS. 


It  is  customary  to  consider  these  two  orders  as  forming  but  one 
division.  The  classification  is  not,  in  every  instance,  correct,  but 
the  practices  of  the  two  are,  in  many  instances,  blended,  and  both 
denominations  are  accurately  applicable  to  the  same  individual.  It  will 
not  be  necessary,  therefore,  to  deviate  from  the  ordinary  enumeration. 

The  Dandis,  properly  so  called,  and  the  Tridandis  of  the  Vaishnavas, 
are  the  only  legitimate  representatives  of  the  fourth  Asrama,  or  men- 
dicant life,  into  which  the  Hindu,  according  to  the  instructions  of  his 
inspired   legislators,  is   to  enter,  after  passing  through  the   previous 

*  See  a  preceding  Nole  — A.  K.  vol.  XVI.  page  2. 

R 


122 

stages  of  student,  householder  and  hermit.*  It  is  not  necessary,  how- 
ever, to  have  gone  through  the  whole  of  the  previous  career,  as  the 
Brahman  may  pass  from  any  one  of  the  first  orders  to  the  last  at 
once  ;t  he  is  then  to  take  up  his  staff  and  water  pot,  to  derive  from 
begging  such  a  portion  of  food  as  is  sufficient  for  his  mere  sustenance, 
and.  to  devote  the  remainder  of  his  day  to  holy  study  and  pious 
meditation.  J 

Adopting,  as  a  general  guide,  the  rules  of  original  works,  the  Dandi 
is  distinguished  by  carrying  a  small  Dand,  or  wand,  with  several  pro- 
cesses or  projections  from  it,  and  a  piece  of  cloth  dyed  with  red  ochre, 
in  which  the  Brahmanical  cord  is  supposed  to  be  enshrined,  attached  to 

*  Thus  Menu,  6,  33. 

"Having  thus  performed  religious  acts  in  a  forest  during  the  third  portion  of  his 
life,  let  him  become  a  Sanydsi,  for  the  fourth  portion  of  it,  abandoning  all  sensual 
affection. 

t  So  Menu,  as  expounded  by  Kulluka  Bhatta,  6,  38. 

f'^'^sm^  ir^^fT  ^^T^T  ^^^T  CiTT  ft^T  I 

"  Having  performed  the  sacrifice  of  Prdjdpati,  &c.  a  Brahman  may  proceed  from 
his  house,  that  is,  from  the  second  order,  or  he  may  proceed  even  from  the  first  to  the 
condition  of  a  Sanydsi."  Indeed  the  intermediate  stage  of  the  FanajJrastha  is  amongst 
the  prohibited  acts  in  the  Kali  age. 

X  Agreeably  to  the  high  authority  already  quoted,  6,  41,  &c. 


"  Departing  from  his  house,  taking  with  him  pure  implements,  his  water- pot,  and 
staff,  keeping  silence,  unallured  by  desire  of  objects  near  him,  let  him  enter  into  the 
fourth  order." 

"  Let  him  have  no  culinary  fire,  no  domicile,  let  him  when  very  hungry,  go  to  the 
town  for  food,  let  him  patiently  bear  disease,  let  him  study  to  know  God,  and  fix  his 
attention  on  God  alone." 


123 

it :  he  shaves  his  hair  and  beard,  wears  only  a  cloth  round  his  loins, 
and  subsists  upon  food  obtained  ready-  dressed  from  the  houses  of  the 
Brahmanas  once  a  day  only,  which  he  deposits  in  the  small  clay  pot  that 
he  carries  always  with  him :  he  should  live  alone,  and  near  to,  but  not 
within  a  city ;  but  this  rule  is  rarely  observed,  and  in  general  the  Dandis 
are  found  in  cities  collected  like  other  mendicants  in  Maths.^  The 
Dandi  has  no  particular  time  or  mode  of  worship,  but  spends  his  time 
in  meditation,  or  in  practices  corresponding  with  those  of  the  Yoga, 
and  in  the  study  of  the  Vedanta  works,  especially  according  to  the 
comments  of  Sankara'cha'rya.  As  that  teacher  was  an  incarnation  of 
SivA,t  the  Dandis  reverence  that  deity  and  his  incarnations,  in  pre- 
ference to  the  other  members  of  the  Triad,  whence  they  are  included 

*  These  are  all  founded  on  the  following  texts  of  Menu  :  — 

"  His  hair,  nails  and  beard  being  clipped,  bearing  with  him  a  dish,  a  staff,  and  a 
water-pot,  let  him  wander  about  continually  without  giving  pain  to  any  being."  52. 

"  Only  once  a  day  let  him  demand  food,  let  him  not  habituate  himself  to  eat  much  at 
a  time,  for  an  anchorite  habituated  to  eat  much,  becomes  inclined  to  sensual  gratifica- 
tion."    55. 

"  At  the  time  when  the  smoke  of  kitchen  fires  has  ceased,  when  the  pestle  lies 
motionless,  when  the  burning  charcoal  is  extinguished,  when  people  have  eaten  and 
when  dishes  are  removed,  that  is,  late  in  the  day,  let  the  Sanyasi  always  beg  food." 

"  For  missing  it  let  him  not  be  sorrowful,  nor  for  gaining  it,  let  him  be  glad,  let 
him  care  only  for  a  sufficiency  to  support  life,  but  let  him  not  be  anxious  about  his 
utensils."  57,  Menu  6. 

f  This  character  is  given  to  him  in  the  Sankara  Vijaya  of  Ma'dhava  Acha'rya  ; 
his  followers  in  the  Dekhin  assert  that  Siva's  descent  as  Sankara,  was  foretold  in 
the  Skanda  Purdna :  a  prophecy  which,  if  found  in  that  work,  will  assist  to  fix  its 
date,  but  the  passage  has  not  been  met  with. 


124 

amongst  his  votaries ;  and  they  so  far  admit  the  distinction  as  not 
unfrequently  to  bear  the  Saiva  mark  upon  the  forehead,  smearing  it 
with  the  Tripundra,  a  triple  transverse  hne  made  with  the  Fibhilti,  or 
ashes  which  should  be  taken  from  the  lire  of  an  Agnihotra  Brahman,  or 
they  may  be  the  ashes  of  burnt  cowdung  from  an  oblation  oifered  to  the 
god.*  They  also  adopt  the  initiating  Mantra  of  all  the  Saiva  classes, 
either  the  five  or  six  syllable  Mantra,  "  Nama  Sivdya,"  or,  "  Om,  Kama 
Sivdya."  The  genuine  Dandi,  however,  is  not  necessarily  of  the  Saiva 
or  any  other  sect ;  and  in  their  establishments  it  will  be  usually  found 
that  they  profess  to  adore  Nirguna  or  Niranjana,  the  deity  devoid  of 
attribute  or  passion. f 

*  The  material,  or  Vihhuti,  and  the  efficacy  of  the  mark,  the  Tripundra,  are  thus 
described  in  the  Kiisikhanda — 


The  ashes  of  fire  made  with  burnt  cowdung,  are  the  material  fittest  for  the  Tri- 
pu7idra. 

Whoever  marks  the  Tripundra  with  ashes,  agreeably  to  rule,  is  purified  from  sins  of 
the  first  and  second  degree:  who  makes  it  on  his  forehead  without  the  Mantras,  being 
ignorant  of  its  virtue,  will  be  purified  from  every  simple  sin.  The  mode  of  making  i°t 
is  thus  laid  down  : 

^T^^  ^5F?K^^  ?fTqr^^T  ^^f  ^J^^t:  I 
JT^ifm^fTf^^Tl^^'^Trf^i'^fT  irf?!%liTrr;  II 

Beginning  between  the  eye-brows,  and  carrying  it  to  their  extremity,  the  mark  made 
with  the  thumb  reverted  between  the  middle  and  third  fingers,  is  called  the  Tripundra. 

t  The  Dandis  of  the  North  of  India  are  the  Sanydsis,  or  monastic  portion  of  the 
Smartal  Br  akmanas  of  the  South,  of  whom  Buchanan  gives  the  following  account; 
"  The  most  numerous  class  here,  and  which  comprehends  about  one-half  of  all  the 
Brahmans  in  the  Lower  Carnatic,  is  called  the  Smartal  sect,  and  its  members  are 
the  followers  of  Sankara  Acha'rya.     They  are  commonly  said  to  be  of  the  sect  of 


125 

The  Dandis,  who  are  rather  practical  than  speculative,  and  who  have 
little  pretence  to  the  appellation  beyond  the  epithet  and  outward  signs 
of  the  order,  are  those  most  correctly  included  amongst  the  Saiva 
sects.  Amongst  these,  the  worship  of  Siva,  as  Bhairava,  is  the  pre- 
vailing form,  and  in  that  case  part  of  the  ceremony  of  initiation  consists  in 
inflicting  a  small  incision  on  the  inner  part  of  the  knee,  and  drawing  the 
blood  of  the  novice  as  an  acceptable  offering  to  the  god.  The  Dandis 
of  every  description,  have  also  a  peculiar  mode  of  disposing  of  their 
dead,  putting  them  into  coffins  and  burying  them  ;  or  when  practicable, 
committing  them  to  some  sacred  stream.  The  reason  of  this  is  their 
being  prohibited  the  use  of  fire  on  any  account.* 

Any  Hindu  of  the  three  first  classes  may  become  Sanydsi  or  Dandi, 
or,  in  these  degenerate  days,  a  Hindu  of  any  caste  may  adopt  the  life 
and  emblems  of  this  order.  Such  are  sometimes  met  with,  as  also  are 
Brahmans,  who,  without  connecting  themselves  with  any  community, 
assume  the  character  of  this  class  of  mendicants.  These  constitute 
the  Dandis  simply  so  termed,  and  are  regarded  as  distinct  from  the 
primitive  members  of  the  order,  to  whom  the  appellation  of  Dasndmis  is 
also  applied,  and  who  admit  none  but  Brahmans  into  their  fraternity. 

The  Dasindmi  Dandis,  who  are  regarded  as  the  descendants  of  the 
original  members  of  the  fraternity,  are  said  to  refer  their  origin  to 
S ANKARA  Acha'rya,  au  individual  who  appears  to  have  performed 
a  part  of  some  importance  in  the  religious  history  of  Hindustan ;  and 
to  whom  an  influence  has  been  often  attributed  much  exceeding  that 
which  he  really  exercised.  His  biography,  like  that  of  most  of  the 
Hindu  saints,  is  involved  in  considerable  obscurity  ;  but  a  few  facts 
may  be  gleaned  from  such  accounts  as  we  have  of  him,  upon  which 
reliance  may  be  placed,  and  to  which  it  may  not  be  uninteresting  here 
briefly  to  advert. 

Siva,  but  they  consider  Brahma,  Vishnu  and  Iswara  to  be  the  same  as  the  creator, 
preserver,  and  destroyer  of  the  universe.  They  are  readily  distinguished  by  three 
horizontal  stripes  on  the  forehead,  made  with  the  ashes  of  cowdung."  (  Buch.  I.  13) 
"  The  Sanydsis  are  the  Gums  of  this  sect;"  (Ibid,  305)  and  the  Dandis  have  great 
influence  and  authority  amongst  Saiva  Brahmans  of  the  North  of  India. 

*  In  the  South,  the  ascetic  followers  of  both  Siva  and  Vishnu  bury  the  dead; 
(Dubois,  56)  so  do  the  Faishnava  Fair dgis  and  Sanydsis  in  the  North  of  India,  and 
the  Saiva  Jogis.  The  class  of  Hindu  weavers  called  Fo^'W,  have  adopted  a  similar 
practice;  (Ward  I,  201)  all  the  castes  in  the  South,  that  wear  the  Lm^-a,  do  the 
same,  (Buch.  I.  27.) 


126 

A  number  of  works  are  current  in  the  South  of  India  relating  to 
this  teacher,  under  the  titles  of  Sankara  Cheritra,  Sankara  Kathd, 
Sankara  Vijaya,  or  Sankara  Digvijaya,  following  much  the  same 
course  of  narration,  and  detailing  little  more  than  Sankara's  con- 
troversial victories  over  various  sects ;  in  most  cases,  no  doubt,  the 
fictions  of  the  writers.  Of  the  two  principal  works  of  the  class,  one 
attributed  to  Anandagiri,  a  pupil  of  Sankara,  has  already  been 
noticed.*  The  other  is  the  work  of  Ma'dhava  Acha'rya,  the  minister 
of  some  of  the  earliest  chiefs  of  Vijayanagar,  and  who  dates,  accord- 
ingly, in  the  fourteenth  century.  This  is  a  composition  of  high 
literary  and  polemical  pretension,  but  not  equally  high  biographical 
value.  Some  particulars  of  Sankara's  birth  and  early  life  are  to  be 
found  in  the  Kerala  Utpatti,  or  political  and  statistical  description 
of  Malabar,  although  the  work  is  sometimes  said  to  have  been  com- 
posed by  Sankara  himself. 

With  regard  to  the  place  of  Sankara's  birth,  and  the  tribe  of 
which  he  was  a  member,  most  accounts  agree  to  make  him  a  native 
of  Kerala,  or  Malabar,  of  the  tribe  of  Namburi  Brahmans,  and  in  the 
mythological  language  of  the  sect,  an  incarnation  of  Siva.  According 
to  other  traditions,  he  was  born  at  Chidambaram,  although  he  trans- 
ferred his  residence  to  Malabar ;  whilst  the  Kerala  Utpatti  recognises 
Malabar  as  his  native  place,  and  calls  him  the  offspring  of  adultery, 
for  which  his  mother  Sri  Mahadevi  was  expelled  her  caste. 

In  Malabar,  he  is  said  to  have  divided  the  four  original  castes  into 
seventy-two,  or  eighteen  sub-divisions  each,  and  to  have  assigned  them 
their  respective  rites  and  duties.  Notwithstanding  this,  he  seems  to 
have  met  with  particular  disrespect,  either  on  account  of  his  opinions, 
origin,  or  his  wandering  life.  On  his  return  home,  on  one  occasion, 
his  mother  died,  and  he  had  to  perform  the  funeral  rites,  for  which  his 
relations  refused  to  supply  him  with  fire,  and  at  which  all  the  Brahmans 
declined  to  assist.  Sankara  then  produced  fire  from  his  arm,  and  burnt 
the  corpse  in  the  court  yard  of  the  house,  denouncing  imprecations 
on  the  country,  to  the  effect,  that  the  Brahmans  there  should  not  study 
the  Vedas,  that  religious  mendicants  should  never  obtain  alms,  and 
that  the  dead  should  always  be  burned  close  to  the  houses  in  which 
they  had  resided—a  custom  which  is  said  to  have  survived  him.. 
*  See  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  XVI.  page  10. 


127 

All  accounts  concur  in  representing  Sankara  as  leading  an  erratic 
life,  and  engaging  in  successful  controversy  with  various  sects,  whether 
of  the  Saiva,  Vaishnava,  or  less  orthodox  persuasions.  In  the  course 
of  his  peregrinations,  he  established  several  Maths,  or  convents,  under 
the  presidence  of  his  disciples,  particularly  one  still  flourishing  at 
Sringeri,  or  Sringagiri,  on  the  western  Ghats,  near  the  sources  of  the 
Tungabhadrd.  Towards  the  close  of  his  life,  he  repaired  as  far  as  to 
Kashmir,  and  seated  himself,  after  triumphing  over  various  opponents, 
on  the  throne  of  Saraswati.  He  next  went  to  Badarihdsrama,  and 
finally  to  Kedarndth,  in  the  Himalaya,  where  he  died  at  the  early  age 
of  thirty-two.  The  events  of  his  last  days  are  confirmed  by  local 
traditions,  and  the  Pitha,  or  throne  of  Saraswati,  on  which  Sankara 
sat,  is  still  shown  in  Kashmir ;  whilst  at  the  temple  of  Siva,  at  Badari, 
a  Malabar  Brahman,  of  the  Namhuri  tribe,  has  always  been  the  officia- 
ting priest.* 

The  influence  exercised  by  Sankara  in  person,  has  been  perpetuated 
by  his  writings,  the  most  eminent  of  which  are  his  Bhdshyas,  or  Com- 
mentaries on  the  Sutras,  or  Aphorisms  of  Vya'sa.  A  Commentary  on 
the  Bhagavad  Gita,  is  also  ascribed  to  him,  as  is  one  on  the  Nrisinha 
Tapaniya  Upanishad :  a  cento  of  verses  in  praise  of  Durga,  the  Saun- 
daryd  Lahari,  is  likewise  said  to  be  his  composition,  as  sometimes  is  the 
Amru  Sataka,  a  collection  of  amatory  stanzas,  written  in  the  name  of 
A  MRU,  a  Prince,  whose  dead  body  Sankara  is  fabled  to  have  animated, 
that  by  becoming  familiarised  with  sensual  enjoyments,  he  might 
argue  upon  such  topics  with  the  wife  of  Madana  Misra,  who  was  more 
than  equal  to  him  in  discussions  of  this  nature,  and  was  the  only  dis- 
putant he  was  unable  to  subdue,  until  the  period  of  his  transmigration 
had  expired,  and  he  had  thence  become  practised  in  the  gratification 
of  the  passions. 

Although  no  doubt  of  Sankara's  existence,  or  of  the  important  part 
performed  by  him  in  the  partial  re- modelling  of  the  Hindu  system,  can 
be  entertained,  yet  the  exact  period  at  which  he  flourished  can  by  no 
means  be  determined.  I  have,  in  another  place,  expressed  my  belief 
that  he  may  have  existed  about  the  eighth  or  ninth  century  .f  Subse- 
quent enquiry  has  failed  to  add  any  reasons  to  those  assigned  for  such  an 

*  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  XI I.  page  536. 

t  Preface  to  the  Sanscrit  Dictionary,  page  XVII. 


128 


inference  ;  but  it  has  offered  nothing  to  weaken  or  invalidate  the  con- 
clusion there  proposed,* 

The  spiritual  descendants  of  Sankara,  in  the  first  degree,  are  vari- 
ously named  by  different  authorities,  but  usually  agree  in  the  number. 
He  is  said  to  have  had  four  principal  disciples,  who,  in  the  popular 
traditions,  are  called  Padmapdda,  Hastdmalnka,  Sureswara  or  Mandana, 
and  Trotaka.  Of  these,  the  first  had  two  pupils,  Tirtha  and  Asrama ; 
the  second,  Vana  and  Aranya ;  the  third  had  three,  Saraswati,  Puri, 
and  Bhdrati ;  and  the  fourth  had  also  three,  Giri  or  Gir,  Pdrvata,  and 
Sdgara.  These,  which  being  all  significant  terms,  were  no  doubt 
adopted  names,  constitute  collectively  the  appellation  Dasndmi,  or  the 
ten-named,  and  when  a  Brahman  enters  into  either  class,  he  attaches  to 
his  own  denomination  that  of  the  class  of  which  he  becomes  a  mem- 
ber ;  as  Tirtha,   Puri,  Gir,  &c.t     The  greater  proportion  of  the  ten 

*  A  HdlaJcunara  Manuscript,  in  the  possession  of  the  late  Col.  Mackenzie,  entitled 
Sankara  Vijaya,  (Mackenzie  Collection  II,  34)  gives  the  following  list  of  the  spiri- 
tual heads  of  the  Sringeri  establishment : 


1.  Govinda  Pada. 

2.  Sankara  Acharya. 

3.  Sanandana  Acharya. 

4.  Surasura  Acharya. 

5.  Trotaka  Acharya. 

6.  Hastamalaka  Acharya. 

7.  Jnyanaghana  Acharya. 

8.  Jnyanottaina  Acharya. 

9.  Sinhagirisvvara  Acharya. 

10.  Iswaratirtha  Acharya. 

11.  >i  risinha  Miirtti  Acharya. 

12.  Vitarana  Acharya. 

13.  Vidyasankara  Acharya. 

14.  Bharati  Krishna  Acharya. 

15.  Vidyasanya  Achraya. 

16.  Chandra  Sekhara  Acharya. 


17.  Nrisinha  Bharati  Acharya. 

18.  Sankara  Bharati  Acharya. 

19.  Nrisinha  Bharati  Acharya. 

20.  Purushottoma  Bharati  Acharya. 

21.  llamachandra  Bharuti   Acharya. 

22.  Nrisinha  Bharati  Acharya. 

23.  Immadi  Bharatf  Acharya. 

24.  Abhinava  Nrisinha  Bharati  Acharya. 

25.  Sachchidananda  Bharati  Acharya. 

26.  Nrisinha  Bhkrati  Acharya. 

27.  Iminadi     Sachchidananda    Bharati 
Acharya. 

28.  Abhinava  Sachchidananda  Bharatia 
Acharya. 

29.  Nrisinha  Bharati  Acharva. 


This  gives  27  descents  from  Sankaka.  As  the  Mahant  is  elected  from  the  disci- 
ples, either  by  the  Guru  when  about  to  die,  or  by  the  Swumalu,  the  spiritual  chiefs 
of  other  establishments  of  the  same  sect,  he  is  raised  probably  to  the  station  in  the 
prime  of  manhood,  and  in  the  ease  and  dignity  of  his  sanctity  has  a  favourable  pros- 
pect of  a  long  life.  Twenty-five  years  to  a  Guru  may  therefore  be  but  a  fair  average 
allowance,  and  the  above  list  comprises  at  that  rate  an  interval  of  657  years  :  at  what 
period  it  closes  does  not  appear  ;  but  the  Halakanara  language  is  obsolete,  and  the 
work  is  possibly  not  less  than  two  or  three  centuries  old.  This  series  of  Gurus  is  so 
far  corroborative  of  the  view  else  where  taken  of  Sankaka's  date  ;  but  as  it  has  been 
extracted  by  a  Pandit,  from  a  work  which  1  could  not  consult  myself,  it  is  by  no 
means  certain  that  it  is  correct,  and  I  do  not  wish  to  attach  any  undue  importance  to 
the  authority. 

t  It  is  scarcely  worth  while  perhaps  to  translate  words  of  such  common  occurrence, 
but  to  prove  what  I  have  stated   in  the  text,  I   subjoin  their  signification  :   Tirtha, 


129 

classes  of  mendicants,  thus  descended  from  S Ankara.  Aciia'rya,  have 
failed  to  retain  their  purity  of  character,  and  are  only  known  by 
their  epithets  as  members  of  the  original  order.  There  are  but  three, 
and  part  of  a  fourth  mendicant  class,  or  those  called  Tirtha  or  Indra, 
Asrama,  Saraswati,  and  Bhdrati,  who  are  still  regarded  as  really 
Sankara"s  Dandis.  These  are  sufficiently  numerous,  especially  in 
and  about  Benares.  They  comprehend  a  variety  of  characters  ;  but 
amongst  the  most  respectable  of  them,  are  to  be  found  very  able 
expounders  of  the  Vedanta  works.  Other  branches  of  Sanscrit  litera- 
ture owe  important  obligations  to  this  religious  sect.*  The  most 
sturdy  beggars  are  also  members  of  this  order,  although  their  contri- 
butions are  levied  particularly  upon  the  Brahmanical  class,  as  when- 
ever a  feast  is  given  to  the  Brahmanas,  the  Dandis  of  this  description 
present  themselves  unbidden  guests,  and  can  only  be  got  rid  of  by 
bestowing  on  them  a  due  share  of  the  cates  provided  for  their  more 
worldly-minded  brethren.  Many  of  them  practice  the  Yoga,  and  pro- 
fess to  work  miracles,  although  with  less  success  than  some  members 
of  the  order  in  the  days  of  the  author  of  the  Ddbistdn,  who  specifies  one 
Dandadhdri,  as  able  to  suspend  his  breath  for  three  hours,  bring  milk 
from  his  veins,  cut  bones  with  hair,  and  put  eggs  into  a  narrow  mouth- 
ed bottle  without  breaking  them. 

The  remaining  six  and  a  half  members  of  the  Dasndmi  class,  although 
considered  as  having  fallen  from  the  purity  of  practice  necessary  to 
the  Dandi,  are  still,  in  general,  religious  characters,  and  are  usually 
denominated  Atits  •.\  the  chief  points  of  difference  between  them  and 

a  place  of  pilgrimage  ;  Asrama,  an  order,  as  that  of  student,  householder,  &c.  ;  Vana, 
a  wood  ;  Aranya,  a  wood  ;  Saraswdti,  the  goddess  of  speech  and  eloquence  ;  Puri, 
a  city  ;  Bharati,  speech,  or  its  goddess  ;  Giri,  a  mountain  ;  in  common  use  it  always 
occurs  Gir,  which  implies  speech  ;  Pdrvata,  a  mountaineer  ;  Sdgara,  an  ocean  ; 
the  names  are  always  compounded  with  different  terms.  One  of  Sankara"s  dis- 
ciples we  have  seen,  called  Ananda  Giri.  The  famous  Ma'dhava,  when  he 
became  a  Dandi,  adopted  the  appellation  of  Vi'dya'r anya.  Pu'rangir,  has  been 
elsewhere  adverted  to,  and  other  like  names  occur  in  some  of  the  following  notes. 
Bharati  is  the  prevailing  title  of  the  latter  Sringagiri  Gurus. 

*  Sankara'  and  Ma'dhava  are  well  known  by  their  numerous  and  excellent 
works.  The  chief  Vedanta  writers,  in  like  manner,  were  Dandis  ;  and  the  author 
of  the  Dasakumura,  Ra'masrama,  the  Commentator  on  Amera,  and  Vijnya'nes- 
wara,  the  Commentator  on  the  texts  of  Yajnavalkya,  were  of  the  same  class  of 
ascetics. 

t  From  ^[fTi  ^  Atithi,  a  guest,  a  temporary  dweller  upon  earth  ;  or  "^fTlff 
Atita,  past  away,  liberated  from  worldly  cares  and  feelings. 


130 

the  preceding,  are  their  abandonment  of  the  staff,  their  use  of  clothes, 
money,  and  ornaments  ;  their  preparing  their  own  food,  and  their 
admission  of  members  from  any  order  of  Hindus.  They  are  often 
collected  in  Maths,  as  well  as  the  Dandis,  but  they  mix  freely  in 
the  business  of  the  world  ;  they  carry  on  trade,  and  often  accumulate 
property,  and  they  frequently  officiate  as  priests  at  the  shrines  of 
some  of  the  deities  :*  some  of  them  even  marry,  but  in  that  case  they 
are  distinguished  by  the  term  Samyogi,  from  the  other  Atits. 

The  chief  practices  and  designations  of  the  Dandis,  as  generally 
characteristic  of  them,  have  been  already  adverted  to,  but  a  great 
variety  prevails  in  the  details. f  Their  philosophical  tenets  in  the  main, 
are  those  of  the  Vedanta  system,  as  taught  by  Sankara'  and  his  disci- 
ples ;  but  they  generally  superadd  the  practice  of  the  Yoga,  as  taught 
by  the  followers  of  Patanjali,  and  many  of  them  have  latterly  adopted 
the  doctrines  of  the  Tantras.  Besides  Sankara',  the  different  orders 
of  Dandis  hold  in  high  veneration  the  Muni  Dattatreya,  the  son  of 
Atri  and  Anasuya'.  By  virtue  of  a  boon  bestowed  upon  Atri,  or 
according  to  one  legend,  on  his  wife,  by  the  three  deities  Brahma', 
Vishnu,  and  Siva,  that  sage  had  three  sons.  Soma,  Datta,  and 
Durva'sas,  who  were  severally  portions  of  the  deities  themselves. J 
Datta,  or  Dattatreya,  was  eminent  for  his  practice  of  the  Yoga,  and 
hence  is  held  in  high  estimation  by  the  Jogis,  of  whom  we  are  next  to 
speak,  whilst,  as  an  incarnation  of  a  portion  of  Vishnu,  he  is  likewise 
venerated  by  the  Vaishnavas. 


YOGIS  OR  JOGIS. 

« 


The  Dandis  are  to  the  Saiva  sects,  what  the  followers  of  Ra'ma'nuja 
are  to  those  of  the  Vaishnava  faith,  and  a  like  parallel  may  be  drawn 

*  The  officiating  priests  at  the  celebrated  shrine  of  Annapu'kna,  in  Benares,  are 
Atits. 

t  A  specimen  of  the  independent  but  scarcely  orthodox  Dandi,  is  presented  in  the 
well  know  personage  Puran  Gir,  of  whom  Mr.  Duncan  published  an  account  in  the 
5th  volume  of  the  Asiatic  Researches. 

X  Bhdgavat,  Book  IV,  and  M&rkandeya  Purdna,  Chapter  XVI. 


131 

between  the  disciples  of  Ra'ma'nand  and  those  of  Gorakhna'th,  or  the 
Kdnphata  Jogis,  the  first  pair  being  properly  restricted  to  the  Brahmani- 
cal  order,  intended  chiefly  for  men  of  learning ;  the  two  latter  admit- 
ting members  from  every  description  of  people,  and  possessing  a  more 
attractive  popular  character. 

The  term  Jogi,  or  Yogi  is  properly  applicable  to  the  followers  of  the 
Yoga,  or  Pdtanjala  school  of  philosophy,  which,  amongst  other  tenets, 
maintained  the  practicability  of  acquiring,  even  in  life,  entire  command 
over  elementary  matter,  by  means  of  certain  ascetic  practices.  The 
details  of  these  it  is  unnecessary  to  particularize,  and  accounts  of  them 
and  of  the  Yoga  philosophy,  will  be  best  derived  from  the  translation  of 
Bhoja  Deva's*  Comment  on  the  Pdtanjala  Sutras,  in  Ward's  Account 
of  the  Hindus,  and  Mr.  Colebrooke's  Essay  on  the  Sdnkkya  and 
Pdtanjala  doctrines,  in  the  1st  volume  of  the  Transactions  of  the  Royal 
Asiatic  Society.  It  is  sufficient  here  to  observe,  that  the  practices  con- 
sist chiefly  of  long  continued  suppressions  of  respiration  ;  of  inhaling 
and  exhaling  the  breath  in  a  particular  manner  ;  of  sitting  in  eighty - 
four  different  attitudes  ;  of  fixing  the  eyes  on  the  top  of  the  nose,  and 
endeavouring,  by  the  force  of  mental  abstraction,  to  effect  a  union 
between  the  portion  of  vital  spirit  residing  in  the  body  and  that  which 
prevades  all  nature,  and  is  identical  with  Siva,  considered  as  the 
supreme  being,  and  source  and  essence  of  all  creation.  When  this 
mystic  union  is  effected,  the  Yogi  is  liberated  in  his  living  body,  from 
the  clog  of  material  incumbrance,  and  acquires  an  entire  command  over 
all  worldly  substance.  He  can  make  himself  lighter  than  the  lightest 
substances,  heavier  than  the  heaviest  ;  can  become  as  vast,  or  as  minute 
as  he  pleases,  can  traverse  all  space,  can  animate  any  dead  body,  by 
transferring  his  spirit  into  it  from  his  own  frame,  can  render  himself 
invisible,  can  attain  all  objects,  becomes  equally  acquainted  with  the 
past,  present,  and  future,  and  is  finally  united  with  Siva,  and  conse- 
quently exempted  from  being  born  again  upon  earth.  The  super- 
human faculties  are  acquired,  in  various  degrees,  according  to  the 
greater  or  less  perfection  with  which  the  initiatory  processes  have  been 
performed. 

According  to  standard  authorities,  the  perfect  fulfilment  of  the  rites 
which  the  Yogi  has  to  accomplish,  requires  a  protracted  existence  and 
repeated  births,  and  it  is  declared  to  be  unattainable  in  the  present  or 


132 

Kali  age.*  The  attempt  is  therefore  prohibited,  and  the  Yoga  is 
prescribed  in  modern  times.  This  inhibition  is,  however,  disregarded, 
and  the  individuals  who  are  the  subjects  of  our  enquiry,  endeavour  to 
attain  the  super- human  powers  which  the  performance  of  the  Yoga  is 
supposed  to  confer.  They  especially  practice  the  various  gesticulations 
and  postures  of  which  it  consists,  and  labour  assiduously  to  suppress 
their  breath  and  fix  their  thoughts  until  the  effect  does  somewhat 
realise  expectation,  and  the  brain,  in  a  stateof  over- wrought  excitement, 
bodies  forth  a  host  of  crude  and  wild  conceptions,  and  gives  to  airy 
nothings  a  local  habitation  and  a  name.f  A  year's  intense  application 
is  imagined  enough  to  qualify  the  adept,  J  whilst  inferior  faculties  may 
be  obtained  by  even  a  six  month's  practice. 

*  The  Kasikhanda  thus  enumerates  the  difficulty  or  impossibility   of  completing 
the  Yoga  in  the  present  age. 


"  From  the  unsteadiness  of  the  senses,  the  prevalence  of  sin  in  the  Kali,  and  the 
shortness  of  life,  how  can  Exaltation  by  the  Yoga  be  obtained." 

Again  — 

In  the  Kali  age,  the  Yoga  and  severe  penance  are  impracticable. 

t  Some  who  have  commenced  their  career  in  this  line,  have  carried  the  practice  to 
several  hours  duration,  at  which  time  they  have  described  themselves  as  becoming 
perfectly  exhausted,  with  strange  objects  passing  before  them,  and  sparks  of  fire 
flashing  in  their  eyes.  One  individual  quitted  it  from  having  at  last  a  figure  resembling 
himself  always  before  him,  and  knowing  this  to  be  a  deception,  he  wisely  inferred  the 
similar  character  of  any  other  visionary  creature  of  his  contemplation,  and  the  absurdity 
of  the  practice.  Dubois  has  some  amusing  anecdotes  on  this  subject,  (page  357,  &c.) 
they  are  fully  authenticated  by  the  similar  accounts  which  many  Fairdgis,  in  upper 
India,  will  readily  furnish.  The  worthy  Abbe  may  indeed  be  generally  trusted  when 
he  confines  himself  to  what  he  saw  or  knew  :  in  much  that  he  heard  he  was  misled,  and 
in  almost  every  thing  connected  with  the  language  and  literature,  and  the  religion  or 
philosophy,  as  taught  by  classical  authority,  he  commits  egregious  blunders. 

Leading  a  life  of  chastity  and  abstemiousness,  and  diligent  in  the  practice  of  the 
Yoga,  the  Yogi  becomes  perfect  after  a  year  :  of  this  there  is  no  doubt.  Hatha  Prodipa. 


133 

There  are  few  Jogis,  however,  who  lay  claim  to  perfection,  and  their 
pretensions  are  usually  confined  to  a  partial  command  over  their  physical 
and  mental  faculties.  These  are  evinced  in  the  performance  of  low 
mummeries,  or  juggling  tricks,  which  cheat  the  vulgar  into  a  belief  of 
their  powers.  A  common  mode  of  display  is  by  waving  a  Chowri,  or 
bunch  of  peacock's  feathers,  over  a  sick  or  new-born  infant,  to  cure  it 
of  any  morbid  affection,  or  guard  it  against  the  evil  eye.  A  trick  of 
loftier  pretence  has,  of  late,  attracted  some  notice  in  the  person  of  a 
Brahman  at  Madras,  who,  by  some  ingenious  contrivance,  appeared  to 
sit  in  the  air,  and  who  boasted  of  being  able  to  remain  for  a  considerable 
period  under  water.  He  and  his  followers  ascribed  the  possession  of 
these  faculties  to  his  successful  practice  of  the  observances  of  the  Yoga."^ 

In  referring  to  the  origin  of  this  system,  we  must,  no  doubt,  go 
back  to  some  antiquity,  although  the  want  of  chronological  data 
renders  it  impossible  to  specify  the  era  at  which  it  was  first  promul- 
gated. That  it  was  familiarly  known  and  practised  in  the  eighth 
century,  we  may  learn  from  the  plays  of  Bhagabhu'ti,  particularly  the 
Mdlati  and  Mddhava,\  and  from  several  of  the  Saiva  Purdnas,  in 
some  of  which,  as  the  Kurma  Purdna,  we  have  a  string  of  names  which 

*  "  Sitting  in  the  Air.— An  exhibition  at  Madras  has  excited  considerable 
curiosity.  A  Brahmin,  old  and  slightly  made,  represented  to  be  of  high  caste, 
contrives  to  poise  himself  in  a  most  extraordinary  manner  in  the  air.  He  performs 
this  feat  at  any  gentleman's  house,  not  for  money,  but  as  an  act  of  courtesy.  The 
following  is  a  description,  from  an  eye-witness,  given  in  a  Calcutta  paper, — '  The 
only  apparatus  seen  is  a  piece  of  plank,  which,  with  four  pegs,  he  forms  into  a  kind 
of  long  stool  ;  upon  this,  in  a  little  brass  saucer  or  socket,  he  places,  in  a  perpendi- 
cular position,  a  hollow  bamboo,  over  which  he  puts  a  kind  of  crutch,  like  that  of 
a  walking  crutch,  covering  that  with  a  piece  of  common  hide  :  these  materials  he 
carries  with  him  in  a  little  bag  which  is  shown  to  those  who  come  to  see  him  exhibit. 
The  servants  of  the  house  hold  a  blanket  before  him,  and  when  it  is  withdrawn,  he 
is  discovered  poised  in  the  air,  about  four  feet  from  the  ground,  in  a  sitting  atitude, 
the  outer  edge  of  one  hand  merely  touching  the  crutch,  the  fingers  of  that  hand 
deliberately  counting  beads  :  the  other  hand  and  arm  held  up  in  an  erect  posture. 
The  blanket  was  then  held  up  before  him,  and  they  heard  a  gurgling  noise  like  that 
occasioned  by  wind  escaping  from  a  bladder  or  tube,  and  when  the  screen  was 
withdrawn  he  was  again  standing  on  terra  firma.  The  same  man  has  the  power  of 
staying  under  water  for  several  hours.  He  declines  to  explain  how  he  does  it,  merely 
saying  he  has  been  long  accustomed  to  do  so.'  The  length  of  time  for  which  he  can 
remain  in  his  aerial  station  is  considerable.  The  person  who  gave  the  above  account 
says  that  he  remained  in  the  air  for  twelve  minutes;  but  before  the  Governor  of 
Madras  he  continued  on  his  baseless  seat  ior  forty  minutes"— Asiatic  Monthly  Jour- 
tialfor  March,  1829. 

t  See  especially  the  opening  of  the  5th  Act,  and  Notes. 


134 

appear  to  be  those  of  a  succession  of  teachers.*  The  cavern  temples 
of  the  South  of  India,  in  the  subjects  of  their  sculptures,  and  the 
decorations  of  Siva  and  his  attendants,  belong  to  the  same  sect  ;t 
whilst  the  philosophical  tenets  of  Patanjali  are  as  ancient  perhaps  as 
most  of  the  other  philosophical  systems,  and  are  prior  to  the  Purdnas, 
by  which  they  are  inculcated  in  a  popular  form.  The  practices  of 
the  Yoga  are  also  frequently  alluded  to,  and  enforced  in  the  Mahd- 
bhdrat.X  There  is  little  reason  to  question  therefore  the  existence 
and  popularity  of  the  Yoga  in  the  early  centuries  of  the  Christian 
era,  but  whether  it  was  known  and  cultivated  earlier  must  be  matter  of 
vague  conjecture  alone.  As  represented  in  the  Sankaravijaya,  (Sec- 
tion 41)  the  Yogis  vindicate  their  doctrine  by  texts  from  the  Vedas, 
but  the  applicability  of  the  texts  is  there  denied,  and  is  certainly  far 
from  conclusive  or  satisfactory. 

The  principal  mode  in  which  the  Yoga  takes  a  popular  shape  in 
upper  India,  is  probably  of  comparatively  recent  origin.     This  is  the 

*  Siva,  it  is  said,  appeared  in  the  beginning  of  tlie  Kali  age  as  Sweta,  for  the 
purpose  of  benefiting  the  Brahmanas.  He  resided  on  the  Himalaya  mountains  and 
taught  the  Yoga.  He  had  four  chief  disciples,  one  also  termed  Sweta,  and  the 
others  Swetasikha,  Swetaswa,  and  Swetalohita.  They  had  tweniy-eight 
disciples— 5'Miara,  Madana,  Suhotra,  Kankana,  and  twenty-four  others.  Of  these 
four,  whose  names  are  not  mentioned,  had  ninety-seven  disciples,  masters  of  the  Yoga 
and  inferior  portions  of  Siva.  Those  Brahmanas  who  recite  the  names  of  the 
teachers  and  offer  to  them  libations  acquire  Brahmavidyd,  or  knowledge  of  spirit. 
That  this  long  string  of  one  hundred  and  twenty-five  names  is  wholly  fictitious,  seems 
improbable,  although  the  list  is  possibly  not  very  accurate.  The  four  primitive  teachers 
may  be  imaginary  ;  but  it  is  a  curious  circumstance  that  the  word  Sweta,  white,  should 
be  the  leading  member  of  each  appellation,  and  that  in  the  person  of  Si  v  a,  and  his  first 
disciple,  it  should  stand  alone  as  Sweta,  the  white.  Siva,  however,  is  always  paint- 
ed white,  and  the  names  may  be  contrived  accordingly  ;  but  we  are  still  at  a  loss  to 
understand  why  the  god  himself  should  have  a  European  complexion. 

t  In  the  temples  of  Salsette,  Elephanta,  and  Ellora,  the  principal  figure  is  mostly 
SiVA,  decorated  with  ear-rings,  such  as  are  still  worn  by  the  Kdnphata  Jogis  ;  the 
walls  are  covered  with  ascetics  in  the  various  Asanas,  or  positions  in  which  the  Yogi 
is  to  sit ;  a  favourite  subject  of  sculpture  at  Elephanta  and  Ellora  is  the  sacrifice  of 
Daksha  disconcerted,  and  the  guests,  though  saints  and  gods,  put  to  rout,  bruised 
and  mutilated,  by  Virakhadra,  and  the  Ganas  of  Siva,  in  revenge  for  that  deity's 
not  having  been  invited,  a  story  told  in  most  of  the  Purdnas  which  inculcate  the 
Yoga  tenets.  The  cells  attached  to  some  of  the  temples  are  also  indicative  of  Jogi 
residence,  and  one  of  the  caves  of  Salsette  is  named  that  of  Jogiswara,  or  Siva,  as  lord 
of  the  Jogis.     Transactions  of  the  Literary  Society  of  Bombay.     Vols.  1  and  2. 

X  These  allusions  occur  in  the  Vana  Parva  chiefly  ;  whilst  in  the  Udyoga  Parva, 
the  observances  of  the  Yoga  are  detailed  at  considerable  length,  and  strenuously 
enjoined. 


135 

sect  of  Kdnphata  Jogis,  who  acknowledge  as  their  founder  a  teacher 
named  Gorakhna'th,  traces  of  whom  are  found  in  a  Gorakhkshetra  at 
Peshawer,  mentioned  by  Abulfazl,  and  in  the  district  and  town  of 
Gorakhpur,  where  also  exist  a  temple  and  religious  establishment  of  his 
followers.  They  hold  also  in  veneration  a  plain  near  Dwdraka,  named 
Gorakhkhetr  ;  and  a  cavern  or  subterraneous  passage  at  Haridwar, 
The  Saiva  temples  of  Nepal,  those  of  Sambunath,  Pasupatindth,  and 
others,  belong  to  the  same  system,  although  local  legends  attached  to 
them,  have  combined  in  a  curious  manner  the  fictions  of  the  Bauddha 
with  those  of  the  Brahmanical  mythology.* 

From  a  Ghoshti,\  or  controversial  dialogue  between  Kabi'r  and 
Gorakhna'th,  it  would  seem  that  they  were  personally  known  to  each 
other,  but  various  texts  in  the  Bijek  allude  to  him  as  if  recently  deceas- 
ed. In  either  case  these  two  teachers  may  have  been  cotemporaries,  or 
nearly  so,  and  the  latter  therefore  flourished  in  the  beginning  of  the 
15th  century.  According  to  his  followers,  he  was  an  incarnation  of 
Siva  ;  but  in  the  controversial  tract  above  named,  he  calls  himself  the 
son  of  Matsyendra  Na'th,  and  grandson  of  Adina'th.:}:  Matsyen- 
DRA  Na'th  appears  to  have  been  the  individual  who  introduced  the 
Yoga  Saivism  into  Nepal:  one  of  the  works  of  the  sect,  the  Hatha 
Pradipa,  makes  Matsyendra  prior  to  Gorakh  by  five  spiritual  des- 
cents.§  and  this  would  place  the  former  in  the  14th  century,  supposing 
the  Kabir  work  to  be  correct  in  the  date  it  attributes  to  the  latter. 

*  See  Asiatic  Researches,  Vol.  XVI.  page  471,  and  Note. 

t  This  has  been  printed  in  the  first  volume  of  Hindee  and  Hindustani  Selections, 
for  the  use  of  the  Interpreters  of  the  Bengal  Army,  compiled  by  Captain  Price.  The 
discussion,  in  the  form  of  a  dialogue,  occurs  page  14U. 


1  The  list  of  teachers  is  thus  particularised  : 


1.  Adindth. 

2.  Matsyendra. 

3.  Sambara. 

4.  Ananda. 

5.  Bhairava. 

6.  Chourdngi. 

7.  Mena. 

8.  Goraksha. 

9.  Virupdksha. 


10.  Vileso. 

11.  Manthana  Bhairava. 

12.  Siddhahuddha. 

13.  Kanthada. 

14.  Paurandaka. 

15.  Surdnanda. 

16.  Siddhapdda. 

17.  Churpati. 

18.  Kdneri. 


136 

If  the  date  assigned  by  Hamilton  to  the  migration  of  the  Hindu 
tribes  from  Chitaur,  the  beginning  of  the  14th  century,  be  accurate,*  it 
is  probable  that  this  was  the  period  at  which  the  worship  of  Siva, 
agreeably  to  the  doctrines  of  Matsyendra,  or  Gorakh,  was  introduced 
there,  and  into  the  eastern  provinces  of  Hindustan. 

The  temple  of  Gorakhna'th  at  Gorakhpur,  according  to  the  local 
tradition,  was  founded  by  Siva  in  the  second,  or  Treta  age.  Of  its  revo- 
lutions subsequent  to  that  period,  no  account  was  preserved,  until  it  was 
converted  into  a  Mohammedan  mosque  by  Ala-addin.  The  temple, 
after  some  interval,  was  re-built  in  a  different  situation  by  an  associa- 
tion of  the  followers  of  Gorakhna'th,  and  this  was  possibly  the  period 
at  which  the  sect  assumed  its  present  form.  A  similar  fate,  however, 
attended  this  edifice,  and  it  was  appropriated  by  Aurangzeb  to  the 
Mohammedan  religion.  A  second  interval  elapsed  before  a  shrine  was 
again  erected  to  Gorakhna'th,  when  it  was  re-built  on  the  spot  on 
which  it  now  stands,  by  Buddhana'th,  according  to  instructions  com- 
municated to  him  by  Gorakhna'th  in  person.  The  present  temple 
is  situated  to  the  west  of  the  City  of  Gorakhpur,  and  attached  to  it  on 
the  south  are  three  temples,  consecrated  to  Maha'deva,  Pasupatina'th 
and  Hanuma'n.  The  inclosure  also  comprehends  the  tombs  of  several 
eminent  members  of  this  communion,  and  the  dwellings  of  the  Mahant 
and  his  resident  disciples. 

Gorakhna'th  was  a  man  of  some  acquirement,  and  has  left  speci- 
mens of  his  scholarship  in  two  Sanscrit  Compositions,  the  Goraksha 
sataka  and  Goraksha  kalpa :  third,  the  Goraksha  sahasra  Ndma  is,  pro- 
bably, of  his  writing.  The  celebrated  Bhartrihari,  the  brother  of 
Veikrama'ditya,  is  said  to  have  been  one  of  his  disciples,  but  chronology 


19.  Pujyapdda. 
'2U.   Nityandtha. 

21.  Niranjana. 

22.  Kapdla. 

23.  Bindu. 

24.  Kukachandiswara. 

25.  Allamd 


26.  Prahhudeva. 

27.  Gordchili. 

28.  Dindima. 

29.  Bhdluki. 

30.  Nugahodha. 

31.  Chandakapulika 


The  author  of  the  Hatha  Pradipa,  Atma  Ra'ma,  states  that  these  and  many  more 
Mahasiddhas,  or  perfect  Yogis,  are  in  e.xistence.  His  names  are  possibly  those  of  the 
Mahants,  of  a  particular  establishment :  some  of  them  are  very  unlike  Hindu  appella- 
tives. If  the  date  assigned  to  GoraArwa^/i  in  the  text  be  rightly  conjectured,  we  can- 
not assign  much  more  than  fifteen  years  to  each  of  his  successors. 

*  Hamilton's  Nepal,  page  14. 


137 

will  not  admit  of  such  an  approximation.  According  to  the  authorities 
of  the  sect,  Gorakh  is  but  one  of  nine  eminent  teachers,  or  Ndths. 
Of  the  perfect  Yogis,  or  Siddhas,  eighty-four  are  enumerated ;  but  it  is 
said,  that  there  have  been  many  more,  of  whom  several  are  still  upon 
the  surface  of  the  earth. 

The  Jogis  of  Gorakhna'ih  are  usually  called  Kdnphatas,  from  having 
their  ears  bored,  and  rings  inserted  in  them  at  the  time  of  their  initia- 
tion. They  may  be  of  any  caste  ;  they  live  as  ascetics,  either  singly  or 
in  Maths. "^  Siva  is  the  object  of  their  worship — they  officiate  indeed, 
as  the  priests  of  that  deity,  in  some  places,  especially  at  the  celebrated 
Ldt,  or  Staff,  of  Bhairava,  at  Benares.  They  mark  the  forehead  with 
a  transverse  line  of  ashes,  and  smear  the  body  with  the  same ;  they 
dress  in  various  styles,  but  in  traveUing  usually  wear  a  cap  of  patch- 
work and  garments  dyed  with  red  ochre.  Some  wear  simply  a  Dhoti, 
or  cloth  round  the  loins. 

The  term  Jogi,  in  popular  acceptation,  is  of  almost  as  general  appli- 
cation as  Sanydsi  and  Vairdgi ;  and  it  is  difficult  to  fix  its  import  upon 
any  individual  class,  besides  the  Kdnphata :  the  vagrants  so  called,  fol- 
lowing usually  the  dictates  of  their  own  caprice  as  to  worship  and  be- 
lief, and  often,  it  may  be  conceived,  employing  the  character  as  a  mere 
plea  for  a  lazy  livelihood.  The  Jogis  are,  indeed,  particularly  distinguish- 
ed amongst  the  different  mendicant  characters,  by  adding  to  their  reli- 
gious personification  more  of  the  mountebank  than  any  others ;  most  of 
the  religious  mendicants,  it  is  true,  deal  in  fortune- telling,  interpretation 
of  dreams,  and  palmistry ;  they  are  also  often  empirics,  and  profess  to 
cure  diseases  with  specific  drugs,  or  with  charms  and  spells  :  but  besides 
these  accomplishments,  the  Jogi  is  frequently  musical,  and  plays  and 

*  Solitary  and  independent  living,  however,  appears  to  be  improper,  if  the  authority 
of  the  Hatha  Pradipa  is  to  be  depended  upon. 

*'  In  a  well-governed  and  well-regulated  country,  fertile  and  prosperous,  the  Hatha 
Yogi  (he  who  upholds  the  world  in  eternal  continuity,)  should  reside  in  a  solitary 
cell,  within  the  precincts  of  a  Math."  "  Other  directions  follow,  applicable  to  most 
establishments  of  a  similar  nature.  The  cell  should  have  a  small  door,  be  neither  too 
lofty,  nor  too  low,  be  well  smeared  with  cow-dung,  and  should  be  kept  clean  and  free 
from  reptiles :  the  Math  should  have  a  temple,  a  mound  or  altar,  and  a  well,  adjoin- 
ing, and  be  enclosed  by  a  wall. 

T 


138 

sings  ;  he  also  initiates  animals  into  his  business,  and  often  travels  about 
with  a  small  bullock,  a  goat,  or  a  monkey,  whom  he  has  taught  to 
obey  his  commands,  and  to  exhibit  amusing  gesticulations.  The  dress 
of  this  class  of  Jogis  is  generally  a  cap  and  coat,  or  frock  of  many 
colours :  they  profess  to  worship  Siva,  and  often  carry  the  Linga,  like 
the  Jangamas,  in  the  cap  ;  all  classes  and  sects  assume  the  charac- 
ter, and  Musselman  Jogis  are  not  uncommon.  One  c)ass  of  the 
Hindu  Jogis  is  called  Saringihar,  from  their  carrying  a  Saringi,  or 
small  fiddle  or  lute,  with  which  they  accompany  their  songs  :  these 
are  usually  Bhdsha  stanzas  on  religious  or  mythological  topics, 
amongst  which,  stanzas  ascribed  to  Bhatrihari,  and  a  Pauranic 
legend  of  the  marriage  of  Siva  and  Pa'rvati,  are  particularly  cele- 
brated. The  Saringihars  beg  in  the  name  of  Bhairava  :  another 
sect  of  them,  also  followers  of  that  deity,  are  termed  Durihdrs,  from 
their  trafficking  in  small  pedlary,  especially  the  sale  of  thread  and 
silk,  to  the  housewives  of  the  villages  ;  another  class  adopt  the  name 
of  Matsyendris,  or  Macchendris,  from  Matsyendra,  whom  they  regard  as 
their  founder  ;  and  a  fourth  set  are  Bhartriharis,  from  a  traditional 
reference  to  him  as  the  institutor  of  this  particular  order.  The  va- 
rieties of  this  class  of  mendicants,  however,  cannot  be  specified  : 
they  are  all  errants  ;  fixed  residences,  or  Maths,  of  any  Jogis,  except 
the  Kdnphatas,  rarely  occurring  :  an  observation  that  will  apply  to, 
perhaps,  all  the  Saiva  sects,  of  whom  it  yet  remains  to  give  an 
account. 


JANGAMAS. 


The  worship  of  Siva,  under  the  type  of  the  Linga,  it  has  been  ob- 
served, is  almost   the   only   form  in  which  that   deity  is  reverenced.* 

*  Its  prevalence  throughout  the  whole  tract  of  the  Ganges,  as  far  as  Benares,  is 
suflBciently  conspicuous.  In  Bengal,  the  temples  are  commonly  erected  in  a  range 
of  six,  eight,  or  twelve,  on  each  side  of  a  Ghat,  leading  to  the  river.  At  Kalna  is  a 
circular  groupe  of  one  hundred  and  eight  temples,  erected  by  the  Raja  of  Bard  wan. 
Each  of  the  temples  in  Bengal,  consists  of  a  single  chamber,  of  a  square  form,  sur- 
mounted by  a  pyramidal  centre  ;  the  area  of  each  is  very  small,  the  Linga,  of  black 
or  white  marble,  occupies  the  centre  ;  the  offerings  are  presented  at  the  threshold. 
Benares,  however,  is  the  peculiar  seat  of  this  form  of  worship  :  the  principal  deity 


139 

It  is  also  perhaps  the  most  ancient  object  of  homage  adopted  in 
India,  subsequently  to  the  ritual  of  the  Vedas,  which  was  chiefly,  if 
not  wholly,  addressed  to  the  elements,  and  particularly  to  fire.  How 
far  the  worship  of  the  Linga  is  authorised  by  the  Vedas,  is  doubtful, 
but  it  is  the  main  purport  of  several  of  the  Puranas.*  There  can  be  no 
doubt  of  its  universality  at  the  period  of  the  Mohammedan  invasion  of 
India.  The  idol  destroyed  by  Mahmud,  of  Ghizni,  was  nothing  more 
than  a  Linga,  being,  according  to  Mirkhond,  a  block  of  stone,  of  four 
or    five    cubits  long,   and   proportionate   thickness. f     It  was,   in  fact, 

ViswESWARA,  as  observed  already,  is  a  Linga,  and  most  of  the  chief  objects  of  the 
pilgrimage  are  similar  blocks  of  stone.  •  Particular  divisions  of  the  pilgrimage  direct 
visiting,  forty-seven  Lingas,  all  of  pre-eminent  sanctity  ;  but  there  are  hundreds  of 
inferior  note  still  worshipped,  and  thousands  whose  fame  and  fashion  have  passed 
away.  If  we  may  believe  Siva,  indeed,  he  counted  a  hundred  Pararrdhyas  in  Kasi, 
of  which,  at  the  time  he  is  supposed  to  tell  this  to  Devi,  he  adds  sixty  crore,  or  six 
hundred  millions,  were  covered  by  the  waters  of  the  Ganges.  A  Par&rrdhya  is  said, 
by  the  commentator  on  the  Kasi  Khanda,  in  which  this  dialogue  occurs,  to  contain  as 
many  years  of  mortals  as  are  equal  to  fifty  of  Brahma's  years.  Notwithstanding  the 
acknowledged  purport  of  this  worship,  it  is  but  justice  to  state,  that  it  is  unattended  in 
upper  India  by  any  indecent  or  indelicate  ceremonies,  and  it  requires  a  rather  lively 
imagination  to  trace  any  resemblance  in  its  symbols  to  the  objects  they  are  supposed 
to  represent.  The  absence  of  all  indecency  from  public  worship  and  religious 
establishments  in  the  Gangetic  Provinces,  was  fully  established  by  the  Vindicator  of 
the  Hindus,  the  late  General  Stuart,  and  in  every  thing  relating  to  actual  practice, 
better  authority  cannot  be  desired.  (Vindication,  Part  1st,  99,  and  more  particularly 
Part  2d,  135). 

*  The  Skanda  Parana,  which  contains  the  Kasi  Khanda,  particularly  inculcates 
the  worship  of  Siva  in  this  form  ;  so  do  the  Siva,  Brahmanda,  and  Linga  Puranas, 

t  The  following  is  the  passage  from  the  Rozet  as  Sefa,  alluded  to  : 

•yJ3^{  ^jtJ  (^t  i^A-o  ^^^  (c^y^*^  i^^j  sUsr*^.  *i  e^Uaj. 
»^^^^^  tiT^j^J^  ^5^^   ijr^j  ^.^j  j^  j^  ^^  a  y^^  ^^  o^^ 

^y.^\j2i     »j\.^hi     Ay^SS^ 


140 

one  of  the  twelve  great  Lingas,  then  set  up  in  various  parts  of  India, 
several  of  which,    besides    Someswara,    or   Somanath,   which   was   the 

"  The  temple  in  whick  the  Idol  oi  Somnath  stood,  was  of  considerable  extent,  both 
in  length  and  breadth,  and  the  roof  was  supported  by  fifty-six  pillars  in  rows.  The 
Idol  was  of  polished  stone,  its  height  was  about  five  cubits,  and  its  thickness  in  pro- 
portion: two  cubits  were  below  ground.  Mahmud  having  entered  the  temple,  broke 
the  stone  Somnath,  with  a  heavy  mace:  some  of  the  fragments  he  ordered  to  be  con- 
veyed to  Ghisni,  and  they  were  placed  at  the  threshold  of  the  great  Mosque."  An- 
other authority,  the  Tehkat  AJcheeri,  a  history  of  Akber's  reign,  with  a  preliminary 
Sketch  of  Indian  History,  has  the  following  : 

JS^^^  My\xx>  ikA^^I^J  i«i.X*a»  Ui^^Ai  ^}  j^  ^  jJ«3j.J  **^^N'^ 
o>^^^  JU  ^I^^  j'-fTi-  ^^  \i^  K*y-^j  j^  CLkm\  ^iji:^  *^i 
x^3.^5  u^-i    ls*.^.I  ^i;^     *A4.^l^j  ^iy^i3    C1a-oI  i(U4.Al^j     <2»^jj(^ 

\i^Mk^  j^llaXic  f-J^jj^,  l^**"^*  '•S.^I  (J-^l  «XJ»>^-yw^  djU^^.M*J 
^LIXj       (»j^>^       tlL^ii^f    ^  ^aAx)      XxX5    jU***^    «^*^^^J       t^J^'*"^  jl    »>»Xj5 

r,L  s.sji'  *^^  ^J^t-  Ij  djUx»^xo  t^;^^  *>j^i^  ^^O^  »ji^ijSi 

^^j  l^J  C-^;«»  l^5l->oj  AX-«!^f  ^l^  j^s-'^^jjv^    X3jj  j^-jJ>ij  U 

"  In  the  year  415  (Hijera)  Mahmud  determined  to  lead  an  army  against  Sotnnatk, 
a  city  on  the  sea-shore,  with  a  temple  appertaining  to  the  followers  of  Brahma  ; 
the  temple  contained  many  idols,  the  principal  of  which  was  named  Somnath.  It  is 
related  in  some  histories  that  this  idol  was  carried  from  the  Kaaha,  upon  the  coming 
of  the  Prophet,  and  transported  to  India.  The  Brahmanical  records,  however,  refer 
it  to  the  time  of  Krishna,  or  an  antiquity  of  4000  years.  Kkishna,  himself,  is  said 
to  have  disappeared  at  this  place. 


141 

name  of  the  Siva,  demolished  by  Mahmud,  were  destroyed  by  the 
early  Mahommedan  conquerors.*  Most,  if  not  all  of  them,  also  are 
named  in  works,  of  which  the  date  cannot  be  much   later   than    the 

*'  When  the  Sultan  arrived  at  Neherwaleh,  (the  capital  of  Guzerat)  he  found  the 
city  deserted,  and  carrying  off  such  provisions  as  could  be  procured,  he  advanced  to 
Somnath  :  the  inhabitants  of  this  place  shut  their  gates  against  him,  but  it  was  soon 
carried  by  the  irresistible  valour  of  his  troops,  and  a  terrible  slaughter  of  its  defenders 
ensued.  The  temple  was  levelled  with  the  ground  :  the  idol  Somnath,  which  was  of 
stone,  was  broken  to  pieces,  and  in  commemoration  of  the  victory,  a  fragment  was 
sent  to  Ghizni,  where  it  was  laid  at  the  threshold  of  the  principal  mosque,  and  was 
there  many  years." 

These  statements  shew  that  the  idol  was  nothing  more  than  a  block  of  stone,  of  very 
moderate  dimensions,  like  the  common  representation  of  the  type  of  Siva.  Ferishta, 
however,  has  converted  it  into  something  very  different,  or  a  colossal  figure  of  the 
deity  himself,  and  following  Colonel  Dow's  version  of  that  compiler,  the  historian  of 
British  India  gives  the  following  highly  coloured  account  of  a  transaction  which  never 
took  place.  "  Filled  with  indignation  at  sight  of  the  gigantic  idol,  Mahmud  aimed  a 
blow  at  its  head,  with  his  iron  mace.  The  nose  was  struck  off  from  its/ace.  In  vehe- 
ment trepidation,  the  Brahmans  crowded  round  and  offered  millions  to  spare  the  god. 
The  Omrdhs,  dazzled  with  the  ransom,  ventured  to  counsel  acceptance.  Mahmud 
crying  out  that  he  valued  the  title  of  Breaker  not  Seller  of  idols,  gave  orders  to  proceed 
with  the  work  of  destruction.  .At  the  next  blow  the  belly  of  the  idol  burst  open,  and 
forth  issued  a  vast  treasure  of  diamonds,  rubies  and  pearls,  rewarding  the  holy  perse- 
verance of  Mahmud,  and  explaining  the  devout  liberality  of  the  Brahmans !" 
(Vol.  1.  491.) 

*  The  twelve  Lingas  are  particularised  in  the  Keddra  Kalpa,  of  the  Nandi 
Upapurdna,  where  Siva  is  made  to  say — "  1  am  omnipresent,  but  1  am  especially  in 
twelve  forms  and  places."     These  he  enumerates,  and  they  are  as  follow  : 

1.  Somanatha,  in  S aurashtra,  i.  e.  Sural,  in  its  most  extensive  sense,  including 
part  of  Guzerat,  where,  indeed,  Patana  Somnath,  or  the  city  of  Somnath,  is  still 
situated. 

2.  Mallikdrjuna,  or  Sri  Saila,  described  by  Colonel  Mackenzie,  the  late  Surveyor 
General.     Asiatic  Researches,  Vol.  5th. 

3.  Mahakala,  in  Ougein.  This  deity  of  stone  was  carried  to  Dehli,  and  broken 
there  upon  the  capture  of  Ougein,  by  Altumsh.  A.  D.  1231, — Dow.  According  to 
the  Tehkat  Akberi,  the  shrine  was  then  three  hundred  years  old. 

4.  Omkdra  is  said  to  have  been  in  Ujayin,  but  it  is  probably  the  shirne  of  Maha- 
DEo,  at  Omkhra  Mandatta,  on  the  Nurmadd. 

5.  Amareswara  is  also  placed  in  Ujayin  :  an  ancient  temple  of  Mahadeo,  on  a 
hill  near  Ujayin,  is  noticed  by  Dr.  Hunter,  Asiatic  Researches,  Vol.  6th,  but  he 
does  not  give  the  name  or  form. 

6.  Vaidyanath,  at  Deogerh,  in  Bengal;  the  temple  is  still  in  being,  and  is  a 
celebrated  place  of  pilgrimage. 

7.  Ramesa,  at  Setubandha,  the  island  of  Ramisseram,  between  Ceylon  and  the 
continent;  this  Lingam  is  fabled  to  have  been  set  up  by  Rama.  The  temple  is  still 
in  tolerable  repair,  and  is  one  of  the  most  magnificent  in  India.  The  gateway  is  one 
hundred  feet  high.  It  has  been  repeatedly  described,  and  is  delineated  in  Daniel's 
Superb  Plates  of  Indian  Antiquities,  from  which  it  has  been  copied  into  Langle's 
Monuments  de  L'Hindoostan. 


142 

eighth  or  ninth  century,  and  it  is  therefore,  to  be  inferred,  with  as  much 
certainty  as  any  thing  short  of  positive  testimony  can  afford,  that  the 
worship  of  Siva,  under  this  type,  prevailed  throughout  India  at  least  as 
early  as  the  fifth  or  sixth  century  of  the  Christian  era.  Considered  as 
one  great  branch  of  the  universal  public  worship,  its  prevalence,  no 
doubt,  dates  much  earlier  ;  but  the  particular  modifications  under  which 
the  several  types  received  their  local  designations,  and  became  entitled 
to  special  reverence,  are  not  in  every  case  of  remote  antiquity. 

One  of  the  forms  in  which  the  Linga  worship  appears,  is  that  of  the 
Lingayets,  Lingawants,  or  Jangamas,  the  essential  characteristic  of  which 
is  wearing  the  emblem  on  some  part  of  the  dress  or  person.  The  type 
is  of  a  small  size,  made  of  copper  or  silver,  and  is  commonly  worn 
suspended  in  a  case  round  the  neck,  or  sometimes  tied  in  the  turban. 
In  common  with  the  Saivas,  generally,  the  Jangamas  smear  their  fore- 
heads with  VibhiUi  or  ashes,  and  wear  necklaces,  and  carry  rosaries, 
made  of  the  Rudrdksha  seed.  The  clerical  members  of  the  sect  usually 
stain  their  garments  with  red  ochre.  They  are  not  numerous  in  upper 
India,  and  are  rarely  encountered,  except  as  mendicants,  leading  about 
a  bull,  the  living  type  of  Nandi,  the  bull  of  Siva,  decorated  with 
housings  of  various  colours,  and  strings  of  cowri  shells  :  the  conductor 
carries  a  bell  in  his  hand,  and  thus  accompanied  goes  about  from  place 
to  place,  subsisting  upon  alms.  In  the  south  of  India,  the  Lingayets 
are  very  numerous,  and  the  officiating  priests  of  the  Saiva  shrines,  are 
commonly  of  this  sect,*  when  they  bear  the  designations  of  Arddhya 
and  Pandaram.\  The  sect  is  also  there  known  by  the  name  of  Vira 
Saiva.     The  following  account  of  the  restorer,  if  not  the  founder  of  the 

8.  Bhimasankara,  in  Dakini,  which  is,  in  all  probability,  the  same  with  Bhimes- 
wara,  a.  Linga  worshipped  at  Dracharam,  in  the  iJ^/awa^ewrfn  district,  and  there 
venerated  as  one  of  the  principal  twelve. 

10.  Tryamhaka,  on  the  banks  of  the  Gomati ;  whether  the  temple  still  exists  I  have 
no  knowledge. 

11.  Gautamisa  is  another  of  the  twelve,  whose  original  site  and  present  fate  are 
uncertain. 

12.  Keddresa,  or  Kedaranath,  in  the  Himalaya,  has  been  repeatedly  visited  by 
late  travellers.     The  deity  is  represented  by  a  shapeless  mass  of  rock. 

*  They  also  officiate  in  this  capacity  at  the  temple  of  Keddrnath,  in  Benares. 

t  This  word  seems  to  be  properly  Pdnduranga,  (^'[W^^'^l)  P^le  comple.xion- 
ed,  from  their  smearing  themselves  with  ashes.  It  is  so  used  in  Hemachandra's  history 
of  Mahdvira,  when  speaking  of  the  Saiva  Brahmans. 


143 

faith,  as  well  as  a  specimen  of  the  legends  by  which  it  is  maintained, 
are  derived  from  the  Bdsava  Purdna. 

According  to  the  followers  of  this  faith,  which  prevails  very  exten- 
sively in  the  Dekhin,  Bdswa,  Bdsava,  Bdswana  or  Bdswapa,  or  Bdsavappa, 
different  modes  of  writing  his  name,  only  restored  this  religion,  and  did 
not  invent  it.  This  person,  it  is  said,  was  the  son  of  Mddiga  Rdya, 
a  Brahman,  and  Madevi  written  also  Madala  arasu  and  Mahdmhd,  inhabi- 
tants of  Hinguleswar  Parvati  Agrahdram,  on  the  west  of  Sri  Saila, 
and  both  devout  worshippers  of  Siva.  In  recompense  of  their  piety, 
Nandi,  the  bull  of  Siva,  was  born  on  earth  as  their  son,  becoming 
incarnate  by  command  of  Siva,  on  his  learning  from  Na'reda,  the 
decline  of  the  Saiva  faith,  and  prevalence  of  other  less  orthodox  systems 
of  religion.  The  child  was  denominated  after  the  Bdswa  or  Bdsava, 
the  bull  of  the  deity.  On  his  arriving  at  the  age  of  investiture,  he  re- 
fused to  assume  the  thread  ordinarily  worn  by  Brahmans,  or  to  acknow- 
ledge any  Guru,  except  Iswara  or  Siva.  He  then  departed  to  the  town 
of  Kalydn,  the  capital  of  Bijala  or  Vijala  Rdya,  and  obtained  in  marriage 
Gangdmbd,  the  daughter  of  the  Dandandyak,  or  minister  of  police.  From 
thence  he  repaired  to  Sangameswara,  where  he  received  from  Sangames- 
wara  Swdmi,  initiation  in  the  tenets  of  the  Vira  Saiva  faith.  He  was 
invited  back  from  this  place  to  succeed  his  father-in-law  upon  his  decease, 
in  the  office  he  had  held. 

After  his  return  to  Kalydn,  his  sister,  who  was  one  of  his  first  disci- 
ples, was  delivered  of  a  son,  Chenna  Bdsava,  who  is  not  unfrequently 
confounded  with  his  uncle,  and  regarded,  perhaps  more  correctly,  as  the 
founder  of  the  sect. 

After  recording  these  events,  the  work  enumerates  various  marvellous 
actions,  performed  by  Bdsava  and  several  of  his  disciples,  such  as  con- 
verting grains  of  corn  to  pearls — discovering  hidden  treasures — feeding 
multitudes — healing  the  sick,  and  restoring  the  dead  to  life.  The  fol- 
lowing are  some  of  the  anecdotes  narrated  in  the  Purdna. 

Bdsava  having  made  himself  remarkable  for  the  profuse  bounties 
he  bestowed  upon  the  Jangamas,  helping  himself  from  the  Royal 
Treasury  for  that  purpose,  the  other,  ministers  reported  his  conduct 
to  Bijala,  who  called  upon  him  to  account  for  the  money  in  his  charge. 
Bdsava  smiled,  and  giving  the  keys  of  the  treasury  to  the  king, 
requested   him    to   examine   it,    which    being  done,   the  amount   was 


144 

found  wholly  undiminished.  Bejala  thereupon  caused  it  to  be  pro- 
claimed, that  whoever  calumniated  Bdsava,  should  have  his  tongue  cut 
out. 

A  Jangama,  who  cohabited  with  a  dancing  girl,  sent  a  slave  for 
his  allowance  of  rice  to  the  house  of  Bdsava,  where  the  messenger 
saw  the  wife  of  the  latter,  and  on  his  return  reported  to  the  dancing 
girl  the  magnificence  of  her  attire.  The  mistress  of  the  Jangama 
was  filled  with  a  longing  for  a  similar  dress,  and  the  Jangama  having 
no  other  means  of  gratifying  her,  repaired  to  Bdsava,  to  beg  of  him  his 
wife's  garment.  Bdsava  immediately  stripped  Gangdmbd,  his  wife, 
and  other  dresses  springing  from  her  body,  he  gave  them  all  to  the 
Jangama. 

A  person  of  the  name  of  Kanapa,  who  regularly  worshipped  the 
image  of  Eka'mreswara,  imagining  the  eyes  of  the  deity  were  affected, 
plucked  out  his  own,  and  placed  them  in  the  sockets  of  the  figure. 
Siva,  pleased  with  his  devotion,  restored  his  worshipper  his  eyes. 

A  devout  Saiva  named  Mahadevala  Machdya,  who  engaged  to 
wash  for  all  the  Jangamas,  having  killed  a  child,  the  Raja  ordered 
Bdsava  to  have  him  secured  and  punished  ;  but  Bdsava  declined 
undertaking  the  duty,  as  it  would  be  unavailing  to  offer  any  harm 
to  the  worshippers  of  Siva.  Bijala  persisting,  sent  his  servants  to 
seize  and  tie  him  to  the  legs  of  an  elephant,  but  Machdya  caught 
the  elephant  by  the  trunk,  and  dashed  him  and  his  attendants  to 
pieces.  He  then  proceeded  to  attack  the  Raja,  who  being  alarmed, 
applied  to  Bdsava,  and  by  his  advice,  humbled  himself  before  the 
offended  Jangama.  Bdsava  also  deprecated  his  wrath,  and  Machdya 
being  appeased,  forgave  the  king,  and  restored  the  elephant  and  the 
guards  to  life. 

A  poor  Jangam  having  solicited  alms  of  Kinnardya,  one  of  Basava's 
chief  disciples,  the  latter  touched  the  stones  about  them  with  his  staff, 
and  converting  them  into  gold,  told  the  Jangam  to  help  himself. 

The  work  is  also  in  many  places  addressed  to  the  Jainas,  in  the 
shape  of  a  dialogue  between  some  of  the  Jangama  saints  and  the 
members  of  that  faith,  in  which  the  former  narrate  to  the  latter 
instances  of  the  superiority  of  the  Saiva  religion,  and  the  falsehood 
of  the  Jain  faith,  which  appears  to  have  been  that  of  Bijala  Rdya, 
and  the  great  part  of  the  population  of  Kalydna.     In  order  to  convert 


145 

them  Ekdnta  Ramdya,  one  of  Bdsavas  disciples,  cut  off  his  head  in  their 
presence,  and  then  marched  five  days  in  solemn  procession,  through  and 
round  the  city,  and  on  the  fifth  day  replaced  his  head  upon  his  shoulders. 
The  Jain  Pagodas  were  thereupon,  it  is  said,  destroyed  by  the  Jan- 
gamas.  It  does  not  appear,  however,  that  the  king  was  made  a  convert, 
or  that  he  approved  of  the  principles  and  conduct  of  his  minister.  He 
seems,  on  the  contrary,  to  have  incurred  his  death  by  attempting  to 
repress  the  extension  of  the  Vira  Saiva  belief.  Different  authorities, 
although  they  disagree  as  to  the  manner  in  which  Bijala  was  destroyed, 
concur  in  stating  the  fact :  the  following  account  of  the  transaction  is 
from  the  present  work. 

"  In  the  city  of  Kalydna  were  two  devout  worshippers  of  Siva,  named 
Allay  a  and  Madhuvaya.  They  fixed  their  faith  firmly  on  the  divinity 
they  adored,  and  assiduously  reverenced  their  spiritual  preceptor,  attend- 
ing upon  Bdsava  whithersoever  he  went.  The  king,  Bijala,  well  knew 
their  merits,  but  closed  his  eyes  to  their  superiority,  and  listening  to  the 
calumnious  accusations  of  their  enemies,  commanded  the  eyes  of  Allaya 
and  Madhuvaya  to  be  plucked  out.  The  disciples  of  Bdsava,  as  well  as 
himself,  were  highly  indignant  at  the  cruel  treatment  of  these  holy  men, 
and  leaving  to  Jagaddeva  the  task  of  putting  Bijala  to  death,  and  de- 
nouncing imprecations  upon  the  city,  they  departed  from  Kaldyna — 
Bdsava  fixed  his  residence  at  Sangameswara. 

Machdya,  Bommidevaya,  Kinnara,  Kannatha,  Bommadeva,  Kakdyd, 
Masanaya,  Kolakila  Bommadeva,  Kesirajaya,  Mathirajaya,  and  others, 
announced  to  the  people,  that  the  fortunes  of  Bijala  had  passed  away,  as 
indicated  by  portentous  signs  ;  and  accordingly  the  crows  crowed  in  the 
night,  jackalls  howled  by  day  ;  the  sun  was  eclipsed,  storms  of  wind  and 
rain  came  on,  the  earth  shook,  and  darkness  overspread  the  heavens. 
The  inhabitants  of  Kalydna  were  filled  with  terror. 

When  Jagaddeva  repaired  home,  his  mother  met  him,  and  told  him 
that  when  any  injury  had  been  done  to  a  disciple  of  the  Saiva  faith,  his 
fellow  should  avenge  him  or  die.  When  Daksha  treated  Siva  with  con- 
tumely, Parvati  threw  herself  into  the  flames,  and  so,  under  the  wrong 
offered  to  the  saints,  he  should  not  sit  down  contented  :  thus  saying,  she 
gave  him  food  at  the  door  of  his  mansion.  Thither  also  came  Mallaya 
and  Bommaya,  two  others  of  the  saints,  and  they  partook  of  Jagaddeva's 

u 


146 

meal.  Then  smearing  their  bodies  with  holy  ashes,  they  took  up  the 
spear,  and  sword,  and  shield,  and  marched  together  against  Bijala.  On 
their  way  a  bull  appeared,  whom  they  knew  to  be  a  form  of  Bdsava  come 
to  their  aid,  and  the  bull  went  first,  even  to  the  court  of  the  king,  goring 
any  one  that  came  in  their  way,  and  opening  a  clear  path  for  them. 
Thus  they  reached  the  court,  and  put  Bijala  to  death  in  the  midst  of  all 
his  courtiers,  and  then  they  danced,  and  proclaimed  the  cause  why  they 
had  put  the  king  to  death.  Jugaddeva  on  his  way  back,  recalling  the 
words  of  his  mother,  stabbed  himself.  Then  arose  dissension  in  the  city, 
and  the  people  fought  amongst  themselves,  and  horses  with  horses,  and 
elephants  with  elephants,  until,  agreeably  to  the  curse  denounced  upon  it 
by  Bdsava  and  his  disciples,  Kalydna  was  utterly  destroyed. 

Bdsava  continued  to  reside  at  Sangameswara,  conversing  with  his  dis- 
ciples, and  communing  with  the  divine  essence,  and  he  expostulated  with 
Siva,  saying  "  By  thy  command  have  I,  and  thy  attendant  train,  come 
upon  earth,  and  thou  hast  promised  to  recall  us  to  thy  presence  when  our 
task  was  accomplished."  Then  Siva  and  Pa'rvati'  came  forth  from  the 
Sangameswara  Lingam,  and  were  visible  to  Bdsava,  who  fell  on  the 
ground  before  them.  They  raised  him,  and  led  him  to  the  sanctuary,  and 
all  three  disappeared  in  the  presence  of  the  disciples,  and  they  praised 
their  master,  and  flowers  fell  from  the  sky,  and  then  the  disciples  spread 
themselves  abroad,  and  made  known  the  absorption  of  Bdsava  into  the 
emblem  of  Siva. —  Mackenzie  Collection,  Vol.  2nd.  Hdlakanara  MSS. 

The  date  of  the  events  here  recorded  is  not  particularised,  but  from 
various  authorities,  they  may  be  placed  with  confidence  in  the  early  part 
of  the  eleventh  century*. 

The  Mackenzie  Collection,  from  which  the  above  is  taken,  contains  a 
number  of  worksf  of  a  similar  description,  in  the  ancient  Kanara  dialect. 
There  are  also  several  works  of  the  same  nature  in  Telugu,  as  the  Basa- 
veswara  Purana,   Panditdrddhya  Cheritra,  and  others.       Although  the 

*  Colonel  Wilks  gives  the  same  date,  (Mysore  1,  50ti, )  but  terms  the  founder  Chen 
Bas  IsMvar,  intending  clearly  Chenna  (little)  Bdsava,  the  nephew  of  Bdsava,  or 
Basaveswara.  Buchanan  has  the  name  Bdswana,  ( Mysore  I,  240,)  but  agrees  nearly 
in  the  date,  placing  him  about  seven  hundred  years  ago. 

t  As  the  Bdswana  Purana,  Chenna  Bdsava  Purana,  Prahhulinga  Lild,  Saranu 
Lildmrita,  Viraktaru  Kdvyam,  and  others,  containing  legends  of  a  vast  number  of 
Jangama  Saints  and  Teachers.— ilfac/i:e«~/e  Collection,  Vol,  2. 


147 

language  of  these  compositions  may  now  have  become  obscure  or  obso- 
lete,  it  is  not  invariably  so,  and  at  any  rate  was  once  familiar.  This 
circumstance,  and  the  marvellous  character  of  the  legends  they  relate, 
specimens  of  which  have  been  given  in  the  above  account  of  the  founder 
of  the  sect,  adapted  them  to  the  comprehension  and  taste  of  the  people 
at  large,  and  no  doubt  therefore  exercised  a  proportionate  influence. 
Accordingly,  Wilks,  Buchanan,  and  Dubois,  represent  the  Lingawants  as 
very  numerous  in  the  Dekhin,  especially  in  Mysore,  or  those  countries 
constituting  ancient  Kanara,  and  they  are  also  common  in  Telingana. 
In  Upper  India  there  are  no  popular  works  current,  and  the  only  autho- 
rity is  a  learned  Bhdshya,  or  Comment,  by  Nilkantha,  on  the  Sutras  of 
Vya'sa,  a  work  not  often  met  with,  and,  being  in  Sanscrit,  unintelligible 
to  the  multitude.* 


PARAMAHANSA. 


According  to  the  introduction  of  the  Dwddasa  Mahdvdkya,  by  a  Dandi 
author,  Vaikunthe  Puri,  the  Sanydsi  is  of  four  kinds,  the  Kutichara, 
Bahudaka,  Hansa,  and  Paramahansa:  the  difference  between  whom, 
however,  is  only  the  graduated  intensity  of  their  self-mortification  and 
profound  abstraction.  The  Paramahansaf  is  the  most  eminent  of  these 
gradations,  and  is  the  ascetic  who  is  solely  occupied  with  the  investiga- 

*  Besides  (he  Jangama  priests  of  Keddrniith,  an  opulent  establishment  of  them 
exists  at  Benares  :  its  wealth  arises  from  a  number  of  houses,  occupying  a  consider- 
able space,  called  the  Jangam  Bdri  :  the  title  to  the  property  is  said  to  be  a  grant  to 
the  Jangamas,  regularly  executed  by  Man  Sinh,  and  preserved  on  a  copper  plate  : 
the  story  with  which  the  vulgar  are  deluded  is,  that  it  was  granted  by  one  of  the 
Emperors  of  Hindustan,  in  consequence  of  a  miracle  performed  by  a  Jangama 
devotee.  In  proof  of  the  veracity  of  his  doctrine,  he  proposed  to  fly  :  the  Emperor 
promised  to  give  him  as  much  ground  as  he  could  traverse  in  that  manner  :  not  quite 
satisfied  of  the  impossibility  of  the  feat,  he  had  a  check  string  tied  to  the  ascetic's 
legs,  and  held  by  one  of  the  attendants  :  the  Jangama  mounted,  and  when  he  reached 
the  limits  of  the  present  Jangama  Bdri,  the  Emperor  thinking  that  extent  of 
ground   sufficiently  liberal,  had  him  constrained  to  fly  back  again. 

t  Moor,  in  his  Hindu  Pantheon,  (page  352)  asserts,  upon,  as  he  says,  authentic 
information,  that  the  Paramahansas  eat  human  flesh,  and  that  individuals  of  this  sect 


148 

tion  of  Brahma.,  or  spirit,  and  who  is  equally  indifferent  to  pleasure  or 
pain,  insensible  of  heat  or  cold,  and  incapable  of  satiety  or  want. 

Agreeably  to  this  definition,  individuals  are  sometimes  met  with  who 
pretend  to  have  attained  such  a  degree  of  perfection :  in  proof  of  it  they 
go  naked  in  all  weathers,  never  speak,  and  never  indicate  any  natural 
want :  what  is  brought  to  them  as  alms  or  food,  by  any  person,  is 
received  by  the  attendants,  whom  their  supposed  sanctity  or  a  confe- 
deration of  interest  attaches  to  them,  and  by  these  attendants  they  are 
fed  and  served  on  all  occasions,  as  if  they  were  as  helpless  as  infants. 
It  may  be  supposed  that,  not  unfrequently,  there  is  much  knavery  in 
this  helplessness,  but  there  are  many  Hindus  whose  simple  enthusiasm 
induces  them  honestly  to  practice  such  self-denial,  and  there  is  little  risk 
in  the  attempt,  as  the  credulity  of  their  countrymen,  or  rather  country 
women,  will,  in  most  places,  take  care  that  their  wants  are  amply  sup- 
plied :  these  devotees  are  usually  included  amongst  the  Saiva  ascetics  ; 
but  it  may  be  doubted  whether  the  classification  is  correct. 


AGHORIS. 


The  pretended  insensibility  of  the  Paramahansa  being  of  a  passive 
nature,  is,  at  least,  inoffensive,  and  even  where  it  is  mere  pretence,  the 
retired  nature  of  the  practice  renders  the  deception  little  conspicuous  or 
revolting.  The  same  profession  of  worldly  indifference  characterises  the 
Aghori,  or  Aghorapanthi ;  but  he  seeks  occasions  for  its  display,  and 
demands  alms  as  a  reward  for  its  exhibition. 

The  original  Aghori  worship  seems  to  have  been  that  of  Devi  in  some 
of  her  terrific  forms,  and  to  have  required  even  human  victims  for  its 

are  not  very  unusually  seen  about  Benares,  floating  down  the  river,  and  feeding  upon 
a  corpse  :  it  is  scarcely  necessary  to  add  that  he  is  wholly  wrong  :  the  passage  he  cites 
from  the  Researches  is  quite  correct,  when  it  describes  the  Paramanhansa  as  an 
ascetic  of  the  orthodox  sects,  in  the  last  stage  of  exaltation ;  and  the  practice  he  des- 
cribes, although  far  from  usual,  is  sometimes  heard  of  as  a  filthy  exhibition,  displayed 
for  profit  by  individuals  of  a  very  different  sect,  those  who  occupy  the  ensuing  portion 
of  the  present  text— the  Aghoris, 


149 

performance.*  In  imitation  of  the  formidable  aspect  under  which  the 
goddess  was  worshipped,  the  appearance  of  her  votary  was  rendered  as 
hideous  as  possible,  and  his  wand  and  water-pot  were  a  staff  set  with 
bones  and  the  upper  half  of  a  skull :  the  practices  were  of  a  similar 
nature,  and  flesh  and  spirituous  liquors  constituted,  at  will,  the  diet  of 
the  adept. 

The  regular  worship  of  this  sect  has  long  since  been  suppressed, 
and  the  only  traces  of  it  now  left  are  presented  by  a  few  disgusting 
wretches,  who,  whilst  they  profess  to  have  adopted  its  tenets,  make 
them  a  mere  plea  for  extorting  alms.  In  proof  of  their  indifference  to 
worldly  objects,  they  eat  and  drink  whatever  is  given  to  them,  even 
ordure  and  carrion.  They  smear  their  bodies  also  with  excrement, 
and  carry  it  about  with  them  in  a  wooden  cup,  or  skull,  either  to 
swallow  it,  if  by  so  doing  they  can  get  a  few  pice  ;  or  to  throw  it 
upon  the  persons,  or  into  the  houses  of  those  who  refuse  to  comply 
with  their  demands.  They  also,  for  the  same  purpose,  inflict  gashes 
on  their  limbs,  that  the  crime  of  blood  may  rest  upon  the  head  of 
the  recusant ;  and  they  have  a  variety  of  similar  disgusting  devices  to 
extort  money  from  the  timid  and  credulous  Hindu.  They  are,  fortu- 
nately, not  numerous,  and  are  universally  detested  and  feared. 


URDDHABAHUS,  AKAS  MUKHIS,  AND  NAKHIS. 


Personal  privation  and  torture  being  of  great  efficacy  in  the  creed  of 
the  Hindus,  various  individuals,  some  influenced  by  credulity,  and  some 
by  knavery,  have  adopted  modes  of  distorting  their  limbs,  and  forcing 
them  out  of  their  natural  position,  until  they  can  no  longer  resume  their 
ordinary  direction. 

*  It  may  be  credulity  or  calumny,  but  the  Bhils,  and  other  hill  tribes,  are  constantly 
accused  by  Sanscrit  writers  of  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  centuries,  as  addicted  to  this 
sanguinary  worship.  The  Vrihat  Katha  is  full  of  stories  to  this  effect,  the  scene  of 
which  is  chiefly  in  the  Vindhyu  range.  Its  covert  existence  in  cities  is  inferable  from 
the  very  dramatic  situation  in  Bhavabkuti's  Drama,  Mulati  and  Mddhava,  where 
Mddhava  rescues  his  mistress  from  the  Aghora  Ghanta,  who  is  about  to  sacrifice 
Mdlati  at  the  shrine  of  Chamunda. 


150 

The  Urddhabdhus'^  extend  one  or  both  arms  above  their  heads,  till 
they  remain  of  themselves  thus  elevated.  They  also  close  the  fist,  and 
the  nails  being  necessarily  suffered  to  grow,  make  their  way  between 
the  metacarpal  bones,  and  completely  perforate  the  hand.  The  Urddah- 
hdhus  are  solitary  mendicants,  as  are  all  of  this  description,  and  never 
liave  any  fixed  abode  :  they  subsist  upon  alms  ;  many  of  them  go  naked, 
but  some  wear  a  wrapper  stained  with  ochre  ;  they  usually  assume  the 
Saiva  marks,  and  twist  their  hair  so  as  to  project  from  the  forehead, 
in  imitation  of  the  Jata  of  Siva. 

The  Akdsmukhis\  hold  up  their  faces  to  the  sky,  till  the  muscles  oi 
the  back  of  the  neck  become  contracted,  and  retain  it  in  that  position  : 
they  wear  the  Jata,  and  allow  the  beard  and  whiskers  to  grow,  smearing 
the  body  with  ashes  :  some  wear  coloured  garments  :  they  subsist  upon 
alms. 

The  Nakhis  are  of  a  similar  description  with  the  two  preceding,  but 
their  personal  characteristic  is  of  a  less  extravagant  nature,  being  con- 
fined to  the  length  of  their  finger  nails,  which  they  never  cut :  they  also 
live  by  begging,  and  wear  the  Saiva  marks. 


GUDARAS. 


The  Gudaras  are  so  named  from  a  pan  of  metal  which  they  carry 
about  with  them,  and  in  which  they  have  a  small  fire,  for  the  purpose 
of  burning  scented  woods  at  the  houses  of  the  persons  from  whom  they 
receive  alms.  These  alms  they  do  not  solicit  further  than  by  repeating 
the  word  Alakh,X  expressive  of  the  indescribable  nature  of  the  deity. 
They  have  a  peculiar  garb,  wearing  a  large  round  cap,  and  a  long  froci 
or  coat,  stained  with  ochery  clay.  Some  also  wear  ear-rings,  like  the 
Kdnphata  Jogis,  or  a  cylinder  of  wood  passed  through  the  lobe  of  the 
ear,  which  they  term  the  Khechari  Mudrd,  the  seal  or  symbol  of  the 
deity,  of  him  who  moves  in  the  heavens. 

*   Urddha,  above,  and  Bdhu,  the  arm. 

t  A'kus,  the  sky,  and  Mukha,  the  face. 

X  A,  the  negative  prefix,  and  Lakshma,  a  mark,  a  distinction. 


151 


RUKHARAS,  SUKHARAS,  AND  UKHARAS. 

The  Sukharas  are  Saiva  mendicants,  distinguished  by  carrying  a 
stick  three  spans  in  length  :  they  dress  in  a  cap  and  sort  of  petticoat 
stained  with  ochery  earth,  smear  their  bodies  with  ashes,  and  wear  ear- 
rings of  the  Rudrdksha  seed.  They  also  wear  over  the  left  shoulder  a 
narrow  piece  of  cloth  dyed  with  ochre,  and  twisted,  in  place  of  the 
Zenar. 

The  Rukharas  are  of  similar  habits  and  appearance,  but  they  do  not 
carry  the  stick,  nor  wear  the  Ruddrdksha  ear-rings,  but  in  their  place 
metallic  ones  :  these  two  classes  agree  with  the  preceding  in  the  watch- 
word, exclaiming  Alakh,  as  they  pass  along  ;  the  term  is,  however,  used 
by  other  classes  of  mendicants. 

The  Ukharas  are  said  to  be  members  of  either  of  the  preceding  classes, 
who  drink  spirituous  liquors,  and  eat  meat :  they  appear  to  be  the  refuse 
of  the  three  preceding  mendicant  classes,  who,  in  general,  are  said  to  be 
of  mild  and  inoffensive  manners. 


KARA  LINGIS. 


These  are  vagabonds  of  little  credit,  except  sometimes  amongst  the 
most  ignorant  portions  of  the  community  :  they  are  not  often  met  with  ; 
they  go  naked,  and  to  mark  their  triumph  over  sensual  desires,  affix  an 
iron  ring  and  chain  on  the  male  organ  :*  they  are  professedly  worship- 
pers of  Siva. 


SANYASIS,  BRAHMACHARIS,  AND  AVADHUTAS. 


Although  the  terms  Sanydsi  and  Vairdgi  are,  in  a  great  measure, 
restricted  amongst  the  Vaishnavas  to  peculiar  classes,  the  same  limit 

*  These  ascetics  were  the  persons  who  attracted  the  notice  of  the  earlier  travellers, 
especially  Bernier  and  Tavernier.  They  were  more  numerous  then,  probably, 
than  they  are  at  present,  and  this  appears  to  be  the  case  with  most  of  the  mendicants 
who  practised  on  the  superstitious  admiration  of  the  vulgar. 


152 

can  scarcely  be  adopted  with  regard  to  the  Saivas.  All  the  sects,  except 
the  Sanyogi  Atits,  are  so  far  Sanydsi,  or  excluded  from  the  world,  as  not 
to  admit  of  married  teachers,  a  circumstance  far  from  uncommon,  as  we 
have  seen  amongst  the  more  refined  followers  of  Vishnu.  Most  of 
the  Saiva  sects,  indeed,  are  of  a  very  inferior  description  to  those  of  the 
Vaishnavas. 

Besides  the  individuals  who  adopt  the  Danda  Grahana,  and  are  un- 
connected with  the  Dasndmis,  there  is  a  set  of  devotees  who  remain, 
through  life,  members  of  the  condition  of  the  Bramachdri,  or  student  :* 
these  are  also  regarded  as  Sanydsis,  and  where  the  term  is  used  in  a 
definite  sense,  these  twelve  kinds,  the  Dandis,  Brahmachdris,  and  ten 
Dasndmi  orders  are  implied.  In  general,  however,  the  term,  as  well  as 
Avadhuta,  or  Avdhauta,  and  Alakhndmi,  express  all  the  Saiva  classes  of 
mendicants,  except,  perhaps,  the  Jogis. 


NAGAS. 


The  Siava  Sanydsis  who  go  naked,  are  distinguished  by  this  term. 
They  smear  their  bodies  with  ashes,  allow  their  hair,  beards,  and  whis- 
kers to  grow,  and  wear  the  projecting  braid  of  hair,  called  the  Jata  ; 
like  the  Vairdgi  Ndgas,  they  carry  arms,  and  wander  about  in  troops, 
soliciting  alms,  or  levying  contributions.  The  Saiva  Ndgas  are  chiefly 
the  refuse  of  the  Dandi  and  Atit  orders,  or  men  who  have  no  inclination 
for  a  life  of  study  or  business  :  when  weary  of  the  vagrant  and  violent 
habits  of  the  Ndga,  they  re-enter  the  better  disposed  classes,  which  they 
had  first  quitted.  The  Saiva  Ndgas  are  very  numerous  in  many  parts  of 
India,  though  less  so  in  the  Company's  provinces  than  in  any  other  ; 
they  were  formerly  in  great  numbers  in    Bundelkand,\  and   Himmet 

*  The  Dirghakdla  Brahma  char  yam,  or  protracted  period  of  studentship  is,  however, 
amongst  the  acts  enumerated  in  various  authorities  of  indisputable  character,  as  those 
which  are  prohibited  in  the  Kali  age. 

t  A  party  of  them  attacked  Colonel  Goddard's  troops  in  their  march  between 
Dorawal  and  Herapur,  the  assailants  were  no  more  than  four  or  five  hundred,  but 
about  two  thousand  hovered  about  the  rear  of  the  army :  they  are  called  Pandarums 
in  the  narrative,  but  were  evidently  Saiva  Nagas.  Pennant's  Hindustan,  '2,  192. 
The  Vindicator  of  the  Hindus,  speaking  of  them,  observes,  that  they  often  engage  in 


153 

Bahadar  was  a  pupil  of  one  of  their  Mahants,  Ra'jendra  Gir,  one  of 
the  lapsed  Dasndmi  ascetics.  These  Ndgas  are  the  particular  opponents 
of  the  Vairdgi  Ndgas,  and  were,  no  doubt,  the  leading  actors  in  the 
bloody  fray  at  Haridwar,^  which  had  excluded  the  Vaishnavas  from  the 
great  fair  there,  from  1760,  till  the  British  acquired  the  country.  The 
leader  of  the  Saiva  party  was  called  Dhokal  Gir,  and  he,  as  well  as  the 
spiritual  guide  of  Himmet  Bahadar,  was,  consequently  of  the  Dasndmi 
order,  which  would  thus  seem  to  be  addicted  to  violent  and  war-like 
habits.  With  respect  to  the  sanguinary  affray  at  Haridwar,  in  which 
we  are  told  eighteen  thousand  Vairdgis  were  left  dead  on  the  field,  there 
is  a  different  legend  current  of  the  origin  of  the  conflict,  from  that  given 
in  the  Researches,  but  neither  of  them  is  satisfactory,  nor  indeed  is  any 
particular  cause  necessary,  as  the  opposite  objects  of  worship,  and  the 
pride  of  strength  and  numbers,  and  consequent  struggle  for  pre-eminence, 
are  quite  sufficient  to  account  for  the  dispute. f 


the  rival  contests  of  the  Indian  Chiefs,  and,  on  a  critical  occasion  some  years  ago,  six 
thousand  of  them  joined  the  forces  of  the  Mahratta  Chief  Sinpiah,  and  enabled  him, 
with  an  equal  number  of  his  own  troops,  to  discomfit  an  array  of  thirty  thousand  men, 
headed  by  one  of  his  rebellious  subjects. 

*  A.  H,  11.  455.  It  may  be  observed,  that  a  very  accurate  account  is  given  in 
the  same  place  of  the  general  appearance  and  habits  of  the  Saiva  Sanyasis  and  Jogis, 
the  Vaishnava  Vair&gis,  and  Uddsis  of  Nanckshah.  The  term  Gosain,  as  correlative 
to  Sanydsi,  is  agreeable  to  common  usage,  but,  as  has  been  elsewhere  observed,  is  more 
strictly  applicable  to  very  different  characters. 

t  The  irregular  practices  of  these  and  other  mendicants,  have  attracted  the  lash  of 
Kabir,  in  the  following  Remaini : 

Rrmaini  69. 


H^  f%^  1%^  iTXIi^Tt,  &;c. 


"  I  never  beheld  such  diJogi,  Oh  brother!  forgetting  his  doctrine,  he  roves  about  in 
negligence.  He  follows,  professedly,  the  faith  of  IVIaha'deva,  and  calls  himself  an 
eminent  teacher  ;  the  scene  of  his  abstraction  is  the  fair  or  market.  Ma'ya'  is  the 
mistress  of  the  false  saint.  When  did  Dattatreya  demolish  a  dwelling;  when  did 
Sd'kadeva  collect  an  armed  host;  when  did  Na'rada  mount  a  matchlock  ;  when  did 
Vya'sadeva  blow  a  trumpet.  In  making  war,  the  creed  is  violated.  Is  he  an  Ati't, 
who  is  armed  with  a  quiver?  Is  he  a  Viraktd,  who  is  filled  with  covetousness  ?  His 
garb  is  put  to  shame  by  his  gold  ornaments  ;  he  has  assembled  horses  and  mares ;  is 
possessed  of  villages  ;  is  called  a  man  of  wealth  ;  a  beautiful  woman  was  not  amongst 
the  embellishments  of  Sdnakd,  and  his  brethren  ;  he  who  carries  with  him  a  vessel  of 
ink,  cannot  avoid  soilins  his  raiment. 


154 
SAKTAS. 

The  worshippers  of  the  Sakti,  the  power  or  energy  of  the  divine  na- 
ture in  action,  are  exceedingly  numerous  amongst  all  classes  of  Hindus.* 
This  active  energy  is,  agreeably  to  the  spirit  of  the  mythological  system, 
personified,  and  the  form  with  which  it  is  invested  considered  as  the  espe- 
cial object  of  veneration,  depends  upon  the  bias  entertained  by  the  indivi- 
duals towards  the  adoration  of  Vishnu  or  Siva.  In  the  former  case,  the 
personified  Sakti  is  termed  Lakshmi',  or  Maha'  Lakshmi,  and  in  the 
latter,  Pa'rvati,  Bhava'ni  or  Durga'.  Even  Saraswati'  enjoys  some 
portion  of  homage,  much  more  than  her  lord,  Brahma',  whilst  a  vast 
variety  of  inferior  beings  of  malevolent  character,  and  formidable  aspect, 
receive  the  worship  of  the  multitude.  The  bride  of  Siva,  however,  in 
one  or  other  of  her  many  and  varied  forms,  is  by  far  the  most  popular 
emblem  in  Bengal,  and  along  the  Ganges. 

The  worship  of  the  female  principle,  as  distinct  from  the  divinity, 
appears  to  have  originated  in  the  literal  interpretation  of  the  metaphori- 
cal language  of  the  Vedas,  in  which  the  will  or  purpose  to  create  the  uni- 
verse, is  represented  as  originating  from  the  creator,  and  co- existent 
with  him  as  his  bride,  and  part  of  himself.  Thus  in  the  Rig  Veda, 
it  is  said  "  That  divine  spirit  breathed  without  afflation  single,  with 
(Swadha)  her  who  is  sustained  within  him  ;  other  than  him  nothing 
existed.  First  desire  was  formed  in  his  mind,  and  that  became  the 
original  productive  seed,t  and  the  Sdma  Veda,  speaking  of  the  divine 
cause  of  creation,  says,  "  He  felt  not  delight,  being  alone.  He  wished 
another,  and  instantly  became  such.  He  caused  his  ownself  to  fall 
in  twain,  and  thus  became  husband  and  wife.  He  approached  her, 
and  thus  were  human  beings  produced. "J  In  these  passages  it  is 
not  unlikely  that  reference  is  made  to  the  primitive  tradition  of  the 
origin  of  mankind,  but  there  is  also  a  figurative  representation  ol 
the  first  indication  of  wish  or  will  in  the  Supreme  Being.  Being 
devoid  of  all  qualities  whatever,  he  was  alone,  until  he  permittee 
the  wish  to  be  multiplied,  to  be  generated  within  himself.  This 
wish  being  put  into  action,  it  is  said,  became  united  with  its  parent 

*  It  has  been  computed,  that  of  the  Hindus  of  Bengal,  at  least  three-fourths  are  o 
this  sect;  of  the  remaining  fourth,  three  parts  are  Faishnavas,  and  one  Saivas,  &c. 
t  Asiatic  Researches,  Vlll.  393. 
X  Asiatic  Researches,  VIII.  426. 


155 

and  then  created  beings  were  produced.  Thus  this  first  manifestation  of 
divine  power  is  termed  Ichchhdrupad,  personified,  desire  ;  and  the  crea- 
tor is  designated  as  Swechchamaya,*  united  with  his  own  will  whilst  in 
the  Vedanta  philosophy,  and  the  popular  sects,  such  as  that  of  Kabir, 
and  others,  in  which  all  created  things  are  held  to  be  illusory,  the 
Sakti,  or  active  will  of  the  deity,  is  always  designated  and  spoken  of  as 
Mayd  or  Mahdmayd,  original  deceit  or  illusion. f 

Another  set  of  notions  of  some  antiquity,  which  contributed  to  form 
the  character  of  the  Sakti,  whether  general  or  particular,  were  derived 
from  the  Sdnkhya  philosophy.  In  this  system.  Nature,  Prakriti,  or 
Mula  Prakriti,  is  defined  to  be  of  eternal  existence,  and  independent 
origin,  distinct  from  the  supreme  spirit,  productive  though  no  produc- 
tion, and  the  plastic  origin  of  all  things,  including  even  the  gods.  Hence 
Prakriti  has  come  to  be  regarded  as  the  mother  of  gods  and  men,  whilst 
as  one  with  matter,  the  source  of  error,  it  is  again  identified  with  Mayd, 
or  delusion,  and  as  co-existent  with  the  Supreme  as  his  Sakti,  his  per- 
sonified energy,  or  his  bride.  J 

♦  Thus,  in  the  Brahma  Vaivertta  Purana,  which  has  a  whole  section  dedicated 
to  the  manifestations  of  the  female  principle,  or  a  Prakriti  Khanda. 


ff  f^H^  5TH^T  ^T^*  -^^ftll  ^^f  II 


The  Lord  was  alone  invested  with  the  Supreme  form,  and  beheld  the  whole  world, 
with  the  sky  and  regions  of  space,  a  void  Having  contemplated  all  things  in  his  mind, 
he,  without  any  assistant,  began  with  the  will,  to  create  all  things.  He,  the  Lord, 
endowed  with  the  wish  for  creation. 

t  So  also  in  the  authority  last  quoted. 

She  (Prakriti,)  one  with,  Brahma,  is  Maya,  eternal,  everlasting.  And  in  the 
Kalika  Purana. 

Prakriti  is  termed  Inherent  Mayd,  because  she  beguiles  all  beings. 

X  In  the  Gita,  Prakriti  is  identified  with  all  the  elementary  predicates  of  matter. 


156 

These  mythological  fancies  have  been  principally  disseminated  by  the 
Puranas,  in  all  which  Prakriti,  or  Maya,  bears  a  prominent  part.  The 
agE^regate  of  the  whole  is  given  in  the  Brahma  Vaivartta  Purana,  one 
section  of  which,  the  Prakriti  Khanda,  is  devoted  to  the  subject,  and  in 
which  the  legends  relating  to  the  principal  modifications  of  the  female 
principle  are  narrated. 

According  to  this  authority,  Brahma,  or  the  Supreme  Being,  having 
determined  to  create  the  universe  by  his  super- human  power,  became 
twofold,  the  right  half  becoming  a  male,  the  left  half  a  female,  which 
was  Prakriti.  She  was  of  one  nature  with  Brahma.  She  was  illusion, 
eternal  and  without  end  :  as  is  the  soul,  so  is  its  active  energy  ;  as  the 
faculty  of  burning  is  in  fire.*  In  another  passage  it  is  said,  that 
Krishna,  who  is  in  this  work  identified  with  the  Supreme,  being  alone 
invested  with  the  divine  nature,  beheld  all  one  universal  blank,  and 
contemplating  creation  with  his  mental  vision,  he  began  to  create  all 
things  by  his  own  will,  being  united  with  his  will,  which  became  mani- 
fest as  Mu'la  Prakriti.!      The  original  Prakriti  first  assumed  five 

"  This,  my  Prakriti,  is  inherently  eight-fold,  or  earth,  water,  fire,  air,  ether,  mind, 
intellect,  individuality." 

So  also  the  Kurma  Purana  (Chapter,  12). 

His  Energy,  being  the  universal  form  of  all  the  world,  is  called  Maya,  for  so  does 
the  Lord  the  best  of  males  and  endowed  will  illusion  cause  it  to  revolve.  That  Sakti 
of  which  the  essence  is  illusion,  is  omniform  and  eternal,  and  constantly  displays  the 
universal  shape  of  Mahesa. 


He,   by  the  power  of  Yoga,  became  himself  in  the  act  of  creation  two-fold,  the 
right  half  was  the  male,  the  left  was  called  Prakriti. 


From  the  wish  which  was  the  creative  impulse  of  Sri  Krishna,  endowed  with  his 
will,  she,  Mtcla  Prakriti,  the  Supreme,  became  manifest. 


157 

forms* — Durga'  the  bride,  Sakti,  and  Mayd,  of  Siva,  Lakshmi'  the 
bride,  Sakti  and  Mayd  of  Vishnu,  Saraswati  the  same  of  Brahma,  or 
in  the  Brahma  Vaivartta  Purana,  of  Hari,  whilst  the  next,  Sa'vitri  is 
the  bride  of  Brahma'.  The  fifth  division  of  the  original  Prakriti,  was 
Ra'uha',  the  favourite  of  the  youthful  Krishna,  and  unquestionably  a 
modern  intruder  into  the  Hindu  Pantheon. 

Besides  these  more  important  manifestations  of  the  female  principle, 
the  whole  body  of  goddesses  and  nymphs  of  every  order,  are  eaid  to 
have  sprung  from  the  same  source,  and  indeed  every  creature,  whether 
human  or  brutal,  of  the  female  sex,  is  referred  to  the  same  principle, 
whilst  the  origin  of  males  is  ascribed  to  the  primitive  Purusha,  or  male. 
In  every  creation  of  the  universe,  it  is  said  the  Mu'la  Prakriti  assumes 
the  different  gradations  of  Ansarupini,  Kaldrdpini  and  Kaldnsarupini,\ 
or  manifests  herself  in  portions,  parts,  and  portions  of  parts,  and  further 
subdivisions.  The  chief  Ansas  are,  besides  the  five  already  enumerated, 
Ganga',  Tulasi,  Manasa'  Sashthi,  or  Devasna,  Mangala'chandika, 
and  Ka'li'  ;  the  principal  Kalds  are  Swa'ha',  Swadha,  Dakshina, 
SwASTi,  Pushti,  Tushti,  and  others,  most  of  which  are  allegorical 
personifications,  as  Dhriti,  fortitude,  Pratishthd,  fame,  and  Adharma, 
Wickedness,  the  bride  of  Mrityu,  or  Death.  Aditi,  the  mother  of  the 
gods,  and  Diti,  the  mother  of  the  demons,  are  also  Kalds  of  Prakriti. 
The  list  includes  all  the  secondary  goddesses.  The  Kaldnsas  and 
Ansdnsas,  or  sub-divisions  of  the  more  important  manifestations,  are 
all  womankind,  who  are  distinguished  as  good,  middling,  or  bad,  accord- 
ing as  they  derive  their  being,  from  the  parts  of  their  great  original,  in 
which  the  Satya,  Rajas,  and  Tama  Guna,  or  property  of  goodness, 
passion,  and  vice  predominates.  At  the  same  time  as  manifestations  of 
the  great  Cause  of  all  they  are  entitled  to  respect,  and  even  to  venera- 
tion :  whoever,  says  the  Brahma  Vaivartta  Purana,  offends  or  insults  a 


ff^T^iTT  ^^t%^T  ^ffe  ^fi:Hl%5T^fT: 


And  she  (the  Miila  Prakriti.)  became  in  the  act  of  creation  five-fold  by  the  will 
ot  the  Supreme. 


In  every  creation  of  the  universe  the  Devi,  through  divine  Yoga,  assumes  different 
forms,  and  becomes  Ansarupd,  Kalarupd,  and  Kaldnsarupd,  or  Ansdnsariipd, 


158 

female,  incurs  the  wrath  of  Prakriti,  whilst  he  who  propitiates  a  female, 
particularly  the  youthful  daughter  of  a  Brahman,  with  clothes,  orna- 
ments and  perfumes,  oflfers  worship  to  Prakriti  herself.  It  is  in  the 
spirit  of  this  last  doctrine  that  one  of  the  principal  rites  of  the  Sdktas, 
is  the  actual  worship  of  the  daughter  or  wife  of  a  Brahman,  and  leads 
with  one  branch  of  the  sect  at  least  to  the  introduction  of  gross  impuri- 
ties. But  besides  this  derivation  of  Prakriti,  or  Sakti,  from  the 
Supreme,  and  the  secondary  origin  of  all  female  nature  from  her,  those 
who  adopt  her  as  their  especial  divinity,  employ  the  language  invari- 
ably addressed  towards  the  preferential  object  of  worship  in  every  sect, 
and  contemplate  her  as  comprising  all  existence  in  her  essence.  Thus 
she  is  not  only  declared  to  be  one  with  the  male  deity,  of  whose  energy 
some  one  of  her  manifestations  is  the  type,  as  Devi  with  Siva,  and 
Lakshmi  with  Vishnu  ;  but  it  is  said,  that  she  is  equally  in  all  things, 
and  that  all  things  are  in  her,  and  that  besides  her,  there  is  nothing.* 

Although  the  adoration  of  Prakriti  or  Sakti  is,  to  a  certain  ex- 
tent, authorised  by  the  Purdnas,  particularly  the  Brahma  Vaivartta,  the 
Skanda,  and  the  Kdlikd,  yet  the  principal  rites  and  formulae  are  derived 
from  an  independent  series  of  works,  known  by  the  collective  term  of 
Tantras.  These  are  infinitely  numerous,  and  in  some  instances  of  great 
extent ;  they  always  assume  the  form  of  a  dialogue  between  Siva  and 
bis  bride,  in  one  of  her  many  forms,  but  mostly  as  Uma'  and  Parvati, 
in  which  the  goddess  questions  the  god  as  to  the  mode  of  performing 
various  ceremonies,  and  the  prayers  and  incantations  to  be  used  in 
them.     These  he  explains  at  length,  and  under  solemn  cautions  that 

*  Thus  in  the  Kasi  Khanda  — 

^TtTt^  ^r^f^W  f%f^^r^  ^^Wf^fT 

Thou  art  predicated  in  every  prayer— 5ra/^ma  and  the  rest  are  all  born  from  thee. 
Thou  art  one  with  the  tour  objects  of  life,  and  from  thee  they  come  to  fruit.  From 
thee  this  whole  universe  proceeds,  and  in  thee,  asylum  of  the  world,  all  is,  whether 
visible  or  invisible,  gross  or  subtle  in  its  nature  ;  what  is,  thou  art  in  the  Sakti  form, 
and  except  thee  nothing  has  ever  been. 


159 

they  involve  a  great  mystery,  on  no  account  whatever  to  be  divulged  to 
the  profane. 

The  followers  of  the  Tantras  profess  to  consider  them  as  a  fifth  Veda, 
and  attribute  to  them  equal  antiquity,  and  superior  authority.*  The 
observances  they  prescribe  have,  indeed,  in  Bengal,  almost  superseded 
the  original  ritual.  The  question  of  there  date  is  involved  in  consider- 
able obscurity.  From  the  practices  described  in  some  of  the  Purdnas, 
particularly  that  of  the  Dikshd  or  rite  of  initiation,  in  the  Agni  Purdnas, 
from  the  specification  of  formulae,  comprising  the  mystical  monosyllables 
of  the  Tantras  in  that  and  other  similar  compilations,  and  from  the 
citation  of  some  of  them  by  name  in  different  Paurdnic  works, f  we  must 
conclude  that  some  of  the  Tantras  are  prior  to  those  authorities.  But 
the  date  of  the  Purdnas  themselves  is  far  from  determined,  and  whilst 
some  parts  of  them  may  be  of  considerable  antiquity,  other  portions  of 
most,  if  not  of  all,  are  undoubtedly  subsequent  to  the  tenth  century  of 
the  Christian  era.     It  is  not  unlikely,  however,  that  several  of  the  Tan- 

*  Thus,  in  the  Siva  Tantra,  Siva  is  made  to  say — 

^fT^^r^T^  ^^^  ^mmm:  iT^tf^fTT:  i 

"The  five  Scriptures  issued  from  my  five  mouths,  and  were  the  east,  west,  south, 
north,  and  upper.  These  five  are  known  as  the  paths  to  final  liberation.  There  are 
many  Scriptures,  but  none  are  equal  to  the  Upper  Scripture."  Kulliika  Bhatta, 
commenting  on  the  first  verse  of  the  second  chapter  of  Menu,  says,  the  Sruti  is  two- 
fold—Fa  tdj'Aro  and  Tantrika  ; 


^f?T^  firf%^T  tf^^fit  mf^^  ^  II 


t  As  in  the  Kiirma  Purana,  the  Kapdla^  Bhairava,  Vdma  and  Ydmala,  and  the 
Panchardtrd  in  the  Vardha ;  we  have  also  a  number  mentioned  in  the  Sankara 
Vijayas,  of  both  Anandagiri  and  Mddhava  as  the  Siva  Gita,  Siva  Sanhitd,  Riidra 
Ydmala,  and  Siva  Rahasya.  It  is  also  said  in  Anandagiri's  work,  that  the  Brah- 
manas  were  cursed  by  Gayatri,  to  become  Tdnirikas  in  the  Kali  age. 


^  ^^  ^^5??^^  f^f?T  fTT^TT^^T^^ 


"  She  being  angry  said  to  them,  in  the  Kali  age,  after  abandoning  the  Feda  ritual, 
become  followers  of  the  Tantrika  observances. 


160 

tras  are  of  earlier  composition,  especially  as  we  find  the  system  they 
inculcate,  included  by  Anandagiri,  in  his  life  of  Sankara'cha'rya, 
amongst  the  heterodoxies  which  that  Legislator  succeeded  in  confuting. 
On  the  other  hand,  there  appears  no  indication  of  Tantrika  notions  in 
the  Mahdhhdrat,  and  the  name  of  Tantra,  in  the  sense  of  a  religious  text 
book,  does  not  occur  in  the  vocabulary  of  Amera  Sinha.  It  may 
therefore  be  inferred,  that  the  system  originated  at  some  period  in  the 
early  centuries  of  Christianity,  being  founded  on  the  previous  worship  of 
the  female  principle,  and  the  practices  of  the  Yoga  with  the  Mantras,  or 
mystical  formulae  of  the  Vedas.  It  is  equally  certain  that  the  observan- 
ces of  the  Tantras  have  been  carried  to  more  exceptionable  extremes  in 
comparatively  modern  times,  and  that  many  of  the  works  themselves 
are  of  recent  composition.  They  appear  also  to  have  been  written  chief- 
ly in  Bengal  and  the  Eastern  districts,  many  of  them  being  unknown  in 
the  West  and  South  of  India,  and  the  rites  they  teach  having  there 
failed  to  set  aside  the  ceremonies  of  the  Vedas,  although  they  are  not 
without  an  important  influence  upon  the  belief  and  the  practices  of  the 
people. 

The  Tantras  are  too  numerous  to  admit  in  this  place  of  their  spe- 
cification, but  the  principal  are  the  Sydma  Rahusya,  Rudra  Ydmala, 
Mantra  Mahodadhi,  Sdreda  TVeka,  and  Kdlikd  Tantra,  whilst  the  Kula- 
churdmani,  Kuldrnava,  and  similar  works,  are  the  chief  authorities  of  one 
portion  of  the  Sdktas,  the  sect  being  divided  into  two  leading  branches, 
the  Dakshindcharis  and  Vdmdcharis,  or  followers  of  the  right  hand  and 
left  hand  ritual. 


DAKSHINAS,  OR  BHAKTAS. 


When  the  worship  of  any  goddess  is  performed  in  a  public  manner,  and 
agreeably  to  the   Vaidik  or  Paurdnik  ritual,*  it  does  not  comprehend 

*  The  peculiarites  of  this  sect  are  described  in  the  Dakshindchara  Tantra  Raja,  a 
modern  summary  of  the  system  by  Kdsinath  :  according  to  this  authority — 


^f^tFFT'^T^  ff^]n  ^JfffT^tr  ^f^JT 


"  The  ritual  declared  in  the  Tantras  of  the  Dakskindchdras,  is  pure,  and  conform- 
able to  the  Vedas." 


161 

the  impure  practices  which  are  attributed  to  a  different  division  of  the 
adorers  of  Sakti,  and  which  are  particularly  prescribed  to  the  followers 
of  this  system.  In  this  form  it  is  termed  the  DaksMna,  or  right  hand 
form  of  worship.*  The  only  observance  that  can  be  supposed  to  form 
an  exception  to  the  general  character  of  this  mode  is  the  Bali,  an  offer- 
ing of  blood,  in  which  rite  a  number  of  helpless  animals,  usually  kids, 
are  annually  decapitated.  In  some  cases,  life  is  offered  without  shed- 
ding blood,  when  the  more  barbarous  practice  is  adopted  of  pummelling 
with  the  fists  the  poor  animal  to  death  :  at  other  times  blood  only  is 
offered  without  injury  to  life.  These  practices,  however,  are  not  consi- 
dered as  orthodox,  and  approach  rather  to  the  ritual  of  the  Vdmdcharis,f 
the  more  pure  Bali,  consisting  of  edible  grain,  with  milk  and  sugar. 
Animal  victims  are  also  offered  to  Devi,  in  her  terrific  forms  only,  as 
Ka'li'  or  Durga'.  The  worship  is  almost  confined  to  a  few  districts  ; 
and,  perhaps,  is  carried  to  no  great  extent. 

The  Fdma  ritual,  although  declared  by  me,  was  intended  for  Sudras  only.  A 
Brahman,  from  receiving  spirituous  liquor,  forfeits  his  Brahmanical  character— let  it 
not  be  done— let  it  not  ever  be  done.  Goddess,  it  is  brutality,  never  let  it  be  prac- 
tised. 

t  f^ft^^ftr^T^mT  Kmw^  ^xf?^^j  5§;  1 

The  Bali  is  of  two  kinds,  Rdjasa  and  Sdtwika  ;  the  first  consists  of  meat,  and  in- 
cludes the  three  kinds  of  flesh  ;  the  second  of  pulse  and  rice-milk,  with  the  three  sweet 
articles,  (ghee,  honey,  and  sugar,)  let  the  Brahman,  always  pure,  ofTer  only  the 
Sutwika  Bali. 

The  Brahmavaivartta  also  observes—"  The  animal  sacrifices,  it  is  true,  gratify 
Durga'  ;  but  they,  at  the  same  time,  subject  the  sacrificer  to  the  sin  which  attaches 
to  the  destroyer  of  animal  life.  It  is  declared  by  the  Vedas,  that  he  who  slays  an 
animal,  is  hereafter  slain  by  the  slain.     "  Brahma  Vaivartta  Purana." 


162 

Although  any  of  the  goddesses  may  be  objects  of  the  Sakta  worship, 
and  the  term  Sakti  comprehends  them  all,  yet  the  homage  of  the  Saktas 
is  almost  restricted  to  the  wife  of  Siva,  and  to  Siva  himself,  as  identi- 
fied with  his  consort.*  The  sect  is,  in  fact,  a  ramification  from  the 
common  Saiva  stock,  and  is  referred  to  Siva  himself  as  its  institutor. 
In  the  Tantras,  as  has  been  noticed,  he  appears  as  its  professor,  ex- 
pounding to  Pa'rvati  the  mantras,  tenets,  and  observances  of  the  Sakta 
worship,  whether  of  the  right  or  left  hand  description. 

The  worship  of  Devi,  thus  naturally  resulting  from  the  works  on 
which  the  Sakta  doctrines  are  founded,  is  one  of  considerable  antiquity 
and  popularity.  Laying  aside  all  uncertain  and  fabulous  testimony,  the 
adoration  of  Vindhya  Vdsini,  near  Mirzapur,\  has  existed  for  more  than 
seven  centuries,  and  that  of  Jwdlamukhi,  at  Nagarkot,  very  early  attract- 
ed Mohammedan  persecution.^  These  places  still  retain  their  reputa- 
tion, and  are  the  objects  of  pilgrimage  to  devout  Hindus.  On  the  eighth 
of  the  dark  fortnight  of  Chaitra  Kdrtik  in  particular,  a  numerous  as- 
semblage of  pilgrims  takes  place  at  them. 


"  The  joint  form  of  Siva  and  Sakti  is  to  be  worshipped  by  the  virtuous.  Whoever 
adores  Sakti,  and  offers  not  adoration  to  Siva,  that  Mantrka  is  diseased;  he  is  a 
sinner,  and  hell  will  be  his  portion."  For  it  appears  that  some  of  the  .Sa^^a^  elevate 
the  Sakti  above  the  Saktima'n,  or  deity  :  thus  the  Vdmis,  in  the  Sankara  Vijaya, 
say  : 

"  Sakti  gives  strength  to  Siva,  without  her  he  could  not  stir  a  straw.  She  is, 
therefore,  the  cause  of  Siva. 

And  again  ;  of  the  two  objects  which  are  eternal,  the  greater  is  the  Sakti. 

t  It  is  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Vrihat  Katha,  the  age  of  which  work  is  ascer- 
tained to  be  about  seven  centuries.  Nagarkot  was  taken  by  Firoz  the  3d,  in  1360, 
(  Dow  2.  55,)  at  which  time  the  goddess  Jwdlamukhi  was  then  worshipped  there. 

X  For  a  full  account  of  both,  the  work  of  Mr.  Ward  may  be  advantageously  consult- 
ed—II.  89  to  96,  and  125  to  131. 


163 

The  adoration  of  Ka'li,  or  Durga',  is,  however,  particularly  prevalent 
in  Bengal,  and  is  cultivated  with  practices  scarcely  known  in  most  other 
provinces.  Her  great  festival,  the  Dasahara,  is,  in  the  West  of  India, 
marked  by  no  particular  honors,  whilst  its  celebration  in  Bengal  occu- 
pies ten  days  of  prodigal  expenditure.  This  festival,  the  Durgd  Pujd, 
is  now  well  known  to  Europeans,  as  is  the  extensive  and  popular  estab- 
lishment near  Calcutta,  the  temple  of  Ka'li,  at  Kdli  GMt.  The  rites 
observed  in  that  place,  and  at  the  Durgd  Pitj'd,  however,  almost  place 
the  Bengali  Saktas  amongst  the  Vdmdcharis,  notwithstanding  the  rank 
assigned  them  in  the  Dakshindchdri  Tantrardja,  which  classes  the 
Gauras  with  the  Keralas  and  Kashmirians,  as  the  three  principal 
divisions  of  the  purer  worshippers  of  Sakti. 


VAMIS,  OR  VAMACHARIS. 


The  Vdmis  mean  the  left  hand  worshippers,  or  those  who  adopt  a 
ritual  contrary  to  that  which  is  usual,  and  to  what  indeed  they  dare 
publicly  avow.*  They  worship  Devi,  the  Sakti  of  Siva,  but  all  the 
goddesses,  as  Lakshmi,  Saraswati,  the  Mdtris,  the  Ndyikas,  the  Yoginis, 
and  even  the  fiend-like  Ddkinis,  and  Sdkinis,  are  admitted  to  a  share  of 
homage.  With  them,  as  well  as  with  the  preceding  sect,  Siva  is  also 
an  object  of  veneration,  especially  in  the  form  of  Bhairava,  with  which 
modification  of  the  deity  it  is  the  object  of  the  worshipper  to  identify 
himself.f 

*  The  following  verse  is  from  the  Syama  Rahasya— 

•'  Inwardly  Saktas,  outwordly  Saivas,  or  in  society  nominally  Faishnavas,  the 
Kaulas  assuming  various  forms,  traverse  the  earth." 

CffT^f^r^T  ^f^i  ^^I^^t  ^^T^TrT  II 

I  am  Bhairava,  1  am  the  omniscient,  endowed  with  qualities.  Having  thus 
meditated,  let  the  devotee  proceed  to  the  Kula  worship.  — 6>a?no  Rahasya. 


164 

The  worship  of  the  Vdmdcharis  is  derived  from  a  portion  of  the 
Tantras :  it  resolves  itself  into  various  subjects,  apparently  into  different 
sects,  of  which  that  of  the  Kaula,  or  Kuhna,  is  declared  to  be  pre- 
eminent.* The  object  of  the  worship  is,  by  the  reverence  of  Devi  or 
Sakti,  who  is  one  with  Siva,  to  obtain  supernatural  powers  in  this  life, 
and  to  be  identified  after  death  with  Siva,  and  Sakti. 

According  to  the  immediate  object  of  the  worshipper,  is  the  particular 
form  of  worship  ;  but  all  the  forms  require  the  use  of  some  or  all  of  the 
five  Makdras,\  Mansa,  Matsya,  Madya,  Maithuna,  and  Mudrd,  flesh,  fish, 
wine,  women,  and  certain  mystical  gesticulations.  Suitable  Mantras  are 
also  indispensable,  according  to  the  end  proposed,  consisting  of  various 
unmeaning  monosyllable  combinations  of  letters  of  great  imaginary 
eflacacy.J 


*'  The  Vedas  are  pre-eminent  over  all  works,  the  Vaishnava  sect  excels  the  Fedas, 
the  5'aim  sect  is  preferable  to  that  of  Vishnu,  and  the  right  hand  S  a  kta  to  that  of  Siva 
—the  left  hand  is  better  than  the  right  hand  division,  and  the  Siddhanta  is  better  still 
—the  Kaula  is  better  than  the  Siddhanta,  and  there  is  none  better  than  it." — Kuldr- 
nava.  The  words  Kaula  and  Kulina  are  both  derivatives  fronx  Kula,  family;  and  the 
latter  is  especially  applied  to  imply  of  good,  or  high  family  :  these  terms  have  been 
adopted  to  signify,  that  those  who  follow  this  doctrine  are  not  only  of  one,  but  of  an 
exalted  race. 

t  They  are  thus  enumerated  in  the  Sydma  Rahasya  : 

iT^K  ^-^^^^^  ^T^T^TfT^  5TT^5(Tr  || 

Wine,  flesh,  fish,  Mudru,  and  Maithuna,  are  the  five-fold  Makdra,  which  takes 
away  all  sin. 

X  Many  specimens  might  be  given,  but  one  will  be  here  sufficient.  It  is  the  com- 
bination H  and  S  as  ^.  and  is  one  of  the  very  few  to  which  any  meaning  is  attempt- 
ed to  be  given  :  it  is  called  the  Prdsada  Mantra,  and  its  virtues  and  import  are  thus 
described  in  the  Kuldrnava. 

^T^^J  ^^m^K  ^^^1%^;  fi^m^  II 


165 

"Where  the  object  of  the  ceremony  is  to  acquire  an  interview  with  and 
controul  over  impure  spirits,  a  dead  body  is  necessary.  The  adept  is 
also  to  be  alone,  at  midnight,  in  a  cemetery  or  place  where  bodies  are 
burnt  or  buried,  or  criminals  executed  :  seated  on  the  corpse,  he  is  to 
perform  the  usual  offerings,  and  if  he  does  so  without  fear,  the  Bhutas, 
the  Yoginis,  and  other  male  or  female  goblins,  become  his  slaves. 

In  this,  and  many  of  the  observances  practised,  solitude  is  enjoined  ; 
but  all  the  principal  ceremonies  comprehend  the  worship  of  Sakti,  and 
require  for  that  purpose  the  presence  of  a  female,  as  the  living  represen- 
tative and  the  type  of  the  goddess.  This  worship  is  mostly  celebrated 
in  a  mixed  society,  the  men  of  which  represent  Bhairavas  or  Viras,  and 
the  women  Bhairavis  and  Ndyikds.  The  Sakti  is  personated  by  a 
naked  female,  to  whom  meat  and  wine  are  offered,  and  then  distributed 
amongst  the  assistants,  the  recitation  of  various  Mantras  and  texts,  and 
the  performance  of  the  Mudrd,  or  gesticulations  with  the  fingers,  accom- 
panying the  different  stages  of  the  ceremony,  and  it  is  terminated  with 
the  most  scandalous  orgies  amongst  the  votaries.*  The  ceremony  is 
entitled  the  Sri  Chakra,  or  Purndbhisheka,  the  Ring,  or  Full  Initiation. 


*'  He  who  knows  the  excellent  Prasdda  Mantra,  that  was  promulgated  by  the  fifth 
Feda,  fthe  TantrasJ  and  which  is  the  supreme  form  of  us  both,  he  is  himself  Siva  : 
this  Mantra  is  present  in  all  beings  that  breathe  from  Siva,  to  a  worm,  and  exists  in 
states  of  expiration  and  inspiration."  The  letter  H  is  the  ex  pirated,  and  S  the  in- 
spirated  letter,  and  as  these  two  acts  constitute  life,  the  Mantra  they  express  is  the 
same  with  life  :  the  animated  world  would  not  have  been  formed  without  it,  and  exists 
but  as  long  as  it  exists,  and  it  is  an  integral  part  of  the  universe,  without  being  distinct 
from  it,  as  the  fragrance  of  flowers,  and  sweetness  of  sugar,  oil  of  Sesamum  seed,  and 
Sakti  of  Siva.  He  who  knows  it  needs  no  other  knowledge — he  who  repeats  it  need 
practice  no  other  act  of  adoration.  The  authority  quoted  contains  a  great  deal  more 
to  the  same  purpose. 

*  It  might  have  been  sufficient  to  have  given  this  general  statement,  or  even  to 
have  referred  to  the  similar  but  fuller  account  of  Mr.  Ward:  his  information  was, 
however,  merely  oral,  and  may  therefore  be  regarded  as  unsatisfactory  ;  and  as  it  seems 
to  be  necessary  to  show  that  the  charge  is  not  altogether  unfounded,  I  shall  subjoin 
the  leading  rites  of  the  Sakti  Sodhana,  or  Sri  Chakra,  as  they  arc  prescribed  in  the 
Devi  Rahasya,  a  section  of  the  Rudra  Yamala. 


]e6 

The  occurrence  of  these  impurities  is  certainly  countenanced  by  the 
texts,  which  the  sects  regard  as  authorities,  and  by  a  very  general  belief 
of  their  occurrence.      The  members  of  the  sect  are  enjoined  secrecy. 


SAKTl    SODHANA. 

The  object  of  the  ceremony  should  be  either— 

"  A  dancing  giri,  a  female  devotee,  a  harlot,  a  washerwoman,  or  barber's  wife,  a  female 
of  the  BraJimanical  or  Sudra  tribe,  a  flower  girl,  or  a  milk  maid."  It  is  to  be  per- 
formed at  midnight,  with  a  party  of  eight,  nine,  or  eleven  couple,  as  the  Bhairavas 
and  B  hair  avis. 


Appropriate  Mantras  are  to  be  used,  according  to  the  description  of  the  person  selec- 
ted for  the  Sakti,  who  is  then  to  be  worshipped,  according  to  prescribed  form;  she  is 
placed  disrobed,  but  richly  ornamented— on  the  left  of  a  circle  (Chakra)  described 
for  the  purpose,  with  various  Mantras  and  gesticulations,  and  is  to  be  rendered  pure  by 
the  repetition  of  different  formulas. 


Being  finally  sprinkled  over  with  wine,  the  act  being  sanctified  by  the  peculiar 
Mantra. 

The  Sakti  is  now  purified,  but  if  not  previously  initiated,  she  is  to  be  further  made 
an  adept  by  the  communication  of  the  radical  Mantra,  whispered  thrice  in  her  ear, 
when  the  object  of  the  ceremony  is  complete. 


167 

which,  indeed,  it  might  be  supposed  they  would  observe  on  their  own 
account,  and,  consequently,  will  not  acknowledge  their  participation  in 
such  scenes.  They  will  not,  indeed,  confess  that  they  are  of  the  Sdkta 
sect,  although  their  reserve  in  this  respect  is  said,  latterly,  to  be  much 
relaxed.  It  is  contrary,  however,  to  all  knowledge  of  the  human  cha- 
racter, to  admit  the  possibility  of  these  transactions  in  their  fullest  extent ; 

^ftf%fTTf^^'^ftlftfW^^^%Tr^T  II 

The  finale  is  wiiat  might  be  anticipated,  but  accompanied  throughout  with  Ma7itras 
and  forms  of  meditation,  suggesting  notions  very  foreign  to  the  scene. 

^5T*^fTfTfft  ^Tifrt  ft^:  ^T5T^f%^^  I 
^^5Trruq'^Tr^^^^#tT:^^f^  II 

^^T^T^ff  JT^WT^^^W^  ^f^^^^T  II 

^^^fri3^^i-t%frfT:  t%ff  ^^i^^nrf  i 


168 

and,  although  the  worship  of  the  Sakti,  according  to  the  above  outline, 
may  be  sometimes  performed,  yet  there  can  be  little  doubt  of  its  being 
practised  but  seldom,  and  then  in  solitude  and  secrecy.  In  truth,  few 
of  the  ceremonies,  there  is  reason  to  believe,  are  ever  observed  ;  and, 
although  the  Chakra  is  said  to  be  not  uncommon,  and  by  some  of  the 
zealous  Saktas,  it  is  scarcely  concealed,  it  is  usually  nothing  more  than 
a  convival  party,  consisting  of  the  members  of  a  single  family,  or  at 
which  men  only  are  assembled,  and  the  company  are  glad  to  eat  flesh 
and  drink  spirits,*  under  the  pretence  of  a  religious  observance.  In 
justice  to  the  doctrines  of  the  sect,  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  these  prac- 
tices, if  instituted  merely  for  sensual  gratification,  are  held  to  be  as  illicit 
and  reprehensible,  as  in  any  other  branch  of  the  Hindu  faith. f 

*  The  zeal  that  is  prescribed  might  suit  some  more  civilized  associations — 

Let  him  pledge  the  wine  cup  again  and  again, 
Till  he  measures  his  length  on  the  ground. 
Let  him  rise  and  once  more  the  goblet  drain, 
And  with  freedom  for  aye,  from  a  life  of  pain. 
Shall  the  glorious  feat  be  crowned. 

t  The  Kularnava  has  the  following  and  many  similar  passages  :  they  occur  con- 
stantly in  other  Tantras. 

^%^  ^f%^^5ff*  fSr^^TT^R  f%^?r^T;  i 

iT^rn^KfTT:  ^5^1%f^^Tl%^«ftf^?Tt  II 


irR'^fT'^  II 


169 

The  followers  are  considered  as  very  numerous,  especially  amongst 
the  Brahmanical  tribe :  all  classes  are  however  admissible,  and  are  equal 
and  alike  at  the  ceremonies  of  the  sect.  In  the  world*  they  resume 
their  characteristic  distinctions,  and  wear  the  sectarial  marks,  and 
usually  adopt  the  outward  worship  of  any  other  division,  whether 
orthodoxical  or  heretical.  When  they  assume  particular  insignia,  they 
are  a  semi- circular  line  or  lines  on  the  forehead,  of  red  saunders  or 
Vermillion,  or  a  red  streak  up  the  middle  of  the  forehead,  with  a  circular 
spot  of  red  at  the  root  of  the  nose.  They  use  a  rosary  of  Rudrdksha 
seeds,  or  of  coral  beads,  but  of  no  greater  length  than  may  be  con- 
cealed in  the  hand,  or  they  keep  it  in  a  small  purse,  or  a  bag  of  red 
cloth.  In  worshipping,  they  wear  a  piece  of  red  silk  round  the  loins, 
and  decorate  themselves  with  garlands  of  crimson  flowers. 


**  Many  false  pretenders  to  knowledge,  and  who  have  not  been  duly  initiated, 
pretend  to  practise  the  jfiToM^a  rites;  but  if  perfection  be  obtained  by  drinking  wine, 
independently  of  my  commands,  then  every  drunkard  is  a  saint :  if  virtue  consist  in 
eating  flesh,  then  every  carnivorous  animal  in  the  world  is  virtuous  :  if  eternal  happi- 
ness be  derived  from  sexual  intercourse,  then  all  beings  will  be  entitled  to  it  :  a 
follower  of  the  Kula  doctrine  is  blameless  in  my  sight,  if  he  reproves  those  of  other 
creeds  who  quit  their  established  observances— those  of  other  sects  who  use  the 
articles  of  the  Kaula  worship,  shall  be  condemned  to  repeated  generations  as  numerous 
as  the  hairs  of  the  body." — In  fact,  the  texts  of  Menu  are  taken  as  authorities  for  the 
penance  to  be  performed  for  the  crimes  of  touching,  smelling,  looking  at,  or  tasting 
the  forbidden  articles,  except  upon  religious  occasions,  and  when  they  are  consecrated 
by  the  appropriate  texts. 

It  is  only  to  be  added,  that  if  the  promulgators  of  these  doctrines  were  sincere, 
which  is  far  from  impossible,  they  must  have  been  filled  with  a  strange  phrenzy,  and 
have  been  strangely  ignorant  of  human  nature. 

"  Whilst  the  Bhairavi  Tantra  is  proceeding,  all  castes  are  ^ra^man^— when  it  is 
concluded,  they  are  again  distinct." — Sydma  Rahasya.  According  to  Ward,  such 
of  them  as  avow  their  creed,  leading  at  the  same  time  a  mendicant  life,  are  termed 
Vyaktdvadhuias,  or  they  who  are  openly  free  from  restraints  :  those  who  conceal  their 
creed  and  observe  its  practices  in  privacy,  are  termed  Guptavadhutas,  the  liberated  in 
secret.  11.  296. 


170 


KANCHELIYAS. 


This  is  a  sect  of  which  the  existence  may  be  questioned,  nothwith- 
standing  the  assertion  that  it  is  not  uncommon  in  the  South  of  India ; 
the  worship  is  that  of  Sakti,  and  the  practices  are  similar  to  those 
of  the  Kaulas,  or  Vdmdcharis.  It  is  said  to  be  distinguished  by  one 
peculiar  rite,  the  object  of  which  is  to  confound  all  the  ties  of  female 
alliance,  and  to  enforce  not  only  a  community  of  women  amongst  the 
votaries,  but  disregard  even  to  natural  restraints.  On  occasions  of 
worship,  the  female  votaries  are  said  to  deposit  their  upper  vests  in  a 
box  in  charge  of  the  Guru.  At  the  close  of  the  usual  rites,  the  male 
worshippers  take  each  a  vest  from  the  box,  and  the  female  to  whom  the 
garment  appertains,  be  she  ever  so  nearly  of  kin  to  him,  is  the  partner 
for  the  time  of  his  licentious  pleasures.* 


KERARI. 


The  Kerdri  is  the  worshipper  of  Devi,  in  her  terrific  forms,  and 
is  the  representative  of   the  Aghora  Ghanta  and  Kapdlika,f  who,   as 

*  This  sect  appears  in  the  Sankara  Vijaya,  as  the  Uchchishtha  Ganapati,  or 
Hairamha  sect,  who  declare  that  all  men  and  all  women  are  of  one  caste,  and  that 
their  intercourse  is  free  from  fault. 

The  same  sort  of  story  is  told,  but  apparently  with  great  injustice  of  the  Mohamme- 
dan Byahaharis  or  Borahs,  and  of  a  less  known  Mohammedan  sect,  the  Cheraghkesh  : 
something  of  the  same  kind  was  imputed  to  the  early  Christians  by  their  adversaries. 

t  The  following  description  of  the  Kapdlika,  is  from  the  Sankara  Vijaya  of 
Anandagiri. 


171 

lately  only  as  seven  or  eight  centuries  ago,  there  is  reason  to  suppose 
sacrificed  human  victims  to  Ka'li',  Chamunda',  Chhinnamastaka', 
and  other  hideous  personifications  of  the  Sakti  of  Siva.  The  attempt 
to  offer  human  beings  in  the  present  day,  is  not  only  contrary  to  every 
known  ritual,  but  it  vi^ould  be  attended  with  too  much  peril  to  be 
practised,  and,  consequently,  it  cannot  be  believed  that  this  sect  is 
in  existence  :  the  only  votaries,  if  any  there  be,  consisting  of  the 
miscreants  who,  more  for  pay  than  devotion,  inflict  upon  themselves 
bodily  tortures,  and  pierce  their  flesh  with  hooks  or  spits,  run  sharp 
pointed  instruments  through  their  tongues  and  cheeks,  recline  upon 
beds  of  spikes,  or  gash  themselves  with  knives,  all  which  practices 
are  occasionally  met  with  throughout  India,  and  have  become  familiar 
to  Europeans  from  the  excess  to  which  they  are  carried  in  Bengal 
at  the  Charak  Pujd,  a  festival  which,  as  a  public  religious  observance, 
is  unknown  any  where  else,  and  which  is  not  directed  nor  countenanced 
by  any  of  the  authorities  of  the  Hindus,  not  even  by  the  Tantras. 


MISCELLANEOUS  SECTS. 

The  sects  that  have  been  described  are  those  of  the  regular  system, 
and  particularly  of  what  may  be  called  Brahmanical  Hinduism,  emanat- 
ing, more  or  less  directly,  from  the  doctrines  of  the  original  creed. 
Besides  these,  there  are  a  number  which  it  is  not  so  easy  to  class, 
although  they  are  mostly  referable  to  a  common  source,  and  partake,  in 
many  respects,  of  the  same  notions,  especially  of  those  of  a  Vaishnava 
and  Vedanta  tendency.     They  exist  in  various  degrees  of  popularity, 

His  body  is  smeared  with  ashes  from  a  funeral  pile,  around  his  neck  hangs  a  string 
of  human  skulls,  his  forehead  is  streaked  with  a  black  line,  his  hair  is  wove  into  the 
matted  braid,  his  loins  are  clothed  with  a  tiger's  skin,  a  hollow  skull  is  in  his  left  hand, 
(for  a  cup)  and  in  his  right  he  carries  a  bell,  which  he  rings  incessantly,  exclaiming 
aloud,  Ho,  Sambhu  Bhairava  —  Ho,  lord  of  Kali. 


172 

and  date  from  various  periods,  and  in  most  instances,  owe  their  institu- 
tion to  enthusiastic  or  contemplative  individuals,  whose  biography  is  yet 
preserved  consistently  enough  by  tradition. 

This  is  not  the  case,  however,  with  the  first  two  on  the  list — the 
Saurapdtas  and  Ganapdlas :  these  are  usually,  indeed,  ranked  with  the 
preceding  divisions,  and  make,  with  the  Vaishnavas,  Saivas,  and  Sdktas, 
the  five  orthodox  divisions  of  the  Hindus :  they  are  of  limited  extent 
and  total  insio:nificance. 


SAURAPATAS.  OR  SAURAS. 


The  Saurapdtas  are  those  who  worship  Suryapati,  the  Sun-god  only  ; 
there  are  a  few  of  them,  but  very  few,  and  they  scarcely  differ  from  the 
rest  of  the  Hindus  in  their  general  observances.  The  Tilaka,  or  frontal 
mark,  is  made  in  a  particular  manner,  with  red  sandal,  and  the  necklace 
should  be  of  crystal ;  these  are  their  chief  peculiarities :  besides  which 
they  eat  one  meal  without  salt  on  every  Sunday,  and  each  Sankrdnti,  or 
the  sun's  entrance  into  a  sign  of  the  Zodiac  :  they  cannot  eat  either  until 
they  have  beheld  the  sun,  so  that  it  is  fortunate  that  they  inhabit  his 


native  regions. 


GANAPATYAS. 


These  are  worshippers  of  Ganesa,  or  Ganafati,  and  can  scarcely  be 
considered  as  a  distinct  sect :  all  the  Hindus,  in  fact,  worship  this  deity, 
as  the  obviator  of  difficulties  and  impediments,  and  never  commence  any 
work,  or  set  off  on  a  journey,  without  invoking  his  protection.  Some, 
however,  pay  him  more  particular  devotion  than  the  rest,  and  these  are 
the  only  persons  to  whom  the  classification  may  be  considered  applicable. 
Ganesa,  however,  it  is  believed,  is  never  exclusively  venerated,  and  the 
worship,  when  it  is  paid,  is  addressed  to  some  of  his  forms,  particularly 
those  of  Baktratunda  and  Dhundhirdj . 


173 


NANAK  SHAHIS. 


A  sect  of  much  greater  importance  is  that  which  originated  with 
Na'nak  Shah,  and  which,  from  bearing  at  first  only  a  religious 
character,  came,  in  time,  to  be  a  political  and  national  distinction, 
through  the  influence  of  Mohammedan  persecution  and  individual  ambi- 
tion. The  enterprising  pohcy  of  Govind  Sinh,  and  the  bigotry  of 
AuRANGZEB,  convcrtcd  the  peaceful  tenets  of  Na'nak  into  a  military 
code,  and  his  speculative  disciples  into  the  warlike  nation  of  the  Sikhs. 
It  is  not,  however,  in  their  political  capacity  that  we  are  now  to  consider 
them,  but  as  the  professors  of  a  peculiar  form  of  faith,  which  branches 
into  various  sub- divisions,  and  is  by  no  means  restricted  to  the  Punjab, 
At  the  same  time  it  is  unnecessary  to  detail  the  tenets  and  practices  of 
the  Sikhs,  as  that  has  been  already  performed  in  a  full  and  satisfactory 
manner. 

The  Sikhs,  or  Ndnak  Shahis,  are  classed  under  seven  distinctions,  all 
recognising  Ndnak  as  their  primitive  instructor,  and  all  professing  to 
follow  his  doctrines,  but  separated  from  each  other  by  variations  of 
practice,  or  by  a  distinct  and  peculiar  teacher.  Of  these  the  first  is  the 
sect  of  the  Uddsis. 


UDASIS. 

These  may  be  regarded  as  the  genuine  disciples  of  Ndnak,  professing, 
as  the  name  denotes,  indifference  to  worldly  vicissitudes.  They  are  pure- 
ly religious  characters,  devoting  themselves  to  prayer  and  meditation, 
and  usually  collected  in  Sangats,  colleges  or  convents ;  they  also  travel 
about  to  places  of  pilgrimage,  generally  in  parties  of  some  strength.  In- 
dividuals of  them  are  to  be  met  with  in  most  of  the  chief  cities  of  Hin- 
dustan, living  under  the  patronage  of  some  man  of  rank  or  property, 
but  in  all  situations  they  profess  poverty,  although  they  never  solicit 
alms ;  and  although  ascetics,  they  place  no  merit  in  wearing  mean 
garments  or  dispensing  altogether  with  clothes.     On  the  contrary,  they 


174 

are,  in  general,  well  dressed,  and,  allowing  the  whiskers  and  beard  to 
grow,  are  not  unfrequently  of  a  venerable  and  imposing  appearance. 
Though  usually  practising  celibacy,  it  does  not  appear  to  be  a  necessary 
condition  amongst  the  Sikhs  to  be  found  in  the  Gangetic  provinces  : 
•  they  are  usually  the  ministrant  priests ;  but  their  office  consists  chiefly 
in  reading  and  expounding  the  writings  of  Na'nak  and  Govind  Sinh, 
as  collected  in  the  Adi  Granth  and  Das  Padshah  B  Granth.  The  perusal 
is  enlivened  by  the  chaunting,  occasionally,  of  Hindi  Padas  and  Rekhtas, 
the  compositions  of  Kabi'r,  Mira  Bhai,  Sur  Das,  and  others.  With 
that  fondness  for  sensible  objects  of  reverence  which  characterises  the 
natives  of  India,  the  Book  is  also  worshipped,  and  rupees,  flowers,  and 
fruits,  are  presented  by  the  votaries,  which  become,  of  course,  the 
property  of  the  officiating  Uddsi.  In  return,  the  Uddsi  not  uncommonly 
adopts  the  presentation  of  the  Prdsdda,  and  at  the  close  of  the  ceremony, 
sweetmeats  are  distributed  amongst  the  congregation.  In  some  of  the 
establishments  at  Benares,  the  service  is  held  in  the  evening  after  sunset, 
and  the  singing  and  feasting  continue  through  a  great  part  of  the  night. 
Many  of  the  Uddsis  are  well  read  in  Sanscrit,  and  are  able  expounders  of 
the  Vedanta  philosophy,  on  which  the  tenets  of  Na'nak  are  mainly 
founded. 

The  Uddsi  sect  was  established  by  Dharmachand,  the  grandson  of 
Na'nak,  through  whom  the  line  of  the  Sage  was  continued,  and  his  des- 
cendants, known  by  the  name  of  Ndnak  Putras,  are  still  found  in  the 
Punjab,  where  they  are  treated  by  the  Sikhs  with  especial  veneration. 

The  doctrine  taught  by  Na'nak,  appears  to  have  differed  but  little 
from  that  of  Kabi'r,  and  to  have  deviated,  but  inconsiderably,  from  the 
Hindu  faith  in  general.  The  whole  body  of  poetical  and  mythological 
fiction  was  retained,  whilst  the  liberation  of  the  spirit  from  the  delusive 
deceits  of  Mdyd,  and  its  purification  by  acts  of  benevolence  and  self-denial, 
so  as  to  make  it  identical  even  in  life  with  its  divine  source,  were  the  great 
objects  of  the  devotee.  Associated  with  these  notions,  was  great  chariness 
of  animal  life,  whilst  with  Na'nak,  as  well  as  with  Kabi'r,  universal 
tolerance  was  a  dogma  of  vital  importance,  and  both  laboured  to  persuade 
Hindus  and  Mohammedans  that  the  only  essential  parts  of  their  respective 
creeds,  were  common  to  both,  and  that  they  should  discard  the  varieties 
of  practical  detail,  or  the  corruptions  of  their  teachers  for  the  worship  of 
one  only  Supreme,  whether  he  was  termed  Allah  or  Hari.     How  far 


175 

these  doctrines  are  still  professed  by  the  Ndnak  Skdhis,  may  be  inferred 
from  the  translations  in  the  eleventh  volume  of  the  Researches,  to  which 
the  following  may  be  added  as  part  of  the  service  solemnized  at  the 
Sikh  Sangat,  at  Benares. 


HYMN. 

Thou  art  the  Lord — to  thee  be  praise. 

All  life  is  with  thee. 

Thou  art  my  parents.     I  am  thy  child — 

All  happiness  is  derived  from  thy  clemency. 

No  one  knows  thy  end. 

Highest  Lord  amongst  the  highest — 

Of  all  that  exists.  Thou  art  the  regulator. 

And  all  that  is  from  thee  obeys  thy  will. 

Thy  movements — thy  pleasure — thou  only  knowest. 

Ndnak,  thy  slave,  is  a  free-will  offering  unto  thee. 

The  Priest  then  says — 
Meditate  on  the  Saheb  of  the  Book,  and  exclaim  Wah  Guru. 

The  People  accordingly  repeat — 
Wah  Guru — Wah  Guru  kifateh. 

The  Priest. 
Meditating  on  Rdmachdndra,  exclaim  Wah  Guru. 

The  People. 
Wah  Guru — Wah  Guru  ki/ateh. 


HYMN. 


Love,  and  fix  thy  whole  heart  upon  Him— 
The  world  is  bound  to  thee  by  prosperity- 
No  one  is  another's. 

Whilst  prosperity  endures  many  will  come, 
And  sit  with  thee  and  surround  thee  ; 


176 

But  in  adversity  they  will  fly. 

And  not  one  will  be  near  thee. 

The  woman  of  the  house  who  loves  thee. 

And  is  ever  in  thy  bosom  ; 

When  the  spirit  quits  the  body, 

Will  fly  with  alarm  from  the  dead. 

Such  is  the  way  of  the  world, 

With  all  on  which  we  place  affection  ; 

Do  thou,  Ndnak.  at  thy  last  hour. 

Rely  alone  upon  Hari. 

Priest  as  before. 
Meditating  on  the  Saheb  of  the  Book,  &c. 

People  as  before. 
Wah  Guru,  SfC. 


HYMN. 

My  holy  teacher  is  Ke  who  teaches  clemency — 

The  heart  is  awake  within  :  who  seeks  may  find. 

Wonderful  is  that  rosary,  every  bead  of  which  is  the  breath. 

Lying  apart  in  its  arbour,  it  knows  what  cometh  to  pass — 

The  Sage  is  he  who  is  merciful  ; — the  merciless  is  a  butcher. 

Thou  wieldest  the  knife  and  regardlessly  exclaimest — 

What  is  a  goat,  what  is  a  cow,  what  are  animals  ? 

But  the  Saheb  declares  that  the  blood  of  all  is  the  same. 

Saints,  Prophets,  and  Seers,  have  all  passed  in  death. 

Ndnack,  destroy  not  life  for  the  preservation  of  the  body. 

That  desire  of  life  which  is  in  the  heart,  do  thou,  brother,  repress. 

Ndnack,  calling  aloud,  says—take  refuge  with  Hari. 

Priest  as  before. 
Meditating  on  the  Saheb,  &c. 

People  as  before. 
Wah  Guru — Wah  Guru  ki/ateh. 


177 


GANJ  BAKHSHIS. 


Of  this  division  of  the  Sikhs,  no  particulars,  except  the  name,  have 
been  ascertained.  This  is  said  to  have  been  derived  from  that  of  the 
founder.     They  are  not  numerous  nor  of  any  note. 


RAMRAYIS. 


These  derive  their  appellation  from  that  of  Ra'ma  Ra'ya,  the  son  or 
grandson  of  Hari  Ra'ya,  and  their  distinction  from  the  other  Sikhs  is 
more  of  a  political  than  religious  complexion.  Ra'ma  Ra'ya  disputed 
the  succession  to  the  Pontificate  with  Hari  Krishna,  the  son  of  Hari 
Ra'ya,  and  was  unsuccessful.  His  followers,  however,  maintain  the 
superiority  of  his  pretensions,  and  record  many  miracles  wrought  by 
him  in  proof  of  his  sanctity.  He  flourished  about  A.  D.  1660.  The 
Rdmrdyis  are  not  common  in  Hindustan. 


SUTHREH  SHAHIS. 


These  are  more  often  met  with  than  either  of  the  two  preceding,  and 
the  priests  are  recognisable  by  distinguishing  marks.  They  make  a 
perpendicular  black  streak  down  the  forehead,  and  carry  two  small  black 
sticks  about  half  a  yard  in  length,  which  they  clash  together  when  they 
solicit  alms.  They  lead  a  vagabond  life,  begging  and  singing  songs  in 
the  Punjabi  and  other  dialects,  mostly  of  a  moral  or  mystic  tendency. 

They  are  held  in  great  disrepute,  however,  and  are  not  unfrequently 
gamblers,  drunkards,  and  thieves.  They  look  up  to  Tegh  Bauader, 
the  father  of  Guru  Govind,  as  their  founder. 

2   A 


178 


GOVIND  SINHIS. 


These  form  the  most  important  division  of  the  Sikh  community, 
being,  in  fact,  the  political  association  to  which  the  name  is  applied,  or 
to  the  Sikh  nation  generally.*  Although  professing  to  derive  their 
national  faith  from  Ndnak,  and  holding  his  memory  in  veneration,  the 
faith  they  follow  is  widely  different  from  the  quietism  of  that  reformer, 
and  is  wholly  of  a  worldly  and  warlike  spirit.  Guru  Govind  devoted 
his  followers  to  steel,  and  hence  the  worship  of  the  sword,  as  well  as  its 
employment  against  both  Mohammedans  and  Hindus.  He  also  ordered 
his  adherents  to  allow  their  hair  and  beards  to  grow,  and  to  wear  blue 
garments  :  he  permitted  them  to  eat  all  kinds  of  flesh,  except  that  of 
kine,  and  he  threw  open  his  faith  and  cause  to  all  castes,  to  whomsoever 
chose  to  abandon  the  institutes  of  Hinduism,  or  belief  in  the  mission  of 
Mohammed,  for  a  fraternity  of  arms  and  life  of  predatory  daring.  It 
was  then  only  that  the  Sikhs  became  a  people,  and  were  separated  from 
their  Indian  countrymen  in  political  constitution,  as  well  as  religious 
tenets — at  the  same  time  the  Sikhs  are  still,  to  a  certain  extent, 
Hindus :  they  worship  the  deities  of  the  Hindus,  and  celebrate  all  their 
festivals :  they  derive  their  legends  and  literature  from  the  same  sources, 
and  pay  great  veneration  to  the  Brahmanas.  The  impress  of  their 
origin  is  still,  therefore,  strongly  retained,  notwithstanding  their  rejec- 
tion of  caste,  and  their  substituting  the  Das  Padshah  ki  granth,-\  the 
compilation  of  Guru  Govind,  for  the  Vedas,  and  Puranas. 

*  Described  by  Sir  John  Malcolm,  in  the  eleventh  volume  of  the  Asiatic  Re- 
searches. The  ^z^A  priest  to  whom  he  alludes  (page  198)  as  one  of  his  authorities, 
was  afterwards  well  known  to  me,  and  was  an  individual  every  way  worthy  of  confi- 
dence. His  name  was  Atmd  Ram,  and  although  advanced  in  years,  he  was  full  of 
energy  and  intelligence,  combining  with  them  extreme  simplicity  and  kindliness  of 
disposition.  The  old  man  was  a  most  favourable  and  interesting  specimen  of  the 
Punjabi  nation  and  disciples  of  Ndnak.     He  died  a  few  years  ago  in  Calcutta. 

t  From  the  succession  of  Chiefs,  Govind  was  tenth  teacher  in  succession  from 
Ndnak,  who  flourished  at  the  close  of  the  17th  and  beginning  of  the  18th  century. 

The  other  standard  authority  of  the  Sikhs,  the  Adi  Granth,  is  a  compilation  chiefly 
of  the  works  of  Ndnak,  and  his  immediate  successors,  made  by  Arjunmal,  a  Sikh, 
teacher,  in  the  end  of  the  16th  century.  As  it  is  usually  met  with,  however, 
it  comprehends  the  writings  of  many  other  individuals,  many  of  whom  are  Vaish- 
navas.  At  a  Sikh  Sangat,  or  Chapel,  in  Benares,  the  Book,  a  large  folio,  there 
denominated  the  Samhhu  Granth,  was  said  to  contain  the  contributions  of  the  following 
writers :  — 


179 


NIRMALAS. 


These  differ  but  little  from  the  Uddsis,  and  are,  perhaps,  still  closer 
adherents  to  the  doctrines  of  the  founder,  as  the  name  imports :  they 
profess  to  be  free  from  all  worldly  soil  or  stain,  and,  consequently,  lead 
a  wholly  religious  life.  They  observe  celibacy,  and  disregard  their  per- 
sonal appearance,  often  going  nearly  naked.  They  are  not  like  the  Uddsis^ 
assembled  in  colleges,  nor  do  they  hold  any  particular  form  of  divine 
service,  but  confine  their  devotion  to  speculative  meditation  on  the  peru- 
sal of  the  writings  of  Na'nak,  Ka'bir,  and  other  unitarian  teachers. 
They  are  always  solitary,  supported  by  their  disciples  or  opulent  indivi- 
duals, and  are  often  known  as  able  expounders  of  the  Vedanta  philosophy, 
in  which  Brahmans  do  not  disdain  to  become  their  scholars.  They  are 
not  very  numerous ;  but  a  few  are  almost  always  to  be  found  at  the  prin- 
cipal seats  of  Hindu  wealth  and  learning,  and  particularly  at  Benares."^ 


NAGAS. 


The  naked  mendicants  of  the  Sikhs  are  said  to  differ  from  those  of 
the  Vaishnava  and  Saiva  sects,  by  abstaining  from  the  use  of  arms,  and 
following  a  retired  and  religious  life.  Except  in  going  without  clothes, 
they  are  not  distinguishable  from  the  Nirmalas. 

Nanak,  Nam  Doe,  Kdbir,  Sheikh  Feridaddin,  Dhana,  Rdmunand,  Pipa,  Sena, 
Jayadeva,  Phandak,  Suddma,  Prahldd,  Dhuru,  Raidas,  Fibhishana,  Mira  Bdi, 
Kerma  Bdi. 

*  An  interesting  account  of  the  religious  service  of  the  Sikhs,  in  their  college  at 
Patna,  was  published  by  Mr.  Wilkins,  in  the  first  volume  of  the  Asiatic  Researches. 
1  witnessed  a  similar  ceremony  at  a  Sikh  establishment  at  Benares,  and  partook  of 
the  iPra^(ida  or  sweetmeats,  distributed  to  the  assistants.  Both  Mr.  Wilkins  and  Sir 
John  Malcolm  notice  this  eating  in  common,  as  if  it  were  peculiar  to  the  Sikh  faith; 
but  this,  as  elsewhere  observed,  is  not  the  case.  It  prevails  with  most  of  the  Vaish' 
nava  sects;  but  it  should  be  remembered  that  it  is  always  restricted  to  articles  which 
have  been  previously  consecrated  by  presentation  to  the  object  of  worship,  to  the 
Idol,  the  sarcophagus,  the  sculptured  foot-marks,  or  the  book. 


180 


JAINS. 


A  satisfactory  account  of  the  religion  of  the  Jains  would  require  a 
disttnct  dissertation,  and  cannot  be  comprised  within  the  limits  necessa- 
rily assigned  to  this  general  sketch  of  the  Hindu  sects.  The  subject  is 
of  considerable  interest,  as  affecting  a  very  large  proportion  of  the  popu- 
lation of  India,  and  involving  many  important  considerations  connected 
with  the  history  of  the  Hindu  faith  :  an  extended  inquiry  must,  however, 
be  left  to  some  further  opportunity ;  and  in  the  meantime  our  attention 
will  be  confined  to  a  few  observations  on  the  peculiar  tenets  and  practices 
of  the  Jain  religion,  its  past  history,  and  actual  condition. 

Previously,  however,  to  entering  upon  these  subjects,  it  may  be 
advisable  to  advert  briefly  to  what  has  been  already  done  towards  their 
elucidation,  and  to  the  materials  which  exist  in  the  original  languages 
for  a  complete  view.  The  latter  are  of  the  most  extensive  description, 
whilst  the  labours  of  European  writers  are  by  no  means  wanting  to  an 
accurate  estimate  of  the  leading  doctrines  of  the  Jain  faith,  or  to  an  ap- 
preciation of  the  state  in  which  it  exists  in  various  parts  of  Hindustan. 

The  first  authentic  notices  of  the  Jains  occur  in  the  ninth  volume  of 
the  Asiatic  Researches,  from  the  pens  of  the  late  Colonel  Mackenzie, 
Dr.  Buchanan,  and  Mr.  Colebrooke.  The  two  first  described  the  Jains 
from  personal  acquaintance,  and  from  their  accounts,  it  appeared,  that 
they  existed,  in  considerable  numbers  and  respectability,  in  South- 
ern India,  particularly  in  Mysore,  and  on  the  Canara  Coast ;  that  they 
laid  claim  to  high  antiquity,  and  enumerated  a  long  series  of  religious 
teachers,  and  that  they  differed  in  many  of  their  tenets  and  practices 
from  the  orthodox  Hindus,  by  whom  they  were  regarded  with  aversion 
and  contempt.  A  further  illustration  of  their  doctrines,  and  a  particular 
account  of  their  deified  teachers,  was  derived  by  Mr.  Colebrooke  from 
some  of  their  standard  authorities,  then  first  made  known  to  Europeans. 

Little  more  was  published  on  the  subject  of  the  Jains  until  very  lately, 
with  exception  of  numerous  but  brief  and  scattered  notices  of  the  sect  in 
the  Peninsula,  in  Buchanan's  Travels  in  Mysore.  Some  account  of 
them  also  occurs  in  Colonel  Wilks'  Historical  Sketch  of  the  South  of 
India,  and  in  the  work  of  the  Abbe  Du  Bois.  Mr.  Ward  has  an  article 
dedicated  to  the  Jains,  in  his  account  of  the  Hindus ;  and  .VIr.  Erskine 


181 

has  briefly  adverted  to  some  of  their  peculiarities  in  his  observations  on 
the  Caves  of  Elephanta,  and  the  remains  of  the  Bauddhas  in  India,  in  the 
Proceedings  of  the  Bombay  Literary  Society,  It  is,  however,  to  the 
Transactions  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  that  we  are  indebted  for  the 
latest  and  most  detailed  accounts,  and  the  papers  of  Mr.  Colebrooke, 
Major  Delamaine,  Dr.  Hamilton,  Colonel  Franklin  and  Major  Tod,* 
furnish  many  interesting  particulars  relative  to  the  doctrines  and  past 
or  present  condition  of  the  Jaitis.  Some  valuable  illustrations  of  the 
latter  subject  is  to  be  found  in  the  Calcutta  Quarterly  Magazine  :t 
some  historical  notices  obtained  from  the  inscriptions  at  Abu,  occur  in 
the  last  volume  of  our  Researches,  whilst  a  novel  and  rather  compre- 
hensive view  of  Jain  literature  is  contained  in  the  Catalogue  of  Manu- 
scripts collected  by  the  late  Colonel  Mackenzie.^ 

From  this  latter  authority,  we  learn  that  the  literature  peculiar  to 
Jainas,  comprises  a  number  of  works  peculiar  to  the  sect,  the  composi- 
tion of  their  own  writers,  and  on  a  variety  of  subjects. §  They  have  a 
series  of  works  called  Puranas,  as  the  Adi  and  Uttara  Puranas,  Chd- 
munda  Rdya  Pur  ana,  and  Chaturvinsati  Purana  ;\\  but  these  are  not  to  be 

*  On  the  Philosophy  of  the  Hindus,  part  IV.  by  Mr.  Colebrooke,  vol.  I.  On  the 
Srdwaks,  or  Jains,  by  Major  Delamaine,  vol.  1,  418.  On  Inscriptions  in  Jain 
Temples,  in  Behar,  by  Mr.  Colebrooke,  Dr.  Hamilton,  and  Colonel  Franklin,  vol. 
1,  520.  On  the  Srdwaks,  or  Jains,  by  Dr.  Hamilton,  vol.  I,  531.  On  the  Religious 
Establishments  in  Mewar,  by  Major  Tod,  vol.  2. 

t  Particularly  in  the  Journal  of  a  Native  Traveller  from  Calcutta,  and  back  again 
through  Behar.  The  traveller  was  a  learned  Jain,  in  the  service  of  Colonel  Macken- 
zie. There  is  also  an  interesting  account  of  a  visit  to  the  temple  of  Pa'usvfana'th, 
at  Samet  Sikhar. 

X  Vol.  1,  page  144,  &c. 

§  The  List  comprises  44  Works — 

Puranas 7 

C^erjiro*  and  Legends,   10 

Ritual,  Prayers,  &c 18 

Medicine, 1 

Grammar, 2 

Arithmetic, .....  2 

Miscellaneous, ..  ..  4 

II  Hamilton  says,  the  Digamharas  have  twenty-four  Puranas,  twenty-three  giving 
an  account  of  each  Tirthankara,  and  the  twenty-fourth,  of  the  whole;  but  this  seems 
to  be  erroneous.  The  actions  of  the  twenty-four  Tirthankaras,  are  described  in  a 
single  Purana,  but  the  section  devoted  to  each  is  called  after  him,  severally  as  the 
Purana  of  each,  as  Rishabha  Deva  Purana,  one  section  of  the  Chdmunda  Rdya 
Purana.  In  the  Adi  and  Uttara  Puranas,  forming,  in  fact,  but  one  work,  the  Adi, 
or  first  part,  is  appropriated  to  the  first  Tirthankara,  whilst  the  Uttara,  or  last  portion, 


182 

confounded  with  the  Puranas  of  the  Hindus  ;  as,  although  they  occasion- 
ally insert  legends  borrowed  from  the  latter,  their  especial  object  is  the 
legendary  history  of  the  Tirthakaras,  or  deified  teachers,  peculiar  to  the 
sect.  The  chief  Puranas  are  attributed  to  Jina  Sena  Scha'rya,  whom 
some  accounts  make  contemporary  with  Vikrama'ditya  ;  but  the  great- 
er number,  and  most  consistent  of  the  traditions  of  the  South,  describe 
him  as  the  spiritual  preceptor  of  Amoghaversha,  king  of  Kdnchi,  at  the 
end  of  the  ninth  century  of  the  Christian  era.  Analogous  to  the  Jain 
Puranas,  are  works  denominated  Cheritras,  their  subject  being,  in 
general,  the  marvellous  history  of  some  Tirthankara,  or  some  holy 
personage,  after  whom  they  are  denominated  ;  as  the  Jinadatta  Rdya 
Cheritra,  Pujyapdda  Cheritra,  and  others.  They  have  a  number  of 
works  explanatory  of  their  philosophical  notions  and  religious  tenets  of 
the  sect,  as  well  as  rituals  of  practice,  and  a  grammatical  system  found- 
ed on  the  rules  of  Sa'kata'yana,  is  illustrated  by  glosses  and  commen- 
taries. The  Jains  have  also  their  own  writers  on  astronomy  and  as- 
trology, on  medicine,  or  the  mathematical  sciences,  and  the  form  and 
disposition  of  the  universe. 

This  general  view  of  Jain  literature  is  afforded  by  the  Mackenzie 
Collection,  but  the  list  there  given  is  very  far  from  including  the  whole 
of  Jain  literature,  or  even  a  considerable  proportion.  The  works  there 
alluded  to,  are,  in  fact,  confined  to  Southern  India,  and  are  written  in 
Sanscrit,  or  the  dialects  of  the  Peninsula ;  but  every  province  of 
Hindustan  can  produce  Jain  compositions,  either  in  Sanscrit  or  its 
vernacular  idiom,  whilst  many  of  the  books,  and  especially  those 
which  may  be  regarded  as  their  scriptural  authorities,  are  written  in  the 
Prdkrit  or  Mdgadhi,  a  dialect  which,  with  the  Jains,  as  well  as  the 
Bauddhas,  is  considered  to  be  the  appropriate  vehicle  of  their  sacred 
literature. 

The  course  of  time,  and  the  multiplication  of  writings,  have  probably 
rendered  it  almost  impossible  to  reduce  what  may  be  considered  as  the 
sacred  literature  of  the  Jains  to  a  regular  system.  They  are  said  to 
have  a  number  of  works  entitled  Siddhdntas  and  Agamas,^  which  are  to 

contains  the  accounts  of  all  the  other  deified  Sages.  There  are  several  collections, 
comprehending  what  may  be  termed  twenty-four  Puranas  ;  but  it  does  not  appear  that 
there  are  twenty-four  distinct  works  so  denominated. 

*  Hamilton  enumerates  eight  works,  as  the  Agamas  of  the  Digambara  sect,  the 
TrailoJcya  Sara,  the  Gomatisara,  Pungjiraj,  Trailokya  Dipika,  Kshepanasara,  Tri- 


183 


them  what  the  Vedas  are  to  the  Brahmanical  Hindus,  and  this  appears 
to  be  the  case,  although  the  enumeration  which  is  sometimes  made  of 
them  is  of  a  loose  and  popular  character,  and  scarcely  reconcilable  with 
that  to  be  derived  from  written  authoritity.* 

bhangisara,  and  Shatpawar,  attributed  to  the  pupils  of  Mahavira.  He  states  also, 
that  the  Swetamharas  have  forty-five,  or  as  some  allege,  eighty-four  Siddhdntas, 
amongst  which  he  specifies  the  Thdndngi  Sutra,  Gnydnanti  Sutra,  Sugoranyi  Sutra, 
Vpasakadesa,  Mahopandanna,  Nandi  Sutra,  Rayapseni,  Jirabhigam,  Jambudwipa- 
pannati,  Surapannatti,  Chandrasagarapannatti,  Kalpa  Sutra,  Katantraoibhrama 
Sutra,  Shakti  Sutra,  and  Sangrahani  Sutra.  Some  of  these  are  incorrectly  named, 
and  others  inaccurately  classed,  as  will  be  seen  from  what  follows  in  the  text. 

*  The  following  Works  are  either  in  my  possession  or  in  the  library  of  the  Sanscrit 
College  of  Calcutta  : — Compositions  descriptive  of  the  tenets  or  practices  of  the  Jai7i 
religion.  Bhagavatyangam.  This  is  one  of  the  eleven  primary  works,  and  is  entitled 
also  in  Prakrit,  Vivaha  Pannatti,  in  Sanscrit,  Vivdha,  or  Vivadhd  Prajnapti.  In- 
struction in  the  various  sources  of  worldly  pain,  or  in  the  paths  of  virtue.  It 
consists  of  lessons  given  to  Gautama  by  Maha'vi'ka,  and  is  in  Prakrit.  It  contains 
36,000  stanzas.  Bhagavtyanga  Vritti,  a  Sanscrit  Commentary  on  the  preceding 
(defective.)  Thdndnga  Sutra,— also  one  of  the  eleven  Angus.  Kalpa  Sutra,  the 
precepts  of  the  Jain  faith— these  are  originally  1250;  but  they  are  interspersed  with 
legends  of  the  Tirthdnkaras,  and  especially  of  Maha'vi'ra,  at  the  pleasure  of  the 
writer,  and  the  several  copies  of  the  work  therefore  differ.     Prakrit 


Kalpa     Sutra     Balabodha,     a    sort    of 

abridgment  of  the  preceding.   Prakrit. 
Kalpa  Sutra     Siddhanta,  the  essence  of 

the  Kalpa  Sutra.      Prakrit. 
Dasavaikalika  Sutra.     Prakrit. 
Ditto.     Tika. 

Rayaprasna  Sutra  Siddhanta.     Tika, 
Gautamaprashtha.     Prakrit. 
Sangrahini  Sutra.     Prakrit. 
Laghu  Sangrahini  Sutra. 
Nava  Tatwa  Sutra.     Prakrit. 
Nava  Tatwa  Prakarana.     Prakrit. 
Nava  Tatwa  Balabodha.     Prakrit. 
Karma  Grantha. 
Jiva  Vichara.     Sanscrit. 
Jiva  Vinaya. 
Smarana  Sutra.     Prakrit. 

Vriddhatichara.     Prakrit. 
Si7iduraprakara  Tika.     Sanscrit. 

Ekavinsati  Sthana,     Bhasha. 

Dasakshapanavratavidhi.     Bhasha. 

Upadesa  Mala.     Prakrit. 

Pratikramana  Vidhi.     Prakrit. 

Pratikra7nana  Siitra.     Bhasha. 

Chaturdasa  Gunasthana.    Bhasha. 

Chaturdasa  Guna}iama7ii. 

Pakshi  Sutra.     Bhasha. 

Shattrinsat  Kermakatha.    Bhasha. 

Dhermabuddhi  Chatushpadi.     Bhasha. 

Balavibodha.     Bhasha 

Upadhanavidhi.     Prakrit. 

Ashtahnika77iahotsava.     Prakrit. 

Ashtahnikavyakhajaiia. 


Mahamuni  Swadhyaya. 

Pragnasukta  Muktavali. 

Aradhana  Prakara. 

Parswanatha  Gita. 

Uttaradhyayana  Gita. 

S  adhusa77iachari. 

Sra vakaradhana. 

Jnyannpuja. 

Dikshu7nahotsava. 

Barak  Frata. 

Saptavi7isati  Sadhu  Lakshana. 

Ratribhojana  Nishedha. 

Sadhwapasha^a  Vidhi. 

Dwisashti  Fakya. 

Kshetrasa7)iasa  Sutra. 

Sa7nyaktwadhyaya7ia. 

Prishnottara  Retnamala. 

Navakurunta  Balabodha. 

Asahyana  Fid  hi. 

Santaraka  Fidhi- 

Atmdnusdsana.     Bhasa. 

Panchdstikdya,  according  to  the   Digam. 

bara  faith. 
Jinapratima  Sthapana  Fidhi. 
Jalakshalana  Fidhi. 
Sudopakara  Muktavali. 
Moksha  Marga. 
Nitisangraha. 
Fie  ha  ruma  7ijari. 
Parswanatha  Dasabhavavisaha. 
Sataviasbhava. 
Anandasravaka  Sa7idhi. 
Rohi7iitapa. 


184 

The  author  of  the  Abhidhdha  Cyintdmani,  a  useful  vocabulary,  Hema- 
CHANDRA,  is  Well  kuowii  as  a  zealous  and  able  propagator  of  the  Jain  doc- 
trines in  the  twelfth  century.  He  was  no  doubt  well  versed  in  the 
peculiarity  of  the  system  which  he  taught,  and  may  be  regarded  as  a 
safe  guide.  In  his  vocabulary  he  specifies  what  appear  to  be  the  Jaina 
scriptures,  at  least  in  the  estimation  of  the  Swetdmbara  sect,  to  which 
he  belonged,  and  in  a  valuable  Commentary  on  his  own  work  he  has 
further  particularised  the  works  named  in  his  text.  From  this  it  appears 
that  the  principal  authorities  of  a  sacred  character  were  termed  Angas, 
and  were  eleven  in  number,  or  with  a  supplementary  division,  twelve. 
They  are  thus  enumerated  and  described  ;  Achdrdnga,  a  book  teaching 
sacred  observances  after  the    practice  of  Vasishtha   and    other  saints. 


Siddhdchala  Piija- 

Pujapaddhati      Bhasha. 

Silopadesa  Mala. 

Snana  Vidhi. 

Navapattatupa  Vidhi. 

Amritushtamitapa. 

Devopuja. 

Baranhhavanasandhi.     Bhasha. 

Panegyrics   of    the   Jain   teachers,    &c. 

which  are  not  unfrequently  repeated  in 

the  temples. 
Santi  Jina  Stava.     Bhasha. 
Vrihat  Sdnti  Stava.     Sanscrit. 
Mahavira  Stava.     Bhasha. 
Laghu  Santi  Stava. 
Rishahha  Stava. 


Parswanath  Stava. 

Parswanath  Stuti.     Prakrit. 

Neminatha  Stava. 

Ashanta  Stava.  Prakrit. 

Ajitasdnti  Stava. 

Bhaktamaya  Stotra. 

Kalyuna  Mandira  Stotra  Sanscrit. 

Chnturvinsati  dandakastava. 

Sudhuhandana. 

Satrunjaya  Stava. 

Parswanath  Namaskdra. 

Champaka  Stavana. 

Vpasergahara  Stotra. 

Guru  Stava. 

Karmma  Stava. 


I 


LEGENDARY  TALES  AND  HISTORIES. 


Padma  Puranu.     Bhasha. 

Mahavira  Cheritra,  which  is  called  by 
others  a  portion  of  the  Trisashti  Saint- 
ka  Purusha  Cheritra,  or  Legend  of 
the  sixty-three  personages,  most  emi- 
nent in  Jain  Tradition.     Sanscrit. 

Nemirajarshi  Cheritra. 

Salabhadra  Cheritra.    Bhasha. 

Chitrasena  Cheritra.     Prakrit. 

Gajasukumara  Cheritra.     Bhasha. 

Chandraraja  Cheritra.     Bhasha. 

Bhaktamara. 

Sripala  Cheritra.     Bhasha. 


Kalikacharya  Katha. 
Samyaktwa  Kaumudi. 
Vastradana  Katha. 
Meghadutapada  Samasya. 
Avantisakumara  Cheritra. 
Retanchuropakhyana. 
Mrigavati  Cheritra. 
Retnachura  Muni;   Chaupai. 
Mrigavati  Chaupai.     Bhasha. 
Sadhu  Charitra. 
Satrunjaya  Mahatmya, 
Gajasinha  Charitra. 
Dasadrishtanta  Katha. 


Bhasha. 


MISCELLANEOUS. 


Vriddhayavana,  Astronomy.     Sanscrit. 

Chaturdasaswapanavichara. 

Trailokya  Dipika. 

Setunjoddhar. 

Pathanardmbhapithika. 

Hastarekhavivarana.     Prakrit. 


Namavali. 

Patavali. 

Many  of  these  are  of  small  extent,  but 
others  are  exceedingly  voluminous,  as 
the  Bhagavatyanga,  Padma  Purana, 
Satrunjaya  Mahatmya,  and  others. 


185 

Sutrakritdngam,  a  work  on  acts  imposed  by  positive  precepts.  Sthdndn- 
gam — On  the  organs  in  which  life  abides,  or  the  ten  acts  essential  to 
purity.  Samavaydngam — On  the  hundred  Paddrthas  or  categories. 
Bhagavatyangam — On  the  ritual,  or  rules  for  worship,  jnydtadherma- 
kathd — An  account  of  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  by  holy  personages. 
Updsakadasd — Rules  for  the  conduct  of  Srdwakas,  or  secular  Jains, 
apparently  in  ten  lectures.  Antakriddasa — On  the  actions  of  the  Tir- 
thakaras,  in  ten  lectures.  Anuttaropapatikadara — On  the  principal 
or  final  births  of  the  Tirthakaras,  in  ten  lectures.  Prasnavyakaranam — 
Grammar  of  questions,  probably  on  the  Code  of  the  Jains.  Vipdkas- 
rutam — On  the  fruits  or  consequences  of  actions. 

With  these  are  connected  inferior  Angas  or  Updngas,  the  names  of 
which  are  not  specified — whilst  the  Drishtabdda,  the  twelfth  Anga,  which 
seems  to  be  a  supplementary  authority,  is  divided  into  five  portions, 
entitled ;  Parikermma — On  moral  acts  ;  Sutra — Precepts  for  conduct  and 
life  ;  Purvdnuyoga — On  the  doctrines  and  practice  of  the  Tirthakaras 
before  attaining  perfection  ;  Purvagata — On  the  same  after  perfection  ! 
Chulikd — On  doctrines  and  practice  not  comprised  in  the  two  preceding. 

These  different  works  profess  to  be  derived  from  the  oral  instructions 
of  Maha'vi'ra  himself  to  his  disciple,  especially  to  Gautama  ;  but  be- 
sides these  a  class  of  works  is  enumerated  by  Hemachandra,  entitled 
Purvas,  because  they  were  drawn  up  by  the  Ganadharas  before  the  Angas  * 
There  are  fourteen  of  them  treating  of  the  chief  tenets  of  the  sect,  appa- 
rently  sometimes  controversially,  as  the  Astipravdda,  the  doctrine  of 
existence  and  non-existence.  Jnydnapravdda,  the  doctrine  of  holy 
knowledge — Satyapravdda,  discussion  of  truth — Atmapravdda,  investi- 
gation of  spirit — Prdndvdya,  nature  of  corporeal  life — Kriydvisdla,  con- 
sequences of  acts,  and  others. f  They  are  held  to  be  the  works  of 
Mahaviras  Ganas,  or  of  that  Tirthakdra  and  his  predecessors,  or  to 
have  emanated  from  them  originally,  although  committed  to  writing 
by  other  hands.     Some  of  them  still  exist,  it  appears,!  although   in 

^f  TWtf'2lfH^^^^^frTf5T^rT^^  II       ^'^^'^ha  Cher.     Section  5. 

t   A  similar  enumeration  of  these  Works  occurs  in  the  Mdhavira  Cheritra. 

X  Thus  the  Thandngisutra  and  Upasakadesa,  of  Hamilton,  are  no  doubt  the 
Sthan6.'iga  and  Upasakadasa,  of  Hemachandra' s  text,  and  the  Bhayavatyanga  is  in 
the  Sanscrit  College  Library. 

2    B 


186 

general  their  places  have  been  assumed  by  a  list  of  more  recent  com- 
positions. 

From  this  brief  statement  it  will  be  evident  that  there  is  no  want 
of  original  authorities  with  regard  to  the  belief,  the  practices,  or  the 
legends  of  the  Jaina  sect.  There  is  indeed  more  than  a  sufficiency,  and 
the  vast  extent  of  the  materials  is  rather  prejudicial  to  the  enquiry,  it 
being  impossible  to  consult  any  extensive  proportion  of  what  has  been 
written,  and  it  being  equally  impossible  without  so  doing  to  know 
that  the  beat  guides  have  been  selected.  For  such  accounts  as  are  here 
given,  the  Vocabulary  of  Hemachandra,  with  his  own  Commentary, 
the  Mahdvira  Cheritra  of  the  same  author,  the  Kalpa  Sutra,  the  Avasya^ 
kavrihad  Vritta,  the  Bhagavatyanga  Vritta,  Nava  Tatwabodha,  and  Jiva 
V\chdra  have  chiefly  been  consulted. 

The  leading  tenets  of  the  Jains,  and  those  which  chiefly  distinguish 
them  from  the  rest  of  the  Hindus,  are  well  known — they  are,  first,  the 
denial  of  the  divine  origin  and  infallible  authority  of  the  Vedas ;  second- 
ly, the  reverence  of  certain  holy  mortals  who  acquired,  by  practices  of 
self-denial  and  mortification,  a  station  superior  to  that  of  the  gods  ;  and 
thirdly,  extreme  and  even  ludicrous  tenderness  for  animal  life. 

The  disregard  of  the  authority  of  the  Vedas  is  common  to  the  Jains 
and  the  Bauddhas,  and  involves  a  neglect  of  the  rites  which  they  pres- 
cribe :  in  fact,  it  is  in  a  great  degree  from  those  rites  that  an  inference 
unfavourable  to  the  sanctity  of  the  Vedas  is  drawn,  and  not  to  speak  of 
the  sacrifices  of  animals  which  the  Vedas  occasionally  enjoin ;  the  Homa, 
or  burnt  offering,  which  forms  a  part  of  every  ceremonial  in  those  works, 
is  an  abomination  ;  as  insects  crawling  amongst  the  fuel,  bred  by  the 
fermented  butter,  or  falling  into  the  flame,  cannot  fail  to  be  destroyed 
by  every  oblation.  As  far,  however,  as  the  doctrines  they  teach  are 
conformable  to  Jain  tenets,  the  Vedas  are  admitted  and  quoted  as 
authority. 

The  veneration  and  worship  of  mortals  is  also  common  to  the  Jains 
and  Bauddhas,  but  the  former  have  expanded  and  methodised  the 
notions  of  the  latter.  The  Bauddhas,  although  they  admit  an  endless 
number  of  earthly  Buddhas  to  have  existed,  and  specify  more  than 
a  century  of  names,*  confine  their  reverence  to  a  comparatively  small 
number — to  seven.     The  Jainas  extend  this  number  to  twenty-four  for 

*  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  XVI.  pages  446  to  449. 


187 

a  given  period,  and  enumerate,  by  name,  the  twenty- four  of  their  past 
age,  or  Avasarpini,  the  twenty-four  of  the  present,  and  the  twenty-four 
of  the  age  to  come.  The  statues  of  these,  either  all  or  in  part,  are  as- 
sembled in  their  temples,  sometimes  of  colossal  dimensions,  and  usually 
of  black  or  white  marble.  The  objects  held  in  highest  esteem  in  Hindus- 
tan are  Pa'rswana'th  and  Maha'vira,  the  twenty-third  and  twenty- 
fourth  Jinas  of  the  present  era,  who  seem  to  have  superseded  all  their 
predecessors. 

The  generic  names  of  a  Jaina  saint  express  the  ideas  entertained  of 
his  character  by  his  votaries.  He  is  Jagatprabhu,  lord  of  the  world ; 
Kshinakermmd,  free  from  bodily  or  ceremonial  acts ;  Sarvajna,  omnis- 
cient ;  Adhiswara,  supreme  lord  ;  Devddideva,  god  of  gods ;  and  similar 
epithets  of  obvious  purport ;  whilst  others  are  of  a  more  specific  charac- 
ter, as  Tirthakdra,  or  Tirthankara,  Kevali,  Arhat,  and  Jina.  The  first 
implies  one  who  has  crossed  over,  (Tiryate  anenaj  that  is,  the  world, 
compared  to  the  ocean ;  Kevali,  is  the  possessor  of  Kevala,  or  spiritual 
nature,  free  from  its  investing  sources  of  error :  Arhat  is  one  entitled  to 
the  homage  of  gods  and  men,  and  Jina  is  the  victor  over  all  human 
passions  and  infirmities.* 

Besides  these  epithets,  founded  on  attributes  of  a  generic  character, 
there  are  other  characteristics  common  to  all  the  Jinas  of  a  more  specific 
rtature.  These  are  termed  Atisayas,  or  super-human  attributes,  and  are 
altogether  thirty-six;  four  of  them,  or  rather  four  classes,  regard  the 
person  of  a  Jina,  such  as  the  beauty  of  his  form,  the  fragrance  of  his 
body,  the  white  colour  of  his  blood,  the  curling  of  his  hair,  its  non- 
increase,  and  that  of  the  beard  and  nails,  his  exemption  from  all  natural 
impurities,  from  hunger  and  thirst,  from  infirmity  and  decay :  these  pro- 
perties are  considered  to  be  born  with  him.  He  can  collect  around  him 
millions  of  beings,  gods,  men,  and  animals,  in  a  comparatively  small 
space,  his  voice  is  audible  to  a  great  distance,  and  his  language,  which 
is  Arddha  Mdgadhi,  is  intelligible  to  animals,  men  and  gods,  the  back  of 

These  Etymologies  are  from  Hemachandra' s  Commentar)-. 


188 

his  head  is  surrounded  with  a  halo  of  light,  brighter  than  the  disk  of  the 
sun,  and  for  an  immense  interval  around  him,  wherever  he  moves,  there 
is  neither  sickness  nor  enmity,  storm  nor  dearth,  neither  plague  portents, 
nor  war.  Eleven  Atisayas  of  this  kind  are  ascribed  to  him.  The  re- 
maining nineteen  are  of  celestial  origin,  as  the  raining  of  flowers  and 
perfumes,  the  sound  of  heavenly  drums,  and  the  menial  offices  rendered 
by  Indra  and  the  gods. 

Notwithstanding  the  sameness  of  the  general  character  and  identity 
of  generic  attributes,  the  twenty -four  Jinas  are  distinguished  from  each 
other  in  colour,  stature,  and  longevity.  Two  of  them  are  red,  two 
white,  two  blue,  two  black,  the  rest  are  of  a  golden  hue,  or  a  yellowish 
brown.  The  other  two  peculiarities  are  regulated  with  very  systematic 
precision,  and  observe  a  series  of  decrement  from  Rishabha,  the  first 
Jina,  who  was  five  hundred  poles  in  stature,  and  lived  8,400,000  great 
years  to  Mahduira,  the  24th,  who  had  degenerated  to  the  size  of  man, 
and  was  not  more  than  forty  years  on  earth.  These  peculiarities  have 
been  detailed  by  Mr.  Colebrooke,  in  the  ninth  volume  of  the  Researches, 
and  he  draws  a  probable  inference  from  the  return  to  reason  in  the 
stature  and  years  of  the  two  last  Jinas,  that  they  alone  are  to  be  consi- 
dered as  historical  personages.  The  rest  are  the  creatures  of  fiction. 
The  notion  of  decreasing  longevity,  like  that  of  the  existence  of  human 
beings,  superior  to  the  gods,  is  common  to  the  Bauddhas."^ 

There  is  also  great  similarity  in  the  general  tenor  of  the  legends 
related  of  each  of  the  Jinas.  They  are  all  born  a  number  of  times,  and 
in  a  variety  of  characters,  before  they  arrive  at  the  state  of  a  Tirthan- 
kara  :  after  which,  as  their  attainment  of  divine  knowledge  is  the  work 
of  self-denial  and  ascetic  meditation,  we  need  not  expect  much  varied 

*  A  comparison  of  the  Jain  and  Bauddha  series  suggests  strong  confirmation  of 
the  opinion,  that  the  Jain  legends  are  only    Bauddha  notions   exaggerated.     The     t 
ages  of  the  seven  Buddhas  run  thus —  9 

Vipasivi 80,000  years. 

Sikhi 70,000  ditto. 

Viswabhu, 60,000  ditto. 

Krakuchchanda 40,0U0  ditto. 

Kanaka, 30,000  ditto. 

Kasyapa,    ...., 20,000  ditto. 

Sdkya, 100  ditto. 

A.  K.  vol.  XVI.  p.  453.     The  last  Jina  but  one,  or  Parsivanath,  lived  like  Sdkya, 
lUO  years. 


189 

incident  in  their  adventures,  a  sketch  of  the  life  of  Maha'vi'ra,  from 
the  Mahdvira  Cheritra,  will  convey  some  notion  of  their  ordinary  his- 
tory, whilst  further  illustration  may  be  derived  from  an  abstract  of  the 
Pdrswandtk  Cheritra,  or  life  of  Pa'rswana'th,  in  the  Royal  Asiatic 
Society's  Transactions. 


LIFE  OFMAHAVIRA. 


The  twenty-fourth  Tirthankara  Maha'vi'ra's  first  birth,  which  oc- 
curred at  a  period  indefinitely  remote,  was  as  Nayasa'ra,  head  man  of 
a  village,  in  the  country  of  Vijaya,  subject  to  Satrumerddana.  His 
piety  and  humanity  elevated  him  next  to  the  heaven  called  Saudherma, 
where  he  enjoyed  happiness  for  some  oceans  of  years.  He  was  next 
born  as  Marichi,  the  grandson  of  the  first  Tirthankara  Rishabha,  then 
transferred  to  the  Brahmaloka,  whence  he  returned  to  earth  as  a  world- 
ly-minded and  sensual  Brahman,  the  consequence  of  which  was  his 
repeated  births  in  the  same  caste,  each  birth  being  separated  by  an 
interval  passed  in  one  of  the  Jain  heavens,  and  each  period  of  life 
extending  to  many  lakhs  of  years.  He  then  became  Viswabhu'ta, 
prince  of  Rajagriha,  and  next  a  Vdsudeva,  named  Tri'pri'shtha,  from 
having  tliree  back  bones  :  his  uncle  and  foe  in  a  former  life,  Visahha- 
nandi,  was  born  as  his  Protagonist,  or  Prativdsudevd,  named  Aswagriva 
or  Hayagriva,  and  was,  in  the  course  of  events,  destroyed  by  the 
Vdsudeva,  a  palpable  adaptation  of  the  Pauranic  legend  of  Vishnu  and 
Hayagriva.  Tri'pri'shtha  having  put  his  chamberlain  cruelly  to 
death,  was  condemned  to  hell,  and  again  born  as  a  lion  ;  he  migrated 
through  various  forms,  until  he  became  the  Chakravertti  Priyamitra, 
in  the  division  of  the  world,  Mahavideha.  After  a  victorious  reign  of 
eighty- four  lakhs  of  years,  he  became  an  ascetic  for  a  further  period 
of  a  hundred  lakhs,  and  was  then  translated  to  one  of  the  higher  heavens. 
Thence  he  returned  to  earth  in  the  Bharata  division,  as  Nandana,  the 
son  of  JiTASATRu,  hc  adopted  a  life  of  devotion,  and  diligently  adored 
the  Jinas.  After  an  existence  of  twenty-five  lakhs  of  years,  he  was 
raised  to  the  dignity  of  king  of  the  gods  in  the  Pushpottara  heaven,  in 


190 

which  capacity  he  preserved  his  ancient  faith,  offering  flowers  to,  and 
bathing  daily  the  one  hundred  and  eight  images  of  the  Arhats.  Such 
exalted  piety  was  now  to  meet  with  its  reward,  and  the  pains  of  exist- 
ence to  be  terminated  in  the  person  of  the  Tirthankara,  Ma'ha'vi'ea,  or 
Verddhama'na. 

On  the  return  of  the  spirit  of  Nandana  to  earth,  it  first  animated  the 
womb  of  the  wife  of  a  Brahman,  but  Mahendra  disapproving  of  the 
receptacle  as  of  low  caste,  transferred  it  to  the  womb  of  Trisala',  wife  of 
Siddha'rtha,  of  the  family  of  Ikshwaku,  and  prince  of  Pavana,  in  Bhar- 
atakshetra.  MahaVi'ra  was  born  on  the  thirteenth  of  the  light  fort- 
night of  Chaitra :  the  fifty- six  nymphs  of  the  universe  assisted  at  his 
birth,  and  his  consecration  was  performed  by  Sakra,  and  the  other  sixty 
three  Indras.  The  name  given  by  his  father  was  Verddhama'na,  as 
causing  increase  of  riches  and  prosperity,  but  Sakra  gave  him  also  the 
appellation  of  MahaVi'ra,  as  significant  of  his  power  and  supremacy 
over  men  and  gods. 

When  arrived  at  maturity,  MahaVi'ra  was  prevailed  upon  by  his 
parents  to  marry  Yasoda',  daughter  of  the  prince  Samaravi'ra.  By  her 
he  had  a  daughter,  Priyadersana',  who  was  married  to  Jama'li,  a 
prince,  one  of  the  saint's  pupils,  and  founder  of  a  schism.  Siddha'rtha 
and  his  wife  died  when  their  son  was  twenty- eight  years  old,  on  which 
Maha'vi'ra  adopted  an  ascetic  life,  the  government  devolving  on  his 
elder  brother  Nandiverddhana.  After  two  years  of  abstinence  and 
self-denial  at  home,  he  commenced  an  erratic  life,  and  the  attainment  of 
the  degree  of  a  Jina. 

During  the  first  six  years  of  his  peregrination,  Maha'vi'ra  observed 
frequent  fasts  of  several  months  duration,  during  each  of  which  he  kept 
his  eyes  fixed  upon  the  tip  of  his  nose,  and  maintained  perpetual  silence. 
He  was  invisibly  attended  by  a  Yaksha,  named  Siddha'rtha,  who,  at 
the  command  of  Indra,  watched  over  his  personal  security,  and  where 
speech  was  necessary  acted  as  spokesman.  At  Ndldndd,  a  village  near 
Rdjagriha,  Maha'vi'ra  acquired  a  follower  named  Gosa'la,  so  called 
from  his  birth  in  a  cow-house,  a  man  of  low  caste  and  vulgar  propensities, 
and  who  acts  as  a  sort  of  buffoon.*    He  is  involved  in  repeated  difficulties, 

*  Some  curious  and  unintelligible  things  are  related  of  this  individual,  which  sug- 
gest a  suspicion  that  the  author  had  in  view  some  of  the  oriental  legends  relating  to 
Mani  or  Manes.    The  birth  of  Gosa'la,  in  a  cow-house,  may  or  may  not  refer  to 


191 

and  not  unfrequently  receives  a  beating,  but  when  free  from  fault,  the 
Yakshas,  who  attend  on  Siddha'rtha,  come  to  his  aid,  and  destroy 
with  fire  the  houses  and  property  of  his  assailants.  Amongst  other 
enemies  he  provokes  the  followers  of  Verddhana  Su'ri,  the  disciple  of 
Chandra- a'cha'rya,  a  teacher  of  the  Jain  faith,  according  to  the  doc- 
trines of  Pa'rswana'th.  In  the  course  of  the  dispute  it  appears  that 
the  followers  of  Pa'rswana'th  wore  clothes,  whilst  Maha'vi'ra  was 
indifferent  to  vesture,  and  the  latter  consequently  belonged  to  the  divi- 
sion of  the  Jains  called  Digambaras,  or  those  who  go  naked,  whilst 
Pa'rswana'th's  disciples  were  Swetdmharas,  dressed  in  garments.*  Bur- 
ring the  six  years  expended  in  this  manner,  Maha'vi'ra  visits  a  number 
of  places,  most  of  which  appear  to  be  in  Behar  and  the  adjacent  provin- 
ces, as  Rdjagriha,  Srdvasti  near  OudCy  Vaisdli,  which  is  identified  with 
the  capital  of  Behar,  and  others. 

Proceeding  on  his  peregrinations,  Maha'vi'ra  voluntarily  exposed  him- 
self to  be  maltreated  by  the  Mlechha  tribes  of  VajrabMmi  Suddhibhumi, 
and  Ldt,  or  Ldr  the  countries  apparently  of  the  Gonds,  who  abused  and 
beat  him,  and  shot  at  him  with  arrows,  and  baited  him  with  dogs,  to  all 
which  he  offered  no  resistance,  and  indeed  rejoiced  in  his  sufferings,  for, 
however  necessary  to  personal  purification,  it  is  not  the  duty  of  a  Jain 
ascetic  to  inflict  tortures  upon  himself — his  course  of  penance  is  one  of 

Christianity  ;  but  it  is  also  observed  that  his  father  and  mother  carried  about  a  Chitra 
Pattika,  a  painted  cloth  or  picture,  which  Gosa'la  stole  from  them,  and  that  when 
he  adopted  the  service  of  Maha'vi'ra,  he  abandoned  the  heresy  of    the  picture, 

♦  They  reply  to  Gosa'la's  enquiry  :  fif^r^fX*  m^^f^^^T.*  ^  "We  are 
the   pupils  of   Pa'rswa,  free  from  restrain"— to  which  he  rejoins     "^^Sffff^pEff^ 

?TrT"T(«t<4«'^T  fTT^^  ^l"^  II       "  How  can  you  be  free  from  restraint  en- 

cumbered  with  clothes  and  the  like,  these  heretical  practices  are  adopted  merely  for 
a  livelihood  :  wholly  unfettered  by  clothes  and  such  things,  and  disregarding  the  body, 
the  followers  of  such  a  teacher  as  mine  is,  are  the  only  persons  exempt  from  restraint." 
Further  confirmation  of  Maha'vi'ka  and  his  followers  being  Digambaras,  occurs  in 
various  places,  especially  in  a  passage  where  Gosa'la  gets  beaten,  and  almost  killed 
by  the  women  of  a  village  in  Magadha,  because  he  is  a  naked  Sramana,  or  mendicant. 


192 

self-denial,  fasting  and  silence,  and  pain  however  meritorious  its  endur- 
ance, must  be  inflicted  by  others,  not  himself.  At  the  end  of  the  ninth 
year,  Maha'vi'ra  relinquished  his  silence  in  answer  to  a  question  put  by 
Gosa'la,  but  continued  engaged  in  the  practice  of  mortification  and  in 
an  erratic  life.  His  squire  having  acquired  from  him  the  possession  of 
the  Tejalesya,  or  power  of  ejecting  flame,  and  having  learned  from  certain 
of  the  disciples  of  Pa'rswana'th,  what  is  technically  termed  the  Mahd- 
nimitta  of  the  eight  Angas,  intending  probably  their  scriptural  doctrines, 
set  up  for  himself  as  a  Jina,  and  quitted  his  master. 

Indra  having  declared  that  Maha'vi'ra's  meditations  could  not  be 
disturbed  by  men  or  gods,  one  of  the  inferior  spirits  of  heaven,  indignant 
at  the  assertion,  assailed  the  Sage  with  a  variety  of  horrors  and  tempta- 
tions, but  in  vain.  Maha'vi'ra's  pious  abstraction  was  unbroken.  He 
then  wandered  about  and  visited  Kausdmbi,  the  capital  of  Satdnika, 
where  he  was  received  with  great  veneration,  and  where  his  period  of 
self-denial  ended  in  perfect  exemption  from  human  infirmities.  The 
whole  of  the  time  expended  by  him  in  these  preparatory  exercises  was 
twelve  years  and  six  months,  and  of  this  he  had  fasted  nearly  eleven 
years.  His  various  fasts  are  particularised  with  great  minuteness,  as 
one  of  six  months,  nine  of  four  months  each,  twelve  of  one  month,  and 
seventy- two  of  half  a  month  each,  making  altogether  ten  years  and 
three  hundred  and  forty-nine  days. 

The  bonds  of  action  were  snapped  like  an  old  rope,  and  the  Kevala, 
or  only  knowledge  attained  by  Maha'vi'ra  on  the  north  bank  of  the 
Rijupdlikd,  under  a  Sal  tree,  on  the  tenth  of  the  light  fortnight  of 
Vaisdkha,  in  the  fourth  watch  of  the  day,  whilst  the  moon  was  in  the 
asterism  Hasta.  Indra  instantly  hastened  to  the  spot,  attended  by 
thousands  of  deities,  who  all  did  homage  to  the  saint,  and  attended 
him  on  his  progress  to  Apdpdpuri,  in  Behar,  where  he  commenced  his 
instructions  on  a  stage  erected  for  the  purpose  by  the  deities,  a  model 
of  which  is  not  uncommonly  represented  in  Jain  temples.  The  follow- 
ing is  the  introductory  lecture  ascribed  to  Maha'vi'ra  by  his  biographer. 

"  The  world  is  without  bounds,  like  a  formidable  ocean ;  its  cause  is 
action  (Karma,)  which  is  as  the  seed  of  the  tree.  The  being  (JivaJ 
invested  with  body,  but  devoid  of  judgment,  goes  hke  a  well- sinker, 
ever  downwards,  by  the  acts  it  performs,  whilst  the  embodied  being 
which  has  attained  purity,  goes  ever  upwards,  by  its  own  acts,  like  the 


193 

builder  of  a  palace.  Let  not  any  one  injure  life,  whilst  bound  in  the 
bonds  of  action ;  but  be  as  assiduous  in  cherishing  the  life  of  another  as 
his  own.  Never  let  any  one  speak  falsehood,  but  always  speak  the 
truth.  Let  every  one  who  has  a  bodily  form  avoid  giving  pain  to  others 
as  much  as  to  himself.  Let  no  one  take  property  not  given  to  him,  for 
wealth  is  hke  the  external  life  of  men,  and  he  who  takes  away  such 
wealth  commits  as  it  were  murder.  Associate  not  with  women,  for  it 
is  the  destruction  of  life  :  let  the  wise  observe  continence,  which  binds 
them  to  the  Supreme.  Be  not  incumbered  with  a  family,  for  by  the 
anxiety  it  involves,  the  person  separated  from  it  falls  like  an  ox  too 
heavily  laden.  If  it  be  not  in  their  power  to  shun  these  more  subtle 
destroyers  of  life,  let  those  who  desire  so  to  do,  avoid  at  least  the  com- 
mission of  all  gross  offences." 

When  Maha'vi'ra's  fame  began  to  be  widely  diffused,  it  attracted  the 
notice  of  the  Brahmans  of  Magadhd,  and  several  of  their  most  eminent 
teachers  undertook  to  refute  his  doctrines.  Instead  of  effecting  their 
purpose,  however,  they  became  converts,  and  constituted  his  Ganadharas, 
heads  of  schools,  the  disciples  of  Maha'vi'ra  and  teachers  of  his  doc- 
trines, both  orally  and  scripturally.  It  is  of  some  interest  to  notice  them 
in  detail,  as  the  epithets  given  to  them  are  liable  to  be  misunderstood, 
and  to  lead  to  erroneous  notions  respecting  their  character  and  history. 

This  is  particularly  the  case  with  the  first  Indrabhu'ti,  or  Gautama, 
who  has  been  considered  as  the  same  with  the  Gautama  of  the  Baud- 
dhas,  the  son  of  Ma'ya'devi,  and  author  of  the  Indian  metaphysics.* 
That  any  connexion  exists  between  the  Jain  and  the  Brahmana  Sage 
is,  at  least,  very  doubtful ;  but  the  Gautama  of  the  Bauddhas,  the  sun 
of  SuDHODANA  aud  Ma'ya',  was  a  Kshetriya,  a  prince  of  the  royal  or 
warrior  caste.  All  the  Jain  traditions  make  their  Gautama  a  Brahman^ 
originally  of  the  Gotra,  or  tribe  of  Gotama  Rishi,  a  division  of  the 
Brahmans  well  known,  and  still  existing  in  the  South  of  India.  These 
two  persons  therefore  cannot  be  identified,  whether  they  be  historical  or 
fictitious  personages. 

Indrabhu'ti,  Agnibhu'ti,  and  Va'yubhu'ti,  are  described  as  the  sons 

of  Vasubhu'ti,  a  Brahman  of  the  Gotama  tribe,  residing  at  Govara,  a 

village  in  Magadha :  from  their  race,  Hemachandra,  in  the  commentary 

on  the  vocabulary,  observes,  they  are  all  called  Gautamas.    Vyakta  and 

*  R.  A.  S.  Transactions,  vol.  I.  p.  538. 

2  c 


194 

SuDHERMA  were  the  sons  of  Dhanamitra  and  Dhammilla,  two  Brah- 
mans  of  Kollaka,  the  former  of  the  Bharadwdja,  and  the  latter  of  the 
Agnivaisya  tribe.  Mandita  and  Maurya  putra  were  half-brothers,  the 
sons  of  Vijayadevi'  by  Dhana  Deva  and  Maurya,  two  Brahmans  of 
the  Fdsishtha  and  Kdsyapa  races,  but  cousins  by  the  mother's  side,  and 
consequently,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  country,  it  is  stated,  the 
one  took  the  other's  widow  to  wife  upon  his  decease.  Akampita  was 
the  son  of  a  Maithili  Brahman,  of  the  Gautama  tribe.  Achalabhra'ta', 
of  a  Brahman  of  Oude,  of  the  Hdrita  family.  Metarya  was  a  Brahman 
of  Vatsa,  of  the  Kaundilya  tribe  ;  and  Prabha'sa,  a  Brahman  of  the 
same  race,  but  a  native  of  Rdjagriha  in  Behar.  These  are  the  eleven 
Ganadharas,  or  Ganddhipas,  holders  or  masters  of  Jain  schools,  although, 
before  their  conversion,  learned  in  the  four  Vedas,  and  teaching  the  doc- 
trines  contained  in  them, 

These  converts  to  Jain  principles  are  mostly  made  in  the  same  man- 
ner :  each  comes  to  the  Saint,  prepared  to  overwhelm  him  with  shame 
when  he  salutes  them  mildly  by  name,  tells  them  the  subject  that 
excites  their  unuttered  doubts,  and  solves  the  difficulty,  not  always  very 
satisfactorily  or  distinctly  it  must  be  admitted  ;  but  the  whole  is  an 
epitome  of  the  Jain  notions  on  those  subjects  which  chiefly  engage  the 
attention  of  the  Hindu  philosophers. 

Indrabhu'ti  doubts  whether  there  be  life  (Jiva)  or  not— Maha'vi'ra 
says  there  is,  and  that  it  is  the  vessel  of  virtue  and  vice,  or  where  would 
be  the  use  of  acts  of  virtue  or  piety. 

Agnibhu'ti  questions  if  there  be  acts  (Kerma)  or  not,  to  which 
Maha'vi'ra  replies  in  the  affirmative,  and  that  from  them  proceed  all 
bodily  pleasure  and  pain,  and  the  various  migrations  of  the  living  prin- 
ciple through  different  forms. 

Va'yubhu'ti  doubts  if  life  be  not  body,  which  the  Sage  denies,  as  the 
objects  of  the  senses  may  be  remembered  after  the  senses  cease  to  act, 
even  after  death,  that  is,  in  a  succeeding  state  of  existence  occasionally. 

Vyakta  questions  the  reality  of  elementary  matter,  referring  it  with 
the  Veddntis  to  illusion ;  the  Sage  replies  that  the  doctrine  of  vacuity  is 
false,  illustrating  his  position  rather  obscurely,  by  asking  if  there  are  no 
other  worlds  than  the  Gandharba,  cities  of  dreams,  or  castles  in  the  air. 

SuDHERMA  imagines  that  the  same  kind  of  bodies  which  are  worn  in 
one  life  will  be  assumed  in  another,  or  that  a  human  being  must  be  born 


195 

again  amongst  mankind  ;  for  as  the  tree  is  always  of  the  same  nature  as 
the  seed,  so  must  the  consequences  of  acts,  in  a  peculiar  capacity,  lead  to 
results  adapted  to  a  similar  condition.  This  Maha'vi'ra.  contradicts,  and 
says  that  causes  and  effects  are  not  necessarily  of  the  same  nature  as 
horn,  and  similar  materials  are  convertible  into  arrow  barbs,  and  the 
like. 

Mandita  has  not  made  up  his  mind  on  the  subjects  of  bondage  and 
liberation,  (Bandha  and  MokshaJ  ;  the  Jina  explains  the  former  to  be 
connexion  with  and  dependence  on  worldly  acts,  whilst  the  latter  is 
total  detachment  from  them,  and  independence  of  them  effected  by  know- 
ledge. 

Mauryaputra  doubts  of  the  existence  of  gods,  to  which  Maha'vi'ra 
opposes  the  fact  of  the  presence  of  Indra,  and  the  rest  around  his  throne. 
They  cannot  bear  the  odour  of  mere  mortality,  he  adds ;  but  they  never 
fail  to  attend  at  the  birth,  inauguration,  and  other  passages  of  the  life 
of  a  Jina. 

Akampita  is  disposed  to  disbelieve  the  existence  of  the  spirits  of  hell, 
because  he  cannot  see  them ;  but  the  Sage  says  that  they  are  visible  to 
those  possessing  certain  knowledge,  of  whom  he  is  one. 

Achalabhra'ta'  is  sceptical  as  to  the  distinction  between  vice  and 
virtue,  for  which  Maha'vi'ra  rebukes  him,  and  desires  him  to  judge  of 
them  by  their  fruits  :  length  of  days,  honorable  birth,  health,  beauty  and 
prosperity,  being  the  rewards  in  this  life  of  virtue ;  and  the  reverse  of 
these  the  punishments  of  vice. 

Meta'rya  questions  a  future  existence,  because  life  having  no  certain 
form  must  depend  on  elementary  form,  and  consequently  perish  with  it ; 
but  Maha'vi'ra  replies,  that  life  is  severally  present  in  various  elemen- 
tary aggregates  to  give  them  consciousness,  and  existing  independent  of 
them,  may  go  elsewhere  often  they  are  dissolved.  He  adds,  in  confirma- 
tion of  the  doctrine,  that  the  Srutis  and  Smritis,  that  is,  the  scriptural 
writings  of  the  Brahmanas,  assert  the  existence  of  other  worlds. 

The  last  of  the  list  is  Prabha'sa,  who  doubts  if  there  be  such  a  thine: 
as  Nirvdn,  that  state  of  nonentity  which  it  is  the  object  of  a  Jaina  saint 
to  attain.  The  solution  is  not  very  explicit.  Nirvdn  is  declared  to  be  the 
same  with  Moksha,  liberation,  and  Kermakshaya,  abrogation  of  acts,  and 
that  this  is  real  is  proved  by  the  authority  of  the  Veda,  and  is  visibly 
manifested  in  those  who  acquire  true  knowledge. 


196 

According  to  this  view  of  the  Jain  system,  therefore,  we  find  the  vital 
principle  recognised  as  a  real  existence,  animating  in  distinct  portions, 
distinct  bodies,  and  condemned  to  suffer  the  consequence  of  its  actions 
by  migrations  through  various  forms.  The  reality  of  elementary  mat- 
ter is  also  asserted,  as  well  as  of  gods,  demons,  heaven,  and  hell.  The 
final  state  of  the  vital  and  sentient  principle  is  left  rather  obscure,  but 
as  its  actual  and  visible  exemption  from  human  acts  is  taught,  it  follows 
that  it  is  exempt  from  their  consequences,  or  repeated  births  in  various 
shapes,  and  therefore  ceases  to  be  in  any  sensible  or  suffering  form.  It 
is  unnecessary  to  dwell  longer  on  the  subject  here,  as  we  shall  have 
occasion  to  recur  to  it. 

After  the  conversion  of  these  Brahmans  and  their  disciples,  Maha'vi'ra 
instructed  them  further  in  his  doctrines,  and  they  again  taught  them  to 
others,  becoming  the  heads  of  separate  schools.  Akampita  and  Achala- 
bhra'ta,  however,  and  Meta'rya  and  Pkabha'sa  taught  in  common, 
so  that  the  eleven  Ganadhipas  established  but  nine  Ganas  or  classes. 

Having  thus  attained  the  object  of  his  penance  and  silence,  Maha'vi'ra, 
attended  by  his  disciples,  wandered  about  to  different  places,  disseminat- 
ing the  Jain  belief,  and  making  numerous  converts.  The  scene  of  his 
labours  is  mostly  along  the  Ganges,  in  the  modern  districts  of  Behar 
and  Allahabad,  and  principally  at  the  cities  of  Kausdmbi  and  Rdjagriha, 
under  the  kings  Sata'ni'ka  and  Sreni'ka,  both  of  whom  are  Jains.  The 
occurrences  described  relate  more  to  the  disciples  of  the  Saint  than  to 
himself,  and  there  are  some  curious  matters  of  an  apparently  historical 
character.  There  is  also  a  prophetic  account  of  Hemachandra  himself, 
and  his  patron  Kuma'ra  Pa' la  of  Guzerat,  put  into  the  mouth  of 
AJaha'vi'ra  ;  but  these  are  foreign  to  our  present  purpose,  which  is 
confined  to  the  progress  of  the  Jain  sage. 

Maha'vi'ra  having  completed  the  period  of  his  earthly  career,  returned 
to  Apdpapuri,  whither  he  was  attended  by  a  numerous  concourse  of  fol- 
lowers of  various  designations.  However  fanciful  the  enumeration,  the 
list  is  not  uninstructive,  as  it  displays  the  use  of  various  terms  to  signify 
different  orders  of  one  sect,  and  not,  as  has  been  sometimes  erroneously 
supposed,  the  sect  itself.  Sramanas,  Sadhs  and  Srdvaks,  may  be  Jains, 
but  they  are  not  necessarily  so,  nor  do  they  singly  designate  all  the 
individuals  of  that  persuasion.  Vird's  train  consists  of  Sddhus,  holy  men, 
fourteen  thousand  ;  Sddhwis  holy  women,  thirty-six  thousand  ;  Sramanas 


I 


197 

or  ascetics,  versed  in  the  fourteen  Purvas,  three  hundred  ;  Avadhijndnis 
those  knowing  the  limits  or  laws,  one  thousand  and  three  hundred; 
Kevalis,  or  detached  from  acts,  seven  hundred ;  Manovits,  possessors  of 
intellectual  wisdom,  five  hundred  ;  Bddis,  controversialists,  four  hundred  ; 
Srdvakas,  the  male  laity,  one  lack  and  fifty-nine  thousand  ;  and  Srdvikas, 
female  hearers  of  the  word,  double  that  number,  or  three  lacks  and 
eighteen  thousand.  The  only  Ganadharas  present,  were  Gautama  and 
SuDHERMA,  the  other  nine  having  attained  felicity,  or  having  died  before 
their  master. 

The  period  of  his  liberation  having  arrived,  Maha'vi'ra  resigned  his 
breath,  and  his  body  was  burned  by  Sakra  and  other  deities,  who 
divided  amongst  them  such  parts  as  were  not  destroyed  by  the  flames, 
as  the  teeth  and  bones,  which  they  preserved  as  reliques ;  the  ashes  of 
the  pile  were  distributed  amongst  the  assistants :  the  gods  erected  a 
splendid  monument  on  the  spot,  and  then  returned  to  their  respective 
heavens.  These  events  occurred  on  the  day  of  new  moon,  in  the  month 
Kdrtik,  when  Maha'vi'ra  was  seventy-two  years  of  age,  thirty  of  which 
were  spent  in  social  duties,  and  the  rest  in  religious  avocations,  and 
he  died  two  hundred  and  fifty  years  after  the  preceding  Jina,  Pa'rswa- 
na'th  :  no  other  date  is  given,  but  in  the  passage  in  the  prophetic  strain 
above  alluded  to,  it  is  mentioned  that  Kuma'ra,  Pa'la  will  found  Anahilla 
Patau,  and  become  the  disciple  of  Hemachandra,  one  thousand  six 
hundred  and  sixty-nine  years  after  the  death  of  Maha'vi'ra. 

The  conversion  of  Kuma'ra  Pa'la  occurred  about  A.  D.  1174,  and 
consequently  the  last  Jina  expired  about  five  hundred  years  before  the 
Christian  era.  According  to  other  authorities,  the  date  assigned  to  this 
event,  is  commonly  about  a  century  and  a  half  earlier,  or  before  Christ 
six  hundred  and  sixty-three,*  but  Hemachandra  is  a  preferable  guide, 
although,  in  point  of  actual  chronology,  his  date  is  probably  not  more 
to  be  depended  upon  than  those  derived  from  other  sources. 

The  doctrines  of  the  Jains,  which  constitute  the  philosophy  of  their  sys- 
tem, it  is  not  part  of  the  present  plan  to  discuss :  but  a  few  of  the  lead- 
ing tenets,  as   derived  from  original  authorities,  may   be  here  briefly 

*  Colonel  Mackenzie,  on  the  inforniation  of  the  Belligolu  Jains,  says  Verddha- 
mdna  attained  beatitude  2464  years  before  the  year  1801,  which  is  663  years  before 
Christ.  Mr.  Colebrooke  observes,  that  the  Jains  of  Bengal  reckon  Ferdd/iatndna 
to  have  lived  580  years  before  Fikramaditya,  which  is  A.  C.  636. 


198 

adverted  to.  It  is  the  more  necessary  to  dwell  on  the  subject  as  the 
chief  opinions  of  the  sect  of  Jina,  as  described  elsewhere,  have,  for  the 
most  part,  been  taken  from  verbal  communication,  or  the  controversial 
writings  of  the  Brahmans. 

An  eternal  and  presiding  first  cause  forms  no  part  of  the  Jain  creed, 
nor  do  the  Jains  admit  of  soul  or  spirit  as  distinct  from  the  living  prin- 
ciple. All  existence  is  divisible  into  two  heads — Life  (JivaJ  or  the  living 
and  sentient  principle  ;  and  Inertia  or  Ajiva,  the  various  modifications 
of  inanimate  matter.  Both  these  are  uncreated  and  imperishable.  Their 
forms  and  conditions  may  change,  but  they  are  never  destroyed ;  and 
with  the  exception  of  the  unusual  cases  in  which  a  peculiar  living  prin- 
ciple ceases  to  be  subject  to  bodily  acts,  both  life  and  matter  proceed  in 
a  certain  course,  and  at  stated  periods  the  same  forms,  the  same  charac- 
ters, and  the  same  events,  are  repeated. 

To  proceed,  however,  according  to  the  original  authorities,  all  objects 
sensible  or  abstract,  are  arranged  under  nine  categories,  termed  Tatwas, 
truths  or  existences,  which  we  shall  proceed  to  notice  in  some  detail. 

I.  Jiva,  Life,  or  the  living  and  sentient  principle,  as  existing  in  various 
forms,  but  especially  reducible  to  two  classes,  those  with  and  those 
without  mobility.  The  first  comprises  animals,  men,  demons,  and  gods — 
the  second,  all  combinations  of  the  four  elements,  earth,  water,  fire,  air, 
as  minerals,  vapours,  meteors,  and  tempests — and  all  the  products  of  the 
vegetable  kingdom.  They  are  again  arranged  in  five  classes,  according 
to  their  possession  of  as  many  Indriyas,  or  sensible  properties.  The 
wholly  unconscious  bodies  to  ordinary  apprehension,  but  which  have  a 
subtle  vitality  perceptible  to  saintly  and  super- human  beings,  have  the 
property  of  form  :  such  are  minerals,  and  the  like.  Snails,  worms,  and 
insects,  in  general,  have  two  properties — form  and  face.  Lice,  fleas,  and 
the  like,  have  three  properties,  or  form,  face,  and  the  organ  of  smell. 
Bees,  gnats,  and  the  rest  have,  in  addition  to  these,  vision  ;  whilst 
animals,  men,  demons,  and  gods,  have  form,  vision,  hearing,  smell,  and 
taste.  To  these  five  predicates  of  vital  beings,  two  others  are  some- 
times added,  and  they  are  said  to  be  Sanjnina  and  Asnajnina,  or,  born 
by  procreation,  or  spontaneously  generated.  Again,  these  seven  orders 
are  distinguished  as  complete  or  incomplete,  making  altogether  four- 
teen classes  of  living  things.  According  to  the  acts  done  or  suflfered  in 
each  condition,  the  vital  principle  migrates  to  an  inferior  or  superior 


199 

grade,  until  it  is  emancipated  from  bodily  acts  altogether.  It  is  a 
peculiarity  of  the  Jain  notions  of  life,  that  it  is  always  adapted  to  the 
body  it  animates,  and  diminishes  with  the  gnat,  and  expands  to  the 
elephant,  a  notion  that  is  treated  with  just  ridicule  by  the  Brahmans. 
Generically,  it  is  defined  to  be  without  beginning  or  end,  endowed  with 
attributes  of  its  own  agent  and  enjoyer,  conscious,  subtle,  proportionate 
to  the  body  it  animates ;  through  sin,  it  passes  into  animals,  or  goes  to 
hell ;  through  virtue  and  vice  combined,  it  passes  into  men,  and  through 
virtue  alone,  ascends  to  heaven ;  through  the  annihilation  of  both  vice 
and  virtue,  it  obtains  emancipation. 

II.  Ajiva,  the  second  predicate  of  existence,  comprises  objects  or 
properties  devoid  of  consciousness  and  life.  These  seem  to  be  vaguely 
and  variously  classed,  and  to  be  in  general  incapable  of  interpretation ; 
but  the  enumeration  is  commonly  fourteen,  like  the  modification  of  vital- 
ity. They  are  Dhermdstikaya,  Adhermdstikaya,  and  Akdsdstikaya,  each 
comprehending  three  varieties.  Kdla,  or  time,  is  the  tenth ;  and  Pud- 
gala,  or  elementary  matter,  in  four  modifications,  completes  the  series. 

It  is  not  very  easy  to  understand  these  technicalities,  for  the  etymo- 
logy of  the  words  is  of  little  avail.  Astikaya  indicates  the  existence  of 
body,  "  Body  is  "  whilst  Dherma  signifies  virtue,  and  Adherma,  vice  ;  but 
Dherma  means  also  peculiar  function  or  office,  in  which  sense  it  seems 
to  be  here  intended,  thus — Dhermdstikaya  is  defined  to  be  that  which 
facilitates  the  motion  of  animate  or  inanimate  bodies,  as  water  for  fish. 
Adhermdstikaya  is  that  which  impedes  or  stops  their  motion.  Akdsdstikaya 
is  the  principle  of  repulsion,  that  which  keeps  bodies  separate,  or  space  : 
the  varieties  of  these  are  only  in  degree,  of  little,  more,  and  complete. 
Time  is  sufficiently  intelligible,  but  the  Jairis  indulge  in  modifications  of 
it  infinitely  more  extravagant  than  those  for  which  the  Hindus  are  re- 
proached ;  thus  after  enumerating  days,  weeks,  months,  and  years,  we 
have  the  Palya,  or  Palyopama,  a  period  measured  by  the  time  in  which 
a  vast  well,  one  hundred  Yojans  every  way,  filled  with  minute  hairs  so 
closely  packed  that  a  river  might  be  hurried  over  them  without  penetrat- 
ing the  interstices,  could  be  emptied  at  the  rate  of  one  hair  in  a  century. 
A  Sagaropama  is  one  hundred  million  millions  of  Palyas,  and  an  Avasar- 
pini  and  Utserpini,  which  make  up  a  great  age,  consist  each  of  one  hun- 
dred million  millions  of  Sagaras.  Pudgala  is  atomic  matter,  distinguish- 
ed like  the  first  three  categories,  by  being  combined  in  three  degrees — 


200 

little,  much,  and  most,  whilst  it  adds  a  fourth  state,  or  that  of  Paramanu, 
primitive,  subtle,  indivisible,  and  uncombined. 

III.  The  third  Tatwa  is  Puny  a,  Good,  or  whatever  is  the  cause  of 
happiness  to  living  beings  ;  the  sub- divisions  of  this  category  are  forty- 
two,  it  will  be  sufficient  here  to  enumerate  a  few  of  the  principal. 

1.  Ucchairgotra,  high  birth,  rank,  or  the  respect  of  mankind. 

2.  Manushyagati,  the  state  of  man,  either  as  obtained  from  some  other 
form  of  being  or  continuance  in  it. 

3.  Suragati,  the  state  of  divinity,  Godhead. 

4.  Panchendriya,  the  state  of  superior  vitality,  or  possession  of  five 
organs  of  sense. 

5.  Panchadeha,  the  possession  of  body,  or  form  of  one  of  five  kinds. 
Auddrika,  elementary — that  arising  from  the  aggregation  of  elements, 

as  the  bodies  of  men  and  beasts. 

Vaikriya,  transmigrated — that  assumed  in  consequence  of  acts,  as  the 
forms  of  spirits  and  gods, 

Ahdrakam,  adventitious,  one  assumed,  such  as  that  of  the  Purvadha- 
ras,  of  one  cubit  in  stature,  when  they  went  to  see  the  Tirthankaras  in 
Mahdvidehakshetra. 

Taijasa,  the  form  obtained  by  suppressing  mortal  wants,  in  which 
state  fire  can  be  ejected  from  the  body. 

Kdrmanam,  the  form  which  is  the  necessary  consequence  of  acts. 
These  two  last  are  necessarily  connected  from  all  time,  and  can  only  be 
disunited  by  final  liberation,  or  Moksha. 

Other  varieties  of  '  Good',  are  colour,  odour,  flavour,  touch,  warmth, 
coolness,  and  the  hke. 

IV.  Pdpa,  or  '  ///,'  in  contradistinction  to  the  preceding,  and  imply- 
ing that  which  is  the  cause  of  unhappiness  to  mankind  ;  there  are  eighty- 
two  kinds ; 

As  the  five  Avaranas,  or  difficulties  in  acquiring  as  many  gradations 
of  holy  or  divine  wisdom.  Five  Antardyas,  disappointments,  or  impedi- 
ments, as  not  obtaining  what  is  about  to  be  presented,  not  being  able 
to  enjoy  an  object  of  fruition  when  in  possession  of  it,  and  want  of 
vigour  though  in  bodily  health.  Four  Dersanavasdnas,  obstruction,  or 
impediment  to  information  derivable  from  the  senses,  or  the  understand- 
ing ;  or  to  the  acquirement  of  divine  knowledge.  Five  states  of  sleep, 
inferior  birth,  pain,  as  a  condition  of  existence,  as  when  condemned  to 


201 

purgatory,  belief  in  false  gods,  defect  of  size  or  shape,  and  all  the  human 
passions  and  infirmities — as  anger,  pride,  covetousness,  &c.,  including, 
amongst  the  ills  of  life,  laughter  and  love. 

V.  Asrava  is  that  source  from  which  the  evil  acts  of  living  beings 
proceed.  The  varieties  are  the  five  Indriyas,  or  organs  of  sense ;  the  four 
Kashdyas,  or  passions,  as  vi^rath,  pride,  covetousness,  and  deceit ;  the  five 
Avratas,  non-observance  of  positive  commands,  as  lying,  stealing,  &c. 
and  three  Yogas,  addiction  or  attachment  of  the  mind,  speech,  and 
body  to  any  act ;  Kraiyas,  or  acts,  of  which  twenty-six  varieties  are 
specified  as  those  performed  with  any  part  of  the  body,  or  with  the 
instrumentality  of  a  weapon,  or  the  like — those  prompted  by  feelings 
of  hate  or  wrath — those  which  are  inceptive,  progressive,  or  conclu- 
sive— those  performed  by  oneself,  or  through  another  creature — those 
which  are  suggested  by  impiety,  or  unbelief  in  the  doctrine  of  the 
Trithankdras. 

VI.  The  sixth  Tatwa  is  termed  Samvara,  and  is  that  by  which  acts 
are  collected  or  impeded.  There  are  fifty-seven  varieties  classed  under 
six  heads. 

1.  Samiti,  keeping  the  attention  properly  alive,  so  as  to  see  imme- 
diately if  an  insect  is  in  the  way,  to  refrain  from  uttering  what  should 
not  be  said,  to  distinguish  any  of  the  forty- two  defects  in  food  given  as 
alms,  taking  or  relinquishing  any  thing  indifferently,  and  avoiding  or 
abandoning  unfit  things. 

2.  Gupti,  secrecy,  or  reserve  of  three  kinds,  or  in  mind,  speech  and 
person. 

3.  Parishahd,  endurance  or  patience,  as  when  a  person  has  taken  a 
vow  of  abstemiousness  he  must  bear  hunger  and  thirst ;  so  he  must  en- 
dure heat  and  cold,  when  he  practices  the  immoveable  posture  of  Jain 
abstraction  ;  if  he  is  disappointed  in  what  he  has  laboured  or  begged  for, 
he  must  not  murmur  ;  and  if  he  is  reviled  or  even  beaten,  he  must 
patiently  submit. 

4.  Yatidherma,  the  duties  of  an  ascetic,  these  are  ten  in  number,  pa- 
tience, gentleness,  integrity,  and  disinterestedness,  abstraction,  morti- 
fication, truth,  purity,  poverty,  and  continence. 

5.  Bhdvand,  conviction  or  conclusion,  such  as  that  worldly  existences 
are  not  eternal,  that  there  is  no  refuge  after  death,  that  life  is  perpetu- 
ally migrating  through  the  eighty-four  lakhs  of  living  forms,  that  life  is 

2   D 


202 

one  or  many  :  it  also  includes  perception  of  the  source  whence  evil  acts 
proceed,  and  the  like. 

The  sixth  division  of  this  class  is  Cheritra,  practice  or  observance,  of 
five  sorts.  Sdmdyika,  conventional,  or  the  practice  and  avoidance  of 
such  actions  as  are  permitted  or  prescribed.  Chhedopasthdpaniya,  pre- 
vention of  evil,  as  of  the  destruction  of  animal  life.  Pariharavisuddhi, 
purification  by  such  mortification  and  penance  as  are  enjoined  by  the 
example  of  ancient  saints  and  sages.  Sulkshmasampardya,  the  practises 
of  those  pious  men  who  have  attained  a  certain  degree  of  eminence  ; 
and  Yathakhydtam,  the  same  after  all  the  impediments  and  impurities  of 
human  nature  are  overcome  or  destroyed. 

VII.  Nirjard,  the  seventh  Tatwa,  is  the  religious  practice  that  des- 
troys mortal  impurities,  or,  in  other  words,  penance  :  it  is  of  two  kinds, 
external  and  internal ;  the  first  comprehends  fasting,  continence,  silence, 
and  bodily  suffering  ;  the  second,  repentance,  piety,  protection  of  the 
virtuous,  study,  meditation,  and  disregard,  or  rejection  of  both  virtue 
and  vice. 

VIII.  Bandha  is  the  integral  association  of  life  with  acts,  as  of  milk 
with  water,  fire  with  a  red  hot  iron  ball :  it  is  of  four  kinds — Prakriti, 
the  natural  disposition  or  nature  of  a  thing — Sthiti,  duration,  or  mea- 
sure of  time,  through  which  life  continues — Anuhhdga,  feeling,  or  sensi- 
ble quality — Pradesa,  atomic  individuality.  The  characters  of  this  prin- 
ciple are  illustrated  by  a  confection.  1 .  According  to  its  natural  proper- 
ties it  cures  phlegm,  bile,  &c. ;  2,  it  remains  efficient  but  for  a  given 
period  ;  3,  it  is  sweet,  bitter,  sour,  &c. ;  and  4,  it  is  divisible  into  large 
or  small  proportions,  retaining  each  the  properties  of  the  whole  mass. 

IX.  The  last  of  the  nine  principles  is  Moksha,  or  liberation  of  the 
vital  spirit  from  the  bonds  of  action  :  it  is  of  nine  sorts. 

Satpadaprarupana.  The  determination  of  the  real  nature  of  things, 
the  consequence  of  a  finite  course  of  progress  through  different  stages 
of  being  and  purification.  It  is  attainable  only  by  living  creatures  of 
the  highest  order,  or  those  having  the  five  organs  of  sense  ;  by  those  pos- 
sessed of  the  Trasakdya,  or  a  body  endowed  with  consciousness  and 
mobility  ;  by  those  beings  which  are  engendered,  not  self-produced  ;  by 
those  which  have  reached  the  fifth  Charita,  or*  exemption  from  human 
infirmity  ;  by  those  which  are  in  the  Kshayika  Samyaktwa,  or  that  state 
of  perfection  in  which  elementary  or  material  existence  is  destroyed ;  by 


203 

those  no  longer  requiring  material  existence ;  by  those  who  have  acquired 
the  Kevalajndna,  the  only  knowledge,  and  the  Kevala  Dersana,  or  only 
vision.  , 

2.  Dravyapramdna,  as  regulated  by  the  fitness  of  the  things  or  persons 
to  be  emancipated. 

3.  Kshetrapramdna,  depending  on  the  essentiality  of  certain  holy  places 
at  which  only  it  can  be  obtained. 

4.  S per  Sana,  contact,  or  identity  of  the  individuated  living  principle 
with  that  of  the  universe,  or  any  part  of  it. 

5.  Kdla,  the  times  or  ages  at  which  emancipation  is  attainable;  or 
the  periods  spent  in  various  transmigrations. 

6.  Antaram,  the  difference  of  temperaments  or  dispositions. 

7.  Bhdga,  the  existence  of  the  imperishable  part  of  all  living  bodies 
in  which  the  purified  essences  or  Siddhas  reside. 

8.  Bhdva,  the  nature  or  property  of  that  pure  existence  which  has 
attained  the  Kevalajndna,  and  other  perfections  essential  to  final  liberation. 

9.  Alpabahutwa,  the  degree  or  ratio  in  which  different  classes  of 
beings  obtain  emancipation.* 

From  the  details  of  these  nine  Tatwas  the  sum  of  the  whole  Jain  system 
may  be  collected,  but  they  form  only  the  text  on  which  further  subtilties 
are  founded,  and  they  leave  the  end  and  scope  of  all  the  doctrine  or  the 
attainment  of  ultimate  liberation  singularly  indistinct. 

The  Moksha  of  the  Jains  is  exemption  from  the  incidents  of  life,  and 
above  all  from  the  necessity  of  being  born  again ;  but  in  what  state  the 
living  principle  subsists  after  it  is  so  exempted,  does  not  very  satisfac- 
torily appear.  In  one  state  indeed  the  bodily  individuality  remains,  or 
that  of  Jivanmukti,  liberation  during  life,  whilst  from  most  of  the  subdi- 
visions of  Moksha,  it  follows  that  the  Siddahs,  the  pure  existences, 
correspond  with  our  notions  of  spiritual  beings,  having  an  impassive  and 
inappreciable  form,  variable  at  will,  capable  of  infinite  contraction  or 
dilation,  and  wholly  void  of  feeling  or  passion.  This  is  not  incompatible 
with  their  enjoyment  of  Nirvdn,  another  term  for  Moksha,  and  which, 
as  Mr.  Colebrooke  observes,  meaning  literally,  extinct  or  gone  out  as  a 


*  Although  termed  iTT'^H^I  ^"  ^^®  original  authorities,  thes«  varieties  are 
rather  in  the  requisite  conditions  for  attaining  Moksha,  than  in  the  kind  or  sort  of 
emancipation  attained, 


204 

fire,  set,  as  a  heavenly  luminary,  defunct  as  a  saint  who  has  passed  away, 
implies  profound  calm.  "It  is  not  annihilation,  "  he  concludes,  "  but 
unceasing  apathy  which  they,  *  the  Jains  and  Buddhas,'  understand  to  be 
the  extinction  of  their  saints,  and  which  they  esteem  to  be  supreme 
felicity  worthy  to  be  sought  by  practice  of  mortification  as  well  as  by 
acquisition  of  knowledge." 

Besides  the  notions  exhibited  in  the  detail  of  the  nine  Tatwas,  the 
Jains  are  known  in  controversial  writings  by  the  title  Saptabddis,  or 
Saptabhangis,  the  disputers  or  refuters  of  seven  positions  :  more  correctly 
speaking,  they  are  reconcilers,  or  could  be  so  of  seven  contradictory 
assertions,  evincing  a  sceptical  character  which  justifies  another  epithet 
which  they  acknowledge,  of  Syddbddis,  or  assertors  of  possibilities :  the 
seven  positions  are  the  following : 

1,  a  thing  is  :  2 — It  is  not :  3 — It  is  and  it  is  not :  4 — It  is  not  defin- 
able :  5 — It  is,  but  is  not  definable  :  6 — It  is  not,  neither  is  it  definable  ; 
7 — It  is  and  it  is  not,  and  is  not  definable — Now  these  positions  imply 
the  doctrines  of  the  different  schools,  the  Sdnkhya,  Veddnta,  and  others, 
with  regard  to  the  world,  to  life,  and  to  spirit,  and  are  met  in  every 
case  by  the  Jains  with  the  reply,  Syddbd,  It  may  be  so  sometimes  :  that 
is,  whatever  of  these  dogmas  is  advanced  will  be  true  in  some  respects, 
and  not  in  others  ;  correct  under  some  circumstances,  and  not  under 
others  ;  and  they  are  therefore  not  entitled  to  implicit  trust,  nor  are 
they  irreconcilable.  There  is  one  inference  to  be  drawn  from  this  at- 
tempt to  reconcile  the  leading  doctrines  of  the  principal  schools,  of  some 
importance  to  the  history  of  the  Jain  doctrines,  and  it  renders  it  pro- 
bable that  they  were  posterior  to  all  the  rest.  As  this  reasoning  howe- 
ver has  been  opposed  by  Ramanuja,  it  dates  earlier  than  the  twelfth 
century. 

Liberation  during  life,  and  as  a  necessary  consequence,  exemption 
after  it  from  future  birth,  implies  the  abandonment  of  eight  classes  of 
Karmas,  or  acts,  four  of  which  are  noxious  and  four  innoxious — they 
are  all  included  under  the  Tatwa,  Pdpa,  III,  as  above  noticed,  but  are 
also  more  especially  detailed.  To  the  first  order  belong  the  following  : 

Jyandvarani,  disregard  of  the  various  stages  of  knowledge,  from  sim- 
ple comprehension  to  the  only  true  wisdom,  as  so  many  steps  to  final 
liberation. 

Dersandvarani,  disbelief  in  the  doctrines  of  tbe  Jain  Saints. 


205 

Mohani,  hesitation  in  obeying  the  injunctions  of  the  Jain  code,  or 
doubt  as  to  their  importance  and  the  consequences  of  their  neglect. 

Antardya,  impeding  or  vexing  those  engaged  in  seeking  Uberation. 

The  second  class  comprises — 

Vedamya,  self- consciousness  or  sufficiency. 

Mdma,  pride  of  name — Gotra,  pride  of  birth — and  Ayushka,  attach- 
ment to  bodily  existence. 

These  essential  principles  of  the  faith  are  common  to  all  classes  of 
Jains,  but  some  differences  occur  in  their  Duties  as  they  are  divided  into 
religious  or  lay  orders,  Yatis  and  Srdvakas.  Implicit  belief  in  the 
doctrines  and  actions  of  the  Tirthankaras  is,  of  course,  obligatory  on 
both  ;  but  the  former  are  expected  to  follow  a  life  of  abstinence, 
taciturnity,  and  continence,  whilst  the  latter  add  to  their  moral  and 
religious  code,  the  practical  worship  of  the  Tirthankaras,  and  profound 
reverence  for  their  more  pious  brethren.  The  moral  code  of  the  Jains  is 
expressed  in  five  Mahdvratas,  or  great  duties — Refraining  from  injury  to 
life,  truth,  honesty,  chastity,  and  freedom  from  worldly  desires.  There 
are  four  Dhermas,  or  merits — liberality,  gentleness,  piety,  and  penance  ; 
and  three  sorts  of  restraint — government  of  the  mind,  the  tongue,  and 
the  person.  To  these  are  superadded  a  number  of  minor  instructions  or 
prohibitions,  sometimes  of  a  beneficial  and  sometimes  of  a  trivial,  or 
even  ludicrous  tendency,  such  as  to  abstain,  at  certain  seasons,  from 
salt,  flowers,  green  fruit,  and  roots,  honey,  grapes,  and  tobacco  ;  to 
drink  water  thrice  strained  ;  never  to  leave  a  liquid  uncovered,  lest  an 
insect  should  be  drowned  in  it ;  not  to  deal  in  soap,  natron,  indigo,  and 
iron  ;  and  never  to  eat  in  the  dark  lest  a  fly  should  be  swallowed.  Re- 
ligious characters  wear  a  piece  of  cloth  over  their  mouths  to  prevent 
insects  from  flying  into  them,  and  carry  a  brush  under  their  arms  to 
sweep  the  place  on  which  they  are  about  to  sit,  to  remove  any  ants  or 
other  living  creatures  out  of  the  way  of  danger.  Upon  the  whole,  the 
doctrine  of  the  Jainas  is  a  system  of  quietism,  calculated  to  render  those 
who  follow  it  perfectly  innoxious,  but  to  inspire  them  with  apathetic  in- 
difference towards  both  this  world  and  the  next. 

The  ritual  of  the  Jains  is  as  simple  as  their  moral  code.  The  Yati, 
or  devotee,  dispenses  with  acts  of  worship  at  his  pleasure,  and  the  lay 
votary  is  only  bound  to  visit  daily  a  temple  where  some  of  the  images 
of  the  Tirthankaras  are  erected,  walk  round  it  three  times,  make  an 


206 

obeisance  to  the  images,  with  an  offering  of  some  trifle,  usually  fruit  or 
flowers,  and  pronounce  some  such  Mantra,  or  prayer,  as  the  following — 
"  Namo  Arihantdnam,  Namo  Siddhdnam,  Namo  Aryandm,  Namo  Updjy- 
dndm,  Namo  Loe  Sahba  Sahunam — Salutation  to  the  Arhats,  to  the  Pure 
Existences,  to  the  Sages,  to  the  Teachers,  to  all  the  Devout  in  the  world." 
A  morning  prayer  is  also  repeated — Ichchhami  Khama  Samano  bandiyon, 
jo  man  jdye  nisidye ;  mathena  banddmi — I  beg  forgiveness,  oh  Lord,  for 
your  slave,  for  whatever  evil  thoughts  the  night  may  have  produced — I 
bow  with  my  head."  The  worshipper  then  perhaps  remains  to  hear 
read,  part  of  the  Kalpasiitra  or  Bhaktdmara,  or  some  narrative  of  one  or 
other  of  the  Tirthankars,  and  the  devotion  of  their  followers,  and  pro- 
ceeds to  his  daily  occupations. 

The  reader  in  a  Jain  temple  is  a  Yati,  or  religious  character ;  but  the 
ministrant  priest,  the  attendant  on  the  images,  the  receiver  of  offerings, 
and  conductor  of  all  usual  ceremonies,  is  a  Brahman.  It  is  a  curious 
peculiarity  in  the  Jain  system,  that  they  should  have  no  priests  of  their 
own,  but  it  is  the  natural  consequence  of  the  doctrine  and  example 
of  the  Tirthankars,  who  performed  no  rites,  either  vicariously  or  for 
themselves,  and  gave  no  instruction  as  to  their  observance.  It  shews 
also  the  true  character  of  this  form  of  faith,  that  it  was  a  departure  from 
established  practices,  the  observance  of  which  was  held  by  the  Jain 
teachers  to  be  matter  of  indifference,  and  which  none  of  any  credit  would 
consent  to  regulate :  the  laity  were,  therefore,  left  to  their  former  priest- 
hood, as  far  as  outward  ceremonies  were  concerned. 

The  objects  of  worship  are  properly  only  the  Tirthankaras,  but  the 
Jains  do  not  deny  the  existence  of  the  Hindu  gods,  and  admit  such  of 
them  as  they  have  chosen  to  connect  with  the  adventures  of  their  saints, 
according  to  a  classification  of  their  own,  to  a  share  in  the  worship 
offered  to  their  human  superiors. 

According  to  the  Mythology  which  they  have  adopted  and  modified, 
the  Jains  reckon  four  classes  of  divine  beings,  whom  they  name  Bhuva- 
napatis,  Vyantaras,  Jyotishkas,  and  Vaimdnikas :  the  first  comprises  ten 
orders  :  the  progeny  of  the  Asiiras,  Serpents,  Garura,  Dikpdlas,  Fire, 
Air,  the  Ocean,  Thunder  and  Lightning — who  are  supposed  to  reside  in 
the  several  hells  or  regions  below  the  Earth.  The  second  has  eight 
orders,  the  Pisdchas,  Bhiltas,  Kinnaras,  Gaudherbas,  and  other  monstrous 
or  terrestrial  divinities,  inhabiting  mountains,  woods,  and  forests,  as  well 


207 

as  the  lower  regions,  or  air.  The  third  has  five  orders — the  Sun,  Moon, 
Planets,  Asterisms,  and  other  heavenly  bodies.  The  fourth,  includes  the 
Gods  of  present  and  past  Kalpas.  Of  the  first  kind  are  those  born  in 
the  Heavens,  Saudherma,  Isdna,  Mdhendra,  Brahma,  Sanatkumdra,  Sukra, 
and  others  to  the  number  of  twelve,  or  in  the  Kalpas,  when  Sudhermal 
and  the  rest  were  severally  presiding  Deities.  The  last  class  reside  in 
two  divisions  of  five  and  of  nine  heavens — the  five  termed  Vijaya,  Faij- 
ayanti,  &c. ;  the  second  termed  Anuttara,  because  there  are  none  beyond 
them,  as  they  crown  the  triple  construction  of  the  universe.  In  the 
sovereignty  of  the  hosts  of  heaven,  a  great  number  of  Indras  are  recognis- 
ed, but  of  these  two  are  always  specified  as  the  chief,  Sukra  and  Isa'na, 
one  regent  of  the  north,  the  other  of  the  south  heaven  :  the  former  alone 
has  eighty-four  thousand  fellow  gods,  each  of  whom  has  myriads  of 
associates  and  attendants. 

Above  all  these  rank  in  dignity,  and  as  objects  of  worship,  the  twenty- 
four  Tirthankaras,  or  with  those  of  the  past  and  of  the  future  periods, 
seventy- two.  Allusion  is  made  by  Hemachandra  in  his  life  of  Maha'- 
vi'ra,  to  a  hundred  and  one,  and  the  same  work  specifies  four  Sdstvat  or 
eternal  Jinas,  Rishabha'nana,  Chandra'nana,  Va'risena,  and  Verd- 
dhama'na — what  is  meant  by  them  is  not  explained,  and  they  are  not 
recognised  by  all  Jains. 

The  presence  of  Brahman  ministrants,  or  the  lapse  of  time  and  the 
tendency  of  the  native  mind  to  multiply  objects  of  veneration,  seems 
to  have  introduced  different  innovations  into  the  worship  of  the  Jainas 
in  different  parts  of  Hindustan ;  and  in  upper  India  the  ritual  in  use  is 
often  intermixed  with  formulse  derived  from  the  Tantras,  and  belonging 
more  properly  to  the  Saiva  and  Sdkta  worship.  Images  of  the  Bhairavas 
and  Bhairavis,  the  fierce  attendants  on  Siva  and  Ka'li,  take  their  place 
in  Jain  temples,  and  at  suitable  seasons  the  Jains  equally  with  the  Hin- 
dus address  their  adoration  to  Saraswati'  and  Devi.* 


*  Thus,  in  a  Pujapaddhati,  procured  at  Mainpuri,  where  a  Jain  temple  of  con- 
siderable size  stands,  the  Tirthankaras,  as  they  are  severally  presented  with  offerings, 
are  addressed ;  Om  Sri  Rishabhdya  Swasti—Om  Hrim  hum :  and  Om  Hrim  Sri 
Sudhermdchdrya,  Adigurubhyo  Nama—Om  Hrim  Hram,  Samajinachaityalayehhyo 
Sri  Jinendrabhyo  Nama.  There  are  also  observances  for  regular  Hindu  festivals, 
as  the  Sripanchami,  Akshayatritiyd,  &c.,  when  Saraswati  and  other  goddesses 
are  invoked.  Rules  are  given  for  the  Ghata  Sthapana,  when  Sakti  or  Devi  is 
supposed  to  be  present  in  a  water  jar,  erected  as  her  receptacle  and  emblem,  and  the 


208 

In  the  South  of  India,  from  the  account  given  by  Colonel  Mackenzie, 
it  appears  that  the  Jains  observe  all  the  Brahminical  Sanskdras,  or 
essential  ceremonies.  This  is  not  the  case  in  upper  India,  and  the  only- 
rites  followed  are  the  Initiation  of  the  infant,  twelve  days  after  birth,  by 
repeating  a  Mantra  over  it,  and  making  a  circular  mark  with  the  sandal 
and  perfumes  on  the  top  of  the  head :  Marriage  and  Cremation,  which 
are  much  the  same  as  those  of  the  Brahmans,  omitting  the  Mantras  of 
the  Vedas.  Srdddhas,  obsequial  ceremonies  at  stated  periods,  are  not 
performed  by  the  Jains  in  upper  Hindustan. 

The  festivals  of  the  Jains  are  peculiar  to  themselves,  and  occur 
especially  on  days  consecrated  by  the  birth  or  death  of  some  of  the 
principal  Tirthankars,  especially  the  two  last  Pdrswandth  and  Verddha- 
mdna  :  the  places  where  these  events  occurred  are  also  objects  of 
pilgrimage,  and  very  numerous  assemblages  of  devout  pilgrims  occur 
at  them  at  different  seasons— thus  in  Behar,  a  very  celebrated  place  of 
resort  is  the  scene  of  Parasndth's  liberation;  the  mountain  Samet 
Sikhara,  or  Parasndth,  near  Pachete  ,-*  and  another  of  equal  sanctity,  the 
scene  of  Verddhamdna's  departure  from  earth,  is  at  Pdpapuri,\  in  the 
same  province.  Pilgrims  come  from  all  parts  of  India  to  these  places  at 
all  seasons,  but  the  principal  Melas  are  held  at  the  former  in  Mdgh,  and 
in  Kdrtika,  at  the  latter.  On  the  western  side  of  India,  the  mountains 
of  Abu,X  and  Girinar,  are  the  great  scenes  of  pilgrimage,  being  covered 
with  Jain  temples  and  remains.  Rishabha  Deva  and  Nemina'th  seem 
to  be  the  favourite  divinities  in  that  quarter. 

Besides  these  particular  festivals,  the  Jains  observe  several  that  are 
common  to  the  Hindus,  as  the  Vasantaydtrd,  or  spring  festival,  the 
Sripanchami,  and  others ;  they  also  hold  in  veneration  certain  of  the 
Lunar  days,  as  the  2d,  5th,  8th,  Uth,  and  12th;  on  these  no  new  work 
should  be  undertaken,  no  journey  commenced,  and  fasting,  or  absti- 
nence at  least,  and  continence  should  be  observed. 

Sorasa  Karana  Piija  ends  with  a  Lakshmi  Stotra,  or  Hymn,  addressed  to  the  Goddess 
of  Prosperity. 

*  Described  very  fully,  as  previously  noticed,  in  the  Quarterly  Magazine  for 
December,  1827. 

t  It  is  also  written  Apapapuri,  and  Pdvapuri,  under  which  latter  name,  it  and  other 
celebrated  Jaina  shrines  in  Behar,  are  described  by  a  Native  traveller,  a  Jain,  in  the 
service  of  Colonel  Mackenzie,  in  the  Calcutta  Magazine  for  June,  1823. 

X  See  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  XVI.    Jain  Inscriptions  at  Abu. 


209 

The  origin  of  the  Jain  faith  is  immersed  in  the  obscurity  which 
invests  all  remote  history  amongst  the  Hindus.  That  it  is  the  most 
recent  of  all  the  systems  pursued  in  Hindustan  is  rendered  highly  pro- 
bable by  the  extravagances  in  which  it  deals,  by  the  doctrine  it  opposes 
to  those  of  all  other  schools,  and  by  the  comparatively  recent  date  of 
many  Jam  authors  of  celebrity,  and  of  numerous  monumental  reliques ; 
but  at  what  period  it  actually  took  its  rise  it  is  not  easy  to  determine."^ 
Mr.  Colebrooke  has  suggested  the  probability  of  the  Jain  religion  being 
the  work  of  Pa'rswana'th,  in  the  account  of  whom  there  is  a  nearer 
approach  to  sober  history  and  credible  chronology  than  in  the  narratives 
of  his  predecessors — this  would  throw  back  the  origin  of  the  Jain  faith 
to  the  ninth  century  before  the  Christian  era,  admitting  the  Jain  chro- 
nology of  Verddhama'na's  existence,  but  it  is  difficult  to  concur  in  the 
accuracy  of  so  remote  a  date,  and  whatever  indirect  evidence  on  the 
subject  is  procurable,  is  opposed  to  such  a  belief. 

It  has  been  supposed  that  we  have  notices  of  the  Jaina  sect  as  far 
back  as  the  time  of  the  Macedonian  invasion  of  India,  or  at  least  at  the 
period  at  which  Megasthenes  was  sent  ambassador  to  Sandracoptus, 
and  that  these  notices  are  recorded  by  Strabo  and  Arrian — the  nature 
of  the  expressions  which  those  and  other  writers  have  employed  has  been 
canvassed  by  Mr.  Colebrooke,  and  shewn  satisfactorily  to  establish  the 
existence  at  that  time  of  the  regular  Brahmans,  as  well  as  of  other  sects  : 
what  those  sects  were,  however,  it  was  no  part  of  his  object  to  enquire, 
and  he  has  left  it  still  to  be  ascertained  how  far  it  can  be  concluded  that 
the  Jainas  were  intended. 


*  Major  Delamaine  observes,  "  the  usual  idea  of  the  Jains  beinj?  a  modern  sect 
may  not  be  erroneous  :  the  doctrines  originating  with  Rishabha,  and  continued  by 
Arhanta,  dividing  at  periods  ofsehism  into  more  distinct  classes,  of  which  the  Jaiiis 
or  Srdwacs,  as  now  established  from  one,  and  the  modern  Buddhas,  as  in  Burma, 
Siam,  Ceylon,  Tibet,  &c.  another. — Major  Delamaine,  T.  R.  A.  S.  1.  427.  "  Were 
1  disposed  to  speculate  on  the  origin  of  the  Jains,  from  the  striking  coincidences  of 
doctrine  and  religious  usages  between  them  and  the  Bouddhists,  I  should  be  led  to 
conjecture  that  they  were  originally  a  sect  of  Bouddhists."— -Vir  Erskine,  Bombay 
Trans.  3.  502.  "  It  is  certainly  probable,  as  remarked  by  Dr.  Hamilton  and  Major 
Delamaine,  that  the  Gautama  of  the  Jainas  and  of  the  Bauddhas,  is  the  same  per- 
sonage, and  this  leads  to  the  further  surmise  that  both  these  sects  are  branches  of  one 
stock.  — Both  have  adopted  the  Hindu  Pantheon,  or  assemblage  of  subordinate  deities 
—both  disclaim  the  authority  of  the  Vedas,  and  both  elevate  their  pre-eminent  saints 
to  divme  supremacy — Mr.  Colebrooke,  Trans.  R.  A.  S.  1.  521. 

2    E 


210 

Much  perplexity  in  the  Greek  accounts  of  the  Brahmans  and  Gym- 
nosophists  has,  no  doubt,  occurred  from  their  not  having  been  acquainted 
with  the  subdivision  of  the  priestly  caste  into  the  four  orders  of  student, 
householder,  hermit,  and  mendicant,  and  therefore  they  describe  the 
Brahman  sometimes  as  living  in  towns,  sometimes  in  woods,  sometimes 
observing  celibacy,  and  sometimes  married,  sometimes  as  wearing  clothes, 
and  sometimes  as  going  naked  ;  contradictions  which,  though  apparently 
irreconcilable  if  the  same  individuals,  or  classes,  be  meant,  were  appre- 
ciated by  the  shrewdness  of  Bayle  more  justly  than  he  was  himself 
aware  of,*  and  are  all  explained  by  the  Achdras,  or  institutes  of  the 
Hindus,  as  affecting  the  various  periods  of  life  and  corresponding  prac- 
tices of  Brahmanical  devotion. 

As  far,  therefore,  as  the  customs  or  observances  of  the  Gymnosophists 
are  described,  we  have  no  reason  to  conclude  that  any  but  the  followers 
of  the  Vedas  are  intended,  and  the  only  part  of  the  account  apphcable 
to  any  other  sect  is  the  term  Germanes,  or  Sermanes,  or  Samanaans, 
applied  to  one  division  of  the  Sophists  or  Sages.  This  name,  as  Mr. 
Colebrooke  observes,  seems  to  bear  some  affinity  to  the  Sramanas,  or 
asceticks  of  the  Jains  or  Bauddhas,  but  we  can  derive  no  positive  con- 
clusion from  a  resemblance,  which  may  possibly  be  rather  imaginary 
than  real,  and  the  object  of  which,  after  all,  is  far  from  being  the  indi- 
vidual property  of  any  sect,  but  is  equally  applicable  to  the  ascetic  of 
every  religious  system.  As  distinct  from  the  Brahmans,  the  Sarmanes 
will  be  equally  distinct  from  the  Jains ;  for  the  Brahmans,  it  is  said  by 
Porphyry,  are  of  one  race  ;  and  the  Samanceans  are  selected  from  all  the 
tribes,  and  consist  of  persons  choosing  to  prosecute  divine  studies,  pre- 
cisely the  independent  Sanydsi  or  Gosain,  of  modern  times,  few  persons 
of  which  description  belong  to  the  order  of  the  Brahmans,  or  are  united 
with  the  rest  by  any  community  of  origin  or  peculiarity  of  faith. 

Again,  another  word  has  been  adduced  in  corroboration  of  the  exist- 
ence of  the  Jains,  and  it  may  be  admitted,  that  this  is  a  better  proof 
than  the  preceding,  as  the  Pramnce  are  declared  to  be  the  opposers  of  the 

*  "  It  may  be  that  they  '  the  Brachmans  did  not  follow  the  same  institute  in  all 
ages,  and  that  with  a  distinction  of  time  one  might  reconcile  some  of  the  variations  of 
the  authors  who  have  spoken  of  them."  — Article  Brachmans.  Note.  C.  Harris,  (1.454) 
also  has  rightly  estimated  the  real  character  of  the  Germanes,  and  concluded  that 
they  were  nothing  but  Gioghis,  from  Pietro  della  Valle's  description  of  the  latter. 


211 

Brahmans,  which  is  no  where  mentioned  of  the  Sarmanes.  This  expres- 
sion is  said  to  designate  the  Jains,  but  this  is  far  from  certain  :  the  term 
is  probably  derived  from  Pramdna,  proof,  evidence,  and  is  especially  the 
right  of  the  followers  of  the  logical  school,  who  are  usually  termed  Prd- 
mdnikas  :  it  is  applicable,  however,  to  any  sect  which  advocates  positive 
or  occular  proof  in  opposition  to  written  dogmas,  or  belief  in  scriptural 
authority,  and  is  in  that  sense  more  correctly  an  epithet  of  the  Bauddha 
sectaries  than  of  the  Jains,  who  admit  the  legends  and  worship  the 
deities  of  the  Purdnas,  and  who  hold  it  the  height  of  impiety  to  question 
the  written  doctrines  of  their  own  teachers.  The  proofs  from  classical 
writers,  therefore,  are  wholly  inadequate  to  the  decision  of  the  antiquity 
of  the  JainSy  and  we  are  still  entirely  left  to  sources  of  a  less  satisfac- 
tory description. 

All  writers  on  the  Jains,  entitled  to  our  attention,  agree  in  admitting 
an  intimate  connexion  between  them  and  the  Bauddhas  ;  the  chief  analo- 
gies have  been  above  adverted  to,  and  the  inference  of  later  origin  is 
justly  founded  on  the  extravagant  exaggerations  of  the  system  adopted 
by  the  Jains.  Their  identity  of  origin  rests  chiefly  upon  the  name  of 
Gautama,  which  appears  as  that  of  Verddhama'na's  chief  pupil,  and 
as  the  legislator  of  the  Bauddha  nations  in  the  east.  The  dates  also 
assigned  to  both  are  not  far  removed  ;  the  apotheosis  of  the  Buddha, 
Gautama,  occurring  five  hundred  and  forty-three  years  before  Christ, 
and  the  death  of  Maha'vi'ra,  the  preceptor  of  the  Jain  Gautama,  about 
the  same  time.  That  there  is  some  connexion  may  be  condeded,  but 
for  reasons  already  assigned,  it  is  not  likely  that  the  persons  are  the 
same  ;  the  Jains  have  not  improbably  derived  their  Gautama  from  that 
of  their  predecessors. 

No  argument  for  the  antiquity  of  the  Jains  is  derivable  from  the 
account  given  of  Rishabha  in  the  Bhdgavat  Purdna.  He  was  not  a 
seceder  from  the  true  faith,  although  the  mistaken  imitation  of  his  prac- 
tices is  said  to  have  led  others  into  errors,  evidently  intending  the  Jain 
heresy.  He  is  scarcely  identifiable,  in  consequence,  with  the  Jain  Rish- 
abha, the  first  of  the  Tirthankaras  ;  but  even  if  that  were  the  case,  no 
confidence  could  be  placed  in  the  authority,  as  the  work  is  a  modern 
compilation,  not  exceeding,  at  the  most,  twelve  centuries  of  antiquity. 
The  refutation  of  Jain  doctrines  in  the  Brahma  Sutras,  is  a  less  ques- 


212 

tionable  testimony  of  their  early  existence  ;  but  the  date  of  that  work  is 
to  be  yet  ascertained.  Sankara  Acharya,  the  commentator  on  the 
texts  of  Vya'sa,  affords  a  more  definite  approximation  ;  but  he  will  not 
carry  us  back  above  ten  centuries.  It  is  also  to  be  observed,  that  the 
objects  of  the  attacks  of  the  Sutras  and  of  Sankara  are  philosophical 
and  speculative  tenets,  and  these  may  have  been  current  long  before  they 
formed  part  of  a  distinct  practical  system  of  faith,  as  promulgated  by  a 
class  of  Bauddhas,  the  germ  of  the  Jains. 

However  we  may  admit  from  these  authorities  the  existence  of  the 
Jains  as  a  distinct  sect,  above  ten  or  twelve  centuries  ago ;  we  have 
reason  to  question  their  being  of  any  note  or  importance  much  earlier. 
The  Bauddhas,  we  know  from  Clemens  of  Alexandria,  existed  in  India 
in  the  second  century  of  the  Christian  era,  and  we  find  them  not  only 
the  principal  objects  of  Hindu  confutation  and  anathema,  but  they  are 
mentioned  in  works  of  lighter  literature,  referable  to  that  period,  in 
which  the  Jains  are  not  noticed,  nor  alluded  to  :  the  omission  is  the  more 
worthy  of  notice,  because,  since  the  Bauddhas  disappeared  from  India, 
and  the  Jains  only  have  been  known,  it  will  be  found  that  the  Hindu 
writers,  whenever  they  speak  of  Bauddhas,  shew,  by  the  phraseology 
and  practices  ascribed  to  them,  that  they  really  mean  Jains :  the  older 
writers  do  not  make  the  same  mistake,  and  the  usages  and  expressions 
which  they  give  to  Bauddha  personages  are  not  Jain,  but  Bauddha ;  with 
the  one  they  were  familiar,  the  other  were  yet  unknown. 

The  literature  of  the  Jains  themselves  is  unfavourable  to  the  notion 
of  high  antiquity.  Hemachandra,- one  of  their  greatest  writers,  flour- 
ished in  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century,  and  the  compiler  of  the  Jain 
Purdnas  of  the  Dekhin,  is  said  to  have  written  at  the  end  of  the  ninth. 
The  Kalpa  Sutra  professes  to  have  been  composed  nine  hundred  and 
eighty  years  after  the  death  of  Maha'vi'ra,  or  fifteen  centuries  ago  ; 
but  from  internal  evidence,  it  could  not  have  been  composed  earlier 
than  the  twelfth  or  thirteenth  century.  Various  eminent  Jain  authors 
were  cotemporary  also  with  Munja  and  Bhoja,  princes  of  Dhdr,  in  the 
ninth  and  tenth  century,  and  a  number  of  works  seem  to  have  been  com- 
})iled  in  the  sixteenth  century,  during  the  tolerant  reign  of  Akber. 

Of  the  progress  of  the  Jain  faith  in  the  Gangetic  provinces  of  upper 
India,  we  have  no  very  satisfactory  traces.     It  may  be  doubted  if  they 


213 

ever  extended  themselves  in  Bengal.  Beluir,  according  to  their  own 
traditions,  was  the  birth  place  of  Veliddhama'na,  and  Benares  of 
Pa'rswana'th  ;  and  temples  and  monuments  of  their  teachers  are  com- 
mon in  both,  particularly  the  former ;  but  all  those  now  existing  are  of 
very  recent  dates*  and  there  are  no  vestiges  referable  to  an  intermediate 
period  between  the  last  Tirthankara,  and  the  eighteenth  century.  At 
Benares,  its  princes  professed  the  faith  of  Bauddha  as  late  as  the 
eleventh  century,  whilst  during  the  same  period,  as  is  proved  by  inscrip- 
tions and  the  historical  work  of  Chndrakavi,  the  sovereigns  of  Kanoj 
and  Delhi  were  of  the  orthodox  persuasion.  It  is  very  doubtful,  there- 
fore, if  the  Jains  ever  formed  a  leading  sect  in  this  part  of  Hindustan. 
They  were  more  successful  in  the  west  and  south. 

In  western  Marwar,  and  the  whole  of  the  territory  subject  to  the 
Chaulukya  princes  of  Guzerat,  the  Jain  faith  became  that  of  the  ruling 
dynasty  ;  but  this  occurred  at  no  very  remote  period.  The  Mohammedan 
Geographer,  Edrisi,  states  that  the  king  of  Nehrwala,  the  capital  of 
Guzerat,  worshipped  Buddha  ;  and  we  know  from  the  writings  of 
Hemachandra,  that  he  was  the  apostle  of  the  Jain  faith  in  that  king- 
dom— converting  Kuma'ra  Pal  a,  the  monarch  of  Guzerat,  to  his  creed. 
This  is  also  an  occurrence  of  the  twelfth  century,  or  about  1174.  The 
consequences  of  this  conversion  are  still  apparent  in  the  abundant 
reliques  of  the  Jain  faith,  and  the  numbers  by  whom  it  is  professed  in 
Marwar,  Guzerat,  and  the  upper  part  of  the  Malabar  Coast. 

On  the  Coromandel  side  of  the  Peninsula,  the  Jains  were  introduced 
upon  the  downfall  of  the  Bauddhas,  in  the  reign  of  Amoghaversha, 
king  of  Tonda  Mandalam,  in  the  ninth  century,  or  according  to  some 
traditions,  in  the  eighth.  Farther  south,  in  Madura,  the  date  of  their 
introduction  is  not  known,  but  they  were  in  power  in  the  eleventh 
century  under  Kuna  Pa'ndya.  In  this,  and  in  the  twelfth,  they  seem 
to  have  reached  their  highest  prosperity,  and  from  that  period  to  have 
declined.     Kuna  Pa'ndya  became  a  Saiva — Vishnu    Verddhana,  raja 


*  As  late  even  as  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth  centuries. — These  dates  are  some- 
times said  to  indicate  the  periods  at  which  the  temples  were  repaired,  but  the  intelli- 
gent author  of  the  'Visit  to  Mount  Parstvatiath'  observes,  "only  in  one  instance 
is  there  reason  to  suspect  that  the  buildings  are  much  older  than  the  inscriptions 
announce."  The  most  ancient  Mundir  at  that  place,  is  reckoned  to  be  but  fifty  years 
old  —Calcutta  Magazine,  December,  1827. 


214 

of  Mysore,  was  converted  from  the  Jain  to  the  Vaishnava  faith  in  the 
twelfth  century,  and  about  the  same  time  the  Lingavant  Saivas  deposed 
and  murdered  Vijala,  the  Jain  king  of  Kalydn.  The  sect,  however, 
continued  to  meet  with  partial  countenance  from  the  kings  of  Vijayana- 
gar,  until  a  comparatively  modern  date. 

The  conclusions  founded  on  traditionary  or  historical  records  are 
fully  supported  by  the  testimony  of  monuments  and  inscriptions — the 
latter  of  which  are  exceedingly  numerous  in  the  south  and  west  of  India. 
Most  of  these  are  very  modern — none  are  earlier  than  the  ninth  century. 
An  exception  is  said  to  exist  in  an  inscription  on  a  rock  at  Belligola, 
recording  a  grant  of  land  by  Chdmunda  Raya  to  the  shrine  of  Gomatis- 
WARA,  in  the  year  600  of  the  Kali  age,  meaning  the  Kali  of  the  Jains, 
which  began  three  years  after  the  death  of  Verddhamana.  This 
inscription,  therefore,  if  it  exists,  was  written  about  fifty  or  sixty  years 
before  the  Christian  era — but  it  is  not  clear  that  any  such  record  is  in 
existence,  the  fact  resting  on  the  oral  testimony  of  the  head  Pontiff  at 
Belligola  :  even,  if  it  be  legible  on  the  face  of  the  rock,  it  is  of  question- 
able authenticity,  as  it  is  perfectly  solitary,  and  no  other  document  of 
like  antiquity  has  been  met  with. 

The  Mackenzie  collection  contains  many  hundred  Jain  inscriptions. 
Of  these,  the  oldest  record  grants  made  by  the  princes  of  Homchi,  a  petty 
state  in  Mysur.  None  of  them  are  older  than  the  end  of  the  ninth 
century.  Similar  grants,  extending  through  the  eleventh  and  twelfth 
centuries,  by  the  Velala  sovereigns  of  Mysur,  are  also  numerous,  whilst 
they  continue  with  equal  frequency  to  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth 
centuries,  during  the  existence  of  the  sovereignty  of  Vijayanagar.  Again, 
at  Ahu,  under  the  patronage  of  the  Guzerat  princes,  we  have  a  number 
of  Jain  inscriptions,  but  the  oldest  of  them  bears  date  Samvat  1245, 
(A.  D.  1189);*  they  multiply  in  the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth  centuries, 
and  are  found  as  late  as  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth — and,  finally,  in 
Magadha,  the  scene  of  Verddhamana's  birth  and  apotheosis,  the  oldest 
inscriptions  found,  date  no  further  back  than  the  beginning  of  the  six- 
teenth century. t 
*  Asatic  Researches,  Vol.  XVI.  Page  317. 

t  Dr.  Hamilton's  description  of  Jain  Temples  in  Behar.  — TVan^.  R.  A.  S.  I.  525. 
To  these  may  be  added  the  inscriptions  at  Parsivanath,  and  a  number  of  inscriptions 
at  Gwalior,  copies  of  which  were  sent  to  Mr.  Fraser,  and  which  are  all  dated  in 
the  middle  of  the  15th  century. 


215 

From  all  credible  testimony,  therefore,  it  is  impossible  to  avoid  the 
inference  that  the  Jains  are  a  sect  of  comparatively  recent  institution, 
who  first  came  into  power  and  patronage  about  the  eighth  and  ninth 
century  :  they  probably  existed  before  that  date  as  a  division  of  the 
Bauddhas,  and  owed  their  elevation  to  the  suppression  of  that  form  of 
faith  to  which  they  contributed.  This  is  positively  asserted  by  the 
traditions  of  the  south  in  several  instances  :  the  Bauddhas  of  Kdnchi 
were  confuted  by  Akalanka,  a  Jain  priest,  and  thereupon  expelled  the 
country.  Vara  Pandya,  of  Madura,  on  becoming  a  Jain,  is  said  to 
have  persecuted  the  Bauddhas,  subjecting  them  to  personal  tortures,  and 
banishing  them  from  the  country.  In  Guzerat,  Bauddha  princes  were 
succeeded  by  the  Jains.  There  is  every  reason  to  be  satisfied,  therefore, 
that  the  total  disappearance  of  the  Bauddhas  in  India  proper  is  connect- 
ed with  the  influence  of  the  Jains,  which  may  have  commenced  in  the 
sixth  or  seventh  centuries,  and  continued  till  the  twelfth. 

The  inveteracy  prevalent  between  kindred  schisms  is  a  sufficient  rea- 
son for  any  enmity  felt  by  the  Jains  towards  the  Bauddhas,  rather  than 
towards  the  Brahmanical  Hindus.  There  is,  indeed,  a  political  leaning 
to  the  latter,  observable  in  their  recognition  of  the  orthodox  Pantheon, 
in  the  deference  paid  to  the  Vedas,  and  to  the  rites  derivable  from  them, 
to  the  institution  of  castes,  and  to  the  employment  of  Brahmans  as 
ministrant  priests.  They  appear  also  to  have  adapted  themselves  to 
the  prevailing  form  of  Hinduism  in  different  places  :  thus  at  Abu, 
several  Jain  inscriptions  commence  with  invocations  of  Siva,*  and  in 
the  Dekhin,  an  edict  promulgated  by  Bukka  Ra'ya,  of  Vijayanagar, 
declares  there  is  no  real  difference  between  the  Jains  and  Vaishnavas.f 
In  some  places  the  same  temples  are  resorted  to  by  Jains  and  Rdrndnu- 
jiya  Vaishncfvas,  and  as  observed  by  Mr.  Colebrooke,  a  Jain  on  re- 
nouncing the  heretical  doctrines  of  his  sect,  takes  his  place  amongst 
the  orthodox  Hindus  as  a  Kshetriya  or  Vaisya,  which  would  not  be  the 
case  with  a  convert,  who  has  not  already  caste  as  a  Hindu.  J  In  the 
South  of  India,  indeed,  the  Jains  preserve  the  distinction  of  castes  ;  in 
upper  India,  they  profess  to  be  one  caste,  or  Vaisyas.      It  is  very  clear, 

*  Major  Delamaine  notices  that  the  mountain  Girnar,  is  equally  sacred  to  Hindus 
as  to  Jains,  and  that  an  ancient  temple  of  Mahadeva  is  erected  there. 

t  Asiatic  Researches,  Vol.  IX.  Page  '270. 

X  Transactions  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1.  549. 


216 

however,  that  admission  to  the  Jain  communion  was  originally  indepen- 
dent of  caste,*  and  the  partial  adoption  of  it  or  pretension  to  it,  is  either 
a  spontaneous  or  politic  conformity  to  the  strong  feeling  on  the  subject 
which  prevails  amongst  all  Hindus. 

These  are  the  great  outlines  of  the  rise  and  progress  of  the  sect,  as 
derivable  from  sources  entitled  to  credit ;  but  the  Jains  have  amongst 
themselves  records  of  sectarial  value,  detailing  the  succession  of  differ- 
ent teachers,  and  the  origin  of  various  heresies.  Some  extracts  from  one 
of  these  attached  to  a  copy  of  the  Kalpa  Siitra,  may  be  acceptable. 

The  succession  of  teachers  is  always  deduced  from  MahaVi'ra,  through 
his  disciple  Sudherma.  Of  the  rest,  all  but  Gautama  died  before  their 
master,  as  has  been  observed  above,  and  Gautama  survived  him  but  a 
month,  which  he  spent  in  penance  and  fasting.  Sudherma,  therefore, 
was  the  only  one  who  remained  competent  to  impart  instruction.  His 
pupil  was  Jambuswa'mi',  the  last  of  the  Kevalis,  or  possessors  of  true 
wisdom  :  six  teachers  follow,  termed  Sriita  Kevalis,  or  hearers  of  the 
first  masters,  and  then  seven  others,  Dasapurvis,  from  having  been 
taught  the  works  so  named. f  These  are  common  to  all  the  lists  when 
correct.  In  the  Belligola  list  they  are  omitted,  and  the  successor  of 
Jambuswa'mi'  is  there  named  Verasi'na,  who  may  have  been,  as  Mr. 
Colebrooke  remarks,  a  hundred  degrees  removed.  The  lists,  subse- 
quently, vary  according  to  the  particular  line  of  descent  to  which  they 
belong. 

Of  these  persons,  the  second  Si^utakevali  is  reputed  to  be  the  author 
of  the  Dasavaikalikd,  one  of  the  standard  works  of  the  sect.  Suhasti, 
the  second  Dasapurvi,  was  the  preceptor  of  Samprati  Raja,  and  the 

*  Maha'vi'ra  himself  was  the  son  of  a  king;,  and  should  therefore  be  a  Kshetriya. 
His  chief  disciples,  Indrabhuti,  and  the  rest,  were  Brah?nans.  His  especial  atten- 
dant, Gosa'la,  was  an  outcast,  and  his  followers,  of  both  sexes,  were  of  every  caste. 

t  The  following  are  the  names  of  the  individuals  alluded  to  in  the  text: 
Srutakevalis.  Dasapu'rvi's. 

Prahhava  Swami.  Arya  Mahagiri  Suri. 

Sayyambhadra  Suri.  Arya  Sufiasti  Suri. 

Yasobhadra  Suri.  Arya  Susthita  Suri. 

Sambhuta  Fijaya  Suri.  Indradoina  Sun. 

Bhadrabahu  Siiri.  Diuna  Suri. 

Sthulabhadra  Siiri.  Sinhugiri  Suri. 

rajraswami  Suri. 


217 

fourth  SusTHiTA,  founded  the  Kote  gachcha,  or  tribe.     Vajraswa'mi' 
the  last,  established  a  particular  division  called  the  Fdj'ra  Sdkhd. 

Of  the  succeeding  teachers,  or  Suris,  the  title  borne  by  the  spiritual 
preceptors  of  the  Jains,  Chandrasu'ri  the  second,  is  the  founder  of  the 
family  of  that  name,  eight  hundred  and  nine  years,  it  is  said,  after  the  eman- 
cipation of  MahaVi'ra.  In  his  time,  it  is  stated,  the  Digambaras  arose  ; 
but  we  have  seen  that  they  were  at  least  cotemporary  with  Maha'vi'ra. 

The  38th  on  the  list,  from  Maha'vi'ra  inclusive,  Udyotana  Su'ri 
first  classed  the  Jains  under  eighty-nine  Gachchas.  The  40th  Jineswa- 
Ri'  who  lived  A.  D.  1024,  founded  the  Khertara  family.*  With  the  44th 
JiNADATTA  Originated  the  Oswal  family,  and  the  Madhyakhertara  branch  ; 
he  was  a  teacher  of  great  celebrity,  and  impressions  of  his  feet  in  plaster 
or  on  stone  are  preserved  in  some  temples,  as  at  Bhelupur  in  Benares  ; 
he  lived  in  1148.  Other  divisions,  either  of  a  religious  or  civil  nature, 
are  attributed  to  various  teachers,  as  the  Chitrahala  Gachcha  to  Jinapati 
Suri,  in  A.  D.  1149 ;  the  Anchalika  doctrine  to  Jineswara  in  1160;  the 
Laghu  Khertara  family  to  Jinachandra  in  1265  ;  another  Jinachandra, 
the  61st  in  the  list,  was  cotemporary  with  Akber.  The  list  closes  with 
the  70th  Jina,  Hersha  Su'ri,  with  whom,  or  his  pupils,  several  works 
originated  in  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century.f 

Admitting  this  record  to  have  been  carefully  preserved,  we  have  seven- 
ty-one persons  from  Maha'vi'ra,  to  whom  a  period  of  less  than  fourteen 
centuries  can  scarcely  be  assigned,  an4  whose  series  would,  therefore, 
have  begun  in  the  third  century.  It  is  not  at  all  unlikely  that  such  was 
the  case,  but  no  positive  conclusion  can  be  drawn  from  a  single  document 
of  this  nature :  a  comparison  with  other  lists  is  necessary,  to  determine 
the  weight  to  be  attached  to  it  as  an  authority. 

The  Jains  are  divided  into  two  principal  divisions,  Digamharns  and 
Swetambdras ;  the  former  of  which  appears  to  have  the  best  pretensions 

♦  Major  Tofl  gives  a  somewhat  different  account  of  the  origin  of  this  tribe.  Khar- 
tra,  he  says,  means  true,  an  epithet  of  distinction  which  was  bestowed  by  that  great 
supporter  of  the  Buddhists  or  Jains,  Sidraj,  King  of  Anhulwara  Paten,  on  one  of 
the  branches  Gachcha,  in  a  grand  religious  disputation  at  the  capital,  in  the  eleventh 
century.  The  accounts  are  by  no  means  incompatible,  and  my  authority  represents 
Jineswari  victorious  in  a  controversy. 

t  Hemachandra,  at  the  end  of  the  Mahdvira  Cheritra,  after  stating  that  Vajra'- 
swa'mi  founded  the  Vajrasa'kha',  which  was  established  in  the  Chandra  Gachcha, 
gives  the  teachers  of  that  family  down  to  himself,  Yasobhadra,  Pradyumna, 
ViswASENA,  Dkvachandua,  and  Hemachandra. 

2    F 


218 

to  antiquity,  and  to  have  been  most  widely  diffused.*  The  discriminat- 
ing difference  is  implied  in  these  terms,  the  former  meaning  the  Sky-clad, 
that  is,  naked,  and  the  latter  the  white-robed,  the  teachers  being  so 
dressed.  In  the  present  day,  however,  the  Digambara  ascetics  do  not 
go  naked,  but  wear  coloured  garments  ;  they  confine  the  disuse  of 
clothes  to  the  period  of  their  meals,  throwing  aside  their  wrapper  when 
they  receive  the  food  given  them  by  their  disciples  :  the  points  of  differ- 
ence between  the  two  sects  are  far  from  restricted  to  that  of  dress,  and 
comprehend  a  list  of  no  fewer  than  seven  hundred,  of  which  eighty-four 
are  regarded  as  of  infinite  importance  :  a  few  of  these  may  be  here  noticed. 

The  Swetdmharas  decorate  the  images  of  the  Tirthankaras  with  ear- 
rings, necklaces,  armlets,  and  tiaras  of  gold  and  jewels  :  the  Digambaras 
leave  their  images  without  the  foreign  aid  of  ornament. 

The  Swetdmbaras  assert  that  there  are  twelve  heavens,  and  sixty- four 
Indras :  the  Digambaras  maintain  that  there  are  sixteen  heavens,  and 
one  hundred  Olympian  monarchs. 

The  Swetdmbaras  permit  their  Gurus  to  eat  out  of  vessels  :  the  Digam- 
baras receive  the  food  in  their  open  hands  from  their  disciples. 

The  Swetdmbaras  consider  the  accompaniments  of  the  brush,  water- 
pot,  &c.,  as  essential  to  the  character  of  an  ascetic  :  the  Digambaras  deny 
their  importance. 

The  Swetdmbaras  assert  that  the  Angas,  or  scriptures,  are  the  work 
of  the  immediate  disciples  of  the  Tirthankaras  :  the  Digambaras,  with 
more  reason,  maintain  that  the  leading  authorities  of  the  Jain  religion 
are  the  composition  of  subsequent  teachers  or  Achdryas. 

The  advantage  gained  by  the  Digambaras,  in  the  last  debateable  mat- 
ter, they  lose,  it  is  to  be  apprehended,  in  the  next,  when  they  assert  that 
no  woman  can  obtain  Nirvdn,  in  opposition  to  the  more  gallant  doctrine  of 
their  rivals,  which  admits  the  fair  sex  to  the  enjoyment  of  final  annihilation. 

These  will  be  sufficient  specimens  of  the  causes  of  disagreement  that 
divide  the  Jainas  into  two  leading  branches,  whose  mutual  animosity 
is,  as  usual,  of  an  intensity,  very  disproportionate  to  the  sources  from 
whence  it  springs. 

*  All  the  Dekhini  Jains  appear  to  belong  to  the  Digambara  division.  So  it  is  said 
do  the  majority  of  the  Jains  in  Western  India.  In  the  early  philosophical  writings  of 
the  Hindus,  the  Jains  are  usually  termed  Digambaras,  or  Nagnas,  naked.  'J'he  term 
Jain  rarely  occurs,  and  Swetambara  still  more  rarely  if  ever,  as  observed  in  the  text  ; 
also  Vkrdhama'na,  practically  at  least,  was  a  Digambara, 


219 

Besides  these  two  great  divisions,  several  minor  sects  are  particular- 
ised as  existing  amongst  the  Jains.      They  appear,  however,  to  be  of  no 
importance,  as  it  has  been  found  impossible  to  obtain  any  satisfactory 
account  of  the  heresies  they  have  adopted,  or  of  their  origin  and  present 
condition.     Schism  was  contemporary  even  with  Maha'vi'ra,  and  his 
son-in-law,  Ja'ma'li,  founded  a  dissentient  order.  His  follower,  Gosa'la, 
was  also  the  institutor  of  a  sect,   and  an  impostor  into   the  bargain, 
pretending  to  be  the   twenty-fourth   Tirthankara.       Bajrabanda,   the 
pupil  of  a  very  celebrated  Digamhara  teacher,  Kunda  Kund  A'cha'rya, 
founded  the  Drdvir  sect,  according  to  some  in   the   fifth,  and  to  the 
others,  in  the  seventh  century.     Vajraswa'mi'  instituted  the  Mahdnist- 
tha  sect,  and  Jinendra  Su'ri  founded  the    Lampaka   sect,   by  which 
images  were  discarded.  The  sects  now  most  often  heard  of,  although  little 
known,  are  the  Mula  Sanghis,  who  use  brushes  of  peacock's  feathers, 
wear  red  garments,  and  receive  alms  in  their  hands  :  the  Kdshta  Sanghis, 
who  make  their  images  of  wood  and  employ  brushes  of  the  tail  of  the 
Yak  :  the  Tera  Panthis  and  Bis  Panthis,  or  followers  of  ten  and  of  twenty, 
said  sometimes  to  refer  to  the  number  of  objects  which  are  most  essential 
to  salvation,  and  at  others,  explained  by  a  legend  of  the  foundation  of 
the  heresy  by  a  number  of  persons,  such  as  the  denomination  implies. 
Both  these  are  said  to  deny  the  supremacy  of  a  Guru,  to  dispense  with 
the  ministration  of  a  Brahman,  and  to  present  no  perfumes,  flowers,  nor 
fruits  to  the  images  of  the  Tirthankaras*     The  Bhishana  Panthis  carry 
their  aversion  to  external  emblems  still  farther,  and  discard  the  use  of 
images  altogether.     The  Dundiyas  and  Samvegis  are  religious  orders : 
the  former  affect  rigorous  adherence  to  the  moral  code,  but  disregard  all 
set  forms  of  prayer  or  praise,  and  all  modes  of  external  worship :  the 
Somv^gis  follow  the  usual  practices,  but  subsist  upon  alms,  accepting 
no  more  than  is  indispensable  for  present  wants. 

The  whole  of  the  Jains  are  again  distinguished  into  clerical  and  lay, 
or  into  Yatis  and  Srdvakas :  the  former  lead  a  religious  life,  subsisting 
upon  the  alms  supplied  by  the  latter.  According  to  the  greater  or  less 
degree  of  sanctity  to  which  they  pretend,  are  their  seeming  purity  and 
outward  precision,  shewn  especially  in  their  care  of  animal  life  :  they 
carry  a  brush  to  sweep  the  ground  before  they  tread  upon  it ;  never  eat 

*  The  Bis  Panthis  are  said  to  be,  in  fact,  the  orthodox  Digamharas ,oi  whom  the 
Tera  Panthis  are  a  dissenting  branch. 


220 

nor  drink  in  the  dark,  lest  they  should  inadvertently  swallow  an  insect, 
and  sometimes  wear  a  thin  cloth  over  their  mouths  lest  their  breath 
should  demolish  some  of  the  atomic  ephemera  that  frolic  in  the  sun- 
beams ;  they  wear  their  hair  cut  short,  strictly  they  should  pluck  it  out 
by  the  roots  ;  they  profess  continence  and  poverty,  and  pretend  to  observe 
frequent  fasts  and  exercise  profound  abstraction.  Some  of  them  may  be 
simple  enthusiasts  ;  many  of  them,  however,  are  knaves,  and  the  repu- 
tation which  they  enjoy  all  over  India,  as  skilful  magicians,  is  not  very 
favourable  to  their  general  character :  they  are,  in  fact,  not  unfrequently 
Charlatans,  pretending  to  skill  in  palmistry  and  necromancy,  dealing  in 
emperical  therapeutics,  and  dabbling  in  chemical,  or  rather  alchemical 
manipulations.  Some  of  them  are  less  disreputably  engaged  in  traffic, 
and  they  are  often  the  proprietors  of  Maths  and  temples,  and  derive  a 
very  comfortable  support  from  the  offerings  presented  by  the  secular 
votaries  of  Jina.  The  Yatis,  as  above  remarked,  never  officiate  as 
priests  in  the  temples,  the  ceremonies  being  conducted  by  a  member  of 
the  orthodox  priesthood,  a  Brahman,  duly  trained  for  the  purpose.  The 
Yatis  are  sometimes  collected  in  Maths,  called  by  them  Posdlas  and  even 
when  abroad  in  the  world,  they  acknowledge  a  sort  of  obedience  to  the 
head  of  the  Posdla  of  which  they  were  once  members. 

The  secular  members  of  the  Jaina  religion,  or  Srdvakas,  follow  the 
usual  practices  of  the  other  Hindus,  but  give  alms  only  to  the  Yatis, 
and  present  offerings  and  pay  homage  only  to  the  Tirthankaras ;  the 
present  worship,  indeed,  is  almost  restricted  to  the  two  last  of  these 
personages,  to  Pa'rswanath,  as  commonly  named  Parisnath,  the  twenty- 
third,  and  to  Verddhama'na  or  Mahvi'ra  Swami,  the  twenty-fourth 
Tirthankara  of  the  present  age.  The  temples  of  these  divinities  are,  in 
general,  much  handsomer  buildings  than  those  of  the  orthodox  Hindus  : 
they  consist  of  a  square  or  oblong  room,  large  enough  to  admit  a  tole- 
rably numerous  assemblage,  surrounded  by  an  open  portico  :  on  one 
side  is  a  sort  of  altar-piece  of  several  stages  ;  on  the  centre  of  the  upper 
tier  sits  the  chief  deity  of  the  temple,  supported  by  two  other  Arhats, 
whilst  the  rest,  or  a  portion  of  them,  are  ranged  upon  the  inferior  tiers  : 
the  steeple  is  also  distinguishable  from  that  of  other  temples,  being 
formed  of  departments,  which  are  intended,  apparently,  to  represent 
leaves,  and  surmounted  by  a  pole  resembling  a  flag  staff,  terminating  in 
a  gilt  knob  :  there  are  several  of  these  temples  in  the  chief  cities  along 


221 


the  Ganges,  and  no  fewer  than  a  dozen  in  Murshedabad,  to  which  the 
circumstance  of  the  Set  family,  being  of  Jaina  persuasion,  attracted  a 
number  of  fellow  worshippers.  In  Calcutta  there  are  four  temples,  two 
belonging  to  each  sect.  In  Behar  are  the  temples  of  Pa'risna'th  and 
the  Pddukas,  or  feet  of  Verddha'mana,  and  Va'supu'jya.  Benares 
possesses  several  temples,  one  of  which,  in  the  suburb,  called  Belupura, 
is  honoured  as  the  birth-place  of  Pa'rswana'th.  The  shrine  comprises 
two  temples,  one  belonging  to  the  Swetdmbaras,  and  one  to  the  Digam- 
baras.  A  temple  of  some  size  and  celebrity  occurs  at  Mainpuri,  in  the 
Doab,  and  most  of  the  towns  in  that  direction  present  Jain  spires.  The 
chief  temples,  however,  are  to  the  westward,  and  especially  at  Jaypur. 
The  whole  of  Mewar  and  Mdrwar  is  strewed  with  remains  of  the  sacred 
edifices  of  this  sect. 

The  Jains  of  the  South  of  India,  as  has  been  observed,  are  divided 
into  castes  :  this  is  not  the  case  in  upper  Hindustan,  where  they  are  all 
of  one  caste,  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  of  none.  They  are  neverthe- 
less equally  tenacious  of  similar  distinctions,  and  not  only  refuse  to  mix 
with  other  classes,  but  recognise  a  number  of  orders  amongst  them- 
selves, between  which  no  intermarriages  can  take  place,  and  many  of 
whom  cannot  eat  together.  This  classification  is  the  Gachcha  or  Got, 
the  family  or  race,  which  has  been  substituted  for  the  Verna,  the  Jdti, 
or  caste.  Of  these  Gachchas,  or  family  divisions,  they  admit  eighty- 
four,*  and  these  again  appear  to  comprehend  a  variety  of  subdivisions  : 


*  The  following  are  the  appellation^  of  the  eighty-four  Gachchas 


Khandewal. 

Natila.  , 

Dhaktha. 

Bikt  iya. 

Porwdl. 

Mothiya. 

Vuisya. 

Bidyabya. 

Agarwil. 

Tattora. 

Ndgdhdr 

Bersdri. 

Jaiswiil. 

Bdgerwul. 

Par. 

Astaki. 

Banhiya. 

Harsola. 

Surendra. 

Ashtadh&r. 

Goldl. 

Sriguru. 

Kadaya. 

Paivardhhi. 

Gnjapurbi. 

Jolura. 

Kdhari. 

Dhakkachula 

Srimdl. 

Gahakhanduja. 

Soniya. 

Bogo^ri. 

Bansivdl,  or  Oswul. 

Chordiya. 

Sorathiya. 

Naraya. 

Porwar. 

Bhungeriwdl. 

Rajiya. 

Korghdriya. 

Patliwdl. 

Brahmatd, 

Maya. 

Bamdriya. 

Danderwdl 

Beduja. 

Kammeha. 

Seksantdiiya. 

Him  margujerdti. 

Bdhariya. 

Bhang  ela. 

Anundi. 

Baramora* 

Goguwdl. 

Gangarda. 

JSIdgora. 

Kharuivu. 

Andaluja. 

Mar  key  a. 

Tattora. 

Lahec.hu. 

Gogayya. 

Motwdl. 

Pukhastya. 

Khandoya. 

Mandaluja. 

Swetwdl. 

Sacchora. 

Kathnora. 

Pancharn. 

Chakkichnj}- 

Jannord. 

Kahliyn. 

Somahansihogar. 

Khundarya. 

Nemildra. 

Kapola . 

Chatiirtha. 

Narischya. 

Gandoriya. 

Nadila. 

Hardar. 

Bimongai. 

Dhuwaljoii. 

222 

some  of  the  Gachchas  comprehend  a  portion  of  Sri  Vaishnavas,  between 
which  sect  and  the  Jains  in  upper  India,  a  singular  aUiance  seems 
sometimes  to  prevail. 

The  condition  of  Jaina  worship  may  be  inferred  from  the  above  no- 
tices of  its  temples.  Its  professors  are  to  be  found  in  every  province  of 
Hindustan,  collected  chiefly  in  towns,  where,  as  merchants  and  bankers, 
they  usually  form  a  very  opulent  portion  of  the  community.  In  Calcutta 
there  are  said  to  be  five  hundred  families  ;  but  they  are  much  more 
numerous  at  Murshedabad.  In  Behar  they  have  been  estimated  at 
between  three  and  four  hundred  families.  They  are  in  some  numbers  in 
Benares,  but  become  more  numerous  ascending  the  Doab.  It  is,  how- 
ever, to  the  westward  that  they  abound  :  the  provinces  of  Mewar  and 
Mdrwar  being  apparently  the  cradle  of  the  sect.*  They  are  also 
numerous  in  Guzerat,  in  the  upper  part  of  the  Malabar  coast,  and  are 
scattered  throughout  the  Peninsula.  They  form,  in  fact,  a  very  large, 
and  from  their  wealth  and  influence,  a  most  important  division  of  the 
population  of  India. 


BABA  LALIS. 


The  followers  of  Baba  Lal  are  sometimes  included  amongst  the 
Vaishnava  sects,  and  the  classification  is  warranted  by  the  outward 
seeming  of  these  sectaries,  who  streak  the  forehead  with  Gopichandana, 
and  profess  a  veneration  for  Rama  :  in  reality,  however,  they  adore  but 
one  God,  dispensing  with  all  forms  of  worship,  and  directing  their  devo- 
tion by  rules  and  objects  derived  from  a  medly  of  Veddnta  and  Sufi  tenets. 

Some  of  these  are  well  known,  but  many  of  the  others  are  never  met  with.  The 
list  was  furnished  by  a  respectable  Yati—hni  how  far  it  is  throughout  jjenuine,  1 
cannot  pretend  to  say.  It  omits  several  Gachchas  of  celebrity,  particularly  the 
Chandra  and  Khertara. 

*  According  to  Major  Tod,  the  Pontiff  of  the  Khartra  Gachcha  has  eleven  thou- 
sand clerical  disciples  scattered  over  India,  and  the  single  community  of  Oswal 
number  one  hundred  thousand  families.  In  the  West  of  India,  the  officers  of  the  state 
and  revenue,  the  bankers,  the  civil  magistrates,  and  the  heads  of  corporations,  are 
mostly  Jains — Trans.  R.  As.  Soc.  vol.  II.  p.  I.  263. 


223 

Ba'ba  La'l  was  a  Khetriya,  born  in  Malwa,  about  the  reign  of  Jeiian- 
GiR  :  he  early  adopted  a  religious  life  under  the  tuition  of  Chetana 
Swa'mi',  whose  fitness  as  a  teacher  had  been  miraculously  proved.  This 
person  soliciting  alms  of  Ba'ba  La'l,  received  some  raw  grain,  and  wood 
to  dress  it  with  :  lighting  the  wood,  he  confined  the  fire  between  his  feet, 
and  supported  the  vessel  in  which  he  boiled  the  grain  upon  his  insteps, 
Ba'ba  La'l  immediately  prostrated  himself  before  him  as  his  Guru,  and 
receiving  from  him  a  grain  of  the  boiled  rice  to  eat,  the  system  of  the 
universe  became  immediately  unfolded  to  his  comprehension.  He  follow- 
ed Chetana  to  Lahore,  whence  being  dispatched  to  Dwdrakd  by  his 
Guru,  to  procure  some  of  the  earth  called  Gopichandana,  he  eflfected  his 
mission  in  less  than  an  hour:  this  miraculous  rapidity,  the  distance 
being  some  hundred  miles,  attesting  his  proficiency,  he  was  dismissed  by 
his  Guru,  in  order  to  become  a  teacher.  He  settled  at  Dehanpur,  near 
Serhind,  where  he  erected  a  Math,  comprehending  a  handsome  temple, 
and  where  he  initiated  a  number  of  persons  in  the  articles  of  his  faith. 

Amongst  the  individuals  attracted  by  the  doctrines  of  Ba'ba  La'l, 
was  the  liberal-minded  and  unfortunate  Dara  Shekoh  :  he  summoned 
the  sage  to  his  presence  to  be  instructed  in  his  tenets,  and  the  result  of 
seven  interviews  was  committed  to  writing,  in  the  form  of  a  dialogue 
between  the  Prince  and  the  Pir,  by  two  literary  Hindus,  attached  to  the 
Prince's  train,  one  Yadu  Da's,  a  Khettriya,  and  the  other  Raichand 
Brahman,  the  latter  the  Mirmunshi ;  the  interview  took  place  in  the 
garden  of  Jaffer  Khan  Saduh,  in  the  21st  year  of  Shah  Jehan's 
reign,  or  1649;  the  work  is  entitled  Nadir  unnikdt,  and  is  written,  as 
the  name  implies,  in  the  Persian  language.  Some  miscellaneous  ex- 
tracts from  it  may  not  be  unacceptable,  as  they  may  not  only  explain 
the  tenets  of  Ba'ba  La'l,  and  something  of  the  Veddnta  and  Sufi 
doctrines,  but  may  illustrate  better  than  any  description  the  notions 
generally  prevailing  of  the  duties  of  a  religious  and  mendicant  life.  The 
interrogator  is  the  Prince,  Ba'ba  La'l  himself  the  respondent. 

What  is  the  passion  of  a  Fakir  ? — Knowledge  of  God. 

What  is  the  power  of  an  Ascetic  ? — Impotence. 

What  is  Wisdom  ? — Devotion  of  the  heart  to  the  Heart's  Lord. 

How  are  the  hands  of  a  Fakir  employed } — To  cover  his  ears. 

Where  are  his  feet  ? — Hidden,  but  not  hampered  by  his  garments. 

What  best  becomes  him  ? — Vigilance,  night  and  day. 


224 

In  what  should  he  be  unapt  ? — Immoderate  diet. 
In  what  should  he  repose  ? — In  a  corner ;   seclusion  from  mankind, 
and  meditation  on  the  only  True. 

What  is  his  dwelling  ? — God*s  creatures. 
His  Kingdom  } — God. 

What  are  the  lights  of  his  mansion  } — The  Sun  and  Moon. 
What  is  his  couch  } — The  Earth. 

What  is  his  indispensable  observance  .^—praise  and  glorification  of 
the  Cherisher  of  all  things,  and  the  needer  of  none. 

What  is  suitable  for  a  Fakir  ? — La,  none  ;  as  Ld  Allah,  &c.  there  is 
no  God  but  God. 

How  passes  the  existence  of  a  Fakir  ? — Without  desire,   without 
restraint,  without  property. 

What  are  the  duties  of  a  Fakir  ? — Poverty  and  faith. 
Which  is  the  best  religion  .?— Verse,  "  The  Creed  of  the  lover  differs 
from  other  Creeds.     God  is  the  faith  and  creed  of  those  who  love  him, 
but  to  do  good  is  best  for  the  follower  of  every  faith."     Again,  as  Hafiz 
says — 

The  object  of  all  religions  is  alike. 

All  men  seek  their  beloved, 

What  is  the  difference  between  prudent  and  wild, 

All  the  world  is  love's  dwelling, 

Why  talk  of  a  Mosque  or  a  Church. 

With  whom  should  the  Fakir  cultivate  intimacy  ? — With  the  Lord 
of  loveliness. 

To  whom  should  he  be  a  stranger  } — To  covetousness,  anger,  envy, 
falsehood,  and  malice. 

Should  he  wear  garments  or  go  naked  ? — The  loins  should  be  covered 
by  those  who  are  in  their  senses — nudity  is  excusable  in  those  who  are 
insane.     The  love  of  God  does  not  depend  upon  a  cap  or  a  coat. 

How  should  a  Fakir  conduct  himself.^ — He  should  perform  what  he 
promises,  and  not  promise  what  he  cannot  perform. 

Should  evil  be  done  to  evil  doers } — The  Fakir  is  to  do  evil  to  none, 
he  is  to  consider  good  and  ill  alike,  so  Hafiz  says — "  The  repose  of 
the  two  worlds  depends  upon  two  rules,  kindness  to  friends,  and  gentle, 
ness  to  foes." 


225 

What  is  the  nature  of  the  Takia  (the  pillow  or  abbacy  ?) — To  com- 
mence with  a  seat  upon  it  is  improper,  and  at  all  times  an  erratic  life  is 
preferable  ;  when  the  body  is  weakened  by  age  or  sickness,  the  Fakir 
may  then  repose  upon  his  pillow  :  so  situated,  he  should  welcome  every 
Fakir  as  his  guest,  and  consider  nothing  but  God  to  be  his  own. 

Is  it  necessary  for  a  Fakir,  to  withdraw  from  the  world  ? — It  is  pru- 
dent, but  not  necessary  :  the  man  in  society  who  fixes  his  heart  on  God 
is  a  Fakir,  and  the  Fakir  who  takes  an  interest  in  the  concerns  of  men 
is  a  man  of  the  world,  so  Maulana  Rum  observes — "  What  is  the 
world  ?  forgetfulness  of  God,  not  clothes,  nor  wealth,  nor  wife,  nor 
offspring." 

What  is  the  difference  between  nature  and  created  things  ? — Some 
compare  them  to  the  seed  and  the  tree.  The  seed  and  the  tree  are 
equivalent  though  related  ;  although  the  same  in  substance,  they  are 
not  necessarily  co-existent  nor  co-relative.  They  may  be  also  compared 
to  the  waves  and  the  sea ;  the  first  cannot  be  without  the  second,  but 
the  sea  may  be  without  waves,  wind  is  necessary  to  their  product :  so, 
although  nature  and  created  things  are  of  one  essence,  yet  the  evolution 
of  the  latter  from  the  former  requires  the  interference  of  an  evolving 
cause,  or  the  interposition  of  a  Creator. 

Are  the  soul,  life,  and  body  merely  shadows  } — The  soul  is  of  the 
same  nature  as  God,  and  one  of  the  many  properties  of  universal  life  ; 
like  the  sea,  and  a  drop  of  water ;  when  the  latter  joins  the  former,  it 
also  is  sea. 

How  do  the  Paramdtmd  (supreme  soul)  and  Jivdtmd  (living  soul) 
differ } — They  do  not  differ,  and  pleasure  and  pain  ascribable  to  the 
latter,  arises  from  its  imprisonment  in  the  body — the  water  of  the 
Ganges  is  the  same  whether  it  run  in  the  river's  bed  or  be  shut  up 
in  a  decanter. 

What  difference  should  that  occasion  } — Great — a  drop  of  wine  added 
to  the  water  in  the  decanter  will  impart  its  flavor  to  the  whole,  but  it 
would  be  lost  in  the  river.  The  Paramdtmd,  therefore,  is  beyond  ac- 
cident, but  the  Jivdtmd  is  afilicted  by  sense  and  passion.  Water  cast 
loosely  on  a  fire  will  extinguish  the  fire ;  put  that  water  over  the  fire  in 
a  boiler,  and  the  fire  will  evaporise  the  water,  so  the  body  being  the 
confining  caldron,  and  passion  the  fire,  the  soul,  which  is  compared  to 

2    G 


226 

the  water,  is  dispersed  abroad  ; — the  one  great  supreme  soul  is  inca- 
pable of  these  properties,  and  happiness  is  therefore  only  obtained  in 
reunion  with  it,  when  the  dispersed  and  individualized  portions  combine 
again  with  it,  as  the  drops  of  water  with  the  parent  stream  ;  hence, 
although  God  needs  not  the  service  of  his  slave,  yet  the  slave  should 
remember  that  he  is  separated  from  God  by  the  body  alone,  and  may 
exclaim  perpetually,  Blessed  be  the  moment  when  I  shall  lift  the  veil 
from  off  that  face.  The  veil  of  the  face  of  my  beloved  is  the  dust  of 
my  body. 

What  are  the  feelings  of  the  perfect  Fakir  P — They  have  not  been, 
they  are  not  to  be,  described,  as  it  is  said — a  person  asked  me  what  are 
the  sensations  of  a  lover  ?  I  replied,  when  you  are  a  lover,  you  will 
know. 


PRAN   NATHIS. 


These  are  also  called  Dhdmis  :  they  owe  their  origin  to  Pra'n  Na'th, 
a  Khetriya,  who  being  versed  in  Mohammedan  learning,  as  well  as  in 
his  own,  attempted  to  reconcile  the  two  religions  :  with  this  view,  he 
composed  a  work  called  the  Mahitdriyal,  in  which  texts  from  the  Koran, 
and  the  Vedas  are  brought  together,  and  shewn  not  to  be  essentially 
different.  Pra'n  Na'th  flourished  about  the  latter  part  of  Aurungzeb's 
reign,  and  is  said  to  have  acquired  great  influence  with  Chattrasa'l, 
Raja  of  Bundelkand,  by  eff^ecting  the  discovery  of  a  diamond  mine. 
Bundelkand  is  the  chief  seat  of  his  followers,  and  in  Punna  is  a  building 
consecrated  to  the  use  of  the  sect,  in  one  apartment  of  which,  on  a  table 
covered  with  gold  cloth,  lies  the  volume  of  the  founder. 

As  a  test  of  the  disciple's  consent  to  the  real  identity  of  the  essence 
of  the  Hindu  and  Mohammedan  creeds,  the  ceremony  of  initiation, 
consists  of  eating  in  the  society  of  members  of  both  communions :  with 
this  exception,  and  the  admission  of  the  general  principle,  it  does  not 
appear  that  the  two  classes  confound  their  civil  or  even  religious  distinc- 
tions :  they  continue  to  observe  the  practices  and  ritual  of  their  fore- 


227 

fathers,  whether  Mussel  man  or  Hindu,  and  the  union,  beyond  that  of 
community  of  eating,  is  no  more  thap  any  rational  individual  of  either 
sect  is  fully  prepared  for,  or  the  admission,  that  the  God  of  both,  and  of 
all  religions,  is  one  and  the  same. 


SADHS. 

A  full  account  of  this  sect  of  Hindu  Unitarians,  by  the  Reverend 
Mr.  Fisher,  was  published  in  the  Missionary  Intelligencer  some  years 
ago,  and  some  further  notice  of  them  is  inserted  in  the  Transactions  of 
the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  by  Mr.  Trant.  They  are  distinguished 
from  other  Hindus,  by  professing  the  adoration  of  one  Creator,  and 
by  personal  and  moral  observances  which  entitle  them,  in  their  own 
estimation,  to  the  appellation  of  Sdds,  Sddhus,  Pure  or  Puritans. 

The  Sddhs  are  found  chiefly  in  the  upper  part  of  the  Doab,  from 
Farakhabad  to  beyond  Delhi.  In  the  former,  they  occupy  a  suburb  called 
Sddhwdra,  and  are  more  numerous  there  than  in  any  other  town,  their 
numbers  are  estimated  at  two  thousand.  There  are  said  to  be  some  at 
Mirzapore,  and  a  few  more  to  the  South ;  their  numbers,  however,  are 
limited,  and  they  are  chiefly  from  the  lower  classes. 

The  sect  originated  in  the  year  of  Vikrama'ditya,  1714,  (A.  D. 
1658)  according  to  Mr.  Trant,  with  a  person  named  Birbha'n,  who 
received  a  miraculous  communication  from  one  Udaya  Da's,  and  in 
consequence  taught  the  Sddh  doctrines.  Mr.  Fisher  calls  Birbha'at 
the  disciple  of  Jogi  Das,  who  commanding  a  body  of  troops  in  the  ser- 
vice of  the  Raja  of  Dholpur,  was  left  as  slain  on  the  field  of  battle,  but 
restored  to  life  by  a  stranger  in  the  guise  of  a  mendicant,  who  carried 
him  to  a  mountain,  taught  him  the  tenets  of  the  faith,  and  having  bestow- 
ed upon  him  the  power  of  working  miracles,  sent  him  to  disseminate  his 
doctrines.  These  circumstances  are  rather  obscurely  alluded  to  in  the 
original  authorities  consulted  on  the  present  occasion,  but  they  agree 
with  the  above  in  considering  Birrha'n  an  inhabitant  of  Brijhasir,  near 
Narnoul,  in  the  province  of  Delhi,  as  the  founder  of  the  sect,  at  the  date 
above  mentioned,  Birbha'n  received  his  knowledge  from  the  Sat 
Guru,  the  pure  teacher,  also  called  Udaka  Dds,  the  servant  of  the  one 


228 

God,   and  particularly  described  as  the  Mdlekka  Hukem,  the  order  of 
the  Creator,  the  personified  word  of  God. 

The  doctrines  taught  by  the  super-human  instructor  of  Birbha'n 
were  communicated  in  Sabdas  and  Sdkhis,  detached  Hindi  stanzas  like 
those  of  Kabir.  They  are  collected  into  manuals,  and  read  at  the 
religious  meetings  of  the  Sddhs :  their  substance  is  collected  into  a  tract 
entitled  Adi  Upadh,  first  precepts,  in  which  the  whole  code  is  arranged 
under  the  following  twelve  Hukems,  or  Commandments. 

1 .  Acknowledge  but  one  God  who  made  and  can  destroy  you,  to  whom 
there  is  none  superior,  and  to  whom  alone  therefore  is  worship  due,  not 
to  earth,  nor  stone,  nor  metal,  nor  wood,  nor  trees,  nor  any  created 
thing.  There  is  but  one  Lord,  and  the  word  of  the  Lord.  He  who 
meditates  on  falsehoods,  practices  falsehood,  and  commits  sin,  and  he 
who  commits  sin  falls  into  Hell. 

2.  Be  modest  and  humble,  set  not  your  affections  on  the  world, 
adhere  faithfully  to  your  creed,  and  avoid  intercourse  with  all  not  of 
the  same  faith,  eat  not  of  a  stranger's  bread. 

3.  Never  lie  nor  speak  ill  at  any  time  to,  or  of  any  thing,  of  earth  or 
water,  of  trees  or  animals.  Let  the  tongue  be  employed  in  the  praise 
of  God.  Never  steal,  nor  wealth,  nor  land,  nor  beasts,  nor  pasture  : 
distinguish  your  own  from  another's  property,  and  be  content  with 
what  you  possess.  Never  imagine  evil.  Let  not  your  eyes  rest  on 
improper  objects,  nor  men,  nor  women,  nor  dances,  nor  sHows. 

4.  Listen  not  to  evil  discourse,  nor  to  any  thing  but  the  praises  of  the 
Creator,  nor  to  tales,  nor  gossip,  nor  calumny,  nor  music,  nor  singing, 
except  hymns ;  but  then  the  only  musical  accompaniment  must  be  in 
the  mind. 

5.  Never  covet  any  thing,  either  of  body  or  wealth  :  take  not  of 
another.  God  is  the  giver  of  all  things,  as  your  trust  is  in  him  so 
shall  you  receive. 

6.  When  asked  what  you  are,  declare  yourself  a  Sddh,  speak  not  of 
caste,  engage  not  in  controversy,  hold  firm  your  faith,  put  not  your  hope 
in  men. 

7 .  Wear  white  garments,  use  no  pigments,  nor  collyrium,  nor  denti- 
frice, nor  Mehndiy  nor  mark  your  person,  nor  your  forehead  with  sec- 
tarial  distinctions,  nor  wear  chaplets,  or  rosaries,  or  jewels. 


229 

8.  Never  eat  nor  drink  intoxicating  substances,  nor  chew  pdn,  nor 
smell  perfumes,  nor  smoke  tobacco,  nor  chew  nor  smell  opium,  hold  not 
up  your  hands,  bow  not  down  your  head  in  the  presence  of  idols  or  of 
men. 

9.  Take  no  life  away,  nor  offer  personal  violence,  nor  give  damnatory 
evidence,  nor  seize  any  thing  by  force. 

10.  Let  a  man  wed  one  wife  and  a  woman  one  husband,  let  not  a 
man  eat  of  a  woman's  leavings,  but  a  woman  may  of  a  man's,  as  may  be 
the  custom.     Let  the  woman  be  obedient  to  the  man. 

1 1 .  Assume  not  the  garb  of  a  mendicant,  nor  solicit  alms,  nor  accept 
gifts.  Have  no  dread  of  necromancy,  neither  have  recourse  to  it.  Know 
before  you  confide.  The  meetings  of  the  Pious  are  the  only  places  of 
pilgrimage,  but  understand  who  are  the  Pious  before  you  so  salute 
them. 

12.  Let  not  a  Sddh  be  superstitious  as  to  days,  or  to  lunations,  or  to 
months,  or  the  cries  or  appearances  of  birds  or  animals  ;  let  him  seek 
only  the  will  of  the  Lord. 

These  injunctions  are  repeated  in  a  variety  of  forms,  but  the  purport 
is  the  same,  and  they  comprise  the  essence  of  the  Sddh  doctrine  which  is 
evidently  derived  from  the  unitarianism  of  Kabir,  Nanak,  and  similar 
writers,  with  a  slight  graft  from  the  principles  of  Christianity.  In  their 
notions  of  the  constitution  of  the  universe,  in  the  real,  although  tem- 
porary existence  of  inferior  deities  and  their  incarnations,  and  in  the 
ultimate  object  of  all  devotion,  liberation  from  life  on  earth,  or  Mukti, 
the  Sddhs  do  not  differ  from  other  Hindus. 

The  Sddhs  have  no  temples,  but  assemble  at  stated  periods  in  houses, 
or  courts  adjoining  set  apart  for  this  purpose.  According  to  Mr.  Fisher, 
their  meetings  are  held  every  full  moon,  when  men  and  women  collect 
at  an  early  hour,  all  bringing  such  food  as  they  are  able,  the  day  is 
spent  in  miscellaneous  conversation,  or  in  the  discussion  of  matters  of 
common  interest.  In  the  evening,  they  eat  and  drink  together,  and  the 
night  is  passed  in  the  recitation  of  the  stanzas  attributed  to  Birbha'n, 
or  his  preceptor,  and  the  poems  of  Da'du,  Nanak,  or  Kabir. 

From  the  term  they  apply  to  the  deity,  Satna'm,  the  true  name,  the 
Sddhs  are  also  called  Satndmis ;  but  this  appellation  more  especially 
indicates  a  different,  although  kindred  sect. 


230 


SATNAMIS. 


These  profess  to  adore  the  true  name  alone,  the  one  God,  the  cause 
and  creator  of  all  things,  Nirgun,  or  void  uf  sensible  qualities,  without 
beginning  or  end. 

They  borrow,  however,  their  notions  of  creation  from  the  Veddnta 
philosophy,  or  rather  from  the  modified  form  in  which  it  is  adapted  to 
vulgar  apprehension.  Worldly  existence  is  illusion,  or  the  work  of 
Ma'ya',  the  primitive  character  of  Bhava'ni',  the  wife  of  Siva.  They 
recognise  accordingly  the  whole  Hindu  Pantheon — and,  although  they 
profess  to  worship  but  one  God,  pay  reverence  to  what  they  consider 
manifestations  of  his  nature  visible  in  the  Avatdrs,  particularly  Ra'ma 
and  Krishna. 

Unlike  the  Sddhs  also,  they  use  distinctive  marks,  and  wear  a  double 
string  of  silk  bound  round  the  right  wrist.  Frontal  lines  are  not  in- 
variably employed,  but  some  make  a  perpendicular  streak  with  ashes 
of  a  burnt  offering  made  to  Hanuman. 

Their  moral  code  is  something  like  that  of  all  Hindu  quietists,  and 
enjoins  indifference  to  the  world,  its  pleasures  or  its  pains,  implicit 
devotion  to  the  spiritual  guide,  clemency  and  gentleness,  rigid  ad- 
herence to  truth,  the  discharge  of  all  ordinary,  social,  or  religious 
obligations,  and  the  hope  of  final  absorption  into  the  one  spirit  which 
pervades  all  things. 

There  is  little  or  no  difference  therefore  in  essentials  between  the 
Satndmis  and  some  of  the  Vaishnava  unitarians,  but  they  regard  them- 
selves as  a  separate  body,  and  have  their  own  founder  Jagji'van  Da'^. 
He  was  a  Kshetriya  by  birth,  and  continued  in  the  state  of  Grihastha, 
or  householder,  through  life :  he  was  a  native  of  Oude,  and  his  Samddh, 
or  shrine,  is  shewn  at  Katwa,  a  place  between  Lucknow  and  Ajudhya. 
He  wrote  several  tracts,  as  the  Jnydn  Prakds,  Mahdpralaya,  and  Prathama 
Grantha :  they  are  in  Hindi  couplets ;  the  first  is  dated  in  Sambat  1817, 
or  A.  D.  1761,  the  last  is  in  the  form  of  a  dialogue  between  Siva  and 
Pa'rvati'.     The  following  is  from  the  Mahdpralaya. 

"  The  pure  man  lives  amidst  all,  but  away  from  all :  his  afi^ections 
are  engaged  by  nothing :  what  he  may  know  he  knows,  but  he  makes 


231 

no  enquiry  :  he  neither  goes  nor  comes,  neither  learns  nor  teaches, 
neither  cries  nor  sighs,  but  discusses  himself  with  himself.  There  is 
neither  pleasure  nor  pain,  neither  clemency  nor  wrath,  neither  fool  nor 
sage  to  him.  Jagjivandas  asks,  does  any  one  know  a  man  so  exempt 
from  infirmity  who  lives  apart  from  mankind  and  indulges  not  in  idle 
speech." 


SIVA  NARAYANAIS. 


This  is  another  sect  professing  the  worship  of  one  God,  of  whom  no 
attributes  are  predicated.  Their  unitarianism  is  more  unqualified  than 
that  of  either  of  the  preceding,  as  they  off'er  no  worship,  pay  no  regard 
whatever  to  any  of  the  objects  of  Hindu  or  Mohammedan  veneration. 
They  also  differ  from  all  in  admitting  proselytes  alike  from  Hindus  or 
Mohammedans,  and  the  sect  comprises  even  professed  Christians  from 
the  lower  classes  of  the  mixed  population. 

Admission  into  the  sect  is  not  a  matter  of  much  ceremony,  and  a 
Guru,  or  spiritual  guide,  is  not  requisite  ;  a  few  Siva  Ndrdyanis  assemble 
at  the  requisition  of  a  novice,  place  one  of  their  text  books  in  the  midst 
of  them,  on  which  betel  and  sweetmeats  have  previously  been  arranged. 
After  awhile  these  are  distributed  amongst  the  party,  a  few  passages 
are  read  from  the  book,  and  the  sect  has  acquired  a  new  member. 

Truth,  temperance,  and  mercy  are  the  cardinal  virtues  of  this  sect,  as 
well  as  of  the  Sddhs  ;  polygamy  is  prohibited,  and  sectarial  marks  are 
not  used  :  conformity  to  the  external  observances  of  the  Hindu  or 
Mohammedans,  independently 'of  religious  rites,  is  recommended,  but 
latitude  of  practice  is  not  unfrequent ;  and  the  Siva  Ndrdyanis,  of  the 
lower  orders,  are  occasionally  addicted  to  strong  potations. 

The  sect  derives  its  appellation  from  that  of  its  founder  Sivana'ra'- 
YAN,  a  Rajput,  of  the  Nerivdna  tribe,  a  native  of  Chanddwan,  a  village  near 
Ghazipur :  he  flourished  in  the  reign  of  Mohammed  Shah,  and  one  of 
his  works  is  dated  Sambat  1791,  or  A.  D.  1735.  He  was  a  voluminous 
writer  in  the  inculcation  of  his  doctrines,  and  eleven  books,  in  Hindi 
verse,  are  ascribed  to  him.     They  are  entitled :   Lao  or  Lava  Granth, 


232 

Santvilds,  Wajan  Granth,  Santsundara,  Guru  Nyds,  Sant  Achdri,  Sant 
Opadesa,  Sabddvali,  Santparwdna,  Sant  Mahima,  Sant  Sdgar. 

There  is  also  a  twelfth,  the  Seal  of  the  whole,  but  it  has  not  yet  been 
divulged,  remaining  in  the  exclusive  charge  of  the  head  of  the  sect. 
This  person  resides  at  Baisande,  in  the  Ghazipur  district,  where  there  is 
a  college  and  establishment. 

The  Sivandrdyanis  are  mostly  Rajputs,  and  many  are  Sipahis  :  many 
of  the  Up-county  Bearers  also  belong  to  the  sect.  The  members  are 
said  to  be  numerous  about  Ghazipur,  and  some  are  to  be  met  with  in 
Calcutta. 


SUNYABADIS. 


The  last  sect  which  it  has  been  proposed  to  notice,  is  one  of  which 
the  doctrines  are  atheistical.  There  is  no  novelty  in  this  creed,  as  it  was 
that  of  the  Chdrvdkas  and  Ndstikas,  and  is,  to  a  great  extent,  that  of 
the  Bauddhas  and  Jains ;  but  an  attempt  has  been  recently  made  to  give 
it  a  more  comprehensive  and  universal  character,  and  to  bring  it  within 
the  reach  of  popular  attraction. 

A  distinguished  patron  of  the  Sunyahddis  was  Da'yara'm,  the  Raja 
of  Hatras,  when  that  fortress  was  destroyed  by  the  Marquis  of  Hast- 
ings. Under  his  encouragement,  a  work  in  Hindi  verse  was  composed 
by  Bakhtawar,  a  religious  mendicant,  entitled  the  Sunisdr,  the  essence 
of  emptiness,  the  purport  of  which  is  to  shew  that  all  notions  of  man 
and  God  are  fallacies,  and  that  nothing,  is :  a  few  passages  from  this 
book  will  convey  an  idea  of  the  tenets  of  the  sect. 

"  Whatever  I  behold  is  Vacuity.  Theism  and  Atheism — Maya  and 
Brahm — all  is  false,  all  is  error — the  globe  itself,  and  the  e^g  of 
Brahma,  the  seven  Dwipas  and  nine  Khandas,  heaven  and  earth,  the 
sun  and  moon,  Brahma,  Vishnu  and  Siva,  Kd'rma  and  Sksha,  the 
Guru  and  his  pupil,  the  individual  and  the  species,  the  temple  and  the 
God,  the  observance  of  ceremonial  rites,  and  the  muttering  of  prayers, 
all  is  emptiness.  Speech,  hearing  and  discussion  are  emptiness,  and 
substance  itself  is  no  more." 


233 

"  Let  every  one  meditate  upon  himself,  nor  make  known  his  self- 
communion  to  another — let  him  be  the  worshipper  and  the  worship,  nor 
talk  of  a  difference  between  this  and  that — look  into  yourself  and  not 
into  another,  for  in  yourself  that  other  will  be  found — there  is  no  other 
but  myself,  and  I  talk  of  another  from  ignorance.  In  the  same  way  as 
I  see  my  face  in  a  glass,  I  see  myself  in  others,  but  it  is  error  to  think 
that  what  I  see  is  not  my  face,  but  that  of  another — whatever  you  see 
is  but  yourself,  and  father  and  mother  are  nonentities  ;  you  are  the 
infant  and  the  old  man,  the  wise  man  and  the  fool,  the  male  and  the 
female  :  it  is  you  who  are  drowned  in  the  stream,  you  who  pass  over, 
you  are  the  killer,  and  the  slain,  the  slayer  and  the  eater,  you  are  the 
king  and  the  subject.  You  seize  yourself  and  let  go,  you  sleep,  and 
you  wake,  you  dance  for  yourself,  you  play  and  sing  for  yourself.  You 
are  the  sensualist  and  the  ascetic,  the  sick  man  and  the  strong — in  short, 
whatever  you  see,  that  is  you,  as  bubbles,  surf,  and  billows  are  all  but 
water." 

"  When  we  are  visited  in  sleep  by  visions,  we  think  in  our  sleep  that 
those  visions  are  realities — we  wake,  and  find  them  falsehoods,  and  they 
leave  not  a  wreck  behind.  One  man  in  his  sleep  receives  some  infor- 
mation, and  he  goes  and  tells  it  to  his  neighbour — from  such  idle  narra- 
tions what  benefit  is  obtained — what  will  be  left  to  us  when  we  have  been 
winnowing  chaff." 

"  I  meditate  upon  the  Suni  Doctrine  alone,  and  know  neither  virtue 
nor  vice — many  have  been  the  princes  of  the  earth,  and  nothing  did 
they  bring  and  nothing  took  they  away — the  good  name  of  the  liberal 
survived  him,  and  disrepute  covered  the  niggard  with  its  shadow.  So 
let  men  speak  good  words,  that  none  may  speak  ill  of  them  afterwards. 
Take  during  the  few  days  of  your  life  what  the  world  offers  you. 
Enjoy  your  own  share,  and  give  some  of  it  to  others  :  without  liberality, 
who  shall  acquire  reputation  ?  Give  ever  after  your  means,  such  is  the 
established  rule.  To  some  give  money,  to  some  respect,  to  some  kind 
words,  and  to  some  delight.  Do  good  to  all  the  world,  that  all  the 
world  may  speak  good  of  you.  Praise  the  name  of  the  liberal  when  you 
rise  in  the  morning,  and  throw  dust  upon  the  name  of  the  niggard. 
Evil  and  good  are  attributes  of  the  body — you  have  the  choice  of  two 
sweetmeats  in  your  hands,     Karna  was  a  giver  of  gold,  and  Janaka  as 

2   H 


234 

liberal  as  wise.     Sivi,  Harischandra,  Dadhi'cha,  and  many  others, 
have  acquired  by  their  bounty  fame  throughout  the  world." 

"  Many  now  are,  many  have  been,  and  many  will  be — the  world  is 
never  empty ;  like  leaves  upon  the  trees,  new  ones  blossom  as  the  old 
decay.  Fix  not  your  heart  upon  a  withered  leaf,  but  seek  the  shade  of 
the  green  foliage — a  horse  of  a  thousand  rupees  is  good  for  nothing 
when  dead,  but  a  living  tattoo  will  carry  you  along  the  road.  Have  no 
hope  in  the  man  that  is  dead,  trust  but  in  him  that  is  living.  He  that 
is  dead  will  be  alive  no  more :  a  truth  that  all  men  do  not  know : 
of  all  those  that  have  died,  has  any  business  brought  any  one  back 
again,  or  has  any  one  brought  back  tidings  of  the  rest  ?  A  rent  gar- 
ment cannot  be  spun  anew,  a  broken  pot  cannot  be  pieced  again.  A 
living  man  has  nothing  to  do  with  heaven  and  hell,  but  when  the  body 
has  become  dust,  what  is  the  difference  between  a  Jackass  and  a  dead 
Saint." 

"  Earth,  water,  fire,  and  wind,  blended  together,  constitute  the  body 
— of  these  four  elements  the  world  is  composed,  and  there  is  nothing 
else.  This  is  Brahma',  this  is  a  pismire,  all  consists  of  these  elements, 
and  proceeds  from  them  through  separate  receptacles." 

"  Beings  are  born  from  the  womb,  the  egg,  the  germ,  and  vapour." 

"  Hindus  and  Musselmans  are  of  the  same  nature,  two  leaves  of  one 
tree — these  call  their  teachers  Muallas,  those  term  them  Pandits ;  two 
pitchers  of  one  clay :  one  performs  Numaz,  the  other  offers  Pvja :  where 
is  the  difference  ?  I  know  of  no  dissimilarity — they  are  both  followers  of 
the  doctrine  of  Duahty — they  have  the  same  bone,  the  same  flesh,  the 
same  blood,  and  the  same  marrow.  One  cuts  off  the  foreskin,  the  other 
puts  on  a  sacrificial  thread.  Ask  of  them  the  difference,  enquire  the 
importance  of  these  distinctions,  and  they  will  quarrel  with  you  :  dispute 
not,  but  know  them  to  be  the  same — avoid  all  idle  wrangling  and  strife, 
and  adhere  to  the  truth,  the  doctrine  of  Da'yara'm." 

"  I  fear  not  to  declare  the  truth — I  know  no  difference  between  a 
subject  and  a  king — I  want  neither  homage  nor  respect,  and  hold  no 
communion  with  any  but  the  good ;  what  I  can  obtain  with  facility  that 
will  I  desire,  but  a  palace  or  a  thicket  are  to  me  the  same — the  error  of 
mine  and  thine  have  I  cast  away,  and  know  nothing  of  loss  or  gain.  When 
a  man  can  meet  with  a  preceptor  to  teach  him  these  truths,  he  will  destroy 


235 

the  errors  of  a  million  of  births,  such  a  teacher  is  now  in  the  world,  and 
such  a  one  is  Da'yara'm."  ^ 

The  survey  that  has  thus  been  taken  of  the  actual  state  of  the  Hindu 
religion  will  shew,  that  its  internal  constitution  has  not  been  exempt 
from  those  varieties,  to  which  all  human  systems  of  belief  are  subject, 
and  that  it  has  undergone  great  and  frequent  modifications,  until  it 
presents  an  appearance  which  there  is  great  reason  to  suppose  is  very 
different  from  that  which  it  originally  wore. 

The  precise  character  of  the  primitive  Hindu  system  will  only  be 
justly  appreciated,  when  a  considerable  portion  of  the  ritual  of  the  Fedas 
shall  have  been  translated,  but  some  notion  of  their  contents  and  purport 
may  be  formed  from  Mr.  Colebrooke's  account  of  them,*  as  well  as  from 
his  description  of  the  religious  ceremonies  of  the  Hindus, f  It  is  also 
probable  that  the  Institutes  of  Menu,  in  a  great  measure,  harmonise 
with  the  Vaidik  Code. 

From  these  sources  then  it  would  seem,  that  some  of  the  original 
rites  are  still  preserved  in  the  Homa,  or  fire  offerings,  and  in  such  of  the 
Sanskdras,  or  purificatory  ceremonies,  as  are  observed  at  the  periods  of 
birth,  tonsure,  investiture,  marriage  and  cremation.  Even  in  these 
ceremonies,  however,  formulae,  borrowed  from  the  Tantras,  assume  the 
place  of  the  genuine  texts,  whilst  on  many  occasions  the  observances  of 
the  Vedas  are  wholly  neglected.  Nor  is  this  inconsistent  with  the 
original  system,  which  was  devised  for  certain  recognised  classes  into 
which  the  Hindu  community  was  then  divided,  and  of  which  three  out 
of  four  parts  no  longer  exist — the  Hindus  being  now  distinguished  into 
Brahmans  and  mixed  castes  alone— and  the  former  having  almost  uni- 
versally deviated  from  the  duties  and  habits  to  which  they  were  origin- 
ally devoted.  Neither  of  these  classes,  therefore,  can  with  propriety 
make  use  of  the  Vaidik  ritual,  and  their  manual  of  devotion  must  be 
taken  from  some  other  source. 

How  far  the  preference  of  any  individual  Divinity,  as  an  especial 
object  of  veneration,  is  authorised  by  the  Vedas,  remains  yet  to  be  deter- 
mined ;  but  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  most  of  the  forms  to  which 
homage  is  now  paid  are  of  modern  canonization.  At  any  rate  such  is 
the  highest  antiquity  of  the  most  celebrated  Teachers  and  Founders^  of 

*  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  VIII. 
t  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  VII. 


236 

the  popular  sects  ;  and  Ba'sava  in  the  Dekhin,  Vallabha  Swa'mi'  in 
Hindustan,  and  Chaitanya  in  Bengal,  claim  no  earlier  a  date  than  the 
eleventh  and  sixteenth  centuries. 

Consistent  with  the  introduction  of  new  objects  of  devotion,  is  the 
elevation  of  new  races  of  individuals  to  the  respect  or  reverence  of  the 
populace  as  their  ministers  and  representatives.  The  Brahmans  retain, 
it  is  true,  a  traditional  sanctity  ;  and  when  they  cultivate  pursuits  suited 
to  their  character,  as  the  Law  and  Literature  of  their  sacred  language, 
they  receive  occasional  marks  of  attention,  and  periodical  donations  from 
the  most  opulent  of  their  countrymen.  But  a  very  mistaken  notion  prevails 
generally  amongst  Europeans  of  the  positions  of  the  Brahmans  in  Hindu 
society,  founded  on  the  terms  in  which  they  are  spoken  of  by  Menu,  and 
the  application  of  the  expression '  Priesthood,'  to  the  Brahmanical  Order, 
by  Sir  William  Jones.  In  the  strict  sense  of  the  phrase  it  never  was 
applicable  to  the  Brahmans,  for  although  some  amongst  them  acted  in 
ancient  times  as  family  priests,  and  conducted  the  fixed  or  occasional 
ceremonials  of  household  worship,  yet  even  Menu  holds  the  Brahman, 
who  ministers  to  an  idol,  infamous  during  life,  and  condemned  to  the 
infernal  regions  after  death,  and  the  Sanscrit  language  abounds  with 
synonimes  for  the  priest  of  a  temple,  significant  of  his  degraded  condition 
both  in  this  world  and  the  next.  Ministrant  Priests  in  temples,  there- 
fore, the  Brahmans,  collectively  speaking,  never  were — and  although 
many  amongst  them  act  in  that  capacity,  it  is  no  more  their  appropriate 
province  than  any  other  lucrative  occupation.  In  the  present  day,  how- 
ever, they  have  ceased  to  be  in  a  great  measure  the  ghostly  advisers  of 
the  people,  either  individually  or  in  their  households.  This  office  is  now 
filled  by  various  persons,  who  pretend  to  superior  sanctity,  as  Gosains, 
Vairdgis,  and  Sanydsis.  Many  of  these  are  Brahmans,  but  they  are  not 
necessarily  so,  and  it  is  not  as  Brahmans  that  they  receive  the  venera- 
tion of  their  lay  followers.  They  derive  it  as  we  have  seen  from  indivi- 
dual repute,  or  more  frequently  from  their  descent  from  the  founder  of 
some  particular  division,  as  is  the  case  with  the  Gokulastha  Gosains  and 
the  Goswdmis  of  Bengal.  The  Brahmans  as  a  caste  exercise  little  real 
influence  on  the  minds  of  the  Hindus  beyond  what  they  obtain  from  their 
numbers,  affluence  and  rank.  As  a  hierarchy  they  are  null,  and  as  a 
literary  body  they  are  few,  and  meet  with  but  slender  countenance  from 
their  countrymen  or  their  foreign  rulers.     That  they  are  still  of  great 


237 

importance  in  the  social  system  of  British  India,  is  unquestionable,  but 
it  is  not  as  a  priesthood.  They  bear  a  very  large  proportion  to  all  the 
other  tribes, — they  are  of  more  respectable  birth,  and  in  general  of 
better  education — a  prescriptive  reverence  for  the  order  improves  these 
advantages,  and  Brahmans  are  accordingly  numerous  amongst  the  most 
affluent  and  distinguished  members  of  every  Hindu  state.  It  is  only, 
however,  as  far  as  they  are  identified  with  the  Gurus  of  the  popular 
sects,  that  they  can  be  said  to  hold  any  other  than  secular  consi- 
deration. 

Aware  apparently  of  the  inequality  upon  which  those  Gurus  contended 
with  the  long  established  claims  of  the  Brahmanical  tribe,  the  new  teach- 
ers of  the  people  took  care  to  invest  themselves  with  still  higher  pre- 
tensions. The  AcMray  or  Guru  of  the  three  first  classes,  is  no  doubt 
described  by  Menu,  as  entitled  to  the  most  profound  respect  from  his  pupil 
during  pupilage,  but  the  Guru  of  the  present  day  exacts  implicit  devotion 
from  his  disciples  during  life.  It  is  unnecessary  here  to  repeat  what 
there  has  been  previous  occasion  to  notice  with  respect  to  the  extrava- 
gant obedience  to  be  paid  by  some  sectarians  to  the  Guru,  whose  favour 
is  declared  to  be  of  much  more  importance  than  that  of  the  god  whom 
he  represents. 

Another  peculiarity  in  the  modern  system  which  has  been  adverted  to 
in  the  preceding  pages,  is  the  paramount  value  of  Bhakti — faith — implicit 
reliance  on  the  favour  of  the  Deity  worshipped.  This  is  a  substitute  for 
all  religious  or  moral  acts,  and  an  expiation  for  every  crime.  Now,  in 
the  Vedas,  two  branches  are  distinctly  marked,  the  practical  and  specu- 
lative. The  former  consists  of  prayers  and  rules  for  oblations  to  any  or 
all  of  the  gods — but  especially  to  Indra  and  Agni,  the  ruler  of  the 
firmament  and  of  fire,  for  positive  worldly  goods,  health,  posterity  and 
affluence.  The  latter  is  the  investigation  of  matter  and  spirit,  leading  to 
detachment  from  worldly  feelings  and  interests,  and  final  liberation  from 
bodily  existence.  The  first  is  intended  for  the  bulk  of  mankind,  the 
second  for  philosophers  and  ascetics.  There  is  not  a  word  of  faith,  of 
implicit  belief  or  passionate  devotion  in  all  this,  and  they  seem  to  have 
been  as  little  essential  to  the  primitive  Hindu  worship  as  they  were  to 
the  religious  systems  of  Greece  and  Rome.  Bhakti  is  an  invention, 
and  apparently  a  modern  one,  of  the  Institutors  of  the  existing  sect,  in- 
tended like  that  of  the  mystical  holiness  of  the  Guru,  to  extend  their  own 


238 

authority.      It  has  no  doubt  exercised  a  most  mischievous  influence 
upon  the  moral  principles  of  the  Hindus. 

Notwithstanding  the  provisions  with  which  the  sectarian  Gurus  forti- 
fied  themselves,  it  is  clear  that  they  were  never  able  to  enlist  the  whole 
of  Hinduism  under  their  banners,  or  to  suppress  all  doubt  and  disbelief. 
It  has  been  shewn  in  the  introductory  pages  of  this  essay,  that  great 
latitude  of  speculation  has  always  been  allowed  amongst  the  Brahmans 
themselves,  and  it  will  have  been  seen  from  the  notices  of  different  sects, 
that  scepticism  is  not  unfrequent  amongst  the  less  privileged  orders. 
The  tendency  of  many  widely  diffused  divisions  is  decidedly  monotheis- 
tical,  and  we  have  seen  that  both  in  ancient  and  modern  times,  attempts 
have  been  made  to  inculcate  the  doctrines  of  utter  unbelief.  It  is  not 
likely  that  these  will  ever  extensively  spread,  but  there  can  be  little 
doubt  that  with  the  diffusion  of  education,  independent  enquiry  into  the 
merits  of  the  prevailing  systems  and  their  professors,  will  become  more 
universal,  and  be  better  directed.  The  germ  is  native  to  the  soil :  it 
has  been  kept  alive  for  ages  under  the  most  unfavourable  circumstances, 
and  has  been  apparently  more  vigorous  than  ever  during  the  last  century. 
It  only  now  requires  prudent  and  patient  fostering  to  grow  into  a  stately 
tree,  and  yield  goodly  fruit. 


BISHOP'S    COLLEGE    PRESS. 


TWO  LECTURES 


ON    THE 


RELIGIOUS  PRACTICES  AND  OPINIONS 

OF    THE 

HINDUS; 

DELIVERED     BEFORE 

THE    UNIVERSITY  OF    OXFORD, 

On  the  9nt]i  and  mh  of  February,  1840. 


J           ^^ 

H. 

H. 

WILSON,  MA. 

(OF 

EXETER    college), 

ODEN 

PROFESSOR    OF    SANSCRIT,    ETC. 

OXFORD, 


PRINTED    BY    T.  COMBE,     PRINTER    TO    THE    UNIVERSITY:      SOLD    BY 

JOHN  HENRY  PARKER ; 

AND  W.  H.  ALLEN  AND  CO.  LEADENHALL  STREET,  LONDON, 
MDCCCXL. 


TN  a  Convocation,  holden  on  Thursday  the  13th  of 
February,  1840,  the  following  proposal,  made 
through  the  Right  Reverend  The  Lord  Bishop  of 
Calcutta,  was  submitted  to,  and  accepted  by  the 
University. 


Bishop's  Palace,  Calcutta,  June  12,   1839. 

To  the  Reverend  the  V ice-Chancellor  of  the  Univer- 
sity of  Oaford, 

Rev.  Mr.  Vice-Chancellor, 

1 .  I  am  requested  by  a  Gentleman  of  the  Civil  Service  of 
the  Hon.  The  East  India  Company,  in  this  Presidency,  to 
submit  the  proposal  of  a  Prize  for  the  Members  of  the 
University,  if  you  should  see  fit  to  accept  of  the  same. 

2.  The  subject  on  which  this  Gentleman  (who  begs  me 
to  suppress  his  name)  is  desirous  of  proposing  a  prize,  is 
thus  described  in  a  letter  to  myself. 


IV 

"  For  the  best  refutation  of  Hinduism  in  its  main  sys- 
tems, both  exoteric,  and  esoteric ;  to  consist  of  such  argu- 
ments, and  be  conveyed  in  that  form  of  address,  which 
are  most  suited  to  Indian  genius,  modes  of  thinking,  and 
state  of  knowledge,  and  most  Hkely  to  carry  conviction  to 
the  understanding  and  heart  of  the  Indian  Pundit ;  to- 
gether with  such  a  statement  of  the  Evidences  of  Christi- 
anity as  may  be  most  suitable  to  the  mental  and  moral 
character  of  learned  Hindus,  and  the  state  of  information 
among  them ;  the  whole  treatise  being  so  constituted,  as, 
together  with  the  more  necessary  and  essential  arguments, 
to  furnish  also,  judiciously  interwoven,  those  elementary 
principles  of  morals,  natural  theology,  metaphysics,  his- 
torical evidence,  &c.,  &c.,  and  those  historical  facts,  which 
the  perverted  condition  of  the  Hindu  intellect,  and  its  want 
of  correct  historical  information,  may  render  indispensable, 
in  order  to  the  clear  apprehension  of  the  reasoning  which 
is  to  form  the  principal  subject  of  the  Treatise. 

"  Any  considerations  connected  with  the  subject,  which 
the  writer  may  think  interesting,  and  important  to  the 
European  reader,  but  which  have  not  a  direct  bearing  on 
the  primary  object  of  the  Treatise,  (the  conversion  of 
learned  and  philosophical  Hindus  to  Christianity,)  might 
be  thrown  into  an  Appendix.^' 

3.  The  gentleman  has  lodged  Two  Hundred  Pounds 
sterling  in  the  banking  house  of  Messrs.  Hobarts,  Curtis, 
and  Co.,  which  will  be  paid  to  your  order,  at  a  moment's 


notice,  by  a  check  drawn  by  the  Rev.  D.  Wilson,  vicar, 
Islington,  London. 

4.  The  proposer  leaves  it  entirely  to  the  University  to 
determine  the  classes  of  Students,  or  Members,  to  whom 
the  prize  should  be  proposed.  He  supposes  that  justice 
cannot  be  done  to  the  subject  in  less  than  three  or  four 
hundred  pages ;  and  he  wishes  that  the  successful  Candi- 
date should  print  a  certain  number  of  copies  of  the  Essay, 
at  the  direction  of  the  University. 

5.  The  gentleman  further  suggests  that  Mr.  Professor 
Wilson,  and  Dr.  Mill,  late  Principal  of  Bishop's  College, 
Calcutta,. might  be  advantageously  referred  to  by  persons 
intending  to  write  for  the  prize,  with  respect  to  the  best 
works  to  be  consulted  for  information  on  the  nature  of 
Hinduism,  and  the  state  of  sentiment  and  morals  in 
India. 

6.  He  states  to  me,  also,  that  he  is  anxious  to  draw  the 
attention  of  academical  youth  to  the  consideration  of  the 
welfare  of  India,  and  wishes  the  projected  work  to  be 
adapted  for  learned  Hindus,  i.  e.  both  such  as  are  learned 
in  their  own  religious  and  philosophical  literature,  and 
those  who  have  received  a  good  English  education.  The 
Treatise  should,  in  short,  be  in  such  a  form,  as  to  be  at 
once,  without  further  preparation  or  modification,  a  suit- 
able work  to  be  put  into  the  hands  of  the  English-reading 
Natives,  and  also  fit  for  translation  into  Sanscrit ;  and, 


VI 


with  the  latter  view,  it  would,  we  think,  be  advisable  to 
have  it  written  in  the  form  of  Dialogue,  the  different  parts 
of  the  subject  being  introduced  by  questions  or  objections 
from  a  pupil,  and  expounded  in  his  Teacher's  reply. 

7.  But  all  these  intimations  are  intended  to  be  entirely 
subordinate  to  the  judgment  of  yourself,  Mr.  Vice-Chan- 
cellor,  and  the  Heads  of  Houses,  and  the  Proposer  of  the 
Prize  will  be  perfectly  satisfied  in  whatever  way  his  main 
object  shall  be  carried  into  effect. 

8.  I  cannot  close  this  letter  without  tendering  my  grate- 
ful acknowledgments  to  the  University  for  all  their  con- 
sideration to  myself  since  my  matriculation  the  1st  of  May, 
1798;  and  to  assure  them  that  it  is  with  no  slight  feelings 
of  gratification  I  find  myself  called  upon,  in  this  distant 
country,  to  be  the  channel  of  communication  with  them  on 
so  important  and  deeply  interesting  a  subject. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be, 

Mr.  Vice-Chancellor, 
Your  obedient  humble  Servant, 

D.  CALCUTTA. 

It  was  at  the  same  time  determined,  That  "  the 
Candidates  shall,  at  the  time  of  delivering  in  their 
Compositions,  be  Members  of  the  University,  having 
their  names  upon  the  Books  of   some  College  or 


Vll 


Hall:— that  the  Compositions  be  delivered  to  the 
Registrar  on  or  before  the  14th  day  of  January, 
184S  :— and  that  the  Vice-Chancellor  and  Proctors, 
with  such  Assessors  as  they  shall  think  proper  to 
call  in,  be  the  Judges  " 


LECTURE   I. 


TT  has  always  been  my  wish  and  intention  to 
offer  to  those  members  of  the  University  who 
may  take  an  interest  in  the  subject,  a  general  view  of 
the  institutions  and  social  condition,  the  literature 
and  the  religion  of  the  Hindus.  The  purpose, 
although  unfulfilled,  is  not  abandoned.  Various 
impediments  have  retarded  its  accomplishment,  and 
still  delay  its  execution;  but  I  hope,  at  no  very 
distant  period,  to  be  able  to  carry  it  into  effect.  In 
the  mean  time,  the  invitation  which  has  been  ad- 
dressed to  the  University  by  the  Bishop  of  Calcutta, 
and  which,  I  am  happy  to  think,  has  been  accepted^ 
to  contribute  to  the  religious  enlightenment  of  a 
benighted,  but  intelligent  and  interesting  and  ami- 
able people,  has  suggested  to  me  the  propriety  and 
the  duty  of  giving  some  earnest  of  my  desire  to 
render  to  any  who  may  apply  their  talents  and 
learning  to  the  proposed  task — a  task  peculiarly 
appropriate  to  a  society  equally  eminent  for  piety 
and  erudition — whatever  assistance  the  direction  of 
my  studies,  my  personal  knowledge  of  the  Hindus, 
and  the  extent  of  my  ability  may  qualify  me  to 
afford  them. 

The  task  that  has  been  proposed  to  the  members 

B 


2  LECTURE  I. 

of  the  University  is  twofold.  They  are  invited  to 
confute  the  falsities  of  Hinduism,  and  affirm  to  the 
conviction  of  a  reasonable  Hindu  the  truths  of 
Christianity.  For  the  second  branch  of  this  under- 
taking the  qualifications  are  widely  disseminated. 
Deep  impressions  of  the  importance  of  Christian 
truth,  and  of  the  obligation  to  extend  it  to  the 
ends  of  the  earth — knowledge  of  that  truth,  and 
skill  to  make  it  known — are  not  likely  to  be  deficient 
in  this  University.  For  the  effective  performance, 
however,  of  the  first  branch  of  the  imdertaking, 
some  preparation  is  requisite — some  preliminary 
study  is  necessary — some  information  not  yet  sought 
for  is  to  be  obtained.  It  is  obviously  essential  to 
know  that  which  we  engage  to  controvert.  It  is 
indispensable  that  we  should  be  well  acquainted 
with  the  practices  and  doctrines  and  belief,  the 
erroneousness  of  which  we  would  demonstrate  ;  and 
in  this  respect  whatever  may  be  the  zeal  and  the 
ability,  the  like  extent  of  available  fitness  cannot 
at  present  be  reasonably  expected.  Yet  the  plan 
submitted  to  the  University  requires  this  fitness, 
and  judiciously  requires  it.  Besides  the  general 
principles  upon  which  the  necessity  of  such  com- 
petency is  obvious,  it  is  still  more  imperative  in 
regard  to  the  circumstances  and  character  of  those 
with  whom  we  have  to  deal.  The  Hindus  will  not 
listen  to  one  who  comes  amongst  them  strong  only 
in  his  own  faith  and  ignorant  of  theirs.  "  Read  these 
translations,"  said  a  very  worthy  clergyman  to  a  sect 
of  religionists  at  Benares,  who  were  already  seceders 
from  idolatrous  worship,  and  were  not  indisposed  for 
argument  upon  the  comparative  truth  of  different 
creeds.    "  We  have  no  objection  to  read  your  books," 


LECTURE  I.  3 

was  the  reply,  "  but  we  will  enter  into  no  discussion 
of  their  contents  with  you  until  you  have  read  ours." 
This  was  inconvenient  or  impracticable,  and  no 
further  intercourse  ensued.  This  is  one  instance 
out  of  many  where  precious  opportunities  have  been 
lost,  because  the  only  means  of  communicating  fully 
with  the  natives — conversancy  not  merely  with  their 
language  but  with  their  literature — has  been  wanting 
or  incomplete ;  and  with  an  acute  and  argumenta- 
tive people  like  the  Hindus  you  must  satisfy  them 
that  they  are  in  error  before  you  can  persuade  them 
to  accept  the  truth.  To  overturn  their  errors  we 
must  know  what  they  are ;  and  for  the  purpose  of 
conveying  to  you  some  notion  of  their  nature  and 
extent,  and  of  putting  you  in  the  way  of  acquiring 
more  precise  information  on  the  subject,  I  have 
thought  it  possible  that  even  some  brief  observa- 
tions may  be  of  use.  With  this  hope  I  propose  to 
give  in  this  and  a  succeeding  Lecture  a  general 
sketch  of  the  principal  religious  practices  and  opin- 
ions of  the  Hindus. 

The  account  which  it  is  thus  proposed  to  sub- 
mit to  you  must  be  unavoidably  of  a  very  general 
nature.  The  interval  that  has  elapsed  since  the 
invitation  was  accepted  has  not  permitted  the  pre- 
paration of  a  very  comprehensive  detail ;  nor  is  the 
subject,  perhaps,  in  that  stage  of  its  consideration  in 
which  minuteness  of  detail  would  be  of  advantage. 
What  is  now  wanted,  and  that  as  early  as  possible, 
is  some  determinate  direction  in  which  inquiry  may 
be  prosecuted — some  definite  point  to  which  the 
thoughts  may  be  made  to  converge.  In  a  topic 
necessarily  unfamiliar  to  the  customary  tenor  of 
academic  study,  it  is  not   possible  that   any  exact 

b2 


4  LECTURE  I. 

ideas  should  have  been  yet  formed  as  to  the  degree 
or  kind  of  preparation  that  is  requisite,  and  few  are 
likely  to  be  acquainted  with  the  situation  and  suffi- 
ciency of  those  stores  from  which  they  must  pro- 
vide their  outfit  for  an  untried  voyage.  The  scene 
is  so  new,  the  prospect  so  indistinct,  that  enterprise 
may  lose  heart,  and  zeal  may  languish  in  vain  aspi- 
rations, unless  something  of  a  chart,  however  rude 
and  imperfect,  be  laid  before  the  adventurer  whilst 
he  yet  hesitates  to  make  his  first  advance.  It  is  this 
help  which  it  is  my  present  purpose  to  supply,  in  the 
hope  that  some,  who,  although  competent  to  do 
honour  to  themselves  and  the  University,  might 
shrink  from  encountering  they  know  not  what, 
may  be  induced,  if  the  mist  may  be  in  some  degree 
cleared  away,  to  look  a  little  nearer,  advance  a 
little  farther  into  the  now-seeming  labyrinth,  as- 
sured that  every  step  they  take,  the  path  will  become 
less  intricate,  and  the  goal  be  more  perceptibly  in 
view ;  assured,  too — unless  my  own  experience 
deceive  me — that  there  will  not  be  wanting  on  their 
journey  objects,  if  not  of  beauty,  yet  of  exceeding 
curiosity  and  interest,  to  enliven  their  way.  and  be- 
guile them  of  the  consciousness  of  fatigue. 

The  history  of  the  Hindu  religion,  although  not 
traceable  with  chronological  precision,  exhibits  un- 
equivocal proof  that  it  is  by  no  means  of  that 
unalterable  character  which  has  been  commonly 
ascribed  to  it.  There  are  many  indications  which 
cannot  be  mistaken,  that  it  has  undergone  at  differ- 
ent periods  important  alterations  in  both  form  and 
spirit.  These  are  little  heeded,  have  been  little  in- 
vestigated, and  are  little  known  by  even  the  most 
learned  of  the  Brahmans.     Some  have  been  pointed 


LECTURE   I.  5 

out  by  the  late  Hindu  reformer  Raja  Rammohun 
Roy,  but  even  he  was  unaware  of  their  full  extent, 
and  they  are  of  themselves  fatal  to  the  pretensions 
of  the  Hindu  faith,  as  it  now  mostly  prevails,  to  an 
inspired  origin  and  unfathomable  antiquity. 

The  oldest  monuments  of  the  Hindu  religion 
are  the  Vedas.  It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  we 
have  not  a  translation  of  these  works  in  any  of  the 
languages  of  Europe  ;  if  we  had,  they  would  no 
doubt,  in  like  manner  as  the  Koran  of  the  Mo- 
hammedans and  the  Zend-a vesta  of  the  fire- worship- 
pers of  Persia,  supply  us  with  irrefutable  arguments 
against  the  credibility  of  the  religion  of  which  they 
were  once  the  oracles.  A  summary  of  the  contents 
of  the  Vedas — as  satisfactory  as  a  summary  can  be — 
was  published  by  Mr.  Colebrooke,  the  most  eminent 
of  all  our  Sanscrit  scholars,  in  the  eighth  volume  of 
the  Researches  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal.* 
The  account,  with  a  variety  of  instructive  disserta- 
tions on  the  religion,  philosophy,  science,  and  lite- 
rature of  the  Hindus,  has  been  reprinted  in  a 
Collection  of  Miscellaneous  Essays ;  ^  published  by 
Mr.  Colebrooke,  or  rather  for  him,  not  long  before 
his  death.  The  text  also,  with  a  Latin  translation 
of  one  book  out  of  eight,  of  one  of  the  Vedas,  the 
Rig- Veda,  has  been  printed  by  the  Committee  of 
the  Oriental  Translation  Fund.*^     It  was  the  work 

a  Asiatic  Researches.  Transactions  of  a  Society  instituted  in 
Bengal,  for  inquiring  into  the  History,  &c.,  of  India.  20  vols. 
4to.     Calcutta. 

^Miscellaneous  Essays,  by  H.  T.  Colebrooke.  2  vols.  8vo. 
London.    Allen  and  Co.      1837. 

<=  Rig-veda  Sanhita.     Liber   Primus,       i   vol.    4to.     London. 
Oriental  Translation  Fund.     Allen  and  Co.      1838. 
B  3 


6  LECTURE  I. 

of  Dr.  Rosen,  a  distinguished  oriental  scholar,  who 
died  in  the  prime  of  life  and  in  the  spring  of  his 
fame.  A  portion  of  the  same  Veda  has  also  been 
translated  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Stevenson,  and  published 
at  Bombay. 

From  these  authorities  a  tolerably  correct  notion 
may  be  formed  of  the  character  of  the  Vedas.  They 
are  four  in  number,  Rich,  Yajush,  Saman,  and 
Atharvan,  or,  as  usually  compounded,  Rig-veda, 
Yajur-veda,  Sama-veda,  and  Atharva-veda.  The 
latter,  however,  differs,  as  far  as  it  is  known,  ma- 
terially in  purport  and  even  in  style  from  the  others  ; 
it  is  rarely  met  with,  and  is  not  uncommonly  omitted 
from  the  specification  of  the  Vedas  even  by  early 
writers,  who  not  unfrequently  speak  of  the  Vedas 
collectively  as  but  three.  It  evidently  enters  in  a 
less  degree  than  the  rest  into  the  formation  of  the 
national  religion  as  taught  by  the  Vedas.  Neither 
of  the  Vedas  can  be  considered  as  a  distinct  work, 
composed  upon  a  definite  plan,  having  either  a  con- 
sistent method  or  a  predominating  subject.  Each 
is  an  unarranged  aggregate  of  promiscuous  prayers, 
hymns,  injunctions,  and  dogmas,  put  together  in 
general,  though  not  always,  in  similar  succession, 
but  not  in  any  way  connected  one  with  the  other. 
It  is  not  at  all  unusual  for  even  what  is  considered 
as  the  same  hymn,  to  offer  perfectly  isolated  and 
independent  verses,  so  that  they  might  be  extruded 
without  injury  to  the  whole.  In  the  belief  of  the 
Hindus,  the  Vedas  were  coeval  with  creation,  and 
are  uncreated,  being  simultaneous  with  the  first 
breath  of  Brahma — the  creative  power.  This  is 
sometimes  questioned  ;  but  the  opinion  is  universal 
that   Brahma  was  their  author,  and  that  they  were 


LECTURE  I.  7 

amongst  the  first  created  things.  There  are,  how- 
ever, legends  of  their  having  been  lost ;  and  there 
is  one  account  of  their  recovery,  which  states  that 
they  were  then  taught  to  a  number  of  Brahmans  by 
a  son  of  Brahma.  This  refers,  probably,  to  the 
period  of  their  composition  by  different  Brahmans. 
They  themselves  furnish  evidence  of  their  composi- 
tion by  different  hands,  and  at  different  periods. 
Each  hymn  is  said  to  have  its  Rishi — the  sage  by 
whom  it  was  first  communicated  ;  and  these  Rishis 
comprise  a  variety  of  secular  as  well  as  religious 
individuals,  members  of  the  Kshatriya  or  military,  as 
well  as  the  Brahmanical  order,  who  are  celebrated 
at  different  aeras  in  Hindu  tradition.  It  is  also 
admitted  that  the  Vedas  existed  in  a  scattered  form 
until  the  parts  of  which  they  now  consist  were  col- 
lected and  arranged  in  their  actual  form  by  a  person 
of  very  equivocal  origin — the  son  of  Rishi,  by  the 
daughter  of  a  fisherman,  and  therefore,  properly 
speaking,  of  very  impure  caste — and  who  from  his 
arranging  the  Vedas  is  known  by  the  name  of 
Vyasa — the  arranger.  He  is  supposed  by  the  Hin- 
dus to  have  lived  about  5000  years  ago.  It  seems 
not  improbable  that  he  or  the  school  of  which  he  is 
the  reputed  founder,  flourished  about  thirteen  centu- 
ries before  the  Christian  era.  He  was  assisted  in 
his  labour,  it  is  reported,  by  various  sages,  and  it 
is  here  again  evident  that  the  composition  of  the 
Vedas  was  the  work  of  many  hands — of  a  school  or 
religious  community  which  first  reduced  the  strag- 
gling institutes  and  practices,  and  popular  prayers 
and  hymns  of  the  people,  into  a  compact  and  per- 
manent authority.  The  proceedings  of  Vyasa  and 
his  coadjutors,  and  the  formation  of  various  branches 

B  4 


8  LECTURE  I. 

from  the  main  stem,  or  of  subordinate  and  subse- 
quent from  one  primary  and  principal  school,  are 
described  by  Mr.  Colebrooke,  and  will  also  be  found 
detailed  in  the  Vishnu  Purana,^  of  which  a  transla- 
tion is  about  to  appear  from  the  press  of  the  Uni- 
versity. 

In  the  state  in  which  they  are  now  found,  the 
Vedas  are  each  distinguishable  into  two  portions — 
a  practical  and  a  speculative  :  the  one  still  forms 
the  chief  basis  of  speculative  opinion  ;  the  other  is, 
except  in  a  few  particulars,  obsolete. 

The  practical  portion  of  the  Vedas  consists  of 
little  else  than  detached  prayers  addressed  with  a 
few  exceptions  to  divinities  no  longer  worshipped, 
some  of  whom  are  even  unknown.  There  is  one 
for  instance  named  Ribhu,  of  whose  history,  office, 
or  even  name,  a  person  might  ask  in  vain,  from  one 
end  of  India  to  the  other.  The  prayers  have  con- 
sequently gone  out  of  fashion  along  with  their 
objects,  and  when  they  are  employed  they  are  used 
as  little  else  than  unmeaning  sounds,  the  language 
in  which  they  are  written  differing  much,  both  in 
words  and  construction,  from  the  Sanscrit  of  later 
writings.  In  many  parts  of  India  the  Vedas  are 
not  studied  at  all ;  and  when  they  are  studied  it  is 
merely  for  the  sake  of  repeating  the  words ;  the 
sense  is  regarded  as  a  matter  of  no  importance,  and 
is  not  understood  even  by  the  Brahman  who  recites 
or  chaunts  the  expressions.  Now  this  is  in  itself 
a  vital  departure  from  the  sacred  institutes  of  the 


<'  The  Vishnu  Purana.  A  System  of  Hindu  Mythology  and 
Tradition,  translated  from  the  original  Sanscrit.  i  vol.  4to. 
London.     Murray,      1840. 


LECTURE   I.  9 

Hindus,  by  which  the  first  portion  of  life,  the 
first  of  the  four  orders  or  stages  through  which  all 
males  of  the  three  first  castes,  the  Brahman, 
Kshatriya,  and  Vaisya,  were  peremptorily  com- 
manded to*  pass,  was  that  of  the  religious  student ; 
the  term  of  whose  studentship  was  to  be  spent  with 
a  Brahman  teacher  of  the  Vedas,  and  the  sole  object 
of  whose  studies  was  the  understanding  of  the 
Vedas.  For  a  Brahman  to  be  wholly  ignorant  of 
the  Vedas  was  a  virtual  degradation.  "  A  Brahman," 
says  Manu,  "  unlearned  in  holy  writ,  is  extinguished 
in  an  instant  like  dry  grass  on  fire."  "  A  twice  born 
man  (that  is,  a  man  of  either  of  the  three  first 
castes)  not  having  studied  the  Veda,  soon  falls,  even 
while  living,  to  the  condition  of  a  Sudra,  and  his 
descendants  after  him."  It  is  also  declared  that  a 
Brahman  derives  not  that  name  from  birth  alone, 
but  from  his  knowledge  of  the  Vedas.  According 
therefore  to  the  letter  of  the  law,  there  are  very  few 
Brahmans  now  in  India  who  have  a  right  to  the 
respect  and  privileges  which  the  designation  claims. 
The  religion  of  the  Vedas,  as  far  as  we  are 
acquainted  with  it,  differs  in  many  very  material 
points  from  that  of  the  present  day.  The  worship 
they  prescribe  is,  with  a  few  exceptions,  domestic, 
consisting  of  oblations  to  fire,  and  invocations  of  the 
deities  of  fire,  of  the  firmament,  of  the  winds,  the 
seasons,  the  moon,  the  sun  ;  who  are  invited  by  the 
sacrificer  if  a  Brahman,  or  by  his  family  priest,  if 
he  is  not  a  Brahman,  to  be  present  and  accept  the 
offering,  either  oiled  butter,  or  the  juice  of  the 
Soma,  of  a  species  of  asclepias,  which  are  poured 
upon  the  sacrificial  fire,  in  return  for  which,  they 
are  supplicated  to  confer  temporal   blessings  upon 


10  LECTURE   I. 

the  worshipper,  riches,  life,  posterity;  the  short- 
sighted vanities  of  human  desire,  which  constituted 
the  sum  of  heathen  prayer  in  all  heathen  coun- 
tries. 

The  following  is  the  second  hymn  of  the  Rig- 
Veda : 

1.  Approach,  O  Vayu  (deity  of  the  air);  be 
visible :  this  Soma  juice  has  been  prepared  for  thee ; 
approach,  drink,  hear  our  invocation. 

2.  Those  who  praise  thee,  Vayu,  celebrate  thee 
with  sacred  songs,  provided  with  store  of  Soma 
juice,  and  knowing  the  season  suitable  for  their 
oblations. 

3.  Vayu,  thy  assenting  voice  comes  to  the  sacri- 
ficer,  it  comes  to  many  through  the  offering  of  the 
libation. 

4.  Indra  and  Vayu,  this  juice  has  been  prepared  ; 
come  with  benefits  for  us ;  verily  the  libation  desires 
you. 

5.  Vayu  and  Indra,  observe  the  libations,  being 
present  in  the  offerings,  come  quickly. 

6.  Vayu  and  Indra,  mighty  men,  approach  the 
priest  of  the  sacrificer  quickly,  on  account  of  his 
prayers. 

7.  I  invoke  Mitra  (the  sun),  the  source  of  purity; 
I  invoke  Varuna,  able  to  destroy ;  both  cherishing 
earth  with  water. 

8.  Mitra  and  Varuna,  be  pleased  with  this  pro- 
pitiatory offering ;  for  to  you,  assuredly,  do  sacri- 
fices owe  their  success,  as  the  waters  do  their 
abundance. 

9.  Mitra  and  Varuna,  all  wise  divinities,  born  for 
the  benefit  of  multitudes,  and  multitudinously  pre- 
sent, give  efficacy  to  our  acts. 


LECTURE   I.  11 

The  titles  and  functions  of  the  deities  commonly 
addressed  in  these  invocations  give  to  the  religion 
of  the  Vedas  the  character  of  the  vrorship  of  the 
elements,  and  it  is  not  unlikely  that  it  was  so  in  its 
earliest  and  rudest  condition.  It  is  declared  in 
some  texts  that  the  deities  are  only  three ;  vrhose 
places  are,  the  earth,  the  middle  region,  between 
heaven  and  earth,  and  the  heaven  ;  namely,  fire, 
air,  the  sun.  Upon  this,  however,  seems  to  have 
been  grafted  some  loftier  speculation,  and  the  ele- 
ments came  to  be  regarded  as  types  and  emblems 
of  divine  power,  as  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the 
fundamental  doctrine  of  the  Vedas  is  monotheism. 
*'  There  is  in  truth,"  say  repeated  texts,  "  but  one 
deity,  the  Supreme  Spirit."  "  He  from  whom  the 
universal  world  proceeds,  who  is  the  Lord  of  the 
universe,  and  whose  work  is  the  universe,  is  the 
Supreme  Being."  Injunctions  also  repeatedly  occur 
to  worship  Him,  and  Him  only.  "  Adore  God 
alone,  know  God  alone,  give  up  all  other  dis- 
course ;"  and  the  Vedant  says,  "  It  is  found  in  the 
Vedas,  that  none  but  the  Supreme  Being  is  to  be 
worshipped,  nothing  excepting  him  should  be  adored 
by  a  wise  man." 

It  was  upon  these  and  similar  passages  that 
Rammohun  Roy  grounded  his  attempts  to  reform 
the  religion  of  his  countrymen,  to  put  down  idolatry, 
and  abolish  all  idolatrous  rites  and  festivals,  and 
substitute  the  worship  of  one  God  by  means  of 
prayer  and  thanksgiving.  His  efforts  were  not 
very  successful,  not  so  successful  as  they  might 
have  been,  had  he  confined  himself  to  their  legiti- 
mate objects ;  but  he  involved  himself  in  questions 
of  Christian   polemics  and  European  politics,  and 


12  LECTURE    I. 

intermitted  his  exertions  for  the  subversion  of  Hindu 
idolatry.  He  did  not,  however,  labour  vrholly  in 
vain ;  and  there  is  a  society  in  Calcutta,  which 
although  not  numerous  is  highly  respectable,  both 
for  station  and  talent,  which  professes  faith  in  one 
only  Supreme  God,  and  assembles  once  a  week,  on 
a  Sunday,  to  perform  divine  service,  consisting  of 
prayers,  hymns,  and  a  discourse  in  Bengali,  or  San- 
scrit, on  moral  obligations,  or  the  attributes  and 
nature  of  the  Deity.  A  leading  preacher  at  those 
meetings,  when  I  left  India,  was  a  learned  Brahman, 
who  was  professor  of  Hindu  law  in  the  Sanscrit 
college  of  Calcutta  :  and  another  influential  member, 
a  man  also  of  Brahmanical  birth,  of  good  family, 
and  of  property,  set  on  foot,  and  I  believe  still  con- 
tinue, an  English  newspaper,  called  the  Reformer, 
in  which  the  opinions  of  the  party,  not  only  on  reli- 
gion, but  on  the  measures  of  the  government  of  India, 
are  advocated,  by  natives  solely,  although  in  our 
language,  with  remarkable  boldness  and  ability. 

To  return  however  to  the  purpose  of  the  Vedas. 
It  seems  very  doubtful,  if  at  the  time  of  their  com- 
position idolatry  was  practised  in  India :  images 
of  the  deified  elements  are  even  now  unworshipped, 
and  except  images  of  the  sun,  I  am  not  aware  that 
they  are  ever  made.  The  personification  of  the 
divine  attributes  of  creation,  preservation,  and  re- 
generation, Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Siva,  originate  no 
doubt  with  the  Vedas,  but  they  are  rarely  named, 
they  are  blended  with  the  elementary  deities,  they 
enjoy  no  preeminence,  nor  are  they  ever  objects  of 
special  adoration.  There  is  no  reason,  from  the  in- 
vocations addressed  to  them  in  common  with  the 
air,  water,  the  seasons,  the  planets,  to  suppose  that 


LECTURE  I.  13 

they  were  ever  worshipped  under  visible  types. 
Ministration  to  idols  in  temples  is  held  by  ancient 
authorities  infamous ;  Manu  repeatedly  classes  the 
priest  of  a  temple  with  persons  unfit  to  be  admitted 
to  private  sacrifices,  or  to  be  associated  with  on  any 
occasion  ;  and  even  still,  the  priests  who  attend  upon 
the  images  in  public  are  considered  as  of  a  scarcely 
reputable  order  by  all  Hindus  of  learning  and  re- 
spectability. The  worship  of  images  is  declared  to  be 
an  act  of  inferior  merit  even  by  later  authorities, 
those  perhaps  with  which  it  originated,  and  it  is 
defended  only  upon  the  same  plea  which  has  been 
urged  in  other  times  and  other  countries — that  the 
vulgar  cannot  raise  their  conceptions  to  abstract 
deity,  and  require  some  perceptible  object  to  which 
their  senses  may  be  addressed.  "  Corresponding 
to  the  natures  of  different  powers  and  qualities,"  it 
is  said,  "  numerous  figures  have  been  invented  for 
the  benefit  of  those  who  are  not  possessed  of  suffi- 
cient understanding."  And  again  ;  "  The  vulgar  look 
for  their  gods  in  water ;  men  of  more  extended  know- 
ledge, in  the  celestial  bodies ;  the  ignorant,  in  wood, 
bricks,  and  stones."  It  is  almost  certain  therefore,  that 
the  practice  of  worshipping  idols  in  temples  was  not 
the  religion  of  the  Vedas. 

The  dwellinghouse  of  the  householder  was  his 
temple  :  if  qualified,  he  was  his  own  priest ;  but  this 
practice  even  among  the  Brahmans  probably  soon 
fell  into  desuetude,  as  they  more  extensively  engaged 
in  secular  avocations,  and  it  became  almost  univer- 
sally the  practice  to  retain  a  family  priest.  This  is 
still  the  custom.  Instead  of  being  however  a  Brah- 
man of  learning  and  character,  he  is  very  commonly 
illiterate,  and    not  always  respectable.     The  office 


14  LECTURE   I. 

has  also  undergone  an  important  modification.  The 
family  priest  was  formerly  also  the  Guru,  or  spi- 
ritual adviser  of  the  family.  The  priest  now  rarely 
discharges  that  function,  he  merely  conducts  the  do- 
mestic rites  ;  and  the  Guru,  to  whom  extravagant  de- 
ference, such  as  is  due  to  deity  alone,  is  paid,  is  a  very 
different  individual,  very  usually  not  a  Brahman  at  all, 
but  a  member  of  some  of  the  mendicant  orders  that 
have  sprung  up  in  comparatively  modern  times,  a 
vagrant  equally  destitute  of  knowledge,  learning, 
and  principle. 

Again ;  although  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Siva  are 
named  in  the  Vedas,  yet  it  is  very  doubtful  if  even 
the  names  of  those  incarnations  and  types  under 
which  they  are  now  exclusively  worshipped  occur. 
Rama  the  son  of  Dasaratha,  Krishna  the  son  of 
Vasudeva,  are,  it  is  believed,  unnoticed  in  authentic 
passages  of  the  Sanhita  or  collected  prayers,  and 
there  is  no  mention  of  the  latter  as  Govinda  or 
Gopala  the  infant  cowherd,  or  as  the  uncouth  and 
anomalous  Jagannath.  The  only  form  in  which 
Siva  is  now  worshipped,  the  Linga  or  Phallus,  it  is 
generally  agreed,  has  no  place  whatever  amongst  the 
types  and  emblems  of  the  mythos  of  the  Vedas.  It 
is  clear  therefore  that  the  great  body  of  the  present 
religious  practices  of  the  Hindus  are  subsequent  in 
time  and  foreign  in  tenor  to  those  that  were  en- 
joined by  the  authorities  which  they  profess  to  re- 
gard as  the  foundations  of  their  system. 

Some  parts  of  the  private  and  domestic  ceremonial 
of  the  Vedas  are  however  still  in  use,  althovigh 
mixed  up  with  much  extraneous  matter.  For  these 
I  may  again  refer  to  Mr.  Colebrooke,  who  published 
originally  in  the  fifth  and  seventh  volumes  of  the 


LECTURE   I.  15 

Asiatic  Researches  three  papers  on  the  religious 
ceremonies  of  the  Hindus  and  of  the  Brahmans 
especially.  They  are  reprinted  in  his  Essays,  and 
describe  the  constant  and  occasional  offices  of  the 
Hindus,  the  rites  to  be  performed  daily,  and  those 
appropriated  to  seasons  of  joy  or  sorrow,  those  by 
which  marriage  is  consecrated  and  death  is  solem- 
nized. 

Characteristic  features  in  these  observances — and 
they  are  common  to  all  formal  religions — are  the 
prodigal  demand  which  they  make  upon  the  time  of 
the  observer,  and  the  minuteness  of  their  inter- 
ference in  all  the  most  trivial  actions  of  his  life. 
The  Hindu  rules  compel  a  Brahman  to  get  out  of 
bed  before  daylight,  and  prescribe  how  many  times 
he  shall  rince  his  mouth,  and  with  what  sort  of  a 
brush  and  in  what  attitude  he  shall  clean  his  teeth. 
He  is  then  to  repair  to  a  river,  or  piece  of  water,  and 
bathe.  This  is  not  a  simple  ablution,  but  a  compli- 
cated business,  in  which  repeated  dippings  alternate 
with  a  variety  of  prayers,  and  a  still  greater  variety 
of  gesticulations.  The  whole  is  to  precede  the  rising 
of  the  sun,  whose  appearance  is  to  be  waited  for 
and  welcomed  with  other  gesticulations  and  other 
prayers.  The  most  celebrated  of  the  latter  is  the 
Gayatri,  held  to  be  the  holiest  verse  in  the  Vedas, 
and  personified  as  a  goddess,  the  wife  of  Brahma. 
It  is  preceded  by  a  mysterious  monosyllable,  the 
type  of  the  three  divinities,  Brahma,  Vishnu,  Siva, 
and  the  essence  of  the  Vedas — OM,  and  by  three 
scarcely  less  sacred  words,  Bhur,  Bhuvm\  Swm\ 
denoting  earth,  atmosphere,  heaven.  The  prayer  is 
merely,  "  Let  us  meditate  on  the  sacred  light  of 
that  divine  sun,  that  it  may  illuminate  our  minds." 


16  LECTURE   I. 

This  is  to  be  repeated  mentally  as  often  as  the  wor- 
shipper can  do  it  whilst  he  closes  his  mouth  and 
nostrils,  effecting  the  latter  by  rule.  It  is  the  most 
orthodox  of  the  gesticulations,  and  is  performed  by 
placing  the  two  longest  fingers  of  the  right  hand  on 
the  left  nostril,  inhaling  through  the  right,  closing 
the  right  with  the  thumb,  and  when  the  breathing 
can  no  longer  be  suspended  raising  the  fingers  and 
exhaling  by  the  left  nostril.  There  are  other  gesti- 
culations, all,  to  our  seeming,  very  absurd,  but  they 
are  not  subjects  of  ridicule,  because  they  are  se- 
riously and  reverentially  practised  by  men  of  even 
sense  and  learning.  The  excuse  made  for  them  is 
that  they  contribute  to  fix  the  attention,  and  pre- 
vent the  thoughts  from  straying.  It  cannot  be  re- 
garded as  a  very  arduous  attempt  to  shew  how  ill 
calculated  must  be  the  subject  of  an  individual's 
meditations  to  occupy  his  mind,  how  little  either  his 
understanding  or  his  feelings  can  be  interested  in 
his  devotions,  if  he  is  obliged  to  have  recourse  to 
sleight  of  hand  to  prevent  their  being  put  to  flight. 

After  his  morning  ablutions,  a  Brahman  ought 
to  devote  part  of  his  time  to  the  perusal  of  the 
Vedas.  This,  as  already  intimated,  is  never  done ; 
but  other  works — the  Puranas — may  sometimes  be 
substituted.  Then  follows  domestic  worship,  now 
idol  worship ;  for  in  most  houses  there  is  an  image 
of  the  favourite  deity  of  the  householder,  in  a  room 
or  recess  appropriated  to  its  accommodation.  And 
to  this  the  family  Brahman,  in  the  presence  of  the 
master  of  the  house,  makes  offerings,  and  addresses 
prayers^  diversifying  his  recitation  by  blowing  a 
conch-shell,  ringing  a  bell,  beating  a  drum,  waving 
lights,   or   other   unmeaning   accompaniments.     A 


LECTURE   I.  17 

considerable  portion  of  the  forenoon  is  thus  unpro- 
fitably  expended.  There  is  no  doubt  that  many 
Hindus  of  respectability  feel  these  rites  as  grievous 
burdens,  although  the  influence  of  prescription, 
example,  and  fear  of  scandal,  prevent  them  from 
casting  them  off. 

The  marriage  ceremonies  of  the  Hindus  vary 
much  with  caste  and  condition,  but  they  are  always, 
in  relation  to  the  circumstances  of  the  parties, 
troublesome  and  expensive.  It  is  very  little  the 
object  of  the  rite  to  impress  upon  the  married 
couple  any  reverence  for  the  union  so  contracted. 
Some  injunctions  are  directed  to  the  bride ;  as, 
"  Be  gentle  in  thy  aspect ;  be  loyal  to  thy  husband  ; 
be  amiable  in  thy  m.ind  ;  be  lovely  in  thy  person." 
But  no  reciprocity  of  duty  is  recommended  to  the 
bridegroom.  The  greater  number  of  the  prayers 
and  invocations  are  mythological  and  unmeaning. 
It  may  be  remarked  of  the  rite,  however,  that  it 
evidently  contemplates  responsible  persons.  The 
Vedas  then  did  not  sanction  the  marriage  of  chil- 
dren. In  fact,  it  was  impossible  for  a  man  to  marry 
before  maturity,  as  nine  years  are  specified  as  the 
shortest  term  of  his  studentship,  imtil  the  expiration 
of  which  he  was  not  allowed  to  marry.  He  did  not 
enter  his  studentship  till  he  was  seven  or  eight,  and 
therefore,  at  the  earliest,  he  could  not  have  been 
married  before  he  was  seventeen ;  an  early  age 
enough,  in  our  estimation,  but  absolute  manhood,  as 
compared  with  the  age  of  nine  or  ten,  at  which 
Hindu  boys  are,  according  to  the  present  practice, 
husbands.  There  is  no  doubt  that  many  other 
innovations  for  the  worse  have  been  made  in  the 
marriage   ritual   and   usages  of  the   Hindus.     And 


18  LECTURE   I. 

the  whole  system,  the  premature  age  at  which  the 
parties  are  married,  the  practice  of  polygamy,  and 
the  circumstances  under  which  the  alliance  is  com- 
monly contracted,  involving  the  utter  degradation 
of  the  female  sex,  is  equally  fatal  to  the  development 
of  the  moral  virtues  and  intellectual  energies  of  the 
man,  and  is  utterly  destructive  both  of  public  ad- 
vancement and  domestic  felicity. 

The  funeral  ceremonies  originate  also  in  part 
from  the  Vedas.  It  may  be  necessary  here  to 
explain  that  the  use  of  forms  and  prayers,  derived 
from  the  Vedas,  is  not  incompatible  with  the  neglect 
of  the  study  of  these  works.  The  necessity  of  an 
acquaintance  with  the  text  has  been  obviated  by 
the  compilation  of  manuals  and  breviaries,  if  they 
may  be  so  termed,  in  which  the  rules  are  laid  down, 
and  the  formulae  (whether  from  the  Vedas  or  other 
authorities)  are  inserted.  These  are  always  modern. 
The  great  authority  for  Bengal  is  a  Pundit,  who 
lived  less  than  a  century  ago,  named  Raghunandana. 
He  composed  eighteen  works  of  this  kind,  deno- 
minated Tatwas.  One  treats  of  daily  rites  ;  one  of 
weekly  or  monthly  rites  ;  one  of  marriage ;  one 
of  obsequies,  and  the  like.  These  are  the  sources, 
not  always  exempt  from  suspicion  of  unfaithfulness 
or  interpolation,  and  always  objectionable  as  con- 
founding authorities,  and  attaching  weight  to  works 
of  various  eras,  and  of  very  opposite  tendency,  by 
which  the  practices  of  the  Hindus  are  regulated. 

The  Hindus,  as  is  well  known,  burn  their  dead ; 
a  usage  recommended  by  the  peculiarities  of  climate, 
and  the  habits  of  the  people,  as  much  as  by  authority. 
The  custom  of  carrying  the  dying  to  the  banks  of 
the  Ganges,  or  some  river  considered  sacred,  has  no 


LECTURE   I.  19 

warrant  from  antiquity,  any  more  than  it  has  from 
reason  or  humanity.  The  final  commitment  of  the 
corpse  to  the  funeral  pile  is  decorously  conducted. 
The  tone  of  the  ceremony,  though  not  open  to  much 
exception,  is  cold  and  selfish.  It  offers  no  consola- 
tion from  the  future  condition  of  the  dead,  although 
it  rebukes  the  natural  emotions  of  the  living :  it 
represses  affliction  by  expatiating  upon  its  inutility ; 
it  seeks  not  to  soothe  sorrow  by  inspiring  hope. 

The  practice  of  the  Sati,  the  burning  of  the  widow 
on  her  husband's  funeral  pile,  is  now  prohibited 
in  the  territories  subject  to  the  British  govern- 
ment. Its  prohibition  was  prudently  gradual,  and 
was  facilitated  by  the  difference  of  opinion  enter- 
tained by  the  Hindus  themselves  as  to  its  obligation, 
as  well  as  by  those  natural  feelings  of  which  not  even 
superstition  can  wholly  divest  mankind.  Although 
noticed  by  the  historians  of  Alexander's  invasion, 
and  therefore  then  prevailing,  there  is  no  authority, 
it  is  believed,  for  the  practice  in  the  Vedas.  There 
is  certainly  none  even  in  the  laws  of  Manu. 

A  peculiar  feature  in  the  funeral  ceremonies  of 
the  Hindus  is  the  performance  of  the  Sraddha : 
periodical  offerings  of  cakes,  of  flesh,  or  other  viands, 
and  libations  of  water,  to  the  manes.  These  are  in- 
cumbent on  every  householder,  and  are  presented  on 
a  variety  of  occasions.  They  are  offered  in  the 
first  instance  to  such  of  his  own  ancestors  as  are 
deceased,  and  then  to  the  general  body  of  the  pro- 
genitors of  mankind,  to  the  collective  Pitris,  or 
Patres  of  the  human  race.  When  a  person  dies,  the 
nearest  of  kin  presents  an  obsequial  oblation  to  his 
ghost  daily,  for  ten  days,  and  again  at  stated  inter- 
vals for  a  twelvemonth.     A  ceremony  is  then  per- 

c  2 


20  LECTURE   I. 

formed  by  which  the  spirit  of  the  defunct  is  supposed 
to  be  associated  with  the  Pitris,  and  to  take  his 
place  in  their  sphere  or  heaven.  On  every  anniver- 
sary of  his  demise  the  rite  is  repeated.  These 
Sraddhas  are  imperative,  but  the  Pitris  should  be 
worshipped  once  every  fortnight  at  least ;  and 
offerings  should  be  made  to  them  on  every  occasion 
of  private  or  public  festivity,  and  whenever  a 
householder  is  desirous  of  acknowledging  or  solicit- 
ing any  temporal  good.  The  character,  offices,  and 
situation  of  the  Pitris  formed,  no  doubt,  part  of  the 
ancient  system,  and  various  appellations  and  func- 
tions are  ascribed  to  them  in  the  laws  of  Manu,  and 
in  some  of  the  Puranas.  The  subject  is  little  con- 
sidered or  understood  in  the  present  day.  The 
inefficacy  of  all  such  ceremonies  has  not  escaped  the 
satire  of  some  of  the  Hindus  themselves  ;  and  it 
would  not  be  difficult  to  shew  that  their  object  is 
incompatible  with  the  condition  of  the  soul  after 
death,  as  it  is  more  commonly  represented  by  their 
own  authorities. 

These  are  some  of  the  practices  of  the  domestic 
worship  of  the  Hindus,  which,  although  very  ma- 
terially modified,  are  no  doubt  referable  to  their 
original  institutes.  The  public  worship  of  the 
Hindus  has,  unquestionably,  undergone  still  greater 
change. 

The  system  of  the  universe  and  the  theory  of 
creation  as  universally  received  by  the  Hindus,  no 
doubt  originated  with  the  Vedas,  and  consequently 
the  three  great  divinities  of  their  mythology,  Brahma, 
Vishnu,  and  Siva,  must  have  been  devised  about  the 
same  time,  as  they  are  nothing  more  than  the  per- 
sonified attributes  of  the  Supreme  Being  in  action, 


LECTURE  I.  n 

or  his  powers  to  create,  preserve,  and  destroy,  or, 
rather,  regenerate — manifested.  Brahma  is  the 
creator,  Vishnu  the  preserver,  Siva  the  regene- 
rator. Their  invention  vras  probably  at  first  little 
more  than  a  metaphor,  a  personification,  or  allegory. 
It  has  been  mentioned,  that  little  beyond  their 
names  appears  in  the  Vedas  regarding  them,  and  it 
is  doubtful  how  far  any  definite  figures,  any  images 
of  them,  any  temples  for  them,  any  worship  of 
them,  formed  part  of  the  ancient  religion. 
It  is  doubtful  if  Brahma  was  ever  worshipped. 
Indications  of  a  local  adoration  of  him  at  Pushkara, 
near  Ajmir,  are  found  in  one  Purana,  the  Brahma 
Purana,  but  in  no  other  part  of  India  is  there  the 
slightest  vestige  of  his  worship.  Of  Siva,  it  is  also 
to  be  remarked,  that  he  receives  worship  under  one 
form  alone^ — that  of  the  Linga  or  Phallus,  of  which, 
as  before  observed,  no  notice  occurs  in  the  Vedas. 
Some  of  the  continental  mythologists,  therefore, 
have  been  egregiously  mistaken  in  asserting  that 
the  primitive  worship  of  India  was  that  of  the 
phallic  emblem  of  Siva.  When  this  type  was  intro- 
duced is  uncertain  :  it  was,  probably,  prior  to  the 
Christian  era.  The  worship  was  in  its  most 
flourishing  state  at  the  date  of  the  first  Moham- 
medan invasion,  the  end  of  the  tenth  century,  when 
twelve  celebrated  Lingas  were  enshrined  in  as  many 
of  the  capital  cities  of  India.  Somnath  was  one  of 
them,  the  destruction  of  whose  temple  by  Mahmood, 
of  Ghizni,  is  narrated  by  Gibbon.  The  worship  of 
the  Linga  is  now  in  a  somewhat  dubious  condition 
in  different  parts  of  India.  In  the  south,  it  gives  a 
name  and  a  principle  of  combination  to  a  particular 
sect — the  Jangamas  or  Lingayits,  whose  chief  priests 

c  3 


22  LECTURE   I. 

are  Pariahs,  outcasts, — although  the  votaries  include 
Brahmans,  and  Brahmans  are  in  some  of  the  temples 
ministering  priests  under  a  Pariah  pontiff.  In 
Bengal,  although  the  temples  are  numerous,  they 
are  ordinarily  mean  and  are  little  frequented,  and 
the  worship  is  recommended  to  the  people  by  no 
circumstances  of  popular  attraction.  It  has  no  hold 
upon  their  affections,  it  is  not  interwoven  with  their 
amusements,  nor  must  it  be  imagined  that  it  offers 
any  stimulus  to  impure  passions.  The  emblem — 
a  plain  column  of  stone,  or,  sometimes,  a  cone  of 
plastic  mud — suggests  no  offensive  ideas  ;  the  people 
call  it  Siva,  or  Mahadeva,  and  there's  an  end.  They 
leave  to  Europeans  speculations  as  to  its  symbolical 
purport.  It  is  enough  for  them  that  it  is  an  image,  to 
which  they  make  a  prostration  or  to  which  they 
cast  a  few  flowers.  There  are  no  secret  rites,  no 
mysterious  orgies  celebrated  in  its  honour. 

Vishnu,  the  preserving  power,  is  a  much  more 
popular  divinity,  not  in  his  own  person,  however, 
but  in  some  of  his  Avataras — descents  or  incarna- 
tions, especially  as  Rama  or  Krishna.  I  have 
already  stated  that  it  is  very  doubtful  if  these  incar- 
nations are  adverted  to  in  the  Vedas,  at  least  in  the 
text.  They  are  mentioned  in  some  of  the  Upanish- 
ads,  supplementary  treatises  of  the  Vedas,  but  these 
compositions  are  evidently  from  their  style  of  later 
date  than  the  Vedas,  and  some  of  them,  especially 
those  referring  to  Rama  and  Krishna,  are  of  very 
questionable  authenticity. 

The  history  of  these  two  incarnations  of  Vishnu, 
Rama  and  Krishna,  gives  to  the  adoration  paid 
to  them  every  appearance  of  Hero  worship.  They 
were  both   of  royal   descent,  and   were   both  born 


LECTURE  I.  23 

on  earth  like  true  knights-errant  to  destroy  fiends, 
giants,  and  enchanters,  and  rescue  hapless  maids 
and  matrons  from  captivity  and  violence.  Poetry 
exaggerated  their  exploits  and  mythology  deified 
the  performers.  The  story  of  Rama  is  told  in 
the  mytho-heroic  poem,  entitled  the  Ramayana, 
of  the  first  two  books  of  which  a  translation  in 
very  choice  Latin,  by  the  celebrated  A.  Von 
Schlegel,  has  been  published.  No  fault  is  to  be 
found  with  the  character  of  Rama  as  a  hero,  except 
the  impossibility  of  his  feats  ;  but  he  is  described  as 
a  dutiful  son,  an  affectionate  husband,  an  intrepid 
warrior,  and  a  patriotic  prince.  His  wife,  Sita,  is 
a  model  of  a  wife, — gentle,  devoted,  enduring,  and 
obedient.  The  worst  that  can  be  said  of  either  is, 
that  their  poetic  celebrity  has  been  abused,  and  has 
given  rise  to  sects  of  votaries,  who  think  that  the 
repetition  of  their  names  is  a  sufficient  substitute 
for  all  moral  and  religious  merit.  Most  of  the 
mendicant  orders  choose  Rama  for  their  patron. 

The  worship  of  Krishna  may  be  traced  to  the 
other  of  the  two  great  mytho-heroic  poems  of  the 
Hindus,  the  Mahabharata.  In  the  accounts  there 
given  of  him  there  is  more  of  mysticism  than  in  the 
story  of  Rama ;  but  even  there  he  does  not  appear 
under  the  character  in  which  he  is  most  popular, 
that  of  the  infant  Gopala,  the  boy  Cowherd,  and 
the  juvenile  lover  of  Radha.  It  is  in  these  capaci- 
ties that  he  is  now  most  extensively  worshipped  ; 
and  they  are  no  doubt  fictions  of  comparatively 
modern  invention.  Vishnu  was  born  as  Krishna  for 
the  destruction  of  Kansa,  an  oppressive  monarch, 
and,  in  fact,  an  incarnate  Daitya  or  Titan,  the  na- 
tural enemy  of  the  gods.     Kansa  being  forewarned 

c  4 


24  LECTURE  I. 

of  his  fate  seeks  to  anticipate  his  destroyer  ;  but 
Krishna  is  conveyed  secretly  away  from  Mathura, 
the  capital  of  Kansa,  and  is  brought  up  as  the  child 
of  a  cowherd  at  Vrindavan,  a  pastoral  district  near 
Mathura.  It  is  whilst  thus  circumstanced  that  he 
has  been  exalted  into  an  object  of  adoration,  and  the 
mischievous  follies  of  the  child,  the  boy,  and  the 
lad,  are  the  subject  of  popular  delight  and  wonder. 
His  male  companions  are  not  very  prominent  in  the 
tale  of  his  youth ;  but  the  females,  the  deified  dairy- 
maids, play  a  more  important  part  in  the  drama. 
Amongst  the  most  conspicuous  is  the  one  I  have 
named,  Radha ;  and  she  receives  scarcely  less  uni- 
versal homage  than  Krishna  himself.  The  adora- 
tion of  the  forms  of  Siva  or  Vishnu  is  advocated 
not  upon  the  original  principle,  that  worship 
addressed  to  them  is  virtually  addressed  to  the 
Supreme,  they  being  merely  representations  of  his 
power,  but  upon  the  novel  doctrine,  that  one  or 
other  of  them  is  himself  the  Supreme ;  and  not 
only  this,  but  in  the  true  spirit  of  pantheism  that 
he  is  all  things.  This  is  asserted  of  Siva  by  the 
Saivas  ;  of  Vishnu,  by  the  Vaishnavas.  This  notion, 
which  is  very  widely  disseminated,  seems  to  have 
originated  with  the  next  great  class  of  the  sacred 
writings  of  the  Hindus,  the  Puranas. 

The  Puranas  are  eighteen  in  number :  some  of 
them  are  voluminous  compositions.  It  is  said  that 
they  were  the  work  of  the  same  Vyasa  by  whom  the 
Vedas  were  arranged,  and  they  are  held  in  almost 
equal  estimation.  According  to  a  definition  fur- 
nished by  many  of  them,  a  Purana  should  treat  of 
five  topics — primary  creation,  secondary  creation, 
the  families    of  the    patriarchs,  the  reigns   of  the 


LECTURE  I.  25 

Menus,  and  the  dynasties  of  kings.  The  actual 
Puranas  conform  in  no  one  instance  to  this  defini- 
tion :  the  authors  are  often  declared  to  be  others 
than  Vyasa,  and  they  offer  many  internal  proofs 
that  they  are  the  work  of  various  hands,  and  of 
different  dates,  none  of  which  are  of  very  high 
antiquity.  I  believe  the  oldest  of  them  not  to  be 
anterior  to  the  eighth  or  ninth  century  ;  and  the 
most  recent  to  be  not  above  three  or  four  centuries 
old.  In  the  present  state  of  Hindu  belief  the 
Puranas  exercise  a  very  general  influence.  Some 
of  them,  or  portions  of  them,  are  publicly  read  and 
expounded  by  Brahmans  to  all  classes  of  people. 
Most  Brahmans  who  pretend  to  scholarship  are 
acquainted  with  two  or  more  of  them,  and  parti- 
cular sections,  as  the  Devi  Mahatmya  are  amongst 
the  most  popular  works  in  the  Sanscrit  language. 
Prayers  from  them  have  been  copiously  introduced 
into  all  the  breviaries ;  observances  of  feasts  and 
fasts  are  regulated  by  them ;  temples,  and  towns, 
and  mountains,  and  rivers,  to  which  pilgrimages 
are  made,  owe  their  sanctity  to  legends  for  which 
the  Puranas  or  the  Mahatmyas,  works  asserted, 
often  untruly,  to  be  sections  of  them,  are  the  only  au- 
thorities ;  and  texts  quoted  from  them  have  validity 
in  civil  as  well  as  religious  law.  The  determination 
of  their  modern  and  unauthenticated  composition 
deprives  them  of  the  sacred  character  which  they 
have  usurped,  destroys  their  credit,  impairs  their 
influence,  and  strikes  away  the  main  prop,  on 
which,  at  present,  the  great  mass  of  Hindu  idolatry 
and  superstition  relies.  That  the  Puranas  represent  in 
many  instances  an  older,  and  probably  a  primitive 
scheme  of  Hinduism,  is  no  doubt  true :   they  have 


26  LECTURE  I. 

preserved  many  ancient  legends ;  they  have  handed 
down  all  that  the  Hindus  have  of  traditional  his- 
tory, and  they  furnish  authoritative  views   of   the 
essential  institutions  of  the  Hindus,  both   in  their 
social  and  religious  organisation.    But  in  their  deci- 
dedly sectarial  character,  in  their  uncompromising 
advocacy  of  the  pre-eminence  of  some  one  deity,  or  of 
some  one  of  his  manifestations,  in  the  boldness  with 
which  they  assert  his  pantheistic  presence,  in  the 
importance  they  attach    to    particular  observances, 
as  fasting  on  the  8th,  11th,  and  14th  days  of  each 
half  month,  in  the  holiness  with  which  they  invest 
particular  localities,  in  the  tone  and  spirit  of  their 
prayers  and  hymns,  and  in  the  numerous,  and  almost 
always  frivolous,  and  insipid,  and  immoral  legends, 
which  tliey  have  grafted    upon  the  more  fanciful, 
dignified,  and    significant  inventions  of  antiquity; 
they  betray  most  glaringly  the  purposes  for  which 
they  were  composed,  the    dissemination  of  new  ar- 
ticles   of   faith,    the    currency  of   new  gods.    The 
Hindus  are   not  much  disposed  to  scrutinise  with 
critical  suspicion  the  history  of  a  composition  re- 
puted sacred  ;   yet  even  they  have  been  unable  to 
avoid  a  controversy  amongst  themselves  respecting 
the    authenticity  of  the   most    popular    of  all    the 
Puranas,  the  Bhagavata  ;  and  many  learned  Brah- 
mans  maintain  that  it  is  the  work  of  an  uninspired 
writer,  a  celebrated  grammarian,  named  Vopadeva, 
who  flourished    in  the  twelfth    century.      This   is 
strenuously  denied    by  those  with  whom  it  is  the 
text-book  for  their  worship  of  the  infant  Krishna; 
but  there  is  no  doubt  of  the  fact.     There  is  equally 
little  doubt  that  another  of  these  works,  the  Brahma 
Vaivarta  Purana,  is  still  more  modern.     It  is  dedi- 


LECTURE   I.  27 

cated  in  great  part  to  the  juvenile  Krishna,  and  his 
favourite  mistress,  Radha  ;  and  although  the  wor- 
ship of  Radha  is  now  so  exceedingly  popular,  parti- 
cularly in  western  Hindustan,  yet  her  person,  and 
even  her  name,  are  unknown  to  all  the  other 
Puranas,  to  the  heroic  poems,  and  even  to  the 
popular  literature  of  the  Hindus,  to  the  plays, 
poems,  and  tales  which  are  not  compositions  of 
the  last  three  or  four  centuries. 

It  would  occupy  too  much  time  to  enter  into  any 
further  details  upon  this  subject.  The  grounds 
upon  which  the  opinions  intimated  have  been  formed 
may  be  found  in  anal3^tical  descriptions  of  the  con- 
tents of  several  of  the  most  popular  of  the  Puranas 
which  have  been  published  in  the  Journals  of  the 
Asiatic  Societies  of  Bengal  and  Great  Britain,  and 
in  the  preface  to  the  Vishnu  Purana  to  which  I  have 
previously  referred  ^. 

There  seems  good  reason  to  believe  that  the 
Puranas  in  their  present  form  accompanied  or  suc- 
ceeded a  period  of  considerable  religious  ferment  in 
India,  and  were  designed  to  uphold  and  extend  the 
doctrines  of  rival  sects,  which  then  disputed  the 
exclusive  direction  of  the  faith  of  the  Hindus.  It 
began  perhaps  in  the  third  or  fourth  century  of 
our  aera,  having  for  its  object  the  extermination 
of  the  Buddhists,  who  in  consequence  were  driven 
out  of  India  to  Siam,  Java,  China  and  Tibet. 
When  the  Buddhists,  whom  all  parties  considered 

'^  Analysis  of  the  Agni  Purana  :  Jour.  As.  Soc.  of  Bengal, 
vol.  I.  p.  81  ;  of  the  Brahma  Vaivartta  P.  ib.  p.  217  ;  of  the 
Vishnu  P.  ib.  p.  431  ;  of  the  Vayu  P.  535  ;  of  the  Brahma  P. 
Jour.  Royal  As.  Soc.  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  V.  p.6i  ;  of  the  Padma 
P.  ib.  p.  280. 


^8  LECTURE   I. 

heterodox    were    expelled,   their  enemies    began   to 
quarrel  amongst  themselves,  and  in  the  eighth  or 
ninth  century  a  reformer  named  Sankara  Acharya 
is  celebrated   for  having  refuted  and  suppressed  a 
variety  of  unorthodox  professors,  and  established  the 
preferential  worship  of  Siva.     He  instituted  in  sup- 
port of  his  doctrines  an  order  of  mendicants  which 
still  subsists,  and  he  is  in  an  especial  manner  re- 
garded as  the  founder  of  a  system  of  belief  adhered 
to   by  Brahmans   of   learning,   particularly  in   the 
south  of  India.     The  triumph  that  he  obtained  for 
the  deity  he  patronized  did  not  long  survive  him. 
Early  in  the  eleventh  century,  Ramanuja  a  follower 
of  Vishnu,  undertook  to  depose  Siva  and  set  up  his 
own  divinity,  not  only  in  the  belief  of  the  people, 
but  in  the  more  substantial  benefits  of  temples  and 
endowments.  Tradition  records,  that  the  great  temple 
of  Triveni,  one  of  the  largest  and  richest  in  the  Penin- 
sula, now  dedicated  to  Vishnu,  was  wrested  from 
the  rival  votaries  of  Siva  by  Ramanuja  and  his  fol- 
lowers.    The  ascendency  of  the  Vaishnavas  was  not 
undisputed  in  the  south,  and  a  new  sect  of  Saivas, 
to  whom  I  have  alluded,  the  Lingayits,  sprang  up 
in  opposition  to  them. :   the  contest  was  carried  on 
with  popular  violence,  and  in  one  of  the  disturbances 
that  ensued,  the  Raja  of  Kalyan-pur  was  killed  and 
his  capital  destroyed.     The  Mohammedan  invasion 
of  the  south  crushed   both  the  contending  parties, 
and  the  predominance  of  the  same  power  in  Upper 
India  prevented  the  like  violence  of  collision.     The 
Vaishnavas  there  spread  with  little  resistance  under 
the  followers  of  Ramanand,  a  disciple  of  Ramanuja, 
to  whom,  or  to  whose  pupils,  the  greater  proportion 
of  the   mendicant  orders   in   Hindustan   owe  their 


LECTURE  I.  29 

origin,  and  under  two  Brahmanical  families,  one  in 
the  west  sprung  from  a  teacher  named  Vallabha, 
who  established  themselves  as  hereditary  priests  of 
the  juvenile  Krishna,  and  one  in  Bengal  and  Orissa 
descended  from  Nityanand  and  Adwaitanand,two  dis- 
ciples of  Chaitanya,  a  teacher,  with  whom  the  popu- 
larity of  the  worship  of  Jagannath  originated.  A 
particular  description  of  all  the  different  divisions 
of  the  poj)ular  religion  of  the  Hindus  may  be  found 
in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  volumes  of  the 
Asiatic  Researches^. 

These  different  orders  and  families  are  now  almost 
exclusively  the  spiritual  directors  of  the  people.  Some 
of  them  are  rich  and  of  Brahmanical  descent ;  some 
are  poor  and  composed  of  persons  of  all  castes. 
They  are  almost  all,  whether  rich  or  poor,  illiterate 
and  profligate.  Such  literature  as  they  occasionally 
cultivate— and  it  is  one  of  the  means  by  which  they 
act  upon  the  people — is  vernacular  literature,  compo- 
sitions in  the  spoken  languages.  These  are  mostly 
songs  and  hymns  addressed  to  Vishnu,  Krishna  or 
Radha,  tales  and  legends  of  individuals  celebrated 
amongst  them  as  saints,  always  marvellous,  mostly 
absurd,  and  not  unfrequently  immoral,  and  vague 
and  dogmatical  expositions  of  elements  of  belief, 
which  although  in  some  degree  discoverable  in  the 
Puranas,  have  assumed  a  novel  and  portentous  pro- 
minence in  the  doctrines  of  the  Vaishnava  teachers 
and  the  practices  of  the  people.  These  elements 
are  passionate  devotion  and  all-sufficient  faith. 

Whatever  may  have  been  the  mistaken  veneration 
entertained  by  the  early  Hindus  for  personified  ele- 

^  Sketch  of  the  Religious  Sects  of  the  Hindus,  As.  Res. 
vol.  XVI.  p.  I.  and  XVII.  p.  169. 


so  LECTURE   I. 

merits  and   attributes,  or  even   for  deified  mortals, 
the  language  of  invocation  and  prayer,  though  re- 
verential, is  calm  and  unirapassioned.     The  hymns 
of  modern  fanatics  are  composed  in  a  very  different 
strain,  and  breathe  a  glowing  fervour  of  devotion 
which  might  almost  be  mistaken  for  sensual  love. 
Something  of  this  may  have  been  borrowed  from  the 
Mohammedans,  amongst  whom  the  Sufis  have  always 
employed  the  language  of  earthly  rapture,   to  de- 
scribe the  yearnings  of  the  human  soul,  to   be  re- 
vmited  with  that  divine  spirit  from  which  it  is  sup- 
posed to  have  originally  proceeded.     "  Oh  !  the  bliss 
of  that  day,"  says  a  Persian  mystic,  "  when  I  shall 
depart  from  this  desolate  mansion,  shall  seek  rest 
for  my  soul,  and  shall  follow  the  traces  of  my  be- 
loved." They  possibly  derived  their  notions  from  one 
branch  of  the  Hindu  philosophy,  the  Vedanta ;  but 
they  pursued  the  figure  until  they  had  converted  it 
into  a  gross  deformity,  and  furnished  a  model  adapted 
to  the  ardent  imagination  of  irrational  enthusiasm. 
A  remarkable  specimen  of  this  style  has  been  given 
to   English   readers   by  sir   William    Jones,  in  his 
translation  of  the   songs  of  Jayadeva ;    where,  al- 
though  to  the  uninitiated,   the   hero    and    heroine 
appear  to  be  actuated  by  human  passions  alone,  yet 
the   initiated   find   in   the   fervent   desires   and  jea- 
lous  tortures    of  Radha,   the   anxieties,  the  hopes, 
the    fears,  the   longings   of   the   soul ;    and    in   the 
steady,  though  sometimes  seemingly  inconstant  love 
of  Krishna,  the  affection  which  the  Supreme  Being 
bears  amidst  all  his  misgivings  and  fallings  off  to 
man.     As  a  brief  and  inoffensive  specimen  of  this 
kind  of  composition,  I  will  quote  a  fev/  stanzas  at- 
tributed   to   a  lady   named   Mira   Bai,    princess   of 


LECTURE  I.  31 

Jaypur,  and  one  of  the  Sadhwis,  or  female  saints  of 
the  Vaishnavas,  addressed  to  Krishna  as  Rana-chhor, 
a  curious  title  to  have  been  given  him,  as  it  means 
the  coward,  the  runavray  from  battle. 

"  O  sovereign  Rana-chhor,  give  me  to  make 
Dwaraka  my  perpetual  abode.  Dispel  with  thy 
shell,  discus,  and  mace,  the  fear  of  Yama  (the  deity 
of  death).  Eternal  rest  is  pilgrimage  to  thy  sacred 
shrines.  Supreme  delight  is  the  sound  of  thy  shell, 
the  clash  of  thy  cymbals.  I  have  abandoned  my 
love,  my  possessions,  my  principality,  my  husband. 
Mira  thy  servant  comes  to  thee  for  refuge — O  take 
her  wholly  to  thee.  Lord  of  Mira,  Girdhara  her 
beloved,  accept  her,  and  never  let  her  more  be  sepa- 
rate from  thee."  Upon  which,  says  the  legend,  the 
image  opened — Mira  leaped  into  the  fissure — it 
closed — and  the  princess  disappeared  for  ever. 

The  other  principle  which  I  have  specified,  and 
which  is  closely  allied  with  the  preceding,  is  the  ab- 
solute sufficiency  of  faith  alone,  wholly  independent 
of  conduct,  to  insure  salvation.  This  doctrine  is 
carried  to  the  very  utmost  of  that  abuse  of  which 
it  is  susceptible.  Entire  dependence  upon  Krishna, 
or  any  other  favourite  deity,  not  only  obviates  the 
necessity  of  virtue,  but  it  sanctifies  vice.  Conduct 
is  wholly  immaterial.  It  matters  not  how  atrocious 
a  sinner  a  man  may  be,  if  he  paints  his  face,  his 
breast,  his  arms,  with  certain  sectarial  marks ;  or, 
which  is  better,  if  he  brands  his  skin  permanently 
with  them  with  a  hot  iron  stamp;  if  he  is  constantly 
chaimting  hymns  in  honour  of  Vishnu  ;  or,  what  is 
equally  efficacious,  if  he  spends  hours  in  the  simple 
reiteration  of  his  name  or  names ;  if  he  die  with 
the  word  Hari  or   Rama  or  Krishna  on  his  lips. 


32  LECTURE  I. 

and  the  thought  of  him  in  his  mind,  he  may  have 
lived  a  monster  of  iniquity — he  is  certain  of  heaven. 

Now  these  doctrines  and  practices,  however  popu- 
lar with  the  multitude,  and  although  traceable  to 
authorities  held  in  high  estimation,  are  not  looked 
upon,  it  may  be  easily  imagined,  by  Brahmans  of 
learning,  with  any  profound  deference.  Their  ten- 
dency is  in  a  great  degree  to  supersede  all  ritual, 
whether  of  the  Vedas  or  Puranas,  and  to  divest  the 
authorized  expounders  of  those  works  of  all  influence 
and  control  over  the  acts  and  thoughts  of  the 
people.  They  will  therefore  not  be  indisposed  to 
acknowledge  that  the  objects  of  this  fervour  of  devo- 
tion are  wholly  unworthy  of  it,  and  that  its  inculca- 
tion is  calculated  to  destroy  all  moral  and  religious 
principle. 

Whilst  most  of  the  existing  sects  have  thus  out- 
raged even  Hinduism,  it  is  consolatory  to  find  that 
a  few  have  taken  a  different  direction ;  and  although 
they  have  stopped  short  of  the  truth,  they  have  dis- 
played a  disposition  to  seek  it  which  may  turn  to 
good  account.  There  are  several  sects  that  have 
abandoned  all  worship  of  idols,  that  deny  the  effi- 
cacy of  faith  in  any  of  the  popular  divinities,  and 
question  the  reasonableness  of  many  of  the  existing 
institutions  :  they  substitute  a  moral  for  a  cere- 
monial code,  and  address  their  prayers  to  one  only 
God.  These  sects  are  not  numerous,  but  they  are 
in  general  respectable.  Such  however  is  the  want 
which  is  felt  by  the  Indian  mind  of  something  tan- 
gible on  which  to  lean,  that  they  have  mostly  lapsed 
into  something  very  like  an  idolatrous  worship  of 
their  founder.  Still  they  prove  that  the  people  are 
not  all  satisfied  with  the  superstitions  of  their  fore- 


LECTURE  I.  S3 

fathers,  and  that  some  among  them  are  inclined  to 
inquire,  and  think,  and  determine  for  themselves. 
That  they  offer  a  favourable  soil  in  which  to  implant 
the  seeds  of  Christianity  has  been  lately  shewn  by 
the  conversion  of  the  inhabitants  of  several  villages 
in  the  vicinity  of  Krisbnagur,  who  had  for  some 
time  past  seceded  from  the  prevailing  practices,  and 
under  teachers  of  their  own  had  adopted  a  theistical 
belief. 

There  is  still  another  and  a  very  important  divi- 
sion of  the  Hindu  religion  to  be  noticed,  so  far  is  it 
from  being  a  consistent  and  homogeneous  system. 
The  history  of  this  is  very  obscure,  and  the  origin 
of  the  authorities  on  which  it  rests  is  unknown. 
Tradition  is  silent  as  to  the  authors  of  the  Tantras — 
they  are  mythologically  ascribed  to  Siva,  and  are 
generally  in  the  form  of  a  colloquy  between  him  and 
his  wife  Parvati.  They  are  very  numerous,  and 
some  are  of  considerable  volume  ;  but  they  are  not  in- 
cluded in  any  of  the  ordinary  enumerations  of  Hindu 
literature,  and  were,  no  doubt,  composed  after  that 
literature  was  complete  in  all  its  parts.  They  are 
specified  in  some  of  the  Puranas,  to  which  they  must 
be  therefore  anterior.  They  have  been  but  little 
examined  by  European  scholars,  but  sufficient  has 
been  ascertained  to  warant  the  accusation  that  they 
are  authorities  for  all  that  is  most  abominable  in  the 
present  state  of  the  Hindu  religion. 

The  great  feature  of  the  religion  taught  by  the 
Tantras  is  the  worship  of  Sakti — Divine  power  per- 
sonified as  a  female,  and  individualized,  not  only  in 
the  goddesses  of  mythology,  but  in  every  woman  ; 
to  whom,  therefore,  in  her  own  person  religious 
worship  may  be  and  is  occasionally  addressed.    The 

D 


34  LECTURE  I. 

chief  objects  of  adoration,  however,  are  the  manifold 
forms  of  the  bride  of  Siva ;  Parvati,  Uma,  Diirga, 
Kali,  Syama, Vindhya-vasini,  Jaganmata,  and  others. 
Besides  the  usual  practices  of  offerings,  oblations, 
hymns,  invocations,  the  ritual  comprises  many  mys- 
tical ceremonies  and  accompaniments,  gesticulations 
and  diagrams,  and  the  use  in  the  commencement 
and  close  of  the  prayers  of  various  monosyllabic 
ejaculations  of  imagined  mysterious  import.  Even 
in  its  least  exceptionable  division  it  comprehends 
the  performance  of  magical  ceremonies  and  rites, 
intended  to  obtain  superhuman  powers,  and  a  com- 
mand over  the  spirits  of  heaven,  earth,  and  hell. 
The  popular  division  is,  however,  called  by  the 
Hindus  themselves  the  left-hand  Sakta-faith.  It  is 
to  this  that  the  bloody  sacrifices  offered  to  Kali  must 
be  imputed ;  and  that  all  the  barbarities  and  inde- 
cencies perpetrated  at  the  Durga  Puja,  the  annual 
worship  of  Durga,  and  the  Churuk  Puja,  the  swing- 
ing festival,  are  to  be  ascribed.  There  are  other 
atrocities  which  do  not  meet  the  public  eye.  This 
is  not  an  unfounded  accusation,  not  a  controversial 
calumny.  We  have  the  books — we  can  read  the 
texts — some  of  them  are  in  print,  veiled  necessarily 
in  the  obscurity  of  the  original  language,  but  incon- 
trovertible witnesses  of  the  veracity  of  the  charge. 
Of  course  no  respectable  Hindu  will  admit  that  he 
is  a  Vamachari,  a  follower  of  the  left-hand  ritual,  or 
that  he  is  a  member  of  a  society  in  which  meat  is 
eaten,  wine  is  drunk,  and  abominations  not  to  be 
named  are  practised.  The  imputation  will  be  in- 
dignantly denied,  although,  if  the  Tantras  be  be- 
lieved, "  many  a  man  who  calls  himself  a  Saiva,  or  a 
Vaishnava,  is  secretly  a  Sakta,  and  a  brother  of  the 


LECTURE   I.  35 

left-hand  fraternity."  But  what  can  any  Hindu  of 
reason  and  right  feeling  say  in  vindication  of  a 
system  which  has  suffered  such  enormities  to  be 
grafted  upon  it,  which  could  afford  any  plea,  any 
suggestion,  any  opening  for  abuses  of  which  he  ad- 
mits, when  he  dares  not  avow  them  in  his  own 
case,  the  shame  and  the  sin  ? 

For  further  information  on  this  subject,  I  must 
once  more  refer  you  to  the  l6th  and  17th  volumes 
of  the  Asiatic  Researches. 

From  the  survey  which  has  thus  been  submitted 
to  you,  you  will  perceive  that  the  practical  religion 
of  the  Hindus  is  by  no  means  a  concentrated  and 
compact  system,  but  a  heterogeneous  compound, 
made  up  of  various  and  not  unfrequently  incom- 
patible ingredients,  and  that  to  a  few  ancient  frag- 
ments it  has  made  large  and  unauthorized  addi- 
tions, most  of  which  are  of  an  exceedingly  mis- 
chievous and  disgraceful  nature.  It  is,  however,  of 
little  avail  yet  to  attempt  to  undeceive  the  multi- 
tude ;  their  superstition  is  based  upon  ignorance, 
and  until  the  foundation  is  taken  away,  the  super- 
structure, however  crazy  and  rotten,  will  hold 
together.  By  what  means  this  object  may  be  best 
accomplished,  admits  of  difference  of  opinion ;  but 
there  can  be  no  disagreement  as  to  the  general  con- 
clusion, that  all  means  which  hold  out  promise  of 
success,  which  are  honest,  rational,  and  benevolent, 
should  be  tried,  as  far  as  may  be  consistent  with  the 
most  scrupulous  regard  for  the  obligations  of  our 
political  position  in  India,  upon  the  permanence 
and  integrity  of  which  depends  every  hope  of  ulti- 
mate success. 

The  means  suggested  by  the  plan  submitted  to 
D  2 


36  LECTURE   I. 

the  University,  are  in  every  respect  unexceptionable  : 
yon  are  invited  to  employ  knowledge  and  argument, 
in  endeavouring  to  convince  intelligent  and  learned 
Hindus  of  the  defects  and  errors  of  their  religion. 
This  is  probably  not  difficult  of  accomplishment  to 
a  certain  extent ;  many,  perhaps  most  educated 
Hindus,  contemplate  with  indifference  or  contempt, 
the  practices  and  belief  of  the  majority  of  their 
countrymen.  There  are,  however,  obstacles  of  some 
magnitude  to  be  overcome,  before  conviction  can  be 
hoped  for. 

The  whole  tendency  of  Brahmanical  education  is 
to  enforce  dependence  upon  authority.  In  the  first 
instance  upon  the  Guru,  in  the  next  upon  the 
books.  A  learned  Brahman  trusts  solely  to  his 
learning ;  he  never  ventures  upon  independent 
thought ;  he  appeals  to  memory ;  he  quotes  texts 
without  measure,  and  in  vmquestioning  trust.  It 
will  be  difficult  to  persuade  him  that  the  Vedas  are 
human  and  very  ordinary  writings,  that  the  Pu- 
ranas  are  modern  and  unauthentic,  or  even  that  the 
Tantras  are  not  entitled  to  respect.  As  long  as  he 
opposes  authority  to  reason,  and  stifles  the  workings 
of  conviction  by  the  dicta  of  a  reputed  sage,  little 
impression  can  be  made  upon  his  understanding. 
Certain  it  is,  that  he  will  have  recourse  to  his 
authorities,  and  it  is  therefore  important  to  shew 
that  his  authorities  are  worthless. 

Another  serious  obstacle  is  opposed,  by  his  tem- 
poral interests.  Although  the  learned  Brahman  does 
not  participate  in  the  profits  of  religious  offices,  yet 
he  derives  no  small  share  of  emolument  and  con- 
sideration from  his  connexion  with  religion,  as  the 
interpreter  of  the  works  in  which  it  is  taught.     A 


LECTURE   I.  37 

Pundit,  a  learned  Brahman,  although  he  takes  no 
part  in  the  ceremonial  of  religious  festivals,  or  mar- 
riage feasts,  or  funeral  solemnities,  is  always  invited 
as  a  guest,  and  presents  are  made  to  him,  of  value 
proportionate  to  his  reputation.  They  constitute^ 
indeed,  his  chief,  often  his  sole  means  of  subsistence, 
as  v/ell  as  of  that  of  his  scholars,  whom  he  is  obliged 
by  the  law  to  teach,  without  gratuity  or  fee,  and 
whom  it  is  his  duty  also  in  part  to  support.  The 
predominance  of  a  foreign  government,  and  one 
which,  notwithstanding  the  plausibility  of  its  pro- 
fessions, sympathises  not  at  all  with  any  class  of  its 
native  subjects,  excludes  a  learned  Hindu  from  any 
liope  of  the  patronage  of  the  state,  and  we  need  not 
wonder,  therefore,  if  he  should  be  reluctant  to 
acknowledge  the  truth,  by  which  he  may  starve, 
and  should  cling  to  the  error,  by  which  alone 
he  lives. 

There  is  still  another  and  a  weighty  obstacle  to 
conviction,  which  arises  from  the  state  of  the  native 
mind,  especially  amongst  men  of  learning.  Their 
toleration  is  so  comprehensive,  that  it  amounts  to  in- 
difference to  truth.  The  Brahmans  who  compiled  a 
code  of  Hindu  law,  by  command  of  Warren  Hastings, 
preface  their  performance,  by  affirming  the  equal 
merit  of  every  form  of  religious  worship.  Con- 
trarieties of  belief,  and  diversities  of  religion,  they 
say,  are  in  fact  part  of  the  scheme  of  Providence, 
for  as  a  painter  gives  beauty  to  a  picture  by  a 
variety  of  colours,  or  as  a  gardener  embellishes  his 
garden  with  flowers  of  every  hue,  so  God  appointed 
to  every  tribe  its  own  faith,  and  every  sect  its  own 
religion,  that  man  might  glorify  him  in  diverse 
modes,  all  having  the  same  end,  and  being  equally 

D  3 


38  LECTUKE   I. 

acceptable  in  his  sight.  To  the  same  effect  it  is  stated 
by  Dr.  Mill  in  the  preface  to  the  Krista  Sangita,  or 
sacred  history  of  Christ,  in  Sanscrit  verse,  that  he 
had  witnessed  the  eager  reception  of  the  work,  by 
devotees  from  every  part  of  India,  even  in  the 
temple  of  Kali,  near  Calcutta,  and  that  it  was  read 
and  chaunted  by  them,  with  a  full  knowledge  of  its 
anti-iclolatrous  tendency,  close  to  the  very  shrine 
of  the  impure  goddess.  "  No  one  acquainted  with 
India,"  he  adds,  "  will  rate  these  facts  at  more  than 
their  real  worth,  and  to  those  who,  in  ignorance 
of  the  genius  of  paganism,  might  found  erroneous 
conceptions  on  them,  it  may  be  sufficient  to  recall 
to  mind,  what  is  the  most  melancholy  trait  in  the 
history  of  this  work,  the  readiness  with  which  these 
devotees  of  superstition  can  assume  the  ideas  of  a 
faith  most  opposed  to  it."  This  indifference  is  un- 
doubtedly the  most  formidable  impediment  with 
which  argument  has  to  contend,  but  it  is  not  in 
the  nature  of  things,  it  is  not,  we  may  presume  to 
believe,  in  the  dispensations  of  Providence,  that 
truth  should  not  ultimately  prevail.  Its  effects  may 
not  be  confessed,  though  felt ;  its  influence  may 
not  be  manifested,  though  implanted.  The  seed 
lies  long  beneath  the  soil,  but  it  germinates,  though 
in  darkness  :  and  it  rises  at  last  into  daylight,  and 
ripens  into  the  nutritious  grain,  blossoms  in  the 
beautiful  flower,  and  expands  into  the  vast  and 
majestic  monarch  of  the  forest. 

In  my  next  lecture  I  propose  to  take  a  view  of 
the  opinions  of  the  Hindus  on  the  existence  and 
character  of  God — the  creation  of  the  universe — 
the  nature  of  the  soul^^ — and  the  destiny  of  man. 


LECTUPvE    II 


"IT7E  yesterday  considered  the  state  of  the  Hindus 
in  regard  to  those  practices  of  a  religious 
character  which  are  prevalent  in  India.  The  do- 
mestic worship  which  originated  with  the  Vedas, 
and  of  which  portions  are  still  retained  in  the  daily 
and  occasional  observances  of  individuals  in  their 
purifications,  their  marriage,  and  their  funeral  cere- 
monies, and  the  public  worship  of  the  Divine  attri- 
butes of  creation,  preservation,  and  regeneration, 
referable  to  the  same  works,  first  engaged  our  atten- 
tion. We  then  adverted  to  the  introduction  of  Hero 
worship  by  the  mytho-Heroic  poems,  its  dissemi- 
nation under  new  modifications  by  the  Puranas,  and 
its  still  further  alteration  and  adaptation  to  the 
taste  of  the  people  by  persons  and  orders  of  modern 
date,  who  had  introduced  new  divinities  and  new 
elements  of  belief  in  the  passionate  devotion  and 
all-sufficient  faith  of  which  Krishna  was  in  particu- 
lar the  object,  and  we  lastly  noticed  the  mystical 
and  debasing  rites  which,  founded  upon  the  class  of 
works  called  Tantras,  were  exercising  at  present  a 
most  baneful  influence  upon  the  manners  and  princi- 
ples of  the  Hindus,  lliese  circumstances,  although 
comprehending  even  the  better  informed  and  more 
learned  amongst  the  natives  of  India,  apply  still  more 
particularly  to  the  religious  practices  of  the  people 
at  large.     We  have  now  to  treat  of  topics  which 

D  4 


40  LECTUKE    II. 

concern  the  educated  and  learned  more  especially— 
to  the  opinions  which  they  have  been  taught,  by 
men  whom  they  consider  as  little  lower  than  di- 
vinities, to  entertain  on  some  of  the  most  important 
subjects  of  reflexion,  which  in  ail  ages  have  exer- 
cised and  tested  the  energies  of  the  human  mind. 

The  speculative  notions  of  the  Hindus  originate, 
in  a  great  degree,  with  the  same  authorities  that 
have  enjoined  their  religious  practices.  Although 
in  their  widest  scope  familiar  only  to  the  learned, 
and  to  some  only  amongst  them,  yet  the  subjects  of 
speculation,  and  the  modes  in  which  they  are  in- 
vestigated, are  not  Vv  holly  unknown  to  the  literature 
of  the  people.  The  Indian  mind,  even  amongst  the 
least  instructed,  has  a  ready  tendency  to  contempla- 
tive reflexion,  and  delights  in  subtle  and  metaphysi- 
cal research.  We  need  not  be  surprised,  therefore, 
to  find  the  great  mysteries  of  the  imi verse,  some 
attention  to  which  is  forced  upon  the  least  civilized 
portions  of  the  human  race,  favourite  objects  of  in- 
quiry amongst  the  Hindus  from  the  earliest  periods 
of  their  traditional  history,  or  that  they  should  from 
the  first  have  expatiated  freely  in  conjecture  and 
hypothesis,  how  the  universe  came  to  be  and 
whence,  what  is  the  nature  of  man,  what  his  origin, 
and  what  his  destination.  What  were  at  first  con- 
jectures only  were  soon  transmuted  into  dogmas. 
These  were  next  moulded  into  systems,  and  a  variety 
of  works  have  in  all  ages  been  composed  by  Hindu 
writers,  in  which  it  is  attempted,  with  considerable 
profundity  of  thought  and  subtlety  of  reasoning, 
and  with  still  more  unhesitating  positiveness,  to 
solve  all  the  most  dark  and  difficult  perplexities  of 
our  condition,  but  leaving  them,  as  all  the  efforts 


LECTURE  II.  41 

of  human  wisdom   unassisted    by   revelation    have 
ever  left  them,  still  in  darkness  and  perplexity. 

The  Hindus  boast  of  six  different  schools  or 
systems  of  metaphysical  philosophy.  They  are 
called  the  Purva  Mimansa,  Uttara  Mimansa,  or 
Vedanta,  the  Sankhya,  the  Patanjala,  the  Nyayika, 
and  the  Vaisheshika  :  these,  although  some  of  them 
offer  m-econcilable  contradictions  to  essential  doc- 
trines of  their  religious  belief,  are  recognised  by  the 
Brahmans  as  orthodox,  and  attributed  to  authors  of 
saintly  reputation.  There  are  other  schools,  as 
those  of  the  Charvakas,  Buddhists,  and  Jains, 
which,  although  in  some  respects  not  more  at  vari- 
ance with  received  opinions  than  the  preceding,  are 
stigmatized  with  the  reproach  of  infidelity  and 
atheism.  The  cause  of  this  difference  is  sufficiently 
obvious,  and  is  characteristic  of  a  state  of  feeling 
which  prevails  as  much  in  the  present  as  in  any 
former  period.  The  orthodox  schools  of  philosophy 
do  not  disparage  the  authority  of  the  Vedas,  they 
do  not  dissuade  the  celebration  of  the  acts  of  formal 
devotion  which  the  Vedas  or  Puranas  enjoin,  al- 
though they  argue  their  utter  inefficacy  as  means  of 
final  and  permanent  felicity.  They  recommend  their 
performance,  however,  as  conducive  to  that  frame 
of  mind  in  which  abstract  contemplation  may  be 
safely  substituted  for  devotional  rites,  and  even 
admit  of  external  observances  after  the  mind  is  in 
pursuit  of  true  knowledge,  as  long  as  such  cere- 
monies are  practised  from  no  interested  motive,  as 
long  as  they  are  observed  because  they  are  enjoined, 
and  not  because  any  benefit  is  either  to  be  expected 
or  desired  from  their  practice.  Again,  the  writings 
of  the  orthodox  philosophers  meddle  not  with  exist- 


42  LECTURE  II. 

ing  institutions;  and  least  of  all  do  they  urge  or 
insinuate  any  consideration  to  detract  from  the 
veneration,  or  trespass  upon  the  privileges,  of  the 
Brahmans.  As  long  as  these  precautions  were  ob- 
served, the  Brahmans  did  not,  nor  would  they  now 
object  to  any  form  of  doctrine  having  in  view  the 
establishment  of  merely  abstract  propositions.  The 
case  was  very  different  with  the  heterodox  schools. 
They  went  from  abstractions  to  things.  The  Char- 
vakas  condemned  all  ceremonial  rites,  ridiculed  even 
the  Sraddha,  and  called  the  authors  of  the  Vedas, 
fools,  knaves,  and  buffoons.  The  Buddhists  and 
Jains  denied  the  inspiration  of  the  Vedas  and  the 
sanctity  of  the  Brahmanical  character,  abrogated 
the  distinction  of  caste,  invented  a  set  of  deities  for 
themselves,  whom  they  placed  above  those  of  the 
Hindu  pantheon,  and  organized  a  regular  hierarchy, 
a  priesthood,  and  a  pontiff;  an  institution  still  sub- 
sisting in  the  trans-Indian  countries,  of  which  the 
grand  Lama  of  Tibet  is  the  head.  It  is  a  remark- 
able historical  fact,  that  this  organization  was  found 
too  feeble  to  oppose,  in  India,  the  apparently  loose 
and  incoherent,  the  undisciplined,  the  anarchical 
authority  of  the  Brahmans.  It  had,  however,  the 
effect  of  exciting  their  apprehensions  and  their 
hatred  to  such  an  extent,  that  it  became  proverbial 
with  them  to  say,  ''  If  your  only  alternative  be  to 
encounter  a  heretic  or  a  tiger,  throw  yourself  before 
the  latter ;  better  be  devoured  by  the  animal  than 
contaminated  by  the  man."  There  may  be  a  few 
Charvakas  in  India,  but  their  opinions  are  unavow- 
ed.  The  Buddhists  have  totally  disappeared.  The 
Jains  are  found  in  some  numbers  and  influence  in 
the  west  of  India,  but  are  little  heard  of  elsewhere. 


LECTURE   II.  48 

Besides  the  acknowledged  schools  or  systems  of 
philosophy,  there  is  another,  which,  without  being 
considered  as  one  of  the  number,  and  without  claim- 
ing the  character  of  a  system,  is,  nevertheless,  to  be 
included  in  the  list,  as  it  presents  a  peculiar  scheme 
of  doctrine  on  metaphysical  subjects,  and  exercises 
more  influence  over  popular  opinion  than  any  of  the 
rest ;  this  is  the  Pauranik  school,  the  philosophy  of 
the  Puranas  :  it  may  be  termed  also  the  Eclectic 
school^  as  it  has  evidently  derived  its  principles  from 
different  systems,  and  formed  them  into  a  miscel- 
laneous combination  of  its  own  contrivance.  It  is 
not  put  forward  as  a  new  scheme,  but  is  subsidi- 
ary to  the  popularization  of  particular  objects  of 
worship,  for  which  the  Puranas,  as  we  remarked 
yesterday,  seem  to  have  been  composed. 

The  Vedas  are  authority  for  the  existence  of  one 
Divine  Being,  supreme  over  the  universe,  and  exist- 
ing before  all  worlds.  "  In  the  beginning,"  it  is 
said,  "this  all  (this  universe)  was  in  darkness." 
"He  (the  Supreme)  was  alone,  without  a  second." 
"  He  reflected,  I  am  one,  I  will  become  many." 
Will  was  conceived  in  the  Divine  mind,  and  crea- 
tion ensued.  This  being  the  doctrine  of  the  Vedas 
is  that  also  of  the  Vedanta,  the  purport  of  which 
school  is  declared  to  be  the  same  as  that  of  the 
Vedas — their  end  (anta)  or  aim.  I  mentioned  be- 
fore that  the  Vedas  comprise  two  portions,  one 
practical,  one  speculative.  The  speculative  or  theo- 
logical portion  of  the  Vedas  is  explained  chiefly  in 
separate  treatises,  called  Upanishads.  These  are 
for  the  most  part  short,  and  are  commonly  mystical 
and  obscure.  The  ordinary  enumeration  of  them  is 
fifty-one.       There    are  some    others,   but    they  are 


44  LECTURE  II. 

probably  spurious.  The  whole  fifty-one  were  trans- 
lated into  Latin^  and  published  by  Anquetil  du 
Perron  in  1801,  under  the  title  of  "  Oupnekhat, 
sen,  Theologia  et  Philosophia  Indica^."  His  trans- 
lation was  made  from  a  Persian  version,  translated 
by  order  of  a  Mohammedan  prince,  the  elder  brother 
and  unsuccessful  competitor  of  Aurvmgzeb,  Dara 
Shekoh.  Persian  translators  are  not  very  careful, 
nor  is  the  Latinity  of  Anquetil  du  Perron  remark- 
able for  precision.  His  version,  therefore,  is  almost 
as  unintelligible  as  the  original  Sanscrit.  Some  of 
the  Upanishads  have  been  rendered  into  very  good 
English  by  Rammohun  Roy^;  and  the  whole  are 
in  course  of  translation  into  French,  by  a  Prussian 
gentleman,  M.  Poley.  There  will  be  no  difficulty, 
therefore,  in  acquiring  whatever  information  the 
Upanishads  may  afford  regarding  the  Monotheism 
and  the  Psychology  of  the  Vedas. 

The  Vedanta  is  called  also  the  Uttara-mimansa — 
subsequent  or  supplementary  investigation.  I  have 
named  also  a  Purva-mimansa,  or  prior-school  of  in- 
vestigation ;  the  object  of  this  is  to  teach  the  art  of 
reasoning,  with  the  express  purpose  of  aiding  the 
interpretation  of  the  Vedas  not  only  in  the  specula- 
tive but  the  practical  portion.  As  far  as  concerns 
the  former,  it  of  course  adopts  the  same  monothe- 
istic principles.  The  Patanjala  school  teaches  also 
the  being  of  a  God  ;  the  Nyayika  and  Vaishe- 
kika  teach  the  existence  of  one  Supreme  Soul — the 
seat  of  knowledge  and  the  maker  of  all  things  ;  and 

*-'  Oupnekhat  &c.      2  vol.  4to.     Parisiis  (ix.)  iSor.  '' 

f  Translation  of  several  prijicipal  books,   passages,  and  texts 

of  the  Vedas,  by   Raja   Rammohun   Roy.     Svo.    London,  Allen 

and  Co.    1832. 


LECTURE  II.  45 

the  Paiiranik  or  Eclectic  school  maintains  the  same 
doctrine.  The  Sankhya  denies  the  existence  of  a 
Supreme  Being,  although  it  recognises  a  twofold 
distribution  of  the  universe,  as  matter  and  spirit. 

The  simple  fact,  then,  of  the  existence  of  one  su- 
preme spiritual  Cause  of  all  things — supreme  over  and 
quite  distinct  from  the  mythological  divinities — is, 
with  one  exception,  the  received  doctrine  of  the  Hin- 
dus. When  they  come  to  particulars,  and  attempt  to 
define  the  Divine  nature,  their  notions,  as  may  be 
easily  conceived,  are  exceedingly  embarrassed  and 
unsatisfactory.  Brahma — not  Brahma  in  the  mas- 
culine, but  Brahma  in  the  neuter  form,  the  term 
commonly  applied  to  the  supreme  first  Cause — is  for 
the  most  part  defined  by  negatives.  He  is  incorpo- 
real, immaterial,  invisible,  unborn,  uncreated,  with- 
out beginning  or  end ;  he  is  illimitable,  inscrutable, 
inappreciable  by  the  senses,  inapprehensible  by  the 
imderstanding,  at  least  until  that  is  freed  from 
the  film  of  mortal  blindness  ;  he  is  devoid  of  all 
attributes,  or  has  that  only  of  perfect  purity  ;  he  is 
unaffected  by  emotions  ;  he  is  perfect  tranquillity, 
and  is  susceptible  therefore  of  no  interest  in  the 
acts  of  man  or  the  administration  of  the  affairs  of 
the  universe.  Vyasa  declares  that  the  knowledge 
of  the  Supreme  Being  is  not  within  the  boundary 
of  comprehension,  that  what  and  who  he  is  cannot 
be  explained. 

These  are  the  most  generally  adopted  sentiments, 
and  conformably  to  them  no  temples  are  erected,  no 
prayers  are  even  addressed  to  the  Supreme.  Texts 
from  the  Vedas  and  other  authorities,  enjoining  the 
worship  of  God  alone,  were  adduced,  as  I  noticed 
yesterday,   by  Rammohun  Roy  in  support  of  the 


46  LECTURE  II. 

reform  which  he  set  on  foot ;  but  it  is  generally 
and  consistently  enough  maintained  by  his  oppo- 
nents, that  they  intend  spiritual  worship,  mental 
adoration,  abstract  meditation — not  formal,  practi- 
cal, or  external  worship — and  that  they  are  appli- 
cable only  to  those  persons  who  devote  themselves  to 
contemplative  devotion,  not  to  those  who  are  engaged 
in  the  daily  duties  of  social  life.  It  is,  however, 
undeniable,  that  in  contradiction  to  these  negative 
descriptions,  we  have  affirmative  attributes  asserted : 
"  God  is  a  Spirit,"  "  the  Supreme  Spirit ;"  he  is 
knowledge,  he  is  purity,  he  is  happiness  ;  he  sees 
all,  he  hears  all,  he  moves  whithersoever  he  will,  he 
takes  whatsoever  he  will,  although  he  has  neither 
eyes,  nor  ears,  nor  feet,  nor  hands ;  he  is  omni- 
scient, omnipresent,  almighty  ;  he  is  the  maker  of 
all  things,  and  the  director  and  governor  of  the 
world  ;  not,  however,  in  his  own  person,  but 
through  the  instrumentality  of  agents,  whom  he  has 
created  for  the  purpose. 

That  the  Supreme  Being  exercises  an  immediate 
personal  providential  control  over  the  affairs  of  the 
world,  is,  however,  the  doctrine  of  the  Pauranik 
school ;  but  it  is  the  progeny  of  another  doctrine, 
which  is  also  theirs,  and  theirs  alone,  the  identity  of 
some  one  personate  and  perceptible  form — some  one 
present  deity  with  the  Supreme.  There  is  no  differ- 
ence of  opinion  with  regard  to  the  character  of  the 
Gods  of  Hindu  mythology,  of  Brahma,  Vishnu,  Siva, 
and  the  rest  of  the  thirty-three  millions  of  the  host 
of  heaven,  at  least  in  their  own  individualities.  The 
most  ignorant  Hindu  will  tell  you,  that  either  of 
these,  as  considered  pe?^  se,  is  an  imperfect  and 
finite  creature ;   he  is  mighty,  merely  in  contrast  to 


LECTURE    II.  47 

the  weakness  of  man  ;  he  is  immortal  only  in  rela- 
tion to  the  shortness  of  human  life.  The  Gods  had 
a  beginning,  they  will  have  an  end  ;  their  duration 
ceases  at  the  period  of  universal  dissolution.  The 
Puranas,  however,  as  I  have  intimated,  have  it  es- 
pecially in  view  to  elevate  to  exclusive  adoration 
some  individual  of  the  greater  mythological  divini- 
ties ;  and  they  can  claim  this  exaltation  for  their 
favourite  only  by  identifying  him  with  that  Being 
of  whose  supremacy  and  eternity  there  is  no  dis- 
pute. Their  God,  their  Vishnu  or  Siva,  is  then  no 
longer  a  limited  and  finite  Being  ;  he  is  no  longer  a 
God — he  is  God.  The  incongruity  of  attributes 
and  no  attributes  ;  of  perfect  happiness  with  feelings 
of  affection  or  animosity  ;  of  perfect  purity  with  the 
human  frailties  and  vices  that  reduce  the  Pauranik 
deities  to  weak  and  profligate  men  ;  of  almighty 
power  and  wisdom,  with  the  feebleness  and  fear 
and  folly  ascribed  to  them  on  various  occasions,  is 
too  palpable  to  be  denied.  The  objection  is  there- 
fore evaded.  It  is  asserted  that  the  Supreme  as- 
sumes these  disguises  for  his  sport  or  for  the  mani« 
festation  of  his  j)ower,  or  that  the  whole  is  an  illu- 
sion a  mystery — which  the  grossness  of  human 
conception  is  unable  to  penetrate  or  comprehend. 
The  philosophical  writings  are,  however,  free  from 
these  contradictions,  and  they  clearly  owe  their  ori- 
gin to  that  spirit  of  sectarian  rivalry  of  which  the 
Puranas  are  the  champions,  and  were,  perhaps,  the 
source.  They  are  foreign  also  to  the  tenor  of  the 
doctrine  of  the  Vedas  ;  for  although  texts  are  fre- 
quent which  affirm  that  Brahma  is  all  that  exists, 
and  consequently  is  Brahma,  Vishnu  and  Siva,  as 
well  as  all  other  persons  and  things,  yet  none  can 


48  LECTURE  II. 

be  cited  affirmative  of  the  converse  of  the  proposi- 
tion, or  sanctioning  the  doctrine  that  any  one  of  the 
inferior  divinities  is  Brahma. 

The  doctrine  of  Pantheism — the  identification 
of  God  and  the  universe — is  another  principle  which 
the  Puranas  most  unequivocally  and  resolutely 
maintain.  Vishnu,  Siva,  or  Sakti,  whatever  indi- 
vidual they  undertake  to  glorify,  is  not  only  the 
remote  and  efficient,  but  the  proximate  and  sub- 
stantial cause  of  the  world.  Thus,  in  the  Linga 
Purana,  Brahma  addresses  Siva,  "  Glory  to  thee, 
whose  form  is  the  universe."  In  the  Vishnu  Purana, 
"  This  world  was  produced  from  Vishnu  ;  it  exists  in 
him;  he  is  the  cause  of  its  continuance  and  cessation; 
he  is  the  world."  In  the  Kalika  Purana,  the  goddess 
Kali  is  said  to  be  identical  with  the  universe,  as  well 
as  distinct  from  it ;  and  in  the  Brahma  Vaivartta, 
even  Radha  is  eulogized  as  "  the  mother  of  the  world, 
and  the  world  itself;  as  one  with  primaeval  nature — 
with  universal  nature,  and  with  all  created  forms ; 
with  all  cause,  and  with  all  effisct."  Expressions  of 
this  tenor  occur  in  every  page  of  the  Puranas ;  and 
although  something  may  be  ascribed  to  the  exagge- 
rations of  panegyric,  and  the  obscurities  of  mysti- 
cism, yet  the  declarations  are  too  positive  and  re- 
iterated to  admit  of  reasonable  doubt.  And  it 
cannot  be  questioned  that  these  writers  confound 
the  creature  with  the  Creator,  and  expose  them- 
selves justly  to  the  imputation  of  gross  materialism. 

Little  doubt  can  be  entertained  that  the  mate- 
rialism of  the  Puranas  derives  some  countenance 
from  the  Vedas.  Universality  is  there  predicated  of 
the  Supreme  Being  directly,  without  the  interven- 
tion of  any  one  of  his  hypostases.     Thus  it  is  said, 


LECTURE    II.  49 

"  This  whole  is  Brahma,  from  Brahma  to  a  clod  of 
earth.  Brahma  is  both  the  efficient  and  the  material 
cause  of  the  world.  He  is  the  potter  by  whom 
the  fictile  vase  is  formed  ;  he  is  the  clay  of  which  it 
is  fabricated.  Every  thing  proceeds  from  him, 
without  waste  or  diminution  of  the  source,  as  light 
radiates  from  the  sun.  Every  thing  merges  into 
him  again,  as  bubbles  bursting  mingle  with  the 
air,  as  rivers  fall  into  the  ocean,  and  lose  their 
identity  in  its  waters.  Every  thing  proceeds  from 
and  returns  to  him,  as  the  web  of  the  spider  is 
emitted  from,  and  retracted  into  itself."  These  and 
similar  illustrations  speak  the  language  of  material- 
ism too  plainly  to  be  misunderstood,  although  it 
may  be  possible  that  the  full  extent  of  their  signi- 
fication was  not  intended;  that  these  comparisons 
are  not  to  be  interpreted  too  literally;  that  they 
purpose  no  more  than  to  assert  the  origin  of 
all  things  from  the  same  first  Cause;  that  the 
authors  of  the  texts  may  have  been  in  the  same 
predicament  as  the  author  of  the  "  Essay  on  Man," 
and  inculcated  materialism  without  being  aware 
of  it. 

The  distinction  however  did  not  escape  the  notice 
of  the  philosophers  ;  and  the  schools,  which  are 
probably  the  most  ancient,  carefully  discriminate 
between  spirit  and  matter,  as  the  two  opposite  ele- 
ments by  whose  temporary  association  the  world  is 
compounded.  This  is  particularly  the  case  with 
the  Sankhya,  the  doctrines  of  which  school  may 
bs  seen  in  the  translation  of  one  of  its  text-books 
(the  Sankhya  Karika),  printed  in  Oxford.^  Matter 
is  by  the  Sankhyas  subtilized,  in  its  undeveloped 

g  Sankhya  Karika,  translated  from  the  Sanscrit,  &c.  i  vol. 
4to.      i!^37.     Allen  and  Co. 


50  LECTURE    II. 

state,  into  a  principle,  the  precise  character  of  which 
is  not  very  intelligible,  but  to  which  the  vague  de- 
nomination of  "  Nature"  may  be  applied .  They  do  not 
however  question  the  reality  of  substance:  the  various 
forms  of  substance,  gross  material  forms,  they  trace 
back  through  others  more  subtile,  which  proceed  from 
one  imperceptible,  indefinable  Prakriti  or  nature. 
They  maintain  that  causes  and  effects  are  essentially 
the  same,  and  there  is  no  real  difference  between 
a  product  and  that  which  produces  it.  Consequently, 
as  all  substances  are  products  of  nature,  nature 
itself  is  substantial ;  that  is,  it  is  matter.  Matter  and 
spirit,  then,  are  the  two  elements  of  the  universe  ; 
both  unproduced  ;  the  former  productive,  the  latter 
not;  both  eternal  and  independent ;  subject  to  change 
of  form  and  condition,  but  incapable  of  destruction  ; 
combining,  from  the  influence  of  a  controlling  neces- 
sity, for  a  given  object  and  a  definite  term,  but  per- 
petually reverting  to  a  primitive,  inert,  and  reci- 
procal independence. 

It  might  be  supposed  that  the  Vedanta  philosophy, 
professing  to  carry  out  the  doctrine  of  the  Vedas, 
would  have  been  next  in  order  of  time  to  those 
works  ;  but  this  is  questionable :  and  it  seems  not 
improbable  that  the  system  originated  in  the  pur- 
pose of  exonerating  the  Vedas  from  the  charge  of 
materialism,  by  founding  upon  such  texts  as  have 
already  been  quoted  the  refinement  of  spiritual  Pan- 
theism, or  idealism,  and  at  the  same  time  controvert- 
ing the  doctrine  of  the  Sankhyas  and  the  Nyayikas, 
which  maintained  the  distinct  and  independent  ex- 
istence of  matter  and  spirit.  The  doctrine  of  the 
Vedanta  is  denominated  Kar  €^^oxr^,  Adwaita,  non- 
duality ;  and  the  very  title  indicates  the  priority 
of  a  dualistic   hypothesis.     The   main   proposition 


LECTURE    II.  51 

contended  for,  in  opposition  to  that  which  affirms 
two  elements  of  creation,  matter  and  spirit,  being 
the  existence  of  one  only  element  in  the  universe, 
which  universal  element  or  principle  is  spirit. 

But  then  comes  the  question,  the  solution  of 
which  has  puzzled  the  philosophers,  not  of  India 
only,  but  of  the  world  ;  not  only  of  ancient  but 
modern  times  ;  not  only  Vyasa  and  Sankara,  but 
Parmenides  and  Plato  ;  Mallebranche  and  Berkeley  ; 
Fichte  and  Schelling.  If  all  is  spirit,  wliat  is  svib- 
stance  ?  The  early  teachers  of  the  Vedanta  school 
asserted  it  was  the  Sakti,  the  perceptible  power,  the 
active  energy,  the  manifested  instrumentality  of  the 
Supreme  Spirit ;  and  therefore,  though  not  sub- 
stantially, yet  essentially  one  and  the  same.  As 
this  solution  was  possibly  found  too  subtle  to  satisfy 
the  understanding,  later  teachers  went  a  step  far- 
ther, and  boldly  cut  the  knot,  by  maintaining  there 
is  no  such  thing  as  substance.  In  the  spirit  of 
the  Berkeleyan  theory,  they  affirmed  that  matter 
exists  not  independent  of  perception,  and  that  sub- 
stances are  indebted  for  their  seeming  reality  to  the 
ideas  of  the  mind.  They  went  still  farther,  and 
maintained  that  until  our  intellects  are  purified  by 
abstraction,  until  we  have  attained  a  just  apprecia- 
tion of  our  own  nature,  and  of  that  of  universal 
spirit,  our  ideas  are  all  wrong.  Until  the  day  of 
true  knowledge  dawn  upon  us,  we  are  asleep — in 
a  dream  ;  we  misconceive  of  all  we  perceive ;  we 
take  a  rope  for  a  snake ;  an  oyster-shell  for  mother- 
of-pearl  ;  mirage  for  real  water.  All  that  we  see 
in  our  unilluminated  condition  is  Maya,  deception, 
illusion.  There  are  no  two  things  in  existence; 
there  is    but   one  in   ail.     There   is  no  secoiid,  no 

E  2 


52  LECTURE    II. 

matter ;    there   is  spirit  alone.     The  world  is  not 
God,  but  there  is  nothing  but  God  in  the  world. 

Should  it  be  an  object  to  acquire  more  precise 
views  of  this  part  of  our  subject,  they  are  easily  at- 
tainable.    The  doctrines  of  the  Vedanta  philosophy 
have  been  recently  the  topic  of  controversy,  as  simi- 
lar doctrines  of  idealism  or  transcendentalism  have 
ever  been  and  will  probably  ever  be.     The  different 
schools  of  Indian  philosophy  are  described  by  Mr. 
Colebrooke  in  several  essays,  in  the  Transactions  of 
the    Royal   Asiatic    Society.     In    speaking   of   the 
Vedanta,  he  indicates  the  tendency  of  the  illustra- 
tions which   its   teachers   borrow    from   the  Vedas 
towards  materialism,  and  asserts  the  explanation  of 
Maya    or  illusion,  to  have  been    an  after- thought. 
Col.  Vans  Kennedy,  also  a  distinguished  Oriental 
scholar,  had  maintained  in  a  work  which  merits  to 
be  consulted  on  a  variety  of  important  points — Re- 
searches on  the  Nature  and  Affinities  of  ancient  and 
Hindu  Mythology^ — that  the  Hindu  philosophers  of 
every  school  and  every  period  had  asserted  a  spi- 
ritual principle  alone,  and  never  countenanced  mate- 
rialism.    He  therefore  in  defence  of  his  theory  con- 
troverted Mr.  Colebrooke's  account  of  the  Vedanta 
in  an  essay  on  the  subject,  published  in  the  third 
volume  of  the   Society's  Transactions.    Sir  Graves 
Haughton  appended  to  this  paper  some  observations 
in    vindication    of   Mr.  Colebrooke's    views,    which 
called  forth  further  comments  from  Col.  Vans  Ken- 
nedy, a  reply  from  sir  Graves  Haughton,  and  a  re- 
joinder from  the  colonel.     These  latter  papers  were 
printed  in   the  London   Asiatic  Journal ;  whether 
they  have  settled  the  point  in  dispute  may  be  doubted, 

h  Published  by  Longman  and  Co.      i  vol.     4to.      1831. 


LECTURE  IL  53 

but  they  have  had  the  effect  of  bringing  the  prin- 
cipal doctrines  of  the  Vedanta  philosophy  within 
the  acquirement  of  European  students.* 

The  observations  thus  made  have  anticipated  in 
some  degree  an  explanation  of  the  opinions  enter- 
tained by  the  Hindus  in  regard  to  the  creation .  The 
theories  that  attempt  to  elucidate  its  course  are  more 
definite  and  congruous  than  those  which  would 
ascertain  its  cause.  All  the  schools  admit  two  sorts, 
or  rather  stages  of  creation,  one  rudimental  and 
primary,  the  other  formal  and  secondary.  They  all 
admit  the  infinity  and  eternal  succession  of  crea- 
tions, their  periodical  dissolution  or  disintegration, 
and  their  periodical  regeneration  or  reorganization. 
In  the  season  that  precedes  creation,  all  agree  that 
there  is  no  perceptible  form — all  is  without  shape. 
According  to  the  Vedanta  philosophy  there  is  no 
substratum  even  of  form,  there  is  no  immaterial  sub- 
stance ;  the  illusion  is  dissipated,  the  energy  has 
ceased  to  act  separately  ;  all  real,  that  is,  all  spiri- 
tual existence  is  concentrated  in  its  supreme  source, 
which  is  still  all  that  is.  All  the  other  schools, 
theistical  or  atheistical,  are  dualistic,  and  agree  in 
recognising  the  eternity  and  indestructibility  of  the 
principle  or  element  of  the  sensible  world,  the  major 
part  of  the  Indian  sages  adopting  as  an  axiom  the 
prevailing  doctrine  of  classical  antiquity,  ex  nihilo 
nihil.  Whether  creation  therefore  took  place  from 
the  will  of  a  Creator,  or  the  spontaneous  evolution 
of  its  principles,  it  is  preceded  by  a  something ; 
by  nature,  say  the  Sankbyas,  by  simple  uncom- 
pounded  imperishable  atoms, say  the  Nyayiks.  When 
the  evolution  of  the  first  imperceptible  material  prin- 

i  Asiatic  Journal,  October,  1835  5  November,  1835  ;  January, 
1839.     London.     Allen  and  Co. 


54  LECTURE   II. 

ciple  into  perceptible  form  takes  place  without  the 
intervention  of  the  Divine  will,  it  proceeds  from 
necessity.  Nature  is  compelled  to  assume  corpo- 
real form  that  the  ends  of  Spirit  m^ay  be  fulfilled, 
namely,  that  it  may  be  embodied,  until  by  a  series  of 
bodily  migrations  it  has  no  longer  need  of  such  a 
state,  it  has  attained  knowledge  which  is  the  cause 
of  its  liberation,  and  its  connection  with  matter 
ceases.  ''  Soul  desists/'  says  the  Sankhya  Karika, 
"  because  he  has  seen  (or  fully  understood)  nature. 
Nature  ceases  (or  withdraws)  because  she  has  been 
seen;"  that  is,  fully  understood.  It  is  not  very  in- 
telligible why  the  soul,  which  in  its  independent 
state  is  described  as  already  pure,  should  be  allied 
with  body  merely  to  be  purified,  and  so  freed  from 
the  alliance.  But  this  is  a  difficulty  for  the  fol- 
lowers of  the  Sankhya  to  explain. 

The  mode  in  which  the  Divine  will  operates  as  it 
is  alluded  to  in  the  Vedas,  is  not  attempted  to  be 
explained.  He  wills  creation  to  be,  and  it  is.  In 
the  systems  in  which  primaeval  crude  matter  is  the 
subject  of  Divine  agency,  its  development  is  ascribed 
to  an  influence  communicated  to  it  by  the  Divine 
will,  by  which  it  receives  motion  and  life.  This 
appears  to  have  been  expressed  in  language  origi- 
nally metaphorical,  but  some  of  the  Puranas  have 
understood  it  literally,  and  abusing  the  figure  of 
personification,  have  described  the  production  of  the 
world  as  if  it  was  analogous  to  that  of  animal  birth. 
The  abuse  is  of  very  old  date,  and  not  confined  to 
the  Hindus.  The  mundane  egg^  the  form  in  which, 
according  to  Manu,  the  rudiments  of  the  world  are 
first  manifested,  was  not  unknown,  as  you  are  well 
aware,  to  the  ancient  cosmogonies  of  Greece. 

In  whatever  mode  movement  is  imparted  to  the 


LECTURE   II.  55 

first  inert  principle  of  things,  the  stages  by  which  it 
evolves  into  the  actual  variety  of  perceptible  forms 
are  much  the  same  in  the  different  systems  ;  the  first 
product  is  intelligence ;  thence  proceeds  egotism,  or 
the  consciousness  of  individuality :  thence  come  the 
senses  ;  thence  the  rudiments  of  the  objects  of  sense 
or  the  subtle  elements,  and  from  them  the  gross  or 
perceptible  elements  ether,  air,  fire,  water,  earth 
are  developed,  and  they  are  the  compound  ingre- 
dients of  all  visible  and  tangible  form.  A  more 
particular  detail  may  be  found  in  the  Sankhya 
Karika  and  Vishnu  Purana. 

The  elements  of  forms  thus  developed  from  pri- 
mary matter  remain  unaltered  for  a  day  of  Brahma; 
a  tolerably  long  interval,  2,160,000,000  years.  At 
the  end  of  this  period,  Brahma  sleeps.  The  material 
forms  which  then  occupy  the  world,  and  the  lower 
spheres  of  the  universe,  are  then  consumed  by  fire ; 
the  fire  is  extinguished  by  mighty  rains,  and  the 
globe  becomes  a  shoreless  ocean.  The  sages,  the 
gods,  the  elements  survive,  and  when  Brahma 
wakes  and  finds  what  mischief  his  slumbers  have 
generated,  he  sets  to  work  to  repair  it.  With  the 
materials  ready  to  his  hands,  he  remanufactures 
the  earth  and  its  inhabitants,  and  this  is  what 
is  intended  by  secondary  creation.  This  kind  of 
creation  is  repeated  daily  during  the  100  years  of 
Brahma's  existence  ; — a  term  which  cannot  be  ex- 
pressed in  mortal  years  by  any  of  our  scales  of 
numeration,  but  which  may  be  written  with  fifteen 
figures,  or  311,040,000,000,000  years. 

At  the  end  of  this  term  Brahma  himself  expires, 
and  with  him  die  all  the  gods  and  holy  sages,  and 
all  forms  whatever  retrograde  successively  into  their 

E  4 


56  J.ECTURE  II. 

constituent  elements,  until  the  whole  is  finally 
merged  into  the  single  or  double  rudiment  of  being, 
universal  spirit,  or  primary  matter  and  primary 
spirit,  according  to  the  theories  of  the  dualistic  or 
non-dualistic  philosophers.  After  a  considerable 
interval,  similar  causes  produce  similar  effects  ;  na- 
ture and  spirit  are  again  in  movement,  the  creation 
is  renewed,  and  the  universe  thus  eternally  fluctu- 
ates between  existence  and  non-existence,  without 
any  motive,  without  any  end,  that  rational  conjecture 
can  guess  at. 

Upon  the  subject  of  the  extravagant  chronology 
of  tlie  Hindus  it  may  be  remarked,  that  the  enor- 
mous periods  of  which  it  is  composed  are  of  a  purely 
mythological  character.  The  attempts  that  have 
been  made  to  account  for  them  on  astronomical 
computations  have  led  to  no  satisfactory  results. 
How  far  they  are  analogous  to  similar  extravagan- 
cies in  the  chronology  of  other  nations  of  antiquity 
is  also  undetermined  ;  the  subject  is  only  of  import- 
ance as  furnishing  an  additional  argument  against 
the  authority  of  those  works  in  which  it  is  seriously 
affirmed  as  truth. 

The  philosophical  systems  take  no  notice  of  the 
creation  of  man  except  in  the  abstract :  for  the 
origin  of  the  human  race  we  must  have  recourse  to 
other  authorities,  and  particularly  to  the  Puranas, 
in  which  various  accounts  of  the  occurrence  are 
narrated.  It  is  not  difficult  to  detect,  through  all 
their  embellishments  and  corruptions,  the  tradition 
of  the  descent  of  mankind  from  a  single  pair,  how- 
ever much  they  have  disguised  it  by  the  mis- 
employment  of  the  figures  of  allegory  and  personifi- 
cation.   The  embodied  creative  attribute,  the  agent 


LECTURE  II.  57 

in  formal  creation,  Brahma,  is  fabled  to  have  divided 
himself  into  two  creatures — one  male,  one  female ; 
from  their  union  the  first  man  and  first  woman  were 
born,  who  married  and  begot  children,  and  from 
them  sprang  not  only  mankind  but  all  living  crea- 
tures. This  is  the  general  outline  of  the  mode  in 
which  it  is  related  that  the  earth  was  peopled,  and 
it  is  probably  traceable  to  the  Vedas  ;  but  the  heroic 
poems  and  the  Puranas  have  remodelled  the  tale  in 
a  variety  of  shapes,  until  it  presents  an  incoherent 
and  conflicting  series  of  legends — not  always  very 
intelligible,  and  sometimes  not  very  decent.  I  must 
refer  for  details  to  the  Vishnu  Purana. 

The  description  of  the  phenomena  of  secondary 
creation  includes  an  account  of  the  disposition  of 
the  universe,  of  the  different  spheres  or  worlds,  of 
the  situation  and  size  of  the  planets,  and  of  the  divi- 
sions of  the  earth.  As  long  as  the  geography  of 
the  Hindus  is  restricted  to  India,  it  is  sufficiently 
accurate  ;  but  as  soon  as  it  extends  beyond  those 
limits  it  is  wholly  fanciful  and  absurd.  The  Pu- 
ranas distribute  the  earth  into  seven  concentric 
circles  or  rings,  each  forming  an  annular  continent, 
and  being  separated  from  the  next  in  succession  by 
a  circumambient  ocean.  These  oceans  vary  also 
as  to  their  constituent  parts;  and  besides  seas  of 
fresh  and  salt  water,  we  have  them  of  treacle, 
honey,  milk,  and  wine.  The  whole  is  encompassed 
by  a  stupendous  mountain  belt,  beyond  which  lies 
the  region  of  darkness ;  and  in  the  centre  of  all, 
which  is  also  the  centre  of  the  continent  we  inhabit, 
towers  Mount  Meru,  to  the  height  of  64,000  miles. 
The  astronomy  is  more  moderate,  but  the  mythologic 
or  Pauranik  astronomy  is  as  incompatible  with  the 


58  LECTURE    II. 

scientific  astronomy  of  the  Hindus  as  it  is  with  the 
Copernican  system.  Much  of  the  astronomy  of  the 
Hindus,  properly  so  called,  agrees  with  that  of 
Europe,  and  advantage  has  judiciously  been  taken 
of  the  difference  between  the  inventions  of  their 
Puranas  and  the  facts  of  their  astronomers  to  con- 
vict the  former  even  by  native  testimony  of  ab- 
surdity and  error.  It  is  also  through  geography 
and  astronomy  that  the  first  and  strongest  impres- 
sions have  been  made  upon  the  minds  of  native 
youth  who  have  received  an  English  education  :  ac- 
quaintance with  the  extent  and  divisions  of  the  earth, 
and  with  the  leading  phenomena  of  the  heavens, 
however  superficial,  is  fatal  to  all  faith  in  the  ex- 
travagances of  the  Puranas,  and  affixes  discredit  to 
whatever  they  inculcate. 

Man  being  created  and  provided  with  a  habita- 
tion, the  next  question  to  be  considered  is  the  object 
of  his  existence.  For  what  is  he  designed  ?  Final 
liberation.  What  that  is  understood  to  be  I  shall 
presently  endeavour  to  explain  ;  but  it  is  necessary 
first  to  offer  a  fev/  w^ords  respecting  the  mode  in 
which  it  is  imagined  that  the  purposes  of  human 
life  may  be  best  effected.  The  social  institutions  of 
the  Hindus  appear  to  have  originated  with  the 
Vedas,  and  present,  as  is  well  known,  the  character- 
istic peculiarity  of  the  distinction  of  castes.  The 
original  scheme  contemplates  but  four — the  Brah- 
man, whose  duties  were  to  study  and  teach  the 
Vedas,  and  conduct  the  domestic  worship  of  the 
next  two  classes.  The  Kshatriya  was  the  warrior  and 
prince,  w^hose  duties  were  to  fight  and  govern.  The 
Vaisya  was  the  merchant  and  farmer.  Both  he 
and  the  soldier  were  enjoined  to  study,  though  not 


LECTURE    II.  59 

permitted  to  teach  the  Vedas.  The  fourth  caste,  that 
of  the  Sudra,  supph'ed  artificers,  labourers,  and 
servants  to  the  other  three.  The  Sudras  were  sub- 
jected to  much  indignity  and  injustice,  but  their 
condition  was  never  so  bad  as  that  of  the  Helot, 
the  bondsman  or  the  serf;  they  were  free,  masters  of 
their  own  property,  and  at  liberty  to  settle  where 
they  pleased.  Intermarriages  between  all  four  castes 
took  place,  and  the  only  check  upon  them  was  the 
degradation  of  the  children.  They  were  not  even 
Sudras ;  they  therefore  formed  new  castes,  dis- 
tinguished according  to  their  mixed  descent  and  the 
occupation  which  came  to  be  regarded  as  peculiarly 
their  own.  In  the  present  day  the  only  one  of  the 
original  castes  extant  is  the  Brahman  :  the  Kshat- 
riya,  Vaisya,  and  Sudra  are  extinct ;  and  the  in- 
numerable castes  which  are  now  met  with  are  in 
part  the  representatives  of  the  ancient  mixed  castes, 
but  in  a  still  greater  degree  are  the  progeny  of  later 
times,  and  distinctions  unauthorizedly  assumed  by 
the  people  themselves.  For  it  is  a  great  mistake  to 
imagine  that  caste  in  India  is  either  a  burden  or  a 
disgrace.  The  notion  is  European,  springing  like 
many  others  out  of  the  belief,  that  our  own  customs 
and  feelings  furnish  an  infallible  standard  by  which 
to  measure  those  of  other  nations.  The  fact  is, 
that  even  with  the  most  abject  classes  caste  is  a  pri- 
vilege, not  a  shame  ;  and  in  proportion  as  the  scale 
of  society  descends,  so  are  the  people  more  tenacious 
of  their  caste.  Even  the  Mohammedans,  to  whose 
religion  such  a  distinction  is  as  uncongenial  as  it  is  to 
Christianity,  imitate  in  India  their  Hindu  country- 
men in  this  particular,  and  pique  themselves  upon 
their  caste.     The  principle  of  the  distinction  is  of 


60  LECTURE  II. 

course  indefensible,  and  in  some  parts  of  India,  or 
under  particular  circumstances,  it  is  oppressively 
enforced.  In  practice,  however,  where  European 
influence  predominates,  little  more  inconvenience 
results  from  it  than  from  the  distinctions  of  rank 
in  the  countries  of  Europe.  The  diligent  discharge 
of  the  duties  assigned  to  each  caste  is  one  of  the 
means  by  which  the  members  are  prepared  for  the 
attainment  of  higher  grades  of  perfection. 

The  period  of  life,  of  the  three  master  castes,  was 
divided  into  four  portions  or  stages.     The  first,  that 
of  the  student,  was  to  be  devoted  to  sacred  study  ; 
the  second,  that  of  the  householder,  to  the  duties  of 
active  life ;  the  third,  that  of  the  hermit,  to  solitude 
and  contemplation  ;  the  fourth  and  last,  that  of  the 
mendicant,  to  self-denial  and  abstraction.     This  dis- 
tribution leaves,  therefore,  but  one-fourth  of  exist- 
ence for  the  offices  of  a  householder,  the  father  of  a 
family,  the  citizen  ;  and  this  is  one  respect  in  which 
the   tendency  of  the   Hindu    system   to    depreciate 
active,  social,   and   moral  obligations  is  most  mis- 
chievously manifested.    It  is  not  to  be  imagined  that 
the  Hindus  are  ignorant  of  the  foundations  of  all 
morality,  or  that  they  do  not  value  truth,  justice, 
integrity,  benevolence,  charity  to  all  that  lives,  and 
even  the  requital  of  evil  with  good.     *'  The  tree,"  says 
one  of  their  familiar  illustrations,  "  withholds  not 
its  shade  from  the  woodman  that  is  cutting  it  down." 
"The  sandal-tree,"    says  another,    "communicates 
its  fragi^ance  to  the  hatchet  that  levels  it  with  the 
ground."     These  duties  are  all  repeatedly  enjoined, 
and  Hindu  authorities  commend  as  earnestly  as  those 
of  any  other  language,  and  the  people  practice,  in 
general,  as  much  as  most  other  people,  the  duties  of 


LECTURE    II.  61 

their  social  condition,  filial  piety,  paternal  tender- 
ness, kindness  to  inferiors,  and  obedience  to  the 
king.  These,  however,  as  well  as  the  duties  of  caste, 
and  even  devotional  rites,  are  held  to  be  only  sub- 
ordinate and  preliminary  obligations,  steps  leading 
towards  perfection,  but  stopping  at  the  threshhold, 
and  to  be  cast  away  as  soon  as  the  interior  of  the 
temple  is  entered.  All  the  obligations  of  social  life 
do  no  more  than  qualify  a  man  to  abandon  them : 
they  are  of  no  avail,  they  are  impediments  in  his 
way  when  he  undertakes  to  consummate  the  end 
of  his  being,  when  he  would  lose  himself  entirely  in 
imperturbable  meditation  upon  his  own  nature,  by 
which  alone  he  can  know  that  he  himself  is  one  with 
the  Divine  nature,  by  which  alone  he  can  be  identi- 
fied with  the  universal  soul,  and  emancipated  for 
ever  from  the  necessity  of  future  existence. 

Now  it  is  true  that  in  the  present  constitution  of 
Indian  society  this  distribution  of  the  periods  of  life, 
beyond  that  of  the  student,  is  never  regarded,  ex- 
cept by  a  few,  who  prefer  a  life  of  lazy  mendicity, 
or  by  some  half-crazed  enthusiast,  who  thinks  it 
possible  to  realise  the  letter  of  the  law.  The  great 
body  of  the  people,  Brahmans  included,  pursue  their 
worldly  avocations  as  long  as  their  faculties  permit, 
spend  the  decline  of  life  in  the  bosom  of  their  fami- 
lies, and  die  peaceably  and  decently  at  home.  But 
although  the  practice  is  discontinued  the  doctrine 
remains,  and  influences  opinion ;  and  devotional 
ceremonies,  pilgrimage,  penance,  and  abstract  con- 
templation, have  an  undue  preponderance  in  the 
estimation  of  the  people,  even  the  best  informed 
amongst  them,  over  active  duties  and  the  precepts 
of  morality.     As  to  the  common  people,  they  have, 


62  LECTURE  II. 

as  I  indicated  in  my  last,  a  still  lower  scale,  and  they 
find  a  ready  substitute  for  the  inconveniences  of  all 
moral  restraint  in  the  fervour  of  that  faith  which 
they  place  in  Vishnu,  and  the  unwearied  perseve- 
rance with  which  they  train  a  parrot  or  a  starling 
to  repeat  his  names,  to  articulate  Krishna-Radha, 
or  Sita-Ram. 

What  then  are  the  consequences  which  the  Hin- 
dus propose  to  themselves  from  the  fulfilment  of  any 
description  of  prescribed  duties  or  acts  of  merit  ? 
Those  who  profess  devoted  attachment  to  a  popular 
deity  expect  to  be  rewarded  by  elevation  to  the 
heaven  in  which  he  is  supposed  to  dwell,  and  to 
reside  there  for  ever  in  ecstatic  communication  or 
union  with  him.  These  notions,  however,  are  inno- 
vations ;  and  even  the  independent  establishments, 
the  several  heavens  of  these  divinities,  are  modern 
contrivances.  The  heaven  of  Krishna,  Go-loka,  the 
sphere  or  heaven  of  cows,  has  grown  out  of  the 
legends  of  his  boyhood,  whilst  straying  amongst 
the  pastures  of  Vruj.  There  is  no  such  place  in  the 
celestial  topography  of  the  Vedas,  or  of  the  most 
genuine  of  the  Puranas. 

According  to  what  appears  to  be  the  most  ancient 
and  authentic  theory  of  the  future  state  of  man,  punc- 
tual performance  of  religious  rites,  with  due  atten- 
tion to  moral  conduct,  and  entire  belief  in  the  holi- 
ness of  the  Vedas,  secured  for  the  soul  after  death 
a  period  of  enjoyment  proportioned  to  the  quantum 
of  moral  and  religious  merit  of  the  deceased,  in  the 
heaven  of  Indra  ;  a  kind  of  Elysium.  Neglect  of 
prescribed  rites  and  duties,  irreverence  for  the  Brah- 
mans,  and  disbelief  in  the  Vedas,  incurred  punish- 
ment for  a  given  term,  proportionate  to  the  crime. 


LECTURE    11.  63 

ill  various  hells,  or  regions  of  Tartarus.  At  the 
expiration  of  a  limited  period,  the  soul,  which 
in  either  of  its  destinations  had  continued  to  he 
invested  with  a  subtile  and  ethereal,  but  material 
and  sensible  body,  returns  to  earth,  and  is  born 
again,  in  union  with  some  gross  and  elemental 
body,  according  to  the  former  merits  or  demerits  of 
the  individual,  as  a  reptile,  a  fish,  a  bird,  a  beast,  a 
giant,  a  spirit,  a  divinity,  until,  after  sundry  migra- 
tions, it  ascends  or  descends  to  man,  to  undergo  a 
similar  career. 

Now  this,  I  may  remark,  is  what  the  Hindus 
understand  by  Fate.  They  do  not  understand  it  to 
depend  upon  the  Divine  foreknowledge  of  what  a 
man  will  be,  or  will  do,  conformably  to  which  he 
must  act  and  must  be ;  nor  is  it,  in  their  opinion, 
an  irresistible  impulse  given  to  his  career,  which  he 
cannot  choose  but  obey.  It  is  the  result  of  conduct 
in  a  previous  existence,  the  consequences  of  which 
are  necessarily  suffered  in  a  succeeding  life.  A  man 
is  poor,  miserable,  diseased,  unfortunate,  not  because 
it  was  so  predestined,  not  because  it  was  so  ordained 
from  the  beginning  of  time,  but  because  he  was 
ignorant,  negligent,  profligate,  irreligious  in  a 
former  life,  and  is  now  paying  the  penalty  of  his 
follies  and  his  sins.  He  cannot  change  his  actual 
condition,  but  he  is  so  far  master  of  his  own  fate, 
that  by  now  leading  a  life  of  innocence  and  piety, 
he  will  secure  his  being  born  again  to  a  better  and 
a  happier  lot. 

The  consequences  of  acts,  whether  moral  or 
devotional,  being  thus,  in  the  estimation  of  all 
classes  of  Hindus,  temporary  and  transient,  the  philo- 
sophical   schools   have    made  it   their   especial   aim 


64        ^  ^^  LECTURE   II. 

to  determine  by  what  means  a  career  so  precarious 
and  uneasy  may  be  cut  short.  For  it  is  a  remark- 
able circumstance  in  the  history  of  Hindu  opin- 
ion, that,  amidst  the  many  varieties  of  practice 
and  collisions  of  belief  that  have  from  time  to  time 
prevailed  in  India,  it  does  not  seem  to  have  occurred 
to  any  individual,  learned  or  unlearned,  heterodox 
or  orthodox,  to  call  in  question  the  truth  of  the 
Metempsychosis.  It  is  not  only  the  one  point  onv^hich 
all  are  agreed,  it  is  the  one  point  which  none  have 
ever  disputed.  Even  the  Buddhist,  who  denies  every 
other  essential  dogma  of  the  Brahmanical  religion, 
adopts,  without  demurring,  as  an  article  of  his  creed, 
the  transmigration  of  the  soul.  It  is,  as  you  know, 
a  doctrine  of  remote  antiquity,  and  it  still  reigns 
despotic,  without  any  sign  of  decrepitude  or  decay, 
over  the  minds  of  the  nations  of  the  extreme  east, 
over  Burman,  Chinese,  Tartar,  Tibetan,  and  Indian; 
over  perhaps  the  most  numerous  portion  of  the 
human  race ;  over  at  least  six  or  seven  hundred 
millions  of  mankind. 

Adopting,  then,  this  unquestioned  dogma  as  the 
basis  of  their  argument,  all  the  philosophical  schools 
propose  for  their  object  the  ascertainment  of  those 
means  by  which  the  wanderings  of  the  soul  may  be 
arrested,  its  transitions  through  all  the  painful 
vicissitudes  of  corporeal  existence  be  terminated, 
and  its  emancipation  from  bodily  imprisonment 
and  degradation  be  effected  for  ever.  This  is 
what  is  termed  Moksha,  or  MuMi  —  Liberation, 
emancipation.  All  the  systems  agree  that  this 
devoutly  desirable  consummation  is  to  be  accom- 
plished only  through  that  knowledge  which  they 
profess  to  teach ;    not   literature,  not  science,  not^ 


LECTURE    II.  65 

morality,  not  devotion,  but  true  knowledge ;  know- 
ledge, obtained  by  profound  contemplation,  of  the 
true  nature  of  the  soul,  and  of  the  universe ;  when 
the  contemplatist  can  say,  with  perfect  conviction, 
and  with  truth,  I  am  Brahma,  I  am  all  that  is,  I  am 
one  with  God.  The  absolute  state  of  the  soul  thus 
liberated  is  nowhere  clearly  defined  ;  it  ceases  to 
transmigrate ;  it  loses  all  bodily  individuality ;  it 
loses  all  spiritual  individuality,  as  whether,  with  the 
Vedanta,  we  consider  it  to  be  reunited  with,  or 
absorbed  into,  the  Supreme  Spirit,  or  whether,  with 
the  Sankhyas,  we  hold  it  to  be  commingled  with 
the  spiritual  element  of  the  universe,  individual 
spirit  ceases  to  exist.  Annihilation,  then,  as  regards 
individuals,  is  as  much  the  ultimate  destiny  of  the 
soul  as  it  is  of  the  body,  and  "  Not  to  be"  is  the 
melancholy  result  of  the  religion  and  philosophy  of 
the  Hindus. 

I  have  thus  attempted  to  place  before  you  some 
of  the  principal  features  of  the  religious  practices 
and  opinions  of  the  Hindus,  to  which  it  is  fit  that 
your  attention  should  be  directed  in  engaging  in  any 
investigation  of  their  nature.  To  have  entered  more 
fully  into  detail  would  have  occupied  too  much  of 
your  time,  and  particulars  will  be  easily  multiplied 
by  inquiry.  With  the  minor  incidents  of  the  popular 
superstition  it  is  not  necessary  to  encumber  the 
argument  farther  than  they  are  countenanced  by 
authorities  considered  sacred.  That  learned  Brah- 
mans  will  readily  admit  the  unauthorized  intro- 
duction, and  the  unprofitable  and  degrading  tendency 
of  much  of  the  popular  practice,  is  not  unlikely,  as 
I  have  before  stated  ;  and  their  indifference  is  likely 
to  be  the  chief  obstacle  to  their  acknowledging  the 

F 


66  LECTURE  II. 

inefficiency  and  evil  of  much  even  of  that  which  is 
authorized.  They  are  likely  to  adhere  to  their 
speculative  tenets,  and  particularly  to  those  regard- 
ing the  nature  and  condition  of  the  soul,  with  more 
tenacious  obstinacy.  Dependence  on  authority, 
veneration  for  antiquity,  pride  of  learning,  confi- 
dence in  argument,  and  disdain  of  defeat,  will  com- 
bine with  the  inherent  difficulties  of  the  controversy 
to  oppose  the  influence  of  reason  in  generating  con- 
viction in  the  minds  of  the  Pundits.  Still  there 
is  no  occasion  to  despair.  Besides  that  encourage- 
ment which  a  firm  trust  in  the  omnipotence  of  truth 
inspires,  we  may  derive  animation  and  hope  from 
the  history  of  the  past. 

It  will  not  have  escaped  your  observation,  that  in 
all  the  most  important  speculations  upon  the  nature 
of  the  Supreme  Being  and  man,  upon  matter  and 
spirit,  the  Hindus  traverse  the  very  same  ground 
that  was  familiarly  trodden  by  the  philosophers  of 
Greece  and  Rome,  and  pursue  the  same  ends  by  the 
same  or  similar  paths.  The  result  was  equally  im- 
potent ;  but  what  it  more  concerns  us  to  remark  is, 
that  all  these  speculations — all  the  specious  systems 
of  philosophers,  at  once  acute  and  profound — all  the 
plausible  and  graceful  illustrations  of  the  most  pro- 
lific ingenuity — all  the  seemingly  substantial  com- 
binations of  intellectual  powers  still  unsurpassed, 
were  divested  of  their  speciousness,  despoiled  of 
their  beauty,  deprived  of  all  by  which  they  held 
reason  captive,  and  shewn  to  be  fallacious  and  false 
by  the  Ithuriel  spear  of  Christian  truth.  The  wea- 
pons, which  wielded  by  the  first  defenders  of  that 
truth  discomfited  these  delusions,  are  in  your  hands. 


LECTURE   II.  67 

Have  they  lost  their  efficacy,  or  have  you  not  the 
skill,  the  courage  to  employ  them  ? 

It  is  however  to  be  recollected,  that  agreeably  to 
the  invitation  of  the  Bishop  of  Calcutta,  an  im- 
pression upon  the  minds  of  learned  natives,  that  is, 
upon  Pundits,  Brahnians  learned  only  in  Sanscrit 
learning  is  only  a  contingency.  The  argument  is 
to  be  addressed  in  the  first  instance,  to  English- 
reading  natives,  to  natives  who  have  been  educated 
in  the  language  of  our  country,  and  in  the  learning 
of  Europe.  There  are  many  such  at  the  chief  cities 
of  the  British  Indian  empire.  In  Calcutta  they  are 
in  great  numbers,  perhaps  thousands,  and  they  are 
of  various  descriptions.  The  greater  number  have 
only  such  knowledge  of  English  as  qualifies  them 
for  public  employment,  and  they  rarely  concern 
themselves  with  matters  of  controversy.  Some  very 
good  native  English  scholars  continue  orthodox, 
nay  even  bigoted  Hindus.  They  are  generally 
however  men  of  mature  years  who  studied  English 
in  early  life,  when  they  were  taught  little  else 
than  words.  Some  who  are  familiar  with  our  lan- 
guage are  amongst  the  leading  members  of  the 
society  instituted  by  Rammohun  Roy,  to  which  I 
have  already  alluded ;  a  much  greater  number 
consist  of  young  men  whose  English  education 
is  more  recent,  and  has  been  conducted  on  an  im- 
proved and  more  effective  plan,  which  proposes  to 
give  an  English  tone  to  their  feelings  and  princi- 
ples, as  well  as  to  communicate  parts  of  speech. 
Many  of  these  write  English,  not  only  with  facility 
but  with  elegance  :  they  are  familiar  with  our  stand- 
ard authors,  are  possessed  of  an  extent  of  general 
information,  which  few  young  men  even  in  England 

F  2 


68  LECTURE   II. 

at  the  same  age  surpass,  and  have  learned  to  think 
and  feel  on  many  important  subjects  more  like 
natives  of  the  west  than  of  the  east.  These  have 
almost  all  become  Seceders  in  different  degrees  from 
the  religion  of  their  fathers.  They  have  not  how- 
ever yet  adopted  a  better.  The  last  description  of 
English  scholars  is  a  branch  from  that  just  speci- 
fied, and  consists  of  a  few  who  have  read,  reflected, 
reasoned,  and  believed.  One  of  them,  Kristo  Mohan 
Banerji,  a  young  man  of  very  excellent  ability  and 
attainments,  by  birth  a  Brahman  of  the  most  re- 
spectable rank,  is  an  ordained  minister  of  the  Eng- 
lish church  in  Calcutta. 

It  is  the  advantage  of  those  English  scholars  who 
halt  yet  between  two  opinions,  who  have  no  religion 
at  all,  that  the  work  to  which  competition  has  been 
invited,  is  calculated  in  the  first  instance  to  pro- 
mote. The  feeling  with  which  most  of  them  regard 
Hinduism  is  favourable  to  conviction,  and  it  might 
be  supposed,  that  as  they  have  already  disavowed 
allegiance  to  it,  they  require  not  to  be  enlightened 
as  to  its  errors  and  evils ;  but  this  would  be  a  mis- 
take. Their  English  education  has  left  them  no 
opportunity  of  native  education,  and  they  know 
almost  as  little  of  what  they  abandon  as  what  they 
decline  to  accept.  It  is  not  possible  to  depend  upon 
the  durability  of  impressions,  taken  up  from  a 
wish  perhaps  to  get  rid  of  inconvenient  restrictions, 
or  from  the  vanity  of  being  thought  wiser  than 
others,  rather  than  from  a  rational  estimate  of  the 
defects  of  a  system  grounded  upon  a  knowledge  of 
that  system.  By  placing  those  defects  clearly  be- 
fore them,  they  will  become  more  aware  of  their 
existence  and  character,  and  their  conviction  will  be 


LECTURE   II.  69 

rational  and  permanent.  They  will  also  be  able  to 
defend  their  conviction,  perhaps  to  communicate  it 
to  others.  At  present  truth  derives  not  that  benefit 
even  from  its  professed  votaries,  which  they  might 
easily  be  in  a  position  to  render.  The  mere  native 
English  scholar  has  no  common  debateable  ground 
on  which  to  contend  with  his  learned  countrymen. 
The  contemptuous  answer  of  the  Brahman  to  his 
objections  is,  "You  know  nothing  about  the  matter — 
you  understand  not  the  language  of  the  Sastras — 
you  are  unacquainted  with  their  contents — you  are 
not  qualified  to  impugn  them."  If  his  adversary 
can  shew  that  he  is  conversant  with  the  system,  he 
will  acquire  the  right  of  being  listened  to,  and  he 
will  possibly  not  be  listened  to  wholly  in  vain. 
When  too  at  the  same  time  that  he  is  supplied  with 
valid  reasons  for  his  own  departure  from  the  na- 
tional superstitions,  he  is  furnished  with  arguments 
and  inducements  to  seek  shelter  from  his  own  uneasy 
undulations  of  opinion  in  the  harbour  of  Christian 
certainty,  it  may  be  hoped  that  he  will  not  only  con- 
tribute to  win  his  countrymen  from  their  errors,  by 
laying  bare  their  enormity,  but  that  he  will  afford 
in  his  own  person  an  example  and  a  guide  to  the 
adoption  of  a  pure  and  holy  system  of  belief. 

It  is  recommended  that  with  a  view  to  the  trans- 
lation of  the  proposed  Essay,  it  should  be  written 
in  the  form  of  a  dialogue.  The  writers  are  not  to 
understand  by  this  a  mere  succession  of  question 
and  answer,  or  a  keen  encounter  of  wit,  or  even  the 
more  equally  maintained  discussion  of  which  the 
works  of  Cicero  and  Plato  furnish  classical  models. 
In  the  style  in  which  the  Puranas  for  instance,  are 
written,  a  disciple,  or  one  seeking  for  information, 


70  LECTURE    II. 

puts  a  leading  question  which  furnishes  a  text  on 
which  his  teacher  or  instructor  dilates,  or  he  sug- 
gests a  difficulty  or  hints  an  objection,  which  is 
thereupon  attempted  to  be  solved  or  answered  at 
length. 

To  those  who  may  undertake  the  task  I  have  one 
caution  to  offer.  Let  whatever  they  urge  be  urged 
in  charity. 

It  is  natural  to  feel  impatient  of  error — it  is  diffi- 
cult not  to  feel  indignant  with  wickedness ;  but, 
in  instituting  a  discussion  into  the  truth  or  falsehood 
of  a  religious  creed,  with  the  hope  of  demonstrat- 
ing the  latter  to  the  assent  of  those  by  whom  it  is 
professed,  we  have  not  in  view  the  expression  of  our 
own  feelings,  but  a  kindly  influence  over  theirs — we 
are  not  contending  for  victory  but  for  conviction — 
we  seek  not  to  humble  or  incense  our  adversaries, 
but  to  conciliate  their  confidence  and  direct  their 
judgment — we  seek  to  work  a  salutary  change  in 
their  principles,  and  in  this  we  shall  most  assuredly 
fail  if  we  commence  the  operation  by  disregarding 
their  prejudices  and  provoking  their  resentment. 
The  Hindu  is  not  resentful — not  unconfiding — not 
disinclined  to  discussion — not  incapable  of  appreci- 
ating kindness — at  the  same  time  he  is  sensitive  and 
timid.  Treat  him  rudely,  harshly,  intemperately,  it  is 
like  touching  the  leaf  of  the  mimosa;  he  shrinks  from 
all  contest — he  adopts  the  course  recommended  by  his 
authorities  to  the  man  in  quest  of  true  knowledge — 
he  imitates  the  tortoise  who  retracts  his  limbs  be- 
neath his  shell,  and  is  then  alike  indifferent  to  the 
sunshine  or  the  storm.  Let  the  argument,  then,  be 
enforced  in  a  spirit  of  benevolence — let  it  be  a  calm 
and  conciliating  appeal  to  the  understanding  of  in- 


LECTURE   II.  71 

telligent  men,  and,  although  it  may  fail  of  producing 
any  immediate  or  ostensible  effect,  it  will  not  in  all 
likelihood  have  been  wholly  unprofitable.  Important 
changes  in  the  opinions  of  nations  are  not  the  work 
of  a  day.  Many  and  repeated  and  long  continued 
efforts  are  necessary  for  their  consummation,  and 
many  causes  of  little  apparent  magnitude,  and  of  no 
immediately  observable  agency,  cooperate  for  their 
accomplishment.  It  is  not  the  earthquake  or  the 
tempest  only  that  rives  asunder  the  mountain 
barriers  of  the  Himalaya,  and  opens  its  steep  re- 
cesses to  man  and  to  cultivation.  The  smallest 
rill  that  trickles  from  the  eternal  snow  contributes 
to  swell  the  torrents,  which,  bursting  through  the 
rocks,  transform  declivities  into  valleys,  and  preci- 
pices into  paths,  and  finally  descend  a  stately  river 
to  fertilize  the  plains  of  Hindustan. 


'♦ 


Princeton  Theological  Semmary-Speer  Lit 


1    1012  01061    1392 


*f^  ., 

^^r^  "*i 

^r^^ 


W^'m*-::M 


%M 


mt 


