===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.228867.The-Religion_djvu.txt =====

THE EELIGION AND 
PHILOSOPHY OP THE VEDA 
AND DPANISHADS 

BY 

ARTHUR BERRIEDALE KEITH 

D.C.L., D.Liit. 

Of the Inner Temple^ Barrister-at-Law^ and of the Scottish Bar ; Regius 
Professor of Sanskrit and Comparative Philology at the University 
of Edinburgh ; formerly of the Colonial Office 


The, second half. Chapters ^0-29 
Page S13 to page 683 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 

Delhi :: Varanasi :: Patna 



© MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 
Indological Publishers & Booksellers 
Head Office : BUNGALOW ROAD, JAWAHAR NAGAR, DELHI-7 
Branches : 1. CHOWK, VARANASI-i (u.P.) 

2. ASHOK-RAJPATH, OPP. PATNA COLLEGE, PATNA-4 (BIHAR) 


By arrangement with the Harvard University Press 


First Edition 1925 
First Indian Reprint 1970 
Second Indian Reprint 1976 

Price t Rs, 80.00 for 2 vols. 


Printed in India 

BY 8HANTILAL JAIN, AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS, A-45, PHASE- 1 , INDUSTRIAL 
AREA, NARAINA, NEW DELHl-28 AND PUBLISHED BY SUNDARLAL JAIN, FOR 
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS BUNGALOW ROAD, JAWAHAR NAQAR, DELHI-7 



CONTENTS OF VOLUME 33 


CHAP. 

20. The sacrifices of the ^rauta ritual 


§ 1. General characteristics .... 

§ 2. Establishment and re-establishment of the fires 
§ 3. The Fire-god oblation or Agnihotra 
§ 4. The new-moon and full-moon sacrifices * 

§ 5. The four-month or seasonal sacrifices 
§ 6. First-fruit sacrifice (agrayana isti) and others . 

§ 7. The animal sacrifice ..... 

§ 8. The Soma sacrifice ... 

§ 9. The Pravargya or hot-milk sacrifice 

§10. The Aikadagina animal offering 

§11. Other forms of Jyotistoma .... 

§ 12. Other Soma sacrifices of one day’s duration . 

§ 13. The Vajapeya or drink-of-strength 
§ 14. The royal consecration ..... 

§ 15. The horse sacrifice ..... 

§ 16. The human sacrifice ..... 

§ 17. Other Ahina rites ..... 

§18. The Sattras or sacrificial sessions . 

§ 19. The Sautrama^i ...... 

§ 20. The piling of the fire-altar .... 

§ 21. The Hotr formulae . , . . , 

§ 22. Expiations ....... 


21. The domestic ritual .... 

>*/§!. General character of the domestic sacrifices 
2. The various offerings 
y§ 3. Birth-ceremonies and others . 

§ 4. Studentship 

^§5. Marriage .... 


22. Magic in the ritual ....... 

§ 1. The relations of magic to religion . 

§ 2. The nature of Vedic magic .... 

§ 3. The removal of hostile influences 
§ 4. The attraction of beneficial substances and powers 


PAGE 

. 313 

. 313 

, 316 

. 318 

. 319 

. 321 

. 323 

. 324 

. 826 
. 332 

. 833 

. 834 

. 836 

. 839 

. 840 

. 843 

, 347 

^ 348 

.. 849 

. 852 

, 854 

. 356 

. 856 

. 858 

. 858 

. 859 

- 866 
• 869 

. 873 

. 879 

. 879 

. 880 
. 882 
. 886 



Contents of volume 32 


ri 


CHAP. page 

§ 5. Mimetic magic ........ 388 

§ 6. Divination and ordeal . ..... 390 

§ 7. The magic spell . ...... 393 

§ 8. The magic sacrifice . . . . . 396 

§ 9. Yoga practices ........ 401 


CONTENTS OF PART IV.— THE SPIRITS OF THE DEAD 


23. The abodes of the dead ........ 403 

§ 1. The nature of the dead ...... 403 

§ 2. The places of the dead ....... 406 

§ 3. The transmutation of the dead ..... 415 

24. The disposal of the dead ........ 417 

25. The cult of the dead ........ 425 

§ 1. The living and the dead ...... 425 

§ 2. The offerings to the dead in the domestic ritual . . 427 

§ 3. The offerings to the dead in the ^rauta ritual . . . 429 

CONTENTS OF PART V.— THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE VEDA 

26. The beginnings of Vedic Philosophy ...... 433 

27. The Theosophy of the Brahmanas ...... 440 

§ 1. The general character of the Brahmana philosophy . . 440 

§ 2. The highest principle of the universe .... 442 

§ 3, The theory of the sacrifice ...... 454 

§ 4. The ethics of the Brahmanas ..... 468 

§ 5. Modes of thought and categories ..... 482 

28. The Philosophy of the Upanisads ...... 489 

§ 1. The origin of the XJpanisads ...... 489 

§ 2. The extant Upanisads ....... 497 

§ 3, The interpretation of the Upanisads .... 507 

§ 4. The problem and conditions of knowledge . . . 513 

§ 5. The nature of the Absolute ...... 516 

§ 6. The Absolute and the Universe ..... 522 

§ 7. Maya and Prakrti — lUusion and Nature . . . 529 

(а) Illusion 529 

(б) Nature 532 

(c) The origin of the Samkhya and Buddhism . . . 535 

§ 8. The Supreme and the Individual Souls .... 551 



Contents of volume 32 vii 

CHAP. PAG-E 

§ 9. The four states of the Soul ...... 567 

§ 10. The doctrine of transmigration . . . . .570 

§ 11. The way of salvation ....... 581 

§ 12. The ethics of the Upanisads and Yoga .... 584 

§ 13. The significance of the philosophy of the Upanisads . 592 

29. Greece and the philosophy of India ...... 601 


APPENDIX 

A. The age of the Avesta and the Rigveda ..... 614 

B. The sacrifice of Purusa and the origin of the world . . . 619 

C. The Aryan conception of the heaven ..... 621 

D. The drink of immortality ....... 628 

E. The Indo-European fire-cult ....... 625 

F. Cremation and burial ........ 626 

G. The Dravidian element in Indian thought .... 629 

H. Pythagoras and Parmenides ....... 634 

General Index 639 


Sanskrit Index . 


675 




CHAPTER 20 

THE SACRIFICES OF THE ^RAUTA RITUAL 

§ 1. General Characteristics 

The rites of the ^rauta ritual have much essentially in common, in addition 
to the necessity of the use of the three or one at least of the three fires in 
place of the domestic fire. They necessitate the presence of priests numbering 
from one up to sixteen, or with the Kausitakins seventeen,^ to whom should be 
added the actual performers of some of the minor actions in the more compli- 
cated forms of the ritual, whose number is not defined, and whose menial 
functions rendered them of no consequence in the eyes of the priests of the 
higher rank. It is obvious, for instance, that in the slaughtering of the victims 
there must often have been need for other aid than that of the Adhvaryu and 
his assistants proper, and the Camitrs are occasionally referred to as charged 
with the actual slaying : more often a general term like servant is used to 
apply to such helpers. 

As a result of the constant development of the ritual, the festivals of the 
^rauta type are full of details which are of no consequence with regard to the 
meaning of the sacrifice : practically in no case is an important rite addressed 
to one god only : the effort on the contrary was clearly to find as much room 
as possible for as many gods as possible. We find, too, many variations 
among the details of the rites, of which but a few can be reduced to any simple 
principle. Thus we know that some families like the Jamadagnis and the 
Bhrgus made five divisions or layers of the offerings, while other families ^ 
made but four, whence the former are called •pahcdvattins, and the latter 
caturavattins. Another distinction which has more religious value is the 
differences between families based on the distinction of the use of Tanunapat 
or Nara9ahsa, as one of the deities invoked at the Apri litanies of the animal 
sacrifice,® while the difference of dressing the hair is also of interest from the 
point of view of social usages,^ having many parallels in other lands. 

In the Sutras the principle is laid down that the sacrifices are to be dis- 
tinguished as Prakrtis and Vikrtis, the former being the base on which the 
later are built up ; thus the new’- and full-moon sacrifices are the model for 
other sacrifices of the type known as Isti, and for the animal sacrifice, in its 
form as an offering to Agni and Soma, on wfiich further animal offerings are 
based. The Agnistoma again is the fundamental form of the Soma sacrifice : 

1 See Keith, Rig-Veda Brahmanas, pp. 48, ® Weber, Ind. Stud, x. 89 

498,11. 1. ^ Zimmer, Aliind, Leben^ p. 264; Hille- 

2 KfS. i. 9. 3 ; Eggeling, SEE. xii. 192. brandt, Rituallitteratur, pp. 7, 8. 



314 


Vedic Ritual 


[Part III 


on it are based other performances up totheDvada^aha inclusive, while on the 
latter are based the Sattras. Each sacrifice is divided into Pradhanas, the 
characteristics which mark it out as a special offering, and Angas, the auxiliary 
parts which are common to many sacrifices, and which build the framework, 
Tantra, which serves to maintain the sacrifice. The distinction between the 
Yajatayas and the Juhotayas, the latter managed by the Adhvaryu alone and 
accompanied by the mere utterance of the word Svaha, ‘ hail ’5^ has already 
been noted. 

In the Soma offering there is added the complications of the recitation of 
the Samans. The rule is that the Saman is a melody, which is performed on 
a verse of the Rigveda, and the verses can be sung to different melodies, for 
which purpose they have to be eked out by the addition of letters, or even of 
whole syllables, which have themselves no meaning, and of which as many as 
fifteen are enumerated.^ The nature of the times must have been’ varied in the 
extreme, to judge from the many names recorded, of which the Brhat and the 
Rathantara are the most notorious, but the nature of Indian music is an 
unsolved problem, and perhaps insoluble.® Seven notes are mentioned, but 
their significance is much disputed. Each Saman is divided into parts, the 
most usual being that into Prastava, introduced by the word hum {hunkdra\ 
sung by the Prastotr, the Udgitha, introduced by om, sung by the Udgatr, the 
Pratihara, introduced by hmn, sung by the Pratihartr, and the Nidhana, or 
finale, sung by all together. In some cases the Pratihara is divided into two 
parts, the latter, the Upadrava, being sung by the Udgatr, or the Hinkara is 
made into a separate element. Moreover there are UpagMrs, three in number, 
who accompany the song with the word ho. The contempt which through the 
Indian literature is more or less clearly shown for Saman singers is justified by 
the extraordinary stupidity of the position assigned to them. 

The singing of more than one verse on a tune is a Stotra, which usually 
is made up of a triplet or a Pragatha, a double verse, which is made into three 
for recitation purposes. From the Stotras are built up the Stomas, or forms 
of chanting Stotras. Of these there are many varieties. The simplest in some 
ways is the Trivrt, which is the first used in the Agnistoma : it consists of nine 
verses, which can be variously arranged in sets of three, either as adg, beh, cfi, 
which is the Udyati form, or abcy def, ghi, the Parivartini, and abc, efd, igh, the 
KulayinL On the other hand the other Stomas, the Pancada9a, Saptada^a, 
EkavifiQa, which with the Trivrt are the main Stomas of the Agnistoma, and 
others such as the Pancavinga, Triniava, Trayastrihga, Caturvinga, Catugcat- 
varifiga, and Astacatvaringa, are all based on three verses or a Pragatha made 
into three. The numbers of the Stomas are derived from the number of verses 
which are used : thus the Pancadaca in one form is made up of aaabc^ ahhhc, 

^ HiHebrandt, RitmllitteratwTy p. 100. Hindostan (1914) ; Caland and Henry, 

* Cf. Felber, Die indische Musik der vedi- Agnistoma, pp. 461-7 ; Oldenberg, 

schen und der klassischen Zeit (1912) ; GN. 1915, pp. 522 ff. For the metre 

A. H. Fox Strangways, The Mumc of see H. Weller, ZII. i. 115-84. 



Chap. 20] General Characteristics 315 

and abccc, the Hinkara being said before each set of three similar verses. 
Further complications will be noted later on. 

Before the Stotras can be performed the singers must obtain the approval 
of the Brahman and the Maitravarupa, who give it with the words om stuta, 
the Brahman saying also one of the Stomabhagas, certain formulae provided 
for the purpose. The Stotra is followed by a ^astra, a recitation of the Hotr 
or his fellows, the signal for it being given by the performer of the Stotra 
saying e$d, ‘this is the last verse.’ The Hotr asks the Adhvaryu if he is to 
recite, the latter agrees. But at the morning litany in front of this dialogue 
are placed certain syllables, and a muttered prayer to Matarigvan and the 
Kavis. This is followed by the silent praise, Tusnirhjapa, and by the Puroruc, 

‘ that which shines before ’, but in the midday and evening ^astras the place 
of the Puroruc is taken by Nivids, which are inserted in the hymns of the 
^astra. The Nivids are introduced by the procedure of asking the Adhvaryu’s 
authority to recite, but this formality is omitted in the case of the Puroruc 
at the first ^astra in the morning : at the second Qastra, on the other hand, we 
find seven Purorucs preceded by the dialogue of Hotr and Adhvaryu, and 
followed by a triplet. In the case of the midday ^astras there are further 
complications. In the first Castra of the midday and the evening pressings 
there are found sets of three verses called Pratipad and Anucara, which are 
preceded by the usual dialogue ; then comes in the case of the midday ^astra, 
the Maruta ^astra, a Pragatha addressed to Indra, which is recited as three 
verses, the last part of each verse being repeated with the first of the 
next ; thus the Pragatha, which consists of a Brhati ^ and Satobrhati ^ or 
Kakubh^ and Satobrhati, is made into a Brhati and two Kakubh verses. 
This is followed by a Pragatha for Brhaspati, Dhayyas, supplementary verses, 
a Pragatha for the Maruts, the hymn in which the Nivid is inserted, the 
Ukthavirya formula, and then as in the other f astras come the offering verse 
and the libation. In the case of the second ^astra of the midday and evening 
pressings, and all the ^astras of the assistants of the Hotr, the Hotrakas, the 
same sort of beginning is prescribed, but the verses are called Stotriya and 
Anurupa, names which refer to the fact that they follow the strophe and 
antistrophe of the corresponding Stotra of the Saman singers, which obey the 
rule that the Anurupa, ‘ corresponding verse should follow the Stotriya in 
metre, number of syllables, and deity. As usual the rule is obeyed that the two 
verses of the Stotriya are made into three in recitation, and so with the 
Anurupa. Then in the second ^astra of the midday pressing, the Niskevalya, 
come Dhayyas, a Samapragatha, the hymn with the Nivid, the Ukthavirya 
and the offering verse with the libation. 

In the first ^astra of the evening pressing, the Vai^vadeva, the Pratipad 
and Anucara are followed by a hymn with a Nivid, then a verse for Vayu, 
then a hymn with a Nivid to sky and earth, a hymn with a Nivid for the 

^ A verse of 4 lines (8+ 8+ 12+ 8 syllables), ^ 12+ 8+ 12+ 8 syllables. 

3 8+ 12+ 8 syllables. 



316 


Vedic Ritual 


[Partm 


Rbhus, three isolated verses, and a hymn with a Nivid to the All-gods. The 
second, the Agnimaruta, is composed of a hymn with a Nivid to Vai9vanara, 
a Dhayya, a hymn with a Nivid to the Maruts, the Stotriya and Anurilpa 
made from Pragathas, a hymn with a Nivid to Jatavedas, and a mass of 
miscellaneous stanzas addressed to the waters, &c. The other ^astras are less 
important : the specimens given indicate the confusion and elaboration of 
ideas. 

In other cases there takes place an elaborate process of intermingling both 
verses and parts of verses of different strophes with one another. This is the 
rule with the recitation of the Valakhilya hymns, which may be treated in two 
different but both complicated ways,^ with the Mahanamni verses,^ with the 
verse for the Apyayana or swelling out of the dry Soma stems, and so forth. 
It is only worth noting that as early as the Rigveda these puerilities seem 
to have been in vogue. 

The most important division of the sacrifices is that between the Soma 
offerings and the offerings which are sometimes classed as Haviryajnas, and 
which differ essentially from the Soma sacrifice as they do not employ the 
Saman singers. With the latter may be classed the animal sacrifice, but it 
also forms an integral and important part of the Soma offering. 

§ 2 . The EstaUishment and Be-estahlishmeni of the Fires 

The ritual texts lay down various periods as appropriate for the setting up 
of the sacred fires,® the spring is the season for a Brahman, the summer for 
a Ksatriya, the rainy season for a Rathakara, and the autumn for a Vai 9 ya, 
or the cool season is suited for all castes. They also suggest that the proper 
time is the new moon, especially in conjunction with certain asterisms, but 
the full moon is also permissible. The essential part of the rite which takes two 
days is the setting up of the fires ; on the first day are set up two sheds, the one 
for the Garhapatya, the other for the Ahavaniya fire : the actual altar of the 
first is round, that of the second square : the Daksina fire is south of the 
Garhapatya and is shaped like a half moon. The fire is obtained for the 
Garhapatya either by friction, or by being borrowed from the house of a 
wealthy man or distinguished sacrificer. The night of the first day is spent by 
the sacrificer and his wife in wakefulness to the noise of lutes and flutes. Early 
in the morning the new fire for the hearths is produced by friction, and a horse 
is brought to watch and further the process by its presence, doubtless as a 
symbol of the fire or the sun. Moreover, while the fire is being produced by 
friction from the wood,^ Samans may be sung. As soon as the fibre appears the 
sacrificer breathes upon it and inhales it. It is placed on the Garhapatya and 

1 Cf. Oldenberg, Prolegomena, pp. 212 ff., » Ap^IS. v. 1 ff. ; BgS. ii,^ MQS.i. 5; 6.5; 

494 ff., 514 ff. ; GGA. 1907, pp. 280 ff. ; K^S. iv. 7-10 ; AgS. ii. 1. 9 ff. ; QQS, 

Scteftelowitz, Die Apokryphen des ii. 1 ; LgS. iv. 9- 10 ff. ; 12. 6 ff. 

J^gveda, pp. 36 ff., 89 ff. * Roth, ZDMG. xliii. 590-5 ; Schwab, 

* Cf. Oldenberg, GN. 1915, p. 377. Altind, Thieropfer, pp. 77 ff. 



Chap. 20] Establishment and Re-establishment of the Fires 317 

wood placed upon the fire : it is addressed with words which recall the 
ancestors of the offerer : thus an Ahgirasa refers to Ahgiras, a Bhargava to the 
Bhrgus, a Rajanya to Indra, a Ksatriya to Yaruna, a Vai9ya to Manu 
Gramani, the typical village headman, and a Rathakrt to the Rbhus, the 
famous chariot makers among the gods. At the same time Samans may be 
sung, not by the Saman singers, but, as in the Vajapeya and the Sautramani 
rites, by the Brahman or alternatively by the Adhvaryu himself. Then 
a brand is taken from the Garhapatya and borne to the Ahavaniya, the horse 
preceding it, and the sacrificer following it so that the smoke reaches him : 
it is carried at first knee high, then navel high, and then the height of the face. 
The Daksi:^a fire is then in one version lighted in the same way* ; according 
to others it precedes the setting up of the Ahavaniya : it may also be made 
from the fire which on the preceding day was placed on the Garhapatya for 
cooking the porridge for the priest : at any rate it afterwards can be used for 
cooking any offerings save meat offerings. 

After the Ahavaniya is set up follows, in the case of a Ksatriya only it 
seems, the setting up of a Sabhya fire, one doubtless in the Sabha, the meeting 
hall of the community. The ceremony for that is accompanied by the dicing 
for a cow as a prize by the priests perhaps or by Ksatriyas : the game is as 
usual unintelligible : it seems to have amounted to a test of the power to 
produce even numbers.^ In the normal case this ceremony is not performed, 
and the establishment of the fires ends with a full offering of butter to Agni, 
after which the Agnihotra can be duly performed with the fires. Twelve days 
afterwards, the fires being carefully maintained in the interval, may be per- 
formed the Tanuhavis offerings which are offerings to Agni in three forms, 
Pavaraana, Pavaka, and ^uci. As soon as the performance of the estab- 
lishment is over, the sacrificer is bound to observe chastity for 3 to 12 days, 
maintain the fire, offer the Agnihotra, and sleep on the ground near the fire. 
After that he must for aU his days avoid untruth, place no bad wood on the 
fire, eat nothing cooked by a covered fire, drink no water from a ship, and so 
on. If he is prosperous he must keep up the fires all his life. 

The ceremony of re-establishment * is prescribed in cases where the fires 
bring the sacrificer no luck. The old fires are allowed to go out, and, after a 
break of three days to a year, new fires are established in much the same way 
as before, but the fire is nourished when produced with Ku^a grass, not with 
wood. In the fore- and after-offerings which are part of the rite the use of 
different forms, Vibhakti, of the word Agni is expressly enjoined, doubtless to 
secure the special attention of the god to the new fires. The fees for the priest 
contain references to the character of the rite ; so for instance a mended 
garment and repaired chariot are given. Traces of a periodic re-establishment 
of outworn fires cannot be proved : the mere fact that the re-establishment, 

1 Macdonell and Keith, Vedic Index, i. 2 ff. ; * ApfS. v. 26 ; BgS. iii. 1-3 ; K^S. iv. 11 ; 

lJXAeTS,DmWurJelspklim alien Indien AfS. ii. 8. 6ff. ; ^ J Vait. 

(1907). viii. 3. 



Vedic Rit'ual 


318 


[Part HI 


if necessary^ is placed at the period of the rains as well as at other times is 
inadequate evidence on which to found any theory.^ 


§ 3 . The Fire-God Oblation or Agnihotra 

It is the duty of the man who has established his fires, as of the man 
who has no fires, to offer daily, morning and evening, the Agnihotra : ^ the 
precise time of offering, whether just before or just after the rising of the sun in 
the morning, and whether after sunset or after the appearance of the first star 
in the evening, is a subject of much discussion in the Brahmanas and Sutras. If 
the fires were kept perpetually alight, then they required only to be brightened 
up for each occasion : if not, then the fire must be taken from the Garhapatya, 
either only every evening, it being used also for the morning, or each time : 
the Daksina might be kept perpetually alight, or taken out daily, or only on 
the new- and full-moon days, on which according to some authorities the 
sacrificer must himself perform the ritual. The main offering was milk, 
milked by an Aryan into a pail made by an Aryan : the milk was heated and 
mixed with water on the Garhapatya, and offered in the Ahavaniya and 
Garhapatya. At the end the sacrificer eats and offers four water libations to 
the gods, the Fathers, the seven seers, and Agni on the earth, or to other 
deities also. The Daksina fire received no special honour. 

With the Agnihotra might be performed the ceremony of homage to the 
fires, Agnyupasthtoa, usually carried out at the night service only. The 
Ahavaniya is honoured first, then the cow from which the milk was taken, then 
the Garhapatya, and then the cow, or its calf might be substituted for the cow. 
At the end the sacrificer names the name of his dear son who is to succeed him 
in the duty. The same close connexion of the offering and the home is seen 
in the fact that, on going on a journey, the householder takes leave of the 
fires, and on return approaches them with wood and words of welcome. If he 
goes away from the old house for good, he offers a libation to Vastospati, the 
lord of the abode, while his cart has one horse, the right-hand one, spanned, and, 
the other not yoked. The obligation to offer the Agnihotra ends only when 
one becomes a wandering mendicant. 

There can be little doubt that even as early as the Rigveda there was 
present the idea that the Agnihotra, with its brightening up of the fires, was a 
spell to aid the rising of the sun, a view which was doubtless the ground of the 
opinion of those who pressed for the performance of the ceremony before sunrise.® 


^ Hillebrandt, Fed. MythAi, 77 ff. 

2 ApgS. Vi ; BgS. iii. 4~9 ; UQS. i. 6 ; 
Kgs. iv. 12-15 ; AgS.ii.2-5; ggS.iii. 

7-12 ; Vait. vii. 

^ Weber, ind. iSiwd. X. 329. Cf. the worship 
of Hestia in Greece and Vesta in Rome, 
and the holy fire of the Lithuanian 
tradition, as well as the still greater 
development of the fire cult in Iran. 


The view of Feist (Kultur der Indog^r- 
manen, p. 345) that the fire worship 
takes its origin in respect to the spirits 
of the dead who congregate at the 
hearth is untenable; cf. Wissowa, 
Archiv /. ReUgionswissenschaft^ vii, 
45 ff. For Germany, see Caesar, R. 6?. 
i. 50 ; Helm, AUgerm. Rel, i. 258. See 
also below, Appendix E. 



Chap. 20] 


319 


The Fire-God Oblation or Agnihotra 

But we must not decide from this that the origin of the rite was a mere 
spell : it is clearly the tendance of the god in the house, the family fire in a 
developed form in the ^rauta, in a simple form in the domestic ritual. 

§ 4. The New-moon and Full-moon Sacrifices 

These sacrifices ^ are of special value as they form the model for all sacri- 
fices of the type called Isti, which include an enormous number of offerings for 
special ends ; in all these cases the sacrifice is assumed to be performed pre- 
cisely as in the new- and full-moon offerings, but with the distinction that some 
special rite is inserted in the place of the essential features of these offerings, 
which are at the full-moon offering a cake for Agni and Soma, and at the new- 
moon offering a cake for Agni and Indra. Moreover, at the latter offering some 
authorities allowed a milk mess made of sweet and sour milk for Indra or 
Mahendra, while others restricted this offering to one who offered the Soma 
sacrifice. The new and full moon themselves received no offerings, except 
in the view of certain authorities who prescribed offerings to the Parvans : 
the times served only to fix the dates of the offerings, and there was, it is clear, 
difficulty in deciding exactly when the offerings should be made. Two days 
were required at new moon, but one might suffice at the full moon. On the first 
day the ceremonies were in the main preparatory, the making ready of the 
fires, and the taking of a vow by the sacrificer, which involved abstinence 
from meat, sleeping on the ground, the cutting of hair and beard, and so on. 
If the milk mess were to be offered on this day^ a twig of Pala9a or Qami 
wood was cut to drive away the calves from the cows, for the milking of the 
latter, a rite which is paralleled in western Europe.^ The ceremonies of the 
second day consisted in the preparation of the rice, its pounding and husking, 
the cooking of the cakes, the preparation of the altar, the girding of the wife 
of the sacrificer, the looking at a pot of butter, the covering of the altar with 
the grass, and the setting up of the partitioning sticks which were intended to 
keep off’ evil spirits. At the end of these preliminaries the real sacrifice begins ; 
first come fifteen Samidheni verses accompanying the laying on of kindling 
wood. The verses are Joined into a single whole by the device of pausing after 
the first half verse of each. Then come two libations of the butter, doubtless 
in part at least necessary to make the fire burn brightly ; between them 
comes the Pravara, the enumeration of the seers who 'were claimed as 
ancestors by the sacrificer — or if he were not a Brahman by his Purohita — and 
the invitation of the gods, whom Agni is invoked to bring to the offering in the 
order in which they were to be honoured. After the second of these Agharas 
comes the formal choosing of the Hotr by the Adhvaryu on the authority of 

^ Ap^S. BfS. i ; M^S. i. 1-3 ; KQS. sacrifices are normally based on this 

ii-iv. 5 ; AfS. i. 1, 4-13 ; QfS, i. 4-15 ; principle ; see below. Chap. 22, § 8. Cf. 

Vait. i-iv ; Hillebrandt, Neu^ und Keith, Taittifiya Samhita, i, p, cv. 

Vollmondsopjer (Jena, 1880) ; Weber, * Kuhn, Herdbkunft des Feuers^, p. 159. 

Ind, Stud, X. 329 ff. Even magic 



320 


Vedic Ritual 


[Part in 


the Agnidhra, in which the ancestors of the sacrificer are again named. The 
Hotr then touches the Adhvaryu and Agnidhra, in order doubtless to establish 
a community between them. Then come the fore-offerings of butter to the 
kindling sticks, the god Tanunapat or Nara9ahsa, the sacrificial food {ida)^ 
the gods who have been invited to the offering and are now honoured. Then 
come the Ajya offerings of butter for Agni and Soma, which at the new moon 
must be accompanied by verses containing the word vrdh, ‘ grow and at the 
full moon by verses referring to the slaying of Vrtra. There follows a cake for 
Agni, a butter offering made in a low tone for Agni and Soma, and then the 
offering, to Agni and Soma at the full moon, to Agni and Indra, with or with- 
out a milk mess for Indra, at the new moon. The close of the offering is 
marked by an offering to Agni Svistakrt, ‘the maker of the sacrifice correct’, 
in which all the gods are invoked. Then comes the tasting of the offering by 
the priest, the Brahman has a special portion, the Pragitra, the Agnidhra 
another, the Sadavatta, and all the priests invoke the Ida, which is taken from 
all the offerings, and, while doing so, they touch the sacrificer. Then the cakes 
are given to them, and thereafter each has a part of the Ida. The Fathers are 
invoked to take part, and the fees are given, in this case the Anvaharya mess 
cooked in the Daksina fire, perhaps merely because of the name. The dis- 
tribution of the fees is followed by the Anuyajas, to the strew, Nara^ansa, and 
Agni Svistakrt, and the Suklavaka, which concludes with an invocation of 
prosperity for the sacrificer and a prayer ; at the end of this prayer the 
Prastara, or bundle of grass which is supposed to represent the sacrificer, is 
put in the fire Then comes the ^amyTivaka, an invocation of prosperity, 
accompanied by the burning of the enclosing sticks. The remains are offered 
to the All-gods, then follow four Patnisamyajas, offerings to the gods with 
the wives of the gods, to Soma, Tvastr, the wives of the gods, and Agni 
Grhapati : the third is offered under a covering while the wife of the sacrificer 
touches the Adhvaryu : the offerings are of butter, and made in the Garhapatya 
fire. Then come minor rites to accompany the burning of the strew, and to 
make good defects, the Raksases are given the fragments which have been 
produced in the husking of the rice, the wife’s girdle is loosened and laid down, 
the sacrificer in imitation of and assimilation to Visnu strides three steps from 
the south hip of the altar ground, which is made to be like the shape of a 
woman, to the east, pays reverence to the Ahavaniya and Garhapatya, and 
then lays aside his vow. 

The rite is to be performed all one’s life, or for thirty years, or for fifteen 
only, in which case the two offerings are to be conjoined : in the Daksayana 
form ^ it is celebrated every day for a year only, both forms being used. In 
the case of the first offering of the new- and full-moon sacrifice, the Anvaram- 

^ 4. 1-6, where is given the history Daksayana line. Similarly a list of the 

of the transmission of the rite from handers down of the drink for the king 

Prajapati through Pratidarga Qvaikna, at the royal consecration is given in 

Suplan Sarhjaya, Devabhaga ^rau- AB. vii. 34. 

tarsa, and Daksa Parvati to the royal 



Chap. 20] The New-moon and Full-moon Sacrifices 321 

bhaiiiya Isti is offered, wMch consists of a cake on eleven potsherds for Tisnii, 
a pap for Sarasvat!, and a cake on twelve potsherds for Sarasvant, It is offered 
as an independent rite on the first full-moon day after the AgnyMhana and 
Agnlhotra. Each new- and full-moon sacrifice can be followed by an offering 
to Aditi and to India Vaimrdha, and the sacrifice can be carried out with 
Soma if desired and so also the other Haviryajnas.^ 

The position of Agni and Soma in the ritual is peculiar in view of the rarity 
of the conjunction of these gods in the Rigveda, and it is a legitimate and 
probable conjecture of Oldenberg^s ^ that the place they obtained was only 
gradually won by them, in consequence in some degree at least of the tendency 
to see the moon in Soma. 


§ 5. The Four-month or Seasonal Sacrifices 

The three four-month offerings ® are connected intimately with the 
seasons of the year, the Vai^vadeva being offered in spring, the Varunapra- 
ghasas in the rains, and the Sakamedhas in the autumn, at the beginning of 
each season. The connexion with the seasons is shown by the formulae, the 
names of the months which are connected with certain libations, and the 
formal cutting of the hair which is connected with certain of the rites. The 
man who first performs them must begin with an Isti to Agni Vai9vanara and 
Farjaiiya or an Anvarambhaniya Isti. In each case the sacrifice is introduced 
by five libations to Agni, Soma, Savitr, Sarasvati, and Pusan. In the first 
follow offerings to the Maruts, to the All-gods, and to heaven and earth, the 
first and last of cakes, the second of a milk mess. The season is indicated by 
the use of a tree with budding branches for the wood for the fire, while the 
strew is made from plants which are shooting. 

The second offering, the Varunapraghasas, is more important. One point 
in it is the preparation of two animals, a ram and sheep, from barley, which 
the sacrificer and his wife cover with wool and equip with the marks of sex 
made prominent ; the Adhar}^ makes the one, the Pratiprasthatr the other : 
there are two Vedis, and the south one is assigned to the latter priest, who there 
performs a mimicry of the action of the Adhvaryu. There are offerings to 
Indra and Agni, to Yaruna, to the Maruts and to Ka : the ram and the 
ewe are offered in the milk messes presented to Yaruna and the Maruts respec- 
tively, the remainder being eaten. A further important point is the ceremony 
already referred to,^ by which the wife of the sacrificer is called upon to admit 
what lovers she has and to offer in the Daksina fire the plates of Karambha, 
^ porridge which number one more than the members of the family. The 


1 ggs. xiv. 2 ff. ; LCS. iv. 9 
^ keL des Veda^y I, 439, n. 2. 

^ Apgs. viii ; F'gs. v ; MQS. i. 7 ; KQS. 
y ; AgS. ii. 15-20 ; iii. 13-18 ; 

Vait. viii. 8 ff. ; Weber, Ihd. Sited, x. 
337. 

Above, Part III, Cbap. 18, § 3. For the 
1 [s.o.s. 32] 


two figures Hubert and Mauss (Anfde 
sodoL ii. Ill) adopt the view that they 
represent the spirit of barley as ferti- 
lizing and fertilized, which is eaten in 
the rite, and that the ram is * Varuna 
visible’, but this is quite impossible, or 
a mere mistranslation of gB. ii. 5. 2. 1®. 



322 


Vedic Ritual 


[Part III 


liiisband and wife then share a bath, washing each other in it» The two 
elements of the rite are clearly enough the aim to secure the abundance of the 
flocks, and the sin offering to Varuna, whose presence in the rite may be due 
either to his deep and undeniable connexion with water, or merely be ac- 
counted for by the sin offering and the concluding bath, which are clearly in 
great measure merely pieces of magic to which a religious connexion has been 
attached. 

The third festival is the Sakamedhas : the number of offerings in it, 
especially for the Mamts, is considerable, but the most important element is 
a feast for the dead, the Pitryajna, or Mahapitryajha, where the Fathers are 
honoured as Somavantas, ‘ connected with Soma ’, sitting on the strew, 
and as ‘ burnt by Agni The rite follows the rules for offerings to the dead : 
it takes place in a hut south of the Daksina j&re, in which a Vedi is made and 
the fire there placed : the offerings are made with the term Svadha ^ in place 
of Svaha. Still more important is an offering to Tryambaka,^ which is an 
offering to Rudra, everything therefore being done in the north, the region of 
that god. At a cross-way a fire is made and cakes offered in it, at least four, 
but properly one more than the number of the members of the family. One, 
however, is thrown upon an ant-heap in the north with the words, ‘ This is thy 
portion: the mole is thine animal, O Rudra’. On returning the priests 
engaged and the sacrificer all say, ‘ We supplicate Rudra away from us, aw’'ay 
the god Tryambaka’. As in the offering to the Fathers, they go round the 
Are thrice from right to left, smiting the left thigh, then thrice in the opposite 
and normal way, smiting the right thigh, and the same form is followed by the 
unmarried women of the family, in verses which show^ that they hoped thus to 
secure marriage and avoid death. The remains of the cakes the sacrificer 
throws up in the air and catches as they fall : the cakes are then tied up in 
two baskets, tied to a bamboo, and placed on a tree ® or some similar object so 
high that an ox cannot reach them. Rudra is then asked to go away beyond 
the Mujavants, after which the breath is held and the sacrificers return from 
the place without looking back,^ and touch water. The fee is a white horse, 


1 This term is of ambiguous sense, but 

refers perhaps to the self-disposal or 
volition of the dread spirits. This 
according to Oldenberg {Eel. des Veda^y 
p. sai, n. 3) is due to their partaking of 
the food for the dead. Contra^ Colinet, 
Melanges Mviy pp. 159 JBf. 

2 Arbman, Eudra^ pp. 48-64 ; Hillebrandt, 

Ved. Myth. ii. 186 E. 

® So also in the Baudhyavihara rite in 
.KfS. ii. 9. 1. Rudra thus stands out 
in ritual as associated with a primitive 
mode of offering. Cf. above, Chap. 9, 
§ 10 . 

^ This common rite in connexion with 


ehthonic powers Webei (Rdjasuya, p.ll, 
n. 4) ingeniously but most implausibly 
conjectures to be due to a desire to 
show the complete confidence of safety 
produced in the mind of the performer 
by his devotion. The placing of gifts 
on a tree is a rite with many parallels ; 
Meyer (Gesch. d. p. 722) holds 

that the idea is to bring the offer- 
ing (e.g. in Ilion and Bambyke live 
animajs) into immediate contact with 
the divinity temporarily resident in the 
tree. Cook (Zeus, i. 533) holds that the 
fertilizing animal is placed on the tree 
to secure its life. We are reduced to 



Chap. 20 ] The Four-month or Seasonal Sacrifices 323 

or a bull, white or with white marks. The festival is followed by an offering 
to fnnasirau, which is evidently an agricultural rite for ploughing, addressed 
to two parts or deities of the plough. The features of it are a cake on twelve 
potsherds for funasirau or Indra ^unasmya, fresh milk or barley gruel for 
Vayu, and a cake on one potsherd for Surya : the fee is a six or twelve span 
plough or two plough beasts, while for the offering to Surya a white horse 
or sheep is the fee. A curious way of celebrating the whole of the offering 
together, in five days from the 11th day of the light half of Phalguna to the 
full moon, is recorded as practised by the Kathas. The offerings can also be 
connected with the Soma and the animal offering in such a way that the six 
days of the three make up a Prsthya Sadaha. 


§ 6 . First-fruit Sacrifice [Agrayana Isti) and others 

Before partaking of any of the fruits of the fields it is necessary for a man 
who has established the fires to make offerings.^ The normal offerings are 
those of rice in autumn, and barley in spring : alternatives are bamboo seeds 
in summer, and millet in autumn or the rains : in these two cases Soma is 
the god to whom the offerings are made : in the other case Indra and Agni 
receive a cake of the new fruits, and the All-gods and heaven and earth also 
have offerings. In the first case the fee is a garment or a repaired car, in the 
second the firstborn of the calves cast that year. In place, however, of the 
ordinary Isti the new- and full-moon sacrifices may be performed, or the Agni- 
hotra made night and morning with the new fruits. Or, again, the rice or 
barley may be given to a cow to eat, and then the Agnihotra offered with the 
milk of that cow. In that case the motive of the offering may be taken as 
merely a desire to secure that the first-fruits shall, in the first place, be used 
by some one other than man ; but it is more probable that we have nothing 
more here than the not rare practice of giving animals food in place of the 
deities, or yet more probably that the offering is merely a variety of the normal 
offering, milk being used instead of the actual first-fruits, a simple explanation, 
and one perfectly reasonable in itself. The offering of first-fruits then remains 
a perfectly natural offering to the gods, rather however as the formulae show 
an offering to secure the safe use of the fruits, than the expression of gratitude 
to the gods for their gift. That it was felt to be in any way sacramental, or 
even as inducing a special sense of community, is not to be seen in the Vedic 
evidence. 

Of other Istis there are innumerable varieties, but they are ail based on the 
model of the new- and full-moon offerings, and differ only in the presence of 


mere conjecture. Helm (Altgerm, Bel, 
i. 244 f.) ascribes the German rite (Tac. 
Ann, i. 67) either to an offering to wind 
and air demons or to tree spirits. 

ApgS. vi. 29. 2 ff. ; BQS. iii. 12 ; MgS. i. 
6. 4 ; V ; KfS. iv. 6 ; AgS. iii. 9 ; 
ggS. iii. 12 ; Vait, viii. 4 ; Lindner, 
1 ^ 


Festgruss an Bohtlingkf pp. 79 ff. In 
Mexico the eating of maize had to be 
preceded by a human sacrifice ; 
Sahagun, trans. by Jourdanet and 
Simeon, pp. 126, 135 ; Hubert and 
Mauss, Annie social, ii. 95, 97, 



324 


Vedic Ritual 


[Part in 


certain new offerings. Thus, there are Istis for one who desires a son, for 
various purifications, for making people subject to the sacrihcer, and so on. 
One of the most interesting is the Kariristi, which is obviously a dressed up 
rain spell. A black ^horse is placed in the east facing west ; the saerificer 
robes it with a black garment and makes it neigh, and from the sounds which 
it makes and its actions he can foretell rain.^ The new- and full-moon offerings 
themselves can be applied to fulfil wishes, and forms of these offerings are 
mentioned such as the Munyayana, Turayana, and Vasisthayajha, which 
may extend to a year in duration. 


§ 7 , The Animal Sacrifice 

According to the Shtras we must distinguish between the animal sacrifice 
as an independent offering and the sacrifice as connected with the Soma 
sacrifice : the offering of a goat to Agni and Soma in that offering is often 
treated as the Prakrti of all animal sacrifices, but in some cases the indepen- 
dent animal offering which is called the Nirudhapa9ubandha ^ takes the place 
of the Agnisomiya. The rite is to be performed by any man who establishes 
the fires, before he eats meat, and then yearly or half yearly, in which case the 
beginning of the bright course of the sun and the end of that period are pre- 
scribed by some authorities. The form of the offering is that of the new-moon 
sacrifice, the victim taking the place of the milk offered to Indra or Mahendra, 
but there is present another priest, the Maitravaruna, whose duty it is to give 
directions to the Hotr to say his Yajya verses. For Indra and Agni, or Surya, 
or Prajapati, a goat is the victim ; it must be perfect, free from blemish, 
such as the loss of a horn or an eye ; but in other offerings than the Nirudha- 
pa^ubandha are found many other animals, including normally oxen and 
sheep ; and exceptionally, as at the piling of the fire, at the horse sacrifice and 
at human sacrifices, large numbers of victims are alleged to be offered, mainly 
if not entirely in theory. For Nirrti the dove, owl, and hare are offered,® to the 
Raksases the black dog, the ass with lop ears, and the unknown taraksuJ^ 
Some animals appear as unfit for ordinary sacrifice, the dog, the durvardhay 
‘ bad boar and edaha, ‘ vicious ram ’. The normal rite occupies two days, of 
which the former is filled by preliminary rites, the second being the day of the 
actual sacrifice. The two days however may be compressed into one. 

An essential feature of the rite is the use of a post, to which the victim is 


^ HGS. xxii. IS. 

* ApgS.vii; K^S.vi; MgS.i.8; 

A5:S.iii.l-8 ; iv.11,12; g^S.v.lSff. ; 
vi. 18 ff. ; Vait. x ; Schwab, Das 
altindische Thieropfer (Erlangen, 1886) ; 
Hang, Aitareya Brahmana, ii. 72 ff. ; 
Weber Ind. Stud, x. 344 ; Hubert 

and Mauss, Annie social, ii. 62 fF. (with 
many parallels from Jewish and Greek 
records); Keith, Brdhmanas, 


pp. 134 n,, 403 ff. 

® MS. iii. 14. 19. 

* MS. iii. 14. 21. For the dog offering 
cf. that of a dog to Robigus in the 
Roman religion ; Warde Fowler, Re- 
ligious Experience of the Roman People, 
p. 197. The motive in both cases was 
presumably propitiation ; the choice 
of an abnormal victim being due to the 
abnormal character of the recipient. 



Chap. 20] 


325 


The Animal Sacrifice 

tied ; in the greater rites as many as eleven are used : the tree is solemnly cut 
down with protestations that it is not being injured, and, when a splinter is 
struck out of it in the cutting, that is kept and placed ultimately in the pit in 
which the post is inserted. The stump is treated with respect, and receives 
a libation, accompanied by a prayer that it shall spring up with a hundred 
shoots. The post is placed in a hole which is half within, half without the 
altar. Round the post a band is placed at the height of the navel ; if the 
sacrificer wishes little or much rain he places it lower or higher. For the 
sacrifice the altar is placed west of the fire, and in the east third of it another 
altar, Uttaravedi, is provided as at the Varunapraghasas, and a fire placed 
there, which takes the place of the normal Ahavaniya, while that serves as the 
Garhapatya. There are required also special implements, the spit for the 
heart, and the utensils by which the omentum is cooked. When the prepara- 
tions are over, the victim is bathed, and brought up, and tied to the post by 
a string, which is fastened to the left forefoot, round the back, and over the 
left horn : it is then sprinkled and given a drink.^ Then the kindling verses 
are said, the butter oblations are offered, the victim is anointed with the 
butter,^ and the usual procedure of the new- and full-moon sacrifices followed 
down to the fore-offerings, which number eleven and to which the Apri 
litanies provide the Yajya verses. After the tenth of the fore-offerings, 
the splinter of the tree, and the one edge of the two-edged knife, are dipped in 
the butter : the actual slaying must be done with the unconsecrated side by 
the slaughterer or famitr, the other being used by the Adhvaryu to cut off 
portions for offering. The Agnidhra thrice carries a brand round the victim, 
the Apavya libations are performed, the Adhvaryu gives through the Maitra- 
varuna the order to the Hotr to recite the old litany ® for the slaying of the 
victim ; from the Garhapatya fire flame is placed on the Camitra fire, the 
victim is then taken over to that fire, preceded by the Agnidhra with his fire- 
brand, followed by the Pratiprasthatr, touching it with the spit, the Adhvaryu 
holding on to him and the sacrificer to the Adhvaryu, thus keeping in close 
contact with the holy power in the victim. Then the victim, with its head 
facing west, its feet north, is by the Qamitrs strangled or pierced without 
sound, ^ while the rest of those present turn their heads away. Then a libation 
is made, and the wife of the sacrificer brought up. The Adhvaryu or the wife 
pours water over the members of the victim and washes them. The omentum 


^ Perhaps originally to secure a free flow of 
blood ; cf. Eitrem, Opferritus und 
Voropfer der Griechen und Eomer, p. 
435 ; Keith, JHS. xxxw. 109. Doubt- 
less it may have been felt in time as 
puriflcatory (cf. the sacrificer’s rinsing 
of his own mouth), as taken by Hubert 
and Mauss (op. cit, 65, n. 1). 

* Cf. the Roman mola salsa, the Greek ovkai 
(JHS. xxxvi. 108). 


* Roth, Nir,, pp. xxxviii fl. ; AB. ii. 6 ; 

KB. X. 4 ; cf. Warde Fowler, Religious 
Experience of the Roman People, p. 180. 

* For this requirement cf. the solemn dis- 

play of the corn at Eleusis ; probably 
in silence the corn was cut and displayed 
likewise in silence ; cf. Reinach, Revue 
des j^tudes Grecques, xvi. 342 fl. ; E.S., 
JHS. xxxvi. 105; Farneil, Cults of the 
Greek States, iii. 183 f. 



326 


Vedic Bitual 


[Part III 


is taken out and placed on a spit : in the first blood a grass blade is dipped, 
and thrown north-west or south-west as a spell to devote the enemy to the 
deepest darkness. It is cooked on the f amitra fire, and then placed on the 
Uttaravedi, where it is covered with butter. Then come the eleventh fore- 
offering, the two butter portions, and then the offering of the whole of the 
omentum, which is covered with pieces of gold and butter. The spits are then 
cast into the fire, and the fees distributed, three barren or three milch cows. 
Then come the making of the rice cake and the cutting up of the victim : of 
these eighteen portions are made, of which the first eight count as daivatdni : 
the heart is cooked separately on a spit, the rest of the pieces are cooked in 
a pot, while the excrement, blood, and stomach are offered to the Raksases, 
in a pit west of the ^amitra fire outside the altar-ground. The various parts 
of the animal are then offered, the priests have shares both of the Ida as usual 
and of the meat. Then come the 11 after-offerings, offerings to the strew, the 
divine doors, &c. With each of the after-offerings a supplementary offering is 
connected in which the Pratiprasthatr offers pieces of the intestines which are 
left over. The splinter, the staff, of which the Maitravaruna never lets go, 
and the Prastara, ‘ bundle of grass are put into the fire. The offering to the 
wives of the gods is performed with the tail of the victim, the heart spit is 
buried, with a verse imploring Varu^a to forgive sin, in the presence of the 
sacrificer, his wife, and all the priests.^ As they go back they each pick up 
three dry twigs, and place them on the Uttaravedi. 

The animal sacrifice can be used for many special purposes, in which cases 
some variation is made to adapt it to the special end in view. 

In all its essential features the offering must be regarded as a gift only : 
the presence of the divine essence in the victim is clearly proved by abundant 
evidence, and the priests all taste of it. But there is not the slightest sign 
in the elaborate ritual, nor in the formulae which are recorded in full, that 
there was any idea that the death of the victim was the ritual death of one of 
the gods, or that the ceremony was a sacrament, in which worshippers renewed 
or strengthened their union with the god by a common meal.^ 

§ 8 . The Soma Sacrifice 

The model form of the Soma sacrifice may be said to be the Agnistoma,® 
which is the simplest form of the one-day Soma sacrifice, that is an offering on 
which the Soma is offered on one day only, in the morning, at midday, and 

^ Above, Part III, Chap. 18, § 6. a divinity. 

* Ibid., § 5. Hubert and Mauss {Annie ^ Ap^JS. x-xiii ; xiv. 8-12 ; BfS. vi-viil ; 
sodol. ii. 81, 82) indeed compare the M^S. ii; K^S. vii-xi. 1 ; A^S. iv, v, 

invocation and consumption of the vi. 11-14 ; v-viii ; LQS. i, ii, v, 

Ida to the Mass and transubstantiation ; 5 ff. ; Vait. xi~xxii ; Caland and Henry, 

but this is clearly a grave exaggeration. VAgnistoma (Paris, 1906) ; Keith, 

The Ida is the divine power present in Taittiriya Samkitd, i. pp. exv ff. ; Eig- 

the food when eaten : there is no Veda Brahmarias, pp. 53 ff. 

question of the death and eating of 



Chap* 20] The Soma Sacrifice 327 

in the evening. The name Agnistoma appears to be due to the fact that the 
last of the Samans used on the day is addressed to Agni. Its time of per* 
formance is left vague by the texts : the evidence that it was a spring festival, 
celebrated at the new- or full-moon, which marked the beginning of the year, 
at which the nectar of the gods was offered to them in the shape of King Soma, 
as is held by Hillebrandt, is clearly inadequate even to make probable this 
thesis. 

In the Soma sacrifice the animal sacrifice plays an important part. In the 
first place, on the last of the Upasad daj’^s, which precede the day of pressing, 
there is an offering of a goat for Agni and Soma : secondly, there is a victim 
which is offered throughout the day of pressing, and which is sacrificed to 
Agni in the Agnistoma, but in the Ukthya form of the Soma sacrifice to Indra 
and Agni, in the So4a9in to Indra, and in the Atiratra to Sarasvati : the more 
prevalent view, however, adds the extra victim to each different form, so that 
the Atiratra form has all four. Thirdly, after the final bath and before the 
concluding Isti there is a barren cow for Mitra and Varuna, or three for Mitra 
and Varuna, the All-gods, and Brhaspati. 

The offering is preceded by the choice of the priests, who are invited to 
come by a herald announcing the offering, and the obtaining of a place of 
sacrifice which the sacrificer asks from the prince, and which the latter must 
give on pain of the grave displeasure of the priest. Before or after this act, the 
consecration of the sacrificer takes place in the manner above ^ described. 
The length of the consecration may last anything from one, three, or four days 
up to a year : he sends out people to obtain food for him in this time, and his 
name is absolutely taboo. Then comes the purchase of the Soma, in which 
takes place a pretended buying by a cow, but it is taken away from the seller : 
there is a clear mimicry in some measure of the winning of the divine drink 
from the hands of the Gandharvas. The Soma is then brought forward on a 
cart, and the Subrahmanya utters the formula, whence he derives his name, 
and which invites Indra to the drinking of the Soma. The guest-offering is 
then given to the Soma, and the priests and the sacrificer, by touching 
together butter taken from the guest-offering, conclude a close alliance not to 
prove false to one another in the rite. The Agnidhra brings the Madanti 
waters which all touch, and the sacrificer undertakes the Avantaradiksa, 
‘ intermediate consecration in which he draws tighter his girdle, clasps more 
firmly his fist, and only drinks warm milk. Then comes the Pravargya rite, 
which will be described below, and three days of Upasads, in which offerings are 
made before and after midday with reference to the iron, silver, and golden 
forms of Agni. The term refers to sieges, but it is impossible to accept the 
suggestion of Hillebrandt ^ that the rites of besieging cities have been here 
interpolated : the siege is a mythical one. The second Upasad day is the time 

^ Part III, Chap. 19, § 1. im alien Indien^ p. 35) suggests that 

* Rituallitteraturf p. 127 ; Ved, Myth, i. 300. Upasad means fasting. 

Hauer {Die Anfdnge der Yogaprcuds 



328 


Vedic Ritiud 


[Partin 


for the coestnictioE of the Mahavedi, ‘ great altar’. The carts, which liave the 
Soma, are placed in it, and three paces east from its west end is the Sadas, 
‘ seat which is a hut covered over, in which ceremony the Udgatr helps the 
Adhvaryu as in other parts of the service. In front of the axle of the right- 
hand cart four sounding holes are made, which are used as an earth dram to 
increase the sound of the pressing of the Soma with the stones. Over the holes, 
which at the foot are not separated, are placed the pressing-boards, and over 
them again the skin on which the stones are placed. The earth thrown up 
from the pit serves to make six fire hearths or Dhisnyas, which extend from 
south to north, and are appropriated to the Maitravaru^ia, Hotr, Brahmapac- 
chahsin, Potr, Nestr and Achavaka. Outside the Sadas, on the right side of 
the Vedi, is the Marjaliya hearth, used for cleansing the utensils, and opposite 
it the hut for the Agnidhriya fire. 

The offering of the victim to Agni and Soma is the occasion of an interest- 
ing rite : the sons, grandsons, and relatives of the sacrificer are invited to 
assist in it : the Adhvaryu takes hold of the sacrificer, the wife of the 
Adhvaryu, of her the sons, of them the grandchildren, and of them the 
relatives, thus presenting a picture of family ritual, which is the more note- 
worthy in that it is not connected as usual with the worship of the dead. The 
whole body set themselves in procession to the Agnidhriya and the Ahavamya 
to the recitation of verses for the bringing forward of Agni and Soma. Before 
the offering is actually made, the Avantaradlksa comes to an end. The 
sacrificer unloosens his girdle, lets go his fist, and gives up the restrictions 
hitherto imposed on him. The victim is then offered, and the waters for use 
are drawn in some place shadowed from the sun, while the cows are milked, 
and the sacrificer spends the night awake and guarding the Soma. 

The early dawn of the next day sees the service commenced by the per- 
formance of the Prataranuvaka, ‘ morning litany addressed to Agni, the 
Dawn, and the A9vins : the rule according to some texts is that the recitation 
is to be kept up from very early in the morning to the break of day. At the 
same time cakes are made ready for offerings to Indra Harivant, Indra and 
Pusan, Sarasvati, Bharati, Indra, and Mitra and Varuna. Then comes the 
ceremony of fetching waters for use in the mixing of the Soma. 

The pressing of the Soma may be preceded by the offering of cups of curds, 
butter, or Soma, in which case a few stalks only are pressed : in the Vajapeya 
and the Rajasuya there are also the Aii9u and Adabhya cups, the first of 
sour milk merely touched with Soma stalks, the latter of Soma. The great 
pressing is preceded by the Upafi9usavana which provides Soma for the 
Upangu cup. The pressing takes place in three rounds : the Adhvaryu, 
Pratiprasthatr, and Unnetr are the performers : the juice is poured into the 
Adhavaniya vessel, which is filled with water, and is then passed through a 
sieve to the wooden tub. The Unnetr draws Soma from the Adhavaniya 
with a vessel, and pours it into the Hotr’s cup, and the sacrificer then pours 
from it an unbroken stream on the sieve from which the next oups are drawn 



Ck»p. 20] The So'ma Sacrifice 329 

for offering, the Antaryima, Aindravayava, Maitravaruna, Manthin, 

Agrayana, Ukthya, and Dhruva, which, therefore, are called Dharagrahas, 
as opposed to the other cups, which are made full from the wooden tub with 
the Tessel called Pariplava. The rest of the Soma is placed in the Piitabhrt 
vessel, except a part needed to fill the goblets, Camasas, of the priests. After 
libations to atone for loss of drops of Soma, the Bahispavamana Stotra is 
performed by the priests to accompany the purifying of the Soma : it is 
repeated outside the Sadas. The priests creep to the performance of this 
Stotra, each holding the previous one,^ and the Adhvaryu starts the perform- 
ance by handing to the Prastotr a handful of Darbha grass, which the latter 
hands to the Udgatr, asking the Brahman’s authority to begin. The song is 
duly sung, the Agvina cup is offered, and the victims sacrificed, and a cake 
offering is made in accordance with the preparation of the early morning. The 
cups for the double deities, Indra and Vayu, Mitra and Varupa, and the 
Alvins, are then offered ; then are filled the goblets of the priests, and offerings 
of the ^ukra and Manthin cups made for the strange figures of Qarida and 
Marka. The oblations are made from the cups of the priests by the Adhvaryu, 
and the priests partake of the remainder. The emptied cups are now filled 
again and placed under the back part of the southern Soma cart, receiving the 
name Nara^ahsa and being allotted to the Fathers as Avamas, IJrvas, and 
Kavyas. The Achavaka hereupon makes his appearance, and, if the Hotr 
consents to allow this late innovation among the priests to have a share in the 
rite, he is given a portion of the cake ; then follow 12 or 14 season offerings and 
then the Hotr recites his Ajya Qastra, the contents of which have already been 
given.^ The end of the Qastra is marked by the offering and partaking of the 
cup of Soma and the Nara9ahsa cups are also partaken of, but not offered. 
From them is taken a cup for the All-gods, and then follows the second 
Stotra, followed by the Praiiga ^astra of the Hotr ; the cup is offered and 
partaken of with the Nara9ansas as before. Then a third of the Ukthya is 
taken for each of Mitra and Varuna, Indra, and Indra and Agni respectively, 
and used as the libations for the Stotras and ^astras, three in number, which 
end the pressing : the fastras are recited by the Maitra varuna, Brahmanac- 
chahsin, and Achavaka. 

The midday pressing follows mainly the form of that of the morning : the 
season cups and those for two deities are omitted, and a new priest appears in 
the shape of the Gravastut, ^ praiser of the stones whose business it is to say 
the verses addressed to the pressing stones, and who during his work keeps his 
head covered in a cloth lent to him by the sacrificer.® The Qukra and Manthin, 
the Agrayana, the two Marutvatlyas, and the Ukthya before or between them 
form the cups for the midday pressing. The Bahispavamana is represented by 

^ A very good parallel to this rite is the * Part III, Chap. 20, § 1. 

Mexican water ritual referred to by * This is a rare feature in Vedic ritual, 

Useiaer, Archwf, Religionswissenschaft, but recurs in the covered head of the 

vii. 285. Roman sacrificer. Cf. below, § 9. 



330 


Vedic Ritual 


[Part m 


the Madhyandinapavamana Stotra. At the end of it there is the place of the 
preparation of the drink of hot sour milk, the Dadhigharma, which is proved 
to have existed even in the time of the Rigveda. Then come the oake offering, 
the filling of the goblets, the offering of the ^i^kra and Manthin cups, and the 
further ceremonies down to the depositing of the Nara§ansa cups, after which 
the fees should be given, consisting of 7, 21, 60 to 1,000 cattle, or all the 
sacrificer’s goods save his eldest son. In case of these two highest numbers he 
must also give a mule, for some uncertain cause. The sacrificer divides his 
largesse, cattle, sheep, horses, elephants, servants, clothes, in four heaps, the 
Adhvaryu has one share, out of which portions are obtained by the Prati- 
prasthatr, the Nestr and Unnetr, of a half, a third, and fourth respectively 
of the Adhvaryu’s share, and so with the other priests. An Atreya is given 
a gold gift in addition : Kanvas, Ka^yapas, and ignorant Brahmans get 
nothing : even a daughter may be given in the form of marriage known as 
daiva^ ‘ divine After the fees are received two Marutvatiya cups are 
offered, and then a third which is the occasion of the Marutvatiya fastra of 
the Hotr. Then a libation is made to Mahendra, which is accompanied by 
the first Prstha Stotra of the Saman singers, and the Niskevalya ^astra of the 
Hotr. Three Atigrahyas are offered at the same time, for Agni, Indra, and 
Surya. Then follows as in the morning three Ukthya cups with the second 
to fourth Prstha Stotras and the three ^astras of the Maitravaruna, Brah- 
manacchafisin, and Achavaka. 

The evening pressing is intended by an Aditya cup, which is the means of 
producing magic effects according as it is prepared. It is made out of the 
remains of the cups for two deities, and is made ready, when both doors of 
the hut of the Soma carts are closed. The main pressing is much as in the 
morning, but the old Soma shoots are used as well as new. The Agrayana is 
performed with four streams, not three as at midday, or two as at the morning. 
The Arbhavapavamana Stotra is followed by the proceeding with the un- 
finished animal offering, then the cake offering takes place, and the rest goes 
on as at midday until the Nara 9 ansa cups are disposed of. There follows a 
libation in which the Fathers are referred to. After that the Savitra cup is 
offered, and thereafter the Vai 9 vadeva cup which gives rise to the Vai 9 vadeva 
Qastra. Now a pap is offered : and the Udgatrs look at themselves in butter. 
Then a Patnivata cup is offered, in connexion with which the Agnldh sits on the 
lap of the N estr , who fetches thereafter the wife of the sacrificer. The Adhvaryu 
starts the Yajnayajniya Saman, the sacrificer repeats the formula called 
Saptahotr, the Nestr causes the wife to be looked at by the Udgatr, and she 
pours along her thigh water. Then follows the Agnimaruta f astra. With this 
the rite is drawing to a close : the main sacrifice is completed, the HMyo- 
jana cup is offered, and finally there is the Avabhrtha in which many of the 
utensils are thrown into the water; the sacrificer and his wife have a bath, and 
put on new clothes. There still, however, have to be performed an Udayaniya 
^ On Vedic marriage cf. Macdonell and Keith, Vedic Index, ii. 479 ff. 



Chap. 20] The Soma Sacrifice 331 

offering, the sacrifice of a barren cow to Mitra and Varnna, for which the 
BaJivrcas substitute a mere milk offering, an offering to the minor deities, 
or in the case of a king to the divine impellers, and the burning of the strew 
and other minor rites, and at last an Udavasaniya offering. 

There can be no doubt whatever as to the great part played by Indra in the 
Soma offering : the midday pressing is almost entirely his, the Maruts 
appearing only in his company, though at the evening pressing his place is 
comparatively slight. In the morning we find in the Praiiga ^astra, which is 
certainly to be traced to the Rigveda, invocations of seven sets of gods, first 
Vayu, then Indra and Vayu, Mitra and Varuna, the A9vins, Indra, the All- 
gods, and Sarasvati, while the three litanies of the assistants of the Hotr are 
devoted to Mitra and Varuna, Indra, and Indra and Agni. In the evening 
the ritual finds places for the Adityas, Savitr, the Ail-gods, Agni with the 
wives of the gods, and Indra with the bay steeds. The Rbhus thus play a very 
minor part, though they have verses and though their old importance, which 
is asserted in the Rigveda, may be traced in the name of the Arbhavapavamana 
Stotra. In the case of the Adityas we have evidence in the Rigveda of their 
having a share in the offering, and so also in the case of Agni and the Maruts, 
but so comparatively seldom as to show that the position of these gods was 
distinctly far from assured as regards their share in the Soma sacrifice. The 
wives of the gods are also mentioned in the Rigveda as having a part, but 
never Savitr, a fact which is doubtless fair evidence that the Rigveda did not 
know him as having a place in the rite, and that he was later brought in, per- 
haps because of his growing importance, perhaps as an Aditya. The position 
of Agni also in the rite is a proof that he was not at first one of the great Soma 
drinkers : he appears in it in the main as connected with Indra, or as one of 
many other gods. On the other hand, the evidence of the Rigveda forbids the 
adoption of the view that the Soma offering was originally given to Indra 
alone : if that were the case it lies in times beyond our possibility of knowledge. 
The exclusion of Rudra, which seems, however, to be post-Rigvedic, though it 
is marked in the ritual, is the obvious result of his hostile nature.^ 

In some places it is clear enough that the Soma sacrifice was considered as 
a rain spell : ^ the pressing of the juice from the plant, and the pouring of the 
water and the juice through the sieve, are sufficient in themselves to import 
a rain spell of the normal Vedic type, and there can be no doubt that this view 
explains the fact that Soma is often regarded as a rain bringer, though doubt- 
less in part that idea may be merely an extension of the practice of applying 
to any great god all the powers, which are important to man. But to go so far 
as to suggest, as Hillebrandt ® does, that the essence of the sacrifice was a 
piece of magic, the moon’s rays being full of nectar and being represented by 
the shoots of the Soma plant, so that the manipulations of the priests are 

* RV. i. 122. 1 recognizes his share and his ® Oldenberg, MeL des Veda^, p. 456 ; Henry, 
dual nature increases in force in the L* Agnistoma, p. 486. 

later development. * Fed. Myth, ii. 217 



332 Vedic Ritual [Partin 

adequate to supply the gods with the nectar drink which they love, is to 
misunderstand the nature of the sacrifice completely, and further the whole 
idea is vitiated by the assumption which the author has never proved nor even 
made plausible that Soma in the Rigveda is the moon. Nor, as we have seen, 
is there any real possibility of proving that the Soma offering has any totem- 
istic flavour : it can be shown to be nothing but the offering to the god of the 
intoxicating drink, which in itself, on the other hand, creates the conception of 
the god Soma, who later and only among the Brahmans in the first instance 
is by the exercise of creative fancy equated with the moon.^ 

An ingenious but implausible suggestion is that of von Schroeder,^ who, 
accepting as primitive the connexion of Soma with the moon, holds that the 
purpose of the rite was to enable the sacrifice! to assimilate in the form of 
a symbol of the moon the strength of the moon itself, just as in the Pravargya 
ceremony ^ we may see the sacrifice! acquiring the strength of the sun by 
drinking the hot milk, which is as naturally offered to the sun as is Soma to the 
moon. There is, however, clearly no positive evidence to support these 
suggestions as representing primitive views of either offering. 

§ 9. The Pravargya or Hot-milk Sacrifice 

In the Soma sacrifice the Pravargya ^ is inserted by the ritual text-books 
as an element which is to be performed twice a day in the course of the Upasad 
days, giving, with the normal three Upasads, six performances. But there is 
great doubt as to whether the rite is necessary, or whether it should be per- 
formed also at the first Agnistoma, or not until after one has been performed. 
The discrepancy of opinion suggests that the rite was originally a separate 
sacrifice altogether, and this is borne out by the Rigveda, where it seems to 
have been an offering made in fche morning only. From clay chosen from a pit 
east of the Ahavanlya fire, to which a horse leads the way, a Mahavira pot is 
made, a span high, two spare pots, and various other utensils. A stool of 
Muhja grass is also made as a throne for the pot. The pot is heated, the milk 
of a cow and a goat is poured in. Finally, the hot drink is offered to the 
Alvins, and two Rauhina cakes are also offered in the morning to the day, in 
the evening to the night. At the outset of the ceremony the wife of the 
sacrifice! is made to cover her head, but she joins with the rest at the close 
in the finale of the Saman which is sung. At the end the offering utensils 
are arranged so as to make up the semblance of a man, the three Mahavira 

^ Keith, Taittiflya Samhitd, i. pp. cxxff. Wurzeln der Sage vom heiligen Gtal 

Hubert and Mauss {Ann4e social, ii. (1911). 

129, 130) see in the rite the birth and * See below, § 9. 

death of the god, but in this case as ^ ApQS. xi. 2. 5 fP. ; B^S. ix ; MfS. iv ; 
usual they read into the rite much more K^S. xxvi ; AQS. iv. 6, 7 ; CQS. v. 

than even what the Brahma^as see as 9 ff. ; LQS. i. 6 ; Vait. xiii ; Garbe, 

a pure speculation : we have no right ZDMG. xxxiv. 319 ; Weber, Ind, 

whatever to regard this view as Stitd, ix. 218 fit. For possible Greek 

primitive or popular. parallels cf. Cook, Zens, i. 676. 

* Arische Eeligion, ii. 388, 390, and cf. Die 



Oiiap. 20] 


333 


The Pravargya or Hot-milh Sacrifice 

vessels marking the head, and so on. There are as nsnal prescriptions for the 
various accidents which may happen in the course of the rite, and, when it is 
performed, the sacrihcer for a year eats no food, has intercourse with no 
woman of a certain class, and drinks from no earthen vessel. Moreover, for 
a year before the offering the same taboos should be observed and the rite 
studied in advance. 

The rite is explained by the Aitareya Brahmana ^ as a mystic union of the 
gods which provides a new body for the sacrificer, and this theory is accepted 
by Geldner,^ who regards it as an allegory of sexual union generally. This 
is not an attractive explanation : the explanation of the Mahavira pot as 
a symbol of the Lihga is wholly unsupported J>y a single word in the formulae, 
and the explanations of the Brahmanas are always to be taken with- the 
utmost care. On the other hand, we have clear suggestions in other passages 
that the rite, which is one of a specially dangerous, that is, sacred type,® 
was understood as a sun spell, and this is directly indicated by the formulae 
used at the rite. The pot is covered with a golden plate, which can be nothing 
else than a symbol of fire or the sun, the pot glows, the milk, which in its 
whiteness is a sun symbol, boils with heat. The sacrificer drinking as 
usual a share of the milk thus gains power at the same time as the sun is 
strengthened. Nor is there any objection to the fact that the offering is made 
to the A9vins : the turning of magic into prayer and sacrifice is a constant 
feature of the Vedic ritual, parallel to the turning of prayer and sacrifice into 
magic, and, once the rite existed,, the idea of presenting the milk to the 
A 9 vins, the harbingers of morning, was almost inevitable.^ ^ 

Mystically the rite seems in the ^atapatha Brahmana ® to have been inter- 
preted in the sense that the pot was the sun, the milk the divine flood of life 
and light which falls to the sacrificer : as the sun is the head of the universe, 
so the pot is the head of the sacrificer : the rite provides the sacrificer and the 
universe alike with a head. Hence the deep reverence paid to the pot, and 
its optional character in the rite, since the Soma sacrifice by itself would 
confer the same blessings. The Aitareya Brahmana holds that it must not be 
performed until after a Soma sacrifice, a view which is explained b}’’ the 
Kausitaki Brahmana which requires that the body of the sacrificer should be 
first completed by the Soma sacrifice, and so made able to receive a head. 

§ 10. The Aikadagina Animal Offering 

This is a special form ® of the animal sacrifice which takes the place of the 
simpler ritual observed in the Agnistoma, when it is preferred to use eleven 

1 i. 22, 14; KB. viii. 3-7. Hillebrandt, Ved. Myth. ii. 217 ff. 

* Ved. Stud ii. 135. ® Keith, Taittiflya Samhitd, i, pp. cxxiii-v ; 

® Cf. xiv. 2. 2. 45 ; 3. 1. 14 ; TA. v. Eggeling, SBE. xliv. pp. xIvi-1. 

3,7 ; 6.12. Hence the treatment of the ® ApQS. xiv. 5-7 ; B^JS. xvii. 11-16 ; K^^S. 

rite in TA. iv and v; Oldenberg, viii. 8, 6 ; xii. 6. 11 ff. ; vi. 9. 

GN. 1915, p. 387. 3, 4 ; 10, 11 ; Vait. xxii. 20 ; Keith, 

^ Oldenberg, EeL des Veda^^ pp. 448 ff, ; Taittinya Samhitd, i. p. 466, n. 11. 



334 


Vedic Ritual 


[Fart in 


for the one victim there prescribed. In that case the ceremony is lengthened 
by the performance for each of the victims of the forma! rite of the slaying, 
&c. : the general parts, such as the fore-offerings, are not repeated for each. 
Thirteen posts are used in place of one : the twelfth, the Upa9aya, is not set 
up, and the thirteenth is reserved under the name of Patnivata for an offering 
at the end of the ceremony. The middlemost post is placed near the fire, then 
one on either side, the rule being that the height increases from north to south : 
the Upa9aya is bound round with two cords, and placed at the southern post 
with maledictions on an enemy. To the centre post is tied the victim for 
Agni, north to it the sheep for Sarasvati, south the goat for Soma, and so on, 
ending with the victim for Varuna on the south : mentally a beast of the wild, 
such as a mole, is attributed to the Upagaya. After the offering of the 
omentum of the Anubandhya cow, preparations are made for an offering of 
a victim to Tvastr at the Patnivata post, but the victim, which must be 
reddish brown, after the carrying round of fire is allowed to go free, being 
replaced by butter, with the offering of which the rite ends, unless it is stopped 
sooner at the carrying round of the fire. 

§ 11 . Other Forms of Jyotistoma 
The ritual texts rank the Agnistoma as the first form of the series of Soma 
sacrifices which bear the generic title of Jyotistoma. The list is in their view 
the Atyagnistoma, the Ukthya, the So(Ja9in, the Vajapeya, Atiratra, and 
Aptoryama or Aptoryama. The number of the series is seven, and it is most 
probable that the number is simply the sacred seven, and not a trace of an 
original view. The Atyagnistoma, the Vajapeya, and the Aptorytoa have not 
the place of forms of the Jyotistoma in the older Samhitas, and probably were 
added to make up the number to seven.^ 

The essential distinction of the Ukthya from the Agnistoma lies in the fact, 
that at the third pressing of the Soma the number of fastras and of Stotras is 
brought up to five each by the addition of three others, so as to correspond 
with the five of each which are found in the other two pressings. The Stotras 
and ^astras accompany the rounds of goblets at the other pressings. Further, 
the fastras bear the name Uktha or Ukthya of the Ukthj^a cups which are 
given to Indra and Varuna, Indra and Brhaspati, and Indra and Visnu, and 
not to the same deities as at the morning and afternoon pressings. The name 
of the sacrifice is of obscure origin : the more probable view is that it was so 
called, because there was a discussion as to whether the Ukthya cup in its 
three portions was to be used at the third pressing : the question would then 
be a disputed one and the sacrifice, in which they were used, would be called 
that with the Ukthya or more shortly Ukthya.^ The Samans of the extra 

i ApfS. xiv. 1-4 ; BfS. xvii. 1-10; K^S. xivff, ; Keith, Taitiifiya Samhitd, i. 

X. 9. 28 ; xii. 5. 1-6. 10 ; A^S. vi. pp. cxv fl. ; Hig-Veda BrdkmanaSt 

1-7 ; xi. 1, 2 ; ix. 11 ; ix. 1-21 ; pp. 54 ff. 

L^S. ii. 5. 23 ; iii. 1 ff . ; v. 4. 24 ff. ; * Eggeling, SBE. xli. p. xv. 

Vait. XXV ; Eggeling, SBE. xli. pp. 



Cliap. 20] 


335 


Other Forms of Jyotistoma 

Stotras seem to have been the Sakama9va, Saubhara, and Narmedha. A 
further difference lies in the fact that there is a change of Samans at the Prstha 
Stotras of the mid-day pressing : in the first and the third of these the Brhat 
and ^yaita replace the Rathantara and Naudhasa, while the second and the 
fourth retain the old Samans, Vamadevya and Kaleya. There is also a second 
victim, a he-goat for Indra and Agni, for the day of the pressing. 

The So(Ja9in ^ differs from the preceding rite by the addition of a ram for 
Indra, and by the possession of a sixteenth cup, which is offered at the morning 
pressing or at all three, as the last of the Dharagrahas. It is accompanied by 
a special Stotra and fastra making the number up to sixteen, with the fifteen 
of the Ukthya, and, in accordance with this increase, there are also four sets of 
goblets in place of three as at the Ukthya. The Soma cow has to be of very 
small stature and have red ears. The Soda9in cup is treated with special 
care : it is placed in a square vessel of Khadira wood, addressed as soon as It 
is put on the Vedi, and, in giving the signal for the commencement of the 
Stotra when the sun is half set, a gold piece is handed to the Udgatr in place 
of the usual piece of grass. The sacrificial fee is a reddish brown horse or a 
female mule. 

The Atyagnistoma is closely connected with the Soda9in, though in the 
view of the ritual texts it is treated as if it were simply an Agnistoma with an 
extra Stotra and Qastra. It is really a Soda9in in which the three Stotras and 
Qastras of the Ukthya, and of course the corresponding goblets and Ukthya 
cup, are omitted. Its real place in the ritual is not as a separate sacrifice at all, 
but as the form of service on the tenth day of a Da9aratra, a period of ten days, 
which with an Atiratra before and after it makes up the common form of a 
Dvada9aha rite : it must in all probability be treated as a variant form, pro- 
duced by those theologians who did not approve the addition of the three 
Stotras and Qastras at the Ukthya rite. 

The Atiratra attains the number of twenty-nine Stotras and ^astras by 
adding a series of twelve of both, which are used to accompany three rounds, 
Paryayas, each of four sets of goblets, which in turn are led off by that of the 
Hotr, Maitravaruna, Brahmanacchansin, and Achavaka. The offerings are 
made during this nocturnal carouse, which gives the name to* the rite, to Indra 
Api9arvara. When the cups have been duly offered and the priests have 
drunk, then the Sandhi Stotra is performed, while a cake is made ready for the 
A9vins, the name of the Stotra being derived from the twilight, which is 
about to break. It has nine verses and is sung to the Rathantara tune. Then 
follows the Prataranuvaka to the A9vins, which must contain a thousand verses 
or more, or a thousand Brhati verses, made up artificially from other metres : ^ 
the last verse is to be said after sunrise. Then the Adhvaryu takes the cup 
of the Hotr, the other assistants of the Adhvaryu the rest, and with the Soma 

^ HiUebrandt (Fed. Myth, iii. 217 m) sees xvii. 1. 

in it a rite to strengthen the sun at the * Cf. Keith, Aitareya Aranyaka^ pp, 29, 214 ,* 

winter solstice ; cf. AB. iii. 41 ; KB. Eggeling, SBE. xliii. 111. 



336 


Vedic Eitual 


[Part III 


from tlie previous night, a cup is offered tothe Alvins, while the Pratiprasthatr 
offers the cake. There is also a fourth animal victim, a he-goat for Sarasvatl. 

The Atiratra might, it is clear, be performed without the So«Ja§in cup and 
the corresponding Stotra and ^astra, but this is not the prevailing view. It 
lasted with its nocturnal continuation over the night, and so can be considered 
as the tail of the sacrifice, which laps over from the end of the month into the 
next month.^ 

The Aptoryama is classed sometimes with the Atiratra as an Ahina, that 
is a rite lasting more than a day, instead of as an Ekahalike the other forms of 
the Jyotistoma. It is marked out from the Atiratra by the addition after the 
Sandhi Stotra and the A9vina Qastra of four more Stotras and ^astras, 
accompanying four sets of goblets for the priests which are drawn for Agni, 
Indra, the Ail-gods, and Visnu, or according to others for the deities of the 
Sandhi goblets. As an independent rite, it is practically unknown : it is, 
however, occasionally mentioned with other forms of one day ceremonies. 

. The last form of the Jyotistoma is the Vajapeya, which is of special nature 
and will be treated below. 

§ 12 . Other Soma Sacrifices of One Day's Duration. 

The Agnistoma is the model on which innumerable ^ other kinds of sacrifice 
can be formed, in order to bring about certain desires. The Vi^vajit® is 
occasionally mentioned : in it a man gives all his goods as the fee, or at least a 
thousand cattle and hundred horses. In the former case he first hands over to 
his eldest son his ^are in the property. After the offering he spends twelve 
nights in different places, three where an Udumbara is, eating fruits and roots 
only, three among Nisadas, without eating the grains cultivated by them, 
three with folk, and three with folk like himself, or according to another view 
either Vai^yas or Rajanyas. The symbolic nature of the rite is obvious. 

The six Sadyahkras ^ are offerings which in one day include all the rites, 
including the Biksa from the beginning to the end of a Soma sacrifice. The 
first serves as a model of the rest : the priests, Hotr, Udgatr, Adhvaryu, and 
Brahman, are stationed in the four quarters at considerable distances ; the 
altar is a sown field, or field full of ripe barley or rice : the Uttaravedi a 
threshing-floor. Milk is churned into butter in a skin by the primitive mode of 
shaking it. The offering is supposed to bring the attainment of heaven, of 
cattle, and of the defeat of a rival. The second removes disease, and brings 
strength and food. The fourth is the Vi9vajit f ilpa, at which one should give 
as many fees as possible ,* the fifth is the Qyena, which is employed for 

^ Keith, Taittirlya Samhitd, i, p. cxvii. * Cf. the Adityas’ and Angirases’ strife to 

^ See e. g. the list in B^IS. xviii. win heaven first ; JB. iii. 187 f, ; ii. 

® K^S. xxii. 1. 9 ff. ; Lf S. viii. 1. 28 ; 2. 1 f. 115-17 ; AB. vi. 84 f. ; KB. xxx. 6 ; 

PB. xvi, 6 ; JB. ii. 188 f. ; KB. xxv, PB. xvl. 12. 1 ; BgS. xviii. 22 f. 

15 ; ApfS. xvii. 26. 14-18. 



Chap. 20] Other Soma Sacrifices of one Day's Duration 337 


exorcism, and the fee in this case consists of one-eyed lame cattle without 
horns or tails, mixed with diseased ones.^ 

Of special importance are the four Vratya Stomas,^ which are rites 
apparently intended for the admission into the Brahmanical community of 
persons who though Aryans have been living outside that community. It is 
in the ritual said to be intended for the case of persons who have lost their 
position as twice born by various reasons, including living among non-twice- 
born people. Of such people it is said that they do not study, do not practise 
agriculture or trade ; they call good words bad, perhaps a reference to differ- 
ences of dialect, they punish the guiltless with blows, presumably an allusion 
to difference of law, and, though unconsecrated, speak the speech of the con- 
secrated. According to the views of Katyayana, the first offering is for Vratyas, 
who, skilled in dance, song, and music, are capable of teaching these arts to a 
company of Vratyas, the second for eunuchs, the thi^'d for those of little account, 
and the fourth for old impotent men. The dress of the Vratyas is described as 
including a special kind of turban (usmsa), white garments with black fringes, 
and a curious kind of bow without a string (jydhroda) : at the rite also is 
used a special sort of cart {vipatha), and a silver ornament as worn by Vratyas. 
The Grhapati, who is to be chosen from the leader of the Vratyas to be con- 
verted, carries two skins, one white, one black, and a pair of shoes, black and 
shaped like ears, or provided with ears. All these articles are to be given as 
a fee at the proper time to an unworthy Brahman from Magadha, a sign that 
Magadha was not regarded as strictly Brahmanical, or to Vratyas who have 
not yet been converted, and who are thus made scapegoats. When the 
ceremony is over, the Vratyas cease to have that characteristic : they become 
admitted to full membership of the Brahmanical society, and can engage in the 
pursuit of sacred learning. 

The rites are specially interesting, as they mention several words which 
are not easily explicable, and evidently were not well understood at a very 
early date : they may be borrowed from the speech of the eastern tribes, and 
together with the mention of the Brahman from Magadha suggest, but do 
not prove, that the Vratyas came from the east rather than from the west, 
though we know that the western tribes were by no means fully Brahmanized,® 


1 Kgs. xxii. 3. 26 ff. ; BgS. xvii. 20 ff. 

PB. xvii. 1-4 (a later view in JB. ii. 222) ; 
BgS. xvii. 24-6 ; KQS. xxii. 4 ; LQS. 
viii. 6 ; Weber, Ind. Stud, x. 101 ff. ; 
Macdonell and Keith, Vedic Index, ii. 
341-5 ; Keith, JRAS. 1913, pp, 155 ff. 
Vratyas may have been non- Aryan, but 
this is not probable ; cf. Weber, Ind 
Lit, p. 73 ; Hopkins, Bel. of India, 
p. 179 ; Hillebrandt, Rituallitteratur, 
p. 140 ; Bloomfield, Athawaveda, 
p. 94. In some cases Aryans who have 
fallen from grace may have been so 
2 [h.o.s. 32] 


reinstated. Cf. below, Chap. 22, § 9. 

® A rash hypothesis (cf. above, Chap. 1), 
based' on late linguistic facts, and 
supported by worthless ethnological 
material, claims that the Vedic Indians 
were Aryans who entered their homes 
from Chitral and Gilgit and not directly 
connected with the Punjab (see e.g. 
Risley, People of India, pp. 55 ff.). 
The theory contradicts the evidence of 
the Rigveda, and the Chitral route, as 
Holdich {The Gates of India) insists, is 
impracticable for a people’s migration. 



338 


Vedic Ritual 


[Partin 


and it has been suggested that the Vratyas represented one or other of the 
many Aryan tribes which were in motion in the period 1500-1000 b. c. There 
are clear traces that the Udgatrs were specially active in the business of 
bringing in these outlying members of the Brahmanical society : possibly this 
may stand in some relation to the fact that the Chandogas were never held in 
the highest repute among the Vedic Indians.^ The suggestion of Charpentier ^ 
that we are to see in these Vratyas adherents of Rudra-^iva must be regarded 
as impossible. It is, however, of interest to note that already in the Athar- 
vaveda ® the Vratya is a well-known figure, and by the curious ideas of that 
Veda is turned into an expression of the supreme deity. 

Of other rites of this class the Upahavya ^ is interesting, as it is born of 
strife between the gods and the Asuras, and in it the names of the gods are 
carefully changed to avoid mentioning them aloud : thus the name of Indra is 
^akra, of Soma Indu, and likewise the hold deva is changed to hotd yahse^ 
and so on, even the simple word sarva, all, becoming the old vigva. There is a 
rite, the Sarvasvara,® for one who wishes to die : the sacrificer in it is com- 
pletely covered over and sits facing south on a dark skin. In the Brhaspatisava,® 
on the other hand, which is offered by one who wishes such rank as a Puro- 
hitaship, the sacrificer must be treated with respect, be greeted by others with- 
out returning the salutation, and be styled Sthapati, ‘ lord all these things by 
sympathetic magic working the desired end. If the Apacitis are offered to 
bring a man honour, he must pay dearly in Daksinas in proportion to what he 
aspires to attain, and so in all these offerings the greed of the priest for fees 
shows itself. 

The Gosava is of special interest, because it involves incest with one’s 
mother, sister, and a woman of one’s own Gotra, that is with whom marriage 
is forbidden. The Jaiminiya Brahmaria ® records that Janaka of Videha 
declined to undertake it, though it would have secured him the world of the 
Ox, doubtless Prajapati as in the Atharvaveda,^ but a ^ibi king did perform 
it, carrying out literally the rule of acting according to nature. 


^ Burnell, Devatadhydya Brdhmana, p. ix ; 
Muir, Sansk, Texts tUi. 26 ; Hillebrandt, 
Sonnwendfeste, p. 34. 

* VOJ. XXV. 355-88 ; see Keith, JRAS. 

1913, pp. 155-60. Caland ( JB., p. 184) 
ama 2 ingly argues that the fact that 
in JB. I 9 ana is hostile to the Vratyas 
supports the theory. 

* XV. This shows some trace of the influence 

of Rudra worship. It is clearly late. 

* LfS. viii. 9 ; comm, on PB. xviii. 1.3; 


B^S. xviii. 28 has a different version, 
5 K^^S. xxii. 5. 31 ; 6. 1 ff. 

® B^S. xviii, 1, 2 ; cf. § 13. Other rites 
dwelt on in the JB. are ^ada, Upa^ada, 
Punastoma, Valabhid, Udbhid, Duraya, 
Tivrasoma, Rtapeya, &c. 

’ Kf^S. xxii. 10. 13 ; L^S. ix. 4. 13 ; B^S. 
xviii. 39 ; ApfS. xxii. 12. 4 f. ; JB. ii. 
100 ff. ; PB. xix. 8. 

« ii. 113 ; Ap^:S. xxii. 13. 1-3. 

* iv. 11. 



Cliap. 20] 


339 


§ 13 , The Vdjapeya or Drink-of -Strength 
The Vajapeya ^ is of especial interest in that it preserves, despite the 
formalism imposed upon it by its inclusion in the Soma ritual, many traces of 
very popular origin. It is said by many authorities to be a festival of the 
autumn, and it is also allowed either to perform it independently, or as the 
sixth day of a Sarvamedha or universal sacrifice. It consists of one pressing 
day and at least 13 days of consecration and three Upasad days, so that it 
takes up at least 17 days and may be spun out to a year. It adds to the 
ordinary Soda^in form a seventeenth Stotra and ^astra, and the number 
seventeen is also introduced into the Bahispavamana and Madhyandinapa- 
vamana Stotras in place of the Trivrt and Pancadaga Stomas there normally 
used. The number of cups in the ordinary rite is increased by the addition of 
the Ah^u and Adabhya, and also five Vajapeya or Aindra cups ; there are 
added a dappled barren cow for the Blaruts, and seventeen goats for Prajapati, 
hornless but capable of procreation. The sacrificer, his wife, and the priest all 
wear garlands of gold, which form the fees. The special features of the rite 
begin with the midday pressing, at which a warrior with seventeen arrows 
measures out a course for a race, marking the place where the last falls with 
a twig of Udumbara. Then three horses of the sacrificer are yoked to his 
chariot, sixteen others are yoked with four horses each, and the sacrificer is 
victoiious in a formal race, during which 17 drums are beaten, and the 
Brahman climbs up a post, on which is fastened a wheel of Udumbara wood, 
to sing the Saman of the strong steeds, while the wheel is turned to the right. 
The horses are given, before and after the race, the offering to Brhaspati to 
smell, to gain its strength. In the second place, along with the cups of Soma 
there are offered by the Nestr alternatively cups of Sura, which are purchased 
from a long-haired man and placed in a special place. Mention is also made 
of a cup of honey, which is not used for any offering, but is placed in the hand 
of a Ksatriya or Vai9ya competitor, and seems to be an unintelligible remainder 
of an older rite. In the third place, the sacrificer for himself and his wife 
solemnly mounts to the sun by climbing with the aid of a ladder to the top 
of the sacrificial post which is decorated by placing on it a wheel-shaped 
garland of meal, in which position he is touched by the priest or others with 
salt in A^vattha leaves. He then descends and sits on a throne, and is sprinkled 
with a mixture of water, milk, and seventeen other substances, or so many as 
can be thought of, with the exception of one of which he never again eats. The 
rest of the mixture is used for certain libations called Vajaprasaviya, and the 
festival closes with seventeen Ujjitis, ‘ benedictions ’, which can be accom- 
panied by libations. 


Ap^JS. xviii ; B^S. xi ; KfS. xiv ; AfS. 
ix. 9 ; 9CS. XV. 1 ff. ; xvi. 17. 1 ff. ; 
hgS, V. 12. 8-25; viii. 11, 12; Vait. 
xxvii ; Hillebrandt, Ved, Myth. i. 
247 ff. ; Weber, t)ber den Vdjapeya 
(SBA. 1892, pp. 705 n.) ; Eggeling, 
2 * 


SBE. xli. pp. xxiii ff. For parallels see 
von Schroeder, Ansche Religioriy ii. 
191, 395, 050, cf. 349 ff.; 379. Cf. 
N. N. Law, Ancient Indian Polity y 
pp. 160 f., 177 ff. ; Keith, Taiftirlya 
Samhitdy i. pp. cviiiff. 



340 


Vedic Bit'iml 


[Part III 


The name of the offering is explained by tradition as ‘ food and drink 
by Oldenberg ^ as ‘ the drink of strength % and by Weber as ‘ the protection of 
strength The last rendering is clearly to be rejected : the drink which 
Weber denies to be seen in the offering is the Soma, and we cannot assume that 
the name is older than the use of Soma in the rite. It is important to note that 
the rite could, it is clear from scattered notices, be used by a Vai9ya and not 
merely by a Brahman or a Ksatriya, but it is also clear that the offering was 
connected with the attainment of high prosperity, and it may well be that it 
was intended to be offered only by one who was in the technical sense a gatagrl, 
‘ who had attained prosperity % and so could aspire to highest things. More- 
over, this is indicated by the fact that the person who performs this offering 
is not expected to take notice of persons who have not done so, go behind 
them, or share a bed with them. The nature of the rites is clearly on the one 
hand that of the attainment of victory and power by the symbolic acts of 
winning, of being hailed as victor, and anointing : references to fertility are 
obvious also, and the sun spell of the wheel is noteworthy. It is accordingly 
impossible to lay down precisely the original character of the rite : ^ it was not 
merely the feast of victory of the winner in a chariot race, such as might be 
paralleled in Greek ritual, nor was it solely an agricultural rite : it has been 
blended by a mixture of many elements to form a general offering available 
for any successful person. 

This curious position of the Vajapeya clearly led to confusion : some texts 
place it above the Rajasuya, and say that by the latter mere kingship is con- 
ferred, by the former paramount lordship. But other texts make the Vajapeya 
appropriate for a paramount lord, and the Rajasuya for a universal monarch 
like Varuna.^ The simplest solution is that which makes the Vajapeya a rite 
which is performed by the king before the Rajasuya and by the Brahman 
before the Byhaspatisava.*^ The essential priestly character of the rite as it 
stands is shown by the prominence of Brhaspati and the part played by Praja- 
pati. 

Other special forms of sacrifices for obtaining a special rank are the Suta, 
Gramani, Sthapati, and Go-Savas.® 

§ 14 . The Royal Consecration 

The royal consecration ® is a Soma sacrifice having the usual Diksa and 
Upasad days and preceded by a long series of preparatory rites. It is mythi- 
cally connected with the consecration of Varuna or with Indra, and it 


^ Heh de$ Veda^, p. 470. 

^ Keith, Taittinya Samhiid, i, pp. cviii~cxi. 
For the sun-wheel see Cook, Zeus, i. 
197 n, 

^ TB. ii. 7. 6. 1 ; v. 1. 1. 13. See 
Macdonell and Keith, Vedic Index, ii. 
256. 

A^S. ix, 9. 19. For the Brhaspatisava, 


see JB. ii. 128-30 (used by both 
Brahman and Ksatriya) ; PB. xvii. 11; 
TB. ii. 7. 1 ; ks. xxxvii. 7 ; B?S. 
xviii. 1. 

® B^S. xviii. 3 fi . ; comm, on TB. ii. 7. 

« Ap^S. xviii ; BfS. xii ; K^S. xv ; AfS. 
ix. 3, 4 ; XV. 12-27 ; xvi. 18 ; 

ix. 1-3 ; Vait. xxxvi ; Weber, 



Chap. 20] 


The Royal Consecration 


341 


displays many popular elements in its character, as was inevitable from its 
nature. The great nobles and office bearers of the court play an important 
part, the Pnrohita performs many of the priestly functions, the people are at 
least present to hear the announcement of the consecration of the sovereign. 
It connects itself with Vedic history : the tribes who are mentioned are the 
Bharatas or their successors in blood and tradition, the Kuru-Pahcalas. The 
preliminary ceremonies begin with the first day of Diksa on the 1st Phalguna, 
followed by offerings to Anumati and to Nirrti, who receives the fallen portions 
of the grain on a salt piece of ground in the south. With the 15th of the 
month commence the observances for a year of the four- month offerings, the 
periods between the new- and full-moon days being filled up either by the new- 
and fuJl-moon offerings or offerings to the sim and the moon. These offerings 
cease with the Qunasiriya offering on the 1st Phalguna of the following year, 
and on that and the next two days offerings are made to the deities of the 
quarters, and others, and then on the 4th to the 15th offerings called the 
Ratninam Havifisi, which are offered in the houses of the ‘ jewels ’ of the king,^ 
his wives and high officers, the deities chosen being the appropriate gods for 
the persons in whose houses the offerings are made, as for Aditi in that of the 
chief queen, for Nirrti in that of the discarded lady. After these follow various 
libations, and on the 1st of Caitra comes the day of anointing, which is per- 
formed as an Ukthya rite. There are offered on it eight offerings to the divine 
instigators, who are to pay heed to the crowning of the prince in the rite. 
The actual anointing takes place after the Marutvatiya cups : seventeen kinds 
of waters, brought from the Sarasvati, drawn against the current of the stream, 
or with it, &c., are used : they are sieved after mixing and poured into four 
vessels, of Palaga, Udumbara, Nyagrodha, and Agvattha. The sacrificer clad 
in splendid raiment takes from the Adhvaryu a bow with three arrows, and 
is proclaimed with the Avid formulae which he repeats announcing his 
anointment. The evil spirits are appeased by the gift of copper placed in the 
mouth of a long-haired man. The sacrificer then strides to the various quarters, 
and steps on a tiger-skin, beneath which is a piece of lead, on which he tramps 
as on the head of Namuci. With gold under his feet and a gold fillet over his 
head, he is anointed by the Adhvar3ru in front, and also by a kinsman, a 
Rajanya, and a Vaigya, representing the whole people. After this are per- 
formed six Partha libations which are offered to correspond with six before 
the anointing ; ^ the king steps on the skin the steps of Visnu and puts in the 

iiber die Konigsweihe (APAW. 1893), 8-11 ; AB. vii. 13 ; viii ; f B. v. 2. 3-5. 

who is exhaustive, but had not then 5 ; N. N. Law, Ancient Indian Polity ^ 

available ApQS. and BQS. ; Eggeling, pp. 161 ff. ; Keith, Taittirlya Samhitd, 

SBE. xli. pp. xxiv ff. ; xliv. pp. xv ff. i. pp. cxi ff. ; Uig-Veda Brahmanas, 

The term of the QB. and the Black pp. 61 ff. 

Yajurveda is Rajasuya, the Abhise- ^ See Macdonell and Keith, Vedic Index^ ii* 
caniya denoting the actual aspersion 200. 

of the king in the course of the whole “ At this point or later is recited by the 
rite. Cf. TS. i. 8 ; TB. i. 6-8 ; PB. xviii. Hotr the legend of ^lunah^epa, in which 



342 


Yedic Ritual 


[Part III 


Palana dish the remains of the mixture, which he hands to his eldest son, that 
he may continue his work and strength. An offering is also made in which the 
names of the father and son are first confused, then rightly said. A mimic 
expedition for booty is performed : the king in his chariot goes out against 
cattle of his kinsfolk : at the time of the fees he plunders them and they 
surrender their belongings : a third of their goods goes to the priest, a third 
to the drinkers of the Dagapeya, and the owners are allowed to have a third 
back. But they also receive villages, and are called Rajanyas, but unworthy 
of anointing.^ In another account,^ which does not in this interesting way 
bring out the conception of the pretenders to the royal throne and their defeat, 
the king mounts his horse and advances to the quarters, a parallel to which 
is quoted from the ceremony of coronation of the King of Hungary. Before 
descending from the chariot which he mounts for the fray, the king puts on 
sandals of boar’s hide, and prays neither to injure the earth, nor be injured 
by it, a clear allusion to his high sanctity. After the later Ke 9 avapamya 
rite he never stands with bare feet on the ground. He then sits on a throne 
placed over the tiger-hide, and takes five dice from the Adhvaryu : the priest 
gently beats him from behind with sticks of pure trees, doubtless to expel any 
taint of ill.^ Before the dicing begins the Purohita hands the king a wooden 
sword, which he passes on to his brother, and through him it is taken by a man 
who marks out the place for dicing, where a hut is erected. After the dicing, 
which is merely formal and which deliberately was so carried out as to make 
the king a victor, the sacrifice progresses to the normal end, but the bath is 
followed by an offering to Indra and Visnu of a special nature. Then comes 
the preparation for the l}a 9 apeya offering, for which the Diksa consists in ten 
Sariisrpam Havihsi. The offering itself seems to have been in origin an inde- 
pendent offering : it is performed on the 7th of Caitra : the performers must 
have ten generations of Soma drinkers : from ten cups ten drink together 
at each : it is uncertain if the relatives of the king may drink or not, but he 
certainly has a goblet. After this, according to some authorities, the king, the 
people save the Brahmans, and the steeds may not have their hair cut for a 
year. There are also a number of minor offerings to propitiate the quarters, to 


has been seen a trace of an old human ^ 
sacrifice ; above, Part III, Chap. 18, 

§ 2. See also Keith, Taitiinya Samhitd, 
i. pp. cxi-cxiii. Wellhausen {Archiv f, 
Religionswissensckaft, vii. 33-9) argues 
that the touching is the essential and 
primitive feature of the Hebrew royal 
anointment. 

1 LfS. ix. 1. 14 

^ Hillebrandt, Rituallitteratur, p. 146. The 
Buddhist legend preserves this feature 
in the account of the movements of 
the Buddha on birth ; see Windiseh, 
Buddha's Geburt, pp. 130 ff. 


K^^S. XV. 7. 4. There is no Mantra for this 
in any Samhita. Weber (p, 63) com- 
pares the occasional beating of the 
bridegroom in the marriage ceremony 
{Ind. Stud, V. 300), but erroneously 
thinks that the rite is a symbol of 
priestly power. Reinach (Cultes^ Mythes 
et Religions, i. 173 ff.) finds totemism 
in ritual flogging ; Mannhardt (Myth. 
Forsch., p. 72), much more plausibly, 
mere fertilization, as obviously in the 
Lupercalia (Warde Fowler, Religious 
Experience of the Roman People, pp. 54, 
479). Cf. JRS. iii. 162 ff. 



Chap. 20] 


343 


The Royal Consecration 

win the seasons, for Aditi or the Adityas, and the Maruts or the All-gods. In 
Jyaistha follows in the next year the ceremony of the cutting of the hair, 
the Ke^avapanlya, which may be followed by two Vyusti offerings a fortnight 
later, and the Ksatradhrti, a month later, a rite interesting as it is connected 
with the ruin of the Kurus.^ The fees are exaggerated beyond measure, 
even 240,000 cows being given. 

The rite is full of magic and symbolism : its nature is obvious and has in- 
numerable parallels : it is worth noting that the king is expected to rub in the 
substance of the anointing mixture with the horn of a black antelope : it is 
thus clear that the holy strength is actually in the mixture, and must be made 
to impregnate the system ; the keeping of the long hair, like the Frankish kings, 
is to preserve for a time this holiness. The position and prominence of the 
game of dice ^ are interesting : it is possible to see in it a connexion with the 
foretelling of prosperity, but it must have been made the more natural in that 
the king was interested, we may believe even at this period, in the revenue to 
be derived from dicing, which was carried on in the Sabha, ‘ house of assembly 
and which in later times was assuredly a valuable monopoly, and probably so 
in earlier days. 

Different forms of consecration are referred to : the Aitareya Brahmana ® 
distinguishes the great consecration, Abhiseka, of Indra from the renewed con- 
secration of a consecrated king, and its account of the consecration, which 
deals only with the anointing, differs very greatly from that of the Yajurveda, 
which it possibly presupposes. Great stress is laid on the fact that the king is 
only given a curious mixture to drink, being absolutely denied the use of 
Soma, a fact explained by a long mythological story. 


§ 15. The Horse Sacrifice 

The horse sacrifice ^ is in the ritual reckoned an Ahina, that is a rite with 
more than one day on which the Soma is pressed, in this case three. It is an 
old and famous rite, which kings alone can bring, to increase their realms ; we 
have lists of the great kings of old ® who were consecrated and who performed 
the horse sacrifice. The horse chosen must be swift, in front black, behind 
white, and with a dark mark. The offering begins on the 8th or 9th of 
Phalguna or in summer. On that day a mess of rice is cooked for the priests, 
and the king, his four wives, and their four hundred maidens of different ranks 


^ According to Q^S. xv. 16. 11. 

* Liiders, Das Wurfelspiel im alien Indien 

(1907) ; cf. Keith, JRAS. 1908, pp. 
823 ; Vedic Index, i. 2 ff. 

* viii. 5, 12. Kau9. xvii has the consecrating 

of a subordinate prince and a sovereign 
ruler respectively : the dicing plays an 
important part in either case ; in the 
latter the king goes to his queens, a 
symbol of his royal status ; a tiger-skin 


is used in the latter, a bull-hide in the 
former case ; cf. Henry, La magie 
dans VJnde antique, pp. 14)6-8. 

* Apgs. XX ; Bgs. XV ; KQS. xx ; Af S. x. 
6 xvi. 1 ff. ; 18. 10 ff. ; LfS. 

ix. 9-11 ; Vait. xxxvi. 14-xxxvii. 8 ; 
N. N. Law, Ancient Indian Polity, pp, 
181 ff, ; Keith, Taittiriya Samhitd, i. 
pp. cxxxii ff. 

5 AB. viii. 21-3 ; xiii. 5. 4. 



344 


Vedic Ritual 


[Part III 


assemble, the king spending the night at the Garhapatya fire. Next morning 
the horse is bound, and sprinkled in standing water : a man of low class kills 
with a club of Sidhraka wood a four-eyed dog, and lets it float on a mat under 
the horse. The sacrificer says, ‘ He who will kill the horse attacks Varuna : 
away the man, away the horse ! ’ ^ The horse is then led back to the fire, and 
offerings are made of cakes to Savitr in various forms for three days. The 
horse is then set free to wander with a hundred old horses, and guarded by 
four hundred youths of the same relative rank as the ladies of the queen, who 
are armed with armour, with swords, arrows, or sticks according to their 
rank, as princes, warriors, sons of heralds and headmen, and sons of atten- 
dants and charioteers. They must guard the horse from any danger, in- 
cluding bathing and intercourse with mares, doubtless acts calculated to 
reduce its sanctity of power. The princes among them are promised the 
royal consecration as the reward for success. If any ill fall upon the horse, it 
must be atoned for : if it dies, a new horse is found and some ceremonies 
repeated. During the period of its absence the priests and the sacrificer sit 
on golden thrones : the Hotr begins the telling* of the cyclic * narrative, 
Pariplava Akhyana, the telling of tales, Akhyanas, of ancient kings, which last 
by series of ten days for the whole year. At the end of the performance the 
Adhvaryu offers in the Daksina fire libations for the movements of the steed, 
and in the Ahavaniya, after sunset, the Dhrti libations to secure the success of 
the rite : at his bidding a lute player, a Raj any a, sings to the lute three 
Gathas, verses, made by himself which refer to victories in battle connected 
with the sacrificer. All the performances repeat themselves daily for a year, or 
six months, or even for half a month; if the period is reduced. When the 
horse returns, the king, who has been celebrated hitherto with the kings of 
the past, is from the Diksa day of the new sacrifice hailed as with the gods, 
and on the three pressing days proper with Prajapati. The first pressing day ® 
falls on the full moon of Vai9akha : there are 21 posts and 21 victims for Agni 
and Soma : on the days of pressing the victims are two sets of eleven each. 
The second pressing day is the most important. The Stotra is started at the 
neighing of a horse in the morning : after the ^astra of the Hotr, three other 
horses are yoked with the sacrificial horse, and are driven to bathe. On the 
return of the horses the victim is anointed by the chief of the queens, and 101 
gold pieces placed in its mane and tail. It is given the remains of an offering 
made the previous night ; but, if it will not eat them, they are cast into water. 
Then take place curious riddles between the Brahman and the Hotr, the 
Brahmodya.^ Then the victims are bound to the posts, in all S27 or 349 tame 
animals and a large number of wild animals from the elephant to the bee, 

1 A^S. X. 6. 10 ; QB. xiii. 4. 3, 5. 4. 22 ; 5. 1 ; 8. 12, 13 ; AfS. x. 8. 2 ; 

* There is nothing of sequence in the 9. 8. 

several narratives. * Bloomfield, Religion of the Veda, pp. 216 ff. 

=* The forms of the rites on these days are Cf. for a specimen of this sort, JB. i, 

subject to much dispute, e. g. KQS. xx. 258. 



Chap. 20] 


'The Horse Sacrifice 

making 609 in one version. The iarge numbers, especially of the wild animals, 
which were, however, to be let go after the hre had been carried round them, 
are suspicious : the best defence ^ to be made is that there was need of large 
numbers for the festival to follow the sacrifice. The horse is covered with a 
garment and slain : the queens go round it from left to right thrice, and thrice 
vice versa : the chief queen goes near the horse : both are covered with a 
garment, and the queen unites with it : meanwhile the priest and the maidens 
and the other wives indulge in ribald dialogue. Then the horse and the other 
Victims are cut up. The blood is cooked, the omentum offering of the ordinary 
ritual prepared : before it another Brahmodya between Hotr and Adhvaryu, 
Brahman and Udgatr, sacrificer and Adhvaryu, takes place. The rest of the 
horse is cooked, the blood offered at the end of the Svistakrt offering and also 
on other occasions. Before the Svistakrt offering the cooked flesh is offered 
to Prajapati, and at the end of the second day offerings are made, through the 
night, of various plants. 

The offerings of the third day are followed by the final bath, in which is 
performed the curious rite of an offering on the head of a man already referred 
to.^ The fees are given in various forms : the conquered land is to be divided : 
even the wives of the sacrificer are sometimes demanded : the Adhvaryu 
apparently obtains a daughter in wedlock, and also the fourth wife. 

The Rigveda ® clearly knows this greatest of all Vedic sacrifices, though it 
is certain that the holocaust of victims w^as not then usual ; only a goat appears 
to lead the way for the horse, and, though this is not conclusive, still it makes 
it doubtful whether the early ritual had the large number of victims offered. 
The victims too seem to be led round the fire, mot vice versa. But it is clear 
that the offering was already a Soma sacrifice, and that in essence the rite was 
known : reference is also made to the use of gold and the cloths for decking 
the steed. 

The meaning of the sacrifice is in the former view of Oldeiiberg * the 
offering to Tndra, the god of the w^arriors, of a swift strong steed from which 
the sacrificer would thus derive magic power, whether directly or indirectly 
through the fact that Indra would thus be made strong to aid him. The 
slaying of the dog he thinks intended as the destruction of hostile powers, 
or perhaps in origin as providing the horse with a guardian ; such a function is 
sometimes given to a four-eyed dog in the Avesta. The relation of the queen 
and the horse is clearly a fertility spell, while the obscene language, he thinks, 
might be explained in the same sense, or as an amusement of the gods, or a 

^ Hillebrandt, BifwaKiWerafur, p. 152, A^oka magic; the horse embodies royalty, 

records the large numbers of animals and by its consecration is made 

killed in his time (Pillar Edict V ; Vin- especially sacred so that its slaughter 

cent Smith, Asoka, p. 204). gives strength to the sacrificer. He 

* Part HI, Chap. 18, § 3. observes, however, that in RV. x. 56 

® i. 162 and 163. a horse sacrifice to the dead occurs, 

^ MeL des Veda}, pp. 306, 356, 473-5. His which may be the imitation of the 

later view (pp. 473 f.) makes the rite horse sacrifice or its prototype. 




346 


Vedic Ritual 


[Part III 


mere relic of the plain speech of the crowd. In the view of Eggeling ^ the horse, 
the next animal to man in the scale, is the appropriate offering on great 
occasions : at the sacrifice the steed can be identified with Prajapati, and 
so Prajapati comes properly into the ritual. On the other-hand he points out 
that the horse is connected with Varuna, in that the horse is the sun horse 
which traverses the heaven, which is Varuna and is conceived as a sea of 
waters, so that the horse is sprung from the waters. Varuna may, therefore, 
have been the earlier deity of the offering. 

The original force of the rite is somewhat obscure. The possibility of 
comparison with the October horse at Rome ^ is obvious, and the eating of the 
horse, the fertility rite in which it appears, and the obscenity of the conversa- 
tion, point to a vegetation ritual, but the absence of any suggestion that 
the horse was a vegetation spirit, or that its body was in part used for a 
direct vegetation magic, is against that theory. In the view of von Negelein,^ 
the offering, was one made to the sun conceived as a steed, in order to strengthen 
him for his course in the heaven. As Indra with his steed defeats the Asuras, 
so the earthly king by the horse sacrifice^ uniting himself mysteriously with 
the sacrificial horse and its magic power, defeats the Asuras. Indra’ s horse 
is the thunderbolt which slays Vrtra, and so the human horse aids the king to 
defeat his enemies. Varuna then, and later Prajapati, were given by tradition 
the ownership of the horse, first connected with Indra. The difficulty of this 
theory is to see exactly why the horse is connected with Indra. He is not the 
sun in Vedic and probably not even in pre- Vedic myth. On the other hand 
Varuna is the god of the waters par excellence : the waters in many lands are 
conceived as horses, both sea and fresh waters being so regarded : to rivers and 
the sea horses are offered as in Greece : Indra would then not be the primary 
figure in the myth as von Negelein holds, but a natural intruder in the rite. 
The most attractive alternative to this view is undoubtedly the acceptance 
of the sun as the sun horse,^ offered originally to the sun as a spell to strengthen 
it, and the chief difficulty in that view is merely the fact that the sun is not the 
recipient of the offering, in any measure. If he were actually offered to, it 


^ SBE. xliv. pp. xviii-xxiv. For the four- 
eyed dog, cf. Moulton, Early Zoroas- 
trianism, p. 333, whose suggestion as to 
aboriginal Magoi connected with Indian 
aborigines I do not share (JRAS. 
1915, pp. 790-9). The dogs of Yama 
and Yudhisthira’s faithful hound may 
be recalled. 

2 Festus, p. 178 ; Mannhardt, Myth. Forsch., 
pp. 156-201 ; Warde Fowler, Roman 
Festivals, pp. 242-50 ; MacCulloch, 
Eel. of Anc. Celts, pp. 213-15. 

® Das Fferd im arischen Altertum, p. 97 ; 
for offerings of the horse to the sun in 
Greece and Illyria, see Cook, Zem, 1. 
180, 181 ; Keith, JRAS. 1916, pp. 548, 


549. Cf. E. Lehmann (de la Saussaye, 
Lehrh. der Eeligionsgesch.^ ii. 37), 
who takes the rite as one to present the 
sun with a new horse for his team, but 
of this the texts show no trace, though 
a votive offering of this kind is natural 
(cf. Helm, Altgerm. Eel. i. 178 f.). 

^ Keith, Taittiriya Samhitd, L pp. cxxxiv ff., 
where all the older views are discussed. 
Needless to say, while Frazer makes 
it a corn spirit, Reinach (Cultes, Mythes 
et Religions, iii. 124-40) sees totemism, 
like E. Monseur, RHR. li. 16 ; for a 
refutation see A. van Gennep, Vital 
actuel du probUme ioUmique, pp. 291 f. 



Chap. 20] 


The Horse Sacrifice 


347 


would be easy to understand the place of Indra : that Indra should have com- 
pletely superseded him is odd, but on the whole the explanation of the horse 
as the sun steed seems the most plausible. It is at least certain that in the 
Vajasaiieyi Samhita the steed was regarded in the rite as identical with 
Dadhikravan whose sun character is not to be doubted.^ Perhaps the true 
solution lies in the view that two rites are confused, the offering of a horse to 
the sun and of a horse to Varuna as god of the waters. Prajapati must in any 
case be deemed to be a later addition to the r^‘te. It is of course possible that 
the position of Varuna was not won until after he had become prominent 
in the ritual of the final bath, and that then he appropriated in part the 
sacrifice of the steed. 


§ 16 . The Human Sacrifice 

The human sacrifice as prescribed in two of the ritual texts ^ is based 
closely on the horse sacrifice ; while there the chief victims are the horse, a 
Gomrga, and a hornless goat, here a man is added, a Brahman or Ksatriya 
bought at the price of a thousand cows and a hundred cattle, and he is per- 
mitted like the horse a year of freedom, in which he can do as he wishes, save 
that he must remain chaste. The offering is to be performed by a Brahman 
or a Ksatriya who is not successful. When slain, the chief queen must lie 
beside the victim as beside the horse : the attempt to find a reference to this 
practice in the Rigveda ^ is a failure. On the other hand the nominal offering 
of large numbers of other men, 166 at 11 posts, is mentioned by the Qatapatha 
Brahmana,^ but we have every reason to assume that this is mere priestly 
imagination, unless, as is possible, the conceptions of the priest were occa- 
sionally made real by a king. It is laid down ^ that a king may on this occasion 
give up his goods and enter into the life of the wandering mendicant, but this 
seems merely to have been a facultative rule. It must, however, be noted that 
the rite of an actual slaying of man is not described in the Brahmanas at all : 
there is in the ^atapatha and the Taittiriya and their Sutras merely the 
symbolic offering of men, who are let free like the wild animals at the horse 
sacrifice, and therefore the actual offering rests merely on Sutra evidence, the 
Vaitana and ^ankhayana, and not even on the early Sutras. It is not credible 
that the Brahmanas should have passed over the rite if they had actually 
known of it ; its mention in the later Sutras is consistent only with the 
invention of it, as a reasonable complement to the theory of sacrifice which 
saw an anomaly in the omission of man from the victims.® 


Cf. Henry, Album- Kern, pp. 10 ff. : contra^ 
Oldenberg, Archiv /. Religionswissen- 
sckafty vii. 212“14. 

xvi. 10 f. ; Vait. xxxvii. 10 ff. ; 
Weber, ZDMG. xviii. 262 ff. ; Episches 
im vedischen Eitmly pp. 9 ff. ; Raja- 
suyay pp. 47, 52 ; Hillebrandt, Ritual- 
litteraiury p. 153 ; Keith, Taittinya 
Samhitdy i. pp. cxxxv, cxxxvii, cxl. 


X. 18. 8 ; 85. 21, 22 ; Hillebrandt, ZDMG. 
xl. 708-11; Ved. Myth, ii. 109. See 
Oldenberg, GGA. 1907, p. 218, n. 1, 
5B. xiii. 6 ; KfS. xxi. 1 ; TB. iii. 4. 1- 
19 ; Ap^S. XX ; H^S. xiv. 6. 

^:B. xiii. 6. 2. 20 ; KfS. xxi. 1. 17. 
Oldenberg, Rel, des Veda^y p. 363 ; Keith, 
Taittiriya Samhitdy i. pp, cxxxvii-cxl ; 
Eggeling, SBE. xliv. pp. xl ff. Hopkins 



348 


Vedic Ritual 


[Part III 


No other trace of human sacrifice exists in the Vedic literature apart from 
the quite different case of the use of a man and four other victims as an 
offering at the piling of the great fire altar.^ This usage is not actually laid 
down for the contemporary time by any Brahmana : the most contemplated 
is the use of the head of a man who has been slain by lightning or by an arrow 
shot, not a victim killed for the purpose, and normally the head of a goat 
seems to have sufficed. But it is clearly no real sacrifice at all. The legend of 
^unah9epa, which has been thought to embody an old legend of human 
sacrifice which was later abolished, and for which the recitation of the story 
suffices when recited to the king at the royal consecration, has been noted 
above ; its essential feature of the horror of the proposed offering, whether the 
victim is the son of the king or merely a priest, and the view thus taken is 
quite incompatible with the idea that the actual human sacrifice was per- 
formed in Vedic India. ^ 


§ 17 , Other Ahina Rites 

While the human sacrifice occupies five pressing days, the universal sacri- 
fice, Sarvamedha,^ takes ten, and it is modelled on the offering made of him- 
self by Brahman Svayambhu, in the beginning of things. Its relation to the 
human sacrifice is held to be the perfection of the former : at the human 
sacrifice, according to Qankhayana, the ofierer gives away the kingdom with 
the people : at this he gives the earth away also, and in Hillebrandt’s * view 
the rite marked the act by which the king left the royal life for the ascetic, 
as the Buddha afterwards did. It is, however, difficult to take the offering 
seriously : it is based on myth, and seems no more than a purely priestly 
fiction : this is borne out by the fact that it is mentioned only in the latest 
Sutras, though it figures in the legend of Naciketas. 

There are many other forms of the Ahma rite, with more than one and not 
more than twelve pressing days, making up at most with the Upasads, <fec., 
not over a month. The number of variations is very large indeed, and the 
different forms are given names, according to the families or individuals who 
invented or practised them. Of their make-up the most important i-ule is that 
they must end with an Atiratra rite, and in all the days of the Abhiplava and 
Prsthya Sadahas are usually brought into account ; of these further particu- 
lars will be given below. 

Apart, however, from mere priestly inventions, there are clear traces of 
popular rites : the most interesting is the ^abalihoma,® performed in spring to 
increase the herds. The sacrificer cuts hair and beard, puts on an unused 

(Eel. of India, pp. 198-200), however. Eel. des Veda^, p. 363, n. 1. 

accepts it. a K^S. xxi. 2 ; H^S. xiv ; QgS. xvi. 15, 16 ; 

^ Hubert and Mauss, Annee sociol. ii. 104. Vait. xxxviii. 10 ff. 

^ Pumsbment of crime occasionally takes * Bituallitteratur, p. 154. 

the form of a sacrifice (ApDS. i. 9. 25. = PB. xxi. 3 ; L^:S. ix. 8. 1 ff. ; Weber, 

12 ; VasDS. xx. 25 f.), but this is . Ind. Stud. v. 437-47. 
isolated and abnormal ; Oldenberg, 



Chap. 20] 


Other Ahma Mites 


349 


garment^ lies twelve nights on an uncovered elevated spot, and drinks hot 
milk. The fire in his house must be kept burning : no one, save a friend to 
give him the directions to perform his functions, must accompany him : he 
must say little and keep close. On the morning of the twelfth day he offers a 
libation of honey and sour milk with a formula addressed to f abali. Before 
the voices of beings are heard, he goes from the village to a wood where he can 
hear none of the sounds of the village animals, takes a bunch of grass and 
cries thrice with loud voice ‘ ^abaii ’ : if any animal other than a dog or an ass 
replies, his sacrifice will be successful. If no answer comes he repeats the 
performance a year later ; if, however, at the third time there is no reply, 
or an ass or dog answers his first appeal, he will have no success. In the view of 
Henry, ^ ^abali is the personified cloud, of varied hue, whose purpose can be 
expressed by the cow rich in milk. Originally a rain spell, the rite was 
developed for more general purposes. The Pancavin 9 a Brahmana,^ however, 
treats ^abali, the wonder cow, as representing Vac, speech. 


§ 18 . The Sattras or Sacrificial Sessions 

The rite of twelve days, Dvadagaha,® may be performed either as an 
Ahina or a Sattra, and all rites with more than twelve pressing days are 
Sattras : the number of years they may be continued extends to thirty-six 
or more up to 1,000. The Sattras all differ from other forms of the Soma 
sacrifice, because all the performers must be consecrated and must be Brah- 
mans : there is therefore no separate sacrificer : all share in the benefits of the 
offering : each bears the burden of his own errors, whereas at the ordinary 
sacrifice the sacrificer receives the benefit and the evil results of errors alike. 
Moreover, they should usually be Brahmans who perform the same; kinds of 
rites, and have the same deity, Tanunapat or Naragahsa, at the Apri invoca- 
tion ; if not, the deity of the majority is adopted. During the Sattra all other 
sacrifices cease to be performed by the priests taking part in the rite : any 
sexual intercourse is forbidden, as are swift movements, laughing without 
holding the hand before the mouth, untruth, connexions with non- Aryans, and 
so forth. One of them plays the part of sacrificer : the others hold on to him 
when he does those acts which only one man can perform. The Adhvafyu 
consecrates the sacrificer, and so on until a student consecrates the Unnetr. 
The wives of the priests are also consecrated each with her husband. There 
are no fees : instead the priests go south saying as they shake black skins, 
‘ What here from my life departeth, that, O Agada, I bring to thee as a fee,’ 
evidently a device to secure long life. The aims of the Sattras are most 


^ La magic dans Vlnde antiqu^f pp. 70, 71. 

^ xxi. 1.5; Trans, Conn. Acad. xv. 27, n. 2. 
For the wish-cow idea, cf. JB. i. 181 ; 
ii. 83 f. ; iii. 146 (wish-cows in the 
world to come). 


» ApfS. xxi ; B^IS. xvi ; KfS. i. 6. 13 ; 
xii ; AfS. x. 5 ; x-xii ; LfS, x. 1. 
11 ff. ; Vait. xlii. 14 ff., Hillebrandt, 
Rituallitteratur, pp. 153-6 ; Keith, Eig- 
Veda BrdhmanaSy pp. 55 ff. 



350 


Vedic Ritual 


[Part III 


various : the obtaining of wealth, of cattle, of offspring, of prosperous 
marriage, and many other things. Much as they are, it is clear, elaborated by 
the priest, they reflect here and there primitive conceptions of sacrifice. 

The model of all Sattras is the Dvada^aha, which is made up of a Praya- 
nlya and an Udayaniya, which, as in all Sattras as opposed to Ahlnas, must 
both be Atiratra days, as the beginning and concluding rites respectively 
of a Prsthya Sadaha, and of either 4 Chandomas or 3 Chandomas and an 
Avivakya day as the tenth. The name Prsthya is based on the different 
treatment of the Prstha Stotra of each day corresponding to the ^astra of the 
Hotr : on the first it is in the Rathantara tune, on the second the Brhat, the 
third the Vairupa, the fourth the Vairaja, the fifth the ^akvara, the sixth the 
Raivata. Of these days the first and fourth are Agnistomas, the others 
Ukthyas. The Chandomas are Ukthyas, the tenth is an Atyagnistoma : it is 
called Avivakya, because on that day no dispute about errors in the ceremony 
is allowed.^ A further variation is possible : on the fourth and ninth days the 
Agrayana cup may be drawn first, on the six and seventh the Qukra, in which 
case the Stotras and the ^astras must also be transposed, or they may be trans- 
posed without change in the order of the cups : this makes the period of ten 
days bear the term vyudhachandas. The Soma is daily watched by one 
priest, the rest may study the Veda, fetch wood, and eat. The tenth day is 
marked by interesting rites, the singing of the Siatnan called the success of the 
Sattra, and the performance of a Brahmodya like that at the horse offering 
or regarding the unqualified Prajapati. 

Rules are given for building up the Dvada 9 aha to longer Sattras ; the 
simplest addition is that of a Mahavrata day after the period of ten days : 
other additions are inserted before that period, the shorter before the longer. 
But these rules are very much varied in practice. Of the various forms by 
far the most interesting is the Gavam Ay ana, ‘ the way of the cows ’, which is 
a Sattra of one year’s duration. 

The beginning of this Sattra ^ is variously prescribed, at the full moon of 
Phalguna or Caitra, or four days before the full moon of these months or of 
Magha. The middle day, the Visuvant, divides it into two halves, of which the 
latter is in many respects intended to be the reverse of the former. The 
scheme of the offering is a Prayaniya Atiratra, a Caturvihga day on which the 
twenty-four-fold Stoma is used, the form being either an Agnistoma or an 
Ukthya ; five months each of four Abhiplava Sadahas and one Prsthya ; 
a sixth one of one Prsthya, three Abhiplavas, one Abhijit, an Agnistoma rite, 
and three Svarasaman days making up 28, to which the first two days are 
added to complete the month. Then comes the Visuvant. The second half- 
year has as the seventh month three Svarasamans, one Vigvajit, one Prsthya, 
and three Abhiplavas ; then months 8 to 11 have one Prsthya and four 

^ Cf. Eggeling, SBE. xli. p. xvii ; Keith, xxiv. 4, 5 ; A^JS. xi. 7 ; xii ; 

Rig-Veda Brdhmanas, p. 247. xiii. 19 ; LQS. iii. 5-iv. 5 ; Vait. xxxi. 

* ApfS. xxii, xxiii ; BfS. xvi ; K^S. xiii ; 6-34 ; Eggeling, SBE. xliv. 140 ff. 



Chap. 20] TKt Sattras or Sacrificial Sessions 351 

Abhiplavas each, and the last has three Abhiplavas, one Ayiis day, one Go day, 
one Da9a'ratra5 and the Mahavrata and Udayaniya days. 

The Abhiplava Sadaha, which is often used in Sattras of all kinds and also 
in Ahinas, differs in certain respects from the Prsthya. In the first place 
in it the Prstha Stotra is alternatively Rathantara and Brhat only. In the 
second place the days of the Abhiplava are differentiated as Jyotis, Go, and 
Ayus according to the Stomas used for the different Stotras. The Jyotis form, 
which is an Agnistoma, having twelve Stotras only, employs for 1-6 the 
Paiicada^a, for 7-11 the Saptada9a, and for 12 the Ekavin9a. The other two 
are Ukthyas and have fifteen Stotras : for 1 the Go uses the Pancada9a, for 
2-5 the Trivrt, for 6-10 the Saptada9a, for 11-15 the Ekavin9a. The Ayus 
has for 1 Trivrt, for 2-5 Pahcada9a, for 6-10 Saptada9a, and 11-15 Ekavin9a, 
At the Visuvant the sun is honoured with offerings, but the Mahavrata ^ 
is much more fully known to us. The rite is according to the ritual allowed to 
be performed variously as a one-day rite, an Ahina, or in a Sattra, and the 
latter is its natural place. It is clearly an old festival of the winter solstice, 
and not even originally, as Hillebrandt holds, of the summer solstice, when 
the strengthening of the sun was an essential duty. There is beaten an earth 
drum, doubtless to scare away the demons who might attempt to overthrow 
the power of the sun ; the Hotr sits on a swing and is swung to and fro, to 
represent the path of the sun in the sky, and strengthen its power to perforin 
it ; ritual abuse is exchanged for fertility purposes, between a student or, in a 
later usage, a Magadha, and a hetaira ; there is actually carried out sexual 
intercourse ; the consecrated persons are alternately praised and reviled ; 
there is a mimic fight between an Aryan and a Qudra for the possession of a 
white round skin which is declared to be a symbol of the sun ; ^ the skin of an 
unfruitful cow is hung up or stretched out and warriors pierce through it with 
arrows, perhaps as a rain spell.^ Women celebrate to the sound of the lute 
in the south the patrons of the ceremony : maids dance round the fire with 
water pitchers, while the Stotra is being performed : they pour the water on 
the fire, and their song shows that they desire richness in milk with water for 
the cows. The desire of heat and rain seems clearly united : the position of 
the sun nearest earth is indicated by the priest, who touches the board of the 

^ Hillebrandt, Sonnwendfeste (Roman, Dying God, pp. 277-85 ; Warde 

Forsch. V. 299 ff.) ; Keith, Qdnkhdyana Fowler, Religious Experience of the 

Aranyaka, pp. 79 ff. ; Eggeling, SBE. Roman People, pp, 61-7. 

xliii. pp. XXV ff. ; Max Muller, SBE. i. * Brunnhofer (AHsche Urzeit, p. 304) 
pp. xciiff. ; von Schroeder, Aiische interpretsRV.viii. 20, 8 as the shooting 

Religion, ii. 137 ff., 210 f., 243 f., 317 ff., of arrows by the Sobharis against the 

599, 631 ff., adducing parallels. See Maruts’ car to bring down the honey- 

TS.' vii. 5. 9 f . ; KS. xxxiv. 5 ; PB. dew, and cites the practice of the 

vi. 5. 13-21 ; 6. 11-15 ; JB. ii. 404-10, Mapongas to shoot arrows to bring 

which negatives performance on the down rain. The skin may represent 

Visuvant. the clouds, as the Aegis brings the 

“ Keith, Taiitinya Samhitd, i. p. cxxxi. thunderstorm (IL xvii. 593 ff. ; Aen, 

For ritual swinging see Frazer, The 



352 


Vedic Ritual 


[Part III 


swing and the earth with one hand, and says, ‘ The God hath united with the 
goddess 

From the point of view of the priest, most important elements of the 
Mahavrata are the Mahavrata Stotra or the Prstha Stotra, corresponding to 
the Mahaduktha of the Hotr : it is noteworthy for the fact that it is intended 
to reproduce the form of the fire, the five Samans, the Gayatra, Rathantara, 
Brhat, Bhadra, and Raj ana, are equated to the head, right and left wing, tail 
and body, and accompanied by the Stomas from Trivrt to Pahcavm9a in 
order. The later ritual of the ^ahkhayana frauta Sutra identifies the Stotra 
with the body of a man, showing the influence of the mystic speculations of the 
priests who performed the Agnicayana, ^ piling of the fire and who saw in this 
act the making up of the universal father, the creator god Prajapati, identified 
with the primeval giant who in the Purusasukta is conceived as having, when 
sacrificed, provided the material for the whole world.^ 

Of other Sattras an interesting one is that performed on the Drsadvati,® 
a specially sacred river, and still more that on the Sarasvati, which is marked 
by many special rites. The sacrifice is performed as the sacrificer moves 
along the bank from the place where the Sarasvati disappears in the desert, 
across the confluence with the Drsadvati, at the crossing of which an offering 
is made to Apaih Napat, to the place where the stream arises, the Piaksa 
Prasravana,^ where an offering is made to Agni as Kama, ‘ desire The 
sacrifice is accompanied by the driving of a hundred young calves along with 
a bull into the wood, and is terminated when these have reached the number 
of a thousand, or the sacrificer dies, or the cows disappear. At the end of the 
whole sacrifice, a mare and a woman are given as a present to the worthiest of 
those who have taken part in the performance. The final bath is taken at 
Karavapacava on the Yamuna. This and the Drsadvati offering are 
important for the fact that they mention several places of the Kum land, 
such as Parinah,^ and indicate the boundaries of that country, tJtie chief 
home of Brahmanism. 

§ 19. The Sautrdmani' 

The Sautramani ® is not a Soma sacrifice, but is classified by the Sutras 
as a Haviryajna, though its chief characteristic in its form as recorded is the 
offering of Sura. It has two distinct forms, the Kaukili, which is an inde- 
pendent offering, the other the Caraka, an offering which forms part of another 


1 This is clearly the wedding of sun and 
earth, a form of that of sky and earth ; 
cf. Brunnhofer, Arische XJrzeit, pp. 325- 
7 ; Cook, Zem, i. 526 ff., 604, 672, 709, 
733. 

® Other Ayanas (e. g. Utsarginiara Ayana, 
JB. lii. 393-7 ; TS. vii. 5. 6 f. ; KS. 
XXX. 7 ; PB. V. 10) are given in the 
Brahmanas and Sutras. 

3 PB. XXV. 13. 1 ff. ; L^S. x. 18. 12 ff. ; 


K^S. xxiv. 6. 32 ff. ; xiii. 29. 

27 ff. 

‘ See Macdoncll and Keith, Vedic Index, ii. 
65. 

® JUd, i. 170 ; JB. ii. 300. 

« BfS. xvii. 31-8 ; M^S. v. 2. 4, 11 ; ApQS. 
xix; HgS.xiii.24; K^S. xv. 9. 27 ff. ; 
xix ; AgS. iii. 9 ; ggS. xv. 15 ; LfS. v 
4. 11 ff. ; Vait. xxx. 



Chap. 20] 


The Sautrdmam 


353 


offering, as the Rajastiya and the Agnicayana. It is prescribed for various 
occasions, but the characteristic ones are the rites for a man who is vomiting 
Soma, or from whose nose, ears, &c.. Soma flows as a result of over-indulgence 
in the drink. The Caraka form seems clearly a reference to the school of the 
Black Yajurveda, which is often so named : the view of Hillebrandt ^ that 
it aMdes to the medical teacher Caraka, in whose school Sura was used as 
medicine, is improbable and unsupported by any evidence. The differences 
between the two forms are of detail : thus the Kaukili is marked by the 
singing by the Brahman of certain Samans. The use of the Sura is accom- 
panied by offerings of animals, to Indra a bull, to Sarasvati a sheep, and to the 
A9vins a goat. These are offered on the fourth day of the rite, which is 
modelled on the fourth- day Soma sacrifice, along with oblations of milk, of 
Sura, and of animal fat. The goat for Agni and Soma, which in the Soma 
sacrifice precedes the pressing day, is replaced by a bull for Agni, and the 
barren cow at the end of the Soma rite is replaced by a bull for Indra Vayodhas. 
In the Sura, which is prepared from various kinds of herbs in a wonderful 
way, are mixed hairs ^ of a lion, a tiger, and a wolf, to confer corresponding 
characteristics on the partakers of the cups of Sura. The Fathers also receive 
an offering of the Sura. After the libation to Vanaspati in the animal offering, 
a throne of Munja grass is set down between the two Yedis, which, as at the 
Varunapraghasas, are used in this rite, and on this the sacrificer sits down 
with silver under his left and gold under his right foot : the offerings, thirty- 
two in number, of fat are then made, while the remainder is used to sprinkle 
the sacrificer, so that it flows from his mouth. The Adhvaryu then touches the 
sacrificer, who calls on his servants with their ritual names, and they lift him 
up first knee high, then navel high, and then as high as the mouth. He then 
steps on to a tiger-skin as establishing himself in the lordship : the thirty- 
third cup of fat is offered, a Saman is sung, and all join in the finale. A milk 
offering toMitra and Varuna, and a bullfor Indra Vayodhas conclude the rite. 

It is conjectured by Hillebrandt^ that the rite was taken over by the Indians 
from a non-Brahmanical tribe, and then remodelled on the basis of the Soma 
ritual : he thinks that the Sura was once a drink akin to the Madhu, and 
offered to the A9vins. The A9vins are not prominent as Soma-drinkers, but 
they certainly are connected with the Madhu, and the Sura seems from the 
evidence of the Avesta to have been once a sacred and honoured drink. The 
Madhu or Sura cult, he thinks, may have flourished on the banks of the Saras- 
vati, where the Vasisthas show little anxiety about the Soma cult, and may 
not originally have practised it, but have learned it from later intruders. The 

^ Hitualliiteratur^ p. 159. Windisch {Bud- Ixii. 135 ff. ; Taittirxya Sathhitd, i. 

dhd's Geburt, pp. 51, 52) tiiinks p. cxxii. The two kinds in MfS. are 

that the medical school has its name Kaukili and Aistiki. 

from the Vedic school in which, he * Cf. the use of hairs of a bull in feeding the 
thinks, medicine was much studied. newly born child ; below, Chap. 21, § 3. 

Of this, however, there is not the ^ Ved. Myth. i. 250 ff. On the Avestan 
slightest proof. Cf. also Keith, ZDMG. Hura see Geiger, Ostimn. Kultufj p. 233. 

3 [s.o.s. 32 ] 



354 


Vedic Ritual 


[Partin 


hypothesis, however, is not supported by any evidence of value,^ and there 
are clear traces that the rite was based on myth, that of the effects on Indra 
of over-indulgence in Soma and the resulting illness which was cured by the 
efforts of the A 9 vins and Saras vati, a fact alluded to in the Rigveda. 


§ 20 . The Piling t)f the Fire 

The piling of the fire altar ^ is a rite which is regarded as being always 
available for performance along with the Soma sacrifice, but which is declared 
to be obligatory only in certain cases, including the Mahavrata, and even that 
view is far from being universally prescribed. There can be no doubt that it 
was by no means a normal or frequent rite : its elaboration is such that no 
ordinary sacrificer would trouble himself with it, and it must have been only 
occasionally used. The main authority for it in the ^atapatha Brahmana 
is a different authority from the chief source of rules on the rest of the sacri- 
ficial ritual including the Soma sacrifice, Yajnavalkya : it is attributed 
to Qandilya, and others mentioned in connexion with it are Tura Kavaseya,® 
who performed it on the Karoti, and Nagnajit Gandhara, names which have 
been held with some force to point to the North-West, where in conjunction 
with the fire cult there may have been special activity, perhaps in consequence 
of contact with Iran. 

The beginning of the sacrifice is the offering of victims, including a man : 
the heads are to be built into the altar and the bodies are placed in the water 
whence the clay for the fire-pan and the bricks of the altar are derived. 
The clay is solemnly collected with the aid of a horse, an ass, and a goat, 
a procession being formed to the place which the horse is supposed to deter- 
mine, and the clay being brought formally back. Then the wife of the sacri- 
ficer makes the Asadha brick, and the sacrificer makes the fire-pan and the 
three Vi 9 vajyotis bricks. The fire-pan is kept filled with fire, from the time of 
the consecration, which takes place fourteen days after the animal offering, 
and for a year the sacrificer carries it about, and performs various rites, 
striding the Visnu steps and adoring the fire in the pan. Then comes the 
actual ceremony of the building of the altar, which is made in five layers, of 
which the first ^ has 1,950 and the whole together 10,800 bricks, which are 
given diverse names ; the length of time used in the rite differs greatly : 
the first four layers may occupy eight months and the last four, or a few days 
may suffice. Noteworthy features of the building are the placing in the 
lowest layer of a golden figure of a man, which seems to be meant as symbolic 


^ Bloomfield, JAOS. xv. 193 ff. ; Keith, 
Taitiiflya Samhitdt i. pp. cxxii ff. 

2 ApfS. xvi ff. ; BfS. x ; K^S. xvi-xviii ; 
ACS. iv. 1. 21 ff. ; CCS. ix. 22 ; LCS. 
i, 5. 5 ff . ; Vail, xxviii f. ; W'eber, 
Ind, Stud, xiii. 217-92 ; Eggeling, 
SBE. xli. pp. xxvi ff. ; xliii. pp. xiii ff. ; 
Oldenberg, GN. 1917, pp. 9 ff. ; Keith, 


Taittinya Samhitd, i. pp. cxxv ff. 

* Macdonell and Keith, Vedic Index, i. 314. 

^ In the White Yajurveda ritual there are 
considerable differences in detail from 
the rules of the Black Yajurveda, but 
the points are of no real consequence ; 
cf. Weber, Ind, Stud, xiii. 325 ff. ; 
Eggeling, SBE. xliii, 357 ff. 



Cliap, 20] 


355 


The Piling of the Fire 

of Agni, who is thus as it were put bodily in the altar, while a tortoise is also 
immured alive,^ and addressed as a mystic being. After the altar has been 
erected, there are 425 libations for the Rudras, made of all sorts of wild 
plants. The mode of cooling the altar is also noteworthy : the Adhvaryii 
draws lines on the altar with a reed to which a flag, a twig of Veta^a, and an 
Avaka plant, all things closely connected with the waters, are tied. The 
formal placing of fire on the altar is carried out with much ceremony : the 
priest and the sacrificer step upon the altar : milk of a black cow with a white 
calf is offered on the last-deposited naturally perforated brick, the fire-brand 
is deposited on it, and special v/ood is used to kindle it. Then come a number 
of libations, for Vai 9 vanara, for the forty-nine winds, which are to be as helpful 
to the sacrificer as they were formerly for Indra, the shower of wealth libations, 
B72 libations for Agni, thirteen for the names of the months, sixteen again for 
Agni, the Partha offering, one introduced by the m 5 rthical king Prthi Vainya ^ 
at his royal consecration, and fourteen Vajaprasaviyas, whose remnants mixed 
with milk and water serve to anoint the sacrificer, who, according as he touches 
bhe altar or stands or sits, uses a black antelope-skin as a carpet, or a goat-skin, 
has certain wishes fulfilled. After the anointing, follow six further Partha 
ablations, twelve Rastrabhrts, and three oblations to the winds, which are 
offered in the place of the horses of the chariot, and treated as if they were 
horses. The first pressing day of the rite is marked by the yoking of the fire 
before the Prataranuvaka, and by its releasing with appropriate formulae at 
aight. To the ordinary rites of the Soma sacrifice are added offerings to the 
minor deities, Anumati, Kuhu, Raka, Sinivali, and for Dhatr at the Udaya- 
aiya Isti, and at the very end of the final libations an offering of milk for 
Mitra and Varuna. The performer of the piling is subjected to certain taboos : 
he may not go out in the rain, nor eat the flesh of a bird, the altar being deemed 
bo be of bird or human form, nor have relations with any save a wife of the 
same caste : after a second offering of the Agnicayana, which is permissible 
if the first has not good results, he may only have relations with his own wife, 
ind after a third not even with her. In these cases the obvious meaning is 
that the sacrificer is to avoid wasting in any way the sacred power of the fire, 
which is within him, and which might be dispersed uselessly, while he must 
mot eat the bird which is the symbol of the fire. 

There can be little doubt that this vast ceremonial is not a simple or 
3rimitive rite : it is a definite attempt of the priest to embody in the ritual 
:he conception already found in the Rigveda ^ of the creation of the universe 
Torn the dismemberment of the primeval giant, which requires as its comple- 
ment the process of building up the fire altar, which is a symbol of the universe, 
ind of the cosmic sacrifice which is eternally repeated. It falls, therefore, 
:o be considered below as an important expression of the theory of sacrifice of 

This practice may clearly be connected Macdonell and Keith, Vedic Index^ ii. 16. 
with the recorded discovery of toads ^ x. 90. 
living inside rocks, &c. 



356 


Vedic Ritual 


[Part 111 


the Brahmans : much as there is of magic and many offerings as there are in 
the ritual, it is essentially in conception the embodiment of philosophic 
theory, a fact which explains its loose connexion with any real sacrifices.^ 

§ 21. The Hotr Formulae 

The ritual requires in many places the use of the Hotr formulae, which are 
formulae in which the priests are mentioned as being identical with deities 
and other objects, the formulae being distinguished according to the number 
of priests so mentioned as Caturhotr, Pancahotr, and so on. They are termed 
offerings, because they represent various sacrifices from the Agnihotra to the 
Soma offering inclusive. They are often used in the course of important rites, 
in which case they are normally assigned to the sacrificer, but also they can 
be employed independently, either by themselves or with the accompaniment 
of cups of some offering and the cry Svaha. Thus a man, who wishes cattle, 
must for twelve nights drink hot water, put on a fresh garment and sleep on 
the ground. Early next morning he goes east, says the Da^ahotr, and offers 
the Caturhotr with butter. They can even be used as spells, in which case an 
offering is made on salt ground, or a break in the earth, and in place of the 
ordinary Vasat-call harsh words like khat or phat are used. This use is clearly 
an abuse : the formulae are of the nature of Upanisads, and must be treated 
as representing the desire to substitute mental processes for the tedious- 
ness of the sacrifice. But it was inevitable that even they should sink to 
magic uses. 2 

§ 22. The Expiations 

In the intolerable complications of the Vedic sacrifice, coupled with the 
tendency to inaccuracy of the Indian mind of the Vedic period, may be found 
ample excuse for the number of prescriptions which are laid down for the 
purpose of expiating errors in the sacrifice.® In some cases the expiations are 
elaborate in the extreme : in most they are fairly simple. Of the former the 
most notorious case is that of the Kusmanda,^ which serves as a means of 
purification from grave sins, and w’^hich is dealt with in detail in the Taittiriya 
Aranyaka, whereas most of the other expiations are confined to the Sutras 
or to the later portions of the Brahmanas. 

Of these expiations the most interesting are given in the Kau 9 ika Sutra,® 
which details magic ceremonies intended to remove the evil results of the 
violation of certain taboos. One of these is the primitive dread of disturbing 

1 Eggeling, SBE. xliii. pp. xvff. ; Keith, xxv; AfS.ixi. 10-14; vi. 6-10 ; 

Taittiriya Sarhhitd, i. pp. cxxvff. iii. 19-21 ; xiii. 2-12 ; Atharva Pra- 

2 TA. iii. 2 ff. ; AB. v. 25 ; QgS, x. 14-18 ; yagcitta (von Negelein, JAOS. xxxiii. 

for use in magic rites, Ap^S. xiv. 13-15 ; 71-144). 

mgs. V. 2. 14. See Weber, Ind, Stud, * TA. ii. 7, 8. 

X. 139, 140, ® Henry, La magie dam Vlnde antique, 

» Ap^S. ix ; xiv. 16 ff. ; M?S. iv ; KgS. pp. 211-19. 



Chap, 20] 


The Expiations 


357 


the earth, for which a natural explanation can be found in the deadly character 
of the work of commencing agricultural operations in a tropical climate : the 
earth must be consoled for the wound on her by the operation of opening her 
body.^ An expiation is equally required for the eating of food which has been 
buried in the ground : it takes the homoeopathic form of offering in the fire 
grains which have been so buried.^ In domestic life the sin of marrying before 
an elder brother must be expiated and two hymns are provided for this 
express purpose.® Expiations are also provided against Agni as Kravyad, the 
term which applies to the fire by which the body of the dead is burned, but 
which denotes also a definite aspect of Agni which he may assume without the 
actual contact with the dead.^ But the list of expiations is endless : there is 
hardly any sphere in which errors cannot be committed and expiations 
required, and the Brahman is the author par excellence of these rites. 

1 Kau 5 . xlvi. 51, 52 ; AV. xii. 1. 35, 61. * Kau^. xlvi. 28, 29 ; AV. vi. 112, 113. 

* Kaup. xlvi. 33-5. * Kau 9 . xliii. 16-21 ; AV. iii. 21. 



CHAPTER 21 

THE DOMESTIC EITUAL 

§ L The General Character of the Domestic Sacrifices 

The householder of the Vedic period was expected to maintain a fire 
normally in his dwelling, sometimes, however, in a special place outside the 
actual house. The establishment of such a fire was normal on marriage, on 
the division of the property of a family, the return of a student from his 
studentship, or the death of the head of the family, when his eldest son was 
expected to kindle a new fire. The fire might be produced by friction, but 
normally it was obtained from the house of a wealthy man, or from one who 
made many sacrifices. It was the duty of the householder, his son, wife, 
daughter, or pupil to keep it alive : if it was allowed to go out, it had to 
be rekindled by friction or reborrowed. If its existence had been interrupted 
for twelve days, a completely new establishment was prescribed. From it on 
going a journey the householder took leave and greeted it on his return, 
kissing his eldest son thereafter to the accompaniment of formulae, while 
daughters were kissed on the head, not the lips, in silence. 

The sacrifices of the domestic ritual were expected to be performed 
normally by the householder ; his wife, however, might act for him as at the 
morning and evening libations, and at the evening Bali : ^ a Brahman might 
be used in nearly every case, though at the Paka offerings and one or two 
others the householder was required to act himself, according to some 
authorities at least ,* a Brahman was required for the offerings to Dhanvan- 
tari and the spit-ox offering.^ If the householder wished to perform the 
function of the Brahman, he placed a sunshade and a garment, or straw 
puppet, on the seat in the south which a Brahman would occupy, if employed. 
The Brahmans claimed that at a marriage the formulae for the bridegroom 
must be said by them unless he were a Brahman himself, evidently an effort to 
extend their field of employment.^ The sacrificer wore a thread under the left 
armpit and over the right shoulder at offerings to the Fathers, but in the 
reverse way for offerings to the gods,"* 

The divisions of the domestic offerings are very differently and confusingly 
given by the different authorities : ^ clearly the matter was not one of 

j GGS. i. 3. 15 ; 4. 19 ; 4, 29 ; 9. 8, 9 ; cultural rites, PGS. ii. 17. 18. The idea 

BhGS. iii. 12. that these limited functions are due to 

2 AGS, i. 3. 6. priestly influence (Arbman, Budra, 

» GGPar. ii. 24. Women are authorities p. 103) is implausible. 

for supplementary rites at marriage, * TA. ii. 1 ; GGS. i. 2. 1 ff. ; JGS. i. 1. 
ApGS. ii. 15, though in general not ® Weber, Ind, Stud, x. 326 ; Oldenberg, 
approved, viii. 3 ; they share in agri- SBE. xxx. p. xxiii. 



Chap. 21 ] The General Character of the Domestic Sacrifices 359 


agreement : one division ^ distinguishes seven species of Paka offerings*, 
where Paka probably denotes cooked food, another ^ distinguishes what is 
offered in fire, what is exposed merely, offerings to the Manes, and offerings 
which are given to a Brahman to eat. The material included milk, barley 
gruel, porridge, curds, melted butter, rice, barley, sesame, and, but very 
rarely, animal victims. The butter offering — ^various kinds of butter ^ are 
distinguished — ^is of a fairly simple character : a ladle called Darvi, or a Sruva, 
is used ; also blades of grass for purifying purposes, water to cleanse the 
grass blades, and kindling sticks, while enclosing sticks are laid around the 
fire. The Paka offerings * differ from the Qrauta in having no fore- or after- 
offerings, no invocation of the Ida, and no kindling verses or instruction 
formulae, known as Nigadas. At the end of some at least of the rites, a cere- 
mony called the Yajnavastu is performed : of the grass of the sacrifice 
a handful is taken, dipped in the butter, with a request to the birds to lick 
it, sprinkled in water, and offered to Rudra as lord of the beasts.® 

The animal victim is prescribed for a guest reception, for offerings to the 
Fathers, and at marriage : there is also a special spit-ox offering. The cow is 
the normal victim, but a goat is allowed to take its place. The ceremony of 
the offering was clearly akin to that of the ^rauta ritual ; there is the same 
touching of the victim, the setting up of a Qamitra fire, which is derived from 
the fire-brand thrice carried round it, the taking out first of the omentum and 
its separate offering, and the cutting of pieces of flesh. The feast was in 
effect an opportunity, doubtless readily appreciated, for a meal of flesh.® 


§ 2 . The Various Offerings 

The daily offerings of the householder include offerings at night and 
morning to Agni and Prajapati, and Surya and Prajapati respectively : ^ there 
is, however, great divergence as to the nature of the offerings, usually rice or 
barley, and the exact deities and times of offering. Further, there are five great 
offerings to be performed ; ® the first is the Devayaj iia, that for the gods made 
in the fire morning and evening, when the meal is ready. The second, that 
called BhutayajnaorBali,^ is offered on the ground for all manner of beings ; 
in the version of Gobhila, the first is for earth, the second for Vayu, the third 
for the All-gods, the fourth for Prajapati, then the fifth is offered in the water- 
holder for the god of the waters, the sixth at the middle posts for plants and 


1 ^GS. i. 1. 15. 

2 fGS.i.S. 1. 

® AB. i. 3. 5, with comm. ; Maedonell and 
Keith, Vedic Index, i. 250, 437 ; ii. 20. 
^ See Arbman, Rudra, pp. 64 ff. 

« GGS. i. 7 ff. ; AGS. i. 10. 6 ff. 

® Maedonell and Keith, Vedic Index, ii. 
145-7. 

’ GGS. i. 3. 16 ; MGS. ii. 3. 1, 2 ; JGS. i. 
23. The cow, however, may be let go ; 
cf. BhGS. ii. 25 f. ; VarGS. xii ; BGS. 


1. 2, where great stress is laid on the use 
of a ram or goat in lieu, or flesh of a 
wild beast, and in default only is cereal 
allowed. 

8 GGS. i. 4. 1 ff. ; PGS. ii. 9. 3 ff. ; AGS. i. 

2. 4 ff. ; QGS* ii. 14 ; Kau 9 . Ixxiv. 
2 ; BGS. ii. 9 ; BhGS. iii. 14 ; VarGS., 

p. 22. 

8 Cf. Chap. 12, § 5 ; Arbman, Rudra, 
pp. 189 ff. 



360 


Vedic Ritual 


[Part III 


trees, and the seventh at the honse-door for the ether ; an eighth in the bed 
for Kama, and finally one in the dustbin for the Raksases. But many other 
names are also given, including offerings to hosts of serpents- The third 
great offering, the PitryaJ na, is the throwing of the rest of the Bali sprinkled 
with water to the Fathers. The fourth, the Brahmayajna, is the repetition 
of some part of the Veda, usually reduced within narrow limits, and the 
fifth, the Manusyayajna, is the feeding of Brahmans, guests, and beggars. 

In the version of f ankhayana,^ Vai9vadeva offerings are made in the fire 
evening and morning to Agni, Soma, Indra and Agni, Visnu, Bharadvaja 
Dhanvantari, Vi9ve Devas, Prajapati, Aditi, Anumati, and Agni Svistakrt. 
Then come the actual Balis offered in the centre of the floor for the same 
deities, followed by Balis for Brahman and the Brahmans and Vastospati. 
Balis are then distributed through the different quarters of the horizon in due 
order to the presiding deities, Indra, Yama, Varuna, Soma, and Brhaspati, 
each with those connected with him. Then turning towards the disk of the sun 
offerings are made to Aditi and the Adityas, the Naksatras, seasons, months, 
half-months, days and nights, and years. On the thresholds offerings are made* 
to Pusan as maker of ways, Dhatr, Vidhatr, and the Maruts ; on the grind- 
stone to Visnu, on the mortar to the tree ; in the place where the herbs are 
kept to the herbs ; near the water-pot to Parjanya and the waters ; at the 
head and the foot of the bed respectively to ^ri and Bhadrakali ; in the 
privy to Sarvannabhuti ; in the air in the evening to the night-walkers, in 
the morning to the day- walkers ; in the north to the unknown gods and 
Dhanapati, the lord of wealth. Finally the remnants are poured out in the 
south for the Fathers, and then a Brahman or student and women are formally 
fed, as well as boys and the old. In this version we have a duplication which 
shows the fire ritual encroaching on the ordinary Bali ritual, which involves 
merely the placing on the ground of the offering for the use of the divinities. 
There is no doubt of the substantial antiquity of the latter rite, which is 
attested for Iran by the express and clear assertions of Herodotos,^ and has 
also parallels in the usage of the Slavs, Lithuanians, and Germans.^ It is 
further clear from ^ankhayana that we have in this elaborate rite the develop- 
ment of something far more simple and primitive, the purpose of which is 
hinted at in the further directions which are given that one should eat nothing 
without having cut off and offered a portion thereof as a Bali, nor should one 
eat alone or before others. Not merely the eating of firstfruits is a dangerous 
thing, rendering a preliminary offering to the gods and the Fathers desirable 
to break any taboo, but in every case of a meal it is well to propitiate by 
sharing the food which is enjoyed."^ Hence Qankhayana recommends, though 


^ ii. 14 ; Arbman (Rudra, p. 191) omits 
Brahman and Varuna, doubtless per 
incuriam, 

2 i. 132. 

» Carnoy, Les Indo-Europiens, p. 232. 

^ Cf. GGS. i. 4. 20 ; Manu, iii. 117 f. ; RV. 


X. 117. 6 ; MGS. i. 9. 13 ; at the 
Madhuparka, AGS. i. 24. 15 ff. ; QGS, 
iv. 21. 7 n. ; PGS. i. 3. 18 f. See also 
the Pra 9 itra legends, TS. ii. 6 . 8. 3 ; 
9IB.i.7.4. 1. Arbman (Kwdra, pp. 204 ff.) 
compares modern Tibetan (JR AS. 



Ckap. 21] 


361 


The Various Offerings 

not as part of the formal rite, the giving of food to the dogs, the dog-butchers, 
and the birds, and Manu ^ formally includes in the Bhutayaj fia dogs, outcastes, 
diseased persons, birds, and insects. In the Kaugika Sutra ^ we find abstract 
deities, Dharma, Adharma, hope, faith, wisdom, prosperity, modesty, and 
knowledge, along with the Vedic gods and snake deities such as Vasuki, 
Citrasena, Citraratha, Taksa, and Upataksa. 

In this generosity we may take it gods. Fathers, and men shared with 
all manner of beings, and the term Bali applied to all the offerings. Bhutayaj na 
may well have been a synonym, whence first were differentiated by regard to 
the recipients of the offerings the Fathers and men, Pitryajna and Manus- 
yayajiia. All these offerings were precisely of the same kind, made in the 
same way, without the use of fire, but the domestic ritual suffered expansion 
by the priests ® through the introduction of the fire ritual, and we have the 
spectacle of the Devayajna introduced making up with the Brahmayajna, 
Vedic study, ^ a set of five sacrifices. The Devayajna, it is plain, is later than 
the Bhutayaj fia in this connexion, and this renders the effort ® to interpret 
Bhuta in the light of the existence of the Devayaj fia out of the question. It 
is significant of its later character that the deities of the Devayajna differ 
greatly and are largely priestly ; thus Gobhila® make them to be the late 
figure of Prajapati and the technical one of Agni Svistakrt, who is far removed 
from popular rites. The absence of fire is found also, as we have seen, in 
parts of the Qrauta ritual, as in the hanging of offerings for Rudra on trees, 
a usage familiar from Germanic ritual, and it is common in the ritual of offer- 
ings to the dead which are frequently placed in pits. 

The new and full moon offerings ’ of the domestic ritual agree closely in the 
deity and other details with those of the ^rauta, but for cakes are substituted 
paps as offerings, and the offerings to Indra or Mahendra entirely disappear. 
Other deities are, however, sometimes substituted. At the end the wife of the 
sacrificer makes an offering to the man, the woman, the age — or the bird, the 
white, the black toothed, the lord of bad women and others, who are difficult 
fully to explain. ^ The sacrificer and his wife should spend the night before the 
offering in telling each other stories, and the sacrificer should follow some 
at least of the other rules applicable to the sacrificer with the ^^^auta ritual. 
A spring festival in the month Caitra ® is recorded by one Sutra only, figures of 


1894, pp. 265 ff.) and fiidian usages, 
as well as Greek and Roman and other 
parallels. Cf. Hubert and Mauss, 
MSangeSf pp. 74 ff. ; Hopkins, Origin 
of Religion^ pp. 155, 171. 

" iii. 92. 

2 Ixxiv. 2 ff. 

® Cf. QB. xi. 5. 6. 1, which has the five ; 

ApDS. i. 12, 13 (brdhmanokta), 

* This is patently late ; cf. ApDS. i. 13. 1 ; 
Manu, iii. 80 f. 


Arbman, Rudra^ pp. 189 ff., who fails 
to realize the complex and artificial 
character of the series of five, and the 
essential unity of the meal in which 
all share, gods generically, Fathers, and 
men. 

« i. 4. 3. 

’ GGS. i. 5 ; 8. 22 ; AGS. i. 10. 5 ; ApGS. 
vii. 17. 

« gGS. iv, 19. Cf. MGS. ii. 7. 6-8 (the talpa 
is addressed). 



Vedic Bitual 


362 


[Part III 


pairs of beasts are made from meal, which suggest a vegetation magic as at the 
Varunapraghasas of the Qrauta ritual. 

At the month ^ravana,^ when the rains begin and snakes become very 
dangerous, an offering is made to appease them in the southern fire by the 
keeper of the fires, in the house fire by the ordinary householder, or a fresh fire 
may be lighted. In that offerings are made to many deities, including the earth 
spirit, Bhauma, the rains, ^ravana, as well as Agni, Surya, Vayu and Visnu ; 
^veta, a genius which is with its foot to drive away the snakes is also invoked. 
The second part of the sacrifice is one addressed directly to the snakes, who are 
given water to wash themselves in, a comb to comb themselves with, unguents, 
and so forth. Finally a Bali is offered to the snakes of the three regions : 
it is made of groats or roasted barley. This performance goes on daily, until 
the time when the beds of the sacrificer and his wife, which have been raised up 
since the beginning of the rains, are replaced on the ground with the advent of 
drier weather. A stream of water is poured round the house to keep the 
snakes at the desired distance from it. 

On the full moon of Prausthapada ^ an offering is prescribed by one Sutra 
for Indra, Indrani, the one-footed goat, the serpent of the deep, and the 
Prausthapadas, and a Bali at the end to the Maruts, the other receiving butter 
libations. The mention of the two rare deities is clearly due to the presence of 
the twin Naksatra, Prausthapadas. 

On the full moon of Agvini ® is prescribed an offering to Pa9upati, 
^iva, Qankara, and Prsataka; it consists of the sacrifice of a mixture of milk 
with butter. The deities, however, differ greatly, and it is not clear that the 
ceremony is intended for the welfare of the herds. The priest and the sacrificer 
partake of the Prsataka, and put on amulets, and later the cows are allowed to 
have a share of it, 'and eventually the calves and the cows are shut in together. 

The Agrahayani festival ^ is celebrated at the full-moon day of the month 
Margagirsa : it is, as the name denotes, the festival of the beginning of a new 
year, and is characterized by a thorough cleaning of the house, followed by 
a smoking of it parallel to German rites observed at the new year, in which 
the house is smoked. The offerer also pours water into a water-jug set on a 
firm stone, which constitutes the consecration of the water-holder, in which 
daily Balis are offered. The use of six or nine kinds of plants in this ceremony 
is paralleled by the use of nine in Germany. At this time, the danger from 
snakes being over, the beds come back to the ground : the ceremony is 


^ GGS. iii. 7. 3 ; AGS. ii. 1. 15 ; ?GS. iv. 
15 ; PGS. ii. 14. 9 ; ApGS. xviii. 5-xix. 
2 ; HGS. ii. 16 ; MGS. ii. 16 ; BGS. iii. 
10; BUGS. ii. 1. 

2 PGS. ii. 15. 

® AGS. ii. 2. 1 ; fGS. iv. 16 ; PGS. ii. 16 ; 
GGS. iii. 8. 1^8; KhGS. iii. 3. 1. 
Prsataka is really tbe name of the offer- 
ing, and it is characteristic that 


A 9 valayana turns it into a deity which 
none of the others do, and adds C^iva 
and ^ahkara as forms of Pagupati. In 
MGS. ii. 3. 4~8 Prsataka and cows are 
both revered. 

* GGS. iii. 9 ; AGS. ii. 3 ; ^GS. iv. 17 ; 
PGS. iii. 2 ; ApGS. xix. 3 ; HGS. ii. 
17 ; MGS. ii. 7. 1-5 ; BhGS. ii. 2 ; 
Weber, Naxatrai ii. 332. 



Chap. 2L] The Various Offerings 363 

carried out in due form, the householder sitting on a strew west of the fire 
with the rest of the family beside him in order of age, and then his wife and 
children, and those of the other members of the family ; the earth is entreated 
to be friendly to them all. The snakes also receive offerings. A special form 
of snake offering ^ is commenced in BhMrapada for one injured by a snake ; 
a five-headed snake of wood or clay is made and revered for a whole year. 

Of the occasional offerings the most interesting is the Arghya,^ the paying 
of honour to special guests, namely the teacher, the priest, a Snataka, if he 
come as a wooer or on the day when he completes his studies by the bath, 
whence his name is derived, a connexion by marriage, or a friend. Only once 
a year apparently should the full ceremony be paid, but constantly to a priest 
invited to sacrifice. The gifts are six, one or two stools to sit on, water to 
wash the feet, Argha water, a portion of which is poured over the guest’s 
hands, water to cleanse the mouth, the Madhuparka, a mixture of curds, 
honey and ghee, with or without water and barley groats. The guest may 
eat all, or give a portion to a son or pupil or other person : the king merely 
accepts proforma and gives them to his Purohita. Finally the cow is offered 
and slain, unless the guest politely declines the offer, when other flesh may be 
used in its place. The deity varies in the cases of the different guests, Agni, 
Brhaspati, Indra and Agni, Prajapati, Indra and Mitra, being given as the 
appropriate gods, for obvious reasons in most cases. 

The directions as to the building of the house ® are numerous and com- 
plicated. Of interest is the fact that the presence of certain plants and certain 
trees on the chosen place, or in its vicinity, is forbidden : the A^vattha is 
connected with the A9vins and causes the danger from fire, Yama’s Pala9a 
danger of death, Varuna’s Nyagrodha danger of fighting, and Prajapati’s 
Udrimbarabad eyes. The chosen place is thrice surrounded by a thin stream 
of water. The food chamber should be where water runs away, the parlour 
looking north, but opinions vary : the door should be in the west : it is 
also desirable that the householder should be ensured privacy at his meal and 
ritual. When the posts are driven into the earth, an Avaka plant is put in the 
hole to prevent fire. When the middle post is put in, Ku^a grass is strewn, 
water, rice, and barley are poured on it, and homage paid to the earth spirit. 
An anointed stone is also buried, to which a parallel exists in the burying of 
stones in Buddhist temples in Siam. When the house is complete, an offering 
is made to Vastospati, which is repeated yearly according to some authorities. 
Brahmans are fed, and expected to wish good luck for the place. Even a 
black cow or a white goat may be offered : the former in its colour is similar to 
the black cock killed at the foundation of a new house in Greece.'^ Ten Balis 

^ AGPar. iii. 16. For magic rites against BGS. i. 2. 

snake-poison, see Henry, La magie ® GGS. iv. 7 ; AGS. ii. 7, 8 ; HGS. i. 

dans Vlnde antique, pp. 108 ff., 198 ff. 27 ; MGS. ii. 11 ; AV. iii. 12 ; vii. 41 ; 

* GGS. iv. 10 ; AGS. i. 24 ; ^GS. ii. 15 ; Bloomfield, JAOS. xvi. 12 ff. 

PGS.i. 3; ApGS. xiii. 20 ; HGS. i. 13 ; * Winternitz, Mitth, Anthrop. Ges. Wien, 

MGS. i. 9. 1 ; BhGS, ii. 23-6 ; 1887, xvii. 37 ff. 



364 


Vedic Ritual 


[Part III 


are also offered to the quarters. Of human sacrifice there is no trace in the 
ritual, which is meant in special of ordinary houses : such a practice is only 
recorded of the much more important Agnicayana. But there are traces of 
such a practice later ^ in legends and in history, perhaps coming from a 
period when the simple buildings of Vedic India had been superseded by large 
buildings of stone, which, like the brick altars, were supposed to need special 
measures to make them secure. 

The new house is entered when complete formally by the householder with 
his eldest son and his wife : they carry with them food, and partake of honey 
and butter to secure prosperity in it. On leaving and returning to it formulae 
of good luck are said.^ 

Other acts of consecration are those of a grove or a tank of water : the 
offerings in the latter case include one to Varuna, as god of the waters.^ 

The agricultural festivals are not unimportant, and are numerous. 
Formulae are regularly used for the driving out and the return to their stalls 
of the cattle.^ Many curious performances ^ are recorded as devices to secure 
the multiplying of the herds : the marking of a pair of calves male and female 
is one : in another a pap is offered to Agni, Pusan, Indra and I^vara, and 
honour is paid to the bull, whose neck and horns are ornamented and who 
is fed. In the case of a horse, Yama and Varuna are included in the offering, 
and the same respect is paid to the horse. A cow which has two calves should 
be given away. The spit-ox ® sacrifice brings wealth and is of a special 
character : an ox is offered in spring or autumn to Budra. The offering is 
made away from the village after midnight, or at least after sunset : Rudra’s 
twelve names are invoked. The omentum is offered with a leaf or a wooden 
instrument, not with the Juhu ladle. Balis are offered also in all four quarters 
to appease the troops of Rudra.^ The tail, skin, &c., are thrown into the fire, 
the blood is poured out on Ku9a or Darbha grass for the snakes, to whom 
formulae are addressed. None of the victims may be brought into the village, 
since the god is fain to hurt men, no connexion of the sacrificer may be near 
the place of sacrifice, and he himself shall not eat the flesh save for a very 
special instruction, in which case, however, he will prosper greatly. In 
another version of the offering, place is found for the wives of Rudra, Rudranl, 
^arvani, Bhavani, and for Indrani ; the blood-covered entrails are burned or 
cast into the fire. In another quite different form ® the offerings take the 
place of three messes of rice, which are offered to three animals, a bull, a cow, 
and a calf, which are styled the ^ulagava or l9ana, the bountiful one, and the 
victor respectively : when the offerings are given, Rudra is hailed by all his 

1 Haberlandt, ibid, 42 ff. « GGS. iii. 6 ; KhGS. iii. 1 ; HGS. i. 18. 

“ AGS. ii. 10. 2 ; iii. 4. 9. For magic ® AGS. iv. 8 ; PGS. iii. 8 ; not in GGS. ; 

rites as to houses see Henry, La magie very briefly in MGS. ii. 5. Cf. BhGS. 

dans VInde antique, pp. 96-9. Cf. BGS. ii. 8-10 ; BGS. ii. 7. 

i. 5 ; BhGS. ii. 4-6. Arbman, Budra, pp. 156 ff. 

» QGS. V. Z ; AGPar. iv. 9, 10. « HGS. ii. 8 ; ApGS. xix. 13 ff. ; see above, 

* GGS. iii. 6. 9 Chap. 18, § 4. 



Chap. 21] 


365 


The Various Offerings 

names, the second offering is made to the wife of Rudra, the third to Jayanta. 
The cows are placed round the fire so as to smell the burnt offering, and all 
go round it from left to right, while verses are addressed to the ^ulagava. It 
is perfectly clear ^ that here the bull and the cow are fetishes for the god and his 
wife, but the position of Jayanta is less obvious : possibly a child of the two is 
deemed to be repi'esented by him. At the same time it must be realized that 
the beasts are so treated merely as a substitute for the other rite of slaughter ; 
the rite has every appearance of being a later elaboration. 

Another rite,^ the Baudhyavihara, a curious name of dubious origin, for 
the propitiation of Rudra and his hordes, is the making of a basket of Palana 
leaves, the placing in it of rice and butter, and hanging it on a tree as an 
offering to the god as wearer of the quiver : the offerer also spreads leaves 
about and touches the cattle with a number of things, with sandal, salve, 
Sura, water, cow-dxmg, and a cow’s tail to secure luck. Further, an offering is 
made to Ksetrapati,^ who is represented by a bull as at the ^hlagava rite. 

Mention is also made, as appropriate to be performed on the new moon 
after full moon in Phalguna, of the marking of the cattle, which is accompanied 
by the expression of the hope that the work will be more in the following year.^ 
The ceremony of letting loose a bull ^ is performed at the full moon of Karttika : 
it is performed by lighting a fire among the cows, offering six libations of 
butter and a pap for Pusan, and with a verse addressed to Rudra the bull is 
set free, after being ornamented. The Brahmans receive a meal for the pre- 
paration of which milk from all the cows has been used. 

Of agricultural rites proper there are several of importance. The ceremony 
of ploughing is formally accomplished after the plough has been yoked.® 
On the east side of the field an offering is made before the plough to sky and 
earth. Among the deities to whom offerings are also made are Indra, Par- 
janya, the A 9 vins, the Maruts, Udalaka^yapa, Svatikari, Sita and Anumati, 
and others : the bulls receive honey and butter. Other rites of the same kind 
are those to the furrow, the offering on the threshing-floor, at sowing, at 
harvest and at threshing, and here may be mentioned the offering made to 
avert danger from the moles or mice to the king of the moles or mice : a 
similar practice may be the explanation of the connexion of the mouse with 
Apollo in which totemism has been so often seen.’ 

The offering to the furrow is described at some length in one Sutra.® 

^ Haradatta’s effort to ignore this is quite also AV. vi. 141 ; Delbriick, Guru- 

indefensible. pujakaumudX^ p. 48. AV. ii. 32 is 

® HGS. ii. 9. 7 ; ApGS. xix. 20. directed against worms in cattle. 

» HGS. 2. c. ; ApGS. xx. 13 ff. « ^GS. iv. 13 ; GGS. iv. 4. 27 ff. ; PGS. ii. 

« ^GfS. iii. 10 ; cf. MGS. ii, 10. 1 ff. : the 13 ; Kau§, xv. 

women are not to eat of one offering ’ Cf. Lang, Custom and Myth, pp. 103 ff. ; 
(a tundila (?) for Agni), Farnell, Cults of the Greek States, iv. 

^ PGS. iii. 9 ; Kau 9 . xxiv. 22. For other 164, 265, who lays stress on the pro- 
magic rites for cattle see Henry, bability that the connexion is rooted in 

La magie dans Vlnde antique, pp. 102- pre-Hellenic custom. 

6; for agriculture, pp. 106-111. See * PGS.ii. 17; cf. MGS. ii. 10. 7. 



366 


Vedic Bitual 


[Part III 


East or north of the field on a place which is pure, and has been ploughed 
without injury to fruits, or in the village, a fire is kindled, and Darbha grass 
mixed with rice or barley, according to the season, is strewed round it : then 
offerings of butter are made to Indra, Sita, the furrow, and Urvara, the 
ploughfield, and from the food cooked in a pot to Sita, Yaja, the personified 
sacrifice, ^ama, ‘energy’, and Bhuti, ‘prosperity’. On the Kuga grass 
remaining from the strewing an offering is made to the guardians of the furrow, 
who sit in the east with bows and quivers, in the south to those with mail, 
in the west to the mighty Bhuti, Bhumi, Parsni, and Qunamkuri, and in the 
north to the terrible ones. The women should also make offerings. 

In a period lying outside the Vedic period proper we are carried by the 
Caitya offering which is recorded in one Sutra : ^ it is interesting, as it seems 
clearly to refer to the offering of homage to the memorials erected to the 
memory of some teacher or other distinguished personage. The procedure con- 
templates that the Caitya cannot be visited in person : therefore the sacrificer 
prepares two bales of food, and gives them to a messenger real or symbolical, 
to take to the destination, providing the messenger with a weapon and boat, 
if the journey is a long one. The offering to Dhanvantari, which is mentioned 
with emphasis as needing the co-operation of priests, is not explained in the 
texts. 

The offerings of firstfruits belong to the domestic as well as to the f rauta 
ritual ; as in it there are offerings of rice, barley, and millet at different 
periods, and at these offerings Indra, Brahman, and VSsuki are to receive 
libations. Another similar offering is the Asasyabali, to be performed by the 
householder alone, of barley up to the rice harvest, and of rice up to the barley 
harvest.® 

§ 3 . Birth Ceremonies and others 

As is natural the domestic ritual devotes much space to the minute descrip- 
tion of large number of rites, mainly magical in essence, which accompany 
the child from even before birth to its death. In the third or fourth month 
or even later after pregnancy takes place the rite for quickening a male child, 
Pnmsavana,® the essence of which consists in the placing in the nostril of the 
wife by her husband of a Nyagrodha shoot, which he purchases in due form and 
which is pounded, either by a young girl, or a student or a wife who is keeping 
a vow, or a Brahmabandhu, a term which is perhaps best taken as a Brahman 

1 AGS. i. 12 ; Oldenberg, SBE. xxix. 178. « GGS. ii. 6 ; QGS. i. 20 ; HGS. ii. 2 ; MGS. 

Similar late offerings are those to i. 16 ; BGS. i. 9 ; BhGS. i. 22 ; JGS. 

Sasthi (MGS. ii. IS), who is giver of i. 5 ; AV. hi. 23 ; vi. 11 ; vii. 17, 19. 

wealth and is called Qri ; to the Magic rites for love purposes are rare 

Vinayakas (ib, 14 ; Yajn- i. 274 ff.) ; outside Atharvan texts, e. g. RV. x. 

toNejamesa(ih.l8.4). The Soma text 145, 159, 162, 183; TS. ii. 3. 9. 1 ; 

gives remedies for evil omens from a MS.ii. 3, 2 ; TB. ii. 3. 10 ; BAU. vi. 4 ; 

pigeon (ii. 17) and evil dreams (ii. 15). ApG^. ix. 4 ; xxiii. 3 ; see Bloomfield, 

* GGS. iv. 7. 43 ; i. 4. 30 ; QGS. iii. 8. 1 ; Atharvaveda, pp. 69 ff. 

PGS. iii. 1. 1 ; ApGS. xix. 6. 



Chap. 21] 


Birth Ceremonies and others 


367 


by birth only, not by learning. A further rite is that to prevent an abortion, 
or more generally to secure the safety of the embryo, which is accomplished by 
offering a cooked mess, and rubbing butter on the limbs of the wife.^ The cere- 
mony of the parting of the hair ^ is performed once only for the first pregnancy, 
and is not repeated : it is celebrated in the fourth month or later. The wife 
sits west of the fire, her husband puts round her neck an Udumbara branch 
with an even number of unripe fruits, he parts her hair from the front back- 
wards with Darbha grass,^ Viratara (‘ very male ’) wood, a full spindle, and a 
porcupine’s quill ; he also makes her look at the mess of rice, sesame, and ghee, 
and asks her to see in it offspring. Some authorities allow two lute players to 
sing the king, or him that is higher than the king, that is Soma. One special 
Gatha is prescribed which should end with the name of the stream on which 
the people dwell, and one or two such verses have been preserved to us. Other 
authorities provide for Brahman women sitting beside her, and uttering 
phrases indicating that she is to be the mother of living children. Old Brah- 
man women are said also to be the authorities for the acts to be done in these 
cases. The wife should keep silence after the rite until the stars appear, when 
she should touch a calf, say the Vyahrtis, Bhuh, Bhuvah, Svar, and then 
speak. There are also ceremonies for the actual birth : the place is anointed 
against the Raksases : a Brahman loosens all the knots in the house, as in 
Germany all doors and locks are opened ; water and the Turyanti plant are 
placed before the mother.^ If the child dies in birth, special rites are ordered. 
When the child is born alive, a fire ^ is lit in the house to warm utensils and 
be used for the smoking of the child,® which is performed by throwing into 
the fire grains of corn and hemp, with formulae to drive away demons of 
various kinds. For ten days the offering of sesame and rice grains is prescribed. 
On the twelfth day the special fire disappears, the old household fire comes out 
into use, the purification of the wife and child having been performed. 

Immediately on birth are performed the ceremonies for securing long life, 
the Ayusya, and the production of intellect, Medhajanana : in the case of 
girls these ceremonies may be performed, but then without the accompanying 
formulae. The father breathes thrice upon the new-born child, and gives it to 
eat a mixture of butter, honey, and sour milk, to which others add rice and 
barley, and even whitish black and red hairs of a black bull. The child is fed 
with a golden instrument. In some authorities five Brahmans are expected 
to invoke its possession of the breaths of life, or the father makes up for this 


1 gCS. i. 21 ; HGS. ii. 2. 7. Cf. also Kau 9 . 
xxxiv. 8-11. 

» GGS. ii. 7 ; gGS. i. 22 ; PGS. i. 15. 3 ; 
ApGS. xiv ; HGS. ii. 2 ; MGS. i. 15 ; 
cf. Kan?. XXXV, 20 with Ke 9 ava’s 
comment ; BhGS. i. 21 ; BGS. i. 10 ; 
JGS. i. 7. 

® For the later practice of putting on a red 
mark, to frighten demons, see Hopkins, 


Origin of Religion^ p. 119, and cf, 
VarGS. xvi. 

* ApGS. xiv. 14 ; HGS. ii. 2. 8 ; Henry, 
La magie dans VInde antiquct p* 143. 

5 gGS.i.25.4; PGS. i. 16. 23; JGS.i.8, 

® The Greek ritual substitutes an Amphi- 
dromia in which the child is carried 
swiftly round the fire to acquire strength 
and speed. The fire here too purifies. 



368 


Vedic Ritual 


[Paartlll 


by going about the child in the several quarters. The child is asked to 
become a stone and an axe, and in some cases these instruments are actually 
present at the rite. At this point the smoking of the child may take place. 
Intellect is given by repeating a prayer in the ear of the babe, asking Savitr or 
Mitra and Varuna to give it intelligence : with the fourth gold-covered finger 
butter and honey are given to the infant to eat. Thereafter the navel string 
is cut, and the child is washed and given the breast. After that a water jug 
is placed on the head of the mother, and she is commended to the protection 
of the water.^ 

The child has two names, ^ one secret for the knowledge of father and 
mother alone, and apparently given immediately on birth at the life-giving 
ceremony. This name from its close connexion with the life of the child is not 
allowed to be known in order to prevent injury through the use of the name 
by enemies. The second normal name is given on the tenth day in agreement 
with the Brahmans, or on the twelfth or even a year later. It should be of 
an even number of syllables, different merits being connected with the diverse 
numbers, begin with a soft letter, contain a semi-vowel, and end in ^ or a long 
vowel ; for a Brahman it should be a compound ® in garman^ ‘ protection % 
for a Ksatriya in var7nan, ‘ armour ’, and for a Vai^ya in gupta, ‘ protected 
A girl’s name should have an uneven number of syllables. The giving of the 
name is accompanied by offerings to Prajap^ti, the day of birth, the Naksatra 
of that day, and the god of the Naksatra. Another name is the Naksatra name 
derived from a lunar mansion such as Rauhina : the notices regarding it are 
confused with that of the name by which the boy is to designate himself when 
he becomes a student and announces his name in greeting others, and one or 
both of these names seem to be made out to be the secret name. A Soma 
sacrificer may have yet another name in due course. Birthday offerings to 
Agni, Indra, heaven and earth, the All-gods, the day and constellation of 
birth, and the deities of both, are prescribed every year. 

On the tenth or twelfth day after birth the father and mother and the 
child are washed, the house purified, and offerings made to the day of birth and 
three constellations, to Agni and Soma. The special fire is now extinguished, 
and the old household fire resumes its functions- The child is now named and 
enters thus into the full life of every day, just as in the Salic law, at the end of 
nine days,^ it received its name and became a subject of wergeld. 

^ GGS. ii. 7 ; AGS. i. 15 ; ^JGS. i. 24 ; PGS. Indogetmaneriy pp. 802 ff. 

i. 16 ; ApGS. xv ; MGS. i. 17 ; HGS. *■ The variation in India from 9, which is 

ii. 3 ; BGS. ii. 1 ; BhGS- i. 24-6, a common number in these cases, is 

2 GGS. ii. 7. 15 ff, ; AGS. i. 15. 4 ff. ; ^GS. probably due as regards 10 (^GS. i. 25. 

i. 25 ; PGS. i. 17 ; ApGS. xv. 8 ; MGS. 1 ; GDS. xiv. 16 ; VDS. iv. 21) to inclu- 

i. IB ; HGS. ii, 4; Weber, Naxaira, ii. sive reckoning and the fondness for a 

817 ff. ; BGS. ii. 1 ; BhGS. i. 26 ; JGS. unit like 10, and in the case of 12 to the 

i. 0. frequent use of that number (= that of 

^ This is the normal Indo-European mode of the months) in the ritual as a period of 

name formation ; cf. Feist, Kultur der time. 



diap. 21] 


Birth Ceremonies and others 


369 


On the third day of the third month the moon is revered by the father, and 
the mother is newly washed, the child being first handed by the mother to the 
father and then given back to her by him. In the fourth month the first going 
out takes place, when the child is made to look at the sun. In the sixth month 
the first solid food is given : its kind is dependent on what qualities are 
desired, quickness is due to fish eating, holy brilliance to the partridge, glory 
to rice and butter, oratory to Bharadvaji flesh, and so on.^ By one Sutra an 
offering to speech and strength is prescribed. 

The ceremony of the tonsure ^ is usually performed in the third year, or 
the fifth and seventh for a Ksatriya and a Vaigya respectively : the essence of 
the ceremony is the formal wetting of the child’s hair, the putting of bunches of 
Barbha on it, the cutting of the right and then the back and then the left side 
with a razor, which is not to injure the child, and which is addressed as an axe. 
The hair with the Darbha is thrown away in the cow-stall, near water, or in 
a pool of water or elsewhere. For three days after, the barber, it seems, must 
not use the razor : as often, in the case of girls the formulae used for boys 
are omitted. The hair is then arranged in the peculiar mode of the family, or 
in a number of tufts according to the number of seers hailed as belonging to 
the family tree in the Pravara ceremony. The barber receives as his fee rice 
and butter, or another gift : the family teacher a cow. In the sixteenth year, 
or the 22nd and 24th for the Ksatriya and Vai 9 ya, follows the shaving of the 
beard based on the same model, but the cutting is extended to hair, beard, 
hair of the body, and nails. The fee to the priest is a pair of cattle, to the barber 
a goat. The shorn youth should for a year, or at least three days, observe 
chastity, and not cut his hair again.^ The piercing of the ears in the third or 
fourth year is a rite which is only recorded in one late text.^ 

§ 4 . Studentship 

A Brahman child in the eighth year from conception or birth, a Ksatriya 
in the eleventh, a Vai 9 ya in the twelfth, should be received as a student by a 
teacher : ® the period can be increased to 16, 22, and 24 years respectively, but 
after that a youth has lost the right to say the Savitri verse, and should not be 
associated with, taken as a pupil, permitted to sacrifice, or accepted as a son- 
in-law : if the Savitri is lost for three generations, the right of the sacraments 
is lost, and can only be regained by the performance of the ^rauta rite called 
the Vratya Stomas. The ceremony of the reception is performed with much 
form before a fire newly lighted by friction or taken from the household fire : 
north of it are laid the necessary utensils, a stone, a fresh garment, a skin, 

1 AGS. i. 16 ; ^GS. i. 27 ; PGS. i. 19. 2 ; =» GGS. iii, 1, 2 ; AGS. i. 18 ; ^GS. i. 28. 19. 

MGS, i. 20 ; BGS. ii. 3 ; BhGS. i. 27. ^ Speijer, Jdtakarman, p. 21. 

® GGS. ii. 9 ; AGS. i. 17 ; gCS. i. 28 ; » GGS. ii. 10 ; AGS. i. 19 ; QGS, ii. 1 ; 

PGS. ii. L; ApGS. xvi ; BGS. ii. 4 ; PGS. ii. 2; BGS. ii. 5; BhGS. i. 

BhGS. i. 28 ; HGS. ii. 6 ; MGS. i. 21. 1-10 ; ApGS. xi ; HGS. i. 1 ; JGS. i. 

The AV. (vi. 21, 136, 137) has spells to 12, 13 ; MGS.i. 21 ff. ; Glaser, ZDMG. 

make hair grow. Ixvi. 1 ff. 

4 [h.O.S. 32] 



370 


Vedic Ritual 


[Part III 


a girdle, a staff, and twenty-one pieces of wood. The Sutras give innumerable 
details of the garments, the skin, and the staff : the materials and colour 
differ for each caste : thus the skin is of a black antelope for a Brahman, 
of a Ruru deer for a Ksatriya, of a goat or of a sheep for a Vai9ya, their girdles 
of Munja, of a bowstring, or wool, and so on, but the differences are endless ; 
the garment should be woven on that day. The teacher makes the pupil 
stand on the stone to secure firmness, he puts on his new garment and girdle 
and the sacred cord, and then the skin ; the boy is fed and a water libation 
offered.^ Then comes the formal taking of the student as a pupil by the 
teacher, effected by a dialogue of request and acceptance under the auspices of 
Savitr, and with reference to the seer ancestry of teacher and pupil. They 
both wash. Then follow rites to bring the two into close contact : the 
teacher takes the pupil by the shoulders and grasps his right hand with 
suitable formulae, and says to him, ‘ On the instigation of Savitr, be the pupil 
of Brhaspati : taste water, lay wood on the fire, do thy work, sleep not by 
day Then the teacher touches the pupil’s heart with a magic formula to 
unite their hearts, touches his navel, then whispers formulae in his ear 
and prays for wisdom for the child : finally he commends him to the care of 
gods and demons, or gods only. 

The teacher may then or later teach the pupil the Savitr! : the two sit 
opposite to each other, the pupil takes the teacher’s right foot or both feet 
in his right hand, and begs to be taught the verse : the teacher repeats it by 
quarter, by half verses, and then as a whole. Different verses are prescribed 
for the different classes. The pupil then puts kindling wood on the fire for the 
first time, and the staff is now usually given, after which the teacher receives 
a gift which may be whatever the pupil can afford, and the pupil pays 
reverence to the sun. For three days the fire continues to burn, the pupil 
must eat no salt or spiced food. At the end of three days the Brahmans are 
fed, and bestow benedictions. 

. The first duty of the pupil is to secure wood from the forest, without 
destroying living trees, for the fire which he tends morning and night : some 
authorities require also that he should with prayers revere the morning and 
evening twilights in the woods, wearing the sacred cord and performing the 
usual ablutions. The making of sectarian marks on the body with ashes from 
the fire is not recognized in any save an interpolated text.^ In the second 
place, he must beg food for his teacher and himself, in the first instance from 
his mother or other friends : twice a day this is done, and two meals, one after 
the first expedition and one after sunset, are prescribed. Thirdly, he must 
sleep on the ground, and he is also enjoined to eat no spiced or salt food, 
to avoid resorting to women, not to sit on a high seat, &c. He is, fourthly, to 
be obedient to his teacher, to rise when he is spoken to, and answer at once. 

The mode of study was simple : the two sat down north of the fire, the 

1 For the initiation as a rebirth, cf. Hauer, Indim, pp. 79 ff. 

Die Anfdnge der Yogapracds im alien * fGS. ii. 10. 1. 



Chap. 21] 


Studentship 


371 


teacher as usual facing east, the pupil west, and the teacher at the request of the 
pupil recited the verse he was to learn, giving the seer, deity, and metre of each : 
in the case of the Rigveda the pupil might learn all the hymns of each seer, 
or of each of the eighty-five Anuvakas, or so much as the teacher wished to 
teach him, or the first and last hymns of each seer or Anuvaka, or a verse at 
the beginning of each hymn. Doubtless there were differences in the extent of 
the teaching, according to the desire of the pupil and his caste : explanations 
of the texts and of the rites which they were to accompany must clearly have 
been given. At the end of each lesson Ku^a grass balls* were taken by the 
teacher, a pit of cow dimg made at their roots, and water poured on. A 
mistake on the part of the pupil required for atonement a twenty-four hours’ 
fast at least. 

During his period of studentship the pupil may have several vows ^ to 
perform, each of which requires an initiation ceremony, and at the end the 
removal of the initiation. They are the fukriya vow, which precedes the study 
of the Rigveda, the ^akvara before that of the Mahanamni verses, the 
Vratika before the Mahavrata, and the Aupanisada before the Upanisads. The 
first may last from three days to a year, the last three each a year. The last 
three cannot be undertaken until the Rigveda has been completely studied : 
they contain the secret texts. For them a preparation is necessary of three 
days or a night only : the teacher envelopes the head of the pupil in a garment,^ 
and bids him, while ceasing to observe the rule of laying wood on the fire, 
begging, &c., to spend the time in a wood, or temple, ^ or place where the Agni- 
hotra is offered : the teacher himself abstains from flesh and sexual inter- 
course, and then at the end of the period of probation instructs him in the forest 
in the secret texts, the pupil wearing a turban : in the case of the Mahanamni 
verses the instruction is as usual ; in the other cases the pupil listens only. 
He gives the teacher as fees a turban, a vessel, and a cow. Other vows are 
prescribed .for learners of the Jyestha Saman, who must not eat bird flesh, 
and must avoid contact with fudra women. The ^akvari vow must have been 
popular, as a mother is represented as wishing for her infant that he may 
perform it. The three verses of the Stotra which make up the Saman are 
revealed at the end of the three portions of the vow. The pupil must fast, and 
shut his eyes to receive them, a clear reference to their dazzling power. 

The beginning of each term of study is marked by a festival under the 
Naksatra Hasta or ^ravana, but there are traces of different openings of the 
year ; roughly the rainy season may be said to have been the popular time, 
when other forma of activity were hampered. The ceremony was performed 

^ GGS. iii, 1, 2 ; ii. 11, 12 ; JGS. i. CGS. iv. 5 ; BhGS. iii. 8-11 ; MGS, i. 

16-18; MGS.i.23ff. ; BhGS.iu.4, 5; 4. 1-5; PGS. ii. 10; HGS. ii. 18; 

BGS. iii. 2 ; Oldenberg, Ind, Stud, xv. Biihler, Ind. Ant. xxiii. 238 ff., whose 

139, 140. Cf. VarGS. vi. conclusions as to the antiquity of Vedic 

® Cf. the covering of the head of the practices are not to be accepted (above, 

Gravastut priest in the Soma sacrifice. Part I, Chap, 1). 

^ The Upakarana ; GGS. iii. 3 ; AGS. iv. 5 : 



372 


Vedic Eitual 


[Part III 


by means of offerings of grains with ghee and miik, and with the repetition of 
either the whole of the Rigveda or the first verses of sections and many 
offerings : the deities vary from each Veda, and it is only of interest to note 
that they include abstractions such as Medha, ‘ intelligence Dharana, ‘ fixing 
in memory ^raddha, Anumati, ‘ favour and Sadasaspati and other deities : 
the divisions ot the texts were sometimes ascribed to deities, and the seers are 
duly honoured. The ceremony was followed by three days’ break of study, and 
similarly a break occurred at the end : breaks are also prescribed after the 
Astakas, when offerings were made to the Fathers, and on many other days, 
full- or nev-moon days, while deaths and other things such as praddhas, the 
sight of unholy persons, dogs, asses, or jackals, the noise of a Saman, the 
cries in distress of men and so forth, prevent learning ; the aim of the Sutras 
seems to have been to interrupt study as often as possible. Thunder, lightning, 
rain, earthquakes, meteors, and other prodigies more reasonably interrupt 
study 

The term comes to an end in Magha or Taisa, after from 5|- to 6| or 
occasionally even only four months’ duration : it is marked by the Utsarga,^ 
‘ dismissal ’ festival, where offerings are made to gods, seers, &c., and a bath 
is taken by teacher and pupils, of whom the number to be taken by any one 
teacher is in no wise limited. After this an old rite of offering to the Fathers 
is described by Hira^iyake 9 in in full detail. Even, however, after this Utsarga, 
which normally brought work to an end for the year, some might resume their 
studies and continue working throughout the year. The total length of the 
study might extend to forty-eight years, or twelve for each Veda, or such 
time as was necessary to learn each : clearly the matter was not in the 
slightest degree fixed. The end of the period of learning is marked by the 
final bath,® which is best taken when the student has completed his instruction 
and performed all his vows, but may be taken if either is complete. With the 
bath, the exact time for which is variously stated, are combined shaving, hair 
cutting, nail paring, and teeth washing. The hair is thrown away in a cow 
stall, beside an Udumbara or Darbha grass. The whole of the pupil’s outfit 
is cast into the water, and the Snataka, ‘ one who has bathed ’, puts on a new 
suit, shoes, sunshade, staff, garland, powder, salve for hands and lips, eye-salve 
and turban, and the teacher does likewise ; or the teacher alone can adopt 
this gay clothing. The student has also ear-rings and a mirror. All day he 
must keep from the sunlight and remain silent till the stars appear : then 
he goes east or north, pays reverence to the quarters, and to the stars and the 
moon, converses with his friends and goes to where he expects to receive the 
Argha gift, which is appropriate for a Snataka immediately after the bath. 
For the first days after his completion of his study, he should eat no flesh, not 

^ fGS. iv. 7 gives many cases ; AGS. iv. 4. PGS. ii. 12 ; MGS. i. 4. 7-9 ; HGS. ii. 

17 n , ; GGS. iii. 3. 24 ff. ; PGS. ii. 11 . 18 . 8 ; BGS. ii. 6 ; JGS. i. 19. 

7 ff. ; MGS.i.4, 6. > GGS. iii. 5. 21 ff. ; PGS. ii. 5. 31. 

2 GGS. iii. 3. 14 ; ^GS. iv. 6 ; AGS. iii. 5 ; 



Chap. 21] 


373 


Studentship 

drink from a clay vessel, neither speak to nor see women, fiidras, corpses, 
cows, dogs, &c.^ By gleaning ears of corn, by gifts given without asking, or 
begged from the pious, or by assisting in sacrifices he may live, but the last 
mode of livelihood is the worst. ^ He is also forbidden to look in a well, and 
many other taboos are imposed on him ; on the other hand he is also not to 
speak of what he has not seen or heard as if he had, to avoid whatever hinders 
study, and to guard himself like a vessel of oil.® Curious is the rule that 
he is to avoid mentioning undesirable things, which are more or less taboo to 
him, by their own names ; a pregnant woman he is to call ‘ without children ’ ; 
a Nakula, ‘ ichneumon Sakula ; a Kapala, ‘ skull Bhagala ; and so on.^ 


§ 5 . Marriage 

The duty of the Vedic Indian to marry is assumed by all the texts, and the 
domestic ritual gives precise rules for the performance of the legitimate and 
honourable form of marriage,^ ignoring as a rule the irregular forms based upon 
capture, violence, or mere mutual love without parental approval, which are 
recognized by the law books in various forms, Gandharva, Asura, Pai^aca, and 
Raksasa, as well as the romantic form of nominal self-choice by the bride of 
a suitor, the Svayamvara which bears traces of a test of skill of suitors by the 
king or other parent of high rank similar to that of Kleisthenes. The youth 
should obtain permission from his parents or his teacher to marry : only one 
Sutra ® prescribes the numbers of brides, three for the Brahman, two for the 
Ksatriya, and one for th^Vai9ya, and in one view a for each : this 

refers clearly to a rule by which each caste could have a wife of its own and one 
of each inferior caste. The later texts prescribe that the maiden must be of 
the same caste and land, but not of the same Gotra as the father or a sapindd 
on the mother’s side, rules which are difficult to define with precision J 
Maidens with names of stars, rivers, or trees are to be avoided, as are those 
with names with r or Z as the penultimate consonant. The physical marks are 
most important, but, as it is difficult to be sure of them, the maiden may be 
given eight or nine lumps of earth chosen from different places, and, as she 
choses, her disposition can be gauged.® The bridegroom should be of good 
family and character, have good bodily signs, be healthy and learned. As con- 
siderations in marriage family ranks above intelligence, beauty, and wealth.® 


^ PGS. ii. 8. 
a 9GS.iv.ll,13. 

» GGS. iii. 5. 24. 

* GGS. iii. 5. 20 ; cl Frazer, Taboo, pp. 
392-418. 

® GGS. iii. 4 ; ii. 1 ff. ; AGS. i. 6 ff. ; gGS. 
i. 11 ff. ; MGS. i. 7-12 ; BhGS. i. 11-20 ; 
BGS. i. 1 ff. ; JGS. i. 20 ff. ; PGS. i. 4 ff. ; 
ApGS. v n . ; HGS. xix &, ; Haas and 
Weber, Ind. Stud. v. 177 E. ; Winter- 
nitz, Atiind. liochzeitsrituell ; von 


Schroeder, Die Hochzeitsgebrduche der 
Esten ; Hillebrandt, Rituallitteratur, 
pp. 63-8 ; Zachariae, VOJ. xvii. 135 fit., 
211 ff. 

« PGS. i. 4. 8-11. 

^ Macdonell and Keith, Vedic Index, ii. 
258-260. 

* GGS. ii. 1. 3-9 ; Kaiw. xxxvii. 7-12 
» BhGS. i. 11 ; Keith, JRAS. 1914, pp. 
1081 1, confirmed by VarGS. x. 



374 


VediG Ritual 


[Part ni 


The first formal step in the procedure, which doubtless was often carried 
out only after the marriage had been duly aiTanged beforehand by the parents 
with the advice of the Brahmans, was for the bridegroom to send wooers, 
usually his own father and the Acaarya of the house, to the fathei* of the other 
family : the new-comers announced themselves, and set out the Gotra names 
— doubtless to show that the relationship was not a forbidden one — and if the 
other side agreed, all touched a pot filled with grains, fruits, flowers, &c., 
pronounced a formulae expressing agreement and assurance, and then the 
teacher of the bride’s family placed the pot on her head. When the girl is to be 
taken to her new home, she is first formally washed by women of the same 
caste, and she names her husband in a verse addressed to Kama, ‘ love She 
puts on a red or uncoloured garment and sits behind the fire, and holds on to 
the priest as he offers to Indra and Indrani : the bridegroom offers similarly to 
Vai9ravana ^ and l9ana. Thereafter four or eight women danf*e in the house of 
the bride, and receive food, and the Brahmans are also fed. The appropriate 
time for the wedding ceremony is the northern course of the sun and the increas- 
ing half of the month, but some authorities allow any time almost to be used : 
the two months of the cool season and the last hot month are by some excluded. 
The bridegroom is led to the house of the bride by gay young women, not 
widows, to whom he must behave with complaisance. On his arrival, he 
should, according to some authorities, be received with the Argha offering of a 
cow, but by others this is postponed until the actual consummation of the 
marriage : a second cow is also later slain in the bridegroom’s own house in 
honour of his father, teacher, and others. The bridegroom, with the permission 
of the maidens, gives the bride a new garment, anoints her, puts in her right 
hand a porcupine quill, perhaps for the ceremony of hair-parting, 'which takes 
place after pregnancy, and in the left a mirror. Her relatives then put on her 
a reddish black cord of wool or hemp with three amulets, and place Madhuka 
flowers on the bridegroom. 

Other preparations have been made for the wedding. A fire is lit outside 
the house, water is procured by Brahmans, roast grains and a stone are in 
readiness. The maiden is formally handed over by the father to the bride- 
groom, but the place of this rite, the Kanyapradana, differs in the various 
authorities. The bride and bridegroom sit down on a mat behind the fire, and 
then butter oblations are offered, and also an oblation by the father or brother 
of the bride on the head of the bride, with a sword point or a ladle, in order to 
secure her pre-eminence in the house of her stepfather. Then comes the 
pouring into the joined hands of the bride of grains by her brother or mother ; 
she is made to stand on a stone, when she receives the grains, and her husband 
invokes her to be firm as the stone : she offers the grains and her husband 
leads her round the fire, keeping her»right side turned to it : this is all done 
thrice, the offerings being to Varuna, Aryaman, and Pusan respectively. 

^ I. e. Kubera (AV, viii. 10. 28 ; QB. xm. 4, 3. 10 ; SB, v. 6 ; TA, i. 31. 6 ; Kau^. 
XXV. 34, &c.). 



Chap. 21] 


Marriage 


375 


Then the bride takes seven steps in the north-east direction, the quarter of 
victory, the bridegroom takes her by the shoulders, and touches heart and 
navel as at the ceremony of the initiation of a student, and water is sprinkled 
on her. Then the bridegroom, in the version of Gobhila, takes the hand of the 
bride as she sits facing east and he stands facing west : this rite is placed 
differently by other authorities : the manner of seizing the hand depends on 
what is wished : if he desires sons only the thumb, if daughters the fingers, if 
both the whole hand. Then gifts are made : the Acaiya receives a cow from 
a Brahman, a village from a royal personage, a horse from a Vai9ya. If he 
has a daughter, he receives a hundred cows and a car, unless, as is much more 
probable, the provision really refers to the old practice of purchasing a wife.^ 
The bridal garment is also given to the knower of the Surya hymn, which is 
used for the rites, and is apparently hung up on a post.^ The bride is now 
taken to her new home by a car, horse, or elephant, and formulae are pro- 
vided for all eventualities, when she cries, ^ when there is a breakdown en 
route^ and so on. If they cross a stream, she is not to look at the crew. Fire 
is carried with them so that, if the car breaks, it can be mended, and then be 
sprinkled with butter left over from the offering made. This fire serves also 
to be the fire used by the householder at the sacrifices which his marriage 
imposes upon him. Some authorities prescribe the spending of the first night 
of marriage in the house of an old Brahman woman, whose husband and 
children are still alive, in which case the bride sits in silence on a red skin, hair 
upwards, until the stars appear : when this happens her husband offers six 
butter libations, pours the remains over her head, and shows her the stars 
Arundhati and the pole star ^ as symbols of constancy. When they arrive at 
the home of the husband, he unyokes first the right, then the left animal, and 
Brahman women, with living husbands and children, help her down. She 
must enter the house without touching the threshold, and sit down on a skin, 
hair up, but she may be lifted over it and so put down by a strong man. On 
her lap a male child is placed, fruits are put in her hands, and Brahmans wish 
her prosperity. Then, if not before, -the ceremony of looking at Arundhati 
and the pole star may take place. 

The marriage is not consummated for three nights after it : for that time 
the newly married couple must lie on the ground, avoid spiced or salted food, 
and, if they refrain from consummation for a year, the birth of a seer son is 
predicted for them. Between them in this period at night a staff is placed 
which is clad in a garment : it is clear that it is a symbol of the Gandharva 

^ Hiilebrandt {Rituallitteraiur, p. 67) pre- * Cf. Macdonell and Keith, op. ciL i. 405, 
fers to take the words as referring to 406. For the use of a strew of Ulapa 

the'priest, but sale is quite a recognized grass over which the pair walk from 

Brahra^nical form of marriage : Mac- the chariot to the house, cf. Calaud, 

donell and Keith, Vedic Index, i. 484 ff, ZDMG. !i. 133 ; Zachariae, VOJ, xvii. 

^ Kau9. Ixxix. 22. 151 ; von Schroeder, Arische Religion, 

^ In which — absurdly — a trace of marriage ii. 308; for the hand grasping, von 

by robbery has been seen. Negelein, Wellanschauung, pp. 157 h“. 



376 


Vedic Ritual 


[Part III 


Vi9vavasu5 who is addressed when on the fourth night it is cast away. The 
exact force of the practice is uncertain : the desire by refraining from con- 
summation to deceive evil demons and cause them to depart is a possible 
motive. Vi9vavasu as a Gandharva ^ seems to claim his rights of connexion 
with women even after the marriage, and must at first be appeased and then 
formally be banished.^ But the obvious connexion of the rite with other 
similar rites over the world down to the ius trium noctium is a warning against 
any feeling of security in the interpretation of the customs, which are of 
immemorial antiquity and based on feelings which are perhaps to us no 
longer psychologically even possible. The Vedic marriage does not contain 
any hint that by a previous rite of any sort the danger of interference with 
virginity ^ was removed, and, therefore, the first three nights may have seemed 
a time of too great danger to allow of immediate consummation of the 
marriage. In that case there may have arisen the idea that the Gandharva 
Vi9vavasu possessed these three nights, and the idea may be due to the rite, 
not a cause of it. 

The removal of the period of continence is marked by an offering in the fire 
to Agni, Vayu, Surya, Aryaman, Pusan, Varuna, and Prajapati, with Svistakrt 
as the eighth. To this list others add Candra and Gandharva.^ The root of 
the Adhyanda plant is pounded, and some of it placed in the nostrils of the 
wife at the time of the menses, as a rite to secure conception.^ Before and 
after the first period of intercourse, formulae must be recited at great length : 
they are clearly love speUs to secure affection and offspring. On the fourth 
day of the marriage finds place a ceremony mentioned by one Sutra alone : 
the husband and wife have their hair and nails cut and then go out of the 
village to pay honour to an Udumbara tree, and to pray for good fortune on 
their marriage. Fish also are caught in a fresh cloth and offered as a Bali to 
the water birds.® 

The rite, which is of course paralleled in innumerable details by the prac- 
tices of Greeks, Romans, Germans, and many other peoples Aryan and non- 
Aryan, is on the whole but loosely connected with religion. The Vedic ritual 
prescribes many verses and offerings, but the great wedding hymn,*^ which 

^ This position of the Gandharva is clearly Archiv f. Beligionmissenscnaft, vii. 

a relic of more primitive thought than 88 ; Greece and Babylon, pp. 277-81 ; 

that which makes, as a result of the Hartland, Anthropological Essays pre- 

beliefin transmigration, the Gandharva senied to E. B, Tylor, pp, 190 ff.; 

the being which at conception enters J. J. Meyer, Das Weih im altindischen 

the womb, and it is to this popular Epos, pp. 235 f. ; Fehrle, KuUische 

and ancient belief that we must look Keuschheit, p. 40. Cf. BhGS. i. 20 ; 

in the main for the choice of this name Keith, JRAS. 1914, p. 1088. 

rather than (as does Windisch, Buddha^s * QGS. i. 18. 2 ff. ; PGS. iii. 1. 

Gehurt, pp. 13 ff.) to transmigration ® Winternitz, op. cit., p. 101. 

into a Gandharva. ® BGS. i. 13 ; Zachariae, VO J. xviii. 299 ff. ; 

* Oldenberg, Bel. des Veda\ pp. 88, n. 2 ; xx. 291. 

249, n. 2. ^ RV. x. 85 ; 109.-2 (AV. v. 17. 2). 

* Crawley, The Mystic Bose ; Farnell. 



Chap. 21 ] Marriage 377 

makes the wedding of Suiya, the sun maiden, and Soma, the mysterious god 
known by the Brahmans, doubtless the moon, the prototype of the human 
wedding, is clearly a late production, and the outcome of much priestly 
elaboration. Agni alone is the real object of much feeling, and it is as the 
living fire on the hearth that he is really worshipped.^ 

As in the case of the wedding ceremony, it is easy to find parallels for many 
of the rites of the Vedic domestic life, nor is it in the slightest degree doubtful 
that the formulae, which are used in the Vedic texts, were in the main 
invented or transferred, very often very badly, from other rites for use with 
practices which came into being and developed without any assistance from 
priestly influence. In many cases, of course, the formulae are merely redac- 
tions of the actual words which often must have accompanied these rites in 
the first instance : in others, as in the wedding service, much new matter was 
introduced. But in these cases the essential point of interest is rather the 
alteration by the Brahmans than the primitive rites, which are common to 
civilized Indians and much more savage tribes, and some of which persist 
among the highest civilizations of the earth. The case of the initiation of the 
boys of the people is the most striking instance of the peculiar character 
given to a rite by the influence of the priests. It is clear that, already by 
the period of Indo-Iranian unity, the ceremony has assumed a good deal of its 
present shape, and that a spirit of civilization had been introduced into 
barbaric rites. The conception of Vedic India saw in the initiation a species of 
second birth : by it the boy became fuUy a twice-born person, and failure to 
undergo initiation as we have seen might lead to inconvenient results for the 
person so failing. Certain taboos applied to the youth, but most of them had 
been reduced to reasonable limits, and could be supported by primitive ideas 
of what foods were suitable, as for example in the case of the interdiction of 
the use of flesh and honey for a growing boy who was in his studentship. 
Moreover, the relation of pupil and teacher has clearly been in some degree 
remodelled on the analogy of human marriage, in order to make it an expres 
sion of spiritual union. 

In other lands and among other peoples strange puberty or initiation 
rites have been recorded, many of them accompanied by violent physical 
tortures and applied both to boys and to girls, of which Sparta in historical 
times still preserved relics, and which are still practised widely among modern 
savages. The idea of a second birth has often been connected in the minds 
of the performers of these rites with the practices which they follow and 
carried to the logical extreme of requiring the newly born people to start life 
at the infant stage, ^ to pretend that they have forgotten how to speak, or 
to feed themselves. Severe scourgings, the knocking out of teeth, circum- 

^ Babylonian religion — which hardly has For the Cretan marriage of sun and 

a hearth deity— has almost no re- moon, see Cook, Zeus, i. 2 ff, 

ligion in its marriage ceremony ; ^ Cf. the Vedic Diksa, above. Chap. 19, § 1. 

Farnell, Greece and Babylon, p. 134. 



378 


Vedic Bitual 


[Part III 


cision, the pouiing over the initiated of kindred blood and other agreeable 
absurdities are recorded of such tribes, and it is natural of course to see in the 
Vedic rite a deliberate and reasoning reduction of these practices to sensible 
limits. There must be a certain amount of truth in this, but it is essential to 
note that we have no evidence to what extent the more violent of these 
customs ever prevailed among the ancestors of the Indo-Europeans.^ The 
customs in question agree in the main only in their infinite variety, and it 
would be impossible to establish any form for initiation. In some cases doubt- 
less the practices often were changed and assumed new forms : the drastic 
treatment of the Spartan boys may have been seriously intensified with a 
definite view to discipline character, though the origin may have been merely 
the driving away of evil influences at a critical time of youth, the appearance 
of puberty : in the case of girls, the Vedic Indians, in accordance with their 
usual practice as regards women, ignored entirely their claim to be initiated, 
and therefore prescribed no form of ritual at all for them. 

The motive ^ for the doctrine of initiation is not alluded to in the Indian 
rite : beyond the obvious possibility of it being a mere expulsion of dangerous 
influences, and an effort by the fiction of a new birth to deceive the demons, 
there is no suggestion of much cogency. In the view of Sir J. Frazer the 
whole of these rites and the origin of totemism may be due to the wish to 
deposit permanently at a dangerous time of life the external soul in some safe 
object, but the suggestion lacks both external proof and internal cogency.^ 

Of the other domestic rites, that of the parting of the hair raises many pro- 
blems. Various motives ^ may be assigned : the alteration of the mode of 
wearing the hair at marriage is known among other peoples than the Vedic 
Indians.® It is possible that it must be reckoned as a piece of deception magic, 
to deceive demons at a time when a woman is certainly exposed to much 
danger : possibly the idea may be to render more easy the entry of the child 
desired into the woman, if we ascribe to the period ® the doctrine that a child 
enters ah extra. 


* Rome had reduced them to very slight 
traces ; cf. Warde Fowler, Religiom 
Experience of the Roman People, p. 42. 

® Oldenberg, Rcl. des Veda pp. 466 If. 

» Keith, JRAS. 1916, pp. 548, 549 ; 
Reinach’s view is of course totemism 
pure and simple. 

^ Oldenberg, op, cit,p. 463, n. 3 ; Hopkins, 
Origin of Religion, p. 119. 


® Kaug, Ixxix. 14. 

* It is clearly the later. Buddhistic and 
general Indian, view (Windisch, Bud^ 
dhd*s Geburt, pp. 9 ff.). It is the 
Arunta belief, and that of palaeolithic 
Europe if we believe Reinach (Cultes, 
Mythes et Religions, iv. 361 ff.), but 
cf. Cook, Zeus, i. 703. 



CHAPTER 22 

MAGIC IN THE RITUAL 


§ 1. The Relations of Magic to Religion 

The theory that all religion is later than magic has already been discussed, 
and its fundamental weakness pointed out/ and it is therefore possible to con- 
sider the question of the relation of these two factors apart from any pre- 
conceived doctrine of the priority of magic. The position in the literature of 
Vedic India is a simple one : with very few exceptions the Rigveda is a book 
in which magic is not dealt with : a few late hymns are indeed found there, 
but these stand out as exceptions in a religious milieu. The Atharvaveda is a 
book of magic, mingled with some theosophy : that it is priestly magic, and 
not popular magic uninfluenced by the priests is clear : the priests have con- 
stantly altered, and changed much of what they dealt with, but the book itself 
is conclusive proof that the priests of that time were keenly concerned with 
magic rites. The position is further made clear by the Brahmanas, which 
show beyond possibility of doubt that the whole of the sacrifice was penetrated 
by conceptions of magic. Scarcely any rite but can be so adapted as to pro- 
duce magic ends : the rites are often varied in detail for this very purpose, the 
mode in which the post is covered with the cord will determine the amount 
of rain which will fall, the priest can bring to nothing the kingdom if he varies 
by manipulations the offering ; he is constantly told how to alter the words, 
when he dislikes the sacrifice!', or when he seeks to obtain for him such special 
blessings as a male child. 

The Atharvaveda and the Brahmanas prove, therefore, that the India of 
their period was one in which magic and religion were inextricably blended : 
the same conclusion is suggested by the Rigveda itself ; the man who is pure 
complains that he is called a magician and a companion of evil spirits,^ and 
doubtless many among the priests who composed the songs of the Rigveda 
were not devoted to magic or specially interested in it. The exaltation which 
saw in the poetry of the Rigveda the highest form of honour which the gods 
could receive, would scarcely trouble itself about the lower field of magic. 
But we cannot believe ^ that there was ever a time when the Vedic sacrifice 
was not filled with magic elements,^ and all that we can say with certainty is 

1 Cf. also Jevons, Idea of God (1910). the elements lie side by side in no 

® RV. vii. 104. 16. strongly felt differentiation. 

» Magic and sacrifice represent two different * So the Babylonian and in less degree the 
aspects of man’s efforts to accomplish Greek ; Farnell, Greece and Babylon, 

his desires. They are essentially pp. 158, 176-0, 291-301 ; Fossey' 

distinct and are felt to be so in the La magie assyrienne ; R. C. Thompson, 

higher faiths. Butin primitive religions Semitic For Vedic magic. 



380 


Vedic Ritual 


[Part III 


that the desire to see magic in ever3d;hing was one which was growing in the 
period of the Brahmanas, which degrade the sacrifice from the position 
of an appeal to the bounty of heaven to the position of the greatest power on 
earth, which controls the gods and produces whatever is desired by the priests. 
Magic thus won a powerful support from theosophy, and we cannot in the 
Vedic literature say that magic was regarded as a wicked thing, except when 
it was practised by others against a man. If he could, he would himself use 
magic to confound his enemies.^ The code of Manu ^ in effect well sums up 
the point of view of its own, and also of the earlier Vedic period, in the doctrine 
that, while witchcraft is a bad thing, the Brahman who is wronged need not 
seek redress tamely by civil process through the intervention of the royal 
authority, but should assert his own power by his magic arts. The position is 
natural enough ; all religions have to contend with magic, and, while the 
higher religions cast much aside, they cannot be successful in removing all. 
The Vedic religion had, however, developed no such moral or religious basis as 
would render it possible to demand the disappearance of magic rites, and thus 
magic flourished under its aegis in almost a disconcerting degree. Nothing 
shows how much the idea of the magic power of the sacrifice and its importance 
superseded moral considerations in the minds of the priests than the offerings 
prescribed by one text ® to enable a man to break faith at pleasure without 
punishment by Varuria. 


§ 2 . The Nature of Vedic Magic 


In the sphere of Vedic magic we have to do both with personal and with 
impersonal substances. The conception of all sorts of demons as threatening 
man is one which is supplemented by the more impersonal view of substances 
or potencies, which dwell in things, and which are often, therefore, of value 
in magic rites. It is possible that the earlier view is that which conceives these 
potencies either animatistically as actually alive, or animistically as spirits, 
but in the Vedic literature the two views, personal and impersonal, are both 
clearly found, and, like everything in the Veda, they are never clearly kept 
apart. Such powers ^ are the power of error in the sacrifice which clings to the 
sacrificial post, and therefore may pass to the sacrificers,® if care is not taken to 
render it harmless, the nature in woman, which causes her to slay her husband 
or to bear no children to him, and to bring death and disease among his cattle.® 


see V, Henry, La magie dans Vlnde 
antique, and Caland, Altindisches 
Zauberritual ; Blaedonell, ERE. viii. 
311-21. For the Roman attitude to 
magic, see Warde Fowler’s Religious 
Experience of the Roman People, 

^ AV. vii. 70. 2. 

“ xi. 32, 33. Cf. Henry, op, cit,, p. 253 ; 

Jevons, Idea of God, pp. 8 ff, 

“ TS. ii. 2. 6. 2. 


* One term for these is tanu, body, e.g. 
used of hunger and thirst in TA. iv. 22 ; 
Oldenberg, ReL des Ved(P, p. 478. 
The instances given show that this is 
not by any means the same as mana as 
defined by Marett {The Threshold of 
Religion). 

® Kau9. cii. 2 ; HGS. i. 16. 16. 

« 5GS. i. 18, 3. 



Chap. 22] 


381 


The Nature of Vedic Magic 

It is not vitally to be distinguished from the strength of the tiger^ which is 
found in its hair and its skin, and which makes these things suited for use in 
many magic performances, by which man seeks to attain for himself strength 
and kingship over men, such as the tiger exercises over animals. The frog and 
the Avaka plants can be used for cooling, for they have in them the nature of 
the water, a fact which shows clearly how real the presence of the deity in a 
symbol was to the Vedic conception. The banished king uses a clod of earth 
from his home in his desire to regain his kingdom : the lightning ^ leaves its 
strength in the tree which it blasts, the boar in the earth which it kicks up : ^ 
the name, the image, the hair, the very footprints ® of man, are so connected 
with him as to be suitable modes of injury. Hence we can understand such 
legends as the theory that in laughing Makha ^ allowed his brilliance to depart 
from him, that the gods placed it in the plants, and thus was millet produced. 
Or again the white Valakhilyas ^ practised asceticism : half of it with the 
resulting power Tarksya drank, and thus created the bird Garuda. The same 
idea displays itself in the constant fear of being affected by the mouth, which 
is one of the motives, no doubt, of the fasting recommended often by the 
Veda ; of being affected by mere inhalation, whence often the holding of the 
breath is laid dowm ; or of being affected by sight, 'whence often the eyes 
must be shut, or the sacrificer must at least not look round. The constant 
play of fancy between the real substance and the spirit is seen in the treatment 
of such ideas as Papman,® impersonal evil, or the spirit of a thousand eyes, or 
of Takman, the actual fever disease,’ which seizes the patient, and makes him 
shiver, and the spirit which brings this about. 

Of the means, which we may describe as magic in opposition to the rule 
of petition and offering which is religion, much of course is based on actual 
observation of fact, and much is based on mistaken fancies : magic, indeed, is 
doubtless in some sense and in fact the forerunner of science,® and like science 
is slow in clearing away misconceptions of all kinds. At times it is desirable 
to attract substances or spirits, at times urgently necessary to drive away such 
things : another branch of the subject is divination, which rests on the same 
foundation of contiguity or similarity, upon which rest the other laws of magic. 
The means are various : the word is of great importance, and so again are 
figures or representations of things which may be used as substitutes for or in 
addition to ai!ticles connected with the things or persons, who form the sub- 
jects of the conjuration. The time again is of importance : many things 
should be done at night, but others at special times of the day or the year, and 

^ Kau^. xlviii. 37. . a disease demon (AV. ii. 25), may be a 

* Kau^. XV. 2. case of a soul of the dead as a demon. 

» Kau 9 . xlvii. 25. * Cf. Henry, La magie dans VInde antique, 

* TA. V. 1. 3. pp. 241-60 ; Frazer, The Magic Art. 

® Suparnfidhyaya, 2. Both, however, have unsatisfactory 

* AV. xi. 8. 19 ; vi. 26. views of the relation of magic and re- 

^ Grohmann, /wd. ix. 383 ; cf.Jambha, ligion. See also L. Thorndike, The 

‘convulsions’, AV. vii. 10. Kanva, History oj Magic 



382 


Vedio Ritual 


[Part III 


various places are specially favourable, such as cross-roads, or graveyards, 
where spirits do mostly congregate, and where are the evil birds of prey and 
the jackals. But in special circumstances almost any place is suited specially 
for the rite. 

It is natural, that, representing as it does a part of the primitive science of 
man, magic should be found in similar forms all the world over. There is little 
that is of special character in Indian magic, and the variety of its rites is 
enormous : fortunately or unfortunately for our opinion of the intelligence of 
the Vediq Indian not only has the Atharvaveda come down to us, but the 
Kau^ika Sutra contains (vii-lii) in the fullest detail, often however unintelli- 
gible to us, the nature of the rites which were used with the texts of that Veda. 
Other details occur in the Pari^istas of the Atharvaveda, in the Samavidhana 
Brahmana, in the Bgvidhana and minor texts. The antiquity of these works is 
by no means very great : the age of most of the practices may be indefinitely 
remote. The only practices of which we can say definitely that they are in- 
novations are those, not at all few in number, in which priestly ingenuity has 
used mythical ideas, in order to found on them a magic practice. Thus in one 
rite laid down in the Kau^ika Sutra ^ we find that as a means of driving 
away evil spirits the use of a food is prescribed, which has been cooked 
with wood of a tree in which birds nest : this is due merely to the fact that 
in accompanying verses Indra, the averter of evil spirits, is invited to come 
as a bird to a tree. 

§ 3 . The Removal of Hostile Influences 

In a modified degree the principle is adopted in Vedic ritual that hostile 
powers should be propitiated. Thus the Raksases are given the portions that 
fall away from the* grain, when it is pounded for the offerings : the blood, the 
entrails, the excrement of the animal victim, are made over to them or the 
snakes. Diseases treated as demons are propitiated and shown reverence in 
the hope, which is expressed, that they will depart, being satisfied with what 
is done for them. The disease Takman is entreated to depart, and addressed 
as a god, just as among the Esths down to modern times the same procedure of 
paying homage was adopted to make a disease depart.^ What is more 
interesting is that both methods might be tried in close conjunction : the 
jackal might be addressed with formulae of reverence at the one time, and at 
the same time a fire brand be thrown at it.^ The ants receive an offering, 
but, if that fails, a poisonous mixture is made for them, and the aid of the 
gods in their utter extirpation is invoked.^ Snakes are simultaneously treated 
with reverence, and their extinction invoked : in the snake offering itself, 
while the snakes are fed, the sacrificer draws round the house a line of water 
to keep them away from it. But as a rule the attitude of the Vedic Indian to 

* xxix. 27. Based on AV. vi. 2. 2 ; Olden- 16. 24 ; HGS. ii. 7. 2; BBS, ii. 1. 32. 

berg, ReL des Vedd^, p. 480, n. 3. * HGS. i. 16. 20 ff, 

* Grohmann, Ind. Stud, ix. 413 ; cf. AV. * Kaug. cxvi. 

i. 12, 13 ; V. 7 ; vi. 13, 20 ; PGS. i. 



Chap. 22] The Removal of Hostile Influences 383 

the hostile powers is the desire to banish them far from his life, to deceive and 
cheat them in every way : hence such actions as fasting to forbid them en- 
trance, refraining from breathing, from intercourse, from looking round and so 
on. The same idea is also to foe seen in the fact that on certain occasions dis- 
guises are adopted, and that the hair which is cut from the child or youth is 
carefully buried. In this last instance, however, in many cases the hair is 
prescribed to be buried in such a place as a cow stall, and in that instance it 
may be that the burying was rather to bring prosperity to the cows ^ than as a 
piece of prophylactic magic, or the two ideas may have been merged into 
one. The difficulties of realizing the precise sense of magic rites is far greater 
than that of interpreting religious ceremonies. Other modes of avoidance are 
mentioned, in addition to not looking round at any dread sight, or not coming 
into physical contact with what is dangerous : thus the mother is impure for 
ten or twelve days after birth and is avoided, and the bricks for Nirrti at the 
setting up of the fire altar are put in place without actual contact. Steps are 
taken to efface the footsteps of the priest, who carries the fire of the sacrifice, 
just as a clog is bound to the foot of the dead to wipe out the tracks. Similarly 
the use of different doors from the normal may be prescribed : the child 
attacked by the doggie demon cough is taken into the assembly hall, where the 
spell to exercise the demon is to be performed, through a hole made in the 
thatch.^ When the sacrificer dies, and the fire hitherto maintained by him 
becomes the place of resort of powers of death, it is removed, but not by the 
door. Or, again, something may be interposed to shut out the demons : water 
they cannot cross,® and the use of water prevents the evil influence of the bricks 
for Nirrti ^ or the funeral rite exercising its power. Similar cases of the inter- 
position of obstacles are presented by the use of a stone to sever the living 
from the dead, the mat ® employed for the same purpose, and at the sacrifice 
the enclosing sticks placed round the fire in order to keep off the demons. 

The use of water for actual washing away different forms of evil is 
extremely common, as in the final bath : the place where a pigeon has 
alighted is washed clean : the bride is washed to rid her of all evil influences : 
after dealings with Rudra, demons, or the Fathers, it is necessary to purify 
oneself by touching water, but not rain water, which is deemed to have some 
degree of impurity and to spoil offerings on which it falls. The face is wiped 
after an evil dream.® Lead and wool are used also for cleansing purposes.*^ 
The urine of a cow has as in Iran and in modern India great properties of 
cleansing.® The new-born child is washed, and also the breast of the mother : 
but smoke is also used to purify the child, while fire is a constant source of 
protection. The sickle with which is cut the grass for the sacrifice is made 
glowing by means of fire, thus driving off the Raksases. 


^ Cf. Frazer, The Magic Art, i. 28 ff. 
2 HGS. ii. 7. 2. 

® MS. iv. 8. 5. 

^ Weber, Ind. Stud. iii. 243. 


® Kau^. Ixxxvi. 14. 

« HGS. i. 16. 5. 

^ KauQ. Ixxi. 16, 17. 
* K^JS. XXV. 11.16. 



384 


Yedic Ritual 


[Part III 


The use of noise to drive away demons is common : the drums at the 
Mahavxata rite are paralleled by the sounds made by the Soma stones at the 
pressing, which are made doubly resonant by the device of putting under 
them sounding holes. The noise of the Saman is also powerful to drive away 
evil, if the critics of the Saman singers also make it a ground for the breaking 
off of the holy study for the day on which it is heard. Pots are beaten at 
burial. When a gong is beaten, it is expected that the demon which has a 
child in its grip will be driven away.^ The fragrant bdellion also serves to drive 
away demons, while the Apamarga plant is famed for this service, which, as 
its name denotes, it derives from its power to wipe off the influences of such 
powers. The ritual use of beating is not unknown : it occurs during the 
royal consecration, when the priests gently beat the prince, ^ and it may per- 
haps be recognized in the beating of their thighs by the maidens who dance 
round the fire at the Mahavrata, bearing on their heads the water pitchers.® 

The use of a staff is of special interest : the student is given a staff, and is 
forbidden ever to let anything intervene between his body and it. When 
his studentship is over, it is thrown in the water with the rest of his outfit, but 
he obtains a new staff, and this is expressly stated to be of use not merely for 
protection against human foes but also from Raksases and Pi9acas.^ The 
Soma offerer has a staff, which he receives from the priest to guard him, and 
which he ought never to let go.® The Maitravaruna priest stands through the 
service with staff in hand, slightly bending forward, in the attitude of readiness 
to smite the demons.® A specially consecrated staff brings fortune wherever 
one goes : if a circle is drawn with it and one thinks of a place, then no enemy 
can enter that place.*^ The wooden sword of the sacrificer is used to cut up 
the earth on the altar place, and it is thrown into the dust heap, being treated 
as the enemy, Araru, who is destroyed.® After an offering to the Fathers the 
sword is drawn over the altar to send away the demons. Small staves are 
shot in the air at the wedding ceremony to destroy the sight of the Raksases. 

Yet another form is that of shaking : the black antelope skin used at a 
sacrifice is shaken out with the view of removing any evil that may have 
crept there : the corner of the garment of him who offers to the Fathers is 
similarly shaken to remove any evil spirit. Remains of Sura were thrown away 
on an ant heap. Akin to these rites is the use of a comb to purify the hair of 
the bride from dangerous influences of any sort, and also the passing of people 
through narrow holes, of which the classical example is that of Apala in the 
Rigveda,® whom Indra dragged through the hole of the chariot, of the cart, 


1 Kau^.lxxxvi. 15; HGS.ii.T, 2. 

“ KQS. XV. 7. 6 ; Weber, Rdjasuya, p. 63. 

» Cf. PB. ix. 8. 9 ; Vait. xxxiv. 9, 10. 
‘•GGS. iii. 1. 14, 27 ; iv. 9. 17 ; AGS. iii. 8, 
20 ; <?GS. ii. 13. 1, 2, 8 ; PGS. ii. 6. 31, 
&c. ' 

9B. Hi. 2. 1.32. 

« TS. vi. 1. 4. 2 ; AfS. iii. 1. 20 ; KfS. vi. 


4. 6. ’ SVB. ii. 4. 1, 2. 

* VS. i. 29 n . ; ggS. iv. 4. 2. 

® Cf. Kau 9 . XV. 4 ; Ixxii. 16 ; RV. viii, 
91. 7 ; von Schroeder (VO.J. xxii. 223 ff.) 
has a fanciful explanation of the legend ; 
cf. Oldenberg, JRgveda-Noten, ii. 142, 
143 ; Zachariae, Zeitsch. des Vereins 
/. Volksk. XX. 154 £f. 



Chap. 22] 


385 


The Removal of Hostile Influences 

and of the yoke, and so healed of a skin disease, and which is to be seen also 
in the marriage ritual, when the hole of the yoke of a car is placed on the 
bride.^ The aim of this rite is probably also to be seen in the making of a hole 
in the roof of the assembly hall for the introduction of the boy who is ill : 
the narrowness was probably a feature of the rite. The question which arises 
in this case, as in the case of the passing of an army under the yoke in the 
Roman usage, ^ is whether the guilt of blood or the disease is considered to be 
wiped away by the contact with the sides of the hole, or whether it is to be 
classed as one of the devices by which an enemy is deceived and the angry 
demons or spirits of the dead are baulked of their prey. 

In many other cases the plan is adopted of the transfer of the evil to some 
other person or thing. The principle is at work in the case of the scapegoat, 
of which the classic example is to be found at the final bath of the horse 
sacrifice. The bride’s garment after marriage is hung up on a tree or post, 
so that the evil influence in it may be disposed of. Similarly the cloth with 
which she is wiped is given to the guardian of the maiden, who puts it in a cow- 
stall or hangs it up in the wood.® The Vratyas at the end of the festival, by 
which they are admitted to the Brahmanical community, hand their apparel 
and utensils to other Vratyas, or an inferior Brahman of Magadha, who bears 
away the defects inherent in them. A cow which is unfit for a fee is given 
to an enemy. After a miscarriage the woman is taken to three different huts : 
she is made to stand on lead and washed, her dark garment is taken off, 
and the hut burned.^ The sufferer from a headache goes out with a turban on 
and scatters grains : when an attack comes on, he deposits the turban, the 
winnowing fan which he has used, and a bowstring : apparently the demon is to 
come out of the head into the turban and to make for the grains, when he 
will be attacked by the bow.® To avert a bad omen a hook is tied to the foot 
of a black bird, a cake attached, and it is sent away to hang on to the enemy 
as the hook hangs to it. Sleeplessness is banished to Trita Aptya or to an 
enemy. An offering is prescribed, by which it is possible to prevent two 
enemies transferring to a third person their mutual hatred. For a person who 
is possessed of an evil spirit various devices are combined : fragrant substances 
are mixed together and burned, the person concerned stands against the water 
of a stream, and water is poured over him, an offering is hung up on a bird- 
frequented tree, in each case to take away the evil.® Fever is banished to the 
distant people of Gandhara and the Mujavants. A ceremony is prescribed by 
which when a man is thirsty in illness he transfers the thirst to another man.'^ 
The disease jaundice is transferred to birds of appropriate hue, like the 

^ Wintemitz, Hochzeitsritiiellf pp. 43 fl. 48-50. 

^ Warde Fowler, Eeligiom Experience of the * Kau^. xxxiv. 3. 

Roman People^ pp. 267, 268 ; Frazer, ® Kau^. xxvi. 2. Cf., however, Henry, 
Balder the Beautiful^ ii. 192 ; Caland, La magic dans Vlnde antique^ pp. 206, 

Altindisches Zauherriiual, p. 31 ; Henry, 207. 

La magie dans Vlnde antique, p. 133. • Kau^. xxvi. 29 ff. 

® Kau^. Ixxvi. 1 ; Ixxix. 24 ; AV. xiv. 2. ’ Kan 9 . xxvii. 9 ff. 

5 [h.o.s. 32] 



386 


Vedic Ritual 


[Fart III 


thrush or parrot. Fever is transferred to a frog by pouring water over the 
patient and putting a frog under the bed ; ^ the connexion of the frog with the 
disease may be very old. An interesting means of finding out the presence in 
a house of a demon like a Pi^aca is to hang up in the house kindling wood, and 
the strew for the sacrifice : if they are moved, the presence of the spirit is 
certain.^ 

Diseases are specially often the subjects of exorcism in one form or another : 
a woman suffering from lung disease must be rubbed by a chaste man with 
balls of fresh lotus leaves, limb by limb, and thereafter the leaves are thrown 
to the west.® He who suffers from an inherited disease is deluged with water 
and a plough is held, apparently a mixture of washing and contact.^ Diarrhoea 
is dealt with by tying a string round a bunch of Muhja grass, and giving the 
patient to eat earth from a field and from an ant-heap.® Sick cow's are made to 
drink salt water.® 


§ 4 . The Attraction of Beneficial Substances and Powers 

The sacrificer must avail himself of the same means to attack his enemies 
as. they use to attack him : if the enemy assail, the skilled priest can send 
against them the demon Apva which seems to be the diarrhoea caused by 
terror, and to symbolize in emphatic fashion the fear produced by panic in 
battle : this performance is already recorded in the Rigveda.*^ So also it is 
perfectly in keeping with the ideas of magic that terror and fear would be 
conveyed to the enemy by the process of sending a white-footed one, presum- 
ably a sheep, against the opposing host.® In such a case Apva is indeed a 
dreadful thing, but it is in the control of the priest and therefore useful to him. 
In other cases he has more direct control : he can use one substance for wash- 
ing himself, another he can drink or eat, another use as an amulet ; with 
yet another he can rub or anoint himself.® The avoidance of the touch of 
anything dangerous is one side of a practice, of which the other is the touching 
of things which are beneficial. The touching of the victim has two sides ; 
it may convey the death to which the victim is being led, but it may also 
convey — and this is the view which Brahman logic finally adopts — the 
power and strength of the divine essence. Hence we have an enormous 
number of rites, the standing on a tiger-skin to obtain royal power, the use 
of an antelope-skin, the placing of the wife on a bull’s hide, the placing of 
her and of the student upon a stone to attain firmness, the depositing at the 
fire-piling and other offerings on the place of the fire altar of a piece of earth 


Kau 9 . xxvi. 18 ; xxxii. 17 ; cf. Hubert 

and Mauss, Ann^e sociol. ii. 92 ; Bloom- 
field, JAOS. xvii. 173. 

Kau9. XXV. 34. 

ApGS. ix. 10. 

Kaug, xxvii. 1 ; Henry, op. cit., p. 204. 
Bloomfield, Seven Hymns of AV,y p. 3. 
Kau 9 . xix. 1. Other rites in TA. iv. 30 ; 


KhGS. iv. 3. 13. 

^ RV. X. 103. 12 ; Kau 9 . xiv. 21. 

* Weber, Ind. Stud, xvii. 269 ; Kau 9 . 
xiv. 22, 23. Caland, however, thinks 
that an arrow with white feathers is 
meant. 

» AV. xix. 45. 5. 
gB.iii.S. 1. 10. 



Chap. 22 ] Attraction of Beneficial Svhstances and Powers 387 

from an ant-heap, since the ants as finders of waters give richness : the same 
ants per contra are often used to destroy dangerous substances like the 
remnants of offerings. • 

Various strange messes are prescribed for eating : the least unpleasant may 
be the mixture of milk, of cow-dung, of bdellion, and salt which is taken at an 
agricultural offering : the burying of a similar mess could, however, produce 
equal results.^ The wife must eat a barley-corn with two beans attached to 
secure a male ^ and a strong infant. A peculiarly unpleasant drink, in which 
the members of a cow form an element, will secure all desires. The common 
eating of the king and the priest ® and of the bride and bridegroom show that 
unit}’^ of essence was thus produced : it may be conjectured ^ that the Tanu- 
naptra ceremony was originally of this kind, though the common eating has 
disappeared. The idea would then be that he who injured any of those united 
to him by the common meal would injure himself. The use of anointing is 
often recorded : an enemy might be injured by anointing sweat on reed 
arrow-points and offering them.® The king and the sacrificer at the royal 
consecration and the Sautramani were formally anointed and so on. Other 
means are breathing, as upon the new-born child to give it life, and the 
putting of substances in the nose to produce offspring.® 

The eyes should not see many things, such as the taboos imposed on the 
Snataka and his teacher, but, on the other hand, the eye may have purifying 
influence, and hence with the eye of Mitra the guest may look on what is given 
to him,^ But the glance of a i&nake is deadly,® and so may the glance of the 
bride be : therefore her husband places salve on her eyes to secure his safety.® 
In a number of interesting cases effective results are produced by using in 
the rite things connected with the object to be attained. Thus for a prince 
in exile it is well in the rite to use, for the kindling wood to cook a magic 
drink, wood from a stump of a tree which has grown again, or to place on the 
fire altar earth from his old realm. To defeat the ants when troublesome the 
use of a ladle of Badhaka wood is valuable, as Badhaka means ‘ repelling ’. 
If victory in battle is the object, earth which a boar has torn up may be placed 
on the altar, and thus give the rite the strength of the boar. 

In other cases burying things produces good results, as in the burying 
above referred to of a curious mixture for the prosperity of the herds : so too 
the burying of hair and other objects such as nails. On the other hand, it is 
necessary to provide rites to dig up objects, such as one’s own hair and nails, 
which an enemy has buried : a special ceremony for this is mentioned in the 
Taittiriya Samhita,^® 

^ Kau§. XX. 25 ; xix. 9. ® Kau^. xlvii. 44. 

* HGS. ii. 2. 2, 3 ; AGS. i. 13. 2. « QGS, i. 24. 2. ’ VS. v. 34. 

® Weber, Rajasuya, p. 140 ; Kau^. xvii; ® AB. vi. 1 ; KB. xxix. 1. 

Kau^, xii. 7 has a ceremony of eating ® RV. x. 85. 44 ; i. 16. 5. On the 

in common to procure harmony, evil eye see Caland, Zaviberritudl, p, 79, 

^ Oldenberg, ReL des Veda^y p. 502, n. 4 ; n. 27. 

cf. below, § 7. V. 2. 11 ; ^B. iii. 5. 4. 

5 ^ 



388 


Vedic Mitnal 


[Part III 


For the purpose of protection the use of amulets is very common indeed : 
it is not indeed quite clear exactly what idea was conceived to be embodied in 
the%se of these amulets. In the opinion of Oldenberg,^ the view taken of 
the amulet was, in the first instance, that there was in it a spirit which took 
its abode therein, but in the period of the Vedic belief the view had been altered 
by a process of development, so that the effect of the amulet is produced by a 
substance resident therein.^ It is, however, a little difficult to accept this view 
of the development of ideas. The view that the first element is spirit, and that 
the belief in the utility of the amulet is due to the view that a spirit is living in 
it, is unnecessarily refined : the fact, admitted by Oldenberg, that the amulet 
is not rarely addressed and treated as having an actual spirit in it, is most 
naturally of all explained by the fact of animatism : the amulet is conceived 
to be a living substance : only by a natural development of thought is there 
any element of a non-spiritual substance found. Animism in the strict 
sense of the word, therefore, need hardly come into operation, in so far 
as it postulates the belief in a mere detachable spirit* 

The potency of nakedness as a magic rite is seldom mentioned save for 
rain spells : the Kaugika ^ however, tells how to expiate a day of ill omen by 
sitting naked and rubbing the forehead, and in its collection of spells for 
inducing slumber in women it prescribes nakedness in the performer of a rite, 
consisting in the besprinkling of the place where she is from a vessel full of 
water and the remains of an offering. 

§ 5. Mimetic Magic 

In one special class of cases the effect which it is desired by magic means to 
produce in nature is brought about by the simple plan of representing in 
sensible form, within the means available to man, the operations which it 
is desired should take place. Thus when an enemy is to be defeated ^ it is 
useful to break in two a piece of grass which is thrown towards the opposing 
host : the breaking of the grass symbolizes the breaking in two of the armed 
foemen. Or the rite can be made more effective in quite a simple way : 
as a daughter-in-law by an old taboo is expected to shrink away from her 
father-in-law, so by taking the hostile enemy as the daughter-in-law, and by 

' Bel. des Veda\ pp. 512, 513. Cf. AV. x. i. 22 f. 

6. 5 for a dear case of the amulet as ^ xxxviii. 4 and xxxvi. According to Henry 
living. Henry {La magie dans Vlnde {op, dt,, p. 109) nudity has this value 

antique, pp. 89-92) suggests that the because it brings man back to his 

srdktya amulet owes its name to its primitive dress ; cf. Slachariae, Kl. Sck., 

form, which was like that of the Semitic pp. 238 f. ; Samter, Geburt, Hochzeit 

* seal of Solomon ’ amulet and was und Tod, pp. 112 ff. ; Hopkins, Origin 

borrowed from Semites, but this is of Eeligion, p. 188. For nudity in rain 

needless ; ef. AV, ii. 11 ; viii. 5 ; ritual cf. Mitra, JRAS. 1897, pp, 471- 

Bloomfield, SBE. xlii. 675. For com- 84 ; Frazer, Golden Bough\ i. 283 ff. 

parison of Teutonic use of amulets see ^ Kaug, Ivi. 10 ; xiv. 19-22 gives other 
SBE. xlii. 409. devices, noted above. 

2 Cf. ERE, ii. 392 ff. ; Helm, Aligerm, Bel. 



Chap. 22] 


389 


Mimetic Mdgic 

addressing to it the remark that the father-in-law is looking at: it, the hostile 
army will then break up in utter confusion.^ More elaborate instances of the 
same thing are of course the ceremonies of the Mahavrata where the water 
thrown on the fire produces rain, and the winning of the white round skin 
which represents the sun is a spell representing the recovery of the sun from 
the hostile powers affecting it. In the royal consecration the victory of the 
king over his rival is graphically depicted in mimic form : his success in 
dicing ^ is a picture of his success in the position of king on earth. The 
fertility of the earth and of the crops is produced by the mimicry of sexual 
relationships at the Soma sacrifice, at the horse sacrifice, and by the actual 
performance of ritual intercourse at the Mahavrata offering. At the Vajapeya 
the chariot race is a magic performance to secure the pre-eminence of the 
sacrificer, just as in the rite he is made to be the victor in the race in question.® 
The SautramanI offering is a clear imitation of the story of the healing 
of India from his intoxication with Soma after the slaying of the demon 
Namuci : ^ it is used to secure the sacrificer the success for which he is anxious 
in whatever sphere of life he may live. This sort of magic is particularly 
common in rain magic : ® herbs are often dipped in water, black garments 
assumed, black victims offered. One rite is of interest : the heads of a dog 
and a ram, hairs, and old shoes are fastened to the end of a bamboo, and 
passes are made in the air as if in combat with a demon : the animals may 
be intended to aid in the breaking open of the sky, just as at the Mahavrata 
the shooting of arrows through, but not so as to penetrate, a skin, is pre- 
sumably intended to let the waters of the skies flow down on the earth. 

The death of a man can be, as in all lands, compassed thus in many ways : 
an image of him may be made of wax and melted or it may be pierced to the 
heart, or again his shadow, which is in some degree the man, may be likewise 
treated : again a chameleon may be killed and formally burned in mimicry of 
the rite of the burning of the dead man.® The footmark of a maiden can 
be used as a means of winning her love : ^ the footmark of a beleaguered king 
is scattered to the winds.® Worms are generally to be banished by the crushing 
and the burning of twenty-one selected U 9 ira w^orms.® The running away of 
a slave or some other persons may be prevented by the idiotic rite of pouring 
round the person affected the urine of the performer from the horn of a living 
animal, a symbol of strength : the urine represents the person to whom the 
slave belongs, and thus the person in living presence is in the vicinity and 
prevents the slave from running away.^® The destruction of misfortune of any 
kind often takes the shape of the burning or throwing away in water of old 

^ AB. iii. 22. 7 ; Liebich, VOJ. xxvii. 474-7. disches Zauberrifual, p. 141. 

* Ap^JS. V. 19. 2 ff. ; 20. 1 ff. ; Weber, « Kau^. xlvii. 54 if. ; 39 ff. ; Caiaiid, 

Eajasuya, pp. 69 ff. op. cit., pp. 164, 166. 

» Weber, Vajapeya, pp. 27 ff. ’ SVB. ii. 6. 8 ; Caland, op. cit., p. 163. 

« Oldenberg, GN. 1893, pp. 342 ff. « MS. ii. 2. 1 ; cf. Caland, 1. c. 

® For these rites cf. Henry, La magie dans * Kau^. xxix. 24. 

Vlnde antique, p. 110 ; Caland, Altin- HGS. i. 14 ; PGS. iii. 7. 



390 


Vedic Ritual 


[Part III 


things such as garments, sunshades or shoes.^ To destroy the borer insect 
which is damaging crops, one of the species is buried, head downwards, the 
mouth closed with thread, to prevent further depredations.^ When the Soma 
is being pressed, he who desires to destroy a foe should think of him as he 
pounds with the pressing stone : the pounding will directly affect the foe. 
More amusing is the device to be adopted to secure the transfer of a stream 
from one course to another : the new bed desired is watered, plants like the 
Avaka are put along it, and a frog is also put there. The stream will therefore 
follow the path thus laid down.® The same principle is at work in the rule 
by which objects to be attained are often expressed in a speech as so won. 
Thus when the wife is given an offering to look at in the ceremony of the 
parting of the hair and is asked, ‘ What dost thou say ? ’ she replies, ‘Offspring.’ 
Similarly in the rite to attain male offspring her answer as to what she drinks, 
in the magic drink given to her, is the producing of a son. The husband 
and wife on the fifth day after the wedding ask a young Brahman what he 
sees, to which he replies, ‘ Sons and cattle.’ ^ So in the rite of the animal 
offering the question, ‘ Is it ready ? ’ has always the answer that it is ; in 
the plough festival ® the question of the wife whether the ploughing has been 
accomplished receives an affirmative reply ; and such cases are to be found in 
every important rite. A mode of divination can be made a mode of conveying 
good fortune in this way : thus a merchant, going on a journey, places balls 
of dung on the limbs of a friendly Brahman and asks what sort of day it is, to 
which the latter replies that it is good and lucky.® 


§ 6 . Divination aifid Ordeal 

The principle of divination is in large measure directly due to the doctrine 
of mimetic magic : ^ if the use of a representation of things can produce them, 
it is also legitimate, if less easy, to deduce the future of events from the 
behaviour of things, which are supposed to be an imitation of the events. 
This, however, is no doubt not the whole ground of the belief in the power to 
read the future, and, moreover, the fact that the future was uncertain must 
have induced many people to resort to the gods for aid in unravelling it. In 
these cases the performances are indeed much the same as in an ordinary 
species of divination, but the belief is different : it is the view that the future 
is revealed by the god, through the means employed : magic here is supple- 
mented as often by religious conceptions. 


1 Kau§. xviii. 9 ff. ; cf. Henry, op, cit., p. 163. 

* Kau^. xi, 19 ; AV. vi. 50. 1. 

3 Kau^. xl. 1-9 ; Henry, op, cit,, p. 101 
Weber, Ind, Stud. xvii. 243. 

* GGS. ii. 7. 10 ; AGS. i. 13. 3 ; Winternitz, 

Hochzeitsntitell, p. 101. 

Kau9.xx.l6ff. 

* Kau9. 1. 15 ; Henry, op. cit., p, 70 ; Bloom- 

field, SBE. xlii. 532 ff. 


’ Oldenberg, Rel. des Veda% pp. 484, 507 ff. ; 
Henry, op, cit,, pp. 59-62. Divination 
from the entrails of the victim, which 
is specially Babylonian (Farnell, Greece 
and Babylon, pp, 248, 249), is not 
Vedic. For Babylon, cf. Meyer, Gesch. 
d, AIV I. ii. pp. 585-7 ; for Greece, 
W. R. Haliiday, Greek Divination 
(1913). 



Chap. 22] Divination and Ordeal 391 

The use of means is very varied : the fire of the sacrifice and the victim at 
the sacrifice are specially suited to give knowledge by their magic connexion 
with the gods as well as religious conceptions : more clearly connected with 
the activity of divine powers in Vedic belief is the drawing of omens from the 
flight and the movements of animals, which are specially clearly connected 
with birds or beasts, with gods or spirits of the dead or demons. When a 
ceremony is performed to win for a maiden a husband, the side from which 
crows first appear is that from which her wooer will come.^ The movement 
of the cow at a particular moment in the Soma sacrifice shows the fortune of 
the sacrificer.2 The clear flaming of the fire at a sacrifice brings with it the 
prospect of twelve villages for the sacrificer ; if it smokes, of at least three.® 
More interesting is the rule that, when the body of the dead is being burned, 
the soul will go to the heaven, atmosphere, or the earth according as the 
eastern, western, or southern fire first reaches it.^ The owl is invoked to fly 
round the village aiid give signs for the future : it is a bird which flies to the 
dwellings of the gods, and the Rigveda already knows birds of omen.® The 
hyena’s howl is uttered either of its own will, or on the prompting of other 
powers.® The battle’s result can be judged by the lighting of a special fire on 
a suitable place and observing the movements of the fire, or it can be fore- 
casted by taking three bowstrings, and placing them on a fire : the move- 
ments of the three, of which the middle one is treated as death, will show the 
event : that which keeps clear from it will represent the victorious army, that 
which comes into contact with it the army which is to be ruined.’ The 
character of the bride can foe judged foy the choice by her of balls of earth 
chosen from very various places : ® the sex of the future child by the fact 
whether the member of the foody of the prospective mother which a Brahman 
boy touches has a masculine or feminine name.® 

The meanings of dreams is an interesting part of Vedic magic and is dealt 
with in various passages, including an Atharvan Pan9ista. The Rigveda 
already regards as ominous the making of a garland or neckband in a dream. 
Ten dreams which forebode death are recorded in the Aitareya Aranyaka : 
when one sees in a dream a black man with black teeth who kills him, when a 
boar kills him, when a wild cat springs on him, when one eats and then spits 
out gold, when one eats honey and lotus roots, when one goes to a village with 
asses or boars, or when one drives south a black cow with a black calf, wearing 


^ Kang, xxxiv. 24. 

* ?B. iv. 5. 8. 11. 

» GGS. iv. 8, 15. 

« AGS. iv. 4. 2 fif. 

« HGS. i. 17. a ; RV. ii. 42 and 43. 

« HGS. i. 17. 1. 

’ Kau^. xiv. 31 ; xv. 15. 

« GGS. ii. 1. a ff. 

® Kan?, xxxiii. 19, For other modes see 
Henry, op. cit,, p. 67. 


viii. 47. 15 ; Oldenberg’s note to x, 164. 
iii. 2. 4. For an evil dream one should 
turn over on the other side, saying 
AV, vii. 100, and for expiating the 
dream of eating in sleep should say 
AV. vii. 101 (cf. Caland, Altindisches 
Zavbertitual, p. 151 ; Pischel, Albmn- 
Kern, pp. 115 ff.) ; Kau?. xlvi. See 
also J. von Negelein, Der Traumschliissel 
de$ Jagaddeva (1912), p. 378. 



392 


Yedic RitvM 


[Part III 


a garland of nard. If one has a dream, one should, as we have seen, wash one’s 
mouth. The view is also held that certain stars are unlucky, especiaEy 
Mtila.^ Moreover, many sights forebode evil : the sun seeming as the moon, 
the heaven red like madder, when one’s shadow appears upside down in a 
mirror or water, or when one’s head smells like a crow’s nest.^ Evil is further 
portended by meteors and lightning. Of ominous birds the main classes are 
those which are black or whose appearance or utterance is horrible : the 
pigeon, the owl, the vulture, the Dirghamukhi, &c., but the bird is also called 
generally the mouth of Dissolution. Birds, ^ too, are said to go about in the 
semblance of the Fathers, other animals are seldom mentioned in this regard ; 
the fact that a horse on several occasions is used to forecast prosperity, or 
other results, is rather due to its connexion with the offering than to its 
intrinsic nature as ominous, though fortune in popular superstition can be 
inferred from the neighing of a horse.* Other prodigies are the appearance 
of an ant-heap in the house, the making of honey there by the bees, the scream 
of a jackal, the drinking of one cow from another, the cows giving blood 
for milk, and so on.^ 

The existence of men skilled in the interpretation of omens is natural 
and is also recorded, as for instance in the case of the men who could tell the 
marks which led to luck or otherwise in the choice of a wife. We hear also 
of a prophet who made his prophecies on the basis of the smoke of dung, 
the Qakadhuma of the Atharvaveda, whose business it was, it is clear, to fore- 
cast the weather.® We learn also of men who by the means of plants such as 
the Sadampuspa were able to behold sorcerers male and female, whether 
they went in the sky or on the earth : the same idea of the power of socerers 
to assume various forms is found in the Rigveda® where it asks for the 
destruction of the demons, who in form of birds fiy about the village at night. 
Necromancy, however, is not apparently known, ^ nor the inspection, on a 
system, of the entrails of the victims, in order to read the future. 

The ordeal is nothing more than a form of divination in one of its aspects : 
the idea in it is not that the deity would actually punish an accused person so 
much as that it should by its treatment of him show whether or not he is 
innocent of the charge made against him. But the analogy of the ordeal to 
the oath in which the swearer invokes a penalty on himself, if he is telling 
untruth, shows that the separation of the ideas of punishment and discrimina- 
tion cannot be assumed to have been present to the Vedic mind : the form 


^ Kau^. xlvi. 25 ff. Cf. Bloomfield, Athar- 
vaveda, pp. 83, 85. 

2 AA. iii. 2. 4 ; cf. L^S. iii. 3. 6 ff. ; ApfS. 
ix. 20, 10. The sight of the dead 
presages death to the seer ; JUB. iii. 
29. 

=» AB. ii. 15. 4 ; BBS. ii. 8. 14. 9, 10. 

^ Grimm, Deutsche Myth.^ iii. 442. 

^ QGS. V. n. 10 ; HGS. i. 16. 19 ; 17, 6; 


Kau9. 

® Bloomfield, Atharvaveda, p. 81 ; Henry, 
op. cit., pp. 68 ff. 

’ Kau^. xxviii. 7 ; AV. iv. 20. 

® vii. 104. 18. 

® Oldenberg, Mel. des Veda^, p. 569, n. 2. 
Ibid., p. 508 ; Jolly, ZDMG. xliv. 346 ; 
Maedoneli and Keith, Vedic Index, I. 
364, 365, 392 ; Glotz, L'ordalie (1904) ; 



Ch^p. 22 ] 


Divination and Ordeal 


393 


of ordeals recorded for early Vedic times shows the prevaleace of punishment 
at the same time as the test of fact : the Rigveda has not any certain example 
of the ordeal : the only Brahmana cases are those in which Vatsa asserts his 
purity of Brahmanical origin by walking through the fire without harm 
affecting him/ Tri^oka’s assertion of superior Vedic knowledge by a fire 
ordeal and the successful crossing of a stream, and the glowing axe which 
is brought up for the purpose of testing the accused thief/ The lire as a 
sentient power by failing to burn or by burning shows innocence or guilt : 
but it punishes at the same time, and this is roughly speaking true of some 
of even the later ordeals, such as the poison and water ordeals/ A procedure 
to prevent the burning of the hand in the ordeal of plunging the hand into 
boiling oil to extract a piece of gold is prescribed in the Kau9ika/ 

§ 7 . The Magic Spell 

The power of the word is ver}?- marked in all systems of magic and naturally 
not least in India. The magic spell is sometimes in prose, in the style of the 
formulae used by the Adhvaryus at the sacrifice, more often in verse, some- 
times newly made for the purpose, sometimes, and indeed very often, chosen 
without any appropriateness from the vast body of existing sacred literature. 
Of this latter tendency two examples may be given : the number available 
is legion. The finest hymn to Varuna in the Vedic literature is found in 
the Atharvaveda where it has been preserved in a charm.® The great hymn 
of the Rigveda, which celebrates the god Prajapati in the form of questions, 
has the second verse used in a spell for preventing the miscarriage of a cow, 
doubtless for no better reason than that the idiotic system on which names 
of authors were assigned to every hymn of the collection resulted in postulat- 
ing an author Hiranyagarbha, ‘he of the golden womb really an epithet of 
the supreme god, and the fact that the deity was Prajapati.® 

Of the spell one characteristic is the regularity with which many gods are 
invoked : it is absurd to suppose that in these enumerations there was 
normally any sense of the different deities invoked : all that was desired was 
to strengthen the spell by the utterance of as many names of deities as 
possible : in some cases the mention of individuals is dropped and merely 
the numbers are given, 99 or 88 or 77 and so on : the fondness for such numbers 

Keith, ERE. s, u. Ordeal ; Hopkins, * lii. 8, 9 ; Henry, La magie dans Mlnde 
Origin of Meligion, p. 256. antique, p. 100- 

^ PB. xiv. 6. 8 ; JB. iii. 233 ff, ® iv. 16 . It is not clear if the spell is against 

^ CU. vi. 10. Cf. the use of fires to discrimi- an enemy who curses or is cursed : 

nate after death, fB. i. 9. 3. 2 ; below, gapyantam may {pace Caland on Kau^. 

Chap. 28, § 10. xlviii. 7) be an irregularity (cf. badhya, 

“ As weighing ordeal, without punishment BD. v. 134 ; vi. 14). See Weber, 

directly, is hinted at n xi. 2. 7. 33, Ind. Stud, xviii. 66 ; Henry, op. dt., 

where a man’s fate after death is deter- pp. 235-9. 

mined by weighing his good and evil ® Kau 9 . xliv. 5 j RV. x, 121. 2. 
deeds. 



394 


Vedic Mitual 


[Part III 


is a feature of many forms of magic.^ Analogous to this feature is the fact that 
when anything is to be dealt with every conceivable place where it may be is 
enumerated : a disease is banished, not merely from the place where it is 
paining the person afflicted, but from all his members. On the other hand, 
where possible the exact name and origin of the thing dealt with must be 
given : if one can name father and mother so much the better : the drum ^ is 
described as coming from the lord of the forest and strung by the cows. Some- 
times names of, to us, inexplicable and perhaps esoteric character are given, 
such as hrudu applied in the Atharvaveda® to fever, in accordance with the 
well-known rule that in magic a mysterious name is the most potent of alL^ 

A second characteristic of the spells is the stress laid on the recital of 
comparisons which have magic effect in producing the results desired. The 
kidneys are made to settle themselves firmly by comparison with the mountains 
which abide for ever, or the bird which is at rest in its nest, or the cows which 
have come back to the stall.^ The amulet is made effective by the fact that 
it was the one bound by the Daksayanas on ^atanika.® The dying round the 
Brahman, which is prescribed in the Aitareya Brahmana ^ as the spell par 
excellence of the Purohita against the foes of his master, is accompanied by 
comparison with the mode in which the constellations appear and set again. 
The birth of the embryo is encouraged by the comparison with the wind which 
moves the lotus pond on all sides,® and so on indefinitely. The use of the word 
‘ grow ’ is necessary when the Arundhati plant is addressed in order to heal 
a broken bone : ‘ below ‘ away % are used when a disease is expelled : if 
one practises witchcraft, one should use the word ‘ broken ’ when offering 
a cup : in bringing about harmony the word ‘ in unison ’ is of value. The 
importance of the name has already been mentioned : it results in the 
giving to each child ^of a secret name. Nor is there missing the rite by which 
a formula is repeated backwards : if the offering priest is interrupted by 
the servants of the sacrificer, he should repeat backwards the Da9ahotr 
formula, and thus bring the sacrifice to ruin.® The use of harsh words like 
phati &c., is mentioned possibly even as early as the Rigveda.^® 

The word has special force in the form of the curse, which is often recorded 
in Vedic literature and which as is well known is one of the most common 
motives in later Indian literature. Fish are killed out of hand by men, 
because they betrayed to the gods Agni when he fled for shelter to the waters 
and for that deed Agni cursed them to be slain by men.^^ The trees which 

^ AV. xix. 47. 3 ff. ; vi. 25 ; Kuhn, KZ. impossible as Hal^vy’s derivation from 

xiii. 128 ff. For the motive of such Greek. 

invocations see Henry, op, cit.i pp. 12, * 3Legge, Forerunners and Eivals of Chris^ 

19. tianity, ii. 33. 

“ AV. V. 20. 1 ff. Cf. Babylonian parallels ® AV. vii. 96. 1. 
in Famell, Greece and Babylon, pp. * AV. i. 35. 

296-9. ’ viii. 28. 

3 i. 25, 4. Henry’s guess {op, cit„ p. 184) of * RV. v. 78. 7. ® Apf S. xiv, 15. 1. 

a Semitic source of this word is as x. 87. 13. TS. ii. 6. 6. 1. 



Cliap. 22] 


395 


The Magic Spell 

caused illness to the gods were cursed by the gods to be destroyed by a handle 
of the woodman’s axe, made from their own bodies.^ The curse is often men- 
tioned as being invoked to recoil on the curser himself, showing that it was 
a common form of magic attack. It might also be heightened in effect by a 
formal offering, in which the rules of the sacrifice are violated and the points 
of reeds are sacrificed to the accompaniment of formulae declaring that the 
sacrificer takes from the enemy, who has played him false with his wife, hope 
and sight, children and cattle, breathing in and breathing out.^ The curse ^ 
in the Brahmanas is constantly expressed in a curious form : if a man per- 
forms an act in the offering incorrectly, then he places himself in such a posi- 
tion that, if any one were to say of or to him something unpleasant, that would 
come true. The point is clear ; the mistake exposes the man guilty of it to 
the risk of the effective working of any curse which is invoked upon him. 

The Vedic oath is often recorded : the king at the great consecration 
recorded by the Aitareya Brahmana must swear to his priest to be true, at 
the cost otherwise of all his merit in sacrifice and gifts to the priests since the 
beginning of his life, his good deeds, his offspring, passing from him on the 
occasion of his falsehood.^ But a still older form of oath recorded ^ is by cows, 
or waters, or Varuna,® and the Indian to this day swears in some cases by 
Ganges water which he holds in his hand. The legal literature ’ allows oaths 
for a Brahman by his truth, for a Ksatriya by his teams and weapons, and for 
a Vai 9 ya by his cows, grain and gold, but these are not recorded for the Vedic 
period, and the first is modern in appearance as compared with the Vedic 
oaths. Later, too, we find that the touching of oneself in the oath was not 
rare, as showing the spirits the person to be punished if the oath were not kept : 
this usage is proved for late Vedic times by the provision that the touch in such 
a case is, like the offering to Rudra, a ground for purification by means of water.® 
Possibly, too, the curses recorded that a man’s head shall fly off, which is 
paralleled by the Buddhist malediction that the head should split in seven 
pieces, may be connected with this idea of touching the head.® A joint curse 
is that of the Tanunaptra rite, which is an oath of fidelity of the priest and the 
sacrificer in the Soma sacrifice, with a curse on the violator of the oath. 
There is in the Aitareya Brahmana an echo of the famous story of the lotus 
theft, in which the various persons accused of stealing the lotus fibres 
declared themselves guiltless by the device of invoking the most dreadful 


i PB. vi. 5. 11. 

» 9;B.xiv.9-4. 11. 

® fB. xii. 4, 1. 4. 

« AB. viii, 15 ; cf. Kau^. xvii. 

® TS. i. 3. 11. 1 ; cf. AV. xix. 44. 9; ?B. 
iii. 8. 5. 10. For an oath by water, see 
Ramayana, vii. 05. 29 ff. 

« This form is clearly religious and there is 
no ground to claim magic as a more 
primitive source of the oath, both kinds 


being natural. Cf. von Schroeder, 
AHsche Religion, i. 147 ff., 156 fl*., 
476 ff. 

^ Manu, viii. 113. Cf. TS. ii. 3. 5. 1 and 
the Pali Saceakiriya (Burlingame, 
JRAS. 1917, pp. 429 ff.). 

« gGS,L 9. 10. 

® Oldenberg, Rel, des Veda^, p. 520. 

V, 30 ; Charpentier, ZDMG. Ixiv. 65 ff. ; 
Ixvi. 44 ff. ; Geldner, Ixv. 306, 307. 



396 


Vedic Ritual 


[P&rtni 


misfortunes on the head of the thief, while the trae thief, the god himself, 
revealed his nature by invoking nothing but good. The classical instance of 
a broken oath is that of Soma, who is punished for failing to keep his promise 
to dwell with the twenty-seven wives whom he received from Prajapati, 
by the disease Rajayaksma, perhaps consumption.^ 


8. The Magic Sacrifice 


In many cases the sacrifice itself is degraded to mere magic : this is a precise 
parallel to the degradation of the formulae to spells which we have already 
seen, and of which the mystic Hotr formulae, originally of a superior type of 
thought, but later degraded to common magic purposes, are the best example. 
The actual sacrifice itself may be adapted to magical ends : thus to secure the 
opposite of the natural results the sorcerer performs it with the arrangement 
reversed as far as may be : the movements are not from south to north 
and from left to right, but from north to south, the region of the dead, and 
from right to left. Or again the offering verse in a sacrifice for Indra may be 
addressed to the Maruts, and vice versa in an offering to the Maruts. The 
Kau^ika Sutra has full descriptions of black magic, an idea which has never 
been without votaries and which in the Middle Ages attained great fame.^ 
More directly the sacrifice becomes not merely in the theosophy of the Brah- 
mans the great power of the universe : more prosaically it becomes the means 
by which the sorcerers who practise magic against one can be made to show 
themselves, by which rival wives can be overcome, by which the monarch in 
exile can regain his throne.® The sacrifice can be adapted to these ends by any 
manipulations of its component parts or by the precise mode in which the 
ritual acts are performed. 

Slightly different is another method of producing magic results : in this 
case the nature of the offering chosen differs essentially from the ordinary 
sacrifice : thus ants are offered poison ; ^ for a rival reed-points are sacrificed, 
the order of sacrifice being also altered ; ® to win cattle,® dung of a pair of 
calves, to win sheep, of a pair of sheep, is offered : long life is aimed at by 
offering nails of Khadira wood ; and from the practice of passing people 


^ TS. ii. 3. 5. 1 ff. Two theories of the 
e^ect of a meal combined with an oath 
may be noted. Oidenberg (Rel. des 
Veda}, p. 502, n. 4) thinks that the 
common meal results in creating 
identity of substance of the partakers, 
so that he who wrongs another thus 
wrongs himself. Westermarek {Anthro- 
pological Essays presented to E. B, Tylor, 
p. 374) holds that the meal operates a 
transference of conditional curses to 
those concerned (and to the god if he 
is party to the convenant). 

2 Henry, La magie dans Vlnde antique. 


pp. 220 flP. The conjuring up of souls to 
use them against the living is recorded 
only late, e. g. SVB. iii. 6. 12 ; the 
same text tells (iii. 7. 0) how to bring 
up demons who give five Karsaparias, 
which never fail to return to their owner, 
so long as he does not part with ail at 
one time. 

“ AV. i. 8 j KV. X. 159. 4 ; 174. 

‘ Kau^. cxvi. See above, Part II, Chap. H, 
§ 7 ; Hillebrandt, BituaUitteratur, pp. 
185 , 186 . 

® Kau^. xlvii. 44. 

» GGS. iv. 9. 13 f. ; 8. 11. 



Chap. 22] The Magic Sacrifice 397 

through holes to rub off evil or make them invisible to their foes, the use of 
sacrificing through a hole ^ naturally came into existence. 

In one other respect the magician avails himself of the forms of the 
ordinary sacrifice. One of the most important ingredients in every magic 
offering is the Sampata, the remnant of the butter offering made at the new 
and full moon, and the Kau9ika Sutra ^ contains precise instructions for the 
performance of these offerings, though it would be erroneous to imagine with 
Caland ® that every magic ceremony required to be accompanied by such a 
rite, a rule which would have restricted the workings of magic to a very short 
period.'^ In the operations of his ceremonies the magician follows closely 
the ordinary rites of sacrifice : the person in whose interest he sacrifices takes 
stalks of Darbha grass and touches the priest with them to establish close 
contact with him, and smells the smoke of the oblations made in the fire by the 
priest.^ On the other hand, it is characteristic of the special nature of the rite 
that it is performed in the north-eastern quarter away from the village,® and 
when it is completed the performers wash themselves in the stream near which 
the rite has been carried out, and return to the village, never turning round 
lest they may see the dread presences which they have evoked. The materials 
of the magic rite, apart from the frequent use of uneatable materials, are in the 
main the same as those of the ordinary ritual, but the diverse varieties of 
butter found in that ritual are replaced by the regular use of Ajya alone, while 
the Ingida is often mentioned as an ingredient.’ Special interest attaches 
to the frequent use of earth from an ant-heap : as we have seen, the ant, 
doubtless owing to its skill and industry, was regarded as an uncanny animal 
by the Vedic Indian, and possibly experience may have proved the existence 
of some value in the earth. An interesting excursion into the realm of sacrifice 
is made by this belief : in the ceremony of the piling of the fire altar, when the 
clay for the making of the bricks has been collected, the priest is to gaze at it 
through an ant-heap, i.e. presumably through a tunnel made in such a heap. 
The explanation of this rite is obscure : Henry ® suggests comparison with the 
German superstition that by wearing a moleskin a man can see sorcerers ; 
possibly the medium of an ant-heap conferred on the priests the faculty of 
discerning whether any evil influences were affecting his materials. Another 
curious ingredient is lead, and its three substitutes, iron filings, dried river 
foam, and a lizard’s head.® Woods of various kinds play a large part : one 
list enumerates twenty-two kinds of value, and is not exhaustive as it omits 


1 Kau^. Ixxii. 16. 

® vii. 15. 

» AUindisches Zatsberritual, p. vi. 

« Bloomfield, GGA. 1902, pp. 493 ff. ; 
Henry, op. cit., pp, 39 ff, 

Kauy. vii. 21, 28. 

* Kau^. vii. 13. it is the gate of the heaven 
(^B. vi. 6. 2. 4), because (Henry, op. cit.^ 
p. 46) the sun appears there at the 


summer solstice. 

’ Henry, op. cit., p. 51. 

® Op. cit, p. 56. Oldenberg (Eel. des Veda^, 
p. 499) holds that the richness in water 
and sustenance of the ants is thus 
conferred on the sacrificer. 

* Kau 9 . viii. 18. 

Kau 9 . viii. 15. 



398 


€fd%G 


[Part ni 


the A^vattha, which is often in fact employed in magic rites. But scarcely 
anything from an elephant’s tooth or hair^ downwards comes amiss to the 
sorcerer, who in India as elsewhere is anxious to increase the importance of 
his action by asserting that his ingredients have been obtained from afar : 
an antidote against snakes is dug up on the ridges of the mountain with shovels 
of gold by the little Kirata maiden,^ an assertion with which we may, if we will, 
compare the practice not rarely recorded, under which people of higher culture 
ascribe to those of lower culture possession of superior magic powers.® 

In other respects the parallelism between sacrifice and magic ceremony is 
extremely close : in both cases the operator expects and receives a reward, but 
the Kau^ika Sutra only rarely gives us an exact measure of the Daksina 
payable : in some cases the materials used may have been the fee,* but 
often these would be too worthless or too valuable and it is reasonable to 
believe ® that the fee was usually fixed by agreement. The magic ceremony 
can serve most of the purposes of the formal sacrifice : just as a main object 
ox the regular offering is long life, so an infinity of charms provide life, and 
amulets of varied kinds are provided by the magician. There are spells for the 
house, to guard against hre, to bring rain, to secure increase of cattle, to pre- 
vent injury and increase the growth of crops, to secure safety on a journey 
or trade venture and success in gambling. Spells provide success in the 
assembly, bring victory in war, restore an exiled king, produce harmony or 
discord among the several classes of the people just as sacrifices do. Even more 
than sacrifice are magic ceremonies adapted to secure success in love, the over- 
throw of rivals, constancy between husband and wife, the birth of a son rather 
than of a daughter, safety in child-birth, and the protection of the life, always 
precarious and doubly so in such a climate as that of India, of the infant, and 
spells as well as sacrifices protect the whole adolescence and life of man. 
Specially rich in spells is the domain of medicine : remedies are provided in this 
way against many diseases, including intestinal worms, to which the Vedic 
Indian attributed many diseases with which they had no concern ; fever whose 
several varieties were already known from their periods of recurrence ; 
wounds and fractures, one formula used having some faint claim to be Indo- 
European in character ; ® skin affections including even leprosy ; ^ the effects 
of poison ; and even perhaps diseases ranked as hereditary.® The means 
employed are often obscure, and, while traces of some medical knowledge are 
not wanting — ^the use of the probe ® has been recognized by Henry and 


^ Kau^. xiii, 2, 3. 

® AV. X. 4. 14. 

^ Moulton, Early Zoroastrianism, pp. 193, 
194. His application of this doctrine 
to the case of thp Magoi is not tenable ; 
see JRAS. 1915, pp. 790-9. Henry 
(op. ciL, p. 141) reminds us of the use of 
obi men made by creoles. 

* Kau 9 . viii. 5. 


® Henry, op, dU, p. 48. 

« Cf. Feist, Kultur der Indogermanen, 
pp. 349, 350 ; Bloomfield, Athawaveda, 
pp. 58, 61 ; SBE. xlii. 409. 

’ Henry, op, ciL, pp, 190, 266 ; Birdwood, 
Sva, pp. 183 ff. 

* ksetriya, of uncertain sense j Henry, 
op, dU, p. 203. 


* Kau9. XXV. 10-19. 


Op, dU, p. 208 


10 



Chap. 22 ] The Magic Sacrifice 399 

Caland ^ — in the main the speli seems to be relied on, together with symbolic 
acts for banishing, for example, the yellow jaundice to the yellow bird. 

A question of some difficulty presents itself as to the performers of these 
magic rites. Many of them are of such simplicity that it would appear obvious 
that they could be carried out by each householder for himself, for example, 
the rites to secure the safety of the cattle against wild beasts while grazing and 
their safe return at evening.^ Nor can we reasonably doubt that in the first 
instance the householder was his own magician as well as sacrificer,® But in 
the Kau9ika Sutra, as is natural, we find it assumed throughout that the 
performer of the rite is essentially the Brahman priest, whose Veda the 
Atharvaveda essentially is, and that no rite has any value without his presence. 
We may, therefore, assume that by the time of the Sutra, and even earlier, the 
control of magic had largely fallen into the hands of these priests, and this fact 
accords well with their clearly increasing importance in the history of the 
sacrifice proper,^ in which the services of the Brahman in making good by 
his presence and his skill defects in the ritual win for him the credit of the 
performance of half the sacrifice. 

Henry,® however, goes much further than this and insists that the Brahman 
was the first of priests, originally a magician, and that the spell is the primitive 
form whence prayer has emerged, as from the magician the priest has evolved 
with the growth of religion. Common as this view is, it is clear that it has 
no support in historical evidence, as in the Rigveda Brahman, both masculine 
and neuter, means normally priest and prayer, not magician and spell,® and 
as a theory of religion it must be held to be as defective as are all theories 
which endeavour to develop religion from something essentially not religious.'^ 

It is of interest to note that, while in the main the magician is content 
to use the Vedic pantheon as it appears in the sacrificial ritual, he is also pre- 
pared when necessary to fashion fresh figures or to modify those already 
existing. While Rudra in his forms as Bhava and fa^va is invoked in a hymn ® 
against internal disease in terms which are suggestive of the popular favour 
which was to turn him into ^iva, the great god, Visnu takes an inferior place, 
though the representation of his three steps can be used to strengthen the 
magic act.® The Apsarases appear in close connexion with dice, possibly 
as Henry holds in the main because the term knd, ‘ play applies to them 
par excellence : such linguistic considerations are of real importance in Vedic 


^ Altindisches Zauherritual, p. 69, n. 7. 

* Kau9. li. 

* Henry, op, di., pp. 204, 261 ; Oltramare, 

Le rdle du Yajamana^ p. 34, 

* So too the Purohita in this period is 

expected to be an Atharvavedin ; 
Bloomfield, Atharvaveda^ pp. 32-4 ; 
74-6. 

® Op. dt,, pp. 35-9. Cf. Usener, Archiv 
/. Religionswusenschaft, vii. 16 ff. ; 
Meyer, Gesch. d, AIV I. ii. pp. 870, 871 ; 


Marett, Folk-lore, 1904. 

® Bloomfield, Religion of the Veda, pp. 205, 
273, who criticizes Oldenberg’s con- 
ception of Brahman as ‘ Zaiiber- 
fluidum ’ (GN, 1916, pp. 715 ff.). 

’ Jevons, Idea of God, pp. 122 ff. 

« AV. xi. 2. 

» Kaii 9 . xlviii. 35 (cf. AV. vii. 13) ; xlix. 26 
(AV. xiii. 1. 56, 57). 

AV. iv. 38 ; vii. 109 ; Henry, La magie 
dans Vlnde antique, pp. 113 ff. 



400 


Vedic Ritual 


[Part HI 


thought. In battle charms we find not merely Apva, the spirit of panic and its 
physical result, but also Trisandhi, which is clearly India’s bolt, Arbudi, and 
Nyarbudi, who is plainly but a verbal variant of the former.^ In Henry’s 
view ^ Arbudi himself is a duplicate of India, like Namuci, but this view is 
much less probable than that of Bloomfield,® who sees in him an old derivative 
of Arbuda, the cloud serpent slain by India, who comes to be regarded later 
merely as a serpent divinity and auspicious, like Taksaka, who also figures 
in the Atharvaveda.^ It is characteristic of the Atharvaveda that Asura in 
independent passages has always an evil sense, that abstract deities like 
Arati,^ iiliberality towards priests, and perhaps Nirrti,® dissolution, take a pro- 
minent place, and that a faded mythological figure like the mysterious Trita 
appears, in the form Trta,’ in connexion with a hymn which is interpreted 
as an expiation for the somewhat venial fault of marrying before an elder 
brother, a fact on which is based the theory of Max Muller,® which Henry 
inclines to approve, that Trta is the departing sun. On the model of Pusan is 
created the god Susan, from su^ ‘ beget *, who is invoked to secure safe delivery.® 

One direct addition to our knowledge of the ordinary sacrificial ritual is 
made by the Atharvaveda, wliich in its last, late, book has a section of hymns 
styled collectively Kuntapa.^® The contents of this collection is very varied, 
but it includes several riddles, in part obscene, as well as a panegyric of a 
king : doubtless we must assume that these are fragments of popular 

merriment in connexion with sacrificial rites which have been stereotyped. 

In the sacrificial ritual, however, the most interesting of the innovations 
of the Atharvavedins is the introduction of rites regarding the presentation 
of the presents claimed by the priests. Instead of mere appendices to the 
actual offering, these become in themselves offerings of the highest importance 
and value.^® The other ritual texts know of Savas as consecrations for various 
rites of importance, but in the Kau9ika the Sava is essentially the ceremony 


^ AV. xi. 9, 10 ; xvi. 21-6. 

^ AV. x-xil, p. 164 r on Namuci, Meoue 
critique^ xxxii. 499. 

® Atharvaveda^ p. 75. 

^ Cf. Kau 9 .xxviii. 1 ff. ; Bloomfield, SBE. 
xlii. 374 ; Weber, SBA. 1896, p. 684 n. 

® AV. V. 7 ; Kau 9 . , xviii. 13-15. Cf. 
Vicvaiit, TrayamaUa, Kalyani, Sarva- 
' vid (AV. vi. 107). 

® Henry (La magic dans rinde antique, 
pp. 160 ff.), however, prefers, with 
Speijer, to see in Nirrti a parallel of 
Nerthus (cf. Helm, Altgerm, ReL i. 
311 ff.) and a goddess of earth. 

’ AV. vi. 113. 1. 

® Cf. Henry, op. ciL, p. 215. 

« AV. i. 11 ; Bloomfield, SBE. xlii. 242 ff. 

AV. x:s. 127-136 ; see Bloomfield, Atkar- 
vaveda, pp. 96-101; AB. vi. 32 ff.; 


KB. XXX. 5 n. ; xii. 14-16. 

“ Perhaps two : that in praise of Kaurama, 
King of the Ilu 9 amas (xx. 127. 1-3), is 
a Nara 9 ansi clearly, and xx. 127. 7-10, 
which praise Fariksit, seem to deal 
with an earthly king, not merely with 
Agni. The Nara 9 ansis, like the Dana- 
stutis, form one of the germs of the 
epic ; their inaccuracy is recognized in 
KS. xiv. 15 ; TB. i. 3. 2. 6. 

Possibly a reflex of popular quarrels is the 
name Kanva given to a demon, which 
devours the embryo in the womb (AV. 
ii. 25). 

Bloomfield, p. 78. Per contra, 

the simpler and more naive Danastutis 
disappear (save in AV. xx. 127). 
e.g. TB. ii. 7, 

Ix-lxviii. 



Chap. 22] 


401 


The Magic Sacrifice 

wMch centres in the giving of largesse to the priests. The Atharvaveda has 
many hymns in connexion with these donations, two ^ of which are noteworthy 
in connecting an ordinary Soma rite with the formal preparation and cooking 
of porridge for the priests, one preparer boasting that he is the fifteenth of his 
line who has performed the operation : in other cases animals are the fees, and 
are extolled in the most exaggerated terms as divine : the goat ^ recalls Aja 
Ekapad, that faded mythological figure of the Rigveda. In another ® case 
a house is taken to pieces and presented to the Brahman. A counterpart to 
these demands for fees is the stress laid on the sacred character of the Brahman : 
his wife is inviolable : nay Soma has made over to him his claim to the 
first mating with every woman.^ His cow ® is equally sacrosanct, and on the 
strength of his own sanctity he can demand, when such a portent as the birth 
of twin calves takes place, that the erring cow should be made over to him 
as alone fitted to be its master.® 


§ 9 . Yoga Practices 


The ritual, as has been seen, both in the case of magic and of the sacrifice, 
is full of elements which appear systematized in the later Yoga philosophy 
and practice. But it would be a mistake to exaggerate the degree of corre- 
spondence, and in point of fact much that is later cha!*f».cteristic and essential 
is lacking in the earlier Vedic literature.’^ In special hardly any trace can be 
found of the importance later attaching to elaborate regulation of the breath, 
despite the fact that the division of the breaths or vital airs as five is early. 
The suggestion that the term gusma is a word with ecstatic implications is 
wholly implausible. The inducing of perspiration as a part of the Diksa and as 
a means of exciting ecstasy is clear, but it does not appear as a distinct or 
important rite as with the Scythians of Herodotos or the aborigines of North 
America or Australia. Nor do we find any clear reference to the various 
sitting postures familiar to the later Yoga, for it is absurd to believe that the 
sense ‘ altar if it ever really belongs to the obscure term Dhisana, owes its 
origin to the fact that by his posture at the place of sacrifice the priest beholds 
the might {dhisana) of the gods. The mysterious Uttanapad of the Rigveda ® 
as a cosmic power cannot with any plausibility be deemed to yield a proof 
of the practice of assuming the position of an embryo in the womb as a means 
of attaining mystic rebirth. That silence and solitude were conducive to 
ecstasy is, curiously enough, little referred to, and the dirt of both person and 
garments of the later Yogin is recognized only in a few hints.^ There is more 
evidence of fasting, and the hymn of Lopamudra and Agastya in the Rigveda 


^ AV. xi. 1 ; xii. 3. 

* AV. ix. 5 ; a barren cow, x. 10 ; a bull, ix. 

4 ; a draught ox, iv. 11. 

^ AV. ix. 3. 

* AV. V. 17 ; against oppressors are pro- 

vided V. 18, 19 ; xii. 5. 

» AV. V. 11 ; xii. 5. 

6 [h.o.s* 32] 


« AV. iii. 28 ; cf. Kau?. cix-cxi. 

’ J. W. Hauer (Die Anfdnge der Yogapraxis 
im alien Indien, pp. 9-65) adduces all 
available evidence, but most of it is 
obviously without value. 

» X. 72. 

• RV. X. 136. 2. 


“ i, 179. 



402 


Vedic Ritual 


[Part HI 


appears, despite its obsctirity, to express the two kindred ideas of the magic 
potency engendered by continence on the one hand, and on the other of the 
cosmic importance of the rite of generation, both doctrines of the later system.^ 
The idea of a mystic union between the god and the worshipper, which finds its 
highest development in the ^akti cults of Bengal, appears wholly unknown 
to Vedic literature,® and dancing as a means of producing ecstasy is never 
mentioned, though the gods as dancers’ may be a relic of the conception. The 
songs, and their musical accompaniments, together with the ritual exclama* 
tions which are preserved in the Song-books of the Samaveda, may have 
served a similar purpose; sound may often have accomplished results of 
spiritual excitement irrespective of the words, and the term Vipra, used of the 
poet, seems to suggest the trembling or quaking of divine inspiration.® 

More important than these facts is the striking description of the Muni 
found in one late Rigveda hymn.^ He differs entirely from the Brahman 
student or the man undergoing consecration, for his ecstasy is not connected 
either with the sacrifice or with any of the rites ancillary to it or to the entry 
of the youth into the full life of the community. His mortal body men see, 
but he himself fares on the path of the Apsarases, the Gandharvas, the beasts 
of the wild, he dwells in the east and the western ocean, the steed of Vata, 
the friend of Vayu, inspired by the gods. He knows secret desires, he is the 
dearest friend, he supports Agni and both the worlds, he is the heaven and the 
light, and his ecstasy, it seems, is due to a potent draught which, with Rudra, 
he drinks from a goblet, perhaps a reference to the use of some poison to pro- 
duce exhilaration or hypnosis.® His hair is long, his soiled garments are of 
yellow hue. 

This description is curiously isolated in the Rigveda and later, not un- 
naturally, since this aspect of religious life does not fall within the normal 
outlook of our texts. In the Atharvaveda,® however, we find the curious and 
enigmatical figure of the Vratya, exalted into a cosmic power, and therefore 
of obscure origin. It has been suggested that we are to find in him the type of 
Yogin, produced in the eastern lands under the aegis of the ETsatriyas, who 
wandered about the country, received with friendship in the courts, bringing 
prosperity in his train by reason of his ecstatic practices, in which a part was 
taken by the hetaera, who is made part of his retinue, and the Magadha whose 
loud cries doubtless played a part in his rites. The suggestion is ingenious, 
but unfortunately it lacks any probative value. The references to the year 
long standing of the Vratya and his other actions are too indistinct to enable 
us to discern with any certainty the outlines of an ancient seeker after ecstatic 
trances, and the elaboration of his retinue, though it may be paralleled in other 
lands, ^ is strange to Indian usage. 

^ Hathayogapradipika, i, 61 ff, ; iii. 83 ff. ® Cf. AV. ii. 27 {pdtd) ; SO 4, 5 

» RV. i. 164, 15 cannot thus be explained. (fana, hemp). 

* Cf. Vates ; Carnoy, Les Jndo^Europiens, * xv. 

p. 213 ; Paton, Spiritism, pp. 82 ff. ’ Apuleins, Metam, viii. 27 f, is cited by 

* X. 136. Cf. Arbman, Rudra, pp. 267 ff. Hauer (op, cit„ p. 177). 



PART IV. THE SPIRITS OF THE DEAD 

CHAPTER 23 
THE ABODES OF THE DEAD 
§ 1. The Nature of the Bead 

It is not altogether easy to derive from the Rigveda a precise conception 
of the nature which was attributed to the spirits of the dead by the mind of the 
people or of the priest, and it is natural to assume that the ground for this 
difficulty is to be traced to the variation of both popular and ecclesiastical 
opinion. The modern view of the spirits and their abode is extremely varied 
and confused, and it would be ill-judged to assume that it was otherwise in 
the earlier Vedic religion. 

Long before the period of the Rigveda, it is clear that the Indian had 
realized the difference between life and death and had separated in his 
imagination the two elements of the man, his body and his spirit,^ but the dis- 
tinction must have been vague in the extreme.^ Of the spirit as distinct 
from the body we have two expressions which occur frec}uently enough to let 
us believe that their meaning was more or less definitely known : of these the 
first was what we would regard as physical, but what doubtless seemed just 
as psychical to the Vedic India as any other aspect of the spirit : it is the asu,^ 
life, which seems clearly to have been based on the conception of the breath of 
the man, which is the visible sign of life and intellect : later, but not in the 
Rigveda, the term Atm.an, the breath, is the most characteristic term for the 
self, and the breaths, Pranas, are a constant subject of investigation in the 
Upanisads, where often they appear as essentially representing the life and 
spirit of man. The identification of breath and the asu is made formally 
in the ^atapatha Brahmana,^ but this fact is of much less importance than 
the clear indications of the Rigveda. The other term is, unlike asu, which 
never in later times became an expression of any philosophical importance, 
one which never loses a place in the thought of India, though it does not 
achieve the rank of the Atman. It is Manas, the mind, which in later Indian 

^ Passages like RV. x. 16. 3 ; AB. ii. 6. 13 * This is illustrated in detail in Tuxen’s 

clearly do not imply ignorance of this Forestillingen om Sjcelen i Rigveda, but 

faOt, which is clearly revealed in many is notorious, see Hopkins, Origin of 

passages, e. g. RV. x. 14. 8 ; 16. 5. The Religion, p. 112. 

idea of many souls in the individual * RV. i. 113. 16 ; 140. 8 ; Oldenberg, Rel, 
appears in philosophical form in the des Veda*, pp. 525, 526 ; for Avestan, 

doctrines of sheaths of the soul in TU, anhu, Geiger, Ostiran, KuUur, p. 290. 

ii, 4. Cf. Hopkins, Origin of Religion, * vi, 6. 2. 6 ; ii. 4. 2. 21. 
pp. 109 ff. 

6 * 



404 


[Partn 


The Spirits of the Dead 

thought is of importance as the means of knowledge of all internal events,' 
and a necessary link in the knowledge of external events en route from the 
senses. The conception of the Rigveda is seen clearly in the case ® when the 
mind of a senseless person is said to have gone away to Yama, the lord of the 
dead, to sky and earth, to the sea and the mountains, to the sun and the dawn. 
It is also probable that the conception later prevalent that the mind has its 
abode in the heart was already developed : ® the connexion of mind and heart 
is not rare in the Rigveda. The further view that the mind had the dimensions 
of a pigmy or a thumb in si 2 e, which is found said of the Purusa as the prin- 
ciple of life in the Upanisads and often later, is not to be proved for the period 
of the Rigveda.^ 

Naturally enough there is abundant evidence of the simple views whici: 
suggest the theory of the spirit : the phenomena of loss of the senses, which is 
recorded in the Rigveda, is also recorded of the ancient Bhrgu, who in this 
condition went to the other world and had experiences of interest there.' 
The view that in the case of a dream the soul might be outside the body anc 
moving about freely at will, which is a common belief of many peoples, is 
proved by the reference to such a case in the ^atapatha Brahmana,® whici 
warns us of the danger of waking the sleeper too hurriedly, lest the soul shoulc 
thus fail to find its way back into the body. It appears also that dreams 
about the dead were deemed to be due to the souls of the dead moving thus 
about. At least this belief would explain the fact that, on going away frorr 
a festival for the dead, the partaker in the rite should rub himself with the 
Apamarga plant and ask it to wipe away evil dreams.*^ The danger of the 
spirit escaping through yawning seems suggested by the rule that in such £ 
case one should say, ^ In me be strength and wisdom The shadow also is 
here and there found as being in some way connected with man : if one cannol 
see his reflection it is an omen of death, and the reflection of one whose mine 
is gone can be used in a spell to restore his mind to him.^ All these elements 
can be supposed to have been steadily at work in Vedic India, and the resuli 
is the conception of the spirit as some more or less impalpable substance. I1 
is not asu entirely nor mind : it is also breath, and it is very often regarded as 


^ C. Rhys Davids, Buddhist Manual of 
Psychological Ethics^, pp. Ixxxvff. ; 
Keith, Indian Logic and Atomism, pp. 
243-7. 

® X, 58 ; cf. Feist, Kultur der Indogermanen, 
p. 323. 

® RV. viii. 100. 5. For the later view see 
AV.vi.18.3 ; AGS.iii.6.8 ; Windisch, 
BSGW. 1891, pp. 163 ff.; C. Rhys 
Davids, Buddhist Manual of Psycho^ 
logical Ethics^, pp. Ixxxvi ff. 

* Oldenberg, Bel. des Veda^, p. 525 ; cf. 

BAU. iv. 3. 14 ; Katha Up. iv. 12. 

* Oertel, JAOS. xv. 234. On the legend of 


Subandhu’s loss of soul and its recovery 
see JB. iii. 168-70 ; PB. xii. 12. 5 
Oertel, JAOS. xviii.41 ; Macdonell anc 
Keith, Vedic Index, i. 47 ; RV. x. 57-60 
« xiv. 7. 1. 12. 

^ fB. xiii. 8. 4. 4. 

® TS. ii. 5. 2. 4 ; cf. Pease, CP. xi. 429-44 
* TS. vi. 6. 7. 2 ; HGS. i. 11. 6. For th< 
shadow see also LfS. iii. 3. 6 ; AfS. v 
19. 5 ; ApQS, xiii. 14. 3 ; AV. xiii, 1 
56 (v. 19. 9 is wrongly so interpreted b;< 
Brunnhofer, Arische Urzeit, pp. 258 ff.) 
Frazer, Taboo, pp. 77 ff. ; von Negelein 
Archiv /. Beligionstvissenschafi, v. 18 ff 



Chap. 23] 


The Nature of the Dead 


405 


asu and mind : ^ or it appears as mind or as asu^ as in the frequent phrase 
asuntii, ‘ asu leading which is applied both to the process by which the 
spirits are led from the earth to their home in the sky, and the reverse pro- 
cess by which they are brought back by Agni, as the conveyer of souls, from 
the heaven in which they live to the offerings made to them on earth. It is, 
however, of importance that mind is assumed to be with the spirit when it is 
away from the body : the Fathers of the Vedic creation are thus creatures who 
are perfectly gifted for intellectual action of all kind, to know, to perceive, 
to enjoy, and to will. But the view as to exactly what it was which departed 
at death was never quite clearly settled by the thought of India : the Upani- 
sads inclined to regard it as the Atman, the Buddhist in one view as con- 
sciousness, Vijhana,® and later there developed more precise views of the 
psychic apparatus which transmigrated, but the views of the populace were 
probably as vague as those of Vedic India itself. 

But it would be an error to assume that the body was left for ever at death : 
this might seem to be the logical view, but it is not the view of the Vedic 
Indian, as it has not been the view of many different classes of men. The 
care expressed in the Rigveda ^ itself for the avoidance of injury to the body 
of the dead, which was to be burned, by a bird or other beast, is confirmed by 
the express injunction to the dead that he has in the next world to unite 
himself with his body. The same idea is expressed in the Atharvaveda,^ 
which treats as in the next world the body, the asu^ the mind, the limbs, and 
the sap all uninjured, and the Fathers are entreated to secure that the bones 
which have been placed out of order shall all be placed in due arrangement. 
This unquestionably is the regular view in the Veda : the alternative view 
once found in the Rigveda,® which sends the eye of the dead to the sun, the 
breath to the wind, bids him go to the heaven and the earth, or if he prefers 
to the waters, and to dwell among the plants with his members, cannot be 
treated as more than a mere deviation of no great consequence for the general 
view of Vedic religion. The connexion of the eye and the sun is also seen in 
the Purusasukta, where the sacrifice of the primeval giant results in the sun 
being created from his eye. The concrete character of the entity which is left 
in the heaven is proved by the fact that the Fathers are always addressed, 
when mentioned individually, by their own names : there is no such thing 
as an invocation of the spirit of any individual. He himself continues 
Ms life. 

^ AV. viii. 1. 1, 15 ; 2. 26 ; v. 30. 1 ; viii. Buddha's Gehurty pp. 37 ff. ; Keith, 

1. 7 ; 2. 3. Buddhist Philosophy ^ pp. 6 ff. 

* RV. X. 15. 14 ; 16. 2. * x. 16. 6 ; 14. 8 ; 16. 5. Hauer’s reference 

® Oldenberg, Buddha^y p. 308. For the {Die Anfdnge der Yogapraxis im alien 

Atman in the Samjfiana, see QB. xiv. Indien, pp. 97, 108) of x. 16 to an 

7. 2. 3 ; BAU. iv. 4. 2. Strictly speaking initiatory ceremony is impossible, 

the aggregate of the Skandhas is the ® xiv. 2. 24. 

transmigrating element ; Windisch, ® x. 16. 3, So of the victim, AB. ii. 6. 13. 



406 


The Spirits of the Dead 


[Part nr 


§ 2. The Places of the Dead 

The chief place of the dead in the conception of the Rigveda ^ is unques- 
tionably heaven : the soul leaves the body on death, and by the path of the 
Fathers it goes to the place where there is eternal light, endowed with lustre 
like that of the gods.^ It is said to go as by a car or by wings : ® more com- 
pletely the Atharvaveda ^ pictures the dead man as borne up by the Mamts, 
with gentle breezes fanning him, and cooled by showers until he recovers his 
complete body, and meets with the Fathers in the highest heaven, where 
with Yama they dwell. The heaven is called also the home,® but the idea can 
hardly be pressed to the view that the going to heaven is a return home : it is 
rather that the man reaches in the highest heaven a new and abiding abode. 
The connexion of this journey of the souls with the actual burning of the body 
is always a vague one, but the reality of the connexion of soul and body is 
proved by the emphasis laid in the Brahmanas ® on the necessity for the due 
collection of the bones of the dead, and the need of replacing them symbolically 
in cases where they may happen to be lost. 

Another conception of the nature of death is hinted at in the legend of the 
dogs of Yama,7 the four-eyed, a term probably derived from the presence of 
some mark on the dog which gave the appearance of four eyes,® brindled, 
broad-nosed, dogs which wander about and guard the path or sit on it : 
the spirit is bidden to haste past the dogs, and to join the Fathers with Yama. 
Delighting in lives, they watch men and serve as messengers of Yama, and 
are entreated to grant continued enjoyment of life. It is possible that they 
were conceived as going among men, and taking to the abode of death the 
souls of the dead. The Avestan parallel is one dog, which four-eyed and yeliow- 
eared watches the head of the Cinvat bridge ® which reaches from this to the 
next world, and by his barking scares away the fiends, who would hinder the 
passing of the souls of the just dead. In the Bigveda there is no clear evidence 
to any such functions of the dogs as the dividers out of souls as good or bad : 
the suggestion of Roth^® and Aufrecht that this was their function is based on 
interpretations, which are not very probable, and at any rate are uncertain. 
In the Atharvaveda the messengers of Yama appear already as plural as well 
as dual. Any possibility of holding that they had duties of discrimination 


^ ix. 113. 7 ff. is the Mlest description. 

* AV. xi. 1, 37, 

» AV. iv. 34. 4 ; VS. xviii. 52. 

* xviii. 2. 21-6. 

® RV. X. 14. 8. 

* 5B. xi. 6. 3. 11 ; xiv. 6. 9. 28. 

’ BV. X. 14. 10-12 ; AV. xviii. 2. 12 ; vui. 

1. 9 ; JB. i. 6 (Cabala and CySiua). 

® Cf. Hommel, Festschrift Kuhn, p, 422. 

» No bridge exists in the HV. (ix. 41 . 2 is not 
a reference to this) nor is there a river 
(x.63. 10) : Scherman, Vinonslitteratur, 


pp. 110, 111. For the Avesta see Moul- 
ton, Early Zoroastrianism, pp. 165, 383, 
n. 4. Later the soul ofthe bull slain by 
Mithra is guarded by his hound on its 
ascent to heaven, with which the dog of 
the horse sacrifice may be compared. 

“ Based on RV. vii. 55. 2-5; Aufirecht, 
jfnd. Stud, iv. 841 ; IVeber, xviii. 
20 ; Oldenberg, ^tgoeda*Noten, ii. 42. 
Bloomfield also (on AV. iv. 5) rejects 
this view. 

w viii. 2, 11 ; 8. 11 ; v. 80. 6. 



Chap. 23] The Places of the Dead 407 

would of course disappear if they were to be regarded as being really the sun 
and the moon, as is argued by Bloomfield (the day and the night in the 
Jaiminiya Brahmana),^ or the doubles of Yama and Yami, which was the view 
of Bergaigne,® but it is difiicult to go beyond the view that the imagination 
of the Indo-Iranians and, if the identification — doubtful in the extreme — 
of Qabala and Kerberos ^ is to be accepted, probably of the Indo-Europeans 
also, believed that the way to the sky was guarded or infested by a dog or dogs. 

The nature of the heaven which is attained by the spirits is described 
repeatedly in the Rigveda : ^ it is further elaborated in the later Samhitas, but 
all its characteristics are the same : there is light, the sun for the highest 
waters, every form of happiness, the Svadha, which is at once ® the food of the 
spirits, and the power which they win by it, their self-determination. The 
spirits are so material as not merely to enjoy the most material things. Soma, 
milk, honey, Sura, ghee, but also to delight in the joys of love,® a fact indicating 
how corporeal was their nature. The sound of singing and the flute is also 
among the delights available, and there is a fig-tree where Yama drinks with 
the gods.^ There are wish-cows, which yield all desires, and there is perfect 
harmony and joy unbounded. The picture is singularly simple : it is merely 
the pleasant things of earth to the priestly imagination, heaped upon one 
another : the total absence of an 5 rthing which could be regarded as natural 
in the heaven of warriors is a striking reminder that the conceptions of Vedic 
India, in so far as they are within reach of our knowledge, were the ideas of 
priests and not of the whole community. The idea thus presented prevailed 
throughout the Vedic periods : even in the Brahmanas among speculations of 
various sorts, it is often §aid that men obtain unity with the sun, which 
clearly means that he goes to dwell in the heaven of the sun where are the 
Fathers, the gods, and above all Yama. 

Yama it is whom, with Varupa, the new arrival in the realms of heaven 
sees. He is closely connected with Agni, and also with Matari 9 van : his is the 


^ JAOS, XV. 163 ff. ; Cerberus, the dog of 
Hades {1905) ; Hillebrandt, Ved.Myih,, 
p. 155. 

* Beh VM. i. 93. Arbman^lZtidra, pp. 258 ff.) 

makes them refined versions of therio- 
morphic death demons. Cf. the 
alleged wolf of death in RV, ii. 29. 6 
(Scherman, Visionslitteratur, p. 127). 
See Hopkins, Origin of Religion, p. 33, 
n. 1, and for German wolves who eat 
the dead. Helm, Altgenn. Bel. i. 209 ff. 

* Rohde, Psyche, i. 280. 

*RV.x. 14-16; 27.21; 56.1; 107.2; 154.5; 

i. 109. 7 ; 125. 6 ; AV. iv. 34. 2-6 ; xi. 
4 ; iil. 29. 3 ; vi. 120. 3 ; MS. i. 10. 18 ; 

ii. 8. 9, &c. ; fB. xi. 5. 6. 4 ; xiv. 7. 1. 
32, 33 ; Kaus, i. 4. It is the highest of 
the heavens ; RV. x. 14. 8 ; AV. xi. 4. 


11 ; ix. 5. 1, 8 ; xviii. 2. 48 ; 4. 3 ; the 
sun, RV. X. 107. 2 ; 154.5. 

® RV. iv. 26. 4 ; Oldenberg, Bel. des Veda?, 
p. 531, n. 3. 

» AV. iv. 84. 2 ; TB. ii. 4. 6. 6 ; ^B. x. 4. 4. 
4 ; Kaus. i. 4. Their bodies are freed 
from all bodily defects ; AV. iii. 28. 5 ; 
vi. 120. 3. 

' RV. X. 135. 1 ; cf. AV. v. 4. 3. In Kaus. 
i. 3 it is called the Ilya or Ilpa tree, and 
we hear of the Vijara stream, the 
Salajya city, the Aparajita palace, 
&c., in the world of Brahman : cf. CU. 
viii. 5. 3. It is implausible to see any 
mythological importance in this tree, 
which seems merely the reflex of the tree 
of the Indian village, under which sit 
the elders. Cf. above, p. 172, n. 2. 



408 


[Part IV 


The Spirits of the Dead 

third heaven, the other two being Savitr’s, and his is the highest,^ the abode 
of the snn which he gives to men. He does so because he was the first of 
mortals who died, and who found out the way for many to the realm, where now 
he reigns rather than rules as king. In the later Samhitas ^ his connexion with 
death, which is his path already on the Rigveda,® and with which he may even 
be identified there, is more and more emphasized : he is connected with 
Antaka, ‘ the ender Mrtyu, ‘ death ’, and Nirrti, ‘ dissolution ’, and Mrtyu is 
his messenger as well as his two, or more, dogs. But he is also the father of 
men with his sister Yami, who bids him in a dialogue of much interest commit 
incest with her for the creation of the race, a view which Yama on moral 
grounds reprobates in the hymn.^ In the Avesta Yama is the king of 
a distant paradise on earth, the lord of a golden age where no heat or cold or 
defects exist. He has, though not in the Avesta, a sister Yimeh from whom 
with him men are sprung. It is tempting to see in him the king first of a 
golden age, and then of a realm of the spirits of the heroes of that age, the 
E-sis mentioned with him as makers of the way to the world to come, as 
Oldenberg suggests, but the evidence hardly avails to establish this. For 
India and Iran, however, he is beyond doubt the first of mortals, and therefore 
also the first to die. The view that he is more than that, a faded divinity, 
whether Agni as held by Bergaigne,® or the sun, as Barth ® thought, or, as 
Weber suggested, the parting day, Yami being then night in whose gloom 
may be seen sorrow for Yama, or the setting sun and so the lord of the dead, as 
taken by Max Muller, ^ is not necessary and is not supported by any decisive 
evidence : still less plausible is the effort of Hillebrandt ^ to find in him the 
moon as the mortal child of the sun, even if as hejholds this conception was 
indeed Indo-Iranian, but no longer a living belief in Vedic times. The effort 
to remove Yami from the tradition and to see in Yama the alter ego of the 
living man, his soul, is clearly contrary to the whole of the Vedic and the 
Avestan evidence. 

Yama, however, and Varuna also do not appear as active in the work of 
controlling the world of the dead : as the great god, Varuna’ s place is there, 

^ RV, i. 35. 6 ; x. 135.7 ; VS. xii. 63. ^ Oldenberg, UeL des Veda^, p. 533 ; cf. 

® MS. ii. 5. 6 ; VS. xxxix. 13 ; AV. v. 30. Moulton, Early Zoroastrianism^ pp. 144 

12 ; xviii. 2. 27 ; v. 24. 13 (lord of ff. To distinguish two Yamas (Hille- 

Manes). Arbman (Rudra, p. 306, n. 2) brandt, Ved, Myth,^ p. 155) is quite 

seeks to prove that Yama is idealized impossible, 

in the RV, but wrongly ; in TS. iii. 3. 8. * ReL Vid. i. 89. 

3, there is no distinction between hell * Rel, of Ind„ pp. 22, 23. 

and heaven, and Yama is lord of earth ’ Ved. Beitr., 1894, pp. 1 ff. For Yama as 
(TS. iii. 4. 5 ; V. 2. 3. 1) as first of men. a man, see Bloomfield, Eel, of Veda, 

TA. iv. 37 and QB. xi. 6. 1. 1 ff. prove p. 105. 

nothing for his original nature. His is ® Anthr. Rel., pp. 297, 298 ; Ehni, Yama, 
clearly a case of syncretism of different p. 8 ; Carnoy, JAOS. xxxvi. 317. 

views of death. Cf. Rhys, Celtic * Fed.M2/^^.i.394ff.; (Ki. Ausg.),pp. 151ff. 
Heathendom, pp. 654 ff. Indog. Myth. i. 229 ff. See also below, 

® i. 38. 5 ; 165. 4. Appendix B. 



Chap. 23] 


409 


The Places of the Dead 

perhaps too as the god to whom cries proceed for pardon from sin, but neither 
god is said to punish the dead or judge them for their sins. The idea of judge- 
ment of any sort is foreign to the Rigveda as to early Iran, and it is only in 
the Taittiriya Aranyaka ^ that we have the express statement that the truth- 
ful and the untruthful are separated before Yama, but his activity in this 
separation is in no wise indicated, and the idea of the weighing of the deeds of 
man on his arrival in the other world, which is prominent in the Avesta, is only 
found in the ^atapatha Brahmana ^ in a passage of speculative activity. 
What the dead obtain in heaven is not only long life there by the gift of the 
mercy of the gods : they obtain the merit of the Istapurta, the sacrifices 
which they have offered, and the gifts which they have given to the priest,® 
and at the same time they are nourished by the piety of their relatives on 
earth, as they have nourished in their turn their forefathers. Such nourish- 
ment may be either buried with them, when the grains of corn and sesame 
will become wish-cows and their calves in the heaven, or may be conveyed by 
the later offerings.^ It is not a very distant step to the idea of the Buddhists ® 
that souls which are miserable can be aided by the gift to monks in their name, 
and the assignment to them of the merit thus acquired. 

The other side of the belief in heaven is the belief in hell. It is of course 
in itself perfectly possible that the Vedic Indian might not have believed in 
the existence of hell : the view that annihilation might be the fate of the souls 
which did not receive the boon of immortal life from the gods is not in itself 
absurd, but a hell is a natural complement to heaven, and in point of fact the 
Rigveda ® itself seems to contain references to a place of punishment, into 
which Indra and Soma are to hurl the evil doers so that not , one can emerge ; 
under the three earths is the place of the enemy and robber, and the demoness 
is to disappear in endless abysses. There occurs here and in a few other places 
the idea of the eternal punishment in a place of deep darkness of the evil.’ 
The idea of hell is made clear by the Atharvaveda ® which has the word 
Naraka Loka in contrast to Svarga, heaven, as the place for female goblins 
and sorceresses : it is also the place of the murderer,® and appears as black. 


vi. 5. 13. The references in the RV. are 
not probable (Scherman, Fmons- 
litteratur, pp. 152, 153), despite x. 12. 8. 
The royal assessors of Yama (AV. iii. 29. 
1) are merely transferred from human 
relations as receivers of tribute from 
the good deeds of the dead, as kings on 
earth from their subjects’ goods. Yama 
as the hare in the moon appears in 
JB. i. 28, but merely because the moon 
is the abode of the dead. 

* xi. 2. 7. 33 ; cf. xii. 9. 1. 1, and for 

separation by lire, i. 9. 3. 2. 

» RV. X. 14. 8. 

* AV. xviii. 4. 32 if. ; iv. 34 ; Kau 9 . Ixvi. 6. 
® Cf. B. C. Law, The Buddhist Conception of 


Spirits. Kaus. i. 4 recognizes the trans- 
fer to relatives and foes respectively of 
a man’s good and evil deeds on death. 

® Punishment is denied by Roth, JAOS. 
iii. 329-47 ; Weber, ZDMG. ix.238, 239 ; 
it is generally accepted now : Scherman, 
Visionslitteratur, pp. 122 ff. ; Hopkins, 
Bel. of Indittf p. 147 ; Oldenberg, Bel. 
des Veda^, pp. 536 flf. ; Zimmer, 
Altindisches Leben, p. 417 ; Macdonell, 
Ved. Myth., p. 169. 

’ RV. vii. 104. 3, 17, 11 ; ii. 29. 6 ; ix. 73. 
8, 9 ; iv. 5. 5. 

® xii. 4. 36 ; Whitney, JAOS. xiiz. p. civ. 

* VS. XXX. 5. For Iran cf. Moulton, Early 
Zoroastrianism, pp. 172 ff. 



410 


[Partly 


The Spirits of the Dead 

blind or the lowest darkness.^ There is no trace of the fires of hell, nor of a 
wolf of hell in the Vedic literature,® nor can the view of Geldner ® that the 
word Vici in the Rigveda ^ directly denotes hell be accepted ; but there is 
reason enough to hold that the idea was present in germ. The actual tortures 
of hell are reserved for later texts in the main, and are dwelt on by Buddhism 
in a way to make us realize that on the popular mind these horrors had due 
result. In the Atharvaveda ® the sinners who injure the Brahman sit in 
streams of blood eating hair, and in the ^atapatha Brahmana ® and the 
Jaiminiya the proud Bhrgu goes to the other world, where he sees many horrible 
things such as men being cut to pieces, and men being eaten, and also the lord 
of the place as a black man with a staff and yellow eyes beside two maidens, 
one fair and one, described by an epithet atikalydnl, as either ‘ very fair ^ or 
‘ past her beauty The Jaiminiya mentions three hells and three heavens. 
Another horror is suggested by the Kausitaki Brahmana,*^ which threatens 
man with being eaten in the next world by the animals which he devoured in 
this, unless he adopts a certain ritual practice of special potency. The idea of 
punishment or reward according to one’s deeds is constantly expressed in 
the ^atapatha Brahmana® under diverse forms, but it appears rather as 
a philosophical doctrine brought out to explain the operation of the universe 
than as a popular belief. The Vedic view is clearly far other than this : 
the great majority of men believed themselves to be good and destined to 
the joys of heaven, but they did not regard these joys as making earth less 
desirable. The normal attitude of the whole of the Vedic religion, down to the 
very end of the period of the Brahmanas, is that it is a good thing to behold 
the light of the sun, and to live a hundred years, for which prayers and spells 
alike are earnestly resorted to, and that, at the end of the life one attains, 
there will be another, if different yet analogous, life in the world to come 
with the same pleasures as on earth, but without the disadvantages of human 
imperfection. 

As compared with the clear conception of the dwelling of the spirit in the 
highest heaven or in hell, there is little trace in the Vedic literature of the more 
simple and perhaps more primitive conception ® which regards the dead as 
dwelling in the earth, whether actually in the place of burial, or in the under 


^ AV. ii. 14. 8 j V. 30. 11 ; xviii. 3. 3 ; viii. 
2. 24 is like BV. x. 152. 4, dubious. 

* Oldenberg, BeL des Veda\ pp. 539, 540, 

against Scherman (ii. 29. 6, wolf ; iv. 
5. 4 ; vii. 59. 8, fires of hell). 

® JFesigmss an W^er, p. 22. 

* X. 10. 6. 

® V. 19. 

* xl. 6. 1 ; JB. i. 42-44 in JAOS. xv. 234-8. 

That the man is Yama is unproved ; 
for the Tidrakdlk, see JB. i. 825. 

^ xi. 3. 

* vi. 2. 2. 27 ; x, 6. 3. 1 ; Weber, ZDMG. ix. 


237 ff. Flames or a scale determine 
their merit, fB. x. 9. 3. 2 ; xi. 2. 7. 83, 
both apparently speculative doctrines. 
In JUB. iv. 26 the organs of man are 
speculatively made ten heavens or 
hells (narakdh). In JUB. i. 5 a deity, 
perhaps Rudra (above, Chap. 9, § 10), 
keeps back the evil, but is answered by 
the assertion that the god saw what he 
did and really did it, since he else would 
not have allowed him to act; an 
interesting, but obscure doctrine. 

• Cf. Bhys, Celtic Heathendom, pp. 657 f. 



Chap. 23] 


411 


The Places of the Dead 

world. The idea that the dead man^s spirit went to the sky is not in the 
slightest degree essentially bound up with the burning by fire, for the Rig- 
veda^ expressly places both the Fathers, who have been burnt, and those who 
have not been burnt, as dwelling in the heaven, and there is no hint of any 
contrary view in Yedic literature. But undoubtedly here and there the idea 
is to be seen that the burning by the fires was the moment of the passage of the 
sotil to the sky : of this the best proof is the doctrine of Agvalayana ® that the 
place attained by the spirit depends on the nature of the fire, which first seizes 
the corpse when the body is set on the bier within the reach of fires derived 
from the sacred three fires. But this example in itself is not in the slightest 
degree a proof that it was the fire which sent the spirit to heaven : it is only 
a natural, but not primitive, view, as is shovm by the mere fact that it depends 
on the use of the three fires, which the average householder could not dream of 
maintaining. The real view was doubtless less complicated, and in the same 
passage it9valayana presents us with a difierent idea : a pit, knee deep, is to 
be dug north-east of the Ahavaniya fire, a water plant, QipSla, is put there, and 
with the smoke the soxd thence goes to the heaven. This latter view, which 
looks at the earth as the place of the dead, is also supported by various other 
considerations. When a man is near to death, a spell is used to bring him from 
the lower to the upper earth to the protection of Aditi, sun and moon.® When 
a pit is dug, as often in the ritual, it is called the place of the Fathers ; what 
is dug down has the Fathers as its deity ; ^ Yama ® even is lord of the earth ; 
the darkness of the abode of the dead is referred to in passages where we cannot 
see any reference to the punishments of hell ; ® a spell of the Atharvaveda ^ 
seeks to send his enemy to the place of Yama ; the dead are mentioned as 
living at the roots of the plants ; the dead man in the fimeral ritual is spoken 
of as being laid to rest in mother earth, which is to be kind to him. The 
path of the gods is often distinguished from the path of the Fathers,® the 
presence of the dogs ® on the way shows that the road was a special one, and 
not the peaceful path of the gods i the door of the heaven is in the north-east, 
that of the world of the Fathers in the south-east,^® a conception which is 
clearly due in part at least to opposition to the world of the gods : the relation 
of the south to the Fathers may be due to the fact that on the shortest day, 
the time of the spirits par excellence, the sun is at the furthest south point in his 
course. The path too appears to be a different one from that of the gods 
since it is described as pravat, which may denote either a downward path as of 
a stream, or, at any rate, a path forward to the horizon, rather than one rising 
erect to the heaven.^® But, if any doubt existed as to the connexion of the 

^ X. 15. 4 ; AV. xviii. 2. 34. ’ ii. 12. 7. 

* AGS. iv. 4. * AV. xviii. 4. 62 ; RV. x. 2. 7 ; 18. 1. 

» AV. viii. 2, 15. • AV. viii. 1. 9, 10. 

* TS. i. 8. 6. 1 ; vi. 8. 4. 2 ; ^B. iii. 6. 1. 18 ; 9B. xiii. 8. 1. 5 ; xii. 7. 8. 7 ; vi. 6. 2. 4. 

V. 2. 1. 7. Kem, Der Buddhismm, i. 859. 

“ PGS. i. 5. 10. “ RV. x. 14. 1 ; AV.vi.28. 8 ; xviii. 4. 7 ; 

* e. g. RV. X. 132. 4. Oldenberg, Bel des Veda^, p. 545 ; 



412 


[Part lY 


The Spirits of the Dead 

spirits with the earth, it would be removed by the descriptions of the ritual of 
the dead, which, though not given in detail in the Brahmanas, are set out at 
length in the Sutras, and must be of great antiquity in their essence.^ The 
gifts for the souls are not sent to them by fire to be conveyed to the sky : 
they are often laid in pits on the earth or upon the earth, in the neighbourhood 
of human dwellings which spirits all the world over are ever supposed to 
haunt : they come to the meal, and sit on the place made ready for them, or 
they find their way into the water-bottle : ^ they take out the heat of the 
food, and leave only the outer substance.^ At the end of the meal they 
are sent away, politely indeed, with the words, ‘ The Fathers have satisfied 
themselves ’, or, as at the Anthesteria in Athens, more directly with, 

‘ Depart, ye Fathers, Soma-loving, on your ancient deep paths ; but return 
a month later to our house to eat the offering, with wealth in offspring, 
in heroes.’ ^ The shaking out of the garment of the offerer is another proof 
of the anxiety to be rid of the ghostly guests.® But it must not for a 
moment be supposed that the belief in the presence of the spirits on earth 
on such occasions was incompatible with the belief in their dwelling in 
the sky : the two beliefs are inextricably confused in the human mind 
at the present day, and have been so confused for centuries, probably for 
thousands of years. 

It is perfectly in keeping with the multitude of ideas regarding the nature 
of the future of the dead which must be produced by our total ignorance of its 
character, that the idea should be found that the newly departed does not 
at once join the congregation of the other ancient dead.® In the first period, 
often for a year after death, the monthly fraddha offerings are not paid to the 
newly dead in the usual form of offerings to father, grandfather, and great 
grandfather : he is offered a separate offering : in this he is not invoked to 
come, doubtless because he is near at hand ; he is not dismissed, but merely 
bidden be at peace ; in place of the prayer that the gifts to the Fathers may be 
theirs for ever, it is merely asked that they may be present for the dead : the 
innovation of some schools in which the offerings to the Fathers were 
supplemented by one to the All-gods, a clear proof that the assimilation of 
Fathers and gods was in progress,"^ is omitted in the case of the offering to one 
who has just died. The distinction is made in the later literature and can 


reference to a stream in the path is 
hinted at in AV, xviii. 4. 7 ; the boat 
in RV. X. 63. 10, is, however, probably 
mythological ; cf. TA. vi. 7. 2 ; 
Scherman, Visionslitteratur, p. 112. In 
Kaus. i. 3 it appears as the Vijara 
stream of perpetual youth. The later 
Vaitarani is not mentioned in the Veda, 
nor does Sarasvati seem to play this role. 

‘ GGS. iv. 2 ff. The authorities are given 
fully in Caland, AUindischer Ahnenkult, 


® Caland, Altind, Ahnenkult, p. 89. 

® Ibid. p. 180. 

* HGS. ii. 13. 2 ; Kau?. Ixxxviii. 28 ; Far- 

nell. Cults, V. 221 

® Kau 9 . Ixxxviii. 27. The mind is similarly 
recalled when it is conceived as min- 
gling with the souls in the feast, VS. iii. 
53 n. ; Kgs. V. 9. 22. 

* Caland, op. dt., pp. 160 ff., 181 . 

’ Ludwig, Rigveda, vi. 196 ; Hillebrandt, 
Ved. Myth. iii. 418. 



Chap. 23] 


413 


The Places of the Dead 

perhaps be traced right back to ^ahkhayana ^ by which the recently dead 
is a Preta, ^ departed ’ spirit, and is distinguished from the Fathers, Pitaras, 
par excellence. It is, however, clear that the view is not that of the Rigveda,^ 
where it is obviously contemplated that the souls join at once the ancient 
Fathers, but it is not necessary to regard it as a later innovation : it is one of 
these divergent views, which may be regarded as a sort of compromise between 
the idea of the soul in heaven and the soul in earth, but which need not have 
been later than the developed view of the soul as in heaven and which also 
need not have been ever generally accepted. It must, further, be remembered 
that the belief in the departure of the soul to the sky cannot be proved to be 
later than the belief in the soul remaining near the body. But it is natural 
to assume that in the earliest view the latter was the attitude of mind adopted, 
before the clear separation of mind and body produced the idea that the mind 
had no need to remain with the body,® and that the soul, at first held to abide 
on earth near or with the body, was gradually conceived as going to the gods 
in the highest sky, while the older view lived on, combining in various 
ways with the new. 

It is probable that in the Indo-Iranian period there had already developed 
the conception of the distinction between the heavenly lot of the blessed dead 
and the dismal fate in hell of the evil. There is less ground for supposing that 
such beliefs go back to the Indo-European period ; ^ then it may be that the 
only idea of the fate of the dead was that of a continued existence in a shadowy 
and imperfect condition, best represented to us by the Hades of Homer. Of 
this there may be seen traces in the Vedic conception of the future of the dead ; 
it is interesting that the vision of Bhrgu presents us with something of this kind, 
though evil-doers suffer there, as do even in the Greek Hades certain criminals 
of conspicuous demerit. As it stands, however, the accoi^nt is not early, since 
Vanina’s heaven appears to be located in the same region as that of the 
shades.® 

With the conception of the removal of the spirit to a greater distance is 
often conjoined with primitive peoples ® the idea of the final burial of the 
body which has been provisionally buried. In the Vedic funeral ritual there 
are different stages of the process of disposal of the dead to be noted, but 
the ritual does not reveal, as we have it, any trace of this conception of the 
removal of the Preta to the sphere of the Fathers as connected with the 


1 gCS. iv. 2. 7 ; 3. 5, 6. Cf. PGS. iii. 10. 
49 ff. The distinction of name and 
the fact of a Preta becoming a Pitr in a 
year is stated in BGS. iii. 12. 14 ; cf. 
BhGS. iii. 17. 

* Oldenberg, Rel. des Veda^, p. 536. Oltra- 
mare (Uhistoire des iddes th^osophiques, 
L 43) argues that the popular view was 
essentially that of the dwelling of the 
soul as a Preta, but this strains the 


evidence. 

® Cf. Keith, JHS. xxxvi. 109 ; Helm, 
Altgerm. Rel, i. 135 jK., 147 ff. (develop- 
ment from stone to bronze ages in ideas 
of future life). 

* Cf. Carnoy, Les Indo-Ruropiens, pp. 222 ff. ; 
cow/f a, L. B. Paton, Spiritismy pp. 104 £f. 

« JB. i. 44. 

« Wilken, Rev, CoL InU iii. 256 ff. ; ERE. 
iv. 442 f. 



414 The Spirits of the Dead [Parti? 

different progress of the burial rites. If the connexion existed, as it may well 
have done, it is not proved for India by the available authorities. 

Even, however, as a Preta there is extremely little trace of the belief of the 
sonl as a ghost which comes to visit men. It is possible, as we have seen, that 
dreams of the dead were ascribed to visits of their ghosts, though this is not 
directly recorded ; the Rigveda ^ expressly refers to Fathers who sit in the 
regions of earth or in the dwellings of men ; the Taittiriya Samhita * declares 
that the man who draws blood from a Brahman must fail to attain the world 
of the Fathers for as many years as the blood wets grains of sand. It seems 
possible that in the case of a dead man, whose soul is to live in the world of 
earth, because the southern fire first reaches his body, the soul is regarded as 
remaining away from the world of the Fathers in heaven ; reference is made 
in that view also to the Fathers, who live in the air, and whom we may 
imagine as ghosts there, but too much faith may not be placed in this concep- 
tion.® We hear of the appearance of Uccai99ravas Kaupayeya to instruct his 
nephew on a mystery of the Saman.'* But the normal view is that men and 
the Fathers do not appear together,® and the Vedic literature hardly shows a 
trace of the belief in ghosts which abounds in the Buddhist : the idea that 
evil spirits are caused by men needing proper burial, which is common in 
modern India, and that ghosts exist everywhere and send disease, is one which 
is not to be found in the Atharvaveda, which in its innumerable references to 
demons, Raksases, Pigacas, and others, deals with them in such manner as to 
show that the belief that many of them were merely hostile spirits of the dead 
was not a living one.® The Buddhist view, on the contrary, deals solemnly 
with ghosts : ^ it treats the stealing of their property on the same footing as 
stealing the property of beasts, it provides for cases of sexual intercourse with 
such ghosts ; ghosts abide in the lonely woods, on the banks of rivers, in a 
sugar field. They are often at the cross-roads and they crowd into their old home 
in eager search for kind friends to give them a little food. But in the main 
it is clear the ghosts are not normal things : it is not a case of simple belief 
in the constant presence of the dead among the living which the ^atapatha 
Brfihmana denies.® They are guilty souls suffering punishment, naked or 
covered barely by their hair, without protection against the heat, which fills 
them, from water, shade, or wind, hungry and thirsty, for the water even of the 
Ganges turns to blood in their mouths. A city of ghosts is recorded by the 
Divyavadana ® of the Buddhists, an island inhabited by ghosts in a Jataka,^® 
and the classical Sanskrit literature contains striking pictures of the ghosts 
which throng the places of sepulture of the dead. But how far these views 

^ X. 15. 2 ; cf. AV. xiii. 8, 9 ; TA, vi. 4. 2. views cf. Hopkijos, Epic Myth,, pp. 29 If. 

* ii. 6. 10. 2. Cf. Manu, iv. 168 ; xi. 207. ’ Parfijika, i. 10. 14 ; ii. 6. 4. See the 

* AGS. iv, 2; cf. RV. x. 15. 1, 2; Hille- PetavatthuandB.C.I^w, 

braadt, Ved, Myth, ii. 91 ; iii. 417. Conception of Spirits, 

* JUB. iii. 29. * Cf, L^vi, La doctrine du sacrifice, pp. 98 

* {JB. xiii. 8, 4. 12. • p. 7 (ed, Cowell and Neil). 

* Above, Part II, Chap. 5, § 8. On Epic “ iv. 2. 



415 


Chap. 23] The Places of the Dead 

were held in the Vedic period it is impossible to say : ^ there is no reasonable 
doubt that some of the Buddhist ghosts are transmutations of tree and w&ter 
spirits due to the growing animism which treated the spirit as merely living 
in, and not having its life in, the tree or the waters. But it is worth noting 
that in many cases the Buddhist ghosts are to die and go to hell in a certain 
period : ^ it is natural to see in this the record of the condition before final 
damnation of the Preta. 


§ 3 * The Transmutation of the Dead 

The Rigveda and the Vedic literature of the period of the Samhitas and 
the Brahmanas presents us with no clear proof of the belief in the transmigra- 
tion of the dead : the scanty evidence which has been adduced to prove the 
contrary view will be discussed hereafter,^ but in this place it is important to 
note certain really popular beliefs of which there are traces in that literature 
and in that of the Sutras. The most important piece of evidence is late : 
it is recorded by Baudhayana ^ that the birds at the offering to the dead should 
receive lumps of food, just like the Fathers, on the ground that in the form of 
birds the Fathers go about. It must, however, be admitted that this is not 
enough to prove a real popular belief. The idea of the incarnation of men as 
snakes is clearly to be accepted for the later period,^ but for the actual Vedic 
period it is not demonstrated, and it must in all likelihood be deemed to be an 
idea which entered the religion of the Veda with the advance of aboriginal 
influences. A more interesting case is recorded in the ritual for the final burial 
of the bones of the dead ; ® if they cannot be found, then a garment is spread 
out, and, if a beast alights on it, it is treated as representing the bones of the 
dead. But this usage which is recorded for us at a late period cannot be pressed 
very far. To this scanty evidence may be added such support as can be ob- 
tained from such stories as that ^ of a mother, who, dying in the absence of her 
son, lies in wait for him in the shape of a newly created jackal to warn him 
of danger. The proof does not come to much, and none of it is of early date. 

Of the soul becoming a plant or passing into a plant we have no early 
evidence save such as may be derived from the solitary address to the dead 
man in the Rigveda ® which tells him to go to the plants with his members, and 
the isolated statement that the Fathers lie about the roots of the plants.® 


^ Oldenberg, Iteh des Veda^ pp. 559 ff. 

* Petavatthu, i. 10. 12 ; ii. 7. 12. 

» Part V, Chap. 28. 

‘ BDS. ii. 14. 9, 10. The Indo-European 
character of the belief is asserted by 
Feist, Kultur der Indogermanm, pp. 
823 ff., but his evidence is not con- 
clusive (Greek religion cannot safely be 
seen in the Hagia Triada sarkophagos, 
which is Minoan). Cf. also Johannson, 
Soljdgeln i Indim, pp. 20 ff.; G. 
Weicker, Der Seelenvogel in der aUen 


Literaiur und KunsU That soul birds 
are referred to in PGS. i. 2. 4ff., or 
TS. i. 1. 13, is out of the question 
{contra^ Arbman, Budra^ pp. 100 f.). 

* Winternitz, Der SarpabaK, p, 87 ; contra^ 

Paton, Spiritism, pp. 96 ff. 

* KauQ. Ixxxiii. 22 ff. 

’ Jataka, ii. 888 ; Oidenberg, BcL des Veda\ 
pp. 564, 565. 

» X. 16. 3. 

* fB. xiii. 8. 1. 20. Cf. Dieterich, Mutter 

Erd^, p. 49 ; Cook, Zeus, i. 687, n. 3. 



416 


[Part IV 


The Spirits of the Dead 

There is much evidence of connexion with stars. This, however, is very 
different from a normal transmigration : it obviously is connected with the 
belief in the departure of the souls to the regions of heaven, and on the philo- 
sophical side it appears as the doctrine of the identity of the soul with Aditya.^ 
The epic notoriously is fond of seeing the souls of the great heroes and priests 
of the past in the constellations of the heavens. The ^^tapatha Brahmana ^ 
calls the stars women and the light of those who by their good works have 
reached the heaven. The same view is found in the Sutra of Apastamba.^ 
It is possible also that the same idea may be referred to in the Rigveda ^ in the 
reference to the seers who watch the sun, or those who stand high in heaven 
through the giving of plenteous largesse to the priest.® Perhaps too the name 
of the Great Bear as the Seven Seers,® of one of the Pleiades as Arundhati, 
and even the view of the Krttikas as wives of the Bears, may be traced to this 
idea. The view that the moon is the abode of the souls is found also in the 
later period, but there is no identification with the moon, but merely by a 
transfer of ideas the change of the resting-place of the souls.’ 

1 TB. iii. 10. 9. 11 ; fB. ii. 6. 4. 8 ff . 12 ; HGS. i. 12. 14 C ; cf. RV. iv. 42. 8. 

^ vi. 5. 4. 8 ; cf, Hillebrandt, Ved, Myth, ’ Kaus.i.2; K^S. xxv. 6, 11; Hillebrandt, 
iii. 420-3, who finds planets in most im- Ved, Myth. i. 276, 394 ft. ; Scherman, 

possible places, e.g. the five Adhvaryus VisionsliiteratuT, p. 29. On shooting 

of RV.iii. 7. 7,orperhaps (iii. 321, n. 1) stars cf. MS. i. 8. 6 ; Ath. Parigi^ta, 

the Pleiades as the Maruts transported Iviii b, i. 3 ff. ; Hopkins, Epic Myth., 

to heaven. Cf. above. Chap. 11, § 10. p. 34 ; Haradatta, on ApDS. i. 11. 31. 

® ApDS. ii. 9. 24. 14. 17. .Cnmont, After-Lije in Boman 

* X, 107. 2 ; 154. 5 ; AV, xviii. 2. 47. Paganism, pp. 92 ff., 104 fi. It is very 

® Oldenberg, Bel. des Veda^, p. 566. For dubious if we are to see Chaldean 

the epic see Hopkins, Epic Myth., influence, as held by Cumont and 

p. 53. E. Pfeiffer, Studien zurn antiken Stern- 

* ii. 1. 2. 4 ; xiii. 8. 1. 9 ; JUB. iv. 26. glauben, pp. 113 ff. 



CHAPTER 24 

THE DISPOSAL OF THE DEAD 


Thebe is nothing in Vedic literature to encourage the view, which has been 
so energetically contended for in connexion with western civilization, that the 
custom of burning the dead is one which denotes an essential distinction of race, 
as contrasted with the practice of burying the dead,^ The burning of the dead 
is set over against the burying of the dead in the Rigveda ^ merely as two 
legitimate alternative methods, and this is the state of affairs throughout the 
history of India. Burning is normally preferred, the chief exceptions being 
very holy ascetics and infants under two years of age,® but the existence of 
burial cannot be denied for any period. Moreover it is important to note that 
the double practice of burial or burning is recorded of many other objects 
which it is desired to dispose of, owing to their dangerous character. Nor is it 
to be doubted ^ that the primitive use of fire in this case was that of removing 
the dread substance, which burial could also effect. The idea that burning was 
necessary to take the soul to heaven is not Vedic : the Rigveda proves that 
from the earliest recorded period the unburnt dead went to heaven no less 
than the burnt. 

Other modes of disposal of the dead are referred to in the Rigveda ® and 
the Atharvaveda.® The dead might be cast away {pavoptah), or they might 
be exposed {iiddhitdh). The latter expression seems to mean exposed on 
trees, a practice which was known in later India, and which is referred to 
in the ^atapatha Brahmana,’ being prescribed as the expiation, in the case 
in which a cow is slaughtered and found to be in calf, as regards the disposal 


1 Keith, JRAS. 1912, pp. 470-4. 

2 X. 15. 4. 

^ Roth, ZDMG. ix. 471 ; Hopkins, Rel of 
India, pp. 271 ff. ; Caland, Todten- 
gebrduche, pp. 93-5 ; PGS. iii. 10. 5. 
The placing of the funeral pyre on a 
ship (as in Teutonic usage) is not 
proved for India ; the passage cited by 
Zimmer (AUindisches Leben, p. 410) 
from RV, x, 135 does not naturally 
bear this sense ; Oldenberg, J^gveda- 
Noten, ii. 351. 

« Cf. Rohde, Psyched, i. 26 ff. ; Helm, 
Altgerm, ReL i. 152 ; Pfuhl, GGA^IOOO, 
p. 342 ; below. Appendix F. 

® X. 15. 4 (burnt and not burnt). 

^ xviii, 2. 34. Those cast away may refer 
to a usage as in Iran of throwing to the 
7 [n.o.s. 32] 


beasts to devour (Zimmer, AUindisches 
Leben, p. 402), or merely to depositing 
dead bodies in cemeteries, as recognized 
in Buddhist tales; Buddhist India, 
pp. 78 f. ; below, p. 424, n. 6. 

’ iv. 5. 2. 13. A similar custom is recorded 
of the Colchians (Ap. Rhod. iii. 200 ff.), 
who buried women. Cook (Zeus, i. 
533, 534) conjectured that it was to 
bestow life on the tree or on the dead ; 
and elsewhere (p. 687) adopts the view 
that trees planted round graves were 
originally homes for the spirits of the 
dead. Zimmer (l»c,) thinks the refer- 
ence is to persons exposed in old age 
to death as among the Massagetae 
and others (ibid., p. 328). 



418 


[Part IV 


The Spirits of the Dead 

of the embryo. But these ideas are of no importance for Vedic India in general ; 
the rite of burning is the rite which has won approval in the Sutras, and that 
of burying the body is there severely restricted. 

It is, however, a very different question whether this position is primitive. 
In one of the funeral hymns in the Rigveda ^ the dead is told to go to mother 
earth, which is to enclose him, as with a garment a mother her child. It is 
the view of the ritual texts that these words apply to the later rite by which 
the burnt bones of the dead are placed in an urn in earth, but the inter- 
pretation, though defended by Oldenberg,^ cannot be treated as natural, and 
we must admit that it is only reasonable to assume that it is meant for an 
actual burial. The later ritual which had in the main given up burial for 
burning naturally had to use the verses somewhere, and the burial of the 
bones gave an excellent opportunity for this action, but the fact remains that 
the verses are burial verses, that the Rigveda treats burial and burning as on 
the same footing, and that it probably represents contemporary fact.® 

The details of the burning alone can be reconstructed with certainty, but 
many of them must be assumed to have applied equally to burial.^ * In the 
moment of death the man was laid oti the ground, which is smeared with cow- 
dung and strewn with grass, near his sacred fire. The dead then was washed 
and anointed : the hair, the beard, and the nails were closely trimmed : a 
garland and fresh garment were laid upon him. The women of the house ® 
wailed around the place on which he was laid, tearing or loosening their hair, 
like the mourners at a Roman funeral, smiting their breasts and thighs. 
The body was borne to the grave or taken there on a car : the tracks of the 
party — ^rather than of the dead — ^were wiped out by means of a bundle of 
twigs attached to the dead, so as to prevent the recurrence of the spirit of 
the dead. The mourners accompanied the bier with loosened hair. Perhaps 
as the procession moved along were repeated verses ® urging the dead to go 
on his long way, to unite with the Fathers and with Yama, to leave sin behind, 
to go home, and to escape the dogs of Yama, while evil spirits were banned. 
The dead was then laid on the funeral pyre, in the midst of three fires produced 
by manipulation from the three sacred fires maintained by him, if he did so 
maintain them. Then the wife of the dead man is placed beside him, but 

^ X. 18 ; cf. AV. xviii. 2. 50-2. Oldenberg, ReL des Feda% pp. 572 ff. ; 

® ReL des Veda\ pp. 572 ff. ; Rgveda-Noten, Caland, Die altindischen Todten^ und 

ii. 219 ff. ; ' Caland, Todiengebrduche, Bestattungsgebrduche (Amsterdam, 

p. 165. 1896) ; and ed. of Baudhayana, Hir- 

® For the Avestan practice, cf. Moulton, anyake 9 i, and Apastamba Pitrmedha- 

Earli/ Zoroastrianism, p. 163. See also sutras (1896) ; Roth, ZDMG. viii. 

von Schroeder, VOJ.ix. 112 ff. ; Weber, 467 ff. ; Zimmer, Altindisches Leben, 

SBA. 1896, p. 255 ; Hopkins, JAOS. pp. 404 ff. 

xvi. p. cliii. ® See Bloomfield, AJP. xi. 336 ff. 

« fB. xi. 5. 2 ; xiii. 8 for valuable notices; ® RV. x. 14. 7-12. The Sutras vary ; cf. 
also TS. vi ; AfS. vi. 10 ; AGS. iv. Kau^. Ixxx. 35, 42 ; AGS. iv. 2. 10 ; 

1 ff. ; gCS. iv. 14 ff. ; PGS. iii. 10 ; CGS. iv. 14. 7. 

KQS. xvi, 3, 4 ; xvii. 7 ; Kau 9 . Ixxx. ff. ; 



Chap. 24] 


419 


The Disposal of the Dead 

taken away with the words, ^ ^ Arise, O woman, to the w^oiid of the living ; 
departed is the life of him with whom thou liest ; to marriage here hast thou 
attained with him as husband who graspeth ^ thy hand.’ It is clear that the 
husband’s brother or some other — a pupil or aged servant, according to 
A^valayana — must be meant who takes her in wedlock.® The bow ^ is taken 
from the hand of the dead if a Ksatriya — ^in the case of a Brahman ® a staff, of 
a Vai^ya an ox-goad, according to the later ritual — with a verse saying that it 
is taken for attainment of lordly power and strength : the later ritual,® 
however, breaks the bow and leaves it with the dead, as the soldiers of Brennus 
when they died had their swords broken and laid by them to deceive the 
learned Polybios and the modern w^orld for tw^o thousand years.'^ Further, in 
the ritual the offering utensils of the dead are placed on the bier with Mm, 
only the stone, metal, or earthen being kept back and given to a Brahman, 
a practice disapproved by some, or thrown into water, or kept by the son of 
the dead.® This usage is apparently to be seen in the Rigveda ® as applied 
to a Soma vessel at least. 

The Rigveda expressly refers to the burning of a goat which is the share 
of Agni, and to the use of the flesh of a cow to protect the body against the 
flame. In the ritual texts details of the use of the flesh of the cow are 
given : the omentum is placed over the face, the kidneys in either hand, to 
satisfy the dogs of Yama — like the honey cake for Kerberos — and the skin 
is put over the whole. A goat is also tied to the pyre so. loosely that it can 
easily break the cord. The pyre is then lighted or the three fires are directed 
towards it, and Agni is invoked to take the dead uninjured to the Fathers. 
Other prayers and offerings seem to have been addressed to Yama, the 
Ahgirases, and Sarasvati ; the sense of the ceremony is shown by the words 
of the prayer, not recorded in the Rigveda, ‘ From him thou art born ; may 
he in turn he born from thee.’ 

The ceremony of the burning of the body is followed by the departure of 
the mourners who do not turn round : they wash themselves and offer 


^ RV. X. 18. 8 ; the practice was not in 
favour with the later feeling ; Caland, 
Todiengebrduche^ pp. 43-5. 

® This must be the sense as taken by 
Oldenbcrg and Caland. A reference to 
the dead man is impossible, though 
taken so by Max MiUler and Roth, and 
TA. vi. 1. 3 clearly negates this sense. 

^ AGS. iv. 2. 18. 

« RV. X. 18. 9. 

^ AV. xviii. 2. 59 ; Kau^. Ixxx. 48 ft. ; ibid, 
46, and AV. xviii. 4. 56 also prescribe 
the taking of a piece of gold from his 
hand. Pieces of gold — failing it, melted 
butter — are placed on the seven open- 
ings in the head of the dead ; Caland, 
Todtengebrducke^ p. 47 ; JGS. ii. 4 ; cf. 

7 ^ 


the Greek and Roman usage. 

® AGS. iv. 2. 22. 

’ Reinach, Culies, Mythes et Religions ^ iii. 
141. Cf. Helm, Altgerm, Rel, i. 140, 
n. 39 ; Hopkins, Origin of Religion, 

p. 110. 

8 gB, xii. 5. 2. 14 ; AGS. iv. 3. 18, 19 ; 

Kauc. Ixxxi. 19 ; JAOS. xxxiv. 249. 
* X. 16. 8. Removal of risk for the living 
may have operated as well as pro- 
vision for the dead. 

X. 16. 4, 7. 

“ Kau 9 . Ixxxi. 34-9 ; RV. x. 18. 1-6, 13 ff. ; 
17. 7-9 are used here according to 
Oldenberg {Rel. des Veda\ p. 578), but 
cf. Caland, Todtengebrauche, p. 65. 

QB, xii. 5. 2, 15 ; TA. vi. 1. 4. 



420 


The Spirits of the Dead 


[Fart IV 


libations of water for the dead : they change their garments : they pass under 
a yoke^ of branches of the purifying Parna tree, they touch on entering 
the house purifying things, water, fire, dung, mustard grains, and barley 
grains, the power of which lies in the name Yava, which is constantly con- 
nected in theVedic mind with yu, ‘restrain ’ (demons). Perhaps,^ too, at this 
point, and not merely at the putting away of the bones, there takes place 
the ceremony of removing from the house, and placing in a desolate place, 
the fire which must not go through the door. It is impossible to believe that 
this fire was really in the view of the Rigveda kept for the making of offerings 
to the dead, though the exact meaning of the references to it in the Rigveda is 
hard to ascertain.® Moreover, until the bones are collected, or for three or 
ten days, the relatives must observe certain restrictions : they must not use 
their ordinary beds, but sleep on the ground, must observe chastity, cook no 
food, and live on what they buy, or what others give to them. The nature of 
these observances is obvious : it is in some way to avoid the risk which death 
has brought into the vicinity of the relatives : the view that the Preta of the 
dead is near at hand is clear. The prohibition of cooking is attested by the 
Avesta also ; after death the relatives should cook nothing for three days, 
and the Parsis observe this rule to the present day.** Clearly the death has 
infected the food and the vicinity in which it was, and to eat it will bring 
injury. The sleeping on the ground is less easy to explain : it is possibly an 
effort to avoid the attention of the spirit if it returns : possibly it may be 
traced to the view that the relative, by contact with the dead, has con- 
taminated himself and must be purified, before the bed can be safely 
approached, if it is not to be infected for all time to come : or communion 
with the earth may be desired. The abstinence from intercourse may be 
explained, as it is explained by Oldenberg,® as due to the danger that injury 
might thus be done to any child which might perchance be born. 

The third or tenth day is that of the collecting of the bones of the dead.® 
In the first instance the place of burning is cooled by the use of cooling sub- 
stances, water plants, one Kiyambu with the very name suggesting water, and 
the inevitable frog.’ Water and milk are prescribed for the besprinkling of 
the place of the fire in the later ritual, which also provides for the offering of 
water and milk for the dead on the night after the death.® According to 

^ The Mantras (Todtengehrduche, pp. 74, 76) Stevenson, Bites of the Twice-Bom, 

suggest the idea of a barrier between p. 154. 

dead and living. ® Beh des Veda^, p. 590. 

* Oldenberg, Bel, des Veda\ p. 57S. The ® ICaegi {Die Neunzahl hei den Ostariern) 
rite seems to follow the putting away points to the importance of nine in the 

of the bones in KQS. xxi. 4. 28 ; cf. funeral rites of Indo-European peoples. 

Kaug. Ixix ; AGS. iv. 6. RV. x. 16. In India the periods vary, but ten days 

9 ff. are used. is usual ; Caland, Todtengehrduche^ pp. 

® Bergaigne, Bel, Vid, i. 78. 81~4; Paton, Spiritism, pp. 142 ff. 

^ SBE. V. 382, n. 2, Ethnic parallels in ^ RV. x. 16. 13 ff. ; Kau 9 . Ixxxvi. 26, 27 ; 
Wilken, Bev, Col. Int. iv. 352 ; Frazer, AJP. xi. 342 ff. 

Journ, Anthrop, Inst, xv. 92 1 Cf. ® PGS. iii. 10. 28. 



Chap. 24] 


421 


The Disposal of the Dead 

A 9 valayana,^ who places the rite on the tenth day after death, the bones 
should be put, those of a man in a male urn and those of a woman in a female 
urn respectively, the reference being to marks on the urns which are treated 
as like the breasts of a woman,^ The bones should be picked up by aged 
persons, in uneven numbers, not men and women together, with the thumb 
and the fourth finger and deposited without noise, those of the feet coming 
first, those of the head last. Then the bones are purified with a sieve, and the 
urn is placed in a pit where waters do not run together from every side, save 
rain water ; earth is put down upon the urn, and it is covered with a lid. The 
performers then go away, not turning back, purify themselves, and offer a 
fraddha to the dead. According to the Kaugika Sutra,® a different procedure 
is adopted, in so far that the bones are deposited at the root of a tree, with a 
verse of the Atharvaveda,^ which beseeches the great tree not to press heavily 
on them ; but it is by no means clear that this is the original sense of the 
Atharvan verse, which may refer to proper burial, 

A still further rite is prescribed by the Brahmana ® and men- 

tioned in other texts, the raising of a memorial to the dead. This is to be done 
a long time after the death ; when even the year is forgotten is a suitable time. 
The bones are gathered from the hole in the earth or from the tree roots, in 
which case a verse ® is used which rather points to the idea of real burial, 
and may suggest that once the gathering of the bones and the putting away 
of them in a relic mound were done when the body had decayed after normal 
burial. If the bones cannot be found, the rite alluded to above takes place ; ^ 
a garment is spread on the water’s edge : the dead is called by name, and 
any beast ® that alights is treated as representing the bones ; in the alterna- 
tive, dust from the place is used. The night is spent in ceremonies : women 
beating their thighs with the right hand,^ with hair loosened, wailing, thrice 
in the course of the night dance thrice round the bones. Lutes are played, and 
— doubtless to scare away spirits — a noise made by the beating of an old shoe 
on an empty pot or in other ways.^® In the morning the bones are taken to the 
new place of rest, which must be out of sight from the village, in a place 
where there is abundance of plants, around whose roots the Fathers are said 


^ AGS. iv. 5. 7-10, using RV. x. 18. 10 ff. 

2 Lanman, Sanskrit Reader, p. 404. For the 
cleansing of the bones, cf. Germanic 
usage, Helm, Aligerm. RcL i. 154 f. It 
may be a transfer of the usage of 
washing the dead body, or an clfort to 
banish the soul entirely from connexion 
with earth. 

® Ixxxii. 13. 

* xviii. 2. 25. 

xiii. 8. 1 ; K^S. xxi. 3. 1. 

® AV. xviii. 3. 70 ; Kau^. Ixxxiii. 19. 
Oldenberg {EcL des Veda^, pp. 580, n, 4; 
581, n. 4) suggests that the whole rite 


is a misunderstanding of the verse 
originally referring to the wood of the 
pyre, but this is not probable. Original 
burial is more likely. 

’ Kau 9 . Ixxxiii. 22 

** Doubtless normally an insect, which was 
often regarded in Greek religion as a 
vehicle of the soul (Cook, Zeus, i. 532, 
n. 12). Cf. the Samoan parallel in 
Journ, Anihrop, Inst. xv. 96, n.’l, 

® Cf. Eitrcm, Opferritus wid Voropjer, pp. 
35, 42. 

Kau 9 . Ixxxiv. 9 ; K?S. xxi. 3. 7. 



422 


[Part IV 


The Spirits of the Bead 

to creep/ but no thorns. A hole is made or furrow ploughed : seeds of all 
sorts are sowed and the bones deposited. The hole is then covered over with 
stones and earth to make a memorial mound : in it seeds are sov/n to feed the 
dead/ and pits are dug in it into which water and milk are poured to please 
the dead/ 

The departure from the place of the erection of the memorial is followed by 
many rites to prevent contamination, the use of fire, of the Apamarga plant, 
the obliteration of the footsteps, the crossing of pits filled with water, and 
so on. The placing of a barrier of some sort between the dead and the living 
is a rite recorded in the Rigveda ^ itself, whether the object is stone or some 
piece of earth. 

The nature of the mode of disposal of the dead probably showed itself 
specially valuable in the Indian climate, but apart from this consideration, the 
influence of the practice of removing evil influences by burning, and of the 
worship of the fire, and the use of fire as the messenger between men and the 
gods, must have aided the development of the use of cremation as almost the 
normal and certainly much the most usual form of disposing of the dead. 
The belief in the burning of the dead as a suitable mode of disposal may be 
Indo-European/ the evidence for this is merely the practice in early Greece 
and Germany also — ^but it may equally have been produced in India, perhaps 
at first under the influence of the needs of war, where the burial of the dead 
leaves them exposed to misusage by the enemy. It may be that the belief in 
burning is older than the belief in the heavenly abode, but that is not sus- 
ceptible of proof ; the fact that the Rigveda does not require burning in order 
that the dead may go to heaven may best be explained on the ground that 
the belief is older than burning of the dead, rather than that it developed and 
became independent of that burning. Naturally, however, in any case the 
burning of the dead was regarded as helping the path to the sky, and from 
another point of view here and there the idea presents itself that the dead man 
is in a sense® an offering to the gods. Such an idea, however, never became of 
importance, to judge from its rare appearance, and from the fact that the 
burning of the dead was never decked out with fche apparatus of the sacrifice. 

^ 5®- xiii. 8. 1. 20. and Roth (JAOS. xvi. p. ccxliii) 

As at the piling of the fire, Weber, Ind, finds the name in JUB. i. 25. 8. 

Stixd, xiii. 245 ; Caland, Todtenge- ® Oldenberg, Hei. des Veda?^ pp. 5S4 ff. In 
brdtiche, p. 177, misses the obvious primitive Greece, as in early Italy and 

purpose in this case of the rite. Britain, both modes of disposal are 

® For alleged remains at Lauriya Nandan- found ; we can hardly believe that in 

garb, see CHI. i. 616 ; above, p. 82, n. 1. every case an Indo-European rite was 

* X. 18. 3 and 4. From the idea of the superinduced on a non-Indo-European, 

inability of the soul to cross water is Cf. Hopkins, Origin of Beligion, pp. 

perhaps developed the later idea of the 148 ff. ; for Germany, Helm, Altgerm, 

Vaitarani stream and of a mimic boat JRel. i. 152 ff. It was disapproved in Iran, 

to cross it (Caland, Todtengebfduche, ® RV. x. 16. 5 ; late Sutra evidence is given 
pp. 8, 153), Hillebrandt {Ved, Myth, by Caland, Todtengehrduche, pp. 178, 

iii. 877) sees the Vaitaranf s prototype 170, who seems to overestimate its 

in the Sarasvati of RV. x, 17. 7-9, value. 



Chap. 24] 


The Disposal of the Dead 


423 


The exact idea connected with the burning seems to have been that the 
whole self was burned, soul as well as body, in order to convey it, in a refined 
form but still unaltered in essence, to the regions of heaven. It is clear from 
what has been already said that there is no question of the mere sending 
thither of the soul in the Vedic religion : in the philosophy different ideas 
appear, but not in the religious faith. Nevertheless at the same time the man 
is still regarded as being in some measure present in the bones which are left : i 
even if, as is probable, the original force of the verses of the Rigveda and the 
Atharvaveda, which refer to burial, dealt with real burial, yet when they were 
adopted for burial of the bones, they must have been felt not to run counter to 
popular belief. 

In the Vedic belief the popular view that the dead must be provided with 
the same things ^ as they enjoyed in the world of men has been greatly 
attenuated. It is absurd to suppose that all women were ever burned with 
the dead ; ® the practice never existed in India at any time which is recorded, 
and in many cases the result would have been to leave children without 
proper care. But it is perfectly clear that the wife of a great man might be 
burned with him, and that the Rigveda ^ shows a stage of opinion in which 
this rite has been definitely abolished by the Brahmans, and has been replaced 
by the giving of her to the brother or some other relative of the dead in sym- 
bolic, if not necessarily always real, marriage : we may well believe that the 
marriage might be real only if the dead had left no son alive to perform for 
him the funeral ceremonies. Similarly the dead was deprived not merely of 
his bow, but also of a piece of gold, which his eldest son received : it is difficult 
not to believe that the older practice was as in ancient Greece to allow him 
to bear with him to his future abode the ornament of gold which he wore 
in his life on earth.® The practice of enveloping the body of the dead in the 
limbs of the cow is a curious one, and offers possibilities of different explana- 
tions. But it is clearly the view of the Rigveda that the heat of the fire is 
to exhaust its fury on the members of the goat and presumably also of the 
cow,® and it may be that the offering was a sort of substitution for the dead 
himself, so that evil powers might assail it in place of him. The goat stands in 
another category : it may be compared to the goat which is slain with 
the sacrificial horse to show it the w^ay : in the passage to the next 

^ A corporeal resurrection is seen by Jack- p. 311 ; Bergaigne, Bel. VM., i. 78 ; 

son in Yasna, xxx, 7 ; the Persians Garbe, Beitrage zur indischen Kultur- 

according to Herodotos (i. 140 ; cf. vii. geschichte, pp. 148 £f. 

117) buried their dead. « The idea of paying Charon is obviously a 

^ e.g. garments (AV. xviii. 4. 31). No misunderstanding. In central Europe 

burning of slaves ever occurs, while the gift is accompanied by the words, 

in Germany it was frequent. ‘ Thou hast thy due ; leave me in 

® In no country is so universal a custom peace ’ ; Carnoy, Les Indo-Europiens, 

known, p, 224. Gold possibly was held as a sun 

* Cf. AV, xviii. S. 1 (TA. vi, 1. 3) ; Mac- symbol to give the dead aid in attaining 
donell and Keith, Vedic Index, i. 488, immortal life. 

489 ; Feist, KuUur der Indogermanen, ® Oldenberg, EeL des Veda}, p. 587. 



424 The Spirits of the Dead [Paitiv 

world the journey may be trackless and the sure-footed goat wiE find the 

way.^ 

In addition to the normal rites special forms ^ are prescribed for many cases, 
such as the death of an Agnihotrin, of a pregnant woman after the saving of 
the embryo, and a Brahman who has acquired knowledge of the Brahman, the 
rite in his case being the Brahmamedha.® In the case of death in absence the 
body may be preserved in oil or only the bones brought back for the formal 
rites. When a man is believed dead the cremation of a figure representing 
Mm is allowed, and, if after such a rite has been performed he should return 
alive, he is subjected to the same form of ritual as a newly born child, including 
remarriage to his wife.^ The modern practice by which in the burial of an 
ascetic his skull is broken open with a coconut to allow the escape of the 
spirit, though based on a doctrine of the Upanisads ^ as to the departure of the 
soul through the skull on death, is not recorded in any early Vedic text. 
Though children under two were usually buried or thrown away, they might 
be cremated if their teeth had grown ; ® burial in the house which is elsewhere 
often recorded — ^perhaps as a mode of securing rebirth in the mother — ^is 
unknown. 


^ According to AV. xviii. 2. 22, the Mamts 
are to cool the dead through the goat, 
perhaps by using up the power of the 
fire on it, 

2 Caland, Todtengehrauche) pp. 85-98. 

® TA. iii. 

* Cf. Frazer, Joum, Anthrop* Inst xv. 64. 

5 CU. viii. 6. 6. 

“ So in AB. vii. 14. 4 an animal is fit for 
sacrifice when its teeth appear. That 


bodies, were often merely dumped on 
burial grounds is suggested by the 
Buddhist evidence and that of classical 
literature, as well as of Vedic evidence 
(above, p, 417, n. 6). See also Baton, 
Spiritism^ pp, 122 If. The view that 
Yama’s dogs reflect the custom of ex- 
posure is implausible ; for Hekate and 
the dog, see Farnell, Cults ^ ii. 510, 



CHAPTER 25 

THE CULT OF THE BEAD 

§ 1. The Living and the Dead 

The attitude of the Vedic Indian to his dead is one of distinctive and 
pronounced individuality. The constant anxiety lest from the dead should 
come injury to the living is perfectly obvious, but it must be admitted that it 
does not show any trace of being due to the direct fear of the spirit of the 
dead : it is the fear of death which marks the attitude of the Indian ; the dead 
has not a hostile nature, but the thing which has affected him is to be feared. 
It is, therefore, intelligible that the Indian in the Vedic period looks, despite 
his dread of death, with affection and esteem upon his ancestors, and that 
much of his existence should be concerned with the means of securing them 
nourishment.^ That food is required especially on certain occasions, not 
less often than once a month and occasionally at other times : in a certain 
portion of the rainy season the dead are conceived as leaving the abode of 
heaven and coming to the houses of their kin to seek for food.^ On the other 
hand if the men care for their Fathers, it is but natural that these Fathers 
should be deemed to be anxious to aid and assist them, and the companion- 
ship of the blessed dead with the gods encourages the belief that they have 
power to aid, even as the gods have power.^ The Fathers generally are often 
referred to in the Rigveda and the later literature as invoked to confer boons, 
similar to those which the gods convey, and, though they are distinctly 
differentiated by a multitude of things, and especially by cult, from the 
powers of heaven, nevertneless, for the purpose of being a very present help 
in tribulation, they appear to be ranked as not unworthy of invocation with, 
or even without, the gods. Like the gods, men pray to them for success, for 
the defeat of enemies, for the gift of rain, for the bestowal of eloquence, or 
for abundance of food. Even in battle the Fathers are invoked as warriors.^ 
But the energy of the Fathers has one special end, the production of off- 
spring, in which they have the special interest that the rites for the dead can 
only be kept up by the device of continuing the family. At the offering for the 

^ Caland {Todtengebrauche^ pp. 171, 172) India, ct Stevenson, Rites of the Twice- 

insists that fear is the only motive even Born, pp. 156-92. See also Paton, 

for the feeding of the dead, but this Spiritism, chap. iv. 

is clearly untenable ; cf. Meyer, Gesch. ^ Caland, Todtenverehrung, pp. 43 ff. 
d. AltJ^ I. i. § 62 ; Warde Fowler, Roman ^ Bergaigne, ReL Vid, i. 95 ff. ; AV. iv. 15. 
Ideas of Deity, pp. 23-6 ; Hopkins, 15 ; vii. 12. 1 ; xviii. 2. 80 ; 3. 15 ; 

Origin of Religion, pp. 74, 78 ; Max ii. 12. 4, &c. ; TA. v. 7, 8 ; AGS, iv. 

Muller, Egypt. Myth., p. 183 ; Helm, 7. 1. 

Altgerm. Reh i. 136 ff. For modern * RV. vi. 75. 9. 



426 


[Part rV 


The Spirits of the Dead 


dead the -great-grandfather, the grandfather, and the father are all invoked to 
send sons : ^ the wife of the offerer is given a lump of the food made ready 
for the Fathers with the prayer that they may accord her a son ; ^ the offerer ® 
himself, who desires a son, wets his face with the remains of the water poured 
out for the Fathers, They naturally find a place in the ritual for the marriage 
ceremony : food is offered to them before the marriage to induce them to give 
offspring to the bride, and, when the bridal procession starts out, it is thought 
that the Fathers crowd around to see the bride.^ But we do not hear in any 
case that the Fathers were deemed to incorporate themselves in the bride for 
rebirth, as is one constant view of birth in Australian belief, and as seems 
in some degree to have been the view taken of the Roman Genius,® 

In the overwhelming majority of cases the person invoked is not an indivi- 
dual, but the whole body of the Fathers as such : nevertheless in occasional 
instances an individual ancestor may be invoked, like Kanva or Kaksivant, 
or a specific group such as the Vasisthas.® Men too occasionally appear 
among the gods with divine attributes, such as Kutsa who is invoked along 
with Indra."^ Other men may here and there be placed in this position : the 
name, Udalaka9yapa, of a spirit invoked at the plough festival, does not look 
very divine or demoniac, but that is a mere speculation.® 

The attitude of the Fathers to the living is assumed by the latter to be one 
of friendship : they are invoked to turn the merit acquired by their good deeds 
to the overthrow of the foe of the living, but to their own they are dangerous 
only when these sin against them by failing to provide them with due offerings, 
a fact which seems clearly alluded to as early as the Rigveda.® Their power 
to injure is pre-supposed by the help they are to give in the overthrow of 
enemies, but very little is said directly about it. In a spell against the Dasyus, 
who at the offering for the dead mix themselves with the Fathers looking like 
kinsmen, a torch is employed, but this is hardly any definite evidence that the 
Fathers per se were dangerous.^® Nor is the mere fact that various objects 
are buried at cross-roads for the destruction, of enemies any proof of their 
activity in effecting the desired destruction, since many other evil spirits 
inhabit cross-roads. The soujs of unborn children become according to a late 
piece of evidence blood suckers, and possibly this may explain the special 


^ Kau^. Ixxxviii. 28. 

^ Kang. Ixxxix. 6. 

3 AGS. iv. 7. 15. 

^ Kau 9 . Ixxxiv. 12 ; AV. xiv. 2. 73. Cf. RV, 
X. 40. 10, with Oldenherg’s note. 

® Cf. Reinach, Cultes, Mythes et Religions^ 
iv. 861 if. ; Warde Fowler, Religious 
Experience of the Roman People^ pp. 74, 
75. In India this view appears only 
under the influence of transmigration 
in the Upanisad period and in Bud- 
dhism ; Windisch, Buddha's Gehurt, 
pp. 9 ff. ; cf. Segcrstedt, Le Monde 
Oriental^ iv. 144 f. ; Oldenberg, ReL des 


Veda\ p. 565, n. 1. 

* RV. x. 15. 8 ; AV. xviii. 3. 15. 

’ RV. V. 31, 9. 

® PGS. ii. 13, 2 ; Oldenberg, Eel des Veda% 
p. 567, n. 3. 

® X. 15. 6 ; TB. i. 3. 10. 7. Brannhofer 
(Arische Urzeit, pp. 280^) cites RV, 
i. 119. 4 ; vi. 59. 1 in the same sense 
and refers the idea to phenomena of 
twilight ! 

AV. xviii. 2. 28 ; Kau 9 . Ixxxvii. 30. 

AV. V. 31. 8 ; X. 1. 8. 

Caland, AUind, Ahnenhult, p. 32. 





427 


The Living and the Dead 

objection felt In Vedic religion to the slayer of an embryo, but this explanation 
is not necessary^ The danger from the dead is, as we have seen, fear of death, 
not of the spirits of the Fathers. Moreover, as we have noted, the Atharva- 
veda finds for the evils w^hich are practised on men the cause in demons,^ 
not in souls of the dead, which is again a strong piece of evidence that the 
mischievous powers of the dead were not strongly felt in the Vedic period. 

As we have seen, ghosts appear very little in the Vedic literature, and 
similarly the presence of the dead on earth to aid their offspring is practically 
unknown m Indian literature before the Buddhist era.^ 

§ 2 . The Offerings to the Dead in the Domestic Ritual 

Beside the regular offerings which are prescribed for the Fathers, there are 
others which are to be performed on special occasions, such as the birth of a 
son, a marriage, and the giving of the name to the child.^ In this case the 
offering or fraddha’, which bears its name ^ of that which is connected with 
^raddha, ‘ faith % from the fact that the presents to the Brahmans which 
accompany the offerings to the dead reveal the faith of the offerer in the 
Brahmans, is to be performed on the ‘waxing half of the month, and before 
midday : the number of Brahmans chosen is even, not as usual odd : the 
performances are from left to right, not vice versa ; barley replaces sesame ; 
the milk meal lumps are mixed with sour milk and roasted grains, and the 
Fathers are addressed as Nandimukha, ‘ joyful in countenance ® in place 
of ‘ with tearful countenance % which is elsewhere not rarely used. These 
rank as the Vrddhi ^raddhas, and similar to them are Purta Qraddhas, at the 
dedication of wells, pools, and so on. 

Much more important are the regular monthly f raddhas ® performed on the 
day of new moon, month by month, and after midday. The important part 
of the rite is the choice of Brahmans to represent the Fathers, at least tliree, 
but often more, and on no account one only at least at the first ^raddha offered. 
Moreover, by some authorities, further Brahmans are required to represent 
the All-gods. Three vessels of metal, stone, and cla^" are employed : into each 
water is poured, and in the view of ^aunaka the first vessel is not touched 
for the whole of the ceremony, as the Fathers would be present in it. Sesame 
is also put into the vessels. Then the water is offered as Arghya water to the 
Brahmans, and they are also given garlands, incense, lights, perfumes, and 
clothes. With the remains of the water the offerer -wipes his face, if he 

^ The birth of a Raksas from the head of 11. 25 ; TS. vii. 4. 1. 1 ; xiv. 1. 4. 

Namuci (fB. v. 4. 1. 9) is cited by 10 ; RV. x. 151 ; Oldenberg, Eel. dcs 

Oldenberg as showing the close relation Vedar, p. 566, n, 4 ; ZDMG. 1. 448 ff. 

of demons and souls, though disguised. ® They are clearly not the ancestors beyond 
® See Mahavagga, i, 4. 2 ; Udana, i. 10, &c. the Immediate three as has been sug- 

® AGS. ii. 5. 13 ; iv, 7. 1 ; BhGS. iii. 16 ; gested. 

BGS. iii. 12. 2-»15 ; GGS. iv. 3. 35 ff. ; « AGS. iv. 7 ; ?GS. iv. 1 ; HGS. ii. 10 ; 

Caland, Todtemerehrung^ pp, 39 ff. BhGS. ii. 11-14. 

^ Max Mliller, India, p. 235 ; see PB. xii. ^ AGS. iv, 7. 16. 



428 


[Part IV 


The Spirits of the Dead 

desires a son. Then he asks their permission to offer lumps of food in the fire, 
and does so or places it in their hands : they are also given other food, which 
they eat, and the ceremony finishes when they are satisfied. 

Distinct from the monthly Parvana Qraddha seems to have been another 
offering, the Masika,^ monthly brought on the waning half of the month on 
an uneven day. The rites for this day are varyingly given, and in some cases 
the rite seems to have been assimilated to the Astaka rites. For it Hiranya- 
ke^in ^ lays down the rule that the sacrificer up to the age of fifty should 
offer to the Fathers the seam of his garment, and that otherwise^e should 
offer hair. The first idea is clearly that the dead need garments : the second 
seems less obvious, and it is possible that it is due to the very different idea of 
substitution, which becomes the more necessary, since at fifty one is approach- 
ing the age when death is claiming a man more and more energetically.^ 
But other theories are possible ; the giving of hair may be merely a desire 
for communion, the burial of hair with the dead has been explained by 
Eitrem ^ as at once due to this desire^ and to the wish to lay apart that which 
has been contaminated by death. 

The Astakas ® are festivals of special importance and difficulty. The rije 
of A^valayana is that there should be four, on the eighth day of the dark half 
of the month in the two months of each of the two seasons, winter and 
the cool season, Marga 9 irsa, Pausa, Magha, and Phalguna. But the rule 
is that the number should be three or less. The normal view seems to be that 
Taisa, Magha, Phalguna are the months, but the three ceremonies can be 
reduced to three days, the 7th to 9th of one month, or pressed into the eighth 
day only. Hiranyakegin allows only one festival, the three-day rite of the 
Ekiistaka, the eighth day of the dark half of the month Magha. The deities of 
the Astakas are a matter of dispute : Agni, Surya, Prajapati, night, the 
Naksatras, the seasons, and the Fathers have all claims. The nature of the 
offering is equally disputed : some demand flesh at all three : others cakes at 
the first, a cow at the second, and vegetables at the third, or the same set but 
in diverse order. A very odd rite is prescribed by the Manava school,’ for 
the evening before the last Astaka : at the cross-roads the sacrificer kills a 
cow, dismembers it, and divides the flesh among the passers-by. The Astaka 
is followed by the Anvastakya, which is allowed to follow all three rites, or the 
middle one only. The nature of the rite is rather curious : a fire is made, 
surrounded, and an opening made in the north : an offering strew is laid 


i AGS.ii. 5; 10. 

^ ii. 10-13 ; so also at the Pindapitryajiia, 
ACS.ii.r. G. 

® TB. i. 3. 10. 7 ; Oldenherg, Rel des Veda\ 
pp. 552, 553. 

* See Keith, JHS. xxxvL 108. 

® More plausibly Hopkins (Origin of Religion, 
pp. 118 ff.) holds that the gift of hair, 
which is endowed with life, is a mode 


of strengthening the dead, as is the 
offering of blood (Cumont, After-Life 
in Roman Paganism, pp. 51 f.). 

« AGS.ii. 4; 9:GS. iii. 12-14 ; GGS.iii.lO; 
iv. 1 ; MGS. ii. 8, 0 ; BhGS. ii. 15-17 ; 
BGS. ii. 11 ; PGS. iii. 3 ; IIGS. ii. 13 ; 
Oldenberg, Ind, Stud, xv. 145 ff. ; 
Winternitz, VOJ. iv. 205 ff. 

» VOJ. iv. 211 ; MGS. ii. 9. 1-3. 



429 


Chap. 25] Offerings to the Dead in the Domestic Ritual 

down, and food placed on it, various forms of rice with sesame, milk rice, and 
mixed messes of meat and sour milk, and of meal and honey. Then he offers 
to Soma with the Fathers and to Agni Kavyavahana, and thereafter gives to 
the Fathers in the east, and their wives in the west, shares of all except 
the honey drink : the Mothers receive also Sura and the scum of boiled 
rice. The offering is, according to Gobhila, made with much elaboration in 
pits which are dug for the offerings. Three lumps of food are made, and salve 
and sesame oil are also given to the Fathers and the Brahmans : the three 
lumps at the end are put to varied uses : the middle one his wife eats, if she 
wishes sons : the others are put in the water, or on a fire, or given to a cow or 
to a Brahman to eat.^ The giving to a cow is of interest as it is also provided 
as a substitute for the offering of a cow at the appropriate Astaka that a cow 
should be given food to eat. It is difficult not to feel that this is a case of a 
very simple desire to save the life of the cow, and of the parallel desire to 
secure the favour of the cow. Another mode of evading the offering of a cow 
at the Astakas was to fire brushwood, an idea which Oldeiiberg ^ has suggested 
may be regarded as an effort to strengthen the sun at the period of the winter 
solstice, in which very roughly the Astakas tended to fall. 

There is clear evidence that, in addition to the three or four Astakas, 
another offering was made in the middle of the rains, perhaps in the month of 
Prausthapada : it is stated to be intended to be like the Anvastakya offering 
or the Parva^a Qraddha : there is the same dispute as to the nature of the 
offering : flesh is necessary if at all possible, but one authority calls it out and 
out a vegetable Astaka. This provision and the tendency, as we have seen, 
to make the offerings simple are due doubtless to the fact that they are 
obligatory offerings, which could not be omitted and which therefore must 
often be simple.® 


§ 3 . !Phe Offerings to the Bead in the ^rauta Ritual 
In the ^rauta ritual a leading place in the cult of the dead is taken by the 
Pindapitryaj lia,^ which should be offered after midday of the day of new moon. 
The sacrifice must take place in the southern fire, which is that appropriate to 
the Fathers, and the regular procedure of such offerings is followed : the sacred 
cord is to be worn over the right shoulder, not the left ; all movements 
are from right to left, and recitations and acts take place once, not thrice ; 
while in the normal offering movements are from south and west to north and 
east, in this offering they are in the reverse order, in so far that they must 


1 GGS. iv. 1. 18 ft. ; AGS. ii. 4. 8-10. The 
use of pits is not regularly provided 
for, but it is clearly old ; cf. Homer, 
Od. X. 527 ; xi. 23 ; Wissowa, 

Beh der Edmetf pp. 234 fl . ; Arbman, 
Rudra, pp. 73 ff. (whose German 
parallel, however, must be corrected; 
see Helm, Altgerm. EeL i. 244). 


2 Eel. des Veda\ p. 446. 

^ AGS. ii. 5. 9 ; ^GS. iii. 3. 13 ; HGS. ii. 

13. 3 ; PGS. iii. 3. 13 (Cakastaka). 

« ApgS. i. 7-10 ; Kgs. iv. 1 ; AgS. ii. 6, 7 ; 
ggS. iv. 3-5 ; Dormer, Eindapitryajna 
(Berlin, 1870) ; Caland, Todtenverehr- 
PP* Off.; Todtengebrduche, pp. 
172, 173. 



430 


[Part IV 


The Spirits of the Dead 

begin, in the north and end in the south. In the libations the hand has the 
outer part turned downwards, the space between the thumb and the index 
finger is the space which serves for the passage of the oblations. Water is 
touched after each naming of the Fathers, and the offerer looks south, not 
north.^ A pit is dug in the earth, south or west of the southern fire, with a 
formula to drive away the Asuras and the Raksases, and a firebrand from that 
fire is used as an additional mode of causing fear. The offering begins with 
two libations of boiled grain or butter to Soma with the Fathers and to Agni 
Kavyavahana. Then the Fathers are directly approached : at the beginning, 
middle, and end of the furrow or pit water is poured, and the Fathers are 
invited to wash themselves.^ Then Darbha grass is strewn in the pit, and 
from the remains of the rice pap and butter are made three lumps of food, or 
according to some authorities four, w^hich are laid down in the pit on the 
places on which the water was formerly poured. In each case the Fathers 
are hailed by name if they are known as the father, grandfather, and great- 
grandfather of the offerer ; if the father of the offerer is still alive, various 
varieties of procedure are mentioned.^ The Fathers are invited to delight 
themselves : the offerer turns his back — doubtless to avoid too close con- 
tact, not that they may be unencumbered by his presence,^ and remains 
with averted head, until he is breatliless or the food is cold ; he then turns 
round to the lumps, says, ‘ The Fathers have delighted themselves and pours 
water on the lumps, adds salve and some pieces of wool — or if over fifty, hair 
from his arm or breast — and invites the Fathers to wash, anoint, and clothe ® 
themselves. He may also smell, if he desires a son, the remains of the pot. 
The Fathers are then honoured, and the Adhvaryu, looking south-east, and 
pushing away the lumps, bids them depart, pays reverence to the southern and 
the Garhapatya fires, for the removal of all sin against heaven and earth. If 
the wife of the offerer wishes a son, then she eats the middle lump as in the 
domestic ritual : the other two may be thrown into fire or water, or eaten by 
prescribed persons. 

The second great ^rauta offering is that of the Pitryaj fia, or Mahapitryaj na, 


Other distinctions in offerings to the 
dead are the use of sesame in place of 
barley, of folded grass instead of 
straight stalks for the strew, of black 
not red victims, the use of old worn-out 
things, and the turning south with 
hairy side downwards, not east with 
hair upwards, of skins, doubtless to 
attract the spirits to take up their place 
therein. 

* Cf. Kleidamos in Athenaios, ix. p. 410. 

® Weber, Ind, Stud* x. 82, n. 1. 

* This is the Indian view ; Caland, Altind, 

AkmnkuUt p. 180. 

« Possibly the idea of the Fathers clothed 


only in their hair (Petavatthu, i. 10, 2) 
may here be present ; Oldenberg {ReL 
des Veda^, p. 552) insists on taking all 
oiBferings of hair as redemptions of self. 
But it is enough to recognize that a 
hair offering brings the living into close 
communion with the dead as is shown 
in many of the usages. Ct Wilken, 
Rev, CoL InU iil. 225 ff. ; iv. S45 ff. ; 
Frazer, Magic Art^ i. 28 ff. ; Gruppe, 
Griech. Myth,, p. 913 ; Cook, Zeus, i. 
23, 24 ; Samter, Geburt, Hochzeit und 
Tod, pp. 179 ff. ; ERE. iv. 431 ff, Cf. 
above, p. 428, n. 5. Disguise is an 
inadequate motive. 



Obap. 25] The Offerings to the Dead in the Qrauta Ritual 431 

which takes place on the afternoon of the second day of the Sakamedhas, 
the third of the four-month offerings.^ The recipients of offerings are the 
Fathers with Soma, or Soma with the Fathers, the Fathers who sit on the 
strew, and the Fathers burned by Agni, while some add Yama with or without 
the Angirases. The offerings to the three sets of Fathers are a cake, grains, 
and the offering of meal pap mixed in the milk of the cow, which has lost its 
own calf, and which has been given another to bring up. The sacrifice is 
conducted within a hut erected south of the southern fire, in which is made an 
altar with its orientation based on the intermediate points, on which the 
southern fire is placed. The technical terms of the offering for the Fathers 
07 h svadhdy astu svadhd, svadhd namali, replace those used for the gods. An 
offering for Kavyavahana is substituted for the usual Svistakrt offering at the 
end of a sacrifice. Washing water is poured out for the Fathers, and lumps are 
placed at the south-east and west corners of the altar, but the names, not of 
the latest but of the more distant Fathers, are uttered, the sixth, fifth, and 
fourth respectively. On the northern side the offerer wipes his hands and says, 

‘ Here, 0 Fathers, do ye delight yourselves and then all leave the hut, 
placing the sacred cord over the left shoulder, and adore the Ahavaniya fire, 
and then the Garhapatya. They then return to the hut, altering the position 
of their cords : the offerer declares that the Fathers have delighted them- 
selves and offers them reverence in the shape of six payings of homage. 

The similarity of the domestic and the Qrauta ritual in the case of the 
offerings to the dead is most marked, indeed more clearly so than in the case 
of the offerings to the gods, where the presence of the three fires led the 
Brahmans to constant elaboration of the rites in which they were interested, 
until they bore but faint similarity to the rites of the householder. In the case 
of the offerings to the dead, however, the southern fire is the only fire of con- 
sequence : the performances of the sacrificer and the priest in the other fires 
are purely formal, mainly devices to give them something to do, when the 
Fathers were presumed in spiritual presence to be eating the offerings from 
which, it is clear, they were deemed to extract the vital heat. 

The very clear differences between the form of the worship of the gods and 
the reverence paid to the dead ^ indicate beyond possibility of doubt that the 
attitude of the living to the dead differed in a marked degree from their 
attitude towards the gods, a fact which, so far as it goes, is doubtless evidence 
against the view that the worship of the gods sprang from the worship of 
men who had died. It is clear, however, that before the period of the Rigveda 
the tendance of the dead, the giving of gifts to them to use in the life to come, 
had developed so as to present the definite view that the dead were possessed 

^ The parallel of the winter All-souls worship of the dead, and that of even 

festival of Europe ; Caland, Todten- the chthonian gods ; see also FarnelFs 

mrehrungi pp. 78 H. distinction of tendance and worship, 

“ Stengel (Opferbrduche, pp. 127 ff.) shows Hibbert Journal^ 1909, p. 417. 

in Greek religion the distinction of 



432 


[Parti? 


The Spirits of the Dead 

of great powers, and were in many respects as important to their descendants 
from the point of view of conferring boons as the gods themselves. It is 
a question of great interest, but one which is insoluble by any evidence 
available, whether we are to assume that in the Indo-European period the 
conception of the divine dead had been developed : there is no evidence of any 
value to show that it had : we may safely assume that, as even in palaeolithic 
times in Europe, the dead were buried with due honour and gifts made to them, 
but the development of divinity may lie within the period of development of 
the several nations.^ 


1 Cf. MacCulloch, Bel. of Anc. Celts^ pp. 
165 ff. ; Farnell, Greece and Babylon^ pp. 
208 ff., where stress is laid on the absence 
of any ancestor worship, so far as yet 
is known, in Babylonian religion. Hence 
the cult (assumed as Indo-European by 
Moulton, Early Zoroastrianism^ p. 262 ; 
Feist, Kultur der Indogermanen^ pp. 
327, 328) cannot safely be postulated- 
In the Greek area matters are compli- 


cated by the existence (as shown in the 
Hagia Triada sarkophagos) of a pre- 
Hellenic reverence of ancestors per- 
haps already as divine. For other 
evidence of the far from universal 
character of the belief see Hopkins, 
Origin of Beligion^ pp. 80-2? Warde 
Fowler, Roman Ideas of Deity, pp, 
22 f.; Cumoot, After-Life in Roman 
Paganism, pp. 60 



PART V.— THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE VEDA 


CHAPTER 26 


THE BEGINNINGS OF VEDIC PHILOSOPHY 


The earliest poetry of India already contains many traces of the essential 
character of the philosophy of India. In nothing indeed does the continuity 
of Indian life show itself more strikingly than this : the gods of India change, 
but the alteration of the higher thought is far less marked. 

Philosophy in India shows its beginnings as often in the expression of 
scepticism : the normal belief in the gods here and there seems to have been 
questioned, and it is not unnatural that the questioning should have arisen 
in the case of the most human of the gods, him whom the seers most closely 
fashioned in their own likeness, the vehement Indra. We have not indeed any 
certain case of a seer who himself doubted the truth of Indra’s greatness : ^ 
no open attack on the god would, we may be sure, have been allowed to come 
down to us in the Samhita. But we are distinctly told that there were men 
who asked, ‘ Who is Indra, who ever saw him ? ’ or asserted that he did not 
exist at all.^ There were, we learn, faithless men, who did not believe in the 
gods of the Brahmans and did not — ^perhaps a worse thing — ^give the priests 
their fees for sacrifice, men who did not believe in Indra, anindrak. The 
pious poets denounce these men and assert in opposition the truth ® of the 
greatness of the god, but it is improbable that their hymns had the effect of 
convincing the impious. 

It might, however, have been expected that in the moral law of Varuna, 
which is the counterpart of the physical law recognized by the religion of the 
Veda as prevailing in the universe, the Rta, and in Varuna himself as the 
great guardian of that law, there might have been found a deity in whom the 
mind of the sceptic might find peace and satisfaction. The case of Iran proves 
that the nature of the great Asura could easily give rise to the conception of 
a moral ruler and a deep ethical view of the world. But, whatever the cause. 


^ Radhakrishnan (Ind. PhiL i. 87 1) finds 
in RV. viii. 96. 13~15 traces of conflict 
between Indra and Krsna, the proto- 
type of the god of the Gita. 

** ii. 12. 5 ; viii. 103. 3. A fetish of Indra 
alone of gods is mentioned (RV. iv. 24. 
10). Hardy {Ved,-brahm, Periode, pp. 
175, 176) seeks to show a much wider 
knowledge as probable (e. g. ii. 33. 9 ; 

8 [h.o.s. 32 ] 


ill, 4. 4 ; V. 52. 15), but this is untenable, 
especially as actual references to idols 
(PGS. iii. 14. 8) or Caityas (AGS. i. 12. 1> 
are found only at the very close of the 
Vedic period ; cf. pp, 30 f. 

® Indra’s deeds are often declared true ; 
cf, RV. ii. 15, 1 ; 22. 1-3 ; i. 84. 17 ; 
vi. 27. 1, 2, 



434 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 


it is beyond possibility of doubt that in India from the first philosophy is 
intellectual, not moral, in interest and outlook. The conception of Varu^ia, 
which reaches a high level and is majestic enough both in its eosmical and 
moral aspect, has attained by the time of the Rigveda its highest develop- 
ment : it falls rapidly into unimportance, until the Brahma^a ^ can assert 
that an ugly deformed man, who is used as a scapegoat at the final bath of 
the horse sacrifice, is said to be a symbol of Varuna. With this decline of the 
great and noble god goes hand in hand the decline of the interest of Indian 
philosophy or religion in morality as such : numerous as are the moral pre- 
cepts which can be found here and there in Vedic literature, it must be 
admitted that it is quite impossible to find any real or vital principle of ethics. 

The tendency to treat Indra as a doubtful personality is paralleled by the 
somewhat cynical tone which is certainly shown in speaking of him here and 
there. In one hymn ^ a number of human occupations and desires is men- 
tioned and the refrain is ‘ O Soma, flow for Indra ’ : the humorous tone of the 
poem seems obvious, and the refrain alone may have preserved it from 
oblivion. Another hymn ^ in which Indra expresses his feelings of exhilara- 
tion, as the result of the Soma drink, may be considered to be the natural 
expression of the poet’s mind, in describing the splendid results of the glorious 
drink ; it seems to be very doubtful whether the assumption of covert satire 
is not more natural and probable. The famous frog hymn ^ also presents 
difficulties ; it would be wrong to deny that it is intended as a rain spell,® but 
there is improbability in the attempt to deny that there is some humour 
intended in the comparison of the frogs to priests : the idea that the hymn 
is a mere satire on the Brahmans will not do, for such a hymn would not have 
been preserved if composed, but a hymn may, like those to Indra, be preserved 
with incidental satire if it contains a religious or magic basis. The Vrsakapi 
hymn ® which shows Indra and Indrani in dispute over a male ape may be 
adduced in this connexion, but in the absence of any surety as to its meaning 
it is difficult to rely upon it. 

The positive side of the tendency of the Bigveda to dissatisfaction with the 
gods of tradition is to be seen in the assertion of the unity of the gods and of the 
world. When all is said and done this is the one important contribution of 
the Rigveda to the philosophy of India. It asserts as a norm for the future 
development of that thought the effort to grasp more concretely and definitely 
the unity, which it asserts as a fact, but which it does not justify or explain in 
detail. The assertion is made with emphasis in a hymn ’ attributed to a quite 
mythical author Dirghatamas, who develops at much length the riddle of the 


1 5B. xiii. 8. 5. 5 ; TB. iii. 9. 15. 8. 

* ix. 112. 

» RV. X. 119. 

* vii.103. Cf. Bender, JAOS. xxxvii. 186 ff. 
® Bloomfield, JAOS. xvii. 173-9 j Oldenberg, 

J?ei. des VeddJ^, p. 68 ; but see Deussen, 
Gesch, der PhiU I. i. 101, 102 ; Hardy 


Ved.-htahm, Periodet p. 146. Cf. von 
Schroeder, Mysterium und Mimus, 
pp. 396 ff. ; Hauer, Die Anfdnge der 
Yogapraxis, pp. 68 ff. 

® X, 86. 

’ 1 164, with Oldenberg’s notes and 

references. 



Chap. 26] The Beginnings of Vedic Philosophy 435 

universe. The form of the long hymn of fifty-two verses is remarkable and 
characteristic. It is a feature of the Vedic sacrifice that at certain points 
are found Brahmodyas, discussions about the Brahman, the holy power in the 
universe. Such theosophical riddles are especially common at the horse 
sacrifice and are often of simple enough kind : the one priest asks, ‘ What is it 
that doth move alone ? What is ever born again ? What is the remedy of cold ? 
and what the great pile ? ' The answers here are obvious enough, and are 
given as the sun, the moon, the fire, and the earth respectively.^ In this 
long hymn of Birghatamas we have a great series of riddles, but there is to be 
seen in them some degree of cohesion, the influence of the doctrine of the unity 
of the world. It is frankly expressed as regards the gods in one verse : They 
call it Indra, Varuna, Mitra, Agni, and the winged bird (the sun) : the one 
they call by many names, Agni, Yama, and Matari^van.’ The same idea 
appears more expressly still in another verse, where the poet asks the wiser 
to tell him what supported the six regions of the universe, who was the 
first unborn being. The hymn is of special further value in that it foreshadows 
one of the most common ideas of the philosophy of the Veda,\he identity of 
the sacrifice and the world ; the seven priests of earth are paralleled by seven 
in the heaven, the speech on earth by that in the heaven ; there are also the 
earthly and the heavenly metres, the earthly Pravargya rite and the rain 
from heaven, the animal offering and the bull sacrifice of the gods, the altar 
and the end of the earth, the sacrifice itself and the navel of the world, and 
the Soma on earth and the sun and rain. 

The idea of unity is more fully developed and explained in a hymn,^ which 
with all its defects is the most important in the history of the philosophy of 
India. It is the hymn of creation, and exhibits not merely the putting of the 
question of the nature of the universe, but an effort to enter into detail, 
followed by confession of doubt as to the value of the result achieved. The 
hymn is specially interesting for this latter point : it is true that it may be 
censured with justice for the fact that its conceptions are full of vagueness, and 
crudely seek to xmite opposites, but the admission of difficulties is a point 
which must evoke admiration, not so much for the achievement, but for the 
thinker who had endeavoured to realize, and had failed to satisfy himself. 
While much of its content is repeated in the later philosophy, its spirit of doubt 
is wholly alien to the classical philosophical systems of India. 

The poem commences with an assertion : in the beginning there was 
neither being nor not-being : ^ there was no atmosphere nor sky : the question 
is asked what covering there was, and was there a fathomless abyss of the 
waters. There was neither death nor immortality, nor night nor day. There 
was nothing else in the world save the one which breathed, but without wind, 

^ VS. xxiii. 9 and 10. See Hang, Vedische of the RV. Cf. Whitney, JAOS. xi. 

BdthselfragenundRdtkselsprucheilSro); p. cxi ; fB. x. 5. 3. 1 ; JB. iii. 359f. 

Ludwig, RV. iii. 390 ff. ; Bloomfield, That it is a Brahmodya is not probable 

JAOS, XV. 172 ; JB. ii. 158, ® So Oldenberg ; contrast Geldner, Zur 

* X. 129 : the most often translated hymn Kosmogonie des BF., p. 16. 

8 * 



436 


The Philoso'phy of the Veda 


[Part V 


of its own power. There was, however, darkness, and a moving ocean without 
light : through the might of fervour, Tapas, was born a living force enveloped 
in a shell. Then there developed desire, Kama, the first seed of mind : the 
sages found the root of not-being in being, searching for it in the heart. Thus 
far the first four verses : the fifth is a puzzle : it may be referred to the 
sages who drove a division through the universe and distinguished the upper 
and the lower, the world of nature above, the principle of nature below : but 
this version is wholly problematical. The next two verses end with a deep 
expression of doubt : the gods are later than the creation and cannot 
know of its origin ; whether the creation was made by itself or not, the 
overseer of it in the highest space of heaven he knows of it, or perhaps he 
knows not. 

The hymn is clearly difficult to understand : the part of the seers, which 
appears merely as a statement of what their reflections have arrived at, is 
even understood by Bloomfield ^ to be a cosmical action, indicating that they 
took part in the creation of the universe. This seems, however, unnatural 
and strained, but not more so than the interpretation of verse 5 adopted by 
Deussen,^ which would make it into an assertion that the sages were able to 
discriminate between the thing in itself and the phenomenal world, between 
natura naturans and natura naturata. What is clear is that there is conceived 
as first existing one thing, which is described as breathing without wind,^ an 
effort to express a primitive nature different in essence from anything known 
to the priest, conceived perhaps metaphorically only as a dark ocean or chaos. 
In this through Tapas, which here must rather be cosmic than refer to the 
activity of seers or other human powers, by inward fervour, springs up the 
being enveloped in a shell, which in the later conception is the golden world 
egg. The next step in development is the appearance of desire, unless that 
it is to be taken as born of mind, when it is described as the first seed of mind. 
If so, the mind must be deemed to be an attribute of the one which develops 
in the shell, whence springs desire ; in the alternative the phrase may be 
taken as the source which produces mind, and desire, unconscious will, 
may be held to produce conscious will or mind. The latter view, however, is 
unnatural in point of language and has the additional disadvantage that 
in “the Taittiriya Aranyaka ^ we already find that mind is given as prior to 
desire in a passage which is based on the hymn. Nor can we hold — and this 
is much more important — ^that Kama was conceived as unconscious will : 
it is rather the natural expression for conscious desire, which would rise from 
the existence of mind as a substratum. The later philosophy makes the 
knowledge of desires depend on the existence of mind, and this idea may be 

1 i2eZ. 0 / Ferfa, p. 237. Cf. the claims of the » To compare (Kadhakrishnan, Jnd, PUL 
Druids. i. loi) Aristotle’s deity, the unmoved 

* Gesch, der PUL I. i. 124, 125. He com- mover, is to falsify entirely primitive 

pares the Eros of Hesiod (Theog, 120) thought, 

and Parmenides (Aristotle, Met, 984 « i. 23. 1. 

b 25). 



Chap. 26] The Beginnings of Vedic Philosophy 4:Z1 

foreshadowed here, where mind is made a cosmic prius of desire.^ Beyond 
this the poet does not go : he ends with the suggestion of a supreme deity as 
distinct from the gods who are created, and ends with a doubt whether such 
a deity has power of knowledge, that is, whether it has consciousness at all. 
We cannot, therefore, really say whether or not the first cause of the world is 
deemed a conscious entity at all : the assertion that it was not-being, and yet 
not not-being, which is in words a little inconsistent with the assertion that 
the sages found the root of being in not-being, searching in the heart, is in 
effect an assertion that it was a peculiar sort of being, different from ordinary 
being. The reference to the heart, however, as the place of search reminds 
us that the heart even in the Rigveda seems the abode of mind,^ and suggests 
that in the ultimate issue the final entity might be deemed to be possessed of 
mind, for consciousness, without an object, is the nature in the Vedanta of the 
Brahman and even of Purusa in the Samkhya. 

This hymn is the finest effort of the imagination of the Vedic poet, and 
nothing else equals it. The conceptions of unity, of fervour as the cause of 
development, of the power in the shell, of the primeval chaos of waters, are 
all familiar in the Brahmanas and on the whole degraded in their development. 
In the Rigveda itself the other efforts to attain the conception of the unity of 
the universe are directed in the main to setting up personal deities, who are 
credited with the creation and government of the whole of the universe. Of 
these the most famous and enduring is Prajapati.^ He it is who later at least 
is the god who is first born, the gplden germ, Hiranyagarbha, who creates the 
whole universe, who gives life, whose commands the gods obey, whose shadow 
is death and immortality, who is lord of man and beast, of the mountain and 
the sea. Thus in the one god are summed up the duties of creator, of ruler, 
and preserver of the universe. 

In the Brahmapas Prajapati is eternally identified with the year, the all- 
creator with the time in which he exercises his eternal process of creation, but 
this is not stated in the Rigveda, unless in a short hymn ^ we are to find the 
conception of Prajapati underlying the year. There fervour, Tapas, is made 
the starting-point of all : from it come order, Rta, and truth, the night, and 
the primeval ocean : from the ocean was born the year which rules over all, 
and as creator produces the sun and the moon, the heaven and the earth, the 
atmosphere and the light of the sun. The parallel to Prajapati is close, but the 
identity is not to be certainly established. 

Vi9vakarman, ‘ all-maker ’, is another synonym of Prajapati, and has two 
hymns ® of the tenth book devoted to his honour : they add, however, com- 
paratively little to our appreciation of the beginnings of Vedic thought : but 
we find here the tendency which is found in Indian conceptions to insist that 
^ In the Samkhya it is from Buddhi ‘ intel- * x. 121. 

lect ’ that Ahaihkara, the principle of * RV. x. 190 ; Deussen, Gesch, der PhiL I. i. 

individuality which expresses itself in 134. 

conscious will, springs. ® RV. x. 81 and 82. 

* Above, Part IV, Chap. 23, § 1. 



438 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

the creator, who is self-created, is not merely the material cause, but also the 
efficient cause of the world- The process, therefore, by which the world 
emerges from the unity at its base assumes a decidedly curious aspect : 
there is first the unity, which may be conceived as a creator god : then, 
derived from it, the waters or other primeval substance : then the god appears 
in the waters as a spirit to bring about the development of the universe. 
This triad of first principle, primitive matter, and the first-born of creation, is 
carried out mythologically in an interesting hymn to Brahma>>a^pati,^ in 
which we learn of Daksa as father of Aditi and also her son, an absurdity in 
which the philosophic basis is clearly that of the conception of the three 
stages of creation. 

Brahmanaspati is of interest, since his personality as the god of prayer is 
closely connected with the mighty power of the prayer to secure the ends of 
man. This idea finds expression also in the hymn ^ which celebrates Vac, 
speech, as the supporter of the world, as the companion of the gods, and the' 
foundation of religious activity and ail its advantages : she appears as 
impelling the father in the beginning of things and again as being born in the 
waters. The idea which has, of course, long ago been compared by Weber 
with the Greek Logos, is ingenious : the will of the creator is thus considered 
as expressed in speech, but the idea is merely a secondary and unimportant 
one in the Rigveda, and even later is never destined to be developed in much 
detail, the weight being laid on the Brahman, at once the prayer and the holy 
power in the universe. 

Already in the hymn to Vi9vakarman there appears the desire to parallel 
the creation of the universe with a sacrifice. This idea is carried to its fullest 
extent in the Purusasukta of the Rigveda,^ one of its latest hymns, which 
has often already been mentioned. The first part of the hymn is a strong 
expression that the Purusa is the universe : the whole of this universe is but 
a quarter of him, three quarters are immortal ; he has a thousand heads, 
eyes, and feet, and extends ten digits beyond the universe. In comparison 
with the normal gods he represents the whole of the world, and not one fraction 
only. The idea of the three stages appears here also : the Viraj springs from 
Purusa, and Purusa again from the Viraj, which must denote the waters in 
their cosmic aspect. The next part of the poem insists that the creation of the 
universe took the form of a sacrifice at which were present the gods, who could 
not logically have existed : the offering was a holocaust ; from the juice of the 
burning of the offering sprang the speckled ghee, and from it are derived 
the animals of the air, the house, and the wild ; all the Vedas, Rc, Saman, 
and Yajus, are assigned to his burning, and further the animals with double 
incisors and those with a single set. Then by change of idea the four castes ^ 

^ RV. X. 72. 150 ff. 

® RV. X. 125 ; cf. 71 ; Weber, Ind, Stud, * First here mentioned, one of many proofe 

ix, 473-80 ; Brunnhofer, Arische Ur-- of the late nature of the hymn ; cf. 

zeit, pp. 390-4. Macdonell and Keith, Vedic Index, ii. 

® X. 90 ; Deussen, Gesch, dev Phil, I. i. 248. 



Chap. 26 ] The Beginnings of Vedic Philosophy 439 

are derived from the cutting up of the body, and again by a further change the 
gods and the parts of the world are derived from him : the eye gives the sun, 
the breath the wind, the mind the moon, perhaps because of its clear light 
which might be compared with mind, the head the heaven, the feet the earth, 
and the navel the regions between. Time is explained as connected with the 
means of sacrifice : the rains were the butter, the summer the kindling wood, 
the autumn the gifts to the priests. The idea is crude and rough and so badly 
suited to the connexion with its context, that it is difficult not to believe that 
we have here the adaptation to the needs of a pantheistic view of a primitive 
and rude legend of the primeval giant, whence the world was born, an idea 
found in a different form in Norse mythology.^ 

^ Golther, German, Myth,, pp. 513 ff. Cf. Greece and Babylon, p. 182 ; above, 

the construction by Marduk of the p. 81, 

universe from Tiamat’s limbs ; Farnell, 



CHAPTEE 27 

THE THEOSOPHY OF THE BRAHMANAS 


§ 1. The General Character of the Brdhmana Philosophy 

The value of the Brahmanas as sources of philosophy is difficult to deter- 
mine with any accuracy. They are works in which the imagination of succes- 
sive generations of priests has been allowed to run riot : there is no modera- 
tion in their cpnception, and no great Brahmana is, as far as can be judged, the 
production of a single mind.^ The one great merit of Greek philosophy, the 
appearance of clear-cut ideas expressed in works of individual authorstdp, is 
wholly wanting for us in the Brahmanas, and the question constantly obtrudes 
itself to what extent we can believe that the priests by whom these texts were 
composed and handed down held the views which they wrote down. In many 
cases it may be taken that they did not ; the works abound in their explana- 
tions of rites with all sorts of absurdities, which we need not accuse the 
priests of being so foolish as not to recognize as absurdities ; but the question 
of the dividing line between profoundity and absurdity presents itself with the 
greatest frequency. 

It is, however, another question whether we can acquiesce in the theory of 
Deussen^ that the Brahmanas in various places are conscious of higher 
philosophical views, which they ignore and turn to ritual purposes. The 
proofs which he adduces of his theory are far from carrying conviction. In 
his view the account of the Taittiriya Brahmana ^ of the origin of the Naci- 
ketas fire is really posterior in order of conception to the account in the 
Katha Upanisad. It is there told that Vaja^ravasa made an offering, at 
which he gave to the priests all his goods, retaining, however, his son, Naci- 
ketas, as the ritual prescribes ; the boy, however, insisted that he should also 
be given, ^ and his father in just irritation at his persistence gave him to death. 
The young man goes, in the true spirit of fairy tale, to the house of Yama, who 


1 QB. xi. and i. are obviously instances of 

a later and more comprehensive, and 
an earlier and more naive, treatment 
of the same topic. For the strata 
in AB. see Keith, HOS. xxv. 40 fi. 
The Agnieayana rites and speculations 
are clearly later than most other por- 
tions of the ritual discussions ; cf. 
Oldenberg, GN. 1917, p. 16, 

2 Gesch. der PhiL 1. i. 172-80. Oltramare 

{I/histoire des idies thiosophigues, i, 
127 ff.) tacitly rejects this view. 

® iii. 11. 8. 


* No question of the sacrifice of Naciketas 
arises ; it is all a piece of imagination, 
parallel to the visit of Bhrgu to the 
other world, recounted in the fatapatha 
Brahmapa (xi. 6. 1) and the Jaiminiya 
Brahmapa, i. 42-4 (JAOS. xv. 234 ff.). 
Barua’s view {Prebuddh. Ind. Phil, 
p. 265), that the Naciketas legend 
represents the philosophy of the 
Gotamakas mentioned in the Ahgut- 
tara, is clearly quite without plausi- 
bility. 



Chap. 27] General Character of the Brdhmana Philosophy 441 

is away, and who, therefore, for three nights fails in the important duty of the 
due reception of guests. He must, therefore, on his return make atonement, 
and he gives the lad three boons, Naciketas chooses the kind reception of him 
by his father on his return, the imperishableness of his due reward for his 
sacrifices and gifts to the priests,^ and the freedom from repeated death — 
not in this world, in all probability. In the two latter cases the god teaches 
the boy the way of piling the Naciketas fire. To this Deussen takes exception, 
and thinks that originally the means to the third wish must have been the 
knowledge of the eternal redemption from the bonds of death, and he holds, 
therefore, that in the Brahmana we have the expression of a polemical 
attitude to the more philosophical doctrine. The idea appears, however, to be 
one wholly unjustifiable. The aim of the ritual is simply to assert the value 
of this fire, and the repetition of the fire as the means of knowledge of the end 
desired is perfectly natural and simple. That the boy asked for the grant of 
final release is nowhere hinted at : what he fears, according to the language 
used, is simply that, as is often threatened in the later Brahmarias, he may 
fall in due course, even in the next world, under the control of death. 

Nor is there any happier result to be seen in the second case adduced by 
Deussen. It is of course later in the Upanisads the doctrine that the whole 
essence of man is contained in the Atman, ‘ self % that the essence of the 
world is also an Atman, and that the two are identical. This idea he finds 
expressed in a sentence of the Taittiriya Brahmana,^ where it is said that the 
various gods, the plants, and trees are in various parts of man, Indra in his 
strength, Parjanya in his head, the lord, that is Rudra-fiva, in his anger, the 
Atman in his Atman, the Atman in his heart, the heart in him, he in the im- 
mortal, the immortal in the Brahman. In this passage he thinks that the 
assertion of the identity of the Atman is really a reference to the identity of 
the self of man and of the universe, an assertion of the fundamental view of the 
Upanisads wrapped up with a different view. The answer to this is clearly that 
the passage cannot be pressed to yield so much ; it is possible that it simply 
has the sense that the body of the world is in the body of man, but it is pro- 
bably merely a vague identification of self with self, without any profound 
meaning being either felt, or, though felt, hidden. The conscious identifica- 
tion of the universal spirit and the individual is a very different thing from 
such a phrase as that in question, and the theory that the phrase indicates a 
knowledge, but a degradation, of the higher truth, is too far-fetched. 

The point is of importance, since the Vedic tradition makes a clear dis- 
tinction between Brahmanas and Upanisads, though it attaches as we have 
seen the Upanisads to Brahmanas. The distinction corresponds, we may 
fairly say, in the main to a change of time and still more to a change of view. 
The Upanisads hold in some degree at least the doctrine of transmigration, 
and, though not in a developed condition, the pessimism which follows on it : 
these views are not those of the Brahmanas, which, taken all in all, know not 
‘ Cl JB.ii. 53 ; KB. vii.4. 2 jO. 8. 



442 The Philosophy of the Veda [Party 

transmigration, have no conception of pessimism, and therefore seek no release 
from the toils of life, for which in reality there is no ending. These are funda- 
mental distinctions, and they give an essentially different aspect to the 
speculations of the Brahmanas as compared with those of the Upanisads. A 
further distinction lies in the fact that the Brahmanas are essentially connected 
with the doctrine of the sacrifice. The sacrifice clearly occupied the minds of 
the priests to the practical exclusion of all else, and their theories were in large 
measure devoted to the consideration of its relation to the universe, to the gods, 
and to men.^ In the Upanisads this is not the case ; the sacrifice is still here 
and there the subject of speculation, but the speculation is no longer based on 
the view that the sacrifice is all in all. Hence it is that so little progress can 
be seen in the Brahmanas towards the development of a real philosophy. The 
Rigveda carries us nearly as far as anything excogitated in this period. 

The conception of order is one which is wholly strange to the Brahmanas, 
and any treatment of the philosophy implied and contained in them must 
neglect the divisions of these texts, which in the main follow merely the order 
of the rites performed in the sacrificial ritual. The most important of these 
conceptions from the point of view of philosophy are (1) the endeavour to 
state the nature of the highest principle of the universe, (2) the theory of the 
sacrifice, and (3) the nature of truth and right. On all of these topics there is 
available much material, but the sameness of the ideas is obvious through a 
multitude of detailed differences. 

§ 2 . The Highest Principle of the Universe 

In the period of the Brahmanas the god Prajapati occupies without doubt 
or question the position of the creator god, the supreme god of the world. 
The commencement of legend after legend proclaims his creative activity, 
often figured under the form of the practising of fervour, a reminder of the 
cosmic heat, whence came forth the power enclosed in the shell according to 
the view of the hymn of creation.^ The world egg appears as producing the 
heaven and the earth from its two parts, and, as Hiranyagarbha, it is the 
form of Prajapati, in which he proceeds to immediate creation of living beings 
of all kinds, and the ordering of the universe. These tales, of which there is 
no end, often tell us that Prajapati felt at the end of his efforts that he was 
empty, and had to be filled up again, always by some ritual process. The 
details of these stupid myths are wholly unimportant : it is enough to note 
that he is constantly the creator, the ruler, and the preserver of the world and 
is accepted by every Brahmana of the period as being the lord of the world : 
he is, it may be added, without any ethical importance ; the conception of 
him is purely intellectual, that of the unity of the universe, and the choosing 

^ This is the bandhu investigated, not the see iii. 613). See Oldenberg, Die 

connexion between the rites and the Weltanschauung derBrdhmanatexte,^. 5, 

formulae as formerly held by Winter- * RV. x. 129. Cf. L6vi, La doctrine du 
nitz {Gesch, d, ind. Litt, i. 164, n. 3 ; sacrifice, pp. 18 ff. 



Chap. 27] The Highest Principle of the Universe 443 

of Prajapati as the symbol of this unity is one of the most striking proofs of the 
great influence of the Rigveda upon the period of the Brahmanas. 

Of Prajapati’s activities the most interesting are his relation as creator to 
the gods, to the Asuras, whose connexion is with the darkness and cunning, 
and to men. He is, however, much more than the mere universe : he is the 
unmeasured, the unexpressed, as opposed to the measured and the expressed 
in nature : he is the seventeenth beside the sixteen elements of the psychic 
organs : the thirty-fourth above the thirty-three gods. He is universal 
peace, the decider of disputes among the gods ; he gives Indra his victorious 
prowess and his crown of victory. He is devoid of sorrow, for there is no 
sorrow in heaven. He is the lord of the three worlds, he sits above them and 
sees in himself the seed of creation, and the gods proceed from his mouth, the 
Asuras from his descending breath, that of nutrition. 

It is, however, clear that in Prljapati the Brahmanas do not find complete 
satisfaction for their view of the construction of the universe. The Atharva? 
veda, which in these matters must, be ranked with the Brahmanas, in its 
version of the great hymn of the Rigveda, which, as later expanded,^ mentions 
him as all-creator, leaves out the last line giv^ing his name and the Brahmana 
of that Veda, which is certainly late, replaces him by the Brahman and 
Atharvan.2 In the Brahmapas, therefore, we find efforts made to arise to a 
principle above and beyond him : in the Rigveda he produced from himself — 
the idea of world creation is always in the Vedic literature regarded in the light 
of the sending out of something already there rather than of mere bringing into 
being — ^the waters, and then entered them in the form of Hiranyagarbha, the 
golden germ. In the Taittiriya Samhita,® we find in the spirit of the hymn of 
creation the waters treated in two places as the jprius^ and Prajapati as 
arising as wind on them, and the Qatapatha Brahmana ^ goes one step farther 
in attributing to the waters as Prajapati’s predecessors as first in order the act 
of fervour, which is primarily his activity in creation. A farther step is taken 
in the Taittiriya Aranyaka,® in which the waters come first, then Prajapati, 
in whose mind desire arises ® and who practises fervour ; then his body he 
throws off : from the sap is born the tortoise, who is Purusa, who, however, 
asserts his priority to Prajapati himself, and from the flesh the seer Arunaketu, 
to whom further creative activity is assigned. Yet another step is reached in 
the ^atapatha Brahmana,^ where the first thing is stated to be not-being, 
then arises Prajapati, who is the same as Purusa, and then the Brahman, 
the holy science, the threefold Veda, with which he enters the waters as a 
creative principle. Thus sprang up the world egg, whence came forth first the 


^ Oldenberg, Weltanschauung der Bmh- 
manatexte, p. 28, n. 2, against Oltra- 
mare, Vhistoire des idies th^osophiques, 
i. 25, n. 1. 

* AV. iv. 2 ; GB. i. 1, explaining RV. x. 121. 

® V. 6 . 4. 2 ; vii. 1. 5. 1. 

* xi. 1. 6. 1 ; xiv. 8. 6. 1 (BAU. v. 5. 1), 


where the waters produce the real 
(satya), and it, as the Brahman, Praji.- 
pati, as in xi. 1, 0, the golden egg or the 
waters produces him. 

® i. 23. 

® This is the view here taken of B V. x. 129.4. 

’ CB. Vi. 1. 1. 



444 


[Part V 


The PhilosofJiy of the Veda 


Brahman itself, and then Prajapati in the form of Agni. But in another 
account ^ the priority of the Brahman over Prajapati is made absolute, not 
merely empirical : the first entity is not-being, then springs into life mind, 
i.e. the Brahman, and then Prajapati. Later still the Brahman produces 
Prajapati, but without face or sight ; then it enters him, as breath, and makes 
him mortal, to arise as a generator of beings. 

There is nothing particularly valuable or serious in these attempts, 
though they merit mention. More interesting are efforts to explain the nature 
of Prajapati, and to dispose thus of him. The position of Prajapati as decider 
of disputes leads to the view that he intervenes in the great dispute of the 
mind and speech as to which should be given the higher rank, a dispute settled 
by Prajapati in favour of mind.^ The connexion of speech and mind ^ as 
elements in Prajapati himself is expressed by the figure of union between the 
two within him, and either is occasionally made into the final entity of the 
world : thus mind is identified with Brahman, with Prajapati, and even 
with the first principle, which is neither being nor not-being, of the hymn of 
creation.^ Similarly Vac, ‘ speech is identified with Prajapati, or even placed 
above Prajapati, identified with Vi9vakarman, with the whole world, and 
with Indra.® These identifications are, however, despite their interest, of no 
importance for Indian philosophy : the will or the intellect as such does not 
in fact become the essential reality of any Indian orthodox philosophy. 
Prajapati is also the sacrifice,® and sacrifices himself to the gods, for, as we 
have seen, the order of the world is constantly compared with the sacrifice, 
and Purusa by being sacrificed creates the universe : he is also the year,^ or 
both,® and these identifications are of great importance in connexion with 
the theory of sacrifice to which we shall return. 

In the Atharvaveda ® we find several further efforts to substitute for 
Prajapati new names and ideas. In this effort it is certainly difficult to resist 
the view that the Atharvaveda is out of the main stream of Vedic develop- 
ment : the hymns seem like deliberate efforts to convert into a kind of 
poetry the philosophical ideas of the Brahmana period without any real 
inspiration of any sort. The abstractions Kala, ‘time’,^® and Rohita,^^ ‘the 
ruddy one probably the sun as the more concrete expression of time, are 
identified with Prajapati and praised as all-creating : the ox and the cow, 
Va9a,^® are also identified with the god, and may to some extent be compared 
with the view of the Brahmanas, that the sacrifice is Prajapati. But the 


1 TB. ii. 2, 9 ; JUB. iii. 38. 1 ff. 

pB. i. 4. 5. 8-11. 

» gB. vi. 1. 2 . 7 ; PB. vii. 6 . 

* TB. ii. 2. 9 ; KB, xxvi. 3 ; gB. x. 5. 3. 1. 
® PB. XX. 14. 2 ; KS. vii. 5 ; gB. v. 1. 3. 11 ; 

viii. 1. 2. 9 ; xi. 1. 6. 18. 

* gB. i, 5. 1. 16 ; 6. 3. 5, &c. ; PB. xiii. 11. 

18 ; vii. 2. 1 f. 

’ gB. i. 1 . 1 . 13 ; 5. 2. 17, &c. 


* KB. vi. 15. 

® Cf. M. Lindenau on ii. 1, ZII. i. 83 ff. 

AV. xix. 53, 54. 

“ AV. xiii. 1. 3 ; TB. ii. 5, 2 ; Henry, Le$ 
Hymnes Bohitas (Paris, 1891) ; Bloom- 
field, AJP. xii. 430 ff. ; Lindenau, 
ZII. i. 48, n. 2. 

AV. iv. 11. 

AV. X. 10. 



Ckap. 27] 


445 


The Highest Princi'ple of the Universe 


Atharvaveda goes farther and in its pseudo-theosophy exalts many other 
things to the rank of supreme powers, the ladles, the Darbha grass amulet, the 
porridge cooked for the priest, the bull offered in the sacrifice, the deity 
Anumati, and possibly others.^ In two cases a deeper meaning has been 
seen by Deussen,^ who finds in the Skambha hymns ^ an effort to find a 
principle above Prajapati which supports the whole universe, and in the 
Ucchista ^ hymn, a glorification of ‘ what is left over not, as is normally 
believed, from the offering, but after all that is empirical has been abstracted 
from the universe, an idea which he thinks can possibly be reconciled with the 
normal view by remembrance of the fact that Purusa in the sacrifice hymn is 
said to be only a quarter in the universe, the other three-quarters being 
beyond it. But it is impossible to take this speculation seriously, and the 
Skambha hymn has no great claim to be more than a poor piece of theo- 
sophical juggling with words, save in so far as it seems to identify Skambha 
with the Brahman, and as it served as a suggestion for the Mundaka 
Upanisad.® 

But beside these ideas there is to be found a much more fruitful source 
of philosophy, the creation of the conception of the Brahman as a cosmic 
principle. The origin of the meaning of Brahman is uncertain : it is inter- 
preted by the Vedtota school, absurdly/, as the absolute from vrh, ‘ twist % 

‘ tear away ’ ,* the view of Max Muller ® is that it denotes what grows, from 
vrh in the sense of ‘ grow ’, that which expresses itself in speech or in nature 
as force. The view of Deussen ’ is that it is the human will in its striving to the 
divine, when the individual in prayer returns to the timeless, spaceless, 
individualless self of his, which is God. These senses are somewhat elaborate, 
and render it difficult to think that the word really had any such meaning : 
neither for the views of Max Muller nor for that of Deussen is there any 
support in the actual use of the word in the Rigveda. There at any rate the 
word naturally and normally means prayer, but there are further develop- 
ments : it can mean spell, for the prayer may be a spell,^ and not real prayer. 


^ AV. swiii. 4. 5 ; xix, 82. 9 ; ix. 4 ; iv. 
35 ; vii. 20. 

2 Gesch. der Phil, I, i. 305 ff. 

» AV. X. 7, 8. Hauer (Die Anfdnge der 
Yogapraads im alien Indien, pp. 115 f.) 
sees in this a personification of the 
ascetic who wins ecstasy by Tapas. 
For the mystic sense of x. 7. 11, see 
Lindenau and Geidner, ZII, i. 48 f. 

« AV. xi. 7. 

® Hertel’s assertion (Mundaka Upanisad, 
pp. 45 ff.) that in AY. x. 7. 32 ff. 
hfdhman is used as masculine, is not 
probable, nor is it certain that brahman 
is the product of Skambha, though 
that may be the sense of verse 17, as 
opposed to the identification in 32-4. 


* Six Systems oj Indian Philosophy ^ pp. 68 ff. 

^ Op, cit.f pp, 240 ff. For Oldenberg’s 
latest view see GN. 1916, pp. 715 ff. ; 
for connexion with Irish bricht, Osthoff, 
BB. xxiv. 113 ff. ; cf. Scandinavian 
brag, Carnoy, Les lndo-Europ4em, 
p. 236. Hertel’s criticism (IF, xli. 205) 
that the etymology is based on a false 
interpretation of the sense of Brahman, 
is itself based on his quite incorrect 
view of Brahman (see below). 

® Bloomfield (i2e/. of Veda, p. 273) insists on 
the secondary character of this sense 
and rejects the magic fluid idea of 
Oldenberg. Oltramare (Dhistoire des 
idies tMosophiques, i. 12 ff.) sees in 
it the force passing from men to the 



446 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 


and it often means holy speech and the holy writ, the three-fold Veda. It is 
not necessary to trace to the original sense of Brahman the fact that the Vedie 
poet regards himself often as inspired : we cannot really think it probable, 
and certainly no argument had yet been adduced to show, that the prayer was 
felt to be the voice of God speaking in the prayer. But in many passages it 
seems as if Brahman must be taken rather as holy power than as prayer or 
holy rite : the gods are said to discuss the Brahman, and, when the great- 
ness of the Brahman is celebrated, it is clear that more than the mere word may 
be intended. But the growth of the idea of Brahman as a suitable expression 
for the absolute must have been greatly furthered by the extraordinary value 
attached to the prayer and to the spell. The prayer rapidly passes over to the 
lower rank : in one late hymn of the Rigveda ^ a prayer is offered that Agni 
should in union with the Brahman drive away disease. The spell appears 
repeatedly by itself in the Atharvaveda as a power to destroy evil of all 
kinds, and the Brahman is actually set over against the three Vedas as a power 
of equal force. ^ It is a very easy step from the conception of the Brahman as 
the prayer, which brings into operation the activity of the gods, or as the spell 
which is the cause of results aimed at by men, and from the conception of the 
whole body of such spells and prayers, to develop the use of the term to cover 
the idea of holy power generally, and this rendering is applicable in many 
passages of the Brahmanas, where the idea of holy writ is too vague and the 
idea of the absolute is too elaborate. 

A further element should doubtless be allowed for in the process of the 
evolution of the use of the term Brahman. Oldenberg,^ indeed, has denied 
that in the Veda there exists either the idea or the word for a supernatural 
power pervading the universe, akin to that power which in Melanesia is 
denoted by mana, among the Hurons by orenda, and variously in other parts 
of the world.^ It seems, however, unlikely that no such general idea should 
have appealed to the intellect of the Indians. If we accept, as we should, the 
view that individual powers are older in conception than manifestations of 
a universal power, still it seems natural to suppose that India developed the 
conception of a power common to the various gods, just as there was admitted 
the unity of the gods even by the time of certain Rigvedic hymns. This power, 
we may assume, was naturally denoted by the term Brahman, as a result of 
the extraordinary importance attached by priests to the prayers and spells 
which secured them their means of livelihood, and which served to propitiate 
the gods or to secuje ends desired by their patrons or themselves. Other terms 
such as Maya, which served in part to denote a power similar to mana, failed 


gods, or vice versa, in religious life ; 
cf. Giintert, Der arische Weltkdnig, pp. 
222 if. 

1 RV. X. 162. 

* VS. xi. 2 ; gB. v. 2. 4. 18. 

® Weltanschauung der Brdhmanatexte, pp. 
49 f. 


* Cf. Marett, Archiv fiir Rel. xii. 186 ff . ; 
Preuss, ibid. xiii. 427 ff. ; Soderblom, 
ibid. xvii. 1 ff. ; Strauss, Brhaspati im 
Rgveda, p. 20 ; Hubert and Mauss, 
Ann6e social., 1902-3, pp. 108 ff. ; 
Soderblom-Stube, Das Werden des 
Gottesglaubens, pp. 54 ff. 



Chap. 27] 


447 


The Highest Principle of the Universe 

to be widely generalized. Asu possibly served the same purpose, if we believe 
the view of Guntert that Asura denotes primarily and properly the possessor 
of mana^ 

A very different view of the nature of the Brahman is presented by Hertel,^ 
who asserts that the misinterpretation of the term is one of the many fatal 
errors of Vedic scholarship, shared alike by the Indian and the western inter- 
preters. The essential work of Indian philosophers of the Upanisad period 
was to depersonalize the old gods, and to show that in the macrocosm and the 
microcosm alike there existed nothing save nature powers and processes, which 
required no explanation by the assumption of divinities. The Ksatriyas who 
were the sources of the doctrine of the Upanisads rejected the doctrine of 
personal deities, and also the theory that man’s lot depended on his deeds, 
and constructed in lieu a materialistic, monistic, science of nature, which 
was at once morally indifferent and in essence atheistic. The priests decided 
to render innocuous this doctrine by amalgamating it with their own as an 
esoteric system. On this view the Brahman is that which fills all beings, 
stimulates the sense organs, penetrates the whole world, and encircles the 
universe. Its true nature is revealed in those passages of the Upaniwsads which 
describe the Brahman as qualified, the unqualified Brahman being manifestly 
the product of further refinement of speculative thought. Now in certain 
passages ^ we find that the Brahman is the bodily warmth in man, which is 
identified with his self, Atman, and also with the cosmic light or fire (tejas or 
jyotis). These passages are to be taken perfectly literally, and this version 
throws an important light on the Indian ascetic, Tapasa, who is a very 
different person from the Christian ascetic. The latter practises chastity and 
flees from desires, because these are the work of the devil, and he seeks to kill 
carnal longings. The Tapasa inflicts even more serious penances on himself 
and remains celibate, merely to increase the vital fire within him, and fit him- 
self for the abundance of sexual delight which Indian opinion as early as the 
Atharvaveda ^ and even in the Upanisads ® assures him. The fire, however, 
which composes the self of the individual, is essentially bound up with the 
power of thought.® The cosmic Brahman, on the other hand, is fire (jyotis) in 
no metaphorical sense ; ’ the hrahmariah parimarah of the Aitareya Brah- 
mana ® really means that all comes from fire and is resolved into it again. Now 
the connexion of the individual and the cosmic fire is simple; ^ the rays of the 
sun bring fire into the heart of the individual, and at death the fire departs from 

1 See Der arische Weltkdnig, pp. 98 ff., ® Kaus. iii. 5 ff. ; TU. iii. 6. 1 ; x. 3. 

229 ff. « BAli. iv. 3. 7 ; CU. iii. 14, 2. 

^ IF. xli (1923), 185 ff. ’ BAU, iv. 4. 16 f. ; CU. viii. 3. 4 ; 4. 2 ; 

“ BAU.iv. 3. 1 ff. ; 4. 1 ff. ; CU. iii. 13. 8 ; 12. 2 f. ; Mund. ii. 2. 8 ; 8 ; 

Mund, iii. 1. 5 ; seed is the concentrated the sun is the Brahman, CU. iii, 19. 1. 

te^as, AU. ii. 1. viii. 28 ; cf. Kaus. ii. 12. The interpreta- 

* iv. 34. 2 ; cf. Lanman, HOS. vii. 206 ; tion is clearly impossible. 

RV. ix. 113. 11 (cf. TB. ii, 4. 6, 5 f. ; * CU. iii. 13. 7 f . ; v. 3 (five fire-doctrine) ; 

Muir, OST, v. 307, n. 462). viii. 6. 1 ff. 



448 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

Mm back to the sun whence it came, or rather to the heaven of fire, which lies 
above the earth and of which the sun and the moon are doors pierced in it. The 
idea of this path of light is older than the Upanisads, for it occurs in verses 
cited in the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad,^ and the Atharvaveda ^ knows the 
threads of which life is woven and calls this knowledge the great Brahmana, 
that is the great secret of the Brahman. Prior to the Upanisads we find 
the conception in a personal shape, Brhaspati, the lord of the heaven of light, 
the peer of Zeus Pater, of Jupiter, of the German war god, a form of Dyaus 
himself. It is for this that he appears in the Rigveda as the highest of gods, 
their father and ruler, guardian of the Bta, leader of men, enemy of aU that 
is false, an Indian parallel to Ahura Mazdah. Significant is his connexion with 
Nara9ahsa, for in the Avesta Nairyosanha is not merely the envoy of Ahura 
Mazdah, but also the fire which burns in the kings and secures them in their 
power. Brhaspati as lord of the heaven is responsible for breaking through 
its stone boundary to set the sun as a source of the streaming forth of its 
light ; moreover he has placed the stars there, and released through the 
apertures the waters amid the noise of his thunders.^ Significant is the 
assertion that he encompasses or is present in all (vibhu)^ the Rigveda ^ thus 
saying of the personal deity what the Upanisads assert of the depersonalized 
Brahman. 

The obvious question why the term Brahman is so regularly used of 
prayer in the Rigveda is answered by the theory that the cause is used for the 
effect, and similarly the use of re and dh% dhlti, and dldhiti is explained. 
Moreover a suitable etymology is found in the comparison with the Greek 
and Latin fiagro, and the Brahmacarin of the Atharvaveda ® is ex- 
plained as one who concentrates in himself the fire from which all conditions 
and actions in the world are derived. The fact that Brhaspati appears in the 
Rigveda already as a moon god, which Hertel accepts from Hillebrandt,® is 
explained as due to the gradual fading out of the idea of the sun and moon as 
merely doors to heaven and the abode of the Soma, the rain, and the Fathers, 
and the emergence of the conception of the moon as actually the home of 
these beings. 

Ingenious as is the theory, it is clear that it cannot claim acceptance as 
probable. The idea that fire pervades and constitutes the essence of the 
universe is based on the interpretation given to the Brahman ; independent 
evidence is wholly lacking ; Hertel cites only an Atharvan passage in which 
it is stated that fire exists in the earth, the plants, the waters, stones, men, 
cattle, and horses, and an Avestan reference ^ to six fires which the Pahlavi 
tradition interprets as the fire in kings, the temple fire, and that of everyday 


^ iv. 4. 8 ff. ; cf. CU. viii. 6. 1. 

® X. 8. 87. 

^ Cf. Part II, Chap. 10, § 2. 

« ii. 24. 11. 

® xi. 5. 24 ; cf. V. Henry, Les Livres X, XI 


et XII de V Atharva-Veda, pp. viii ff. 
« Ved, Myth, i. 404 fl ; iii. 450. 

’ xii. 1. 19 ff. 

8 Yasna, xvii. 11. 



Chap. 27 ] The Highest Principle of the Universe ' 449 


use, the fire in the body of men and beasts, the fire in plants, the fire of 
lightning, and the fire in the paradise of Ahura Mazdah. Neither of these 
passages even suggests that fire is the essential principle of the universe, and 
the only other proof, the etymology of Brahman, is extremely far from con- 
vincing. Not a single passage is adduced in which Brahman normally or 
naturally denotes fire, and the transfer of meaning alleged is harsh and im- 
plausible, for the alleged parallel of rc and dhi is quite unproved. The whole 
theory in fact rests on the overestimation of the terms light (tejas or jyotis) 
applied to the self, individual or cosmic, and insistence on treating them as 
essentially material. We have to deal with an early stage of intellectual effort, 
and with the great difficulty of expressing the nature of the self in anything but 
material terms, as well as with the fact that the Brahman is not an abstraction. 
It is something which embraces all, and which is manifested in the warmth of 
the body and in the heat of the sun. But it is manifested also in the breath 
of man and in the wind, and it is to exaggerate one element out of all propor- 
tion to find the fundamental reality in fire, even when that fire is deemed to be 
endowed with intelligence, and therefore to be much more than merely 
material. 

In the process of evolution of the conception of Brahman an important 
part is played by the identification of the Brahman and Brhaspati, ‘ the lord 
of prayer ’ : he is in the later period of the Brahmanas always regarded as 
the Purohita of the gods, as their Brahman priest in the technical sense of the 
term and also as the Brahman itself,^ an idea which is often expressed. Now 
Brhaspati is the depository of great power already in the Rigveda, and this 
element undoubtedly aided the conception of the Brahman to obtain great 
prominence. This prominence as usual takes the form of identification with 
many diverse things, such as speech and truth and holy order, Rta,^ as the 
wind into which the five deities, sun, moon, fire, lightning and rain ail enter and 
from which they emerge,^ as the breaths,^ and often as the sun.® In the latter 
aspect the Brahman appears as the firstborn of the day, and perhaps also as 
the firstborn of the whole creation, a conception which places it on a lower 
plane than the final reality. The tendency is, however, more and more to 
place the Brahman on that plane: as we have seen, Prajapati, who at first 
is the superior of and the creator of the Brahman, as the holy writ, became 
identified with the Brahman, as is often expressly stated in the Brahmanas, 
and is at last placed below the Brahman as a metaphysical principle. With 
this view we attain to the conception of Brahman Svayambhu,® the Brahman 
which exists of itself and which is regarded as being the cause of the universe, 
in which it sacrifices itself in the usual parallelism of the world and the 


1 AB. i. 19. 1 ; 30. 6 ; TS. iii. 1. 1. 4 ; ^B. 

iii. 9. 1. 11 ; xiii. 5. 4. 25. 

® gB. ii. 1. '4. 10 ; iv. 1. 4. 11. 

® AB. viii. 28. 

^ CB. viii. 4. 1. 3. 

^ fB. vii. 4. 1. 14 ; viii. 5. 3. 7 ; TS. v. 3. 4. 
^ [n.o.s. 32] 


4 ; VS. xxiii. 48 ; KB. viii. 3 ; TA. x. 
63. 15, &c. 

e TB. ii. 8. 8. 8-10 ; AV. iv. 1 ; AB. i. 19. 1 ; 
KB. viii. 4 ; TA. x. 1. 1, &c. ; f B. xi. 
2. 3 ; xiii. 7. 1. 1. 



450 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

sacrifice, the ground of the continued existence of the universe, and the 
source into which on death things return. Hence we meet the idea that by 
correct sacrifice a man may succeed in obtaining community of life and abode 
with the Brahman, or by right study of the Veda avoid repeated death and 
attain identity of essence with the Brahman.^ The further step is taken to 
apply to the Brahman the attribute of taking the place of the highest god, 
Prajapati or Vi9vakarman of the Rigveda, and this is duly done in the 
Taittiriya Brahmana.^ The Atharvaveda ® in its own peculiar way recognizes 
the same idea in its explanation of the Brahman and the Brahmacarin, the 
Brahman student, as the highest of beings. 

The final step to be taken in the conception of the Brahman was to identify 
it with the Atman,^ which, from another point of '^ew in the Brahmanas, 
attains the position of representative of the unity of the world, and this step 
is partially taken in the Taittiriya Brahmana,® where the Brahman and the 
omnipresent Atman are identified, and the self of man, as it seems, is stated to 
be the mode of finding the Atman, while knowledge of it frees from contamina- 
tion by works, and the same idea occurs in the Qatapatha Brahmana.® Both 
these passages, however, are clearly transitional to the period of the TJpanisads, 
and mark the end of the reflections of the Brahmanas before the new views 
were definitely accepted. 

Apart from the most improbable etymology, suggested by Hertel, which 
has been discussed above, there is, as we have seen, no ground to find more in 
the word than, in the first place, prayer, and the development which it 
imdergoes is in all probability to be attributed to the growth of the importance 
of the prayer in the mind of the priest, not in the realization of the subjective 
nature of prayer as the striving towards the divine, which is in reality the 
human, will. The Brahman is, therefore, rather a conception of the ritual and 
of religion, not a psychological principle, and it is in my opinion impossible 
to accept the view of Deussen,"^ that the Atman is evolved from the Brahman 
by developing the conception of the subjective element, which lay in the 
latter. The conception of the Brahman and the Atman is late, and has 
every appearance of being a syncretism ® due to the fact that the two expres- 
sions had by diverse ways come to be regarded as expressions for the same 
thing, the highest reality and unity of the universe, and the history of the 
Atman suggests that it had from the first an independent existence. This view 
is certainly strengthened by the fact that the opinion of Deussen is based 
to some degree on a new etymology, which he suggests for that word : in 
place of the root an, ‘ breathe \ at, ^ move or az? ( = vd), ‘ blow and connexion 
with the Greek arfjLo^ dvTfirjv, and Germanic atum^ aedhm, he suggests that 

1 QB. xi. 4. 4 ; 5. 6. 9. ® x. 6. 3. See also TA. iii. 11, 1 ; VS. xxxiv. 

2 TB. ii, 8. 9. 3-7. 1-6. 

2 X. 2 and xi. 5. ’ Gesch. der Phil. I. i. 284 ff. 

AV. X. 8. 44, recognizes Atman as the * Oldenberg, Buddha, pp. 30 ff. ; Die Lehre 

world soul probably for the first time. der TJpanishaden, pp. 44 ff. 

* iii. 12. 9 ; cf. PB. xxv. 18. 5. 



Chap. 27] 


451 


The Highest Principle of the Universe 

it is a highly abstract word derived from the roots a seen in aJiam, ‘ I \ and ta^ 
‘ this so that it denotes ‘ this 1/ the self, which in due course is felt to be 
the final expression possible for the ultimate fact of existence, arrived by 
stripping away the various coverings which envelop the ultimate reality, the 
covering of the body, the covering of the mind, the covering of the intellect. 
This view he supports, not merely by the undoubted difficulties ^ in the 
explanation of the form Atman, and of the corresponding form in the Rigveda, 
without the a, but also by the suggestion that the development of meaning 
assumed from ‘ wind in which sense it is found only four times in the Rigveda, 
to ^ self ’ is more difficult than the development of meaning which his own 
etymology would give. Thus he thinks from ‘ this I ’ could easily spring 
the view of the body in contrast to the outer world, and thence the trunk in 
contrast to the limbs, and on the other hand the sense of the soul in opposition 
to the body, and real being in opposition to unessential things. The possibility 
of such an etymology must, however, be denied : without pretending that 
the problems of the relation of Atman and Tmanis easy, or that the etymology 
is certain, the fact remains that the word does mean ‘ wind ’ in the Rigveda,^ 
that the normal use of it there is ‘ breath of life and that the meaning 
‘ wind ’ is harder to deduce from ‘ breath than vice versa, and that to 
deduce either ' wind ’ or ‘ breath ’ from the conception of this I ’ is extremely 
difficult. 

The real history of Atman seems then to be that from the meaning ‘ wind ’ 
sprang early up that of ^ the breath ’ : thence came the meaning ‘ self % as 
when it is said of Surya that he is the self of that which stands and moves.^ 
Then we have the use of the self as a reflexive pronoun, and the use as meaning 
the body,^ an idea which is clearly intended when it is contrasted with Prana, 
‘ the breath ’ : the meaning "" trunk as opposed to limbs, is an easy develop- 
ment fronr this sense. But the sense ‘ breath ’ or ‘ self ’ is also capable of 
being understood in more abstract ways, and we, therefore, find Atman used 
to denote the essential nature of a thing : this use is already found in the 
Rigveda ® where the nature of the breath, the blood, the self of the earth, is 
put as a question, and similarly we hear of the self of the disease Yaksma,"^ 
of all beings, and the adjective atmanvant^ ‘ possessing existence But of 
much more importance is the development of the use of the word to denote the 
self of man in direct distinction from the members of his body and his body 
itself : it must be admitted that the use is far from common in the Vedic 
literature, but twice in the Atharvaveda ® the contrast of Atman with breath 
and body seems clearly intended, and the same thing must be admitted for 
two passages in the ^atapatha,^® in which either one or ten breaths are set over 

Bloomfield, AJP. xvi. 421. viii. 7. 23, &c. 

» vii. 87. 2 ; i. 34. 7 ; x. 02. 13 ; 168. 4. « i. 164. 4. 

» RV. i. 115. 1 ; ix. 2. 10 ; 6. 8, &c. RV. ix. 07. 11 ; AV. viii. 7. 0, and often. 

^ RV. X. 163. 5, 6 ; AV.iii. 20. 8 ; vi. 53. 2 ; » TB. ii. 1. 6. 1 ; AV. x. 2. 32 ; xi. 2. 10. 

vii. 67. 1, &c. * V. 1. 7 ; 9. 7. 

^ VS. xix. 93 ; fB. i. 3. 2. 2 ; vii. 1. 1. 21 ; iv. 2. 3. 1 ; xi. 2. 1. 2. 

9 * 



452 The Philosophy of the Veda [Partv 


against the self. Further, it seems that efforts were being made to define the 
self either as mind or as consciousness, Vijhana.^ 

The development of the meaning of Atman was accompanied by the 
development of the conception of the relation of the Atman of the universe and 
the Atman of the individual. The comparison of the macrocosm and the 
microcosm had been familiar from the time of the Rigveda,^ where the cosmic 
Purusa is clearly closely allied to the individual man. In the case of Purusa, 
however, under that name we do not find that the conception of his Atman 
was developed : of the individual man we have the question asked, later at 
least, what is left after his members are dispersed by death ; but, though it 
might have been expected that this problem would have been posed in the 
case of Purusa, there is no evidence that this was ever done. The reference to 
the cosmic Atman seen by Deussen ® in a passage of the Taittiriya Brahmana ^ 
is as shown above too doubtful to found any argument upon : if the cosmic 
Atman is really deliberately meant, it is very strange that the series of identi- 
fications of macrocosm and microcosm should not end there, but should 
proceed to the abode of the Atman in the heart, the heart in the man, the man 
in the immortal, and the immortal in the Brahman. More important is the 
recognition of the Atman as cosmic in the Atharvaveda, as the conclusion of 
the second Skambha hymn.^ 

In the case of Prajapati, the development of the conception of the Atman 
is very clear : the creator enters, in the view of the Rigveda ® and of all 
subsequent texts, into the creation with his spirit, and the terms now used 
in the late works, the Taittiriya Aranyaka ’ and the Tadeva section of the 
Vajasaneyi Samhita,® are that he enters with the self into the self. It is 
needless to press the exact force of these words : it is sufficient to note that 
they obviously lend themselves to the view of the identity of the cosmic self 
with the self of man. The actual expression of this identity is found only 
occasionally and in late texts such as the Taittiriya Aranyaka ® and the 
^ivasamkalpa section of the Vajasaneyi Saihhita,^® both works which are of 
the latest period of the Brahmana epoch and closely analogous to Upanisads, 
while the identification of the Atman and the Brahman is also, as we have seen, 
confined to texts of the most developed stratum of Brahmana philosophy, the 
Taittiriya Brahmana and the ^atapatha Brahmana, in either case in late 
chapters. 

Of other expressions of the inner nature of man, the Purusa is of no very 
serious importance for the philosophy of this epoch : he is indeed mentioned 
in two sections of the Vajasaneyi Samhita, the Uttaranarayana and the 


1 QB. X. 3. 5. 13 ; cf. iii. 8. 3. 8 (mind). 

2 X. 90. Cf. below, Chap. 29. 

2 Gesch. der Phil, I. i, 333. 

4 iii. 10. 8. Cf. above, p. 441. 
e X. 8. 44. 

« X. 121. 1. 

’ X. 1. 19. 


® xxxii. 11. 

® iii. 11. 1. 

xxxiv. 1-6 ; cf. Scheftelowitz, ZDMG. 

Ixxv. 201-12. 
iii. 12. 9. 

1* X. 6. 3. 



Chap. 27] 


453 


The Highest Principle of the Universe 


Tadeva, in which he is identified with Prajapati, and with Brahman, ensouls 
nature, is before but is also produced by the gods, is the source of time and is 
without limit in space ; moreover the cosmic and the individual self appear 
to be identified, and we find the doctrine ^ that, as Anquetil du Perron expresses 
it, ‘ Quisquis Deum intelligit Deus fit ; ’ the inspired seer can become 
identical with the deity, entering with his own self into the self.^ But, though 
the term Purusa is occasionally used as a vague expression for the human 
personality,® it is not destined to become in this period ever a very definite or 
clear conception. On the other hand the Brahmanas have an important 
principle of existence to match with the Atman, and one the prominence of 
which never disappears entirely in Indian philosophy, though the Samkhya 
system seeks to diminish its place. This is the conception of the Prana or the 
Pranas, ‘ breath ’ or ‘ vital airs ’, which achieves an importance denied to the 
older term Asu. 

The importance of the breath is due obviously to its connexion with the 
life of man or beast, and we find in the ^atapatha Brahmana ^ the express 
statement that the victim is the breath, since only while it breathes is it a 
beast at all, and, when the breath departs, it is a mere inert mass. But the 
term is naturally enough extended to other forms of the activity of life, the 
speech, the hearing, the sight, and the mind, and further in the Vedic view 
between the organ and the activity there was no very clear distinction : ® the 
ear is what hears and the hearing, the eye what sees and the sight, and so on. 
The number of the vital airs is very various : they can be reckoned pretty 
much at pleasure as two, three, five, seven, nine, twelve, thirteen, and so on. 
But nine are often mentioned : seven in the head and two below.® The seven 
in the head are the mind, speech, the breath itself, the two eyes and the two 
ears, and those below the organs of reproduction and evacuation. But the 
seven can be reduced to five by counting the ears and eyes as one organ each, 
and from quite different points of view we have six,^ two eyes, nostrils and 
ears, or two, Prana and Udana, or three. Prana, Udana, and Apana.® These 


^ Cf. AV. ii. 1 as interpreted by Lindenau, 
ZII. i. 33 His view (p. 37, n. 1) 
that RV. iv. 26 and 27 refer to the 
divinity of man is without justification ; 
in neither case is a man the speaker. 

^ xxxi. 17-22 (— TA. iii. 13) ; xxxii. 1-12 
(=:TA. X. 1. 2-4). 

® Deussen, Gesch, der PhiL I. i. 288 ff. 
Its use in the Samkhya is significant ; 
the one Purusa regarded as pure spirit 
here is split into innumerable entities. 
^ iii. 8. 3. 15. 

® An attempt at an analysis of perception 
occurs in the Buddhist canonical work, 
the Dhammasamgani ; see C. Rhys 
Davids, Buddhist Manual of Psycho- 
logical Ethics^ ^ pp. Iviii ff. ; but even 


there it is quite impossible to say if the 
conception was not materialistic (as 
in the Milindapanha, p. 60 ; Walleser, 
Die philosophische Gmndlage des dlteren 
Buddhismusy pp. 113, 114). In truth, 
the distinction of psychic and physio- 
logical elements had not been yet 
thought out ; see below. Chap. 28, § 10. 

« QB. vi. 4. 2. 5 ; ix. 2. 2. 5 ; x. 1. 3. 4, &c. 

’ 5B. xii. 9. 1. 9. 

® A. H- Ewing, The Hindu Conception of the 
Functions of Breath (1901-3) ; Caland, 
ZDMG. Iv. 2611tf. ; Ivi. 556 ff. ; Keith, 
Aitareya Aranyaka, p. 217, n. 4 ; Old- 
enberg, Weltanschauung der Brahmana- 
textCt pp. 65 ff. ; G. W. Brown, Human 
Body in the Upanishads, pp. 201 ff. 



454 


[Party 


The Philosophy of the Veda 


vital airs are repeatedly called the gods, Devas : they are produced from the 
ascending airs of Prajapati with which he created the gods, and the view that 
these activities are divine is a perfectly natural one from the point of view of 
Vedic religion, and it is quite unnecessary ^ to attribute the use of the term 
to the fact that no word for nature powers existed. 

The multitude of Pranas, however, rest upon a single Prana, which is some- 
times, it would seem, sought to be identified with mind, but normally is called 
the Mukhya Prana, the chief of the breaths. Its position appears clearly in 
a legend of creation in the fatapatha Brahmana.^ From the not-being arose 
the seven Pra^ias in the shape of the seven seers : they were kindled up by the 
Prana in the middle as Indra, whereupon they produced the seven Purusas, 
which again united themselves to one Purusa. The same priority of one 
Prana is elsewhere expressed by the relationship of it to the others as like that 
of Prajapati to the gods.® 

It was of course quite inevitable that the eternal comparison of macrocosm 
and microcosm should here play its part, and so, in point of fact, we find the 
relationship of the breath as the principle of life in man, and the cosmic 
Prana, which is the wind, asserted in the ^fatapatha Brahmana.^ Nor are 
there lacking evidences of efforts to make Prana the one reality, as Atman was 
so made : Prana is identified with Prajapati, and also the Atman, but these 
views are late and isolated.® The theosophy of the Atharvaveda ® with its 
cosmopolitanism, however, accepts the Prana readily as an expression of the 
universal, just as it accepts the Brahman, and as it sees in the Atman the same 
essence as the meaning of the universe. 


§ 3. The Theory of the Sacrifice 

Amid an infinity of varied details the Brahmanas present a perfectly 
definite body of opinion as to the fundamental nature of the sacrifice,’ and in 
connexion with the sacrifice of the gods, the Asuras, the seers, and men. This 
theory is the most characteristic and independent part of the Brahmanas : 
in the speculations as to the unity of the universe and the god in whom that 
unity finds expression, the Brahmanas are only inheritors of the speculation 
of the Rigveda, but in the doctrine of the sacrifice they develop a theory 
which may have been held in germ at least in the age of the Bigveda, but which 
is not expressed there and which doubtless in considerable measure is a new 
creation. This is indicated by one fundamental fact : the sacrifice in the 
Brahmanas is a piece of magic pure and simple : this is assuredly not the 


^ Hertel, IF. xli, 188 . 

* vi. 1. 1. In vii. 5. 2. 6 it is identified with 
mind. 

3 5B. vii. 5. 1. 21. 

^ X. 3. 3. 6. 

« gB. iv. 2. 3. 1 ; xi. 1. 1. 17. Cf. later 
JUB. iii. 1 f. ; CU. iv. 3 ; Lfiders, SBA. 
1916, pp, 278 ff. (the SamvargavidyS). 


« xi. 4 ; cf. TA. iii. 14. 

’ Practically all the evidence is collected 
in L^vi, La doctrine du sacrifice dans les 
Brahmanas ; the texts (e. g. KS.) not 
used by him add little of value. Cf. 
also Oldenberg, Weltanschauung der 
Brdhmanatexte, pp. 159”67. 



Ckap. 27] 


455 


The Theory of the Sacrifice 

attitude of the average seer of the hymns of the Rigveda. The turning into 
magic of the sacrifice is, we have seen, a conception which is secondary : the 
existence of magic as early as the sacrifice is one thing ; the converting of 
what was originally a sacrifice into magic is, like the art of black magic, 
a subsequent development. 

In this theory of the universe there is much that cannot be called in any 
normal sense philosophical, but taken as a whole it is impossible to deny the 
name of philosophy to an ordered view of the universe, fully thought out, 
and within its fundamental limitations logical and complete. 

The basis of the whole system is the identification of the sacrifice with 
Prajapati, who is the creator excellence. The exhaustion of Prajapati on 
creation is the exhaustion of the sacrifice : the work of creation is carried out 
with the aid of the sacrifices of various kinds : the danger to which the 
creatures whom he creates are exposed from the jealousy of the gods has to be 
overcome by new sacrifices invented for them, for Agni, the Maruts, even for 
Varuna. As the sacrifice, Prajapati is all creative, the gods and the Asuras 
arise from his upgoing and his descending breaths, from him are sprung men, 
the beasts, the plants and the trees, the minerals as well as the heaven and 
the earth and the mountains. But, while he is the all-father, still his nature 
as the sacrifice presents another relationship : he is father of Agni, but 
as the sacrifice Agni recomposes him and so is his father : ^ and similarly 
with the gods as a whole. Moreover he is the creator of the sacrifice as 
well as the sacrifice : he invents rite after rite to aid the gods in their 
struggles with the Asuras, and he was the first to invent the words used 
in the sacrifice and its varied forms. Moreover the sacrifice is not only 
Prajapati, but, as he is the first to sacrifice, so he is the first victim to be 
offered.^ He gave himself to the gods, and when he did so he created a 
counterpart of himself in the form of the sacrifice, and thus he redeemed 
his life from the gods. Yet again, as the first to sacrifice, he is the first to 
win the reward of sacrifice and to ascend to the sun.^ 

Prajapati is not merely the creator of beings, but he reduces them to order 
from their confusion by entering them with form, Rupa, and name, Naman.^ 
The same feat is accorded to the Brahman by another text, and the form is 
identified with mind and the name with speech.® These two figure in a contest 
for priority, the mind claiming that speech is but an imitation of it, while 
speech lays stress on the fact that it gives means of expression and communica- 
tion. But Prajapati decides, in favour of the mind, a struggle which is con- 
stantly taken up again in the Upanisads, and which has a famous parallel 
in the Roman legend of the contest of the members and the stomach.® Speech, 

1 gB. vi. 1. 2. 26, 27. « TB. ii. 2. 7. 1. « xi. 2. 6. 1--6. 

* PB. vii. 2. 1 ,* gB. xi. 1. 8. 2-4. In RV. » TS. ii. 5. 11. 4 ; PB. vi. 4. 7 ; xi. 1. 3 ; 
X. 121. 2 (dtmadd) this sense has been MS. iv. 6. 4 ; QB. i. 4. 5. 8-11 ; BAU. 

seen, but wrongly (cf. Lindenau, ZII. i. vi. 3 ; CU. v. 1. 1 ; AU. ii. 4 ; PU. ii. 

46, n. 2). See also below, Appendix B. 3 ; fA. ix ; Lanman, Hindu Pantheism, 

® gB. X. 2. 2, 1. pp. 18, 19. 



456 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

however, remains of value and aid to Prajapati, and encourages him when he is 
in doubt or is wearied ; he sends her forth to be revealed as the earth, atmo- 
sphere, and sky ; she is his bride, to bear creation.^ She forms, therefore, a 
ground of contest between the gods and the Asuras : the gods win her by 
inducing the sacrifice to make overtures to her : ^ again the gods obtain by the 
offer of her the Soma from the Gandharvas : she brings back the Soma, and 
the two sides seek to retain her : the Gandharvas recite the Veda, the gods 
dance and sing and win her foolish heart by these base means. Again she 
flies from them and enters the wood, but the gods find her and she curses the 
wood for delivering her up : the trees, however, distributed her in the drum, 
the lute, and other places.^ At another time she is wroth with the Angirases 
who prefer Surya to her as a sacrificial fee, and leaves the gods, remaining 
in the space between them and the Asuras and becoming a lioness.^ She is, 
however, won over. The distinction of speech was accomplished by Indra in 
return for a fourth part of the Soma : one quarter only is distinct, the other 
parts are the speeches of the beasts, the birds, and insects.® Among men the 
speech is best in the country of the Kuru-Paficalas, and the Asuras and 
barbarians alike talk a bad speech.® 

To the other gods the sacrifice stands in a slightly different relation : 
Visnu indeed is often identified with the sacrifice, but this idea, though im- 
portant, and doubtless an expression of the high standing in the pantheon of 
that god, is not in all probability much more than a recognition of this im- 
portance. Visnu plays no very great part in the theosophy proper. The 
gods are, like the Asuras, children of Prajapati, but, though born of the nobler 
part of the god, are yet in physical strength weaker : they are, however, 
superior in science, and by their knowledge of the sacrifice they can defeat 
their rivals. They are essentially in the control of the sacrificer : the seers can 
even seize and hold them fast, for despite their possession of more than one 
body they can be present at only one rite at a time. Kutsa holds Indra by 
cords ; Lu^a taunts the god who breaks free, but Kutsa with a new Saman 
brings him back : a later version of the legend, however, allows of the division 
of the god into his person and his greatness.^ The sacrifice or the threefold 
knowledge, which is the essence of the sacrifice, is the essence of the gods. The 
gods are lovers of the recondite,® compact of truth, but the truth is nothing but 
exactness in the rites and the formulae of the sacrifice. To the sacrifice they 
owe the glory and power which is theirs, and, what is far more important, their 

1 PB. X. 2. 1 ; XX. 14. 2 ; KS. xii. 5. In ® gB. iii. 2. 3. 15 ; 1. 23, 24 ; KB. vii. 6 ; 
the domestic ritual of the gabali rite Macdonell and Keith, Vedic Index, ii. 

she appears as a wish-cow ; cf. 279. For speech as a divine gift to the 

Hopkins, TCA. xv. 27, n. 2. singer, cf. AV. ii. 1. 4. 

gB. iii. 2. 1. 18-23. ^ ’ PB. ix. 2. 22 ; JB. i. 228 in JAOS. xviii. 

3 PB. vi. 5. 10 ; TS. vi. 1. 4.1 l ; MS. iii. 6. 8. 32 ; cf. PB. ix. 4. 14, &c. 

* gB. iii. 5. 1. 21. « paroksakdrna, gs. vi. 1, 1, and often ; 

® TS. vii. 4. 7. 3 ; MS. iv. 5. 8 ; gB. iv, 1. in AB., TB., GB. as paroksapriya. So 

3. 6. Indra = Arjuna, gB. ii, 1, 2. 11. 



457 


Chap. 27] The Theory of the Sacrifice 


immortality,^ which they gain by the sacrifice : they are ever represented as 
being in fear of death, or Yama, or the ender, the year, death, Prajapati. 
Over the question of immortality they have desperate struggles with the 
Asuras, whom the ^atapatha often, and the Pa hca vinca once, make their 
elder brothers : in one case the gods were being steadily killed because ^usna, 
the Asura, had in his mouth the ambrosia, which Indra as an eagle stole from 
him, thus depriving his breath of the power to revive the smitten Asuras.^ 
The struggle with the Asuras repeats itself in innumerable forms : in one case 
Indra metamorphizes himself into a female jackal, and runs thrice round, 
winning the earth : ® more famous is the use of Visnu, the sacrifice, as a 
dwarf to accomplish the winning of the earth from the Asuras,^ or more 
directly the three citadels of the Asuras, of iron, silver, and gold in the three 
worlds, are overthrown by the performance of the Upasad ceremonies.^ 
The gods also by the use of the new- and full-moon sacrifices force the Asuras 
to abandon the half month of waning moon, which they had occupied.® 

In the struggle the sacrifice plays a constant part : the gods are often 
aided by advice from Prajapati, and they apply themselves to severe penances 
to bring about victory, but the decisive thing in their favour is their knowledge 
of the correct mode of offering : the Asuras put the bricks in the fire altar 
with the mark below,’ in the preliminary rites they shave first the hair, then 
the beard, then the arm-pits ; ® they offer a white victim born of a black 
mother,® and these errors are fatal. They try magic but without success. The 
gods on their part cajole the chaplains of the demons, fanda, Marka, and 
Ucanas, and are willing to break faith for victory : they detach the Raksases 
from the Asuras by promise of equal shares of the spoil, and they refuse them 
any share at all.^® They defeat the Asuras by the inability of the latter to find 
a feminine for the word five,^^ but more often they have to fight hard battles. 
One story shows the Asuras seeking to build a fire altar to reach the heaven : 
Indra disguises himself, is allowed to put on a brick, and, when it is all but 
finished, he drags it away with the result that the altar falls.^^ Even, however, 
within the divine family there are disagreements : the ancient Sadhya gods 
seem to have vanished from importance,^® but the Adityas and the Angirases 
are bitter rivals. Here, again, however, the value of knowledge of the sacrifice 
is the most important thing of all, and the Adityas are superior by far in this 


1 TS. vii. 2. 4. 1 ; AV. ii. 1. 5 ; xiii. 1. 7 ; 
5B. xi. 2. 3. 6 ; x. 4. 3. 3-8 ; MS. ii. 
2. 2 ; iii. 4. 7 ; PB. xxiv. 19. 2, and 
often. That they, being born, will 
pass away, is recognized only later 
(cf. Maitr. i. 4). 

® KS. xxxvii, 14. 

® TS. vi. 2. 4. 3, 4 ; MS. iii. 8. 3. 

“ MS, iii. 8. 3 ; QB. i. 2. 5. 1-7. 

« TS. vi. 2. 3. 1 ; MS. iii. 8. 1 ; QB, iii. 4. 4, 
3-5 ; KB. viii. 8, &c. 

« 5B.i.7.2.22-4; TB.i. 5. 6. 3, 4. 


’ MS. iii. 2. 7. 

® TB. i. 5. 6. 1. 

» MS. ii. 5. 9. 

TS. vi. 4. 10. 1 ; PB. vii. 5. 20 ; TS. ii. 

4. 1. 1 ; TB. i. 8. 3. 3. 

5B. i. 5. 4. 6-11. 

« TB. i. 1. 2. 4-6 ; MS. i. 6. 9 ; KS. viii, 1 ; 
gB. ii. 1. 2. 13-17. 

They (like the demons ; TS. vi. 2. 5. 3 f.) 
had two libations only, PB. viii. 3. 6; 
4. 9 ; XXV. 8. 2. 


13 



458 


[Part y 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

and reach heaven before the Ahgirases, who have to serve them in place of 
being served by them. The same defective knowledge in the Ahgirases leads 
them to require teaching from Nabhanedistha, for which they have to pay 
dearly, and drives them to compromises with the Fathers.^ 

The sacrifice is, however, the source of disagreement among the gods ; 
the advantages of it are far too great to allow of the gods being content to 
share equally, and we hear that Vispu, recognized as the first of the gods by 
reason of his sacrificial skill, makes himself hated for his pride, and the gods 
induce the ants to gnaw through his bowstring, so that his head is carried 
away Even when, at a session in Kuruksetra, it had been agreed to share the 
glory of the sacrifice, when it is attained by Soma,^ he appropriates it, and 
Indra readily destroys Namuci, when he finds that he can do so by stretching 
the words of his oath. The several residences of the gods is exclusive ; they 
do not visit one another. They race one another for shares in the offering, and 
Indra and Yayu bear off the first places. 

The danger from the Asuras drives the gods to close union ; they find that 
they must have mutual confidence, and they make a pact depositing their 
bodies with Varuna, on the understanding that he who violates it shall not be 
reunited with his forms They are further compelled to resort to monarchy : 
they chose Varuna, Agni, or Soma, as king, but finally they perform the great 
consecration of Indra : the All-gods serve as heralds, the water of consecration 
is poured on by Prajapati, the Vasus assist at the east, the Rudras in the south, 
the Adityas at the west, the All-gods at the north, the Sadhyas and Aptyas 
in the centre, the Maruts and the Angirases at the zenith.® 

Despite the relations of the gods with the sacrifice, the sacrifice is by no 
means always loyal to them : it flees from them, taking now the form of 
Visnu, now that of a Suparna bird, now that of a horse, or of a black antelope. 
Nor have the gods ever learned the whole art of sacrifice, even as men have not 
had it revealed to them ; they pick up fragments of it from time to time. They 
may even have to seek knowledge from the Rsis such as the snake seer, 
Arbuda Kadraveya. 

The place of the seers is in view of their relation to the sacrifice one of great 
importance : they are the means by which in the normal case men secure the 
essential knowledge of the ritual, and they are often indebted to the gods for 
it ; Nodhas is taught a Saman by them in reward for his learning. They even 
declare that Angirasa was entitled to call the Fathers ‘ my children * 
owing to his knowledge of the ritual, as in the Atharvaveda the seer may by 
insight win the position of father of his father. The Vaikhanasas, the seers, 
whom Rahasyu Devamalimluc slew at Munimarana, were revived by Indra, 
and the same god revived Upagu Sau9ravasa, whom his royal master Kutsa 

1 TB. iu 1.1,1. * TS. vi. 2. 2. 1, 2 ; MS. iii. 7 . 10 ; gB. iii, 

» MS. iv. 5. 9 ; gB. xiv. 1. 1. 1~10 ; PB. 4. 2. 4, 5, &c, 

vii. 5. 6. ® AB. viii. 12. 

3 MS, ii. 1. 4. 



Chap. 27] 


459 


The Theory of the Sacrifice 

had killed for persisting in the worship of Indra.^ Atri, on his part, saves the 
sun from the grip of the Asura Svarbhanu, the darkness disappearing as 
a succession of variously coloured sheep, ^ and Bharadvaja warns the gods of 
the presence of the Asuras in the Ukfchas, and so saves them.® Vasistha con- 
strains the god Indra to show himself to him in bodily presence, and Indra 
must agree.^ Even if the gods seek to keep, as they sometimes do, knowledge 
from the seers, the latter triumph : they recognize that the gods have put 
the sacrificial post in upside down, and they find the Nigadas and Praisas, which 
they had at first omitted. The seer also can rely on the gods to enable him to 
convince men of his seerhood : Kavasa Ailusa, despised by other priests, 
is shown to be a seer by the conduct of the Sarasvati, which pays him reverence 
by flowing round him : ® Vatsa walks triumphant through the fire, w’^hen his 
claim is disputed b}’' Medhatithi.® 

The mode of transmission of the knowledge of the rites explains why the 
ceremonial can be altered m important detail : the tradition is not established, 
and the theologians can discuss details even with royal personages, such as 
Janaka and A9vapati Kaikeya. We are actually told of points on which the 
great Yajnavalkya held opinions differing from the normal, but which he did 
not carry into effect.^ 

In its aspect towards men the sacrifice is identical with the sacrificer, and 
it is identical also with the gods and with Prajapati. The sacrifice is essen- 
tially commensurate with men, and the conclusion is not doubtfully drawn 
that the sacrifice should be the sacrifice of man himself : ® he owes debts, to 
the Fathers to produce a son, to the seers to recite the sacred texts, to men 
in the shape of hospitality, and to the gods he owes himself, just as Prajapati 
offered up himself. The conclusion would, therefore, appear to be that the 
perfect form of sacrifice should be suicide, but such an idea is not mentioned 
in the text of the Brahmanas, whether or not it existed then,^ as it in a sense 
certainly did in the Buddhist and Jain period. The idea, however, in its less 
developed form is expressed in various ways : the sap which is the essence of 
sacrifice is first in man, then it passes on to the other victims, the horse, the 
ox, the sheep, the goat, and even into the rice, which is thus not in itself 
worthy of sacrifice, but is still full of the sap of sacrifice.^® Again the consecra- 
tion gives man a new and divine life, but it also means the handing over of his 
old body to the gods as an offering : this offering is not, however, performed : 
it is redeemed by the offering to the victim to Agni and Soma, which follows, 
and of that victim one view is that the man should not eat, since it is a 


1 PB. xiv. 4. 7 ; 6. 8. 

® PB. vi. 6, 8 ; Hopkins, TCA. xv. 35 ; the 
gods by noises (PB. iv. 5. 2) accomplish 
the feat. 

* AB. iii. 49. 

* TS. iii. 5. 2 ; KS. xxxvii. 17 ; PB. xv, 

5. 24. 

« AB. ii. 19 ; KB. xii. 3. 


® PB- xiv. 6. 6 ; cf. the later text, JB. iii. 
233-5. 

’ 9iB. iv. 2. 1. 7. See also below, § 5. 

« gB. xi. 1. 8. 2-5 ; iii. 6. 2. 16 ; i. 7. 2. 1-6. 
® L^vi, La doctrine du sacrifice , p. 133. 

MS. iii. 10. 2 ; QB. i. 2. 3. 6 ; vi. 2. 2. 15 ; 
AB. ii. 8. 



460 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 


redemption of his own body.^ The human sacrifice is also permitted, not as 
suicide, but as a substitute for oneself, but this is a doctrine which has no 
direct support in the Brahmanas, and may be a very late conception. The 
offering of man in the rite of the piling of the fire altar is recorded, but the 
sense of the redemption of the self is not there pressed, though it receives a 
classical form in the legend of 5unah9epa, who is to serve as a substitute for 
the offering of the king’s son. Here, however, the motive of sacrifice is an 
ordinary case of the vow of some precious object to a god. 

At the same time the sacrifice involves the death of the god in the form of 
the Soma ^ or the victim. In the former case every effort is made to conceal 
the fact of death from the god : he is assured that he is being pounded, 
not for the sake of his death, but to attain the overlordship of the metres : 
or again one thinks, as one takes up the pressing stone, of one’s enemy, and 
thus kills him and not the innocent Soma.^ The seller of the Soma is treated 
with insult and blows as an evil man, and the Soma himself is accorded the 
guest reception, as he moves to his death in the ritual. These remarks, how- 
ever, show clearly enough no serious or real feeling for the death of the god : 
they are products of speculation, not of deep religious conviction. 

The sacrifice itself is supposed to undergo a perpetual series of deaths, and 
of coming again to life : in the etymology of the Brahmanas it is born through 
movement, hence it is yan-ja^ which is as much as yajna^ The sacrifice is the 
eater, for it lives on all creatures,® but at the same time it is the universal prin- 
ciple of life.® The libation offered in the fire is the life of the gods : the eating 
of the oblation by the priests is the life of men : the placing of the Nara9afisa 
cups on the oblation holders is the life of the Fathers. Aforetime, indeed, the 
gods and the men and the Fathers used to enjoy the sacrifice together, and still 
they do so, but the difference is that the gods and the Fathers are no longer 
seen by the mortal eyes.'^ The gods depend essentially on the sacrifice : Indra 
is hungry, and goes and asks for a gift : courtesy is due to them, and, therefore, 
when they are on the next day to receive the sacrifice, men do not eat but fast, 
since it would be discourteous to anticipate the feeding of the guests, who have 
been invited. The gods are so anxious for the offering that they consider 
eagerly whether they are to receive the sacrifice, or if it is to go to others. 
They know beforehand the intention of man, for he resolves with his mind, 
thence the knowledge goes to the breath, thence to the wind, and the wind 
wafts to the gods the news of the intention.® 

The gods, despite their close relations to men,® and their interest in the 


1 TS. Vi. 1. 11. 6 ; AB. ii. 9 ; KB. x. 3 ; 
5B.iii. 3. 4. 21 ; xl. 7. 1. 3. 

TS. Vi. 6 . 7. 1 ; MS. iv. 7. 2 ; gB. iii. 9. 4. 
2 ; iv. 3. 4. 1 ; AB. iii. 32. 2. 

3 gB. iii. 3. 2. 6 ; 9. 4. 17 ; cf. ii. 2. 2. 1 ; 

GB.ii.3. 9. 

^ gB. iii. 9. 4. 23. 

5 gB. ix. 4. 1. 11. 


« gS. xiv. 3. 2. 1 ; iii. 6. 2. 25. 

’ gB. iii. 6. 2. 26. 

* gB. iii. 4. 2. 6, 7. The first comer wins 
Indra, who has favourites, PB. ix. 4. 
10 f. 

® The Brahmans are the gods who do not 
eat oblations, MS. i. 4. 6 ; GB. ii. 1. 6. 



Chap. 27] The Theory of the Sacrifice 461 

sacrifice, regard men with some degree of dislike and suspicion : there was 
even a time when men and gods lived together, but the gods were wearied and 
disgusted with the demands of men, who used always to ask them for what 
they wanted sans phrasCy^ and therefore departed from the earth. It is 
the gods who have given men the evils of sleep, sluggishness, anger, hunger, 
love of dice and of women.^ The Rbhus, admitted indeed into the society of 
the gods, are disliked because of their human odour.^ Many are the devices 
adopted by the gods to prevent men following them into their immortality : 
they succeed in so far that an agreement with the god of death secures that 
men shall not attain immortality with their bodies.^ On the other hand men 
ever strive to imitate the gods and adopt in the sacrifice the habits of the gods, 
that especially of preferring the right side for the commencement of all rites 
as opposed to the left, which men are said to favour : the differences are of 
absurd detail.® 

The aim of the sacrifice is the world of heaven : the sacrifice is the ship 
which bears the sacrificer to that world, and the Brhat and Rathantara 
Stoans are the two rudders of the ship, which bears the sacrificer to the 
desired bourne. From another point of view the sacrificer mounts to the 
heaven : he does this by the special mode of recitation adopted : first he 
performs the text prescribed, pausing at each quarter verse, thus attaining this 
world ; then by half verses, attaining the atmosphere ; then by three- 
quarter verses, attaining the heaven ; and then he says the whole verse, thus 
winning firmly the sun. If, however, he stops here, then he will definitely lose 
the world of earth, and the sacrificer is not prepared to enjoy immortality, 
until he has lived a full life : so he reverses the process, and returns to earth 
again. The same idea appears in the three steps of Visnu, which the sacrificer 
steps and thus wins the way to the heaven, but he also must take care to 
descend again.® 

For the priest a very important rule must be noted : the sacrifice, as we 
have seen, dies eternally, and is eternally renewed, but this renewal must be 
conditioned by the giving of the fees to the priests : the sacrifice goes to 
heaven, the fee accompanies it, and by holding fast to the fee the sacrificer 
goes also.^ The man who sacrifices, without giving fees, is reserved for 
a dread fate : on him the Aptyas wipe off the sin which was com- 
municated to them, when Indra slew the three-headed son of Tvastr, 
Vi9varupa.® 

It is not only, however, by the sacrifice proper that the sacrificer attains 
the gods : the consecration is a process by which he is given new birth, and 
becomes an embryo, his actions and his clothing being based on the comparison 

1 5B. ii. 3. 4. 4. 2. 2. 6 ; iii. 1. 2. 4, 5 ; 3. 14 ; TS. vi. 1. 

2 JB. i. 98 ; cf. ii. 363. 1. 5 ; MS. iii. 6. 3, &c. 

3 AB. iii. 30. 4. ® AB. iv. 22 ; PB. xviii. 10. 10 ; fB. i. 0. 3. 

* ^B. X. 4. 3. 9. Ascent to heaven with a 8-11. 

body is admitted, PB. xxi. 4. 3. ^ ^IB. i. 9. 3. 1 ; iv. 3. 8, &c. 

« CB- h 2. 2. 9 ; 7. 2. 9 ; iii, 2. 2. 16 : vii. ® ^B. ii. 2. 3. 4. 



462 


The Philosophy of the Veda 


[Part V 


of Hm with such an embryo. His ordinary body, on the other hand, as we 
have seen, becomes an offering to the gods or by the gods. He himself is now 
in a state of extraordinary power, being filled with the sacrifice : if men eat his 
food, they take a third of any evil in him, those who speak ill of him a third, 
and the ants who bite him a third.^ 

The motive which induces the sacrificer to sacrifice and to undergo the 
painful self-torment, which is necessitated by the rite of consecration, is the 
possession of faith, which the Kausitaki Brahmana ^ declares to be the source 
of the abiding character of the sacrifice. Now faith is clearly allied to truth, 
and precision or truth is intimately associated with actual sight, as opposed 
to mere hearing : the principle of the Brahmanas places sight as the highest 
source of truth.® Faith in the sacrifice by gods and men is attained only by 
him who sacrifices with faith.^ Faith is, therefore, necessary in the sacrifice 
and also in the priest : if Vatsapri Bhalandana was at first denounced as a 
thief by the seers, they were confuted by his winning faith through dis- 
covering the proper rite.^ A very odd story tells of the cows : ^ they started 
a session for the purpose of obtaining horns : they received them after ten 
months, but some, not satisfied, not showing true faith, insisted on completing 
the year, where they won rich food, but lost their horns. Brhaspati, the 
priest of the gods, wins their faith by his discovery of the proper ritual.’' 
The sacrificer must realize, if he is to prosper, the fixed truth of the rule that 
the gods receive the offering and he the benediction accompanying it.® 

The importance of faith is such that it renders the gods of no importance, 
for the man who has faith realizes that the sacrifice produces its results with- 
out need of the gods. Atri is one of those whose deity is faith, ^raddhadeva : 
when he is in need he does not appeal to heaven, but invents the proper rite 
and disposes of his disabilities.® The first father of men, Manu himself, is the 
believer in faith par excellence : his one aim is the sacrifice : with Ida as his 
daughter he repeoples the world after the deluge, and he continues his long 
course of sacrifices even down to the point that he is anxious to sacrifice his 
own wife at the bidding of the demons, Trsta and Varutri, and has to be 
prevented from doing so by Indra, who induces him to let her go, when the 
fire had already been carried round her as a preliminary to the slaughter. But 
one version actually attributes to him the performance of the sacrifice at the 
suggestion of Kilata and Akuli, the Asura priests.^^ This faith in the sacrifice 

^ MS. iii. G. 7 ; PB. v. 6. 10. ’ TS. vii. 4. 1. 1. 

" vii. 4. 8 gB. ii. 3. 4. 5 ; cf. TS. ii. 6. 10. 1. 

8 gB. i. 3. 1, 27 ; MS. iii. 6. 3. » TS. vii. 1. 8. 2. 

* TS. i. 6. 8. 1 ; MS. i. 4. 10 ; iv. 1, 4. gB. i. 8. 1. 1-10. Guntert {Der arische 

® MS. iii. 2. 3 ; PB. xii. 11. 25. Weltkdnig, p. 346) sees in her a relic 

® TS. vii. 5. 1 and 2 ; PB. iv, 1. 1, 2 ; AB. of the legend of the sacrifice of a 

iv. 17 ; JB. ii. 374. For curious bisexual giant (see below, Appendix B). 

speculations on its astronomical sense, “ MS. iv, 1. G ; 8. 1 ; KS. ii. 30 ; gB. i. 1. 
see A. C. Das, Mig^Vedic India, i. 4.14-17; TS. vi. 6. 1. The gB. recog- 

475 ff. Cf. PB. XXV. 8. G. nizes the offering. 



Chap. 27] 


463 


The Theory of the Sacrifice 

is encouraged by the long accounts given of the men who flourished by the use, 
and by the still longer lists of things, which by the sacrifice can be achieved 
automatically for men by the priests. 

The need of faith is the more obvious in that the sacrificer at the sacrifice 
is hopelessly given up into the hands of the priests. He can by manipulation 
deprive him of his senses, of his life, of his wealth, of his kingdom ; if he 
thinks of him as he says the Vasat call, he hurls upon him the thunderbolt 
which is contained in that call. The situation is repeatedly developed that 
the sacrificer may be hated by the priest, and the priest is then instructed how 
to ruin him : the idea that this is wrong is absolutely derided. But, even if 
the priest is honest, the sacrifice is a dread thing, a dangerous wild beast, 
which must be propitiated : the gods themselves suffered terrible mischief 
by imprudence : Pusan’s teeth were knocked out, Savitr’s hands cut off to be 
replaced with golden ones, and Bhaga lost his eyesight.^ The priest Bhalla- 
veya made an error in the sacrifice : he fell and broke his arm.^ Asadhi 
Sau 9 romateya thought fit to substitute heads picked up anywhere for the five 
heads of the victims to be slain at the building of the fire altar, and paid for it 
by Ms hfe.® The priest is, therefore, a person, avIio has difficult tasks to 
perform, and whose services should not be despised : the effect of any offer- 
ing is definite and precise, and it is idle to seek success in any haphazard 
manner. 

The reward of the sacrificer for Ms efforts is, in the long run, one in the 
world to come : he may gain many desired things by the sacrifice and its 
manipulations in the present life, but these things are incidentals in the main 
offerings, a point in which they distinguish themselves from the occasional 
offerings, and from magic performances generally. The sacrifice is reduced in 
a sense to mere magic by the priests, but it is a performance which, unlike 
a magic rite or an offering set on foot for some definite object, must be per- 
formed regularly, and in it the profit acquired in this life is incidental, while 
the essential reward lies in the world to come. But this reward of immortality 
there is not to be construed in the sense that man should seek by an early death 
to obtain the world to come : on the contrary, in that world Ms place will be the 
better, the longer he lives : it is the aim of man not merely to achieve im- 
mortality, as eternal life hereafter, but also the full age of a hundred years, 
which is the allotted span of man. Those who die under twenty years of 
age by a weird conception attain as their abode the days and the nights, those 
under forty the half months, those under sixty the months, those under eighty 
the seasons, those under a hundred the year, and those over a hundred years 
the boon of immortality.^ The opposite of immortality is the repeated death, 

^ TS. ii. 6. 8. 3 ; ^B. i. 7. 4. 6-8 ; KB. vi. * QB. i. 7. 3. 19. 

13, 14. So Tvastr, by a wrong accent, ® QB. vi. 2. 1. 37. 

destroyed his own son in place of Indra, * PB, xxiv, 19. 2 ; x. 1. 5. 4 ; 2. 6. 8 ; 
TS. ii. 5. 2. 1 ; i. 6. 3. 10 (indra- the amount of eating necessary in the 

gdtru, ‘ foe of Indra mispronounced as next world depends on the offerings 

indra-gatru, ‘ having Indra for a foe ’). made on earth, ^B. x. 1. 5. 4. 



464 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 


Punarmrt}^,^ of which men are in deep fear. The idea is that the passing once 
through death is not enough : even after death, when man is in enjoyment 
of the precious boon of immortality, he may be robbed of it, and have once 
again to face the terrors of dissolution, of which the Vedic Indian shows him- 
self most deeply afraid. The idea of a second death is, however, that of 
a second death in the future life, not of rebirth on earth and death in the 
ordinary sense, and the conception obviously could lend itself to the idea that 
the death might be not once only, but for numberless occasions : though the 
idea is actually found in the Qatapatha Brahmana, where a distinction is made 
between those born for immortality after death in the world to come, and 
those born after death only to fall again and again into the power of death,^ 
nevertheless the ordinary conception is merely that of a repetition of death. 
Moreover it must not be forgotten that this idea occurs in the later Brah- 
manas such as the Kausitaki and the ^atapatha.® 

The dead man, according to the agreement made by the gods with death, is 
not permitted to enter into immortality with his mortal body, which must be 
laid aside first. The way to the heaven despite that fact is even then not easy ; 
the Adityas ^ among others seek to keep back those who aim at heaven, and 
in addition there are en route two fires which try to burn up those whom they 
should burn, but let pass those whom they ought to let pass.® In what manner 
the discrimination is made nothing is said, and, as we have seen, there is no 
other trace of the doctrine of a divine judgement in the Vedic literature. 
Beyond these powers, however, the dead is subject to the power of the sun, 
which is death : all creatures below it are subject to death, those above are 
free. The sun owes its position in the heaven to the gods who established 
it there, and keep it from falling away from its high place. The sun indeed for 
a time did not appreciate the high honour thus paid : he returned to earth, but 
found it in the clutches of death : he therefore praised Agni, and won again 
his home in the heaven.® The just men are the rays of the sun, and the con- 
stellations are appropriated to those good men who go to the world of heaven.’ 

The dead, however, do not always go to the gods : they may also go to the 
Fathers, who dwell in the third heaven. The difference of the ways is not 
explained, and remains as mysterious as the Fathers themselves. Of them 
diverse accounts are given : they are the children of Prajapati, born before 
the gods and after the Asuras ; they are the gods, who were slain in the fight 
with Vrtra, brought to life as the Fathers.® Incorporeal, they are compared 
to mind,^ as they cannot be seen. They correspond to the seasons, inter- 


1 gp. X. 2. 6. 19 ; 5. 1. 4 ; 6. 1, 4 ; xi. 4. 3. 
20 ; 5. 6. 9 ; xii. 9. 3. 11, 12. Also in 
KB. But never in the early part of 
AB. It is a late idea in the Brahmanas. 
It cannot be found in RV. x. 14. 14 ; 
ix. 113 despite Boyer, JA. 1901, ii. 
466 ; Oidenberg, Die Lehre der Upani- 
shaden, p. 27, n. 2. 

* gB. X. 4. 3. 10 ; cf. ii. 3. 3. 7, 8. 


^ Below, Chap. 28, § 10. 

« MS. i. 6. 12. 

® gB. i. 9. 3. 2. 

® gB. ii. 3. 3. 7, 8 ; TS. i. 5. 9. 3 ; PB. iv. 
5. 9-11 ; TB. i. 2. 4. 2. The idea is 
clearly suggested by the fire ordeal. 

’ gB. vi. 5. 4. 8. 

» MS.iv.1.2; gB.ii. 6. 1. 1. 

» PB. vi. 9. 19, 20. 



Chap. 27] 


465 


The Theory of the Sacrifice 

mediate between the day, which is appropriate to man, and the year of the 
gods : they correspond to the world of the atmosphere which comes between 
the earth and the heaven, but their world is not there. With the gods they 
have been at variance : their chief Yama ^ used to deprive the gods of all that 
they had^ until the intervention of Prajapati led to the settlement of the dispute. 
The gods are compelled to share with the Fathers the sacrifice. To their 
worshippers they are a somewhat dreaded band : ^ they must be appeased by 
offerings of the fringe of one’s garment up to the age of fifty, and thereafter 
demand the offering of hair : their approach in the later period becomes 
closer and the need to buy off their demands by the redemption of oneself 
increases. When they come, It is said the Fathers take a man or they give one.® 
They are also to be honoured by the sacrificer turning away his head, when 
they come to eat, even as the prince eats without the gaze -of the people.^ 
They receive offerings for many reasons,® to prevent their bringing death with 
them, to carry out the rule of following the usages of the gods who offered to 
them, to show benevolence to those whom the gods recalled to life, to elevate 
the sacrificer’s own Fathers to a better world, and to make good the injuries 
which one inflicts on oneself by misconduct. 

Of quite special interest among these speculations is the theory of the 
piling of the sacred fire, which has peculiarities of its own and deserves, there- 
fore, special consideration.® The building of the fire altar, as we have seen, 
is no ordinary part of the ritual : it is not an essential part perhaps of any 
sacrifice at all, and it is perfectly clear that the elaboration of the performance 
meant that it was one to be undertaken only occasionally, and then by a rich 
noble or prince or Brahman. The essence of the piling is clearly mystic : 
it has the purpose of carrying out in ritual form the essential act of the recon- 
struction of Prajapati, whose sacrifice as Purusa has resulted in the creation 
of the universe in all its parts. This sacrifice cannot be regarded as a single 
definite act in time : it is rather a constant process, and therefore the dis- 
membered god must ever and again be renewed. The renewal is brought 
about by the reconstruction of Prajapati in the shape of the fire altar. The 
mass of significant members connected in the ritual is noteworthy : the god 
himself is not merely identified with Purusa as is natural, but he is identical 
with Agni as fire : the identification is carried out in detail : the fire altar is a 
year in building, and the fire-pan which the sacrificer has is for a year carried 
%bout by him. The bricks for the altar are prepared while preparation is made 


^ MS. ii, 5. 3. Oltramare {Uhistoire des 
id6es tMosophiques, i. 47, n. 1) thinks 
that RV. X. 88. 15 (VS. xix. 47) refers 
to a hostility of god and mortals on. 
one side and the Fathers on the other. 
But the passage is hopelessly obscure ; 
cf. QB. xii, 8. 1. 21 ; below, Chap. 28, 
§ 11 ; Oldenberg’s note on RV. I, c. 

^ The idea that their existence is something 
10 [h.o.s. 32] 


dream-like (QB. xii. 9. 2, 2, a false 
explanation of VS. xx. 16 ; cf. KU. 
vi. 5) is sporadic and unimportant. 

^ TB. i. 3. 10. 7. 

^ TB. i. 3. 10. 6 with comm. 

® gB. ii. 1. 6. 3. 

® Eggeling, SBE. xliii. pp. xv~xxvii ; 
Keith, Taittifiya Samhitd, i, pp. cxxv- 
cxxviii ; Oldenberg, GN. 1917, pp. 9 ff. 



466 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

of the fire-pan. The altar is arranged to represent earth, atmosphere, and 
heaven, and the same arrangement is devised in the fire-pan. The relations 
between Prajapati and Agni are not absolutely simple : Prajapati is the 
father of Agni, but also the son, since Agni restores him by the sacrifice, 
and the fire altar is the body of Agni, through which Prajapati is built up. 
Agni is also the child of the waters — ^which in their turn are created by Praja- 
pati — and in the fire altar there is laid at the bottom a lotus leaf from which 
Agni is born. The bird shape of the fire altar is also often referred to as well 
as the mortal shape : the bird shape is clearly connected with the myth of 
Agni in lightning form bringing down the Soma from the sky : the Soma, 
moreover, as the sacrifice par excellence^ is, as was inevitable, identified with 
Prajapati. The bird altar has, however, another aspect : the bird is to fly 
to the sky as the sacrifice, and with the bird the sacrificer who is identified 
with Prajapati is to attain the sky.^ In the piling of the altar the symbolism 
is carried out in the form of the gold disk, a symbol of the sun, which is placed 
over the lotus, and over which again is placed the golden image of a man, 
above whom lie in the first, third, and fifth layers of the pile the three naturally 
perforated bricks, representing the three worlds, through which the golden 
man can breathe, and through which the sacrificer must rise to the sun. The 
symbolism is effective : the ideas of the sun, the god Agni, the all-creator, and 
the sacrificer, as identical, and the nature of the sacrifice as leading to the 
world of heaven, are as efficiently produced by the ritual, as can be well 
conceived. 

The ritual as it is seen in the texts of the Black Yajurveda does not seem 
to go beyond these conceptions, but the ^atapatha Brahmana in the tenth 
book,^ doubtless a later addition to the text, which deals with the secret of the 
fire, develops the theme more philosophically. Prajapati is the year, for he 
is essentially, as the creator, time, and the year is at once the symbol of time, 
and the period in which the working of nature completes a round, and com- 
mences again. The year of the piling of the altar, and the carrying of the 
fire in the fire-pan by the sacrificer, has been already mentioned : the year 
is symbolic also of birth ; Agni must be borne for a year in the fire-pan before 
he is brought to life as the fire on the altar itself. In the acts of carrying him 
in the pan the sacrificer takes Agni into himself and in the fullness of time he 
brings him forth from himself, in accordance with the doctrine that the father 
of Agni is Prajapati, the sacrificer himself. But the fact that Prajapati is 


^ Oldenberg {loc, ciu) takes this as the 
essence of the rite, but though he justly 
insists on the non-popular character of 
the belief, he does not disprove the 
view of Eggeling, which is strongly 
supported by the ^atapatha. 

® X. 3. 8 and 6. 4. The Brahmanas and the 
Upanisads alike have no really philo- 
sophic discussion of time which they 


take for granted j cf. Walleser, Bie 
philosophische Grundlage d, alt. Bud- 
dhismtcs, pp. 123-33 ; below. Chap 28, 
§ 8. A doctrine of time as the absolute 
(brahman) is mentioned, to be rejected, 
in the fveta^vatara Upanisad. See 
also Keith, Buddhist Philosophy, pp. 
163-8. 



Chap. 27] 


467 


The Theory of the Sacrifice 


time, and that the sacrificer is identical with Prajapati as time, has another and 
important side : the effect of time must be that, even if a man attain, as the 
piling of the altar will aid him to attain, the full life of a hundred years, still he 
must die, and he dies thus as death itself by his own hands, passing from the 
realm of material existence and its troubles and limitations to the eternal and 
abiding happiness of the life to come.^ But the Brahmana goes further than 
this and attributes to ^andilya the doctrine that the ultimate essence of 
Prajapati, of the sacrificer, and therefore of the universe, is mind, from which 
develop speech, the breath, the eye, the ear, work, fire. The final reality is 
summed up as the self, made up of intelligence, with a body of spirit, a form 
of light, and an ethereal nature, which pervades the regions and upholds the 
universe, though devoid of speech and mental affects. Or, again, it is said 
that the Purusa in the heart is as a grain of rice or granule of millet ; like 
smokeless light, it is greater than the heaven, the atmosphere, and the earth, 
than all existing things : the self of the spirit is the self of man, and on passing 
away from life he attains that self. The changed spirit of the speculation in 
the course of time cannot be better illustrated than by this view, for the 
Taittiriya Samhita holds closely to the material view that the result of the 
offering in the next world is to secure the sacrificer his self and his breath there- 
in. The continuance as nearly as possible in the same condition as before of 
the existence on earth is the ideal of the Samhita : it has been transmuted by 
the wisdom of Qandilya ^ into a conception which seeks in its grand manner 
to solve the question of the existence of the universe and of the individual, by 
finding in them both the expression of a single spiritual principle. The im- 
pression of later growth thus engendered is supported, and made beyond 
reasonable doubt, not merely by the evidence of language, but by the fact that 
it is precisely this book of the fatapatha which gives us the conception of 
the repetition, not once merely, of death in the world to come.^ The philo- 
sophy of the Brahmanas is merging into that of the Upanisads. 


^ This connexion of birth and the year may 
conceivably be due to the old view — 
apparently Indo-European — of the 
year of ten months of gestation, which 
may be found in the Rigveda as in 
ancient Borne. Buddhist tradition 
insists on ten months precisely as the 
period of his stay in the womb (Win- 
disch, Buddha's Geburt, pp. 120 ff.) ; 
Hopkins (JAOS, xxiv. 19, 392) thinks 
references to the year are only periods 
within which, which would prove 
nothing for a ten months’ year. His 
view that the month is twenty-seven 


or twenty-eight days in the popular 
reckoning is counter to the fact that 
birth is placed in the tenth month, 
not at the end, so that his month is 
too short. Probably the thirty-day 
month is all that is meant. Buddha is 
clearly a miraculous child. 

2 gB.x.6.4. 

^ Lindenau’s suggestion (ZII. i. 48, n. 2) 
that AV. xiii. 3. 7 enunciates, as regards 
Rohita, the doctrine of the necessary 
mortality of the highest being, so far as 
involved in the empiric world, rests on 
a dubious translation. 



468 


The Philosophy of the Veda 


[Part V 


§ 4 . The Ethics of the Brdhmanas 

In the strict sense of the word there is no theory of ethics in the Brahmana 
literature : the question of the nature of right action does not seem ever to have 
in any degree influenced the speculations of the curious spirits which framed the 
remarkable theory of which the outlines have been sketched above. It was, 
indeed, natural that the first element of the speculative thought of India 
should in the main be directed to problems of pure speculation, as was also 
the case in Greece, but the dominating feature in the philosophy of India is 
that the question of right conduct never attained the dignity of a subject to be 
propounded for serious consideration. In the Rigveda, while the hymns of 
creation and the other efforts to arrive at a philosophical account of the 
universe have beside them the expression in the hymns to Varuna of the pre- 
valence of moral order and the punishment of sin, the latter conception cannot 
be found in living force any longer in the Brahmanas, a fact which has un- 
wisely been used as a proof that early India was exposed to Semitic influences 
later not felt.^ 

The contrast here between Indian and Iranian development in religious 
matters becomes marked. Almost contemporaneously, perhaps, with the 
development of the thought of the Brahmanas, we find Zoroaster engaged in 
deepening the meaning of religion for the people of Iran and founding a 
reasoned ethical system. While Varuna was losing ground in India, Zoroaster 
was developing the figure of Ahura Mazdah, and depriving him of a rival by 
degrading Indra, his most serious competitor, as the god of war, to the rank 
of a demon.2 At the same time he removed from the character of the god 
any suspicion of uncertainty or caprice, such as still clings in the Rigveda to 
Varuna, whose noose and whose punishments appear to afflict at times even 
the innocent, and who is lord of a Maya, which may be harmful as well as 
beneficent. Further, to Zoroaster the powers of evil loomed far greater than 
they had done to the early Aryan mind, which, as in the Rigveda, knows 
indeed demons in abundance, but has no doubt in the power of the gods to 
overcome them, nor indeed of its own ability to win the favour of the gods. 
Vrtra may be terrible, but he is never victorious, even if it would be unkind to 
assert that the Vedic demons exist merely for the gods to slay. Zoroaster 
accepts the impossibility of explaining the evil in the world, if it be assumed 
that Ahura is all-mighty, and that all has been created by him at his pleasure. 
On the contrary, the spirit of evil contends against the good, and only after 
desperate struggles can good be made to prevail. Moreover, in that struggle 

1 Brunnhofer, AHsche Urzeit, pp. xviii, the mere similarity of sound without 

89, 90 ; his etymologies of Vedic words identity of use is an utterly insufficient 

need not seriously be considered ; to ground. 

that of Weber which derives Dula, one * See Giintert, Der arische Weltkdnig, pp. 
of the Krttikas, from a Semitic source 211 ff. 

no objection in principle is open, but 



Chap. 27] 


The Ethics of the Brdhmanas 


469 


each man is free and morally bound to participate ; it lies with him to further 
the conquest of evil ; the deeds which he does are not merely personal ; they 
serve to further the constant struggle of good against evil, and have cosmic 
value. Moreover, by his deeds does a man decide his future fate, in heaven or 
hell ; the intervention of divine favour is excluded ; ^ the soul of the dead 
finds the Cinvat bridge wide or hopelessly narrow, according as his good or 
evil deeds prevail. Deeds,- moreover, are essentially matters of practical 
utility and activity ; prayers and offerings play their part, but the ideal of 
Zoroaster is the man who founds a family, performs his duties in his tribe, and 
furthers agriculture, performing useful works, as opposed to the nomad, 
who is the personification of the lie {druj). 

It may be that the stern conditions of life in Iran, where cultivation can 
be maintained only by unceasing toil, and the agriculturist must ever fear the 
incursions of the nomad, played a definite part in evoking the Zoroastrian 
outlook, nor, of course, must be ignored the individual character of his teaching, 
which never was fully assimilated in Iran, but was on the one hand exagge- 
rated and made absurd by the pedantic and cruel pursuit of detail, and on the 
other hand contaminated by the reintroduction of much of the old nature- 
worship of Iran.^ In India under different conditions of climate and life and 
racial admixture, thought turned to speculation rather than to action, and 
inclined to see unity, in lieu of regarding life as a struggle between the good 
and the bad. This contrast interposed for Zoroaster essential difficulties in 
regarding the world as a single whole, animated by one spirit ; in India this 
was possible, and an absolute came to be recognized in which all was contained, 
whether good or bad, material or spiritual. Parallel with this movement was 
necessarily the decline from power of Varuna. Indra, as the god of the 
warrior and the people, remained powerful and popular : recent research, 
indeed, has shown how much alive, if in humble guise, he is to-day in northern 
India ; ^ first Prajapati, and then the Brahman absorbed the metaphysical 
elements of Varuna’ s nature, while the growth in popularity of Yama as king 
of the dead limited his chthonian functions,^ so that the god who once was the 
chief guardian of the Rta sank to the function of lord of waters, which was his 
by right as a sky god, and w^hich no other deity arose to wrest from him. 
Similarly the conception of the Rta passes away before the prevalence of the 
Brahman. 

The development which places the Brahman in the first place is not 
achieved until the Upanisads, but it is in preparation during the period of the 
Brahmanas, and it is in entire harmony with this spirit that these texts do 

1 For the idea of a future Sa'viour for the 238 f. He (p. 390) lays stress on the 

world as a whole, see Giintert, pp. 219, ^ folk etymology of Yama as the re- 

395 strainer {yam) as securing his relation 

* Cf. Hertel, Die Zeit Zoroasters, pp. 9 ff., as controller of the dead in later thought. 

48 ff. Less plausible is his suggestion of 

® See Grierson, Zll.ii. 133 ff. Poseidon’s history as comparable to 

^ Cf. Giintert, Der arische Weltkonig, pp. that of Varuna. 



470 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

not develop any theory of morality.^ Indeed they do not normally inculcate 
morality even on merely empiric grounds. The myths which they recount and 
invent have this characteristic about them, that they are indifferent to the 
moral qualities of the acts : the gods are willing to commit sins freely for their 
own gain : they obtain the aid of the Raksases against the Asuras, and then 
they refuse to carry out their bargain to share equally with the former in the 
event of victory attending their united efforts. They are not ashamed to 
purchase the Soma from the Gandharvas by means of Vac, on the clear agree- 
ment arrived at between her and them that she will return to them when in- 
vited. They win speech from the Asuras by the low arts of solicitation and of 
dancing and singing in opposition to the pious recitation of the Veda by their 
rivals. They are constantly jealous of men, whom they refuse to allow to 
share with them the happiness of immortality without laying aside the 
corporeal body in death. But compared with Indra they are comparatively 
virtuous people : he, however, is quite unashamed : he makes a compact with 
Namuci and sets about to find a way of violating it, which he does with 
success : his murder of Vi^varupa, son of Tvastr, is unmotived and wicked, 
and brings on him the guilt of slaying a Brahman. His amour with Ahalya 
is only accomplished by means of deceiving the lady by adopting the form of 
her husband,^ and he gave over to the hyenas certain ascetics, an impure 
{amedliya) act.^ His adultery ^ is repaid in kind; for his own son, born of his 
thigh, Kutsa Aurava, takes advantage of his physical likeness, to win the 
favour of ^aci Paulomni, his father’s wife. But, after all, what could be more 
degrading than the pictures of him hungry and begging a priest for an offering, 
and then running about cake in hand, or bound by cords by Kutsa and urged 
by Lu9a to break aw^ay from this degrading servitude ? ® Even his own sub- 
jects, the Maruts, he plunders, justifying the royal habit of accepting loot 
plundered from the husbandmen. Prajapati appears as committing incest, 
and as adopting in the course of it an animal form, w'hich is slain by the wrath 
of the gods concentrated in the form of Rudra,® and in one rite he is formally 
reviled. The other gods are constantly jealous of one another ; they have 
separate dwellings, and are moved by envy of one another rather than by love 
and friendship. The Vratyas insult Vayu and Igana, who bar the world of 
heaven to them, but are shown it by Prajapati."^ The gods are essentially 
selfish ; they give men the six evils of sleep, sloth, anger, hunger, love of 
dicing and of women. 


^ For an interesting contrast with Con- 
fucianism, see M. Weber, Religionssozio- 
logic, ii. 136 fL 

2 Weber, SBA. 1887, p. 903 ,* Oertel, JAOS. 
xix. 120 ; xxvi. 186. For the sins of 
the gods see PB. i. 6. 10 ; AV. vi. 111. 
3 ; X. 1. 12 ; Bloomfield, SBE. xlii. 520. 
Traces of ‘ high moral sense and exalted 
sentiment ’ (Radhakrishnan, Ind, Phil. 
i. 131) are invisible, and the term 


A 9 rama certainly does not show that 
it was recognized that all progress 
involved suffering, 

^ TS.iii.3.7.3; PB.xiv. 11.28; xvm.1.9. 
* JB.iii. 199-202. 

® PB. ix. 2. 22 ; xxi. 1. 1. f, 

® MS.iv.2.12; fB. i. 7. 4. 1-4 ; vi. 1. 3. 8 ; 
PB. viii. 2. 10 ; AB. hi, 33 ; ApgS. 
xxi. 12. 1 ff. 

’ JB. a. 222. 



Chap. 27] 


The Ethics of the Brdhmanas 


471 


It is the case that the gods are said to be essentially true,^ but the nature of 
the truth is not vitally moral : it is strictly confined to the precise carrying out 
of the rites and utterance of the formulae of the sacrificial ritual. Just as 
man’s faith is not in the goodness of the gods, but in the efficacy of the sacrifice, 
if duly performed, so truth has no real moral content and in intellectual out- 
look is limited to the sacrifice, which, it must be admitted, is the reality par 
excellence for the Brahmans. But even this truth was not always the posses- 
sion of the gods ; as children of Prajapati, the gods and the Asuras shared the 
patrimony of the father, which was Vac : they then indifferently spoke truth 
and falsehood : finally the gods abandoned the use of anything but truth, 
and the Asuras that of anything but falsehood. The gods, however, by saying 
nothing but the truth became feeble and impoverished, while by the opposite 
device the Asuras prospered like salt, the Indian equivalent of the green bay 
tree. But in the end the truth prevailed over the untruth, mainly, it would 
seem, because by the consecration offering, which they invented, the gods 
extended truth and made it more effective.^ The moral apparently, therefore, 
is that in the long run exactitude in the sacrifice must prevail. 

The sense of the importance of exactitude in the rite is seen in the famous 
ritual of confession which is performed at the Varunapraghasas, when the 
priest, the Pratiprasthatr, asks the wife of the sacrificer with whom she 
consorts, other than her husband.® It is essential that she should confess, 
since else it will go badly with her kinsfolk, an interesting assertion of the 
solidarity of the kin. The speaking out of the sin diminishes it, but not, it 
appears, by anything else than that it brings exactitude again into the order 
of things : the wife commits an offence against Varuna, in that being the 
wife of one she consorts with another : the statement of the true fact removes 
the inexactitude, and repairs in so far the defect. It brings truth, i.e. reality, 
and order into the rite.^ The position of Varuna in this regard is of importance 
as it indicates in what degree the high conception of the Varuna of the Rig- 
veda has been degraded by the passage of time and the growing preference 
for the sacrifice. He is not regarded in the ritual, as it stands, as more 
than the power which resents the introduction of irregularity into the facts 
of the universe. 

The position of Varuna in this regard is also of interest on another ground : 
in the Brahma^as Varuna is essentially a god of the waters, and this con- 
nexion of truth or reality and the waters must be traced to this relation. 
Hiranyadant Baida ® is quoted as asserting that heaven rests on the atmo- 
sphere, the atmosphere on the earth, the earth on the waters, the waters 

1 AB. i. 6. 7 ; KB. ii. 8 ; MS. i. 9. 3 ; ^IB. meant death. He ultimately was slain 

iii. 4. 2. 8. by a Gandharva, after an Apsaras had 

2 12-27. been substituted for the wife of 

® A painful light is shed on priestly morality Yajnavacas, and after in madness he 

by the story of Yavakri, who was wont had cut off the heads of his cattle. 

to summon to him any woman at * QB. ii. 5. 2. 20. 

pleasure, though intercourse with him ® AB. iii. 6 ; he appears also in JB. ii. 278. 



472 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

on trathj truth on the Brahman, and the Brahman on fervour. The waters 
are, it must be remembered, the primeval elements, they are a fact and they 
are also based on fact, on truth. The waters are also the conception of law : 
when the waters come to this earth, then all is in due and lawful order : when 
there is lack of rain, the stronger oppresses the weaker.^ The waters are also 
the reality itself,^ they are immortality,® they are faith, ^ they are the sacrifice.® 
Man must use them to sprinkle himself with water, in order to become 
ritually pure. The performance of the bath provides even consecration and 
fervour, for the gods placed consecration in the waters.® Moreover, the sap 
of the sacrifice is in the waters and by it they flow.*^ The impurities of men do 
not affect the waters themselves, in accordance with the pact they made with 
the gods. The Darbha grass owes its power to the presence in it of the waters. 
The waters are as a thunderbolt, and they must be propitiated with suitable 
words to avoid injury by them. They are extremely powerful to destroy the 
Raksases,® and they are, therefore, benevolent if managed well : they form the 
atonement ® for every harsh deed in the sacrifice, and on the other hand, when 
appeased, they confer glory and power on the king at the royal consecration. 

But the identification of the waters with truth or reality is not the only 
identification : the earth is also truth, for it is of all the worlds the most 
obviously genuine.^® Gold again is reality ; lead, being neither iron nor gold, 
is a mere appearance.^^ Truth, therefore, is nothing but a species of existence, 
which the term used, Satya, also properly expresses. But the most important 
side remains ritual accuracy : the best pair is the union of faith and truth as 
ritual accuracy.^® The sacrifice is formally identified with the truth, and so 
is the threefold Veda*, and the Brahman as holy writ, to which conception we 
must refer the doctrine of Hiranyadant Baida that truth rests on the Brahman, 
More simply, however, the rite is simple fact ; the eye is asserted to be truth, 
because, unlike the mind and speech, it is not prone to give false witness. 
From this fact, however, there is deduced a doctrine of some value for the 
guidance of the sacrificer : as in the case of the wife and her lovers, he must 
see that in the rite he shall duly bring himself into harmony with the truth 
by the use of true speech.^® When he is about .to undertake a vow, he should 
realize that he passes from the inaccuracy of ordinary life to the exactitude, 
which is characteristic in ritual of the god, and, at the end when he lays down 
the vow, he ceases to be under the bond of accuracy. But in the rite he does 
not say so openly : he contents himself with the declaration that he is once 
more as he was — ^that is one who lives among men, whose nature is inaccuracy. 


gB. xi. 1. 6. 24. 

» MS.iv. 1.4; gB.vii.e. 1.4. 

3 MS.iv. 1.9; GB.ii. 1.3. 

^ TS. i. 6. 8. 1 ; MS. i. 4. 10 ; iv. 1. 4. 
® MS.iii. 6.2; 6.9; iv. 1. 4. 

« TS.vi. 1.1.2; MS.iii. 6. 2. 

’ fB.iii. 9.2. 1. 

« MS. iv. 1. 3. 


» MS. ii. 1. 5 ; iv. 5. 4 ; ^B. i. 9. 3. 2 ; 
AB. viii. 6. 

QB. vii. 4. 1. 8. 

MS. ii. 2. 2 ; iv. 3. 1. 

AB. vii. 10. 

QB, iv. 3. 4. 16 ; iii. 4. 2. 8 ; ii. 2. 2. 19 ; ' 
i.1.1.5; AB.ii.5~9; TB.i. 1.4.1. 

QB. i. 1. 1. 4r-6. 



Chap. 27] 


The Ethics of the Brahmanas 


473 


A difficulty, however, arises in practice : if the rule of truth is laid^ down 
absolutely as incumbent always on him who has established the sacred fires, 
what will happen to him ? What man can always speak the truth ? Aruna 
Aupavegi, when urged to establish his fires, put the point plainly that he was 
being condemned by this instruction to silence, as no one could avoid speaking 
what was false.^ 

In the view of Oldenberg,^ truth denotes something more than mere 
accuracy, and it is probable that there is justice in this contention, if it is not 
pressed too hard. It is characteristic of this period ^ that the terms Satya and 
Anrta come to form a formal contrast. As we have seen, in the Rigveda 
it is impossible to accept the view that Rta and Satya, order and truth, are 
identical,^ and it would probably be erroneous to assume that the contrast of 
Satya and Anrta denoted that in this period the term Anrta had lost any con- 
nexion with the idea of order and righteousness. It may perhaps be said that, 
while Anrta tends to be weakened into meaning no more than falsehood, Satya 
takes on an additional tinge of value ® and it is certain that Rta still means 
order, though here and there ® it is tempting, but probably misleading, merely 
to render it ‘ truth 

Varuria is the deity who is constantly ready to punish inaccuracies in the 
ritual ; his cords and his knots make him admirably fit for this purpose, and 
the errors in the offering are at once seized hold of by him. By sacrificing in 
the southern fire, the sacrificer secures the seizing by Varuna of his rival, 
but the offering if made on the Ahavaniya would entail the same fate for the 
sacrificer himself.^ Visnu, on the other hand, repairs the errors of the sacri- 
fice, and does not seize on them as the time for assailing the author of the 
mistakes.® If the rule that a father should not be transgressed against is 
asserted, and traced to Prajapati’s offspring being punished by Varuna for 
transgress against him, it is at once found that the transgress was a ritual 
one.^ In Varuna’s house when the gods make mutual pledge of loyalty 
at the Tanunaptra they deposit their, forms : here again the act is a ritual 
performance.^® 

But the most convincing evidence of all regarding the almost purely ritual 
character of goodness in the view of the Brahmarias is the fact that their 
conception of torment in the other world is inextricably bound up with the 
correct practice, or the failure to follow the correct practice, of the ritual. 

1 AB. i. 0. 6 ; ii. 2. 2. 20. Satya are opposed to Anrta only. 

* GN. 1915, pp. 177 n, » Cf. gB. i. 1. 1. 4, 5 with KB. if. 8. 

® In the RV. Rta and Satya come together, ® e. g. rtdm TS. ii. 3. 5. 1 ; cf. MS. 

usually late, ix. 113. 4 ; x. 190. 1 ; cf. ii. 2 . 7 ; PB. xxi. 2. 1 ; cf. Oldenberg, 

vii. 104. 8 ; anrta asatydh, iv, 5. 5 ; UeL des Veda^, p. 519, n. 2. 

Anrta regularly is opposed to Rta ’ TS. ii. 3. 13. 2 ; i. 7. 2. 6 ; fB. i. 3. 1. 14- 
(i. 105. 5 ; 130. 2 ; 152. 1, 3 ; ii. 24. 7 ; 16 ; xii. 7. 2. 17 ; iv. 5. 1. 6 ; PB. xv. 

vii. 60. 5 ; 65. 3 ; 66. 13 ; x. 87. 11 ; 2. 4 ; TB. i. 6. 5. 4. 

124. 5) ; to Satya, only vii. 49. 3 ; ® AB. vii. 4. 4. 

X. 55. 6. ® MS. i. 10. 10. 

^ In KS. xxxvi. 5 and MS. i. 10. 11 Rta and TS. vi. 2. 2. 1, 2, &c. 



474 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

After death man is weighed in the balance to test the good and the bad, 
an idea which is evidently not a primitive speculation but a late develop- 
ment,^ suggested, it may be, by the ordeal of the balance which is known 
in the later literature : it is, however, at least possible that the idea is 
no more than one of the passing conceptions of the Brahmanas, possibly 
a faint echo of the Iranian conception of judgement.^ But we cannot for 
a moment assume that the distinction depends on ordinary morality. The 
real nature of the idea is shown by the story of Bhrgu, son of Vanina, who 
was so proud that the god for his improvement made him unconscious and 
sent his spirit to see the world to come. Of the sights seen by Bhrgu there are 
two versions preserved in the Qatapatha ® and the Jaiminiya Brahmanas : ^ 
according to the latter, he first saw a man devouring another man whom he 
had cut up in pieces ; in the second place he saw a man who was eating another 
while the latter uttered cries of misery ; in the third place he saw a man who 
was eating another, who, however, kept entire silence ; in the fourth place 
he saw two women guarding a treasure ; and in the fifth place two rivers, one of 
blood guarded by a naked man armed with a mace, and one of butter guarded 
by men of gold, who with cups of gold draw from it what they desire. Then he 
saw, last of all, five rivers covered with lotuses blue and white, with waves of 
honey, where the dance, the song, and the lute resounded, where Apsarases 
disported themselves, and sweet fragrance was wafted. The Qatapatha 
version differs in detail : Varuna sends Bhrgu simply on a journey to cure 
him of pride : he visits the four cardinal points and one of the intermediate 
spaces. He sees only five instead of six sights, and these five are reduced to 
four by the fact that the first is really reduplicated, the first being the vision 
of men who were cutting in pieces and the second of men who were cutting 
only. The two rivers of blood and of butter, and the five of gold are omitted 
in toto, and the nude man figures in the episode of the two damsels. The 
explanation of these visions is given to the chastened Bhrgu by his father 
Varuna : the first exhibits the fate of those men who, without offering the 
Agnihotra and without true knowledge, cut wood in the world : the trees take 
thus revenge on them in the world to come ; the second is the fate of men who 
without proper ritual knowledge kill and eat animals ; the third applies 
in the case of eating herbs. The other three visions are faith and lack of faith 
respectively ; the river of blood is the blood of a Brahman, the black man is 
the sacrifice, the river of butter is formed from the waters used at the offering ; 
the five rivers are the worlds of Varuna. If a man performs the due offering, 
the trees in the world to come do not eat him, nor animals, nor rice and barley : 
his offerings go neither to faith or lack of faith : he avoids the river of blood, he 
gains the river of butter. The same idea appears in the Kausitaki Brahmana ® 

1 QB, xi. 2. 7. 33. 3 xi. q, i, 

^ Moulton, Early Zoroastrianism, pp. 169, * JB. i. 42-4 (JAOS. xv. 234-8). 

313; Giintert, Der arische Weltkonig, * xi* 3, 

p. 218. 



Chap. 27] 


475 


The Ethics of the Brdhmanas 

also : the animals revenge themselves on man in the next world, unless he 
adopts the proper form of rite, 

A final proof of the brutal morahty of the priest can be adduced in the 
position assigned to women : woman in India has always suffered much from 
all religions,^ but by none has she been so thoroughly despised as by the 
Brahmans of the period of the Brahmanas. The insolence of the question 
at the Varunapraghasas has been noted : . however much it may be explained 
away, it remains an insult, since it can only be justified on the theory that 
infidelity in a wife is not surprising ; a priest like Yavakri takes toll of every 
woman he fancies at pleasure. The wife is the half of man,^ but this is merely 
due to the fact that, without her, the man cannot secure the essential off- 
spring to continue his family, and perform the offerings to him after death. 
The Maitrayam Samhita ^ is very outspoken in its view of women : the three 
things which are connected with Nirrti, " Dissolution are dice, women, and 
slumber : the reality is the sacrifice, women is lack of truth. Three invitations 
addressed in a loving tone will overcome the most circumspect women, and 
their bad taste prefers the dance and song to the recitation of the Veda.^ 
Their power of wheedling secrets out of their husband is referred to in con- 
temptuous terms.® As compared with men they are always inferior : woman 
is the inferior part of the sacrifice ; she is ritually impure, and must be covered 
mth a girdle.® They have been smitten by the gods with the thunderbolt 
of the butter and hence they are emasculated, they cannot control themselves 
or an inheritance : even if many women are together and there is but a small 
boy, he takes precedence of them all.® They are inferior even to a bad man,® 
and their inferiority is marked by the ceremony on birth when the child is 
brought to the father.^® 

On the other hand, it would be wholly unfair to ignore the fact that the 
Brahmanas do not encourage or contemplate many crimes, which have been 
committed in other rituals. The exposure of female children which has been 
asserted to be mentioned in the Brahmanas is a mere error.^^ The Brahmanas, 
further, never actually prescribe a human sacrifice : the tradition of such an 
offering in the piling of the fire altar is handed down, and the name of the last 
sacrificer is given, but, though the Brahmana does not show any profound 
horror at the past, and may possibly have regretted the change, it must be 
remembered that this rite was always a rare and exceptional one. The 


^ Cf., in addition to Winternitz’s and 
Meyer’s works, the summary in Frazer, 
Indian Thought Past and Present, 
pp. 271-806 ; JB. ii. 269 ff. 

^ QB, V. 2. 1. 10. 

“ Hi. 6. 3 ; i. 10. 11, 16 ; JB. i. 98 f. adds 
sloth, anger, and hunger. 

« iii. 2. 4. 3-6 ; TS. vi. 1. 6. 5 ; MS. iii. 
7.3. Cf. BAU. vi. 4. 12. 

® KS. XXX. 1 ; AB. iii. 22. 


® QB. i. 3. 1. 12, 13 ; the symbolic ritual 
to secure fertility is slightly refined in 
PB. viii. 7. 8-13 ; Hopkins, TCA. xv. 36. 
’ QB. iv. 4. 2. 13 ; TS. vi. 8. 2. 

® gB. i. 3. 1. 9. 

» TS. vi. 5. 8. 2, 

MS, iv, 6. 4. 

Macdonell and Keith, Vedic Index, i. 395 ; 
ii. 115. 

gB. vi. 2. 1. 39. 



476 


[Party 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

slaughter of animals was, of course, prescribed by the rite, but the use of 
animals for food was the basis of this slaughter, and the doctrine of Ahinsa is 
one which has never even in India received full sanction. The accusation of 
cruelty in the slaying of the victim, which has often been brought against 
religious rites, is not specially proved for the Brahmanas : the primitive 
means of slaying victims available probably caused suffering to the animals, 
as in the Jewish practice of to-day, but that there was any deliberate lack of 
humanity is contrary to the desire of the sacriJficers to avoid anything un- 
seemly, which might indicate the reluctance of the victim to depart from the 
world. The Omophagia of the Dionysiac rites is not in the slightest degree 
hinted at in the Indian sacrifice. 

The ritual admittedly contains several rites based on fertility magic, 
which to modern taste are revolting, and sometimes even horrible, such as the 
action of the queen at the horse sacrifice. The idea that these rites were 
invented by the Brahmans, as is suggested even by Victor Henry,^ must be 
rejected as an error : the beliefs so expressed are primitive and natural, not 
priestly, and the only action of the priests in regard to them was doubtless the 
adoption from the popular belief of these usages and their decoration with 
the literature of the priests.^ Even in regard to these usages it is fair to note 
that there arose among the priests a disinclination to perform the ritual. 
In the Qankhayana Qrauta Sutra ^ there is recorded the view that the rite, by 
which a pair, or pairs, in the course of the Mahavrata at the winter solstice 
went through the process of intercourse, ought not to be performed, whether 
because it was antiquated or too extensive is uncertain. That such a view 
should have been taken in the face of the prescription of the rite in all the 
ancient texts ^ is creditable and worthy of notice. It is only to be regretted 
that it stands almost alone, for the omission in certain texts of the rite of 
beating the king on the occasion of the royal consecration may be explained 
otherwise. 

Moreover, we must admit that the ritual books show sometimes the most 
unedifying indifference to morality. The Jaiminiya Brahmapa ® actually 
records, without disapproval apparently, a rite, the Gosava, in which the per- 
former pays the ox the compliment of imitating its mode of existence, 
including incest with mother, sister, and female relative, though it records 

^ La doctrine du sacrifice^ pp. 107, 108. The Ixvi. 720, 730. The term utsanna recurs 

Tantras reveal to us a religion — perhaps in Samudragupta’s record of his sacri- 

aboriginal — of sexual orgiastic charac- lice, raising doubts of its sense ; lA, lii, 

ter, which doubtless in substance is very 17. 

old and popular ; cL 'WehcT, Religions^ * TS. vii. 5.9.4 ; KS. xxxiv. 5. These texts 
soziologie, ii. 322 ff. may be put about 800-700 b.c., the 

^ See, e. g., the rites for sexual intercourse ^rauta Sutra is dated (Keith, JRAS. 

given in BAU. vi. 4, a priori an un- 1908, p. 387) about 350 b.c. In JB. ii. 

expected place, and the speculations of 404 f. a Magadha is given the distasteful 

the Garbha Upanisad, forerunners of duty, 

the Kama Sutra. ® ii. 113; ApfS. xxii. 13. 1-3. 

® Weber, Ind, Stud, x. 125 ; Keith, ZDMG. 



Ckap. 27] 


477 


The Ethics of the Brdhmanas 


that Janaka of Videha did not carry out the rite, when he understood its 
nature, and the ^ibi king, who did, concluded that it was a ritual which should 
be performed in old age only, when the action it prescribed might be more 
excusable in certain regards. The priestly nature of the rite as it stands is 
shown by the reward promised, the world of the Ox, a reference to that 
creature in its Atharvan ^ form as a cosmic equivalent of Prajapati, Not less 
brutal is the cynical rite ^ provided when a man desires his wife to have lovers 
in plenty during his absence from her side. 

A more favourable view of the morality of the Brahmanas is taken by 
Hopkins,® who holds that, while in the case of the Pahcavihga the Saman and 
the rite make the gist of the Brahmana’s religion, it remains true that there 
is a real ethical foundation for this religion. The evidence adduced, however, 
is scanty ; untruth is indeed reproved, and the ‘ hant " follow^s the slayer, 
while taking too much is like swallowing poison.^ But the sacrifice does away 
with sin automatically ; even a sinner by means of wealth gets to the top ; 
goods wrongly accepted can thus be made proper and ht.^ The conception 
of sin is mechanical : all slaying, even of demons such as Vrtra, brings the 
taint of bloodshed, whether Justified or not, the fault of the sacrifice passes to 
him who blames it, as does a third of the sin of the initiated' to any one who 
speaks ill of them.® Evil repute {agllla vac) fastens on every killer, irrespective 
of the nature of his deed. A false accusation makes a man, despite his inno- 
cence, avoided by the gods, but the priests can make his sacrifice acceptable 
to them, and it is wisely said that the false accusers are the real sinners.*^ 
Untruth is described as a hole in the voice which can be filled by adding a 
syllable to a verse.® We find also the dubious doctrine ® of ‘ sins caused 
by the gods, by the Fathers, by other men or by ourselves which the com- 
mentator explains as evils inflicted by the gods or Fathers in respect of 
neglect, but not with certain accuracy. Moreover, insistence is laid on the 
fact that sacrifice increases proportionately man’s welfare materially and 
spiritually.^® 

The Brahmana, however, contains one doctrine of interest, intended to 
explain the fact of the grief {goka) which is the lot of the harlot, the eunuch, 
and the sinner. It adapts the old doctrine of the grief of the earth and sky 
on parting ; Indra removes grief from the earth into the harlot, from the 
atmosphere, which is the weakest of the worlds,^® to the eunuch, and from the 
sky to the sinner ; hence their desires are unattainable, and, even if one 
obtains some part of desire, he attains also a portion of grief. 


1 AV. iv. 11. 

^ BhGS. ii. 28 ; ApGS. xxiii. 4 ; ef. Keith, 
JRAS. 1914, p. 1088. 

3 TCA. XV. 29. 

« PB. xix. 4. 10. 

° PB. xvii. 2. 2 ; xiii. 7. 12 f. 

« PB. V. 5. 13 ; 6. 10. 

’ PB. xviii. 1. 10-12 (cf. the unholy voice 
which attaches to a man falsely accused 


of murder, TS. ii. 1, 10. 2) ; vi. 10. 7. 

® PB. viii. 6. 13. 

® PB. i. 6. 10 ; cf. VS. viii. 33 ; f B. iv. 4. 5, 
22 . 

Yet ‘ ill does he who gives all % PB. xvi. 

5. 6 ; 6. 1 ; 9. 2. 

PB. viii. i. 9-11. 

1® PB. vii. 3. 10 ; cf. TS. v. 4, 6. 4 ; PB. 
xxi. 7. 3 ; its name is neuter. 



478 The Philoso'phy of the Veda [Partv 

The association of purely ritual acts with morality is conspicuous even in 
the Upanisads/ and it is not surprising, that the Brahmanas remain in hopeless 
ignorance of the specific character of morality. As in the sphere of the 
sacrifice, we find confusion of the ideas of divine intervention and magic 
operation. Thus Varuna seizes the doer of evil, and therefore, since the 
evening is Vanina’s time, one should then on no account utter falsehood.^ 
But, having spoken truth in the evening, it makes no difference how much 
falsehood one speaks thereafter ; the original truth, applied at the proper 
moment, continues to have, we may say, an abiding and dominant effect.® 
Untruth and impurity can be washed away by water, or wiped away by appli- 
cation of the sacred Darbha grass.^ The same independence of morality is 
seen in the new doctrine of the fruit of ritual works, independent of divine 
action, and the view that man is born into the world hereafter which he has 
made for himself.^ The germ of the ideas lies in the gifts and sacrifices 
(istdpurta) of the Bigveda with which one is united in the world to come, 
without any divine intervention. We have here a germ whence later appears 
the conception of the automatic working of Karman. 

One idea of importance, however, can be faintly traced. Impurity, of 
course, is largely ritual, and a new-born child is ritually impure.® On the other 
hand, we find it definitely asserted that if one perform a certain ceremony of 
purification one will be left with no more guilt than is in a toothless child, and 
a similar assertion is made of a child on birth.*^ These assertions clearly admit 
that sin is not to be ascribed to a being incapable of volition, and in the same 
strain of thought we have the assertion of the sin which accrued to Soma 
because he had merely the intention of oppressing the Brahmans.® But these 
are isolated utterances, we have no reason to suppose that there was recognized 
any general doctrine of the necessity of volition to create responsibility ; 
the opposite clearly appears from the tale of the charioteer who by inadver- 
tence killed a Brahman boy, for the discussion of the incident deals only with 
the point whether the charioteer, or his master who was riding in the chariot, 
was to bear the sin of the slaughter.® 

In the terminology of the Brahmanas, however, appear differentiations 


1 e. g. BAU. iii. 8. 9. 

2 TB.i.7.2. 6; i. 5. 3. 3. 

» KB. ii. 8. 

« gB. iii. 1. 2. 10 ; 3. 18 ; AV. x. 5. 22. 

® KB. xxvi. 3 ; QB. vi. 2. 2. 27. On the 
imperishableness of the istdpurta see 
KB. vii. 4 ; JB. ii. 53. The idea seems 
applied to good deeds in TB. iii. 10. 11. 
3 ; Oldenberg, Die Lehre dev Upani- 
shaden, p. 30. 

« Cf. TB. iii. 7. 12. 3 f. 

’ gB. iv. 4. 5. 23 ; KS. xxxvi. 5 ; PB. xviii. 
1. 24. 

® gB. iv. 1. 2. 4. The Kali Gandharvas 


vainly attempt to obtain favour from 
gods, Fathers, and men by asserting 
(JB. i, 154 f.) that they had mentally 
favoured their contest against Asuras, 
Raksases, aiKi Piyacas. 

® See Sieg, Die Sagenstoffe des Rgveda, 
pp. 64 fl ; Macdonell and Keith, Vedic 
IndesCi it 321 ; JB. iii. 94-6. Intention 
becomes recognizedin Buddhism ( Keith, 
Buddhist Philosophy, p. 114). See also 
Oldenberg, in Mommsen, Zum dltesten 
Strafrecht der Kulturvblker, pp. 76 ff. 

Oldenberg, Weltanschauung der Brahmana- 
iexte, pp. 186 ff. ,* GN. 1915, pp. 167 if. 



Oliap. 27] 


479 


The Ethics of the Brahmanas 

from the uses of the Rigveda which attest the development of moral concep- 
tions. The conception of Rta as righteousness, as has been seen, is less pro- 
minent ; but the term itself in the negative form, Anrta, has established itself 
as the opposite of truth, Satya, which largely supersedes Rta. The old 
conception of law, Dharman, persists, but there appears beside it the later 
formation Dharma, which the ^atapatha Brahmana ^ formally personifies. 
The king now is hailed as the guardian of the Dharma and to him who has the 
power men resort in matters of Dharma,^ whence later we have the Dharma 
Sutras with their inextricable mixture of ritual, of domestic practices, and of 
civil and criminal law, all matters which Dharma is wide enough to cover. 
Vrata in the Rigveda denotes either the will of the god, or the usage of the man 
who obeys that will, nor does it cease to have this sense in the Brahmanas, for 
the committer of a breach of the established moral laws can be called one who 
turns from Vrata (apavrata),^ But it tends to be specialized to denote the 
course of observance specially undertaken by an individual for some special 
purpose, and the Brahmanas, like the Upanisads and the Sutras, know of many 
curious Vratas. 

There is development also in the terms for good and evil. The old words 
Vasu and fri ^ continue to denote material prospeiity, the earlier sense of the 
latter term as appropriate to beauty becoming less and less prominent, and 
the wicked man is still Papa. But from its use with terms of motion Sadhu 
comes to denote what is right,^ and Punya slowly develops, in lieu of its 
purely unethical sense of ‘ fortunate’ or ‘ lucky the implication of goodness,® 
as evinced in prosperity. Both terms are fated to have an important develop- 
ment later, for they are used in those passages of the Upanisads which touch 
on the essential connexion of the position of man in life as affected by the 
merit or demerit of his deeds in a previous birth. 

But though -terminology shows a certain advance in view^ it remains the 
case that nothing architectonic arises in the way of conception of good and evil. 
Truth and falsehood are sometimes set against each other, and once truth, 
good fortune, and light are opposed to untruth, evil, and darkness. But we 
miss entirely even what might have been expected, a living effort to combine 

opposition of gods and Asuras with the conception of good and evil. Goods 
remain essentially mundane ; the prayers offered are especially for temporal 
things, prosperity for the crops, the cattle, the boon of children, harmony in 
the realm, or pre-eminence for the Brahmans, or the restoration of an exiled 


^ xiii. 4, 3. 14. 

^ AB, viii. 12. 5 ; KS. xvii. 19 ; QB. v. 
3. 3. 9. 

® MS.iv.2. 12. 

^ Oldenberg, GN. 1918, pp. 35 £f. 

® fB. ii. 6. 3. 8 is dubious, but xi. 2. 7. 33 
contrasts sadhu-krtya and pdpa-kriyd ; 
a king, true to his duty {dhrtavrata), 
speaks and acts sadhu^ v. 4. 4. 5. 


® Connexion with pf or pu^ is dubious ; 
for the old sense see RV. ii. 43. 2 ; vii. 
55. 8 ; TS. i. 6. 11. 4 ; iii. 3. 8. 5 ; KS. 
xiii. 5 ; xxvii, 10. 

’ punya, BAU. iii. 2. 13 ; iv. 3. 15 (against 
papa) ; sadhu, asddhu, BAU. iv. 4. 22 ; 
sadhu, papa, TU. ii. 9 ; sadhu, punya, 
papa, BAU. iv. 4. 5. 



480 


[Part V 


The Philosoj>hy of the Veda 

king, acuteness of the senses, and rarely the world of heaven.^ Occasionally 
the idea appears that all objects of human desire are of minor importance ; 
the chariot of the gods is yoked for the world of heaven, that of men for mere 
desires. Similarly knowledge is stated to attain a result which neither gifts 
to the priest nor asceticism can obtain.^ But this is not the prevailing idea, 
nor are prayers necessarily moral. Man may sacrifice and pray to be freed 
from reproach of murder, from persecution by evil spirits, but also to be safe 
in violating for a year his oath, without meeting punishment from Varuna.® 

It is the conviction of the Brahmanas that life on the earth is on the whole 
a good thing ; for a man to live out his length of days is the ideal, and such 
traces of discontent as appear are mainly in regard to the doubt that man must 
feel whether he has even a year more to live.^ If he must die, then the sacrifice 
avails to carry him to the world of heaven, but he is never normally anxious 
to precipitate this result ; if a rite carries him to the sky, it ends, none the less, 
in restoring him to the solid earth. Besides death there are other evils ; 
hunger, dice, women, sleep, cause sin as does untmthfulness ; these are of 
the nature of things, for Prajapati is untruth and darkness as well as truth 
and light ; ® but no question is yet raised as to the compatibility of the 
existence of the creator and evil.® Nor is there any effort to evolve a complete 
code of moral rules ,* a man owes sacrifice to the gods, Vedic study to the 
seers, offspring to the Fathers, a triad of obligations, but also hospitality 
to friends ; ^ the duty of truth, as we have seen, is repeatedly asserted. 
But of the three duties, which in an Upanisad® are enunciated as the three 
d(2’s, generosity, self-restraint, and sympathy {datta, ddmyata, dayadhvam), 
only the first is heartily recognized in the Brahmanas. Gifts are a bridge to 
the heaven, a gift of a cow protects one’s life, that of a garment prolongs it ; 
the food destroys him who eats what he should give to others — the priests 
par excellence. It is only in an Aranyaka that we have the wise counsel 
that a man should be able to say ^ No ’ as well as ‘ Yes ’ and to give only 
at the right moment.^ Self-restraint is asserted in one passage of the gods,^® 
but sympathy is a virtue of the Upanisad period. 

In the undeveloped state of ethical views it would be hopeless to expect 
any political philosophy, nor have we any. The existence of the castes is taken 
for granted, and their origin attributed to divine creation whether in the 
version of the Purusa hymn of the Bigveda or in some variant form.^^ The 
duties and privileges of the castes are often mentioned incidentally, occa- 
sionally in more completeness, but there is no effort to develop a theoretic 

1 TS.ii ; Caland, Overde Wenschoffers (1902). TS. vi. 3. 10. 5 ; QB. i. 7. 2. 1 f. 

* KS. xxii. 1 ; x. 5. 4. 16. ® BAU. v. 2. 

» TS. ii. 2. 6. 2. » MS. iv. 8. 3 ; KS. xxviii. 5 ; TB. ii. 8.8.1; 

« V. 5. 2, 2 ; TB. i. 8. 4. 3. AA. ii. 3. 6. Cl above, p. 477, n. 10. 

5 gB. X. 6. 5. 1 ; MS. iii. 6. 8 ; QBA. 1. 1. 1 ; KB. ix. 1. 

V. 1. 2. 10. e. g. TS. vii. 1. 1. 4 ; fB. xii. 7. 3. 12 ; 

« A ritual criticism of Prajapati for creating BAU. i. 4. 11 f. ; PB. vi. 1. 6 ff. ; JB. 

thieves, flies, &c., is given in Ap^S. xxi. i. 68 f. 

12. 1 ft*. 



Oliap. 27] 


481 


The Ethics of the Brdhmanas 


version of the matter. The Brahman is required to be of Brahmanical descent, 
to follow an appropriate course of life, to possess renown for learning, and to be 
engaged in the spiritual advancement of the people. In return he is entitled 
to receive honour and presents, and to be exempt from oppression and the 
death penalty.^ The Ksatriyas are to protect the people, and show considera- 
tion for Brahmans, while the commonalty in its subjection to these two castes 
is not very much better off than the Qudras, children of the Asuras or of non- 
existence, save in so far as they are sharers in the rites of the twice born. It 
is assumed^ that, in the perpetuation of the due subordination of the castes, 
there is assured prosperity for the people ; no attempt is made to demon- 
strate or render this theory plausible. In the relations of the king and his 
Purohita there is an element of contract, with which may be compared the 
effort of the Buddhists to base the existence of caste relations and the state 
on contractual agreements as well as on creation myths, ^ but the Brahmans 
insist in the ceremony of the royal consecration that they own no king, for 
Soma is their overlord, an assertion of the superiority of the priestly to the 
warrior class doubtless more honoured in theory than in practice, though not 
without actual importance. 

Of the origin of kingship itself we have variant versions, while the con- 
dition of anarchy is once vividly described.^ On one theory ® Indra owes his 
kingship among the gods to Prajapati’s favour, who at first made him the 
most inferior, but later conferred on him his own lustre and made him over- 
lord, of the gods. Another version ® makes him the chosen of the gods, 
including Prajapati, by reason of his eminent qualities of mind and body. 
Yet another ^ makes the gods choose Soma as their king, because they felt 
that they owed their defeats at the hands of the Asuras to their lack of a 
sovereign. Or again they consecrate Varuna,® their brother, because they see 
in him the form (rupa) of their father, Prajapati. Among men the rule of the 
Bajanya is explained ® on the ground that he is the representative of Prajapati, 
thus being entitled, though one, to rule over many. It is, however, dubious 
whether this should be regarded as precisely a doctrine of the divine origin of 
the kingship in any specific sense ; at any rate there is no effort to expound 
a doctrine of hereditary divinity in the Brahmanas, and the ceremony of the 
Bajastiya, or royal consecration, hints at recollections of an elective kingship 
by the consent of the people.^® The inviolability of the king is asserted, and 
his duty to assert and defend the law,^^ Dharma, but no grounds of a philoso- 
phical character for his obligations are alleged. 


^ QB. xi. 5. 7. 1 ; AB. vii. 29 ; Macdonell 
and Keith, Vedic Index, ii. 82 ff. 

=» Cf. QB. V. 4. 4. 19 ; xiii. 4. 4. 13. 

® N. N. Law, Ancient Indian Polity, pp. 
96~8. See also U. Ghoshal, History of 
Hindu Political Theories (1923), pp. 
117 ff., 135, 210. 

« QB. xi. 1. 6. 24. 

® AB. viii. 4, 12. 

1 1 [h.0.S. 32] 


8 JB. iii. 152 ; cf. PB. xiii. 9. 22 f. 

8 gB.v.1.5.14, 

The view (Ghoshal, op. cit, pp. 38 ff.) 
of the rise in Vedic times of a nobility 
of office versus birth is not plausible, 
and the Teutonic parallel is explained 
by difference of social conditions. 
gn. V, 4. 4. 7. 

1* f B. V. 4. 4. 5 ; 3. 3. 9. The Dharma Sutras 


8 TB. ii. 2. 10. 1 f. 
’ AB. i. 1. 14. 



482 


[Part V 


Th& Philosophy of the Veda 

§ 5 . Modes of Thought and Categories 

Despite their interminable controversies, of which the Brahmanas contain 
many hints, there is no evidence of the development of any logical theory. In 
a late text, the Taittiriya Ara^iyaka,^ we find, indeed, an enumeration of four 
means of attaining correct knowledge, tradition {smrti), perception [fpraty* 
aksa), communication by one who is expert (aitihya), and reasoning {afiumdna). 
This occurs in a verse to be used in connexion with the piling of the Aruna- 
ketuka fire, a late rite, and it has epic parallels,^ showing that it represents a 
late popular view. It is obvious that it is unscientific, for tradition and 
communication obviously are not distinct sources, and what really was meant 
by reasoning does not appear, nor is the term otherwise defined in the 
Brahmanas. 

The real distinction in the Brahmanas }s between what is normally per- 
ceived (pratyaksa) and what is beyond mere perception {jparoksa), and, as the 
gods prefer the latter, so men recognize that mere appearances are not the 
essence of reality. Hence the foundation is laid for the doctrine of forms 
(rupa) which lie at the basis of the interminable and seemingly absurd identi- 
fications of the texts. Philosophically the view has a real importance, for it 
points to the development of the pantheistic doctrine which asserts the unity 
of the individual self and the universe ; the individual is no more than an 
aspect of the universal. What is obvious is not what is ultimately true ; 
what is pratyaksa for men is paroksa for the gods ; what is paroksa for men, is 
pratyaksa for the gods.^ Hence, although the importance of sight as a source 
of knowledge is asserted, at other times the emphasis is laid on the necessity 
of thought to penetrate reality, but this stage is not consciously reached until 
the Upanisad period. In the Brahmanas what we find is the assertion of 
special insight through the power of asceticism, which enables the seers to 
behold the rising of the metres to the heaven.^ By asceticism or even without 
it the seers discover the sacred texts and the rites, for already these are 
regarded as beyond human creation or invention; they must be seen, 
learned, or found, not created. Indra himself in visible form reveals the 
Stomabhaga formulae to Vasistha, a Saman converses with Ke9in Dalbhya, 
a voice unseen instructs Devabhaga, a golden bird, a maiden possessed by a 
Gandharva reveal secret lore, ^rautarsi Devabhaga discovers the right way 
to divide the sacrificial victim, but dies without revealing it to any one ; 
a supernatural being tells it to Girija. The great texts trace their revelation 
to such gods as Aditya, Indra, Prajapati, or Brahman, though no purposeful 
action is ascribed in this regard to these deities. 

give much information as to royal the product of a post-Vedic era. 

duties as well as those of other persons, 2. 1 ; Oldenberg, Weltanschauung dev 

but, apart from their dubious date, they Brahman atexte, pp. 221 ff. 

contain nothing of philosophical impor- “ Hopkins, Great Epic of India, pp. 145 ff. ; 
tance. Cf. Weber, Religionssoziologic, Ramayana (ed. Gorr,), v, 87. 23. 

ii. 141 ff. The Artha^astra is clearly ® PB. xxii. 10. 3. * TS. v. 3. 5. 4. 



Chap. 27] Modes of Thought and Categories 483 

Against tradition of this kind human ingenuity is valueless ; YaJ havalkya, 
always an innovator in spirit, asserts that there are two kinds of created 
things ; the Rc verse says three, and its authority is conclusive.^ Neverthe- 
less human thought must have an outlet, and it expresses itself in the deep 
consideration of topics, styled Mimahsa, the desiderative form of man, 
‘ think ’, a term so common that it can be omitted, the genitive case alone 
standing to denote the object of investigation. At other times Mimahsa fares 
less respectfully ; suggestions that a rite should be carried out in other than 
the established manner may be dismissed as mere speculation. Another term, 
Vicikitsa, also a desiderative formation, denotes the doubt which prompts 
inquiry, while the final result is denoted by Sthiti, the station attained. 

Unfortunately this consideration does not penetrate to facts, but lives 
largely in a world of fancy, unrestrained by regard for reality and with 
extremely slight sense of the limitations of knowledge. If the Taittiriya 
Samhita ^ in a moment of sanity admits the possibility of doubt whether 
a man really exists in yonder world or not, that candour is accidental and 
episodic. The theologians of the Brahmanas are not prepared to admit to 
ignorance of any sort, and revelation reduces them to interpretation at their 
pleasure, aided by the fact of the bizarre nature of the revealed texts. If the 
waters can practise asceticism, it is not surprising that speech can speak 
standing in the seasons, or that the sacrificial consecration can be pursued by 
the gods with the aid of the seasons, or that the ascent of the metres to the 
sky should be visible. The texts operate freely, as already in the later 
Rigveda, with the conceptions of being or not-being, but they fail to make Q.ny 
serious progress in discovering effective categories. The cardinal points and 
the year lead very slowly up to more adequate conceptions of space and time, 
and the two seem endlessly confused even in the Upanisads. The conception 
of causality remains wholly obscure; instances of natural causation are 
recorded, but equally we have the most fantastic conception of cause and 
result, and it is significant that neither Karya, ‘result’, nor Karana, ‘cause’, 
appears. Other important technical terms are missing ; there are no expres- 
sions for relation in general or conditions, the expressions Visaya, ' object ’, 
Viparyaya, ‘ opposition Pravrtti, ‘ activity ’, and Nivrtti, ‘ cessation from 
action ’, are wanting. On the other hand, certain advances are made ; the 
adjective prdkrta in the Qatapatha Brahmana reveals the existence of the 
conception Prakrti, ‘ ground form ’, later famous in the Samkhya ; difference 
is expressed by Nanatva, though the later Bheda occurs only in the more 
recent Upanisads ; the nature of any thing is expressed by a derivative in 
tva or tdy and in a late passage in the Taittiriya Aranyaka ^ the use, later 
established, of an abstract in the ablative as giving the ground of some result, 
is actually found. The terminology of the Brahmanas does not know any 

1 fB. ii. 5. 1. 2. ^ i. 7, 6 (ndndlingatvdt), BAU. iv. 3. 23 

^ vi. 1. 1. 1. has avindgitvdt, ‘ by reason of im- 

^ KU. has Visaya and uipariia, perishability’, 

II* 



484 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

general expression for sensation or perception, compelling needless repetitions, 
which the Upanisads also adopt, but phrases such as ‘ In each season there is 
the form of all the seasons ’ show efforts at expressing general conceptions.^ 

When no clear distinction had been made between personal and impersonal, 
and anything whatever might be conceived as active and living, it was in- 
evitable that little progress could be made with formal definitions. We have 
instead endless identifications ; the sacrifice is man or the year or anything 
else which may suit the moment, and, if the horse character (agvatva) of the 
horse is explained, it is merely that it came into being from the eye of Praj apati 
when it was swollen (acvayat). Some of these etymologies were probably 
recognized as absurd by their makers, but others not, despite the fact that 
there was already developing itself an acute system of lingtdstic investiga- 
tions, which reveals itself in the early appearance of terms for number (vacana), 
case forms {vibhakti) and so on, and in investigations as to euphonic combina- 
tion and phonetical peculiarities,^ When the priests set to work to define, 
they normally merely give fanciful identifications, as those of Agni Vai^vanara, 
which they propound to A^vapati Kaikeya.^ Nevertheless, occasionally they 
reveal more acumen ; the vague term Kratu is defined ; ‘ When a man wishes, 
“ May I do that, may I have that,” that is Kratu ; when he attains it, that is 
Daksa.’ ^ 

When definition is in so feeble a condition, classification naturally fares no 
better. The love of numbers already appears as a dominant factor ; the term 
Prana is subdivided into five elements, among other divisions, and these five 
are obviously incapable of presenting any intelligible picture to the minds of 
the priests ; moreover, under the same title we find not merely varieties of 
breathing, as is natural, but the quite different set of five, mind, speech, 
breath, sight and hearing. But other numbers and divisions are also found ; 
we have here signs of that love of numerical enumerations which is seen in its 
full development in the Anguttara Nikaya of the Pali Canon or the Ekottara- 
gama of the north, and which on one view has given the Samkhya philosophy 
its distinctive name. 

Reasoning, indeed, we find, but of a peculiar character. Its logical 
value consists merely in its systematic form, marked by the use of the particles ® 
vai and khalu va% the former of which marks the general principle asserted as 
the basis of the reasoning, the latter the identification which renders the 
general principle apposite. Thus, if it is necessary to explain Ivhy during the 
consecration the person consecrated has milk as his sole food, the principle ® 
is asserted, ‘ By milk indeed {vai) embryos wax ’ ; the application follows, 

‘ Now indeed {khalu vai) the consecrated person is as it were an embryo 
and the conclusion is arrived at, ‘ In that he has milk as his food, he causes 

1 viii. 7. 1. 3 f. ^ ^B. iv. 1, 4. 1. 

* Cf. PB. XX. 14. 2 ; AB. v. 4. 3 ; Wacker- , ® Delbriick, Altindische Syntax^ p. 493 ; cf. 

nagel, AUind, Gramm, i. pp. Ixii. ff. Keith, Rig-Veda BrdhmanaSt p. 95. 

» 5B. X. 6. 1. « TS. vi. 2. 5. 3. 



Chap. 27] 


485 


Modes of Thought and Categories 

himself to wax.’ Or again ^ we have, ‘ By means of the Stoma the gods prosper 
in this world ; the Vatsapra is a counterpart of the Stoma ; in that he pays 
homage with the Vatsapra, so does he win prosperity in this world.’ The 
principles and their application alike rest on mere assertion, and it is seldom 
that they are self-evident. Naturally, when deductive processes are so feebly 
represented, there is no effort at induction, which is found only in the Upani- 
sads, and even then merely in the form of arguments which exhaust a series 
of possibilities, assumed, not proved, to be exhaustive, and so assumed tacitly, 
no expression of the assumption being requisite. There is a further advance in 
the Pali canon, but that is of still later date.^ 

With thinking still so undeveloped, it would be impossible to expect any 
serious advance in the construction of categories to aid in the comprehension 
of the world. The distinction between what has and what has not life and 
power of action is not made ; the gods, demons, men, plants, beasts of all kinds, 
are no more alive than the atmosphere, wind, rain, storm, minerals, the 
sacrifice and its utensils, numbers, metres, qualities or emotions. The holy 
power and the lordly power are concrete activities, like the strength (mrya) 
of a man ; his greatness (mahiman) is even said along with his Atman to 
constitute him.® The anguish caused to the victim in the slaying adheres to 
the roasting spit, and if placed on earth will penetrate to the earth ; guilt 
(ena$, dgas) is a substance which the god can carry with him ,* a man’s good 
deeds are within the altar, his evil deeds without it.^ Equally substantial are 
conceptions such as right, asceticism, evil, death, immortality, truth, false- 
hood, space and time. These two are normally represented by the cardinal 
points and the year ; gradually we find the development of Aka^a, which 
denotes the vacancy between objects,® such as the Antariksa between heaven 
and earth, but it is also material, as the Upanisads frankly recognize, and of 
Kala, which primarily means the suitable moment for anything, but becomes 
regarded as a cosmic power, similar to the year, in the Atharvaveda. 

Even the more imposing conceptions of being and not-being prove to 
have little profundity. Being does not denote in the Brahmanas the whole of 
existence as a unity, contrasted with the imperfect plurality of the individual ; 
it is essentially the term to denote that whence the world emerged, and the 
Vedic thinker proceeds to ask whence it itself came, evolving the answers not- 
being or something beyondtooth being and not-being, identified in the usual 
light-hearted manner in one passage with mind.® Not-being naturally as the 
foundation of all things is subject to similar identifications ; it may be said to 
be the seers, or to practise austerities, or to desire to become being, mere 
verbal intricacies without trace of serious thought.’^ 

Some effort, however, is made to secure order in conceptions, and there can 
1 TS. V. 2. 1. 6 f. 33. 

® BAU. iv. 5. 6 ff. ; Mahavagga, i. 6. 38 ff. ; = AB.iii.42.1; 5B.iii.3.2. 19; vii.1.2.23, 

Oldenberg, Buddha^ y pp. 214 ff. ^B. x. 5. 3. 1, 2. 

» JB. i. 228. ’ 5B. Vi. 1. 1. 1 ; TB. ii. 2. 9. 1. See also 

* gB. iii, 8. 5. 8 f. TS. ii. 5. 1 ; fB. xi. 2. 7. AV. iv. 19. 6 ; x. 7. 21. 



486 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

be traced the gradual formation of the ideas of the five elements and of the five 
senses, with mind above or beside them, ideas which introduce some degree of 
system into the conception of the external world and of man’s powers, 
although terminology remains changing and vague. Persistent from the 
Purusasukta onwards is the effort to distinguish and compare the macrocosm 
and the microcosm ; what is interpreted as regards the gods {adMdevatam, 
adhidaivatam) as earth, atmosphere, and sky, is mind, breath, and speech as 
regards the self {adhydtmam ) ; wind, fire, sun, the quarters, and the moon 
correspond to breath, speech, eye, ear, and mind. Similarly there is a marked 
love for arranging things in lists, each with many correspondences ; if the 
creator produces ^ from his mouth the Trivrt Stoma, it has as correlative the 
god Agni, the metre Gayatri, the Rathantara tune, the Brahman among 
men, the goat among beasts, and similar series are invented for the other 
Stomas. Correspondence in any sense is a basis for identification, and affords 
one of the various rounds of connexion even of the loosest nature which 
justified a Brahmanical identification. 

More interesting is the efforti:o express aspects of reality by the use of the 
word Tanu, ‘body’. It denotes primarily simply the body of a person or his 
self regarded as corporeal, as in the reflexive use of the term and in its occa- 
sional exchange with Atman, ^ which denotes the spiritual aspect of the self. 
But it is specially frequent in the plural to denote what may best be styled 
aspects ; ® thus Agni has one aspect as bearing the oblations to the gods, 
another as carrying the offerings for the dead ; he has auspicious and dread 
aspects. The aspects may be mortal or immortal ; Prajapati has five of either, 
mortal as hair, &c., immortal as mind, &c. Taken together they may make up 
the whole, or they may be set beside the self, Atman, as members ; or the 
whole may itself be sty ed a Tanu.** Or the aspects may be in different places ; 
even the Rigveda recognizes that Agni has such aspects. In any ease the 
Tanus give rise to indefinite possibilities of identification, since in respect of 
some one or other of them most things can be made similar. 

While Tanu is not of enduring importance in Indian thought, Rtipa, 
‘ form remains a term of high importance. Its primary meaning is visible 
extension or shape ; it is the object of the eye, as sound is that of the ear. 
Only during life does form exist, being lost in death, a hint of the doctrine of 
the necessity of the imposition of form on matter to create the concrete 
individual.® Similarly ® the Brahman is said to enter the world when it is to 
be made distinct by means of name and form, the name corresponding to the 
form, and thus — to develop the idea — ^being the means of expressing the 
nature of the form, though this conception is far from that of the Brahmana 
which treats name and form as two distinct active potencies. Nor can we 

1 TS. vii. 1. 1. 4 m Cf. JUB. iii. 1 f. 17. 

® KS. vii. 6. ® JUB. iii. 32 ; cf. of animals, f B. iv. 3. 4. 14. 

® KS. xxxvi. 13 ; vii. 13 ; fB. x. 1. 3. 2, 4, ® 5B. xi. 2. 3. 

^ AB.v.25.11; TB.i.l.6.3f. ; KS.xxxiv. 



Chap. 27] 


487 


Modes of Thought and Categories 


venture to attach too much importance to the aspect of Rupa as form, for 
even in the Chandogya Upanisad ^ the term denotes not pure form, but a 
material possessing form ; heat, water, food are the results of the creator 
entering the world with name and form. 

Form naturally serves as the basis of identifications, for almost an}i:hing 
can be said to be the form of another, either on solid or on fanciful grounds. 
Thus the bull can be said to be the form or symbol of Indra, type of male 
strength, butter and gold of the cow, repaired things of the fire piled after an 
fruitless effort. Or the firesiicks are the hidden form of Agni, while he is the 
revealed form. If things have any form in common, they can be identified, and 
though Tanu derives its origin from the corporeal aspect of a thing, and Rupa 
comes from the idea of appearance, they tend largely to coincide in force. 
But, unlike Tanu, Rupa is regularly associated with name, and the association 
develops into the expression, name and form, which in Buddhism expresses 
concrete individuality. 

Akin to Rupa in the view of many scholars is the somewhat vague term 
Dhaman, especially in cases w’here we hear of the Dhamani of such a god as 
Soma,^ or, as often in the Brahmapas and earlier, of the dear Dhaman of a 
deity, though the sense ‘ abode ’ is preferred by Hillebrandt ^ among others. 
We hear of the butter as the dear Dhaman of Agni, of the mead as that of the 
Agvins ; speech is that of Indra and Agni, salt that of heaven and also of the 
cattle, the quarters that of Soma.^ A frequent reward of the man who 
worships correctly or has the proper knowledge is to attain the Dhaman of the 
deity, or by the use of the sacrificial strew, which is the Dhaman of cattle, one 
obtains them.® In Oldenberg’s view ® the term denotes what is ordained {dha). 
Thus in the Rigveda we hear of the ordinances of Mitra and Varuna, and with 
a genitive the term often denotes what is appointed by some power.’' In other 
cases, when thus used, the term in the genitive expresses what is ordained, 
or the substratum, in which the thing ordained has effect ; the former may 
be the meaning in the Rigveda ^ of the phrase the Dhaman of the Rta, which 
is given ® as the description of the dawn, or the Dhaman of the sacrifice.^® But, 
while this explanation has the advantage of being true to the etymology of the 
term, and is doubtless largely correct, it is clear that the meaning ‘ abode ’ 
early developed, and this sense should probably be recognized much more 
freely than is admitted by Oldenberg, though he recognizes that the term did 
develop something approaching this sense.^^ 


^ vi. 2 ff. 

® So Geldner (Glossar, s.v.) as to RV. i. 91. 
4, 19, &c. The term occurs frequently 
in formulae of offering. 

® Lieder des l^gveda, p. 66, n. 1. 

* TS.v.1.9.5; 8.10.3; xiv. 1. 4. 13 ; 
AB. vi. 7. 10 ; KS. xx. 1 ; viii. 2 ; fB. 
iii. 9. 4. 20. 

® TS. V. 2. 3. 4 ; KS. viii. 2 ; MS. iii. 2. 2 ; 
cf. RV. ix. 114. 1 ; Yasna, xlvi. 6. 


« GN. 1915, pp. 180-90, 401-3. He treats 
daman in the Avesta similarly. 

’ RV. X. 10. 6 ; i. 91. 3 ; 123. 8 ; x. 81. 5 
(Vi^vakarman) ; vi. 21. 3 (Indra). 

® RV. i. 43. 9 ; cf. the use of the verb in 
i. 71. 3 ; viii. 27. 19. 

’ KS. xxxix. 10. 

RV, X. 67. 2 (created by the Angirases). 

J Mund.iii. 2. 1. 



488 


[Part Y 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

It is significant that contemporaneously we find the science of grammar 
alone in process of development ; the Brahmanas show knowledge of the 
scientific grouping of the letters,^ of the distinction of case forms, numbers and 
so forth, and the elaboration of the system of Panini, as well as the researches 
of the Prati^akhyas prove the skill which was being developed in this period. 
The Nirukta of Yaska which falls in date at the close of the Brahmana period 
proves how considerable had been the advances made in regard to questions 
of etymology, the classification of the parts of speech (of which Yaska reckons 
four, nouns, verb, prepositions, and particles), and the nature of language.^ 
The superiority of Indian achievement in this regard to that of contemporary 
Greece is manifest, but, on the other hand, there is extremely little evidence 
of any progress in regard to astronomy or mathematics, for we cannot accept 
the overestimates of the knowledge involved in the ^ulba Sutras, apart 
altogether from the doubt as to their date, and the fact of their serving 
essentially practical ends.® Of natural science we know nothing at this period, 
and both in the Brahmanas and the Upanisads the nature of the ideas current 
is incompatible with any progress in these matters in contemporary thought.^ 


^ Cf. PB. XX. 14. 2 ; CU. ii. 22 ; Wacker- 
nagel, Altind. Gramm* i. p. Ixii ; Olden- 
berg, Weltanschauung der Brahmana- 
texte, p. 233 ; TU. i. 2 ; AA, iii. 1 ff. 

^ See Lakshman Sarup’s trs. of the Nirukta, 
Intr. pp. 53 fif. 

^ See Chap. 29. 


Regarding Indian medicine, cf. A. F. R. 
Hoernle, Studies in the Medicine of 
Ancient India^ and Keith, ZDMG. Ixii. 
134 ff. It is impossible to take seriously 
the Kama Sutra tradition which makes 
^vetaketu, who figures in the Upanisads, 
an authority on erotics. 



CHAPTER 28 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISADS 


§ 1. The Origin of the Upanisads 

Native tradition^ derives the term Upanisad, by means which will not bear 
scrutiny, from roots which yield as its sense either that which destroys innate 
ignorance, or that which leads to the Brahman. It is more important to note 
that from an early period the utmost stress is laid on the secret character of 
the instruction contained in these works : the rule is that they are the highest 
mysteries, and that their doctrines should not be imparted to any pupil, other 
than a son, who has not already studied with the teacher for a year and who 
does not intend himself to become a teacher. The same view is enforced by 
the facts recounted in the texts : when the deepest part of the discussions 
arrives, the two concerned go apart and talk of the new doctrine of action as 
the source of human fate. 

When, therefore, we seek for an origin of the term which will not defy the 
laws of etymology, it is necessary to find something which will accord with this 
essential nature of secrecy. The word is derived obviously from the prefixes 
upa-ni and sad, ^sit’, and the only natural meaning is a session, a sitting 
down near some person, who naturally is assumed to be the teacher. This 
accords with the mode of teaching followed in India, which, as we have seen, 
involved the sitting of the pupil and tb^ teacher facing each other, while the 
latter repeated the lesson to be learned by the former. The lessons of the 
teacher to his pupil were not public in the ordinary sense of the word : to be 
practicable they naturally required quiet, but the ritual texts show us more 
than that : they bear witness that certain texts of special importance were to 
be taught to the pupil in the forest, and not in the normal place, the abode 
of the teacher. With this accords admirably the fact that the Upanisads 
form parts of, or are attached in the case of the most important and old of 
these works to, texts which tradition gives the names of Aranyaka,^ The 
name must clearly, as held by Oldenberg, have been derived from the fact 
that the discussions contained in these works were studied in the forest ; 
the alternative view ® that the Aranyakas were specially intended for study by 


1 Cf. t^ankara on BAU. p. 2 ; KU. p. 73 ; 

TU. p. 9 ; Muiid. p. 261. 

* Oldenberg, Prolegomena^ pp. 291 ff . ; 
GN. 1915, pp. 382 ff. Cf. ^GS. ii. 12. 11 ; 
vi ; AQS. viii, 14. 

® Deussen, Seckzig Vpanishad’^s^ p, 7, 
following the Indian (Aruiieya Up. 2) 


tradition of an Aranyaka as a BrSh- 
niana for those engaged in the vow of 
forestlife(Sayanaon AA.i. 1 ; Aufrecht, 
Aitareya Brdhmana, p. iii). The other 
view is, however, also traditional. 
Winternitz (Gesch, d» ind. Lit, i. 202, 
n. 1) agreed with Deussen but (iii. 616) 



490 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

the Vanaprasthas, men who, after serving their apprenticeship as Brahman 
students and having performed as householders their duties, retire to the 
forests to study, is clearly a more advanced conception than that obtained in 
the early Upanisads. The later view is an artificial conception, and one which 
grew up only with the strict division of stages of life enjoined on Brahmans, 
if not always observed. Naturally, however, the Aranyakas, in so far as they 
are texts of allegorical interpretation of the sacrifice, were studied by such 
Vanaprasthas more than were the Brahmanas proper, which were rather ritual 
in their interest, and presumed that the sacrifice was actually being performed. 
The Aranyakas in their more distinctive portions deal with the meaning of the 
offering, without necessarily assuming that it will be performed : they some- 
times suggest modes of performing the sacrifice by meditation and repetition — 
as of the Hotr formulae only. But the distinction of Brahmana and Aranyaka 
is not an absolute one : in no case have we in the works handed down to us 
Brahmanas which alw^ays suppose the performance of ritual, or Aranyakas 
which assume that it is not to be performed. Nor can we see why the dis- 
tinction, which was probably the real one between the Brahmanas and the 
Aranyakas, the comparative sanctity of their contents, should have attached 
itself to precisely the ceremonies to which it did so attach itself. The ritual 
texts of the different Vedas show us clearly the fact that certain rites and texts 
were regarded as especially sacred, to be performed outside the village, and 
these texts are contained not merely in Aranyakas but even in the Samhita 
form.^ Thus the Pravargya rite is treated in this fashion in the Taittiriya 
Aranyaka iv and v, while the Mantras concerned are also to be found in the 
later part of the Vajasaneyi Samhita,^ in which they are followed by other 
Mantras, containing certain dread names of the Maruts and certain invocations 
of formidable character used in theTiorse sacrifice. The Aranyagana of the 
Samaveda and the Aranyaka Samhita contain the secret texts of that Veda,® 
and the Aitareya ^ and Qankhayana Aranyakas ® present the secret texts of 
the Rigveda, of which the most important is that concerning the Mahavrata, 
an old and popular rite, while the former contains also the Mahanamni verses,® 


with Oldenberg. Oltramare (Vhistoire 
des idies thiosophiques, i. 63, n. 1) 
suggests ‘ introduction ’ or ‘ initiation % 
hence mystic doctrine. 

1 See Oldenberg, ON. 1915, pp. 382-401. 
xxxvi. 1-xxxix. 6 ; 7 ; 8-13. See also 
TA. i. 32 ; ApgS, xv. 20. 1 ff. ; B^S. 
ix. 19 ; BhGS. iii. 6 ; M?S. iv. 7. 1 ff. ; 
K^S. xviii. 4. 24 ; xx. 8. 5 ; PGS. ii, 
15.6; 5®. xiii. 3. 4. 1 ; xiv. 1. 1. 26 ff. 
The additional matter in TA. iv. 22-7 
is parallel to that in VS. xxxix, while 
iv. 21 has the Dadhigharma (Ap^S. xv. 
18. 17), a rite parallel to the Pravargya 
at the midday pressing. 


« GGS. iii. 1. 28 ff.; 2. 1 ff. ; 54; JGS. i. 
16 f. The CU. is, of course, treated in 
this way, and perhaps also the Mantra 
Brahmana, which precedes the CU. 
The Samans of this type are especially 
full of insertions and are longer. 

* See Keith, Aitareya Aranyaka (1908). 

^ Trans. Keith (1909). See also JRAS. 
1908, pp. 364-87. 

« Cf. Oldenberg, GN. 1915, pp. 375-81, 
whose ingenious reconstruction of the 
original form is, however, not wholly 
convincing. The verses are known to 
TS. V. 2. 11. 1 ; MS. iii. 12. 21 ; VS. 
xxiii. 35 ; AV. xi. 7, 6. Scheftelowitz 



Chap. 28] 


491 


The Origin of the Upanisads 

which appear in a form strange to the manner of the Eigveda and akin to that 
of the S toaveda, in which they are also found. Both texts contain also certain 
mystic doctrines regarding the Samhita form of the text of the Rigveda, and 
the ^ahkhayana deals also with the Mantha. Both also include, like the 
Taittiriya, philosophical Upanisads. The Aitareyins and the Kausitakins of 
the Rigveda placed the Mahavrata ceremony in the rank of a fit subject for 
an Aranyaka, but the Yajurveda allowed it to appear in the Samhita, and the 
Samaveda treats of it in the Pahcavinga and Jaiminiya Brahmanas. But we 
can realize how from their superior sanctity the tendency grew for these 
treatises to be used as the places of the record of the secret doctrines, which 
gradually, in the mind of the priests, took the place of the more material 
performance of the ritual. 

As the distinction between Brahmana and Aranyaka is not an absolute one, 
though the Aranyakas tend to contain more advanced doctrines than the 
Brahmanas, so the distinction between Upanisad and Aranyakas is also not 
absolute, tradition actually incorporating the Upanisads in some cases in the 
Aranyakas. The most that can be said is that the term Upanisad, when 
applied to a text, normally denotes that it contains speculation mainly on the 
nature of the universe and of the Atman or the Brahman. Its use in the 
Upanisad is in one or other of the senses ‘ secret word ’ or phrase ‘ secret 
text’ or ‘secret import’. Thus, when the phrase^ neti net% ‘not so, not so’, 
is used as an expression of the highest unity, that is an Upanisad ; or again the 
word jaldn ^ as indicating that in which beings breathe, perish, and are born, 
or the phrase ® satyasya satyam^ ‘ the truth of the true or tadvanam ^ as the 
final end is so described. In the texts of the Taittiriya school in special the 
phrase is used at the end of a section of philosophical teaching as a descrip- 
tion of that teaching. Or the word is applied to a special subject of knowledge, 
such as the meaning of the word Om. In a slightly different way we hear of 
a man’s Upanisad, which denotes his secret rule of life, such as that one should 
not beg.® In these senses the term Aranyaka is never used, and thus we can 
perhaps see why the two different words Aranyaka and Upanisad came into 
being. The former is a name, denoting the generic character of the texts, 
as those which from their secret nature must be dealt with in the special 
manner of being studied in the forest ; the latter is a secret text, imparted 
at such a secret session, and in course of time more and more specifically 
appropriated to the description of secrets which were of philosophical 
character. Beyond these generalisms we are hardly likely to be able to 
penetrate. 

Two different theories of the origin of the term have, however, been urged 

(ZII. i. 58-68), who inclines to overesti- ® BAU. ii. 1. 20 ; 3. 6. 

mate the age of the verses, as of * Kena 31 (JUB. iv. 21. 6). 

Rigvedic rank, unfortunately ignores ® Kaus. ii, 1, 2. Cf. the Aupanisadika 

entirely Oldenberg’s work. chapters on secret charms of the Artha- 

^ BAU. ii. 3. 6. ^astra and Kama Sutra. 

® CU. iii. 14. 1. 



492 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

and require some notice. It is the view of Oldenberg ^ that the real sense of 
Upanisad is worship or reverence, that the word expresses the same ideas as 
Upasana,^ and that it is due to the constant practice of the text to recom- 
mend the adoration of the Brahman or the Atman under the guise of some 
symbol. There can be no doubt about the fact of the use of symbols in this 
way, but it is certain that the use of upa-sad as a verb in the Upanisads is 
always quite clearly distinguished from the meaning ‘ worship and relates 
only to the going to a teacher, and sitting beside him for instruction : it is 
admitted that in this sense the normal use is upa-sad, not upa-ni-sad, but 
it is also plausible that the choice of the term was dictated by the fact that 
Upasad has in the ritual a very definite meaning of its own, which rendered the 
selection of a different word desirable to describe the action intended. In 
the second place it is clear that the idea of reverence or worship must have 
passed away at an early date from its original sense, and that, therefore, 
there is nothing to commend it on the ground of simplicity as an explanation : 
the Taittiriya Upanisad uses the term of the mere knowledge of the combina- 
tion of letters, and the sense ‘ rule as in ^ not to beg cannot be deduced from 
‘ worship ’ as easily as ‘ secret instruction ’ can be deduced from ‘ session’, 
beside a teacher, as opposed to a gathering for open discussion, Parisad or 
Sarhsad. In the third place, though this is not at all conclusive, the Atman 
or the Brahman is not properly the object of reverence at all, since reverence 
implies the very duality which the Upanisads deny, and, if in reality the 
origin of the word lay in that sense, then it must be admitted that the 
Upanisads bear a name which their essential doctrine transcends. This of 
course is quite possible in itself : the other two considerations set out make it 
improbable. 

The view of the’ word taken by Deussen ® differs from that adopted above, 
which sees in it a natural counterpart to the term Aranyakas, and derives it 
from the tradition of the Vedic school teaching, in that it assumes a break in 
the development of the thought of India. For that view it should be observed 
that there is the advantage of continuity : the Brahmanas shade off imper- 
ceptibly into the Aranyakas, the Aranyakas shade off into the Upanisads 
without violent change of any kind. But on the theory of Deussen we are not 
to adopt the view that secret import on the subjective, and secret instruction 
on the objective side, were the meanings developed from the secret teaching 
in the forest. On the contrary we are to believe that, at this point at a time 
when the Brahmans were still bent on the study of the ritual, the warrior class 
developed a new and striking philosophy,^ which they expressed in secret 

1 ZDMG. 1. 457 ff. ; liv. 70 ; Die Lehre unproved. 

det Upanishaden, pp. 37, 348. The ® Phil, of Up,, pp. 16 ff. 
epic invests an absurd Nisad as a form ^ Per contra Hopkins (JAOS. xxii. 335) 
of literature besides Upanisad. conjectures that Yoga practices were 

® Senart (Florilegium Melchior de VogiiS, grafted on to the Upanisad doctrine 

pp. 575 ff.) argues that Upasana from the ‘ royal knowledge * ; he gives 

means ‘ knowledge but this is clearly no ground save that Yoga first appears 



Chap. 28] 


493 


The Origin of the Upanisads 


formulae like tajjaldn} called Upanisads, because the essence of their character 
was secret communications, and that these doctrines were accompanied by 
secret explanations, from which in the course of time arose the first Upanisads. 
We must, it is claimed and has been argued by Garbe ^ with great emphasis, 
accept the view that it was not to the Brahmans, but to the warriors, to the 
princes, and the nobles, and to the wisdom of kings that India owed its 
philosophy. 

This argument rests on facts recorded in the texts themselves, in which 
kings appear as authorities on philosophy. In the Chandogya Upanisad ® 
five learned Brahmans desire to learn from Uddalaka Aruni the nature of the 
Atman Vai9vanara : he doubts his ability to explain it, and as a result all six 
betake themselves to the king A 9 vapati Kaikeya, who gives them instruction, 
after first demonstrating the inaccuracy of their knowledge. In a narrative 
which is preserved in the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad ^ and in the Kausitaki 
Upanisad ^ a scholar, Gargya Balaki, undertakes to set out the nature of the 
Brahman to the king Ajata 9 atru of Ka 9 i : he propounds tw^elve views — or 
in the Kausitaki sixteen — which are all defective, and the king then explains 
the Atman to him by the principle of deep sleep, prefacing his instruction by 
the observation that it is a reverse of the rule for a Brahman to betake himself 
to a Ksatriya for instruction. Another legend in the Chandogya ® show^s 
the Brahmans being instructed in the nature of ether, as the ultimate basis 
of all things, by the king Pravahana Jaivali. It is added that Atidhanvan 
once gave the same knowledge to Udara 9 apdilya, and the former name might 
be that of a prince. Less important is the fact that the Brahman Narada 
is represented in the Chandogya as being the recipient of information from 
Sanatkumara, later the god of war, who tells the former that all his Vedic lore 
is a mere name. The great text regarding the doctrine of transmigration ® is 
set out by Pravahana Jaivali to Aruni with the remark that the Brahmans 
have never before had this information, which so far had remained the 
monopoly of the Ksatriyas. In a third version of this account, given in the 
Kausitaki Upanisad,^ the king is Citra Gangyayani. 

Now it is always difficult to believe in the sudden evolution of new doctrines, 
actually associated in the name with the conception of the absolute of the 
Brahman class, by circles, whose duty was presumably to wield the weapons of 
war, and who at any rate failed to retain the control of these doctrines : it is 
absolutely certain that the Upanisads, as we have them, are not the work of 


in the Upanisads of the Yajurveda, the 
royal Veda, and this is certainly not 
an argument of any value. 

More correctly jaldn, 

Beitr. zur ind. KuliurgescMchte, pp. 3 ft . ; 
Winternitz, Gesch, d. ind. Lit, i. 198 ff., 
modified in iii. 615 f. 

V. 11-24. For the plan cf. JB. i. 22-5, 
where Janaka instructs five Brahmans 
on the Agnihotra. 


* ii, 4. 

® iv. 

® i. 8 and 9, 

^ CU. vii. 

® BAU. vi. 2 ; CU. v. 3-10. The rendering 
of pra^dstrtvam as ‘ rule ’ here is clearly 
wrong, though adopted by Deussen 
(Sechzig Upanishad\ p. 141 ) and Hertel 
{Weisheit der XJpanischaden, p. 77). 



494 


The Philosophy of the Veda 


[Part V 


warriors, that they were handed down by priests, and that, if the warrior 
class originated these doctrines, they failed to continue the interest they had 
shown in them.^ Stress must also be laid as against the supporters of the 
theory on the divergent views taken by them of the real work done by the 
Ksatriyas. To Garbe they appear to have revolted from the sacrifice, and to 
have introduced a monist philosophy, centring in the idea of the Brahman — 
presumably appropriated by them, with a curious sense of hmnour, from their 
rivals. The doctrine of Karman is expressly claimed as theirs, so that they 
must be held, while adopting a monist philosophy, to have insisted on the 
importance of morality. On the other hand, the Brahmans were forced to 
adopt this Ksatriya view by the pressure of public opinion, which compelled 
them to adopt it into their own system. This, frankly, appears a very curious 
conception ; it is remarkable that the public should insist on a philosophic 
monism, when we remember that throughout Indian history we find every 
form of worship pursued with a painful eagerness and precision, and when we 
remember also how little popular opinion anywhere insists on a strict monism, 
especially one which empties life of any reality. A further difficulty arises 
when we find that the Ksatriyas are credited by Garbe ^ with the creation of the 
Samkhya philosophy as a revolt against prevailing views ; apparently one set 
of Ksatriyas operated against another, and, as he accepts Ksatriya doctrines as 
the basis of Buddhism, we find that the great schism in Indian views was that 
of one Ksatriya view against another. Hertel,^ again, who accepts the doctrine 
of the Ksatriya origin of the philosophy of the Upanisads, ignores the fact 
that the doctrine of Karman is their chief claim, and insists instead that they 
were rationalists who depersonalized the old gods, substituting in lieu the 
idea of nature powers — called by them fauie de mieux, through the poverty of 
language of the time, deities, and whose philosophy was essentially a monism 
atheistic, materialistic, and morally indifferent. Judged on this basis it may 
be doubted if the praise lavished on the Ksatriyas at the expense of the 
Brahmans would have exactly been acceptable to them. 

As has been indicated, stress is naturally laid in support of the theory of 
Ksatriya influence on the explicit assertion of the king that the knowledge 
of transmigration had never belonged to any Brahmans, but the assertion is 
a very odd one: the king claims that the ‘giving of instruction ’ has been the 
possession of the warriors because the Brahmans have not studied this 
doctrine, but even for India such a thought is absurd and meaningless, and 
reduces the claim of the king to what, it seems, is an idle vaunt. Then again, 
as it is impossible to deny that the Atman-Brahman doctrine has a long pre- 
vious history in the Brahmanas, and is a logical development of the idea of 

1 A further complication is adduced by appear to be explained by their 

those who believe that Buddhism was supporters. 

promoted by Ksatriyas of Mongolian ^ In Sdmkhya-Philosophie^, p. 13, Garbe 
origin (V. Smith, Oxford History of shows less assurance than formerly. 

India, p. 47) ; the precise relations of ® IF. xli. 188. 
these sets of Ksatriyas does not 



Chap. 28] 


495 


The Origin of the U'panisads 

unity of the Rigveda, we must admit that the warrior class must have shared 
in the intellectual development, which produced that idea, and then started a 
fresh view — which nevertheless was based on the Brahman, not the Ksatra 
in opposition to the sacrifice, while the priests were deeply engaged in the 
sacrifice. But the sacrifices were essentially not matters in which the priest 
acted for himself : he aimed at securing the profit of his patron, and the 
patrons for the great sacrifices must have been in the main the very warrior 
class, which we are to assume turned with disgust from the sacrifice.^ The true 
solution of the problem is suggested by the obvious difficulties of the position 
of the maintainers of the theory : we must adopt a solution which explains 
why the whole Upanisad tradition is Braiimanical, and yet why the texts 
record actions of importance as regards the doctrine by the princes of earth. 
It is absurd to imagine that these references would have been left to stand had 
the Brahmans found them derogatory to their dignity : the sense of historical 
accuracy must have been very strong, incredibly so indeed, which would have 
induced a priesthood to preserve an exact account of the royal founders of each 
doctrine, and that they did so is sufficiently disproved by the mere fact that 
they clearly did not preserve a true account even of the Brahman founders of 
their doctrines. The prominence of Yajhavalkya can hardly be historical, 
since he is also the great ritual teacher of the datapath a Brahmana, and the 
device of assuming more than one man of the same name is absurd in this 
as in many other cases, since the texts assume that the two are the same : 
nor again does any one really believe that Sanatkumara was a human king. 

The explanation ^ becomes simple enough when we look at the Brahmanas 
and the Rigveda : there we find that kings are often mentioned as generous 
donors : that there are lists of the great kings who performed sacrifices, and 
who beyond all things gave fees to the priest, just as in historical times great 
kings, like Pusyamitra and Samudragupta, boast of their offerings. It was 
clearly necessary for the priests, who abandoned the doctrine of sacrifice, to 
live : they, therefore, had to find patrons and they must accordingly, like their 
predecessors, the sacrificial priests, represent their teachings as worth large 
sums. As a king must sacrifice to give gifts, so he must at least understand, 
and take part in discussions, to give gifts, and the position of the kings might 
easily be wholly deduced from the needs of the priest. But it would be un- 
necessary, and, it may be added, perhaps unjust to hold this view : the 
thought of the Upanisads with all its demerits is a far nobler thing than the 
thought of the Brahmanas : as later among the Buddhists, the minds which 
could rise from the mere sacrifice to the consideration of the self were quite 
capable of accepting help from other minds : of low origin, Satyakama, 

^ Actually we find Janaka instructing berg, Buddha^, p. 73, n. 1 ; Die Lehre 

Yajnavalkya regarding the Agnihotra, der Upanishaden, pp. 166 ff. ; Oltra- 

and as a boon becoming a Brahman. mare, Vhistoire des idies thiosophiques^ 

See ?B. xi. 6. 2, and see JB. i. 22~5. i. 64 ff. ; Weber, Meligionssoziologie, 

“ Keith, JRAS. 1908, pp. 468-73 ; Bloom- ii. 155 ff. ; Dahlmann, Der Mealismus 

field, ReL of Veda, pp. 220 ff. ; Olden- der ind, ReL, pp. 126 ft. 



496 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 


whose mother was a mere slave girl Jabala, who ran about with men and who 
could not tell his father, was taken as a pupil by Haridrumata and attained 
the complete knowledge : ^ even the epic, in one of its juster moments, allows 
a learned ^udra honour and permits a merchant to instruct a Brahman.^ 
In modern India saints of the highest rank have been other than Brahmans 
in caste. The princes w’^ere now and then seers, like Divodasa, son of 
Vadhrya^va,® and they may for their part have now and then wearied of 
the sacrifice, and sought a higher truth, Just as, inversely, we hear of seers 
who sought kingly rank for their offspring,^ and there may be that degree of 
accuracy in the figure played by them in the legends.® But that the philo- 
sophy of the Brahmanas as seen in the Upanisads is essentially the develop- 
ment of the philosophy of the Brahmapas cannot reasonably be doubted. Nor 
is there any ground for thinking that the plnlosophy had its chief home 
anywhere save in the holy ground of the Brahmans, the land of Kuruksetra, 
which seems to have been in this period as in the earlier epoch the place of 
Brahmanical culture par excellence,^ The culture was not absolutely restricted 
to that area : the mention of A^vapati Kaikeya carries us further to the north- 
west, while we hear of Brahmans who dwelt in Magadha,’' though that was 
rare. The Kausitaki Upanisad ® preserves for us in the movements of Gargya 
Balaki the traces of the extent of the activity of the new movement : he went 
among the Kurus, the Pahcalas, the two folks then being joined, the Kayis 
and Videhas, and the Va9as and Matsyas, and among the U^inaras. All this 
accords with the extent of the land in which the sacrifice was prevalent, and 
the addition of the Kosalas would complete the list : doubtless their omission 
here is mere chance. Other allusions to countries do not show any substantial 
extension of the geographical horizon of the authors : the Vindhya mountains 
are, it seems, known to the Kausitaki Upanisad, and this is perhaps a proof 
that the Vedic civilization was extending southwards ® in greater degree than 
in the preceding period. The references to the Indus region, whence came salt 
and noble horses, suggest that it was afar off, but against this is to be set the 
mention of Gandhara as not at all a distant country in the Chandogya 
Upanisad,^® But culture was not in any event rigidly confined to the middle 
country : scholars in their wanderings penetrated as far as the Madras, on 
the Hy^hasis.^^ 

Inevitably the question arises, how far in this period thought was affected 
by the growing intermixture of the people with the aborigines or earlier 


1 CU. iv. 4. 

* MBh. iii. 216. 13 f. 

® JB.i.222; PB.ix.2.8. 

* Cf. Vi^vamitra (JB. ii. 221) and Astaka ; 

Keith, Big^Veda BrdhmanaSt p. 67. 

® That Raikva (CU. iv. 1) was a ^udra 
(Hertel, IF. xli, 189) is certainly wrong. 
® Macdonell and Keith, Vedic Index, ii. 125, 
126 ; often in JB. 

’ 5A. vii. 13 ; cf. Oldenberg, Buddha (ET.), 


p. 400, n. There is no doubt in the 
Sutra period of the contempt felt for 
Magadha audits Brahmans ; a Magadha 
is prescribed for an undignified rite in 
JB. ii. 404, and in the Vratyastoma. 
« iv. 1 ; Keith, JRAS. 1908, p. 367. 

^ Cf. Keith, Aitareya Aranyaka, p. 200, 
CU. vi. 14. 1. 

BAU. iii. 3. 1. 



Chap. 28] 


497 


The Origin of the Upanisads 

inhabitants, Dravidians or others. It has frequently been suggested that the 
philosophy of the Upanisads is essentially Dravidian rather than Aryan, and 
plausible grounds can be adduced in this sense.^ Thus, we may be fairly 
certain that, as time went on, Dravidian blood came more and more to pre- 
vail over Aryan, though in candour we should admit that the evidence on this 
head is purely speculative in the absence of any real knowledge of the Aryan 
physical type which entered India. In the second place the changes in 
language may be due to Dravidian influence ; ^ here again the evidence is 
scanty enough, in the absence of independent evidence of the Dravidian 
languages for the period of the Brahmanas and Upanisads, and the difficulty 
of tracing to them any definite influence on the language ; the use of cerebral or 
domal letters, and forms like the second future (kartdsmi) or perfect participle 
used verbally {krtavdn\ or the development of constructions with the in- 
declinable gerund, may have been encouraged by tendencies among the 
Dravidians ; but this cannot be definitely established. That Rudra-^iva 
is mainly aboriginal is rather a guess based on the belief that the name denotes 
‘ red ’ than an ascertained fact, and we have no assurance on the strength of 
which we could claim that the use of trance and asceticism or caste were 
Dravidian elements appropriated by the Aryans. The pantheism of the 
Upanisads may be deemed to be a philosophical development from the 
animistic views which Jainism and in a sense Buddhism presents, and which 
* may be contrasted with the anthropomorphic nature gods of the Aryans, and 
a contrast may be drawn between Iranian religion and Indian,^ suggesting 
that the fbrmer presents us a picture of the practical Aryan mind as opposed 
to the more mystic Indian intelligence. These contentions, we may admit, da 
not lead to any assured results in the sense of establishing the Dravidian ^ 
claim. What they indicate is the unquestionable fact that the Upanisads, as 
in some degree all earlier thought in India, represent the outcome of the 
reflections of a people whose blood was mixed. We may, if we desire, call the 
Upanisads the product of Aryo-Dravidian thought ; but, if we do so, we must 
remember that the effect of the intermixture must be regarded in the light of 
chemical fusion, in which both elements are transformed. 

§ 2. The Extant Upanisads 

The texts which have come down to us are certainly not the beginning of 
the intellectual activity of the time : they bear every trace in their manner and 
matter of representing the result of many discussions, and deviations of 
opinion among the priestly schools. The doctrines have been handled and 

^ A. E. Gough in his Philosophy of the happily. See below, Appendix G. 

Upanishads explains their demerits ^ Konow, Linguistic Survey^ iv. 278 ff. 
as due to racial intermixture. For a ^ Cf. above, -Chap. 27, § 4, 
recent claim for the Dravidians, see * It may be noted that Dravidian religion, 
G, W. Brown, Studies in honor of as we know it, shows no special affinity 

Bloomfield, pp. 75 ff. Frazer (ERE. to Sumerian as described, e. g. in 

s.u.) states the case for intermingling Camb. Anc, Hist. i. 371, 384, 441 ff. 

12 [h.o.s. 32] 



498 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

rehandled, and the names to which they are ascribed cannot be taken au pied 
de la lettre : as in the case of Yajhavalkya, we cannot assume that they really 
prove or indicate activity in philosophical research on the part of the men who 
are mentioned. It is also important to note that the texts, such as they are, 
are, in the case of the more important at any rate, not the productions of a 
single hand : they are redactions, perhaps made at more than one time,^ of 
varying philosophic arguments, and they therefore contain very various 
doctrines, which are not often consistent. 

It is perfectly possible to arrive at a rough estimate of the relative periods 
of the Upanisads. The first place must probably be accorded to the Aitareya 
Aranyaka ^ in its philosophic portion, that is the first three sections of the 
second book, and probably the Aitareya Upanisad, which fills the remaining 
three sections of the second book, is not to be dated later than any of the 
other Upanisads : the only evidence of later date alleged by Deussen ® in the 
case of the Upanisad cannot be taken as sufficient to prove his view. After 
these works must certainly come the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad in its main 
portion, books i-iv, and the Chtodogya Upanisad. The Chtodogya is in 
almost every case, as far as one can judge, secondary in its versions of matter 
which it shares with the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad. But at any rate it is 
certain that the Taittiriya Upanisad, which forms books vii~ix of the Taitti- 
riya Aranyaka, is later than the two last-mentioned : it exhibits the doctrine 
of five ^ as opposed to three elements,® and that in a way which renders the 
simple view that the distinction is unimportant most improbable. This is a 
matter of real consequence in the progress of thought,® and the argument is 
of quite different weight than that derived by Deussen from the fact that the 
Aitareya Upanisad ^ ’ knows of four classes of living beings to three of the 
Chandogya : ® the classification is merely mentioned en passant, and is of no 
moment in other Upanisads. The Kausitaki is much later than the others, 
except the Taittiriya, but is probably earlier than it. Its version ® of transmi- 
gration is a new edition of that in the two great Upanisads, the Brhadaranyaka 
and the Chtodogya,^^ and its account of Gargyais a more developed one than 


^ BAU. consists of three parts iii-iv, 
v-vi) ; ii. 4 is repeated in a secondary 
form in iv. 5. The 8 books of the 
Chandogya seem each distinct. AA. 
consists of three parts, ii. 1-3 ; ii. 4-6 ; 
iii. 1-2. See especially Deussen’s 
analyses in Sechzig Upanishad'^s des 
Veda, Full bibliographies, translations, 
and a valuable intr. are found in R. E. 
Hume’s Thirteen Principal Upanishads 
(1921). 

Keith, ^Aitareya Aranyaka, pp. 43 ft, ; 
Winternitz, Gesch, d, ind. Lit, iii. 616 f. 

® Phil, of Up,, pp. 23, 24, 
ii. 1. 

* CU. vi. 2. So TU. ii. 8 is obviously later 


than BAU. iv. 3. 33. 

® An advanced and profound doctrine may 
be early in appearance, as Yfij naval- 
kya’s view in BAU., for philosophy does 
not present any orderly advance of 
ideas, and Yajhavalkya was evidently 
too subtle for his age, which, however, 
was strongly influenced by views which 
it could not wholly adopt. 

^ iii. 3. 

® vi. 3. 1. 

® i. 
vi. 2. 

V. 3-10. 
iv. 



Chap. 28] 


499 


The Extant Upanimds 

that in the Brhadaranyaka/ while in another section ^ it is clearly later than 
the Aitareya.^ Finally the Kena, which is in part metrical and is in itself a 
part of much longer Upanisad, the Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, is no 
doubt to be ranked as the last of the older Upanisads. The Jaiminiya 
Upanisad Brahmana itself is of the nature of an Aranyaka rather than a mere 
Upanisad : that it does not bear the title Aranyaka is perhaps an idiosyncrasy 
of the Saman schools, none of which actually call any text of theirs an 
Aranyaka. As an Aranyaka it has no claim to any very early date : it seems 
in fact to be certainly later than the Aitareya. The Taittiriya Aranyaka/ 
on the other hand, apart from the Upanisad section (vii-ix and x), is of most 
miscellaneous content and various date. The Brhadaranyaka Upanisad 
forms part of the last book of the Qatapatha Brahmana/ and the title shows 
the close relation of Aranyaka and Upanisad. In the case of the Chandogya, 
the first two sections of the work are of the Aranyaka type, but as with texts 
attached to the Samaveda generally do not bear that name. The Kausitaki, 
like the Aitareya, is part of a longer Aranyaka.® 

The next group of Upanisads is marked by the fact that it is composed of 
texts in metre, with very slight exceptions. It contains the Katha, the lg&, 
the Qveta9vatara, Mundaka and Mahanarayana,^ that is the last book (x) 
of the Taittiriya Aranyaka. The texts are distinguished from the previous 
group, not merely by their form, but by their contents. The old discussions 
with their tentative and confused efforts to reach definite results are replaced 
by a definite phraseology, in* which the results of speculation have been 
summed up in brief dogmas, expressed often with an obvious desire for the 
paradoxical and the bizarre. The allegories, not rarely found in the Upanisads 
of the older class, which share them with the Aranyakas, disappear altogether. 
More marked still is the relation of the texts to the other collections : the 
Katha bears the name of a famous school of the Black Yajurveda whose 
Samhita is still preserved for us, but its nature is that it is really a rewriting, 
from a philosophical as opposed to a ritual point of view, of the story, found 
in the Taittiriya Brahmana, of Naciketas and the winning of boons from Death 
by him. The Mahanarayana is reckoned in some authorities as the tenth 
book of the Aranyaka of the Taittiriya school, but the Aranyaka is a body of 
very various and confused contents, and between it and the Upanisad there is 
no inherent connexion at all, such as always exists in the previous group. 
Similarly the 19a Upanisad has succeeded in obtaining entry as a book (xl) 
of the Vajasaneyi Samhita, with which it has nothing really to do, and which 


^ ii. 1. * iii. 

® iii. a. 

* See Keith, Taittiriya Samhita, i. pp. 
Ixxviii ff. 

® It is preserved in two recensions ; the 
later probably is the Madhyandina, the 
earlier the Kaiiva, which places 9^* 

6. 4, 5, before the rest of the text. fB. 
12 * 


xiv. 1-3 ranks as the Aranyaka, 4-9 as 
the Upanisad in the Madhyandina re- 
cension. Cf. Liebich, Pdnini, pp. 62 ff. 

« Keith, JRAS. 1908, pp. 363 ff. ; gdnkha- 
yana Aranyaka, pp. v ff. 

’ Cf. R. Zimmermann, Quellm d. Mahandrd^ 
yana-Upanisad (Leipzig, 1913) ; lA. 
xliv. 130 ff., 177 ff. 



500 


[Part Y 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

has been much added to in the course of time, parts of its contents in books 
xxxi, xxxii, and xxxiv ^ belonging in conception to the period of the Brah- 
manas. The 5veta9vatara and the Mundaka have not even a nominal 
effective connexion with any extant text, beyond the fact that the Mundaka 
uses the Atharvaveda (x. 7), and we need not suppose that they ever had any 
such connexion. 

In this group it is quite clear that the Katha takes the first rank : its style 
is suggested already by the metrical part of the Kena and by verses found in 
the Brhadaranyaka in a later addition.^ The I^a is clearly dependent on the 
Katha, ^ and the ^veta 9 vatara is certainly ^ well aware of the Katha, and is 
probably a good deal later even than the I^a, which is free from the sectarian 
spirit of the 5 veta 9 vatara in which the philosophy leads up to the glorifica- 
tion of Rudra as the god par excellence. The Mundaka uses apparently the 
^vetagvatara,® and it again is probably presumed by the Mahanarayana.^ 
The last group of important Upanisads consists of the Pra^na, the Maitra- 
yaniya, and the Mandukya. They are in prose, but they differ essentially in 
every respect from the older prose Upanisads : the diction is in style much 
more elaborate than the early prose, and in the case of the Maitrayaniya, 
which Max Muller wrongly believed early in date, the language is obviously 
closely allied to classical Sanskrit, which it follows in the introduction of 
greater development and complexity of style. The order of the Upanisads 
in this group is certain as regards the Pra 9 na and Maitrayaniya,^ and pro- 
bable as regards the Mandukya.® In philosophy they show their wide know- 
ledge of the earlier texts, which they freely use. The Pracna is proved to be 
later than the Mundaka by the fact that it presupposes it and quotes it.® 
With these the list of important Upanisads closes : but the manufacture 
of these works went on indefinitely down even to modern times. The later 
Upanisads claimed connexion with the Atharvaveda, and it is probable that 
the Mundaka and the Pracna were really so connected : the others had no 
real bond of union, but were pleased to assume one for their own purposes. 
These Upanisads fall into four classes, according as they (1) merely develop 
doctrines already found in the older Upanisads ,* or (2) devote themselves to 

^ For its several parts see Scheftelowitz, despite Barua, Prcbuddk. Ind, PhiL^ 

ZDMG. Ixxv. 201-12. pp. 259 f., 424. 

iv. 4. 8-21. ® Cf. X. 2f. with ii. 1.8 f. 

“ 19a 8 compared with KU. v. 13. With ’ vi, 5 quotes PU. v. 2. 

19a 9-11, cf. Kena 3. ® Cf. Mand. 3 with Maitr. vi. 4. 

^ Beu^en, Sechzig Upanishad's^, p. 289. * iii.5. Both texts show the use of </ia in the 

The irregular form brahmam (i. 9, 12) 2nd plural Imperative as in Pali and 

suggests that its author was far from Buddhist Sanskrit, but we cannot say 

a but there is nothing to show ifthis is more than an error of tradition, 

that this group of Upanisads comes and it would be rash to accept on the 

from another miZzew than the older texts strength of such evidence Buddhist 

as Jacobi (Die Entwicklung der Gottes- influence, via faiva sects, as suggested 

idee, p. 20, n. 1) suggests. by Hume (Upanishads, p. 7). For 

® Cf. iv. 6f. with iii. 1. If. That 19a other errors in the Mundaka, see below,, 

answers the Mupdaka is implausible, p. 504, n. 2. 



Chap. 28] 


The Extant Upanisads 


501 


the glorification of the Yoga practices, by which religious ecstasy was pro- 
duced ; or (3) deal with the condition of the Sannyasin ; or (4) finally give 
themselves up to the glorification of Rudra-^iva. 

The history of the text of the Upanisads is of interest, but not of impor- 
tance for philosophy : the Atharvan Upanisads seem the first to have been 
collected into one set : we know of collections ^ of 34 or 52, ^ in which case 
others from the older type were added. A later collection, which arose in 
South India, has 108 Upanisads, including all the great Upanisads of the older 
type. A collection of 50 Upanisads was made at some unknown date and was 
translated into Persian in 1656 for Dara Shukoh : a literal Latin translation 
from the Persian made by Anquetil dii Perron in 1801-2 was the means of 
bringing the Upanisads to the notice of Schopenhauer,® and winning for them 
that place in the history of philosophy which they have never lost. The collec- 
tion includes in 12 Upanisads the older texts, 26 Atharvan Upanisads and 
8 others, and makes up the total by adding four chapters of the Vajasaneyi 
Samhita.^ Of the dates of the making of these collections we have no proof : 
it is, however, possible that by the time of ^ankara (9th cent, a.d.) the 
Pra9na and Mundaka were already studied together. It is certain that he 
made use of all the Upanisads included in the three great groups, save the 
Maitrayaniya and the Mandukya, which he perhaps did not regard as an 
Upanisad at all. To him also are ascribed, though with doubtful justice in all 
cases, commentaries on these. Upanisads, except the Kausitaki and the 
Maitrayaniya, and also a commentary on the Mandukya, which however is 
probably the work of a different Qaiikara.® The Upanisads used by Ramanuja 
include all those of the great groups, save the Mandukya (though the Karika 
of Gaudapada is cited), the Subala and Culika, hnd once even the Garbha, 
J abala, and Maha. The Jabala and Paingi as well as the Karika are mentioned 
by f ankara. 

The question of absolute dates for the Upanisads is one far more difficult 
than that of the relative order of the texts, and admits of no decisive solution. 
The one argument of weight is the fact, really undeniable, that the doctrines 
of the Upanisads are presupposed by the doctrine of the Buddha, and that, 
accordingly, if we accept the view that the opinions of the Buddha can be 
gathered with approximate accuracy from the older texts of the Pali Canon, 
it is probable that the older Upanisads are, substantially at least, older than 
say 500 b.c.® The argument is not by any means perfect : it may be criticized 

1 Weber, Berlin-Handschriften, ii. 88. Der altere Vedanta, p. This fact in- 

* The' lists of Narayana and Colebrooke ; validates much of Deussen’s argument 

see Deussen, Sechzig Upanishad^s^, (Phil, of Up,, pp. 30 ff.). For this date 

p. 537. For various MSS. collections of fahkaracf. references in JRAS. 1916, 

see Eggeling, J. O. Catal, i. 104 ff. ; pp. 151 ff. *, Garbe, Sdmkhya- hilo- 

Keith, ibid, ii. 205 ff. sophie^^ p. 157, n. 2. 

» Parerga, 2, § 185 (Werkey vi. 427). « e. g. Rhys Davids, Dial, of the Buddha, 

* xvi, xxxi, xxxii, xxxiv. i. pp. ix ff. ; Walleser, Die philosophische 

® Jacobi, JAOS. xxxiii. 52, n. 2 ; Walleser, Grundlage des alter en Buddhismus, 



602 


[Party 


The Philosophy of the Veda 


on the ground that even now the date of the Buddha is only established by 
very conjectural means, and still more so by the fact that the date of the 
Buddhist Canon rests on mere tradition, which is demonstrably in many 
respects defective, so that the frequently repeated assertion that the Nikayas 
represent approximately a period shortly after the death of the Buddha is 
wholly unproved and almost certainly quite untrue. A more serious argument 
is afforded by the really antique character of the metre of the metrical 
Upanisads,^ such as the Katha, Kena, and Ica, but here again no absolute date 
is arrived at, since the only standard of comparison is either the epic, which 
is of very uncertain date and being not in pari materia not an absolutely safe 
criterion, or Pali texts, which, apart from their own uncertainty of date, are 
written in a different speech, and, therefore, certainly not cogently to be 
adduced as evidence.^ Perhaps more secure is comparison with the metre of 
the Brhaddevata,^ which is with much plausibility assigned to the fourth 
century b.c., and this certainly suggests that the metre of these texts is older. 

More positive evidence cannot be found : the view that the Katha 
Upanisad is older than Buddhism, because the legend resembles in some 
degree the legend of the Buddhist Mara,^ ignores the fact that the story is 
already found in the Taittiriya Brahmana. The suggestion of Walleser ^ 
that in the Tevij ja Sutta we are to find a reference to the Aitareya, Chandogya, 
and Taittiriya Upanisads is quite impossible,® and the definite use of any 
particular Upanisad by any Buddhist Sutta has still to be proved. The 
similarity ’ of the language of the early Upanisads to that of Panini is decidedly 
against a very early dating. Certainly it is wholly impossible to make 
out any case for dating the oldest even of the extant Upanisads beyond the 
sixth century b.c., and the acceptance of an earlier date must rest merely 
on individual fancy. 

In the case of the later Upanisads any dating must be still more vague. 
Hopkins ® indeed suggests the fourth century for such works as the Katha, 
Maitrayaniya, and the 5veta9vatara, but this appears to be as regards the 
Maitrayaniya much too early a date : style and content alike suggest that this 
is one of the most recent of the important Upanisads. In the case of the 
f veta 9 vatara, the date selected by Hopkins appears high in view of the fact 


Part 1 ; contra, Keith, Buddhist Philo- 
sophy, chap- i ; de la Valine Poussin, 
Musion, 1905, pp. 213 ff. ; Bouddhisme, 
pp. 29 ff. ; ERE. iv. 179 ff, ; L^vi, 
Les Saintes J^critures du Bouddhisme 
(1909) ; Franke, JPTS. 1908, pp. 1 ff. 

1 Cf. Oldenberg, GN. 1909, pp. 219 ff., and 
his reff. ; Zimmermann, lA. xliv. 
130 ff., 177 ff. ; Oldenberg, GN. 1915, 
pp. 490 ff. 

^ Jacobi, Bdmdyana, p. 93. 

« Keith, JRAS. 1906, pp. 1 ff. Evidence of 
Pali influence on the Karman of BAU. 


iii. 2. 13, or the BAU. iv. 3. 2 {paly a- 
yate), seen by Hume {Upanishads, p. 6), 
is negligible. 

* Oldenberg, Die Literatur des alien Indien, 
p. 83. 

® Die philosophische Grundlage des dlteren 
Buddhismus, p. 67. 

® Cf. Rhys Davids, op, dL, p. 303. 

^ Cf. Liebich, Panini, pp. 28 ff. ; A. Fiirst, 
DerSprachgebrauck d, dlteren Upanisads; 
W. Kirfel, Nominalkomposition in den 
U. ; O. Wecker, BB. xxx. 1 ff., 177 ff. 

® JAOS. xxii. 336, n. 1. 



Chap. 28] The Extant Upanisads 603 

that he is convinced that this Upanisad is later than the orthodox atheistic 
Samkhya^ and than the theistic Samkhya-Yoga, and marks the appearance 
of the illusion doctrine foreign to the early Upanisads. But this view of his 
can hardly be accepted for reasons which will later be given, and there is, 
accordingly, no strong objection to the suggested date beyond the fact that 
there is no cogent evidence for it. A very different view of the date of the 
^veta^vatara, the Mundaka, and the Mandukya Upanisads is suggested by 
Walleser,^ who holds that the illusion theory is posterior to, and derived from, 
the nihilistic school of Buddhist thought, and that in particular the Mandukya 
is not necessarily anterior to the Karika of Gaudapada — taken by him as a 
designation of a Bengal school, not of an individual — ^which expounds the 
illusionist form of Vedtota for the first time, and which was in being by 
A.D. 550, but not necessarily very much earlier. This view, however, is with- 
out any sound foundation, and of these Upanisads no assured date can even be 
suggested. 

The investigation of J. Hertel ^ as to the age of the Mundaka Upanisad 
yields little that is positive. Its comparatively late date is assured, apart from 
its imitations of the Katha among others, by the fact that it mentions for the 
first time, except perhaps for the Taittiriya Aranyaka,® the seven worlds by 
name, that it has a list of Vedic sciences which includes the six Vedahgas, 
though that term is not used,^ and the Atharvaveda by that title, and uses 
the term Vedanta of the doctrine of the Upanisads. It knows in all probability 
the personal Brahman.® In certain points Hertel indicates similarities with 
Jain views ; thus, as the title indicates, the work seems to belong to an Athar- 
vavedin sect which practised the habit of shaving the head or pulling out the 
hair,® a Jain practice. The Purusa in the Upanisad is described by comparing 
his various members to the fire and other cosmic powers ; the Jains, xxnlike 
Buddhists and Brahmans, are wont to represent the universe in human shape 
in their cosmographical fancies. The Upanisad approves asceticism, as does 
Jainism, and treats release as attained by one who has gained the Brah- 
maloka, and it is from that world that the man who is freed attains his final 
abode in the Jain system, and a parallel can be drawn between the terms in 


1 Der altere Vedanta^ pp. 5 ff. His date for 

the Karika is contrary to the tradition 
which makes him the spiritual grand- 
father of Qahkara ; Deussen, Sechzig 
Upanishad^s^, p. 574. 

2 Mundaka Upanisad (1924), pp. 64 ff. 

® X. 27, 28 ; Kirfel, KosmographUi p. 24*. 
The TA. X. is probably later than the 
Mundaka. 

* As it occurs in RV. Pratigakhya (xiv. 30) 
and the Nirukta (i. 20), it is impossible 
to deduce any late date from the mere 
knowledge of the Vedahgas, but their 
appearance is new in the Upanisads as 


a definite group, excluding the other 
miscellaneous texts found in BAU, and 
CU. 

® See i. 1. 1 f. and 2. 5. 

® 5^ankara (on iii. 2. 10) takes it as a putting 
of fire on one’s head, but this severity is 
probably not Vedic, though in keeping 
with Hindu and even Buddhist prac- 
tices. 

’ But in Jainism freedom does not mean 
extinction of individual existence, as in 
Brahmanism ; cf. von Glasenapp, Die 
Lehre vom Karman, p. 105. 



504 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

which the Upanisad and the Jain texts describe the ascent. Certain of the 
terms of the Upanisad have Jain currency {cyu, nirveda, rdga, vitaraga, samyag- 
jMna, granthi). It is, however, clear that in all these cases there is no reason to 
assume Jain priority. Nor do metrical tests do more than show what is other- 
wise certain, the priority of the Katha.^ Grammatical forms ^ of pronounced 
inaccuracy suggest careless composition rather than assure any definite date. 

Another possible source of evidence is the date of I^varakrsna, the 
author of the Samkhya Karika. It is perfectly clear that the Samkhya system 
was substantially older than he in its substance and even in detail, so that a 
considerable age must be assumed for it, if l9varakrsna is to be assigned to the 
first century a.d. or even the first half of the second century a.d. Unfortu- 
nately the evidence as to l9varakrsna is by no means satisfactory. It seems, 
however, clear that he was either an older contemporary, if he is identified 
with Vindhyavasa, of Vasubandhu, or still older, but this clearly, accepting the 
earlier date of Vasubandhu, which terminates his existence about a.d. 350, 
does not lead us further back than about a.d. 300, or half a century earlier.^ 
A further argument, however, has been adduced by S. K. Belvalkar,^ who 
holds that the commentary on the Karika, which was rendered into Chinese by 
Paramartha about a.d. 560, was the work of Mathara, and is to be dated 
about A.D. 400. Now as the Mathara- Vrtti frequently calls l9varakrsna 
Bhagavant, a term which would not readily be applied to a recent author, we 
may assume the date of the first century a.d. or shortly after for l9varakrsna. 

Unfortunately the evidence for these conclusions is peculiarly unsatis- 
factory. The work for which the title of Mathara-Vrtti is claimed bears this 
title on the strength of a single colophon only in a MS. apparently of a. d. 1400, 
which is a very slender piece of evidence. The careful analysis of Belvalkar 
himself shows that it contains up to 3 per cent, of what he regards as con- 
taminations with Gaudapada, and 20 per cent, of students’ additions, includ- 
ing a reference to the Hastamalaka attributed to Qankara, while it gives 
apparently an extra Karika, which certainly has no real claim to be original. 
In these circumstances, instead of claiming that we have the Mathara- 
Vrtti established as the source of Paramartha and Gaudapada, the natural 
conclusion seems to be that this is a compilation derived from the original 
commentary, now lost, to which the style of Mathara-Vrtti has been given 
without authority in the lighthearted manner of scribes and owners of MSS. 
Practically fatal to the theory of Mathara as the author of the original com- 

1 They do not, it may be observed, really tive), athawaya (dative), yositdydm ; 

aid in dividing the text into an original vibhum (nom. neut.) is doubtless a mere 

and an interpolator’s hand, for the one misprint ; adtegyam is uncertain ; the 

point made by Hertel (p. 52) is clearly use of pravadeta for imperfect is the 

invalid. . chief sign of later date ; the irregulari- 

2 e. g. bhavate, parimucyanti (pass.), ddadd- ties have epic parallels. 

ijan {^adudat), graddhayantah.praveda- ® See Keith, Sdmkhya System^, pp. 79 f. 

yanti (in sense of simple verb), viddhi * Mathara-Vrtti {Ann. of Bhandarkar Insti- 
(from vyadh),jdnatha, dcaraiha (impera- tute, 1924, pp. 133 &.). 



Cliap. 28] 


505 


The Extant Upanisads 

ment is the fact that the translator nowhere gives or hints at this name, 
which is also ignored by Gaudapada. What we really do know of an early 
Mathara is that Jain texts ^ which refer to the Satthitanta add to it the 
Madhara, which means probably that Mathara wrote on the Sastitantra, 
with which agrees precisely the assertion of Gunaratna Suri in his commentary 
on the Saddar 9 anasamuccaya that Mathara’s Bhasya was Sastitantroddhara- 
rupa. Otherwise, the silence regarding Mathara as a commentator of the 
Kmka is complete. We are, therefore, left without any evidence of the real 
authorship of the original commentary, which, if not by Igvarakrsna himself, 
need not go back earlier than a.d. 500. 

Mention should perhaps be made of the argument deduced by Jacobi ^ 
from the Kautiliya Artha^astra from which he infers that the Samkhya and 
Yoga systems were in existence as vrell as the Purva Mimahsa and the 
materialist system of the Lokayata by the fourth century b.c. Unhappily 
the evidence adduced for this is not satisfactory, as the date of the Artha^astra 
must probably ^ be placed some centuries after the date of the minister of 
Candragupta under whose name it passes. 

From a literary point of view the Upanisads command interest by their 
introduction of new forms. The dialogue appears beside the simpler dogmatic 
exposition of the Brahmanas, expanded and developed from the brief dis- 
cussions in this form of ritual problems which the Brahmanas occasionally 
present. The individual character of the new teaching, which was* a mystery, 
naturally furthered this mode of treatment, and dialogues are recorded 
between very strange interlocutors as well as between teacher and pupil. 
Interesting is the fact of competitions in which the speakers contend against 
one another, in order to win favour and the prize offered by a rich prince. 
Or two Brahmans are enjoying the meal offered by admirers ; one comes to 
them and wins food by setting a clever riddle. A son returns to his father to 
report that he has been questioned, and has found himself unable to return a 
reply ; his father assures him that he has told him all he knows, and goes with 
him to seek instruction. The wise can be induced by strange causes to give 
of their wisdom. The geese sing the praises of Raikva ; he is found under a 
cart, scratching himself ; offers of cows he haughtily refuses, but, when 
Janagruti presents his daughter, he taunts him with not realizing that this was 
the boon with which he should have sought his favour.^ Janaka of Videha 
is the king who appears as the greatest of patrons, and Yajhavalkya the wisest 
of Brahmans ; in one contest of wits alone he vanquishes nine opponents ; 

1 Nandi and Annyogadvara Sutras in Weber, Megasthenes und Kautilya (SWA . 1921) . 

Ind* Stud* xvii. 9 ; Berlin CatalAi, 697. Jacobi’s defence of bis thesis (ZDMG. 

® SBA. 1911, pp. 732 ff. ; Oldenberg, Die Ixxiv. 254 ; Die Entwicklung der 

Kultur der Gegenwarf, I. v. 32-4. Gotiesidee bei den Indern, p. 41, n. 1) is 

® Keith, JRAS. 1916, pp. 130--7 ; 1920, ineffective. Use of Yajhavalkya is 

p. 628 ; Jolly, ZDMG. Ixviii. 355—9 shown by T, Gaiiapati l^astri in his 

and pref, to ed. (Lahore, 1923) ; Winter- ed. (Trivandrum, 1924), pp. 8 ff. 

nitz, Gesch, d* ind. Lit* iii. 518 ; O, Stein, * CU. iv. 2. 



606 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 


the head of the last, ^akaiya, splits open as the result of his failure, while 
robbers steal his bones.^ Women are not excluded from contests, a maiden 
seized by a Gandharva or even one of Yajhavalkya’s wives shows herself an 
adept in these questions. The gods appear ; Prajapati instructs the intelli- 
gent pupil Indra and the stupid demon Virocana.^ Animals lend their quota of 
tuition ; the pupil, who watches his master’s kine increase, receives instruction 
from the bull of the herd, from the fire, from a gander, and from a Madgu bird.® 
It would, of course, be rash to trust to the historicity of the dialogues ; they 
are attached readily to famous names, as in the Katha Naciketas and Yama 
carry on a dialogue in the later form of verse. 

There is, of course, much that contrasts strangely with the Platonic 
dialogue. An element of grave risk enters into such discussions, as we have 
seen in the case of the rivals of Yaj navalkya ; to hold a wrong view often 
involves risk of death in an age when the curse is believed to have power to 
work its own end.^ Again of real dialectic there is hardly any ; the inquirer 
is ignorant and makes wrong guesses, the teacher dogmatically expounds the 
truth, with little or no leading up to it, and with still less reasoning for its 
support ; curiously enough, it is in the discussions between Indra and Praja- 
pati ^ that we find more of the expression of uncertainty leading to a final 
illumination than usual. There are, however, especially in the dialogues of 
Yaj navalkya, signs of planning; the outcome is attained by a process of 
rejection of inferior views, arranged in something like a series of lower to 
higher.® 

No serious advance in logic is made over the Brahmanas, though faint 
traces of induction by simple enumeration may be traced.’ On the other 
hand, there is a certain gain in literary form ; the description of the unity 
of the universe produces passages of much higher feeling than was possible 
when dealing with the sacrifice,® and distinct power is shown in the invention 
of such designations of the Atman as ‘ Not so, not so,’ which excludes all 
particularization, while the phrase ‘ That thou art ’ not unworthily sums up 
the mystery of the identity of the self and the universe. In other cases we 
have empty mysticism as in the unintelligible jaldn ^ or tadvanam as 
expressions of the absolute. One distinctive feature of value is the use of 
similes, often of complexity and interest ; they are treated as conclusive 
arguments, though often only fanciful analogies, and though as always, if these 
are pressed, they tend to confuse the precise meaning of the text, and have 
afforded cause for doubt both to ancient and to modern interpreters.^^ Biddles, 


1 BAU. iii. 1 ; cf. xi. 6. 3. 

^ BAXJ. ii. 4 ; iv. 5 ; CU. viii. 7 ff. 

® €U. iv. 4 n. 

^ JUB.iii.S. Cf.gB.xi.4.1 ; GB.i.3.6. 

® CU. viii. 7 ff. 

« BAU. iii. 1 ff. ; iv. 3. 23 ff. ; CU. v. 12 ff. 
’ CU. vi. 1. 4-6 ; above, Chap. 27, § 5. 

» CU. iii. 14 ; ^B. x. 6. 3. 


» Bohtlingk, BSGW. 1896, pp. 159 f. ; 1897, 
p. 83. 

Kena 31 ; Hopkins, JAOS. xxii. 362. 

“ e.g. BAU, ii. 4. 7 ff . ; Oldenberg, Die 
Lehre der UpanishadeUt p. 183, n. 1. 
The idea that the late Muijdaka 
(iii. 2. 4) has Lihga in the technical 
logical sense (Radhakrishnan, Ind, 



Chap. 28 ] The Interpretation of the Upanisads 507 

inherited from the sacrificial tradition, are curiously rare, though not unknown, 
and in the earlier Upanisads the employment of verse is restricted, though 
it occurs here and there in the Brhadaranyaka and the Chandogya. Inter- 
esting as presaging the manner of the Pali texts is the constant repetition of 
the same idea in slightly different forms ; thus whatever is said of one sense 
is normally repeated verbatim, with only the essential changes, for another ; 
the generic terms wliich would have spared the tedium have not yet been 
invented or even felt to be necessary and appropriate.^ 


§ 3 . The Interpretation of the Upanisads 

It was attempted by the great philosopher ^ankara to find in the Upani- 
sads the expression of a single simple doctrine, carried out consistently 
through all, and in his commentary on the Vedanta as set out in the Brahma 
Sutra of Badarayana it is his object to interpret that Sutra and to bring out 
at the same time the doctrines of the Upanisads, the whole forming a great 
system of philosophy in which no contradictions should exist.^ The plan 
adopted by the philosopher for this purpose was simple : he found in the 
Upanisads the principle that knowledge was of two kinds, wholly different. 
On the one hand the higher knowledge recognized the existence of absolutely 
nothing save the Brahman or the Atman, the one unity, which was at once 
real, thought, and bliss. The force of these terms must be understood in a 
special sense : reality is not something outside the Brahman : no predication 
is possible of the Brahman, for predication involves diversity and in the 
Brahman there is no diversity. Thought or consciousness, which is not an 
attribute of, but the essence of the Brahman, does not mean actual activity, 
the vovs voi;crcws of Aristotle on the most probable view of that famous 
doctrine : ^ it is consciousness without any object or subject, and therefore 
differs so entirely from the very nature of consciousness as not in our view to 
deserve the name at all. The bliss also is that of being which has no con- 
sciousness of any kind and no feeling, and therefore is merely a metaphorical 
expression. This single thing is all that the world really is, the one Brahman 
which is the Atman. All the multiplicity of phenomena is unreal : the saving 
truth which redeems the individual from the constant stream of births is the 
recognition of this fact, that he himself is really the one Atman, not related 
as part to it, but solely and absolutely it. In the expression That thou art 
which is enunciated in the Upanisads, is set out the fundamental fact of all 
existence, the indivisible unity. 


Phil. i. 263) is implausible. Similarly 
Vyasti and Samasti in BAU. iii. 3. 2 
can hardly denote distinction and 
generality, or distributive and collective 
aggregates, or Siddhi, in KU. iii. 3, 
proof. 

^ Cf. the Canonical Buddhist style ; Olden- 
berg, GN. 1912, pp. 123 ff. 


2 See e.g. his comment on the Sutra, iii. 3. 1. 
The best defence of this theory is in 
A. E. Gough, Philosophy of the Upani- 
shads. 

^ For an attack on Aristotle’s view see 
Gomperz, Greek I'hinkers, iv. 211 ff. 

* CU. vi. 8. 7 ; cf . ‘ I am Brahman 
BAU. i. 4. 10. 



508 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 


The apparent multiplicity of the universe and the empirical knowledge 
of man is not in the view of Qahkara to be denied for a moment, ^ankara 
wages war both against the idealistic school of Buddhism, which denies that 
there is any real distinction between dreams and waking reality, and the 
nihilistic school, which asserts that all is mere void. Existence is not 
momentary at all : it has a substantiality and is real, but only from the point 
of view of the lower knowledge.^ The Atman in itself has allied with it a 
power, Maya, illusion, which limits it : the limitation is not indeed real, for 
that would hopelessly violate the essential doctrine of Qahkara which denies 
any dualism whatever ; but from the point of view of the lower knowledge 
that illusion exists, and through that illusion exists all that there is in the 
universe as known to us. Thus, there is room for a great god, the Hiranya- 
garbha of the Veda, who occupies the position of a demiourgos, inasmuch as 
he is the Atman, when it is obscured by illusion, and there is afforded an 
explanation for the seeming multiplicity of souls, for the unending stream of 
life, for the world of living creatures and inanimate nature. All indeed is an 
illusion, but it has within that fundamental fact all the appearance of reality.^ 
It will be seen at once that in this doctrine Qahkara has a powerful Weapon, 
with which to explain the whole of the system of the Upanisads as the product 
of a single philosophical impulse. Nevertheless, the attempt is undoubtedly 
merely a clever tour deforce without final validity, and its ingenuity is as great 
but no greater than its improbability. That this is the case could be easily 
proved by the examination of the Upanisads in detail, but it is sufficient to 
state that the Brahma Sutra itself did not take the view adopted by Qankara : 
it is now certain, thanks to the efforts of Thibaut,^ Sukhtankar,^ and Jacobi,^ 
among others, that the real view taken by Badarayana was more akin to, 
though not identical with, that taken by the commentary of Ramtouja,® 
whose work dates some two centuries after fankara. The view of that 
scholar was that the explanation of the world and of the individual souls 
as mere products of illusion, enveloping the nature of the Brahman, was 
wholly wrong : on the contrary the two elements, the world and the indivi- 
dual souls, had a definite entity of their own, which was perfectly real, even if 
they were only parts of, and, therefore, much inferior in order of rank to, 
the Brahman, who is conceived no longer as mere impersonality but as per- 
sonal being. The views of Ramanuja are in many points difficult to formulate 


^ For a modern defence of ^s^S^kara, see 
Max Muller, The Silesian Horseherd 
(1903) ; a good criticism is given by 
Bahlmann, JDie Sdmkhya-Philosophie, 
pp. 236-55 ; cf. also Walleser, Der 
dltere Ved&nta (1910). 

® Cf. de la Vallde Poussin, JRAS. 1910, 
pp. 128 ff. 

® SBE. xxxiv and xlviii. 

* VOJ. xxii. 120 ff. 

® JAOS. xxxi. 1 ff. ; xxxiii. 52-4 ; in Fest- 


schrift E, Windisch, pp. 153-7, he traces 
in fabarasvamin on Mimahsa Dar9ana, 
i. 5, the view that BAU. iii. 9. 26 ; 
iv. 5. 12, recognize a multiplicity of 
souls contra ^ahkara’s view (Brahma 
Sutra, iii. 3. 53) ; cf. also de la Valine 
Poussin, Le Brahmanisme^ pp. 73 iff. 

See Keith, ERE. s. o. ; Bhandarkar, 
V aisnacismy Saivism, and Minor Re- 
ligious Systems, pp. 50 ff. See also 
Kokileswar Sastri, Adwaiia Philosophy, 



Chap. 28] The Interpretation of the Upanisads 509 

with precision : there is vagueness regarding the position of the individual 
soul, the world and the divinity, which is probably unavoidable, but certainly 
undeniable. But at any rate the system of pure idealism of the most abstract 
kind, which ^ahkara put forward, is confronted with a system which is 
pantheistic, for the individual souls and the world are in some sense part of the 
deity, but which has also a strong theistic element in the fact that the indi- 
vidual souls, even when they become free from transmigration through the 
influence of their devotion to the lord and his compassion for them, are deemed 
still to retain a separate existence and not to be merged in the deity. As in the 
case of all Indian thinkers, the tendency of Btotouja is to be hazy regarding 
the nature of the deity, and the part played in that nature by consciousness, 
which, as we have seen, for Qahkara disappears into a meaningless abstraction, 
but the individual soul seems, contrary to the clear tendency of the Upanisads, 
and of the epic Samkhya-Yoga,^ to retain in its final form of existence some 
kind of consciousness which is consistent with its enjoyment of the most 
perfect bliss. 

Ramanuja quotes the Upanisads as agreeing with his doctrine, but he has 
not made any such determined and deliberate effort to bring the Upanisads 
into one definite scheme as has Qahkara : he relies rather on the Sutra than 
on the Upanisads, but still he offers an alternative view which suits admirably 
many of the Upanisad passages, which he cites. He has, of course, the obvious 
advantage that the distinction of two kinds of knowledge is one which is 
artificial, and which has no direct sanction from the Upanisads Ihemselves, so 
that fahkara is forced in effect to postulate a distinction of knowledge, which 
is not asserted in his sources. 

Of modern interpreters of the Upanisads, the most important, Deussen,^ 
as before him Gough ® also, has endeavoured to show that the view of ^ahkara 
is the best key to the secrets of the Upanisads : Deussen insists that in his 
view, which is that of the Yajhavalkya of the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, 
Cahkara formulates the essential doctrine of the distinction between the 
empirical reality and the thing in itself, which was first made perfectly distinct 
by Kant, and which reaches its complement in the Christian and Schopen- 
hauerian doctrine of the primacy of the will over the intellect. Deussen holds 
that this form of idealism is the main doctrine of the Upanisads in the sense 
that it was definitely formulated and laid down, and that other doctrines are 
really deviations from it, caused by the inability of man to remain on the high 
level of thought postulated in the distinction, and by the constant effort to 
apply empirical categories to the thing in itself. From the tendency to regard 

1 This doctrine is definitely pantheistic ; the Dahlmann, Nirvana and Die Sdmkhya- 

Brahman realizes itselfin the individual Philosophie, who contends that this is 

selves through the operation of Buddhi, the primitive Sarhkhya as a logical 

‘ intellect % and Ahamkara, the prin- (dmihnkt) science of the Brahman ; 

ciple of individuation, and recognition see below, § 7, 

of the unity of the individual and the ® Phil, of Vp., pp. 39 ff. 

Brahman is the release aimed at ; see ^ Philosophy of the Vpanishads, 



510 


The Philosophy of the Veda 


[Party 


the universe, however, as actually real and an absolute thing, there grows up 
the view that the Atman is the universe which we know, that is a system of 
pantheism. Even Yajhavalkya, like Parmenides in Greece,^ could not 
resist this tendency, and falls into the error when he describes the Atman as 
the internal ruler, or as supporting the sun and moon, heaven and earth, and 
the whole universe, or as expanding into the whole external universe. But 
this standpoint was also liable to difficulties : the identity was difficult to 
hold fast, and gave way to the simpler empirical conception of causality : 
the Atman produces the universe, and he enters into it with his self, an 
idea which of course had abundant parallels in the Brahmanas, when 
applied to personal deities such as Prajapati. This doctrine is found, he 
thinks, nowhere in the Brhadaranyaka, but in the Chandogya, the Taittiriya, 
the Aitareya, and later. The Atman, however, still remains the same in the 
wori^ as in itself : it does not create other spirits, but enters in as itself. 
The pantheism thus passes into cosmogonism, and from this point of view or 
from the former can be explained the insistence on the identity of the spirit 
in the heart with the infinitely great outside. The next stage of thought pro- 
duces theism : the relation of the Atman to the soul in man is conceived as no 
longer one of identity, but as one of some degree of contrast and independence : 
the Atman of the individual is set over against the Atman in its highest 
aspect, tentatively even in some old passages, then definitely and openly in the 
Katha Upanisad, and still more markedly with the presentation of the Atman 
as the god Budra in the QJveta9vatara Upanisad. The road was now open for 
the disappearance of the deity, since the individual souls were now indepen- 
dent entities, and could explain the universe if taken in conjunction with the 
principle of the world other than souls, Prakrti, the primeval nature. The idea 
of god, therefore, disappears in the Samkhya faith, and later the Yoga, which 
in deference to the demands of the popular movement of the day asked for a 
god, introduces the divinity ab extra with an obvious inconsequence, which 
makes him of no real importance in the philosophy of the theory. 

This is a brilliant and attractive theory, and it, of course, affords a far more 
rational ground for the historical comprehension of the Upanisads than does 
that of ^ankara with its contrast of the two kinds of knowledge, and its 
wholly incredible suggestion^ that the authors of the views found in the 
Upanisads really were making this distinction between the higher and the 
lower forms of knowledge, when it is plain to the reader that they are simply 
doing their best to express their philosophic beliefs for what they were worth. 
Nevertheless, the idea that the different stages of view are related in the form 
given by Deussen is one impossible to accept : the obvious history of the 
Upanisads,^ if we are not led astray by the belief in the opening up of new 

^ What was Parmenides’ real view in the ® Cf. Speyer, Indische Theosophies p. 307. 
second part of his poem is doubtful in ® Edgerton (JAOS. xxxvi. 197-204 ; Studies 
the extreme, and Deussen’s assertion in honor of Maurice Bloomfield, pp. 117- 

is far from being certainly correct. 35) very justly emphasizes the con- 



Chap. 28] The Interpretation of the Upanisads 511 

ideas by the warrior class, would suggest that the cosmogonic is the oldest 
form of the doctrine of the Brahman or Atman. The Vedic cosmogonism is 
the natural standpoint : we have there the first principle, the first creation or 
emanation of that principle, and the entry of that principle into the creation. 
The tendency of the Veda is throughout to treat creation, not as something 
which is developed by the mere will of the creator, but as something lying in 
his nature ah initio : creation is rather development than the bringing into 
being of something hitherto not existing in any way. Hence the way is paved 
for the doctrine of identity in the Atman ; ^ the principle is manifested in the 
whole world, as in the myth Purusa by his sacrifice becomes the whole world, 
and the further step of identifying the spiritual principle in each man with the 
spiritual principle which is the prius of the world, is an obvious and easy one. 
The pantheism of the Brahmanas is thus inseparably connected with their 
cosmogonism : it would be unwise to seek to establish for the Upanisads any 
real distinction between these ideas. 

The tendency of the Brahmanas is certainly to diminish the personal aspect 
of the deity, but the influence of the popular religion must be borne in mind, 
as explaining the nature of the development of the philosophy of the Upani- 
sads. The worship of Rudra was, it is perfectly clear from the Brahmanas 
themselves, a very important thing indeed for the Brahmans and the people 
alike, and the inevitable tendency of this vivid belief in powerful and real gods, 
not an abstraction, was to make th^ character of the universal change. Praja- 
pati had been in some measure a god of the ritual : his name helped to make 
him more than mere priestly fiction, but he could not be expected to have 
that vivid nature, which is the characteristic of the form of Rudra. The 
effect of this personal adoration of great gods with the sense of dependence on 
them and trust in them, which is a real element in the religion of India, ^ 
shows itself in philosophy in the theism which begins to be clearly marked in 
the Katha Upanisad and which is expressed in the doctrine of predestination 
there enunciated, in the form that the saving knowledge is not a matter of 
learning, but is revealed to the fortunate man by the highest power itself. 
It is only a step hence to the sectarianism of the ^vetagvatara Upanisad, a 
work which has often wrongly been deemed of much more modern date than 
it really is, because of the belief that the spirit of devotion to god was a product 
of the introduction of Christian influences. The theism of the Upanisads is, 
then, we may believe, a later stage than their pantheism and cosmogonism, and 
is due to the influence of the personal element in the religion of the priest and 
Brahmans alike. 


tinuity of the Vedic tradition ; the 
philosophic hyi^ns of the AV, have 
relations with the Upanisads. 

Hopkins (JAOS. xxiL 380, 381) insists 
that Atmanism without illusion is the 
essential side of the Upanisads and that 
illusion is late, hut this again is 4 )ver- 
straining the position to some slight 


extent at least. 

Bbandarkar, Vai^navism, ^aivism^ and 
Minor Religious Systems (Strassburg, 
1913) ; Keith, JRAS. 1907, pp. 490-3 ; 
1915, pp. 833 ff. ; Grierson, 1908, p. 
361 ; Nicol Macnicol, Indian Theism 
(1915) ; Weber, Meligionssoziologie, li. 
319 ff. 



612 The PMlosophp of the Veda [Party 

There is, however, undoubtedly another side of the absolute, which must 
be set off against the theistic development which in the time of Ramtouja 
was used to place on a philosophic basis the worship of Visnu, as in the 
^veta^vatara Upanisad it had been made the base of the worship of Rudra. 
We know of its existence from two independent sources of the highest value, 
the Buddhist and the Samkhya systems of philosophy, which reveal to us such 
despair of and disbeliefin the one Atman and the absolute as to present us with 
nothing but individual souls in the Samkhya, and even to deny, though in a 
foolish and superfecial way, the existence of souls in the Buddhist faith. It is 
certainly not easy to see how the pantheism and cosmogonism or the theism 
of the Upanisads could have produced this outlook on the world, and it 
suggests that there must have been in existence a view of the Atman as 
absolute which emptied it of much significance, and made it therefore tempting 
for those, who desired to rise superior to the mere fictions of the popular 
religion, to find true reality in something nearer hand, the existence of the 
individual and of the external universe. The theory which postulated an 
Atman of no real content was indeed to be found, and that was the theory 
of Yajhavalkya. It is true that the teaching in question is not consistently 
carried out, as Beussen admits, but it is plain that it lays stress on the three 
propositions that (1) the Atman is the knowing self, is the subject of cognition ; 
(2) that as such it can never be an object of knowledge of any sort ; and (8) 
that beyond the Atman there is no reality at all, as it is the sole reality. These 
propositions form the basis of the views of Qahkara, and it would be a com- 
plete error to suppose that the position of fahkara was really due^ to the effect 
of the teaching of the nihilist and idealist schools of Buddhism, the Madhya- 
mikas and the Yijhanavadins. That ^ahkara was deeply influenced b^^ their 
doctrines is doubtless true enough, but at the same time it seems beyond 
doubt that the doctrine which he maintained was originally the property of a 
school of Aupanisadas, and that, therefore, it was descended from an inter- 
pretation of the Upanisads, whose accuracy is confirmed by the actual texts 
of the Upanisads in so far as they bear out the meaning of Yajhavalkya’s own 
doctrine : the distinction of the two forms of knowledge, and the effort to 
show that other views in the Upanisads can be reconciled with Yaj havalkya’s 
on this basis, are of course the work of the predecessors of ^ahkara. 

The view of Yajnavalkya cannot, save by paradox, be deemed the earliest 
view or the dominating view expressed in the Upanisads : it must be taken 
as one view of considerable importance, which has received expression in 
portions of two of the oldest Upanisads, the Brhadaranyaka and the Chand- 
ogya, but most of all in the first. Independent and older are the cosmogonic 
and pantheistic views which appear in the Aitareya Aranyaka ^ and in the 

1 As held by Ganganatha Jha, Khanda- as he held, it is really first in Gauda- 

nakhandakhddya^ i. p. xii ; cf. Keith, pada’s Karika on the Mandukya Upa- 

JEAS. 1916, pp. 379-81. The same nisad that the real Vedanta appears. 

view appears in Walleser, Der dltere * Keith, Aitareya Aranyaka, pp. 41 ff. ; 

Vedanta (1910), but it is incredible that, JEAS. 1906, pp. 490 ff. 



Citap. 28] The Interpretation of the Upanisads 513 

Brahmanas, and the dominating influence of the view of Yaj havalkya ascribed 
to it by Deussen cannot be established. Its interest for us is not lessened by 
that fact : it is the most characteristically individual of the doctrines of the 
Upanisads, and in some ways of the greatest philosophic value. It is, more- 
over, the chief matter in which an advance on the views of the Brahmanas 
can be recognized. 

If we are to seek a more plausible theory of stages of development, we 
may assume that the fundamental question of finding a unity in the world was 
attacked from two points of view, already foreshadowed in the Brahmanas. 
On the one hand the conception of the Brahman was developed to include the 
whole of the universe ; the holy power which controls things becomes 
expanded in idea into that which contains and accounts for all. On the other 
hand the psychic element is also developed, in part doubtless through the 
study of the stages of the spirit in waking and sleep ; the unity here is 
imagined first as breath. Prana, then it becomes conceived as intellect, Prajna, 
and finally in the more abstract form of the self, Atman, a term which has the 
advantage of including the conception of breath, and also of intelligence, 
while transcending both. A decisive advance occurs when, in lieu of inade- 
quate efforts to express the nature of the Brahman, we have the pregnant 
assertion of the identity of the individual Atman with the Brahman regarded 
as a cosmic Atman. But this assertion leaves us with unsolved difficulties ; 
on the one hand it leads to suggestions such as those implied or made by 
Yaj navalkya which indicate the illusory character of the world of appearances, 
asserting the unity of Atman, broken in life by the duality induced by indi- 
viduality, which is merged temporarily in deep sleep, finally in death ; on the 
other we have efforts, as in the Katha, to accept as real, and deduce from 
the Brahman, the whole of the spiritual and non-spiritual world, efforts which 
lead to antinomies regarding the relation of the absolute and individual souls 
and end in the abolition of the absolute in the Sarhkhya, and of both absolute 
and individual in Buddhism. 

§ 4. The Problem and Conditions of Knowledge 

It is an essential feature of the Upanisads that, though they make, as we 
have seen, little or no advance in logical doctrine, they do tentatively raise 
and deal in some measure with the question of the source of knowledge of the 
Brahman or Atman. The view of the Brahmanas, of course, is that knowledge 
is to be found in the Vedas, and the authority of the Vedic texts is not dis- 
cussed. In the Upanisads, however, we find that the question of the means of 
knowledge is definitely raised : the three Vedas or the four, which are some- 
times recognized, are not always recognized as the sources of complete know- 
ledge : Qvetaketu, despite much Vedic learning, cannot solve the question of 
transmigration, Narada admits to Sanatkumara his incompetence to under- 
stand the Atman. The Taittiriya Upanisad ^ expressly reduces the knowledge 

» ii. 3. 


13 [h.o.s. 32 ] 



614 


[Paxt V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

of the Vedas to an inferior position by assigning them to the stage of the mind- 
made Atman, which has to be surmounted before reaching the final truth. 
But these views were gradually and naturally supplemented by another, 
which makes the Upanisads an essential part, the secret instruction, of the 
Veda : hence the term Vedanta which first occurs in the fveta9vatara 
Upanisad ^ and denotes the Upanisads, as the end of the Veda in which its 
deepest secret is disclosed. 

The Brahmanas had recognized, beside study of the Veda, the duty of 
sacrifice, and the importance of asceticism, and on both these points the 
thinkers of the Upanisads were bound to take a clear stand. The sacrifice 
is least reputed in the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad ^ where, with a certain 
insolence, the worship of anything except the self is derided, and the rela- 
tion of the ordinary worshipper to his gods is compared with that of housedogs. 
Again Yama is said to have his abode in the sacrifice, and the sacrifice in the 
fees. The Chandogya ® also seems in part to recognize the demerits of the 
sacrifice. But it would be an error to think that the general depreciation of 
the sacrifice is characteristic of the Brahmans ; it is clear that a few en- 
lightened minds had a poor opinion of the whole apparatus, but the normal 
view of the Upanisads is quite removed from that of opposition to sacrifice, 
which is often believed to mark them out. The sacrifice, however, is expressly 
relegated to an inferior place : the faithful performance of offerings takes a 
man but to the world of the Fathers, whence he will return to earth again 
in due course,^ and not thus can final liberation be won. On the other hand 
the actual performance of the sacrifice is rendered needless by the substitute 
for the ritual acts of allegorical acts : the three periods of life supersede the 
three Soma offerings,® inhalation and speech the Agnihotra,® the organs of the 
self the four priests, and so on. The tendency, however, to restore the sacri- 
fice to honour steadily grows : the Katha ’ recognizes it as of value, the 
^veta 9 vatara ® recommends recourse to it, the Maitrayamya ® asserts that 
without the study of the Veda, the observance of caste duties, and the 
following of the orders of life, through the stage of student householder, 
forest hermit, and wandering ascetic,- the reunion of the individual and the 
personal self is impossible. Doubtless in this we can recognize the growing 
aversion of the Brahmans to the Buddhist and the Jain tenets. 

The part of asceticism in the pursuit of knowledge is similar to that of the 
sacrifice. The Brhadaranyaka is not inclined towards it, recognizing in it 
as in sacrifice at most a way to the lower bliss of the world of the Fathers,^^ 


1 vi. 22 ; Miind. iii. 2. 6. Cf. Kena 33. 

2 iii. 9. 6, 21. 3 i. 10-12 ; iv. 1-3. 

^ BAU. i. 5. 16 ; vi. 2. 16 ; CU. v. 10. 3 ; 
PTJ. i. 9 ; Mund. i. 2. 10. 

3 CU.iii. 16. « AA.m.2. 6. 

’ i. 17; iii. 2. Cf. also 19 a 11 . 

« ii. 6, 7. M. 1 ; iv. 1 ff. 

13 iii. 8. 10 ; iv. 4. 22. 


11 vi. 2. 18 ; in view of this passage we may 
perhaps hold that in CU. v. 10. 1 the 
qualification for full enlightenment is 
not faith and Tapas (as in PU. i. 10 ; 
Mund. i. 2. 11 ; Windisch, Buddha^ s 
Gehurt, p. 73, n. 1) but faith as Tapas, 
as the words graddhd tapa ity updsate 
normally mean ; see below, § 10. 



Cha-p. 28] The Problem and Conditions of Knowledge 


615 


the Chandogya ^ substitutes the faith of the forest dweller for penance. The 
Taittiriya Upanisad,^ on the other hand, places value on Vedic study and 
asceticism, and even insists on the supreme value of the latter ; the Mahana* 
rayana ^ sets renunciation, Nyasa, above even asceticism : and from the Kena^ 
onwards the value of asceticism for the obtaining of the knowledge of the 
Brahman is absolutely recognized and sometimes insisted upon. In this, as 
in regard to Vedic study and sacrifice, the process is one of steady accommoda- 
tion to the popular view, which was at the same time the profitable view to the 
priests. It is needless, however, to see in this the fact of the borrowing of the 
theory of the Atman from an external source : the facts accord perfectly with 
a reform within the Brahmanical fold : the reformers gradually sink back into 
the main body, while their doctrine in some degree at least is adopted by the 
main body of the priests. 

Nor in the oldest stratum of the Upanisads do we find the necessity of 
instruction by a teacher laid down: Yajnavalkya^ on several occasions 
teaches persons such as his wife, Maitreyi, informally and without initiation, 
and A9vapati ® teaches the Brahmans who come to him freely. The rule of 
taking a teacher is absolute in the Katha,’ and is approved in the Chandogya,® 
where the teacher is regarded as being as essential as the removal of a 
bandage to a blindfolded man, who wishes to find his way home to Gan- 
dhara. In these texts the vague requirements also occur that a man should 
be endowed with self-restraint, renunciation, tranquillity, patience, and 
collectedness. 

But beyond these minor matters, which are none of them recognized as 
essential in the oldest Upanisads, a further question arises, how far there can 
be real knowledge at all of the Atman. The natural desire of the philosopher 
is to know -the Atman ; the Upanisads are in very real sense the search for 
that knowledge, but the conviction is clearly early felt that there were serious 
difficulties in assuming the possibility of empiric means giving the desired 
result. The Rigveda ® already contained the idea that the first principle in 
some degree disguised itself, and the world of name and form becomes in the 
Brhadaranyaka the immortal concealed in truth, or reality, and as the 
reality of reality is seen the self. The only normal sense which can be given to 
these passages is that suggested by the description of the whole universe in the 
Chandogya as a matter of words, a mere name. The reality of the world 
is empiric, the true reality is the Atman, which the empiric reality conceals. 
It follows, therefore, that all so-called knowledge is really ignorance, Avidya, 
and that in death in casting off the body the soul throws aside ignorance.^^ 

^ ii. 23. ® vi. 14. ^JU. vi. 23 demands devotion to 

* i. Oandiii. the teacher as to god. 

® Ixii. 11. ® X. 81. 1 ; cf. 129. 7 ; even the lord may 

* 33 ,* PU. i. 10 ; Mund. i. 2. 11. not know the origin of creation. 

® BAU. ii. 4 ; iv. 1 ff. i. 6. 3 ; ii. 1. 20 ; ii. 4. 7-9. 

® CU. V. 11. 7. vi. 1-3 ; cf. vii. 1, 2 ; viii. 3. 1, 2. 

’ ii. 8. BAU. iv. 4. 3, 4 ; QU. v. 1. 

13* 



516 


The Philosophy of the Veda 


[Part V 


The Katha ^ illustrates this theme : ordinary knowledge aims at pleasure, 
real knowledge at salvation, and it must be accorded through a teacher,^ 
and by the favour of the Atman, ^ a doctrine which develops into the express 
declaration that the favour of the creator is essential. The Cvetagvatara ^ 
carries us to the logical result and offers prayers to the gods for assistance, 
inculcating devotion, Bhakti, to god and to the teacher. 

On the other hand, there arises in the doctrine of Yajiiavalkya a distinct 
and different element : the self in this view cannot be known at all.® There is 
no consciousness after death, he explains to Maitreyi, and the grounds of his 
explanation are that duality is essential for consciousness. The absolute 
self is unknowable, for there is no duality between it and anything else : 
the individual self is also unknowable because it must be the activity in 
knowing, and cannot be the object. The doctrine has echoes in other Upani- 
sads,® and it results in fierce attacks on knowledge, which is ranliied as worse 
than ignorance by the l^a.’ The Katha ® lays stress on the necessity of turning 
the eye inwards in contrast to the mere use of the senses to grasp what is 
external, and insists that the only assertion that can be made of the self is the 
mere declaration of existence pure and simple. The way is, therefore, 
clearly open to the development of the doctrine alluded to in the earlier 
Upanisads, but not developed until later, ^ which seeks by means of processes 
of physical and psychical disposition to produce the trance condition in which 
unity with the absolute, the only possible form of knowledge, is arrived at. 

§ 5 . The Nature of the Absolute 
The Upanisads are essentially concerned with the endeavour to describe 
the nature of the absolute, and the rich abundance of attempts to succeed in 
this end, proved by the references to conflicting theories in the Upanisads, is 
clear proof of the busy mental activity of the period. From the earliest 
Upanisad we have, the view is clear that there is a unity, that it is necessary 
further to grasp the nature of that unity, and that the proper names of the 
unity are either the Brahman or the Atman. The two ideas whose history we 
have seen in the Brahmanas are used constantly in alternation with each other. 
It is clear that they must have been felt to be practically akin. 

Many of these attempts were, it is clear, of little j^orth : Balaki Gargya in 

^ KU. ii. 1~6 ; Mund. i. 2. 8-10 ; Maitr. vii. of Buddhism, p. 75). 

9; the later verses in BAU.iv.4. 11, 12. ® CU. vi. 9, 10 ; 15. 1, 2 ; vii. 24. 1 ; TU. 

^ KU. ii. 7-9. ii ; Kena 3, 11. 

® KU. ii. 23 and 20 ; iii. 20 ; Mahanar. ’ 9-11. 

X. 1 (viii. 3) ; Murid, iii. 2. 3. ® iv. 1 ; vi. 12, 13 ; the later verse in BAU. 

* ii. 1-5 ; iii. 1-6 ; iv. 1. iv. 4. 10. 

® ii. 4. 12 ; iii. 4. 2 ; 7. 23 ; 8. 11 ; iv. 3. ® The Abhidharmako^a (i. 40) formally 

10 ; 4. 2. Similarly the Dharma of the insists against older Buddhism that 

Buddhists, which replaces the Brahman sensuous consciousness and material 

(W. Geiger, Dharma und Brahman, elements can be suppressed only by 

pp. 1 ff.), is ultimately unknowable ecstasy, not knowledge. 

(Stcherbatsky, The Central Conception 



Chap. 28] 


617 


The Nature of the Absolute 

his interview with Ajatacatru puts forward twelve ^ or sixteen views of the 
nature of the absolute. They are all of the same type, the soul in the sun, the 
moon, lightning, ether, fire, water, the person in a mirror, the sound that 
follows one as he goes, the person in the quarters, the shadow, the person in 
the body, &c., to which the king opposes in reply the conception of that 
whence the breaths proceed, and on which the worlds, gods, and men depend. 
Other suggestions made by ^akalya ^ which treat breath, love, forms, ether, 
&c., as the basis of the absolute are refuted by Yajnavalkya, who also rejects 
the suggestions of speech, the breath, the eye, the ear, mind, and the heart laid 
before him by Janaka as doctrines enunciated on this head.® Yajnavalkya 
shows that these things are only the basis of the attributes of the divine unity, 
and that it is necessary to go behind the mere attributes or their manifestation, 
which can only be done by recognizing the essential identity of the absolute 
and our own spirit. The Brahmans who with Uddalaka are instructed by 
A9vapati B^aikeya ^ are supporters of the claims of heaven, sun, wind, ether, 
water, and earth as the absolute unity, there conceived as the Atman Vai9va- 
nara, an idea borrowed from the Agni Vai9vanara which forms the subject of 
discussion in the secret doctrine of the fire in the Qatapatha Brahmana.^ The 
king, on his part, insists that the Atman must be within, not an external 
object. A much longer and more elaborate series of imperfect views is repre- 
sented in the instruction of Narada by Sanatkumara,® where from name the 
advance is made through speech, mind, conception or judgement (samkalpa), 
thought, intuition (d%ana),knoMedge {vijhdna), force, food (i.e. earth), water, 
heat, ether, memory, and longing (dpa), to the breath which is the individual 
soul, and finally to the great one, Bhuman, which comprehends all, fills space, 
and is identical with the principle of egoism, Aharhkara, and the self, Atman, 
in man. The transition from the individual to the great one is made thus ; 
truth depends on knowledge, this on thought {mati), this on faith, this on 
concentration {nihsthd)^ this on productive power, this on pleasure, which 
exists in the unlimited. 

More important than these theories are others : Indra ^ and the demon 
Virocana went to Prajapati for instruction : he first describes the Atman as 
the body, a view thought adequate by Virocana, who is the prototype of all 
men who merely see in the body the hope of immortality, and, therefore, 
deck it out on death with gay raiment, Prajapati then explains the self as the 
spirit in dreams, but Indra is not satisfied, since the spirit is still in this con- 
dition opposed to a world beyond itself. Prajapati then propounds the self 
in dreamless sleep, where there is no distinction of subject and object, which 
he explains as not the annihilation of the self, but its entry upon the fullest 

^ BAU. ii, 1 ; KU. iv. For the person ^ BAU. iii. 9. 10-17, 26. For ether a the 
in the eye, superior person (atipurusa) universe, see JUB. i. 27 1 

in the sun, and the supreme person in * BAU. iv. 1. 
the lightning, see JUB. i, 27. The * CU. v. 11. 
person in the eye is Prajapati, Indra, * x. 6. 1. 
the universe, i. 43. 10 ff. ; iv. 24. 13. ® CU. vii. 


^ CU. viii. 7-12. 



518 


The Philosophy of the Veda 


[Part V 


light in identification with the absolute. With this view must be compared 
a more developed one expressed in the Taittiriya Upanisad,^ where there are 
distinguished five Atmans ; the first is the annamaya, which corresponds to 
the body ; then the prdnamaya, which corresponds to the life of the breaths 
or vital airs ; the manomaya, the self of the mind, which here clearly means the 
activity of the self as conscious will in such actions as sacrifice and study ; 
the vijndnamaya, in which for sacrifice is substituted knowledge and worship 
of the deity in that manner ; and finally the dnandamaya, that of joy before 
whom words and thought recoil, not finding him. This last self is not an 
object of knowledge, and hence it is described as not real — empirically — , as 
unconscious and unutterable. In it is bliss, which is broken by the belief in any 
difference between the self and it. 

Other efforts are made to realize the Atman by a process of examination 
of the merits of the different claimants. Thus we have the account of the 
rivalry of the senses foreshadowed in the Brahmanas carried out in detail. 
The breath is the victor over speech, the eye, the ear, and mind, because when 
all the others go from the body still it is left animated,^ and from another point 
of view breath alone is able in the conflict of the gods, the senses, and the 
demons to overthrow the demons.^ Another version ^ adds to the other powers 
the cosmical equivalents, and ranges speech, eye, ear and breath against one 
another, and fire, sun, moon, and wind against one another ; in each case 
the result is the victory of breath and wind. In the Kausitaki Upanisad,® 
following the Aitareya Brahmana,® the cosmic divinities fire, sun, moon, 
lightning, and the psychic divinities, speech, eye, ear, mind, enter into the 
wind and the breath respectively. The same idea occurs in an earlier version of 
the ^atapatha Brahmana : in sleep speech enters the breath, and so with 
eye, mind, ear, and correspondingly with fire, sun, moon, and the quarters in 
their relation to the wind. Hence we frequently find that the breath is set up 
as an idea of the Brahman,® but merely to be rejected as inadequate. 

Still more clearly inadequate are the identifications of Brahman with 
mind,® which as in the Brahmanas never achieves a decisive place of im- 
portance, and with more material concepts, such as the sun and as the ether. 
The sun is interesting, as it is clear that efforts were made — as in Egypt in the 
reform of Akhenaten — ^to penetrate beyond the mere physical sun to the 
man in the sun, with whom the dying man declares his identity.^® The real 

^ ii. It has also the doctrine of the Brahman ’ x. 3.3, 5-8. In JUB.iii. 2 breath swallows 
as satyam jndnam anantam (or anand- up speech, mind, sight, and hearing ; 

am) ; see below. The first three cover Ka (Prajapati) swallows fire, moon, sun, 

satyam. and the quarters. 

^ CU. V. 1. 6-12 ; BAU. vi. 1. 7-13 ; AA. ® BAU. iv. 1. 3 ; v. 13 ; Kaus. ii. 1 and 2 ; 
ii. 1. 4 ; Kaus. ii. 14 ; iii, 3 ; ^A. ix ; CU. iv. 10. 5 ; TU. iii. 3. 1 ; JUB. i. 

PU. ii. 2-4. 33. 2. 

® BAU. i. 3 ; CU. i. 2 ; JUB. i. 60, &c. » CU. iii. 18 ; vii. 3 ; BAU. iv. 1. 6. 

* BAU. i. 5. 21-3, 10 BAU. v. 15 ; CU. iv. 11-13 ; i. 6, 7 ; 

» ii. 12, 13. TU. ii. 8 ; I^a 15-18. 

« viii. 28. 



Chap. 28 ] 


The Nature of the Absolute 


619 


relation to the sun is, however, declared to be something above that,^ and 
similarly against the conception of the absolute as there is set the view that the 
absolute is in the ether, and is the controller of the ether. ^ 

Another set of conceptions is rather different : they are not so much real 
efforts to explain the absolute as merely to bring it into contact with the 
sacrifice : it was clearly the most natural thing in the world for the various 
schools, which were contemporary with the development of the Brahman, to 
apply to the chief concepts of their special branch of Vedic literature the idea 
of identification with the absolute. Thus the schools of the Bigveda fixed 
upon the Uktha,® the litany, especially that of the Mahavrata ceremony as the 
absolute, the Samaveda schools chose the Saman and in special the Udgitha,^ 
and the schools of the Yajurveda the horse ® offered at the sacrifice. Much 
more common is the view that by the mystic syllable, Om, originally no more 
perhaps than a formal word of assent, the Brahman is denoted.^ 

A more advanced conception is to be found in the Aitareya Aranyaka ^ 
which uses the old conception of breath, but identifies with it Prajna, ‘ intel- 
lect ’. On intellect the whole world is based, it is guided by intellect, and know- 
ledge is the absolute. The same view is expressed in the Kausitaki Upanisad ^ 
where the identity of breath and intellect is asserted absolutely, but also later 
on is more precisely investigated : it shows that the objects of sense depend 
on the organs of sense, and the latter are dependent in turn on intellect, but 
it still adheres to the identification of the two. The Chandogya itself identifies 
breath, ether, and bliss. The breath, therefore, still here and there appears 
with its claim to be the Atman, but it is also now and then made dependent 
on it, or even the shadow of it. 

But the nature of the Brahman is not intellect alone : it is also bliss and 
reality, and these ideas are here and there already united as in the later 
Upanisads, though the enumeration of the triad as the actual character of the 
Brahman is not actually found in the early Upanisads. In its place the 
Taittiriya ^ once presents the Brahman as being (sat), thought (cit), and 
eternity, where ananta, eternity % stands probably in error for the Ananda, 
‘ bliss of the later triad. As being the Brahman, it is at once being and not- 
being : the old duplication of the Rigveda,^® which asserts that at first there 
was neither being nor not-being is recognized here and there, but in the 
definite sense that, as not-being, the absolute is not empirical being, and that as 
being it is also not empirical being, so that the question is one of terminology 


1 CU. iv. 13. 

« BAU. in. 7. 12. 

® AA. ii. 1-3. 

* CU. ii. and passim in JUB. 

® BAU. i. 1, 2. 

« Keith, ERE. s.v. 

’ ii. 6=AU.iii. 1-3. Ct prajna atmafiiBAlJ. 
iv. 3. 21. 

« iii. Oldenhetg (Die LehrederUpanishaden, 
pp. 350 f.) minimizes the value of these 


.passages, but unjustly; of. below, § 9, 
as to the influence of speculations as to 
deep sleep on the conception of the 
absolute. 

® ii. 1. Deussen (Sechzig Upanishad^s^^ 
p. 225) reads dnandam, followed by 
Jacobi, Die Entmicklung der Gottesidee 
bei den Inderny p. 16. 

X. 129. 



520 


[Party 


The Philosophy of the Veda 


alone and is decided in favour of the appellation being.^ Much more important 
is the attribute of thought, which is asserted repeatedly in the doctrine of 
Yaj navalkya.^ He there asserts that the hearer, the seer, the understander, the 
knower, are all unknown : they are the soul within, which again is in essence 
the divine, for all else than it is liable to suffering. In this subject of knowledge 
ether or space is interwoven : it is the meeting-place of all sounds, smells, 
sights, and other experiences. The different organs — and their functions — are 
only names for the one subject. In his conversation with Janaka,® the 
philosopher traces the Atman as the knowing subject, which persists without 
change through the stages of waking, dreaming, deep sleep, death, trans- 
migration, and final deliverance of the soul. The spirit in the waking state 
beholds the good and the evil of the world, but it is not moved by it, since 
as subject it is really incapable of affection : in the state of dreaming it builds 
up its own world, and in deep dreamless sleep, wrapped round by the intellec- 
tual self, it has no consciousness of objects, and yet is not unconscious. The 
self is compared to a lump of salt which has no inner or outer aspects : it is 
simply a single unit, and so consciousness has no inner and outer side, and is 
one unity alone. The Brahman is also the light of lights, and through it alone 
is there any light in the universe. For the wise man there is perpetual and 
abiding light, and this idea in the later Upanisads appears in a variety of 
metaphors such as the day of Brahman which is eternal. 

The conception of the self as essentially consciousness is not, however, 
confined to Yajhavalkya : the same view is expressed, in words which may be 
dependent on the Brhadaranyaka, in the Chandogya,^ and the Aitareya ^ 
and the Kausitaki ® texts as we have seen emphasize the same conception 
under the view that the self is intellect. In neither case, however, need we 
assume dependence on Yajhavalkya, for unlike the case of the Chandogya 
the line of argument differs, and is, in the later case directly, and in the former 
indirectly, linked with the conception of the self as breath, which does not 
appear in the development of the ideas of Yajhavalkya. 

The nature of the absolute as bliss is also asserted by Yajhavalkya,*^ who 
brings the conception into the closest relation with his idea of its nature. The 
bliss which he contemplates is that of the man in dreamless sleep, when the 
consciousness of individuality is lost, and when the self, therefore, is above 


^ BAU. i. 6. 3 ; ii. 1. 20. 

^ ii. 4. 11 ; hi. 4 ; 8. 11 ; vijnanam dnandam 
trahmay iii. 9. 28 ; mjndnaghana, ii. 
4. 12 ; prajuanaghanttf iv. 5. 13 ; 
prdjfia dtman, iv. 3. 21. 

® iv. 3, 4 ; 5. 13. 

CU. iii. 11 ; viii. 3. 4 ; 12. 3, 4. 

* iii. 

* iii and iv. 

’ The unit of bliss is that of a happy man in 
this world ; that in the Fathers’ world 
is ten times greater ; that of the 


Gandharvas 100 times; that of the 
gods by merit 1,000 times ; that of the 
gods by birth 10,000 times ; that in 
Prajapati’s world 100,000 times ; and 
that in the Brahmaloka 1,000,000 times, 
and this is attributed to the Brahman ; 
BAU. iv. 3. 33. For a later version, 
see TU. ii. For another series of 
worlds, BAU. iii. 6. 1 (atmosphere, 
Gandharvas, sun, moon, stars, Indra, 
Prajapati, Brahman) ; KU. i. 3. 



Chap. 28] 


521 


The Nature of the Absolute 

all pain and grief and enjoys pure bliss, whence it is a simple step to the 
equation of the absolute and bliss. Nor is there much doubt that here again 
the Chandogya^ depends on the Brhadaranyaka,^ when it enunciates the 
doctrine of the absolute as ether, breath, and joy under the mystic name of 
Kha. The Kausitaki ^ also seems to borrow from the Brhadaranyaka, and the 
whole idea is further developed in the Taittiriya,^ in the Anandavalli. There 
special stress is laid on the error of seeking to find any division of subject and 
object in bliss : that would create division and would admit the idea of fear, 
which can arise only from division. The dependence on the Brhadaranyaka 
of this doctrine is borne out by the relation of the dnandamaya self to the 
vijndnamaya : in the former text they are the same idea, and, therefore, the 
conscious self is the highest, there being no difference of subject and object in 
it : the Taittiriya refines by making the vijhanamaya still have the distinction 
of subject and object, and then erecting the dnandamaya above it in rank. It 
is characteristic of the growth of these distinctions that, later on,® the dnan- 
damaya itself became regarded as a mere sheath {hoga) in which the self or the 
Brahman resided. 

The other side of this exaltation of the bliss of the absolute is of course the 
view that all the world is misery,® but the pessimism of the XJpanisads is 
moderate : we hear of the miseries of old age and death or disease, and trouble 
which the knowledge of the absolute removes, but the growth of the spirit 
of pessimism is only to be traced in XJpanisads of the quite late class. 

But, despite the giving to the absolute of these three attributes or charac- 
teristics, Yajhavalkya returns constantly to the fact that they are not to be 
taken in the empirical sense, and that, therefore, our knowledge of the 
absolute is non-existent. The most drastic expression for this view is the 
formula neti neti^ ‘ not so, not so ^ which denies to the absolute any and 
every attempt to define it in terms of ordinary knowledge. Its existence is 
a transcendental reality, which is essentially from the empirical point of view 
a nonentity : its consciousness involves the essential fusion of subject and 
object, and the transcendence of their diversity, although the phraseology of 
the XJpanisads always treats the Atman as subject,® and, therefore, is not 
ordinary consciousness at all, and the bliss arises from this state of non-dis- 
tinction. Hence we have two different conceptions which are repeated times 
without number : on the one hand every empirical attribute is attributed to 
the absolute and also denied of it : in the secorid place the most contradictory 


1 iv. 10. 5. 

2 iv. 3. 19-33. 

® iii. 8. ^ ii ; of. iii. 

® Maitr. vi. 27 ; Mahanar. Ixiii. 16. 

« BAU. iv. 2. 4 ; iii. 8. 8. 

’ BAU. iv. 2. 4 ; 4. 22 ; 5. 15 ; iii. 9. 26. 
Hillebrandt’s theory (DUZ. 1897, p. 
1929 ; ZDMG. Ixix. 105 f.) that 
na is an affirmative particle here is 


clearly erroneous. Oltramare {Uhistoire 
des idees tMosophiques, i. 74) thinks 
it merely denies {iti signalling out na) 
every eilort to define ; so Jacobi, Die 
Entwicklung der Goitesidee bei den In- 
dern, p. 15. 

® Oldenberg, Die Lehre der Upanishaden, 
p. 101, n. 1, against Simmel, llaupi- 
probleme der Philosophie, p. 95. 



522 


The Philosophy of the Veda 


[Part V 


observations are made regarding it. The ideas thus enunciated are clear : the 
absolute is not in space ^ which is expressed by the assertion that it is infinitely 
large and infinitely small, that space is interwoven in it, and that it is all 
pervading. The absolute is not in time : ^ hence it appears as above the three 
times, independent of the past and the future, at its feet time rolls on its 
course : on the one hand it is of infinite duration, but at the same time it is 
of the instantaneous character of the flash of the lightning, or the swift rush 
of thought. The absolute is also free from causal connexion : ^ it is said to be 
absolutely without diversity, and this point is variously developed : the 
Katha ^ is emphatic that the absolute is independent of becoming and not 
becoming, of good and evil, of past and future, the knowing seer is not born, 
does not die, abides from everlasting. The Iga ® insists that it is unmoving, 
yet swifter than mind ; far, yet near ; within, yet without the universe ; 
above knowledge and ignorance ; that it differs essentially from coming into 
being and not coming into being. The final answer to the question of the 
nature of the Atman is that recorded for us in a legend by ^ankara : Vaskali 
asked Bahva as to the nature of the Brahman : the latter remained silent, 
and on being pressed for an answer replied, ‘ I teach you, indeed, but you 
understand not : silence is the Atman.’ ® 

§ 6 . The Absolute and the Universe 

The theory of Yajnavalkya asserts, as we have seen, that the absolute 
is unknowable and not definable by any empirical predicates. It, therefore, 
becomes obviously a pressing question to connect the empirical and the real 
universes : the gulf between the two is only accentuated by asserting, in so 
determined a manner, that there is a deep division between the one and the 
many. The relation of the universe as known to the one is, however, the pro- 
blem which all philosophies find insoluble in greater or less degree, and the 
efforts of the Upanisads to bridge the difference are not at all satisfactory. 
The answer given in fact is merely that the absolute is the same as the world, 
or that the world is the product of the Brahman. The difficulty, however, 
arises, in considering these passages of the Upanisads, which present the 
doctrines of cosmogonism and pantheism in close and inextricable union, to 
know whether we have here efforts to explain the Brahman understood in the 

^ BAU. iii. 8. 7 ; CU. iii, 14. 3 ; KU. ii. such an absolute cannot be regarded 

20 ; iv. 10, 11 ; QU. iii. 20 ; Idahanar. either as conscious or unconscious ; 

X. 1. How far the idea was clearly felt Oldenberg, Die Lehre der XJpanisha- 

must be left undecided ; ef. Oldenberg, den, pp. 100-5. HerteFs view {Die 

Die Lehre der Upanishaden, p. 73, WHsheit der XJpanischaden, p, 32), 

* BAU. iv. 4. 16, 17 ; KU. ii. 14 ; iii. 15 ; that in Kena we have a polemic 

V. 6 ; fU. V. 13, &c. against the doctrine of the Brahman, is 

® BAU. iii. 8 ; iv. 4. 20 ; CU. vi. 1. 3. untenable. The polemic is rather 

^ ii. 14, 18. against knowledge as the one way of 

® 4, 5, 9, 10, 12-14. salvation, but a reply to the Mundaka 

® Brahma Sutra, iii. 2. 17. It is clear that specifically need not be assumed. 



Chap. 28] 


The Absolute and the Universe 


623 


sense of Yajiiavalkya, or merely the natural continuation of the doctrines 
of the Brahmanas. It is on this point that it is necessary to part com- 
pany with Deussen, who in his aim at system assumes that the doctrine 
of the absolute, as expounded in the Brhadaranyaka, underlies the whole 
thought of the Upanisads. We can only say that the deeper view of Yajha- 
valkya may, though not very probably, have been held now and then by 
those who express the more crude views of the identity of the absolute and 
the universe. 

In the Aitareya Aranyaka, an early text, we find a simple and clear 
assertion of the presence of the self, Atman, in living things, but in different 
degrees, without here, as yet, any implication of the absolute character of 
the self or its identity with the universe. He who knows more and more 
clearly the self attains fuller being ; the self is revealed in an ascending order 
or revelation in plants and trees, animals, and man. In plants and trees sap 
only is found, in animals consciousness is present, but man excels since he is 
highly endowed with intelligence, saying what he has known, seeing what he 
has known, knowing to-morrow, the world and its opposite ; by the mortal 
he desires the immortal, being thus endowed. As for the others, hunger and 
thirst comprise the power of knowledge of animals ; they say not and see not 
what they have known. Man also is likened to the sea, for the insatiable 
nature of his desires ,* whatever he attains he desires to go beyond it ; if he 
gains the sky, yet is he not content.^ 

The pantheistic view is undoubtedly present in the many passages in which 
the development of the world from the absolute is expressed in metaphors : 
thus in the metaphor of the spider from which the thread proceeds, or the 
fi.re whence come forth the sparks.^ Often too the Atman is declared to 
pervade the whole of the universe, it is likened to the lump of salt which 
in water disappears, indeed, but leaves all pervaded by it,^ a view which must 
be older than the more refined conception, which, as we have seen, is applied 
to the Atman when the object of comparison is a lump of salt, which has no 
inner or outer aspect, but is but one in itself. The Katha Upanisad ^ compares 
the self to the light which penetrates everywhere, and adapts itself to every 
form. This view is found also in another form, in the laying down of the view 
of the self as the inward controller, as the greatest of powers, in which the 
heaven and the earth alike are contained. This view sets the self over against 
the world, and in doing so it adopts the old view that the seat of the self is the 


^ Aitareya Aranyaka, ii. S. 2 f. Barua 
{Prebuddh. Ind. Phil., pp. 51 ff.) has an 
elaborate account of Mahidasa’s views, 
but they are normally unphilosophical. 
His statements as to his cosmological 
doctrines (p. 69) are unwarranted by the 
text, and to style him the ‘ incipient 
Aristotle % ‘ who compares favourably 
in a great number of points with 


Aristotle is inadmissible. The effort 
to make personalities out of the 
Upanisad teachers is vain, while to treat 
Aghamarsana as the first philosopher 
of India is absurd. 

2 Muud.i. 1. 7; ii. 1. 1. 

* BAU. ii. 4. 12 as against iv. 15. 3. 

« V. 9-11. 



524 The Philosophy of the Yeda [Party 

heart, ^ in which accordingly the lord of the universe resides, infinitely small, 
yet greater than the earth, the atmosphere, and the heaven. He is the pro- 
tector of the, universe, the guardian of mankind, the bond which holds the 
worlds together and prevents them coming into conflict. It is in this connexion 
that the terms ^ tat tvam asi, ‘ that thou art ’, and etad vai tat,^ ‘ that is this ’, 
must be understood : they assert the essential identity of the self and the 
universe, but they do not necessarily or originally depend on the adoption 
of the view of Yajhavalkya, though they may later be regarded as a natural 
^adaptation of it to meet the question of the relation of the universe and the 
final reality. 

The impossibility of ascribing these views of the absolute and the world to 
attempts to solve the problem suggested by the transcendental view of the 
absolute is seen in the many cases where the realism is material and gross : 
thus the old doctrine of the creator, the primeval substance created by him, 
and his entry into it, which appears in the Aitareya Upanisad,^ cannot be 
treated as a later development of a primitive identification of the universe and 
the absolute : it derives directly from the Brahmanas, and shows the early, 
not the later, date of the Upanisad, as compared with the doctrine of Yajna- 
valkya. The same primitive ideas must be seen in the view that the Purusa 
dwells in the body as a span in height, as flame without smoke. 

From this cosmogonism or pantheism it is not a difficult step to arrive at 
atheism : the attitude of the Brahmanas, as we have seen, is not theistic, for 
they tend xmdoubtedly to depart from the primitive conception of Prajapati 
as a creator god in favour of the idea of the more impersonal Brahman or the 
Atman. But the tendency to abstraction was always, doubtless, confronted 
with the realism and clinging to personahty of the average intellect, and that 
realism results in the growing tendency ^ to separate the individual and 
the supreme self, which is a perfectly natural development from the hasty 
unity of pantheisms. The Katha Upanisad ® undoubtedly shows this tendency 
in its distinction of the supreme and the individual self as light and shadow, 
and in the doctrine of the grace of the creator which gives man saving know- 
ledge : the idea is, however, far more effectively brought out in the ^veta- 
9vatara,’ where the identity of the supreme and the individual souls is not 
indeed denied, but can only be realized by the favour of the supreme lord, the 
l9vara, who thus appears as in some measure distinct from the individual 
soul. The l9vara is also a maker of magic, and the universe is the product, 
the illusion. The Upanisad shows no trace of the presupposition of the 
doctrine of Yajnavalkya : it is adequately explained as the mere develop- 
ment of primitive pantheism, or cosmogonism. 

In this Upanisad it is of importance that the conception of theism is allied 

1 CU.iii. 14. 2 ; 13. 7 ; viii. 1. 3 ; BAU.iii. « i. 11, 12 ; cf. CU. vi. 3. 3 ; TU. ii. 6 ; 

7. 3. For a possible reference to the Maitr, ii. 6. 

head see RV. ii. 16. 2 ; viii. 96. 3. ® See also below, § 7. 

2 CU. vi. 8. 16. « iii. 1 ; ii. 20. 

® BAU. V. 4 ; KU. iv. 3-vi. 1. ^ iv. 6, 7. 



Chap. 28 ] 


The Absolute and the Universe 


525 


to the name of Rudra : the Vedic gods in the Upanisads exist as much as men,^ 
but they are nothing more important than men, and need the knowledge of 
the Brahman as much as men ; Indra and Prajapati himself are, though the 
keepers of the door of heaven, unable to turn back the man who knows the 
Brahman. The Vedic gods are in themselves not enough to account for the 
prominence of the theistic aspect : it is essentially connected with ^iva or 
later with Visnu, new great gods of the popular side of Brahmanism. The 
new relation is seen in the use of the term Igvara, I^a, or synonyms, of the god, 
and in the use of these terms later of the supreme god in Indian philosophy : 
these are names obviously in harmony with the chief name of Rudra as the 
I^ana, the lord, among the gods and the world in general. 

The nature of the process by which the universe comes into being is con- 
sidered under many different aspects, but they all rest on the old hypothesis 
of the mode of creation of the universe. They adopt just the same sort of 
language : there was according to one version first not-being, which was being : 
it arose : an egg was evolved : it lay for a year : it split open into two halves, 
one of silver which is the earth, and one of gold which is the heaven. The 
material of the world as it exists is in the most primitive view the waters, an 
idea already found in the Rigveda ^ and this conception is adhered to in the 
Aitareya Upanisad. A more developed, and probably later, view is that of 
the Chandogya Upanisad,^ which makes the Brahman resolve to create the 
world, and therefore to create ^ heat, whence arose, as sweat arises in man, the 
waters, and from the waters came food, after which the supreme self enters 
into the three as the individual self, the JivMman. Thereafter a further step 
is taken : the Jivatman having entered, the three elements are mixed together 
so that existing things are composed of the three separate elements, an idea 
which is the source of the distinction of the subtle and the gross elements, 
which occurs as such first in the Pra9na Upanisad,^ where the earth, water, 
heat, wind, and ether elements are distinguished from the earth, water, heat, 
wind, and ether. A further and very important development of this theory is 
that of the Taittiriya Upanisad ® which derives from the Atman the ether, 
wind, fire, water, and earth. This five-fold division may be regarded as the 
established order in the philosophy of India, and the fact that the Aitareya 


There are gods by meritorious action 
(karman) or by birth, BAU. iv. 3. 33 ; 
TU. ii. 9. The latter are the happier. 
Indra and Prajapati have distinct 
heavens, BAU, iii. 6. 1. 

X. 121 ; TS. V. 6. 4 ; AV. iv. 2. 8 ; Oltra- 
mare (L%istoire des idies th^osophiques, 
i. 7) compares Genesis i. 2 ; Psalm 
cvi. 4. 

vi, 2; 

A primitive materialism, seen here by 
Jacobi {Festschrift Kuhn, pp. 37 ff.) 
is quite improbable. See Oldenberg, 
GN. 1917, pp. 248 ff., and Jacobi’s 


later view, Die Entwicklung der Goites^ 
idee bei den Indern, pp. 11 ff. 

® iv. 8. 

® ii. 1. For the meaning of ether see below, 
§ 10. If it is space, then a faint 
similarity to the Timaios may be 
recognized. 

’ AA. ii. 3. 1 (earth, wind, ether, water, 
light) ; AU. iii. 3 (these as mahabhu- 
tdni); cf. fA. vii. 21, where small 
hhutdni, of uncertain nature, appear. 
For its development in Buddhism, cf. 
Stcherbatsky, The Central Conception 
of Buddhism, pp. 12 f. 



526 


[Party 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

has not it in definite form shows that it is earlier than the Taittiriya. With the 
five elements correspond the five senses. 

The absolute, after the production of the elements, must enter into the 
world, and many texts refer to this entry. Hence the world is penetrated 
throughout organic nature by the self of the absolute, which exists in the 
plant world, in insect life, in animal life, and in man, in things born of the egg, 
born alive, and sprout-born ^ or born from sweat, a category including insects.^ 
The tree and the plant alike are regarded as animated by a spirit. The idea 
is seen frequently in the doctrine of transmigration where animals, insects, 
vegetables and gods appear as subject to transmigration. The Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad ^ has, in a legend which may be compared with the famous observa- 
tions of Plato in the Symposion^^ a theory of the Atman as neither male nor 
female which is cleft asunder and attains fresh unity in the creation of new 
life, human and animal alike. 

It was inevitable that, in the view of the universe which regarded it as a 
creation, and distinguished between the soul of man and his body, there 
should arise the conception of the soul of the universe related to it as the soul 
in man to his body : this conception is made material in the person of 
Hiranyagarbha, who in the Rigveda ^ is the golden germ which enters into 
creation after the first action of the creator, or of Brahman as masculine. The 
position of either of these deities is first quite distinctly asserted in the 
Kausitaki Upanisad,® and the idea appears in prominence only in the theistic 
^veta9vatara Upanisad,^ where a third name occurs, the red seer, Kapilarsi, 
a term often,® but certainly wrongly, assumed to refer to the founder — who is 
a very legendary figure and may owe his name to this passage — of the 
Samkhya system. But the idea is found in a less theoretic form in the 
Katha Upanisad,^ where in the development of principles the ‘ great self ’ 
stands after the undeveloped and the primeval spirit, and later in the Buddhi 
of the Samkhya. 

The absolute is not merely the creator of the universe ; through it the 
universe after creation continues to live and move and have its being : in its 
bliss the universe tastes of bliss itself, Yajnavalkya expresses this thought 
in his conversation with GargI, in which he points out that at the bidding 
of the imperishable one heaven and earth, the minutes, hours, days and 
nights, half-months, and months, the seasons, and the years are kept asunder, 
and the streams run from the mountains east and west, men praise the generous 
givers, the gods favour the sacrificer, and the Fathers desire the offerings to 
the dead. By another Upanisad the comparison is made between the 


1 CU. vi. 3. 1. 

® AU. iii. 3. 

® i. 4. 3, 4. Cf. below, Appendix B, 

^ 189 C ff. « X. 121. 1. 

® i. 7. Possibly Brahman occurs also in BAU. 
iv. 4. 4, and in the term ‘ world of 
Brahman but not in AA. ii. 6. 1. 


’ hi. 4 ; iv. 12. 

® e.g. Garbe, Samkhya und Yoga, p. 2 ; Hop- 
kins, JAOS. xxii. 386, 387 ; Oldenberg, 
Hie Lehre def Upanishaden, pp. 208 f. 

* iii. 10, 11 ; vi. 7, 8. 

BAU. iii. 8. 9. 

KU. vi. 1. 



Chap. 28] 


The Absolute and the Universe 


527 


absolute and the A9vattha tree, which sends its shoots downwards. He is the 
dike which holds apart the worlds to keep them asunder,^ but the same 
metaphor, by another turn, is made to yield the idea that he is the bridge 
which secures continuity between the past and the future.® From another 
point of view ^ the absolute is the ruler, the Antaryamin of the universe, who 
is the controlling power in the earth, water, fire, atmosphere, wind, sky, sun, 
the heavenly regions, moon and stars, ether, darkness, and light, of all living 
creatures, and of the eight organs, the whole complex forming his body, being 
distinct from him and not knowing him, but yet being ruled by him. In this 
way again we come to the idea of the world soul, but the difference between 
this and the view of the Qveta9vatara Upanisad is that the internal ruler is 
still merely the absolute. 

But an important conclusion follows inevitably from the view that the 
inner power in all is the absolute : he causes the man whom he will lead on 
high from these worlds to do good works, and he causes the man whom he 
will lead downwards to do evil works The gods are also determined by him : 
the grass cannot be burned by Agni, nor swept away by Vayu, apart from the 
will of the Brahman. This idea is found repeatedly in the Upanisads, and is 
contrasted with the position of the spirit, which leaves the world after having 
known the soul and the true desires, and whose part then in all worlds is the 
life of freedom : he who departs without knowing the soul has in all worlds 
a life of constraint. The recognition of the freedom of the self is due to the 
recognition of the fact that the self is the real actor, and that, therefore, the 
constraint, to which it seems to be subject, is the constraint which it itself 
exercises on itself : as the Maitrayaniya Upanisad ^ has it, ‘ He fetters him- 
self by himself, as a bird by its nest.’ 

An interesting development of the doctrine occurs in the Jaiminiya 
Upanisad Brahmana ; ® the picture is drawn of a deity, described probably as 
‘ the good deity ’, and therefore indicating Agni-Rudra, who bars the passage 
to the sun or beyond to the soul, on the score of the evil he has done, declaring 
that only the doer of good deeds may pass. The soul replies, ‘ Thou didst see 
whatever I used to do ; thou wouldst not have made me do it (i.e. had it been 
evil) ; thou thyself art the doer.’ The answ^er satisfies the deity, who, there- 
fore, lets him pass. The dangerous implications of the doctrine are obvious 
and undeniable. 

If the will is thus empirically completely subject to determination, it is 
inevitable that, with the growing tendency to view the relation of the soul 
to the absolute from the point of view of theism, there should arise the position 

1 BAU. iv. 4, 22. . pp, 265-92. 

“ CU. viii. 4. 2. ® i. 5. %Ve must doubtless read akhald 

® BAU. iii. 7. 3 ; cf. ii. 5. with Caland, Over en uit ket Jaiminiya- 

* Kaus. iii. 8. brahmana^ p, 47, n. 69. The god must 

^ iii. 2 ; cf. the Samkhya and Stoic views ; be Agni, with whom Rudra is identified 

Dahlmann, Die Sdmkhya-Philosophie, in JB. iii. 261. 



528 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

that the absolute assumes the appearance of a personal providence. This is 
clearly the case in the Qveta^vatara Upanisad,^ where the Atman is the over- 
seer of actions, who apportions his qualities to each person, who executes 
justice, who restrains the evil, allots good fortune, and brings to maturity 
the actions of the soul. The Katha Upanisad ^ faintly adumbrates the same 
idea in the view that the wise self-existent one has assigned ends for all time, 
an idea which an interpolator has made more precise by adding, to the 
destruction of the metre, the word ydthdtathyatas, according to the quality of 
the works of the individual souls. 

In detail we learn very little indeed of the creation of the earth and the 
world : the old Vedic ideas coexist, according to which there are three worlds, 
earth, air, and heaven, but the primeval waters are regarded in the Aitareya 
Upanisad^ as lying above and below these regions. They are also said to be 
interwoven in the ether, by which space may be meant, as the latter is in 
the Brahman. From the practice of equating the regions with the worlds of 
the sacrifice, Bhuh, Bhuvah, and Svar, a fourth region is added as Mahas, in the 
Taittiriya Upanisad^ denoting the Brahman : the Mundaka ® adds three more, 
Janas, Tapas, and Satya are given as their names in the Mahanarayana : ® still 
later, seven lower worlds are invented to correspond with them. A different 
conception is, however, found in the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad,^ where on the 
basis of the old cosmic egg there is devised the view that the inhabited world 
is surrounded by the earth, and this again by the ocean, the world being 
32 days’ journey of the chariot of the sun in breadth, the earth 64, and 
the sea 128. Where the heaven and the earth as the two layers of the egg 
of the universe meet, there is the space of a razor edge or the wing of a fly, 
by which access is attained to the place of the offerers of the horse sacrifice, 
no doubt the back of heaven. A divergent view ® is found shortly after, in 
which there are ten layers over the universe, the worlds of the wind, the 
atmosphere, the Gandharvas, the sun, moon, stars, the gods, Indra, Prajapati, 
and Brahman. The only importance of these questions attaches to the case of 
the sun and the moon, which become associated with the doctrine of trans- 
migration : the sun, indeed, is actually apparently deemed nearer ® the earth 
than the moon. 


1 vi. 11, 12,4 ; v.5,&c. 

^ V. 13 ; Ica 8. 

^ i. 1. 2. The waters are not, of course, 
the region of fiery ether, suggested by 
Barua, Prebuddh, Ind. Philf p. 69. 

^ TU. i. 5. i. 2. 3. 

® TA. X. 27, 28 ; Kirfel, Kosmographie, 
p. 24. 

’ iii.3. ThereisnotraceintheXJpanisadsof 
the view of heaven as a stone building, 
in which the sun, moon, and stars are 
doors, as held by Hertel (Die Himmels- 
tore im Veda und im Avesta ) ; see 


below. Appendix C. 

® BAU. iii. 6 ; cf. Kaus. i. 3 (fire, wind, 
Varuna, Indra, Prajapati, and Brah- 
man) ; cf. BAU. iv. 3. 33 ; TU. ii. 8. 

* CU. iv. 15. 5 ; v. 10. 2. The planets are 
unknown before Maitr. vi. 16, and a 
Kathaka fragment of late character has 
in Grahesti Mantras the older sun, 
Venus, Jupiter, Mercury, Mars, Saturn, 
the moon, Efihu, Ketu (Caland, 
Brdhmana en Sutra-Aanwinsten^ pp. 8, 
29), which differs from the order later 
usual under Greek influence. 



Chap. 28] 


The Absolute and the Universe 


529 


In the later systems of India it is an essential principle that, in accordance 
with the doctrine of transmigration, there can never be an origin of the world 
in time, and, since, on the other hand, the origination of the world was an 
accepted doctrine, the difficulty was overcome by the theory of the periodic 
destruction and regeneration of the world. This doctrine, which has been 
wrongly seen in the Atharvaveda, is certainly not to be found in any older 
Upanisad, and must be regarded as a definite sign of late date. It is found in 
the 5 veta^vatara Upanisad ^ when the god, who puts forth many times one 
net after another in space, is compared to a spider. It is also made clear that 
it is the actions of the soul which result in the activity of the creator in appor- 
tioning to each person all their attributes. The later Upanisads ^ recognize 
frankly the destruction of the universe by periodic fire. The only idea in the 
older texts ^ which affords the slightest analogy is the mere mention of the 
fact that into the Brahman the individual must fall on death, an idea which 
has no logical connexion with the developed theory. The latter may have 
arisen as a mere desire to apply to all the worlds what applied to the individual : 
more probably perhaps it is due to the needs of the doctrine of transmigration. 


§ 7 . Mdyd and Pralcrti — Illusion and Nature 

(a) Illusion 

In the doctrine of Yajnavalkya we have seen the tendency of the Upani- 
sads to assert over again, and in still more emphatic terms, the unity of the 
world, which the poets of the Rigveda already foreshadowed, and to deduce 
from it the conclusion that the world is nothing that is real in the full sense 
of the word, since everything in it is not ultimately to be regarded as having 
a truth of its own. In what sense, then, can the empiric world be said to 
exist ? This Yajnavalkya leaves vague, but in his exposition to Maitreyi of 
the doctrine that after death there is no consciousness he uses terms to which 
later at least great weight was attached. A duality is necessary, he argued, 
for one to see another, smell another, hear another, and so forth, and in death 
no such duality is present ; the phrase,^ however, which he uses in this 
contention is ‘ where there is a duality as it were (iva) \ and it may be deduced, 
not unfairly, from the addition of the qualification that he was not prepared to 
admit as absolutely certain the existence of the duality. Later in the Upani- 
sad ^ we have similar wording, ‘when there seems to be another’, the same 


1 vi. 3, 4 ; V. 3 ; iv. 11 (adapting VS. xxxii. 
8). Cf. Maitr. vi. 17 ; Atharva^iras 6. 

* Atharvagikha 1 ; Nrsinhap, ii. 1. 

® CU. i. 9. 1 ; TU. iii. 1 ; Mund. i. 1. 7 ; 
ii. 1. 1 ; Hand. 6 ; Culika 17 f. The 
theory that AV. x. 8. 39, 40 refers 
to this is a mere speculation of no 
plausibility of Jacobi (GGA. 1895, 
p. 210), unfortunately adopted by 
Garbe, Sdmkhya und Yoga, p. 1C. 

14 [h-o.s. 32] 


The scheme, in fact, is a necessary 
accommodation to the fact of trans- 
migration of the recognized doctrine 
of a beginning of the world ; cf. 
Speyer, Indische Theosoyhie, pp. 132 ff. 

^ ii. 4. 14. 

® iv. 3. 31. Oldenberg {Die Lehre der Vpani- 
shaden, p. 344) unduly minimizes the 
essence of iva. 



530 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

particle being used. Here again we cannot simply ignore the qualification ; 
to do so is as one-sided as to ascribe to it the value of a definite assertion 
of the unreality or illusory character of the universe. What we have is the 
germ of the illusion theory. 

A further passage which has been adduced in this connexion is the declara- 
tion of the Chandogya Upanisad ^ regarding the modifications of the three 
fundamental constituents of being, fire, water, food ; just as all that is made 
of clay, copper, or iron, is only a modification, a verbal expression {vdcdram- 
hhana), a mere name, the reality being clay, copper, or iron, so all things can 
be reduced to the three primary forms of reality. Further, all reality, it is 
clearly indicated, is reducible to reality only, all things being mere modifica- 
tions, &c. In Deussen’s view ^ we have here the first open assertion of the 
unreality of the universe, a doctrine which shortly afterwards was to be 
realized by Parmenides in the famous declaration : 

r<5 irarr ovojx icrrac 
00 " era ^pOTol KaridevTo TreTTOLOores elvai 
y[yv€(TdaL re Kal oWvadai^ 

and later by Spinoza in his doctrine of modes of the one substance, God. The 
alternative view ^ is to regard the whole as frankly realistic ; the name is not 
a mere name in the sense of disguising a reality ; on the contrary it serves to 
mark out a reality, just as the phrase ndma-rupa can be used to designate a 
concrete individual made up of intellectual and other faculties and matter. 
In this case we have a doctrine frankly pantheistic, but not of illusion. The 
difficulty of deciding is increased by the uncertainty of the correct rendering 
of the text, which Deussen interprets as directly asserting that ‘ change is a 
mere matter of words, a simple name % treating the words vdearambhanam 
vikdro ndmadheyam as a distinct sentence, instead — as is possible — of taking 
it as a predicate description, ‘a matter of words, a change, a simple name’, 
and it would be unwise to draw any far-reaching conclusion from the passage. 

We find also in the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad ^ in a verse which occurs 
with slight variation in the Katha,^ a distinct assertion that there is no 
diversity and that a failure to realize this fact is the source of repeated death. 
The I^a emphatically demands that the universe be merged in God, and, 
moreover, denies becoming and passing away, thus condemning the doctrine 
of the reality of change ; this at least is Deussen’s interpretation,® though 
it is open to argue that the real sense is merely that the absolute stands above 
becoming and passing away, which it transcends. In the late Maitrayaniya 
Upanisad we find the comparison of the absolute with the spark which, made 

1 vi. 1. 3 ff. ^ iv. 4. 19. 

^ Sechzig Upanishad^s^f p. 156. ® iv. 10 f. 

® S, Schayer, Mahdydnistische ErUsungs- * 1, 12-14 ; Sechzig Upanishad’^s^, p. 527 ; 
lehre, p. 14. The sense of vaedram- cf. Mandukya Karika, iii. 25. 
hhana (of dubious formation) is uncer- ’ vi. 24 ; Karika, iv. 47-52. 
tain ; cf. Oldenberg, p. 843. 



531 


Chap. 28] Maya and Prakrti — Illusion and Nature 

to revolve, creates apparently a fiery circle, an idea which is taken up and 
expanded by Gaudapada in the Mandukya Karika, and which undoubtedly 
is consistent with the conception of the illusory nature of empirical reality. 
In other cases adduced by Deussen ^ there is no need to suspect any idea of 
the world as unreal, the frequent assertion,^ that with the knowledge of the 
self all is known, does not exclude the reality of what is derived from the 
self ; the reality of the absolute may be contrasted ^ with empirical reality, 
which is styled real by man, without making the latter an illusion ; when the 
Aitareya ^ asserts that the universe is founded in consciousness and guided by 
it, it assumes its reality, not its merely apparent existence, and, if the elements 
of being rest on the consciousness and it on the Prana, ^ we need not suspect 
any lack of reality in them. 

Far more importance attaches to a late Upanisad.® The precise character 
of the nature of the external world is summed up finally in the doctrine of the 
Qveta§vatara Upanisad,^ which sees in the world other than the absolute — 
which it conceives in a theistic way — an.illnsion, Maya, a term thus first 
introduced into the philosophy of the Upanisads, to become, through the 
adoption of this theory of the universe by Gaudapada and fankara, the 
basis of the orthodox Vedanta system. It would, however, it is clear, be 
a mistake to regard the new term as being a mere individual innovation of the 
^veta 9 vatara school without previous preparation in the literary tradition. 
The idea of the concealment of the divine nature by illusion is seen in the 
Atharvaveda,^ where it is said that the flower of the water, who is Hirariya- 
garbha, the personal Brahman, in whom are fixed gods and men as spokes in 
a nave, is concealed by illusion, and the illusions of Indra in his many shapes 
are mentioned in the Rigveda.® It may, therefore, be assumed that the term 
had obtained considerable favour in philosophic circles,^® before it appears in 
the Upanisad as a definite doctrine of importance. Still more important is the 
fact that the term was by no means ill adapted to express the nature of the 
relation of the empirical world to the real absolute, as it was conceived by 
Yajnavalkya. It is, of course, impossible to say that the actual term and its 
precise connotation would have approved themselves to that sage, or to tKose 
who evolved the doctrines which passed current under his name : on the other 
hand, the doctrine is a legitimate and natural development from the principles 
which he enunciated. They are clearly not to be derived in any reasonable 
way from a system, which was pantheistic or cosmogonic, and in which, 
therefore, the assumption that the world was illusory would have been 
ridiculous. A pantheism and still more a cosmogonism are under the danger 
of falling to the level of materialism, but not of evoking an illusionism. 

1 Phil, of Up., pp. 234 ff. passage, but his doubt seems hyper- 

® BAU. ii. 4, 5, 7—9 ; CU. vi. 1. 2 ; Mund. critical. 

i. 1. 3. ’ iv. 10. 8 X. 8. 34. 

3 TU. ii. 6, * iii. 3. ® Kaus. iii. 8. » vi.47. 18; BAU. ii. 5. 19; xi. 1. 6. 10, 

8 Oldenberg (Die Fhilosophie der Vpani- Contra, Hopkins, JAOS. xxii. 385, 380. 

shaden, p. 280) denies the force of this Cf. Spey ex, IndischeTheosophie, pp. 123. 

14* 



532 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

A very different suggestion as to the development of ideas is put forward by 
Schayer.^ On this theory the Maya doctrine comes in as the expression of 
a conception wholly alien to the normal Brahmanical idea of the regular 
working of the world, in which nature and the ritual stand in constant paral- 
lelism. The Brahman signifies the regular and orderly procedure of the 
universe ; Maya, on the other hand, introduces the conception of the unregu- 
lated, self-determined, intervention of a god ; Indra’s Maya in the Rigveda ^ 
is the expression of his might, revealed in his great deeds. When, naturally, 
opposition came into being directed against the Brahmanical conception of 
the tJbermensch whose knowledge makes him ruler of the universe, we find 
the idea of the necessity of divine intervention as in the Katha Upanisad,® 
and the condemnation by the 19a ^ of knowledge as even more unsatisfactory 
than ignorance, and finally in the 5veta9vatara ^ the natural step is taken of 
ascribing to god the epithet mdydvin. The suggestion is ingenious but uncon- 
vincing. The Qvetaevatara certainly does not mean that god is a real creator 
and that matter is his real creation ; the sense of delusion or illusion ® is para- 
mount. 

(b) Natube 

While, however, one side of the teaching of the Upanisads develops in 
this brilliant manner, and in the hands of Gaudapada and Qankara emerges as 
the chef d' oeuvre of the Indian philosophical intellect, another and important 
scheme of philosophy was growing up, and was destined to exhibit itself, 
at a period not far distant from the close of the great Upanisads, in a living and 
effective form. The existence of this system as the definite Saihkhya of the 
classical period is not attested until comparatively late : the oldest text-book, 
the Samkhya Karika, may be assigned to about the fourth century a. d.,’ 
and for the earlier form of the system we are reduced to conjectures built 
on that text, the history of the parallel system of Yoga, and the indications 
of the epic, which knows well the Saihkhya and Yoga systems, but which in 
regard to its date is so uncertain, that it does not necessarily afford us any 
infosmation older than that contained in, and to be inferred from, the 


1 Mahaydnisiische ErlOsungslehre, pp. 22 ff. 

* X. 54. 2 ; vi. 47. 18. In iv. 16. 9 Schayer 
treats dbrahmd as ‘ dem brahman 
feindliche Dasyu ’, which is impossible. 

® ii. 23. 

« 9. 

® iv. 10. 

® Schayer’s effort (ef. also pp. 42 f.) to 
establish the doctrine that Maya is a 
free creation, not an illusion, is as 
ingenious as it is unconvincing. There 
is no evidence that the idea of illusion 
was unknown to India in connexion 
with a juggler’s work (contrast the 
stories given ibid, pp. 53), and the 


synonyms of Maya include such as 
Gandharvanagara. The idea of Maya 
is akin to the product of the juggler in 
the Ratnavali who conjures up the 
appearance of a fire, into which the 
king rushes, whereas none exists. Cf. 
Asanga’s account in the Sutralam- 
kara, as given by Schayer himself (ZII. 

ii. 103-5), which is perfectly clear as to 
the unreality of Maya. 

’ A later date is usually given (cf. Garbe, 
Samkhya und Yoga, p. 7), but the earlier 
date is now the most probable ; see 
Winternitz, Gesch, d, ind. Lit, ii. 256 ; 

iii. 452 f. 



Ctiap. 28] Maya and PraTcrti — Illusion and Nature 


533 


Samkhya Karika itself. Very briefly put,^ the classical Samkhya system 
discards entirely the idea of an absolute : it reduces the universe to a multi- 
tude of individual subjects, which have nothing true about them save their 
subjectivity, a subjectivity which has no creative power and is not properly 
realized at all by having an objective content. On the contrary, it is only by 
error in any way connected with the existing world, through its fancied con- 
nexion with Prakrti, ‘ nature Through the development of Prakrti there 
arises the principle called the great one or intellect, Mahan or Buddhi : the 
Prakrti is, therefore, to be regarded as purely unconscious, a conception 
vaguely analogous to the Aristotelian Hyle, and connected, directly as it 
would seem, with the older views of the Rigveda and the Brahmanas as to the 
primitive condition of the universe as a chaos. The development of con- 
sciousness must therefore, it would appear, be cosmic, and the Mahan or 
Buddhi would thus correspond to the Hiranyagarbha of the later Upanisads 
and the Vedanta, the spirit which, in the earlier view, appeared on the 
waters after the creation of the waters by Prajapati or the Brahman. But at 
the same time the Buddhi is the first element of the subtle body, the Linga, 
which is the essence of the individual spirit, and which passes through trans- 
migration. The Buddhi serves as the basis for the development of the prin- 
ciple of Individualism, Ahamkara, from which are derived on the one hand the 
mind and the ten organs — or rather potentialities or faculties — of sense, five 
of perception, and five of action, and on the other hand the subtle elements, 
from which in their turn come the gross elements, though an epic variant gives 
in lieu the elements and the objects of sense, sound, &c.^ The Linga, which is 
perhaps most appropriately called the ‘psychic apparatus’, contains in itself 
all the elements down to the subtle elements, and even of the gross elements it 
has the fine parts,^ and it is through it that the individual subject experiences 
— or rather seems to experience — ^the facts of this world. The experience is 
painful and unhappy, even though alleviated by the joys of earth, and the 
real aim of life is to be rid of the connexion with nature. But that conne^cion 
does not really exist : it is only thought to exist by an error and, when this 
error of ignorance is removed, then the connexion is seen not to exist and ceases 
to exist, the subject being freed from any connexion with an object, and on the 
other hand, the Prakrti is freed from any pain or trouble, since being absolutely 
unconscious in the absence of subject there is no possibility of its suffering or 
enjoying anything. Strictly speaking, therefore, the spirit is never troubled 
1 In the main I agree with Deussen (Gesch, ® Deussen, Gesch, der Phil. I. iii, 497. This 
der Phil. I. iii) when he departs from is the only possible or at least natural 

the views of Garbe {Sdmkhya-Philoso- sense of Samkhya Karika 38-41, 

phie and Samkhya und Yoga). The though this fact is often ignored, and 

account of Deussen in the Phil, of Up. normally the fine parts are treated as 

is slightly inaccurate. Cf. my Samkhya if the subtle elements included them. 

System (1918, 2nded. 1924). Berndl’s Maitr. vi. 10 may be thus explained 

reconstruction {tlber das Samkhya) is instead of being amended. For an 

clearly unhistorical ; see below. attempt to regard suksma as tanmdtra, 

^ Cf. O. Strauss, VOJ. xxvii. 257 ff. see Strauss, p, 262. 



534 The Philosophy of the Veda [Partv 

or suffers anything or enjoys anything : it merely illumines natures which 
accordingly suffers, but is set free by the cessation of illumination. But the 
difference of the result in the two cases is enormous : the subject by ceasing 
to have an object is emancipated for all time, the Prakrti in that one case is 
delivered, but that is a matter of indifference since the infinite number of 
other souls means that Prakrti is ever being unrolled for the gaze of the 
subject and ever is suffering. 

The whole theory is one mass of difficult par^-doxes, despite its seeming 
elegance and simplicity of structure. The main basis of the conception, that 
there is suffering through the connexion of the soul with nature, is contra- 
dicted by the fact that there is reaUy no connexion : the suffering is pro- 
duced by a connexion which does not exist, and is only imagined to exist, but 
an imagined connexion is no ground for results which a real connexion alone 
could produce. The relation of the one Prakrti with the psychical apparatuses 
which are not conscious except under the illumination of the subject is never 
clearly explained, or perhaps understood.^ At best we may endeavour to 
conceive the position that the connexion — ^which, however, as we have 
seen, is not really existent — of the spirit with Prakrti, as a single undifferen- 
tiated unit, produces a primal consciousness (Buddhi), which develops under 
the influence of the individuation (Ahamkara) of the spirit an individual form 
or psychic apparatus, on which is based the life of the individual. In that case 
the conception of a cosmic development of individuation and the other things 
would be in the main a mistaken complement of the system which is not 
essential to it. But there is the grave objection to this theory that already in 
the Samkhya Karika the paternal and maternal portions of the gross elements 
are supposed by the author to fall back into and be picked up out of Prakrti 
by the psychic apparatus in the case of death and rebirth, and not as would 
be logical and proper, if the development of Prakrti were individual from 
the point of Buddhi onwards, recalled into and evolved from the subtle 
elements, while the Prabhutas, which represent the material world, are made 
to stand over against the selves as an independent real world. 

It is, however, unnecessary to consider further the contradictions of the 
Samkhya, and it is only requisite to note that in the nature of Prakrti there 
is supposed to be contained a triad of constituent factors, Gunas, literally 
‘ threads ’ rather than ‘ determinant qualities which in the passive condition 
of Prakrti are in a quiescent state of equilibrium, but which in the process of 
evolution develop differently in the several psychic apparatuses, producing, 
therefore, the very varied characters of men and of life. These factors are 
Sattva, the light, the intellectual principle, Rajas, the active and emotional 
principle, and Tamas, the dark and gloomy principle. The terms are wholly 
indefinite and unphilosophical, and the use made of them in practice is mainly 

^ Cf. Oltramare, Vhistoire des idies thioso- den InderUy pp. 30 f.) leaves the 

phiqueSy i. 261 ff. Jacobi’s account obscurity unaffected. 

(Die Entwicklung der Gottesidee bei 



Chap. 28] 


Mdyd and Prakrti — Illusion and Nature 


535 


psychical, whereas, as constituents of Prakrti, they ought to have received 
some different cosmic sense, such as that of conditional being, energy, and 
inertia, suggested by Hopkins.^ Their importance in the system, however, 
cannot be underestimated, and it is significant that, while Qahkara rejects 
definitely the validity of these principles, they are accepted by the later school 
of Vedanta and interwoven with the Vedanta philosophy.^ 


(c) The Origin of the Samkhya and Buddhism 

The question inevitably arises in what manner these views are to be con- 
nected with those of the Upanisads,® and the further problem must be men- 
tioned of the origin of Buddhism, which has been traced to the Samkhya. The 
Buddhist system differs in one essential from the Samkhya : it abolishes, as 
does that system, the principle of an absolute, with which the individual souls 
are identified, and it goes further than that system in seeking to deny the 
existence of soul. The latter aberration need not, however, be taken very 
seriously : the Buddhists, being determined believers in transmigration, had 
to produce an entity ^ which would transmigrate ; the entity provided does 
not differ, in any very essential way, from the ordinary view in India of a 
transmigrating soul, and certainly is philosophically inferior to the ordinary 
conception, unsatisfactory as that in itself is. 

No Upanisad attains the point of view of the Sarhkhya system, and it is 
therefore only possible to indicate the mode in which the conception of the 
absolute tended to fade away and to leave the individual spirits confronted 
with nature. The essential feature of the Samkhya is the evolutionary series, 
and the name Samkhya, ‘ examination ’, ‘ calculation or ‘ description by 
enumeration of constituents rather than a mere counting, suggests that 
the philosophy owed its importance to its insistence on the principle of careful 
examination of the elements of the process of development from the absolute. 
Now in the Upanisads the first case in which the order of evolution from the 
absolute is stated with precision — even then incomplete — is in the Katha 
Upanisad,® where we find that in the carrying out of meditation, Yoga, in 
order to reach the absolute, the objects are merged in the senses, the senses in 
the mind, the mind in the intellect, Buddhi, the intellect in the great self, 


^ Great Epic of India, p. 113, n. 1. See also 
Garbe, Sdmkhya-Philosophie^, pp. 274 ff. 

2 E.g. in the Vedantasara, as pointed out 
by Col. Jacobs in his edition, and by 
Deussen in his translation {Gesch. der 
Phil. I. iii) I Keith, Samkhya System, 
chap. viii. 

® Cf. Oldenberg, Die Lehre der Upanishaden, 
pp. 202 fe.; GN. 1917, pp. 218 ff. ; 
Keith, Buddhist Philosophy, chap. vii. 

* Walleser, Die philosophisehe Grundlage 
des alter en Buddhismus, pp, 77 ff. ; 
Keith, Buddhist Philosophy, chap. ix. 


® Accepted by Oldenberg, Die Lehre der 
Upanishaden, p. 351, n. 129. 

® iii. 10-13 ; vi. 7-11. The alternative view 
that the Samkhya is of independent 
origin, based on an independent analysis 
of consciousness, and that the Katha 
represents a compromise may be men- 
tioned (cf. Oltramare, Uhistoire des id4es 
tMosophiques, i. 221 ff., for a critique 
of Garbe’s view on this point). But 
it IS not possible to ignore the obvious 
fact that the Purusa of the Samkhya 
is merely the Atman made many. 



536 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

which is also then merged in the undiscriminated, Avyakta, described 
as the calm self, and that again in the spirit, Purusa, which is the absolute. 
The similitude of these views to the series of development of the Saihkhya is 
obvious : the separation of the Mahan Atma, the great self, and Buddhi is a 
distinction which it is difficult to appreciate in the Katha and would naturally 
disappear on further reflection, with the abandonment of a cosmic Atman, 
while the interposition of the undiscriminated, which corresponds to the 
position of the old primitive material or waters of the Brahmanas, between the 
spirit and the intellect, corresponds also precisely to the position of Prakrti in 
the Samkhya system, except for the fact that the Katha is still monistic, and 
still regards the spirit as an absolute, whence nature is derived, the individual 
spirit being identified more or less clearly with the highest spirit. But it must 
have been an obvious, if no less a very important, step when it was decided 
by some thinker that there was no necessity to imagine the unity of all the 
spirits in one. Ex hypothesi the spirits were all identical with the one spirit, 
and, therefore, each must have the same creative power to produce the 
undiscriminated as the supreme spirit. To what end then to feign a supreme 
spirit ? Moreover, from another point of view the postulating of a supreme 
spirit would appear unsound : the enormous variety of individual experience 
of life, the plain facts of every-day existence, show that there is not one 
spirit merely but many.^ The theory of unity of all spirits is difficult and con- 
fusing, and the obvious refuge from these difficulties is to admit that each 
spirit is a separate entity. The relation of the spirits and Prakrti would follow 
at once, when this was accepted : the doctrine of Ya|navalkya was clear that 
the self was merely the knowing subject : clearly, therefore, as the self was 
the subject only, Prakrti cannot be produced from the spirit in any material 
sense : it is the independent object merely of spirit.^ 

It is important to note the real similarity between the self in the view of 
the Yajhavalkya of the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad and that of the Samkhya ; 
both are absolutely without quality or activity, completely inactive, the 
capacity of knowing without content ; both, we may fairly say, represent 
bare abstractions which could never as such be real. If the self of Yaj havalkya 
is wholly apart from empirical existence and knowledge, the same thing really 
applies to the spirit of the Saihkhya, for it is not really in contact with matter. 
In the Buddhism of the Saiwastivadins ^ we find the same view of Vij ilana, 
which remains wholly apart from real connexion with the object, being, like it, 
merely a momentary flashing wholly transitory and uncaused. Naturally in 
all three cases some effort must be made to explain the connexion of this 

1 Cf. Samkhya Karika 18. Oldenberg {op. cit., p. 231) suggests. 

® The Atman in KU.iii. 3 f. is the lord of the For its frequent omission in the epic, 

chariot, who is essentially a mere Great Epic oj India, p.lZZ. 

spectator, for intellect is the driver, ® Cf. Stcherbatsky, The Central Co? 2 Ception 
mind the reins, and the senses the of Buddhism, pp.6Bt; Garhe,S dm khy a- 

horses. The absence of the Ahamkara Philosophic^, pp. 358 ff. 

in KU. can hardly be accidental as 



Chap. 28] 


537 


The Origin of the Sdmhhya 


subjectivity and the object which makes its potentiality concrete knowledge, 
and equally naturally at this point in all three systems we have a lacuna, 
which is filled up by unintelligible assertions, the Buddhists resorting to a 
relation of Sarfipya, ‘ co-ordination ’ or ‘ co-relation which is found also 
in the Yogabhasya ^ of Vyasa as the mode of bridging over the gulf between 
knower and knowledge. 

If we seek to find in the older Upanisads a more direct connexion with the 
doctrines of the Samkhya than the conception of the self in Yaj havalkya, 
then the most obvious parallel, in addition to the scheme of evolution in the 
Katha, is the passage in the Kausitaki Upanisad ^ in which a list of ten senses 
is opposed to a corresponding number of objects, and the presence of intellect, 
Praj na, is said to be essential for every kind of sense-knowledge, including the 
activity of mind in respect of thought and desire. We have here the prototype 
of the curious feature in the Samkhya of the senses and mind as alike only 
potential until reflected in some manner in Purusa. The more common idea 
of the senses being powerless without mind lies doubtless at the back of this 
more advanced conception, a fact which illustrates the remarkable dependence 
of the Samkhya on older ideas. 

A certain degree of parallelism to the Katha evolution series is present in 
doctrine of the mode in which on death according to the Chandogya Upanisad 
speech (the eye, the ear, and the other organs are presumably here typified 
by speech) enters the mind, the mind the breath, the breath the brilliance of 
fire (the other two elements of the Chandogya, water and earth, may be 
included), and that the supreme deity. In deep sleep, again, we have a series 
in the Pra^na Upanisad ^ where we may understand that the five gross, the 
five subtle, elements, the organs of sense, all enter the mind, it the intellect, it 
individuation,^ it thought, it brilliance, it breath, and it the self, but this latter 
passage is too vague to be of much importance save as showing how prevalent 
were these efforts to find the order of evolution. 

In the Mundaka Upanisad ^ we find an expression of the order of develop- 
ment commencing from the absolute, as all-knowing, the second element being 
food, an expression perhaps for the undiscriminated, the coming breath, which 
may correspond with Hiranyagarbha, mind, truth, the -worlds, and actions. 
The more precise similarity of the doctrine of the Mundaka^’ to that of the 
Katha is maintained by Hertel,^ who has endeavoured to reconstruct an 
original text of this Upanisad by conjecture from that which, as he holds, 
based on a single manuscript which was far from correct, has been preserved 


M. 4 ; ii. 23. 

2 iii. 5 tt. ' See below, § 8. 

^ iv, 7. 

* According to Oldenberg {Die Lehre der 
Vpayiishaderii p. 226, n. 1) it means 
‘ “ das Ichmaclien,” d. h. das Ichsagen 
und Betatigen der Ichheit,’ rather than 
‘ der Ichmacher The genesis of this 


entity may be connected with the 
speculations of the Upanisads on deep 
sleep, in which individuality disappears; 
Heimann, Die Ticjschlajspekulation der 
alien XJpanisaden (1922), pp. 13 f. 

® i. 1.8, 9 ; ii. 1.2, 3. 


vi. 10. 

’ Mundaka-Vpanimd (1924). 



538 The Philosophy of the Veda [Partv 

to us by Qankara. Reconstructions of this kind seldom permit of any satis- 
factory result to others than their author, and there is always the fundamental 
difficulty, apart from minor points, whether the incoherence of thought which 
gives rise to the reconstruction is not, as most probably in the case of the 
Bhagavadgita, due to the author, and not the result of interpolation. If, 
however, we omit the whole of ii. 2, and hi. 1. 4-10 and 2. 3 and 9, we obtain 
the doctrine that, as in the Skambha hymn of the Atharvaveda,^ which affords 
part of the material of the Upanisad, the highest thing in the world is regarded 
as personal, from which there emanates the Brahman and whatever else 
exists. On this view the ultimate fate of the soul on its return is not absorp- 
tion in the Brahman but union with Purusa, the world of Brahman serving 
merely as the place of those who fully perform the sacrificial ritual in the mode 
approved by the Mundaka. The other portions, however, of the text, which 
cannot with any assurance be ascribed to working over, definitely identify 
the highest principle with the Brahman, adopting the regular identification 
of the Brahman and the Atman, and treating the final result to be aimed at as 
the recognition of the identity of the Brahman and the Atman. Moreover, 
even in the verses which are spared by Hertel, we find hints contradicting his 
theory of a simple doctrine ; thus in i. 1. 7 all is stated to arise from the 
imperishable (aksara), while in ii. 1. 2 we find the personal highest being 
declared to be above the imperishable, and in ii. 1. 10 the Brahman and 
Purusa are directly identified, unless we hold with Hertel that there is a lacuna 
in the text for which we have no other ground. It is significant also that the 
interpolator has to be credited with iii. 2. 3, which adopts the Katha^ doctrine 
of salvation by the favour of the lord, so that we have to assume that, on the 
one hand, he altered the personal aspect of the Upanisad by insisting on the 
primacy of the impersonal Brahman, while, on the other, he deliberately added 
one of the most personal touches in the shape of the doctrine of grace. This 
is plainly incredible, and we may safely assume that, while the author worked 
on an older idea of a personal prius as in the Atharvaveda, and accepted the 
doctrine of grace from the Katha, he himself adopted the Brahman standpoint.^ 
The resemblance of the Maitrayaniya Upanisad ^ to the Samkhya is of a 


1 X. 7. 

- ii. 23. 

^ To certain of Hertel’s metrical views the 
strongest exception must be taken. To 
carry out his rule that the first syllable 
of a dissyllabic, and the second of a 
trisyllabic, middle part of the Tristubh 
is short he has to argue for osadhyah, 
puTdstddf parammii (sdmyam) as two 
shorts, snriasya, kavayo ydntif and 
agr^hymn ; he turns -dni and -esu 
into single final syllables, and postulates 
a great number of quite impossible 
elisions of short vowels. These, added 


to text alterations, enable him to 
reform the metre, but they do not 
justify his severe censure of Deussen for 
his perfectly just strictures on the 
metre of the text as we have it. Every 
metrical irregularity could thus be 
removed from any text, and Hertel’s 
procedure is specially inconsistent, 
since he objects to alteration of 
Prakritic irregularities in grammar, 
which might equally well be changed, 
if the Upanisad is to be rewritten. But 
metre may be excused in a philosopher. 

« Cf, E. A. Welden, AJP. xxxv. 32 ff. 



Cliap. 28] 


539 


The Origin of the Sdmhhya 


different character from that of the Katha ; it is due in all likelihood to direct 
Samkhya influence at a much later date. In this Upanisad we find an answer 
attempted to the question why and how the absolute self enters the world and 
appears in individual form. Prajapati, existing alone, had no joy ; therefore 
he created offspring as inanimate, and to enjoy them he enters with the breaths 
into them, thus animating them, and then by means of the organs of sense and 
action and the mind he has joy of them. But the absolute self, Prajapati, 
remains wholly unaffected, though an apparent actor ; action actually belongs 
to the Bhutatman, or elemental soul, which overcome by the fruits of action 
passes to a good or evil birth, and is merged in existence, while the true self 
remains unaffected like the drop of water on a lotus leaf. The elemental soul is 
overcome by the qualities or factors of nature, Prakrti, and thus conceives the 
erroneous impression of individuality ; thinking ‘ This is I ’ and ‘ That is 
mine ’ he binds himself as a bird with a snare But the pure self is not without 
responsibility for this evil state, for a definite though obscure statement 
attributes it to the fact that the elemental self is overpowered by the inner 
Purusa.^ The composite character of the text reveals itself in the further con- 
ception of the self as the enjoyer, while the elemental soul is made out to be 
the body, which it enjoys.^ We find also the three factors named and described 
at length, essentially as psychic, and Prajapati as affected by Sattva, goodness, 
as a factor is equated with Visnu, as affected by Raj as^ activity, with Brahman, 
and as affected with Tamas, dullness, with Rudra. It is characteristic that 
the Upanisad shows equally knowledge of the development of Yoga doctrine, 
though its scheme of stages of exercises has six in lieu of the classical eight.^ 
Further, it is markedly pessimistic, the evils of empirical existence being set out 
with an elaboration of comparison and detail such as is only to be paralleled 
in the Buddhist texts, which it doubtless knew in some early form. It shows an 
advanced psychology, for it recognizes the function of individuation, though 
not as in the Samkhya in its classical form, as placed between intellect and 
mind and as the source of the latter, but as following on mind and intellect, 
without any assertion of derivation, and it conceives of the existence of the 
subtle body, or Linga, though it is not clear whether it actually asserts that 
the Linga possesses not merely the fine elements but also the gross elements as 
part of its composition.® Moreover, the question is actually posed whether 
it is merely the factors that are really subject to bondage, or the self; 
the classical Samkhya asserts definitely, though not always consistently, that 
the self is not really bound, but this is not the view accepted by the Upanisad, 
which insists on the bondage of the self, exhibited in the actions of intellect, 
mind, and individuation, and promises release when the sense organs, mind, 
and intellect have ceased to function.® 


1 ii. 3£f. ; iii. 1 f. ^ iiir 3. 

* YU 10. * vi. 18. 

® Cf. above, p. 53S, n. 3. Deussen (Sechzig 
Vpanishad^s^, p. 337, n. 2) amends; 
Oldenberg (op, cit,, p. 355) prefers to 


see in Vi^csa in Maitr. vi. 10 a desig- 
nation of the subtle elements, not as in 
the epic (Strauss, VOJ. xxvii. 205), 
where it applies to the effects of the 
gross elements. ® vi.30. 



540 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

For the doctrine of the Gunas or factors there is obvious a parallel in the 
^veta9vatara Upanisad,^ which has on the ground of its content often been 
needlessly supposed to postdate the Samkhya system, a view which cannot 
be sup|>orted on any cogent ground.^ In it, we are told, that one she-goat, 
red, white, and black in hue, produces many young like herself : one he-goat 
leaps on her in love, the other abandons her, after associating with her. The 
idea of the relation of nature to the many spirits seems obviously expressed in 
this metaphor. But it is clear that the red, white, and black colours carry 
us beyond doubt to the Chandogya XJpanisad,® where everything in the 
universe is declared to be connected with the three elements, the red of fire, 
the white of water, and the black of food, probably an allusion to earth, this 
being the order of creation when the absolute first produced heat, thence water, 
then earth, in the shape of food. It is not necessary to suppose that in the 
^vetS^vatara there is anything more meant than the three elements : the 
transformation of these to psychic forces, which is prominent in the Samkhya, 
though the other conception is implied in the ascription of the three to 
Prakrti, would then be a later development, which in the Upanisads occurs 
first in the Maitrayaniya.^ 

It is clear, therefore, that the seeds of the Samkhya lie in the philosophy 
of the Upanisads : the conception of the deliverance from the round of 
rebirth and misery is wholly absurd on the Samkhya theory of the universe, 
which denies any real connexion of spirit and nature,® and, therefore, makes 
any suffering impossible, since without connexion there is no illumination, 
and without illumination of nature by spirit no suffering of any kind. In the 
doctrine of Maya there is an illusion which is perfectly real though an illusion, 
and knowledge can dispel it and its products. But the ignorance which must 
be dispelled in the Samkhya is the belief in a connexion which does not exist, 
and the Samkhya philosophy never suggests that the misery of the universe is 
due to the belief : it is only possible because of the connexion : ignorance 
does not produce the connexion : therefore logically there is no misery. The 
mere fact of this illogicality alone and the marked pessimism of the system 
would testify to its derivative character. 

A somewhat divergent view of the development of the Samkhya is 
suggested by Dahlmann, who in several works ® has insisted on the view that 

^ iv. 5. ^ iii. 5 ; v. 2. 

® Hopkins (JAOS‘. xxii. 380-7) insists that ® This leads Speyer (Indische Theosophie, p. 
sdmkhyayogddhigamyam in vi. 13 must 113) to the conjecture that an originally 

refer to the system ofthe epic Samkhya- materialistic system has been trans- 

Yoga, but this is not in the least proved ; formed in an external method idealis- 

see Deussen, Gesch. der Phil, I, iii. 15, tically. But this theory rests on no 

Moreover it is difficult to reconcile solid basis and ignores the essential link 

Hopkins’ view with his date of the 4th of connexion with the Upanisads. So 

cent. {ibid. p. 336) for this Upanisad. with Jacobi, JPesisc/tri/i Kw/in, pp. 37 If., 

Kapila in v, 2 is clearly mythical (cf. and Berndl, Vhet das Sdmkhya, For 

iv. 12), not the teacher. a later view of Jacobi, see below. 

® vi. 4. Das Mahdbhdrataals Epos undRechtsbuch; 



CShap. 28] 


541 


The Origin of the Samhhya 

the epic reveals to us the oldest stage of the Samkhya philosophy and not 
as maintained by Hopkins,^ and in some degree ^ Deussen among others, an 
eclectic philosophical view. Dahlmann’s position is obscured by its connexion 
with his ingenious but unsuccessful effort to prove that the epic is in itself a 
unity consciously produced at a period before Panini, a thesis which rests on 
absolutely no cogent or even plausible evidence.® Nor have we any tolerable 
ground for the view that the system of Samkhya as first evolved under that 
name was other than atheistic, in the sense not merely of denying an I^vara 
which in a degree Dahlmann would admit, but also of denying an absolute. 
Further, it is most natural to hold that the Samkhya- Yoga of the epic is a 
definite theistic modification of the Samkhya, which is more really theistic 
and absolutist than the later Yoga, in which as a system attention is directed 
towards the Yoga practices and not so largely to the theistic aspect.^ But 
the rejection of Dahlmann’s theories in these respects does not deprive of 
value his theory of the development of Indian philosophy. He argues that the 
first stage must be looked for in a view which is in close touch with the expres- 
sions of the Brahmanas as to the process of creation, in which there is more or 
less consciously assumed to be some material beyond the actual creator, and he 
points out that in the early speculations of the Upanisads we learn of the 
Atman on the one hand, but also of what is not the Atman, which is full of 
misery. In more philosophic form this appears as the doctrine of the Brahman, 
beside which stands Prakrti, into which is emptied the whole of the ordinary 
world of thought and action, while the Brahman remains outside all contact 
with thought, affording the end, Nirvana, which is to be attained by the 
extinguishing of all kinds of feeling, by the negation of everything empirical. 
From this dualistic basis he deduces on the one hand the Samkhya and on 
the other the Vedanta of the illusionist school. The former view is arrived at 
by a determined effort to make logical the process of development in final 
release : it became intolerable to contemplate that there was really only one 
Atman, which, by connexion in some unexplained way with Prakrti, produced 
the innumerable separate spirits through the action of Buddhi and of Aham- 
kara, since release became meaningless, and it, therefore, assumed that there 
were innumerable Atmans, whose derivation from the primitive Atman was 
proved by the fact that they retained the characteristics of omnipresence 
and infinity, which belong properly only to the one Atman and which, applied 
to all, lead to absurdity. On the other hand, the Vedantins laid' such stress 
on the unity of the universe that they denied the existence as real of Prakrti, 
contenting themselves with the idle doctrine of illusion, which was clearly 
inconsistent with their own principle of unity. Moreover, he argues, 
materialism was a natural product of the early view, since it really emptied 
Nirvana; Genesis des Mahdbhdrata; d,ind. LitA, B7Q, n. 1. 

Die Scthkhya-Philosopkie (1895-1 902). ^ See references in Winternitz, Gesck, d, ind. 

Great Epic of India, pp. 97 ff. Lit, i. 263. 

* Gesch. der Phil I. iii. 21 ff. ; cf. Jacobi, * Tuxen, Yoga, pp. 56 
SBA. 1911, p. 738 ; Winternitz, Gesch. 



542 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

the Atman of all empirical reality, and gave such reality to Prakrti, and thus 
encouraged the view that matter by itself was able to produce the universe, 
while on the other hand by its subjectivism in the doctrine of the Atman 
encouragement was given to scepticism, and finally to the philosophic in- 
difference of early Buddhism. 

Apart from the fact that there is really no good ground for calling the first 
stage Samkhya,^ and that the denial of illusionism cannot be accepted as 
absolutely true of the Upanisads, Dahlmann’s theory has the merit of directing 
attention to a real aspect of the philosophy of the Upanisads and the epic : 
there is a real affinity between the process by which Buddhi and Ahamkara 
are deemed to produce the world of experience and the older myths of Praja- 
pati and his desire, Kama, as playing their parts in the creation of the world, 
while still further back we have the picture of Purusa as at once the material 
and the spiritual source of the world. But it would be a mistake to accept the 
view that the aspect insisted upon by Bahlmann was really either the sole 
aspect or the chief aspect of philosophy in the period of the later Upanisads. 
In particular Dahlman goes clearly too far in stressing the independent 
character of the evolution of Prakrti, and in his insistence on the nature of 
l9vara as the world soul arising from Prakrti alone, thus placing Prakrti beside 
the Atman as in itself accounting for the whole of the empirical world. It 
must never be forgotten, as Dahlmann himself elsewhere ^ recognizes, that the 
spiritual side of existence is essentially conditioned by the fact that in Prakrti 
the Atman is present as the observer, a fact which in the Samkhya is preserved 
and emphasized in the insistence on the doctrine that but for the connexion of 
Purusa and Prakrti there would be no cognition or feeling of any kind. 
When due weight is accorded to this fact, we reach fairly closely to a concep- 
tion which is not far different from that of Badarayana as the normal, not 
unique, doctrine of the Upanisads : there is an absolute on which matter is 
dependent indeed, but not illusory, and individual souls which in the Upani- 
sads, but not in the Brahma Sutra, at the end are resolved into the absolute, 
but which are not in themselves illusory, being, we may assume, the necessary 
result of the coexistence of the absolute and matter, and therefore endowed, 
until united with the absolute through knowledge, with a certain relative but 
real independence.^ 

The real question is in a sense whether we can legitimately call Samkhya 
a system which accepts an absolute, and differs from the normal Upanisad 
doctrine essentially in the attention given to derivation from the absolute of 
Prakrti and individuals. The best defence of this suggestion is that of Olden- 
berg,^ who faces the fundamental difficulty that a system with an absolute in 

^ Oldenberg {Die Kultur der Gegenwart*, * Cf. also Beussen, Gesch. der Phil. I. iii. 

I. V. 34) does not deny the possibility of 259 ff, 

this view ; cf. Buddhc^, p. 68, n. 1. * Oldenberg, Die Lehre der Upanishaden, 

^ Die Sdmkhya-Philosophie, pp. 80 ff., where pp. 206-58, who accepts an epic 

he tends to exaggerate, as usual, the Samkhya with an absolute as cxplain- 

Prakrti side of the compound Jiva. ing Buddhism (GN. 1917, pp. 218 ff.). 



Chap. 28] 


543 


The Origin of the Samhhya 

the epic is not normally Samkhya, and that the twenty-five principles of the 
Samkhya of the epic seem in their correspondence with the classical school to 
negate the presence among them of the absolute. Oldenberg’s suggestion, 
that the twenty-fifth principle includes both the absolute and its manifesta- 
tions as individual, is ingenious, but hardly convincing, and as a matter of 
terminology and historic fact it seems unwise to employ the term Samkhya as 
applicable to any system which acknowledges an absolute. The facts of the 
derivation of the Samkhya above accepted are, of course, not affected by the 
question of terminology, and in view of the extremely composite nature of 
epic philosophy we need not be in the least surprised to find a conglomerate of 
this side of Aupanisada views with genuine Samkhya, and the blend which the 
epic knows as Samkhya- Yoga, and which has the somewhat unfortunate 
appearance of an effort to reconcile the Upanisads and the Sarnkhya. 

An interesting and ingenious effort, however, has been made by Professor 
Edgerton ^ to establish the doctrine that the epic knows nothing of a Samkhya 
which denies the world soul or an l 9 vara, and that in it Sarnkhya and Yoga 
do not denote philosophical systems but means of realizing that unity with the 
world soul, which is the aim of all philosophy in this period which is not 
materialistic. Samkhya denotes simply reflection — doubtless its primary 
meaning — and Yoga practical exercises tending to produce the unity desired, 
the details in the Moksadharma showing that a sort of self-hypnosis is aimed 
at, while in the Gita the method is that of unselfish normal activity in the 
position of life in which fate has placed a man. Ingenious as this effort is, the 
denial of a specific Samkhya doctrine appears, on the whole, untenable. It 
compels us in the passage xii. 11037 ff. to render the words amgvarah kathani 
mucyet as ‘ how the soul may be saved ’, and to hold that in this passage no 
distinction is being drawn between the view^s of Samkhya and Yoga, which 
is to put an intolerable strain upon the language.^ Nor does it seem possible 
in xii. 11408 to render amgvaram applied to the twenty- fifth principle merely as 
‘ supreme ’ ; the term Igvara in the preceding verse makes it clear that a 
contrast is intended.^ Another reference to the distinctive Samkhya insistence 
on a multitude of spirits must be seen in xii. 11483,^ and the whole matter 
appears clearly from xii. 13713 ff. In this passage we find two very distinct 
views set out : the Samkhya and the Yoga accept a multiplicity of souls, while 
Vyasa insists that all the souls at bottom rest on the world soul. To endeavour ® 
to explain away this obvious distinction by the theory that the real distinction 
is between a full and a brief exposition, and not between the views of Kapila 
and others and of Vyasa, is as unsatisfactory as the suggestion that adhydtma 
in the description of Kapila’s activities means that he took thought on the 
supreme soul ; the reference is clearly to the soul only. Nor is there anything 

* AJP. xlv. 1 ff. Contrast Hopkins, Great ® Hopkins, op. city p. 126. 

Epic of Indiay pp. 104 ff. * The rendering in AJP. xlv. 24 is certainly 

The meaning must be ‘ how can one be impossible. 

saved without a creator ? ’ ^ AJP. xlv. 27, n, 29. 



544 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 


out of place ^ in the allusion to the Yoga, for on the score of the multiplicity 
of souls Samkhya and Yoga in their classical forms agree. The effort also to 
remove the significance of the addition of a twenty-sixth principle in the Yoga 
on the score that, as Oldenberg ^ suggested, the new head serves merely to 
distinguish the souls as released, is clearly a tour deforce ; the twenty-sixth is 
l9vara, with whom, indeed, the enlightened soul may be identihed.® 

In the very different view of Berndl ^ the Saihkhya system, as we have it 
in the Karika of Igvarakrsna and later, is a serious deviation from the true 
views of Kapila, who may have been the first teacher to express his views in 
prose. The original doctrine which denied any soul has been recast to meet 
Brahman prejudices, and has thus lost its definite character. Traces of the 
older view may be found in the assertion of the Mahabharata ® which gives 
number and matter, Prakrti, and twenty- four principles as the essence of the 
Samkhya. Originally the doctrine recognized only three Gunas, ‘ Character e 
whose interactions, themselves uncaused, since cause does not affect these 
things in themselves, produce the whole empirical world, which is ruled by 
absolute necessity. The Gunas are not material, but are capable of mutual 
attraction, repulsion, and experience, and their interaction results in the 
formation of complexes (Empfindungszentren), which are selves, but which 
true knowledge shows are not distinct, eternal, metaphysical entities. But 
each is conscious of its essential relation to the Gunas, and this is expressed, 
subjectively, in the consciousness of transcendence, and, objectively, in the 
will to live and to maintain one’s individuality. Space is an abstraction made 
by the subject from the relations of things inter se and to itself, to which 
there corresponds only a manifold of heterogeneous sensations of quality, which 
the subject, by reason of the difference from its own homogeneity, experiences 
as something without. Time is also an abstraction made by the subject, to 
which alterations of external and internal conditions correspond, the ground 
for distinguishing them being their different characters, those without being 
many and cutting across one another, while those which are internal are 
individualized and unified. The suggestion is ingenious, but it is perfectly 
clear that it is unhistorical. To eliminate Purusas as an essential feature 
opposed to Prakrti is to contradict everything we know of the Samkhya, and 
it is difficult to appreciate why the system should thus have been transformed, 
nor do the changes in the system of Empedokles made by Anaxagoras ® provide 


1 AJP. xlv. 20, n. 31. 

® GN. 1917, p. 237. 

Hopkins, op, city pp. 134 ff. 

Tiber das Sdmkhya, Versuch einer Wieder- 
herstellung und Deutung der SdtMiya- 
Prinzipien. 

® xii. 1. 409. He notes also the disappearance 
of the Sastitantra as supporting his 
view as well as the legend of Vindhy- 
akavasa’s changes in the Samkhya 
(see Garbe, Sdmkhya-Philosophie^, pp. 


79 ff.). 

® The latter invented nous because the fact 
that the elements of Empedokles were 
conscious was forgotten, in BerndFs 
view. The view of Kapila was similarly 
altered, but illogically many selves were 
admitted, to avoid adopting the 
Vedanta view. But, while Anaxagoras 
was a pioneer as to nous, Kapila w'as 
a rebel against the Brahman soul doc- 
trine, which ruins the alleged parallel. 



Chap. 28] 


645 


The Origin, of the Sdrkkhya 

an adequate parallel. It is necessary also in Berndl’s view to deny the doctrine 
of necessary periodical destruction of the universe, since all that is requisite 
is that, since things have originated, they cannot be permanent, and to 
question the early character of the marked pessimism of the Karika as incon- 
sistent with the date of 700 or 800 b.c. ascribed to Kapiia. 

A different view of the relation of the Upanisads and the Samkhya is 
presented by Professor Jacobi,^ whose latest view is that a distinct gulf lies 
between the older Upanisads, and the middle and younger groups, terms which 
denote the Katha, I^a, QvetaQvatara, Mundaka and Mahanarayana, and the 
Pra^na, Maitrayaniya, and Mandukya respectively. The middle group is 
marked out from the oldest group by the absence of Ar any aka characteristics, 
the fact that the thought of the Upanisads is no longer in the making but 
already expresses itself in characteristic verses and turns of phrase, and the 
metrical form, while, as Jacobi points out, there appears in the middle and 
younger groups a large number of technical terms of philosophical interest 
which are unknown to the earlier texts. In Jacobi’s view there is also a vital 
philosophical difference between the two strata ; the middle and younger 
Upanisads are composed under the direct influence of the Samkhya system 
which had come into being after the oldest Upanisads. The vital element in the 
new point of view is the manifestation of the belief in the doctrine of the 
personal immortality of the souls of men and other creatures conceived as 
monads or as a multiplicity of immaterial substances, this view being accom- 
panied by the clear distinction of what was material and what was immaterial. 
The souls of the Samkhya are derived, in his view, from the aspect of the self as 
composed of intelligence or consciousness {vijndnamaya) in the older Upanisads, 
but with the essential difference that the soul is no longer regarded as being 
derived from and merging on death into the Brahman. At the same time the 
being (sat) -of the Chandogya Upanisad ^ with its three constituents, which 
in the Upanisad are regarded as living, is distinguished as purely material, and 
its constituents figure as the Gunas of the Samkhya, while the Buddhi of the 
Samkhya is a transformation of the vijndnaghana dtmd of Yajhavalkya, 
the whole somewhat bizarre conception being due to an effort at an early date 
to make a coherent system out of the confused thoughts of the oldest Upani- 
sads. This system was of influence, though it did not prove generally accept- 
able, The middle and younger Upanisad groups represent efforts to compro- 
mise between the Samkhya with its kindred Yoga, and the pantheistic 
spirit of the Upanisads, an effort continued in the Bhagavadgita and the 
philosophical parts of the Mahabharata, and finally resulting in the compro- 
mise of the Puranas. One doctrine, however, that of the personal immortality 
of the soul, became generally accepted, figuring in the Nyaya and Vaigesika 
schools,^ the Vedanta of Badarayana, and even the Purva Mimansa,^ as well 

1 Die Entwicklung der Gottesidee bei den ® Keith, Indian Logic and Atomism^ pp. 

Indem (1923), pp. 19 ff. 239 ff. 

2 vi. * Keith, Karma- Mtmdmsd, pp. 64 ff. 

15 [n.o.s. 32] 



546 The Philosophy of the Veda [Partv 

as in Jainism. In the latter case the conception both of soul and matter seems 
to have been developed contemporaneously with the Samkhya views, though 
it is probable that the idea of the soul as essentially pure intelligence and 
immortal was taken over by the Jains from some other doctrine, much of 
primitive hylozoism clinging to their view of the soul. 

This view has been accepted as regards the origin of the theory of soul by 
Prof. Stcherbatsky,^ who holds that the fact that the theory was new was the 
ground why it was so bitterly assailed by the Buddhists. He admits that the 
idea of a surviving personality is not unknown in the Veda, and that its essence 
and its relation to the Brahman are the main topic of discussion in the 
Upanisads. ‘ But this self is a psychological entity, different explanations 
of its nature are proposed, and materialistic views are not excluded.^ The 
idea of an immortal soul in our sense, a spiritual monad, a simple, uncomposite, 
eternal, immaterial substance is quite unknown in the Veda inclusive of the 
older Upanisads.’ Most regrettably neither Prof. Jacobi nor Prof. Stcher- 
batsky has pointed out the passages in the middle or younger Upanisads 
in which this new idea of an immortal soul is to be found, as contrasted with 
those in the older Upanisads ; and it appears to me wholly impossible to find 
any such distinction as real. The idea that at this period in the history of 
Indian thought the conception of an immortal soul was first introduced 
appears wholly without warrant, and to misunderstand entirely the course 
of development of Indian philosophy. 

The fact, of course, is that the primitive Vedic belief clung to the doctrine 
of the survival of something after death, and that, therefore, immortality 
was no new idea. The view as to what survived was as hazy as it is to-day in 
popular and philosophic thought alike, for then, as now, it was practically 
impossible to form any intelligible conception of what a soul is, for such a 
description of the modern view as that given by Prof. Stcherbatsky cannot be 
said to have any intelligible meaning. But superinduced on this simple view 
we have the philosophic doctrine passed off under the name of Yajnavalkya, 
which asserts that the soul is not, as the ordinary man thinks, independent ; 
it is only a part of a greater whole or more accurately an aspect of that whole, 
so that at death there is no separate existence in the sense of personal im- 
mortality. That this view was ever generally accepted in philosophic circles 
is not suggested in the older Upanisads, and the middle and younger Upanisads 
show that it was not attractive and that the tendency was to consider the 
matter more theistically, the absolute taking on a definitely personal appear- 
ance and less stress being laid on merger in it, though it is essential to note 
that merger remains as a doctrine alongside with the contemplation of 
continued existence. But there is not the slightest trace of the advent of 

1 The Central Conception of Buddhism (192Q), based on Jacobi’s older suggestion of 

pp. 69 materialism in CU. vi, which seems 

® That such views are allowed in the older tacitly revised in op. ciU^ pp. Ilf, 

Upanisads seems an error, perhaps 



547 


Chap, 28 ] The Origin of the Sdmkhya and Btiddhism 

personal immortality or the spiritual nature of the soul as new ideas in the 
period of the middle Upanisads ; the soul there remains a psychological 
entity exactly to the same extent as it was such an entity in the older 
Upanisads. 

Prof. Stcherbatsky, however, maintains that the old and the new soul 
theories were clearly distinguished ; thus all Buddhists rejected the doctrine 
of a self corresponding to the psycho -physical individual, AtmavMa, but the 
Vatsiputriyas and Sammitiyas accepted the theory of the doctrine of per- 
manent soul, Pudgalavada. This basis of distinction, however, is clearly 
illegitimate, and is not given by the Buddhist texts ; instead the Pudgala is 
clearly a self corresponding to the psycho-physical individual, since it is main- 
tained that it assumes new elements at birth and throw^s them off at death, ^ 
and the other Buddhist schools justly rejected either doctrine, seeing through 
the subterfuge by which these two schools endeavoured, while evading direct 
contradiction of the master’s insistence on Anatta, negation of a self, to 
preserve the existence of something which could transmigrate, thus preserving 
the reality of the doctrine of moral retribution, which utterly disappears in 
the ordinary conception of Buddhism,- Nor is there any plausibility in the 
view that the Katha Upanisad already recognizes what Prof. Stcherbatsky — 
on dubious grounds — claims to be the fundamental doctrine of Buddhism, the 
existence of Dharmas conceived as a plurality of subtle, ultimate, not further 
analysable elements of matter, mind, and force. The theory is based on the 
fact that in that Upanisad (iv. 14) we find a condemnation of him who sees 
Dharmas separately {2^Tthag dharmcui pagi/ati), which is a very different thing 
from Stcherbatsky ’s rendering maintains the existence of separate elements 
The idea that Dharmas in this passage are ‘ elements ’ is as implausible as 
that the term Dharma in i. 21 has this sense ; the word seems to mean in both 
instances something like ‘ thing ’ as taken by Geiger,® and this use harmonizes 
with dharmya as opposed to what is subtle {anu) in ii. 13, a passage ignored by 
.Stcherbatsky. With this rendering disappears wholly the idea that the 
author of the Katha is directing a polemic against a doctrine which denies both 
the old and the new theories of the soul, or that Dharma is ‘ a catchword 
referring to a new and foreign doctrine, some andtma- dharma theory Nor 

is there the slightest justification for the view that Pariini ^ is aware of 
Buddhist and Sarhkhya views of causation, for his explanation of the use 


1 See Vasubandhu’s account in Stchcr- 

batsky’s Soul Theory^ p. 851. 

^ Cf. Keith, Buddhist Philosophy , PP- 81 ff. 

2 Pali Dhamma^ p. 9. 

* ii. 3. 53 ; iv. 2. IG, 4. 3 ; vi. 1. 139. The 
Paribhasas referred to neither prove 
the thesis nor have validity for Panini. 
They do not appear in the Mahabhasya, 
but in the Ka^ika (7th cent. a.d.). 
The absurdity of the suggestion of 

15 * 


Panini ’s knowledge would be increased 
if we accepted Charpentier’s claina (ZII. 
ii. 140 ff.) that he lived not later than 
550 B.C., since he knew the title of 
Kamboja King, which w^as extinct 
after the death of Kambyses (= Kam- 
boja King, title of older Achaiine- 
nidai). But this rests on a number of 
conjectures, all unproved and all most 
implausible. 



[Part V 


548 The Philosophy of the Veda 

of samskrta and upakrta or upaskrta corresponds very poorly with this 
suggestion. 

Stcherbatsky ^ suggests further that from the Samkhya the Buddhists 
derived the incentive to the doctrine of the world as consisting of momentary 
elements of mind, matter, and force. The Gunas of the Samkhya on this view 
are interpreted as fundamental principles, matter, mind-stuff, and energy- 
stuff, acting as interdependent moments in every real and substantial exist- 
ence ; ‘ the infinitesimals of energy, present everywhere, are semi-material ; 
although different from the inertia of matter and the luminosity of mind, they 
are separate and substantial \ The Buddhist elements are a reply to the 
Samkhya by an architect of greater skill. Ingenious as this theory is, it 
depends, even if we accept the suggested view of the Buddhist Dharmas as 
primitive — which seems impossible — on the belief that the interpretation of 
the Gunas adopted is really that of the early Samkhya. This seems frankly 
impossible in view of the silence of the Sarhkhya texts and of the epic alike. 
The interpretation is based on the Yogabhasya of Vyasa,^ who is a compara- 
tively late author,^ and who shows every sign of influence by the Buddhist 
schools.^ To substitute his views for those of the origin of the Samkhya is as 
unwise as to adopt the doctrines of the Sarvastivadins, as expounded by Vasu- 
bandhu, as representing the early doctrines of Buddhism from a philosophical 
point of view. The same error marks the suggestion ® that the name of Samkhya 
is borrowed from Samkhya in the sense of Prajiia, that intellectual insight 
which destroys the infections {klegas), through which the spirit is bound to con- 
tinued existence. There can be no question that the epic ® explanation of the 
term as Parisamkhyana, ‘ enumeration (of principles) ’, is to be preferred to this 
suggestion, though it is still more probable that in its earliest stage the term 
simply referred to reasoning. 

The Upanisads themselves contain traces of the doctrine of Yoga, regarded 

^ Op. dt,, p. 22. seeks to show that the name refers to 

® Cf. Dasgupta, The Study of Patahjali ; number, not of principles, but of the 

Ind. Phil. i. 240 iK. Guiias as transcendent realities. 

® Cf. Woods, Yoga-System of Patanjali, ® See Hopkins, Grea^^pico/JTndf a, pp. 126 f. 
pp. XX f. His reasoning (p, xxi) that Thus Samkhya indicates a stage of 

the comm, is after a.d. 650 because it is definition prior to the Vai9esika, which 

cited by Magha is clearly a slip; defines by special difference In 

Magha knew it apparently and so it lieuitgivesadescriptionwithenumera- 

dates before A. D. 700. Basgupta’s (/wd. tion of contents. The term Yoga, 

Phil. i. 230 ff.) early date for Patanjali however, when used with Samkhya 

as identical with the grammarian is indicates the wider sense. It itself 

implausible in the extreme. denotes the exertion which results in 

^ See Stcherbatsky, op. dt., pp. 46, 47, n. 3. hypnosis, praxis as opposed to theory, 

The idea that the Samkhya did not but it assumes other shades of meaning, 

recognize substance and quality in a including the restraint of the senses (cf. 

relation of inherence {ibid., p. 27, n. 2) Giintert, JDer arische WeltkOnig, p. 225) 

is clearly impossible, and is not even and the joining of the spirit to that of 

Vyasa’s view. T^vara or an absolute. Cf. Keith,., 

® Op. ciL, p. 51, n. 1. BerndI(op.cif.,p.l3n.) Sdmkhya System, chap. iv. 



649 


Ciiap. 28] The Origin of the Sdmkhya and Buddhism 

as a discipline by which the mind can be withdrawn from the things of this 
world and unity with the absolute can be attained, although it is only in the 
Katha, the Qveta^vatara, and the much later Maitrayapiya that these traces 
are of importance. The Qveta9vatara, however, contributes an element which 
in the classical Yoga distinguishes it from the Samkhya, the presence of a 
personal deity, though the figure of the god in the Upanisad is infinitely more 
vivid and important than that of the Igvara of the Yoga. This Upanisad, 
however, is distinctly marked by lack of clearness of conception, and attempts 
at harmonization of contrasting views. Recognizing the strength of the 
popular religion which craved for aid from the gods, and in no wise satisfied 
with mere Yoga methods bf securing the end desired, the Qveta9vatara intro- 
duces into its system the conception of god. But in this introduction we find 
a repeated confusion between god as an addition to the empiric universe 
beside matter and spirits, and god as identical with the absolute. In the first 
sense ^ we have the conception of the absolute as comprehending the three ; 
god, who is the knower, the inciter to enjoyment, the lord ; spirit, the enjoyer, 
the ignorant, not the lord ; and nature, which is to be enjoyed by each spirit 
according to its merit or demerit. Two birds there are dwelling in one tree, one 
eats the sweet fruit, the other merely gazes on the scene ; one, spirit, is dis- 
tressed in contact with nature, but when it beholds the other, the lord, is 
freed from its woes. In the classical Yoga this picture presents itself in the 
form of a god who is a special spirit untouched by the impurity of the world, by 
action and its fruits, and who promotes the freedom of unemancipated spirits. 
The objections to the later view are obvious ; how can there exist a god, who 
is not removed from all connexion with the world as is the released spirit, and 
yet is untouched by the misery of the world ? In the Upanisad, however, god 
has a much more real existence ; he is hailed as Rudra ^ and begged to spare 
the votary ; he is invoked with the names of Mahe9vara, Hara, and f iva, and 
he is identified at times with the Brahman, which, though also set above Rudra, 
is immediately after ^ expressly given the name of Lord, 19a, which is essentially 
that of Rudra. The end of man is to know, to see mystically this god, who is 
the magician ^ who creates the universe in which the soul by illusion {mayd) 
is bound. He is the maker of all, all-knower, self-sourced, intelligent, the 
author of time,® yet above the three times and impartite,® possession of quali- 
ties, omniscient, the ruler of matter {jpradhdna), and of the spirit, lord of 
qualities, the cause of transmigration and of liberation, of continuance and of 
bondage. When men shall roll up space as if it were a piece of leather, then 
only will there be an end of evil apart from the knowledge of god.*^ 

Knowledge of god is vouchsafed by the grace of the lord ® to him who has 
the highest devotion (bhaJeti) to god, and also to his spiritual teacher even as to 

1 1.8-16; iv. 6, 7. similar to those of Buddhism or the 

® iii. 1-6 ; iv. 16, 18, 21, 22. later Samkhya. 

® hi. 7. " iv. 9, 10. » iii. 20 (=TA. x. 10. 1 ; cf. KU. ii. 20). 

® vi, 16. ® vi. 5. Cf. the Yoga doctrine in Vyasabhasya, 

’ vi. 20, obviously a polemic against views i. 23 f. 



650 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 


god,^ a doctrine which suggests not the later Yoga, but the spirit of the 
Bhagavadgita and the general adoration of the teacher, as an essential part 
of the way of salvation, in the sectarian religions. 

The early Upanisads contain no clear trace of the doctrine which is later 
found in the Buddhism of the Sarvastivadins,^ and which discriminates 
between the power of knowledge to remove causes of existence and that of 
ecstasy, assigning to the latter alone the power of suppressing all material 
elements and all sensuous consciousness, knowledge dealing with mental 
elements and mental consciousness. Such a distinction has every appearance 
of being an excrescence on the original Buddhist doctrine, evoked by the 
desire to find a logical place for ecstasy as opposed to mere knowledge, but it 
may have been early in appearing. 

Slight as is normally the recognition in the Buddhist texts of the Brahman 
doctrine of their rivals, Geiger ® has shown that the term Bhamma not rarely 
is used as a substitute, in expressing the Buddhist ideal, for the Brahman of 
the Upanisads, while the term Brahman itself is occasionally preserved.^ 
The famous phrase ^ Wheel of the Law (dhamma-cakka) ’ is also paralleled 
by Brahma-cakka ,• ^ the Dhammayana by Brahmayana ; ® the Tathagata 
is not merely an incorporation of Bhamma but also of the Brahman, he has 
become not only the Bhamma but also the Brahman ; the Bhamma even 
claims the worship which is the lot of the Brahman in the Upanisads.® Nor 
in choosing the term Bhamma for the system was Buddhism without Upani- 
sad precedent ; the Brhadaranyaka ^ tells that Brahman created the 
Bharma, than which nothing is higher, and the Mahanarayapa asserts that 
the whole universe is encircled by the Bharma, than which there is nothing 
harder to describe. 

While it is, as has been seen, impossible to accept the derivation of the 
Samkhya from a materialism, it is probable that its realistic elements were 
partly due to a contemporary tendency in this direction of which, not un- 
naturally, we have no direct early evidence. The 9veta9vatara Upanisad, 
however, records possible or actual theories of the absolute or final principle 
{hrahman)V^ which include necessity {niyati\ chance {yadrccha), time, inherent 
nature (svabhdva), matter (bhutdni), and spirit. In the records of Buddhism 
we have given to us as existing contemporaneously with the Buddha the 
doctrine of Ajita Kesakambalin, who was in effect a materialist, and who, 
according to the Jain tradition, believed, as did the Carvakas of the later 
tradition, in pleasure as the one end to be followed. The terms used of this 


^ vi. 23- 

“ Abhidhamako^a, i. 40 ,* Stcherbatsky, 
The Central Conception of Buddhism^ 
p. 52 (where dhatus 1-5 and 7-11 (not 
7-10) is to be read). 

» Dhamma und Brahman. 

^ DN. iii. 232. 

° MN. i. 69. 

« SN. V. 5. 


’ BN. iii. 80 It. 

3 SN. i. 138 ff. ; AN. ii. 20 It. 
i. 4. 14. 

xxi. 6. i. 2. 

1- In this general sense also in BAU. ii, 1. 1 ; 

iv. i. 2 ; CU. v. 11. 1 ; Kaus.iv. 1, <fec. 
1* Cf. Keith, Buddhist Philosophy ^ pp. 1 3,5 h. ; 

Barua, Prebuddh. Ind. Phil., pp. 289 ft 
1^ Cf. Sutrahrtahga, ii. 1. 17 (SBE. xlv. 341). 



Chap. 28] The Supreme and the Individual Souls 551 

doctrine ^ certainly suggest that it was based on some degree at least on the 
principle enunciated by Yajhavalkya,^ that on dissolution of the body there 
exists in certain cases no consciousness, which, if the belief in the existence of 
the Brahman be removed, would result in a pure materialism, regarding the 
body as the reality of which life is a mere accompaniment, a view attributed 
also in Buddhist tradition ^ to the king Payasi, who experimentally established 
that soul did not survive bodily death. The records are important, since they 
show that the renunciation of belief in the Brahman could produce materialism 
as well as the Sarhkhya dualism and the negation of soul in Buddhism. 

The other principles enumerated by the ^veta^vatara as possible theories 
are less important. Necessity figures also in the system of Makkhali Gosala, 
while inherent nature appears also as an aspect of that system ; ^ time has 
Vedic authority and persisted much later ; ® chance is rather an element in a 
system than an actual system, while the brevity of the allusion renders it 
obscure what particular doctrine is referred to. 


§ 8 . The Supreme and the Individual Souls 

In the philosophy of Yajhavalkya the identity of the supreme and the 
individual souls is carried to the extreme extent, but at the same time the 
term soul is deprived of any distinct meaning. The identity of the soul of 
man and the absolute is due to the mere fact that, by reducing the soul to 
nothing save what may be termed the mere abstraction of subjectivity, or of 
the transcendental unity of apperception, the soul becomes nothing but an 
aspect of a process.® It is perfectly legitimate then to identify the supreme 
and the individual souls, but we are really carried no further by this than 
the occasional remarks of the Brhadaranyaka TJpanisad, which regards the 
universe as made up of nothing except subject and object. It is in fact 
perfectly true that all the world can be regarded as distinguished as subject 
and object, but, unless we are able to show that this is the sum total of all that 
we can know, it is clearly impossible for philosophy ^o stop there. The actual 
existing world of thought, emotion, and action requires explanation and 
investigation. In the Vedanta the matter is solved comfortably by the 
doctrine of the two forms of knowledge : on the upper stage the identity of the 
self and the absolute is recognized, on the lower there is found to be a personal 
deity, Hiranyagarbha, and personal selves, who are indeed the absolute self, 
but fall under the influence of conditioning facts, the Upadhis, mind, the 


^ Cf. Sarvadar9anasamgraha, p. 2 ; ^ilanka, 
Sutrakrtanga (ed, Dhanapati), p. 290. 

2 BAU. ii. 4. 13 ; iv. 5. 13. 

® Payasi Suttanta of Digha Nikaya. 

* Barua, op, cit,, pp. 310 ff. 

® See below, § 8. 

® The fact of this undue abstraction explains 
the view of one aspect of Buddhism in 
its denial of any Atman at all. But 


in so doing they naturally found them- 
selves obliged to invent a substitute in 
the doctrine of Karman. The praise oc- 
casionally lavished on their psychology 
without a soul is only conclusive of the 
philosophical crudity of the encomiasts. 
Cf. de la Valine Poussin, Bouddhisme, 
pp, 82 ff., 156 ff. ; Keith, Buddhist 
Philosophy, pp. 1G9 ff., 207 f. 



552 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

senses, the vital airs, and the body, which, while in reality no more affecting 
the reality of the nature of the absolute than the red colour the rock crystal, 
nevertheless convert it into the self or soul, Jiva,^ of everyday humanity. In 
the Upanisads we naturally expect to find both sides of this doctrine, and we 
do find them in point of fact quite clearly expressed. On the one hand, we 
have the constant efforts to show that there is but one self, that there is no 
multiplicity and no change, which is pure idealism of a very intransigeant 
type, and on the other the reality of the individual self is constantly insisted 
upon. It is, however, constantly repeated that the individual and the absolute 
self are the same, and this is true no less in those cases where we may accept the 
view that idealism of the Yajnavalkya type is present, than in those, in which 
there is mere pantheism or cosmogonism. In the latter cases equally there is 
no ground to distinguish ultimately between the selves, since at the most the 
individual is merely the absolute in another form. But even when the 
Upanisads are theistic in spirit, like the Katha and still more decidedly by 
far the ^veta^vatara, they never reach the view that the supreme and the 
individual souls are anything really different. The Katha,^ however, is 
marked by its clear enunciation for the first time of the conception of the 
enjoyer as the union of the self with mind and the senses. It also describes the 
two aspects of the souls as light and shadow, while in the Qveta9vatara ^ 
we find the metaphor of the two birds on a tree, one eating the sweet berries, 
the other merely gazing downwards, without eating. It also develops the 
idea of the individual soul, as endowed with the faculty of framing concepts 
and resolves, individualism and intellect, as enjoying the fruit of action, as 
small as a thumb in height, or a needle’s point, or the ten-thousandth part of 
the tip of a hair, which is yet identical with the infinitely great supreme soul, 
a statement which is clearly identical in essence with the Vedanta position as 
seen in ^ankara. 

The cause of the appearance in this restricted form of the supreme soul is 
given by Qankara as the effect of ignorance, and with him that explanation 
ends the matter, since it is impossible to go further than this. In the 
Upanisads, apart from the many creation legends which yield no philosophic 
result, the actual nature of the problem is rarely expressed and very slightly 
explained. The view of the Pragna ^ is that breath is born from the self, and 
it is likened to the shadow on a man. Unhappily the rest of its explanation 
is obscure : if rendered according to grammar, it distinctly says that the 
position is involuntary (manokrta) on the part of the self: the version of 
Sayana, which is defiant of grammar, takes it that the result is produced by 
the previous acts of the will of the man in question ; it is possible that we 
must amend so as merely to say that the mind attaches itself to the breath, 
but this suggestion of Bohtlingk’s ® is doubtful, and the best plan seems to be 

1 Cf. A. Guha, Jlvatman in the Brahma-- ® Hillebrandt suggests manodutena, but this 
(Calcutta, 1921). * iii. 1. gives no explanation of the misreading. 

® iv. 6 , 7 ; V. 2-6. * iji. 1-3. Bdhtlingk emends to manah. Una, 



Chap. 28] 


The Supreme and the Individual Souls 


653 


to recognize that the process is not voluntary, which is in agreement with the 
Vedanta view. In the Maitrayaniya,^ which is influenced by the Samkhya 
views of the constituents of nature, the doctrine is laid down that the self 
is overcome by the Gu^as, and falls into an illusion in which it becomes weak, 
disordered, sensual, and believes in the separate existence of the self, fettering 
itself by its own action like a bird by its nest, while an addition ^ to that 
text gives the different conception, that the supreme soul becomes individual, 
in order to experience life in the world as well as eternal verity. 

The description of the parts of the individual souls in the Upanisads is far 
from uniform or homogeneous. In the Samkhya, as we have seen, it is a union 
of the individual spirit with the elements of intellect, individuation, mind, 
the five organs of intelligence and the five organs of action, and the subtle 
elements as well as the fine parts of the gross elements. In the Vedanta the 
position is not essentially different : the soul is the absolute enveloped in the 
UpMhis : in this case they are mind,® the ten senses, the five breaths, which 
are the organs of nutrition, and the subtle body, that is the subtle parts of the 
elements which form the seeds of the body. In both cases there must be added 
the psychic diaposition which causes the kind of rebirth and secures that 
rebirth, the Bhava of the Samkhya, the Karman of ^aiikara. 

In the Upanisads the terminology centres mainly in the word Prana, 
which every now and then, as we have seen, is treated as a synonym of the 
absolute, but which on the whole is more normally of less consequence. The 
Prana often represents the senses, but the numbers of Pranas, into which 
it is divided, differ greatly : the origin of the various calculations may 
certainly be traced in part at least to the Atharvaveda,^ where we are told of 
the head as a drinking bowl with seven seers in the apertures : the sense 
ascribed to the seven appears to have been the eyes, ears, nostrils, and the 
organ of taste, for the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad ® adds to the seven an 
eighth in the form of speech. The Upanisads normally enumerate a series of 
five,® breath, eye, ear, mind, and speech, but these are sometimes reduced to 
four or less ; thus the Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana repeatedly dwells on the 
series, speech, mind, sight, hearing, and the breath or breaths ; the cosmic 
parallels are fire, moon, sun, the quarters (i. e. apace), and wind. A different 
view is that of a passage of the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad,’ where the organs 


1 iii. 2. 

® vii. 11. 

^ Mind in this system covers all the three 
activities of the Samkhya Buddhi, 
Ahamkara, and Manas, and in the epic 
these three appear often as two 
(Ahamkara being suppressed) ; cf. Dahl- 
mann, Die Sdmkhya-Philosophie, pp. 
79 ff. See also Oltramare, L'histoire 
des idies thiosophiques, i. 190 ff. 

* X. 8. 9 ; in ver. 44 we have one of the 
earliest declarations of the Atman 


doctrine. 

« BAU. ii. 2. 3. 

® Possibly the source of the five Buddhist 
Skandhas ; see Stcherbatsky, The 
Central Conception of Buddhism, p. 72. 
See JUB. ii. If. ; iii. 1 f. 

’ iii. 2. 2-9, where Prana seems to mean 
sense of smell, Apana odour, but the 
text is doubtless corrupt, despite the 
agreement of the recensions ; cf. 
Deussen, Phil, of Up., pp. 277 f. 



664 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

of smell, speech, tongue, eye, ear, mind, hands, and skin are enumerated as 
the eight Grahas, and the corresponding objects, odour, name, taste, form, 
sound, desire, action, and touch arc set over against them as the Atigrahas, 
possibly an indication, since Graha may mean seizer, that the soul was 
fettered by the organs and their activities, an idea carried out in the phrase 
‘ bands of the heart which is first found in the Chandogya Upanisad^ The 
later term Indriya is first found in the Kausitaki Upamsad,^ when on death 
the father hands over to his son his speech; smell; eye; ear; tastes; actions; 
pleasure and pain; bliss, delight, and procreation; movements; mind; and 
intellect (prqjnd), where the usual later enumeration of ten with mind is 
followed, with one exception. In the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad® we find the 
skin as the uniting-place of touch ; the tongue of tastes ; the nose of odours ; 
the eye of forms ; the ear of sounds ; the mind of conceptions (samkalpa ) ; 
the heart of knowledge ; the hands of actions ; the generative organ of 
pleasure; the anus of procreation; the feet of movements; and speech of the 
Vedas ; but the name, Indriya, is not used. The normal later total of ten 
with mind, including the heart, as Indriyas is found in the Pra9na,^ in a 
passage which also enumerates the five subtle elements, the five gross elements, 
intellect, individuation, thought, brilliance, and breath. 

It is of importance in the history of Indian philosophy to note the develop- 
ment of the sense of Manas, ‘ mind In the earliest period, and in the 
Brahmanas, and even in the Upanisads, mind is a vague term ® denoting con- 
sciousness generally, whether feeling,® willing, or thinking, and it can be used 
as a synonym for Prajapati, when it is sought to reduce that figure to some- 
thing more abstract and less mythological. From that use it is later sometimes 
definitely minimized to mean the power which forms ideas and decisions, but 
it is probably in the wider and less precise sense that it still appears in all the old 
lists of the breaths beside speech, eye, ear, and breath. The more limited 
meaning is possible in cases where mind is said to be the uniting place of con- 
ceptions, the heart of knowledge, or mind discriminates names, and intellect 
{prajnd) deals with thoughts, what is to be understood, and desires.*^ On the 
other hand, there clearly evolves itself, as in Epicharmos’ doctrine : yoi!? 6p^ /cal 
vov<: dKov€L, raWa /cw^a koI ru^Xa the idea that the presence of the mind, atten- 
tion in fact, is necessary to see, to hear, and so forth. Desire, judgement, 
belief, doubt, unbelief, firmness, weakness, modesty, knowledge, fear, all 
these depend on the mind. Mind therefore is regarded as forming into ideas 
the impressions of the senses, sight, hearing, taste, smell, and touch, and it 
then — as will motived by desire — ^transforms the ideas into resolves, which 

1 vH. 26. 2 ; KU. vi. 15. denotes will (vaga) as directed by intel- 

^ ii. 15. lect. The word man specially denotes 

^ iv, 5. 12 ; ii. 4. 11. to think that a thing is so and so; 

* iv, 2. A late hymn (AV. xix. 9. 5) has dM to meditate on it. 

the five Indriyas with Manas- ® e. g., JB. i. 269 ; BAU. iii. 2.7. 

® Oldenberg, Weltanschauung derBrdhmana- ’ BAU. ii. 4. 11 ; iv. 5. 12 ; Kaus. i. 7. 
textCf pp. 69 ff. The early term kratu 



Chap. 28] 


The Supreme and the Individual Souls 


555 


are carried out by the organs of action. It is the mind which drives man to 
beget on his wife a son/ the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad^ also says. Similarly 
the mind is the cause of all action of every kind, sacred study, or the gaining 
of wealth. In the metaphor of the chariot and the driver, the body and 
the soul, in the Katha ® the intellect is the charioteer, mind the reins, and the 
senses are only the horses. One of the selves in the doctrine of five selves 
in the Taittiriya Upanisad ^ is expressly called the mind-made self, and its 
object is sacrificial activity. The Maitrayaniya Upanisad ® develops the 
chariot metaphor further ; the whip is nature, the horses the organs of 
action, the reins the organs of intellect, and the driver is mind who with his 
whip stirs the steeds to action under the control of the reins.® 

The mind is specially concerned with Samkalpas, a term which appears 
only in a late passage of the Rigveda,^ but is later frequent. The root idea is 
putting in order, so that a Sarhkalpa or conception may be equally well an 
idea or a decision, though in fact the word is frequently used with an implica- 
tion of will. Mind is the abode of all Samkalpas,® but with the usual inconsis- 
tency we have Samkalpa ranked above mind, the product above the function,® 
Mind is fundamental ; what one desires with it is Kratu, conscious will. 

Beside mind we find sometimes the term Citta, which in the Pali Canon 
is often a synonym for mind.^® The term cit denotes from the Rigveda on to 
notice something, whether by the sense organs or by mental activity ; in the 
Chandogya we find Citta, what is noticed, placed above Samkalpa which in 
its turn is superior to mind ; a contrast is drawn between the man who knows 
much and has no Citta, and who is accordingly little regarded, and him who 
has Citta and, therefore, is in high repute. In the sense of thought as an 
activity Citta is later in use, beside Citti and Cetas, and occasionally mind 
and Citta or Cetas are directly identified The term Citta becomes of special 
importance later in the Yoga system. 

Vij nana, discriminating knowledge, w'hich is made a synonym of mind in 
the Pali Canon, is sometimes merely a function of mind,^® but it also occurs not 
rarely in the older Upanisads with a distinct implication of a superior form of 
knowledge to the mere action of mind ; thus hearing, thinking, and discrimi- 

^ AU. iii. 2 ; Kaus. iii. 7 ; BAU. i. 5. 3. ® The contrast with the Piatonie metaphor 

^ iv. 1. 6 ; see i. 5, 3; Maitr/vi. 3. in the Phaidros is as obvious as the 

® iii. 3. parallel. 

4 ii. a, ’ X. 104. 5. Often with Kama, ‘ desire ’ ; 

® ii. 6; for the Epic view of Manas see AV. iii. 25. 2; CU. viii. 1.5; 2; BAU, 

Deusscn, Gesch. d. Phil, I. iii. 59-63 ; i. 5. 3. 

for the Buddhist, C. Rhys Davids, Bud- ® BAU. ii. 4. 11 (dhydna in Kaus. iii. 3). 
dhist Mamial of Psychological Ethics-, ® CU. vii. 4. 

pp. Ixxi ff., which, however, is very Digha Nikaya, i. 21. Cf. ICeith, 
speculative and unduly modernizes ; Philosophy, p. 85. 

Keith, Buddhist Philosophy, pp. 85, 89, “ CU. vii. 5. 

161, 168 f. ; Stcherbatsky, The Central VS. xviii. 2 ; CU. iii. 6. 8 ; VS. xxxiv. 3. 

Conception of Buddhism, pp. 15, 72. ^B. xii. 9. 1. 14. It is used of mind and 

See also JUB. i. 33. 4 f. ; ^'B. iv. 6. 7. 5 ; the four senses in JB. i. 209. 

BAU. iii. 2 ; KU. iii. 0 ; JUB. iv. 26. 



556 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 


Bating, or seeing, thinking, and discriminating, are enumerated, and in the 
final doctrine, which denies the possibility of knowing that which knows all, 
the term used is vijnd?- But this idea is not formally developed, in accord- 
ance with the whole spirit of the XJpanisads. 

On the side of feeling the terminology of the Upanisads marks a great 
advance in the normal employment of Sukha to denote pleasure generically 
and Duhkha, based upon it, for misery. A generic term to cover both forms 
of feeling is not found before the Vedana of the Pali texts. But we have the 
definite statement ^ that, when a man experiences pleasure, he acts, when he 
experiences pain, he refrains from action, while the Kausitaki ® asserts that 
pleasure and pain are felt by means of the body. 

Of more philosophical interest are efforts made to render more precise 
the functions of the senses. Thus the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad ^ in the 
doctrine above cited, of eight graspers, or apprehenders (grahas)^ and eight 
that are beyond (ati) the graspers, gives as pairs Prana and Apana, the former 
being used to smell odours ; speech and names ; the tongue and tastes ; the 
eye and visible forms (rilpa) (i. e. coloured extension) ; the ear and sounds ; 
the mind and desires ; the hands and action ; and the skin and feelings of 
touch.^ In the Kausitaki ® we have speech and name as its external correlate ; 
breath (i.e. smell) and odour ; eye and visible form ; the ear and sound ; the 
tongue and tastes ; the two hands and action ; the body and pleasure and 
pain ; the organ of generation and bliss, delight, and procreation ; the two 
feet and movements ; and the intellect and thoughts, what is to be under- 
stood, and desires. The Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana ’ has a series of ten : 
mind and matters requiring examination {jpanksya) ; speech (i. e. the tongue) ® 
and tastes ; breath’and odours ; the eye and visible forms ; the ear and sounds ; 


^ CU. vii. 13. 1 ; 15. 4 ; 25. 2 ; BAU. iii. 4. 
2 ; ii, 4. 14 ; iv. 5. 15 ; it ranks 
above Bhyana, CU. vii. 7. Vijnana 
is in KU. iii. 9 apparently ranked 
with Buddhi above mind. In Bud- 
dhism it is sometimes given a higher 
rank ; Oldenberg, Buddha^, pp. 258 f., 
264. In JB, i. 269 it is used to denote 
the functions of eye, ear, smell, tongue, 
and mind. 

* CU, vii. 22. Ct priydpriye, CU. viii, 12, 1 ; 

hrdayajna, ethrdayajna, vii. 2. 1 ; 

suhardasa^ durhdrdasa, JB. i. 269. 

* i. 7. 

" iii. 2. 2-9. 

* ii. 4. 11 ; iv- 5. 12 of the same text have 

further identifications ; see above, 
p. 554. 

® i. 7 (breath and names and mind and names 
are also given according to genders) ; 
cf. ii. 15, where there are variants in the 
two texts, see Hume’s notes ; in iii. 6 


(see below) mind replaces intellect in 
one version, doubtless correctly. 

’ iv. 26. 

® So in JB. i. 269, where Praria covers smell 
(as in gB. x. 5. 2. 15 ; BAU. i. 3. 3 ; CU. 
i.2. 2; AU. i. 3. 4; KU.i.7; ii. 5, &c.), 
and beside ear, eye, smell, and tongue 
we find mind which discriminates 
suhdrdasa and durhdrdasa, that pleases 
and displeases the heart. The dis- 
tinction of functions of mind into sense- 
perception and the functions of heart 
and mind (Barua, Prebuddh» Ind. PhiL, 
p. 178) attributed to Yajnavalkya 
and Mahidasa is clearly not found 
either in the BAU. or AA. As in 
JB., L c., mind and heart are related as 
activity and organ in Buddhism ; 
Rhys Davids, Buddhist Manual of 
Psychological Ethic^, pp. Ixxxvi f. ; 
Keith, Buddhist Philosophy^ pp. 87, 
196. 



Chap. 28] 


557 


The Supreme and the Individual Souls 


the skin and contacts [samsparga ) ; the hands and actions ; the belly and 
hunger ; the penis and joys ; and the feet and roads. These ten are for man 
either heavens or hells, according to their operation. 

Beyond these parallelisms the relation of sense and object is left unde- 
termined. The use of the expressions Graha and Atigraba might be held to 
suggest the view that sense seeks out its object and mascers it, and the same 
doctrine may be found in the Aitareya ^ and Kausitaki TJpanisads.^ In the 
Katha Upanisad ® we find that the objects are placed above the senses, which 
might be the sense of the first element in Atigraha, but also that the senses are 
the steeds and the objects their field of action. A more penetrating analysis is 
to be found in another passage of the Kausitaki Upanisad,^ where a set of ten 
senses ^ and their objects is drawn up, similar to that above cited. In it the 
objects are described as the external existential elements, Bhutamatra, 
correlated to the senses. The process of knowledge is then described by the 
metaphor of one mounting the object by means of intellect, Prajna — which 
for the Kausitaki is thtprius from which both senses and objects are derived — 
and thus attaining it. The senses are declared in similar detail to be uncon- 
scious without the presence of intelligence ; the rule is applied even to mind, 
which here stands in the place of an organ and has as its object thoughts, what 
is to be understood, and desires. The passage, however, is characteristic of 
the somewhat complex and late character of the Upanisad, for the reason 
given why the other senses are unable to act without intellect is the fact that 
mind, in the absence of intellect, is elsewhere. Stress is laid on the necessary 
connexion of existential elements and intellect- elements, Prajiiamatra ; 
if there were no existential elements, there would be no intellect-elements axid 
vice versa^ and without the co-operation of both, no appearance (rupa) 
whatever would be brought about, the term appearance doubtless standing 
here as an example of visual cognition and applying to all the other forms of 
cognition enumerated. At the same time insistence is laid on the fact that 
there is no ultimate diversity ; as the felly rests on the spokes, and the spokes 
in the hub, so the existential elements rest on the intellect elements, and they 
again are fixed in Prana, which is identified by the Upanisad with the intellect- 
self, Prajnatman.^ 

This doctrine obviously is more metaphysical than psychological in interest, 
and goes a very little way to solve the question of the nature of perception 
or sensation. This is further borne out by the failure to make clear what is 
meant by senses as opposed to objects ; later we find in the Samkhya a 


M. 3. iii. 4. 

® iii. XO and 4. * hi. 5 ff. 

® Viz. speech and names ; breath (smell) 
and odours ; eye and forms ; ear and 
sounds ; tongue and tastes ; hands and 
actions ; body and pleasure and pain ; 
organ of generation and bliss, &c. ; 
feet and movements ; mind and 


thoughts, &c. 

® Deussen {Sechzig Vpanishad's'^, p. 42) 
declares that the two are the expression 
of will, as unconscious and conscious 
(citing his Elemente der Meiaphysik, 
Pt. II, chap. iv). 

’ But only in the late Samkhya Sutra, ii. 
23 ; cf. Vijnanabhiksu on i. 62 and v. 



558 The Philosophy of the Veda [Part v 

distinct recognition of the difference between function and the material organ, 
the faculty of hearing, for example, and the gross ear, but such a distinction 
is nowhere hinted at in the Upanisads, and it is uncertain how the matter was 
regarded in them. In the later texts we find two different theories represented : 
on the one hand, in the Samkhya philosophy^ there is a consistent and 
harmonious materialism of process which, however, is made conscious only 
by the intervention of the Purusa, which is the equivalent in that system of the 
Atman of the Vedanta. On the other hand, in the Vedanta, as interpreted by 
Gaudapada,^ stress is laid on the fact that ultimately the visions of a dream 
and those of our waking state cannot be absolutely distinguished : if the 
dream apparitions are truly produced by the activity of the Atman, so in the 
case of waking states the objects are equally produced by the Atman : the 
thing and its representation condition each other : each separately has no 
existence : they exist only in the Atman, a position which, though differen- 
tiated by ^ahkara from the idealism of the Buddhist Vijhanavada. tends 
indefinitely to merge into it. As against these clear theories, which recognize 
the problem of ideal and real or even material factors in knowledge and supply 
their varying solutions, we have in Buddhist texts® of the earlier period 
a theory of contact which in the Milindapafiha ^ is frankly materialist and was 
doubtless so ah initio, but which at any rate seems not to have appreciated the 
real question involved. It is to this confused species of thought that we must 
in the. main turn in considering the views of the Upanisads : the haziness of 
their ideas is shown conclusively by the fact that often, as later in Buddhism, 
organ and function seem hardly consciously to be separated in their concep- 
tion of the activities of sense. Neither realism nor idealism can be said to be 
yet clearly held. If, as we have seen, in the Kausitaki Upanisad ^ we find all 
existential elements, 4&c., referred to and made dependent on consciousness, 
i. e. apparently a subjective idealism, yet in the Madhyandina recension of the 
Brhadaranyaka Upanisad ® we expressly hear of the Atman that after death 
it is not possessed of empirical consciousness, because it is not in contact with 
Matra, which is most naturally interpreted as a realist or materialist concep- 
tion, somewhat like that of the Samkhya, such consciousness arising from the 
contact of the mind and matter, but the term Matra may have a wider sense 
of all empirical existence. Similarly there is abundant evidence of a naive 
realism, which places side by side the facts of the macrocosm and the micro- 
cosm without suggestion that there is any but a real relation. The parallelism 


104 ; Garbe, Smnkhya-Philosophie^, 
p. 320. 

^ Oltramare, L'histoire des id6es tMoso- 
phiques, i. 271 ff. 

^ Mandukya KMka, ii. 1-18; iv. 67; cf. 
AtJ.i.3. 12. 

^ C. Rhys Davids, Buddhist Psychology, 
pp. 61 ff. ; the account is speculative 
and the conjecture (p. 60) as to the 


significance of BAU. iii. 9. 20 purely 
fanciful. See Keith, Buddhist Philo- 
sophy, pp. 88 ff. 

^ p. 60. 

« iii. 8. 

® iv. 5. 14 (Kanva) omits the statement ; 
Deussen, Sechzig Upaniskad's^, p. 485, 
n, 1. Cf. iv. 3. 9 ; in dream sleep the 
soul is in contact with matter, Matra. 



Chap. 28] 


The Supreme and the Individual Souls 


659 


of the cosmic order (adhidaivata) with the disposition of man (adhydtma) is 
constant and wearisome ; the space within the heart is parallel to cosmic 
space ; ^ the breath of man to the wind,^ the speech to fire, the eye to the sun, 
the ear to the moon, the mind to the lightning ; ® there are live cosmic spaces, 
five gods of nature, five classes of beings, and correspondingly we have five 
vital airs, five senses, five parts of the body ; ^ to name, form, and action in the 
world correspond speech, sight, and man in the individual ; ^ there is Dharma, 
law, and truth for the world and for the man, and the macrocosm and the micro- 
cosm are interrelated in an indissoluble union of reciprocal service and support.® 
The general attitude of the Upanisadsmust, therefore, be described as realistic, 
and, accordingly, not incompatible with a rejection of the subjective idealism 
of the Vijnanavadins. Here and there this interpretation suggests itself with 
special force, as when it is expressly made clear that the Atman is the real 
active force in seeing, in smelling, in speaking, in hearing, in thinking, and the 
senses are but means, or again the Atman is pictured like the ocean as the 
abode of all the sense activities.® From the Samkhya view the Upanisads are 
distinguished in an important respect, the frank recognition accorded by them 
of the activity of the Atman,® while in the Samkhya view the Purusa has 
really no activity, though paradoxically all consciousness is made to depend 
on the imaginary connexion of the Purusa with Prakrti. 

There is, naturally enough, no trace in the Upanisads of any clear apprecia- 
tion of the distinction between mere sensation and ideas such as Dignaga 
made distinct in his doctrine of sensation as without operation of abstract 
thought (kalpandpodha) as opposed to definite cognition {savikalpaka)S^ 
though, in a sense, this distinction might be held to be latent in the contrast 
noted above of the senses and the mind as sources of knowledge. This fact 
renders it most improbable, a priori, that-^^ ‘ from the very beginning Bud- 
dhism had established this difference : vijfidna and its synonyms, citta^ manah, 
represent pure sensation, the same as the kalpandpodha pratyaksa of Dignaga, 
and sanjnd corresponds to definite ideas The realization of the possibility 


1 CU. i. 8. 3. 

^ CU.iv. 3. 1. 

® KU. ii. 12 ff. 

^ TU. i. 7. 

5 BAU. i. 6. 

« BAU. ii. 5. 

’ CU. viii. 32. 4. 

« BAU.ii.4. 11. 

® e.g. BAU. iii. 7 and passim. The Vai 9 e- 
sika school accepts the real activity of 
the self. See also above, § 6 ; Keith, 
Indian Logic and Atomism, pp. 239 ff. 

Keith, Indian Logic and Atomism, 
pp. 70 ff. 

Stcherbatsky, The Central Conception of 
Buddhism, p. 19 (cf. p. 105) . Neglect of 
history and philology has led the same 


scholar into the inaccurate view (p. 48) 
that Duhkha means unrest among the 
elements {dharmas) which Buddhism 
alone admits to be real ; Duhkha 
clearly exf>resses the result of the 
instability of existence, not the insta- 
bility. Both popularly and theoretically 
caksur duhkham means that vision is 
sorrow, not that vision is unrest. The 
translation of drya-saiya as ‘ Aryan 
facts ’ adopted (ihid. p. 48, n. 3) is 
philologically objectionable, because we 
have not the slightest ground for 
belief that in the time when the phrase 
arose Arya had any ethnic connotation 
at all. 



560 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

thus of treating Vij nana, in the scheme of the five Skandhas must have been 
slow ; it is emphatically not reached by the Pali texts of the Canon/ and, like 
all refined conceptions, can be attributed to early Buddhism only at the 
expense of historical truth. 

Naturally it might be expected that from an examination of the relation 
of the Atman to the questions of time and space some light would be cast on the 
aspect in which the Atman was viewed. But unfortunately the account of 
time in the Upanisads is quite valueless from the point of view of philosophy : 
in the Atharvaveda we have Kala set forth as the highest principle of the 
universe, and the waters and even Prajapati are derived from it.^ In the 
Upanisads we have little more than this : an affectedly obscure passage in the 
later part of the Maitrayaniya Upanisad ® exalts time as being the Brahman, 
the highest principle, the source of all that is ; the Qveta9vatara ^ mentions 
time, nature, necessity, accident, material, and spirit as various rival theories 
of being, but declares time as past, present, and future to be inferior to the 
Brahman ; and the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad ® derives time from the 
Brahman, and declares it to be lord of the past and the future. In the view 
of Qahkara,^ while time is absolutely non-existent in the true sense of existence, 
since all but the one is illusion, time, space and causality are in themselves on 
the standpoint of the lower knowledge truly real ; but it is perfectly clear that 
in the case of the Upanisads the nature of time has not received any real 
investigation. 

A more favourable view of the achievement of early Indian philosophy is 
taken by F, Otto Schrader,^ who contends that the distinction between the 
ordinary or empiric and a higher or transcendental time can be traced back 
to the Kala hymns of the Atharvaveda and is recognizable in the epic in such 
phrases ^ as ‘ Time leads me in time ’. With this distinction he connects the 
declaration of the Maitrayaniya Upanisad regarding the time that has parts, 
and is later than the sun and the stars, and the non-time which is without parts, 
and is earlier, and the distinction later made between time which cooks, or 
matures, all beings and him in whom time is matured. Later doubtless we do 
find developed the doctrine that the changing time which we observe in daily 
life is only time as an effect (kdryakdla), the cause of which is a time without 
sections (akhandakdla) and unchanging, and that there must be a sphere or 

1 Cf. C. Rhys Davids, Buddhist Psychology, Present, pp. 97, 98. 

pp. 52 ff. ; Keith, Buddhist Philosophy, ’ Veher den Stand der indischen Philosophic 
pp. 84 ff. ; Oltramare, Uhistoire des zur Zeit Mahdviras und Buddhas, 

id6es theosophiques, ii. 161 ff. pp. 17-30 ; Introduction to the PMca- 

“ xix. 53, 54. For epic views, cf. Barua, rdtra, pp, 65 f, Oldenherg {Weltan-* 

Prehuddh. Ind. PhiU, pp, 198 ff. schauung der Brdhmanatexte, p. 40) 

® vi. 14-16 where time begins with the sun, recognizes that in the AV. Kala may 

a piece of shallow mysticism. Before merely mean ‘ the right moment ’. 

that is impartite (as in fU.) non-time. * Mahabharata, xii. 227. 29. The phrase 
^ vi. 5, 6 ; i. 2, seems to be incapable of bearing any 

® iii. 8, 9 ; iv, 4. 15, 16. serious meaning. 

® Cf. Frazer, Indian Thought, Past and 



661 


Chap. 28 ] The Suf rente and the Individual Souls 

condition which is totally unaffected by time, though time exist in it as an 
instrument. But there seems no real reason why we should ascribe any of 
tliese developed conceptions to the Upanisad period.^ 

The same remark applies even more strongly to space, the conception of 
which can hardly be said to be fully apprehended in the Upanisads. The term 
Aka9a, which is rendered ‘ ^ther ’ in accordance with the established usage, 
denotes in the opinion of B 5 htlingk ^ the empty space, the elements Vayu 
and Aka9a, representing wind and atmosphere, corresponding to the Greek a-^p, 
there being no idea to correspond with the ether of the Greek view. The 
Aka9a was conceived, in his view, as empty space, the atmosphere as opposed 
to the wind not being regarded as corporeal. Whether this view is correct can- 
not be determined with certainty from the evidence : it can be made com- 
patible with whatever is said regarding Aka9a, but on the other hand it is not 
clear that this conception is always adequate. The term Aka9a first appears in 
the Brahmana style, and denotes room or space through which one can pass or 
into which one can thrust a finger.^ Further, the space between the sky and the 
earth when they separated is the Antariksa or atmosphere,^ and, in contrast 
to the wind, Vayu, which as an element is normally rendered air, at the cost 
of some confusion of idea, the atmosphere is regarded as something empty, 
being compared in the Taittiriya Samhita ® to not-being. On the other hand, 
just as not-being is in a sense something concrete, the Aka9a is more than mere 
space. Man, the Kausitaki ® tells us, is born from the Akaga as from a womb ,* 
when fire heats the Aka9a, then rain falls, in the view of the Chandogya ; ^ 
the Taittiriya ® makes the Aka9a born from the self, and from the Aka9a the 
wind is born. Yet in it are the sun and the moon, lightning, stars and fire ; 
by means of it one calls, hears and answers; in it a man is born, and has joy ; 
in it he meets a woman.® Thus the Akaga approaches the sense of space, 
though a material space, but it seems that it does not denote space in the most 
general sense, but rather the space between the sky and the earth, which is 
around us.^® The idea is evidently a considerable advance on the mythological 
presentation of the quarters as divinities, which tends here and there to pass 
over into an attempt to express space as opposed to time, symbolized by the 
seasons.^^ The combination of the terms, Di9 and Aka9a, appears in the 
Maitrayaniya Upanisad,^® which describes Akaga as a lotus flower whose leaves 
are the four quarters and the four intermediate quarters or cardinal points. We 


^ For later views on time, see Keith, 
Buddhist Philosophy^ pp. 163-8, 239 ; 
Indidn Logic and Atomism, pp. 232 ff. ; 
Karma-Mlmdfhsd, pp. 53 ff. ; Sdmkhya 
System^, pp. 57, 61, 99. For an unsuc- 
cessful modern attempt to restate the 
problem of space and time, see Alex- 
ander, Space, Time and Deity, 

* BSGW. 1900, pp. 149-51. Cf. Garbe, 
Sdmkhya^Philosophie^, pp. 268 f. 

1 6 [s.o.s. 32] 


» AB. iii. 42. 1 : QB. iii. 3. 2. 19 ; in the 
body, Garbha Up. 1 (cf. AA. ii. 3. 3) ; 
Majjh. Nik. iii. 242. 

* gB. vii. 1. 2. 23 ; xiv. 7. 1. 19. 

® V. 4. 6. 4. « i. 6. 

’ vii. 11. » ii. 1. 

* CU. vii. 12 ; Kena 25. 

Oldenberg, Weltanschauung der Brdh- 
manatexte, pp. 38 f, 
gJB. X. 2. 6. 2 f. 1* vi. 2. 



562 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

have, however, in the fact that ether is treated regularly as one of the hve 
elements a warning against regarding it as essentially distinct in the view of the 
Upanisads from the other more obvious material elements.^ Yet it must be 
noted that in Buddhism no serious advance was made in attempting to under- 
stand the nature of space ; it was for some unintelligible reason excluded from 
non-derived Bupa,^ and, when the Andhakas claimed that the room between 
objects was perceptible, this view was rejected, a defect which has been traced 
to the failure of Buddhism to investigate the true function of mind.® 

The position with regard to causality is the same. In the Sarhkhya system 
and in the Buddhist the category of causality is regarded as truly existing, and 
the Samkhya quite seriously applies the doctrine of causality as enabling it to 
determine the nature of its final principles : the things of empirical life are 
referred ultimately to one ground in nature, Prakrti, while again the unfolding 
of nature is essentially relative to some principle for whose advantage it takes 
place, which is the Purusa. In the Upanisads a theory of causality is not to be 
found, and the early texts have not the term, Karana ; nor is this remarkable : 
in effect the Brahman is essentially above all cause : when the categories of 
place, time, substance, and cause disappear, then the Brahman remains over, 
as it is said in a very late text.^ The Chandogya Upanisad ® uses the idea of 
root and shoot to convey the idea of derivation. 

Imperfect, however, as are the views of the Upanisads on these points, the 
defects of their theories must not be exaggerated. The amount of progress 
made in developing speculation on these questions for many centuries after 
was very slight, as can be seen from even a brief glance at the Buddhist theory 
of sense as developed in the Pali Nikayas. In that theory the chief difference 
is unquestionably the effort to do without a self at all, which was clearly one 
aspect of the Buddhist faith, though by no means the only aspect and certainly 
in the long run not the most important. But apart from the odium theologicum ® 
it is impossible to grant this attempt any real validity at all : ^ it would have 
been easy to show that the conception of the Atman attained by the Brahmans 
was inadequate, but it was merely a retrogression to solve the problem by 
ignoring its existence : there is nothing in the Nikayas to suggest the most 
moderate competence in treating of the matter, the whole Buddhist position 

^ So also the Aka 9 a is the body of the ’ It may be urged that the view of the 
Atman like fire, wind, moon, and stars, Buddhists has an analogy — imper- 

BAU. iii. 7. 12 ; cf. iv. 4. 5. feet indeed — in modern psychology 

® C. Rhys Davids, Buddhist Manual of (Walleser, JJas Problem des Ich, p. 74). 

Psychological Ethics^, pp. liv, Ixvi. But this proves the essential point that 

2 Buddhist Psychology (1924), pp. 274 if. modern psychology is, as developed. 

See also Keith, Buddhist Philosophy, an empirical science and therefore 

pp. 94 f., 160, 168 f., 185 f, ; Indian abstracts from its data by ignoring the 

Logic and Atomism, pp. 285 ff . ; Karma- transcendental aspect of the ‘ I ’ 

Mlmdmsd, pp. 53 ff. ,* Samkhya System^, element. When as in Buddhism this 

pp. 43, 99. aspect is absolutely denied, a process 

^ Sarvasaropanisad. ® vi. 8. 4, 6. legitimate in science is introduced with 

« Cf.RhysDavids,BMddhisfZndia,pp.251ff. fatal results into philosophy. 



Chap. 28] 


The Supreme and the Individual Souls 


563 


being rendered easy by the illegitimate assumption, whenever necessary, of the 
subject which is denied. It is an elementary fact that a sensation is nothing 
if not an experience for an individual being, and, while for a definite scientific 
purpose we are doubtless free, if we will, to ignore the subjective factor, 
if we carry this ignoring into the field of philosophy, we deal with a false 
abstraction ; nor is it less false because it has appealed to the enthusiastic, but 
confused mind of William James.^ The Upanisads frankly do not face the 
question of memory, but leave it a possibility. But even in the Abhidhamma 
the problem of reinstatement and the conditions of reinstatement are not 
raised as matters calling for definition.^ If even we go to a far later period, 
a formula ^ like ‘ the upspringing of potential cittas, not empty and mutually 
disconnected, but each fraught with the informing satti of this or that among 
former cifta continua \ appears both clumsy and question-begging as a sub- 
stitute for the conception of a real unity in multiplicity, since a citta continuum 
is clearly impossible without such a unity. 

Nor is any progress made in the analysis of consciousness. It is true ^ 
that in place of the occasional remarks of the Upanisads we find in the 
Buddhist texts interminable repetitions of the same facts regarding all the 
senses which are, therefore, more definitely recognized than in some portions 
of the Upanisads, but any real progress in defining sense perception remains to 
be pointed out. On the contrary, we have the old view which makes no clear 
distinction if any at all between the organ and the sensation, and as late as the 
Milindapahha, as we have seen, sensation is expressed in terms of mere 
material contact. The position of mind, Mano, remains precisely what it was 
in the Upanisads : it is wholly erroneous ® to compare it with the sensus com- 
munis of Aristotle, whose two special functions,® that of self-consciousness and 
of consciousness of the common sensibles, by no means correspond with those 
of Mano, which is rather in origin a power without which the senses v/ould in 
effect not perceive at all, and which in a more effective psychology might have 
been developed into the psychical representative of sensation conveyed 
through the physiological apparatus.^ Even the position of touch as in some 
sense the most fundamental of the senses which is claimed for the Dhamma- 
samgani can hardly be accepted as in any way a really scientific theory, as it 
is only enunciated in company with an extraordinarily unintelligible doctrine 
of the position of what is somewhat hypothetically interpreted as the cohesive 
element.® The primitive nature of the process of consciousness as conceived 
in the Nikayas is obvious from the stereotyped account of the origin of 


1 In the various developments of Ms theory 
of pragmatism. 

^ C. Rhys Davids, Buddhist Psychology^ 
p. 142 ; cf. pp. 236 ff., and for a 
criticism of the Bergsonian view there 
adopted, B. Edgell, Theories of Memory , 
pp. 114 ff. 

Ibid. p. 198. 

16 * 


* Ibid. p. 63. ® Ibid. p. 68. 

® De An. ii. 6 ; iii. 1, 2 ; de Somno 2 ; 
de Mem. 1. 

’ Cf. the hint in BAU. i. 5. 3 ; Mahabharata, 
xiv. 22. 16. 

® Contrast C. Rhys Davids, op.cit., pp. 163- 
75, with Buddhist Manual of Psycho- 
logical Ethics^, pp. Ixi ff. 



564 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

knowledge,^ Through the eye and visible form arises visual consciousness ; 
the collision of the two factors is contact : conditioned by contact arises feel- 
ing : what one feels one perceives : what one perceives one thinks about : what 
one thinks about one is obsessed withal. The crudeness and valuelessness 
of the theory is obvious at once from the very fact that it is wholly impossible 
to understand what precise sense was attributed to the several terms, for the 
explanations of the scholiast are in all likelihood nothing but the interpreta- 
tions of later generations of thinkers, who had to do their best to make the 
most out of the tradition of the text. The Buddhists too remain with the 
Upanisads on the basis of the dwelling of the soul or its equivalent in the heart, ^ 
which is thus brought into the theory of sensation. What is indeed of interest 
is not the development of doctrine in the Nikayas, which give us only a few 
changes in terminology such as the metaphor of the doors of the senses,® 
but the extraordinary persistence in Buddhism of the psychology of the 
Upanisads. 

In addition to the mind and the sense organs, the soul possesses the breaths 
or vital airs. Prana, originally ‘ breath then used often as a name for the 
absolute, is in the Upanisads a constant expression for the whole sum of the 
organs of sense, and at the same time a special one breath, beside eye, ear, mind, 
and speech. It, however, in the growing development of the doctrine of 
mind and the organs of sense is gradually reduced to minor importance, and 
becomes concerned not with the intellectual aspect of the soul, but with the 
principle of life as opposed to intellect. The single Prana in this aspect is 
divided into five, which, however, are also sometimes given as two,^ Prana and 
Apana, as three,® these with Vyana, or four,® these with Udana. The Jaimi- 
niya Upanisad Brahmaria gives Prana, Apana, Vyana, Samana, Avana, and 
Udana ; or seven in the head, or nine, including two below, and a tenth in the 
navelJ The precise sense of these terms has been much disputed, but it is not 
open to serious doubt that alone Prana or Apana may mean breath simply, 
whether in or out, and therefore Prana may mean smell.® In contrast, how- 

^ Majjhima Nikaya, i. 111. It is, however, Grundlage des alter en Buddhismus, p. 

to be noted that in the Paticcasamup- 114 ; S. Z. Aung, Compendium of Philo-^ 

pada series is found the order ; con- sophy, pp. 277 

sciousness, name and form, the six » Ptut the CU. iii. 13. 1 has susayah for the 

spheres, contact, feeling, desire, &c. entrances into the heart of eye, ear. 

The hopeless contradiction of view is speech, mind, and air. 

disposed of in the Manual (ed. 2) in the * KU. v. 3. 

words (p. Ixxxii), ‘ This mysterious old ® BAXJ. iii. 1. 10. 

rune must not further complicate our « BAU.iii.4. 1. 

problem and in the Psychology it is ’ JUB. ii. 5. 

passed over with due contempt. But ® Ewing, JAOS. xxii. 249-308, and The 

to establish doctrines by ignoring the Hindu Conception of the Functions of 

most important part of the evidence Breath ; Oertel, JAOS. xvi. 236 ; 

does not further research. See also Macdonell and Keith, Vedic IndeXt ii* 

Keith, Buddhist Philosophy, pp. 196 ff. 48 ; Keith, Aitareya Aranyaka, p. 217, 

^ Buddhist Manual of Psychological Ethics^, n. 4 ; Caland, ZDMG. Iv. 261 ff, ; Ivi. 

p.lxxxvi; 'Wdllts^^VyDiephilosophische 556 ff.; Oldenberg, Weltanschauung der 



565 


Chap. 28] The Supreme and the Individual Souls 


ever, they are on the one hand expiration, on the other inspiration. Apana, 
however, has the definite sense of the downward wind, which presides over 
evacuation in not a few passages ; it also often denotes smell. Vyana is the 
bond of union of the two, that is either the power which maintains life when 
neither expiration nor inspiration takes place, or the breath connecting the 
upper and the lower breaths. Samtoa is not clearly defined : it is said to 
connect expiration and inspiration, which seems needless ; or to assimilate 
food. Udana conducts the soul from the body on death, or leads in deep sleep 
to the Brahman. 

But, besides these psychical and physiological elements, in the later view, 
the soul has, as individual, certain other permanent entities, the elements, 
and a mind- disposition attached to it. It is clearly ^ in one place regarded at 
death as being connected with earth, water, wind, ether, and fire and its 
opposite, and also with desire and its opposite, anger and its opposite, and 
justice and its opposite, as well as with the organs. The same idea seems in 
metaphorical form to be found in the view ^ that for rebirth the waters are 
five times offered in sacrifice as faith, the Soma, rain, food, and seed to become 
a man. The term Linga found in a verse added here is apparently used 
technically to denote the entity which transmigrates as early as the Katha ^ 
at least, and in the Maitrayan.iya Upanisad ^ it has its full technical sense. 
Much more often, however, we hear of the moral qualities and power of 
remembrance of the self which go on the journey of transmigration. 

Of the gross body we learn that the seat of the breaths, of the mind, and 
even of the organs of sense is really in the heart, where in sleep the organs 
remain and where in death they gather ; nay, the heart is even identified with 
the Brahman, and is essentially its home : the name hrdayam is derived from 
hrdy ay am, ‘ he here in the heart In the golden lotus of the heart is the 
ether in which heaven and earth, sun, moon, and stars are enclosed, into which 


Brahmanatexte, pp. 64 ff. The later 
view of Sadananda’s Vedanfeasara, 
§§ 94-8, is preluded by Maitr. ii. 6. 

1 BAU.iv.4.5. 

* CU. V. 3-16 ; BAU. vi. 2. 1-16. These 

passages (Deussen, Phil, of Up,, pp. 
280-2) are inadequate to show that the 
corporeal element of the Linga was as 
yet clearly recognized. It is so first 
in Maitr. vi. 10 ; here we, however, 
must recognize the full force of the 
Saihkhya, to which system its presence 
in the Vedanta may be due (cf. fankara 
on Brahma Siitra, iii. 3. 1 ; Beussen, 
System des Vedanta^ p. 399). 

* vi. 8 ; QU. vi. 9. 

* vi. 10 ; Deussen, Sechzig Upanishad'^s^, 

p. 337. 

« CU. viii. 3. 3. Cf. BAU. iv. 4. 22 ; v. 6 ; 
KU. ii. 20, 4&C. In BAU, iii. 9. 20 the 


heart knows colours, doubtless through 
the mind which is seated there. This is 
the only possible significance of the 
contrast between it and the eye which 
depends on forms while they depend on 
the heart ; there is no distinction 
between primary and secondary quali- 
ties in question. From the connexion 
of mind with the heart is derived the 
Theravadin (BSOS.iii. 353) view which 
places a hadaya-vatthu as the organ of 
mind, evidently the older Buddhist 
view as opposed to the refinement of 
the Sarvastivadin (contrast Stcher- 
batsky, The Central Conception of 
Buddhism, pp. 17 f.). Heart is placed 
side by side with mind as concerned 
with knowledge in BAU. ii. 4. 11 ; iv. 
5. 12, i.e. it is the place of intellect. 



566 


[Party 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

the soul enters in sleep, and in which the immortal golden Purusa resides.^ 
It is the cavity in which the Brahman is concealed. Round the heart are the 
veins 72,000 in number,^ and these, by another turn of thought, are conceived 
a& of five colours, uniting with the rays of the sun similarly coloured and thus 
connecting the sun and the heart. In deep sleep the soul glides into the veins 
and through them it becomes one with the heart. At death the soul is con- 
ceived as passing out by the veins, and the rays of the sun, which the wise find 
open to them, while the entrance is closed to the ignorant.^ By yet another 
turn of thought ^ the conception is reached that only one vein leads to the sun 
out of 101, the vein in question leading to the head, presumably in connexion 
with the fact that there is the suture, the Brahmarandhra,^ through which 
in the process of creation the Brahman is supposed to enter the body as spirit. 
Later accounts such as that of the Pragna ® merge the two versions of 72,000 
and 101 veins into one, the 101 veins having each 100 branches, each of which 
has 72,000 siib-branches, in all 727,210,201. 

The body itself is derived from the three elements, recognized in the Chto- 
dogya Upanisad ’ by the rule that the dense parts become the coarse (faeces, 
urine, bone), the medium the medium (flesh, blood, marrow), constituents of 
the body, and the finest the mind, breath, and speech, corresponding to food 
or earth, water, and heat. The soul is nourished by the blood massed in the 
heart, thus enjoying purer (pravivikta) food than the gross body.® The pro- 
duction of the body is traced to the seed of the father,® and different views of 
the nature of the process of generation can be traced ; in the simplest form 
it is said that the seed is the self of the father, which enters the woman and 
becomes part of herself; but it is also said, in more exact accordance with 
the doctrine of the transmigration of souls, that the seed is merely a stage on 
the course of the rebirth of the soul, which in the moon has exhausted its 
good works : it comes down through the ether, the wind, smoke, rain, plants, 
seed, and the mother’s womb, in each of which it of course has merely a tem- 
porary habitation : from yet another point of view the cause of procreation 
is the desire for reunion of the two halves of the same being originally united, 
but divided as male and female by Prajapati. But the primitive view of the 
Upanisads is clear that the production of offspring is a religious duty, 
which was inculcated on the student at the close of the studentship : a chapter 
on how to secure certain qualities in the child is incorporated in the Brhada- 
rapyaka Upanisad^® probably for this very reason. On the other hand there 


1 CU. viii. 1. 3. 

^ BAU. ii. 1. 19 ; cf. iv. 2. 3 ; 3. 20. 

® CU. viii. 6. 1 ; ef. BAU. iv. 4. 8, 9 ; Mund. 
i. 2. 11. 

^ CU. viii. 6. 6; KU. vi. 6. 

® AU. i. 3. 12. 

® iii. 6 ; Maitr. vi. 30. 

’ vi. 5. The Garbha Upanisad has the more 
usual five (cf. BAU. iv. 4. 5). Cf. Keith, 


Sdmkhya System^, p. 110. 

® BAU. iv. 2. 3 ; cf, Mand. 3, 4, misunder- 
stood in Vedantasara, § 120. 

» BAU. iii. 9. 22 ; vi. 1. 6 ; 4. 1, &c. 

AU. ii. 2, 3. 

CU. V. 10. 5, 6 ; BAU. vi. 2. 16 ; Kaus. i. 

2 ; Mund. ii. 1. 5. 

BAU. i. 4. 3, 4. 

12 BAU. vi. 4 ; TU. i. 9. 



Chap. 28] The Supreme and the Individual Souls 567 

is clear proof of the gradual advance of the spirit of asceticism, in complete 
harmony with the fact that the knowledge of the Atman shows that all 
desires for children to continue the race, to discharge the debt to the Fathers, to 
expiate the faults of their parents in life, are idle and foolish. The Brahmans, 
who have known the self, are twice declared in the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad ^ 
to have held aloof from the desire of children, ‘ What need have we of off- 
spring, whose soul is the universe ? ’ By a bizarre conception, found here only 
in the late Garbha Upanisad, the embryo in the ninth month is conceived as 
remembering all its previous births and its good and evil deeds, a remembrance 
which is taken from it by the pangs of birth. ^ 

In addition to creatures born alive, other creatures exist born from a germ 
or shoot (udbhid), born from eggs, and born from moisture like insects and so 
forth. These ideas which are found only in two passages in the Upanisads ^ 
are decisive for later philosophy, but their connexion with the theories of the 
Upanisads is nowhere indicated. 

§ 9 . The Four States of the Soul 

The soul, despite its close connexion with the body, which we have traced 
in detail, is also enabled by its nature to approach closely the absolute. The 
spirit is most remote from the absolute in its normal waking activities : in 
that case the senses and the mind are at work, but when there is sleep the 
senses and the mind are merged* in the breath. A further distinction is then 
made between the condition of the soul in the sleep of dreams, and in deep 
dreamless sleep, in which the soul enters into the purest light, and then as a 
consequence of its own nature emerges again from it. These three stages alone 
are found in the oldest Upanisads, and it is not till the latest Upanisads 
that a fourth is added in accordance with the constant tendency further to 
subdivide. 

The philosophical importance of the doctrine ^ lies in the effect which the 
investigation of the stages of the soul must have had on the conception of the 
soul itself. The early identification of the soul with Prana as breath must 
have been suggested by the fact of the permanence of the breath despite the 
cessation in sleep of the activities of the mind ; death overcomes the voice, 
the eye, the ear, but while these are sunk in sleep the breath perishes not.^ 
It is a further step, but one intelligible enough, to the conclusion ® that, 
though the body perishes in death, yet the breath remains, for the breath is 
invisible and there is, therefore, no ground to assume that the falling to pieces 
of the body affects its being. We attain thus the conception of the self as 

1 iii. 5. 1 ; iv. 6. 22. disch, op. cit, p. 191 ; A. Guha, Jivat- 

® Windisch, Buddha's Geburt, p. 90. man in the Brahma- Sutras , chap. ii. 

® AU. iii. 3 ; CU. vi. 3. 1 ; cf. Brahma * B. Heimaiin, Die Tiefschlafspek'ulation 

Sutra, iii. 1. 21 ; Keith, Aiiareya der alien Upanisaden (1922). 

Aranyaka, p. 235 ; Manu, i. 43 ff. ; ® BAU. i, 5. 21. 

Caraka, ^^arirasthana, Hi. 25 ; Win- ® CU. vi. 11, 3, 



568 


[Part y 


The Philosophy of the Veda 


something which does not perish, which, therefore, is without beginning and 
without end, and as the essential element in man we find all activities resolved 
ultimately into Prana on their cessation. On a higher level of thought we have 
the concept Prajna, intelligence, substituted for the breath, in recognition of 
the psychic side of man and of the fact that it is consciousness or intelligence 
which is aware of breath and of all man’s life, and in it also all else is resolved. 
Advancing still further on the path of abstraction, we attain the concept of 
the Atman as that which knows, without possessing any empiric object, 
suggested inevitably by the condition attained in deep dreamless sleep. The 
identity of such an Atman with the Brahman is obviously an easy step, and 
this may well have been a factor in achieving the identification. Obviously 
also the tendency to attain the unity in question by means of artificial pro- 
cesses of mental suppression arises immediately from the desire to imitate 
artificially the condition achieved in deep sleep, but under natural conditions 
inevitably only for a limited period, and subject to the possibility of dreams. 

In the waking state the man uses all his faculties and is confronted by a real 
world, but the waking state is in reality merely a dream condition, since it has 
not true reality, and the man who is awake is really furthest removed from the 
clear knowledge usually attached to the waking condition. Hence in the 
Aitareya Upanisad ^ we find three sleeps or dreams mentioned which may well 
be the three s.tates, the first regarded as dreaming no less than the other two. 
In the case of a dream, however, the outer world is not there : ^ there are no 
carts, houses, roads, but he makes them for himself; there is no joy, happiness, 
nor desire, but he makes them for himself ; w'ells, pools, and streams also he 
fashions for himself. The spirit serves as light for itself in this condition. 
From another point of view ® the primitive idea of the absence of the mind 
during sleep is recognized, and a warning given not lightly to waken the sleeper, 
lest he not easily find his way back to the body. These two views, the activity 
of the self in the body in sleep, and the journeying of the self from the body, 
are united in a third ^ which pictures the self as engaged in the process of 
wandering through his own body here and there. The vital spirits are then 
treated as being his subjects, who attend him in his movements, like a king, 
through the realm of his body. The nature of the dream consciousness is 
shown also by the Upanisads to be closely connected with the character of the 
consciousness which was enjoyed in the waking life, and which thus is the 
material (mdfrd) on which the soul acts ; what a man feared might happen 
to him, to be slain, to be flayed, to be trampled on by an elephant, or plunged 
into a pit, all these ideas crowd in upon him.® In the Pragna ® the whole 


^ i. 3. 12 ; cf. Keith, Aitareya Aranyaka, 
p. 230, n. 10. 

® BAU. iv. 3. 9 ff. 

8 lUd, 11-14. Cf. CU. viii. 12. 3. 

* BAU. ii. 1. 18. 

® BAU. iv. 3. 20 ; CU. viii. 10. 2. This is 
not a negation of the creative power of 


the soul in dream-sleep, for which cf. 
Walleser, Bet dltere Vedanta^ p. 39 ; 
Qankara on Brahma Sutra, p. 780, as 
against and Dvivedaganga, 

followed by Max Muller, on BAU. iv. 3. 
14. 



Chap. 28] The Four States of the Soul 569 

process of dreaming is a review of what has been experienced in the waking 
state. 

From the ordinary process of dreaming sleep a transition is made to deep 
sleep, when the soul advances more closely to the world to come, and from the 
mere consciousness of individual things, such as the concept of being a king 
or a god, becomes conscious of itself as the universe, in w'hich case, however, 
there is no longer any possibility of contrast between subject and object, and 
ordinary consciousness is superseded by the union for the time being with the 
Prajha Atman, the intelligent self, the absolute. In this condition, as a man 
in the embrace of his darling wife does not have any consciousness of outer or 
inner, so the spirit embraced by the self consisting of knowledge has no con- 
sciousness of outer and inner.^ The spirit in this condition is without desire 
and free from all pain ; it is unaffected by good, unaffected by evil, the father 
ceases to be father, the mother mother, the worlds wwlds, the gods gods. 
There is no interruption of seeing, though the spirit sees not : we have in fact 
the condition of a pure objectless knowing subject, continuing in this condition. 
The soul now passes from the 72,000 veins in w^hich it has moved during 
dream-sleep, and rests in the pericardium in supreme bliss, like a great king or 
Brahman. The Chandogya ^ follows the same line of thought, but it lays 
stress on the entry of the self into the brilliance or heat, treats the soul as 
existing in the veins, which is possibly found also in the Brhadara^iyaka, and, 
by a curious confusion of ideas which is already foreshadowed or perhaps 
rather later borrowed and interpolated in the Brhadaranyaka, the joys of free 
movement which belong merelj^ to dreaming sleep are in one later passage 
ascribed to the deep sleep also. The Kausitaki ® makes the deep sleep the 
union with breafh, which in its scheme is identical with the intellectual self, 
which is the absolute. 

In this condition of sleep without dreams it is clear that the older Upanisads 
find the highest bliss, ^ the complete union of the individual with the absolute,^ 
which is all that can be attained by man. In the later Upanisads ® there 
appears the effort to add a fourth condition, called by its numerical designation 
the Caturtha or more archaically Turiya. This state is that which is attained 
not in deep sleep, but in the waking condition by the effort of concentration 
of the mind which is Yoga, The two conditions of deep sleep and the fourth 
differ, not in point of their failing to recognize plurality, but in the fact that the 
Turiya knows no slumber : the Turiya is neither deep asleep nor dreaming : 


1 BAU. iv. a. 19-33 ; cf. ii. 1. 19, and, of 

death, ii. 4. 12 f, Cf. Maitr. vi. 7, 35 ; 
the pure self is nirmama, li. 7; niratmariy 
ii. 4 ; vi, 20, 21 ; cf. i. 6 ; Tejo- 
bindu 3. 

2 vi. 8. 1 ; viii. 6. 3 ; 11. 1 ; 12. 3 (as in 

BAU. iv. 3. 15 as to movement) is 
different from viii. 3. 4, and is perhaps 
interpolated. At least it expresses a 


different ideal ; cf. p. 570, n. 8. 

® iii. 3 ; iv. 19, 20. 

* BAU. iv. 3. 21 f, ; CU. viii. 4. 1 f. ; 3. 
4 ; 6. 1 f. ; 9. 1 f. ; it is free from 
limitation and is bliss ; vii. 23, 24. 
CU.vi.8. 1 ; vii. 25.1. 

® See Gaudapada, MSndukya Karika, iii. 
33 ff. The first three are now styled 
Vai 9 vanara, Taijasa, and Prajna. 



570 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

the dreamer has false knowledge, the sleeper has none. It is obviously im- 
possible to make much of this refinement and still less of the four subdivisions 
of it which a later Upanisad, the Nrsinhottara,^ invents. Oltramare,*^ while 
recognizing the possibility that even in the period of the Upanisads there may 
have been felt the necessity of making some effort to supply an ideal which 
would not, like the established conception, find the only true reality in an 
entity ® deprived of that consciousness which is in experience the most 
essential and real part of existence, admits that in this conception of the 
Mandtikya Upanisad we have nothing more than a logical construction, even 
if in ultimate analysis the phenomena of ecstasy may have given a basis for the 
conception. 

The Upanisads assume in these accounts of the states of the soul the dis- 
tinction between the knowledge possessed in dreams and that which the soul 
enjoys in waking moments. But in what does this important distinction 
consist ? The answer to this problem, which is much discussed in later 
philosophy, cannot be supplied effectively from the Upanisads themselves, 
which, as has been seen, still fall short of developing a theory of the nature of 
sensation and perception. 

§ 10. The Doctrine of Transmigration 

The origin of the doctrine of transmigration is one of the most difficult 
problems of Indian philosophy : its extraordinarily firm hold on the mind of 
part at least of India, which is shown by the fact that Buddhism rests on the 
doctrine as an essential presupposition, makes it natural to seek the view in 
the earliest period of Indian religion, and this desire to find metempsychosis 
in the beginnings of Indian belief takes two forms. On the one hand there 
have been seen direct references to metempsychosis in the Rigveda, and on the 
other there have been traced there ideas which explain the genesis of the con- 
ception. 

The references to transmigration which have been seen in the Rigveda are 
all of the most improbable character : it is to ignore the nature of poetry to 
press the wish that there may be long life for man among the gods ^ into the 
view that it contemplates rebirth : the attempt to find references to it in 
two of the verses of the riddle hymn of Dirghatamas ® is bold, but not very 
plausible : the allusion,^ in which Vasistha is made ^ to refer to his previous 

^ 2. * BAU. passage may be interpolated 

^ Vhistoire des idies thiosophiquesj i. 124 ff. (Madhyandina has it later, iv. 3. 33) ; 

^ It is clear that the self is always an entity, see Deussen, Sechzig Upanishad^s^, 

but in CU. viii. 11. 1 the state of deep p. 468, n. 2 ; CU. viii. 12. 3. 

sleep is treated as annihilation, and RV. x. 14. 4 ; Windisch, Buddha's Geburt, 

in lieu the self is given the attributes of p. 54 ; Boyer, JA. s4r. 9, xviii. 451-99. 

motion free from the body sporting with ® RV. i. 164. 30, 38 ; Bdhtlingk, BSGW. 

women or friends (as illogically in BAU. xlv. 88-92. 

iv. 3. 15). This clearly indicates an ® RV. vii, 33. 
ehtort to give individuality and pleasure ’ Geldner, Ved. Stud. ii. 142. 
to the self in its highest form. The 



Chap. 28] 


571 


The Doctrine of Transmigration 


birth, is quite impossible, and the same criticism can be applied in every other 
case.^ The effort to find such views is naturally not modern merely : the 
commentaries on the Upanisads themselves seek to trace the idea, and the 
fact that they can adduce nothing worthy of consideration is surely con- 
clusive proof that there was nothing. In the Brhadaran3’'aka Upanisad ^ it is 
sought by Qahkara, without any good ground, and not in accord with the 
Upanisad, to show that Vamadeva, the reputed author of a hymn ^ beginning, 

‘ I was aforetime Manu, I the sun ", refers to his former births, and in another 
passage of that text,^ in the exposition of the doctrine of transmigration, a 
verse ^ celebrating the two ways of the Fathers and of the gods, on which 
everything meets which moves between father and mother, is pressed by the 
Upanisad itself into service, though the reference is merely to day and night. 
A third passage in the Aitareya Aranyaka,® which refers to a third birth after 
death, beside that from the father and by initiation, makes also use of a verse 
of Vamadeva, in which lying in the womb the speaker learned all the births of 
the gods, but it is not proved or even plausible that the Upanisad itself refers 
to transmigration at all : the third birth may most probably have been in the 
next world,® and in any case the quotation had nothing whatever to do with 
the subject. 

The effort to find suggestions of the origin of transmigration in Vedic 
beliefs ® is worthy of more consideration. The ideas that the birds are the 
forms of the Fathers, and that the Fathers creep about the roots of the plants, 
and the practice of using an insect or other animal, which alighted on a gar- 
ment spread out with an invocation to the soul of the dead, when his bones 
cannot be found, to serve in place of his mortal relics, are points adduced by 
Oldenberg as suggesting the groundwork on which the Indian belief 
developed. It is not necessary to brush these ideas lightly aside, or even to 
point out that the evidence for them is late, and not of value as proof for the 
early Vedic religion. What is necessary is to point out that, while the ideas 
thus recorded are of some value as showing the presence in Indian religion of the 
belief of the incorporation of the souls of the dead now and then in animals or 
^plants — of the latter there is even a hint in the Rigveda itself — the importance* 


1 Keith, Taittirlya Samhitdi i. pp. cxxviii ff. 
RV, ix. 113 is not good evidence. 

“ i.4. 10. 

RV.iv. 26.1. 

" BAU. vi. 2. 2- 

5 RV. X. 88. 15. 

^ AA. ii. 5. 

’ RV. iv. 27. 1 ; ^ahkara on Brahma Sutra, 
iii. 4. 51 ; Windisch, Buddha's Geburt, 
p. 62, n. 2. 

® This is strongly supported by ^B. xi. 2. 1. 
1 (L4vi, La doctrine du sacrifice, p. 107), 
though the other view is taken by 
Windisch (Buddha's Geburt, p. 62), who 
ignores the QB. passage. The language 


of the text, moreover (itah prayann eva 
punar jdyate), and JUB. iii. 9 ft, seems 
conclusive against a second birth on 
earth. 

® German belief is dubious, Appian, Hist, 
i. 4. 3 ; Helm, Altgerm, Bel. i. 254 f. ; 
for the Druids, see Caesar, B. G. vi. 14 ; 
below. Chap. 29. 

Bel, des X^eda^, pp. 563, 581 ; cf. Bloom- 
field, Bel. of Veda, pp. 255 ff. 

Deussen, Phil, of Up., p. 316. 

X. 16. 3. Other considerations which may 
have rendered easy the growth of the 
doctrine are the theory that the sac- 
rifice carries the offerer to heaven and 



672 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

of transmigration lies precisely in the fact that the doctrine is an ethical 
system, and that it has, therefore, not merely a value totally distinct from the 
mere belief suggested by the evidence above adduced, but is thereby referred 
for its real origin to something quite other than popular belief. That it 
should have been so fully accepted by the people in course of time was 
doubtless aided by such views as that mentioned : but no such view could 
create metempsychosis as a system of the marked character of the Indian view. 

The Brahmanas contain on the whole no acceptance of the doctrine of 
transmigration : the souj aims at the world of the Fathers as before : the mere 
fact ^ that as punishment for the cursing of a Brahman, the laying of violent 
hands on him, or the spilling of his blood, the wrong-doer is kept a hundred, a 
thousand years, as many years as the grains of dust moistened by his blood, 
from the world of the Fathers, shows that the view still prevailed that this 
world was the appointed place for the holy dead even as it is in the Rigveda. 
Nor in the main is that world distinct from heaven to which a man naturally 
goes but sometimes fails to reach, confused by the smoke of the fire which 
burned his body.^ The conception of weighing the good and evil of a man in a 
balance and his following whichever is the greater,® and that of two fires 
which hold back the wicked from the way of the gods or of the Fathers,^ do 
not carry us to any definite view other than that of the Rigveda, and the con- 
ception of men being discriminated as good or bad in the presence of Yama® 
is equally unimportant. But a new and important motive appears in the 
growing fear of death even in the world to come. 

This fear seems, as we have seen, to have developed in accordance with the 
desire to distinguish the diverse degrees of good acquired by different modes of 
sacrifice ; it was obviously necessary to admit that every sacrificer would 
receive reward by admission to the happiness of the world to come, but the 
Brahmans had to consider the claims of the richer of their patrons, and had 
to promise them more in the world to come than the poorer, who offered and 
gave less. Hence we find that the need of food in the next world may be 
severely limited, according to the mode of offering : it can be unnecessary for 
a spirit to feed oftener than once in fourteen days, in four, six, or twelve 
months, or even once only in a hundred years, or even never at all. Again 
it is said that sacrifice to the gods produces less than offering to the self.® 
Naciketas begs that he may be granted the privilege that his good deeds shall 
not decay, while it is said that day and night wear out the good deeds in the 


then back to earth until he dies, and 
that life descended from the sky as rain 
to produce fruits and nourish and 
generate life in turn ; Oltramare, 
Uhistoire des id&es thiosopkiqiies, i. 
97, 98, Cf, also Speyer, Indische 
Theosophie, pp. 90 ff. Aboriginal belief 
of passing of souls into plants, &c., is 
probable, and may explain the ready 


adoption of the view ; cf. Oldenberg, 
Die Lehre der Upanishaden, pp. 27 ff. ; 
Leumann, Buddha und Mahdx^raf p. 15. 
1 TS.ii.6.10.2. 

TB.iii. 10. 11. 1. 
gB, xi. 2. 7. 83. 

" gB. i. 9. 8. 2. 

® TA. vi. 5. 13. 

« gB. xi. 2. 6. 14. 


’ TB. iii. 8. 5. 



Chap. 28] The Doctrine of Transmigration 573 

next world of one who does not know a certain rite.^ The fear thus forms itself 
that in place of the desired immortality in the next world there will be 
renewed death, and many rites ^ are said to save from it, the Agnihotra, the 
Visuvant, the Naciketas fire, the piling of the fire, the study of the Veda. 
There can be no doubt that the repeated death is in the next world, not in 
this : it is applied to the Fathers,® and from those who are born after death 
to immortality are distinguished those who are born to die again."^ The idea 
of the death as being a birth in the next world is not at all rare, as in the 
passage of the Aitareya Upanisad above mentioned, and the conception that 
death might there be repeated is a very natural one. It remained only to 
transfer it to the present world and the effect of transmigration was reached. 
But though this step is taken in the TJpanisads it is by no means universally 
to be found there : there is no clear reference in the Aitareya Aranyaka or 
Upanisad, and the Brhadaranyaka ® has passages which quite clearly do not 
recognize it at all. 

The earliest notice of the doctrine of transmigration preserved for us, 
apart from a few very dubious allusions in the Qatapatha Brahmana,® is to be 
traced in the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad in the section ascribed to Yajnavalkya. 
It is founded in an idea which is plainly expressed but merely as an incidental 
view in the Bigveda that at death the eye of man goes to the sun, the breath 
to the wind, the speech to the fire, and the members are also dispersed. This 
conception which has no importance for the Bigveda is developed in the 
9 atapatha Brahmana ® in one of the passages which approach the Upanisad 
character, and in the Brhadaranyaka,® after a long enumeration of the modes 
of disposal of the parts of man in this way, it is asked where the man then 
remains. On this Yajnavalkya takes the questioner Artabhaga apart and 
confers with him in secret, and what they conversed about was work, and what 
they commended that was work. In truth, it is added, a man becomes good 
by good works, evil by evil. In a subsequent passage the matter is further 
explained by the doctrine that on death, like a caterpillar — or grass leech — 
proceeding from one leaf to another, the soul, having shaken off the body and 
freed itself from ignorance, presumably empirical life, makes a beginning on 
another body. As a goldsmith chisels out a newer and fairer form from a 
piece of carving, so the soul fashions for itself another newer, fairer form, 
whether it be of the Fathers, or the Gandharvas, or the gods, or Prajapati, or 
Brahman, or other living beings ; ^ just as man acts, just as he behaves, so will 


1 TB.iii. 10. 11. 2. 

* QB.ii.3.3.9 ; KB. xxv. 1 ; TB.iii. 11.8. 
6 ; 9B. X. 1. 4. 14 ; xi. 5. 6. 9, &c.; 
Oltramare, Uhistoire de$ id6es ihioso- 
phiqueSf i. 50 ff. 

» CB. xii. 9. 3. 12. 

^ fB. X. 4. 3. 10. 

« i.4. 15; 5.16; iii. 8. 10, &c. 

» QB, i. 5. 3. 4. 


’ X. 16. 3. 

» X. 3. 3. 8. 

» iii. 2. 13. 

BAU.iv.4.2-6. 

Hence the doctrine of Karmadevas (BAU. 
iv. 3. 33), men who become gods by 
their deeds, and men Gandharvas (TU. 
ii. 8). An anticipation of Karman is 
faintly contained in the isfupilrta of the 



574 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 


he be born. He who does good will be born good, he who does evil will be 
born evil : he becomes holy by holy deeds, evil by evil. Hence is explained 
the view that man is composed of desire, in proportion to desire is his will, in 
proportion to his will he performs acts, and according to his acts does it happen 
to him. Or, as an appended verse has it, having attained the end of his deeds 
committed on earth, he returns from yonder world to the world of work. 

That this doctrine does not teach the transmigration from one body to 
another is asserted by Schrader,^ but this view can only be taken as a tour de 
force, even apart from the appended verse, which expressly makes the trans- 
migration clear. It is also certain that, apart from the verse which is doubtful 
in sense, ^ it is a simple transmigration by reason of character or action. It is 
a change of the soul ® from one body into another, and the instances cited are 
better bodies, as they are of better results from good action in the present life : 
the other beings who are mentioned are, therefore, to be understood of higher 
beings, in all likelihood, than man. It is only in the later Madhyandina 
recension of this passage that the form of a man is inserted. Yaj havalkya, then, 
considered that transmigration was the fate of men, who had not the know- 
ledge of the identity of the individual and the absolute, which ended the 
possibility of transmigration of any kind : exactly what sort of fate awaited 
the bad, he does not say, but clearly they would take on at best the forms of 
beings inferior to themselves, perhaps men of lower degree, animals, &c. 

The appended verse is interpreted by ^ahkara to refer to the fact that the 
soul is not merely rewarded by being transferred to another body, but before 


Rigveda, which is an entity preceding 
its master to heaven; cl Naciketas’s 
store of good deeds. Geldner (see 
Lindenau, ZII. i. 49 n.) sees in AV. x. 
7. 11 a reference to the persistence of 
Tapas, which is an element of Karman, 
but the passage is very obscure. 

1 ZDMG. Ixiv. 333-5. 

® Deussen, Sechzig IJpanishad^^, p. 476, 
n. 3 ; Windisch, Buddha's Gehurt, pp. 
70, 71. 

^ This is made clear by BAU. iv. 4. 3 ff., 
which Jacobi {Die Eniwicklung der 
Gottesidee bei den Indern, p. 9) wrongly 
ignores in his contention that Karman 
was regarded as a transcendent power 
bringing into being a new psychic 
complex, no permanent self being 
known. It is also very dubious if we 
can accept his view that the origin of 
Karman in a philosophic sense is to be 
found in the Mimansa doctrine of 
Apurva, a mysterious entity, which 
attaches itself to the soul of man when 
he has offered sacrifice and clings to 
him until such time as his action bears 


its fruit (cl Keith, Karma-Mimdmsd, 
pp. 36, 73 ff., 89). This theory was 
naturally enough evoked by the fact 
that the sacrifice often did not reap 
any immediate fruit, and it was, there- 
fore, necessary to provide something to 
preserve continuity. But we need not 
believe this bizarre speculation very 
old ; it can hardly have been needed so 
long as any real belief in the Vedic gods 
survived ; in the Mimansa that has 
wholly disappeared. In the Jain theory 
Karman is definitely material (von 
Glasenapp, Die Lehre mm Karman), 
but it seems very dubious if Stcher- 
batsky {The Central Conception of 
Buddhism, p. 34) is right in ascribing a 
semi-material nature to Karman in 
Buddhism ; the Jains remained on an 
extremely primitive level of thought 
which other schools earlier outlived. 
The idea of Karman, however, was 
doubtless affected inter alia by the 
conception of sin {enas, dgas) as clinging 
in a quasi-physical way to a man. 



Chap. 28] The Doctrine of Transmigration 575 

that period undergoes reward or punishment for its deeds in the appropriate 
place. The question of its precise meaning is not important : it may mean ^ 
merely that he transmigrates after completing one life. But the important 
fact is that, with the doctrine of action as determining the future life of man, 
there comes to be combined the doctrine of reward in heaven or punishment 
elsewhere, which is already seen in the Bigveda and more clearly in the 
Atharvaveda, and which we need not doubt was a popular belief, and this 
combination is already found in the two main texts which are our sources for 
the transmigration doctrine. Of these the Brhadaranyaka ^ version is found 
in the sixth book which occurs in the appendix, and this fact alone indicates 
its later date. The other version is in the Chandogya,® and here as always that 
Upanisad shows its dependence in the case of common material on the 
Brhadaranyaka. A somewhat corrupt version is also given in the second 
Pari9ista of the Nirukta. 

The account is divided naturally into two parts. The first is the theory 
of the five fires, which is an account apparently of the mode in which the soul 
on death passes immediately, without intermediate reward or punishment, 
into the new body. The burning of the body on death is here taken by a new 
turn of thought as the offering of sacrifice, and the essential part of the offering, 
the action of man, is figured as the waters, which are offered with faith ; hence 
the faith takes the place of the waters as the expression for the part which 
transmigrates. The faith, which thus ascends in the form of the sacrificial 
vapour to the gods, is by them offered in the heaven, the atmosphere, the 
earth, the man, and the woman as sacrificial fires, changing thus first to the 
Soma, then to rain, then to food, then to seed,^ and then to the embryo, and 
then receiving existence afresh. The mythical character of the whole is 
obvious, and reminds us that the new doctrine of action as determining the 
future life was decidedly disadvantageous to the sacrificial priest, and that it 
was natural to reserve it as a holy mystery. 

The second part of the account deals with the two ways, that of the gods 
and of the Fathers, and it teaches the doctrine first of punishment in the next 
world, and then rebirth on earth for those persons who were not to receive 
full enlightenment. The Devayana, originally in the Rigveda the path by 
which the sacrifice of a man was borne to the gods or by which they came for it, 
and by which on death he joined the Fathers and the gods in heaven, is trans- 
formed into the path by which the soul goes to the gods or to the absolute. 
On the burning of the body the soul enters the flame, then the day, the bright 
half of the month, the bright half of the year, the year, the sun, the moon 
(in the Chandogya version), the lightning, and finally, led by a spiritual man or, 


^ Deussen, PhiL of Up.f p. 332 ; Sechzig 
VpanisKad's^, p. 476, n. 3. 

^ vi. 2. 

® V, 3-10. 

^ This is a point of difference from the 


Buddhist theory by which the counter- 
part of the soul enters directly db extra 
the womb ; Windisch, Buddhds Geburt, 
pp. 29, 32, 76. 



576 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 


as the Chandogya has it, a superhuman man, into the world of Brahman. The 
terms are of course to be understood spatially, but in later India they were 
interpreted as temporal, and thus in the great epic the death of Bhisma is 
delayed by that warrior so that he may die in the Uttaraya^a, the northern 
course of the sun.^ In the case of the Pitryana the course is different : the 
moon is common to both since the moon was often regarded as the home of the 
dead, 2 and in the Upanisads its waxing and waning were brought into con- 
nexion with the movements of the souls : hence the path is the smoke, the 
night, the dark half of the month, the dark half of the year, the world of the 
Fathers in lieu of the year, the ether not the sun, the moon, which is now not 
a stage of transit to the world of Brahman, but the highest place attained by 
the souls. The arrival of the souls fills up the moon,^ so that in the meta- 
phorical language of the Upanisads they are enjoyed by the gods, a view 
which the Vedanta reduces to the principle that the souls and the gods 
together delight therein. This time of felicity ends only when the merit of the 
soul is finished, and then it returns to earth by the process, in its last stages 
very difficult, of being materialized into ether, wind, smoke, mist, cloud, rain, 
plants, food, seed, and entrance into the womb of the mother to be followed by 
rebirth. The way of the Fathers is the lot of those who are bent on sacrifice, 
works of piety, and asceticism (in the Chandogya, sacrifice, gifts, and alms- 
giving), while that of the gods which leads to the Brahman is allotted to the 
wise who know the doctrine and those who in the forest worship faith (in the 
Chandogya, worship faith and asceticism, unless it means ‘ worship, holding 
that faith is asceticism ’) . The lot of the wicked appears to have been the third 
place which led to birth again as animals, of the lower insect orders, worms, or 
flies. In the Chandogya Upanisad^ the position is differentiated by the 
division of the classes of souls, which go to the moon, into those of good and 
those of abominable conduct : the former are reborn as Ksatriyas, Brahmans, 
or Vai9yas, the latter as dogs, pigs, or Candalas, but the absurdity is retained 
that the third class remains, described as beings which ever return. 

The Kausitaki Upanisad ® presents an accommodation version : here the 
souls are all sent to the moon : their knowledge is there tested, and according 
to the result they proceed by the Devayana leading through the worlds of 
Agni, Vayu, Varuna, Indra, and Prajapati to that of Brahman, or they return 


1 Cf. Bhagavadgita, viii. 24 ; ^^nkara on 
Brahma SUtra, iv. 2. 20 ; WinternitZ, 
Gesch, d, ind. Lit, i. 370, 

* Kaus. ii. 8. Its position in the Devayana 

is only thus to be explained : it is 
clearly out of place ; cf. JUB, iii, 13. 12. 
® Cf, Kaus. i. 2 ; BAU. vi. 2. 16 ; there is a 
clear reference to the doctrine (RV. x. 
85. 5) of the Soma cup of the moon as 
the food of the gods, to explain its 
waxing and waning. 

* V. 10. 


* i. 2 ; a difficult passage ; see Keith, 
Qunkh&yana Arariyaka^ p.^ 17 ; BOht- 
lingk, BSGW. xlii. 198 ff. ; xlix. 
98 f. ; Windisch, BSGW. lix. Ill ff. ; 
Buddha's Geburt, pp. 68, 67, 71. There 
are quasi parallels in JB. i. 18 and 49 
(Oertel, JAOS. xix. Ill ff.). The path 
to the moon in the latter version is 
through the fire, smoke, night, day, 
waning half of month, waxing half of 
month, and soul and body unite in the 
moon or month. 



Chap. 28 ] The Doctrine of Transmigration 577 

to earth in rebirth as a worm or a fly or a fish or a bird or a lion or a boar 
or a serpent or a tiger or a man or as something else. The later Upanisads 
add nothing of value to this doctrine : the Katha ^ refers to the rebirth of 
men as men or plants according to their deeds and knowledge, and the 
Pra9na ^ follows the Chandogya with some deviation. It, with the Jaiminiya 
Upanisad Brahmana,^ recognizes two ways from the start, one by the north 
course to the world of Aditya, the other by the south course to the moon, 
from the former there being no return. The mention of Aditya here is an 
archaic touch in comparison with the world of Brahman, while on the other 
hand it is more recent than the conception of the goal as the world of Yama, as 
in the Bigveda. The Jaiminiya version contains the curious assertion ^ that 
a man can, after attaining the world of Brahman through the earth, Agni, 
Vayu, the atmosphere, the quarters, day and night, the half months, the 
months, the seasons, the year, the heavenly Gandharvas, the Apsarases, the 
sky, the gods, the sun, the moon, each of which is the world of Brahman,® 
choose at will birth in a Brahman or a Ksatriya family, a clear proof of a 
doctrine independent of Karman, and a curious parallel to the Buddhist 
doctrine — found also in Jainism — of the choice of family made by the Buddha 
while in the Tusita heaven.® In the Bhagavadgita ^ we find the process carried 
one degree further and above the world of Brahman, from which once no 
return was possible, is set that of Krsna as all-god. The Mundaka ^ makes 
the soul attain release by passing through the sun ; HerteFs view ® that 
release is attained after life in the Brahmaloka seems erroneous ; attain- 
ment of the Brahmaloka is release. 

In keeping with the curious vagueness of the Upanisads is the failure 
to make it clear precisely what is the ground which secures for a man union 
with the absolute in lieu of rebirth. In the Chandogya the matter is fairly 
simple ; the boon falls to those who know the doctrine of the five fires and the 
offerings in them which explain man’s descent to earth after his death, and 
to those who practice worship in the forest, holding that faith is their asceti- 
cism ; at least this is the moi’e natural sense of the terms employed. Return 
to earth is attributed to those who in the village worship, holding that their 
sacrifices and their gifts to the priests are their tribute. In the Brhadaran- 
yaka,^ on the other hand, the distinction is between those who practise faith 


1 V. 7. 

® i. 9, 10. 

* iii. 20~8. In i. 3 ff. the way is to the 
moon, then to or through the sun. 

^ iii. 28.4. 

® That is, the doctrine of Brahman’s world 
is known, but only in part accepted by 
being identified with either the world 
of the sun or the moon. Cf. i. 6. 

® Windisch, Buddha^s Geburt, p. 66 ; Maha- 
vastu, i. 1 ; Jataka, i. 48. 

17 [h.O.S. 32] 


^ viii. 16. On the moon cf. T. Segerstedt, 
Monde Oriental^ iv. 62 ff. 

8 i. 2. 11. 

* Mundaka Upanisad^ pp. 63, 66, on iii. 2. 6. 
V. 10. 1, 3 : the phrases are graddhd tapa 
ity updsate and istdpurte dattam itij 
updsate. In both iti may be enumera- 
tive, and the sense be ‘ practise faith 
and asceticism and ‘ practise sacrifice 
gifts and generosity’, 
vi. 2. 15, 16. 



578 


[Party 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

and truth, and those who devote themselves to sacrifice, alms, and asceticism. 
In the Mundaka Upanisad ^ the attainment of the absolute is the reward of 
those who wise, calm, of holy conduct, practise faith and asceticism, which is 
doubtless intended to be a reproduction of the view of the Chandogya, though 
its accuracy is dubious. In the Pra9na ^ the sun and the absolute are assured 
to those who give themselves up to holy conduct (brahmacarya), asceticism, 
faith, and knowledge, while rebirth is attained by those who hold that sacri* 
fice and gifts are their action. It may fairly be held that the earlier sources do 
not accept asceticism as any essential part of the equipment for attaining the 
absolute, while it is assumed as necessary in the later texts.^ 

The nature of the being which passes through transmigration is not specially 
discussed in the accounts of the paths. The curious mention of the man, 
variously described as spiritual {mdnasa) or as superhuman {amdnava), who 
leads the migrating soul from the lightning to the world of Brahman, is trans- 
formed by the account of the Nirukta ^ into a change effected in the soul itself, 
which becomes a spiritual essence, and with this conception Windisch ^ 
compares the fact that the Buddha emerges in spiritual {manomaya) form 
from his mother’s womb, thus avoiding all injury to her, and the gods assume 
such a form. No certainty, however, is possible, and Deussen ® is equally 
certain that the mdnasa of the Brhadaranyaka version is merely a corruption 
of the amdnava of the Chandogya text. 

The nature of the soul which is fated, unlike this class of soul, to return to 
earth, is not here specifically described in any way, but in another part of 
the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad we find the description of the fate of the soul 
on death, from which it appears that all the organs accompany the departing 
Atman, that it enters into the Samj Mna, and so becomes possessed of know- 
ledge and consciousness, Vijnana, while, it is added, its learning and actions 
hold fast to it, and its knowledge of what has been before. With this accords 
well enough the Buddhist view of the migrating substance which is composed 
of Vijnana, and the other four Skandhas of Vedana, ‘feeling’, Saihjiia, 

‘ perception ’, Rupa, ‘ corporeal form and Samskaras, ‘ dispositions ’, and 
which also bears the compendious term of Namarupa, ‘ name and form ’, the 
former being essentially a brief designation of the four Skandhas other than 
form. Here, however, and in the orthodox doctrine of Qankara and the 
Samkhya,® we have express recognition of a factor which is not mentioned 
expressly at any rate in the Brhadaranyaka, that of corporeal form. It is 

^ i. 2. 11. 4. 17). 

* i. 9, 10. ^ Par. ii. 9. 

® Thus renunciation of children is recognized ® Buddha's Gehurt, p. 73, n. 4. 

in Mahanarayana (Ixii. 7, 11 ; Ixiii. 8 , ® Sechzig Upanishad's'^, p. 508, n. 2. 

13), Pra 5 na (i. 13, 15), and in the ’ iv. 4. 3 Madh. ; Windisch, op. cit., p. 38 ; 
Sannyisa Upanisads, and is regarded cf. CU.iii. 14. 1 ; KU. v. 7 ; 15-17. 

as natural in the knower of the absolute ® Windisch, op. cit, ch. v; Oltramare, 
by Yajfiavalkya, despite his own two L'histoire des idies tMosophiques^ i. 

wives (BAU. iii. 5. 1 ; iv. 4. 22 ; cf. i. 246 ff. 



Chap. 28] 


The Doctrine of Transmigration 


579 


evident that this view was not absolutely necessary for the theory of the 
Atman, and its development went, we may assume, hand in hand with the 
development of the principle of the fine elements of matter, such fine elements 
being obviously necessary if they were to be conceived as accompanying an 
invisible entity like a transmigrating soul. We find, however, in the same 
Upanisad^ in the dialogue between Yajhavalkya and Artabhaga, which is 
preserved in one tantalizing fragment, that in the case of death a man’s 
speech departs to the fire, his breath to the wind, his eye to the sun, his mind 
to the moon, his ear to the pole, his body to the earth, his Atman to the ether, 
his hair to the plants and trees, his blood and seed to the waters, but there 
remains to transmigrate his Karman alone.^ It is true that Qahkara proves 
equal to the occasion and disposes of the mention of the disappearance of the 
Atman by interpreting the ether as the space in the heart wherein dwells 
the self, but this explanation is a mere tour de force. On the other hand, 
Windisch ^ suggests that the necessary element of personality must be deemed 
to be given by the persistence of the name, which in the preceding section of 
the XJpanisad Yajnavalkya has declared to be the one thing which persists on 
the death of man, and this interpretation appears to be necessarily correct, 
while it suggests the origin of the use of the term ‘ name ’ in the Buddhist 
conception of Namarupa as the factor which passes through transmigration. 
Jacobi,^ again, suggests that the force of Karman produces a new complex of 
the elements, holding that the idea of a permanent soul was not yet known, 
but this is a far-fetched conception. In the vagueness of conception we have 
nothing to wonder at : the whole conception is seriously regarded so bizarre, 
that it is not surprising that to clothe it in definite language was beyond the 
power of the authors of the Upanisads. 

In the later literature ® there exist, despite the prevalence of the Karman 
doctrine, none the less the inconsistent ideas that on the one hand the sin of 
the father passes over to the child, apart from the action of the child in former 
births, and on the other that the saving grace of the Lord avails to break the 
chain of Karman. Still more naturally in the period of the Upanisads, when 
the doctrine of Karman was far from being a fixed dogma, it is not surprising 
that many traces of conceptions inconsistent with the Karman belief should 
appear. Of these the most obvious is the belief in the power of the Atman by 
special grace to manifest itself, which is found in the Katha, the Mundaka, 
and still more clearly in the 5veta9vatara Upanisad, but equally important is 
the doctrine that in the son the father is continued in being in such a manner 
that the son takes over all that his father has, including his Karman,® though 

1 iii. 2. 13. ® Windisch, Buddha's Geburty pp. 69, 70. 

® In Caraka’s ^^arirasthana, iii. 14, the BAU. iv. 4. 3 ff.must be bornein mind ; 

transmigrating element is the Sattva, see above, p. 573. 

while in each man self-consciousness, * Die Entwicklung der Gottesidee bei den 
mind, senses, and the breaths are Zndern, p. 9. 

derived from the fion-transmigrating ® Hopkins, JRAS. 1906, pp. 581 ff. 
self. ® Kaus, ii. 15. 

17 * 



580 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

the term in the context applies generally to all action and has no moral 
reference, and that for any evil done by his father the son makes atonement,^ 
a view which results in the constant insistence on begetting offspring as a 
religious duty,^ and which in the later period takes the more crude and vulgar 
form that the mere birth of a son (putra) saves the father from the hell named 
Put, a puerile verbal play in the precise manner of the Upanisads. This idea 
must clearly be reckoned along with those passages which declare that in the 
son the father is born again, an idea which is in itself not strictly reconcilable 
with the view that the soul transmigrates on death, since in the elaborate 
description of the Upanisads the tradition from father to son is of so complete 
a kind that it would seem that there was nothing more which could transmi- 
grate : we have in fact three diverse ideas more or less blended, the birth 
of the father in the production of a son, the handing over by the father on 
death to the son of his whole personality, and the migration of the father’s 
soul into some new existence. 

A further breach with the theory of Karman is to be seen in the case of 
the Kausitaki Upanisad,® which tells how the man who attains the Brahman 
after passing by the river of immortality casts away his good and his evil deeds, 
which his friends and enemies duly share, while he from his lofty position gazes 
calmly at good and evil deeds, and the contrasts of night and day. This 
• idea, as Hopkins ^ has shown, has a ritual origin : in the Qatapatha Brahmana ® 
we are told how the man who performs the Agnihotra after sunset and before 
sunrise escapes the fate which normally awaits men in the world to come, 
where the days and the nights gradually destroy their good deeds, and doom 
them in due course to that renewal of death which the Brahman regards as the 
worst of unhappinesses. Thus early it is clear the Karman doctrine had to 
face the competition of conflicting and doubtless older views, which never 
could be brought into real coincidence with it. 

Another of the many contradictions involved in the theory arises from 
the view that on the departure of the soul on death it is accompanied by its 
recognition of the past, that is, that it retains a real personality. The difficulty 
of disposing of the fact that in practice the soul has no such recollection in its 
new birth of this previous experience is met by the statement that the child 
in the womb in its ninth month of existence possesses this knowledge, but 
through the pangs of birth is deprived of it.® The Buddhist view admits that 
the Buddha enters with complete memory and intelligence into the womb,^ 
but in his case his miraculous birth prevents the loss of his supreme powers. 

The later literature, by no means in harmony with the principles of 
Karman, assumes that great importance attaches to the thought which is in 

1 BAU. i. 5. 17. * JRAS. 1907, pp. 666 

CU. iii. 17. 5 ; v. 8, 9 ; BAU. vi. 2. 13 ; ® ii. 3. 3. 8-12. 

full details in vi. 4, and the Kama ® Garbha Upanisad 3, 4 ; Nirukta, Par. ii. 

Sutra. t Windisch, Buddha’s Geburt, p. 88, n. 1. 



Chap. 28] 


681 


The Doctrine of Transmigration 

the mind of man in the moment of death, ^ and we find a faint premonition of 
this view in the insistence laid in the Pra9na Upanisad ^ that man’s thought 
determines his next life. Possibly a similar conception may underlie the 
prayer put by the l^a Upanisad ® in the mouth of the dying man. 

§ 11 . The Way of Salvation 

In the view of the Buddhist the world is misery, and the whole end of man 
is to remove the misery of existence from himself by the destruction of that 
desire, which leads ever from birth to birth. But the wholesale pessimism 
of the Buddhist is by no means characteristic of the Upanisads : to find real 
pessimism in them, as apart from mild expressions of the unsatisfactoriness 
of the finite compared with the infinite, is impossible. It is also impossible, 
therefore, to trace to the empirical despair of the world the growth of pessi- 
mism ; the most that in this regard can be said is that the tendency to take 
a pessimistic view of life may have been favoured among the upper classes of 
the Indians by the effect of the climate ^ and admixture with the aborigines, 
which was steadily taking place and was weakening the mental character of the 
race. Of the latter fact there can be no doubt : the genius of the Upanisads 
is different from that of the Rigveda, however many ties may connect the two 
periods. The emancipation theories of the Upanisads must, therefore, be 
traced to some more intellectual ground. 

In the Rigveda and in the Brahmanas the ideal aimed at is length of days 
on earth and life in the world of heaven in companionship with the gods. In 
the Brahmanas we find that the reward of community of being, companion- 
ship, and fellowship with the gods is promised to the performers of various 
rites, in the case of diverse gods, Agni most of all, but also Vayu, Indra, 
Varu^a, Aditya, Brhaspati, Prajapati, and finally even with the impersonal 
Brahman.® The gods are then reduced to the position of being no more than 
means by which entry to the Brahman can be obtained, and even Agni is 
placed in this position as well as Indra and Prajapati. When the Brahman 
is also regarded as the Atman, the end becomes unity with the Atman, and 
this was the saving mode of emancipation^ before transmigration was believed 
in. The knower of the wise long-emancipated youthful Atman ceases to fear 
death ; ® the finder of the Atman ceases to be stained by action ; ’ knowledge 
leads to the place where desire is at rest, where no sacrificial gift reaches, nor 

1 e.g. Bhagavadgita, viii. 6. des idies tMosophiques, i. 102 ff. ; Rhys 

® iii. 10; cf. CU. Hi, 14. 1 ; BAU. iv. 4. 5. Davids, Hibbert Lectures, 1881^ p. 22 ; 

® 15-17 ; BAU. v. 15. H. Guntert, Der arische Weltkonig, p. 

* Thapressure of the Brahmanical system is 227, who greatly overestimates the 

a doubtful factor, and is denied by pessimism of the Upanisads. 

Deussen, of Up., p. 341. He ® QB. ii. 6. 4. 8 ; xi. 4. 4. 1, 21 ; 6. 2. 2, 3 ; 

ignores the climate ; that is, however, TB. iii. 10. 9. 11 ; 11. 6. Immortality 

clearly wrong, as shown by the effects even in life is secured by TS. vi. 6. 9. 2. 

on human life of the climate at the ® AV. x. 8. 44. 
present day. Cf. Oltramare, Vhistoirc ’ TB.iii. 12. 9. 8. 



582 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 


the penance of the ignorant.^ It is clear that what is contemplated is attain- 
ing by knowledge union with the Brahman, but the influence of the traditional 
view is seen in the fact that it is still regarded as the arrival at a world of 
heaven as if the Atman were without the self.^ The same conflict appears in 
the view that the Atman is the infinitely great and the infinitely small, 
and that on the departure of the soul, it is to go to the Atman, and enter in. 
In all these passages it is necessary to recognize that the knowledge of the 
Atman leads only to unity with the Atman after death, and that the unity is 
conceived on the old model of community with a deity. 

A further and important step is undoubtedly taken with the recognition 
of the fact that the emancipation desired is already achieved in this life by 
means of the recognition of the fact of the unity of the self and the absolute.® 
He who knows ‘ I am the Brahman ’ becomes the universe : even the gods have 
no power to prevent him so becoming, for he is its soul.^ Or, in the words of 
the Mundaka Upanisad,® ‘ He who knows the supreme Brahman becomes 
the Brahman.’ The mere knowledge constitutes the deliverance : the man 
ceases to be affected by any desires of any kind : his deeds good or bad cease 
to have any effect on him : ® like the reed stalk in the fire, his works consume 
themselves away : ’ as water does not stay on the lotus leaf, further works do 
not cling to him.® The discussions of Yajnavalkya with the king, Janaka,® 
reveal the truth that the absence of desire, the disappearance of every passion,^® 
is the mark of the man becoming immortal and attaining to the Brahman. 
Similarly, in veiled language he informs the king that death will not produce 
any essential change in the self, and he denies in his discussion with Maitreyi 
that there is any consciousness after death. Though later interpreted 
materialistically by the Carvakas, the sense is clearly otherwise. After death 
the indestructible self ceases to have that division of consciousness as subject 
and object, which gives the empirical consciousness of the world. The wise 
know that there is in the universe as we have it no reality, nor is there any 
further reality in immortality, if understood as a prolonged individual exis- 
tence after death. 

The attainment of emancipation by this knowledge which gives it, and is it, 
results in the immediate cessation of every emotion : how can man desire any- 


^ gS. X. 5. 4. 15. 

^ Deussen, op, cit., p. 343. 

* Gaudapada, Mapdukya Karika, iv. 98. 

* BAU. i. 4. 10. 

® iii. 2. 9, which Hertel (ed., pp, 49 f.) 
treats as a working over of an original 
identification with the personal Purusa. 

« BAU. iv. 4. 22 ; TU. ii. 9 ; Kaus. i. 4 ; 
iii. 1 . So analogously in the doctrine of 
St. Paul and Lao Ts4 enlightenment 
frees from the law ; in the Brahmanas 
(e.g. QB, i. 6. 1. 21) sacrifice has a 
similar potency ; Oltramare, L'histoire 


des idies tMosopkiqucb, i. 114. 

’ CU. V. 24. 3. 

« CU. iv. 14. 3. 

^ BAU. iv. 2 ; cf . 3 and 4. 

This ideal is, of course, dominant in later 
thought ; by a singular delusion, 
Rhys Davids {Early Buddhism, p. 59) 
persists in his denial of the obvious 
truth. Cf. de la Valine Poussin, 
Bouddhisme, pp. 60, 414. 

“ pretya samjfld ndsti ; BAU. ii. 4. 12 ; iv. 
5. 13 ; CU. vi. 9 (deep-sleep and death 
are both meant). 



Chap. 28] 


The Way of Salvation 


683 


thing who knows himself to be all ? How can he fear when there is no other? 
There can be no sorrow for him nor pain : he is like a blind man who has 
gained his sight, a wounded man healed, a sick man made whole. All his 
works are annihilated, as they have meaning only for an individuality. Future 
works have no effect upon him, but evil he cannot wish to do, since he has no 
desires : ^ he may, if he cares, live on for the full length of life or do any 
action so long as he does it disinterestedly, a view which the I^a Upanisad 
offers, despite its paradoxical appearance, doubtless as a sop to those who did 
not wish to be denied the position of emancipation, but preferred also to 
enjoy the things of life. He cannot again ever feel any doubt ; ^ he has the 
full and abiding knowledge for all time. 

The view that the emancipation is attained in the moment of the know- 
ledge is, however, very far from being universally expressed or believed. The 
idea on the contrary occurs, ever and again, that the result of the enlighten- 
ment is only complete at the end of the life of the self, and that the enlighten- 
ment takes the form of an alteration in space to a new abode.® These ideas 
are, of course, merely the ideas regarding the fate of the soul, transferred to the 
new conception of the gaining of knowledge. The view that the attainment of 
knowledge brought release was one, which, we may safely assume, was not 
easy to grasp or to hold, for the very good reason that it is as a matter of fact 
unintelligible. Hence the Upanisads as a rule merely consider that the 
advantages of the acquisition of knowledge are the winning of the desired 
immortality : the view of the merger of the Atman in the Atman as a mere 
recognition of identity is not the conception usually found, which is rather 
that the reward is eternity. Thus in the Katha Upanisad, in which has been 
seen the doctrine of final release by Deussen, there is no trace, as Whitney ^ 
has clearly pointed out, of anything more than the mere recognition of the 
winning of immortality as the result of knowledge, in this case philosophical 
knowledge, not as in the Taittiriya Brahmana,^ from which the conception 
of the Upanisad is borrowed, ritual knowledge. So we have many other 
accounts, all of the same kind : the soul is supposed to go out by the veins to 
the rays of the sun and to the sun ; ® in the accounts in the transmigration 

doctrine ^ the souls even of the men who have acquired knowledge are 

conceived as going by a long journey to the world of Brahman and the same 
idea is repeated in the variant versions of the Kausitaki Upanisad ® where 
from the moon such souls go by the worlds of fire, wind, Varuna, Indr a, 
Prajapati and then reach Brahman. In the Aitareya Aranyaka ® we learn 

1 BAU. iv. 4. 23. ® CU. iii. 14. 4. dii ff. ; KU. iii. 7-9. 

® The 19 a (11 ; Maitr. vii. 9) actually pro- ^ iii. 11. 8. ® CU. viii. 6. 1-5. 

vides for a regime of works (termed ’ BAU. vi. 2 ; CU. v. 10; Nirukta, Par. ii. 
Avidya) to conquer repeated death, 8, 9. See also CU. iv. 15. 5, 6 ; Mund. 

and of knowledge, to conquer the i. 2. 11. 

migration, as simultaneously to be ® i. 2 ; cf. JB. i. 18. 4 ff. ; 49. 7 ff. 
pursued. ^ ii, 5 ; Keith, Aitareya Aranyaka^ p. 234, 

* TAPA. 1890, pp. 88 ff. ; JAOS. xiii. pp. n, 9. 



584 The Philosophy of the Veda [Partv 

that Vamadeva, as a result of knowing the Atman, ascended from this world, 
and attained immortality in yonder world of heaven. The Kausitaki also 
has an account in detail of the world of Brahman, with the Aparajita palace, 
which is derived from Varuna’s Rigvedic abode, the tree Ilya, the Salajya 
city, and the sea Ara, the later conception being perhaps derived from the seas, 
Ara and Nya, in the world of Brahman invented by the Chandogya Upanisad.^ 
Yet another version makes the emancipated man be separated from the non- 
emancipated by the fact that at death his soul goes out by the 101st vein,^ 
whence he proceeds by the crown of the head, fire, wind, and sun up to Brah- 
man. All these are proofs of the perfectly simple meaning given to saving 
knowledge by the Upanisads generally. The knowledge might really confer 
the enlightenment in the view of a few minds, but the overwhelming opinion ® 
of the age was that the reward was the heaven in one form or another The 
later Vedanta endeavoured to bring order into these ideas, and reconcile them 
with the real nature of emancipation by the theory of the contrast between 
the Jivanmukta, who obtains release in perfection only on death, but who is 
really released in life by his attainment of knowledge, and the subject of the 
progressive emancipation, Kramamukti, by which the passage to the world 
of Brahman took place before the final release by the attainment of complete 
insight, but these devices remain as unnatural as possible.^ 


§ 12 . The Ethics of the Upanisads and Yoga 

In comparison with the intellectual activity of the Brahmans the ethical 
content of the Upanisads must be said to be negligible and valueless.® The 
total impression conveyed by the Upanisads is that of an intellectual exercise, 
whose aim was the attainment partly of immediate goods, partly of the 
highest good, normally the happiness of heaven which was often materially 
enough conceived, and there is made no attempt to make the theoretical 
philosophy a ground of morality of any sort. There are, here and there, 
moral maxims enunciated, but these are of no consequence and rise in no way 
above popular morality. On the contrary, the essential fact is expressed by 
Indra in his dialogue with Pratardana : ^ the possession of knowledge makes 
a man independent of all morality, the slaying of an embryo, the murder of a 


^ CXJ- viii. 5. a. 

^ CU. viii. 6. 6 ; KU. vi. 16 ; summnd, 
Maitr, vi. 21. Cf. PU. iii. 7. 

® Cf. the power of motion and enjoyment of 
women ascribed in the CU. viii. 12. 3 ; 
BAU. iv. 3. 15, however illogically. 
So TU. iii. 10, 5 f., where motion, eating, 
changing form, and singing occur. 

* This agrees precisely with the views of 
A 9 oka, whose preoccupation is with 
men’s future heavenly bliss ; Oltramare, 
L^histoire des idies thiosophiques, ii. 55. 


® gU. i. 4, 11 ; V. 7 ; Mund. iii. 2. 6 ; cf. 
Oltramare, Uhistoire des i(Mes iMoso- 
phiqueSf i. 208-210. 

* Radhakrishnan’s dictum (Ind. Phil. i. 243), 
* Morality, according to the Upanisads, 
expresses the true nature of things 
is not consistent with other views 
expressed by him (p. 230), and is 
wholly contrary to the spirit of the 
Upanisads. 

’ Kaus. iii. 1. 



685 


Chap* 28 ] The Ethics of the Upanisads and Yoga 

father or of a mother. It is, of course, true that these statements are not 
meant seriously, and that we may console ourselves by supposing that the 
priest did not hold that these crimes could really be disposed of in this way, 
though of that we cannot be certain as the same results can be attained by 
ritual practices. But they must have felt an exaggerated value to attach to 
their speculations, and have completely failed to see that morality is the most 
objective and essential part of philosophy, and is something other than 
sacrificial activity or intellectual gymnastics. 

Here and there we have views which are sound so far as they go ; the 
allegory of life ^ as a Soma sacrifice postulates that the fee shall be asceticism, 
liberality, right dealing, non-injury to life, and truthfulness, and a list of 
a student’s duties is given in the Taittiriya Upanisad.^ The student is 
bidden by his teacher not to be negligent of truth, virtue, welfare, prosperity, 
study and teaching, and in due course propagation of children. Further, duties 
to the gods, the Fathers, and parents are inculcated, and teachers and guests 
are to be ranked as gods. Those acts which are irreproachable alone should 
be practised, and good deeds alone should be revered. Refreshments with a 
seat should be provided for deserving Brahmans. Giving is regulated ; ® 
one should give with faith, one should not give without faith, one should give 
with plenty, with modesty, with fear,^ with sympathy. Further, a very useful 
practical rule is enjoined ; if the student has doubt concerning an act or 
conduct, then recourse should be had to the attitude of Brahmans, competent 
to judge, apt, devoted, not harsh, lovers of virtue ; as they behave themselves 
in such a case, so should the student demean himself, and similarly should he 
act in regard to persons who are spoken against. There is thus given as the 
norm of conduct the average righteous man, who embodies in himself the 
standard of action. In the same Upanisad ® in addition to the essential study 
and teaching a further list is given which runs : right dealing, truthfulness, 
asceticism, self-restraint, tranquility, maintenance of the sacred fire, the 
offering of the Agnihotra, hospitality, courtesy, and duties to children, wives, 
and grandchildren. Another text sees in the voice of the thunder the rules 
‘ Be restrained, liberal, merciful ’.® So we have condemned as sinners the 
stealer of gold, the drinker of Sura, the murderer of a Brahman, and the 
defiler of his teacher’s bed, and their associates,’ while A9vapati, the prince, 
boasts that his kingdom has no thief, churl, or drunkard, none who neglect the 
sacrifice or the sacred lore, no adulterer or courtesan.® This is, it is clear, 
purely elementary : the failure to rise to the conception even of a system of 
ethics is a sign not so much, as Deussen ® suggests, of the virtue of the age, 

^ CU. iii. 17. generosity. 

* i. 11. ® i. 9. 

® Cf. AA. ii, 3, 6. For Buddhism ct. Keith, ® BAU. v. 2. 

Buddhist Philosophy, pp. 117 f., 279 ff. ’ CU. v. 10. 9. 

* Possibly of hard-heartedness ; cf. RV. ® CU. v. 11. 5. 

X. 117. 5. Cf. PB. xvi. 5. 6 ; 6. 1 ; 9. 2 ; » Phil of Up., p. 366. 

AA. ii. 3. 6, which urges moderation in 



586 The Philosophy of the Veda [Partv 

which is not proved by any other evidence, but rather of the lack of ethical 
sense on the part of the Brahmans. Philosophically also the doctrine of the 
absolute as all-pervading resulted in the negation of human responsibility : it is 
the deity who really acts in and through man, and the latter cannot be blamed 
for what he thus seemingly does.^ 

In truth the aims of the Brahmans were bent on things which are not 
ethical at all, immediate profit on the one hand, or, on the other, the closer 
realization of the absolute in which they believed, and which they desired to 
appreciate in full enjoyment. The ideal is embodied in the most curious 
forms. Knowledge in the XJpanisads is essentially profitable, ^ and by no 
means for spiritual ends alone. He who knows the world as fivefold obtains 
it ; he who knows Indra as without a rival has no rival ; the possessor of 
knowledge cannot be injured by an enemy ; neither the northern nor the 
southern mountains can prevail against him, and his foes die around him, an 
idea found in the Aitareya Brahmana.^ It is an easy step to the result already 
seen ; knowledge obliterates evil ; one who knows may consort with even the 
murderer without being contaminated.^ With a strange contrast to Sokrates 
who held that the wise man would necessarily be good, we are repeatedly 
assured that knowledge relieves man from worrying as to whether he has 
done wrong or right in any matter.® Entry into the absolute is accompanied 
by the casting aside of good and evil deeds, which are transferred on one view 
to one’s relatives or foes respectively.® With an anticipation of modern 
idealism, and in the true spirit of mysticism, good and bad may be regarded 
as imperfect concepts for which there is no proper place in the absolute ; if 
speech were not, neither right nor wrong, true nor false, good nor bad, 
pleasant nor unpleasant, could be known.'^ The absolute self is unsullied by 
evil to which he is external ; an etymology proves it ; for he is called the 
person, Purusa, since he burned {ils) up evil before {jpurva) all these worlds.® 
In uniting with him the individual parts utterly from good or bad.® We see 
this even in sleep, for in it neither evil nor good attaches itself effectively to the 
self When we are told that the world is truth, there is no ethical implication, 
for it is plain that there is here merely an assertion of the reality of the universe, 
the word Satya conveying both senses, and in the theistic Qveta9vatara 
the description of the lord as the bringer of right and the remover of evil is 
due to the confusion, there constant, between the personal deity and the 
absolute. The emancipated self possesses autonomy, but it is not an ethical 

^ JUB. i. 5 ; above, § 6. « TU. ii. 9 ; BAU. iv, 4. 22 ; Mund. iii. 1. 3. 

^ BAU. i, 4. 17 ; 5. 12 ; CU. i. 2. 8 ,* BAU. i. « Kaus. i. 4. 

8. 28 ; 5. 21 ; v. 4 ; TU, ii. 1 ; iii. 7 ’ CU. vii. 2. 1. 

Kaus. i. 7 ; ii. 13 ; Mund. iii. 2. 9. ® KU. v. 11 ; 15 a 8 ; BAU. i. 4. 1. 

^ viii. 28 ; cf. TU. iii. 10. 4. » BAU. iv. 3. 21 f. 

« BAU. V. 7 ; 14. 8 ; CU. v. 10. 9 f. ; 24. 3. BAU. iv. 3. 7, 16 ; CU. viii. 6. 3. 

Cf. BAU. iv. 4. 23; CU. iv. 14. 3; CU. vi. 16. 

PU, V. 5 ; Maitr. iii. 2 ; vi. 18. Con- vi. 6. 

trast KU. ii. 24 ; iii. 7, 8. 



587 


Chap, 28] The Ethics of the Upanisads and Yoga 


state ; ^ it is merely a condition of unhindered power, the ideal of a despot, 
the state of the man who goes up and down these worlds, eating what he desires, 
assuming what form he desires.^ 

Prajapati utterly condemns ^ the doctrine, derived allegedly from his 
teaching by the demon Virocana, which asserts that the man who consults his 
own desires in this life obtains both this world and the world to come ; this 
view is described as devilish, naturally enough since it would have turned all 
against gifts to the priests or sacrifice. But we have instead the clear doctrine ^ 
that the self is dearer even than a son, and that whatever is dear, be it wife, 
sons, wealth, the Brahman class, the Ksatriya class, the gods, worlds, any- 
thing, is dear not for itself, but for the sake of the self or soul. We have here, 
not the psychological theory that things are desired for their pleasure, not for 
themselves, nor the suggestion that all love is ultimately self-love, but the 
recognition of the fact of the unity of the whole, which finds its truth in the self. 
Plainly, however, there is no attempt to develop a positive morality ^ which 
would render empiric selfishness wrong on the score that it was based on a 
false distinction between self and not-self. On the contrary we find only 
emphasized throughout the necessity of caring for one’s own salvation ,* 
Yajnavalkya abandons his faithful wives to seek the welfare of his soul, Just as 
the Buddha abandons his young bride and his child, because they are hin- 
drances to the attainment of release. 

The true ideal, therefore, of the seeker for truth is embodied in the 
practice of asceticism and the adoption of renunciation : by turning away from 
the things of this world, and by concentrating unnaturally the mind on the 
object, the vision beatific was to be obtained : the utter incompatibility of 
this with the purely intellectual view, that the recognition of the Brahman as 
the self was emancipation, is obvious, but contradictions in adjecto are the 
normal characteristic of the Upanisads. Hence was developed the scheme by 
which the old rule of life was complicated and a series of four A9ramas, 
‘ places of asceticism was devised, through which the man should pass on his 
way to his home in the heaven. 

In the earliest Upanisads we find only the conception that, beside the life 
of the student and the householder, men might give themselves up to ascetic 
practices in their seeking for the truth. There was no idea that the stages of 
life should be successive, ending with the ascetic stage : the ascetic stage 
might follow the stage of household life if desired, but equally it might not.® 
But in the later Upanisads, such as the Jabala"^, we find the four stages ordered 


1 CU. vii. 25. 2 ; TU. i. 6. 2. 

2 TU. iii. 10. 5. 

» CU. viii. 7 1 * BAU. ii. 4 ; iv. 5. 

® Kadhakrishnan (Ind, Phil i. 228 ff., 242ff.) 
ignores the fundamental moral indiffer- 
ence of the Upanisads by reinterpreting 
them in the light of absolute idealism. 
« CU. viii. 15 ; ii. 23. 1 ; v. 10 ; BAU. iv. 


2. 22 ; iii. 8. 10. 

’ 4. Cf.alsoN. Law, lA.lii. 272ff. S.Butt 
(Early Buddhist Monachism^ chap, ii) 
holds that the fourth Agrama is an 
addition to the Brahmanical system of 
the ^Iramanas, wandering teachers 
of semi-Aryanized eastern communities- 
This seems quite unproved. 



588 


[Part V 


The PMloso'phy of the Veda 

as student, householder, anchorite, Vanaprastha, and finally wandering beggar, 
Parivrajaka, Bhiksu. The first two stages remain much as in the Brahmana 
period : it is of interest that we hear of cases, where a pupil seems to have been 
used by his alleged teacher mainly for the purpose of tending his cattle, in 
return for which the teaching might be long delayed, as in the case of Satya- 
kama.^ Other pupils again were deemed unworthy of the teaching they 
desired : Upakosala ^ tended the fires for twelve years without his teacher 
making up his mind to trust him with the sacred knowledge. The householder 
may still attain the world of Brahman by attention to his duties, if he con- 
tinues to study and brings up pious sons and pupils, subduing his organs in 
the seif and slaying no life, save at the sacrificial ground. But another view 
condemns such persons to life in the moon, and then to return to earth again. 
Sacrifice, Veda study, liberality, and the production of sons are still the 
chief duties, though, as we have seen, the tendency was growing to reduce 
the sacrifice to symbolic acts. 

The late Vaikhanasa Dhatmasutra lays down that there are four categories 
of householder. The first (varttdvrtti) devotes himself to the duty of agricul- 
ture, cattle rearing or trade. The second (gdlzna) performs regularly the 
domestic offerings, Pakayajhas, and, after establishing his fire, carries out 
each fortnight the new and full moon offerings, and every four months the 
four-month offerings, as well as twice a year the animal offering, and once the 
Soma offering. The third (ydydvara) performs the ^rauta sacrifices, including 
the Soma sacrifice, for himself and also acts as priests for others, whence his 
name of ‘ Wanderer ’ ; he studies and teaches pupils ; he gives and accepts 
gifts ; he maintains his fire and entertains guests. The fourth (ghordcdrika) 
is a man of severe observances, for he offers Istis, studies and gives gifts, 
practising specially rigorous abstinence in the months Marga9irsa and Jyaistha, 
performing morning and evening the Agnihotra, and maintaining the fire 
with fruits of the wood. We need not suppose that this ideal scheme corre- 
sponded to any very definite practice; it is noteworthy that it recognizes that 
in many cases the householder was more busied in his business than in the per- 
formance of his domestic ritual. 

The business of teaching ® was doubtless carried on by many of the house- 
holders, as well as by those who had passed this stage. For the early Vedic 
period we have no indication of anything corresponding to the later Math, 
where large bodies of teachers and pupils were united in a loose form of 
monastic life. We seem to find nothing more than individual teachers attract- 
ing a larger or smaller number of pupils ; the ideal seems to have been that a 
true student must dwell in his teacher’s house (antevdsin), and this fact alone 
would negative large bodies. The epic tradition ^ seems to suggest that five 
was a maximum. From this simple relationship may be explained a dominant 
feature of the Buddhist and later monastic system, the free right of any person 

^ CU. iv. 4. 5. ® Cf. Weber, Ueligionssoziologie^ ii. 157 

® CU. iv. 10. 1, 2. * Mahabharata, xii. 328, 41. 



589 


Chap. 28] The Ethics of the Upanisads and Yoga 


who had entered on a course of study to abandon it. The development of 
monastic systems which soon became common to all sects was furthered by the 
rise of Buddhism, though it need not be held to have been a specific Buddhist 
innovation, for it may easily have risen spontaneously among Buddhists 
Jains and Brahmans alike as the outcome of their competition for public 
favour. 

The third stage, that of the anchorite, is not distinguished by Yaj navalkya 
from that of the wanderer : when he decides to give up the life of the house- 
holder he contemplates wandering about as a beggar.^ The value of penance 
for the knowledge of the Brahman is not overestimated in the oldest Upanisads : 
the king Brhadratha,^ after most painful mortification, is still far from 
attaining the desired knowledge. Asceticism, it is even said, leads only to the 
way of the Fathers, and has not the result of future emancipation. The man 
who really realizes the Brahman is above the A9ramas ; ® he has realized all 
that is aimed at by asceticism ; he has no longer individuality or family con- 
nexion, he wanders about homeless, begging, without possessions, and bears 
the name Sannyasin, the renouncer of everything. How this ideal can be 
logically derived from knowledge of the Atman is nowhere explained in the 
Upanisads. 

With the usual curious turns of Indian thought the Sannyasin, who is 
really a person beyond the Acramas as the ^veta9vatara Upanisad calls him, 
becomes in the later Upanisads a man striving for the knowledge of the Atman 
by means of asceticism. He should undertake this stage only as a rule after 
being a forest hermit, though he may enter into it direct from the house- 
holder’s state.^ He parts solemnly after sacrifice from all his kin, abandons all 
sacrifice for ever, gives up the sacred cord and the tonsure, lays aside his 
former garments and his staff, is clad in rags and a loincloth, and wanders 
about save at the period of the rains, living on what hti begs and inhabiting 
lonely spots : some texts even demand nudity ; he bears now a triple staff or 
a single staff, to signify perhaps the reconciliation of caste differences. Only 
one night may he live in a village, five in a town, but in the four months of the 
rains he may stay there. He is to recite Upanisads and the Aranyaka, to 
meditate, perform bathings, be indifferent to every human emotion, and show 
charity to all creatures. He must practise Yoga, that is, exercises intended 
to bring the mind into mystic union with the absolute. Though the system of 
the later Yoga,® which is linked to the Samkhya, and which, therefore, in 
theory aims really primarily at the isolation of the spirit and nature, not at 
union with the divinity, is not found set out in the same precise detail, most 


1 BAU. ii. 4. 1. 

^ Maitr. i. 2. 

® gu. Vi. 21. 

* See Jabala, A 9 rama, Sannyasa, Kantha- 
9 ruti (or Katha^ruti), Brahma, Arii- 
neya, and Paramahansa. 

° The sense of ‘ harnessing ’ seems to be 


found in atmanam yunjUa in Mahanar. 
Ixiii, 21 ; Maitr. vi. 3 ; as a union of 
breath and Om, Yoga is found in Maitr. 
vi. 25 ; in KU. ii. 12 it is practically 
equivalent to the restraint of the senses. 
Cf. above, § 8. 



590 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 


of its elements can be traced in the XJpanisads/ and in the Katha we are dis- 
tinctly told that it is necessary to suppress speech and mind, merging the 
latter in the knowledge self, that in the great self, and that in the calm self, 
the absolute. The highest stage is attained when the five senses cease to give 
knowledge, when the mind and the intellect are at rest ; the firm restraint 
of the senses is Yoga. The Qvetagvatara devotes its second chapter to the 
praise of Yoga, prefacing it with prayers, adapted from the Taittiriya Samhita, 
in which the aid of Savitr is invoked to secure the application of the mind to 
the task set before the Yogin. He should hold erect his body, and cause his 
senses and mind to enter into the heart, check his movements, and breathe 
with diminished intensity through the nose, restraining from distraction his 
mind. A clean level spot, free from pebbles, fire or gravel, favourable to 
thought by the presence of water, not offensive to the eye, protected from the 
wind and secluded, is recommended. Fog, smoke, sun, fire, wind, fireflies, 
lightning, crystal, the moon, are given as the preliminary appearances which 
present themselves to the Yogin ; lightness, healthiness, steadiness or 
freedom from desire, clearness of countenance, pleasantness of voice, sweetness 
of odour, and scantiness of excretions are the first stage in his progress. The 
revelation of the absolute procures freedom from fetters and sorrow ; sickness, 
old age, and death are overcome. The Upanisad, however, does not rely on 
Yoga alone ; the one is attainable not by Yoga merely but by reflection 
{sdmkhya) also, terms in which we need not see references to established 
schools, as does Oldenberg.^ The insistence on breathing as a matter of im- 
portance is noteworthy ; ® restraint of breath not merely banishes evil 
influences, it tends to generate heat, thus producing Tapas, and by restraint 
serves to deaden the activity of the brain, thus favouring the feeling of 
severance from the world and union with the absolute. 

The Maitrayaniya repeatedly develops the theme ; the state to be aimed 
at is reaching the fourth stage, ^ by the suppression of the living self. By 
pressing the tip of the tongue against the palate,^ by suppressing voice, mind, 
and breath, one sees the Brahman, the self, and becomes selfless. Another 
device, forming the beginning of an advance by sound to the absolute without 
sound, consists in closing the ears with the thumbs,® when the sound of the 
ether within the heart becomes audible. By the suppression of breath the 
light of the ether within the heart is made manifest.'^ Or again by using the 
sound Om as an arrow, with mind as its point, the Yogin pierces the darkness 
and sees him who sparkles like a wheel of fire, the colour of the sun, the Brah- 


1 e.g. KU. iii. 13 ; vi. 10, 11 ; cf. Hopkins, 
JAOS. xxii. 333 ff. According to Tuxen 
( Yoga, pp. 20 ff.) the prime sense of 
YogaisSamadhi ; Charpentier(ZDMG. 
Ixv. 846, 847) thinks practical effort is 
the root sense. Cf. Oltramare, L'histoire 
des iiUes tMosopMqueSy i. 300-2. 

® Die Lehre der Upanishaderiy p. 280. Con- 


trast Deussen, Sechzig Vpanishad's^y 
p, 308, n. 3, who justly insists on the 
parallel of dhydnayoga in i. 3. 

Oltramare, Vhistoire des i(Ues tMoso- 
phiqueSy i. 322 ff. 

vi. 19. ® vi. 20 f. 

vi. 22, ’ vi. 27. 



Chap. 28] 


591 


The Ethics of the Upanisads and Yoga 


man that shines beyond the darkness, in the sun, the moon, the fire, and the 
lightning.^ The oneness of the breath and mind and also of the senses and the 
relinquishment of all conditions of existence is declared to be Yoga. A formal 
list of six elements of Yoga appears in the Maitrayaniya Upanisad.^ These 
are Pranayama, ‘ regulation of the breathing out and in Pratyahara, 
‘ suppression ’ of the organs of sense such as the mind, so as to prevent its 
activity spoiling concentration, Dhyana, ‘ meditation Dharana, ‘ concentra- 
tion of the attention Tarka, ‘ reflection a term of doubtful sense in this 
context,® and Samadhi, ‘ absorption ’ or complete union with the object of 
meditation. This list differs, in the insertion of Tarka, and in the placing of 
Dhyana before Dharana, from the later list, which makes up the number of 
eight members by inserting as the first three items Yama, ‘ discipline 
refraining from doing injury, truthfulness, &c., Niyama, ‘ self-restraint ’ such 
as purity, contentment, &c., and Asana, ‘ postures in sitting ’. Of all these 
the most important is the use of Om as a symbol of Brahman to meditate 
upon. It is recognized by the Katha,^ but its importance belongs to the later 
Upanisads, which delight in mystery regarding it ; it has three syllables or 
morae, or three and a half, or three morae and three echoes, three morae and 
four half morae, and so on ; the point of the Anusvara is given a hidden sense 
and the echo is also famed. It is refreshing to find that silence is called the 
highest point of all.^ The view then is that man can only enter on the medita- 
tion with Om : he must at the end attain the nothingness in that which is not 
a word, like the sap of the flowers in the liquid honey.® In the condition of 
Samadhi the consciousness of a separate subject and object entirely disappears, 
and the state of selflessness is reached. This union is attained by the ascent 
of the soul, from the heart through the Susumna vein and the Brahmarandhra, 
to union with the absolute.’ Naturally this conception is developed with 
the aid of the metaphor by which the heart is called a lotus, and by the use of 
the veins, 72,000 in number, into wild fantasies. Yet, though most of this 
absurdity is found in the later Upanisads, it should be recognized that the 
needs of Asana are hinted at in the ^vetacvatara,® and the virtues of Praty- 
ahara are recognized by the Chandogya.® 

Religious suicide, which we have not seen in the Brahmana period, is 
mentioned in this, but only at the latest stage, long after the period of the 
Upanisads proper, when authority is given to the beggar to abstain from food, 
to throw himself into the water or fire,^® to choose a hero’s death. Strange 
folly to emerge from the comparative rationalism of the Upanisads, and 
to reach its apotheosis in the religion of the Jina. 


1 vi. 24. ® Maitr. vi. 18. 

® Possibly it indicates the stage of medita- 
tion accompanied by reflexion; cf. 
MBh. xii. 195. 15 ; the first Pali 
Jhana ; Oldenberg, Die Lehre der 
Vpanishaderit p. 324. 

^ ii. 17 ; cf. CU. i. 1 ; TU. i. 8 ; ?U. i. 14 ; 


Mund.ii.2. 4. See also Keith, ERE., 5.w. 
® Dhyanabindu 4. ® Maitr, vi. 22. 

’ Brahmavidya 11, 12 ; Ksurika 8, 9 ; 
Maitr. vi. 21. 

® ii. 10. ® viii. 15. 

Jabala 5 ; Kanthagruti 4 ; cf. Keith, 
ERE., s.v. 



592 


[Part V 


The Philosophy o/ the Veda 

§ 13. The Significance of the Philosophy of the Upanisads 

What judgement are we to pass on the main thought of the Upanisads ? 
Are they really the expressions at an early date of the deepest principles of 
philosophy, or are they merely of historical value, interesting pictures of the 
early thought of man, important not per se^ but because of their dominating 
influence on the future philosophy and life of India ? The two interpreters, 
who have of recent times been most impressed by the nature of that philosophy 
as idealism, have passed the most diametrically opposed views on the question : 
Gough was impressed with the necessity of explaining the defects of the subject 
of which he treated by the admixture of blood among the Indians, and the 
corrupting influences of a low order of civilization, while Deussen^ is lost 
in admiration of the Upanisads, as was Schopenhauer before him : ‘ Eternal 
philosophical truth ’, he says, ‘ has seldom found more decisive and striking 
expression than in the doctrine of the emancipating knowledge of the Atman.’ 
He claims^ that Yajhavalkya had anticipated the view of Schopenhauer 
regarding immortality as indestructibility without continued existence ; he 
regards the view of the nature of the self as an anticipation of the doctrine of 
Kant ; he defends the doctrine of transmigration as the best expression of the 
true state of matters in the terms of empirical thought, while recognizing that 
such an expression is misleading : nay, he argues that the Kantian argument 
regarding immortality, based on the realization of the moral law within us, 
points not to ordinary immortality, but rather to the process of transmigra- 
tion, and transmigration has been solemnly upheld as philosophic doctrine at 
the present time by competent authorities. 

The position of Deussen .is, of course, coloured by his acceptance of the 
view that Kant has finally ® shown that the knowledge of the ultimate reality 
is not possible, with which he combines the Schopenhauerian doctrine of the 
primacy of the will which he traces to Christianity, and his view of the Upani- 
sads is, therefore, greatly determined by his double desire, to find in them the 
anticipation of Kant and to show that the views of Kant, as modified by 
Schopenhauer, are the only possible views of philosophy. To those who do 
not accept his theories the arguments adduced by him fall with the theories 
themselves, but the investigation of this question belongs to a general philoso- 
phical discussion, which is hardly here necessary or appropriate. The more 
important question which arises is to what extent the doctrines of the Upani- 
sads do foreshadow the views of Kant. 


1 Phil, of Up., pp, 38-50. 

® Op. cit., p. 350. Contrast the judgement 
of Lanman {Beginnings of Hindu 
Pantheism, p. 24) : ‘ What a prospect, 
dark and void — this Supreme Spirit, 
before whom all human endeavour, 
all noble ambition, all hope, all love, is 
blighted ! What a contrast, a relief, 
when we turn from this to the teachings 
of the gentle Nazarene \ ’ 


® A view, of course, rejected by various 
schools on different grounds, e, g. H. 
Jones, Philosophy of Lotze, pp. 371 ff. ; 
E. Caird, Critical Philosophy of Kant ; 
Hobhouse, Theory of Knowledge ; 
Pritchard, Kanfs Theory of Knowledge ; 
Taylor, Elements of Metaphysics ; J. 
Ward, A Study of Kant (1922) ; F. H. 
Bradley, The Principles of Logic (1922) 
E. Cassirer, Das Erkenntnisproblem. 



Chap. 28 ] Significance of the Philosophy of the Upanisads 693 

The answer to this question must candidly admit that the conception of 
the Upanisads formed by Deussen as containing a definite doctrine of idealism, 
that of Yajnavaikya, which is variously broken down by realistic intrusions, 
and accommodations to common-sense, is one which is contrary to all pro- 
bability and reason. The ideas of Yajnavaikya, that is of the men who 
framed and attributed to his famous name those views, are the high-water 
mark of the speculation of the Upanisads : the rest of the material is merely 
the natural development of the Brahmana theories. Those theories are of 
historic interest : as philosophy, they are unworthy of a moment’s considera- 
tion. On the other hand the views of Yajnavaikya do certainly go the length 
of asserting the unknowableness of the subject and the fact that the Atman, 
the subject matter of the philosophy of the age, was the knowing subject within 
the man : it is further clear that he maintained that the Atman was the only 
real thing, and that plurality was illusorj^ It is quite true that even in the 
section attributed to him there are many expressions which will not harmonize 
with this conception, but it would be unfair not to take the doctrines at their 
face value, and to recognize that we cannot reasonably expect full consistency 
on these matters. It is, therefore, necessary to consider these doctrines in 
themselves in their value for thought. 

The essential result appears to lie in this, that the distinction of subject and 
object is realized, and that, with the recognition of this distinction, it is seen 
that, as such, the subject cannot possibly be an object of thought or knowledge. 
These propositions are perfectly true, if duly confined to what they assert : 
consciousness essentially involves the distinction of subject and object, and 
clearly it is impossible to make the subjective activity an object of knowledge 
in exactly the same sense as the conti^t of that activity is an object of know- 
ledge.^ But with this doctrine we m^^b little progress to the understanding of 
the world, and the theory that it was ^e^ly an anticipation of the view that 
the thing-in-itself is unknowable is not supported by any evidence whatever. 
On the contraty, the assertion of the unity of the self and the denial of plurality 
cannot be deduced on any legitimate manner from the doctrine so far arrived 
at, and these theories amount to no more than the desire to arrive at the con- 
ception of some permanent and abiding thing. But the identity of the self 
and the absolute is based merely on the abstraction of the self as subjectivity, 
and that of the absolute as subjectivity, and the identity is therefore meaning- 
less and a mere matter of words. 

Moreover the utter difference between Yajnavaikya and Kant appears 
clearly when we realize that Yajnavaikya, with his theory of the unity of the 

* For the iater views on this point cf. Keith, philosophy deals with this effectively ; 

JRAS. 1916, pp. 371, 372. The real Buddhism, if we believe C. Rhys 

problem of individuality is, of course, Davids (JRAS. 1903, pp. 587 ff.), has 

merely stated, not solved by this eon- not even the courage to face the pro- 

trast. The question is, What is the ex- blcm. For an attempt to restate the 

planation of the quasi-permanence of Buddhist view of rebirth, see her 

the knowing subject 1 No Indian Buddhist Psychology^ pp. 244-68. 

18 [h.O.S. 32] ' 



594 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

absolute, has no theory at all of the relation of the empiric world to the 
absolute, i. e. that he really leaves the whole question of philosophy unsolved, 
and that the followers of his theory were at the last forced to fall back, as 
early as the 5veta9vatara Upanisad, on the mere phrase of Maya, ‘ illusion 
which turns the supreme lord into a conjurer.^ The Kantian doctrine, it need 
hardly be said, leaves us with the whole empiric world regulated under 
definite principles in time and space, and subject to causality, and it merely 
assures us that behind these relations we must not expect by intellectual means 
to find the meaning of existence. That meaning, however, it finds in the 
moral consciousness, which then becomes of infinite importance. In the 
doctrine of Yaj havalkya on the contrary we have nothing save denial of 
ail real causality and multiplicity, and on the other the normal cosmogonism 
of the Brahmanas. Of moral principles Yajhavalkya’s main text is entirely 
innocent : the pure intellectuality of his doctrine led to the consequence that 
the moral acts of the person who had knowledge were indifferent, a fact which 
no sophistry could conceal and which was recognized at an early date : ^ it has 
its precise counterpart in the view, prevalent in the Middle Ages in Europe as 
in India, that devotion to God or an idol was enough to wipe out any infamies. 

When we pass to the doctrine of Karman, the hopeless inconsistencies of 
the view of Yaj havalkya become painfully obvious : the doctrine of Karman 
is now introduced as explaining the nature of man’s fate in life, without regard 
to the other doctrine that knowledge means emancipation at once. How on 
the theory of Yaj havalkya conduct could have any effect at all, or any 
bearing on the matter, cannot be understood, but it is really incomprehensible 
how Deussen can accept the view that the knowledge of the unity of the 
Atman produces liberation. All the effect of the philosophy of Yaj havalkya 
is to declare the difference of subject and object, and then to assert that the 
Atman is one, in which there is no difference of subject and object, and there- 
fore no consciousness, and these views do not show any connexion with 
emancipation or transmigration by degree of merit of conduct. It is simply 
inconceivable why on the ground of such theoretic knowledge men should 
abandon the desire for children, should give up their property, and wander 
about like beggars, practising a foolish asceticism. Nor as a matter of fact can 
we imagine that any such conception normally entered the heads of the ascetics 
of the Vedic age : they doubtless deemed, as the texts indeed show, that what 
they would attain by these practices w'as the mystic contemplation of the 


^ Hence in Mahayana Buddhism we reach 
the logical result that all knowledge 
is failing away from truth and reality 
and its suppression is essential ; cf. 
Sehayer, Mahay anisHsche JSrlosungs- 
khre, p. 49 ; Asanga, Sutrdlamkara in 
ZII. ii. 103 ff. 

^ Hence the constant discussion in the epic 
of the problem of determinism (Dahl- 


mann, Die Sdmkhya-Philosophie, pp. 
113 ff., 265 fit.); O. Strauss, Ethische 
Prohleme aus dem Mahdbhdrata, For 
Buddhism, see Keith, Buddhist Philo- 
sophy, pp. 97, 113, 135 f., 175, n, 1 ; 
Stcherbatsky {The Central Problem of 
Buddhism, pp. 5, 32), who insists on 
the limited role of Karman. 



Chap. 28 ] Significance of the Philosophy of the Upanisads 695 


divine which mystics of ever}^' time and clime have aimed at winning*^ This 
fact, which is clearly proved by the evidence of the many passages in which 
union with the absolute is aimed at, and regarded as a state of abiding bliss, 
is not in any degree compatible with the view that what the priests and sages 
of the Upanisads believed in was the mere fact that there existed a thing 
in itself, which was for ever unknowable. From such premises no such con- 
clusions as are drawn by the Upanisads could possibly be derived at any time. 
The essence of the doctrine of the Upanisads must be looked for in some- 
thing else. 

Nor indeed is there the slightest doubt as to what that belief was, apart 
from occasional flashes of insight which led to other conclusions. The 
absolute is conceived as an ideal, with which unity is as ardently desired, as 
it was desired in earlier times with the gods in heaven, and the unity with the 
absolute is conceived in the same mode as unity with the divine had been 
conceived. The Upanisads are essentially pantheistic with a strong theistic 
leaning, but the extent of that theism differs from passage to passage, and in 
the case of Yaj navalkya and others doubtless a still more intellectual view of the 
situation was taken, in which the chief stress was laid on the conception of the 
Atman as the one and only reality, free from pollution, serene, unalterable, 
far above empirical being, or thought of any kind. But this cool intellec- 
tualism is not by any means the pervading doctrine of the Upanisads,^ nor 
indeed in the record of Yajnavalkya’s views are we without indication that the 
Atman itself inspired devotion of a marked kind, as comes out plainly in his 
address to Maitreyi, on deciding to abandon his goods and his wives and 
wander forth into the wilderness.^ For most of his contemporaries, who 
devoted themselves to the study of philosophy, it may confidently be believed 
that they were pantheists, who were delighted with their discovery of this 
as the truth of the universe, and who conceived the fate of the enlightened soul 
as the enjoyment of bliss in the existence to come in union with the one 
essence of the world. 


It is these two aspects of the Upanisads which explain the two diverse 
interpretations which, as we have seen, ^ankara, following Gaudapada and 
some Aupanisada school on the one hand, and Badarayana,^ doubtless with 
another Aupanisada school, on the other, placed on the Upanisads. The 
purely negative character of the universe of experience is insisted upon by 
^ankara as a result of the stress laid on the unknowability of the Atman, and 


The similarity of result between the views 
of Plotinus and of the Vedanta is some- 
times (as by Lassen, Ind, Alt. iii. 379 If,; 
Garbe, PhiL of Anc. India, pp. 46 ff.) 
attributed to borrowing by Neo-Platon- 
ism ; for a complete refutation of the 
view see Caird, Evolution of Theology 
in the Greek Philosophers, where it is 
shown that the Neo-Platonic views 
were in all essentials the natural, and 
18 * 


almost inevitable, outcome of earlier 
Greek philosophy. In Buddhism we 
have the Jhanas and Iddhis and 
similar ridiculous states. See also T. 
Whittaker, The Neo-Platonists (1918) ; 
F. Heidemann, Plotin (1921) ; below. 
Chap. 29. 

2 Bloomfield, Eel. of Veda^ p. 281. 

* BAU. ii, 4 ; iv. 5. 

* Thibaut, SBE. xxxiv. pp. c ff. 



696 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

its separation from all empirical reality, while Badarayana takes the more 
simple view, which sees in the absolute a divine nature, and finds a place for 
the world and the souls beside that nature, though still in some degree 
pantheistically regarded as part of the divine. The result of true knowledge as 
the attainment of union with the supreme deity is thus much more easily 
brought into concord with the utterances of the XJpanisads themselves. 
Moreover, the sense of devotion to the absolute was thus brought into accord 
with metaphysical reality and at the same time opportunity given to adapt 
the Visnu worship of the masses ^ to the esoteric side of the philosophy of 
the XJpanisads, a task carried out by Ramanuja in his great commentary 
on the Brahma Sutra.^ 

From the point of view of ethics the demerits of the system of the Upani- 
sads are even more glaring than from the point of view of the intellect. It is 
doubtless impossible to arrive at certainty on questions of the ultimate nature 
of reality, but it is an easier matter to establish some principles of moral 
obligation, and to bring them into harmony with a scheme of the universe 
which if theoretical shall none the less be at any rate plausible. The defect 
of the Upariisads is that they render morality in the ultimate issue valueless 
and meaningless. We may reasonably assume that any complete metaphysic 
must seek to explain as essential ingredients of existence, truth, goodness, and 
beauty, and we may safely conclude that a system, which, like that of the 
XJpanisads, regards beauty and goodness as nothing but hollow mockeries, is 
defective and essentially unsound in its theoretic basis. 

It might indeed seem at first sight that the doctrine of Yajnavalkya 
which ascribes results to the action of Karman, would supply us with a ground 
for morality, and the Buddhist system has indeed been praised ® as an ingenious 
effort to estabhsh a rigid rule of moral order in the world and to negate selfish- 
ness by maintaining the doctrines that there is no real self on the one hand, and 
that every action is causally determined by some previous action on the other. 
Even, however, in the case of Buddhism the theory is by no means satisfactory 
or convincing. The conception of Karman serves indeed in an excellent 
way to defend and protect the established order of things, but it is essentially 
fatalistic, and fatalism is not for a normal mind a good incentive to moral 
progress. If, on the one hand, the doing of an evil deed is restrained by the 
thought that it will be punished in another life,^ it is equally true that reflec- 
tion shows that the actor has really no option in his acts and is an absolutely 
predetermined person, whose former acts produce his present motives and 
reasonings without the possibility of intervention of any kind on his part. 
This fatalism haunts the Vedanta and the Samkhya no less than the Buddhist 
system and practically every modern system of absolute idealism,^ and it is 

1 Cf. Senart, Album-Kern^ pp. 104 * Speyer, Indische Theosophies p. 90, who 

® Cf. Keith, ERE, s.v. takes a very favourable view of this 

® Walleser, XHe phUosophische Grundlage doctrine. 

des dlteren Buddhismnss pp. 74, 75. « Cf. J. Ward, The Realm of Ends (1911), 



Chap. 28 ] Significance of the Philosophy of the Upanisads 597 

noteworthy that in the doctrine of Ramanuja there is a real effort to find some 
place for independence on the part of the individual soul. Just as in Buddhism 
and Jainism alike free will is often tacitly assumed as existing. Again, while 
in the occidental systems of absolute idealism there is ever an effort to find real 
value for the individual by seeing in him the conscious working of the absolute 
which realizes itself in some degree of reality in him, in Buddhism no such 
satisfaction is possible. We are indeed sometimes ^ invited to see in the 
Buddhists of the Pali texts lovers of empirical pyschology and hedonists who 
believed that life of a certain kind, the full and perfect efflorescence of mind 
and character on earth, was fair and lovely beyond all non-being, beyond ail 
after-being. Unhappily in this view we have merely the ascription to Bud- 
dhism of ideals cherished by a modern sect, in flagrant defiance of the obvious 
fact that the summum bonum of the system envisaged by these writers was 
precisely non-being, for in death alone have unhealthy moral conditions 
completely passed away fo^ ever from a sage. Prom such an end the only 
deduction bearing upon action must obviously be the rule of avoiding passion 
and emotion and action of every kind, and it is significant that the develop- 
ment of the doctrine of active compassion in the Buddhist faith is coincident 
with the development of the religious aspect of that belief, which in effect 
overthrows entirely the old ideal and which in large measure w'as accomplished 
during foreign dominion in India under the stress of spreading the Buddhist 
gospel beyond the narrow bounds of India proper. 

In the case of the Upanisads, 'however, the position for morality is still less 
favourable than in the Buddhist system. It is quite impossible to make 
Karman the leading principle of these texts, to many of which it was clearly 
a sealed book. Moreover it is quite impossible to make the Karman doctrine 
harmonize with the doctrine of salvation by knowledge, and this doctrine 
is superior to all morality. Doubtless, when restricted within the narrow 
circles in which it first became recognized as the fundamental truth, the 
doctrine of salvation by knowledge alone was not likely to produce evil living, 
but the effect of a doctrine, which makes morality negligible, on less trained 
minds can easily be recognized, and is admirably illustrated by the effect of the 
doctrine of faith when divorced from works. But more directly and funda- 
mentally the system failed wholly to provide, just as the Buddhist failed to 
provide, a criterion for morality, since for it also the summum bonum had no 
intelligible relation to moral activity of any sort. On the contrary it declared 
the world of reality to be a delusion or at least not true reality and to be 

pp, 270 ff.; J, Koyce, Lectures on and Eealityi Plotinus 

Modem Idealism (1919) ; W. R. ^ C. Rhys Davids, Buddhist Manual of 
Sorley, Hibbert Journal, ii. 703 ff. ; Psychological Ethics^, pp. xciv ff. Con- 

Moral Values and the Idea of God (1918) trast Stcherbatsky, The Central Concep- 

against Bosanquet, Principle of In- iion of Buddhism, pp. 49 ff. In her 

dividuality and Value (1912) ; The Buddhist Psychology, pp. 278 ff., 3Urs. 

Meeting of Extremes in Contemporary Rhys Davids shows a clearer apprecia- 

Philosophy{1^21)i Bradley, Appearance tion of the defects of Buddhism. 



598 The PMlosofhy of the Veda fPartv 

miserable; it encouraged the declaration of one Upanisad^ that devotion to 
childrens wife, or parents is a means of keeping back the self from its saving 
knowledge : it drove Yajhavalkya to abandon his dear wife for ever, and not, 
as in the more sympathetic version of the Buddha legend, subject to the 
possibility of relations of friendship at a later period. The essence of its 
doctrine is that of the saving of the individual soul, which must resolutely 
refuse to allow itself to be blinded by the ordinary desires and sympathies of 
mankind. This is a logical conclusion of the metaphysic of the system. When 
Yajhavalkya ^ declares that the husband is dear to the wife not for his own 
sake but for the sake of the self, and applies the same principle to the other 
relations of human life, to the wife, to children, to riches, to other men, to the 
gods, and the universe, he is doubtless concerned mainly with a metaphysical 
doctrine ; but not onl}’- is the selfish conclusion obvious to ordinary minds, ^ 
but it is essentially connected with the teaching itself, for on ultimate 
analysis the aim of the self turns out to be the annihilation of every human 
desire and activity, an ideal which renders all active philanthropy idle, and 
which has caused the chief virtues of India to take the form of resignation, 
passive compassion, and charity.^ 

On the other hand, the attainment of the ideal of union with the absolute 
led to the addiction to the practise of meditation, and above all in ever in- 
creasing measure in later times to the seeking of mystic states of absorption 
in the absolute. It is right to recognize that of this tendency on its worst side 
the Upanisads have very little to show. It is an exception when the Chto- 
dogya Upanisad ® solemnly assures us that the possession of saving knowledge 
enables a man to have at pleasure the presence of the Fathers, the Mothers, 
brothers, sisters, friends, garlands, perfumes, music, and women : doubtless 
in some degree concession had to be made to the desires of those who, unlike 
Naciketas, preferred material joys and the houris of paradise ® to the know- 
ledge of the truth of the fate of man after death. But it was inevitable that 
a doctrine, which regarded morality as not really existent, and preached the 
attainment of union with the absolute by means of mystic abstraction, should 
be productive of means of attaining the desired end which were grossly 
immoral : the Tantras of the later Hinduism, which in Bengal ^ have ousted 
the Veda, which in a very real sense are the most important books of a large 
section of Hindus, and which are certainly by no means without occidental 
and American admirers, are in ultimate analysis descendants of one side of the 
mysticism of which a higher form appears in the Upanisads. The same 
tendencies were from the first marked in Buddhism, as in the earliest texts we 
find the possession of certain supernatural powers admitted as real. 

The final judgement passed on the Upanisads cannot, therefore, be in 

1 Maitr. vi. 28. BAU. ii. 4. 5. Christian love. 

® Oitramare, L'histoire des id6es thioso- ® viii. 2 ; 12. 8. 

phiqties, i. 137. « KU. i. 25. Cf. Kaus. i. 4. 

^ Cf. Oldenberg, Aus dem alien Indien, pp. ’ Ewing, JAOS. xxiii. 65 ; Weber, 

1 tf., on the diilerence of Maitrl and soziologie, ii. 322 ff. 



Chap. 28 ] Significance of the Philosophy of the Upanisads 599 * 

doubt : ^ they are the products of the indigenous philosophy of India^ most 
interesting expositions of early and acute efforts to grasp the nature of the 
universe and man’s place in the cosmos, of vital importance for the under- 
standing of Indian philosophy and religious life in later times, since the con- 
ceptions which they enunciate have for the rest of Indian intellectual progress 
preponderant weight and influence. In comparison with the rest of Indian 
philosophy they excel in interest no less than in literary form and in freedom 
of thought : the deadly defect of the Buddhist dialogues, interminable 
repetition and dullness accentuated by the heaping up of synonyms or quasi- 
synonyms, is only nascent in the Upanisads, which again are happily exempt 
from the painful duty imposed on ^ahkara of expounding his idealism in the 
form of commentaries on texts which he must take as binding upon him and 
expressing one consistent doctrine, in face of the fact that obviously they do 
nothing of the sort. On the other hand, regarded as serious contributions to 
the solution of the fundamental problems of philosophy, the value of the 
Upanisads must be considered to be comparatively small : moreover they 
became known to the western world at a time when the development of philo- 
sophy had reached a point at which it could acquire little or nothing of great 
value from the Upanisads : to measure the exact effect of their influence 
on Schopenhauer would be extremely difficuit,^ especially having regard to 
the fact that he knew them only in a version which often completely misrepre- 
sented their sense ; but in the long run Schopenhauer himself represents 
merely a back current in the course of the stream of philosophy to its un- 
attainable goal. 

A stronger claim, ^ however, has been made for the value of the doctrine of 
the Upanisads as a school of mysticism, ‘ an attempt to gain personal 
experience of God found within the heart as a result of self-purification or 
‘ as a constant process of self-purification to the intent that God may be found 
within ’, definitions in which as applied to the Upanisads God must be under- 
stood as the Brahman. It is claimed from this point of view that the 
Upanisads have the superiority over Christian mysticism in originality, 
siiice that depends vitally on Plotinus, while it is admitted that the 
mysticism of the Upanisads is too purely metaphysical, and lacks the ethical 
and social content of Christian mysticism. Much of Christian mysticism, 
however, seems defective in this regard equally with the Upanisads, though 
it may be conceded that, unlike the Upanisads, the Christian mystics 

1 Cf. Oldenberg, Die KuUur der Gegenwart^, Die Kultur der Gegenwart^t I* v. 53-5 ; 

I. V. 56, whose judgement of Indian Speyer, Indische Theosophie, pp. 306 ff. 

philosophy concludes : Fiir den west- Oldenberg (Die Lehre der Upanishaden, 

lichen Geist — ‘ welch Schauspiel ! aber pp. 195 ff.) rightly emphasizes the fact 

ach ! ein Schauspiel nur ! ’ Contrast that mystics like Meister Eckhardt are 

S. Radhakrishnan, The Beign of far more akin than Kant to the spirit 

Religion in Contemporary Philosophy^ of the Upanisads. 

p. 451. ® Cf. R. Gordon Milburn, The Religious 

® M. F. Hecker, Schopenhauer und die Mysticism of the Upanishads, pp. 26 ff. 

indische Philosophie (1897) ; Oldenberg, 



600 


The Philosophy of the Veda 


[Party 


professed a faith in which essential stress was laid on morality. Christian 
mysticism,^ however, is undoubtedly differentiated from that of the Upanisads 
by reason of the difference between the conception of God and that of the 
Brahman, even though in certain mystics the personal character of the 
divinity tends to be merged, while in the later Upanisads a personal deity 
appears in lieu of an impersonal absolute. In harmony with this distinction 
is the normally greater personal character of the mysticism of Christian seers, 
men and women alike. From this point of view the Upanisads may justly be 
accorded greater value and importance than from that of philosophy proper, 
and it is significant that it is in Christian mystics that we find utterances which 
the seers of the Upanisads would have found far easier to interpret than the 
Kantian system, such as that of St. Catherine, ‘ My being is God, not by 
simple participation, but by a true transformation of being or Eckhardt’s, 
‘ When the soul has lost itself and everything in God, it finds itself again in 
God when it attains to the knowledge of Him, and it finds also everything 
which it had abandoned in God % or his emphatic denial that God has any 
definite character of his own.^ 

It is this fact of universalism that gives the mysticism of the Upanisads 
in its purest form its chief appeal to many minds, which find in the cult of 
a personal deity too narrow an outlook and too selfish a destiny for man. To 
such spirits as these the ideal of merger in the absolute presents an effective 
antidote to the narrowness of traditional religion, and thus the philosophy of 
the Upanisads has for them the same attraction as systems of absolute idealism 
have had for many types of western mind. The chief distinction, however, 
between the standpoint of the Upanisads in this regard and that of western 
theories of the absolute is that the Upanisads do not feel any serious necessity 
for finding a place for morality and political life, while in the west from Hegel 
onwards heroic, if unsuccessful, efforts have been made by the followers of 
this ideal ® to establish morality and civil life as an essential element in the 
absolute. The contrast admits of explanation on many grounds, but one of the 
most obvious is the fact that the system of caste provided ready-made an 
ethical framework which no philosopher cared to attack, while political organi- 
zation remained almost stationary. 

^ See, e.g., C. A, Bennett, A Philosophical Archiv fiir ReL xix. 165 ff. 

Study of Mysticism ; R. Otto, The ^ Cf. John Scotus : Deus propter excellen- 
Idea of the Holy ; James, Varieties of tiam non immerito nihil vocatur ; 

Religious Reference ; von Hiigel, Mystic Angelus Silesius : Gott ist ein lanter 

Element in Religion ; Underhill, Mysti- nichts. (James, op, ciL, pp, 416 f.) 

cisw, and The Mystic Way; cf, Keith, ^ e.g. Bosanqnet, Philosophical Theory of 
Buddhist Philosophy, p. 127. For the State. Cf. Hobhouse, Metaphysical 

Egyptian parallels, cf. Weinreich, Theory of the State. 



CHAPTER 29 

GREECE AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF INDIA 

It is not to be thought that the early philosophy of Greece exercised any 
influence on the philosophy of India. Apart from every other consideration, 
it is clear that the rise of philosophy in Greece was long subsequent to the 
beginnings of Indian philosophy in the hymns of the Rigveda, and from 
those hymns the history of that philosophy presents itself in the light of an 
ordered development. The same reason, which makes it inconceivable that 
the philosophy of the Upanisads should have been the product of external 
influences, such as the introduction of extraneous ideas from the warrior class, 
makes it inconceivable that the development of that philosophy should have 
been affected by influences from Greece. 

The only question, therefore, which can arise is whether the early schools of 
Greek philosophy were affected by the tenets of the schools of the Brahmans. 
This question, first handled with naive enthusiasm by Sir William Jones, has 
been dealt with at length by Garbe,^ who is quite prepared to derive early 
Greek philosophy in large measure from India, and the merit of his work on 
Indian philosophy renders it necessary to consider carefully the arguments 
which he has adduced. The possibility of such influence must be admitted, 
though its probability is a very different question. Still we cannot assert that 
there was any insuperable barrier between early India and early Greece : 
the proof of such intercourse is not large in quantity or quality, but the mere 
fact that the two countries were not separated by uncrossed deserts or seas is 
so far in favour of there having been exchange of ideas. Positive evidence 
is sometimes alleged in the shape of the quaint legend of the wooers of 
Agariste in Herodotos,^ which is traced to a Buddhist Jataka, and even for 
the famous passage of the Antigone^^ in which the heroine weighs the respec- 
tive claims of brother and husband to consideration as regards the duty of 
self-sacrifice, an Indian original has been claimed. In neither instance 
is the case at ail made out and the easy credulity with which the claims of the 
proof of the wandering of fables and folk-tales at an early date have been 
accepted ^ is scarcely creditable to the historic acumen of the critics. 

1 Philosophy of Ancient India, pp, 32-56 ; ^ 904-20 ; Herodotos, iii. 119 ; Pischel, 

Sdmkhya-Philosophie^, pp. 114 ff. Cf. Hemes, xxviii. 465 ff. ; Noldeke, xxix. 

W.* Jones, Works (1T99), i. 360 f. ; von 155 ; Tawney, lA, x. 370 ; Winter- 

Eckstein, Ind, Stud, ii. 369-8S. nit25, ii. 111. 

® vi. 130. For an uncritical account of the * e. g. by Macan, L c. Cf. v. Schroeder, 
relationsliip, see Macan, Herodotos, lndiensLiteraiurundKultur,pp. 518&»; 

III-VI. ii. 804-11 ; cf. Wintemitz, Oldenberg, Me LiL des alien Indien, 

Gesch. d. ind. Lit. ii. 102 ; Tawney, JP. pp. 110 ff. ; Forke, Xndische Mdrchen, 

xii. 131; Giintert, BwddM, pp. 50ff. pp. 26 ff. ; Wintemitz, iii, 307 ff. ; 



602 


[Party 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

A more serious attempt to prove connexions of a literary and religious 
nature is made by A. Gotze, who compares ^ the doctrine of correspondence of 
macrocosm and microcosm as enunciated in the Bundahisn ^ with the pseudo- 
Hippokratean treatise Trepl i/3SofjidBu>v, The latter work appears to have been 
known to Plato, and therefore goes back to the fourth century b. c., while W. H. 
Roscher has endeavoured to assign the short treatise to the seventh century 
and to regard it as the earliest work extant of Greek science and cosmology. 
The Bundahisn, of course, is late, and this particular portion cannot even for 
certain be attributed to the Sassanian recension. On the other hand we have 
in the Upanisads and even in the Brahmanas ® the idea of the parallelism of 
macrocosm and microcosm, so that the possibility that oriental influence 
lies at the basis of the Greek composition cannot be excluded. It may be 
conjectured also that oriental influence is to be seen in the doctrine of the 
pseudo-Hippokratean treatise Trepl <jbvo-o)i/, where the breath is a ground of 
illness, and even in the doctrine of the humours, for Panini already knows in 
the fourth century b.c. of wind, bile, and phlegm as affecting health.^ But, 
even if we grant that there was influence in these matters, the date xs late ; the 
doctrines suggested by Persia were, it is believed, introduced into Greece not 
before 480 b. c. by the Knidian school of medicine. We know in fact of three 
Greek physicians at the Persian court, Demokedes under Dareios I, Ktesias 
under Artaxerxes II, and Apollonides, whom Ktesias mentions. It must, 
however, be borne in mind that we have no evidence that the doctrines alleged 
to have influenced Greece were actually known in Persia in the fifth century 
B. c., and that a case can quite fairly be made out for Greek independence in 
these regards. 

Still less can we deduce Indian influence on Greece from the famous 
Orphic hymn,® which celebrates the greatness of Zeus, and was in some form 
or other known to Plato,® Aischylos,*^ and Xenophanes.® The parallelism 
which has been seen between the cosmic doctrine of this hymn and that of the 
Purusasukta ® is interesting, but it is not claimed that it is due to borrowing 
from India. Rather it is suggested that the Orphic movement owed much to 
Iranian religious conceptions of the people, which play little part in the 
reformed religion of Zoroaster. Nor need we doubt Iranian influence on this 
comparatively late movement. But, so far as ascertained facts go, the 
evidence of any intellectual^^ connexion of a serious character between 


Garbe, Indien und das Christentum, 
p. 24 ; Hertei, ZDMS. Ixii. 113 ff., 
corrected by Jacobi, 358 ff. ; Cosquin, 
Les contes indiens et V accident. 

1 ZII. ii (1923), 60 ft. 

^ c. xxviii. 

« CU.ii.19; ^IB.x. 1.3. 34. 

^ B. Liebich, Zur Einftlkrung in die ind. 
einheimische Sprachmissensckaft, iv. 22. 

® Kern, fragm. 168. 


* Laws, iv. 715 E. 

’ Frag. 70 (ed. Nauck). 

* Frag. 24 (ed. Diels). 

» RV. X. 90. 

See G6tze, op. cit., pp. 167 ff. 

“ To cite the presence of Greek gems of the 
seventh century b.c. in the Punjab 
(Furtwangler in Sdmkhya-Philosophie^, 
p. 119) as proof of intellectual influence 
of India on Greece is decidedly odd. 



Chap. 29] Greece and the Philosophy of India 603 

Greece and India in the period before the extension of the empire of Persia to 
the north-west of India is still to seek. 

The actual proof of influence must, therefore, be derived from internal 
evidence, the comparison of the two systems. Garbe lays stress on the fact 
that Xenophanes teaches that the universe is one (ets 0€os h t€ Oeoio-c Kal 
avOpwrotcTL piyicrros), eternal and without change, and that Parmenides 
writes in verse, and holds that reality is due alone to this universal being, 
neither created nor to be destroyed, and omnipresent, that everything which 
is subject to change is unreal, and that thinking and being are identical.^ He 
admits that the identity of thinking and being, and the insistence on the 
unreality of the universe, can be proved as a definite doctrine in India only 
from texts later than Parmenides; but he insists that the doctrines are 
implicit in the Upanisads, and that they, therefore, may justly be deemed to 
have been the sources of the Eleatic philosophy. It might be added that the 
two philosophies are alike in the fact that they both realize that the nature of 
the absolute must be deemed in some way to be intellectual, however little 
either is able to make the nature of that intellectual character intelligible. 

When these resemblances are pointed out, however, all that can be said 
for the theory is said : there is no ground to assume borrowing : the clearness 
of the position of Parmenides regarding the nature of the one is much more 
pronounced than the view of the Upanisads, and the identification of thought 
and the object is carried beyond the views of the Upanisads, while by his 
view of truth and opinion as distinct Parmenides anticipates Indian thought. 
It is, therefore, far more probable that the Greek and the Indian views were of 
independent origin : the Greek bears already the mark of definiteness which 
is only evolved centuries later in the Indian thought, and it is also aided by its 
freedom from the mythological connexions, which weigh so heavily on the 
thought of the Upanisads. The fact that the Brahman is identified with thought 
is by no means the same thing as the idea that thought and its object are 
identical, a doctrine of Parmenides ^ which duly modified is brought to its 
most complete form in the theory of Aristotle.^ Nor is it of any value to cite 
the fact that Thales’s view of the origin in water of everything is much later 
than the Vedic conception of the waters as the primeval form of existence. 
The idea is not only Babylonian but is a singularly simple one, as found in 
primitive religion, and must have been natural to primitive man : it is 
even possible to trace in theory the mode in which he arrived at this result. 
Similarly it is idle to compare the primitive matter (aTrapov) of Anaximander, 
which is indefinite and into which things pass again as they have emerged 
from it, new worlds arising and passing away, with the matter of the Saiiikhya 
school : apart from the fact that the nature of the Samkhya is not shown to 

1 rcavThv 5’ karl vouv re Kal oxvtKev kart pp, 57 if., where the implications of 

voTjfia, Cf. also Xenophanes : ov\os 6pa, the doctrine are made clear. 

olj'Kos Se VQH, oSaos Se r aKovet. ^ de ^71. i. 3. 13 ; cf. also Wallace, 

® ver. 94 ; cf. Windelband, Hist of Phil., Psych., pp. c ff. 



604 


[Part V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

be as old a conception as Anaximander, and that it is essentially possessed of 
three constituents, and even rectifying the theory by placing in the position 
of Prakrti the vague conception of the Brahmanas as to the primitive nature 
of the universe, the parallelism is far too weak to be of any value as proof. 
In the case of Herakleitos the argument is even more unsatisfactory : the 
doctrine of the constant flux of things {irdvra pet) is certainly comparable 
with the movement of nature in the Samkhya system and to some degree in 
Buddhism, and his belief in the innumerable annihilations and re-creations of 
the universe may be compared with the view of the Sarnkhya of the destruc- 
tion and re-creation of the world.^ But, apart from the fact that the 
comparison of the doctrine of constant movement with the Samkhya system 
of the development of Prakrti is far from important, in view of the complete 
distinction between the two ideas of development, it must be pointed out once 
more that the Samkhya system is not proved to be, and most probably was 
not by any means, as early as the system of Herakleitos, and the doctrine of 
the periodic destruction of the universe, which is probably caused in India by 
the doctrine of transmigration, is not recorded in one of the older Upanisads, 
and is clearly a late development ; Garbe himself rejects the theory that it is 
known to the Atharvaveda.^ It is hardly necessary to add that it is quite out 
of the question to regard Empedokles as borrowing from India his view that 
nothing can arise from nothing : the same view is undoubtedly held by the 
Samkhya, but is as emphatically not normally held by the Upanisads. Nor is 
it of any importance that the character of that teacher as a prophet, a 
magician, a believer in purification, and a mystic is comparable with certain 
types of Indian sage. The view that the world is incapable of producing 
similar figures under similar or even different circumstances is one which 
must be proved first before mere similarities prove anything, and Empedokles' 
claim to be a god, degraded to earth, is un-Indian, being derived from the 
Orphic doctrine of man’s defilement.’ The fact that a dislike to flesh as food 
sprung up among the believers in transmigration like Empedokles is perfectly 
true : ^ it is, however, striking that in India itself the belief was of more tardy 
appearance as at all general than the date of Empedokles,^ and was not so far 
as we can see caused by the doctrine of transmigration. The great sage, 
Yajhavalkya, with whose name the doctrines of the Upanisads are mainly 
connected, was a beef-eater with decided views as to the condition in which he 
ate it. It is also argued that the position of the gods in the view of Demokritos, 
who holds with Empedokles that nothing arises from nothing, is precisely the 
position of the gods in Indian thought, as seen in the Upanisads, where they 


^ L. Bemdl (Uber das Sdmkhya, p. 14) 
argues strongly that this element in the 
Samkhya is late. In his novel, but 
untenable, theory of the Samkhya, he 
sees parallelism with Anaxagoras, but 
not influence on either side. 

® Sdmkhya-Philosophie^t p. 286 ; AV. x. 


8. 39 f. 

* Speyer (Indische Theosophie, p. 299) 

lays stress on this point. 

* For many exceptions in Buddhism, cf. 

Hopkins, JAOS. xxvii. 455-64; cf. 
Macdonell and Keith, Vedic Index, ii. 
145-7. 



Chap. 29] Greece and the Philosophy of India 605 

cease to be anything more considerable than a number of superior beings, 
not very essentially different from men. But this argument is clearly of no 
weight. 

Though Garbe is in favour of the view that these comparisons are proofs of 
borrowing, he confines his assurance of dependence to the case of Pythagoras, 
which has been accepted by von Schroeder ^ and Hopkins ^ with others ® as 
a clear case of the influence of Greek philosophy on Indian speculation. The 
question cannot be ignored nor easily disposed of. The theory of Pythagoras 
clearly included the belief in transmigration, the idea that a series of births 
serves to purify the souls, and the view that the contemplative life is the 
highest form of existence and that man by living it most effectively strives to 
rid himself of the fetters of nature. It is, therefore, argued that he must have 
borrowed his conception from India, as there is no earlier trace of metempsy- 
chosis in Greece, and the principle must therefore have come from an external 
source. Further arguments are based on detailed coincidences, which must 
at once be admitted to be of great value in such a question, if only they could 
be established. The prohibition to eat beans, the rule of ceremonial purity 
regarding the sun {irpos ^]Xtov rerpap/jiiyov pJrj the vow of silence like 

that taken by an Indian Muni, the Pythagorean theorem, the irrational root 2, 
the character of the religious philosophical brotherhood treated as similar to the 
Indian philosophical schools, and the mystic character of the doctrine are all 
regarded by Hopkins as valid evidence of the connexion. Other arguments 
have also been adduced by von Schroeder, but have been abandoned by’’ his 
own supporters : thus the theory that the Pythagorean numbers are borrowed 
from the Samkhya system is given up even by Garbe, in face of the fact that 
in that system number plays no part save in so far that three Gunas and 
twenty-five principles are enumerated, and the Pythagorean conception 
of number is something totally different.^ The further argument adduced 
by Garbe that the five elements are borrowed by Pythagoras from India is 
open to the grave objection that the five elements are not certainly known in 
India early enough for this, but to the still more grave objection that the 


^ Pythagoras und die Inder (1884) ; Indiens 
Lit. und Kuliur, pp. 717 ff. Cf. Cole- 
brooke. Essays^, i. 436 ff. 

* ReL of India, pp. 559, 560. 

® Macdonell, Sanskrit Literature, p. 422 ; 
Gomperz, Greek Thinkers, i. 127, 146 ; 
Speyer, op. cit., pp. 299 ff. C. Rhys 
Davids {Buddhist Psychology, p. 143) 
actually suggests that the doctrine that 
like is known by like in Hellenic 
philosophy (Aristotle, de An. i. 2. 5 ; 
Plotinus, Enn. i. 6. 9) may be due to 
Eastern sources, although a conscious 
statement of the doctrine appears first 
in Buddhaghosa in the fifth century 


A.D., and asserts that Empedokles, 
Plato, and Plotinus were all influenced 
by Eastern thought. Classical scholars 
naturally ignore such bare assertions, 
or repeat them uncritically. 

^ So also Dahlmann, Die Sdthkhya-Philo* 
Sophie, pp. 256, 257. Berndi (op. ciL, 
p. 4) insists on MBh. xii. 11409 as 
proving that number was essential for 
the early Saihkhya. One may justly 
dismiss as ludicrous Garbe’s suggestion 
that Pythagoras invented his system 
as a result of misunderstanding in- 
formation given to him as to the 
Samkhya. 



606 


[Paxt V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

system of five elements cannot be traced back to Pythagoras himself, and 
further that the five by no means precisely correspond with the five of India 
in the concepts attached to them : the efforts ^ to show that the word oX/ca? as 
used by Fhilolaos of the ether is the imperfect transcript of the Aka9a of the 
Indian tradition must be deemed to be methodologically completely mistaken. 

The detailed evidence of the arguments adduced is quite insufficient to 
prove the propositions contended for.^ The origin of transmigration in Greece 
is probably to be traced to Thrace, and it seems to have been spread by the 
Orphics, whose views in part at least appear to have been brought forward 
in a rational form by P3;^thagoras : it cannot be traced, as so often urged, to 
the personal activity of Pythagoras : it was known by Empedokles and by 
Pherekydes, and was recognized by Pindar : ^ it is most probable that in 
Thrace it developed itself in connexion with the belief in the temporary 
embodiment of the divinity in animal form revealed in the Dionysiac rites : 
the Mainads, the Bakchai, with their close communion with nature, their 
adoption of animal garb, their tearing of the animal who represented the god, 
their efforts to produce states of ecstasy, portrayed for us by the master hand 
of Euripides, suggest the source from which the belief could grow.^ The 
story of the Thracian Zamolxis is clear proof of the belief as existing in Thrace.^ 
There was also no such spirit in Greek I'eligion, as would prevent the ready 
acceptance of the view. On the contrary, it may be noted that the idea of the 
transfer of one soul into another body was familiar from such tales- as that of 
Kirke and the comrades of Odysseus, and the daimons of Hesiod suggest a 
mode of transition. The fact that transmigration appears also among the 
Dxuids, and has independently grown up with other peoples is of importance.® 
The case of Egypt where Herodotos ’ held that transmigration prevailed is 
difficult : the view may have been held by a sect there, though its existence is 
not yet established, but this possibility does not appear to be of fundamental 

^ Von Schroeder, op. di., p. 05, n. 2 ; Garbe, ® Among the Druids, Caesar, vi. 14. 5; 
VOJ. xiii. 303 ff. Cf. Bohtlingk, VOJ. ef. Dieterich, Nekyia, pp. 90 ff. ; 

xiv. 85; BSGW. 1900, p. 150 ; Gunder- Archiv f. Religionswissenschaft, viii. 

raann, RM, 1904, pp. 145 ff. ; Winter- 29 ff. ; MacCulloch, Mel. of Anc. Celts, 

nitz, Gesch. d. ind. Lit. iii. 478. pp. 334 ff., 348 ff. The interpretation 

^ Keith, JRAS. 1909, pp. 569 ff., where full of Caesar, which sees in the belief no 

details will be found. Oldenberg real transmigration, but the adoption 

(IHe Kuliur der Gegenwarf, I. v. 52) of a new body by the soul in the land of 

does not accept the theory, nor Weber, happiness, is less probable. For 

Ind. Stud, xviii. 463 ff. ; SBA, 1890, Germany cf. Appian, Hist. i. 4. 3; 

pp. 923 ff. Helm, Altgerm. Mel. i. 254 f. 

® In Greece, it should be noted, transmigra- Mi. 123 ; cf. Bertholet, Seelenwandemng 
tion is optimistic, not a source of pessi- (Halle a. S., 1904). Rhys Davids 

mism ; Oltramare, Vhistoire des i(Ues {Hibbert Lectures 1881^, p. 75) traces 

tMosophiques, i. 102 ff. For the early Pythagoras’ views to this source. Cf. 

date of the Orphic views, see Diels, J. H. Breasted, Dev. of Mel. in Egypt, 

Archiv fur Gesch. der Phil. ii. 91 ff. p. 277, with Hopkins, Origin of Mel., 

* Burnet, Early Greek Philosophy^, pp. 86 ff. p, 234 ; Jevons, Hist, of Mel., p. 317. 

^ Herodotos, iv. 94, 95. 



Chap, 29] 


607 


Greece and the Philosophy of India 


importance. The doctrine much more probably originated in Thrace than at 
any other point in the Greek area, and its development beyond crude outlines 
was the work of the Greek religious and philosophical genius, as will be shown 
below. 

The effort to show that the Pythagorean theorem and the problem of the 
square root of the number two are older in India than in Pythagoras, is based 
on a mistake : the error was certainly in great measure favoured by Cantor, 
who declared that the Indian versions of these matters must be based on those 
of Greece, and it was, therefore, easy for von Schroeder to argue that the 
relation must be the other way, that the Indian versions occurred in works 
which were much older than the versions recorded in Greece. The fact is that 
the Qulba Sutras which contain the earliest mentions of these matters are of 
uncertain date ; they are nominally parts of the ritual Sutras, in the sense that 
they bear the name of the school, and it is urged that further they are so 
essentially connected with the structure of the sacred altars that they must be 
held to be early. The arguments for their age cannot be taken as at all con- 
clusive : ^ the Sutras of the schools were works without internal connexion 
of such a kind as to render it in the slightest degree difficult to interpolate, and 
that the Qulba Sutras may not have been added long after the ^rauta Sutras 
were composed it would be absurd to contend. The existing Sutras have no 
appearance of great antiquity in any way : they have new technical terms, 
but little or none of the irregularities of construction and the archaic phraseo- 
logy which justify us in placing some of the ^rauta Sutras about the fourth 
century b. c., and even then of course the date assigned to them would be too 
late to prove borrowing by Pythagoras. We may legitimately assume that 
they were composed at the close of the Sutra period, when interest in their sub- 
ject-matter had developed. What is more important, and what, it may be 
added, tells against borrowing by India in this regard from Greece, is that 
examination of the Sutras ^ has shown that complete generality of the theorem 
of Pythagoras was never attained and was not even striven after. The 
practical form of the problem was known to the Egyptians and Babylonians, 
long before it was known to the Sutras.^ The same remark applies to the 
alleged knowledge of the theorem of the irrational — the mere approximate 
calculation of the root of two, which is all the Sutras attained, is far from 


1 See Keith, JRAS. 1910, pp. 518-20, a 
passage which Garbe has unfortunately 
forgotten in his polemic (Sdmkhya- 
Philosophic^, p. 126), though in- 
formed of it in 1910. His second 
argument, that Pischel has completely 
proved the dependence of Buddhism 
on the Samkhya, is without serious 
value for any one who prefers argument 
to assertion ; cf. above, Chap. 28, § 7. 

^ Kaye, JRAS. 1910, pp. 752 ff. His views 
confirm those expressed by me in 1909. 


See also his Indian Mathematics (Cal- 
cutta, 1915), pp. 3 Cf. also Vogt, 
Bibl. Math. 1906, pp. 6 ff., and the 
judgement of Oldenberg, GN. 1917, p. 
253, n. 1 ; Weltanschauung der Brdh- 
manaiexte, p. 233. See also T. Heath, 
Hist, of Greek Mathematics (1921), 

* Garbe’s assertion that the theorem occurs 
in the TS. is due to his confusing 
empirical knowledge with theoretical, 
an error made by Biirk. 



608 


[Paxt V 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

being equivalent to the discovery of the solution of an irrational. The real 
period when these questions came to be discussed in India was doubtless at a 
date considerably later than Pythagoras — not before the third century b.c. 
in all likelihood, when the ingenuity of the Brahmans began to deal with the 
questions of the signification of the exact details of the measurements of the 
sacrificial ground- The Brahmanas themselves are guiltless of any knowledge 
of the discussions of numbers, and this is proof positive that the speculations 
found in the ^ulba Sutras are of later origin. 

The other resemblances in detail are negligible ; the prohibition of the 
eating of beans, and the rule regarding the respect due to the sun, are examples 
of taboos of a common sort which are ethnic, and are not subjects of borrowing : 
the latter being found in Hesiod,^ it is hardly intelligible how it should have 
been considered by Hopkins to be valid as an argument for Indian borrowing.^ 
The vow of silence taken by the Muni is, on the one hand, not a common idea 
in the Upanisads, and it cannot be shown to be as early there as the date of 
Pythagoras : on the other hand, silence as an observance for all sorts of reli- 
gious and magic purposes is ethnic.® The character of the Pythagorean 
brotherhood bears no real similarity to the Indian, save such as is inherent 
in every case where any men agree together in any belief. The evidence of 
early Greece points to the existence of such societies for two centuries before 
P3rthagoras, and his own society seems to have developed a political activity 
of a truly Greek kind ; ^ in the India of the Upanisads we have nothing 
recorded precisely similar to these-societies : we have instead the phenomena 
of individual teachers with pupils wandering here and there in disputations, 
of a closed or mystic brotherhood not one trace. Nor is it reasonable to lay 
any stress on the comparison of the speculations of the Brahmanas as being 
fantastic with those of Pythagoras on the theory of number ; that every 
fantastic system is derived from another is an absurd proposition, and the 
kinds of fantasy are quite different. 

Moreover it is right to note that the spirit of Pythagoras is different in 
essentials from the spirit of the Upanisads. Plato in the Fhaidon ® gives as 
older than Philolaos, and perhaps as already held by Pythagoras, the view that 
the soul of man is a stranger in the world, that the body is the tomb of the 
soul, and that yet we may not seek to escape from it, for we are the chattels of 
God, and he is our herdsman, and we may not leave it without his command. 
This religious attitude is clearly, as will have been seen from the account of 
the Upanisads, wholly at variance with the thought of those texts. In the 


^ Works and Days^ 727 ; cf. Pliny, NaL Hi$L 
xxviii. 6 ; AV. xiii. 1. 56. 

^ Hopkins would doubtless reject Brunn- 
hofer’s view that Hesiod’s is not genuine 
Greek belief. Von Schroeder (VO.T. xv, 
187-212) himself explains the taboo 
against beans as Aryan and due to their 
use in offerings to the dead. 


3 Cf. Beussen, Phil, of Up., p. 11. For 
silence as a sign of the highest wisdom, 
cf. BAU. iii. 5. 1 ; CU. viii. 5. 2 ; 
Katha^ruti Up. 3. 

* Cf. A. Delatte, Essai sur la politique 
pythagoriciemie (1922). 

® 62 B ; cf . Gorg, 493 A ; Kratyl, 400 B ; 
Zeller, Presocratic Phil., i. 481 



Chap. 29] 


609 


Greece and the Philosophy of India 

second place, there is a real point of difference between the form of the belief 
in transmigration of Pythagoras and that of the Upanisads : it is expressly 
and sarcastically recorded of Pythagoras that he recognized in the howling 
of a dog the voice of a friend, and that he claimed to remember his former 
births.^ These characteristics are not to be found in the doctrine of the older 
Upanisads : the doctrine of the recollection of former births is only recorded 
later, ^ and the recognition of the voice of a friend is a peculiarity of the Greek 
imagination, displaying a humour which in India the doctrine of trans- 
migration does not excite in the times of the Upanisads. Further the Indian 
doctrine of knowledge resulting in emancipation is not to be found in Pytha- 
goras, who was a believer in the essential character of purification, probably 
in origin a physical purification,^ but soon transformed into one of moral 
character. 

It is in fact hopeless to seek any real derivation of Greek philosophy from 
India : the alleged travels of Pythagoras and others to India are foolish and 
late inventions, of no real value whatever. The efforts made, and often 
most uncritically accepted, to find the influence of Pythagorean views derived 
from India on Plato is hopeless : the fact that Plato believes in the bondage of 
the soul in matter and in its immortality and transmigration is made the 
ground for the belief that he is indebted to the Saiiikhya philosophy by 
Barthelemy St. Hilaire,^ a view which wwld be comic if it were not endorsed 
by the authority of Hopkins. The broad fact which should be recognized 

1 Xenophanes ap. Diog. Laert. viii. 36. Supamamge, pp. 135 ff.). In AU., on 

^ The view that this is meant in BAU. i. 4. the other hand, the citation is merely 

10 ; AU. ii. 4 (Deussen, Phih of Up,, to establish the fact that Vamadeva 

pp. 317, 318), is clearly speculative; it knew the three forms of birth ; not a 

is not stated in either text and is a bad word is said of his having passed 

guess of the commentators who read through any series of births at all. 

their own views into the Upanisads * Cf. Parnell, Evolution of Religion, pp, SS ft, 
wholesale, which unfortunately has The eschatology of Pindar, as we gather 

misled Deussen. According to Deussen it from the second Olympian and the 

in the former passage Vamadeva is Threnoi, is vitally different from that of 

stated to have recognized his identity the Upanisads. On death the souls are 

with the Brahman, ‘ and as a proof of judged ; the good then dwell in bliss 

his knowledge of Brahman alleged his with Pluto and Persephone ; the evil 

acquaintance with his former births as must undergo anguish to punish and 

Manu and Surya But the Upanisad purify them. Then they arc sent back 

has nothing whatever as to former again to earth, and on death are judged 

births, and the argument is quite once more. Those who in three 

different. By knowledge of the Brah- di:Kerent stages of life live uprightly, 

man one becomes the Brahman, as it and abstain from evil, are permitted 

did itself, and as may the gods and seers ; eternal life in the Tower of ICronos (cf. 

in substantiation of this doctrine is Christ, Pindar, pp. 21 f.). 

cited the fact that Vamadeva became ^ Premier mdmoire sur le Sdnkhya, pp. 512, 
(not ‘ once was ’) Manu and Surya 513, 521, 522. Roer’s comparison of 

by recognizing his identity with them the chariot metaphor in the Katha 

(acompletemisunderstandingjofcourse, Upanisad and the Phaidros (p. 246) 

of the hymn which is not spoken by is no proof of borrowing, 

Vamadeva : cf., last, Charpentier, Die 
19 [h.o.s. 32] 



610 


[PaxtV 


The Philosophy of the Veda 


is that, the nature of the problem of existence being the same everywhere, 
and the mind of man not being essentially different in the India of the 
Upanisads and the Greece of the Pythagoreans and Plato, the results of the 
philosophy tend to resemble each other in diverse points.^ But in philosophy 
it is not the results which matter : the solution of the riddle of the universe is, 
we may feel assured, reserved for no mortal, and the comparative value of two 
philosophies, even when the results in the mere sphere of theory as opposed to 
practical philosophy are similar, depends in the main on the methods adopted. 
In this respect the discrepancy between the Upanisads and Plato is sufficient 
to make us realize from what different foundations the structures of the two 
edifices of thought were raised. 

One further point of suggested contact between Indian and Greek thought 
should be noted, as it has the support of the authority of Garbe.^ Weber ^ 
suggested that there might possibly be some degree of dependence on India 
through Alexandria of the philosophy of Neo-Platonism in its doctrine of the 
Logos, as compared with the position of Vac, speech, in the Brahmanas. In 
that literature, as we have seen. Vac now and then appears as the instrument 
by which the creator god carries out the process of the creation of the universe. 
Moreover, in a few passages there is a suggestion that Vac is even higher than 
her normal lord, Prajapati : thus at the Vajapeya offering we learn that some 
offered to her the last of the seventeen oblations in the hope to win her,^ 
and she is credited with the creation of the whole universe and identified 
with Vi9vakarman.® The conception of speech as .the final power in the uni- 
verse, which thus grows up naturally in the Brahmanas, is contrasted by 
Weber with the sudden and unexpected appearance of the Logos in Greek 
philosophy. Garbe, accepting this view, presses it further : the Logos in 
Greek philosophy came to Neo-Platonism through Philo, and he borrowed it 
from the Stoics,® who in their turn inherited it from Herakieitos whose 
dependence on India for his philosophy is thus triumphantly proved."^ The 
whole theory is clearly without any solid foundation of truth : the essence of 
the view that the sporadic doctrine of the importance of Vac should have 
given rise to the very definite and clear conception of the Logos ® is in itself 
wholly incredible, seeing that at the most it is reasonable to assume that a 


^ Cf. E, Leumann, Buddha und Mahdviray 
pp, 55-70. 

- Philosophy of Ancient India, pp. 55 ff. 

® ind. Stud. ix. 473-80. 

* fB. V. 1. 3. 11, which disapproves. 

® gB. viii. 1. 2. 9 ; cf. xi. 1. 6. 8. 

^ Dahlmann (Die Sdmkhya-Philosophie, pp. 
255-81) suggests that the Stoic doctrine 
of logic, physics, and ethics owes much 
to India, hnt his parallelisnos — often 
just and forcible — prove nothing save 
the similarity of the mind of man. 

’ If Hertel’s doctrine of Brahman as fire 


were accepted (see above, Chap. 27, § 2) 
the case for borrowing would be far 
stronger. But, as we have seen, this is 
most implausible. 

® Burnet, Greek Philosophy, Bart I, pp. 57- 
63 ; cf. Mills, JRAS. 1902, pp. 897 ff. ; 
Aall, Die Lehr e vom Logos. S. Langdon 
(JRAS. 1918, pp. 443 ff.) argues for 
a Babylonian origin of the Logos as 
cosmic, connected with the primeval 
waters, suggesting that Thales derived 
his doctrine of water as the origin of 
things from Babylonian thought. 



Chap. 29] Greece and the Philosophy of India 611 

view which was widely spread and normal in the philosophy of India might 
be conveyed by chance to Greece : to assume this of an idea which plays 
comparatively speaking no part in theBrahmanas and which in theUpanisads, 
i.e. in the early philosophy of India, has no part at all, is contrary to all 
plausibility.^ 

The true relation between Greek and Indian philosophy can be seen 
clearly from the parallel which, quite legitimately, has been drawn ^ between 
the view of Empedokles and of Pakudha Kaccayana, whose opinions are 
recorded for us by Buddhist texts. The date of the views of the latter teacher 
is such that it is absurd to assume that his opinions, which were obviously 
never widely held, could have reached Greece and influenced Empedokles. 
Kaccayana asserted the existence of seven distinct elements whose interaction 
gave rise to the world of experience, namely earth, air, fire, water, pleasure 
and pain as sources of attraction and repulsion, and the soul, Jiva. The first 
six of these factors clearly correspond closely with the four elements of 
Empedokles, to which he added love and strife as sources of motion. Both 
agree in regarding their elements as unchanging, both recognize pores in 
organized bodies,® both deny the existence of a void. Yet the fact that 
Pakudha Kaccayana accepted the existence of soul reminds us that he derives 
from a philosophic tradition to which the conception of souls was familiar, 
while Empedokles’ opinions are. based on a naturalistic philosophy, although, 
like Kaccayana, he believes in the doctrine of transmigration. 

When in Anaxagoras we find Nous introduced as an element, comparison 
with the Samkhya is far from convincing, for nor merely is Nous one, not 
many, but it clearly bore no resemblance in nature or function to the Purusa 
of the Samkhya. 

Parallelism again is the cause of most of the similarities which have often 
been traced between Indian thought and post-Aristotelian philosophy. 
Garbe has, very wisely, discounted much of the borrowing assumed by the 
pioneer researches of Lassen,^ but his own efforts to trace borrowings from the 
Sarnkhya in the case of Plotinus are far from happy. The doctrine that the 
soul is in reality free from sorrow, which, on the contrary is essentially 
involved in the world of matter, is the development of a Platonic conception, 
and farther back is Orphic in origin. The conception of the soul as light 
is Aristotelian, and, as it is an essential doctrine of the Upanisads, derivation 
from the Samkhya in any event would be wholly unnecessary. The metaphor 
of the mirror applied to the explanation of consciousness of knowledge is 
traced by Garbe to the Samkhya, though we have not a scrap of proof that the 
school knew the doctrine for centuries after his date, since the Karika is 

^ Cf. Oldenberg, Weltanschauung der Brah- ^ Barua, Prehuddh, Ind. Phil, pp. 281 ff. ; 
manatexte, p. 81 ; Hopkins, Bel, of DN. i. 48 ; MN. i. 198, 250 ; ii. 2, &c. 

India, p. 558. For the doctrine in the * Aristotle, de Gen, et Corr, i. 8. 

Hermetic writings in Egypt see Flinders * Ind, Alt, iii. 379 ff., 884 ff. (Gnostics), 
Petrie, Trans, Third Internal Congress 417 ff. (Plotinus), 430 ff. (Porphyry), 

of Eel, i. 196 £f. 438 (Ahammon). 

19* 



612 


[Party 


The Philosophy of the Veda 

absolutely silent regarding it. The fact that the system of Plotinus is directed 
to freeing man from misery follows from Ms own doctrine, nor in any case 
could it be made specially Samkhyan in derivation, and the same observation 
applies to the view of Plotinus that even in sleep happiness is possible since 
the soul does not sleep. IJis reduction ^ of all souls to one (et iracraL al ij/vxal fxia) 
is, of course, opposed to the Samkhya, and can be explained perfectly well 
without the introduction of derivation from the Vedanta. His belief in the 
turning away of the mind from things of the sense and the achievement of a 
condition of union with the divine in ecstasy is parallel with the Pratibha, 
intuitive knowledge,^ of the Yoga doctrine, but it also follows inevitably from 
the foundations of his philosophy. 

It is remarkable also that, though in the case of Porphyry (a. d. 232-304) 
we know that he used Bardesanes and actually reproduces remarks of his 
regarding the Brahmans, we find nothing conclusive of borrowing from the 
Samkhya. The distinction which he makes between spirit and matter is 
merely in keeping with the views of Plotinus ; equally so are the doctrines of 
the superiority of spirit to matter, of the omnipresence of the soul when freed 
from matter, and of the fact that the world has no beginning. His objection to 
sacrifice and the slaying of animals might be traced with Lassen to Buddhism 
with far greater likelihood than to the Samkhya, but it has historical antece- 
dents in Greece. Abammon’s doctrine of the remarkable magic powers 
possessed by persons in ecstasy agrees perfectly with Buddhist views as well 
as those of the Brahmans, but we cannot forget the delusions attributed by 
Euripides to the Bakchai and in special to Pentheus. We may see an echo of 
the Samkhya Gunas in the Gnostic divisions of men as 7rv€VjxaTLKOL, and 

vXt/coi, and in the according of personal existence to such mental states as the 
intellect, will, &c., in the manner in which existence is assigned to Buddhi, 
Ahamkara, Manas, &c. But the case for real borrowing is far from certain ; 
in the later case Iranian influence is probably at work ; in other instances, 
as in the system of Basilides, Buddhist influence is clear.® 

On the other hand the efforts which have been made by Satis Chandra 
Vidyabhusana ^ to establish the gradual reception in India of Greek logic, 
while ingenious and interesting, are equally without assured ground. It is, 
indeed, far more probable, if borrowing really took place, that India obtained 
the impulse to logical investigation from Greece in a general way and pro- 
ceeded more suo to develop her doctrines without detailed intervention of 
Greek ideas. At least this would suit the history of Indian logic far more 
satisfactorily than the suggestions of Vidyabhusana, whose readiness to 
recognize Greek influence is, however, admirable testimony to the scientific 
spirit in which his valuable researches were conducted. Nor in any case is 
there any doubt that he is perfectly in the right in distinguisMng, as against 

^ JSnw. iv. 0 j Betissen, Allgem, Gesch, der (1918) ; Reitzenstein, Die hellenisti- 

PM7.n.i. 497 ; Inge, i. 205 ff. ; ii. 82ff. schen Mysterienreligionen (1910); Das 

* Yoga Sutra, iii. 33. iranische Erldsungsmysterium (1921) ; 

a Kennedy, JRAS. 1902, pp. 376 ff. See Keith, JHS. xU. 280 f. 

also T. Whittaker, The Neo-Platonisis * History of Indian Logic, pp. 497 ff. 



Chap. 29] Greece and the Philosophy of India 613 

the contentions of Barua and others, the use of syllogism from the theoretical 
exposition. A similar error, as has been seen, has led Biirk and Garbe 
to hold that at the time of the Taittiriya Samhita the Pythagorean problem 
was known, when in truth all that is recorded is the correct measurement 
of the sides of a right-angled triangle. 

We have in fact to admit that the human spirit, in virtue of its character, 
is able to produce in different parts of the world systems which agree in large 
measure, without borrowing by one side from the other. The stress laid in the 
cave metaphor in the Republic by Plato, as by Parmenides, on the relative 
unreality of the world of sense and experience bears a certain similarity to the 
conception of the Brahman as alone real, but Plato was the inheritor of the 
Sophists and Sokrates, and as a result his philosophy is something vitally 
distinct from any known to India. The metaphor of the chariot and its 
steeds in the Phaidros has, as we have seen, an interesting parallel in the 
Katha, but the details of the two are perfectly distinct, for Plato uses the con- 
ception to illustrate the struggle between the rational and the irrational 
elements in the soul, and his distinction of (9u/x.os and has no real 

parallel in the Upanisads. In the Brhadaranyaka XJpanisad ^ we hear of 
procreation as the result of the desire for reunion of the two halves of the 
primitive being, divided by Prajapati into man and woman. The brilliant 
myth in the Symposion of Plato has been compared by Deussen,^ who argues 
that the view departs from truth merely in that it places in the past what lies 
in the future, for the being that* brings together man and woman is the child 
that is to be born. The two passages must certainly be independent, and 
afford an excellent instance of what parallelisms can be adduced. 

Yet another instance is that of the five elements. As Deussen ^ points 
out there are characteristic differences between the two lists which show a 
divergence of origin ; the Greeks place fire between ether and air, the Indians 
air — which is really for them wind, Vayu — ^between ether and fire. Moreover 
there is a perfectly simple natural fact to which the series corresponds, the 
division of states of matter into the solid, the fluid, the fiery or gaseous, the 
elastic, and the imponderable, which could not fail to win early attention. 
In point of fact we can trace in Greek philosophy the gradual emergence of the 
doctrine of the five elements in a perfectly characteristic manner. Thales 
claimed water as the primary source of reality, Anaximenes air, Herakleitos 
fire, Parmenides, in the part of his work dealing with opinion as opposed to 
true knowledge, admitted the hot and the cold, fire and earth, andEmpedokles, 
accepting four, set fire off against the other three, and, in a wholly un-Indian 
manner, experimentally proved air to be different from space. The fifth 
element was added, whether under the title ‘ ether " or not, by the school of 
Pythagoras, not himself, and is derived from a conception of a TTViVfJLd 
surrounding the world, which is also regarded as space.^ 

^ i. 4. far-fetched {op. cit., p, 153). 

“ PhiU of Up., p. 293. His comparison of ® Op. cit., p. 189. 

Maitr. vi. 15 as to the beginning of * See Keith, JRAS. 1909, pp. 595 f. with 

time with Tim. 37 D seems decidedly references : Appendix H. 



APPENDIX 

A. THE AGE OF THE AVESTA AND THE RIGVEDA 

An effort definitely to establish the date of the reform of Iranian religion 
by Zoroaster has been made by J. Hertel/ who seeks to trace the activity of 
the prophet from 559-522 b.c., a result of much importance in view of the 
probability that no very great interval of time can intervene between the 
Rigveda and the Gathas of the Avesta. 

Stress is naturally laid by Hertel on the fact that the religion of the 
Persians as described by Herodotos contains nothing specifically Zoroastrian, 
while it accepts much that Zoroaster rejected, especially the direct veneration 
of nature gods, and the animal sacrifice ; moreover Herodotos records the 
drunkenness of the Persians, -which may be connected with the Haoma 
offering, the fear of defiling fire or water, and the practice of the Magoi of 
permitting the bodies of the dead to be torn by birds or beasts, matters which 
are not recognized in the Gathas. Hence it may be concluded that Zoroaster's 
activity fell at no great date before the reign of Xerxes I. Nor can we form 
any reasoned judgement to the contrary on the strength of the view of 
Xanthos of Lydia, a contemporary of Artaxerxes I (465-424 b.[c.), who 
places Zoroaster 6,000 years ^ before the expedition of Xerxes, or the slightly 
variant account of Aristotle which makes him 6,000 years before the death of 
Plato.^ 

The Persian inscriptions show Dareios I as a believer in Auramazda, 
who is clearly the god of Zoroaster, not the sky god of the nature worship of 
the Persians, whose name Herodotos heard under a form akin to the Indian 
Dyaus. The devotion of Dareios to this god can be accounted for only by the 
view that he was the deity of his branch of the family of the Achaimenidai. 
Dareios had to struggle against the hostility of the Magoi, representing the 
traditional faith, and it was his earnestness under the influence of the prophet’s 
teaching, which secured the sudden predominance of the Zoroastrian view, 
despite its abstract character and lack of popular elements. But this means 
that Zoroaster had lived just before Dareios or was still alive, for if he had 
lived some centuries before, and his religion had still at the time of Dareios 
been of so small account, it could never have suddenly expanded to important 
dimensions. This view, in Hertel’s opinion, is strengthened by the terms used 
by Dareios himself, when he asserts that the earlier kings had failed to accom- 
plish what in one year he had wrought by the aid of Auramazda, and when he 
advises his successors to punish the adherents of the lie. His successors omit 
this warning, which was only in place when a new god was being first pro- 
claimed. Under Artaxerxes II (404-359 b. c.) we find Auramazda worshipped 
along with Mithra and Anahita, showing the contamination of Zoroastrianism 
with the older nature worship under the influence of the Magoi, who had 
accepted the duty of preaching the new faith, but naturally permeated it with 
ideas of the older belief. 

^ Die Zeit Zoroasters (1924)). Ilapp, ZDMG. xix. 25 ; Maspero, 

® There is a variant 600 ; Moulton, Early Passing of the Empires, p. 572, n. A 

Zoroastrianism, p. 412 (a work un- ^ Pliny, NJl. xxx. 2. 1 ; see Jackson, 
known to Hertel). It is preferred by Zoroaster, pp. 152 ff. 



615 


The Age of the Avesta and the Bigveda 


Ingenious as are the arguments of Hertel, it is clearly impossible to accept 
them as adequate to prove his thesis that Zoroaster was an earlier contem- 
porary of Dareios I. The attitude of the king is certainly that of the adherent 
of a faith who believes strongly in his god ; it does not prove that the faith 
was a new one ; it might well have existed for some centuries in comparative 
obscurity, to be brought into prominence by the moral earnestness of a king 
who shared the spirit of the founder of the reformed faith and of his successors. 
The evidence a priori is simply negative in direction, and the conclusion 
drawn by Hertel is wholly uncertain, unless it can be supported by other 
evidence. 

Such evidence Hertel finds in the Parsi tradition which gives something 
like 595-594 b. c. as the opening of Zoroaster’s ministry and makes him live 
about 660-583 B. c. The date is earlier than his own, but in view of the 
deplorable nature of the Parsi tradition generally, he deems this of no impor- 
tance, and refers to the fact that Anquetil du Perron ^ arrives at the date 
559 B.c. for the beginning of Zoroaster’s work, on the strength of the fact that 
a religious sect, which immigrated into China about a.d. 600 and which is 
evidently of Zoroastrian origin, had an era dating approximately from that 
time, which Anquetil interpreted as fixed by the prophet’s leaving his home 
and entering on his mission. For the accuracy of the tradition the best 
argument to be adduced is that, if Zoroaster had not lived at a comparatively 
later epoch, the Parsis would not have brought his date down, since no sect 
willingly depreciates the age of its founder. Here, however, we are left to mere 
guess-work, and we have a very formidable argument to confront in the fact 
that tradition does not make the patron of Zoroaster, Vi§taspa, identical with 
the father of Dareios until as late as Ammianus Marcellinus (5th cent, a.d.), 
whose evidence in this regard, Hertel very frankly admits, is worthless. 

The later Avesta in fact and the Parsi tradition ascribe the patron of 
Zoroaster to a Kavi dynasty, founded by a certain Kavata ; moreover it is 
silent regarding the great Persian kings who favoured the faith. It also, like 
the Greek tradition, gives Zoroaster the position of one of the Magoi. In 
Hertel’s view the dynasty of Kavi is a pure invention, Kavi Vistaspa in the 
Avesta really denoting merely the king ^ Vistaspa ; the omission to mention 
the Achaimenidai is due to the opposition of Dareios to the Magoi, and the 
connexion of Zoroaster with that body is mythical.^ On the contrary, 
in vv. 8 and 9 of the Gatha (Yasna, liii.) Hertel finds a direct encitement to 
Vistaspa to overthrow the usurper Gaumata and the Magoi, the passage 
dating shortly before Dareios acted on the hint in lieu of his father, and brought 
about by treachery the destruction of the Magoi. This suggestion, however, 
seems wholly implausible. The verses form part of the utterance of the 
prophet at the marriage of his daughter Pourucista ,* what he says naturally 
applies generally to evil-doers and to their punishment by the Lord, and it is 
illegitimate to read into them an admonition, carefully disguised from motives 
of prudence under a double entendre in the later Indian style. 

Hertel naturally rejects the argument ^ in favour of an earlier date of 
Zoroaster derived from the occurrence of Mazdaku as a royal name in Media 


^ Jackson, op. cit.f p. 165. 

2 But Vistaspa does not appear as a king 
in the inscriptions ; Herodotos (iii. 70) 
makes him only virapxos in Persia. 

® So, for very different reasons, Moulton, 
op, dt., pp. 116, 197. 

^ Meyer, KZ. xlii. 16. See Moulton, op. 
cit., pp. 30 f., 422 ff. Hertel ignores 


C. Clemen’s important work. Die 
griechischen und lateinischen Nach- 
richien fiber die persische Religion 
(Giessen, 1920), where the date, not 
later than 1000 b. c., is contended for, 
and where (pp. 54-77) a fair case is 
made out for the view that Cyrus was 
a Zoroastrian ; cf. Keith, JHS. xl. 232. 



616 


Appendix A 

about 715 B.c., on the ground, also adopted by Jackson, that the name need 
not be derived from Mazdah as a divine name, but merely from the word in its 
signification of wisdom, parallel to Sanskrit medhd. The occurrence of 
Assara Mazas as a divine name in an inscription of the seventh century b. c. 
probably, in view of its form, carries back the existence of Ahura Mazdah to a 
period before the life of Zoroaster, so that, even if the royal name were 
theophoric, it would prove nothing for the date of Zoroaster J 

It remains, therefore, impossible to establish with any certainty Zoroaster’s 
date. The views of Hertel rest on a priori reasoning so far as they have any 
validity ; the tradition which supports them as regards date contradicts them 
on the vital point of ancestry, and there are certain considerations of high 
importance to be set against his contentions. In the first place, we find Greek 
reports as early as the fifth century b.c. placing Zoroaster in the very remote 
past ; in the second place, the younger Avesta already treats Zoroaster as a 
mythical figure. It is very difficult to reconcile these facts with the theory 
that Zoroaster was alive as late as 522 b. c., and it must be recognized that even 
the Parsi tradition declines to place him as late as that, for it is out of the 
question to take seriously the suggestion of Anquetil, on which Hertel relies 
for his upper date of 559 b. c. as the beginning of the work of the prophet. 

It seems, therefore, that the date of the Gathas of the Avesta must remain 
unascertained ; it remains, however, to consider the value of the evidence 
adduced by Hertel regarding the position of the Rigveda. He finds in that text 
evidence of hostility to the tenets of Zoroaster openly expressed, in the con- 
demnation of the brahmadvis ^ and the devanid? The doctrine of the Brah- 
man was held by persons who insisted on negating the pre-existence and future 
existence of each individual ; the believers in the Daena of Zoroaster, for 
which the younger Avesta has FravaSi, held opposing views, and thus can 
be censured as brahmadvis. Similarly the Zoroastrians were the only persons 
known to us who degraded the gods of the Aryans to demons. The answer 
in either case seems irresistible ; the devanid of the Rigveda is most naturally 
and normally applied to the non- Aryan foes of the Vedic Indians, and the 
brahmadvis is even more obviously not to be interpreted in the strange way 
suggested by Hertel, whose assertion that the believers in the doctrine of 
Brahman did not accept an individual pre-existence and future existence of 
the soul is a pure h 3 q)othesis, quite unsupported by anything which we know 
of any historical Brahman doctrine as opposed to that invented by Hertel,^ 
in which, doubtless, the individual is to be regarded as the result of the 
streaming out of the cosmic fire, into which he is reabsorbed. Hertel does not 
state how he connects this view with the obvious belief in transmigration 
of the Upanisads. Even more remarkable is his assertion that in Rigveda vii. 
104 j. 2 the term brahmadvis is applied to a Pi 9 aca, the Pi^acas being a canni- 
balistic race found in the Indus valley and in the Hindu Kush. Apart from 
any dubiety as to the correctness of Grierson’s views on Pi 9 acas,^ there is the 
uncontrovertible fact that Pigaca does not appear in the passage cited at all, 
which clearly and obviously applies to a Raksas, the hymn being directed 
against these demons* Even on Hertel’s own theory it is obvious that it is 


Maspero (op. cit, pp. 455, 572) argues that 
the name Phraortes denotes Fravartis, 
‘ confessor ’ of the Zoroastrian faith, 
which, of course, would give an early 
date as Deiokes’ father bore the name 
(Herodotos, i. 96), but the etymology 
is dubious (Moulton, Early Zoroas- 


trianisTTiy pp. 269 ff.). 

® Die Zeit Zoroasters, p. 62. 

* IF. xli. 200. The term occurs only in RV. 
i. 152. 2 ; vi. 61. 3. 

« Ibid, 185 ff. Cf. above, Chap. 27, § 2. 

^ Cf. above, p. 73. 



617 


The Age of the Avesta and the Rigveda 

unlucky that the Rigveda should apply the same term bmhmadvis to the 
Zoroastrians and to a race of eaters of dead bodies, who are severely censured 
and denounced in the Avesta.^ Nor does he adduce any reason why, even on 
his own theory, the term should not always apply to Pi^acas, if it actually 
once does so. 

It appears impossible also to derive any results as to the age of the Rigveda 
or the Avesta from the discovery of Aryan elements in the speeches of Asia 
used in the Hittite Empire, Sumerian, Babylonian or Akkadian, Kanisian 
(Hittite), Luvian, Balaian, Charrian, Proto-Hittite, and that of the Manda.^ 
That Indo-European elements of centum type may l3e traced in Kanisian and 
Luvian is quite natural in view of the obvious activity of the Indo-European 
tribes. More immediate value attaches to the evidence of the Aryan speech 
of the Manda tribes on the borders near Mitanni, to whose speech Forrer 
ascribes the names of Mitanni gods, which as pronounced he holds to have been 
Midrassil, Ur(u)vanassil, Nasattiyana, and Indar. The first three names are 
preceded by the determinative An (-Mes) which marks them as denoting 
groups of gods, which may as regards Mifcra and Varuna serve as an indication 
of their being closely united. The variant Arimassil is regarded as due to 
influence by the Kanisian word arunas, ocean, a view interesting if it may be 
taken as indicating a connexion between Varuna and the ocean in the minds 
of the Manda tribes. As Manda also he classes the terms of horse-breeding 
and training found in a text emanating from a man of Mitanni ; they include 
in his view, aika-vartanna, ‘ one round temvartanna or ierdHanna, three 
rounds panzavartanna, sattavartanna, satvartanna, navartanni vasannasaya, 
‘ in nine rounds of the stadium ’, and auzomewa, ‘ run ’, in which he sees the -wa 
of an infinitive termination comparable to Vedic -mane and -vane, drawing the 
further conclusion that in a period |5rior to the period of Indo-European speech 
unity there existed a spirant which in Kanisian became a v sound, in Greek and 
Luvian an m sound. This is much too speculative ; what is clear is that the 
numerals are by no means Vedic and that they can be set down as Aryan with 
equal plausibility. We are, therefore, still left without any definite evidence 
to aid us in dating the distinction of Aryan into Iranian and Indian, and we 
should probably revise our conception of this division. In an area of consider- 
able extent ov'er which Aryan was spoken we may assume dialectical differences 
sprang up, accelerated in development by contact with different racial 
elements, and the fragments of Mitanni speech akin to Aryan found of late 
represent developments of what may conveniently be called Aryan, not either 
Iranian or Indian. This natural hypothesis removes the need of imagining 
movements back from India to the west, while the possession of some gods 
in common well accords with the Aryan character of the speech. 

Hertel ® accepts as proved Ipsen’s effort ^ to establish the theory that the 
period of Indo-European unity lasted until the period 2000 b. c. The evidence, 
however, for this thesis is inadequate ; it rests merely on the view that the 
prototype of the Indo-European variants of the word star ® could only have 
been borrowed then. It is, however, obvious that, even if we assume that the 
word was borrowed, the evidence is quite insufficient to establish either the 
date or the unity of the Indo-Europeans at the time of the borrowing. What 

^ Vend. vii. 23 f. ; viii. 73 f. Die dltesten V olkermandemngen V order- 

2 E. Forrer, ZDMG. Ixxvi. 174-269; cf. asiens (1923); ZDMG. Ixxvii. 87 il*. ; 

J. Friedrich, ibid, 153-73 ; IF. xli. A. E. Cowley, The Hittites (1918). 

369-76 ; Bloomfield, JAOS. xli. 195- ® IIQF. li. 7. 

209 ; Prince, ibid. 210-24 ; Sayce, ^ IF. xli. 174 IT. 

JRAS. 1922, pp. 5G3 Tf. ; cf. A. Ungnad, ® Greek doTTjp, Latin Stella, OE. steorra. 



618 


Appendix A 

is fairly well established is only the existence in the latter part of the first half 
of the second millennium b. c. of dialects which may generically be styled 
Aryan, and which have developed beyond the hypothetical language, which 
may be regarded as Indo-European. 

Peake, ^ who argues for the Indo-Europeans, or Wiros, as of Nordic race, 
with heads rather narrow than broad, transparent skin, light hair, and grey 
eyes, settled in the steppes east of Dnieper about 3000 b. c., holds that drought 
about 2200 B. c. sent some of them to the Iranian plateau where they appear 
as the Kassites,^ while the Aryas proper, speaking Indo-Iranian dialects, were 
still living together in Russian Turkestan in 2000 b.c. He places about 
1760 B. c., contemporaneously with the Kassite occupation of Mesopotamia, the 
separation of the Indians and the Iranians. The Mitanni barons he regards as 
a group of Aryas who spoke a language with Iranian affinities and separated 
themselves from the main body somewhat after 2000 b. c., rejecting Sayce's 
suggestion that they were Phrygians, who entered their territory from 
Thracian homes in the west. Yet other Wiros established their power in the 
Hittite Empire,^ which they reached via Gallipoli. This reconstruction is 
interesting, but it lacks decisive proof of any kind.' The Hungarian home of 
the Wiros claimed by Dr. Giles ^ he rejects, save in so far as he admits that 
many of the Wiros may have been descendants of the late Aurignacian and 
Solutrean horse-hunters, and that they may have developed the rudiments of 
their language in some post-Solutrean time within the Carpathian ring. The 
Germanic origin of the Wiros is also wholly rejected, nor despite the arguments 
of Kossinna ^ and others does it seem tenable.^ 

Some would fix the Vedic period by first establishing the probable date of the 
Bharatan war, and then by reckoning of generations on the basis of epic or 
Parana genealogies dating certain kings who figure in the Rigveda. Thus the 
wur is placed by various modern critics, contrary to tradition, about 950 b. c. 
or 850B.C., whence it is deduced that some at least of the personages of the 
Rigveda flourished no more than a couple of centuries earlier.’ There is 
nothing impassible in such a result, but it must be confessed that it is difficult 
to put any faith on the epic or Purana genealogies, and that the probative 
value of such reasonings must be admitted to be minimal.^ Least of all is it 

^ The Bronze Age and the Celtic World fehsLps. route language of Baltic-Mesopo- 

xii. and xiv. Cf. CAH. i. 82--5, where tamian origin is a mere guess, of an 

attention is called to their invention of improbable character. That it was an 

wheeled transport and domestication easy language is equally implausible ; 

of the horse. all extant Indo-European speeches are 

^ This view, followed in CAH. i. 553, vastly more simple than the original 

depends on the equations Burias = (see, e.g., Jespevsen, Progress in Lan- 

Boreas ; Surias=Surya ; Maruttas ^ ^ . 

= Marut ; buga^= Slav bogu, Phrygian ’ Cf. Hemchandra Raychaudhuri, Calcutta 
bagaios, ^ god But this is all very Beviezo, xiii. (1924), 67-77, who places 

dubious ; Keith, IHQ. i. 15 f. Pariksit in the ninth century b.c. 

Op, ciL, p, 158, where erroneously Wiro ® When legendary accounts can be checked, 
gods are ascribed as adopted by the their extraordinary inaccuracy is seen ; 

Hittites, among whom Wiros were cf., e. g., the ‘ pseudo-Kallisthenes ’ 

merely imlitary adventurers (Sayce, version of the history of Alexander the 

JHS. xliii. 48 f.). Great ; the Charlemagne cycle with its 

* CHI. i. *67 ff.*; CAH. ii. 28 f. colossal exaggeration of the reverse at 

® Die Derkunft der Germanen (1911), Cf. Koncesvalles in the Roman de Boland 

C. Schuchhardt, Alteuropa (Berlin, (a case which should give pause to all 

1919). An eifort is made by C. Antran arguments of a great Bharatan war) ; 

(Phiniciens, 1920) to assign Minoan the utter confusion of the legend of 

culture to the Caro-Lelegians of Dietrich of Bern (Theodoric of Verona) 

Caucasian origin. — ^see Chadwick, The Heroic Age, pp. 

“ That Indo-European is a composite trade- 23 f. ; the amazing development of 



619 


The Age of the Avesta and the Eigveda 

possible to find any support for the proposed date of the war in Jain tradition, 
which places Aristanemi, the second predecessor of Mahavna, contemporary 
with Krsna. This can be made to support the date only by assuming a period 
of two hundred years between each Tirthamkara. For this idle assumption 
we have not the slightest evidence of any kind. The Jain tradition gives 
Par 9 vanatha a semblance of reality by placing him 250 years before Mahavira, 
Aristanemi it banishes to the remotest antiquity, and we have not the slightest 
evidence of any kind that any Tirthamkara of that or any other name existed 
c. 950 B. c. Even the historical existence of Pargvanatha is totally unproved. 
But at any rate, since the Jains themselves did not believe that Aristanemi was 
a figure of comparatively recent history, it is really otiose for us to rewite 
their scriptures. 


B. THE SACRIFICE OF PURUSA AND THE ORIGIN 
OF THE WORLD 


H. Giintert^ has traced the common possession over an area extending 
from Germany, through the Thraco-Phrygian area, to the Indo- Iranians of a 
number of mythological elements, which are preserved for us in complex and 
contaminated forms in the religious records of these peoples. The first of 
these ideas is that of the origin of mankind and the world from the sacrifice 
of a primeval being, an idea suggested by the great potency which primitive 
religious thought ascribes to the bloody sacrifice.^ This is preserved for us in 
the legend of the sacrifice of Purusa and of Ymir, whose original character he 
strongly defends against suggestion of Christian influence ; it is reflected also 
in the strange, though late, legend of Odin who records how for nine nights 
he hung on a tree, wounded by the spear, dedicated to Odin, himself to himself. 
The action of the god in permitting himself to be sacrificed is one of free will, 
motived by the desire to create the world and establish the race of men. 
Yama, he holds, is such a god ; the difficult passage of the Rigveda, x. 13. 4, 
he explains as a reference to a deliberate decision by Yama to sacrifice himself 
for the sake of mankind ; it is as a sacrificer of himself that Yama performs 
the feat of finding the hidden Agni,® who is the mediator in the sacrifice 
between the offerer and the gods. Later we find in Iran the conception of 
some sin in the primitive being, as in Yima, and, when the human sacrifice 
became antiquated, the creator as in the legend of Mithra slays a bull, not a 
human being.^ 

The second motif is the belief that men are sprung from a primeval 


the VergUian tradition (Comparetti, 
Virgilio in medio evo). To treat as 
historical the Indian traditions, which 
confuse hopelessly recent history, when 
they deal with events 900-1000 b.c., is 
explicable only on the theory that those 
who do so are ignorant of any history 
save that of India, and are wholly 
unversed in the principles of historical 
evidences. The various accounts of the 
basis of the Bharatan war are all 
vitiated by this naive lack of criticism. 
The Homeric controversy is peculiarly 
instructive as to the ddlieulty of 
securing results of historic value ; thus 
Leaf (Homer and History) surrenders 


the Catalogue of Ships (Iliad, ii.) as 
an invention (contrast T. W. Allen, 
The Homeric Catalogue of Ships, 1921 ; 
Homer, 1924). See also U. v. Wila- 
mowitz-Moeliendorff, Die Ilias und 
Homer; E. Schwartz, Zur Enistehung 
der Ilias (1918) ; Cauer, GGA. 1917, 
pp. 201 ff, ; Bethe, GGA. 1919, pp, 
141-9 ; J. A. Scott, The Unity of 
Homer (1921). 

^ Der ansche Weltkonig, pp. 315 ff. 

^ Bousset, Hauptprobleme d. Gnosis, p. 211. 

® RV, X. 51. 3. All metres rest on Yama, 
X. 14. 16. 

^ Cf. perhaps the bull sacrificed by the gods 
in AV, ix. 4. 



620 


Appendix B 

creature of "bi-sexual character. This idea can be traced in Teutonic my thology 
in legends of Tuisto, Ymu% Tveggi, in the Doias of Phrygia, in Prajapati and 
Purusa ^ in India, and in Zrvan in Iran, while the Yama legend shows the 
variant by which a twin sister is given to the primeval man, in order to explain 
the origin of man, a conception found also in Iran in the legends of Yimak, 
Manusak, and Masyanlk. 

The third motif is the view that the first to die becomes, like Yama and 
Yima, the lord of the blessed dead, and, like Yama, the judge of the dead. 
Further, he may be regarded as the ancestor of men, and in virtue of his 
paternal power a great king when on earth, and one whence royal families are 
fain to claim descent, ideas found in the legends of Yima, Jamsed, Yama, and 
the Teutonic Mannus. The first mortal is also deemed the first saerificer, like 
Manu and Yama, from whom as in the case of Manus in Iran priests claim 
their origin. 

Giintert, while admitting the possibility of Asianic origin for the myth of 
an androgynous primeval creator of mankind, does not claim that the motifs 
discussed are Indo-European, but rather takes them as evidence of a long- 
continued contact between the special peoples among whom they occur. A 
similar contact he finds ^ suggested by the partial parallelisms of Odin-Wodan 
with Varuiia and Ahura Mazdah, the root idea in ail these cases being, in this 
view, that of a lord and creator of the world, a cosmic magician, one of whose 
aspects is that of him who binds the sinner, whence the name Varuna from 
ver^ bind, while Mitra, whose name has a similar force, ^ binds men together 
in bonds of social obligation. A connecting link between the Aryans and the 
Teutons may be seen in the Thracian deity Darzales, whose name denotes 
him as the binder, and who may be the source of the Egyptian Sarapis,^ while 
the Thracians and the Phrygians had a goddess Bendis with similar functions. 
Savitr again is merely a hypostasis of Varuna,^ the aspect in which the world 
lord stretches aloft his mighty hands, the beams of the sun, and his figure 
accords with the delineations of a god with mighty hands uplifted which are 
found freely in the German and Thraco-Phrygian areas, while a remnant of the 
idea is to be seen in the epithet ‘ long-handed ’ applied to the Iranian demon 
Busyasta. 

The ingenuity of these suggestions deserves recognition, but it must be 
regarded as very dubious whether they really serve to establish the closer 
religious connexions between certain of the Indo-European peoples which are 
postulated. The case of Savitr is clearly unconvincing ; the parallel is too 
general to be of value ; the idea of representing the sun as of human form 
with uplifted hands is one which might easily occur independently ; there 
is nothing specially distinctive in the resemblance of Odin and Varuria as 
magicians, and the evidence for the origin of the world from a primitive 
sacrifice is too slight to enable us to feel any assurance of a common origin. 
It must be added that the evidence for Yama as originally the primeval being 
from whose sacrifice the world springs is inconclusive, for the Rigvedic passage 
cited naturally denotes a sacrifice of Brhaspati, not of Yama, and says no 
more than that Yama died. The finding of Agni by Yama does not absolutely 

1 RV. X. 90. 5; Viraj, a feminine principle * Weinreich, Nem Vrkunden zur Sarapis- 
bom from Purusa, and he from her. So Religion (1919), p. 7. 

with Aditi and Daksa. Cf. also ® Giintert, p. 161. The further effort (p. 168) 
Ziegler, Neue J aJirb. xxxi (1913), 529 ff, to find a Swedish rock delineation of the 

on Plato’s Symposion and Empedokles. parallel of Varupa with his noose 

^ Op, ciL, pp. 150 ft. (15 cent, b.c.) is as speculative as that 

® Op, cit,, pp. 147 f. For Mitra cf. in respect of the Dioskouroi (pp. 272 f.). 



The Sacrifice of Purusa and the Origin of the World 621 

prove his divinity, and in any case has no necessary connexion with his 
sacrificing himself. Moreover the contention that the idea of the origin of the 
world in sacrifice must be old because it rests on the belief in the peculiar 
efficacy of human sacidfice, and that form of sacrifice is essentially primitive, 
is wholly speculative, and by no means probable. At least as good a case 
can be made out for the belief that the high value attached to the human 
offering is a product of religious development. This is so whether we take ^ 
the cause of human offerings to be the desire to propitiate a god who naturally 
menaces human life, such as a god of death, of war, or of the sea, or whether 
the sacrifice is one of a man to represent the god ; ^ in the latter case the 
offering of a man is associated with anthropomorphic conceptions of deity, 
and, while we need not believe that animal conceptions are older, we certainly 
cannot think anthropomorphic the oldest.® Substitution legends are aetio- 
logical and mark a refined speculation, not primitive ideas. 

Giintert ^ contends that in the case of Yama a distinction must be made 
between the ideas of ‘ dead ‘ human ’, and ‘ immortal ’ ; Yama was a god 
who permitted himself to be sacrificed, and therefore died, but he is not a man 
{mdnusa, mdnava). Thus the Atharvaveda ^ describes him as the first of 
mortals {mdrtya) to die, but not as a man, while the Rigveda ® refers to his 
innate immortality {Yamdsya jdtdm amftam). But despite his relation to 
Vivasvant it is impossible to deny his mortality by these distinctions ^ what- 
ever his origin, to the Vedic poet he was the first of men to die. 

c. THE AKYAN CONCEPTION OE THE HEAVEN 

J. Hertel claims that in India and Iran alike we find the conception of 
the heaven as a great stone building, filled with light, through whose doors, 
the sun and the stars, the light of heaven shines upon men. For this view is 
adduced the reference in the Rigveda to the palace of Varuna with a thousand 
doors, which is asserted to be none other than the heaven with its stars. For 
Iran there is the narrative in Vendidad ii, which has long passed as the 
Iranian version of the legend of the flood, but in which we should rather see the 
account of Yama’s reign in the golden age and of the way in which he con- 
veyed the first to die through the opening of the heaven, i.e. the sun, into the 
heaven of light. It is, how^ever, true that this original legend of the Magian 
faith has been altered in the form in which we have it, since it could not, as it 
stood, be made consistent with the Zoroastrian doctrine of the fate of the dead. 
The Yara mentioned in the Vendidad is to be compared with the Vedic Vala,® 
which is none other than the closed firmament which the lord of the heaven of 
light, Brhaspati, or sometimes Indra, cleaves in order to set. free the ruddy 
kine, i.e. the stars. Yet a further confirmation of the new interpretation of 
the Vendidad is seen in an obscure verse of the Rigveda.® which is made to 
yield the sense that Manu adorned with flam'es the door of the heaven of Indra. 
By yet another conjecture we are to see in Rigveda x. 14. 2 Yama as the 

^ 'Ei.MQ^{DieMen8chenopferderGermanen, 333 ff. ; Wissowa, xxii. 201 ff. (expul- 

Leipzig, 1909) thus explains the origin sion of evil), 

of German human sacrifices. See also ® Cf. Helm, Altgerm* EeL i. 51. 

F. Schwenn, Die Menschenopfer hei dm ^ Op,xit,, pp. 388 f. 

Griechen und Eomern ; Reid, JHS. ii. ® xviii. 3. lA 
34 ff. « i. 83. 5. 

^ Cf. Preuss, GlobtiSf Ixxxvi, 108 ff. ; Frazer, ’ Die Himmelstore im Veda und im Avesta 
The Dying God ; Farnell, Cults of the (1924). 

Greek States^ v. 167 ff. ; W. Weber, ® Contrast above, Chap, 9, § 1. 

Archiv /. Religionswissenschaft, xix. ® viii. 63. 1. 



622 


Appendix 0 

first hath found this way to the heaven for us, and this pastureland none can 
take from us ’) the sole allusion to a legend of the gi'adual failure of the 
earth to support the number of those alive and the departure of Yama with 
the superfluous population, involving the introduction of death into the world. 

It is clearly impossible to accept this evidence as establishing the doctrine 
enunciated. That in one passage ^ Varuna’s palace with a thousand doors 
should be spoken of, is not the slightest proof that the Vedic Indian normally 
regarded the firmament as a building filled with light, whose doors were the 
sun and the stars, and the rendering of Rigveda viii. 63. 1, which ascribes to 
Manu the making of flames in the heaven of Indra, is clearly impossible ; ^ 
even on HerteFs h 3 rpothesis, all that Manu could naturally be said to do would 
be to enter by a flaming door, not to create it, and in fact the term dhiyali 
here used refers clearly to devotion and not to flames. The version of Vala 
is wholly implausible, while the interpretation of the Vendidad passage is 
accomplished merely by the process of inventing a meaning and explaining 
away everything which contradicts it by the theory of adaption to Zoroastrian 
ideas. Peculiarly gi’atuitous is the interpretation of Rigveda x. 14, 2, which 
has not the slightest reference to an overburdened earth, but merely to the 
winning of an abode which knows no ending in the sky. The whole doctrine 
that Yama removed the surplus population to the heaven because the earth 
was overcrowded is un-Vedic, and even the epic ^ knows it not. For the Veda 
we have merely the aetiological legends of tlxe expansion of the earth from a 
small nucleus, often by the action of a cosmic boar,^ and the wholly unconnected 
and late legend of the sinking of the earth in the ocean because the evil-minded 
Vi 9 vakarman, son of Bhuvana, sought to bestow it upon the priest Kagyapa, 
though no mortal had the light to do so.^ 

There is, therefore, no ground to hold that the term a 9 manara svaryam 
in Rigveda, v. 56. 4, with the derivative v. 30. 8, refers to the firmament of 
stone which the Maruts cause to move. Quite different is vii. 86. 1, which 
ascribes to Varuna the motion of the lofty vault of heaven, that is the starry 
firmament, for that passage says nothing of the firmament as a building of 
stone. Wholly irrelevant also are passages in the Upanisads and later ® which 
treat of the sun as a stage on the way to the highest place ; this is not the view 
of the Rigveda ^ which expressly prays that those who despise Vedic practices 
(apavrata) may be debarred from the sun itself, doubtless as the abode of the 
holy, not as the way to it ; Hertel himself recognizes that in ix. 113. 8 the 
pious man desires to win immortality in the place where is the closure of the 
sky, i. e. the sun. When in the Upanisads ® the moon appears as the door of 
the world of heaven, nothing whatever is said to suggest that this refers to an 
opening through which the waters of heaven are poured forth ; clearly the 
reference is to the old idea that the souls of the dead go to the moon to dwell 
there, as the text in question expressly lays down. When the Aitareya 
Brahmana ® says that the rain springs from the moon and enters back into it, 
it says nothing of water from the heaven. Varuna’s connexion with rain is 
sufflciently natural without deriving it from the fact that the firmament is his 

1 vii. 88. 5. Cf, Srao§a’s palace in Yasna, the expansion of the earth (prthivi, the 

Ivii. 21. broad), see FB. xx. 14. 5 ; TS. ii. 1.2.3. 

“ RV. X.68. 11, cited as parallel, deals with ® AB. viii. 21 ; fB. iii. 7. 1. 14 ff, 

the souls of the dead as stars, not as ® BAU. v. 10. 1 ; CU.viii. 0. 2 ; Mund, i. 

making holes in the sky ; cf. AV. xviii. 2. 5, &c. 

2. 47. V. 42. 9. 

» MBh. iii. 142. 35 ; xii. 255. 15 if. » KU. i. 2. 

^ MS. i. 6. 3 ; KS. viii. 2 ; TB. i. 1. 3. 5-7 ; * viii. 28. 

fB. xiv. 1. 2. 11. For other legends of 



623 


The Aryan Conception of the Heaven 


palace, and that the ocean of the heaven is connected with the fire of heaven. 
Still less plausible is the treatment of Brhaspati as merely lord of the fire- 
heaven, who, therefore, can send down rain, or thf assertion that the ruddy 
kine which he sets free are the stars who send rain, and that this conception of 
them is only explicable on the theory that they are doors to the fiery heaven. 

Final arguments for the view of Hertel are based on a new interpretation 
of the TiStrya legend ^ as revealing the production of rain through the over- 
flowing of the celestial ocean Vourukasa through the stars as the openings in 
the firmament, and on the view that the divine doors invoked in the AprI 
hymns are really the sun, moon, and stars ; it is sufficient to note his admission 
that this view was already unknown to the author of Rigveda x. 70. 5, and 
to add that this ignorance was fully justified by the incredible nature of the 
theory.^ ’ 

D. THE DRINK OF IMMORTALITY 

G. Bumezil in his Le Festin d" ImmortaliU ® seeks to establish, despite the 
silence of the Veda, the existence of an Indo-European myth of the winning of 
the drink of immortality. From the epic legend of the churning of the ocean 
he derives a myth which tells how, in fear of death, the gods took counsel as to 
procuring a drink to preserve them from it. Visnu advises them to churn the 
ocean for it, and, after coming to terms with the demons, and obtaining the 
assent of the god of the ocean, they accomplish their end, producing the 
Amrta, and other good things, including Laksmi ,* a poison engendered in 
the churning is drunk by ^iva, whose neck thus becomes blue. The Asuras, 
however, steal the Amrta, and demand Laksmi ; Visnu-Narayana, in female 
guise, accompanied by Nara, in similar costume, goes to them, and wins them 
over to give him the Amrta, which then he bears back to the gods. They pro- 
ceed to drink the nectar ; the demon, Rahu, found among them is decapitated 
by Visnu, and the fall of his body produces much commotion of the earth. 
A fight follows, in which the Asuras, defeated by the gods, are banished to the 
earth and the waters, and the gods remain in definitive possession of the 
drink.^ 

Bumezil seeks to show ® that on principle the silence of the Vedic texts 
is not fatal to the early character of the legend, considering that these texts 
show no disinterested narratives of legends, and that the philosophical thought 
of the Vedic age was not concerned with this special theme. Similarly, he 
insists that the Avesta represents most imperfectly the true Iranian nature 
beliefs. The arguments a priori have weight, but it seems impossible to accept 
his reconstructed primitive legend ^ as established by the legends he recounts, 
including the Scandinavian legend of the beer of the Ases, the Greek legends of 
the war of the gods and the giants and of Prometheus and the Pithos of Im- 
mortality, the Latin tale of Anna Perenna or its Christian version as Aimsi 
Petronilla, a Celtic Grail legend and the Slav legend of Mikhailo Potyk and 
Maria, the white swan. Here and there in these tales common ideas can be 
seen, often doubtless much transformed, but there is far too little evidence 


^ Yast, viii. Contrast Moulton, Early Zoro- 
astrianism, pp. 22 ff., 436 f. 

^ Hertel rejects the view of Grassmann and 
Oldenberg (Prolegomena, pp. 28, n. 1, 
194 f.) that the Apri hymn in ix. is a 
mere imitation of those for Agni in the 
other books, holding that it is due to 
the fire nature of Soma, shown by its 


effect on man and its identification with 
the moon. But the older theory is 
clearly the more plausible. 

® Annales du Musee Guirnel, xxxiv (Paris, 
1924). 

^ MBh. i. 1095 if. 

® pp. viii ff. 

® pp. 24ff. 



624 


Appendix D 

to enable us to claim Indo-European antiquity for the complex myth which 
Dumezil evolves from the scanty evidence. The conclusion to be drawn is 
rather against than for the epic as a source of early myths ; in truth what is in 
origin mythical is there often so transformed by imagination as to be barely 
recognizable, and a good deal more can be said for HerteFs contention that 
the Brahmanas present a much superior held for the discovery, in thin dis- 
guises, of true nature myths. 

Dumezil further ^ deduces as the basis of the legends the existence of 
an Indo-European festival in the spring, at which was drunk in communion 
the sacred drink, originally a kind of beer derived from barley, which was 
replaced by wine in Greece, and by Soma among the Indo-Iranians. With 
this drink the Indo-Europeans associated the idea of life without end, and the 
success of the gods over the demons their rivals ; but in the rites of which we 
have historical information many other elements of vegetation ritual have 
intruded themselves. He negatives ^ the idea that the mead was primitively 
the ambrosia ; nothing in the legends recalls either the special characteristics 
nor the mode of preparation of the hydromel. If in Greece the ideas of 
ufi^pocria and pIOv were confused, it was because both lost their precise sense, 
and similarly in India the distinction between Amrta and Madhu was 
obliterated by reason of the attraction of the idea of Soma. A trace of the old 
pre-eminence of beer is to be seen in a legend of the ^atapatha Brahmana,® 
where the barley is declared to have alone remained faithful to the gods in 
their demon contests, 'while the episode in the epic of the poison which arose in 
the^ churning of the ocean is held to be a distant echo of the process of fermen- 
tation of the beer which is apt to go too far, as in the narrative of the Kalevala.^ 
In these details again it is clearly impossible to find any cogent proof of the 
existence of an Indo-European rite. 

Geldner ® has suggested that references to the legend of the churning of the 
ocean are to be found in the Rigveda. Thus in v. 2. 3 he interprets the amriam 
viprkvat^ which the Purohita throws on the fire, as denoting the ghee which 
separates itself out, as did the Amrta at the churning of the ocean. Again 
in i, 163 he holds that the poet is dealing, not with the sun-horse, but with the 
coming into being of the ‘ Urross’, whether from the sun (verse 2) or, along 
with the Soma, from the ocean {asi somena samayd viprJetah). The whole 
stress of the argument rests on the artificial sense ascribed to vipre in both 
passages, and it is quite impossible to accept Geldner’s suggestion, which is 
not repeated by Dumezil. 

Another and very different view of Amrta is put forward by Slater ® 
as part of the quite implausible hypothesis of the predominance in India of 
a Dravidian civilization based on reaction to E^ptian influence. He suggests 
that Amrta was either Egyptian beer or the fermented juice of the date 
palm, palrnyra, or coconut palm, the great intoxicating beverage of India, the 
art of making toddy of this kind having reached India from Mesopotamia, the 
home of the date palm cultivation. It is sufficient to observe that the maker 
of the conjecture appears to be ignorant of the patent fact that Amrta in the 
Rigveda denotes beyond doubt the Soma drink, and there is no conceivable 
possibility of reconciling the description of the Soma plant as contained in 
Vedic references and the date palm. 

* pp. 265 ff. 5 jpesigruss an Bothy p. 192, but cf. Der Rtg- 

^pp. 2T9ff. veda, i, 203. ^ 

® iii. 6. 1. 8, 9. « The Dravidian Element in Indian Culturey 

^ XX ; Dumezil, pp. 284 f. pp. 73 ff. See below, Appendix G. 



625 


The Indo-European Fire Cult 
E. THE INDO-EUROPEAN FIRE CULT 

That fire should be regarded in its own right as a divine power, worthy of 
worship, appears so natural that it is only reasonable to recognize such 
worship as Indo-European, The sanctity of Agni in the Rigveda is, of course^ 
especially that of the fire regarded as the recipient of sacrifice and the bearer 
of oblations, but it seems wholly unjustifiable to suggest ^ that his sanctity 
arose from his nature as the sacrificial fire ; rather he was the recipient of 
offerings as sacred in his own right. 

In Greece, in addition to Hephaistos, Hestia must, it seems, be accorded 
an origin as fire, especially the fire on the hearth, not the hearth with its fire 
as Farnell ^ suggests. He bases this view on the identity of the words for 
hearth and for the goddess, but there seems no reason wdiatever for accepting 
this suggestion, which derives Hestia from vas, dwell, when it is at least as 
natural to assume that the name of the fire on the hearth was used to denote 
the hearth, and connexion with vas or possibly some other root with the 
signification of shining or burning is easy.^ Moreover the earliest literary 
references point singularly clearly to a conception like that of Agni ; the 
Homeric Hymns ^ tell of Hestia as the goddess who haunts the house of 
Apollo in Pytho and from whose locks sweet unguents trickle down, and of her 
sitting in the middle of the house, taking the fat of sacrifice. Euripides ^ 
definitely calls her the lady of fire and associates her with Hephaistos. At 
Delphi we find her associated with the deathless fire in the Amphictyonic oath. 
Moreover the maintenance of a sacred fire in the Prytaneion at Athens, 
and the fact that it w'as regarded as in a sense the source of the Ionic colonies, 
because they carried thence the sacred fire, show clearly enough that the 
essential element in the idea is the fire, not the hearth. Nor is there any 
evidence for the suggestion ® that the hearth in Mediterranean lands was built 
of sacred stones or that its sanctity is a reflex of the pillar cult of pre-Hellenic 
times. The parallelism of the expressions ‘ Hephaistos is laughing ’ and 
‘ Hestia is laughing used of the crackling of the fire, suggests essential 
identity of -both deities with fire. 

The rules in India which urge the householder to maintain a sacred fire, 
a duty especially incumbent on the king, is paralleled by the Greek evidence 
as to the fires of the Prytaneia and the Roman cult of Vesta, which bears 
adequate evidence of independence to render derivation from Greece unnatural. 
The fire of the Sabha clearly approaches the conception of these public fires 
in Greece and Rome. For the practice in Greece and Rome various explana- 
tions have been offered. That of Frazer ^ stresses the importance of preserving 
one fire at least in a village which would never be extinguished, while Farnell ® 
contends that the rite was religious in origin, depending on the belief that the 
fire on the hearth was the external thing in which the soul of the chief resided, 
so that the whole tribe had an interest in keeping it up ; when kingship passed 
away the idea was transferred to the fire of the state in the Prytaneion, with 
which the fortune of the state might be held to be inextricably connected. It 
may be granted that the purpose of maintaining the fire was religious from the 
start, but the motive had, it seems probable, nothing to do with any idea of 
the connexion of the chief’s soul with the fire ; rather the fire as a most 

* Cuiis of the Greek States, v. 358. ® Phaeth, frag. 781, I. 55. 

® Ibid,, 359. ® Farnell, ibid., 360. 

® Brugmann, Grieck. Gramm.*', p. 52 ; ’ JP. xiv. 167 ff. 

Ehrlich, KZ. xli. 289 f. « Ibid., 353 f. 

* xxiv, and xxix. 

20 [h.o.s. 32 ] 



626 


Appendix E 

important ^ and ever valuable deity was to be preserved alight if possible by 
every sacrificer, an idea which naturally enough with civic organization 
results in the fires of the Prytaneia and the cult of Vesta at Rome. 

The nature of such deities as Hestia and Vesta is often misunderstood by 
students of Greek and Roman religion, who are accustomed to reckon 
personality in terms of clear anthropomorphism, and who fail to appreciate 
that the conception of fire as living and active is in essence a personal con- 
ception. This error, fostered by the fact that what we know of old Roman 
religion is only on its formal side, has led to the view that early Roman 
religion could not be nature worship of the type usually attributed to Indo- 
Europeans. The conclusion obviously rests on the wholly erroneous view that 
Indo-European worship was that of personifications of nature forces ; it w'as 
the worship of nature as animate, and what is animate is not impersonal. 
The theory that Roman or any other religion developed from the indeter- 
minate conception of an impersonal force ascribes to early man the power of 
framing a complex conception which is w^holly implausible. It is absurd to 
suppose that the daily reverence paid in the household to the flame of Vesta 
into which a morsel of salted cake was thrown was not paid to a personal deity, 
although she was not represented by an image. The reason for this paucity 
of representation in Rome as in Greece was precisely the same as in Greece ; 
the living flame is the present deity, and to a people to whom this was a living 
belief the idea of making an image would have appeared idle. The formalism 
of the Indigitamenta is the result of priestly ingenuity,^ not primitive belief, 
and all our knowledge of Roman religion is obscured by the lateness of our 
records and the effect of Greek ideas. It is characteristic of the tendency to 
treat Roman religion as more abstract than it really was that efforts are made 
to explain away the facts recorded of the connexion of the wolf and the wood- 
pecker with Mars as representing a late development, and to deny the 
paternity of Jupiter^ and the maternity of Earth, and to make even sun 
worship a borrowing.^ 

F. CREMATION AND BURIAL 

The view that cremation was a distinctively Indo-European form of dis- 
posal of the dead cannot be supported by any evidence of value. There is 
abundant proof that burial is at least as ancient a method, and, indeed, it is 
possible to hold that it was Indo-European, while burning was introduced 
after that period among the different peoples either independently or by 
borrowing. The Vedic evidence, as has been shown, proves that burial was 
early ; Herodotos ® ascribes the usage to the Persians, while the Magoi, possibly 
by religious conservatism, preserved the method of exposure ; burial he also 

^ Learned Brahmans, village headmen, and Indo-Iranian sun worship is incapable 

Ksatriyas are enumerated as called of serious denionstration. 

upon so to act, and the ritual still rarely ® Cumont {TMologie solaire, pp. has 

survives ; Hillebrandt, Fed. Myth*, induced Fowler (pp. 56 L) to believe 

pp. 54 f. • sun worship an invention of astrono- 

2 W. R. Halliday, Roman Religion, pp. 89 ff. mers, and to disbelieve the evidence of 

* This is recognized by Halliday, op* cih, Varro, L,L, v. 68, 7’4, and the existence 

pp. 114 ff. of Sol Indiges. The effort of L. Malten 

^ Warde Fowler (Roman Ideas of Deity, (Arch* Jahrb. xxvii (1912), 232 ff.) to 

pp. 30 fi*) exalts Jupiter into a primi- prove Hephaistos Lycian, not Greek, is 

tive monotheistic deity, a result of his clearly unconvincing, 

treatment of the religion as abstract- ® i. 140, Cf. C. Clemen, Die griechisehen und 
Grierson’s theory (Trans* Third InL lateinischen Nachrichten uber die per^ 

Cong* Hist, ReL ii. 44 f.) of an early sische Religion, pp* 201 &* 

Indian monotheism developed from 



Cremation and Burial 


627 


assigns to the Iranian Scythians.^ In the case of Greece the existence of a 
pre-Hellenic population which practised burial renders the evidence ^ specially 
obscure, but it is important that in the earliest Athenian cemeteries in the 
‘ dipylon ’ graves of the geometric period of art cremation is very rare. The 
evidence from Italy shows burials preceding cremations in the oldest 
cemeteries, and even if the people of the terremare, perhaps in part the 
ancestors of the Latins, were addicted to burning,^ it is impossible to assume 
that burial was in Italy derived from the non-Indo-European population. 
The laws of the Ten Tables ^ forbade the burial or burning of a dead man 
within the city, and there is a remarkable provision in an old law of the regal 
period which provides for the saving of the embryo in the case of the burial 
of a pregnant woman.® That burial was the more ancient custom is suggested 
strongly by the fact that conservative families like the Cornelii persisted in 
burying their dead until the time of the Dictator Sulla, whose cremation was 
dictated by political reasons. Archaeological evidence in the lands held by 
the Slavs, Teutons, and Celts establishes the priority of burial, and it is not 
plausible to suppose that the appearance of burning there meant the advent of 
a new race. Cremation is recorded for the Celts by Caesar ® and the Hallstatt 
cemetery ; for the Teutons by Tacitus,’ and later evidence establishes it for 
the Slavs and Lithuanians. All the evidence, therefore, is compatible with the 
view that burning was a rite introduced, comparatively late in some cases, in 
the separate life of the Indo-European peoples. 

It is, however, extremely difficult to arrive at any theory establishing the 
period when or the place whence the new practice came to be disseminated. 
The theory of Ridgeway ® which makes the Celts protagonists in the matter is 
most implausible in the form in which he has stated it, and there is no con- 
clusive reason to assume that the use must have been started by one only of 
the Indo-European peoples. Whether the motive of burning was due to a 
change in the aspect in which men regarded the dead, or arose from practical 
considerations, such as those affecting the advance of a people who could not 
continue to bury their dead and to cherish them in their ancestral homes, there 
is no special reason to suppose that only one Indo-European people invented 
it. The Greeks invading Hellas, and the Indians invading India, may have 
been moved by similar motives independently, or again in one case one, in 
another yet a different, motive may have been operative, and it is not neces- 
sary to seek any theory which will explain all cases. Borrowing from any non- 
Indo-European source is implausible, in the absence of any clear evidence of 
the prevalence of the rite among peoples by whom the Indo-Europeans could 
have been influenced. 


^ iv, 71. 

* See e. g. Zehetmaier, Leichenverbrennung 

und Leichenbestattung im alien Hellas. 
The lake dwellers of Europe first buried, 
then burned their dead, and it has been 
suggested that cremation is a specific 
usage of broad-headed peoples (CAH. i. 

* Peet, Stone and Bronze Ages in Italy, 

p. 370 ; von Duhn, liuckhlick auf die 
Grdberforschung (Heidelberg, 1911), 

? . 18 ; Modestov, Introduction d 
histoire romaine (Paris, 1907), p. 107 ; 
cf. Peake, The Bronze Age and the Celtic 
WorU, pp. 122, 131, 103 ; CAH. i. 74, 
108, 110, where they are taken as Alpine 

20 * 


in race ; Indo-European, CAH. ii. 569. 

* X. 1. Cf. X. 8 f. ; Cicero, Leg. ii. 22 ; Pliny, 
N. II, vii. 187. 

® Dig. xi. 8. 2 (Bruns, Fontes Juris Romani^, 
p. 11). Similar instructions are given 
in India before cremation; Baudhayana 
Pitrmedha Sutra, ii. 15 ; Vaikhanasa 
Grhya Sutra, vii. 4. 

® B.G. vi. 19 ; Pomponius Mela, iii. 19. Cf. 
MacBain, Celtic Mythology and Eeligion, 
pp. 235 fi‘. ; CAH. ii. 592 ff. 

’ Germ. 21. 

® Early Age of Greece, i. chap. vii. Peake 
{The Bronze Age and the Celtic World, 
pp. 101 If.) does not adopt this theory. 
Cf. CAH. ii. 473 ff. 



628 


Appendix F 


The motives which may have influenced burning are many, apart from 
the necessities or convenience of invaders. The removal of a dangerous 
object is obviously one possibility ; the view that it was intended to facilitate 
the celestial existence of the soul by ridding it of the encumbrance of the body 
has been strongly supported,^ but, as we have seen, is not borne out by any 
Vedic evidence. Paton ^ adopts the suggestion of E. Meyer ® that cremation 
existed in Indo-European times alongside with burial, but that it was performed 
originally only in the case of heroes, chiefs or kings, who w'ere believed to 
partake of the divine nature and, therefore, were returned by Are to the 
celestial regions. In support of this is adduced the fact that in Egypt ^ the 
ideas of the future of the king gradually became applied to the ordinary 
people, as did cremation in Greece. But the evidence for this distinction 
is inadequate ; in India there is nothing of the kind, the fact that children 
under two years of age were not cremated, adduced by Paton, is irrelevant, 
for ascetics shared the same fate, and there is no trace of the caste differen- 
tiation in this regard which would be necessary on the theory of a distinction 
based on an aristocratic practice. It is not the case that the distinction can 
be seen in Homer,® and the evidence of Caesar and Tacitus regarding the 
Celts and the Teutons says nothing of a distinction between the treatment of 
the great and the mere clansmen. 

Definite proof of the Indo-European character of burial of the dead would 
be afforded if it were possible to accept as proved Peake’s ® identification 
of them with the Kurgan people of the steppes east of the Dnieper, who 
certainly buried their dead in a contracted position, the skeletons found being 
thickly covered with red ochre, a custom which is attested as early as Aurig- 
nacian times. The evidence, as has been mentioned, for this theory is 


1 Cf. Sophus Muller, Nord, Altertums- 
hunde, i. 363 ; Scheftelowitz, Archiv 

/. Eeligionswissenschaft, xix. 219 f who 
connects it with the belief in a star 
destiny for the soul.. His argument that, 
if the use is apotropaeic, the burning 
of utensils, &c., is meaningless, is 
clearly mistaken. A banned soul 
might return for his own, and his con- 
nexion with them has rendered their 
retention unwise. 

^ Spiritisirif p. 129. 

® Gesch. des Alt.^ ii. 771. 

* See e.g. J. H. Breasted, Development of 
Religion and Thought in Ancient Egypt, 
pp. 103, 256 ; Cambridge Ancient His- 
tory, i, 350 f. 

® Cf. Lang, Homer and Ms Age, p. 90 ; 
Keith, JRAS. 1912, p. 473, n. The 
ethnic question discussed by me there 
still remains unsolved. Leaf (Homer and 
History, p. 37) adopts the impossible 
view that the Greek mainland was 
occupied by neolithic peoples speaking 
a Greek dialect of which Arcadian may 
be a descendant, who were first 
dominated over by Minoan and next by 
Hellenic Achaeans ; Peake (The Bronze 
Age and the Celtic World, chap, ix) 
makes the mainland population of 
eastern Alpine, the Cretan of Mediter- 
ranean (pp. 28 ff.) stock, while the 
Minoan overlords are ‘ Prospectors of 


a blend of Mediterranean and eastern 
Alpine stocks, who may be of Sumerian 
origin and akin to the Etruscans. The 
Achaeans are a small body of intrusive 
Nordics, while no place is left for an 
earlier Greek - speaking population. 
Evans again (JHS. xxxii. 281 If.), by 
insisting o;n the continuity of Minoan 
and Mycenaean culture, brings down 
any real influence of the Hellenic influx 
to the period of dipylon culture, which 
is clearly too late, and has provoked 
the equally impossible suggestion (T. 
W. Allen, JHS. xxxiii. 115) that the 
Minoans must have been Achaeans. It 
is much more probable that early 
Greeks took a substantial part in de- 
veloping Mycenaean civilization under 
Minoan influence, and that the epic 
reflects this Greek civilization, not 
memories of the Minoan epic. See 
against G, Murray’s traditionalist 
theory of the Iliad, J. T. Sheppard’s 
able analysis. The Pattern of the Iliad 
(1922); Bury, CAM. ii. 502 ff. 

The Bronze Age and the Celtic World, 
pp. 67 ff. ; cf. Minns, Scythians and 
Greeks, pp. 142 ff. ; Rostovtzeff, Journal 
des Savants, 1920, pp. 60, 109 ff. 

Cf. the blood-offerings for the dead, to 
strengthen their life ; Baton, Spiritism, 
ppv 72 1, 140 f. 



Cremation and Burial 


629 


inadequate to establish it, but it may be noted that the Vedic Indians appear 
to have agreed with these people in their tendency to simplicity and economy 
in regard to the offerings deposited with the dead, for the Vedic offerings are, 
as we have seen, strictly limited in quantity and quality. The contracted 
position of the dead may have been induced by the desire to reproduce the 
character of a foet is, awaiting new birth in the world to come, and the idea of 
rebirth as an embryo is conspicuous in the Vedic Diksa ceremonial. The 
barrow may be compared with the Vedic memorial mound.^ It might further 
be^ conjectured that the use of burning was influenced by the practice of the 
neighbouring peoples of Tripolye culture ^ who regularly, if not invariably 
burned their dead. But we have no real means of arriving at any valid con- 
clusion. 

G. THE DEAVIDIAN ELEMENT IN INDIAN THOUGHT 


The desire to prove that Dravidian or pre-Dravidian peoples affected 
deeply Vedic thought and life is natural, and is supported by the generally 
accepted view that the population of India is predominantly Dravidian or at 
least of non-Indo-European origin. It is true, however, that in the absence 
of any real certainty of the physical characteristics of the Indo-Europeans this 
belief cannot be made the subject of strict proof. Assuming, however, the 
validity of the doctrine, there remains the question whether the invaders were 
essentially responsible for the Vedic religion and philosophy, imposing a 
superior culture on inferior races, or whether the process as regards culture was 
reversed ; instances of analogical cases can be easily adduced.^ Here again, 
however, we must remember that we have no satisfactory evidence of the 
relative numbers of the invaders and the earlier settlers ; we are left in this 
matter wholly to conjecture. 

The best case that can be made out for the Indo-European character of 
Vedic religion or philosophy depends on comparison with the achievements 
of other Indo-European peoples, and, of course, in this case we are met with the 
problem to w^hat extent these religions and philosophies were Indo-European 
in character, or on the contrary represent elements borrowed by the invaders 
from the countries they occupied. Thus, for instance, we have Sir A. Evans’ 
suggestion ^ that the Homeric epic embodies largely traditions of the pre- 
Hellenic Minoans, though the language is Indo-European, and, even if we 
dismiss the suggestion as not very plausible, we are not in a position to disprove 
it definitely by the evidence available. More important is the close similarity 
of many Indian and Iranian ideas, as developed by Julius von Negelein in his 
Weltanschauung des indogermanischen Asiens\ but it may be noted even here 
that, as that work shows, many of the important ideas of Aryan belief can be 
paralleled among other races. 

On the other hand, we must admit that when we come to definite attempts 
to prove Dravidian influence on Vedic religion or philosophy we are in the 
region of conjecture. The absence of any really early Dravidian evidence as to 


^ This is not to be high nor too large, 
according to the ritual texts (cf. 
Megasthenes in Strabo, xv. 54), nega- 
tiving any idea of a great chamber (cf, 
Blocb and Hillebrandt’s view of RV. 
X. 18. 13) ; see Caland, Versh en Meded, 
der Kon, Akad. n. Wet. te Amsterdam, 
4^ R., dl. xi. 378 ff. ; Arckiv /. Reli* 
gionswissenschaft, xviii. 482, 


^ Minns, op. cit., pp. 133 ff. ; Peake, op. ciL, 
pp. 64 f. ; CAH. i. 80 ff. 

® See, e.g., Leaf, Homer and History, pp. 
44 ff., following E. Meyer, Gesch, des Alt} 
ii, 52. 

* JHS.^ xxxif. 281 If., 293 ; on Minoan 
religion, in correction of Evans’ views, 
see R. Dussaud, Les civilisations pri^ 
helUniques} (Paris, 1914), pp. 327- 413. 



630 Appendix G 

culture deprives us of any assured knowledge of pre-Indo-European conditions 
such as "would enable. us effectively to gauge Dravidian influences in Vedic 
religion or philosoph}^ This leads to the necessity of relying on conjectures, 
of which many may be easily shown to have no sound foundation, or at most 
to be mere possibilities. We may, of course, accept such possibilities if we like, 
but in doing so we cease to be judicial and arrive merely at subjective judge- 
ments which have no lasting value. 

It must be noted that the Dravidians are not allowed the credit of origina- 
lity by such writers as Elliot Smith, ^ and Fleure, who insist instead on oversea 
and overland influences from Mesopotamia and Egypt as settling the course of 
Dravidian culture, though the evidence for this influence in the third millen- 
nium B. c. and much later is entirely speculative, depending on the existence of 
megaliths alleged to be connected with metallic deposits, and on the certainly 
unproved theory of the dissemination of this mode of building by a particular 
race, moved by peculiar religious views, who sought life-giving substances. 
The structures raised on this basis by Elliot Smith and Perry seems to me 
entirely unfounded and in every respect implausible, nor is there much 
probability of their receiving general endorsement by competent critics. It 
is, however, needless here to discuss their views, and Slater,^ quite justly, lays 
more stress than his authorities on the independent power of the Dravidians 
to develop their culture. Moreover he rejects,® very plausibly, the doctrine 
that the Dravidians represent the admixture of Mediterranean bearers of 
heliolithic culture with pre-Dravidians to form the Dravidian race, and his 
position treats the Dravidians as immigrants from the north-west who passed 
through Babylonia before the Sumerians were practising agriculture there. 

Slater^ contends that there is evidence to prove the superiority of the 
Dravidians in culture, ascribing to them the possession of castles, cities, wealth, 
luxury, the use of magic, superior architectural skill, and ability to restore the 
dead to life. He holds that they possessed a priest-magician clan or caste 
such as did not exist among the Aryans. Unfortunately he adduces no 
evidence for these assertions beyond the unscientific opinions of Mr. C. F, 
Oldham,^ and a couple of even less plausible conjectures, and it is sufficient to 
observe that there is nothing whatever to induce us to believe in the superiority 
of the culture of the Dravidians or the Munda-speaking tribes, and that on the 
contrary the evidence points rather in the opposite direction. 

It is further held ^ that caste is Dravidian, the Brahmans being the 
product of the mingling of the bringers of the heliolithic culture from Egypt 
with the Dravidians. They achieved domination over the Dravidians, and, 
when the Aryans entered India, showing superior prowess, as users of horses, 
the Brahmans saw the wisdom of adopting the allegedly easier language 
which the masters spoke, and became the guardians and exponents of the 
Vedas, until finally they succeeded in imposing themselves as leaders of the 
Aryans who were Dravidized in culture. It is important to note that on this 
theory the Bigveda is left to the Aryans during the period when they were 
in the full flush of their conquests. It is difficult to reconcile this with the 
assertion that Visnu is certainly not an Aryan god, since he most unmistakably 

^ Migraiions of Early Culture ; cf. Perry, IHQ. i, 176 ff. 

Children of the Sun ; Fleure in Slater, - Op. HL, pp. 8, 22 ff. 

The Dravidian Element in Indian ® Op. cit., p. 158. 

Culture, pp. 35 ff. ; Peake, The Bronze * Op. cit, chap. ii. 

Age and the Celtic World, chap. iv. But ® The Sun and the Serpent. 

see CAH. i. 94 ff. On alleged Dravidian ® Slater, pp. 48 ff., 157 ff. But seeMacdonell 

remains (Mohen-jo-Daro, Harappa), see and Keith, Vedic Index, ii. 247 ff. 



The Dravidian Element in Indian Thought 631 

exists in the Rigveda, which also knows Rudra, who is in part the prototype 
of Qiva, also asserted to be not Aryan. 

The doctrine of the Egypto-Bravidian origin of caste is supported by the 
following arguments. (1) It is admitted that the Brahmans of the south claim 
Aryan descent and that they are differentiated from the bulk of the Dravidian 
population in facial appearance, complexion, and intellectual habit ; but the 
justice of the claim to Aryan connexion is discounted on the score that it may 
be explained on the Egyptian hypothesis. This contention proves nothing, 
and leaves the traditional view unaffected. (2) It is alleged that the bearers 
of the heliolithic culture claimed divinity and established in Indonesia and 
elsewhere ruling classes claiming divine descent, while the traditional Brahman 
theory is that every Brahman is a god. The alleged facts are wholly problema- 
tical ; the divinity of rulers when it exists can be traced to various ethnic 
causes, ard the claims of the Brahmans are easily explicable without going 
beyond the Aryans.^ (3) The carriers of the heliolithic culture are asserted 
to have been worshippers of the sun and the serpent ; the Nambudiris, who 
are specially conservative, worship the cobras in Nayar households, and 
Brahman was a solar deity. The Brahmans of the Rigveda, however, do 
not worship cobras, and do not know a god Brahman. (4) The sacred cord 
of the Brahman is of cotton ^ which indicates an original association of the 
caste with cotton spinning, which certainly was no art of the Vedic Aryans. 
This, it is held, is a clear indication of the descent of Brahmans from foreigners 
who earned the gratitude and homage of the people of India by teaching them 
to spin and weave. The argument is clearly without value, and Slater himself 
admits that India itself was the home of the art of spinning and weaving 
cotton — primarily tree cotton, so that it is wholly needless to look to Egyp- 
tians of problematic reality. Moreover, it will be seen that the account of the 
origin of caste accepted by Slater is in effect merely a transfer to an Egyptian 
element of the tendency to stress racial distinctions, which together with 
occupation he believes to explain caste. A final complication introduced by 
Slater is his view that when they achieved supremacy the Brahmans became 
largely Aryanized in blood, because they aimed at securing the fairest wives. 

Finally may be noted the argument which ascribes special potency in 
magic to the Dravidians, including the power of raising the dead, on the 
strength of ‘ the Vedas No such statement, of course, has any Vedic 
authority.^ 

Nothing more substantial is adduced by Mr. G. W. Brown in his examina- 
tion of the sources of Indian philosoph}^® He claims that animism is Dravi- 
dian, and that in it Jainism and Buddhism show closer adherence to Dravidian 
ideas, rejecting the new Aryan gods. The Aryans must have learned in India 
to worship new trees like the peepal and banyan, the peafowl, the serpent, the 
monkey, various species of grass, and sacred places innumerable, from their 
predecessors, to whom also is due the doctrine of transmigration with its 
corollary of release. But here again we have nothing of substantial importance ; 
we have no right to hold that animistic or animatistic ideas were un- Aryan ; 
Roman religion .for instance is permeated by them, and Greek has relics of 

1 Cf. Frazer, TAe Magic Art and the Evolu- i. 36 ; VDS. xii. 14 ; ApDS. ii. 4. 22 ; 

tion of Kings ; Warde Fowler, Roman Manu, ii. 44. 

Ideas of Deity, chap, iv ; von Negelein, ® Slater, p. 11 7. 

Weltanschauung des indogeTmanischen * A passage like TS. ii. 1. 1. 3 neither refers 
Asiens, pp. 127 ff. to revival as real nor to Dravidians. 

^ Cotton is unknown from early texts ; cf. ® Sitidies in honor of Bloomfield, pp. 75 ff. 
on the thread, BDS. i. 5. 5 ; GDS. 



632 


Appendix 0 

Transmigration again is recorded as a Druid bcliefj^ and was adopted 
in Greece, apparently from Thrace, and independently of India, The more 
concrete suggestion that the terms Samkhya and Yoga, and even Upanisad are 
really derived from Dravidian names is clearly illegitimate in the absence 
of any difficulty of explaining satisfactorily the terms as Aryan contributions. 
For asceticism and caste as Dravidian no proof is even attempted.^ 

An effort to render probable pre-Dravidian influence on Vedic civilization 
and religion has recently been made by Professor S. Lcvi,^ who revives the 
hint of Barth ^ that the Atharvan tdbum may really be derived from the 
taboo of the Australians and Polynesians, and refers also to Mr. J. HornelFs 
conclusions,® from the facts regarding Indian boats, of Polynesian influence, 
and even of a Polynesian invasion, the latter in Dravidian times, which 
introduced the coco-nut palm into India. Levi’s evidence is based on the 
existence of pairs — or triads — of ethnic names, applied to neighbouring 
peoples, which are differentiated by an initial preformant, a usage neither 
Indo-European nor Dravidian. Thus the Atharvaveda Paripista knows of 
Tosala as well as Kosala, a union found later in the Puranas and textbooks 
of rhetoric, while A9oka records Tosali, the name of which Levi would even 
identify with Dhauli. Anga is found in the Atharvaveda, while with Vanga 
it appears from the epic onwards, usually in close association with Kalinga. 
For the latter again we have a parallel in the quite late ’ name of the Telegu 
country Tiiiiiga, Trilihga, Tailinga, &c., whose antiquity, however, may 
be supported by Trilingon or Triglypton in Ptolemy’s geography.® Levi 
compares also the Bhulingas, known to Pliny and Ptolemy and the Ganapatha, 
who appear to have been a part of the Salvas,® though the epic ignores them. 
Both epics, however, have the combination Utkala with Mekala (with the 
variant Melaka). We have also U^rade^a, Orissa, which goes back to an 
Uda to be recognized in Manu,^® for which Urnja is a variant ; comparable 
are the Pundras, and even the Mu^das. The Pulindas are known from the 
Aitareya Brahmana onwards ; the Brhatkatha9lokasamgraha represents 
them in terms which suggest that they were small and black, like the pre- 
Dravidians,^^ and practised totemism. The epic mentions with them the 
Kulindas who may more properly have been Kalindas, as the name, Kalindi, 
of the Yamuna suggests, and another variant is Kunindas.^® The Mupda 
languages permit the use of consonants as prefixes and the infixation of 
a nasal in certain cases between the prefix and the root, facts which would 
explain these variants, and which suggest that in the ultimate issue Utkala 
is Udra, difierentiated by the infixation of a and Mekala Muncja. There 


^ See, e.g., Farnell, Cults of the Greek States, 
in. 2 IT. ; iv. 302 f. ; v. 361 ft*. 

® See also Dieterich, Mutter Erde, pp. 33, 50 ; 
von Negelein, op. cit., pp. 54 f. 

® On Sanskrit and Dravidian cf. J. Bloch, 
Bull. Soc. Ling. xxv. 1 ff. ; J. Przy- 
luski (ibid, pp, 66 f. ; xxiv. 118 f., 255 f.) 
finds Austro-Asiatic words borrowed 
(including the term karpdsa, cotton), 
and strengthens the argument for 
borrowing of the phallic cult by the 
Aryans from the aborigines by the fact 
that this worship is prominent in 
Indo-China. It may be noted that here 
the paucity of phallic worship in the 
case of other Indo-European peoples 
strengthens the argument for borrow- 


ing. None of the instances alluded to 
by Farnell, op. cit. v. 8, is clearly or 
probably Indo-European. 

^ JA. cciii. 1-56. 

® (Euvres, ii. 254. 

® Memoirs of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, 
vn. iii (1920). 

’ Markandeya Purana, iviii, 28, &c. 

® vii. 2. 23. 

® Ka 9 ika Vrtti, iv. 1. 173. 

X. 44. 

viii. 31 ff. ; cf. for colour, Natya 9 astra, 
xxi. 89, 

Thurston, The Madras Presidency, p. 124; 
above, p. 11. 

Varahamihira, Brhatsamhita, iv. 24 ; 
xiv. 30, 33. 



The Dravidian Element in Indian Thought 633 


may be noted also the parallelism of Takkola as a place-name and the plant- 
name Kakkola, and of ksunid {Jcsauma) and umd (aumlna, umya) as the name 
of linen. The element -lihga in some of these names suggests comparison 
with Lanka as denoting ‘ island applied in both the Mahanadi and Godavari 
regions/ though P. Schmidt ^ has suggested for Kaiihga comparison with the 
Nicobar word kaldn^ sea-eagle, which would suggest that the ethnic names 
were of totemic origin. In the Indian archipelago names such as Karmarahga, 
Kamarahga, Tamralihga, suggest that in Kamarupa and Tamralipti in its 
varied forms we have variants of a pre-Dravidian word. Kam again reappears 
probably in Kamboja, which is in its turn equated with Kapi^a, both imperfect 
representations of an old form. Without a prefix we have Bhoja, the aspirate 
of which is due to contamination with the root bhuj of Sanskrit. The pairs 
of names suggest certain conclusions as to the social and political importance 
of a people who must have created political unities of considerable extent, 
so firmly connected with the real life of the country that they have persisted 
through thousands of years to the present day. 

This evidence, unfortunately, hardly carries us any farther towards 
ascertaining the amount of pre-Dravidian influence on Vedic civilization, 
and it must be added that much of it seems of very dubious value. The 
evidence that Tilihga was an early form is negligible ; Ptolemy has already 
Trilihga before him and he localizes the place in Arakan. Utkala may be 
Udra, but obviously, if we can operate with such names, we can establish 
anything we like ; similarly with Kamarupa and Ttoiralipti. The attempt 
to deduce from Yaska ^ that he classed the Bhojas, of whom the Kambojas 
were a branch, as different from the Aryas appears hardly justifiable, bhoja 
in the passage cited having probably the sense ‘ enjoying and not an 
ethnic significance, and the one thing certain about that people is that they 
w^ere reckoned by Yaska as using a language closely akin to that of the Aryas. 
Clearly a very necessary proof of the thesis is still lacking, plausible 
etymologies from Austric languages, and these are clearly by no means 
easy to find, for Levi rejects the one suggested, prima facie with plausibility, 
for Kalinga. If it were true that tdbuva w’as taboo, it would seem natural 
to expect that even the modern languages which are our chief means of 
investigating Austric language construction should show in other words 
similar conservatism of form. But in point of form nothing very satisfactory 
can be made out of the comparisons already, very ingeniously, made by 
Przyluski.^ The conditions under which the investigation has to be conducted 
perhaps fatally preclude the adduction of really convincing cases, at any rate 
where Vedic words are concerned. We may readily believe in pre-Dravidian 
language and religion or even political organization as affecting the same 
phenomena among the Vedic peoples, but we still lack strict proof. 

An effort to determine the characteristics of the pre-Dravidians has been 
made by Professor Giuffrida Buggeri,^ who holds that India was successively 


^ Tibetan glin ; Pliny, NJl, vi. 18, has 
Modogalinga in the Ganges. CL the 
Lanka of the Ramayana, which is not 
Ceylon (Jacobi, pp. 90 ff.). 

* BEFEO. vii, 261. 

® Nimkta, ii. 2. Cf. E. Kuhn, Avesta, 
Pahlavi, and Ancient Persian Studies 
(1904), pp. 213 ff. ; Nariman, JRAS. 
1912, pp. 255 ff. ; L. Samp (trs., p. 22, 
n. 5) misunderstands Roth’s view on 
this point ; Yaska himself uses gu as 
‘ go ’ (iii. 18 ; iv. 13), which contradicts 


his assertion that the Kambojas used 
gavaii, the Aryans gavas only. Roth 
does not deny the Aryan use of gatas, 
■which Yaska doubtless connected (as 
bala) with gatikarman, Yaska is either 
inconsistent or there is an old inter- 
polation (known to Patanjali, Maha- 
bhasya, i. 1. 1). 

* MSL. xxii. 205 ff, ; BSL. xxiv. 118 ff, 

® Outlines of a Systematic Anthropology of 
Asia (1921), pp. 43 ff. 



634 


Appendix G 

occupied by Negritos apparently platyrrhine; pre-Dravidians (Australo- 
Veddaie) ; Dravidians (akin to Homo Indo-Africanus Aethiopicus) ; tali 
dolichocephalic (Mesopotamaic ?) elements seen in the Todas ; dolicho-' 
cephalic Aryans ; and brachycephalic Leukoderms — ^presumably of the 
Alpine t37pe. The pre-Dravidians, on his view, were numerically preponder- 
ant, as held by Chanda, but the Dravidians imposed their language on large 
bodies of them, though the Munda languages persisted. The Dravidians 
were mesorrhine as opposed to the pre-Dravidian platyrrhines, the Nisadas 
of Vedic texts, the ‘ noseless ’ enemies of the Rigveda. Similarly he assumes 
that the pre-Dravidians imposed their language on the Negritos, thus 
accounting for the fact that the speeches kindred to the Mun<Ja are spoken by 
tribes of Negrito as well as of pre-Dravidian type.^ It must be admitted, 
however, that despite the ingenuity of this reconstruction evidence for it 
of any decisive character is wholly lacking, as it is based on recent anthropo- 
metrical data, whence conjectures are made for events of some four thousand 
years ago.^ 


H.— PYTHAGORAS AND PARMENIDES 


U. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff ® holds that in the doctrine of Philolaos 
the five bodies in the sphaira are the four elements, which compose it, with 
as fifth 6 ra? <T^aLpa <5 oAkos in the sense of that which gives the sphaira its 
form, the nature of that something being only vaguely felt ; in the Timaios 
Plato makes the world-soul perform an analogous function. He insists^ 
that it is to Aristotle we must look for the conception of the ether as a fifth 
element, for he evidently deliberately claims this as his own invention. The 
assertion of Xenokrates ® which ascribes the doctrine to Plato he explains either 
as referring to a casual adoption of the idea by Plato, which he did not carry 
farther, or to his accepting an innovation of Aristotle’s. Doubtless ascription 
to Plato or Aristotle of the precise form of the doctrine is legitimate, but 
there is force in the view of Rostagni ® that already in the early Pythagorean 
view, if we accept the traditional accounts, the basis of the doctrine existed. 
The fifth element is the Treptixov which is described also as the other as well 
as the aTTupov 7TV€vpa, while on the immaterial side we have the World spirit 
as the power which binds together the mass. In any event there is no close 


^ W. Schmidt, Die Mon-Khmer-Vdlker 
(1906) ; Die Gliederung der ausiraliscken 
Sprachen (1919). 

^ Cf. the divergent views of Myres, CAH, 
i. chap, i ; Haddon, The Races of Man 
(new ed., 1924). It is natural to regard 
the Dravidians as ultimately not 
essentially different from the pre- 
Dravidians or even the Negritos, but 
all these views rest on insufficient 
grounds. Giuffrida-Ruggeri adopts the 
idea of the Aryan ‘Midland’ as 
excluding the Punjab and Rajputana 
with the United Provinces, but this 
view is not in harmony with any 
ancient authority on the Midland. 
Chanda ( The Indo-Aryan RaceSy i. 74 ff.) 
regards the men of the Alpine race as 
Tocliarians, a branch of the Indo- 
Europeans of centum speech, and 
ascribes to their influence the difference 
between ‘ Outer ’ and ‘ Inner ’ lan- 


guages. But we have no proof of the 
early existence of these Tocharians in 
East Turkestan, and the ‘ Outer ’ 
languages show no centum features. 
His view of Yadus, Turva^as, &c., as 
immigrants — partially Semitized — 
from Mesopotamia, is quite implausible, 
as is his denial of the aboriginal char- 
acter of the Qudras ; though that class 
may, of course, have included Aryan 
slaves, thisisimplausible on the evidence 
(Macdonell and Keith, Vedic Index, 
ii. 380 ff.). Cf. JRAS. 1917, pp. 167 ff. 

® Platon^, ii. 91 f. 

* Ibid. i. 718. For Plato’s claim, see Frank, 
Plato und die sogenannien Pythagoreer 
(1923), pp. 233, 319 f. 

® Simplikios, Phys. 1165 ; Eva Sachs, Die 
fiinf platohischen Kdrper, pp, 9 ff., 
41 ff. 

® II Verbo di Piiagora (1924), pp, 56 ff. 



635 


Pythagoras and Parmenides 

similarity between the Greek and the Indian conception of ether, whether 
as regards the final doctrine as seen in Aristotle or the material whence it 
was developed. 

Frank, ^ as against Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, insists that in the fragment 
of Philolaos there is a reference to the twofold doctrine of the five regular 
bodies and their correspondence with the five elements, but he holds that this 
is merely one of many proofs that the ascription of the fragment to Philolaos 
is a mere error. He points out ^ that the natural deduction to be made from 
Plato’s writings is that both the doctrine of the irrational and the discovery 
of the five figures were invented shortly before the time when he accepted 
them, apparently by Theaitetos. He denies to the real Pythagoras the 
mathematical achievements claimed for him, but ignored by Xenophanes, 
Herakleitos, Empedokles, and Herodotos,® placing them in the Platonic age, 
while he traces the mathematical philosophy of the Pythagoreans to an effort 
to reconcile the doctrines of Anaxagoras and Demokritos, pointing out that 
their views are inconceivable before Anaxagoras (c. 460-430 b. c.) had 
clearly distinguished the ideas of quality and quantity, and first Protagoras 
and then Demokritos (c. 430 b, c.) had established the doctrine of the sub- 
jectivity of sense qualities. The Pythagorean view was thus one of points as 
monads, related to the dynamic conception of matter in Anaxagoras and the 
materialistic atomism of Demokritos as was the Monadologia physica of 
Kant’s youth to the dynamic conception of matter in Leibnitz and the 
atomism of Huyghens and Newton. Without necessarily accepting the whole 
of Frank’s contentions, and in particular the view that Speusippos is the real 
author of the Philolaos fragments, it is clear that we cannot safely accord 
to Pythagoras himself credit for his mathematical discoveries, and thus one 
important ground for the alleged derivation of his views from India disappears. 

Frank, who candidly recognizes ^ the influence of Egypt on the beginnings 
of Greek mathematics and derives ® thence the Greek knowledge of the 
planets — which, of course, were certainly not borrowed from India — insists ® 
that the essential turning point in Greek thought came with the Persian war, 
after which Greece broke free from connexion with the general oriental 
tendency of thought, and Anaxagoras formulated the fundamental principle 
of the distinction between our subjective world and reality, as it appears to 
an ideal spectator, in his doctrine of optics. In the Chandogya Upanisad ’ 
we find the assertion that all things can be resolved into one or other of three 
elements, but no proof is attempted, and the difference is indicative of the 
distance which separates Greek and Indian trends of thought. Others again 
tend to argue that Iranian ideas, partly themselves of Babylonian origin, 
were influential ® on early Greek thought as well as later,® but, whatever the 
value of these views, they do not support any direct, nor probably any indirect, 
influence of India on Greece. 

The probability of parallelism as regards the development of the doctrine 


^ Op, dty pp. 318 ff. 

* Ibid,, pp. 227 ff. Cf. Vogt, Bibl, Math. 

X. 97 ff. ; Heath, Greeh Math. i. 157. 

^ Ibid., pp. 219-22. 

* Ibid,, p. 79 ; Heath, i. 121. 

^ Ibid,, pp. 197, 201 f. Cf. K. Kerenjri, 
Archiv f. Religionswissenschaft, xxii. 
245—56. 

° Ibid,, pp. 143 ff. ’ vi. 2 ff. 

® Thus Eudoxos is credited with being the 
intermediary for the introduction of 


oriental ideas by Norden, Geburt des 
Kindes (1924), pp. 29 ff. Cf. Kerenyi, 
Archiv, xxii. 256 ; Jager, Aristoteles, 
p. 133. 

» The effort to find the influence of the 
Brahmana conception of Brajapati as 
the year on the Aion doctrine made by 
Reitzenstein, Das iranische Erl&sungs^ 
mysterium (cf. L. Troje, Archiv, xxii. 
87 ff.) and others is not at all con- 
vincing. 



636 


Appendix H 

of transmigration is shown by the fact that Plato in the Laws ^ treats the idea 
as pre-Pythagorean and illustrates one motive creating it in the view that the 
murderer of a father or mother must be reborn to endure in his own person 
the punishment of a similar fate. It is no more surprising that such an idea 
should be found independently in two countries than that the Jaiminiya 
Brahmaria^ should record as a symptom of divinely induced madness the 
action of a priest in cutting off the heads of his father’s cattle, even as Aias 
shows his dementia by his onslaught on his kine. The tale of Aias was known 
to the Little Iliad^^ and was probably current by 700 b. c., far too early to 
permit of borrowing. For Greece Wilamowitz-Moellendorff ^ finds the cause 
of the doctrine in the succession of generations, the grandson bearing the 
grandfather’s name and reproducing him, while Rostagni ® insists on the fact 
that the early mind, when it reflects, is unable to conceive of anything 
utterly perishing or coming into being from nothing, and thus is induced 
to accept transmigration. It is surprising that Gomperz,® who recognizes 
this fact, should insist on deriving the Greek view from India. His view is 
evidently based in part on inaccurate information, as in the case of his 
contention that ‘ the formulae which summarize the whole of the “ circle 
and wheel ” of birth are likewise the same in both’ Pythagorean and Indian 
belief. Similarly he finds ’ a curious parallel between the appearance of 
the doctrine of transmigration shortly before the belief of Parmenides in 
the one reality, as compared with the first records of transmigration in India 
as occurring not long before the doctrine of the eternal one ; this suggestion 
of Oldenberg ^ is not supported by the facts, which suggest that the order in 
time of the doctrines was rather the reverse. Gomperz admits, however, 
the radical difference between the Greek outlook as scientific as well as 
religious, and the Indian as mainly religious. A most striking illustration of 
the divergence is furnished by the doctrine of the Pythagoreans recorded by 
Aristotle ^ explaining how souls were always available to enter new bodies 
when these came into being. They found the explanation in the existence of 
particles of dust in the sunlight, which they conceived to be living souls, 
not immaterial but formed of fine matter, a conception which maintained 
itself as late as the Neo-Platonists in one aspect of the doctrine of irveO/xa. 

The parallel drawn by Garbe between the doctrine of the Upanisads and 
that of Parmenides is, of course, largely discounted, if we accept the view 
that Parmenides was essentially not the father of idealism but of materialism, 
as claimed by Burnet, who with Zeller denies to Parmenides the assertion 
of the identity of thought and being which is attributed to him by Garbe. 
Burnet also further differentiates Parmenides from the doctrine of the 
Upanisads by denying that the second part of his poem is intended as an 
exposition of appearances as opposed to reality in the sense that Parmenides 
admitted in some degree that appearances existed. On his view, as on that 
of Diels, this part of the poem merely deals with opinions of others, which 
are necessarily false, those others being, as he thinks, Pythagoreans, not, as 
in Diels’s view, followers of Herakleitos. But this latter view is opposed 

^ 870 ff. ® Greek Thinkers, i. 124. 

ii. 269-72 (Yavakri’s story). ’ Op, cit, i. 552. ® Buddha^, p. 45. 

^ Jebb, Ajas:, pp. xvi f. ® de An. i. 2. The doctrine may be from 

Platon,^ i. 251. Cf. Tyior, Primitive Cuh Demokritos (cf. Frank, pp. 101 ff.). 

iure, ii. 14. For the Orphic belief, see Inge, Plotinus, i. 219 f. 

Rohde, Psyche, ii*. 109, 121, and for pp. 198, n. 1, 208. 

the close relations of Pythagorean and Pre~Socratic Phil, i. 584, n, 1 {PhiL d, 

Orphic views, Frank, op, ciU, pp. 356 f. Griech, i®. 588, n. 1). 

® Op, cii,, p. 150. Op, dt,, pp. 210 ff. 



637 


FytJiagoras and Parmenides 

both by Gomperz ^ and Wilamowitz,^ and it must be regarded as far from 
satisfactorily made out,® while the treatment by Plato of Parmenides is 
inconsistent with the view that he was really a mere materialist. The 
analogy of Spinoza cited by Gomperz is perhaps the most enlightening ; the 
one is material but also it is spiritual ; ‘ It is universal matter and universal 
spirit at once, but the matter is sterile because capable of no expansion and 
the spirit powerless because capable of no action.’ Gomperz, however, is 
clearly erroneous in comparing the Vedanta philosophy, which in no form 
develops this precise doctrine. 

K. Reinhardt,^ again, insists that Parmenides admits no distinction 
between thinking and being,® but in his doctrine of opinion he aims, not at 
describing any merely apparent reality, but at the world as it necessarily 
presents itself to man, a world in which being and not-being stand side by 
side commingled, although he has no means of explaining their union, whence 
arises this empirical universe, save by hinting {fjiop^a<s yap KariO^vro Bm 
6vopd^€tv) that it is conventional as opposed to the one reality. Parmenides, on 
this view, in lieu of being essentially a materialist, was rather a logician, who, 
however, had not reached the stage when thought could be held to be other than 
reality. Like Frank, Reinhardt ® rejects the idea of any connexion between 
Parmenides and the Pythagoreans ; nor indeed is there any real ground for 
this suggestion, least of all for the conception of Burnet that Parmenides 
was a Pythagorean who was renouncing the false doctrines of liis youth. 

The views of Parmenides, therefore, must be deemed a parallel of interest 
to Indian thought, but not derived from India. In this regard interest also 
attaches to his treatment of the ideas of being, not-being, and being and 
not-being, which is reiterated in Qorgias,’ and presents a certain similarity, 
but also in its dialectic an instructive contrast, to the treatment of the issue 
in the Chandogya Upanlsad.® 

^ Op. cii. i. 179. Cf. Diels, Farmenides^ i. 132 ; Goodwin, Greek Moods and 

pp. 63, 100. ^ Tenses, p. 300 ; Herakleitos, frag. 112 

® Flaton^, i. 75 f., 562 f. ; Hermes, xxxiv. rb^povuv dp^ri) payiarr), Kal ao(pia dX-tjOia 

203 ft. Cf. Reinhardt, Parmenides Xiyeiv ; Iliad, i. 274 ; x. 174 ; Stahl, 

( 1916 ), pp. 5ff. ; Arnim, KuUur der Syntax d,griech,Verbums,pp, 601 it. 

Ge^enwart, I. y, 106. ® Op. ciL, pp. 231 ff. 

® Despite Rostagni, op. ciL, pp. 22 ff. ; ’ Reinhardt, pp. 36 f. ; Gorgias, frag. 3. 

A. Covetti, Ann. delle Univ. Toscane, If Reinhardt is right in the effort 

xxiii.^ 40 ff. (pp. 89 If.) to place Xenophanes's 

* Parmenides, pp. 30 ff., 09 ff. His view theistic interpretation of the unity of 

that Herakleitos is later than Par- the universe after Parmenides’s philo- 

menides (pp. 64, 155 ff.) is plausible, sophical discoveries, the parallel (p. 153, 

but not certain ; cf. Rostagni, 11 Verbo n. 1) with the development in India to 

di Piiagora, pp. 12 ff. That frag, 6 the 5veta9vatara Upanisad’s theism is 

and 8 of Parmenides refer to Hera- noteworthy. But the view is uncertain, 

kleitos is equally dubious. » vi. 2. 1, 2 ; 'coiUra, v. 19. 1 ; TU. ii. 7; 

® In J;he famous passage to ydp avrd voeTv the absolute includes both being and 

Urtv Tfi Kal (ipai Burnet insists (Greek not-being in the Mundaka (ii. 2. 1) and 

Philosophy, i, 67, n. 1) that the infini- Pra 9 na (ii. 5). The fourfold treatment 

lives cannot be regarded as subjects, of being, not-being, being and not- 

and that the meaning must be that it being, neither being nor not-being is 

is the same thing that can be thought first developed in Buddhist texts. For 

and that can be. He leaves unex- dialectic com]jarabie in quality with 

plained what Parmenides conceived to that of Gorgias we must wait until such 

be the relation between being and texts as the Maridukya Karlka (e. g. 

thought, and his dictum is not valid. iv. 3 f., 83) or* 'Nagarjuna (Kejth, 

That the infinitive was not originally Buddhist Philosophy, pp. 237 ff.). Cf. 

a subject is no proof that it could not for Gorgias, Reinhardt, pp. 37 ff. ; 

become one, i. e. be felt as one. Cf. Gomperz, Greek Thinkers, i. 482 ff. ; 

Gildersleeve, Syntax of Classical Greek, Plato’s Sophist. 




GENEEAL INDEX 


Abammon, Neo-Platonist, 612. 

Abhilalapant, a spirit, 214. 

Abodes of the dead, 403-16. 

Aborigines, influence of, 18, 24, 31, 54, 91, 
92, 100, n. 5, 130, 149, 206, 238, 415, 476, 
n. 1, 629-34 ; relation of, with Vedic 
Aryans, 9. See also Dravidians. 

Absolute, 593, 594 ; see Brahman. 

Absolute idealism, determinism of, 596 ; 
similarity to doctrine of the Upanisads, 
600. 

Abstinence from intercourse after death, 
420. 

Abstract deities, 65, 66, 203-19, 361, 369, 
400. 

Abuse, see Ribaldry. 

Acarya of family, 374, 375. 

Achaeans, in Greece, 10, 52, 53, 628, n. 5. 

Achaimenidai, 615. 

Achavaka, priest, 294, 298, 299, 328, 329, 
335. 

Actions, 554, 556, 557 ; see also karman. 

Activity (pravrtti)^ 483. 

Adhvaryu, priest, 16, 17, 159, 252, 253, 254, 
294, 295, 298, 311, 315, 319, 320, 325, 328, 
386, 849, 353, 430. 

Aditi, goddess (Unermesslichkeit, v. Nege- 
lein, Weltanschauung^ p. 103), 62, 70, 81, 
82, 88, 99, 105, 125, 161, 191, 200, 215-17, 
244,248, 341, 342, 360, 411, 438, 620, n. 1. 

Adityas, 33, 34, 62, 82, 86, 05, 113, 122, 134, 
153, 176, 206, 215, 216, 222, 223, 229, 244, 
248, 260, 270, 279, 331, 336, n. 4, 343, 360, 
416, 457, 458, 464, 482, 577. i 

Adonis, 187. 

Adultery, of wife assumed in Varunapra- 
ghasas, 321, 475 ; regarded as sinful, 585. 

Aegean religion (cf. CAH. ii. 612 IT.), 19, 37, 
39, 58, 74, n. 5, 629, 

Aetiological myths, 125, n. 7, 128, n. 1, 132, 
183, 

Affection, see Desire. 

Agastya, and the Maruts, 151. 

Age of the Avesta, 614-19. 

Age of the Rigveda, 3-8, 616-19. 

Aghamarsana, a sage, 523, n. 1, 

Aghnya, sun or pole star, 202. 


Aghora, deity, 213. 

Agnayi, wife of Agni, 218. 

Agni, god, 2, 36, 59, 62, 66, 67, 69, 70, 81, 82, 
83, 84, 86, 87, 88, 89, 93, 95, 96, 103, 105, 
106, 112, 114, 115, 120, 122, 124, 125, 126, 
127, 130, 131, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 140, 
141, 142, 143, 144, 147, 149, 150, 151, 154- 
62, 163-6, 167, 169, 174, 170, 177, 179, 
183, 188, 192, 196, 199, 200, 205, 206, 220, 
221, 222, 223, 233, 244, 246, 247, 248, 255, 
261, 268, 272, 273, 279, 280, 286, 292, 308, 
310, 317, 319, 320, 321, 327, 331, 334, 353, 
355, 359, 376, 402, 407, 419, 428, 435, 455, 
458, 464, 465, 466, 486, 527, 576, 581, 620. 
625, 

Agni, Vai^vanara, 484. 

I Agnidh, priest, 252, 294, 296. 

I Agnidhra, priest, 294, 298, 320, 325, 327. 
j Agnimindha, priest, 252. 

Agnisoma, dual deity, 221. 

I Agohya, host of the Rbhus, 177, 178. 
i Agricultural offerings, 57, 256, 366. 

I Agriculture, spirits of, 186, 187, 366. 
Ahalya, wife of Gautama, seduced by Indra, 

132, 244, 471. 

Ahi, serpent demon, 193. 

Ahi Budhnya, deity, 62, 142, 193, 204, 362, 
Ahura Mazdah, 33, 90, 128, 134, 231, 247, 
448, 461, 616, 620. 

Aias, Indian parallel to madness of, 636. 
Aila, epithet of Pururavas, 200. 

Aion, alleged Indian origin of doctrine of the, 
635, n. 9. 

Air, as element, 613, and see Elements, and 
vdyu, 

Aisakrta, Qitibahu’s Soma stolen by Indra, 

133. 

Aischylos, Greek tragedian, 602. 

Aitareya Arauiyaka, 391, 490, 498, 499, 512, 

519, 523, 571, 573. 

Aitareya Brahmana, 17, 19, 26, 29, 86, 110, 
115, 125, 139, 145, 148, 156, 176 193, 208, 
219, 270, 271, 333, 343, 394, 395, 447, 518, 
586, 632. 

Aitareya Upanisad, 19, 498, 499, 502, 510, 

520, 521, 524, 525, 531, 557, 568, 573. 
Aita^ayana Ajaneyas, priests, 226. 



General Index 


640 

Aja Ekapad, deity, 62, 80, 186, 137, 166, 175, 
192, 362. 

AJas, tribe, 196. 

Ajata 9 atri 2 , King, 21, 22, 493, 517. 

AJatasattu, patron of the Buddha, 22. 

Ajigarta, father of fuiiah^epa, 282, 283. 

Ajita Kesakambalin, teacher, 550. 

Ajya Qastra, 315, 329. 

Akhenaten (Ikhnaton), religious reformer 
(CAH. ii. 309 fl), views on sun (for a 
different opinion see Sethe cited in JRAS. 
1924, p. 325), 518. 

Akhyanas, 344. 

Akuil, demon, 233, 462. 

Akupara Ka 9 yapa, cosmic tortoise, 81, n. 3, 
82, n. 9, 242. 

Alexander, invasion of India, 30. 

Alfr, Norse parallel of elf, 38. 

Alikhant, demon, 240. 

Alkaios, prayer to Dioskouroi, 117. 

Alkman, alleged reference to Soma in, 
171, n. 3. 

Allegorical myths, 60. 

Allegories, 499. 

All-gods, Vi^ve Devas, 2, 89, 93, 136, 213, 
214, 221, 265, 270, 300, 301, 323, 327, 329, 
343, 359, 427. 

All-soul, see diman. 

Alpine brachycephaiics, Indo-Europeans as, 
12, 027, n. 3, 634, n. 2 ; opposed to Indo- 
Europeans, 634. 

Altars, as symbols of Soma guardians, 68. 

Amavasya, new moon night, offerings to, 

201 . 

Ambala, place of abode of Rigvedic Indians, 
3. 

Ambika, sister or mother of Rudra, 144, 149, 
242. 

Ambrosia {amfta), 167, 168, 170, 171, 172, 
623, 624. 

Amesa Spenta, Iranian deities, 33, 34, 217. 

Amma, Dravidian goddess, 199, n. 9, 200. 

Ammianus Marcellinus, cited, 615, 

Amphidromia, 367, n. 6. 

Amulets, 388. 

Anagha, goddess, 186. 

Anahita, Iranian deity, 173, n. 4, 614. 

Anar 9 ani, demon, 236. 

Anaxagoras, Greek philosopher (c. 440 B.c.), 
544, 594, 604, n. 1, 611, 635. 

Anaximander, Greek philosopher (6th cent. 
B.C.), 603. 

Anaximenes, Greek philosopher (6th cent. 
B.C.), 613. 

Anchorite, 490, 589, and see Asceticism. 


Andaman islanders, religion of, 46. 

Andhakas, Buddhist school, views of the, 
562. 

Androgynous character of Indra, 125 ; 
of the primeval being, 462, n. 10, 620. 

Afiga, tribe, 632. 

Afigaraka, planet, 200, 528, n, 9. 

Angelas Siiesius, mystic, 600, n. 2. 

Anger, see Wrath. 

Angiras, 83, 95, 104, 128, 158, 244, 317. 

Angirases, priestly" family, 223, 224, 228, 261, 
300, 336, n. 4. 419, 431, 

Anguttara Nikaya, 484. 

Aniconic worship, 48, n. 3, 56, 

Animal fetish, 68-71, 190. 

Animal form of gods, 133, 151, 195, 208 j 
see also Theriomorphism. 

Animal heat, Agni, as, 157. 

Animal sacrifice (for Egypt, cf. Wiedemann, 
Arckiv f. Religionswissenschaft, xxii. 70), 
13, 40, 47, 48, 56, 164, 270, 271, 296, 298, 
324-6, 327, 333, 334, 390. 

Animal worship, 63, 74, n. 5, 187, 193, 194, 
197, 323, 362, 364, 365. 

Animals, in the Upanisads, 506 ; self in, 
523 ; transmigration of, 526. 

Animatism, 42, n. 8, 74, 120, 185, 204, n. 
213, 236, 380, 388, 626, 631. 

Animisa, demon, 240. 

Animism, 42, 43, 71-5, 204, n. 1, 236, 240, 
380, 388, 497, 626, 631. 

Anna Perenna, Latin legend of, 623. 

Anna Petronilla, Christian legend of, 623, 

Annihilation, as fate of dead, 409. 

Anointing, in ritual, 341, 355, 377. 

An^a, an Aditya, 86, 99, 100. 

Antaka, deity, 213, 408. 

Antelope, horn and skin, use in ritual, 301, 
302, 303, 386. 

Ant heaps, 287, 322, 384, 386, 387, 392, 397. 

Anthesteria, Greek festival, 412. 

Anthropomorphic deities, 237. 

Anthropomorphism, 47, 58-61, 74, 87, 95, 
119, 154, 166, 621, 626. 

Antigone^ alleged derivation of motif from 
India, 601. 

Ants, 194, 382, 387, 397 ; occasional 
worship of, 63 ; slay Visriu, 112 ; water 
and, 142. 

Anu, Semitic deity, 222, n. 8. 

Anumati, goddess, 199, 201, 211, 341, 355, 
360, 365, 372, 445. 

Anumroka, Kimidin, 239. 

Anus {pdyu)i 554. 

Anus, people, 9. 



General Index 


641 


Antisarpa, Kimidin, 239. 

Apakliyatr, spirit, 214. 

Apala, passed by Indra through a hole, 133, 
384, 385. 

Apalalapant, spirit, 214. 

Apim Napat, deity, 31, 122, 135, 136, 174, 
204, n. 2, 279. 

Apam Napat, in Avesta, 135. 

Apaosa (Apavurta), Avestan demon, 127. 

Aparajita palace, 407, n. 7, 584. 

Apastamba Dharma Sutra, 29, 416. 

Apastamba Grhya Sutra, 28, 

Apastamba ^rauta Sutra, 28, 298. 

Ape form of Raksases, 237. 

Apollo (as Hellenic, Bethe, Festschrift Jacob 
Wackernagel, pp. 14-21), 155, n. 2, 160, 
n. 1, 197. 

Apollonides, Greek physician at the Persian 
Court, 602. 

Apotropaeic worship of snakes, 193, 194. 

Apsarases, water nymphs, 24, 60, 142, 179- 
84, 263, 268, 299, 301, 474, 577. 

Apsu, chaos, 81, n. 2. 

Aptya, 134, 135, and see Trita. 

Apva, demon, 386. 

Ara, sea, 584. 

Arachosia, 7, 91. 

Ara da, goddess, 186. 

Aramati (Armaiti), in Avesta, 65, n. 3, 211. 

Aranya Gana, of Samaveda, 16, n. 1, 490. 

Aranyaka, 389, 489, 490, 491, 492, 499. 

Araiiyaka Samhita, 490. 

AranySni, deity, 185. 

Araru, demon, 233, 384. 

Arati, Aratis, demons of avarice, 211, 239, 
400. 

Arbhavapavamana Stotra, 330. 

Arbuda, foe of Indra, 130, 134. 

Arbuda Kadraveya, snake priest (cf. v. 
Negelein, Weltanschauung, p. 77), 194, 
458. 

Arbudi, demon, 400. 

Archery, in ritual, 258, 351, 389. 

Areion, legend of, 198. 

Aristanemi, and Tarksya, 190. 

Aristanemi, Jain saint, 619. 

Aristotle, Greek philosopher (384-322 B.c.), 
436, n. 3, 507, 523, n. 1, 533, 563, 603, 611, 
634, 635, 636. 

ArjikiyS river, 7, 8. 

Arjuna, mystic name of Indra (^B. v. 4. 3. 7: 
not connected with Arjuna of epic qua 
hero, but possibly with Arjuna in Panini, 
iv. 3. 98), 456, n. 8. 

Arka, planet, 200. 

2 1 [h.o.s. 32] 


Armour, deified, 188. 

Arnava, ocean, 175. 

Arrow, deified, 188. 

Arrows of Kama (cf. Konow, Festschrift 
Jacob Wackernagel, p. 5), 210. 

Arsakes, Iranian name, 7. 

Arsanukram^ni, 19. 

Artabhaga, sage, 573, 579. 

Artaxerxes I, 614. 

Artaxerxes II, 602, 614. 

Artha 9 astra, Kautiliya, 481, n. 12, 491, n. 5, 
505. 

Aru, an Asura, 233. 

Aruna, post-Vedic charioteer of the sun, 191, 
n. 4, 202 ; cf. Kanisian arunas, 617. 
Aruna Aupave 9 i, teacher, 473. 

Arunaketu, mythical sage, 443. 
Arunaketuka fire, 482. 

Arundhati, plant, used to heal a bone, 
394. 

Arundhati, star, 201, 375, 416. 

Arujieya Upanisad, 589, n. 4. 

Aruni, sage, 493. 

Arunmaghas or Arurmaghas, slain by Indra, 
133, 233. 

Arunta belief as to entry of child into 
mother, 378, n. 6. 

Arurmaghas, slain wickedly by Indra, 183. 
Arval Brethren, 291 ; worship their oWae, 269. 
Aryaman, deity, 86, 91, 93, 96, 374, 376. 
Aryan conception of the heaven, 621-3. 
Aryans, 234, 299, 337, 351, 618, 621-9. 
Aryo-Dravidians, and Indo- Aryans, 11, 12 ; 

see also Dravidians. 

A 9 a, spirit, 57, 186. 

A 9 ani, name of Rudra, 144. 

A 9 apati, deity, 57. 

A 9 oka, Buddhist emperor, 30, 632. 

Aprama Upanisad, 589, n. 4. 

A 9 ramas, stages of life, 587-9. 

A 9 valayana Grhya Sutra, 28, 411, 421. 
A 9 valayana ^rauta Sutra, 28, 298. 

A 9 vapati Kaikeya, King, 459, 484, 493, 496, 
515, 517, 585. 

A 9 vina f astra, 336. 

A 9 vini, sacrifice on full moon, 362. 

A 9 vini, wife of the A 9 vins, 115, and see 
Surya. 

A 9 vins, twin deities, 275, 280, 284, 310, 328, 
332, 353, 363, 365. 

Asadhi Saugromateya, sacrificer, 463. 
Astaka, son of Vi 9 vamitra, 496, n. 4. 
Astacatvarin 9 a Stoma, 314. 

Asera, Semitic (CAH. ii. 348), 67. 

A§§ur, not Asura (cf. H. Skold and F. W. 



642 


General Index 


Thomas, JRAS. 1924, pp. 265 ff.; on 
ASsur, ef. CAH. i. 231 ; ii. 348, 709, n. 1), 
13. 

Asceticism, 301, 402, 480, 485, 497, 503, 
514, 515, 516, 517, 576, 577, 578, 585, 618 ; 
see also Muni and Yatis. 

Ash, Germanic, as sacred, 172, n. 2. 

Asia Minor, religion in, 87, 

Asiknf, river, 152. 

Asita Dhanva, King of Asuras, 234. 

Asnatare, Iranian counterpart of Potr, 294. 

Ass, in myth, 69, 114, 192 ; in ritual, 266, 
267, 271, 279 ; offered to Raksases, 324. 

Assara Mazas, 5, n. 3, 616. 

Assimilation of offering to the character of 
the deity, 279, 280. 

Assyria, 33, n. 

Astronomical data, as evidence of age of the 
Rigveda, 4 ; the Brahmanas, 22. 

Asuniti, deity, 211. 

Asura, form of marriage, 373. 

Asura, lord, 13, 232, 233, 447 ; see also Ahura 
Mazdah. 

Asura Maya, in epic, 96, n. 6. 

Asuras, demons, 24, 26, 33, 35, 36, 73, 75, 
88, 95, 96, 110, 111, 131, 142, 153, n. 9, 159, 
179, 207, 231-4, 244, 272, 480, 455, 456, 
457, 459, 464, 470, 471, 478, n. 8, 481, 
623. 

Atar, Iranian, 135, 161, 225. 

Atarevakhga, Iranian parallel of the Agnidh, 
294. 

Aten (Aton) worship, alleged Indo-Iranian 
influence on (Cumont, Astronomy and 
Religion, pp. 73 ff. ; CAH. ii. 400 ; but 
see Breasted, Development of Religion and 
Thought, p. 367, n. 1), 26, 103, n. 5. 

Atharvan, Atharvans, priests, 34, 116, 161, 
166, 223, 224, 225, 228, 261, 443. 

Atharvangiras, 225. 

Atharvaveda, 1, 14, 16, 18, 19, 23, 24, 29, 
52, 64, 68, 73, 76, 78, 82, 89, 91, 92, 97, 
103, n. 1, 104, 109, 113, 124, 134, 137, 142, 
143, 144, 147, 155, 158, 159, 161, 170, 174, 
176, 180, 181, 182, 184, 188, 192, 193, 207, 
208, 209, 213, 221, 223, 229, 231, 238, 245, 
247, 292, 338, 375, 382, 393, 894, 399, 402, 
405, 406, 414, 417, 423, 427, 444, 445, 446, 
447, 448, 451, 454, 458, 485, 503, 510, n. 3, . 
531, 538, 558, 560, 575, 604, 621. 

Atharvaveda Pari 9 ista, 391, 632. 

Athene, Greek goddess (non Indo-European 
name, CAH. ii. 616), 425. 

Athravan, Iranian priest, 84, 161, 225. 

Athwya, Iranian sacrifice, 34, 113, 134, 171. 


Atidhanvan, royal (?) philosopher, 493. 

Atithigva Divodasa, relation to Indra, 129, 
180. 

Atlas, in Greek m 3 i;hoIogy, 80. 

Atmosphere, 33, 90, 128, 134, 247, 486, 520, 
n, 7, 561, 593, 594, 595 ; offerings to, 213. 

Atreya, priest as scapegoat, 263. 

Atri, Atris, priests, 1, 91, 92, 227, 291, 439. 

Atri Saptavadhri, rescued by the A§vins, 
116. 

Attention, 535, 554. 

Attis, Anatolian deity, 187. 

Attraction by magic of beneficial sub* 
stances, 386-8. 

AugenblicksgOtter, momentary gods, 
Usener’s theory of, 44, 45. 

Aupamanyava, grammarian, his views on 
Nisadas, 299. 

Aupanisada, school, 512. 

Aupanisadika sections of Artha^Sstra and 
Kama Sutra, 491, n. 5. 

Auramazda, Persian form of Ahura Mazdali, 
614. 

Aurava, Kutsa, son of Indra, 125. 

Aurnavabha, demon, 193. 

Aurpavabha, grammarian, derivation of 
Hotr, 254, n. 1. 

Aurora, Roman deity, 38, 121. 

Austerity, see Asceticism. 

Australian religion, 49, 52. 

Australian tribes, supreme deity among, 42. 

Australo-Veddaic, Pre-Dravidians as, 634. 

Austric languages, 633. 

Avayas (perhaps Avayaj, Macdonell, Vedic 
Grammar, § 302, but dubiously), priest, 
252. 

Averting of face at sacrifice, 172, n. 11, 281. 

Avesta, 32, 60, 63, 110, 128, 134, 137, 139, 
161, 171, 180, 193, 211, 220, 231, 232, 233, 
249, 254, 286, 294, 299, 345, 353, n, 3, 406, 
408, 409, 420, 448, 619, 620, 621, 622, 623, 
624 ; age of the, 614-19. 

Avoidance of use of nameofRudra,145,146. 

Axe, ordeal by, 393. 

Ayu, foe of Indra, 129, 228. 

Azi Dahaka, Iranian demon, 134. 


iBabylon, alleged reference in Rigveda to 
capture of, 4. 

Babylonian religious influence, 13, 25, 26, 
41, 53, n. 1, 81, n. 2, 174, n. 4, 258, n. 2, 
259, n. 1, 268, 270, n. 2, 277, n. 1, 279, n. 4, 
390, n. 7, 394, n. 2, 432, n. 1, 603, 607, 610, 
n. 8, 630, 635. 



General Index 


643 


Badarayana, author of Brahma Sutra, 607, 
545, 595, 596. 

Bagaios, Phrygian god, 37, 116, 618. 

Bagha, Iranian, 100. 

Bahikas, people, 92, 147. 

BahispavamMa Stotra. 329. 

Bahram Yast, 63. 

Bahva, on nature of the Brahman, 522. 
Baka, spirit, 242. 

Bakchai, 606. 

Balaian or Balaic, language, 617. 

Balance, ordeal for soul, 393, n. 3, 572. 

Bali, offerings, 55, 175, 210, nn. 1, 4, 213, 
287, n. 3, 359. 360. 

Bamboo seeds, offered, 323. 

Barber, rewarded, 369. 

Bardesanes, Gnostic (2nd cent, a.d.), 612. 
Barley, in ritual, 167, 323, 359, 366. 

Barrier between dead and living, 422. 
Basilides, Gnostic (2nd cent, a.d.), 612. 
Bath, in ritual, 304, 321, 322, 345, 372. 
Battle, to foresee result of a, 891. 
Baudhayana Dharma Sutra, 29, 200, 415. 
Baudhayana Grhya Sutra, 28. 

Baudhayana ^rauta Shtra, 28. 

Bdellion, used to drive away demons, 384. 
Beans, taboo against use of, 608. 

Beating of King, to expel evil, 342. 

Beer, Indo-European drink, 624 ; of the Ases, 
Scandinavian legend of, 623. 

Beginnings of Vedic philosophy, 433-9. 
Being, 483, 485, 507, 519, 525 ; Parmenides’ 
identification of thought and, 636, 637. 
Bendis, Phrygian deity, 620. 

Berndl, L., theory of Samkhya, 544, 604, 
n. 1, 605, n. 5. 

Bhadrakali, deity, 212. 

Bhadra Saman, 249, 352. 

Bhaga, god, 34, 86, 99, 100, 105, 106, 120, 
191, 206. 

Bhagavadgita, 538, 550, 577, and see Gita. 
Bhang, Soma supposed to be, 172, n. 1. 
Bharadvaja, Bharadvajas, 1, 91, 92, 127, 
n. 2, 152, 176, 227, 291, 459. 

Bharadvaja Grhya Sutra, 28, 

Bharatan war, 618, 619, n. 

Bharatas, people, 12, n, 1, 64, n. 5, 79, 80, 
80, n. 1, 173, n. 3, 200. 

Bharati, goddess, 193, 200, 328. 

Bhargavas, priests, 226. 

Bhauma, spirit, 362 ; see also Bhumi, 
Bhava, name of Rudra, 92, 144, 150, 193, 
399. 

Bhavani, wife of Bhava, 364. 

Bheda, defeated by Sudas, 131. 

21 * 


Bhiru, spirit, 242. 

Bhojas, alleged to be pre-Dravidian, 633. 

Bhujyu, son of Tugra, rescued by the 
A9vins, 115. 

Bhulingas, a people, 632. 

Bhumi, earth, 174, 197, 212, 366 ; see also 
Bhauma. 

Shut, modern use of term, 214. 

Bhutapati, deity, 153, 214. 

Bhutas, spirits, 73. 

Bhuti, goddess, 186, 212, 366. 

Bhrgu, seer, 38, 71, 138, 158, 162, n. 1. 

Bhrgus, seers, 223, 225, 226, 228, 313, 317, 
410, 413, 440, n. 4, 474, 475. 

Bhrgvahgiras, 225. 

Binding of self in matter, 534, 539. 

Bird form of altar, 466. 

Birds, 63, 71, 87, 105, 119, 133, n. 6, 150, 
153, 155, 169, 190, 193, 197, 209, 237, 391: 
as dead, 571 ; of omen, 392 ; taboos on 
eating, 318. 

Birth, different kinds of, 526 ; see also Re- 
birth and Transmigration. 

Birth ceremonies, 366-9. 

Birthday offerings, 368. 

Bisexual being, world sprung from, 462, n. 
10, 620. 

Bithynians,. religion of, 39. 

Black birds, 392. 

Black dog, offered to Raksases, 324. 

Black garments, in rain spell, 309, 324, 
339. 

Black magic, 396. 

Black offerings, 212, 363, 389. 

Black Yajurveda, 17. 

Bliss (dnanda), 507, 518, 519, 520, 521, 
556, 557, 569. 

Blood (for Egyptian religion, see Wiede- 
mann, Archiv /. Beligionswissenschaft, 
xxii. 58 ff.), 56, 194, 241, 273, 281, 284, 
n. 2. 

Blood suckers, demons as, 237. 

Blue-black, connected with the dead, 143, 

n. 1. 

Blue colour of demons, 237. 

Boar, theriomorphic form of deities or 
demons, 111, 143, 157, 192, 208 ; cosmic, 
81, n. 3, 208, 622. 

Bodily presence of gods among men, 83. 

Body i^arlra), 556, 557, 565, 566. 

Boghaz-Kdi, gods invoked in inscriptions 
found at, 5, 617. 

Boiling oil ordeal, 393. 

Bonds, of Varuna, 97, 246. 

Bones of dead, burial of, 415, 420, 421 . 



644 


General Index 


Boomerang, weapon of India and Thorr, 124. 

Bo5pis, Here, 217, n. 3. 

Borer insect, how to destroy, 390. 

Bounty of India, 132. 

Bouphonia, at Athens, 47, 269, 274. 

Bowstring, Rta as, 162. 

Bowstrings, used to forecast outcome of 
money, 391. 

Brbu Taksan, enemy of the Panis, 7. 

Brhadara^yaka Upanisad, 19, 21, 448, 483, 
484, 485, 493, 498, 500, 509, 510, 512, 514, 
515, 520, 521, 527, 536, 550, 553, 554, 555, 
558, 560, 567, 569, 571, 573, 575, 576, 613. 

Brhaddevata, 502. 

Brhaddiva Atharvan, priest, 225. 

Brhaddiva, goddess, 200. 

Brhaspati, god, 65, 79, 80, 93, 96, 105, 122, 
123, 124, 126, 128, 133, 134, 138, 158, 
162-4, 171, 177, 205, 208, 223, 292, 29.3, 
315, 327, 339, 360, 370,448, 449, 620, 623. 

Brhaspati, planet, 200. 

Brhaspatisava, offering, 338, 340. 

Brhatkatha9lokasaihgraha, 632. 

Brhat Saman, 253, 335, 350, 351, 461. 

Brahmacarin, Brahman student, 200, 208, 
209, 304, 309, 448 ; expiation of vow of 
chastity, 266, 267. 

Brahmaloka, world of Brahman (or the 
Brahman), 209, 407, n, 7, 503, 520, n. 7, 
526, n. 6, 528, 577, 583, 584, 588. 

Brahman (n.), holy power, absolute (Hopkins 
{Ethics of India, p. ' 85) takes this as 
original sense ; F. Preisigke (Vom 
gottlichen Fhiidum nach dgyptischer An- 
schauung, 1920) finds a parallel to Olden- 
berg’s ‘Zauberfluidum ’ theory in Egypt), 
168, 171, 209, 399, 437, 443, 445-50, 469- 
72, 489, 491, 494, 507-13, 516-22, 522-9,‘ 
538, 541, 549, 550, 551, 560, 568, 577, 580, 
589, 599, 603, 610, n. 7, 613. 

Brahman (m.), god, 17, n. 3, 55, 57, 164, 
173, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211, 213, 214, 
222, n. 8, 242, 360, 366, 407, n. 7, 482, 503, 
526, 531, 573, 576. 

Brahman, a special priest, 252, 253, 294, 
296, 297, 298, 315, 320, 336, 339, 353, 357, 
399. 

Brahmaijacchahsin priest, 18, 162, 253, 296, 
297, 298, 328, 329, 333, 335. 

Brahma^as, philosophy of the, 440-88 ; re- 
ferred to, 17, 19, 20, 27, 73, 75, 84, n. 3, 86, 
99, 105, 109, 110, 112, 122, 126, n. 1, 138, 
142, 143, 144, 151, n. 1, 155, 156, 159, 161, 
164, 169, 170, 173, 174, 180, 189, 199, 201, 
207, 208, 210, 225, 228, 232, 233, 234, 239, 


252, 256, 259, 260, 261, 273, 274, 277, 282, 
288, 292, 298, 302, 333, 375, 379, 395, 410, 
415, 572, 581, 608, 612. 

Brahmanaspati, god, 65, 82, 162, 205, 438. 

Brahmans, priests, 16, 29, 39, 159, 162, 270, 
280, 290, 299, 316, 317, 340, 347, 349, 358, 
368, 369, 370, 373, 374, 375, 380, 395, 
401, 414, 427, 428, 429, 433, 460, n. 9, 476, 
481, 493-6, 515, 576, 577, 584, 631. 

Brahma Sutra, 507, 542, 596. 

Brahuis, Dra vidian in speech, 11. 

Breaking of utensils, &c., of the dead, 419. 

Breath {prana), 467, 484, 486, 517, 518, 537, 
553, 554, 559, 564, 565, 567. 

Breathing, to produce life, 387. 

Bridal garment, treatment of, 375. 

Bride, 373-8, 385. 

Bridegroom, 373-8. 

Bridge, passed over by dead, not Vedic 
(Hopkins, Ethics of India, p. 57, n. 1; 
suggests a hint of it in QB. xiii. 2. 10. 1, 
but this is not plausible), 406, n. 9. 

Brilliance {iejas), 554, 569. 

Bringing of Soma from the mountain, 169. 

Britain, disposal of dead among neolithic 
tribes of, 53. 

Broad-headed people, cremation alleged to 
be characteristic of, 627, n. 2. 

Brothers of Agni, legend of, 157, 158. 

Brushwood, burnt at Astakas, 429. 

Buddha, Gotama, the, 20, 22, n. 1, 29, 501, 
502, 577, 578, 587. 

Buddhaghosa, on like as known by like, 605, 
n. 3. 

Buddhism, doctrine of, 20, 21, 26, 29, 36, 56, 
180, 378, n. 6, 395, 409, 410, 414, 459, 
467, n. 1, 484, 485, 494, 495, 497, 500, n. 9, 
501, 512, 513, 514, 516, n. 9, 535, 536, 537, 
547, 548, 550, 551, 558, 559, 560, 562, 563, 
564, 577, 581, 596, 597, 612, 631. 

Buddhist Canon, date of, 502. 

Budha, planet, 200. 

Bull, 62, 68, 95, 140, 155, 168, 191, 254, 280, 
353, 364, 365 ; of Mithra, 406, n. 9, 619. 

Bull-king, alleged offerings to, 195. 

Bull’s hide, use in ritual, 386. 

Bundahign, 602, 

Burial mounds, Vedic, 32, n. 1, 421, 422, 
629, n. 1. 

Burial of the dead, 53, 417-24, 626-9, 

Burias, Kassite god, 618, n. 2. 

Burning of old articles, 389, 390, 628, n. 1. 

Burning, of self, as essence of consecration, 
302 ; of the dead, 53, 417, 422, 626-9 ; 
of widow of the dead, 418, 419, 423. 



General Index 


645 


Burying of hair and nails, 387. 

Busyasta, Iranian demon, 620. 

Butter and Agni, 154, 254, 278, 359. 

Cacus, 38, 127, 235. 

Caesar, on Celtic religion, 627, 628. 

Calendar of Numa, 51, 52, 

Calves, 254, 278, 279. 

Calves of Viraj, sun and moon as, 62, n. 1, 

Candra,376 ; see also Candramas and Moon. 

Candragupta, alleged Persian influence at 
Court of, 306, n. 3 ; repels Greeks, 30. 

Candramas, 122, and see Moon. 

Captured enemies, sacrifice of, 303. 

Car, Agni as a, 154. 

Caraka, medical teacher, 353, 

Caro-Lelegians, pre-Hellenic (cf. CAH. ii. 
17, 26, 283 ff., 553 ff.), 618, n. 5. 

Carvakas, 556. 

Castes, 2, 23, 54, 81, 83, 207, 480, 481, 497, 
631, 

Categories, 483, 484. 

Cathartic use of fire, 285, 286. 

Cattle, Rudra as lord of, 143, 145. 

Cattle bells, revered by Todas, 269, n. 7. 

Caturvin5a Stoma, 319, 350, 351. 

Catu9catvarin9a Stoma, 319, 350, 851. 

Causality, 483, 484, 487, 522, 562, 594. 

Celtic religion, 36, 37, 38, 39, 117, n. 3, 149, 
n. 2, 199, 229, n. 1, 283, n. 2, 422, n. 5, 
571, n. 9, 606, n. 6, 623, 627, 628. 

Central organ of thought, 554, 556, 557, 

Centum speech in Asia Minor, &c., 617, 634, 
n. 2 ; and satem speakers, alleged distinc- 
tion of, 100, n, 1. 

Cereal offerings, 40, 278, 279. 

Chameleon, used in magic ritual, 389. 

Chance, as final principle, 550, 551. 

Chandogya Upanisad, 19, 170, 487, 493, 496, 
498, 502, 510, 512, 514, 515, 519, 520, 521, 
537, 540, 545, 561, 569, 575, 576, 577, 578, 
591, 598, 635, 637. 

Change of form, by Visnu, 109 ; see also 
Transformation of gods. 

Chariot, simile of, 389, 536, 555. 

Chariot race, at the Vajapeya, 339, 340. 

Chariots of the gods, 87. 

Charites, 162, n. 1. 

Charity, see Generosity and Gifts. 

Charlemagne cycle, 618, n. 9. 

Charri(Ham) people and speech, 5, n. 3, 617. 

Chastity, see Adultery. 

Children, xmder two years of age, buried, 
not burned, 424, 628 ; guiltlessness of new 
born, 478 ; renunciation of, 578, n. 3. 


Chitral, route into India, 337, n. 8. 

Chota Nagpur, princes of, claim descent 
from snake, 196. 

Christian influence, 511, 619, 

Christian love, 598,. n. 4. 

Christian Mass, 270, n. 11. 

Christian mysticism, 599, 600. 

Chthonic character, attributed to Rudra and 
the Maruts, 148. 

Chthonic deity, 148. 

Churning of the ocean, epic legend of, 623, 
624. 

Cinvat, bridge, 406, 469. 

Circle, 240. 

Circumambulation of a tree, 185. 

Citra Gangyayani (Gargyayani), King, 
493. 

Citrajyotis, a Marut, 153, n. 6. 

Citraratha, snake deity, 361. 

Citrasena, snake deity, 361- 
City of ghosts, 414. 

Clan, worship of Agni, 159. 

Classes, see Castes. 

Classification, 484. 

Clay, taboo on use of vessels of, 309. 
Climbing to top of sacrificial post, as spell, 
339. 

Cloelia, legend of, 199. 

Clothes, offered to Brahmans for the dead, 
427. 

Cloud spirit, Gandharva as a, 181. 

Clouds, 108, 119, 120, 126, 127, 128. 

Coconut palm, 624. 

Cohabitation, as religious duty, 268. 
Colchians, exposure of dead on trees among, 
417, n. 7. 

Collective aggregate, not sense of samasti, 
506, n. 11. 

Colours of demons, 237. 

Colours of victims, 279. 

Comb, used to remove dangerous influences 
from the hair, 384. 

Common meal, to secure harmony, 387. 
Common sensibles, 563. 

Communion and sacrament in the Vedic 
sacrifice, 268“78. 

Comparison, in spells, 394. 

Compassion, 480 ; in Buddhism, 597. 
Competitions in philosophy, 507. 

Conception, 554, 556 ; part of Gandhabba 
in, 180. 

Confarreaiio (cf. Warde Fowler, JRS. vi. 

186 ff.), 271, n. 3. 

Confession of sin, 321, 472. 

Confidence in gods, see Faith. 



646 


General Index 


Confucianism, 470, n. 1. 

Confusion, see Ignorance. 

Conjuring up of souls, 896, 

Consciousness, 507, 509, 520, 521, 522, 558, 
559, and see prajna^ buddhi, vijndna, 
samjna. 

Consciousness of sin, 246. 

Consecration of grove or tank, ceremony, 
364. 

Constellations, worship of, 200-2. 

Consummation of marriage, delayed, 375, 
376. 

Contact, 271, 272. 

Contamination of deities, 92, 181, n, 9. 

Cooking, prohibited after death, 420. 

Copper, 23 ; alleged to be introduced into 
India, from Mesopotamia, 26 ; is gift to 
evil spirits, 341. 

Corn spirit, 258, 262, 264, 277. 

Corpse-eating wolves, of Wodan, 144, n. 2. 

Cosmogonical hymns, 2, 14. 

Cosmogonism, as philosophical doctrine, 
510, 511, 524, 531, 552, 594. 

Cosmography, Jain, 503. 

Cotton, unknown to early India, 631, 632, n. 3. 

Cough, sent by Rudra, 144. 

Courtesy, to gods, 460 ; to Fathers, 465 ; 
to others, 585. 

Covering of head of sacrificer, 281, n. 5, 300, 
329, 332, 371. 

Covetousness, disapproved, 585. 

Cow, 62, 63, 70, 87, 125, 191, 192, 200, 216, 
217, 359, 362, 363, 365, 374, 419, 427, 428, 
429 ; and Ida, 270 ; clouds as, 108, 127, 
128, 151, 198 ; oath by, 395 ; offerings to, 
213 ; stars as, 623 ; waters as, 168. 

Creation of world, 443, 444, 509, 524, 525 ; 
see also Cosmogonism. 

Creator gods, 206-10. 

Creeping of the priests, 329. 

Cremation, see Burning of the dead. 

Cretan marriage of sun and moon, 377, n. 1. 

Criminal, veiled before execution, 281, n. 5. 

Crossways, 145, 239, 322, 414, 420, 428. 

Culika XJpani§ad, 501. 

Culture, connected with fire cult, 158. 

Culture hero, 59, n. 4, 60. 

Cumuri, a chief or demon, 130, 236. 

Cup of Tvastr, 206. 

Cupid, Ktoa as, 210. 

Curse, 394, 395 ; automatic effect of, 506. 

Cyavana, demon, 240. 

Cyavana, Cyavana, rejuvenated by the 
Agvins, 115. 

Cyrus, of Persia, 615, n. 4. 


Dabhi, among Asuras, 233. 

Dabhiti, protege of Indra, 130. 

Dadhikra, Dadhikravan, the sun-horse, 189, 
190, 220, 225, 264. 

Dadhyanc Atharvapa, 116, 224, 225, 228. 

Daena, Iranian, 616. 

Daevas, 101, 244, n. 4. 

Dahae, 7, 234. 

Dahlmann, J., theory of the development of 
the Samkhya, 540, 541. 

Daimons, Hesiod’s doctrine of, 606. 

Daityas, demons, 218. 

Daivya, an Asura, 233. 

Daksa, an Aditya, 86, 99, 100, 215, 216, 438, 
620, n. 1 ; Prajapati, 218. 

Daksa Parvati, sacrificer, 320, n. 1. 

Daksayana, line of kings, 320, n. 1, 394. 

Danaoi (cf. CAH. ii. 8, 281 f., 476), 235, n. 1. 

Danava, name of Vrtra, 235. 

Danavi Vilistenga, loved by Indra, 125. 

Dance of the sun on Easter day, 121, n. 1. 

Dancer, Indra as an aged, 125, n. 13. 

Dancing, in ritual, 258, 342, 343, 351, 374, 
389, 402, 470, 475, 480. 

Danu, mother of Vrtra, 234. 

Dara Shukoh, collection of Upanisads for, 
501. 

Dareios I, of Persia, 602, 614, 615. 

Darkness, 479. 

Darzales, Thracian deity, 620. 

Da 9 agvas, priests, 224. 

Dasa, 7, 75, 129, 220, 234. 

Dasyus, 73, 75, 129, 161, 234, 426, 

Date of Avesta, 614-19; of Brahmanas, 
19-22; of Rigveda, 3-8, 614-19; of 
Samhitas, 19-22 ; of Upanisads, 21, 22, 
501-5. 

Date palm, 624. 

Datr, abstract deity, 86, n. 3. 

Daughter-in-law, taboo in respect of 
father-in-law, 388. 

Daurgaha, possibly a sun-horse, 191, n. 3. 

Dawn, Usas, 2, 3, 38, 58, 80, 82, 83, 84, 87, 
100, 104, 115, 119, 122, 132, 134, 155, n. 2, 
157, 163, 189, 197, 198, 218, 221, 279, 310, 
328. 

Day walkers, spirits as, 214. 

Dead, abodes of the, 403-16 ; cult of, 322, 
345, n, 4, 425-32, 361 ; disposal of, 53, 
417-24 ; god of the, 148, 150, 165 ; sight 
of, as a presage of death, 392 ; spirits of 
the, in connexion with origin of gods and 
demons, 71-5, 79, 81, 85. 

Death, 460 ; of enemy, modes to compass, 
389 ; of god in the sacrifice, 49, 460 ; of 



General Index 647 


the three brothers of Agni, 157, 160 ; 
taboos arising from, 308, 309. 

Debts, three, owed by man, 480. 

Deduction, logical, 485. 

Deep sleep, 537, 566, 567-70. 

Definition, 484, 548, n. 6. 

Deformed shapes of demons, 237. 

Deified States or Conditions, 211-15. 

Deiokes, father of, 616, n. 1. 

Demokedes, Greek physician at the Persian 
court, 602. 

Demokritos, Greek philosopher (5th cent. 
B.C.), 604, 635, 636, n. 9. 

Demons, or spirits, Wundt’s classification of, 
44, 45. 

Demons, 72, 76, 427, 517, 518 ; and Maruts, 
153 ; killed by Agni, 158 ; by Soma, 168 ; 
mixed form of, 225, 237. 

Descent from animals or plants, 196. 

Desertion of Indra by the gods, 127. 

Desire, 436, 442, 480, 523, 554, 556, 574, 582. 

Destri, ‘ disposing ’ deity, 206. 

Destruction of the universe by fire, periodic, 
529. 

Destructive character of Rudra, 143. 

Determinism, 527, 586, 594, and see Will. 

Deussen, P., theory of meaning of Upani- 
sads, 509-12, 592. 

Devabhaga Qrautarsa or sacri- 

ficer, 320, n. 1, 482. 

Devalakas, colporteurs of idols, 30. 

Devapi, Purohita, 261, 292, 293. 

Devavata, Agni of, 158. 

Devayajana, Vinayaka, 242. 

Deviations from the Karman doctrine, 
579, 580. 

Dhammasamgani, 563. 

Dhanapati, offering to, 360. 

Dhanvantari, 175, 214, 224, n. 4, 227, n. 8. 

DhanvantariBharadvaja, 360 ; offerings to, 
358, 361. 

Dharma Siitra, 27, n. 1, 29. 

Dhartr, supporter god, 206. 

Dhaty, god, 65, 86, n. 3, 104, 205, 206, 214. 

Dhauli, perhaps Tosali, 632. 

Dhisai^a, deity, 211. 

Dhruva, pole-star, 4, 22, 79, n. 6, 164. 

Dhuni, chief or demon, 130, 236. 

Dhurta, epithet of Rudra, 150, n. 2. 

Dialectic, 506. 

Dialogue form in Upanisads, 505. 

Diarrhoea, means of curing, 386 ; see also 
Apva. 

Dice, and Apsarases, 182. 

Dicing, 87, 258, 317. 


Diction of Upanisads, 500. 

Dietrich of Bern, 618, n. 9. 

Dignaga, 559, 560. 

Dione, goddess, 61. 

Dionysos, Thracian and Greek god (CAH. ii. 
615, 619 ff.), 47, 48, 250, 284, n. 2. 

Dioskouroi, Greek deities, 38, 117, 119, 620, 
n. 5. 

Dirghajihvi, Asura woman, relations of, 
with Indra, 126. 

Dirghamukhi, bird of omen, 392. 

Dirghatamas, seer, 434. 

Dirghatamas Aucathya, Apri hymn of, 165. 

Dirt, as sign of asceticism, 401 . 

Disease, demons, 72, 147, 240, 381, 382. 

Disguise, adopted by gods, 125 ; see also 
Transformation of gods. 

Disinterested action, 583. 

Dislike of flesh, 604. 

Disposal of the dead, 415-24. 

Distinction, not denoted by vyasti, 506, 
n. 11. 

Distinction between offerings to the dead 
and those to the gods, 429, 430. 

Distributive aggregate, alleged sense of 
vyastif 506, n. 11. 

Diti, goddess, 217, 218. 

Divakara, the sun, 104. 

Diversity denied, 507. 

Divination, 390-2. 

Divine animals, 189-95. 

Divine implements, 188, 189. 

Divine judgement of the dead, 464. 

Divine ladies, connected with Tvastr, 205. 

Divodasa Atithigva, King, 91, 158, 228, 496. 

Divyavadana, 414. 

Do ut des principle of Vedic sacrifices (for an 
idealistic interpretation, see van der 
Leeuen, Archiv /. Iteligionswissenschaft, 
XX. 241 ff.), 259. 

Dog, 62, 128, 144, 150, 192, 237; not 
usually sacrificed, 324 ; offered, 279, 324, 
406, n. 9 ; skin, 267. 

Dogs of death, 406, 424, n. 6. 

Dogs of Rudra, 144. 

Doias, Phrygian god, 620. 

Dolphin form of Apollo, 123. 

Domestic fire, 158, 159, 287-9, 358. 

Domestic ritual, 55, 175, 201, n. 2, 358-78, 
(see Contents). 

Domestication of the horse, 618, n. 1. 

Donar, Teutonic god, 37. 

Doors of the heaven, 621-3!! 

Doors of the place of sacrifice, as divine, 189. 

Double of Indra, 125. 



648 


General Index 


Doubt, as to Indra, 433. 

Dove, offered to Nirrti, 324, 

Drbhika, possibly Iranian name, 7, 236, 

Drsadvati, river, 173 ; sacrifice on the, 372. 

Dragons, in German religion, 136, n, 11. 

Drahyayana ^rauta Sutra, 28. 

Dramatic ritual, 48, 110, 142. 

Draug, Norse malignant spirit, 38. 

Dravidians, influence on Vedic Indians, 9, 
10, 11, 12, 13, 64, n., 149, 155, 200, 497, 
629-34. 

Dreag, Old English malignant spirit, 38. 

Dreamless sleep, 517, 519, n. 8, 520, 567-70. 

Dream-like existence of the Fathers, 465, 
n. 2. 

Dreams, 383, 391, 392, 517, 520 ; as source 
of belief in spirits of the dead, 75, 414 ; 
bad, banished to Trita Aptya, 120 ; com- 
pared with waking reality, 508, 558, 
567-70. 

Dried river foam, a magic ingredient, 397. 

Drink-of-strength, 339, 340, and see 

vajapeya, 

Dronasa, demon, 240. 

Dropsy, 282. 

Druhyus, people, 9, 226. 

Druids, 571, n. 4, 606, n. 6, 632. 

Drum, deified, 188 ; used to scare demons, 
351. 

Drunkenness, of Indra, 132 ; of the Persians, 
614. 

Dual deities, 220, 221. 

Duality, 508. 

Dula, star, 468, n. 1. 

Durga, goddess, 150, n, 1. 

Durkheim, theory of sacrifice, 276-8. 

Duties of man, 585, 586. 

Dvapara age, 82. 

Dwarf animal. 111, n. 1. 

Dwarf incarnation, of Visnu, 110, 111. 

Dwelling of dead in the earth, 410, 411. 

Dyaus, god, 34, 37, 45, 58, 80, 95, 96, 104, 
115, 118, 120, 125, 140, 141, 147, n. 3, 174, 
191, 208, 216, 221, 232, 448, 614. 

Dyaus Pitr, 37, 86, 96. 

Dyavabhumi, 220. 

Dyavaksama, 220, 

Dyavaprthivi, 220. 

Dying round the Brahman, 394. 

Ea, Semitic deity, 222, n. 8. 

Eagle, 62, 63, 105, 154, 169, 172, 189, 193, 
242. 

Ear igrotra), 453, 467, 486, 517, 518, 534, 
536, 537. 


Earth, Prthiv!, deity, 3, 24, 38, 57, 61, 64, 
77, 78," 80, 82, 95, 132, n. 4, 140, 177, 
208, 363, 622, 626 ; see also Bhauma, 
Bhumi. 

Earth, element, 486, 517, 525. 

Earth of ant-heap, 397. 

Earth spirit as snake, 194. 

East, as place of the gods, 145. 

East and west, contrast between, 92. 
Easterners, usages of, 147, 210, 362, 363, 
368. 

Eating, taboos on, 307, 308 ; to secure 
magic results, 387. 

Eating of god, 267. 

Eating of sacrifice by priests and sacrificers, 
270, 271. 

Eckhardt, mysticism of, 599, n. 2, 600. 
Eclipse, demon of, 130, n. 3. 

Eclipses, as evidence of date of Rigveda, 4. 
Edgerton,F,, theory of Sanikhya philosophy, 
543. 

Egypt, 518. 

Egyptian influence on India, 26, 624, 628, 
630 ; on Greece, 635. 

Egyptian religion, 47, n. 1, 101. 

EkastakS, mother of Indra, 125. 

Ekavihga Stoma, 319, 350, 351. 
Ekottaragama, 484. 

Elb, elf, 38. 

Eleatic philosophy, 603. 

Election, doctrine of, see Grace. 

Elemental self (bhuiatman), 539. 

Elements, 486, 525, 527, 537, 554, 557, 565, 
566 ; contrast with Greek view, 605, 613* 
Elephant, 23. 

Eleusis, 275 ; silent cutting of corn in, 
325, n. 4. 

Eleven, sacred number, 86. 

Elliot Smith, G., theories of, 26, 630. 

Elves, 178. 

Emancipation, 594, and see Transmigration. 
Embryo, offering of an, 152 ; saved on 
burning of dead mother, 424, 627. 
Embryos, Visi:iu as protector of, 109, 110. 
Empedokles, Greek philosopher (c. 495-435 
B.C.), 544, 604, 605, n. 4, 611, 620, n. 1. 
Emperor of Japan, sanctity of, 276. 

Emusa, boar. 111. 

Enclosing sticks (paridhi)^ 241, 359, 383. 
Enemies of man, 236-42, 

Enemies of the gods, 231-6. 

Enemy, spells to defeat, 388, 389. 

Energy deified, see fama. 

Eniautos Daimon, theory of, 49, 50. 

Enlil, Semitic deity, 222, n. 8. 



General Index 


649 


Entrails of victim, divination from, 390, n. 7 ; 

given to hosts of Rudra, 14-5, 

Eos, Greek goddess of dawn, 38, 121. 

Epic, original story of, 613 ; use of, as 
authority for mythology, 623, 624. 

Epic Saihkhya, 54-3, 544. 

Epicharmos, Greek comic poet (6th cent. 
B.C., Rostagni, 11 Verbo di Piiagorat pp. 
18 ff.), 554. 

Epona, goddess, 199. 

Equinoxes, play no part in early Indian 
ideas, 4. 

Erinys, Greek spirit, 38, 104, n. 1, 198. 
Eros, in Boeotia, 210, n. 5. 

Establishment of the fires (agnyddhma), 
316, 317. 

Esus, Gaulish god, 233, n. 2. 

Etadu, Asura, 233. 

Etaya, horse of the sun, 105, 191, 202. 

Ether (dkdga), element, 493, 517, 519, 613, 

634, 635. 

Ethical principles, and religion, 46. 

Ethics of the Rigveda, 246-50, 433 ; of the 
Brahmanas, -468-81 ; of the Upanisads, 
584-91. 

Etymology, 488. 

Eudoxos, alleged mediator of Indian ideas, 

635, n. 8. 

Euhemerism, 50. 

Euripides, Greek tragedian, 275, 606, 612. 
Evacuations (visarga), anus and, 554. 

Evil, 248, 249, 479, 480, 485, 585, 586. 

Evil dreams, face wiped after, 383 ; Trita 
and, 120, 134. 

Evil eye, 387, 

Evil forms of Agni, 241, 

Evil repute, of a killer, 477. 

Ewe, as sacrificial victim, 280. 

Exile, plan to restore prince from, 387. 
Expiations, 356, 357. 

Exposure of children, not practised, 475. 
Exposure of dead on trees, 417. 

Expulsion of evil, 263 ; see also Scapegoat, 
Exfa, special treatment of, in Roman ritual, 
281. 

External soul, 131, 196, 378, 625. 

Extinction of fires on death, 160. 

Eye (cakms), 453, 467, 472, 486, 517, 518, 
537, 553, 554, 556, 557 ; as purifying, 387 ; 
of Prajapati, as source of horse, 208. 

Faith (graddhd ; cf, v. Negeiein, Weltan-- 
schauu7ig, p. 34), 249, 250, 514, n. 11, 517, 
575, 576, 577 ; as a deity, 2, 210. 

False accusation, effect of; 477. 


Family books, of the Rigveda, 1, 2. 

Family worship, 328, 358. 

Fasting, 800, 301, 306. 

Fata Morgana, 179. 

Fate, see Determinism. 

Father-in-law, taboo to daughter-in-law, 
388. 

Fathers (piirs), spirits of the dead, 15, 63, 
73, 80, 83, 93, 120, 122, 165, 168, 170, 173, 
250, 270, 272, 275, 279, n. 3, 288, 300, 320, 
322, 329, 330, 353, 358, 359, 360, 861, 372, 
383, 392, 405, 407, 418, 425-32, 448, 464, 
465, 466, 480, 571, 572, 578, 575, 576, 598. 

Fauni, in Roman religion, 147. 

Fear in religion, 53, n. 2, 54, n. 2, 425. 

Feather, of eagle becomes tree or porcupine, 
169. 

Fees (daksinds), 817, 323, 326, 330, 335, 336, 
337, 338, 343, 345, 398, 401, 

Feet {pdda)f as organs, 554, 556. 

Feretrius, Jupiter, 37. 

Fertility magic, 351, 476* 

Fetishism, 47, 66-75, 189, 190, 191. 

Fever, dismissed to Gandhara or the 
Mfijavants, 385, 394. 

Fides, abstract deity, 65. 

Fig-tree dropping Soma somasavana), 

172, n. 2, 407. 

Fire, as an Indo-European deity, 625, 626 ; 
as element, 451, 467, 478, 613 ; carried 
before host in battle, 161 ; domestic, 37, 
38, 50, 55, 88, 867 ; in heaven, 621-3 ; 
sacrificial, 34, 36, 38, 48, 55, 56, 285-9 ; 
used against demons, 241, 243, 287 ; used 
for burning dead, 420, 447, -448. 

Fire altar, 55, 59, 67, 156 ; sec also Fire 
piling. 

Fire ordeal, 393. 

Fire-pan, 465, 466. 

Fire piling, 271, 282, 352, 354-6, 364, 397, 
422, n. 2, 440, n. 1, 465-7, and see agni- 
cayana. 

Fire sticks (aram), Agni’s production from, 
161. 

Fires of hell, 410, n. 2. 

First fruits, 260, 266, 323, 360, 389. 

First of men, 228-30, 619-21. 

First principle, 538, 550. 

Fish, and Manu, 110, 123, 229 ; caught at 
marriage rite, 376 ; not normally offered, 
279. 

Fish-otter, sacrificed to ApSiii Napat, 279. 

Fish symbol, in Christianity, 123, n. 3. 

Five Adhvaryus, 201, 416, n. 2. 

Five Bulls, in sky, 201, 202. 



650 


General Index 


Five-headed snake, 363. 

Five regular figures, discovered by Theai- 
tetos, 635. 

Fjorgynn and FjSrgyn, 61, n. 5, 141. 
Fiamen, Roman, 39 ; Dialis, sanctity of, 
276. 

Flames, as deciding fate of the dead, 410, 
n. 8. 

Flesh, restrictions on eating (cf. Hopkins, 
Ethics of India, pp. 160 ff.), 307. 

Flesh offering, at Astakas, 429. 

Flies, Greek offering to the, 194. 

Flight of Agni, 153, 154. 

Flood, 25, 111, 229, 621. 

Food, as designation of earth in CU., 525 ; 
left over from meals, offered to Rudra, 
145 ; of the gods, 87. 

Footprints, man can he injured through, 381 ; 

veneration of, 108, n. 4, 389. 

Forecasting the weather, 392. 

Forest cattle, Vayu as lord of, 144, n. 13. 
Forest fires, wind as producing, 138. 
Forgiveness of sin, 246, 247. 

Form, 486, 487, 554, 556, and see rupa. 

Four ages, 82, n. 9. 

Four-eyed dog, 344, 346, 406. 

Four-month sacrifices (cdiurmdsya), 155, 
160, 178, 298, 305, 321-3. 

Four states of the soul, 567-70. 

Frank, E., views cited, 635. 

Frankish kings, long hair of, 343, 

Fravartis, Phaortes, 61*6, n. 1. 

FravaSi, in Iranian religion, 616. 

Frazer, Sir J. G., theory of sacrifices, 262. 
ii'reedom, as opposed to Determination of 
the will, 469, 503, 527, 586, 594. 

Freyr and Freyja, 61, n. 5. 

Friction, lighting of fire by, 155, n. 1. 
Friends, duties to, 480. 

Progs, in myth and ritual, 141, 294, 302, 381, 
386, 390, 420, 434. 

Full moon, offerings to, 213. 

Funeral hymn, 256, 282, 418-20 ; see also 
Disposal of the dead. 

Furrow, see Sita. i 

Gambling, see Dicing. 

Ganapati, epithet of Brhaspati, 162. 

Ganas, troupes, 242, 

Ganas, of Samaveda, 16. 

Gandarewa, 34, 180. 

Gandhabba, in Buddhist belief, 180. 
Gandh&ra, 385, 496. 

Gandharva, Gandharvas, 8, 24, 34, 72, 76, 
82, n. 9, 83, 91, 92, 104, n. 1, 142, 179-84, 


199, 213, 214, 218‘, 327, 375, 376, 402, 456, 
470, 482, 520, n. 7, 577 ; Kali, 478, n. 8 ; 
men as, 573. 

Gandharva marriage, 373. 

Gandharvaloka, 179, n. 7, 301. 

Gandharvanagara, 532, n. 6. 

Gane^a, a deity, 242. 

Ganges, descent from heaven of the, 173 ; 
oath by water of the, 395. 

Ganymede legend, Indian parallel to, 131, 
n. 4. 

Gaotema, in Avesta, 85. 

Garbe, R.. doctrine of Indian origin of 
Greek philosophy, 601-13. 

Garbha Upanisad, 476, n. 2, 501, 567. 

Gargya Balaki, teacher, 498, 496, 498, 516. 

Garuda, the sun-bird, 109, 190, 381. 

Garutmant, the sun as, 193. 

Gate of the heaven, 397, n. 6. 

Gaudapada, author of Mandukya Karika, 
50i, 503, 505, 512, n. 1, 531, 532, 558, 637, 
n. 8. 

Gaulish religion, 39, 233, n. 2 ; see also 
Celtic religion. 

Gaumata, usurper of Persian throne, 615. 

Gauri, goddess, 17, n. 3. 

Gau§ukti, teacher, 22. 

Gautama, Gotama, 1, 132, 221, n. 1. 

Gautama Dharma Siitra, 29. 

Gayatra Saman, 352. 

Gazelle form of Usas, 208. 

General character of the Brahmapa philo- 
sophy, 440-2. 

General conceptions, 484. 

Generality, not denoted by samasii, 506, 
n. 11. 

Generalization of activity of Rudra, 145. 

Generation, as connected with Tvastr, 205. 

Generative organ (upastha), 554, 556, 557, 
n. 5. 

Generosity, 250, 477, n. 10, 480, and see 
Gifts. 

Germanic religion, 35, 36, 87, 38, 39, 59, 117, 
n. 3, 121, n. 1, 136, n. 11, 172, n. 2, 178, 
193, 258, n. 2, 283, n. 2, 286, n. 2, 287, n. 3, 
303, n. 1, 318, n. 4, 322, n. 4, 360, 361, 
376, 397, 407, n. 2, 422, n. 5, 448, 571, n. 9, 
620, 621, n. 1. 

Geryoneus, Greek legend of, 38, 127, 235. 

Ghee, as food of Agni, 154. 

Ghosini, guardian of cattle at pasture, 214. 

Ghoks, 413, 414, 427. 

Ghouls of the burial places, 237. 

Giant, 81 ; Gandharva as a, 181. 

Gift theory of sacrifice, 48, 256-60. 



General Index 


Gifts, 250, 262, 268, 269, 577, 578, 585 ; 

see also Generosity. 

Girding and ungirding of sacrificer’s wife, 
319, 320. 

Girija, a sage, 482. 

Girls, rites affecting as distinct from boys, 
369, 878. 

Gita, 543, and see Bhagavadgita, 

Glacier, Vrtra as personification of the, 127. 

Glance of snake, as deadly, 387. 

Glory, in Avesta, 135. 

Gnomic hymns, 14. 

Gnostic views, 612. 

Goat, 63, 69, 70, 87, 106, 107, 137, 158, 167, 
189, 192, 254, 264, 267, 269, 280, 324, 334, 
359, 363, 419, 423, 424. 

Gobhila Grhya Sutra, 28, 375, 429. 

God, 549, 599, 600, and see Igyara, Igana. 

Goddesses, 61 ; as wives of the gods, 218, 
219 ; of weaving, 214. 

Gods, see Contents^ Part II. 

Gods and men, 243-51, 460-2, 605. 

Gods by birth, 520, n. 7, 525, n. 1. 

Gods by works, 520, n. 7, 525, n. 1, 573, n. 11. 

Going out of child, ceremony of first, 369. 

Gold, 23, 67, 339, 341, 345, 419, 423. 

Golden figure of a man at piling of fire altar, 
354, 355. 

Golden hatchet, used by Brhaspati, 162. 

Golden man, in fire altar, 466. 

Golden plate, as sun symbol, 67. 

Good and evil, 248, 574, 596 ; sec also Ethics, 
Evil, and Morals. 

Gorgias, dialectic of, 637. 

Gotama Rahugana, pioneer of Aryan civili- 
zation, 158. 

Gotamas, family of, 196, 227 ; Indra as the 
god of the, 127, n. 2 ; see also Gautama. 

G6tze, A., on Iranian influence on Greek 
ideas, 602. 

Gough, A. E., theory of meaning of the 
Upanisads, 509, 592, 

Grace, divine, 579. 

Grahas, planets as, 201. 

Grass, magic rite with, as war spell, 386 ; of 
sacrifice, how used, 359, and see barkis* 

Gravagrabha, priest, 252, 253. 

Gravastut, priest, 298, 329. 

Grdhra^irsni, demoness, 241. 

Great Bear, 201, 416. 

Greece, population of, 628, n. 5. 

Greek fire, alleged reference to, in the 
Rigveda, 285, n. 8. 

Greek influence, on use of statues of deities, 
30, n. 3. 


651 

Greek philosophy, alleged derivation from 
India, 601-13, 634-7. 

Greek religion, compared with Vedic, 35, 36, 
37, 38, 39, 45, 47, 48, n. 8, 51, 54, 57, 58, 
95, 117, 119, 149, n. 2, 194, 257, 259, n. 1, 
263, 272, 273, n. 4, 275, 279, n. 5, 280, n. 1, 
283, n. 2, 284, n. 2, 287, n. 4, 290, n. 5, 
291, 303, n. 2, 318, n. 3, 325, n. 4, 332, n. 4, 
346, n. 3, 361, 365, 376. 377, 379, n. 4. 390, 
n. 7, 419, n. 5, 422, n. 5, 476, 488, 561, 623, 
624, 625, 626, 627, 028, 631. 

Grhamedhin, class of Maruts, 215. 

Grhya religion, 93, 177, 213, 270 ; see also 
Domestic ritual. 

Grhya Sutra, 4, 27, 28, 29, 213, 242. 

Grief, of harlot, &c., 477. 

Gross elements, 537, 554, 613. 

Groups of gods, 221, 222, 

Groves, as places of worship, 39. 

Gudea, Sumerian king, facial aspect of, 10, 
n. 1. 

Guests, offerings to, 363. 

Guilt banished to Trita, 134 ; in killing, 
131, 477 ; see also dgas and enas, 

Guparatna Stiri, 505. 

Gungu, goddess, 199. 

Guru, see Teacher. 

Hades, in Homer (for a Celtic parallel see 
H. Meyer, SBA. 1919, pp. 507 ff.), 413. 

Hagia Triada sarkophagos (Dussaud, Civili- 
sations prihelUniqueSf pp. 404 ff.), 415, n. 4. 

Hahahuhu, Gandharvas, 214. 

Haimavata, spirit, 242. 

Hair, 353 ; taboos regarding the, 805-6. 

Hair cutting, 285, 342, 843, 372, 378, 383. 

Hair growing, spells for, 369, n. 2. 

Hair offerings, 268, 324, 428, 430. 

Hairs of bull, used to feed child, 353, n. 2, 
367. 

Hands {pdni, hasta), as organs, 554, 556, 
557. 

Hanging of offerings on trees, 55, 50, n. 3, 
149, n. 5, 155, 156, n. 3, 287, 322, 361, 365, 
385. 

Hafisa, Agni as, 154. 

Hantrimukha, demon, 240. 

Hanumant (god of the monsoon : Jacobi, 
Das Rdmdyana, p. 133), 192. 

Haoma, in Iran, 34, 113, 167, 171, 614. 

Happiness, see Pleasure. 

Hara, name of Rudra, 144, n. 8, 146, 549. 

Harahvaiti, 7 ; see also SarasvatL 

Hare (gaga)^ shape in moon, identified with 
Yama, 77, 122, 123, 409, n. 1. 



652 


General Index 


Haridnimata, teacher, 496. 

Hari<?candra, King, 263, 282. 

Hariydpiya, river, 7. 

Harsh words, 394. 

Haryaksa, demon, 240. 

Hastamalaka, attributed to fahkara (or 
comm, only), 504. 

Hatchet, Agni as a, 154. 

Headache, spell to remove, 385. 

Head-hunting, as Indo-European, 267. 

Hearing (grotm), 453, 484, 553, 554. 

Heart (hfdaya), 437, 554, 556, n. 8, 564, 566. 

Hearth, deity of the, 625, 626. 

Heat (tapas), 301, n. 2, 525. 

Heaven (svarga), 34, 177, 406-9, 525, 583, 
584, 621-3. 

Hegel, G. W. F., German philosopher (a.d. 
1770-1831), 600. 

Helene, Greek heroine, 116, 117. 

Heiioiithic culture, alleged, 630. 

Hell, 409, 410; see also naraka loka, ndrakdh. 

Henotheism, 88, 89. 

Hephaistos, Greek god of fire, 625, 626, n. 5, 

Herakleitos, Greek philosopher (c. 500 b.c.), 
301, n. 2, 604, 613, 635, 636. 

Herakles, Greek hero, 38, 235. 

Herbs, offerings to the, 213. 

Here, Greek goddess, 50, 117, n. 3, 119, 217, 
n. 3. 

Hermes, Greek god (pastoral deity of 
fertility, CAH. ii. 637), 62, 107, 108, 150, 
n. 1. 

Herodotos, Greek historian, 360, 401, 601, 
606, 614, 615, n, 2, 626, 635. 

Hertel, J., theory of Brahman, 447, 448 ; 
of heaven, 621-3 ; of place and age of the 
Avesta and Rigveda, 614-19. 

Hesiod, 608- 

Hestia, Greek goddess of the fire, 37, 161, 
625, 626. 

Highest principle of the Universe, 442-54 ; 
see also Brahman. 

Highwaymen, Rudra as patron god of, 150. 

Himavant, mountain god, 200. 

Hinduism, 56. 

Hira:^iyadant Baida, sage, 471. 

Hiraiiyagarbha, deity, 208, 393, 437, 508, 
526, 531, 533, 537. 

Hiranyake§i Grhya Sutra, 28, 188, 372, 428. 

Hiranyake^i ^rauta Sutra, 28. 

Hissing of Vrtra, terrifies the gods, 127. 

Hittites (cf. CAH. ii. 252 fi.), 617, 618. 

Hole, drawing through a, to rub oJBi evil, 397; 
in thatch, child taken through, 383 ; sacri- 
fice through a, 397. 


Holy lustre (brahmavarcasa), as deity, 213. 

Holy power, see Brahman. 

Home of the gods in heaven, 87, 621-3. 

Home of the Rigveda, 7, 11, 12 ; the Brah- 
manas, 22, 23 ; the Upanisads, 496. 

Homeric question, 619, n. 

Homeric religion, 19, 51, ^2, 58, 85, 212, 
269, 270, 628. 

Honesty, see Truth. 

Honey, 114, 167, 192, 225 ; in ritual, 141, 
284, 339, 349, 363, 364, 377. 

Honey cake for Kerberos, 419. 

Hoof print of horse, cult of, 108, n. 4. 

Hook, of Indra, 124. 

Horse, theriomorphic form of gods, 62, 154, 
189, 191, 198 ; victim in ritual, 254, 279, 
and see agmmedha. 

Horse fetish, 69. 

Horse-flesh, eating of, 279. 

Horse sacrifice, 40, 63, 105, 114, 118, 119, 
175, 195, 343-»7, and see agvamedka. 

Hospitality, 480, 

Hostile aspect of the Maruts, 152, 153. 

Hot-milk sacrifice, 332, 383, and see pra- 
vargya. 

Hot season, Rudra, as deity of the, 146. 

Hotr, priest, 16, 34, 119, n. 1, 157, 159, 165, 
n. 7, 207, 226, 252, 253, 254, 297, 298, 315, 
319, 320, 324, 828, 336, 351. 

Hotrakas, priests, 315. 

Hotra, 173. 

House, ceremonies regarding, 363, 364; 
deities of, 188, and see Vastospati. 

Householder, as stage of life, 587, 588. 

Hubert and Mauss, theory of sacrifice, 275-8. 

Human sacrifice (purusamedha), 40, 262-4, 
282, 283, 304, 847, 348, 354, 619, 621. 

Hundred-oared ship, of the A 9 vins, 115. 

Hungary, ceremony of royal coronation, 342. 

Hunger {aganayd), 470, 475, n. 3, 480, 557. 

Hura, Avestan drink, similar to Sura, 284. 

Huyghens, Christian, Butch scientist (a.d. 
1629-95), 635. 

Hyakinthos, cult origin of legend of, 48, n. 2. 

Hyena, howl of, 391. 

Hyle, primitive matter in the Aristotelian 
system, 533. 

Ida, father of Pururavas, 84, n. 3. 

Ida, goddess of the sacrificial offering, 62, 70, 
84, n. 3, 199, 200, 202, 209, 229, 278, 320, 
359. 

Idealism, 509, 510, 511, 552, 558. 

Idealist school of Buddhism, 509, 512. 

Ideas, see dharma and manas. 



General Index 


653 


Identifications, in the Brahmai;ias, 484. 

Idols, use of, 30, 31, 54, 56, 69, n, 1, 70, 
201, n. 2. 

Ignorance {avidyd), 515, 516. 

Iksvaku, family, 196. 

Ilibi^a, foe of Indra, 130, 236. 

Illusion (mayo), 508, 509, 524, 529-32, 541, 
542, 549, 594. 

Ilpa or Ilya tree, 407, n. 7, 584. 

Image, as mode of injuring man, 381. 

Immortality, 105, 176, 227, 463, 545, 546, 
581-3, 592, 609, 621 ; drink of, 623, 624 ; 
not originally possessed by the gods, 82 ; 
of man, 82, 83. 

Impressions, see samshdras. 

Impurity, owing to death, 160, 420. 

Incarnation, 197, 208, 229. 

Incense lights, offered to dead, 427. 

Incest, 120, n. 2, 208, 230, 247, 249, 338, 476. 

Incestuous unions, in Iran, 26. 

Indar, Mitanni form of Indra, 617. 

Indigitamenta, 64, 150, 215, 626. 

Individual and supreme souls, 551-67. 

Individual souls, 508, 509, 510, 545, 546, 
551-70. 

Individuation, 537, 539, 554, 612, and see 
ahamkdra. 

Indo-Aryans, and Aryo-Dravidians, 11, '12. 

Indo-European, class distinctions, 23, n. 4 ; 
date of period of unity, 617, 618 ; home of, 
618, 628, 629 ; idolatry, 31 ; myths and 
religion, 36-42, 46, 117, 118, 162, 167, 205, 
229, 291, 412, 422, 433, 619-21, 621-3, 624, 
626, 627, 629. 

Indo-Iranian cult, 34, 35, 626, n. 4 ; see also 
Iranian religion. 

Indra, god, 2, 3, 33, 38, 47, 50, 59, 60, 62, 63, 
65, 68, 81, 82, 85, 86, 87, 88, 90, 91, 93, 95, 
96, 99, 103, 104, 105, 106, 109, 111, 112, 
113, 115, 117, 124-33, 134, 139, 140, 141, 
151, 162, 165, 167, 168, 169, 173, 176, 177, 
186, 191, 192, 199, 201, 205, 206, 210, 214, 
219, 222, 223, 233, 234, 235, 241, 242, 244, 
245, 248, 249, 250, 255, 274, 275, 279, 280, 
281, 296, 311, 319, 320, 321, 327, 329, 342, 
846, 389, 396, 409, 433, 434, 435, 444, 454, 
457, 458, 460, 468, 469, 470, 481, 482, 487, 
n. 7, 506, 517, 520, n. 7, 525, 528, 532, 581, 
583, 584, 621. 

Indragni, 165, n. 6, 220, 

Indrani, 61, 125, 133, 151, 200, 218, 364, 
374, 434. 

IndrSparvata, 187. 

Indrapusaija, 221. 

Indrasoma, 220. 


' Indra vayO, 220, 221, 

Induction, logical, 485. 

Influence of the moon on the tides, 122. 

Inherent nature, as final principle, 550. 

Initiation of pupil, as rebirth, 285, 370, 377. 

Insect, 567, 571 ; as soul vehicle, 421, n. 8. 

Insight of seers, 482. 

Intellect, intelligence, 537, 539, 554, and see 
buddki ; as central organ (prajM), 513, 
554, 556, 557, 568 ; as insight, 548. 

Intention, 478. 

Interrelation of the gods, 84-93. 

Intuition, see Knowledge. 

Invasion of India by Indo-Europeans, 11, 
12, 618, 628, 629. 

Inviolability of the king, 481. 

Inward controller (aniarydmin), 523, 527. 

lonians, 52. 

Ipsen, G., theory of date of period of Indo- 
European unity (Sireiiberg-Fesischrifi, 
pp. 200 ff.), 017. 

Iran, 7, 8, 26, 101, 122, n. 2. 

Iranian, transcription of Avesta (cf. ZII. i. 
192 ff., 230), 32, n. 2, 33, n. 2. 

Iranian religion, 36, 46, 61, 71, 72, 73, 74, 
211, 217, 224, 229, 231, 258, n. 2, 270, n . 2, 
271, n. 5, 281, 283, n. 2, 284, 286, 294, 318, 
n. 4, 354, 360, 377, 422, n. 5, 423, n. 1, 483, 
468, 469, 474, 497, 602, 603, 614-16, 619- 
21, 621-3, 624, 635 ,* see also Indo- 
Iranian cult. 

Iron, 23, 26. 

Iron axe, used by Brhaspati, 162. 

Iron filings, as magic ingredient, 397. 

Irrational, theorem of the, 607, 635. 

19a, the Lord, 525, 549. 

19a Upanisad, 499, 500, 502, 516, 522, n. 6, 
532, 545, 581, 583. 

I9ana, the Lord, 10, 144, n. 8, 242, 338, 364, 
374, 470. 

I9vara, the Lord, 364, 504, 505, 524, 525, 
542, 543, 544, 549. 

I9varakrsna, author of the Samkhya 
Karika, 544. 

Isu Trikapda, constellation, 146. 

Italian religion, 39 ; see also Roman religion. 

JabSla, mother of Satyakama, 496. 

Jabala Upanisad, 501, 587, 589, n. 4. 

Jaimini Grhya Sutra, 28. 

Jaiminiya Brahmaija, 17, 19, 22, 81 116, 
122, 125, 136, 242, 338, 407, 410, 474, 470, 
491, 636. 

Jaiminiya Upanisad Brahmana, 19, 22, 213, 
499, 533, 556, 564, 577. 



General Index 


654 

Jainism, views of, 20, 56, 459, 503, n, 7, 
504, 514, 546, 577, 591, 631. 

Jamadagni, Apr! hymn of, 165. 

Jambhaka, spirit, 242, 

Jamsed, in Persian legend, 620. 

Janaka, King of Videha, 64, 459, 493, 495, 
496, 505, 517, 520. 

Jatavedas, epithet of Agni, 160, 316. 
Jaundice, transferred to birds by magic rite, 
385, 386. 

Jayanta, deity (ef. Artha^Sstra, ii. 4), 197, 
365. 

Jealousy of heaven, Herodotos’ doctrine of 
the, 243-4. 

Jevons, H. B., theory of sacrifice, 278. 
Jewish week, 41 . 

Joint-curses, 395, 396. 

Journey, mode of predicting, 390. 

Jumbaka, as Varuna, 304. 

Juno, Roman goddess, 117, n. 3. 

Jupiter, Roman deity, 37, 45, 51, 96, 117, 
n. 3, 448, 626, n. 4. 

Jus trium noctium^ 376. 

Jyestha Saman, 309, 371. 

Jyotismant, a Marut, 153, n, 6. 

Ka, god, 207, 321, 518, n. 7. 

Kabeiroi, alleged connexion with Kubera, 
38. 

Kai Kaos, Iranian hero, 227, 232. 

Kakkola, parallel to Takkola, 633. 

Kala, deity, 24, 209. 

Kalaha, spirit, 242. 

Kalakanjas, Asuras, 234. 

Kali, goddess, 212. 

Kali, legend of Alvins’ aid to, 116. 

Kali, age of the world, 82. 

Kali Gandharvas, 82, n, 9, 179, n. 7, 478, 
n, 8. 

Kalindas, people, 632. 

Kalinga country, 633. 

KalyaijI, spirit, 400, n. 5, 

Kama, desire, 24, 210, 352 (Agnias), 859, 
374, *542, 555, n, 7. 

Kamaduh, wish-cow, 191. 

Kamadyu, wife of Purumitra, 116. 
Kamaranga, country, 633. 

Kamarupa, country, 683. 

Kama Sfitra, 476, n. 2, 488, n. 4, 491, n. 5. 
Kamboja, people, 547, n. 4, 633. 

Kanisian or Kanesian (i.e. late Hittite, con- 
taining Indo-European elements, CAH. 
ii. 253 f., 428, n. 1 ; Friedrich, SireOberg- 
Festschrift, pp. 307 ff.),.617. 

Kansa, legend of, 262. 


Kant, E., German philosopher (a.d. 1724- 
1804), 480, 551, 554, 563, 564, 592, 635. 

Kantha^ruti Upanisad, 589, n. 4. 

Kanva, disease demon, 381, n, 7. 

Kanvas, family, 2, 227, 228, 330, 400, n. 12, 
426. 

Kapila Rsi, 526, 543, 544, n. 6. 

Kapisthaia Samhita, 17. 

Karanja, enemy of Indra, 129. 

Karapans, in Avesta, 232. 

Karata, 17, n, 3. 

Karavapacava, place, 352. 

Karoti, river, 354. 

Ka^i, place and people, 496. 

Ka 9 yapa, cosmic tortoise, 196, 214, and see 
Akupara. 

Ka^yapa, a priest, 193, 622 ; see also 
Udalaka^yapa. 

Kasaka (Kr 9 ana, Kar^ana), 213. 

Kassites, 6, 618. 

Katha Upanisad, 499, 500, 502, 503, 506, 
510, 511, 513, 514, 515, 516, 518, 519, 522, 
523, 526, 531, 535, 536, 537, 538, 539, 545, 
547, 549, 552, 555, 557, 577, 579, 583, 591, 
617. 

Kathaka Samhita, 17, 21, 157. 

Katha^ruti Upanisad, 589, n. 4, 

Kathas, ritual school, 323. 

Kathenotheism, 88, 89. 

Katyayana ^rauta Sutra, 28. 

Kaurama, King of Ru^amas, 250, 400, n. 11 . 

Kau 9 ika, as epithet of Indra, 132. 

Kau 9 ikas, Vedic clan, 196. 

Kau 9 ika Sutra, 28, 29, 194, 205, 214, 356, 
361. 382, 888, 393, 396, 397, 400, 421. 

Kausitaki Brahmana, 17, 19, 144, 148, 209, 
33*3, 410, 464, 474. 

Kausitaki Upanisad, 493, 490, 498, 501, 520, 
52*1, 537, 554, 556, 557, 558, 561, 567, 576, 
577, 580, 583, 584. 

Kautiliya Artha§astra, 481, n. 12, 491, n. 5, 
505. 

Kavasa Ailusa, sage, 459. 

KavSta, of Kavi dynasty, 615. 

Kavi, dynasty, 615. 

Kavis, 315. 

Kavya U 9 ana. mythical priest, 159, 227, 232. 

Kavyas, Fathers as, 329. 

Kena Upanisad, 19, 499, 500, 502, 522, n. 6. 

Kentauros, alleged connexion with Gandh- 
arva, 104, n. 1, 180. 

Kerberos, dog of Hades, 38, 192, 407. 

Keresani, Iranian hero, 84. 

Keresaspa, 180. 

Ke 9 ava, Visnu as, 17, n. 3. 



General Index 


655 


Ke^in Dalbhya, sage, 482. 

Ketu, planet, 200, 528, n. 9. 

Khadira Grhya Sutra, 28. 

Khilas, of Rigveda, 17, n. 3. 

Khojis, cattle trackers, 107, n, 8. 

Kbyatr, spirit, 214. 

Kilata, Asura priest, 233, 462, 

Killer, haunted by the ghost of murdered 
man, 477. 

Kimidins, demons, 239. 

Kiihvadanta, demon, 240. 

Kindness, see ahihsd* 

King (cf. V. Negelein, Weltanschauung^ pp. 
127 ff.), 292, 481 ; burial or burning of, 
628 ; see also mjasuya. 

Kirata, Kilata, 233, 462. 

Kleisthenes, tyrant of Sikyon, marriage feast 
of his daughter, 373. 

Knidian school of medicine, 602. 

Knots, loosened to facilitate childbirth, 367. 
Knowledge, 482, 507, 510, 513--16, 517, 583, 
584, 586, 593, 594, 595, 596. 

Kosala, coimtry, 23, 496, 632. 

Kr 9 anu, archer, 34, 60, 169, 179. 

Krsna, god, 262, 433, n. 1, 577. 

Krta age, 82. 

Krttikas, date derived from, 4, 22. 

Krldin, class of Maruts, 215. 

Krivis, people, 23, 196, n. 7. 

Krobalos, of Hermes, 107. 

Ksatra, husband of Upama, 125, n. 13. 
Ksatrana, spirit, 214. 

Ksatriyas, second class in Vedic society, 92, 
148, n. 1, 289, 292, 316, 339, 340, 347, 368, 
369, 370, 373, 395, 447, 481, 576, 577, 587 ; 
and philosophy, 493-6. 

Ksetrapati, god, 57, 63, 64, 186, 315. 
Ktesias, Greek physician at the Persian 
Court, 602. 

Kubera, god, 38, 238, 242. 

KuhQ, goddess, 199, 201, 355. 
Kulangapamarin, spirit, 242. 

Kulindas, people, 632, 

Kulitara, father of f ambara, 236. 

Kum§ra, demon, 241. 

Kumbhin, demon, 240. 

Kunindas, people, 032. 

Kurgan people, bury their dead, 628, 629. 
Kurkura, demon, 241. 

Kuruksetra, sacrifices in, 21, 352, 496. 
Kuru-Pancalas, joint people, 341, 456, 496. 
Kurus, people, 22, 71, 196, n. 7, 343 ; and 
Paiidavas, 20, 21. 

Ku 9 ikas, Indra as god of the, 127, n. 2, 182. 
Kusmai^darajaputra, Vinayaka, 242. 


Kusta, opposed to Aditi, 233. 

Kfitadanta, demon, 240, n. 6. 

Kutsa Aurava, relations to Indra, 125, 129, 
130, 227, 228, 251, 261, 292, n. 2, 426, 456, 
470. 

I^aksmi, prosperity deified, 212, 623. 

Lambastana, demon, 240, n. 6. 

Language, influence on development of 
religion, 45. 

Lanka, not Ceylon, 633, n. 1, 

Lanman, C. R., judgement on Indian 
philosophy, 592, n. 2. 

Lao Ts6, 582, n. 6. 

Lar familiaris, 186, n. 4. 

Latency of fire in wood, 155, n, 1, 

Latin Festival at Alban Moimt, as rite of 
communion, 269. 

Latins, origin of (cf. CAH. ii. 36, 569 52. 

Latyayana ^rauta Sutra, 28. 

Laughter, 349, 383 ; as loss of strength, 307. 

Lauriya Nandangarh, alleged Vedic burial 
mounds at, 32, n. 1. 

Laverna, Roman deity, 150, n. 1* 

Law, 249, 472, 479, 481, 516, n. 5, 517, 518. 

Lead, in ritual, 385, 397 ; representing in 
Rajasuya the head of Namuci, 341 ; used 
for cleansing purposes, 383. 

Leader god, see Netr. 

Leaves, used in lieu of ladles, 56, n. 3. 

Leibnitz, G. W., German philosopher 
(A.D. 1646-1716), 635. 

Lemuria, character of, in contrast with 
Parentalia, 51. 

Letting loose of bull (vr§oisarga), ceremony, 
865. 

Levirate, in India (for Hebrew usage, see 
Scheftelowitz, Archiv f, Iteligionswissen^ 
sekaftf xviii, 250 ff.), 248, n. 3, 419, 423. 

Leviticus, on sin offerings, 281 . 

Liberation, see Salvation, 

Licchavis, in Buddhist texts, 36. 

Life of Vedic tribes, 8, 9 ; see also Long life. 

Light (jyotis), 479, 523, 524. 

Lightning, as' divine, 157, 168, 169, 190, 225, 
226, 372, 381, 517, 518. 

Like as known by like, Greek doctrine of 
(Inge, Plotinus, i. 137-9 ; Empedokles, 
frag. 109), 605, n. 3. 

Lion, 151 ; well known in the Rigveda, 23 ; 
hair of, 353. 

Lioness, 399. 

Lithuanian religion, 86, 87, 89, 40, 45, 57, 
64, 117, 140, n. 6, 141, 360, 627, 

Little Iliad, 636. 



656 


Qenercd Index 


Living and the dead, relations of, 425-7. 

Lizard’s head, as magic ingredient, 397. 

Logic, 482, 506 ; theory of Greek origin of 
Indian, 612, 613. 

Logos, 438, 610, 611. 

Lohitaksa, spirit, 242. 

Lokayata, materialistic system, 505. 

Loki, Teutonic deity, 123, 138, n. 4, 
162, n. 1. 

Long-haired man, used for menial functions 
in ritual, at Vajapeya, 389 ; at Rajasuya, 
341. 

Long-headed, Indo-Europeans supposed by 
some authorities to be, 12, 618, 634- 

Long life, desire for, 349, 463, 480. 

Lopamudra, wife of Agastya, 401. 

Lotus theft, story of the, 395, 

Love of god, see bhakii. 

Lunar mansions, see Naksatras. 

Lu^a, priest, 156, 251, 470. 

Lust, see Desire. 

Luvian, language (CAH. ii. 253), 617. 

Lycian religion, Hephaistos in, 626, n. 5. 

Lying-in women, taboos regarding, 300. 

Macrocosm and microcosm (cf. v. Negelein, 
Weltanschauung^ p. 57), 452, 486, 553, 558, 
589, 602. 

Madhuka flowers, 874. 

Madhyamika, school of Buddhism, 512. 

Madness, caused by the Gandharvas and 
Apsarases, 182, 636, 

Magadha, country, 92, 337, 351, 385, 496. 

Magadha, man of Magadha, 402. 

Maghavan, the bounteous, Indra as, 132. 

Magic in ritual, Chap, 22 ; relations of magic 
to religion, 379, 380; nature of Vedic 
magic, 380^2 ; removal of hostile influ- 
ences, 382-6 ; of sin, 260-4 ; sacrifice, 
396-401 ; spell, 393-6, 524. 

Magic powers possessed in state of ecstasy, 
612. 

Magicians, 399. 

Magoi, 40, 47, 48, 51, 286, n. 2, 398, n. 3, 
614, 615, 626 ; alleged non-Iranian 
character of, 39, n. 3. 

Mahabharata, 20, 29, 112, 545, 618, n. 8. 

Mahadeva, Mahan Deva, name of Rudra, 
143, n. 6, 144, 

Mahadeva, spirit, 242. 

Mahanamni verses, 371, 490. 

Mahanarayana Upanisad, 499, 500, 515, 
528, 545, 550, 578, n * 3. 

Maharaja, spirit, 242. 

Mahasena, disease demon, 242. 


Maha Upanisad, 501. 

Mahavira, Jain saint, 619. 

Mahe^vara, name of Rudra, 549. 

Mahi, deity, 173. 

Mahidasa, sage, 523, n. 1, 

Mainads, 606. 

Maitravaruna, priest, 253, 296, 298, 315, 324, 
326, 328, 333, 335, 384, 

Maitrayai?.! Saihhita, 17, 86, 99, 208, 212, 
475. 

Maitraya^iiya Grhya Sutra, 429. 

Maitrayaniya Upanisad, 500, 501, 514, 527, 
530, 540, 545, 549, 553, 555, 560, 561, 565, 
590, 591. 

Maitreyi, wife of Yajhavalkya, 515, 516, 582, 
595.* 

Maize, human sacrifice in Mexico before 
eating, 323, n. 1. 

Makha, demon, 68, 112, 213, 226, 266, n. 7, 
381. 

Makkhali Gosala, ascetic teacher, 551. 

Maleficent aspects of nature as personified 
as demons, 236. 

Malevolence, of Rudra, 143, 144. 

Malimluca, demon, 240. 

Mana (cf. Nilsson, Archiv f. Religions- 
wissenschaftysxii. 379 ff. ; Preuss, xxi. 171, 
314), 48, 44, 380, n. 4, 446. 

Manann, Celtic deity, 229, n. 1, 

Manava Dharma Sutra, 30. 

Manava Grhya Sutra, 28, 242. 

Manava ^rauta Sutra, 28. 

Manda, language (on the name, cf . Friedrich, 
Streitberg-Fesischnft, p. 306, n. 2), 617. 

Mandukeyas, Vedic family, 196. 

Mandukya Karika, 531, 637, n. 8 ; see also 
Gaudapada. 

Mandukya Upanisad, 500, 501, 503, 545, 
570. 

Manes, see Fathers. 

Manifold origin and character of Agni, 157. 

Maoism, 42, n. 3, 43, 

Manitou, 43. 

Mannus, Germanic ancestor, 229, n. 1, 620. 

Man-slaying, epithet of Rudra, 143. 

Man-tiger, 197. 

Mantra Brahmana, 490, n. 3. 

Manu, 24, 72, 82, 111, 112, 113, 176, 198, 
200, 620, 621, 622 ; as Gramani, ancestor 
of Vai 9 yas, 317. 

ManiiSak, Iranian hero, 620. 

Manyu, wrath deified, 124, 210. 

Mapongas, custom of the, 351, n. 3. 

Mara, in Buddhism, 502. 

Marga 9 lrsa, festival in, 362. 



General Index 


657 


Marduk, Babylonian god, 81, n. 2. 

Mare form of Saranyu, 38, 198 ; of VSc, 
199, n. 7. 

Marica, as gazelle, 130, n. 4. 

Marka, demon, 232, 329, 457. 

Marking of cattle, ceremony, 365. 

Marriage ceremonies, 111, 115, 138, 184, 
278, 373-8 ; of sun and earth in ritual, 
351, 352. 

Marriage hymn, 14, 138, 170, 256. 

Mars (as god of lusiratio, Schwenn, Archivf. 
Religionswissenschoft, xxii, 241 f.), 38 ; 
Silvanus, 147. 

Marsyas, as an ass, 267, n. 2. 

Martanda, the eighth Aditya, 99. 

Martyava, spirit, 214. 

Martyumjaya, spirit, 214. 

Marudvrdha, river, 151. 

Maruta fastra, 315. 

Maruts, gods, 3, 38, 67, 71, 81, 87, 91, 92, 
124, 126, 127, 134, 139, 143, 150-3, 154, 
156, 157, 158, 161, 168, 176, 192, 198, 210, 
215, 222, 255, 265, 275, 280, 315, 321, 322, 
331, 342, 360, 365, 396, 406, 455, 470. 

Maruttas, Kassite god, 618, n. 2. 

Marutvatiya fastra^ of the Hotr, 330. 

Ma 9 aka ^rauta Sutra, 28. 

Masyanik, in Iranian legend, 620. 

Massagetae, sun worship among the, 104. 

Matali, Indra's character, 139. 

Matari^van, god, 88, 112, 138, 139, 156, 162, 
n. 1, 163, 164, 166, 206, 221, 222, 226, 228, 
315, 407, 435. 

Materialism, 525, 531, 541, 546, 550, 558 ; 
in Parmenides, 636. 

Materials of the fraiita sacrifice, 278-85 ; 
for domestic offerings, 359. 

Mathara, 505. 

Mathara-Vrtti, 504, 505. 

Mathava Videgha, fosters Aryan fire cult, 
38, 158. 

Mathematics, 488, 607, 635. 

Matsya Sammada, King of fish people, 196, 
n. 4. 

Matsyas, people, 196, 496. 

Matter, see prakrti and hhutani ; cf. mdtrd, 

Maujavata, epithet of Soma, 169. 

Mazdaku, 615, 616. 

Mead, 172, 624, and see madhu» 

Meal, as a sacrifice, 270, 360, 361. 

Meat eating, in Vedic India, 191, 192. 

Medhatithi Kanva, Apri hymn of, 165. 

Medhyatithi, seer, 227. 

Mediation, sacrifice as mode of, between 
gods and men, 275-8. 

22 [n.o.s. 32] 


Medicine, 398, 399. 

Medicine man, as prototype of deity, 49. 

Mekala, Melaka, country, 632. 

Memorial mound to dead, erection of, 421, 
629. 

Memory, 563 ; and see smriL 

Men as deities, 50 ; see also Chap. 14. 

Mena, of Vrsana 9 va, applied to Indra, 125. 

Menaka, Apsaras, 184. 

Mercy, see Compassion. 

Merit, see punya. 

Mesopotamia, influence on India, 25, 26, 
624, 634. 

Messenger, Agnias, 159 ; Nara 9 ahsa as, 165. 

Metempsychosis, see Transmigration. 

Meteor as a Raksas, 238. 

Methu, fxiOv, 172, 624. 

Metre (for an implausible theory see Leu- 
mann, K2. lii.), 6, 16, n. 2, 255, 499, 500. 

Metru, Assyrian term, 101, n. 4. 

Mexican religion, 277, 323, n. 1, 329, n. 1. 

Midland, definition of the Aryan, 634, n. 2. 

Midrassil, Mitanni name of Mitra, 617. 

Milindapanha, 558, 563. 

Milk, in ritual, 167, 171, 254, 278, 310, 332, 
336, 353, 355, 420 ,* as madku, 167 ; 
cooked, placed in the raw cow by Indra, 
132. 

Milk pails, Todas’ worship of, 269, n. 5. 

Milky way, Sarasvati as, 173, n. 4, 202, n.4. 

Millet, offered, 323, 366, 381 ; theory of 
Soma as, 172, n. 1. 

Millstone, possibly deified, 189, n. 6. 

Mimetic magic, 388-90. 

Mimi, parallel with Trita, 135. 

Mimic raid, by king at Rajasuya, 342. 

Mind (manas), 122, 210, 436, 443, 444, 453, 
455, 467, 472, 484, 486, 517, 518, 537, 539, 
553, 554, 555, 556, 557, 559, 563, 565, 612. 

Mingling of races and cultures as affecting 
religion, 51-5. 

Minoan religion, see Aegean religion. 

Minoans, probably pre-Hellenic (cf., how- 
ever, Bury, CAH. ii. 475 f. who makes 
Minos an Achaean), 628, n. 5, 629. 

Minos (on etym. as possibly Indo-European, 
cf. Giintert, Der arische Weltkonig, pp. 
380 ff,), 229, n. 1. 

Miraculous birth of Indra, 125. 

Mirror, used in marriage ritual, 374. 

Miscarriage, magic rite to remove ill effects 
of a, 385. 

Misers, see Faijis. 

Misery, see duhkha. 

Mitanni, gods of the, 5, 33, 38, 54, 87, n. 2, 



658 


General Index 


90, 101, n. 5, 114, lir, 133, 161, 202, n. 2, 
617. 

Mithra, Iranian god, S3, 34, 104, 107, 614, 
619. 

Mitra, god, 5, 33, 34, 58, 60, 67, 83, 86, n. 8, 
87, 90, 93, 96-8, 104, 105, 127, 133, 141, 
157, 161, 166, 167, 182, 189, 199, 200, 215, 
217, 246, 280, 296, 327, 328, 329, 331, 353, 
355, 387, 435, 617, 620. 

Mitravaruna, 220. 

Mixed forms of demons, 225, 237. 

Mixed marriages, as factor in caste, 23, 

Moabite stone, writing parallel to that of 
India, 26. 

Mode of wearing hair, altered at marriage, 
378. 

Modes, Spinoza’s, 530, 637. 

Modes of thought and categories, 482-8. 

Modogalinga, people, 633, n. 1. 

Moellendorff, U. von Wilamowitz-, views 
cited, 634, 635, 636, 637. 

Moira, fate in Greek religion (CAH. ii. 623), 
85. 

Mola salsa, sprinkled on victim, 270, 325, 
n, 2. 

Moles, occasional worship of, 63, 194, 322, 
334, 367. 

Moleskin, as aid to detecting sorcerers, 397. 

Momentary gods, Usener’s theory of, 44, 45. 

Mon-Khmer languages, 11, 634, n. 1. 

Mongolian influence on Indian religion, 36. 

Mongolian offering to the sun, 287, n. 3. 

Monism, 494. 

Monkey form of Indra, 133. 

Monkey god, 192, 631. 

Monotheism, alleged early (cf. K. Th. Preuss, 
Die hOchste Goitheit hei den kuUurarmen 
Vdlkern (1922) ; Meinhof, Archiv f, 
Religionswissenschaft, xxii. 179), 626, n. 4. 

Monsoon, 109, 127, 128 ; Hanumant as the, 
192. 

Months and half months, offerings to, 201 . 

Moon (cf, V. Negelein, Weltanschauung, 
pp. 42 ff.), 34, 81, 123, 133, 134, 136, 137, 
147, n. 3, 164, 165, 170, 171, 172, 179, 181, 
183, 199, 211, 235, 274, 284, 332, 409, n. 1, 
416, 577, 622 ; and spirits, 165 ; and 
tides, 122 ; offerings, 213. 

Moon phases, worship of, 199, 201, 355. 

Moon-stations, see Naksatras. 

Morals, 83, 84, 95, 97, 99, 101, 105, 133, 139, 
141, 145, 158, 161, 168, 215, 216, 233, 
244-9, 251, 264-8, 380, 468-75, 494, 
584-9, 594, 596, 597, 598. 

Morning and evening star, 118. 


Mothers, as a class, like the Fathers, 429, 
598 ; as demonesses or patron goddesses, 
149. 

Mothers of Indra, Tvastr’s daughters as, 
205. 

Mountain tops, worship on, 39. 

Mountains, as divine, 143, 147, 169, 176, 182, 
184, 187, 188, 199, 213 ; see also Parvata. 
Mouth, as organ, 575, 576. 

Movements, 556, 557: 

Mrda, name of Rudra, 144, n. 8, 146. 

Mrga, constellation, 146, 208. 

Mrga9iras, constellation, 146, 

Mrgavyadha, constellation, 146, 208. 
Mrtyu, death, 408. 

Mroka and Anumroka, demons, 239. 
Mudgala, Vedic seer, 191. 

Mujavants, people, 322, 385. 

Mufljavant, mountain home of Soma, 169. 
Mula, Naksatra, 392. 

Mundaka Upanisad, 499, 500, 503, 522, n. 6, 
528, 537, 538, 545, 577, 578. 

Mundas, 11, 632. 

Muijda-speaking tribes, 11, 632-4. 

Muni, ecstatic ascetic, 301, 402, 618. 
Munimarana, 458. 

Murder, 477, 480 ; see also Killer. 

Music, 258. 

Mysticism, 598, 599, 600. 

Myth and cult, 48, 354. 


Nabhanedistha, sage, 61, 229. 

Naciketas, student, 250, 348, 440, 441, 499, 
572, 573. 

Naga clans, Pancalas supposed to represent, 
23, n. 1. 

Nagas, kind of demon, 197. 

Nagnajit Gandhara, authority on the fire 
cult, 354. 

Naigamesa, demon, 242. 

Naighantuka, 87, 105, 136, 137, 141, 199, 
216, 228. 

Nails, in magic, 387. 

Nairuktas, authorities on etymology, 86, 87, 
156. 

Nairyosanha, Iranian, 165, 448. 

Nakedness, in ritual, 388. 

Naksatras, 4, 25, 79, 179, 189, 201, 208, 213, 
21*8, 428 ; offerings to, 368. 

Namas, homage, as above the gods, 261. 

Nambudiris, 631. 

Name (cf. v. Negelein, Weltanschauung, 
p. 83), 391, 394 ; see naman and ndmarupa» 

Names of child, 368. 



General 

Names of certain objects, altered for 
reasons of taboo, 373. 

Namuci, demon, 68, 80, 130, 131, 221, 231, 
236, 341, 389, 400, n. 2, 427, n. 1, 458, 
470. 

Naonbaithya, Iranian Nasatya, 117, 232. 
Narada, sage, 493, 513, 517. 

Nara^ansa, god, 106, 122, 138, 160, 163, 
164-6, 313, 320, 349. 

NSra^ansa cups, 329, 330, 448, 460. 
Nara 9 ansa fire, 254. 

Nara^ansis, verses, 400. 

Narayana, god, 17, n. 3. 

Narayaiia, list of Upanisads, 501, n. 2. 
Narmedha Saman, 335. 

Nasattiyana, Mitanni name of Nasatya, 617. 
Nasatya, name of A§vins, 5, 38, 87, n. 2, 114, 
117, 133, 232. 

Naiura naturans, 436. 

Natura naturata, 436, 

Naturalism, as source of religion, 42, n. 3, 
43. 

Nature, Prakrti, in Sanikhya, 483, 5i0, 
532-5, 559, 562, 604. 

Nature and characteristics of Vedic magic, 
380-2. 

Nature of the aead, 403-5. 

Nature worship, as source of religion, 42-5, 
626. 

Naubandhana, place of descent of Manu’s 
ship, 229. 

Naudhasa Saman, 335. 

Navagvas, priests, 224. 

Necessity, as final principle, 550, 551. 
Necromancy, unknown in Vcdic ritual, 392. 
Need fire, 155, n. 1. 

Negritos, as element in Indian population, 

634. 

Nejamesa, demon, 242. 

Nemesa, demon, 242. 

Neo-Platonists, 611, 612, 636. 

Nerthus, Teutonic earth deity, 400, n. 6. 
Nestr, priest, 91, 205, 294, 296, 298, 328, 
330, 339. 

Net, of Indra, 124. 

Netr, leader god, 206. 

New-born child, impure or innocent, 478. 
New moon and full moon offerings (darga- 
puTna’-mdsesti)^ 319-21, 361. 

Newton, Isaac, scientist (a.d. 1642-1727), 

635. 

New Year, Dawn as goddess of, 155, n. 2 ; 

domestic ritual festival of, 362. 

Night, 80, 130, 131, 279, 428 ; as time of 
activity of Raksases, 237. 

22 * 


Index 659 

Night walkers, spirits as, 214. 

Nihilistic school of Buddhism, 510, 512, 513. 

Nin Ella, mother of waters, 173, n. 4. 

Nine, as sacred number of Indo-Europeans, 
41, 86, 116, n. 2, 420, n. 6. 

Nirrti, deity, 211, 212, 245, 266, 267, 279, 
324, 341, 383, 400, 408, 475. 

Nirukta, by Yaska, 20, 86, 177, 578. 

Nirvana (cf. L. de la Vallee Poussin, Nirvana 
(1925), 541. 

Nisadas, aborigines, 11, n. 2, 146, n. 4, 298, 
299, 330, 634. 

Niskevalya ^^-stra, of the Hotr, 168, 330, 
331, 335. 

Nistigri, mother of Indra, 125. 

Nivartana, Sondergott, 64. 

Nobility of office versus birth, 481, n. 10. 

Nodhas, seer, 458. 

Noise, 439 ; used to scare demons, 384. 

Non-injury, see ahinsd. 

Nordic race, 618, 628, n. 5. 

Norse mythology, cosmic giant in, 81, 619. 

North, Rudra in the, 145. 

North-eastern quarter, 375, 397 ; door of 
heaven in the, 411. 

Nose, 553, 554, 579. 

Noseless, Nisadas as, 11, 634. 

Not-bcing, 483, 485, 519, 625, 637, n. 8. 

‘ Not so’, as definition of absolute, 491, 506, 
521. 

Nous, in Anaxagoras, 544, n. 6, 611 ; of 
Aristotle, 507 ; of Epicharmos, 554. 

Nrmani, demon, 240. 

Nrsihhottaratapaniya Upanisad, 570. 

Number, of deities, 35 ; of wives permitted 
to members of differenv castes, 373. 

Numbers, 222, 484, 544, 604, 605, n. 4 ; 
3X7: 150; 3x60 : 150; 99: 234 ; 
1,100 : 236 ; 100,000 : 236 ; and see 

Three, Five, Seven, Nine, Thousand. 

Numerals, Mitanni type (aika is pre-Vedic, 
satta post-Vedic ; probably na is by 
haplology ; they are at least as probably 
Aryan as Indian, and may even be proto- 
Iranian), 617. 

Nyarbudi, a demon, 400. 

Nyaya, philosophy, 545. 

Oak, and lightning, 37 ; god of the, 141. 

Oath (cf. Laseh, Der Eid (1908) ; Petersen, 
Der Eid bei den Semite n (1914) ; F. 
Schwenn, Archiv /. Religions^nssenschafl, 
XX. 304-8), 268, 392, 395, 396. 

Obi men, 398, n. 3. 



General Index 


660 

Objects of sense (ariha), 519, 553, 554, 556 , 
557. 

Obscene language, in ritual, 345, 346, 351 . 

Ocean, deity, 97, 115, 174, 175, 213. 

October horse, at Rome, 346. 

Odin, Norse deity, 193, 619, 620. 

Odour {gandha), 554, 556, 557. 

Odras, not in Vedic texts, 23, n. 3. 

Offering post (yUpa), 66, 67, 185. 

Offerings to animals, 197, 323, 362, 364, 365 ; 
to Raksases, 145. 

Offerings to the dead, in the domestic ritual, 
427-9 ; in the frauta ritual, 429-32. 

Oldenberg, H., judgement of Indian philo- 
sophy, 599, n. 1 ; views of, cited, passim, 

OUae, revered by Arval Brethren, 269, n. 5, 

Omens, 366, n. 1, 390, 391, 

Omentum, 280, 281, 345, 363. 

Omophagia, not practical in India, 476. 

Ophthalmic sleeplessness, Indra’s, 205. 

Opposition to worship of Indra, 125, n. 7, 
433. 

Ordeal, 392, 393. 

Orenday among Huron, 446. 

Organs of sense {indriya)^ 537, 553, 554, 550, 
557. 

Orgiastic cult, 150, 158. 

Orgiastic traits of fiva, 150. 

Origin of gods, 82. 

Origin of man, 82, 83, 229, 230. 

Origin of religion, 42-51. 

Origin of the world, 80, 619-21. 

Original home of Indo-Europeans, in cold 
climate, 162, 618 ; that of Kurgan 
dwellers east of Dnieper, 628, 629. 

Orion, as saevus, 146. 

Orphic hymn, 602. 

Orphic movement (cf. Kern, Orpheus, 1920), 
602, 636. 

Osiris, god of Nile and fertility (Breasted, 
Dev, of Religion in Anc, Egypt, pp. 18 ff.), 
187. 

Ostara, Teutonic deity, 121. 

Otos and Ephialtes, Greek giants, 234. 

Ouranos, Greek deity, 38, 100, 101, 104. 

Over-population of the earth, 622, 

Owl, as bird of omen (cf. for Greece, 
A. Kiock, Archivf. Religionswissenschaft, 
xviii. 127-33), 193, 391, 392 ; demons as, 
237 ; offered to Nirrti, 324. 

Ox, 279, 324 ; cosmic and mystical, 444, 
445, 477, 619, n. 4. 

Pada Patha, of Rigveda, 20. 

Paidva, possibly the sun-horse, 191. 


Pain (duhkha), 556, 557. 

Paingi Upanisad, 501. 

Pairs, 87, 89- 
Pai9aca marriage, 373. 

Paigaci language, 73. 

Pakudha Kaccayana, doctrines of, 611. 
Pali, alleged origin of, 21, n. 2. 

Pahcalas, people, 22, 23 ; origin of name, 
196, n. 7. 

Pahcavih§a Bralimana, 17, 19, 227, 349, 477, 
491. 

Pancavih9a Stoma, 319, 350, 351. 
Pandavas, and Kurus, 21. 

Panini, 20, n. 1, 30, 488, 502, 541, 547, 602. 
Panis, enemies of the gods, 7, 38, 123, 192, 
223, 234, 243, 266. 

Pantheism, 510, 511, 512, 523, 524, 531, 552, 
595. 

Papas, Phrygian Zeus, 36, n. 4. 
Paramahahsa Upanisad, 589, n. 4. 
Paramartha, version of commentary on 
Samkhya Karika, 504. 

Paraskara Grhya Sutra, 28, 213. 

Paravrj, cured by the Alvins, 116. 

Pardon, for sin, 244-8. 

Parendi, Avestan deity, 65, 211. 

Parentage, various forms of cosmic, 80, 
81. 

Parentalia, character of, in contrast with 
Lemuria, 51. 

Parents, duties to, 480. 

Pariksit, King, 400, n. 11, 618, n. 7. 
Parinah, place, 352. 

Pariplava Akhyana, at horse sacrifice, 344. 
Parjanya, god, 86, 93, 95, 99, n. 2, 120, n. 4, 
139, 140, 141, 213, 214, 221, 290, 321, 360, 
365, 441. 

Parmenides, Greek philosopher (6th cent. 

B.C.), 509, n. 1, 530, 603, 613, 636, 637. 
Parnaya, an enemy of Indra, 129. 

Parnians, 7. 

Parrot, jaundice transferred to a, 386. 
Par9U, possibly Iranian name, 7. 

Par9va, Par9vanatha, alleged date of, as the 
founder of Jaina philosophy, 20, 619. 
Parsni, goddess, 186, 366. 

Parthava, alleged Iranian reference, 7. 
Parthian invasions of India, 64. 

Parting of hair of pregnant women, 
ceremony, 367, 

Parts of the soul, 554-67. 

Parvata, mountain as god, 187. 

Parvati, goddess, 144. 

Pa9adyumna Vayata, sacrificer, 251. 
Pa9upati, god. 111, 112, 362. 



General Index 


661 


Passions, 581 ; see also Desire. 

Paths, Pusan’s connexion with, 106, lOT. 

Patrapani, demon, 240. 

Patricide, of Indra, 125. 

Paurnamasi, offerings to, 201. 

Payasi, King, 551. 

Pedu, recipient of a steed from the A 9 vins, 
116. 

Pehrkon, Lettish deity, 140, n. 4. 

Pelops, death of, 119, n. 5. 

Penance, see Asceticism. 

Penis, as organ, 55'?'. 

Pentheus, origin of legend of, 48, 612. 

People, plundered by the king, 151, n. 1. 

Perception (pratyaksa)^ 453, n. 5, 482, 559, 
560, 564. 

Performers of the sacrifice, 280-99. 

Perfumes, offered to Brahmans for the dead, 
427. 

Periodic destruction of universe by fire, 520. 

Perjury, see Truth. 

Perkunas, Lithuanian deity, 37, 140, n. 4, 
141. 

Persian influence on court of Candragupta, 
306, n. 3 ; see also Iranian religion. 

Persian religion, 39, 626, and see Iranian 
religion. 

Personal deity, 509, 511, 626. 

Personality of deities, development of, 45 ; 
of the absolute, 522, n. 6. 

Perun, Slav god, 140, n. 4, 141. 

Pessimism, not early Vedic, 581. 

Pestle and mortar, used in pressing Soma, 
167. 

Petavatthu, 29, 74. 

Phaidros, of Plato, chariot metaphor in, 609, 
n. 4, 613. 

Phallic worship, 10, 56, 129, 148, 632, n. 3. 

Pharmakoi, scapegoats (ef. Wissowa, Archiv 
f. Heligionswissenschaft, xxii. 21), 263. 

Pherekydes, Greek poet (c. 540 b.c.), 606. 

Philo, Jewish philosopher (c. 30 b.c.-a.d. 50 ; 
cf. on his Logos, Inge, Plotinus, i. 98), 610. 

Philolaos, Pythagorean philosopher (5th 
cent. B.C.), 608, 634, 635. 

Philosophical hymns, in the Rigveda, 2, 14. 

Philosophical myths, 60. 

Philosophy of the Veda, see Contents, Part V* 

Phlegyai, 38, 226. 

Phraortes, sense of name, 616, n. 1. 

Phrygian religion, 620. 

Physical paternity, sense of pater in Roman 
religion, 96, 626. 

Physicians of the gods, Alvins as, 115. 

Piercing of skin of cow, as rain spell, 351. 


Pig, not offered in sacrifice, 279. 

Pigeon, as bird of omen, 193, 383, 892. 

Pigmy size of mind, 404, 

Piling of the fire, 271, 282, 352, 354-6, 364, 
397, 440, n. 1, 465-7. 

Pindar, Greek lyric poet, eschatology of, 
609, n. 3. 

Pipru, Asura, 130, 231, 236, 

Pi 9 acas, demons, 73, 74, 76, 91, 180, n. 9, 
181, 238, 239, 384, 386, 414, 478, n. 8, 610. 

Pits, and dead, 411. 

Pity, see Compassion. 

Places of the dead, 406-15. 

Plaksa Prasravana, offering at the, 352. 

Planets (cf. v. Negelein, Weltanschauung, 
p. 126), 79, 108, n. 4, 200, 201, 416, n. 2, 
528, n. 9, 635. 

Plant demons, 239, 240. 

Plant life, influenced by the moon (for epic, 
cf. Meyer, Das Weib im altind. Epos, 
p. 353 ; V. Glasenapp, Hinduismus, 
p. 49), 170. 

Plants (osadhayah), 34, 64, 184, 225, 523, 
526, 631 ; and souls of the dead, 415. 

Plato, Greek philosopher (b.c. 427-347), 
526, 602, 605, n. 4, 613, 620, n. 1, 635, 636, 
637. 

Pleasure (sukha), 520, n. 7, 521, n. 5, 550, 
556, 557. 

Pleiades, 202, 416, n. 2. 

Plotinus, Neo-Platonist (a.d. 204-70), 599, 
611. 

Plough festival, 390. 

Ploughshare, deity, 64, 188. 

Plurality of selves, 536. 

Poison, 150 ; sent by Rudra, 144 ; to 
produce ecstasy, 402. 

Poison ordeal, 393. 

Polar dawn, theory of a, 122, n. 1. 

Pole star, in marriage ritual, 4, 375 ; 
worship of, 202. 

Political theory, 480, 481, 600. 

Polyandry, apparent in case of marriage of 
Surya, 119, n. 5. 

Polydaemonism, 204, n. 1, 

Polynesian influence on India, 634. 

Pool of youth, 116, 

Popular and hieratic religion, 55-7, 

Porcupine quill, used by bride, 367, 374. 

Porphyry, Neo-Platonist (a.d. 232-301 ), 612. 

Porridge, as cosmic principle, 275, 445, 

Portents, 392. 

Poseidon, Greek god (on derivation Rorci Aas; 
Kretschmer, Ilnn-Aa (Aaov); Hoffmann, 
see R. Loewe, KZ. li. 219 f.), 469, n, 4. 



662 


General Index 


Possession by evil spirit, modes to remove, 
S85. 

Post, sacriiBicial (yupa), 234, 264,. 324, 325, 
334. 

Potr, priest, 252, 294, 296, 297, 298, 328. 

Pourucista, daughter of Zoroaster, 615. 

Power, holy, see Brahman. 

Prthi Vainya, King, 355, 

Prthivi, goddess, 86, 87, 95, 145, 197, 622, 
n. 4 ; see also Earth. 

Pr9ni, goddess, 151, 198. 

Prsataka, offering and deity, 362. 

Prabhus, class of Rbhus, 176. 

Prahrada Kayadhava, an Asura, 232. 

Prajapati, god, 24, 65, 68, 84, n. 3, 86, 88, 
96, n. 5, 101, 105, 111, 122, 125, 146, 192, 
196, 213, 218, 233, 324, 345, 346, 347, 350, 
359, 363, 376, 393, 396, 428, 437, 442-4, 
449, 450, 454, 455, 456, 464, 465, 466, 467, 
469, 470, 471, 473, 479, 480, n. 6, 481, 482, 
486, 506, 510, 517, 524, 525, 539, 554, 560, 
573, 581, 583, 610, 613, 635, n. 9. 

Prakritic languages, origin of, 52. 

Prakrits, 233, 238. 

Pramr9ant, demon, 240, n. 6. 

Pra9astr, priest, 252, 253, 294, 296. 

Pra9na Upanisad, 500, 501, 525, 537, 545, 
552, 568, 577, 578, 581. 

Prasaha, wife of Indra, 125, 219. 

Prastotr, priest, 297, 298, 814. 

Pratardana, King, 584. 

Pratidar9a Qvaikna, sacrificer, 320, n. 1. 

Pratihartr, priest, 297, 298, 314. 

Pratiprasthatr, priest, 294, 295, 321, 326, 
330, 336, 371. 

Prati9akhyas, 488. 

Praxiga fastra, of the Hotr, 255, 315, 329. 

PravahaQa Jaivali, philosopher, 493. 

Prayer (for an implausible critique of RV. 
vii. 86, see v. Negelein, Weltanschauung, 
pp. 44~6), 65, 162-4, 310-12, 479, 480 ; 
and spell, 390, 

Predestination, 511 ; see also Determinism. 

Pre-Dravidians, 11, 632-4 ; see also Nisadas. 

Pregnant woman, funeral rite of a, 424, 627. 

Preparation of Soma, 166-8. 

Pressing stones (grdvan), 66, 167, 254. 

Priest, 223-7, 289-99 ; power to injure his 
patron or enemy, 312 ; see also Brahmans. 

Priesthood, 39, 40, 55-7, 58, n. 1, 72. 

Primitive matter, 438, 483, 510, 532-5 ; see 
also prakrti. 

Primitive savages, alleged, 42. 

Prince in exile, magic rite to restore, 387. 

Principles, Samkhya system of, 532-4. 


Priyamedha, seer, 227. 

Probe, used in medicine, 398. 

Problem and Conditions of Knowledge, 513- 
16. 

Procreation, 566, 567. 

Prodigies, 392, 

‘ Projection ’ theory of religion, 49. 
Prometheus, Greek hero, 138, 158, 162, n. 1, 
226, n. 5, 289, n. 2. 

Prostitution, disapproved, 585. 
Proto-Hittite, language (Sayce, JRAS. 

1924, pp. 245 ff.), 617. 

Prussian religion, 39. 

Prytaneia, sacred fires of the, 625. 
Pseudo-Hippokratean treatises, 602. 
Pseudo-Kallisthenes, 618, n. 9. 

Psychic apparatus, 405, and see Uhga, 
Public sacrifices, paucity of, 159, 258, 625. 
Pulindas, people, 632. 

Puloman, father of Qaci, 125. 

Punishment of crime, as a sacrifice, 348, 
n. 2. 

Punjab, 3, 91, 121, 127, 337, n. 3, 634, n. 2. 
Puramdhi, goddess, 211. 

Puranas, 111, 112. 

Purification, 141, 142, 383 ; see also Expul- 
sion of evil. 

Purohita, domestic priest, 159, 162, 227, 
253, 292, 293, 319, 341, 342, 363, 394, 481. 
Puru, Asura, 234. 

Purukutsa, wife of, 90. 

Pururavas, and Urva§i, 84, n. 3, 183, 200. 
Purus, people, 9 ; and Vaievanara, 164, 
n. 5. 

Purva Mimansa, 260, 505, 545, 574. 

Pusan, god, 63, 70, 81, 87, 92, 93, 105-8, 110, 
115, 125, 126, 142, 150, 166, 169, 170, 188, 
192, 205, 211, 219, 221, 264, 274, 280, 328, 
360, 364, 365, 374, 376, 400. 

Pusyamitra, King, 495. 

Put, hell, 580. 

Putting crop into the barn, Anagha wor- 
shipped on occasion of, 186. 

Pythagoras, Greek philosopher (6th cent. 

B.C.), and his school, 605-10, 634-7. 
Pythagorean theorem, 607, 635. 

Quail, saved from a wolf by the A9vins, 116, 
117. 

Quantity and quality, ideas of, distinguished 
by Anaxagoras, 635. 

Quarters, 213, 483, 486, 518, n. 7, 553, 561. 
Queen at Rajasuya (for a quasi-parallel, see 
V. Negelein, Weltanschauung, p. 93), 190, 

n. 7. 



General Index 


663 


Rbhuksan, leader of the Rbhus, 1T6. 

Rbhus,elves,38,93,168, 1T6-8, 255, 315,461. 

Rgvidhana, 382. 

Rji 9 van, son of Vidathin, protege of Indra, 

* 130. 

Rjra^va, saved by the A 9 vins, 116. 

;9>ksa, father of Saihvarana, 196. 

Rtu, seasons, 93, 178. 

Race at wedding of Soma and Shrya, 114, 
139. 

Races, mingling of, as religious factor, 51-5. 

Racing, in ritual, 339, 340. 

Rahasyu Devamalimluc, slayer of the Vai- 
khanasas, 129, n. 4, 458. 

Rahu, demon of eclipse, 235, 623. 

Raikva, sage, 496, n. 5, 505. 

Rain, 622, 623 ; see also Clouds ; and Soma, 
151, 169, 172, 176, 178. 

Rainbow, Gandharva as the, 181. 

Rain spells, 309, 310, 331, 351, 389. 

Rain water, as impure, 383. 

Raivata Saman, 350. 

Raj ana Saman, 352. 

Rajanyas, 92, 326, 341, 342, 481, 

Raka, goddess, 199, 201, 355. 

Raksasa, form of marriage, 373. 

Raksases, demons, 56, 73, 75, 76, 111, n. 1, 
158, 213, 237, 238, 241, 272, 281, 285^ 301, 
320, 324, 360, 382, 383, 384, 886, 414, 427, 
n. 1, 430, 457, 470, 472, 478, n. 8, 616. 

Raksasi, as house deity, 76. 

Ram, 359 ; of Medhatithi, Indra invoked as, 
131, n. 4. 

Rama, epic hero, 64, 92. 

Ramanuja, philosopher, 501, 508, 509, 512, 
596. 

Ramayana, 30. 

Ramman, Semitic deity, 222, n, 8, 

Rastrabhrt, Apsaras, 184. 

Rathakaras, caste, 298, 299, 316, 317. 

Rathakrt, 178. 

Rathantara Saman, 253, 335, 350, 351, 461, 
486. 

Ratri, night, 198. 

Real, 507, 519. 

Realism, 558, 559. 

Reasoning, 482, 484, 485 ; see also Know- 
ledge. 

Rebha', saved by the A 9 vins, 116. 

Rebirth in the consecration, 302 ; see also 
Transmigration. 

Recollection of previous births, 580, 609. 

Red, colour of Rudra, 145 ; connected with 
the dead, 143, n. 1 ; ochre, used in 
Kurgan burials, 628. 


Redemption of self in sacrifice, me Sacrifice. 

Reed arrow points in magic, 387, 395. 

Re-establishment of the fires (punarddheya), 
317, 318. 

Reinhardt, views cited, 635. 

Relations of magic to religion, 379 ; see also 
Magic and Sacrifice. 

Release, see Salvation. 

Remains of offerings, 275. 

Remedies, of Rudra, 143. 

Remembrance of former births, 580, 609. 

Removal of hostile influences by magic, 
382-6. 

Renewed death (cf. v. Negelein, Weltan- 
schauung, p. 96), 573, 583, n. 3. 

Renunciation, 515. 

Repeated death, see Renewed death. 

Repeating a formula backwards, 394. 

Repentance of sin, 244, 471 . 

Replacing of offering by butter, 334. 

Resignation, 598. 

Restoration of dead to life by Indra, 125, 
n. 7, 458. 

Restriction on nature of offerings, 258. 

Retribution, see karman. 

Ribaldry, in ritual, 258 ; at horse sacrifice, 
845, 346 ; at Mahavrata, 351. 

Rice, 323, 359, 366 ; not known to Rigveda, 
23. 

Riddles, 258 ; in Upanisads, 505, 506, 507. 

Right, see rta and dharma, 

Rigveda, 1-15, 16, 17, 23, 24, 33, 48-52, 53, 
58, 59, 60, 61, 63, 64, 68, 74, 77, 87, 88, 89, 
90, 91, 92, 97, 98, 111, 115, 119, 181, 134, 
135, 136, 137, 188, 140, 142, 143, 147, 150, 
155, 158, 159, 164, 166, 167, 169, 170, 171, 
176, 180, 181, 187, 188, 191, 192, 193, 199, 
210, 213, 227, 229, 230, 231, 237, 243, 245, 
249, 250, 252, 253, 254, 259, 260. 261, 272, 
n. 10, 275, 282, 283, 286, 290, 291, 294, 
295, 296, 297, 300, 301, 303, 316, 331, 332, 
347, 351,. 354, 371, 375, 391, 393, 402, 403, 
404, 405, 406, 409, 417, 420, 422, 423, 426, 
427, 428, 438, 443, 445, 446, 449, 451, 454, 
468, 479, 480, 483, 486, 490, 491, 515, 519, 
555, 570, 571, 575, 581, 616-19, 621, 622. 

Rinsing of the mouth by the sacrificer, 826, 
n. 1. 

Rites ancillary to the sacrifice ; the con- 
secration, 300-3 ; the Avabhrtha, 303, 
304 ; taboo, 304-10 ; form of prayer, 310, 

311. 

Ritual in the Rigveda, 252-6 ; in the later 
texts, 257-402 ; see Contents, 

Rivalry in sacrifice, 251. 



664 


General Index 


River, crosse4 by dead, 406, n. 9, 412 n. 

Rivers, as divine, 176, 213. 

Robbers, &c., Rudra as patron of, 144, 150. 

Robbery, marriage by, 375, n. 3. 

Robigus, dog offered to, 324, n. 4. 

Rock, cloud as, 157, 169. 

Rodasi, goddess, 151, 220. 

Rohini, constellation, 146, 170, 179. 

Roliita, deity, 209, 444, 467, n. 3. 

Roman de Roland, 618, n. 9. 

Roman religion, 36, 39, 45, 48, n. 3, 51, 53, 
57, 117, 121, 188, 258, 259, 260, n. 5, 
262, n. 2, 269, 270; n. 2, 273, n. 4, 274, 276, 
279, n. 5, 280, 281, n. 1, 283, 284, n. 2, 
286, n. 4, 289, 291, 318, n. 4, 325, n. 4, 329, 
n. 3, 346, 361, 376, 378, n. 1, 385, 418, 419, 
n. 5, 421, n. 2, 422, n. 5, 455, 626, 627, 
631, 

Royal consecration, see rdjasuya. 

Royal hair washing, 306. 

Rubbing, in ritual, 271, 272, 343, 367. 

Rudhikra, demon or enemy, 236. 

Rudra, god, 24, 46, 56, 57, 61, 69, 71, 81, 91, 
92, 105, 106, 110, 112, 137, 142-50, 153, 
156, 159, 188, 191, 192, 194, 199, 200, 208, 
214, 215, 221, 222, 229, 241, 242, 244, 257, 
272, 273, 287, 322, 331, 338, 355, 359, 864, 
383, 399, 410, n. 8,^97, 501, 510, 511, 525, 
527, 539, 549. 

Rudrani, wife of Rudra, 218, 364. 

Rudras, 81, 86, 143, 150-3, 222, 223, 270, 
455 ; see also Maruts. 

Rudriyas, 143. 

Ru 9 amas, people, 250 ; Kaurama, king of, 
400, n. 11. 

Qabala, ^abara, dog of Yama, 192, 406. 

5abali, deity, 191, n, 6, 456, n, 1 ; offering, 
456, n. 1. 

Qabara, 38 : and see Qabala. 

Qabarasvamin, on Mimahsa DarQana, 508, 
n. 5. 

Qaci, 81, 125, 219 ; Paulomni, wife of Indra, 
470. 

Qaka, uncertain sense of, 201, n. 1. 

Qaka invasions of India, 54. 

Qakadhuma, weather prophet, 201, n. 1, 
392. 

Qakalya, author of Pada Patha of Rigveda, 

20 . 

Qakalya, sage, 506, 517. 

Qakapuni, author, 164. 

Qakuntala, Apsaras, mother of Bharata, 184. 

Qakvara Saman, 253, 350. 

Qakvari, verses, 253, 309. 


Qakya, line, 21 ; alleged connexion with 
non-Aryan Scyths, 36. 

Qalakatenkata, spirit, 242. 

Qama, goddess, 186, 212, 366. 

Qambara, son of Kulitara, demon, 129, 131, 
236. 

Qambavya Grhya SQtra, 28, n. 3. 

Qamitr, priest, 253, 325. 

Qanai^cara, planet, 200, 

Qanda, Asura, 232, 329. 

Qandilya, sage, 354, 467, 576. 

Qankara, philosopher, 367, 501, 503, n. 0, 
504, 507, 508, 509, 512, 522, 531, 532, 
551, 552, 553, 558, 560, 571, 574, 578, 5^9, 
595, 596, 599. 

Qankara, name of Rudra, 144, n. 8, 146. 

Qankhayana Aranyaka, 490. 

Qahkhayana Grhya Sutra, 413. 

Qankhayana Qrauta Sutra, 347, 354, 476. 

Qahstr, priest, 252. 

Qarkara Qih^umara, dolphin, 129, 201, n. 

11 . 

Qarva, god, 35, n. 4, 92, 144, 147, 399. 

Qarvapi, wife of Qarva, 364. 

Qagin, as name of the moon, 122. 

Qatanika, King, 394. 

Qatapatha Brahmana, 17, 19, 22, 23, 25, 29, 
36, 86, 92, 96, 106, HO, 118, 116, 117, 144, 
148, 182, 188, 192, 193. 208, 226, 229, 242, 
298, 304, 833, 347, 354, 403, 404, 409, 410, 
414, 416, 417, 421, 443, 450, 451, 452, 453, 
457, 464, 466, 474, 479, 483, 495, 499, 517, 
573, 624. 

Qatarudriya litany, 144, 150, 215. 

Qatru, demon, 240. 

Qatrumjaya, spirit, 214. 

Qatyayana Brahmana, 18, n. 2. 

Qaunaka, on Qraddhas, 427. 

Qaundikeya, demon, 240. 

Qavasi, mother of Indra, 81, 125, 217. 

Qigrus, people, 196. 

Qi 9 u Angirasa, a seer, 458. 

Qitibahu, see Aisakrta. 

Qiva, god, 30, 76, 137, 144, 148, 149, 150, 209, 
362, 399, 525, 549, 623. 

Qiva, as style of the jackal, 150, n. 4, 

Qivasamkalpa section of Vajasaneyi 
Samhita, 452. 

Qraddhas, offerings to dead, 427-32. 

Qramanas, ascetics, 587, n. 7. 

Qrauta ritual, 55, 93, 149, 177, 287-9, 289- 
99, 313-57 {see Contents), 429-32, 607. 

Qrautarsi Devabhaga, sage, 482. 

Qrauta Sutras, 27, 28, 29. 

Qravap.a, snake offering in, 362. 



General Index 


666 


?rl, goddess, 212, 360, 479. 
fmti, offerings to, 213. 
fudras, fourth class in Vedic society, 23, 
67, 213, 298, 299, 351, 371, 373, 481, 496, 
634, n. 2. 

fukra, planet, 200. 
fukrajyotis, Marut, 153, n. 6. 
fuiba Sutra, 488, 607. 

^ulvana, spirit, 214. 
puna, as deity, 188. 

5unah9epa, legend of, 263, 282, 283, 341, 
n. 2, 348, 460. 

Qunakas, priestly family, 196. 
funamkuri, deity, 186, 366. 

Qunasirau, offering to, 323. 

Qunasiriya, Indra as, 323. 
gusna, demon, 130, 131, 227, 228, 231. 
gutudri, as deity, 172. 
gveta, genius, 362. 
gvetaketu, teacher, 488. 
gveta9vatara Upanisad, 499, 500, 510, 511, 
512, 514, 516, 524, 526, 528, 529, 531, 540, 
545, 549, 550, 552, 560, 579, 586, 589, 590, 
591, 

gyaita Saman, 335. 
gyama, dog of Yama, 192, 406. 
gyaparna Sayakayana, last offerer of human 
sacrifice, 282. 
gyena, spirit, 242, 

Saddar^anasamuccaya, 505. 

Sadvih9a Brahmaiia, 18. 

Sasthi, offering to, 360, n, 1, 

Sastitantra, 505, 544, n. 5. 
Sastitantroddhara-rupa, 505. 

Sacramental sacrifice, 268-78, 323, 326. 
Sacred marriage, 117, n. 3. 

Sacred places, worship of, 631. 

Sacred texts, not created by men, 482. 
Sacrifice, 40, 47, 48 ; as a gift, 257-60 ; as 
a spell, 260-4, 333, 356 ; attacked by 
Raksases, 238 ; communion and sacra- 
ment in the, 268-78 ; fire and, 285-9 ; 
materials of the, 278-85 ; of a god, 276, 
284, 332, n. 1, 019 ; performers of the, 
289-99 ; removal of sin by, 264-8 ; 
theory of, in the Brahmanas, 454-67, 
480 ; used in allegorical sense in doctrine 
of transrpigration, 575 ; view of, in 
Upanisads, 495, 514, 576, 577, 578; 
Visnuidentified with, 111 ; see also Magic, 
Sacrifice of Purusa and the origin of the 
world, 619-21. * 

Sacrificial grass (barhis), as divine, 189. 
Sadasaspati, deity, 213, 372. 

Sadasya, priest, 298. 


Sadhyas, ancient deities, 213. 

Sagara's wife, 196. 

Sages, as cosmic actors, 436. 

Sahampati, Buddhist epithet of Brahman 
(according to Przyluski, for Sabhapati), 
209. 

Sahasraksa, spirit, 213. 

Saint, see Salvation. 

St. Catherine, on God and the soul, 600. 

St. Paul, his doctrine of freedom from the 
law, 582, n. 6. 

Sakai, in Malay Peninsula, 11. 

Sakama9va Saman, 335, 

Salajya city, 407, n. 7, 484. 

Salavrkas, hyenas, 197, n. 1. 

Sale, as form of marriage, 375, n. 1. 

Salic law, name given under, 368. 

Salii, Roman, 39, 291. 

Salt, 323, 339, 341, 356, 370, 375, 386, 387 ; 
symbol of prosperity, 471 ; taboo on use 
of, 307. 

Salvas, people, 632. 

Salvation (moksa), way of, 581-4, 585-7. 

Salve from Trikakubh, 187, 188. 

Samagas, priests, 253. 

Samans, 16, 253, 314, 835, 372, 384, 519. 

Samanyas, priests, 253. 

Samas, Babylonian god, 222, n. 8. 

Samaveda, 1, 16, 17, 19, 52, 53, 402, 415, 438, 
490, 491, 519. 

Samavidhana Brahmana, 18, 382. 

Samhita Patha, of Rigveda, 20. 

Sainhita text, mystic speculations on, 491. 

Samkhya, philosophy, 437, 453, n. 3, 483, 
484, 494, 503, 504, 505, 509, n. 1, 510, 512, 
513, 526, 535-51, 553, 557, 559, 562, 565, 
n. 2, 578, 589, 590, 603, 604, 605, 607, n. 1, 
609, 611, 612. 

Samkhya Karika, 532, 533, 534, 544. 

Samkhya-Yoga philosophy, 20, 503, 543,544. 

Sammitiyas, Buddhist school, views on the 
soul, 547. 

Samtapana, class of Maruts, 215. 

Samudra, ocean, 174, 175. 

Samudragupta, emperor, 495. 

Samvarani, Manu, 229. 

Sanatkumara, 493, 513, 517 ; see also 
Skanda. 

Sandhi Stotra, 336. 

Sannyasa Upanisad, 578, n. 3. 

Saptada9a Stoma, 819, 350, 351. 

Saptavadhri, Atri, prot^gd of the A§vins, 
116, 227. 

Sarama, divine being, 62, 128, 142, 241. 

Sarameya, dogs of Yama, 128, n, 2, 192, 



666 


General Index 


Saranyu, daughter of Tvastr, 88, 62, 104, 
n. 1, 112, 115, 128, n. 2, 174, 198, 205, 229. 

Sarapis, Egyptian god, 620. 

Sarasvant, male counterpart of Sarasvati, 
173, 174, 321. 

Sarasvati, river, 8, 7, 151, 172, 174, 321, 
327, 331, 334, 353, 419, 422, n, 4, 459 ; 
offerings on the, 352 ; speech, 197, 199, 
200, 213, 280. ' 

Sarpa and Anusarpa, demons, 239. 

Sarsaparuiia, demon, 240. 

Sarvannabhuti, deity, 212, 360. 

Sarvastivadins, Buddhist school, 536, 548, 
550, 565, n, 5. 

Sarvavid, deity, 400, n. 5. 

Satire, alleged, in RV. x. 119, 132, n. 5 ; in 
Vrsakapi hymn (RV. x. 86), 133. 

Satis Chandra Vidyabhusana, view on 
Greek origin of Indian logic, 612, 613. 

Sattliitanta, mentioned in Jain texts, 505. 

Sattras, sacrificial sessions, 179, 290, 314, 
349-52. 

Satyajyotis, Marut, 153, n. 6. 

Satyakama, sage, 495, 496. 

Saubhara Saman, 335. 

Saudhanvana, a caste, 178. 

Saudhanvanas, epithet of the Hbhus, 176. 

Saura, planet, 200, n. 10, 528, n. 8. 

Saurva (^arva), Avestan demon, 35, n. 4, 
139, n. 2, 232. 

Savitr, god, 65, 80, 82, 92, 93, 96, 98, 105, 
106, 107, 157, 176, 187, 203, 205, 206, 207, 
215, 233, 265, 831, 370, 408, 590, 620. 

Savitri, goddess, 65, n. 4 ; offering to, 213 ; 
see also Sita. 

Savitri verse, 105, 369, 370. 

Savour, see Taste. 

Scale, as deciding fate of dead, 410, n. 8. 

Scapegoat, 263, 385. 

Scents {gandha), see Smell. 

Scepticism, 133, 243, 244. 

Schopenhauer, A., German philosopher 
(a. d. 1778-1860), 592, 599. 

Schrader, F. Otto, views cited, 560. 

Scotus, John Eriugena (Erigena), 600, n. 2. 

Scythian religion, 39. 

Sea, man likened to the, 523 ; see also 
Ocean. 

Sea foam, Namuci’s soul in, 131. 

Seasonal sacrifices, see Four-month sacri- 
fices. 

Seasons, offerings to, 201, and see !ptu. 

Secrecy, in the Upanisads, 489. 

Sectarian marks, use of, 28, n. 2, 370. 

Seed, and body, 566. 


Seers (rsi), and the sacrifice, 458, 459. 
Self-restraint, 480, 586, 587 ; see also 
Asceticism. 

Self-sacrificing instinct, in religion, 46. 
Selloi, of Dodona, 39. 

Semang, in Malay Peninsula, 11. 

Semites, and Sumerians, 10. 

Semitic influence, 25, 26, 41, 101, n. 4, 180, 
n. 1, 222, n. 8, 229, 268, 273, 274, 283, n. 2, 
290, n. 5, 303, n. 2, 304, n. 3, 388, n, 1, 
394, n. 3, 418. 

Sena, wife of Indra, 125, 219. 

Senses {indriya), 486, 518, 537, 553, 554, 

556, 557, 559, 560, 563, 564 ; and objects. 

557, 558. 

Sensual elements in religion, see Phallic 
worship and Sexual intercourse. 

Sensus communis, 563. 

Serpent of the deep, Ahi Budlinya, 136, 137. 
Serpents, theriomorphic forms of deities, 62, 
126, 127, 136, 139, 234, and see Snakes. 
Servants, see Slave and f udra. 

Sesame, offered, 359. 

Seven, number, 41, 79, 103, 105, 154, 162, 
334, 335. 

Seven day week, 103. 

Seven Hotrs, 201. 

Seven mothers of Skanda, 149. 

Seven rivers, 174. 

Seven Seers (j^ksas or Rsis), 20 1 , 226, 294, 41 6 . 
Seven steps, as bond of union, 98, 375. 
Seven worlds, 503. 

Sex, assimilation of, in case of victim, 280. 
Sex of future child, how foreseen, 391. 
Sexagesimal reckoning, 80. 

Sexual intercourse, in horse sacrifice, 345 ; 

in Mahavrata, 351 ; taboos of, 306, 307. 
Sexual union, Pravargya as allegory of, 333. 
Shadow of man, 404, 521 ; used in magic, 
389. 

Shaking, as a magic device, 384, 385, 

Shape of the various altar fires, 316. 
Sharp-horned bull, Soma as a, 168, 

Shaving, as a ceremonial rite, 305 ; of beard, 
369. 

Sheep, 254, 279, 324. 

Shooting stars, 416, n. 7. 

Shutting of eyes, 307. 

Sickle, heated to drive off demons, 383. 
Siddhas, offerings to the, 213. 

Sight (caksus), 453, 484, 553, 554. 

Silence, of Brahman priest, 297 ; taboo of, 
300, 306, 307, 308 ; vow of (cf. Arseniew, 
Archw f, Religionswissenschaft, xxii 
267 ff.), 608. 



General Index 


Silent death of the victimj 280, 281, 325. 

Silver, 23. 

Similes, in the Upanisads, 506. 

Sin, 95, 215, 245-9, 264-8, 310-12, 322, 477, 
527, 575, 576, 585, 586 ; caused by the 
Fathers or the gods, 477 ; divine re- 
sponsibility for human, 527, 586 ; ritual 
error as (cf. Latte, Archiv f. Religions* 
wissenschaftf xx. 256 ff., 269, 285), 478. 

Sin, Semitic deity, 100, n. 5, 222, n. 8. 

Sindhu, river, 174, 175. 

Sinivali, goddess, 199, 201, 355. 

Sinking of earth in ocean, 622, 

Sira, as deity, 188, 

Sisara, demon, 241. 

Sisyphos, alleged Vedic parallel to legend of, 
116, n. 1. 

Sita, deity, 64, 186, 212, 214, 365, 366. 

Sita Savitri, 128. 

Six-eyed, Nara^ahsa as, 165. 

Skambha., support as cosmic principle, 405, 
n. 3, 445, 452. - 

Skambha hymn of the Atharvaveda, 538. 

Skanda, god, 149, 150, n, 2, 242 ; see also 
Sanatkumara. 

Skin (tvac), as organ of touch, 554, 556, 557. 

Skins, in ritual, 67, 197, 268-8, 375. 

Skull, 150, 266, 267. 

Sky, 3, 34, 57, 61, 77, 78, 80, 82, 95, 132, 
486 ; see also Dyaus and Heaven. 

Slave, mode to prevent running away, 389 ; 
see also fudra. 

Slavonic religion, 37, 40, 121, n. 1, 140, n. 6, 
623, 627. 

Sleep, 245, 246, n. 3, 470, 475 ; as an evil, 
212; rite to induce, 388. 

Sleeping on ground, in ritual, 308, 420. 

Sleeplessness, banished to Trita Aptya, 385. 

Sloth, 471, 475, n. 3. 

Smadibha, a warrior, 228. 

Smell {ghrana, gandha), 553, 554, 556. 

Smelling, or snuffing, as mode of appro- 
priating essence of sacrifice, 272. 

Smoke, as means of purification, 383. 

Smoking, of young child, 367, 368. 

Smrti, offerings to, 213. 

Snakes (cf. v. Negelein, Weltanschauung, 
pp. 75 f.), as divine, 24, 63, 193, 194, 213, 
362, 363, 364, 382, 445, 631 ; Raksases 
as, 145 ; see also Serpents. 

Snataka, religious student, 270. 

Sobharis, shooting of arrows against the 
Maruts* car, 851, n. 3. 

Sokrates, Greek philosopher (469-399 b.c.), 
586, 613. 


667 

Sol Indiges, early Roman sun worship, 
626, n. 5. 

Solid food, ceremony of feeding (anna* 
prdgana) child with, 369. 

Soma, drink, 87, 91, 92, n. 5, 106, 109, 113, 
114, 121, 124, 133, 134, 139, 143, 151, 
154, 166-8, 176, 184, 197, 205, 228, 235, 
623, 624. 

Soma, god, 60, 62, 79, n. 6, 81, 82, 84, n. 4, 
93, 97, 104, 106, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 
117, 134, 140, 141, 142, 158, 179, 181, 182, 
188, 193, 207, 208, 218, 222, 225, 227, 255, 
260, 272, 273, 274, 319, 320, 321, 324, 353, 
360, 377, 396, 409, 429, 430, 431, 456, 458, 
460, 466, 481. 

Soma PavamSna, 2, 296, 297. 

Soma plant, 283, 284. 

Soma sacrifice, 13, 34, 93, 109, 124, 254, 255, 
265, 270, 271, 274, 275, 283, 287-9, 326- 
32, 343, 390, 397, 385. 

Son, sacrificing, for father, 283 ; secures 
essence of father on death, 580 ; successor 
to name and being of grandfather, 636. 

SondergStter, 33, n. 3, 44, 45, 55, 57, 64, 65, 
150, 186, 203, n. 1, 212, 215. 

Sophists, 613. 

Sorcerers, power to see, 892. 

Soul, 522-70, and see dtman snidpurusa. 

Soul-birds, 415. 

Souls of dead, as Raksases, 146, 147 ; 
places of the, 403-15 ; transmutation of 
the, 415, 416, 628, n. 1. 

Sound (gahda), 554, 556. 

Sounding holes (uparavas), 328. 

South, and Fathers, 411 ; and Yama, 148. 

South-east, world of Fathers, 411. 

Sowing of the crop, Arada worshipped at the, 
186. 

Space (dkdga, dig), 483, 485, 522, 525, n. 6, 
544, 561, 562, 594. 

Spartan initiatory ritual, 377, 378. 

Special deities, 203, n, 1. 

Speech, Vac, 161, 162, 163, 168, 173, 174, 
453, 455, 456, 467, 472, 484, 486, 517, 518 ; 
used in magic, 390. 

Spells, 2, 14, 18, 65 ; related to prayers, 399 ; 
sacrifice as a, 260-4. 

Speusippos, Greek philosopher, nephew of 
Plato, 635. 

Sphatimkari (?), offerings to, 214. 

Spider, 523. 

Spinoza, B., Jewish philosopher (a.d. 1632- 
77), 530, 637. 

Spirit, and body, 403 ; see Soul ; of barley, 
alleged representation of, 321, n. 4. 



668 


General Index 


Spiritism, 42, n, 3. 

Spirits, or demons, Wundt’s classification 
of, 44. 

Spirits, of tlie dead and demons, 236, 237, 
238, 239. 

Spirit-worship, as source of religion (cf. 
H. Naumann, Primitive Gemeinschafts- 
kuliur^ 1921 ; Weinreich, Archiv /. 
ligionswissenschajt, xxii. 321 ff.), 42-5. 

Spiritual man, as psychopomp, 575. 

Spit ox, offering, see gulagava. 

Spring festival, in month Caitra, 361, 362. 

Sprinkling, 270 ; of sacrifice! at Vajapeya, 
339. 

Srbinda, possibly Iranian name, 7, 236. 

Srma, Asura, 232. 

Srnjaya, possibly Iranian name, 7. 

Sraosa’s palace, 622, n. 1. 

Staff, use of, in magic rites, 384. 

Stag form of Prajapati, 208. 

Stammering speech, of consecrated persons, 
300, 302, 303. 

Stars, as souls of the dead, 201, 416, 628, 
n, 1 5 worlds of the, 520, n. 7, 528 ; see also 
Great Bear, Morning and evening star, 
Naksatras, Planets, 

Stcherbatsky, Th., views on Buddhism, 546, 
547, 548. 

Steeds, of Agni, 154 ; of the gods, 87. 

Steps, of Visnu, 108, 109, 354 ; seven, as 
bond of union, 98, 375. 

Stoic philosophy, 610, n. 1, 

Stone, buried at house building, 363 ; use 
in ritual as symbolic of firmness, 386 ; 
used to separate dead and living, 883. 

Stone building, not practised in Vedic 
India, 10 ; theory of heaven as a, 621-3. 

Stories, as part of ritual, 306. 

Straining of Soma, 167. 

Stream, as divine, 126, 127, 172-4. 

Stream, transfer of, from one bed to another, 
390. 

Strew {harhis), 34, 286, 287. 

Strophic composition, in the Rigveda, 16. 

Studentship, 369-73, 587, 588. 

Study, modes of, 370, 371. 

Styx, oath by, 104. 

Subala Upanisad, 501. 

Subandhu, loss of his soul, 404, n. 5. 

Subject and object, 525, 593. 

Subrahmanya, priest, 298, 299, 327. 

Subrahmanya, formula, 125, 131, n. 4, 
132. 

Substitution, of victim for self in sacrifice, 
268, 272 


Subtle elements, 537, 554, 579. 

Sud3,s, King, protege of Indra, 91, 131, 228. 

Suicide, 303, 459. 

Sumerians, 497, n. 4 ; relation to Dravidians, 
10, 628, n. 5, 630. 

Sumitra, disguise of Indra, 125. 

Summer solstice, 351 ; as beginning of the 
Vedic year, 4, n. 6, 

Sun, 38, 60, 67, 88, 92, 156, 168, 179, 181, 
190, 193, 203, 206, 447, 448, 486, 517, 518, 
520, n. 7, 528, 624, 626. 

Sun boat, 123. 

Sun spells, 309, 333, 335, n. 1, 340, 346, 351. 

Sunrta, deity, 211. 

Suovetaurilia, in Roman sacrifice, 279, n. 5. 

Suparakrodin, spirit, 242. 

Superhuman man, as psychopomp, 576. 

Superior deity, belief in as source of religion, 
45, 46 ; see also Monotheism. 

Suplan Sarnjaya, saerificer, 320, n. 1. 

Surias, Kassite god, 618, n. 2. 

Surya, sun god, 39, 60, 65, 86, 88, 92, 95, 99, 
104, 105, 109, 114, 120, 126, 127, 156, 189, 
213, 243, 323, 324, 359, 362, 376, 428, 451. 

Surya, daughter of the sun, dawn, 93, 107, 
115, 119, 120, 170. 

Suryacandramasa, sun and moon, 122. 

Suryamasa, sun and moon, 122. 

Su9ravas, Purohita of Kutsa, 125, n. 7, 181, 
259. 

Susan, invented on analogy of Pusan, 400. 

Suspension of offering on trees, 55, 56, n. 3, 
149, n. 5, 155, 156, n. 3, 287, 322, 361, 365, 
385. 

Sutras, 222, 242, 252, 256, 266. 

Suyajna, author of the Qankhayana Sutra, 
28, n. 3. 

Svarbhanu, demon of eclipse, 227, 231, 235. 

Svatavas, class of Maruts, 215. 

Svatikari, offerings to, 214. 

Swan maidens, 40, 151. 

Swans, as steeds of the A9vins, 114. 

Swinging, in ritual, 123, 351. 

Symbolic gods, 203, n. 1. 

Sympathy, 480, 

Symposion, of Plato, myth of birth (U, v, 
Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, Platon* ^ i. 
366 ff.), 613. 

Syncretism of deities, 87, 88. 

Taboos, 183, 197, 267, n. 2, 304-10, 317, 319, 
327, 333, 339, 349, 355, 373, 377, 386, 420. 

Tacitus, on Teutonic religion, 627, 628, 

Tadeva section of Vajasaneyi Samhita, 452, 
453. 



General Index 


669 


Tail of victim, offered, 326. 

Tailifiga, country, 632. 

Taittiriya Aranyaka, 112, 140, 144, 241, 356, 
409, 436, 482, 496, 498, 499, 503. 

Taittiriya Brahma^a, 17, 137, 186, 209, 347, 
440, 443, 450, 452, 499, 502, 583. 

Taittiriya Saiiihita, 17, 110, 111, 160, 184, 
208, 216, 222, 303, 310, 387, 414, 443, 467, 
483, 561, 590, 613. 

Taittiriya TJpanisad, 492, 498, 510, 513, 515, 
521, 525, 526, *555, 561, 585. 

Takman, fever, 240, 381, 382. 

Taksa, snake deity, 361 . 

Taksaka, snake, 194, 214, 400. 

Tamralipti, 633. 

Tanaros, Gallic god, 37, n. 3. 

Tantalos, in Greek myth, 80. 

Tantras, 476, n. 1, 598. 

Tanunapat,god, 138, 165, 166, 313, 320, 349. 

Tarksya, sun-bird or sun-horse, 190, 381 ; 
Vaipa 9 yata, bird king, 193. 

Tasmanian tribes, disposal of dead among, 
53. 

Taste (jihvd)y of flavours (rasa), 552, 554, 
556, 557. 

Teacher (guru)^ and student, 869-*73. 

Teaching, 588, 589. 

Tearing of bodies of dead by birds or beasts, 
614. 

Tell-el-Amarna letters, 5, 83. 

Temples (for Greece cf. CAH. ii. 625 f.), 
258, n. 2. 

Ten, as sacred number, 82, 420. 

Ten kings, battle of, 131. 

Ten-month year of gestation, 467, n, 1. 

Terremare people, various theories as to, 
627. 

Terror as religious motive, 194. 

Teutonic religion, 35, 121, 627, 628, and see 
Germanic religion. 

Tevijja Sutta, 502. 

Thales, Greek philosopher (6th cent. b. c.), 
doctrine of origin of world from water, 
603, 610, n. 8. 

Thank-offering, 259, 260. 

‘That thou art’ as description of the 
absolute, 506, 524. 

Theaitetos, Greek Mathematician (4th cent. 
B. c.), 635. 

Theft of fire, 162, n.l. 

Theism, 510, 511, 512, 527, 528, 546, 595. 

Theodoric of Verona, 618, n. 9. 

Theory, of sacrifice in the Brahmaiias, 454- 
67. 

Theravadin, school of Buddhism, 565. 


Theriomorphic ghouls of the dead, 238, 407. 

Theriomorphism, 47, 61-3, 70, 74, 75, 95, 
105, 114, 133, 134, 151, 168, 189-95, 197, 
208, 216, 274. 

Thetis, nymph, 183. 

Thieves, Rudra as patron god of, 150 ; dis- 
approved, 585 ; ordeal to test, 393. 

Thing-in-itself, 509, 593. 

Thirst, transferred by magic rite, 385. 

Thirteen, as sacred number, 334. 

Thirty-three, 82, 86. 

Thirty-three gods, 35. 

Thorr, Teutonic god, 37, 124. 

Thought, see Consciousness. 

Thought and being, in Parmenides, 636, 637. 

Thought in moment of death, as determin- 
ing rebirth, 581. 

Thousand : spies of Varuna (for number, cf . 
Jacoby, Archiv /. Religionswissenschqft, 
xxii. 262 ff.), 247, 381. 

Thrace, as source of transmigration doctrine, 
606, 607, 632 ; deity, Darzales, 620. 

Thraetaona, Iranian hero, 127, 134. 

Three, sacred number, 41, 82, 110, 114, 149, 
n. 2, 156, 167, 168, 265, 288, 420. 

Three abodes of Soma, 168. 

Three backs of Soma, 168. 

Three births of Agni, 156, 157. 

Three brothers of Agni, legend of, 157, 158. 

Three fires, 287-9. 

Three forms of Agni, 157, 160. 

Three-headed, Naraoahsa as, 105. 

Three-headed serpent, 127. 

Three heads of Vi^varupa, legend of the, 
235. 

Three mothers of ^iva, 149. 

Three nights, marriage not consummated 
for, 376 ; obscuration of the moon by the 
sun, 181. 

Three Soma lakes, of Indra, 168. 

Three steps of Visnu, imitated by sacrificer, 
320. 

Three-wheeled chariot, of the A 9 vins, 114. 

Threshing-floor sacrifice, A 9 a worshipped 
at, 186. 

Threshold, not trodden on by bride, 375 ; 
offerings to Pusan on, 107. 

Thrita, in Iran, 34, 113, 134, 171. 

Throwing away in water, of garments, the, 
389, 390. 

Throwing up in the air, 287, 322, 

Throwing water over an object, 287, 389. 

Thrush, transfer of jaundice to a, 386. 

Thugs, patronized by Durga, 150, n. 1. 

Thumb, peculiar use of, 111, n. 1. 



670 


Oeneral Index 


Thumb size of the mind, 404. 

Thunder, 168, 190 ; moral lessons in voice 
of, 585. 

Thunderbolt, 124. 

Tiamat, Babylonian deity, 81, n, 2. 

Tibetan origin of Buddhism, alleged, 86. 

Tides, influence of the moon on the, 122, 

Tiger-king, alleged offering to, 195, 

Tiger skin, 341, 353. 

Tilinga, country, 632. 

Tilphossian Erinys, legend of, 38, 

Time, 443, 453, 466, n. 2, 483, 485, 522, 544, 
549, 550, 551, 560, 561, 594, 613, n, 2 ; 
see also Kala, 

Tir Yast, 8. 

Tirindira, possibly Iranian name (=Tira 
and Indra, of whom Tira is an epithet, 
A. Gotze, KZ. li. 152 1), 7. 

Tistrya ( = Tisya, Seirios ; Gotze, KZ. li. 
146-51, from ivis\ 623. 

Tisya, 146, 163. 

Tithi, lunar day of birth, offered to, 201, n. 3. 

Tocharians, Indo-Europeans (possibly Celtic, 
CAH. ii. 35 f .), of centum speech, 634, n. 2. 

Todas, worship of cattle bells and milk 
pails, 269, n. 5 ; suggested Mesopotamian 
origin of, 634. 

Toddy, art of making, introduced from 
Mesopotamia, 624, 

Tongue (jihvd), 554, 556, 557. 

Tongues of fire, seven, 154, 

Tonsure {cuddkarman)^ of child, 369. 

Torch, as sun symbol, 67. 

Tortoise, cosmic, and divine, 81, n. 3, 112, 
192, 193, 196, 208, 242, 355. 

Tortures of hell, 410. 

Tosala, country, 632. 

Tosali, perhaps Dhauli, 632. 

Totemism, 46, 47, 49, 54, n. 1, 74, n. 5, 195-7, 
267, n. 2, 269, 276, 283, 284, 318, 342, n. 3, 
346, n. 4, 365, 378, n. 3, 633. 

Touch (sparga), 553, 554, 556, 557, 563. 

Touching, in magic, 386 ; oneself in the 
oath, 395. 

Towns, not Bigvedic, 8, 10. 

Trksi Trasadasyava, a prince, 190, 191. 

Trsta, demon, 462. 

Trta, form of Trita, 400. 

Tracks, obliterated to deceive spirit of the 
dead, 418. 

Traitana (RV. i. 158. 5), 135, n. 5. 

Traiyambaka offering, 56, n. 3, 149. 

Trance, 497, 516, n. 9 ; as source of belief in 
spirits of the dead, 75. 

Tranquillity, 585. 


Transfer of deeds, 409. 

Transfer of evil; 385, 386. 

Transformation of gods (cf. v. Negelein, 
Weltanschauung, pp. 67 ff.), 241, 242. 
Transmigration, 54, 180, 498, 514, 535, 570- 
81, 592, 594, 606, 609, 632, 636. 
Transubstantiation, 326, n. 2. 

Trasadasyu, King, 90, 158, 226. 

Tratr, protector god, 65, 206. 

Trayamana, deity, 400, n. 5. 

Trayastrin9a Stoma, 319, 350, 351. 

Treaty, Mitra in connexion with (v. 

Negelein, Weltanschauung, pp. 170 fl.), 103. 
Tree marriage, post-Vedic, 184. 

Trees, 64, 74, 182, 184, 185, 213, 376, 631 ; 

sap in, 523 ; transmigration of, 526. 
Treta age, 82. 

Triad of gods, 156, 222, n. 8. 

Triad of obligations of man, 480. 

Tribal preferences in the Rigvedic worship, 
91, 92. 

Triglypton, country, 632. 

Trikakubh, salve from mount, 187. 
Triliuga, country, 682. 

Tripolye culture, 629. 

Tri9oka, ordeal of, 393. 

Trisandhi, demon, 400. 

Trita, ancient deity, 34, 113, 120, 127, 134, 
185, 151, 171, 245, 389, 400. 

Triton, Greek deity, 134. 

Trittya, in Greek sacrifice, 279, n. 5. 

Trivrt Stoma, 319, 850, 351. 

Truth {satya), 456, 471, 473, 479, 480. 
Tryambaka, epithet of Rudra, 143, 149, 322. 
Tryaruna, Iksvaku King, 239. 

Tugra, warrior, 228. 

Tuisto, Teutonic deity, 620. 

Tura Kavaseya, as an authority on the fire 
cult, 354! 

Tiirvayana, protege of Indra, 129, 228. 
Turva9a, King, aided by Indra, 131. 
Turva9as, people, 9, 634, n. 2, 

Tvastr, god, 65, 87, 106, 112, 115, 122, 139, 
162, 165, 176, 177, 178, 198, 204-6, 207, 
219, 220, 235, 320, 334, 470. 

Tveggi, Teutonic deity, 620. 

Twelve days, at end of year, 177, 178. 
Twelve gods, in Greece, 35. 

Twelve nights, period of, 116, n. 2. 
Twenty-five principles of Samkhya, 543, 605. 
Twenty-six principles of Yoga, 543. 
Twilights (sandhye), offerings to the, 213 ; 

possible explanation of the A9vms, 118, 
Twins, uncanny powers of, 118, n, 11, 

Two births of Agni, 157. 



General Index 


671 


Two births of Soma, 169. 

Two divine Hotrs, 226. 

Uccai99ravas Kaupayeya, sage, 414, 
Ucchista, remnant of oblation deified, 24, 
445. 

Uda, variant of Udra, 632. 

Udagrabha, priest, 253. 

TJdalaka^yapa, offerings to, 214, 426. 
XJdankya, a spirit, 214. 

Udara9andilya, sage, 493. 

Uddalaki, student of philosophy, 493, 517. 
Udgatr, priest, 16, n. 3, 165, n, 7, 253, 297, 
314, 330, 335, 336, 338. 

Udra, Orissa, 632, 

Ugnis Szventa, Lithuanian fire deity, 37, 
161, n.6. 

Ugra, name of Rudra, 144. 

Ugrajit, Apsaras, 184. 

Ugrampa9ya, Apsaras, 184. 

Uhsing, Lettish deity, 121. 

Ulukhala, demon, 240. 

Uma, goddess, 218, n. 4 ; Haimavati, 144. 
199, 200. 

Uii^a, variant of Udra, 632. 

Unity, of the gods, 88 ; of the universe, 
507, 508. 

Universe and absolute, 522-8. 

Unnetr, priest, 298, 328, 330, 349. 

Unreality of the world, see mdyd. 

Untruth {anrta)y 479, 480, 485. 

Upagatr, priest, 314, 

Upagu Sau9ravasa, story of, 292, n. 2, 458. 
Upakosala, student, 588. 

Upama, wife of Ksatra, Indra appears to, 
125, n. 13. 

Upanisads, philosophy of the. Chap. 29 ; 
referred to, 17, 20, 21, 22, 26, 54, 403, 
404, 405, 441, 442, 443, 447, 448, 479, 480 ; 
alleged Dravidian origin of name, 632. 
Upa9ruti, demon, 240, 

Upataksa, snake deity, 361. 

Upavaktr, priest, 253. 

Upavira, demon, 240. 

Urajia (perhaps a double of Vrtra, from vr), 
130, 193, 235. 

Uraspe9a, demon, 240, n. 6. 

Urine, used in Magic, 383, 389, 

Urriayu, Gandharva, 180. 

Uruvanassil, Mitanni form of Varuna’s 
name, 617. 

Urvara, deity of the ploughed field, 64, 83, 
136, 137, 366. 

Urvarapati, Indra as, 186. 

Urva9i, bride of Pururavas, 182, 183, 200. 


U^anas, 457, and see Kavya. 

U9ij, family, 232. 

U9inaras, people, 496. 

Usas, Dawn, 38, 50, 87, 93, 95, 105, 114, n, 3, 
*115, 119, 122, 208, 214, 218, 243. 

Utkala, Orissa, 632. 

Uttanapad, cosmic power, 81, n. 3, 401. 

Uttaranarayaria section of Vajasaneyi 
Samhita, 452. 

Uttuda, Sondergott, 64. 

Vac, deity, 29, n. 3, 80, 199, 227, 349, 438, 
444, 470, 471, 610, 

Vacaspati, god of speech, 163. 

Vadhrya9va, Agni of, 158. 

Vadhula Siitra, 28, n. 4. 

Vahagn, Armenian deity, 33. 

Vaikhanasa Dharmasutra, 588. 

VaikhSnasa Sutra, 28, n. 4. 

Vairaja Saman, 350. 

Vairupa Saman, 350- 

Vai9aleya, a spirit, 214. 

Vai9esika, philosophical system, 545, 548, 
n. 6, 559, n. 9. 

Vai9ravana, Kubera, 10, n. 3, 242, 374. 

Vai9vadeva Qastra, 93, 220, 255, 315, 331. 

Vai9yas, third class of Vedic society, 292, 
316, 317, 326, 339, 341, 368, 369, 370, 373, 
375, 395, 481, 576. 

Vaitana Sutra, 20, 345. 

VaitarapI, and dead, 153, n. 5, 347, 412. 

Vaivasvata, epithet of Manu, 112. 

Vaja, Rbhu, 176. 

Vajapravasa, father of Naeiketas, 440. 

Vajasaneyi Samhita, 17, 19, 144, 347, 452, 
490, 499, 501. 

Vajjis, people, 36. 

Vala, demon, 128, 134, 163, 223, 235, 621, 
622. 

Valakhilya hymn, mode of reciting, 316, 381. 

Vamadeva, Vamadevas, 1, 227, 571, 584, 
609, n. 2. 

Vamadevya Saman, 335. 

Vanaspati, lord of the forest, tree, 184. 

Vandana, rescued by the Ayvins, 116. 

Vaiiga, place, 632. 

Vara, in Vendidad, 621, 622. 

Varaghna, bird form of Verethraghna, 63, 
133, n. 6. 

Varaha Sutra, 28, n. 4, 

Varcin, Asura, 131, 231, 236. 

Varuna, god, 25, 33, 34, 38, 57, 60, 71, 83, 86, 
n. 3, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 96-104, 
105, 112, n. 3, 113, 120, 122, 124, 126, 133, 
141, 142, 147, n. 3, 157, 161, 167, 169, 177, 



672 


General Index 


182, 189, 199, 200, 215, 217, 22C, 233, 244, 
246-9, 257, 263, 264, 265, 267, 280, 282, 
296, 304, 311, 322, 328, 329, 331, 334, 346, 
347, 353, 355, 360, 363, 364, 374, 376, 380, 
393, 395, 407, 413, 433, 434, 435, 468, 469, 
473, 474, 475, 478, 480, 481, 583, 584, 617, 
620, 622. 

Varunanl, wife of Varuna, 218. 

Varutri, demon, 462. 

Varutrl, protector deities, 206. 

Va9a, cow as cosmic power, 444. 

Va9as, people, 496. 

Va9ini, deity, 213. 

Vaskali, on the nature of the Brahman, 522. 

Vasistha, Vasistlias, 1, 83, 91, 92, 131, 152, 
181, 182, 227, *228, 251, 261, 291, 292, 293, 
353, 354, 426, 482, 570. 

Vasistha Dharma Sutra, 29. 

Vastospati, god, 63, 64, 188, 237, 317, 363. 

Vasubandhu, Buddhist philosopher, 504, 
547, n. 1, 548. 

Vasuki, snake deity, 361. 

Vasus, Agnfs associates, 86, 91, 215, 222, 
223, 458. 

Vata, wind god, 86, 92, 114, 139, 140, 402. 

Vatsa, ordeal of, 393. 

Vatsapri Bhalandana, sage, 462. 

Vatsas, people, 196- 

Vayu, Iranian demon, 34. 

Vayu, wind god, 81, 86, 92, 93, 122, 124, 126, 
139, 140, 144, n. 13, 151, 156, 167, 168, 
213, 323, 331, 339, 362, 376, 402, 458, 470, 
527, 561, 577, 581.' 

Vedas, 207, 514, 515 ; offerings to the, 213. 

Vedahgas, 503, n. 4. 

Vedanta, meaning of term, 514 ; philosophy 
of the, 503, 507, 533, 535, 545, 551, 552, 
553, 558, 565, n. 2, 576, 584, 612, 637. 

Veddahs, of Ceylon, 11, 634. 

Vegetation, influence of moon on, 122. 

Vegetation spirit, 44, 148, 149, n. 5, 186, 197, 
n. 4. 

Veins, 566, 569, 587, 591. 

Vendidad, 621. 

Verethraghna, Iranian genius of victory, 33, 
63, 68, 133, 171, 193, 235, h. 1. 

Vergilian tradition, 619, n. 

Vesta, 37, 151, n. 1, 161. 

Vestal Virgins, 258. 

Vetasus, defeated by Indra, 228. 

Vibhinduk^, Afeura, 234. 

Vibhu, class of the Rbhus, 176. 

Vibhvan, Rbhu, 176. 

Vices, Si.e Sin. 

Vidatliin, father of Rji9van, 130. 


Videgha Mathava, and Aryan fire cult, 38,1 58. 

Videha, country, 23, 496. 

Vidhatr, an abstract deity, 205, 206, 360. 

Vighne9a, deity, 242. 

Vijara, stream, 407, n. 7. 

Vijnanavada, Vijnanavadin, Buddhist 
school, 512, 558, 559. 

Vike9a, demon, 240, n. 6. 

Vilistenga, Danavi, 125. 

Vimada, aided by the A9vins, 116, 

Vimukha, spirit, 242. 

Vinayaka, Vinayakas, spirits, 242. 

Vindhya, mountains, 496. 

Vindhyavasa (see Keith, BSOS. iv. 554), 504. 

Vindhyakavasa, 544, n. 5. 

Vipa9, as a deity, 172. 

Viraj, 62, n. 1, 436, 620, n. 1 ; as dawn, 
121, n. 5. 

Virginity, danger of interference with, 376. 

Virocana, a demon, 506, 517. 

Virtues, 480, 585, 586. 

Virupaksa, deity, 213, 242. 

Virupas, a subdivision of the Angirases, 224. 

Vi9irsni, demoness, 241. 

Vi9pala, given an iron limb by the A9vins, 
116. 

Vi9vajit, deity, 400, n. 5. 

Vi9vaka, aided by the A9vins, 116. 

Vi9vakarman, creator god, 193, 206, 207, 
265, 437, 438, 444, 450, 487, n. 7, 610. 

Vi9vakarman Bhauvana, gives earth to 
Kagyapa, 622. 

Vi9vamitra, Vi^vamitras, seer and family, 
1, 91, 182, 184, n. 12, 227, 283, 291, 292, 
496, n. 4. 

Vi9varupa, demon son of Tvastr, 122, 127, 
128, 133, 134, 165, 205, 235, *461, 470. 

Vi9vasrj, all-creator gods, 207. 

Vi9vavasu, Gandharva, 67, 179, 180, 181, 376, 

Vi9ve Devas, All-gods, 75, 214. 

Visad, Asura, 234. 

Visnapu, found by the A9vins, 116. 

Visnu, god, 24, 30, 40, 57, 62, n. 4, 80, 88, 
92, 93, 08, 104, 106, 108-12, 123, 126, 127, 
131, 142, 143, 187, n. 4, 192, 197, 199, 204, 
208, 213, 215, 221, 229, 250, 291, 292, 293, 
, 320, 324, 342, 354, 360, 362, 426, 456, 458, 
461, 473, 512, 525, 539, 570, 623. 

Vistaspa, Iranian King, 615. 

Vital airs, see Breaths. 

Vivahhvant, Iranian deity, 34, 113, 171, 

Vivasvant, perhaps the sun, 34, 82, 83, 99, 
112, 113, 120, 138, 159, 171, 198, 203, 215, 
229, 254, 621. 

Volition, 478, and see Will. 



General Index 


673 


Voluntary death by fire, as explanation of 
the Diksa, 302. 

Vourukasa, ocean in Iranian view, 135, 623. 

Vows, 260, n. 5 ; of student, 303, 304, 371. 

Vrsakapi, obscure figure in myth, 66, 133, 
192, 214. 

Vrsaria 9 va, Indra hailed as Mena of, 125. 

Vrtra, demon, 62, 68, 72, 88, 91, 93, 104, 114, 
124, 131, 133, 134, 136, 142, 151, 161, 163, 
168, 192, 195, n. 2, 205, 210, 220, 234, 235, 
266, n. 7, 464, 468, 477. 

Virtrahan, epithet of Indra (Magoun (Studies 
in honor of Bloomfieldy pp. 197-210), makes 
it apply primarily to Agni, but uncon- 
vincingly), 33, 133. 

Vratya, Vratyas, 24, 147, 148, 209, 337, 338, 
385, 402, 471. 

Vratya Stomas, 209, 337, 338, 369, 496, n. 7. 

Vultures, as birds of omen, 193 ; demons as, 
237. 

Vyah^a, demon, 130. 

Vyasa, Yogabhasya, 537, 548. 

Waking reality, compared with dreams, 508, 
558, 567-70. 

War god, Agni as, 161 ; Brhaspati, 163. 

Warriors, 228. 

War-spell, see Apva. 

Washing, as prophylactic means, 383 ; 
taboo on, 305, 306. 

Water, as an element, 471, 472, 517, 525 ; 
as source of the universe, 603. 

Waters (dpak), goddesses, 34, 38, 58, 60, 64, 
82, 88, 97, 104, n. 1, 135, 136, 141, 142, 168, 
175, 181, 182, 184, 213, 214, 227 ; and 
Agni, 155, 156 ; as barrier between dead 
and living, 422 ; in magic, 383, 389 ; oath 
by, 395. 

Water offerings, to the dead, 427. 

Water ordeal, 393. 

Water spirit, in Namuci legend, 131. 

Wax image, used in magic, 389. 

Way of salvation, 581-3. 

Way of the Fathers, see pitrydna. 

Way of the gods, see devaydna. 

Weapons, as divine (cf. Ayudhapuja, 
Thurston, Omens and Superstitions of 
Southern hidia, p, 174 ; Rose, JRS. iii. 
235), 64, 66, 188 ; of Rudra, deposited on 
trees, 143. 

Wedding hymn, 2, 170, 373-8. 

Wedding party, trees asked to bless, 182. 

Wedding ritual, 330, 373-8, 390. 

Weighing ordeal, for dead man, 393, n. 3, 
572. 

23 [h.o.s. 32 ] 


Welfare, as deity, 213. 

Well, student not to look at shadow in a, 
373. 

Werwolves, 197, n. 1. 

Wheel, as fetish, 67, 105 ; and sun, 340. 
White Yajurveda, 17 ; see also fatapatha 
Brahmana aiicl Vajasaneyi Saihhita. 
Wicked, fate of, 576. 

Wieland, in Germanic mythology, 205, n. 8. 
Wife of dead in funeral ritual, 418, 419 ; 
of sacrificer, Yajamana, 265, 266, 299, 
319, 820, 330, 332, 339, 361. 

Will, 245, 509, 527, 554, 555, 557, 574, 586. 
Will o’ the wisp, 238, 

Wind, as deity, 38, 50, 138, 139, 140, 179, 
181'; as element, 517, 525, 561- 
Wine, replaces mead in Greece, 284, 624. 
Wings of the mountains, cut off by Indra, 
132. 

Winter, 127. 

Winter solstice, 155, 160, 177, 191, n. 4. 
Wiping away of sin, 245. 

Wiros, i.e. Indo-Europeans, 618, 619. 
Wisdom of Agni, 160, 161, 168. 

Wish cows, 349, n. 2, 407. 

Wives of the gods, 218, 219, 296, 320. 
Wodan, German god, 620, and see Odin. 
Wolf, well known in the Rigveda, 23. 

Wolf of hell, 410, n. 2. 

Wolves, Greek offerings to, 197. 

Women, 56, 471, 475, 480 ; as mourners, 
418 ; in domestic ritual, 358, n. 3, 367 ; 
in Mahavrata, 351 ; marriage, 373-8 ; 
not initiated, 378. 

Woodpecker, connected with Mars, 626. 
Woods, eaten by Agni, 154 ; haunted by 
Rudra, 145 ; ingredients in magic, 397, 398. 
Wooers, in marriage ritual, 374 ,* of Agariste, 
motif of legend of, alleged derivation 
from India, 601. 

Wool, as cleansing material, 383. 

Word, see Logos, Speech, and Vac. 

Work, 467, and see karman. 

World egg, 436, 442, 525, 528, 

World of the ox, 477. 

Worlds, 520, n. 7, 528. 

Worms propitiated, 194. 

Worship of dead and sacrifice, 257, 425-32. 
Wrath, as characteristic of Rudra, 143 ; 
as a deity, 2, 203 ; of the Maruts, depre- 
cated, 152 ; not to be shown, 585. 

Xanthos of Lydia, 614. 

Xenokrates, Greek philosopher (4th cent. 
B. c.), 634. 



General Index 


674 

Xenophanes, Greek philosopher (6th cent. 
B. c.), 602, 603, 635. 

Xerxes, King (486-465 b. c.), of Persia, 614. 

Yadu, King, helped by Indra, 131. 

Yadus, people, 9, 634, n. 2. 

Yaja, Sondergottin, of sacrifice, 186, 212. 

Yajfiavacas, wife of, 471, n. 3. 

Yajfiavalkya, a sage, 191, 310, 325, 354, 
459, 483, 495, 498, 505, 506, 507, 510, 512, 
513, 515, 517, 520, 521, 522, 523, 524, 529, 
530, 536, 546, 551, 552, 573, 574, 579, 582, 
587, 592, 593, 594, 595, 596, 598, 604. 

Yajnaviksepin, spirit, 242. 

Yajnayajniya Saman, 330. 

Yajurveda, 1, 16, 17, 19, 24, 25, 50, 79, 97, 
109, 113, 134, 140, 142, 144, 145, 150, 
159, 168, 170, 173, 182, 184, 211, 213, 215, 
221, 231, 252, 253, 438, 491, 493, 519. 

Yajus, 16. 

Yaksas, spirits, 73, 213, 242. 

Yania, god, 34, 63, 71, 82, 84, 87, 88, 92, 93, 
113, 122, 138, 148, 150, 179, 192, 193, 198, 
205, 213, 229, 230, 247, 248, 280, 360, 
363, 406, 409, 411, 418, 419, 431, 435, 440, 
469, 619, n. 3, 621, 622. 

Yama-Raksasas, 73. 

Yami, sister of Ykma, 83, 84, 179, 198, 205, 
236, 247, 248, 408. 

Yaska, author of the Nirukta, 20, 86, 100, 
107, 117, 127, 138, 139, 156, i64, 198, 229, 
488, 633. 

Yasna, 34. 


Yatis, slain by Indra, 133, 226. 

Yava, barley, as spirit, 214. 

Yavakri, slain by a Gandharva and an 
Apsaras, 182, n. 9, 471, n. 3, 636, n. 2. 

Yavanani, Greek writing, 20, n. 1. 

Yawning, risk of soul excaping in, 404. 

Year, 79 ; offerings to, 201. 

Yellow colour of demons, 237. 

Yggdrasill, fabulous ash, 172, n. 2. 

Yima, in Iran, 34, 113, 619. 

Yimak, in Iranian legend, 620. 

Ymir, sacrifice of, 619, 620. 

Yoga, philosophy, 56, 81, n. 3, 148, n. 1, 492, 
n. 4, 505, 510, 535, 589, 541, 543, 544, 549, 
555, 569, 589-91 ; alleged Dravidian 
origin of name, 632. 

Yoga practices, 401, 402. 

Yoke, passing under, 420 ; see also Hole. 

Yupake 9 in, spirit, 242. 

Zamolxis, of Thrace, 606. 

Zaotar, Iranian equivalent of the Hotr, 34, 
254, 294. 

Zeus, 36, 45, 85, 95, 102, 117, n. 3, 119, n. 5, 
309, 448 ; as Pater, 37. 

Zeus Pramantheus, 289, n. 2. 

Ziu, Germanic god, 37, n. 2. 

Zoroaster, 6, 7, 33, 90, 101, 117, 232, 468, 
469, 614, 615, 616. 

Zoroastrian period of Indian history, 
alleged, 35, n. 4. 

Zrvan, Iranian, 620. 

Zulus, burn omentum, 281. 



SANSKEIT INDEX 


ariQ^i, cup, 328, 339. 
akhandakdla, impartite 
time, 560. 

akhala^ epithet of Rudra, 

144, n. 4 ; akhala demid, 

145, 327, n. 6. 
agnicayana, 352, 354-6, 364, 

397, 440, n. 1, 465-7, and 
see Piling of the fire, 
agnihotra^ fire-offering, 161, 
261, 289, 297, 317, 318, 
319, 321, 323, 514, 580, 
585, 588. 

agnistoma, sacrifice, 155, 
255, 272,310,313, 326-32. 
Agnlsomiya, victim, 324. 
agnyddhdna, agnyddheya^ 
297, 316, 317, and see 
Establishment of the fires . 
aghnyd, applied to the cow, 
191. 

anw, subtle, 547. 
at^ move, 466. 
aiigraha, objects of sense, 
554, 556, 557. 
atigrdhya, cup, 330. 
atirdira, sacrifice, 119, n. 1, 
256, n. 3, 327, ,335, 336, 
348, 350, 351. ' 
dTfxSs, dvTfJ.7]Vy 466. 
atyagnistoma, sacrifice, 335, 
350. 

addbhya, cup, 328, 339. 
adri, pressing stone, 167. 
adhidemtam^ adhidaivatam^ 
486, 559. 

adhydndd, plant, 376. 
adhydimam^ psychologi- 
cally, 486, 559. 
aUf breathe, 466. 
anattd, doctrine of, 547. 
ananta, or ananda, of abso- 
lute, 519; 

anindrdbt People who do not 
believe in Indra, 433. 
anucara^ in fastras, 315. 
anuhandhydy cow, 334. 
anumdna^ inference, 482, 

23 * 


anuydjaSy afterofferings, 320 . 
anurupa, verses in ^astras, 
315, 316. 

anu-vasatkdray secondary 
vasal call, 295. 
anuvdkydy verse of invita- 
tion, 255. 

anrta, untruth, 473, 479. 
anriadeva, sense of, 247, n.4. 
antariksa, 486, 520, n. 7, 
561, and see Atmosphere. 
antary dma, cup, 329. 
aniarydminy internal con- 
troller, 527. 

andhaSy used of Soma, 167. 
annaprdgana, see Solid food, 
feeding of child with. 
annamaya, epithet of self, 
518. 

anvastakya, rite, 428, 429. 
anvdramhhaniyd isti, 320, 
321. 

anvdhdrya, mess, 320. 
anvdhdryapacana, fire, 288. 
apaciti, offerings, 338. 
apavrata, despisers of Vedic 
rites, 622. 

inspiration, 453, 558, 
n. 7, 556, 564, 565. 
apdpa, epithet of slayer at 
animal sacrifice, 274, n. 7. 
apdmdrga, plant, 265, 384, 
404. 

apdvya, libations, 325. 
apigarvara, Indra as, 335. 
apurva, Mimansa doctrine 
of, 574, n. 3. 

aptgrydma (dptorydma), foim 
of sacrifice, 334, 336. 
apsaras, meaning of, 182. 
apsujit, sense of, 81, n. 2. 
obkipitva, sense of, 255. 
abhiplava sadaha, form of 
sacrifice, 348, 351. 
abhisecanlya, aspersion of 
the king, 340, n. 6. 
amdnava, superhuman, used 
of psychopomp, 578. 


amrta, drink of immortality, 
623, 624. 

amedhya, impure, *470. 
ay as, meaning of, 22, n. 5. 
argha, gift for Snataka, 
372, 374. 

arghya, ceremony, 363 ; 
water, 427. 

arta, uria, Iranian counter- 
part of rta, 35. 
avakd, plant, 142, n. 3, 355, 
363, 381, 390. 
avamas, Fathers as, 329. 
avabhrtha, final bath, 286, 
303, 304, 330. 

avdna, a form of breath, 564. 
avantaradlksd, intermediate 
consecration, 327, 328. 
avidyd, ignorance, 515. 
avivdkya, tenth day in main 
part of dvddagdha, 350, 
aglild vac, haunts the evil 
doer, 477. 

agva, origin of, from Praja- 
pati’s swollen eye, 208. 
agvattha, 339, 341, 363, 398, 
527 ; as home of Ap- 
sarases, 184. 

agvaiva, horse-nature, 484. 
agvamedha, horse sacrifice, 
40, 63, 105, 114, 118, 
119, 175, 195, 198, 199, 
200, 202, 213, 218, 227, 
254, 260, 262, 263, 279, 
285, 304, 311, 343-7, 389, 
476. 

aia (urta), right, 35, 83. 
asddha, brick, 354, 
astakds, offerings on the, 93, 
*177, 197, 201, 280, 300, 
372, 428, 429. 
asddhu, evil, 479, n. 7. 
asu, breath, spirit, 233, 403, 
404, 405, 447, 453. 
asuniti, spirit-leading, 405. 
asura (on etym. cf. Giintert, 
Der arische Welikonigj 
pp. 97 ff.), 232. 



676 

ahamkdra, individuation, 
43r, n. 1, 509, n. 1, 517, 
533, 534, 542, 553, 612. 
ahifisd, non-injuring life, 
192, 476. 

ahina, sacrifices, 348, 349. 
ahrdayajna, unpleasant, 
556, n. 2, 

dkdga, ether, 204, n, 3, 485, 
561, 562. 

dgaSi sin, 249, 485. 
Agnimdrutay cup, 330, 
agnldhrlya, fire, 328. 
dgrayana, ceremony, 323, 
350. 

dgrayana, cup, 329. 
dgrahdyani, festival, 201, n. 
6, 362.* 

a^/iara, butter libation, 319. 
dghrni, epithet of Pusan, 
107. 

djya, butter, 397. 
ail, aquatic bird, 182. 
dtmada, 455, n. 2. 
d tman, self, 403, n. 5, 441, 
447, 450-2, 485, 486, 491, 
507-13, 515, 516-22, 538, 
541, 558, 559, 560, 562-7, 
567-70, 578, 579, 581, 
582, 583, 589 ; etymology, 
450, 451. 
dtmanvani, 451. 
dUnavdda, doctrine of self, 
rejected by Buddliism, 
547. 

adhamna, mixing of Soma 
with water, 167. 
(Jdhavaniya, tub, 255, 328, 
329. 

dnanda, bliss, or ananta, 
eternity, of absolute, 519, 
dnandamaya, epithet of self, 
518, 521. 

dptya, derivation of (cf. 
Gixntert, JDer arische 
Welikonig, p. 33 : dpi, 
friend), 135, n. 5, 
dpydyana, swelling out of 
Soma shoots, 167, 316. 
aprly invocations, 164, 185, 
275,293,313,325,349,623. 
drnantrana, altar, 159, n. 2. 
dyusya, ceremony to pro- 
duce long life, 367. 368. 


SansJerit Index 

dyus, form of ukthya sacri- 
fice, 351. 

dnja-satya, Aryan or noble 
truths, 559, n. 11. 
dmsaihya, fire, 159, 258, 
290. 

avid, formulae, in rdjasuya, 
341. 

dgd, longing, 186, 517. 
dgir, name of milk, &c., 
mixed with Soma, 167. 
d^kdra, sneeze, 307, n. 10. 
dsana, postures in sitting, 
591. 

dsasyabali, offering, 366. 
dhavanlya, fire, 157, 159, 
164, 254, 288, 289, 316, 
317, 318, 320, 325, 332, 
344, 416, 431, 473. 

ignis, Latin parallel of Agni, 
"l61. 

ingida, plant, 397. 
iddhi (rddhi), magical 
powers, Buddhist, 595, 
n. 1. 

indriya, senses, 554. 
istdpurta, sacrifice and gifts, 
250, 409, 478, n. 5, 573, 
n. 11. 

isti, sacrifice, 313, 319. 

nkthavirya, formula, 315. 
ukthya, cup, 329. 
ukthya, sacrifice, 327, 334, 
835, 350, 351. 
ucchista, as absolute, 24, 
445. 

tijjitis, at close of vdjapeya, 
339. 

uitaravedi, form of altar, 
254, 325, 326, 336. 
uisanna, extensive or obso- 
lete, 476, n, 3. 
utsarga, dismissal festival, 
37 ^ 

utsargindm ayana, form 
of Sattra, 352, n. 2. 
udayanlyd isti, concluding 
oifering, 330, 831. 
udavasdtilyd isti, concluding 
offering, 331. 

uddna, up-breathing, 453, 
564, 565. 

udumbara, tree, 336, 339, 


341,363, 367, 372, 376; as 
home of Apsarases, 184. 
udgltha, part of Saman, 314, 
519. 

uddhita, of dead, 417. 
udyatl, form of arrangement 
of verses, 314. 
upadram, part of Saman, 
314. 

upanisad, etymology, 489. 
upagaya, post, 334. 
upasad, ceremony, 327. 
upa-sad, 492. 

upastha, organ of genera- 
tion, 556. 

upasihdna,TeveTmce, 311. 
upahavya, offering, 338. 
updhgusavana, cup, 328. 
upddhis, conditioning facts, 
551. 

umd, linen, 633. 

UTUguld, 26, n. 4. 
urta, 83, and see a§a, 
ulapa grass, strew used at 
wedding, 375, n. 4. 
uglra, worms, 389. 

urvas, Fathers as, 329. 

rksa, in sense of Raksas, 237, 
*n. 1. 
rc, 448. 

rta, right, order, 33, 35, 83-5, 
162, 246, 248, 249, 433, 
437, 448, 449, 469, 473, 
479, 487. 

rtmg-varana, choosing of the 
priests, 254 
rbhu, etymology, 178. 

ekdstakd, in Magha, 122, 
428. 

edaka, ram, not sacrificed, 
*324 

eiad vai tat, that is this, 524. 
enas, sin, 249, 485. 
emusa, fierce, 111. 
esd, as signal for recitation 
* of the gastra, 315. 

aikavariamia (probably cor- 
responding to eka and 
vrt), in Mitanni, 617. 
aikddagina, animal offering, 
333, 334. 

aitihya, tradition, 482. 



Sanskrit Index 


677 


Aindravdyava, cup, 329. 
aistiM, form of sautrdmani, 
353, n. 1. 

odana, porridge, 275, 445. 
odanapacana, fire to cook 
the porridge, 159. 
om, 491, 519, 589, n. 4, 590, 
591 ; offered to, 213. 
osadhi, 175, and see Plants, 

aupanisada^ vow, 371. 
aumlna, linen, 633. 
auzomewa, infinitive in 
Mitanni, 617. 

kakubk, metre, 315. 
kanydpraddna, gift of a 
daughter, 374. 
kammbha, offerings of, 321. 
hafira, plant, 142, n. 3. 
karpdsa, cotton, 634, n. 2. 
karmadevas, gods by merit, 
573, n. 11, 520, n. 7, 
525, n. 1. 

karman^ work, action, 250, 
478, 494, 502, n. 3, 553, 
573, 574, 577, 578, 579, 
580, 594, 596, 597. 
kalaga, bowl, 255. 
kalpandpodha (perception), 
without imagination, 559. 
kavyavdhana (cf. Bloom- 
field, Streiiberg-Festgabe, 
pp. 12 ff.), 160, 254, 429, 
430, 431. 

kdrana, 483, 562,- and see 
Causality. 

kdriristi, offering, 135, 324. 
kdrya, result, 482. 
kdryakdla, time as an effect, 
560. 

kdrsdpanas (cf. JR AS. 1916, 
p. 366; 1924, p. 94), 

magic, 396, n. 2. 
kdla, 444, 485, 560 ; a7id see 
Time. 

kiydmbu, plant, 420. 
kuntdpa, hymn, 400. 
kuldyinl, form of arrange- 
ment of verses, 314. 
kugay grass, 111, 317, 363, 
364, 366, 371. 
ku^dnday ceremony, 356. 
krtydy magic, 40. 


kegavapanlya, rite, 342. 
koga, bowl, 255 ; sheath of 
soul, 521. 

kaukiliy form of sauirdmanl, 
352, 353. 

kratu, will, 484, 554, n. 5, 
555. 

kramamuktiy doctrine of, 
584. 

kravyavdhana, Agni as, 160. 
kravyddy Agni as (cf . Bloom- 
field, Sireitberg-Festgabey 
pp. 13 ff.), 160, 238, 357. 
klegUy defilements, 548. 
ksatray royal power, of 
Varuna, 96. 

ksatradhrtiy offering to 
secure one’s lordship, 343. 
kmmdy linen, 633. 
ksetriyay 73, n. 6, 398, n. 8. 
ksauma, linen, 633. 

khaty 356. 

khadira, wood, 396. 
kkarjuray plant, 142, n. 3. 
khalu vaiy 484. 

gatagrz, possessing full pro- 
sperity, 340. 
gandhay see Smell. 
gandharva and gandhay 180. 
gavdm ayanay sacrifice, 350- 
2 . 

gdihd ndrdgahsl, 250. 
gdyatrl, metre, 255, 
gdrhapatya, fire, Agni, 157, 
158, 159, 250, 265, 288, 
316, 317, 318, 320, 325, 
344, 430, 431. 

gunaSy constituents, 535, 
539, 540, 544, 548, 605, 
612. 

gupta, second part of a 
Vai9ya’s name, 368, 
grhadevty household deity, 
76. 

grhapaiiy lord of the home, 
Agni as, 320. 
gOy form of ukthyay 351 . 
gotray restrictions on mar- 
riage within the, 373. 
go-saua, offering, 338, 340, 
476. 

granihiy Jain technical term, 
504. 


grakaSy graspers, 235 ; cups, 
255 ; senses, 554, 550, 
557. 

grdmanl-sava, offering, 340. 
grdvatiy pressing stone, or 
(Oliphant, Studies in 
honor of Bloomfield, pp. 
228 ff.) mortar and 
pestle, 167. 

ghoTdcdrika, man of severe 
observances, 588. 
ghrana, see Smell. 

cakmsy see Eye and Sight. 
caturavaftinsy those who 
make four portions, 313. 
caturtha, state of soul, 569, 
570. 

caturhotr, formula, 356. 
camasaSy goblets of the 
priests, 329. 
camuSy bowls, 255. 
carakdy form of sautrdmaniy 
352, 353. 

dt, consciousness, 519, 555. 
ClUa, consciousness, 555, 
559, 563. 

cittiy thought, 555. 
cetas, thought, 555. 
caitya, offering, 366, 433, n. 

2 . 

eyUy as technical term, 504. 

chandomas, days in a Sattra, 
350, 351. 

jagatiy metre, 255. 
janas (janarloka), 528. 
jambha, convulsions, 381, 

n. 7. 

jalan, epithet of absolute, 
491, 493, 506. 

jaldsa, Rudra’s remedy, 143, 
152. 

jihvdy see Taste a??, d Tongue. 
jlvanmukta, ideal of a, 584. 
jivdtman, empirical soul, 
525. 

juhu, ladle, 364. 
jukotayaky forms of offering, 
294, 

jyotistoma, general type of 
Soma sacrifice, 334-6. 



678 

jyotis, form of agnistoma, 
351. 

jhdnas, forms of trance, 
Buddhist, 595, n. 1. 

taks, fashion, 205. 
taksaUy carpenter, 298. 
tat tvam asi, that thou art, 
506, 524. 

tadvanam, epithet of abso- 
lute, 491, 506. 
tanu, body, 380, n. 4, 486. 
tanuhavis, offering to three 
forms of Agni, 317. 
tapas, heat, asceticism, 210, 
300, 303, 306, 307, 436, 
437, 514, n. 11, 590. 
tapas (tapoloka), 528. 
tamas, darkness, as a guntty 
535, 539. 

iaraksuy offered to Raksases, 
324. 

tarkay reflection, 591. 
iarpana, ceremony, 213. 
tdnunapiray ceiemonml, 166, 
309, 385, 399, 473. 
idpasa, Indian as con- 
trasted with Christian, 
447, 

tdbuva, alleged identity with 
taboo, 632, 633. 
iitaiiy Iranian form, 8. 
tithiy lunar day, not early 
Vedic, 28, n. 2. 
iaijasa, as soul state, 569, 
n. 6. 

taimdta, dubious sense of, 
26, n. 4, 81, n. 2. 
turdyana isti, sacrifice, 324. 
iusnimjapay in morning 
litany, 315. 
iristubhy metre, 255, 
tvakSy fashion, 205. 
tvaCy see Skin. 

/Afl, imperative termination, 
500, n. 9. 

daksa, effective desire, 484. 
dakmna, fire, 157, 159, 254, 
268, 288, 316, 317, 318, 
320, 321, 322, 344, 473. 
doJmndy as epithet of Dawn, 
121 . 

daJmndSy fees, 299, 352, 495. 


Sanskrit Index 

dattay give, ddnay gift, 480. 
dadhikrdy sense of, 190. 
dayadhvam, be compassion- 
ate, daydy pity, 480. 
darbhay grass, 70, 89, 142, 
n. 3, 329, 364, 366, 367, 
372, 397, 430, 445, 472. 
darvi, ladle, 254, 359. 
dagapeya, offering, 342. 
dagardira, ten-day rite, 335. 
dagahoir, formula, 356, 394. 
dasra, wonderworkers, 114. 
Ddksdyana, form of new and 
full-moon sacrifice, 320, . 
ddnasiutiSy praises of gifts, 
250, 400. * 

ddmariy in Avesta, 487, 
n. 6. 

ddmyatay be subdued, 480. 
diksdy consecration, 182, n. 

10, 276, 285, 300-3, 306, 
336, 341, 377, n. 2, 401, 
629 ; etymology of, 302. 

duhkha, pain, 556, 559, n. 

11. 

durvardha, not sacrificed, 
324. 

durhdrdasa, unpleasant, 
556, nn. 2, 8. 
duTvd, plant, 142, n. 3. 
deva, sense of term, 75, 76, 
231, 232. 

devajanay kind of deity, 76. 
devanidy sense of, 616. 
devayajna, in domestic 
ritual, 215, 359, 361. 
devaydna, way of the gods, 
14, 15, 160, 575, 576. 
daiva, form of marriage, 
330. 

druj, hostile spirit, 34, 38, 
239, 469. 

dronakalaga, wooden vessel, 
255. 

dvddaga, year, 4, n. 6. 

twelve-day offer- 
ing, 177, 178, 314, 335, 
350. 

dhammaydnay Buddhist 
term, 550. 

dharmay law, 361, 479, 481, 
516, n. 5, 517, 518. 
dharmariy law, 84, n. 4, 
249, 479. 


dharmyay 547. 
dhamariy form or abode, 
487. 

dhdyydSy verses in ^astras, 
315, 316. 

dhdrand, fixing in memory, 
372 ’, 591. 

dhdrdgrahasy cups, 329. 
dhisandy might, 401 ; see 
also. Dhisana. 
dhisnyaSy of priests, 328. 
dhly meditation, 251, 448, 
556, 622. 
dhiiiy 448. 

dhrtavraiay of firm ordi- 
nances, 479, n. 5. 
dhrtiy libations, 344. 
dhydna, meditation, 391, 
517, 555, n. 8, 556, n. 1. 
dhruvOy cup, 329. 

nakra, offered to Varuna, 
175. 

naraka loka, hell, 409. 
na (or nd) vartanna (ap- 
parently 7iava and vrt)y 
in Mitanni, 617. 
ndndtvay difference, 483. 
ndndlmukhay Fathers as, 
427. 

ndmariy name, 455, 486, 554. 
ndmarupay name and form, 
530, 578, 579. 
ndmkdhy of hell, 410, nn, 
6 , 8 . 

ndrdgansay cups, 329, 330. 
nih^thdy concentration, 517. 
nigadaSy not used in domes- 
tic ritual, 359, 459. 
mdhanay finale of Saman, 
314. 

niyati, as final principle, 
550. 

niyama, self-restraint, 591. 
nirudhapaguhandhay offer- 
ing, 324. 

nirvarunatvdyay to evade 
Varuna, 97, n. 3. 
nirveda, indifference, 504. 
nividy inserted verses, 253, 
295, 315, 316. 

nimttiy refraining from 
activity, 483. 
nisady form of literature, 
492, n. 1. 



Sanskrit Index 


ntlagrlva^ epithet of Rudra, 
142. 

neti, negative of absolute, 
491, 506, 521. 

nyagrodha, tree, 23, 341, 
363 ; as home of Apsa- 
rases, 1*84, 

nydsa, renunciation, 515. 

panzavartanna (probably 
connected with panca, 
and possibly with vrt), 
Mitanni, 617. 
pancahotr^ formula, 356, 
pancdvaiiins, those who 
make five portions, 313. 
paticcasamuppdda, formula 
of causation of misery, 
564, n. 3 . 

patnlsamydjaSy offerings to 
the gods with their wives, 
320. 

parijman, epithet of various 
gods, 114. 

2)aridhdniydSi concluding 
verses, 256. 
pariplavd, vessel, 329. 
parivariinti form of arrange- 
ment of verses, 314. 
parisad, assembly, 492. 
parisamkhydna, enumera- 
tion, 548, 

partksya, matters requiring 
investigation, 556. 
paroksa, beyond percep- 
tion, 482. 

paToksakdma, loving the 
recondite, 456, n. 8. 
paroksapriya, 456, n. 8. 
paropta, of dead, 417. 
pamaj tree, purifying in- 
fluence of, 420. 
paldga, wood, 819, 341, 363, 
365. 

pavamdna, epithet of Soma, 
167 ; form of Agni, 317. 
pavdka (i. e. pdvaka% form 
of Agni, 317. 
pdka, offerings, 359, 588. 
pd/d, plant, 402, n. 5. 
pdni^ see Hands. 
pdinivata, cup, 330, 334. 
pdda, see Feet. 
papa, evil, 249, 479, n. 7. 


pdpa-krtyd, 479, n. 5. 
pdpman, evil, 381. 
pdyu, see Anus. 
pdrtha, libations, at raja- 
suya, 341. 

pdTvana frddd/ia,fortnightly 
offerings, to the dead, 
428. 

pdmravl, daughter of the 
lightning, 173. 
pindapitryajna, offering to 
the Fathers, 429, 430. 
pitu, used of Soma, 167. 
pitryajna, in domestic ritual, 
360, 361, 430, 431 ; in 
sdkamedhas, 322. 
piirydna ydna), way of the 
Fathers, 14, 160, 575, 576. 
pwhsavana, ceremony, 366, 
367. 

puny a, good, merit, 479, 

n. 7. 

putra, derivation of, 580. 
pudgala, person, 547. 
pudgalavdda, in Buddhism, 
547. 

punarddheya, 289, 317, 318, 
and see Re-establishment 
of the fires. 

punarmrtyu, see Renewed 
death. 

purusa, spirit (cosmic and 
individual), 104, 208, 220, 
261, 282, 352, 355, 405, 
437, 438, 444, 452, 453, 
454, 469, 503, 511, 524, 
535, 536, 537, 542, 544, 
558, 559, 562, 582, n. 5, 
586, 619-21. 

purusasukta, 8, 104, 125, 
189, 352, 405, 438, 480, 
486, 602. 

puronuvdkyd, verse, 294, 
295. 

puroruc, verses in ^a-stras, 
253, 315. 

puiabhft, vessel, 255, 329. 
puria graddha, form of 
offerings to the dead, 
427. 

prsatl, steeds of the Maruts, 
*151. 

Pfsthya sadaha, form of 
sacrifice, 323, 330, 348, 
350, 351. 


679 

prakrti, base form of sacri- 
fice, 313. 

prakrti, nature, 483, 510, 
532-5, 559, 562, 604. 
pragdtha, form of verse, 253, 
314, 315. 

prajfid, consciousness, in- 
tellect, 513, 548, 554, 556, 
557, 568. 

prajndtman, conscious or 
intelligent self, 557. 
prajndnaghana, made up of 
intelligence, 520, n. 2. 
prajndmdtrd, intellect-ele- 
ments, 557. 

pratipad, in ^astras, 315. 
pratihdra, part of Saman, 
314. 

pratyaksa, perception, 482 ; 

in Dignaga, 559, 560. 
pratydhdra, suppression of 
the organs of sense, 591. 
pradhdna, matter, 549. 
prapitva, sense of, 255. 
prahhutas, represent ma- 
terial world, 534. 
pramantha, alleged con- 
nexion with Prometheus, 
88, 289, n. 2. 
pravat, sense of, 411. 
pravara, enumeration of 
seer ancestors of sacri- 
ficer, 319. 

pravargya, sacrifice, 68, 213, 
255, 309, 327, 332, 333, 
435, 490. 

pravrttiy activity, 483. 
prastara, bundles of grass 
as representing the sacri- 
ficer, 320. 

prastdva, part of Stoan, 314. 
prdjna, as soul state, 569, 
n. 6. 

prdjna dtman, 520, n. 2, 569. 
prana, breath collectively, 
or specifically expiration, 
209, 403, 404, 531, 553, 
554, 556, 564, 565. 
pranas, breaths, 352, 452, 
4k, 531, 553, 556, 564, 
565, 589. 

prdnamaya, epithet of self, 
518. 

prdndydma, regulation of 
the breath, 591. 



680 

prataronuvdka, morning 
litany, 115, 828, 333, 353. 
prdyanlya atirdtra^ offering 
introducing a dvddagdha, 
350. 

prdyagciiia, expiations, 266, 
356, 357. 

pragiim^ portion of the 
Brahman, 820, 360, n. 4. 
priydpriye, pleasant and 
unpleasant, 556, n. 2. 
preia, ghost, 413. 
praisaSj ritual directions, 
296, 459. 

prausthapada, offering at, 
362. 

plaksa, as home of Apsa- 
rases, 184. 

plaksa somasamna^ fig-tree 
dropping Soma, 172, n. 2, 
407. 

phai, 356. 

flagrOf possible connexion 
with Brahman, 448. 
(pkiyct}, 448. 

handhUy connexion of sacri- 
fice and universe, 442, 
n. 1. 

haresman, Avesta, 35, 286. 
harhis, sacrificial strew, 34, 
286. 

hali, offering, 210, 213, 376. 
bddhaka, wood, 387. 
hugaM, Kassite word, 618, 
n. 2. 

huddhi, intellect, 437, n. 1, 
509, n. 1, 533, 534, 535, 
536, 542, 55S, 556, n. 1, 
612. 

hudhna, depth, 136. 
brh, grayer, 65, n. 5- 
brhail, metre, 315. 
baudhyavihdra, offering, 56, 
n. 3, 149, n. 5, 322, n. 3, 
365. 

brag, Scandinavian, 39, n. 2, 
445, n. 7. 

brakmacakka, Buddhist 
term, 550. 

hrahmanah parimarah, a 
certain rite, 447. 
brakmadvis, sense of, 616. 


SansTcrit Index 

brahman, see Brahman. 
brakmabandhu, sense of 
term, 366. 

brahmamedka, offering, 424. 
brahmayajna, in domestic 
ritual, 360, 361. 
brahmaydna, Buddhist term, 
550. 

brakmarandhra, cleft in 
skull, 566, 591. 
brahmodyas, riddles, 344, 
345, 350, 435. 
bricht, Irish, 445, n. 7. 

bhakti, devotion to god, 516, 
549, 579. 

bhdradvdjl, bird, 369. 
bhuj, and Bhoja, 633. 
bhuvah, exclamation, 310. 
bhuvar (loka), 528. 
bhuh, exclamation, 310. 
bhur (loka), 528. 
bhutamdtrd, existential ele- 
ments, 557. 

bhutayajna, offering, 189, n. 

6, 214, 215, 3.59, 361. 
bhutavidyd, science of be- 
ings, 215. 

bhutas, beings, 213, 214, 
215. 

bhutdiman, elemental self, 
539. 

hhutdni, matter, 556. 
bhuman, greatness, 517. 
bheda, difference, 483. 

mandukaparni, plant, 142, 
n. 3. 

mati, thought, 517. 
mada, name of Soma, 167, 
madanil, waters, 327. 
madas, terms for nivids, 
295. 

madhu, 172, 284, 353, 624, 
and see BEoney. 
madhuparka, ceremony, 270, 
360, 363. 

madhyddhidevana, altar, 159, 
n. 2. 

man, think (that a thing is 
so-and-so), 554. 
manas, 403, 612, and see 
Mind. 

manlsd, holy thought, 251. 


manusyayajna, in domestic 
ritual, 360, 361. 

-mane, infinitive affix, 617. 
manomaya, epithet of self, 
518, 578. 

mantha, mystic doctrine of, 
491. 

manikin, cup, 232, n. 2, 329. 
marut, derivation of, 154, 
155. 

martya, mortal, 621. 
mahas (mahar-loka), 528. 
mahdndmnl, verses, 316. 
mahdpiiryajna, in sdkamedh- 
as, 322, 430, 431. 
mahdbhutdni, gross ele- 
ments, 525, n. 7. 
mahdvlra, pot, used at 
pravargya, 68, 332, 333. 
mahdvrata, sacrifice, 55, 
351, 352, 354, 374, 384, 
476, 490, 519. 
mahiman, greatness, 485. 
mdtarigvan, derivation of, 
138. 

mdird, element, 468, 558. 
mdnava, man, 621. 
mdnasa, spiritual, 578. 
mdnusa, man, 621. 
mdyd, illusion, 231, 247, 
446, 468, 508, 529-32, 
540, 549, 594. 
mdrjdllya, hearth, 328. 
mdsika grdddha, monthly 
offerings to the dead, 428. 
midhvdhs, epithet of Rudra, 
143, n. 3. 

mlmdnsd, in ves tigation, 483 . 
mukhya prana, form of 
breath, 453. 

munja, grass, 332, 353, 370. 
munyayana isti, offering, 
324. 

muradeva, those whose 
deities are plants, 75. 
mrga, epithet of demons, 
*193. 

nprgayu, epithet of Rudra, 
*144, n. 13. 

mrdhravdc, of hostile speech, 
10, n. 3. 

medhd, intelligence, 372. 
medhdjanana, ceremony to 
engender intelligence, 367. 
Maitrdvaruna, cup, 329. 



Sanskrit Index 


681 


maitri, in Buddhism, 398, 

n. 4. 

moksa, see Salvation, 
mleccha^ barbarian, 233. 

yaksma, self of, 451. 
yajaiayah, form of offerings, 
294. 

yajamdnaf sacrificer, 279, 
289, 358, 359. 
yajna^ sacrifice, 34, 460. 
yajnavdstu, ceremony, 359. 
yama, discipline, 591. 
yava, as purifying, 420. 
ydjyas. Verses of offering, 
255, 294, 295, 296. 
ydiu, sorcerer, 34, 237, 238. 
ydtudhdna, sorcerer, 238, 
240. 

ydydvara, wanderer, 588. 
ye yajdmahe, words accom- 
panying sacrifice, 295. 
yogin, ascetic, 401, 412, 
590. 

rajas, as a guna, 535, 539. 
ratnindm hainnH, offerings, 
341. . 

rdsa, see Taste. 
rdga, Jain technical term, 
504. 

rdjayak^a, disease, 396. 
rdjasuya, sacrifice, 55, 92, 
142, 170, 212, 293, n. 2, 
328, 340, 343, 481. 
rdstrdbhri, offerings, 355. 
Tud, sense of, 146. 
rupa, form, 455, 482, 486, 
487, 556, 557, 578. 
rauhina, cakes, 332. 

linga, phallus, mahdmra, pot 
alleged to be symbol of 
the, 333. 

linga, subtle body, 506, n. 

11, 533, 539, 565. 
loha, copper or bronze, 26. 

vacana, numberin grammar, 
484. 

vajra, thunderbolt, 127. 
vajrin, epithet of Indra, 
124. 

•vane, infinitive in, 617. 
myodhas, Indra as, 353. 


Varunapraghdsas, offerings, 
177, 265, 266, 267, 321, 
322, 325, 353, 362, 471. 
varman, second part of a 
Ksatriya’s name, 368. 
vaga, will, 554, n. 5. 
vasat, call, 80, 253, 256 ; 

offerings to, 213. 
vas, base of Hestia, Vesta, 
625. 

Vasisthayajna, 324. 
vasu, good, 479. 
vdcdramhhana, dubious 
sense of, 530. 
vdjapeya, cups, 339. 
vdjapeya, sacrifice, 55, 67, 
213, 255, 271, 283, 328, 
334, 336, 339, 340, 389. 
vdjaprasavlya, offerings,355. 
vdnaprastha, anchorite, 490, 
589. 

vdyu, air, wind, 525. 
vdriidvfUi, class of house- 
holder, 588. 

vikdra, modification, 530. 
vikrii, derived form of sacri- 
fice, 313. 

vicikiisd, doubt, 483. 
vijndna, consciousness, 465, 

517, 520, n. 2, 536, 555, 
556, 559, 578. 

vijndnaghana, epithet of 
self, 520, n. 2, 545. 
vijndnamaya, epithet of self, 

518, 521. 

viparyaya, error, opposition, 
483. 

viprc, sense of, 624. 
vipra, poet, 402. 
vibhakii, case form, 317, 484. 
vibhu, encompassing ail, 
448. 

vimuco napdt, epithet of 
Pusan, 106. 

vigesa, peculiarity, 539. 
vigpati, epithet of Agni, 158. 
vigvajit, day of a Sattra, 
350. 

vigvajit gilpa, offering, 336. 
vigvajyoiis, brick, 354. 
vigvdvasu, possessing all 
good things, 179. 
vigve devaJi and sarve devdh, 
213, n. 2 ; see All-gods. 
vis, base of Visnii. 109. 


visaya, object, 483. 
visuvant, day in a Sattra, 
*350, 351, 573. 
visarga, see Evacuation. 
viharana, transposition of 
the verses, 253. 
vid, hell, 410. 
mraiara, wood, 367, 
virya, strength, 485. 
vrddhi grdddha, kind of 
offerings to the dead, 427. 
vetasa, plant, 142, n. 3. 
vedand, feeling in Buddhist 
terminology, 566, 578. 
vedi, altar, 84, n. 1, 254, 
353. 

vai, 484. 

vaimrdha, Indra as, 321. 
vaigvadeva, cup, 330. 
vaigvadeva, offerings, 177, 
240, 241, 321, 322. 
vaigvdnara, as soul state, 
569, n. 6. 

vaigvdnara, fire, 254, 264, 
288, 353, 493, 517. 
vausat, call, 295. 
vyasti, sense dubious, 506, 
n.* 11. 

vydna, cross-breathing, 564, 
565. 

vydhrtis, exclamations, 367. 
vyuptakega, epithet of Muni, 
150. 

vyusti, offerings, 343. 
vyudhachandas, with metres 
transposed, 350. 
vrata, rule, vow, 83, 84, n. 4, 
249, 479. 

vrdtika, vow, 371. 

gamyuvdka, invocation of 
prosperity, 320. 
gakii, cults, 402. 
gakra, epithet of Indra, 126. 
gadpati, Indra as, 125. 

gana, hemp, 402, n. 5. 
gatakraiu, epithet of Indra, 

126. 

gabalihoma, 348, 349. 
gabda, see Sound, 

gaml, as drug, 402, n. 5 ; 
wood used for twig to 
drive off calves, 319. 

gardva, as etymology of 
carva, 144, n. 4. 



682 


Sanshrit Index 


garmarii in Brahman’s 
name, 368, 

gdkdstaka, offering, 429, n. 3. 
gdkvara, vow, 371. 
gdmiiTat fire, 325, 359. 
gdllna, type of householder, 
588. 

^itikantha, epithet of Rudra, 
143. 

gipivista, epithet of Visnu, 
108, 109, n. 3. 
giva, as epithet of Rudra 
(cf. Giintert, Der arische 
Welikonigi p. 79), 143, 
n, 2. 

gigna, see Penis. 
gignadeva, phallus worship- 
pers, 75. 

gipdla, plant, 411. 

gu, gavaSi 633, n. 4. 

gukra, cup, 232, n. 2, 329 ; 

epithet of Soma, 167. 
gukriya, vow, 371. 
guci, form of Agni, 317 ; 
epithet of Soma, 167 ; 
epithet of Rudra, 142. 
gupna, alleged ecstatic im- 
plication of, 401. 
gula, as Vedic weapon of 
Rudra, 150, n. 7. 
gulagava, offering, 69, 70, 
197, 358, 359, 364. 
gyena, offering, 336, 337. 
graddhd, faith, 210, 372, 
427. 

gri, beauty, 249 ; see also 

gn. 

groira^ see Ear and Hearing. 
grausat sacrificial call, 253. 
gloka, sound of sun, 106. 
gvasatha^ of Vrtra, 130. 

sadavaUa, portion of Agnl- 
dhra, 320. 

sodaciUy sacrifice, 69, 327, 
335, 339. 

samsad, gathering for dis- 
cussion, 492. 

samsrpdm hamnsiy offerings, 
34 ^ 

samskdrasy impressions, 578. 
samsparga, contact, 557. 
samkalpay conception, 517, 
554, 555. 


saccakiriya, in Pali litera- 
ture, 395, n. 7. 
samjndy perception, 578. 
samjndnay 405, n. 3, 578. 
satohrhatly metre, 315. 
sattavartanna^]^ossihly con- 
nected with sapia and 
mt)y Mitanni term, 617, 
sattra, see Sattra. 
saitva, as a gwna, 535, 539 ; 
in transmigration, 579, 
n. 2. 

sativasy principles, list of, 
in Samkhya system, 
532-^. 

saiya, truth, 246, 248, 472, 
473, 479, 486 ; see also ria. 
satya {loka), 528. 
sadampuspdy a plant, 392. 
sadaSy seat, i. e. hut, 84, n. 1, 
298, 328, 329. 
sapinda, relationship, 373. 
saptahoiTy formulae, 330. 
sahhdy assembly, dicing hall, 
159, 258, 290, 343, 625. 
sabhya, fire, 317, 
samasti, sense dubious, 
506, n. 11, 

samddhiy absorption, 591. 
samdna, a form of breath, 
564, 565. 

samdvartana, ceremony at 
^nd of studentship, 306. 
sampdtay remnant of butter 
offering, 397. 

samyagjndnay Jain technical 
term, 504. 

samrdjy epithet of Varuna, 
96. 

savanas, passings of the 
Soma, 165, n. 7, 297, 
328-31. 

samrndy substitute for Sara- 
nyu, 229. 

savaSy various offerings, 400, 
401. 

samkalpakUy determinate 
(perception), 559. 
saharaksos, as epithet of 
Agni, 160. 

sdkamedhaSy offerings, 68, 
289, 322, 323. 

sddyabkra^ offerings, 336, 
337. 

sddhUy good, 479, nn. 5, 7. 


sdnuy Soma’s abode there, 
169. 

sdmidhenly kindling verses, 

319. 

sdrupya, co-ordination, as 
principle of knowledge, 
537. 

Sdvitray cup, 330. 
siddhi, sense dubious, 506, 

n. 11. 

sidhraka, wood, 344. 
sukhOy pleasure, 556. 
suparna, bird, sacrifice 
takes form of, 458. 
sura, god, 232. 
surd, drink, 91, 92, 235, 265, 
339, 352, 353, 384, 407, 
429, 585. 

susayai^y doctrine of. 564, 

n. 3. 

summndy vein, 591, 
sustuti, lovely praise, 251. 
suhdrdasa, pleasant, 556, 
nn. 2, 8. 

sukiavakUy formula, 259, 

320. 

'suta-sam, offering, 340. 
suk^a, sense of, 533, n. 3. 
srjy create, 80, n. 8. 

somavantab, Fathers as, 
322. 

sautrdmanl, sacrifice, 131, 
255, 265, 271, 283, 285, 
317, 389. 

skandha, in Buddhism, 209, 
578. 

sthapaii-sava, offering, 340. 
stotriya, verses, in fastras, 
315, 316. 

stoma, form of chant, 485, 
486. 

stomabhdgas, formulae, 315, 

482. 

sthiii, the result attained, 

483. 

sndtaka, student who has 
performed bath, 372. 
sparga, see Touch. 
smrti, memory, 482. 
sfdktya, amulet, 388, n. 1. 
sruCy ladle, 254. 
svadhdy sacrificial call, 147, 
322, 407. 

svabhdva, innate nature, as 
final principle, 550. 



Sanskrit Index 


683 


smyammra, form of mar- 
riage, 119, 373. 
sx?ar [loka), 528.' 
svarasdmariy days, 350. 
svardj, epithet of Indra and 
Varuna, 96. 
svargaloka, 179, n. 7. 
svdm, chip, burned at end 
of sacrifice, 286. 
svdhd, sacrificial call, 147, 


152, n. 11, 253, 322, 
356, 

svistakrtf Agni offered to 
as, 320, 345, 360, 376. 

hadaya-vatthUy heart basis, 
565. 

harivant, Indra as, 328. 
haviryaj-na, form of offering, ! 
316. I 


hasia, see Hands. 
hdriyojana, cup, 330. 
hinkdra, part of Saman, 314. 
hr day tty heart, 565. 
hrdayajnay pleasant,556,n,2 . 
he HavOy exclamation of the 
Asuras, 233. 
hoir formulae, 356, 396. 
hruduy dubious origin of 
term, 394. 



