===== Internet Archive OCR: religionveda00bloouoft_djvu.txt =====

Ex  Libris 

THE  CANADIAN 


Courtesy  of 

The  Estate  of  G.J.L.   Bates 


— 


FROM-THE-LIBRARYOF 
TRINITYCOLLEGETORDNTO 


THE  AMERICAN  LECTURES 
ON  THE  HISTORY  OF  RELIGIONS. 


I.  Buddhism. — The  History  and  Literature  of  Bud 
dhism.     By  T.  W.  RHYS-DAVIDS,  LL.D.,  Ph.D. 

II.  Primitive  Religions. — The  Religions  of  Primitive 
Peoples.    By  D.  G.  BRINTON,  A.M.,  M.D.,  LL.D.,  Sc.D. 

III.  Israel. — Jewish  Religions.     Life  after  the  Exile. 
By  Rev.  T.  K.  CHEYNE,  M.A.,  D.D. 

IV.  Israel. — Religion  of  Israel  to  the  Exile.     By  KARL 
BUDDF,,  D.I). 

V.  Ancient  Egyptians. — The  Religion  of  the  Ancient 
Egyptians.     By  G.  STEINDORFF,  Ph.D. 

VI.  Religion  in  Japan. — The   Development  of   Re 
ligion  in  Japan.     By  GEORGE  W.  KNOX,  D.D. 

VII.  The  Veda.— The   Religion   of  the  Veda.     By 
MAURICE  BLOOMFIELD,  Ph.D.,  LL.D. 

In  active  preparation  : 

VIII.  Islam. — The    Religion   of  Islam.      By   IGUAZ 
GOLDZIHER,  Ph.D.,  Litt.D. 


G.    P.    PUTNAM'S   SONS 

NEW   YORK   AND    LONDON 


AMERICAN    LECTURES    ON     THE 
HISTORY  OF  RELIGIONS 

SEVENTH  SERIES— 1906-1907 

THE  RELIGION  OFTHE  VEDA 

THE  ANCIENT  RELIGION  OF  INDIA 

(FROM  RIG- VEDA  TO  UPANISHADS) 


BY 

MAURICE  BLOOMFIELD,   Ph.D.,  LL.D. 

Professor  of  Sanskrit  and   Comparative   Philology   in  Johns   Hopkins 
University,    Baltimore 


G.  P.  PUTNAM'S  SONS 

NEW    YORK    AND    LONDON 

Cbe  Ifcnicfcerbocfcer   press 

1908 


123139 
JAN  2  0  1987 


COPYRIGHT,  igo8 

BY 
G.  P.  PUTNAM'S  SONS 


TTbe  ftnfcfcerbocfcer  TDr«s,  flew  JPort 


PREFACE. 


THIS  volume  reproduces  with  some  little  ampli 
fication  six  lectures  on  the  Religion  of  the 
Veda  given  before  various  learned  institutions  of 
America  during  the  fall  and  winter  of  1906-07. 
The  period  of  time  and  the  amount  of  literature 
embraced  in  the  term  Vedic  are  large  ;  moreover  any 
discussion  of  this  religion  that  deserves  the  name 
must  also  include  a  glance  at  the  prehistoric  periods 
which  preceded  the  religion  of  the  Veda.  Con 
sequently  my  treatment  must  be  selective.  It  was 
not  difficult  to  make  the  selection.  I  have  not 
thought  it  necessary  to  include  a  complete  account 
of  Vedic  mythology  and  legend  ;  nor  did  the  details 
of  priestly  ritual  and  religious  folk-practices  seem 
to  me  to  call  for  elaborate  exposition  at  this  time 
and  under  the  circumstances  of  a  popular  treatment 
of  Vedic  religion.  On  the  other  hand,  it  seemed 
both  interesting  and  important  to  bring  out  as 
markedly  as  possible  the  development  of  the  re 
ligious  thought  of  the  Veda  in  distinction  from 


iv  Preface 

myth  and  ceremony.  The  reader  of  these  pages 
will,  I  hope,  learn  to  his  satisfaction  how  the  religion 
of  the  Veda  rests  upon  a  prehistoric  foundation 
which  is  largely  nature  myth ;  how  it  continues  in 
the  Rig- Veda  hymns  as  hieratic  ritual  worship  of 
polytheistic  gods ;  how  this  religion  grew  more  and 
more  formal  and  mechanical  in  the  Yajur-Vedas  and 
Brahmanas,  until  it  was  practically  abandoned  ;  how 
and  when  arose  the  germs  of  higher  religious 
thought ;  and,  finally,  how  the  motives  and  prin 
ciples  that  underlie  this  entire  chain  of  mental 
events  landed  Hindu  thought,  at  a  comparatively 
early  period,  in  the  pantheistic  and  pessimistic  re 
ligion  of  the  Upanishads  which  it  has  never  again 
abandoned. 

MAURICE  BLOOMFIELD. 

JOHNS  HOPKINS  UNIVERSITY, 
BALTIMORE,  April,  1907. 


ANNOUNCEMENT. 

THE  American  Lectures  on  the  History  of 
Religions  are  delivered  under  the  auspices  of 
the  American  Committee  for  Lectures  on  the  History 
of  Religions.  This  Committee  was  organised  in  1892, 
for  the  purpose  of  instituting  "  popular  courses  in 
the  History  of  Religions,  somewhat  after  the  style  of 
the  Hibbert  Lectures  in  England,  to  be  delivered 
annually  by  the  best  scholars  of  Europe  and  this 
country,  in  various  cities,  such  as  Baltimore,  Boston, 
Brooklyn,  Chicago,  New  York,  Philadelphia,  and 
others." 

The  terms  of  association  under  which  the  Commit 
tee  exist  are  as  follows : 

1.  The  object  of  this  Association  shall  be  to  provide 
courses  of  lectures  on  the  history  of  religions,  to 
be  delivered  in  various  cities. 

2.  The  Association  shall  be  composed  of  delegates 
from  Institutions  agreeing  to  co-operate,  or  from 
Local  Boards  organised  where  such  co-operation 
is  not  possible. 

3.  These  delegates — one  from  each  Institution  or 


iv  Preface 

myth  and  ceremony.  The  reader  of  these  pages 
will,  I  hope,  learn  to  his  satisfaction  how  the  religion 
of  the  Veda  rests  upon  a  prehistoric  foundation 
which  is  largely  nature  myth ;  how  it  continues  in 
the  Rig- Veda  hymns  as  hieratic  ritual  worship  of 
polytheistic  gods ;  how  this  religion  grew  more  and 
more  formal  and  mechanical  in  the  Yajur-Vedas  and 
Brahmanas,  until  it  was  practically  abandoned  ;  how 
and  when  arose  the  germs  of  higher  religious 
thought ;  and,  finally,  how  the  motives  and  prin 
ciples  that  underlie  this  entire  chain  of  mental 
events  landed  Hindu  thought,  at  a  comparatively 
early  period,  in  the  pantheistic  and  pessimistic  re 
ligion  of  the  Upanishads  which  it  has  never  again 
abandoned. 

MAURICE  BLOOMFIELD. 

JOHNS  HOPKINS  UNIVERSITY, 
BALTIMORE,  April,  1907. 


ANNOUNCEMENT. 

THE  American  Lectures  on  the  History  of 
Religions  are  delivered  under  the  auspices  of 
the  American  Committee  for  Lectures  on  the  History 
of  Religions.  This  Committee  was  organised  in  1892, 
for  the  purpose  of  instituting  "  popular  courses  in 
the  History  of  Religions,  somewhat  after  the  style  of 
the  Hibbert  Lectures  in  England,  to  be  delivered 
annually  by  the  best  scholars  of  Europe  and  this 
country,  in  various  cities,  such  as  Baltimore,  Boston, 
Brooklyn,  Chicago,  New  York,  Philadelphia,  and 
others." 

The  terms  of  association  under  which  the  Commit 
tee  exist  are  as  follows : 

1.  The  object  of  this  Association  shall  be  to  provide 
courses  of  lectures  on  the  history  of  religions,  to 
be  delivered  in  various  cities. 

2.  The  Association  shall  be  composed  of  delegates 
from  Institutions  agreeing  to  co-operate,  or  from 
Local  Boards  organised  where  such  co-operation 
is  not  possible. 

3.  These  delegates — one  from  each  Institution  or 


vi  Announcement 


Local  Board  —  shall  constitute  themselves  a 
Council  under  the  name  of  the  "  American  Com 
mittee  for  Lectures  on  the  History  of  Religions." 

4.  The  Council  shall  elect  out  of  its  number  a  Chair 

man,  a  Secretary,  and  a  Treasurer. 

5.  All  matters  of  local  detail  shall  be  left  to  the  In 

stitutions  or  Local  Boards,  under  whose  auspices 
the  lectures  are  to  be  delivered. 

6.  A  course  of  lectures  on  some  religion,  or  phase  of 

religion,  from  an  historical  point  of  view,  or  on 
a  subject  germane  to  the  study  of  religions,  shall 
be  delivered  annually,  or  at  such  intervals  as  may 
be  found  practicable,  in  the  different  cities  repre 
sented  by  this  Association. 

7.  The  Council  (a)  shall  be  charged  with  the  selec 

tion  of  the  lecturers,  (b)  shall  have  charge  of  the 
funds,  (c)  shall  assign  the  time  for  the  lectures  in 
each  city,  and  perform  such  other  functions  as 
may  be  necessary. 

8.  Polemical  subjects,  as  well  as  polemics  in  the  treat 
ment  of  subjects,  shall  be  positively  excluded. 

9.  The  lecturer  shall  be  chosen  by  the  Council  at 
least  ten  months  before  the  date  fixed  for  the 
course  of  lectures. 

10.  The  lectures  shall  be  delivered  in  the  various  cities 

between  the  months  of  September  and  June. 

11.  The  copyright  of  the  lectures  shall  be  the  prop 

erty  of  the  Association. 


Announcement  vii 


12.  One-half   of  the   lecturer's   compensation   shall 

be  paid  at  the  completion  of  the  entire  course 
and  the  second  half  upon  the  publication  of  the 
lectures. 

13.  The  compensation  to  the  lecturer  shall  be  fixed 

in  each  case  by  the  Council. 

14.  The  lecturer   is   not   to  deliver  elsewhere  any 

of  the  lectures  for  which  he  is  engaged  by  the 
Committee,  except  with  the  sanction  of  the 
Committee. 

The  Committee  as  now  constituted  is  as  follows : 
Prof.  Crawford  H.  Toy,  Chairman,  7  Lowell  St., 
Cambridge,  Mass.  ;  Rev.  Dr.  John  P.  Peters,  Treas 
urer,  225  West  QQth  St.,  New  York;  Prof.  Morris 
Jastrow,  Jr.,  Secretary,  248  South  23d  St.,  Philadel 
phia,  Pa.  ;  Prof.  Francis  Brown,  Union  Theological 
Seminary,  New  York  ;  Prof.  Richard  Gottheil,  Col 
umbia  University,  New  York ;  Prof.  R.  F.  Harper, 
University  of  Chicago,  Chicago,  111.  ;  Prof.  Paul 
Haupt,  2511  Madison  Avenue,  Baltimore,  Md. ; 
Prof.  F.  W.  Hooper,  Brooklyn  Institute,  Brooklyn, 
N.  Y. ;  Prof.  E.  W.  Hopkins,  New  Haven,  Conn. ; 
Prof.  Edward  Knox  Mitchell,  Hartford  Theologi 
cal  Seminary,  Hartford,  Conn. ;  Prof.  George  F. 
Moore,  Cambridge,  Mass. ;  Rev.  F.  K.  Sanders, 
Boston,  Mass. ;  Pres.  F.  C.  Southworth,  Meadville 
Theological  Seminary,  Meadville,  Pa. 

The  lecturers  in  the  course  of  American  Lectures 


viii  Announcement 


on  the  History  of  Religions  and  the  titles  of  their 

volumes  are  as  follows  : 

1894-1895— Prof.    T.    W.    Rhys-Davids,      Ph.  D.— 

Buddhism. 
1896-1897— Prof.  Daniel  G.  Brinton,  M.D.,  LL.D.— 

Religion  of  Primitive  Peoples. 
1897-1898— Rev.  Prof.  T.  K.  Cheyne,  D.D.— Jewish 

Religious  Life  after  the  Exile. 
1898-1899— Prof.    Karl  Budde,    D.D.— Religion  of 

Israel  to  the  Exile. 
1904-1905  — Prof.    Georg   Steindorff,   Ph.D.  —  The 

Religion  of  the  Ancient  Egyptians. 
1905-1906— Prof . George  William  Knox,  D. D., LL.  D. 

— The  Development  of  Religion  in  Japan. 
The  present  course  of  lectures,  the  seventh  in  the 
series,  was  delivered  by  Professor  Maurice  Bloomfield, 
Ph.D.,  LL.D.,  Professor  of  Sanskrit  and  Comparative 
Philology  at  the  Johns  Hopkins  University,  and  one 
of  the  leading  authorities  on  Vedic  Literature.  His 
latest  work,  a  Concordance  of  the  Vedic  hymns  and 
prayer  formulae,  covering  1 100  pages,  theembodiment 
of  a  life's  study,  published  as  Vol.  10  of  the  Harvard 
Oriental  Series,  will  ensure  Professor  Bloomfield  a  per 
manent  place  in  the  history  of  Vedic  studies.  Besides 
this  he  has  edited  from  the  manuscripts  the  Vedic 
ritual  book,  known  as  the  Kaucjka-Sutra ;  published 
a  translation  of  the  Hymns  of  the  Atharva-Veda,  in 
cluded  in  Professor  Max  Muller's  Sacred  Books  of 


Announcement  ix 


the  East  (Oxford,  1897);  written  a  volume  on  the  Lit 
erature  and  History  of  the  Atharva-Veda,  entitled  : 
"The  Atharva-Veda  and  the  Gopatha-Brahmana  " 
(Strassburg,  1889) ;  and  edited,  in  collaboration  with 
Professor  Richard  Garbe  of  Tubingen,  a  chromophoto- 
graphic  reproduction  of  the  unique  birch-bark  manu 
script  of  the  Kashmirian  Atharva-Veda  (3  vols., 
Baltimore,  1901).  He  has  also  contributed  to  the 
technical  journals  of  this  country  and  Europe  num 
erous  papers  on  linguistic,  mythological,  and  ethno 
logical  topics  in  general,  in  addition  to  a  large  num 
ber  of  contributions  on  the  interpretation,  textual 
restoration,  and  religion  of  the  Veda  in  particular. 

The  lectures  in  this  course  were  delivered  before 
the  Johns  Hopkins  University,  Baltimore ;  Union 
Theological  Seminary,  New  York;  Brooklyn  Institute 
of  Arts  and  Sciences,  Brooklyn ;  Drexel  Institute, 
Philadelphia;  Meadville  Theological  Seminary,  Mead- 
ville  ;  University  of  Chicago,  Chicago  ;  and  Hartford 
Theological  Seminary,  Hartford. 

JOHN  P.  PETERS,    \  Committee 
C.  H.  TOY,  on 

MORRIS  JASTROW,  )  Publication. 
January,  1908. 


CONTENTS. 

LECTURE  THE  FIRST. 

INDIA  THE  LAND  OF  RELIGIONS.— THE  VEDA. 

Multiplicity  of  Hindu  religions — Brahmanism — Bud 
dhism — Profound  hold  of  religion  upon  the  Hindu 
mind — Hindu  life  dominated  by  religious  institu 
tions — The  four  stages  of  life — The  institution  of 
caste — Caste  then  and  now — Symptoms  of  revulsion 
against  caste — Other  pernicious  religious  institu 
tions — Continuity  of  India's  religious  history — Date 
of  the  conception  of  rta,  or  "cosmic  order" — Close 
relationship  of  the  religions  of  India  and  Persia — 
Slight  connection  between  India  and  Persia  in  sec 
ular  history — The  Parsis  in  India — Close  relation 
between  Veda  and  Avesta — The  Veda  and  the  Indo- 
European  period — The  Veda  as  a  whole — The  date 
of  the  Veda — Its  great  uncertainty — Nature  of  Vedic 
tradition — The  £rotriyas,  or  "Oral  Traditionalists"- 
Uncertain  character  of  Vedic  life  and  institutions — 
Origin  of  the  Veda — Contents  of  Vedic  literature 
as  a  whole — The  four  Vedas — The  Rig- Veda — The 
books  of  the  Rig- Veda — Theme  and  character  of  the 
Rig- Veda — A  hymn  to  Goddess  Dawn — The  Yajur- 
Veda — Character  of  the  ^a/^5-formulas — The  Sama- 
Veda — Origin  and  purpose  of  the  Sama-Veda — The 
Atharva-Veda — Contents  of  the  Atharva-Veda — 
Religious  Quality  of  the  Atharva-Veda  —  Two 
Atharvan  hymns  —  The  Brahmana  Texts  —  Some 
legends  of  the  Brahmanas — The  Aranyakas,  or  "  For 
est  Treatises" — The  Upanishads — Literary  history 


xii  Contents 


of  the   Upanishads — The  Upanishads  in   the  West 

— Critical  estimate  of  the  Upanishads J-59 

LECTURE  THE  SECOND. 

THE    HIERATIC    RELIGION.— THE    PANTHEON 
OF  THE  VEDA. 

Fundamental  traits  of  early  Vedic  religion — False  view 
of  the  nature  of  Vedic  poetry — The  Rig-Veda  as 
sacrificial  poetry — Difficulty  of  understanding  the 
ritual  character  of  the  Rig- Veda — Poetry  addressed 
to  the  Goddess  Dawn — A  hymn  to  the  sacrifice 
post — The  Goddess  Dawn  as  the  symbol  of  liberality 
at  the  sacrifice — Some  erroneous  estimates  of  God 
dess  Dawn — Agni  the  son  of  "Baksheesh" — Prac 
tical  purposes  of  Vedic  poetry — The  Rig- Veda  con 
tains  the  religion  of  the  upper  classes — The  ritual  of 
the  Rig- Veda — The  apri-hymns — Nature- worship 
the  keynote  of  the  Rig-Veda — India's  climate  and 
nature- worship —  Vedic  and  Hellenic  mythology 
compared  —  Arrested  anthropomorphism  —  Defini 
tion  of  the  word  Pantheon  as  applied  to  the  Veda 
— Faulty  classifications  of  the  Vedic  gods — Chrono 
logy  of  the  gods — Different  degrees  of  certainty 
about  the  origin  of  the  gods — Classification  of  the 
gods  in  these  lectures 60-98 

LECTURE  THE  THIRD. 

THE  PREHISTORIC  GODS. 

Two  prehistoric  periods  bearing  upon  Hindu  religion — 
Scepticism  about  Comparative  Mythology — Diffi 
culties  in  the  way  of  Comparative  Mythology — Com 
parative  Mythology  and  Ethnology — The  myth  of 
Cerberus — The  Indo-European  period — Prehistoric 
words  for  god — Father  Sky  and  Mother  Earth— 
The  Thunderer — The  Vedic  Agvins,  or  "Horsemen," 
the  two  Sons  of  Heaven — The  Dioscuri  in  Greek 


Contents  xiii 


mythology — The  Lettish  myth  of  the  two  "Sons  of 
God" — Common  kernel  of  the  myth  of  the  two  "Sons 
of  Heaven  " — The  Aryan,  or  Indo-Iranian  period — 
Important  religious  ideas  common  to  the  two 
peoples — The  dual  gods  Varuna  and  Mitra — Ahura 
Mazda  and  Varuna  —  The  conception  of  rta,  or 
"cosmic  order" — The  Adityas — Aditi,  the  mother 
of  the  Adityas — Mitra,  a  sun  god — The  sun,  the 
moon,  and  the  planets — The  Adityas  and  Amesha 
Spentas — Early  ethical  concepts  among  the  Indo- 
Europeans — Varuna  and  Greek  Ouranos  (Uranus) — 
The  origin  of  man — Sundry  parents  of  man — 
"Father  Manu" — Yama  and  YamI,  the  "Twins" — 
Interlacing  of  the  myths  of  the  first  man — The 
human  character  of  Manu  and  Yama — Yama,  the 
god  of  the  dead — Soma,  the  sacrificial  drink  of  the 
gods — The  myth  of  Soma  and  the  Heavenly  Eagle — 
Value  of  the  preceding  reconstructions 99-149 

LECTURE  THE  FOURTH. 

THE   TRANSPARENT,   TRANSLUCENT,   AND 

OPAQUE  GODS— RELIGIOUS  CONCEPTIONS 

AND  RELIGIOUS  FEELING  IN  THE 

VEDA. 

The  transparent  gods:  their  importance  for  the  study  of 
religion — Father  Sky  and  Daughter  Dawn — Surya, 
a  god  of  the  sun — Vata  and  Vayu,  gods  of  wind — • 
The  most  transparent  god:  Agni,  Fire — Agni  as  the 
sacrifice  fire — Prehistoric  gods  of  fire — Birth  and 
youth  of  Agni — Agni  as  god  of  the  morning — New 
births  of  Agni — Agni  on  the  altar,  the  agent  of  the 
gods — Priesthood  and  divinity  of  Agni — A  hymn  to 
Agni — Other  myths  of  the  Fire  God — The  trans 
lucent  gods:  definition  of  the  term — God  Vishnu — 
God  Pushan — God  Indra,  as  an  example  of  an 
opaque  god — Traditional  explanation  of  the  myth 
of  Indra  and  Vritra — Professor  Hillebrandt's  inter- 


xiv  Contents 


PAGES 

pretation  of  the  same  myth — Renewed  definition  of 
the  religion  of  the  Rig-Veda — Renewed  definition  of 
Vedic  practicalities — Conflicting  prayers  and  sac 
rifices — The  conception  of  faith — Faith  related  to 
Truth  and  Wisdom — Faith  personified — Faith  and 
works — The  reward  for  faith  postponed  to  heaven — 
Contrast  between  early  "  faith  "  (jraddha)  and  later 
"  devotion  "  (bhakti) — "Gift  praises,"  another  sop  to 
the  sacrificer — The  religious  feeling  of  the  Rig- Veda. 
— The  utilitarian  sense — The  glory  of  the  gods — 
Absence  of  real  sentiment  towards  the  gods — Poetic 
inspiration  the  true  religious  feeling — The  com 
placent  master-singers — The  poets'  own  estimate  of 
their  work — The  divine  quality  of  devotion.  . . .  150-207 

LECTURE  THE  FIFTH. 

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  HINDU  THEOSOPHY. 

Statement  of  the  problem — Time  when  theosophy  origin 
ated — Metempsychosis  and  pessimism  unknown  in 
the  earlier  Vedic  records — Place  where  the  higher 
religion  originated — Priest  philosophy  at  the  sacrifice 
— The  theosophic  charade — Specimens  of  the  theo- 
sophic  charade — The  riddle  hymn  of  Dirghatamas — 
Interrelation  between  the  sacrifice  and  theosophy — 
On  the  supposed  origin  of  theosophy  with  the  royal 
caste — Criticism  of  this  view — Transition  from  rit 
ualistic  polytheism  to  theosophy — Early  scepticism 
— "  Gotterdammerung  " — Failure  of  God  Varuna — 
Monism,  or  the  idea  of  unity — The  creation  hymn — 
Translation  and  analysis  of  the  creation  hymn — At 
tempts  at  Monotheism — Prajapati,  the  Lord  of 
Creatures — Vicvakarman,  creator  of  the  universe, 
and  kindred  conceptions — Purusha,  the  world  man 
— Brihaspati,  the  Lord  of  Devotion — Transcendental 
monotheistic  conceptions:  "Time,"  "Love,"  etc. — 
Defects  of  the  earlier  monotheistic  and  monistic 
attempts 208-248 


Contents  xv 

PAGES 

LECTURE  THE  SIXTH. 
THE  FINAL  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  VEDA. 

Death  and  future  life  in  paradise — Early  notions  of 
Hell — The  idea  of  retribution — Limit  of  reward  for 
good  deeds — The  notion  of  "death-anew,"  or  "re- 
death  " — How  comes  the  belief  in  transmigration — 
Hindu  doctrine  of  transmigration — The  method  of 
transmigration — The  doctrine  of  karma,  or  spiritual 
evolution — How  transmigration  and  karma  appear 
to  Western  minds — The  pessimist  theory  of  life — 
Cause  of  Hindu  pessimism — Pessimism  and  the  per 
fect  principle  (Brahma) — Dualistic  pessimism — 
Salvation  through  realisation  of  one's  own  Brahma- 
hood — The  conception  of  the  alman,  "breath,"  as 
life  principle — Atman,  the  soul  of  the  Universe — 
Brahma,  the  spiritual  essence  of  the  Universe — 
Fusion  of  Atman  and  Brahma — Maya,  or  the  world 
an  illusion — The  unknowableness  of  Brahma — 
Emerson's  poem  on  the  Brahma — The  fulness  of 
Brahma:  a  story  of  Yajnavalkya  and  his  wife  Mai- 
treyl — Transition  from  philosophy  to  piety — Hindu 
asceticism — Professor  Huxley's  critique  of  asceti- 
ism — Pilgrim's  progress  under  the  religion  of  Brahma 
— Investiture  and  disciplehood — The  life  of  the 
householder — The  life  of  the  forest-dweller  and 
wandering  ascetic — Ultima  Thule 249-289 

INDEX 291 


LECTURE  THE  FIRST. 
India  the  Land  of  Religions — The  Veda. 

Multiplicity  of  Hindu  religions — Brahmanism — Buddhism — 
Profound  hold  of  religion  upon  the  Hindu  mind — Hindu 
life  dominated  by  religious  institutions — The  four  stages 
of  life — The  institution  of  caste — Caste  then  and  now — 
Symptoms  of  revulsion  against  caste — Other  pernicious 
religious  institutions — Continuity  of  India's  religious 
history — Date  of  the  conception  of  rta,  or  "cosmic 
order" — Close  relationship  of  the  religions  of  India  and 
Persia — Slight  connection  between  India  and  Persia 
in  secular  history — The  Parsis  in  India —  Close  relation 
between  Veda  and  Avesta — The  Veda  and  the  Indo- 
European  period — The  Veda  as  a  whole — The  date  of 
the  Veda — Its  great  uncertainty — Nature  of  Vedic  tra 
dition — The  Qrotriyas  or  "Oral  Traditionalists" — Un 
certain  character  of  Vedic  life  and  institutions — Origin 
of  the  Veda — Contents  of  Vedic  literature  as  a  whole 
— The  four  Vedas — The  Rig-Veda — The  books  of  the 
Rig- Veda — Theme  and  character  of  the  Rig- Veda — A 
hymn  to  Goddess  Dawn— The  Yajur-Veda — Character 
of  the  ya jus-formulas — The  Sama-Veda — Origin  and 
purpose  of  the  Sama-Veda — The  Atharva-Veda — Con 
tents  of  the  Atharva-Veda — Religious  quality  of  the 
Atharva-Veda — Two  Atharvan  hymns — The  Brahmana 
Texts — Some  legends  of  the  Brahmanas — The  Aranya- 
kas,  or  "Forest  Treatises" — The  Upanishads — Literary 
history  of  the  Upanishads — The  Upanishads  in  the 
West — Critical  estimate  of  the  Upanishads. 


|M'V/ 


2  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 

INDIA  is  the  land  of  religions  in  more  than  one 
sense.  It  has  produced  out  of  its  own  resources 
a  number  of  distinctive  systems  and  sects,  two  of 
which,  at  least,  are  of  world-wide  interest  and 
importance. 

Brahmanism,  in  its  manifold  aspects,  is  to  this  day 
the  religion  of  about  200  millions  of  people  in  India 
herself,  a  matter  of  interest  on  the  face  of  it.  But 
its  universal  importance  lies  with  the  Brahmanical 
systems  of  religious  philosophy,  especially  the  two 
known  respectively  as  Vedanta  and  Sankhya.  These 
are  two  religio-philosophical,  or  theosophical  systems 
which  essay  to  probe  the  twin  riddle  of  the  universe 
and  human  life.  They  do  this  in  so  penetrating 
a  way  as  to  place  them  by  the  side  of  the  most 
profound  philosophic  endeavors  of  other  nations. 
The  beginnings  of  this  philosophy  are  found  in  the 
so-called  Upanishads,  a  set  of  treatises  which  are 
part  of  the  Veda.  The  Upanishads  contain  the 
higher  religion  of  the  Veda.  The  essence  of  higher 
Brahmanical  religion  is  Upanishad  religion.  The 
religion  of  the  Upanishads  is  part  of  the  theme  of 
these  lectures. 

Buddhism  started  in  the  bosom  of  Brahmanism. 
Its  radical  reforms,  concerning  both  doctrine  and 
practical  life,  are  directed  in  good  part  against  Brah 
manism.  Yet  Buddhism  is  a  religion  genuinely 


India  the  Land  of  Religions 


Hindu  in  its  texture.  It  shares  with  Brahmanism  its 
dominant  religious  ideas.  Transmigration  of  souls, 
pessimism,  and  the  all-absorbing  desire  to  be  re 
leased  from  an  endless  chain  of  existences,  linked 
together  by  successive  deaths, — these  are  the  axioms 
of  both  Brahmanism  and  Buddhism.  After  spread 
ing  over  the  continent  of  India  Buddhism  crossed 
over  into  Ceylon,  Farther  India,  and  the  islands  of 
the  Asiatic  Archipelago.  To  the  north  it  passed 
into  and  across  the  great  Himalaya  Mountains  to 
Nepaul,  Thibet,  Turkestan,  China,  Korea,  and  Japan. 
In  its  various  forms  it  is  to  this  day  one  of  the 
world's  great  religions.  There  are  no  absolutely  re-  | 
liable  statistics  as  to  the  number  of  Buddhists  upon 
the  surface  of  the  earth  ;  300  millions^  may  be  re 
garded  as  a  conservative  estimate  of  the  number  of 
people  who  either  are  Buddhists,  or  whose  religion 
has  been  shaped  by  Buddhist  ideas,  Brahmanism 
and  Buddhism,  both  Hindu  products,  together  sup- 
ply  the  religious  needs  of  500  millions  of  the  earth's 
inhabitants. 

In  another  sense  India  is  the  land  of  religions. 
Nowhere  else  is  the  texture  of  life  so  much  im-  A- 
pregnated  with  religious  convictions  and  practices. 
At  a  very  early  time  belief  in  the  transmigration 
of  souls  (metempsychosis),  whose  precise  origin  in 
India  is  still  something  of  a  problem,  planted  itself 


The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


down  in  the  Hindu  mind  as  the  basis  and  funda 
mental  axiom  of  all  speculations  about  the  soul  and 
future  life.  This  of  itself  is  merely  a  theory.  The 
practical  importance  of  this  theory  is,  that  it  is 
coupled  almost  from  the  start  with  a  pessimistic  view 
of  life.  According  to  this  the  everlasting  round 
of  existences  is  a  nuisance,  and  release  from  it  an 
imperative  necessity.  It  would  be  difficult  to  find 
anywhere  else  a  purely  speculative  notion  which  has 
taken  so  firm  a  hold  upon  practical  life.  It  pervades 
f  the  Hindu  consciousness  in  a  far  more  real  and 
intimate  way  than  its  great  rival,  the  belief  in  an 
eternal  future  life,  pervades  the  religious  thought 
of  the  Western  world. 

From  the  beginning  of  India's  history  religious 
institutions  control  the  character  and  the  develop 
ment  of  its  people  to  an  extent  unknown  elsewhere. 
Hindu  life  from  birth  to  death,  and  even  after  death 
in  the  fancied  life  of  the  Fathers,  or  Manes  in 
heaven,  is  religious,  or  sacramental  throughout.  It 
is  surrounded  by  institutions  and  practices,  and 
clouded  by  superstitions  which  are  discarded  only 
by  them  that  have  worked  their  way  to  the  highest 
philosophical  aspects  of  religion. 

The  religious  life  of  the  Brahmanical  Hindu  is 
divided  into  the  four  stages 1  of  religious  disciple ;  god- 

1  Called  dframa,  literally,  "hermitages." 


India  the  Land  of  Religions 


fearing  and  sacrificing  householder;  contemplative 
forest -dweller;  and  wandering,  world -abandoning 
ascetic.  Such  at  least  is  the  theory  of  their  religious 
law.  Even  though  practice  at  all  times  fell  short  of 
this  mechanical  and  exacting  arrangement,  yet  the 
claim  is  allowed  that  life  is  an  essentially  solitary 
religious  pilgrimage,  the  goal  being  personal  salva 
tion.  There  is  no  provision  in  such  a  scheme  for  ' ' 
the  interests  of  the  State  and  the  development- 
of  the  race.  Unintentionally,  but  none  the  less 
effectively,  they  are  left  out  of  account,  leaving  a 
corresponding  blank  in  India's  national  character. 

Over   this  hovers,   like   a    black    cloud,   another? 
institution,  the  system,  or  rather  the  chaos,  of  caste.  | 
Its  grotesque  inconsistencies  and  bitter  tyranny  have 
gone  far  to  make  the  Hindu  what  he  is.     The  corro 
sive  properties  of  this  single  institution,  more  than 
anything  else  whatsoever,  have  checked  the  develop 
ment   of   India  into   a   nation.      They   have   made 
possible  the  spectacle  of  a  country  of   nearly   300 
millions   of   inhabitants,    governed   by  the   skill    of 
60,000  military  and  60,000  civilian  foreigners. 

In  olden  times  there  were  four  castes:  the  Brah 
man,  or  priestly  caste  ;  the  Kshatriya,  or  warrior 
caste ;  the  Vai$ya,  or  merchant  and  farmer  caste  ; 
and  the  C^udra,  or  servitor  caste.  Then  came  many 
cross-castes,  the  result  of  intermarriages  between 


The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


members  of  the  four  original  castes.  Such  marriages 
are  now  strictly  taboo.  Gradually,  differences  of 
occupation,  trade,  and  profession,  and,  to  a  consider 
able  extent  also,  difference  of  geography,  established 
themselves  as  the  basis  of  caste  distinction,  until  the 
number  of  castes  became  legion.  At  the  present 
time  there  are  nearly  2000  Brahman  castes  alone. 
According  to  an  intelligent  Hindu  observer  of  our 
own  day1  the  Sarasvata  Brahmins  of  the  Panjab 
alone  number  469  tribes ;  the  Kshatriyas  are  split 
up  into  590 ;  the  Vaigyas  and  £udras  into  even 
more.  There  is  a  Hindustani  proverb,  "eight 
Brahmins,  nine  kitchens."  In  the  matter  of  food 
and  intermarriage  all  castes  are  now  completely  shut 
off  one  from  the  other.  A  tailor  may  not,  as  is  the 
custom  with  all  other  peoples,  invite  his  neighbor, 
an  honest  shoemaker,  to  share  his  humble  fare.  The 
son  of  the  shoemaker  may  not  woo  and  wed  the 
blooming  daughter  of  the  barber.  Even  a  minor 
deviation,  some  new  trick  of  trade,  will  at  once  breed 
a  new  caste.  In  certain  parts  of  India  fisher-folk 
who  knit  the  meshes  of  their  nets  from  right  to  left 
may  not  intermarry  with  them  that  knit  from  left  to 
right.  In  Cuttack,  the  most  southerly  district  of 

1  Rai  Bahadur  Lala  Baij  Nath,  B.A.,  of  the  North-western  Province 
Judicial  Service,  and  Fellow  of  the  University  of  Allahabad,  in  his 
very  interesting  little  book,  Hinduism,  Ancient  and  Modern  (Meerut, 
1889),  p.  9. 


India  the  Land  of  Religions 


Bengal,  there  is  no  intercourse  between  potters  who 
turn  their  wheels  a-sitting  and  make  small  pots,  and 
them  that  stand  up  for  the  manufacture  of  large 
pots.  A  certain  class  of  dairymen  who  make  butter 
from  unboiled  milk  have  been  excluded  from  the 
caste,  and  cannot  marry  the  daughters  of  milkmen 
who  churn  upon  more  orthodox  principles.  Even 
as  late  a  census  as  that  of  1901  reports,  and  in  a  way 
gives  its  sanction  to  the  Cimmerian  notion  that  the 
touch  of  the  lower  caste  man  defiles  the  higher : 

While  a  Nayar  can  pollute  a  man  of  a  higher  cast  only 
by  touching  him,  people  of  the  Kammalan  group,  includ 
ing  masons,  blacksmiths,  carpenters,  and  workers  in 
leather,  pollute  at  a  distance  of  twenty-four  feet,  toddy 
drawers  at  thirty-six  feet,  Palayan  or  Cheruman  culti 
vators  at  forty-eight  feet  ;  while  in  the  case  of  the; 
Paraiyan  (Pariahs)  who  eat  beef,  the  range  of  pollution 
is  stated  to  be  no  less  than  sixty-four  feet. ' 

Thus  Hindu  society  is  split  into  infinitely  small!1 
divisions,  each  holding  itself  aloof  from  the  other,  ; 
each  engaged  in  making   its  exclusiveness  as  com 
plete  as  possible.     Members  of  a  lower  caste  cannot 
rise  into  a  higher  caste ;  the  individual  is  restricted 
to  such  progress  only  as  is  possible  within  the  con 
fines  of  his  caste.     To  the  Pariah  the  door  of  hope 

1  Quoted  from  New  Ideas  in  India,  by  the  Rev.  Dr.  John 
Morrison  (Edinburgh,  1906),  p.  33. 


8  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


;  is  shut  forever.  There  is  little  chance  for  national  or 
/patriotic  combination. 

Moreover  the  laws,  or  rather  the  vagaries  of  caste 
have  taken  largely  the  place  of  practical  religion  in 
the  mind  of  the  average  Hindu  who  has  not  eman 
cipated  himself  through  higher  philosophy.  The 
supreme  law  which  really  concerns  him  in  his  daily 
life  is,  to  eat  correctly  ;  to  drink  correctly  ;  to  marry 
correctly.  The  broader,  more  usual,  dictates  of 
religion,  such  as  worship  of  the  gods  and  ethical 
conduct,  are  not  ignored,  but  they  take  a  distinctly 
secondary  place.  India  has  at  all  times  put  the 
stamp  of  religion  upon  much  that  Europe  counts  as 
social  habit,  or  social  institution.  There  is  not,  and 
there  seems  never  to  have  been,  fixed  creed  in  India. 
Hinduism  has  always  been  tolerant,  liberal,  latitud- 
inarian  in  matters  of  abstract  belief;  tyrannous, 
illiberal,  narrow-minded  as  regards  such  social  prac 
tices  as  can  be  in  any  way  connected  with  religion. 
Fluidity  of  doctrine,  rigidity  of  practice  may  be 
regarded  as  the  unspoken  motto  of  Hindu  religion 
at  all  times. 

Fortunately  there  are  not  wanting  signs  of  a  revul 
sion  of  feeling  which  bids  fair  to  sweep  the  entire 
system  of  caste  with  all  its  incredible  foolishness  off 
the  face  of  the  earth.  The  great  Hindu  reformer 
Raja  Rammohun  Roy  declared  as  early  as  the  year 


India  the  Land  of  Religions 


1 824 that  "caste  divisions  are  as  destructiveof  national 
union  as  of  social  enjoyment."  The  late  SvamI  Vive- 
kanancla,  the  brilliant  representative  of  Hinduism  at 
the  "Parliament  of  Religions,"  held  in  Chicago  in  con 
nection  with  the  Universal  Exposition  in  1893,  passed 
the  last  years  of  his  too  short  life  (he  died  in  1902) 
in  a  suburb  of  Calcutta,  doing  philanthropic  work, 
denouncing  caste  and  the  outcasting  of  those  who 
had  crossed  the  ocean,  and  recommending  the  Hindus 
to  take  to  the  eating  of  meat.  The  voices  of  other 
reformers  are  lifting.  Especially  the  two  great  native 
religious  reform  associations,  the_Brahma  Samaj,  or 
Theistic  Association  of  Bengal,  and  the  Arya  Samaj, 
or  Vedic  Association  of  the  United  Provinces  and 
the  Panjab,  different  as  are  their  aims  in  other  re 
spects,  are  marshalled  on  the  side  of  opposition  to 
caste,  as  an  anachronism,  anomaly,  and  bar  to  social 
and  national  progress. 

The  dreadful  institution  of  Suttee,  or  widow-burn- \ 
ing  abolished  in  1829,  under  the  administration  of  j 
Lord  William  Bentinck,  by  decree  of  government ; 
the  car  of  Juggernaut;  the  sect  of  the  Thugs;  and 
the  practice  of  self-hypnosis  to  the  point  of  prolonged 
trance  or  apparent  death,  are  evidences  of  the  frenzy- 1 
ing  quality  of  Hindu  religion,  and  the  way  it  has; 
of   overshadowing  individual  sanity  and  public  in 
terest.     There  has  been,  and  there  still  is,  too  much ; 


io  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


so-called  religion  in  India :  Brahmanical  hierarchy, 
sacerdotalism,  asceticism,  caste  ;  infinitely  diversified 
polytheism  and  idolatry ;  cruel  religious  practices ; 
and  bottomless  superstition.  All  this  the  higher 
Hindu  religions,  or  rather  religious  philosophies, 
blow  away  as  the  wind  does  chaff.  In  their  view  such 
religiosity  is  mere  illusion  or  ignorance,  to  save  from 
which  is  their  profession.  But  they  can  save  only 
the  illumined  of  mind.  On  the  real  life  of  India  the 
great  philosophies  are  merely  a  thin  film.  Anyhow 
they  have  not  as  yet  penetrated  down  to  the  Hindu 
people,  and  we  may  question  whether  India's  salva 
tion  will  come  that  way,  rather  than  through  the 
growth  of  social  and  political  intelligence  which  so 
gifted  a  people  is  sure,  in  the  long  run,  to  obtain. 

The  student  of  the  History  of  Religions  has  good 
reason  to  think  of  India  as  the  land  of  religions  in 
yet  another  sense.  Not  only  has  India  produced 
out  of  its  own  mental  resources  many  important 
religions  and  theosophic  systems,  but  it  has  carried 
on  these  processes  continuously,  uninterrupted  by 
distracting  outside  influences.  The  Moghul  con 
quests  in  Northern  India  introduced  Mohammedan 
ism  to  a  limited  extent,  and  Mohammedanism  fused 
with  Hinduism  in  the  hybrid  religion  of  the  Sikhs. 
A  small  number  of  Zoroastrian  Parsis,  driven  from 
Persia  during  the  Mohammedan  conquest,  found 


India  the  Land  of  Religions  u 


a  friendly  refuge  for  themselves  and  the  religion 
of  Zarathushtra  (Zoroaster)  in  the  West  of  India. 
Aside  from  that  there  is  no  record  of  permanent 
outside  influence  on  a  larger  scale,  until,  in  the  last 
century,  the  above-mentioned  Brahma  Samaj,  a  kind 
of  religious  Volapiik,  or  Esperanto,  undertakes,  in 
the  most  praiseworthy  spirit,  upon  a  universal  theis- 
tic  platform,  to  blend  and  harmonise  the  best  in 
Hindu  religious  thought,  with  the  best  that  may  be 
found  in  other  religions.  In  this  way  Hindu  re 
ligion  is  more  strictly  native  than  any  of  the  great 
religions  of  mankind.  This  is  no  doubt  due  mainly 
to  India's  geographical  isolation,  and  to  her  insular 
secular  history.  It  has  had  the  merit  of  keeping 
her  religious  development  continuous  and  organic. 
Every  important  idea  has  a  traceable  past  history ; 
every  important  idea  is  certain  to  develop  in  the 
future.  We  may  say  that  a  body  of  3500  years 
of  organic  religious  growth  lies  more  or  less 
open  before  the  eyes  of  the  student  of  India's 
religions,  to  dissect,  to  study,  and  to  philosophise 
upon. 

This  great  period  of  time  has  of  late  become 
definite  in  a  rather  important  sense.  Within  recent 
years  there  were  discovered  at  Tel-el-Amarna,  in 
Upper  Egypt,  numerous  cuneiform  tablets  contain 
ing  letters  from  tributary  kings  of  Babylonia, 


1 2  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


Assyria,  Mitani,  Phoenicia,  and  Canaan,  addressed  to 
certain  Egyptian  Pharaohs,  their  liege  lords.  These 
tablets  have  thrown  much  new  light  upon  the  history 
of  Western  Asia.  There  is  among  them  a  letter 
written  by  a  king  of  Mitani  in  Syria,  Dushratta  by 
name.  In  this  letter  figure  among  others  the  names 
of  his  brother  Artashuvara  and  his  grandfather  Arta- 
tama.  These  names  are  obviously  Iranian  (Persian), 
or  "  Iranoid  "  ;  with  the  tablets  themselves  they  date 
back  to  at  least  1600  B.  c.1  The  names  Artashuvara 
and  Artatama  open  out  with  the  syllables  artOr, 
familiar  to  Western  students  of  history  as  part  of 
the  numberless  Persian  names  like  Artaxerxes,  Arta- 
phernes,  etc.  This  stem  arta  is  identical  with  arta- 
of  the  Western  Iranian,  Achemenidan  inscriptions, 
with  asha  of  the  Avesta,  and  with  rta  of  the  Veda, 
i  The  word  means  "  cosmic  order,"  or  "  order  of  the 
universe."  We  shall  find  it  later  on,  figuring  as  one 
of  the  most  important  religious  conceptions  of  the 
Rig- Veda.  We  have  here  at  any  rate  a  definite 
lower  date  for  the  idea ;  it  is  likely  to  have  existed 
a  long  time  before  1600  B.C.  From  the  point  of 
view  of  the  history  of  religious  ideas  we  may,  in  fact 
we  must,  begin  the  history  of  Hindu  religion  at 

1  See  the  author,  American  Journal  of  Philology \  xxv.,  p.  8  ; 
F.  Hommel  in  Sitzungsberichte  der  Koniglich  Bohmischen  Gesell- 
schaft  der  Wissenschaften,  1898,  Number  vi. 


India  the  Land  of  Religions  13 


least  with  the  history  of  this  conception.  Broad  as 
the  ocean,  and  as  uninterrupted  in  its  sweep  there 
lies  before  us  a  period  of  thousands  of  years  of  the 
religious  thought  and  practice  of  the  most  religious 
people  in  the  history  of  the  world. 

Now  this  brings  us  face  to  face  with  the  tried  and 
true  fact  that  the  religious  history  of  India  does  not 
really  begin  at  the  time  when  the  Veda,  the  earliest 
literature,  was  composed,  but  that  it  begins  much 
earlier.  In  the  first  place,  it  shares  a  fairly  clear 
common  life  with  the  ancient  religion  of  Iran  (Persia) 
in  a  prehistoric  time,  the  so-called  Indo-Iranian  or 
Aryan  period.1  The  reconstruction  of  these  com 
mon  religious  properties  is  purely  prehistoric.  It 
partakes  of  the  fate  of  all  prehistoric  studies ;  it  is 
not  definite,  but  more  or  less  hazy.  Yet,  such  as  it 
is,  it  counts  fairly  with  the  best  that  may  be  achieved 
in  this  way.  It  is  based  upon  the  plainly  evident 
relationship  between  the  Hindu  Veda  and  the 
Persian  Avesta,  the  most  ancient  sacred  books  of 
the  two  peoples.  No  student  of  either  religion 
questions  that  they  drew  largely  from  a  common 
source,  and  therefore  mutually  illumine  each  other. 

I  am  sure  that  the  full  meaning  of  this  last  state 
ment  will  appear  clearer  after  a  word  of  explanation. 
Students  of  profane  history  are  accustomed  to  see 

1  See  below  page  119. 


14  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


ancient  Persia  with  her  face  turned  westward.  It 
is  to  them  the  Persia  that  conquers,  or  controls 
through  her  satrapies,  Assyria  and  Babylonia,  Pales 
tine,  Egypt,  or  parts  of  Asia  Minor.  It  is  to  them 
the  Persia  that  falls  down  before  Greece.  In  the 
day  of  her  greatest  glory  Darius  I.  Hystaspes  carved, 
into  the  Behistan  rock,  300  feet  above  the  ground, 
the  hugh  trilingual  cuneiform  inscription,  in  which 
he  claims  suzerainty  over  twenty-three  countries. 
To  all  intents  and  purposes  he  claims  the  earth  for 
his  own.  Among  the  countries  mentioned  are  parts 
adjacent  to  the  extreme  north-west  of  India:  Dran- 
giana,  Arachosia,  Gandhara,  etc.  Between  500-330 
B.C.,  the  rule  of  the  Achemenidan  Persian  dynasty 
had  without  doubt  sent  out  its  loosely  attached 
satrapies  to  the  land  of  the  Indus  River.  But  this 
did  not  result  in  the  permanent  attachment  of  one 
country  to  the  other.  Again,  the  so-called  Graeco- 
Parthian  rulers,  successors  of  Alexander  the  Great 
in  the  Persian  countries  of  Parthia  and  Baktria,  from 
about  200  B.C.  to  200  A.D.,  established  principalities 
in  the  north-west  of  India,  notably  the  Indo-Parthian 
kingdoms  of  Taxila  and  Arachosia.1  But  this  politi 
cal  relation,  again,  proved  unstable  and  transient. 
A  small  number  of  Parsis,  after  the  Mohammedan 

1  See  Vincent  Smith,  The  Indo-Parthian  Dynasties,    in  Journal 
of  the  German  Oriental  Society,  vol.  Ix. ,  p.  49  ff. 


India  the  Land  of  Religions  15 


conquest  of  Persia,  fled  to  India  with  their  priests, 
sacred  fire,  and  the  manuscripts  of  the  Avesta,  their 
holy  scriptures.  Their  descendants,  about  80,000  in  j 
number,  still  adhere  to  their  ancient  religion  They  "I 
form  one  of  the  most  esteemed,  wealthy,  and  philan 
thropic  communities  on  the  west  shores  of  India, 
notably  in  the  city  of  Bombay.  It  is  not  of  record  ; 
that  they  had  even  the  faintest  idea  that  they  were 
fleeing  into  the  hospitable  bosom  of  a  people  related 
by  blood  and  language,  or  that  the  Hindus  who  gave 
them  shelter  knew  that  they  were  receiving  their 
very  own  kin.  As  far  as  we  know,  the  Aryan 
Hindus  at  any  rate,  throughout  their  history,  are 
entirely  unconscious  of  the  important  fact  that, 
across  the  mountains  to  the  north-west  of  their 
country,  dwelt  at  all  times  a  branch  of  their  own 
stock — the  other  half  of  the  so-called  Indo-Iranians 
or  Aryans. 

And  yet,  the  languages  of  the  Hindu  Veda  and 
the  Persian  Avesta,  the  respective  bibles  of  the 
two  peoples,  are  mere  dialects  of  the  same  speech. 
Students  regularly  enter  upon  the  study  of  the 
Avestan  language  through  the  door  of  the  Veda. 
Entire  passages  of  the  Avesta  may  be  turned  into 
good  Vedic  merely  by  applying  certain  regular  sound 
changes.  It  is  said  sometimes  that  there  is  less  dif 
ference  between  the  Veda  and  the  Avesta  than  be- 


1 6  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


tween  the  Veda  and  the  later  Hindu  Epic,  the 
Mahabharata.  This  is,  in  my  opinion,  an  exag 
geration,  but  it  is  significant  that  the  statement 
could  be  made  at  all.  The  early  religions  and  the 
religious  institutions  of  the  Hindus  and  Persians 
show,  to  be  sure,  far  greater  independence  from  one 
another  than  their  languages,  but  they  are,  never 
theless,  at  the  root  much  the  same.  So  it  has  come 
to  pass  that  a  not  at  all  mean  part  of  the  Vedic 
Pantheon  and  Vedic  religious  ideas  begin  before  the 
Veda.  Or,  to  put  it  even  more  paradoxically,  Indian 
religion  begins  before  its  arrival  in  India. 

Yet  further,  beyond  the  common  period  of  the 
Hindus  and  the  Persians,  there  is  a  still  remoter 
period  which  is  not  entirely  closed  to  our  view. 
It  is  the  common  Indo-European  time,  the  time 
when  the  Hindus  and  Persians  still  shared  their 
language  and  home  with  the  remaining  mem 
bers  of  the  same  stock,  the  Hellenes,  Italians, 
Celts,  Teutons,  and  Slavs.  In  this  altogether  pre 
historic  time  there  also  existed  certain  germs  of 
religion,  and  some  of  these  germs  grew  into  import 
ant  features  of  the  later  religions  of  these  peoples. 
The  religion  of  the  Veda  is  indebted  to  this  early 
time  to  an  extent  that  is  not  negligible.  We  shall 
see  later  on  in  what  way  the  two  layers  of  prehis 
toric  religious  matter  have  contributed  to  and  affected 


The  Veda  1 7 


the  shaping  of  Vedic  thought.  For  the  present 
it  will  be  advantageous  to  turn  to  the  Vedic 
religion  of  historic  times,  so  that  there  may  be 
some  basis  for  discriminating  between  what  is  old 
and  what  is  new.  And  as  it  would  not  be  gra 
cious  to  presume  too  much  knowledge  of.  so  remote 
a  theme  as  the  Veda,  we  must  first  describe  briefly 
the  documents  of  which  consists  the  Veda,  the  most 
ancient  literary  monument  of  India,  the  most  ancient 
literary  document  of  the  Indo-European  peoples — the 
foundation  for  all  time  of  India's  religious  thought. 

THE  VEDA 

The  word  veda  means  literally  "  knowledge,"  that 
is,  "sacred  knowledge."  It  is  derived  from  viJ,  "to 
know,"  and  connected  with  Greek  (F)oida,  Gothic 
wait,  German  weiss,  English  wtt,  "  to  know."  The 
term  Veda  is  used  in  two  ways :  either  as  the  col 
lective  designation  of  the  entire  oldest  sacred 
literature  of  India,  or  as  the  specific  name  of 
single  books  belonging  to  that  literature.  So 
then,  on  the  one  hand,  we  speak  of  the  Veda  as  the 
bible  of  ancient  India  ;  or,  on  the  other  hand,  we 
speak  of  Rig-Veda,  Atharva-Veda,  etc.,  as  individual 
books  of  that  great  collection.  The  number  of  | 
books  which,  in  one  sense  or  another,  are  counted  [; 
as  Veda  is  a  hundred  or  more.  The  Hindus  l 

2 


i8  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


themselves  were  never  very  keen  about  canonicity; 
quasi-Vedic  books,  or,  as  we  should  say,  Pseudo- 
Vedic  books  were  composed  at  a  very  late  date, 
when  the  various  and  peculiar  sources  of  early  in 
spiration  had  dried  up ;  they  kept  pouring  new,  mostly 
sour  wine  into  the  old  skins.  The  huge  Concordance 
of  the  Vedas,  which  it  has  been  my  fate  to  publish 
this  year  (1906),  absorbs  about  120  texts  more  or 
less  Vedic. 

It  is  truly  humiliating  to  students  of  ancient  India 

!to  have  to  answer  the  inevitable  question  as  to  the 
age  of  the  Veda  with  a  meek,  "  We  don't  know."  As 
regards  their  texture,  the  books  of  the  Veda  claim 
great  antiquity  with  no  uncertain  voice.  One  should 
like  to  see  this  intrinsically  archaic  quality  held  up 
by  actual  dates  ;  those  same,  almost  fabulous,  yet  per 
fectly  authentic  dates  that  are  being  bandied  about 
in  the  ancient  history  of  Assyria,  Babylonia,  and 
Egypt.  The  late  Professor  William  D.  Whitney  left 
behind  the  witty  saying  that  Hindu  dates  are  merely 
ten-pins  set  up  to  be  bowled  down  again.  This  is 
not  altogether  so.  Buddha  died  477  B.C.  Alexander 
invaded  India  in  326  B.C.  In  the  year  315  B.C. 
Candragupta,  or  Sandrakottos,  "Alexander-Killer," 
as  Greek  writers  ominously  mouthed  over  his  name, 
led  a  successful  revolt  against  Alexander's  prefects 
and  established  the  Maurya  dynasty  in  Pataliputra, 


The  Veda  19 


the  Palibothra  of  the  Greeks,  the  Patna  of  to-day. 
The  most  important  date  in  Hindu  secular  history 
is  that  of  Candragupta's  grandson,  the  famous 
Buddhist  Emperor  A^oka  or  Piyadassi,  who  ruled 
India  from  north  to  south  around  about  250  B.C.  His 
edicts,  carved  into  rock  all  over  his  great  empire, 
show  us  the  singular  spectacle  of  a  great  ruler  who 
used  his  power  to  propagate  his  religion  peacefully. 
His  inscriptions  upon  pillars  and  rocks  boast  not 
of  victory  or  heroic  deed  ;  they  exhort  his  people  to 
virtue,  warn  against  sin,  and  plead  for  tolerance  and 
love  of  humanity.  This  is  an  important  date  in  the 
history  of  India,  but  an  even  more  important  date 
in  the  history  of  good  manners. 

Unquestionably  a  century  or  two  must  have  passed 
between  the  conclusion  of  the  Vedic  period  and  the 
beginnings  of  Buddhism.  Buddhist  literature  pre 
supposes  Brahmanical  literature  and  religion  in  a 
stage  of  considerable  advancement  beyond  the  Vedas. 
We  are,  therefore,  reasonably  safe  in  saying  that  the 
real  Vedic  period  was  concluded  about  700  B.C. 
We  are  further  on  safe  ground  in  demanding  a  num 
ber  of  centuries  for  the  much  stratified  language, 
literature,  and  religion  of  the  Veda.  But  how  many? 
It  is  as  easy  to  imagine  three  as  thirteen  or  twenty- 
three.  Only  one  thing  is  certain.  Vedic  ideas  are 
very  old.  I  have  noted  the  fact  that  the  concept  rat, 


20  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


"  cosmic  or  universal  order,"  is  found  in  cut  and  dried 
Iranian  names  in  Western  Asia  as  early  as  1600  B.C. 
I  am,  for  my  part,  and  I  think  I  voice  many  scholars, 
now  much  more  inclined  to  listen  to  an  early  date, 
say  2000  B.C.,  for  the  beginnings  of  Vedic  literary 
production,  and  to  a  much  earlier  date  for  the 
beginnings  of  the  institutions  and  religious  concepts 
which  the  Veda  has  derived  from  those  prehistoric 
times  which  cast  their  shadows  forward  into  the 
records  that  are  in  our  hands.  Anyhow,  we  must 
not  be  beguiled  by  that  kind  of  conservatism  which 
merely  salves  the  conscience  into  thinking  that 
there  is  better  proof  for  any  later  date,  such  as 
1500,  1 200,  or  1000  B.C.,  rather  than  the  earlier 
date  of  2000  B.C.  Once  more,  frankly,  we  do  not 
know. 

Vedic  tradition  is  in  some  respects  the  most  re 
markable  in  recorded  history.  From  the  entire 
Vedic  period  we  have  not  one  single  piece  of  anti 
quarian  or  archaeological  material,  not  one  bit  of  real 
property  ;  not  a  building,  nor  a  monument ;  not  a 
coin,  jewel,  or  utensil ; — nothing  but  winged  words. 
Even  the  manuscripts  of  these  precious  texts, 
splendid  as  we  know  their  authority  to  be  on  inner 
evidence  are  of  comparatively  recent  date.  We  do 
not  know  when  the  Vedas  were  first  committed  to 
writing.  Even  if  they  were  written  down  during  the 


The  Veda  21 


Vedic  period  itself,  as  I  think  altogether  likely,  the 
early  manuscripts  were  certain  to  perish  in  the  furious 
Indian  climate.     They  must,  in  that  case,  have  been 
saved   by   diligent   copying    and    recopying.      The 
majority  of  the  manuscripts  upon  which  are  based 
our  editions  of   Vedic  texts  date  from  recent  cen 
turies.    Manuscripts  that  date  back  to  the  fourteenth  (I 
century  of  our  era  are  rare  ;  only  a  very  few  go  back  ij 
to  the  twelfth. 

Here,  however,  enters  one  of  the  curiosities  of 
Hindu  religious  life.  The  adherents  of  a  certain  Veda 
or  Vedic  school,  no  matter  whether  the  text  of  that 
school  was  reduced  to  writing  or  not,  must,  in  theory, 
know  their  texts  by  heart.  These  are  the  so-called  1 
(^rotriyas  or  "  Oral  Traditionalists."  They  live  to 
this  day,  being,  as  it  were,  living  manuscripts  of  their 
respective  Vedas.  The  eminent  Hindu  scholar,  the 
late  Shankar  Pandurang  Pandit,  tells  us  in  the  pre 
face  to  his  great  Bombay  edition  of  the  Atharva- 
Veda  how  he  used  three  of  these  oral  reciters  of  the 
Atharva-Veda  out  of  a  total  of  only  four  that  were 
at  that  time  still  alive  in  the  Dekkhan  ;  and  how 
their  oral  authority  proved  to  be  quite  as  weighty 
as  the  written  authority  of  his  manuscripts.  These 
living  manuscripts  were  respectively,  Messrs.  Bapujl 
Jlvanram ;  Kegava  Bhat  bin  Dajl  Bhat ;  and  Ven- 
kan  BhatjT,  the  last  "  the  most  celebrated  Atharva 


22  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


Vaidika  in  the  Dekkhan."  Mr.  Pandit  cites  them  by 
sigla,  quite  in  the  manner  of  inanimate  manuscripts, 
respectively,  as  Bp,  K,  and  V.  They  are,  I  believe, 
now  all  dead. 

We  are  waiting  now  for  the  time  when  the  India 
Exploration  Society  shall  step  out  from  its  existence 
on  paper,  and  take  hold  of  the  shovel  and  the  spade. 
With  bated  breath  we  shall  then  be  watching  to  see 
whether  great  good  fortune  will  make  it  possible  to 
dig  through  the  thick  crust  of  centuries  that  are 
piled  upon  the  Vedic  period.  If  so,  it  will  be  some 
thing  like  the  revelation  of  the  Mycenean  age  that 
was  found  at  the  root  of  Hellenic  civilisation.  Until 
that  time  Vedic  life  and  institutions,  reported  only 
by  word  of  mouth,  must  remain  an  uncertain  quan 
tity.  The  hymns  of  the  Veda  are  to  a  considerable 
degree  cloudy,  turgid,  and  mystic ;  taken  by  them 
selves  they  will  never  yield  a  clear  picture  of  human 
life  that  fits  any  time  or  place.  We  have  from  the 
entire  Vedic  period  no  annals  except  priestly  annals, 
or  such  at  least  as  have  been  edited  by  priests.  It 
is  as  though  we  relied  upon  cloister  chronicles  alone 
for  our  knowledge  of  the  politics  and  institutions  of 
a  certain  time.  Or,  to  use  an  even  homelier  compari 
son,  as  though  we  had  to  reconstruct  the  social 
conditions  of  a  more  modern  time  from  an  inter 
cepted  boarding-school  correspondence.  The  poets, 


The  Veda  23 


or  priestly  writers  of  the  Veda  are  entirely  preoccu 
pied  with  their  own  interests ;  if  we  want  anything 
like  secular  records  of  India  we  must  look  to  a  later 
time. 

We  do  not  even  know  exactly  what  a  term  as  fam 
iliar  as  raja  (rex)  "  King,"  meant  in  those  early  days. 
Was  a  Raja  a  great  potentate,  or  merely  a  tribal 
chieftain  ?  We  know  that  the  early  Vedic  period 
was  a  cattle-raising  age.  The  lowing  of  kine  was 
lovely  music  to  the  ear  of  the  Vedic  poet.  But 
there  were  also  workers  in  metals,  chariots,  navi 
gation  of  some  kind,  gold,  jewels,  and  trade.  This 
is  all  too  vague,  and  to  some  extent  introduces 
uncertain  quantities  into  our  estimation  of  Vedic 
religion. 

At  an  unknown  date  then,  as  we  have  had  to 
confess  reluctantly,  Aryan  tribes  or  clans  (vi$1}  began 
to  migrate  from  the  Iranian  highlands  to  the  north 
of  the  Hindu-Kush  Mountains  into  the  north-west 
of  India,  the  plains  of  the  river  Indus  and  its  tribu 
taries,  the  Panjab,  or  the  land  of  the  five  streams.8 

1  From  this  word  is  derived  vaicya,  the  later  name  of  the  third,  or 
agricultural  and  merchant  caste. 

8  Professor  E.  W.  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  vol.  xix.,  pp.  19-28.  argues  that  the  majority  of  the  Vedic 
hymns  were  composed  farther  east  than  the  Panjab,  in  the  region 
of  the  modern  city  of  Amballa,  between  the  rivers  Sarasouti  and 
Ghuggar. 


24  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


The  river  Ganges,  so  essential  to  a  picture  of  India 
in  historical  times,  and  even  more  bound  up  with 
all  Western  poetic  fancies  about  India,  is  scarcely 
mentioned  in  the  Rig- Veda.  This  same  text  is  full 
of  allusions  to  the  struggles  of  the  fair-skinned 
Aryas  with  the  dark-skinned  aborigines,  the  Dasyus. 
The  struggle  is  likely  to  have  been  bitter.  The 
spread  of  Aryan  civilisation  was  gradual,  and  re 
sulted  finally  in  the  up-building  of  a  people  whose 
civilisation  was  foreign  and  superior,  but  whose  race 
quality  was  determined  a  good  deal  by  the  over 
whelmingly  large,  native,  dark-skinned,  non-Aryan 
population.  At  the  beginning  of  our  knowledge  of 
]  India  we  are  face  to  face  with  an  extensive  poet- 
tical  literature,  in  set  metres.  This  is  crude  on 
the  whole,  even  when  compared  with  classical 
Sanskrit  literature  of  later  times.  Yet,  it  shows, 
along  with  uncouth  nai'vet6  and  semi-barbarous 
turgidity,  a  good  deal  of  beauty  and  elevation  of 
thought,  and  a  degree  of  skill  bordering  on  the 
professional,  in  the  handling  of  language  and  metre. 
That  this  product  was  not  created  out  of  nothing  on 
Indian  soil  follows  from  the  previously  mentioned 
close  connection  with  the  earliest  product  of  Persian 
literature,  the  Avesta.1  Even  the  metric  types  of 
Veda  and  Avesta  are  closely  related. 

1  See  above,  p.  13. 


The  Veda  25 


Vedic  literature,  in  its  first  intention,  is  through-;/ 
out  religjous,  or  it  deals  with  institutions  that  haven 
come  under  the  control  of  religion.  It  includes 
hymns,  prayers,  and  sacred  formulas,  offered  by 
priests  to  the  gods  in  behalf  of  rich  lay  sacrificers ; 
charms  for  witchcraft,  medicine,  and  other  homely 
practices,  manipulated  by  magicians  and  medicine 
men,  in  the  main  for  the  plainer  people.  From  a 
later  time  come  expositions  of  the  sacrifice,  illus 
trated  by  legends,  in  the  manner  of  the  Jewish 
Talmud.  Then  speculations  of  the  higher  sort, 
philosophic,  cosmic,  psycho-physical,  and  theosophic, 
gradually  growing  up  in  connection  with  and  out  of 
the  simpler  beliefs.  Finally  there  is  a  considerable 
body  of  set  rules  for  conduct  in  every-day  secular 
life,  at  home  and  abroad,  that  is,  a  distinct  literature 
of  customs  and  laws.  This  is  the  Veda  as  a  whole. 

TheJV"_eda  consists,  as  we  have  seen,  of  consider 
ably  more  than  a  hundred  books,  written  in  a  variety 
of  slightly  differentiated  dialects  and  styles.  Some 
of  the  Vedic  books  are  not  yet  published,  or  even 
unearthed.  At  ^e_bas.e.jQi-.this.-eatke  canon,  .if  we 
may  so  call  it,  lie  four  varieties  of  metrical  composi 
tion,  or  in  some  cases,  prayers  in  sacred,  solemn  prose. 
These  are  known  as  the  Four  Vedas  in  the  narrower 
sense  :  the  Rig- Veda,  the  Yajur-Veda,  the  Sama- 
Veda,  and  the  Atharva-Veda.  These  four  names  • 


26  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


come  from  a  somewhat  later  Vedic  time  ;  they  do 
not  coincide  exactly  with  the  earlier  names,  nor  do 
they  fully  correspond  to  the  contents  of  the  texts 
themselves.  The  earlier  names  refer  rather  to  the 
different  styles  of  composition,  than  to  canonical  col 
lections.  They  are  rcah,  "  stanzas  of  praise";  yajun- 
shi,  "  liturgical  stanzas  and  formulas  ";  sdindni,  "mel 
odies  ";  and  atharvdngirasah,  "  blessings  and  curses." 
The  book  which  goes  by  the  name  of  Rig- Veda  con 
tains  not  only  "  stanzas  of  praise,"  but — in  its  later 
parts — also  "  blessings  and  curses," as  well  as  most  of 
the  stanzas  which  form  the  text  to  the  sdman-melo- 
dies  of  the  Sama-Veda.  The  Atharva-Veda  contains 
rcah,  "  stanzas  of  praise,"  and  yajunshi,  "  liturgical 
stanzas, "mostly  worked  over  for  its  own  purposes,  as 
well  as  its  very  own  "  blessings  and  curses."  The  Ya- 
jur-Veda  also  contains  materials  of  the  other  Vedic 
types  in  addition  to  its  main  topic,  the  liturgy.  The 
Sama-Veda  is  merely  a  collection  of  a  certain  kind 
of  rcah,  or  "  stanzas  of  praise,"  which  are  derived  with 
some  variants  and  additions  from  the  Rig- Veda,  and 
are  here  set  to  music  which  is  indicated  by  musical 
notations. 

The  Rig- Veda  is,  on  the  whole,  the  oldest  as  well 
as  the  most  important  of  the  four  collections.  Its 
language  is  a  priestly,  very  high,  or  very  literary 
speech.  This  we  may  call  by  distinction  the  hieratic 


The  Veda  27 


language  of  the  Veda.  It  is  based  upon  a  very  old 
popular  dialect,  into  which  the  poets,  to  serve  their 
own  needs,  have  introduced  many  new  words  and 
speech-forms.  So,  for  instance,  the  great  liking  of  the 
hieratic  language  for  verbs  derived  from  nouns,  the 
so-called  denominative  or  denominal  verbs,  surrounds 
the  style  of  the  Rig- Veda  with  an  air  of  turgidity 
and  stiltedness  which  is  far  from  being  archaic.  A 
hieratic  poet  prefers  to  say  "  give  battle  '\prtandyati, 
prtanyati),  rather  than  "fight";  " cultivate  the 
gods"  (devayati\  rather  than  "  be  pious  ";  "  show 
a  kind  disposition"  (sumanasyate),  rather  than  "be 
friendly,"  etc. 

A  little  over  1000  hymns,  containing  about  10,000 
stanzas,  equal  in  bulk  to  Homer's  poems,  are  divided 
into  ten  mandalas,  "  circles,"  or,  as  we  should  say, 
books.  Inside  of  these  books  the  hymns  are  arranged 
according  to  a  regular  scheme:  first,  in  the  order  of 
the  number  of  hymns  addressed  to  a  particular  god, 
beginning  with  the  largest  number  and  continuing  in 
a  descending  scale.  Next,  each  god's  hymns  are 
arranged  according  to  the  length  of  each  single  hymn, 
again  in  a  descending  scale.  Six  of  these  ten  books 
(ii— vii),  the  so-called  "family-books,"  form  the  nucleus 
of  the  collection.  Each  of  these  is  supposed  to 
have  been  composed  by  a  different  Rishi,  poet  or 
seer,  or  rather  by  some  family  of  poets  who  would 


28  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 

fondly  derive  their  descent  from  such  a  Rishi.  The 
hymns  themselves  state  this  repeatedly — such  and 
such  a  poet  has  seen1  such  and  such  a  hymn — :  the 
exact  value  of  this  claim  is  not  easily  estimated. 
The  names  of  these  traditional  Rishis  have  a  good 
ring  in  India  at  all  times.  They  are  in  the  order  of 
Books  ii— vii,  Grtsamada,Vicvamitra,Vamadeva,  Atri, 
Bharadvaja,  and  Vasishtha.  The  eighth  book  and 
the  first  fifty  hymns  of  the  first  book  are  ascribed 
to  the  family  of  Kanva ;  they  are  marked  off  even 
superficially  from  the  rest,  because  they  are  arranged 
strophically  in  groups  of  two  or  three  stanzas.  These 
form  the  bulk  of  those  stanzas  which,  set  to  music, 
reappear  in  the  Sama-Veda.  The  ninth  book,  a  kind 
of  Bacchic  collection  or  text-book,  is  addressed  to 
the  deified  plant  soma,  and  the  liquor  pressed  from 
it.2  This  soma  drink  furnishes  by  far  the  most  pre 
cious  libation  to  the  gods.  They  are  supposed  to 
intoxicate  themselves  with  it  unto  great  deeds  of 
valor.  The  remainder  of  the  first  book  and  the 
entire  tenth  book  are  more  miscellaneous  in  char 
acter  and  problematic  as  to  intention  and  arrange 
ment.  To  some  extent,  though  by  no  means  en 
tirely,  they  are  of  later  origin  and  from  a  different 
sphere,  in  part  of  distinctly  popular  character,  very 

1  That  is,  has  had  revealed  to  him. 

2  See  below,  p.  145. 


The  Veda  29 


much  like  and  often  identical  with  the  hymns  of  the 
Atharva-Veda. 

On  the  whole  and  in  the  main,  as  we  shall  see,  the 
Rig- Veda  is  a  collection  of  priestly  hymns  addressed 
to  the  gods  of  the  Vedic  Pantheon.  The  chanting 
of  these  hymns  is  regularly  accompanied  by  libations 
of  the  intoxicating  drink  called  soma,  and  of  melted 
butter,  or  ghee  (ghrtd).  The  enduring  interest  of 
the  Rig- Veda  as  literature  lies  in  those  old  priestly 
poets*  vision  of  the  beauty,  the  majesty,  and  the 
power  of  the  gods,  and  in  the  myths  and  legends  told 
of  them,  or,  more  often,  merely  alluded  to  in  connec 
tion  with  them.  But  the  paramount  importance  of 
the  Rig- Veda  is  after  all  not  as  literature,  but  as 
philosophy.  Its  mythology  represents  a  clearer, 
even  if  not  always  chronologically  earlier  stage  of 
thought  and  religious  development  than  is  to  be 
found  in  any  parallel  literature.  On  one  side  at 
least  it  is  primitive  in  conception,  and  constructive 
under  our  very  eyes  :  how  a  personal  god  develops 
b^_rjersonification  out  of  a  visible  fact  in  nature 
(anthropomorphosis)  no  literary  document  in  the 
world  teaches  as  well  as  the  Rig- Veda.  The  original 
nature  of  theVedic  gods,  however,  is  not  always  clear, 
not  as  clear  as  was  once  fondly  thought.  The  analy 
sis  of  these  barely  translucent,  or  altogether  opaque 
characters  makes  up  a  chapter  of  Vedic  science  as 


30  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


difficult  as  it  is  important.  In  any  case  enough  is 
known  to  justify  the  statement  that  thekey-note  and 
engrossing  theme  of  Rig-Vedic  thought  is  worship  of 
the  personified  powers  of  nature. 

In  order  to  make  good  this  last  statement,  and  at 
the  same  time  by  way  of  fore-taste  of  the  Rig- Veda,  I 
present  here  some  stanzas  of  one  of  its  finest  hymns.1 
It  is  addressed  to  the  goddess  Ushas,  Dawn  person- 
fied,  whom  the  Vedic  poets  sing  with  special  warmth 

and  liking;  the  metre  imitates  the  original : 
I 

This  light  hath  come,  of  all  the  lights  the  fairest, 
The  brilliant  brightness  hath  been  born,  far-shining, 
Urged  on  to  prompt  the  sun-god's  shining  power. 
Night  now  hath  yielded  up  her  place  to  morning. 

The  sisters'  pathway  is  the  same  unending, 
Taught  by  the  gods,  alternately  they  tread  it. 
Fair-shaped,  of  different  forms,  and  yet  one-minded, 
Night  and  Morning  clash  not,  nor  yet  do  linger. 

Bright  bringer  of  delights,  Dawn  shines  effulgent, 
Wide  open  she  hath  thrown  for  us  her  portals. 
Arousing  all  the  world,  she  shows  us  riches, 
Dawn  hath  awakened  every  living  creature. 

'T  is  Heaven's  Daughter  hath  appeared  before  us, 
The  maiden  dazzling  in  her  brilliant  garments. 
Thou  sovereign  mistress  of  all  earthly  treasure, 
Auspicious  Dawn,  flash  thou  to-day  upon  us  ! 

1  Rig-Veda  1.113  in  Professor  A.  A.  MacdonelPs  translation,  in 
his  History  of  Sanskrit  Literature,  p.  83.  I  have  taken  the  liberty 
of  making  a  few  slight  alterations. 


The  Veda  31 


On  heaven's  frame  she  hath  shone  forth  in  splendor  ; 
The  goddess  hath  cast  off  the  robe  of  darkness. 
Awakening  the  world,  with  ruddy  horses, 
Upon  her  well-yoked  chariot  Dawn  approacheth. 

Showering  upon  it  many  bounteous  blessings, 
She  spreads  her  brilliant  lustre — all  may  see  her. 
Last  of  the  chain  of  mornings  that  have  passed  by, 
First  of  bright  morns  to  come  Dawn  hath  arisen. 

Arise  !  the  breath  of  life  again  hath  reached  us  ! 

Dread  darkness  slinks  away  and  light  is  coming  ! 
'(She  hath  blazed  a  pathway  for  the  sun  to  travel, 
I 'We  have  found  the  place  where  men  prolong  existence. 

The  Rig- Veda  presupposes  a  tolerably  elaborate 
and^jnojL uninteresting  ritual,  or  scheme  of  priestly 
practices,  in  connection  with  the  hymns  addressed 
to  the  gods.  How  this  may  be  read  between  the 
lines  of  the  Rig- Veda's  poetry  I  hope  to  show  quite 
clearly  later  on.  The  Yajur-Veda  represents  the 
exceeding  growth  of  this  ritualism,  or  sacerdotalism, 
as  time  went  by.  Gradually  the  main  object,1 
namely,  devotion  to  the  gods,  is  lost  sight  of :  sol 
emn,  pompous  performance,  garnished  with  lip 
service,  occupies  the  centre  of  the  stage.  This  per-  * 
formance  is  supposed  to  have  magic  or  mystic  power 
of  its  own,  so  that  its  every  detail  is  all-important. 
It  regulates  mechanically  the  relation  of  man  to  the 
divine  powers  by  its  own  intrinsic  power,  but  yet  a 


32  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


power  controlled  and  guided  by  the  wonderful  tech 
nique  of  the  priests,  and  their  still  more  wonderful 
insight  into  the  meaning  of  all  the  technical  acts. 
A  crowd  of  priests — seventeen  is  the  largest  number 
— conduct  an  interminable  ceremonial  full  of  sym 
bolic  meaning  down  to  its  smallest  minutiae.  The 
priests  seat,  themselves  on  the  sacrificial  ground 
strewn  with  blades  of  sacred  dfor^tf -grass,  and  mark 
out  the  altars  on  which  the  sacred  fires  are  built. 
They  handle  and  arrange  the  utensils  and  sacrificial 
substances.  And  then  they  proceed  to  give  to  the 
gods  of  the  sacrifice,  each  his  proper  oblation  and 
his  proper  share.  Even  the  least  and  most  trivial 
act  has  its  stanza  or  formula,  and  every  utensil  is 
blessed  with  its  own  particular  blessing.  These 
stanzas  and  formulas,  to  which  a  description  of  the 
rites  is  more  or  less  directly  attached,  make  up  the 
numerous  redactions  of  this  Veda. 

The  Yajur-Veda  is  a  later  collection  in  the  main, 
though  it  contains  much  substance  that  is  old,  old 
enough,  indeed,  to  be  prehistoric.  But  like  all  other 
Vedic  collections,  its  redaction,  at  any  rate,  pre 
supposes  the  Rig-Veda.  A  good  many  verses  of 
the  Rig- Veda  reappear  in  the  Yajur-Veda,  usually 
not  in  the  exact  form  of  the  Rig-Veda,  but  taken 
out  of  their  connection,  and  altered  and  adapted  to 
new  ends  which  were  foreign  to  the  mind  of  the 


The  Veda  33 


original  composers.   There  are  also  many  new  verses 
in  the  Yajur-Veda  which  are  in  the  main  ritualistic 
rather  than  hymnal,  concerned  with  technical  details 
of  the  sacrifice  rather  than  with  the  praise  of  the  gods. 
But  the  characteristic  element  of  this  Veda  are 
the  yajus,  or  formulas  in  prose,  often  more  or  less 
rhythmic  prose.     To  these  this  Veda  owes  its  name. 
They  are,  by  the  way,  unquestionably  the  oldest  || 
prose   on   record    in   the   literatures   of   the    Indo-  \\ 
European  peoples.     These  formulas  are  often  brief 
and  concise,  mere  dedications  or  swift  prayers,  ac 
companying  an  action,  and  sometimes  hardly  ad 
dressed  to  any  one  in  particular.     So,  for  instance, 
"  Thee  for  Agni  "  (agnaye  tva),  or  "  This  to  Agni  " 
(idam  agneJi),  indicate  that  an  object  is  dedicated 
to  the  god  Agni.     Or,  "  Thee  for  strength  "  is  the 
briefest  prayer,  or  rather  magically  compelling  wish, 
that  the  use  of  a  certain  article  may  give  strength 
to  the  sacrificer.     But  they  swell  out  from  this  brev 
ity  to  long  solemn  litanies  that  betray  at  times  such 
a  measure  of  good  sense  as  may  at  best  be  expected 
in  these  doings.     Often,  however,  they  are  sunk  in 
the  deepest  depths  of  imbecility,  mere  verbiage  in 
tent  upon  silly  puns  on  the  names  of  the  things  used 
at  the  sacrifice.     When  an  animal  victim  is  tied  to 
the   post   the   priest   addresses  the   rope  with   the 
words,  "  Do  not  turn  serpent,  do  not  turn  viper!" 


34  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


The  Hindus  have  always  had  reason  to  fear  ser 
pents  ;  they  must  have  at  times  been  stung  by 
serpents  whom  they  mistook  for  ropes,  because  the 
two  things  are  often  correlated  in  their  literature. 
A  Hindu  figure  of  speech  (or  kenning)  for  serpent 
is  "  toothed  rope."  1  For  instance,  a  theosophic  text 
of  Upanishad  character  establishes  the  following 
comparison :  "  As  a  rope  which  is  not  clearly  seen 
in  the  dark  is  mistaken  for  a  serpent,  so  the  un 
enlightened  mistake  the  character  of  their  own 
self."  That  is  to  say,  they  do  not  comprehend  the 
divine  nature  of  their  self.  This  is  sensible,  and 
there  is  sense  also  in  the  following:  Kings  are  con 
ceived  as  rulers  of  the  earth.  Therefore,  at  the 
ceremony  of  consecration  the  king  looks  down  upon 
the  earth,  and  prays :  "  O  mother  Earth,  do  not 
injure  me,  nor  let  me  injure  thee ! "  But  often 
prayer  passes  over  into  litany,  here  as  in  other 
secondary  stages  of  religious  literature.  The  fol 
lowing  is  an  all  too  typical  case :  "  May  life  prosper 
through  the  sacrifice!  May  life's  breath  prosper 
through  the  sacrifice  !  May  the  eye  prosper  through 
the  sacrifice !  May  the  ear  prosper  through  the 
sacrifice !  May  the  back  prosper  through  the  sac- 

1  See  the  author  in  Hymns  of  the  Atharva-  Veda  (Sacred  Books  of 
the  East,  vol.  xlii.),  pp.  147,  368. 

2  Mandukya-Karika,    2.    17.      Cf.  the   adage   in    Petronius,  45' 
colubra  restem  non parit,  "  a  serpent  does  not  beget  a  rope." 


The  Veda  35 


rifice  !  "  And  finally— O  deepest  bathos  !— "May  the 
sacrifice  prosper  through  the  sacrifice  !  "  1 

The  many  thousand  formulas  of  this  sort  which 
occur  in  the  Yajur-Veda  and  its  accessory  literature 
are  now  for  the  first  time  collected  in  my  Vedic 
Concordance.  I  am  sure  that  the  enduring  im 
pression  which  they  leave  upon  the  mind,  aside  from 
their  partial  foolishness,  is  that  of  a  formalism  and 
mental  decay  upon  the  very  brink  of  dissolution. 
The  practices  which  accompany  these  formulas, 
though  they  contain  much  that  is  natural  and  vigor 
ous,  are  also  covered  up  by  silly  details  of  formalism, 
so  that  it  is  often  difficult  to  discover  their  real  human 
meaning.  It  is  remarkable,  however,  that  new  life 
springs  up  on  this  arid  waste.  It  is  as  though  this 
phase  of  Hindu  religion  had  prepared  itself  by 
its  very  excesses  for  a  salutary  and  complacent 
hajra-tciri.  In  its  last  outcome,  in  the  very  same 
Brahmanical  schools  where  all  this  folly  runs  riot, 
spring  up  the  Upanishads,  those  early  theosophic 
treatises  of  India  which  pave  the  way  for  her  endur 
ing  philosophies.  The  Upanishads  in  reality,  though 
not  professedly,  sweep  aside  the  ritual  like  cobwebs, 
and  show  the  Hindu  mind,  not  yet  perfectly  trained, 
but  far  from  choked ;  and  quite  capable  of  carrying 

1  C/.  Winternitz,  Geschichte  der  Indischen  Litteratur,  Part  First, 
P- 


36  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


on  the  development  of  Hindu  religions  to  the  really 
great  results  which  they  eventually  reach. 

The  Sama-Veda  is  of  all  the  Vedas  the  least  clear 
as  regards  its  origin  and  purpose.     As  a  literary  pro 
duction  it  is  almost  entirely  secondary  and  negative. 
The  Sama-Veda  is  interesting  chiefly,  because  it  is  the 
Veda  of  music.     In  addition  it  contains  some  original 
practices  to  which  tradition  has  attached  a  number 
of  legends    unknown  in  the  other  Vedic    schools. 
There  are  no  connected  hymns  in  this  Veda,  only 
more  or  less  detached  verses,  borrowed  in  the  main 
from  the  Rig- Veda.     Even  the  sense  of  these  verses 
is  subordinated  to  the  music  to  which  they  are  set. 
The  verses  are  grouped    in  strophes   which,  when 
accompanied  by  their  music,  are  known  as  sdmani, 
"  melodies."     The  saman-stanzas  are  preserved   in 
three  forms.     First,   in   the    Rig-Veda,  as   ordinary 
poetry  accented  in  the  usual  way,  and  not  accompan 
ied  by  melodies.     They  are  contained  mostly  in  the 
first  fifty  hymns  of  the  first  book,  and  in  Books  viii 
and  ix.     Most  of  these  stanzas  are  composed  in  the 
metre  gdyatrl,  or  in   strophes  known  as  pragdtha, 
which  are  compounded  of  gdyatrl  &nd  jagati  verse- 
lines.     Both  the  words  gdyatrl  and  pragdtha   are 
derived    from    the    verb    gai,   "  sing,"    and    show 
that  the  stanzas  and  strophes  composed  in  these 
metres  were   from  the  start  intended  to  be  sung. 


The  Veda  37 


Secondly,  they  occur  in  the  Sama-Veda  itself  in  a 
form  called  drcika,  that  is,  "collection  of  stanzas." 
This  is  a  kind  of  libretto,  or  text-book  contain 
ing  the  stanzas  which  are  to  be  memorised  for 
"  making  upon  them,"  as  the  Hindus  say,  the 
sdma7t-melodies.  Here  also  there  is  a  system 
of  accents,  peculiar  in  its  notation,  but  appar 
ently  still  with  reference  to  the  unsung  sdmans.  In 
the  third  sdman-version,  the  Ganas1  or  song-books,  we 
find  the  real  sdmans  as  they  are  to  be  sung.  Here 
not  only  the  text  but  also  the  musical  notes 
are  given.  Still  this  is  not  a  complete  sdman  yet. 
In  the  middle  of  the  sung  stanzas  certain  phantastic 
exclamatory  syllables  are  introduced,  the  so-called 
stobhaS)  such  as  oin,  hau,  hai,  hoyi,  or  him ;  and  at 
the  end  of  the  stanzas  certain  concluding  exclama 
tions,  the  so-called  nidheQna^  such  as  atJia,  d,  im,  and 
sat?  They  remind  us  in  a  way  of  the  Swiss  and 
Tyrolese  "yodels"  which  are  introduced  into  the 
songs  of  these  countries  as  a  sort  of  cadenzas, 
intended  to  heighten  the  musical  effect. 

The  Sama-Veda  is  devoted  a  good  deal  to  the 
worship  of  Indra,  a  blustering,  braggart  god,  who 

1  The  word  gana,  again,  is  derived  from  the  root^m,  "  sing." 

2  The  Pancavin9a  Brahmana  relates  that  the  poet  Kanva  was  for  a 
good  while  puzzled  to  find  a  nidhana  for  his  sdman,  until  he  heard 
a   cat  sneeze  ash  I     Then   he   took  ash   for  the    nidhana    of    his 


38  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


has  to  befuddle  himself  with  soma,  in  -order  to  get 
the  necessary  courage  to  slay  demons.  He,  and  he 
alone,  has  in  the  Rig-Veda  the  epithet  rclshama,  that 
is,  "he  for  whom  the  sdmans are  composed  upon  the 
the  rks"  or,  as  we  should  say,  "  out  of  the  rks"  l  It 
seems  likely  that  the  Sama-Veda  is  built  up  out_of 
remnants  of  savage  Shamanism — the  resemblance 
between  the  words  Saman  and  Shamanism,  however, 
is  accidental.  Shamanism,  as  is  well  known^jat- 
tempts  to  influence  the  natural  order  of  events  by 
shouts,  beating  of  tam-tams,  and  frantic  exhortation 
of  the  gods.  The  Brahmans  were  in  the  habit  of 
blending  their  own  priestly  practices  and  concep 
tions  with  a  good  deal  of  rough  material  which  they 
found  current  among  the  people.  The  sdman  melo 
dies,  too,  betray  their  popular  origin  in  that  they 
seem  to  have  been  sung  originally  at  certain  popular 
festivals,  especially  the  solstitial  festivals.2  The  ex 
clamations  interspersed  among  the  words  of  the  text 
are  likely  to  be  substitutes  for  the  excited  shouts  of 
the  Shaman  priests  of  an  earlier  time.  It  is  perhaps 
worth  while  to  note  that  in  later  Vedic  times  the 

1  See  my  articles,  On  Rclshama,  an  Epithet  of  Indra^  vs\Journal  of 
the   American  Oriental  Society,  vol.  xxi.,  p.  50  ff.  \    and,   The    God 
Indra  and  the  Sdma-  Veda,  in  Vienna  Oriental  Joiirnal,  vol.  xvii.,  p. 
156 /-. 

2  See  A.    Hillebrandt,   Die  Sonnenwendfeste   in  Alt-Indien,  Fest 
schrift  ftir  Konr ad  Hoffmann,  (Erlangen  1889),  pp.  22.  ff  and  34  ff. 
of  the  reprint. 


The  Veda  39 


Sama-Veda  is  held  in  small  regard.  The  Brahman- 
ical  law-books  prescribe  that  the  recitation  of  Rig- 
Veda  and  Yajur-Veda  must  stop  whenever  the 
shout  of  sdmans  is  heard.  One  of  these  law-books, 
for  instance,  counts  the  barking  of  dogs,  the  bray  of 
asses,  the  howling  of  wolves,  and  the  sound  of  the 
sdman  as  noises  so  obnoxious  or  defiling  that, 
when  heard,  the  study  of  the  other  Vedas  must 
stop.1 

The  interest  of  the  Sama-Veda  for  the  history 
of  Hindu  religion  and  literature  amounts  to  very 
little.  It  represents  in  fact  little  more  than  the 
secondary  employment  in  the  service  of  religion 
of  popular  music  and  other  quasi-musical  noises. 
These  were  developed  and  refined  in  the  course  of 
civilisation,  and  worked  into  the  formal  ritual  of 
Brahmanism  in  order  to  add  an  element  of  beauty 
and  emotion.  In  more  modern  times  the  sdman- 
chants  at  the  sacrifice  are  said  to  be  quite  impressive.2 

The  oldest  name  of  the  Atharva-Veda  is  atharvdn- 
girasah,  a  compound  formed  of  the  names  of  two 
semi-mythic  families  of  priests,  the  Atharvans  and 
Angirases.  At  a  very  early  time  the  former  term 
was  regarded  as  synonymous  with  "  holy  charms,"  or 

1  Compare  on  this  point  Professor  Ludwig's  remark   in   Der  Rig- 
Veda,  vol.  v. ,  p.  8. 

2  See  the  author  in  the  Vienna  Oriental  Journal,  vol.  xvii.,  p.  162. 


4O  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


"  blessings  "  ;  the  latter  with  "  witchcraft  charms/'  or 
"  curses."  In  addition  to  this  name,  and  the  later 
more  conventional  name  Atharva-Veda,  there  are 
two  other  names,  used  only  in  the  ritual  texts  of 
this  Veda.  One  is  bhrgvangirasah,  that  is,  Bhrigus 
and  Angirases.  In  this  the  Bhrigus,  another  ancient 
family  of  fire  priests,  take  the  place  of  the  Athar- 
vans.  The  other  is  Brahma-Veda,  probably  "  Veda 
of  the  Brahman,"  that  is  the  Veda  of  the  supervising 
fourth  priest  at  the  Vedic  ($rauta)  sacrifices.1  The 
latter  name  may,  however,  be  due  to  some  extent  to 
the  fact  that  the  Atharva-Veda  contains  a  surprising 
number  of  theosophic  hymns  which  deal  with  the 
brahma,  the  pantheistic  personification  of  holy 
thought  and  its  pious  utterance.  This,  as  we  shall 
see  later  on,2  becomes  in  time  the  ultimate  religious 
conception  of  the  Veda. 

The  Atharvan  is  a  collection  of  730  hymns,  con 
taining  some  6000  stanzas.  Aside  from  its  theo 
sophic  materials,  which  look  not  a  little  strange  in  a 
collection  of  charms  and  exorcisms,  and  some  hieratic 
stanzas  which  were  employed  by  the  Brahman  or 
fourth  priest,3  the  collection  is  almost  entirely  of  a 
popular  character.  It  consists  of  hymns  and  stanzas 

1  Cf.  Caland,    Vienna  Oriental  Journal,  vol.  xiv.,  p. 

2  See  below,  p.  273. 

3  See  Caland  in  the  article  just  cited. 


The  Veda  41 


for  the  cure  of  diseases  ;  prayers  for  health  and  long 
life ;  charms  for  the  prosperity  of  home  and  children, 
cattle  and  fields;  expiatory  formulas  designed  to  free 
from  sin  and  guilt;  charms  to  produce  harmony  in  the 
life  of  families  and  in  the  deliberations  of  the  village 
assembly  ;  charms  concerned  with  love  and  marriage, 
and,  indirectly,  with  the  rivalries  and  jealousies  of 
men  and  women  in  love;  conjurations  against  demons, 
sorcerers,  and  enemies  ;  charms  for  kings  in  peace  and 
war ;  and  charms  calculated  to  promote  the  interests 
of  the  Brahmans,  especially  to  secure  for  them  the 
abundant  baksheesh  for  which  they  clamor  with  the 
most  refreshing  directness. 

The_Atharva-Veda  is  of  unrivalled  importance  for 
the  history  of  superstition,  of  folk-lore,  and  popular 
practices.  Related  in  character  are  the  so-called 
"  House-books  "  ( Grhya-Sutras).  These  were  com 
posed  as  formal  treatises  at  a  comparatively  late  Vedic 
period,  yet  they  report  practices  and  prayers  of  great 
antiquity.  The  Hindus,  then  as  now,  took  an  in 
tensely  religious  view  of  their  lives.  In  its  even  daily 
course,  as  well  as  in  its  crucial  moments,  such  as  birth, 
investiture,  disciplehood,  marriage,  and  death,  the 
life  of  the  Hindu  was  both  sanctified  and  enlivened  by 
a  continuous  chain  of  religious  formalities,  acts,  and 
festivals.  These  were  codified  in  the  "  House-books" 
with  nice  minuteness.  The  Atharva-Veda  and  the 


42  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


"  House-books"  togetherlay  bare  with  unrivalled  preci 
sion  of  detail  the  religion  of  the  obscure  and  the  hum 
ble.  For  many  a  Hindu,  through  many  centuries, 
these  fond  time-honored  customs  of  the  fathers, 
the  schone  sitte,  was  the  true  religion,  which  turned 
inward,  irradiating  and  sustaining  the  spirit  of  a  peo 
ple  whose  masses  live  the  life  of  dark  toil  and  do 
not  see  the  light  revealed  to  their  own  elect.  To  the 
development  of  the  higher  and  ultimate  religion  of 
the  Veda  these  homely  practices  and  superstitions 
contribute  very  little. 

Charm  against  Jaundice. 

1.  Up  to  the   sun  shall    go    thy  heart-ache  and   thy 
jaundice:  in  the  colour  of  the  red  bull  do  we  envelop 
thee! 

2.  We  envelop  thee  in   red  tints,  unto  long  life.    May 
this  person  go  unscathed,  and  be  free  of  yellow  colour  ! 

3.  The  cows  whose  divinity  is  RohinI,  they  who,  more 
over,   are  themselves  red[rMnfs] — in  their  every  form 
and  every  strength  we  do  envelop  thee. 

4.  Into  the  parrots,  into  the  ropandkas  (thrush)  do  we 
put  thy  jaundice  ;  into  the  hdridravas  (yellow  wagtail) 
do  we  put  thy  yellowness. 

{Atharva-Veda,  i.  22.)' 

1  See  the  author,  Hymns  of  the  Atharva-Veda  (Sacred  Books  of 
the  East,  vol.  xlii.)  p.  7.  For  the  very  interesting  symbolic  practices 
that  accompany  the  recital  of  this  charm  against  jaundice,  see  p. 
263^.  of  the  same  work. 


The  Veda  43 


A   Woman  s  Incantation  against  her  Rival \ 

1.  I  have  taken  unto  myself  her  fortune  and  her  glory, 
as  a  wreath  off  a  tree.     As  a  broad-based  mountain  may 
she  sit  a  long  time  with  her  parents  ! 

2.  This  woman  shall  be  subjected  to  thee  as  thy  bride, 
O  King  Yama  (Pluto)  :  till  then  let  her  be  fixed  to  the 
house  of  her  mother,  or  her  brother,  or  her  father  ! 

3.  This  woman   shall   be  the  keeper   of  thy  house,  O 
King  Yama  :  her  do  we  deliver  over  to  thee  !     May  she 
long  sit  with   her  parents,  until  her  hair  drops  from  her 
head  ! 

4.  With  the  incantation  of  Asita,  of  Kacyapa,  and  of 
Gaya  do  I  cover  up  thy  fortune,  as  women  cover  things 
within  a  chest. 

(Atharua-Veda,)  i.  14.) 1 

The  poetic  stanzas  of  all  sorts,  and  the  ritualistic 
prose  formulas  of  the  Veda  collectively  go  by  the 
name  of  mantra,  "  pious  utterance  "  or  "  hymn."  In 
the  texts  of  one  group  of  Yajur-Vedas,  the  so-called 
Black  Yajur-Vedas,2  these  stanzas  and  prose  formulas 
alternate  with  descriptive  prose  chapters  which  tell 
how  these  mantras  are  to  be  used  at  the  sacrifice, 
and  why  they  are  to  be  used  in  a  given  way.  The 
passages  are  designated  as  braJimana.  In  the  case 
of  the  so-called  White  Yajur-Vedas  and  also  all  the 
other  Vedas  the  Brahmanas  are  compiled  into  sep- 

1  See  the  same  work,  pp.  107  and  252  .ff 

2  For  the  distinction  between  Black  and  White  Yajur-Veda  see  Mac. 
donell,  History  of  Sanskrit  Literature,  p.  177. 


44  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


arate  works  whose  object,  again,  is  to  expound  the 
combination  of  prayer  and  ritual  at  the  sacrifice. 
The  meaning  of  the  word  brdhmana  is  not  altogether 
clear.  Either  it  means  "  holy  practice,"  or  "  religious 
performance "  in  distinction  from  mantra,  "  holy 
utterance,"  or  "  religious  text."  Or,  perhaps  rather 
it  means  the  theological  explanation  by  Brahman 
priests  of  the  religious  ritual  as  a  whole,  including 
both  prayer  and  performance.  As  regards  both 
contents  and  literary  quality,  the  Brahmanas  are 
closely  analogous  to  the  Hebrew  Talmud.  In  the 
main  they  are  bulky  prose  statements  of  the  details 
of  the  great  Vedic  sacrifices,  and  their  theological 
meaning.  Both  the  performances  and  their  explana 
tion  are  treated  in  such  a  way,  and  spun  out  to  such 
length,  as  to  render  these  works  on  the  whole  monu 
ments  of  tediousness  and  intrinsic  stupidity.  And 
yet  the  Brahmanas  compel  the  student  of  Hinduism 
that  comes  to  scoff  to  stay  to  pray.  In  the  first 
place  they  are  important  because  they  are  written  in 
connected  prose — the  earliest  narrative  prose  in  the 
entire  field  of  Indo-European  speech,  only  little  less 
archaic  than  the  prose  formulas  of  the  Yajur-Veda.  * 
They  are  especially  important  for  syntax  :  in  this 
respect  they  represent  the  old  Hindu  speech  far 
better  than  the  Rig- Veda,  whose  syntax  and  style 
1  See  above,  p.  33. 


The  Veda  45 


are  distracted  by  the  licenses  and  restrictions  that  go 
with  poetic  form.  Secondly,  the  Brahmanas  are  an 
almost  inexhaustible  mine  for  the  history  of  the 
sacrifice,  religious  practices,  and  the  institutions  of 
priesthood.  These  institutions  in  time  became  so 
systematic  and  formidable  as  to  make  the  names 
Brahman  and  Brahmanism  typical  everywhere  for 
priest  and  priesthood.  Thirdly,  the  Brahmana  texts 
not  only  describe  and  expound  the  sacrifice,  but 
they  illustrate  and  enliven  it  by  numerous  stories 
and  legends.  While  engaged  in  expounding  the 
technicalities  of  the  ritual,  they  at  the  same 
time  unconsciously  supplement  the  poetic  Vedas. 
The  Hebrew  Talmud  interrupts  the  hair-splitting,' 
logic-chopping  expositions  of  its  ritual  Hallacha, 
by  picking  from  time  to  time  rare  flowers  from 
the  garden  of  its  Haggada,  or  legendary  lore. 
The  Brahmanas  no  less  make  drafts  upon  the  past 
and  present  of  the  great  storehouse  of  myths  and 
stories  that  India  has  cherished  from  the  beginning 
of  her  time.  The  poetic  value  of  many  of  these 
stories  may  be  judged  from  the  fact  that  they 
remain  stock  themes  for  the  Hindu  poets  of  later 
times. 

Here  we  find,  first  of  all,  the  story  of  the  flood, 
wonderfully  analogous  to  the  flood  legends  of  all 
Western  Asia,  and  especially  the  account  of  the 


A.6  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 

~  o 


book  of  Genesis.1  Many  echoes  are  called  up  by 
the  story  of  Cyavana  the  Bhargava  who,  old  and 
decrepit  as  a  ghost,  is  pelted  with  clods  by  the 
children  of  the  neighborhood.  Then  he  punishes 
their  families  by  creating  discord,  so  that  "  father 
fought  with  son,  and  brother  with  brother."  Cyavana 
finally,  through  the  help  of  the  divine  physicians, 
the  Agvins,  enters  the  fountain  of  youth  (queckbronri) 
and  marries  the  lovely  Sukanya.2  Like  an  oasis  in 
the  desert  comes  the  ancient  tale  of  Pururavas  and 
UrvacJ,  whose  mythic  meaning  has  been  much  dis 
puted  or  altogether  denied.3  Already  the  Rig- Veda 
knows  the  story,  and  the  Hindu  master-poet  Kali- 
dasa,  perhaps  a  thousand  years  later,  derives  from  it 
one  of  his  loveliest  dramas.  It  is  a  story  which  con 
tains  the  same  motif  as  the  Undine,  Melusine,  and 
Lohengrin  stories.  A  heavenly  nymph  (Apsaras), 
UrvacJ  by  name,  loves  and  marries  King  Pururavas, 
but  she  abandons  him  again  because  he  violates  one 
of  the  conditions  of  this  intrinsically  ill-assorted 


Val 

(M; 

Hwi 

ur 


1  See  Eggeling's  translation   of   the  version  of  this  legend  in  the 
apatha   Brahmana,   Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  xii.,  p.  2i6_y. 

For  the  story  of  the  flood  in  general  see  Usener,  Die  Sintflutsagen 
(Bonn,  1899)  ;  Andree,  Die  Flutsagen  (Brunswick,  1891)  ;  and 
Winternitz  in  Mittheilungen  der  Anthropologischen  Gesettschaft  in 
Wien,  vol.  xxxi  (iqoi),  p.  305. 

2  (^atapatha  Brahmana  4.  I.  5.  I  ff. 

3  See,  last,  the  author  in  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society, 
vol.  xx.,  p.  1 80. 


The  Veda  47 


union.  Not,  however,  through  his  own  fault,  but  on 
account  of  a  trick  played  him  by  the  Gandharvas,  a 
kind  of  heavenly  "  sports,"  the  natural  mates  of  the 
heavenly  nymphs,  the  Apsarases.  He  must  not  be 
seen  in  a  state  of  nudity  by  his  wife.  But  on  a  certain 
occasion  the  Gandharvas  cause  lightning  to  play: 
she  sees  him  and  vanishes.  Then  Pururavas  roams 
wailing  through  the  land  of  the  Kurus,  until  he 
comes  to  a  lotus  pond  in  which  nymphs  in  the  form 
of  swans  disport  themselves.  One  of  them  is  UrvacJ. 
They  engage  in  a  poetic  dialogue  which  is  preserved 
without  the  rest  of  the  story  as  one  of  the  hymns  of 
the  Rig- Veda  (10.  95).  This  finally  relieves  the 
intolerable  situation.  The  Brahmana  story  tells  : 

"  Then  she  was  sorry  for  him  in  her  heart.  And  she 
spake  :  '  A  year  from  to-day  thou  shalt  come  ;  then 
thou  mayest  tarry  with  me  one  night.  Till  then  thy  son 
whom  I  am  bearing  shall  have  been  born.'  And  that 
night  a  year  he  returned.  Behold  there  was  a  golden 
palace.  Then  they  said  to  him,  '  Enter  here.'  Then  they 
sent  Urvaci  to  him.  And  she  spake  :  '  To-morrow  the 
Gandharvas  will  grant  thee  a  wish  ;  choose  one.'  He 
said,  4  Choose  thou  for  me.'  She  advises  him  to  say, 
'I  desire  to  become  one  of  you.'  The  next  morning 
the  Gandharvas  grant  him  a  wish.  And  he  says,  *  I 
wish  to  become  one  of  you.' " 

Then  the  Gandharvas  teach  him  a  particular  fire- 
offering,  by  means  of  which  a  mortal  may  become  a 
Gandharva ;  thus  he  becomes  a  fitting  mate  for 


48  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


UrvacJ.    Now  the  reason  why  this  story  is  preserved 

|  is  that  the  Brahmana  text  is  engaged  in  describing 

i  this  very  fire-offering ;  the  story  proves  the  magic  of 

this  sacrifice  which  is,  aye,  powerful  enough  to  turn 

a  mortal  into  a  demi-god. 

Here  area  couple  of  short  legends,  crisp  and  clear- 
cut  as  cameos.  They  show  that,  just  as  the  early  gods 
of  India  are  nature-gods,  so  the  early  legends  are.  en 
grossed  with  problems  of  nature  and  the  world.  The 
first  of  these  snatches1  may  be  entitled 

A  Legend  of  the  First  Pair. 

"  Yama  and  Yarn!  (*  the  twins  ')  are  the  first  man  and 
woman.  Yama  died.  The  gods  sought  to  console 
YamI  for  the  death  of  Yama.  When  they  asked  her  she 
said,  *  To-day  he  hath  died/  They  said :  '  In  this 
way  she  will  never  forget  him.  Let  us  create  night  ! ' 
Day  only  at  that  time  existed,  not  night.  The  gods 
created  night.  Then  morrow  came  into  being.  Then 
she  forgot  him.  Hence,  they  say,  '  Days  and  nights 
make  men  forget  sorrow.'" 

The  second  legend  2  may  be  entitled 

The  Mountains  as  Winged  Birds. 

"The  mountains  are  the  eldest  children  of  Prajapati 

(the  Creator).     They  were  winged  (birds).     They  kept 

,  flying  forth  and  settling  wherever  they  liked.     At  that 

1  Maitrayani  Sanhita    i.  5.  12. 

2  Maitrayani  Sanhita  i.   10.  13.  cf.  Pischel,   Vedische  Studien,  i., 
174  ff. 


The  Veda  49 


time  this  earth  was  unstable.      (God)  Indra  cut  off  their 
wings.     By  means  of  the  mountains  he  made  firm  the 
earth.      The   wings    became    clouds.       Therefore   these 
clouds  ever  hover  about  the  mountains.    For  this  is  their  ( 
place  of  origin." 

At  the  end  of  the  Brahmanas  appears  a  class  of 
texts  known  as  Aranyakas,  or  "Forest  Treatises." 
The  meaning  of  this  name  is  not  altogether  clear.  It 
seems  probable  that  these  works  were  recited  by 
hermits  living  in  the  forest,  or,  more  precisely,  those 
who  went  to  the  forest  to  live,  at  the  time  when  they 
entered  the  third  stage  of  Hindu  life,  preparatory 
to  final  emancipation.1  According  to  another,  less 
likely,  view  they  are  texts  which  were  taught  by 
teacher  to  pupil  in  the  solitude  of  the  forest,  rather 
than  in  the  profaner  surroundings  of  the  town  or 
village  :  this  because  the  quiet  of  the  forest 
harmonised  better  with  the  sanctity  of  their  con 
tents.  In  either  view  it  is  difficult  to  see  why  so 
much  ado  should  have  been  made  about  them.  The 
Aranyakas  are  later  than  the  Brahmanas ;  this 
follows  from  the  position  they  occupy  at  the  end 
of  these  texts,  and  from  their  contents.  On  top  of 
descriptions  of  sacrificial  ceremonies  we  have  here 
symbolism  of  the  sacrifice  and  priestly  philosophy  of 
the  most  fantastic  order.  The  real  ritual  perform. 

1  See  below,  p.  288. 


50  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


ance  seems  for  the  most  part  to  be  supplanted  by 
allegorical  disquisition.  But  the  themes  of  the 
Aranyakas  are  by  no  means  of  one  sort  only ;  on  the 
contrary  they  are  heterogeneous  and  haphazard. 
Thus  the  Taittirlya  Aranyaka  deals  in  its  first  book 
with  the  Arunaketuka  Agni,  a  particular  method  of 
building  the  fire-altar;  its  second  book  makes  the 
rather  astounding  leap  over  to  Brahmanical  educa 
tion  and  Veda  study ;  its  third,  fourth,  and  fifth 
books  deal  with  parts  of  the  Vedic  sacrificial  cere 
monial  ;  and  its  sixth  book  describes  the  old  Vedic 
funeral  ceremonies  (pitrmedha).  Still  more  varie 
gated  are  the  contents  of  the  Aitareya  Aranyaka. 
What  governs  the  choice  of  these  "  forest  themes  " 
escapes  our  notice  almost  altogether.  In  any  case 
these  books  are  of  lesser  importance  from  the  point 
of  view  of  Vedic  literature  and  religion,  except  for  the 
following  fact,  which  is  of  paramount  importance  : 

The  Aranyakas  are  symptomatic  and  transitional. 
The  important  symptom,  if  we  understand  the 
matter  aright,  is  the  subordination  of  the  mere  act 
of  the  sacrifice  to  its  allegorical,  or,  as  we  might  say, 
spiritual  meaning.  This  suppression  of  the  material 
side  of  the  ritual  bridges  over  to  the  last  class  of 
texts  which  the  Veda  has  to  offer  along  this  line  of 
evolution.  They  are  the  famous  Upanishads,  the 
early  philosophical  or  theosophical  texts  of  India, 


The  Veda  51 


which  have  become  fateful  for  all  subsequent  higher 
Hindu  thought.  In  these  the  ritual  together  with 
every  other  manifestation  of  the  religion  of  works  is 
negated,  sometimes  by  cautious  and  delicate  innu 
endo,  always  by  the  inherent  antagonism  of  the  Upan- 
ishad  themes.  The  older  Upanishads  are  for  the 
most  part  either  imbedded  in  the  Aranyakas  or, 
more  frequently,  attached  to  the  end  of  these  texts. 
From  very  early  times,  therefore,  they  have  the 
name  Vedanta,  "  End  of  the  Veda."1  End  of  the 
Veda  they  are,  as  regards  their  position  in  the  re 
dactions  of  the  long  line  of  the  so-called  revealed 
($rauta)  texts,  and  as  regards  the  time  of  their  com 
position.  But  they  are  the  end  of  the  Veda  in  a 
higher  sense  as  well.  They  are  the  texts  of  the 
Veda's  highest  religion  and  philosophy.  In  particu 
lar  that  system  of  Brahmanical  philosophy  which 
controls  at  the  present  time  nearly  all  the  higher 
thought  of  Brahmanical  India  bears  the  name 
Vedanta.  And  there  is  no  important  form  of  Hindu 
thought,  heterodox  Buddhism  included,  which  is  not 
rooted  in  the  Upanishads. 

The  philosophic  and  religious  quality  of  the 
Upanishads  will  occupy  a  good  deal  of  our  attention 
when  we  come  to  the  higher  religion  of  the  Veda  in 
the  fifth  and  sixth  lectures  of  this  course.  For  the 

1  £vet§9vatara  Upanishad  6.  22  ;  Mundaka  Upanishad  3.  2.  6. 


52  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


present  we  may  content  ourselves  with  some  facts  in 
the  literary  history  of  these  extraordinary  composi 
tions.  As  regards  their  date  we  can  say  at  least  this 
much,  that  the  older  Upanishads  antedate  Buddha 
and  Buddhism.  The  production  of  after-born  Upan: 

•flt*.~i-:-  • 

ishads  continued,  however,  many  centuries  after 
Buddhism,  into  very  modern  times.  Next  to  the 
Rig-Veda  the  Upanishads  are  decidedly  the  most 
important  literary  document  of  early  India.  For 
the  history  of  religion  they  are  even  more  important. 
In  the  year  1656  the  Mogul  (Mussalman)  Prince 
Mohammed  Dara  Shukoh  invited  several  Hindu 
Pandits  from  Benares  to  Delhi,  and  induced  them  to 
I  translate  the  Upanishads  into  Persian.  Dara  Shukoh 
was  the  oldest  son  of  that  Mogul  Emperor  Shah 
Jehan,  who  built  at  Agra,  as  a  mausoleum  for  his 
favourite  Sultana,  the  Taj  Mahal,  perhaps  the  most 
beautiful  edifice  on  earth.  He  was  afterwards  de 
posed  from  the  throne  by  another  son  of  his,  the 
bloody  and  powerful  Emperor  Aurengzeb.  Dara 
Shukoh  was  a  man  of  another  sort.  He  was  the 
spiritual  follower  of  the  famous  liberal  Emperor 
Akbar,  and  wrote  a  book  intended  to  reconcile  the 
•religious  doctrines  of  the  Hindus  and  Mohammedans. 
Hence  his  extraordinary  desire  to  spread  the  know 
ledge  of  infidel  writings.  Three  years  after  the 
accomplishment  of  the  Upanishad  translation  he  was 


The  Veda  53 


put  to  dccith  (1659)  by  his  brother  Aurcngzeb,  on 
the  ground  that  he  was  an  infidel,  dangerous  to  the 
established  religion  of  the  empire  ;  as  a  matter  of 
fact,  because  he  was  the  legitimate  successor  to  the 
throne  of  Shah  Jehan.1  India,  in  more  than  one 
respect  the  land  of  origins,  is  also  the  country  from 
which  came  the  first  suggestions  of  a  comparative] 
study  of  religions.  The  Buddhist  Emperor  Agoka, 
250  years  before  Christ,  had  the  spirit  of  perfect 
religious  freedom.  Emperor  Akbar,  Prince  Dara 

Shukoh, and    Raja    Rammohun    Roy    are    another 

trifolium  of  this  sort.  The  last-named  enlightened 
prince  wrote  in  1824  a  book  entitled  Against  the 
Idolatry  of  all  Religions;  told  the  Hindus  that  caste 
divisions  "  are  as  destructive  of  national  union  as  of 
social  enjoyment";  expressed  belief  in  the  divine 
authority  of  Christ ;  and  yet  confidently  did  regard 
the  Upanishads  as  the  true  source  of  the  higher 
religious  life  of  the  Hindus.  This  class  of  men  are 
the  advance  guard  of  the  modern  scholars  who 
study  gentile  religions  in  a  spirit  of  sympathy 
and  fairness. 

I  would  ask  you  to  remember  in  this  connection 
my  friend,  the  late  Professor  Max  Miiller,  one  of  the 
translators  of  the  Upanishads — Mokshamulara,  as 

1  See  Elphinstcne,  History  of  India  (edited  by  Cowell),  p.  610  • 
Max  Miiller,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  i.,  p.  cvii. 


54  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


the  Hindus  called  him  during  his  latter  days.  It 
happens  that  moksha  is  the  Sanskrit  word  for  "  sal 
vation,"  and  milla  means  "  root."  To  the  Hindus  his 
name  means  "  Root-of-salvation,"  or,  as  we  might  say, 
with  a  different  turn,  "  Salvation  Miiller."  I  do  not 
imagine  that  Miiller  believed  in  the  Hindu  salvation, 
which  is  release  from  the  chain  of  lives  and  deaths 
in  the  course  of  transmigration.  But  if  freedom  of 
mind  partakes  of  the  flavor  of  salvation,  "  Salvation 
Miiller  "  he  was.  Max  Muller's  eminence  as  a  scholar 
and  writer  is  well  known  to  you  ;  less  generally  well 
understood,  perhaps,  is  the  liberalising  quality  of 
his  thought,  which  he  exercised  untiringly  during 
more  than  half  a  century.  Among  Europeans  he 
was  pre-eminent  for  the  spirit  of  sympathy  and 
fairness  which  he  brought  to  the  study  and  criticism 
of  Hindu  religious  thought. 

The  Persian  pronunciation  of  the  word  Upani- 
shad  is  Oupnekhat.  It  happened  that  the  French 
man  Anquetil  du  Perron,  the  famous  pioneer  in  the 
study  of  the  Zoroastrian  religion  of  the  Parsis,  was 
living  in  India  in  1/75.  There  he  became  interested 
in  the  Persian  Oupnekhat,  and  later  on  made  a 
Latin  translation  of  Dara  Shukho's  version.  This 
was  published  in  Strassburg  in  two  volumes  (vol.  i. 
in  1801  ;  vol.  ii.  in  1802).  This  translation  proved 
eventful  in  the  West.  At  that  comparatively  recent 


The  Veda  55 


time  the  Upanishads  were  yet  unknown  in  Europe. 
Notwithstanding  its  double  disguise,  first  the 
Persian,  and  next  the  Latin,  Anquetil's  Latin  ren 
dering  proved  to  be  the  medium  through  which 
Schopenhauer  became  acquainted  with  the  thought 
of  the  Upanishads.  As  is  well  known,  Schopen 
hauer,  who  is  the  father  of  Western  pessimism,  was 
powerfully  impregnated  with  their  pantheistic,  or, 
more  precisely,  monistic  philosophy.  His  own  sys 
tem  is  really  based  upon  conceptions  that  coincide 
in  one  way  or  another  with  the  more  detached 
teachings  of  the  Upanishads.  Schopenhauer  used 
to  have  the  Oupnekhat  lie  open  upon  his  table,  and ; 
was  in  the  habit,  before  going  to  bed,  of  performing  || 
his  devotions  from  its  pages.  His  own  estimate  of 
the  character  of  the  Oupnekhat  is  preserved  to  us 
in  the  following  statement :  "  Next  to  the  original  it 
is  the  most  rewardful  reading  possible  in  the  world. 
It  has  been  the  solace  of  my  life  ;  it  will  be  the 
solace  of  my  death."  Schopenhauer  himself  tells  us 
the  reason  for  his  faith  in  the  Upanishads.  The 
fundamental  thought  of  the  Upanishads,  he  says, 
is  what  has  at  all  times  called  forth  the  scoffing  of 
fools  and  the  unceasing  meditation  of  the  wise, 
namely,  the  doctrine  of  unity  ;  the  doctrine  that  all 
plurality  is  only  apparent  ;  that  in  all  individuals  of 
this  world,  in  whatsoever  endless  number  they 


56  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


present  themselves,  one  after  another,  and  one  be 
side  another,  there  is  manifested  one  and  the  same 
true  being.  Therefore  the  Upanishads  are  in  his 
eyes  the  fruit  of  the  profoundest  insight  that  the 
world  has  ever  seen  ;  almost  superhuman  thought, 
whose  authors  can  scarcely  be  imagined  to  have  been 
mere  men. 

Schopenhauer  unquestionably  caught  with  lynx- 
like  perspicacity,  through  the  murky  medium  of  the 
Oupnekhat,  the  spirit  of  the  Upanishads,  which  are 
now  before  us  in  many  editions  of  their  Sanskrit 
originals.  It  is  what  is  known  in  philosophy  as 
monism — the  .most  uncompromising,  perfervid 
monism  that  the  world  has  ever  seen.  Nor  is  his 
estimate  of  the  religious  or  philosophical  quality  of 
the  Upanishads  to  be  brushed  aside  lightly.  Pro 
fessor  Deussen,  one  of  the  profoundest  living 
students  of  Hindu  philosophy,  himself  a  trained 
philosopher,  does  not  fall  far  behind  Schopen 
hauer  when  he  says  that  the  thought  of  the 
Upanishads  has  not  its  equal  in  India  nor  per 
haps  anywhere  else  in  the  world ;  that  to  these 
thinkers  came,  if  not  the  most  scientific,  yet 
the  most  intimate  and  immediate  insight  into 
the  ultimate  mystery  of  being.  This  is  not  far 
behind  Schopenhauer's  estimate ;  both  estimates 
reflect  pretty  nearly  the  position  of  the  Hindus 


The  Veda  57 


themselves,  who   regard   the  Upanishads  as  divine 
revelation. 

With  all  due  respect  for  these  great  thinkers,  I 
believe  that  Sanskrit  scholars  in  general  incline  to  a 
soberer  estimate  of  the  Upanishads.  With  the 
Hindu  view  of  revelation  we  need  not  quarrel.  As. 

t 

to  the  question  whether  the  Upanishads  are  inspired, !. 
we  may  safely  intrust  its  decision  to  the  broadening 
spirit  of  the  conception  of  inspiration,  which  at  the 
present  time  is  everywhere  in  evidence  in  the  world. 
More  to  the  point  is,  that  the  Upanishads  contain  in 
fact  no  system  of  thought,  though  they  did  un 
questionably  inspire  later  Hindu  systematic  phi 
losophy.  We  are  often  vexed  with  their  unstable, 
contradictory,  and  partly  foolish  statements.  The 
commanding  thought  of  the  Upanishads — monism, 
or  the  doctrine  of  unity  precedes  the  Upanishads 
in  the  Rig- Veda ;  unfortunately  we  do  not  know  by 
how  many  years  or  centuries.  Above  all,  we  cannot 
and  should  not  forget  that  underneath  Upanishad 
thought,  as  underneath  all  advanced  Hindu  thought, 
is  found  the  belief  in  transmigration  of  souls,  a 
picturesque  notion  which  to  the  very  end  retains 
the  quality  of  folk-i-jre,  rather  than  the  q'.mjity  of 
philosophy.1  But  to  the  Hindus  of  the  Upanishads 
this  belief  is  an  axiom.  After  all,  the  prime  interest 
1  See  below,  p  254. 


58  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 

of  the  Upanishads  is  literary  and  historical,  We 
are  captivated  by  the  quality  of  the  endeavor  more 
than  by  the  quality  of  the  thing  accomplished. 

From  the  literary  side  the  Upanishads  captivate 
not  because  they  are  finished  products — they  are 
anything  but  that — but  because  they  show  great 
power  and  originality  as  a  kind  of  rhapsodic  philo 
sophic  prose  poems.  From  the  point  of  view  of  the 
history  of  human  thought,  what  entitles  them  to 
enduring  respect  is  that  they  show  us  the  human 
mind  engaged  in  the  most  plucky  and  earnest  search 
after  truth — and  let  me  add  that  this  search  is 
carried  on  in  the  sweetest  of  spirit,  without  fear  of 
offending  established  interests,  and  entirely  free 
from  the  zealotism  that  goes  with  a  new  intellectual 
era. 

But  the  Upanishads  do  not  contain  consummation. 
On  the  contrary,  it  is  the  dear,  familiar,  earnest  human 
fight,  doomed  rather  to  disappointment,  which  very 
early  Hindus  here  carry  on,  to  find  the  secret  of  the 
world  and  the  secret  of  self-conscious  man  in  the 
hiddenmost  folds  of  their  own  heart — that  is  what 
always  holds  attention,  and  that  is  the  endearing 
quality  of  these  texts.  Therefore  it  is  true  that, 
wherever  the  spirit  of  the  Upanishads  has  been  carried 
there  has  sprung  up  genuine  human  sympathy,  if  not 
final  intellectual  consent.  How  this  is  so  I  shall  hope 


The  Veda  59 


to  show  later,  at  the  proper  point  in  the  development 
of  the  religion  of  the  Veda.  But  for  a  good  while  we 
shall  be  occupied  with  more  primitive  religious  forms, 
though  even  through  these  sounds  from  time  to  time,  j 
almost  in  the  manner  of  a  Wagnerian  leitmotif,  the] 
clarion  note  of  the  leading  Hindu  idea. 


LECTURE  THE  SECOND. 

The   Hieratic  Religion. — The    Pantheon 
of  the  Veda. 

Fundamental  traits  of  early  Vedic  religion — False  view  of 
the  nature  of  Vedic  poetry — The  Rig- Veda  as  sacrificial 
poetry — Difficulty  of  understanding  the  ritual  char 
acter  of  the  Rig-Veda — Poetry  addressed  to  the  Goddess 
Dawn — A  hymn  to  the  sacrifice  post — The  goddess 
Dawn  as  the  symbol  of  liberality  at  the  sacrifice — Some 
erroneous  estimates  of  Goddess  Dawn — Agni  the  son  of 
"Baksheesh  " — Practical  purposes  of  Vedic  poetry — The 
Rig- Veda  contains  the  religion  of  the  upper  classes — 
The  ritual  of  the  Rig- Veda — The  aprl-hymns — Nature- 
worship  the  keynote  of  the  Rig-Veda — India's  climate 
and  nature-worship — Vedic  and  Hellenic  mythology 
compared — Arrested  anthropomorphism — Definition  of 
the  word  Pantheon  as  applied  to  the  Veda — Faulty 
classifications  of  the  Vedic  gods — Chronology  of  the 
gods — Different  degrees  of  certainty  about  the  origin 
of  the  gods — Classification  of  the  gods  in  these  lectures. 

THE  religion  which  is  contained  in  the  bulk  of 
the  so-called  "  revealed  "  (^rauta)  Vedic  litera 
ture,  that  is  in  the  main  body  of  the  hymns  of  the 
Rig-Veda,  the  Yajur-Veda,  the  Sama-Veda,  and  the 
Brahmanas,  is  a  hieratic  or  priestly  religion.  As_£e- 
gards  its  mechanism,  or  its  external  practices,  i£js 

unmistakably  liturgic  or  ritualistic.     As  regards^its 

60 


The  Hieratic  Religion  61 


immediate  mirncise,  or  its  economic  aspect,  it  is 
thoroughly  utilitarian  and  practical.  Its  purpose,  is 
to  secure  happiness  and  success,  health  and  long  life 
for  man,  notably  the  rich  man,  while  living  upon  the 
earth ;  to  secure  to  a  very  talented  and  thrifty  class 
of  priest-poets  abundant  rewards  in  return  for  their 
services  in  procuring  for  men  this  happiness,  success, 
and  so  on  ;  to  satisfy  the  divine  powers,  visible  and 
invisible,  beneficent  and  noxious,  gods  and  demons, 
that  is,  to  establish  livable  relations  between  gods 
and  men  ;  and,  finally,  to  secure  after  death  the  right 
to  share  the  paradise  of  the  gods  in  the  company 
of  the  pious  fathers  that  have  gone  there  before. 

For  a  generation  or  two  since  the  real  beginnings  of 
the  study  of  the  Veda,  say  fifty  years  ago,  and  endur 
ing  more  faintly  to  the  present  day,  the  imagination 
of  scholars  thought  it  saw  in  the  hymns  of  the  Rig- 
Veda  the  earliest  spontaneous  outbursts  of  the  prim 
itive  mind,  face  to  face  with  the  phenomena  of  nature. 
The  poets  of  the  Rig-Veda  were  supposed  to  be 
simple  sons  of  nature.  Awe-struck  and  reverent, 
they  were  supposed  to  be  pondering,  without  ulterior 
motive  of  any  kind,  the  meaning  of  day  and  night ; 
of  dawn,  sun,  and  moon  ;  of  sky,  thunder,  and  light 
ning  ;  of  atmosphere  and  wind ;  of  earth  and  fire. 
The  Rig-Veda  was  the  "  Aryan  Bible,"  containing  the 
earliest  flashes  of  the  religious  thought  of  awakening 


62  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


humanity.  This  stately  gathering  of  more  than  a 
thousand  hymns  was  viewed  as  a  historical  collection. 
Just  as  the  hymns  were  composed  by  poets,  so  the 
collection  and  redaction  of  the  Rig- Veda  was  sup 
posed  to  have  been  undertaken  by  persons  of  literary 
taste  and  redactorial  diligence,  apparently  in  order 
to  save  these  precious  monuments  for  the  aesthetic 
delight  of  posterity. 

One  cannot  now  help  wondering  to  what  station 
in  life  might  have  belonged  these  early  poets.  I  can 
only  think  of  rhapsodists  from  out  of  the  people, 
seized  on  occasion  by  the  divine  frenzy,  perchance 
some  village  barber — old  and  semi-religious  function 
ary  in  the  Hindu  village — or  some  village  Hans  Sachs, 

' '  shoe 
maker  and  a  poet  too  " 

as  we  may  translate  the  German  doggerel.1  Unless, 
still  less  likely,  Vedic  poetry  was  the  child  of 
the  muse  of  some  Raja's  poet  laureate,  "given 
to  infinite  tobacco,"  eager,  as  he  took  the  air 
under  one  of  those  huge  banyan-trees  large 
enough  to  hold  a  village,  to  bag  some  good  sub 
ject  for  the  delectation  of  the  court  of  his  patron. 
Delightful  as  might  be  some  such  romantic  a  view  to 
the  student  of  a  literature  that  requires  the  devotion 

1  "  Hans  Sachs  war  ein  Schuh- 
Macher  und  Poet  dazu," 


The  Hieratic  Religion  63 


of  a  lifetime,  it  is  not  the  correct  view.  My  own 
fancy  in  the  earlier  days  moved  along  these  lines. 
I  am  not  sure  but  what  some  such  conception  of 
Vedic  literature,  faulty  as  I  now  believe  it  to  be, 
drew  me  into  these  studies  more  enticingly  than 
could  have  the  soberer  view  of  ripening  years. 

I  shall  endeavor  later  on  to  attach  the  right  value 
to  the  poetry  of  the  Vedic  hymns  in  the  abstract. 
I  shall  also  show  the  way  in  which  these  poems  ex 
press  a  high  quality  of  religious  feeling  on  the  part 
of  their  composers — Rishis,  as  they  are  called  in  the 
texts  themselves.  My  endeavor  shall  not  be  to 
minimise  the  quality  of  these  compositions,  but 
rather  to  show  that  they  contain  the  rudiments  of  a 
far  higher  species  of  thought  than  these  early  poets 
could  have  dreamt  of;  thought  which  in  its  way, 
and  along  its  particular  avenue,  has  become  final  for 
all  time  in  India,  and  even  outside  of  India.  At 
present  we  are  engaged  with  the  more  external  charac 
ter  of  the  Rig-Veda — its  epidermis,  as  we  might  say. 
The  Rig- Veda  collection  served  purely  utilitarian 
purposes.  It  is  in  fact  a  prayer-book  whose  explana 
tion  ought  not  to  be  undertaken  without  reference  to 
definite  occasions  and  definite  practices.  The  main 
body  of  the  books  of  the  Rig-Veda,  the  so-called  fam 
ily  books,1  represents  in  all  probability  the  prayers 

1  See  above,  p.  27. 


64  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


of  different  priestly  families  on  the  same  or  similar 
occasions,  or  in  connection  with  the  same  or  similar 
sacrifices.  The  Vedic  hymns  are  not  quite  described 
even  if  we  designate  them  as  sacrificial  poetry.  It  is 
a  little  more  than  that :  I  cannot  express  it  better 
than  by  saying,  it  is  the  sacrifice — to  the  gods  of 
course — treated  poetically.  In  other  words  these 
poems  are  incidental  to  the  sacrifice.  The  Vedic 
poet  rises  in  the  early  morning  to  a  sacrificial  day. 
The  very  first  natural  phenomenon  he  sees  with  his 
own  eyes,  the  glorious  maiden  Dawn,  is  at  once 
pressed  into  service.  She  trumpets  forth,  so  to  say, 
to  the  world  that  this  is  going  to  be  a  day  of  sacri 
fice  which  shall  result  in  wealth  and  comforts.  The 
day  goes  on,  being  a  mere  scaffolding,  or  ladder  upon 
whose  rungs  are  placed  offerings  to  the  gods.  Morn 
ing,  noon,  and  evening,  tolerably  definite  gods  get 
their  regular  allowance  of  offerings,  and  a  very  admi 
rable  kind  of  hymnal  praise,  namely  the  hymns  of  the 
Rig-Veda.  As  the  gods  come  on,  one  after  another, 
or  in  pairs,  or  in  groups,  they  enter  upon  a  stage. 
The  stage  is  the  sacrificial  day.  They  are  figures  in 
a  drama,  more  important  collectively  than  singly. 
Take  them  singly,  and  I  venture  to  say  that  even  the 
Rig-Veda,  as  does  the  later  ritual,  begins  to  show 
most  of  them  in  the  state  of  a  sort  of  supernumera 
ries  on  the  stage  of  the  sacrifice.  India  is  nothing  if 


The  Hieratic  Religion  65 


not  singular.  We  must  not  shrink  from  realising  that 
the  earliest  Hindu  poetry  is  not  epic,  nor  lyric  in  the 
ordinary  sense,  not  idyllic,  nor  didactic,  but  that  it  is 
almost  throughout  dominated  by  a  single  idea,  name 
ly,  the  praise  of  the  gods  in  connection  with  the 
sacrifice.  The  sacrifice  is  the  dominant  note  of  Vedic 
life,  as  far  as  it  is  revealed  in  these  ancient  documents. 
The  chief  acts  of  the  people  living  this  life,  in  so 
far  as  it  is  revealed  by  the  literature  are  sacrificial; 
their  chief  thought  the  praise  and  conciliation  of  their 
gods  at  the  sacrifice.  The  soma,  the  sacred  drink, 
intoxicates  the  gods  into  heroism,  or  the  rich  melted 
butter,  or  ghee  (ghrtd),  that  is  poured  into  the  willing 
fire,  fattens  them  into  contentment.  Especially  the 
soma  is  ever  present,  in  express  statement  or  by  im 
plication.  So  much  so  that  in  a  technical  sense  at 
least  the  Rig- Veda  religion  may  be  designated  as  a 
religion  of  ^^^-practices. 

But  the  hymns  are  dithyrambic,  often  turgid  and 
intentionally  mystic.  It  requires  at  times  pretty 
sharp  sight  to  see,  and  a  clear  head  to  remember, 
that  this  poetry  hugs  the  sacrifice  closely ;  that  at 
the  bottom  of  the  golden  liquid  of  inspiration  there 
are  always  the  residual  dregs  of  a  supposedly  useful 
formalism.  In  fact  the  poets,  as  their  fancy  flies 
away  from  their  immediate  purpose,  succeed  un 
commonly  well  in  withdrawing  the  eye  from  the 
5 


66  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


trivial  real  properties  of  the  sacrifice  to  the  luminous 
gods  whom  they  praise  so  well. 

The  most  beautiful  hymns  of  the  Rig- Veda  are 
addressed  to  Ushas  or  Aurora,  the  maiden  Dawn, 
the  Goddess  Dawn,  the  daughter  of  Dyaush  Pitar — • 
(Zevz  7rarrfp\  Father  Heaven — Homer's  Rose-finger 
Eos.  A  poet  sings  her  ecstatically  : 

"We  have  crossed  to  the  other  side  of  darkness, 
Gleaming  Aurora  hath  prepared  the  way. 
Delightful  as  the  rhythm  of  poem,1  she  smiles  and  shines, 
To  happiness  her  beauteous  face  aroused  us." 

(Rig-Veda    i.  92.  6.) 

We  feel  that  we  -^e  going  to  be  held  willing  cap 
tives  of  a  primitive  Shelley  or  Keats,  until  we  are 
sobered  by  another  stanza  of  the  same  hymn 
(stanza  5): 

"  Her  bright  sheen  hath  snown  itself  to  us; 
She  spreads,  and  strikes  the  black  dire  gloom. 
As  one  paints  the  sacrificial  post  at  the  sacrifice, 
So  hath  Heaven's  daughter  put  on  her  brilliance." 

What  a  comparison  !  The  petty  sacrificial  post 
(svaru),  destined  to  hold  fast  an  animal  victim, 
gaudily  ornamented  with  paint — it  is  described  tech 
nically  as  having  a  knob  for  a  head,  along  with 
sundry  other  barbaric  beauties — brings  us  down 
with  a  thud  from  heaven  to  the  mockeries  of  the 

1  The  expression  chdndo  nd  here  and  at  8.  7.  36  is  to  be  rendered 
so,  or  simply  "  like  a  poem."  There  is  no  occasion  for  an  adjectival 
stem  chdnda  in  the  sense  of  "singer,"  or  the  like,  as  the  lexicons 
and  translators  generally  assume. 


The  Hieratic  Religion  67 


sacrifice.  Our  good  friend  the  poet  is  after  all  a 
monger  in  technical  rites  who  cannot,  even  in  the 
moment  of  his  inspiration,  quite  forget  his  trade. 
Lest  we  think  that  just  this  particular  poet  has 
nodded  for  a  moment,  another  hymn  repeats  the, 
to  us,  offensive  comparison : 

"  The  bright  Dawns  have  risen  in  the  East, 
Like  sacrifice  posts  uplifted  at  the  sacrifice. 
Luminous,  pure,  and  clear,  they  have  unbarred 
The  portals  of  the  stable  of  darkness." 

(Rig- Veda  4.  51.  2.) 

We  may  turn  this  about  the  other  way  and  prove 
the  example.  Just  as  it  is  possible  for  a  brilliant 
poet  of  the  Rig- Veda  to  institute  comparisons  be 
tween  glorious  Dawn  and  the  tawdry  sacrifice  post, 
so  it  is  possible  for  another  poet  to  consider  the 
sacrifice  post  as  a  subject  fit  for  high  poetic  treat 
ment.  We  are  accustomed  to  make  allowance  for 
symbolism  in  connection  with  articles  belonging  to 
ritual,  but  I  question  whether  the  poets  of  any 
other  land  have  ever  turned  their  talents  to  such 
curious  use : 

Rig -Veda  3.  8. 

i.  "  God-serving  men,  O  sovereign  of  the  forest! ' 
With  heavenly  mead  at  sacrifice  anoint  thee. 

1  That  is,  the  tree  from  which  the  sacrifice  post  is  made. 


68  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


Grant  wealth  to  us  when  thou  art  standing  upright, 
And  when  reposing  on  this  Mother's  1  bosom  ! 

2.    "  Set  up  in  front  of  the  enkindled  fire, 

Accepting  tireless  prayer,  that  brings  strong  sons, 
Driving  far  from  us  away  all  noisome  sickness, 
Lift  thyself  up  to  bring  us  great  good  fortune! 

4.    "  Well-robed,  enveloped,  he  is  come,  the  youthful  ; 
Springing  to  life  his  glory  waxeth  greater. 
Contemplative  in  mind  and  god-adoring, 
Sages  of  wise  intellect  upraise  him. 

9.    "  Like  swans  that  fly  in  ordered  line 

Have  come  the  pillars  gay  in  brilliant  colors. 
They,  lifted  up  on  high  by  sages,  eastward, 
Go  forth  as  gods  to  the  gods'  dwelling-places. 

10.  "  These  posts  upon  the  earth,  with  ornate  knobs, 

Seem  to  the  eye  like  horns  of  horned  cattle. 
Upraised  by  priests  with  rival  invocations, 
Let  them  assist  us  in  the  rush  of  battle  ! 

11.  "  Lord  of  the  world,  rise  with  a  hundred  branches— 

With  thousand  branches  may  we  rise  to  greatness— 
Thou  whom  this  hatchet  with  an  edge  well  whetted 
For  great  felicity  hath  brought  before  us  !  " 

I  am  reminded  here  of  the  tense  struggle  in  which 
my  friend  the  late  Professor  Max  Miiller  was  engaged 
with  an  epithet  of  Ushas,  quite  startling,  I  admit,  at 
first  sight.  The  same  beautiful  Daughter  of  Heaven^ 

i  Mother  Earth. 


The  Hieratic  Religion  69 


in  another  hymn,  is  called  Dakshina.  Now  the  word 
daksJiimi  means  ".sacrificial  fee,"  or,  in  plainer  words, 
it  is  the  baksheesh  of  the  priests  at  the  sacrifice.  But 
it  did  not  seem  tolerable  to  Miiller's  poetic  mind  that 
a  poet  might  degrade  so  charming  a  theme  by  such 
a  comparison : 

"  Up  the  shining  strands  of  Dawn  have  risen, 
Like  unto  glittering  waves  of  water  ! 
All  paths  prepareth  she  that  they  be  easily  traversed  ; 
Liberal  goddess,  kind,  she  hath  become  baksheesh." 

(Rig- Veda  64.  6.  i.) 

The  word  which  I  have  just  rendered  by  "  liberal 
goddess  "  (  magkoni)  is  the  very  one  that  is  used  con 
stantly  and  technically  for  the  patron  of  the  sacrifice 
(maghavan),  the  immediate  source  from  which  flow 
all  the  fees  of  the  sacrifice.  In  its  feminine  form 
(maghoni)  it  is  used  almost  solely  as  an  epithet  of 
Dawn.  Here  it  is,  cheek  by  jowl  with  dakshind. 
Ushas  is  the  patroness  of  the  sacrifice ;  she  is  herself 
the  sacrifice  fee,  because  she  heralds  or  ushers  in  the 
sacrificial  day 1  after  the  darkness  of  the  night,  when 
both  liberal  and  stingy  are  asleep.  If  I  could  get 
myself  to  suspect  one  of  these  ancient  Rishis  of  hu 
mor,  I  should  say  that  there  was  a  touch  of 
humor — anyhow  it  is  unconscious  humor — in  the 

i  See  Rig-Veda  7.  78.  3,  where  the  Dawns  are  said  to  beget  the 
Sun,  the  sacrifice,  and  Agni :  ajljanan  suryam  yajnam  agnim. 


70  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


following  appeal  to  Ushas  :  "  Arouse,  O  Ushas,  liberal 
goddess,  them  that  give ;  the  niggards  shall  sleep 
unawakened  !  "  That  is  to  say,  what  is  the  use  of 
waking  the  stingy  man,  he  is  not  going  to  give  us  any 
thing  anyhow.  Another  stanza  states  this  even  more 
emphatically :  "  O  shining  Dawns,  ye  liberal  god 
desses,  do  ye  to-day  suggest  to  the  rich  that  they  shall 
give  bounty  !  Let  the  stingy,  unawakened,  sleep  in 
the  depths  of  obscure  darkness  ! 2 

The  very  first  hymn  in  the  Rig-Veda  that  is  ad 
dressed  to  Ushas  presents  in  its  opening  strain  the 
ritual,  serving,  economic  goddess,  in  an  inextricable 
tangle  with  the  poetic  divinity.  Almost  do  we  feel 
that  economic  advantage  and  aesthetic  delight  are 
much  the  same  thing  to  the  soul  of  such  a  poet : 

"  With  pleasant  things  for  us,  O  Ushas, 
Shine  forth,  O  Daughter  of  Heaven, 
With  great  and  brilliant  wealth,  of  which, 

0  luminous  goddess,  thou  art  the  giver  !  " 

(Rig-Veda  i.  68.   I.) 

And  immediately  after,  in  the  next  stanza,  the 
significant  words,  "Arouse  thou  the  benevolence  of 
our  patrons!"  And  so  another  time,3  "To  these 
nobles  give  thou  glory  and  fine  sons,  O  patroness 
Dawn,  to  them  that  have  given  us  gifts  that  are  not 

1  Rig- Veda  I.  124.  10. 

2  Rig- Veda  4.  51.  3. 

3  Rig- Veda  5.  79.  6. 


The  Hieratic  Religion  71 


shabby  1 "  And  once  again,  *  "  God  after  god  urge 
thou  on  to  favor  us  ;  make  all  pleasant  things  come 
our  way ;  and,  as  thou  shinest  forth,  create  in  us  the 
inspiration  that  leads  to  gain!"  That  is  to  say,1i 
make  our  poetry  so  clever  that  it  shall  not  fail  to 
stimulate  the  liberality  of  the  patron  of  the  sacrifice  ! 
We  can  now  understand  the  tour  de  force  of  the 
poet-priest  who,  when  he  sings  of  Dawn,  is  anxious 
above  all  that  the  main  issue  shall  not  be  neglected. 
Therefore  he  blurts  out  his  crassest  thought  first, 
afflicts  the  goddess  with  the  doubtfully  honorable 
title  baksheesh,  and  then  settles  down  to  a  very  nice 
appreciation  of  his  poetic  opportunity : 

"  Baksheesh's  roomy  chariot  hath  been  harnessed, 
And  the  immortal  gods  have  mounted  on  it, 
The  friendly  Dawn,  wide-spread,  from  out  of  darkness 
Has  risen  up  to  care  for  the  abode  of  mortals. 

!<  The  mighty  goddess  arose  before  all  the  creatures, 
She  wins  the  booty  and  always  conquers  riches; 
The  Dawn  looks  forth,  young  and  reviving  ever, 
She  came  the  first  here  to  our  morning  offering." 

(Rig-Veda  i.  123.  i,  2.) 

I  think  my  hearers  will  understand  that  it  is  not 
necessary  to  regard  the  word  daksliind,  with  Professor 
Max  Miiller,  as  a  vague  honorific  adjective  of  Dawn, 
in  the  sense  of  "  clever,"  or  the  like.3  Nor  need  we 

1  Rig-Veda  7.  79.  5. 

2  See  his  Auld  Lang  Syne,  Second  Series,  p.  223^". 


72  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 

in  this  instance  to  go  to  the  school  of  the  late  great 
French  interpreter  of  the  Rig- Veda,  Abel  Bergaigne, 
who,  in  a  fashion  quite  his  own,  transports  too  many 
of  the  events  in  the  earthly  life  of  the  Vedic  Hindu 
to  heaven.  He  sees  clearly  enough  that  dakshind 
means  "  sacrifice  fee,"  and  nothing  else,  but  opines 
that  Dawn  is  called  dakshind  because  she  is  the  gift 
of  heaven  bestowed  upon  pious  men  as  a  recompense 
for  their  piety.1  This  is  all  too  roundabout,  and 
unnecessary,  and  un-Vedic.  Still  less  can  we  assent 
to  the  statement  of  another  very  sane  and  enlight 
ened  critic  of  the  Vedas,  Professor  Oldenberg,  who 
declares  that  "  the  hymns  to  Dawn  waft  to  us  the 
poetry  of  the  early  morn ;  that  they  steer  clear  of 
the  mystic  sophistries  of  sacrifice  technique ;  and 
that  they  have  a  charm  that  is  wanting  in  the  sac 
rificial  hymns  proper."  '  Professor  Oldenberg  takes 
the  usual  view  of  this  interesting  goddess.  I  would 
advocate  precisely  the  opposite  view,  namely,  that 
the  hymns  to  Dawn,  their  many  intrinsic  beauties 
to  the  contrary  notwithstanding,  represent  the  first, 
the  keenest,  so  to  speak,  the  least  tired  sacrificial 
mood  of  these  poet-priests  as  they  enter  upon  the 
absorbing  business  of  the  day  ;  and  that  never  _has_ 
the  battledoor  and  shuttlecock  of  really  fine  poetic 

1  La  Religion  Vedique,  vol.  i.,  p.   127  ff' 
9  Die  Religion  des  Veda,  p.  237. 


The  Hieratic  Religion  73 


inspiration  and  plain  self-engrossed  human  neediness 
been  played  so  frankly  and  undisguisedly  by  poet — 
who  must  first  live  and  afterwards  compose  poetry. 

Once  more  I  must  tax  your  patience  and  return 
to  Dawn's  epithet  dakshind,  or  ''baksheesh."  In 
Rig- Veda  3.  58.  i  Dawn,  under  the  name  of  Dak- 
shina  is  called  the  Daughter  of  Heaven,  and  Agni, 
the  God  of  Fire,  is  called  the  Son  of  Dakshina. 
What  is  really  meant  is,  that  Agni  is  the  son  of 
Dawn.  We  have  here  a  double  ritual  touch  which 
becomes  clear  only  through  deep  sympathy  with  the 
economy  of  the  sacrifice.  Why  should  Agni,  "  Fire," 
be  the  son  of  Dawn?  Is  it  that  Dawn  means  " light," 
and  light  is  fire?  That  would  be  the  far-fetched 
poetic  derivation;  I  wish  to  accuse  no  scholar  of 
having  made  it.  Poetically  we  think  of  fire  espe 
cially  as  an  evening  phenomenon,  not  as  a  phenome 
non  of  the  sober  morning.  I  doubt  whether  the 
farmer,  as  he  splits  kindling  for  the  breakfast  fire  of 
a  cold  winter  morning,  cheers  himself  with  the 
poetic  thought  that  the  breakfast  fire  is  the  son  of 
Dawn.  Our  farmers  are  not  temperamentally  inclined 
that  way.  But  it  is  another  matter  with  the  sac- 
rificer  who  must  beautify  and  beatify  all  his  acts,  and 
throw  into  them  a  dash  of  cajolery.  The  fact  is 
that  the  god  Agni  is  also  a  prized  and  much  extolled 
divinity  of  the  morning,  because  the  first  act  of  the 


74  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


sacral  day  is  to  kindle  the  fire  that  shall  convey  the 
oblations  to  the  other  gods.  This  is  so  familiar  a 
fact  of  Vedic  religion  as  to  require  no  illustration. 
The  truly  significant  thing  is,  that  it  creates  a  theme 
in  the  poetic  treatment  of  the  sacrifice,  namely : 
Agni  is  the  son  of  Dawn,  because  immediately  after 
Goddess  Dawn  is  beheld  God  Fire  is  kindled.  In 
a  beautiful  hymn  to  God  Savitar,  the  motive  or 
promotive  power  behind  the  sun,  the  doings  of  the 
early  morn  are  described  in  real  poetry : 

"  Weaving  Night  hath  folded  up  her  woof, 
In  the  midst  of  her  performance  wise  Savitar  suspends 

her  work. 

He  riseth  from  his  couch  and  sets  the  seasons, 
With  fitting  plan  God  Savitar  hath  come  hither." 

;'  The  scattered  homes  and  all  life 
The  mighty  flame  of  household  fire  pervadeth. 
The  largest  share  the  Mother  has  decreed  unto  her  Son; 
To  do  his  own  desire  god  Savitar  hath  sped  hither." 

(Rig- Veda  2.  38.  4,  5.) 

Let  us  not,  by  any  means,  imagine  that  the 
Mother  here  is  the  unselfish  human  mother  who  sees 
to  it  that  her  boy  Devadatta,  or  whatever  his  name 
may  be,  has  a  substantial  breakfast.  No,  it  is  the 
Mother  Dawn  whose  Son  Agni  would  as  a  matter  of 
fact  get  the  largest  share  anyway,  because  all  obla 
tions  are  poured  into  the  fire.  We  must,  I  think, 


The  Hieratic  Religion  75 


acknowledge  that  never  has _sagrifj eg  had  su ch 
genuine  poetry  to  serve  it.  But  the  reverse  of  the 
coin  is,  that  never  has  poetic  endowment  strayed  so  ,: 
far  from  wholesome  theme  as  to  fritter  itself  away 
upon  the  ancient  hocus-pocus  of  the  fire-priest  and 
medicine-man.  Of  course,  what  finally  saves  this 
poetry  from  banality  is  the  presence  in  it  of  those 
same  luminous  gods  whose  brilliance  is  obscured 
but  not  extinguished  by  such  childish  treatment. 

We  are  now  better  prepared  to  bear  up  under  the 
statement  that  Vedic  religion  is  from  the  very  first 
moment  practical  and  utilitarian,  and  that  the  Vedic  [v 
people,  to  begin  with,  practise  their  religion  for 
what  there  is  in  it.  The  Rig-Veda  with  its  worship 
of  the  great  nature-gods  represents  from  the  start  a 
form  of  worship  very  similar,  though  apparently 
neither  as  extensive  nor  as  formal  and  rigid  as  the 
later  technical  ritual  of  the  Yajur-Vedas  and  the 
Brahmanas.  The  poetry  of  the  Rig- Veda  is  in  the 
main  also  really  dull  and  mechanical,  but  we  have 
seen  that,  in  good  part,  it  is  leavened  by  true  beauty 
of  conception,  fineness  of  observation,  and  all  the 
circumstances  of  literary  composition  which  we  of 
modern  times  are  accustomed  to  see  at  work  with 
its  eyes  shut — or  half  shut — to  practical  considera 
tions.  We  must  not  be  misled  by  these  mental 
defects  of  the  Vedic  poets  into  an  exaggeratedly 


76  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


pessimistic  view  of  their  entire  activity.  A  great 
diplomatist,  upon  whom  depends  the  destiny  of  his 
country,  may  be  shrewd,  unscrupulous,  Machiavel 
lian,  velvet  as  to  glove,  iron  as  to  hand,  and  yet  be 
a  real  patriot.  Even  so  a  priestly  religion  of  works, 
trivial  as  these  works  may  appear  to  our  eyes,  does 
not  shut  out  spiritual  elevation.  Nor  does  practical 
poetry  shut  out  entirely  the  more  silent  workings  of 
literary  taste  and  poetic  inspiration.  The  Vedic 
poets  themselves  insist  upon  it,  their  poems  are 
"well-hewn,"  "  well-fashioned  as  a  war-chariot  from 
the  hands  of  a  skilled  artisan."  And  so  they  are  in 
many  cases:  if  we  cut  out  the  foolish  sacrifice,  and 
pare  down  a  pretty  thick  crust  of  conventionalism, 

.;  there  is  left  in  the  Vedic  hymns  enough  of  beauty 
and  character  to  secure  them  a  place  in  the  world's 

[I  literature.  Forget  but  the  string  that  ties  the 
thought  of  the  Vedic  Rishis  to  the  sacrificial  post, 
and  you  shall  see  that  thought  flit  far  away  to  great 
heights,  where  birds  do  not  fly.1  For  the  time  being, 
at  least,  it  becomes  what  we  call  inspired,  and,  any 
how,  it  breeds  the  germs  that  shall  flower  out  to 
great  things  in  future  days,  when  Hindu  thought 
finally  emancipates  itself  from  sacrifice  along  with 
many  other  trivialities  of  life. 

The  religion  of  the  Rig-Veda,  much  like  the  later 

1  Rig- Veda,  I.    155.  5. 


The  Hieratic  Religion  77 


hieratic  religion  of  the  Yajur-Veda  and  the  Brah- 
manas,  is  the  religion  of  the  upper  classes.  Even  to 
this  day  only  rich  Brahmanical  Hindus  are  in  the 
position  to  perform  Vedic  sacrifices.  So  it  was  in 
olden  times.  The  popular  religion,  the  religion  of 
the  poor,  or  of  the  modest  householder,  with  its 
humble  rites,  and  its  even  more  childish  reliance 
upon  sorcery  and  the  medicine-man,  runs  from  the 
start  side  by  side  with  the  hieratic  religion.  It  is 
the  religion  of  the  Atharva-Veda  and  the  so-called 
"  House-books. "J  It  happens  to  lie  outside  of  the 
scope  of  these  lectures,  though  I  have  for  my  part 
been  drawn  on  by  its  simple  yet  tense  humanity  to 
the  publication  of  several  volumes.3  The  religion 
of  the  Rig-Veda  presupposes  an  established  house 
hold  of  considerable  extent ;  a  wealthy  and  liberal 
householder ;  elaborate  and  expensive  materials ; 
and  many  priests  not  at  all  shamefaced  about  their 
fees. 

In  fact  the  body  of  the  Rig- Veda  presupposes  the 
ordinary  form  of  the  soma  sacrifice  which  extends 
through  an  entire  day,  in  the  manner  of  the  so-called 
jyotishtoma  of  the  later  ceremonial.  Or,  rather,  it 
is  largely  a  collection  of  the  hymns  composed  by  vari- 

1  See  above  p.  41. 

2  For     general    information     on    this    literature    see    my     book 

The  Atharva-  Veda  (Strassburg,  1899  ). 


78  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


ous  priest  families  for  this  important  sacrifice.  The 
soma  drink  is  pressed  three  times  daily  :  morning, 
noon,  and  evening.  The  gods  of  the  Vedic  Pantheon 
are  all  interested  in  these  ceremonies  ;  each  has  a 
fairly  definite  share  in  them.  Indra,  the  god  who 
figures  more  frequently  than  any  other,  has  part  in 
all  three  pressings  ;  but  the  mid-day  pressing  belongs 
to  him  exclusively.  Ushas,  the  Maiden  Dawn,  and 
Agni,  God  Fire,  play,  as  we  have  seen,  a  very 
important  part  in  the  morning.  The  Adityas  1  and 
Ribhus,  the  latter  a  sort  of  clever-handed  elves, 
appear  upon  the  scene  injthe  evening.  A  host  of 
hymns  are  addressed  to  pairs  of  divinities  whose 
coupling  is  not  always  based  upon  any  special 
natural  affinity  between  them,  but  upon  purely 
liturgic  association :  Indra  and  Agni,  Indra  and 
Varuna,  Agni  and  Soma,  and  so  on. 

One  important  class  of  hymns,  the  so-called  dprl- 
hymns,  that  is,  "  songs  of  invitation,"  consist  of 
individual  stanzas  which  invoke  certain  divinities 
and  personifications  of  acts  and  utensils,  prelimin 
ary  to  the  sacrifice  of  cattle  at  the  soma  rites.3  God 
Fire  (Agni)  is  especially  called  upon  under  different, 

1  See  below,  p.   129. 

8  See  Max  Miiller,  History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,  p. 
463  ff\  Roth,  Yaska's  Nirukta,  p.  xxxvi  ff\  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  x.  89  ff\  Grassmann,  Translation  of  the  Rig-Veda,  vol.  i., 
p.  6  ;  Bergaigne,  Journal  Asiatique^  1879,  p.  17. 


The  Hieratic  Religion  79 


partly  mystic  designations ;  of  sacrificial  articles, 
the  sacred  straw  upon  which  the  priests  are  seated, 
the  doors  of  the  enclosure  within  which  the  offering 
takes  place,  and  the  sacrificial  post  to  which  the 
animal  is  tied  have  a  stanza  each  in  every  one  of  the 
ten  tf/r£-hymns.  These  sets  of  invocations  are 
purely  liturgical ;  each  set  belongs  to  a  different 
family  of  Rishis  or  "  seers."  In  general,  each  of  the 
so-called  "  family  books  "  of  the  Rig- Veda  has  its 
aflri-hymn.  A  peculiar  odor  of  sancity,  solemnity, 
and  family  pride  must  have  attached  itself  to  these 
formulas.  In  later  times,  when  the  hymns  of  the 
Rig-Veda  are  taken  in  lump,  and  employed  at  the 
great  sacrifices  with  but  very  slight  reference  to  the 
particular  priest  family  from  which  they  are  sup 
posed  to  have  been  derived,  the  choice  of  the  dprl- 
hymns  is  still  made  according  to  family.  The  ritual 
books  at  that  time  still  order  that  the  sacrificer  must 
choose  that  <2/rz-hymn  which  was  composed  in  the 
family  of  the  Rishi  from  whom  he  would  fain  derive 
his  descent.1  It  seems  likely,  therefore  and  for 
other  reasons,  that  each  family  book  of  the  Rig- 
Veda  was  intended  for  essentially  the  same  class  of 
practices,  carried  on  according  to  different  family 
traditions,  and  to  the  accompaniment  of  different 

1  See  (^ankhayana £rautasutra  5.  16  ;  A9valayana    (^rautasutra  3.  2  ; 
Latyayana  (^rautasutra  6.  7. 


8o  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


hymns,  somewhat  in  the  manner  of  the  later  Ve- 
dic  schools  or  branches  (qdkha]  of  one  and  the 
same  Veda. 

Large  numbers  of  technical,  ritualistic  words  and 
expressions  crowd  the  pages  of  the  Rig- Veda.  Its 
metres  are  finished  and  conventional  to  a  very  high 
degree  ;  they  are  also,  to  some  extent,  distributed 
among  the  gods,  so  that  a  given  metre  is  associated 
especially  with  a  certain  god.  For  instance,  the 
gayatrl  is  the  metre  of  the  god  Agni ;  the  trishtubh 
the  metre  of  the  god  Indra.  They  are  also  distributed 
to  some  extent  according  to  the  time  of  the  day : 
the  gayatrl  in  the  morning,  the  trishtubh  at  noon, 
the  jagatl  at  evening.  Above  all,  the  advanced 
character  of  the  Rig- Veda's  ritual  manifests  itself 
in  the  large  number  of  different  designations  for 
priests.  These  occur  not  only  singly,  but  in  series  : 
the  names  of  these  priests  are  largely,  though  not 
entirely,  the  names  of  the  priests  of  the  later 
ceremonial.1 

And  yet  the  poetry  of  the  Rig- Veda  is,  in  a  deeper 
sense,  original.  It  is  primitive  religious  poetry,  if 
by  primitive  we  mean  uninterrupted  contact  with 
the  last  source  of  its  inspiration.  The  final  judg 
ment  of  its  character,  after  all,  depends  not  so  much 

1  See  Hillebrandt,  Rituallitteratur,  p.  n  ff,  and  the  literature 
cited  on  p.  17  of  the  same  work. 


The  Hieratic  Religion  81 


upon  the  economic  motives,  or  the  all-around  per 
sonal  character  of  its  authors  as  upon  the  extent 
and  quality  of  their  mental  vision.  To  treat  sacri 
ficial  themes  in  the  high  poetic  way  seems  to  most 
of  us  hollow  mockery.  But  we  must  not  forget  that 
such  performances,  to  some  extent,  continue  the 
pious  ways  of  the  fathers ;  that  the  acts  in  part  sym 
bolise  real  religious  feeling;  and  that  most  religions 
have  a  trick  of  throwing  a  poetic  and  sentimental 
glamor  around  practices  that  are  trivial  intrinsically. 
Then  the  difference  of  standards  in  a  semi-bar 
barous  time,  such  as  the  time  of  the  Rig- Veda,  must 
count  for  something.  After  all  that  I  have  said  to 
forefend  what  may  be  called  a  padded  or  swollen 
estimate  of  Rig-Veda  poetry  and  religion,  both  the 
poetry  and  the  religion  are  of  singular  interest  and 
importance.  In  its  essence  the  Rig- Veda  is  not  lit 
urgy  but  mythology.  Its^rjriest-poetsLin  their  heart 
of  hearts,  are  not  mere  technicians,  but  tense  ob 
servers  of  the  great  facts  and  acts  of  nature,  and 
worshippers  of  the  powers  whom  they  fancy  at  work 
in  nature.  In  fact  they  are  both  poets  and  philoso 
phers.  There  is  in  this  matter  some  real  cause  for 
surprise.  We  must  not  forget  the  long,  almost  in 
definite  past  of  Hindu  mythology  and  religion.  I 
shall  endeavor  to  make  this  clear  in  the  next  lect 
ure  when  we  come  to  deal  with  the  reconstructions 

6 


82  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


of  comparative  mythology.  There  was  plenty  of 
time  for  all  nature-worship  to  have  stiffened  into 
mere  admiration,  fear,  and  adulation  of  personal 
gods,  accompanied  inevitably  by  a  more  or  less  com 
plete  forgetfulness  of  the  forces  in  nature  from  which 
sprang  the  gods.  That  this  was  not  so  is  due,  in 
my  opinion,  to  the  vast  impressiveness  of  India's 
nature.  Its  fiercely  glowing  sun,  its  terrible  yet  life- 
giving  monsoons,  the  snow-mountain  giants  of  the 
north,  and  its  bewilderingly  profuse  vegetation  could 
hardly  fail  to  keep  obtruding  themselves  as  a  reve 
lation  of  the  powers  of  the  already  existing  gods. 
What  is  still  more  important,  it  could  hardly  fail  to 
stimulate  the  creation  of  new  nature-gods  to  a  de 
gree  unknown  elsewhere.  It  is  this  unforgetting 
adherence  to  nature  that  has  made  the  Vedic  hymns 
the  training-school  of  the  Science  of  Mythology,  and 
to  a  large  extent  also  of  the  Science  of  Religion. 
Deprived  of  the  hymns  of  the  Rig- Veda,  we  should 
hardly  know  to  this  day  that  mythology  is  the  first 
and  fundamental  adjustment  of  the  individual  hu 
man  life  to  the  outer  active,  interfering,  dynamic 
world,  which  surrounds  and  influences  man  from  the 
moment  when  he  opens  his  eyes  upon  the  wonders 
of  its  unexplained  phenomena.  In  this  sense  Vedic 
mythology  is  in  its  day  what  empirical  science  is  in 
our  day. 


The  Hieratic  Religion  83 


We  can  realise  this  to  some  extent  by  calling  up 
another  mythology,  that  of  the  Greeks.  This  is  also 
based  upon  nature,  but  nature  is  soon  forgotten, 
or,  if  not  entirely  forgotten,  much  obscured  by 

«M«..       -JJ...KM-*'* 

after-born  movements.  Owing  to  a  curious  slip, 
fortunate  from  the  artistic  side,  unfortunate  from 
the  religious  and  mythical  side,  Greek  mythology 
fell  too  completely  into  the  hands  of  the  people. 
Poets,  artists,  and  even  philosophers  handle  it,  each 
in  their  own  way.  But  there  is  a  notable  absence 
of  those  Rishis  of  the  Veda  who,  with  all  their  too 
human  sordidness  and  all  their  Hindu  fancifulness 
see  the  great  realities  of  the  world  with  their  eyes 
wide  open,  and  work  their  way  slowly  but  with 
secure  touch  from  the  single  and  separate  manifesta 
tions  of  nature  in  the  Rig-  Veda  to  the  absolute  One 
Being  which  is  nature  as  a  whole,  that  is  the  idea  of 
unity  as  finally  settled  in  the  Upanishads.  The 
finest  flower  of  Greek  mythology,  great  Zeus,  of 
whom  Hesiod  says,  navra  idoov  ocpOaXpoz  uai 
Ttdvra  vorjaaz,  "  The  eye  of  Zeus  which  sees  all  and 
knows  all,"  or  of  whom  the  old  Orphic  hymn  sings, 


navra 


11  Zeus  is  the  beginning,  Zeus  is  the  middle,  on  Zeus 
all  is  founded,"  is  at  the  same  time  the  flippant, 
breezy  Jove  to  whom  the  poets  ascribe  foibles 
and  vices  barely  excusable  in  a  modern  bon-vivant 


84  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 

and  man  about  town.  Too  finished  personification 
causes  the  break-down  of  Greek  mythology  even 
from  the  artistic  side.  The  same  poets  in  whom  we 
praise  above  all  aversion  to  everything  excessive  or 
monstrous,  those  Greek  poets  who  in  general  fancy 
and  say  just  enough,  but  not  too  much,  run  a  close 
race  with  the  most  extravagant  fancies  of  semi-civil 
ised  peoples  in  the  description  of  their  primeval 
gods.  Uranos  was  maimed  by  his  own  son,  Kronos  ; 
Kronos,  the  unnatural  son,  is  also  an  unnatural 
father.  For  he  swallows  his  own  children,  and,  after 
years  of  tentative  but  unsuccessful  digestion,  vomits 
forth  the  whole  brood.  Fair  Phoebus  Apollo  hangs 
Marsyas  on  a  tree  and  flays  him  alive.  Homicide 
without  end,  parricide  and  murder  of  children  are 
the  stock  events  of  their  mythology.  No  wonder 
that  Plato  banished  even  the  Homeric  poems  from 
his  ideal  republic.  And  Epicurus  had  to  say :  "  The 
gods  are  indeed,  but  they  are  not  as  many  believe 
them  to  be.  Not  he  is  an  infidel  who  denies  the 
gods  of  the  many,  but  he  that  fastens  upon  the  gods 
the  opinions  of  the  many."  Nothing  so  much  as 
the  complete  humanisation  of  Greek  mythology 
paved  the  way  for  the  rapid  spread  of  that  Shemitic 
religion,  deeply  ethical  in  its  teachings,  Judaeo- 
Christianity,  among  the  Indo-European  peoples. 
You  may  remember  how  skilfully  Kingsley's  novel, 


The  Hieratic  Religion  85 


Hypatia  pictures  Greek  religion  when   it  confronts 
in  final  struggle,  already  in  the  throes  of  death,  the 
growing  belief  of  the  future,  as  still  the  Homeric 
theology  ;  that  is,  crude  anthropomorphism,  dashed 
with    occasional    but    troubled    visions    of    better 
things.     The  real  rivals  of  Christianity  in  the  cen-/? 
turies  after  Christ  were  Persian  forms  of  religion  :> 
Mithraism  and  Manicheism.     Of  Mithraism  Ernest' 
Renan  once  said  that  if  the  world  had  not  been; 
Christianised   it  would  have   been  Mithraised ;  and  \ 
Manicheism,    dualistic,    exhaustively   Gnostic,  with 
its  superb  colouring  and  its   appealing    asceticism, 
proved  for  a  time  an  even  more  dangerous  rival  of  I 
Christianity. 

We  know  from  the  history  of  the  later  classical 
Sanskrit  literature  that  India's  climate  and  physio 
graphy  have  kept  her  poets  in  touch  with  nature  to 
a  degree  unknown  elsewhere,  until  we  come  to  the. 
modern  nature  poets.  Evenjso,  the  _trans£arency  of 
the  Vedic  Pantheon  as  a  whole  remains  surprising. 
This  results  in  what  we  may  call  arrested  personifi 
cation,  or  arrested  anthropomorphism,  and  this  is  the 
very  genius  of  Vedic  religion,  and  more  especially 
of  the  religion  of  the  Rig- Veda.  Nothing  so  much 
as  this  has  enabled  the  early  Hindu  thinkers  to  think 
out  anew,  a  second  and  a  third  time,  what  had  been 
apparently  settled  to  everybody's  final  satisfaction, 


86  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


and  was  beginning  to  enter  upon  a  career  of  rigma 
role.  Thus  the  Rig- Veda  says  of  God  Savitar, 
the  sun  conceived  as  the  promoter  of  life  :  "  God 
Savitar,  approaching  on  the  dark  blue  sky,  sustaining 
mortals  and  immortals,  comes  on  his  golden  chariot, 
beholding  all  the  worlds."1  It  is  the  fiery  ball  that 
rises  from  the  sea  or  over  the  hills,  nothing  more 
in  the  first  place.  The  ordinary  way  of  mythology 
would  be  to  make  of  this  Savitar  a  wonderful  chari 
oteer,  given  over,  say,  to  racing  or  to  warlike  deeds. 
Instead,  this  process  is,  as  I  say,  arrested.  The 
natural  phenomenon  remains  the  repository  of  re 
newed  and  deepening  thought.  Even  in  the  Rig- 
Veda  itself  the  conception  of  the  sun  makes  great 
onward  strides  as  the  most  prominent  symbol  of 
the  ultimate  force  at  work  in  the  universe.  An 
other  stanza,  speaking  of  Surya,  another  sun-god, 
says,  "  The  sun  is  the  Self  or  Soul  of  all  that 
moves  or  stands." '"  And  yet  another,  the  fam 
ous  so-called  Savitrl,  or  GayatrT,  which  remains 
sacro-sanct  at  all  times,  and  is  recited  daily  even 
now  by  every  orthodox  Hindu, 3  again  turns  to 
Savitar : 


1  Rig- Veda  I.  35.  2. 
8  Rig- Veda  i.  115.  i. 

3  See  Monier  Williams,  Transactions  of  the  Fifth  International 
Congress  of  Orientalists,  vol.  ii.,  p. 


The  Hieratic  Religion  87 

,  "  That  lovely  glory  of  Savitar, 
I  /  The  heavenly  god,  we  contemplate  : 
I    Our  pious  thoughts  he  shall  promote."  1 

Here  is  almost  the  first  touch  of  that  inimita 
ble  combination  of  the  Upanishads,  the  Atman, 
Breath/'  and  the  Brahma,  "  holy  thought/'  that  is 
the  combination  of  physical  and  spiritual  force  into 
one  pantheistic  all.  As  a  modern  Hindu  says  of  the 
Savitri :  *  "It  is  of  course  impossible  to  say  what  the 
author  of  the  Savitri  had  in  view,  but  his  Indian 
commentators,  both  ancient  and  modern,  are  as 
one  in  believing  that  he  rose  from  nature  up  to 
nature's  God,  and  adored  that  sublime  luminary 
which  is  visible  only  to  the  eye  of  reason,  and  not 
the  planet  we  daily  see  in  its  course."  Katyayana 
in  his  Index  to  the  Rig- Veda,  the  so-called  Anu- 
kramanl,  after  stating  the  familiar  classification  of 
all  the  gods  of  the  Veda  into  three  types — Agni  (fire 
and  light  on  earth),  Vayu  (air  or  wind  in  the  atmo 
sphere),  and  Surya  (sun  in  the  sky) — proceeds  still 
farther  to  assert  that  there  is  only  one  deity, 
namely,  the  "  Great  Self/'  (mahdndtma),  and  "  somej 
say  that  he  is  the  sun  (surya]  or  that  the  sun 
is  he."  This  is,  of  course,  later  thought,  Upan- 

4  Rig-Veda  3.  62.  10. 

6   Rajendralalamitra  in  the  Introduction  to  his  Edition  of  the  Gopa- 
tha,  Brdhtnana,  p.  24. 


88  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


ishad  thought,  as  it  appears,  for  instance,  in  the 
Taittirlya  Upanishad  (8.  8) :  "  He  who  dwells 
in  man  and  he  who  dwells  in  the  sun  are  one 
and  the  same."  But  this  later  thought  is  founded 
on  the  repeated  revision,  so  to  say,  of  the  concep 
tions  of  the  sun,  fed  anew  by  the  sight  of  this 
engrossing  nature  force,  which  is  not  obscured 
and  not  made  trivial  by  personification  into  an 
Olympian,  human  god. 

But  we  shall  return  to  this  all-important  matter 
when  we  come  to  the  highest  outcome  of  Vedic  reli 
gion.  It  is  now  time  to  take  a  look  at  the  individual 
gods  of  the  Veda,  or  what  we  may  call  the  Vedic 
Pantheon. 

THE   PANTHEON   OF  THE  VEDA. 

At  the  outset  we  may  observe  that  this  word  ap 
plies  to  the  Vedic  gods  only  in  an  analogical  sense. 
There  is  no  Pantheon  in  the  Veda,  if  by  Pantheon 
we  mean  an  Olympus  patterned  after  a  more  or  less 
snobbish  conception  of  a  royal  household,  in  which 
every  god  holds  his  position  and  exacts  sensitive 
respect  from  all  the  others  as  the  price  of  his  own 
observance  of  court  proprieties.  The  Vedic  gods 
have  no  acknowledged  head.  They  group  them 
selves  to  some  extent  according  to  their  characters ; 
for  instance,  as  sun-gods,  or  storm-gods.  As  such 


The  Pantheon  of  the  Veda  89 


they  have  more  or  less  definite  habitations.  In  the 
time  of  the  great  Epic,  the  Mahabharata,  no  one 
knows  how  many  hundreds  of  years  later,  they 
really  do  manage  to  foregather  in  the  heaven  of  one 
of  them,  namely,  Indra's  heaven.  They  begin  to 
take  rank:  Indra  first,  Agni  second,  and  so  on.  With 
that  comes  a  little,  very  little,  of  those  roseate  poetic 
and  plastic  possibilities  which  the  poets  and  artists 
of  all  ages  have  read  into  the  finishedly  human 
Greek  Olympus.  We  have  seen  enough  of  our 
theme  to  know  that  many  gods  of  the  Veda  are 
scarcely  more  than  half  persons,  their  other  half 
being  an  active  force  of  nature.  Such  material  is 
not  yet  ripe  even  for  a  Hindu  Olympus.  The  mind 
of  the  Vedic  poet  is  the  rationalistic  mind  of  the 
ruminating  philosopher,  rather  than  the  artistic  mind 
which  reproduces  the  finished  product.  It  is  en 
gaged  too  much  in  reasoning  about  and  constantly 
altering  the  wavering  shapes  of  the  gods,  so  that 
these  remain  to  the  end  of  Vedic  time  too  uncertain 
in  outline,  too  fluid  in  substance  for  the  modelling 
hand  of  the  artist.  On  a  pinch  we  could  imagine  a 
statue  of  the  most  material  of  the  Vedic  gods,  Indra  ; 
but  it  is  hard  to  imagine  a  statue  of  the  god 
Varuna.  As  a  matter  of  fact  there  is  no  record  of 
Vedic  ikons,  or  Vedic  temples.  In  all  these  senses 
there  is  no  Vedic  Pantheon. 


90  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


It  would  seem  possible  to  present  the  Vedic  gods 
in  the  order  of  their  importance,  but  many  are 
equally,  or  nearly  equally,  important.  We  find 
nearly  a  dozen  of  them  engaged  in  creating  the 
world,  and  rather  more  than  a  dozen  engaged  in  pro 
ducing  the  sun,  placing  it  on  the  sky,  or  preparing  a 
path  for  it ;  under  these  circumstances  it  is  not  easy 
to  rank  them.1  The  gods  have  not  all  of  them  come 
into  existence  at  the  same  time.  Some  belong 
to  Indo-European  times  ;  others  to  Indo-Iranian 
times.  Of  the  rest  some  come  from  an  earlier, 
some  from  a  later  period  of  the  Veda.  If  we  had 
all  the  dates  we  might  try  a  chronological  arrange 
ment  pure  and  simple,  but  we  do  not  have  all  the 
dates. 

A  celebrated  ancient  Hindu  glossographer  and 
etymologer  of  the  name  of  Yaska  reports  three  lists, 
respectively  of  32,  36,  and  31  gods,  or  semi-divine 
beings.2  The  last  of  these  seems  to  begin  to  tell  us 
in  what  succession  the  Vedic  gods  appear  on  the 
stage  day  by  day,  especially  in  the  morning.3  He  be 
gins  well  with  the  Agvins,  or  "  Horsemen  "  (the  Vedic 
Dioscuri),4  Ushas,  the  Goddess  Dawn,  and  Surya, 

1  See  Macdonell,   Vedic  Mythology,  p.  15. 
1  Nighantu  5.  4-6. 

zCf.  Nirukta    12.  i.  Brhaddevata  2.  "]  ff. 
4  See  below,  p.  112. 


The  Pantheon  of  the  Veda  91 


the  "  Sun-Maiden."  1  Soon,  however,  he  grows  prob 
lematic,  or  dunder-headed,  with  Vrishakapayl,  Sar- 
anyu,  Tvashtar,  and  so  on.  Many  years'  occupation 
with  the  writings  of  this  worthy,  whose  sense  and 
erudition  are  valued  much  by  the  Hindus,  as  well  as 
by  Western  scholars,  have  not  increased  my  belief 
in  his  authority,  or  decreased  my  faith  in  the  infi 
nite  possibilities  of  his  ineptitude.  Still  this  proces 
sion  of  the  gods  along  the  hours  of  the  day  has  great 
interest  for  the  Vedic  ritual  and  the  explanation  of 
the  gods  themselves.  Touches  of  it  appear  in  the 
hymns  themselves,  as  when  the  Rig-Veda2  groups 
very  neatly  the  gods  of  the  morning  : 

"Agni  awoke  upon  the  earth,  and  Surya  riseth; 
Broad  gleaming  Dawn  hath  shone  in  brilliance. 
The  Atpvins  twain  have  yoked  their  car  to  travel. 
God  Savitar  hath  roused  the  world  in  every  place." 

There  is  another,  more  permanent  traditional 
Hindu  division  of  the  gods  which  arranges  them  in 
three  classes,  mostly  of  eleven  each,  according  to 
their  place  or  habitat  in  nature  or  the  cosmos,  that 
is,  in  sky,  mid-air,  and  earth.  The  classification  is 
first  made  in  Rig-  Veda  I.  139.  n  :  to  some  extent  it 
remains  good  ever  after.  This  topography  of  nature 
has  a  strong  hold  on  the  early  religion  :  times  without 

1  See  below,  p.  112. 


i.  157- 


92  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


end  the  later  Vedic  texts  insist  that  Agni,  "  Fire  " 
belongs  to,  or  is  typical  of  the  earth ;  Vata  or  Vayu; 
"Wind, "of  the  mid-air,  and  Surya,  "  Sun, "of  the  sky.1 
So  far  it  is  the  philosophy  of  the  obvious.  They 
continue  cleverly  along  that  line  in  the  following 
arrangement.  I  state  only  the  more  important 
members  of  each  class : 

Celestial^gods :  Dyaus  or  Dyaush  Pitar  ("Sky " 
or  "  Father  Sky  "),  Varuna,  Mitra,  Surya  and  the 
Adityas,  Savitar,  Pushan,  Vishnu,  Ushas,  and  the 
Agvins.2 

Atmospheric  gods :  Vata  or  Vayu  ("  Wind")  Indra, 
Parjanya,  Rudra,  and  the  Maruts. 

Terrestrial  gods:  Prithivl  ("  Earth"),  Agni,  and 
Soma. 

This  threefold  division,  in  order  to  be  consistent, 
would  have  to  be  carried  on  to  the  end,  so  as  to  in 
clude  all  the  gods.  As  a  matter  of  fact  it  is  uncertain 
in  many  places,  even  when  carried  no  farther.  We 
are  not  so  certain  as  are  the  Hindus  that  Indra,  for 
instance,  is  a  god  of  the  mid-air,3  even  though  we 
must  admire  this,  on  the  whole  successful,  apprecia 
tion  of  the  place  in  nature  that  belongs  to  a  goodly 
proportion  of  the  chief  gods. 

1  Cf.  Brihaddevata  i.  t,  ff. 

2  See  the  index  at  the  end  of  this  book  for  these  and  most  of  the 
following  gods. 

3  See  below,  p.    173. 


The  Pantheon  of  the  Veda  93 


There  are  yet  other  possibilities  which  need  not 
be  mentioned,  because  we  shall  not  follow  their  lead. 
Our  own  course,  doubtless  open  to  some  objection, 
will  be  eclectic.  We  shall  call  up  the  more  important 
Vedic  gods  under  such  various  points  of  view  as  will 
bring  out  some  one  salient  quality— which  does  not 
say  that  they  may  not  have  other  qualities  of  great 
interest.  Thus  the  chronological  element  must  re 
main  immensely  important.  The  chronology  of  the 
gods  must  influence  to  some  extent  our  judgment  of 
this  ancient  religion  of  the  Veda.  The^pld  prehistoric 
gods  that  have  been  imported  by  the  Aryas  into 
India,  no  matter  how  much  they  have  been  Hindu- 
ised,  will  necessarily  have  characteristics  of  their  own. 

Next_come  the  gods  which  have  been  coined  in 
hot  haste  out  of  the  phenomena  of  nature  in  a  glow: 
ing  subtropical  climate,  or  have  been  imbued  anew 
with  the  vitality  of  India's  imposing  nature.  These 
have  not  had  time  to  forget  their  own  origin — they 
are,  as  I  have  called  them,  the  gods  of  arrested  per 
sonification  or  arrested  anthropomorphism.  They 
are  the  beacon  lights  of  Vedic  religion,  of  Compara 
tive  Mythology,  and  of  the  Science  of  Religion. 
They  are  the  rare  guides  and  philosophers  on  this 
labyrinthine  and  rocky  road  ;  they  have  made  the 
Veda  the  training-school  of  the  study  of  religion. 
Since  they  show  in  a  given  number  of  cases  just  what 


94  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


has  taken  place,  they  point  the  way  when  the  light 
becomes  hazy. 

Again,  it  is  still  as  true  as  ever  that  a  large  number 
of  the  gods,  whether  early  or  late,  are  nature-gods 
whose  origin,  we  regret  to  say,  has  been  somewhat 
obscured  by  later  processes.  They  again  make  up 
for  the  student  of  the  Veda  a  class,  the  most  impor 
tant  as  well  as  the  most  difficult  theme  of  investiga 
tion.  Every  nation's  mythology  must  contain  gods 
of  this  class.  They  bring  with  them  problems  that 
will  never  be  dismissed  until  they  are  finally  answered 
— and  that,  paradoxically,  may  never  be.  I  have  in 
mind  gods  like  Varuna,  Indra,  and  the  Acvins.  To 
some  Vedic  scholars  it  seems  without  doubt  begging 
the  question  to  speak  of  nature-gods  in  cases  when 
we  do  not  know  for  certain  what  was  the  natural 
object  that  was  personified.  No  one  can  say  at  this 
time  that  the  origin  of  either  Varuna,  Indra,  or  the 
Agvins  has  been  definitely  settled.  Yet,  for  my  part 
I  confess  to  that  faith,  because  I  remember  that  such 
uncertainty  represents  in  truth  the  normal  result  of 
mythologic  development.  As  a  rule,  a  nature-god 
does  not  remain  transparent  for  ever:  the  opposite 
happens  far  more  frequently,  as  may  be  seen,  again 
and  again,  in  Hellenic  or  Teutonic  mythology. 
Really  durable  myths  are,  as  a  rule,  mixed  myths, 
/and,  therefore,  more  or  less  obscure  myths.  A  cei:- 


The  Pantheon  of  the  Veda  95 


tain  amount  of  the  complications  and  entanglements 
of  human  life  must  be  imported  into  mythology  be 
fore  it  becomes  mythology.  Otherwise  it  remains 
philosophy,  primitive  cosmic  philosophy,  or  primitive 
empirical  natural  science. 

Let  me  paraphrase  a  statement  made  some  years 
ago  in  a  learned  journal.1  Mythological  investigation 
must  draw  a  sharp  line  between  the  primary  attri 
butes  of  a  mythic  personage  which  are  the  cause  of 
the  personification,  and  the  attributes  and  events 
which  are  assigned  to  him  or  her,  and  are  supposed 
to  happen  after  the  personification  had  been  com 
pleted.  Zeus,  as  we  all  know,  originally  meant  "sky," 
and  Zeus  pater  was  the  personified  "  Father  Sky," 
contrasted  with  "  Mother  Earth."  But  it  would  be 
foolish  to  search  for  these  primary  qualities  of  Zeus 
or  the  other  Greek  gods  in  a  play  of  Euripides,  where 
the  gods  are  afflicted  with  all  the  passions  and  weak 
nesses  of  mortal  men.  Yet  he  who  refuses  to  myth- 
ologise  on  the  basis  of  Euripides'  treatment  need  not 
therefore  be  sceptical  about  the  naturalistic  origin  of 
most  of  the  Greek  gods ;  he  may  be  willing  at  the  right 
time,  and  in  the  right  stage  of  the  history  of  any 
myth,  to  point  out  the  physical  factors  or  the  phys 
ical  events  which  gave  it  a  start.  But  to  be  pres 
ent  at  the  right  time,  that  is  not  always  so  easy. 

1  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  vol.  xv.,  pp.  185,  186. 


96  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


Further,  _  there  are  gods  in  the  Veda — not 
too  many  in  number — about  whose  origin  we 
can  determine  nothing  that  is  either  definite  or 
helpful.  Either  these  gods  have  been  obscured 
totally  by  later  events  in  their  natural  history,  or 
they  are  derived  from  aboriginal  tribes  or  other 
foreign  sources  about  which  we  know  nothing 
at  all. 

Keeping  in  mind  this  idea  of  genesis,  we  might 
divide  the  gods  into  three  classes :  transparent, 
translucent,  and  opaque  gods.  And  being  by  nature 
and  occupation  philosophically  inclined,  plagued  by 
an  incontinent  desire  to  find  last  causes,  I  shall  fol 
low  the  lead  of  these  my  suggestions,  and  de 
scribe  the  gods  from  the  point  of  view  of  their 
origin  and  the  rationale  of  their  being  under  five 
heads : 

1.  Prehistoric  gods,  whether  their  origin  be  clear 
or  obscure. 

2.  Transparent,  half-personified  gods,  who  are  at 
the  same  time  nature  objects  and  mythic  persons. 

3.  Translucent   gods,  who   impose  upon  the   in 
vestigator  the  theory  of  their  origin  in  nature. 

4.  Opaque  gods,  who  refuse  to  reveal  their  origins. 

5.  To  these  may  be  added,  as  a  fifth  class,  the 
abstract  or  symbolic  gods  who  embody  an  action,  a 
wish,  or  a  fear  in  the  shape  of  a  good  or  evil  divinity, 


The  Pantheon  of  the  Veda  97 


god,  or  demon.  Of  this  class  our  fifth  lecture  will 
furnish  abundant  illustration.1 

Fortunately  it  does  not  fall  within  the  province  of 
these  lectures  to  exhaust  the  long-drawn  and  mo 
notonous  theme  of  Vedic  mythology,  or  to  establish 
definitely  the  precise  origin  of  all  the  gods.  My 
object  is  to  sketch  the  motives  and  principles  that 
underlie  the  remarkable  chain  of  religious  ideas  that 
ieads~from  the  ritual  worship  of  the  great  nature- 
gods  of  the  Rig-Veda  to  the  high  theosophy  of  thej 
Upanishads.  Mythology  pervades  this  develop 
ment  to  a  very  great  extent,  so  that  we  must 
understand  its  principles.  But  a  mythic  figure  more 
or  less  cannot  materially  change  the  picture,  when 
once  we  know  how  mythic  figures  in  general  are 
fabricated,  and  then  overlaid  with  religious  feeling 
and  advancing  religious  thought.  The  particular 
character  of  the  individual  god  soon  becomes  un 
important.  One  of  the  most  remarkable  facts  in 
the  religion  of  the  Veda,  when  carried  to  its  legit 
imate  conclusion,  is,  that  these  multiple  gods  really 
vanish  in  the  end,  after  they  have  contributed  their 

*    . 

individual  attributes  to  the  great  idea  of  unity,  of 
oneness  at  the  root  of  the  universe.  This  is  the 
very  negation  of  mythology  and  Pantheons;  of 

i  See  also  my  essay,  The  Symbolic  Gods,  in  Studies  in  Honor  of 
B.  L.  Gilder  sleeve,  p.  37  ff. 

7 


98  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 

sacrificial  hocus-pocus  and  poetic  fable.  And  when 
the  twilight  has  engulfed  these  gods,  then,  and  not 
until  then,  in  India  as  elsewhere,  do  real  religion 
and  real  philosophy  begin. 


LECTURE  THE  THIRD. 

The  Prehistoric  Gods. 

Two  prehistoric  periods  bearing  upon  Hindu  religion — 
Scepticism  about  Comparative  Mythology — Difficulties 
in  the  way  of  Comparative  Mythology — Comparative 
Mythology  and  Ethnology — The  myth  of  Cerberus — 
The  Indo-European  period — Prehistoric  words  for 
god — Father  Sky  and  Mother  Earth — The  Thunderer 
— The  Vedic  Acvins,  or  "Horsemen,"  the  two  Sons  of 
Heaven — The  Dioscuri  in  Greek  mythology — The 
Lettish  myth  of  the  two  "Sons  of  God" — Common 
kernel  of  the  myth  of  the  two  "Sons  of  Heaven" — 
The  Aryan,  or  Indo-Iranian  period — Important  re 
ligious  ideas  common  to  the  two  peoples — The  dual 
gods  Varuna  and  Mitra — Ahura  Mazda  and  Varuna — 
The  conception  of  rta,  or  "cosmic  order" — The  Adityas 
— Aditi,  the  mother  of  the  Adityas — Mitra,  a  sun  god 
— The  sun,  the  moon,  and  the  planets — The  Adityas 
and  Amesha  Spents — Early  ethical  concepts  among  the 
Indo-Europeans — Varuna  and  Greek  Ouranos  (Uranus) 
— The  origin  of  man — Sundry  parents  of  man — "Father 
Manu" — Yama  and  Yaml,  the  "Twins" — Interlacing 
of  the  myths  of  the  first  man — The  human  character  of 
Manu  and  Yama — Yama,  the  god  of  the  dead — Soma, 
the  sacrificial  drink  of  the  gods — The  myth  of  Soma 
and  the  Heavenly  Eagle — Value  of  the  preceding 
reconstructions. 

99 


ioo  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


THE  treatment  of  India's  prehistoric  gods  takes 
on  of  itself  the  outer  form  of  a  chapter  of  Com 
parative  Mythology.  We  have  seen  in  the  past  that 
the  events  which  preceded  the  migration  of  the 
Aryas  into  India  belong  to  two  very  different  pre 
historic  periods.1  One  of  these  is  the  periodjwhen 
the  Hindu  and  Iranian  (Persian)  peoples,  the  so- 
called  Aryas,  were  still  one  people,  a  period  which 
does  not  lie  so  very  far  behind  the  Veda  itself,  just 
behind  the  curtain  which  separates  the  earliest  his 
torical  records  of  both  India  and  Iran  from  the  very 
long  past  which  preceded  both  of  them.  This  is  the 
Indo-Iranian,  or  Aryan  period.  The  second  is  the 
still  remoter  period  of  Indo-European  unity ;  the 
languages,  institutions,  and  religions  of  this  great 
group  of  peoples  permit  us  to  assume  that  there  was 
once  upon  a  time  one  Indo-European  people,  and 
that  this  people  possessed  religious  ideas  which  were 
not  altogether  obliterated  from  the  minds  of  their 
descendants,  the  Indo-Europeans  of  historical  times 
(Hindus,  Persians,  Greeks,  Romans,  Celts,  Teutons, 
Slavs,  etc.). 

It  is  my  painful  duty  to  report  that  there  has 
been  of  recent  years  a  great  "  slump  "  in  the  stock  of 
this  subject.  In  fact,  some  scholars,  critics,  and  pub 
licists  have  formally  declared  bankruptcy  against  the 

1  See  above,  p.  13. 


The  Prehistoric  Gods  101 


methods  and  results  of  Comparative  Mythology. 
In  the  long  run  prehistoric  reconstructions,  infer 
ences,  analogies,  and  guesses  do  not  find  favor  with 
certain  types  of  mind.  Of  course,  it  is  safer  to  re 
strict  one's  self ;  to  analyse  and  describe  the  history 
of  each  Indo-European  people  by  itself;  and  to  refrain 
from  speculating  about  their  connection  in  a  remote 
past.  Is  it  not  better  to  stay  at  home,  each  trained 
scholar  in  his  own  philology,  rather  than  to  ride  out 
towards  points  on  the  broad  and  dim  horizon  which 
bounds  the  more  or  less  hypothetical  Indo-European 
community,  to  chase  after  something  that  may  turn 
out  to  be  a  mirage  ?  So  it  has  transpired  that  what 
bid  fair  once  upon  a  time  to  grow  into  an  important 
branch  of  historical  science  is  now  by  some  ignored, 
if  not  pooh-poohed.  The  writings  of  many  great 
scholars  during  the  last  fifty  years  or  more  are  now 
declared  by  some  to  be  ready  to  be  wiped  off  the 
slate.  It  is  but  fair  to  note  that  the  same  critics 
who  are  sceptical  about  Comparative  Mythology 
are,  as  a  rule,  inclined  also  to  doubt  the  explanations 
of  myths  that  are  restricted  to  a  single  people.  It 
seems  to  be  a  matter  of  temperament,  this  dislike  to 
search  after  origins,  after  final  explanations,  after 
resolving  chords,  as  it  were.  Here  also  they  prefer 
to  treat  a  myth  at  its  face  value,  as  story,  fancy, 
poem,  and  nothing  more.  Now  all  this  sounds  very 


102  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


virtuous  and  abstemious ;  does  not  the  true  spirit 
of  research  call  a  halt  at  the  point  where  rigid 
mathematic  certainty  is  at  an  end  ? 

The  difficulties  which  have  beset  Comparative 
Mythology  are  of  various  sorts  :  First,  the  unques 
tionable  delicacy,  clear  to  the  point  of  fragility,  of 
prehistoric  materials.  Next,  the  imagination  of 
scholars  who  incline  to  such  studies  is  prone,  by  the 
very  terms  of  its  existence,  to  be  a  little  excessive. 
The  first  results  of  the  science  were  so  striking  and 
fascinating  that  its  development  went  on  too  fast, 
its  conclusions  became  too  hasty.  May  the  shades 
of  Theodor  Benfey,  Adalbert  Kuhn,  and  Max 
Muller  pardon  me  if  I  say  that  their  almost  poetic 
genius  did  at  times  take  flight  from  the  firm  earth 
into  sheer  cloudland — "  where  birds  can  no  longer 
fly."  Unquestionably  they  did  compare  some  myth 
ological  names  because  of  the  faintest  and  shakiest 
phonetic  resemblances.  Intuitive  fanciful  explana 
tions  of  the  most  complicated  myths  do  to  some 
extent  masquerade  as  scientific  results  in  their  writ 
ings,  and  in  the  writings  of  the  school  that  grew  up 
mushroom-like  about  them.  A  science  based  upon 
vague  and  general  resemblances  of  both  things  and 
words  could  not  be  otherwise  than  faulty  both  as  to 
its  details  and  its  philosophic  generalizations.  In 
brief,  Comparative  Mythology  suffered  from  the 


The  Prehistoric  Gods  103 


pardonably  excessive  zeal  of  its  early  friends.  Since 
then  the  pruning  knife  has  kept  busy.  At  the  pres 
ent  time  this  is  a  subject  that  should  be  handled 
very  gingerly  by  all  those  who  do  not  know  how  to 
winnow  the  chaff  from  the  grain.  But  there  still 
is  Comparative  Mythology,  and  it  is  here  to  stay. 

There  is  yet  another  difficulty  which  should  be 
rated  at  its  right  value,  not  too  much  and  not  too  lit 
tle.  The  primary  object  of  the  comparative  mythol 
ogy  of  the  Indo-European  peoples  is  to  collect,  com 
pare,  and  sift  the  religious  beliefs  of  these  peoples,  so 
as  to  determine  what  they  owned  as  common  property 
before  their  separation.  What  now,  we  hear  it  fre 
quently  asked,  about  the  strange  peoples,  not  Indo- 
European,  nor  Aryan,  who  share  these  beliefs  with 
the  Indo-Europeans  or  have  similar  beliefs  ?  Without  I 
question,  in  the  earlier  stages  of  the  science,  similari 
ties  which  were  independent  products  in  different 
quarters,  due  to  the  similar  endowment  of  the  human 
mind,  were  confused  with  genetic  similarities.  By 
genetic  similarities  I  mean  such  similarities  as  trans 
mitted  mythological  conceptions  which  were  already 
in  vogue  among  the  prehistoric  Indo-Europeans,  so 
that  they  were  continued,  with  later  modifications, 
by  the  separate  branches  of  the  Indo-European  peo 
ples.  Should  not,  therefore,  this  entire  subject  be 
handed  over  to  those  broader  students  of  Ethnology 


iO4  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


who  investigate  human  customs,  institutions,  and  be 
liefs  all  over  the  world  ?  Does  not  the  entire  subject 
of  the  origin  and  development  of  religions  belong  to 
Ethnology  rather  than  Philology  ? 

For  instance,  the  Indo-Europeans  make  much  of 
the  worship  of  the  sun  as  a  supreme  being.  But  so 
do  the  Iroquois  Indians,  and  many  other  savage  or 
semi-barbarous  peoples.  It  is  indeed  true,  and  it  is 
an  important  truth,  that  the  human  race,  endowed  as 
it  is  essentially  alike,  is  liable  anywhere  and  at  any 
time  to  incorporate  in  its  beliefs  this  most  imposing 
and  deifiable  visible  object  in  all  nature,  the  sun,  the 
source  of  light  and  heat,  seasons  and  vegetation. 
This  is  the  simple  ethnological  fact.  The  fact  in 
Indo-European  Comparative  Mythology  is  a  differ 
ent  one  :  it  is  a  historical  fact.  In  the  early  period 
of  each  Indo-European  people  heaven,  its  agents  and 
powers,  including  of  course  the  sun,  were,  as  we  know 
on  excellent  authority,  worshipped  or  deified.  We  are 
therefore  to-day,  as  formerly,  securely  intrenched  in 
the  conviction  that  the  worship  of  heaven  and  the 
visible  heavenly  phenomena,  more  or  less  personal 
ised,  did  in  fact  form  the  common  kernel  of  Indo- 
European  religion.  Now  do  I  fail  to  see  what  the 
beliefs  of  other  peoples,  not  Indo-European,  along 
the  same  line,  have  to  do  with  this  particular 
case,  except  to  show  that  the  Indo-Europeans  were 


The  Prehistoric  Gods  105 


rational  beings,  and  that  all  the  rest  of  the  peoples 
who  worship  the  sun  are,  from  their  primitive  point 
of  view,  also  rational  beings. 

I  have  devoted  of  recent  years  considerable  effort 
to  the  statement  and  explanation  of  the  myth  of 
Cerberus,  the  dog  of  Hades.  The  Veda  has  two 
Cerberi,  who  are  said  to  belong  to  King  Yama. 
Yama  was  the  first  royal  man  who  started  the  prac 
tice  of  dying.  He  then  went  aloft  to  heaven,  and 
found  there,  once  for  all,  a  choice  place  where  the 
sons  of  man  might  disport  themselves  after  death. 
There  he  rules  as  Yama,  the  King  of  Paradise. 

The  Vedic  texts  look  upon  this  pair  of  dogs  in  a 
variety  of  ways.  First,  the  soul  of  man  has  to  get 
past  them  in  order  to  get  to  heaven.  This  is  the 
familiar  Cerberus  idea.  Secondly,  the  two  dogs  of 
Yama  pick  out  daily  candidates  for  death.  Thirdly, 
the  dogs  are  entrusted  with  the  care  of  the  souls 
of  the  dead  on  their  way  to  join  Yama  in  heaven. 
Now  we  might  almost  ask  with  the  riddle :  "  What  is 
it?"  I  wonder  whether  there  is  not  present  in  this 
audience  some  ingenious  man  or  woman  who  can 
guess  what  real  pair  in  nature  on  the  way  to  heaven, 
coursing  like  dogs  across  the  heaven,  can  harmonise 
these  discrepant  points  of  view.  But  we  are  not  left 
to  guess.  The  Vedic  texts  tell  us  in  plain  language 
that  they  are  the  sun  and  the  moon,  or  as  they  are 


io6  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


called,  with  a  very  ancient  poetic  touch,  the  speckled 
and  the  dark.  Now  the  word  for  speckled  is  Cabalas; 
it  fits  in  well  enough  with  Greek  Kepfispoz,  con 
sidering  the  susceptibility  of  mythic  proper  names 
to  the  kind  of  modulation,  or  sophistication,  which 
we  call  popular  etymology.  But  we  may  disregard 
the  verbal  etymology  altogether.  Other  Indo-Eu 
ropean  peoples  have  more  or  less  definite  notions 
about  one  or  two  dogs.  It  is  more  than  probable 
that  the  early  notions  of  future  life  turned  to  the 
visible  heaven  with  its  sun  and  moon,  rather  than 
the  topographically  unstable  and  elusive  caves  and 
gullies  that  lead,  in  the  unquestionably  late  Greek 
fancy,  to  a  wide-gated  Hades.  I  cannot  here  afford 
the  time  that  would  be  required  to  the  full  expo 
sition  of  this  myth,  and  would  refer  you  to  my 
little  book,  Cerberus,  the  Dog  of  Hades  :  The  History 
of  an  Idea,  published  in  1905,  which  I  regard  as  my 
program  of  method  in  the  study  of  Comparative  My 
thology.  Now,  to  be  sure,  we  find  that  other  peoples, 
not  Indo-European,  here  and  there,  own  a  dog  who 
gets  in  the  way  of  the  soul  on  its  way  to  heaven. 
Obviously,  the  conception  may  have  arisen  indepen 
dently  in  the  same  way  :  the  dead  journeying  upward 
to  heaven,  but  interfered  with  by  a  coursing  heavenly 
body,  the  sun  or  the  moon,  or  both.  But  grant  that 
somewhere  or  other  a  dog,  pure  and  simple,  has 


The  Prehistoric  Gods  107 


strayed  into  this  sphere  of  conceptions  without  any 
organic  mythological  meaning,  simply  as  a  baying, 
hostile,  watchdog  in  heaven  or  hell.  We  cannot 
therefore  ignore  the  wonderful  yet  simple  Indo-Eu 
ropean  myth  which  is  begotten  of  high  reason  and 
keen  appreciation  of  myth-making  opportunity. 
Plainly,  this  myth  requires  no  further  explanation 
from  the  usually  vague  and  half-understood  analo 
gies  that  may  befound  on  the  broad  ground  of  univer 
sal  Ethnology  and  Folk-lore.  Far  be  it  from  me  to 
suggest  that  mythological  evidence,  whencesoever 
obtainable,  should  be  excluded  from  these  delibera 
tions  :  all  I  want  to  prevent  is  the  importation  of  bad 
coal  into  Newcastle.  Since  the  Indo-Europeans  are 
one  people,  let  us  first  study  their  own  minds  in  their 
own  literature  or  archeological  remains,  before  turn 
ing  to  the  Iroquois,  the  Papuas,  or  the  inhabitants  of 
the  Aleutian  Islands  for  sporadic  reports  that,  more 
often  than  not,  reach  our  ear  out  of  their  proper 
connection,  or  with  their  point  bent.  When  the 
smoke  shall  have  cleared  there  will  be — of  this  I  am 
certain — less  airy  reliance  on  ethnological  quantities 
irrational  in  Indo-European  mathematics.  But  there 
will  be  left  a  goodly  stock  of  Indo-European  divini 
ties  and  simple  myths,  profoundly  interesting,  not 
only  with  the  interest  of  hoary  antiquity,  but  even 
more  so  because  they  determine  and  explain  the  main 


io8  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


I  lines  along  which  move  the  mythologies  of  the  Indo- 
European  peoples  of  historical  times.  The  main  sub 
stance,  though  by  no  means  the  entire  substance,  of 
the  mythologies  and  religions  of  these  peoples — this 
is  as  true  to-day  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Benfey,  Kuhn 
and  Miiller — is  the  nature  myth.  If  we  count  Brah- 
manical  theosophy  and  Buddhism  as  the  two  great 
yields  of  the  study  of  Hinduism,  we  may  safely  add 
Comparative  Mythology  as  the  third  great  field  of  re 
ligious  history  that  has  been  opened  out  by  the  study 
of  India.  Had  we  but  fuller  records  of  ancient  Indo- 

*»..,...     v  -  -  •***-•+  *#*.  ***• 

European  history  and  literature,  these  fuller  records 
would  reveal  more  common  myths  and  religious 
ideas.  The  added  facts  would  fill  in  the  necessarily 
sketchy  picture,  but  it  would  still  be  the  same 
picture. 

We  are  by  the  limits  of  our  plan  restricted  here  to 
those  religious  ideas  which  concern  the  early  religion 
of  India,  and  even  of  these  we  shall  select  only  the 
more  important.  We  begin  with  the  remoter  of  the 
two  periods,  the  Indo-European  period. 

The  universal  Indo-European  word  for  "god^jvvas 
deivos,  gone  over  into  archaic  Latin  as  deivos  (deus), 
Celtic  devos  in  the  Gallic  proper  name  Devognata, 
Old  Scandinavian  tivar,  "  gods,"  Lithuanian  devas, 
and  Sanskrit  devas.  The  irreproachable  etymology 
which  connects  this  word  with  the  verb  div,  dyu, 


The  Prehistoric  Gods  109 


"shine,"  shows  that  the_word  came  from  the  lumin-v 
ous  manifestations  of  nature  by  day  and  night, 
and  determines  authoritatively  the  source  from; 
which  the  Indo-Europeans  derived  their  first  and 
most  pervasive  conception  of  divine  power.  On 
more  limited  Indo-European  territory  appears 
another  general  term,  Slavic  bogu,  Old  Persian  baga 
Avestan  bagha  "  god,"  Sanskrit  bhaga  "  god  of  for 
tune."  The  word  is  again  of  clear  origin  :  it  means 
"  spender  of  goods,  or  blessings."  It  contains  the 
abstract  conception  of  a  good  god,  embodying  an 
eternal  and  never  slumbering  wish  of  mankind.  The 
same  eastern  region  of  the  Indo-European  territory 
has  in  common  another  sacred  word,  used  as  an 
attribute  of  divinity,  namely,  Avestan  (Persian) 
spenta,  Lithuanian  szventas.  Old  Slavic  svqtti,  "  pure  " 
or  "holy."  This  secures  for  prehistoric  religion  an 
important  spiritual  concept.  Two  important  con 
ceptions  expressing  sentiment  towards  the  gods, 
that  of  reverence  (Sanskrit  yaj,  Avestan  yaz,  Greek 
ay  in  aCo//az,*'revere"),  and  that  of  belief  (Sanskrit 
graddhd,  Latin  credo,  Celtic  cretim,  "  believe  ")  come 
from  old  times,  though  they  need  not  necessarily 
have  been  in  vogue  in  every  part  of  the  territory 

1  The  "  Phrygian  "  Zeus  Bagaios  reported  by  the  Greek  glosso- 
grapher  Hesychios  is  nothing  but  the  Persian  Baga  ;  see  the  author 
in  Transactions  of  the  American  Philological  Association,  vol.  xxxv., 
p.  xxxi. 


1 10  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


occupied  by  the   Indo-Europeans  prior  to  historic 
times. 

All  Indo-Europeans  revered  the  shining  sky  of 
daytime  as  a  mighty  being.  The  Hindus,  Greeks, 
and  Romans  call  him  respectively  Dyaush  pitar, 
Zeus  pater,  and  Diespiter  or  Jupiter.  The  meaning 
of  the  name  is  quite  transparent  in  the  Veda,  where 
dyaus  is  still  both  common  and  proper  noun.  It 
always  means  sky.  The  Latin  expression  sub  Jove 
frigido,  "  under  a  cold  sky/'  "  in  a  cold  climate," 
preserves  the  sense  of  the  word  as  a  fossil.  The 
slender  myth  that  is  contained  here  is  that  of  a 
marital  relation  between  the  visible  two  halves  of 
the  cosmos.  The  lady,  or  "correspondent  "  in  the 
affair  was  "  Mother  Earth  "  (Vedic  prithim  mdtar, 
"  terra  mater").1  This  union  was  blessed  with  child 
ren,  known  frequently  in  the  Veda,  and  occasionally 
elsewhere,  as  the  children  of  the  Sky.  In  the  Veda 
Agni,  "  Fire,"  Ushas,  "  Dawn,"  and  especially  the 
dual  "  Horsemen,"  the  Agvins,  are  so  named.  The 
"  Horsemen,"  as  we  shall  see  later,  correspond  to 
the  Greek  Dioscuri  (dioffxovpoi),  "  Sons  of  Zeus,  or 
Heaven,"  Castor  and  Pollux,  and  to  the  "  Sons  of 
God "  in  Lettish  mythology.  In  this  instance  at 

1  Herodotus  iv.  59  testifies  forthright  that  the  Scythians, 
closely  allied  to  the  Persians,  worshipped  Earth  as  the  wife  of  Zeus: 
Aia.  TE  Kairf/v,  VOILII£,OYT£$  TTJY  Trjv  rov  AioS  eivociyvvcciKa. 


The  Prehistoric  Gods  1 1 1 


least    the    concept  "  children    of    Father    Sky  "    is 
prehistoric,  and  genuinely  mythic. 

The  sky  has  another  irrepressible  quality  :  it 
thunders.  In  this  aspect  also  it  became  a  personal 
god  with  a  definite  name  in  prehistoric  times,  who 
tends  at  times,  as  one  might  naturally  suppose,  to 
encroach  on  the  domain  of  Father  Sky,  or  to  blend 
with  him.  The  chief  heathen  god  of  the  Lithuanians 
was  Perkunas,  "Thunderer,"  from  which  is  derived 
the  word  perkunyja,  "  thunder-storm."  The  identity 
of  this  name  with  the  parents  of  the  Norse  "  Thun 
derer,"  the  god  Thor  (Donar),  namely,  the  male 
Fjorgynn  and  the  female  Fjorgyn,  has  never  been 
questioned.  Here  also  belongs  Parjanya,  that  most 
transparent  divinity  of  the  rain-storm  in  the  Vedic 
hymns,  who  "  roars  like  a  lion  and  thunderous  strikes 
the  evil-doers."  There  is  some  slight  phonetic  diffi 
culty  here,  I  would  suggest  that  the  word  has  been 
modulated  euphemistically,  so  as  to  suggest  the  idea 
of  "guarding  the  folk"  (pari,  "about,"  and  jana, 
"folk").1  Homer's  Zeus  has  absorbed  the"Thun-'; 
derer,"  and  therefore  appears  in  a  double  aspect.  \ 
On  the  one  hand  he  is  "far-eyed  Sky  " 
on  the  other  he  is  "  cloud-gatherer  " 


1  The  original  etymology  is  doubtful  ;  see  Hirt,  Indogermanische 
Forschungen,  i.,  436  ;  Kretschmer,  Einleitung  in  die  Geschichte  der 
Griechischen  Sprache,  p.  81. 


1 1  2  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


and  "rejoices  in  lightning,"  or,  "twists  the  light 
ning"  (re  pains  paw  o$).  The  Lithuanian  Perkunas  has 
absorbed  the  functions  of  Zeus  and  has  become  chief 
god.  In  the  Veda  also1  Parjanya  is  called  "  Father 
Asura,"  making  him  for  the  moment  the  double  of 
Father  Sky,  the  Asura.  In  another  passage  he  is 
even  more  directly  identified  with  Dyaus.2 

The  Veda  has  a  pair  of  twin  gods,  known  as 
the  "two  Horsemen  "  (aqviii).  They  are  frequently 
called  "  Sons  of  Heaven "  (divo  napdta).  Of  all 
Vedic  divinities  they  have  the  most  pronounced 
mythical  and  legendary  character.  They  put  in 
their  appearance  regularly  in  the  morning,  along 
with  other  divinities  of  morning  light.  A  maiden 
by  the  name  of  Surya,  that  is  "Sun-Maiden,''  or 
daughter  of  Surya,  that  is  "  Daughter  of  the  Sun," 
is  captivated  by  the  youthful  beauty  of  the  Agvins, 
chooses  them  for  her  husbands,  and  ascends  their 
chariot  that  is  drawn  by  birds.  A  different  yet  re 
lated  touch  is  added  to  their  character  in  a  riddle- 
some  brief  story 3  which  furnishes  them  with  an 
other  female  relation,  namely,  a  mother  by  the  name 

1  Rig-Veda  5.  83.  6. 

2  Divah  parjanydd  antarikshat  prthivyah.     Vajasaneyi    Sanhita, 
18,  55^<z/. 

8  Told  in  Rig- Veda  10.  17.  I,  2  ;  see  the  author  in  Journal  of  the 
American  Oriental  Society,  vol.  xv.,  p.  \T2.  ff. 


The  Prehistoric  Gods  113 


of  Saranyu.  And,  once  more,  with  considerable 
deviation,  they  figure  in  a  heavenly  marriage  in 
which  they  themselves  are  not  the  principals.  They 
are  the  wooers  in  a  marriage  which  their  own  bride 
Surya,  according  to  a  later  view,  enters  into  with 
Soma,  the  Moon.  The  specific  use  of  the  Agvins 
is  that  they  are  the  most  reliable  helpers  in  need. 
The  hymns  harp  persistently  upon  the  fact  that  all 
sorts  of  men  and  women  have  in  the  past  appealed 
to  them  for  aid,  and  have  not  been  disappointed.1  j 
Even  animals  are  helped  or  cured  by  them.  In  one 
instance  they  perform  a  cure  calculated  to  make 
green  with  envy  even  the  most  skilled  of  modern 
veterinary  surgeons,  if  by  any  chance  he  should 
hear  of  it.  When  the  racing  mare  Vicpala  breaks  a 
leg  they  put  an  iron  one  in  its  place :  with  that  she 
handily  wins  the  race.2 

Even  the  most  stalwart  sceptics  in  this  field  have 
not  found  it  in  their  hearts  to  deny  the  connec 
tion  of  these  divinities  and  their  female  relative 
with  the  Dioscuri,  the  "  Sons  of  Zeus,"  Castor  and 
Pollux  (Poludeukes),  and  their  sister  Helena.  The 
name  of  the  Acvins'  mother  SaranyQ  may,  according 
to  a  suggestion  of  Professor  E.  W.  Fay,  in  its  first 
two  syllables  contain  the  sound  for  sound  equivalent 

1  See  Macdonell,   Vedic  Mythology,  p.  51  ff. 

2  See  Pischel,   Vedische  Studien,  vol.  i.,  p.  171  ff. 


1 14  The  Religion  of  the  Vecla 


of  the  two  first  syllables  of  Helena.  The  connection 
with  horses,  expressed  in  the  name  of  the  Agvins 
(a$va,  "  horse  "),  comes  out  more  strongly  with  the 
Dioscuri,  who  are  celebrated  tamers  of  horses,  riders 
of  horses,  and  charioteers.  The  Dioscuri  also  were 
revered  as  helpers  in  need,  and  therefore  were  called 
Anaktes,  "  protecting  lords." 

In  another  quarter,  with  the  Lettish  or  Baltic 
peoples,  a  strikingly  similar  myth  appears,  with  the 
notable  addition  that  the  two  "  Sons  of  God  "  are 
mentioned  individually  as  the  morning  or  evening 
star.  This  calls  up  a  feature  of  the  Greek  myth: 
Zeus  rewards  the  affection  of  the  Dioscuri  for  one 
another  by  placing  them  in  the  heavens  either  as 
morning  and  evening  star,  or  the  twin  stars  Gemini. 
1  j  So,  to  this  day,  the  gigantic  statues  of  the  horse- 
U  taming  Dioscuri  opposite  the  Quirinal  palace  in 
.Rome  carry  stars  on  their  heads. 

A  Lithuanian  folk-song  (daina)  runs  as  follows: 

"  The  Moon  did  wed  the  Maiden  Sun, 
In  an  early  day  of  spring-tide. 
The  Maiden  Sun  arose  betimes, 
The  Moon  just  then  did  slink  away. 

"  He  wandered  by  himself  afar, 
Coquetted  with  the  morning-star. 
Perkunas  hence  was  greatly  wroth  ; 
He  cleft  him  with  his  sword  in  twain  : 


The  Prehistoric  Gods  115 


"  *  Why  didst  thou  thus  desert  the  Sun, 
And  wander  in  the  night  afar  ? 
Why  didst  thou  flirt  with  the  morning-star? 
His  heart  was  filled  with  grief  and  pain."  1 

Perkunas  is  the  god  of  thunder.  In  the  mythol 
ogy  of  these  peoples  he  has  absorbed  the  character 
istics  of  the  old  god  of  heaven  and  become  the  chief 
god,  just  as  Zeus,  conversely,  has  taken  upon  him 
self  the  functions  of  the  "  Thunderer."  This  folk- 
story  presents  the  materials  of  the  Hindu  Agvin 
legend  in  a  new  arrangement,  not  at  all  applicable 
to  the  Hindu  myth.  But  the  materials,  Sun- 
Maiden,  Moon,  and  "Sons  of  God,"  are  there.  In 
another  folk-song,  this  time  a  Lettish  one,  the 
morning-star  is  represented  as  pursuing  amorously 
Saule,  the  equivalent  of  Vedic  Surya,  the  "  Sun- 
Maiden  "  2 

With  all  the  rich  and  often  perplexing  modula 
tions  of  this  myth,  we  have  the  common  kernel  of  a 
heavenly  dual  pair  of  divinities  in  intimate  relation 
with  a  female  divinity  of  the  heavens.  The  quality 
of  helpers  in  need  and  saviours  in  trouble  is  almost 
unquestionably  begotten  of  the  universal  notion  that 

1  This  version  of  the  daina,  with  slight  alterations,  is  that  of  Pro 
fessor  Chase  in    Transactions  of  the  American  Philological  Associa 
tion  ,  vol.  xxxi.,  p.  191. 

2  See  Oldenberg,  Die  Religion  des  Veda,  p.  212^". 


n6  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


V|the  divinities  of  morning  light  overcome  the  hostile 
^powers  of  darkness.  We  are  not  quite  so  certain  as 
are  some  excellent  scholars  that  the  heavenly  pair 
were  originally  the  morning  and  evening  star,  nor 
has  any  other  naturalistic  explanation  been  pro 
posed  which  is  finally  satisfactory.1  In  any  case,  one 
of  the  pair,  at  least,  to  which  the  other  has  been 
subordinated,  belongs  to  the  events  of  nature  in  the 
morning,  and  the  marriage  is  with  the  "  Sun-Maiden  " 
(Surya,  Saule)  ;  or  the  "  Sun  Maiden  "  is  imagined  to 
be  their  sister  (Helena),  or  even  their  mother  (Sar- 
anyu).2  The  myth  of  which  I  have  given  here  the 
merest  outline  flits  about  considerably  among  super 
ficially  discrepant  notions.  It  is  overlaid  with  many 
secondary  fancies  of  the  poet  and  story-teller.  No 
sane  scholar  will  now,  as  was  once  the  habit,  try  to 
make  each  of  the  silly  "  stunts "  which  the  Vedic 
hymns  ascribe  to  the  Agvins  part  of  the  organic 
matter  contained  in  the  myth.  They  are  mostly 
later  fancy.  And  even  after  deducting  the  crudities 
of  past  interpreters  we  must  not  quarrel  with  certain 
mental  reservations  as  to  this  and  that  detail.  But 
j.  in  the  last  outcome  no  rational  historian  or  anti- 

1  All  explanations  have  been  subjected  to  searching  criticism  by 
Professor    Hillebrandt  in   the  third  volume  of  his  great  work    on 

Vedic  Mythology,  p.  379^". 

2  In  Greek  mythology  also  the  Dioscuri  are  placed  in  the  relation 
of  sons  to  a  mother,  namely,  Antiope  of  Bceotia. 


The  Prehistoric  Gods  1 1 7 


quarian    will    ignore    such    parallels   as   shows   the  ' 
story  of  the  two  "  Sons  of  Heaven  "  with  the  Hin 
dus,  the  Greeks,  and  the  Letts,1  or  be  so  abstemious 
as  to  refrain    from  looking  for  reasonable   motives 
for  the  creation  of  a  myth  that  has  so  marked  a  t 
physiognomy. 

In  brief,  once  more,  there  are  two  luminous  sons 
of  heaven,  conceived  as  horsemen,  and  as  helpers  of 
men  in  all  kinds  of  sore  straits.  They  are  in  loving 
relation  with  another,  feminine,  heavenly  divinity 
conceived  as  a  "  Sun-Maiden,"  or  "  Daughter  of  the 
Sun."  This  relation  is  crossed  by  another  affair  be 
tween  the  "  Sun-Maiden  "  and  the  Moon.  To  concep 
tions  of  this  sort  the  Indo-Europeans,  before  their 
separation  into  the  peoples  of  historical  times,  had 
advanced.  The  changes  and  additions  to  the  myth 
are  not  surprising  ;  surprising  is,  that  the  myth  should 
have  retained  its  chief  features  during  great  peri 
ods  of  time,  in  very  various  surroundings,  and  under 
the  constant  pressure  of  a  flood  of  remodelling  ideas 
poured  out  upon  it  by  the  fertile  mind  of  man,  and 
tending  constantly  to  obliterate  the  more  primitive 
and  simple  fancies. 

I  have  dwelt  before  upon  the  almost  romantic  in 
terest  which  attaches  itself  to  the  relationship  of  the 

i  For  possible  traces  of  the  same  myth  among  the  Teutons  see  De 
la  Saussaye,  The  Religion  of  the  Teutons,  pp.  68  and  140  JT. 


1 1 8  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


two  peoples,  the  Hindus  and  the  Iranians.1  Separated 
only  by  a  chain  of  mountains,  they  are  entirely  un 
conscious  of  the  close  relationship  of  their  languages, 
literatures,  and  religions.  Nowhere  in  the  Veda  is 
there  the  slightest  knowledge  of  the  Avesta  ;  nowhere 
is  the  Avesta  conscious  that  there  is  going  on  across 
the  Himalaya  Mountains  in  India  an  intense  and  char 
acteristic  religious  development  which  started  with  a 
good  many  of  the  same  primitive  beliefs  as  were  ab 
sorbed  by  the  religion  of  Zoroaster,  As  time  went  by 
the  religions  of  the  two  peoples  became  about  as  differ 
ent  as  it  is  possible  for  religions  of  civilised  peoples  to 
be.  On  the  one  side,  Parsism  or  Zoroastrianism,  mold 
ed  by  the  mind  of  a  single  prophet,  Zarathushtra,  or 
Zoroaster :  a  dualistic  religion,  believing  in  God  and 
Satan  ;  an  ethical,  optimistic,  but  at  the  bottom  really 
unphilsophical  religion  ;  yet  sufficient,  as  the  modern 
Parsis  show,  to  guide  a  people  into  a  very  superior 
form  of  life.  On  the  other  side,  higher  Hinduism, 
monistic,  pessimistic,  and  speculative  ;  without  real 
leadership,  except  that  which  is  present  in  the  own 
spirit  of  each  individual  bent  upon  finding  the  way 
out  of  a  hated  round  of  existences  through  a  keen 
conviction  that  there  is  only  one  fundamental  truth, 
the  Brahma  in  the  universe  and  in  one's  self; 
that,  consequently,  this  world  of  things  is  illusory, 
1  See  above,  p.  13 


The  Prehistoric  Gods  119 


and  must  be  discarded  in  order  to  release  from 
existence. 

But  these  two  religions  began  at  approximately  the 
same  point,  and  they  continue  with  enough  of  the 
same  materials  to  make  the  study  of  each  in  some 
measure  dependent  upon  the  other.  We  are  here 
concerned  with  the  Vedic  side  only.  A  very  con 
siderable  number  of  important  Vedic  divinities, 
religious  conceptions,  and  sacred  institutions  belong 
to  this  common  Aryan  period.1  Their  sphere  is  en 
larged,  their  meaning  better  defined,  and  their  chro 
nology  shifted  across  long  periods  of  time,  if  we  keep 
our  eye  on  the  Avesta.  Of  course  we  must  not  neg 
lect  to  allow  for  the  process  of  recoining  which  these 
ideas  have  passed  through  in  India.  In  a  certain 
sense  every  prehistoric  religious  idea  that  has  man 
aged  to  survive  and  to  emerge  in  India  has  become 
Hindu  ;  not  the  least  fascinating  part  of  these  re 
searches  is  to  show  just  how  the  spirit  of  India  na 
tionalises  or  individualises  the  ideas  that  were  born 
on  a  different  soil. 

Two  spheres  of  Vedic  ideas  and  practices  concern 
us  here  in  a  particular  degree.  The  first  is  the  sphere 
of  the  great  Vedic  god  Varuna,  his  dual  partner 

1  See,  Spiegel  Die  Arise  he  Periode;  Darmestetter,  Sacred  Books  of 
the  East,  iv.,  p.  Ivi,  ff;  Oldenberg,  Die  Religion  des  Veda,  pp.  26^"., 
341  ff;  Hillebrandt,  Rituallitteratur ^  p.  n,  and  the  bibliographic 
notes  there  given;  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  7  ff. 


I2O  The  Religion  of  tne  Veda 


Mitra,  and  a  set  of  gods  known  as  Adityas,  to  whom 
belong  both  Varunaand  Mitra.  Varuna,  unquestion 
ably  the  most  imposing  god  of  the  Rig-Veda,  is  in 
charge  of  the  moral  law  or  order  of  the  universe,  that 
rta  which,  we  have  seen,  dates  at  least  as  far  back 
as  1600  B.C.  The  second  sphere  is  that  of  the  plant 
soma,  which  is  pressed  artfully  so  as  to  yield  an  intox 
icating  liquor  that  is  accepted  joyfully  by  the  Vedic 
gods  as  their  tipple.  It  was  pressed  first  by  a  mythic 
first  man  of  the  name  of  Yama,  and  by  his  divine 
father  Vivasvant.  Yama  has  a  sister  YamT,  the  first 
pair,  who  unconventionally  people  the  world.  Vivas 
vant,  "  the  shining  one,"  is  the  father  of  Yama,  the 
final  progenitor  who  carries  this  familiar  chain  of 
logic  to  an  end.  He  is,  in  all  probability,  either 
the  "fire,"  or  the  "  sun " ;  or,  mixedly,  "the  sun, 
the  divine  fire."  In  each  of  these  spheres  Vedic 
mythology  presents  itself  in  its  most  brilliant  aspects. 
We  shall  deal  with  them  in  the  order  stated. 

In  common  with  most  scholars  I  believe  that  the 
god  Varuna  is  to  be  connected,  if  not  identified, 
with  the  chief  good  and  wise  god  of  the  Zoroastrian 
faith,  namely  Ahura  Mazda,  or  Ormazd,  that_Js 
"  Wise  Lord."  Varuna  carries  the  title  Asura, 
'*  Lord,"  the  same  word  as  Ahura ;  this,  however, 
must  not  be  held  to  say  too  much,  because  other 
gods  of  the  Veda  are  honoured  with  the  same  dis- 


The  Prehistoric  Gods  121 


tinguishing  title.  But  Varuna  is  a  close  partner  in 
a  partnership  which  is  expressed  in  the  dual  number. 
It  consists  of  himself  and  the  god  Mitra,  who  is, 
however,  little  more  than  a  silent  partner  in  the  com 
bination.  Such  partnerships  are  frequent  in  the 
Veda,  but  exceedingly  rare  in  the  Persian  Avesta. 
Yet  the  Avesta,  in  a  matter-of-fact  manner,  joins 
Ahura  and  Mithra  in  the  same  dual  partnership  as 
the  Veda  does  Varuna  and  Mitra.1  Since  Ahura  is 
the  paramount  divinity  of  the  Avesta  his  pairing 
with  Mithra  has  every  appearance  of  a  fossil,  left 
over  from  a  time  when  Ahura's  supremacy  had  not 
yet  become  absolute,  in  other  words,  from  a  time 
when  Ahura  and  Mithra  were  on  a  par  of  dignity. 
It  seems  to  me  an  almost  unimaginable  feat  of 
scepticism  to  doubt  the  original  identity  of  the  two 
pairs.  Ahura  figures,  however,  by  himself  also. 
Again,  it  seems  unlikely  that  Ahura  Mazda,  when 
mentioned  by  himself,  is  not  the  same  Ahura  that 
appears  in  the  combination  Ahura  and  Mithra,  be 
cause  Ahura  Mazda,  taken  by  himself,  is  so  very  like 
Varuna,  the  Vedic  partner  of  Mitra.  In  the  Zoroas- 
trian  system  Ahura  Mazda  orders  the  world,  and 
assigns  to  all  good  creatures  and  entities  their  re 


spective  places  and  activities.       Ahura  creates  the 
divine   order  (as/ia),  the  good    waters    and   plants 

1  See  Spiegel,  Die  Arische  Pcrivde,  p.  185  ff. 


: 


122  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


light,  earth,  and  all  that  is  good.  He  was  the  first 
progenitor,  the  first  father  of  divine  order.  He 
made  a  way  for  the  sun  and  the  stars.  It  is  he  that 
causes  the  moon  to  grow  or  wane.1  As  guardian  of 
divine  order  Ahura  is  not  to  be  deceived,  does  not 
sleep  ;  he  sees  all  human  deeds,  overt  or  covert.2 

The  Veda  describes  Varuna  in  the  same  spirit,  at 
times  in  almost  the  same  words.  He  is  the  sup 
porter  of  beings ;  he  has  spread  the  atmosphere  over 
the  forests  ;  has  put  fleetness  into  the  steed,  an^ 
milk  into  the  cows.  He  has  placed  intelligence  into 
the  heart,  fire  into  the  waters,  the  sun  upon  the  sky, 
the  soma-plant  upon  the  mountains.  He  has  opened 
a  path  for  the  sun ;  the  floods  of  the  rivers  hasten 
seaward  like  racers  obeying  the  divine  order.3  Even 
more  pointed  than  Ahura's  is  the  expression  of 
Varuna's  omniscience  and  undeceivableness :  he  sees 
all  the  past  and  all  the  future  ;  he  is  present  as  a 
third  wherever  two  men  secretly  scheme  ;  his  spies 
do  not  close  their  eyes. 

The  hymn  Atharva-Veda  4.  1 6  presents  a  rugged 
picture  or  Varuna  in  his  role  of  omniscient  and 
omnipotent  god: 

1  Yasna  37.  i ;  44.  3. 

2  Yasna  31.  13  ;  43.  6  ;  45.  4  ;  Vendidad  19-20.    Cf.  Oldenberg  in 
Journal  of  the  German  Oriental  Society,  vol.  I,  p.  48. 

3  Rig- Veda  5.  85.  2  ;  87.  i  ;  8.  41.  5. 


The  Prehistoric  Gods  123 


"  The  great  guardian  among  these  gods  sees  as  if  from 
anear.  He  that  thinketh  he  is  moving  stealthily — all 
this  the  gods  know. 

*'  Whoso  stands,  walks,  or  sneaks  about,  and  whoso 
goes  slinking  off,  whoso  runs  to  cover  ; — if  two  sit  to 
gether  and  scheme,  King  Varuna  is  there  as  the  third 
and  knows  it. 

"  Both  this  earth  here  belongs  to  King  Varuna  and 
also  yonder  broad  sky,  whose  bounds  are,  far  away.  The 
two  oceans  are  Varuna's  loins  ;  yea,  in  this  petty  drop  of 
water  is  he  hidden. 

"  Whoso  should  flee  beyond  the  heavens  far  away 
would  yet  not  be  free  from  King  Varuna.  From  the 
sky  his  spies  come  hither  ;  with  a  thousand  eyes  they  do 
watch  over  the  earth. 

"  All  this  King  Varuna  does  behold — what  is  between 
the  two  firmaments,  what  beyond.  Numbered  of  him 
are  the  winkings  of  men's  eyes.  As  a  (winning)  gamester 
puts  down  the  dice,  thus  does  he  establish  these  (laws)." 

Another  hymn,  Rig-Veda  7.  86,  depicts  Varuna  as 
guardian  of  moral  order,  hence  angry  at  the  mis 
deeds  of  men.  The  contrite  attitude  of  his  suppli 
ant,  a  singer  of  the  family  of  the  Vasishthas,  the 
authors  of  the  seventh  book  of  the  Rig- Veda,  has  a 
strong  Hebraic  flavor,  and,  like  the  preceding 
hymn,  suggests  many  a  passage  of  the  Psalms : 


124  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


i. 

"Wise,  truly,  and  great  is  his  own  nature, 
Who  held  asunder  spacious  earth  and  heaven. 
He  pressed  the  sky,  the  broad  and  lofty,  upward, 
Aye,  spread  the  stars,  and  spread  the  earth  out  broadly. 

2. 

"  With  my  own  self  I  hold  communion  : 
How  shall  I  ever  with  Varuna  find  refuge? 
Will  he  without  a  grudge  accept  my  offering  ? 
When  may  I  joyous  look  and  find  him  gracious  ? 

3- 

"  Fain  to  discover  this  my  sin,  I  question, 
I  go  to  those  who  know,  and  ask  of  them. 
The  self-same  story  they  all  in  concert  tell  me ; 
1  God  Varuna  it  is  whom  thou  hast  angered.' 

4- 

"  What  was  my  chief  offence,  O  Varuna, 
That  thou  wouldst  slay  thy  friend  who  sings  thy  praises? 
Tell  me,  infallible  Lord,  of  noble  nature, 
That  I  may  be  prompt  to  quench  thy  wrath  with  homage  ! 

5- 

"  Loose  us  from  sins  committed  by  our  fathers, 
From  all  those,  too,  which  we  ourselves  committed  ! 
Loose  us,  as  thieves  are  loosed  that  lifted  cattle ; 
As  from  a  calf,  take  off  Vasishtha's  fetters  ! 


The  Prehistoric  Gods  125 


6. 

'  'T  was  not  my  own  sense,  Varuna!     'T  was  deception, 
'T  was  scant  thought,  strong  drink,  or  dice,  or  passion. 
The  old  are  there  to  lead  astray  the  younger, 
Nay,  sleep  itself  provokes  unrighteous  actions. 

7- 

"  Let  me  do  service  to  the  merciful  giver, 
The  zealous  god,  like  a  slave,  but  sinless  ! 
The  gracious  god  gave  wisdom  to  the  foolish, 
He  leads  the  wise,  himself  more  wise,  to  riches. 

8. 

"  May  this  our  song,  O  Varuna,  we  pray  thee, 
Reach  to  thy  heart,  O  god  of  lofty  nature  ! 
On  home  and  work  do  thou  bestow  well-being  ; 
Protect  us,  gods,  for  evermore  with  blessings ! " 

We  are  accustomed  to  make  much  allowance  for 
general  similarities  in  the  conceptions  of  the  gods  of 
different  peoples,  but  it  is  scarcely  possible  that  they 
should  reach  so  far.     The  connection  that  exists  be 
tween  Ahura  Mazda  and  Varuna  is  expressed,  how-/ 
ever,  not  only  through   their  general   similarity  as  I 
supreme  arbiters   of  the  world   and   its   moral  law.  1 
That   very    particular    conception,    which    dignifies 
alike  Veda  and  Avesta,  namely,  Vedic   rta,  Avestan 
asha  (areta),  and  Cuneiform  Persian  arta,  is,  of  course, 
not  entirely  put  in  the  keep  of  those  two  gods.     But 


1 26  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


it  is  theirs  in  an  especial  degree.  One  of  the  most 
interesting  parallels  between  Veda  and  Avesta  is 
that  both  gods  are  described  as  the  "  spring  of  the  rta, 
or  righteousness."  Varuna  is  khd  rtasya  (Rig- Veda 
2.  28.  5)  ;  Ahura  Mazda  as/take  khdo,  (Yasna  10.  4). 
The  words  are  sound  for  sound  the  same.  The 
high  thought  of  the  rta  is  in  many  ways  similar 
to  the  Confucian  idea  of  order,  harmony,  and  ab 
sence  of  disturbance.  It  is  unquestionably  the 
best  conception  that  has  been  elaborated  by  the 
Aryans. 

We  have  seen '  that  it  reaches  back  at  least  to 
1600  B.C.,  and  yet,  notwithstanding  its  early  date,  it 
is  superior  to  any  of  the  earlier  conceptions  of  the 
remaining  Indo-European  peoples.  As  far  as  the 
Veda  is  concerned,  it  presents  itself  under  the 
threefold  aspect  of  cosmic  order,  correct  and  fitting 
cult  of  the  gods,  and  moral  conduct  of  man,2  We 
have  in  connection  with  the  rta  a  pretty  complete 
System  of  Ethics,  a  kind  of  Counsel  of  Perfection. 

As  the   basis  of  cosmic  order  the  rta  rules  the 

world  and  nature.    The  established  facts  of  the  visible 

world,  but  especially  the  events  of  nature  that  recur 

^"^periodically,  are  fixed  or  regulated  by  rta.     Those 

1  Above,  p.  12. 

2  The  same  threefold    character  is  quite  evident  in  the  Avestan 
as  ha.     See  Mills    Journal  of  the  American    Oriental  Society ',  vol. 
xx.,  pp.  31  /.,  277 /"• 


The  Prehistoric  Gods  127 


daughters  of  heaven,  the  Maidens  Dawn,  shine  upon 
the  morning  sky  in  harmony  with  rta,  or  when  they 
wake  up  in  the  morning  they  rise  from  the  seat  of  rta. 
The  sun  is  placed  upon  the  sky  in  obedience  to  the 
rta.  He  is  called  the  wheel  of  rta  with  twelve  spokes. 
This  means  that  he  courses  across  the  sky  as  the  year 
of  twelve  months.  Even  the  shallow  mystery  that 
the  red,  raw  cow  yields  white,  cooked  milk  is  "  the  rta  N 
of  the  cow  guided  by  the  rta"1  The  gods  them 
selves  are  born  of  the  rta  or  in  the  rta  (rtajdtd) ; 
they  show  by  their  acts  that  they  know  the  rtay 
observe  the  rta,  and  love  the  rta? 

The  religion  of  the  Veda,  as  we  have  observed,  rests 
upon  the  material  foundation  of  cult  and  sacrifice,  j 
These  performances  are  not  always  regarded  merely 
as  merchandise  wherewith  to  traffic  for  the  blessings 
of  the  gods.  They  begin  to  evolve  intrinsic  virtues 
and  harmonies.  In  a  later  time,  the  time  of  the  Yaju 
Vedas,  as  we  have  seen,3  the  technical  acts  of  the 
sacrifice  are  imbued  with  magic  and  divine  power. 
But  even  in  the  Rig-Veda  the  sacrifice  fire  is  kindled 
under  the  "  yoking  of  the  rta"  or,  as  we  should  say, 
under  the  auspices  of  world  order.  Agni,  the  god  of 

1  "  O  sage  mir,  wie  geht  es  zu, 

Giebt  weisse  milch  die  rote  Kuh  ?"     German  nursery  rhyme.  • 

2  rtajnd,  rtdyu,  rtasap,  and  so  on. 

3  Above,  p.  31. 


:\ 


128  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


fire,  is  "  scion  of  the  rta"  or  "  first-born  of  the  rta" 
He  performs  his  work  with  rta,  carries  oblations  to 
the  gods  "  on  the  path  of  rta"  Prayers,  lowing  like 
cattle,  "  longing  for  the  soma-drmk"  take  effect  in 
accordance  with  rta.1  A  figure  of  speech,  bold  to 
the  point  of  grotesqueness,  turns  prayer  into  u  rta- 
fluid,  distilled  by  the  tongue."2  Holy  sacrifice,  in 
distinction  from  foul  magic,  is  performed  with 
rta  :  "  I  call  upon  the  gods,  undefiled  by  witchcraft. 
With  rta  I  perform  my  work,  carry  out  my  thought.'* 
Thus  exclaims  a  poetic  mind  conscious  of  its  own 
rectitude.3 

Finally  in  man's  activity  the  rta  manifests  itselfjas. 
the  moral  law.  Here  it  takes  by  the  hand  the  closely 
kindred  idea  of  truth,  satya.  Untruth,  on  the  other 
hand,  is  anrta,  more  rarely  asatya,  the  same  two  words 
with  prefix  of  negation.  The  two  words  satya  and 
anrta  form  a  close  dual  compound,  "truth  and  lie," 
"sincerity  and  falsehood,"  both  zealously  watched 
over  by  God  Varuna.4  They  remain  the  standard 
words  for  these  twin  opposites  for  all  Hindu  time. 
Varuna  is  the  real  trustee  of  the  rta.  When  God  Agni 
struggles  towards  the  rta  he  is  said  in  a  remarkable 
passage  to  become  for  the  time  being  God  Varuna.6 

1  Rig- Veda  9.  94.  2.         *  Ibid.,  9.  75.  2. 
3  Ibid.,  7.  34.  8.  *Ibid.,  7.  49.  3. 

5  Ibid.,  10.  8.  5. 


The  Prehistoric  Gods  129 


k<xvj^ 
Truth  and  lie  include,  by  an  easy  transition,  right 

Q«*^      I  I  &' 

and  wrong-doing.  In  a  famous  hymn1  YamI  (Eve) 
invites  Yama  (Adam)  to  incestuous  intercourse. 
Mythically  speaking  this  is,  of  course,  unavoidable : 
they  are  the  first  pair,  and  there  are  no  other  human 
beings  whatsoever.  But  the  poet  conceives  of  the 
situation  in  the  spirit  of  his  own  time.  When  Yarn! 
pretends  to  justify  the  act  Yama  exclaims  pithily: 
"  In  saying  the  rta  we  shall  really  say  the  anrta" 
which,  rendered  more  broadly,  means  to  say  :  "  When 
we  pretend  to  justify  the  act  as  being  rta,  'right- 
doing,'  we  really  shall  knowingly  engage  in  anrta, 
'wrong-doing.'"  We  may  imagine  Yama  finally \\ 
saying:  "  Anyhow,  don't  let  us  beat  the  devil  about  U 
the  stump!" 

Varuna  and  Mitra,  the  dual  pair,  are  implicated 
still  further  in  a  group  of  divinities  of  the  name 
dditya.  The  number  of  these  gods  is  very  uncer 
tain.  Sometimes  it  is  three  :  Mitra  and  Varuna,  with 
Aryaman  as  third.  This  third  god,  no  less  than  the 
first  two,  is  Indo-Iranian :  the  name  of  Aryaman's 
Avestan  counterpart  is  Airyama.  The  name  of  this 
not  too  determinate  god  seems  to  mean  "  comrade  "; 
accordingly  Aryaman  figures  in  the  Veda  as  the  ./ 
typical  groomsman  at  the  wedding  rites.  Beyond  ! 
this  triad  the  name  dditya  becomes  very  indefinite, 

1  Rig- Veda  10. 10. 

9 


1 30  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


both  as  to  number  and  the  individuals  which  it  is 
supposed  to  harbor.  As  regards  number,  the  god 
Indra  sometimes  swells  the  three  to  four.  Then 
there  is  seven,  a  favourite  and  vague  number ;  to  this 
the  legendary  Martanda1  (Indra)  is  at  times  added 
as  eighth.  In  later  times  the  number  rises  to  twelve. 
Not  more  than  six  are  ever  mentioned  by  name  out 
right  in  the  Veda:  Bhaga,  Daksha,  and  Anga  in 
addition  to  the  three  mentioned  above.  Bhaga, 
"  Fortune,"  is  not  only  Indo-Iranian,  but  even  Indo- 
European,  as  we  have  seen. '  Anga,  "  Portion,"  "  Ap- 
portioner,"  is  a  very  faint  abstraction.  And  so  is 
Daksha,  "Dexterity,"  "  Cleverness." 

Now  the  Veda  conceives  of  the  Adityas  as  the 
descendants  of  a  feminine  Aditi  who  cuts  a  consid 
erable  figure  as  a  very  abstract  female,  suggesting 
the  ideas  of  "  freedom  from  fetters,"  "  freedom  from 
guilt,"  "boundlessness,"  and  "universe."  She  is 
finally  identified  in  the  Hindu  mind  with  "  earth." 
A  father  who  might  be  responsible  for  the  offspring 
of  this  interesting  lady  is  never  mentioned.  We  are 
struck  first  of  all  with  the  fact  that  Aditi,  the  mother, 
a  purely  Hindu  product,  is  obviously  younger  than  her 
own  sons,  the  best  of  whom  are  at  least  as  old  as  the 
Indo-Iranian  period.  I  have,  for  my  part  little 

1  See  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology^  p.  43. 
*  Above,  p.  109. 


The  Prehistoric  Gods  131 


doubt  but  what  Aditi  is  a  well-executed  abstraction 
of  some  kind.  In  the  past  I  have  suggested '  that  the 
word  dditya  meant  originally  "of  yore,"  and  that 
this  set  of  antique  gods  whose  most  substantial 
members  are  prehistoric  were  thus  fitly  named  "  gods 
of  yore  "  or  "  gods  of  old."  We  may  perhaps  con 
trast  with  this  the  description  of  Indra  as  "  later 
born "  (anujdvara),  in  a  legend  told  in  Taittirlya 
Brahmana  (2. 2. 10).  From  the  word  dditya, conceived 
as  a  metronymic,  the  feminine  Aditi  might  be  easily 
abstracted.  If  this  is  well  taken  we  must  assume 
that  the  Veda  had  forgotten  the  meaning  of  dditya 
in  the  sense  of  "  of  yore."  This  was  necessarily  the 
case  before  some  speculative  genius  might  invent 
the  mother  Aditi.  Another  explanation,  that  of 
Professor  Macdonell,"  has  perhaps  the  advantage  of 
greater  simplicity.  He  starts  from  the  expression 
aditeh  putrdh)  which  is  applied  several  times  to  the 
Adityas.  This,  he  thinks,  may  have  meant  origi 
nally  •"  sons  of  freedom,"  perhaps  better  "  sons  of 
guiltlessness  "  ;  such  an  expression  may  have  led  to 
the  personification  of  Aditi  as  a  female  mother  of 
Adityas.  At  all  events  Aditi  may  be  safely  re 
garded  as  later  drippings  from  the  very  sappy 

1  See  my  essay,  The  Symbolic   Gods,  in  Studies  in  Honor  of  B .  L. 
Gildersleeve,  p.  45. 
3  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  122. 


132  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


myth  of  Varuna  and  the  Adityas.  The  interpre 
tation  of  Aditi  as  "  boundlessness,"  or  "  universe," 
sits  very  well  upon  an  assumed  mother  of  these 
great  gods.  Aditi  is  later  defined  as  "  earth,"  a 
narrowing  of  her  scope,  somewhat  as  we  of  the 
modern  languages  make  synonymous  the  terms 
"world"  and  "  earth."  * 

The  mythic  cycle  represented  by  Mitra-Mithra  and 
Varuna-Ahura  is  important  for  early  Vedic  reli 
gion,  and,  more  permanently,  for  the  whole  history 
of  Persian  religion.  There  is  no  chapter  of  Aryan 
religion  and  mythology  that  has  stimulated  the 
instinct  of  ultimate  interpretation  more  persist 
ently  than  this  very  one.  I  am  of  those  who  can 
not  imagine  any  cessation  of  these  attempts  for  any 
great  length  of  time.  The  one  solid  point  in  the 
genesis  of  these  myths  is  the  solar  character  of 
the  Aryan  Mitra.  In  later  Persian  the  word  mithra 
in  the  form  mihir  is  the  name  of  the  sun.  As  pre 
viously  stated,2  this  solar  Mithras  passed,  in  the 
centuries  after  Christ,  out  of  the  bounds  of  Per 
sia  and  started  upon  a  career  of  conquest  which 
threatened  at  one  time  to  subject  all  Western 
civilisation. 

1  See   the  author  in  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgenldndischen 
Gesellsehaft,  xlviii.,  552,  note  ;  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  125. 
'Above,  p.  85. 


The  Prehistoric  Gods  133 


Now  what  is  the  natural  origin  of  that  other 
partner  in  the  dual  partnership,  namely,  Vedic  Va- 
runa  the  Asura,  Avestan  Ahura  Mazda?  Not  very 
many  years  ago  Professor  Oldenberg  advanced  and 
defended  ingeniously  the  hypothesis  '  that  Varunais 
the  Moon,  and  this  theory  he  did  not  hesitate  to 
follow  to  a  very  logical  conclusion.  Mitra  and 
Varuna  are  Sun  and  Moon.  They  are  members,  as 
we  have  .seen,  in  a  group  of  gods  called  Adityas. 
Oldenberg  chooses,  perhaps  a  little  hastily,  the 
number  seven  as  the  sum  total  of  this  group.2  Simi 
larly  in  the  Avesta,  Ahura  is  accompanied  by  the  so- 
called  "  Immortal  Holy  Ones,"  the  Amesha  Spents, 
the  angels  of  the  Puritan  Zoroastrian  faith.  They 
also  make  up  the  number  seven.  Mithra,  we  may 
note,  is  altogether  absent  from  the  Avestan  arrange 
ment.  Now  Oldenberg  believes  not  only  that 
Varuna  and  Mitra  were  the  Moon  and  the  Sun,  but 
that  the  Adityas,  essentially  identical  with  the  j: 
Amesha  Spents,  were  the  planets.  He  assumes  still 
further  that  the  whole  set,  originally,  were  not  Indo- 
European  divinities  at  all,  but  that  they  were  bor 
rowed  by  the  Aryans  from  a  Shemitic  people — 
presumably  the  Babylonians — far  enough  advanced 

1  See  his  latest  treatment  of  the  matter  in  Zeitschrift  der  Deut- 
schen  Morgenlandischen  Gesellschaft,  vol.  1.,  p.  43  ff. 

2  See  above,  p.  129. 


134  The  Religion  of  Veda 


in  astronomical  knowledge  to  observe  the  interrela 
tions  of  sun,  moon,  and  the  planets. 

The  Adityas  and  the  Amesha  Spents  have  been 
compared  often,  perhaps  over-confidently.  It  is  not 
necessary,  in  order  to  feel  unconvinced  by  Professor 
Oldenberg's  chain  of  consequences,  to  deny  a  certain 
nebulous  cluster  of  ancillary  or  subsidiary  divinities 
which  hovered  about  the  persons  of  the  supreme 
Indo-Iranian  twin-gods  Ahura-Mithra,  Varuna- 
Mitra.  As  a  matter  of  fact  the  Amesha  Spents  are 
not  the  Adityas.  I  do  not  believe  that  the  Adityas, 
indefinite  in  number  and  gradual  in  their  develop 
ment  in  India,  represent  that  cluster,  or  even  its 
very  gradual  Hindu  substitutes.  Several  Adityas, 
notably  Mitra,  Bhaga,  and  Aryaman  recur  in  the 
Avesta,  but  are  not  listed  as  Amesha  Spents.  Either 
Macdonell's  or  my  own  hypothesis '  as  to  the  origin 
of  the  Adityas  presupposes  that  their  origin  as  a 
class  of  gods  is  gradual  and  secondary.  The  Amesha 
Spents,  on  the  other  hand,  are  sheer  abstractions.  I 
confess  that  there  is  not  in  me  the  faith  to  see  in 
them  anything  as  concrete  as  personified  planets. 
The  mere  names  of  the  "  Immortal  Holy  Ones  " 
show  what  I  mean.  They  are  :  Vohu  Manah,  "  Good 
Mind  ";  Asha  Vahishta,  "  Best  Righteousness  "; 
Khshathra  Vairya,  "  Wished-for  Kingdom,"  or 

1  See  above,  p.  131. 


The  Prehistoric  Gods  135 


"  Good  Kingdom  ";  Spenta  Armaiti,  "  Holy  Har 
mony";  Haurvatat,  "  Soundness,"  "Health";  and 
Ameretat,  "Immortality."  It  is  a  beautiful,  heavenly 
hierarchy,  but  it  is  unmythological,  non-naturalistic 
to  the  bone.  If  anywhere,  then  here  is  the  place 
where  sprang  up  purely  symbolic  gods  in  the  man 
ner  of  the  symbolic  creations  in  Bunyan's 
Pilgrim  s  Progress. 

As  for  the  Shemitic  source  of  this  deified  solar 
system,  Professor  Oldenberg,  if  I  understand  him 
aright,  is  in  part  led  thereto  by  the  striking  ethical 
character  which  is  manifested  by  the  gods  of  this 
group  at  so  early  a  period  of  Indo-European  history 
as  is  the  common  period  of  Persia  and  India.  He 
thinks  that  the  Shemites  preceded  the  Indo-Euro- 
peans  in  the  evolution  of  ethical  concepts,  and  that 
the  ethical  coloring  of  the  Ahura-Varuna  myth 
came  along  with  the  divinities  themselves.  But,  as  J 
I  have  shown,  we  find  the  chief  Aryan  ethical 
concept,  the  rta,  safely  imbedded  in  the  Persian 
dynastic  Arta-names  that  are  reported  in  the  Cunei-. 
form  Tel-el-Amarna  tablets,  1600  years  B.C.  Now 
that  date  lies  far  back  of  the  period  from  which  Pro 
fessor  Oldenberg  would  deduce  his  results.  I  should 
prefer  to  judge  that  the  wide  prevalence  of  this  idea 
at  a  very  early  date  shows  rather  that  some,  if  not 
all,  Indo-Europeans  had  advanced  in  ethical 


136  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


perception  at  an  earlier  date  than  has  hitherto  been 
suspected,  at  a  date  when  the  Shemites  had  not  as  yet 
evolved  any  ethical  ideas  of  quite  as  fine  a  flavor 
as  the  rta. 

Professor  Oldenbcrg  is  not  the  only  scholar  to 
whom  Varuna  has  suggested  the  moon.  Yet  I  think 
that  this  interpretation,  when  taken  outside  of  that 
hypothesis  which  involves  the  entire  solar  system, 
has  not  very  much  in  its  favor  beyond  the  close 
dualic  connection  of  Varuna  with  Mitra,  the  sun.  I 
confess,  moreover,  that  I  am  not  quite  willing  to 
listen  to  any  interpretation  of  this  god  which  leaves 
out  in  the  cold  Greek  Ovpavoz.  There  has  been 
some  phonetic  scepticism  about  the  equation 
.ovpo(v<^  which  time  has  not  justified.  Greek 
is  Indo-European  nori^-nnos  or  uorn-cnos ; 
Sanskrit  varunas  is  Indo-European  norn-nos.  The 
two  forms  differ  no  more  than,  for  instance,  Vedic 
nutanas  and  nutnas,  "  recent,"  or  Greek  ffTtyavoz 
and  ffrcyvos,  "  covered."  Mere  is  a  situation  met  with 
quite  often  in  this  kind  of  inquiry.  The  interpre 
tation  of  the  myth  is,  as  usual,  not  quite  certain. 
Few  interpretations  of  advanced  myths  are  quite 
certain.  Next,  the  etymology,  like  that  of  many 
etymologies  of  mythic  proper  names,  likewise  brings 
with  it  no  bonded  guaranty.  The  next  step 
is,  that  they  who  do  not  believe  in  the  intcrprc- 


The  Prehistoric  Gods  137 


tation  are  prone  to  belittle  the  etymology.  But 
there  is  little  gain  in  pooh-poohing  an  etymol 
ogy  which  will  not  stay  pooh-pooned.  The  time 
will  never  be  when  any  interpretation  that  disre 
gards  this  obvious  comparison  will  pass  current 
free  from  perplexity  and  misgivings.  All  settle 
ments  that  do  not  regard  it  will  be  temporary 
and  doomed  in  the  end  to  be  repudiated.  It 
would  seem  to  me  that  we  must  accept  this  im 
portant  etymology,  and  submit  to  its  guidance.  It 
shows  that  Varuna  belongs  not  only  to  the  Indo- 
Iranian  (Aryan)  time,  but  reaches  back  to  the 
Indo-European  time,  and  that  he  represents,  on 
the  impeccable  testimony  of  ovpavo$t  some  aspect 
of  the  heavens,  probably  the  encompassing  sky,  in 
accordance  with  the  stem  uorn  which  is  its  essential 
element.  Rig- Veda  8.  41.  3  states  that  Varuna,  the 
distinguished  god,  embraces  the  all,  and  Rig- Veda 
I.  50.  6  states  that  Mitra  (the  sun)  is  the  eye  of 
Varuna.  The  dualism  of  Heaven  and  its  eye,  the 
sun,  is  not  less  well  taken  than  the  dualism  sun  and 
moon. 

Into  the  gusty  discussion  which  has  grown  up  in 
a  particular  degree  around  this  point  of  interpreta 
tion  I  would  lead  my  hearers  no  farther.  There  is 
perhaps  not  a  single  point  in  the  comparative  study  of 
this  most  important  sphere  of  Aryan  religion  which 


138  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


is  lifted  entirely  above  doubt.  I  have  endeavored 
to  give  a  conservative  estimate  of  the  varying  inter 
pretations,  as  free  from  fanciful  exaggeration  of  the 
probabilities  as  it  is  from  unwholesome  scepticism. 

We  may  now  turn  to  the  second  great  sphere  of 
Indo-Iranian  mythology.  It  deals  with  the  first 
men  and  sacrificers,  and  the  soma-liquor,  the  most 
distinguished  sacrifice  to  the  gods. 

One  of  the  duties  of  primitive  man  as  he  grows 
into  the  irksome  habit  of  looking  for  the  reason  of 
things  is  to  find  a  reason  for  himself.  He  does  not 
take  himself  for  granted,  but  assumes  that  he  orig 
inated  from  something  or  other.  This  is  as  a  rule 
not  as  easy  as  it  is  in  the  myth  of  Deucalion.  All 

that  he  had  to  do  was  to  throw  stones,  the  bones 

* 

of  Mother  Earth,  behind  him,  and,  behold,  there 
were  men.  The  abstract  benevolent  Divinity  turning 
himself  into  a  creative  Father  God  is  not  always  at 
hand ;  he  does  not  on  the  whole  represent  a  very 
primitive  form  of  thought,  certainly  not  in  India. 
An  important  and  widespread  conception,  partly 
religious  in  character,  is  Totemism.  This  is  founded 
on  the  belief  that  the  human  race,  or,  more  fre 
quently,  that  given  clans  and  families  derive  their 
descent  from  animals :  totemic  names  like  "  Bear  " 
and  "  Wolf  "  carry  traces  of  this  sort  of  belief  into 
our  time.  This  particular  question  is  a  splendid 


The  Prehistoric  Gods  139 


theme  of  universal  ethnology,  but  I  have  never  been 
able  to  discover  that  it  has  any  considerable  bearing 
upon  the  ancient  religion  of  India.  The  many  hints 
at  its  possible  importance  should  be  substantiated 
by  a  larger  and  clearer  body  of  facts  than  seems  at 
present  available.1 

We  have  met  previously  the  greatest  parents  of 
them  all :  Heaven  and  Earth.  Their  union  was  con 
ceived  in  early  Indo-European  times  as  the  fruitful 
source  of  the  heavenly  gods.  Occasionally  they 
shoulder  the  additional  responsibility  for  the  human 
race  as  well.  In  the  Indo-Iranian  period  there  was 
a  personage,  Vedic  Vivasvant,  Avestan  Vlvanhvant, 
who  figures  rather  paradoxically  as  the  father  of  the 
first  men,  Yama  and  Manu.  He  is,  as  the  Vedic 
texts  state  distinctly  and  intelligently,  the  Sun  con 
ceived  as  the  Father  of  men.2  God  Agni,  "  Fire,"  is 
occasionally  regarded  as  the  progenitor  of  men.3 
There  is  in  this  some  vague  symbolic  connection 
with  the  process  of  obtaining  fire  by  friction.  This 
is  the  Vedic  process  :  the  two  sticks  which  are  rubbed 
are  conceived  as  parents  ;  Agni  is  their  child,  the  first 
progeny,  and,  next,  possibly,  the  first  man.  Certainly 
the  epithet  dyu,  "  living,"  is  used,  on  a  large  scale, 

1  Cf.     Oldenberg,  Die  Religion  des  Veda,  p.  68  ff. 

2  See  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  vol.  i.,  p.  488^. 

3  Rig-Veda  1.96.2;  10.53.6. 


140  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


of  fire  and  man  alike.  It  continues,  or  seems  to  con 
tinue,  a  sense  of  the  relationship  of  Agni  and  man. ' 
Now  the  Veda  discloses,  and  all  Hindu  tradition 
;  harps  upon,  a  father  of  the  human  race  by  the  name 
of  Manu,  or  Manush  Pitar,  "  Father  Manu."  The 
word  manu  is  nothing  else  than  our  own  word  "  man  ": 
there  is  good  reason  to  believe  that  this  "  original 
man  "  was  set  up  as  a  kind  of  Adam  or  Noah  in  Indo- 
European  times.2  For  a  while  the  primitive  mind 
seems  to  be  well  content  with  this  eponymous  man: 
later  on,  as  I  shall  presently  show,  Manu  is  in  his 
turn  duly  furnished  with  a  well-established  father, 
Vivasvant,  about  whose  origin  people  have  ceased  to 
worry. 

From  a  later  time,  yet  still  a  very  early  time, 
namely,  the  Indo-Iranian  period,  comes  the  Vedic 
myth  of  Yama,  the  son  of  Vivasvant.  This  myth  is 
the  clearest  and  best-preserved  common  piece  of 
property  of  the  two  religions.  As  to  the  component 
ideas  of  this  myth  I  see  no  room  for  doubt.  Yama 
means  "  twin."  He  is  the  male  of  the  obligatory 
twin  pair  that  is  required  to  people  the  world  in  real 
earnest.  The  female  YamI,  little  as  is  said  about  her 
in  the  earlier  parts  of  the  myth,  plays  Eve  to  Yama's 

1  See  Bergaigne,  La  Religion  Vedique,  vol.  i.,  p.  59  ff. 

2  Compare  Tacitus,  Ger mania,  chapter  2  :   "  They  [the  Germans] 
honor  Tuisto,  a  god  who  has  sprung  from  the  earth,  and  his  son 
Mannus,  as  the  originators  and  founders  of  the  race." 


The  Prehistoric  Gods 


141 


Adam.     She  is,  however,  not  Yama's  bone,  but  his 
independent,  self-poised  sister.     As  a  truthful  histo 
rian  I  have  been  compelled  to  record  that  Yamr,  like 
Eve,  was  the  prime  mover  in  the  nefarious  but  ne-  ['• 
cessary  act  of  peopling  the  world. 

Both  Manu  and  Yama  are  primarily  nothing  but 
first  men.  Yama's  father  Vivasvant  is  probably  p_ri-f/* 
marily  the  sun,  whose  divine  character  is,  however,  at 
that  time  quite  completely  forgotten :  old  as  is  this 
affiliation  it  is  probably  not  original,  because  the  first 
twins,  Yama  and  Yami,  are  in  reality  an  attempt  to 
beg  the  question  of  the  origin  of  the  human  race  al 
together.  The  descent  of  man  from  the  sun  represents 
another  start  towards  solving  the  difficulty ;  of  course 
this  conception  must  and  does  blend  with  the  Yama 
pair.  In  the  same  way  Manu  begins  quite  early  to 
adopt  Vivasvant  for  his  father,  and  he  remains  so  for 
all  time.  The  myths  begin  to  interlace  very  much, 
and  to  sprout  shoots  in  unexpected  directions.  A 
famous  pair  of  riddle-stanzas,  Rig- Veda  10.  I/.  I  and 
2,  expand  the  theme  in  an  interesting  fashion,  ac 
cording  to  an  interpretation  which  I  have  pro 
posed1:  it  is  worth  while  to  present  it  as  an  extreme 
example  of  the  blend  of  original  mythic  roots  into  a 
real  myth : 

Tvashtar,  the  creator,  offers  his  daughter  Saranyu 

1  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  xv., 


142  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


in  marriage  to  the  whole  world  of  gods  and  mortals. 
The  suitor  who  gains  favor  is  Vivasvant,  conceived 
as  a  mortal.  Saranyu,  barely  wedded,  is  displeased 
with  Vivasvant  and  flees ;  not,  however,  until  she 
had  given  birth  to  the  twins  Yama  and  Yaml.  This 
marriage,  you  perceive,  provides  the  twins  with  a 
mother,  whereas  they  have  previously  had  only  a 
father.  In  order  to  make  sure  her  escape,  she 
changes  into  a  mare  and  flees  to  the  gods,  who  hide 
her  away  from  her  mortal  family,  Vivasvant,  Yama, 
and  Yaml.  The  gods,  in  order  to  make  matters 
still  more  safe,  construct  another  female,  called  Sa- 
varna,  who  is  to  take  Saranyu's  place  in  Vivasvant's 
affections.  The  word  savarnd  means  "  of  like  char 
acter  "  ;  it  trickily  states  that  the  new  female  was  at 
one  and  the  same  time  like  Saranyu  in  appearance, 
and  also  suitable  in  character  to  the  mortal  Vivas 
vant — more  suitable  than  the  divine  Saranyu,  we 
may  perhaps  understand.  Vivasvant  begets  Manu 
with  the  Savarna,  and  thus  Manu  comes  into  pos 
session  both  of  a  father  and  mother.  Ultimately 
Vivasvant  finds  out  the  deception  practised  upon 
him,  follows  Saranyu  in  the  shape  of  a  horse,1 
and  thus  gaining  her  favor,  begets  with  her  the 
Agvins,  "  the  Horsemen "  or  Dioscuri.  Saranyu 
abandons  them  also,  just  as  she  has  previously 

1  Cf.  the  classical  Pasiphae  myth. 


The  Prehistoric  Gods  143 


abandoned  the  twins  Yama  and  YamI,  and  resumes, 
we  may  understand,  her  independent  station  as  a 
divinity. 

The  final  outcome  of  these  mythic  entanglements 
are  two  progenitors  of  the  human  race  :  Yama  the 
son  of  Vivasvant,  and  Manu  the  son  of  Vivasvant. 
They  remind  us  in  a  way  of  Adam  and  Noah,j, 
especially  as  Manu  is  the  hero  of  the  Hindu  flood- \j 
legend,  which  is  astonishingly  like  the  account  of 
the  book  of  Genesis.  Vivasvant  and  his  double  pro 
geny  all  of  them  are  endowed  for  a  good  while  with 
purely  human  qualities.  According  as  the  profane 
or  sacred  interest  preponderates  these  first,  and,  of 
course,  great  men  become  kings  or  great  sacrificers 
of  yore.  Manu  is  the  typical  first  sacrificer.  The  later 
sacrificer  of  the  time  of  the  Veda,  as  he  performs  on 
his  sacrificial  place,  fancies  himself  a  Manu,  doing 
like  Manu  (manusvat),  in  the  house  of  Manu.  In 
the  Avesta  Vlvanhvant  is  the  first  mortal  who 
pressed  the  drink  haoma  (soma)  in  behalf  of  the 
corporeal  world.  His  son  Yima  and  his  descendants 
continued  to  do  so,  but  Yima  turns  rather  into  a 
worldly  ruler,  the  king  of  a  golden  age,  in  which 
there  is  nor  old  age  nor  death  ;  nor  heat  nor  cold  ; 
nor  want  nor  disease.  He  becomes  the  leading  Epic 
personality  in  later  Persian  times.  In  the  Avesta 
he  is  called  "  Ruler  Yima,"  Yima  Khshaeta ;  this  ex- 


144  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


pression  turns  in  later  Persian  into  Djemshed,  the 
well-known  hero  of  the  Persian  Epic,  the  Shah 
Nameh,  or  Book  of  Kings  \  the  name  is  now  familiar 
to  Western  readers  as  the  interlocutor  in  Omar 
Khayyam's  Rub  ay  at. 

The  myth  takes  another,  even  more  important 
turn  in  the  Veda.  Yama  is  the  first  mortal  king 
who  died  and  found  for  the  race  of  men  a  heaven 
where  they  may  rejoice  in  the  company  of  the  pious 
dead,  especially  those  pious  archpriests  of  mythical 
antiquity,  the  Angiras.  He  is  the  first  of  mortals 
who  died  and  went  forth  to  this  heaven  1 :  "  Where 
is  Vivasvant's  son,  the  king,  where  is  heaven's 
firm  abode,  where  are  yonder  flowing  waters, 
there  let  me  live  immortal."'  "He  (Yama)  went 
before  and  found  a  dwelling  from  which  no  power 
can  shut  us  out.  Our  fathers  of  old  have  travelled 
the  path:  it  leads  every  earth-born  mortal  thither. 
There,  in  the  midst  of  the  highest  heaven,  beams 
unfading  light,  and  eternal  waters  flow  ;  there  every 
wish  is  fulfilled  on  the  rich  meadows  of  Yama.  " 
"  These  blessed  have  left  behind  them  the  de 
crepitude  of  their  bodies ;  they  are  not  lame  nor 
crooked  of  limb."  3 

1  Atharva-Veda  18.  3.  13. 

2  Rig-Veda  9.  113.  8. 

3  Atharva-Veda  3.  28.  5;  6.  I2O.  3. 


The  Prehistoric  Gods  145 


Yet  this  same  Yama,  such  is  the  terror  of  death, 
becomes  in  due  time  the  Hindu  Pluto,  god  of  hell 
and  judge  of  the  wicked.  Which  shows  how  impor 
tant  is  the  special  and  national  treatment  of  myths, 
and  how  constant  is  the  disregard  of  what  may 
be  called  the  radical  beginnings  of  myths.  From 
Yama  of  the  golden  age  of  man  to  dread  Yama,  the 
destroyer  of  the  bodies  of  men — as  such  he  figures 
in  the  later  Pantheon  of  the  Mahabharata — Com 
parative  Mythology  traces  every  step. 

And  now,  the  sacrificial  substance  which,  when 
freely  given  to  the  gods,  secures  to  mortals  the 
golden  age  of  the  Avesta  and  the  paradise  of  the  Veda 
is  the  old  Indo-Iranian  drink,  Vedic  soma,  Avestan 
haoma.  It  is  an  accepted  fact  with  each  people  that 
this  drink  was  prepared  from  a  plant  of  the  same 
name  ;  that  it  was  an  intoxicating  drink  ;  and  that  it 
was  regarded  as  the  tipple  of  the  gods,  inspiring 
them  to  those  valorous  deeds  which  men  craved 
of  them.  Physically,  it  is  a  plant  that  grows  upon 
the  mountains,  has  green  shoots,  and  yields  a  golden 
fluid  which  insures  health  and  long  life  and  averts 
death.  No  wonder  that  Haoma-Soma  is  king  of  the 
plants,  and  that  the  pressing  and  offering  of  it  was 
an  important  act.  After  pressing  it  was  purified 
through  a  sieve  of  hair  and  mixed  with  milk — 
doubtless  the  earliest  milk-punch  on  record.  The 


146  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


Rig-Veda  and  the  Avesta  report  the  names  of  the 
same  ancient  worthies  that  prepared  the  fluid  for 
the  gods  :  Vedic  Vivasvant,  Yama,  and  Trita  Aptya ; 

'|Avestan   Vlvanhvant,   Yima,  Athwya   and   Thrita. 
'This  marks  the  most  intimate,  if  not  the  most  import- 

';ant,  relation  between  the  two  religious  literatures. 

Mythically,  this  wonderful  drink  was  conceived  as 
coming  from  heaven,  the  type  on  earth  of  the  heav 
enly  fluid  that  is  hidden  in  the  clouds.  In  the  Veda 
a  heavenly  eagle,  doubtless  the  lightning,  breaks 
through  the  brazen  castle,  the  cloud,  within  which 
the  heavenly  fluid  is  confined,  and  carries  it  off  to 
earth,  that  is,  causes  it  to  pour  down  upon  the  earth. 
It  is  the  simple  phenomenon  of  cloud,  lightning,  and 
downpour  of  refreshing  and  life-giving  rain  which  is 
turned  into  the  heavenly  prototype  of  this  delightful 
drink.1 

The  Iranian  haoma  is  also  fetched  from  heaven 
by  a  bird,  though  the  manner  of  his  descent 
to  earth  is  not  told.  In  both  literatures  the 
drink  finally  turns  god,  slays  demons,  casts  mis 
siles,  and  gains  in  his  perfect  wisdom  *  light  for 

1  See  the  author  in  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  xvi., 
i  ff.     For  analogous  conceptions  in  Greek  mythology,  see  Usener  in 
Rheinisches  Museum,  lx.,  z^ff.    For  winged  lightning  see  Jacobsthal, 
Der  Blitz  in  der   Orientalise  hen  und  Griechischeti  Kunst,  p.  19,  25 

ff,  &/.,  42. 

2  Vedic,  sukratu  =  Avestan  hukhratu. 


The  Prehistoric  Gods  147 


men,  "  the  best  world  of  the  pious,  the  luminous 
world." 

In  the  Avesta  the  haoma  practices  and  worship  are 
somewhat  fossilised :  its  use  has  become  secondary 
and  symbolic.  In  the  Veda  soma  figures  as  the  most 
distinguished  offering,  the  champagne  of  the  gods, 
which  exhilarates  them  and  inspires  them  to  valor 
ous  deeds  against  demons  and  the  enemies  of  the 
liberal  sacrificer.  Herculean  Indra  especially  stands 
in  need  of  an  especial  meed  of  courage  in  his  demon 
fights ;  therefore  he  is  the  most  insatiable  consumer 
of  "  pools  of  soma"  as  the  texts  say.  He  has  his 
very  own  allowance  at  noontide ;  the  rest  of  the 
gods,  including  Indra,  come  in  at  the  other  nodal 
points  of  the  day,  morning  and  evening.  The  en 
tire  ninth  book  of  the  Rig- Veda  tells  of  the  sacred 
practice  of  brewing  this  Bacchanalian  drink ;  it 
praises  the  drink  itself  as  a  god  in  poetic  and  ec 
static  language.  We  may  remember  that  the  hieratic 
parts  of  the  Rig- Veda  are  preoccupied  with  the  dis- 
pensal  of  soma  to  such  an  extent  that,  in  a  sacral 
sense  of  least,  we  may  speak  of  the  religion  of  the 
rcah  as  a  religion  of  soma  rites. 

I  have  tried  with  as  secure  a  touch  as  in  my  power 
to  sketch  some  of  the  principal  myths  and  religious 
ideas  which  the  Vedic  Hindus  preserved  out  of  the 
long  past  which  preceded  their  occupation  of  India. 


148  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


I  am  mindful  of  the  relative  insecurity  of  prehistoric 
reconstructions  :  they  must,  in  the  nature  of  the  case, 
to  some  extent  be  prehistoric  guesses.  Neverthe 
less,  in  handling  these  specimens,  and  remembering 
others  which  time  forbids  me  to  treat  here,  my  own 
faith  at  least  in  the  reality  of  these  very  old  fossils  of 
human  thought  has  grown  and  not  shrunk.  When 
I  say  human  I  mean,  too,  that  they  are  so  very 
human.  They  are  of  the  logic  of  mental  events. 
The  effect  upon  the  higher  grade  of  primitive  mind 
which  the  facts  and  events  of  the  visible  world  may 
naturally  be  expected  to  have — that  is  the  effect 
which  we  have  traced.  We  must,  of  course,  not 
imagine  either  Indo-Europeans  or  Indo-Iranians  as 
town  folk,  but  rather  as  semi-barbarous  nomad  and 
agricultural  tribes,  accustomed  to  look  hard,  and  to  be 
^strongly  interested  in  the  sights  that  nature  offers. 
Certainly  if  our  analyses  are  not  true  they  are  well 
found  :  Father  Sky  and  Mother  Earth  ;  next,  the 
inevitable  children  of  Father  Sky,  namely,  the  visi 
ble  bodies  and  luminous  phenomena  on  the  sky,  the 
demos,  "  or  shiners,"  as  the  most  persistent  idea 
of  the  early  gods  ;  their  destruction  of  hostile  dark 
ness  ;  their  character  as  overseers  and  guardians  of 
cosmic  and  moral  order ;  thunder,  the  commanding 
voice  of  another  little  less  obvious  god  in  heaven  ; — 
they  appear  treated  with  simplicity  and  directness,  we 


The  Prehistoric  Gods  149 


may  say  with  inevitable  logic.  The  perplexed  search 
after  a  first  man,  a  first  pair ;  the  propagation  of  man  ; 
and  man's  destiny  after  death  is  more  subjective,  yet 
carried  out  with  clever  realism.  There  is  no  better 
way  until  we  come  to  the  clarified,  yet  intrinsically 
no  less  impotent  philosophies  of  a  much  later  time. 
Because  all  these  myths,  fancies,  poems,  and  chains 
of  logic  are  founded  on  the  outer  universe  and  on 
human  consciousness,  therefore  we  are  reasonably 
sure  that  they  are  real.  This  is  an  even  more  valu 
able  guaranty  than  philological  exactness  and  his 
torical  sense  which,  of  course,  should  strengthen  the 
hands  of  the  trained  investigator  in  every  detail. 
In  my  opinion  the  mental  sanity  of  Comparative 
Mythology  is  its  brief  to  practise  the  profession  of 
a  true  science ;  and  it  is  permissible  to  say  with  re 
newed  emphasis  that  the  religion  of  the  Veda  is  the 
child  in  direct  succession  of  the  prehistoric  ideas 
which  this  science  calls  out  from  the  dim  past. 


LECTURE  THE  FOURTH. 

The  Transparent,  Translucent,  and 
Opaque  Gods. — Religious  Con 
ceptions  and  Religious  Feel 
ing  in  the  Veda. 

The  transparent  gods:  their  importance  for  the  study  of 
religion — Father  Sky  and  Daughter  Dawn — Surya,  a 
god  of  the  sun — Vata  and  Vayu,  gods  of  wind — The 
most  transparent  god:  Agni,  Fire — Agni  as  the  sacrifice 
fire — Prehistoric  gods  of  fire — Birth  and  youth  of  Agni 
— Agni  as  god  of  the  morning — New  births  of  Agni — 
Agni  on  the  altar,  the  agent  of  the  gods — Priesthood 
and  divinity  of  Agni — A  hymn  to  Agni — Other  myths 
of  the  Fire  God — The  translucent  gods:  definition  of 
the  term — God  Vishnu — God  Pushan — God  Indra,  as 
an  example  of  an  opaque  god — Traditional  explanation 
of  the  myth  of  Indra  and  Vritra  —  Professor  Hille- 
brandt's  interpretation  of  the  same  myth — Renewed 
definition  of  the  religion  of  the  Rig- Veda — Renewed 
definition  of  Vedic  practicalities — Conflicting  prayers 
and  sacrifices — The  conception  of  faith — Faith  related 
to  Truth  and  Wisdom — Faith  personified — Faith  and 
works — The  reward  for  faith  postponed  to  heaven — 
Contrast  between  early  "faith"  (craddha)  and  later 
"devotion"  (bhakti) — "Gift-praises,"  another  sop  to 
the  sacrificer — The  religious  feeling  of  the  Rig- Veda — 
The  utilitarian  sense — The  glory  of  the  gods — Absence 
150 


Transparent  and  Opaque  Gods        151 


of  real  sentiment  towards  the  gods — Poetic  inspiration 
the  true  religious  feeling — The  complacent  master- 
singers — The  poets'  own  estimate  of  their  work — The 
divine  quality  of  devotion. 

FOR  my  part  I  always  come  to  this  theme  in  the 
spirit  of  scientific  elation.  You  know  from 
preceding  statements  what  I  mean  by  transparent 
gods.  They  are  the  gods  who  are  at  one  and  the 
same  time  nature  object  and  person.  In  other 
words,  they  are  mythic  formations  whose  personi 
fication  is  arrested  by  the  continued  action  and  the 
vivid  memory  of  the  very  qualities  which  lead  to 
personification.  Figuratively  speaking,  just  when 
the  chemical  is  about  to  precipitate  or  to  crystalise 
into  something  unrecognisable,  and  far  removed 
from  its  elements,  it  is  shaken  and  dissolved  anew. 
We  are  spared  the  labor  of  a  qualitative  and  quanti 
tative  analysis.  In  the  midst  of  the  uncertainties  and 
intricacies  of  this  subject  as  a  whole  the  assurance 
that  these  processes  be  renews  the  courage  of  the 
investigator.  There  is  hope  that  out  of  the  Babel 
of  discordant  opinions,  many  of  them  grown  on  the 
soil  of  just  scepticism,  the  gods  and  the  beliefs  of 
ethnic  religions  will  reveal  their  origins.  I  believe 
that,  next  to  the  Science  of  Language,  the  Science 
of  Religion,  is  the  clearest  of  mental  or  historical 
sciences,  for  the  very  reason  that  it  is  possible  to 


152  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


trace  some  of  the  most  advanced  products  of  re 
ligious  thought  to  simple  and  tangible  beginnings 
in  nature  and  in  human  consciousness. 

Comparative  mythology  has  influenced  these 
studies  profoundly  by  extending  the  field  and  the 
time  within  which  we  may  carry  on  our  observations. 
At  the  risk  of  seeming  too  insistent,  let  me  point 
out  once  more,  how  it  has  spanned  the  distance  be 
tween  prehistoric  "  Father  Sky  "  and  the  strenuous 
human  personality  of  the  Olympian  Zeus  of  the 
poets.  Now  a  visit  to  the  Vedic  Pantheon  brings  us 
into  the  very  workshop  where  the  gods  are  made. 

We  have  encountered  before  some  transparent 
gods.  "  Father  Sky  "  (Dyaush  Pitar),  who  comes 
from  olden  times,  and  does  not  grow  in  the  Veda 
into  anything  like  the  personality  of  Greek  Zeus 
Pater,  but  is  there  submerged  by  other  formations 
that  have  gained  ground  at  his  expense.  We  have 
seen  what  his  daughter  Ushas  is  :  Eternally  young 
and  beautiful,  ageless  in  distinction  from  the  wither 
ing  race  of  man,  she  appears  as  a  lovely  maiden  dis 
playing  her  charms  to  the  world.  While  doing  this 
she  caters  at  the  same  time  to  interests  which  are  the 
reverse  of  poetic.  She  starts  the  day  of  sacrifice,  her 
face  set  towards  very  practical  performances.  She 
secures  rewards  for  pious  men  and  their  agents  with 
the  gods,  namely  the  priests.  Yet,  on  the  whole,  the 


Transparent  and  Opaque  Gods        153 


poetic  possibilities  of  this  loveliest  of  nature  sights 
gain  the  day.  She  releases  from  service  her  sister 
Night  as  she  rises  from  the  darkened  East  higher 
and  higher  to  flood  heaven  and  earth  with  her  waves 
of  light.  To  the  Sun-God  she  is  a  bride,  opens  for 
him  her  bosom's  splendor.  Or,  she  loves  the  two 
Agvins,  the  Dioscuri,  with  whom  she  travels  on  their 
car  drawn  by  birds.  Divine  and  gracious  maiden, 
but  yet  no  more  than  one  of  nature's  splendors,  she 
is  the  type  of  many  a  heaven-born  story,  could  we 
but  read  it  aright. 

Next  Surya(Sol,  Helios)  appears  upon  the  stage. 
He  is  the  Sun-God  treated  as  transparently  as  pos 
sible.  He  is  styled  the  son  of  Dyaus,  the  Father 
Sky  ;  Dawn  is  his  bride,  or,  in  another  mood,  the 
Dawns  are  said  to  be  his  mothers.  On  a  car  drawn 
by  seven  tawny  steeds,  his  course  is  guided  by  other 
great  gods,  the  old  Adityas,  Mitra,  Varuna  and 
Aryaman.  Again,  he  is  the  eye  of  Mitra,  Varuna,  or 
Agni  (Fire).  He  is  the  preserver  and  soul  of  all  crea 
tion,  of  everything  that  stands  or  moves.  Enlivened 
by  him  men  pursue  their  vocations.  He  is  far-see 
ing,  man-beholding,  takes  note  of  the  good  and  bad 
deeds  of  mortals.  They  in  turn  look  up  to  him, 
rejoicing  in  the  security  and  the  inspiration  which 
his  light  affords. 

I  shall   let  speak  for  itself  the  hymn,  Rig- Veda 


1 54  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 

1.50,    in   the   attractive   metrical    translation   (with 
slight  changes)  of  the  late  Dr.  John  Muir ;    see  his 
Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  vol.  v.,  p.  160,  and  Metrical 
Translations  from  Sanskrit  Writers,  p.  179: 
Hymn  to  Surya 

By  lustrous  heralds  led  on  high, 
The  fire  Sun  ascends  the  sky  ; 
His  glory  draweth  every  eye. 

The  stars  which  gleamed  throughout  the  night, 
Now  scared,  like  thieves  slink  fast  away, 
Quenched  by  the  splendor  of  thy  ray. 

Thy  beams  to  men  thy  presence  show  ; 
Like  blazing  fires  they  seem  to  glow. 

Conspicuous,  rapid,  source  of  light, 
Thou  makest  all  the  welkin  bright. 

In  sight  of  gods  and  mortal  eyes, 

In  sight  of  heaven  thou  scalest  the  skies. 

O  fiery  God,  with  thy  keen  eye, 
Thou  scannest,  like  God  Varuna, 
The  doings  of  all  busy  men. 

Thou  stridest  o'er  the  sky's  broad  space, 
Thy  rays  do  measure  out  our  days  ; 
Thine  eye  all  living  things  surveys. 

Seven  tawny  steeds  thy  chariot  bear, 
Self-yoked,  athwart  the  fields  of  air, 
Bright  Surya,  god  with  flaming  hair. 


Transparent  and  Opaque  Gods         155 

That  glow  above  the  darkness  we 
Beholding  upward  soar  to  thee, 
For  there  among  the  gods  thy  light 
Supreme  is  seen,  divinely  bright. 

And  there  are  other  gods,  not  a  few,  whose  origin 
in  nature  is  positively  on  the  surface.  So  the  two 
wind-gods  Vata  and  Vayu,  the  former  of  whom, 
on  the  likely  evidence  of  Teutonic  Wotan-Odhin, 
is  probably  prehistoric.  A  good  bit  of  profound 
human  philosophy  is  contained  in  the  mere  fact  that 
Vata  is  described  as  a  real  person  in  language  such 
as  that  of  the  following  hymn,1  and  that  he  may 
finally  be  invited  to  partake  of  oblations  : 

Hymn  to  Vata 

Now  Vata's  chariot's  greatness  !     Breaking  goes  it, 
And  thunderous  is  its  noise.     To  heaven  it  touches, 
Makes   light  lurid,  and  whirls  the  dust  upon  the 
earth. 

Then  rush  together  all  the  blasts  of  Vata  : 
To  him  they  come  as  women  to  their  trysting  ; 
With  them  conjoint,  on  the  same  chariot  travelling, 
Hastes  the  god,  the  king  of  all  creation. 

Sleepless  hastes  he  on  his  pathway  through  the  air, 
Companion   of  the   watery   flood.     First-born    and 
holy, 

1  Rig-Veda  10. 168,  reproduced  with  some  changes  from  Professor 
Hopkins's  translation,   The  Religions  of  India,  p.  88. 


156  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


Whence,  forsooth,  arose  he,   and   whence  was   he 
created  ? 

The  breath  of  gods  and  source  of  life  is  Vata. 
This  god  doth  journey  whithersoe'er  he  listeth, 
His  sound  is  heard  but  no  one  sees  his  figure. 
With  our  oblation  let  us  this  Vata  honor  ! 

But  there  is  one  figure  that  looms  far  above  all 
others  in  ancient  Hindu  religious  history  from  Veda 
to  Mahabharata,  as  the  classical  illustration  of  how  a 
phenomenon  of  nature  may  be  itself  and  personal 
god  at  one  and  the  same  time.  It  is  the  god  Agni 
'*  Fire,"  who  is  element  and  god  at  the  beginning 
and  remains  so  to  the  end.  Richard  Wagner  adopts  in 
the  Nibelungen  tetralogy  the  doubtful  interpretation 
of  the  Norse  god  Loge  (Loki)  as  fire ;  Wotan  calls 
upon  this  red-haired,  impish  god  to  appear  when  he 
wishes  to  hedge  with  fire  his  erring  child  Brunhilde. 
This  is  interesting,  because  it  shows  how  even  the 
modern  poetic  fancy  may  get  itself  to  bridge  over,  un 
critically,  as  behooves  the  poet,  the  great  gap  that  is 
between  the  reality  of  nature  and  the  unstable  spec 
ulation  of  myth-makers.  Native  Hindu  theologians 
in  their  scholastic  mood  find  time  to  worry  over 
the  fact  that  a  god  like  Agni  can  be  devouring 
element  and  intelligent  god  at  one  and  the  same 
time.  Even  the  Epic  poet  in  the  Mahabharata 


Transparent  and  Opaque  Gods        157 


stops  to  wonder:  ''There  is  but  one  Agni,  yet 
is  he  kindled  manifold " ; '  and  Agni  himself  is 
made  to  say :  "  Because  I  can  multiply  myself 
by  the  power  of  mental  concentration  (yoga),  there 
fore  am  I  present  in  the  bodies  (of  men,  as  vital 
fire)."2 

Agni  is,  next  to  Indra,  the  most  prominent 
god  of  the  Rig- Veda,  quantitatively  speaking.  He 
is  the  theme  of  more  than  two  hundred  hymns, 
and  owes  his  special  prominence  to  the  personifica 
tion  of  the  sacred  fire  which  is  present  at  all  Vedic 
performances.  In  the  hieratic  (in  distinction  from 
the  popular)  hymns  of  the  Rig-Veda  there  will  be 
few  cases  in  which  Agni  is  not  more  or  less  directly 
connected  with  the  sacrifice.  And  it  is  well  now  to 
take  this  simple  article,  the  sacrifice  fire,  and  let  it 
unfold  its  own  story  step  by  step.  How  it  turns  in 
the  hands  of  these  priestly  poets  into  a  person  gifted 
with  the  thinly  disguised  qualities  of  fire  ;  into  a  mes 
senger  mediating  between  men  and  gods;  into  an 
archpriest  typical  of  holy  rites ;  and  finally  into  a 
god.  But  to  the  end,  as  we  shall  show,  the  origin 
of  all  these  ideas  is  never  forgotten  ;  the  god  remains 
a  more  or  less  well-assorted  bundle  of  fire  qualities 
and  fire  epithets.  Therefore,  too,  he  remains  to  the 


1  Mahabharata  3.  134.8  =  10658. 

2  Ibid.,  i.  7.6=916. 


158  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


last  an  indifferent  vehicle  for  far-reaching  specula 
tions,  or  the  finer  sort  of  religious  feeling. 

The  Sanskrit  word  agnis,  "  fire,"  at  all  events,  is 
Indo-European;  Latin  ignis,  Lithuanian  ugnis,  Old 
Slavic  ognl.  Some  kind  of  worship  of  the  sacrifice 
fire,  and  with  it  some  degree  of  personification,  is 
likely  to  have  taken  place  in  Indo-European  times. 
The  Greeks  and  Romans,  as  well  as  the  Aryans, 
offered  libations  to  the  fire  when  using  it  to  convey 
offerings  to  their  gods.  But  there  was  no  definite 
result  that  we  know  of ;  the  chaste  figure  of  Hestia 
of  the  Greeks,  or  Vesta  of  the  Romans,  contrasted 
with  boisterous  male  Agni,  shows  that  the  initial 
conception  must  have  been  faint  and  unstable,  to 
enable  it  to  produce  shapes  so  thoroughly  diverse. 
In  the  main  God  Agni  is  in  every  essential  a  product 
of  the  poet-priests  of  the  Rig- Veda. 

In  India,  as  elsewhere,  fire  was  produced  by  fric 
tion,  and  this  mode  of  starting  fire  was  obligatory  as 
far  as  the  sacrifice  fire  was  concerned.  The  two  fire- 
sticks,  or  drills,  called  aranl,  are  therefore  Agni's 
parents,  the  upper  stick  being  the  male,  the  lower 
,tthe  female.  They  produce  him  under  the  name  of 
Ayu  "  Living  "  ;  wonderful  to  narrate,  from  the  dry 
wood  the  god  is  born  living.  At  once  he  becomes 
the  type  of  human  progeny,  and  faintly  figures  as, 
or  suggests  the  first  man  and  the  originator  of  the 


{\ 

Transparent  and  Opaque  Gods        159 


,  , 

human  race.1    The  new-born  infant  is  hard  to  catch ; 

he  is  born  of  a  mother  who  cannot  give  him  ; 
suck.  The  child  as  soon  as  born  devours  the  . 
parents. 

With  a  different  touch,  because  powerful  exertion 
is  required  to  produce  Agni  by  friction,  he  is  fre 
quently  called  "  Son  of  Strength." 

The  pronounced  ritualist  quality  of  the  poetry  of 
the  Rig- Veda  fixes  Agni  as  a  divinity  of  the  morn 
ing,  rather  than  of  the  night.  Interpretations  of  Rig- 
Veda  passages  which  involve  reference  to  something 
like  the  cosy  family  hearth,  the  tea-kettle  simmering, 
the  wind  soughing  outside,  are  generally  moonshine. 
Nor  is  his  definite  association  with  the  morning  just 
what  we  should  expect  it  to  be  from  our  point  of 
view ;  no  suggestion,  perchance,  of  the  merry  dairy 
maid  milking  the  cows,  or  the  housewife  busy  with 
a  comfortable  breakfast.  Familiar,  home-life  touches 
are  not  absent  altogether  even  in  the  Rig- Veda ; 
they  are  more  abundant  in  the  "  House-books" 
(Grhya-Sutras).  But  in  the  main  Agni  is  cosmic 

iv 

and  ritualistic,  and  little  else.  He  dispels  the  dark 
ness,  destroys  the  demons  of  night.  He  throws 
open  the  gates  of  darkness  ;  earth  and  sky  are  seen 
when  Agni  is  born  in  the  morning.  He  is  even 

1  See  above,  p.  139. 


160  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


.supposed  to  lift  daily  the  eternally  youthful  sun  to 
the  sky  to  furnish  light  to  the  people.1 

Such  is  his  cosmic  aspect  in  the  morning.  On  the 
other  hand  his  ritualistic  character  betrays  itself  in  his 
epithet  usharbudh,  which  means  "waking  at  dawn." 
We  have  seen  before  that  he  is  also  regarded  as  the 
son  of  Dawn.2  All  this  emphasises  the  opening  of 
the  sacrificial  day,  ushered  in  by  the  Goddess  Dawn, 
God  Agni,  and  the  gods  that  wake  in  the  morning 
and  come  in  the  morning,  like  the  Agvins  and 
others. 

Every  morning  Agni  is  produced  anew  for  the 
sacrifice  ;  this  secures  for  him  the  appropriate  epithet 
"  the  youngest."  On  the  other  hand  he  is  the  same 
old  Agni,  and  now  comes  a  good  deal  of  playful  or 
mystic  handling  of  this  paradox.  His  new  births  are 
contrasted  with  his  old  ;  having  grown  old  he  is 
born  again  as  a  youth.  Thus  it  happens  that  he 
is  called  "  ancient  "  and  "  very  young  "  in  the  same 
passage ;  the  Vedic  poets  delight  in  this  kind  of 
mental  see-saw.  The  mystery  is  shallow  ;  what  is 
meant  is,  that  the  vigorous  life  of  the  present-day 
Agni  recalls  his  traditional  importance  in  the  past. 
There  is  no  sacrificer  older  than  Agni,  for  he  con 
ducted  the  first  sacrifice.  Just  as  he  flames  up  to- 

1  Rig- Veda  10.  156.  4. 

2  Above,  p.   73- 


Transparent  and  Opaque  Gods         161 


day  at  dawn  so  he  shone  forth  under  the  auspices 
of  former  dawns  at  the  sacrifice  of  many  a  great 
forefather:  Bharata,  or  Vadhryacva ;  Divodasa,  or 
Trasadasyu. 

After  having  been  kindled  Agni  is  placed  upon 
the  altar  or,  if  we  trust  the  testimony  of  the  ritual 
texts  of  the  Veda,  upon  three  altars.1  Fagots  are 
now  piled  on,  fat  oblations  are  poured  in  ;  he  waxes 
big ;  his  tongues,  three,  or  seven,  shoot  up ;  he  has 
four  eyes,  or  a  thousand  eyes — both  things  mean  that 
he  is  sharp-sighted  ;  his  jaws  are  sharp ;  and  his  teeth 
shine  golden,  or  his  iron  grinders  clutch.  Then  the 
figure  is  changed :  he  is  flame-haired,  tawny-haired, 
tawny-bearded  ;  his  glowing  head  faces  in  all  direc 
tions.  Ghee,  or  melted  butter,  is  his  food:  he 
is  therefore  called  ghee-backed,  ghee-faced,  ghee- 
haired.  Once,  even  more  boldly,  Agni  himself  says, 
ghee  is  his  eye.  This  is  the  point  where  Agni  begins 
to  take  on  a  little  more  of  the  flesh  and  blood  of  per 
sonality  upon  the  skeleton  of  his  elemental  qualities. 
For  he  receives  the  offerings  neither  passively  nor 
selfishly.  At  as  late  a  time  as  that  of  the  great 
Epic,  the  Mahabharata2  he  is  made  to  say:  "The 
ghee  that  is  poured  into  my  mouth,  in  the  way  pre 
scribed  in  the  Veda,  nourishes  the  Gods  and  the 

1  Cf.  Rig- Veda  2.  36.  4  ;  5.  n.  2  ;  10.  105.  9. 

1.7-  1- 


1 62  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


Manes  .  .   .  called  by  my  mouth  the  Gods  and  the 
Manes  come  to  eat  the  ghee." 

In  fact  the  gods  cannot  subsist  without  him.  A 
very  neat  story  which,  as  usual,  remains  one  of  the 
stock  themes  of  story-telling  India  in  later  times, 
tells  in  two  hymns  of  the  Rig-Veda1  how  Agni  on 
a  certain  occasion  tired  of  this  service.  Agni  has  it 
born  in  upon  him  that  his  older  brothers  have  worn 
themselves  out  in  their  job,  and  concludes  that  he 
had  better  dodge  a  like  fate.  Whereupon  he  es 
capes  into  the  waters.  But  the  god  Yama  discovers 
and  betrays  him,  and  Varuna,  as  the  spokesman  of 
the  gods,  finally  induces  him  for  a  consideration  to 
resume  the  task  of  expediting  the  sacrifice  to  the 
gods.2  The  names  which  he  obtains  in  this  capacity, 
such  as  "  oblation-eater  "  and  "  oblation-carrier,"  ; 
reappear  familiarly  in  the  Mahabharata  and  later. 
There  they  are  pigeon-holed,  along  with  numerous 
other  names,  to  be  selected  in  the  manner  of  the 
Norse  kennings,  to  vary  the  diction,  to  swell  its 
dignity,  and  to  ease  the  task  of  the  verse-maker. 
With  a  different  turn,  he  brings  the  gods  to  the  sac- 

1  10.  51  and  52. 

2  For  other  later  tales  of  Agni  lost  and  found  again  see  the  Maha 
bharata  legends  in  Holtzmann,  Agni  nach   den    Vorstellungen   des 
Mahabharata,  p.  a  ff. 

3  Huta<;a,  hutat;ana,  hutabhuj,  hazyabhaksha,  etc.;  hutavaha,  havy- 
avah,  havvavahana,  etc. 


Transparent  and  Opaque  Gods        163 


rifice,  and  seats  them  on  the  strewn  grass.  He  thus 
becomes  familiar  with  the  roads  that  connect  heaven 
and  earth,  and  becomes  the  regular  messenger  be 
tween  the  two.  In  this  capacity  he  is  associated 
with  the  Angiras,  a  race  of  mythic  semi-divine 
priests  whose  name  seems  to  be  identical  with  Greek 
ayyskoZ  (angel),  "  messenger."  They  also  mediate 
between  gods  and  men,  and  naturally  Agni  is  an 
Angiras,  the  first  seer  Angiras,  the  ancient  Angiras, 
the  most  inspired  of  the  Angiras. 

Agni  officiates  at  the  sacrifice  and  becomes  the 
divine  counterpart  of  the  earthly  priesthood  :  house- 
priest,  serving-priest,  and  priest  in  general,  as  states 
the  very  first  stanza  of  the  Rig-Veda.  As  such  he 
also  inspires,  or  invents  the  brilliant  speech  and 
thought  of  prayer,  and,  what  is  very  important, 
he  frees  from  sin.  For  the  sacrifice,  of  course,  is 
the  staple  means  of  conciliating  the  gods  when 
they  are  supposed  to  be  angry.  The  idea  of 
priesthood  blends  with  that  of  seer  a  ad  sage.  He 
is  so  expert  and  well-travelled  as  to  assume  in  a  very 
pronounced  sense  the  qualities  of  omniscience  and 
omnipresence.1 

He  knows  everything  by  virtue  of  his  wisdom  ;  he 
embraces  wisdom  as  a  felly  does  the  wheel.  The 
adjective  kavikratu,  "  possessing  the  intellect  of  the 

1  Cf.  Holtzmann's  essay,  cited  above,  p.  5. 


164  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


sages,"  applies  to  him  particularly,  and  the  epithet 
jdtavedas,  "  having  innate  wisdom,"  is  exclusively 
•  his  own.  From  the  function  of  archpriest  and  arch- 
|  sage  to  godhead  it  is  but  a  step.  Agni  is  the  divine 
benefactor  of  his  worshipper  who  sweats  to  carry  him 
fuel :  him  he  protects  with  a  hundred  iron  walls,  or 
takes  across  all  calamities,  as  in  a  ship  over  the  sea. 
And  then,  finally,  he  is  divine  monarch,  surpassing 
mighty  heaven  and  all  the  worlds,  is  superior  to  all 
the  other  gods  who  worship  him,  or  takes  his  place 
in  the  long  line  of  supreme  gods  whom  the  poets 
indifferently,  or  henotheistically,  as  Max  Miiller  put 
it,  praise  at  convenient  times  with  all  the  fervor 
and  all  the  resourceful  verbiage  which  marks  the 
diction  of  the  Rig- Veda : 

Then  hail  to  Agni  on  his  brilliant  chariot, 
The  shining  signal  of  every  holy  sacrifice, 
Of  every  god  in  might  divine  the  equal, 
The  gracious  guest  of  every  pious  mortal  ! 

Dressed  out  in  all  thy  ornamented  garments, 

Thou  standest  on  the  very  navel  of  the  earth, 

The  hearth  of  sacrifice.     Born  of  the  light, 

Both  priest  and  king,  shalt  hither  fetch  th'  immortals  ! 

For  thou  hast  ever  spread  both  earth  and  heaven, 
Tho'  being  their  son  thou  hast  spread  out  thy  parents. 
Come  hither,  youthful  god,  to  us  that  long  for  thee, 
And  bring,  O  Son  of  Strength,  the  bright  immortals  ! 

(Rig-Veda  10.  i.  5-7.) 


Transparent  and  Opaque  Gods        165 


I  have  followed  the  main  current  of  Agni's  life  injf* 
order  to  make  clear  the  meaning  of  arrested  person 
ification,  or  arrested  anthropomorphism.  The  Vedic 
poets  are  far  from  restricting  themselves  to  this  one 
view.  Fire  is  not  only  in  the  sacral  fire-sticks,  but 
he  is  visible  everywhere :  as  sun  and  lightning  in 
the  sky ;  as  glint  on  the  surface  of  the  waters ;  as 
the  embryo  of  plants  and  trees  that  willingly  give  it 
up  when  in  flames ;  as  the  spark  of  flint  and  the 
rocks  ;  and  even  in  the  heat  of  the  body,  and  as 
vital  force  latent  in  all  living  things.  Especially 
remarkable  is  the  certainly  Indo-European  myth 
which  deals  very  clearly  with  a  twin  descent  from 
heaven  :  the  descent  of  fire,  and  the  descent  of  the  . 
heavenly  fluid.  In  its  Vedic  treatment  the  heavenly 
fire  is  Agni  of  the  lightning ;  the  heavenly  fluid  is 
soma,  the  ambrosial  drink :  "  The  one  (namely,  the 
heavenly  fire)  Matarigvan  brought  from  heaven ; 
the  other  (namely,  soma)  the  eagle  brought  from  the 
rock."  J  I  have  spoken  before  of  the  descent  of  the 
heavenly  fluid 3;  the  descent  of  Agni  from  heaven  is 
doubtless  connected  with  the  lightning  fire.  Ma 
tarigvan,  however,  who  brings  Agni,  belongs  to  the 
class  of  mythic  persons  for  whom  I  have  reserved 
the  attribute  "  opaque."  Even  this  dramatic  nature 

1  Rig-Veda,  i.  93.  6. 
5  Above,  p.  146. 


1 66  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


act,  which  the  plastic  spirit  of  the  Greeks  shapes  for 
all  time  into  the  main  motif  of  the  Prometheus 
tragedy,  appears  to  the  Vedic  poets  merely  as 
heaven's  method  of  furnishing  fire  and  soma  for  the 
sacrifice:  it  does  not  turn  into  a  real  humanised 
myth.  And  what  I  have  deduced  here  in  detail  is 
true  of  all  of  Agni's  traits  in  the  Veda ;  he  is  at  one 
moment  element  and  phenomenon,  at  another  person 
and  god,  at  all  times  as  clear  as  his  own  light  to 
teach  the  nature  of  the  gods. 

I  have  used  the  term  transparent  in  connection 
with  divine  personifications  whose  naturalistic  basis 
and  whose  starting  point  in  human  consciousness  is 
absolutely  clear.  Now  the  term  translucent,  figure 
of  speech  though  it  is,  I  wish  to  be  understood  in  its 
plain  physical  sense.  It  refers  to  mythic  formations 
whose  structural  outline  may  still  be  traced  with  a 
great  deal  of  truth,  although  it  is  obscured  by  incrus 
tations  of  secondary  matter.  It  is  often  merely  the 
loss  of  the  original  simple  name  which  is  the  cause 
of  the  obscuration.  Divinities  of  the  name  "  Dawn  " 
(Ushas),  "  Sun  "  (Surya),  or  "  Fire  "  (Agni),  bring 
credentials  that  every  one  can  read.  But  the  quick 
substitution  of  an  attractive,  or  pointed  epithet  for 
the  original  name  may  plague  the  investigator  for  all 
time  to  come,  and  deprive  him  of  mathematical  cer 
tainty,  even  though  every  instinct  draws  him  in  the 


Transparent  and  Opaque  Gods        167 


right  direction.  An  unusually  unsympathetic  sceptic 
will  not  find  it  hard  to  rest  his  feet  upon  some  pro 
jecting  ledge  of  doubt,  and  all  history  cries  out  that 
we  must  not  try  to  dislodge  sceptics  by  violence. 
Every  middle-aged  student  of  Comparative  Mythol 
ogy  and  Comparative  Philology  recalls  the  time  when 
even  the  most  complex  myths  were  blandly  ex 
plained  as  nature  processes  ;  nothing  in  that  line 
could  be  too  fanciful  and  far-fetched  to  find  adher 
ents.  No  cock  might  crow  in  a  fairy-tale  without 
becoming  party  to  an  involved  and  profound  sun- 
myth.  We  have  all  sobered  much  ;  there  is  now, 
perhaps,  too  much  insistence  upon  the  element  of 
uncertainty  which  goes  with  the  term  ".probable," 
no  matter  how  closely  the  probable  may  approach 
certainty. 

Tho  two  Agvins,  the  Dioscuri,  are  translucent 
gods.  They  harbor  some  phenomenon  of  morning 
light  as  one  part  of  their  dual  character.  The  other 
is  probably  the  corresponding  phenomenon  at  eve. 
But  just  what  this  duality  is  we  were  unable  to  say.1 
It  is  something  to  have  limited  this  brilliant  Indo- 
European  myth  so  far,  and  to  find  behind  it  reason 
rather  than  idle  fancy.  The  god  Varuna,  as  we  have 
seen,  belongs  also  to  this  class  ;  for  better  or  for 
worse  interpretation  will  turn  to  some  phenomenon 

1  See  above,  p.  116. 


i68  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


of  heaven  which  suggests  the  god's  salient  quality  of 
overseer,  be  it  encompassing  sky,  be  it  moon.  I 
choose  two  other  gods  as  the  type  of  translucent 
gods,  Vishnu  and  Pushan  ;  in  both  cases  we  shall  be 
engaged  with  variant  aspects  of  the  sun.  This  may 
seem  to  some  minds  a  suspicious  monotony  of  ex 
planation,  in  fact  it  is  the  so-called  solar  theory. 
But  I  am  nothing  daunted  :  the  sun  is  important 
and  ever  present  with  early  observers ;  I  shall  let 
him  fight  his  own  battles. 

If  I  am  not  mistaken,  I  have  done  the  cause  of 
Vishnu  a  service  in  pointing  out  that  the  name  itself 
is  compounded  of  the  two  words  m  and  snu,  meaning 
"  through  the  back."  '  The  leading  fact  in  Vishnu's 
activity  in  the  Veda  is  that  he  takes  three  strides 
(tredlid  vi  krawi).  A  passage  in  the  Sama-Veda 
states  that  "  Vishnu  strode  through  over  the  back  of 
the  earth."8  Here  the  word  for  "  through"  is  vi ; 
the  word  for  "  back"  is  sdnu  (snu) — the  two  parts  of 
the  name  Vishnu.  The  third  of  these  enormous 
strides  lands  Vishnu  in  the  highest  heaven,  in  the 
bright  realm  of  light,  where  even  the  winged  birds 
do  not  dare  to  fly.3  There  in  the  highest  stepping 

1  American  Journal  of  Philology,  vol.  xvii.,  p.  428. 

2  Sama-Veda    2.    1024,  yato  vishnur   vi  cakrame  prthivya    ad  hi 
sdnavi. 

3  Rig- Veda  i.  155.  3,  5. 


Transparent  and  Opaque  Gods        169 


place  is  Vishnu's  fount  of  honey.1  This  place  is 
identical  with  the  highest  place  of  Agni ;  Vishnu 
guards  the  highest,  or  third  place  of  Agni,  the  fire 
on  high,  the  sun.a  There  the  gods  and  pious  men 
rejoice.  Liberal  sacrificers  ever  look  forward  to  this 
place ;  it  is  fixed  like  an  eye  in  heaven.3  Later  Veda 
texts  clearly  define  the  three  steps  as  earth,  atmos-  ' 
phere,  and  heaven.  Vishnu  represents  the  sun  in 
his  ascent  from  the  horizon  of  the  earth,  through 
the  atmosphere  to  the  zenith,  considered  as  the  solar 
paradise.  His  swift  climb  over  the  back  of  the  uni 
verse  through  the  cosmic  triad  justly  arrested  the 
fancy  of  the  poets,  and  they  name  him  accordingly. 
Instead  of  holding  to  the  proper  name  of  the  sun,  or 
to  his  more  familiar  functions  of  giver  of  light  and 
life,  they  express  in  the  name  Vishnu,  and  in  the 
fancies  connected  with  it  the  sufficiently  remarkable 
fact  that  his  ascent  from  earth  to  the  paradisiacal 
zenith  involves  but  three  stations :  earth,  atmos 
phere,  and  heaven.  From  the  earliest  time  Hindu 
records  show  the  greatest  interest  in  this  threefold 
division  of  the  universe.4  Other  notions,  such  as 
that  Vishnu  marks  off  with  his  wide  steps  for  his 

»  Rig- Veda  I.  154.  5. 

2  Ibid.,  10.  i.  3. 

3  Ibid.,  i.  22.  20. 

4  See  above,  p.  91. 


1 70  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


worshippers  corresponding  breadth  or  wide  scope  for 
success  and  prosperity,  and  that  he  frees  them  from 
restraint  and  trouble,  follow  as  an  almost  inevitable 
consequence.  In  a  later  time  Vishnu  is  elevated  to 
the  highest  place ;  he  is  one  of  the  so-called  Hindu 
}  Trinity.  To  the  end  he  remains  the  Vishnu  of  the 
solar  paradise  to  whom  go  the  spirits  of  the  departed 
pious.  But  at  the  same  time  he  represents  to  his 
sectarian  worshippers  the  pantheistic  Brahma,  or 
"all-soul,"  with  which  the  soul  of  man  is  ultimately 
destined  to  unite. 

I  choose  as  the  second  example  of  a  translucent 
god,  the  shepherd  god  Pushan.  His  chief  claim  to 
usefulness  is  that  he  knows  the  roadways  ;  protects 
from  their  dangers,  such  as  wolves  and  robbers ; 
guards  cattle,  so  that  they  be  not  dashed  to  pieces 
in  the  ravine ;  brings  them  home  unhurt  when  they 
have  gone  astray ;  and,  in  general,  restores  lost 
things.  Pushan  personally  drives  the  cows  to  pas 
ture  ;  he  weaves  the  sheeps'  dresses,  and  smoothes 
their  coats ;  he  carries  a  goad,  and  his  car  is  drawn 
by  goats.  And  seeing  that  he  lives  on  mush  or 
gruel,  whereas  the  other  gods  revel  in  soma  or  ghee, 
his  bucolic  nature  is  pretty  clear.  His  name  means 
"  Prospero,"  which  may,  of  course,  be  the  epithet  of 
any  benevolent  god,  and  therefore  veils  rather  than 
tells  his  particular  character. 


Transparent  and  Opaque  Gods          171 


The  following  specimen  shows  the  tone  of  the  not 
too  numerous  hymns  addressed  to  him: 

Rig-Veda  6.  54. 

Guide  us,  O  Pushan,  to  a  man 

Who,  wise,  straightway  shall  point  the  way, 

And  say  to  us  :  "  Lo,  here  it  is!  " 

With  Pushan  joined  let  us  go  forth ; 

He  points  our  houses  out  to  us, 

And  saith  to  us  :  "  Right  here  they  are  ! " 

His  chariot's  wheel  doth  never  break ; 
Its  seat  doth  never  tumble  down ; 
Nor  doth  his  wheel's  rim  ever  crack. 

Whoso  payeth  tribute  to  the  god 
Him  Pushan  never  doth  forget  ; 
That  man  is  first  to  gather  wealth. 

May  Pushan  follow  our  kine, 
May  he  protect  our  horses  too, 
And  furnish  us  with  solid  wealth  ! 

May  naught  be  lost,  nor  aught  be  hurt ; 
May  naught  be  injured  in  the  pit  ; 
Our  cattle  sound  bring  back  to  us  ! 

May  Pushan  pass  his  good  right  hand 
Around  about  and  far  and  wide, 
And  drive  our  lost  goods  back  to  us  ! 

The  standard  interpretation  of  this  god  is  again  as 
a  sun-god.     This  is  well  supported  by  some  higher 


172  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


mythic  traits  in  which  this  god  is  not  altogether 
wanting.  He  is  lord  of  all  things  that  stand  or 
move  ;  almost  the  same  words  describe 'Surya  (Helios). 
He  also  is  the  lover  or  husband  of  the  Sun-Maiden 
Surya,  that  arch-flirt  who  carries  on  affairs  with  the 
male  Surya,  the  Agvins,  and  Soma.  He  alone  has 
the  very  ancient  epithet  aghrni  "  glowing."  This 
fits  the  sun,  and  besides  hardly  any  other  article 
than  fire.  Now  fire  Pushan  is  not.  To  consider 
him,  under  these  circumstances,  a  mere  "  god  Pros- 
pero,"  or  an  abstract  "  Lord  of  the  Paths,"  is  a  good 
deal  like  begging  the  question.  Contrariwise  his 
abilities  as  path-finder,  cattle  god,  and  restorer  of 
lost  things  point  to  an  overseeing  heavenly  body, 
particularly  if  we  may  trust  another  Lithuanian  folk 
song  (daind)  which  I  may  be  permitted  to  quote : 

Oh,  at  the  yester  even  tide 

I  lost  my  little  lamb  ! 

Oh,  who  shall  help  me  go  and  seek 

My  only  little  lamb  ? 

I  went  and  asked  the  morning  star, 
The  morning  star  replied  : 
"  I  have  to  build  the  dear  sun's  fire 
At  morrow's  morning  tide." 

I  went  and  asked  the  evening  star, 
The  evening  star  replied  : 
"  I  have  to  make  the  dear  sun's  bed 
At  every  even  tide." 


Transparent  and  Opaque  Gods          1 73 


I  went  and  asked  the  waning  moon, 
The  waning  moon  replied  : 
"  I  have  been  smitten  with  a  sword,1 
My  sorry  face  I  hide." 

I  went  and  asked  the  lovely  sun, 
The  dear  sun  gave  reply  ; 
"  Nine  days  I  '11  seek,  and  on  the  tenth 
I'll  not  set  in  the  sky."a 

The  familiar  notion  that  the  sun  oversees  every 
thing3  appeals  in  this  instance  to  the  simple  reasoning 
power  of  shepherd  folk.  A  more  suitable  origin  for 
a  shepherd  god  it  is  not  easy  to  imagine.  They  there 
fore  dress  him  out  in  shepherd's  clothes,  feed  him  on 
shepherd's  food,  and  turn  him  into  a  heavenly  bell 
wether  of  their  flocks.  But  his  real  natural  history 
does  not  seem  to  me  to  be  very  much  disguised  by 
the  simple-minded  fable.  We  may  safely  call  Pushan 
a  translucent  god. 

The  most  prominent  of  the  gods  of  the  Rig-Veda 
is  Indra.  About  two  hundred  and  fifty  hymns  are 
devoted  to  his  praise,  perhaps  one-fourth  of  all  the 
hymns  of  the  collection.  No  account  of  Vedic  religion 
can  pass  by  his  big  personality,  and  yet  his  essence 
and  quality  are  that  of  lower,  rather  than  higher 

1  Cf.   the  Lithuanian  folk-song,  above,  p.  114. 

8  Professor  Chase's  rendering,  Transactions  of  the  American  Philo 
logical  Association,  vol.  xxxi.,  p.  193. 
*'H\ioc>Tta.voTtTri<->,  Iliad  3.  277  ;  yEschylus,  Prometheus  Bound,  91. 


1 74  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


religious  conceptions,   even  if   we  adopt  no  higher 

standard  than  the  Rig-Veda.    To  the  growingly  finer 

religious  thought  of  the  later  Veda  Indra  contributes 

nothing  positive.     Negatively,  the  coarse  grain  and 

the  fleshliness  of  his  character  which,  taken  all  in  all, 

are  foreign  to  the  gods  of  the  Vedic  Pantheon,  arrest 

very   unfavorable    attention.      Indra   is   so  grossly 

I  anthropomorphic,  that  is,  he  embodies  so  completely 

i  the  human  qualities  of  brag  and  bluster,  gluttony, 

1  drunkenness,  and  lust,  as  to  make  him  the  peg  upon 

I  which  to  hang  scepticism.    In  that  way  he  contributes 

negatively  to  the  advance  of  Hindu  thought.     Of 

this  later  on. 

This  god  has  remained  opaque  to  the  eye  of 
Vedic  study.  He  is  not  wanting  in  superlative 
cosmic  qualities.  In  fact  the  poets  never,  unless 
except  perhaps  in  the  case  of  Varuna,  come  nearer 
biting  off  more  than  they  can  chew,  than  when  en 
gaged  in  lauding  Indra.  He  has  nocounterpartamong 
those  born  or  to  be  born.  No  one,  celestial  or  ter 
restrial,  has  been  born,  or  shall  be  born,  like  unto  him. 
All  the  gods  yield  to  him  in  might  and  strength.1  He 
supports  earth  and  sky,  or  spreads  out  the  earth.2 
More  particularly,  he  is  the  Hindu  Hercules  and 
demiurge4  the  doer  of  great  deeds  for  the  people. 

1  Rig- Veda  4.  18.  4;  7.  32.  2;  8.  51.  7. 
'2  Ibid.,  2.  15.  2. 


Transparent  and  Opaque  Gods        175 


He  slays  dragons  and  monsters ;  he  is  the  typical 
slayer  of  the  foes  of  the  pious  sacrificer.  To  these 
deeds  of  heroic  valor  he  is  stimulated  by  immense 
potations  of  intoxicating  soma.  In  order  to  accom 
plish  the  slaughter  of  the  arch-dragon  Vritra  he  drank 
on  one  occasion  three  lakes  of  that  delightful  bever 
age,  so  that  decidedly  he  had  a  jag  on,  which,  it  has 
been  noted,  rhymes  well  with  dragon.  Accordingly 
he  has  a  tremendous  body,  strong  jaws  and  lips.  He 
is  tawny-haired  and  bearded,  carries  a  club  in  his 
hand,  and  fights  on  a  chariot  drawn  by  two  bay  steeds. 
In  general  the  Vedic  poets  cannot  be  accused  of 
coarseness ;  yet  it  seems  that,  in  this  instance,  they 
were  irresistibly  attracted  by  the  mighty  deeds  of 
this,  "  Lord  of  Strength,"  as  they  call  him.  This  is 
probably  owing  to  the  fact  that  he  is  felt  to  be  the 
national  hero  of  the  Aryan  invaders  in  their  struggles 
against  the  dark-skinned  aborigines,  whom  they  must 
overcome  in  order  to  hold  possession  of  the  land 
which  they  invaded.  And  nations  are  never  coarser 
than  when  they  put  their  own  nationality  into  an 
tagonism  against  another  nation.  In  a  recent  war, 
familiar  to  all  of  us,  a  prominent  warrior  on  the  side 
of  the  stronger  nation  expressed  his  consuming  de 
sire  to  make,  by  his  own  valorous  deeds,  the  language 
of  the  weaker  nation  the  vernacular  of  Hades.  This 
is  the  spirit  of  the  worship  of  Indra. 


176  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


But  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  Indra  is 
a  mere  coarse  embodiment  of  the  jingo  valor  of  a 
superior  race  exercised  against  a  weak  enemy  fated 
to  subjection.  Indra's  character  is  not  even  trans 
lucent,  that  is,  we  can  no  longer  define  his  origin  with 
certainty,  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  he  originated 
somewhere  in  visible  nature.  The  difficulty  is  to  tell 
where.  To  begin  with,  there  is  no  belittling  the  fact 
that  Indra's  origin  is  prehistoric.  His  name  occurs 
in  the  Avesta  (Andra)  where,  as  is  often  the  case  with 
I  earlier  Aryan  divinities,  he  is  degraded  to  a  demon. 
But  his  chief  Vedic  epithet,  Vritrahan,  "  Slayer  of 
Vritra,"  is  the  same  name  as  that  of  the  abstract 
genius  of  Victory,  Verethraghna  in  the  Avesta,  and 
the  Armenian  dragon  slayer  Vahagn.1  On  the  other 
hand  there  is  no  real  Indra  literature  outside  of  India. 
If  then  we  are  forced  to  turn  to  India  in  order  to 
explain  Indra,  we  must  not  forget  that  his  origin  is 
outside  of  India  and  precedes  Hindu  history. 

The  following  specimen,  Rig-Veda  i.  32,  is  done 
into  prose,  rather  than  into  metre,  in  order  to  show 
clearly  how  Indra  and  his  principal  exploit,  namely, 
the  slaughter  of  the  dragon  Vritra  and  the  liberation 
of  the  waters,  really  presents  itself  to  the  mind  of  the 
poets : 

1  See  Hillebrandt,   Vedische  Mythologie,  vol.  iii.,  p. 


Transparent  and  Opaque  Gods         177 


1.  Let  me  now  tell  forth  the  heroic  deeds  of  Indra, 
which  he  that  wields  the  club  performed  of  yore.     He 
slew  the  dragon,  broke  the  way  for  the  waters  ;  he  cleft 
the  belly  of  the  mountains. 

2.  He  slew  the  dragon  who  lay  upon  the  mountain. 
God  Tvashtar  forged  for  him  his  heavenly  club.     Like 
roaring  cattle,  down  came  the  waters,  flowing  swiftly  to 
the  sea. 

3.  Lusty  as  a  bull,  Indra  demanded  soma  ;  from  three 
vats  drank  he  of  the  pressed  drink.     His  missile  bolt  he 
took  in  hand,  the  generous  god,  and  slew  the  first-born 
of  the  dragons. 

4.  When  thou  didst  smite,  O  Indra,  the  first-born   of 
the  dragons,  when  thou  didst  make  naught  of  the  wiles 
of  the  wily,  then,  bringing  out  both  sun  and  heaven  and 
dawn,  thou  verily  didst  not  find  a  foeman  worthy  of  thy 
steel. 

6.  A  drunken  weakling,  Vritra,  did  challenge  the  great 
hero,  the  mighty,  dashing  fighter.    He  did  not  withstand 
the  impact  of  his  weapons  :  with  broken  nose  lay  shat 
tered  he  whose  foe  was  Indra. 

7.  Over  him  lying  so,   like  a  broken  reed,  the  waters 
go   flowing  at  will.     Those  (very  waters)  which  Vritra 
had  encompassed  with  his  might,  at  the  feet  of  them  the 
dragon  prone  lay  stretched. 

13.  Nor  thunder,  nor  lightning  did  help  him  ;  nor  the 
hail-storm  which  he  cast  about  him.  When  Indra  and 
the  dragon  fought  their  battle,  then  even  for  future 
times  the  liberal  god  won  the  battle. 

These  stanzas  carry  us   into  the  very  midst  of  a 


178  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


myth  whose  three  elements  bring  with  them  three 
questions :  First,  what  are  the  waters  ?  Secondly, 
who  is  Vritra  that  shuts  them  in  ?  Thirdly,  who  is 
Indra  that  liberates  them  after  a  struggle  that  puts 
him  so  very  much  on  his  mettle  ?  Hindu  tradition, 
commentators  and  later  classical  Sanskrit  literature, 
has  always  had  an  unhesitating  answer  :  The  waters 
are  rain ;  Vritra  is  the  cloud  that  shuts  them  off 
from  the  earth ;  Indra,  therefore,  is  the  storm  or 
thunder  god  that  rends  the  clouds  with  his  lightning 
bolt  and  frees  their  waters.  This  interpretation,  at 
first  sight  thoroughly  sensible  and  most  satisfactorily 
suggestive,  was  for  a  good  while  held  to  be  good  by 
most  western  students  of  the  Veda  and  Comparative 
Mythology.  The  trouble  with  it  turned  out  to  be 
that  the  Veda  has  the  real  storm  and  rain  god 
Parjanya, '  and  that  the  hymns  addressed  to  him 
describe  thunder-storms  in  language  that  is  very  dif 
ferent,  and  cannot  be  mistaken  for  anything  else 
than  the  phenomena  of  the  thunder-storm.  The 
sober  facts  of  the  Indra- Vritra  myth  are  as  follows  : 
A  god  armed  with  a  bolt  fights  a  dragon  or  serpent 
who  holds  the  rivers  in  confinement  within  the 
mountains.  He  kills  the  dragon,  cleaves  the  mount 
ains.  The  rivers  flow  from  the  mountains  to  the 
sea.  Thus  the  texts :  there  is  nothing  to  show  that 

1  See  above,  p.   in. 


Transparent  and  Opaque  Gods         i  79 

the  mountains  mean  clouds,  and  the  rivers  the  flow 
of  rain. 

After  such  and  other  premonitory  symptoms  of 
scepticism  and  unrest,  Professor  Hjllebrandt  has 
recently  advanced  a  new  theory  of  Indra,  Vritra, 
and  the  waters,  which  he  expounds  with  great  in 
genuity  and  learning.1  He  argues  that  the  streams  1 
of  India  and  the  neighboring  Iranian  countries  are 
at  their  lowest  level  in  the  winter;  that  the  confiner 
of  their  waters  is  the  frozen  winter,  conceived  as  a 
winter  monster  by  the  name  of  Vritra,  "  confiner;" 
that  Vritra  holds  captive  the  rivers  on  the  heights  of 
the  glacier  mountains;  and  that,  consequently,  Indra 
can  be  no  other  than  the  spring  or  summer  sun  who 
frees  them  from  the  clutches  of  the  winter  dragon: 
"  Behold,  in  winter's  chain  sleeps  the  song  of  the 
waterfall  under  the  dungeon  roof  of  crystal  ice !  " 
So  sings  a  Swedish  poet,  Count  Snoilsky.  And 
another  Swedish  poet,  Andreas  Aabel,  rings  out  the 
antistrophe:  "  Hear  the  mountains  proud  cascade ! 
Just  now  it  has  broken  winter's  check  and  prison, 
and  now  it  courses  free  along  its  road!"2 

Now  it  is  true  that  the  emergence  of  spring  from 
winter  is  sometimes  treated  poetically  as  a  battle. 
We  can  understand  this  much  better  in  a  north  coun- 

1  See  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  vol.  iii.,  p.  i^l  ff- 

2  See  ibid,  p.  187. 


180  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


try  like  Sweden  where  the  conflict  is  hard  and  long. 
Even  there  these  phenomena  seem  hardly  to  suggest 
so  fierce  and  Herculean  a  contest  as  that  which  is 
supposed  to  take  place  between  Indra  and  the  frost 
giant  Vritra : 

Released  from  ice  are  stream  and  brook, 
By  spring-tide's  enchanting,  enlivening  look. 

These  words  of  Goethe  seem  to  come  so  much 
nearer  to  what  might  be  expected. 

But  over  and  beyond,  Indra  performs  in  his  pro 
fessional  capacity  of  Hercules  a  large  assortment 
of  other  "  stunts."  He  releases  the  cows  from  the 
stables  of  the  avaricious  who  confine  them  and  will 
not  sacrifice  them  to  the  gods.  He  also  performs 
the  heavenly  analogue  of  this  deed  :  he  breaks  open 
the  stables  of  darkness,  presided  over  by  another 
demon  of  the  name  of  Vala,  and  releases  the  heav- 
!|  enly  cows,  that  is,  the  light  of  dawn  and  the  sun. 
It  seems  impossible  to  hold  aloof  this  important 
myth  from  the  classical  myths  of  Heracles  and 
three-headed  Geryon,  and  Hercules  and  three-headed 
Cacus.  Hercules  carries  off  the  cattle  which  belong 
to  the  monster,  or,  in  the  case  of  Cacus,  which  the 
monster  had  stolen  from  the  hero,  and  had  hidden 
away  in  his  cave.1  Indra,  moreover,  kills  a  great 
variety  of  other  demons.  To  the  immediate  con- 

1  See  Oldenberg,  Die  Religion  des  Veda,  p.  143  ff. 


Transparent  and  Opaque  Gods         181 


ception  of  the  Veda  he  is  indeed  a  sort  of  Hercules, 
the  most  personal  of  ajljthe ..gods,  so  personal  that 
people  begin  to  doubt  his  existence,  and  ask,  "  Who 
has  seen  him?"  I  have  brought  much  sympathy  to 
Professor  Hillebrandt's  interpretation  which  I  hope 
may  in  the  end  turn  out  to  be  the  right  one ;  for  the 
present  it  has  left  me  in  the  frame  of  mind  indicated 
by  the  word  opaque.  I  confess,  I  cannot  pass  over 
as  lightly  as  does  Hillebrandt  the  unanimous  Hindu 
tradition  that  Vritra  is  the  cloud.  The  partnership 
of  Indra  with  Vayu  "Wind"  is  paralleled  sugges 
tively  by  the  association  of  Parjanya  and  Vata, 
"  Wind."  Parjanya  is  beyond  peradventure  a  god  of 
the  thunder-storm.  It  is  therefore  still  possible  that 
the  myth  of  Indra,  Vritra,  and  the  waters  represents 
a  specialised  poetic  treatment  of  a  myth  of  thunder 
storm,  cloud,  and  rain.  The  myth  may  have,  so  to 
speak,  been  brought  down  to  earth :  Indra,  the 
storm  god,  becomes  a  Hercules,  and  kills  a  dragon 
who  hoards  in  the  mountains  (formerly,  the  clouds), 
the  rivers  (formerly,  the  rain  of  the  clouds).  For 
a  final  solution  of  this  most  important  theme  in 
mythology  it  seems  to  me  that  we  must  look  to  the 
future.  The  confirmation  of  Hillebrandt's  masterly 
theory,  if  it  comes  at  all,  must  come  from  Iran  or 
Western  Asia.  Such  confirmation  should  establish 
more  definitely  Indra's  and  Vritra's  character  in  the 


1 82  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


Indo-Persian  time  from  which,  if  not  from  a  still 
earlier  time,  dates  their  beginning.  If  these  earlier 
data  should  by  any  chance  ever  show  Indra  and 
Vritra  in  the  mutual  relation  of  summer  and  winter, 
then  Hillebrandt's  hypothesis,  and  I  fear  not  until 
then,  would  be  triumphantly  vindicated. 

RELIGIOUS  CONCEPTIONS  AND   RELIGIOUS   FEELING 
IN  THE   VEDA. 

The  religion  of  the  Rig-Veda,  as  we  have  seen, 
is  in  its  most  superficial  aspect  a  priestly  religion 
of  works  designed  to  propitiate  and  to  barter  with 
personal  gods.  The  outer  form  in  which  it  pre 
sents  itself  is  as  poetry  of  the  sacrifice.  The  sac 
rifice  with  its  ceremonial  formalities  is,  as  I  have 
ventured  to  say,  the  epidermis  of  Vedic  religion. 
In  its  next  layer  the  religion  of  the  Veda  is  ex 
pressed  in  hymnal  worship  of  the  same  personal 
gods  who  get  the  offerings.  Whatever  we  may  say 
about  the  origin  of  these  gods,  one  by  one,  they  are 
;  to  the  Hindu  conception  for  the  most  part  related  to 
|  the  visible  and  audible  forces  of  nature.  Nature  in 
its  larger  aspect,  cosmic  nature,  is  the  prime  source 
of  inspiration  of  the  Vedic  religious  bard,  just  as  it 
was  the  inspiration  of  his  prehistoric  Aryan  and  Indo- 
European  ancestors.  The  conception  of  nature  and 
the  nature  gods,  notwithstanding  many  crudities,  is 


Religious  Conceptions  and  Feeling     183 


singularly  poetic.  I  shall  show  later  that  the  relig 
ious  consciousness,  in  so  far  as  it  concentrates  itself 
upon  their  admiration  and  praise,  marks  in  fact  the 
highest  point  in  the  Vedic  Rishis'  mental  and  spirit 
ual  possibilities.  In  the  end  it  will  be  found  to  be 
something  more  than  religious  poetry  ;  it  is  rather 
religion  or  religious  sense  expressing  itself  as  poetic 
inspiration.  Anyhow  we  must  not  believe  that  the  j| 
ritual  has  swamped  everything.  The  delight  in  the 
gods,  especially  the  half-personalised  nature  forces 
which  are  treated  as  gods,  is  too  unstinted  and  gen 
erous  to  allow  us  to  doubt  its  genuineness.  I  am 
sure  that  many,  if  not  all,  of  these  poets  addressed 
their  beautiful  hymns  to  the  goddess  Dawn,  or  to 
the  sun-god  Surya  with  the  full  swing  of  creative 
poets,  delighting  in  their  theme  for  the  theme's  sake, 
and  chiseling  their  poems  for  the  poems'  sake.  We 
may  believe  that  these  priest-poets  at  times,  when 
in  their  best  vein,  asked  the  favor  of  the  gods  not 
as  greedy  beggars,  but  as  joyously  unconscious  bene 
ficiaries  of  divinities  whose  power  to  reward  is  in 
cidental  to  their  inherent  generous  nature,  and  who, 
therefore  present  themselves  as  a  brilliant  and  worthy 
theme  of  song. 

But  the  every-day  existence  of  these  men  is 
something  different.  It  is  loaded  down  with  those 
dreadful  practicalities.  They  must  live  by  this 


184  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


very  trade  of  theirs,  namely,  praise  of  the  gods 
and  purveyance  of  the  sacrifice.  When  they  turn 
their  minds  away,  as  they  constantly  do  and  must  do, 
from  those  well-conceived  personifications  they  tend 
downward.  As  middle-men  between  the  gods  and 
men  they  must,  above  all,  take  care  of  men,  their 
own  selves  not  least  of  all.  Men  can  subsist  and 
prosper  only  if  the  gods  return  in  kind.  The  gods, 
on  the  whole,  are  good  ;  they  do  not  beat  down  the 
requests  of  him  that  comes  with  prayer  and  cup  of 
soma.  Reciprocity,  frank  unconditional  reciprocity, 
thus  becomes  an  accepted  motive  :  "  Give  thou  to 
me,  I  give  to  thee,"  is  the  formula.1  The  sacrificing 
king,  or  rich  householder,  is  thereby  placed  between 
the  upper  and  the  nether  mill-stone  :  he  must  satisfy 
both  gods  and  priests,  each  of  whom  show  a  sur 
prising  habit  of  becoming  more  and  more  exacting 
as  time  goes  by.  In  this  way  the  high  poetic  quality 
of  Vedic  religion  is  crowded  and  choked  by  many 
conceptions  mean  from  the  start,  or  bent  by  these 
circumstances  into  a  mean  shape.  The  gods  them 
selves,  notwithstanding  their  luminous  origin,  are 
brought  down  to  the  plane  of  human  weakness. 
Open  to  adulation,  they  become  vain  ;  eager  for  ad 
vantage,  they  become  shifty;  reflecting  human  desires, 
they  become  sordid,  and  in  some  cases  even  indecent. 

1  dehi  me  daddmi  le.      Cf.  the  Roman  do  ut  des. 


Religious  Conceptions  and  Feeling     185 


In  the  first  place,  Vedic  poets  engage  in  a  sort 
of  scramble  for  the  gods.  The  gods  cannot  be  in 
one  and  the  same  place  at  the  same  time,  and  cannot 
grant  all  the  conflicting  wishes  of  their  numerous 
suppliants.  I  have  dealt  with  this  theme  which  may 
interest  the  broader  students  of  the  history  of  relig 
ions,  in  a  recent  paper  presented  to  the  XlVth  Inter 
national  Congress  of  Orientalists,  held  at  Algiers  in 
1905.'  The  title  of  the  paper,  On  Conflicting  Prayers 
and  Sacrifices,  tells  a  good  deal  of  the  story.  The 
notion  which  comes  out  quite  persistently  is  that  it 
requires  art  to  "  hog  "  the  gods,  and  it  is  not  a  very 
delectable  notion  either  from  the  aesthetic  or  the  eth 
ical  point  of  view.  Yet  not  less  so  perhaps  than  the 
Te  Deum  laudamus  over  the  slaughter  of  enemies, 
which  has  been  known  to  be  chanted  by  both  sides 
at  the  same  time  when  each  side  claimed  victory.2 

1  See  Johns  Hopkins  University  Circulars  of  1906,  Nr.  10,  p.  I  ff. 

2  Or  consider : 

"  Gieb  regen  und  gieb  sonnenschein 

Fur  Reuss  und  Schleuss  und  Lobenstein  ; 
Und  wollen  andre  auch  was  ha'n 
So  mogen  sie's  dir  selber  sa'n." 

My  colleague,  Professor  Gildersleeve, proposes  the  following  Eng 
lish  transfusion  : 

"  Give  rain  and  sunshine  we  implo' 
For  us  upon  the  Eastern  sho' ; 
If  any  others  want  a  share 
Themselves  may  offer  up  the  prayer." 


1 86  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


So,  for  instance,  poets  of  the  ancient  family  of 
bards,  the  Vasishthas,  on  a  certain  occasion  brag  that 
they  made  Indra  prefer  their  own  soma  libations  to 
those  of  Pagadyumna  Vayata,  though  the  latter  had 
gone  to  the  trouble  of  fetching  Indra  from  a  great 
distance.  Frantically  emphatic  prayer  ;  imprecation 
of  the  man  who  is  praying  at  the  same  time ;  and 
naughty  tricks  of  various  sorts  show  us  under  this 
aspect  the  whole  world  of  praying  and  sacrificing 
men  engaged  in  a  sort  of  universal  game  of  tag :  the 
hindmost  is  "it."  The  Vedic  Hindus  have  made  a 
sad  botch  of  this  matter.  I  am  glad  to  say  that  this 
particular  crudity  passes  out  at  the  end  of  the  Vedic 
period  with  the  slow  "  twilight  of  the  gods  "  which 
shifts  the  interest  from  polytheism,  myth,  and  sacri 
fice  to  the  theosophic  speculations  of  the  Upanishads. 
When  the  personal  gods  emerge  again  in  later  Hin 
duism,  they  are  much  clarified  ;  at  least  the  risky 
question  about  their  presence  in  many  places  at  one 
and  the  same  time,  and  the  equitable  distribution  of 
their  favors  is,  as  far  as  I  know,  never  asked  again. 

There  is  scarcely  any  idea  which  has  suffered  so 
much  from  the  utilitarian  aspects  of  Vedic  religion 
as  the  Vedic  idea  of  faith.  To  begin  with,  the  word 
itself  is  of  interest ;  it  is  qraddhat  the  sound  for  sound 
equivalent  of  Latin  and  our  own  credo.  The 
etymological  meaning  of  this  word  is  absolutely 


Religious  Conceptions  and  Feeling     187 



transparent.  It  means  "  to  set  one's  heart  upon." 
This  etymology,  which  is  still  quite  clear  to  the  Ve- 
dic  poets,  shows  it  full  of  ethical  possibilities.  The 
word  starts  well  in  the  Rig-Veda.  It  means  first  of 
all  belief  in  the  existence  and  godhead  of  the  gods. 
So,  a  poet  is  anxious  to  make  certain  the  position  of 
the  god  Indra,  that  blustering,  pinchbeck,  braggart, 
Herculean  god  whose  shortcomings  have  gone  far  to 
establish  a  certain  position  for  the  Vedic  freethinker. 
The  poets  say  of  him  : 

"  The  terrible  one  of  whom  they  ask,  where  is  he  ? 
Nay  verily  they  say  of  him,  he  is  not  at  all.  He  makes 
shrink  the  goods  of  his  enemy  like  a  gambler  the  stakes 
of  his  opponent  :  Put  your  faith  in  him — He,  O  folks,  is 
Indra." 

(Rig- Veda  2.  12.  5.) 

"  As  a  strong  warrior,  he  verily  fights  with  might 
great  battles  in  behalf  of  the  people.  Aye,  then  they  have 
faith  in  strong  Indra,  as  he  hurls  down  his  weapon." 

(Rig-Veda  i.  55,  5.) 

"Who,  what  mortal,  can  overcome  him  whose  treasure 
them  art,  O  Indra  ?  Through  faith  in  thee,  O  liberal 
God,  on  the  decisive  day,  does  he  that  strives  obtain 
booty." 

(Rig- Veda  7.  32-  *4.) 

So  there  is  no  doubt  that  faith  means  the  belief  in 
the  existence  of  the  gods,  and  their  interference  in 
the  life  of  man.  It  would  be  doing  injustice  to  those 


1 88  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


early  believers  to  say  that  they  did  not  develop  the 
idea  beyond  this  stage  of  mere  primary  utility.  A 
later  text  of  the  Yajur-Veda  says:  Faith  is  truth, 
and  unfaith  is  lies  : 

"  The  creator  (Prajapati)  having  beheld  two  qualities 
separated  truth  and  lie  from  one  another.  He  put  un 
faith  into  lie,  faith  he  placed  into  truth." 

(Vajasaneyi  Samhita  19.  77.) 

Next,  faith  is  wisdom  ;  faith  is  the  sisterof  wisdom: 
The  fool  saith  in  his  heart,  "  there  is  no  god."  In 
order  to  disprove  his  folly  it  becomes  needful  to 
couple  the  ideas  of  Faith  and  Wisdom.  From  a  later 
time  we  have  very  interesting  accounts  of  the  initia 
tion  of  disciples,  and  their  instruction  in  the  Vedas. 
Teacher  and  pupil  in  a  kind  of  dramatic  dialogue  carry 
on  the  solemn  action  :  "  Teach  me  the  revealed  books 
(of  the  Veda),  my  Lord  !"  saith  the  pupil.  "  I  teach 
thee  the  revealed  books,"  replieth  the  teacher. 
"  Teach  me  the  Vedic  tradition,  my  Lord!"  saith  the 
pupil.  "  I  teach  thee  the  Vedic  tradition,"  replieth 
the  teacher.  ''Teach  me  Faith  and  Wisdom,  my 
Lord!"  saith  the  pupil.  "  I  teach  thee  Faith  and 
Wisdom."  l  In  another  text,  as  the  pupil  puts  on  the 
sacred  girdle  which  he  wears  during  disciplehood,  he 
addresses  it  : 

1  See  (^ankhayana  Grihyasutra  2.  7,  and  compare  Agvalayana 
Grihyasutra  3.  9.  I. 


Religious  Conceptions  and  Feeling     189 


"  Daughter  of  Faith,  born  of  Zeal,  sister  was  she  of  the 
Seers  that  did  create  the  beings.  Do  thou,  O  girdle,  as 
sign  to  us  Thought  and  Wisdom  ;  also  assign  to  us  Zeal 
and  Strength." 

(Atharva-Veda  6.  133.  4.) 

Faith  kindles  the  sacrifice-fire  and,  by  way  of  re 
turn,  the  sacred  fire,  this  chief  emblem  of  Brahmani- 
cal  religion,  is  in  charge  of  both  Faith  and  Wisdom  : 

"  Through  Faith  the  fire  is  kindled, 
Through  Faith  the  oblation  is  offered. 
Faith,  that  stands  at  the  head  of  fortune, 
Her  do  we  with  our  song  proclaim." 

(Rig- Veda  10.  151.  i.) 

On  the  other  hand,  the  Brahmanical  disciple  appeals 
to  Agni  Jatavedas  (the  holy  fire)  to  preserve  for  him 
faith  and  wisdom,  to  keep  intact  his  memory,  so  that 
he  may  not  forget  the  sacred  texts,  and  to  secure  him 
in  well-being.1 

Next,_  Faith  becomes  a  person,  a  goddess.  That  ' 
would  not  be  bad  but  for  the  mechanical  character 
which  she  then  assumes.  Imagine — and  in  order  to 
imagine  this  one  must  be  pretty  well  steeped  in  Hin 
duism — the  frame  of  mind  of  a  poet  who  skilfully 
exalts  the  goddess  Faith,  but  finally  asks  her  to 
accept  oblations : 

1  C^ankhayana  Grihyasutra  2.  10.  6. 


190  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


"  Through  Faith  the  gods  obtain  their  divine  quality; 
Faith,  the  goddess,  is  the  foundation  of  the  world. 
May  she  pleased  come  to  our  sacrifice, 
Bring  our  wish  as  her  child,  and  grant  us  immortality! 

"  Faith,  the  goddess,  is  the  first-born  of  divine  order, 
Upholder  of  all,  foundation  of  the  world, 
That  Faith  do  we  revere  with  our  oblations ; 
May  she  create  for  us  an  immortal  world." 

(Taittirlya  Brahmana3.  12.  3.  1,2.) 

"  Faith  dwells  within  the  gods, 
Faith  dwells  upon  this  world, 
Faith,  the  mother  of  wishes — 
With  oblations  do  we  prosper  her." 

(Taittirlya  Brahmana  2.  8.  8). 

So  far  so  good.  All  that  is  still  a  development  of 
the  idea  of  faith  in  harmony  with  a  decent  belief  in 
personal  gods.  Unfortunately,  the  Vedic  conception 
of  faith,  at  least  the  prominent  or  average  conception 
sinks  to  a  much  lower  plane.  In  the  main  and  in  the^ 
end,  faith  expresses  itself  in  works,  and  the  Brahmans 
who  are.  anything  but  mealy-mouthed  have  seen  to 
it  that  they  shall  be  benefited  by  these  works.  In 
other  words,  he  who  gives  baksheesh  (dakshina]  to^ 
the  Brahmans,  he  has  faith  (graddha).  In  a  hymn  that 
is  otherwise  not  badly  pitched  the  poet  requests  the 
personified  goddess  Faith  to  make  his  poetic  work 
take  well  with  the  liberal  sacrificer,  and  to  make  him 


Religious  Conceptions  and  Feeling     191 

persona  grata  "  with  him  that  giveth,  and  him  that 
shall  give."  *  An  exceedingly  interesting  hymn  of  the 
Atharva- Veda,  not  at  all  wanting  in  poetic  inspiration,, 
isaddressed  to  the  demoness  "  Grudge,"  or  "  Avarice.", 
The  name  of  the  lady  is  Arati.  Of  course  she  is 
primarily  an  abstraction.  Yet  she  appears  as  a  full- 
fledged  person :  she  has  a  golden  complexion,  is 
lovely,  rests  upon  golden  cushions;  is  in  fact  quite 
an  Apsaras,  or  "schoene  Teufelinne,"  as  the  old 
German  poetry  has  it  in  for  Venus.  With  all  her 
charms  she  is  coaxed  to  go  away : 

"  Bring  (wealth)  to  us,  do  not  stand  in  our  way,  O 
Arati  ;  do  not  keep  from  us  the  sacrificial  fee  when  it  is 
being  taken  to  us!  Homage  be  to  the  power  of  grudge, 
to  the  power  of  baffling!  Adoration  to  Arati! 

"Him  whom  I  implore  with  holy  word  (Vac  Sarasvatl), 
the  yoke-fellow  of  thought,  may  Faith  enter  him  to-day, 
aroused  by  the  burnished  soma  drink!  " 

(Atharva-Veda  5.  7.  i,  5.) 

That  is  to  say,  when  the  burnished  soma  drink* 
sparkles  in  the  cup,  when  the  pious  emotion  that 
comes  from  the  skilful  hymn  stirs  the  heart  of  the  j 
rich  sacrificer,  then  enters  into  him  Faith.    But  what 
kind  ?    The  kind  that  drives  out  niggardliness.    Then 
he  gives  to  the  Brahmans.     How  the  Brahmans  do  \ 
long  for  baksheesh,  especially  when  they  are  poor !  t 

1  Rig-Veda  10.  151.  2,  3. 


192  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


There  is  the  record  of  one  who  plaintively  ejac 
ulates  :  "  What  gentleman,  desirous  of  more  poss 
essions  will  get  us  out  of  this  wretched  misery? 
Who  desireth  to  sacrifice,  and  who  is  willing  to 
give  presents?  Who  desireth  long  life  from  the 
gods?"1 

Even  this  mean  and  selfish  construction  of  Faith, 
on  one  famous  occasion  at  least  turns  forth  a  better 
side.  A  zealous  young  Brahman,  Naciketas  by  name, 
observes  that  baksheesh  is  by  way  of  being  freely 
given.  In  fact  his  father  Vajagravasa  has  performed 
a  desperately  pious  sacrifice,  the  "  All-his-property- 
sacrifice  " — luscious  morsel  for  the  Brahmans.  He 
has  given  away  in  sacrifice  and  attendant  fees  all 
that  he  possesses.  Then  Faith  enters  into  the  boy 
Naciketas.  He  wishes,  so  to  say,  "  to  get  into  the 
band-wagon."  He  startles  his  father  by  asking:  "To 
whom  wilt  thou  give  me  ?  "  The  father  replies  :  "  To 
death" — we  can  imagine  the  formula  that  would 
come  from  the  lips  of  a  modern  fond  father,  if  his 
son  were  to  ask  him  a  question  so  very  awkward. 
Naciketas  takes  him  literally  and  goes  down  to 
Yama,  the  God  of  Death.  He  manages,  however,  to 
get  the  better  of  Yama,  not  only  enjoying  his 
hospitality,  but  also  extracting  from  him  certain 

1  Atharva-Veda  7.  103.  i.  Cf.  Ludwig,  Der  Rig-  Veda,  vol.  iii.,  p. 
283^";  the  author,  American  Journal  of  Philology,  vol.  xvii,  p.  408  ff. 


Religious  Conceptions  and  Feeling     193 


profound  information  concerning  the  riddle  of 
existence.1 

Now  I  shall  not  claim  that  this  important  concept 
was  unmixedly  mean  and  unspiritual.  Indeed  we 
have  seen  that  it  is  not  wholly  so.  This  much,  how 
ever,  is  clear  that  the  anxious  mind  of  the  ritual  is 
almost  entirely  fastened  upon  Faith  as  the  promoter 
of  the  sacrifice  and  its  attendant  gifts  to  the  Brah- 
mans.  In  the  end  a^raddha,  "  devoid  of  faith,"  is  f 

the  typical  epithet   of  the  demons  of  avarice,  the 

\>. 

Panis,  who  withhold  the  cows  from  the  gods  and  the 
Brahmans.  One  or  two  writers  have  the  hardihood 
to  put  up  a  chain  of  four  links :  Faith,  Consecration, 
Sacrifice,  Baksheesh.2  Since  consecration  (dlksha)  in 
this  connection  means  really  nothing  but  ancient 
hocus-pocus  preliminary  to  the  sacrifice,  where,  we 
may  ask,  is  there  a  franker  avowal  of  shady  motives 
that  ordinarily  present  themselves  elsewhere  with  a 
thick  coat  of  whitewash  ? 

But  what  is  there  in  it  for  the  sacrificer,  we  may 
ask?  It  is  all  very  well  for  him  to  silence  those  rau 
cous  voices  of  demand,  and  keep  giving — for  a  while. 
He  must  in  the  long  run  get  something  in  return,  or 
he  will  balk.  Our  texts,  explicit  if  nothing  else, 
leave  no  doubt  in  our  minds  as  to  the  way  in  which 

1  See  the  first  book  of  the  Katha  Upanishad. 

2  Atharva-Veda  15.  16.  4.  ff.  ;  Gopatha  Brahmana  I.  1.39. 

13 


194  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


the  sacrificer  was  rewarded,  or  thought  he  was  re 
warded,  under  this  otherwise  monotonously  one 
sided  arrangement.  We  have  seen  that  Faith, 
(^raddha,  is  personified.  Now  the  sacrifice,  called 
is/it at  and  the  baksheesh,  called  (by  another  name) 
purta,  enter  into  a  close  compound,  the  ishtdpurta. 
They,  in  their  turn,  get  to  have  a  kind  of  personal 
reality,  and  turn  into  a  kind  of  beneficent  genius,  or 
perhaps  better  a  kind  of  solid  asset  which  becomes 
useful  with  the  gods  during  life,  and,  mark  you,  after 
death  as  well.  During  life,  the  god  helps  him  who 
sacrifices  and  gives  baksheesh  ;  he  adds  to,  does  not 
rob  his  property.1  But  it  is  for  the  most  part  a 
question  of  future  reward.  In  a  well-known  funeral 
hymn  of  the  Rig- Veda  the  corpse  is  addressed  most 
realistically  : 

"  Do  thou  join  the  Fathers,  do  thou  join  Yama,  join 
thy  ishtdpurta  (that  which  thou  hast  sacrificed  and 
given  to  the  priests)  in  the  highest  heaven  !  " 

(Rig- Veda  10.  14.  8.) 

And  the  following  is  a  particularly  realistic  treat 
ment  of  the  same  ideas.  Again  a  dead  man  is 
blessed  as  he  goes  to  heaven  : 

"  Know  him  (the  pious  dead),  O  ye  associated  gods  in 
the  highest  heaven,  recognise  his  form  !     When  he  shall 
have  arrived  by  the  paths  that  lead  to  the  gods,  disclose 
1  Rig-Veda  6.  28.  2. 


Religious  Conceptions  and  Feeling     195 


to  him  his  ishtapurta  (that  is,  the  merit  which  he  has 
accumulated  through  sacrifice  and  liberality  to  the 
priests  )  !  " 

(Taittirlya  Samhita  5.  7.  7.  i.) 

And  so  another  poet,  in  a  better  vein,  says  in  a 
verse  that  has  become  famous  in  India: 


"  The  highest  step  of  Vishnu  (that  is  the  solar  para 
dise)  is  ever  seen  by  the  liberal  giver  :  it  is  fixed  like  an 
eye  in  the  heavens." 

(Rig-  Veda  i.  22.  20.) 

At  a  later  time  when  the  Hindus  in  their  highest 
mood  turn  the  ordinary  gods  into  supernumeraries, 
when  metempsychosis  takes  the  place  of  a  journey 
to  heaven,  when  they  have  sloughed  off  priests,  sacri 
fice  fire,  spoon,  and  ghee,  all  that  is  changed.  The 
degraded  (Jraddha  or  Faith  is  replaced  by  Bhakti, 
"  Devotion,"  that  is,  devotion  to  the  Eternal  True, 
Only  Being  that  is  at  the  root  of  all  things.  The 
ishtapurta,  piled  up  in  the  savings-bank  of  heaven, 
where  Yama  and  the  Fathers  are  engaged  in  ever 
lasting  feasts,  isr££laiCed^by  karma,  the  accumulated 
deeds  of  a  given  lifetime  and  the  attendant  evolution 
which  these  deeds  have  worked  upon  the  spirit. 
This  so  definitely  shapes  character  as  to  determine 
the  nature  of  the  next  rebirth,  until  a  perfect  life 
shall  free  the  mortal  from  the  toils  of  all  existence, 


196  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


and  replace  him  in  the  bosom  of  the  One  True  Being. 
Of  all  this  later  on. 

However,  even  these  saccharine  promises  about 
the  accumulated  credit  given  in  heaven  for  sacrifice 
and  baksheesh  seem  not  to  have  been  regarded  by 
the  poet  priests  as  a  sufficient  guarantee  that  they 
might  securely  count  upon  that  faith  which  meant 
works  useful  to  them.  They  employ  another  device. 
Being  skilled  verse-smiths,  they  begin  to  use  their 
craft  to  forge  chains  of  poetry  which  shall  hold  rich 
patrons  willing  captives.  They  compose  the  so-called 
ddna-stutis,  "  gift-praises,"  or  gdthd  ndragahsyak, 
"  stanzas  singing  the  praise  of  men."  1  In  dithyrambic 
language  exorbitant  gifts  on  the  part  of  generous 
givers  of  old,  mythic  kings  and  patrons,  are  nar 
rated,  so  as  to  stimulate  the  potential  patron  of  the 
present  day.  They  sing  these  praises  so  stridently 
that  the  Vedic  texts  themselves,  in  their  soberer 
moments,  decry  the  "  gift-praises  "  as  lies  and  pollu 
tion.  The  poet  of  a  "  stanza  singing  the  praise  of 
men"  and  the  brandy-drunkard  are  likened  unto  one 
another:  they  are  polluted,  their  gifts  must  not  be 
accepted.  I  question  whether  the  religious  litera 
ture  of  any  other  people  contains  anything  that 
resembles  either  in  character  or  extent  the  "  gift- 

1  Cf.  Ludwig,  Der  Rig-Veda,  vol.  iii.,  p.  274  ff.;  Bloomfield,  The 
Atharva-Veda  {Indo- Aryan  Encyclopedia],  p.  100. 


Religious  Conceptions  and  Feeling     197 


praises  "  of  the  Veda  ;  the  type  is  thoroughly  Hindu 
in  its  naivete  and  its  boundlessness. 

To  begin  with,  there  is  in  the  Rig- Veda  a 
doubtless  late  hymn  consecrated  to  Dakshina,  or 
"  Baksheesh."  It  is  only  a  poetaster  who  under 
takes,  as  he  says,  to  unfold  "  the  broad  road  of 
Baksheesh,"  i.  e.  to  show  how  important  it  is  to  keep 
giving.  Then,  with  refreshing  obviousness  he  claims  : 

'  Those    that    give    daks  hind    dwell    on    high    in    the 

heavens  ;  they  that  give  horses  dwell  with  the  sun. 
They  that  give  gold  partake  of  immortality  ;  and  they 
that  give  garments,  O  Soma,  prolong  their  lives." 

(Rig-Veda  10.  107.  2.) 

There  are  forty  or  more  "  gift-praises  "  in  the  Rig- 
Veda  alone  ;  they  continue  throughout  the  rest  of 
the  Veda.  I  do  not  mean  to  dwell  upon  them 
beyond  a  single  example.  We  may  remark,  how 
ever,  that  some  of  this  baksheesh  must  have  proved 
a  veritable  elephant  on  the  hands  of  the  receiver, 
except  for  the  fact  that  it  was  as  a  rule  imaginary 
baksheesh : 

"  Listen,  ye  folks,  to  this  :  (a  song)  in  praise  of  a  hero 
shall  be  sung  !  Six  thousand  and  ninety  cows  did  we  get 
(when  we  were)  with  Kauruma  among  the  Rueamas  ! 

"  Kauruma  presented  the  Seer  with  a  hundred  jewels, 
ten  chaplets,  three  hundred  steeds,  and  ten  thousand 
cattle." 

(Atharva-Veda  20.   127.    i,  3.) 


198  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


Operations  on  such  a  scale  are  calculated  to  show 
the  magnates  of  the  present  day  meat-packing  trust 
that  they  have  yet  to  learn  from  these  arch-flatterers 
a  trick  or  two  in  the  way  of  collecting  cattle. 

If  my  hearers  shall  ask  now  what,  after  all  this, 
is  the  essence  of  Rig-Vedic  religion,  I  am  for  my 
part  not  unready  to  answer  in  accordance  with 
hints  thrown  out  before.  It  is  poetry,  or  rather, 
more  precisely,  poetic  exaltation,  or  the  pride  and 
joy  of  poetic  creativeness.  This  is  at  first  conceived 
to  be  favored  and  promoted  by  the  gods,  because 
they  get  the  fruit  of  it  in  the  form  of  praise  and 
flattery.  The  finer  the  frenzy  of  the  poet  and  the 
more  finished  the  product  of  his  art,  the  better 
pleased  are  the  gods.  Therefore  the  gods,  next,  co 
operate  with  the  poets,  promoting  their  devotion 
and  its  expression.  Finally,  these  twin  factors  of 
devoted  fervor  and  its  successful  utterance  in 
hymns  and  stanzas  create  sensations  of  satisfaction 
which  are  easily  taken  for  sanctification.  At  first 
the  article  is  not  very  genuine.  But  it  goes  on  being 
the  receptacle  of  better  thoughts  until  it  grows  into 
what  we  may  consider  real  religious  feeling. 

To  some  extent  we  can  test  this  statement  by 
showing  what  the  religious  feeling  of  the  Veda  is 
not,  rather  than  what  it  is.  The  frank  system  of 
barter  of  the  sacrificer's  soma  and  ghee  for  the  god's 


Religious  Conceptions  and  Feeling     199 


t  and  protection,  with  considerably  more 
than  one-eighth  of  one  per  cent,  brokerage  for  the 
priest  —  that,  surely,  is  jp.,Q..t,  the  religious  feeling  in 
the  souls  of  the  composers  of  the  Rig-Veda  hymns. 
I  have  taken  pains  to  show  how  constantly  pres. 
ent  is  this  external  side  of  their  religion  :  may  the 
religion  that  is  free  from  all  external  considerations, 
the  religion  from  which  is  absent  every  form  of 
safe-guarding  self,  throw  the  first  stone. 

The  contemplation  of  the  glory  of  the  gods  as  . 
a  matter  of  intellectual  wonder  is  expressed  times  ; 
without  end.  It  does  not  seem  to  me  to  have  quitei 
the  true  ring.  It  is  perfunctory  ;  it  is  told  by  rote.. 
God  after  god  steps  into  line  and  gets  it.  They  each 
in  turn  establish  the  heavens  and  the  earth  ;  they 
start  the  sun  on  his  course,  almost  indifferently  well. 
Perhaps,  as  I  have  hinted  before,  their  rotation  in 
the  ritual,  rather  than  forgetfulness  of  the  virtues  of 
the  preceding  god,  is  the  truth  at  the  bottom  of  this 
kathenotheism  or  henotheism,  as  Max  Miiller  called 
it.  It  is  polytheism  grown  cold  in  service,  and  un- 
nice  in  its  distinctions,  leading  to  an  opportunist 
monotheism  in  which  every  god  takes  hold  of  the 
sceptre  and  none  keeps  it.  Anyhow  it  is  very  me 
chanical.  No  one  who  reads  in  the  hymns  the  end 
less  accounts  of  the  wonderful  performances  of  the 
gods  will  deny  that  the  poets  at  times  grow  truly 


200  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


warm  and  feel  their  theme.  Sometimes  they  are 
really  carried  away  by  it.  But  I  do  not  believe  that 
either  the  greatness  and  majesty,  or  the  incompre- 
hensibleness  of  the  gods,  have  produced  a  permanent 
impression  of  their  superiority  and  perfection  which 
should  permit  us  to  speak  of  settled  intellectual 

•  religious  consciousness  in  the  Rig- Veda. 

Most  conspicuously  there  is  no  sentimental  rela 
tion  of  any  great  depth  between  gods  and  men,  and 
therefore  no  piety  in  the  higher  sense  of  the  word. 
I  mean  piety  that  is  not  mere  emotional  self-excite 
ment,  but  reasonable  and  settled  reverence  of  tried 
and  true  gods.  As  a  matter  of  fact  the  gods  are 
good,  and,  at  least  in  a  general  way,  they  are  just 
also.  In  India,  as  we  have  seen,  the  gods  have  in 
charge  especially  the  order  of  the  world,  and  that  is 
at  the  proper  time,  to  the  advantage  of  the  suppliant 
mortal.  Conversely,  and  especially,  god  Varuna 
stands  ready  to  punish  the  wrong-doer.  The  poets 
sometimes  describe  Varuna's  power,  and  the  sense 
of  their  own  unworthiness  or  sinfulness  in  language 
that  reminds  us  of  the  Psalmist.  Varuna,  however, 

'[is  no  longer  pre-eminent  even  in  the  Rig-Veda:  he 
ihas  left  no  really  lasting  impression  on  India's  relig 
ions.  If  Varuna  had  prevailed  India  would  have 
'become  monotheistic  and  theocratic,  which  it  never 
did. 


Religious  Conceptions  and  Feeling     201 


Occasionally  a  start  is  made  towards  a  warmly 
glowing  relation  of  love  and  confidence  ;  the  singer 
in  need  of  help  trusts  that  the  god  will  help  him. 
But  there  is  no  permanent,  clarified,  unselfish  love., 
of  the  gods  such  as  overrides  the  experience  of  their 
instability,  such  as  lives  down  the  melancholy  fact 
that  they  do  not  always  help.  And  we  have  seen 
what  faith  is  in  the  Veda :  it  is  the  faith  that  mani 
fests  itself  in  works.  The  Vedic  poets  are  trained 
"  master-singers."  Such  poets  are  not  likely  to  pene 
trate  far  into  the  soul  of  man.  There  is  no  real 
warmth  or  depth,  no  passionate  indistinct  feeling,  no 
unsatisfied  longing  which  can  be  made  hopefully  en 
durable,  or  even  pleasurable  and  exalting,  through 
the  mystery  of  a  relationship  with  perfect  beings,  un 
derstood  by  each  individual  soul  in  its  own  way. 
Anything  like  a  contemplative,  trustful  joy  in  the  per 
fection  of  the  gods  comes  much  later:  it  is  of  the 
BhagavadgTta,  rather  than  the  Rig- Veda. 

But  these  master-singers  do  believe  in  their  own  art ; 
in  their  wonderful  poetry,  and  in  the  exaltation  of 
mind  which  goes  with  its  composition.  The  gods 
accept  both  the  poetry  and  the  devout  mind  at  the 
value  put  upon  them  by  the  poets ;  the  poets  are  se 
renely  certain  that  the  gods  are  well  satisfied. 1  This 

1  "  Like  (a  cow)  her  calf  so  do  the  poets  lick  (the  gods)  with  their  A 
prayers,"  says  Rig- Veda  10.  123.  I. 


2O2  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


then  is  the  state  of  mind  that  approaches  genuine 
and  lasting  religious  feeling  in  the  Rig-Veda: 
belief  in  the  beauty  and  fitness  of  those  glit 
tering,  rhythmical,  and  assonant  stanzas  ;  genuine 
rapture  over  the  excited,  throbbing  mind,  while 
the  glow  of  composition  is  upon  the  poet.  The 
poet  calls  himself  vipra,  "  inspired " ;  calls  his 
compositions  vipah,  "  inspirations ";  and  when  he 
composes,  vepate  matl,  "  he  is  inspired  in  his  mind." 
In  the  poet's  pride  of  exquisite  workmanship  and  the 
gods'  unresisting  admiration,  the  Rig-Veda  makes 
us  forget  at  times  that  unpleasant  economic  founda 
tion  of  the  performance,  namely  flattery  and  cajo 
lery  of  the  gods — for  what  there  is  in  it.  *  Soon  both 
gods  and  men  are  engaged  fraternally  in  promoting 
devotion  and  its  best  possible  expression  in  hymns, 
as  things  of  intrinsic  worth,  as  beautiful  elevated 
cosmic  potencies.  And  so  we  finally  find  at  the 
summit  of  this  thought,  the  captivating  and  impor 
tant  prayer  of  the  poet  of  the  Savitri  stanza,2  that 
the  god  himself  shall  inspire  his  devotion. 

I  have  used  the  word  "master-singers."  We  may 
take  this  word  quite  stringently  and  seriously.  The 
hymns  often  allude  to  the  songs  of  old  that  were  com- 

1  Rig- Veda  8.  21,  6  puts  this  baldly  to  god  Indra  :   "  We  cite  you 
hither  with  this  prayer  ;  don't  bethink  yourself  a  minute.      We  have 
wishes,  you  have  gifts.      Here  we  are  with  our  songs." 

2  See  above  p    86. 


Religious  Conceptions  and  Feeling    203 

posed  by  the  Rishis  of  the  past.  The  very  first 
hymn  in  the  Rig-Veda  strikes  this  note  in  its  second 
stanza:  "  Agni,  worthy  to  be  adored  by  the  ancient 
Rishis  and  the  present  ones — may  he  conduct  the 
gods  hither !  "  Another  time  a  poet  of  the  family  of 
Kanva  sings  1:  "  In  the  spirit  of  the  olden  times  do  I 
dress  out  my  songs  like  (the  poet)  Kanva,  through 
which  (god)  Indra  gets  his  fiery  strength."  Or  again : 
"  (Hear),  O  Indra,  him  that  hath  produced  for  thee  a 
new  and  lovely  song,  with  comprehending  mind  a 
pious  song  such  as  of  yore  has  strengthened  the  di 
vine  order  of  the  universe/'2  In  more  confident  or 
ecstatic  temper,  the  poets  often  declare  that  they 
have  produced  new  songs  of  praise,  and  that,  in  their 
opinion,  these  are  first-rate  songs.  One  poet  recom 
mends  his  "  new,  beautiful  song  of  praise,  that  comes 
from  the  heart;"  another  exclaims  :  "  I  bring  forward 
my  word,  the  new,  the  fresh-born."  With  all  due 
respect  to  their  predecessors  this  pretty  nearly 
amounts  to  saying  that  the  new  hymns  are  just  as 
good  as  the  old,  in  addition  to  having  the  charm  of 
novelty.  One  thing  is  certain  :  we  have  nothing 
like  beginnings  before  us.  The  Rig- Veda  is  pretty 
nearly  the  final  expression  of  its  own  type  of  compo 
sition.  What  comes  later  in  the  way  of  sacred  poetry 


1  Rig- Veda  8.  6.  n  ;  cf.  8.  44.  12  ;  8.  76.  6. 

2  Rig- Veda  8.  95.  5. 


204  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


is  distinctly  epigonal,  or  after-born.  We  are  face  to 
face  with  the  finished  product  of  this  past  age. 

If  we  consider  that  the  theme  is  the  worship  of  un- 
clarified  polytheistic  gods,  but  little  advanced  beyond 
the  point  where  they  originated  somewhere  in  nature, 
or  in  a  tolerably  primitive  consciousness,  we  may 
say,  taking  the  fat  with  the  lean,  that  the  pride  of 
these  poets  in  their  work  is  justified.  Of  course  we 
must  not  apply  the  chaster  standards  of  a  later  time, 
nor  can  we  expect  perfectly  even  results.  Anyhow, 
in  the  poet's  own  eyes  the  Rig-Vedic  hymn  is  a  thing 
of  blameless,  finished  beauty.  He  has  fashioned  it 
as  a  skilled  artisan  a  war  chariot.  He  has  filed  it  until 
it  is  free  from  all  blemish,"  as  grain  is  winnowed  in  the 
winnowing-basket,"  "  as  ghee  is  clarified  for  the  sacri 
fice."  The  heart  of  the  poets  is  in  their  work,  they 
are  unquestionably  giving  the  best  they  have.  The 
poems  are  their  inspirations.  In  so  far  as  they  rise 
above  their  all  too  human  interests,  in  so  far  as  they 
are  something  higher  than  blarneying  beggars,  they 
lift  themselves  up  through  their  own  art  rather  than 
the  intrinsic  qualities  of  the  gods  upon  whom  they 
spend  their  efforts. 

In  the  end  the  gods  themselves  take  a  hand  in  these 
valuable  and  delectable  poetic  performances.  Al 
though  they  cannot  directly  furnish  the  metres, 
alliterations,  beautiful  words,  and  bold  figures  of 


Religious  Conceptions  and  Feeling     205 


speech,  they  can  perform  another  service.  They 
may  furnish  the  devout  mind,  the  inspiration  that  is 
behind  the  hymn.  In  fact  the  gods  themselves  per-/ 
form  prayers,  and  fashion  hymns  :  "  May  the  go 
who  perform  brahma  (that  is,  prayer)  furnish  us 
their  thrice-covering  protection  from  evil !  "  l  "  Sing 
ye  a  braJnna  given  by  the  gods  !"  exhorts  a  poet  of 
the  house  of  Kanva.2  Prayer,  or  devotion,  is  so 
beautiful  as  to  be  imagined  dressed  out  in  glowing 
colors  and  bright  garments  :  "  May  God  Agni  lift  up 
our  devotion  that  hath  glowing  color  !  "  or  :  "  May 
God  Agni  place  on  high  our  brightly  adorned  devo 
tion  ! "  3  Heaven  and  Earth,  stable  and  orderly,  guide 
the  sacrifice,  aglow  with  shining  hymns.4  Prayers, 
personified^oby  the  path  of  the  divine  order  to  the 
gods  Indra  and  Agni  ;  they  are  the  messengers  be 
tween  the  two  worlds.6  Hymnal  beatification  of 
prayer  can  scarcely  reach  higher  than  the  follow 
ing: 

"  Prayer  born  of  yore  in  heaven, 
Eagerly  chanted  in  the  holy  assembly, 
Delightfully  dressed  out  in  bright  array, 
Ours  is  that  father-inherited  prayer  of  old  !" 
(Rig-Veda  3.  39.  2.) 

1  Rig- Veda  10.66.  5.  2  Ibid.,  i.  37.  4  ;  8.  32.  7. 

3 Ibid.,  i.  143.  7;  144.  i.  4  Ibid.,  4.  56.  2. 

5  Ibid.,  3.  12.    7  and  I.   173.  3. 


206  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


The  last  step,  namely  that  Prayer  or  Devotion 
itself  becomes  divine  and  assumes  a  tolerably  distinct 
personality,  deserves  to  hold  our  attention.  The 
epithet  "  Goddess "  is  freely  given  to  numerous 
designations  of  prayer  and  devotion.  There  is  the 
"  Goddess  Devotion  "  (Dhl) ;  the  goddess  "  Lovely 
Praise"  (Sushtuti);  the  goddess  "  Holy  Thought" 
(Manlsha),  and  others.1  And  by  an  almost  comical 
tour  de  force,  such  as  is  possible  only  in  India, 
Devotion,  having  become  divine,  turns  into  a  real 
personage  who  might  in  the  company  of  the  other 
gods  call  out  a  second  layer  of  the  same  article: 
"  Drink  the  soma,  O  ye  Agvins,  in  the  company  of 
Agni  and  Indra,  of  Varuna  and  Vishnu  ...  in 
the  company  of  all  pious  Devotions."2 

For  the  history  of  the  human  mind  this  last  out 
come,  present  in  the  ancient  literature  of  this  gifted 
people,  is  of  unusual  importance.  The  father  mystic 
idea  of  the  divinity  of  Devotion  and  its  expression, 
the  notion  that  the  sacred  inspired  thought  and 
word  can  itself  be  god,  will  concern  us  more  later 
on.  From  the  point  of  view  of  religious  feeJingjt^ 
is  the  last  and  best  word  of  the  Hindus  as  to  the 
nature  of  the  divine.  There  comes  to  mind  the  first 
verse  of  the  Gospel  of  John  :  "  In  the  beginning  was 

1  See  Rig-Veda  3.  18.  3  ;  4.  43-  i  ;  7-  34-  i  and  9  ;  8.  27.  13. 
35.  I/". 


Religious  Conceptions  and  Feeling    207 

the  Word,  and  the  Word  was  with  God,  and  the 
Word  was  God."  Here  the  original  Greek  for 
"  Word  "  is  Logos.  This  is  not  quite  the  same  as 
the  Hindu  "  Devotion,"  or  "  Holy  Utterance,"  which 
we  shall  meet  again  in  its  finished  expression  as, 
Brahma.  The  Logos  originated  in  the  philosophy 
of  the  Stoics  and  the  Neo-Platonists :  it  is  intellec 
tual  rather  than  emotional.  But  the  two  are  alike 
in  this:  they  seek  the  creative  power  and  the  crea. 
tive  plan  in  the  mind  or  heart  of  the  universe  rather 
than  in  its  mechanical  manifestations.  We  shall  see 
farther  on  how  very  peculiar  is  the  treatment  which 
the  Hindus  gave  to  this  important  and  original  con 
cept,  led  on  thereto  by  the  melancholy  genius  that 
may  be  supposed  to  preside  over  the  hot  sombre 
land.  For  the  present,  and  in  this  connection,  we 
may  be  satisfied  to  see  the  origin  of  this  seemingly 
mystic  idea  exposed  to  our  eyes  with  a  degree  of 
clearness  that  is  not  obscured  by  its  mythological 
coloring.  Like  almost  all  other  important  religious 
ideas  of  the  Hindus  this  idea,  when  analysed 
patiently  with  the  help  of  their  rich  literature,  sheds 
light  on  the  seeming  mysteries  of  other  religions. 


LECTURE  THE  FIFTH. 

The  Beginnings  of  Hindu  Theosophy. 

Statement  of  the  problem — Time  when  theosophy  originated 
— Metempsychosis  and  pessimism  unknown  in  the 
earlier  Vedic  records — Place  where  the  higher  religion 
originated — Priest  philosophy  at  the  sacrifice — The 
theosophic  charade — Specimens  of  the  theosophic 
charade — The  riddle  hymn  of  Dirghatamas — Interre 
lation  between  the  sacrifice  and  theosophy — On  the 
supposed  origin  of  theosophy  with  the  royal  caste — 
Criticism  of  this  view — Transition  from  ritualistic 
polytheism  to  theosophy — Early  scepticism — "Gotter- 
dammerung" — Failure  of  God  Varuna — Monism,  or 
the  idea  of  unity — The  creation  hymn — Translation 
and  analysis  of  the  creation  hymn — Attempts  at  mono 
theism — Prajapati,  the  Lord  of  Creatures — Vicva- 
karman,  creator  of  the  universe,  and  kindred  concep 
tions — Purusha,  the  world  man — Brihaspati,  the  Lord 
of  Devotion — Transcendental  monotheistic  conceptions: 
"Time,"  "Love,"  etc. — Defects  of  the  earlier  mono 
theistic  and  monistic  attempts. 

THE  appreciation  of  the  higher  forms  of  Hindu 
ism    has   gotten   to    be    one   of  the    foremost 
intellectual  arts  of  our  time,  because  the  final  results 
of    Hindu   thought   count    really    among   the   most 

noteworthy  achievements  of  the  human  mind.     In 

208 


The  Beginnings  of  Hindu  Theosophy  209 


order  to  understand  the  origin  and  nature  of  the 
higher  religion  of  the  Veda  it  is  necessary  to  twist 
many  threads  into  a  single  skein.  It  is  a  question 
of  when,  where,  by  whom,  and  how  ;  each  phase  of 
this  question,  if  considered  aright,  will  contribute  to 
the  clearness  of  the  whole. 

As  regards  the  time  when  higher  religious  motives 
appear,  I  would  remind  my  hearers  of  the  indefinite 
and  relative  character  of  Vedic  chronology.  The 
older  Upanishads,  the  Vedic  texts  which  profess 
higher  religion  or  theosophy,  are  written  in  about 
the  same  language  and  style  as  the  so-called  Brah- 
mana  texts.  These  latter,  as  you  may  remember,1 
are  prose  works  which,  quite  like  the  Hebrew  Tal 
mud,  define  the  sacrifice  with  minute  prescript  and 
illustrative  legend.  And  the  older  Upanishads  are 
part  of  the  Brahmanas ;  the  majority  of  the  older 
Upanishads,  through  the  medium  of  the  Aranyakas, 
join  their  theosophic  speculations  right  on  to  the 
dead  ritual.  To  some  extent  the  bones  of  the  ritual 
skeleton  rattle  about  in  early  theosophy  in  quite  a 
lively  fashion.  The  Upanishads  and  theosophy  are 
part  of  the  Veda ;  neither  Hindu  believer  nor  west 
ern  critic  has  ever  doubted  that.  Now  the  thought 
of  the  Upanishads  has  its  forerunners  in  all  parts  of 
Vedic  literature  clear  back  to  the  Rig- Veda ;  in  the 

1  See  above,  p.   43. 
14 


210  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 

Atharva-Veda  it  even  shows  signs  of  at  least  tem 
porary  going  to  seed.  '  We  cannot  expect  the 
family-books  of  the  Rig- Veda,  or  the  ninth,  soma 
book  to  break  out  in  theosophy.  These  books  are 
collections  of  hymns  addressed  to  the  gods  at  a 
definite  sacrifice  :  to  that  business  they  attend.  It 
does  not  follow  that  what  they  do  not  mention  does 
not  exist  at  that  time.  We  must  beware  of  too 
straight-lined  a  view  of  these  matters,  one  type  fol 
lowing  another  like  a  row  of  bricks,  or  like  different 
troops  of  the  same  army.  I  am  not  wise  enough  to 
say  when  the  following  stanza  was  pronounced : 
"  They  call  (it)  Indra,  Mitra,  Varuna,  and  Agni,  or 
the  heavenly  bird  Garutmant  (the  Sun).  The  sages 
call  the  One  Being  in  many  ways ;  they  call  it  Agni, 
Yama,  Matarigvan." 

This  verse  states  that  the  great  gods  of  the  Veda 
are  but  One  Being ;  therefore  it  at  once  takes  a  high 
stand  in  the  range  of  possible  human  thought.  And 
yet  it  occurs  in  a  hymn  of  the  Rig- Veda,  namely, 
the  famous  riddle-hymn  of  Dlrghatamas,  in  the  first 
book  of  that  collection.2  Another  statement  in  the 
tenth  book 3  is  as  follows :  "  That  One  breathed 

1  Some  stanzas  of  the  Atharvan  occupy  the  most  advanced  position 
of  the  Upanishads.   For  instance,  10.  8.  44  :  "  Free  from  desire,  true, 
eternal,  self-begotten,  full  of  joy,  subject  to  none,  he  no  longer  fears 
death  who  knows  the  wise,  ageless  Atman." 

2  Rig- Veda  i.   164.  46.  3  Rig- Veda  10.  129.  2. 


The  Beginnings  of  Hindu  Theosophy   211 

without  breath,  by  inner  power;  than  it,  truly, 
nothing  whatever  else  existed  besides." 

Here  are  two  statements  in  two  Brahmanical 
hymns,  composed  in  the  trishtubh  metre,  the  same 
metre  in  which  the  Vedic  poets  love  to  call  upon 
their  fustian  god  Indra,  and  yet  their  intention  is 
unmistakable.  They  herald  monism  ;  they  claim 
that  there  is  but  one  essence,  one  true  thing:  it  is 
but  a  step  from  such  ideas  to  the  pantheistic,  abso 
lute,  without  a  second,  Brahman-Atman  of  the 
Upanishads  and  the  later  Vedanta  philosophy. 

On  the  other  hand,  there  are  in  the  earlier  religion, 
whether  it  be  hymn  and  sacrifice  to  the  gods,  or 
theosophic  thought,  no  clear  signs  of  belief  in  the 
transmigration  of  souls ;  no  pessimistic  view  of  life, 
and  consequently  no  scheme  of  salvation,  or  rather 
release  (mukti)  from  the  eternal  round  of  existences, 
in  which  birth,  old  age,  decay,  and  death  are  the 
nodal  points  in  the  chain  of  lives.  That  this  phase 
of  the  higher  religion  belongs  to  a  later  time,  to  a 
different  geographical  locality,  and  to  an  economic 
and  social  state  different  from  that  of  the  earliest 
Vedic  time,  seems  exceedingly  likely.  So  we  are  led 
to  the  conclusion  that  there  was  a  period  of  monistic 
speculation,  tentative  in  character,  yet  fairly  ad 
vanced  at  the  time  of  the  composition  of  at  least 
the  later  hieratic  hymns  of  the  Rig- Veda.  But  this 


212  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


higher  religious  thought  lacked  the  twin  factors  of 
metempsychosis  and  pessimism  which  really  deter 
mine  its  Hindu  character.  Pessimist  view  of  trans 
migration,  and  release  from  transmigration  are  the 
true  signs  of  Hinduism  in  the  broadest  sense  of  that 
word:  through  these  twin  conceptions  the  Hindu 
idea,  as  we  may  call  it,  is  marked  off  from  all  the  rest 
of  human  thought ;  without  these,  Hindu  specula 
tions  about  the  divine  might  readily  pose  as  a  kind  of 
Volapiik,  or  Esperanto,  for  all  the  world  of  religious 
thought  from  the  Prophets  and  Plato  to  Spinoza  and 
Kant.  We  may  safely  date  the  entrance  of  metem 
psychosis  and  pessimism  towards  the  end,  rather  than 
the  beginning  of  Vedic  tradition.  It  seems  to  mark 
a  most  important  division  of  the  Veda  into  two 
periods.  Other  marks,  such  as  more  or  less  advanced 
priestly  ritual ;  the  presence  or  absence  of  complica 
ted  witchcraft  practices;  the  sudden  and  unexpected 
glint  of  a  brilliant  theosophic  idea ;  or  the  varying 
forms  of  Vedic  literary  tradition  involve  real  distinc 
tions  of  time,  but  they  are  more  gradual,  and  are 
easily  construed  subjectively.  They  do  not,  at  any 
rate,  involve  anything  as  vital  as  the  presence  or 
absence  of  that  pessimist  doctrine  of  transmigration 
which  holds  India  captive — to  its  cost — even  at  the 
present  day. 

Next,  where  did  the  higher  religion    spring   up 


The  Beginnings  of  Hindu  Theosophy   213 


There  is  at  this  time  no  centre  of  learning,  no  stoa, 
no  monastery,  no  university.  With  the  beginning 
of  the  growth  of  the  higher  religion  there  are  con 
nected  many  names,  but  not  one  name.  There  is  no 
great  teacher  of  genius  like  Buddha  who  is  of  a  later 
time.  We  have  no  reason  to  look  to  some  confined 
space  within  which  this  business  of  world  philosophy 
was  carried  on  exclusively.  Indeed,  the  sporadic, 
tentative  nature  of  the  earliest  high  thought,  the  way 
in  which  it  was  approached  from  many  different  sides 
and  in  many  different  moods,  shows  that  it  flitted 
about  from  place  to  place,  and  was  the  play-ball  of 
many  minds.  But,  I  believe,  we  can  tell  pretty  defi 
nitely  the  kind  of  environment  from  which  theosophy 
received  its  first  impulse,  and  within  which  it  pros 
pered  up  to  goodly  size  and  strength.  That,  curi 
ously  enough,  was  the  great  Vedic  sacrifice  with  its 
mock  business  and  endless  technicalities,  calculated 
to  deaden  the  soul,  and  apparently  the  very  thing  to 
put  the  lid  tight  on  higher  religious  inspiration  and 
aspiration. 

The  great  Vedic  sacrifices,  the  so-called  qrauta  sac 
rifices,  such  as  the  rdjasuya  (coronation  of  a  king), 
or  the  aqvamedha  (horse-sacrifice)  were  performances 
intended  to  strengthen  the  temporal  power  of  kings. 
They  were,  of  course,  undertaken  either  by  kings  or 
at  least  rich  Kshatriyas,  rather  than  by  the  class  of 


214  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


smaller  house-holders  who  could  not  afford  them,  and 
did  not  have  any  use  for  them.  They  had  in  them 
the  elements  of  public,  tribal  or  national  festivals.1 
Of  course  they  were  expensive.  A  large  number  of 
priests  were  present.  We  have  seen  in  the  past  that 
these  gentlemen  were  not  at  all  shy  about  asking  fees 
(dakshina)  for  their  services.  Now  we  are  told  dis 
tinctly  that  the  Vedic  Kings,  or  tribal  Rajas,  were 
not  only  interested  in  the  mechanical  perfection  and 
outward  success  of  the  sacrifices  undertaken  under 
their  patronage,  but  that  they  were  even  more  im 
pressed  by  the  speculative,  mystic,  and  theosophic 
thoughts  which  were  suggested  by  various  phases  of 
the  sacrifice.  Both  in  the  Brahmanas  and  in  the  Up- 
anishads  kings  appear  as  questioners  of  the  great 
Brahmans  who  solve  for  them  some  knotty  sacrificial 
problem,  or  even  some  question  connected  with  the 
riddle  of  existence.  Whenever  their  questions  are 
answered  to  their  satisfaction,  in  the  midst  of  a 
continuous  discourse,  the  King  again  and  again  is 
excited  to  generosity :  "  I  give  thee  a  thousand 
(cows)/'  says  King  Janaka  of  Videha  to  the  great 
theosopher  Yajnavalkya,  as  the  latter  unfolds  his 
marvellous  scheme  of  salvation  in  the  "  Great  Forest 
Upanishad." 2  Kings  were  known  to  give  away  their 

1  Cf.  Ludwig,  Dcr  Rig-Veda,  vol.  vi.,  p.  x. 

2  Brihadaranyaka  Upanishad  4.  13. 


The  Beginnings  of  Hindu  Theosophy  215 


kingdoms  on  such  occasions,  and  kings  became  them 
selves  glorious  expounders  of  theosophic  religion. 

The  beginnings  of  theosophic  thought  are  not  in 
the  Upanishads  but,  as  we  have  said  before,  in  the 
polytheistic  and  ritualistic  religion  that  preceded  the 
Upanishad.  Especially  in  connection  with  the  great 
sacrifices  of  the  kind  just  mentioned  the  Brahmans, 
in  the  long  run,  found  it  to  their  advantage  to 
impress  the  "  generous  givers/'  the  patrons  of  the  sac 
rifice,  not  only  with  their  mastery  of  sacrificial  tech 
nique,  but  also  with  their  theological  profundity.  To 
some  extent  learned  theological  discussions  in  prose, 
of  a  highly  scholastic(Talmudic)  nature,  fulfil  this  pur 
pose.  This  we  may  call  the  philosophy  of  the  sacri 
fice,  such  as  is  displayed,  for  instance,  in  the  exposi 
tion  of  {.\\eagnihotra  sacrifice  in  £atapatha  Brahmana 
ii.  6.  2.  But  furthermore,  they  employ  a  very  inter 
esting  form  of  poetic  riddle  or  charade  to  enliven 
the  mechanical  and  technical  progress  of  the  sacrifice 
by  impressive  intellectual  pyrotechnics.  I  question 
whether  such  a  type  of  religious  literature  is  known 
in  any  other  religion,  or  whether  the  riddle  has  ever 
elsewhere  been  drafted  into  the  service  of  religion 
as  one  of  the  stages  of  its  advancement.  In  other 
words,  religious  charades  are  a  part  of  Hindu  re 
ligious  literature.1 

1  See  Ilaug,  Vedische  Rdthselfragen  und  Rathselspriiche,  Transac- 


216  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


The  Vedic  word  for  higher  speculative  discussion 
as  a  whole,  and  especially  for  the  religious,  mostly 
poetic,  riddle  is  brahrnodya  or  brahinavadya,  that  is, 
"  analysis  or  speculation  about  the  brakma,  or  relig 
ion."  It  is  very  generally  carried  on  by  two  priests, 
one  of  whom  asks  questions,  the  other  answers  them. 
It  is  a  kind  of  theological "  quiz,"  prearranged  by  the 
two  parties :  questioner  and  responder  know  their 
parts  to  perfection. 

At  the  horse-sacrifice  two  priests  ask  and  answer : 

"  Who,  verily,  moveth  quite  alone  ;  who,  verily,  is  born 
again  and  again  ;  what,  forsooth,  is  the  remedy  for  cold  ; 
and  what  is  the  great  (greatest)  pile  "  ? 

The  answer  is : 

"  The  sun  moveth  quite  alone  ;  the  moon  is  born  again 
and  again  ;  Agni  (fire)  is  the  remedy  for  cold  ;  the  earth 
is  the  great  (greatest)  pile."  1 

The  priest  called  Hotar  asks  the  priest  called 
Adhvaryu  : 

"  What,  forsooth,  is  the  sun-like  light  ;  what  sea  is  there 
like  unto  the  ocean  ;  what,  verily,  is  higher  than  the 
earth  ;  what  is  the  thing  whose  measure  is  not  known  "  ? 

The  answer  is : 

"  Brahma  is  the  sun-like  light ;  heaven  is  the  sea  like 

tions  of  the  Munich  Academy,  1875,  p.  *]  ff.  of  the  reprint  ;  Ludwig, 
Der  Rig-Veda,  vol.    iii.,    p.  390  ff. ;  the    author,  Journal   of  the 
American  Oriental  Society,  vol.  xv.,  p.  172. 
1  Vajasaneyi  Samhita  23.  9  and  10. 


The  Beginnings  of  Hindu  Theosophy   217 


unto  the  ocean  ;    (the   god)  Indra  is   higher  than    the 
earth  ;  the  measure  of  the  cow  is  (quite)  unknown.  ' 1 

Again  the  following  questions  and  answers : 

"  I  ask  thee  for  the  highest  summit  of  the  earth  ;  I  ask 
thee  for  the  navel  of  the  universe  ;  I  ask  thee  for  the 
seed  of  the  lusty  steed  ;  I  ask  thee  for  the  highest 
heaven  of  speech." 

"  This  altar  is  the  highest  summit  of  the  earth  ;  this 
sacrifice  is  the  navel  of  the  universe  ;  this  soma  (the  in 
toxicating  sacrificial  drink)  is  the  seed  of  the  lusty  steed 
(God  Indra  ?)  ;  this  Brahman  priest  is  the  highest  heaven 
(that  is  to  say,  the  highest  exponent)  of  speech.  " 2 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  these  riddles  show  us 
again  the  Hindu  mind  preoccupied  with  the  nature 
phenomena  of  the  world,  at  a  time  when  the  old 
nature  gods  have  become  completely  crystallised. 
Again,  as  regards  the  status  of  these  riddles,  the 
Kena  Upanishad  opens  with  a  very  similar  pair  of 
riddle-stanzas,  showing  that  the  state  of  mind  at  the 
bottom  of  nature-worship,  brahmodya,  and  Upani 
shad  marks  advancing  mental  interests,  but  yet 
advance  along  the  same  line. 

The  Rig- Veda  (i.  164)  contains  a  hymn  which  is 
nothing  but  a  collection  of  fifty-two  verses  of  poetry, 
all  of  them,  except  one,  riddles  whose  answers  are 
not  given.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  occa- 

1  The     same  text,  23.  47  and  48. 

2  Ibid.,  23.  6 1  and  62. 


2 1  8  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


sion  upon  which  these  riddles  were  let  off  was  the 
same  as  with  those  just  cited,  namely,  the  sacrifice. 
The  subjects  of  these  riddles  are  cosmic,  that  is,  per 
taining  to  the  nature  phenomena  of  the  universe  ; 
mythological,  that  is,  referring  to  the  accepted  legends 
about  the  gods  ;  psychological,  that  is,  pertaining  to 
the  human  organs  and  sensations  ;  or,  finally,  crude 
and  tentative  philosophy  or  theosophy.  Heaven 
and  earth,  sun  and  moon,  air,  clouds  and  rain  ;  the 
course  of  the  sun,  the  year,  the  seasons,  months, 
days  and  nights  ;  the  human  voice,  self-conscious 
ness,  life  and  death  ;  the  origin  of  the  first  creature 
and  the  originator  of  the  universe  —  such  are  the 
abrupt  and  bold  themes.  Here  figures  also  (stanza 
46)  that  seemingly  precocious  statement  which  con 
tains  the  suggestion,  symptomatic  for  all  future 
Hindu  thought,  namely,  that  above  and  behind  the 
great  multitude  of  gods  there  is  one  supreme  person 
ality  ;  behind  the  gods  there  is  that  "  Only  Being  " 
of  whom  the  gods  are  but  various  names  — 
}JLIOL\ 


"  They  call  it  Indra,  Mitra,  Varuna,  and  Agni,  or  the 
heavenly  bird  Garutmant  (the  sun).  The  sages  call  the 
One  Being  in  many  ways  ;  they  call  it  Agni,  Yama, 
Matarievan.  " 

How  closely  attached  to  the  sacrifice  theosophic 
speculations  remained  as  they  grew  in  clearness  and 


The  Beginnings  of  Hindu  Theosophy   219 


importance,  we  cannot  say  ;  all  that  we  can  say  is, 
that  in  time  the  two  intrinsically  uncongenial  themes 
parted  company.  Nor  can  we  assert  that  theosophic 
thought  would  not  have  sprung  up  in  the  Hindu 
mind,  endowed  as  we  see  it  to  be,  independently 
from  the  sacrifice  and  its  perverted  scholastic  scintil 
lations.  Given  the  mind,  the  thought  will  come. 
But  it  is  easy  to  see  that  the  beginnings  of  higher 
religion  started  around  the  sacrifice,  by  calling  out 
the  higher  aspirations  of  the  patrons  of  the  sacrifice. 
Wisdom-searching  Rajas,  weary  of  the  world,  Janaka 
and  Ajatagatru  at  an  earlier  time,  Buddha  and  Bim- 
bisara  at  a  later  time,  have  as  much  to  do  with  the 
development  of  Hindu  religion  as  the  thirst  for 
newer  and  larger  truth  on  the  part  of  the  Brahmans 
themselves.  The  Rajas  were  the  Maecenases  of  the 
"  poor  clerics."  We  imagine  very  easily  that  some 
of  them  got  a  surfeit  of  the  world,  and  were  attracted 
to  the  things  beyond.  The  beginnings  of  theosophy 
grew  up  around  the  sacrifice  which  was  under  their 
patronage.  The  Brahmans  grew  up  to  their  patrons' 
— and,  we  may  add,  to  their  own — higher  needs. 
They  began  to  offer  these  patrons  something  more 
than  ritual  technicalities.  In  the  long  run  they  must 
hold  their  position  and  reputation  by  something 
better  than  by  handling  with  ludicrous  correctness 
fire-wood  and  sacrificial  ladle  ;  soma  drink  and  obla- 


22O  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


tions  of  melted  butter.  And  in  the  long  run  their 
minds,  which  somehow,  the  hocus-pocus  of  the  sac 
rifice  had  neither  deadened  nor  satisfied,  rose  to 
those  higher  and  permanent  requirements  which  led 
to  practical  abandonment  of  the  sacrifice  and  lasting 
devotion  to  philosophic  religion. 

The  question,  next,  as  to  who  carried  on  the 
higher  religion  has  been  answered  incidentally  in 
what  has  just  been  said.  If  what  is  stated  there  is 
stated  correctly,  we  shall  not  go  astray  if  we  assume 
that  the  Brahmans  were  the  mainspring  in  the  ad 
vance  of  higher  thought,  just  as  they  were  the  main 
factors  in  the  worship  of  the  gods  and  in  ceremonial 
practices.  But  this  same  question  requires  to  be 
stated  more  precisely  for  the  following  reason.  A 
number  of  distinguished  scholars  have  recently  ad 
vanced  the  theory  that  Hindu  theosophy  is  not,  as 
has  been  tacitly  assumed,  in  the  main  the  product 
of  Brahmanical  intellect,  but  that  it  was  due  to  the 
spiritual  insight  of  the  Royal  or  Warrior  Caste.1 

Professor  Garbe  of  the  University  of  Tubingen, 
an  eminent  student  of  Hindu  philosophy  and  at 
the  same  time  a  scholar  well  versed  in  the  early 
literature  of  the  Vedas,  is  the  most  ardent  advo- 

1  See  Deussen,  Allgemeine  Geschichte  der  Philosophie,  vol.  i.,  part 
2«  PP-  354  ff-\  Garbe,  Beitrdge  zur  Indischen  Kulturgeschichte,  pp.  3 
ff.\  Winternitz,  Geschichte  der  Indischen  Litter atur,  pp. 


The  Beginnings  of  Hindu  Theosophy   221 

cate  of  this  view.  Garbe  is  not  at  all  an  admirer 
of  Brahman  civilisation ;  on  more  than  one  oc 
casion  has  he  poured  out  the  vials  of  his  just 
wrath  against  the  intolerable  pretensions  and  cruel 
ties  which  the  Brahmans  have  practised  during  the 
period  of  their  ascendancy  in  India  through  several 
milleniums.  But  not  content  with  that,  he  believes 
that  the  Brahmans  were  not  only  bold  bad  men,  but 
also  that  they  were  too  stupid  to  have  worked  their 
way  from  the  sandy  wastes  of  ritualism  to  the  green 
summits  where  grows  the  higher  thought  of  India. 
For  centuries  the  Brahmans  were  engaged  in  ex 
cogitating  sacrifice  after  sacrifice,  and  hair-splitting 
definitions  and  explanations  of  senseless  ritualistic 
hocus-pocus.  "  All  at  once,"  says  Professor  Garbe, 
"  lofty  thought  appears  upon  the  scene.  To  be 
sure,  even  then  the  traditional  god-lore,  sacrificial 
lore,  and  folk-lore  are  not  rejected,  but  the  spirit  is 
no  longer  satisfied  with  the  cheap  mysteries  that 
surround  the  sacrificial  altar.  A  passionate  desire 
to  solve  the  riddle  of  the  universe  and  its  relation  to 
the  own  self  holds  the  mind  captive  ;  nothing  less 
will  satisfy  henceforth." 

Parts  of  this  observation  of  Professor  Garbe  are 
correct,  nay  even  familiar.  But  not  every  part,  it 
seems  to  me.  Having  in  mind  Yajnavalkya  and 
Uddalaka  Aruni  of  the  Upanishads,  or  £ankara  and 


222  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


Kumarila  of  the  Vedanta  Philosophy,  one  may  fairly 
doubt  the  unredeemed  stupidity  of  the  Brahmans  at 
any  period  of  India's  history.  I  would,  for  my  part, 
question  more  particularly  the  expression  "all  at 
once  "  in  the  above  statement. 

Mental  revolutions  rarely  come  all  at  once,  least 
of  all  in  India.  The  evidence  of  India's  remarkably 
continuous  records  shows  that  every  important 
Hindu  thought  has  its  beginning,  middle,  and  final 
development.  As  regards  theosophy,  its  beginnings 
are  found  in  the  Vedic  hymns ;  its  middle  in  the 
Upanishads  ;  and  its  final  development  in  the  "  Sys 
tems  "  of  Philosophy,  like  the  Vedanta  and  Sankhya 
of  later  times.  I  am  afraid  that  Professor  Garbe  has 
somehow  gotten  into  the  state  of  mind  that  there  is 
only  one  kind  of  good  Brahman,  namely,  a  dead 
Brahman,  to  paraphrase  a  saying  about  that  other 
Indian,  the  American  Indian.  Selfishness,  foolish 
ness,  bigotry,  and  cruelty  galore — the  marks  of  these 
some  Brahmans  have  left  in  their  compositions,  fool 
ishly  as  behooves  knaves.  But  there  were,  and  there 
are,  Brahmans  and  Brahmans.  The  older  Upani 
shads,  written  in  approximately  the  same  language 
and  style  as  the  so-called  prose  Brahmana  (Talmudic) 
texts,  figuring  largely  as  parts  of  these  compositions, 
were  composed  by  Brahmans  who  had  risen  to  the 
conviction  that  not  "  the  way  of  works  "  lies  the 


The  Beginnings  of  Hindu  Theosophy   223 


salvation  that  is  knowledge.  Countless  Brahman 
names  crowd  these  texts :  Naciketas  and  Qvetaketu, 
Gargya  and  Yajnavalkya,  and  many  others.  Even 
the  wives  or  daughters  of  great  Brahmans,  Gargi 
and  Maitreyl,  take  part  in  spiritual  tourneys,  and 
occasionally,  as  in  the  case  of  Gargi  in  the  Great 
Forest-Upanishad  (3.  6  and  8),  rise  to  a  subtler  ap 
preciation  than  the  Brahman  men  of  the  mystery  of 
the  world  and  the  riddle  of  existence. 

The  scholars  mentioned  have  been  attracted  to 
their  position  by  the  interesting  fact  that  the  Up- 
anishads  narrate  several  times  that  the  ultimate 
philosophy  was  in  the  keeping  of  men  of  royal  caste; 
and  that  these  warriors  imparted  their  knowledge  to 
Brahmans.  This  is  put  in  such  a  way  that  the  Brah 
man,  after  having  aired  his  own  stock  of  theosophy 
"  lays  down  "  before  the  king's  superior  insight.  The 
king  is  then  represented  as  graciously  bestowing  his 
saving  knowledge  upon  the  Brahman.  Once  or  twice, 
however,  the  king  turns  braggart,  and  mars  his  gen 
erosity  by  claiming  that  the  warrior  caste  are  the 
real  thing,  and  that  they  alone  in  all  the  world  are 
able  to  illumine  these  profound  and  obscure  matters. 
Thus  the  extreme  example  of  this  kind  is  narrated 
in  two  Upanishads.1  The  Brahman  £vetaketu  Aruni, 
ignorant  of  the  doctrine  of  transmigration,  is  com- 

1  Brihad  Aranyaka  Upanishad  6.  2  ;  Chandogya  Upanishad  5.  3. 


224  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


pelled  to  look  for  instruction  to  King  Pravahana 
Jaivali,  who  receives  him  graciously  and  condescends 
to  become  his  teacher.  In  the  course  of  his  preach 
ment  the  King  says  to  the  Brahman : 

"  Because,  as  thou  hast  told  me,  this  doctrine  ere  this 
and  up  to  thy  time  has  not  been  in  vogue  among  the 
Brahmans,  therefore  in  all  the  world  sovereignty  has  re 
mained  in  the  hands  of  the  warrior  caste.  As  surely  as 
we  desire  that  thou  and  ail  thy  ancestors  shall  remain 
well-disposed  towards  us,  so  surely  has  to  this  day 
no  Brahman  ever  possessed  this  knowledge." 

I  doubt  whether  this  statement,  and  others  of 
a  similar  nature,  justify  us  in  regarding  the  warrior 
caste  as  the  spiritual  saviors  of  India.  As  regards 
King  Pravahana  Jaivali's  statement,  it  is  specious  on 
the  face  of  it.  For  what  have  royalty  and  transmi 
gration  to  do  with  one  another?  In  its  essence  the 
doctrine  of  transmigration  has  no  more  regard  for 
royalty  than  for  the  lowest  caste,  because  its  purpose 
is  release  from  any  form  of  individual  existence  (see 
the  sixth  lecture).  Then  again,  the  very  texts  that 
narrate  these  exploits  of  the  Kshatriyas  are  un 
questionably  Brahmanic.  Would  the  arrogance  and 
selfishness  of  the  Brahmans  have  allowed  them  to 
preserve  and  propagate  facts  calculated  to  injure 
permanently  their  own  standing?  Surely  not. 

The  situation  is  somewhat  as  follows :  there  never 


The  Beginnings  of  Hindu  Theosophy   225 


was  a  time  in  India  when  the  Aryas,  that  is, 
the  three  upper  of  the  four  ancient  castes,  were 
excluded  from  Brahmanical  piety.1  Now,  as  theo- 
sophy,  by  its  very  terms,  shuts  down  on  the  ritual, 
the  special  profession  of  the  Brahmans,  there  is 
nothing  at  all  in  it  to  exclude  occasional  intelligent 
and  aspiring  men  from  the  other  noble  (Arya)  castes. 
This  is  true  even  at  the  present  day  :  Svami  Vive- 
kananda  was  no  Brahman,  but  a  member  of  the 
Kayastha  or  clerk  caste.  The  Chandogya  Upani- 
shad  (4.  4)  narrates  how  Satyakama,  the  son  of 
the  gadabout  servant-maid  Jabala,  was  admitted  to 
Brahmanic  disciplehood  by  Haridrumata,  for  the 
very  reason  that  he  did  not  try  to  cover  up  his  low 
birth.  Satyakama,  in  the  end,  obtains  the  highest 
knowledge.  When  it  comes  to  higher  religion  the 
bars  are  consciously  let  down  at  all  times.  In  the 
Mokshadharma  of  the  Mahabharata3  the  Vaigya 
(Vanik)  caste  man  Tuladhara,  "  seller  of  juices,  scents, 
leaves,  barks,  fruits,  and  roots,"  teaches  righteous 
ness  to  the  Brahman  Jajali.  In  the  same  text  *  the 
Rishi  Para^ara  declares  that  Brahmans  learned  in  the 
Veda  regard  a  virtuous  Qudra,  or  low  caste  man,  as 
the  equal  of  Brahmans. 

1  Compare  Pandit  Shyamaji  Krishnavarma,    Transactions   of  the 
Fifth  International  Congress  of  Orientalists,  vol.  ii.,  p.  218  ff. 

2  12.    261^".  3  12.   290^". 


226  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 

Here,  I  think,  is  where  the  good  Brahman,  of 
whom  Professor  Garbe  will  not  hear,  comes  in.  The 
Brahman  authors  of  the  Upanishads,  just  as  high- 
minded  Brahmans  of  all  ages,  were  honest  and  liberal 
enough  to  permit  all  fit  men  to  participate  in  higher 
religious  activity,  in  wisdom  and  in  piety.  Nay, 
they  express  particular  admiration  in  such  participa 
tion,  because,  after  all,  there  was  to  them  something 
unexpected  in  all  this.  They  were  carried  away  by 
it  to  a  certain  ecstasy,  the  kind  of  ecstasy  that  goes 
with  a  paradox,  as  when  the  son  of  a  peasant  in 
Europe  works  his  way  to  a  professorship  in  a  uni 
versity.  As  regards  the  Rajas,  or  other  nobles,  we 
must  not  forget,  too,  that  they  were  after  all  the 
source  from  which  all  blessings  flowed.  Even  in 
theosophic  occupation  the  Brahman  remains,  as  I 
have  said  before,  the  poor  cleric  with  the  Raja  as 
his  Maecenas.  I  think  that  any  one  who  reads  these 
statements  of  royal  proficiency  in  the  highest  wisdom 
attentively  will  acknowledge  that  they  are  dashed  in 
the  Upanishads,  as  they  are  in  the  Ritual,  with  a 
goodly  measure  of  captatio  benevolentice.  In  other 
words,  the  genuine  admiration  of  high-minded  nobles 
is  not  necessarily  divorced  from  the  subconscious- 
ness  that  it  is  well  to  admire  in  high  places.  Even 
really  good  Brahmans  might  do  that. 

If  King  Janaka  of  Videha  punctuates  the  Brahman 


The  Beginnings  of  Hindu  Theosophy    227 

Yajnavalkya's  brilliant  exposition  of  theosophy  by 
repeated  gifts  of  a  thousand  cows — we  may  wonder 
who  counted  them,  and  what  Yajnavalkya  did  with 
them — King  Ajatacatru  of  Benares,  real  intellectual 
as  he  is,  will  not  allow  admiring  Brahmans  to  starve. 

I  think  that  a  saying  of  the  modern  sage  and  pious 
ascetic,  the  Paramahansa  Ramakrishna, 1  throws 
essentially  the  right  light  upon  the  exceptional 
character  of  the  theosophic  exploits  of  kings  :  "  Men 
always  quote  the  example  of  the  King  Janaka,  as 
that  of  a  man  who  lived  in  the  world  and  yet  attained 
perfection.  But  throughout  the  whole  history  of 
mankind  there  is  only  this  solitary  example.  His 
case  was  not  the  rule  but  the  exception."  We  may 
tone  down  this  statement,  and  apply  it  to  the  present 
question  as  follows :  Not  all  Brahmans  were  intellec 
tually  or  morally  sound,  but  some  Brahmans  were  at 
all  times,  as  they  were  in  the  days  of  £ankara  and 
Kumarila,  the  intellectual  leaders  of  India ;  brilliant 
helpers  from  the  other  castes,  more  especially  the 
Royal  caste,2  lent  occasional  aid,  and  this  aid  justly 
compelled  acknowledgment  and  admiration. 

I  am  now  come  at  last  to  the  "  how  "  of  Hindu 
higher  thought,  that  is,  my  task  is  now  to  show  how 
the  main  or  essential  thoughts  of  Hindu  theosophy 

1  See  Max  Mtiller,  Ramakrishna,  His  Life  and  Sayings,  p.  127. 

2  See  above,  p.   219. 


228  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


arose.  In  the  transition  from  the  nature  gods,  the 
legends,  the  ritual,  and  the  folk-lore  practices,  to  the 
settled  theosophy  of  later  times,  many  conceptions 
flit  like  phantoms  across  the  vision  of  these  specu 
lators  or  seers,  sometimes  not  to  be  heard  of  a  second 
time.  The  air  is  charged  with  experimental,  electric 
thought.  No  religious  or  philosophic  literature  of 
ancient  times  has  buried  so  many  "  lost  children  "  as 
the  Hindu  in  the  storm  and  stress  period  that  ends 
with  the  Upanishads.  No  people  of  thinkers  have 
started  to  rear  so  many  edifices  of  thought  to  be 
abandoned  without  regret  or  scruple  when  found 
wanting  in  the  end.  They  have  left  behind  them 
many  a  ruin  which  they  might  well  enough  have 
finished,  and  within  which  the  religious  thinkers  of 
many  another  nation,  less  exacting,  would  have 
cheerfully  settled  upon  as  permanent  and  congenial 
habitations.  Philip  Sidney's  saying:  "  Reason  can 
not  show  itself  more  reasonable  than  to  leave  off 
reasoning  on  things  above  reason,"  does  not  hold 
with  the  Hindus.  They  would  certainly  have  stig 
matised  such  sweet  reasonableness  as  the  philosophy 
of  sloth,  if  they  had  ever  heard  of  it.  On  the 
contrary,  the  old  questions  of  whence,  why,  and 
whither  fascinate  and  enthrall  their  thoughts  from 
the  time  of  the  Vedic  Rishis  to  the  present  day. 
Remarkable  as  this  may  sound,  we  have  really  no 


The  Beginnings  of  Hindu  Theosophy   229 

record  of  any  period  of  Hindu  thought  of  which  we 
can  say  definitely  that  it  was  wanting  in  the  highest 
and  most  strenuous  thought,  from  the  time  of  the 
riddle-hymn  of  Dirghatamas  and  the  creation-hymn,1 
to  the  modern  Vedantins  and  Paramahansas  of  the 
type  of  Ramakrishna  and  Vivekananda. 

To  begin  with,  negatively  speaking,  there  are  at  a 
very  early  time  traces  of  scepticism.  The  old  myth 
ological  gods  in  strong  flesh  tints  are  just  the  least 
bit  disconcerting.  There  are  those  who  begin  to  say 
of  the  gods  :  "  They  are  not,"  and,  doubtless,  there 
is  a  growing  number  of  those  who  begin  to  weaken 
in  that  faith  ($raddha]  which  means  monotonously 
sacrifice,  and  gifts  to  the  Brahmans.  The  way  in 
which  the  Veda  insists  upon  this  faith  shows  that  it 
could  not  always  be  taken  for  granted.  Especially 
the  god  Indra  who  is  a  good  deal  of  a  Bombastes 
Furioso  must  have  presented  himself  to  the  eye  of 
the  more  enlightened  as  a  brummagem  god,  tricky, 
braggart,  drunken,  and  immoral.  Indra,  like  Zeus, 
will  have  his  fling.  There  is  a  story  about  himself 
and  a  lady  by  the  name  of  Ahalya  in  which  he 
assumes  the  outer  form  of  that  lady's  august  priestly 
husband  for  his  own  purposes,  and  this  as  well  as 
other  treacherous  acts  are  a  fruitful  source  of  moral 
ising  in  the  later  Veda.  Even  in  the  Rig-Veda,  if 

1  Rig-Veda  i.   164  and  10.   129. 


230  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


we  read  between  the  lines,  there  are  those  who  mock 
Indra,  and  those  who  apologise  for  him : 

"Bring  lovely  praise  to  Indra,  vying  one  with  the 
other,  truthful  praise,  if  he  himself  be  true.  Even 
though  one  or  another  says  :  *  Indra  is  not,  who  ever 
saw  him,  who  is  he  that  we  should  praise  him?'  ' 

(Rig-Veda  8.  100-  3.) 

Or  again  : 

"The  terrible  one  of  whom  they  ask,  *  where  is  he?' 
Nay  verily  they  say  of  him,  'he  is  not  at  all'. 
He  makes  shrink  the  goods  of  his  enemy  like  a  gambler 

the  stakes  of  his  opponent  : 
Put  your  faith  in  him — He,  O  folks,  is  Indra." 

(Rig-Veda  2.  12   5.) 

Hence  they  that  have  no  faith  are  called  a^raddha, 
"  infidel,"  or  anindra,  "repudiators  of  Indra."  ' 

Every  onward  movement  of  Hindu  thought  takes 
place  at  the  expense  of  the  old  gods  of  nature ;  the 
divine  attribute  becomes  more  important  than  the 
mythological  person.  The  individual  natural  history 
of  the  gods  becomes  a  thing  of  minor  interest.  In 
this  sense  polytheism  is  decadent  even  in  the  hymns 
of  the  Rig- Veda  themselves.  It  shows  signs  of 
going  to  seed  for  philosophy.  The  gods  in  turn 
perform  about  the  same  feats  of  creating  and  up 
holding  the  world  :  the  interest  of  the  poets  in  the 
acts  has  evidently  increased  at  the  expense  of  the 

1  Rig-Veda  7.  6.  3    and  5.  2.  3.  ;  10.  48.  7. 


The  Beginnings  of  Hindu  Theosophy  231 

agents.  The  gods,  too,  we  must  not  forget,  have 
taken,  very  mechanically,  fixed  positions  in  the  ritual 
devoted  to  their  service.  One  thing  is  certain,  in 
the  host  of  figures  that  crowd  the  canvass  in  the 
transition  period  from  mythology  to  theosophy  the 
nature  gods  play  no  real  role.  They  are,  if  not  ex 
actly  abandoned,  at  least  relegated  to  a  subordinate 
position  and  treated  with  comparative  coldness. 
Every  embodiment  of  the  divine  idea  is  now  abstract 
or  symbolic.  The  higher  forms  of  early  Hindu  re 
ligion  operate  decidedly  from  the  ontological  side, 
from  the  severely  intellectual  side.  Faith  and  piety, 
sentiment  and  emotion,  right  and  wrong,  invariably 
take  the  second  place,  as  long  as  there  is  to  settle 
the  question  of  the  universe,  the  great  cosmos ;  man, 
the  little  cosmos;  time;  space;  causality.  There 
fore,  perhaps,  the  plastic  possibilities  of  the  early 
gods  through  poetry,  legend,  and  the  art  of  repro 
duction  remain  in  India  a  coarse-grained  exercise 
of  second  rate  power :  one  needs  but  to  call  up  for 
comparison  the  part  that  Greek  mythology  plays  in 
Greek  literature  and  art. 

It  is  interesting  to  test  this  on  the  person  of  one 
great  nature  god  of  the  early  time.  We  have  seen 
that  in  a  very  early  prehistoric  time,  the  common 
period  of  the  Hindus  and  Iranians,  there  existed  a 
high  view  of  the  gods  as  moral  forces,  as  the  omni- 


232  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


scient  guardians  of  the  moral  law  and  order  of  the 
universe.  Avestan  Ahura  Mazda  and  Vedic  Varuna 
are  the  guardians-in-chief  of  the  rta,  the  cosmic  and 
moral  order  of  the  universe  and  man.1  Vedic  Varuna 
in  his  ethical  strength  has  a  Hebraic  flavor.  By  the 
side  of  even  the  loftiest  figure  and  the  loftiest  traits 
of  the  Hellenic  or  Teutonic  Pantheon  Varuna  stands 
like  a  Jewish  prophet  by  the  side  of  a  priest  of 
Dagon.  And  yet  what  permanent  moral  strength 
have  the  Hindus  derived  from  Varuna,  and  what  be 
comes  of  Varuna  himself  in  the  course  of  his  de 
velopment  ?  A  second  rate  Neptune,  "  Lord  of  the 
Waters,"  a  mere  stage  figure.  In  the  straight-lined 
advance,  looking  neither  to  the  right  nor  to  the  left, 
to  the  recognition  of  the  one  Brahma,  the  universal 
spirit,  as  the  one  Reality,  and  the  consequent  illu- 
soriness  of  the  entire  phenomenal  world,  there  is 
really  no  more  room  for  righteous  and  stern  Varuna 
than  for  an  idol  of  clay,  unless  you  can  make  out 
that  Varuna  is  but  a  particular  manifestation  of  the 
One  Brahma,  and  then  he  is  no  more  important  than 
any  other  manifestation. 

The  absence  of  a  strong  chronological  scaffolding 
is  felt  not  only  for  the  events  of  Hindu  history,  but 
also  for  the  events  of  Hindu  thought.  It  is  the  cus 
tom  to  speak  rather  glibly  of  "  late  "  and  "  early  "  in 

1  See  above,  p.  126. 


The  Beginnings  of  Hindu  Theosophy   233 


these  thought  movements.  As  a  matter  of  fact  we 
are  at  the  beginning  of  higher  Hindu  thought  con 
fronted  with  its  most  important  and  most  permanent 
idea.  Some  poets  of  the  Vedic  time,  writing,  not 
badly,  in  Vedic  metre,  see  more  or  less  clearly  that 
the  idea  of  God,  in  so  far  as  it  can  be  conceived  at 
all,  presupposes  the  idea  of  absolute  unity.  It  is  a 
thought  both  independent  and  of  leonine  boldness. 
Independent,  because  there  is  no  suspicion  of  foreign 
thinkers,  or  foreign  literature.  Bold,  because  it  will 
soon  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  there  is  but  one 
real  thing,  one  "That,"  one  ding  an  sick,  which  ex 
ists  both  in  the  universe  and  in  man,  and  that  all  else 
is  illusion.  Whatever  else  we  may  say  of  this  con 
ception,  a  bolder  conception  has  not  emanated  from 
the  brain  of  man ;  a  bolder  conception  cannot,  per 
haps,  come  from  the  brain  of  man.  We  have  become 
acquainted  with  one  expression  of  this  unity  in  the 
hymn  of  Dlrghatamas1 :  "  They  call  it  Indra,  Mitra, 
Varuna,  and  Agni,  or  the  heavenly  bird  Garutmant 
(the  sun).  The  sages  call  the  one  being  in  many  ways  ; 
they  call  it  Agni,  Yama,  Matarigvan."  Professor 
Deussen,  in  his  History  of  Philosophy,2  remarks  that 
no  more  epoch-marking  word  has  been  uttered  in 
India  until  we  come  to  the  famous  tat  tvam  asi, 

1  Rig-Veda  1.164.46. 

2  Allgemeine  Geschichte  der  Philosophic,   vol.  i.,  part  i,  p.  106. 


234  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 

"  thou  art  the  That,"  of  the  Chandogya  Upanishad. 
Lest  some  one  should  suspect  this  to  be  a  mere 
blundering  thought  for  the  nonce,  a  kind  of  freak  or 
sport  of  mental  rumination,  the  same  Dlrghatamas 
hymn  contains  the  idea  several  times  more ;  for 
instance  in  stanza  6: 

"  In  ignorance  do  I  ask  here  them  that  haply  know, 
Who  did  support  the  six  regions  of  the  world  ? 
What  was,  forsooth,  this  one  unborn  thing  "  ? 

The  tenth  book  of  the  Rig-Veda  contains  the 
famous  creation  hymn  (10.129).  This  remarkable 
production  has  always  interested  Sanskritists  pro 
foundly  ;  it  has  also  passed  over  into  the  general 
literature  of  religion  and  philosophy.  That  great  and 
sober  critic,  the  late  Professor  William  D.  Whitney, 
remarked  anent  it  in  1882,  that  the  unlimited  praises 
which  had  been  bestowed  upon  it,  as  philosophy  and 
as  poetry,  were  well-nigh  nauseating.1  And  yet, 
twelve  years  later,  in  1894,  Deussen,  who,  I  am  sure, 
is  not  trying  to  contradict  Whitney,  breaks  out  into 
new  praise,  more  ecstatic  than  ever:  "In  its  noble 
simplicity,  in  the  loftiness  of  its  philosophic  vision 
it  is  possibly  the  most  admirable  bit  of  philosophy  of 
olden  times."  And  again,  "  No  translation  can  ever 
do  justice  to  the  beauty  of  the  original."2  I  think 

1  Proceedings  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  vol.  xi.,  p.  cxi. 

2  History  of  Philosophy,  vol.  i.,  part   i,  pp.  119  and  126. 


The  Beginnings  of  Hindu  Theosophy    235 


we  may  grant  that  the  composition  shows  a  good  deal 
of  rawness,  unevenness,  and  inconsistency.  Yet  it  is 
perhaps  easier  to  undervalue  such  a  performance  than 
to  exaggerate  its  importance.  It  occurs  in  one  of 
the  earliest  literatures  of  the  world  ;  it  brushes  aside 
all  mythology,  and  it  certainly  exhibits  philosophic 
depth  and  caution  when  it  designates  the  fundamen 
tal  cause  of  the  universe  not  by  a  name,  but  as  "  that  " 
(tad\  or  "  the  one  thing  "  (ekam).  But  let  my  hearers 
judge  for  themselves : 

FIRST   STANZA. 

"  Nor  being1  was  there  nor  non-being ;  there  was  no 
atmosphere  and  no  sky  beyond.  What  covered  all, 
and  where,  by  what  protected  ?  Was  there  a  fathom 
less  abyss  of  the  waters  ?  " 

The  poet  describes  as  deftly  as  possible  a  pri 
mordial  chaos.  There  was  not  non-being,  for  that  is 
unconceivable ' ;  there  was  not  being  in  the  ordinary 
experience  of  the  senses.  What  was  there  ?  The 
poet  in  the  next  stanza  carries  on  his  negation  and 
then  abruptly  presses  forward  to  a  positive  con 
clusion  : 

SECOND    STANZA. 
"  Neither  death  was  there  nor  immortality  ;  there 

1  Cf.  Chandogya  Upanishad  6.   2.    2. 


236  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


was  not  the  sheen  of  night  nor  light  of  day.  That 
One  breathed,  without  breath,  by  inner  power  ;  than  it 
truly  nothing  whatever  else  existed  besides." 

The  poet  is  careful  in  his  thought  of  what  posi 
tively  was.  It  is  "  That  One  "  (tad  ekatri) ;  it  exists 
and  breathes,  but  it  breathes  in  a  higher  sense,  with 
out  breath  (literally  "wind")  which  is  physical  and 
material.  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  a  more  cautious, 
or  even  a  more  successful  attempt  to  conceive  and 
express  a  first  cause  or  principle  without  personality. 
Yet  we  must  not  fail  to  observe  that  even  so  subtle 
a  conception  as  the  neuter  "  That  One  "  is  furnished 
with  the  anthropomorphic  attribute  of  breath,  be 
cause  after  all,  in  the  long  run,  it  must  be  decked  out 
in  some  sort  of  flesh  and  blood.  The  third  stanza 
takes  up  anew  the  description  of  chaos,  and  follows 
it  up  with  a  second  description  of  the  primal  force  : 

THIRD    STANZA. 

"  Darkness  there  was,  hidden  by  darkness  at  the 
beginning- ;  an  unillumined  ocean  was  this  all.  The 
living  force  which  was  enveloped  in  a  shell ,  that  one 
by  the  might  of  devotional  fervor  was  born" 

Unquestionably  we  have  here  the  idea,  frequently 
expressed  in  the  Brahmana  tales  of  the  creator 
Prajapati.1  According  to  this  the  primal  being  be- 

1  See  below,  p.  240. 


The  Beginnings  of  Hindu  Theosophy   237 


gins  to  create  through  the  force  of  devotion  (tapas). 
Here  an  even  more  primary  condition  is  assumed  : 
the  fundamental  force  is  itself  put  forth  by,  or  is 
born  from,  devotion.  This  devotional  fervor  marks 
either  another  start  at  a  primeval  cause,  or,  paradox 
ical  as  this  may  seem,  is  the  devotional  fervor  of  the 
yet  uncreated  sages.  Anyhow  these  sages  appear 
upon  the  scene  as  del  ex  machina  in  the  next  stanza, 
and  then,  after  this  gap  has  been  spanned,  the  work 
of  creation  can  really  proceed. 

FOURTH   STANZA. 

"Desire  arose  in  the  beginning  in  That ;  it  was  the 
first  seed  of  mind.  The  sages  by  devotion  found  the 
root  of  being  in  non-being,  seeking  it  in  (their)  heart." 

Desire,  Kama,  the  equivalent  of  Greek  "Epcos 
"  Love,"  means  here  the  desire  to  live ;  it  is  the  first 
possible  seed  or  fruit  of  the  mind,  for  there  is  no 
conceivable  action  of  the  mind  which  is  not  preceded 
by  life.  The  second  hemistich  introduces  an  even 
more  primordial  creative  role  on  the  part  of  the 
sages,  whose  devotion  is  the  real  promotive  force  in 
the  act  of  creation.  The  poet  does  not  tell  whence 
come  the  sages  at  this  stage  of  the  drama.  The 
production  of  this  creation,  which  is  here  defined  as 
"  being"  coming  out  of  "  non-being,"  contradicts, 
the  first  stanza  where  "  non-being"  is  denied  :  "  How 


238  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


can  'being'  come  out  of  'non-being?'"  asks  the 
Chandogya  Upanishad  (6.  2.  2).  Moreover  it  ignores 
the  previously  postulated  "  That  Only  "  which  by  its 
terms  eliminates  "  non-being."  The  poet  here  un 
questionably  entangles  himself  in  sham-profundity  ; 
he  had  better  left  out  all  reference  to  "  non-being"  I 
it  is  a  term  handled  by  the  Hindus  with  a  degree 
of  deftness  which  is  in  the  inverse  ratio  to  their 
fondness  for  it. 

The  hymn  continues  with  a  mystical  fifth  stanza 
which  is  obscure,  and  in  any  case  unimportant. 
Then  it  takes  a  wholly  new  turn  into  the  direction  of 
philosophic  scepticism.  This  is  quite  unexpected  in 
the  wake  of  "  That  Only,"  in  whose  mind  creative 
desire  had  sprung  forth :  it  ought  to,  aided  by  its 
own  or  the  sages'  creative  fervor,  go  on  to  create  the 
world,  if  it  does  anything  at  all : 

SIXTH   STANZA. 

"  Who  truly  knowetJi  ?  Who  can  here  proclaim  it  ? 
Whence  hither  born,  whence  cometh  this  creation  ? 
On  this  side  are  the  gods  from  its  creating, 
Who  knoweth  then  from  whence  it  came  to  being?  " 

SEVENTH    STANZA. 

"  This  creation — from  whence  it  came  to  being, 
Whether  it  made  itself,  or  whether  not — 
He  who  is  its  overseer  in  highest  heaven, 
He  surely  knoweth — or  perchance  he  knoweth  not." 


The  Beginnings  of  Hindu  Theosophy    239 

The  avowed  purpose  of  all  philosophy  is  to  ac 
count  for  the  presence  of  the  world  and  its  contents, 
as  something  which  is  not  self-evident,  and  needs  to 
be  explained  beyond  the  point  of  mere  individual 
experience,  or  analysis  through  empirical  knowledge. 
The  creation  hymn  performs  this  act  not  without 
some  unsteadiness  and  with  petulance  due  to  scep 
ticism.  In  putting  forth  a  fundamental  principle 
without  personality  it  does  not  fall  far  behind  the 
best  thought  of  later  times  inside  or  outside  of  In 
dia.  It  fails  where  all  philosophy  fails,  in  bridging 
over  to  this  particular  idealistic  or  phenomenal  world, 
even  after  the  fundamental  principle  has  been  ab 
stracted,  no  matter  in  how  rarefied  and  non-committal 
a  form.  We  may  expect,  therefore,  other  starts  to 
wards  the  same  end.  The  Veda,  as  I  have  hinted 
before,  contains  an  astonishing  number  of  attempts 
to  establish  a  supreme  monotheistic  being  who  is  far 
easier  to  handle  than  the  monistic  "  That  Only  "  ;  a 
monotheistic  god  who,  when  once  conceived,  con 
veniently  assumes  all  responsibility.  We  have  seen 
more  than  once  how  supreme  divine  action  makes  a 
show  of  gradually  detaching  itself  from  the  persons 
of  the  various  gods  who  figure  in  the  earlier  myth 
and  cult,  and  how  this  action  impresses  itself  upon 
the  mind  as  really  more  important  than  the  particu 
lar  divine  agent  who  was  at  any  given  time  supposed 


240  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 

to  perform  it.  Creation  of  the  world  ;  production  of 
the  sun  ;  spreading  out  of  the  sky  and  the  earth ; 
and  lordship  over  all  that  moves  or  stands — these 
are  some  of  the  grander  acts  in  world  life.  Even  in 
the  Rig- Veda  these  acts  are  bunched  and  thrown 
into  the  lap  of  a  divinity  by  the  name  of  Prajapati 
"  Lord  of  Creatures."  Various  earlier  divinities  of 
a  more  or  less  abstract  and  specialistic  character, 
especially  Savitar,  the  inspiring,  enlivening  principle 
of  the  sun,  and  Tvashtar,  a  kind  of  divine  carpenter 
or  artificer  of  less  important  objects,  are  blended  in 
this  product ;  it  goes  as  far  to  realise  personal  mono 
theism  as  was  ever  possible  in  India.  One  hymn1 
pictures  Prajapati  in  very  glowing  colors ;  he  is 
a  true  creator,  ruler,  and  preserver,  and  yet,  it  is 
very  interesting  to  observe,  that  the  description  of 
him  does  not,  after  all,  differ  very  materially  from  that 
of  the  polytheistic  god  Indra  in  the  hymn,  Rig- Veda 
2.  12,  as  may  be  seen  from  a  comparison  of  the  two.2 
Some  of  the  stanzas  of  the  Prajapati  hymn  are  as 

follows : 

Rig-Veda  10.  121. 

i.  "A  golden  germ  arose  in  the  beginning, 

Born  he  was  the  one  lord  of  things  existing, 
The  earth  and  yonder  sky  he  did  establish — 
What  god  shall  we  revere  with  our  oblation  ? 

1  Rig-Veda  10.  121. 

2  See  Deussen,  Geschichte der  Philosophic,  vol.  i.,  part  i,p.  128^". 


The  Beginnings  of  Hindu  Theosophy   241 


2.  "Who  gives  life's  breath  and  is  of  strength  the  giver, 

At  whose  behest  all  gods  do  act  obedient, 

Whose  shadow  is  immortality  and  likewise  death — 

What  god  shall  we  revere  with  our  oblation  ? 

3.  "The  king,  who  as  it  breathes  and  as  it  shuts  its  eyes, 

The  world  of  life  alone  doth  rule  with  might, 
Two-footed  creatures  and  four-footed  both  controls — 
What  god  shall  we  revere  with  our  oblation  ? 

4.  "Through  whose  great  might  arose  these  snow-capped 

mountains, 

Whose  are,  they  say,  the  sea  and  heavenly  river, 
Whose  arms  are  these  directions  of  the  space — 
What  god  shall  we  revere  with  our  oblation  ? " 

Not  until  we  come  to  the  tenth  stanza  does  this 
omnipotent  god  who  so  far  has  not  betrayed  his 
name,  unless  we  so  regard  the  epithet  "  Golden 
Germ  "  in  the  first  stanza,  reveal  himself  as  Prajapati : 

io.  '  'Prajapati,  thou  art  the  one — and  there  's  no  other — 
Who  dost  encompass  all  these  born  entities  ! 
Whate'er  we  wish  while  offering  thee  oblations, 
May  that  be  ours  !     May  we  be  lords  of  riches  !  " 

It  is  easy  to  feel  both  the  inferiority  and  the 
greater  convenience  of  this  Creator  God  who  lords 
it  over  everything,  without  exactly  having  estab 
lished  any  particular  mental  or  moral  claim  to  his 
prerogatives.  As  compared  with  the  sheer  philo 
sophic  "  That  Only,"  the  one  thing  without  humanly 

16 


242  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


definable  quality,  Prajapati  cuts  a  sorry  figure,  and 
marks  a  backward  movement.  There  are,  as  we 
have  said,  many  other  monotheistic  conceptions, 
symbolic,  ritualistic,  and  philosophic,  which  make  a 
short  spurt  and  fall  by  the  way.  The  supreme  being 
is  conceived  as  V^vakarman,  "  fabricator  of  the 
universe'* ;  as  Parameshthin,  "  he  who  occupies  the 
highest  summit";  as  Svayambhu,  "  the  self-exist 
ing  being";  as  Skambha,  "  Support";  as  Dhatar, 
"Maker";  as  Vidhatar,  "Arranger";  and  others. 
These  are  mere  symbolism. 

In  another  way  a  move  in  the  direction  of  mono 
theistic  pantheism  is  made  through  the  personifica 
tion  of  all  nature  as  a  giant  *'  man,"  called  Purusha. 
His  head  is  heaven,  his  eye  is  the  sun,  his  breath  is 
the  wind,  and  so  on.  Purusha  reminds  us  of  the 
cosmic  giant,  Ymir  in  the  Edda.  The  notion  that 
man  is  a  microcosm,  or  small  world,  and  that,  con 
versely,  the  world  is  a  huge  man  (macranthropos)  is 
widely  diffused.  Here  are  some  stanzas  of  Rig- 
Veda  10.  90 : 

1.  "  The  Purusha  with  thousand  heads, 

With  thousand  eyes  and  thousand  feet, 
Surrounds  the  earth  on  every  side, 
And  goes  ten  digits  yet  beyond. 

2.  "  Purusha,  aye,  is  all  this  world, 

The  world  that  was  and  that  will  be. 


The  Beginnings  of  Hindu  Theosophy      243 

He  even  rules  th'  immortal  world 
Which  must  sustain  itself  by  food. 

3.  "Thus  great  is  this  his  majesty — 

Yet  even  beyond  in  strength  he  goes. 
A  quarter  of  him  all  beings  are. 
Three  quarters  are  immortal  beyond." 

The  most  significant  of  all  monotheistic  personifi 
cations  is  derived  from  the  sphere  of  worship  and 
ritual,  namely  the  God  Brihaspati  or  Brahmanaspati, 
"  Lord  of  Prayer  or  Devotion."  He  presents  him 
self  at  first  as  a  mere  personification  of  the  acts  of 
the  poets  and  priests.  We  remember  a  preceding 
statement  that  the  Vedic  poets'  consciousness  is  in 
vaded  by  and  impressed  with  the  dignity  and  charm 
of  their  own  poetic  devotions.  They  go  so  far  as  to 
lift  this  very  devoutness  to  the  level  of  divinity.1 
In  Brihaspati  we  have  a  personification  of  prayer 
and  religious  performance  both  in  one.  A  beautiful 
stanza  of  the  Rig- Veda  *  has  it :  "  When,  O  Brihas 
pati,  men  first  sent  forth  the  earliest  utterance  of 
speech,  giving  names  to  things,  then  was  disclosed 
a  jewel  treasured  within  them,  most  excellent  and 
pure."  In  another  famous  hymn  of  the  Rig- Veda  3 
Vac,  "  Holy  Speech,"  is  represented  as  the  companion 
and  upholder  of  the  gods,  and  as  the  foundation  of 

1  See  above,  p.  206.         2  10.  71.1  3  10.  125 


244  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


all  religious  activity  and  its  attendant  boons.  From 
a  later  time  we  have  the  significant  metaphoric 
statement  that  "  Holy  Song  "  (Dhena)  is  the  wife  of 
Brihaspati  just  as  "  Weapon  "  (Sena)  is  the  wife  of 
Indra.1 

Brihaspati  at  first  is  placed  as  an  ally  by  the  side 
of  the  more  regal  gods,  like  Indra,  Agni,  and  Soma, 
in  their  fights  against  demons  and  stingy  unbelievers. 
The  Vedic  gods  derive  strength  from  prayer  and 
sacrifice,  just  as  do  Hindu  men — this  is  a  familiar 
conception  from  the  beginning.  The  thought  which 
underlies  Brihaspati  has  in  store  for  itself  a  greater 
future  and  a  more  permanent  result  in  the  still  more 
abstract  Brahma,  which  is  religious  devotion  in  the 
absolute.  Of  this  in  the  last  lecture.  For  the  pres 
ent  Brihaspati  rises  from  his  modest  position  as  aider 
and  abettor  of  the  war-gods  to  become  father  of  the 
gods,  upholder  of  the  ends  of  the  earth.  Sun  and 
moon's  alternate  rise  is  his  work.  Like  a  blacksmith 
Brihaspati  soldered  together  this  world.  That  hap 
pened  before  the  races  of  the  gods  came  into  being  ; 
perhaps  at  the  time  when  "  being  "  was  born  of  "  non- 
being." 

More  transcendental  are  the  exploitations  in 
the  direction  of  monotheism  of  such  conceptions 

1  See  the  author,  Journal  of  the  German  Oriental  Society^  vol. 
xlviii.,  p.  599. 


The  Beginnings  of  Hindu  Theosophy     245 


as  Kala,  "  Time,"  "  Father  Time  "  ;  of  Kama,  "  Love," 
"  Eros  " ;  of  Prana  "  Breath  of  Life  ";  and  others  even 
more  faint  and  tentative.  The  conception  of  Eros 
we  have  met  above  as  the  first  movement  in  The 
One  after  it  had  come  into  life  ;  its  deification  is  never 
very  pronounced.  Prana,  or  "  Breath  of  Life,"  is  an 
almost  universal  cosmic  principle ;  it  will  occupy  our 
attention  in  connection  with  the  final  shaping  of 
Hindu  theosophy.  The  most  transcendental  of  these 
personifications  is  that  of  "  Time" — namely  :  Praja- 
pati,  "  the  lord  of  creatures,"  at  first  an  abstraction, 
is  readily  associated  with  the  generative  power  of 
nature.  Now  this  generative  power  is  revealed  par 
ticularly  in  the  cycle  of  the  year.  By  easy  associa 
tion  Prajapati  is  next  boldly  identified  with  year: 
"  Prajapati  reflected,  '  This  verily,  I  have  created  as 
my  counterpart,  namely,  the  year.'  Therefore  they 
say,  *  Prajapati  is  the  year/  for  as  counterpart  of 
himself  he  did  create  the  year."  Thus  the  prose 
Brahmana  texts  naively,  yet  closely,  reason.  And 
out  of  some  such  reasoning  "Time"  itself  emerges 
as  a  monotheistic  conception,  in  whose  praise  the 
Atharva-Veda  sings  two  hymns  1 : 

"Time  runs,  a  steed  with  seven  reins,  thousand-eyed, 
ageless,  rich  in  seed.  The  seers  thinking  holy  thoughts, 
mount  him  ;  all  the  beings  are  his  wheels. 

1  19.  53  and  54. 


246  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


"  Time  begot  yonder  heaven,  Time  also  these  earths. 
That  which  was  and  that  which  shall  be,  urged  forth  by 
Time,  spreads  out." 

(Atharva-Veda  19.  53.  i  and  5.) 

After  a  survey  of  these  manifold,  all  of  them  more 
or  less  shaky  attempts  to  account  for  the  universe 
and  man,  one  impression,  which  I  have  spoken  of  be 
fore,  grows  mightily.  I  mean  the  presence  of  intel 
lectual  subtlety,  the  absence  of  sentiment.  Anything 
like  a  practical  bearing  of  all  these  earlier  monothe 
istic  and  monistic  creations  upon  the  Hindu  mind 
and  heart  seem  as  yet  almost  altogether  wanting. 
In  a  sense  they  are  not  religious,  but  crudely  philo 
sophical.  That  is,  if  we  define  religion  as  the  inti 
mate,  mutual,  personal  relation  between  man  and  the 
higher  powers  that  surround  him.  In  so  far  as  they 
are  religious  in  this  sense  these  monotheistic  and 
monistic  creations  do  not  advance  perceptibly  be 
yond  the  stage  of  the  polytheistic  nature  gods,  the 
ritual,  and  the  sorcery  of  earlier  times.  The  extrava 
gant  power  of  Prajapati  is  still  nothing  more  than  a 
cause  for  cajolery : 

"  Prajapati  thou  art  the  one — and  there  's  no  other — 
Who  dost  encompass  all  these  born  entities! 
Whate'er  we  wish,  while  offering  thee  oblations, 
May  that  be  ours  !     May  we  be  lords  of  riches  !  " 

(Rig-Veda  10.  121.10.) 

All  this  is  far  from  being  the  final  form  of  the 


The  Beginnings  of  Hindu  Theosophy      247 


higher  religion.  When  Hindu  theosophy  has  reached 
its  full  growth  and  has  stretched  its  limbs  we  find 
that  all  its  various  intellectual  movements  still  keep 
on  differing  among  themselves  considerably,  to  the 
end,  as  they  did  at  the  beginning.  But  they  are 
absolutely  agreed  on  one  point,  namely,  their  final 
purpose.  Their  final  purpose  is  salvation  ;  release 
from  the  endless  chain  of  existences  in  which  death 
marks  the  passage  from  link  to  link.  This  salvation 
can  be  effected  in  only  one  way,  namely,  profound 
and  genuinely  religious  appreciation  of  the  identity 
of  one's  own  self  with  the  One  True  Being.  This 
rests  upon  the  twin  doctrine  of  Transmigration  and 
Monism  without  which  India  would  not  be  India. 
The  earlier  forms  of  monotheistic  and  monistic 
speculation  show  no  sign  of  a  belief  in  transmigra 
tion.  I  thought  it  advisable  to  let  this  belief  mark 
the  division  between  the  tentative,  purely  specu 
lative  philosophy  of  the  earlier  time,  and  the  thought 
of  the  Upanishads,  which  is  in  its  essence  truly  relig 
ious.  The  Upanishads,  with  all  their  curvy  move 
ments  and  through  all  their  fluttering  thought,  never 
lose  sight  of  that  great  purpose  of  salvation.  How 
came  the  belief  in  transmigration  in  India;  how  it 
led  to  a  pessimistic  view  of  life  ;  how  Brahma,  the 
One,  the  Universal,  the  True,  finally  shaped  himself 
from  out  of  the  mass  of  conflicting  and  yet  converg- 


248  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


ing  thoughts  about  the  Divine  which  we  have 
sketched  to-day  ;  and  how  release  from  the  chain  of 
existences  through  union  with  Brahma  may  be  ob 
tained — that  will  be  the  theme  of  our  concluding 
lecture  on  the  religion  of  the  Veda. 


LECTURE  THE  SIXTH. 

The  Final  Philosophy  of  the  Veda. 

Death  and  future  life  in  paradise — Early  notions  of  Hell — 
The  idea  of  retribution — Limit  of  reward  for  good  deeds 
— The  notion  of  "  death-anew, "  or  "re-death" — How 
comes  the  belief  in  transmigration — Hindu  doctrine 
of  transmigration — The  method  of  transmigration — 
The  doctrine  of  karma,  or  spiritual  evolution — How 
transmigration  and  karma  appear  to  Western  minds 
—The  pessimist  theory  of  life — Cause  of  Hindu  pessi 
mism — Pessimism  and  the  perfect  principle  (Brahma) 
— Dualistic  pessimism — Salvation  through  realisation 
of  one's  own  Brahmahood — The  conception  of  the 
dtman,  "breath,"  as  life  principle — Atman,  the  soul 
of  the  Universe — Brahma,  the  spiritual  essence  of  the 
Universe — Fusion  of  Atman  and  Brahma — Maya,  or 
the  world  an  illusion — The  unknowableness  of  Brahma 
— Emerson's  poem  on  the  Brahma — The  fulness  of 
Brahma:  a  story  of  Yajnavalkya  and  his  wife  Maitreyi 
—Transition  from  philosophy  to  piety — Hindu  asceti 
cism — Professor  Huxley's  critique  of  asceticism — Pilgrim's 
progress  under  the  religion  of  Brahma — Investiture 
and  disciplehood — The  life  of  the  householder — The 
life  of  the  forest-dweller  and  wandering  ascetic — Ultima 
Thule. 

THE  Veda's  conception  of  the  polytheistic  gods, 
and  the  relations  which  the  early  Hindus  have 
established  with  them  by  means  of  their  songs  of 

J  o 

249 


250  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


praise  and  nourishing  gifts,  are  of  a  spirit  very 
simple.  The  temper  of  these  things  almost  guaran 
tees  beforehand  equally  simple  notions  about  death 
and  future  life.  There  is  a  paradise  above,  conceived 
oftenest  as  a  solar  paradise,  where  the  gods  are  hav 
ing  a  delightful  time.  Man  would  be  most  happy  to 
have  a  share  in  this  delight,  like  the  gods  immortal. 
Therefore  the  gods  are  implored  to  let  come  to  them 
the  pious  man  that  has  spent  his  substance  freely  in 
their  behalf.1  Next,  this  elementary  belief  is  fittingly 
padded  out  with  simple  rites  and  ancient  legends. 
The  bodies  of  the  dead  are  burned  and  their  ashes 
are  consigned  to  earth.  But  this  is  viewed,  symbolic 
ally,  merely  as  an  act  of  preparation— cooking  it  is 
called  forthright — for  that  other  life  of  joy.  Arms 
and  utensils,  especially  sacrificial  utensils,  are  buried 
with  the  corpse.  For  the  occupations  and  necessi 
ties  of  those  "  who  have  gone  forth  "  (preta),  as  the 
dead  are  called  euphemistically,  are  the  same  as  upon 
the  earth,  sacrificing  included.  The  righteous  fore 
fathers  of  old  who  have  gone  forth  in  the  past — they 
have  found  another  good  place.  Especially  Yama, 
the  first  royal  man,  went  forth  as  a  pioneer  to  the 
distant  heights  in  the  skies.  He  searched  and  found 
a  way  for  all  his  descendants.  He  went  before  and 
found  a  dwelling  from  which  no  power  can  debar 

1  Rig- Veda  i.  31.  7  ;  91.  i  ;  125.  5,6)5.  55.  4  ;  63.  2. 


The  Final  Philosophy  of  the  Veda       251 


mortal  man.  The  Fathers  of  old  have  travelled  it, 
and  this  path  leads  every  earth-born  mortal  thither. 
There  in  the  midst  of  highest  heaven,  in  the  lap  of 
the  Goddess  Dawn,  beams  unfading  light,  there 
eternal  waters  flow.  There  Yama  sits  under  a  tree 
of  beautiful  foliage,  engaged  in  an  everlasting  bout 
in  the  company  of  the  gods  ;  there  mortals  gather 
after  death  at  Yama's  call  to  behold  Varuna.  They 
have  left  all  imperfections  behind  them  on  returning 
to  their  true  home,  the  rich  meadows  of  which  no 
one  can  rob  them.  In  that  place  there  are  no  lame 
nor  crooked  of  limb ;  the  weak  no  longer  pay  tribute 
to  the  strong  ;  all  alike  share  with  Yama  and  the 
gods  the  feast  of  the  gods. 

Underneath  the  coat  of  sugar  the  pill  of  death  is 
bitter  after  all.  Fitfully  the  Vedic  Hindu  regales 
himself  with  the  hope  of  paradise,  but  his  real  crav 
ing  is  expressed  in  Vedic  literature  countless  times  : 
"  May  we  live  a  hundred  autumns,  surrounded  by 
lusty  sons!  "  On  the  way  to  Yama  the  dead  must 
pass  the  two  broad-nosed,  four-eyed  dogs,  the 
speckled  and  the  dark  ;  according  to  another  turn  of 
this  myth  these  same  dogs,  originally  sun  and  moon,1 
wander  among  men  and  pick  the  daily  candidates 
that  are  to  go  on  their  last  pilgrimage.  Soon  we 
hear  of  the  foot-snare  of  Yama.  Think  or  do  what 

1  See  above,  p.  105. 


252  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


you  will,  death  remains  uncanny.  The  prospect  of 
paradise  is  marred  to  some  extent  by  visions  of  hell, 
the  inevitable  analogical  opposite  of  paradise,  that 
deep  place  of  bottomless,  blind  darkness,  which  in 
a  later  time  is  fitted  out  with  the  usual  gruesome 
stage-setting  in  the  style  of  Dante's  Inferno,  or  the 
wall-paintings  in  the  Campo  Santo  at  Pisa. 

From  the  start  there  is  the  idea  of  retribution.  To 
Yama's  blissful  seat  only  they  who  have  done  good 
may  aspire.  We  remember  the  belief  that  the  things 
sacrificed  and  given  the  priests  (the  ishtdpiirta)  await 
in  highest  heaven  the  faithful  as  a  sort  of  twin  guard 
ian  angels,  securing  for  them  bliss.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  oppressors  of  the  Brahmans,  "  they  who 
spit  upon  the  Brahmana  sit  in  the  middle  of  a  pool 
of  blood  chewing  hair."  .  .  .  "  The  tears  which  did 
roll  from  the  eyes  of  the  oppressed,  lamenting  Brah 
mana,  these  very  ones,  O  oppressor  of  Brahmans,  the 
gods  did  assign  to  thee  as  thy  share  of  water."  In 
an  early  version  of  hell  the  sage  Bhrigu  observes 
some  yelling  men  who  are  being  cut  up  and  devoured 
by  other  men  who  also  yell :  "  So  they  have  done  to 
us  in  yonder  world,  so  we  do  to  them  in  return  in 
this  world."2 

But  now  the  Hindu,  subtle  and  at  the  same  time 
naive,  given  over  to  rigid  schematism  and  mechan- 

1  Atharva-Veda  5.  19.  3.  and  13. 
9  (^atapatha  Brahmana  n.  16.    I. 


The  Final  Philosophy  of  the  Veda      253 


ical  consistency,  as  all  his  intellectual  history  shows, 
becomes  nervous  about  the  permanence  of  life  after 
death.  What  if  the  effect  even  of  his  good  deeds 
should  not  last  forever?  What  if,  instead  of  the 
hoped-for  immortality  in  yonder  world,  there  be 
death  again  ?  One  text  fancies  a  limited  immortal 
ity  which  lasts  only  a  hundred  years,  that  is,  the 
ideal  length  of  the  life  of  man  upon  earth.  The 
treasure  of  good  deeds  is  after  all  finite  ;  day  and 
night,  or,  as  we  should  say,  time  may  exhaust  the 
stock  of  one's  good  works.  In  strict  logic  that  must 
mean  death  anew.  So  we  read  in  the  Brahmana 
texts  of  fervent  wishes  and  cunning  rites  potent  to 
ensure  imperishableness  of  one's  good  works,  and  to 
cut  off  the  possible  recurrence  of  death.2  There  are 
also  performances  intended  to  secure  to  the  deceased 
ancestors  who,  for  aught  one  knows,  are  in  the  same 
danger  of  re-dying,  genuine,  instead  of  temporary  and 
conditional  immortality.3  This  "  death-anew,"  or 
"  re-death  "  (punarmrtyii)  as  the  Hindus  call  it,  is 
an  exceedingly  characteristic  idea,  but  it  is  not  yet 
transmigration  of  souls.  As  long  as  its  scene  is  loca 
ted  entirely  in  the  other  world,  and  as  long  as  it  is 
thought  possible  to  avoid  or  cure  it  by  the  ordinary 
expedients  of  sacrifice,  so  long  the  essential  character 

1  (^atapatha  Brahmana  10.  I.  5.  4. 

2  Taittiriya  Brahmana  3.  n.   8.  5. 

3  £atapatha  Brahmana  12.  9*  3.  12. 


254  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


of  that  belief  is  not  yet  present.  But  the  transition 
from  one  to  the  other  was  easy.  If  men  can  die  in 
heaven  there  is  no  way,  short  of  annihilation,  to  se 
cure  peace  for  anything  that  started  out  by  being 
mortal.  Next,  the  notion  of  "  re-death  "  in  the  im 
agined  world  beyond  was  after  all  too  shadowy  ;  it 
lacked  the  practical  data  of  experience.  It  was  very 
natural  to  transplant  the  consequences  of  "  re-death  " 
to  this  earth,  the  home  and  hearth  of  death  where 
men,  like  fish,  die  at  every  wink  of  the  eye.  He  who 
must  die  again  comes  on  to  do  it  on  earth  where  the 
trick  is  so  well  understood — lo  and  behold,  we  have 
the  essential  of  metempsychosis,  namely  a  succession 
of  lives  and  deaths  in  the  career  of  one  and  the  same 
being.  I  am  far  from  believing  that  even  such  smooth 
reasoning,  taken  by  itself,  suffices  to  account  for  the 
presence  of  this  important  doctrine  in  India.  The 
germs  of  the  belief  in  transmigration  are  very  likely 
to  have  filtered  into  the  Brahmanical  consciousness 
from  below,  from  popular  sources,  possibly  from 
some  of  the  aboriginal,  non-Aryan  tribes  of  India. 
Brahmanical  religion  has  always  borrowed  immensely 
from  folk  beliefs  and  practices,  and  has  always  man 
aged  to  impart  to  these  borrowings  the  look  of 
integral  Brahmanical  doctrine. 

Like  a  will-o'-the-wisp  the  belief  in  transmigration  J 

1  See  Alfred  Bertholet,  See  ten-wander  ting  (Nr.  2  of  the  iii.  Series 


The  Final  Philosophy  of  the  Veda     255 


flares  up  in  many  parts  of  the  world.  We  hear  of 
it  among  the  Egyptians  and  the  Celts,  but  it  has 
developed  most  significantly  among  the  Greeks  and 
Hindus.  Its  wide  vogue  is  due  to  a  fusion  of  some 
of  the  simplest  observations  and  reasonings  about 
life  and  death,  such  as  can  scarcely  fail  to  come 
to  the  mind  of  primitive  man.  It  is  pure  folk-lore. 
Three  suppositions  are  required  for  this  belief: 

First,  man  has  a  soul,  separate  and  separable  from 
the  body. 

Secondly,  animals,  plants,  and  even  inanimate 
objects  similarly  have  souls. 

Thirdly,  all  these  souls  can  change  their  habita 
tions. 

The  belief  that  man  has  a  soul  depends  in  the 
main  upon  two  observations:  First,  breath  of  life 
and  its  cessation  after  death.  Life's  breath  is  con 
strued  by  primitive  observers  as  an  entity  which 
lives  with  the  living  body  and  leaves  it  at  death. 
When  life's  breath  departs,  the  soul  departs.  Sec 
ondly,  intercourse  of  the  living  with  the  dead  con 
tinues  in  dreams  and  hallucinations.  This  shows 
that  the  dead  after  all  exist.  Primitive  man  does 
not  recognise  illusions. 

The  belief  in  animal  and  plant  souls,  and  even 


of  Religionsgesehichtliche  Volksbucher^  edited  by  Professor  Friederich 
Michael  Schiele),  Halle  a.  S.  1904. 


256  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


souls  of  inanimate  objects  (fetish),  is  based  upon 
the  same  sort  of  simple  logic.  Animals  have  both 
life's  breath  and  some  measure  of  reason.  Nomads, 
cattle-raisers,  hunters,  inhabitants  of  forest  and  sea- 
coast  are  thrown  into  intimate  intercourse,  each  with 
particular  classes  of  animals  whose  mental  resources 
are  not  only  obvious,  but  often  clash  with  man's 
interests.  Clear  up  into  the  high  literature  of  beast 
fable  and  fairy-tale  survives  the  folk's  very  real 
belief  in  reasoning,  soul-inhabited  animals :  see  Rey 
nard  the  Fox  and  Bre'r  Rabbit.  Primitive  man,  too, 
in  the  search  after  his  own  origin  has  often  blun 
dered  into  the  notion  that  man  is  descended  from 
one  or  the  other  animal.  This  has  given  rise  to  the 
very  important  religious,  political,  and  economic 
institutions  known  as  Totemism. 

As  regards  plants,  the  Hindu  Law-Book  of  Manu 
forbids  the  chewing  of  red  rosin,  doubtless  because 
it  looks  like  coagulated  blood,  and  blood  must  not 
be  drunk.1  The  tree  is  supposed  to  be  alive.  The 
weird  twilight  shapes  of  trees  and  plants,  the  sough 
of  the  wind  in  the  leaves  of  the  forest-trees  again 
suggest  life  in  the  vegetable  kingdom. 

As  regards  inanimate  things,  we  need  but  remem 
ber  the  child's  relation  to  its  doll,  or,  that  children 
punish  with  their  own  oft-tasted  penalties  the  stick 

1  See  von  Negelein,  Archiv  fur  Religionswisssnschaft^  vi.,  246. 


The  Final  Philosophy  of  the  Veda     257 


over  which  they  stumble.  In  brief,  the  nearer  or 
remoter  analogies  of  human  life  which  pervade,  or 
seem  to  pervade  all  objects  in  nature  present  them 
selves  to  early  man  as  guarantees  or  suggestions  of 
universal  animation,  of  souls  present  in  every  shapen 
thing. 

And  now  the  passage  of  these  souls  from  one  kind 
of  receptacle  to  another,  from  man  to  man,  from 
man  to  animal,  plant,  or  stock,  or  stone,  follows 
inevitably.  The  records  of  primitive  beliefs  are  full 
of  it.  I  will  merely  remind  you  of  the  belief  in  wer 
wolves  as  one  instance  of  this  kind.  In  the  final 
outcome  of  all  these  notions  some  peoples,  eager  to 
account  for  the  destiny  of  man  after  death,  have 
assumed  a  chain  of  variegated  existences.  And  with 
this  goes  very  generally  some  notion  of  evolution 
forward  or  backward.  The  character  of  the  creature 
in  a  certain  given  existence  controls  the  degree  of 
the  next  existence.  This  last  bit  of  logic  has 
flowered  out  in  India  as  the  important  doctrine  of 
karma  or  "  deed."  ' 

As  far  as  India  is  concerned  one  thing  is  certain  : 
real  metempsychosis  does  not  enter  into  the  higher 
thought  of  India,  or,  at  least,  is  not  stated  unmis 
takably  until  we  come  to  the  Upanishads.  When, 
however,  this  belief  has  finally  taken  shape  we  find  in 

i  See  below  p.  259. 


258  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


it  the  following  established  items  of  faith :  Every 
living  creature  is  reborn  in  some  organic  shape ; 
every  living  creature  had  a  previous  existence  ;  and 
every  living  creature  is  again  and  again  the  prey  of 
death,  until  in  some  life  all  desire  and  all  activity  as 
the  outcome  of  desire  shall  have  been  laid  aside. 
This  is  the  Hindu  salvation,  namely,  absolute  resig 
nation  of  the  finite,  futile,  illusory  world;  cessation 
of  the  will  to  live,  and  the  act  of  living.  This  of 
itself  produces  union  with  Brahma.  Not  until  mor 
tal  man  has  cast  off  every  desire  of  his  heart  does  he 
enter  immortal  into  Brahma.  We  have  now  arrived 
at  the  thought  or  the  position  of  the  Upanishads,  the 
last  in  the  long  line  of  Vedic  texts.  Like  all  Vedic 
thought,  the  thought  of  the  Upanishads  is  not  sys 
tematic,  but  tentative,  fanciful,  and  even  romantic.  It 
feels  its  way  through  misty,  wavering,  sometimes 
conflicting  beginnings.  The  more  rigid  conclusions 
come  later  on  in  one  or  the  other  of  the  so-called 
systems  of  Hindu  philosophy. 

Still  even  in  the  Upanishads  so  important  a  doc 
trine  must  be  established  on  reason.  There  are  two 
questions  to  be  asked.  First,  why  must  the  soul 
wander  from  life  to  life  ;  secondly,  why  does  its  habi 
tation  differ  from  life  to  life,  liable  to  reincarnation : 
at  one  time  as  an  animal  high  or  low  ;  at  another  as 
a  human  being  of  various  degrees  ;  and  at  yet  an- 


The  Final  Philosophy  of  the  Veda      259 


other  even  as  a  god  ?  For  our  convenience  we  may 
answer  the  second  question  first.  The  celebrated 
Law-Book  of  Manu,  at  a  time  when  this  doctrine 
has  become  cut  and  dried,  teaches  that  a  Brahman 
priest  who  steals  the  substance  which  has  been  en 
trusted  to  him  for  sacrifice  to  the  gods  will  in  his 
next  existence  become  a  vulture  or  a  crow.  '  Why  ? 
Because  the  vulture  and  the  crow  make  their  living 
by  stealing  food.  Briefly,  man  is  what  he  does. 

Note  the  superb  moral  possibilities  of  this  teaching. 
This  is  the  well-known  doctrine  of  karma,  or  "  deed," 
now  famous  wherever  men  are  interested  in  the 
evolution  of  the  human  mind.  Deed  and  the  will, 
or  "  desire,"  as  the  Hindus  call  it,  back  of  the  deed, 
are  essentially  one  and  the  same  thing.  On  desire 
man's  nature  is  founded  ;  as  his  desires  so  are  his  en 
deavors,  as  his  endeavors  so  are  his  deeds.  By 
his  deeds  the  character  of  his  next  birth  in  the  round 
of  existences  is  regulated,  for  he  is  himself  the  sum 
of  his  own  deeds.  If  his  karma  in  a  given  life  has 
accumulated  for  him  a  good  balance,  as  it  were,  the 
next  life  will  be  delightful  and  noble ;  conversely,  if 
his  life  is  evil,  the  next  birth  will  be,  consequently,  as 
a  low  and  degraded  being.  Life  is  character — char 
acter  inherited  and  inherent  from  previous  existence, 
and  character  modelled  and  shaped  by  the  deeds  of 

1  Manu  ii.  25. 


260  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


the  present  existence.  Now  we  may  answer  the  first 
question,  namely,  Why  must  the  soul  wander  at  all  ? 
The  answer  is  :  No  deed  leads  the  way  to  salvation, 
to  release  from  life  and  union  with  Brahma.  Aye,  to 
be  sure,  as  the  fragrance  of  a  tree  in  blossom  so  the 
fragrance  of  a  good  deed  is  wafted  afar,  saith  the 
Chandogya  Upanishad.1  But  even  the  best  deed  is 
a  thing  from  its  very  nature  limited  and  vitiated  by 
the  finite.  It  rewards  itself,  it  punishes  itself,  accord 
ing  to  a  process  of  automatic  psychic  evolution,  but 
the  fruit  of  the  finite  can  itself  be  only  finite  : 

"Yajnavalkya,"says  Artabhaga  in  the  "Great  Forest 
Upanishad,"3  "  if,  after  the  death  of  this  man,  his 
speech  goes  into  fire,  his  breath  into  wind,  his  eye  into 
the  sun,  his  mind  into  the  moon,  his  ear  into  the  direc 
tions  of  space,  his  body  into  the  earth,  his  self  (atmari) 
into  ether,  the  hair  of  his  body  into  plants,  the  hair 
of  his  head  into  trees,  his  blood  and  semen  into  water, 
—what  then  becomes  of  the  man?"  Then  spake 
Yajnavalkya:  "Take  me  by  the  hand,  my  dear! 
Artabhaga,  we  two  must  come  to  an  understanding 
about  this  privately,  not  here  among  people."  And 
they  went  out  and  consulted.  And  what  they  said 
was  DEED  (karma),  and  what  they  praised  was  DEED  : 
'  Verily,  one  becomes  good  through  good  deed,  evil 
through  evil  deed." 


1  5.  10.  9. 


Brihadaranyaka  Upanishad  3.  2.  13. 


The  Final  Philosophy  of  the  Veda    261 


Later  in  the  same  tract1  Yajnavalkya  describes  the 
departure  of  the  soul  from  the  body  and  its  conse 
quences  to  man :  "  Then  his  knowledge  and  his  works 
and  his  previous  experience  take  him  by  the  hand. 
As  a  caterpillar  which  has  wriggled  to  the  tip  of  a 
blade  of  grass  draws  itself  over  to  (a  new  blade),  so 
does  this  man,  after  he  has  put  aside  his  body,  draw 
himself  over  to  a  new  existence.  .  .  Now  verily  they 
say:  'Man  is  altogether  desire  (kdmd)',  as  is  his  desire 
so  is  his  insight  (kratu) ;  as  is  his  insight  so  is  his 
deed  (karma)\  as  is  his  deed  so  is  his  destiny."1 

More  than  one  Western  reader,  when  he  ponders 
the  doctrine  of  transmigration  as  rooted  in  desire 
and  deed,  is  likely  to  ask  the  question  why  the 
Hindus  did  not  rest  content  with  its  outcome.  The 
bulk  of  their  spiritual  energy  in  Brahmanism,  as  well 
as  in  Buddhism  and  the  other  Hindu  sects,  is  ex 
pended  in  the  effort  to  break  the  chain  that  ties  man 
to  existence.  Why  is  this  so  ?  The  Western  man,  if 
I  gauge  him  aright,  is  willing  to  tarry  in  the  life 
garden  of  will,  desire,  and  deed,  plucking  its  fruits 
and  flowers  at  the  risk  of  an  occasional  prick  from  its 
thorns,  or  sting  from  its  noxious  insects.  We  want 
more  life,  fuller  life.  Here  are  some  of  the  points 
connected  with  transmigration  that  are  naturally 
sympathetic  to  Western  minds : 

1  Brihadaranyaka  Upanishad  4.  4.   3;  see  also  Brahma  Upanishad, 
chapter  the  first. 


262  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


1.  Love  of  life,  and  abhorrence  of  annihilation  : 
transmigration  ensures  life  in  some  form  for  ever  and 
ever. 

2.  The  twin  ghosts  of  fatalism  and  predestination 
are  laid.    Where  will  and  deed,  with  character  as  their 
result,  rule  every  destiny,  nothing  is  accidental,  no 
thing  is  pre-determined.      Man    himself,  free    from 
outside  interference,  is  the  arbiter  of  his  own  destiny. 

3.  It  involves  the  perfection  of  retribution  :  reward 
and  punishment  adjust  themselves  automatically  and 
organically  to  virtue  and  vice.     It  opens  wide  the 
door  of  hope  to  the  lowly  and  oppressed,  and  checks 
the  excesses  of  the  cruel  mighty.    Byron's  despairing, 

"  Methinks  we  have  sinned  in  some  old  world 
And  this  is  Hell," 

loses  its  sting.  It  is  mere  justice.  But  it  is  the 
justice  that  knows  how  to  reward  merit  just  as  un 
erringly,  as  it  knows  how  to  punish  sin  inexorably. 
There  is  no  human  being  so  hedged  in  by  calamity, 
vice,  and  degradation,  but  what  he  or  she  may  start 
on  the  upward  road  by  some  act  of  determination 
for  good.  If  the  wish,  "  Grant  me  my  heaven  now," 
fails  of  fulfilment,  who  knows  that  it  may  not  be 
fulfilled  in  the  train  of  heroic  effort  ? 

And  yet  the   deep-seated   instinct   of  life   which 
makes  men  all  over  the  earth,  India  included,  wail 


The  Final  Philosophy  of  the  Veda     263 


their  dead,  goes  hand  in  hand  in  all  higher  forms  of 
Hindu  religion  with  the  apparently  sincere  expres 
sion  of  a  desire  to  be  released  from  life.  Pessimism, 
at  first  negative,  in  the  end  positive  and  profound, 
becomes  the  ruling  theory  of  Hindu  life.  With  all  the 
attractions,  fascinations,  and  beauties  of  life,  life  is 
felt  to  be  a  fetter,  or  a  knot  which  ties  the  heart  to 
the  world  of  sense ;  and  release  (moksha)  from  the 
everlasting  round  of  lives  (samsdra)  is  the  Hindu 
salvation  (nirvana).  Buddhism  later  on  expresses 
the  urgent  need  of  salvation  from  existence  in  its 
well-known  fourfold  doctrine  of  suffering.  Its  first 
clause  establishes  the  truth  of  suffering  :  Birth  is 
suffering  ;  age  is  suffering  ;  disease  is  suffering  ;  union 
with  what  is  not  loved  is  suffering  ;  separation  from 
what  is  loved  is  suffering.  The  conviction  that  all 
life  is  futile  is  expressed  hardly  less  distinctly  in  the 
Great  Forest  Upanishad  (3.  5.  2  ),  where  hunger  and 
thirst,  woe  and  delusion,  age  and  death,  desire  for 
children,  and  desire  for  possessions  are  lumped  alike 
as  the  evils  and  vanities  of  life,  before  the  highest 
knowledge  has  been  attained.1  Anyhow,  all  the 
principal  Hindu  systems  of  religion  and  philosophy 

1  "  How  many  births  are  past,  I  cannot  tell  ; 
How  many  yet  to  come,  no  man  can  say  : 
But  this  alone  I  know,  and  know  full  well, 
That  pain  and  grief  embitter  all  the  way." 

(South-Indian  Folk-song,  quoted  in  the  Rev.  Dr.  John  Morrison's 
New  Ideas  in  India,  p.  213.) 


264  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


start  out  with  the  assurance  that  the  world  is  full  of 
suffering,  and  that  is  their  particular  business  to 
account  for  it  and  to  remove  it. 

We  must  not  forget  that  the  perpetual  decay  and 
death  and  replacement  which  is  the  gist  of  human 
life  when  looked  at  purely  from  the  outside  is  not 
redeemed  in  India  by  any  theory,  or  instinctive  faith 
in  general  advancement.  There  is  in  all  Hindu 
thought  no  expression  of  hope  for  the  race,  no 
theory  of  betterment  all  along  the  line.  Each  in 
dividual  must  attend  to  his  own  uplifting  that  is  to 
free  him  from  a  world  whose  worthlessness  is  con 
demned  in  unmeasured  terms.  Admitting  that  this 
is  to  no  small  extent  mere  theory ;  that  the  average 
Hindu  worries  along,  sustained  by  life,  hope,  sun 
shine,  and  what  not,  whence  the  theory  ? 

The  question  has  frequently  been  put  point  blank  : 
How  did  Hindu  pessimism  originate  ?  I  believe  that 
the  answer,  or  at  least  a  partial  answer,  may  be  made 
with  some  degree  of  certainty,  to  wit :  India  herself, 
through  her  climate,  her  nature,  and  her  economic 
conditions,  furnishes  reasonable  ground  for  pessim 
ism.  As  regards  economic  conditions  political  eco 
nomists  say  that  the  value  of  human  life  in  any 
country  may  be  estimated  by  the  average  wage  of 
its  earners.  A  low  caste  servant  may  to-day  be  en 
gaged  for  a  wage  of  five  cents  a  day  out  of  which  he 


The  Final  Philosophy  of  the  Veda      265 


must,  owing  to  caste  laws,  find  his  own  keep,  and 
possibly  that  of  a  family  besides.  India's  nature  is 
more  malignant  than  that  of  any  other  civilised 
country.  The  floods  of  great  rivers  devastate  at 
times  entire  districts  ;  per  contra,  when  the  rains 
are  withheld  at  the  time  of  the  capricious  monsoons, 
famine  with  plague  or  cholera  in  its  wake,  decimate 
the  population.  The  tribe  of  venomous  serpents 
and  the  blood-lust  of  the  tiger  claim  their  regular 
quota  of  victims. 

Our  first  acquaintance  with  the  Aryan  Hindus  in 
the  hymns  of  the  Veda  shows  them  to  us  a  sturdy, 
life-loving  people  on  the  banks,  or  in  the  region  of 
the  river  Indus,  the  land  of  the  five  streams,  the 
modern  Punjab  in  Northwestern  India.  That  coun 
try  they  had  conquered,  fresh  from  the  highlands 
that  separate  India  from  Iran.  By  successive  con 
tests,  hinted  at  in  a  very  interesting  legend  of  the 
Brahmana  texts  1  they  advanced  eastward,  until  they 
had  overrun  the  plain  of  the  Ganges — the  hottest 
civilised  land  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  This  is  the 
land  of  Hindu  theosophy,  the  land  of  the  Upani- 
shads,  the  land  where  Buddha  preached,  some 
centuries  after  the  earliest  Upanishads.  Buddha's 
most  famous  sermon  was  delivered  at  Benares,  in 
the  very  centre  of  the  plain  of  the  Ganges.  There 

1  (^atapatha  Brahmana  I.   4.    I.   10-18. 


266  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 

o 


in  the  land  of  Bengal,  if  anywhere  on  the  face  of  the 
civilised  earth,  the  doubts  and  misgivings  that  beset 
human  life  at  its  best  might  permanently  harden  into 
the  belief  that  life  is  a  sorry  affair.  Hindu  literature 
that  comes  from  these  lands  shows  us  that  the 
Aryans  did  not  succumb  to  this  change,  for  they 
remain  a  great  and  remarkable  people.  But  this 
habitat  of  theirs  unquestionably  left  an  indelible 
impression  on  their  character.  The  mental  subtle 
ness  of  the  race  did  not  perish,  but  their  bodies 
suffered  ;  hypochondria,  melancholia,  dyspepsia — 
call  it  what  we  may — conquered  the  conquering 
Aryan,  whose  stock  was  no  doubt  the  product  of  a 
more  northerly  and  invigorating  climate. 

Now  it  is  time  to  remember  once  more  that  the 
conception  of  the  One  True  Being — let  us  now  call 
it  Brahma — had  risen  to  a  considerable  height,  ap 
parently  long  before  the  doctrine  of  transmigration 
had  taken  hold  of  the  Hindu  mind,  and  established 
in  it  the  theory  of  despair  of  the  wrorld.  Even  aside 
from  such  a  theory  it  is  natural  for  the  mind  of  man 
in  every  clime  and  time  to  evolve  some  great  power 
that  is  behind  the  phenomena  of  the  world,  to  estab 
lish  to  its  own  satisfaction  some  sort  of  perfect 
principle  that  is  underneath  this  obviously  imperfect 
world,  and  then  to  long  for  some  kind  of  association 
with  that  power  or  principle.  So  teach  us  all  higher 


The  Final  Philosophy  of  the  Veda     267 


religions  and  religious  philosophies.  Without  doubt 
the  Hindus  did  this  before  pessimism  and  indepen 
dently  of  pessimism.  But  when  pessimism  began  to 
taint  the  Hindu  view  of  life,  then  the  eternal  all- 
force,  the  root  of  all,  the  One  True  and  Perfect 
Thing  offered  the  only  logical  escape  from  the  evils 
of  existence. 

The  theory  of  the  Brahma  and  the  theory  of  trans 
migration  united  like  the  two  branches  of  a  river. 
The  wandering  of  the  soul  through  the  realms  gov 
erned  by  death  must  be  the  consequence  of  its 
separation  from  Brahma.  As  long  as  lasts  the  will 
to  live  this  life  of  death,  as  long  as  this  will  means 
finite  desires  and  finite  deed,  so  long  the  soul  remains 
separate  from  Brahma  in  the  chain  of  successive  lives 
and  deaths,  each  new  life  shaped  by  the  karma  of 
the  preceding  life.  Escape  from  this  chain  can  be 
accomplished  only  by  union  with  the  Single  True 
Being,  the  Brahma. 

Hinduism  has  again  in  this  matter  taken  a  remark 
able  turn,  if  we  test  it  by  the  normal  temper  of  the 
Western  mind.  It  is  a  kind  of  dualistic  pessimism, 
in  which  the  good  that  is  in  the  world  as  well  as  the 
evil  that  is  there  are  both  made  to  emphasise  the 
evil.  It  is  a  pessimism  that  is  reached  through  both 
avenues  ;  the  avenue  of  evil,  because  it  is  evil  ;  and 
the  avenue  of  good,  because  it  suggests  by  its  very 


268  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


terms  the  existence  of  evil.  We  Westerners  have 
learned  one  way  or  another  to  endure  this  naughty 
world  fairly  well.  But  when  it  becomes  too  bad  we 
are  apt  to  remember  that  the  refuge  is  with  the 
Omnipotent  Power.  That  is  the  silver  lining  to  the 
cloud  of  human  existence.  The  Hindu  mind  turns 
this  the  other  way  ;  the  silvery  sheen  of  Brahma  has 
a  cloud  lining.  The  conception  of  this  One  True 
Being,  out  of  which  flow  all  visible  things,  might 
have  been  an  anchor  of  strength  and  a  head-spring 
of  hope  and  joy  for  the  Hindus.  A  palpably  pos 
sible  consequence  of  their  thought  is,  that  all  men 
have  the  divine  or  Brahmic  spark,  that  all  are  micro 
cosms,  flung  off — for  some  reason — by  that  superb 
macrocosm,  the  Brahma.  If  so,  then  individual 
human  existence  must  be  based  upon  truth  and 
wholesomeness,  no  less  than  the  Universal  Brahma. 
Not  so  did  the  Hindus  proceed.  They  lavish  upon 
the  Brahma  all  imaginable  attributes  of  perfec 
tion,  and  then  proceed  to  apply  the  same  standard 
to  this  world :  of  course  they  find  it  by  contrast  a 
very  sorry  affair.  The  world  ceases  to  be  a  desirable 
home  in  which  one  may  live,  sustained  perhaps  by 
the  hope  of  better  things  to  come,  because  it  is 
measured  by  the  standard  of  Brahma  and  found 
wanting.  When  the  Brahma  is  praised,  that  Brahma 
which  is  lifted  above  hunger  and  thirst,  above  grief 


The  Final  Philosophy  of  the  Veda     269 


and  worry,  above  old  age,  decay,  and  death,  the  per 
sistent  personal  application  is,  that  this  world  of 
creatures  is  full  of  hunger,  thirst,  grief,  worry,  old 
age,  decay,  and  death. 

There  is  yet  one  consequence  to  be  drawn.  The 
question  is  asked,  as  it  must  be  :  "  What  is  the  cure 
for  desire,  the  thirst  for  life  and  its  contents  ?  How 
cut  the  fetter,  or  the  knot  of  adhesion  to  the  illusory 
world?  How  get  rid  of  the  will  to  live?"  The 
answer  is,  through  knowledge.  Knowledge,  or  per 
haps  it  would  be  better  to  say  intuition,  of  the 
unity  of  the  individual  self  with  the  great  True  One  ; 
and  the  recognition,  ever  present,  of  the  divided,  dis 
tracted,  illusory  nature  of  everything  finite :  When 
a  mortal  has  recognised  Brahma,  feeling,  "  He  is 
myself,"  how  can  he  longer  desire  and  cling  to 
bodily  life?  This  is  the  culminating  thought  of  the 
Upanishads  and  the  Veda,  expressed  in  the  solemn 
three  words  tat  tvam  asi,  "  Thou  art  That."  That 
is  to  say,  the  essence  of  man  is  itself  Brahma.  The 
wise  man  when  once  he  has  seen  That  (tad  apagyai], 
becomes  That  (tad  abkavat),  because  in  truth  he 
always  was  and  is  That  (tad  dslt).1  Thus  the  final 
attainment  of  man  is  this  knowledge ;  it  is  the 
"  works "  of  the  Jew,  and  the  "  faith "  of  the 
Christian — salvation  by  the  complete  ascendency 

1  See  Vajasaneyi  Samhita  (Tadeva  Upanishad),  32.  12. 


270  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


of  the  divine  in  one's  self,  and  the  consequent 
submergence  of  all  that  is  temporal  and  illusory. 

It  is  time  now  that  we  return  to  the  last  question 
which  I  propounded  for  to-day's  lecture.  How  did 
the  brahma,  the  One,  the  Universal  spirit,  finally 
shape  himself  from  out  of  the  mass  of  ideas  whose 
constant  drift  was  in  the  direction  of  oneness,  or,  as 
we  may  finally  call  it,  monistic  pantheism?  One 
of  the  main  circumstances  of  the  higher  religious 
thought  of  the  time  just  preceding  the  Upanishads 
was  a  strong  monotheistic  tendency  which  seemed 
to  develop  simultaneously  and  peacefully  along  with 
the  monistic  ideas,  such  as  the  "That,"  the  "  Only," 
the  "  Being." 

In  the  Upanishads  monotheism  is  practically  at 
an  end,  whereas  the  attempts  to  designate  the  ab 
stract  conceptions  just  mentioned  emerge  from  the 
stage  of  tremulous  venture  to  confident  and  familiar 
statement.  Yet  they  are  not  any  one  of  them  the 
final  name  of  the  Universal  Being.  Even  the 
Upanishad  mind  seems  to  prefer  something  more 
tangible  and  suggestive,  something  that  after  all 
has  attributes. 

In  the  seething  caldron  of  the  earlier  speculation 
there  occur  yet  two  other  conceptions  which  have 
become  pretty  well  crystallised  even  before  the  time 
of  the  Upanishads.  The  first  of  these  is  the  con- 


The  Final  Philosophy  of  the  Veda     271 

ception  of  the  dtman,  which  means  first  "  breath," 
and  then  "  self."  As  far  as  the  early  poetry  is  con 
cerned  there  is  not  the  least  doubt  about  the  primary 
meaning  of  dtman.1  It  is  familiarly  correlated  with 
wind,  "  the  breath  of  the  gods."2  The  dtman  or 
soul  of  man  after  death  returns  to  mingle  with  the 
wind  from  which  it  is  supposed  to  have  come.3  The 
later  Veda  abounds  in  crude  and  fanciful  psycho- 
physical  observations  in  which  the  parts  and  func 
tions  of  the  human  body,  the  little  cosmos,  are 
correlated  more  or  less  skilfully  with  the  phenomena 
of  the  outer  world,  the  big  cosmos.  An  important 
thought  of  this  sort  is,  that  the  human  body  is  per 
vaded  by  plural  breaths,  pranas  or  at  mans ;  these 
vivify  the  body,  and  are  the  essential  part,  the  ego, 
of  the  living  individual.  Several  of  the  older  Upan- 
ishads  contain  a  fable,  resembling  the  Latin  fable  of 
"  the  belly  and  the  members."  The  vital  powers 
are  quarrelling  among  themselves  for  supremacy. 
They  bring  their  case  before  Prajapati,  "  the  lord  of 
creatures."  Prajapati  advises  them  to  leave  the  body 
one  by  one  and  to  observe  which  loss  affects  it 
most.  The  voice,  the  eye,  the  ear,  the  mind  de- 

1  For  the  meaning  of  tman,  the  reduced  stem  of  the  same  word  in 
the  pronominal  sense  of  "self,"  see  the  author  in  American  Journal 
of  Philology,  xvi.,  p.  421. 

2  Rig- Veda  7.  87.  2  ;  10.  168.  4. 

3  Ibid.,  10.  16.  3  ;  90.   13  ;  92.  13. 


272  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 

parted,  discommoding  the  body  quite  a  good  deal. 
But  when  the  breath  was  on  the  point  of  departing, 
"just  as  the  proud  steed  from  the  Indus  would  pull 
and  tear  the  pegs  of  his  tether,  so  it  pulled  and  tore 
the  other  vital  powers."  And  they  yielded  the  palm 
to  the  dtman.  Hence  a  text  declares:  "  From  the 
dtman  all  the  members  spring  into  existence.  Of 
all  things  that  come  into  existence  the  dtman  is  the 
first." 

The  dtinans,  or  breaths,  are  finally  conceived  as 
coming  from  a  single  dtman,  the  universal  breath, 
or  self,  or  ego.  A  Brahmana  text  declares :  "  Ten 
(kinds  of)  breath  dwell  in  man  ;  the  universal  dtman 
is  the  eleventh  :  all  the  breaths  are  contained  in 
him."  That  is,  the  dtman,  after  its  supreme  place  in 
the  own  self  has  been  permanently  fixed,  is  trans 
ferred  on  exactly  the  same  terms  to  the  universe 
outside  of  man.  The  dtman,  the  lord  of  breaths,  is 
at  the  same  time  the  lord  of  the  gods,  the  creator  of 
all  beings  ;  all  the  worlds  are  an  emanation  of  his 
great  universal  self :  finally  the  dtman  is  the  all. 

It  is  easy  to  see  that  with  all  the  refinement  of 
the  term  dtman  in  its  final  outcome,  it  certainly  has 
a  strong  physical  touch,  at  least  in  the  beginning  of 
its  use.  The  final  shaping  of  the  idea  consisted  in 
associating,  or  rather  fusing,  with  this  dtman  another 
conception,  coming  from  a  totally  different  quarter, 


The  Final  Philosophy  of  the  Veda     273 


namely,  the  olden  Vedic  sphere  of  devotion,  prayer, 
holy  performance,  in  fact  religion  in  general.  Even 
in  the  Vedic  hymns,  as  we  have  seen,  the  epithet 
"  Goddess  "  is  freely  given  to  the  numerous  names 
for  prayer,  devotion,  religious  emotion,  and  kindred 
ideas.  Unquestionably  the  sdvitrl  stanza  owes  its 
puzzlingly  paramount  position  in  Hindu  religion  to 
the  same  estimate  of  devotion  as  a  thing  essentially 
divine.1  We  have  also  made  acquaintance  with  a 
symbolic  "Lord  of  Prayer,"  Brihaspati,  an  important, 
but  not  lasting  attempt  to  pour  the  sacred  function 
of  the  poets  and  priests  into  the  mould  of  a  personal 
god.  He  marks  one  of  those  false  starts  towards 
personal  monotheism  in  which  the  later  Veda  abounds. 
More  and  more  the  sacred  word,  the  constant  com 
panion  of  the  sacrifice,  is  felt  to  be  a  kind  of  uplift 
ing  spiritual  essence.  The  sacred  word  is  'brahma. 
Starting  as  prayer,2  charm,  sacred  formula,  religious 
act,  it  becomes  the  symbol  of  holy  thought  and  holy 
utterance  (\6yo$\  the  outpouring  of  the  soul  in  its 
highest  longings.  It  is  the  best  wish  of  a  spiritually 

1  See  above,  p.  202. 

2  Professor  Oldenberg    regards  "  zauberfluidum "  as    the    original 
meaning  of  brahma.     But  does  "  magic  essence  "  really  explain,  and 
does  it  not  itself  stand  in  need  of  explanation  ?    Anyway  it  seems  to  me 
that  this  distinguished  scholar's  present  sympathy  with  what  may  be 
called  ethnological  explanations  of  religious  phenomena,  that  is  the 
theory  that  such  phenomena  must  necessarily  begin  somewhere  in  the 
lowest  bathos  of  savage  folk  belief,  is  leading  him  on  a  trail  farther 
than  that  trodden  by  this  word. 


274  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


minded  and  gifted  people  that  becomes  for  a  while 
personal  god,  and  at  last  the  divine  essence  of  the 
universe.  The  conception  is  intellectually  not  as 
subtle  and  abstract  as  the  monistic  philosophical 
conception  of  "  That  Only  True  Being,"  which 
comes  entirely  from  the  head.  But  from  the  point 
of  view  of  heart-felt  emotion  it  is  the  most  exalted 
divine  conception  of  gentile  folk.  Such  is  the 
brahma,  used  in  the  neuter  gender,  not  yet  the  mas 
culine  God  Brahma  who,  after  a  renewed  personifica 
tion  is  placed  at  the  head  of  the  later  Hindu  so-called 
trinity,  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  (Jiva  :  "  The  brahina  is 
the  word,  the  truth  in  the  word  is  brahma.  Through 
brahina  heaven  and  earth  are  held  together." 

The  two  conceptions  of  dtman  and  brahma,  in 
their  origin,  respectively,  the  physical  and  spiritual 
essences  of  the  universe,  are  fused  into  one  concep 
tion.  They  are  used  in  general  as  synonyms.  Still 
there  is  a  tendency  to  use  brahma,  "  Holy  Thought," 
as  the  designation  of  the  universal  principle  in  the 
outer  world  ;  dtman,  "  Self,"  as  the  same  principle 
in  the  inner  life  of  man.  The  conviction  that  the 
braJnna  without  and  the  dtman  within  are  one  and 
the  same,  that  is  the  real  religion  of  the  Upanishads. 
The  power  which  operates  in  the  universe,  creating, 
sustaining,  and  destroying,  the  power  behind  this 
imperfect  world  that  perchance  moves  on  to  some 


The  Final  Philosophy  of  the  Veda     275 


final  development  ;  the  power  that  manifests  itself  in 
every  living  thing  ; — this  eternal  power  is  identical 
with  our  own  innermost  and  truest  self,  equally 
imperishable  when  stripped  of  all  its  external  and 
accidental  circumstances.  This  conviction  is  em 
balmed  in  the  famous  words,  tat  tvam  asi,  "Thou 
art  That,"  or  aham  brahma  asmi,  "  I  am  the 
Brahma."  These  are  the  slogans  of  higher  religious 
thought ;  and  they  contain  the  corollary  that  the 
world  of  things  which  we  see  in  space,  as  we  ideally 
assume  it  to  be  with  our  eyes  and  bodies,  themselves 
phenomena,  are  mere  shadows  cast  by  the  one  truth 
— the  innermost  Personal  Self  identical  with  the 
outer  Universal  Self,  the  brahma-dtman.1 

Now  we  have  seen  that  our  empirical  knowledge 
which  shows  us  a  manifold  variegated  world  where  in 
truth  there  is  only  brahma,  and  a  body  where  there 
is  in  truth  only  dtman,  or  the  brahma  in  ourselves, 
that  all  that  is  mere  ignorance,  distraction,  or  illusion. 
The  things  that  are  unfolded  before  our  eyes  in  space, 
those  things  to  which  we  ourselves  belong  with  our 
ponderable  bodies,  are  not  true  entities,  they  are  not 

1  The  Catholic  mystic,  Johannes  Scheffler,  called  Angelus  Silesius 
(horn  1624),  arrives  at  the  same  end  in  a  stanza  of  his  collection  of 
poems  called  Cherubinischer  Wandersmann  : 
"  Ich  bin  so  gross  wie  Gott, 
Er  ist  wie  ich  so  klein  ; 
Ich  kann  nicht  unter  ihm, 
Er  liber  mich  nicht  sein." 


276  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


the  dtman.  As  long  as  this  is  not  recognised,  the 
Hindus  say  there  is  avidyd  "  ignorance,"  or,  more 
literally  and  philosophically  "  nescience."  Or  they 
say  that  there  is  may  a  "  illusion."  All  else  aside  from 
this  single  truth  is  a  mere  mirage  in  the  desert,  and 
is  so  far  as  it  must  after  all  have  some  kind  of  a  con 
nection  with  Brahma,  have  some  reality  in  Brahma, 
it  is  no  more  real  than  the  reflection  of  the  real  moon 
which  we  see  trembling  on  the  ripple  of  the  waters. 
Even  the  very  conception  of  nescience  or  illusion  is, 
of  course,  not  real,  because  it  can  be  annihilated,  and 
whatever  is  temporary  is  not  real.  What  induced  the 
time-less,  space-less,  and  cause-less  Brahma  to  enter 
upon  the  escapade  of  this  phenomenal  world  of  time, 
space,  and  causality,  the  Hindu  thinkers  cannot  tell 
us.  Their  mythology  is  full  of  crude  ideas  of  the 
primitive  being's  loneliness  and  desire  to  multiply,  but 
these  ideas  belong  to  the  lower  forms  of  their  religion  ; 
they  are  not  entertained  by  their  philosophers.  This 
is  the  point  where  Hinduism  like  every  system  of 
idealistic  philosophy  breaks  down.  Plato's  TO  ovrcos 
or ;  the  ens  realissimum;  Kant's  ding  an  sick;  the 
Upanishads'  "  That  only  True  ' '  are  all  very  well,  but 
the  world  of  phenomena  to  explain  that — aye  there  's 
the  rub.  This  pesky  world  of  plural  things,  full  of 
irrational  quantities — why  does  it  exist,  and  is  it  not 
pounding  along  toward  some  end  that  will  show  a 


The  Final  Philosophy  of  the  Veda     277 


uniting  principle  ?  With  that  kind  of  suggestion  the 
Hindu  will  have  nothing  to  do.  Entranced  by  the 
absolute  reality  of  the  one  Brahma  he  wafts  away 
the  world  of  experience  as  a  conjurer  an  optical 
delusion. 

Into  the  maze  of  difficulties  and  inconsistencies 
which  opens  out  here  we  need  not  go.  The  mani 
fold  modifications,  adjustments,  and  the  trimming 
down  of  the  main  thought  which  the  Upanishads 
are  driven  to  undertake  belong  to  philosophy  rather 
than  religion.  According  to  the  Upanishads'  own 
definition  of  the  dtman,  everything  that  these  works 
undertake  to  say  about  anything  other  than  the  dt 
man  is  mere  figure  of  speech,  and  every  definition  of 
the  dtman  itself  is  also  figure  of  speech.  Every  defi 
nition  is  necessarily  stopped  by  the  words:  "No, 
No  "  (na  ncti).  The  Brahma  has  no  attributes 
(nirguna).  Yea,  the  Hindu  when  in  the  proper 
mood,  advancing  straight  to  the  last  consequence, 
looking  neither  to  the  right  nor  to  the  left,  denies  the 
possibility  of  knowing  Brahma  altogether.  Tremen 
dous  paradox  this,  considering  all  depends  upon  the 
intuition  of  this  very  conception.  In  a  conversation 
with  his  wife  Maitreyl'the  great  thinker  Yajnavalkya 
asserts  that  there  is  no  consciousness  after  death,  be 
cause  there  must  be  two  in  order  that  one  should  see 

1  Brihadaranyaka  Upanishad  2.  4.   12  ff. 


278          The  Religion  of  the  Veda 

the  other,  smell,  hear,  address,  understand,  recognise 
the  other.  "  But  if  one  has  himself  become  Atman 
(that  is,  "  Self ' ')  by  means  of  what  and  whom  should 
he  then  see?  By  means  of  what  and  whom  should 
he  then  smell,  hear,  address,  understand,  recognise  ?  " 
In  brief  and  dry  language,  being  himself  the  subject, 
and  there  being  no  object,  there  is  no  cognition  nor 
consciousness. 

Emerson's  keen  and  terse  poem  on  the  Brahma  in 
which  the  Brahma  itself  speaks,  approaches  this  idea 
of  absolute  unity.  But  the  chilly  sombre  theme  is 
made  warm  and  glowing  in  these  lines  which  may  be 
counted  among  the  best  in  the  English  language: 

If  the  red  slayer  think  he  slays, 
Or  if  the  slain  think  he  is  slain, 

They  know  not  well  the  subtle  ways 
I  keep,  and  pass,  and  turn  again. 

Far  and  forgot  to  me  is  near, 

Shadow  and  sunlight  are  the  same, 

The  vanished  gods  to  me  appear, 
And  one  to  me  are  shame  and  fame. 

They  reckon  ill  who  leave  me  out  ; 

When  me  they  fly  I  am  the  wings  ; 
I  am  the  doubter  and  the  doubt. 

And  I  the  hymn  the  Brahmin  sings. 

The  strong  gods  pine  for  my  abode 
And  pine  in  vain,  the  Sacred  Seven  ; 

But  thou  meek  lover  of  the  good  ! 

Find  me,  and  turn  thy  back  on  heaven. 


The  Final  Philosophy  of  the  Veda     279 


But  we  are  concerned  with  the  value  of  the  Upani- 
shads  as  religion,  in  a  world  which  for  practical 
purposes  must  be  admitted  to  be  real,  for  man  who 
for  practical  purposes  must  be  admitted  to  be  real. 
The  £vetagvatara  Upanishad  starts  out  with  the 
old  question : 

Whence  are  we  born  ?  Whereby  do  we  live,  and 
whither  do  we  go  ?  O  ye  who  know  Brahma,  tell  us  at 
whose  command  we  abide  here,  whether  in  pain  or  in 
pleasure  ?  Should  Time,  or  nature,  or  necessity,  or 
chance,  or  the  elements  be  considered  as  the  cause,  or 
he  who  is  called  Purusha,  that  is,  the  Supreme  Spirit  ? 

The  Upanishads  answer  for  practical  purposes  : 
The  Supreme  Spirit  that  is  alike  in  the  universe 
and  in  man — that  is  the  essence  of  all.  It  is  Being, 
without  a  second,  without  beginning  and  without 
end,  without  limitations  of  any  kind.  Whatever 
there  is,  or  seems  to  be,  mind  and  matter,  nature 
and  man,  is  one  substance  only,  namely,  Brahma. 
The  same  Yajnavalkya,  whose  desperately  ration 
alistic  answer  to  his  wife  Maitreyl  we  have  just 
heard,  takes  also  a  more  human  view  of  the  Atman. 
This  is  told  in  the  frame  of  a  quaint  little  story,  as 
follows ' : 

Yajnavalkya  had  two  wives,  Maitreyl  and  Katyayanl. 
Of  these  two  Maitreyl  knew  how  to  discourse  about  the 

1  Brihadaranyaka  Upanishad  2.  4  and  4.  5. 


280  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


brahma  ;  Katyayani,  on  the  other  hand,  knew  only  what 
women  are  supposed  to  understand.  Now  Yajnavalkya 
desired  to  change  his  life  of  householder  to  that  of 
religious  hermit. 

"  Maitreyl,"  says  he,  "  I  shall  now  retire  from  the 
condition  of  householder,  and  as  a  preliminary  divide 
my  goods  between  thee  and  Katyayanl."  Then  spake 
Maitreyf  :  "  If,  O  lord,  this  whole  earth  with  all  its 
wealth  belonged  to  me,  would  I  then  become  immortal, 
or  not  ?  "  "  By  no  means,"  replies  Yajnavalkya.  "  Only 
like  the  life  of  the  rich  would  thy  life  be  ;  wealth  does 
not  carry  with  it  the  expectation  of  immortality."  Then 
replied  Maitreyl :  "  That  through  which  I  do  not  become 
immortal,  what  good  is  that  to  me  ?  Expound  to  me 
rather  thy  knowledge."  Then  Yajnavalkya:  "Truly 
thou  wast  previously  dear  to  us,  beloved  lady,  and  now 
thou  hast  increased  our  love.  Well  then,  I  shall  expound 
it  to  thee  ;  attend  then,  to  what  I  say  :  All  things  of  the 
world,  and  every  relation  in  the  world  are  dear  to  us  not 
because  of  their  own  value,  but  because  of  the  dtman, 
their  true  essence.  Wife,  husband,  sons,  wealth  ;  the  high 
stations  of  priest  and  warrior  ;  the  worlds,  the  gods,  the 
Veda,  and  the  sacrifice  are  dear  to  us  not  because  of 
their  own  value,  but  because  of  the  dtman,  their  true 
essence.  As  one  grasps  the  tones  of  an  instrument  with 
the  instrument  itself  so  are  grasped  all  things  when  the 
dtman  is  grasped.  Truly  he  that  hath  seen,  heard,  re 
cognised,  and  understood  the  dtman  he  knows  the  whole 
world."  ' 

We  may  be  sure  that  Yajnavalkya  does  not  really 
intend  to  expound  to  his  beloved  Maitreyl  the  ex- 

1  Cf.  Rdmakrishna,  His  Life  and  Sayings,  p.  135  (number  161). 


The  F'inal  Philosophy  of  the  Veda        281 


tremes  of  super-sensual  rationalism.  In  effect  he 
expresses  the  ideal  of  union  with  the  supreme  being, 
the  ultimate  endeavor  of  all  religions  that  have 
evolved  a  supreme  being  worth  uniting  with.  At 
a  later  period  there  comes  out  of  the  permanently 
untenable,  cool  intellectualism  of  the  Upanishads 
the  religion  of  the  Bhaktas  or  "pious  devotees." 
The  destiny  of  Upanishad  thought  is,  after  all,  an 
acute  and  mystic  monotheism,  very  like  the  mysti 
cism  of  those  Christian  "  friends  of  god/'  John  Tauler 
and  Thomas  a  Kempis.  By  knowledge  they  dis 
cover  the  Supreme  Intelligence  and  perceive  its 
essence  ;  by  devotion  (bhakti)  they  feel  the  sweet 
ness  of  the  Supreme  Being  and  reciprocate  its  loving 
intent.  So  the  Bhagavadglta,  the  "  Song  of  the  Celes 
tial,"  can  finally  make  the  Supreme  Being  say  of  the 
pious  man :  "  Through  love  he  recognises  me  in 
truth,  my  greatness  and  my  essence.  He  that  loves 
me  is  not  lost."  It  comes  to  this  finally,  that  know 
ledge  of  the  Supreme  is  but  a  preparation  for  what 
we  call  love  of  God.  In  the  words  of  the  modern 
Bengali  Saint  and  Ascetic  Ramakrishna :  "  The 
Knowledge  of  God  may  be  likened  to  a  man,  while 
the  Love  of  God  is  like  a  woman.  Knowledge  has 
entry  only  up  to  the  outer  rooms  of  God,  but  no 
one  can  enter  into  the  inner  mysteries  of  God  save 
a  lover,  for  a  woman  has  access  even  to  the  privacy 


282  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


of  the  Almighty."  l  And  finally  the  same  thinker 
arrives  at  the  last  possible  conclusion :  "  Knowledge 
and  love  of  God  are  ultimately  one  and  the  same. 
There  is  no  difference  between  pure  knowledge  and 
pure  love."  We  might  have  predicted  the  same 
result.  To  a  religion  which  strives  with  all  its  might 
to  know  the  truth,  truth's  sister,  love,  does  not  long 
remain  a  stranger. 

Yajnavalkya,  as  we  have  seen,  abandons  his  wives 
and  goes  to  live  in  the  forest.  Such  "  Forest- 
Hermits"  (vXofiioi)  must  have  been  common  in 
India  several  centuries  before  Christ.  Buddha  criti 
cises  them,  and  declares  himself  as  against  their 
ascetic  life  and  practices  as  a  hindrance  rather  than 
a  help  to  a  life  of  perfect  freedom  from  passions  and 
desires,  a  life  of  true  emancipation.  He  himself 
advocates  moderation  in  all  things,  salvation  in 
cluded.  He  prefers  the  "middle  of  the  road,"  as 
both  he  and  we  say  (the  media  via,  or  madhyama- 
mdrga).  About  300  B.C.  a  clever  Greek  by  the  name 
of  Megasthenes  was  the  ambassador  of  the  Graeco- 
Persian  king  Seleukos  at  the  court  of  Chandragupta 
in  the  city  of  Pataliputra  (31 1-302  B.c).  Chandra 
gupta — Sandrakottos  or  Sandrokyptos  as  the  Greeks 
called  him — had  succeeded,  after  the  death  of  Alex 
ander  the  Great,  in  founding  the  great  Indian  empire 

1  Rdmakrishna,  His  Life  and  Sayings,  p.  138  (number  172). 


The  Final  Philosophy  of  the  Veda     283 


of  the  Maurya  dynasty,  the  largest  empire  known 
up  to  that  time  in  India.  Megasthenes  wrote  a  work 
called  Indica  which  contains  much  important  in 
formation  about  the  India  of  his  day.  He  tells  that 
these  ascetics  were  indifferent  to  the  good  or  evil 
that  happens  to  man  ;  that  all  being,  in  their  opinion, 
is  dreamlike  illusion  ;  that  they  regard  the  world  as 
created  and  perishable ;  and  believe  that  God  who 
has  created  it  pervades  it  completely.  Considering 
the  source,  this  is  an  uncommonly  good  description 
of  the  pessimistic  pantheism  of  the  Upanishads. 
Alexander  the  Great  himself  was  much  impressed 
with  these  "  Sages  of  the  Forest."  He  sent  one 
Onesikritos  to  talk  with  them.  After  having  been 
laughed  at  by  the  ascetics  for  his  full  dress  of 
mantle,  hat,  and  boots,  and  told  to  lie  naked  upon 
the  stones  if  he  would  learn  from  them,  he  was 
finally  initiated  into  the  Hindu  idea,  to  wit,  that 
the  best  doctrine  is  that  which  removes  not  only 
sorrow  but  also  joy  from  the  soul  of  man. 

Professor  Huxley  in  his  Evolution  and  Ethics  (p. 
65)  has  subjected  the  Hindu  ideal  to  severe  criticism. 
According  to  him  the  summum  bonum  of  the  Hindu 
is  a  state  of  impassive  quasi-somnambulism  which 
but  for  its  acknowledged  holiness  might  run  the 
risk  of  being  confounded  with  idiocy.  It  leads  to 
the  abandonment  of  property,  social  ties,  family 


284  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


affections,  and  common  companionship,  until  all  that 
remains  of  a  man  is  the  impassive  attenuated  men 
dicant  monk,  self-hypnotised  into  cataleptic  trances 
which  the  deluded  mystic  takes  for  foretastes  of 
final  union  with  Brahma.  Professor  Huxley  has  in 
mind  the  extreme  case  of  Yogin  of  the  later  time, 
who  confounds  hocus-pocus  and  humbug  with  re 
ligion.  As  a  matter  of  fact  the  Upanishad  religion 
is  a  religion  of  perfect  freedom,  and  equally  as  a 
matter  of  fact  the  religious  of  the  Upanishads  do 
find  it  advisable  as  a  rule  to  retire  from  active  life 
after  having  done  their  duty  in  active  life. 

Yajnavalkya's  step  marks  not  only  the  new  order 
of  thought  but  also  the  new  order  of  life  which  the 
religion  of  the  dtman-brahma  imposes  upon  India. 
In  fact  we  may  say  that  henceforth  India  leads  a 
double  life.  The  first  is  the  life  of  every  day.  The 
fragile  human  creature  enters  through  the  mother's 
womb,  where  it  has  been  protected  by  the  pious 
prayers  and  ceremonies  of  its  parents,  into  the  be 
wildering  sunshine  of  this  world.  If  it  only  knew  it, 
it  would  be  glad  that  the  karma  of  its  former  exist 
ence  entitles  its  soul  in  the  present  existence  to  the 
shelter  of  a  human  body,  howsoever  lowly.  Worse 
might  have  happened  in  the  hazard  of  the  lottery  of 
transmigration.  Birth  means  that  the  soul  in  ques 
tion  has  not  yet  joined  Brahma.  He  who  has  not 


The  Final  Philosophy  of  the  Veda     285 


done  so,  alas,  is  born  again  as  worm  or  as  fly  ;  as  fish 
or  as  fowl ;  as  lion  or  as  boar ;  as  bull  or  as  tiger,  or 
man  ;  or  as  something  else — any  old  thing  as  we 
might  say — in  this  place  or  in  that  place,  according 
to  the  quality  of  his  works,  and  the  degree  of  his 
knowledge,  that  is  in  accordance  with  the  doctrine 
of  karma.1  Thanks  to  the  past  the  present  is  secure  : 
worse  might  have  happened  than  to  pass  through 
the  temporary  shelter  of  a  human  mother's  body 
into  the  more  enduring  shelter  of  the  mother's  love. 
The  Hindu  mother,  like  any  other  mother,  rejoices 
in  her  child,  especially  if  he  is  a  boy,  and  asks  no 
questions  about  his  ultimate  cosmic  destiny.  Father 
and  mother  now  bend  every  energy  to  raise  the  child 
so  that  he  may  become  an  honored  member  of  the 
Brahmanical  community,  beloved  alike  of  god  and 
man.  The  Hindu  books  of  Rules  of  Home  Life,  the 
so-called  Grihyasutras,2  tell  a  touching  story  of  the 
pious  care  with  which  the  child  is  piloted  through 
infancy.  Indeed  the  life  of  the  Brahmanical  Hindu 
is  sacramental  throughout.  Every  important  phase 
of  his  life  has  its  own  sacraments.  The  most  im 
portant  of  them  are  the  investiture  by  his  teacher 
with  the  sacred  cord,  and  his  marriage. 

This    investiture    is   looked    upon   as   a  spiritual 

1  Kaushltaki  Upanishad  i.   2. 

2  See  above,  p.  41. 


286  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


second  birth,  or  regeneration.  The  little  mortal 
becomes  a  man  in  a  higher  sense,  because  his  teacher 
teaches  him  the  Veda,  syllable  by  syllable,  word  by 
word,  stanza  by  stanza.  During  the  period  of  his 
disciplehood  he  is  the  devoted  servant  of  his  teacher 
who,  throughout  Hindu  tradition,  is  regarded  as  even 
better  entitled  to  respect  than  his  own  parents.  No 
matter  how  rich  and  powerful  his  own  family,  he  now 
lives  obedient  to  his  teacher,  taking  care  of  his  wants 
to  the  point  of  gathering  his  fire-wood  and  begging 
for  him  in  the  village,  humble  and  chaste  in  his  own 
life.  In  return  he  obtains  from  his  teacher  the  sacred 
knowledge,  the  Veda.  Especially,  the  sacrosanct 
Savitrl,  that  famous  brief  stanza  1  which  at  an  early 
time  carries  within  it  the  presentiment  of  the  deep 
theosophy  that  is  to  come,  by  placing  in  the  relation 
of  cause  and  effect  the  physical  and  spiritual  essences 
of  the  universe : 

"  ^hat  lovely  glory  of  Savitar, 
The  heavenly  god,  we  contemplate  : 
Our  pious  thoughts  he  shall  promote." 

After  he  has  absolved  the  study  of  the  Veda  he 
becomes  a  full-grown  man.  The  teacher,  according 
to  the  beautiful  account  of  the  Taittirlya  Upanishad 
(i.  n),  dismisses  his  pupil  with  the  following  last 

1  Rig- Veda  3.  62.    10  ;  see  above,  p.  86. 


The  Final  Philosophy  of  the  Veda     287 


injunction  :  "  Tell  the  truth  ;  do  your  duty,  do  not 
neglect  the  study  of  the  Veda !  After  having 
given  to  your  teacher  your  gift  of  love,  see  to  it  that 
the  thread  of  your  race  be  not  cut  off !  Do  not  neg 
lect  truth,  duty,  health,  property,  and  the  study  of 
the  Veda  !  Honor  your  mother  as  a  god  !  Honor 
your  father  as  a  god  !  Honor  your  teacher  as  a  god  ! 
Honor  your  guest  as  a  god  !  Live  an  irreproachable 
life ;  honor  your  superior ;  give  alms  in  true  spirit ! 
When  in  doubt  follow  the  judgment  of  Brahmans  of 
tried  authority !  " 

Then  he  passes  into  the  life  stage  of  full-grown 
man,  husband  and  householder  (gr  hast  ha).  His  great 
duties  are  now  worship  and  sacrifice  to  the  gods, — and 
the  begetting  of  sons.  The  latter  are  of  great  im 
portance,  because  they  carry  on  through  unbroken 
generations  the  cult  of  the  Manes  or  Fathers  who, 
in  a  vaguely  inconsistent  way,  are  still  carrying  on  a 
happy  life  in  the  abodes  of  the  blessed — between 
transmigrations  we  must  suppose.  This  as  reward 
for  their  supposedly  very  pious  lives. 

It  is  at  the  end  of  this  stage  that  we  may  suppose 
Yajnavalkya  takes  leave  of  his  beloved  Maitreyl. 
The  curtain  now  drops  on  the  scene  of  all  temporal 
interests  :  wife,  children,  home,  and  property.  It  is  a 
curious  fact  that  in  theory  at  least  the  higher  religion 
of  the  Upanishad  begins  where  the  religions  of  other 


288  The  Religion  of  the  Veda 


peoples  are  content  to  conclude  their  offices.  Hav 
ing  disciplined  the  young  Brahman  ;  having  taught 
him  how  to  live  an  orderly,  god-fearing,  god-pro 
tected  life  ;  having  secured  safe  continuation  of  his 
race  through  pious  sons ;  and  having  finally  gained 
his  admission  to  the  heavenly  home  of  the  blessed 
Fathers — what  more  is  needed? 

Not  so  the  Hindu.  Over  this  pigmy  religion  which 
is  engaged  only  with  the  needs  of  the  ponderable, 
perishable  man,  towers  as  a  giant  the  grandiose  con 
ception,  than  which,  in  its  way,  no  higher  is  possible, 
that  the  True  in  man  is  in  fact  the  One  True  in  all  the 
Universe.  There  is  one  eternal  truth :  of  this  we  our 
selves  are  part.  The  distracting,  misleading,  adhesion, 
cemented  by  every  sense,  to  a  divided  individual  ex 
istence  in  a  world  of  illusory  phenomena,  come  no  one 
knows  whence,  but  none  the  less  certainly  false,  re 
quires  time  and  patience  to  undo.  The  Hindu 
theory  assumes  four  stages  or  a^ramas  (literally, 
" hermitages")  in  the  life  of  man  after  his  rebirth  at 
the  investiture.  The  first  two  stages,  as  we  have 
seen,  are  disciplehood  and  householdership.  Then 
come  the  two  stages  of  Forest-dweller,  or  Hermit, 
and  Wandering  Ascetic.  In  the  hermit  stage  he 
simply  lives  in  the  forest,  and  may  yet  keep  up  some 
connection  with  wife  and  children,  and  continue  his 
sacred  practices.  But  in  the  last  stage  all  worldly 


The  Final  Philosophy  of  the  Veda     289 


interest  is  abandoned,  every  fetter  of  affection,  desire, 
passion  is  sundered.  There  is  no  fixed  abode,  he 
lives  as  it  happens,  subsists  as  he  may,  indifferent  to 
all  but  the  realisation  that  he  is  the  brahma.  This 
realisation  of  itself  means  the  destruction  of  nescience: 
with  it  the  phantom  world  of  sorrow  and  joy  sinks 
out  of  sight.  The  soul  knowing  at  last  that  it  is 
brahma,  namely  truth,  sunders  the  chain  that  holds 
it  captive  through  transmigration  to  the  world, 
namely  illusion.  This  is  the  salvation  of  the  Hindu, 
namely  the  perfect  knowledge  that  the  soul  of  man 
that  dwells  in  him  is  the  unpolluted,  not  to  be  pollu 
ted,  serene,  holy,  eternal,  blissful,  divine  self — the 
atman,  or  brahma.  The  realisation  of  this  truth,  un 
hindered  by  any  other  desire,  that  is  all  that  is  needed; 
than  it  nothing  else  whatsoever  can  have  anything 
more  than  temporary  importance. 


INDEX 


Aborigines  of  India,  24,   175 

Abstract  gods,  96,  109,  131, 
135,  191,  242 

Afoka  or  Piyadassi,  Bud 
dhist  Emperor,  19,  53 

Afvamedha,  "horse-sacrifice" 
213,  216 

Acvins,  or  Dioscuri,  46,  90  ff., 
94,  no,  112  ff.,  141,  160, 
167,  172 

Aditi,   130  ff. 

Adityas,  78,  92,  120,  129/7., 
153;  meaning  of  the  word, 

I3I 

Agni  and  Soma,  78 

Agni,  "  God  Fire,  "  78,  87,  89, 
91,  92,  no,  127,  156/7., 
244;  son  of  Ushas  (Dawn), 
73,  1 60;  his  descent  from 
heaven  (lightning),  165; 
produced  by  friction,  139, 
158;  progenitor  of  men 
(Ayu),  139,  158;  servant 
of  the  gods,  162;  and  his 
brothers,  story  of,  162 

Agni  Jatavedas  ("Omni 
scient"),  164,  189 

Ahalya,  story  of,  229 

A  ham  brahma  asmi,  "I  am 
the  Brahma,"  275 

Ahura  Mazda  (Ormazd), 
120  ff.,  126,  133,  232.  See 
Asura 

Airy ama,  129.     See  Aryaman 

Ajatacatru,  219,  227 

Akbar,  Emperor,  52  ff. 


A  Kemp  is,  Thomas,  281 
Alexander     the     Great,    18, 

282 

Altar,  three  altars,   161 
Amesha  Spentas,  "Holy  Im 
mortals,"   133  ff. 
Anca,  130 

Andra,    176.     See  Indra 
Angiras,    semi-divine  priests, 

i44,  163 

Anquetil  du  Perron,  54 
Antiope  of  Bceotia,  mother 
_of  Dioscuri,  1 16 
Apri-hymns,    78,    79 
Apsaras  (nymphs),  46,  191 
Aranyaka  Texts,  49,  50,  209 
Arati,   "Demon  of  Grudge," 

191 
Arrested  anthropomorphism, 

85.  93»  l65 

Arta.     See  Rta 

Artabhaga,  a  theosopher,  260 

Aryaman,  129,  134,  153 

Aryan.      See  Indo-Iranian 

Aryans,  Indian,  geographical 

_  provenience  of,  23 

Arya  Samaj,  a  reform  asso 
ciation,  9 

Asceticism,  criticised  by 
Buddha,  282;  by  Pro 
fessor  Huxley,  283 

Ascetic  wanderer,  288 

As  ha.   See  Rta 

Asura  =  Ahura,  133 

Atharvangirasah,  "blessings 
and  curses,  "  26,  29 

Atharva-Veda,  17,  25  ff.,  39, 
4°  ff-t  77 1  its  theosophy,2O9 


291 


2Q2 


Index 


Atman,     "Supreme    Spirit," 
87,    211,    270  ff.,  280.     See 
Brahma  and  cf.  Breath 
Atmospheric  Gods,  92 
Aurengzeb,    Emperor,    52 
Avesta    and    Veda,    mutual 
relations    of,     13,     15,    24, 

_  II8 

Ayu,    "Living,"    designation 
of  fire  and  man,  139,  158 


B 


Babylonian  influence  on  Ar 
yan  religion,  133,  135 

Baksheesh,  69  ff.,  71,  190 
ff.,  194  ff.,  197,  227,  229, 
252;  hymn  addressed  to, 
197 

Behistan  rock,  cuneiform  in 
scription  on,  14 

"Being  and  non-being,"  235, 
237»  238 

"Belly  and  the  members," 
fable  of,  271 

Benfey,  Theodor,  102,  108 

Bentinck,  Lord  William,  9 

Bergaigne,  Abel,  72 

Bhaga,  old  word  for  "God," 
109,  130,  134 

Bhagavadgita,    201,    281 

Bhakti,  "  devotion,  "  195,  281. 
Cf.  Devotion 

Bhrigu,  a  sage,  252 

Bhrigvangirasah,  name  of 
Atharva-Veda,  40 

Bimbisara,   a   Buddhist,    219 

Brahma,  the  ultimate  prin 
ciple,  87,  118,  211,  232, 
248,  260;  meaning  of  the 
word,  205,  273;  final  shap 
ing  of,  273;  without  at 
tributes,  277;  pessimistic 
conception  of,  267  ff.;  Em 
erson's  poem  on,  277; 
final  union  with,  266,  289. 
Cf.  Atman 


Brahmanas,     or     Brahmana 

Texts,  4$ff.,  48,  209 
Brahmanaspati :   see    Brihas- 

pati 
Brahmanical  philosophies,  2, 

51,  108,  229 
Brahmanism,    extent    of,    2 ; 

criticised,    221;  contrasted 

with  Buddhism,  3 
Brahma     Samaj,     a    reform 

association,    9,    n 
Brahma-Veda,        name       of 

Atharva-Veda,  40 
Brahmodya,     or       Brahma- 

vadya,  theosophic  riddles, 

216  ff. 
Breath  of  life,  as  entity,  255. 

Cf.  Atman 
Brihaspati,"  Lord  of  Prayer," 

243,  273 
Buddha,  213,  219,  282;  date 

of,    18;   his   sphere   of   ac 
tivity,  268 
Buddhism,  2,  3,  108 


106 
Candragupta,    or     Chandra  - 

gupta,  18, 282 
£ankara,  a  philosopher,  221, 

227 
<JCaste,  system  of,   5,  6,   7,  8, 

264;  revulsion   against,    8; 

its  relation  to  theosophy, 

225 
Castor     and     Pollux     (Polu- 

deukes),  no,  113 
Celestial  gods,  92 
Cerberus  and  Cerberi,  myth 

of,  105  ff. 
Chandogya-Upanishad,     234, 

238,  260 

Chandragupta.    See    Candra 
gupta 
Chase,  G.  D.,  Professor,  115. 


Index 


293 


Children   of   "Father   Sky," 

IIO,    I  12 

Climate  and  nature,  influence 
of  upon  mythology,  82 ; 
cause  of  pessimism,  265 

Comparative  Mythology,  108, 
167;  criticism  of,  100  ff. 

Conflicting  prayers  and  sacri 
fices,  185 

"Cosmic  order."      See  Rta 

Counsel  of  perfection,   126 

Creation  hymn,  229,  234  ff. 

Creative  fervor,  237 

£rotriyas,  or  "Oral  Tra 
ditionalists,  "21 

Qvetaketu  Aruni,  223 

Qvetagvatara  Upanishad,  279 

Cyavana  the  Bhargava,  story 
of,  46 


D 


D  aksha,  a  god,  130 

Dakshina,  "Baksheesh," 

name  of  Ushas,  Dawn, 
71.  See  Baksheesh 

Ddna-stuti,  "  gift-praises, " 
196 

Dara  Shukoh,  a  Mogul  prince, 
52  ff- 

Darius  I.      Hystaspes,  14 

Dawn,  mother  of  Agni,  160. 
See  Ushas 

Death,  early  notions  of,  249  ff. 

"Death  anew,"  or  "Re- 
death,  "  253 

D  e  i  v  6  s,  "Shiners,"  Indo- 
European  word  for  gods, 
108,  148 

"  Desire,  "  Kama,  personified, 

237 

Deucalion,  myth  of,  138 
Deussen,  Paul,  Professor,  56, 

233>  234 

Devotion,  195,  202  ff.,  281; 
personified,  206,  273;  con 
trasted  with  Faith,  193. 
Cf.  Prayer. 


Devotional  (creative)  fervor, 

237 

Dhatar,  "Maker,"  242 
Dhena,    "Holy   Song,"   wife 

of  Brihaspati,   244 
Diespiter,  Jupiter,  no 
Dioscuri.  See  Afvins 
Dirghatamas,     author    of    a 

riddle-hymn,  210,  217,  229, 

233 
Djemshed  (Yima  Khshaeta), 

Persian  epic  hero,   143 
Dogs  of  Yama,  dogs  of  death, 

105,  106,  251 
Dreams    and    hallucinations, 

255 

Dyaus,  Dyaush  Pitar,  "Fa 
ther  Sky,  "  66,  92,  95,  110, 
139,  148,  152  ff. 


E 


Economic     conditions     and 

pessimism,   264 
Emerson's  poem  on  Brahma, 

278 
Eros,     "Love,"    personified, 

237'  245 
Ethics,     Vedic     system     of, 

126  ff. 
Ethnology,     its    relation    to 

Mythology,  93 


Faith,  conception  of,  109, 
1 86  ff.;  personified,  189; 
faith  and  works,  190,  269; 
related  to  truth  and  wis 
dom,  1 88;  reward  of,  post 
poned  to  heaven,  193 

"  Family-books"  of  Rig- Veda 
27,  79,  210 

Father  God,  138 

Fathers  in  heaven,  250,  251, 
287 

"  Father  Sky.  "  See  Dyaus. 


294 


Index 


Festivals,  public  and  tribal, 

214 

Fetish,  256  ff. 
Fire,  emblem  of  Brahmanism, 

189;    production    of,     139, 

158.      Cf.  Agni 
Fjorgyn  and  Fjorgynn,  1 1 1 
Flood,    Hindu   story   of,    45, 

M3 

"Forest-dwellers,"    282,    288 
Four  stages  of  life,  4,  288 
Future  life,  early  notions  of, 
149,  249  ff- 


Ganges,  a  river,  23,  265 

Garbe,  R.,  Professor,  220  ff. 

Gargya  and  GargI,  theoso- 
phers,  223 

Garutmant  (the  sun)  210, 
218 

Gatha  ndrdfansyah,  "praises 
of  men, "  196 

Ghee,  food  of  the  gods,  63, 
161 

"Gift-praises,"    196 

Girdle,  sacred,  188 

Gods,  Indo-European  words 
for,  1 08;  three  classes  of, 
87,  91;  chronology  of,  90, 
93 ;  relative  importance  of, 
89,  90,  93 ;  relative  clear 
ness  of  their  origin,  93-96 ; 
daily  order  of  their  ap 
pearance,  90  ff. ;  character 
of,  184  ff.;  glory  of,  199 

Gospel  of  John,  beginning 
of,  206 

Grasco-Parthian  rulers  of  In 
dia,  14 

Greek  and  Hindu  mythology 
compared,  83 

Greeks'  estimate  of  their  own 
religion,  84 

Grihyasutras:  see  "House- 
Books" 


II 


Haridrumata,  a  teacher,  225 
Heaven  and  Earth.      See  Dy- 

aus 
Helena,    sister    of    Dioscuri, 

IJ3 

Hell,  descriptions  of,  252 
Henotheism        (Kathenothe- 

ism),  164,  199 
Heracles    and     three-headed 

Geryon ;    Hercules    and 

three-headed   Cacus,    180 
Hermits    (vXoftioi),   282,   288 
Hestia- Vesta,  158 
Hieratic  religion  of  Veda,  60 ; 

belongs      to      the      upper 

classes,  77 
Hillebrandt,     A.,     Professor, 

i79  ff- 
Hindu  and  Greek  Mythology 

compared,  83 
Hindu    life    and    institutions 

intensely  religious,  3,  4 
Holiness,  conception  of,   109 
Hopkins,    E.    W.,  Professor, 

23,  155 

Horse-sacrifice,  213,  216 

' '  House-Books ' '  (Grihyasu 
tras),  41,  77,  159,  285 

Huxley's  critique  of  asceti 
cism,  283 

Hymns,  artistic  quality  of, 
75.  203 


Ignorance,    or    "nescience," 

276 

Illusion  (maya),  276,  288 
Images,  absence  of  in  Veda. 

89 
India   and   Persia,    historical 

contact  between,   14,   118 
India,    land    of   religions,    2 ; 

geographical    isolation    of, 

1 1 ;    her    nature,    climate, 

etc.,  85,  265 


Index 


295 


Indian  and  Persian  religions 

contrasted,  118 
India's  exploration,  future  of, 

22 
India's    religion,    continuity 

of,  10 
Indo-European  period,    100; 

.of  religion,  16,  108 
Indo-Iranian  period,   100;  of 

religion,  13,  118 
Indo-Parthian  Kingdoms,  14 
Indra,    78,    89,    92,    94,    130, 

I31.  i47»  X57>  177.  l86» 
187,  217,  244;  cause  of 
scepticism,  174,  229 

Indra  and  Agni,  78 

Indra  and  Varuna,  78 

Indra- Vritra  myth,  explana 
tions  of,  178,  179 

Indus,  a  river,  23,  265 

Initiation  of  a  young  Brah 
man,  188 

Investiture  of  a  young  Brah 
man,  285 

Ishtapurta,  "  sacrifice  and 
baksheesh,"  194  ff.,  252. 
See  Baksheesh 


J 


Jabala,     mother    of     Satya- 

kama,  225 
Jajali,  225 
Janaka,  king  of  Videha,  214, 

219,  226,  227 
Jatavedas,        "Omniscient," 

name  of  Agni,  164,  189 
aundice,  charm  against,   42 
uggernaut,  car  of,  9 
upiter,  no 
yotishtoma-sacrifice,  77 

K 

Kala,    "Time,"    personified, 

245 

Kama,  "Love,"  personified, 
237.  245 


Kanvas,   a  family  of  poets, 

28,  203,  205 
Karma,  or  spiritual  evolution, 

195,  257.  259,  284;  Western 

estimate  of,  261   ff. 
Katyayam,    wife   of   Yajna- 

valkya,  277 
Kennings,  162 
Kings,  interested  in  theos- 

ophy,    214,    219,  220,  223, 

227 

Kronos,  84 

Kuhn,   Adalbert,    102,   108 
Kumarila,  a  philosopher,  222, 

227 


Lithuanian  dainos,  or  songs, 

114,  172 
Loge  (Loki),  Norse  god  of 

fire,  156 
Logos,  or  "Word"  (divine), 

207,  273 
Lost  cattle,  Lithuanian  poem 

about,  172 


M 


Macdonell,  A.  A.,   Professor, 

I3I 
Maitreyi,     wife     of     Yajna- 

valkya,  223,  277 
Man,  origin  of,  138,  149 
Manicheism,  85 
Mannus,  son  of  Tuisto,  140 
Manu,  Manush  Pitar,  "  Father 

Manu,  "  140,  143 
Manu,     Law-Book    of,     256, 

259 

Martanda,  130 
Maruts,  92 

"Master-singers,"  201,  202 
Matarigvan,   165,  210,  218 
Maurya  dynasty,   18,  283 
Maya,  "Illusion,"  276,  288 
Megasthenes,   Greek  author, 
282 


296 


Index 


Metempsychosis.  See  Trans 
migration 

Metres,  24;  belonging  to 
different  hours  of  the  day, 
80 ;  to  individual  gods,  80 

Mithraism,  85 

Mitra  (Persian  Mithra,  Mi 
thras),  92,  120  ff.,  129, 
i32  If-.  I53«  210,  218 

Moderation  in  asceticism, 
282,  284 

Mohammedanism  in  India, 
10,  52  ff_. 

Mokshamulara,  Sanskrit 
name  of  Max  Miiller,  53 

Monism,  idea  of  unity,  56^., 
210,  218,  233,  247,  269. 
See  Pantheism 

Moon  and  "Sun-Maiden," 
marriage  of,  114 

Morning  and  evening  star, 
114  ff.,  172 

"Mother  Earth,"  95,  no, 
138,  148 

Mountains  as  winged  birds, 
legend  of,  48 

Muir,  Dr.  John,  154 

Miiller,  Max,  53,  71,  102, 
164,  199 

Mystics,  Christian,  275,  281 

Mythology,  29;  in  its  relation 
to  Ethnology,  103.  Cf. 
Indo-Iranian,  and  Indo- 
European 


N 


Naciketas,  a  theosopher,  192, 
223 

Na  neti,  "no,  no,  "277 

Nature  myth,  29,  81,  108, 
148,  152  ff.;  nature  phe 
nomena  in  legends,  48;  in 
riddles,  217 

Neoplatonism,  207 

Nidhanas  of  the  Sama-Veda, 
37 


Odhin,  a  Norse  god,  155 

Oldenberg,  H.,  Professor,  72, 
J33  ff-,  273 

Onesikritos,  a  Greek,  283 

Opaque  gods,  96,  174 

Oupnekhat,  Persian  trans 
lation  of  the  Upanishads, 
54/7- 


Pairs  of  gods,  78 

Pantheism,  242.  See  Mon 
ism 

Pantheon  of  the  Veda,  78, 
88  ff. 

Paracara,  a  Rishi,  225 

Paradise,  250,  287;  solar, 
169  ff. 

Parameshthin,  "He  who  oc 
cupies  the  highest  place, " 
242 

Parjanya,  God  of  Thunder, 
92,  in,  178,  181 

"Parliament  of  Religions," 
in  Chicago,  9 

Parsis  in  India,  10,  14,  118 

Patrons  of  sacrifice,  193  ff., 
215;  of  theosophy,  219 

Perkunas,  Lithuanian  God  of 
Thunder,  in,  115 

Persian  and  Hindu  religion 
contrasted,  118 

Persian  names  in  arta,  12 

Pessimism,  3,  4,  212,  263; 
its  origin,  264;  its  final 
fixation,  267 

Philosophy,  its  relation  to 
practical  life,  10.  See  The 
osophy 

Phcebus  Apollo  and  Marsyas, 
84 

Pischel,  R.,  Professor,  113 

Poetic  inspiration,  75.201^. 

Popular  religion,  42,  77 


Index 


297 


Prajapati,  "Lord  of  Crea 
tures,"  236,  240,  245,  246, 
271 

Prana,  "Breath  of  Life," 
personified,  245 

Pravahana  Jaivali,  a  royal 
theosopher,  224 

Prayer  beatified  and  deified, 
205,  243.  Cf.  Devotion 

Prayer  of  the  gods,  205 

Prehistoric  gods,  90,  96,  99  ff. 

Priests,  various  kinds  of,  80, 
216 

Prithivl,  "Earth,"  92.  Cf. 
"Mother  Earth" 

Pururavas  and  Urvaci,  story 
of,  46 

Purusha,  "cosmic  man,  "  and 
supreme  spirit,  242,  279 

Pushan,  92,  170,  171 


R 


Raja  Rammohun  Roy,  a  re 
former,  8,  53 

Rajasuya,  "coronation"  of 
a  king,  213 

Ramakrishna,  a  saint  and 
ascetic,  227,  229,  281 

Religion,  science  of,  151 

Religious  liberty,  8,  19,  53 

Renan,  Ernest,  85 

Retribution,  252,  262 

Reverence,  Indo-European 
conception  of,  109 

Ribhus,  78 

Riddles,  theosophic,  210, 
215  ff.,  218 

Rig- Veda,  17,  25  ff.;  geo 
graphy  of,  23  ;  language  of, 
26;  character  of,  29;  er 
roneous  view  of  its  authors 
and  redaction,  61  ff.;  qual 
ity  of  its  hymns,  63 ; 
utilitarian  and  ritual  char 
acter  of,  31,  67,  75,  182 ; 
religious  essence  of,  198/7. 
See  Veda 


Ritual  and  theosophy,    213, 

218 
Royal     caste,     its     influence 

upon  theosophy,  214,  223, 

227 
Rta     (asha,     arta},     "cosmic 

order,"     120,     121,  125  ff., 

232  ;  date  of  the  conception, 

12,  19,  135 
Rudra,  92 


Sacraments  in   daily  life  of 

Hindus,  4,  285 
Sacrifice,  philosophy  of,   33, 

215 

Sacrifice  post,  67,  79 

Sacrificers,  origin  of,   138 

Sages  as  creators,  237 

Salvation,  5,  211,  247,  263, 
269,  289 

Sama-Veda,  25  ff.;  Veda  of 
music,  36;  popular  origin 
of,  38;  inferior  position  of, 
39;  connected  with  god 
Indra,  37;  related  to  Sha 
manism,  38 

Sandrakottos,  Sandrokyptos 
(Candragupta),  18,  282 

Sankhya    philosophy,    2 

Saranyu,  mother  of  the  Ac- 
vins,  91,  113,  141  ff. 

Satyakama,  son  of  Jabala, 
a  low-caste  theosopher, 
225 

Saule,  Lettish  "Sun-Maid 
en,"  115  ff.  See  "Sun- 
Maiden" 

Savarna,  wife  of  Vivasvant, 
142 

Savitar,  74,  86,  91,  92,  240. 
See  next 

Savitri,  or  Gayatri  stanza, 
86,  202,  273,  286.  See 
preceding 

Scepticism,  174,  181,  229; 
philosophic,  238 


2g8 


Index 


Scheffler,    Johannes,  a    mys 
tic,  275 
Schopenhauer      and      Upan- 

ishad    philosophy,    55  ff. 
Seleukos,     a     Greece-Persian 

king,  282 

Self-hypnosis,  9,  284 
Sena,  wife  of  Indra,  244 
Sentimental  regard  of  gods, 

200 

Shah  Jehan,  a  Mogul  Empe 
ror,  52 
Shah  Nameh,  Persian  Epic, 

144 
Shankar  Pandurang  Pandit, 

21 

Sikhs,  religion  of,  10 
Skambha,  "Support,"  242 
Soma     (haoma),     plant,    and 
liquor  pressed  from  it,   77, 

78,   120,    122,    138,    143,    145, 

J47>  I75>  ^s  function  in 
Vedic  religion,  65,  147; 
in  Avestan  religion,  147; 
brought  from  heaven  by 
an  eagle,  146,  165;  per 
sonified,  78,  92,  172;  as 
the  moon,  113 
"Sons  of  God,"  Lithuanian 

myth  of,  no,  114 
Stages  of  life,  four,  4,  288 
Stobhas  of    the   Sama-Veda, 

Sun,  universal  worship  of, 
104;  progenitor  of  man, 
139,  141;  as  shepherd  and 
finder  of  lost  objects,  172  ff. 
See  Savitar,  and  Surya 

Sun  and  moon  as  dogs,  105, 
251 

"  Sun-Maiden,  "  90,  91, 112  ff., 
n5  ff;  172 

Surya  (Helios)  86,  87,  92, 
112,  153,  154,  172 

Surya.   See  "Sun-Maiden" 

Suttee,  or  widow-burning,  9 

Svayambhu,  "The  Self -ex 
isting, "  242 


Symbolic  gods,  96,  109,  131, 
135,  191,  242 


Talmud,  209,  215,  222 
Tapas,      "creative     fervor," 

237 
Tat  tvam  asi,  "Thou  art  the 

That,"   233,   269,   275 
lauler,  John,  a  mystic,  281 
Teacher  and  pupil,  188,  286 
Tel-el- Am  arna,        cuneiform 

tablets  of,  n,  135 
Temples,  absence  of,  89 
Terrestrial  gods,  92 
Theosophy,     beginnings     of, 
208,   215,   219;  time  of  its 
appearance,    209  ff.,     221; 
place  where  it  originated, 
212  ff.',     its  authors,     219, 
227:  chronology  of,  233 
Thor  (Donar),  in 
Thrita  and  Athwya,  146 
Thugs,  sect  of,  9 
Thunder,  god  of,  in,  148 
"Time,"      "Father     Time," 

personified,  245 
Totemism,  138  ff.,  256 
Transcendental  gods,  244 
Translucent  gods,  96,  166  ff. 
Transmigration    of   souls,    3, 
57,  211  ff.,  224,  247;  origin 
and  explanation  of,  254  ff. ; 
date  of,   257;  Western  es 
timate   of,  261  ff.,;   release 
from,  258 
Transparent      gods,      93-96, 

151  ff- 

Trita  Aptya,  146 
Truth  and  untruth,  128 
Tuisto,  father  of  Mannus,  140 
Tuladhara,  a  low-caste    thc- 

osopher,  225 
Tvashtar,  91,  141,  240 
"Twilight  of  the  gods,"  98, 
230 


Index 


299 


u 


Uddalaka  Aruni,  a  theoso- 
pher,  221 

Unity,  idea  of.      See  Monism 

Universe,  threefold  division 
of,  91,  169 

Upanishads,  2,  52  ff.,  209, 
215,  222,  257  ff.,  274,  287; 
discovery  of,  52;  critical 
estimate  of,  57,  58;  Hindu 
estimate  of,  57;  influence 
of,  on  Western  philosophy, 
55;  relation  of  to  ritual, 
35,  209 

Uranos,  84 ;  identical  with 
Varuna,  136 

Urva9i,  an  Apsaras,  46 

Ushas,  "Dawn,"  a  goddess, 
30,  66  ff.,  71  ff;  78,  9°  ff-> 
no,  127,  152  ff.t  251 

Utilitarianism,  61,  183,  198 


Vac,  Vac  Sarasvati,  "Holy 
Speech,"  personified,  191, 

243 

Vajacravasa,  a  zealous  Brah 
man,  192 

Vala  and  the  cows,  myth  of, 
180 

Varuna,  92,  94,  119,  121, 
i2&ff.,  153.  l62.  l67»  174, 
200,  250;  identical  with 
Uranos,  136;  collapse  of, 
232 

Vasishthas,  a  family  of  Vedic 
authors,  28,  123,  186 

Vata,  and  Vayu,  "Wind," 
personified,  87,  92,  155, 
181 

Veda,  17  ff.',  date  of,  18,  209; 
canon  of,  17;  oral  tradition 
of,  2 1 ;  unhistorical  char 
acter  of  its  tradition,  20, 
23;  date  of  its  manu 
scripts,  2 1 ;  literary  be 


ginnings  of,  24;  character 
of  its  literature,  25,  65,  76, 
80;  its  composers,  27,  28, 
6 1 ;  its  metres,  24,  80 ;  mode 
of  acquiring  it  in  school, 
188,  286.  See  Rig-Veda 

Veda  and  Avesta,  mutual 
relations  of,  13,  15,  24,  118 

Veda  and    Mahabharata,  16 

Vedanta  philosophy,  2,  51, 
229 

Vedas,    Concordance   of,    18, 

Vicpala,  a  racing  mare,    113 
Vifvakarman,  "  Fabricator  of 

universe, "  242 
Vidhatar,   "Arranger,"   242 
Vishnu,  92,  168  ff..  195 
Vivas vant   (Vivanhvant),  fa 
ther  of  Yama  and  Manu, 
120,  139,  141  ff.,  146 
Vivekananda,    Svami,    a    re 
ligious    reformer,    9,    225, 
229 

Vrishakapayi,  91 
Vritra,  a  demon,  175  ff. 
Vritrahan         (Verethraghna, 
Vahagn),  epithet  of  Indra, 
176 

W 

Wagner,  Richard,  59,  156 
Warrior  caste,  its  relation  to 

theosophy,  219,  220  ff. 
Whitney,  William  D.,  18,  234 
Woman's  incantation  against 

rival,  43 
Women  as  theosophers,  233, 

279 
Wotan,  a  Teutonic  god,   155 


Yajnavalkya,  a  theosopher, 
214,  221,  223,  227,  287, 
261,  277,  279,  284,  290 

Yajur-Veda,  25  ff.,  31  ff.,  127 


300 


Index 


Yama,  king  of  paradise  and 

hell,    105,    140,    144,    145, 

162,  2 10,  250,  251 
Yama    and    Yatnl,    the    first 

pair,  48,  120,  129,  140,144 
Yaska,  author  of  Nirukta,  90 
Yima,  Yima  Khshaeta,  143. 

See  Yama 
Ymir,    cosmic    man    in    the 

Edda,  242 
"Yodels"  in  Sama-Veda,  37 


Zarathushtra         (Zoroaster), 

118 
Zeus,  Zeus  Pater,  83,  95,  no, 

152.     See  Dyaus 
Zeus  Bagaios,  109 
Zoroastrian  angels   (Amesha 

Spentas),  133  ff. 
Zoroastrian    (Parsi)    religion, 

n,  13,  118  ff. 


. 


BLOOMFIELD 
.26   THE  RELIGION  OF 

1908   ™ VEDA 

12J139 

I 


