===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.47262.Hymns-Of-The-Rigveda--Vol2_djvu.txt =====

76117 


HYMNS  OB'  THE  RIGVEDA 

translated  with  a popular  commentary 


BY 

RALPH  T.  H.  GRIFFITH,  M.A..C.I.E. 

FORMER  PRINCIPAL  OF  THE  BENARES  COLLEGE,  AND  LATE  DIRECTOR 
PUBLIC  INSTRUCTION  N.-W.  P.  AND  OUDH. 


1 

Second  Edition. 

COMPLETE  IN  TWO  VOLUMES. 


VOL.  II. 


BENARES: 

PRINTED  AND  PUBLISHED  BY  E.  J.  LAZARUS  AND  CO. 

1897. 

All  rights  rest 


LIBRARY 


CONTENTS. 

Pagt. 

Hymns,  Translation  and  Commentary  : — 

Book  VII.  ...  ...  ...  ...  1 

„ VIII ...  103 

VAlakhilya  ...  ...  ...  ...  259 

Book  IX.  ...  ...  ...  ...  269 

» x*  •••  ...  ...  383 

Appendix.— Hymns  lxi.,  cvi.,  clxh.-olxiil,  clxxxiv.  ...  611 

index  of  Hymns  ...  ...  ...  ...  015 

General  Index  of  Hymns  ...  ...  ...  633 

Index  of  Names,  Etc.  ...  ...  ...  637 

Corrigenda  et  Addenda  ...  ...  ...  671 


the  hymns  of  the  rigveda. 

BOOK  THE  SEVENTH. 

HYMN  I.  Agni. 

The  men  from  fire-sticks,  with  their  hands’  swift  movement, 
have,  i«  deep,  thought,  engendered  glorious  Agni, 

Far-seen,  with  pointed  flame,  Lord  of  the  homestead. 

? l'he  Vasus  set  that  Agni  in  the  dwelling,  fair  to  behold,  for 
help  from  every  quarter : 

Who,  in  the  home  for  ever,  must  be  honoured. 

) Shine  thou  before  us,  Agni,  well-enkindled,  with  flame,  Most 
Youthful  God,  that  never  fadeth. 

To  thee  come  all  our  sacrificial  viands. 

1 Among  all  fires  these  fires  have  shone  most  brightly,  splendid 
with  light,  begirt  by  noble  heroes, 

Where  men  of  lofty  birth  sit  down  together. 

5 Victorious  Agni,  grant  us  wealth  with  wisdom,  wealth  with 
brave  sons,  famous  and  independent, 

Which  not  a foe  who  deals  in  magic  conquers.  ^ 

To  whom,  the  Strong,  at  morn  and  eve  comes, -maid-like,  the 
ladle  dropping  oil,  with  its  oblation  : 

Wealth-seeking  comes  to  him  his  own  devotion. 

Burn  up  all  malice  with  those  flames,  0 Agni,  wherewith  of 
old  thou  burntest  up  Jarfttha, 

And  drive  away  in  silence  pain  and  sickness. 

With  him  who  lighteth  up  thy  splendour,  Agni,  excellent, 

, pure,  refulgent,  Purifier, 

Be  present,  and  with  us  through  these  our  praises. 

Agni,  the  patriarchal  men,  the  mortals  who  have  in  many 
i places  spread  thy  lustre, — 

Be  gracious  to  us  here  for  their  sake  also. 

.11  the  hymns  of  this  Book  are  ascribed  to  the  Itishi  Vaaishtha,  with  whom 
sons  are  associated  as  the  seels  of  parts  of  two  Lymns. 

i In  deep  thought : ‘ with  their  fingers/  according  to  SAyana,  this  meaning 
ll>g  been  attributed  without  any  philological  grounds  to  the  word  dfdhiti* 
from  its  use  in  this  and  similar  passages. 
fits  own  devotion ; the  worship  which  belongs  especially  to  him. 
w'&tha ; a RAksh  isa  or  demon  with  a loud  harsh  voice. — SAyana, 


2 THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOj 

10  Let  these  men,  heroes  in  the  fight  with  foemen,  prevail  aj  ' 

all  godless  arts  of  magic, — 

These  who  approve  the  noble  song  I sing  thee. 

11  Let  us  not  sit  in  want  of  men,  0 Agni,  without  descenj  ; 

heroless,  about  thee : 

But,  0 House-Friend,  in  houses  full  of  children. 

12  By  sacrifice  which  the  Steeds’  Lord  ever  visits,  there  m 

our  dwelling  rich  in  seed  and  offspring, 

Increasing  still  with  lineal  successors. 

13  Guard  us,  0 Agni,  from  the  hated  demon,  guard  us  j 

malice  of  the  churlish  sinner : 

Allied  with  thee  may  I subdue  assailants. 

14  May  this  same  fire  of  mine  surpass  all  others,  this  fire  ) 

offspring,  vigorous  and  firm-handed,  i 

Wins,  on  a thousand  paths,  what  ne’er  shall  perish.  ! 

15  This  is  that  Agni,  saviour  from  the  foeman,  who  guarcn 

kindler  of  the  flame  from  sorrow : 

Heroes  of  noble  lineage  serve  and  tend  him. 

16  This  is  that  Agni,  served  in  many  places,  whom  the  ricll  i 

who  brings  oblation  kindles, 

And  round  him  goes  the  priest  at  sacrifices. 

17  Agni,  may  we  with  riches  in  possession  bring  thee  cont^ 

offerings  in  abundance, 

Using^both  means  to  draw  thee  to  our  worship. 

18  Agni,  bear  thou,  Eternal,  these  most  welcome  oblation 

the  Deities’  assembly : 

Let  them  enjoy  our  very  fragrant  presents. 

19  Give  us  not  up,  Agni,  to  want  of  heroes,  to  wretched  clod 

to  need,  to  destitution. 

Yield  us  not,  Holy  One,  to  fiend  or  hunger;  injure  us  i)  )t 
home  or  in  the  forest.  ! 

20  Give  strength  and  power  to  these  my  prayers,  0 Agii: 

God,  pour  blessings  on  our  chiefs  and  nobles. 

Grant  that  both  we  and  they  may  share  thy  bounty.  Ye  Gc 
protect  us  evermore  with  blessings. 

21  Thou  Agni,  swift  to  hear,  art  fair  of  aspect : beam  forth 

Son  of  Strength,  in  full  effulgence. 

Let  me  not  want,  with  thee,  a^son  for  ever : let  not  a mw 
hero  ever  fail  us. 

12  The  Steeds'  Lord : Agni,  whose  swift  flames  are  called  horses. 

17  Both  means : prayer  and  praise. 

21  Far 'ever ; ntiyt;  perpetual ; who  shall  live  for  ever  in  his  pop 


THE  RlGVEDA. 


8 


\lttf  2.J 

: Condemn  ua  not  to  indigence,  0 Agni,  beside  these  flaming 
fires  which  Gods  have  kindled  ; 

Nor,  even  after  fault,  let  thy  displeasure,  thine  as  a God,  0 
Son  of  Strength,  overtake  us- 

0 Agni,  fair  of  face,  the  wealthy  mortal  who  to  the  Im- 
mortal offers  his  oblation 

Hath  him  who  wins  him  treasure  by  his  Godhead,  to  whom 
the  prince,  in  need,  goes  supplicating. 
k Knowing  our  chief  felicity,  0 Agni,  bring  hither  ample 
riches  to  our  nobles, 

Wherewith  we  may  enjoy  ourselves,  0 Victor,  with  undimini- 
shed life  and  hero  children. 

6 Give  strength  and  power  to  these  my  prayers,  0 Agni ; 0 God, 
pour  blessings  on  our  chiefs  and  nobles. 

Grant  that  both  we  and  they  may  share  thy  bounty.  Ye 
Gods,  protect  us  evermore  with  blessings. 

HYMN  II.  Aprts. 

Gladly  accept,  this  day,  our  fuel,  Agni : send  up  thy  sacred 
smoke  and  shi^e  sublimely. 

Touch  the  c^estial  summits  with  thy  columns,  and  overspread 
thee  »*ith  the  rays  of  Surya. 

2 Wifch  sacrifice  to  these  we  men  will  honour  the  majesty  of 

holy  Naraeansa — 

To  these  the  pure,  most  wise,  the  thought-inspirers,  Gods  who 
enjoy  bet^h  sorts  of  our  oblations. 

3 We  will'&fctol  at  sacrifice  for  ever,  as  men  may  do,  Agni  whom 

Manu  Kindled, 

Your  very  skilful  Asura,  meet  for  worship,  envoy  between 
both  worlds,  the  truthful  speaker, 
r Bearing  the  sacred  grass,  the  men  who  serve  him  strew  it 
with  reverence,  on  their  knees,  by  Agni. 

Calling  him  to  the  spotted  grass,  oil-sprinkled,  adorn  him,  ye 
Ad  h vary  us,  with  oblation. 

22  Which  Qods  have  kindled : lighted  by  the  ministering  priests. 

23  Hath  him  : possesses,  or  ©njoye  the  favour  of,  Agni.  * That  deity  (Agni) 
fours  the  presenter  of  (sacrificial)  wealth.’ — Wilson, 

24  Knoicing  our  chief  felicity  : understanding  what  we  want  to  make  us 
PPy.  that  is,  riches. 

Hie  Aprfs  are  the  divine  or  deified  beings  and  objects  to  which  the  propi- 
tory  verses  are  addressed.  For  other  Anri  hymns  see  I.  13 ; 188  ; II.  8 : III. 

Lv-  5 ; IX.  5 ; X.  70  ; HO. 

[ Hwdmnsa:  * the  Praise  of  Men’ ; Agni.  Both  tortt  of  our  oblation$ : 

Pr  U2a°f  Sfyitot  pH  or  clarified  butter,  and  libations  of  Soma  juice. 


4 ' JFHF  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  } 

5 With  holy  thoughts  the  pious  have  thrown  open  Doors  fain 

chariots  in  the  Gods’  assembly. 

Like  two  full  mother  cows  who  liok  their  youngling,  like  ma 
ens  for  the  gathering,  they  adorn  them. 

6 And  let  the  two  exalte^  Heavenly  Ladies,  Morning  and  Nig 

like  a cow  good  at  milking, 

Come,  inuch-invoked,  and  on  our  grass  be  seated,  wealtl 
deserving  worship,  for  our  welfare. 

7 You,  Bards  and  Singers  at  men’s  sacrifices,  both  filled  wi 

wisdom,  I incline  to  worship. 

Send  up  our  offerings  when  we  call  upon  you,  and  so  amoi 
the  Gods  obtain  us  treasures. 


8 May  Bharati  with  all  her  Sisters,  IJa  accordant  with  the  Gc 

with  mortals  Agni, 

Sarasvati  with  all  her  kindred  Rivers,  come  to  this  gra 
Three  Goddesses,  and  seat  them. 

9 Well  pleased  with  us  do  thou,  O God,  0 TvashUr,  give  rea 

issue  to  our  procreant  vigour, 

Whence  springs  the  hero,  powerful,  trilled  in  action,  lo\ 
of  Gods,  adjuster  of  the  press-stones. 

10  Send  to  the  Gods  the  oblation,  Lord  of  Forests,  and  let  t 
Immolator,  Agni,  dress  it. 

He  as  the  truer  Priest  shall  offer  worship,  for  the  Gods’  m 
rations  well  he  knowoth. 

J1  Come  thou  to  us,  0 Agni,  duly  kindled,  together  with 
potent  Gods  and  Indra. 

On  this  our  grass  sit  Aditi,  happy  Mother,  and  let  our  H i 
delight  the  Gods  Immortal. 

HYMN  III.  A\ 

Associate  with  fires,  make  your  God  Agni  envoy  at  sacrif 
best  skilled  in  worship, 

Established  firm  among  mankind,  the  Holy,  flame-crowi 
and  fed  with  oil,  the  Purifier. 


5 Doors:  the  deified  doors  of  the  hall  of  sacrifice  wheie  the  Gods  assem 
Fain  for  chariot* . welcoming  the  approach  of  the  cars  in  wliioh  the  prii 
coino  to  the  ce>  mony,  The  latter  half  of  the  stanza  is  obscure  : ‘ (the  laq 
placed  to  the  east  are  plying  the  fire  with  ghi  at  sacrifices,  as  the  moi 
q®ws  liok  the  calf,  or  as  riyers  (water  the  fields).’— Wilson.  ^ 

6 Like  a cow:  the  dual  dhend,  two  cows,  instead  of  dhenuh,  woi  \ as  1} 


wig  suggests,  seem  to  us  to  be  preferable. 

7 Bards  and  Singers:  the  h6t4>4,  or  ‘two  Invokers’  of  J.  13.  8; 
Agni  and  Varuna,  pr  Varuna  and  Aditya. 

8 Stanzas  8-^11  are  identical  with  stanzas  8— 11  of  Book  III.  4. 


perl 


1 Associate:  sajdsMK  being  a shortened  form  of  sajfahasah,  the  no  aim* 
plural.  Sftyana  explains  it  as  an  accusative  singular,  qualifying  Agni, 


lai i IULt  Y JLU A. 


rN  3.] 


5 


,ike  a steed  neighing  eager  for  the  pasture,  when  he  hath 
stepped  forth  from  the  great  enclosure  : 

’hen  the  wind  following  blows  upon  his  splendour,  and, 
straight,  the  path  is  black  which  thou  hast  travelled. 

[from  thee  a Bull  but  newly  born,  0 Agni,  the  kindled  ever- 
, lasting  flames  rise  upward. 

i.]oft  to  heaven  thy  ruddy  smoke  ascendeth : Agni,  thou 
speedest  to  th<j  Gods  as  envoy. 

Thou  whose  fresh  lustre  o’er  the  earth  advanceth  when  greed- 
ily with  thy  jaws  thy  food  thou  eatest. 
jike  a host  hurried  onward  comes  thy  lasso  : fierce,  with  thy 
tongue  thou  piercest,  as  ’twere  barley. 

The  men  have  decked  him  both  at  eve  and  morning,  Most 
Youthful  Agni,  as  they  tend  a courser. 

They  kindle  him,  a gitest  within  his  dwelling  : bright  shines 
the  splendour  of  the  worshipped  Hero. 

0 fair  of  face,  beautiful  is  thine  aspect  when,  very  near  at 
hand,  like  gold  thou  gleamest. 

Like  Heaven’s  thundering  roar  thy  might  approaches,  and 
like  the  wondrous  Sun  thy  light  thou  showest. 

That  we  may  worship,  with  your  Hail  to  Agni ! with  sacrificial 
cakes  and  fat  oblations, 

Guard  us,  - 0 Agni,  with  those  boundless  glories  as  with  a 
hundred  fortresses  of  iron. 

Thine  are  resistless  songs  for  him  who  offers,  and  hero-giving 
hymns  wherewith  thou  savest ; 

With  these,  0 Son  of  Strength,  0 Jatavcdas,  guard  us,  pre- 
serve these  princes  and  the  singers. 

When  forth  he  cometh,  like  an  axe  new-sharpened,  pure  in 
his  form,  resplendent  in  his  body, 

Sprung,  sought  with  eager  longing,  from  his  Parents,  for  the 
Gods’  worship,  Sage  and  Purifier : 

Shine  this  felicity  on  us,  0 Agni : may  we  attain  to  perfect 
understanding. 

A.11  happiness  be  theirs  who  sing  and  praise*  thee.  Ye  Gods, 
preserve  us  evermore  with  blessings. 


— - 

2 From  the  great  enclosvn't ; ‘ from  the  vast  enclosing  (forest)/ — Wilson, 
-hers  understand  It  as  the  enclosure  in  which  the  horse  is  confiued. 

4 Ckoupiercett  as 'twere  baiiey : the  comparison  is  somewhat  compressed  : 
e meaning  is,  thon  penetratest  and  fellest  the  trees  of  the  forest  with  thy 
as  men  cut  down  barley  with  a reaping-hook, 

& From  his  Parents;  the  two  fire-sticks* 


TUB  HYMNS  OP 


[BOOK  1 


HYMN  IY.  A 

Bring  forth  your  gifts  to  his  refulgent  splendour,  your  hy 
as  purest  offering  to  Agni, 

To  him  who  goes  as  messenger  with  knowledge  between 
sons  of  men  and  Gods  in  heaven. 

2 Wise  must  this  Agni  he,  though  young  and  tender,  since 

was  born,  Most  Youthful,  of  his  Mother  ; 

He  who  with  bright  teeth  seizeth  fast  the  forests,  and  e? 
his  food,  though  plenteous,  in  a moment. 

3 Before  his  presence  must  we  all  assemble,  this  God's  wh( 

men  have  seized  in  his  white  splendour. 

This  Agni  who  hath  brooked  that  men  should  seize  him  ha 
shone  for  man  with  glow  insufferable. 

4 Far-seeing  hath  this  Agni  been  established,  deathless  m 

mortals,  wise  among  the  foolish. 

Here,  0 victorious  God,  forbear  to  harm  us : may  we  for  evi 
share  thy  gracious  favour. 

5 He  who  hath  occupied  his  God- made  dwelling,  Agni,  in  wisdoi 

hath  surpassed  Immortals. 

A Babe  unborn,  the  plants  and  trees  support  him,  and  th 
earth  bearetb  him  the  All-snstainer. 

6 Agni  is  Lord  of  Amrit  in  abundance,  Lord  of  the  gift  of  wealt 

and  hero  valour, 

Victorious  God,  let  us  not  sit  about  thee  like  men  devoid  c 
strength,  beauty,  and  worship. 

7 The  foeman’s  treasure  may  be  won  with  labour : may  we  tx 

masters  of  our  own  possessions.  , 

Agni,  no  son  is  he  who  springs  from  others : lengthen  not  ovu 
the  pathways  of  the  foolish.  1 

8 Unwelcome  for  adoption  is  the  stranger,  one  to  be  thought  o 

as  another's  offspring, 

Though  grown  familiar  by  continual  presence.  May  our  strong 
hero  come,  freshly  triumphant.  1 


3 Musi  we  all  assemble : I follow  Ludwig  in  his  interpretation  of  sariw&di 
as  we  are  forsaken,  ami  our  protector  is  far  away  («t,  6,  7,  8),  we  must  crow 
to  the  God  of  Fire  for  defence. 

6 In  the  second  line  I have  borrowed  from  Prof.  Max  Miiller,  Vcdic  Hymni 
I.  p.  80. 

7 Let  us  remain  in  undisturbed  possession  of  our  own  property,  and  let  m 
have  sons  of  our  own  begetting  and  not  the  adopted  children  of  others. 

8 Men  do  not  look  with  pleasure  and  affection  on  adopted  sons  ; but  we  aft 
longing  to  see  our  absent  protector  return  to  us. — Ludwig.  Others  espial 
the  last  half- verse  differently  : ‘ therefore  let  there  come  to  us  (a  son)  new-btM 
possessed  of  food,  victorious  over  foes.’— -Wilson. 


TBE  MOVED  A. 


bv  5.1 


T 


Juard  us  from  him  who  would  assail  us,  Agni ; preserve  us 
0 thou  Victor,  from  dishonour. 

Jere  let  the  place  of  darkening  come  upon  thee : may  wealth 
be  ours,  desirable,  in  thousands, 
jhine  this  felicity  on  us,  0 Agni : may  we  attain  to  perfeot 
understanding. 

\11  happiness  be  theirs  who  sing  and  praise  thee.  Ye  Gods, 
preserve  us  evermore  with  blessings. 

HYMN  V.  Agni. 

IBring  forth  your  song  of  praise  to  mighty  Agni,  the  speedy 
messenger  of  earth  and  heaven, 

Vaisvanara,  who,  with  those  who  wake,  hath  waxen  great  in 
the  lap  of  all  the  Gods  Immortal. 

Sought  in  the  heavens,  on  earth  isJAgni  stablished,  leader  of 
rivers,  Bull  of  standing  waters. 

Vaisvanara,  when  he  hath  grown  in  glory,  shines  on  the  tribes 
of  men  with  light  and  treasure. 

For  fear  of  thee  forth  fled  the  dark-hued  races,  scattered 
abroad,  deserting  their  possessions, 

When,  glowing,  0 Vaisvanara,  for  Puru,  thou,  Agni,  didst 
light  up  and  rend  their  castles. 

Agni  Vaisvanara,  both  Earth  and  Heaven  submit  them  to 
thy  threefold  jurisdiction. 

Refulgent  in  thine  undecaying  lustre  thou  hast  invested  both 
tho  worlds  with  splendour. 

Agni,  the  tawny  horses,  loudly  neighing,  our  resonant  hymns 
that  drop  with  oil,  attend  thee; 

Lord  of  the  tribes,  our  Charioteer  of  riches,  Ensign  of  days, 
Vaisvanara  of  mornings. 

This  stanza  is  a repetition  of  VI.  15,  12,  where  see  note. 

1 Repeated  from  stanza  10  of  the  preceding  hymn. 


ie  hymn  is  addressed  to  Agui  as  Vaisvanara,  the  God  who  is  present  with, 
benefits,  all  Aryan  men. 

With  those  who  wake:  tended  by  the  priests.  According  to  SAyana  ‘as* 
ted  with  the  wakened  Gods.’ 

Bull  of  standing  'maters  : the  meaning  of  stiy  India  is  uncertain.  Perhaps, 
pudwig  suggests,  plants  and  bushes  are  intended  which  Agni  like  a bull 
jels  with  the  ground. 

1 The  dark-hued  races : according  to  von  Roth,  the  spirits  of  darkness.  For 
ru : or,  for  man. 

i Threefold  jurisdiction  : in  heaven,  mid-air,  and  earth. 

> The  tawny  horses : the  hymns  that  hasten  to  Agni  like  eager  horses, 
dwig  translates  the harltah  of  the  text  by  ‘gold -yellow,’  qualifying  ‘hymns;’ 
it  is,  hymns  with  libationB  of  yellow  Soma  juice. 


a THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Vll, 

6 In  thee,  0 bright  ns  Mitra,  Vasus  seated  the  might  of  Asuras, 

for  they  loved  thy  spirit. 

Thou  dravest  Dasyus  from  their  homo,  0 Agni,  and  brought 
est  forth  broad  light  to  light  the  Arya. 

7 Bom  in  the  loftiest  heaven  thou  in  a moment  readiest,  like 

wind,  the  place  where  Gods  inhabit. 

Thou,  favouring  thine  offspring,  roaredst  loudly  when  giving 
life  to  creatures,  Jatavedas. 

B Send  us  that  strength,  Vai^vanara,  send  it,  Agni,  that 
strength,  0 J&tavedas,  full  of  splendour, 

Wherewith,  all-bounteous  God,  thou  pourest  riches,  as  fame 
wide-spreading,  on  the  man  who  offers. 

9 Agni,  bestow  upon  our  chiefs  and  nobles  that  famous  power, 
that  wealth  which  fecdeth  many. 

Accordant  with  the  Vasus  and  the  Rudras,  Agni,  Vaisvanara, 
give  us  sure  protection. 

HYMN  VI.  Agni.1 

Praise  of  the  Asura,  high  imperial  Ruler,  the  Manly  One  in 
whom  the  folk  shall  triumph — • 

I  laud  his  deeds  who  is  as  strong  as  Indra,  and  lauding  celebrate 
the  Fort-destroyer. 

2 Sage,  Sign,  Food,  Light, — they  bring  him  from  the  mountain, 

the  blessed  Sovran  of  the  earth  and  heaven. 

I decorate  with  songs  the  mighty  actions  which  Agni,  Fort- 
destroyer,  did  aforetime. 

3 The  foolish,  faithless,  rudely-speaking  niggards,  without  belie! 

or  sacrifice  or  worship, — 

Far,  far  away  hath  Agni  chased  those  Dasyus,  and,  in  thd 
east,  hath  turned  the  godless  westward. 

4 Him  who  brought  eastward,  manliest  with  his  prowess,  tfa 

Maids  rejoicing  in  the  western  darkness, 

That  Agni  I extol,  the  Lord  of  riches,  unyielding  tamer  o 
assailing  foemen. 

5 Him  who  brake  down  the  tvalls  with  deadly  weapons,  an< 

gave  the  Mornings  to  a noble  Husband, 

6 Thou  drave&t:  cf.  I.  117.  21. 

1 Fort-destroyer  : demoli.sher  of  the  cloud-castles  of  the  demons  of  drought 
9r  of  the  strongholds  of  the  non- Ary  an  tribes. 

2 From,  the  mountain : fram  the  cloud,  as  lightning. 

3 Westward : into  the  darkness  of  night. 

4 Who  brought  eastward : brought  back  the  vanished  lights  of  dawn. 

5 To  a noble  Husband  : the  Sun,  or  Agni  himself.  The  tribes  of  Nahut:  or, 
according  to  von  Roth,  neighbouring  people. 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


Mft  7.) 


y 


Young  Agni,  who  with  conquering  strength  subduing  the 
tribes  of  Nahus  made  them  bring  their  tribute. 

Jn  whose  protection  all  men  rest  by  nature,  desiring  to  enjoy 
his  gracious  fatour— 

Agni  Vaisvanara  in  his  Parents’  bosotri  hath  found  the  choic- 
est seat  in  earth  and  heaven. 

Vaisv&nara  the  God,  at  the  sun’s  setting,  hath  taken  to 
himself  deep-hidden  treasures,: 

Agni  hath  taken  them  from  earth  and  heaven,  from  the  sea 
under  and  the  sea  above  us. 


HYMN  YII.  Agni. 

I send  forth  even  your  God,  victorious  Agni,  like  a Strong 
courser,  with  mine  adoration. 

Herald  of  sacrifice  be  he  who  knoweth  : he  hath  reached  Gods, 
himself,  with  measured  motion. 

By  paths  that  are  thine  own  come  hither,  Agni,  joyous,  delight- 
ing in  tho  Gods’  alliance, 

Making  the  heights  of  earth  roar  with  thy  fury,  burning  with 
eager  teeth  the  woods  and  forests. 

The  grass  is  strewn ; the  sacrifice  advances  : adored  as  Priest, 
Agni  is  made  propitious, 

Invoking  both  All-boon-bestowing  Mothers  of  whom,  Most 
Youthful ! thou  wast  born  to  help  us. 

Forthwith  the  men,  the  best  of  these  for  wisdom,  have  made 
him  leader  in  the  solemn  worship. 

As  Lord  in  homes  of  men  is  Agni  stablished,  the  Holy  One, 
the  joyous,  sweetly  speaking. 

He  hath  come,  chosen  bearer,  and  is  seated  in  man’s  home, 
Brahman,  Agni,  the  Supporter, 

He  whom  both  Heaven  and  Earth  exalt  and  strengthen, 
whom,  Giver  of  all  boons,  the  Hotar  worships. 

Those  have  passed  all  in  glory,  who,  thq  manly,  have  wrought 
with  skill  the  hymn  of  adoration ; 


f Agni  becomes  the  representative  of  the  Sun,  and  in  his  absence  gives 
lit  and  other  blessings  to  man.  The  sea  above  us  : the  ocean  of  air. 

I Like  a strong  courser  : glorified  with  my  praises,  like  a horse  that  has 
m groomed  and  adorned.  Or.  perhaps,  merely,  rapid  as  a horse.  W ith 
isured  motion  ; or,  a speedy  runner.  S&yana  explains  the  word  mitadruh 
this  place  as  ‘consumer  of  trees/  but  in  IV.  6.  £>  as  parimitagatih,  ‘with 
ftsured  motion/ 

* ..Mothers ; Heaven  and  Earth. 


10  TBS  HYMNS  OP  [POOR  V 

Who,  listening,  have . advanced  the  people’s  welfare,  and  s 
their  thoughts  on  this  my  holy  statute. 

J 7 We,  the  Vasishthas,  now  implore  thee,  Agni,  0 Son 
Strength,  the  Lord  of  wealth  and  treasure. 

Thou  hast  brought  food  to  singers  and  to  nobles.  Ye  Got 
preserve  us  evermore  with  blessings. 

HYMN  VIII.  Ag 

The  King  whose  face  is  decked  with  oil  is  kindled  with  homa 
offered  by  his  faithful  servant. 

The  men,  the  priests  adore  him  with  oblations.  Agni  ha 
shone  forth  when  the  dawn  is  breaking. 

2 Yea,  he  hath  been  acknowledged  as  most  mighty,  the  joyo 

Priest  of  men,  the  youthful  Agni. 

He,  spreading  o’er  the  earth,  made  light  around  him,  ai 
grew  among  the  plants  with  blackened  follies. 

3 How  dost  thou  decorate  our  hymn,  0 Agni  ? What  pow 

dost  thou  exert  when  thou  art  lauded  ? 

When,  Bounteous  God,  may  we  be  lords  of  riches,  winners 
precious  wealth  which  none  may  conquer? 

^ 4 Far  famed  is  this  the  Bharata’s  own  Agni : he  shineth  lil 
the  Sun  with  lofty  splendour. 

He  who  hath  vanquished  Puru  in  the  battle,  the  heaven 
guest  hath  glowed  in  full  refulgence. 

5 Full  many  oblations  are  in  thee  collected : with  all  thii 

aspects  thou  hast  waxen  gracious. 

Thou  art  already  famed  as  praised  and  lauded,  yet  still, 
nobly  born,  increase  thy  body. 

6 Be  this  my  song,  that  winneth  countless  treasure,  engender* 

with  redoubled  force  for  Agni, 

That,  splendid,  chasing  sickness,  slaying  demons,  it  ms 
delight  our  friend  and  bless  the  singers. 

7 We,  tho  Vasishthas,  now  implore  thee,  Agni,  0 Son  i 

Strength,  the  Lord  of  wealth  and  riches. 

Thou  hast  brought  food  to  singers  and  to  nobles.  Ye  God 
preserve  us  evermoro  with  blessings. 

6 Who  set  their  thoughts  on  this  my  holy  statute : that  is,  apparently,  w! 
duly  observe  the  law  which  requires  us  to  worship  Agni.  ‘ Who  are  glorilie 
of  this  truthful  (deity).’— Wilson. 

2 With  blackened  fellies : leaving  black  tracks  behind  him:  * dark-pathed.’- 
Wilson. 

4 The  Bharata : Vasishtha,  the  purohita  of  the  Bharatas.  PHru ; tl 
Pftrus,  (one  of  the  Five  Aryan  Tribes)  who  opposed  the  Bharatas. 

6 Countless  treasure : literally,  hundreds,  thousands.  Our  friend:  ti 
institutor  of  the  sacrifice. 


MN  10.] 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


11 


HYMN  IX.  Agni. 

Roused  from  their  bosom  is  the  Dawns’  beloved,  the  joyous 
Priest,  most  sapient,  Purifier. 

He  gives  a signal  both  to  Gods  and  mortals,  to  Gods  oblations, 
riches  to  the  pious. 

Most  wise  is  he  who,  forcing  doors  of  Papis,  brought  the 
bright  Sun  to  us  who  feedeth  many. 

The  cheerful  Priest,  men’s  Friend  and  home-companion, 
through  still  night’s  darkness  he  is  made  apparent. 

Wise,  ne’er  deceived,  uncircumscribed,  refulgent,  our  gracious 
gue^t,  a Friend  with  good  attendants, 

Shines  forth  with  wondrous  light  before  the  Mornings : the 
young  plants  hath  he  entered,  Child  of  Waters. 

Seeking  our  gatherings,  he,  your  Jata vedas,  hath  shone  ador- 
able through  human  ages, 

Who  gleams  refulgent  with  his  lovely  lustre  : the  kine  have 
waked  to  meet  him  when  enkindled. 

Go  on  thy  message  to  the  Gods,  and  fail  not,  0 Agni,  with 
their  band  who  pray  and  worship. 

Bring  all  the  Gods  that  they  may  give  us  riches,  Sarasvati, 
the  Maruts,  As v ins,  Waters. 

Vasishtha,  when  enkindling  thee,  0 Agni,  hath  slain  Jarutha. 
Give  us  wealth  in  plenty. 

Sing  praiso  in  choral  song,  0 Jatavedas.  Ye  Gods,  preserve 
us  overmore  with  blessings. 

hymn  X.  Agni. 

He  hath  sent  forth,  bright,  radiant,  and  refulgent,  like  the 
Dawn’s  Lover,  his  far-spreading  lustre. 

Pure  in  his  splendour  shines  the  golden  Hero  : our  longing 
thoughts  hath  he  aroused  and  wakened. 

He,  like  the  Sun,  hath  shone  while  Morn  is  breaking,  and 
priests  who  weave  the  sacrifice  sing  praises, 

Agni,  the  God,  who  knows  their  generations  and  visits  Gods* 
most  bounteous,  rapid  envoy. 


iey  Dawns'  beloved : Agni,  as  lighted  up  at  day-break.  A signal : of 
hee,  which  men  are  to  offt-r  and  n0ds  are  to  receive. 

Jardtha  : see  VII.  1.7,  where  the  destruction  of  Jarfttha  ia  ascribed  to 
1 himself.  Jarutha,  said  by  S&yana  to  have  been  a RAkshasa  or  demon, 
probably  an  enemy  who  was  slain  in  a battle  at  which  Vasishtha  was 
Jnt  as  purohita.—  Ludwig. 

Like  the  Dawn's  Lover : the  Sun.  See  I.  69.  1. 

And  priests ; I adopt  Sdyana’s  interpretation  of  this  half-line. 


12  THE  HYMNS  OF  t BOOK  Vl\ 

3 Oar  songs  and  holy  hymns  go  forth  to  Agni,  seeking  the  Got 

and  asking  him  for  riches, 

Him  fair  to  see,  of  goodly  aspect,  mighty,  men’s  messengei 
who  carries  their  oblations. 

4 Joined  with  the  Vasus,  Agni,  bring  thou  indrsi,  bring  hithei 

mighty  Rudra  with  the  Rudras, 

Aditi  good  to  all  men  with  Adityas,  Brihaspati  All-bounteou^ 
with  the  Sihgersj 

5 Men  eagerly  implore  at  sacrifices  Agni,  Most  Youthful  GoJ 

the  joyous  Herald.  j 

For  he  is  Lord  and  Ruler  over  riches,  and  for  Gods’  worshi| 
an  unwearied  envoy. 

HYMN  XL  Agn 

Great  art  thou,  Agni,  sacrifice’s  Herald  t not  without  thee  at 
deathless  Gods  made  joyful. 

Come  hither  with  all  Deities  about  thee : here  take  thy  sea 
the  first,  as  Priest,  0 Agni. 

2 Men  with  oblations  evermore  entreat  thee,  the  swift,  to  undei 

take  an  envoy’s  duty. 

He  on  whose  sacred  grass  w ith  Gods  thou  sittest,  to  hip 
0 Agni,  are  the  days  propitious. 

3 Three  times  a day  in  thee  are  shown  the  treasures  sent  fc 

the  mortal  who  presents  oblation. 

Bring  the  Gods  hither  like  a man,  0 Agni : be  thou  our  envo; 
guarding  us  from  curses. 

4 Lord  of  the  lofty  sacrifice  is  Agni,  Agni  is  Lord  of  every  gi: 

presented. 

The  Vasus  were  contented  with  his  wisdom,  so  the  Gods  mad 
him  their  oblation-bearer. 

5 0 Agni,  bring  the  Gods  to  taste  our  presents : with  Indi 

leading,  here  let  them  be  joyful.  J 

Convey  this  sacrifice  to  Gods  in  heaven.  Ye  Gods,  presen 
us  evermore  with  blessings,  1 


4 Singers  : or  Rikvans,  deities  who  attend  and  sing  the  praises  of  soi 
God  : ‘ the  adorable  (Angirasas).’— Wilson. 


3 Three  times  a day : at  the  morning,  the  noon,  and  the  evening  Hbatio 
Or  the  meaning  may  be,  in  the  three  fire-receptacles.  Like  a man  : actii 
like  a human  priest.  The  Commentators  explain  manushvdt  by  ‘ as  (at  l 
•acrifice)  of  Maiiu/ 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


U 


fMN  14.] 

HYMN  XII.  Agni. 

We  with  great  reverence  have  approached  The  Youngest  who 
hath  shone  forth  well-kindled  in  his  dwelling, 

With  wondrous  light  between  wide  earth  and  heaven,  well* 
worshipped,  looking  forth  in  all  directions. 

Through  his  great  might  o’ercoming  all  misfortunes,  praised 
in  the  bouse  is  Agni  J&tavedas. 

May  he  protect  us  from  disgrace  and  trouble,  both  us  who 
laud  him  and  our  noble  patrons. 

0 Agni,  thou  art  Varuna  and  Mitra : Vasishthas  with  their 
holy  hymns  exalt  thee. 

With  thee  be  most  abundant  gain  of  treasure.  Ye  Gods, 
preserve  us  evermore  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XIII,  Agni. 

Biiing  song  and  hymn  to  Agni,  Asura-slayer,  enlightener  of 

; all  and  thoughkbestower. 

I Like  an  oblation  on  the  grass,  to  please  him,  I bring  this  to 

j Vaisvanara,  hymn-inspjrer. 

| Thou  with  thy  flame,  0 Agni,  brightly  glowing,  hast  at  thy 
birth  filled  full  the  earth  and  heaven. 

Thou  with  thy  might,  Vaisvanara  Jatavcdas,  settest  the  Gods 
free  from  the  curse  that  bound  them. 

Agni,  when  born,  thou  lookedst  on  all  creatures,  like  a brisk 
herdsman  moving  round  his  cattle. 

The  path  to  prayer,  Vaisvanara,  thou  foundest.  Ye  Gods, 
preserve  us  evermore  with  blessings, 

HYMN  XIV.  Agni, 

With  reverence  and  with  offered  gifts  serve  we  the  God  whose 
flame  is  bright  •. 

Let  us  bring  Jatavedas  fuel,  and  adore  Agni  when  we  invoke 
the  Gods. 

Agni,  may  we  perform  thy  rites  with  fuel,  and  honour  thee, 
0 Holy  One,  with  praises : 

Honour  theo,  Priest  of  sacrifice ! with  butter,  thee,  God  of 
blessed  light ! with  our  oblation. 


The  Youngest : Agni,  most  youthful  of  the  Gods,  as  being  continually 
xluced. 

The  curse  that  bound  them : the  Gods  seem  to  have  been  suV)ject  to  the 
nities  of  old  age  until  lndra,  or,  as  is  here  said,  Agni,  freed  them,  $ee 
9,  2. 


14 


THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  r/j 


3  Como,  Agni,  with  the  Gods  to  our  invoking,  come,  pleased,! 
offerings  sanctified  with  Vashat. 

May  we  be  h'is  who  pays  thee,  God,  due  honour.  Ye  God 
preserve  us  evermore  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XV.  Ag, 

Offer  oblations  in  his  mouth,  the  bounteous  God's  whom  \ 


must  serve, 

His  who  is  nearest  lun  to  us  r 

2 Who  for  the  Fivefold  People's  sake  hath  seated  him  in  evci 

home, 

Wise,  Youthful,  Master  of  the  house. 

3 On  all  sides  may  that  Agni  guard  our  household  folk  ar 


property ; 

May  he  deliver  us  from  woe. 

4 I have  begotten  this  new  hymn  for  Agni,  Falcon  of  the  sky 
Will  he  not  give  us  of  his  wealth  1 

5 Whose  glories  when  he  glows  in  front  of  sacrifice  are  ft 

to  see, 

Like  wealth  of  one  with  hero  sons. 

6 May  he  enjoy  this  hallowed  gift,  Agni  accept  our  songs,  wl 

bears 

Oblations,  best  of  worshippers. 

7 Lord  of  the  I iouse,  whom  men  must  seek,  we  set  thee  dow 

0 Worshipped  One  ! 

Bright,  rich  in  heroes,  Agni  1 God  t 

8 Shine  forth  at  night  and  mom : through  thee  with  fires  a 

we  provided  well. 

Thou,  rich  in  heroes,  art  our  Friend. 

9 The  men  come  near  thee  for  their  gain,  the  singes  with  tin 

songs  of  praise  r 

Speech,  thousandfold,  comes  near  to  th pc. 

10  Bright,  Purifier,  meet  for  praise,  Immortal  with  refuse 

glow, 

Agni  drives  R&kshasas  away. 

11  As  such,  bring  us  abundant  wealth,  young  Child  of  Streng 

for  this  thou  canst : 

May  Bhaga  give  us  what  is  choice. 


3 Sanctified  with,  Va,hat:  Vashat  (may  he  hear  it  to  the  Gode)  ^ 
exclamation  used  at  the  moment  of  pouring  the  sacrificial  oil  or  dan 


butter  on  the  fire. 


9 Speech : dhskard,  the  imperishable  ; here  speech  in  th©  shape  of  pn 
and  prayer. 


iy  16  ] 


THE  RIG  VEDA . 


'hou,  Agni,  gives fc  hero  fame:  Bhaga  and  Savitar  the  God 
nd  Diti  give  us  what  is  good.  r 

^gm,  preserve  us  from  distress  : consume  our  enemies,  0 God, 
Eternal,  with  thy  hottest  flames. 

Lnd,  irresistible,  be  thou  a mighty  iron  fort  to  ur 
^ith  hundred  walls  for  man’s  defence  ’ 

ST'"  “d 

nfallible  ! by  day  and  night. 

HYMN  XVI. 

'srsr  h~ 1 “u  a.  sonZ 

J"XJ'  “,,el  *i,h  ”*»«  immortal 

Uis  two  red  horses,  all-supportincr  let  him  mV  T 
well-worshipped,  urge  them  fast . ’ ^ ' et  ll"m> 

hen  hath  the  sacrifice  good  pravers  owl  i 

^ heavenly  gift  of  wealth  to  men.  en<^  an<* 

' mounted  up'""1  the  B°Untifu1’  the  Muc,-invokod,  hath 

and  t0l,ch  the  sky  : 

hthe  God/ilitW  te  the  feast™  ^ '**  messenScr-  Bring 
tcril^1’  art  th°  h0mestead’3  Lord,  our  Herald  at  the 

-ii^X-OYtheaglth0  Cl0anSer  aUdaS^ 

1^ongrttethteairifiCer’  ° M°St  Wise’  '<*  thou  art  he 

th!— 1 «»  rite,  all  who 

Agni  who  art  worshipped  well  dear  let-  • 
wealthy  patrons  who  are  governors  ^ mT  K*  t0the°’ 
Affts,  their  stalls  of  kine.  ® f men’  who  Part,  a* 

““y  tavT^; 

regular,  wto  Diti.  &e  Ve&J$j£i  p'm*’  wbo  C0B«dered  the 

t raid : Rntn*  • . . 

omclatiD«  Priestsmvl^"f  a..:»tb«r 


u 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


M 

8 


9 


10 


11 


12 


2 

3 

4 

5 

6 
7 


[BOOH  } 


They  in  whose  home,  her  hand  bearing  the  sacred  oil,  IJ&  s 
down  well-satisfied— 

Guard  them,  Victorious  God,  from  slander  and  from  har 
give  us  a refuge  famed  afar. 

Do  thou,  a Priest  with  pleasant  tongue,  most  wise,  and  Vf 
near  to  us, 

Agni,  bring  riches  hither  to  our  liberal  chiefs,  and  speed  I 
offering  of  our  gifts. 

They  who  bestow  as  bounty  plenteous  wealth  of  steeds,  moi 
by  desire  of  great  renown — 

Do  thou  with  saving  help  preserve  them  from  distress,  M 
Youthful ! with  a hundred  forts.  , 

The  God  who  gives  your  wealth  demands  a full  libation  poir 
to  him. 

Pour  ye  it  forth,  then  fill  the  vessel  full  again : then  doth  i 
God  pay  heed  to  you. 

Him  have  the  Gods  appointed  Priest  of  sacrifice,  oblatii 
bearer,  passing  wise. 

Agni  gives  wealth  and  valour  to  the  worshipper,  to  folk  ^ 
offer  up  their  gifts. 


HYMN  XVII.  * 

Agni,  be  kindled  well  with  proper  fuel,  and  let  the  grass 
scattered  wide  about  thee. 

Let  the  impatient  Portals  be  thrown  open  *.  bring  thou 
Gods  impatient  to  come  hither. 

Taste,  Agni : serve  the  Gods  with  our  oblation.  Offer  g 
sacrifices,  J atavedas  J 

Let  J&tavedas  pay  fair  sacrifices,  worship  and  gratify 
Gods  Immortal. 

Wise  God,  win  for  us  things  that  are  all-goodly,  and  let 
prayers  we  pray  to-day  be  fruitful. 

Thee,  even  thee,  the  Son  of  Strength,  0 Agni,  those  ( 
have  made  the  bearer  of  oblations. 

To  thee  the  God  may  we  perform  our  worship ; do  tl 
besought,  grant  us  abundant  riches. 


8 l\d : the  Goddess  who  is  regarded  as  the  sacrificial  food  or  oblation 
sonified  : annardpd  havirlakshand  devt.  — S&yana. 

2 The  impatient  Portals : the  doors  of  the  sacrificial  chamber  which  | 
to  bear  their  part  in  the  holy  ceremony. 

6 Those  Gods : the  famous  Gods, 


THE  RIGVEHA  k 


17 


tN  1*} 

I HYMN  XVIII.  Indr*. 

iLh  is  with  thee,  0 Indra,  all  the  treasures  which  erst  our 

fathers  won  who  sang  thy  praises. 

Vith  thee  are  milch-kine  good  to  milk,  and  horses ; best  win- 
ner thou  of  riches  for  the  pious. 

’or  like  a King  among  his  wives  thou  dwellest : with  glories, 
as  a Sage,  surround  and  help  us. 
fake  us,  thy  servants,  strong  for  wealth,  and  honour  our 
songs  with  kine  and  steeds  and  decoration. 

[ere  these  our  holy  hymns  with  joy  and  gladness  in  pious 
emulation  have  approached  thee. 

litherward  com^  thy  path  that  leads  to  riches  : may  we  find 
shelter  in  thy  favour,  Indra. 

asishtha  hath  poured  forth  his  prayers,  desiring  to  milk  thee 
like  a cow  in  goodly  pasture. 

II  those  my  people  call  thee  Lord  of  cattle  : may  Indra  come 
unto  the  prayer  we  offer. 

rhat  though  the  floods  spread  widely,  Indra  made  them 
shallow  and  easy  for  Sudas  to  traverse. 

, worthy  of  our  praises,  caused  the  Simyu,  foe  of  our  hymn, 
to  curse  the  rivers’  fury. 

iger  for  spoil  was  Turvasa  Purodfts,  fain  to  win  wealth,  like 
fishes  urged  by  hunger. 

he  Bhrigus  and  the  Druhyus  quickly  listened  : friend  rescued 
friend  mid  the  two  distant  peoples. 


hymn  glorifies  Indra  as  the  protector  of  Sudds,  the  King  of  the  Tritsus, 
•aises  the  liberality  of  that  prince.  See  Vedic  India  (Story  of  the* 
a Series),  pp.  319— 832.  * 


mshtha:  the  Rishi  of  the  hymn,  and  the  chief  priest  who  had 
•anted  the  warlike  expedition  of  Sudds.  To  milk  thee : to  obtain 
through  thy  favour  by  means  of  my  hymn,  as  men  milk  the  cow  at 
3 tor  the  milk  which  is  required  for  libations. 

e poet  begins  to  recount  the  events  of  Sudds’s  victorious  expedition, 
ire  not  always  intelligible  partly  on  account  of  the  obscure  phraseology 
ed,  and  partly  on  account  of  our  ignorance  of  details  which  are  vaguely 
' a this  8tanza  Sudds,  king  or  chief  of  the  Tritsu  tribe,  has,  with 
ot  Indra,  crossed  a deep  river  (the  Parushnt  which  is  now  called  the 
ind  put  the  Simyus  to  flight,  some  of  the  fugitives  being  drowned  in 
1,he  ?lr»yu8  are  mentioned  together  with  the  Dasyus,  in  I 1 °0 
hostile  barb  irians  slain  by  India.  The  second  half  of  the  stanza  is 
J’  tne  meaning  of  two  of  the  words  being  uncertain, 
rva$a , Purodls : Turvasa  appears  here  as  one  of  the  enemies  of  Sudds. 
L.W1/rn  muc^  filiation,  Ludwig  in  taking  Purodds  as  au  appellative  of 
t iul'W»  wk°  preceding  (at  solemn  ‘rites)  ’—Wilson.  77i« 
and  the  Druhpm:  here,  apparently,  allies  of  Turvasa.  Fnhet; 
fg  to  others,  Matsyas,  a people. 


18  THE  HYMNS  OF  [ BOOK  Fj| 

i 

7 Together  came  the  Pakthas,  the  Bhal&nas,  the  Alinas,  ^ 

Sivas,  the  Vishanins. 

Yet  to  the  Tritsus  came  the  Arya’s  Comrade,  through,  love 
spoil  and  heroes’  war,  to  lead  them. 

8 Fools,  in  their  folly  fain  to  waste  her  waters,  they  parted  i 

exhaustible  Parushni. 

Lord  of  the  Earth,  he  with  his  might  repressed  them : still  L 
the  herd  and  the  affrighted  herdsman. 

9 As  to  their  goal  they  sped  to  their  destruction : they  soug 

Parushni ; e’en  the  swift  returned  not. 

Indra  abandoned,  to  Sudas  the  manly,  the  swiftly  flying  fo< 
unmanly  babblers. 

10  They  went  like  kine  unherded  from  the  pasture,  each  clit 

in g to  a friend  as  chance  directed. 

They  who  drive  spotted  steeds,  sent  down  by  Prisni,  ga 
ear,  the  Warriors  and  the  harnessed  horses. 

11  The  King  who  scattered  one-and-twenty  people  of  h 

Vaikarna  tribes  through  lust  of  glory  — 

As  the  skilled  priest  clips  grass  within  the  chamber,  so  h 
the  Hero  Indra  wrought  their  downfall. 


7 The  Pakthas , and  the  rest  mentioned  in  the  first  line  of  the  i 
appear  to  have  been  non-Aryan  tribes  opposed  to  the  Tritsus.  Accord 
the  Scholiast  these  names  are  the  denominations  of  various  minisl 
religious  lites.  and  following  this  interpretation  Wilson  translates  the  < 
as  follows  : * Those  who  dress  the  oblation,  those  who  pronounce  ausp 
words,  those  who  abstain  from  penance,  those  who  bear  horns  (in  their  h 
those  who  bestow  happiness  (on  the,world  by  sacrifice),  glorify  that 
who  recovered  the  cattle^  of  the  Arya  from  the  plunderers,  who  sic 
enemies  in  battle.’  The  Arya  8 Comrade : Indra,  the  ally  of  Tritsu  a 
the  non-Aryan  confederacy. 

8 The  confederates,  who  were  on  the  right  or  farther  bank  of  the  Pari 
intending  to  attack  Sudfts  and  the  Tritsus,  appear  to  have  attempted  to 
the  river  fordable  by  diguing  channels  and  so  diverting  the  water,  wh 
se^ma,  rushed  back  into  its  natural  bed  and  drowned  the  men  who  were 
ing  the  stream.  The  second  line  of  the  stanza  is  obscure  and  the  trans 
is  conjectural.  Wilson  translates  : * but  he  by  his  greatness  pervade 
earth,  Kavi,  the  son  of  Chayam&na,  like  a falling  victim,  sleeps  (in  de 
The  herd  and  the  herdsman  are,  of  course,  the  hostile  band  and  its  leader 

10  They  went : the  fugitives  who  escaped  drowning.  They  who  drive  q 
steeds  : the  Maruts,  sent  down  by  their  mother  Prisni  to  aid  Sudfts. 

11  People:  or.  houses,  i.  e.  families.  Both  Vaikarna  tribes:  perhaps 
allies  of  the  Druhyus  ; but  the  meaning  of  vaikarndyoh  is  uncertain. 
Zimmer,  AUindisches  Leben,  p.  103.  Ludwig  thinks  that  the  reference 
a mythic  battle  at  some  place  called  Vaikarnau  between  Indra  (the I 
and  the  Maruts  (the  one-and-twenty  people).  Clips  grass : with  one  cle# 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


19 


(N  18.] 

Thou,  thunder-armed,  o’erwhelmedst  in  the  waters  famed 

| ancient  Kavasha  and  then  the  Druhyu. 

pthers  here  claiming  friendship  to  their  friendship,  devoted 

: unto  thee,  in  thee  were  joyful. 

Indra  at  once  with  conquering  might  demolished  all  their 
strong  places  and  their  seven  castles. 

The  goods  of  Anu’s  son  he  gave  to  Tritsu.  May  we  in  sacrifice 
conquer  scornful  Pfiru. 

The  Anavas  and  Druhyus,  seeking  booty,  have  slept,  the  sixty 
hundred,  yea,  six  thousand, 

And  six-and-sixty  heroes.  For  the  pious  were  all  these  mighty 
exploits  done  by  Indra. 

These  Tritsus  under  Indra’s  careful  guidance  came  speeding 
like  loosed  waters  rushing  downward. 

The  foenfen,  measuring  exceeding  closely,  abandoned  to  Sudas 
all  their  provisions. 

The  hero’s  side  who  drank  the  dressed  oblation,  Indra’s  denier, 
far  o’er  earth  he  scattered. 

[ndra  brought  down  the  fierce  destroyer’s  fury.  He  gave 
them  various  roads,  the  path’s  Controller.  * * 

f E>en  with  the  weak  he  wrought  this  matchless  exploit : e’en 
, with  a goat  he  did  to  death  a lion. 

|He  pared  the  pillar’s  angles  with  a needle.  Thus  to  Sudas 
f Indra  gave  all  provisions. 


2 Kavasha ; perhaps  the  priest  of  one  of  the  two  Vaikarna  tribes  which 
iner  is  inclined  to  identify  with  the  Kuru-Krivis.  See  A Hindis  ekes  Leben. 
11.  Others  here:  ‘for  they,  Indra.  who  are  devoted  to  thee  and  glorify 
i3  preferring  thy  friendship,  enjoy  it.’ -Wilson.  The  exact  meaning  is 


1 To  Tritsu : to  Sud&s,  the  King  of  the  Tritsus. 

mei\  °f  the  Anutribe<  The  sixty  hundred:  ‘Theenu- 
y-°^SCure  ? e*Pre8Sed>  shashtih  said  shat  sahasi'd  shashtir  adhi 
n 81xty  hu.ndr,ed*.  six  thousands,  sixty,  with  six  more  : SAyana 
rstands  by  jatdni,  thousands,  sakasrdntiyarthafr  Wilson.  ‘Sixty- 

t Z J*  w^dhred  8iX;  L.tdWig  «¥*■*"  ^at  should  be  read 

&!%&,  pp  m-m.  number  66S6'  See  Ben%- 

teki“8  great  care  of  their  good. 

’ *^,e  parV  tke  hostile  leader,  the  non-Aryan,  who 
toted  to \?m  W deTOUred  the  oblations  that  should  have  been 

, He  gave  them  various  roads : made  them  fly  in  all  direo- 


f£stowear.ff0<W'  i®pos.ible  deeds  mentioned  as  illustration,  of  Indra’. 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


80 


[book  n 


18  To  thee  have  all  thine  enemies  submitted : e’en  the  fierq 

Bheda  hast  thou  made  thy  subject. 

Cast  down  thy  sharpened  thunderbolt,  0 Indra,  on  him  wh 
harms  the  men  who  sing  thy  praises. 

19  Yamun&  and  the  Tritsus  aided  Indra.  There  he  stripped 

Bheda  bare  of  all  his  treasures. 

The  Ajas  and  £he  Sigrus  and  the  Yakshus  brought  in  to  hin 
as  tribute  heads  of  horses. 

20  Not  to  be  soorned,  but  like  Dawns  past  and  recent,  0 Indr^ 

are  thy  favours  and  thy  riches. 

Devaka,  Manyam&na’s  son,  thou  slewest,  and  smotest  Sambars 
from  the  lofty  mountain. 

21  They  who,  from  home,  have  gladdened  thee,  thy  servant* 

Parasara,  Vasishtha,  Satay&tu, 

Will  not  forget  thy  friendship,  liberal  Giver.  So  shall  th< 
days  dawn  prosperous  for  the  princes. 

22  Priest-like,  with  praiso,  I move  around  the  altar,  earning 

Paijavana’s  reward,  0 Agni, 

Two  hundred  cotfs  from  DevavSn’s  descendant,  two  chariots 
from  Sudas  with  mares  to  draw  them. 

23  Gift  of  Paijavana,  four  horses  bear  me  in  foremost  place 

trained  steeds  with  pearl  to  deck  them. 

SudiU’s  brown  steeds,  firmly-stepping,  carry  me  and  my  soi 
for  progeny  and  glory. 

24  Him  whose  fame  spreads  between  wide  earth  and  heaven,  who 

as  dispenser,  gives  each  chief  his  portion, 

Seven  flowing  Rivers  glorify  like  Indra.  He  slew  Yudhyaj 
madhi  in  close  encounter. 


18  Bheda  : an  enemy  of  Sudls,  or  an  unbeliever,  says  Sdyana. 

19  Yamund : the  Jumna.  But  it  is  not  easy  to  see  how  the  espeditio: 
reached  so  far.  The  Ajas,  Sigrus,  and  Yakshus  were  perhaps  subject  to  Bheda 
but  nothing  is  known  regarding  them.  Heads  of  horses : which  had  beei 
killed  in  battle. 

20  Like  Dawns  : renewed  every  day.  Devaka : not  mentioned  elsewhed 
According  to  Grassmann  dAvakam  mdnyamdudm.  refers  to  Sambara,  1 thinks 
himself  a God.* 

21  Pardsara  is  said  by  one  authority  to  have  been  the  son,  and  by  another  th 
grandson  o'f  the  llishi  Vasishtha.  Sataydtu  is  said  to  be  Sakti,  Vasishtha’ssoi 

22  Here  begins  the  ddnastuti  or  praise  of  the  prince’s  liberality.'  Paifl 
vma : Sud&s,  descendant  of  Pijavana.  Devavdn’s  descendant : Sud&s,  Devi 
vftn  being  either  the  same  as  Divod&sa,  the  father  of  Sudfcs  or  one  of  ii 
forefathers. 

24  Seven  flowing  Rivers  glorify : the  seven  chief  rivers  of  the  Panja 
glorify  him  as  they  glorify  Indra.  Or,  they  (men)  praise  him  as  the  sevfl 
rivers  praise  Indra.  1 The  seven  rivers  bear  his  glory  far  and  wide*  (L  102-2i 
Yudhydmidhi ; not  mentioned  elsewhere. 


19.]  THE  MOVED  A.  21 

Attend  on  him,  0 ye  heroic  Maruts  as  on  Sud&s’s  father 
t)ivod&sa. 

further  Paijavana*s  desire  with  favour.  Guard  faithfully 
his  lasting  firm  dominion. 

HYMN  XIX.  lndra. 

He  like  a bull  with  sharpened  horns,  terrific,  singly  excites 
and  agitates  all  the  people  : 

Thou  givest  him  who  largely  pours  libations  his  goods  who 
pours  not,  for  his  oWn  possession. 

Thou,  verily,  lndra,  gavest  help  to  Kutsa,  willingly  giving 
ear  to  him  in  battle, 

When,  aiding  Arjuneya,  thou  subduedst  to  him  both  Kuyava 
and  the  D&sa  Sushna. 

) Bold  One,  thou  with  all  thine  aids  hast  boldly  holpen  Sud&s 
whose  offerings  were  accepted, 

?dru  in  winning  land  and  slaying  foemen,  and  Trasadasyu 
Son  of  Purukutsa. 

it'  the  Gods’  banquet,  hero-souled  ! with  Heroes,  Lord  of  Bay 
Steeds,  thou  slowest  many  foemen. 

Phou  sentest  in  swift  death  to  sleep  the  Dasyu,  both  Chumuri 
and  Dhuni,  for  Dabhiti. 

'hese  were  thy  mighty  powers  that,  Thunder-wielder,  thou 
swiftly  crushedst  nine-and-ninety  castles  : 

'hon  capturedst  the  hundredth  in  thine  onslaught;  thou 
slewest  Namuchi,  thou  slewest  Vpitra. 

Id  are  the  blessings,  lndra,  which  thou  gavest  Sudas  the 
worshipper  who  brought  oblations. 

r thee,  the  Strong,  I yoke  thy  strong  Bay  Horses : may  our 
prayers  reach  thee  and  win  strength,  Most  Mighty ! 

ive  us  not  up,  Lord  of  Bay  Horses,  Victor,  in  this  thine  own 
assembly,  to  the  wicked. 

eliver  us  with  true  and  faithful  succours  : dear  may  we  be 
to  thee  among  the  princes. 

\farnt9  / here,  perhaps,  the  Maghavans  or  wealthy  nobles  are  intended 
and  in  the  same  relation  to  Sud4s  as  the  Maruts  to  lndra. 


M Godof  bafctlea-  Thou-  Mra.  This  abrupt 
irom  the  third  person  to  the  second  is  not  unusual  in  the  Veda. 

juneya;  Kutsa,  descendant  of  Arjuna.  See  L 112.  23.  Kuyava:  see 


r Chumuri,  Dhuni,  and  Dabhiti  , see  Vol.  I.  Index 
oTto  de“onJof  drou&ht’  See  L 53.  7.  In  thine  onslaught; 

c?  of  abX’~Wilson  dW®  lmg  : ‘ thou  hast  the  hundredth 

d&s:  the  Kin  at  of  Jthe  Tritana  n..  ~ a: u 


22  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  V 

8 May  we  men,  Maghavan,  the  friends  thou  lovest,  near  thee 

joyful  under  thy  protection. 

Fain  to  fulfil  the  wish  of  Atithigva  humble  the  pride  of  Tu 
vasa  and  Yadva. 

9 Swiftly,  in  truth,  0 Maghavan,  about  thee  men  skilled 

hymning  sing  their  songs  and  praises. 

Elect  us  also  into  their  assembly  who  by  their  calls  on  t\ 
despoiled  the  niggards. 

10  Thine  are  these  lauds,  0 manliest  of  heroes,  lauds  whi 

revert  to  us  and  give  us  riches. 

Favour  these,  Indra,  when  they  fight  with  foemen,  as  Friei 
and  Hero  and  the  heroes’  Helper. 

1 1 Now,  lauded  for  thine  aid,  Heroic  Indra,  sped  by  our  pray 

wax  mighty  in  thy  body. 

Apportion  to  us  strength  and  habitations.  Ye  Gods,  protect i 
evermore  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XX.  1 

Strong,  Godly-natured,  born  for  hero  exploit,  man’s  Fri 
he  doth  whatever  deed  he  willeth. 

Saving  us  e’en  from  great  transgression,  Indra,  the  Yout 
visiteth  man’s  home  with  favour. 

2 Waxing  in  greatness  Indra  slayeth  Vritra  : the  Hero  wit! 

aid  hath  helped  the  singer. 

He  gave  Sudils  wide  room  and  space,  and  often  hath  gra 
wealth  to  him  who  brought  oblations. 

3 Soldier  unchecked,  war-rousing,  battling  Hero,  unconqu 

from  of  old,  victorious  ever, 

Indra  the  very  strong  hath  scattered  armies ; yea,  he  1 
slain  each  foe  who  fought  against  him. 

4 Thou  with  thy  greatness  hast  filled  full,  0 Indra,  even 

the  worlds  with  might,  0 thou  Most  Mighty. 

Lord  of  Bays,  Indra,  brandishing  his  thunder,  is  gratified 
Soma  at  the  banquet. 

5 A Bull  begat  the  Bull  for  joy  of  battle,  and  a strong  Me 

brought  forth  him  the  manly. 

8 Atithigva:  probably  a descendant  of  SudAs  who  must  hare  lived 
before  the  composition  of  this  hymn,  as  the  favour  bestowed  upon  hi 
Indra  is  spoken  of  as  old  in  stanza  6.  Yddva : or  Yadu’s  son. 

9 Elect  ns  a/so:  that  is,  let  us  share  the  blessings  which  thou  withho 
from  the  illiberal  churls  who  offer  no  oblations  and  givest  to  those  who 
upon  thee  and  worship  thee. 

5 A Bull  begat  the  Bull : * A vigorous  (god)  begot  a vigorous  (son)>'5 
The  father  of  Indra  is  Kasyapa,  according  to  SAyapa  ; but  probably  Py* 
intended.  A itrong  Mother  : Aditi. 


MN  5 1.  J in.njn'iwvauA.  23 

He  who  is  Chief  of  men,  their  armies’  Leader,  is  a strong  Hero, 
i bold,  and  fain  for  booty. 

jThe  people  falter  not,  nor  suffer  sorrow,  who  win  themselves 
j this  God’s  terrific  spirit. 

He  who  with  sacrifices  worships  Indra  is  lord  of  wealth,  law- 
\ born  and  law’s  protector. 

[Whene’er  the  elder  fain  would  help  the  younger,  the  greater 
cometh  to  the  lesser’s  present. 

|3hall  the  Immortal  sit  aloof  inactive  1 0 Wondrous  Indra, 
bring  us  wondrous  riches. 

Thy  dear  folk,  Indra,  who  present  oblations,  are,  in  chief 
place,  thy  friends,  0 Thunder-wielder. 

(day  we  be  best  content  in  this  thy  favour,  sheltered  by  One 
who  slays  not,  but  preserves  us. 

To  thee  the  mighty  hymn  hath  clamoured  loudly,  and, 
Maghavan,  the  eloquent  hath  besought  thee. 

Desire  of  wealth  hath  come  upon  thy  singer : help  us  then, 
j Sakra,  to  our  share  of  riches. 

Place  us  by  food  which  thou  hast  given,  0 Indra,  us  and  the 
i wealthy  patrons  who  command  us. 

Let  thy  groat  power  bring  good  to  him  who  lauds  thee.  Ye 
Gods,  preserve  us  evermore  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XXL  Indra. 

Messed  is  the  juice  divine  with  milk  commingled : thereto 
hath  Indra  ever  been  accustomed. 

Ve  wake  thee,  Lord  of  Bays,  with  sacrifices : mark  this  our 
laud  in  the  wild  joy  of  Soma. 

>n  to  the  rite  they  move,  the  grass  they  scatter,  these  Soma- 
drinkers  eloquent  in  synod. 

lither,  for  men  to  grasp,  are  brought  the  press-stones,  far-thun- 
dering,  famous,  strong,  that  wait  on  heroes. 

mo-born : born  in  accordance  with  the  law. 

’he  relations  between  Gods  and  men  resemble  those  between  elders  and 
*s,  superiors  and  inferiors  among  men.  The  inferior  comes  to  his  superior 
iome  offering  in  his  hand  and  is  assisted  by  him  in  return.  So  Indra 
I accept  our  oblations,  and  rew  ird  us  with  wealth. 

he  eloquent:  stdmtih, ; according  to  Ludwig,  the  Greek 
(TTopa,  mouth),  mouthy,  talkative,  and,  in  a good  sense,  fluent,  eloquent, 
loramentators  explain  the  word  as  ‘praiser.* 


Ve  wake  thee  : or,  we  think  of  thee,  serve  thee. 


24  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOH  f 

3 Indra,  thou  settest  free  the  many  waters  that  were  encompa&sc 

Hero,  by  the  Dragon. 

Down  rolled,  as  if  on  chariots  borne,  the  rivers : through  fe 
of  thee  all  things  created  tremble. 

4 Skilled  in  all  manly  deeds  the  God  terrifio  hath  with  1 

weapons  mastered  these  opponents* 

Indra  in  rapturous  joy  shook  down  their  castles  i he  sle 
them  in  his  might,  the  Thunder-wielder. 

5 No  evil  spirits  have  impelled  us,  Indra,  nor  fiends,  0 Mightie 

God,  with  their  devices. 

Let  our  true  God  subdue  the  hostile  rabble : let  not  the  lei 
approach  our  holy  worship. 

6 Thou  in  thy  strength  surpassest  Earth  and  Heaven:  tl 

regions  comprehend  not  all  thy  greatness. 

With  thine  own  power  and  might  thou  slowest  Vritra:  no  f 
hath  found  the  end  of  thee  in  battle. 

7 Even  the  earlier  Deities  submitted  their  powers  to  thy  suprer 

divine  dominion. 

Indra  wins  wealth  and  deals  it  out  to  others  : men  in  the  str 
for  booty  call  on  Indra. 

8 The  humble  hath  invoked  thee  for  protection,  thee,  Lord 

great  felicity,  0 Indra. 

Thou  with  a hundred  aids  hast  been  our  Helper : one  who  brin 
gifts  like  thee  hath  his  defender. 

9 May  we,  0 Indra,  be  thy  frionds  for  ever,  eagerly,  Conquerc 

yielding  greater  homage. 

May,  through  thy  grace,  the  strength  of  us  who  battle  qul 
in  the  shock  the  onset  of  the  foeman. 

10  Place  us  by  food  which  thou  hast  given,  0 Indra,  us  and 
wealthy  patrons  who  command  us. 

Let  thy  great  power  bring  good  to  him  who  lauds  thee. 
Gods,  preserve  us  evermore  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XXII.  In, 

Drink  Soma,  Lord  of  Bays,  and  let  it  cheer  thee : Indra,  i 
stone,  like  a well  guided  courser, 

Directed  by  the  presser’s  arms  hath  pressed  it. 

4 These  opponents : according  to  S&yana,  the  demons  of  the  air.  The  t 
has  no  noun  for  ‘ these.’ 

5 The  lewd : those  who  do  not  follow  Vedio  observances,  according 
Y&ska.  For  a full  discussion  of  the  meaning  of  si^nddevdh  see  Muir,  0- 
Texts , IV.  40<f—  411. 

8 One  who  brings  gifts  like  thee:  Sftyana  interprets  differently:  ‘be< 
defender  against  every  overpowering  (assailant)  like  to  thee.’ — Wilson, 


THE  RIGVEDA. 


V 23.] 


2$ 


i let  the  draught  of  joy,  thy  dear  companion,  by  'which,  0 

Lord  of  Hays,  thou  slayest  foemen, 

slight  thee,  Indra,  Lord  of  princely  treasures* 

irk  olosely,  MaghaVan,  the  words  I utter,  this  eulogy 

recited  by  Vasishtha : 

ccept  the  prayers  I offer  at  thy  banquet. 

jar  thou  the  call  of  the  juice-drinking  press-stone : hear  thou 

the  Brahman’s  hymn  who  sings  and  lauds  thee. 

ke  to  thine  inmost  self  these  adorations, 

mow  and  ne’er  forgot  the  hymns  and  praises  of  thee,  the 

Conqueror,  and  thy  strength  immortal. 

iy  name  I ever  utter,  Self-Refulgent ! 

nong  mankind  many  are  thy  libations,  and  many  a time  the 
pious  sage  invokes  thee. 

Maghavan,  be  not  long  distant  from  us. 

I these  libations  are  for  thee,  0 Hero : to  thee  I offer  these 

my  prayers  that  strengthen. 

er,  in  every  place,  must  men  invoke  thee. 

ver  do  men  attain,  0 Wonder-Worker,  thy  greatness,  Mighty 

One,  who  must  be  lauded, 

r,  Indra,  thine  heroic  power  and  bounty. 

long  all  Rishis,  Indra,  old  and  recent,  who  have  engender- 
;d  hymns  as  sacred  singers, 

on  with  us  be  thine  auspicious  friendships.  Ye  Gods, 
reserve  us  evermore  with  blessings. 


HYMN  XXIII.  Indra. 


^yers  have  been  offered  up  through  love  of  glory  : Yasishtha, 
lonour  Indra  in  the  battle. 

who  with  might  extends  through  all  existence  hears  words 
diich  I,  his  faithful  servant,  utter. 

ry  was  raised  which  reached  the  Gods,  0 Indra,  a cry  to 
hem  to  send  us  strength  in  combat. 

ie  among  men  knows  his  own  life’s  duration  : bear  us  in 
afety  over  these  our  troubles. 


! Bays,  the  booty-seeking  car  I harness : my  prayers  have 
oached  him  who  accepts  th.m  gladly. 


tu  ?.r688?8  0ut  the  iuioe  of  the  plant,  and  eo  may  be 
rlin rr\  \ ^ Scholiast  inserts  mama , of  me  : ‘ Hear  the  invocation  of 

dmg)  stone  (of  me)  repeatedly  drinking  (the  &mia).’—Wilyn. 

of  thu  d“ 


26 


i U tj 


Indra,  when  he  had  slain  resistless  foemen,  forced  w 
might  the  two  world-halves  asunder. 

4 Like  barren  cows,  moreover,  swelled  the  waters  : the  s 

sought  thy  holy  rite,  0 Indra. 

Come  unto  us  as  with  his  team  comes  Viiyu : thou,  th 
our  solemn  hymns  bestowest  booty. 

5 So  may  these  gladdening  draughts  rejoice  thee,  Indr 

Mighty,  very  bounteous  to  the  singer. 

Alone  among  the  Gods  thou  pitiest  mortals : 0 Hero, 
thee  glad  at  this  libation. 

6 Thus  the  Vasishthas  glorify  with  praises  Indra  the  Poi 

whose  arm  wields  thunder. 

Praised,  may  he  guard  our  wealth  in  kine  and  hero 
Gods,  preserve  us  evermore  with  blessings. 

HYNM  XXIV”. 

A home  is  made  for  thee  to  dwell  in,  Indra : 0 Much-in1 
go  thither  with  the  heroes. 

That  thou,  to  prosper  us,  mayst  be  our  Helper,  vouchg 
wealth,  rejoice  with  draughts  of  Soma. 

2 Indra,  thy  wish,  twice-strong,  is  comprehended : prei 

the  Soma,  poured  are  pleasant  juices. 

This  hymn  of  praise,  from  loosened  tongue,  made  p 
draws  Indra  to  itself  with  loud  invoking. 

3 Come,  thou  Impetuous  God,  from  earth  or  heaven  come 

holy  grass  to  drink  the  Soma. 

Hither  to  me  let  thy  Bay  Horses  bring  thee  to  listen  1 
hymns  and  make  thee  joyful. 

4 Come  unto  us  with  all  thine  aids,  accordant,  Lord  c 

Steeds,  accepting  our  devotions, 

Fair-h  el  meted,  o’ercoming  with  the  mighty,  and  lendi 
the  strength  of  bulls,  0 Indra. 

5 As  to  the  chariot  pole  a vigorous  courser,  this  laud  is  br 

to  the  great  strong  Upholder. 

This  hymn  solicits  wealth  of  thee : in  heaven,  as  ’twere 
t'  e sky,  set  thou  our  glory. 

6 With  precious  things.  0 Indra,  thus  content  us:  may  wei 

to  thine  exalted  favour. 

Send  our  chiefs  plenteous  food  with  hero  children.  Pie 
us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

4 Barren  cows : which  are  fatter  than  others. 

% 

1 A home : in  the  sacrificial  chamber.  Heroes : or.  men  ; the  prieata.l 
4 Fair- hd meted : or  fair-cheeked,  or  handsome  chinned.  I 


HYMN  XXV.  Iadra. 

HEN  with  thy  mighty  help,  0 potent  Indra,  the  armies  rush 
together  in  their  fury, 

hen  from  the  strong  man’s  arm  the  lightning  flieth , let  not 
thy  mind  go  forth  to  side  with  others. 

[ndra,  where  the  ground  is  hard  to  traverse,  smite  down 
our  foes,  the  mortals  who  assail  us. 

lep  far  from  us  the  curse  of  the  reviler  : bring  us  accumulat- 
ed store  of  treasures. 

d of  the  fair  helm,  give  Sudas  a hundred  succours,  a 
thousand  blessings,  and  thy  bounty. 

rike  down  the  weapon  of  our  mortal  foeman : bestow  upon 
us  splendid  fame  and  riches. 

yait  the  power  of  one  like  thee,  0 Indra,  gifts  of  a Helper 
Buch  as  thou  art,  Hero. 

rong,  Mighty  God,  dwell  with  me  now  and  ever : Lord  of 
Bay  Horses,  do  not  thou  desert  us. 

^re  are  the  Kutsas  supplicating  Indra  for  might,  the  Lord 
bf  Bays  for  God-sent  conquest. 

Ike  our  foes  ever  easy  to  be  vanquished  : may  we,  victorious, 
win  the  spoil,  0 Hero. 

ith  precious  things,  0 Indra,  thus  content  us : may  we 
attain  to  thine  exalted  favour. 

nd  our  chiefs  plenteous  food  with  hero  children.  Preserve 
us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XXVI.  Mra. 

ha  unpressed  ne’er  gladdened  liberal  Indra,  no  juices 
pressed  without  a prayer  have  pleased  him. 
generate  a laud  that  shall  delight  him,  new  and  heroic, 
so  that  he  may  hear  us. 

every  laud  the  Soma  gladdens  Indra  : pressed  juices  please 
lim  as  each  psalm  is  chanted, 

lat  time  the  priests  with  one  united  effort  call  him  to  aid, 
is  sons  invoke  their  father. 

ese  deeds  he  did;  let  him  achieve  new  exploits,  such  as  the 
priests  declare  at  their  libations. 

>attle  has  begun,  and  the  singer  prays  to  Indra  for  aid. 
e lightning  : the  swift  and  flashing  arrow.  Others  : the  enemy. 
ids  : according  to  SAyana,  ‘ the  liberal  donor  (of  oblations).’— Wilson. 
zutxas ; apparently  the  priests  of  the  hostile  party. 

na  impressed:  cp  VI.  41.  4,  Soma  when  (properly)  presseS  excels  the 
ed  (<>r  ill-pressed  > Soma.  Not  only  must  the  juice  bo  duly  expressed, 
lust  be  expressed  and  offered  with  prayer. 


*8  tHti  HYMNS  OF  [bOdti  tnJ 

Indra  hath  taken  and  possessed  all  castles,  like  as  one  c< 
mon  husband  doth  his  spouses* 

4 Even  thus  have  they  declared  him.  Famed  is  Indra  as  0 

queror,  sole  distributer  of  treasures  ; 

Whose  many  succours  come  in  close  succession.  May  d 
delightful  benefits  attend  us. 

5 Thus,  to  bring  help  to  men,  Vasishtha  laudeth  Indra, 

peoples’  Hero,  at  libation. 

Bestow  upon  us  strength  and  Wealth  in  thousands.  Prese 
us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XXVII*  1* 

Men  call  on  Indra  in  the  armed  encounter  that  he  may  mi 
the  hymns  they  sing  decisive. 

Hero,  rejoicing  in  thy  might,  in  combat  give  us  a portion 
the  stall  of  cattle* 

2 Grant,  Indra  Maghavan,  invoked  of  many,  to  these  my  frier 

the  strength  which  thou  possessest. 

Thou,  Maghavan,  hast  rent  strong  places  open : unclose 
us,  Wise  God,  thy  hidden  bounty. 

3 King  of  the  living  world,  of  men,  is  Indra,  of  all  in  vari 

form  that  earth  containeth. 

Thence  to  the  worshipper  he  giveth  riches : may  he  enrich 
also  when  we  laud  him. 

4 Maghavan  Indra,  when  we  all  invoke  him,  bountiful  ei 

sendeth  strength  to  aid  us : 

Whose  perfect  guerdon,  never  failing,  bringeth  wealth  tot 
men,  to  friends  the  thing  they  covet. 

5 Quick,  Indra,  give  us  room  and  Way  to  riches,  and  let 

bring  thy  mind  to  grant  us  treasures, 

That  we  may  win  us  cars  and  steeds  and  cattle.  Preser 
us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XXVIII.  ™ 

Come  to  our  prayers,  0 Indra,  thou  who  knowest : let  tl 
Bay  Steeds  be  yoked  and  guided  hither. 

Though  mortal  men  on  every  side  invoke  thee,  still  give  thi 
ear  to  us,  0 All-impeller. 


3 All  cattle « ; all  the  strongholds  of  the  demons  of  drought,  the  cloudy 
ties  in  whieh  the  rain  is  imprisoned. 

1 Give  tit  a portion , etc : aid  us  to  capture  and  carry  off  the  cattle  of 
enemy. 


TEE  JRIQVE&A. 


W 29.} 


% 


thy  greatness  reaoheth  to  our  invocation,  the  sages’  prayei 
[ whioh,  Potent  God.  thou  guardest. 

^Vhat  time  thy  hand,  0 Mighty,  holds  the  thunder,  awful  ir 

. strength  thou  hast  become  resistless. 

k^hat  time  thou  drewest  both  world-halves  together,  lik< 

f heroes  led  by  thee  who  call  each  other — 

kr  thou  wast  borp  for  strength  and  high  dominion — ther 

[ e’en  the  active  overthrew  the  sluggish. 

[onour  us  in  these  present  days,  0 Indra,  for  hostile  men  ar< 
making  expiation. 

lur  sin  that  sinless  Yaruna  discovered,  the  Wondrous-Wis< 
hath  long  ago  forgiven. 

Je  will  address  this  liberal  Lord,  this  Indra,  that  be  maj 
grant  us  gifts  of  ample  riches, 

est  favourer  of  the  singer’s  prayer  and  praises.  Preserve  ui 
I evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 


HYMN  XXIX.  Indra 

His  Soma  hath  been  pressed  for  thee,  0 Indra  : come  hither 
Lord  of  Bays,  for  this  thou  lovest. 

rink  of  this  fair,  this  well  effused  libation  : Maghavan,  givi 
us  wealth  when  we  implore  thee. 

>me  to  us  quickly  with  thy  Bay  Steeds,  Hero,  come  to  ou 
prayer,  accepting  our  devotion. 

ljoy  thyself  aright  at  this  libation,  and  listen  thou  unto  th< 
prayers  we  offer, 

hat  satisfaction  do  our  hymns  afford  thee  ? When,  Magha 
van?  Now  let  us  do  thee  service. 

fmns,  only  hymns,  with  love  for  thee,  I weave  thee : ther 
hear,  0 Indra,  these  mine  invocations, 


\y  greatness  reacheth  to  our  invocation  : thou  hast  the  power  to  conn 
ball  if  thou  wilt. 

rewest  both  woi'ld-halves  together : settest  heaven  and  earth  opposite  to 
hnr,  like  armies  arrayed  for  battle.  E'en  the  active : the  meaning  of 
If-line  is  doubtful,  and  chit,  even,  seems  to  be  out  of  place.  Wilson 

Ies,  after  Stiyana  : ‘ whence  the  presenter  of  offerings  overcomes  him 
irs  them  not.’  According  to  Professor  Grassmann,  ‘ the  active’  is  Indra, 
ie  inactive  * is  the  sluggish  demon.  Ludwig  suggests  an  alteration  of 

1 making  expiation : or,  possibly,  set  themselves  in  order,  that  is, 
id  prepare  themselves  for  battle.  The  Wondrous-Wise : mdyt;  Varuna, 


ohttydo  thee  tervice : nUtndm  / 1 no  time  like  the  present.’— Ludwig. 


SO  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOR  } 

4 They,  verily,  were  also  human  beings  whom  thou  wast 

to  hear,  those  earlier  sages. 

Hence  I,  0 Indra  Maghavan,  invoke  thee : thou  art  our  { 
vidence,  even  as  a Father. 

5 We  will  address  this  liberal  Lord,  this  Indra,  that  he  ^ 

grant  us  gifts  of  ample  riches, 

Best  favourer  of  the  singer’s  prayer  and  praises.  Preserve 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings.  * 

HYMN  XXX. 

With  power  and  strength,  0 Mighty  God,  approach  us 
the  augmenter,  Indra,  of  these  riches ; 

Strong  Thunderer,  Lord  of  men,  for  potent  valour,  for  m 
exploit  and  for  high  dominion. 

2 Thee,  worth  invoking,  in  the  din  of  battle,  heroos  invoke 

fray  for  life  and  sunlight. 76177 
Among  all  people  thou  art  foremost  fighter : give  up 
enemies  to  easy  slaughter. 

3 When  fair  bright  days  shall  dawn  on  us,  0 Indra,  and  t 

shalt  bring  thy  banner  near  in  battle, 

Agni  the  Asura  shall  sit  as  Herald,  calling  Gods  hithei 
our  great  good  fortune. 

4 Tidne  are  we,  Indra,  thine,  both  these  who  praise  thee  i 

those  who  give  rich  gifts,  0 God  and  Hero. 

Grant  to  our  princes  excellent  protection  : may  they  wax 
and  still  be  strong  and  happy. 

5 We  will  address  this  liberal  Lord,  this  Indra,  that  hei 

grant  us  gifts  of  ample  riches, 

Best  favourer  of  the  singer’s  prayer  and  praises.  Preservi 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XXXI. 

Sing  ye  a song,  to  make  him  glad,  to  Indra,  Lord  of  T 
Steeds, 

The  Soma-drinker,  0 my  friends. 

2 To  him  the  Bounteous  say  the  laud,  and  let  us  glorify,  as 

May  do,  the  Giver  of  true  gifts. 

3 0 Indra,  Lord  of  boundless  might,  for  us  thou  winnest  stre 

and  kine, 

Thou  winnest  gold  for  us,  Good  Lord. 


1 Far  potent  valour : that  w,  to  give  us  potent  valour. 

2 Foremoet  fighter : caster  of  the  spear,  warrior,  according  to  vonlj 

but  the  meaning  of  etnyah  is  somewhat  uncertain.  * 1 


w 82.]  THE  RIG  VEDA. 

etithful  to  thee  we  loudly  sing,  heroic  Indra,  songs  to  thee : 
[ark,  0 Good  Lord,  this  act  of  ours. 

ive  us  not  up  to  man’s  reproach,  to  foeman’s  hateful  calumny  : 
1 thee  alone  is  all  my  strength. 

hou  art  mine  ample  coat  of  mail,  my  Champion,  Vritra-slayer, 
thou : 

Jith  thee  for  Friend  I brave  the  foe. 

ea,  great  art  thou  whose  conquering  might  two  independent 
[ Powers  confess, 

fhe  Heaven,  0 Indra,  and  the  Earth. 

o let  the  voice  surround  thee,  which  attends  the  Maruts  on 
their  way, 

eaching  thee  with  the  rays  of  light. 

Bt  the  ascending  drops  attain  to  thee,  the  Wondrous  God,  in 
heaven  : 

Let  all  the  folk  bow  down  to  thee. 

tiring  to  the  Wise,  the  Great,  who  waxeth  mighty,  your  offer- 
ings, and  make  ready  your  devotion  : 

Po  many  clans  he  goeth,  man’s  Controller. 

Tor  Indra,  the  sublime,  the  far-pervading,  have  singers  gener- 
ated prayer  and  praises  : 

The  sages  never  violate  his  statutes. 

The  choirs  have  stablished  Indra  King  for  ever,  for  victory, 
him  whose  anger  is  resistless  : 

Lud,  for  the  Bays’  Lord,  strengthened  those  he  loveth. 


HYMN  XXXII. 


Indra. 


^et  none,  no,  not  thy  worshippers,  delay  thee  far  away  from  us. 

Sven  from  far  away  come  thou  unto  our  feast,  or  listen  if  al- 
ready here. 

•'or  here,  like  flies  on  honey,  these  who  pray  to  thee  sit  by  the 
juice  that  they  have  poured. 

Vealth-craving  singers  have  on  Indra  set  their  hope,  as  men 
set  foot  upon  a car. 


'independent  : svadhftvart ; ‘abounding  in  food,’ — Wilson. 

Vhe  voice:  ‘the  praises  of  thine  adorers.’— Wilson. 

Strengthened : ‘ bar  hay  4 : for  abarhayan,  as  is  clear  from  what  pre- 
) —■  Ludwig.  SAyana  takes  barhayd  as  the  imperative  : 4 urge  thy  kinsmen, 
nipper,  to  glorify)  the  lord  of  bay  steeds.’ — Wilson. 


K indebted  to  Max  M tiller's  translation  of  this  hymn  in  his  Ancient 
Literature  for  many  of  the  renderings  which  I have  adopted. 


3,2  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOH  pJ 

3 Longing  for  wealth  I call  on  him,  the  Thunderer  with 

strong  right  hand, 

As  a son  calleth  on  his  sire, 

4 These  Soma  juices,  mixed  with  curd,  have  been  expressed: 

Indra  here, 

Come  with  thy  Bay  Steeds,  Thunder-wielder,  to  our  home, 
drink  them  till  they  make  thee  glad. 

5 May  he  whose  ear  is  open  hear  us.  He  is  aBked  for  wealt 

will  he  despise  our  prayer  ? 

Him  who  bestows  at  once  a hundred  thousand  gifts  none  sh 
restrain  when  he  would  give. 

6 The  hero  never  checked  by  men  hath  gained  his  streng 

through  Indra,  he 

Who  presses  out  and  pours  his  deep  libations  forth,  0 Vi'it 
slayer,  unto  thee. 

7 When  thou  dost  drive  the  fighting  men  together  be,  th 

Mighty  One,  the  mighty’s  shield. 

May  we  divide  the  wealth  of  him  whom  thou  hast  slain  ; brii 
us,  Unreachable,  his  goods. 

8 For  Indra,  Soma-drinker,  armed  with  thunder,  press  the  Sou 

juice. 

Make  ready  your  dressed  meats ; cause  him  to  favour  us.  T1 
Giver  blesses  him  who  gives. 

9 Grudge  not,  ye  Soma-pourers ; stir  you,  pay  the  rites,  I 

wealth,  to  the  great  Conqueror. 

Only  the  active  conquers,  dwolls  in  peace,  and  thrives  : not  I 
the  niggard  are  the  Gods. 

10  No  one  hath  overturned  orstayed  the  carof  him  who  freely  gii 
The  man  whom  Indra  and  the  Marut  host  defend  comes  to| 

stable  full  of  kine. 

11  Indra,  that  man  when  fighting  shall  obtain  the  spoil,  whc 

strong  defender  thou  wilt  be. 

Be  thou  the  gracious  helper,  Hero ! of  our  cars,  be  thou  t 
helper  of  our  men. 

12  His  portion  is  exceeding  great  like  a victorious  soldier’s  spoi 
Him  who  is  Indra,  Lord  of  Bays,  no  foes  subdue.  He  gii 

the  Soma-pourer  strength. 

3 With  the  strong  right  hand  : or,  giver  of  good  gifts. 

7 The  mighty's  shield  : 1 the  shield  of  the  mighty  (Vasishthas).’ — M.  1 
‘a  protection  of  the  Maghavans/  i.  e.  the  institutors  of  the  sacrifice.— Ludi 

8 The  Oiver  blesses  him  who  gives  : Indra  rewards  the  liberal  worshipper. 

10  Comet  to  a stable  full  of  kine : carries  off  rich  booty. 


TIIE  RWVEDA. 


W 32;] 


ft? 


Make  for  the  Poly  Gods  a hymn  that  is  not  mean,  but  well- 
arranged  and  fair  of  form. 

Even  many  snares  and  bonds  subdue  not  him  who  dwells  with 
Indra  through  his  sacrifice. 

[ndra,  what  mortal  will  attack  the  man  who  hath  his  wealth 
in  thee  ? 

The  strong  will  win  the  spoil  on  the  decisive  day  through  faith 
in  thee,  0 Maghavan. 

[n  battles  with  the  foe  urge  on  our  mighty  ones  who  give  thfc 
treasures  dear  to  thee, 

ind  may  we  with  our  princes,  Lord  of  Tawny  Steeds ! pass 
through  all  peril,  led  by  thee. 

Thine,  Indra,  is  the  lowest  wealth,  thou  cherishest  the  mid- 
most wealth, 

Thou  ever  rulest  all  the  highest : in  the  fray  for  cattle  none 
resisteth  thoe. 

Thou  art  renowned  as  giving  wealth  to  every  one  in  all  the 
battles  that  are  fought. 

graving  protection,  all  these  people  of  the  earth,  0 Much- 
invoked,  implore  thy  name. 

[f  I,  0 Indra,  were  the  Lord  of  riches  ample  as  thine  own, 

: should  support  the  singer,  God  who  givest  wealth  ! and  not 
abandon  him  to  woe. 

Sach  day  would  I enrich  the  man  who  sang  my  praise,  in 
whatsoever  place  he  were. 

*o  kinship  is  there  better,  Maghavan,  than  thine  : a father 
even  is  no  more. 

W’ith  Plenty  for  his  true  ally  the  active  man  will  gain  the 
spoil. 

four  Indra,  Much-invoked,  I bend  with  song,  as  bends  a 
wright  his  wheel  of  solid  wood. 

i mortal  wins  no  riches  by  unworthy  praise:  wealth  comes 
not  to  the  niggard  churl. 

^iglit  is  the  task  to  give,  0 Maghavan,  to  one  like  me  on  the 

I decisive  day. 

! ike  kine  unmilked  we  call  aloud,  Hero,  to  thee,  and  sin* 
thy  praise, 

ooker  on  heavenly  light,  Lord  of  this  moving  world,  Lord. 
Indra,  of  what  moveth  not. 


Plenty  ; or,  Spirit,  Boldness. 


84  THE  HYMNS  OF  [ BOOR  fj 

23  None  other  like  to  thee,  of  earth  or  of  the  heavens,  hath  be« 

or  ever  will  be  horn. 

Desiring  horses,  Indra  Maghavan 1 and  kine,  as  men  of  mig[ 
we  call  on  thee. 

24  Bring,  Indra,  the  Victorious  Ones;  bring,  elder  thou,  tl 

younger  host. 

For,  Maghavan,  thou  art  rich  in  treasures  from  of  old,  an 
must  be  called  in  every  fight. 

25  Drive  thou  away  our  enemies,  0 Maghavan  : make  riches  eaj 

to  be  won.  I 

Be  thou  our  good  Protector  in  the  strife  for  spoil : Cherish 
of  our  friends  be  thou. 

26  0 Indra,  give  us  wisdom  as  a sire  gives  wisdom  to  his  sons. 
Guide  us,  0 Much-invoked,  in  this  our  way : may  we  still  lii 

and  look  upon  the  light. 

27  Grant  that  no  mighty  foes,  unknown,  malevolent,  unhallow 

tread  us  to  the  ground. 

With  thine  assistance,  Hero,  may  we  pass  through  all  t‘ 
waters  that  are  rushing  down. 

HYMN  XXXIII.  Vaaisht 

These  who  wear  hair-knots  on  the  right,  the  movers  of  hi 
thought,  white-robed,  have  won  me  over. 

I warned  the  men,  when  from  the  grass  I raised  me,  Not  frt 
afar  can  my  Vasishthas  help  you. 

2 With  Soma  they  brought  Indra  from  a distance,  over  Vaisam 
from  the  strong  libation. 

Indra  preferred  Vasishthas  to  the  Soma  pressed  by  the  sod 
Vayata,  Pasadyumna. 

24  Bring , Indra,  the  Victorious  Ones  : these  would  be  the  Marats.  ‘ E 
Indra,  bring  that  (wealth  to  me)  being  the  junior/— Wilson.  ‘ Bring  all 
to  those  who  are  good,  0 Indra,  be  they  old  or  young/— M.  Muller. 

The  hymn  is  a glorification  of  Vasishtha  and  his  family,  the  latter 
relating  his  birth  and  the  earlier  verses  referring  to  his  connexion  with  1 
Sudis. 

1 Hair-knots  : kaparda  ia  the  chuda  or  single  lock  of  hflir  left  on  the  1 
at  tonsure,  which,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  it  was  characteristic  of 
Vasishthas  to  wear  on  the  right  of  the  crown  of  the  head.  White-rol 
white-coloured,  according  to  S&yana.  Me : Vasishtha,  who  is  the  speake 
stanzas  1—6.  * Von  Roth  (under  the  word  av)  regards  Indra  as  the  spea 
May  it  not  be  Sud&s  ? ’ — Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  I.  319,  320,  where  stanzas  1- 
are  translated.  From  the  grass : the  sacred  grass  laid  on  the  floor  of  the  si 
ficial  chamber. 

2 Vaifanta : probably  the  name  of  a river.  Pdfadyumna : another  king' 
was  sacrificing  to  Indra  at  the  same  time  as  Sud&s. 


THU  HtGTEDA* 


33.] 


SB 


So,  verily,  with  these  he  crossed  the  river,  in  company  with 
these  he  slaughtered  Bheda. 

So  in  the  fight  with  the  Ten  Kings,  Vasishthas  l did  Indra 
help  Sudas  through  your  devotions. 

I gladly,  men  ! with  prayer  prayed  by  our  fathers  have  fixed 
your  axle  : ye  shall  not  be  injured  : 

Since,  when  ye  sang  aloud  the  Sakvari  verses,  Vasishthas  ! ye 
invigorated  Indra. 

Like  thirsty  men  they  looked  to  heaven,  in  battle  with  the 
Ten  Kings,  surrounded  and  imploring. 

Then  Indra  heard  Vasishtha  as  he  praised  him,  and  gave  the 
Tritsus  ample  room  and  freedom. 

like  sticks  and  staves  wherewith  they  drive  the  cattle,  strip- 
ped bare,  the  Bharatas  were  found  defenceless : 

Vasishtha  then  became  their  chief  and  leader;  then  widely 
were  the  Tritsus’  clans  extended. 

Three  fertilize  the  worlds  with  genial  moisture : three  noble 
Creatures  cast  a light  before  them. 

Three  that  give  warmth  to  all  attend  the  Morning.  All  these 

| have  they  discovered,  these  Vasishthas. 

lake  the  Sun’s  growing  glory  is  their  splendour,  and  like  the 
sea’s  is  their  un fathomed  greatness, 

'heir  course  is  like  the  wind’s.  Your  laud,  Vasishthas,  can 
never  be  attained  by  any  other. 

'hey  with  perceptions  of  the  heart  in  secret  resort  to  that 
which  spreads  a thousand  branches. 

'he  Apsaras  brought  hither  the  Vasishthas  wearing  the  vesture 
spun  for  them  by  Yama. 


P*  river  : Yamuna.  See  VII.  18.  19.  Ten  Kings  : of  the  confederate 
who  opposed  Sudds.  See  VII.  18. 

ukvart  verses  : hymns  of  praise  in  the  Sakvarf  metre  (14  x 4). 

rUsus  .-  the  tribe  of  which  Sudds  was  King.  Bharatas  ; apparently  the 

as  the  Tritsus.  rr  J 


idra  is  the  speaker  of  the  rest  of  the  hymn.  ‘ In  explanation  of  this 
\ quotes  a passage  from  the  Sdtydyana  Brahman*  ; (1)  Agni  produces  a 
img  fluid  on  the  eaith,  Vdyu  in  the  air,  the  Sun  in  the  sky.  (2)  The 
• are  the  Vasus,  Rudras,  and  Adityas.  The  Sun  is 

ight.  (3)  Agni,  Vdyu,  and  the  Sun  each  attend  the  Dawn  ’—Muir, 


whtch  spreads  * thousand  branches:  according  to  Ludwig’s  Trans- 
xne  Sun-God  is  meant ; according  to  his  later  view,  the  reference  is  to 
ystic  tree  sustained  by  Varuna  in  the  baseless  region  (I.  24  7). 
’f . the 'body.  The  stanza  is  very  obscure,  and  Sftyana’s  explana- 

mch  overrides  grammar,  is  not  satisfactory;  • By  the  wisdom  seated  in 
rt  the  Vasishthas  traverse  the  hidden  thousand-branched  world,  and 
turasas  sit  down,  wearing  the  vesture  spread  out  bv  Yama.’— WiUn*. 


$8  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK 

10  A form  of  lustre  springing  from  the  lightning  wa*t  thou,  w 

Varuna  and  Mitra  saw  thee. 

Thy  one  and  only  birth  was  then,  Vasishtha,  when  from 
stock  Agastya  brought  thoe  hither. 

11  Born  of  their  love  for  Urvas*,  Vasishtha,  thou,  priest,  art 

of  Varuna  and  Mitra ; 

And  as  a fallen  drop,  in  heavenly  fervour,  all  the  Gods 
thee  on  a lotus-blossom. 

12  He,  thinker,  knower  both  of  earth  and  heaven,  endowed  v 

many  a gift,  bestowing  thousands, 

Destined  to  wear  the  vesture  spun  by  Yama,  sprang  from 
Apsaras  to  life,  Vasishtha. 

13  Born  at  the  sacrifice,  urged  by  adorations,  both  with  a © 

mon  flow  bedewed  the  pitcher. 

Then  from  the  midst  thereof  there  rose  up  Mana,  and  the 
they  say  was  born  the  sage  Vasishtha. 

14  He  brings  the  bearer  of  the  laud  and  Saman  : first  shall 

speak  bringing  the  stone  for  pressing. 

With  grateful  hearts  in  reverence  approach  him  : to  you 
Pratridas,  Vasishtha  cometh. 

HYMN  XXXIV.  Visvedc 

May  our  divine  and  brilliant  hymn  go  forth,  like  a si 
chariot  wrought  and  fashioned  well. 

2 The  waters  listen  as  they  flow  along  : they  know  the  origii 
heaven  and  eaith. 


10  Vasishtha,  appears  here  as  an  embodiment  of  lightning,  light,  or 
and  to  have  been  brought  down  to  men  by  Agastya  who  was  born  in  the  s; 
way  as  Vasishtha. 

1 1 Urvasl : the  most  celebrated  of  the  Apsarases  or  nymphs  of  heave" 
a lotus-blossom  : or,  according  to  others,  * in  the  sacred  pitcher,’  or  wat 
used  in  sacrifice.  ‘ In  the  lake.’— Wilson. 

For  a full  account  of  this  production  of  Vasishtha,  the  curious  rea 
referred  to  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  I.  821.  See  M.  Muller,  Chips,  IV.  108,  1 05 
Hillebrandt,  Varuna  und  Mitra , 148,  149. 

12  The  Apsaras  : Urvasi. 

13  Mdna  : said  to  be  another  name  of  Agastya. 

14  The  hearei'  of  the  laud  and  Siman : the  pressing-stone,  which  was  w 
during  the  lecitation  of  Bacred  verses.  Pratridas : a name  used  he 
designate  the  Tiitsus. 

This  difficult  and  obscure  hymn  has  been  translated  and  thoroughl 
cussed  by  Geldner  ( Vedische  Stvdien , II  pp.  129—155,  criticized  by 
Ludwig,  Uther  die  neuesten  Arbeiten  auf  dem  Oebiete  der  Ryvedaforst 
pp.  163-167). 

2 ‘ An  allusion,  perhaps,  to  the  subsequently  received  cosmogony: 
$tanu,  that  water  was  the  first  of  created  things.’— Wilson. 


t&E  RtO  VEDA. 


■V  3*.} 

ea,  the  broad  waters  swell  their  flood  for  him  : of  him  strong 
heroes  think  amid  their  foes. 

st  ye  for  him  the  coursers  to  the  pole  : like  Indra  Thunderer 
is  the  Golden-armed. 

rouse  you,  like  the  days,  to  sacrifice  : speed  gladly  like  a 
traveller  on  the  way. 

o swift  to  battles,  to  the  sacrifice  : set  up  a flag,  a hero  for 
the  folk. 

p from  his  strength  hath  risen  as  ’twere  a light : it  beara 
the  load  as  earth  bears  living  things. 

gni,  no  demon  I invoke  the  Gods  : by  law  completing  it,  t 
form  a hymn* 

losely  about  you  lay  your  heavenly  song,  and  send  your 
voice  to  where  the  Gods  abide* 

aruna,  Mighty,  with  a thousand  eyes,  beholds  the  paths 
wherein  these  rivers  run. 

e,  King  of  kings,  the  glory  of  the  floods,  o*er  all  that  liveth 
hath  resistless  sway. 

ay  he  assist  us  among  all  the  tribes,  and  make  the  envier*s 
praise  devoid  of  light. 

ay  the  foes’  threatening  arrow  pass  us  by  : may  he  put  far 
from  us  our  bodies’  sin. 

yni,  oblation-eater,  through  our  prayers  aid  us  : to  him  our 
dearest  laud  is  brought,  t 

jcordant  with  the  Gods  choose  for  our  Friend  the  Waters* 
Child  : may  he  be  good  to  us. 

ith  lauds  I sing  the  Dragon  born  of  floods  : he  sits  beneath 
the  streams  in  middle  air. 

B’er  may  the  Dragon  of  the  Deep  harm  us  : ne’er  fail  this 
faithful  servant’s  sacrifice. 

) these  our  heroes  may  they  grant  renown  : may  pious  men 
march  boldly  on  to  wealth. 

fading  great  hosts,  with  fierce  attacks  of  these,  they  burn 
;their  foes  as  the  Sun  burns  the  earth. 

h 

V him : Indra. 

\e  Golden  armed  : Savitar. 

mro  : a sort  of  personification  of  the  sacrifice.  * An  expiatory  sacrifice 
good  of)  mankind.’— Wilson. 

me  Dr&gon  born  of  floods  : Ahibudhnya,  or  the  Dragon  of  the  Deep  of 
[owing  stanza  ; the  regent  of  the  sea  of  air. 
they  : the  Gods. 

v ; Gods,  or  Maruta,  according  to  the  Scholiast. 


W THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK 

20  What  time  our  wives  draw  near  to  us,  may  he,  deft-han 

Tv  ashlar,  give  us  hero  sons. 

21  May  Tvashtar  find  our  hymn  acceptable,  and  may  Arair 

seeking  wealth,  be  ours. 

22  May  they  who  lavish  gifts  bestow  those  treasures : i 

Rodasi  and  Varunant  listen. 

May  he,  with  the  Varutrls,  be  our  refuge,  may  bount 
Tvashtar  give  us  store  of  riches. 

23  So  may  rich  Mountains  and  the  liberal  Waters,  so  may 

Herbs  that  grow  on  ground,  and  Heaven, 

And  Earth  accordant  with  the  Forest-Sovrans,  and  both 
World-halves  round  about  protect  us. 

24  To  this  may  both  the  wide  Worlds  lend  approval,  and  Vai 

in  heaven,  whose  Friend  is  Indra. 

May  all  the  Maruts  give  consent,  the  Victors,  that  we  i 
hold  great  wealth  in  firm  possession. 

25  May  Indra,  Varuna,  Mitra,  and  Agni,  Waters,  Herbs,  T 

accept  the  praise  we  offer. 

May  we  find  refuge  in  the  Maruts’  bosom.  Protect  us  c 
more,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XXXV.  Viaved 

Befriend  us  with  their  aids  Indra  and  Agni,  Indra 
Varuna  who  receive  oblations  ! 

Indra  and  Soma  give  health,  strength  and  comfort,  Ii 
and  Pushan  be  our  help  in  battle. 

2 Auspicious  Friends  to  us  be  Bhaga,  Sansa,  auspicious 

Purandhi  and  all  Riches  ; 

The  blessing  of  the  true  and  well-conducted,  and  Aryama 
many  forms  apparent. 

3 Kind  unto  us  be  Maker  and  Sustainer,  and  the  far-reaci 

Pair  with  Godlike  natures. 

Auspicious  unto  us  be  Earth  and  Heaven,  the  Mountain, 
the  Gods’  fair  invocations. 


21  Aramati : the  Genius  of  Devotion  and  active  piety. 

22  VarUtrts  : protecting  Goddesses. 

23  Forest -Sovrans : tall  timber  trees. 

1 Befriend  us : »dm  no  bhavatdm . The  indeclinable  word  fdm,  signil 
happy,  auspicious,  pleasant,  sweet,  kind,  agreeable,  etc.,  etc.,  is  uaed  wit 
without  the  verb  bhil,  in  the  first  thirteen  stanzas.  1 have  varied  the  ex 
sion  here  and  there. 

2 Sansa:  Prayer  or  Wish  personified.  Or  it  may  be  NarAsmsa,  * 
Purandhi:  Plenty,  or  Spirit,  Boldness  personified, 

3 Far-reaching  Pair ; Heaven  and  Earth. 


rtf  35.]  the  MG  VEDA.  39 

favour  us  Agni  with  his  face  of  splendour,  and  Varuna  and 
Mitra  and  the  Asvins. 

i’avour  us  noble  actions  of  the  pious,  impetuous  VAta  blow  on 
us  with  favour. 

My  invoked,  may  Heaven  and  Earth  be  friendly,  and  Air's 
mid-region  good  for  us  to  look  on. 

’o  us  may  Herbs  and  Forest-Trees  be  gracious,  gracious  the 
, Lord  Victorious  of  the  region. 

pe  the  God  Indra  with  the  Vasus  friendly,  and,  with  Adityas, 

\ Varuna  who  blesseth, 

jtind,  with  the  Rudras,  be  the  Healer  Rudra,  and,  with  the 
| Dames,  may  Tvashtar  kindly  listen. 

Jlest  unto  us  be  Soma,  and  devotions,  blest  be  the  Sacrifice, 

■ the  Stones  for  pressing. 

Meat  be  the  fixing  of  the  sacred  Pillars,  blest  be  the  tender 
Grass,  and  blest  the  Altar. 

fay  the  far-seeing  Sun  rise  up  to  bless  us : be  the  four 
Quarters  of  the  sky  auspicious, 
auspicious  bo  the  firmly-seated  Mountains,  auspicious  be  the 
Rivers  and  the  Waters. 

[ay  Aditi  through  holy  works  be  gracious,  and  may  the 
Maruts,  loud  in  song,  be  friendly. 

[ay  Vishnu  give  felicity,  and  Pushan,  the  Air  that  cherisheth 
our  life,  and  Vayu. 

rasper  us  Savitar,  the  God  who  rescues,  and  let  the  radiant 
[ Mornings  be  propitious. 

Auspicious  to  all  creatures  be  Parjanya,  auspicious  be  the 
i held  s benign  Protector. 

ilay  all  the  fellowship  of  Gods  befriend  us,  Sarasvatl,  with 
Holy  Thoughts,  be  gracious. 

sriendly  be  they,  the  Liberal  Ones  who  seek  us,  yea,  those 
I w“°  dwell  in  heaven,  on  earth,  in  waters. 

(ay  the  great  Lords  of  Truth  protect  and  aid  us  : blest  to  us 
; be  our  horses  and  our  cattle. 

^ind  be  the  pious  skilful-handed  Ribhus,  kind  be  the  Fathers 
! at  our  invocations. 

(ay  Aja-Ekapad,  the  God,  be  gracious,  gracious  the  Dragon 
^ofthe^Deep,  and  Ocean.  * 

Lord  Victorious : Indra.  ~~ 

the  field's  benign  Protector:  Agni,  or  Rudra.  See  IV.  57.  1, 
ija-hkapdd : the  Sun.  See  VI.  50.  14,  and  footnote. 
i rajm  the  DeeP ; Ahibudhnya,  regent  of  the  depth*  of  the  firms- 


40  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  | 

Gracious  be  he,  the  swelling  Child  of  Waters,  gracious 
Pfisni  who  hath  Gods  to  guard  her. 

14  So  may  the  Rudras,  Vasus,  and  Adityas  accept  the  newhy 

which  we  now  ure  making. 

May  all  the  Holy  Ones  of  earth  and  heaven,  and  the  Co 
offspring  hear  our  invocation. 

15  They  who  of  Holy  Gods  are  very  holy,  Immortal,  know 

Law,  whom  man  must  worship, — 

May  these  to-day  give  us  broad  paths  to  travel.  Preserve 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XXXVI.  ViBvede 

Let  the  prayer  issue  from  the  seat  of  Order,  for  Surya  w 
his  beams  hath  loosed  the  cattle. 

With  lofty  ridges  earth  is  far  extended,  and  Agni’s  flame  h 
lit  the  spacious  surface. 

2 0 Asuras,  0 Varuiaa  and  Mitra,  this  hymn  to  you,  like  fo 

anew  I offer. 

One  of  you  is  a strong  unerring  Leader,  and  Mitra,  speaki 
stirreth  men  to  labour. 

3 The  movements  of  the  gliding  wind  come  hither  : like  co 

the  springs  are  filled  to  overflowing. 

Born  in  the  station  e’en  of  lofty  heaven  the  Bull  hath  lou 
bellowred  in  this  region. 

4 May  I bring  hither  with  my  song.  O Indra,  wise  Aryan 

who  yokes  thy  dear  Bay  Horses, 


14  Cow's  offspring : the  Maruts.  According  to  von  Roth  those  who  are  l 
and  live  in  radiant  heaven. 

15  Broad  paths  to  travel : perhaps,  generally,  an  easy  road  to  prosperity 

1 The  seat  of  Order : ‘the  hall  of  the  sacrifice.’ — Wilson.  The  cattle: 
of  light. 

2 ‘ One  of  you  (Varuna)  is  the  lord  and  unassailable  guide,  and  he  wb 
called  Mitra,  ( i . e the  friend)  calls  men  to  activity.  Here  so  much  at  leas 
declared  (and  the  same  thing  is  expressed  in  nearly  the  same  words  in  ni 
places),  that  the  light  of  day,  which  awakens  life,  and  brings  joy  and  acti 
into  the  world,  is  the  narrower  sphere  of  Mitra’s  power  ; though,  howo 
Varima  is  not  relegated  to  the  night  alone,  for  he  continues  to  be  the  1 
and  the  first.’ — Von  Roth,  quoted  by  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts , V.  70.  The  mear 
of  indh  translated  by  * lord  ’ in  this  extract,  is,  in  the  Veda,  rather  ‘ stro 
'energetic,*  and  is  so  given  in  the  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon,  the  meaning  * b 
belonging  to  later  literature.  The  second  half  of  the  second  line  is  repea 
with  a variation,  from  III.  59.  1. 

3 The  springs : the  fountains  of  rain  ; the  clouds.  The  Bull : Parjai 
God  of  the  raiu-cloud.  This  region : literally,  this  udder ; the  firmameu 


TffE  MOVE  DA. 


it 


V 37.] 

oraoious,  with  thy  noble  oar,  0 Hero,  him  who  defeats  the 
wrath  of  the  malicious. 

i their  own  place  of  sacrifice  adorers  worship  to  gain  long 
life  and  win  his  friendship. 

G hath  poured  food  on  men  when  they  have  praised  him ; 
be  this,  the  dearest  reverence,  paid  to  Rudra, 
jming  together,  glorious,  loudly  roaring-— Sarasvati,  Mother 
of  Floods,  the  seventh — 

ith  copious  milk,  with  fair  streams,  strongly  flowing,  full 
swelling  with  the  volume  of  their  water  ; 
id  may  the  mighty  Maruts,  too,  rejoicing,  aid  our  devotion 
and  protect  our  offspring. 

it  not  swift-moving  Akshara  neglect  us  : they  have  increas- 
ed our  own  appropriate  riches. 

ring  yo  the  great  Aramati  before  you,  and  Pushan  as  the 
Hero  of  the  synod, 

laga  Who  looks  upon  this  hymn  with  favour,  and,  as  ovfr 
strength,  the  bountiful  Purandhi. 

ay  this  our  song  of  praise  reach  you,  0 Maruts,  and  Vishnu 
guardian  of  the  future  infant. 

ay  they  vouchsafe  the  singer  strength  for  offspring.  Preserve 
us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XXXVII.  Viavedevas. 

ct  your  best-bearing  car  that  must  be  lauded,  ne'er  injured, 
bring  you  Vajas  and  Ribhukshans. 

11  you,  fair-helmeted  ! with  mighty  Soma,  thrice-mixed,  at 
our  libations,  to  delight  you. 


u-aciouft : epithet  of  horses;  but  the  meaning  of  dhdyft  is  uncertain, 
ing  to  Sftyana,  it  means  ‘holding/  ‘vigorous/  according  to  Ludwig, 
ig  forth  rain  according  to  Grassmann,  ‘ thirsty.’ 

's  friendship  : Rudra’s. 

>e  seventh  : with  the  six  other  celebrated  rivers.  See  I.  32.  12. 

; V&k,  or  Voice  ; ‘ the  imperishable  goddess  of  speech.’ — Wilson. 

ramati the  personification  of  religious  worship,  or  active  piety.  See 
#.21.  According  to  Sftyana,  ardmatim  here  is  an  epithet  of  maAfm, 
ever-resting  Earth.’  For  the  various  meanings  assigned  by  S&yana  to 
)rd  in  the  various  places  in  whi  \i  it  occurs,  see  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts , 

fhnu ; cf.  X.  184.  1. 

jas  and  Ribhukskann : that  is,  Ribhukshan  or  Ribhu,  Vibhvan,  and 
unmonly  called  the  Ribhus  from  the  name  of  the  first  of  the  three. 
meted:  ‘ handsome-chinned/ — Wilson:  ‘ Strong* jawed/ — Ludwig. 
toixed;  with  milk,  curds,  and  meal. 


4*  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOR 

2 Ye  who  behold  the  light  of  heaven,  Ribhukshaus,  give  our 

patrons  unmolested  riches. 

Drink,  heavenly-natured,  at  our  sacrifices,  and  give  us  be 
ies  for  the  hymns  we  sing  you, 

3 For  thou,  0 Bounteous  One,  art  used  to  giving,  at  par 

treasure  whether  small  or  ample. 

Filled  full  are  both  thine  arms  with  great  possessions : 
goodness  keeps  thee  not  from  granting  riches. 

4 Indr  a,  high-famed,  as  Vaja  and  Ribhukshan,  thougoestw 

ing,  singing  to  the  dwelling. 

Lord  of  Bay  Steeds,  this  day  may  we  Vasishthas  offer 
prayers  to  thee  and  bring  oblations. 

5 Thou  winnest  swift  advancement  for  thy  servant,  thre 

hymns,  Lord  of  Bay  Steeds,  which  thou  hast  favoured. 
For  thee  with  friendly  succour  have  we  battled,  and  wher 
Indra,  wilt  thou  grant  us  riches  ? 

6 To  us  thy  priests  a home,  as  ’twere,  thou  givest : when,  In 

wilt  thou  recognize  our  praises  ? 

May  thy  strong  Steed,  through  our  ancestral  worship,  b 
food  and  wealth  with  heroes  to  our  dwelling. 

7 Though  Nirriti  the  Goddess  reigneth  round  him,  Autui 

with  food  in  plenty  come  to  Indra. 

With  three  close  Friends  to  length  of  days  he  cometh, 
whom  men  let  not  rest  at  home  in  quiet. 

8 Promise  us  gifts,  0 Savitar : may  riches  come  unto  u 

Parvata’s  full  bounty. 

May  the  Celestial  Guardian  still  attend  us.  Preserve  us  e 
more,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XXXVIII.  sat 

On  high  hath  Savitar,  this  God,  extended  the  golden  lui 
which  he  spreads  around  him. 

Now,  now  must  Bhaga  be  invoked  by  mortals,  Lord  of  gi 
riches  who  distributes  treasures. 


3 Bounteous  One : Maghavan  ; Indra. 

4 Woi'kiny : 1 the  fulfiller  { of  wishes ).’— Wilson.  The  first  line  is  some? 
obscure. 

7 Nirriti : the  Goddess  of  Death  and  Destruction,  who  has  no  power! 
Indra.  Three  close  Friends : the  Ribhus,  who  represent  the  year,  the  an! 
course  of  Indra  bb  the  Sun.  S^ymm's  explanation  is  different:  ‘Indra,! 
upholder  of  the  three  regions,  whom  the  divine  Nirriti  acknowledges  as  ni 
whom  abundant  years  pass  over,  whom  mortals  detain  from  his  own  ah 
approaches  to  ( recruit ) his  decaying  strength.’ — Wilson  ; who  observes : ‘ 
explanation  is  not  very  clear.’ 

8 ParvakC s full  bounty  ; the  Genius  of  mountain  and  cloud. 


V 39-] 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


43 


se  up,  0 Savitar  whose  hands  are  golden,  and  hear  this  man 
while  sacrifice  is  offered, 

>reading  afar  thy  broad  and  wide  effulgence,  and  bringing 
mortal  men  the  food  that  feeds  them. 

>t  Savitar  the  God  be  hymned  with  praises,  to  whom  the 
Yasus,  even,  all  sing  glory. 

ireet  be  our  lauds  to  him  whose  due  is  worship  : may  he  with 
all  protection  guard  our  princes. 

rcn  he  whom  Aditi  the  Goddess  praises,  rejoicing  in  God 
Savitar’s  incitement : 

rcn  he  whose  praise  the  high  imperial  Rulers,  Varuna,  Mitra, 
Aryaman,  sing  in  concert. 

ley  who  come  emulous  to  our  oblation,  dispensing  bounty, 
from  the  earth  and  heaven, 

ly  they  and  Ahibudhnya  hear  our  calling  : guard  us  Yarfitri 
with  the  Ekadhenus. 

lis  may  the  Lord  of  Life,  entreated,  grant  us, — the  wealth 
which  Savitar  the  God  possesses. 

le  mighty  calls  on  Bhaga  for  protection,  on  Bhaga  calls  the 
weak  to  give  him  riches. 

ess  us  the  Vajins  when  we  call,  while  slowly  they  move, 
strong  Singers,  to  the  Gods’  assembly, 
ushing  the  wolf,  the  serpent,  and  the  demons,  may  they 
completely  banish  all  affliction. 

jep-skilled  in  Law  eternal,  deathless,  Singers,  0 Y&jins,  help 
us  in  each  fray  for  booty. 

•ink  of  this  meath,  be  satisfied,  be  joyful : then  go  on  paths 
which  Gods  are  wont  to  travel. 

HYMN  XXXIX.  Viavedevas. 

3ni,  erect,  hath  shown  enriching  favour : the  flame  goes  for- 
ward to  the  Gods'  assembly. 

ke  car-borne  men  the  stones  their  path  have  chosen  : let  the 
priest,  quickened,  celebrate  our  worship. 


ie  Vasus:  the  Gods  in  general,  according  to  SAyana. 

irUtrl : * the  protectress  (the  goddess  of  speech).’ — Wilson  Ekadhenus  : 

iters  are  probably  meant : ‘excelh  nt  cattle.’ — Wilson. 

jyin* : a class  of  divinities  so  named,  according  to  SAyana  ; but,  accord* 

Wahid hara,  horses,  i . e.  the  teams  which  draw  the  chariots  of  the  Gods. 

v • or  the  robber.  The  serpent : or  the  assassin.  The  demons : the 

[«a8.  See  Satapntha-  Brdhmatyt,  V.  1.5.  21 — 24,  (S.  Books  of  the  East, 

a)  for  a different  version  of  stanzas  6 and  7« 


le  stones  : the  prewing- stones  have  begun  their  course. 


44  fltE  BYMtiS  OF  [BOOK 

2 Soft  to  the  tread,  their  sacred  grass  is  scattered : these  go 

Kings  amid  the  band  around  them, 

At  the  folk’s  early  Call  on  Night  and  Morning, — Vayu, 
Pushan  with  his  team,  to  bless  us. 

3 Here  on  their  path  the  noble  Gods  proceeded : in  the  y 

firmament  the  Beauteous  decked  them. 

Bend  your  way  hither,  ye  who  travel  widely : hear  this 
envoy  who  hath  gone  to  meet  you. 

4 For  they  are  holy  aids  at  sacrifices : all  Gods  approach 

place  of  congregation. 

Bring  these,  desirous,  to  our  worship,  Agni,  swift  the  N 
tyas,  Bhaga,  and  Purandhi. 

5 Agni,  to  these  men’s  hymns,  from  earth,  from  heaven,  br 

Mitra,  Vanina,  Indra,  and  Agni, 

And  Aryaman,  and  Aditi,  and  Vishnu.  Saras vati  be  joy 
and  the  Maruts. 

6 Even  as  the  holy  wish,  the  gift  is  offered : may  he,  unsa 

come  when  men  desire  him. 

Give  never-failing  ever-conquering  riches : with  Gods  for 
allies  may  we  be  victors. 

7 Now  have  both  Worlds  been  praised  by  the  Vasishthas, 

holy  Mitra,  Varuna,  and  Agni. 

May  they,  bright  Deities,  make  our  song  suprcmest.  Pres( 
us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XL.  Viaverli 

Be  gathered  all  the  audience  of  the  synod  : let  us  begin  tl 
praise  whose  course  is  rapid. 

Whate’er  God  Savitar  this  day  produces,  may  we  be  wi 
the  Wealthy  One  distributes. 

2 This,  dealt  from  heaven,  may  both  the  Worlds  vouchsafe 

and  Varuna,  Tndra,  Aryaman,  and  Mitra. 

May  Goddess  Aditi  assign  us  riches,  Vayu  and  Bhaga  m 
them  ours  for  ever. 

3 Strong  be  the  man  and  full  of  power,  0 Maruts,  whom 

borne  on  by  spotted  coursers,  favour. 


2 These  go  like  Kings ; according  to  S&yana,  * may  the  two  lords  of  pec 
(Vftyu  and  P&shati)  ..  appear  now.’ 

3 Our  envoy  : Agni. 

6 Agni : in  his  own  form  as  a celestial  God,  not  in  that  of  terrestrial  & 
6 lie,  umated : Agni. 

1 Their  praise : praise  of  the  Gods. 

2 Dealt  from  heaven : or.  distributed  hv  Tlvii  nr  Dr*iin. 


THE  MOVE  DA. 


45 


V 41.] 


im,  too,  Sarasvati  and  Agni  further,  and  there  is  none  to  rob 
him  of  his  riches. 

hi&  Varuna  is  guide  of  Law,  he,  Mitra,  and  Aryaman,  the 
Kings,  our  work  have  finished. 

dvine  and  foeless  Aditi  quickly  listens.  May  these  deliver 
us  unharmed  from  trouble. 

j ith  offerings  I propitiate  the  branches  of  this  swift-moving 
God,  the  bounteous  Vishnu. 

[ence  Rudra  gained  his  Rudra-strength  : 0 Aflvins,  ye  sought 
the  house  that  hath  celestial  viands. 

le  not  thou  angry  here,  0 glowing  Pushan,  for  what  Varutri 
and  the  Bounteous  gave  us. 

ay  the  swift-moving  Gods  protect  and  bless  us,  and  Vata  send 
us  rain,  who  wanders  round  us. 

ow  have  both  worlds  been  praised  by  the  Vasishthas,  and  holy 
Mitra,  Varuna,  and  Agni. 

[ay  they,  bright  Deities,  make  our  song  supremest.  Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XLI.  Bhaga. 

lgni  at  dawn,  and  Indra  we  invoke  at  dawn,  and  Varuna  and 
Mitra,  and  the  Asvins  twain : 

Ihaga  at  dawn,  Pushan,  and  Brahmanaspati,  Soma  at  dawn, 
Rudra  we  will  invoke  at  dawn. 

Vo  will  invoke  strong,  early-conquering  Bhaga,  the  Son  of 
Aditi,  the  great  supporter  : 

hulking  of  whom,  the  poor,  yea,  even  the  mighty,  even  the 
King  himself  says,  Give  me  Bhaga. 
haga  our  guide,  Bhaga  whose  gifts  are  faithful,  favour  this 
song,  and  give  us  wealth,  0 Bhaga. 

Ihaga,  augment  our  store  of  kine  and  horses,  Bhaga,  may  we 
be  rich  in  men  and  heroes. 


)ur  work : tho  sacrifice. 

|;c  branches:  ‘ yayah , brandies  : all  other  deities  are,  as  it  were,  branches 
iniiy  anye  deyak , Sakha  iva  bhavanti : as  by  a text  cited  by  the  scholiast, 

- is  all  divinities,  Vishnu  h sarvd  divatd  iti  srnteh.' — Wilson.  This, 
l remarks,  gives  no  satisfactory  interpretation;  but  I am  unable  to 
iy  thing  better  at  present.  Gras  nann  alters  vayfth  into  vaydma  : * we 
ir  offerings  approach  the  banquet  of  this  swift-moving  God,  the  boun- 
v ish,  u ; i.  e.  come  to  offer  him  sacrificial  food.* 

hymn  is  addressed  chiefly  to  Bhaga  the  bountiful,  whose  name,  slightly 
ted,  survives  in  the  Slavonic  languages  as  a general  name  for  God  ; but 
s mentioned  in  stanza  1 , and  Ushas,  Dawn  or  Morning,  are  also  regard- 
ne  deities  of  the  verses  in  which  their  names  occur. 

>ve  me  Bhaga : or  riches. 


44  TUB  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  \ 

4 So  may  felicity  be  ours  at  present,  and  when  the  day  approach 

and  at  noontide ; 

And  may  we  still,  0 Bounteous  One,  at  sun»t  be  happy  im 
Deities’  loving-kindness. 

5 May  Bhaga  verily  be  bliss-bestower,  and  through  him,  G<x 

may  happiness  attend  us. 

As  such,  0 Bhaga,  all  with  might  invoke  thee ; as  such 
thou  our  Champion  here,  0 Bhaga. 

6 To  this  our  worship  may  all  Dawns  incline  them,  and  com? 

the  pure  place  like  Dadhikr&van. 

As  strong  steeds' draw  a chariot  may  they  bring  us  hithert 
Bhaga  who  discovers  treasure. 

7 May  blessed  Mornings  dawn  on  us  for  over,  with  wealth 

kine,  of  horses,  and  of  heroes, 

Streaming  with  all  abundance,  pouring  fatness.  Preserve 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XLII.  Visvede 

Lbt  Brahmans  and  Angirases  come  forward,  and  let  the  r 
of  cloudy  heaven  surround  us. 

Loud  low  the  Milch-kine  swimming  in  the  waters : set  be 
stones  that  grace  our  holy  service. 

2 Fair,  Agni,  is  thy  long-known  path  to  travel : yoke  for 

juice  thy  bay,  thy  ruddy  horses, 

Or  red  steeds,  Hero-bearing,  for  the  chamber.  Seated,  1 1 
the  Deities’  generations. 

3 They  glorify  your  sacrifice  with  worship,  yet  the  glad  Pii 

near  them  is  left  unequalled. 

Bring  the  Gods  hither,  thou  of  many  aspects : turn  hit! 
ward  Aramati  the  Holy. 


6 The  pure  place  : the  chamber  of  sacrifice.  Like  Dadhikrdvan  : swift 
Dadhikr&vau,  the  famous  horse,  the  type  and  model  of  racers.  {See  IV.  3S 
40.  1—3. 

1 Angirases : llishis  so  named,  according  to  Sftyana.  The  Milch-kine: 
clouds  in  the  watery  firmament,  with  allusion  also  to  the  milk  and  water  mi 
with 'the  Soma  juice.  The  stones : the  press-stones.  SAyana’s  explanatio 
differentXjuay  the  pious  couple,  (the  Yajamdna  and  his  wife)  coujoii 
appreciate  th#4^auty  of  the  sacrifice.'— Wilson. 

2 Thy  bay , thyfwddy  horses  : or  the  Hai  its  and  the  Rohits.  Red  steedi 
AruBhas.  Hero-bearing:  carrying  the  Hero  Agni.  For  the  chamber: 
sacrificial  hall ; ‘in  thy  stable.’— M.  Muller. 

3 The  human  priests  cannot  equal  Agni  iu  efficiency.  Aramati : theCta 
of  Devotion.  See  VII.  3d.  8. 


jy  43.]  THE  RIQ  VEDA.  47 

that  time  the  Guest  hath  made  himself  apparent,  at  ease 
reclining  in  the  rich  man's  dwelling, 

gni,  well-pleased,  well-placed  within  the  chamber  gives  to  a 
house  like  this  wealth  worth  the  choosing. 

ccept  this  sacrifice  of  ours,  0 Agni ; glorify  it  with  Indra 
and  the  Maruts. 

ere  on  our  grass  let  Night  And  Dawn  be  seated  : bring  long- 
ing Varuna  and  Mitra  hither. 

hus  hath  Vasishtha  praised  victorious  Agni,  .yearning  for 
wealth  that  giveth  all  subsistence. 

ay  he  bestow  on  us  food,  strength,  and  riches.  Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XLIII.  Visvedevas. 

[NG  out  the  pious  at  your  sacrifices  to  move  with  adorations 
Earth  and  Heaven — 

he  Holy  Singers,  whose  unmatched  devotions,  like  a tree’s 
branches,  part  in  all  directions. 

Bt  sacrifice  proceed  like  some  fleet  courser : with  one  accord 
lift  ye  on  high  the  ladles. 

;rew  sacred  grass  meet  for  the  solemn  service : bright  flames 
that  love  the  Gods  have  mounted  upward. 

ike  babes  in  arms  reposing  on  their  mother,  let  the  Gods  sit 
upon  the  grass’s  summit. 

it  general  tire  make  bright  the  flame  of  worship  : scorn  us 
not,  Agni,  in  the  Gods’  assembly. 

adly  the  Gods  have  let  themselves  be  honoured,  milking 
the  copious  streams  of  holy  Order. 

ae  highest  might  to-day  is  yours,  the  Vasus’ : come  ye,  as 
many  as  ye  are,  one-minded. 

k Agni,  send  us  wealth  among  the  people : may  we  be 
closely  knit  to  thee,  0 Victor, 

f harmed,  and  rich,  and  taking  joy  together.  Preserve  us 
wermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 


t Guest : Agni. 

jh general  fire : or,  according  to  S&yana,  < Let  the  full  ladle  balm  the 
worship.’  The  exact  meaning  is  uncertain  as  both  Bubject  and  object 
tctives  without  substantives. 

the  copious  streams : enjoying  tUo  libations  of  law -ordained  sacri- 
fWho  are  the  bestowers  of  water,  the  shedders  of  showers/ — Wilson. 


B THE  HYMNS  OF  IBOOK 

IIYMN  XL1V.  Da<lhii 

I  CALL  on  Dadhikras,  the  first,  to  give  you  aid,  the  Asv 
Bhaga,  Dawn,  and  Agni  kindled  well, 

India,  and  Vishnu,  P.ishan,  Brahmanaspati,  Adityas,  He; 
and  Earth,  the  Waters,  and  the  Light. 

2 When,  rising,  to  the  sacrifice  we  hasten,  awaking  Dadhi 

with  adoiations, 

Seating  on  sacred  grass  the  Goddess  I]a,  let  us  invoke 
-sage  swift-hearing  Asvins. 

3 While  I am  thus  arousing  Dadhikravan  I speak  to  A 

Earth,  and  Dawn,  and  Surya, 

The  red,  the  brown  of  Varuna  ever  mindful : may  they  i 
off  from  us  all  grief  and  trouble. 

4 Foremost  is  Dadhikravan,  vigorous  courser;  in  forefro 

the  cars,  his  way  he  knoweth, 

Closely  allied  with  Surya  and  with  Morning,  Adityas, 
Angirases,  and  Vasus. 

5 May  Dadhikras  prepare  the  way  we  travel  that  we  may 

along  the  path  of  Order. 

May  Agni  hear  us,  and  the  Heavenly  Army:  hear  us  all  Mi 
Ones  whom  none  deceiveth. 

HYMN  XLV.  Si 

May  the  God  Savitar,  rich  in  goodly  treasures,  filling 
region,  borne  by  steeds,  come  hither, 

In  his  hand  holding  much  that  makes  men  happy,  lulli 
slumber  and  arousing  oreatures. 

2 Golden,  sublime,  and  easy  in  their  motion,  his  arms  e: 
unto  the  bounds  of  heaven. 


1 Dadhikrds : see.  IV.  38.  1. 

3 Dadhikr&can : a lengthened  form  of  Dadhikras.  See  IV.  39.  2,  a 
The  red , the  biown:  apparently  the  horse  of  Varuna,  that  is.  the  Sun, 
tended.  Ever  mindful : * who  is  mindful  of  his  adorers.’  — Wilson.  The 
ng  of  the  word  mahsekatth,  or  mAhschatdh,  is  uncertain.  Von  Roth 
that  a colour,  dun  or  yellow,  is  meant.  Ludwig  would  explain  it  as  ‘ki 
snares  or  nooses.’  Grasstnann  translates  it  by,  ‘dcs  Mondversclieu 
‘ who  scares  away  the  Moon.’ 

4 In  forefront  of  the  cars : according  to  S&yana,  the  chariots  of  the 
are  intended.  But,  as  Pischel  observes  ( Vcdische  Studient  I.  124),  E 
rdvan,  the  famous  racediorse,  was  for  ‘the  gentlemen  of  the  turf  ’ i" 
Trasadasyu’s  time  what  the  matchless  English  horse  Eclipse  was  in 
days.  It  seems  probable  that  DahhikrAvan  may  have  been  originally 
most  distinguished  racer,  glorified  and  deified  by  the  exaggerated  prJ 
the  bards  of  a people  who  were  passionately  fond  of  chariot- racing. 


THE  RIQVEDA. 


49 


y 46] 

ow  shall  that  mightiness  of  his  be  lauded  : even  Sftra  yields 
to  him  in  active  vigour. 

;ay  this  Cod  Savitar,  the  Strong  and  Mighty,  the  Lord  of 
precious  wealth,  vouchsafe  us  treasures, 
iiy  he,  advancing  his  far-spreading  lustre,  bestow  on  us  the 
food  that  feedeth  mortals. 

hese  songs  praise  Savitar  whose  tongue  is  pleasant,  praise 
him  whose  arms  arc  full,  whose  hands  are  lovely, 
igh  vital  strength,  and  manifold,  may  he  grant  us.  Preserve 
us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XLVI.  Rudra. 

o Rudra  bring  these  songs,  whose  bow  is  firm  and  strong,  the 
self  dependent  God  with  swiftly-flying  shafts,  ° 

he  Wise,  the  Conqueror  whom  none  may  overcome,  armed 
with  sharp-pointed  weapons  : may  he  hear  our  call. 

e through  his  lordship  thinks  on  beings  of  the  earth,  on 
heavenly  beings  through  his  high  imperial  sway, 
mie  willingly  to  our  doors  that  gladly  welcome  thee,  and  heal 
all  sickness,  Rudra,  in  our  families. 

ay  thy  bright  arrow  which,  shot  down  by  thee  from  heaven, 
flieth  upon  the  earth,  pass  us  uninjured  by.  5 

aou.  very  gracious  God,  hast  thousand  medicines  : inflict  no 
evil  on  our  sons  or  progeny. 

ay  us  not,  nor  abandon  us,  0 Rudra  : let  not  thy  noose,  v hen 
thou  art  angry,  seize  ns. 

ve  us  trimmed  grass  and  fame  among  the  living.  Preserve 
us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 


'm  : the  Sun  as  distinguished  from,  or  a different  form  of,  Savitar  who 

by  Sayaua  to  be  the  Sun  befoie  his  rising. 


yractoug  God:  svapivdta.  ‘This  word  is  not  explained  in  the 
L text  of  Sayana,  although  in  the  “ Varietas  LeetioniV’  appended  to 
face,  Prof.  Muller  notes  that  in  one  MS  , B.  4,  svapivdta  is  rendered 
prana,  he  by  whom  life  (or  breath)  is  conquered.”  In  the  Nirukta 
| is  explained  by  svapta-vac/iana,  “thou  whose  words  are  very  suitable 
tentative.  Muir,  O.  S.  Texts,  IV.  314,  where  an  exhaustive  note  on 
[d  will  be  found.  Wilson  renders  svapivdta  by  ‘ wind-appeaser,’  and 
[aun  by  vielbegehrter,’  ‘ much-desired.’ 

P>e  u«  trimmed  grass  : let  us  share  in  sacrifice.  Fame  among  the  living: 
Petersburg  Lexicon  takes  jtvasnhst  to  mean  rule  over  the  living. 
|take  the  word  as  qualifying  barhUki , trimmed  grass,  i.  e.  sacrifice,  and 

fee  L pta4]£prai8ed am0D« “e“-'  * dong) 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK 


' 50 


HYMN  XLVII.  \va 

May  we  obtain  this  day  from  you,  0 Waters,  that  wavi 
pure  refreshment,  which  the  pious 
Made  erst  the  special  beverage  of  Indra,  bright,  stainless,  i 
in  sweets  and  dropping  fatness. 

2 May  the  Floods’  Offspring,  he  whose  course  is  rapid,  prol 

that  wave  most  rich  in  sweets,  0 Waters, 

That  shall  make  Indra  and  the  Vasus  joyful.  This  may 
gain  from  you  to-day,  we  pious. 

3 All-purifying,  joying  in  their  nature,  to  paths  of  Gods; 

Goddesses  move  onward. 

They  never  violate  the  laws  of  Indra.  Present  the  oil-i 
offering  to  the  Rivers. 

4 Whom  Surya  with  his  bright  beams  hath  attracted,  and  I 

dug  the  path  for  them  to  travel, 

May  these  Streams  give  us  ample  room  and  freedom, 
serve  us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XLVIII.  Ri 

Ye  liberal  Heroes,  Yajas  and  Ribhukshans,  come  and  de 
you  with  our  flowing  Soma. 

May  your  strength,  Vibhus,  as  ye  come  to  meet  us,  turn  hii 
ward  your  car  that  brings  men  profit. 

2 May  we  as  Ribhu  with  your  Ribhus conquer  strength  with 

strength,  as  Vibhus  with  the  Vibhus. 

May  Vaja  aid  us  in  the  light  for  booty,  and  helped  by  Ii 
may  we  quell  the  foeman. 

3 For  they  rule  many  tribes  with  high  dominion,  and  com 

all  their  foes  in  close  encounter. 

May  Indra,  Vibhvan,  Vaja,  and  Ribhukslian  destroy  by  t 
the  wicked  foeman’s  valour. 

4 Now,  Deit.es,  give  us  ample  room  and  freedom : be  all  of] 

one-minded,  our  protection. 

So  let  the  Vasus  grant  us  strength  and  vigour.  Presen 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

1 Wave  of  pure  refreshment:  ‘sweet  essence  of  the  earth  ; ’ Urmi  u 
here  to  imply  the  Soma  juice  produc*  cl  from  the  earth.  Wilson. ^ 

3 All- purifying : stidpavitrdh  ; literally,  with  a hundred,  that  is,  coun 
means  of  purification.  The  Goddesses : the  divine  W.tters. 

1 Vdjas  and  Ribhukshans  : ye  three,  Ribhu,  Vibhvan,  and  Vftja. 

2 The  meaning  is,  may  we  be  as  powerful  as  Ribhu,  as  mighty  as  tb 

pany  of  the  Vibhus  (another  name  of  the  Ribhus).  SAyaua  explains  n 
great,  and  vibhvah  as  powerful.  In  the  fight  for  booty  : rffjasltuu ; a f 
the  word  and  name  vftja,  ... 

4 The  Vasus : according  to  SAyana,  vdsavah  here  is  an  epithet  or  /P 
understood  ; ‘ the  exalted  (Ribhus).’— Wilson. 


N 50.] 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


51  • 

| HYMN  XLIX.  Waters. 

pRTH  from  the  middle  of  the  flood  the  Waters — their  chief 
jthe  Sea — flow  cleansing1,  never  sleeping. 

Ira,  the  Bull,  the  Thunderer,  dug  their  channels : here  let 
; those  Waters,  Goddesses,  protect  me. 

Waters  which  come  from  heaven,  or  those  that  wander  dug 
from  the  earth,  or  flowing  free  by  nature,  & 

right,  purifying,  speeding  to  the  Ocean,  here  let  those 
Waters,  Goddesses,  protect  me. 

hose  amid  whom  goes  Varuna  the  Sovran,  he  who  discri- 
minates men’s  truth  and  falsehood — 

[stilling  meath,  the  bright,  the  purifying,  here  let  those 
Waters,  Goddesses,  protect  me. 

»ey  from  whom  Varuna  the  King,  and  Soma,  and  all  the 
Deities  drink  strength  and  vigour, 

ley  into  whom  Vaisvanara  Agui  entered,  here  let  those 
Waters,  Goddesses,  protect  me. 


HYMN  L.  Various  Deities. 

:Mitra- Varuna,  guard  and  protect  me  here:  let  not  that 
come  to  me  which  nests  within  and  swells. 

Irive  afar  the  scorpion  hateful  to  the  sight : let  not  the 
winding  worm  touch  me  and  wound  my  foot. 

uption  that  appears  upon  the  twofold  joints,  and  that 
which  overspreads  the  ancles  and  the  knees, 
ij  the  refulgent  Agni  banish  far  away:  let  not  the  winding 
worm  touch  me  and  wound  my  foot. 

e poison  that  is  formed  upon  the  Sulmali,  that  which  is 
ound  in  stretms,  that  which  the  plants  produce, 
l this  may  all  the  Gods  banish  and  drive  away  : let  not  the 
winding  worm  touch  me  aud  wound  my  foot. 


} Jood  : the  ocean  of  air,  the  firmament. 

LWm  arp!1|Mfitra  anA,Va,ru’a- (2)  A«oi’  (’)  V'V«  Devlb,  (i)  Praise 

in  or Hi  J? h a^.n?a.°f  thellym"  to  be  repeated  a as  an  antidote  to 
►n  or  disease  which  it  specifies. 

f «AicA  nest,  within  and,  swells : ‘the  insidious  and  spreading  (poison)- 

' .„Yfa?a  8U?ph?9  the  substantive  visham.  The  scorpion  : ajakd- 
ie  exact  meaning  is  uncertain. 

onWhicl!  u ^ the  .aT9  an,d  Ie«3'  SAy»na’s  interpretation  is  different: 
generated  in  the  manifold  knots  (of  trees).  * — Wilson. 

the  silk-cotton  tree.  AU  the  Gods,  or,  the  All-Gods  or 


4 The  steep  declivities,  the  valleys,  and  the  heights,  the 
nels  full  of  water,  and  the  waterless — 

May  those  who  swell  with  water,  gracious  Goddesses, 
afflict  us  with  the  Sipada  disease,  may  all  the  river* 
us  free  from  Simidd. 

HYMN  LI.  i 

Through  the  Adityas'  most  auspicious  shelter,  througl 
most  recent  succour  may  we  conquer. 

May  they,  the  Mighty,  giving  ear,  establish  this  sacri: 
make  us  free  and  sinless. 

2 Let  Aditi  rejoice  and  the  Adityas,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Arj 

most  righteous. 

May  they,  the  Guardians  of  the  world,  protect  us,  f 
show  favour,  drink  this  day  our  Soma. 

3 All  Universal  Deities,  the  Maruts,  all  the  Adityas,  y( 

all  the  Riblius, 

Indra,  and  Agni,  and  the  Asvins,  lauded.  Preserve  us 
more,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LII. 

May  we  be  free  from  every  bond,  Adityas!  a castle  amon 
and  men,  ye  Vasus. 

Winning,  may  we  win  Varuna  and  Mitra,  and,  being,  i 
be,  0 Earth  and  Heaven. 

2 May  Varuna  and  Mitra  grant  this  blessing,  our  Gua 

shelter  to  our  seed  and  offspring. 

Let  ns  not  suffer  for  another’s  trespass,  nor  do  the  thii 
ye,  0 Vasus,  punish. 

3 The  ever-prompt  Angirases,  imploring  riches  from  Savi 

God,  obtained  them. 

So  may  our  Father  who  is  great  and  holy,  and  all  tin 
accordant,  grant  this  favour. 

HYMN  LIII.  Heaven  an- 

As  priest  with  solemn  rites  and  adorations  I worship  ] 
and  Earth,  the  High  and  Holy. 

To  them,  great  Parents  of  the  Gods,  have  sages  of  i 
time,  singing,  assigned  precedence. 

4 2'he  jjfi pada  disease  : ‘perhaps  the  Vaidikform  of  Slipada,  the 
Wilson.  Simidd  : apparently  a female  demon,  or  a disease  at 

to  her  malevolence.  „ „ , , f , .. 

3 Universal  Deities  : vi§ve  devfh  ; the  All-Gods.  Lauded  : the  sei 
incomplete,  the  substantives  in  the  nominative  case  having  no  verb. 

1 Being : really  and  truly  being,  rich,  powerful,  and  distinguished. 
3 Our  Father:  Varuna,  the  father  of  Vasish^ha  j or  Savitar,  or  1 
may  be  intended. 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


53 


' 55.] 

jth  newest  hymns  set  in  the  seat  of  Order,  those  the  Two 
parents,  born  before  all  others, 

jne,  Heaven  and  Earth,  with  the  Celestial  People,  hither  to 
[is,  for  strong  is  your  protection. 

bt,  Heaven  and  Earth,  ye  hold  in  your  possession  full  many 
jt  treasure  for  the  liberal  giver. 

tnt  us  that  wealth  which  comes  in  free  abundance.  Preserve 
s evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

| HYMN  LTV,  VAstoshpati. 

Knowledge  us,  0 Guardian  of  the  Homestead  : bring  no 
lisease,  and  give  us  happy  entrance. 

Ute’er  we  ask  of  thee,  be  pleased  to  grant  it,  and  prosper 
Ihou  our  quadrupeds  and  bipeds. 

Rector  of  the  Home,  be  our  promoter  : increase  our  wealth 
|n  kine  and  steeds,  0 Indu. 

jy  we  be  ever-youthful  in  thy  friendship  : be  pleased  in  us 
is  in  his  sons  a father. 

kugh  thy  dear  fellowship  that  bringeth  welfare,  may  we  be 
Victors,  Guardian  of  the  Dwelling  ! 

itect  our  happiness  in  rest  and  labour.  Preserve  us 
Ivcrmorc,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LV.  V4»toshpati. 

fTOSHPATi,  who  killest  all  disease  and  wearest  every  form, 

San  auspicious  Friend  to  us. 

len,  0 bright  Sou  of  Sarama,  thou  showest,  tawny-lmed  ! 
hy  teeth, 

5y  gleam  like  lances’  points  within  thy  mouth  when  thou 
rouldst  bite:  go  thou  to  sleep. 

am  Vs  Son,  retrace  thy  way  : bark  at  the  robber  and  the 
hief. 

Indra’s  singers  barkest  thou  ? Why  dost  thou  seek  to  tcr- 
ify  us  1 Go  to  sleep. 

the  libeml  giver  : or,  for  Sudds. 

hpati  is  the  Genius  or  tutelary  God  of  the  house.  In  this  hymn 
l reused  also  as  Indu,  another  name  of  Soma  the  Moon-God. 

hpati  is  the  deity  of  the  first  stanzi,  and  Tndra  of  the  rest, 
ictre  is  Gdyatii  in  stanza  1,  Uparishtddbiihati  (8x3  f- 1 2)  in  2-4, 
shtup  in  5-8,  and  the  hymn  appears  to  be  made  up  of  three  corres- 
pieces  unconnected  by  their  subjects. 

SaramA : Saramd.  the  hound  of  Indra,  is  mother  of  the  two 
Jh®  brindled  watch-dogs  of  Yama,  God  of  the  Dead.  Thia  stanza 
avo  following  appear  to  be  addressed  by  the  spirits  of  Indra’s  worship- 
urn  of  the  dogs  who  would  prevent  their  entering  the  home  of  the 


54  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK 

4 Be  on  thy  guard  against  the  boar,  and  let  the  boar  bewai 

thee. 

At  fndra’s  singers  barkest  thou  ? Why  dost  thou  seel 
terrify  us  ? Go  to  sleep. 

5 Sleep  mother,  let  the  father  sleep,  sleep  dog  and  master  oi 

house. 

Let  all  the  kinsmen  sleep,  sleep  all  the  people  who  are  r< 
about. 

6 The  man  who  sits,  the  man  who  walks,  and  whosoever  ] 

on  us, 

Of  these  we  closely  shut  the  eyes,  even  as  we  closely  shut 
house. 

7 The  Bull  who  hath  a thousand  horns,  who  rises  up  from 

the  sea, — 

By  him  the  Strong  and  Mighty  One  we  lull  and  maki 
people  sleep. 

8 The  women  sleeping  in  the  court,  lying  without,  or  stret 

on  beds, 

The  matrons  with  their  odorous  sweets— these,  one  am 
we  lull  to  sleep. 

HYMN  l/VJ.  ^ M 

Wiio  are  these  radiant  men  in  serried  rank,  Rudra's  v 
heroes  borne  by  ncble  steeds  1 

2 Verily  no  one  knoweth  whence  they  sprang  : they,  and 

only,  know  each  other’s  birth. 

3 They  strew  each  other  with  their  blasts,  these  Hawks: 

strove  together,  roaring  like  the  wind. 

5 This  and  the  three  following  Btanzas  form  a lull.iby  or  sleep-song, 
bably  sung  as  a charm  by  a lover  on  a secret  visit  to  his  love.  ^ 

7 The  Bull  who  hath  a thousand  homs : the  Son,  wh'-we  setting  bnuj 
time  of  rest  and  sleep  ; or  j>eihaps  the  starry  heaven  is  intended 

8 With  their  odoiws  sweets  : wearing  garlands  of  fragiant  flowers  mi: 
occasions,  according  to  Sayana  : ‘decoiatcd  with  holiday  perfumes.  \ 
According  to  a legend  mentioned  by  Sayana,  Vasishtha  having  fasted  fo 
days  was  entering  the  house  of  Vanina  in  hope  of  food,  when  the  wat 
set  upon  him  and  was  put  to  sleep  by  the  repetition  of  the  last  four 
which  are  to  be  recited  on  simikir  occasions  by  thieves  and  house-bi< 
See  Wilson’s  note.  The  hymn  has  been  discussed  by  Aufrecht,  h 
Studien , IV.  337f,  and  by  Lanman,  Sanskrit  Header,  p.  370. 

3 They  strew  each  other  with  their  blasts  : the  meaning  of 
uncertain.  ‘ They  go  together  by  their  own  pure  paths.’  -Wilson 
plucked  each  other  with  their  beaks  i?)— M.  Muller.  ‘They  bestrei 
other  with  light.’—  Grassmimn.  ‘They  scatter  dust  over  each  other 
besoms.’— Roth.  I follow  Professor  Ludwig.  The  meaning  appears  to  i 
the  Hawks  or  rapid  Maruts  are  so  crowded  in  their  onward  sweep  in* 
in  front  feel  the  quick  breath  of  those  who  follow.  Similarly  (VIIl.j 
the  crowded  Maruts  are  likened  to  cattle  who  lick  each  other’s  heads  or  i 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


r MJ 


S6 


gage  was  he  who  knew  these  mysteries,  what  in  her  udder 
mighty  Prisni  bore. 

,er  victorious,  through  the  Maruts,  be  this  band  of  Heroes, 
nursing  manly  strength, 

)st  bright  in  splen  lour,  fleetest  on  their  way,  close-knit  to 
glory,  strong  with  varied  power. 

a,  mighty  is  your  power  and  firm  your  strength  : so, 
potent,  with  the  Maruts,  bo  the  band, 
kht  is  your  spirit,  wrathful  are  your  minds  : your  bold 
iroop’s  minstrel  is  like  one  inspired. 

er  avert  your  blazing  shaft  from  us,  and  let  not  your  dis- 
pleasure reach  us  here. 

ur  dear  names,  conquering  Maruts,  we  invoke,  calling  aloud 
dll  ve  are  satislied. 


jll-armed,  impetuous  in  their  haste,  they  deck  themselves, 
fclieir  forms,  with  ornaments  of  gold. 

re,  Maruts  pure  yourselves,  are  your  oblations  : to  you,  the 
pure,  pure  sacrifice  I offer. 

Law  they  came  to  truth,  the  Law’s  observers,  bright  by 
;heir  birth,  and  pure,  and  sanctifying, 
nr  rings,  0 Maruts,  rest  upon  your  shoulders,  and  chains 
>f  gold  are  twined  upon  your  bosoms. 

laming  with  drops  of  rain,  like  lightning-flashes,  after  your 
vont  ye  whirl  about  your  weapons. 

.do  in  the  depth  of  air  spread  forth  your  glories,  far,  most 
adorable,  ye  bear  your  titles. 

ruts,  accept  this  th  msandfolcl  allotment  of  household 
lacrifice  and  household  treasure. 


Mar  its,  ye  regard  the  praise  recited  here  at  this  mighty 
finger’s  invocation, 

uchsafe  us  quickly  wealth  with  noble  heroes,  wealth  which 
no  man  who  hateth  us  may  injure. 


wt  in  her  udder:  according  to  S&yani,  what  beings  (Maruts,  etc.) 
P;Lni  bore  at  her  udder  or  in  the  firmament. 

V[  troop's  minstrel : the  leader  <f  the  Maruts’  thunder-psalm.  Like 
V j / wubartiwi,  like  a Muni  or  inspired  saint  ‘ The  sounds  produced 
inakmg  of  the  trees  are  like  the  varied  intonations  of  a leciter  of  praises, 
las  explanation.’  — Wdson.  La n man  translates  differently:  Clear  is 
ustling.  Your  hearts  are  wrathful  as  the  wild  onward-rush  of  a doughty 

\ V°ur  titles : you  make  yourselves  known.  ‘You  send  down 
pers)  that  beat  down  (the  dust).’— Wilson.  Nfimdni,  names,  according 
?a,  means  waters,  because  they  bend  down  the  dust,  pdnsHti  namayantit 


THE  IIYMNS  OF 


56 


[BOOK J 


16  The  Maruts,  fleet  as  coursers,  while  they  deck  them], 

youths  spectators  of  a festal  meeting, 

Linger,  like  beauteous  colts,  about  the  dwelling,  like  friskj 
calves,  these  who  pour  down  the  water. 

17  So  may  the  Maruts  help  us  and  be  gracious,  bringing  f, 

room  to  lovely  Earth  and  Heaven. 

Far  be  your  bolt  that  slaycth  men  and  cattle.  Ye  Vas: 
turn  yourselves  to  us  with  blessings. 

18  The  priest,  when  seated,  loudly  calls  you,  Maruts,  praising 

song  your  universal  bounty. 

He,  Bulls  ! who  hath  so  much  in  his  possession,  free  ft 
duplicity,  with  hymns  invokes  you. 

19  These  Maruts  bring  the  swift  man  to  a stand-still,  j 

strength  with  mightier  strength  they  break  and  humble 
These  guard  the  singer  from  the  man  who  hates  him  and 
their  sore  displeasure  on  the  wicked. 

20  These  Maruts  rouse  even  the  poor  and  needy  : the  Vasusl 

him  as  an  active  champion. 

Drive  to  a distance,  0 ye  Bulls,  the  darkness  : give  us  i 
store  of  children  and  descendants. 

21  Never,  0 Maruts,  may  we  lose  your  bounty,  nor,  enr-to 

Lords  ! be  hindmost  when  ye  deal  it. 

Give  us  a share  in  that  delightful  treasure,  the  genii 
wealth  that,  Bulls ! is  your  possession. 

22  What  time  the  men  in  fury  rush  together  for  running  strei: 

for  pastures,  and  for  houses, 

Then,  0 ye  Maruts,  ye  who  spring  from  Rudra,  be  our  pro 
tors  in  the  strife  with  foemen. 

23  Full  many  a deed  ye  did  for  our  forefathers  worthy  of  In 

which,  even  of  old,  they  sang  you. 

The  strong  man,  with  the  Maruts,  wins  in  battle,  the  char, 
with  the  Maruts,  gains  the  booty. 

24  Ours,  0 ye  Maruts,  be  the  vigorous  Hero,  the  Lord  Divine 

men,  the  strong  Sustaincr, 

With  whom  to  fair  lands  we  may  cross  the  waters,  and  di 
in  our  own  home  with  you  beside  us. 

25  May  Indra,  Mitra,  Varuna  and  Agni,  Waters,  and  Plants,1 

Trees  accept  our  praises. 

May  we  find  shelter  in  the  Maruts’  bosom.  Preserve  us  e 
more,  yo  Gods,  with  blessings. 

j 24  The  Lord  Divine:  literally,  the  Asura.  We  may  cross  the  watert 
Maruts  are  besought  to  favour  an  expedition  for  the  acquisition  of 
tie  men  t a on  the  further  side  of  a river. 


V 58.J 


THE  RIQVEDA. 


57 


HYMN  LYIT.  Maruts. 

Ea,  through  the  power  of  your  sweet  juice,  ye  Holy  ! the 
SMarut  host  is  glad  at  sacrifices. 

|iey  cause  even  spacious  heaven  and  earth  to  tremble,  they 
[make  the  spring  flow  when  they  come,  the  Mighty, 
he  Maruts  watch  the  man  who  sings  their  praises,  promoters 
of  the  thought  of  him  who  worships. 

>at  you  on  sacred  grass  in  our  assembly,  this  day,  with 
friendly  minds,  to  share  the  banquet. 

o others  gleam  so  brightly  as  these  Maruts  with  their  own 
forms,  their  golden  gauds,  their  weapons. 

'ith  all  adornments,  decking  earth  and  heaven,  they  heighten, 
for  bright  show,  their  common  splendour, 
ir  from  us  be  your  blazing  dart,  0 Maruts,  when  we, 
through  human  frailty,  sin  against  you. 
it  us  not  be  exposed  to  that,  ye  Holy  ! May  your  most  lov- 
ing favour  still  attend  us. 

ly  even  what  we  have  done  delight  the  Maruts,  the  blame- 
less Ones,  the  bright,  the  purifying. 

irther  us,  0 ye  Holy,  with  your  kindness : advance  us 
mightily  that  we  may  prosper. 

id  may  the  Maruts,  praised  by  all  their  titles,  Heroes,  enjoy 
the  taste  of  our  oblations. 

vc  us  of  Amrit  for  the  sake  of  offspring  : awake  the  excel- 
lent fair  stores  of  riches. 

ther,  ye  Maruts,  praised,  with  all  your  succours,  with  all 
felicity  come  to  our  princes, 

ho,  of  themselves,  a hundredfold  increase  us  Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LVIII.  Maruts. 

s' o to  the  troop  that  pours  down  rain  in  common,  the 
Mighty  Compaiiy  of  celestial  nature. 


: acc°rding  to  S&yana,  the  Maruts  are  addressed.  The  Marut 
ima  MTrutam  : the  Marut  name,  t e those  who  are  called  Maruts. 

hymn,  and  all  the  hymns  to  the  Maruts  have  been  translated  and 
in  Max  Muller  a Vedic  Hymns,  l.  (Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  Vol. 

us  of  Amrit : the  secret  essence  which  pervades  the  world  and  nour* 
sustains  all  must  naturally  also  be  the  element  that  promotes  re- 
on.  Budwig.  Von  Both  explains  the  passage  differently:  ‘Add  us  to 
r«  r!  . People  of  eternity,  i,  e.  to  the  blessed.’  * Vouchsafe  our 
g uie.  — Grasstnann.  ‘Bestow  water  upon  our  progeny.’— Wilson. 


58 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK  VII 

They  make  the  world-halves  tremble  with  their  greatness  : 
from  depths  of  earth  and  sky  they  reach  to  heaven. 

2 Yea,  your  birth,  Maruts,  was  with  wild  commotion,  ye  who 

move  swiftly,  fierce  in  wrath,  terrific. 

Ye  all-surpassing  in  your  might  and  vigour,  each  looker  on  the 
light  fears  at  your  coming. 

3 Give  ample  vital  power  unto  our'princes : lot  our  fair  praises 

gratify  the  Maruts. 

As  the  way  travelled  helpeth  people  onward,  so  further  us 
with  your  delightful  succours. 

4 Your  favoured  singer  counts  his  wealth  by  hundreds : the 

strong  steed  whom  ye  favour  wins  a thousand. 

The  Sovran  whom  ye  aid  destroys  the  foeman.  May  this 
your  gift,  ye  Shakers,  be  distinguished. 

5 I call,  as  such,  the  Sons  of  bounteous  lludra : will  not  the 

Maruts  turn  again  to  us-ward  ? 

What  secret  sin  or  open  stirs  their  anger,  that  we  implore  the 
Swift  Ones  to  forgive  us. 

6 This  eulogy  of  the  Bounteous  hath  been  spoken  : accept,  ye 

Maruts,  this  our  hymn  of  praises. 

Ye  Bulls,  keep  those  who  hate  us  at  a distance.  Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LIX.  Maruts. 

Whomso  ye  rescue  here  and  there,  whomso  ye  guide,  0 Deities, 
To  him  give  shelter,  Agni,  Mitra,  Varuna,  ye  Maruts,  and 
thou  Aryaman. 

2 Through  your  kind  favour,  Gods,  on  some  auspicious  day,  the 

worshipper  subdues  his  foes. 

That  man  increases  home  and  strengthening  ample  food  who 
brings  you  offerings  as  ye  list. 

3 Vasishtha  will  not  overlook  the  lowliest  one  among  you  all. 

0 Maruts,  of  our  Soma  juice  effused  to-day  drink  all  of  you 
with  eager  haste. 

4 Your  succour  in  the  battle  injures  not  the  man  to  whom  ye, 

Heroes,  grant  your  gifts. 

1 From  depth 8 of  earth  and  sky  : nlrriti  here  is  said  to  be  synonymous  with 
hh&mi , earth,  and  avansi,  the  unsupported,  with  antariksha , firmament.  But 
nlrriti,  Death,  Destruction,  as  identified  with  bh&mi,  may  be  the  Prithivi  of 
the  atmosphere  (see  V.  84.),  which  must  originally  have  been  considered  to  be 
the  place  of  departed  spirits. 

2 Each  looker  on  the  light:  vhtvah  svardrxk:  according  to  S&yana,  every  tree. 

4 Injures  not : a litotes  for,  is  of  the  greatest  advantage  to. 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


59 


| HYMN  59.  j 

May  your  most  recent  favour  turn  to  us  again.  Come  quickly, 
ye  who  fain  would  drink. 

5 Come  hitherward  to  drink  the  juice,  0 ye  whose  bounties  give 

you  joy. 

These  offerings  are  for  you,  these,  Maruts,  I present.  Go  not 
to  any  place  but  this. 

6 Sit  on  our  sncred  grass,  be  graciously  inclined  to  give  the 

wealth  for  which  we  long, 

To  take  delight,  ye  Maruts,  Friends  of  all,  with  Sv&ha,  in 
sweet  Soma  juice. 

7 Decking  the  beauty  of  their  forms  in  secret  the  Swans  with 

purple  backs  have  flown  down  hither. 

Arouud  me  all  the  Company  hath  settled,  like  joyous  Heroes 
glad  in  our  libation. 

8 Maruts,  the  man  whose  wrath  is  hard  to  master,  he  who  would 

slay  us  ere  we  think,  0 Vasus, 

May  he  be  tangled  in  the  toils  of  mischief ; smite  ye  him 
down  with  your  most  flaming  weapon. 

9 0 Maruts,  ye  consuming  Gods,  enjoy  this  offering  brought  for 

you, 

To  help  us,  ye  who  slay  the  foe. 

10  Sharers  of  household  sacrifice,  come,  Maruts,  stay  not  far  away, 
That  ye  may  help  us,  Bounteous  Ones. 

11  Here,  Self-strong  Maruts,  yea,  even  here,  ye  Sages  with  your 

sunbright  skins  ! 

I dedicate  your  sacrifice. 

12  Tryambaka  we  worship,  sweet  augmenter  of  prosperity. 

As  from  its  stem  the  cucumber,  so  may  I be  released  from 
death,  not  reft  of  immortality. 


5 Whose  bounties  give  yon  joy : or  follow  each  other  closely,  and  are  ever 
fre.-h  and  ready. 

6 Svdhd : an  exclamation,  like  Ave  ! or  Hail  ! used  in  making  oblations  to 
the  Gods. 

7 With  purple  backs  : nflaprishthlh  : cf.  Horace’s  * purpurei  olores.* 

8 Mischief : or  one  of  the  malicious  spirits  called  Diuhs. 

12  Tryambaka  : a name  of  Rudra.  diceet : according  to  SAyana,  sugdndhim, 
Bweet-smelling,  means  here,  * whose  fame  is  fra$p»nfc.’  ‘ The  verse  occurs  in  the 
htjur-Veda,  6 30,  and  is,  in  some  instances,  differently  interpreted  ; TVyaw 
is  tei  med  netrntvayopetam  Jiudram,  the  triocular  Rudra:  sugundhim , 
divyagandhopeiam,  of  celestial  fragrance  : the  urvdruka  is  said  to  mean  the 
hind  hit  [fruit  of  the  jujube- tree],  which,  when  ripe,  falls  of  itself  fiom  its 
stalk.  — Wilson. 


eo  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VII. 

HYMN  LX.  Mitra-Varuna. 

When  thou,  0 Sun,  this  day,  arising  sinless,  shalt  speak  the 
truth  to  Vanina  and  Mitra, 

0 Aditi,  may  all  the  Deities  love  us,  and  thou,  0 Aryaman, 
while  we  arc  singing. 

2 Looking  on  man,  0 Vanina  and  Mitra,  this  Sun  ascendeth  up 

by  both  the  pathways, 

Guardian  of  all  things  fixt,  of  all  that  moveth,  beholding 
good  and  evil  acts  of  mortals. 

3 He  from  their  home  hath  yoked  the  Seven  gold  Coursers  who, 

dropping  oil  and  fatness,  carry  Surya. 

Yours,  Varuryi  and  Mitra,  he  surveycth  the  worlds  and  living 
creatures  like  a herdsman. 

4 Your  coursers  rich  in  store  of  sweets  have  mounted : to  the 

bright  ocean  Surya  hath  ascended, 

For  whom  the  Adityas  make  his  pathway  ready,  Aryaman, 
Mitra,  Varuna,  accordant. 

5 For  these,  even  Aryaman,  Varuna,  and  Mitra,  are  the  chas- 

tisers of  all  guile  and  falsehood. 

These,  Aditi’s  Sons,  infallible  and  mighty,  have  waxen  in  the 
home  of  Law  Eternal. 

6 These,  Mitra,  Varuna,  whom  none  deeeiveth,  with  great  power 

quicken  even  the  fool  to  wisdom, 

And,  wakening,  moreover,  thoughtful  insight,  lead  it  by  easy 
paths  o’er  grief  and  trouble. 

7 They  ever  vigilant,  with  eyes  that  close  not,  caring  for  heaven 

and  earth,  lead  on  the  thoughtless. 

Even  in  the  river’s  bed  there  is  a shallow  : across  this  broad 
expanse  may  they  conduct  us. 

8 When  Aditi  and  Varuna  and  Mitra,  like  guardians,  give  Sudas 

their  friendly  shelter, 

Granting  him  sons  and  lineal  succession,  let  us  not,  bold  ones ! 
move  the  Gods  to  anger. 


The  hymn  is  addressed  chiefly  to  Mitra  and  Varuna,  but  S .rya  or  the  Sun 
is  the  deity  of  the  first  stanza. 

1 Sinless:  Sdyana  makes  dnrfydh  ^andyasah  : ‘ declare  the  truth... that  wc 
are  void  of  sin.’— Wilson.  But  this  seems  forced,  and  the  implied  meaning  <>£ 
the  poet  is  clear  enough  if  the  word  is  taken  in  its  u.sual  signification. 

2 Both  the  pathicays : near  the  earth  and  high  in  the  firmament. 

6 Mitra , Varuna:  and  Aryaman,  understood  : the  verbs  are  in  the  plural. 

8 Bold  ones : the  warning  is  addressed  to  the  people  of  Sudds,  who  has  been 

ntnnlinna/!  !n  1 n <V  KvmrU 


1IYMN  61.1 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


61 


9  May  he  with  offerings  purify  the  altar  from  any  stainB  of 
Varuna’s  reviler. 

Aryaman  save  us  from  all  those  who  hate  us : give  room  and 
freedom  to  Sudas,  ye  Mighty. 

10  Hid  from  our  eyes  is  their  resplendent  meeting:  by  their 

mysterious  might  they  hold  dominion. 

Heroes  ! we  cry  trembling  in  fear  before  you,  even  in  the  great- 
ness of  your  power  have  mercy. 

11  He  who  wins  favour  for  his  prayer  by  worship,  that  he  may 

gain  him  strength  and  highest  riches, 

That  good  man’s  mind  the  Mighty  Ones  will  follow  : they  have 
brought  comfort  to  Ins  spacious  dwelling. 

12  This  priestly  task,  Gods  ! Varuna  and  Mitra  ! hath  been  per- 

formed for  you  at  sacrifices. 

Convey ’us  safely  over  every  peril.  Preserve  us  evermore,  ye 
Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXI.  Mitra-Varuna. 

0 Varuna  and  Mitra,  Surya  spreading  the  beauteous  light  of 
you  Twain  Gods  arisoth. 

He  who  hoholdeth  all  existing  creatures  observeth  well  the  zeal 
that  is  in  mortals. 

2 The  holy  sage,  renowned  afar,  directeth  his  hymns  to  yon,  0 

Varuna  and  Mitra,— 

He  whose  devotions,  sapient  Gods,  ye  favour  so  that  ye  fill,  as 
’twere,  with  power  his  autumns. 

3 From  the  wide  earth,  0 Varuna  and  Mitra,  from  the  great 

lofty  heaveu,  ye,  Bounteous  Givers, 

Have  in  the  fields  and  houses  set  your  warders  who  visit  every 
spot  and  watch  unceasing. 

4 I praise  the  strength  of  Varuna  and  Mitra  : that  strength,  by 

mightiness,  keeps  both  worlds  asunder. 

Heroless  pass  the  months  of  the  ungodly  : he  who  loves  sacri- 
fice makes  his  home  enduring. 


9 May  he  : Agni  may  be  intended.  Varuna' s revile)' : those  who  speak  evil 
of  princes  like  Suchts,  Vuruna  being  the  king’s  prototype  — Ludwig. 

10  Their  resplendent  mutiny  : that  of  Mitra,  Varuna,  and  Aryaman. 

11  Have  bronyht  comfort  to  his  spacious  dwelling:  ‘ bestow  a spacious  man- 
si011  for  a dwelling  upon  him.’— Wilson. 


<52  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VIl 

5 Steers,  all  infallible  are  these  your  people  in  whom  no  wondrou 

thing  is  seen,  no  worship. 

Guile  follows  close  tho  men  who  are  untruthful : no  secrets 
may  be  hidden  from  your  know  ledge. 

6 I will  exalt  your  sacrifice  with  homage : as  priest,  I,  Mitra 

VaruLci,  invoke  you. 

May  these  new  hymns  and  prayers  that  I have  fashionec 
delight  you  to  the  profit  of  the  singer. 

7 This  priestly  task,  Gods  ! Varuna  and  Mitra  ! hath  been  per 

formed  for  you  at  sacrifices. 

Convey  us  safely  over  every  peril.  Preserve  us  evermore,  yi 
Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LX II.  Mitra- Varuna 

Scry  a hath  sent  aloft  his  beams  of  splendour , o’er  all  th 
tribes  of  men  in  countless  places. 

Together  with  the  heaven  he  shines  apparent,  formed  by  hi: 
Makers  well  with  power  ami  wisdom. 

2 So  hast  thou  mounted  up  before  us,  Surya,  through  these  ou 

praises,  with  fleet  dappled  horses. 

Declare  us  free  from  all  oflence  to  Mitra,  and  Varuna,  anc 
Aryarnan,  and  Agni. 

3 May  holy  Agni,  Varuna,  and  Mitra  send  down  their  riches 

upon  us  in  thousands. 

May  they,  the  Bright  Ones,  make  our  praise-song  perfect,  and 
when  we  laud  them,  grant  us  all  our  wishes. 

4 0 undivided  Heaven  and  Earth,  preserve  us,  us,  Lofty  Ones 

your  nobly-born  descendants. 

Let.  us  not  anger  V.iruna,  nor  Vayu,  nor  him,  the  dearest 
Friend  of  mortals,  Mitra. 

5 Stretch  forth  your  arms  and  let  our  lives  be  lengthened 

with  fatness  dew  the  pastures  of  our  cattle. 

Ye  Youthful,  make  us  famed  among  the  people : hear,  Mitn 
Varuna,  these  mine  invocations. 

5 This  stanza  is  difficult.  Sfty ana’s  interpretation  as  given  by  Wilson  is 
‘ Unperplexed,  all-pervading  showerers  (of  benefits),  these  piaises  are  for  you, 
in  which  nothing  surprising,  no  adoration  (woithy  of  you),  is  beheld:  tho  iir 
sincere  commendations  of  men  serve  as  offences  : eulogies  of  you,  although 
offered  in  secret  are  not  unappreciated.’  The  version  of  the  Seventy  Hyvnisit 
somewhat  ns  follows  : ‘ All  your  avenging  spirits,  0 ye  Mighty,  follow  unerr 
iugly  the  sinner’s  traces.  They  have  no  «dgn  that  men  may  mark,  no  figure 
Naught  is  so  secret  that  ye  fail  to  know  it.’  This  latter  involves  a slight 
alteration  of  the  text.  I prefer  Ludwig’s  interpretation,  although  it  is  n°' 
absolutely  convincing. 

A 7V»  th*  m *fUtt  ft  f the  t Inn • baa 


Veiiitrh*  StiLtlipn  I.  43. 


THE  RIQVEDA. 


.68 


rjYMN  64  ] 

6 Now  Mitra,  Varuna,  Aryaman  vouchsafe  us  freedom  and  room, 
for  us  and  for  our  children. 

May  we  find  paths  all  fair  and  good  to  travel.  Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXI1I.  Mitra-Varuna. 

Common  to  all  mankind,  auspicious  Surya,  ho  who  beholdeth  all, 
is  mounting  upward  ; 

The  God,  the  eye  of  Yaruna  and  Mitra,  who  rolled  up  dark- 
ness like  a piece  of  leather. 

2 Surya’s  great  ensign,  restless  as  the  billow,  that  urgeth  men 

to  action,  is  advancing  ; 

Onward  he  still  would  roll  the  wheel  well-rounded,  which 
Etasa,  harnessed  to  the  car-pole,  movcth. 

3 Refulgent  from  the  bosom  of  the  Mornings,  he  in  whom  singers 

take  delight  asccndeth. 

This  Savitar,  God,  is  my  chief  joy  and  pleasure,  who  breaketh 
not  the  universal  statute. 

4 Golden,  far-seeing,  from  the  heaven  he  riseth  : far  is  his  goal, 

he  hasteth  on  resplendent. 

Men,  verily,  inspirited  by  Surya  speed  to  their  aims  and  do 
the  work  assigned  them. 

5 Where  the  Immortals  have  prepared  his  pathway  he  flieth 

through  the  region  like  a falcon. 

With  homage  and  oblations  will  we  serve  you,  0 Mitra-Yaruna, 
when  the  Sun  hath  risen. 

6 Now  Mitra,  Yaruna,  Aryaman  vouchsafe  us  freedom  and  room, 

for  us  and  for  our  children. 

May  wo  fin  1 paths  all  fair  and  goo  1 to  travel.  Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LX  I Y.  Mitra-Varuna. 

Ye  Twain  who  rule,  in  heaven  and  earth,  the  region,  clothed 
be  your  clouds  in  robes  of  oil  and  fatness. 

May  the  imperial  Varnni,  and  Mitra,  and  high-born  Aryaman 
accept  our  presents. 

- Kings,  guards  of  mighty  everlasting  Order,  come  hitherward, 
ye  Princes,  Lords  of  Rivers. 

Send  us  from  heaven,  0 Varuna  and  Mitra,  rain  and  sweet 
food,  ye  who  pour  down  your  bounties. 

2 Elam : or,  the  bright  or  dappled  steed  ; one  of  the  horses  of  the  Sun. 

3 Breaketh  not : faithfully  observes  and  supports. 


64 


the  hymns  of 


[BOOK  VII, 


, May  ft.  to.  Cod,  and  V«w  - “ bj  “» 

- <***.  “■ « 

j It  2S  r iu  •1,lr“’ ,,h° 

»T.,3i'S3?!w“1I  .\Iitra i y.  King..  ».k.  tU 

» —<  ** 

*££&£$!**,  “k*  tl">"sht  “d  ,pirit'  p"”"' 
11a  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 


HYMN  LXV.  Mitra  Vuruiu, 

With  hymns  I call  you,  when  the  Sun  hath  risen,  Mitra,  and 
Varuna  whose  though! s are  holy, 

Whose  Power  Divine,  supreme  and  everlasting,  comes  with  good 
heed  at  each  mans  supplication. 

2 For  they  are  Asuras  of  Go  Is,  the  friendly  : make,  both  of  you, 

our  lands  exceeding  fruitful, 

May  we  obtain  you,  \aruna  and  Mitra,  wheicvcr  Heaven  and 
Earth  and  days  may  bless  us. 

3 Bonds  of  the  sinner,  they  bear  many  nooses  ; the  wicked  mortal 

hardly  may  escape  them. 

Varuna-Mitra,  may  your  path  of  Order  bear  us  o’er  trouble  as 
a boat  o’er  waters. 

4 Como,  taste  our  offering,  Varuna  and  Mitra  : bedew  our  pasture 

with  sweet  food  and  fatness. 

Pour  down  in  plenty  here  upon  the  people  the  choicest  of  your 
fair  celestial  water. 


3 ThQ  second  half  of  the  stanza  is  obscure.  The  meaning  appeals  tube 
that  even  our  foes,  the  godless  who  oiler  no  sacrifices,  shall  envy  the  pro* 
peri  tv  which  we  enjoy  through  the  liberality  of  Sudds,  and  shall  wish  to  fo 
low  our  example,  to  sacrifice  to  the  Gods  and  to  enjoy  their  protection  and 
the  blessings  which  they  send. 

4 This  cxr:  this  care  fully*  formed  hymn  which  goes,  like  a chariot,  to  the 
Gods. 

5 To  Vdyu  : who  receives  the  first  draught  of  Soma  juice  at  the  morning 

62  16.  See  von  Bradke,  Dyaus  Asura,  8 5, 

1 Power  Divine:  asuryhm : Asurahood.  Whose : refers  to Mitra  and  Varuna. 

2 Antras  of  Goils : the  high  or  ruling  Gods  of  all  the  deities. 

3 Bonds : binders.  Many  nooses : * Your  guiles,  ye  Holy  Ones,  to  quell  op1 
pressor*,  your  snares  spread  out  against  the  foe,  Adityas’  (II.  27.  16). 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


YM& 

. To  you  this  laud,  0 Varuna  and  Mitra,  is  offered,  like  bright 

Soma  juice  to  Vayu.  . . 

Favour  our  songs  of  praise,  wake  thought  and  spirit.  Preserve 
us  evermore,  yo  Gods,  with  blessings. 


HYMN  LXVI.  Mitra- Varuna. 

Let  our  strong  hymn  of  praise  go  forth,  the  laud  of  Mitra- 

Varuna,  . 

With  homage  to  that  high-born  Pair ; 

12  The  Two  exceeding  wise,  the  Sons  of  Dakslia,  whom  the  Gods 
ordai’-ed 

For  lordship,  excellently  great. 

3  Such,  Guardians  of  our  homes  and  us,  0 Mitra- Varuna,  fulfil 
The  thoughts  of  those  who  sing  your  praise. 

4  So  when  the  Suu  hath  risen  to-day,  may  sinless  Mitra,  Arya- 
man, 

Bhaga,  and  Savitar  send  us  forth. 

5  May  this  our  home  be  guarded  well : forward,  ye  Bounteous, 
on  the  way, 

Who  bear  us  safely  o’er  distress. 

0 And  those  Self-reigning,  Aditi,  whose  statute  is  inviolate, 

The  Kings  who  lule  a vast  domain. 

7  Soon  as  the  Sun  h ith  risen,  to  you,  to  Mitra-Varuna,  I sing, 
And  Aryaman  who  slays  the  foe. 

8  With  wealth  of  gold  may  this  my  song  bring  unmolested 
power  and  might, 

And,  Brahmans,  gain  the  sacrifice. 

9  May  we  bo  thine,  God  Varuna,  and  with  our  princes,  Mitra, 
thine : 

Food  and  Heaven’s  light  will  we  obtain. 

p Many  are  they  who  strengthen  Law,  Sun-eyed,  with  Agni  for 
their  tongue, 


2 Sons  of  Dakslia  • see  VI.  50.  2.  For  lordship  : literally  for  Asurahood. 

4 Sinless:  S&yana  heie,  as  in  VII  60.  1.  takes  andf/dh  ns  = andgamh,  bo 
tkat,  according  to  his  interpretation,  the  translation  would  be  : may  Savitar, 
Mitra,  Aryaman,  and  Bhaga  send  us  sinless  forth. 

6 Aditi  is  out  of  place  here,  as  there  is  no  copulative  in  the  text : whose 
mother  is  Aditi,  seems  to  be  intended. 

8 And , Brahmans , gain  the  sacrifice  : the  exact  meaning  is  uncertain  : ‘May 
t (be  effective),  Bages,  for  the  fulfilment  of  (the  objects  of)  the  sacrifice.’ — 
r>  llson. 


5 


M 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK  VII. 


They  who  direct  the  three  great  gatherings  with  their 
thoughts,  yea,  all  things  with  surpassing  might. 

1!  They  who  have  stablished  year  and  month  and  then  the  day, 
night,  sacrifice  and  holy  vers«, 

Vanina,  Mitra,  Aryaman,  the  Kings,  have  won  dominion  which 
none  else  may  gain. 

12  So  at  tba  rising  of  the  Sun  we  think  of  you  wit  yittm 

Evenas ' Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman  deserve:  ye  are  the  chariot- 

eei*s of  Law.  . . 

13  True  to  Law,  born  in  Law,  the  strengthened  of  Law,  terrible, 

haters  of  the  false, 

In  their  felicity  which  gives  the  best  defence  may  we  men  and 
our  princes  dwell. 

14  Uprises,  on  the  slope  of  heaven,  that  marvel  that  attracts  the 

sight,  . . 

As  swift  celestial  Etasa  bears  it  away,  prepared  for  every  eye 

to  sec. 

15  Lord  of  each  single  head,  of  fixt  and  moving  things,  equally 

through  the  whole  expanse, 

The  Seven  sister  Bays  bear  Surya  on  h.s  car,  to  bring  m 
wealth  and  happiness. 

16  A hundred  autumns  may  we  see  that  bright  .ye,  o or  am 

ed,  arise : 

A hundred  autumns  may  we  live. 

17  Infallible  through  your  wisdom,  come  hither,  resplendent 

Varuna, 

And  Mitra,  to  the  Soma  draught. 

18  Come  as  the  laws  of  Heaven  ordain,  Varuna,  Mitra,  void  a 

Pilssnear  and  drink  the  Soma  juice. 

19  Come,  Mitra,  Varuna,  accept  Heroes,  our  sacrificial  gift : 
Drink  Soma,  ye  who  strengthen  Law. 

•*"“¥*£•  ,T,he  *'**** “ ”0t  d* 
Ludwig  U of opinion  that  the  three  castes  are  intended. 

The  meaning  of  stanzas  10  and  11  is  that  although  there  be  many 
Varuna,  Mitra,  and  Aryaman'  are  supreme. 

IS  Sister  Bays : the  Harits.  See  IV.  6.  9;  13.  3. 


ryjfN  «7J 


THE  MOVED  A.  67 

HYMN  LXVII.  Asrins. 

I  with  a holy  heart  that  brings  oblation  will  sing  forth  praise 
to  me£t  your  car,  ye  Princes, 

Which,  Much-desired  ! hath  wakened  as  your  envoy.  I call 
you  hither  as  a son  his  parents. 

2 Brightly  hath  Agni  shone  by  us  enkindled  : the  limits  even 

of  darkness  wore  apparent. 

Eastward  is  seen  the  Banner  of  the  Morning,  the  Banner  born 
to  give  Heaven’s  Daughter  glory. 

3 With  hymns  the  deft  priest  is  about  you,  Asvins,  the  eloquent 

priest  attends  you  now,  N&satyas. 

Come  by  the  paths  that  ye  are  wont  to  travel,  on  car  that 
finds  the  light,  laden  with  treasure. 

4 When,  suppliant  for  your  help,  Lovers  of  Sweetness  ! I seek- 

ing wealth  call  you  to  our  libation, 

Hither  Ward  let  your  vigorous  horses  bear  you  : drink  ye  with 
us  the  well-pressed  Soma  juices. 

5 Bring  forward,  Asvins,  Gods,  to  its  fulfilment  my  never-weari- 

ed prayer  that  asks  for  riches. 

Vouchsafe  us  all  high  spirit  in  the  combat,  and  with  your 
powers,  0 Lords  of  Power,  assist  us. 

(>  Favour  us  in  these  prayers  of  ours,  0 Asv-ins.  May  we  have 
genial  vigour,  ne’er  to  fail  us. 

So  may  we,  strong  in  children  and  descendants,  go,  wealthy, 
to  the  banquet  that  awaits  you. 

J Lovers  of  Sweetness,  we  have  brought  this  treasure  to  you  as 
’twere  an  envoy  sent  for  friendship. 

Come  unto  us  with  spirits  free  from  anger,  in  homes  of  men 
enjoying  our  oblation. 

\ With  one,  the  same,  intention,  ye  swift  movers,  o’er  the  Serven 
Rivets  hath  your  chariot  travelled. 

Yoked  by  the  Gods,  your  strong  steeds  rtevet  Weary  White 
speeding  forward  at  the  pole  they  bear  you. 

Exhaust! ess  be  your  bounty  to  our  princes  who  with  their 
wealth  incite  the  gift  of  riches, 

Who  further  friendship  with  their  noble  natures,  combining 
wealth  in  kino  with  wealth  ;n  hdrses. 


T Much-desired:  ‘adorable/ — Wilson. 

f Incite  the  gift  of  riches : move  the  Gods  to  give  riches  in  return. 
friendship ; or,  st  kinsman,  meaning,  apparently,  the  priest 


68  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Vlt, 

10  Now  hear,  0 Youthful  Twain,  mine  invocation:  come,  Afivins, 
to  the  home  where  food  aboundeth. 

Vouchsafe  us  wealth,  do  honour  to  our  nobles.  Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LX  VIII.  As  vim, 

Come,  radiant  As vins,  with  your  noble  horses:  accept  your 
servant’s  hymns,  ye  Wonder-Workers  : 

Enjoy  oblations  which  we  bring  to  greet  you. 

2 The  gladdening  juices  stand  prepared  before  you  : come  quick* 

Iy  and  partake  of  mine  oblation. 

Pass  by  the  calling  of  our  foe  and  hear  us. 

3 Your  chariot  with  a hundred  aids,  0 Asvins,  beareth  you  swift 

as  thought  across  the  regions, 

Speeding  to  us,  0 ye  whose  wealth  is  Surya. 

4 What  time  this  stone  of  yours,  the  Gods’  adorer,  upraised, 

sounds  forth  for  you  as  Soma-presscr, 

Let  the  priest  bring  you,  Fair  Ones,  through  oblations. 

5 The  nourishment  ye  have  is,  truly,  wondrous  : ye  gave  there- 

of a quickening  store  to  Atri, 

Who,  being  dear  to  you,  receives  your  favour. 

6 That  gift,  which  all  may  gain,  ye  gave  Chyavana,  when  he 

grew  old,  who  offered  you  oblations, 

When  ye  bestowed  on  him  enduring  beauty. 

7 What  time  his  wicked  friends  abandoned  Bhujyu,  0 Asvins, 

in  the  middle  of  the  ocean, 

Your  horse  delivered  him,  your  faithful  servant. 


3 Whose  wealth  is  SHn,<U  having  KAryft  for  your  possession  or -trenail* 
Surya,  the  daughter  of  the  Sun.  is  the  consort  of  the  Asvms.  See  1.  116.  1/, 

4 The  Gods'  adorer:  ilevay/th:  literally,  turning  or  going  to  the  Gods,  in 

asmuch  as  it  is  employed  in  prepat  ing  the  Soma  juice.  Ihe  priest:  here, 
perhaps,  the  pressing  stone.  ( 

5 A auickeninq  store  : the  moaning  of  mdhithvantam , which  does  not  occu 
elsewhere,  is  uncertain.  According  to  Sdyana  it  means  a pit  or  cavern . J 
liberated  Atri  from  the  cavern,  or,  literally,  ye  separated  the  cavern  from  AW 
For  the  legend,  see  I.  116.  12. 

6 Which  all  may  gain:  which  you  Asvins  are  ready  to  grant  to  ©verf 
worshipper  who  needs  it.  For  the  story  of  Ghyavdna  seel.  116.  10, 

13;  118.6.  , 

7 Bhujyu : see  Vol.  I , Index.  Your  horse : tliis  meaning  is  suggested 
von  Roth  for  the  uncertain  word  arM,  which  generally  appears  to«£ 
hostile  or  illiberal  ' ut  may  perhaps  stand  in  this  passage  for  arva,  a 
wora  signifying  hor  e.  sfe  I.  Ilf  14  With  horses  b. own  of  hue  that  fl* 
with  »wit't  wings  ye  Lwu^lit  back  Bhujyu  from  the  sea  of  billows,  bee 

VII.  Off.  7. 


hymn  60.]  Tffit  MQVBDA.  6ft 

S Ye  lent  your  aid  to  Vfika  when  exhausted,  and  listened  when 
invoked  to  Sayu’s  calling. 

Ye  made  the  cow  pour  forth  her  milk  like  water,  and,  Asvins, 
strengthened  with  your  strength  the  barren. 

9 With  his  fair  hymns  this  singer,  too,  extols  you,  waking  with 
glad  thoughts  at  the  break  of  morning. 

May  the  cow  nourish  him  with  milk  to  feed  him.  Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  IAIX,  # Asvins. 

M\y  vour  gold  chiriot,  drawn  by  vigorous  horses,  come  to  us, 
blocking  up  the  earth  and  heaven, 

Bright  with  its  fellies  while  its  way  drops  fatness,  food-laden, 
rich  in  coursers,  man’s  protector. 

2 Let  it  approach,  yoked  by  the  will,  three-seate  1,  extending  far 

and  wide  o’er  fivefold  beings, 

Whereon  ye  visit  God-adoring  races,  bending  your  course 
whither  ye  will,  0 Asvins. 

3 Renowned,  with  noble  horses,  come  ye  hither  : drink,  Wond- 

rous Pair,  the  cup  that  h >lds  sweet  juices. 

Your  car  whereon  your  Spouse  is  wont  to  travel  marks  with 
its  track  the  farthest  ends  of  heaven. 

4 When  night  was  turning  to  the  grey  of  morning  the  Maiden, 

Surya’s  Daughter,  chose  your  splendour 
When  with  your  power  and  might  yc  aid  the  pious  he  comes 
through  heat  to  life  by  your  assistance, 
o 0 Chariot-borne,  this  car  of  yours  invested  with  rays  of  light 
comes  harnessed  to  our  dwelling. 

Herewith,  0 Asvins,  while  the  dawn  is  breaking,  to  this  our 
sacrifice  bring  peace  and  blessing, 
f)  Like  the  wild  cattle  thirsty  for  the  lightning,  Heroes,  come 
nigh  this  day  to  our  libations. 

Mon  call  on  you  with  hymns  in  many  places,  but  let  not  other 
worshippers  detain  you. 

8 Vrika  : liter.illy  wolf,  or  robber.  Some  man  so  named  seems  to  be  meant. 
&'.»/« : see  I.  118  8;  VI  13.  5. 

9 Thu  singer:  the  Rishi  Vasishtha.  The  cow : that  is  brought  to  supply 
the  milk  required  for  libations. 

2 Fivefold  beings:  ‘ sarvaprdnhwh*  all  living  beings,  says  S&yana. 

3 Your  Spouse  : SuryA,  daughter  of  the  Sun. 

4 Chose  your  splendour : seel.  116.  17. 

6 Thirsty  for  the  lightning : which  immediately  precedes,  or  accompanies, 
the  raiu  they  long  for. 


70  THE  HYMNS  OF  {BOOR  Vlf, 

1 Bhujyu,  abandoned  in  the  midst  of  ocean,  ye  raised  from  out 

the  water  with  your  horses, 

Uninjured,  winged,  flagging  not,  undaunted,  with  deeds  of 
wonder  saving  him,  0 Asvins, 

8 Now  hear,  0 Youthful  Twain,  mine  invocation  : come,  Asvins, 
to  the  home  where  food  aboundeth. 

Vouchsafe  us  wealth,  do  honour  to  our  nobles.  Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXX.  Asvins. 

Rich  in  all  blessings,  Asvins,  come  ye  hither : this  plane  on 
earth  is  called  your  own  possession, 

Like  a strong  horse  with  a fair  back  it  standeth,  whereon,  as 
in  a lap,  ye  seat  you  firmly. 

2 This  most  delightful  eulogy  awaits  you : in  the  man's  house 

drink-offering  hath  been  heated, 

Which  bringeth  you  over  the  seas  and  rivers,  yoking  as  'twere 
two  well-matched-  shining  horses. 

3 Whatever  dwellings  ye  possess,  0 Asvins,  in  fields  of  men  or 

in  the  streams  of  heaven, 

Resting  upon  the  summit  of  the  mountain,  or  bringing  food 
to  him  who  gives  oblation, 

4 Delight  yourselves,  ye  Gods,  in  plants  and  waters  when  Rishia 

give  them  and  ye  find  they  suit  you. 

Enriching  us  with  treasures  in  abundance  ye  have  looked  back 
to  former  generations. 

5 Asvins,  though  ye  have  heard  them  oft  aforetime,  regard  the 

many  prayers  which  Rishis  offer. 

Come  to  the  man  even  as  his  heart  desireth : may  we  enjoy 
your  most  delightful  favour. 

6 Come  to  the  sacrifice  offered  yon,  Nasatyas,  with  men,  obla- 

tions, and  prayer  duly  uttered. 

Come  to  Vasishtha  as  his  heart  desireth,  for  unto  you  these 
holy  hymns  are  chanted. 

7 Horses  : not  in  the  text,  but  supplied  by  S&yanaand  obviously  understood. 
See  preceding  hymn,  7,  note. 

1 This  place : the  altar. 

2 Drink-offering : gharn^a  : the  libation  of  hot  milk  ; or,  the  caldron  in  which 
it  is  prepared. 

4 Ye  have  looked  back  to  former  generations:  S&yapa  explains  yugStni  diffe- 
rently : ‘ (favour  us)  as  you  have  favoured  former  couples  [».  e.  sacrifices  W 
their  wives].’— Wilson. 

Tin  man : the  institutor  of  the  sacrifice. 


TBB  R1QVEDA . 


11 


jyyfW 

7 This  is  the  thought,  this  is  -the  song,  0 Aevins ; accept  this 
hymn  of  ours,  ye  Steers,  with  favour, 
ftiay  these  our  prayers  addressed  to  you  come  nigh  you. 
Preserve  us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXXI.  Asvins. 

Thb  Night  retireth  from  the  Dawn  her  Sister;  the  Dark  one 
yieldeth  to  the  Red  her  pathway. 

Let  us  invoke  you  rich  in  steeds  and  cattle : by  day  and  night 
keep  far  from  us  the  arrow, 

2 Bearing  rich  treasure  in  your  car,  0 Asvins,  come  to  the 

mortal  who  presents  oblation. 

Keep  at  a distance  penury  and  sickness  ; Lovers  of  Sweetness, 
day  and  night  preserve  us. 

3 May  your  strong  horses,  seeking  bliss,  bring  hither  your 

chariot  at  the  earliest  flush  of  morning. 

With  coursers  yoked  by  Law  drive  hither,  Asvins,  your  car 
. whose  reins  are  light,  laden  with  treasure. 

4 The  chariot,  Princes,  that  conveys  you,  moving  at  daylight, 

triple-seated,  fraught  with  riches, 

Even  with  this  come  unto  us,  Nasatyas,  that  laden  with  all 
food  it  may  approach  us. 

5 Ye  freed  Chyavaua  from  old  age  and  weakness : ye  brought 

the  courser  fleet  of  foot  to  Pedu. 

Ye  rescued  Atri  from  distress  and  darkness,  and  loosed  for 
Jahusha  the  bonds  that  bound  him. 

3 This  is  the  thought,  this  is  the  song,  O Asvins  : accept  this 
hymn  of  ours,  ye  Steers,  with  favour. 

May  these  our  prayers  addressed  to  you  come  nigh  you. 
Preserve  us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXXI1.  Asvins. 

Gome,  0 Nasatyas,  on  your  car  resplendent,  rich  in  abundant 
wealth  of  kine  and  horses. 

As  harnessed  steeds,  all  our  laudations  follow  you  whose  forms 
shine  with  most  delightful  beauty. 

2 Come  with  the  Gods  associate,  come  ye  hither  to  us,  N&satyas, 

with  your  car  accordant. 

Twixt  you  and  us  there  is  ancestral  friendship  and  common 
kin : remember  and  regard  it. 

1 The  Red  : the  Sun.  The  arrow  : of  disease  and  death. 

3 Seeking  bliss : for  men. 

^ For  Chyavdna,  Pedu,  Atri,  and  Jdhnsha , see  Vol.  I.  Index.  There-ap- 
arance,  heralded  by  the  Alvins  or  Gods  of  Twilight,  of  the  departed  Sun 
pears  to  be  symbolized  in  all  these  legends. 


72  Tffti  ItYMtfS  OF  [BOOK  F/| 

3 Awakened  are  the  songs  that  praise  the  Asvins,  the  kindred 

prayers  and  the  Celestial  Mornings. 

Inviting  those  we  long  for,  Earth  and  Heaven,  the  singer 
calleth  these  Nasatyas  hither. 

4 What  time  the  Dawns  break  forth  in  light,  0 Asvins,  to  you 

the  poets  otter  their  devotions. 

God  Savitar  hath  sent  aloft  his  splendour,  and  fires  sing  praises 
with  the  kindled  fuel. 

5 Come  from  the  west,  come  from  the  east,  Nasatyas,  come,  As- 

vins, from  below  and  from  above  us. 

Bring  wealth  from  all  sides  for  the  Fivefold  People.  Preserve 
us  evermoro,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXXIII.  Asvina 

We  have  o’erpassed  the  limit  of  this  darkness  while,  worship. 

ping  the  Gods,  we  sang  their  praises. 

The  song  invoketh  both  Immortal  Asvins,  far-reaching,  born 
of  old,  great  Wonder-Workers. 

2 And,  0 Nasatyas,  man’s  dear  Priest  is  seated,  who  brings  to 

sacrifice  and  offers  worship. 

Be  near  and  taste  the  pleasant  juice,  0 Asvins  : with  food, 

I call  you  to  the  sacrifices. 

3 We  choosing  you,  have  let  our  worship  follow  its  course : ye 

Steers,  accept  this  hymn  with  favour. 

Obeying  you  as  your  appointed  servant,  Yasishtha  singing 
hath  with  lauds  aroused  you. 

4 And  these  Two  Priests  come  nigh  unto  our  people,  united, 

demon-slayers,  mighty-handed. 

The  juices  that  exhilarate  are  mingled.  Injure  us  not,  but 
come  with  happy  fortune. 

5 Come  from  the  west,  come  from  the  east,  NAsatyas,  come,  As- 

vins, from  below  and  from  above  us. 

Bring  wealth  from  all  sides  for  the  Fivefold  People.  Preserve 
us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXX1V.  Asvins.  i 

Tfiese  morning  sacrifices  call  you.  Asvins,  at  the  break  of  day.  I 
For  help  have  I invoked  you  rich  in  power  and  might : for,  ! 
house  by  house,  ye  visit  all. 


5 The  Fivefold  People : the  five  Aryan  tribes.  See  I.  7.  9. 

1 The  first  half-line  has  occurred  before  in  I.  92.  6,  and  183.  0. 

2 Man's  dear  Priest : Agni. 

4 These  Two  Priests : the  Alvins.  t>cm  on  •slayers : slayers  of  RAksh&siw 
evil  spirits  of  the  night  which  disappear  at  the  coming  of  the  heralds  of  day- 


ME  RtGVEDA. 


7S 


\YMtt  75.] 

| 0 Heroes,  ye  bestow  wonderful  nourishment : send  it  to  him 
whose  songs  are  sweet, 

Accordant,  both  of  you,  drive  your  car  down  to  us,  and  drink 
the  savoury  Soma  juice. 

) Approach  ye  and  be  near  to  us:  drink,  0 ye  Asvins,  of  the 
meath. 

t Draw  forth  the  milk,  ye  Mighty,  rich  in  genuine  wealth  : in- 
jme  us  not,  and  come  to  us. 

i The  horses  that  convey  you  in  their  rapid  flight  down  to  the 
worshipper’s  abode, 

With  these  your  speedy  coursers,  Heroes,  Asvins,  come,  ye 
Gods,  come  well-inclined  to  us. 

5 Yea,  verily,  our  princes  seek  the  Asvins  in  pursuit  of  food. 

These  shall  give  lasting  glory  to  our  liberal  lords,  and,  both 
Nasatyas,  shelter  us. 

5 Those  who  have  led  the  way,  like  cars,  offending  none,  those 

who  are  guardians  of  the  men — 

Also  through  their  own  might  the  heroes  have  grown  strong, 
and  dwell  in  safe  and  happy  homes. 

HYMN  LXXV.  Dawn. 

Born  in  the  heavens  the  Dawn  hath  flushed,  and  showing  her 
majesty  is  come  as  Law  ordaineth. 

. She  hath  uncovered  fiends  and  hateful  darkness ; best  of 

i Angirases,  hath  waked  the  pathways. 

? Bouse  us  this  day  to  high  and  happy  fortune  : to  great  felicity, 
0 Dawn,  promote  us. 

j Vouchsafe  us  manifold  and  splendid  riches,  famed  among  mor- 
tals, man-befriending  Goddess  ! 

3 Sec,  lovely  Morning’s  everlasting  splendours,  bright  with  their 
varied  colours,  have  approached  us. 

Filling  the  region  of  mid-air,  producing  the  rites  of  holy  wor- 
ship, they  have  mounted. 

* She  yokes  her  chariot  far  away,  and  swiftly  visits  the  lands 
"'here  the  Five  Tribes  are  settled, 

Looking  upon  the  works  and  ways  of  mortals,  Daughter  of 
Heaven,  the  world’s  Imperia1  Lady. 

3 Draw  forth  the  milk : milk  the  sweet  rain  from  the  firmament. 

b II  ho  have  led  the  way,  like  cars : wealthy  nobles  or  princes,  ‘the  heroes’ of 

‘e  second  line. 

^ * endowed  with  the  noblest  characteristics  of  the  holy 

6 lanes,  Waked  the  “pathways  l litrhted  thorn  for  men  to  use. 


74  THE  HYMNS  OF  IBOOK  F/} 

C She  who  is  rich  in  spoil,  the  Spouse  of  Surya,  wondrousfy 
opulent,  rules  all  wealth  and  treasures. 

Consumer  of  our  youth,  the  seers  extol  her  : lauded  by  priests 
rich  Dawn  shines  out  refulgent. 

6 Apparent  are  the  steeds  of  varied  colour,  the  red  steeds  car- 

rying  resplendent  Morning. 

On  her  all-lovely  car  she  comes,  the  Fair  One,  and  brings  rich 
treasure  for  her  faithful  servant 

7 True  with  the  True  and  Mighty  with  the  Mighty,  with  Gods 

a Goddess,  Holy  with  the  Holy, 

She  brake  strong  fences  down  and  gave  the  cattle  : the  kina 
were  lowing  as  they  greeted  Morning. 

8 0 Dawn,  now  give  us  wealth  in  kine  and  heroes,  and  hors* 

fraught  with  manifold  enjoyment. 

Protect  our  sacred  grass  from  man’s  reproaches.  Preserve 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXXVI.  Dan 

Savitar  God  of  all  men  hath  sent  upward  his  light,  design! 
for  all  mankind,  immortal. 

Through  the  Gods’  power  that  Eye  was  first  created.  Daw 
hath  made  all  the  universe  apparent. 

2 I see  the  paths  which  Gods  are  wont  to  travel,  innocuous  patl 

made  ready  by  the  Vasus. 

Eastward  the  flag  of  Dawn  hath  been  uplifted ; she  hath  com 
hither  o’er  the  tops  of  houses. 

3 Great  is,  in  truth,  the  number  of  the  Mornings  which  wei 

aforetime  at  the  Sun’s  uprising, 

Since  thou,  0 Dawn,  hast  been  beheld  repairing  as  to  thy  lovi 
as  one  no  more  to  leave  him. 

4 They  were  the  Gods’  companions  at  the  banquet,  the  aneieii 

sages  true  to  Law  Eternal. 

The  Fathers  found  the  light  that  lay  in  darkness,  and  will 
effectual  words  begat  the  Morning. 


7 flave  the  rattle : restored  the  rays  of  light  that  had  beeu  imprisoned  k 
the  demons  of  darkness. 

3 As  to  thy  love:  to  the  Sun,  who  is  sometimes  called  the  lover  and  sonw 
times  the  husband  of  Ushas  or  Dawn. 

4 The  Fathers : the  ancestors  of  the  ljUahis  in  the  spirit- world  are  associate 
with  the  Gods  as  companions,  friends,  and  assistants.  See  M.  Muller,  hw 
What  can  it  Teach  us  f pp.  223,  224. 


THE  HIGVEDA . 


75 


YMN  77.] 

Meeting  together  in  the  same  enclosure,  they  strive  not,  of  one 
mind,  one  with  another. 

They  never  break  the  Gods’  eternal  statutes,  and  injure  none, 
in  rivalry  with  Vasus. 

Extolling  thee,  Blest  Goddess,  the  Vasish^has,  awake  at  early 
morn,  with  lauds  implore  thee. 

Leader  of  kine  and  Queen  of  all  that  strengthens,  shine,  come 
as  first  to  us,  O high-born  Morning. 

She  bringeth  bounty  and  sweet  charm  of  voices.  The  flush- 
ing Dawn  is  sung  by  the  Vasishthas, 

: Giving  us  riches  famed  to  distant  places.  Preserve  us  ever- 
more, ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXXVIT.  Dawn. 

She  hath  shone  brightly  like  a youthful  woman,  stirring  to 
motion  every  living  creature. 

Agni  hath  come  to  feed  on  mortals’  fuel.  She  hath  made 
light  and  chased  away  the  darkness. 

5 Turned  to  this  All,  far-spreading,  she  hath  risen  and  shone  in 
brightness  with  white  robes  about  her. 

She  hath  beamed  forth  lovely  with  golden  colours,  Mother  of 
kine,  Guide  of  the  days  she  bringeth. 

i Bearing  the  Gods’  owu  Eye,  auspicious  Lady,  leading  her 
Courser  white  and  fair  to  look  on, 

Distinguished  by  her  beams  Dawn  shines  apparent,  come 
forth  to  all  the  world  with  wondrous  treasure. 

Draw  nigh  with  wealth  and  dawn  away  the  foeman  : prepare 
for  us  wide  pasture  free  from  danger. 

Drive  away  those  who  hate  us,  bring  us  riches  : pour  bounty, 
opulent  Lady,  on  the  singer. 

Send  thy  most  excellent  beams  to  shine  and  light  us,  giving 
us  lengthened  days,  0 Dawn,  0 Goddess, 

Granting  us  food,  thou  who  hast,  all  things  precious,  and 
bounty  rich  in  chariots,  kine,  and  horses. 

0 Ushas,  nobly -born,  Daughter  of  Heaven,  whom  the  Vasish- 
thas  with  their  hymns  make  mighty, 

Bestow  thou  on  us  vast  and  glorious  riches.  Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

5 In  the  same  enclosure : the  vast  aerial  hall  in  which  the  Gods  assemble. 

f, Ag.nt  C0T»*  to  feed  on  mortals’  fuel ; * Agni  is  to  be  kindled  for  the 

od  of  men.’— Wilson. 

r Kine:  rays  of  light. 

P The  Qode ’ own  Eye,  and  Dawn’B  white  Courser  are  the  Sun. 


76  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  V / 

HYMN  LXXVIII.  Da* 

We  have  beheld  her  earliest  lights  approaching  : her  man 
glories  part,  on  high,  asunder. 

On  car  sublime,  refulgent,  wending  hither,  0 Ushas,  bring  tli 
wealth  that  makes  us  happy. 

2 The  fire  well-kindled  sings  aloud  to  greet  her,  and  with  thoi 

hymns  the  priests  are  chanting  welcome. 

Ushas  approaches  in  her  splendour,  driving  all  evil  darkne^ 
far  away,  the  Goddess. 

3 Apparent  eastward  are  those  lights  of  Morning,  sending  on 

lustre,  as  they  rise,  around  them. 

She  hath  brought  forth  Sun,  sacrifice,  and  Agni,  and  far  awai 
hath  fled  detested  darkness. 

4 Rich  Daughter  of  the  Sky,  we  all  behold  her,  yea,  all  men 

look  on  Dawn  as  she  is  breaking. 

Her  car  that  moves  self-harnessed  hath  she  mounted,  the  car 
drawn  onward  by  her  well-yoked  horses. 

5 Inspired  with  loving  thoughts  this  day  to  greet  thee,  we  and 

our  wealthy  nobles  have  awakened. 

Show  yourselves  fruitful,  Dawns,  as  ye  are  rising.  Preserve 
us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXXfX. 

Rousing  the  lands  where  men’s  Five  Tribes  are  settled,  Dawn 
hath  disclosed  the  pathways  of  the  people. 

Site  hath  sent  out  her  sheen  with  beauteous  oxen.  The  Son 
with  light  hath  opened  earth  and  heaven. 

2 They  paint  their  bright  rays  on  the  sky’s  far  limits : the 

Dawns  come  on  like  tribes  arrayed  for  battle. 

Thy  cattle,  closely  shutting  up  the  darkness,  asSavitar  spreadij 
his  arms,  give  forth  their  lustre. 

3 Wealthy,  most  like  to  Indra,  Dawn  hath  risen,  and  brought 

forth  lauds  that  shall  promote  our  welfare. 

Daughter  of  Heaven,  a Goddess,  she  distributes,  best  of  Anp 
ra3es,  treasures  to  the  pious. 


1 Five  Tribes:  of  Aryans  Pathways:  pathy'A  here  has  apparent  y 
same  meaning  as  in  VII.  75.  1.  But  according  to  the  Pada  text  and  ; ■ 
it  is  an  adjective  agreeing  with  UsMh  (Dawn),  and  nignifying  beneficial. 

2 They : the  Dawns.  For  battle : supplied  by  S&yaua. 

3 Best  of  Angirases : see  VII.  75.  1.  j 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


77 


MN  81.] 

Bestow  on  us,  0 Dawn,  that  ample  bounty  which  thou  didst 
send  to  those  who  sang  thy  praises ; 

Thou  whom  with  bellowings  of  a bull  they  quickened  : thou 
didst  unbar  the  firm-set  mountain’s  portals. 

Impelling  every  God  to  grant  his  bounty,  sending  to  us  the 
charm  of  pleasant  voices, 

Vouchsafe  us  thoughts,  for  profit,  as  thou  breakest.  Preserve 
us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LX XX.  Dawn. 

The  priests,  Vasishthas,  are  the  first  awakened  to  welcome 
Ushas  with  their  songs  and  praises, 

Who  makes  surrounding  regions  part  asunder,  and  shows  ap- 
parent all  existing  creatures. 

(living  fresh  life  when  she  hath  hid  the  darkness,  this  Dawn 
hath  wakened  there  with  new-born  lustre. 

Youthful  and  unrestrained  she  cometh  forward  : she  hath 
turned  thoughts  to  Sun  and  fire  and  worship. 

May  blessed  Mornings  shine  on  us  for  ever,  with  wealth  of 
kino,  of  horses,  and  of  heroes, 

Streaming  with  all  abundance,  pouring  fatness.  Preserve  us 
evermore,  yo  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXXXI.  Dawn. 

Advancing,  sending  forth  her  rays,  the  Daughter  of  the  Sky 

is  seen. 

Uncovering,  that  we  may  see,  the  mighty  gloom,  the  friendly 
Lady  makes  the  light. 

Ihe  Suu  ascending,  the  refulgent  Star,  pours  down  his  beams 
together  with  the  Dawn. 

0 Dawn,  at  thine  arising,  and  the  Sun's,  may  we  attain  the 
share  allotted  us.  * 

Promptly  we  woke  to  welcome  thee,  0 Ushas,  Daughter  of 
the  Sky,  • 

Thee,  Bounteous  One,  who  bringest  all  we  long  to  have,  and  to 
the  offerer  health  and  wealth. 


k1H\  IV, a r *v  * rof-  Wilson  : ‘ thou  whom  (thy  worship- 

riMj  welcomed  with  clamour  (loud  as  th>  bellowing)  of  a bull.’ 


1 ^u>  second  line  is  translated  by  Prof. 
iHj  welcomed  with  clamour  (loud  as  tto 

/ art  ah : the  doors  of  the  mountain  or  cloud  in  which  the  cows  or  rays  of 

L LUfha3  iB  imphcation  entreated  to  open  these  doors 

r 01  Llle  singer  of  the  hymn. 


^'>^?Sun/:ndAKnir«:Vlir'78Wi3h  S4ya?tt’  h*th 

3 This  stanza  is  repeated  from  VII.  41.  7. 


n THIS  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  V/} 

4 Thou,  dawning,  workest  fain  to  light  the  great  world,  yea, 

heaven,  Goddess  ! that  it* may  be  Been. 

We  yearn  to  be  thine  own,  Dealer  of  Wealth  : may  we  be  to 
this  Mother  like  her  sons. 

5 Bring  us  that  wondrous  bounty,  Dawn,  that  shall  be  famed 

most  far  away. 

What,  Child  of  Heaven,  thou  hast  of  nourishment  for  man, 
bestow  thou  on  us  to  enjoy. 

6 Give  to  our  princes  opulence  and  immortal  fame,  and  strength 

in  herds  of  kiue  to  us. 

May  she  who  prompts  the  wealthy,  Lady  of  sweet  strains,  may 
Uslias  dawn  our  foes  away. 


HYMN  LXXXIL  Indra-Varuna, 

Grant  us  your  strong  protection,  Indra-Varuna,  our  people, 
and  our  family,  for  sacrifice. 

May  we  subdue  in  fight  our  evil-hearted  foes,  him  who  attach 
the  man  stedfast  in  lengthened  rites. 

2 0 Indra-Varuna,  mighty  and  very  rich  ! One  of  you  is  called 

Monarch  and  One  Autocrat. 

All  Gods  in  the  most  lofty  region  of  the  air  have,  0 ye  Steers, 
combined  all  power  and  might  in  you. 

3 Ye  with  your  strength  have  pierced  the  fountains  of  the  floods: 

the  Sun  have  ye  brought  forward  as  the  Lord  in  heaven. 
Cheered  by  this  magic  draught  ye,  Indra-Varuna,  made  the  dry 
places  stream,  made  songs  of  piaise  flow  forth. 

4 In  battles  and  in  frays  wo  ministering  priests,  kneeling  upon 

our  knees  for  furtherance  of  our  weal, 

Invoke  you,  only  you,  the  Lords  of  twofold  wealth,  you  prompt 
to  hear,  we  bards,  0 Indra-Varuna. 

5 0 Indra-Varuna,  as  ye  created  all  these  creatures  of  the  world 

by  your  surpassing  might,  , , 

In  peace  and  quiet  Mitra  waits  on  Varuna,  the  Other,  aw  11 , 
with  the  Maruts  seeks  renown. 


« Lady  of  sweet  strains:  sdnrMmdi:  according  to  SHyana,  ‘speaker  »f 
truth.’  ‘ Possessing  all  that  is  excellent.’— Ludwig. 

2 One  of  you ; Varuna  is  called  samrUj  or  universal  ruler  (thoroughly  » 
splendent,  according  to  Styana),  and  ludra  svarS},  independent  ruler, 
according  to  S&yana,  self-resplendent. 

4 Twofold  wealth  : celestial  and  terrestrial. 

5 Waite  on  Varuna:  and  so  acknowledges  his  supremacy 
ludra. 


The  Otter : 


i 


THE  RIQVEDA. 


79 


WN  83.) 

That  Varuna’s  high  worth  may  shine  preeminent,  these  Twain 
have  measured  each  his  proper  power  and  might. 

The  One  subdueth  the  destructive  enemy;  the  Other  with  a 
few  furthereth  many  a man. 

No’  trouble,  no  misfortune,  Indra-Varuna,  no  woe  from  any 
side  assails  the  mortal  man 

Whoso  sacrifice,  0 Gods,  ye  visit  and  enjoy  : ne'er  doth  the 
crafty  guile  of  mortal  injure  him. 

With  your  divine  protection,  Heroes,  come  to  us  : mine  invo- 
cation hear,  if  ye  be  pleased  therewith. 

Bestow  ye  upon  us,  0 Indra-Varuna,  your  friendship  and  your 
kinship  and  your  favouring  grace. 

In  battle  after  battle,  Indra-Varuna,  be  ye  our  Champions,  ye 
who  are  the  peoples’  strength, 

When  both  opposing  bands  invoke  you  for  the  fight,  and  men 
that  they  may  gain  offspring  and  progeny. 

May  Iudra,  Varuna,  Mitra,  and  Aryaman  vouchsafe  us  glory 
and  great  shelter  spreading  far. 

We  think  of  the  beneficent  light  of  Aditi,  and  Savitar’s  song 
of  praise,  the  God  who  strengthens  Law. 

HYMN  LXXXIII.  Indra- Vanina. 

Looking  to  you  and  your  allianco,  0 ye  Men,  armed  with 
Irroad  axes  they  went  forward,  fain  for  spoil. 

ife  smote  and  slew  his  Dasaand  his  Aryan  enemies,  and  helped 
Sudfts'  with  favour,  Indra-Varuna. 

Where  heroes  come  together  with  their  banners  raised,  in  the 
encounter  wire  re  is  naught  for  us  to  love, 

Where  all  things  that  behold  the  light  are  terrified,  there  did 
ye  comfort  us,  0 Indra-Varuna. 

The  boundaries  of  earth  were  seen  all  dark  with  do»st  : 

^ 0 Indra-Varuna,  the  shout  went  up  to  heaven. 

I he  enmities  of  the  people  compassed  me  about.  Ye  heard 
my  calling  and  ye  came  to  me  with  help. 

The  One : Varuna. 


*7  **  praised  by  the  Vasishthas,  the  family  priests1  of  Sud As, 

° the  Tiitsus,  for  having  given  him  the’victory  over  the  ten  confederate 
*■  bee  VII.  33.  3. 

; or  Heroes;  India  and  Varuna.  Armed  Dith  broad  axes: 
inir  iql  ^ f ^cTdes.’— Wilson.  Ludwig  maintains  thut  the  former 
Pn tii  perte,cty  impossible,  and  argues  that  prithupth  favah  muAfc  metfn 
1 f‘thu8  and  the  ParSufc.’ 

? fnr  io  l°ve:  Prof.  Grassmann,  whom  Prof.  Peterson 
8’  explains  differently  : f whdre  all  thAt  U dear  is  at  stake.’ 


80  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  F]j 

4 With  your  resistless  weapons,  Indra-Varuna,  ye  conquer^ 

Bheda  and  ye  gave  Sudas  your  aid. 

Ye  heard  the  prayers  of  these  amid  the  cries  of  war:  effectual 
was  the  service  of  the  Tritsus’  priest. 

5 0 Indra-Varuna,  the  wickedness  of  foes  and  mine  assailants’ 

hatred  sorely  trouble  me. 

Ye  Twain  are  Lords  of  riches  both  of  earth  and  heaven:  jo 
grant  to  us  your  aid  on  the  decisive  day. 

6 The  men  of  both  the  hosts  invoked  you  in  the  fight,  Indr» 

and  Varuna,  that  they  might  win  the  wealth, 

What  time  ye  helped  Sudas,  with  all  the  Tritsu  folk,  when  the 
Ten  Kings  had  pressed  him  down  in  their  attack. 

7 Ten  Kings  who  worshipped  not,  0 Indra-Varuna,  confederate, 

in  war  prevailed  not  o’er  Sudas. 

True  was  the  boast  of  heroes  sitting  at  the  feast : bo  at  their 
invocations  Gods  were  on  their  side. 

8 0 Indra-Varuna,  ye  gave  Sudas  your  aid  when  the  Ten  Kingi 

in  battle  compassed  him  about, 

There  where  the  white  robed  Tritsus  with  their  braided  hair, 
skilled  in  song  worshipped  you  with  homage  and  with  hymn, 

9 One  of  you  Twain  destroys  the  Vritras  in  the  fight,  the  Other 

evermore  maintains  his  holy  Laws. 

We  call  on  you,  ye  Mighty,  with  our  hymns  of  praise.  Vouch* 
safe  us  your  protection,  Indra-Varuna. 

10  May  India,  Varuna,  Mitra,  and  Aryaman  vouchsafe  us  gloij 
and  great  shelter  spreading  far. 

We  think  of  the  beneficent  light  of  Aditi,  and  Savitar’s  song 
of  praise,  the  God  who  strengthens  Law. 

HYMN  LXXXIV.  Indra-Varuin 

Kings,  Indra-Varuna,  I would  turn  you  hither  to  this  our 
sacrifice  with  gifts  and  homage. 

Held  in  both  arms  the  ladle,  dropping  fatness,  goes  of  itscii 
to  you  whose  forms  are  varied. 

2 Dyaus  quickens  and  promotes  your  high  dominion  who  biM 
with  bonds  not  wrought  of  rope  or  cordage. 

Far  from  us  still  be  Varuna’s  displeasure  : may  Iudra  gi?e» 
spacious  room  to  dwell  in.  

4 Bheda  : see  VII.  18,  19.  , 

6 both  of  earth  and  heaven  : or,  perhaps,  belonging  to  both  Bides. 

8 W ith  their  braided  hair ; see  VII  33.  I- 

10  This  stanza  is  repeated  from  the  preceding  hymn. 

2 Dyaut:  of.  VI.  62.  9.  Not  wrought  of  rope:  moral  and  figuratiM,* 
material* 


THE  RJOVEDA. 


81 


1 1YMN  85.] 

L Make  ye  our  sacrifice  fair  amid  the  assemblies : make  ye  our 
' prayers  approved  among  our  princes. 

May  God-sent  riches  come  for  our  possession  : further  ye  us 
with  your  delightful  succours. 

[ 0 Indra-Varuna,  vouchsafe  us  riches  with  store  of  treasure, 
food,  and  every  blessing; 

For  the  Aditya,  banisher  of  falsehood,  the  Hero,  dealetU 
wealth  in  boundless  plenty. 

5 May  this  my  song  reach  Varuna  and  Tndra,  and,  strongly 

urging,  win  me  sons  aud  offspring. 

I To  the  Gods'  banquet  may  we  go  with  riches.  Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXXXV.  Indra-Varuna. 

Foil  you  I deck  a harmless  hymn,  presenting  the  Soma  juice 
to  Varuna  and  Indra — 

A hymn  that  shines  like  heavenly  Dawn  with  fatness.  May 
they  be  near  us  on  the  march  and  guard  us. 

I Here  where  the  arrow's  fall  amid  the  banners  both  hosts  invoke 
the  Gods  in  emulation. 

0 indra- Varuna,  smite  back  those  our  foemen,  yea,  smite  them 
with  your  shaft  to  every  quarter. 

) Self-lucid  in  their  seats,  e'en  heavenly  Waters  endowed  with 
Godhead  Varuna  and  Indra. 

One  of  these  holds  the  folk  distinct  and  sundered,  the  Other 
smites  and  slays  resistless  foemen. 

I Wise  be  the  priest  and  skilled  in  Law  Eternal,  who  with  his 
sacred  gifts  and  adoration 

Brings  you  to  aid  us  with  your  might,  Adityas:  let  him  have 
viands  to  promote  his  welfare. 

6 May  this  my  song  reach  Varuna  and  Indra,  and,  strongly 
i urging,  win  me  sons  and  offspring. 

To  the  Gods'  banquet  may  wo  go  with  riches.  Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

4 The  Aditya:  Varuna. 

1 On  the  march : the  Rishi  prays  for  ai ' in  an  expected  battle. 

3 With  Godhead : libations  of  Soma  juice,  with  which  water  is  mingled, 
pport  the  (tods  in  their  several  stations  : somcndpyrtyitrt  hi  devatdh  sve  w 
Mne’vatishthante. — Sftyana.  Distinct  and  sundered:  differently  treated,  re- 
irded  or  punished  in  accordance  with  their  deserts.  ‘The  other  sustains 
e ^parate  creatures.' — Muir.  ‘The  one  protects  the  tribes  which  are  scat- 
red  abioad.’-—  Grassmann. 

4 Mae  be  the  priest:  or,  wise  mufifc  the  priest  be,  skilled,  etc.  He:  the 
(stitutor  of  sacrifice.  Viands  : sacrificed  food  to  be  offered  to  the  Gods. 


£2  THE  HYMNS  OF  [ BOOK  Vll 

HYMN  LXXXVI.  Varur*. 

Wise,  verily,  are  creatures  through  his  greatness  who  stayed 
even  spacious  heaven  ami  earth  asunder ; 

Who  urged  the  high  and  mighty  sky  to  motion,  the  Star  of 
old,  and  spread  the  earth  before  him. 

2 With  mine  own  heart  I commune  on  the  question  how  Varuna 

and  I may  be  united. 

What  gift  of  mine  will  he  accept  unangcred  ? When  may  I 
calmly  look  and  find  him  gracious? 

3 Fain  to  know  this  my  sin  I question  others : I seek  the  wise, 

0 Varuna,  and  ask  them. 

This  one  same  answer  even  the  sages  gave  me,  Surely  thi, 
Varuna  is  angry  with  thee. 

4 What,  Varun-i,  hath  been  my  chief  transgression,  that  thou 

wouldst  slay  the  fiieud  who  sings  thy  praises  ? 

Tell  me,  Unconquerable  Lord,  and  quickly  sinless  will  I ap- 
proach thee  with  mine  homage. 

5 Free  us  from  sins  committed  by  our  fathers,  from  those  where- 

in we  have  ourselves  offended. 

0 King,  loose,  like  a thief  who  feeds  the  cattle,  as  from  the 
cord  a calf,  set  free  Vasishtha. 

6 Not  our  own  will  betrayed  us,  but  seduction,  thoughtlessness, 

Varuna  ! wine,  dice,  or  anger. 

The  old  is  near  to  lead  astray  the  younger:  even  sleep  removeth 
not  all  evil-doing. 

7 Slavelike  may  I do  service  to  the  Bounteous,  serve,  free  from 

sin,  the  God  inclined  to  anger. 

This  gentle  Lord  gives  wisdom  to  the  simple : the  wiser  God 
leads  on  the  wi>e  to  riches. 

8 0 Lord,  0 Varuna,  may  this  laudation  come  close  to  thee  and 

lie  within  thy  spirit. 

May  it  be  well  with  us  in  rest  and  labour.  Preserve  us  ever- 
more, ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 


1 The  Star  • the  Sun. 

5 Like  a thief  who  feeds  the  cattle  : who  has  performed  penance  for  his  theft, 

and,  at  the  completion  of  the  service,  offered  fodder  to  the  stolen  animal : ‘who 

has  feasted  on  stolen  cattle.’— M,  Muller.  But  see  Pischel,  Vedische  Studien, 

I.  p.  106. 

6 Seduction : or,  as  Slyana  explains,  * the  settled  course  of  fate.’ 

The  old  is  near : ‘ The  stronger  perveits  the  weaker.’ — Muir.  1 * * * * 6 There  w® 
senior  [God]  in  the  proximity  of  the  junior  [man].’— Wilson. 


mftf  87.] 


THE  MOVE  DA. 


83 


HYMN  LXXXVII.  Varuna. 

Varuna  cut  a pathway  out  for  Surya,  and  led  the  watery  floods 
of  rivers  onward 

The  Marcs,  as  in  a race,  speed  on  in  order.  Ho  made  great 
channels  for  the  days  to  follow. 

2 The  wind,  thy  breath,  hath  sounded  through  the  region  like 

a wild  beast  that  seeks  his  food  in  pastures. 

Within  these  two,  exalted  Earth  and  Heaven,  0 Varuna,  are 
all  the  forms  thou  lovest. 

3 Varuna’s  spies,  sent  forth  upon  their  errand,  survey  the  two 

world-halves  well  formed  and  fashioned. 

Wise  are  they,  holy,  skilled  in  sacrifices,  the  furtherers  of  the 
praise-songs  of  the  prudent. 

4 To  me  who  understand  hath  Varuna  spoken,  the  names  borne 

by  the  Cow  are  three  times  seven. 

The  sapient  Cod,  knowing  the  place’s  secret,  shall  speak  as 
’twere  to  teach  the  race  that  cometh. 

5 On  him  three  heavens  rot  and  are  supported,  and  the  three 

earths  are  there  in  sixfold  order. 

The  wise  King  Yanina  hath  made  in  heaven  that  Golden  Swing 
to  cover  it  with  glory. 

6 Like  Varuna  from  heaven  he  sinks  in  Sindhu,  like  a white- 

shining  spark,  a strong  wild  creature. 

Killing  in  depths  and  meting  out  the  region,  great  savincr 
power  hath  lie,  this  world’s  Controller.  ° 

1 The  Mares:  the  swift  iher.s.  The  half-line  is  difficult.  ‘ Hasten  in  g~(to 
s h'»rse  let  lno  e rushes  to  (a  Hock  of)  mares,  he  divided  the  great 

ght*  from  the  days  ’—Wilson.  ‘ Like  a troop  (of  horses)  let  loose,  following 
1H  lie  lias  made  great,  channels  for  the  days  ’—Muir. 

3 lanrna  s spies  ‘ the  other  Adityas,  or  perhaps  the  Fathers, 

4 The  Cow:  according  to  Siyana,  V,U  or  Speech  in  the  form  of  a cow 

lV,nK  twenty-one  metres  attached  to  her  breast,  throat,  and  head,  or  holding 

e n imes  of  twenty-one  kinds  of  sacrifice.  Aditi  may  be  intended,  or  Piisni 

ith  the  thrioe-seven  Maruts.  ' ' 

lh,  s' t pi  at  Cod:  ‘ The  wise  god.  though  he  knows  them,  has  not  revealed 

c mysteries  of  (her)  place,  which  he  desires  to  grant  to  a future  generation.’ 

mr.  According  to  Sayan  a.  nd  in  this  line  is  not  negative. 

•»  For  the  three  heavens  and  three  em  ths  sec  Vol.  J , Index.  In  sixfo'd  order 

1 ups  inferring  to  the  heavens  and  earths,  or  else  the  three  earths  arbitrarily 
. ' The  three  earths  with  their  ix  seasons ’—Wilson.  That  Golden 

UTI-  the  Sun. 

He:  th*  Sun.  Sindhu:  or  the  sea.  Haling  in  depths:  referring  to 

min, i whose  dominion,  following  the  setting  sun,  reaches  to  the  depths  of 

v no  ” ?nt  Hie  region  : or,  who  measured  out  the  firmament. 

inin1 * 3 4 * * * * * * * * * * * * * 1 8 !nterP''etati°n  °f  this  stanza  is  different:  ‘(Radiant)  as  the  sun, 
a placed  the  ocean  (in  its  bed),  white  as  a drop  (of  water),  vigorous  as 

,Wn  object  of  profound  praise,  distributor  of  water,  the  powerful 
■porter  beyond  sin,  the  ruler  of  this  existing  (world).’ — Wiison, 


84  THE  HYMNS  OF  [ BOOK  Vll, 

7 Before  this  Varuna  may  we  be  sinless — him  who  shows  mercy 
even  to  the  sinnor — 

While  we  are  keeping  Aditi’s  ordinances.  Preserve  us  ever^ 
more,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXXXVIII,  Varuna, 

Present  to  Vanina  thine  hymn,  Vasishtha,  bright,  most  de> 
lightful  to  the  Bounteous  Giver, 

Who  bringeth  on  to  us  the  Bull,  the  lofty,  the  Holy,  laden 
with  a thousand  treasures. 

2 And  now,  as  I am  come  before  his  presence,  I take  the  face  of 

Varuna  for  Agni’s. 

So  might  he  bring — Lord  also  of  the  darkness — the  light  in 
heaven  that  I may  see  its  beauty ! 

3 When  Varuna  and  I embark  together  and  urge  our  boat  into 

the  midst  of  ocean, 

We,  when  we  ride  o’er  ridges  of  the  waters,  will  swing  within 
that  swing  and  there  be  happy. 

4 Varuna  placed  Vasishtha  in  the  vessel,  and  doftly  with  his 

might  made  him  a Uishi. 

When  days  shone  bright  the  Sage  made  him  a singer,  while 
the  heavens  bioadened  and  the  Dawns  were  lengthened. 

5 What  hath  become  of  those  our  ancient  friendships,  when 

without  enmity  we  walked  together  ? 

I,  Vanina,  thou  glorious  Lord,  have  entered  thy  lofty  home, 
thine  house  with  thousand  portals. 

6 If  lie.  thy  true  ally,  hath  sinned  against  thee,  still,  Varuna, 

he  is  the  Mend  thou  lovedst. 

Let  us  not,  Living  One,  as  sinners,  know  thee  : give  shelter, 
as  a Sage,  to  him  who  lauds  thee, 


7 Aditi's  ordinances  • according  to  Suyana,  Aditi  here  means  ‘the  Mighty/ 
that  is,  Varuna. 

1 The  Bull:  the  Suu, 

2 For  AynVs:  that  is,  it  appears  to  mo  to  be  flaming  with  anger, 

3 ‘ The  kernel  of  the  hymn  lies  in  verses  3 to  0.  The  singer  believes  that 
Lt*  has  been  forsaken  by  his  helper  Varuna ; with  anguish  ho  romembers  hi* 
communion  with  the  God  in  former  times.  In  a vision  he  sees  himself  tr-ms- 
kited  into  Varuna’s  realm,  he  goes  sailing  with  the  God,  is  called  to  be 

or  holy  singer  to  tho  God,  and  is  in  his  palace  with  him,  Now,  Varuna 
withdrawn  his  favour,  yet  let  him  have  mercy  on  his  singer,  and  not  pun^1 2 3 
him  so  grievously  for  his  sin.  The  hymn  perhaps  originally  closed  with  verso 
6.’  — Prof,  von  ltoth’s  note  in  the  Siebcutiy  Lieder , translated  by  Pr°*' 
Peteiv-pa.  But  see  Hillebrandt,  Varuna  und  Mitra , pp.  25,  20. 


jmW  90.]  THJS  RIQVEDA.  «5 

7 While  we  abide  in  these  fixed  habitations,  and  from  the  lap  of 
Aditi  win  favour  , 

May  Varuna  untie  the  bond  that  binds  us.  Preserve  us  ever- 
more, ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXXXlN.  Varura. 

Let  me  not  yet,  King  Vanina,  enter  into  the  house  of  clay  : 
Have  meicy,  spare  me,  Mighty  Lord. 

2 When,  Thunderer ! I move  along  tremulous  like  a wind-blown 

skin 

Have  mercy,  spare  me,  Mighty  Lord* 

3 0 Bright  and  Powerful  God,  through  want  of  strength  I erred 

and  went  astray : 

Have  mercy,  spare  me,  Mighty  Lord. 

{ Thirst  found  thy  worshipper  though  he  stood  in  the  midst  of 
water-floods : 

Have  mercy,  spare  me,  Mighty  Lord* 

5 0 Vanina,  whatever  the  offence  may  he  which  we  as  men  com- 
mit against  the  heavenly  host, 

When  through  our  want  of  thought  we  violate  thy  laws, 
punish  us  not,  0 God,  for  that  iniquity. 

HYMN  XG.  V&yu, 

To  you  pure  juices,  rich  in  meath,  are  offered  by  priests  through 
longing  for  the  Pair  of  Heroes. 

Drive,  Vayu,  bring  thine  harnessed  horses  hither : drink  the 
pressed  Soma  till  it  make  thee  joyful. 


7 Aditi:  here  said  to  mean  earth* 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Dr.  Muir  0 . S.  Text s,  V.  67,  Prof.  M. 
biller,  Ane.  Sand’.  Lit.,  540,  the  authors  of  Sicbenzig  Lieder , p.  12,  and  Prof, 
‘eterson,  JFymm  from  the  Rigveda , p.  287. 

1 The  house  of  clay : the  grave.  Cf.  Atharva-veda,  V.  30.  14. 

2 Thunderer:  adrivah , Carter  of  the  Stone,  a common  epithet  of  Indra, 
'<ifc  not  suitable  to  Varuna.  Tremulous:  Sfty.uia  adds  mitycna r,  with  cold; 
n,l  Prof.  Wilsou  observes  that  ‘the  V urima-p<Ha , a kind  of  dropsy,  seems  to 
)c  »eferred  to.’  Cf.  Atharva-vcda,  IV.  16  7. 

4 Thirst:  avarice.  Jn  the  midst  of  water  foods : when  surrounded  by 
ihimdant  wealth.  According  to  the  Commentator,  the  allusion  is  to  Vasish- 
iha’s  sea- voyage ; or  perhaps  the  perpetual  thirst  of  dropsy  may  be  intended. 

The  last  three  stanzas  are  addressed  to  Indra  and  Vftyu  as  a dual  Deity. 

2 The  Pair  of  Heroes : Ihdra  and  \ Avu. 


56  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Vli 

2 Whoso  to  thee,  the  Mighty,  brings  oblation,  pure  Soma  unt( 

thee,  pure-drinking  Vayu, 

That  man  thou  makcst  famous  among  mortals  : to  him  strong 
sons  are  born  in  quick  succession. 

3 The  Clod  whom  both  these  worlds  brought  forth  for  riches, 

whom  heavenly  Dhishana  for  our  w ealth  appointeth, 

His  team  of  harnessed  horses  waits  on  Vayu,  and,  foremost,  on 
the  radiant  Treasure-bearer. 

4 The  spotless  Dawns  with  fair  bright  days  have  broken ; they 

found  the  spacious  light  when  they  were  shining. 

Eagerly  they  disclosed  the  stall  of  cattle  : floods  streamed  for 
them  as  in  the  days  aforetime. 

5 These  with  their  truthful  spirit,  shining  brightly,  move  on 

provided  with  their  natural  insight. 

Viands  attend  the  car  that  beareth  Heroes,  your  car,  ye  Sovran 
Pair,  India  ami  Vayu. 

C May  these  who  give  us  heavenly  light,  these  rulers,  with  gifts 
of  kine  and  horses,  gold  and  treasures, 

These  pimces,  through  full  life,  lndra  and  Vayu!  oercome 
in  battle  with  their  steeds  and  heroes. 

7 Like  coursers  seeking  fame  will  we  Vasishthas,  0 lndra- \ ;iyu. 
with  our  fair  laudations, 

Exerting  all  our  power  call  you  to  aid  us.  Preserve  us  ever- 
more, ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XCI.  VAyn. 

Were  not,  in  sooth,  the  Gods  aforetime  blameless,  whose 
pleasure  was  increased  by  adoration ! 

Fur  Vayu  and  fur  man  in  bis  affliction  they  caused  the  Morning 
to  arise  with  SQrya. 

3 The  God  : apparently,  lndra  Dhishand : a Ooddess  of  prosperity  and 
gain.  The  radiant  Treasure  bearer' : perhaps  Sonia. 

4 They  found:  the  Angirases.  ‘They  are  not  named  in  the  text,  but 
S&yaiu  refers  the  whole  to  them  ; by  their  praise  of  \6yu  the  dawn  bi ohe, 
the  stolen  cattle  weie  rescued,  and  the  obstructed  rain  set  at  liberiy.  - 
Wilson. 

5 These:  the  institutors  of  sacrifice. 

6 These  riders,  these  princes,  are  the  wealthy  nobles  who  defray  the  expenses 
and  reward  the  priests. 

lndra  is  associated  with  Vdyu  in  almost  every  stanza. 

1 For  Vdyu:  I translate  the  vdydre  of  the  text,  but  it  is  evident 
dydve,  for  Ayu,  or  the  living  one,  should  be  read  in  its  stead. 


THE  RIOVEDA. 


87 


HYMN  92.3 

2 Guardians  infallible,  eager  as  envoys,  preserve  us  safe  through 

many  months  and  autumns. 

. Addressed  to  you,  our  fair  praise,  ludra-Vayu,  implores  your 
favour *and  renewed  well-being. 

3 Wise,  bright,  arranger  of  his  teams,  he  seeketh  men  with  rich 

food  whose  treasures  are  abundant. 

They  have  arranged  them  of  one  mind  with  Vayu  : the  men 
have  wrought  all  noble  operations. 

4 So  far  as  native  power  and  strength  permit  you,  so  far  as  men 

behold  whose  eyes  have  vision, 

‘ 0 ye  pure-driukers,  drink  with  us  pure  Soma:  sit  on  this 
sacred  grass,  Indra  and  Vayu. 

5 Driving  down  teams  that  bear  the  lovely  Heroes,  hitherward, 

IndiM-Vayu,  come  together. 

To  you  this  prime  of  savoury  juice  is  offered  : here  loose  your 
horses  and  be  friendly-minded. 

C Your  hundred  and  your  thousand  teams,  0 Indra  and  Vayu, 
all-muniticent,  which  attend  \ou, 

With  these  most  gracious-minded  come  ye  hither,  and  drihk, 
0 Heioes,  of  the  meath  we  offer. 

7 Like  coursers  seeking  fame  will  we  Vasishthas,  0 Indra-Vayu* 
with  our  fair  laudations, 

Exerting  all  our  power,  call  you  to  aid  us.  Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XCII.  ' vayu. 

0 Vayu,  drinker  of  the  pure,  bo  near  us  : a thousand  teams 
are  thine,  All-bounteous  Giver. 

To  thee  the  rapture-bringing  juice  is  offered,  whose  first 
draught,  God,  thou  takest  as  thy  portion. 

2 Prompt  at  the  holy  rites  forth  came  the  presser  with  Soma- 

dr.iiiglits  for  India  and  for  Vavu, 

Vlieu  minUtemig  priests  with  strong  devotion  bring  to  you 
Twain  the  first  taste  of  the  Soma. 

3 Hie  teams  wherewith  thou  seekest  him  who  offers,  within  his 
home,  0 Vayu,  to  direct  him, 

1 herewith  send  wealth  to  us  with  full  enjoyment,  a hero  son 

aud  gifts  of  kine  and  horses. 


3 He  seekrth:  VAyu.  The  meaning  of  the  stanza  is  obscure. 
5 The  Lovely  Heroes : Indra  and  VAyu. 

1 Drinker  of  th * i — a 


83  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Vtj. 

4 Near  to  the  Gods  and  making  Iudra  joyful,  devout  and  offer. 

ing  precious  gifts  to  Vayu, 

Allied  with  princes,  smiting  down  the  hostile,  may  we  with 
heroes  conquer  foes  in  battle. 

5 With  thy  yoked  teams  in  hundreds  and  in  thousands  come  to 

our  sacrifice  and  solemn  worship. 

Come,  Vayu,  make  thee  glad  at  this  libation.  Preserve  m 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XCIII.  India -A** 

Slaters  of  enemies,  Indra  aud  Agni,  accept  this  day  our  new. 
born  pure  laudation. 

Again,  again  I call  you  prompt  to  listen,  best  to  give  quickly 
strength  to  him  who  craves  it. 

2 For  ye  were  strong  to  gain,  exceeding  mighty,  growing  toge- 

ther, waxing  in  your  vigour. 

Lords  of  the  pasture  filled  with  ample  riches,  bestow  upon  u, 
strength  both  fresh  and  lasting. 

*3  Yea  when  the  strong  have  entered  our  assembly,  and  singer, 
seeking  with  their  hymns  your  favour, 

They  are  like  steeds  who  come  into  the  race-course,  thw 
men  who  call  aloud  oil  Indra-Agui. 

4 The  singer,  seeking  with  his  hymns  your  favour,  bogs  splen- 

did riches  of  their  first  possessor. 

Further  us  with  new  bounties,  Indra-Agni,  armed  with  strong 
thunder,  slayers  of  the  foeman. 

5 When  two  gieat  hosts,  arrayed  against  each  other,  meet 

clothed  with  brightness,  in  the  fierce  encounter 
Stand  ye  beside  the  godly,  smite  the  godless;  and  still  assist 
the  men  who  press  the  Soma. 

G To  this  our  Soma-pressing,  Indra-Agni,  come  ye  prepared  to 
show  your  loving-kindness, 

For  not  at  any  time  have  ye  despised  us.  So  may  I draff 
you  with  all  strengthenings  hither. 

7 So  Agni,  kindled  mid  this  adoration,  invite  thou  Mitra, 
Varuna,  and  Indra. __ 

4 Allied:  the  priests  are  the  allies  and  moral  supporters  of  the  prince 
in  war. 

5 In  hundreds  and  in  thousands : cf.  I.  135.  3. 

3 The  strong : the  nobles  who  institute  sacrifices. 

4 Their  first  possessor : each  God  who  is  invoked. 

5 Great  hosts:  'hosts’  must  be  supplied.  The  feminine  dual  adjective 
have  no  substantive  in  the  text. 


THE  RIOVEDA. 


89 


{YEN  94.) 


Forgive  whatever  sin  we  have  committed  : may  Aryaman  and 
Aditi  remove  it* 


8 While  we  accelerate  these  our  sacrifices,  may  we  win  strength 
from  both  of  you,  0 Agni  : 

fle’er  may  the  Maruts,  India,  Vishnu  slight  us.  Preserve  ns 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blesssngs. 

HYMN  XCIV.  Indra-Agni. 

As  rain  from  out  the  cloud,  for  you,  Iudra  and  Agni,  from 
my  soul  " ° 

This  noblest  praise  hath  been  produced. 

2 Do  ye,  0 Indra-Agni,  hear  the  singer’s  call.'  accept  his  songs. 
Ye  llulers,  grant  his  heart’s  desire. 

3 Give  us  not  up  to  poverty,  ye  Heroes,  Indra-Agni,  nor 
To  slander  and  reproach  of  men. 

4 To  Indra  and  to  Agni  we  bring  reverence,  high  and  holy  hymn, 
And,  craving  help,  soft  words  with  prayer. 

5 For  all  these  holy  singers  here  implore  these  Twain  to  succour 

them, 

And  priests  that  they  may  win  them  strength. 

G Eager  to  laud  you,  we  with  songs  invoke  you,  bearingsacred  food* 
Fain  for  success  in  sacrifice. 

7 Indra  and  Agni,  com^  to  us  with  favour,  ye  who  conquer  men  : 
Let  not  the  wicked  master  us* 


8 At  no  time  let  the  injurious  blow  of  hostile  mortal  fall  on  us  : 
0 Indra-Agni,  shelter  us. 

9 Whatever  wealth  we  crave  of  you,  in  gold,  in  cattle,  or  in 

steeds, 

That,  Indra-Agni,  let  us  gain ; 

0 When  heroes  prompt  in  worship  call  Iudra  and  Agni,  Lords 

of  steeds, 

Beside  the  Soma  juico  effused. 

1 Call  hither  with  the  song  and  lauds  those  who  best  slay  the 

mermen,  those 

Whotako  delight  in  hymns  of  praise, 
lural ryamaa  aml  Aditi : Mitra  and  others  being  understood,  as  the  verb  is 
8 0 Agni : that  is,  Indra  and  Agni. 

°f  \8  coPioU3  ‘m  flow,  and  Is  doubly  bene* 

Ul:  uuitimnnnh  . 0 ? "“‘I  brillSm£  blessings  to  the  worshipper.  From  i ny 

ig  pas,s,n,0  of  * ®*Plftlne(I  hy  the  Commentator  here  and  in  the  correspond- 
11  cun  } -A  t e SAmaveda  by  stotuh,  praiser  or  worshipper. 

Mdsatah  A'_?fh_Lu,dwif;  ,in  r?aaiuS  aviv&tato,  instead  of 


90  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  V/} 

12  Slay  ye  the  wicked  man  whose  thought  is  evil,  of  the  demon 
kind. 

Slay  him  who  stays  the  waters,  slay  the  Serpent  with  yo^ 
deadly  dart. 

HYMN  XCY.  Sarasvati, 

This  stream  Sarnsvati  with  fostering  current  comes  forth,  our 
sure  defence,  our  fort  of  iron. 

As  on  a car,  the  flood  flows  on,  surpassing  in  majesty  anj 
might  all  other  waters. 

2 Pure  in  her  course  from  mountains  to  the  ocean,  alone  of 

streams  Sarasvati  hath  listened. 

Thinking  of  wealth  and  the  great  world  of  creatures,  she 
poured  for  Nahusha  her  milk  and  fatness. 

3 Friendly  to  man  he  grew  among  the  women,  a strong  young 

Steer  amid  the  Holy  Ladies. 

He  gives  the  fleet  steed  to  our  wealthy  princes,  and  decks 
their  bodies  for  success  in  battle. 

4 May  this  Sarasvati  be  pleased  and  listen  at  this  our  sacrifice, 

auspicious  Lady, 

When  we  with  reverence,  on  our  knees,  implore  her  close  knit 
* to  wealth,  most  kind  to  those  she  loveth. 

5 These  offerings  have  ye  made  with  adoration  : say  this,  Saras- 

vati.  and  accept  our  praises; 

And,  placing  us  under  thy  dear  protection,  may  wo  approach 
thee,  as  a tree,  for  shelter. 

6 For  thee,  0 Blest  Sarasvati,  Vasishtha  hath  here  unbarred  the 

doors  of  sacied  Order. 

Wax,  Bright  One,  and  give  strength  to  him  who  lauds  thee. 
Preserve  us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

12  Him  who  stays  the  waters:  udmlhim : according  to  SAyana,  like  aa 
udmlhih.  water-holder  or  pitcher.  The  Serpent : A bhoydm,  ‘ the  coder,’  explained 
differently  by  SAyana,  as  ‘one  who  enjoys  good  things  taken  fiom  tin 
worshippers.’ 

1 Sarasvati : Sindhu  or  Indus  appears  to  be  intended  under  this  nun* 
See  VI.  61.  2,  and  Vulic  Hymns,  I.  p.  60. 

2 Ndhusha : according  to  the  legend,  a King  who  prayed  to  Sarasvati  * j 
gave  him  butter  and  milk  sufficient  for  the  thousand-year  sacrifice  vv  ia' 
was  about  to  perform.  The  Nahushas,  the  people  living  on  the  banks  o 
river,  are  probably  intended. 

3 He  grew:  Saras vAn,  the  consort  of  Sarasvati. 

5 These  offerings  : this  half-line  is  very  obscure.  Prof.  Ludwig  think® ^ 
these  words  may  be  supposed  to  be  spoken  by  Sarasvati  to  her  worslnj’PL 
but  he  is  not  satisfied  of  the  correctness  of  his  conjecture.  1 2 3 Presen  ns 
thee  S , these  oblations  with  reverence  (nmy  we  receive  from  thee  ftfnue 
' — Wils-m. 


YMN  97.] 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


91 


HYMN  XCVI.  SauBTHtl. 

I sing  a lofty  song,  for  she  is  mightiest,  most  divine  of  Streams. 
Saras vati  will  J exalt  with  hymns  and  lauds,  and,  0 Vasishtha, 
Heaven  and  Earth. 

2 When  in  the  fulness  of  their  strength  the  Purus  dwell,  Beau- 
teous One,  on  thy  two  grassv  banks, 

Favour  us  thou  who  hast  the  Maruts  for  thy  friends  •:  stir  up 
the  bounty  of  our  chiefs. 

^ So  may  Sarasvati  auspicious  send  good  luck;  she,  rich  in  spoil, 
i is  never  niggardly  in  thought, 

When  praised  in  Jainadagni's  way  and  lauded  as  Vasishtha 
lauds. 

i We  call  upon  Saras  van,  as  unmarried  men  who  long  for  wives, 
As  liberal  men  who  yearn  for  sons. 

5 Be  thou  our  kind  protector,  0 Sarasvati,  with  those  waves  of 
thine 

Laden  with  sweets  and  dropping  oil. 

5 May  we  enjoy  Sarasvan’s  breast,  all-beautiful,  that  swells  with 
streams, 

May  we  gam  food  and  progeny. 

HYMN  XCVII.  Brihaspati. 

Where  Heaven  and  Earth  combine  in  men’s  assembly,  and 

1 those  who  love  the  Gods  delight  in  worship, 

Where  the  libations  are  effused  for  Indi  a,  may  he  come  first 
to  drink  and  make  him  stronger. 

2 We  crave  the  heavenly  grace  of  Gods  to  guard  us — so  may 

Brihaspati,  0 friends,  exalt  us — 

That  he,  the  Bounteous  God,  may  find  us  sinless,  who  giveth 
from  a distance  like  a father. 

1 Heaven  and  Earth  : heaven  as  the  home  of  the  Goddess,  and  earth  where 
e nows  as  a river. 

’."V  ""  Aryan  tiibe  settled  on  both  banks  of  the  Sarasvati  or 
i i l”  Index'  Gra™U  banks : this,  as  von  Roth  has  .suggested, 

° n of  '^nihasl  but  the  expression  is  difficult.  See 

1 ebrandt,  Vcdische  Mythologie , p 254. 

■ Jui)ut<-l«yni : u celebrated  ancient  liishi. 


Ji  * ,t  >e  tle,lfcy  ?,f  stanza  3>  Illdia  and  Brnhmanaspati  are  the  deities  of 
ilmnuk H uT  BPhasPatl  of  ]0»ft“<l  die  lest  of  the  hymn  is  addressed  to 
id  0f  p'  Brlh{wpati  and  Brahmanaspati  are  one  and  the  same  God,  the 
1 irk  L 14.  3. 

sacvZ  Uwve*  an<i  f '“»•<*  combine : where  Gods  and  men  meet  at  the  piaoe 
(lay  hwV.«.!»?' u 6 hlm  3t"JI“Jer  Sft.'ana  explains  niyafcka  differently  : 
? Like  r (hor8ei>  approach).’— Wilson  1 

ilier  wliu  10  tn>er ’ ^bough  f«r  aw»y  he  gives  us  what  we  ask  like  a 
« near  at  nantl  — T.nriuri» 


92  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  Vi 

3 That  Brahmanaspati,  most  High  and  Gracious,  I glorify  wjt 

offerings  and  with  homage. 

May  the  great  song  of  praise,  divine,  reach  Indra  who  its  tj 
King  of  prayer  the  Gods’  creation. 

4 May  that  Brihaspati  who  brings  all  blessings,  most  dear] 

loved,  be  seated  by  our  altar. 

Heroes  and  wealth  we  crave  ; may  he  bestow  them,  and 
us  safe  beyond  the  men  who  vex  us. 

5 To  us  these  Deathless  Ones,  erst  born,  have  granted  this  lan 

of  ours  which  gives  the  Immortal  pleasure. 

Let  us  invoke  Brihaspati,  the  foeless,  the  clear-voiced  God, tli 
Holy  One  of  households. 

6 Him,  this  Brihaspati,  his  red-hued  horses,  drawing  togothe 

full  of  strength,  bring  hither. 

Rohed  in  red  colour  like  the  cloud,  they  carry  the  Lord i 
Might  whose  friendship  gives  a dwelling. 

7 For  he  is  pure,  with  hundred  wings,  refulgent,  with  sword < 

gold,  impetuous,  winning  sunlight. 

Sublime  Brdiaspati,  easy  of  access,  grantefch  his  friends  ino 
bountiful  refreshment. 

8 Both  Heaven  and  Earth,  divine,  the  Deity’s  Parents,  hat 

made  Brihaspati  increase  in  grandeur. 

Glorify  him,  0 friends,  who  merits  glory  : may  ho  give  pray 
fair  way  and  easy  passage. 

0 This,  Brahmannspati,  is  your  laudation  : prayer  hath  bei 
made  to  thunder-wielding  India. 

Favour  our  songs,  wake  up  our  thought  and  spirit ; destri 
the  godless  and  our  foemen’s  malice. 

10  Ye  Twain  are  Lords  of  wealth  in  earth  and  heaven,  thou, 
Brihaspati,  and  thoit,  0 Indra. 

Mean  though  he  be,  give  wealth  to  him  who  lauds  }": 
Preserve  us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings* 


3 The  God*'  creation : devakfdasya  i inspired,  or,  literally,  made,  b}T  * 

5 Our  hymns  of  praise  which  arc  acceptable  to  the  immortal 
been  given  to  us  by  the  everlasting  deities  themselves.  SAyana  s c.\p 
is  different : ‘ may  the  first-born  immortals  (by  liis  command)  bestow  } 
the  food  that  is  necessary  for  existence.’— Wilson. 

6 Whole  friendship  gives  a dwelling : I adopt  the  interpretation  g;v 
Professor  Cowell  in  his  note  on  the  passage  in  Wilson’s  translation. 

7 With  hundred  wings : ‘ borne  by  numerous  con veyanoes.*— Wils^11' 

8 In  grandeur  t or,  by  their  might. 

1 n Mean  • nr.  nmr. 


*MN  99,]  THE  RIQVEDA , 93 

HYMN  XCVIII,  indra. 

Priests,  offer  to  the  Lord  of  all  the  people  the  milked-out 
stalk  of  iSoraa,  radiant-coloured. 

No  wild-bull  knows  his  drinking-place  like  Indra  who  ever 
seeks  him  who  hath  pressed  tlie  Soma. 

Thou  dost  desifo  to  drink,  each  day  that  passes,  the  pleasant 
food  which  thou  hast  had  aforetime, 

0 Indra,  gratified  in  heart  and  spirit,  drink  eagerly  the  Soma 
set  before  thee. 


Tli on,  newiy-born,  for  strength  didst  drink  the  Soma  ; the 
Mother  told  thee  of  thy  future  greatness. 

0 Indra,  thou  hast  filled  mid-air’s  wide  region,  and  °riven  the 

Gods  by  battle  room  and  freedom,  ° ' 0 

When  thou  hast  urged  the  arrogant  to  combat,  proud  in  their 
strength  of  arm,  we  will  subdue  them. 

Or,  Indra,  when  thou  tightest  girt  by  heroes,  we  in  the  glori- 
ous fray  with  thoe  will  conquer. 

1 will  declare  the  earliest  deeds  of  Indra,  and  recent  aots 
which  Maghavan  hath  accomplished. 

When  he  had  conquered  godless  wiles  and  magic,  Soma  be- 
came his  own  entire  possession. 

Tlmie  is  this  world  of  flocks  and  herds  around  thee,  which 

^ with  the  eye  of  Surya  thou  beholdest. 

Thou,  Indra,  art  alone  the  Lord  of  cattlo  : may  we  enjoy  the 
treasure  which  thou  givest, 

Ye  Twain  are  Lords  of  wealth  iu  earth  and  heaven,  thou,  O 
bnhnspati,  and  thou,  0 India. 

Mean  though  he  be,  give  wealth  to  him  who  lauds  you. 
1 reserve  us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 


1. , HYMN  XOIX.  VLhnu. 

-li.N  come  not  nigh  thy  majesty  who  groweat  beyond  all  bound 
and  measure  with  thy  body. 

!hf  two  re«iolls  ot'  Hie  earth,  0 Vishim,  we  know  ; thou, 
God,  knowest  the  highest  also.  ’ 


ruddy,  here  explained  by  the  Com- 


tiidmnt-colourcd  : arumm , iod, 

' 0,1  dr»c/iuntdnam,  shining. 

4/t::CuT ; r IV* l8' Am  «*»  ***  *** 

u already,  nor  among  those  who  shall  be  born  hereafter. 

kvvor  Siure ^J10  oarth  aud  the  firmament.  ‘The 
’>».  whiter  be 1 U -It  °fJour  P^^eptiou  ; the  thiid  belongs  to 
lolo,Ji/  Of  the  'Vln  the  fck'rd  "f  hia  amending  strides.’ -Wallis, 


U THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  Vjj 

2 None  who  is  born  or  being  born,  God  Vishnu,  hath  reached 

the  utmost  limit  of  thy  grandeur. 

The  vast  high  vault  of  heaven  hast  thou  supported,  aud  fixed 
earth’s  eastern  pinnacle  securely. 

3 Rich  in  sweet  food  be  ye,  and  rich  in  milch-kine,  with  fertile 

pastures,  fain  to  do  men  service. 

Both  these  worlds,  Vishnu,  hast  thou  stayed  asunder,  ^ 
firmly  fixed  the  earth  with  pegs  around  it.  j 

4 Ye  have  made  spacious  room  for  sacrificing  by  generating 

Sftrya,  Dawn,  and  Agni. 

0 Heroes,  ye  have  conquered  in  your  battles  even  the,  bull, 
jawed  Dasa’s  wiles  and  magic. 

5 Ye  have  destroyed,  thou,  Indra,  and  thou,  Vishnu,  SambarA 

nme-and  ninety  fenced  castles. 

Ye  Twain  smote  down  a hundred  times  a thousand  resistless 
heroes  of  the  royal  Varchin. 

G This  is  the  lofty  hvmn  of  praise,  exalting  the  Lords  of  Mighty 
Stride,  the  strong  and  lofty. 

1 laud  you  in  the  solemn  synods,  Vishnu  : pour  ye  food  on  us 
in  our  camps,  0 Indra. 

7 0 Vishnu,  unto  thee  my  lips  cry  Vaslut  ! Let  this  mine  offer 
ing,  Sipivislita,  please  thee. 

May  these  my  .songs  of  eulogy  exalt  thee.  Preserve  us  ever- 
more, ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  C.  VMinii. 

Ne’er  doth  the  man  repent,  who,  seeking  profit,  bringeth  im, 
gift  to  the  far-striding  Vishnu. 

He  who  adoreth  him^vith  all  his  spirit  winneth  himself  so 
great  a benefactor. 

2  Thou,  Vishnu,  con>tnnt  in  thy  courses,  gavest  good-will  to  all 
men,  and  a hymn  that  lasteth, 

That  thou  nvghtst  move  us  to  abundant  comfort  of  very 
splendid  wealth  with  store  of  horses. 


3 The  first  line  appears  to  be  Vishpu’s  blessing  on  heaven  aud  earth 
be  parted  and  supported  them, 

4 Bull-jawed  : or  Vriuhnsipra  may  be  the  name  of  the  DfUa. 

.r>  Royal  Varchin  ■ see  II.  14.  6.  . I 

7 Vafthal : the  exclamation  used  on  making  an  oblation.  Sipivishta  ■ a n* 
of  Vnhnu  of  uncertain  etymology  and  meaning  ‘ Invested  with  rays  ot  Jig  >i 
according  to  S&yana.  See  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  IV.  87,  88,  note. 

2 A hymn  that  lasteth : continually  recurriug  occasion  to  praise  thee. 


THE  MOVED  A. 


95 


n(N  101.] 

Three  times  strode  forth  this  God  in  all  his  grandeur  over  this 
earth  bright  with  a hundred  splendours. 

Foremost  be  Vishnu,  stronger  than  the  strongest  : for  glorious 
is  his  mime  who  lives  for  ever. 

Over  this  earth  with  mighty  step  strode  Vishnu,  ready  to 
<rj \ e it  for  a home  to  Mann. 

In  him  the  humble  people  trust  for  safety  .*  he,  nobly  born, 
hath  made  them  spacious  dwellings. 

Today  I laud  this  name,  0 Sipivishta,  I,  skilled  in  rules,  the 
name  of  thee  the  Noble. 

Yea,  I the  poor  and  weak  praise  thee  the  Mighty  who  dwellest 
in  the  realm  beyond  this  region. 

What  was  there  to  be  blamed  in  thee,  0 Vishnu,  when  thou 
deelaredst,  I am  Sipivishta! 

Hide  not  this  form  from  us,  nor  keep  it  secret,  since  thou  didst 
vear  ayother  shape  in  battle. 

0 Vishnu,  unto  thee  my  lips  cry  Vushat ! Let  this  mine  offer- 
ing, Sipivishta,  please  thee. 

j May  these  my  songs  of  eulogy  exalt  thee.  Preserve  us 
I evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYV1N  CL  Parjanya. 

Srrc\k'  forth  three  words,  the  words  which  light  precedeth, 
winch  milk  this  udder  that  produceth  nectar. 

Quickly  made  manifest,  the  Bull  hath  bellowed,  engendering 
the  germ  of  plants,  the  Infant. 

Giver  of  growth  to  piant.s,  the  God  who  ruleth  over  the  waters 
and  all  moving  creatures, 

Vouchsafe  us  triple  shelter  for  our  refuge,  and  threefold  light 
to  succour  and  befriend  us. 

^~T!us  earth:  meaning,  says  the  Commentator,  earth,  firmament,  and  heaven. 
'This  stanza  is  unintelligible  The  Commentator  on  the  corresponding 
|fige  of  the  Samaveda  says:  ‘Vishnu  formerly  abandoning  hB  own  form, 
assuming  another  artificial  shape,  succoured  Vasislitha  in  battle,  ltecog- 
ng  the  god,  the  Hishi  addresses  him  with  the  verse  ’ Sipivishta  is  said  to 
t word  of  equivocal  meaning,  ‘ebthed  with  rays  of  light,’  and  ‘denuded.’ 
'h'lns  note,  and  0 S.  Texts , IV.  S'7  88,  vote  The  passage  looks  like 
of  the  later  incarnations  of  the  Cod  which  occur  in  the  Srtapatha - 
»»(<na  and  the  Purdnas.  

'Ihiec  beards : or  texts  of  the  three  Vedas.  Which  Vujht  precedeth : int-ro- 
* jy  , , K ,cred  syllable  Om.  More  probably  Parjanya  is  addressed,  the 
woids  being  his  voice,  the  thunder  (V.  63.  6),  heard  in  heaven,  air,  an<l 
hWw  pleie(vled.  b>T  the,  lightning-flash.  See  Beigaigne,  Qnaravte  IJymves 
V*'.  udder:  drawdown  the  sweet  rain  from  the  cloud. 

Parjanya.  The  Infant:  Agni  in  the  form  of  lightning. 

to  et 'fold  ll fjht with  TP fQi’flnno  +1.^.  . 1 . - 


96  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  p// 

3 Now  he  is  sterile,  now  begetteth  offspring,  even  as  he  willetli 

doth  he  change  his  figure. 

The  Father’s  genial  flow  bedews  the  Mother;  therewith  the 
Sire,  therewith  the  son  is  nourished. 

4 In  him  all  living  creatures  have  their  being,  and  the  three 

heavens  with  triply  flowing  waters. 

Three  reservoirs  that  sprinkle  down  their  treasure  shed  thei 
sweet  streams  around  him  with  a murmur. 

5 May  this  my  song  to  Sovran  Lord  Parjauya  come  near  unt 

his  heart  and  give  him  pleasure. 

May  we  obtain  the  showers  that  bring  enjoyment,  and  God 
protected  plants  with  goodly  fruitage. 

G Ho  is  the  Bull  of  all,  and  their  impregner  ; he  holds  the  lif 
of  nil  things  fixed  and  moving. 

May  this  rite  save  me  till  my  hundredth  autumn.  Preseni 
us  evermoie,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  Cl  I.  Parjanvi 

Sing  forth  and  laud  Parjauya,  Son  of  Heaven,  who  sends  tin 
gift  of  rain  : 

May  he  provide  our  pasturage. 

2 Parjauya  is  the  God  who  forms  in  feme,  in  mares,  in  plants 

of  earth, 

And  womankind,  the  germ  of  life. 

3 Offer  and  pour  into  his  mouth  oblation  rich  in  savoury  juice. 
May  he  for  ever  give  us  food. 

HYMN  Cl II.  Fro, 

They  who  lay  quiet  for  a year,  the  Brahmans  who  fulfil  their  vows, 
The  Frogs  lm\e  lifted  up  their  voice,  the  voice  Parjauya  luth 
inspired. 

3 He  is  sterile  : sends  no  rain,  like  a barren  cow  that  gives  no  milk 

The  Fathers  genial  jl<nn : ‘The  father  is  the  sky,  earth  the  mother,  uhore 
ceives  the  rain  fiom  the  foimei,  which,  piotlueing  the  means  of  offering  lib* 
tions  and  oblations,  returns  again  to  the  parent  heaven,  as  well  as  sup>poits  lia 
otb>p»iug— all  living  creatutes.’ — Wilson. 

4 Three  reservoirs:  according  to  bay  ana,  clouds  in  the  east,  west,  and  north 

6 The  Bull  of  all : the  plants,  understood. 

3 Into  his  mouth : that  is,  Agni,  who  is  the  mouth  by  which  the  other  Godi 
consume  the  otfeiings  that  are  made  to  them. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Dr.  Muir,  0.  S Texts , V.  436,  and  by  ^ 
fessor  F.  Max  Muller  in  his  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature , pp.  494f,  ^ 
remarks:  ‘The  hymn...  .which  is  called  a panegyiic  of  the  frogs,  is 
a satire  on  the  priests  ; and  it  is  curious  to  observe  that  the  same 
Bhould  have  been  ohosen  by  the  Vedic  satirist  to  represent  the  priests,  wOT 
by  the  earliest  satirist  of  Greece,  was  selected  as  the  representative  of  fj 
Homeric  heroes.’  But  see  Oldenberg,  Die  Religion  des  Veda , p.  70.  7® 
hymn  evidently  belongs  to  a late  period  of  Yedic  poetry, 


THE  RIOVEDA . 


|rjfy  103.] 


97 


i What  time  on  these,  as  on  a dry  skin  lying  in  the  pool's  bed 
the  floods  of  heaven  descended,  * 

The  music  of  the  Frogs  comes  forth  in  concert  like  the  cows' 
lowing  with  their  calves  beside  them. 


When  at  the  coming  of  the  Rains  the  water  has  poured  upon 
them  as  they  yearned  and  thirsted,  e 

One  seeks  another  as  he  talks  and  greets  him  with  cries  of 
pleasure  as  a son  his  father. 

Each  of  these  twain  receives  the  other  kindly,  while  they  are 
revelling  in  the  flow  of  waters, 

When  the  Frog  moistened  bv  the  rain  springs  forward,  and 
Green  and  Spotty  both  combine  their  voices. 


When  one  of  these  repeats  the  other's  language,  as  he  who 
learns  the  lesson  of  the  teacher, 

Your  every  limb  seems  to  be  growing  larger  as  ye  converse 
with  eloquence  on  the  waters. 


Due  is  Cow-bellow  and  Goat-bleat  the  other,  one  Frog  is  Green 
and  one  of  them  is  Spotty.  ° 

They  bear  one  common  name,  and  yet  they  vary,  and,  talking, 
modulate  the  voice  diversely.  ‘ 

Ls  Brahmans,  sitting  round  the  brimful  vessel,  talk  at  the 
Soma-rite  of  Atiratra, 

Jo,  Frogs,  ye  gather  round  the  pool  to  honour  this  day  of  all 
the  year,  the  first  of  Rain-time. 

ihese  Brahmans  with  the  Soma  juice,  performing  their  year- 
long rite,  have  lifted  up  their  voices; 

And  these  Adhvaryus,  sweating  with  their  kettles,  come  forth 
and  show  themselves,  aud  none  are  hidden. 

They  keep  the  twelvemonth’s  God-appointed  order,  and  never 
do  the  men  neglect  the  season. 


oHkhaUi  ^ea8ure  4 ukhkhalikritya, : uttering  the  involve  exclama* 
You)  every  limb : this  abrupt  change  of  person  is  -*ot  unfrequent  in  the 


Atir&tra : a cerfemony  accompanied  by  tlire-  nocturnal  recitations. 

ntC  * ‘SAWa  makes  it  ref-f  ^ Oavdm  ayanam,  a sacrificial 

,]]’  . lcjjc°ramences  and  ends  with  atirdtra , and  lasts  a whole  year.’ 

ble  oi  f k8011’8  Translation,  sweating  with  their  kettles : ‘ There  is  a 
ite  Jr  6 W,°rd  yharminah.  having  or  bearing  the  vessel,  or  performiu 
m . jmed  ; or»  sufficing  from  gharma,  lieat,  or  the  hot  season 
b fort  Km  mne  are  Ki(i*n : Titkyd  nd  H chit : some  take  nd  here  as‘  like 
’ M ]VT a i erS°US*  Wh°  hftVG  been  hiddea',~Muir-  ‘ Bop  out  like  her- 

hi?  ”!ln\  t,ie  priestlike  frogs.  These  who  were  heated  kettles:  the  frogs 


Soon  as  the  Rain- time  in  the  year  returneth,  these  who  were 
heated  kettles  gain  their  freedom. 

10  Cow-bellow  and  Goat-bleat  have  granted  riches,  and  Green  and 
Spotty  have  vouchsafed  us  treasure. 

The  Frogs  who  give  ns  cows  in  hundreds  lengtheu  our  lives 
iu  this  most  fertilizing  season. 

HYMN  CIV.  Indra-Son 

Indra  and  Some,  burn,  destroy  the  demon  foe,  send  downwar 
0 ye  Bulls,  those  who  add  gloom  to  gloom. 

Annihilate  the  fools,  slay  them  and  burn  them  up  : chase  the 
away  from  us,  pierce  the  voracious  ones. 

2 Indra  and  Soma,  let  sin  round  tho  wicked  boil  like  as  a caldrt 

set  amid  the  flames  of  fire. 

Against  the  foe  of  prayer,  devourer  of  raw  flesh,  the  vile  fiei 
fierce  of  eye,  keep  ye  perpetual  hate. 

3 Indra  and  Soma,  plunge  tho  wicked  iu  the  depth,  yea,  cn 

them  into  darkness  that  hath  no  support, 

So  that  not  one  of  them  may  ever  thence  return  : so  raayyo 
wrathful  might  prevail  and  conquer  them. 

4 Iudra  and  Soma,  hurl  your  deadly  crushing  bolt  down  on  t 

wicked  fiend  from  heaven  and  from  the  earth. 

Yea,  forge  out  of  the  mountains  your  celestial  dart  wlierowi 
ye  bum  to  death  the  waxiug  demon  lace. 


10  Have  granted  riches  : as  the  earliest  proclaimed  of  the  advent  of  I 
ltaina  which  revive  and  fertilize  the  earth. 

‘ It  is  possibly  an  echo  of  this  production  that  we  find  in  a description 
autumn  in  the  Harivamsa,  V 8803,  where  the  poet  compares  tho  noise  m. 
by  a frog,  after  his  rest  of  sixteen  half  months,  along  with  his  wives,  to 
recitation  of  the  Rig-veda  by  a Brfihm.m  surrounded  by  his  pupils  . , 
this  verse  Un*  late  M.  Langlois  somewhat,  naively  remarks  as  follows : Di 
nos  mueurs  r^n  n’  og.ilerait  1’  impel  Imence  d’  uue  cmnparaison  dans  la<jut 
uno  grenouille  so^t  assimilde  a un  respectable  eccldsiastique.  Les  Indie 
a ce  qu  il  parait.,  in  voyaient  dans  telle  espcce  de  rappiochement  huci 
teinte  d’  impiete.’— Mwr,  U.  6’.  Texts,  V.  433.  But  see  Bergaigne,  La  Rdi<j 
Vedique , I.  202. 

The  hymn  consists  chiefly  of  n»orecat-ions  directed  ngainst  demons  i 
evil  spirits,  R&kahasas  and  Yafcudhdna^  The  deities  are  various. 

1 The  demon  foe  . rdkshuh  ■ the  fiends,  demons,  goblins,  S11 

about  at  night,  disturbing  sacrifices  and  <uVout  men,  ensnaring  amU 
devouring  human  beings,  and  geneially  hostde  u the  human  race. 

2 The  vile  Jicnd  : kimldme:  explained  by  tho  Commentator  as  one' 
goes  about  saying,  Kvnidintm  or  What  now  ? A quidnunc,  a vile 
treacherous  spy  and  informer.  The  word  is  used  as  the  name  of 
evil  spirits. 


r ' ‘ 

f)  Indra  and  Soma,  cast  ye  downward  out  of  Leaven  your  deadly 
darts  cf  stone  burning  with  fiery  flame, 

Eternal,  scorching  darts;  plunge  the  voracious  ones  within  the 
depth,  and  let  them  sink  without  a sound. 

6 Iudra  aud  Soma,  let  this  hymn  control  you  both,  even  as  the 

girth  encompasses  two  vigorous  steeds  — 

The  song  of  praise  which  I with  wisdom  offer  you  : do  ye,  as 
Lords  of  men,  animate  these  my  prayers. 

7 In  your  impetuous  manner  think  ye  both  thereon  : destroy 

these  evil  beings,  slay  the  treacherous  fiends. 

Indra  and  Soma,  lot  the  wicked  have  no  bliss  who  evermore 
assails  us  with  malignity. 

8 Whoso  accuses  me  with  words  of  falsehood  when  I pursue  my 

way  with  guileless  spirit, 

May  he,  the  speaker  of  untruth,  be,  Indra,  like  water  which 
tho  hollowed  hand  compresses. 

9 Those  who  destroy,  as  is  their  wont,  the  simple,  and  with  their 

evil  natures  harm  the  righteous, 

May  Soma  give  them  over  to  the  serpent,  or  to  the  lap  of 
Nirriti  consign  them. 

0 The  fiend,  0 Agni,  who  designs  to  injure  the  essence  of  our 

food,  kiue,  steeds,  or  bodies, 

May  he,  the  adversary,  thief,  and  robber,  sink  to  destruction, 
both  himself  and  offspring 

1 May  he  be  swept  away,  himself  and  children  : may  all  the 

three  earths  press  him  down  beneath  them. 

May  his  fair  glory,  0 \ e Gods,  be  blighted,  who  in  the  day  or 
night  would  fain  destroy  us. 

2 The  prudent  finds  it  easy  to  distinguish  the  true  and  false  : 

their  words  oppose  each  other. 

Of  these  two  that  which  is  the  true  and  honest,  Soma  protects, 
and  brings  the  false  to  nothing. 

3 Never  doth  Soma  aid  and  guide  the  wicked  or  him  who  fairly 

claims  the  Warrior’s  title. 

He  slays  the  fiend  and  him  who  speaks  untruly  : both  lie  en- 
tangled in  the  noose  of  Indra. 

5 Without  a sound:  so  suddenly  that  they  have  ®ot  time  to  cry  out. 

9 To  the  serpent:  or  to  death  by  serpents’  bites.  Nirriti : Death  and 
estruction. 

J3  Tkc  W um’or’s  title:  the  rank  of  a ivsAatriya  or  prince  of  the  military 

‘der. 

Tlie  first  eleven  stanzas  ‘are  considered  to  be  a malediction  upon  the 
wthasuS'  by  the  Rishi.  To  account  for  the  change  of  tone  [in  12 — 16], 
yana  gives  an  unusual  version  of  the  legend  told  in  the  Mahabhdrata  of 


100  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  vn 

14  As  if  I worshipped  deities  ot  falsehood,  or  thought  vain 

thoughts  about  the  Gods,  0 Agni. 

Why  art  thou  angry  with  us,  Jatavedas  i Destruction  fall  on 
those  who  lie  against  thee  ! 

15  So  may  1 die  this  day  if  I have  harassed  any  man’s  life  or  if 

I be  a demon. 

Yea,  may  he  lose  all  his  ten  sons  together  who  with  fal8e 
tongue  hath  called  me  Yatudhana. 

16  May  Indra  slay  him  with  a mighty  weapon,  and  let  the  vilest 

of  all  creatures  perish, 

The  fiend  who  says  that  he  is  pure,  who  calls  me  a demon 
though  devoid  of  demon  nature. 

17  She  too  who  wanders  like  an  owl  at  night-time,  hiding  her 

body  in  her  guile  and  malice, 

May  she  fall  downward  into  endless  caverns.  May  press-stones 
with  loud  ring  destroy  the  demons. 

18  Spread  out,  ye  Maruts,  search  among  the  people  : seize  ye  and 

grind  the  Rakshasas  to  pieces, 

Who  fly  abroad,  transformed  to  birds,  at  night-time,  or  sully 
and  pollute  our  holy  worship. 

19  Hurl  down  from  heaven  thy  bolt  of  stone,  0 Indra : sharpen 

it,  Maghavan,  made  keen  by  Soma. 

Forward,  behind,  and  from  above  and  under,  smite  down  the 
demons  with  thy  rocky  weapon. 

20  They  fly,  the  demon  dogs,  and,  bent  on  mischief,  fain  would 

they  harm  indomitable  Indra. 

Sakra  makes  sharp  his  weapon  for  the  wicked  : now  ht  him 
cast  his  bolt  at  fiendish  wizards. 

21  Indra  hath  ever  been  the  fiends’  destroyer  who  spoil  oblations 

of  the  Gods’  invokeis  : 

Yea,  Sakra,  like  an  axe  that  splits  the  timber,  attacks  and 
smashes  them  like  earthen  vessels.  

king  Kalmcuthapada  being  transformed  to  a Rdkshata,  and  devouring  the  100 
eons  of  Vaaishtha  : here  it  is  said  that  a Jtakshasa , having  > devoured  tue 

FUhi't  sons,  assumed  his  shape,  and  said  to  him,  “ I am  Vasishtha,  t mu  & 
the  Ruleshasa ; ' to  which  Vasishtha  replied  by  repeating  this  verse 
12],  declaratory  discriminating  between  truth  and  falsehood.  Wi^ 

‘ The  verses  may,  as  Professor  Max  Muller  supposes,  have  arisen  outo 
Vasishtha’s  contest  with  Tigv&mitra  [see  III.  53.  21,  note],  and  it  may  a 
been  the  latter  peieonage  wh*  brought  those  charges  of  heresy,  and  of  nj'u‘ 
ous  and  demoniacal  character  agdnst  his  rival  ’—Muir,  0.  S,  Text*,  I.  ’ 
15  Ydtudhdna : explained  by  Styana  as  =»  Rftkshasa.  The  YAfcudhnuap 
bably  was  rather  the  goblin  or  sorcer%r  while  the  KAkshasa  was  the  vio 
and  voracious  ogre.  ,inlI 

17  Here  the  malediction  on  evil  spirits  in  general  is  resumed  ana  cou 
ed  to  the  end  of  the  hymn.  She  too : the  M Jcshast,  or  she  fiend. 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


101 


l\rMN  104.] 

9 Destroy  the  fiend  shaped  like  an  owl  or  owlet,  destroy  him  in 
the  form  of  dog  or  cuckoo. 

Destroy  him  shaped  as  eagle  or  as  vulture  : as  with  a stone, 
0 Indra,  crush  the  demon. 

3 Let  not  the  fiend  of  witchcraft-workers  reach  us:  may  Dawn 

drive  off  the  couples  of  Kimidins. 

Earth  keep  us  safe  from  earthly  woe  and  trouble  : from  grief 
that  comes  from  heaven  mid-air  preserve  us. 

4 Slay  the  male  demon,  Indra ! slay  the  female,  joying  and 

triumphing  in  arts  of  magic. 

Let  the  fools’  gods  with  bent  necks  fall  and  perish,  and  see  no 
more  the  Sun  when  he  arises. 

5 Look  each  one  hither,  look  around  : Indra  and  Soma,  watch 

ye  well. 

Cast  forth  your  weapon  at  the  fiends;  against  the  sorcerers 
hurl  your  bolt. 


23  Kimidins:  or  vile  spirits.  See  note  on  stanza  2. 

24  Fools'  gods  : mftradevdh  : explained  by  S&yana  f\H~mdranah'tddht  1 those 
pho  make  killing  their  sport.’  According  to  the  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon, 
wmda'&h-miUadcvdh,  a species  of  demons  or  goblins. 


BOOK  THE  EIGHTH. 


HYMN  I.  Indra. 

Glorify  naught  besides,  0 friends;  so  shall  no  sorrow  trouble 
yon. 

Praise  only  mighty  Indra  when  the  juice  is  shed,  and  say  your 
lauds  repeatedly  : 

l Even  him,  eternal,  like  a bull  who  rushes  down,  men's  Con- 
queror, bounteous  like  a cow  ; 

Him  who  is  cause  of  both,  of  enmity  and  peace,  to  both  sides 
most  munificent. 

) Although  these  men  in  sundry  ways  invoke  thee  to  obtain 
thine  aid, 

Be  this  our  prayer,  addressed,  O ^ndra,  unto  thee,  thine  exal- 
tation every  day. 

I Those  skilled  in  so>'6>  0 Mnghavan,  among  these  men  o’er- 
como  with  -05"*  tllc  focman’s  songs. 

Conm  knng  us  strength  in  many  a varied  form  most 

near  that  it  may  succour  us. 

i 0 Caster  of  the  Stone,  I would  not  sell  thee  for  a mighty  price, 

Not  for  a thousand,  Thunderer!  nor  ten  thousand,  nor  a 
hundred,  Lord  of  countless  wealth  ! 

1 0 Indra,  thou  art  more  to  me  than  sire  or  niggard  brother  is. 

Thou  and  my  mother,  0 Good  Lord,  appear  alike,  to  give  me 

wealth  abundantly. 

Where  art  thou  ? Whither  art  thou  gone  ? For  many  a 
place  attracts  thy  mind. 

Haste,  Warrior,  Fort-destroyer,  Lord  of  battle’s  din,  haste, 
holy  songs  have  sounded  forth. 

Sing  out  the  psalm  to  him  who  breaks  down  castles  for  his 
faithful  friend, 

Verses  to  bring  the  Thunderer  to  destroy  the  forts  and  sit  oil 
K-inva’s  sacred  grass. 

2 Bounteous  like  a cow : the  adjeet;'c  is  not  in  the  text,  but  must  be  sup- 
p'd order  to  make  the  comparison  intelligible.  See  Vcdische  Btudien,  I. 
3.  To  both  sides:  to  the  singers  and  the  iustitutors  of  sacrifice. 

*>  A hundred:  meaning  ‘infinite,’  according  to  the  Commentator. 

8 For  hi*  faithful  friend  : Ludwig  takes  V&v&tar  to  be  the  name  of  a king 
io  has  been  deserted  by  Indra  and  consequently  defeated  in  battle.  Kdnvu't 
wd  ijrass : trimmed  and  prepared  by  Medh&tithi  and  Medbyfttithi,  each  of 
^om  ia  a son  of  Kanva. 


104  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  F/// 

9  The  Horses  wliich  are  thine  in  tens,  in  hundreds,  yea,  iQ 
thousands  thine, 

Even  those  vigorous  Steeds,  fleet-footed  in  the  course, 
those  come  quickly  near  to  us. 

10  This  day  I call  Sabardugh&  who  animates  the  holy  song, 
Indra  the  richly-yielding  Milch-cow  who  provides  unfailin® 

food  in  ample  stream. 

11  When  Sura  wounded  Etasa,  with  Vata's  rolling  wingM  car 
Indra  bore  Kutsa  Arjuneya  off,  and  mocked  Gandharva  t’ 

unconquered  One. 

12  He  without  ligature,  before  making  incision  in  the  neck, 
Closed  up  the  wouud  ngain,  most  wealthy  Maghavan,  wl 

maketh  whole  the  injured  part. 

13  May  we  ho  never  cast  aside,  and  strangers,  as  it  were,  to  the 
We,  Thunder-wit>vjjn<r  fndra,  count  ourselves  as  trees  reject 

and  unfit  to  burn. 

14  0 Vritra-slayer,  we  were  though  8i0w  ana  unready  for  the  fra 
Yet  once  in  thy  great  bounty  may  have  delight,  0 Her 

after  praising  thee. 

15  If  he  will  listen  to  my  laud,  then  may  our  Somud,.0p8  ^ 

flow 

Rapidly  through  the  strainer  gladden  Indra,  drops  due  to  tl 
Tugryas’  Strengthener. 

16  Come  now  unto  the  common  laud  of  thee  and  of  thy  faithft 

friend. 

So  may  our  wealthy  nobles'  praise  give  joy  to  thee.  Fai 
would  I sing  thine  eulogy. 

17  Press  out  the  Soma  withjthe  stones,  and  in  the  waters  wash 

clean. 


10  Sabardughd  ; the  general  name  of  cows  which  supply  the  milk  require 
for  sacrificial  purposes.  See  VI.  48.  11,  note.  Here  Indra  himself  is  intends 
as  is  shown  in  the  following  line. 

11  Sdra:  Surya,  the  Sun-God.  Wounded:  ‘harassed.’* -Wilson.  Etasv 
protige  of  Indra.  See  Vol.  I , Index.  VdU t:  the  Wind-God.  Kutsa  : see  Vol.I 
Index.  Gandharva : the  Sun.  The  meaning  of  the  stanza  is  Bomewhat  obscuu 

12  Closed  up  the  wound  again : healed  Etasa  who  had  been  wounded  bj 
Surya. 

13  Count  ourselves  as  trees : or,  'count  us  not  as  trees,’  the  meaning  of  m 
'not  ’ and  * like  ’ being  ambiguous. 

15  Due  to  the  Tugryas ’ Strengthener : that  belong  to  Indra  the  protector  ol 
the  chiefs  of  the  race  of  Tugra,  who  appear  to  have  been  the  patrons  of  tw 
Rishis  of  Kanva’s  family. 

10  Faithful  friend : see  stanza  8. 


THE  Rl 0 VEDA. 


105 


IYMN  1.] 

The  men  investing  it  with  raiment  made  of  milk  shall  milk  it 
forth  from  out  the  stems. 

8 Whether  thou  come  from  earth  or  from  the  lustre  of  the  lofty 

heaven, 

Wax  stronger  in  thy  body  through  my  song  of  praise  : fill  full 
all  creatures,  0 Most  Wise. 

9 For  Indra  press  the  Soma  out,  most  gladdening  and  most 

excellent. 

May  Sakra  make  it  swell  sent  forth  with  every  prayer  and  ask- 
ingj  as  it  were,  for  strength. 

[)  Let  me  not,  still  beseeching  thee  with  earnest  song  at  Soma 
rites, 

Anger  thee  like  some  wild  beast.  Who  would  not  beseech 
him  who  hath  power  to  grant  his  prayer  1 

1 The  draught  made  swift  with  rapturous  joy,  effectual  with  its 
mighty  strength, 

All-conquering,  distilling  transport,  let  him  drink  : for  he  in 
ectstasy  gives  us  gifts. 

\ Where  bliss  is  not,  may  he,  All-praised,  God  whom  the  pious 
glorify, 

Bestow  great  wealth  upon  tho  mortal  worshipper  who  sheds 
the  juice  and  praises  him. 

3 Come,  India,  and  rejoice  thyself,  0 God,  in  manifold  affluence. 

Thou  fillest  like  a lake  thy  vast  capacious  bulk  with  Soma 
and  with  draughts  besides. 

1 A thousand  and  a hundred  Steeds  are  harnessed  to  thy  golden 
car. 

So  may  the  long-maned  Bays,  yoked  by  devotion,  bring  Indra 
to  drink  the  Soma  juice. 

0 \okcd  to  thy  chariot  wrought  of  gold,  may  thy  two  Bays 
with  peacock  tails, 

Convey  theo  hither,  Steeds  with  their  white  backs,  to  quaff 
sweet  juice  that  makes  us  eloquent. 


17  From  out  the  sterna : see  VedUehe  Sttudien,  I.  133,  178.  Slyana  explains 
V!n  , \n.°  differently  : « (for  by  so  doim*)  the  leaders  (of  the  rain,  the 

w m sky  with  c,ou<,8)  “ wit,‘  a vesture  of  the  hide  of  tho 

w,  milk  forth  (the  water)  for  the  rivers.’-Wilson. 

tlis^text*™  pibatu, : supplied  by  the  Scholiast  ; there  being  no  verb 

ivlre  e ^ ***  **  nof ! *n  defeat  and  trouble.  But  the  meaning  of 

* ,,lt'e*rUlU'  ‘ Atthe  sacrifice,’  is  SAyana’s  explanation.  Von  Roth  sug. 
23  , tr"aS,,Te  chaQlber.’  I «dopt  Ludwig’s  interpretation. 

’ ,th  dra'l9>M  besides : with  tby  fellow-topers  (the  Maruts).’— Wilson. 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


106 


[BOOK  Vli 


26  So  drink,  thou  Lover  of  the  Song,  as  the  first  drinker,  of  thj, 

juice. 

This  the  outpouring  of  the  savoury  sap  prepared  is  good  and 
meet  to  gladden  thee. 

27  He  who  alone  by  wondrous  deed  is  Mighty,  Strong  by  hoh 

works, 

May  lie  come,  fair  of  cheek ; may  he  not  stay  afar,  but  cook 
and  turn  not  from  our  call. 

28  Sushna's  quick  moving  castle  thou  hast  crushed  to  pieces  wit! 

thy  bolts. 

Thou,  Indra,  from  of  old,  hast  followed  after  light,  since  ws 
have  had  thee  to  invoke.  * 

20  My  praises  when  the  Sun  hath  risen,  my  praises  at  the  time 
of  noon, 

My  praises  at  the  coming  of  the  gloom  of  night,  0 Vasu,  have 
gone  forth  to  thee. 

30  Prahe,  yea,  praise  him.  Of  princes  these  are  the  most  liberal 

of  their  gifts, 

These,  Paiamajya,  Ninditasva,  Prapathi,  most  bounteous,  0 
Medliy.itithi. 

31  When  to  the  car,  by  faph,  I yoked  the  horses  longing  for  the 

way — 

For  skilled  is  Yadu’s  sou  in  dealing  precious  wealth,  he  who 
is  rich  m herds  of  kinc. 

32  May  he  who  gave  me  two  brown  steeds  together  with  their 

cloths  of  gold, 

May  he,  A^anga’s  son  Svanadratha,  obtaiu  all  joy  and  high 
felicities 

26  As  the  first  d>  in  far : ‘ According  to  the  .^clioliast,  purvapdh  me'ins 
who,  having  armed  first  in  the  race,  drank  the  Soma  before  the  other 
The  allusion  is  to  the  principal  yraha  libation,  called  A indrardyara,  "'ucii 
Indra  and  1 'ayu  share  together.’  - WiUoti 

28  Castle:  of  el  >ud.  Followed  after  li/ht : to  find  and  bung  it  brick. 

30  Praise  him  : India  Paiamajyd,  Nindit&sva,  and  Pmpatld  appear  to 
the  names  of  tbe  chiefs  who  at  e praised  for  their  liberality.  Sayana  im’®* 
As.mga  the  speaker  : ‘ Praise  me,  for  we  are  the  most  liberal  giveM  : (pwls 
me  .is  one)  who  bears  the  best  aim  a ( paramajyd),  follows  the  right  pat  n{p 
pathl),  and  oiitstiips  a hois*  in  speed  ( ninditdsra ).’ 

31  The  horses : presented  by  the  prince.  The  sentence  is  incomplete,  i 
Scholiast  supplies  at  the  end  of  the  line  taddnha  evummim  atuhi,  then  P _ 
me  thus  Yadu’i  non  : Asanga,  descendant  of  the  ancient  epoiiymoin 
Yadu.  See  Vol.  I , Index.  Rich  in  herds  of  l ine : pasuh  which 

in  apportion  with  yldrah,  is  hardly  intelligible  here.  Siyana  exp 
pawned  a,  having  blasts  or  cattle,  or  as  a derivative  of  pa  j,  to  M,’e’ e3e  ej. 
ing  one  who  sees  what  is  subtile,  sdkshmatya  drashtd.  Neither  o ^ 
plantations  has  anything  but  Sayana’s  name  to  recommend  it,  but  lap 
former  as  a makeshift. 


TIIE  EIO VEDA. 


W - 


MN  2 ] 

playoga's  son  Asanga,  by  ten  thousand,  0 Agni,  hath  surpass- 
ed the  rest  in  giving. 

For  me  ten  bright-hued  oxen  have  come  forward  like  lotus- 
stalks  from  out  a lake  upstanding. 

What  timo  her  husband’s  perfect  restoration  to  his  lost 
strength  and  manhood  was  apparent, 

His  consort  Sasvati  with  joy  addressed  him,  Now  art  thou 
well,  my  lord,  and  shalt  be  happy. 

HYMN  II.  Indra- 

IIeue  is  the  Soma  juice  expressed;  0 Vasu,  drink  till  thou  art 
full  : 

Undaunted  God,  we  give  it  thee. 

Washed  by  the  men,  pressed  out  with  stones,  strained  through 
the  filter  made  of  wool, 

’Tis  like  a courser  bathed  in  streams. 

This  juice  have  wo  made  sweet  for  thee  like  barley,  blending 
it  with  milk. 

Indra,  I call  thee  to  our  feast. 

Beloved  of  all,  Indra  alone  drinks  up  the  flowing  Soma  juice 
Among  the  Gods  and  mortal  men. 

The  Friend,  whom  not  the  brilliant-hued,  the  badly-mixt  or 
bitter  draught 

Repels,  the  far  extending  God; 

While  other  men  than  we  with  milk  chase  him  as  hunters 
chase  a deer, 

And  with  their  kine  inveigle  him. 

3 Ten  bright  hiv'd  o ten : miming  ten  thousand,  according  to  S-tyatu- 
14  Asmga.  the  King  who->e  liberality,  with  that  of  his  sou  (32),  and  perhaps 
igi.iii'lvms  (30),  has  been  eulogized  in  the  four  preceding  stanzas, ^had,  the 
bid  says,  been  changed  to  a worn m by  the  imprecation  of  the  Gods  and 
pwaids  restored  to  his  manhood  in  consequence  of  his  repentance  and  the 
'cession  of  Medhfitithi  and  Medhy&tithi  whom  he  richly  rewarded.  In  this 
7. i S iRvati  congratulates  him  on  his  restoration.  Professors  Ludwig  and 
vsmaun  have  translated  the  stanza  more  literally. 

0 .*  or,  Good  Lord.  * Giver  of  dwellings,’  according  to  S&yana. 

Strained  through  the  filter  made  of  wool : more  literally,  1 cleansed  by  the 
wool  of  the  sheep,’  the  material  of  . hich  the  sieve,  strainer,  or  filter  used 
clearing  and  purifying  the  Soma  juice  was  made, 

Like  barky  : or,  like  the  sacrificial  cake  made  of  barley-meal. 

Alone  drinks  up : he  alone  is  to  receive  the  entire  libation,  which  other 
b only  share  among  them. 

brilliant-hued:  without  sufficient  mixture  with  milk  to  thicken  it  and 
nge  its  colour.  The  meaning  of  this  and  the  following  stanza  is  : Indra 
fers  our  1 ibations,  imperfectly  prepared  as  they  may  be,  to  the  milk-offering* 
k which  other  meu  endeavour  to  attract  him. 


108  THE  HYMNS  OF  [ BOOK  V}}, 

7 For  him,  for  Indra,  for  the  God,  be  pressed  three  draughty 

Some  juice 

In  the  Juice  drinker’s  own  abode. 

8 Three  reservoirs  exude  their  drops,  filled  are  three  beakers  to 

the  brim, 

All  for  one  offering  to  the  God. 

9 Pure  art  thou,  set  in  many  a place,  and  blended  in  the  mjJ 

with  milk 

And  curd,  to  cheer  the  Hero  best. 

10  Here,  Indra,  are  thy  Soma-draughts  pressed  out  byus,tl 
strong,  the  pure  : 

They  crave  admixture  of  the  milk. 

110  Indra,  pour  in  milk,  prepare  the  cake,  aud  mix  the  Som 
draught : 

I hear  them  say  that  thou  art  rich. 

12  Quaffed  juices  fight  within  the  breast.  The  drunken  praii 

not  by  their  wine, 

The  naked  praise  uot  when  it  rains. 

13  Rich  be  the  praiser  of  one  rich,  munificent  and  famed  like  thee 
High  rank  be  his,  0 Lord  of  Bays. 

14  Foe  of  the  man  who  adds  no  milk,  he  heeds  not  any  cbaute 

hymn 

Or  holy  psalm  that  may  be  sung. 

15  Give  us  not,  Indra,  as  a prey  unto  the  scornful  or  the  proud 
Help,  Mighty  One,  with  power  and  might. 

1G  This,  even  this,  0 Indra,  we  implore : as  thy  devoted  friends 
The  Kanvas  praise  thee  with  their  hymns. 


8 Three  reservoirs:  or  troughs  used  in  the  preparation  of  the  Soma-libaiioui 
They  are  called  severally,  dronakalasn , pdtabkrit , and  ddkavanlya. 

9 In  the  midst : 1 in  the  middle  (of  the  day  ? ).' — Hillebrandt. 

12  This  stanza  breaks  the  connexion  between  stanzas  11  and  13,  andisii 
itself  almost  unintelligible.  Wilsou  paraphrases,  after  Sityana  : ‘ The  |v>taW 
(of  Soma)  coutend  in  thy  interior  (for  thine  exhilaration)  like  the  cbnn 
caused  by  wine  : thy  worshippers  praise  thee  (filled  full  of  Soma)  like 
udder  (of  a cow  with  milk).’  SAyana’s  explanation  of  ncignflh,  naked 
as  worshippers,  stotdmh,  * who  do  not  desert  the  verses  of  the  Veda,1  >s  ot) 
ously  impossible,  u'dhah,  udder,  frequently  means  the  rainy  sky,  an(j  ^ 'u‘ 
have  this  meaning  here  ; so  that  the  sense  of  the  passage  may  possibly 
Ludwig  suggests,  that  neither  great  wealth  nor  abject  poverty  tends  to  ■ ® 
a man  devout.  The  rich  man  when  he  drinks  his  wine  at  home  and  the 
clad  wretch  exposed  to  the  drenching  rain  are  equally  regardless  of  the  1 

13  Rich  be  the  praiser  of  the  rich : this  appears  to  be  the  contiuuation 
* thou  art  rich  ’ of  stanza  11. 

14  Indra  will  not  accept  worship  without  oblation. 


TUN  2.]  THE  RIOVEDA.  109 

Naught  else,  0 Thunderer,  have  I praised  in  the  skilled  singer’s 
eulogy : 

On  thy  laud  only  have  I thought. 

The  Gods  seek  him  who  presses  out  the  Soma;  they  desire 
not  sleep  : 

They  punish  sloth  unweariedly. 

Come  hither  swift  with  gifts  of  wealth— be  not  thou  an^rv 
with  us — like  ° J 

A great  man  with  a youthful  bride. 

Let  him  not,  wrathful  with  us,  spend  the  evening  far  from 
us  to-day, 

Like  some  unpleasant  son-in-law. 

For  well  we  know  this  Hero’s  love,  most  liberal  of  the  boons 
he- gives, 

His  plans  whom  the  three  worlds  display. 

Pour  forth  the  gift  which  Kanvas  bring,  for  none  more  glorious 
do  we  know  ® 

Than  the  Strong  Lord  with  countless  aids. 

0 prosser,  offer  Soma  first  to  Indra,  Hero,  Sakra,  him 

The  Friend  of  man,  that  he  may  drink; 

Who,  in  untroubled  ways,  is  best  provider,  for  his  worshippers 

Of  strength  in  horses  and  in  kine.  ’ 

Pressers,  for  him  blend  Soma  juice,  each  draught  most  excel- 
lent, for  him 

The  Brave,  the  Hero,  for  his  joy. 

fho  Vritra-slayer  drinks  the  juice.  May  he  who  gives  a hun- 
dred aids 

Approach,  nor  stay  afar  from  us. 

Hay  the  strong  Bay  Steeds,  yoked  by  prayer,  bring  hither 
unto  ns  our  Friend, 

Lover  of  Song,  renowned  by  songs. 

iwcot  are  tire  Soma  juices,  come!  Blent  are  the  Soma  juices, 
come ! 

Rishi-like,  mighty,  fair  of  cheek,  come  hither  quickly  to  the 
feast. 


■f  man  ;.th®  ®xact  meaning  of  maMn,  great,  is  not  certain.  SAyana 

. I1  9uV<MradhiJcah,  eminent  on  account  of  liis  good  qualities.  ‘ Be 

as  tul,  like  the  ardent  husbaud  of  a new  bride.’ — Wilson.  ‘ Like  a rich 
newly  married,' — Grassm&nn. 


Like  some  unpleasant  son-in-law : who  sees  that  his  company  is  unwel- 
consequently  stays  at  home.  * 

Firntto  Indra:  see  VIII.  1.  20.  Saha : India,  the  Mighty  One. 


THE  HYMNS  OP 


no 


[BOOK  Vli 


29  And  lauds  which  strengthen  thee  for  great  bounty  and  valoni 

and  exalt 

India  who  doeth  glorious  deeds, 

30  And  songs  to  thee  who  lovest  song,  and  all  those  Ly^ 

addressed  to  thee— 

These  evermore  confirm  thy  might. 

31  Thus  he,  sole  doer  of  great  deeds  whose  hand  holds  thunder 

gives  us  strength,  ' 

He  who  hath  never  been  subdued. 

- 32  Vritra  he  slays  with  his  right  hand,  even  Indra,  great  v1’1 
mighty  power, 

And  much-invoked  in  many  a place. 

33  He  upon  whom  all  men  depend,  all  regions,  all  achievements 
Takes  pleasure  in  our  wealthy  chiefs. 

31  All  this  hath  he  accomplished,  yea,  Indra,  most  gloriou 
renowned, 

Who  gives  our  wealthy  princes  strength. 

35  Who  drives  his  chariot  seeking  spoil,  even  from  afar,  to  h 

he  loves  : 

For  swift  is  he  to  bring  meu  wealth. 

36  The  Sage  who,  winning  spoil  with  steeds,  slays  Vritra,  He 

with  the  men, 

His  servant’s  faithful  succourer. 


37  0 Priyamedhas,  worship  with  collected  mind  this  Indra  who 
The  Soma  hath  full  well  inspired. 

38  Ye  Kanvas,  sing  the  Mighty  One,  Lord  of  the  Brave,  wl 

loves  renown, 

All-present,  glorified  by  song. 

39  Strong  Friend,  who,  with  no  trace  of  feet,  restores  the  cattl 

to  the  men 

Who  rest  their  wish  and  hope  on  him. 

40  Shaped  as  a Ram,  Stone-hurler ! once  thou  earnest  hither tf 

the  son 

Of  Kanva,  wise  Medhyatithi. 


34  All  this  hath  he  accomplished:  the  slaughter  of  Vritra  and  other gr^ 
deeds  ; or,  he  made  all  these  eieatures. 

36  The  Sage  Indra  With  the  men  : accompanied  by  the  Maruts. 

37  Priyamedhas : membete  of  the  family  of  one  of  the  RishU. 

39  With  no  trace  of  fed:  without  tracking  the  lost  cattle  (the  rays  oi  iig^ 
by  their  footsteps. 

40  Shaped  as  a Ram:  sea  I.  51.  1.  The  legend  ia  told  iu  the 
Brdhmana , 1.1. 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


Ill 


tMN  3.] 

Vibhiudu,  thou  bust  helped  this  nmu,  giviug  him  thousands 
four  times  ten, 

And  afterward  eight  thousand  more. 

And  these  twain  pouring  sti earns  of  milk,  creative,  daughters 
of  delight, 

For  wedlock  sake  I glorify. 

HYMN  TIL  Indra. 

Dkink,  Indra,  of  the  savoury  juice,  and  cheer  thee  with  our 
milky  draught. 

Be,  for  our  weal,  our  Friend  and  sharer  of  the  feast,  and  let 
thy  wisdom  guard  ns  well. 

: in  thy  kind  grace  and  favour  may  we  still  be  strong  : expose 
us  not  to  foe’s  attack. 

With  manifold  assistance  guard  and  succour  us,  and  bring  U3 
to  felicity.  *** 

1 May  these  my  songs  of  praise  exalt  thee,  Lord,  who  hast 
abundant  wealth. 

Men  skilled  m holy  hymns,  pure,  with  the  hues  of  fire,  have 
sung^hem  with  their  lauds  to  thee. 

[ He,  with  his  might  enhanced  by  lvishis  thousandfold,  hath 
like  an  ocean  spread  himself. 

His  majesty  is  praised  as  true  at  solemn  rites,  his  power  where 
holy  singers  rule. 

> India  for  worship  of  the  Gods,  Indra  while  sacrifice  proceeds, 
Indra,  as  worshippers  in  battle-shock,  we  call,  India  that  we 
may  win  the  spoil. 

3 With  might  hath  Indra  spread  out  heaven  and  earth,  with 
power  hath  Indra  lighted  up  the  Sun. 

In  Indra  are  all  creatures  closely  held;  in  him  meet  the 
distilling  Soma-drops. 

1 Men  with  their  lauds  are  urging  thee,  Indra,  to  drink  the 
Soma  first. 

The  Kibhus  in  accord  have  lifted  up  their  voice,  and  Rudras 
sung  thee  as  the  first. 

41  Vibhindu:  the  prince,  the  institutor  of  the  sacrifice. 

42  The  stanza  is  obscure,  the  ineanin^  of  mUt,  a feminine  dual  which  S&ynna 

tplaina  by  nirmdtryau , maker's  or  creators,  *.  e.  heaven  and  earth,  being  un- 
p'tain.  Sdyana’s  paraphrase  of  the  stanza  is  : ‘ I glorify  these  two  (heaven  and 
h'th),  the  auginentet'8  of  water,  the  originators  (of  beings),  the  benefactors  of 
Mi  worshipper,  cm  account  of  their  generation  (of  the  wealth  so  giveu  to  me).* 
r Wilson  

1 3 the  hues  of  jive:  or,  radiant  as  Agni. 

1 ^ Ribhus  : as  deities  connected  with  the  seasons  which  are  regulated  by 
e Suu  whom  Indra  has  caused  to  shine. 


112  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  F///( 

8 Indra  increased  bis  manly  strength  at  sacrifice,  in  the  wi ty 

rapture  of  this  juice. 

And  living  men  to-day,  even  as  of  old,  sing  forth  their  praia^ 
to  his  majesty. 

9 I crave  of  thee  that  hero  strength,  that  thou  mayst  firs) 

regard  this  prayer, 

Wherewith  thou  holpest  Bhrigu  and  the  Yatis  and  Iraskanvi 
when  the  prize  was  staked. 

10  Wherewith  thou  sentest  mighty  waters  to  the  sea,  that,  Indra 

is  thy  manly  strength. 

For  ever  unattainable  is  this  power  of  him  to  whom  the  world 
have  cried  aloud. 

11  Help  us,  0 Indra,  when  we  pray  to  thee  for  wealth  and  her 

might.  _ . . . 

First  help  thou  on  to  strength  the  man  who  strives  to  wit 
and  aid  our  laud,  0 Ancient  One. 

12  Help  for  us,  Indra,  as  thou  holpest  Paura  once,  this  ir.au' 

devotions  bent  on  gain. 

Help,  as  thou  gavest  Rusama  and  Syavaka  and  Svarnaiaan 
Kripa  aid. 

13  What  newest  of  imploring  prayers  shall,  then,  the  zealou 

mortal  sing  1 

For  have  not  they  who  laud  his  might,  and  Indra* power  wo 
for  themselves  the  light  of  heaven  ? 

14  When  shall  they  keep  the  Law  and  praise  thee  mid  the  Gods 

Who  counts  as  Hishi  and  as  sage  ? 

When  ever  wilt  thou,  India  Maghavan,  come  nigh  to  presser 
or  to  praiser’s  call  ? 

15  These  songs  of  ours  exceeding  sweet,  these  hymns  of  piw 

asceud  to  thee,  . . 

Like  ever-conquering  chariots  that  display  their  stieng 
gain  wealth,  and  give  unfailing  aid. 

16  The  Bhrigus  are  like  Suns,  like  Kanvas,  and  have  gained  * 

that  their  thoughts  were  bent  upon. 

The  living  men  of  Priyamedha’s  race  have  sung  exalting  u 1 
with  their  lauds.  __ 

9 Bhrigu  : see  Vol.  I.,  Index.  Yatis  : an  ancient  race  of  ascetics  conned 
with  the  Bhrigus,  aud,  according  to  one  legend,  said  to  have  taken  part  in 
creation  of  the  world.  Praskanva : a Uishi,  son  of  Kanva,  the  seer  of  8011 
hymns  of  Book  I. 

10  The  worlds : all  men,  or  all  living  creatures. 

12  Paura : the  son  of  King  Punt.  Rusama , S'/dvalm,  Svarnara,  and  ^ 
appear  to  have  beeu  princes  especially  favoured  by  India.  Of.  stanza  % ot 
following  hvrnu. 


THE  RIOVEDA. 


113 


yMX  4.] 

L j3est  slayer  of  the  Vritras,  yoke  thy  Bay  Steeds,  Indra,  from 

f afar. 

; Come  with  the  High  Ones  hither,  Maghavan,  to  us,  Mighty,  to 
drink  the  Soma  juice. 

$ For  these,  the  bards  and  singers,  have  cried  out  to  thee  with 
prayer,  to  gain  the  sacrifice. 

As  such,  0 Maghavan,  Indra,  who  lovest  song,  even  as  a lover 
hear  my  call. 

) Thou  from  the  lofty  plains  above,  0 Indra,  hurledst  Vritra 
down. 

Thou  dravest  forth  the  kine  of  guileful  Mrigaya  and  Arbuda 
from  the  mountain’s  hold. 

j Bright  were  the  flaming  fires,  the  Sun  gave  forth  his  shine, 

| and  Soma,  Indra’s  juice,  shone  clear. 

I Indra,  thou  blewest  the  great  Dragon  from  the  air  : men  must 
regard  that  valorous  deed. 

[ The  fairest  courser  of  them  all,  who  ruuneth  on  as  ’twere  to 

I heaven. 

Which  Indra  and  the  Maruts  gave,  and  Pakasthaman  Kaura- 
yan, 

To  me  hath'Pakaathaman  given,  a ruddy  horse,  good  at  the 
pole, 

Filling  his  girth  and  rousing  wealth ; 

Compared  with  whom  no  other  ten  strong  coursers,  harnessed 
to  the  pole, 

Bear  Tugrya  to  his  dwelling  place. 

Raiment  is  body,  food  is  life,  and  healing  ointment  giveth 
strength. 

As  the  free-handed  giver  of  the  ruddy  steed,  I have  named 
Pakasthaman  fourth. 

HYMN  IV.  Indra. 

Though,  Indra,  thou  art  called  by  men  eastward  and  westward, 
north  and  south, 

Thou  chiefly  art  with  Anava  and  Turvasa,  brave  Champion  ! 
urged  by  men  to  come. 

7 High  Ones:  the  Maruts. 

8 To  gain  the  sacrifice : to  ensure  it  proper  performance  and  the  blessings 

ch  flow  from  it. 

9 Mrigaya:  see  IV.  16.  13.  Arbuda:  see  Vol.  I.f  Index. 

0 The  great  Dragon : or  Serpent,  Ahi, 

il  Kauraydn : Kauray&na,  the  Bon  of  KuruyAna.  P&kasth&man,  whose 

nility  is  praised  in  stanzas  21 — 24,  is  not  mentioned  elsewhere. 

& Tugrya:  Bhujyu,  son  of  Tugra.  See  Vol.  I.,  Index. 

A . . 

Anava : descendant  of  the  eponymous  Anu.  Turvasa : see  Vol.  I.,  Index ■ 


114  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOH  Vjn 

2 Or,  Indra,  when  with  Rama,  Rusama,  Sy&vaka,  and  Kr',pa 

thou  rejoices t thee, 

Still  do  the  Kanvas,  bringing  praises,  with  their  prayeri 
0 Indra,  draw  thee  hither  : come. 

3 Even  as  the  wild-bull,  when  he  thirsts,  goes  to  the  desert’i 

watery  pool, 

Come  hither  quickly  both  at  morning  and  at  eve,  and  with  the 
Kanvas  drink  thy  fill. 

► 4 May  the  drops  gladden  thee,  rich  Indra,  and  obtain  bounty 

for  him  who  pours  the  juice. 

Soma  pressed  in  the  mortar  didst  thou  take  and  drink,  and 
hence  bast  won  surpassing  might. 

5 With  mightier  strength  he  conquered  strength,  with  energy 

be  crushed  their  wrath. 

0 Indra,  Strong  in  youth,  all  those  who  sought  the  fray  bent 
and  bowed  down  to  thee  like  trees. 

6 He  who  wins  promise  of  thine  aid  goes  girt  as  with  a thou- 

sand mighty  men  of  war. 

He  makes  his  son  preeminent  in  hero  might : he  serves  with 
reverential  prayer. 

7 With  thee,  the  Mighty,  for  our  Friend,  we  will  not  fear  or  feel 

fatigue. 

May  we  see  Turvasa  and  Yadu  : thy  great  deed,  0 Hero,  must 
be  glorified. 

8 On  his  left  hip  the  Hero  hath  reclined  himself : the  proffered 

feast  offends  him  not. 

The  milk  is  blended  with  the  honey  of  the  bee  : quickly  come 
hither,  haste,  and  driuk. 

9 India,  thy  friend  is  fair  of  form  and  rich  in  horses,  cars,  and  kine, 
He  evermore  hath  food  accompanied  by  wealth,  and  radian 

joins  the  company. 

10  Come  like  a thirsty  antelope  to  the  drinking-place:  drink 
Soma  to  thy  heart’s  desire. 

Raiuing  it  down,  0 Maghavan,  day  after  day,  thou  gainest  thy 
surpassing  might. 


2 Rusama , Sydvaka , and  Kripa  have  been  mentioned  in  stanza  12  of  the 
preceding  hymn.  Ruma  was  another  of  India’s  favourites. 

3 The  wild-bull:  or  Gaura  (Bos  Gaums),  a kind  of  buffalo. 

7 May  we  tee  Turvata  and  Yadu  : enjoying  happiness  through  thy  favour.- 
84yana.  . 

9 Thy  friend : the  man  whom  thou  favoureat.  Joint  the  company  • 1 

assembly  of  his  equals.  ^ 

10  Raining  it  down  : pouring  down  the  transformed  Soma  in  the  shape  » 

rain.  See  Vedische  Studien , I.  88.  i 


THE  RIGVEDA. 


f MS  4.] 


115 


! priest,  let  the  Soma  juice  flow  forth,  for  Indra  longs  to  drink 
thereof. 

He  even  now  hath  yoked  his  vigorous  Bay  Steeds  : the  Vritra- 
slayer  hath  come  near. 


The  man  with  whom  thou  fillest  thee  with  Soma  deems  him- 
self a pious  worshipper. 

This  thine  appropriate  food  is  here  poured  out  for  thee  : come, 
hasten  forward,  drink  of  it. 


Press  out  the  Soma  juice,  ye  priests,  for  Indra  borne  upon  his 
car. 

The  pressing-stones  speak  loud  of  Indra,  while  they  shed  the 
juice  which,  offered,  honours  him. 

To  the  brown  juice  may  his  dear  vigorous  Bay  Steeds  bring 
Indra,  to  our  holy  task. 

Hither  let  thy  Car-steeds  who  seek  the  saciifice  bring  thee  to 
our  drink-offerings. 

Puslian,  the  Lord  of  ample  wealth,  for  firm  alliance  we  elect. 

May  he  with  wisdom,  Sakra ! Looser!  Much-invoked!  aid  us 
to  riches  and  to  seed . 


Sharpen  us  like  a razor  in  the  barber's  hands;  scud  riches 
thou  who  set  test  free. 

Easy  to  find  with  thee  are  treasures  of  the  Davui  for  mortal 
man  whom  thou  dost  speed. 

Pudiau,  I long  to  win  thy  love,  I long  to  praise  thee,  Radiant 
God. 

Excellent  Lord,  tis  strange  to  me,  no  wish  have  I to  sing  the 
psalm  that  Pajra  sings.  3 

Mykiue,  0 Radiant  God,  seek  pasture  wheic  they  will,  my 
during  wealth,  Immortal  One. 

Be  our  protector,  Pushan  ! be,  most  liberal  Lord,  propitious  to 
our  gathering  strength. 

Rich  was  the  gift  Kurunga  gave,  a hundred  steeds  at  morning 
rites.  e 

Arnoug  the  gifts  of  Turvasas  we  thought  of  him,  the  opulent, 
the  splendid  King. 

What  by  his  morning  songs  Kanva,  the  powerful,  hath,  with 
the  I riyamedhasi  gaiued — 


may  here  be  a name  of  Indra.  Looser:  of  the  chariot-horse* 
“ u comesfc  t0  orifices  ; or,  according  to  Silyana,  liberator  (from  sin). 

v ot?e  ?f  Pajras,  a celebrated  priestly  family,  with  whom  the 

vas  appear  to  have  beeu  on  hostile  terms. 

Kurungct, : this  prince’s  name  does  not  occur  again, 


116  THE  HYMNS  OF  L BOOK  Vijj 

The  herds  of  sixty  thousand  pure  and  spotless  kine,  have  I 
the  Rishi,  driven  away. 

21  The  very  trees  were  joyful  at  my  coming  : kine  they  obtained 
in  plenty,  steeds  in  plenty. 

HYMN  V.  A^j 

When,  even  as  she  were  present  here,  red  Dawn  hath  shone 
from  far  away, 

She  spreadeth  light  on  every  side. 

2 Like  Heroes  on  your  will-yoked  car  far-shining,  Wonder. 

Workers  ! ye 

Attend,  0 Asvins,  on  the  Dawn. 

3 Bv  you,  0 Lords  of  ample  wealth,  our  songs  of  praise  \m 

been  observed  : 

As  envoy  have  I brought  the  prayer. 

4 Kanvas  must  praise  the  Asvins  dear  to  many,  making  many 

glad, 

Most  rich,  that  they  may  succour  us. 

5 Most  liberal,  best  at  winning  strength,  inciters,  Lords  ol 

splendour  who 

Visit  the  worshipper’s  abode. 

6 So  for  devout  Sudeva  dew  with  fatness  his  unfailing  mead, 
And  make  it  rich  for  sacrifice. 

7 Hitherward  running  speedily  with  horses,  as  with  rapid  hawks, 
Come,  Asvins,  to  our  song  of  praise  : 

8 Wherewith  the  three  wide  distances,  and  all  the  lights  that 

are  in  heaven 

Ye  traverse,  and  three  times  of  night. 

9 0 Finders  of  the  Day,  that  wo  may  win  us  food  of  kine  and 

wealth, 

* Open  the  paths  for  us  to  tread. 

10  0 Asvins,  bring  us  wealth  in  kine,  in  noble  heroes,  and  in  cars: 
Bring  us  the  strength  that  hordes  give. 

11  Ye  Lords  of  splendour,  glorified,  ye  Wonder-Workers  borne  on 

paths 

Of  gold,  drink  sweets  with  Soma  juice. 

‘20  Pure  and  spotlm : I follow  SAyana’s  interrelation  of  nirmajdm,  but  * 
correctness  is  at  least  doubtful  Von  Roth  suggests  ‘ to  the  watering-p^ 
as  the  meaning  of  the  word,  and  Ludwig  ‘ so  that  none  remained  belimu. 

3 Lords  of  ample  wealth : ‘affluent  in  sacrifices.’-- Wilson.  See  VJ4- ■ 
A 9 envoy:  as  the  messenger  of  the  patron  of  the  sacrifice. 

8 Times  of  night : ydmas,  night-watches  of  three  hours  each. 

11  Sweets:  or  meath,  mddhu;  here,  perhaps,  the  milk.— Ludwig. 


mN  5.]  TH^RIGVEDA.  117 

; To  us,  ye  Lords  of  ample  wealth,  and  to  our  wealthy  chiefs 

extend 

Wide  shelter,  ne’er  to  be  assailed. 

I Come  quickly  downward  to  the  prayer  of  people  whom  ye 
favour  most : 

Approach  not  unto  other  folk. 

. Ye  Asvins  whom  our  minds  perceive,  drink  of  this  lovely 
gladdening  draught, 

The  meuth  which  we  present  to  you. 

\ Bring  riches  hither  unto  us  in  hundreds  and  in  thousands, 
source 

Of  plenteous  food,  sustaining  all. 

I Verily  sages  call  on  you,  ye  Heroes,  in  full  many  a place. 

Moved  by  the  priests,  0 Asvins,  come, 
r Men  who  have  trimmed  tho  sacred  grass,  bringing  oblations 
and  prepared, 

0 Asvins,  are  invoking  you. 

3 May  this  our  hymn  of  praise  to-day,  most  powerful  to  bring 
you,  be, 

0 Asvins,  nearest  to  your  hearts. 

D The  skin  filled  full  of  savoury  meath,  laid  in  the  pathway  of 
| your  car — 

| 0 Asvins,  drink  ye  both  therefrom. 

0 For  this,  ye  Lords  of  ample  wealth,  bring  blessing  for  our  herd, 

: our  kine, 

Our  progeny,  and  plenteous  food. 

1 Ye  too  unclose  to  us  like  doors  the  strengthening  waters  of  the 
| sky, 

| And  rivers,  ye  who  find  the  day.  # 

£ When  did  the  sou  of  Tugra  serve  you,  Men  1 Abandoned  in 
the  sea, 

That  with  winged  steeds  your  car  might  fly. 

Ye,  0 Nasatyas,  ministered  to  Kanva  with  repeated  aid, 
When  cast  into  the  heated  pit. 


6 By  the  priests  : vdghddbhih  : according  to  S&yana,  * with  horses.’ 

9 The  Asvins  appear  to  be  invited  to  halt  and  drink  the  libations  prepared 
them  by  their  worshippers,  and  not,  as  Sdyana  explains,  to  drink  from  the 
in  suspended  in  their  own  car. — Ludwig. 

22  The  son  of  Tugra:  Bhujyu,  whose  rescue  by  the  Asvins  has  frequently 
en  related  and  referred  to.  The  meaning  is,  I do  not  honour  you  only  when 
&ni  in  distress,  as  others  whom  you  have  aided  have  done. 

23  Ministered  to  Kanva:  see  I,  112.  5,  and  118.  7. 


118  TUB  IIYMIfS  OF  [BOOK  P//j 

24  Come  near  with.  those  most  recent  aids  of  yours  which 

eulogy, 

When  I invoke  you,  Wealthy  Gods. 

25  As  ye  protected  Kanva  erst,  Priyatnedha  and  Upastuta, 
Atii,  Smjara,  Asvins  Twain  ! 

26  And  Ansu  in  decisive  fight,  Agastya  in  the  fray  for  kine, 
And,  in  his  battles,  Sobhari. 

27  For  so  much  bliss,  or  even  more,  0 Asvins,  Wealthy  God* 

than  this, 

We  pray  while  singing  hymns  to  you. 

28  Ascend  your  car  with  golden  seat,  0 Asvins,  and  with  rein 

of  gold, 

That  reaches  even  to  the  sky. 

29  Golden  is  its  supporting  shaft,  the  axle  also  is  of  gold, 
And  both  the  wheels  are  made  of  gold. 

30  Thereon,  ye  Lords  of  ample  wealth,  come  to  us  even  from  afai 
Come  ye  to  this  mine  eulogy. 

31  From  far  away  ye  come  to  us,  Asvins,  enjoying  plenteous  foe 
Of  Dasas,  0 Immortal  Ones. 

32  With  splendour,  riches,  and  renown,  0 Asvins,  hither  con 

to  us, 

Nasatyas,  shining  brilliantly. 

33  May  dappled  horses,  steeds  who  fly  with  pinions,  bring  yc 

hitherward 

To  people  skilled  in  sacrifice. 

34  The  wheel  delayeth  not  that  car  of  yours  accompanied  1 

song, 

That  eometh  with  a store  of  food. 

J5  Horne  on  that  chariot  wrought  of  gold,  with  coursers  ve 
fleet  of  foot, 

Come,  0 Nfisatyas,  swift  as  thought. 


24  Wealthy  6 och:  the  meaning  of  vriskanvasH  is  uncertain : ‘ rich  in  show 

is  Sfiya’a’s  explanation,  and  ‘excellent  as  nteers  ’ Prof.  Ludwigs.  I 
von  ltoth,  but  his  interpretation  is  conjectural.  , 

2 5 Kanva,  Priyamedha . Upastuta  and  Atri  have  been  mentioned  in  B(>0 
Sftyaoa  takes  sinj&ram  to  Ik*  an  epithet  of  Atri,  ‘ repeating  praises.’ 

2d  Ansu:  a worshipper  so  named. — Sdyana.  Af/astya:  appears  in  I-  ‘ ' 
where  he  is  said  to  have  been  the  family-priest  of  Khela.  The  grea  . 
Agastya  is  the  seer  of  Hymns  1Gb — 191  of  Book  I.  See  also  VII. 
Sobhari:  a Rishi,  the  seer  of  Hymns  19-  22  of  this  Book. 

31  Plenteous  food  of  Ddmn:  the  meaning  appears  to  be  that  eyen  . 

in  the  ea*t  the  Dfisas  or  non-Aryan  inhabitants  sacrifice  to  the  Asvins. 

explains  the  stanza  differently  : ‘ Immortal  Asvins,  destroyers  of  the  ci 
the  D&aas,  ye  bring  to  us  food  from  afar.’— Wilson, 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


119 


lYMV  6 ] 

5 0 Wealthy  Gods,  ye  taste  aud  find  the  brisk  and  watchful  wild 
beast  good. 

Associate  wealth  with  food  for  us. 

7 As  such,  O Asvins,  fiud  for  me  my  share  of  new-presented 

gifts, 

As  Kasu,  Chedi’s  son,  gave  me  a hundred  head  of  buffaloes, 
and  ten  thousand  kine. 

8 He  who  hath  given  me  for  mine  own  ten  Kings  like  gold  to 

look  upon. 

At  Chaidya’s  feet  are  all  the  people  round  about,  all  those 
who  think  upon  the  shield, 

9 No  mau,  not  any,  goes  upon  the  path  on  which  the  Chedis 

walk. 

No  other  prince,  no  folk  is  held  more  liberal  of  gifts  than  they. 

HYMN  VI.  Indra. 

Indra,  great  in  his  power  and  might,  and  like  Parjanya  rich 
in  rain, 

Is  magnified  by  Vatsa’s  lauds. 

2 When  the  priests,  strengthening  the  Son  of  Holy  Law,  present 

their  gifts, 

Singers  with  Order’s  hymn  of  praise. 

3 Since  Kanvas  with  their  lauds  have  made  Indra  complete  the 

sacrifice, 

Words  are  their  own  appropriate  arms. 

4 Before  his  hot  displeasure  all  the  peoples,  all  the  men,  bow 

down, 

As  livers  bow  them  to  the  sea. 

5 This  power  of  his  shone  brightly  forth  when  Indra  brought 

together,  like 

A skin,  the  worlds  of  heaven  and  earth. 


36  According  to  SAyana  the  watchful  xcild  beast  is  therthe  Soma  which  must 
5 chased  or  sought  after  by  the  Gods.  Ludwig  would  read  svapatho,  with  4 
ansitive  and  causal  meaning,  instead  of  svddatho , i e , ye  when  ye  appear 
i the  morning  send  to  sleep  the  wild  beasts  that  have  been  awake  all  night, 
he  st.mza  is  obscure. 

37  Buffaloes  : or  camels, 

33  This  stanza  appears  to  be  spoken  by  Kasu  who  is  called  Chaidya  or  son 
c Chedi.  Who  think  upon  the  shield : who  are  practised  in  wearing  armour 
t leather,  according  to  SAyana. 

3 arc  their  own  appropriate  arms:  ‘thev  declare  all  weapons 

eedlc8s.’-Wilaon. 


120 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK  Vm 

6 The  fiercely-moving  Vritra’s  head  he  severed  with  his  thunder- 

bolt, 

His  mighty  hundred-knotted  bolt. 

7 Here  are — we  sing  them  loudly  forth — our  thoughts  among 

the  best  of  songs, 

Even  lightnings  like  the  blaze  of  fire. 

8 When  hidden  thoughts,  spontaneously  advancing,  glow,  and 

with  the  stream 
Of  sacrifice  the  Kanvas  shine. 

9 Iudra,  may  we  obtain  that  wealth  in  horses  and  in  herds  of 

cows, 

And  prayer  that  may  be  noticed  first. 

.0  I from  my  Father  have  received  deep  knowledge  of  the  Holy 
Law : 

I  was  born  like  unto  the  Sun. 

.1  After  the  lore  of  ancieut  time  I make,  like  Kanva,  beauteous 
songs, 

And  Indra' s self  gains  strength  thereby. 

2 Whatever  Rishis  have  not  praised  thee,  Indra,  or  have  lauded 

thee, 

By  me  exalted  wax  thou  strong. 

3 When  his  wrath  thundered,  when  he  rent  Vritra  to  pieces, 

limb  by  limb, 

He  sent  the  waters  to  the  sea. 

14  Against  the  Dasyu  Sushna  thou,  Indra,  didst  hurl  thy  during 
bolt  : 

Thou,  Dread  One,  hast  a hero's  fame. 

^5  Neither  the  heavens  nor  firmaments  nor  regions  of  the  earth 
contain 

Indra,  the  Thunderer  with  his  might. 

.6  0 Indra  him  who  lay  at  length  staying  thy  copious  waters 
thou, 

In  his  own  footsteps,  smotest  down. 

L7  Thou  hiddest  deep  in  darkness  him,  0 Indra,  who  had  set  his 
grasp 

On  spacious  heaven  and  earth  conjoined. 


10  From  my  Father : ‘from  Indra,  the  true  protector,’ according  to 
12  Have  not  praised  thee : have  not  praised  thee  yet,  that  is,  will  praise 
;hee  hereafter.— Ludwig. 

16  In  his  own  footsteps : or,  in  the  (waters)  at  his  feet.  ‘Into  the  rushing 
itreams.’ — Wilson. 

17  Conjoined ; like  two  bowls  turned  towards  each  other. 


TEE  RIGVEDA. 


121 


YMN  6.] 

) Indra,  whatever  Yatis  and  Bhrigus  have  offered  praise  to  thee, 

Liston,  thou  Mighty,  to  my  call. 

) Indra,  these  spotted  cows  yield  thee  their  butter  and  the 
milky  draught, 

Aiders,  thereby,  of  sacrifice ; 

I Which,  teeming,  have  received  thee  as  a life-germ,  Indra,  with 
their  mouth, 

Like  Surya  who  sustaineth  all. 

0 Lord  of  Might,  with  hymns  of  praise  the  Kanvas  have 
increased  thy  power, 

The  drops  poured  forth  have  strengthened  thee. 

! Under  thy  guidance,  Indra,  mid  thy  praises,  Lord  of  Thunder, 
shall 

The  sacrifice  be  suoo  performed. 

, Indra,  disclose  much  food  for  us,  like  a stronghold  with  store 
of  kine: 

Give  progeny  and  heroic  strength. 

: And,  Indra,  grant  us  all  that  wealth  of  fleet  steeds  which 
shone  bright  of  old 

Among  the  tribes  of  Nahushas. 

i Hither  thou  seemest  to  attract  heaven’s  fold  which  shines  be- 
fore our  eyes, 

When,  Indra,  thou  art  kind  to  us. 

! Yea,  when  thou  puttest  forth  thy  power,  Indra,  thou  governest 
the  folk, 

Mighty,  unlimited  in  strength. 

The  tribes  who  briug  oblations  call  to  thee,  to  thee  to  give 
them  help, 

With  drops  to  thee  who  spreadest  far. 

> There  where  the  mountains  downward  slope,  there  by  the 
meeting  of  the  streams 

The  Sage  was  manifest  with  song. 

1 Thence,  marking,  from  his  lofty  place  downward  he  looks 
upon  the  sea, 

And  thence  with  rapid  stir  he  moves. 

yo  * P*°.U8  Ra£e8-’ — Wilson.  Angirnses,  according  to  Sftyana. 

the  stanza  is  unintelligible  to  me.  Sayanasays  that ; thee’  means  Indra 

Ae  shape  of  the  grass  which  his  fertilizing  energy  causes  to  grow,  and  by 

ll]g  011  which  the  cows  multiply.  This  energy  of  Indra’ a is  all-supporting 

n,  ^ee  Wilson’s  note.  Ludwig  proposes  an  alteration  of  the  text. 

28  Tit  • or,  perhaps,  the  neighbouring  tribes. 

t *e  ■<rc;  Indra.  ‘Sftyana’s  conclusion  of  the  purport  of  the  verse  is, 

,l~*ht  to  sacrifice  in  those  places  where  Indra  is  said  to  be  manifest- 

29  2 he  sea;  the  reservoir  of  Some  juice. 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


122 


[BOOK  Vjj 


30  Then,  verily,  they  see  the  light  refulgent  of  primeval  seed, 
Kindled  on  yonder  side  of  heaven. 

31  Indra,  the  Kanvas  all  exalt  thy  wisdom  and  thy  maul 

power, 

And,  Mightiest!  thine  heroic  strength. 

32  Accept  this  eulogy  of  mine,  Indra,  and  guard  me  carefully; 
Strengthen  my  thought  and  prosper  it. 

33  For  thee,  0 Mighty,  Thunder-armed,  we  singers  through  dev 

tion  have 

Fashioned  the  hymn  that  we  may  live. 

34  To  Indra  have  the  Kanvas  sung,  like  waters  speeding  don 

a slope  : 

The  song  is  fain  to  go  to  him. 

35  As  rivers  swell  the  ocean,  so  our  hymns  of  praise  make  Indr 

strong, 

Eternal,  of  resistless  wrath. 

36  Come  with  thy  lovely  Bay  Steeds,  come  to  us  from  regions h 

away  : 

0 Indra,  drink  this  Soma  juice. 

37  Best  slayer  of  the  Vritras,  men  whose  sacred  grass  is  read 

trimmed 

Invoke  thee  for  the  gain  of  spoil. 

38  The  heavens  and  earth  come  after  thee  as  the  wheel  follow 

Etasa : 

To  thee  flow  Soma-drops  effused. 

31  Rejoice,  0 Indra,  in  the  light,  rejoice  in  Saryan-lvan,  be 
Glad  in  the  sacri  fleer’s  hymn. 

40  Grown  strong  in  heaven,  the  Thunder-armed  hath  bellowet 

Vritra  slayer,  Bull, 

Chief  drinker  of  the  Soma  juice. 

41  Thou  art  a Rishi  born  of  old,  sole  Ruler  over  all  by  might  : 
Thou,  Indra,  guardest  well  our  wealth. 

42  May  thy  Bay  Steeds  with  beauteous  backs,  a hundred,  brin 

thee  to  the  feast, 

Bring  thee  to  these  our  Soma-draughts. 

43  The  Kanvas  with  their  hymns  of  praise  have  magnified  th 

ancient  thought 

That  swells  with  streams  of  meath  and  oil.  

30  The  light : the  Sun  which  is  lighted  up  beyond  the  range  of  menssigli 

38  As  the  wheel  follows  Etasa;  as  the  chariot  of  the  Sun  follows  the 

that  draws  it.  c t jj 

39  Saryanlvdn  said  to  be  a lake  and  district  in  Kurukshetra.  &ee 
14,  note. 


THE  RIOVEDA. 


123 


|r)H/.V  7.1 

14  Mid  mightiest  Gods  let  mortal  man  choose  Indra  at  the 

sacrifice, 

Indra,  whoe’er  would  win,  for  help. 

5 Thy  steeds,  by  Priyamedhas  praised,  shall  bring  thee,  God 
whom  all  invoke, 

Hither  to  drink  the  Soma  juice. 

16  A hundred  thousand  have  I gained  from  ParBu,  from 
Tirindira, 

And  presents  of  the  Yadavas, 

[7  Ten  thousand  head  of  kiue,  and  steeds  throe  times  a hundred 
they  bestowed 
On  Pujra  for  the  SS,ma-song. 

8 Knluilia  hath  reached  up  to  heaven,  bestowing  buffaloes  yoked 
in  fours, 

And  matched  in  fame  the  Y&davas. 


HYMN  VI f. 


Marat*. 


O Marots,  when  the  sage  hath  poured  the  Trishtup  forth  as 
food  for  you, 


Ye  shine  amid  the  mountain-clouds. 


2 When,  Bright  Ones,  fain  to  show  your  might  ye  have  deter- 

mined on  your  course, 

The  mountain-clouds  have  bent  them  down. 

3 Loud  roaring  with  the  wiuds  the  Sons  of  Prisni  have  upraised 

themselves  : 


They  have  poured  out  the  streaming  food. 

4 The  Harms  spread  the  mist  abroad  and  make  the  mountains 

rock  and  reel, 

When  with  the  winds  they  go  their  way; 

5 What  time  the  rivers  and  the  hills  before  your  coming  bowed 

them  down, 

So  to  sustain  your  mighty  force. 


Puryi,  from  Tirindira:  1 f i om  Tirindira  the  son  of  Parsu  . 
w V?dia2nhp^m?  Ure  !™n,an  (cf*  Tiridates*  Perpa)-  See  Weber’s  EpUchcs 
(SitZUD8sberifhte  derK-  P'  Akadeuue  der 

r Mams:  or  Yadus,  descendants  of  the  hero  Yadu. 

*<  Pajra:  see  VIII.  4.  17. 

48  Kakuha  ■'  or’ the  lo%  °ne.  meaning  Tirindira.  Buffalo*, or  camels. 

toLrJ4rinfluL‘SdiD8ri0.0ne  of  SflW*'8  three  interpretations,  the 
metre.  g at  th9  midda>’  hbation  accompanied  by  hymns  in  the  Trishtup 


124  * THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  V //, 

6 We  call  on  you  for  aid  by  night,  on  you  for  succour  in  the  daj 
Oil  you  while  sacrifice  proceeds. 

7 These,  verily,  wondrous,  red  of  hue,  speed  on  their  course 

with  a roar 

Over  the  ridges  of  the  sky. 

8 With  might  they  drop  the  loosened  rein  so  that  the  Sun  ma 

run  his  course, 

And  spread  themselves  with  beams  of  light. 

9 Accept,  ye  Maruts,  this  my  song,  accept  ye  this  mine  hyw 

of  praise, 

Accept,  Ribhukshans,  this  my  call. 

10  The  dappled  Cows  have  poured  three  lakes,  meath  for  tin 
Thunder- wielding  God, 

From  the  great  cask,  the  watery  cloud. 

110  Maruts,  quickly  come  to  us  when,  louging  for  felicity, 

We  call  you  hither  from  the  sky. 

12  For,  Rudras  and  Ribhukshans,  ye,  Most  Bountiful,  are  in  th 

house, 

Wise  when  the  gladdening  draught  is  drunk. 

13  0 Maruts,  send  us  down  from  heaven  riches  distilling  raptur 

ousjoy, 

With  plenteous  food,  sustaining  all. 

14  When,  Bright  Ones,  hither  from  the  hills  ye  have  resolved  t 

take  your  way, 

Ye  revel  in  the  drops  effused. 

15  Man  should  solicit  with  his  lauds  happiuess  which  belongs! 

them, 

So  great  a band  invincible. 

1G  They  who  like  fiery  sparks  with  showers  of  rain  blow  throng 
the  heaven  and  earth, 

Milking  the  spring  that  never  fails. 

17  With  chariots  and  tumultuous  roar,  with  tempests  and  witl 

hymns  of  praise 
The  Sons  of  Prism  hurry  forth. 

18  For  wealth,  we  think  of  that  whereby  ye  aided  Yadu,  Turvas 
And  Kanva  who  obtained  the  spoil. 


8 They  drop  the  loosened  rein : they  speed  forward  to  propare  the  way  ^ 
the  Sun. 

0 Ribhukshans : Mighty  Ones,  according  to  Sftyana. 

10  The  dappled  Cows:  the  ^Maruts,  Three  lakes:  three  large  Soma 
tflcles,  the  JJronakalasa,  the  Adhavaniya}  and  the  Pdtabhrit.  The  meaning 
the  Maruts  have  poured  down  abundant  water  from  the  rain-cloud, 


THE  MOVED  A. 


125 


rMN  7.] 

Mav  these  our  viands  Bounteous  Ones  ! that  flow  in  streams 
like  holy  oil, 

With  Kanva’s  hymns,  increase  your  might. 

Where,  Bounteous  Lords  for  whom  the  grass  is  trimmed,  are 
ye  rejoicing  now  ? 

Wlmt  Brahman  is  adoring  you  % 

Is  it  not  there  where  yo  of  old,  supplied  with  sacred  grass, 
for  lauds 

Inspired  the  strong  in  sacrifice  I 

They  brought  together  both  the  worlds,  the  mighty  waters, 
aud  the  Sun, 

And,  joint  by  joint,  the  thunderbolt. 

They  sundered  Vritra  limb  from  limb  and  split  the  gloomy 
mountain-clouds, 

Performing  an  heroic  deed. 

They  reinforced  the  power  and  strength  of  Trita  as  he  fought, 
and  helped 

Indra  in  battle  with  the  foe. 

i They  deck  themselves  for  glory,  bright,  celestial,  lightning  in 
their  hands, 

And  helms  of  gold  upon  their  heads, 
i When  eagerly  ye  from  far  away  came  to  the  cavern  of  the  Bull, 
He  bellowed  in  his  fear  like  Heaven. 
r Borne  by  your  golden  footed  steeds,  0 Gods,  come  hither  to 
receive 

The  sacrifice  we  offer  you. 

5 When  the  red  leader  draws  along  their  spotted  deer  yoked  to 
the  car. 

The  Bright  Ones  come,  and  shed  the  rain. 

) Sushoma,  Saryanav.in,  and  Arjika  full  of  homes,  have  they, 
These  Heroes,  sought  with  downward  car. 

19  With  Kdnva's  hymns:  hymns  of  the  Rishi  Punnrvalsa,  a descendant  of 
iinva 

21  The  strong  in  sacrifice : the  Maghavans , wealthy  worshippers. 

24  Trita  : a Vedic  deity,  perhaps  Agni  in  his  third  form,  geneially  associated 
ith  Indra,  Vftyu,  and  the  Maruts.  See.  Vol.  I.,  Index.  In  battle  with  the 
>c:  or,  to  overcome  Vritra. 

26  The  cavern  of  the  Bull:  perhaps,  the  hollow  of  the  rain-cloud;  ‘the 
pening  of  the  rainy  (firmament).’ — Wilson. 

28  Leader  ; or  side-horse. 

29  Saryawdvdn  :Ahas  occurred  before  (see  I.  84.  14,  and  VIII  6.  89)  as  the 
&uie  of  a lake.  Arjika  is  said  by  S&yana  to  be  the  name  of  a district,  and 
e takes  sushdma  (containing  excellent  Soma)  to  be  an  adjective  qualifying  it. 
tc  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Zeben,  p.  19. 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


126 


[BOOR  VUi 


30  When,  Maruts,  will  ye  come  to  him,  the  singer  who  invokes 

you  thus, 

With  favours  to  your  suppliant  ? 

31  What  now  1 where  have  ye  still  a friend  since  ye  left  Indra  all 

alone  ? 

Who  countoth  on  your  friendship  now? 

32  The  Kanvas  sing  forth  Agni’s  praise  together  with  our 

Maruts5  who 

Wield  thunder  and  wear  swords  of  gold. 

33  Hither  for  new  felicity  may  I attract  the  Impetuous  Ones, 
The  Heroes  with  their  wondrous  strength. 

34  Before  them  sink  the  very  hills  deeming  themselves  abysses; 

yea, 

Even  the  mountains  bend  them  down. 

35  Steeds  flying  on  their  tortuous  path  through  mid-air  carrj 

them,  aud  give 

The  man  who  lauds  them  strength  and  life. 

36  Agni  was  born  the  first  of  all,  like  Surya  lovely  with  his  light; 
With  lustre  these  have  spread  abroad. 


HYMN  VIII.  Asvim, 

With  all  the  succours  that  are  yours,  0 Asvins,  hither  come 
to  us : 

Wonderful,  borne  on  paths  of  gold,  drink  ye  the  meath  with 
Soma  juice. 

2 Como  now,  ye  Asvins,  on  your  car  decked  with  a sun-bright 

canopy, 

Bountiful,  with  your  golden  forms,  Sages  with  depth  of 
intellect. 

3 Come  hither  from  the  Nahushas,  come,  drawn  by  pure  hymns, 

from  mid-air. 

0 Asvins,  drink  the  savoury  juice  shed  in  the  Kanvas’ 
sacrifice. 


31  Left  Indra  all  alone  ? ; This  is  merely  a rhetorical  question  meaning,  )'fl 
never  did  desert  him.  The  Maruts  aloue  stood  by  him  when  he  fought  with 
Vritra. 

36  With  lustre  these  have  spread  abroad : * then  they  (the  Maruts)  stood 
round  in  their  radiance  ’  3  4 The  Scholiast  intimates  that  this  verBe  refers  to 

the  ceremony  called  Agnimdruta , when  Agni  is  first  worshipped,  theu  tw 
Maruts .’ — Wilson. 

3 From  the  Nahushas : or,  according  to  others,  from  the  neighbouring  ^ 

people. 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


127 


MN  8.] 

Come  to  us  hither  from  the  heavens,  come  from  mid-air,  well- 
loved by  us  : 

Here  Kanva’s  son  hath  pressed  for  you  the  pleasant  meath  of 
Soma  juice. 

Come,  Asvins,  to  give  ear  to  us,  to  drink  the  Soma,  Asvins, 
come. 

Hail,  Strengthened  of  the  praise-song  S speed  onward,  ye 
Heroes,  with  your  thoughts. 

As,  Heroes,  in  the  olden  time  the  Rishis  called  you  to  their 
aid, 

So  now,  0 Asvins,  come  to  us,  come  near  to  this  mine  eulogy. 

Even  from  the  luminous  sphere  of  heaven  come  to  us,  ye  who 
find  the  light, 

Carers  for  Yatsa,  through  our  prayers  and  lauds,  0 ye  who 
hear  our  call. 

Do  others  more  than  we  adore  the  Asvins  with  their  hymns 
of  praise? 

The  Tiishi  Vatsa,  Kanva’s  son,  hath  magnified  you  with  his 
songs. 

The  holy  singer  with  his  hymns  hath  called  you,  Asvins,  hither- 
ward ; 

Best  Vritra-slayers,  free  from  stain,  as  such  bring  us  felicity. 

What  time,  ye  Lords  of  ample  wealth,  the  Lady  mounted  on 
your  car, 

Then,  0 ye  Asvins,  ye  attained  all  wishes  that  your  hearts 
desired. 

Come  thence,  O Asvins,  on  your  car  that  hath  a thousand 
ornaments : 

Vatsa  the  sage,  the  sago’s  son,  hath  sung  a song  of  sweets  to 
you. 

Oheerers  of  many,  rich  in  goods,  discoverers  of  opulence, 

The  Asvins,  Riders  through  the  sky,  have  welcomed  this  my 
song  of  praise. 

0 Asvins,  grant  us  all  rich  gifts  wherewith  no  man  may 
interfere. 

Mako  us  observe  the  stated  times  : give  us  not  over  to  reproach. 

: Whether,  Nasatyas,  ye  be  nigh,  or  whether  ye  be  far  away, 

Come  thence,  0 Asvins,  on  your  car  that  hath  a thousand 
ornaments. 


7 Carers  for  Vatsa:  ye  who  favour  and  provide  for  Vatsa,  the  IUahi  of 
yum  VI.  of  thia  Book. 

10  The  Lady ; SdryA,  Daughter  of  the  Sun.  See.  I.  116. 17. 


12* 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK  Yin 


15  Vatsa  the  Rishi  with  his  songs,  Nasatyas,  hath  exalted  you; 
Grant  him  rich  food  distilling  oil,  graced  with  a thousand 

ornaments. 

16  Bestow  on  him,  0 Asvins,  food  that  strengthens,  and  thal 

drops  with  oil, 

On  him  who  praises  you  for  bliss,  and,  Lords  of  bounty,  pray* 
for  wealth. 

17  Como  to  us,  ye  who  slay  the  foe,  Lords  of  rich  treasure,  t< 

this  hymn. 

0 Heroes,  give  us  high  renown  and  these  good  things  of  eart! 
for  help. 

1 8 The  Priyamedhas  have  invoked  you  with  all  succours  tha 

are  yours, 

You,  Asvins,  Lords  of  solemn  rites,  with  calls  entreating  yoi 
to  come. 

19  Come  to  us,  Asvins,  ye  who  bring  felicity,  auspicious  Ones, 
To  Vatsa  who  with  prayer  and  hymn,  lovers  of  song,  liatl 

honoured  you. 

20  x\id  us,  0 Heroes,  for  those  hymns  for  which  ye  hclpe- 

Gosarya  erst,  . 

Gave  Vasa,  Dasavraja  aid,  and  Kanva  and  Medhatithi ; 

21  And  favoured  Trasadasyu,  ye  Heroes,  in  .spoil-deciding  fray : 
For  these,  0 Asvins,  graciously  assist  us  in  acquiring  strengtl 

22  0 Asvins,  may  pure  hymns  of  ours,  and  songs  and  praise 

honour  vou  : 

Best  slayers  everywhere  of  foes,  as  such  we  fondly  year 
for  you. 

23  Three  places  of  the  Asvins,  erst  concealed,  are  made  apparent 


now.  . 

Both  Sages,  with  the  flight  of  Law  come  hither 
who  live. 

HYMN  IX. 


unto  those 
A'dM- 


To  help  and  favour  Vatsa  now,  0 Asvins,  come  ye  hitherward. 
Bestow  on  him  a dwelling  spacious  and  secure,  ant  CCP 


malignities  away.  __ 

20  Gofirya  : said  by  SAyana  to  bo  a name  of  Siyu.  Sea  I.  HO,  22. 
and  Dasacraja  are  known  only  as  proUyis  of  the  Asvins. 

21  Trasadasyu:  see  Vol.  I.,  Index.  . • Aavins' 

23  Three  places:  according  to  S&yana,  the  three  wheels  of  e A 

chariot  are  intended.  The  three  places  can  only  be  heaven,  Brina 
earth,  hidden  during  the  darkness  of  night  and  made  visible  by  tt 


of  the  Asvins  and  Dawn. 

1 Vatsa:  apparently  another  name  of  Saaakarua, 
descendant  of  Kanva,  the  ltishi  of  the  hymn, 


called  also  Klava  or 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


129 


MS  9-] 


All  manliness  that  is  in  heaven,  with  the  Five  Tribes,  or  in 
mid-air, 

Bestow,  ye  Asvins,  upon  us. 

Remember  Kanva  first  of  all  among  the  singers,  Asvins,  who 

Have  thought  upon  your  wondrous  deeds. 

Asvins,  for  you  with  song  of  praise  this  hot  oblation  is  effused, 

This  your  sweet  Soma  juice,  ye  Lords  of  ample  wealth,  through 
which  ye  think  upon  the  foe. 

Whatever  ye  have  done  in  floods,  in  the  tree,  Wonder-Wor- 
kers, and  in  growing  plants, 

Therewith,  0 Asvins,  succour  me. 

What  force,  Nasatyas,  ye  exert,  whatever,  Gods,  ye  tend  and 
heal, 

This  your  own  Vatsa  gains  not  by  his  hymns  alone : ye  visit 
him  who  offers  gifts. 

Now  hath  the  Rishi  splendidly  thought  out  the  Asvins5 
hymn  of  praise. 

Let  the  Atharvan  pour  the  warm  oblation  forth,  and  Soma 
very  rich  in  sweets. 

Ye  Asvins,  now  ascend  your  car  that  lightly  rolls  upon  its 
way. 

May  these  my  praises  make  you  speed  hitherward  like  a cloud 
of  heaven. 

When,  0 Nasatyas,  we  this  day  make  you  speed  hither  with 
our  hymns, 

Or,  Asvins,  with  our  songs  of  praise,  remember  Kanva 
specially. 

As  erst  Kaksbivati  and  the  Rishi  Vyasva,  as  erst  Dirghatamas 
invoked  your  presence, 

Or,  in  the  sacrificial  chambers,  Vainya  Prithi,  so  be  ye  mind- 
ful of  us  here,  0 Asvins. 


Thuiujkt  upon  : or  touched  upon,  handled. 

Think  upon  the  foe : plan  the  destruction  of  the  demon  of  darkness. 

1 Whatever  ye  hare  done:  Professor  Wilson  paraphrases  after  Sftjana: 
eserve  me  with  that  (healing  vit^ue)  deposited  b}  you  in  the  wateis,  in 
tives,  in  the  herbs.’ 

The  A tkavvan ; the  priest  who  has  special  charge  of  the  fire  and  the  Soma, 
illow  Ludwig  in  taking  a tharrani  as  a nominative  and  not  as  a locative  as 
^vnadoes:  4 he  will  spi  inkle  the  sweet-flavoured  Soma  and  the  gharma 
Ltiou)  ou  the  Atharvan  fire.’ — Wilson. 

10  hahshivlu:  seel.  18.  1.  Vyasvi : see  I 112  15.  Dirghatamas : see  Vol, 
ludex.  Vui.iya;  son  of  Vena.  P>itM:  the  first  anointed  king. 


180  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VIII. 

11  Come  as  home-guardians,  saving  us  from  foemen,  guarding 

our  living  creatures  and  our  bodies, 

Come  to  the  house  to  give  us  seed  and  offspring, 

12  Whether  with  India  yc  be  faring,  Asvins,  or  resting  in  oiie* 

dwelling-place  with  Vayu, 

In  concord  with  the  Kibhus  or  A dityas,  or  standing  still  in 
Vishnu’s  striding-places. 

13  When  I,  0 Asvins,  call  on  you  to-day  that  I may  gather 

strength, 

Or  as  all-conquering  might  in  war,  bo  that  the  Alvins’  noblest 
grace. 

14  Now  come,  ye  Asvins,  hitherward:  here  are  oblations  set 

for  you ; 

These  Soma-draughts  to  aid  Yadu  and  Turvasa,  these  offered 
you  mid  Kanva’s  sons. 

15  Whatever  healing  balm  is  yours,  Nasatyas,  near  or  far  away, 
Therewith,  great  Sages,  grant  a home  to  Vatsa  and  to  Vimada. 

16  Together  with  the  Goddess,  with  the  Asvins’  Speech  have 

awoke. 

Thou,  Goddess,  hast  disclosed  the  hymn,  and  holy  gift  fron 
mortal  men. 

17  Awake  the  Asvins,  Goddess  Dawn  ! Up  Mighty  Lady  of  swee 

strains ! 

Rise,  straightway,  priest  of  sacrifice ! High  glory  to  th< 
gladdening  draught ! 

18  Thou,  Dawn,  approaching  with  thy  light  shinest  togethei 

with  the  Sun, 

And  to  this  man-protecting  home  the  chariot  of  the  Asvins  comes 

19  When  yellow  stalks  give  forth  the  juice,  as  cows  from  udders 

pour  their  milk, 

And  voices  sound  the  song  of  praise,  the  Asvins’  worshippers 
show  first. 

20  Forward  for  glory  and  for  strength,  protection  that  shall 

couquer  men, 

And  power  and  skill,  most  sapient  Ones ! 

11  Out  living  creatures : our  dependents  and  our  cattle. 

12  Vishnu's  striding  pf accs : from  which  he  made  hi«  three  great  strides 
through  earth,  firmament,  and  heaven. 

18  That:  the  granting  of  my  request. 

15  And  to  Vimada : as  ye  did  to  Vimada. — Sflyana.  See  Vol.  I.,  Index. 

16  The  Goddess : Dawn.  The  A » mns'  Speech : V&k  or  Speech  who  glorifies 
the  Asvins  ; i.  e.  the  hymn  that  praises  them. 

19  Yellow  stalks  : of  Soma  plants. 

20  Forward  for  glory : advance  and  come  to  give  us  glory,  etc. 


When,  Asvins,  worthy  of  our  lauds,  ye  seat  you  in  the  father’s 
house. 

With  wisdom  or  the  bliss  ye  bring. 

HYMN  X.  Asvins. 

Whether  ye  travel  far  away  or  dwell  in  yonder  light  of 
heaven, 

Or  in  a mansion  that  is  built  above  the  sea,  come  thence,  ye 
Asvins,  hitherward. 

2 Or  if  for  Manu  ye  prepared  the  sacrifice,  remember  also  Kanva’s 

son. 

I call  Brihaspati,  Indra,  Vishnu,  all  the  Gods,  the  Asvins  borne 
by  rapid  steeds. 

3 Those  Asvins  I invoke  who  work  marvels,  brought  hither 

to  receive, 

With  whom  our  friendship  is  most  famed,  and  kinship  passing 
that  of  Gods. 

4 On  whom  the  solemn  rites  depend,  whose  worshippers  rise 

without  the  Sun  : 

These  who  foreknow  the  holy  work  of  sacrifice,  and  by  their 
Godhead  drink  the  sweets  of  Soma  juice. 

5 Whether  ye,  Lords  of  ample  wealth,  now  linger  in  the  east 

or  west, 

With  Druhyu,  or  with  Anu,  Yadu,  Turvsa,  I call  you  hither ; 
come  to  me. 

6 Lords  of  great  riches,  whether  through  the  firmament  ye  fly 

or  speed  through  heaven  and  earth, 

Or  with  your  Godlike  natures  stand  upon  your  cars,  come 
thence,  0 Asvins,  hitherward. 

HYMN  XI.  Agui. 

Thou,  Agni,  God  mid  mortal  men,  art  guard  of  sacred  rites, 
thou  art 

To  be  adored  at  sacrifice. 

21  In  the  father's  house  : in  the  sacrificial  hall  of  the  father  of  the  family, 
the  wealthy  householder  who  institutes  the  sacrifice.  This  stanza  is  a conti- 
nuation of  19,  although  the  connexion  is  interrupted  by  the  intervening  stanza. 


1 Above  the  sea : above  the  ocea^  of  air. 

3 To  receive : our  oblations. 

4 Without  the  sun : S'tyana  explains  astire  differently,  connecting  in  with 
pm  instead  of  sfira : ‘ of  whom  there  are  worshippers  in  a place  where  there 

is  no  worship.’— Wilson. 

5 Druhyu  and  the  other  names  staud  for  the  tribes  called  after  these 
ancient  chieftains.  See  Vol.  I.,  Index. 

iIZ!Zma  “ translated  in  Mvx  Muller’s  History  of  * Ancient  Sanskt'U 


132 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


f BOOK  VIJI 


2 0 Mighty  Agni,  thou  must  be  glorified  at  our  festivals, 
Bearing  our  offerings  to  the  Gods. 

3 0 Jatavedas  Agni,  fight  and  drive  our  foes  afar  fiom  us, 

Them  and  their  godless  enmities. 

4 Thou,  Jatavedas,  scekest  not  the  worship  of  a hostile  man, 
However  nigh  it  be  to  thee. 

5 We  sages,  mortals  as  we  are,  a lore  the  mighty  name  of  thee, 
Immortal  Jatavedas’  name. 

6 Sages,  wo  call  the  Sage  to  help,  mortals,  we  call  the  God  to  aid : 
We  call  on  Agni  with  our  songs. 

7 May  Yatsa  draw  thy  mind  away  even  from  thy  loftiest  dwel- 

ling-place, 

Agni,  with  song  that  yearns  for  thee. 

8 Thou  art  the  same  in  many  a place  : mid  all  the  people  thou 

art  Lord. 

In  fray  and  fight  we  call  on  thee. 

9 When  we  are  seeking  strength  we  call  Agni  to  help  us  in 

the  strife, 

The  giver  of  rich  gifts  in  war. 

10  Ancient,  adorable  at  sacrifices,  Priest  from  of  old,  meet  for  our 
praise,  thou  sittest. 

Fill  full  and  satisfy  thy  body,  Agni,  and  win  us  happiness  by 
offering  worship. 

HYMN  XII.  Indra. 

Joy,  Mightiest  Indra,  known  and  marked,  sprung  most  from 
Soma-draughts,  wherewith 

Thou  smitest  down  the  greedy  fiend,  for  that  we  long. 

2 Wherewith  thou  holpest  Adhrigu,  the  great  Dasagva,  and 

the  God 

Who  stirs  the  sunlight,  and  the  sea,  for  that  we  long. 

3 Wherewith  thou  dravest  forth  like  cars  Sindhu  and  all  the 

mighty  floods 

To  go  the  way  ordained  by  Law,  for  that  we  long. 

2 Bearing  our  offering*  to  tie  Gorts:  liteially,  ‘the  charioteer  of  solemn  rites.’ 

1 Joy:  mddah  : the  rapturous  exhilaration  produced  in  Indra  by  d linking 
the  S«>ma  juice.  For  that  we  Lout/;  the  short  refrain  or  burden  which 
generally  concludes  each  stanza  of  each  triplet  of  this  hymn  is  sometimes 
rather  loosely  attached  and  cannot  always  be  clearly  brought  out  in  the  proper 
place  in  translation. 

2 Adhrigu  : according  to  S Ay ana  a Rishi  so  named.  See  I 1 1 2.  20.  Dasagva : 
one  of  the  priestly  family  connected  with,  or  identical  with,  the  Angirases, 

* the  accomplisher  of  the  ten  (months’  rib).’  -Wilson.  Ludwig  thinks  that^ 
Dagagva  here  may  m<  an  the  Sun  The  sea  : of  dir. 


THE  RIGVEDA. 


133 


hymn  12.3 


4 Accept  this  laud  for  aid,  made  pure  like  oil,  thou  Caster  of 

the  Stone, 

Whereby  even  in  a moment  thou  hast  waxen  great. 

5 Be  pleased,  Song-lover,  with  this  song : it  flows  abundant 

like  the  sea. 

Indra,  with  all  thy  succours  thou  hast  waxen  great. 

6 The  God  who  from  afar  hath  sent  gifts  to  maintain  our 

friendship’s  bond, 

Thou,  spreading  them  like  rain  from  heaven,  hast  waxen  great. 

7 The  beams  that  mark  him  have  grown  strong,  the  thunder 

rests  between  bis  arms, 

When,  like  the  Sun,  he  hath  increased  both  Heaven  and  Earth. 

8 When,  Mighty  Lord  of  Heroes,  thou  did.st  eat  a thousand 

buffaloes, 

Then  grew  and  waxed  exceeding  great  thine  Indra-power. 

9 Indra  consumeth  with  the  rays  of  Surya  the  malicious  man: 
Like  Agni  conquering  the  woods,  he  hath  grown  strong. 

10  This  newest  thought  of  ours  that  suits  the  time  approaches 

unto  thee : 

Serving,  beloved  in  many  a place,  it  metes  and  marks. 

11  The  pious  germ  of  sacrifice  directly  purifies  the  soul. 

By  Indra’s  lauds  it  waxes  great,  it  metes  and  marks. 

12  Indra  who  wins  the  friend  hath  spread  himself  to  drink  the 

Sorna-draught : 

Like  worshipper’s  dilating  praise ; it  metes  and  marks. 

13  He  whom  the  sages,  living  men,  have  gladdened,  offering  up 

their  hymns, 

Hath  swelled  like  oil  of  sacrifice  in  Agni’s  mouth. 


8 Didst  cat  a thousand  buffaloes:  the  buffaloes  probably  represent  the  clouds 
which  the  Sun  dissipates  or  consumes. — Ludwig.  ‘When  thou  hast  slain 
thousands  of  mighty  foes.’ — Wilson. 

10  It  metes  and  marks:  defines  and  discriminates  Indra’s  good  qualities.— 

»S;ty. in  a. 

H the  germ  of  sacrifice  is  probably  the  wish  that  prompts  the  offering. 

My. ma  explains  differently  : ‘ 7 . e devout  praiser  of  the  adorable  (India) 
pun  is  in  due  succession  the  offering  (of  the  Soma)  ; with  sacred  hymns  he 
magnifies  (the  might  of  Indra;  he  voiily  proclaims  the  measure  (of  his  merits).* 
t diluting  praise  : I follow  Sftyana  ; but  the  stanza  is  unin- 

‘ tgi jle  to  me.  ‘Indra,  the  benefactor  of  his  friend  (the  worshipper),  has 

at ged  himself  to  drink  the  Soma,  in  like  manner  as  the  pious  praise  dilates 
fnrJ)10C auns  the  measure  of  hia  merits.’ — Wilson.  The  meaning  of  ivtaf 
accort*inS  to  Siyava)  is  unceitAin.  Von  Roth  thinks  that  the  two 
in  sapJitw8  are  meauti  aQd  other  explain  it  as  the  sword,  knife,  or  axe  used 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


134 


[BOOK  Yin 


14  Aditi  also  hath  brought  forth  a hymn  for  Indra,  Sovran  Lord: 
The  work  of  sacrifice  for  help  is  glorified. 

1 5 The  ministering  priests  have  sungtheir  songs  for  aid  and  eulogy; 
God,  thy  Bays  turn  not  from  the  rite  which  Law  ordains. 

16  If,  Indra,  thou  drink  Soma  by  Vishnu’s  or  Trita  Aptya's  side> 
Or  with  the  Maruts  take  delight  in  flowing  drops ; 

17  Or,  Sakra,  if  thou  gladden  thee  afar  or  in  the  sea  of  air, 
Rejoice  thee  in  this  juice  of  ours,  in  flowing  drops. 

18  Or,  Lord  of  Heroes,  if  thou  aid  the  worshipper  who  sheds  the 

juice, 

Or  him  whose  laud  delights  thee,  and  his  flowing  drops. 

19  To  magnify  the  God,  the  God,  Indra,  yea,  Indra  for  your  help, 
And  promptly  end  the  sacrifice — this  have  they  gained. 

20  With  worship,  him  whom  men  adore,  with  Soma,  him  who 

drinks  it  most, 

Indra  with  lauds  have  they  increased — this  have  they  gained. 

21  His  leadings  are  with  power  and  might  and  his  instructions 

manifold : 

He  gives  the  worshipper  all  wealth  : this  have  they  gained. 

22  For  slaying  Vritra  have  the  Gods  set  Indra  in  the  foremost 

place. 

Indra  the  choral  bands  have  sung,  for  vigorous  strength. 

23  We  to  the  Mighty  with  our  might,  with  lauds  to  him  who 

hears  our  call, 

With  holy  hymns  have  sung  aloud,  for  vigorous  strength. 

24  Not  earth,  nor  heaven,  nor  firmaments  contain  the  Thunder- 

wielding  God : 

They  shake  before  his  violent  rush  and  vigorous  strength. 

25  What  time  the  Gods,  0 Indra,  set  thee  foremost  in  the  furious 

fight, 

Then  thy  two  beautiful  Bay  Steeds  carried  thee  on. 

26  When  Vritra,  stayer  of  the  floods,  thou  slewest,  Thunderer 

with  might, 

Then  thy  two  beautiful  Bay  Steeds  carried  thee  on. 

27  When  Vishnu,  through  thine  energy,  strode  wide  those  three 

great  steps  of  his, 

Then  thy  two  beautiful  Bay  Steeds  carried  thee  on. 

28  When  thy  two  beautiful  Bay  Steeds  grew  great  and  greater 

day  by  day, 

Even  then  all  creatures  that  had  life  bowed  down  to  thee. 

16  Trita  Aptya : see  VIII.  7.  24,  note.  Here  he  appears  as  the  preparer  d 

fnr  Indra. 


TIIE  RIO  VEDA. 


1S5 


ffYMN  13.] 

jO  When,  Indra,  all  theMarut  folk  humbly  submitted  them  to  thee, 
Even  then  all  creatures  that  had  life  bowed  down  to  thee. 
jO  When  yonder  Sun,  that  brilliant  light,  thou  settest  in  the 
heaven  above, 

Even  then  all  creatures  that  had  life  bowed  down  to  thee, 
jl  To  thee,  0 Indra,  with  this  thought  the  sage  lifts  up  this  eulogy, 
Akin  and  loading  as  on  foot  to  sacrifice. 

J2  When  in  thine  own  dear  dwelling  all  gathered  have  Lifted  up 
the  voice 

Milk-streams  at  worship’s  central  spot,  for  sacrifice, 

)3  As  Priest,  0 Indra,  give  us  wealth  in  brave  men  and  good 
steeds  and  kinc 

That  we  may  first  remember  thee  for  sacrifice. 

HYMN  XIII.  IDdrtt. 

Indra,  when  Soma  juices  flow,  makes  his  mind  pure  and  meet 
for  lauds. 

Ho  gains  the  power  that  brings  success,  for  great  is  he. 

2 In  heaven’s  first  region,  in  the  seat  of  Gods,  is  he  who  brings 

success, 

Most  glorious,  prompt  to  save,  who  wins  the  water-floods. 

3 Him,  to  win  strength,  have  I invoked,  even  Indra  mighty  for 

the  fray. 

Be  thou  most  near  to  us  for  bliss,  a Friend  to  aid. 

4 Indra,  Songdover,  here  for  thee  the  worshippers  libation  flows 
Rejoicing  in  this  sacred  grass  thou  shinest  forth. 

5 Even  now,  0 Indra,  give  us  that  which,  pressing  juice,  wo 

crave  of  thee. 

Bring  us  wealth  manifold  which  finds  the  light  of  heaven, 
fi  What  time  the  zealous  worshipper  hath  boldly  sung  his  songs 
to  thee, 

Like  branches  of  a tree  up-grows  what  they  desire. 

7 Generate  songs  even  as  of  old,  give  ear  unto  the  singer’s  call  : 
Thou  for  the  pious  hast  grown  great  at  each  carouse. 

31  The  second  line  is  difficult.  Wilson,  following  S4ya*ja,  paraphrases  the 
Btauza : ‘ The  wise  (worshipper),  India,  offers  thee  this  gratifying  sincere 
pra^LMe  along  with  pious  rites  at  the  sacrifice,  as  (a  man  places)  a kinsinau  in 
(a  prominent)  position.’ 

32  M ilk- stream* : the  sweetly -flowing  hymns. 

Wilson  remarks : ‘ This  is  probably  an  ancient  hymn,  both  by  it*  repetitions 
nd  combination  of  simplicity  and  obscurity.’ 


139 


THE  BY  MSS  OF  [BOOK  T/// 


8 Sweet  strains  that  glorify^him  play  like  waters  speeding  down 

a slope,  . . TI 

Yea,  him  who  in  this  song  is  called  the  Lord  of  Heaven ; 

9 Yea,  who  alone  is  called  i he  Lord,  the  single  Ruler  of  the  folk, 
By  worshippers  seeking  aid : may  he  joy  in  the  draught. 

10  Praise  him,  the  Glorious,  skilled  in  song,  Lord  of  the  two 

victorious  Bays  : 

They  seek  the  worshipper's  abode  who  bows  in  prayer. 

11  Put  forth  thy  strength:  with  dappled  Steeds  come,  thou o! 

mighty  intellect, 

With  swift  Steeds  to  the  sacrifice,  for  ’tie  thy  joy. 

12  Grant  wealth  to  those  who  praise  thee,  Lord  of  Heroes, 

Mightiest  fndra  : give 
Our  princes  everlasting  fame  and  opulence. 

13  I call  thee  when  the  Sun  is  risen,  I call  thee  at  the  noon  of  day; 
With  thy  car-horses,  Indra,  come  well-pleased  to  us. 

14  Speed  forward  hither,  come  to  us,  rejoice  thee  in  the  milky 

draught : . „ . . 

Spin  out  the  threal  of  ancient  time,  as  well  is  known. 

13  If,  Sakra,  Vritra-slayer,  thou  he  far  away  or  near  to  us, 

Or  in  the  sea,  thou  art  the  guard  of  Soma  juice. 

16  Let  songs  we  sing  and  Soma-drops  expressed  by  us  make 

Indra  strong  : . 

The  tribes  who  bring  oblations  find  defight  in  him. 

17  Him  sages  longing  for  bis  aid,  with  offerings  brought  in  eager 

haste, 

Him,  even  as  branches,  all  mankind  have  made  to  grow. 

18  At  theTrikadrnkas  the  Coils  span  sacrifice  that  stirred  the  mud: 
May  onr  songs  strengthen  him  who  still  hath  strengthened 

19  When,  true  to  duty,  at  due  times  the  worshipper  offers  lands 


to  thee, 

They  call  him  Purifier,  Pure,  and  Wonderful. 


TI  Spin  out  the  thread  of  ancient  times  : * extend  the  ancient  Bncrifiee. 

^Thedue  peiformanoe  of  sacrifice  is  regaided  as  an  unbroken  thieatl  reaching 
th'ongh  a Hiiocesvdon  of  Ilinhia  f'om  ancient  to  modern  times. 

15  lathcsea:  in  the  firmament,  or  ocenti i of  air. 

17  AV  mankind:  HlmM  But.ee  M.  Muller  \ (die  Hymns  I.  6W- 

18  At  the  TAkfulruhis : arroiding  to  Silyana  these  are  the  first  t! 

of  the  Ahhiplava  ceremony.  Aeeoidmg  to  Rome  modern i bcIm>  »rH 
probably  tliree  peculiar  Soma-vessels,  or  an  oblation  consisting  of  . 

ing«  of  Soma.  Span  sacrifice : see  above  note  on  14.  That  stirred 

that  urged  others  to  follow  the  example. 

19  Him  : a change  of  per-on,  India  being  meant. 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


1&7 


YMN  13] 

) That  mind  of  Rudra,  fresh  and  strong,  moves  conscious  in  the 
ancient  ways, 

With  reference  whereto  the  wise  have  ordered  this, 
jf  thou  elect  to  be  my  Friend  drink  of  this  sacrificial  juice, 

By  help  whereof  we  may  subdue  all  enemies. 

) ()  In  Ira,  Lover  of  the  song,  when  shall  thy  praiser  be  most  blest? 

When  wilt  thou  grant  us  wealth  in  herds  of  kine  and  steeds? 

\ And  thy  two  highly-lauded  Bays,  strong  stallions,  draw  thy 
car  who  art 

Untouched  by  age,  most  gladdening  car  for  which  we  pray. 

I With  ancient  offerings  we  implore  the  Young  and  Strong 
whom  many  praise. 

He  from  of  old  hath  sat  upon  dear  sacred  grass. 

) Wax  mighty,  thou  whom  many  laud  for  aids  which  Risliis 
have  extolled. 

Pour  down  for  us  abundant  food  and  guard  us  well. 

3 0 fndra,  Caster  of  the  Stone,  thou  helpest  him  who  praises  thee: 

From  sacrifice  l send  to  thee  a mind  yoked  hymn 
J Here,  yoking  for  the  Soma  draught  these  Horses,  sharers  of 
tl  y feast, 

Thy  Bay  Steeds,  Indra,  fraught  with  wealth,  consent  to  come. 

R Attendants  on  thy  glory,  lgt  the  Rudras  roar  assent  to  thee, 
And  all  the  Marut  companies  come  to  the  feast. 

9 These  his  victorious  followers  hold  in  the  heavens  the  place 
they  love, 

Leagued  in  the  heart  of  sacrifice,  as  well  we  know. 

0 That  we  may  long  behold  the  light,  what  time  the  ordered 

rite  proceeds, 

He  duly  measures,  as  he  views,  the  sacrifice. 

1 0 Indra,  strong  is  this  thy  car,  and  strong  are  these  Bay 

Steeds  of  thine  : 

0 Satakratu,  thou  art  strong,  strong  is  our  call. 

| 20  Have  ordered  thin  : son"  of  praise,  or  Imly  ceremony. — Ludwig, 
i 26  Mind-yoked  : m ule  ready  by  the  poet’s  mind,  as  a chariot — to  which  the 
J’tnu  is  frequently  compared — is  equipped  for  a journey. 

28  The  Rudras  : the  sons  of  Rudra,  the  Maruts. 

^9  The  heart,  literally  navel,  tha;  is  the  central  point,  of  sacrifice,  is  the 
icoptvcle  on  which  oblations  are  placed,  or  the  uttaravedl  or  north  altar. 

31  Strong  ; irlshd  * as  h.>s  been  noticed  before  (see  I.  177  2.  3 ) some  of 

|f!  'r°(hc  poets  delight  in  the  repetition  of  this  word  and  derivatives  from  the 
loetdot  SHyana  explains  vrishi : ns  ‘ showerer  of  benefits,’  nnd  Ludwig 
fin*  ate*  it  by  ‘ itierkijiftig,*  strong  as  a bull.  The  original  meaning  of  the 
01  is  mule,  masculine,  and,  hence,  stroug, 


138  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK 

32  Strong  is  the  press-stone,  strong  thy  joy,  strong  is  the  flowii 

Soma  juice: 

Strong  is  the  rite  thou  furtherest,  strong  is  our  call. 

33  As  strong  I call  on  thee  the  Strong,  0 Thunderer  with  th 

thousand  aids  : 

For  thou  hast  won  the  hymn  of  praise.  Strong  is  our  call, 

HYMN  XI V.  Indn 

Ip  I,  0 Indra,  were,  like  thee,  the  single  Sovran  of  all  wealth 
My  worshipper  should  bo  rich  in  kino. 

2 I should  be  fain,  0 Lord  of  Power,  to  strengthen  and  enricl 

the  sage, 

Were  I the  Lord  of  herds  of  kine. 

3 To  worshippers  who  press  the  juice  thy  goodness,  Indra,  iaa 

cow 

Yielding  in  plenty  kine  and  steeds. 

4 None  is  there,  Indra,  God  or  man,  to  hinder  thy  munificence 
The  wealth  which,  lauded,  thou  wilt  give. 

5 The  sacrifice  made  Indra  strong  when  ho  unrolled  the  earth, 

and  made 

Himself  a diadem  in  heaven. 

6 Thine  aid  we  claim,  0 Indra,  thine  who  after  thou  hast  waxeu 

great 

Hast  won  all  treasures  for  thine  own. 

7 In  Soma’s  ecstasy  Indra  spread  the  firmament  and  realms  of 

light, 

When  he  cleft  Vala  limb  from  limb. 

8 Showing  the  hidden  he  dravo  forth  the  cows  for  the  Angirases, 
And  Vala  he  east  hoadlong  down. 

9 By  Indra  were  the  luminous  realms  of  heaven  established 

and  secured, 

Firm  and  immovable  from  their  place. 

10  Indra,  thy  laud  moves  quickly  like  a joyous  wave  of  water 

floods : 

Bright  shine  the  drops  that  gladden  thee. 

11  For  thou,  0 Indra,  art  the  God  whom  hymns  and  praises 

magnify  : 

Thou  blessest  those  who  worship  thee. 

12  Let  the  two  long-maned  Bay  Steeds  bring  Indra  to  drink  the 

Soma  juice, 

The  Bountiful  to  our  sacrifice. 


THE  RIGVEDA. 


139 


With  waters*  foam  thou  torest  off,  Indra,  the  head  of  Namuchi, 
Subduing  all  contending  hosts. 

The  Dasyus,  when  they  fain  would  climb  by  magic  arts  and 
mount  to  heaven, 

Thou,  Indra,  castest  down  to  earth. 

\ As  Soma-drinker  conquering  all,  thou  scatteredst  to  every  side 
Their  settlement  who  poured  no  gifts. 

HYMN  XV.  Indra. 

Sing  forth  to  him  whom  many  men  invoke,  to  him  whom 
many  laud  : 

Invite  tue  powerful  Indra  with  your  songs  of  praise. 

I Whose  lofty  might — for  doubly  strong  is  he — supports  the 
heavens  and  earth, 

And  hills  and  plains  and  floods  and  light  with  manly  power. 

\ Such,  Praised  by  many  ! thou  art  King : alone  thou  smitest 
Vritras  dead, 

To  gain,  0 Indra,  spoils  of  war  and  high  renown. 

1 We  sing  this  strong  and  wild  delight  of  thine  which  conquers 
in  the  fray, 

Which,  Caster  of  the  Stone  ! gives  room  and  ^hincs  like  gold. 

5 Wherewith  thou  also  foundest  lights  for  Ayu  and  for  Manu*s 

sake  : 

Now  joying  in  this  sacred  grass  thou  beamest  forth. 

6 This  day  too  singers  of  the  hymn  praise,  as  of  old,  this  might 

of  thine  : 

Win  thou  the  waters  day  by  day,  thralls  of  the  strong. 

7 That  lofty  Indra-powcr  of  thine,  thy  strength  and  thine 
] intelligence, 

I Thy  thunderbolt  for  which  we  long,  the  wish  makes  keen. 

P 0 Indra,  Heaven  and  Earth  augment  thy  manly  power  and 
thy  renown  : 

The  waters  and  the  mountains  stir  and  urge  thee  on. 

9 Vishnu  the  lofty  ruling  Power,  Varuna,  Mitra  sing  thy  praise : 
In  thee  the  Maruts’  company  have  great  delight. 

13  With  waters'  foam:  with  a thunderbolt  in  the  form  of  foam,  according 
> a later  legend.  See  Lanmau,  Sanskrit  Reader , p.  375,  who  takes  Namuchi 
) be  a waterspout  in  a lake,  and  ‘ with  foam  ’ to  mean  ‘ accompanied  by  foam.‘ 

4 Wild'deliyht Soma  juice,  the  cause  of  thy  raptuie. 

»4  5 /ur  Ayu  and  for  Manu's  sake  : that  is  for  man.  Ayu  was  the  son  of 
i muiavaa  and  Urvaat. 

^ Thralls  of  the  sU'ong : controlled  and  imprisoned  by  Vritra. 

The  with : our  wishes  expressed  in  prayer  and  praise. 


140  THE  I1YMSS  OF  [BOOK  T//| 

10  0 Indra,  thou  wast  born  the  Lord  of  men,  most  liberal  of  tin 

gifts : 

Excellent  deeds  for  evermore  are  all  thine  own. 

11  Ever,  alone,  0 highly- praised,  thou  sendest  Vritras  to  tlicii 

rest : 

None  else  than  Indra  executes  the  mighty  deed. 

12  Though  here  and  there,  in  varied  hymns,  India,  men  call  on 

thee  for  aid, 

Still  with  our  heroes  fight  and  win  the  light  of  heaven. 

13  Already  have  all  forms  of  him  entered  our  spacious  dwelling. 

place : 

For  victory  stir  thou  Indra,  up,  the  Lord  of  Might. 

HYMN  XVT.  Iuifai 

Praise  Indra  whom  our  songs  must  laud,  sole  Sovran  ol 
mankind,  the  Chief 
Most  liberal  who  controllcth  men. 

2 In  whom  the  hymns  of  praise  delight,  and  all  the  glory-givin| 

songs, 

Like  the  floods’  longing  for  the  sea. 

3 Him  I invite  with  eulogy,  best  King,  effective  in  the  fight, 
Strong  for  the  gain  of  mighty  spoil. 

4 Whose  perfect  ecstasies  are  wide,  profound,  victorious,  am 

give 

Joy  in  the  field  where  heroes  win. 

5 Him,  when  the  spoils  of  war  are  staked,  men  call  to  be  thei 

advocate : 

They  who  have  Indra  win  the  day. 

6 Men  honour  him  with  stirring  songs,  and  magnify  with  solcni 

rites : 

Indra  is  he  who  giveth  ease. 

7 Indra  is  Priest  and  Hishi,  he  is  much  invoked  by  many  mer 
And  mighty  by  his  mighty  powers. 

8 Meet  to  be  lauded  and  invoked,  true  Hero  with  his  deeds  < 

might, 

Victorious  even  when  alone. 


13  All  forms  of  him:  the  various  qualities  of  Indra  have  been  yeMmite  • 
Stir  thou:  the  Ilinhi  addresses  himself.  Loui  of  Might:  S'tchipatvn  ■ 
later  literature,  lord  or  husband  of  Sachl  or  his  might  personified  and  icgar 
as  his  consort. 

7 Priest:  brnhmtt , meaning,  according  to  S&yana,  greater  than  all 
45  7,  ‘The  Brahman  who  accepts  the  praje*,'  that  is,  Indra  regi'R^ 
priest,  Rishi : according  to  Sayat.a,  ‘ the  beholder  of  all  the  Aryan  iw* 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


141 


iy  17.3 

The  men,  the  people  magnify  that  Indra  with  their  Sama  songs, 
tV i th  hymns  and  sacred  eulogies  : 

iim  who  advances  them  to  wealth,  sends  light  to  lead  them 
in  the  war, 

\nd  quells  their  foemcn  in  the  fray. 

Way  he,  the  saviour  much-invoked,  may  Indra  bear  us  in  a 
ship 

Safely  beyond  all  enemies. 

Vs  such,  0 indra.  honour  us  with  gifts  of  booty,  further  us, 
Vnd  lead  us  to  felicity. 

HYMN  XVII.  i„<Jra. 

?ome,  we  have  pressed  the  juice  fur  thee ; 0 Indra,  drink 
this  Soma  here  : 

$it  thou  on  this  my  sacred  grass. 

3 Indra,  let  thy  long  maned  Bays,  yoked  by  prayer,  bring 
thee  hitherward  : 

live  car  and  listen  to  our  prayers. 

Ye  Soma-bearing  Brahmans  call  thee  Soma-drinker  with  thy 
friend, 

Ye,  Indra,  bringing  Soma  juice. 

3omo  unto  us  who  bring  the  juice,  come  unto  this  our  eulogy, 
hxir  visored  ! drink  thou  of  the  juice. 

1 pour  it  down  within  thee,  so  through  all  thy  members  let  it 
spread  : 

lake  with  thy  tongue  the  pleasant  drink. 

jweet  to  thy  body  let  it  bo,  delicious  be  the  savoury  juice  : 

hveet  be  the  Soma  to  thine  heart. 

dke  women,  let  this  Soma  draught,  invested  with  its  robe, 
approach, 

) active  Indra,  close  to  thee. 

rnlra,  transported  with  the  juice,  vast  in  his  bulk,  strong  in 

his  neck 

bid  stout  arms,  smites  the  Vritras  down. 

^dra,  go  thou  forward,  thou  who  rulest  over  all  by  might  : 
h°u  Vritra-slayer  slay  the  fiends. 

he  thy  grasping-hook  wherewith  thou  givest  ample  wealth 
to  him 

^ ho  sheds  the  juice  and  worships  thee. 

\u‘!  •'  Iudra’s  companion,  th©  thunderbolt.  ‘With  suitable 

WiU,n. 

flilk  that  €'‘ \ <lre^G(l  white  garments  and  moving  slowly.  Its  robe: 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


142 


[BOOR  yjjj 


1 1 Here,  Indra,  is  thy  Soma-draught,  made  pure  upon  the  sacred 

grass : 

Run  hither,  come  and  drink  thereof. 

12  Famed  for  thy  radiance,  worshipped  well ! this  juice  is  shed 

for  thy  delight : 

Thou  art  invoked,  Akhandala  ! 

13  To  Kundapayya,  grandson’s  son,  grandson  of  Sringavrish ' to 

thee,**  * 

To  him  have  I addressed  my  thought. 

14  Strong  pillar  thou,  Lord  of  the  home  ! armour  of  Soma-offerers 
The  drop  of  Soma  breaketh  all  the  strongholds  down,  an 

Indra  is  the  Kish  is’  Friend. 

15  Holy  Pridakusanu,  winner  of  the  spoil,  one  eminent  o’er  man] 

men, 

Lead  on  the  wild  horse  Indra  with  his  vigorous  grasp  forwart 
to  drink  the  Soma  juice. 


HYMN  XVIII.  Adityu 

Now  let  the  mortal  offer  prayer  to  win  the  unexampled  grace 
Of  these  Adityas  and  their  aid  to  cherish  life. 


12  Famed  for  thy  radiance,  worshipped  well:  the  words  thus  rendered, 
stitch  igo  aud  sttchipUjana , have  not  been  satisfactorily  explained  by  the  Com- 
mentator, and  their  meaning  is  still  uncertain.  According  to  Siiyaiin,  tk 
former  may  mean  ‘thou  whose  cattle  are  strong,’  or  ‘thou  whose  radiand 
is  renowned,’  and  the  latter  ‘thou  of  renowned  adoration  ’ or  ‘whose  hymn, 
are  renowned  * 8ee  Wilson’s  note.  Thou  urt  invoked,  Akhandalal : or,  ‘Thou, 
0 Destroyer,  art  invoked.’  This  appellation  of  Indra  does  not  occur  agaiu is 
the  Rigveda,  8ee  Muir,  0 S.  'Texts,  IV.  190. 

13  Kvndaplyya  and  Sringavrish  appear  hero  to  be  names  of  men.  Accord 
ing  to  S&yana,  knndaptityya  is  the  name  of  a particular  Soma  ceremony,  and 
the  offspring  of  Sringavrish  is  Indra  himself.  ‘(Indra),  who  wad:  the  off 
spring  of  Sringavrish,  of  whom  the  kundapdyya  rite  was  the  protector,  (the 
sages)  have  fixed  (of  old)  their  minds  upon  this  ceremony.’  See  Wilson* 
note  who  observes  that  ‘ tho  construction  is  loose,  aud  the  exphuiationnk 
very  satisfactory.’ 

14  Lord  of  the  home  : apparently  the  householder  who  institutes  the  satfi 
fice  is  addressed,  he  vdstoshpate  grihapate. — tt&yana.  The  Riskin' 
munindm  sakhd , the  friend  of  the  Munis,  sages,  saintly  men  or  ascetics;  of n* 
Rishis,  according  to  S&yana. 

15  Priddkusdnu : I follow  Ludwig  in  taking  this  to  be  the  name  of  the 
insti tutor  of  the  sacrifice.  According  to  Sftyana  who  explains  it  as  'lif^ 
up  the  head  or  back  like  a serpent,’  or  * to  be  propitiated,  as  a serpent  is, 
gems,  charms,  medicaments,  etc.,’  it  is  an  epithet  of  Indra  ; and  the  le*®* 
forward  of  Indra  in  the  second  line  is  the  worshipper,  understood.  11^ 
mania  banishes  the  last  three  stanzas  to  his  Appendix  as  not  originally  for®* 
ing  part  of  the  hymn. 

1 Adityat:  see  I.  14,  3. 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


143 


rj/zv  18.1 


for  not  an  enemy  molests  the  paths  which  these  Adityas  tread  : 
Infallible  guards,  they  strengthen  us  in  happiness, 
tfow  soon  may  Bhaga,  Savitar,  Vanina,  Mitra,  Aryaman 
Give  us  the  shelter  widely  spread  which  we  implore. 

With  Gods  come  thou  whose  fostering  care  none  checks,  O 
Goddess  Aditi : 

Come,  dear  to  many,  with  the  Lords  who  guard  us  well. 

For  well  these  Sons  of  Aditi  know  to  keep  enmities  aloof : 
Unrivalled,  giving  ample  room,  they  save  from  woe. 

Aditi  guard  our  herd  by  day,  Aditi,  free  from  guile,  by  night, 
Aditi,  ever  strengthening,  save  us  from  grief ! 

And  in  the  day  our  hymn  is  this : May  Aditi  come  nigh  to  help, 
With  loving-kindness  bring  us  weal  and  chase  our  foes. 

And  may  the  Asvins,  the  divine  Pair  of  Physicians,  send  us 
health : 

May  they  remove  iniquity  and  chase  our  foes. 

May  Agni  bless  us  with  his  fires,  and  Surya  warm  us 
pleasantly : 

May  the  pure  Wind  breathe  sweet  on  us,  and  chase  our  foes, 
i Drive  ye  disease  and  strife  away,  drive  yo  away  malignity : 
Adityas,  keep  us  ever  far  from  sore  distress. 


Remove  from  us  the  arrow,  keep  famine,  Adityas  ! far  away  : 

Keep  enmities  afar  from  us,  Lords  of  all  wealth  ! 

! Now,  0 Adityas,  grant  to  us  the  shelter  that  lets  man  go  free, 

Yea,  even  the  sinner  from  his  sin,  ye  Bounteous  Gods  ! 

► Whatever  mortal  with  the  power  of  demons  fain  would 
injure  us, 

May  he,  impetuous,  suffer  harm  by  his  own  deeds. 

1 May  sin  o’ertake  our  human  foe,  the  man  who  speaketh  evil 
things, 

Him  who  would  cause  our  misery,  whose  heart  is  false. 

) Gods,  ye  are  with  the  simple  ones,  ye  know  each  mortal 
your  hearts  : 

Ye,  Vasus,  well  discriminate  the  false  and  true. 

} Kain  would  we  have  the  sheltering  aid  of  mountains  and 
water-floods  : 

Keep  far  from  us  iniquity,  O Heaven  and  Earth. 

? So  with  auspicious  sheltering  aid  do  yo,  0 Vasus,  carry  us 

Beyond  all  trouble  and  distress,  borne  in  your  ship. 


in 


of 


4 With  the  Lords : sHrihhth  ; that  is,  the  Gods. 

With  the  power  of  demons  : ‘ from  his  diabolical  nature.’— Wilson. 


THE  ffYMXS  OF 


144 


[BOOK  Via 


18  Adityas,  ye  Most  Mighty  Ones,  grant  to  our  children  and 

their  seed 

Extended  term  of  life  that  they  may  live  long  days. 

19  Sacrifice,  0 Adityas,  is  your  inward  monitor  : be  kind, 

For  in  the  bond  of  kindred  we  are  bound  to  you. 

20  The  Maruts’  high  protecting  aid,  the  Asvins,  and  the  God 

who  saves, 

Mitra  and  Varuin  for  weal  we  supplicate. 

21  Grant  us  a home  with  triple  guard,  Aryaman,  Mitra,  Varuna! 
Unthreatened,  Maruta ! meet  for  praise,  and  tilled  with  men. 

22  And  as  we  human  beings,  0 Adityas,  are  akin  to  death,  * 
Graciously  lengthen  ye  our  lives  that  wo  may  live. 

HYMN  XIX. 

Sing  praise  to  him,  the  Lord  of  Light.  The  Gods  have  made 
the  God  to  be  their  messenger, 

And  sent  oblation  to  the  Gods. 

2 A:ni,  the  Bounteous  Giver,  bright  with  varied  flames,  laud 

thou,  0 singer  Sobhari  — 

Him  who  controls  this  sacred  food  with  Soma  blent,  who  hath 
first  claim  to  sacrifice. 

3 Thee  have  we  chosen  skilfullest  in  sacrifice,  Immortal  Priest 

among  the  Gods,’ 

Wise  finisher  of  this  holy  rite  : 

4 The  Son  of  Strength,  the  blesskl,  brightly-shining  One,  Agni 

whose  light  is  excellent. 

M ty  he  by  sacrifice  win  us  in  heaven  the  grace  of  Mitra, 
Varuna,  and  the  Floods. 

5 The  mortal  who  hath  ministered  to  Agui  with  oblation,  fuel 

r.tual  lore, 

And  reverence,  skilled  in  sacrifice, 


19  Your  inward  monitor  : or  neir  remembrancer,  not  suffering  you  to  reu 
until  you  have  rewarded  men  for  their  devotions.  Ludwig  gays  that  tin 
Juf/th  of  the  text  is  leally  hi  Uah  For  sacrifice,  Adityas,  is  your  neaiesi 
dwelling  pi  tee 

20  Tin  (rod  who  saves:  Imlra,  who  is  especially  the  tutelary  Oml of  A'vaiw 

21  With  triple  fjnanl.  or,  triply  defending  or  defended  According  h 
SAjaoa,  protecting  from  heat,  cold,  and  wot ; or  three-stoi eyed. 

22  Akin  to  death:  born  subject  to  death. 

1 The  Gods:  in  the  first  line  are,  according  to  S&y.uia,  the  priests,  i.  ^ 
who  praise  : dim/anti  stuvantiti  devd  ritvijo ; but  the  word  may  be  taken  u 
its  ordinary  signification. 

5 Ritual  lore : ridena  here  can  hardly  mean,  as  SAyana  explains  it,  ty 
studying  the  Vedo’  It  may  perhaps  mean  ‘ by  knowledge  of  the  ljroP,crU^ 
of  the  saccd  formulas.’  or  hh  M Muller  says,  ‘by  the  bundle  of  gras*  ub 
in  sacrifice.  See  Anc.  S.  Literature . p.  28,  note,  and  p.  205. 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


UB 


TJLV  19.] 

$ Verily  swift  to  run  are  his  fleet-footed  steeds,  and  most  re- 
splendent fame  is  his. 

No  trouble  caused  by  Gods  or  wrought  by  mortal  man  from 
any  side  o’ertaketh  him. 

f May  we  by  thine  own  fires  be  well  supplied  with  fire,  0 Son 
of  Strength,  0 Lord  of  Might : 

Thou  as  our  Friend  hast  worthy  men. 

} Agni,  who  praises  like  a guest  of  friendly  mind,  is  as  a car 
f that  brings  us  gear. 

| Also  in  thee  is  found  perfect  security : thou  art  the  Sovran 
Lord  of  wealth. 

) That  man,  moreover,  merits  praise  who  brings,  auspicious 
Agni,  sacrificial  gifts : 

May  he  win  riches  by  his  thoughts. 

0 He  for  whose  sacrifice  thou  standest  up  erect  is  prosperous 

and  rules  o’er  men. 

He  wins  with  coursers  and  with  singers  skilled  in  song  : with 
heroes  he  obtains  the  prize. 

1 He  in  whoso  dwelling  Agni  is  chief  ornament,  and,  all-desired, 

loves  his  laud  well, 

And  zealously  tends  his  offerings — 

2 His,  or  the  lauding  sage’s  word,  his,  Son  of  Strength  ! who  is 

most  prompt  with  sacred  gifts, 

Set  thou  beneath  the  Gods,  Vasu,  above  mankind,  the  speech 
of  the  intelligent. 

3 He  who  with  sacrificial  gifts  or  homage  bringeth  very  skilful 

Agni  nigh, 

I Or  him  who  flashes  fast  with  song, 

|4  The  mortal  who  with  blazing  fuel,  as  his  laws  command, 
adores  the  Perfect  God, 

Blest  with  his  thoughts  in  splendour  shall  exceed  all  men,  as 
though  he  overpassed  the  floods. 

& Give  us  the  splendour,  Agni,  which  may  overcome  each 
greedy  fiend  in  our  abode, 

The  wrath  of  evil-hearted  folk. 


7 Hast  worthy  men:  in  us  thy  woi  shippers. 

10  With  coursers  and  with  singers : is  successful  in  chariot-races  and  is 
1 aided  by  the  Gods  for  his  sacrifices. 

beneath  the  Gods  and  above  mankind,  is  rud  to  mean  * spread 
ough  all  the  sky.’  The  meaning  of  this  and  the  preceding  stanza  is  some- 

obscurely  expressed. 

^Uibie,Pclmpleto!'’<e;  eiplained  by  S4y™a  as  akhandaniycm, 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


H6 


[BOOK  VUi 


16  That,  wherewith  Mitra,  Vanina,  and  Aryaman,  the  Asvinj 

Bhaga  give  us  light,  ’ ' 

That  may  we,  by  thy  power  finding  best  furtherance,  worship 
0 Indra,  helped  by  thee.  " 

17  0 Agni,  most  devout  are  they,  the  sages  who  have  set  thee 

Sage  exceeding  wise, 

0 God,  for  men  to  look  upon  : 

18  Who  have  arranged  thine  altar.  Blessed  God,  at  morn,  brought 

thine  oblation,  pressed  the  juice. 

They  by  their  deeds  of  strength  have  won  them  mighty] 
wealth,  who  have  set  all  their  hope  in  thee. 

19  May  Agni  worshipped  bring  us  bliss,  may  the  gift,  Bles 

One,  and  sacrifice  bring  bliss  : 

Yea,  may  our  praises  bring  us  bliss. 

20  Show  forth  the  mind  that  brings  success  in  war  with  fien 

wherewith  thou  conquerest  in  tight. 

Bring  down  the  many  firm  hopes  of  our  enemies,  and  let 
vanquish  with  thine  aid. 

21  I praise  with  song  the  Friend  of  man,  whom  Gods  sent  do 

to  be  herald  and  messenger, 

Best  worshipper,  bearer  of  our  gifts. 

22  Thou  unto  sharp-toothed  Agni,  Young  and  Radiant  G( 

proelaimest  with  thy  song  the  feast — 

Agni,  who  for  our  sweet  strains  moulds  heroic  strength  wh 
sacred  oil  is  offered  him, 

23  While,  served  with  sacrificial  oil,  now  upward  and  now  do« 

ward  Agni  moves  his  sword, 

As  doth  the  Asura  his  robe. 


24  The  God,  the  Friend  of  man,  who  bears  our  gifts  to  heave 

the  God  with  his  sweet-smelling  mouth, 

Distributes,  skilled  in  sacrifice,  his  precious  things,  Invokii 
Priest,  Immortal  God. 

25  Son  of  Strength,  Agni,  if  thou  wert  the  mortal,  bright 

Mitra  ! worshipped  with  our  gifts  ! 

And  I were  the  Immortal  God, 


16  That : radiance  or  splendour. 

20  Bring  down  the  many  fim  hopes : there  is  no  substantive  in  the  tel 
and  hopes,  resolves,  thoughts  or  something  similar  must  be  supplied. 

21  The  Fiiend  of  man : or  mdnurhitam  may  mean  ‘him  who  was establisl 
cd  by  Manus.’ 

23  His  sword:  the  flashing  flame.  The  Asura ; the  Sun,  according1 
SAy*$a.  Kobe : outward  form. 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


147 


YMN  19.] 


; I would  not  give  thee  up,  Vasu,  to  calumny  or  misery,  O 
Bounteous  One. 

My  worshipper  should  feel  no  hunger  or  distress,  nor,  Agni, 
should  he  live  in  sin. 

[ Like  a son  cherished  in  his  father’s  house,  let  our  oblation 
rise  unto  the  Gods. 

\ With  thine  immediate  aid  may  I,  excellent  Agni,  ever  gain 
my  wish, 

A mortal  with  a God  to  help. 

} 0 Agni.  by  thy  wisdom,  by  thy  bounties,  by  thy  leading  may 
I gather  wealth. 

Excellent  Agni,  thou  art  called  my  Providence  : delight  thou 
to  be  liberal. 

) Agni,  he  conquers  by  thine  aid  that  brings  him  store  of  noble 
heroes  and  great  strength, 

Whose  bond  of  friendship  is  thy  choice. 

. Thy  spark  is  black  and  crackling,  kindled  in  due  time 

0 Bounteous,  it  is  taken  up. 

Thou  art  the  dear  Friend  of  the  mighty  Mornings:  thou 
shinest  in  glimmerings  of  the  night. 

\ We  Sobharis  have  come  to  him,  for  succour,  who  is  good  to  help 
with  thousand  powers, 

The  Sovran,  Trasadasyu’s  Friend. 

) 0 Agni,  thou  on  whom  all  other  fires  depend,  as  branches  on 
the  parent  stem, 

I make  the  treasures  of  the  folk,  like  songs,  mine  own,  while 

1 exalt  thy  sovran  might. 

1 The  mortal  vyhom,  Adityas,  ye,  Guileless,  lead  to  the  farther  bank 

Of  all  the  princes,  Bounteous  Ones  ! — 

) Whoe’er  he  be,  Man-ruling  Kings ! the  Regent  of  the  race  of 
men — 

May  we,  0 Mitra,  Varuna,  and  Aryaman,  like  him  be  further* 
ers  of  your  law. 

5 ^ fifty  female  slaves  hath  Trasadasyu  given  me,  Puru* 

kutsa’s  son,  v 

Most  liberal,  kind,  lord  of  the  brave. 


33  ^ neglect  of  the  Gods  in  consequence  of  poverty, 

[an  other  men  *eC°  *2  Rppear"  t0  be  : <l  praise  Agni  better 

"f  they  were  f°r  reWWd* 

generaUndwi  • ixwtttf  means  usually  a bride,  a wife,  a woman 

Aquerert  im  here  "andma>ds  or  female  slaves,  the  wives  or  daughters  of 
ler  feuialft  *ffipear  **  rneant-  According  to  von  Roth,  marts  or 

female  draught-animals  are  intended. 


THAI  UXM.JS8  Uf 


140 


ilSUUK  VIII 


37  And  Syava  too  for  me  led  forth  a strong  steed  at  Suvastu’s 
ford : 

A herd  of  three  times  seventy  kine,  good  lord  of  gifts,  he  gave 
to  me. 

HYMN  XX.  Marute. 

Let  none,  Swift  Travellers ! check  you : come  hither,  like. 

spirited,  stay  not  far  away, 

Ye  benders  even  of  what  is  firm. 

2 Maruts,  Ribhukshans,  Rudras,  come  ye  with  your  cars  strong 

fellied  and  exceeding  bright. 

Come,  ye  for  whom  we  long,  with  food,  to  sacrifice,  come  ye 
with  love  to  Sobhari. 

3 For  well  we  know  the  vigorous  might  of  Rudra’s  Sons,  the 

Maruts,  who  are  passing  strong, 

Swift  Vishnu’s  band,  who  send  the  rain. 

4 Islands  are  bursting  forth  and  misery  is  stayed : the  heaven 

and  earth  are  joined  in  one. 

Decked  with  bright  rings,  ye  spread  the  broad  expanses  out, 
when  ye,  Self-luminous,  stirred  yourselves. 

5 Even  things  immovable  shake  and  reel,  the  mountains  and  the 

forest  trees  at  your  approach, 

And  the  earth  trembles  as  ye  come. 

6 To  lend  free  course,  0 Maruts,  to  your  furious  rush,  heaven 

high  and  higher  still  gives  way, 

Where  they,  the  Heroes  mighty  with  their  arms,  display  their 
gleaming  ornaments  on  their  forms. 

7 After  their  Godlike  nature  they,  the  bull-like  Heroes,  dazzling 

and  impetuous,  wear 
Great  splendour  as  they  show  erect. 

37  Suvfotu  is  in  all  probability  the  So.istos  of  Arrian  (Suwad  or  Swat)  near 
the  Kdphfin  or  Kabul  river.  Kine:  there  is  no  substantive  in  the  text.  The 
stanza,  which  has  no  comment  in  the  printed  edition,  is  very  obscure  and  can 
be  only  conjecturally  translated.  See  Ludwig’s  Translation  and  Commentary 
I.  427,  and  IV.  380. 


4 S&yana  seems  to  explain  this  verse,  ‘ The  islands  fall  asunder,  Me  fir^ 
(trees)  experience  distress  ; they  (the  winds)  distress  heaven  and  earth , 
waters  hurry  onward,  0 bright  weaponed,  self-shining  ones,  when  y°,lJ$l 
them.*— E.  B.  C/s  note  in  Wilson’s  Translation.  The  stanza  is  airncu  • 
l have  followed,  generally,  Ludwig’s  version.  Islands:  the  higher  unw 
merged  grounds.  Misery : caused  by  the  preceding  hot  and  dry  wea,  ' 
Are  joined  in  one:  as  the  heavy  rain  obscures  the  horizon.  Bright i 
worn  on  the  arms  or  the  ankles  or  carried  by  the  Maruts  ou  their  shou 
See  I.  166.  9.  . c.  ,r(ci: 

7 Bull-like:  the  exact  meaning  of  vrlshapsavah  is  uncertain,  o/ww 
ahrutapsavah  is  conjecturally  translated.  ^ 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


VYMN  20.] 


140 


8 The  pivot  of  the  Sobharis’  chariot  within  the  golden  box  is 

balmed  with  milk. 

May  they  the  Well-born,  Mighty,  kindred  of  the  Cow,  aid  us 
to  food  and  to  delight. 

9 Bring,  ye  who  sprinkle  balmy  drops,  oblations  to  your  vigorous 

Marut  company, 

To  those  whose  leader  is  the  Bull. 

[0  Come  hither,  0 ye  Maruts,  on  your  strong-horsed  car,  solid  in 
look,  with  solid  naves. 

Lightly  like  winged  falcons,  0 ye  Heroes,  come,  come  to  enjoy 
our  offerings. 

[1  Their  decoration  is  the  same:  their  ornaments  of  gold  are 
bright  upon  their  arms  ; 

Their  lances  glitter  splendidly. 

2 They  toil  not  to  defend  their  bodies  from  attack,  strong  He- 
roes with  their  mighty  arms. 

Strong  are  your  bows  and  strong  the  weapons  in  your  cars, 
and  glory  sits  on  every  face. 

[3  Whose  name  extendeth  like  a sea,  aloue,  resplendent,  so  that 
all  have  joy  in  it, 

And  life-power  like  ancestral  might. 

[4  Pay  honour  to  these  Maruts  and  sing  praise  to  them,  for  of 
the  wheel-spokes  of  the  car 

Of  these  loud  roarers  none  is  last : this  is  their  power,  this 
moves  them  to  give  mighty  gifts. 

15  Blest  by  your  favouring  help  was  he,  0 Maruts,  at  the  earlier 
flushings  of  the  morn, 

And  even  now  shall  he  be  blest. 

.6  The  strong  man  to  whose  sacrifice,  0 Heroes,  ye  approach 
that  ye  may  taste  thereof, 

With  glories  and  with  war  that  wiuneth  spoil  shall  gain  great 
bliss,  ye  Shakers  of  the  world. 

t7  Even  as  Rudra's  Sons,  the  brood  of  the  Creator  Dyaus,  the 
Asura,  desire, 

0 Youthful  Ones,  so  shall  it  be  : 

8 Box:  the  interior  of  the  chariot.  With  milk:  with  fertilizing  rain  sent 
the  Maruts.  The  Cow : Piisni. 

9 1 e icha  sprinkle  balmy  drops : nests  who  offer  libations.  Whose  leader 
* „ Bull  •'  whom  Indra  leads.  Or,  it  may  be,  whose  chariot  is  drawn  by 
3ull8,  as  in  the  following  stanza. 

U 1°°^ : or  bull-like,  or  strong  look. 

4 None  is  last : no  part  of  their  chariot  wheel  is  behind  the  rest  in  speed. 
u«  moves  them  to  give  mighty  gifts : or,  this  (characteristic  belongs  to  them) 
f^ough  greatness  of  their  gifts. 

He;  your  worshipper. 


150  TBS  BYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Vlli 

18  And  these  the  bounteous,  worthy  of  the  Maruts  who  move 

onward  pouring  down  the  rain — 

Even  for  their  sake,  0 Youthful  Ones,  with  kindest  heart  take 
us  to  you  to  be  your  own. 

19  0 Sobhari,  with  newest  song  sing  out  unto  the  youthful  puri- 

fying Bulls, 

Even  as  a plougher  to  his  steers. 

20  Who,  like  a celebrated  boxer,  overcome  the  challengers  in  every 

fight : 

They  who,  like  shining  bulls,  are  most  illustrious-honour 
those  Maruts  with  thy  song. 

21  Allied  by  common  ancestry,  ye  Maruts,  even  the  Cows,  alike 

in  energy, 

Lick,  all  by  turns,  each  other’s  head. 

22  Even  mortal  man,  ye  Dancers  breast-adorned  with  gold,  attains 

to  brotherhood  with  yon. 

Mark  ye  and  notice  us,  0 Maruts ; evermore  your  friendship 
is  secured  to  us. 

23  0 Maruts,  rich  in  noble  gifts,  bring  us  a portion  of  the  Maruts’ 

medicine, 

Ye  Coursers  who  are  Friends  to  us. 

24  Haters  of  those  who  serve  you  not,  bliss-bringers,  bring  us 

bliss  with  those  auspicious  aids  , 

Wherewith  ye  are  victorious  and  guard  Sindhu  well,  and  suc- 
cour Krivi  in  his  need. 

25  Maruts,  who  rest  on  fair  trimmed  grass,  what  balm  soever 

Sindhu  or  Asikni  hath, 

Or  mountains  or  the  seas  contain, 

26  Ye  carry  on  your  bodies,  ye  who  see  it  all : so  bless  us  gracious  j 

therewith.  . , . , 

Cast,  Maruts,  to  the  ground  our  sick  man  s malady : rep 

the  dislocated  limb. 


18  The  bounteous : the  liberal  institutors  of  sacrifice. 

19  Purifying  bulls:  the  strong  Maruts  who  send  the  Bweet  rain. 

21  Allied  by  common  ancestry:  as  the  offspring ; of  Bp?™-  * ^ 

Maruts.  Lick....eack  other's  head  : as  they  crowd  together  in i their  c 
According  to  SAyana,  ‘ the  cows  severally  lick  up  the  quarters  o ) 

22  Ye  Dancers : ye  who  dance  through  the  air. 

24  Krivi : the  eponymus  of  a warrior  tribe  in  the  ben 

combined  with,  or  identical  with  the  panchAlas.  SAy^a  ’^Wilson, 
to  mean  a well : ‘ with  which  you  provided  a well  (f or  Uotama;.  ir> 

25 Asikni : the  Aoesines  of  Quintus  Curtins,  the  Vedie  name  of  the  tw 

bhAzA,  the  modern  ChenAb.  » » i fmrae  * — Wils°n 

26  Redact  the  dislocated  limb : ' re-e»tabh»h  bis  enfeebled  fr*me- 


jYMN  21.] 


THE  RIG  VEDA 


151 


HYMN  XXI.  Indra. 

We  call  on  ^e0,  ^ Matchless  One  ! We  seeking  help,  posses- 
sing  nothing  firm  ourselves, 

Call  on  thee  wonderful  in  fight : 

2 On  thee  for  aid  in  sacrifice.  This  youth  of  ours,  the  hold, 

the  mighty,  hath  gone  forth. 

We  therefore,  we  thy  friends,  Indra,  have  chosen  thee,  free- 
giver,  as  our  Guardian  God. 

3 Come  hither,  for  the  drops  are  here,  0 Lord  of  corn-lands, 

Lord  of  horses,  Lord  of  kine  : 

Drink  thou  the  Soma,  Soma’s  Lord  ! 

4 For  we  the  kinless  singers  have  drawn  hither  thee,  0 Indra, 

who  hast  numerous  kin. 

With  all  the  forms  thou  hast,  come  thou  of  bull-like  strength, 
come  near  to  drink  the  Soma  juice. 

5 Sitting  like  birds  beside  thy  meath,  mingled  with  milk,  that 

gladdeneth  and  exalte th  thee, 

Indra,  to  thee  we  sing  aloud. 

6 We  speak  to  thee  with  this  our  reverential  prayer.  Why 

art  thou  pondering  yet  awhile  ? 

Here  are  our  wishes ; thou  art  liberal,  Lord  of  Bays  : we  and 
our  hymns  are  present  here. 

7 For  not  in  recent  times  alone,  0 Indra,  Thunder-armed,  have 

we  obtained  thine  aid. 

Of  old  we  knew  thy  plenteous  wealth. 

8 Hero,  we  knew  thy  friendship  and  thy  rich  rewards:  these, 

Thunderer,  now  we  crave  of  thee. 

0  Vasil,  for  all  wealth  that  cometh  of  the  kine,  sharpen  our 
powers,  fair-visored  God. 

G Him  who  of  old  hath  brought  to  us  this  and  that  blessing, 
him  I magnify  for  you, 

Even  Indra,  0 my  friends,  for  help : 

10  Borne  by  Bay  Steeds,  the  Lord  of  heroes,  ruling  men,  for  it 
is  he  who  takes  delight. 

i  May  Maghavan  bestow  on  us  his  worshippers  hundreds  of 
cattle  and  of  steeds. 

1 Hero,  may  we,  with  thee  for  Friend,  withstand  the  man  who 

pants  against  us  in  his  wrath, 

In  fight  with  people  rich  in  kine. 

2 May  we  be  victors  in  the  singer’s  battle-song,  and  meet  the 

wicked,  Much-invoked ! 


2 ThU  youth  of  ours : the  noble  who  has  instituted  the  sacrifice. 


152  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VJij 

With  heroes  smite  the  foeman  and  show  forth  our  strength. 
0 Indra,  further  thou  our  thoughts. 

13  0 Indra,  from  all  ancient  time  rivalless  ever  and  compani. 

onless  art  thou  : 

Thou  seekest  comradeship  in  war. 

14  Thou  findest  not  the  wealthy  man  to  be  thy  friend:  those 

scorn  thee  who  are  flown  with  wine. 

What  time  thou  thunderest  and  gatherest,  then  thou,  even  as 
a Father,  art  invoked. 

15  0 Indra,  let  us  not,  like  fools  who  waste  their  lives  at  home, 

with  friendship  such  as  thine 
Sit  idly  by  the  poured-out  juice. 

1G  Giver  of  kine,  may  we  not  miss  thy  gracious  gifts  : lot  ua  not 
rob  thee  of  thine  own. 

Strip  even  the  strong  places  of  the  foe,  and  bring  : thy  gifts 
can  never  be  made  vain. 

17  Indra  or  blest  Sarasvati  alone  bostows  such  wealth,  treasure 

so  great,  or  thou, 

0 Chitra,  on  the  worshipper. 

18  Chitra  is  King,  and  only  kinglings  are  the  rest  who  dwell 

beside  Sarasvati. 

He,  like  Parjanya  with  his  rain,  hath  spread  himself  with 
thousand,  yea,  with  myriad  gifts. 

HYMN  XXII.  Asvin*. 

Hitherward  have  I called  today,  for  succour,  that  moat 
wondrous  car 

Which  ye  ascended,  Asvins,  yc  whose  paths  are  red,  swift  to 
give  ear,  for  Surya’s  sake. 

2 Car  ever  young,  much  longed-for,  easily  invoked,  soon  guided, 
first  in  deeds  of  might. 

Which  waits  and  serves,  0 Sobhari,  with  benevolence,  without 
a rival  or  a foe. 

13  Thou  seefeest  comradeship  in  war:  befrieudest  thy  worshippers  when 
they  need  thine  assistance  in  battle. 

14  Gatherest:  the  clouds.  - M Muller. 

17  Chitra:  the  name  of  this  king  d<>es  not  occur  elsewhere  in  the  Ttigvreda. 

18  Kiivj : rtij'l  Kinyliwjs  : rdjablfh.  Parjanya:  God  of  the  rain  cloud, 
regarded  as  the  type  of  liberal  beneficence. 

1 Ye  whose  paths  are  red  : rudravartard  : this  epithet  of  the  Asvins  h 
variously  explained  ; ‘ having  a path  which  causes  weeping  in  battle, 

‘ whose  paths  are  praised,’ — Sly  ana  ; ‘advancing  on  the  path  to  battle'* 
Wilson;  ‘ proceeding  on  terrible  roads.’ — Muir;  ‘going  on  Kudra’s 
Ludwig;  ‘on  your  light  path.’— Grassmann  ; ‘going  on  a reddish  Pathv 
Pischel.  See  Vedisehe  Studien , I.,  pp.  15  and  55 — 60.  For  SHvyd  i i<iUi  ^ 
choot  the  Asvins  as  her  husbands.  See  1. 110. 17* 


THE  R IQ  VEDA. 


153 


^yMN  22.] 

[3  These  Asvins  with  our  homage,  these  Two  Omnipresent 
Deities 

Hitherward  will  we  bring  for  kind  help,  these  who  seek  the 
dwelling  of  the  worshipper. 

4 One  of  your  chariot  wheels  is  moving  swiftly  round,  one 

speeds  for  you  its  onward  course. 

Like  a milch-cow,  0 Lords  of  splendour,  and  with  haste  let 
your  benevolence  come  to  us. 

5 That  chariot  of  yours  which  hath  a triple  seat  and  reins  of 

gold, 

The  famous  car  that  traverseth  the  heaven  and  earth,  thereon 
Nasatyas,  Asvins,  come. 

5 Ye  with  your  plough,  when  favouring  Manu  with  your  help, 
ploughed  the  first  harvest  in  the  sky. 

As  such  will  we  exalt  you,  Lords  of  splendour,  now,  0 Asvins, 
with  our  prayer  and  praise. 

7 Come  to  us,  Lords  of  ample  wealth,  by  paths  of  everlasting  Law, 
Whereby  to  high  dominion  ye  with  mighty  strength  raised 

Trikshi,  Trasadasyu’s  son. 

8 This  Soma  pressed  with  stones  is  yours,  ye  Heroes,  Lords  of 

plenteous  wealth. 

Approach  to  drink  the  Soma,  come,  drink  in  the  worshipper's 
abode. 

9 0 Asvins,  mount  the  chariot,  mount  the  golden  seat,  ye  who 

aro  Lords  of  plenteous  wealth, 

And  bring  to  us  abundant  food. 

0 The  aids  wherewith  ye  helped  Paktha  and  Adhrigu,  and 

Babhru  severed  from  his  friends, — 

With  those,  0 Asvins,  come  hither  with  speed  and  soon,  and 
heal  whatever  is  diseased. 

1 When  we  continually  invoke  the  Asvins,  the  resistless,  at  this 

time  of  day, 

We  lovers  of  the  song,  with  songs, 


* The  movements  of  the  two  wheels  are  not  very  intelligibly  described.  See 
•tO.  19,  and  V.  73  3 Like  a milch-cow:  a common  type  of  liberality. 

6 Plowjhed  the  first  harvest:  fu si  ploughed  the  ground  and  sowed  and 

toped:  that  ia,  taught,  by  example,  men  to  do  so.  Cp.  I.  117.  21 : 4 Ploughing 
?*  s.ow'nK  barley,  0 ye  Asvins,  milking  out  food  for  men,  ye  wonder-workers, 
poi/th  w^h  y°ur  trumpet,  ye  have  bestowed  wide  light 

7 Tnhhi : see  VI  46.  8. 

IQ  Adf/trt,  AdhriyU)  and  Babhru  are  said  to  have  been  kings. 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


154 


[BOOK  Viti 


12  Through  these,  ye  Mighty  Ones,  come  hither  to  my  call  which 

brings  all  blessings,  wears  all  forms, — 

Through  wuich,  All-present  Heroes,  lavishest  of  food  ye 
strengthened  Krivi,  come  through  these. 

13  I speak  to  both  of  these  as  such,  these  Asvins  whom  I rever- 

ence  at  this  time  of  day  : 

With  homage  we  entreat  them  both. 

14  Ye  who  are  Lords  of  splendour,  ye  whose  paths  are  red,  &t 

eve,  at  morn,  at  sacrifice, 

Give  us  not  utterly  as  prey  to  mortal  foe,  ye  Rudras,  Lords 
of  ample  wealth. 

15  For  bliss  I call  the  blissful  car,  at  morn  the  inseparable  Asvins 

with  their  car 
I call,  like  Sobhari  our  sire. 

16  Rapid  as  thought,  and  strong,  and  speeding  to  the  joy,  bring- 

ing your  swiftly-coming  help, 

Be  to  us  a protection  even  from  far  away,  Lords  of  great  wealth, 
with  many  aids. 

17  Come,  Wonder-Workers,  to  our  home,  our  home,  0 Asvins, 

rich  in  cattle,  steeds,  and  gold, 

Chief  drinkers  of  the  Soma’s  juice  ! 

18  Choice-worthy  strength,  heroic,  firm  and  excellent,  uninjured 

by  the  Rakshas  foe, 

At  this  your  coming  nigh,  ye  Lords  of  ample  wealth  and  all 
good  things,  may  we  obtain. 


HYMN  XXIII.  Agni, 

Worship  thou  Jata vedas,  pray  to  him  who  willingly  accepts, 
Whose  smoke  wanders  at  will,  and  none  may  grasp  his  flame. 

2 Thou,  all  men’s  friend,  Visvamanas,  exaltest  Agni  with  thy 

song, 

The  Giver,  and  his  flames  with  which  no  cars  contend. 

3 Whose  resolute  assault,  to  win  vigour  and  food,  deserves  oui 

praise, — 


12  Krivi:  see  VIII.  20.  24. 

14  Ye  Rudras : ye  red-hued  or  bright  Goda. 

17  Rick  in  cattle : proleptic  ; which  your  coming  will  make  rich. 

The  Rishi  is  Visvamanas  the  son  of  Vyasva. 

1 Wko  williayly  accepts  : p vat  ivy  dm : according  to  S Ay  ana,  * disposed  to 

encounter  enemies ' , 

2 The  second  line  is  difficult,  as  the  adjective  vishpardhasah  stands  withou 
a substantive  and  may  be  either  the  accusative  plural  or  the  genitive  singular  ■ 
4 who  is  the  giver  <»f  chariots  to  the  unenvious  (worshipper).’ — Wibon. 

3 Assault : on  the  oblations  whioh  the  fire  consumes. 


THE  RIO  FED  A. 


155 


YMF  23*1 

Through  whose  discovering  power  the  priest  obtaineth 

wealth. 

Up  springs  the  imperishable  flame,  the  flame  of  the  Reful- 
gent One 

Most  bright,  with  glowing  jaws  and  glory  in  his  train. 

; Skilled  in  fair  sacrifice,  extolled,  arise  in  Godlike  loveliness, 
Shining  with  lofty  splendour,  with  effulgent  light. 

; Called  straight  to  our  oblations,  come,  0 Agni,  through  our 
eulogies, 

As  thou  hast  been  our  envoy  bearing  up  our  gifts, 
r i call  your  Agni,  from  of  old  Invoking  Priest  of  living  men  : 

Him  with  this  song  I laud  and  magnify  for  you. 

\ Whom,  wondrous  wise,  they  animate  with  solemn  rites  and 
his  fair  form, 

Kind  as  a friend  to  men  who  keep  the  holy  Law. 

) Him,  true  to  Law,  who  perfecteth  the  sacrifice,  Law-loving 
ones  ! 

Ye  with  your  song  have  gratified  in  the  place  of  prayer. 

) May  all  our  sacrifices  go  to  him  the  truest  Angiras, 

Who  is  among  mankind  the  most  illustrious  Priest. 

L Imperishable  Agni,  thine  are  all  these  high  enkindled  lights, 
Like  horses  and  like  stallions  showing  forth  their  strength. 

I So  give  us,  Lord  of  Power  and  Might,  riches  combined  with 
hero  strength, 

And  guard  us  with  our  sons  and  grandsons  in  our  frays. 

3 Soon  as  the  eager  Lord  of  men  is  friendly  unto  Manu’s  race, 
Agni  averteth  from  us  all  the  demon  host. 
i 0 Hero  Agni,  Lord  of  men,  on  hearing  this  new  laud  of  mine, 
Burn  down  the  Rakshasas,  enchanters,  with  thy  flame. 

B No  mortal  foe  can  e’er  prevail  by  arts  of  magic  over  him 
Who  serveth  Agni  well  with  sacrificial  gifts. 

3 Vyasva  the  sage,  who  sought  the  Bull,  hath  won  thee,  finder 
of  good  things : 

As  such  may  we  enkindle  thee  for  ample  wealth, 
f Usana  KA,vya  stablished  thee,  0 Agni,  as  Invoking  Priest : 
Thee,  Jatavedas,  Sacrificing  Priest  for  man. 


9 Lawloving  ones:  ‘pious  worshippers.’ — Wilson.  Have  Ratified:  or 

U8t  gratify. 

18  Who  sought  the  Bull : the  strong  Agui.  According  to  SAyapa,  ' the 
lowerer  (of  rain).’ 

H Uifand  Kdvya : see  Yol.  I.,  Index. 


156 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK  Vh 

18  All  Deities  of  one  accord  appointed  thee  their  messenger: 
Thou,  God,  through  hearing,  hadst  first  claim  to  sacrifice. 

19  Him  may  the  mortal  hero  make  his  own  immortal  messenge 

Far-spreading,  Purifier,  him  whose  path  is  black.  c 

20  With  lifted  ladles  let  us  call  him  splendid  with  his  brilliai] 

flame, 

Men’s  ancient  Agni,  wasting  not,  adorable. 

21  The  man  who  pays  the  worship  due  to  him  with  sacrificial  gift 
Obtains  both  plenteous  nourishment  and  hero  fame. 

22  To  Jatavedas  Agni,  chief  in  sacrifices,  first  of  all 
With  homage  goes  the  ladle  rich  with  sacred  gifts. 

23  Even  as  Vyasva  did,  may  we  with  these  most  high  and  libera 

hymns 

Pay  worship  unto  Agni  of  the  splendid  flame. 

24  Now  sing,  as  Sthuiayfipa  sang,  with  lauds  to  him  who  spread 

eth  far, 

To  Agni  of  the  home,  0 Rishi,  Vyasva’s  son. 

25  As  welcome  guest  of  human  kind,  as  offspring  of  the  fores! 

kings, 

The  sages  worship  ancient  Agni  for  his  aid. 

26  For  men’s  oblations  brought  to  him  who  is  the  mighty  Lord 

of  all, 

Sit,  Agni,  mid  our  homage,  on  the  sacred  grass. 

27  Grant  us  abundant  treasures,  grant  the  opulence  which  many 

crave, 

With  store  of  heroes,  progeny,  and  high  renown. 

28  Agni,  Most  Youthful  of  the  Gods,  send  evermore  the  gift  of 

wealth 

Unto  Varosushaman  and  to  all  his  folk. 

29  A mighty  Conqueror  art  thou.  0 Agni,  so  disclose  to  us 
Food  in  our  herds  of  kine  and  gain  of  ample  wealth. 

30  Thou,  Agni,  art  a glorious  God  : bring  hither  Mitra,  Varunn, 

Imperial  Sovrans,  holy-minded,  true  to  Law.  , 

18  Through  hearing : and,  by  causing  the  Gods  to  hear,  men’s  prayers. 

24  Sthtiray&pa : said  by  HAyana  to  be  the  name  of  a Rishi. 

25  Forest  kings  : tall  trees,  or  trees  in  general. 

28  Varosush/lman  : I follow  the  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon  in  joining  ?a,<> 
iushJXmtie  and  taking  the  whole  as  one  word  and  the  name  of  a chief.  Luawtf 
translates  somewhat  as  follows  : 1 Agni,  send  quickly  to  the  folk  who  kbo 
the  goodly  SAnian  well,  the  gift  of  wealth,  for  ever,  Youngest  God  ! to  * 
But  in  a later  volume  of  his  work  (III.  p.  162)  he  comes  to  the  conclj81 
that  SushAraan  is  a proper  name,  aftd  that  va.ro  (which  may,  he  thinks,  w 
interjection)  must  not  be  combined  with  it, 


THE  RIG  VET) A. 


157 


fXX  24.] 

HYMN  XXIV\  Indra. 

Companions,  let  us  learn  a prayer  to  Indra  whom  the  thunder 

arms, 

To  glorify  your  bold  and  most  heroic  Friend. 

) por  thou  by  slaying  Vritra  art  the  Vritra-slayer,  famed  for 
rflight. 

Thou,  Hero,  in  rich  gifts  surpassest  wealthy  chiefs. 

\ As  such,  when  glorified,  bring  us  riches  of  very  wondrous 
; fame, 

j set  in  Jie  highest  rank,  Wealth-giver,  Lord  of  Bays  ! 
jf  Yea,  Indra,  thou  disclosest  that  preeminent  dear  wealth  of 
men  : 

Boldly,  0 Bold  One,  glorified,  bring  it  to  us. 
i The  workers  of  destruction  stay  neither  thy  right  hand  nor 
thy  left : 

Nor  hosts  that  press  about  thee,  Lord  of  Bays,  in  fight, 
j)  0 Thunder-armed,  I come  with  songs  to  thee  as  to  a stall 
with  kine : 

Fulfil  the  wish  and  thought  of  him  who  sings  thy  praise. 

Chief  Vritra-slayer,  through  the  hymn  of  Visvamanas  think 
of  all, 

All  that  concemeth  us,  Excellent,  Mighty  Guide. 

i May  we,  0 Vritra-slayer,  0 Hero,  find  this  thy  newest  boon, 
Longed-for,  and  excellent,  thou  who  art  much  invoked  ! 

> 0 Indra,  Dancer,  Much-invoked  ! as  thy  great  power  is  un- 
surpassed, 

So  he  thy  bounty  to  the  worshipper  unchecked. 

) Most  Mighty,  most  heroic  One,  for  mighty  bounty  fill  thee  full. 
Though  strong,  strengthen  thyself  to  win  wealth,  Maghavan  1 

1 0 Thunderer,  never  have  our  prayers  gone  forth  to  any  God 

but  thee  : 

So  help  us,  Maghavan,  with  thine  assistance  now. 

2 For,  Dancer,  verily  I find  none  else  for  bounty,  saving  thee, 

| For  splendid  wealth  and  power,  thou  Lover  of  the  Song. 

B For  Indra  pour  ye  out  the  drops  ; meath  blent  with  Soma  let 
him  drink  : 

With  bounty  and  with  majesty  will  he  further  us. 

twicer : of  the  dance  of  war.  According  to  S&yana,  1 dancer,  or  who 
dance,  i.  e.  agitator,  exciter,  from  Indra’a  faculty  of  internal  impulse 
PwlbeingB.*- Wilson. 


158  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOR  F//; 

14  1 spake  to  the  Bay  Coursers’  Lord,  to  him  who  gives  ability;  ' 
Now  hear  the  son  of  Asva  as  he  praises  thee. 

15  Never  was  any  Hero  born  before  thee  mightier  than  thou; 
None  certainly  like  thee  in  goodness  and  in  wealth. 

16  0 ministering  priest,  pour  out  of  the  sweet  juice  what  glad. 

dens  most : • 

So  is  the  Hero  praised  who  ever  prospers  us. 

17  Indra,  whom  Tawny  Coursers  bear,  praise  such  as  thine, 

preeminent, 

None  by  his  power  or  by  his  goodness  hath  attained. 

18  We,  seeking  glory,  have  invoked  this  Master  of  all  power  and 

might 

Who  must  be  glorified  by  constant  sacrifice. 

19  Come,  sing  we  praise  to  Indra,  friends,  the  Hero  who  deserves 

the  laud, 

Him  who  with  none  to  aid  o’ercomes  all  tribes  of  men. 

20  To  him  who  wins  the  kine,  who  keeps  no  cattle  back,  Celes- 

tial God, 

Speak  wondrous  speech  more  sweet  than  butter  and  than 
meath. 

21  Whose  hero  powers  are  measureless,  whose  bounty  ne’er  may 

be  surpassed, 

Whose  liberality,  like  light,  is  over  all. 

22  As  Vyasva  did,  praise  Indra,  praise  the  Strong  unfluctuating 

Guide, 

Who  gives  the  foe’s  possessions  to  the  worshipper. 

23  Now,  son  of  Vyasva,  praise  thou  him  who  to  the  tenth  time 

still  is  new, 

The  very  Wise,  whom  living  men  must  glorify. 

24  Thou  knowest,  Indra,  Thunder-armed,  how  to  avoid  destructive 

powers, 

As  one  secure  from  pitfalls  each  returning  day. 


14  Son  of  Asva:  i.  e.  of  Vyasva,  the  Rishi  \ Lvamanas. 

20  Who  keeps  no  cattle  back : either  literally  who  aids  his  worshipped  J 
win  cattle  in  their  raids  and  gives  them  all  the  booty  ; or,  who  send?  ™rk 
the  kine  or  rays  of  light  that  he  has  recovered  from  the  powers  ot  damn 
According  to  SHyana,  ‘ who  rejects  no  praise.’ 

23  Who  to  the  tenth  time  still  is  new : continually  renews  Hia  UberA.lltLh( 

us.  This  seems  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  da^amdm  ndvam  (tenth  new)  o 
text.  S&yana  explains  differently  : * who  is  the  tenth  (of  the  pervading 
principles),  the  adorable.'  . i 

24  Destructive  powers : the  plural  of  Nirriti,  Death  or  Destruction, 
adopt  Ludwig’s  interpretation  of  the  second  line. 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


159 


jyMN  25.] 

5 0 Indra,  bring  that  aid  wherewith  of  old,  Most  Wondrous ! 

thou  didst  slay 

His  foes  for  active  Kutsa  : send  it  down  to  us. 

6 So  now  we  seek  thee  fresh  in  might,  Most  Wonderful  in  act ! 

for  gain  : 

F<y  thou  art  he  who  conquers  all  our  foes  for  us. 

17  Who  will  set  free  from  ruinous  woe,  or  Arya  on  the  Seven 

Streams : 

0 valiant  Hero,  bend  the  Dasa’s  weapon  down. 

18  As  to  Varosushaman  thou  broughtest  great  riches,  for  their 

gain, 

To  Vyasva’s  sons,  Blest  Lady,  rich  in  ample  wealth  ! 

[9  Let  Narya’s  sacrificial  meed  reach  Vyasva’s  Soma-bearing  sons  : 

In  hundreds  and  in  thousands  be  the  great  reward. 

10  If  one  should  ask  thee,  Where  is  he  who  sacrificed  ? Whither 
I lookest  thou  1 

Like  Vala  he  hath  passed  away  and  dwellcth  now  on  Gomati. 

HYMN  XXV.  Mitra-Varuna. 

1 WORSHIP  you  who  guard  this  All,  Gods  holiest  among  the 
Gods, 

You,  faithful  to  the  Law,  whose  power  is  sanctified. 

2 So,  too,  like  charioteers  are  they,  Mitra  and  sapient  Varuna, 
Sons  high-born  from  of  old,  whose  holy  laws  stand  fast. 

3 These  Twain,  possessors  of  all  wealth,  most  glorious,  for 

supremest  sway 

Aditi,  Mighty  Mother,  true  to  Law,  brought  forth. 

27  Arya  on  the  Seven  Streams:  from  any  Aryan  enemy  in  the  land  of  the 
even  Rivers,  probably  the  Indus,  the  five  rivers  of  the  Panjftb,  and  the 
'ubha. 

2S  V arosush&man : see  VIII.  23.  28.  Blest  Lady:  Ushas  or  Dawn  is 

id rested. 

29  X dry  as  saci'ijicial  meed  : Ndrya  appears  to  be  the  name  of  the  institutor 
f the  sacrifice. 

: 30  Ludwig  observes : * This  stanza  clearly  refers  to  the  greatness  of  the 
6ward  given  by  Nary  a,  and  its  meaning  is  : here  are  so  many  cows  (presented 
J Nihya)  that  one  might  think  that,  in  cousequence  of  the  sacrifice,  Vala  had 
jven  up  his  cows  [which  he  had  str den  from  the  Gods,  and  hidden  In  a cave], 
pd  taken  his  departure.’  Ushas  says  also,  * my  cows  are  quite  superfluous 
rreT>  and  I will  drive  them  away  to  some  other  place.’  The  stanza  is  addressed 
|>  huhaa,  ami  the  second  line  is  the  answer  she  is  to  give  to  the  question 
ntained  in  the  first.  Gomati : some  affluent  of  the  Indus,  which  in  later 
Jjes  lent  its  name  to  the  Gomati,  or  Gumti,  which  flows  through  Oudh  and 
Us  l»to  the  Ganges. 

2 Chwioteen : furtherera  of  eternal  Law.  See  VII.  12. 


160  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  F///, 

4 Great  Vanina  and  Mitra,  Gods,  Asuras  and  imperial  Lords, 
True  to  Eternal  Law  proclaim  the  high  decree. 

5 The  offspring  of  a lofty  Power,  Daksha’s  Two  Sons  exceeding 

strong,  0 

Who,  Lords  of  flowing  rain,  dwell  in  the  place  of  food. 

6 Ye  who  have  gathered  up  your  gifts,  celestial  and  terrestrial 

food, 

Let  your  rain  come  to  us  fraught  with  the  mist  of  heaven. 

7 The  Twain,  who  from  the  lofty  sky  seem  to  look  down  on 

herds  below, 

Holy,  imperial  Lords,  are  set  to  be  revered. 

8 They,  true  to  Law,  exceeding  strong,  havo  sat  them  down 

for  sovran  rule : J 

Princes  whose  laws  stand  fast,  they  have  obtained  their  sway. 

9 Pathfinders  even  better  than  the  eye,  with  unobstructed  sight, 
Even  when  they  close  their  lids,  observant,  they  perceive.  ^ 

10  So  may  the  Goddess  Aditi,  may  the  Nasatyas  guard  us  well, 
The  Maruts  guard  us  well,  endowed  with  mighty  strength. 

11  Do  ye,  0 Bounteous  Gods,  protect  our  dwelling-place  by  day 

and  night : 

With  you  for  our  defenders  may  we  go  unharmed. 

12  May  we,  unharmed,  serve  bountiful  Vishnu,  the  God  whe 

slayeth  none : 

Self-moving  Sindhu  hear  and  be  the  first  to  mark. 

13  This  sure  protection  we  elect,  desirable  and  reaching  far, 
Which  Mitra,  Varuna,  and  Aryaman  afford. 

14  And  may  the  Sindhu  of  the  floods,  the  Maruts,  and  the  Asvic 

Pair, 

Boon  Indra,  and  boon  Vishnu  have  one  mind  with  us. 

15  Because  these  warring  Heroes  stay  the  enmity  of  every  foe, 

As  the  fierce  water-flood  repels  the  furious  ones. 

16  Here  this  one  God,  the  Lord  of  men,  looks  forth  exceeding  ftf 

and  wide : 

And  wc,  for  your  advantage,  keep  his  holy  laws. 

17  We  keep  the  old  accustomed  laws,  the  statutes  of  supremacy) 
The  long-known  laws  of  Mitra  and  of  Varuna. 


5 Daksha’t  Two  Som  : or  8on8  of  power  or  energy,  according  to  SAya?* 
Daksha  as  a creative  power,  is  frequently  associated  with  Aditi.  Plact 
food  ; heaven  from  which  the  food-producing  rain  comes. 

12  Sindhu:  the  Indus.  According  to  Sdy ana,  Vishpu  who  onuses  we&l* 
to  flow  to  his  woi  shippers. 


TBS  RIO  VEDA. 


ryMN  26.] 


161 


g \{q  who  hath  measured  with  his  ray  the  boundaries,  of  heaven 
and  earth, 

And  with  his  majesty  hath  filled  the  two  worlds  full, 

9 Surya  hath  spread  his  light  aloft  up  to  the  region  of  the  sky, 
Like  Agni  all  aflame  when  gifts  are  offered  him. 

9 With  him  who  sits  afar  4he  word  is  lord  of  food  that  comes 
from  kine, 

Controller  of  the  gift  of  unempoisoned  food. 

1 So  unto  Surya,  Heaven,  and  Earth  at  morning  and  at  eve  1 
■ speak. 

Bringing  enjoyments  ever  rise  thou  up  for  us. 

2 From  Ukshanyayana  a bay,  from  Harayjina  a white  steed, 

And  from  Sushaman  we  obtained  a harnessed  car. 

3 These  two  shall  bring  me  further  gain  of  troops  of  tawny- 

coloured  steeds, 

The  carriers  shall  they  be  of  active  men  of  war. 

{ And  the  two  sages  have  I gained  who  hold  the  reins  and  bear 
the  whip, 

And  the  two  great  strong  coursers,  with  my  newest  song. 

HYMN  XXVI.  Aewins. 

I call  your  chariot  to  receive  united  praise  mid  princely 
men, 

Strong  Gods  who  pour  down  wealth,  of  never  vanquished 
might  1 

2 Ye  to  Varosushaman  come,  Nslsatyas,  for  this  glorious  rite, 
With  your  protecting  aid,  Strong  Gods,  who  pour  down  wealth. 


20  Varuna  has  only  to  command  and  men  have  milk  and  wholesome  food, 
lyana  explains  differently  : * Raise  your  voice  in  the  spacious  hall  of  sacrifice 
)him  who  is  lord  over  food  derived  from  cattle  ’ — Wilson. 

21  Thou:  Silrya,  that  is,  according  to  S&ya’.ia,  Mitra  and  Varuna  in  Sfirya’s 

tape. 

22  Sushdman  : here  without  Varo,  the  prefix  or  interjection  or  whatever  it 
lay  be.  See  VIII.  23  28. 

23  These  two  horses. 

24  Two  wyes  : vlprd  : the  meaning  is  uncertain.  According  to  SAyapa  the 

oid  is  an  epithet  of  ‘coursers’:  ‘ Hagacious.’--Wilson.  Ludwig  thinks  that 
je  grooms  (probably  enslaved  enemies)  are  ironically  called  sages,  or  as  he 
■anslates,  BrAhmans.  Dr.  Muir  translates  the  stanza  differently:  ‘I  have 
itabratod  at  the  same  time  with  a new  hymn,  these  two  sages  and  mighty 
►nnces],  strong,  swift,  and  carrying  whips.’  But  this  rendering  has  little  to 
Commend  it.  - 

1 Princely  men : the  Sdm  or  institutors  of  the  sacrifice. 

^ Vu'osuskdman  see  VIII.  23.  26.  Who  pour  down  wealth : vrishanvatd  ; 
e IV.  60  10,  note.  ... 

f II 


$t  tee  HYMNS  OF  [BOOR  Vllj 

3 So  with  oblations  wo  invoke  you,  rich  in  ample  wealth,  to-day, 
When  night  hath  passed,  0 ye  who  send  us  plenteous  food. 

4 0 Asvins,  Heroes,  let  your  car,  famed,  best  to  travel,  come  to  us, 
And’  for  his  glory,  mark  your  zealous  servant’s  lauds. 

5 Asvins,  who  send  us  precious  gifts,  even  when  offended,  thinl 

of  him : _ 

For  ye,  0 Rudras,  lead  us  safe  beyond  our  foes. 

6 For,  Wonder-Workers,  with  fleet  steeds  ye  fly  complete! 

round  this  All,  , , , , 

Stirring  our  thoughts,  ye  Lords  of  splendour,  honey-hued. 

7 With  all-sustaining  opulence,  Asvins,  come  hitherward  to  us, 
Ye  rich  and  noble  Heroes,  ne’er  to  be  o’erthrown. 

8 To  welcome  this  mine  offering,  0 yelndralike  N&satyas,  con 
As  Gods  of  best  accord  this  day  with  other  Gods. 

9 For  we,  like  Yyasva,  lifting  up  our  voice  like  oxen,  call  onyoi 

With  all  your  loving  kindness,  Sages,  come  to  us. 

10  0 Rishi,  laud  the  Asvins  well.  Will  they  not  listen  to  thy  cai 
Wiil  they  not  burn  the  Panis  who  are  nearer  them  f 
110  Heroes,  listen  to  the  son  of  Vyasva,  and  regard  me  here, 
Yaruna,  Mitra,  Aryaman,  of  one  accord. 

12  Gods  whom  we  yearn  for,  of  your  gifts,  of  what  ye  bring 

us,  bestow 

By  princes’  hands  on  me,  ye  Mighty,  day  day. 

1 3 Him  whom  your  sacrifices  clothe,  even  as  a woman  with  her  ro 
The  Asvins  help  to  glory  honouring  him  well. 

14  Whoso  regards  your  care  of  men  as  succour  widest  in  its  rea 
About  his  dwelling  go,  ye  Asvins,  loving  us. 

15  Come  to  us  ye  who  pour  down  wealth,  come  to  the  h( 

which  men  must  guard  : 

Like  shafts,  ye  are  made  meet  for  sacrifice  by  song. 

16  Most  fetching  of  all  calls,  the  laud,  as  envoy,  Heroes,  ca 

to  you : 

Be  it  your  own,  0 Asvin  Pair. 

17  Be  ye  in  yonder  sea  of  heaven,  or  joying  in  the  home  of 
Listen  to  me,  Immortal  Ones. 


5 Rudrat : bright  Gods.  . . 

6 Honey-hued : madhuvM'nd  : ‘ of  fascinating  complexion.  1 * , 

15  Like  thaft*  : as  arrows  are  sharpened  for  their  work,  so 

prepared  for  the  sacrifice  by  the  Rishi’s  hymn.  The  word.  ^ ^ 
plained  by  SAyana  as  two  arrows,  is  difficult,  and  other  readi  gs 
lions  liave  been  suggested. 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


fYMN  27.J 


T63 


g This  river  with  his  lucid  flow  attracts  you,  more  than  all  the 
streams, — 

Even  Sindhu  with  his  path  of  gold. 

9 0 Asvins,  with  that  glorious  fame  come  hither,  through  our 
brilliant  song, 

Come  ye  whose  ways  are  marked  with  light. 

>0  Harness  the  steeds  who  draw  the  car,  0 Vasu,  bring  the  well- 
fed  pair. 

0 V&yu,  drink  thou  of  our  meath  : come  untcY  our  drink- 
offerings. 

|1  Wonderful  V&yu,  Lord  of  Right,  thou  who  art  Tvashtar’s  son- 
in-law, 

Thy  saving  succour  we  elect. 

To  Tvashtar’s  son-in-law  we  pray  for  wealth  whereof  he  hath 
control : 

For  glory  we  seek  V&yu,  men  with  juice  effused. 

3 From  heaven,  auspicious  Vayu,  come  ; drive  hither  with  thy 

noble  steeds  : 

Come  on  thy  mighty  car  with  wide-extending  seat. 

4 We  call  thee  to  the  homes  of  men,  thee  wealthiest  in  noble 

food, 

And  liberal  as  a press-stone  with  a horse’s  back. 

5 So,  glad  and  joyful  in  thine  heart,  do  thou,  God,  VAyu,  first 

of  all  * 

Vouchsafe  us  water,  strength,  and  thought. 


HYMN  XXVII.  Visvedevas. 

Chief  Priest  is  Agni  at  the  laud,  as  stones  and  grass  at  sacri- 
fice : 

With  song  I seek  the  Maruts,  Brahmanaspati,  Gods  for  help 
much  to  be  desired. 


18  With  his  lucid  flow : svetayftvart : taken  by  Sflyana  as  the  name  of  a river. 
21  Tcashtar’s  son-in-law : the  Commentators  give  no  satisfactory  explanation, 
ranyft,  Tvashtar’s  daughter,  was  the  wife  of  YivasvAn,  who  cannot  be  ideuti- 
A with  V&yu.  See  Hillebrandt,  Vtdische  Mytholoyie , I.  p.  521. 

24  The  second  line  is  difficult.  The  presB-Btone  which  produces  the  Soma 
ice  which  makes  the  Gods  bountiful  is  regarded  as  a type  of  liberality  ; 
may  be  called  6 fvapfishtham,  liteially,  horse-backed,  because  it  bears  it* 
*1  of  Soma  stalks  like  a horse.  ' Sharp-backed 4 with  9harp  ridges’,  as 
ggested  by  Pischel,  givse  a better  meaning. 


1 Chief  Priest : according  to  SAyana,  pur6hito^.  here  is  taken  in  it*  primary 
we  of  ‘ placed  in  front,’  that  is,  set  by  the  priests  on  the  uttaravedt  yr 
Kthern  altar  or  fire-receptacle.  The  laud  : ukthd : a kind  of  religious  service 
®»uting  of  the  recitation  of  certain  eulogistic  verses. 


164  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Fty 

2 I sing  to  oattle  and  to  Earth,  to  trees,  to  Dawns,  to  Night,  to 

plants.  * 

0 all  ye  Vasus,  ye  possessors  of  all  wealth,  be  ye  the  further, 
ers  of  our  thoughts. 

3 Forth  go^  with  Agni,  to  the  Gods  our  sacrifice  of  ancient  use 
To  the  Adityas,  Vanina  whose  Law  stands  fast,  and  the  alt 

lightening  Marut  troop. 

4 Lords  of  all  wealth,  may  they  be  strengtheners  of  man,  de- 

stroyers of  his  enemies. 

Lords  of  all  wealth,  do  ye,  with  guards  which  none  may  harm, 
preserve  our  dwelling  free  from  foes. 

5 Come  to  us  with  one  mind  to-day,  come  to  us  all  with  one 

accord, 

Maruts  with  holy  song,  and,  Goddess  Aditi,  Mighty  One,  to  our 
house  and  home. 

6 Send  us  delightful  things,  ye  Maruts,  on  your  Bteeds : come 

ye,  0 Mitra,  to  our  gifts. 

Let  Indra,  Varuna,  and  the  Adityas  sit,  swift  Heroes,  on  our 
sacred  grass. 

7 We  who  have  trimmed  the  grass  for  you,  and  set  the  banquet 

in  array, 

And  pressed  the  Soma,  call  you,  Varupa,  like  men,  with  sacri- 
ficial fires  aflame. 

8 0 Maruts,  Vishnu,  Asvins,  Piishan,  haste  away  with  minds 

turned  hitherward  to  me. 

Let  the  Strong  Indra,  famed  as  Vritra’s  slayer,  come  first  witl 
the  winners  of  the  spoil. 

0 Ye  Guileless  Gods,  bestow  on  ns  a refuge  strong  on  every  side 
A sure  protection,  Vasus,  unassailable  from  near  at  hand  o 
from  afar. 

10  Kinship  have  I with  you,  and  close  alliance,  0 ye  Gods,  di 

stroyers  of  our  foes. 

Call  us  to  our  prosperity  of  former  days,  and  soon  to  new  felicit 

1 1 For  now  have  I sent  forth  to  you,  that  I may  win  a fair  rewan 
Lords  of  all  wealth,  with  homage,  this  my  song  of  praise  lil 

a milch-cow  that  faileth  not. 

2 I sing  to : or  I glorify,  in  order  that  I may  win  or  propitiate  them- 

6 Come  ye,  0 Mitm : Varuna  and  Aryaman  being  understood. 

7 Like  men : manushvdt : or  after  the  manner  of  Manus. 

11  Like  a milch-cow  that  faileth  not : the  meaning  of  dnydm  here  is  sop 
what  uncertain.  S&yana  explaius  it  by  adriehtaptirvdm,  unprecedented)  * 
Graasmann  by  * a stream  that  never  dries  up.’  I have  adopted  hudm 
interpretation. 


TUB  RIO  VEDA, 


105 


0 Excellent  Savitar  hath  mounted  up  on  high  for  you.  ye  sure 

and  careful  Guides.  . J 

Bipeds  and  quadrupeds,  with  several  hopes  and  aims,  and 
birds  have  settled  to  their  tasks. 

] Singing  their  praise  with  Godlike  thought  let  us  invoke  each 
God  for  grace, 

Each  God  to  bring  you  help,  each  God  to  strengthen  you. 

4 For  of  one  spirit  are  the  Gods  with  mortal  man,  co-sharers  all 
of  gracious  gifts. 

! May  they  increase  our  strength  hereafter  and  to-day,  provid- 

1 ing  ease  and  ample  room. 

I laud  you,  0 ye  Guileless  Gods,  here  where  we  meet  to  render 
praise. 

None,  Varuna  and  Mitra,  harms  the  mortal  man  who  honours 
and  obeys  your  laws. 

He  makes  his  house  endure,  he  gathers  plenteous  food  who 
pays  obedience  to  your  will. 

Born  in  his  sons  anew  he  spreads  as  Law  commands,  and  pros- 
pers every  way  unharmed. 

E’en  without  war  he  gathers  wealth,  and  goes  his  way  on 
pleasant  paths, 

Whom  Mitra,  Varuna,  and  Aryaman  protect,  sharing  the  gift, 
of  one  accord. 


E’en  on  the  plain  for  him  ye  make  a sloping  path,  an  easy 
way  where  road  is  none  : 

And  far  away  from  him  the  ineffectual  shaft  must  vanish, 
shot  at  him  in  vain. 


If  ye  appoint  the  rite  to-day,  kind  Rulers,  when  the  Sun  as- 
cends, 

Lords  of  all  wealth,  at  sunset  or  at  waking-time,  or  be  it  at 
the  noon  of  day, 

• Or,  Asuras,  when  ye  have  sheltered  the  worshipper  who  goes 
to  sacrifice,  at  eve, 

May  we,  0 Vasus„ye  possessors  of  all  wealth,  come  then  into 
the  midst  of  you. 

If  ye  to-day  at  sunrise,  or  at  noon,  or  in  the  gloom  of  eve, 

Lords  of  all  riches,  give  fair  treasure  to  the  man,  the  wise 
man  who  hath  sacrificed, 

Then  we,  imperial  Rulers,  claim  of  you  this  boon,  your  wide 
protection,  as  a son. 

May  we,  Adityas,  offering  holy  gifts,  obtain  that  which  Shall 
bring  us  greater  bliss. 


166 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK  Vli 

HYMN  XXVIII.  Visvedevfo, 

The  Thirty  Gods  and  Three  besides,  whose  seat  hath  been  the 
sacred  grass, 

From  time  of  old  have  found  and  gained. 

2  Vanina,  Mitra,  Aryaman,  Agnis,  with  Consorts,  sending  boons 
To  whom  our  Vashat  S is  addressed  : 

Z These  are  our  guardians  in  the  west,  and  northward  here,  and 
in  the  south, 

And  on  the  east,  with  all  the  tribe. 

4 Even  as  the  Gods  desire  so  verily  shall  it  be.  None  minishetl 

this  power  of  theirs, 

No  demon,  and  no  mortal  man. 

5 The  Seven  carry  seven  speais  ; seven  are  the  splendours  the; 

possess, 

And  seven  the  glories  they  assume. 

HYMN  XXIX.  Visvedev* 

One  is  a youth  brown,  active,  manifold  : he  decks  the  goldei 
one  with  ornament. 

2 Another,  luminous,  occupies  the  place  of  sacrifice,  Sage,  amonj 

the  Gods. 

3 One  brandishes  in  his  hand  an  iron  knife,  firm,  in  his  seal 

amid  the  Deities. 

4 Another  holds  the  thunderbolt,  wherewith  he  slays  the  Vritras, 

resting  in  his  band. 


1 Thirty  Gods  and  Three : Bee  I.  139.  11. 

2 Agnis : Agni  in  his  various  forma  and  under  different  names.  With  Con- 
sorts : with  the  Gn/ts,  Celestial  Dames,  wives  of  the  Gods.  Vashat  I • the  ex- 
clamation made  when  the  oblation  is  offered. 

4 No  demon  and  no  mortal  man  : or  no  mortal  who  presents  no  offeringi 
to  the  Gods. 

5 The  Seven : the  Marute,  seven,  or  seven  times  nine,  or  seven  times  seven 
in  number.  S&yana  mentions  the  legend  of  their  birth,  which  will  be  found 
in  the  Mmdyana , Book  I.,  Cantos  46,  47.  The  me^ping  is  merely  that  the 
Maruts  carry  lances,  that  is,  their  lightnings,  and  are  splendidly  adorned. 
See  I.  37.  The  connexion  of  this  stanza  with  the  preceding  is  not  obvious. 

1 One : Soma.  * The  yellow  Soma  juice  is  itself  an  ornament  to  the  gold** 
the  finger  (Atharvaveda,  XVIII.  3.  18,  hiranyaplv&l?)  of  the  priest.'- hud' Wjj 
According  to  others,  Soma  as  the  Moon  is  intended,  who  * decorates  (him*8 1 
with  golden  ornaments.’— Wilson. 

2 Another , luminous : Agni. 

3 One  bt'andishe*  : Tvashpir,  as  the  Artificer  of  the  Gods. 

4 Another  holds  the  thunderbolt : Indra. 


THE  RIO  VEDA . 


fYMN  31.] 


137 


5 Another  bears  a pointed  weapon  : bright  is  he,  and  strong, 

with  healing  medicines. 

6 Another,  thief-like,  watches  well  the  ways,  and  knows  the 

places  where  the  treasures  lie. 

7 Another  with  his  mighty  stride  hath  made  his  three  steps 

thither  where  the  Gods  rejoice. 

8 Two  with  one  Dame  ride  on  with  winged  steeds,  and  journey 

forth  like  travellers  on  their  way. 

9 Two,  highest,  in  the  heavens  have  set  their  seat,  worshipped 

with  holy  oil,  Imperial  Kings. 

[0  Some,  singing  lauds,  conceived  the  Sama  hymn,  great  hymn 
whereby  they  caused  the  Sun  to  shine. 

HYMN  XXX.  Visvedevas. 

Not  one  of  you,  ye  Gods,  is  small,  none  of  you  is  a feeble 
child  : 

All  of  you,  verily,  are  great. 

2 Thus  be  ye  lauded,  ye  destroyers  of  the  foe,  ye  Threc-and- 

Thirty  Deities, 

The  Gods  of  man,  the  Holy  Ones. 

3 As  such  defend  and  succour  us,  with  benedictions  speak  to  us  : 
Lead  us  not  from  our  fathers’  and  from  Manu’s  path  into  the 

distance  far  away. 

4 Ye  Deities  who  stay  with  us,  and  all  ye  Gods  of  all  mankind, 
(live  us  your  wide  protection,  give  shelter  for  cattle  and  for 

steed. 

HYMN  XXXI.  Various  Deities. 

That  Brahman  pleases  Indra  well,  who  worships,  sacrifices,  pours 
Libation,  and  prepares  the  meal. 

5 Another  : Rudra,  See  I.  43.  4. 

6 Another : Pushan.  See  T.  42. 

S 'Another  with  hi»  mighty  stride : Vishnu.  Thither:  to  his  station  in  tha 
height  of  heaven. 

8 Two  with  one  Dame  : the  Asvins  with  S'iryl.  See  I.  116.  17. 

9 Two , highest  : Mitra  aud  Varuna. 

10  Som,  tinging  laud* : the  Augira^es,  or,  according  to  S4yana,  the  Atria. 

, ^ Three  and- Thirty  Deitiet : see  i.  139.  11.  The  Qod*  of  man:  or,  God 
|Whom  Manu  worshipped,  which  inteipretation  is  supported  by  stanza  3. 

1 IK/to  stay  with  ut : or  are  present  at  this  sacrifice. 

1 Brahman : here  any  pious  worshipper.  not  one  of  the  regular  professional 
?r'c«tB,  hut  the  institutor  of  sacrifice  who  during  the  ceremony  may  be  re- 
^Nied  as  their  chief.  Prepares  the  meal:  pasupurod  ^dikam  pachati : S4yau*; 
Coo“  the  cake  which  is  an  essential  part  of  the  animal  sacrifice,  etc.’ 


l«a  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  yIn 

2 Sakra  protects  from  woe  the  man  who  gives  him  sacrificiaj 

cake 

And  offers  Soma  blent  with  milk. 

3 His  chariot  shall  be  glorious,  sped  by  Gods,  and  mighty  ^ 

he  be, 

Subduing  all  hostilities. 

4 Each  day  that  passes,  in  his  house  flows  his  libation,  rich  in 

milk, 

Exhaustless,  bringing  progeny. 

5 0 Gods,  with  constant  draught  of  milk,  husband  and  \yife 

with  one  accord 

Press  out  and  wash  the  Soma  juice. 

6 They  gain  sufficient  food : they  come  united  to  the  sacred  grass, 
And  never  do  they  fail  in  strength. 

7 Never  do  they  deny  or  seek  to  hide  the  favour  of  the  Gods: 
They  win  high  glory  for  themselves. 

8 With  sons  and  daughters  by  their  side  they  reach  their  full 

extent  of  life, 

Both  decked  with  ornaments  of  gold. 

9 Serving  the  Immortal  One  with  gifts  of  sacrificial  meal  and 

wealth, 

They  satisfy  the  claims  of  love  and  pay  due  honour  to  the  Gods, 

10  We  claim  protection  from  the  Hills,  wo  claim  protection  oi 

the  Floods, 

Of  him  who  stands  by  Vishnu's  side. 

1 1 May  Pushan  come,  and  Bhaga,  Lord  of  wealth,  All-bounteous, 

for  our  weal : 

Broad  be  the  path  that  leads  to  bliss  : 

12  Aramati,  and,  free  from  foes,  Visva  with  spirit  of  a God, 

And  the  Adityas'  peerless  might. 

13  Seeing  that  Mitra,  Aryaman,  and  Varuna  are  guarding  us, 

The  paths  of  Law  are  fair  to  tread. 


9 The  Immortal  One  : amritdya  : Agni,  or  the  Immortal  (boat),  that  is,  th 
Gods  in  general.  According  to  Mfty-ina,  ‘ that  they  may  obtain  immortalit; 
(in  their  sous  and  descendants).’  They  satisfy:  this  pdda  is  consumed  b; 
some,  on  metrical  and  other  gi omuls,  to  be  an  interpolation.  According 
Pisehel  ( Vedischt  Studiev,  I p.  178),  the  half-line  refeis  to  the  beating^ 
preparation  of  the  rough  stalks  of  the  Soma  plant, 

10  0/  him  uho  stands  by  Vishnu's  side  : of  Vishnu  and  hia  associate  Indn 
— Ludwig. 

12  Aramati:  the  Genius  of  Devotion.  Vuva:  Dyaua  ?— Ludwig- 
ttu>  worshippers/  according  to  SAyana, 


TEE  RIO  VEDA. 


YMN  82.) 


m 


. l glorify  with  song,  for  wealth,  Agni  the  God,  the  fir$t 
of  you. 

We  honour  as  a well-loved  Friend  the  God  who  prospereth 
our  fields. 

As  in  all  frays  the  hero,  so  swift  moves  his  car  whom  Gods 

attend. 

The  man  who,  sacrificing,  strives  to  win  the  heart  of  Deities 
will  conquer  those  who  worship  not. 

Ne’er  are  ye  injured,  worshipper,  presser  of  juice,  or  pious  man. 
The  man  who,  sacrificing,  strives  to  win  the  heart  of  Deities 
will  conquer  those  who  worship  not. 

None  in  his  action  equals  him,  none  holds  him  far  or  keeps 
him  off. 

The  man  who,  sacrificing,  strives  to  win  the  heart  of  Deities 
will  conquer  those  who  worship  not. 

Such  strength  of  heroes  shall  be  his,  such  mastery  of  fleet- 
foot  steeds. 

The  man  who,  sacrificing,  strives  to  win  the  heart  of  Deities 
will  conquer  those  who  worship  not. 

HYMN  XX XII.  Indr*. 

Kanvas,  tell  forth  with  song  the  deeds  of  Indra,  the  Im- 
petuous, 

Wrought  in  the  Soma’s  wild  delight. 

Strong  God,  ho  slew  Anarsani,  Sribinda,  Pipru,  and  the  fiend 
Ahisuva,  and  loosed  the  floods. 

Thou  broughtest  down  the  dwelling-place,  the  height  of  lofty 
Arbuda. 

That  exploit,  Indra,  must  be  famed. 

Bold,  to  your  famous  Soma  I call  the  fair-visored  God  for  aid, 
Down  like  a torrent  from  the  hill. 

Rejoicing  in  the  Soma-draughts,  Hero,  burst  open,  like  a fort, 
[The  stall  of  horses  and  of  kine. 

[ If  my  libation  gladdens,  if  thou  takest  pleasure  in  my  laud, 
Come  with  thy  Godhead  from  afar. 

1 H/to  pi'ogpereth  our  fields:  kshetvas&dhasani : Sivana  explains  kshetra 
modern  Hindi  khett  a field),  as  sacrifice  : ‘ the  bountiful  perfecter  of  the 
ince.  — Wilson. 


Jje  topetnous : rijishinah  : ‘the  drinker  of  the  stale  Soma.’ — Wilson. 
lAt  D&sh,  or  savage.  All  the  names  are  names  of  demons  of 

K t,  of  whom  Pipru  has  been  mentioned  frequently  in  preceding  Books. 
i^a:  see  I 51.  6 ; II.  11.  20;  14.  4. 

d ’J.\y^°rrcnt  from  th*  hill : ‘as  (a  traveller  invokes)  the  water  [from  a, 


170 


THE  HYMNS  OP 


[BOOR  tty 

7 0 Indra,  Lover  of  the  Song,  the  singere  of  thy  praise  are  we. 
0 Soma-drinker,  quicken  us. 

8 And,  taking  thy  delight  with  us,  bring  us  still  undiminshed 

food : 

Great  is  thy  wealth,  0 Maghavan. 

9 Make  thou  us  rich  in  herds  of  kine,  in  steeds,  in  gold : 1# 

us  exert 

Our  strength  in  sacrificial  gifts. 

10  Let  us  call  him  to  aid  whose  hands  stretch  far,  to  whom  high 

laud  is  due,  ' 

Who  worketh  well  to  succour  us. 

11  He,  Satakratu,  even  in  fight  acts  as  a Vritra-slayer  still : 

He  gives  his  worshippers  much  wealth. 

12  May  he,  this  Sakra,  strengthen  us,  Boon  God  who  satisfy 

our  needs, 

Indra,  with  all  his  saving  helps. 

13  To  him,  the  mighty  stream  of  wealth,  the  Soma-preBoer1 

rescuing  Friend, 

To  Indra  sing  your  song  of  praise  ; 

14  Who  bringeth  what  is  great  and  firm,  who  winneth  glory  i 

his  wars, 

Lord  of  vast  wealth  through  power  and  might. 

15  There  liveth  none  to  check  or  stay  his  energies  and  graciot 

deeds : 

None  who  can  say,  He  giveth  not. 

16  No  debt  is  due  by  Brahmans  now,  by  active  men  who  pro 

the  juice : 

Well  hath  each  Soma-draught  been  paid. 

17  Sing  ye  to  him  who  must  be  praised,  say  lauds  to  him  wl 

must  be  praised, 

Bring  prayer  to  him  who  must  be  praised. 

18  May  he,  unchecked,  strong,  meet  for  praise,  bring  hundre< 

thousands  forth  to  light, 

Indra  who  aids  the  worshipper. 

19  Go  with  thy  Godlike  nature  forth,  go  where  the  folk* 

calling  thee : 

Drink,  Indra,  of  the  drops  we  pour.  ^ 

11  Batakratu : Lord  of  a Hundred  Power*. 

12  §akru:  the  Mighty.  _ , 

16  The  Brahmans  or  worshippers  have,  by  offeting  libations,  disco 

their  obligations  to  the  Gods,  and  the  Gods  have  repaid  them,  or  will 
repay  them  for  their  offerings. 

18  Hundred s,  thousands;  counties*  treasure*  for  u*  to  enjoy. 


THE  RIQVBDA. 


m 


rtfX  33.] 

prink  milky  draughts  which  are  thine  own,  this  too  which 
was  with  Tugrya  once, 

This  is  it,  Indra,  that  is  thine. 

pass  him  who  pours  libations  out  in  angry  mood  or  after  sin  : 
Here  drink  the  juice  we  offer  thee. 

Over  the  three  great  distances,  past  the  Five  Peoples  go  thy  way, 
0 India,  noticing  our  voice. 

Send  forth  thy  ray  like  Sfirya  : let  my  songs  attract  thee 
hitherward 

Like  waters  gathering  to  the  vale. 

Now  to  the  Hero  fair  of  cheek,  Adhvaryu,  pour  the  Soma  forth  : 
Bring  of  the  juice  that  he  may  drink  : 

Who  cleft  the  water-cloud  iu  twain,  loosed  rivers  for  their 
downward  flow, 

And  set  the  ripe  milk  in  the  kine. 

He,  meet  for  praise,  slew  Vritra,  slew  Ahfsuva,  ftrnav&bha’s  son, 
And  pierced  through  Arbuda  with  frost. 

To  him  your  matchless  Mighty  One,  unconquerable  Conqueror, 
Sing  forth  the  prayer  which  Gods  have  given  : 

Indra,  who  in  the  wild  delight  of  Soma  juice  considers  ' e 
All  holy  Laws  among  the  Gods. 

Hither  let  these  thy  Bays  who  share  thy  banquet,  Steeds  with 
golden  manes, 

Convey  thee  to  the  feast  prepared. 

Hither,  0 thou  whom  many  laud,  the  Bays  whom  Priyamedha 
praised 

Shall  bring  thee  to  the  Soma-draught. 

HYMN  XXXIII.  Indra. 

We  compass  thee  like  waters,  we  whose  grass  is  trimmed  and 
Soma  pressed. 

Here  where  the  filter  pours  its  stream,  thy  worshippers  round 
thee,  0 Vritra-slayer,  sit. 

20  Which  teas  mth  Tugrya:  like  that  which  thy  favourite  Bhujyu  (see  Vol. 
Index)  formerly  offered  thee. 

22  The  three  great  distances  : the  space  in  front  of  thee,  behind  thee,  and 
thy  side.  Noticing  our  voice : hearing  and  attending  to  our  invocation*. 
>me  to  us  who  are  thy  true  worshippers,  and  pass  by  others  who  worship 
ee  m the  hope  of  being  avenged  upon  their  enemies  or  of  obtaining  pardon 
[■  some  sin. 

rnavdbha's  son : Au  rna v:\bha : a demon  of  drought.  8eeII.ll.  18. 
Jrott : making  the  piercing  cold  of  winter  his  weapon. 

^ter  •*  or  woollen  strainer  through  which  the  Soma  juice  is  run  to 


m the  H7MNS  OP  [BOOK  W//J 

2 Men,  Va8u ! by  the  Soma,  with  lauds  call  thee  to  the  for®. 

most  place : , . . , ^ T , 

When  comest  thou  athirst  unto  the  juice  as  home,  O Indra, 

like  a bellowing  bull  ? 

3 Boldly,  Bold  Hero,  bring  us  spoil  in  thousands  for  the  Kanvag’ 

O aetiv’e  Maghavan,  with  eager  prayer  wo  crave  the  yellow, 
hued  with  store  of  kine. 

4 Medhvatithi,  to  Indra  sing,  drink  of  the  juice  to  make  thee  glad, 
Close-knit  to  his  Bay  Steeds,  bolt-armed,  beside  the  juice  i, 

he  : his  chariot  is  of  gold.  . 

5 He  who  is  praised  as  strong  of  hand  both  right  and  left,  mo® 

wise  and  bold : , , , 

Indra  who,  rich  in  hundreds,  gathers  thousands  up,  honoured 
as  breaker-down  of  forts. 

6 The  bold  of  heart  whom  none  provokes,  who  stands  in  bearded 
Much-lauded,  very  glorious,  overthrowing  foes,  strong  Helper 

7 \Vho°knowa  what  vital  power  he  wins,  drinking  beside  thi 

Thl°  is  "he  “to-cheeked  God  who,  joying  in  the  draught 
breaks  down  the  castles  in  his  strength. 

8 As  a wild  elephant  rushes  on,  this  way  and  that  way,  mtt 

None'may1  compel  thee,  yet  come  hither  to  the  draught : thoi 

9 When  he,  theMighty,  jiier  o’erthrown,  stedfast,  made  read 

When  ‘indS  Maghavan  lists  to  his  praiser’s  call,  he  will  no 

stand  aloof,  but  come.  i m n0« 

10  Yea,  verily,  thou  art  a Bull,  with  a bulls  rush,  who 

may  stay  : 


o a,  home:  as  familiar  to  thee  a»  thine  own  home.  ... 

3 The  i/dlowhucd  : there  is  no  substantive,  hut  gold  “““  ® (in  (liii 

6 In  bearded  confidence:  a conjectural  paraphrase^  JLu,iwl 

beard)  is  said  by  S&yana  to  mean  lu  re  in  combats,  that  w,  perh»p  > ^ | 

suggests,  among  ranks  of  men  bristling  with  apears-  But  t ^ ^ for  „ 

the  meaning  of  the  word  which  .»  probably  So>  the  E« 

fierce  look  of  a wamor  who  challenges  the  foe.  h\i i g.  » d*  vol0 

ThOrr  when  about  to  meet  a foe,  is  said  to  have  raised  b s beam 
See  Grimm,  Teutonic  Mythology,  I.  177  (hnglieh 

8 Mad  with  heat : that  is,  matt,  oi  as  phonetically! >P*<V " f1 cb,e„, 
10  Thou  art  a Bull:  vrithd : or  strong  and  “»8>»ty.  As  i repetiB' 
before  (VIII.  13.  31,  note),  some  of  the  Vedic  poeU  delight  in 
oi  this  word  and  it*  derivatives. 


THE  RIGVEDA. 


yMN  38.] 


178 


Thou,  Mighty  One,  art  celebrated  as  a Bull,  famed  as  a Bull 
both  near  and  far. 

Thy  reins  are  very  bulls  in  strength,  bull8,  strength  is  in  thy 
golden  whip. 

Thy  car,  0 Maghavan,  thy  Bays  are  strong  as  bulls : thou, 
Satakratu,  art  a Bull. 

! Let  the  strong  presser  press  for  thee.  Bring  hither,  thou 
straight-rushing  Bull. 

The  mighty  makes  the  mighty  run  in  flowing  streams  for  thee 
whom  thy  Bay  Horses  bear. 

; Come,  thou  most  potent  Indra,  come  to  drink  the  savoury 
Soma  juice. 

Maghavan,  very  wise,  will  quickly  come  to  hear  the  songs,  the 
prayer,  the  hymns  of  praise. 

When  thou  hast  mounted  on  thy  car  let  thy  yoked  Bay  Steeds 
carry  thee 

Past  other  mens’  libations,  Lord  of  Hundred  Powers,  thee, 
Vritra-slayer,  thee  our  Friend. 

i 0 thou  Most  Lofty  One,  accept  our  laud  as  nearest  to  tbine 
heart. 

May  our  libations  be  most  sweet  to  make  thee  glad,  0 Soma- 
drinker,  Heavenly  Lord. 

' Neither  in  thy  decree  nor  mine,  but  in  another’s  he  delights, — 

The  man  who  brought  us  unto  this. 

Indra  himself  hath  said,  The  mind  of  woman  brooks  not  dis- 
cipline, 

Her  intellect  hath  little  weight. 

I His  pair  of  horses,  rushing  on  in  their  wild  transport,  draw 
his  car  : 

High-lifted  is  the  stallion’s  yoke. 

1 Cast  down  thine  eyes  and  look  not  up.  More  closely  set  thy 
feet.  Let  none 

See  what  thy  garment  veils,  for  thou,  a Brahman,  hast  become 
a dame. 


l^^oWen  ; the  lightning,  vuth  which  Indra  lashes  the  clouds,  his 

jjj  Tht  nighty  makes  the  mighty  run : the  priest  makes  the  Soma  juice  flow. 

inexin6  lalVT  0tftuz‘ia  of  the  hyrnu  are  not  very  intelligible,  nor  is  their 
BDot  “ k lth  the  Prec©ding  verses  obvious.  Stanzas  16  and  18  appear  to 
Indra  f V Woman  al*d  17  by  a man.  Stanza  19  is  said  to  be  addressed 
?recatir  n r AI!?a  80U  °*  Playoga  who  had  been  changed  to  a woman  by  the 
of  the  Gods,  and  who  was  afterward*  restored  to  manhood* 


174 


THE  HYMNS  OP 


[&00K  yuij 

HYMN  XXXIV.  Is 

Come  hither,  Indra,  with  thy  Bays,  come  thou  to  KmiV4», 
eulogy. 

Ye  by  command  of  yonder  Dyaus,  God  bright  by  day ! havj 
gone  to  heaven. 

2 May  the  stone  draw  thee  as  it  speaks,  the  Soma-stone  with 

ringing  voice. 

Ye  by  command  of  yonder  Dyaus,  etc. 

3 The  stones’  rim  shakes  the  Soma  here  like  a wolf  worrying! 

sheep. 

Ye,  etc. 


4 The  Kanvas  call  thee  hitherward  for  succour  and  to  win  tin 

spoil. 

Ye,  etc. 

5 I set  for  thee,  as  for  the  Strong,  the  first  draught  of  the  juici 

shed. 


6 Come  with  abundant  blessings,  come  with  perfect  care  to  au 

cour  us. 

7 Come,  Lord  of  lofty  thought,  who  hast  infinite  wealth  ai 

countless  aids. 

8 Adorable  mid  Gods,  the  Priest  good  to  mankind  shall  brii 

thee  near. 

9 As  wings  the  falcon,  so  thy  Bays  rushing  in  joy  shall  cai 

thee. 

10  Come  from  the  enemy  to  us,  to  Svahfi,  ! and  the  Soma-draug 

11  Come  hither  with  thine  ear  inclined  to  hear,  take  pleasure 

our  lauds. 

12  Lord  of  well-nourished  Horses,  come  with  well-fed  Steeds  al 

in  hue. 

13  Come  hither  from  the  mountains,  come  from  regions  of 

sea  of  air. 


The  R’mhi  is  Nip&tithi  of  the  family  of  Kanva,  but  stanzas  16-18 
ascribed  in  the  Index  to  the  thousand  Vaaurochishas  who  are  said  to  * 
been  a division  of  the  family  of  Angiras. 

1 The  exact  meaning  of  the  second  line,  which  is  the  burden  of  the 
fifteen  stanzas,  is  obscure.  Ye  probably  means  Indra’s  horses,  and  Oodb 
by  day  t ( divdvaso)  Indra  himself  ; that  is,  ye,  horses,  and  thou,  Indra, 
gone  to  heaven.  The  Scholiast  offers  two  different  explanations,  in  one 
boldly  altering  two  words  of  the  text.  See  Wilson’s  Translation,  note. 

8 The  Priest  good  to  mankind : or,  the  Invoking  Priest,  Invoker  or  H 
established  by  Manu,  namely  Agni. 

10  Svdhi : an  exclamation  used  in  sacrifice  ; Ave  ! or  Hail ! 


THE  RIQVEDA. 


YMN  35.] 


175 


. Disclose  to  ua,  0 Hero,  wealth  in  thousands  both  of  kine  and 
steeds 

i Bring  riches  hitherward  to  us  in  hundreds,  thousands,  myriads. 
Ye  by  command  of  yonder  Dyaus,  God  bright  by  day  1 have 
gone  to  heaven. 

; The  thousand  steeds,  the  mightiest  troop,  which  we  and  Indra 
have  received 
From  Vasurochis  as  a gift, 

[ The  brown  that  match  the  wind  in  speed,  and  bright  bay 
coursers  fleet  of  foot, 
hike  Suns,  resplendent  are  they  all. 

) Mid  the  PAr&vata's  rich  gifts,  swift  steeds  whose  wheels  run 
rapidly, 

I seemed  to  stand  amid  a wood. 

HYMN  XXXY.  A,™*. 

With  Agm  and  with  Indra,  Vishnu,  Varuna,  with  the  Adityas, 
Rudras,  Vasus,  closely  leagued ; 

Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Surya  and  with  Dawn,  0 Asvins, 
drink  the  Soma  juice. 

I With  all  the  Holy  Thoughts,  all  being,  Mighty  Ones ! in  close 
alliance  with  the  Mountains,  Heaven,  and  Earth  ; 

Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Surya  and  with  Dawn,  0 Asvins, 
drink  the  Soma  juice. 

With  all  the  Deities,  three  times  eleven,  here,  in  close  alliance 
with  the  Maruts,  Bhrigus,  Floods ; 

Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Surya  and  with  Dawn,  0 Asvins, 
drink  the  Soma  juice. 

Accept  the  sacrifice,  attend  to  this  my  call : come  nigh,  0 ye 
Twain  Gods,  to  all  libations  here. 

Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Sftrya  and  with  Dawn,  0 Asvins, 
bring  us  strengthening  food. 

Accept  our  praise-song  as  a youth  accepts  a maid.  Come  nigh, 
0 ye  Twain  Gods,  to  all  libations  here. 

Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Surya  and  with  Dawn,  0 Asvins, 
bring  us  strengthening  food. 

6 Vasurochis : vdsurochiahah  ia  probably  the  ablative  singular,  and  not  the 
i native  plural,  of  the  name  of  the  inatitutor  of  the  sacrifice.  Wilson, 
rT!n§  V tranelatea  : ‘ We,  the  thousand  Vasurochishas,  and  Indra 
8 'T/Td*1611  vigorous  herds  of  horses, — 

p e is  Vasurochis.  The  P&rAvatas  are  probably  the  jr apvrjral 

®nry,  who  were  settled  northwards  of  Arachosia  — Ludwig. 

de^ \Vi Uo 1 1 ^ tW°  youtlui  * youths  are  delighted  (by  the  voices 


THE  HYMNS  OP 


170 


[BOOK  rin 


6,  Accept  the  songs  we  sing,  accept  the  solemn  rite.  Come  njffi 
0 ye  Twain  Gods,  to  all  libations  here.' 

Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Surya  and  with  Dawn,  0 Aby^ 
bring  us  strengthening  food. 

7  Ye  fly  as  starlings  fly  unto  the  forest  trees;  like  buffaloes y 
seek  the  Soma  we  have  shed. 

Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Surya  and  with  Dawn,  com 
thrice,  0 Asvins,  to  our  home. 


8 Ye  fly  like  swans,  like  those  who  travel  on  their  way;  jjj 

buffaloes  ye  seek  the  Soma  we  have  shed. 

Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Surya  and  with  Dawn,  con 
thrice,  0 Asvins,  to  our  home. 

9 Ye  fly  to  our  oblation  like  a pair  of  hawks;  like  buffaloes  i 

seek  the  Soma  we  have  shed. 

Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Surya  and  with  Dawn,  cor 
thrice,  0 Asvins,  to  our  home. 

10  Come  hitherward  and  drink  and  satisfy  yourselves,  best 

upon  us  progeny  and  affluence. 

Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Surya  and  with  Dawn,  0 Asvi 
grant  us  vigorous  strength. 

1 1 Conquer  your  foes,  protect  us,  praise  your  worshippers ; best 

upon  us  progeny  and  affluence. 

Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Surya  aud  with  Dawn,  0 Asvi 
grant  us  vigorous  strength. 

12  Slay  enemies,  animate  men  whom  ye  befriend;  bestow  iv 

us  progeny  and  affluence. 

Aocordant,  of  one  mind  with  Sftrya  and  with  Dawn,  0 Asv 
grant  us  vigorous  strength. 

13  With  Mitra,  Vanina,  Dharma,  and  the  Maruts  in  your  c 

pany  approach  unto  your  praiser’s  call. 

Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Surya  aud  with  Dawn,  and  \ 
the  Adityas,  Asvins  ! come. 

14  With  Vishnu  and  the  Angirases  attending  you,  and  with 

Maruts  come  unto  your  praiser’s  call. 

Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Sirya  and  with  Dawn,  and  ' 
the  Adityas,  Asvins  ! come. 

15  With  Ribhus  and  with  Vajas,  0 ye  Mighty  Ones,  leagued 

the  Maruts  come  ye  to  your  praiser’s  call. 

Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Surya  and  with  Dawn, 

, with  the  Adityas,  Asvins ! come. 

8 Ye  come  eagerly  to  the  Soma  as  thirsty  hantas  (swans,  geese,  or  0 
goes)  travellers,  and  buffaloes  hasten  to  the  water. 

13  Dharma : Right,  J ustice,  Law,  Virtue  or  Duty  perfqmfied. 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


177 


35.] 

Give  spirit  to  our  prayer  and  animate  our  thoughts ; slay  ye 
the  Rakshasas  and  drive  away  disease. 

Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Surya  and  with  Dawn,  the 
presser’s  Soma,  Asvins ! drink. 

Strengthen  the  Ruling  Power,  strengthen  the  men  of  war ; 
slay  ye  the  RaLkshasas  and  drive  away  disease. 

Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Surya  and  with  Dawn,  the  pres- 
ser’s Soma,  Asvins  ! drink. 

Give  strength  unto  the  milch-kine,  give  the  people  strength, 
slny  ye  the  Rakshasas  and  drive  away  disease. 

Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Surya  and  with  Dawn,  the 
presser’s  Soma,  Asvins  ! drink. 

As  ye  heard  Atri’s  earliest  eulogy,  so  hear  Syavasva,  Soma- 
presser,  ye  who  reel  in  joy. 

Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Surya  and  with  Dawn,  drink 
juice,  0 Asvins,  three  days  old. 

i Further  like  running  streams  Syavasva’s  eulogies  who  presses 
out  the  Soma,  ye  who  reel  in  joy. 

Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Surya  and  with  Dawn,  drink 
juice,  0 Asvins,  three  days  old. 

[ Seize,  as  ye  grasp  the  reins,  Syavasva’s  solemn  rites  who  pres- 
ses out  the  Soma,  ye  who  reel  in  joy. 

Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Surya  and  with  Dawn,  drink 
juice,  0 Asvins,  three  days  old. 

I Drive  down  your  chariot  hitherward  : drink  ye  the  Soma's 
savoury  juice. 

Approach,  ye  Asvins,  come  to  us : I call  you,  eager  for  your 
aid.  Grant  treasures  to  the  worshipper. 

I When  sacrifice  which  tells  our  reverence  hath  begun,  Heroes  ! 
to  drink  the  gushing  juice, 

Approach,  yc  Asvins,  come  to  us  : I call  you,  eager  for  your 
aid.  Grant  treasures  to  the  worshipper. 

Sate  you  with  consecrated  drink,  with  juice  effused,  ye  Deities. 

Approach,  ye  Asvins,  come  to  us  : I call  you,  eager  for  your 
aid.  Grant  treasures  to  the  worshipper. 

17  The  Ruling  Power : kshatrdm  • hence  Kshatriya,  a man  of  the  princely 

military  order. 

jl3  The  people:  visas  : hence  Vai§ya , a man  of  the  mercantile  class  or  order. 

;!9  diri’*.-  as  he  waa  the  progenitor  of  the  Rishi  of  the  Hymn.  See  Vol.  I., 

Hex. 

pi  Solemn  rites : that  is,  the  oblations  presented  thereat. 

Consecrated  drink:  libations  offered  with  the  sacrificial  exclamation 

l&hft ! Ave  ! or  Hail ! 


178 


THE  HYMNS  OF 
HYMN  XXXVI. 


[BOOK  Vjij 


Indn, 


Thou  helpost  him  whoso  grass  is  trimmed,  who  sheds  the 
juice,  0 Satakratu,  drink  Soma  to  make  thee  glad. 

The  share  which  they  have  tixed  for  thee,  thou,  Indra,  Victor 
o’er  all  hosts  and  space,  begirt  with  Maruts,  Lord  of  Heroes 
winner  of  the  floods. 


2 Maghavan,  help  thy  worshipper : let  him  help  thee.  0 

kratu,  drink  Soma  to  make  thee  glad. 

The  share  which  they  have  fixed  for  thee,  etc. 

3 Thou  aidest  Gods  with  food,  and  that  with  might  aids  thee 

0 Satakratu,  drink  Soma  to  make  thee  glad. 

4 Creator  of  the  heaven,  creator  of  the  earth,  0 Satakratu 

drink  Soma  to  make  tlicc  glad. 

f>  Father  of  cattle,  father  of  all  steeds  art  thou.  0 Satakratu 
drink  Soma  to  make  thee  glad. 

6 Stone-hurler,  glorify  the  Atria*  hymn  of  praise.  0 Satakratu 

drink  Soma  to  make  thee  glad. 

7 Hear  thou  SvfivAsva  while  he  pours  to  thee,  as  erst  tho 

heartiest  At ri  when  he  wrought  his  holy  rites. 

Indra,  thou  only  gavest  Trasadasyu  aid  in  the  fierce  figl 
with  heroes,  strengthening  his  prayers. 


HYMN' XXXVII.  Indj 

This  prayer,  and  those  who  shed  the  juice,  in  wars  nil 
Vritra  thou  holpest,  Indra,  Lord  of  Strength,  with  all  tl 
succoms. 

0 Vritra-slaycr,  from  libation  poured  at  noon,  drink  oft! 
Soma  juice,  thou  blameless  Thunderer. 

2 Thou  mighty  Conqueror  of  hostile  armaments,  0 Indra,  Lor 
of  Strength,  with  all  thy  saving  help. 


1 Which  they  have  fixed  : which  all  the  Gods  have  assigned.  This  balf-ver 
is  the  refrain  of  stanzas  1—6.  And  space,  begirt : or,  and  wide  space,  girt.  3 
flood* : the  waters  of  heaven,  the  rain. 

2 Lei  him  kelp  thee:  according  to  Sftyana,  ‘protect  thyself  (by  drinki 
the  Soma).’  ‘ The  mutual  relation  between  the  God  and  his  worshipper 
expressed,  and  the  translation  ‘ help  thyself  ’ is  ridiculous.’ — Ludwig. 

3 Food : sacrificial  food.  That : food,  especially  in  the  shape  of  Soma. 

7 Trasadasyu : an  especial  favourite  of  Indra  and  the  Asvins,  celebra' 

for  his  victories  and  liberality.  See  Index. 


1 0 Vfitraslayer,  etc:  this  half-verse  is  repeated  as  a refrain  in  the 
following  stanzas. 


THE  BIQVEDA . 


tfWt  38.] 


170 


3 Sole  Ruler,  thou  art  Sovran  of  this  world  of  life,  0 Indra, 

Lord  of  Strength,  with  all  thy  saving  help.  * * 

4 Thou  only  sunderest  these  two  consistent  worlds,  0 Indra, 

Lord  of  Strength,  with  all  thy  saving  help. 

5 Thou  art  the  Lord  supreme  o’er  rest  and  energy,  0 Indra, 

Lord  of  Strength,  with  all  thy  saving  help  . 

6 Thou  helpest  one  to  power,  and  one  thou  hast  not  helped,  0 

Indra,  Lord  of  Strength,  with  all  thy  saving  aid. 

7 Hear  thou  SyaLvasva  while  he  sings  to  thee,  as  erst  thou 

heardest  Atri  when  he  wrought  his  holy  rites. 

Indra,  thou  only  gavest  Trasadasyu  aid  in  the  fierce  fight 
with  heroes,  strengthening  his  powers. 


HYMN  XXXVIII.  Indra-Agni. 

Ye  Twain  are  Priests  of  sacrifice,  winners  in  war  and  holy 
works  : 

Indra  and  Agni,  mark  this  well. 

2 Yc  bounteous  riders  on  the  car,  ye  Vritra-slayers  unsubdued  : 
Indra  and  Agni,  mark  this  well. 

2 The  men  with  pressing-stones  have  pressed  this  meath  of 
yours  which  gives  delight  : 

Indra  and  Agni,  mark  this  well. 

4 Accept  our  sacrifice  for  weal,  sharers  of  praise  ! the  Soma 

shed : 

Indra  atad  Agni,  Heroes,  come. 

5 Be  pleased  with  tb^e  libations  which  attract  you  to  our 

sacred  gifts  : 

Indra  and  Ag»b  Heroes,  come. 

6 Accept  tWs  eulogy  of  mine  whose  model  is  the  Gayatri:  Indra 

and  Agni,  Heroes,  come. 

^ Consistent  worlds:  there  is  no  substantive  in  the  text,  and  lolcau  (worlds} 
supplied  by  S&yana.  v l 

) Rest  and  energy : or  pence  and  war.  ‘ Prosperity  and  gains.’— .Wilson. 

1 To  power : ksatrdfya : the  rule  exercised  by  princes. 

[ kej?eated  from  the  preceding  Lmn  with  the  alteration  of  two  words 

» ^nging,  instead  of  sunvatdh, , pouring  (libations),  and  kshatrdni 
meely)  powers  instead  of  brdhnxdyi,  prayers,  ‘as  if,’  observe#  Dr.  Muir, 

>e  former  ( brahmdni ,)  contained  a reference  to  the  functions  of  the  priest, 

1 the  latter  to  those  of  the  prince.’ — 0.  S.  Texts,  I.  263. 

1 Mar '1c  this  well : * hear  (the  praise)  of  this  (thy  worshipper).’ — Wilson. 

B ; touted : according  to  SAyana,  ‘ destroyers  (of  foes)/ 

" ”’ioae  nodd  is  the  Gdyatri;  composed  in  GAyatrl  metre. 


180  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  p;// 

7 Come  with  the  early-faring  Gods,  ye  who  are  Lords  of  genuine 

wealth  : 

Indra-Agni,  to  the  Soma-draught ! 

8 Hear  ye  the  call  of  Atris,  hear  Syavasva  as  he  sheds  th< 

juice  *. 

Indra-Agni  to  the  Soma-draught ! 

9 Thus  have  I called  you  to  our  aid  as  sagos  called  on  you  0 

old: 

Indra-Agni  to  the  Soma  draught ! 

10  Indra’s  and  Agni’s  grace  I claim,  Sarasvati’s  associates 
To  whom  this  psalm  of  praise  is  sung. 

HYMN  XXXIX.  AgD 

The  glorious  Agni  have  I praised,  and  worshipped  with  th 
sacred  food. 

, May  Agni  deck  the  Gods  for  us.  Between  both  gatherin' 
places  he  goes  on  his  embassy,  the  Sage.  May  all  the  othei 
die  away. 

2 Agni,  burn  down  the  word  within  their  bodies  through  or 

newest  speech, 

All  hatreds  of  the  godless,  all  the  wicked  man’s  malignitie 
Away  let  the  destroyers  go.  May  all  the  others  die  away. 

3 Agni,  I offer  hymns  to  thee,  like  holy  oil  within  thy  mouth. 
Acknowledge  them  among  the  Gods,  for  thou  art  the  rnoi 

excellent,  the  worshipper’s  blissful  messenger.  Let  all  tl 
others  die  away. 

4 Agni  bestows  all  vital  power  even  as  ea*L  man  supplicates. 
He  brings  the  Vasus  strengthening  gifts,  a*id  grants  deligh 

in  rest  and  stir,  for  every  calling  on  the  God*.  Let  all  tl 
others  die  away. 

5 Agni  hath  made  himself  renowned  by  wonderful  victories  a( 
He  is  the  Priest  of  all  the  tribes,  chosen  with  sacrificial  mod 

He  urges  Deities  to  receive.  Let  ail  the  others  die  away. 

7 Earlyfanng  Gods : * But  Thou  wast  up  at  break  of  day.'— George  Herbe 
t0  SarasvatU  associates : according  to  Sdyana,  * to  whom  praise  belongs. 

1 Deck  the  Gods  for  us : * brighten  the  gods  with  the  oblations  at  < 
sacrifice.’ — Wilson.  Both  gathering -places  : heaven  and  earth.  All  the  o 
anyake  same : meaning,  acoording  to  S&yapa,  ail  our  enemies. 

2 All  hatred  of  the  godless : ardttr  ardvndm  muBt  be  read  instead  of  « 

rardvndm.— Ludwig.  . 

6 With  sacrificial  meeds : ddkshindbhih : his  dakshinds  or  honoraria  as 
are  the  oblations  which  he  receives  as  a God. 


THE  RIOVEDA. 


181 


jfifiV  40.] 

6 Agni  knows  ^at  sPring8  from  Gods,  he  knows  the  mystery 

of  men* 

Giver  of  wealth  is  Agni,  he  uncloses  both  the  doors  to  us  when 
worshipped  with  our  newest  gift.  Let  all  the  others  die 
away. 

7 A^ni  inhabiteth  with  Gods  and  men  who  offer  sacrifice. 

He  cherisheth  with  great  delight  much  wisdom,  as  all  things 
that  be,  God  among  Gods  adorable.  May  all  the  others  die 
away. 

8 Agni  who  liveth  in  all  streams,  Lord  of  the  Sevenfold  Race  of 

men, 

Him  dweller  in  three  homes  we  seek,  best  slayer  of  the  Dasyus 
for  Mandhatar,  first  in  sacrifice.  Let  all  the  other’s  die  away. 

9 Agni  the  Wise  inhabiteth  three  gathering-places,  triply  formed. 
Decked  as  our  envoy  let  the  Sage  bring  hither  and  conciliate 

the  Thrice  Eleven  Deities.  Let  all  the  others  die  away. 

0 Our  Agni,  thou  art  first  among  the  Gods,  and  first  mid  living 
men. 

Thou  only  rulest  over  wealth.  Round  about  thee,  as  natural 
dams,  circumfluous  the  waters  run.  Let  all  the  others  die 
away. 

HYMN  XL.  Indra-Agni. 

Indra  and  Agni,  surely  ye  as  Conquerors  will  give  us  wealth, 
Whereby  in  tight  we  may  o’ercome  that  which  is  strong  and 
firmly  fixed,  as  Agni  burns  the  woods  with  wind.  Let  all 
the  others  die  away. 

2 We  set  no  snares  to  tangle  you;  Indra  we  worship  and  adore, 
Hero  of  heroes  mightiest. 

Once  may  he  come  unto  us  with  his  Steed,  come  unto  us  to 
win  us  strength,  and  to  complete  the  sacrifice. 

6 That  springs  from  Gods:  tho  past  and  the  present,  while  the  mystei'y  of 
Ken  is  the  future. — Ludwig.  Both  the  doors:  of  wealth,  or,  perhaps  of 
L‘aven  also. 

8 Lord  of  ike  Sevenfold  Race  of  men : perhaps  meaning,  God  of  all  men, 
;e  Vaisvftnara  ; or  the  reference  may  be  t<>  the  seven  priests  : ‘ Who  is  minis- 
red  to  by  seven  priests.’ — Wilson.  ‘Acting  as  seven  priests.’ — M.  Muller. 
andMtar : said  to  bo  the  same  at  M&ndh&tar,  boo  of  Yuvan&sva,  and  Rislii 
X.  134. 

9 Three  gathering -places : heaven,  firmament,  and  earth. 

10  Round  about  thee,  the  waters  run : Cf.  ‘Him,  pure,  resplendent, 

ffspring  of  the  Waters,  the  waters  pure  have  on  all  sides  encompassed’ 
I.  35.  3).  L 

1 Let  all  the  others  die  away  : this  refrain  recurs  in  all  stanzas  of  the  hymn 
[cept  the  final. 

^ Once:  kad&chit : expressive  o * impatience.— Ludwig. 


182  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  Vlij 

3 For,  famous  Indra-Agni,  ye  are  dwellers  in  the  midst  of  fraya 
Sages  in  wisdom,  ye  are  knit  to  him  who  seeketh  you  aj 

friends.  Heroes,  bestow  on  him  his  wish.  * ! 

4 Nabhaka-like,  with  sacred  song  Indra’s  and  Agni’s  praise  I sine 
Theirs  to  whom  all  this  world  belongs,  this  heaven  and  this 

mighty  earth  which  bear  rich  treasure  in  their  lap. 

5 To  Indra  and  to  Agni  send  your  prayers,  as  was  Nabhaka’a 

wont, — 

Who  oped  with  sideway  opening  the  sea  with  its  foundations 
seven — Indra  all  powerful  in  his  might. 

6 Tear  thou  asunder,  as  of  old,  like  tangles  of  a creeping  plant 
Demolish  thou  the  Dasa’s  might.  May  we  with  Indra’s  help 

divide  the  treasure  he  hath  gathered  up. 

7 What  time  with  this  same  song  these  men  call  Indra-Agni 

sundry  ways, 

May  we  with  our  own  heroes  quell  those  who  provoke  us  to  the 
fight,  and  conquer  those  who  strive  with  us, 

8 The  Two  refulgent  with  their  beams  riso  and  come  downward 

from  the  sky. 

By  Indra’s  and  by  Agni’s  best,  flowing  away,  the  rivers  run 
which  they  released  from  their  restraint. 

9 0 Indra,  many  are  thine  aids,  many  thy  ways  of  guiding  ns, 
Lord  of  the  Bay  Steeds,  Hinva’s  Son.  To  a Good  Hero  come 

our  prayers,  which  soon  shall  havo  accomplishment. 

10  Inspire  him  with  your  holy  hymns,  the  Hero  bright  and 

glorious, 

Him  who  with  might  demolisheth  even  the  brood  of  Sushna, 
and  winneth  for  us  the  heavenly  streams. 

11  Inspire  him  worshipped  with  fair  rites,  the  glorious  Hero 

truly  brave. 

He  brake  in  pieces  Sushna’s  brood  who  still  expected  not  the 
stroke,  and  won  for  us  the  heavenly  streams.  Let  all  the 
others  die  away. 

4 Nabhdka-like  : Nabh&ka  may  have  been  the  father  of  NAbh&ka  the  Kishi 
of  the  hymn. 

8 Who  oped : ‘ who  overspread  (with  their  lustre).’ — Wilson.  The  Commen- 
tator does  not  explain  the  passage. 

7 This  same  song : a hymn  like  our  own,  for  victory  in  battle. 

8 The  Two  refulgent  with  their  beams : apparently  the  Sun  and  Moon.  Ac- 
cording to  SAyana,  Indra  and  Agni  are  intended. 

9 Hinva's  Son : Hinva  (the  driver,  impeller,  instigator  of  actions),  a father 
invented  for  Indra  by  the  poet.  To  a Good  Hero : to  Indra.  ‘ The  meaning0 
the  verse,  even  with  the  help  of  the  scholiast,  is  far  from  intelligible.’— WiUou- 


THE  RTGVEDA. 


183 


yyfy  41.] 

> Tims  have  we  sung  anew  to  Indra-Agni,  as  sang  our  sires, 
Angirases,  and  Mandhatar. 

Guard  us  with  triple  shelter  and  preserve  us : may  we  be 
masters  of  a store  of  riches. 

HYMN  XLI.  Vamna. 

To  make  this  Varuna  come  forth,  sing  thou  a song  unto  the 
band  of  Maruts  wiser  than  thyself, — 

This  Varuna  who  guardeth  well  the  thoughts  of  men  like 
herds  of  kine. 

Let  all  the  others  die  away. 

! Him  altogether  praise  I with  the  song  and  hymns  our  fathers 
sang,  and  with  Nabhaka’s  eulogies, — 

Him  dwelling  at  the  rivers’  source,  surrounded  by  his  Sisters 
Seven. 

; The  nights  he  hath  encompassed,  and  stablished  the  morns 
with  magic  art : visible  over  all  is  he. 

His  dear  Ones,  following  his  Law,  have  prospered  the  Three 
Dawns  for  him. 

1 He,  visible  o’er  all  the  earth,  stablished  the  quarters  of  the 
sky  : 

He  measured  out  the  eastern  place,  that  is  the  fold  of  Varuna  : 
like  a strong  herdsman  is  the  God. 

5 He  who  supports  the  worlds  of  life,  he  who  well  knows  the 
hidden  names  mysterious  of  the  morning  beams, 

He  cherishes  much  wisdom,  Sage,  as  heaven  brings  forth  each 
varied  form. 

i In  whom  all  wisdom  centres,  as  the  nave  is  set  within  the 
wheel. 

Haste  ye  to  honour  Trita,  as  kine  haste  to  gather  in  the  fold, 
even  as  they  muster  steeds  to  yoke. 


1 To  make  this  Varuna  come  forth  : SAyana  explains  prabhfliaye  as  an  adjec- 
Vf- prakr'ushtadhanAi/a  : * to  that  opulent  Varuna.' — Wilson.  IViscr  : more 

in  singing.  The  thoughts  : holy  thoughts  and  devotions.  The  refrain, 
^all,  etc.,  recurs  at  the  end  of  e\e  y stanza. 

2 A ihhdka's : that  is,  mine  own  Sisters  Seven  : the  five  rivers  of  thePanj;ib, 
le  f utlus,  and  perhaps  the  KubhA.  See  1 32,  note. 

? dear  Ones : apparently  the  nights,  which  give  place  to  the  mornings. 

Dawns : according  to  SAyana,  morning,  noon,  and  evening 
* The  fold  : or,  perhaps,  the  course,  meaning  the  place  from  which  he  starts. 
® Trita:  Varuna,  here,  apparently,  identified  with  this  ancient  God  who 
spresentH  the  expanse  of  heaven.  According  to  SAyaua,  (Varuna)  ‘who  abides 
1 the  three  world*’ 


184  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  p// 

7 He  wraps  these  regions  as  a robe  ; he  contemplates  the  tribe 

of  Gods  and  all  the  works  of  mortal  men. 

Before  the  homo  of  Varuna  all  the  Gods  follow  his  decree. 

8 He  is  an  Ocean  far-removed,  yet  through  the  heaven  to  hi 

ascends  the  worship  which  these  realms  possess. 

With  his  bright  foot  he  overthrew  their  magic,  and  went  t 
to  heaven. 

9 Ruler,  whose  bright  far-seeing  rays,  pervading  all  three  earth 

have  filled  the  three  superior  realms  of  heaven. 

Firm  is  the  seat  of  Varuna  : over  the  Seven  he  rules  as  Kin 
10  Who,  after  his  decree,  o’erspread  the  Dark  Ones  with  a rol 
of  light; 

AVho  measured  out  the  ancient  seat,  who  pillared  both  tl 
worlds  apart  as  the  Unborn  supported  heaven.  Let  all  tl 
others  die  away. 


HYMN  XLII.  Varu 

Lord  of  all  wealth,  the  Asura  propped  the  heavens,  and  irn 
sured  out  the  broad  earth's  wide  expanses. 

He,  King  supreme,  approached  all  living  creatures.  All  the 
are  Varima’s  holy,  ope  rat  ions. 

2 So  humbly  worship  Varuna  the  Mighty  ; revere  the  wi 
Guard  of  the  World  Immortal. 

May  he  vouchsafe  ns  triply-barred  protection.  0 Earth  a 
Heaven,  within  your  lap  preserve  us. 

7 This  stanza  is  very  obscure,  and  my  rendering  is  conjectural.  Thect 
mentary  is  defective,  aud  von  Both  and  Ludwig  think  that  the  correctness 
one  word  in  the  text  is  doubtful.  According  to  the  slight  alteration  suggi 
ed  by  the  latter  scholar,  ‘ under  the  lead  ’ would  stand  instead  of  ‘ before  1 
home.' 

8 The  first  line  of  this  stanza  also  is  difficult.  Wilson,  following  S3ya 
translates  : ‘ He  is  the  hidden  ocean  ; swift  he  mounts  (the  heaven)  as  ( 
8Un)  the  sky  ; when  he  has  placed  the  sacrifice  in  those  (regions  of  the  tin 
ment).’  Ludwig's  interpretation,  which  I follow,  requires  tirdh  to  be  ri 
instead  of  turdh  (swift).  Their  magic  : the  magical  arts  of  the  fiends  of  darto 

9 Firm:  bo  Hesiod  (Theog.  V.  127)  calls  Ouranoe  = Varuna  the  « 
a(T(pa AtC,  the  firm  seat  of  the  Gods.  See  M.  Muller,  Chips  a^ern 
Workshop,  IV.  xx  (new  edition).  The  Seven : rivers,  understood. 

30  The  Dark  Ones:  the  nights,  which  Varuna  turns  into  days.  M 
Chips,  IV.  xxii.  The  Unhorn  : the  primeval,  everlasting,  uncreated  v 
Being.  According  to  SAyana,  the  Sun. 

1 The  Asura : the  High  God,  Varuna.  * The  wise  spirit.’— M.  Mull^ 

2 Of  the  World  Immortal ; amritasya : according  to  SAyana,  of  »mn 


THE  R1QVEDA. 


185 


\rMN  43.] 

) Sharpen  this  song  of  him  who  strives  his  utmost,  sharpen 
God  Vanina,  his  strength  and  insight ; ’ 

May  we  ascend  the  ship  that  bears  us  safely,  whereby  we  may 
pass  over  all  misfortune.  J 

[ Asvins,  with  songs  the  singer  stones  have  made  you  hasten 
hitherward, 

Nasatyas,  to  the  Soma-draught.  Let  all  the  others  die  away, 

) As  the  sage  Atri  with  his  hymns,  0 Asvins,  called  you  eagerly, 

Nasatyas,  to  the  Soma-draught.  Let  all  the  others  die  away. 

) So  have  I called  you  to  our  aid,  even  as  the  wise  have  called 
of  old, 

Nasatyas,  to  the  Soma-draught.  Let  all  the  others  die  away. 

HYMN  XLIII.  Agni> 

These  songs  of  mine  go  forth  as  lauds  of  Agni,  the  disposing  Sage, 

Whose  worshipper  is  ne’er  o’ert brown. 

I Wise  Agni  Jatavedas,  I beget  a song  of  praise  for  thee. 

Who  willingly  receivest  it. 

3 Thy  sharpened  flames,  0 Agni,  like  the  gleams  of  light  that 
glitter  through, 

Devour  the  forests  with  their  teeth. 

i Gold-coloured,  bannered  with  the  smoke,  urged  by  the  wind, 
aloft  to  heaven 

Rise,  lightly  borne,  the  flames  of  fire. 

5 These  lightly  kindled  fiery  flames  are  all  around  made  visible, 

Even  as  the  gleamings  of  the  Dawns. 

6 As  Jatavedas  speeds  along,  the  dust  is  black  beneath  his  feet, 

When  Agni  spreads  upon  the  earth. 

1 Making  the  plants  his  nourishment,  Agni  devours  and  wTearies 
not, 

! Seeking  the  tender  shrubs  again. 

k Bending  him  down  with  all  his  tongues,  he  flickers  with  his 
fiery  glow  : 

Splendid  is  Agni  in  the  woods. 

Agni,  thine  home  is  in  the  floods : into  the  plants  thou 
forcest  way, 

And  as  their  Child  art  born  anew\ 

1 Worshipped  with  offerings  shines  thy  flame,  0 Agni,  from 
the  sacred  oil, 

^With  kisses  on  the  ladle’s  mouth. 

5 Th*  ship  : a metaphorical  expression  for  hymn  and  sacrifice.  Cf.  I.  46.  7 ; 

; IX.  89.  Q • Y aa  a . i n . i m o . ins  q 


186  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Vn j 

1 1 Let  us  serve  Agni  with  our  hymns,  Disposer,  fed  on  ox  aiJ( 

cow, 

Who  bears  the  Soma  on  Mb  back. 

12  Yea,  thee,  0 Agni,  do  we  seek  with  homage  and  with  fUe 

Priest 

Whose  wisdom  is  most  excellent. 

13  0 worshipped  with  oblations,  pure  Agni,  we  call  on  thee  i 

erst 

Did  Bhrigu,  Manus,  Angiras. 

14  For  thou,  0 Agni,  by  the  fire,  Sage  by  the  Sage,  Good  by  tl 

Good, 

Friend  by  the  Friend,  art  lighted  up. 

15  So  wealth  in  thousands,  food  with  store  of  heroes  give  thou  i 

the  sage, 

0 Agni,  to  the  worshipper. 

16  0 Agni,  Brother,  made  by  strength,  Lord  of  red  steeds  ai 

brilliant  sway, 

Take  pleasure  in  this  laud  of  mine. 

17  My  praises,  Agni,  go  to  thee,  as  the  cow's  seek  the  stall 

meet 

The  lowing  calf  that  longs  for  milk. 

18  Agni,  best  Angiras,  to  thee  all  people  who  have  pleasant  horn 
Apart,  have  turned  as  to  their  wish. 

19  The  sages  skilled  in  holy  song  and  thinkers  with  their  thougl 

have  urged 

Agni  to  share  the  sacred  feast. 

20  So,  Agni,  unto  thee  the  Priest,  Invoker,  strong  in  forays,  pr 
Those  who  spin  out  the  sacrifice. 

21  In  many  a place,  the  same  in  look  art  thou,  a Prince  o’er 

the  tribes  : 

In  battles  we  invoke  thine  aid. 


11  Fed  on  ox  and  cow : ‘the  eater  of  the  ox,  the  eater  of  the  marrow. 
Wilson.  Who  bears  the  Soma  on  his  back:  »<mapruhth&ya : ‘ on  whose  b 
the  libation  is  poured.' — Wilson. 

14  S&yana  refers  to  the  Aitareya  Erdhmana,  I.  16,  ‘which  describes) 
the  fire  produced  by  friction  from  the  two  aranis  [fire-sticks]  is  thrown  i 
the  Ahavamya  fire,  in  the  Atithyeshti  ceremony.  “ In  the  verse  twain  hf 
[For  thou,  0 Agni]  etc.,  the  one  ripra  (a  sage)  means  one  Agni,  the  other  r* 
the  other  Agni ; the  one  san  (being,  existing)  means  the  one,  the  other 
(in  satd)  the  other  Agni.’  (Haug’s  tratis.).' — Note  by  E.  B.  C.  in  ^liS( 
Translation.  Sdn  and  $at&  may  also  mean  ‘ good.’ 

16  Made  by  strength : produced  by  violent  agitation  of  the  fire-stick* 


THE  MOVED  A. 


TMN  44.J 


187 


5 Pray  thou  to  Agni,  pray  to  him  who  blazes  served  with  sacred 
oil : 

Let  him  give  ear  to  this  our  call. 

I We  call  on  thee  as  such,  as  one  who  hears,  as  Jatavedas,  one, 

Agni ! who  beats  away  our  foes.  1 

; I pray  to  Agni,  King  of  men,  the  Wonderful,  the  President 

Of  holy  Laws  : may  he  give  ear. 

I Him  like  a bridegroom,  him  who  stirs  all  people,  like  a noble 
horse, 

Like  a fleet  steed,  we  instigate. 

i Slaying  things  deadly,  burning  up  foes,  Rakshasas,  on  every 
side, 

Shine,  Agni,  with  thy  sharpened  flame. 

Thou  whom  the  people  kindle  even  as  Manus  did,  best  Angiras  ! 

0 Agni,  mark  thou  this  my  speech. 

| 0 Agni,  made  by  strength  ! be  thou  bom  in  the  heavens  or 
born  in  floods, 

Vs  such  wo  call  on  thee  with  songs. 

Tea,  all  the  people,  all  the  folk  who  have  good  dwellings, 
each  apart, 

lend  food  for  thee  to  eat  thereof. 


) Agni,  so  may  wo,  devout,  gazed  at  by  men,  throughout  our 
days 

^ss  lightly  over  all  distress. 

Ve  venerate  with  cheerful  hearts  the  cheerful  Agni,  dear  to  all, 
burning,  with  purifying  flame. 

»o  thou,  0 Agni  rich  in  light,  beaming  like  Surya  with  thy  rays 
ioldly  demolishest  the  gloom. 

Vepray  to  thee  for  this  thy  gift,  Victor!  the  gift  that  faileth 
not, 

) Agni,  choioest  wealth  from  thee. 


HYMN  XLIV.  Agni. 

5ay  service  unto  Agni  with  your  fuel,  rouse  your  Guest  with 
oil : 

in  him  present  your  offerings. 

^gni,  do  thou  accept  my  laud,  be  magnified  by  this  my  song  : 
welcome  my  sweetly-spoken  words. 

/tning  ^eaveni : 68  ®un-  In  floods:  in  the  waters  of  the  firmament 
t*  ai  men  •’  objects  of  their  admiration.  ‘ Beholding  men.’ — Wilson. 

▼ \&Q10nK  PofilnaVv i Wf  T avi nnn 


188  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOR  pj 

3 Agni,  envoy,  I place  in  front ; the  oblation-bearer  I address 
Here  let  him  seat  the  Deities. 

4 Agni,  the  lofty  flames  of  thee  enkindled  have  gone  up  on  hi 
Thy  bright  flames,  thou  Refulgent  One. 

5 Beloved  ! let  my  ladles  full  of  sacred  oil  come  near  to  thee 
Agni,  accept  our  offerings. 

6 I worship  Agni — may  he  hear ! — the  oheerful,  the  InVol 

Priest 

Of  varied  splendour,  rich  in  light. 

7 Ancient  Invoker,  meet  for  praise,  beloved  Agni,  wise  and  strc 
The  visitant  of  solemn  rites. 

8 Agni,  best  Angiras,  accept  straightway  IheBe  offerings,  and  gi 
The  seasonable  sacrifice. 

9 Excellent  God,  with  brilliant  flames,  enkindled  bring  t 

hitherward, 

Knowing  the  way,  the  Heavenly  Host. 

10  Him,  Sage  and  Herald,  void  of  guile,  ensign  of  sacrifices,  liin 
Smoke-bannered,  rich  in  light,  wo  seek. 

1 1 0 Agni,  be  our  Guardian  thou,  God,  against  those  who  injure 
Destroy  our  foes,  thou  Son  of  Strength. 

12  Making  his  body  beautiful,  Agni  the  Sage  hath  waxen  by 
The  singer  and  his  ancient  hymn. 

13  1 invocate  the  Child  of  Strength,  Agni  with  purifying  flai 
At  this  well-ordered  sacrifice. 

14  So  Agni,  rich  iu  many  friends,  with  fiery  splendour, 

thyself 

With  Gods  upon  our  sacred  grass. 

15  The  mortal  man  who  serves  the  God  Agni  within  his 

abode, 

For  him  he  causes  wealth  to  shine. 

16  Agni  is  head  and  height  of  heaven,  the  Master  of  the  e 

is  he  : 

He  quickcneth  the  waters’  seed. 

17  Upward,  0 Agni,  rise  thy  flames,  pure  and  resplendent, 

ing  high, 

Thy  lustres,  fair  effulgences. 

14  Rich  in  many  friends : 'thou  who  hast  Mitra’s  splendour/— Ludwi; 

15  For  him  he  causes  wealth  to  shine : or,  *To  him  he  shines  forth  opul 
* To  him  he  gives  riches.'— Wilson. 

16  The  waters'  seed ; as  lightning,  he  impregnate*  the  wate  rs  of  tbs  i 


THE  RIGVEDA . 


(N  45.] 


139 


?or,  Agni,  thou  as  Lord  of  Light  rulest  o'er  choicest  gifts: 
may  I, 

"»hy  singer,  find  defence  in  thee. 

) Agni,  they  who  understand  stir  thee  to  action  with  their 
thoughts : 

5o  let  our  songs  enhance  thy  might. 

Ye  ever  claim  the  friendship  of  Agni,  the  singing  messenger, 
)f  Godlike  nature,  void  of  guile. 

Vgni  who  bears  most  holy  sway,  the  holy  Singer,  holy  Sage, 
Jhines  holy  when  we  worship  him, 

fea,  let  my  meditations,  let  my  songs  exalt  thee  evermore  : 
Think,  Agni,  of  our  friendly  bond. 

f I were  thou  and  thou  wert  I,  0 Agni,  every  prayer  of 
thine 

Jhould  have  its  due  fulfilment  here. 

'or  Excellent  and  Lord  of  wealth  art  thou,  0 Agni,  rich  in 
light : 

day  we  enjoy  thy  favouring  grace. 

Vgni,  to  thee  whoso  laws  stand  fast  our  resonant  songs  of 
praise  speed  forth 
Vs  rivers  hasten  to  the  sea. 

Vgni,  the  Youthful  Lord  of  men,  who  stirreth  much  and 
eateth  all, 

The  Sage,  I glorify  with  hymns. 

To  Agni  let  us  haste  with  lauds,  the  Guide  of  sacrificial  rites, 
Vrmcd  with  sharp  teeth,  the  Mighty  One. 

Lnd  let  this  man,  good  Agni,  bo  with  thee  the  singer  of  thy 
praise : 

Be  gracious,  Holy  One,  to  him. 

For  thou  art  sharer  of  our  feast,  wise,  ever  watchful  as  a 
Sage  : 

Vgni,  thou  shinest  in  the  sky. 

3 Agni,  Sage,  before  our  foes,  before  misfortunes  fall  on  us, 
Excellent  Lord,  prolong  our  lives. 

HYMN  XLV.  Indrn. 


Hitherward!  they  who  light  the  flame  and  straightway  trim 
the  sacred  grass, 

Whose  Friend  is  Tndra  ever  young. 

> Sateth  all : consumes  the  entire  oblation.— SAyana.  But  the  meaning 
robably  general. 

This  mm : the  Rishi  or  singer  himself. 
i the  kIu  • »\v  ^ 


190  THE  HYMNS  OP  [POOR  y/ 

2 High  is  their  fuel,  great  their  laud,  wide  is  their  splinter  fr, 

the  stake, 

Whose  Friend  is  Indra  ever  young. 

3 Uuquelled  in  fight  the  heroleads  his  army  with  the  warriorchi 
Whose  Friend  is  Indra  ever  young. 

4 The  new-born  Vritra-slayer  asked  his  Mothor,  as  he  sei 

his  shaft, 

Who  are  the  fierce?  Who  are  renowned? 

D Savasi  answered,  He  who  seeks  thine  enmity  will  battle  lil 
A stately  elephant  on  a hill. 

6 And  hear,  0 Maghavan ; to  him  who  craves  of  thee  t 

gran  test  all : 

Whate’er  thou  makest  firm  is  firm. 

7 What  time  the  Warrior  Indra  goes  to  battle,  borne  by  a 

steeds, 

Best  of  all  charioteers  is  he. 

8 ltepcl,  0 Thunder-armed,  in  all  directions  all  attacks  on  u 
And  be  our  own  most  glorious  God. 

9 May  Indra  set  our  car  in  front,  in  foremost  place  to  win  the  s 
He  whom  the  wicked  injure  not. 

10  Thine  enmity  may  we  escape,  and,  Sakra,  for  thy  bounty, 
In  kinc,  may  we  come  near  to  thee  ; 

11  Softly  approaching,  Thunder  armed  ! wealthy  by  hundi 

rich  in  steeds, 

Unrivalled,  ready  with  our  gifts. 

12  For  thine  exalted  excellence  gives  to  thy  worshippers  each 
Hundreds  and  thousands  of  thy  boons. 

13  Indra,  we  know  thee  breaker-down  even  of  strong  f 

winner  of  spoil, 

As  one  who  conquers  wealth  for  us. 

14  Though  thou  art  highest,  Sage  and  Bold  ! let  the  drops  c 

thee  when  we  come 
To  thee  as  to  a trafficker. 

2 Splinter:  the  first  shaving,  splinter,  or  strip  of  wood,  cut  from  the 
or  sacrificial  post,  and  used  in  the  sacrifice. 

4 Aa  soon  as  he  was  born  Indra  showed  his  warlike  disposition,  and 
what  worthy  opponents  he  should  have. 

5 Savasi,  or,  the  Strong  Dame  ; his  mother  Adit-i.  A stately 
follow  S&yana  who  explains  apsah  m darjaniyo  gajah,  a beautiful  elei 
although  in  other  place*  the  word  seems  to  mean  beauty  (I.  124  7), 
head  (V.  80,  6),  The  allusion  is  to  the  size  and  strength  of  Vfitra,  Indr* 
lure  antagonist. 

14  As  to  a trafficker:  as  to  one  who  knows  the  value  of  our  worsnij 
•blations  and  will  give  us  something  in  return. 


YMX  40.J 


TUE  KlUVEDA, 


191 


Bring  unto  us  the  treasure  of  the  opulent  man  who,  loth  to 
give, 

Hath  slighted  thee  for  gain  of  wealth. 

Indra,  these  friends  of  ours,  supplied  with  Soma,  wait  and 
look  to  thee, 

As  men  with  fodder  to  the  herd. 

And  thee  who  art  not  deaf,  whose  ears  are  quick  to  listen  for 
our  aid,  1 

We  call  to  us  from  far  away. 

When  thou  hast  listened,  make  our  call  one  which  thou  never 
wilt  forget, 

And  be  our  very  nearest  Friend. 

When  even  now,  when  we  have  been  in  trouble  we  l»4V« 
thought  of  thee,  ’ 0 

0 Indra,  give  us  gifts  of  kine. 

0 Lord  of  Strength,  we  rest  on  thee,  as  old  men  rest  upon  a 
staff : r 

Wc  long  to  have  thee  dwell  with  us. 

To  Indra  sing  a song  of  praise,  Hero  of  mighty  valour  him 

\\  hum  no  one  challenges  to  war.  ’ 


Hem,  the  Soma  being  shed,  I pour  the  juice  for  thee  to  drink- 
bate  thee  and  finish  thy  carouse. 


Let  not  the  fools,  or  those  who  mock,  beguile  thee  when  they 
seek  thine  aid  : J 


I hove  not  the  enemies  of  pra\  er. 

i lcA 11,0,11  with  11011  milky  draught  cheer  thee  to  great 
i munificence:  b 


brink  as  the  wild-bull  di  inks  the  lake. 

IVawsy 1 111  °Ur  asscmblius  "hat  dcctls>  new  and  ancient,  far 
TllC  Vritra-slayer  hath  achieved. 

In  battle  of  a thousand  arms  Indra  drank  Kadru’s  Soma  juice: 
ieie  lie  displayed  his  manly  might. 

Tnie  undeniable  strength  he  found  in  Yadu  and  in  Turvasa 
"^conquered  through  the  saeriticc.  ' ’ 

1 J enc"““  of  prayer  : according  to  S&yana  those  who  hate  Brihmans. 
f ‘J'-  mid-bull : the  gaura. 

E^tlfc8om'-VW";.K:<lra  ter®  18  »PP»rently  the  name  of  a Rishi  or 
»,  a g J,r,C  - T1*6  St-  Petersburg  Lexicon  takes  it  to 

r » hadru  or  Soma*  vessel. 

furvasa  aud^  Y«^naf^^w*  aocording  to  Sdyapa,  is  the  name  of  the  enemy 
f uiadu:  he  overcame  Ahnav&vva  in  battle.’ — Wilson. 


28  Him  have  I magnified,  our  Lord  in  common,  Guardian  of 

folk,  m 

Discloser  of  great  wealth  in  kine  ; 

29  Ribhukshan,  not  to  be  restrained,  who  strengthened  TugraV 

son  in  lauds,  I 

Indra  beside  the  flowing  juice  ; 

30  Who  for  Trisoka  clave  the  hill  that  formed  a wide  receptacli 
So  that  the  cows  might  issue  forth. 

31  Whate’er  thy  plan  or  purpose  bo,  whate’er,  in  transport,  thoi 

wouldst  do, 

Do  it  not,  Indra,  but  be  kind. 

32  But  little  hath  been  heard  of  done  upon  the  earth  by  oa 

like  thee : 

Let  thine  heart,  Indra,  turn  to  us. 

33  Thine  then  shall  be  this  high  renown,  thine  shall  these  loftj 

praises  be, 

When,  Indra,  thou  art  kind  to  us. 

34  Not  for  one  trespass,  not  for  two,  0 Hero,  slay  us,  nor  fa 

three, 

Nor  yet  for  many  trespasses,  I 

35  I fear  one  powerful  like  thee,  tho  crusher-down  of  enemies, 
Mighty,  repelling  all  attacks. 

36  0 wealthy  God,  ne’er  may  I live  to  see  my  friend  or  son 

need  : 

Hitherward  let  thy  heart  be  turned. 

37  What  friend,  0 people,  unprovoked,  hath  ever  said  unto 

friend, 

He  turns  and  leaves  us  in  distress? 

38  Hero,  insatiate  enjoy  this  Soma  juice  so  near  to  thee, 

Even  as  a hunter  rushing  down. 

20  Rihhuhhan : Indra,  Lord  of  tho  Ilibhus.  Tugra’s  ton:  Bhujyu.  A 
cording  to  Sftyana,  tuyryavrklham  means  * augmenter  of  water.' 

30  The  hill  is  the  massive  rain-cloud,  and  the  cows  are  streams  of  water. 

31  Do  it  not : ‘ Sftyana  understands  this,  “ do  it  not,  for  thou  hast  done 
for  us, — only  make  us  happy.”  Could  it  be  that  the  worshipper  had  a feeiu 
of  nemesis  1 or  would  he  monopolize  all  ? ' — Note  by  E.  B.  C.  in  WiW 
Translation. 

32  ‘ In  the  following  venes  (32—3(5)  the  poet  seems  to  express  disappo^ 
ment  at  the  inadequate  manifestation  of  Indra’s  power,  while  he  at  the  w 
time  entreats  his  grace  and  forgiveness.'— 0.  8.  Texit,  V.  p,  1U. 

37  This  stanza  is  Indra’s  answer  to  the  poet's  complaint.  The 
seems  to  be : no  friend  without  good  cause  calls  bis  friend  a traitor. ■ 
then  have  I done,  or  left  undone,  that  thou  shouldet  say  that  I have  t 
thee  ? See  Ludwig's  Commentary  on  the  very  difficult  jahS  kdK  or;« 


THE  RIGVEDA. 


b/w  46.] 


393 


| Hither  I draw  those  Bays  of  thine  yoked  by  our  hymn,  with 
splendid  car, 

That  thou  mayst  give  unto  the  priests, 
i Drive  all  our  enemies  away,  smite  down  the  foes  who  press 

around, 

And  bring  the  wealth  for  which  we  long : 

0 Jndra,  that  which  is  concealed  in  strong  firm  place  precipi- 
tous : 

Bring  us  the  wealth  for  which  we  long  : 


Great  riches  which  the  world  of  men  shall  recognize  as  sent 
by  thee  : 

Bring  us  tho  wealth  for  which  we  long. 


HYMN  XL VI. 


Indra. 


We,  Indra,  Lord  of  ample  wealth,  our  Guide,  depend  on  one 
like  thee, 

Thou  driver  of  the  Tawny  Steeds. 

For,  Hurler  of  tho  Bolt,  we  know  thee  true,  the  giver  of  our 
food, 

We  know  thee  giver  of  our  wealth. 

) thou  whose  majesty  tho  bards  celebrate  with  their  sontrs 
thou  Lord  b‘  ' 

)f  hundred  powers  and  hundred  aids. 

-dr  guidance  hath  the  mortal  man  whom  Aryaman,  the  Marut 

host, 

Vnd  Mitra,  void  of  guile,  protect. 


Lne,  steeds,  and  hero  strength  he  gains,  and  prospers,  by  the 
Adityas  sped, 

^ver  in  wealth  which  all  desire. 


We  pray  to  Indra  for  his  gift,  to  him  tho  Fearless  and  the 
Strong, 

We  pray  to  him  the  Lord  of  wealth. 


verily  combined  in  him  arc  all  the  fearless  powers  of  aid. 
im,  rich  in  wealth,  let  swift  Steeds  bring  to  us,  his  Bays,  to 
Soma  juice  for  his  carouse  : 


fea,  that  most  excellent  carouse,  Indra,  which  slays  most  ene- 
mies, 

With  Heroes  wins  tho  light  of  heaven,  and  is  invincible  in  war  : 


PiscLl  rPIiCarT  to<, 1,0  ?°mposed  of  two  or  more  originally  separate  hymns 
e (see  in*6  l8cJie.^U(^*eni  L PP-  7 — 9).  There  are  seventeen  varieties  of 
e only  °/  *tymna)-  The  hymn  is  difficult  and  obscure  in  parts, 
pZl  c°BJ<*tural  translations  can  be  given.  ^ 1 

atd:  or,  sucoourere  ; the  Maruts  may  be  intended. 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


194 


[BOOR  r/jj 


9  Which  merits  fame,  all-bountiful  1 and,  unsubdued,  hath  vic- 
tory in  deeds  of  might. 

So  come  to  our  libations,  Strongest  1 Excellent ! May  we  oV 
tain  a stall  of  kine. 

10  Responding  to  our  wish  for  cows,  for  steeds,  and  chariots,^ 

of  old, 

Be  gracious,  Greatest  of  the  Great ! 

1 1 For,  Hero,  nowhere  can  I find  the  bounds  of  thy  munificence, 
Still  do  thou  favour  us,  0 Bolt-armed  Maghavan  : with  strength 

hast  thou  rewarded  hymns. 

12  High,  glorifier  of  his  friend,  he  knows  all  generations,  k 

whom  many  praise. 

All  races  of  mankind  with  ladles  lifted  up  invoke  that  Might] 
Indra’s  aid. 

13  Be  he  our  Champion  and  ITotector  in  great  deeds,  rich  in  al 

wealth,  the  Vritra-slayer,  Maghavan. 

11  In  the  wild  raptures  of  the  juice  sing  to  your  Hero  with  higl 
laud,  to  him  the  Wise, 

To  Indra,  glorious  in  his  name,  the  Mighty  One,  even  as  th 
hymn  allow eth  it. 

15  Thou  givest  wealth  to  me  myself,  thou  givcst  treasure,  Ei 

cellent ! and  the  strong  steed, 

0 Much-invoked,  in  deeds  of  might,  yea,  even  now. 

16  Him,  Sovran  Ruler  of  all  precious  things,  who  even  hat 

power  o’er  this  fair  form  of  his, 

As  now  it  takcth  shape,  and  afterward, 

17  We  praise,  so  that  the  Mighty  One  may  speed  to  you,  Pouk 

of  bounties,  Traveller,  prepared  to  go. 

Thou  favourest  the  Maruts  known  to  all,  by  song  and  sacnnci 
With  song  and  praise  I sing  to  thee. 

18  We  in  the  sacrifice  perform  their  will  whose  voice  is  life 

high,  .. 

The  worship  of  those  Thundering  Ones  who  o’er  the  ridges  i 
these  mountains  fly  in  troops. 

13  This  stanza  may  have  been  the  conclusion  of  one  of  the  original  hy®1 

14  A s the  hymn  ailoweth  it : in  due  accordance  with  the  metre. 

16  S&yana  explains  the  latter  part  of  the  first  line  and  the  following  j* 
of  the  second  as,  ‘ who  overcome*  this  obstructor  (the  enemy)  m /je  v( 
war.’  I follow  Ludwig’s  interpretation  who  refers  to  III.  5%.  o,  w 
weareth  every  shape  at  pleasure,  effecting  magic  changes  in  hia  ’ 
VI.  47.  II,  ‘ Indra  moves  multiform  by  his  illusions/ 

18  Their  will : the  pleasure  of  the  Maruts. 


the  may eda . 


195 


Olndra,  Mightiest,  bring  us  that  which  crushes  men  of  evil  minds, 

Wealth  suited  to  our  needs,  0 Stirrer  of  the  thought,  best 
wealth,  0 thou  who  stirrest  thought. 

0 Winder,  noble  winner,  strong,  wondrous,  moat  splendid, 

excellent, 

Sole  Lord  of  victory,  bring  all-overpowering  wealth,  joy-giving, 
chief  in  deeds  of  might. 

Now  let  the  godless  man  approach  who  hath  received  reward 
so  <*reat 

As  Vasa  Asvya,  when  this  light  of  morning  dawned,  received 
from  Prithusravas,  from  Kanita’s  son. 

Steeds  sixty  thousand  and  ten  thousand  kinc,  and  twenty 
hundred  camels  I obtained  ; 

Ten  hundred  brown  in  hue,  and  other  ten  red  in  three  spots: 
in  all,  ten  thousand  kino. 

Ten  browns  that  make  my  wealth  increase,  fleet  steeds  whose 
tails  are  long  and  fair, 

Turn  with  swift  whirl  my  chariot  wheel ; 

The  gifts  which  Prithusravas  gave,  KanitVs  son  munificent. 

He  gave  a chariot  wrought  of  gold  : the  prince  was  passing 
bountiful,  and  won  himself  most  lofty  fame. 

Come  thou  to  this  great  rite  of  ours,  Vayu  ! to  give  us  vigor- 
ous light. 

We  have  served  thee  that  thou  mightest  give  much  to  us,  yea, 
mightest  quickly  give  great  wealth. 

Who  with  thrice  seven  times  seventy  horses  comes  to  us, 
invested  with  the  rays  of  morn, 

Through  these  our  Soma-draughts  and  those  who  press,  to 
give,  drinker  of  pure  bright  Soma  juice. 

Who  hath  inclined  this  glorious  one,  bounteous  himself,  to 
give  me  gifts, 

Borne  oil  firm  chariot  with  the  prosperous  Nahusha,  wise,  to 
a man  yet  more  devout. 


) 0 winner:  of  wealth  to  be  given  to  thy  worshippers.  * 0 bountiful, 
t bountiful.’— Wilson. 

[ VaWAi}vya:  the  Rishi  of  the  hymn.  Seel,  112.  10.  Prithusravas: 
1 116.  21. 

\ h ten  thousand  hint : the  exact  meaning  is  not  very  clear.  The  last 
18  rendered  differently  in  Wilson’s  Translation  : * a thousand  brown 
?8,J“and  ten  times  ten  thousand  cows  with  three  red  patches.' 

I n V ftPPar©ntly  VAyu,  but,  according  to  SAyapa,  Prithusravas. 

chariot : literally,  on  a car  made  of  the  wood  of  the  Aradu  tres 
Manthes  Indies).  But  SAyana  makes  two  proper  names  of  the  words, 
f Aradva  and  Aksha.’ 


THE  II Y MSS  OF 


[BOOR  r/fl! 


196 

28  Sole  Lord  in  beauty  meet  for  praise,  0 Vayu,  dropping  fatness 

Hurried' along  by  steeds,  by  camels,  and  by  hounds,  spread, 
forth  thy  train  : even  this  it  is. 

29  So  M a prize  dear  to  the  strong,  the  sixty  thousand  have  I gained, 
Bulls  that  resemble  vigorous  steeds. 

30  To  me  come  oxen  like  a herd,  yea,  unto  mo  the  oxen  come. 
And  in  the  grazing  herd  he  made  a hundred  camels  bleat  forme, 
And  twenty  hundred  mid  the  white. 

32  A hundred  has  the  sage  received,  Dasa  Balbutha  s and  Tarot 

Thehso’arefthy  people,  Vayu,  who  rejoice  with  Indra  for  the, 
guard,  rcjoico  with  Gods  for  guards.  . , , , , 

33  And  now  to  Vasa  Asvya  here  this  stately  woman  is  led  font, 
Adorned  with  ornaments  of  gold. 

HYMN  XLVII.  Adityi 

Great  help  yo  give  the  worshipper,  Varutia.Mitra,  Mighty  Ouei 
No  sorrow  ever  readies  him  whom  ye,  Ad.tyas,  keep  romharn 
Youm  are  incomparable  aids,  and  good  the  succour  they  affon 

2 O Gods  Adityas,  well  ye  know  the  way  to  keep  all  woesafa 
As  the  'birds  spread  their  sheltering  wings,  spread  your  proto 

tion  over  us. 

3 As  the  birds  spread  their  sheltering  wings  let  your  protect™ 
We  mean  all  shelter  and  defence,  ye  who  have  all  things  fi 

4 ToThomloevcr  they,  Most  Wise,  have  given  a home  a, 
O’eTthe  whole  riches  of  this  man  they , tho  Adityas,  have  coutn 

6 For  verily  men  sink  and  faint  through  oss 

,»»,  O Cod.,  .b»r, 

have  approached.  — — * 

' 28  The  tlttdt,  camel.,  an 7h^d>  are  apparently  the  fantastic  form,  of 1 
clouds  that  tty  before  Vftyu  or  the  wind. 

wl o{  iha  ^uewd  ^ 

1 Yourt  art,  tic:  the  rsfrsin  recurs  in  every  verse  of  the  hymn. 


THE  RIQtEDA . 


jjr^v  47.]  TI*E  RIG? EDA.  W 

\ On  him  shall  no  fierce  anger  fall,  no  sore  distress  shall  visit 
him, 

To  whom,  Adityas,  ye  have  lent  your  shelter  that  extendeth 
far. 


] Resting  in  you,  0 Gods,  we  are  like  men  who  fight  in  coats  of 
mail. 

Ye  guard  us  from  each  great  offence,  ye  guard  us  from  each 
lighter  fault. 

) May  Aditi  defend  us,  may  Aditi  guard  and  shelter  us, 

Mother  of  wealthy  Mitra  and  of  Aryaman  and  Varuna. 

) The  shelter,  Gods,  that  is  secure,  auspicious,  free  from  malady, 
A sure  protection,  triply  strong,  oven  that  do  ye  extend  to  us. 

I Look  down  on  us,  Adityas,  as  a guide  exploring  from  the 
bank. 

Lead  us  to  pleasant  ways  as  men  lead  horses  to  an  easy  ford. 


2 111  be  it  for  the  demons’  friend  to  find  us  or  come  near  to  us. 

! But  for  the  milch-cow  be  it  well,  and  for  the  man  who  strives 
for  fame. 


j}  Eacli  evil  deed  made  manifest,  and  that  which  is  concealed, 

1 0 Gods, 

The  whole  thereof  remove  from  us  to  Trita  Aptya  far  away. 

[ Daughter  of  Heaven,  the  dream  that  bodes  evil  to  us  or  to 
our  kine, 

Remove,  0 Lady  of  the  Light,  to  Trita  Aptya  far  away, 
i Even  if,  0 Child  of  Heaven,  it  make  a garland  or  a chain  of 
gold, 

The  whole  bad  dream,  whate’er  it  be,  to  Trita  Aptya  we 
consign. 

I To  him  whose  food  and  work  is  this,  who  comes  to  take  his 
share  therein, 

1 To  Trita,  and  to  Dvita,  Dawn  ! bear  thou  the  evil  dream  away. 


13  To  Trita  Aptya  far  away  : Trita  Aptya  is  a divinity  dwelling  in  the  re- 
vest part  of  the  heavens  to  whom  it  was  customary  to  wish  away  and 
asign  any  threatened  calamity  or  unpleasantness.  As  S&yana  regards  Trita 
>tya  as  the  lliahi  of  the  hymn,  he  !s  compelled  to  force  a different  interpre- 
tiou  on  the  first  half  of  the  second  line  : ‘ (let  it  not  be  found)  in  Trit* 
>tya,  keep  it  far  from  us.’ — Wilson. 

14  Daughter  of  Heaven  : Ushas  or  Dawn. 

15  ‘ The  sense  would  then  be  ‘ even  though  parts  of  it  be  pleasant,  we  put 
B whole  of  the  evil  dream  away.” — Macdonell,  Journal  of  R.  A.  S.,  July, 

P-  461. 

him:  to  Trita  whose  business  it  is  to  receive  these  consignments. 

Dvita:  a similar  being,  sometimes  associated  with  Trita,  SeeV.  18. 2, 


193 


THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  F/jj 


17  As  we  collect  the  utmost  debt,  even  the  eighth  and  sixteen^ 

part,  % 

So  unto  Aptya  we  transfer  together  all  the  evil  dream. 

18  Now  have  we  conquered  and  obtained,  and  from  our  trespas 

ses  are  free.  1 2 3 * * 

Shine  thou  away  the  evil  dream,  0 Dawn,  whereof  we  art 
afraid.  Yours  are  incomparable  aids,  and  good  the  succour 
they  afford. 


2 


HYMN  XLVIII. 


Soma, 


Wisely  have  I enjoyed  the  savoury  viand,  religious-thoughted, 
best  to  find  out  treasure, 

The  food  to  which  all  Deities  and  mortals,  calling  it  meath, 
gather  themselves  together. 

Thou  shalt  be  Aditi  as  thou  hast  entered  within,  appeaser  of 
celestial  auger. 

Indu,  enjoying  Indra’s  friendship,  bring  us — as  a swift  steed 
the  car — forward  to  riches. 


3 We  have  drunk  Soma  and  become  immortal ; wo  have  attained 

the  light,  the  Gods  discovered. 

Now  what  may  foeman’s  malice  do  to  harm  us?  What,  0 Im- 
mortal, mortal  man’s  deception  ? 

4 Absorbed  into  the  heart,  be  swoet,  0 Indu,  as  a kind  father  to 

his  son,  0 Soma, 

As  a wise  Friend  to  friend : do  thou,  wide-rulor,  0 Soma, 
lengthen  out  our  days  for  living. 

5 These  glorious  drops  that  give  me  freedom  have  I drunk] 

Closely  they  knit  my  joints  as  straps  secure  a car. 

Let  them  protect  my  foot  from  slipping  on  the  way : yea, 
the  drops  I drink  preserve  me  from  disease. 

6 Make  me  shine  bright  like  fire  produced  by  friction:  give  us 

clearer  sight  and  make  us  better. 

For  in  carouse  I think  of  thee,  0 Soma,  Shall  I,  as  a rich  na 
attain  to  oomfort  ? 

7 May  we  enjoy  with  an  enlivened  spirit  the  juioe  thou  givei 

like  ancestral  riches. 

0 Soma,  King,  prolong  thou  our  existence  as  Surya  makes t 
shining  days  grow  longer. 


1 Meath : mddhu ; or,  sweet. 

2 Within  ; within  my  heart.  Indu  : Soma. 

3 We  have  drunk  Soma : *ee  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  III.  264,  266.  ^ 

6 From  slipping  on  the  wag : 1 may  they  keep  us  from  a 1°°8 

worship. ’—Wilson. 


THE  RIGVEDA. 


199 


'MN  49*1 

King  Soma,  favour  us  and  make  us  prosper : we  are  thy  de- 
votees ; of  this  be  mindful. 

Spirit  and  power  are  fresh  in  us,  0 Indu : give  us  not  up  unto 
our  foeman’s  pleasure. 

For  thou  hast  settled  in  each  joint,  0 Soma,  aim  of  men’s  eyes 
and  guardian  of  our  bodies. 

When  we  offend  against  thine  holy  statutes,  as  a kind  Friend, 
God,  best  of  all,  bo  gracious. 

May  I be  with  the  Friend  whose  heart  is  tender,  who,  Lord  of 
Bays  ! when  quaffed  will  never  harm  me — 

This  Soma  now  deposited  within  me.  For  this,  I pray  for  longer 
life  to  Indra. 

Our  maladies  have  lost  their  strength  and  vanished : they  feared, 
and  passed  away  into  the  darkness. 

Soma  hath  risen  in  us,  exceeding  mighty,  and  we  are  come 
where  men  prolong  existence. 

Fathers,  that  Indu  which  our  hearts  have  drunken,  Immortal 
in  himself,  hath  entered  mortals. 

So  let  us  serve  this  Soma  with  oblation,  and  rest  securely  iu  his 
grace  and  favour. 

Associate  with  the  Fathers  thou,  0 Soma,  hast  spread  thyself 
abroad  through  earth  and  heaven. 

So  with  oblation  let  us  servo  thee,  Indu,  and  so  let  us  become 
the  lords  of  riches, 

Give  us  your  blessing,  0 ye  Gods,  preservers.  Never  may  sleep 
or  idle  talk  control  us. 

But  evermore  may  we,  as  friends  of  Soma,  speak  to  the  synod 
with  brave  sons  around  us. 

On  all  sides,  Soma,  thou  art  our  life-giver  : aim  of  all  eyes, 
light-finder,  come  within  us. 

Indu,  of  one  accord  with  thy  protections  both  from  behind  and 
from  before  preserve  us. 

HYMN  XLIX.  Agni. 

Aoxr,  come  hither  with  thy  fires ; we  choose  thee  as  Invoking 
I Priest. 

| Let  the  extended  ladle  fi'.l  of  oil  balm  thee,  best  Priest,  to 
[sit  on  sacred  grass. 

9 Ann  of  men's  eyes:  or,  beholder  of  men. 

^ immortal  in  himself:  see  note  on  I.  18.  4. 

Soma:  here  the  Moon-God,  who  is  intimately  connected  with  the  Pitris 
fatuera.  See  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  XVIII.  4.  72. 

* place  at  the  end  of  this  Book  the  eleven  hymns,  called  the  VAlakhilya, 
are  usually  inserted  after  Hymn  XLVIII.  These  hymns  are  not 


200 


THE  EYMNS  OF 


[BOOS 


nn 


2 For  unto  thee,  0 Angiras,  0 Son  of  Strength,  move  ladles ' 
the  sacrifice.  !a 


To  Agni,  Child  of  Force,  whose  locks  drop  oil,  we  seek  f0 
most  in  sacrificial  rites.  ! ' 


3 Agni,  thou  art  Disposer,  Sage,  Herald,  bright1  God!  j 

worshipful, 

Best  offerer,  cheerful,  to  be  praised  in  holy  rites,  pure  Loi 
by  singers  with  their  hymns. 

4 Most  Youthful  and  Eternal,  bring  the  longing  Gods  to  i 

the  guileless,  for  the  feast. 

Come,  Vasu,  to  the  banquet  that  is  well-prepared  : rejo 
thee,  gracious,  with  our  songs. 

5 Famed  art  thou,  Agni,  far  and  wide,  Preserver,  righteous,  a 

a Sago. 

The  holy  singers,  0 refulgent  kindled  God  ! arrangers,  call 
thee  to  come. 


6 Shine,  Most  Resplendent  ! blaze,  send  bliss  unto  the  folk,  a 

to  thy  worshipper  : Great  art  thou. 

So  may  my  princes,  with  good  fires,  subduing  foes,  rest  in  t 
keeping  of  the  Gods. 

7 0 Agni,  as  thou  burnest  down  to  earth  even  high-grot 

underwood, 

So,  bright  as  Mitra  is,  burn  him  who  injures  us,  him  who  pic 
ill  against  thy  friend. 

8 Give  us  not  as  a prey  to  mortal  enemy,  nor  to  the  wickc 

friend  of  fiends. 

With  conquering  guards,  auspicious,  unassailable,  protect  u 
0 Most  Youthful  God. 

9 Protect  us,  Agni,  through  the  first,  protect  us  through  tl 

second  hymu, 

Protect  us  through  three  hymns,  0 Lord  of  Power  and  Migh 
through  four  hymns,  Vasu,  guard  thou  us. 


reckoned  in  the  division  of  the  Uigved*  into  Mandalas  (Books)  and  Amivaki 
(Chapters),  and  Sftyana  does  n<>t  notice  them  in  his  Commentary.  See  J*' 
eon's  Translation,  V.  p.  96,  note  by  Cowell.  See  also  Max  Muller’s 
Hymn*  I.  (Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  Vol.  XXXII.),  pp.  xlvi — xlviii. 

Eleven  must  be  added  to  the  number  of  this  hymn  and  of  all  that  ioi° 
in  this  Book  to  make  them  correspond  with  the  numbers  in  Max  Mnller 
edition  of  the  text. 

2 Whose  locks  drop  oil : ‘butter-haired. ’—Wilson. 

5 The  arrangers : of  the  ritual  of  sacrifice. 

6 Princes : wealthy  patrons.  According  to  Sftyana,  the  Rishi’s  own  s 

and  others  may  be  intended.  , „ 

9 The  numbers  probably  have  reference  to  the  four  quarters  of  the  s ;• 
Ludwig.  j 


THE  RIQVEDA . 


201 


'ryjfiV  49.] 

0 Preserve  us  from  each  fiend  who  brings  the  Gods  no  gift, 

preserve  thou  us  in  deeds  of  strength  : 

For  we  possess  in  thee  the  nearest  Friend  of  all,  for  service 
of  the  Gods  and  weal. 

1 0 Holy  Agni,  give  us  wealth  renowned  with  men  and  strength- 

ening life. 

Bestow  on  us,  O Helper,  that  which  many  crave,  more  glorious 
still  by  righteousness ; 

2 Wherewith  we  may  o’ercome  our  rivals  in  the  war,  o’erpower- 

ing  the  foe’s  designs. 

So  wax  thou  by  our  food,  0 Excellent  in  strength.  Quicken 
our  thoughts  that  find  out  wealth. 

3 Agni  is  even  as  a bull  who  whets  and  brandishes  his  horns. 
Well-sharpened  are  his  jaws  which  may  not  be  withstood  : the 

Child  of  Strength  hath  powerful  teeth. 

4 Not  to  be  stayed,  0 Bull,  0 Agni,  are  thy  teeth  w’hen  thou 

art  spreading  far  and  wide. 

Make  our  oblations  duly  offered  up,  O Priest,  and  give  us 
store  of  precious  things. 

5 Thou  Host  in  the  wood  : from  both  thy  Mothers  mortals  kindle 

thee. 

Un wcaricdly  thou  bearcst  up  the  offerer’s  gifts,  then  shinest 
bright  among  the  Gods. 

6 And  so  the  seven  priests,  0 Agni,  worship  thee,  Free-giver, 

Everlasting  One. 

Thou  cleavest  through  the  rock  with  heat  and  fervent  glow. 
Agni,  rise  up  above  the  men. 

7 For  you  let  us  whose  grass  is  trimmed  call  Agni,  Agni,  rest- 
j less  God. 

Let  us  whose  food  is  offered  call  to  all  the  tribes  Agni  the 
Invoking  Priest  of  men. 

8 Agni,  with  noble  psalm  that  tells  his  wish  ho  dwells,  thinking 
, ou  thee  who  g Hardest  him. 

Speedily  bring  us  strength  of  many  varied  sorts  to  be  most 
near  to  succour  us. 

9 Agni,  Praise-singer!  Lord  o'  men,  God ! burner-up  of  Rakshasas, 
Mighty  art  thou,  the  ever-present  Household-Lord,  Home- 

h'kmd  and  Guardian  from  the  sky. 

j2  H herewith : referring  to  the  wealth  which  Agni  is  asked  to  give. 

In  the  wood:  in  the  pieces  of  wood  used  for  the  production  of  Agni. 
wren  prints : minor  Hotar  priests,  such  as  the  MaitrAvaruna  and  others. 
lV  Xi  ' explained  by  S&yana  as  mtgham , the  cloud. 

18  dW : or,  ‘the  irresistible/ — Wilson. 

dwellt : that  is,  the  pious  inatitutor  of  sacrifice, 


02  THE  HYMNS  OF  f/j, 

l0  Let  no  fiend  oome  among  us,  0 thou  rich  in  light,  no  spell  o( 
those  who  deal  in  spells. 

To  distant  pastures  drive  faint  hunger:  far  away,  0 Agni, 
chase  the  demons’  friends. 

HYMN  L.  Ind* 

Both  boons,— may  Indra,  hitherward  turned,  listen  to  this 

And^ghtiest^Maghavan  with  thought  inclined  to  ua  com, 
near  to  drink  the  boma  juice. 

2 For  him,  strong,  independent  Ruler,  Heaven  and  Earth  liavs 

fashioned  forth  for  power  and  might. 

Thou  seatest  thee  as  first  among  thy  peers  in  place,  forth, 

soul  longs  for  Soma  juice. 

3 Fill  thyself  full,  0 Lord  of  wealth,  0 Indra,  with  the  juice  n 

wfkuow  thee,  Lord  of  Bay  Steeds ! victor  in  the  fight,  van 
quisliiug  e’en  the  invincible. 

4 Changeless  in  truth,  0 Maghavan  Indra,  let  it  be  as  thou  ii 

wisdom  wiliest  it.  . . , . • i n ti 

May  we,  0 fair  of  check,  win  booty  with  thine  aid,  0 lliun 

derer,’  swiftly  seeking  it. 

5 Indra,  with  all  thy  saving  helps  give  us  assistance,  Lord  o 

For  after  thee  we  follow  even  as  glorious  bliss,  thee,  Her( 
finder-out  of  wealth. 

6 Increaser  of  our  steeds  and  multiplying  kine,  a golden  well,- 

For  no  one  may  impair  the  gifts  laid  up  in  thee.  Bring  m 
whatever  thing  1 ask. 

1 For  thou,— come  to  the  worshipper  !— wilt  find  great  wea 
to  make  us  rich.  , 

Fill  thyself  full,  0 Maghavan,  for  gam  of  kine,  full, 
for  the  gain  of  steeds. 

8 Thou  as  thy  gift  bestowest  many  hundred  herds,  yea,  mal1 
thousands  dost  thou  give. 

With  singers’  hymns  have  we  brought  the  Fort-render 
singing  to  Indra  for  his  grace. 

20  SpM  7f  thm  who  deal  in  tfdU:  ydliryitumSxKUAm : -torment  oft' 
evil  spirits.’— Wilson.  

1 Both  hoont : Indra  is  asked  to  hear  the  prayer  and  to  drink  the  So»»' 


the  riqved a. 


203 


~YMy 

I Whether  thesimple  or  the  sage,  Indra,  have  offered  praise  to  thee, 
He,  Satakratu ! by  his  love  hath  gladdened  thee,  ambitious  ! 
ever  pressing  on  ! 

) If  he  the  Strong  of  arm,  the  breaker-down  of  forts,  the  great 
Destroyer,  hear  my  call, 

We,  seeking  riches  cry  to  Indra,  Lord  of  wealth,  to  Satakratu 
with  our  lauds. 

We  couut  not  then  as  sinners,  nor  as  niggardly  or  foolish  men, 
When  with  the  Soma  juice  which  we  have  shed  we  make  Indra, 
the  Mighty  Ono,  our  F riend. 

! Him  have  we  yoked  in  fight,  the  powerful  Conqueror,  debt- 
claimer,  not  to  be  deceived. 

Best  charioteer,  the  Victor  marks  each  fault,  ho  knows  the 
strong  to  whom  ho  will  come  near. 

\ Indra,  give  us  security  from  that  whereof  we  are  afraid. 

Help  us,  0 Maghavan,  let  thy  Buccour  givo  us  this  : drive 
away  foes  and  enemies. 

[ For  thou,  0 liberal  Lord  of  bounty,  strengthenest  his  ample 
home  who  worships  thee. 

So  Indra,  Maghavan,  thou  Lover  of  the  Song,  we  with  pressed 
Soma  call  on  thee. 

5 Indra  is  Vritra-slayer,  guard,  our  best  defender  from  the  foe. 
May  ho  preserve  our  last  and  middlemost,  and  keep  watch 

from  behind  us  and  before. 

6 Defend  us  from  behind,  below,  above,  in  front,  on  all  sides, 

Indra,  shield  us  well. 

| Keep  far  away  from  us  the  terror  seat  from  heaven : keep 

[ impious  weapons  far  away. 

^ Protect  us,  Iudra,  each  to-day,  each  morrow,  and  each  follow- 
ing day. 

Oar  singors,  through  all  days,  shalt  thou,  Lord  of  the  brave, 
keep  safely  both  by  day  and  night. 

1 A crushing  Warrior,  passing  rich  is  Maghavan,  endowed  with 
all  heroic  might. 

Thine  arms,  0 Satakratu,  are  exceeding  strong,  arms  which 
have  grasped  the  thunderbolt. 

1M/  8^tl^e  ov  sage:  * the  unskilled  or  the  skilled.’ — Wilson. 

- Marks  each  fault;  the  meaning  of  bhrimdm  is  uncertain  : aocording  to 
^Vlg  it  h 4 his  supporter  or  feeder,’  that  i«,  the  worshipper  who  presents 
ihiT  1 5?,cr^°*al  f°°d-  Sftyana  takes  it  with  vdjinam ; * the  strong  racer.’ — 
15  0 '1  *trony the  rich  aud  powerful  worshipper. 
v U1 ™ an<^  mMcUmort ; putram,  son,  being  understood,  aocording  to 
i«‘V»  ; 16  e*pression  probably  means  ‘ all  of  us.’ 

e teri'or  tent  from  htavtn ; ‘ supernatural  alarm.’— Wilson. 


204 


THE  HYMNS  OP 
HYMN  LI. 


[BOOK  Vli 


2 


il  1 ill. Xl  JU1.  T , 

Indr 

Offer  ye  up  as  praise  to  him  that  wherein  Indra  takes  deligh 
The  Soma-bringers  magnify  Indra’s  great  energy  with  hyiaj 
Good  are  the  gifts  that  Indra  gives. 

Sole  among  chiefs,  companionless,  impetuous,  and  peerless  ft 
Hath  waxen  great  o’er  many  folk,  yea,  over  all  things  bom 
in  might. 


3 Lord  of  swift  bounty,  he  will  win  e’en  with  a steed  of  worth 

less  sort.  J 

This,  Indra,  must  be  told  of  thee  who  wilt  perform  heroic  deeds, 

4 Come  to  us  hither : let  us  pay  devotions  that  enhance  tb 

might, 

For  which,  Most  Potent ! thou  wouldst  fain  bless  the  man 
here  who  strives  for  fame. 


5 For  thou,  0 Indra,  makest  yet  more  bold  the  spirit  of  the  bold 
Who  with  strong  Soma  serveth  thee,  still  ready  with  hia 

reverent  prayers. 

6 Worthy  of  son g,  he  looketh  down  as  a man  looketh  into  wells. 
Pleased  with  the  Soma-bringer’s  skill  he  maketli  him  his  mate! 

and  friend.  1 2 * * * 6 


7 In  strength  and  wisdom  all  the  Gods,  Indra,  have  yielded  m 

thee. 

Be  thou  the  Guard  of  all,  0 thou  whom  many  praise. 

8 Praised,  Indra,  is  this  might  of  thine,  best  for  the  service 

the  Gods, 

That  thou  with  power  dost  slay  Vritra,  0 Lord  of  Strength. 

9 He  makes  the  races  of  mankind  like  synods  of  the  Beauteo 

One. 

Indra  knows  this  his  manifest  deed,  and  is  renowned. 

10  Thy  might,  0 Indra,  at  its  birth,  thee  also,  and  thy  ment 
power, 

In  thy  care,  Maghavan  rich  in  kine ! they  havo  incrcas* 
exceedingly. 


1 Good  are,  etc : the  refrain  is  repeated  in  each  verse. 

2 Chiefs:  nrlbhih:  men,  meaning  Gods,  according  to  S&jana.  Folk:  a 

tribes. 

Z He  mil  win  e'en  with  a steed  of  worthless  sort : 1 He...... wishes  to  bestoi 

blessings  (upon  us)  with  his  unurged  courser.' — WilBon. 

6 He  looketh  down : kindly  on  us  as  a thirsty  man  looks  eagerly  into&w 

9 Like  synods  of  the  Beauteous  One : like  assemblies  that  meet  to  hoflfl 
him  ; but  the  meaning  is  obscure. 

10  They ; thy  worshippers. 


THE  RIOTED  A. 


205 


yjtfr  52.] 

[ 0 VYitra-slayer,  thou  and  I will  both  combine  for  winning 
spoil. 

Even  malignity  will  consent,  0 Bolt-armed  Hero,  unto  us. 

) Let  us  extol  this  Indra  as  truthful  and  never  as  untrue. 

Dire  is  his  death  who  pours  no  gifts  : great  light  hath  he  who 
oilers  them.  Good  are  the  gifts  that  Indra  gives. 

HYMN  LII.  Indra. 

\Vnu  powers  of  Mighty  Ones  hath  he,  Ancient,  Beloved,  been 

equipped, 

Through  whom  the  Father  Manu  made  prayers  efficacious 
with  tho  Gods. 

2 Him,  Maker  of  the  sky,  lot  stones  wet  with  the  Soma  ne’er 

forsake, 

Nor  hymns  and  prayer  that  must  be  said. 

3 Indra  who  knew  full  well  disclosed  the  kine  to  tho  Angirases. 
This  his  great  deed  must  be  extolled. 

4 Indra,  promoter  of  tho  song,  the  sage's  Strengthener  as  of  old, 
Shall  come  to  - bless  and  succour  us  at  presentation  of  this 

laud. 

5 Now  after  their  desire's  intent  the  pious  singers  with  the  cry 
Of  Hail ! have  sung  loud  hymns  to  thee,  Indra,  to  gain  a stall 

of  kine. 

6 With  Indra  rest  all  deods  of  might,  deeds  done  and  yet  to  be 

performed, 

Whom  singers  know  devoid  of  guile. 

7 When  the  Five  Tribes  with  all  their  men  to  Indra  have  sent 

out  their  voice, 

And  when  the  priest  hath  strewn  much  grass,  this  is  the  Friend's 
[ own  dwelling-place, 

‘8  This  praise  is  verily  thine  own  : thou  hast  performed  these 
manly  deeds, 

And  sped  the  wheel  upon  its  way. 

11  Malignity:  or  the  malignant  man.  ‘ The  niggard.’— Wilson. 

12  Dire  is  his  death  : or,  great  is  his  destruction. 

1 This  difficult  verse  is  variously  interpreted  both  by  Indian  commentators 
ttd  by  European  scholars.  I follow  partly  Aufrecht’s  translation  as  given  by 
r.  Muir,  and  partly  Ludwig’s  Commentary.  See  0.  S.  Texts , I.  pp.  163  164, 

[Hwig’s  Rigveda,  Y.  pp.  107—168  ; and  Wilson’s  Translation,  V.  p.  107. 
he  Ancient,  Belov&d  appears  to  be  Soma  and  not  Indra. 

7 The  Friend's : Indra’s,  The  second  line  is  very  obscure.  See  Bergaigne, 
vi.,  and  Vedic  Hymns,  I.,  p.  226.  I adopt  Ludwig’s  interpretation. 

8 The  wheel:  the  Sun. 


THB  HYMNS  OF 


200 


[BOOK  r// 


9  At  the  o’erflowing  of  this  Steer,  boldly  he  strode  for  life,  an 
took 

Soma  as  cattle  take  their  corn. 

10  Receiving  this  and  craving  help,  we,  who  with  you  are  Dak«lia 

8ons, 

Would  fain  exalt  the  Maruts’  Lord. 

11  Yea,  Hero,  with  the  singers  we  sing  to  the  duly-coming  Band 
Allied  with  thee  may  we  prevail. 

12  With  us  are  raining  Rudras,  clouds  accordant  in  call  to  battle 

at  the  death  of  Yritra, 

The  strong  assigned  to  him  who  sings  and  praises.  May  God 
with  Indra  at  their  head  protect  us. 


HYMN  LI II. 


Indra 


May  our  hymns  give  thee  great  delight.  Display  thy  bounty, 
Thunderer. 

Drive  off  the  enemies  of  prayer. 

2 Crush  with  thy  foot  the  niggard  churls  who  bring  no  gifts, 

Mighty  art  thou  ; 

There  is  not  one  to  equal  thee. 

3 Thou  art  the  Lord  of  Soma  pressed,  Soma  impressed  is  also 

thine. 

Thou  art  the  Sovran  of  the  folk. 


4 Come,  go  thou  forth,  dwelling  in  heaven  and  listening  to  the 

prayers  of  men  : 

Thou  tillest  both  the  heavens  and  earth. 

5 Even  that  hill  with  rocky  heights,  with  hundreds,  thousands, 

held  within, 

Thou  for  thy  worshippers  brakest  through. 

6 We  call  on  thee  both  night  and  day  to  taste  the  flowing  Soma 

juice : 

Do  thou  fulfil  our  hearts’  desire. 


‘J  This  Steer:  Soma;  that  is,  when  abundant  libations  had  been  offered, 
lie  : Indra. 

10  Dukthat  sons:  of  the  same  origin  with  you.  1 Lords  of  food/ according 
to  Sftvana. 

11  Duly-coming  Band : of  Maruts,  led  by  Indra 

12  The  strong : perhaps  the  thunderbolt  with  which  Indra  aids  the  wor- 

shipper.  — - — 

3 Unprtssed : in  its  natural  state  in  the  stalks  of  the  plaut.  Or,  a*  LuiMl 
suggests,  the  Soma  which  Indra  drinks  in  heaven  may  be  meant.  See  > . 
20.  1. 

5 That  hiU:  the  cloud  with  its  countless  treasures  of  rain. 

0 Night:  just  before  dawn. 


THB  RIG  VEDA. 


20/ 


YMN  54.] 


Where  is  that  ever-youthful  Steer,  strong-necked  and  never 
yet  bent  down  ? 

What  Brahman  ministers  to  him  1 

To  whose  libation  doth  the  Steer,  betake  him  with  delight 
therein  ? 6 

Who  takes  delight  in  Indra  now? 

Whom,  Vritra-slayer,  have  thy  gifts  and  hero  powers  accom- 
panied ? 

Who  is  thy  dearest  in  the  land  ? 

For  thee  among  mankind,  among  the  Purus  is  this  Soma  shed. 

Hasten  thou  hither  : drink  thereof. 

This,  growing  by  Sushoma  and  by  Saryanav^n,  dear  to  thee, 

In  Arjikiya,  cheers  thee  best. 

Hasten  thou  hitherward,  and  drink  this  for  munificence  to-day 

Delightful  for  thine  eager  draught.  * ? 


HYMN  LIV. 


India. 


riiouon,  Indra,  thou  art  called  by  men  from  east  and  west 
from  north  and  south, 

Jomc  hither  quickly  with  fleet  steeds  ; 


:f  ill  the  effluenoo  of  heaven,  rich  in  its  light,  thou  takest  joy 
Jr  in  the  sea  in  Soma  juice.  J * 

With  songs  I call  thee,  Great  and  Wide,  even  as  a cow  to 
profit  us, 

ndra,  to  drink  the  Soma-draught. 

lithor,  0 Indra,  let  thy  Bays  bear  up  and  bring  upon  thy  car 
■hy  glory,  God  ! and  majesty. 

hou,  Indra,  wouldst  bo  sung  and  praised  as  great,  strong 
^ lordly  in  thy  deeds  : ° 

'Ome  hither,  drink  our  Soma  juice. 

Ve  who  have  shed  the  Soma  and  prepared  the  feast  are  call- 
ing thee 

o sit  on  this  our  sacred  grass. 


Among  the  PHrus : among  men,  or  among  Kings  named  POrup.— SAyana. 
Sushoynd:  apparently  a river  which  cannot  now  be  identified.  Arjtktya : 
uTntry  or  district.  SuryanAvdn  is  said  to  be  a lake  m the  district 
tnetra.  See  Vol.  I.,  Index.  For  conjectures  regarding  SushomA  and 
see  Zimmer,  Altindmhez  Leben , pp.  12,  13.  Cf.  VIII.  7.  29. 


effl'ienc<!  of  heaven : or  the  place  in  heaven  from  which  the  Amrit 
n S€a  • of  air  ; the  firmament. 
a : as  the  most  useful  of  animals. 


208  THE  HYMNS  OF  [ BOOK  F/j 

7 As,  Indra,  thou  art  evermore  the  common  Lord  of  all  alife 
Aa  such  we  invocate  thee  now. 

8 The  men  with  stones  have  milked  for  thee  this  nectar  of  tl 

Soma  juice : 

Indra,  be  pleased  with  it,  and  drink. 

9 Neglect  all  pious  men  with  skill  in  sacrod  song  : come  hithe 

ward 

With  speed,  and  give  us  high  renown. 

10  Gods,  may  the  mighty  rest  unharmed,  the  King  who  gives 

spotted  kino, 

Kine  decked  with  golden  ornaments. 

11  Beside  a thousand  spotted  kine  I have  reoeived  a gift  of  golf] 
Pure,  brilliant,  and  exceeding  great. 

12  Durgaha’s  grandsons,  giving  me  a thousand  kine,  munificent 
Have  won  renown  among  the  Gods. 


HYMN  LV. 


Indri 


Loud  singing  at  the  sacred  rite  where  Soma  flows  we  priest? 
invoke 

With  haste,  that  he  may  help,  as  the  bard’s  Cherisher,  Indrs 
who  findeth  wealth  for  you. 

2 Whom  with  fair  helm,  in  rapture  of  the  juice,  the  firm  resist 

less  slayers  hinder  not : 

Giver  of  glorious  wealth  to  him  who  sing  his  praise,  honouring 
him  who  toils  and  pours  : 

3 Sakra,  who  like  a curry-comb  for  horses  or  a golden  goad, 
Indra,  the  Vritra-slaycr,  urges  eagerly  the  opening  of  the 

stall  of  kiue  : 


9 All  pious  men : all  other  worshippers. 

10  The  King  : who  iustituted  the  sacrifice.  According  to  Sftyana,  Indra « 
meant ; but  this  is  impossible. 

12  Durgaha' s grandsons  : SAynna  explains  durgdkasya  by  duhkham  5^® 
mdnasya  me,  of  me  plunged  in  grief,  and  ndpUuh  (nepotes)  as  avakshi^h 
unprotected  : ‘ Unprotected  as  I am,  and  plunged  in  sorrow  (roy  depew  cn 
by  the  favour  of  the  gods  obtain  food,  and  are  blessed  with  abundance 
thousand  cattle.'  See  Wilson’s  Translation,  and  Cowell’s  note. 

1 We  priests  invoice : the  construction  is  difficult.  I follow  Ludwig,  and  td* 
hutd,  an  infinitivo,  as  equivalent  to  the  first  person  plural. 

3 Carry-comb  for  horses  : the  purifier  of  his  worshippers  and  wdl-skill  ‘ 
horses,  according  to  SAyana.  Golden  goad:  wonderful  aud  golden^ 
according  to  Sflyapa.  The  meaning  of  ktjah,  as  well  as  of  mriksrMh  13  un 
tain,  but  both  seem  to  signify  instruments  connected  with  horses. 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


209 


pJf.V  55.] 

[ Who  for  the  worshipper  scatters  forth  ample  wealth,  even 
! though  buried,  piled  in  heaps  : 

May  ludra,  Lord  of  Bay  Steeds,  fair-helmed  Thunderer,  act 
at  his  pleasure,  as  he  lists. 

i Hero  whom  many  praise,  what  thou  hast  longed  for,  even  of 
old,  from  men. 

All  that  we  offer  unto  thee,  0 Indra,  now,  sacrifice,  laud,  effect- 
ual speech. 

5 To  Soma,  Much-invoked,  Bolt-armed  ! for  thy  carouse,  Celestial, 
Soma-drinker ! come. 

Thou  to  the  man  who  prays  and  pours  the  juice  hast  been 
beat  giver  of  delightful  wealth. 

r Here,  verily,  yesterday  we  Jet  the  Thunder- xviclder  drink  his  fill. 
So  in  like  manner  offer  him  the  juice  to-day.  Now  range  you 
by  the  Glorious  One. 

i Even  the  wolf,  the  savage  beast  that  rends  the  sheep,  follows 
the  path  of  his  decrees. 

So  graciously  accepting,  ludra,  this  our  praise,  with  wondrous 
thought  come  forth  to  us. 

i What  manly  deed  of  vigour  now  remains  that  Indra  hath 
not  done  1 

Who  hath  not  heard  his  glorious  title  and  his  fame,  the  Vritra- 
slaycr  from  his  birth  ? 

How  great  his  power  resistless  ! how  invincible  the  Vritra- 
slayer’s  matchless  might  ! 

ludra  excels  all  usurers  who  see  the  day,  excels  all  traffickers 
in  strength. 

0 Indra,  Vritra  slayer,  we,  thy  very  constant  worshippers, 

Bring  prayers  ne’er  heard  before  to  thee,  0 Much-invoked,  0 
Ih under-armed,  to  be  thy  meed. 

0 thou  of  mighty  acts,  the  aids  that  are  in  thee  call  forward 
many  an  eager  hope. 

Past  the  drink-offerings,  Vasu,  even  of  the  good,  hear  my 
call,  Strongest  God,  and  come. 

; Eerily,  Indra,  wo  aro  thuio,  we  worshippers  depend  on  thee, 
lor  there  is  none  but  only  thou  to  show  us  grace,  0 Maghavan. 
thou  much  invoked. 

j •'  w gold,  precious  stones,  etc. 

The  wolf;  according  to  S&yana,  the  robber.  The  reason  of  mentioning 
in  this  place  is  not  obvious. 

l i ^ie  day  : who  live.  According  to  Sftyana,  who  look  upon  the 

a their  present  life,  but  will  be  sunk  in  darkness  after  death. 


210  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  F/#,| 

14  From  this  onr  misery  and  famine  set  us  free,  from  this  dire 

curse  deliver  us. 

Succour  us  with  thine  help  and  with  thy  wondrous  thought 
Most  Mighty,  finder  of  the  way, 

15  Now  let  your  Soma  juice  be  poured  : be  not  afraid,  0 Kali's  sons. 
This  darkening  sorrow  goes  away;  yea,  of  itself  it  vanishes. 

HYMN  LYI.  ^ Adityii, 

Now  pray  we  to  these  Kshatriyas,  to  the  Adityas  for  their  aid, 
These  who  are  gracious  to  assist. 

2 May  Mitra  bear  us  o’er  distress,  and  Yanina  and  Aryanian, 
Yea,  the  Adityas,  as  they  know. 

3 For  wonderful  and  meet  for  praise  is  these  Adityas’  saving  help 
To  him  who  offers  and  prepares. 

4 The  mighty  aid  of  you,  the  Great,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman, 
We  claim  to  be  our  sure  defence. 

5 Guard  us,  Adityas,  still  alive,  before  the  deadly  weapon  strike: 
Are  ye  not  they  who  hear  our  call  ? 

6 What  sheltering  defence  ye  have  for  him  who  toils  in  pouring 

gifts, 

Graciously  bless  ye  its  therewith. 

7 Adityas,  Gods,  from  sorrow  there  is  freedom,  for  the  sinless, 

wealth, 

0 ye  in  whom  no  fault  is  seen. 

8 Let  not  this  fetter  bind  us  fast : may  he  release  us  for  success ; 
For  strong  is  Iudra  and  renowned. 

9 0 Gods  who  fain  would  lend  your  aid,  destroy  not  us  as  yt 

destroy 

Your  enemies  who  go  astray. 

10  Aud  thee  too,  0 Great  Aditi,  thee  also,  Goddess,  I address, 
Thee  very  gracious  to  assist. 

11  Save  us  in  depth  and  shallow  from  the  foe,  thou  Mother  oi 

Strong  Sons  : 

Let  no  oue  of  our  seed  be  harmed. 

12  Far-spread  1 wide-ruling!  grant  that  we,  unharmed  by  envy 

may  expand  : 

Grant  that  our  progeny  may  live. 

14  From  this  our  misery  : the  hymn  was  ‘ seen  ’ and  employed  in  a time  c 
dearth  and  famine.  Finder  of  the  way : to  prosperity. 

15  Kali's  sons : Kali  is  the  Rishi  or  seer  of  the  hymn. 

I Kshatriyas ; royal  princes. 

II  Of  Strong  >SQn« ; tbs 


TEE  MOVE  DA. 


7MS  57.] 


211 


I  Those  who,  the  Priuoes  of  the  folk,  in  native  glory,  ne  *er 
deceived, 

Maintain  their  statutes,  void  of  guile  — 

14  As  such,  from  mouth  of  ravening  wolves,  0 ye  Adityas, 

rescue  us, 

Like  a bound  thief,  0 Aditi. 

15  Adityas,  let  this  arrow,  yea,  let  this  malignity  depart 
From  us  or  e’er  it  strike  us  dead. 

16  For,  Bountiful  Adityas,  we  have  evermore  enjoyed  your  help, 
Both  now  and  in  the  days  of  old. 

17  To  every  one,  0 ye  Most  Wise,  who  turneth  even  from  sin  to 

you, 

Ye  Gods  vouchsafe  that  lie  may  live. 

18  May  this  new  mercy  profit  us,  which,  ye  Adityas,  frees  like  one 
Bound  from  his  bonds,  0 Aditi. 

19  0 ye  Adityas,  this  your  might  is  not  to  be  despised  by  us  : 

So  be  ye  graciously  inclined. 

20  Lot  not  Vivasvau’s  weapon  nor  the  shaft,  Adityas,  wrought 

with  skill, 

Destroy  us  ere  old  age  be  nigh. 

21  On  every  side  dispel  all  siu,  Aditya3,  all  hostility, 

Indigence,  and  combined  attack. 


HYMN  LVII. 


Indra, 


Even  as  a car  to  give  us  aid,  we  draw  thee  hither  for  our  bliss, 
Strong  in  thy  deeds,  cheeking  assault,  Lord,  Mightiest  Indra, 
of  the  brave ! 


2 Great  in  thy  power  and  wisdom,  Strong,  with  thought  that 

comprehendeth  all  ! 

Thou  hast  filled  full  with  majesty. 

3 Thou  very  Mighty  One,  whose  hands  by  virtue  of  thy  greatness 

grasp 

The  golden  bolt  that  breaks  its  way. 

^ Your  Lord  of  might  that  ne’er  hath  bent,  that  ruleth  over  all 
mankind, 

I call,  that  he,  as  he  is  wont,  may  aid  the  chariots  and  the 
men. 


H Who  turneth  even  from  sin : who  cornea  to  you  for  forgiveness. 

^0  Vhmv&ris  weapon  : the  deadly  bolt  of  the  Sun,  or  perhaps,  metaphor- 
C!%>  of  the  sacrifices  * 

21  Combined  attack : * the  closely  drawn  net.’— Wilson. 

* ThwWjftUa  j»U: 


212  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOR  Vijj 

5 Whom,  ever  farthering,  in  frays  that  win  the  light,  in  both 

the  hosts 

Men  call  to  succour  and  to  help. 

6 Indra,  the  Strong,  the  measureless,  worthy  of  praise,  Most 

Bountiful, 

Sole  Ruler  even  over  wealth. 

7 Him,  for  his  ample  bounty,  him,  this  Indra  do  I urge  to 

drink, 

Who,  as  his  praise  was  sung  of  old,  the  Dancer,  is  the  Lord 
of  men. 

8 Thou  Mighty  One,  whose  friendship  none  of  mortals  ever  hath 

obtained  : 

None  will  attain  unto  thy  might. 

9 Aided  by  thee,  with  thee  allied,  in  frays  for  water  and  for  sun, 
Bolt-armed  ! may  we  win  ample  spoil. 

10  So  seek  we  thee  with  sacrifice  and  songs,  chief  Lover  of  the 

Song, 

As,  in  our  battles,  Indra,  thou  to  Purumflyya  gavest  help. 

11  0 Thunderer,  thou  whose  friendship  and  whose  onward 

guidance  both  are  sweet, 

Thy  sacrifice  must  be  prepared. 

12  To  us,  ourselves,  give  ample  room,  give  for  our  dwelling  ample 

room  : 

Give  ample  room  to  us  to  live. 

13  We  count  the  banquet  of  the  Gods  a spaoious  pathway  for 

the  men, 

And  for  the  cattle,  and  the  car. 

14  Six  men,  yea,  two  and  two,  made  glad  with  Soma  juice,  come 

near  to  me 

With  offerings  pleasant  to  the  taste. 

15  Two  brown-hued  steeds,  Indrotu’a  gift,  two  bays  from  Rikslut’s 

son  were  mine, 

From  Asvatnedha’s  son  two  red. 

7 The  Lancer : in  the  dance  of  war. 

10  Purumdyya:  according  to  SAyana,  ‘ me  (the  Rishi)  the  possessor  of 
much  wisdom.’ 

13  Sacrifice  to  the  Gods  procures  freedom  and  security  for  us  and  all 
belong  to  us. 

15  ‘These  princes  with  their  respective  fathers  are  the  six  of  V.  14.  The 
sons  of  Riksha  and  AwameUhu  had  originally  commenced  the  sacrifice,  but 
Jndrota  and  his  father  Atithigva  came  to  see  it  and  added  tbeir  gifts.  The 
boub  alone  are  mentioned  : the  son  is  the  father’s  second  self,  pitri-putrayor 
abheddt.’—CoweW*  note  in  Wilson’s  Translation. 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


213 


qYMN  58.] 

[6  From  Atithigva  good  car-steeds,  from  Arksha  rein-obeying 
steeds, 

From  Asvamedha  beauteous  ones. 

17  Indrota,  Atithigva’s  son,  gave  me  six  horses  matched  with 

mares : 

And  Putakratu  gave  besides. 

18  Marked  above  all,  amid  the  brown,  is  the  red  mare  Vrishanvati, 
Obedient  to  the  rein  and  whip. 

19  0 bound  to  me  by  deeds  of  might,  not  even  the  man  who  loves 

to  blame 

Hath  found  a single  fault  in  you. 

HYMN  LVIII.  Indra. 

I  send  you  forth  the  song  of  praise  for  Indu,  hero-gladdener. 
With  hymn  and  plenty  he  invites  you  to  complete  the  sacrifice. 

2 Thou  wishest  for  thy  kine  a bull,  for  those  who  long  for  his 

approach, 

For  those  who  turn  away  from  him,  lord  of  thy  cows  whom 
none  may  kill. 

3 The  dappled  kino  who  stream  with  milk  prepare  his  draught 

of  Soma  juice : 

Clans  in  the  birth-place  of  the  Cods,  in  the  three  luminous 
realms  of  heaven. 

4 Praise,  even  as  he  is  known,  with  song  Indra  the  guardian  of 

the  kine, 

The  Son  of  Truth,  Lord  of  the  brave. 

li>  ArJcska:  the  son  of  Riksha.  Asvamedha : the  son  of  Asvamedha. 

17  Pfttakratu:  son  of  Asvamedha. 

18  Vrishanvati:  according  to  von  Roth,  ‘perhaps,  that  may  be  found 
among  stallions.’ 

19  0 bound  to  me : this  stanza  is  addressed  to  the  princes  who  instituted 
the  sacrifice  and  gave  the  rewards  which  have  been  mentioned. 

1 The  son//  of  praise ; trishtubham  : used  in  a general  sense  for  any  hymn 
of  praise.  Indu:  Soma.  According  to  S.tyana,  Indra  is  meant. 
j The  stanza  is  difficult.  I °dopt  Pischel’s  explanation  of  nadam  and 

vditthrtni, 

3 Clans:  v;sah : possibly  the  cows  arc  meant.  Eggcling  translates  : ‘At 

,ls  birth  the  well-like  milking,  speckled  ones  mix  the  Soma  (draught),  the 
c mis  of  the  gods  in  the  three  spheres  of  the  heavens’  (Sacred  Books  of  the 
XLI.  p.  307).  Piachel  observes  : ‘The  connexion  of  the  first  three 

aiizas i is  probably  this  : Soma  shall  be  celebrated  by  you  in  your  song  of 
^ ifln-  or^er  t'hat  he  may  liberally  reward  you.  What  thou  wishest  for 
p I a bull  for  the  cows,  in  order  that  they  may  be  propagated  and 
the 1 * 3 * *  6 *n(*ra  w*fcb  m^k  to  be  mixed  with  his  Soma  juice,  while  they  serve 

race  of  Gods  in  all  the  three  realms  of  heaven.'—  Vedische  Studien , I. 


214 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK  VIII, 


5 Hither  his  Bay  Steeds  have  been  sent,  red  Steeds  are  on  the 
sacred  grass 
Where  we  in  concert  sing  our  songs. 

C For  Indra  Thunder-armed  the  kine  have  yielded  mingled  milk 
and  meath, 

What  time  he  found  them  in  the  vault. 

7 When  I and  Indra  mount  on  high  up  to  the  Bright  One’s  place 

and  home,  . _ -n  . , 

We,  having  drunk  of  meath,  will  roach  his  seat  whose  Fnends 

are  three  times  seven. 

8 Sing,  sing  ye  forth  your  songs  of  praise,  ye  Priyamedhas,  sing 

Yea^let  young  children  sing  their  lauds : as  a strong  castle 
praise  ye  him. 

9 Now  loudly  let  the  viol  sound,  the  lute  send  out  its  voice  with 

Shrilfbe’the  music  of  the  string.  To  Indra  is  the  hymn  up- 
reused* 

10  When  hither  speed  the  dappled  cows,  unflinching,  easy  to  be 
SeiTe'1  quickly,  as  it  bursts  away,  the  Soma  juice  for  ludra’s 

11  Indra  hath  drunk,  Agni  hath  drunk  : all  Deities  have  drunk 

Here'varuna  shall  have  his  home,  to  whom  the  floods  have 
sung  aloud  as  mother-kine  unto  their  calves. 

12  Thou,  Varuna,  to  whom  belong  Seven  Rivers,  art  a glorious 

The°waters  flow  into  thy  throat  as  ’twere  a pipe  with  ample 
mouth.  , 

13  He  who  hath  made  the  fleet  steeds  spring,  well-harnessoa, 

the  worshipper, 

” 6 In  the  vault:  ‘ in  the  oavity  of  the  Soma- vessel.’— von ltoth ; ‘on  the  horizon 
— Ludwig;  4 near  at  hand.’— S&y  ana.  , , r, 

7 The  Bright  One's  place:  the  Btation  of  the  Sun ■ ^1°  folio™  Ludwig 

three  times  seven:  Indra  who  is  the  friend  of  the  MaruU.  I folio  n ^ 
in  combining  the  trih  saptd  sakhyuh  of  the  text  liitci  one  co  p u w 

Stlyana’s  explanation  is  different : ‘ let  us  be  united  in  the  twe  y 
of  the  (universal)  friend,’— See  note  in  Wilson’s  Translation. 

9 The  viol:  girgarah : ‘a  kind  of  musloal  instrument  , saya  Jaod 
GodhX,  originally  the  leather  guard  worn  by  bowmen  on  the  lett  . 

pihgt  (said  to  mean  bowstring)  are  also,  apparently,  names  of  musioa 
ments.  , , . v seven 

12  Vanina’s  throat,  or  palate,  is  said  to  mean  the  sea,  into  which 


jYMN  59.]  THE  MG  VEDA.  215 

He,  the  swift  Guide,  is  that  fair  form  that  loosed  the  horses 
near  at  hand. 

4 Indra,  the  very  Mighty,  holds  his  enemies  in  utter  scorn. 

He,  far  away,  and  yet  a child,  cleft  the  cloud  smitten  by  his 
voice. 

[5  He,  yet  a boy  exceeding  small,  mounted  his  newly-fashioned 
car. 

He  for  his  Mother  and  his  Sire  cooked  the  wild  mighty  buffalo. 

16  Lord  of  the  home,  fair-helmeted,  ascend  thy  chariot  wrought 

of  gold. 

We  will  attend  the  Heavenly  One,  the  thousand-footed,  red  of 
hue,  matchless,  who  blesses  where  he  goes. 

17  With  reverence  they  come  hitherward  to  him  as  to  a Sovran 

Lord, 

That  they  may  bring  him  near  for  this  man’s  good  success,  to 
prosper  and  bestow  his  gifts. 

18  The  Priyamedhas  have  observed  the  offering  of  the  men  of  old, 
Of  ancient  custom,  while  they  strewed  the  sacred  grass,  and 

spread  their  sacrificial  food. 

HYMN  LIX.  Indra. 

He  who,  as  Sovran  Lord  of  men,  moves  with  his  chariots  un- 
restrained, 

The  Vritra-slayer,  vanquisher  of  fighting  hosts,  preeminent, 
is  praised  with  song. 

2 Honour  that  Indra,  Puruhanman  ! for  his  aid,  in  whose  sus- 

taining hand  of  old 

The  splendid  bolt  of  thunder  was  deposited,  as  the  great  Sun 
was  set  in  heaven. 

3 No  one  by  deed  attains  to  him  who  works  and  strengthens 

evermore : 

No,  not  by  sacrifice,  to  Iudra  praised  of  all,  resistless,  daring, 
bold  in  might 


15  If  is  Mother  and  his  Sire : Earth  and  Heaven.  The  buffalo  is  the  dark 
rain-cloud  which  Iudra  pierces  with  his  lightning,  or  peihaps  the  demon  \ala 
is  intended. 

16  The  Heavenly  One:  the  Sun,  which  is  Indra’ s chariot  Thousand -footed : 
bright  with  countless  rays  of  light. 

17  This  man's:  whoinstitutes  the  sacrifice. 


2 Puruhanman : the  Rishi  of  the  hymn  addresses  himself.  Sustaining : 
°r  vidkartari  may  (with  Ludwig)  be  taken  as  a nominative  with  v&jraht  the 
bolt  of  thunder  as  a austainer  (of  Order). 


216  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Via 

4 The  potent  Conqueror,  invincible  in  war,  him  at  whose  birth 

the  Mighty  Ones, 

The  Kine  who  spread  afar,  sent  their  loud  voices  out,  heavens, 
earths  sent  their  loud  voices  out. 

5 0 Indra,  if  a hundred  heavens  and  if  a hundred  earths  were 

thine— 

No,  not  a thousand  Suns  could  match  thee  at  thy  birth,  nut 
both  the  worlds,  0 Thunderer. 

6 Thou,  Hero,  hast  performed  thy  hero  deeds  with  might,  yea, 

all  with  strength,  0 Strongest  One. 

Maghavan,  help  us  to  a stable  full  of  kine,  0 Thunderer,  with 
wondrous  aids. 

7 Let  not  a godless  mortal  gain  this  food,  0 thou  whose  life  is 

long ! 

But  one  who  yokes  the  bright-hued  steeds,  the  Etasas,  even 
Indra  yoker  of  the  Bays. 

8 Urge  ye  the  Conqueror  to  give,  your  Indra  greatly  to  be 

praised, 

To  be  invoked  in  shallow  waters  and  in  depths,  to  be  invoked 
in  deeds  of  might. 

9 0 Vasu,  0 thou  Hero,  raise  us  up  to  ample  opulence. 

Raise  us  to  gain  of  mighty  wealth,  O Maghavan,  0 Indra,  to 
sublime  renown. 

10  Indra,  thou  justifiest  us,  and  trarnplest  down  thy  slanderers. 
Guard  thyself,  valiant  Hero,  in  thy  vital  parts:  strike  down 

the  Dasa  with  thy  blows. 

11  The  man  who  brings  no  sacrifice,  inhuman,  godless,  infidel, 
Him  let  his  friend  the  mountain  cast  to  rapid  death,  the 

mountain  cast  the  Dasyu  down. 

12  0 Mightiest  Indra,  loving  us,  gather  thou  up,  as  grains  of  corn 
Within  thine  hand,  of  these  their  kine,  to  give  away,  yea, 

gather  twice  as  loving  us. 

13  0 my  companions,  wish  for  power.  How  may  we  perfect  Saras 

praise, 

The  liberal  princely  patron,  never  to  be  harmed  ? 


4 The  Kine : the  heavens  and  the  earths. 

7 Etasas:  the  horses  of  the  Sun 

10  In  thy  vital  parts:  liteially,  between  thy  thighs.  * Shelter  us  between 
thy  thighs  ’ — Wilson. 

11  His  friend  - in  which  he  hopes  to  find  refuge:  according  to  SA-yana, 
Parvata  (mountain)  is  a Uishi,  the  friend  of  Indra. 

12  Their  kine:  the  property  of  the  hostile  aboi iginea. 

13  Sara’s  praise : Sara  must  be  the  institutor  of  the  sacrifice:  according 
to  Sftyanu  he  is  ludra,  ‘the  destroyer,’ 


THE  niOVEDA. 


217 


0MN  60.] 

14  By  many  a sage  whose  grass  is  trimmed  thou  art  continually 

praised, 

That  thou,  0 Sara,  hast  bestowed  here  one  and  here  another 
calf. 

15  The  noble,  Suradeva’s  son,  hath  brought  a calf,  led  by  the  ear, 

to  three  of  us, 

As  a chief  brings  a goat  to  milk. 

HYMN  LX.  Agni. 

0 Agni,  with  thy  mighty  woalth  guard  us  from  all  malignity, 
Yea,  from  all  hate  of  mortal  man. 

2 For  over  thee,  0 Friend  from  birth,  the  wrath  of  man  hath 

no  control : 

Nay,  Guardian  of  the  earth  art  thou. 

3 As  such,  with  all  the  Gods,  0 Son  of  Strength,  auspicious  in 

thy  flame, 

Give  us  wealth  bringing  all  things  good. 

4 Maliguities  stay  not  from  wealth  the  mortal  man  whom,  Agrfi, 

thou 

Protectest  while  he  offers  gifts. 

5 Sage  Agni,  he  whom  thou  dost  urge,  in  worship  of  the  G^ds, 

to  wealth, 

With  thine  assistance  winneth  kine. 

G Riches  with  many  heroes  thou  hast  for  the  man  who  offers  gifts  : 
Lead  thou  us  on  to  higher  bliss. 

7 Save  us,  0 J&tavcdas,  nor  abandon  us  to  him  who  sins, 

Unto  the  evil-bearted  man. 

8 0 A grtii,  let  no  godless  man  avert  thy  bounty  as  a God  : 

Over  all  treasures  thou  art  Lord. 

9 So,  Son  of  Streugth,  thou  aides t us  to  what  is  great  and 

excellent, 

Those,  Vasii ! Friend  1 who  sing  thy  praise. 

10  Let  our  songs  come  aneav  to  him  beauteous  and  bright  with 

piercing  flame, 

Our  offeiings,  with  our  homage,  to  the  Lord  of  wealth,  to 
him  whom  many  praise,  for  help  : 

14  Here  one.  and  here  another : tlhim-eknm  : meming  many. 

1 § Silradeva's  son : Sara.  Mitya  ua  explains  s ntradevt/ah  aa  cows  won  in 
attle.  ‘May  Maghavan,  taking  them  l>y  (ho  e.tr*,  lead  the  cows  with  their 

calvog  from  our  three  (destructive  enemies),  as  the  owner  leads  a goat  to 
drink  ’—Wilson.  

2 Guardian  of  the  earth  : kshfip&odn : 4 Lord  of  the  night.’— S&yana. 
Winneth  hint : literally,  is  a goer  among  cows  : ' walks  (lord)  among 

crowds  of  cattle,’— Wilson, 


218  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Vljj> 

11  To  Agui  Jatavedas,  to  the  Son  of  Strength,  that  he  may  give 

ns  precious  gifts, 

Immortal,  from  of  old  Priest  among  mortal  men,  the  most 
delightful  in  the  house  : 

12  Agni,  made  yours  by  sacrifice,  Agui,  while  holy  rites  advance; 
Agni,  the  first  in  songs,  first  with  the  warrior  steed ; Agni  to 

win  the  land  for  us. 

13  May  Agni  who  is  Lord  of  wealth  vouchsafe  us  food  for  friend- 

ship sake. 

Agni  we  ever  seek  for  seed  and  progeny,  the  Vasu  who 
protects  our  lives. 

14  Solicit  withyourchants,  for  help,  Agni  theGod  with  piercing  flame, 
For  riches  famous  Agni,  Purumijha  and  ye  men  ! Agni  to 

light  our  dwelling  well. 

15  Agni  we  land  that  he  may  keep  our  foes  afar,  Agni  to  givo  ua 

health  and  strength. 

Let  him  as  Guardian  be  invoked  in  all  the  tribe3,  the  lighter- 
up  of  glowing  brands. 

HYMN  LXI. 

Prepare  oblation : let  him  come ; and  let  the  minister  serve  again 
*Who  knows  the  ordering  thereof. 

2 Rejoicing  in  his  friendship,  lot  the  priest  be  seated  over  man, 
Beside  the  shoot  of  active  power. 

3 Him,  glowing  bright  beyond  all  thought,  they  seek  among  tin 

race  of  man ; 

With  him  for  tongue  they  seize  the  food. 

4 He  hath  inflamed  the  twofold  plain  : life-giving,  he  hat 

climbed  the  wood, 

And  with  his  tongue  hath  struck  the  rock. 

12  With  the  warrior  steed  : grvati : the  fierce  and  rapid  fire  that  clears  tl 
jungle  for  the  advance  of  the  Aryan  settlers. 

14  To  light  our  dwelling  well : I follow  Ludwigs  explanation,  bayai 
takes  vtdltaye  as  a proper  name  : ‘ a house  for  (me)  Suditi.  Wilson. 

15  The  lighter-up  of  glowing  brands  : vasturrisMnttm  : according  to  ttayai 
1 the  giver  of  homes  to  us  Rishis.’ 

The  language  of  the  hymn  is  intentionally  obscure,  and  much  of  i 
translation  (in  which  1 generally  follow  Ludwig)  must  be  regar  e 
conjectural. 

1 Let  him  come:  Agni.  The  minister:  or,  the  Adhvaryu. 

2 The  shoot : Agui,  according  to  S&yana  : the  stalks  of  the  Sotna-p 
according  to  von  lloth. 

3 They  seek:  that  is,  the  Gods.  , , .. 

4 The  twofold  plain : the  expanses  of  earth  and  heaven.  Climbed  the  w 
a forest  conflagration  is  referred  to. 


THE  RIQVEDA. 


UYMN  61.J 


21 D 


5 Wandering  here  the  radiant  Calf  finds  none  to  fetter  him,  and 

seeks 

The  Mother  to  declare  his  praise. 

6 And  now  that  great  and  mighty  team,  the  team  of  horses  that 

are  his, 

And  traces  of  his  car,  are  seen. 

7 The  seven  milk  a single  cow  ; the  two  set  other  five  to  work, 
On  the  stream’s  loud-resounding  bank. 

8 Entreated  by  Yivasvan’s  ten,  Indra  cast  down  the  water-jar 
With  threefold  hammer  from  the  sky. 

9 Three  times  the  newly-kindled  flame  proceeds  around  the 

sacrifice  : 

The  priests  anoint  it  with  the  meath. 

0 With  reverence  they  drain  the  fount  that  circles  with  its 

wheel  above, 

Exhaustless,  with  the  mouth  below. 

1 The  pressing-stones  are  set  at  work  : the  meath  is  poured  into 

the  tank, 

At  the  out-shedding  of  the  fount. 

2 Ye  cows,  protect  the  fount : the  two  Mighty  Ones  bless  the 

sacrifice. 

The  handles  twain  are  wrought  of  gold. 

3 Pour  on  the  juice  the  ornament  which  reachos  both  the  heaven 

and  earth  : 

Supply  the  liquid  to  the  Bull. 


5 The  radiant  Calf:  Agni  in  the  form  of  lightning  Here:  in  the  sky 
bove  us.  The  Mother  : the  cloud,  wrhich  will  praise  him  with  a thunder-psalm. 

7 The  seven  : officiating  priests,  or  assistants.  See  IT.  1.  2 A single  cow  : 
be  text  has  only  6kdm  (unam).  Sftyana  supplies,  cow,  which  he  explains  as  the 
hurma,  pitcher  or  caldron  used  for  heating  milk,  etc.,  in  the  Pravargya  cere- 
mony. Loud-resounding  hank : with  reference  to  the  saciificial  exclamations, 
ittered  by  the  officiating  priests.  The  two  : the  Adhvaryu  and  the  Pratipras- 
biitar,  his  Assistant,  direct  the  five  others  in  the  performance  of  the  ceremony. 

8 Entreated  by  Vivasvdns  ten:  according  to  Sty-ana,  the  ten  a fingers  of  the 
Worshipper.  Ten  pi  iests  are  probably  meaut.  Indra : Agni  or  Aditya  may  be 
neant.— Sdyana.  The  xoater-jar  • the  rainy  cloud.  Hummer  : meaning,  pro- 
>ably,  the  zigzag  lightning.  S&yana  explains  it  by  rasmind,  with  his  ray. 

10  The  fount : avatam  : the  gharma  or  ma hdvtra,  the  contents  of  which  are 
>oured  into  the  fire.  Its  wheel:  apparently,  the  circular  lim  on  which  it 
iBually  stands  and  which  is  now  inverted  that  all  the  liquid  may  flow  out. 
^coiding  to  Hillebraudt  ( Vedische  Mythologie , I.  325)  the  fount  is  the  Moon. 

12  The  two  Mighty  Ones : Heaven  and  Earth.  But  as  the  meaning  of 
'apsudi  is  unknown,  the  sentenoe  oan  be  only  conjeoturally  translated  : ‘ (The 
wo  kinds  of  milk)  in  the  sacrifice  are  plentiful  and  fruit-giving.’ — Wilson. 

13  The  ornament ; the  milk  whieh  is  mingled  with  the  Soma.  To  the  Bull: 
Agni, 


220  TEE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  F/jj 

14  These  know  their  own  abiding-placo  : like  calves  beside  the 

mother  cows 

They  meet  together  with  their  kin. 

15  Devouring  in  their  greedy  jaws,  they  make  sustaining  food 

in  heaven, 

To  Indra,  Agni  light  and  prayer. 

16  The  Pious  Ono  milked  out  rich  food,  sustenance  dealt  in  por- 

tions seven, 

Together  with  the  Sun’s  seven  rays. 

17  1 took  some  Soma  when  the  Sun  rose  up,  0 Mitra,  Varuna. 
That  is  the  sick  man’s  medicine. 

18  From  where  oblations  must  be  laid,  which  is  the  Well-beloved's 

home, 

He  with  his  tongue  hath  compassed  heaven. 

HYMN  LXII.  Asvins. 

House  ye  for  him  who  keeps  the  Law,  yoke  your  steeds, 
Asvins,  to  your  car  : 

Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

2 Come,  Asvins,  with  your  car  more  swift  than  is  the  twinkling 
■ of  an  eye  : 

Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

3 Asvins,  ye  overlaid  with  cold  the  fiery  pit  for  Atri’s  sake  : 

Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

4 Where  are  ye?  whither  are  ye  gone?  whither,  like  falcons, 

have  ye  flown  ? 

Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

5 If  ye  at  any  time  this  day  are  listening  to  this  my  call, 

Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

6 The  Asvins,  first  to  hear  our  prayer,  for  closest  kinship  I 

appjoach  : 

Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

7 For  At ri  ye,  0 Asvins,  made  a dwelling-place  to  shield  him  well. 
Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 


14  These,  know:  the  cows  know,  and  come  to,  the  place  where  they  are  to 
be  milked  foi  sacnficial  purposes  as  well  as  they  know  their  own  stable. 

15  Devour  in  y : peihaps  the  flames  ; but  the  stanza  is  obscure. 

16  The  Pious  One  : Agni.  Dealt  in  portions  sevm  : one  for  each  priest. 

18  This  Well-beloved's  home:  ‘the  place  which  I,  the  eager  offerer,  choose. 
— Wilson.  Mary atd , ‘ the  well-belov&d,’  is  perhaps  the  Soma. 


1 Who  keeps  the  Law  : which  enjoins  sacrifice.  The  Riski  means  himself. 
3 For  Atri's  take ; see  1.  116.  8. 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


221 


f/yj/iV  62.] 

8 Ye  warded  off  the  fervent  heat  for  Atri  when  he  sweetly  spake  : 
Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

9 Erst  Saptavadhri  by  his  prayer  obtained  the  trenchant  edge 

of  fire  ; 

Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

0 Come  hither,  0 ye  Lords  of  wealth,  and  listen  to  this  call  of 

mine  : 

Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

1 What  is  this  praise  told  forth  of  you  as  Elders  in  the  ancient 

way  1 

Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

,2  One  common  brotherhood  is  yours,  Asvins,  your  kindred  is  the 
same  : 

Let  your  pr ) tecting  help  be  near. 

:3  This  is  your  chariot,  Asvins,  which  speeds  through  the  regions, 
earth  and  heaven  : / 

Let  your  protecting  aid  bo  near. 

14  Approach  ye  hitherward  to  us  with  thousands  both  of  steeds 
and  kine  : 

Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

[5  Pass  us  not  by,  remember  us  with  thousands  both  of  kine 
and  steeds  ; 

Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

1G  The  purple  tinted  Dawn  hath  risen,  and  true  to  Law  hath  made 
the  light  : 

Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

17  He  looked  upon  the  Asvins,  as  an  axe-armed  man  upon  a tree  : 

Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

IB  By  the  black  band  encompassed  round,  break  it  down,  bold 
one,  like  a fort. 

Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

9 Saptavadhri  • see  V.  78.  6.  His  release  seems  to  have  beeu  effected  by 
employing  fire.  But  see  Myriantheus,  Die  A^rins,  pp.  88,  90. 

H ‘ Why  is  this  (repeated  invocation)  addiessed  to  you  as  if  you  were 
decrepit  like  old  men  ? ’ — Wilson. 

12  One  common  brotherhood ; as  twin  children  of  the  consort  of  VivasvAn, 
the  Sun. 

17  The  meaning  is  obscure.  ‘ Asvins,  the  splendidly-brilliant  (sun  cleaves 
the  daikness)  as  the  woodman  with  his  axe  a tree.’— Wilson.  ‘ He  [the  demon] 
looked  at  the  Asvins.’— Grassmaun. 

18  The  first  line  is  said  by  S.iyana  to  be  addressed  to  Saptavadhri.  It 
to  express  self-encouragement  before  an  attack  upon  a Dftsa  enemy. 

ut  8ee  Myriantheus,  Die  Alvins,  p.  90. 


222 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK  Vlli 


HYMN  LXIII.  Agl>i 

Exerting  all  our  strength  with  thoughts  of  power  we  glorify 
in  speech 

Agni  your  dear  familiar  Friend,  the  darling  Guest  in  every 
home. 

2 Whom,  served  with  sacrificial  oil  like  Mitra,  men  presenting  gifts 
Eulogize  with  their  songs  of  praise; 

3 Much-lauded  Jatavedas,  him  who  bears  oblations  up  to  heaven 

Prepared  in  service  of  the  Gods. 

4 To  noblest  Agni,  Friend  of  man,  best  Vritra-slayer,  are  we  come, 
Him  m whose  presence  Riksha’s  son,  mighty  Srutarvan,  waxes 

great ; 

5 To  deathless  Jatavedas,  meet  for  praise,  adored  with  sacred  oil, 
Visible  through  the  gloom  of  night ; 

6 Even  Agni  whom  these  priestly  men  worship  with  sacrificial 

gifts, 

With  lifted  ladles  offering  them. 

7 0 Agni,  this  our  newest  hymn  hath  been  addressed  from  us  to 

thee, 

0 cheerful  Guest,  well-born,  most  wise,  worker  of  wonders, 
ne’er  deceived. 

8 Agni,  may  it  be  dear  to  thee,  most  grateful,  and  exceeding 

sweet : 

Grow  mightier,  eulogized  therewith. 

9 Splendid  with  splendours  may  it  be,  and  in  the  battle  with 

the  foe 

Add  loftier  glory  to  thy  fame. 

10  Steed,  cow,  a lord  of  heroes,  bright  like  Indra,  who  shall  fil 

the  car, 

Whose  high  renown  ye  celebrate,  and  people  praise  each  glo- 
rious deed. 

11  Thou  whom  Gopavana  made  glad  with  song,  0 Agni  Angiras, 
Hear  this  my  call,  thou  Holy  One. 

12  Thou  whom  the  priestly  folk  implore  to  aid  the  gathering  o 

the  spoil, 

Such  be  thou  in  the  fight  with  foes. 

1 I follow  Ludwig  in  his  interpretation  of  this  stanza,  the  construction  c 
which  is  difficult. 

2 Like  Mitra  : or  as  a friend  ; or  like  the  Sun. — S&yana.  . 

10  Steed , cow : there  is  no  verb  to  govern  these  accusatives.  Perhaps,  » 

it,  that  is,  the  hymn,  give,  may  be  understood.  Sftyana  explains  gdm,  c°'> 
by  gantdram , goer.  ‘ (Worship)  ye  men,  the  bright  (Agni)  who  goes  like 
horse  and  fills  our  chariots  (with  spoil),’ — Wilson. 


THE  RIGVEDA. 


223 


YMN  64.] 

) I,  called  to  him  who  reels  with  joy,  Srutarvan,  Riksha’s  son, 
shall  stroke 

The  heads  of  four  presented  steeds,  like  the  long  wool  of  fleecy 
rams. 

[ Four  coursers  with  a splendid  car,  Savistha’s  horses,  fleet  of  foot, 
Shall  bring  me  to  the  sacred  feast,  as  flying  steeds  brought 
Tugra’s  son. 

5  The  very  truth  do  I declare  to  theo,  Parushni,  mighty  flood. 
Waters ! no  man  is  there  who  gives  more  horses  than  Savish- 
tha  gives. 

HYMN  LXIY.  Agni. 

Yoke,  Agni,  as  a charioteer,  thy  steeds  who  best  invite  the  Gods  : 
As  ancient  Herald  seat  thyself. 

2 And,  God,  as  skilfullest  of  all,  call  for  us  hitherward  the  Gods  : 
Give  all  our  wishes  sure  effect. 

3 For  thou,  Most  Youthful,  Sou  of  Strength,  thou  to  whom 

sacrifice  is  paid, 

Art  holy,  faithful  to  the  Law. 

4 This  Agni,  Lord  of  wealth  aud  spoil  hundredfold,  thousand- 

fold, m head 

And  chief  of  riches  and  a Sage. 

3 As  craftsmen  bend  the  felly,  so  bend  at  our  general  call : come 
nigh, 

Angiras,  to  the  sacrifice. 

6 Now,  0 Virupa,  rouse  for  him,  Strong  God  who  shines  at  early 

morn, 

Fair  praise  with  voice  that  ceases  not. 

7 With  missile  of  this  Agni,  his  who  looks  afar,  will  we  lay  low 
The  thief  in  combat  for  the  kine. 

8 Let  not  the  Companies  of  Gods  fail  us,  like  Dawns  that  float 

away, 

Like  cows  who  leavo  the  niggardly. 


H Tugra’s  son:  Bhujyu.  See  Vol.  I.,  Index. 

1£>  Parushnt : now  the  Itftvi,  the  river  on  whose  bank  Srutarvan  offerod 
his  sacrifice.  ' 

1 Ancient  Herald : or,  chief  Invoker. 

6 Vinlpa:  the  Rishi  of  the  hymn  who  addresses  himself.  Who  shines  at 
early  morn ; or,  aspiring  heavenward. 

7 The  thief:  the  hymn  is  a prayer  for  aid  in  an  expedition  for  the  recovery 

stolen  cattle. 

8 Like  Dawns  that  float  away  : Mike  cows  that  bathe  them  in  the  stream/ 
according  to  the  explanation  given  in  the  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon.  Like  cows 
who  leave  the  niggardly : ‘ the  kine  abandon  not  a little  (calf).’— Wilson. 


224 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK  VIII 

9  Let  not  the  sinful  tyranny  of  any  fiercely-hating  foe 
Smite  us,  as  billows  smite  a ship. 

10  0 Agni,  God,  the  people  sing  reverent  praise  to  thee  for 

strength  : 

With  terrors  trouble  thou  the  foe. 

11  Wilt  thou  not,  Agni,  lend  us  aid  in  winning  cattle,  winning 

weal  tb  ? 

Maker  of  room,  make  room  for  us. 

12  In  this  great  battle  cast  us  not  aside  as  one  who  bears  a load : 
Snatch  up  the  wealth  and  win  it  all. 

13  0 Agni,  let  this  plague  pursue  and  fright  another  and  not  us: 
Make  our  impetuous  strength  more  strong. 

14  The  reverent  or  unwearied  man  whose  holy  labour  he  accepts, 
Him  Agni  favours  with  success. 

15  Abandoning  the  foeman’s  host  pass  hither  to  this  company: 
Assist  the  men  with  whom  I stand. 

16  As  we  have  known  thy  gracious  help,  as  of  a Father,  long  agi, 
So  now  we  pray  to  thee  for  bliss. 

HYMN  LXV.  Indni.* 

Not  to  forsake  me,  I invoke  this  Indra  girt  by  Maruts,  Lord 
Of  magic  power  who  rules  with  might. 

2 This  Indra  with  his  Marut  Friends  clarC  into  pieces  Vritra’s 

head 

With  hundred  knotted  thunderbolt. 

3 Indra,  with  Marut  Friends,  grown  strong,  hath  rent  asunder 

Vritra,  and 

Released  the  waters  of  the  sea. 

4 This  is  that  Indra  who,  begirt  by  Maruts,  won  the  light  of 

heaven 

That  lie  might  drink  the  Soma  juice. 

5 Mighty,  impetuous,  begirt  by  Maruts,  him  who  loudly  roars, 
Indra  we  invocate  with  songs. 

6 Indra  begirt  by  Maruts  we  invoke  after  the  ancient  plan, 

That  he  may  drink  tho  Soma  juice. 

7 0 liberal  Indra,  Marut-girt,  much-lauded  Satakratu,  drink 
The  Soma  at  this  sacrifice. 

8 To  thee,  0 Indra,  Marut-girt,  these  Soma  juices,  Thunderer! 
Are  offered  from  the  heart  with  lauds. 


3 Of  the  sea : of  the  firmament  or  ocean  of  air. 


0MX  66.]  THE  RIGVEDA . 225 

9 Drink,  Iudra,  with  thy  Marat  Friends,  pressed  Soma  at  the 
morning  rites, 

Whetting  thy  thunderbolt  with  strength* 

[0  Arising  in  thy  might,  thy  jaws  thou  ahookest,  Indra,  having 
quaffed 

The  Soma  which  the  mortar  pressed. 

11  Indra,  both  worlds  complained  to  thee  when  uttering  thy 

feat  ful  roar, 

What  time  thou  smotest  Dasyus  dead. 

12  From  Indra  have  I measured  out  a song  eight-footed  with  nine 

parts, 

Delicate,  faithful  to  the  Law. 

HYMN  LXYI.  Indra. 

Scarcely  was  Satakratu  born  when  of  his  Mother  he  inquired, 
Who  are  the  mighty  1 Who  are  famed  I 

2 Then  Savasi  declared  to  him  Aurnavabha,  Ahisuva : 

Son,  these  be  they  thou  must  o'erthrow. 

3 The  Vritra-slayer  smote  them  all  as  spokes  are  hammered  in- 

to naves : 

The  Dasyu-killer  waxed  in  might. 

4 Then  Indra  at  a single  draught  drank  tho  contents  of  thirty 

pails, 

Pails  that  were  filled  with  Soma  juice. 

5 Indra  in  groundless  realms  of  space  pierced  the  Gandharva 

through,  that  he 

Might  make  the  Brahmans’  strength  increase. 

11  Complained  to  thee:  in  terror.  When  uttering  thy  fearful  roar:  the 
meaning  of  fcraLshamdnuin,  rendered  thud  conjeoturally,  id  uncertain. 

12  Eight-footed  with  nine  parts : tho  hymn  consists  of  triplets,  each  of 

which  contaius  nine  P&das,  parts  or  half-lines,  of  eight  feet  or  syllables  each. 
That  is,  the  metre  is  octosyllabic  (8  x 3),  and  the  triplet  contains  three  stanzas 
in  that  metre,  or  nine  octosyllabic  Pddas.  Erom  Indra : originating  in  him 
as  its  subject  or  inspires  Faithful  to  the  Law:  closely  connected  with 
sacrifice.  _ . 

1 Cp.  VIII.  45.  4. 

2 Savast:  or,  the  Mighty  One,  Indra’ s Mother.  Aurnavdbha:  or  Drnavdbha'a 
son.  See  V III.  32.  26.  These:  and  other  fiends,  as  U,  these,  is  plural. 

4 Pails:  or  bowls  ; literally,  lakes.  The  memingof  the  word  kdnukflt  in 
this  stanza  is  uncertain.  It  appears  to  be  an  adjective  qualifying  sardnsi 
pails  or  lakes.  See  note  in  Wilson’s  Translation. 

5 The  Gandharva : a heavenly  being  who  dwells  in  the  region  of  tbe  air 
and  guards  the  celestial  Soma,  that  is,  the  rain.  See  I.  22.  14,  and  163.  2. 
According  to  S&yana,  the  Gaudhitrva  is  the  rain-cloud  itself,  which  Indra  shat- 

and  so  released  the  fertilizing  water. 

15 


22<1  TIIE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  V7/j 

6 Down  from  the  mountains  Indra  shot  hither  his  woli-directci 

shaft : 

He  gained  the  ready  brew  of  lice. 

7 One  only  is  that  shaft  of  thine,  with  thousand  feathers,  hund 

red  barbs, 

Which,  Indra,  thou  hast  made  thy  friend. 

8 Strong  ai  the  Uibhus  at  thy  birth,  therewith  to  those  who 

praise  thee,  men 

And  women,  bring  thou  food  to  eat. 

9 By  thee  these  exploits  were  achieved,  tho  mightiest  deeda, 

abundantly  : 

Firm  in  thy  heart  thou  settest  them. 

10  All  these  things  Vishnu  brought,  the  Lord  of  ample  stride 

whom  thou  hadst  sent  — 

A hundred  buHalois,  a brew  of  riee  and  milk ; and  Indr,* 
slow  the  ravening  boar. 

1 1 Most  deadly  is  thy  how,  successful,  fashioned  well ; good  uj 

thin 3 a1 2  row,  decked  with  gold. 

Warlike  and  well  equipped  thine  arms  are,  which  increase 
sweetness  for  him  who  drinks  tho  sv\cot. 

HYMN  LX VII. 

Bkixg  us  a thousand,  Indra,  as  our  guerdon  for  the  Soma 
juice  : 

Hundieds  of  kine,  0 Hero,  bring. 

2 Bring  cattle,  bring  us  ornament,  bring  us  embellishment  and 
steeds, 

Give  us,  besides,  two  rings  of  gold. 


6 The  st.m/a  is  dnularlv  ex  pi  lined  by  S.iynua.  Indra  smote  the  rain  from 
the  cloud**,  and  obtained  food  for  men. 

7 One  only : Indra  alone  is  the  wielder  of  the  thunderbolt. 

10  All  these  things : the  buffaloes  or  dark  clouds,  and  the  lice  and  milk  or 
fertilizing  lain.  Slew:  the  veibis  supplied  by  SA)  ana.  The  ravening  born  . 
Viitra.  (If.  I.  61  7.  wheie  the  deed  is  siinilaily  related.  See  Prof.  A.  A. 
donell,  Journal  R.  A.  Society , 1895,  p.  186, 

11  Which  increase  sweetness  for  him  who  drinks  the  sweet : this  is  Ludwig* 
interpretation  of  two  very  difficult  words  which  mean  according  to  Wiwn* 
Translation,  ‘ destructively  overthrowing,  desti  uctively  piercing;’  according 
to  the  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon,  ‘ like  two  bees  delighting  in  sweetness 
according  to  Grassmann,  ‘ sweetness  loves  thy  two  lips.’ 

1 A thousand:  cows,  understood. 

2 Two  rings:  the  meaning  of  mand  here  is  somewhat  uncertain.  Se<*  M,13 
Muller,  India,  Wluit  can  it  'Teach  us  ? pp  125. 120  ; Weber,  Episches  im  Vt*1* 
chen  Ritual,  p.  30  ; and  Zimuier,  Altindnches  Lcben,  pp.  50,  51, 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


HYMN  68.] 


3 And,  Bold  One,  bring  in  ample  store  rich  jewels  to  adorn  the  ear, 
For  thou,  Good  Lord,  art  far  renowned. 

4 None  other  is  there  for  the  priest,  Hero ! but  thou,  to  give 

him  gifts, 

To  win  much  spoil  and  prosper  him. 

5 Indra  can  never  be  brought  low,  Sakra  can  never  be  subdued: 
He  heareth  and  beholdeth  all. 

6 He  spicth  out  the  wrath  of  man,  lie  who  can  never  be  deceived  : 
Ere  blame  can  come  he  marketh  it. 

7 Ho  hath  his  stomach  full  of  might,  the  Vritra-slayer,  Conqueror, 
The  Soma-drinkcr,  ordering  all. 

8 In  thee  all  treasures  arc  combined,  Soma  ! all  blessed  things 

in  thee, 

Uninjured,  easy  to  bestow. 

9 To  thee  speeds  forth  my  hope  that  craves  the  gift  of  corn,  and 

kino  and  gold, 

Yea,  craving  horses,  speeds  to  thee. 

10  Indrn,  through  hope  in  thee  alone  even  this  sickle  do  I grasp. 
Fill  my  hand,  Maghavan,  with  all  that  it  can  hold  of  barley 
cut  or  gathered  up. 

HYMN  LXVIII.  Soma. 


Tins  here  is  Soma,  ne’er  restrained,  active,  all-conquering, 
bursting  forth, 

Rislu  and  Sage  by  sapience. 

2 All  that  is  bare  he  covers  o’er,  all  that  is  sick  he  medicines: 
The  blind  man  sees,  the  cripple  walks. 

3 Thou,  Soma,  givest  wide  defence  against  the  hate  of  alieu  men, 
Hatreds  that  waste  and  weaken  us. 


i Thou  by  thine  insight  and  thy  skill,  Impetuous  One,  from 
heaven  and  eaith 
Drivest  the  sinner’s  enmity. 

^ When  to  their  task  they  come  with  zeal,  may  they  obtain  the 
Giver’s  grace, 

And  satisfy  his  wish  wht  thirsts. 


$ Xoyna:  here  said  to  mean  India  himself. 

. ^ ‘ It  would  appear  as  if  the  field  were  u barren  one  and  the  poet  fcought 
fn>m  Indra  a harvest  which  he  had  not  sown.’— Wilson. 


■ * bursting  forth  : according  to  Sitya^a,  causing  (fruit)  to  spring  forth. 

< ri  One  • fijUhiu  : according  to  S&yapa,  ‘ possessed  of  tho  remain* 

" g r^8  Soma  juice  offered  in  the  third  8uvuna.* 

[ , : the  priests.  The  Giver'* : bountiful  Indra'*.  Mia  wish  ,*  Indra'i 

ongmg  for  Soma-libations. 


238  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Vll 

6 So  may  he  find  what  erst  was  lost,  so  may  he  speed  the  pious 

man, 

And  lengthen  his  remaining  life. 

7 Gracious,  displaying  tender  love,  unconquered,  gentle  in  thy 

thoughts, 

Be  sweet,  0 Soma,  to  our  heart. 

8 0 Soma,  terrify  us  not;  strike  us  not  with  alarm,  0 King : 
Wouud  not  our  heart  with  dazzling  flame. 

9 When  in  my  dwelling-place  I see  the  wicked  enemies  of  Gods, 
King,  chase  their  hatred  far  away,  thou  Bouuteous  One, 

dispel  our  foes. 

HYMN  LX IX.  Indra. 

0 Satakratu,  truly  I have  made  none  else  my  Comforter. 
Indra,  be  gracious  unto  us. 

2 Thou  who  hast  ever  aided  us  kindly  of  old  to  win  the  spoil, 

As  such,  0 Indra,  favour  us. 

3 What  now  ] As  prompter  of  the  poor  thou  helpost  him  who 

sheds  the  juice. 

Wilt  thou  not,  Indra,  strengthen  us] 

4 0 Indra,  help  our  chariot  on,  yea,  Thunderer,  though  it  log 

behind  ; 

Give  this  my  car  the  foremost  place. 

5 Ho  there  ! why  sittest  thou  at  ease  ] Make  thou  my  chariot 

to  be  first : 

And  bring  the  fame  of  victory  near. 

6 Assist  our  car  that  seeks  the  prize.  What  can  be  easier  for 

thee  ? 

So  make  thou  us  victorious. 

7 Indra,  be  firm  : a fort  art  thou.  To  thine  appointed  place 

proceeds 

Tho  auspicious  hymn  in  season  due. 

8 Let  not  our  portion  be  disgrace.  Broad  is  the  course,  the  prize 

is  set, 

The  barriers  are  opened  wide. 

9  This  thing  we  wish,  that  thou  mayst  take  thy  fourth,  thy 
sacrificial  lftune. 

So  art  thou  held  to  be  our  Lord.  

9 The  wicked  enemies : or,  the  enmities  ; that  is,  when  I see  that  the  Goda 

fcre" displeased  with  me.  

4 The  hymn  is  a prayer  for  success  in  a ooming  chariot  race. 

- 7 To  thine  appointed  place : 1 to  thee  the  repeller  (of  enemies).’ — Wil«<>n- 
9 Thyfgurthy  thy  sacrificial  name : the  other  three,  according  to  SAyapa, are 
the  couetellation-name,  the  secret  name,  and  the  revealed  name. 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


m 


!YMX  71.] 

0 Ekadyu  hath  exalted  you,  Immortals : both  Goddesses  and 
Gods  hath  he  delighted. 

Bestow  upon  him  bounty  meet  for  praises.  May  he,  enriched 
with  prayer,  come  soon  and  early. 

HYMN  LXX.  Indra. 

Indra,  God  of  the  mighty  arm,  gather  for  us  with  thy  right 
hand 

Manifold  and  nutritious  spoil. 

2 We  know  thee  mighty  in  thy  deeds,  of  mighty  bounty,  mighty 

wealth, 

Mighty  in  measure,  prompt  to  aid. 

3 Hero,  when  thou  art  fain  to  give,  neither  may  Gods  nor 

mortal  men 

Restrain  thee  like  a fearful  Bull. 

4 Come,  let  us  glorify  Indra,  Lord  supreme  of  wealth,  Self- 

ruling King  : 

In  bounty  may  he  harm  us  not. 

5 Let  prelude  sound  and  following  chant : so  let  him  hear  the 

Sam  an  sung, 

And  with  his  bounty  answer  us. 

6 0 Indra,  with  thy  right  hand  bring,  and  with  thy  left  remem- 

ber us: 

Let  us  not  lose  our  share  of  wealth. 

7 Come  nigh,  0 Bold  One,  boldly  bring  hither  the  riches  of 

the  churl 

Who  givelh  least  of  all  the  folk. 

8 Indra,  the  booty  which  thou  hast  with  holy  singers  to  receive, 
Even  that  booty  wiu  with  us. 

9 Indra,  thy  swiftly-coming  spoil,  the  booty  which  rejoices  all, 
Souuds  quick  in  concert  with  our  hopes. 

HYMN  LXXI.  Indra. 

Hastb  forward  to  us  from  afar,  or,  Vritra  slayer,  from  anear, 
To  meet  the  offering  of  the  meath. 

10  The  Gods  in  general  are.the  deities  of  this  stanza.  Ekadyd  is  the  seer  of 
the  hymn.  He,  enriched  with  prayer : India,  exulted  by  our  hymn. 

5 Let  prelude  sound : prd  stoshad  npagdsiskat : let  the  prastotar  and  the  «d* 
gfttar,  two  of  the  officiating  priests  at  the  chanting  of  a S&man,  discharge  their 
functions  : the  former  singing  the  prelude  and  the  latter  the  accompaniment. 

8 Win  with  us : make  us  thy  allies. 

9 Sounds  in  concert  with  our  hopes : answers  to  our  expectation.  Perhaps 
M Ludwig  thinks,  the  word  * sounds  ’ refers  to  the  herd  of  cattle  which  pro- 
bably constituted  the  spoil  that  is  spoken  of. 


230  THE  HYMNS  OF  [ BOOK  17//, 

2 Strong  are  the  Soma-draughts ; come  nigh  : the  juices  fill  thee 

with  delight : 

Drink  boldly  even  as  thou  art  wont. 

3 Joy,  Indra,  in  the  strengthening  food  : let  it  content  thy  wish 

and  thought, 

And  be  delightful  to  thine  heart. 

4 Come  to  us  thou  who  hast  no  foo  : we  call  thee  down  tohymus 

of  praiso, 

In  heaven’s  sublirnest  realm  of  light. 

5 This  Soma  here  expressed  with  stones  and  dressed  with  milk 

for  thy  carouse, 

Indra,  is  offered  up  to  thee. 

6 Graciously,  Indra,  hear  my  call.  Come  and  obtain  the  draught, 

and  sate 

Thyself  with  juices  blent  with  milk. 

7 The  Soma,  Indra,  which  is  shed  in  chalices  and  vats  for  thee, 
Drink  thou,  fur  thou  art  Lord  thereof. 

8 The  Soma  seen  within  the  vats,  as  in  the  flood  the  Moon  i3  seen, 
Drink  thou,  for  thou  art  Lord  thereof. 

9 Tnat  which  the  Hawk  brought  in  his  claw,  inviolate,  through 

the  air  to  thee, 

Drink  thou,  for  thou  art  Lord  thereof. 

HYMN  LXXII.  Visvedem. 

Wb  ohoose  unto  ourselves  that  high  protection  of  the  Mighty  Gods 
That  it  may  help  and  succour  us. 

2 May  they  be  ever  our  allies,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman, 
Far-seeing  Gods  who  prosper  us. 

3 Ye  furtherers  of  holy  Law,  transport  us  safe  o’er  many  woes, 
As  over  water-floods  in  ships. 

4 Dear  wealth  bo  Aryaman  to  us,  Varuna  dear  wealth  meet  for 

praise  : 

Dear  wealth  we  choose  unto  ourselves. 

5 For  Sovrans  of  dear  wealth  are  ye,  Adityas,  not  of  sinner’s 

wealth, 

Ye  sapient  Gods  who  slay  the  foe. 

6 We  in  our  homes,  ye  Bounteous  Ones,  and  while  we  journey 

on  the  road, 

Invoke  you,  Gods,  to  prosper  us. 

8 The  Moon:  in  allusion  to  the  double  meaning  of  Suma,  the  plant  and  its 
juice,  and  the  Moon. 

9 The  Hawk  : see  I.  60.  2,  and  03  6. 


yj/JV  74.  J 


THE  KIGVEDA. 


231 


1 Regard  us,  Indra,  Vishnu,  here,  ye  Asvins  and  the  Maruthost, 
Us  who  are  kith  and  kin  to  you. 

5 Ye  Bounteous  Ones,  from  time  of  old  we  here  set  forth  our 
brotherhood, 

Our  kinship  in  the  Mother’s  womb. 

) Then  come  with  Indra  for  your  chief,  at  early  day,  ye  Boun- 
teous Gods: 

Yea,  I address  you  now  for  this. 

HYMN  LXXIII.  Agnt 

Agni,  your  dearest  Guest,  I laud,  him  who  is  loving  as  a friend, 
Who  brings  us  riches  like  a car. 

2 Whom  as  a far-foreseeing  Sage  the  Gods  have,  from  the  olden 

time, 

Established  among  mortal  men. 

3 Do  thou,  Most  Youthful  God,  protect  the  men  who  offer,  hear 

their  songs, 

And  of  thyself  preserve  their  seed. 
i What  is  the  praise  wherewith,  0 God,  Angiras,  Agni,  Son  of 
Strength, 

Wo,  after  thine  own  wish  and  thought, 

5 May  serve  thee,  0 tliou  Child  of  Power,  and  with  what  sacri- 
fice’s plan  1 

What  prayer  shall  I now  speak  to  thee? 

C Our  God.  make  all  of  us  to  dwell  in  happy  habitations,  and 
Reward  our  songs  with  spoil  and  wealth. 

7 Lord  of  the  house,  what  plenty  fills  the  songs  which  thou  ins- 

pi  rest  now, 

Thou  whose  hymn  helps  to  win  the  kine? 

8 Him  Wise  and  Strong  they  glorify,  the  foremost  Champion  in 

the  fray, 

And  mighty  in  his  dwelling-place. 

9 Agni,  he  dwells  in  rest  and  peace  who  smites  and  no  one  smites 

again  : 

With  hero  sons  he  prospers  well. 

HYMN  LXXIV.  As  vine. 

To  this  mine  invocation,  0 ye  Asvius,  ye  Nasatyas,  come, 
lo  drink  the  savoury  Soma  juice. 

8 In  the  Mother's  womb : as  common  children  of  Aditi  the  General  Mother 

°f  all  living  beings  

3 And  of  tk if  self  preserve  their  .ccrf : or,  and  guard  our  offspring  and  oui  selves. 
^ He:  the  faithful  worshipper. 


332  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Vlll, 

2 This  laud  of  mine,  ye  Asvins  Twain,  and  this  mine  invitation 

hear, 

To  drink  the  savoury  Soma  juice. 

3 Here  Krishna  is  invoking  you,  0 Asvins,  Lords  of  ample  wealth, 
To  drink  the  savoury  Soma  juice. 

4 List,  Heroes,  to  the  singer’s  call,  the  call  of  Krishna  lauding 

yon, 

To  drink  the  savoury  Soma  juice. 

5 Chiefs,  to  the  sage  who  sings  your  praise  grant  an  inviolable 

home, 

To  drink  the  savoury  Soma  juice. 

6 Come  to  the  worshipper’s  abode,  Asvins,  who  here  is  lauding 

you, 

To  drink  the  savoury  Soma  juice. 

7 Yoke  to  the  firmly  jointed  car  the  ass  which  draws  you,  Lords 

of  wealth, 

To  drink  the  savoury  Soma  juice. 

8 Come  hither,  Asvins,  on  your  car  of  triple  form  with  triple  seat, 
To  drink  the  savoury  Soma  juice. 

9 O Asvins,  O Nasatyas,  now  accept  with  favouiing  grace  my 

songs, 

To  drink  the  savoury  Soma  juice. 

HYMN  LXXY.  Asvins. 

Ye  Twain  are  wondrous  strong,  well-skilled  in  arts  that  heal, 
both  bringers  of  delight,  ye  both  won  Dakslm’s  praise. 
Visvaka  calls  on  you  as  such  to  save  his  life.  Break  ye  not 
off  our  friendship,  come  and  set  me  free. 

2 How  shall  he  praise  you  now  who  is  distraught  in  mind?  Ye 
Twain  give  wisdom  for  the  gain  of  what  is  good. 

Visvaka  calls  on  you  as  such  to  save  his  life.  Break  ye  not 
off  onr  friendship,  come  and  set  me  free. 

6 To  drink : bo  that  ye  may  drink. 

7 The  aw:  cf.  I.  34.  9 ; 116.  2 ; and  162  21. 

8 Of  triple  form  with  triple  seat : see  I.  34.  2,  9. 

The  Rishi  is  Visvaka  son  of  Krishna. 

1 Daksha’ 8 praise  : on  the  occasion  mentioned  in  I.  116.  2 ; or  when  the 
Asvins  won  SuryA,  for  their  bride,  1.  116.  17.  To  save  his  life:  according  to 
Sftyana,  ‘for  the  sa!<e  of  his  Bon  ’ Come  and  set  me  free:  ‘flying  loose  (your 
reins  and  gallop  hither).’ — Wilson.  ‘ Unyoke  your  horses,’ — Grassmann. 

2 Distraught  in  mind : referring  either  to  Visvaka  himself,  or  the  man  for 
whom  he  invokes  the  Asvins’  aid.  According  to  S&yana,  YimanAh  (distraught 
in  mind)  hero  is  the  name  of  a Rishi. 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


YMN  76.] 


) Already  have  ye  Twain,  possessors  of  great  wealth,  prospered 
Vishnapu  thus  for  gain  of  what  is  good. 

Visvaka  calls  on  you  as  such  to  save  his  life.  Break  ye  not 
off  our  friendship,  come  and  set  me  free. 

[ And  that  Impetuous  Hero,  winner  of  the  spoil,  though  he  is 
far  away,  we  call  to  succour  us, 

Whose  gracious  favour,  like  a father's,  is  most  sweet.  Break 
ye  not  off  our  friendship,  come  and  set  me  free. 

\ About  the  holy  Law  toils  Savitar  the  God  : the  horn  of  holy 
Law  hath  he  spread  far  and  wide. 

The  holy  Law  hath  quelled  even  mighty  men  of  war.*  Break 
ye  not  off  our  friendship,  come  and  set  me  free. 

HYMN  LXXVI.  Asvins, 

Splendid,  0 Asvins,  is  your  praise.  Como,  fountain-like,  to 
pour  the  stream. 

Of  the  sweet  juice  effused— dear  is  it,  Chiefs,  in  heaven— drink 
like  two  wild  bulls  at  a pool. 

2 Drink  the  libation  rich  in  sweets,  0 Asvins  Twain  : sit,  Heroes, 

on  the  sacred  grass. 

Do  ye  with  joyful  heart  in  the  abode  of  man  preserve  his  life 
by  means  of  wealth. 

3 The  Priyamedhas  bid  you  come  with  all  th  e succou  rs  that  are  yours. 
Come  to  his  house  whose  holy  grass  is  trimmed,  to  dear  sacri- 
fice at  the  morning  rites. 

1 Drink  ye  the  Soma  rich  in  meath,  ye  Asvins  Twain  : sit  gladly 

on  the  sacred  grass. 

So,  waxen  mighty,  to  oui  eulogy  from  heaven  come  ye  as  wild- 
bulls  to  the  pool. 

5 Come  to  us,  Oye  Asvins,  now  with  steeds  of  many  a varied  hue, 
Ye  Lords  of  splendour,  wondrous,  borne  on  paths  of  gold, 

drink  Soma,  ye  who  strengthen  Law. 

6 For  we  the  priestly  singers,  fain  to  hymn  your  praise,  invoke 

you  for  the  gain  of  strength. 

So,  wondrous,  fair,  and  famed  for  great  deeds  come  to  us, 
through  our  hymn,  Asvins,  wheu  ye  hear. 

3 Vishn4p{i : the  Ilishi’s  son  or  grandson. 

4 That  Impetuous  Hero:  Indra.  ‘These  two  verses,’  says  Grassmann,  ‘are 
l*eri  from  another  hymn.  Verse  5 is  addressed  to  Savitar,  aud  verse  4,  as 

RPpears,  to  Indra.  The  refrain,  which  is  altogether  unsuitable  here,  has 
Sea  ftdded  in  order  to  connect  the  verses  with  the  preceding  hymn.' 

2 The  libation : gharm&m : the  heated  milk  or  borage,  or  the  vessel 

it  is  heated. 

9 Priymtdhat ; Priyamedha  and  his  family, 


*34  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VIH, 

HYMN  LXXVII.  Indra, 

As  cows  low  to  their  calves  in  stalls,  so  with  our  songs  we 
glorify 

This  Indra,  even  your  Wondrous  God  who  checks  attack,  who 
joys  in  the  delicious  juice. 

2 Celestial,  bounteous  Giver,  girt  about  with  might,  rich,  moan* 

tain-like,  m precious  things, 

Him  swift  we  seek  for  foodful  booty  rich  in  kine,  brought 
hundredfold  and  thousandfold. 

3 Indra,  the  strong  and  lofty  hills  are  powerless  to  bar  thy  way. 
None  stay  that,  act  of  thine  when  thou  wouldst  fain  give 

wealth  to  one  like  me  who  sings  thy  piaise. 

4 A Warrior  thou  by  strength,  wisdom,  and  wondrous  deed,  in 

might  excellcst  all  that  is. 

Hither  may  this  our  hymn  attract  thee  to  our  help,  the  hymn 
which  Gotamas  have  made. 

5 For  in  thy  might  thou  stretchest  out  beyond  the  boundaries 

of  heaven. 

The  earthly  region,  Indra,  comprehends  thee  not.  After  thy 
Godhead  hast  thou  waxed. 

6 When,  Maghavan,  thon  honourest  the  worshipper,  no  one  is 

there  to  stay  thy  wealth. 

Most  liberal  Giver  thou,  do  thou  inspire  our  song  of  praise, 
that  we  may  win  the  spoil. 

HYMN  LXXVIII.  Indra. 

To  Indra  sing  the  lofty  hymn,  Maruts ! that  slays  the  Vritras  best) 
Whereby  the  Holy  Ones  created  fur  the  God  the  light  divine 
that  ever  wakes. 

2 Indra  who  quells  the  curse  blew  curses  far  away,  and  then  in 

splendour  came  to  us. 

Indra,  refulgent  with  thy  Marut  host ! the  Gods  strove  eagerly 
to  win  thy  l »ve. 

3 Sing  to  your  lofty  Indra,  sing,  Maruts,  a holy  hymn  of  piaise. 
Let  Sati.kratu,  Vritra-slaycr,  kill  the  foe  with  hundred-knotted 

thunderbolt. 

1 As  cows:  the  cows  who  are  milked  for  saciifieial  purposes,  whose  cahss 
are  shut  up  during  the  ceremony  . . 

6 The  earthly  reyion  : the  rajas  region,  middle  air,  or  fiimament  is  frequen 
ly  divided  into  two,  one  half  belonging  to  the  earth  and  the  other  to  the  6 7 
See  Wallis,  Cosmology  of  the  Jtigveda,  pp.  114,  115. 

I Maruts:  here  meaning  the  singers  of  the  hymn  of  praise.  * Pi  lest*.  ' 
Wilson.  The  light  divine : the  Sun,  which  the  Visvedevas  generated  or  ci  eu 
for  Indra. 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


235 


#n/A'  79.] 

4 Aim  and  fetch  boldly  forth,  0 thou  whose  heart  is  bold  : great 

glory  will  be  thine  thereby. 

In  rapid  torrent  let  the  mother  waters  spread.  Slay  Vritra,  win 
the  light  of  heaven. 

5 When  thou,  unequalled  Maghavan,  wast  born  to  smite  the 

Vritras  dead, 

Thou  spreadest  out  the  spacious  earth  and  didst  support  and 
prop  the  heaveus. 

6 Then  was  the  sacrifice  produced  for  thee,  the  laud,  and  song 

of  joy, 

Thou  in  thy  might  surpassest  all,  all  that  now  is  and  yet 
shall  be. 

7 Raw  kine  thou  filledst  with  ripe  milk.  Thou  madest  Surya 

rise  to  heaven. 

Heat  him  as  milk  is  heated  with  pure  Sama  hymns,  great  joy 
to  him  who  loves  the  song. 

HYMN  LXXIX.  indra. 

May  Indra,  who  in  every  fight  must  be  invoked,  be  near  to  us. 
May  the  most  mighty  Yritra-slayer,  meet  for  praise,  come  t« 
libations  and  to  hymns. 

2 Thou  art  the  best  of  all  in  sending  bounteous  gifts,  true  art 

thou,  lordly  in  thine  act. 

We  claim  alliance  with  the  very  Glorious  One,  yea,  with  the 
Mighty  Son  of  Strength. 

3 Prayers  unsurpassed  are  offered  up  to  thee  tho  Lover  of  the 

Song. 

Indra,  Lord  of  Bay  Steeds,  accept  these  fitting  hymns,  hymns 
which  we  have  thought  out  for  thee. 

4 For  thou,  0 Maghavan,  art  truthful,  ne’er  subdued,  and 

bringest  many  a Yritra  low. 

As  such,  0 Mightiest  Lord,  Wielder  of  Thunder,  send  wealth 
hither  to  the  worshipper. 


7 Rt m kine : cf  I.  62  9 ; 180  3 ; II.  40.  2 ; IV  3 9;  VI.  72.  4 ; 17.  6 ; 44. 

; VIII.  32.  25.  Thou  madest  Sd~ya  rise  to  heaven : Silyana  relates  a legend  that 
when  the  Panin  had  carried  off  the  cows  of  the  Angirases  and  placed  them  in  a 
mountain  enveloped  in  darkness,  Indra,  at  the  pmyer  of  tho  R'shis,  set  the 
in  heaven  in  order  that  ho  might  see  and  recover  their  cattle.  Hmt  him 
a*  milk  is  heated  : this  Hue  is  difficult.  * (Priests)  excite  (Indra)  with  your 
pr^ibea  as  men  heat  the  Oharma  with  SdwaJi-hymns ' — Wilson.  Gharma 
Ulean8  either  the  hot  milk  or  other  bevei age  offered  in  the  Pravargya  cere* 
ttiony , or  the  vessel  in  which  it  is  heated  Great  joy  to  him  who  lores  the  song: 
ju  perhaps  the  meaning  is,  the  Bribat-S&man  (one  of  the  most  impoit&ut  Sama 
Tunis,  the  first  and  second  veues  of  R.  V.  VI  46),  is  dear  to  him  who  loves 
Song.  • 

3 Fitting  hymns : ydjand  : see  Wilson's  Translation  and  note. 


ttlR  HYMNS  OP 


23* 


[BOOR  Vlii 


6 0 Indra,  thou  art  far-renowued,  impetuous,  0 Lord  of  Strength, 
Alone  thou  slayost  with  the  guardian  of  mankind  resistless 
iiever*conquered  foes, 

6 As  such  we  seek  thee  now,  0 Asura,  thee  most  wise,  craving 
thy  bounty  as  our  share.  * 

Thy  sheltering  defence  is  like  a mighty  cloak.  So  may  thy 
glories  reach  to  us. 

HYMN  LXXX.  Indrai 

Down  to  the  stream  a maiden  came,  and  found  the  Soma  by 
the  way. 

Bearing  it  to  her  home  she  said,  For  Indra  will  I press  thee 
out,  for  Sakra  will  I press  thee  out 

2 Thou  roaming  yonder,  little  man,  beholding  every  house  ic 

turn, 

Drink  thou  this  Soma  pressed  with  teeth,  accompanied  \v ith 
grain  and  curds,  with  cake  of  meal  and  song  of  praise. 

3 Fain  would  we  learn  to  know  thee  well,  nor  yet  cart  wo  attair 

to  thee. 

Still  slowly  and  in  gradual  drops,  0 Indu,  unto  Indra  flow. 

4 Will  he  not  help  and  work  for  usl  Will  he  not  make  ui 

wealthier  ? 

Shall  we  not,  hostile  to  our  lord,  unite  ourselves  to  Indra  now 

5 0 Indra,  cause  to  sprout  again  three  places,  these  which 

declare, — 

My  father’s  head,  his  cultured  field,  and  this  the  part  belo\ 
my  waist. 

6 Make  all  of  these  grow  crops  of  hair,  yon  cultivated  field  o 

ours, 

My  body,  and  my  father’s  head. 

7 Cleansing  Apala,  Indra  ! thrice,  thou  gavest  sunlike  skin  t 

her, 

Drawn,  Satakratu  ! through  the  hole  of  car,  of  wagon,  and  c 
yoke, 

5 The  guardian  of  mankind  : Indra/ s thunderbolt  with  which  he  slays  th 

demons  of  drought  

The  Ilishi  is  Ap&lA  of  the  family  of  Atii. 

1 A maiden  : Ap&IA 

2 Little  man  : vtrakah : according  to  SAyaua,  hero.  Indra  ifl  intended 
perhaps  a3  Surya  the  Sun-God. 

3 Indu : Soma. 

4 He : Indra.  Hostile  to  our  lord  : ApAH,  it  is  said,  was  afflicted  with 
cutaneous  disease  and  was  consequently  repudiated  by  her  husband, 

7 Sunlike  : bright  and  clear.  ‘ SAyapa  aaya  that  Indra  dragged  her  throng 
the  wide  hole  of  hia  chariot,  the  narrower  hole  of  the  cart  and  the  small  jj° 
of  the  yoke#  and  ihewwt  off  throe  akiM,  The  first  skin  became  a hedged 


0MN  81.]  THE  RIO  VEDA . *87 

HYMN  LXXXI.  Indra. 

Invite  ye  Indra  with  a song  to  drink  your  draught  of  Soma 
juice, 

AU-conquering  Satakratu,  most  munificent  of  all  who  live. 

2 Lauded  by  many,  much-invoked,  leader  of  song,  reuowned 

of  old  : 

His  name  is  Indra,  tell  it  forth. 

3 Indra  the  Dancer  be  to  us  the  giver  of  abundant  strength  : 

May  he,  the  mighty,  bring  it  near. 

4 Indra  whose  jaws  are  strong  hath  drunk  of  worshipping 

Sudaksha’s  draught, 

The  Soma  juice  with  barley  mixt. 

5 Call  Indra  loudly  with  your  songs  of  praise  to  drink  the  Soma 

juice, 

For  this  is  what  augments  his  strength. 

6 When  fie  hath  drunk  its  gladdening  drops  the  God  with 

vigour  of  a God 

Hath  far  surpassed  all  things  that  are. 

7 Thou  speedest  down  to  succour  us  this  ever-oonquering  God 

of  yours, 

Him  who  is  drawn  to  all  our  songs; 

8 The  Warrior  not  to  be  restrained,  the  Soma-drinker  ne’er 

o’erthrown, 

The  Chieftain  of  resistless  might. 

9 0 Indra,  send  us  riches,  thou  Omniscient,  worthy  of  our 

praise : 

Help  us  in  the  decisive  fray. 

the  second  au  alligator,  the  third  a chameleon.  I suppose,  with  Prof.  Aufrecht, 
that  the  hole  or  space  of  the  chariot  and  ca?t  represents  the  opening  between 
the  four  wheels ; the  hole  of  the  yoke  seems  to  me  to  mean  the  opening 
through  which  the  animal’s  head  passed,  corresponding  to  Homer’s  ^evyXrj, 
II.  19.  406.’— Cowell. 

For  the  legend  from  the  SUy&yana  Bi&hmana,  founded  on  the  hints  con- 
tained in  this  hymn  and  repeated  by  S&yana  in  his  Commentary,  see  also 
Wilson’s  Translation,  Vol.  V. 

Prof.  Aufrecht  has  published  the  text  and  commentary  of  this  hymn  in 
Indische  Studien,  IV.  p.  1 sqq.  See  M.  Muller’s  Rig-veda  SamhiiA,  Vol.  III., 
2ud  edition,  p.  33  sqq. 

3 The  Dancer : active  in  battle,  dancer  of  the  war  dance.  Near : ahhijnri : 
or>  up  to  our  kneeB. 

* Sudaksha'e  draught : offered  by  a Rishi  of  that  name. 

; 7 According  to  S&yapa  this  stanza  is  addressed  by  the  Yajamdna  or  sacri- 

j “cer  to  the  Stotar  or  praising  priest,  i&d  he  giveB  an  imperative  sense  to  the 
f indicative,  thou  speedest  down  : ‘ Bring  hither.’ — Wilson. 


238 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK  Vlll 

10  Even  thence,  0 Indra,  come  to  us  with  food  that  gives  a 

hundred  powers, 

With  food  that  gives  a thousand  powers. 

11  We  sought  the  wisdom  of  the  wise.  Sakra,  Kine-giver, 

Thunder-armed  ! 

May  we  with  steeds  o’ercome  in  fight. 

12  We  make  thee,  S itakratu,  find  enjoyment  in  the  songs  we  sing, 
Like  cuttle  in  the  pasture  lands. 

13  For,  Satakratu,  Thunder-armed,  all  that  we  craved,  as  men 

are  wmit, 

All  that  we  hoped,  have  we  attained. 

14  Those,  Son  of  Strength,  are  come  to  thee  who  cherish  wishes 

in  their  hearts : 

0 Indra,  none  cxeelleth  thee. 

15  So,  Hero,  guard  us  with  thy  care,  with  thy  most  liberal 

providence, 

Speedy,  and  terrible  to  foes. 

1G  0 Satakratu  Indra,  now  rejoice  with  that  carouse  of  thine 
Which  is  most  splendid  of  them  all; 

17  Even,  Indra,  that  carouse  which  slays  the  Vritras  best,  most 

widely  famed, 

Best  giver  of  thy  power  and  might. 

18  For  that  which  is  thy  gift  we  know,  true  Soma-driuker, 

Thunder-armed, 

Mighty  One,  amid  all  the  folk. 

19  For  Indra,  Lover  of  Carouse,  loud  be  our  songs  about  the 

juice  : 

Let  poets  sing  the  song  of  praise. 

20  We  summon  Indra  to  the  draught,  in  whom  all  glories  rest, 

in  whom 

The  seven  communities  rejoice. 

21  At  the  Tnkadrukas  the  Gods  span  sacrifice  that  stirs  the 

mind  : 

Let  our  songs  aid  and  prosper  it. 

10  Even  thence:  from  where  thou  art ; from  heaven. 

11  Of  the  wise:  Indra.  Kine-giver : godare  : perhaps,  ‘burster  open  of 
the  cow-stall  ‘ cleaver  of  mountains.’— Wilson 

12  Like  cattle:  as  the  cowherd  refreshes  his  cattle — Sftyana. 

18  Thy  gift : the  wealth  which  thou  givest.  Amid  all  the  folk : among  ah 
the  worshippers  who  offer  thee  Soma. — S&yana. 

20  Seven  communities : sapta  sansadah : probably  = all  the  folk,  in  stanza 
18;  ‘the  seven  associated  priests.’ — Wilson. 

21  At  the  Trikadrukat:  see  VIII.  13.  18,  and  note. 


HYMN  82.]  THE  MIG  VEDA.  230 

22  Let  the  drops  pass  within  thee  as  the  rivers  flow  into  the  sea : 

0 Indra,  naught  excelleth  thee* 

23  Thou,  wakeful  Hero,  by  thy  might  hast  taken  food  of  Soma 

juice, 

Which,  Indra,  is  within  thee  now. 

24  0 Indra,  Vritra-slayer,  let  Soma  be  ready  for  thy  maw, 

The  drops  be  ready  for  thy  forms. 

25  Now  Srutakaksha  sings  his  song  that  cattle  and  the  steed  may 

come, 

That  Iudra’s  very  self  may  come. 

2G  Here,  Indra,  thou  art  ready  by  our  Soma  juices  shed  for  thee, 
Sakra,  at  hand  that  thou  mayst  give. 

27  Even  from  far  away  our  songs  reach  thee,  0 Caster  of  the 

Stone  : 

Miy  we  come  very  close  to  thee. 

28  For  so  thou  art  the  hero’s  Fiiend,  a Hero,  too,  art  thou,  and 

stiong : 

So  may  thine  heart  be  won  to  us. 

29  So  hath  the  offering,  wealthiest  Lord,  been  paid  by  all  the 

worshippers : 

So  dwell  thou,  Indra,  even  with  me. 

3i)  He  not  thou  like  a slothful  priest,  0 Lord  of  spoil  and  wealth  : 
rejoice 

In  tho  pressed  Soma  blent  with  milk. 

31  11  Lidra,  let  not  ill  designs  surround  us  in  the  sunbeams  light : - 
This  may  we  gain  with  thee  for  Friend. 

32  With  thee  to  help  us,  Indra,  let  us  answer  all  our  enemies : 

For  thou  art  ours  and  we  are  thine. 

33  Indra,  the  poets  and  thy  friends,  faithful  to  thee,  shall  loudly  sing 
Thy  praises  as  they  follow  thee. 

HYMN  LXXXII.  Indra. 

tiuRYA,  thou  mountest  up  to  meet  the  Hero  famous  for  hia 
wealth, 

Who  hurls  the  bolt  and  works  for  man : 

2 Him  who  with  might  of  both  his  arms  brake  nine-and-ninety 
castles  down, 

Slew  Vritra  and  smote  Ahi  dead. 

24  Thy  forms:  thy  various  bodies  or  splendours. — S&yana. 

-5  Srutakakska : the  Rishi  of  the  hymn. 

Priest : brahmfl : Brahman  or  praying  priest. 

. M l n the  sunbeams'  light:  as  Indra  stands  in  the  closest  relationship  to 
the  Sun.  , 

2 Nine-and-ninety  castles ; cloud-castles  of  the  demou  Sambara. 


S40  THE  HYMNS  OF  [. BOOK  Vlijt 

3 This  Indra  is  our  gracious  Friend.  He  sends  us  in  a full 

broad  stream 

Riches  in  horses,  kine,  and  corn. 

4 Whatever,  Vritra-slayer  ! thou,  Surya,  hast  risen  upon  to-day, 
That,  Indra,  all  is  in  thy  power. 

5 When,  Mighty  One,  Lord  of  the  brave,  thou  thinkest  thus 

I shall  not  die, 

That  thought  of  thine  is  true  indeed. 

6 Thou,  Indra,  goest  unto  all  Soma  libations  shed  for  thee, 
Both  far  away  and  near  at  hand. 

7 We  make  this  Indra  very  strong  tostrike  the  mighty  Vritra  dead: 
A vigorous  Hero  shall  he  be. 

8 Indra  was  made  for  giving,  set,  most  mighty,  o’er  the  joyous 

draught, 

Bright,  meet  for  Soma,  famed  in  song. 

9 By  song  as  ’twere,  the  powerful  bolt  which  none  may  parry 

was  prepared : 

Lofty,  invincible  he  grew. 

10  Indra,  Song-lover,  lauded,  make  oven  in  the  wilds  fairways  for  us, 
Whenever,  Maghavan,  thou  wilt. 

11  Thou  whose  commandment  and  behest  of  sovran  sway  none 

disregards, 

Neither  audacious  man  nor  God. 

12  And  both  these  Goddesses,  Earth,  Heaven,  Lord  of  the  beau- 

teous helm  ! revere 
Thy  might  which  no  one  may  resist. 

13  Thou  in  the  black  cows  and  the  red  and  in  the  cows  with  spot- 

ted skin 

This  white  milk  hast  deposited. 

14  When  in  their  terror  all  the  Gods  shrank  from  the  Dragon’s 

furious  might, 

Fear  of  the  monster  fell  on  them. 

15  Then  he  was  my  Defender,  then,  Invincible,  whose  foe  is  not 
The  Vritra-slayer  showed  his  might. 

16  Him  your  best  Viitra-slayer,  him  the  famous  Champion  ol 

mankind 

I urge  to  great  munificence, 

8 Was  made : waa  created  by  Pr.ij&pati. — Silyana. 

12  Lord  of  the  beauteous  helm : or,  ‘deity  of  the  haudsome  jaw.’ — Wilson. 

13  In  the  black  cows : cf  I.  62.  9. 

14  The  Dragon  s furious  might : the  fierce  attack  of  the  demon  Ahi.  Q 
the  monster : or,  of  the  wild  beast,  Ahi. 

16  Champion:  1 joined  to  sardham,  as  suggested  in  the  St  Petersburg Lexicon 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


241 


UYMN  82  J 

;7  To  comc»  Milch-landed  ! Many-named ! with  this  same  thought 
that  longs  for  milk, 

Whene’er  tho  Soma  juice  is  shed. 

8 Much- honoured  by  libations,  may  the  Vritra-slayer  wake  for  us  : 
May  Sakra  listen  to  our  prayers. 

9 0 Hero,  with  what  aid  dost  thou  delight  us,  with  what  suc- 

cour bring 

Riches  to  those  who  worship  thee? 

!0  With  whose  libation  joys  the  Strong,  the  Hero  with  his  team 
who  quells 

The  foe,  to  drink  the  Soma  juice? 

21  Rejoicing  in  thy  spirit  bring  thousandfold  opulence  to  us : 
Enrich  thy  votary  with  gifts. 

22  These  juices  with  their  wedded  wives  How  to  enjoyment  lov- 

ingly  : 

To  waters  speeds  the  restless  one. 

23  Presented  strengthening  gifts  have  sent  Iiulra  away  at  sacri- 

fice, 

With  might,  unto  the  cleansing  hath. 

21  These  two  who  share  his  feast,  13  ly  Steeds  with  golden  manes, 
shall  bring  him  to 
The  banquet  that  is  laid  for  him. 

23  For  thee,  0 Lord  of  Light,  are  shed  these  Soma-drops,  and 
grass  is  strewn  : 

Bring  Indra  to  his  worshippers. 

26  Miy  Indra  give  thee  skill  and  lights  of  heaven,  wealth  to  bis 

votary 

And  priests  who  praiso  him  : laud  ye  him. 

27  0 Satukratu,  wondrous  strength  and  all  our  lauds  I bring  to 

thee  : 

Be  gracious  to  thy  worshippers. 


17  To  come:  that  is,  that  thou,  Indra,  maysfc  come.  This  abrupt  change 
1 is  not  uncommon  in  the  Veda. 

lNi^e  wAe<MC(l  wives:  of  the  joma  juices  are  said  to  be  the  two  waters 
^ im  oasatloan/ak  and  ekadhaudh,  used  in  the  Soma  ceremonies.  To  enjoy - 
, to  be  drunk  by  Indra.  To  waters  speeds  the  restless  one : or,  with  Gra«s- 
aim,  ^ iho  lover  of  the  waters  speeds  ’ The  exact  meaning  of  nrchumpnndK 
to  ? am’  ^Afika  deriving  it  from  chain,  to  eat,  and  Mahidhara  fioin  chup, 
Scholl  °u  movd  aluwly*  The  meaning  of  the  .sentence  is,  according  to  the 
to  ^le  ^lme  t,^1°  colK'ludmg  purificatory  ceremony  which  is 

throw110  * en  ors  an<f  emissions  in  the  principal  sacrifice,  the  stale  Soma  is 
11  ln^°  waters.  See  Cowell’s  note  in  Wilson’s  Translation, 
iu  wh  T[lc  dazing  bath : tho  avabhritha,  here,  apparently,  the  bath  or  vessel 
01  Bie  ^°nm  plants  were  riused  and  purified. 


242  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  F///, 

28  Bring  to  us  all  things  excellent,  0 Satakratu,  food  and  Btrengtk; 
For,  Indra,  thou  art  kind  to  us. 

29  0 Satakratu,  bring  to  us  all  blessings,  all  felicity  : 

For,  Indra,  thou  art  kind  to  us. 

30  Bearing  the  Soma  juice  we  call,  best  Vritra-slayer,  unto  thee; 
For,  Indra,  thou  art  kind  to  us. 

31  Come,  Lord  of  rapturous  joys,  to  our  libation  with  thy  Buy 

Steeds,  come 

To  our  libation  with  thy  Steeds. 

32  Known  as  best  Yritia-slajer  erst,  as  Indra  Satakratu,  come 
With  Bay  Steeds  to  the  juice  we  shed. 

33  0 Vritra-slayer,  thou  art  lie  who  drinks  these  drops  of  Soma  ; 

come 

With  Bay  Steeds  to  the  juice  we  shod. 

34  May  Indra  give,  to  aid  us,  wealth  handy  that  rules  the  Skilful 

Ones  : 

Yea,  may  the  Strong  give  potent  wealth. 

HYMN  LXXX1II.  Maruts. 

The  Cow,  the  famous  Mother  of  the  wealthy  Maruts,  poura 
her  milk  : 

Both  horses  of  the  cars  are  yoked, — 

2 Sho  in  whose  bosom  all  the  Cods,  and  Sun  and  Moon  for  men 

to  see, 

Maintain  their  everlasting  Laws. 

3 This  all  the  pious  sing  to  us,  and  sacred  poets  evermore  : 

The  Maruts  to  the  Soma-draught ! 

4 Here  is  the  Soma  ready  pressed  : of  this  the  Maruts  drink,  of 

this 

Self-luminous  the  Asvins  drink. 


34  Hand)/:  ribhu.ni.  That  rules  the  Skilful  Ova:  ribhukshanam.  The 
Strong : v&jt  These  words  are  u.-cd  as  plays  upon  the  names  of  the  Ribhus 
or  as  Grassmann  says,  the  veise  may  have  been  taken  from  a hymn  addressed 
to  the  Ribhus.  ‘ May  Indra  bring  to  us  the  bounteous  ltibhu  Ribhukdiana 
to  partake  of  our  sacrificial  viands  ; may  he,  the  mighty,  biiug  the  mighty 
(Vaja) — Wilson.  Cowe'l  remarks  : ‘ ltibhuk*ha;a  was  the  eldest  and  Vrfja 
the  youngest  of  the  three  brothers.  The  llibhua  have  a share  in  the  evening 
libation  between  Prajftpati,  and  Savitri,  see  Ait.  iiirihm.  iii.  30.  This  verse 
is  addressed  to  the  Ribhus  in  the  evening  libation  on  the  ninth  day  of  the 
Dwddasdha  ceremony  (t6.  v.  21).’ 

1 The  Cow : Prisni. 

2 In  whose  bosom:  *ia  whose  presence.’— Wilson. 

The  Maruts:  are  to  be  invoked,  understood. 


THE  R1QVEDA . 


IYMN  84.1 


243 


5 Of  this,  moreover,  purified,  set  in  three  places,  procreant, 
Drink  Vanina,  Mitra,  Aryamnn. 

C And  Indra,  like  the  Herald  Priest,  desirous  of  the  milky  juice, 
At  early  morn  will  quaff  thereof. 

7 When  have  the  Princes  gleamed  and  shone  through  waters  as 

through  troops  of  foes? 

When  hasten  they  whose  might  is  pure? 

8 Whatf  favour  do  I claim  this  day  of  you  great  Deities,  you 

who  arc 

Wundrously  splendid  in  yourselves? 

0 I call,  to  drink  the  Soma,  those  Maruts  who  spread  all  realms 

of  earth 

And  luminous  regions  of  the  sky. 

10  You,  even  such,  pure  in  your  might,  you,  0 yo  Maruts,  I in- 

voke 

From  heaven  to  drink  this  Soma  juice. 

11  The  Maruts,  those  who  have  sustained  and  propped  the 

heavens  and  earth  apart, 

I  call  to  drink  this  Soma  juice. 

12  That  vigorous  baud  of  Maruts  that  abidetli  in  the  mountains,  I 
Invoke  to  drink  this  Soma  juice. 

HYMN  LXXXIV.  India. 

Song-lover  ! like  a charioteer  come  songs  to  thee  when  Soma 
flows. 

0 Indra,  they  have  called  to  thee  as  mother-kine  uuto  their 
calves. 

2 Bright  juices  hitherward  have  sped  thee,  Iudra,  Lover  of  the 

Song, 

Drink,  Indra,  of  this  flowing  sap  : in  every  house  *tia  set  for  tbeo. 

3 Drink  Soma  to  inspirit  thee,  juice,  Indra,  which  the  Falcon 

brought : 

For  thou  art  King  and  Sovran  Lord  of  all  the  families  of  men. 

1 0 Indra,  hear  TiraschPs  call,  the  call  of  him  who  serveth  theo. 
Satisfy  him  with  wealth  of  kiue  and  valiant  otispring : Great 

art  thou. 

5 Set  in  three  places : first  in  a trough  ; thou  in  a stiaiuing-cloth  ; then  in 
* thiid  trough  or  vessel  called  PdUbhrit.  Procreant:  granting  progeny  to 
the  worshipper. 

6 The  Herald  Priest : Agni. 

1 Like  a charioteer : straight  and  swift  to  their  object. 

3 Which  the  Falcon  brought:  see  1.  80.  2,  and  93.  6. 


2 44  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VUl. 

5 For  he,  0 Indra,  hath  produced  for  thee  the  newest  gladden- 

ing song, 

A hymn  that  springs  from  careful  thought,  ancient,  and  full 
of  sacred  truth.  ^ 

6 That  Indra  will  we  laud  whom  songs  and  hymns  of  praise  have 

magnified. 

Striving  to  win,  wo  celebrate  his  many  deeds  of  hero  might. 

7 Como  now  and  let  uh  glorify  pure  Indra  with  pure  Sama  hymn. 
Let  the  pure  milky  draught  delight  him  strengthened  by  pme 

songs  of  praise. 

8 0 Indra,  come  thou  puro  to  us,  with  pure  assistance,  pure  thy- 

self. 

Pure,  send  thou  riches  down  to  us,  and,  meet  for  Soma,  pure, 
be  glad. 

9 0 Indra,  pure,  vouchsafe  us  wealth,  and,  pure,  onrich  the 

worshipper. 

Pure,  thou  dost  striko  the  Vrilras  dead,  and  strivest,  pure, 
to  win  tbo  spod. 

HYMN  LXXXV.  Indra 

For  him  the  Mornings  made  their  courses  longer,  and  Night; 

with  pleasant  voices  spake  to  Indra. 

For  him  the  Floods  stood  still,  the  Seven  Mothers,  Stream 
easy  for  the  heroes  to  pass  over. 

2 The  Darter  penetrated,  though  in  trouble,  thrice-sovcn  clos( 

pressed  ridges  of  the  mountains. 

Neither  might  God  nor  mortal  man  accomplish  what  the  Stron 
Hero  wrought  in  full-grown  vigour. 

3 The  mightiest  force  is  Indra’s  bolt  of  iron  when  firmly  graspc 

in  both  the  arms  of  Indra. 

Ilis  head  and  mouth  have  powers  that  pass  all  others,  and  a 
his  people  hasten  near  to  listen. 

5 Newest ancient  ‘ recent  in  form  and  exprestsiou,  but  ancient 

substance.  See  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  III.  238,  239. 

7 Pure  fmlra  with  pure  S4ina  hi/ inns  : according  to  Sftyana,  ‘ Indra.  purifi 
with  pure  Sama-hymns,’ from  the  pollution  he  had  incurred  by  killing  t 
Biahman  Viitra.  See  Wilson's  Translation,  note, 

1 The  heroes:  perhaps  Turvasa  and  Yadu— Ludwig. 

2 The  Darter  of  the  thundeiholt  ; Indra.  Though  in  trouble  . because 
bad  none  to  aid  him.  What  the  thrice-seven  close-pressed  ridges  of  themoi tutu 
aie,  is  uncertain  See  Wilson’s  Translation,  note.  Lndwig  thinks  that  1 2 3 
battle  of  the  Sun  with  the  demons  of  winter  may  be  meant. 

3 To  listen : to  the  commands  which  issue  from  his  mouth. 


HUm\  oo.j 


L tit i iCiCr  VtiVA.  } 


•J45 

4 I count  thee  as  the  Holiest  of  the  Holy,  the  caster-down  of 

what  hath  ne’er  been  shaken. 

I count  thee  as  the  Banner  of  the  heroes,  I count  thee  as  the 
Chief  of  all  men  living. 

5 What  timo,  0 Indra,  in  thine  arms  thou  tookest  thy  wildly 

rushing  bolt  to  slay  the  Dragon, 

• The  mountains  roared,  the  cattle  loudly  bellowed,  the  Brah- 
mans with  their  hymns  drew  nigh  to  Indra. 

G Let  us  praise  him  who  made  these  worlds  and  creatures,  all 
things  that  after  him  sprang  into  being. 

May  we  win  Mitra  with  our  songs,  and  Indra,  and  wait  upon 
our  Lord  with  adoration. 

< Flying  in  terror  from  the  snort  of  Vritra,  all  Deities  who  were 
thy  friends  forsook  thee. 

So,  Indra,  be  thy  friendship  with  the  Maruts : in  all  these 
battles  thou  shalt  be  the  victor. 

8 Thrico-sixty  Maruts,  waxing  strong,  were  with  thee,  like  piles 

of  beaming  light,  worthy  of  worship. 

We  come  to  thee  : grant  us  a happy  portion.  Let  us  adore 
thy  might  with  this  oblation. 

9 A sharpened  weapon  is  the  host  of  Maruts.  Who,  Indra,  dares 

withstand  thy  bolt  of  thunder  ? 

Weaponless  are  the  Asuras,  the  godless  : scatter  them  with 
thy  wheel,  Impetuous  Hero. 

10  To  him  the  Strong  and  Mighty,  most  auspicious,  send  up  the 

beauteous  hymn  for  sake  of  cattle. 

Lay  on  his  body  many  songs  for  Indra  invoked  with  song,  for 
will  not  he  regard  them? 

11  To  him,  tho  Mighty,  who  accepts  laudation,  send  forth  thy 

thought  as  by  a boat  o’er  rivers, 

Stir  with  thy  hymn  the  body  of  the  Famous  and  Dearest  One, 
for  will  not  he  regard  it? 

12  Servo  him  with  gifts  of  thine  which  Indra  welcomes : praise 

with  fair  praise,  invite  him  with  thine  homage. 


Wildly  rushing  • this  is  M Muller'*  translation  of  madachyulam.  It 
, be  rendered  also  ‘sped  in  tliy  rapturous  joy.’  * ltauschbeschloumgten.’ — 
The  Dragon : Alii. 

7 With  the  Maruts  : as  they  alone  stood  by  him  in  the  conflict. 

• thrice- sixty  ; or  sixty-three,  according  to  Sftynria,  nine  companies  consist- 
o ot  seven  each.  See  Cowell’s  note  in  Wilson's  Tianslation  Like  piles  of 
; 1 like  cows  gathered  together.’ — Wilson  ; ‘ like  morning  stars.* 
wsmann.  I have  followed  Ludwig. 

With  thy  wheel : or  discus,  a sharp-edged  quoit  usea  as  a weapon  o war. 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


246 


[BOOK  Via 


Draw  near,  0 singer,  and  refrain  from  outcry.  Make  thy  voice 
heard,  for  will  not  ho  regard  it  ? 

13  The  Black  Drop  sank  In  Ansumati’s  bosom,  advancing  with 

ten  thousand  round  about  it. 

Indra  with  might  longed  for  it  as  it  panted  : the  hero-hearted 
laid  aside  his  weapons. 

14  1 saw  tho  Drop  in  the  far  distance  moving,  on  the  slope  bank 

of  Ansumati’s  river. 

Like  a black  cloud  that  sank  into  tho  water.  Heroes,  I send 
you  forth.  Go,  fight  in  battle. 

15  And  then  the  Drop  in  Ansimviti’s  bosom,  splendid  with  light, 

assumed  its  proper  body  ; 

And  Indra,  with  Brihaspati  to  aid  him,  conquered  the  godless 
tribes  that  came  against  him. 

16  Then,  at  thy  birth,  thou  wast  tho  foeman,  Indra,  of  those  tho 

seven  who  ne’er  had  met  a rival. 

The  hidden  Pair,  the  Heaven  and  Karth,  thou  foundost,  and 
to  the  mighty  worlds  thou  gavest  pleasure. 

17  So,  Thunder-armed ! thou  with  thy  bolt  of  thunder  didst 

boldly  smite  that  power  which  none  might  equal ; 

With  weapons  broughtost  low  the  might  of  Sushna,  and,  Indra, 
foundest  by  thy  strength  tho  cattle. 

18  Then  wast  thou,  Chieftain  of  all  living  mortals,  tho  very 

mighty  slayer  of  the  Vritras. 

Then  didst  thou  sot  the  obstructed  rivers  flowing,  and  win 
tho  floods  that  were  enthralled  by  Dasas. 

19  Most  wiso  is  he,  rejoicing  in  libations,  splendid  as  day,  resist 

loss  in  his  anger. 

He  only  doth  great  deeds,  the  only  Horo,  sole  Vritra-slayei 
he,  with  none  beside  him. 


12  Draw  near , 0 singer,  and  ref  rain  from  outcry ; * 0 priest,  adorn  thysel 
grieve  not  (for  poverty).’ — Wilson. 

13  The  Black  Drop : tho  darkened  Moon.  Ansumatt:  a mystical  river  q 
the  air  into  which  the  Moon  dips  to  recover  its  vanished  light.  Ten  thousand 
probably,  demons  of  darkness  ; the  numerals  are  without  a substantive.  At « 
panted : . while  striving  against  its  assailants.  Laid  aside  his  weapons : afte 
conquering  the  demons  and  restoring  the  darkened  Moon. 

14  Indra  addresses  the  Maruts. 

SAyana  explains  stanzas  13—15  differently,  in  accordance  with  a legein 
which  was  probably  suggested  by  this  passage.  He  takes  drapsdh  krishndl 
black  drop,  to  mea*i  ‘ the  swift  moving  Krishnah,’  an  Asura  or  demon  wh 
with  teu  thousand  of  his  kind  had  occupied  the  banks  of  tho  river  Ansumat 
which,  he  says,  is  the  Yamuu&  or  Jumna,  and  was  there  defeated  by  InJu 
Brihaspati,  and  the  Maruts.  See  Cowell’s  note  in  Wilson’s  Translation. 

16  The  seven;  Krishna,  Vritra,  Namuchi,  Sambara,  and  others*— S&ya9*' 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


247 


BYMX  86.] 

20  Indra  is  Vritra’s  slayer,  man’s  sustainer  : ho  must  be  called; 

with  fair  praise  let  us  call  him. 

Maghavan  is  our  Helper,  our  Protector,  giver  of  spoil  and 
wealth  to  make  us  famous. 

21  This  Indra,  Vritra-slayer,  this  Ribhukshan,  even  at  hiB  birth, 

was  meet  for  invocation. 

Doer  of  many  deeds  for  man’s  advantage,  liko  Soma  quaffed, 
for  friends  we  must  invoke  him. 

HYMN  LXXXVI. 

0  Indra,  Lord  of  Light,  what  joys  thou  broughtest  from  the 
Asuras, 

Prosper  therewith,  0 Maghavan,  him  who  lauds  that  deed, 
and  those  whose  grass  is  trimmed  for  thee. 

2 The  unwasting  share  of  steeds  and  kine  which,  Indra,  thou 

hast  fast  secured, 

Grant  to  the  worshipper  who  presses  Soma  and  gives  guerdon, 
not  unto  the  churl. 

3 The  ritclcss,  godless  man  who  sleeps,  0 Indra,  his  unbroken 

sleep, — 

May  ho  by  following  his  own  devices  die.  Hide  from  him 
wealth  that  nourishes. 

4 Whether,  0 Sakra,  thou  be  far,  or,  Vritra-slayer,  near  at  hand, 
Thence  by  heaven-reaching  songs  he  who  hath  pressed  the 

juice  invites  thee  with  thy  long-maned  Steeds. 

5 Whether  thou  art  in  heaven’s  bright  sphere,  or  in  the  basin  of 

the  sea ; 

Whether,  chief  Vritra-slayer,  in  some  place  on  earth,  or  in  the 
firmament,  approach. 

G Thou  Soma-driuker,  Lord  of  Strength,  besido  our  flowing 
Soma  juice 

Delight  us  with  thy  bounty  rich  in  pleasantness,  0 Indra,  with 
abundant  wealth. 

7 0 Indra,  turn  us  not  away : be  the  companion  of  onr  feast. 
For  thou  art  our  protection,  yea,  thou  art  our  kin : 0 Indra, 

turn  us  not  away. 

8 Sit  down  with  us,0  Indra, sit  beside  the  juice  to  drink  the  meath. 
Show  forth  great  favour  to  the  singer,  Maghavan  ; Indra,  with 

us,  beside  the  juice. 


21  Ribhukshan ; or,  Lord  of  Ribhus.  • 

1 Joys : riches.— S4y ana.  From  the  A suras : from  the  powerful  JMkahasas. 

2 (Jives  guerdon : liberally  rewards  the  priests. 


243  TIIE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Vlii 

9  0 Caster  of  the  Stone,  nor  Gods  nor  mortals  have  attained  to 
thee. 

Thou  in  thy  might  surpassest  all  that  hath  been  made  : the 
Gods  have  not  attained  to  thee. 

10  Of  one  accord  they  made  and  formed  for  kingship  India,  the 

Hero  who  in  all  encounters  overcomcth, 

Most  eminent  for  power,  destroyer  in  the  conflict,  iierce  and 
exceeding  strong,  stalwart  and  full  of  vigour. 

11  Bards  joined  in  song  to  India  so  that  he  might  drink  the 

Soma  juice, 

The  Lord  of  Light,  that  he  whose  laws  stand  fast  might  aid 
with  power  and  with  the  help  he  gives. 

12  The  holy  sages  form  a ring,  looking  and  singing  to  the  Ilam 
Inciters,  full  of  vigour,  not  to  be  deceived,  are  with  the  chant 

ers,  nigh  to  hear. 

13  Loudly  I call  that  Indra,  Maghavan  the  Mighty,  who  cvermor 

possesses  power,  ever  resistless. 

Holy,  most  liberal,  may  he  lead  us  on  to  riches,  and,  Tlumdei 
armed,  make  all  our  pathways  pleasant  for  us. 

14  Thou  knowest  well,  0 Sakra,  thou  Most  Potent,  with  th 

strength,  Indra,  to  destroy  these  castles. 

Before  thee,  Thunder-armed!  all  beings  tremble  : the  heaven 
and  earth  before  thee  shake  with  terror. 

15  May  thy  truth,  Indra,  Wondrous  Hero!  be  my  guard  : bca 

me  o’er  much  woe,  Thunderer  ' ns  over  floods. 

When,  Indra,  wilt  thou  honour  us  with  opulence,  all-nourisl 
ing  and  much-to-be-desired,  0 King? 

HYMN  LXXXVIL  imir. 

To  Indra  sing  a Satna  hymn,  a lofty  song  to  Lofty  Sage, 

To  him  who  guards  the  Law,  inspired,  and  fain  for  praise. 

2 Thou,  Indra,  art  the  Conqueror : thou  gavest  splendour  t 

the  Sun. 

Maker  of  all  things,  thou  art  Mighty  and  All-God. 

3 Radiant  with  light  thou  wentest  to  the  sky,  the  luminoi 

realm  of  heaven. 

The  Deities,  Indra,  strove  to  win  thee  for  their  Friend. 

4 Come  unto  ns,  O Indra,  dent*,  stdl  conquering,  unconccnlabl 
Vast  as  a mountain  spread  on  all  sides,  Lord  of  Heaven. 

12  The  Ram:  Tqdni.  See  I.  51.  1,  and  VI LI  2.  40.  Inciters:  apparent! 
the  Gods  themselves. 

2 AH -God:  visraderah:  * the  lord  of  all  the  gods,’ — Wilson. 

4 Unconceatable ; as  the  Sun-God. 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


249 


0MX  88.] 

§ 0 truthful  Soma-drinker,  thou  art  mightier  than  both  the 
worlds. 

Thou  strengthened  him  who  pours  libation,  Lord  of  Heaven. 

6 For  thou  art  he,  0 Lidra,  who  stormeth  all  castles  of  the  foe, 
Slayer  of  Dasyus,  man’s  Supporter,  Lord  of  Heaven. 

7 Now  have  we,  Indra,  Friend  of  Song,  sent  our  great  wishes 

forth  to  time, 

Coming  like  floods  that  follow  floods. 

8 As  rivers  swell  the  ocean, so,  Hero, our  prayers  increase  thy  might, 
Though  of  thyself,  O Thunderer,  waxing  day  by  day. 

9 With  holy  song  they  bind  to  tho  broad  wide-yoked  car  the  Bay 

Steeds  of  the  rapid  God, 

Bearers  of  Indra,  yoked  by  word. 

10  0 Indra,  bring  great  strength  to  us,  bring  valour,  Satakratu, 

thou  most  active,  bring 
A hero  conqueiing  in  war. 

11  For,  gracious  Satakratu,  thou  Last  ever  been  a Mother  and  a 

Sire  to  us, 

So  now  for  bliss  we  pray  to  thee. 

12  To  thee,  Strong,  Much-invoked,  who  showest  forth  thy  strength, 

0 Satakratu,  do  I speak  : 

So  grant  thou  us  heroic  strength. 

HYMN  LX XX VII I.  Indra. 

0 thundereii,  zealous  worshippers  gave  thee  drink  this  time 
yesteiday. 

So,  Indra,  listen  here  to  those  who  bring  the  laud  : come  near 
unto  our  dwelling-place. 

2 Lord  of  B iy  Steeds,  fair-helmed,  rejoice  thee : this  wo  crave. 

Here  the  disposers  wait  oil  thee. 

Thy  loftiest,  glories  claim  our  lauds  beside  the  juice,  0 Indra, 
Lover  of  the  Song. 

3 Turning,  as  ’twerc,  to  meet  the  Sun,  enjoy  from  Indra  all  good 

tilings. 

When  lie  who  will  be  born  is  born  with  power  we  look  to  trea- 
sures as  our  heiitage. 

7 Com  iiuj  hie.  floods : m crowds  But  the  half-line  is  very  obscure.  ‘As 
men  going  by  water  (splash  their  friends)  with  handfuls.’ — Wilson. 

10  ^4  hero  : an  heroic  son.  

2 TCt spacers  : tho  priests  who  order  religious  ceremonies. 

1 rT‘s  stanza  is  difficult  and  obscure.  Mahtdhara’s  explanation  is  : ‘The 
gathering  (rays)  proceeding  to  the  sun  distribute  all  Indra’s  treasures  (to 
uing  bemgs,  sc.  as  rain,  corn,  etc.) ; may  we  too  by  our  power  leave  those 
tenures  as  an  inheritance  to  him  who  has  been  or  will  be  born.’  See  Cowell's 
note  111  Wilson’s  Translation , 


250  THE  117 M NS  OF  [BOOK  V] // 

4 Praise  him  who  sends  us  wealth,  whose  bounties  injure  none 

good  are  the  gifts  which  Indra  grants. 

He  is  not  wroth  with  one  who  satisfies  his  wish  : he  turns  hi 
mind  to  giving  boons. 

5 Thou  in  thy  battles,  Indra,  art  subduer  of  all  hostile  bands. 
Father  art  thou,  all-conquering,  cancelling  the  curse,  tho 

victor  of  the  vanquisher. 

6 The  Earth  and  Heaven  clung  close  to  thy  victorious  might, , 

to  their  calf  two  mother-cows. 

When  thou  attackest  Vritra  all  the  hostile  bands  shrink  ai 
faint,  Indra,  at  thy  wiuth, 

7 Bring  to  your  aid  the  Eternal  One,  who  shoots  and  nouo  m 

shoot  at  him, 

Inciter,  swift,  victorious,  best  of  Charioteers,  Tugrya’s  uuvf 
quished  Stiengthener ; 

8 Arranger  of  things  uuarraugcd,  e’en  Satakratu,  sourco 

might, 

Indra,  the  Friend  of  all,  for  succour  we  invoke,  Guardiai 
treasure,  sending  wealth. 

HYMN  LXXXIX.  Indra. 

I  move  before  thee  here  present  in  person,  and  all  tho  Dei 
follow  behind  me. 

When,  Indra,  thou  securest  mo  my  portion,  with  mo  t 
shalt  perforin  heroic  actions. 

2 Tho  food  of  mcath  in  foremost  place  I give  thee,  thy  S 

shall  be  pressed,  thy  share  appointed. 

Thou  on  my  right  shalt  be  my  friend  and  comrade  : ! 
shall  we  two  smite  dead  full  many  a foeman. 

3 Striving  for  strength  bring  forth  a laud  to  Indra,  a trut 

hymn  if  he  in  truth  cxisteth. 

One  and  another  say,  There  is  no  Indra.  Who  hath  be 
him  ? Whom  then  shall  we  honour  1 


6 As  to  their  calf : or  the  translation  may  be,  as  sire  and  mother  to 
child. 

7 Tugrya  is  Bhujyu,  the  son  of  Tugra.  Seo  Vol.  I , Index. 

8 Arranger  of  things  unnrranged : ‘ tho  consecrator  of  others  but  b 
consecrated  by  none.’ — Wilson. 

1 This  stanza  is  spoken  by  Agni. 

2 Indra  answers. 

3 Addressed  to  tho  priests.  One  and  another : nima  : but  accord 
SAyaua,  Noma  is  the  name  of  tho  llishi.  ‘Noma  Bays,  “verily  there 
Indra.”  ’ — Wilson. 


THE  RIO  VEDA, 


YMN  89.] 


m 


1 Here  am  I,  look  upon  mo  here,  0 singer.  All  that  cxistcth  I 
surpass  in  greatness. 

The  Holy  Law’s  commandments  make  me  mighty.  Rending 
with  strength  I rend  the  worlds  asunder. 

5 When  the  Law’s  lovers  mounted  and  approached  me  as  I sate 
lone  upon  the  dear  sky’s  summit, 

Then  spake  niy  spirit  to  the  heart  within  me,  My  friends  have 
cried  unto  me  with  their  children. 

> All  these  thy  deeds  must  be  declared  at  Soma-fcasts,  wrought, 
Indra,  Bounteous  Lord,  for  him  who  sheds  the  juice, 

When  thou  didst  open  wealth  heaped  up  by  many,  brought 
from  far  away  to  Sarabha,  the  Rishi’s  kin. 

Now  run  ye  forth  your  several  ways  : he  is  not  here  who  kept 
you  back. 

For  hath  not  Indra  sunk  his  bolt  deep  down  in  Vritra’s  vital 
parti 

] On-rushing  with  the  speed  of  thought  within  the  iron  fort  he 
pressed  : 

The  Falcon  wont  to  heaven  and  brought  the  Soma  to  the 
Thunderer. 

) Deep  in  the  ocean  lies  the  bolt  with  waters  compassed  round 
about, 

Aud  in  continuous  onward  flow  tho  floods  their  tribute  bring 
to  it. 

) When,  uttering  words  which  no  one  comprehended,  Vak, 
Queen  of  Gods,  tho  Gladdencr,  was  seated, 

Tho  heaven’s  four  regions  drew  forth  drink  and  vigour  : now 
whither  hath  her  noblest  portion  vanished  1 


4 Indra  speaks  this  and  the  following  stanza. 

5 The  Law's  levers  : the  priests  who  in  sacrifice  ascend  to  Indra.  According 
1 Hillebrandt  (F.  Mytholoyic , I.  354),  the  Maruts  ; sUumantuK  meaning  nob 
Vlth  their  children,’  but  ‘ with  the  Infant  (Soma).’ 

6 The  priest  addresses  Indra.  S trabha : a ltishi  of  that  name.— Sfty ana. 
ho  original  hymn  appears  to  end  with  this  stanza. 

7 Addressed  to  the  waters  of  heaven  after  Indra’s  battle  witli  Vritra. 

® ^C:  the  Falcon.  The  iron  fort : the  stronghold  or  cloud  in  which  tho 
or  ambrosial  rain  was  iraprisoued.  Cf.  IV.  27.  2 
® ^ n ^,e  ocean  : as  produced  naturally  in  tho  sea  of  air. 

^ This  and  the  following  stanza  have  no  apparent  connexion  with  what 
recedes.  Vdk:  or  V&ch,  vox,  voice,  or  Speech  personified.  Her  unintcl- 
B1  le  words  are  the  thunder.  Her  noblest  portion ; according  to  S&yana,  the 
» which  follows  thunder.  Or  the  thunder  itself  may  be  intended.  So© 
.J  8 n°fo  in  Wilson’s  Translation*  IF«m  seated : at  tho  sacrifice  offered 


250  TUB  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Via 

4 Praise  him  who  sends  us  wealth,  whose  bounties  injure  none 

good  are  the  gifts  which  Indra  grants. 

He  is  not  wroth  with  one  who  satisfies  his  wish  : he  turns  hi 
mind  to  giving  boons. 

5 Thou  in  thy  battles,  Indra,  art  subduer  of  all  hostile  bands. 
Father  art  thou,  all-conquering,  cancelling  the  cuise,  the 

victor  of  the  vanquisher. 

6 The  Earth  and  Heaven  clung  close  to  thy  victorious  might, 

to  their  calf  two  mother-cows. 

When  thou  attackest  Vritra  all  the  hostile  bands  shrink  a> 
faint,  Indra,  at  thy  wrath. 

7 Bring  to  your  aid  the  Eternal  One,  who  shoots  and  nouo  no 

shoot  at  him, 

Inciter,  swift,  victorious,  best  of  Charioteers,  Tugrya’a  unv 
quished  Stieugthcuor ; 

8 Arranger  of  things  unarranged,  o’ou  Satakratu,  source 

might, 

Indra,  the  Friend  of  nil,  for  succour  we  invoke,  Guardiai 
treasure,  sending  wealth. 

HYMN  LXXXIX.  Indra. 

I  move  before  thee  here  present  in  person,  and  all  the  Dei 
follow  behind  me. 

When,  Indra,  thou  securest  me  my  portion,  with  mo  t 
shalt  perform  heroic  actions. 

2 The  food  of  mcath  in  foremost  place  I give  thee,  thy  S 

shall  be  pressed,  thy  share  appointed. 

Thou  on  my  right  shalt  be  my  friend  and  comrade  : ! 
shall  wc  two  smite  dead  full  many  a foeman. 

3 Striving  for  strength  bring  forth  a laud  to  Indra,  a trut 

hymn  if  he  in  truth  existeth. 

One  and  another  say,  There  is  no  Indra.  Who  hath  be 
him  ? Whom  then  shall  we  honour  ? 


6 As  to  their  calf:  or  the  translation  may  be,  as  sire  and  mother  to 
child. 

7 Tugvya  is  Bhujyu,  the  son  of  Tugra.  Seo  Vol.  I , Index. 

8 Arranger  of  things  unarranged : ‘ the  consecrator  of  others  but  h 
consecrated  by  none.’ — Wilson. 

1 This  stanza  is  spoken  by  Agni. 

2 Indra  answers. 

3 Addressed  to  the  priests.  One  and  another : n6ma : but  accord 
SAyaua,  Neuu  is  the  name  of  the  Rishi.  * Noma  says,  “ verily  there 
Indra.”  ’ — Wilson. 


THE  RIO  FED  A, 


ryjfV  80.] 


$51 


i Hero  am  I,  look  Upon  me  here,  0 singer.  All  that  existeth  I 
surpass  in  greatness. 

The  Holy  Law’s  commandments  make  mo  mighty.  Rending 
with  strength  I rend  the  worlds  asunder. 

5 When  the  Law’s  lovers  mounted  and  approached  mo  as  I sate 
lone  upon  the  dear  sky’s  summit, 

Then  spake  my  spirit  to  the  heart  within  me,  My  friends  have 
cried  unto  me  with  their  children. 

3 All  these  thy  deeds  must  be  declared  at  Soma-feasts,  wrought, 
Indra,  Bounteous  Lord,  for  him  who  sheds  the  juice, 

When  thou  didst  open  wealth  heaped  up  by  many,  brought 
from  far  away  to  Sarabba,  the  Rishi’s  kin. 

1 Now  run  ye  forth  your  several  ways  : he  is  not  here  who  kept 
you  back. 

For  hath  not  Indra  sunk  his  bolt  deep  down  in  Yritra’s  vital 
part  ? 

3 On-rushing  with  the  speed  of  thought  within  the  iron  fort  he 
pressed  : 

The  Falcon  wont  to  heaven  and  brought  the  Soma  to  the 
Thunderer. 

9 Deep  in  the  ocean  lies  the  bolt  with  waters  compassed  round 
about, 

Aud  in  continuous  onward  flow  the  floods  their  tribute  bring 
to  it. 

0 When,  uttering  words  which  no  one  comprehended,  Vak, 
Queen  of  Gods,  the  Gladdencr,  was  seated, 

The  heaven’s  four  regions  drew  forth  drink  and  vigour  : now 
whither  hath  her  noblest  portion  vanished? 


4 Indra  speaks  this  and  the  following  stanza. 

| 5 Tke  Law’s  lovers  : the  priests  who  in  sacrifice  ascend  to  Indra.  According 
Hillebrandt  (F.  Mytholoyic,  I.  354),  the  Maruts  ; meaning  not 

vdh  their  children,’  but  ‘with  the  Infant  (Soma).’ 

6 Tlio  priest  addresses  Indra.  Sirabha:  a Rishi  of  that  name. — SAyana, 
10  ongm,d  hymn  appears  to  end  .vith  this  stanza. 

7 Addressed  to  the  waters  of  heaven  after  Indra’s  battle  with  Yritra. 

® ‘ the  Falcon.  The  iron  fort : the  stronghold  or  cloud  in  which  the 

ama  or  ambrosial  rain  was  imprisoned.  Cf.  IV.  27.  2 
9 In  the  ocean  : as  produced  naturally  in  the  sea  of  air. 
h)  This  and  the  follow  ing  stanza  have  no  apparent  connexion  with  what 
ecedoa,  Vdk;  or  V^ch,  vox,  voice,  or  Speooh  personified.  Her  unintel- 
B1  J o words  are  the  thunder.  Her  noblest  portion  : according  to  S&yana,  the 
iiw  V,,*1  f°  flows  thunder.  Or  the  thunder  itself  may  be  intruded.  See 
^ 1 a note  in  Wilson’s  Translation,  Waa  seated : at  the  sacrifice  offered 


252 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK  VUi 

11  The  Deities  generated  Vak  the  Goddess,  and  animals  of  every 

figure  speak  her. 

May  she,  the  Gladdencr,  yielding  food  and  vigour,  the  Milch- 
cow  Vak,  approach  us  meetly  lauded. 

12  Step  forth  with  wider  st ride,  my  comrade  Vishnu;  make  room 

Dyaiis,  for  the  leaping  of  the  lightning. 

Let  us  slay  Vritra,  let  us  free  the  rivers  : let  them  flow  loosed 
at  the  command  of  India. 

HYMN  XC.  Various. 

Yea,  specially  that  mortal  man  hath  toiled  for  service  of  the 
Gods, 

Who  quickly  hath  brought  near  Mitra  and  Vanina  to  share 
his  sacrificial  gifts. 

2 Supreme  in  sovran  power,  far-sighted,  Chiefs  and  Kings,  most 

swift  to  hear  fiom  far  away, 

Both,  wondrously,  set  them  in  motion  as  with  arms,  in  com 
pany  with  Suryids  beams. 

3 The  rapid  messenger  who  runs  before  you,  Mitra-Varuna,  w'itl 

iron  head,  swift  to  the  draught, 

4 He  whom  no  man  may  question,  none  may  summon  back,  \vh< 

stands  not  still  for  colloquy, — 

From  hostile  clash  with  him  keep  ye  us  safe  this  day;  kcoj 
us  in  safety  with  your  arms. 

5 To  Aryaman  and  Mitra  sing  a reverent  song,  0 pious  one, 

A pleasant  hymn  that  shall  protect  to  Varuna  : sing  forth 
laud  unto  the  Kings. 

G The  true,  Red  Treasure  they  have  sent,  ono  only  Soil  born  ( 
the  Three. 

They,  the  Immortal  Ones,  never  deceived,  survey  the  familic 
of  mortal  men. 

7 My  songs  are  lifted  up,  and  acts  most  splendid  are  to  be  pei 
formed. 

Come  hither,  ye  Nasatyas,  with  accordant  mind,  to  meet  an 
to  enjoy  my  gifts. 

11  Speak  her  : ai  ticuktely-speakiug  men  and  lower  animals  all  derive  the 
voices  from  her. 

12  This  stanza,  which  is  out  of  place  here,  is  spoken  by  Indra  when  he 
about  to  attack  Yiitra.  See  IV.  18  11 

3 The  rapid  messenger  : the  lightning,  as  one  of  the  forms  of  Agni. 

6 The  true,  Red  Treasure : the  Sun.  The  Three:  heaven,  mid-air,  and  ead 


THE  RIO  FED  A. 


253 


YMX  90.] 

t Lords  of  great  woalth,  when  we  invoke  your  bounty  which  no 
demon  checks, 

Both  of  you,  furthering  our  eastward-offered  praise,  come,  Chiefs 
whom  Jamadagni  lauds  ! 

) Come,  Vayu,  drawn  by  fair  hymns,  to  our  sacrifice  that  reaches 
heaven. 

Poured  on  the  middle  of  the  straining-cloth,  and  cooked,  this 
bright  drink  hath  been  offered  thee. 

) He  comes  by  stniightest  paths,  as  ministering  Priest,  to  taste 
the  sacrificial  gifts. 

Then,  Lord  of  harnessed  teams  ! drink  of  the  twofold  draught, 
bright  Soma  mingled  with  the  milk. 

1 Verily,  Stirya,  thou  art  great;  truly,  Aditya,  thou  art  great. 

As  thou  art  groat  indeed,  thy  greatness  is  admired  : yea,  verily, 

thou,  God,  art  great. 

2 Yea,  Surya,  thou  art  great  in  fame : thou  evermore,  0 God, 

art  great. 

Thou  by  thy  greatness  art  tho  Gods’  High  Priest,  divine,  far- 
spread  unconquerable  light. 

3 She  yonder,  bending  lowly  down,  clothed  in  red  hues  and  rich 

in  rays, 

Is  seen,  advancing  as  it  were  with  various  tints,  amid  the  ten 
suiTouudiug  arms. 

[ Past  and  gone  are  three  mortal  generations:  the  fourth  and 
last  into  the  Sun  hath  entered. 

He  mid  tho  worlds  his  lofty  place  hath  taken.  Into  green 
plants  is  gone  the  Purifying. 

15  The  Rudi-as’  Mother,  Daughter  of  tho  Vasus,  centre  of  nectar, 
tho  Adityas’  Sister — 

To  folk  who  understand  will  I proclaim  it — injure  not  Aditi, 
the  Cow,  the  sinless. 

13  She  yonder:  Ushas  or  Dawn.  The  ten  surrounding  arms:  the  ten 
regions  of  the  woild. 

14  Three  mortal  generations  : a '■cording  to  tho  legend,  Prajrtpati  produced 
in  succession  three  kinds  of  eicaturcs  who  all  died.  The  fourth  generation 
Ihod  and  enjoyed  the  light  and  warmth  of  the  Sun.  See  Cowell  a note  in 
Wilson's Translation,  or  Satapatha- Bui/unana,  If.  5.  1.  1 — 4.  Into  green  plants: 
kiy.iua  explains  haritah  as  tho  quarters  of  the  sky,  and  pdvamdnoh  (the  Puri- 
ty11^) as  ViVyu  or  tho  Wind.  Urassmann  takes  pdramdnah  to  be  the  Soma, 
an,i  harUuh  to  be  tho  horses  of  the  Sun  I have  followed  Ludwig’s  inter- 
pretation ; but  I find  the  stanza  almost  unintelligible. 

lo  Centre  of  nectar:  or,  of  ami  it.  or  immortality,  or  tho  world  of  the 
Immortal  Gods.  The  Cow;  the  earthly  cow,  as  the  type  of  Aditi  or  universal 
must  not  be  offended.  The  stanza  is  spoken  by  the  priest  who  has 
Reived  the  cow  as  his  reward. 


m 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK  Fin 


16  Weak-minded  men  have  as  a cow  adopted  me  who  came  hithei 
from  the  Gods,  a Goddess, 

Who,  skilled  in  eloquence,  her  voice  uplifteth,  who  standetb 
near  at  hand  with  all  devotions. 


HYMN  XGI. 


Agni 


Lord  of  the  house,  Sage,  ever  young,  high  powor  of  life,  C 
Agni,  God, 

Thou  givest  to  thy  worshipper. 

2  So  with  our  song  that  prays  and  serves,  attentive,  Lord  o 
spreading  light, 

Agni,  bring  hitherward  the  Gods. 


3 For,  Evcr-Youthful  One,  with  thee,  best  Furtherer,  as  our  ally 
We  overcome,  to  win  the  spoil. 

4 As  Aurva  Bhrigu  used,  as  Apnav  \na  used,  I call  the  pure 
Agni  who  clothes  him  with  the  sea. 


5 I call  the  Sage  who  sounds  like  wind,  the  Might  that  lik 

Parjanya  roars, 

Agni  who  clothes  him  with  the  sea. 

6 As  Savitar’s  productive  Power,  as  him  who  sends  down  bliss,  I cal 
Agni  who  clothes  him  with  the  sea. 


7 Hither,  for  powerful  kinship,  I call  Agni,  him  who  prospers  you 
Most  frequent  at  our  solemn  rites ; 

8 That  through  this  famed  One’s  power,  he  may  stand  by  u 

even  as  Tvashtar  comes 
Unto  the  forms  that  must  be  shaped. 

9 This  Agni  is  the  Lord  supreme  above  all  glories  mid  the  Gods 
May  he  come  nigh  to  us  with  strength. 

10  Here  praise  ye  him  the  most  renowned  of  all  the  ministerinj 
Priests, 

Agni,  the  Chief  at  sacrifice  ; 


11  Piercing,  with  purifying  flump,  enkindled  in  our  homes,  mos 
high, 

Swiftest  to  hear  from  far  away. 


16  Weak-minded  men : ‘ Men  are  too  feeble  in  their  intellect  to  coinprehen 
me  in  my  true  form  and  my  real  nature  : they  can  only  understand  my  wort 
iu  the  shape  of  a cow.’ — See  Ludwig,  R.  V.,  IV.  245,  246. 

The  concluding  stanza  is  spoken  by  Aditi  as  a cow. 

4 Aurva  Bhrigu:  or,  perhaps,  Aurva  and  Bhrigu.  The  ancient  Kid 
Aurva  is  said  to  have  been  the  grandson  of  Bhrigu.  Apnavdna : anothe 
ancient  Itishi,  mentioned  in  connexion  with  the  Bhrigus  and  the  eaihes 
worship  of  Agni,  in  Book  IV.  7.  1. 


THE  RIO  VEDA . 


255 


jyMN  91.) 

2 Sage,  laud  the  Mighty  One  who  wins  the  spoil  of  \ietory  like 

a steed, 

And,  Mitra-like,  unites  the  folk. 

3 Still  turning  to  their  aim  in  thee,  the  oblation-bearer’s  sister 

hymns 

Have  come  to  thee  before  the  wind, 
f The  waters  find  their  place  in  him,  for  whom  tfie  threefold 
sacred  grass 

Is  spread  unbound,  unlimited. 

5 The  station  of  the  Bounteous  God  hath,  through  his  aid  which 

none  impair, 

A pleasant  aspect  like  the  Sun. 

6 Blazing  with  splendour,  Agni,  God,  through  pious  gifts  of 

sacred  oil, 

Bring  thou  the  Gods  and  worship  them. 

7 The  Gods  as  mothers  brought  thco  forth,  the  Immortal  Sage, 

0  Angiras, 

The  bearer  of  our  gifts  to  heaven. 

8 Wise  Agni,  Gods  established  thee,  the  Seer,  noblest  messenger, 
As  bearer  of  our  sacred  gifts. 

9 No  cow  have  I to  call  mine  own,  no  axe  at  hand  wherewith 

to  work, 

Yet  what  is  here  I bring  to  thee. 

0 0 Agni,  whatsoever  be  the  fuel  that  we  lay  for  thee, 

Be  pleased  therewith,  Most  Youthful  God. 

1 That  which  the  white-ant  eats  away,  that  over  which  the 

emmet  crawls — 

Way  all  of  this  be  oil  to  thee. 

2 When  he  enkindles  Agni,  man  should  with  his  heart  attend 

the  song : 

I with  the  priests  have  kindled  him. 

12  Sayc:  the  piiest  is  addiessed. 

13  Before  the  wind:  or,  in  front  of  the  wind,  with  which  the  flame  is 
■unieJ. 

H * The  waters  rest  in  Agni,  wl  > abides  rb  lightning  in  the  fhmament.’ — 
tote  in  Wilson’s  Translation  which  I have  followed  closely  in  this  st»nza. 

15  Or,  a comma  being  substituted  for  the  full  stop  at  the  end  of  the  preced- 
atan/^»  aud  padam  (station)  taken  as  in  apposition  to  padam  (place)  in  14  ; 
18  Nation  of  the  bounteous  : he  hath,  through  his  aid  which  none  impair, 
L pleabunt  aspect  like  the  Sun.’ 

" AsPiayoga,  the  Rislii  of  the  hymn,  has  no  cow  and  no  axe  to  eut  wood, 
^ u;kt‘d  in  this  and  the  two  following  stanzas  to  dwpeuse  with  the  custom- 
VWu*  of  milk,  and  to  accept  such  wood  as  the  worshipper  can  pick  up. 

« With  his  heart  • a devout  spirit  will  compensate  the  want  of  milk  and 
ifoperly  prepared  fuel. 


256 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK  Via 


HYMN  XCIL  Agni 

That  noblest  Furtherer  hath  appeared,  to  whom  men  brim 
their  holy  works. 

Our  songs  of  praise  have  rison  aloft  to  Agni  who  was  born  t 
give  the  Ary  a strength. 

2 Agni  of  Divodasa  turned,  as  'twerc  in  majesty,  to  the  Cods. 
Onward  he  sped  along  the  mother  earth,  and  took  his  statio 

in  the  height  of  heaven. 

3 Him  before  whom  the  people  shrink  when  ho  performs  h 

glorious  deeds, 

Him  who  wins  thousands  at  the  worship  of  the  Gods,  himscl 
that  Agni,  serve  with  songs. 

4 The  mortal  man  whom  thou  wouldst  lead  to  opulence,  0 Vas 

he  who  brings  thee  gifts. 

Ho,  Agni,  wins  himself  a hero  singing  lauds,  yea,  one  who  fee 
a thousand  men. 

5 He  with  the  steed  wins  spoil  even  in  the  fenced  fort,  andgai 

imperishable  fame. 

In  thee,  0 Lord  of  wealth,  continually  we  lay  all  precio 
offerings  to  the  Gods. 

G To  him  who  dealeth  out  all  wealth,  who  is  tho  cheerful  Frit 
of  men, 

To  him,  like  the  first,  vessels  filled  with  savoury  juice,  to  Aj. 
go  the  songs  of  praise. 

7 Votaries,  lichly-gifted,  deck  him  with  their  songs,  even  as  t 

steed  who  draws  the  ear. 

On  both,  Strong  Lord  of  men  ! on  child  and  grandson  pt 
the  bounties  which  our  nobles  give. 

8 Sing  forth  to  him,  the  Holy,  most  munificent,  sublime  w 

his  refulgent  glow, 

To  Agni,  ye  Upastutas. 

9 Worshipped  with  gifts,  enkindled,  splendid,  Maghavan  sli 

win  himself  heroic  fame. 

And  will  not  his  most  newly  shown  benevolence  come  to 
with  abundant  strength  1 


2 Of  Divod/Jsa : whom  Divoddsa  especially  worshipped  aud  claimed  as 
tutelary  God.  The  stanza  is  obscuie,  and  my  translation  founded  on 
Roth’s  interpretation  of  prd  vi  vdvrite , which  has  been  accepted  by  Cowell,  n 
be  regarded  as  conjectural.  See  Wilson’s  Tianslation  and  note. 

4 A hero:  a biaveson. 

7 The  second  line  is  obscure.  * Graceful  lord  of  men,  grant  wealth  tons 
n children  and  grandchildren.’ — Wilson. 

8 Upa*tuta»:  singers  so  named  after  the  Rishi  Upastuta.  See  I.  36. 1 


-jYMX  y*-J 


THE  KU tV EVA. 


257 


0 Priest,  pressor  of  tbo  juice ! praise  now  the  dearest  Guest  of 

all  our  friends, 

Agui,  the  driver  of  the  cars. 

1 Who,  finder-out  of  treasures  open  and  concealed,  briugeth  them 

hither,  Holy  One; 

Whose  waves,  as  in  a cataract,  are  hard  to  pass,  when  he, 
through  song,  would  win  him  strength. 

2 Let  not  the  noblo  Guest,  Agni,  be  wroth  with  us:  by  many  a 

man  his  praise  is  sung, 

Good  Herald,  skilled  in  sacrifice. 

3 0 Vasu,  Agni,  let  not  them  be  harmed  who  come  in  any  way 

with  lauds  to  thee. 

Even  the  lowly,  skilled  in  rites,  with  offered  gifts,  secketh  thee 
for  the  envoy’s  task. 

4 Friend  of  the  Maruts,  Agni,  come  with  Rudras  to  the  Soma- 

draught, 

To  Subhari’s  fair  song  of  praise,  and  be  thou  joyfuTin  the  light. 


10  Prictt,  prester  of  the  juice:  dsdva:  slotah — S&yana.  * Singer  of  hymns.' 
-Wilson. 

11  Whose  wares:  billowy  floods  of  flame  rushing  on  like  waters  falling  down 
piecipice.  ‘ Whose  (flames),  as  he  hastens  to  wage  the  battle  by  means  of  our 
acred  rite,  are  hard  to  be  passed  through  as  waves  rushing  down  a decli- 
ily.’— Wilson.  See  also  Piscliel,  Ved ische  Sludicn,  I.  p.  184.  Through  tony : 
lfipirited  and  strengthened  by  our  hymns. 

13  For  the  envoy's  task:  to  bear  his  oblations  to  the  Gods. 


17 


VlLAKHILYA. 


(Book  VIII.  Hymns  49—59.  M . Muller) 


HYMN  I.  Indra. 

To  you  will  I sing  Indra’s  praise  who  gives  good  gifts  as  well 
we  know ; 

The  praise  of  Maghavan  who,  rich  in  treasure,  aids  his  singers 
with  wealth  thousandfold. 

As  with  a hundred  hosts,  he  rushes  boldly  on,  and  for  the 
offerer  slays  his  foes. 

As  from  a mountain  flow  the  water-brooks,  thus  flow  his  gifts 
who  feedeth  many  a one. 

The  drops  effused,  the  gladdening  draughts,  0 Indra,  Lover  of 
the  Song, 

As  waters  seek  the  lake  where  they  are  wont  to  rest,  fill  thee, 
for  bounty,  Thunderer. 

: Tho  matchless  draught  that  strengthens  and  gives  eloquence, 
the  sweetest  of  the  meath  drink  thou, 

That  in  thy  joy  thou  mayst  scatter  thy  gifts  o’er  us,  plente- 
ously,  even  as  tho  dust. 

> Come  quickly  to  our  laud,  urged  on  by  Soma-pressers  like  a 

horse — 

Laud,  Godlike  Indra,  which  milch-kine  make  sweet  for  thee  : 
with  Kanva’s  sons  are  gifts  for  thee. 

> With  homage  have  we  sought  thee  as  a Hero,  strong,  pre- 

eminent, with  unfailing  wealth. 

0 Thunderer,  as  a plenteous  spring  pours  forth  its  stream,  so, 
Indra,  flow  our  songs  to  thee. 

i ff  now  thou  art  at  sacrifice,  or  if  thou  art  upon  the  earth, 
Come  thence,  high-tboughted  ! to  our  sacrifice  with  the  Swift, 
come,  Mighty  with  the  Mighty  Ones. 

See  Book  VIII.,  Hymn  XLIX.,  note.  Professor  Cowell’s  version  of  these 
even  hymns  will  be  fouud  in  Appendix  I.  of  Wilson’s  Translation,  Vol.  V. 
,aru.  ,U(hhted  to  him  for  some  improvements  on  the  version  which  I had 
'eviously  prepaied. 

4 n ? hmihvd  hosts:  ‘like  a weapon  with  a -hundred  edges.’—Cowell. 
hh  ^ '^V€$  eloquence : vivdkshanam  : from  rack  ; ‘ swelling,’  f i om  vaksk  — 
le  aQd  Cowell.  Pleuteously , even  as  the  dust : the  meaning  of 

ienA+i  18  °hscure.  The  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon  takes  dhrishad = driskad} 

7 vi  v ^iH8toue  : ‘just  as  the  mill-stone  pours  out  meal,’— Cowell. 

IC  &ud  the  Mighty  Ones,  are  Indra’s  horses. 


260  THE  HYMNS  OF  [VALAKHlln 

8 The  active,  fleet-foot,  tawny  Coursers  that  are  thine  are  swifi 

to  victory,  like  the  Wind, 

Wherewith  thou  goest  round  to  visit  Manus'  seed,  wherewitl 
all  heaven  is  visible. 

9 Indra,  from  thee  so  great  we  crave  prosperity  in  wealth  of 
As,  Maghavan,  thou  favouredst  Medhyatithi,  and,  in  the  fight 

Nipatithi. 

10  As,  Maghavan,  to  Kanva,  Trasadasyu,  and  to  Paktha  an 
Dasavraja ; 

As,  Indra,  to  Gosarya  and  Rijisvan  thou  vouchsafedst  wealt 
iu  kine  and  gold. 

HYMN  II.  Inflr 

Sakra  I praise,  to  win  his  aid,  far-famed,  exceeding  bountifn 
Who  gives,  as 5 *  7 1 wore  in  thousands,  precious  wealth  to  hi 
who  sheds  the  juice  and  worships  him. 

2 Arrows  with  hundred  points,  unconquerable,  are  this  Indra 

mighty  arms  in  war. 

He  streams  on  liberal  worshippers  like  a hill  with  spring 
when  juices  poured  have  gladdened  him. 

3 What  time  the  flowing  Sonia  drops  have  gladdened  with  tlu 

taste  the  Friend, 

Like  water,  gracious  Lord  ! weromy  libations  made,  like  mile 
kino  to  the  worshipper. 

4 To  him  the  peerless,  who  is  calling  you  to  givo  you  aid,  for 

flow  the  drops  of  pleasant  meath. 

The  Soma-drops  which  call  on  thee,  0 gracious  Lord,  ha 
brought  thee  to  our  hymns  of  praise. 

5 He  rushes  hurrying  like  a steed  to  Soma  that  adorns  our  ri 
Which  hymns  make  sweet  to  thee,  lover  of  pleasant  food.  T 

call  to  Paura  thou  dost  love. 

6 Praise  the  strong,  grasping  Hero,  winner  of  the  spoil,  ruli 

supreme  o’er  mighty  wealth. 

Like  a full  spring,  0 Thunderer,  from  thy  storo  hast  th 
poured  on  the  worshipper  evermore. 

9 Medhydtitki : a Rishi  whose  name  has  frequently  occurred.  NipdUt 
mentioned  only  here  and  V&lakhilya  Hymn  III. 

10  Trasadasyu : see.  Vol.  I.,  Index.  Paktha:  a favourite  of  the  Afv 
See  VIII.  22  10.  Dasavraja : see  VIII.  8.20.  Gosarya : see  VIII.  8. 
Rljisvan : see  Vol.  I.,  Index. 

5 The  call  to  Paura : the  invitation  to  Paura’ s house.  According  to 

Roth  paurd  means  the  filler,  the  satisfiur  : * thou  approvest  the  summon 

the  satisfying  beverage.’ — Cowell,  See  V,  74.  4, 


■ , YMN  3.]  the  RIO  VELA . 261 

- Now  whether  thou  he  far  away,  or  in  the  heavens,  or  on  the 
earth, 

0 Indra,  mighty-thoughted,  harnessing  thy  Bays,  come  Lofty 
with  the  Lofty  Ones. 

[ The  Bays  who  draw  thy  chariot,  Steeds  who  injuro  none,  sur- 
pass the  wind’s  impetuous  strength — 

With  whom  thou  silencest  the  enemy  of  man,  with  whom  thou 
goest  round  the  sky. 

i 0 gracious  Hero,  may  wo  learn  anew  to  know  thee  as  thou  art : 
As  in  decisive  fight  thou  holpest  Etasa,  or  Vasa  ’gainst 
Dasavraja, 

i As,  Maghavan,  to  Kanva  at  the  sacred  feast,  to  Dirghanitha 
thine  home-friend, 

As  to  Gosarya  thou,  Stone-darter,  gavest  wealth,  give  mo  a gold- 
bright  stall  of  kine. 

HYMN  IIL  Indra. 

As  with  Manu  Samvarani,  Indra,  thou  drankest  Soma  juice, 
And,  Maghavan,  with  Nlpatithi,  Medhyatithi,  with  Pushtigu 
and  Srushtigu, — 

I The  son  of  Prishadvana  was  Praskanva’s  host,  who  lay  decre- 
pit and  forlorn. 

Aided  by  theo  the  Bislii  Dasyave-vrika  strovo  to  obtain  thou- 
sands of  kino. 

1 Call  hither  with  thy  newest  song  Indra  who  lacks  not  hymns 
of  praise, 

llim  who  observes  and  knows,  inspirer  of  the  sage,  him  who 
seems  eager  to  enjoy. 

t He  unto  whom  they  sang  the  seven-headed  hymn,  three- 
parted,  in  the  loftiest  place, 

He  sent  his  thunder  down  on  all  these  living  things,  and  so 
displayed  heroic  might. 

7 This  stanza  is  almost  a lepetition  of  stanza  7 of  Hymn  I. 

9 Etasa:  see  I.  61.  15.  Pas  a : mentioned  as  a favourite  of  the  Asvins  in 
■ to.  1\  Lctsavraja : said  in*  stau/a  10  of  Hymn  I.  to  have  been  helped  by 
dra. 

10  Lirghanttha : Ludwig  takes  this  word  to  be  an  adjective  qualifying 
'dhc  udhvarty  * at  the  saciifieial  feast  of  long  duration.1  A gold-bright  stall 

km : according  to  Ludwig,  a stall  graced  with  bay  steeds,  would  be  a 
ttcr  translation. 

1 Sfimvarani:  son  of  the  VcdicRiHhi  Samvarana.  See  V.  33.  10.  At  the 
d of  tho  stanza,  ‘ so  drink  with  us/  is  to  be  understood. 

“ Eyrlorn  ; rejected  aud  cast  ou  j by  his  kindred.  Lasyavc-vfika  ; literally, 
ol f-to-the*  Dasy  u,  that  is,  Destroyer  of  fiends  or  barbarians. 

The  seven -headed ; sung  by  seven  heavenly  singers. 


262  THE  HYMNS  OF  [ YlLAKHlLY \ 

5 We  invocate  that  Tndra  who  bestoweth  precious  things  on  u« 
Now  do  wo  know  his  newest  favour;  may  we  gaiu  a stable  tha 

is  full  of  kine. 

6 He  whom  thou  aidest,  gracious  Lord,  to  give  again,  obtain 

great  wealth  to  nourish  him. 

We  with  our  Soma  ready,  Lover  of  the  Song ! call,  Inch 
Maghavan,  on  thee. 

7 Ne’er  art  thou  fruitless,  Indra;  ne’er  dost  thou  desert  tl 

worshipper : 

But  now,  0 Maghavan,  thy  bounty  as  a God  is  poured  fori 
ever  more  and  more. 

8 He  who  hath  overtaken  Krivi  with  his  might,  and  silent 

Sushna  with  death-bolts, — 

When  he  supported  yonder  heaven  and  spread  it  out,  then  fir 
the  son  of  earth  was  born. 

9 Good  Lord  of  wealth  is  he  to  whom  all  Aryas,  Dasas  here  l 

long. 

Directly  unto  thee,  the  pious  Rusama  Paviru,  is  that  weal! 
brought  nigh. 

10  In  zealous  haste  the  singers  have  sung  forth  a song  distilli 
oil  and  rich  in  sweets. 

Riches  have  spread  among  us  and  heroic  strength,  with  us  fl 
flowing  Soma-drops. 

HYMN  IY.  Rd 

A s,  Sakra,  thou  with  Manu  called  Vivasvan  drankest  Somajui 
As,  Indra,  thou  djdst  love  the  hymn  by  Trita’s  side,  so  d< 
thou  joy  with  Ayu  now. 

2 As  thou  with  Matarisvan,  Medhya,  Prishadhra,  hast  cheer 

thee,  Indra,  with  pressed  juice, 

Drunk  Soma  with  Rijunas,  Syumarasmi,  by  Dasonya’s,  Dai 
sipra’s  side. 

3 ’Tis  he  who  made  the  lauds  his  own  and  boldly  drank  t 

Soma  juice, 


8 The  son  of  earth  : man.  r 

9 Rusama  Paviru : the  Rusamas  are  mentioned  in  Y.  80.  13—15. 
name  of  Paviru  does  not  occur  again. 

1 Vivasvdn  : or  Vivas  vat,  was  the  father  of  Manu  who  is  generally  cal 
Vaivasvata.  Ayu : the  Itishi  of  the  hymn,  or  the  eacrificer. 

2 Mdtarisvan:  the  Rishi  of  Hymn  VI.  of  the  Vftlakhilya,  Medhya: 
Hishi  of  Hymns  V.  IX.  and  X.  Pfishadhra : the  Rishi  of  Hymn  VIU* 
marasmi : mentioned,  as  a favourite  of  the  Asvins,  in  I.  112.  16.  The  na 
of  Rijunas,  Dasonya,  and  Dasasipra  do  not  occur  again  in  the  Rigveda. 


THE  RIO  VEDA . 


He  to  whom  Vishnu  came  striding  his  three  wide  steps,  as 
Mitra’s  statutes  ordered  it. 

4 In  whose  laud  thou  didst  joy,  Indra,  at  the  great  deed,  0 

Satakratu,  Mighty  One ! 

Seeking  renown  we  call  thee  as  the  milkers  call  the  cow  who 
yields  abundant  milk. 

5 He  is  our  Sire  who  gives  to  us,  Great,  Mighty,  ruling  as  he  wills. 
Unsought,  may  he  the  Strong,  Itich,  Lord  of  ample  wealth, 

give  us  of  horses  and  of  kine. 

6 He  to  whom  thou,  Good  Lord,  givest  that  he  may  give  increas- 

es wealth  that  nourishes. 

Eiger  for  wealth  we  call  on  Indra,  Lord  of  wealth,  on  Sata- 
kratu with  our  lauds. 

7 Never  art  thou  neglectful:  thou  guardest  both  races  with  thy 

care. 

The  call  on  Indra,  fourth  Aditya ! is  thine  own.  Amrit  is 
stablished  in  the  heavens. 

8 The  offerer  whom  thou,  Indra,  Lover  of  the  Song,  liberal 

Maghavan,  favourcst, — 

As  at  the  call  of  Kanva  so,  0 gracious  Lord,  hear  thou  our 
songs  and  eulogy. 

9 Sung  is  the  song  of  ancient  time : to  Indra  have  yc  said  the 

prayer. 

They  have  sung  many  a Brihati  of  sacrifice,  poured  forth  the 
worshipper’s  many  thoughts. 

10  Indra  hath  tossed  together  mighty  stores  of  wealth,  and  both 
the  worlds,  yea,  and  the  Sun. 

Pure,  brightly-shining,  mingled  with  the  milk,  the  draughts 
of  Soma  have  made  Indra  glad. 

HYMN  V.  Indra, 

As  highest  of  the  Maghavans,  preeminent  among  the  Bulls, 
Best  breaker-down  of  forts,  kine-winner,  Lord  of  wealth,  we 
seek  thee,  Indra  Maghavan. 

2 Thou  who  subduedst  Ayu,  Kutsa,  Atithigva,  waxing  daily  in 
thy  might, 

5 Ruling  at  he  wills  : ‘he  who  acts  as  the  sovereign.’ — Cowell. 

7 Roth  races : Gods  and  men.  Fourth  Aditya:  Varui.m,  Mitra,  and  Arya- 
man  being  the  other  three.  A mrit  ■ ‘ ambrosia.’ — Cowell. 

8 As  thou  hearest,  must  be  supplied  at  the  beginning  of  the  Btauza. 

9 Brihati : verse  iu  the  Brihati  metre. 

1 Highest  ■ or,  nearest  The  Bulls : strong  heroes, 

2 Ayu,  Kutsa,  Atithigva : see  I.  53.  10. 


264  THE  HYMNS  OF  [vlLAKBILn 

As  such,  rousing  thy  power,  we  invocate  thee  now,  tie 
Satakratu,  Lord  of  Bays. 

3 The  pressing-stones  shall  pour  for  us  the  essence  of  the  m.\at 

of  all, 

Drops  that  have  been  pressed  out  afar  among  the  folk,  an 
those  that  have  been  pressed  near  us. 

4 Repel  all  enmities  and  keep  them  far  away : let  all  wi 

treasure  for  their  own. 

Even  among  Sishtas  are  the  stalks  that  make  thee  gku 
where  thou  with  Soma  satest  thee, 

5 Come,  India,  very  near  to  us  with  aids  of  firmly-based  resolve 
Come,  most  auspicious,  with  thy  most  auspicious  help,  goo 

Kinsman,  witli  good  kinsmen,  come  ! 

6 Bless  thou  with  progeny  the  chief  of  men,  the  lord  of  heroe 

victor  in  the  fray. 

Aid  with  thy  powers  the  men  who  sing  thee  lauds  and  kcc 
their  spirits  ever  pure  and  bright. 

7 May  we  be  such  in  battle  as  are  surest  to  obtain  thy  grace : 
With  holy  offerings  and  invocations  of  the  Gods,  we  mean 

that  we  may  win  the  spoil. 

8 Thine,  Lord  of  Bays,  am  I.  Prayer  longeth  for  the  spoi 

Still  with  thy  help  I seek  the  fight. 

So,  at  the  raiders’  head,  I,  craving  steeds  and  kiue,  unit 
myself  with  thee  olone. 

HYMN  VI.  Mi 

Indiia,  the  poets  with  their  hymns  extol  this  hero  might  < 
thine  : 

They  strengthened,  loud  in  song,  thy  power  that  droppeth  oi 
With  hymns  the  Pauras  came  to  thee. 

2 Through  piety  they  came  to  Indra  for  his  aid,  they  whos 
libations  give  thee  joy. 

As  thou  with  Krisaand  Samvarta  hast  rejoiced,  so,  Indra,  l 
thou  glad  with  us. 

4 Sishtas:  apparently  a tube  of  no  great  importance.  Stalks:  of  tl 
Soma-plant. 

8 At  the  raiders'  head  : at  the  head  of  tho  band  who  are  going  forth  to  seii 
the  cattle  of  their  enemies.  Von  ltoth  thinks  that  matUidm  should  be  read  i 
stead  of  mathinflm,  and  Grassmann  translates  accordingly,  ‘in  Aufang  mein* 
Bitten,’  i 2 at  the  beginning  of  my  prayers.’ 

1 Pauras  : * the  offerers.’ — Cowell.  See  V&lakhilya,  II.  5. 

2 Krisa : the  Uishi  of  Hymn  VII.  of  the  Vftlakhilya.  Samvarta: 
mentioned  elsewhere. 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


265 


■YMN  7.] 

j Agreeing  in  your  spirit,  all  ye  Deities,  come  nigh  to  us. 

Vasus  and  Ruclras  shall  come  near  to  give  us  aid,  and  Mavuts 
listen  to  our  call. 

[ May  Pushan,  Vishnu,  and  Sarasvati  befriend,  and  the  Seven 
Streams,  this  call  of  mine  : 

May  Waters,  Wind,  the  Mountains,  and  the  Forest-Lord,  and 
Earth  give  ear  unto  my  cry. 

> Indrr,  with  thine  own  bounteous  gift,  most  liberal  of  tho 

Mighty  Ones, 

Be  our  boon  benefactor,  Vritra-slayer,  be  our  feast-companion 
for  our  weal. 

> Leader  of  heroes,  Lord  of  battle,  lead  thou  us  to  combat,  thou 

Most  Sapient  One. 

High  fame  is  theirs  who  win  by  invocations,  feasts  and  enter- 
tainment of  the  Gods. 

Our  hopes  rest  on  the  Faithful  One  : in  Indra  is  the  people's  life. 
0 Maghavan,  come  nigh  that  thou  mayst  give  us  aid  : make 
plenteous  food  stream  forth  for  us. 

5 Thee  would  wo  worship,  Indra,  with  our  songs  of  praise : 0 
Satakratu,  bo  thou  outs. 

Pour  down  upon  Praskanva  bounty  vast  and  iirm,  exuberant, 
that  shall  never  fail. 

HYMN  VI T.  Praskatrva’s  Gift. 

Great,  verily,  is  Indra’s  might.  I have  beheld,  and  hither 
comes 

Thy  bounty,  Dasyave-vyika  ! 

! A hundred  oxen  white  of  hue  are  shining  like  the  stars  iii 
heaven, 

So  tall,  they  seem  to  prop  tho  sky. 

1 Bamboos  a hundred,  hundred  dogs,  a hundred  skins  of  beasts 
well- tanned, 

A hundred  tufts  of  Balbaja,  four  hundred  rcd-liued  mares 
arc  mine. 

4 The  Forest  Lord;  vanaspati : the  tall  timber  tree,  frequently  meaning  the 
o-iticial  Post. 

5 Lcncf actor ; or  Bhaga,  the  God  who  distributes  wealth. 

1 1 Great  is  Indra’s  power,  and  the  gifts  which  I have  received  from  thee,  0 
^tioyer  of  the  Dasyus,  can  be  compared  only  to  his  bounty.’  Dasyaye- 
iKa,  here,  is  the  name,  not  of  the  Kishi,  but  of  a hero  who  in  allitncc  with 
e Ilanvas  has  been  victorious  in  his  attack  on  the  hostile  batbaiians.  bee 
‘fts-Vol.  III.  p.  181.  . . . 

rkilbaj a .■  a kind  of  coarse  grass  (Eleusine  Indica),  used  in  religious  cere* 
ouios,  and  for  other  purposes  when  plaited. 


233  THE  HYMNS  OF  [VALAKHliy 

4 Blest  by  the  Gods,  K&uv&yanas  ! be  ye  who  spread  throui 

life  on  life  : 

Like  horses  have  ye  stridden  forth. 

5 Then  men  extolled  the  team  of  seven : not  yet  full-grown,  i 

fame  is  great. 

The  dark  mares  rushed  along  the  paths,  so  that  no  eye  cou 
follow  them. 

HYMN  VIII.  Praskanva’s  G: 

Thy  bounty,  Dasyavc-vrika,  exhaustless  hath  displayed  itacl 
Its  fulness  is  as  broad  as  heaven. 

2 Ten  thousand  Dasyave-vrika,  the  son  of  Putakrata,  hath 
From  his  own  wealth  bestowed  on  me. 

3 A hundred  asses  hath  he  given,  a hundred  head  of  fleecy  shee 
A hundred  slaves,  and  wreaths  besides. 

4 There  also  was  a marc  led  forth,  picked  out  for  Putakrat&’s  sal 
Not  of  the  horses  of  the  herd. 

5 Observant  Agni  hath  appeared,  oblation-bearer  with  his  car, 
Agni  with  his  resplendent  flame  hath  shone  on  high  as  shin 

the  Sun,  hath  shone  like  Siirya  in  the  heavens. 

HYMN  IX.  Aavi 

Endowed,  0 Gods,  with  your  primeval  wisdom,  come  quick 
with  your  chariot,  0 yc  Holy. 

Come  with  your  mighty  powers,  0 ye  Nasatyas ; come  hithi 
drink  ye  this  the  third  libation. 

2 The  truthful  Deities,  the  Three-and-Thirty,  saw  you  approa 
before  the  Ever-Trutliful. 


4 Kdnvdyanas : descendants  of  Kanva. 

5 The  team  of  seven:  ‘ siebengespannes.’  — Grass  maun  ; ‘seven-yok 
team.’  — Cowell.  But  the  exact  meaning  here  of  sdptdsya  is  uncertain.  V 
Roth  thinks  that  it  is  probably  a pioper  name.  Ludwig  takes  it  in  the  sei 
of  a bond  of  friendship  or  alliance.  The  dark  mares  : there  is  no  substanti 
and  ‘mares’  is  conjecturally  supplied.  According  to  Ludwig,  the  dark  ho 
of  the  Dasyus  conquered  by  Dasyave-vrika  are  intended,  and  the  whole  stai 
would  be  more  correctly  translated : 

‘Then  no  more  thought  they  of  the  great  renown  of  the  collective  bond. 

The  dark  tribes  rushed  along  the  paths  so  that  no  eye  could  reach  to  thei 
See  Ludwig’s  Commentary,  Vol.  V.  p.  552. 

2 The  son  of  Pdtakratd : or,  more  probably,  called  Pautakrata  after  I 
father  Pdtakratu  — Ludwig. 

3 Slaves:  digit  n : conquered  barbarians. 

4 Picked  out:  or,  adorned.  Pdtakratd : the  wife  of  Pdtakr&tu. 

1 Ndsatyas:  * truthful  ones.’ — Cowell.  See  Vol  I.,  Index. 

2 The  Three-and-Thirty : or,  Turice-Eleven.  See  I.  34.  11.  The  Ed 
Truthful : the  Sun,  whose  approach  is  heralded  by  the  Aavins. 


THE  MOVED  A, 


267 


VYMN  11J 

Accepting  this  our  worship  and  libation,  0 Asvins  bright  with 
fire,  drink  ye  the  Soma. 

3 Asvins,  that  work  of  yours  deserves  our  wonder, — the  Bull  of 

heaven  and  earth  and  air’s  mid  region ; 

Yea,  and  your  thousand  promises  in  battle, — to  all  of  these 
come  near  and  drink  beside  us. 

4 Hero  is  your  portion  laid  for  you,  ye  Holy:  come  to  these 

songs  of  ours,  0 ye  Nasatyas. 

Drink  among  us  the  Soma  full  of  sweetness,  and  with  your 
powers  assist  the  man  who  worships. 

HYMN  X.  Visvedevas. 

He  whom  the  priests  in  sundry  ways  arranging  the  sacrifice, 
of  one  accord,  bring  hither, 

Who  was  appointed  as  a learned  Brahman, — what  is  the  sacri- 
fice's knowledge  of  him  1 

2 Kindled  in  many  a spot,  still  One  is  Agni;  Surya  is  One 

though  high  o’er  all  he  shineth. 

Illumining  this  All,  still  One  is  Ushas.  That  which  is  One 
hath  into  All  developed. 

3 The  chariot  bright  and  radiant,  treasure-laden,  three-wheeled, 

with  easy  seat,  and  lightly  rolling, 

Which  She  of  Wondrous  Wealth  was  born  to  harness, — this 
car  of  yours  I call.  Drink  what  remaineth. 

HYMN  XI.  Iudra-Varuna. 

In  offerings  poured  to  you,  0 Iudra-Varuna,  these  shares  of 
yours  btream  forth  to  glorify  your  state. 

Ye  haste  to  the  libations  at  each  sacrifice  when  ye  assist  the 
worshipper  who  sheds  the  juice. 

2 The  waters  and  the  plants,  0 Indra-Varuna,  had  efficacious 

vigour,  and  attained  to  might : 

3 The  Dull : the  Sun,  whom,  as  his  heralds  and  revealers,  they  may  be  said 
to  have  created.  Thousand  promises : ‘ a characteristic  periphrasis  for  the 
Maghavans,  or  wealthy  nobles.’— Ludwig. 

1 TWhymn  appears  to  consist  of  unconnected  fragments,  and  the  purport 
of  this  stauza  is  not  obvious. 

3 She  of  Wondrous  Weatlh : Ushas  or  Dawn.  ITcwf  horn  to  harness : or,  as 
Prof.  Cowell  translates  : ‘At  whose  yoking  the  Dawn  was  bom.’  The  chariot 
°f  the  Asvins  precedes  that  of  the  Dawn. 

2 The  waters  and  the  plants : used  in  sacrifice ; the  Soma-plants  and  the 
'vater  employed  in  preparing  the  juice  for  libation.  The  meaning  of  the 
stanza  seems  to  be  : although  you  are  far  away  in  the  most  distant  firmament, 
0Ul’  libations  have  had  power  to  attract  you.  Regard  us  only  : the  godless 
mai*  is  uuworthv  of  vour  consideration  even  as  an  enemy* 


208  THE  RIG  VEDA . [ VALA  KIIIL  YA 

Ye  who  have  gone  beyond  the  path  of  middle  air, — no  godlcs 
man  is  worthy  to  be  called  your  foe. 

3 True  is  yonr  Krisa’s  word,  Indra  and  Yanina : The  seven  Lob 

voices  pour  a wave  of  meath. 

For  their  sake,  Lords  of  splendour ! aid  tho  pious  man  who 
unbewildered,  keeps  you  ever  in  his  thoughts. 

4 Dropping  oil,  sweet  with  Soma,  pouring  forth  their  stream 

are  the  Seven  Sisters  in  the  scat  of  sacrifice. 

These,  dropping  oil,  are  yours,  O Indra-Varuna : with  thes^ 
enrich  with  gifts  and  help  the  worshipper. 

5 To  our  great  happiness  have  we  ascribed  to  these  Two  Brigh 

Ones  truthfulness,  great  strength,  and  majesty. 

0 Lords  of  splendour,  aid  us  through  tho  Three-times-Sevcn 
as  we  pour  holy  oil,  0 Indra-Varuna. 

6 What  ye  in  time  of  old,  Indra  and  Varuna,  gave  Risliis — rc 

velation,  thought,  and  power  of  song, 

And  places  which  the  wise  made,  weaving  sacrifice, — thcs< 
through  my  spirit’s  fervid  glow  have  I beheld. 

7 0 Indra- Varuna,  grant  to  the  worshippers  cheerfulness  voii 

of  pride,  and  wealth  to  nourish  them. 

Vouchsafe  us  food,  prosperity,  and  progeny,  and  lengthen  oir 
our  days  that  we  may  see  long  life. 

3 The  seven  holt/  voices : tho  voices  of  the  seven  priests  or  sacred  bards 
See  IX.  103.  3.  A wave  of  meath:  ‘a  stream  of  honey.’ — Cowell. 

4 The  Seven  Sisters : 1 sister-streams  of  the  Soma.’ — Cowell. 

5 The  Thrcc-times-Sevcn : perhaps  the  Maruts,  thrice-seven  being  used  in 
definitely  for  a laiger  number  consisting  of  troops  of  seven.  See  I.  133.  6. 

0 Revelation:  srutdm:  that  which  was  heard  (fiotn  the  beginning);  saerei 
knowledge.  ‘Fame.’ — Cowell.  Places:  perhaps,  ah  Ludwig  suggests,  home 
in  the  world  to  come,  which  the  wise  Uishis  have  prepared  for  themselves  bj 
pei  foi  ruing  sacrifice  here  below.  Through  my  spirit's  fervid  glow : tdpasu 
according  to  Grassmann  and  Cowell,  this  trfpas  means  ‘ the  holy  austerities 
of  the  Uishis,  aud  not  the  sacred  fervour  of  the  seer  of  the  hymn.  1 have 
followed  Ludwig. 


BOOK  THE  NINTH. 


HYMN  I.  Soma  Pavamftua. 

In  sweetest  and  most  gladdening  stream  flow  pure,  0 Soma, 
on  thy  way, 

Pressed  out  for  Indra,  for  his  drink. 

2 Fiend-qucllcr,  Friend  of  all  men,  he  hath  with  the  wood  at- 

tained unto 

• Ilis  place,  his  iron-fashioned  home. 

3 Be  thou  best  Vritra-slaycr,  best  grantor  of  bliss,  most  liberal : 
Promote  our  wealthy  princes’  gifts. 

4 Flow  onward  with  thy  juico  unto  the  banquet  of  the  Mighty 

Gods : 

Flow  hither  for  our  strength  and  fame. 

5 0 Iwlu,  we  draw  nigh  to  thee,  with  this  one  object  day  by  day  : 
To  thee  alone  our  prayers  arc  said. 

6 By  means  of  this  eternal  fleece  may  Surya’s  Daughter  purify 
Thy  Soma  that  is  foaming  forth. 

7 Ten  sister  maids  of  slender  form  seize  him  within  the  press 

and  hold 

Him  firmly  on  the  final  day. 

8 The  virgins  send  him  forth  : they  blow  the  skin  musician- 

like, and  fuso 

The  triple  foe-repelling  month. 


Nearly  all  the  hymns  of  this  Book  are  addressed  to  the  deified  Soma  juice, 
or  to  Soma,  or  Indu,  the  Moon,  who  as  containing  the  celestial  nectar,  the  drink 
of  the  Gods,  is  identified  with  the  Soma- plant  and  it*  exhilarating  juice.  As 
the  Moon-God  pours  down  his  ambrosial  rain  through  the  sieve  of  heaven,  lie  is 
addressed  and  worshipped  as  Pavam:\na  (Self-Purifying),  represented  by  the 
^'tna  juice  as  it  undergoes  purification  by  flowing  through  the  wool  which 
h used  as  a filter  or  strainer.  See  Muir,  0 S.  Texts,  V.  258  sqq  , llillebrandt, 
Vfdmche  Mythology,  I.  385  sqq.,  and  Max  M filler,  Chips,  XV.  353 — 367.  But  cf, 
Oldojiheig,  Religion  dcs  Veda,  599 — 612. 

1 Plow  pure  : pdvasva:  ‘ purify  thyself.’- -Ludwig. 

2 With  the  wood:  some  wooden  vessel  or  implement,  perhaps  the  sruva  or 
dipping-spoon.  I von- fashioned  home:  receptacle  that  lias  been  liammerod  or 
formed  with  a tool  of  dyas,  iron  or  other  metal.  It  is  not  clear  what  vessel  is 
intended. 


6 Sdrya's  Daughter : SiaddhA  or  Faith.  Sec  S itapatha-Brdhnana,  XII.  7. 

3  Ip 

. 1 Ten  titter  maids:  the  priest’s  fingers.  The  final  day : on  which  the  Soma 

8 Virgins:  the  unwedded  ores:  the  fingers.  Musician-likc  ■ or,  as  men 
1 "w  a bagpipe  ; but  the  meaning  of  hdkurdm  and  the  second  half- line  is  not 
* ^ 4 They  seize  it  glittering  like  a water-skin.’— Wilson. 


270  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  n 

9 Inviolable  milch-kine  round  about  him  blend,  for  Indra’s  drint 

The  fresh  young  Soma  with  their  milk. 

10  In  the  wild  raptures  of  this  draught,  Indra  slays  all  th 

Vritras  : he, 

The  Hero,  pours  his  wealth  on  us. 

HYMN  II.  Soma  Pavamftni 

Soma,  flow  on,  inviting  Gods,  speed  to  the  purifying  cloth : 
Pass  into  Indra,  as  a Bull. 

2 As  mighty  food  speed  hitherward,  Indu,  as  a most  splendi 

Steer : # 

Sit  in  thy  place  as  one  with  strength. 

3 The  well-loved  meath  was  made  to  flow,  the  stream  of  tb 

creative  juice  : 

The  Sage  drew  waters  to  himself. 

4 The  mighty  waters,  yea,  the  floods  accompany  thee  Mighty  Oik 
When  thou  wilt  clothe  thee  with  the  mdk. 

5 The  lake  is  brightened  in  the  floods.  Soma,  our  Friend 

heaven’s  prop  and  stay, 

Falls  on  the  purifying  cloth. 

6 The  tawny  Bull  hath  bellowed,  fair  as  mighty  Mitra  to  behold 
He  shines  together  with  the  Sun. 

7 Songs,  Indu,  active  in  their  might  aro  beautified  for  the( 

wherewith 

Thou  deckest  thee  for  our  delight. 

8 To  thee  who  givest  ample  room  we  pray,  to  win  the  joyou 

draught : 

Great  are  the  praises  due  to  thee. 

9 Indu,  as  Indra’s  Friend,  on  us  pour  with  a stream  of  sweet 

ness,  like 

Parjanya  sender  of  the  rain. 

10  Winner  of  kine,  Indu,  art  thou,  winner  of  heroes,  steeds,  aii( 
strength  : 

Primeval  Soul  of  sacrifice. 


3 The  Sage  - the  Soma.  Waters:  with  which  the  stalks  of  the  plantar 
sprinkled. 

5 The  lake  • the  Somn  juice. 

6 The  tawny  Bull : 1 the  golden- hued  showerer  of  blessings.’ — Wilson.  Tb 
strong  greenish -yellow  Soma  juice.  Hath  bellowed:  an  exaggerated  expressioi 
for  the  sound  made  by  the  juice  as  it  drops,  but  in  keeping  with  its  represent 
ation  as  a bull. 

9 Like  Parjanya:  eniiching  and  blessing  us  as  the  rain-cloud  fertilizes  tb 
ground. 


tfMX  4.] 


TEE  RIO  VEDA. 


271 


HYMN  II I.  Soma  Pavamltna. 

Hebe  present  this  Immortal  God  flies,  like  a bird  upon  her 
wings,  . 

To  settle  in  tho  vats  of  wood. 

2 This  God,  made  ready  with  the  hymn,  runs  swiftly  through 

the  winding  ways,  v * ° 

Inviolable  as  he  flows. 

3 This  God  while  flowing  is  adorned,  like  a bay  steed  for  war 

by  men  ' 

Devout  and  skilled  in  holy  songs. 

1 lie,  like  a warrior  going  forth  with  heroes,  as  he  flows  along 
Is  fain  to  win  all  precious  boons.  57 

5 This  God,  as  he  is  flowing  on,  speeds  like  a car  and  gives  his  gifts  : 
He  lets  his  voice  be  heard  of  all. 

G Praised  by  the  sacred  bards,  this  God  dives  into  waters,  and 
bestows 

Rich  gifts  upon  the  worshipper. 

7 Away  he  rushes  with  his  stream,  across  the  regions,  into 

heaven, 

And  roars  as  he  is  flowing  on. 

8 While  flowing,  meet  for  sacrifice,  he  hath  gone  up  to  heaven 

across 

The  regions,  irresistible. 

9 After  the  way  of  ancient  time,  this  God,  pressed  out  for 

Deities, 

Flows  tawny  to  the  straining-cloth. 

10  This  Lord  of  many  Holy  Laws,  even  at  his  birth  engendering 
strength, 

Effused,  flows  onward  in  a stream. 

HYMN  IV.  Soma  Pavam&na, 

0 Soma  flowing  on  thy  way,  win  thou  and  conquer  high  re- 
nown ; 

And  make  us  better  than  we  are. 

1 The  vats  of  wood : dr&ndni : large  wooden  vessels,  tubs  or  troughs,  which 
receive  the  Soma  juice. 

, p2  winding  ways : of  the  wool  which  forms  the  strainer —Ludwig. 
Pushes  against  the  enemies/ — Wilson. 

, pives  into  waters : called  vasativaryah , with  which  the  stalks  of  the  Soma* 
Plant  are  sprinkled. 

Pressed  out  for  Deities : -the  Soma  juioe  being  identified  with  the  Amrit 
nectar,  the  drink  of  the  Godb,  contained  in  the  Moon, 

r * Better  than  we  are ; or,  happier  than  we  are. 


z/z 


iaJCi  many o vr 


L tfUUK  /: 


2 Win  thou  the  light,  win  heavenly  light,  and,  Soma,  all  fd 

cities ; 

And  make  us  better  than  we  are. 

3 Win  skilful  strength  and  mental  power.  0 Soma,  drive  awa 

our  foes ; 

And  make  us  better  than  we  are. 

4 Ye  purifiers,  purify  Soma  for  Indra,  for  his  drink  : 

Make  thou  us  better  than  we  are. 

5 Give  us  our  portion  in  the  Sun  through  thine  own  ment; 

power  and  aids ; 

And  make  us  better  than  we  arc. 

6 Through  thine  own  mental  power  and  aid  long  may  wc  loc 

upon  the  Sun  ; 

Make  thou  us  better  than  wc  are. 

7 Wcll-weaponed  Soma,  pour  to  us  a stream  of  riches  doubl 

great ; 

And  make  us  better  than  we  arc. 

8 As  one  victorious,  unsubdued  in  battle  pour  forth  wealth  to  u 
And  make  us  better  than  we  are. 

9 By  worship,  Pavamana  ! men  have  strengthened  thee  to  pro 

the  Law : 

Make  thou  us  better  than  we  are. 

10  0 Indu,  bring  us  wealtli  in  steeds,  manifold,  quickening  a 
life  ; 

And  make  us  better  than  we  are. 

HYMN  Y.  April 

Enktndled,  Pavamana,  Lord,  sends  forth  his  light  on  every  sid 
In  friendly  show,  the  bellowing  Bull. 

2 He,  Pavamana,  Self-produced,  speeds  onward  sharpening  hi 

horns : 

He  glitters  through  the  firmament. 

3 Brilliant  like  wealth,  adorable,  with  splendour  Pavamaiu 

shines, 

Mightily  with  the  streams  of  meath. 


4 Purifiers:  priests  whose  business  is  to  purify  the  juice.  Make  thou:  ( 
Soma. 

9 To  prop  the  Luw  : vtdharmani : ‘ for  their  own  upholding.* — Wilson. 

10  Quickening  all  Life : visvftyum:  explained  by  SAyana  as  ^ sarvagdinincim 

‘all-reaching.’ — Wilson.  

In  this  Apr!  hymn  atributes  of  Agni  are  transferred  to  Soma  PavamAna. 

1 Enkindled : sdmiddhuh  : properly  applicable  to  Agni.  The  bcllowi^l 
Pull : ‘ the  showerer  of  blessings,  uttering  a loud  sound.’ — Wilson. 

2 Self  produced : Tan  And put ; properly  a name  of  Agni ; here,  the  Moon. 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


273 


VfMN  6.] 

4 The  tawny  Pavam&na,  who  strews  from  of  old  the  grass  with 

| might, 

Is  worshipped,  God  amid  the  Gods. 

5 The  golden,  the  Celestial  Doors  are  lifted  with  their  frames 

on  high, 

By  Pavamana  glorified. 

6 With  passion  Pavamana  longs  for  the  great  lofty  Pair,  well- 

formed, 

Like  beauteous  maidens,  Night  and  Dawn. 

1 7 Both  Gods  who  look  on  men  I call,  Celestial  Heralds  : Indra’s 
Self 

Is  Pavamina,  yea,  the  Pull. 

8 This,  Pa  v am  ana’s  sacrifice,  shall  the  three  beauteous  Goddes- 

ses, 

Sarasvat'  and  Bharati  and  Ila,  Mighty  One,  attend. 

9 1 summon  Tvashtar  hither,  our  protector,  champion,  earliest- 

born, 

Indu  is  Indra,  tawny  Steer;  Pavamina  is  Prajapati. 

0 0 Pavamina,  with  the  meath  in  streams  anoint  Vanaspati, 

The  ever-green,  the  golden-hued,  refulgent,  with  a thousand 

boughs. 

1 Come  to  the  consecrating  rite  of  Pavamana,  all  ye  Gods, — 
Vayu,  Surya,  Brihaspati,  Indra,  and  Agni,  in  accord. 

HYMN  VI.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Soma,  flow  on  with  pleasant  stream,  a Bull  devoted  to  the  Gods, 
Our  Friend,  unto  the  woollen  sieve. 

2 Pour  hitherward,  as  Iudra’s  Self,  Indu,  that  gladdening 

stream  of  thine, 

And  send  us  coursers  full  of  strength. 

3 Flow  to  the  filter  hitherward,  pouring  that  ancient  gladden- 

ing juice, 

Streaming  forth  power  and  high  renown. 

I Hither  the  sparkling  drops  have  flowed,  like  waters  down  a 
steep  descent : 

They  have  reached  Indra  purified. 

The  Celestial  Doors : the  doors  of  the  hall  of  sacrifice  are  here  identified 
itli  the  portals  of  the  east  through  which  light  comes  into  the  world.  See 
1.  3.  5. 

7 Celestial  Heralds : seel.  13.  8.  Indra1  s Self:  indrah  here  is  explained 
F SAyana  a %=diptaji ; 1 radiant.’ — Wilson. 

10  Vanaspati  : the  sacrificial  stake. 

11  The  consecrating  rite:  svlXhdkritim, : oblation  accompanied  with  the 
Iterance  of  the  sacred  formula  SvAhA. 


274  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK 

5 Whom,  having  passed  the  filter,  ten  dames  cleanse,  as  ’tw 

a vigorous  steed, 

While  he  disports  him  in  the  wood, — 

6 The  steer-strong  juice  with  milk  pour  forth,  for  feast  a 

service  of  the  Gods, 

To  him  who  bears  away  the  draught. 

*1  Effused,  the  God  flows  ouward  with  his  stream  to  Indra 
the  God, 

So  that  his  milk  may  strengthen  him. 

8 Soul  of  the  sacrifice,  the  juice  effused  flows  quickly  on  : 
keeps 

His  ancient  wisdom  of  a Sage. 

0 So  pouring  forth,  as  Indra’s  Friend,  strong  drink,  best  Gin 
dener  ! for  the  feast, 

Thou,  even  in  secret,  storest  hymns. 

H\MN  VII.  Soma  PavamiV 

Forth  on  their  way  the  glorious  drops  have  flowed  for  mai 
tenance  of  Haw, 

Knowing  this  sacrifice’s  course. 

2 Down  in  the  mighty  waters  sinks  the  stream  of  meath,  mo 

excellent, 

Oblation  best  of  all  in  worth. 

3 About  the  holy  place,  the  Steer  true,  guileless,  noblest,  ha 

sent  forth 

Continuous  voices  in  the  wood. 

4 When,  clothed  in  manly  strength,  the  Sage  flows  in  celcsti 

wisdom  round, 

The  Strong  would  win  the  light  of  heaven. 

5 When  purified,  he  sits  as  King  above  the  hosts,  amonghisfol 
What  time  the  sages  bring  him  nigh. 


*>  Whom:  relative  to  juice  in  the  following  stanza.  Ten  dames : the  fingei 
The  wood  • the  vat  or  trough. 

H To  him  who  hears  away  the  draught : to  Indra.  Others  take  lhardya 
mean  ‘ for  Ntrength  or  prowess  in  battle.’ 

9 Even  in  secret  ■ wisdom  lies  hidden  in  the  Soma,  and  cannot  be  ieco 
nized  until  one  drinks  the  juice. — Ludwig. 

2 The  mighty  waters  : the  holy  waters  called  vasatiraryah. 

3 In  the  wood:  according  to  Siyaua,  vane  kiQYQ  — udake,  in  the  water.  T1 
stanza  is  very  difficult,  and  I am  unable  to  offer  a satisfactory  translation. 

4 The  Strong ; Indra.  * Then  the  mighty  (Indra)  in  heaven  is  eager 
repair  to  the  oblation  ’ — Wilson. 

5 Above  the  hosts,  among  his  folk : or,  as  preferred  by  Prof.  Ludwig  in  h 
Commentary,  above  the  contending  tribes  or  people  (iv'foA). 


275 


\YMN  8.]  THE  RIO  VEDA. 

6 Dear,  golden-coloured,  in  the  fleece  he  sinks,  and  settles  in 

the  wood  : 

The  Singer  shows  his  zeal  in  hymns. 

7 He  goes  to  Indra,  Vayu,  to  the  Asvins,  as  his  custom  is, 

With  gladdening  juice  which  gives  them  joy. 

$ The  streams  of  pleasant  Soma  flow  to  Bhaga,  Mitra-Varuna, — 
Well-knowing  through  his  mighty  powers. 

9 Gain  for  us,  0 ye  Heaven  and  Earth,  riches  of  meath  to  win 
us  wealth  : 

Gain  for  us  treasures  and  renown. 

HYMN  VIII.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

Obeying  Indra’s  dear  desire  these  Soma  juices  have  flowed 
forth, 

Increasing  his  heroic  might. 

2 Laid  in  the  bowl,  pure-flowing  on  to  Vayu  and  the  Asvins, 

may  . 

These  give  us  great  heroic  strength. 

3 Soma,  as  thou  art  purified,  incite  to  bounty  Indra’s  heart, 

To  sit  in  place  of  sacrifice. 

4 The  ten  swift  fingers  deck  thee  forth,  seven  ministers  impel 

thee  on  : 

The  sages  have  rejoiced  in  thee. 

5 When  through  the  filter  thou  art  poured,  we  clothe  thee  with 

a robe  of  milk 

To  be  a gladdening  draught  for  Gods. 

6 When  purified  within  the  jars,  Soma,  bright  red  and  golden* 

hued, 

Hath  clothed  him  with  a robe  of  milk. 

7 Flow  on  to  us  and  make  us  rich.  Drive  all  our  enemies  away. 
0 Indu,  flow  into  thy  Friend. 

8 Send  down  the  rain  from  heaven,  a stream  of  opulence  from 

earth.  Give  us, 

0 Soma,  victory  in  war. 

9 May  we  obtain  thee,  Indra’s  drink,  who  viewest  men  and 

findest  light, 

Gain  thee,  and  progeny  and  food. 

8 Well-knowing , through  his  mighty  powers  • that  is,  the  streams  that, 
trough  the  power  of  Soma,  know  the  way  they  should  go.  4 The  worshippers 
lowing  its  (virtues  are  rewarded)  with  happiness.’ — Wilson. 

7 Flow  on  to  us  and  make  us  rich : or,  4 Flow  to  us  wealthy  worshippers.’ 
'ly  Friend  : Indra.  Cf.  IX.  2.  1. 


276  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK. 

HYMN  IX.  SomaPavaa* 

The  Sage  of  Heaven  whoso  heart  is  wise,  when  laid  betwc 
both  hands  and  pressed, 

Sends  us  delightful  powers  of  life. 

2 On,  onward  to  a glorious  home;  dear  to  the  people  void 

guilo, 

With  excellent  enjoyment,  flow. 

3 He,  the  bright  Son,  when  born  illumed  his  Parents  who  h 

sprung  to  life, 

Great  Son  great  Strengtheners  of  Law. 

4 Urged  by  the  seven  devotions  he  hath  stirred  the  guile! 

rivers  which 

Have  magnified  the  Single  Eye. 

5 These  helped  to  might  the  Youthful  One,  high  over  all,  inv 

cible, 

Even  Indu,  Indra ! in  thy  law. 

6 The  Immortal  Courser,  good  to  draw,  looks  down  upon  t 

Seven : the  fount 
Hath  satisfied  the  Goddesses. 

7 Aid  us  in  holy  rites,  0 Man  : 0 Pavamina,  drive  away 
Dark  shades  that  must  be  met  in  fight. 

8 Make  the  paths  ready  for  a hymn  newer  and  newer  evermoi 
Make  the  lights  shine  as  erst  they  shone. 

9 Give,  Pavamana,  high  renown,  give  kine  and  steeds  and  h( 

sons  : 

Win  for  us  wisdom,  win  the  light. 

IlYMN  X.  Soma  Pavama 

Like  cars  that  thunder  on  their  way,  like  coursers  eager 
renown, 

Have  Soma-drops  flowed  forth  for  wealth. 

2 Foith  have  they  rushed  from  holding  hands,  like  cbari< 
that  are  urged  to  speed, 

Like  joyful  songs  of  smgitig-men. 


1 The  Sage  of  Heaven  the  Soma.  Both  hands  : naptybh  : literally,  < 
granddaughters.  Accoiding  to  Say  ana,  two  boards  used  in  pressing  the  So 
aie  intended.  See  Cowell’s  note  in  Wilson’s  Translation. 

3 His  Parents  : mdtard  ; literally,  his  two  mothers  ; Heaven  and  Earth. 

4 Seven  devotions:  practised  in  the  preparation  of  the  Soma.  SAysnata 
tapta  with  nadyAh : 4 gladdens  the  seven  guileless  rivers.’ — Wilson.  Sir 
Eye : Soma,  the  Moon. 

6 Courser:  the  flowing  Soma.  The  Seven  : rivers.  The  fount:  ‘Full,  a 
well,  he  has  satisfied  the  divine  streams.’ — Wilson. 

7 0 Man : manly  Soma. 


hymn  n.]  the  move  da.  277 

3 The  Somaa  deck  themselves  with  milk,  as  Kings  are  graced 

with  eulogies, 

And,  with  seven  priests,  the  sacrifice. 

4 Pressed  for  the  gladdening  draught,  the  drops  flow  forth  abund- 

antly with  song, 

The  Soma  juices  in  a stream. 

5 Winning  Vivas  van’s  glory  and  producing  Morning’s  light,  the 

Suns 

Pass  through  the  openings  of  the  cloth. 

G The  singing-men  of  ancient  time  open  the  doors  of  sacred 
songs, — 

Men,  for  the  mighty  to  accept. 

7 Combined  in  close  society  sit  the  seven  priests,  the  brother- 

hood, 

Filling  the  station  of  the  One. 

8 He  gives  us  kinship  with  the  Gods,  and  with  the  Sun  unites 

our  eye: 

The  Sage’s  offspring  hath  appeared. 

9 The  Sun  with  his  dear  eye  beholds  that  quarter  of  the  heav- 

ens which  priests 

Have  placed  within  the  sacred  cell. 

HYMN  XI.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

Sing  forth  to  Indu,  0 ye  men,  to  him  who  now  is  purified, 
Fain  to  pay  worship  to  the  Gods. 


5 The  Suns : so  called  as  being  creators  of  the  light : * the  sun-bright 

juices.’ — Wilson.  Vitasvdn  : the  morning  Sun. 

6 Men,  for  the  mighty  to  accept:  ‘men,  offerers  of  Soma,’  according  to 
S&ya’ia. 

7 The  seven  priests  • the  adhraryus  who  bring  the  water  with  which  the 
stalks  of  the  Soma-plants  are  spiinkled.  The  One  : Souia. — S.iyana. 

8 He  gives  us  kinship  with  the  Hods:  1 follow  Prof.  PiscluTB  interpretation 
of  this  difficult  passage.  1 Soma  unites  our  navel  with  the  navel  of  the  Gods, 
our  eye  with  the  Sun,  that  is,  he  bungs  us  into  union  with  the  Gods  in 
heaven  ’ — Vcdische  Studien,  I , p.  69  ‘I  take  into  my  navel  the  navel  of  the 
sacrifice  [the  Soma].  ’—Wilson.  ‘ Ho  [Soma]  as  kinsman  has  brought  us  a 
kinsman  [Surya].’ — Ludwig.  The  Sages  offspring  : a periphrasis  for  the  Sage 
himself,  that  is,  Soma. — Ludwig. 

t 9 This  stanza  is  very  obscure.  I have  adopted  Benfey’s  explanation  who 

here,  follows  an  occasional  interpretation  of  div  or  dyuloka,  given  by  the 
Scholiast,  which  identifies  it  with  the  dronakalasa  or  large  Soma-trough.  He 
fakes  it  as  meaning  that  the  Sun  looks  towaids  the  place  where  the  Soma  lies 

while  it  is  pressed SAyana  seems  to  interpret  this  verse  as  meaning  that 

lrulra  views  the  Soma  with  affection  even  after  it  has  been  drunk  by  the 
pnesta  [fixed  in  the  heart].’-— Cowell,  in  Wilson’s  Translation. 


278  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK 

2 Togother  with  thy  pleasant  juice  the  Atharvans  have  c< 

mingled  milk, 

Divine,  devoted  to  the  God. 

3 Bring,  by  thy  flowing,  weal  to  kine,  weal  to  the  people,  y 

to  steeds, 

Weal,  O thou  King,  to  growing  plants. 

4 Sing  a praise-song  to  Soma  brown  of  hue,  of  independent  mig 
The  Red,  who  reaches  up  to  heaven. 

5 Purify  Soma  when  effused  with  stones  which  hands  ma 

rapidly, 

And  pour  the  sweet  milk  in  the  meath. 

6 With  humble  homage  draw  ye  nigh ; blend  the  libation  w 

the  curds : 

To  Indra  offer  Indu  up. 

7 Soma,  foe-queller,  chief  o’er  men,  doing  the  will  of  Go< 

pour  forth 

Prosperity  upon  our  kine. 

8 Heart-knower,  Sovran  of  the  heart,  thou  art  effused,  0 Soma,  t! 
Indra  may  drink  thee  and  rejoice. 

0 0 Soma  Pavam  ina,  give  us  riches  and  heroic  strength, — 
Indu  ! with  Indra  for  ally. 

HYMN  XII.  Soma  Pavamli 

To  Indra  have  the  Soma-drops,  exceeding  rich  in  sweets,  b,e 
poured, 

Shod  in  the  seat  of  sacrifice. 

2 As  mother  kine  low  to  thoir  calves,  to  Indra  have  the  sag 

called, 

Called  him  to  drink  the  Soma  juice. 

3 In  the  stream’s  wave  wise  Soma  dwells,  distilling  rapture, 

his  seat, 

Resting  upon  a wild-cow's  hide. 

4 Far-sighted  Soma,  Sage  and  Seer,  is  worshipped  in  the  centr 

point 

Of  heaven,  the  straining-cloth  of  wool. 

2 The  Atharvans  : the  priests,  who  perform  the  duties  of  the  Adhvaryus. 

3 King  : the  usual  designation  of  Soma  iu  the  Br&hmana. 

4 The  Red : kaddehidurunavarndya  : ‘sometimes  red -coloured/ — S&yana 

3 In  the  stream's  wave : in  the  water  with  which  the  stalks  are  spriukk 
Upon  a wild-cow's  hide:  this,  which  is  Beufey’s  explanation  of  gaurt,  seei 
to  be  borne  out  by  g6r  ddhi  tvachi,  upon  the  ox-hide,  of  IX.  101.  1 
S&yana’s  interpretation  is  different  .*  * to  a chant  in  the  middle  tone/  — Wusu 

4 Of  heaven  : divah> ; eee  IX.  10.  9,  and  note. 


THE  MOVED  A. 


279 


13.] 

5 In  close  embraces  Indu  bolds  Soma  when  poured  within  the 
jars, 

, And  on  the  purifying  sieve. 

|(j  Indu  sends  forth  a voice  on  high  to  regions  of  the  sea  of  air, 
Shaking  the  vase  that  drops  with  meath. 

7 The  Tree  whose  praises  never  fail  yields  heavenly  milk  among 
our  hymns, 

Urgiug  men’s  generations  on. 

, 8 The  Wise  One,  with  the  Sage’s  stream,  the  Soma  urged  to 

1 speed,  flows  on 

To  the  dear  places  of  the  sky. 

9 0 Ihivamana,  bring  us  wealth  bright  with  a thousand  splen- 
dours, yea, 

0 Indu,  give  us  ready  help. 

HYMN  XIII.  Soma  Pa  vain  An  a. 

Passed  through  the  fleece  in  thousand  streams  the  Soma, 
purified,  flows  on 
To  Indra’s,  Vayu’s  special  place. 

2 Sing  forth,  ye  men  who  long  for  help,  to  Pavamann,  to  the  Sage, 
Effused  to  entertain  the  Gods. 

3 The  Soma-drops  with  thousand  powers  are  purified  for  victory, 
Hymned  to  become  the  feast  of  Gods. 

4 Yea,  as  thou  flowest  bring  great  store  of  food  that  we  may 

win  the  spoil : 

Indu,  bring  splendid  manly  might. 

5 May  they  in  flowing  give  us  wealth  in  thousands,  and  heroic 

power, — 

These  Godlike  Soma-drops  effused. 

5 Indu  h olds  Soma:  ‘the  deity  seems  to  he  thus  opp  >sed  to  the  mete 
plaqt  ’ — CoweH’B  note  Ludwig  slights  that,  Indu  here  in  »y  he  the  Moon, 
is  the  tune  of  important  liturgicJ  core  monies  depends  upon  the.  Moon’s 
phases  So  also  Hillebrandt,  V.  M I.,  p.  316. 

6 To  regions  of  the  sea  of  air  : or  samndrasya  lu  re  may  mean,  of  the  sea 
t>r  water  into  which  the  Soma  juice  falls  Shading  • or,  perhaps,  stiirmg 
(with  joy)  The  vase : kdsam:  t e dronakahsa  the  largo  wooden  vessel  for 
holding  the  juice.  According  to  Sayana,  who>c  interpretation  I have  followed 
m the  first  line  kdsam  here  means  the  cloud. 

7 The  Tice:  Soma.  Men's  generations:  sacrificial  seasons,  according  to 

%ana  

1 Indra’s , Venn's  special  place  • the  vessels  especially  prepared  to  hold 
libations  intended  for  Indra  and  V&yu. 

3 For  victory:  v&jas&taye : ‘for  the  attainment  of  food.’ — Wilson.  So 
Sayana  in  stanzas  3 and  4 ; but  in  6 the  word  is  explained  by  sauynlmdya, 
b>  battle,  in  the  first  clause  where  he  inserts  it  after  hiydnSfh , urged,  and  by 
MnaldbMya,  for  the  attainment  of  food,  in  the  second  clause. 


280  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOR } 

6 Like  coursers  by  their  drivers  urged,  they  were  poured  fori 

for  victory, 

Swift  through  the  woollen  straining-cloth. 

7 Noisily  flow  the  Soma-drops,  like  milch-kine  lowing  to  tin 

calves: 

They  have  run  forth  from  both  the  hands. 

8 As  Gladdener  whom  Indra  loves,  0 Pavamana,  with  a roar 
Drive  all  our  enemies  away. 

9 O Pavamanas,  driving  off  the  godless,  looking  on  the  light, 
Sit  in  the  place  of  sacrifice. 

HYMN  XIY.  Soma  Pavamfl 

Reposing  on  the  river’s  wave  the  Sage  hath  widely  flow 
around, 

Bearing  the  hymn  which  many  love. 

2 When  the  Five  kindred  Companies,  active  in  duty,  with  t 

song 

Establish  him,  the  Powerful, 

3 Then  in  his  juice  whose  strength  is  great,  have  all  the  Go 

rejoiced  themselves, 

When  he  hath  clothed  him  in  the  milk. 

4 Freeing  himself  he  flows  away,  leaving  his  body's  severed  linV 
And  meets  his  own  Companion  here. 

5 He  by  the  daughters  of  the  priest,  like  a fair  youth,  hath  he 

adorned, 

Making  the  milk,  as  7 1 were,  his  robe. 

6 O'er  the  fine  fingers,  through  desire  of  milk,  in  winding  com 

he  goes, 

And  utters  voice  which  he  hath  found. 

7 The  nimble  fingers  have  approached,  adorning  him  the  Lo 

of  Strength  : 

They  grasp  the  vigorous  Courser's  hack. 

8 IFitA  a roar : making  a loud  noise  in  dropping. 

1 On  the  river's  wave : in  the  vasativaH  waters,  which  are  used  tosprin 
the  stalks  Bearing  the  hi/mn  : Prof.  Geldner  explains  this  as  moaning,  ‘ Fc 
ing  aw.iy  th-j  much  coveted  prize,’  Soma  being  regarded  as  a courser  or  ra 
horse  Seo  Vcdisclte  Studien,  I.,  p.  120 

2 Fire  kindred  Companies  : refei ring,  probably,  to  some  saci ifice  institul 
in  common  by  re  preset  datives  of  the  five  Aryan  tribes. 

4 IHs  own  Coinprinimi : Indra.  He  meets  : this  { sanrjato  bhavati)  is  S&yan 
explanation  of  samjighnate  ; but  it  is  not  easy  to  sco  how  the  word  can  b 
this  signification. 

5 Daughters  : or  granddaughters  ; the  fingers. 

0 Which  hf  hath  found  : ‘ which  the  worshipper  recognizes.’ — Wilson, 


THE  MG  VEDA. 


281 


UYMN  16.] 

8 Comprising  all  the  treasures  that  are  in  the  heavens  and  on 
the  earth, 

Come,  Soma,  as  our  faithful  Friend. 

' HYMN  XV.  Soma  Pavamftna, 

Through  the  fine  fingers,  with  the  song,  this  Hero  comes  with 
rapid  cars, 

Going  to  Indra’s  special  place. 

2 In  holy  thought  he  ponders  much  for  the  great  worship  of 

the  Gods, 

Where  the  Immortals  have  their  seat. 

3 Like  a good  horse  is  he  led  out,  when  on  the  path  that  shines 

with  light 

The  mettled  steeds  exert  their  strength. 

4 Ho  brandishes  his  horns  on  high,  and  whets  them,  Bull  who 

leads  the  herd, 

Doing  with  might  heroic  deeds. 

5 He  moves,  a vigorous  Steed,  adorned  with  beauteous  rays  of 

shining  gold, 

Becoming  Sovran  of  the  streams. 

6 He,  over  places  rough  to  pass,  bringing  rich  treasures  closely 

packed, 

Descends  into  the  reservoirs. 

7 Men  beautify  him  in  the  vats,  him  worthy  to  be  beautified, 
Him  who  brings  forth  abundant  food. 

8 Him,  even  him,  the  fingers  ten  and  the  seven  songs  make 

beautiful, 

Well-weaponed,  best  of  gladdeners. 

HYMN  XVI.  Soma  Pavamiina. 

The  pressers  from  the  Soma-press  send  forth  thy  juice  for 
rapturous  joy : 

The  speckled  sap  runs  like  a flood. 


1 Indyus  special  place:  1 Imlra’s  sibode  ’ — WiLon.  In  Hymn  XIII,  1, 
nshkritam  is  explained  by  S&yr  la  as  the  vessel  prcpaied  and  set  apart 

3 Like  a good  horse  : the  text  has  only  hitah  which  may  mean  either  good 
)r  placed  ‘ Placed  (in  the  cart)  he  is  brought.’ — Wilson. 

4 Ifurvs : cf.  IX  5.  2. 

5 Rags  of  shining  gold  : as  the  Moon. 

6 Places  rough  to  pass : the  wool  of  the  strainer  SAyana  gives  a totally 
liflerent  explanation  of  this  Stanza,  See  Wilson’s  Translation.  I have  follow- 
ed Pi  of.  Ludwig. 

8 Seven  songs  : the  songs  of  the  seven  priests. 

Soma  press : onydh,  ablative  dual  of  ont,  signifying  apparently 
or  a vessel,  consisting  of  two  pieces,  used  in  the  preparation 


23*4  THE  II I MIStS  VI  \BVVH 

2 With  strength  we  follow  through  the  sieve  him  who  brii 

might  and  wins  the  kine, 

Enrobed  in  water  with  his  juice. 

3 Pour  on  the  sieve  the  Soma,  ne’er  subdued  in  waters,  waterl^ 
And  make  it  pure  for  Indra's  drink. 

4 Moved  by  the  purifier’s  thought,  the  Soma  flows  into  the  siev 
By  wisdom  it  hath  gained  its  home. 

5 With  humble  homage,  Indra,  have  the  Soma-drops  flowed  foi 

to  thee, 

Contending  for  the  glorious  prize. 

6 Purified  in  his  fleecy  garb,  attaining  every  beauty,  he 
Stands,  hero-like,  amid  the  kine. 

7 Swelling,  as  ’twere,  to  heights  of  heaven,  the  stream  of  t 

creative  juice 

Falls  lightly  on  the  cleansing  sieve. 

8 Thus,  Soma,  purifying  him  who  knoweth  song  mid  living  mi 
Thou  wanderest  through  the  cloth  of  wool. 

HYMN  XVII.  Soma  PavamA 

Like  rivers  down  a steep  descent,  slaying  the  Vritras,  f 
of  zeal, 

The  rapid  Soma-streams  have  flowed. 

2 The  drops  of  Soma  juice  effused  fall  like  the  rain  upon  t 

earth  : 

To  Indra  flow  the  Soma-streams. 

3 With  swelling  wave  the  gladdening  drink,  the  Soma,  flo 

into  the  sieve, 

Loving  the  Gods  and  slaying  fiends. 

4 It  hastens  to  the  pitchers,  poured  upon  the  sieve  it  wa: 

stron  g 

At  sacrifices  through  the  lauds. 

5 Soma,  thou  shinest  mounting  heaven  as  ’twere  above  l’g'i 

triple  realm, 

And  moving  seem’st  to  speed  the  Sun. 

of  the  Soma  juice.  The  woid  is  said  to  be  employed  to  denote,  in  eta  pin 
Cally,  heaven  and  eaith.  ‘ They  who  express  thee,  the  juice  of  heaven  n 
earth.’ — Wilson. 

3 Waterless : dnaptum,  which  S&vana  explains  by  andplam , not  reach 
or  overtaken,  by  enemies.  The  meaning  is  not  clear. 

4 Its  home:  in  the  huge  wooden  vessel  called  dronakalaact. 

5 Contending  for  the  qlorious  prize : like  race- horses.  ‘ Giving  thee  vig*. 
for  the  gieat  conflict.’ — Wilson. 


5 Addressed  to  Soma  as  the  Moon. 


THE  RIQVEDA 


253 


19.] 

him,  the  head  of  sacrifice,  singers  and  bards  have  sung 
-heir  songs,  ° 

Rtering  what  he  loves  to  see. 

The  men,  the  sages  with  their  hymns,  eager  for  help,  deck  thco 
r strong  steed, 

Deck  thee  for  service  of  the  Gods. 

3  Flow  onward  to  the  stream  of  meath : rest  efficacious  in 
thy  home, 

Fair,  to  be  drunk  at  sacrifice. 

HYMN  XVIII.  Soma  Pavamfina. 

Thou,  Soma,  dweller  on  the  hills,  effused,  hast  flowed  into 
the  sieve  : 

All-bounteous  art  thou  in  carouse. 

2 Thou  art  a sacred  Bard,  a Sage ; the  meath  is  offspring  of 

thy  sap  : 

All-bounteous  art  thou  in  carouse. 

3 All  Deities  of  one  accord  have  come  that  they  may  drink 

of  thee  : 

All -bounteous  art  thou  in  carouse. 

4 He  who  containeth  in  his  hands  all  treasures  much  to  be 

desired  : 

All-bounteous  art  thou  in  carouse. 

5 Who  milketh  out  this  mighty  Pair,  the  Earth  and  Heaven, 

like  mother  kine : 

All-bounteous  art  thou  in  carouso. 

6 Who  in  a moment  mightily  floweth  around  these  two  world- 

halves  : 

All-bounteous  art  thou  in  carouse. 

7 The  Strong  One,  being  purified,  hath  in  the  pitchers  cried 

aloud  : 

All-bounteous  art  thou  in  carouse. 


HYMN  XIX.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

D Soma,  being  purified  bring  us  the  wondrous  treasure,  meet 
^°r  lauds,  that  is  in  earth  and  heaven. 


The  head  of  sacrifice : the  most  important  element  of  the  ceremony, 
ecorrtjng  to  Sdyana,  at  the  head,  that  is,  on  the  last  and  most  important  day 
off  Vision  of  the  Soma  juice.  Offering  what  he  loves  to  ste : ‘ eutejtainmg 
auction  for  him  the  all-beholding,' ’—Wilson 

meath  J or  honey.  In  thy  home : in  the  dronakala^a. 

'■  on  the  hills : ‘ pressed  between  the  stones.’ — Wilson. 


284  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK 

2 For  ye  Twain,  Indra,  Soma,  are  Lords  of  the  light,  Lord 

the  kine : 

Great  Rulers,  prosper  ye  our  songs. 

3 The  tawny  Steer,  while  cleansed  among  the  living,  bello’v 

on  the  grass, 

Hath  sunk  and  settled  in  his  homo. 

4 Over  the  Steer’s  productive  flow  the  sacred  songs  w 

resonant, 

The  mothers  of  the  darling  Son. 

5 Hath  he  not,  purified,  impregned  the  kine  who  long  to  n 

their  Lord, 

The  kine  who  yield  the  shining  milk  ? 

6 Bring  near  us  those  who  stand  aloof  : strike  fear  into 

enemies  : 

O Pavamana,  find  us  wealth. 

7 Soma,  bring  down  the  focman’s  might,  his  vigorous  stren 

and  vital  power, 

Whether  he  be  afar  or  near. 

HYMN  XX.  SomaPavan 

Forth  through  the  straining-cloth  the  Sage  flows  to 
banquet  of  the  Gods, 

Subduing  all  our  enemies. 

2 For  he,  as  Pavamana,  sends  thousandfold  treasure  in 

shape 

Of  cattle  to  the  singing-men. 

3 Thou  graspest  all  things  with  thy  mind,  and  purifiest  t 

with  thoughts  : 

As  such,  0 Soma,  find  us  fame. 

4 Pour  lofty  glory  on  us,  send  sure  riches  to  our  liberal  lore 
Bring  food  to  those  who  sing  thy  praise. 

5 As  thou  art  cleansed,  0 Wondrous  Steed,  0 Soma,  thou  1 

entered,  like 

A pious  King,  into  the  songs. 

6 He,  Soma,  like  a courser  in  the  floods  invincible,  made  cle 
With  hands,  is  resting  in  the  jars. 

4 Hymns  are  sung  over  the  Soma-stream,  and  are  called  mothers  of 
precious  juice  because  it  is  prepared  while  they  are  sung 

5 The  kine:  the  vasatlvaii  waters  which  long  to  mingle  with  the  Soma. 

5 Steed : vahne : * bearer  (of  our  offerings)  ’ — Wilson. 

6 Like  a courser : * the  bearer  (of  oblations)’. — Wilson* 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


285 


r 22.] 

bporting,  like  a liberal  chief,  thon  goest,  Soma,  to  the  sieve, 
sliding  the  laud  a Hero’s  strength. 

_ ° HYMN  XXI.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

r 

To  Indra  flow  these  running  drops,  these  Somas  frolicsome  in 

mood, 

Exhilarating,  finding  light ; 

2 Driving  off  foes,  bestowing  room  upon  the  presser,  willingly 
Bringing  their  praiser  vital  force. 

3 Lightly  disporting  them,  the  drops  flow  to  one  common  reservoir, 
And  fall  into  the  river’s  wave. 

4 These  Pavamanas  have  obtained  all  blessings  much  to  be  desired, 
Like  coursers  harnessed  to  a ear. 

5 With  view  to  us,  0 Soma-drops,  bestow  his  manifold  desire 
On  him  who  yet  hath  given  us  naught. 

6 Bring  us  our  wish  with  this  design,  as  a wright  brings  his  new- 

wrought  wheel : 

Flow  pure  and  shining  with  the  stream. 

1 These  drops  have  cried  with  resonant  voice  : liko  swift  steeds 

they  have  run  the  course, 

And  roused  the  good  man’s  hymn  to  life. 

HYMN  XXII.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

These  rapid  Soma-streams  have  stirred  themselves  to  motion 
like  strong  steeds, 

Like  cars,  like  armies  hurried  forth. 

2 Swift  as  wide  winds  they  lightly  move,  like  rain-storms  of 

Parjanya,  like 

The  flickering  flames  of  burning  fire. 

3 These  Soma  juices,  blent  with  curds,  purified,  skilled  in  sa- 

cred hymns, 

Have  gained  by  song  their  hearts’  desire. 

I Immortal,  cleansed,  theso  drops,  siuce  first  they  flowed,  have 
never  wearied,  fain 

To  reach  the  region  and  their  paths.  

7 Chief : S&yana  explains  maichak  by  ddnam , gift. 


5 This  stanza  is  obscure,  and  Sdyana’s  commentary  is  imperfect,  It  seems 
that  the  Soma-drops  are  prayed  to  enrich  the  msti tutor  of  the  sacrifice  who 
has  not  as  yet  rewarded  the  priests 
7 Run  the  course : reached  the  droryxkalasa. 


^ song : vip% : by  knowledge,  according  to  S&yana.  * The  St.  Petersb. 
plains  vip  as  the  twigs  (of.  vepres)  whioh  form  the  bottom  of  the 
Heupport  the  filteriug-cloth,’— Cowell,  in  Wilson s Translation. 


2S (5  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IX 

f>  Advancing  they  have  travelled  o’er  the  ridges  of  the  earth 
and  heaven, 

And  this  the  highest  realm  of  all. 

6 Over  the  heights  have  they  attained  the  highest  thread  tAat 

is  spun  out, 

And  this  which  must  be  deemed  most  high. 

7 Thou,  Soma,  boldest  wealth  in  kine  which  thou  hast  seized 

from  niggard  churls  : 

Thou  calledst  forth  the  outspun  thread. 

HYMN  XXrri.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

Swift  Soma  drops  have  been  effused  in  stream  of  meath,  the 
gladdening  drink, 

For  sacred  lore  of  every  kind. 

2 Hither  to  newer  resting-place  the  ancient  Living  Ones  are 

come. 

They  made  the  Sun  that  he  might  shine. 

3 O Pavamana,  bring  to  us  the  unsacrificing  foeman’s  wealth, 
And  give  us  food  with  progeny. 

4 The  living  Somas  being  cleansed  diffuse  exhilarating  drink, 
Turned  to  the  vat  which  drips  with  meath. 

C>  Soma  flows  on  intelligent,  possessing  sap  and  mighty  strength, 
Brave  Hero  who  repels  the  curse. 

6 For  Indra,  Soma  ! thou  art  cleansed,  a feast-companion  for 

the  Gods : 

Indu,  thou  fain  wilt  win  us  strength. 

7 When  he  had  drunken  draughts  of  this,  Indra  smote  down 

resistless  foes  : 

Yea,  smote  them,  and  shall  smite  them  still. 

HYMN  XXI V.  Soma  PavsmAna. 

Hitherward  have  the  Somas  streamed,  the  drops  while  they 
are  purified  : 

When  blent,  in  waters  they  are  rinsed. 

6 Or,  ‘ Streams  rushing  down  have  filled  the  threads,  moat  excellent,  spread 
out  beneath  ’ ; that  ia,  the  threads  of  the  straining-cloth.  See  note  in  Wilson. 
According  to  S&yana  ‘the  thiead’  is  sacrifice;  and  ‘this  which  must  be 
deemed  most  high  ’ may  be,  as  Ludwig  suggests,  the  place  of  sacrifice  which 
is  also  to  be  held  holy.  Wilson  translates  the  second  line  : — ‘ this  rite  ia 
gloufied  thereby  ’ 

7 From  niggard  churls : or  from  the  Panis.  Thou  calledst  out  the  outspun 
thread:  ‘ thou  hast  called  aloud  at  the  outspread  sacrifice.’ — Wilson. 

2 Hewer- resting-place : a newly- prepared  place  of  sacrifice.  The 
Living  Ones : the  Soma-drups. 


MN  25  3 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


237 


The  milk  hath  run  to  meet  them  like  floods  rushing  down  a 
precipice  : 

They  come  to  Indra,  being  cleansed. 

3 0 Soma  Pavamana,  thou  art  flowing  to  be  Indra’s  drink  : 

The  men  have  seized  and  lead  thee  forth. 

4 Victorious,  to  be  hailed  with  joy,  0 Soma,  flow,  delighting 

men, 

To  him  who  ruleth  o’er  mankind. 

5 Thou,  Indu,  when,  effused  by  stones,  thou  runnest  to  the 

filter,  art 

Heady  for  Indra’s  higli  decree. 

6 Flow  on,  host  Vyitra-slayer ; flow  meet  to  be  hailed  with  joyful 

lauds, 

Pure,  purifying,  wonderful. 

7 Pure,  purifying  is  he  called  the  Soma  of  the  ineath  effused, 
Slayer  of  sinners,  dear  to  Gods. 

HYMN  XXV.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Gheen-hued  ! as  one  who  giveth  strength  flow  on  for  Gods  to 
drink,  a draught 
r*>r  Vayu  and  the  Marut  host. 

2 0 Pav»mana,  sent  by  song,  roaring  about  thy  dwelling-place, 
Pass  into  Vayu  as  Law  bids. 

3 The  Steer  shine^with  the  Deities,  dear  Sage  in  his  appointed 

home, 

Foe-slayer,  most  beloved  by  Gods. 

4 Taking  each  beauteous  form,  he  goes,  desirable,  while  purified, 
Thither  where  the  Immortals  sit. 

5 To  Indra  Soma  flows,  the  Ked,  engendering  song,  exceeding 

wise, 

The  visitor  of  living  men. 

4 To  him  who  ruleth  o’er  mankind : to  Indra. 

5 Ready  for  Imtra’s  high  decree : Wilson,  following  SAyana,  translates  : 
‘an  ample  portion  for  Indra’s  belly.'  See  Bergaignc,  La  Religion  Vedique, 
Hk  210  ft’,  for  the  meaning  of  dhetman  in  the  Kigveda. 

2 Into  Vdyu:  into  the  vessel  appropriated  to  VAyu  — SAyana. 

1 0 The  Red  • arashdh.  : here  explained  by  SAyana  a n — drockamdnah,  shining 
)r  ra(kant  The  visitor  of  living  men : dyushdk . the  meaning  of  this  word 

8 uncertain  The  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon  explains  it  as,  conjointly  with 
V11 ; vv ‘tli  human  co-operation.  Ludwig  in  his  translation  renders  it  by 
SjV  ‘l*1’1  kbenden  besucht/  who  visits  the  living  man  ; but  in  his  Comment- 

that  it  may  mean,  during  the  whole  of  life.  ‘Constantly.’'- 


288 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK  IX. 


6 Flow,  best  exhilarator,  Sage,  flow  to  the  filter  in  a stream 
To  seat  thee  in  the  place  of  song. 

HYMN  XXVI.  Soma 


The  sages  with  the  fingers’  art  have  dressed  and  decked  that 
vigorous  Steed 
Upon  the  lap  of  Aditi. 

2 The  kino  have  called  aloud  to  him  cxhaustless  with,  a thou- 

sand streams, 

To  Indu  who  supporteth  heaven. 

3 Him,  nourisher  of  many,  Sage,  creative  Pavamana,  they 
Have  sent,  by  wisdom,  to  the  sky. 

4 Him,  dweller  with  Vivasv.tn,  they  with  use  of  both  arms  have 

sent  forth, 

The  Lord  of  Speech  infallible. 

5 Him,  green,  beloved,  many-eyed,  the  Sisters  with  the  pressing- 

stones 

Send  down  to  ridges  of  the  sieve. 

6 0 Pavamana,  Indu,  priests  hurry  thee  on  to  Indra,  thee 
Who  aidest  song  and  cheerest  him. 

HYMN  XXVII.  Soma  PavamAna. 

This  Sage,  exalted  by  our  lauds,  flows  to  the  purifying  cloth, 
Scattering  foes  as  lie  is  cleansed. 

2 As  giving  power  and  winning  light,  for  Indra  and  for  Vayu  he 
Is  poured  upon  the  filtering-cloth. 

3 The  men  conduct  him,  Soma,  Steer,  Omniscient,  and  the  Head 

of  Heaven, 

Effused  into  the  vats  of  wood. 


~ R nf  mna  . arkdsya : archaniyaai/endntsya , of  the  adorable  Indra,  accord- 
J toWni.  Arka  has  two  meanings  in  the  Rigveda  (1)  song  or  hymn  <t 
praise  and  (2)  light  or  splendour.  See  Piscliel,  Vedischc  Studien,  X.  pp. 


1 Aditi:  the  earth.  . _ 

2 The  Vine : who  supply  the  milk  that  is  mixed  with  the  Soma  juice. 

a v^unnuU  ■ meaning  here  the  sacrificer.  Of  both  arms : bhutijoh  ; accor  • 

mg  to  s"y^a  = «.thearmsof  the  body.  The  St.  Petersburg  Lex.« 
explains  the  word  as  meaning  a sort  of  vice  or  implement  for  holding  w 
while  it  is  being  cut.  Lord  of  speech : makmg  men  eloquent. 

6 Many-eyJ:  * far-beholding.’-Wilson.  The  Sister,:  the  fingers  of  the 
officiating  piiest.  


3 Omniscient:  or,  all-possessing.  Vat.  of  wood:  vine.hu:  according  to 
Benfey,  into  the  streams  of  water. 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


280 


pLV  29.] 

Longing  for  kine,  longing  for  gold  hath  Indu  Pavama.ua  lowed, 
Still  Conqueror,  never  overcome. 

5 This  Pavamana,  gladdening  draught,  drops  on  the  filtering- 

cloth,  and  then 

Mounts  up  with  Surya  to  the  sky. 

6 To  Indra  in  the  firmament  this  mighty  tawny  Steer  hath  flowed, 
This  Indu,  being  purified. 

HYMN  XXVIII.  Soma  Pavamilna. 

Urged  by  the  men,  this  vigorous  Steed,  Lord  of  the  mind, 
Omniscient, 

Runs  to  the  woollen  straining-cloth. 

2 Within  the  filter  hath  he  flowed,  this  Soma  for  the  Cods 

effused, 

Entering  all  their  essences. 

3 He  shines  in  beauty  there,  this  God  Immortal  in  his  dwelling- 

place, 

Foe-slayer,  dearest  to  the  Gods. 

4 Directed  by  the  Sisters  ten,  bellowing  on  his  way  this  Steer 
Runs  onward  to  the  wooden  vats. 

f)  This  Pavamana,  swift  and  strong,  Omniscient,  gave  splendour 
to 

The  Sun  and  all  his  forms  of  light. 

6 This  Soma,  being  purified,  flows  mighty  and  infallible, 

Slayer  of  sinners,  dear  to  Gods. 

HYMN  XXIX.  Soma  Pavamdna. 

Forward  with  mighty  force  have  flowed  the  currents  of  this 
Steer  effused, 

Of  him  who  sets  him  by  the  Gods. 

2 The  singers  praise  him  with  their  song,  and  learned  priests 

adorn  the  Steed, 

Brought  forth  as  light  that  merits  laud. 

3 These  things  thou  winnest  lightly  while  purified,  Soma,  Lord 

of  wealth  : 

Fill  full  the  sea  that  claims  our  praise. 

4 Longing  for  kine:  who  supply  milk  to  mix  with  the  Soma  juice.  Gold  ■ 
worn  on  the  finger  of  the  priest  who  presses  out  the  juice.  Lowed . made 
a noiRe  m dropping. 

5 Mounts  up : as  the  Moon. 

1 Who  sets  him,  by  the  Qods  : or,  who  decorates  the  Gods.  ‘Who  seeks  to 
Mirpass  the  gods/- Wilson. 

iese  things : for  which  we  pray.  The  sea : the  Soma-vat  or  reservoir. 


290 


THE  HYMNS  OP 


[HOOK  I. 


4 Winning  nil  precious  tilings  at  once,  flow  on,  O Soma,  wii 

thy  stream  : 

Drive  to  one  placo  our  enemies. 

5 Preserve  us  from  the  godless,  from  ill-omened  voice  of  oi 

and  all, 

That  so  we  may  be  freed  from  blame. 

6 ()  Tndu,  as  thou  flowest  on  bring  us  the  wealth  of  earth  ai 

heaven, 

And  splendid  vigour,  in  thy  stream. 


1 1 \ M N XXX.  Soma  Pavawftn 

Streams  of  this  Potent  One  have  flowed  easily  to  the  strai 
ing-cloth  : 

While  he  is  cleansed  he  lifts  his  voice. 

2 Indu,  by  pressers  urged  to  speed,  bellowing  out  while  bcautifie 
Sends  forth  a very  mighty  sound. 

3 Pour  on  us,  Soma,  with  thy  stream  man-conquering  migl 

which  many  crave, 

Accompanied  with  hero  sons. 

1 Hither  hath  Pavamana  flowed,  Soma  flowed  hither  in  a streat 
To  settle  in  the  vats  of  wood. 

5 To  waters  with  the  stones  they  drive  thee  tawny-hued,  mo; 

rich  in  sweets, 

O Indu,  to  be  Indra’s  drink. 

6 For  Indra,  for  the  Thunderer  press  the  Soma  very  rich  in  sw  eet 
Lovely,  inspiriting,  for  strength. 

HYMN  XXXI.  Soma  Pavam&n 

The  Soma  drops,  benevolent,  come  forth  as  they  are  purifie 
Bestowing  wealth  which  all  may  see. 

2 0 Inin,  high  o’er  heaven  and  earth  be  thou,  increaser  of  oi 

might : 

The  Master  of  all  strength  be  thou. 

3 The  winds  are  gracious  in  their  love  to  thet),  the  rivers  flo 

to  thee  : 

Soma,  they  multiply  thy  power. 


5 Ill-omened  voice  . srantXt,  explained  l>y  Sityana  as  = sabdttnninddrilpdt^oM 
or  word  iu  the  form  of  blame;  the  raging  fury  of  the  demon  or  the  godle 
man,  according  to  Grassmann.  

2 A very  mighty  sound  : or,  a sound  which  Indra  loves. 

1 Wealth  which  all  may  see : 1 intellectual  wealth.’—  Wilson. 

3 The  winds,  cf.  ‘ V&yu  is  Soma's  guardian  God  ’ (X.  85.  5). 


IfYtfy  32.]  THE  RIGVEDA.  291 

4 Soma,  wax  great.  From  every  side  may  vigorous  powers  unite 

in  thee : 

Be  in  the  gathoring-place  of  strength. 

5 For  thee,  brown-huod  ! the  kine  have  poured  imperishable  oil 

and  milk 

Aloft  on  the  sublimest  height. 

G Friendship,  0 Indu,  wo  desire  with  thee  who  bearest  noble 
arms, 

With  thee,  0 Lord  of  all  that  is. 

HYMN  XXXII.  Soma Pavam&na. 

The  rapture-shedding  Soma-drops,  effused  in  our  assembly, 
have 

Flowed  forth  to  glorify  our  prince. 

2 Then  Trita’s  Maidens  onward  urge  the  Tawny-coloured  with 

the  stones, 

Indu  for  Indra,  for  his  drink. 

3 Now  like  a swan  he  maketh  all  the  company  sing  each  his 

hymn  : 

He,  like  a steed,  is  bathed  in  milk. 

4 0 Soma,  viewing  heaven  and  earth,  thou  runnest  like  a dart- 

ing deer : 

Set  in  the  place  of  sacrifice. 

5 The  cows  have  sung  with  joy  to  him,  even  as  a woman  to  her 

love : 

He  came  as  to  a settled  race. 

6 Bestow  illustrious  fame  on  us,  both  on  our  liberal  lords  and  me, 
Glory,  intelligence,  and  wealth. 

i  Tliis  stanza  has  occurred  before  See  I.  91.  16.  Be  in  the  gathering  place 
of  strength  • be  the  cential  point  and  source  of  all  power. 

5 The  kine  : of  the  clouds,  the  waters.  Oil  and  milk  : sweet  and  fertilizing 
ram.  Or  the  cows  who  supply  milk  for  the  libation  may  be  intended,  in 
which  ease  ‘ the  sublimest  ’ would  be  the  place  of  sacrifice. 

1 Our  prince  : the  noble  wlm  institutes  the  sacrifice. 

2 Tritas  Maidens : the  fingers  of  the  priest.  See  IX.  38.  2. 

3 Like  a swan:  as  a sentinel  hansa  (swan,  wild-goose,  or  flamingo)  at  the 
appi  oach  of  danger  sounds  a note  of  alarm  which  is  answered  by  all  the 
rest. — Ludwig. 

4 Darting:  Sftyana  takes  taktah  with  ‘thou,’  Soma,  and  explains  it  by 
ffdvyaih  payaldihhirmisritah  san , being  mixed  with  milk,  curds,  etc.  Else- 
where S&yana  explains  it  by  ‘ swift.’ 

5 Cows  : praises,  according  to  Sly  ana.  As  to  a settled  race:  as  a horse  is 
brought  to  run  a race  that  has  been  arranged.  ' As  a hero  hastens  to  the 
welcome  contest.’ — Wilson. 


292  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOR  a 

HYMN  XXXIII.  Soma  Pavamftna 

Like  waves  of  waters,  skilled  in  song  the  juices  of  the  Some 
speed 

Onward,  as  buffaloes  to  woods. 

2 With  stream  of  sacrifice  the  brown  bright  drops  have  flowee 

with  strength  in  store 
Of  kine  into  the  wooden  vats. 

3 To  Indra,  Vayu,  Yaruna,  to  Vishnu,  and  the  Maruts,  flow 
The  drops  of  !Soma  juice  effused. 

4 Three  several  words  are  uttered  : kine  are  lowing,  cows  who 

give  their  milk  : 

The  Tawuy-hued  goes  bellowing  on. 

5 The  young  and  sacred  mothers  of  the  holy  rite  have  uttered 

praise  : 

They  decorate  the  Child  of  Heaven. 

6 From  every  side,  0 Soma,  for  our  profit,  pour  thou  forth 

four  seas 

Filled  full  of  riches  thousandfold. 

HYMN  XXXIV.  Soma  Pavam&na, 

The  drop  of  Soma  juice  effused  flows  onward  with  this  stream 
impelled, 

Pending  strong  places,  with  its  might. 

2 Poured  forth,  to  Indra,  Varuna,  to  Vayu  and  the  Marut  host, 
To  Vishnu,  flows  the  Soma  juice. 

3 With  stonos  they  press  the  Soma  forth,  the  Strong  conducted 

by  the  strong  : 

They  milk  the  liquor  out  with  »vkill. 

4 ’Tis  he  whom  Trita  must  refine,  ’tis  he  who  shall  make  Indra 

glad : 

The  Tawny  One  is  decked  with  tints. 


4 Three  several  words  : according  to  Sftyana,  trividhd  stutih , praise  of  three 
kinds,  from  the  three  Vedas.  ‘ The  puests  utter  the  three  sacred  texts.’— 
Wilson.  Probably  three  tiiplets  chanted  during  the  ceiemony.  See  Beigaigue, 
I.  288. 

5 Mothers  of  the  holy  rite : apparently,  the  cows  who  supply  milk  for 
libations.  The  Child  of  Heaven  : the  Soma,  which,  according  to  a text  quoted 
by  Sftyana,  4 was  in  the  third  heaven  from  hence/ 

fl  Four  seas  : imaginary  seas,  to  correspond  with  the  four  quarters  of  heaven. 

1 Strong  places : the  strongholds  of  enemies,  the  fiends  who  withhold  the 
fain. 

4 Trita : the  preparer  of  the  Celestial  Soma. 


THE  MIO VEDA. 


288 


UYMK  36.] 

5 Him  do  the  Sons  of  Pi'isui  milk,  the  dwelling-place  of  sacrifice, 
Oblation  lovely  and  most  dear. 

6 To  him  in  one  united  stream  these  songs  flow  on  straight 

forward  : he, 

Loud-voiced,  hath  made  the  milch-kine  low. 

HYMN  XXXV.  Soma  Pavamdna. 

Pour  forth  on  us  abundant  wealth,  0 Pavam&na,  with  thy 
stream, 

Wherewith  thou  mayest  find  us  light. 

2 0 Indu,  swayer  of  the  sea,  shaker  of  all  things,  flow  thou  on, 
Bearer  of  wealth  to  us  with  might. 

3 With  thee  for  Hero,  Valiant  One ! may  we  subdue  our  ene- 

mies : 

Let  what  is  precious  flow  to  us. 

4 Indu  arouses  strength,  the  Sage  who  strives  for  victory, 

winning  power, 

Discovering  holy  works  and  means. 

5 Mover  of  speech,  we  robe  him  with  our  songs  as  he  is  purified, 
Soma,  the  Guardian  of  the  folk ; 

G On  whose  way,  Loid  of  Holy  Law,  most  rich,  as  he  is  purified, 
The  people  all  have  set  their  hearts. 

HYMN  XXXVI.  Soma  Pavam&na. 


Forth  from  the  mortar  is  the  juice  sent,  like  a car-horse,  to 
the  sieve : 

The  Steed  steps  forward  to  the  goal. 

2 Thus,  Soma,  watchful,  bearing  well,  cheering  the  Gods,  flow 
past  the  sieve, 

Turned  to  the  vat  that  drops  with  mcath. 


•r>  The  dwell  in  g-^dace  of  sacrifice : the  Soma-plant  contains  within  itself  the 
chief  element  of  sacrifice,  and  the  pieparation  of  the  juice  is  only  the  devel- 
opment of  its  nature. — Ludwig. 


2 The  sea  : the  reservoir  of  Soma  juice. 

4 Discovering  holy  works  and  means : * acquainted  with  sacred  rites  and 
arms.’ — Wilson. 

6 On  whose  way  : on  whose  statutes  or  decrees. 


1 To  the  goal : Mrshman  : apparently,  a line  or  furrow  drawn  across  the 
end  of  the  race-course.  In  I.  116  17,  S&yana  explains  Mrshman  as  a piece 
of  wood  serving  as  a goal,  but  in  this  place  he  takes  it  to  mean,  ‘ the  God- 
attracting  battle-field  called  a sacrifice,’  devdndmdkarshanavati  yajndkhye  sang • 
ro‘m  ®ee  P°weH,s  note  ir.  Wilson’s  Translation. 

^ The  vat ; the  dronakalafa. 


294  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IX. 

3 Excellent  Pavam&na,  make  the  lights  shine  brightly  out 

for  us  : 

Speed  us  to  mental  power  and  skill. 

4 He,  beautified  by  pious  men,  and  coming  from  their  hands 

adorned, 

Flows  through  the  fleecy  straining-cloth. 

5 May  Soma  pour  all  treasures  of  the  heavens,  the  earth,  the 

firmament 

Upon  the  liberal  worshipper. 

6 Thou  mountest  to  the  height  of  heaven,  0 Soma,  seeking 

steeds  and  kine, 

And  seeking  heroes,  Lord  of  Strength  ! 

HYMN  XXXVIT.  Soma  Pavamtaa. 

Soma,  the  Steer,  effused  for  draught,  flows  to  the  purifying  sieve, 
Slaying  the  fiends,  loving  the  Gods 

2 Far-sighted,  tawny-coloured,  he  flows  to  the  siove,  intelligent, 
Bellowing,  to  his  place  of  rest. 

3 This  vigorous  Pavamana  runs  forth  to  the  luminous  realm  of 

heaven, 

Fiend-slayer,  through  the  fleecy  sieve. 

4 This  Pavamana  up  above  Trita’s  high  ridge  hath  made  the  Sun, 
Together  with  the  Sisters,  shine. 

5 This  Vritra-slaying  Steer,  effused,  Soma,  room-giver,  ne’ei 

deceived, 

Hath  gone,  as  ’twerc,  to  win  the  spoil. 

G Urged  onward  by  the  sage,  the  God  speeds  forward  to  the 
casks  of  wood, 

Indu  to  Indra  willingly. 

HYMN  XXXVIII.  Soma  Pavamana 

THrs  Steer,  this  Chariot,  rushes  through  the  woollen  filter 
as  he  goes 

To  war  that  wins  a thousand  spoils. 


1 For  draught : pttdye  : ‘ for  the  drinking  (of  the  gods).’ — Wilson. 

2 Intelligent:  or,  endowed  with  strength. 

4 Trita!  s high  ridge  : according  to  S&ya’ia,  ‘ the  high  place  (of  the  sacrifice 
of  Trita'  the  ilishi.  But  the  heavenly  home  of  Trita,  the  celestial  preparer  o 
the  Soma  for  Indra,  is  intended.  1'he  Sisters:  the  Dawns. 

6 Willingly:  mahhdnd : ‘ pleuteoualy.' — Ludwig.  ‘ In  his  might.’— Cowell 

1 To  war  that  wins  a thousand  spoils  : more  literally,  to  thousandfold  booty 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


295 


gYIMf  39.] 

2 The  Dames  of  Trita  with  the  stones  onward  impel  this 

Tawny  One, 

Indu  to  Jndra  for  his  drink. 

3 Ten  active  fingers  carefully  adorn  him  here ; they  make  him 

bright 

And  beauteous  for  the  gladdening  draught. 

4 He  like  a falcon  settles  down  amid  the  families  of  men, 
Speeding  like  lover  to  his  love. 

5 This  young  exhilarating  juice  looks  downward  from  its  place 

in  heaven, 

This  Soma-drop  that  pierced  the  sieve. 

6 Poured  for  the  draught,  this  tawny  juice  flows  forth,  intel- 

ligent, crying  out, 

Unto  the  well-belovi;d  place. 

HYMN  XXXIX.  Soma  Pavain&ua. 

Flow  on,  0 thou  of  lofty  thought,  flow  swift  in  thy  beloved 
form, 

Saying,  I go  where  dwell  the  Cods. 

2 Preparing  what  is  unprepared,  and  bringing  store  of  food 

to  man, 

Make  thou  the  rain  descend  from  heaven. 

3 With  might,  bestowing  power,  the  juice  enters  the  purifying 

sieve, 

Far-seeing,  sending  forth  its  light. 

1 This  is  it  which  in  rapid  course  hath  with  the  river’s  wave 

flowed  down 

From  heaven  upon  the  straining-cloth. 

5 Inviting  him  from  far  away,  aud  oven  from  near  at  hand,  the 
juice 

For  Indra  is  poured  forth  as  meath. 

C In  union  they  have  sung  the  hymn  : with  stones  they  urge  the 
Tawny  One. 

Sit  in  the  place  of  sacrifice. 

2 The.  Dam €9  of  Trita:  as  Tiitais  the  celestial  purifier  of  the  Sonia,  the 
fingers  of  the  earthly  purifiers  aie  called  hie  dames,  or  his  maidens  us  hi 

IX.  32.  2. 

5 From  its  place  in  heaven  : or  divtih  may  be  the  genitive  ease,  taken  with 
the  Child  of  Heaven,  as  in  IX.  *33.  5. 

® The  well-beloved  place:  the  dronakalasa  or  vat  in  which  it  rests. 

2 Preparing  what  is  unprepared  : ‘ consecrating  the  uuconsecrated  worship- 
per or  place/  ia  S&yana’s  explanation, 
fi  bit : 0 Gods.— Siyana, 


296  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  IX. 

HYMN  XL.  Soma  Pavam&ua. 

The  Very  Active  hath  assailed,  while  purified,  all  enemies  : 
They  deck  the  Sage  with  holy  songs. 

2 The  Red  hath  mounted  to  his  place  ; to  Indra  goes  the  mighty 

juice : J 

He  settles  in  his  firm  abode. 

3 0 Indu,  Soma,  send  us  now  great  opulence  from  every  side 

Pour  on  us  treasures  thousandfold.  1 * 3 * 

4 0 Soma  Pavamana,  bring,  Indu,  all  splendours  hitherward*. 
Find  for  us  food  in  boundless  store. 

5 As  thou  art  cleansed,  bring  hero  strength  and  riches  to  thy 

worshipper, 

And  prosper  thou  the  singer’s  hymns. 

C 0 Indu,  Soma,  being  cleansed,  bring  hither  riches  doubly- 
piled, 

Wealth,  mighty  Indu,  meet  for  lauds. 

HYMN  XLI.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Active  and  bright  have  they  come  forth,  impetuous  in  speed 
bke  bulls, 

Driving  the  black  skin  far  away. 

2 Quelling  the  ntcless  Dasyu,  may  we  think  upon  the  bridge  of 

bliss, 

Leaving  the  bridge  of  woe  behind, 

3 The  mighty  Pavamana’s  io*ir  is  heard  as  ’twere  the  rush  of  rain  : 
Lightnings  are  flashing  to  the  sky. 

4 Pour  out  on  us  abundant  food,  when  thou  art  pressed,  0 Indu, 

wealth 

In  kine  and  gold  and  steeds  and  spoil. 

5 Flow  on  thy  way,  Most  Active,  thou  : fill  full  the  mighty  heav- 

ens and  earth, 

As  Dawn,  as  Surya  with  his  beams. 


2 The  Red:  Soma.  II is  place:  t he  dronaka fasti,  or  reservoir.  His  firm 
ibode  : heaven. 

6 Doubly -piled . dvib&rhusam  : according  to  S&yana,  ‘ from  both  worlds, 
leaven  and  earth  ‘ ^ ^ 

1 They:  the  Soma  juices.  The  black  skin  : meaning,  apparently,  both  tbe 

lack  pall  or  covering  of  night  and  the  lUkshasas  or  dark-skinned  Dasyus  or 
mstile  aborigines. 

3 The  cleansing  of  the  terrestiial  Soma  is  identified  with  the  purification 

>f  the  celestial  uectar  accompanied  by  rain  and  lightning.  See  Hillebrandt, 
V.  M,  343,  3(52,  . 


HYMN  43.]  Tilt'  R10YEDA.  197 

g On  every  side,  0 Soma,  flow  round  us  with  thy  protecting 

stream, 

As  Rasa  flows  around  the  world. 

HYMN  XLII.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

Engendering  the  Sun  in  floods,  engendering  heaven’s  lights, 
greeu-hued, 

Robed  in  the  waters  and  the  milk, 

2 According  to  primeval  plan  this  Soma,  with  his  stream,  effused 
Flows  purely  on,  a God  for  Gods. 

3 For  him  victorious,  waxen  great,  the  juices  with  a thousand 

powers 

Ate  purified  for  winning  spoil. 

4 Shedding  (he  ancient  fluid  he  is  poured  into  the  cleansing  sieve : 
He,  thundering,  hath  produced  the  Gods. 

5 Soma,  while  purifying,  sends  hither  all  things  to  be  desired, 
He  sends  the  Gods  who  stiengthen  Law. 

C Soma,  effused,  pour  on  us  wealth  in  kine,  in  heroes,  steeds, 
and  spoil, 

Send  us  abundant  store  of  food. 

HYMN  XLII I.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

We  will  enrobe  with  sacred  song  the  Lovely  One  who,  ns  a 
Steed, 

Is  decked  with  milk  for  rapturous  joy. 

2 All  songs  of  ours  desiring  grace  adorn  him  in  the  ancient  way, 
Indu  for  Indra,  for  his  drink. 

3 Soma  flows  on  when  purified,  belov6d  and  adorned  with  songs, 
Songs  of  the  sage  Medhyatithi. 

4 0 Soma  Pavamana,  find  exceeding  glorious  wealth  for  us, 
Wealth,  Indu,  fraught  with  boundless  might.. 

5 Like  courser  racing  to  the  prize  Indu,  the  lover  of  the  Gods, 
Hoars,  as  he  passes,  in  the  sieve. 

6 R'Utd : a mythical  stream  that  flows  round  the  atwospheie  and  the  earth. 
See  V.  41.  15,  and  X.  108.  1. 

1 In  floods : in  the  waters  on  high  ; in  the  firmament. 

4 ILiik  produced  the  Gods:  yatrasomo  ’bhishihjate  Ultra  devd  niyatamprldur- 
vhavanti ; where  Soma  is  effused,  there  the  gods  constantly  appear. — !Sft)ana. 

1 ds  a steed : is  bathed  in  w'^ter.  For  rapturous  joy  : 1 for  the  exhilaration 
^of  the  gods)  ^-Wilson. 

* Medhydtithi : the  Rishi  of  the  hymn, 

6 daciny  to  the  prize;  vdjasrit ; ‘rushing  into  battle.’ — Wilson. 


208  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IX. 

6 Flow  on  thy  way  to  win  us  strength,  to  speed  the  sage  who 
praises  thee  : 

Soma,  bestow  heioic  power. 

HYMN  XLIY.  Soma  Pavamflna. 

Indu,  to  us  for  this  great  rite,  bearing  ns  ’twere  thy  wave  to 
Gods, 

Unwearied,  thou  art  flowing  forth. 

2 Pleased  with  the  hymn,  impelled  by  prayer,  Soma  is  hurried 

far  away, 

The  Wise  One  in  the  Singer’s  stream. 

3 Watchful  among  the  Gods,  this  juice  advances  to  the  cleans- 

ing sieve : 

Soma,  most  active,  travels  on. 

4 Flow  onward,  seeking  strength  for  us,  embellishing  the  sacri- 

fice : 

The  priest  with  trimmed  grass  calleth  thee. 

5 May  Soma,  ever  bringing  power  to  Bhaga  and  to  Vayu,  Sage 
And  Hero,  lead  us  to  the  Gods. 

C So,  to  increase  our  wealth  to-day,  Tnspirer,  best  of  Furthered, 
Win  for  us  strength  and  high  renown. 

HYMN  XLY.  Soma  Pavamflna. 

Flow,  thou  who  viowest  men,  to  give  delight,  to  entertain  the 
Gods, 

Indu,  to  Indra  for  his  drink. 

2 Stream  to  thine  embassy  for  us  : thou  hastencst,  for  Indra,  tc 
The  Gods,  0 better  than  our  friends. 

3 We  balm  thee,  red  of  hue,  with  milk  to  fit  thee  for  the  rap 

turous  joy  : 

Unbar  for  us  the  doors  of  wealth. 


6 Heroic  power : ‘excellent  male  offspring.’ — Wilson. 


1 For  this  great  rite:  ‘to  give  us  abundant  wealth.’ — Wilson.  Unwearied 
ay  ft  sy  ah  : according  to  Sftvana,  this  is  the  name  of  the  Kishi : ‘ AyA-sy 
(goeth)  towards  the  gods  (in  sacrifice).’ — Wilson. 


2 Thou  hastenest : S:\yana  gives  a different  explanation  of  this  part  of  tb 
stanza  : ‘thou  (who)  art  drunk  for  Indra,  (pour)  on  the  gods  wealth  for  (ll 
their)  friends.’ — Wilson.  I have  adopted  Ludwig’s  interpretation. 

3 We  balm  thee , red  of  hue:  or,  ‘Yea,  we  adorn  thee,  red.’  For  the  ra j 
turous  joy  : madly  a : ‘for  the  purpose  of  exhilaration.’— Wilson, 


HYMN  40.]  TUB  RIOVEDA.  299 

4 He  through  the  sieve  hath  passed,  as  comes  a courser  to  the 

pole,  to  run : 

Indu  belongs  unto  the  Gods. 

5 All  friends  have  lauded  him  as  he  sports  in  the  wood,  beyond 

the  fleece  : 

Singers  have  chanted  Indu’s  praise. 

6 Flow,  Indu,  with  that  stream  wherein  steeped  thou  announc- 

ost  to  the  man 

Who  worships  thee  heroic  strength. 

HYMN  XLVI.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

Like  able  coursers  they  have  been  sent  forth  to  be  the  feast 
of  Gods, 

Joying  in  mountains,  flowing  on 

2 To  Vayu  flow  the  Soma-streams,  the  drops  of  juice  made 

beautiful 

Like  a bride  dowered  by  her  sire. 

3 Pressed  in  the  mortar,  these,  the  drops  of  juice,  the  Somas 

rich  in  food, 

Give  strength  to  Indra  with  their  work. 

4 Deft-handed  men,  run  hither,  seize  the  brilliant  juices  blent 

with  meal, 

And  cook  with  milk  the  gladdening  draught. 

5 Thus,  Soma,  Conqueror  of  wealth  ! flow,  finding  furtherance 

for  us, 

Giver  of  ample  opulence. 

6 This  Pavamana,  meet  to  be  adorned,  the  fingers  ten  adorn, 
The  draught  that  shall  make  Indra  glad. 


4 To  the  pole  : the  meaning  of  dhuram  here  is  not  clear,  and  the  compari- 
son is  not  obvious.  ‘As  a horse  in  going  passes  the  shaft  (of  the  chariot).’ — 
Wil«on  ‘As  a horse  (presses)  through  the  yoke,’ — Grassmanu.  Ludwig 
suggests  * hedge  ’ or  ‘ barrier  ’ as  the  probable  meaning  of  the  word  in  this 
place . 

5 fn  the  wood,  beyond  theflete  ■ when  he  has  passed  through  the  woollen 
strainer  and  fallen  into  the  wooden  trough  or  vat.  Singers:  ndvtth:  shouts 

joy,  according  to  the  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon. 

1 They  have  been  sent  forth  : asrigran  (effusi  sunt)  is  applicable  both  to  the 
effused  Soma-drops  and  to  hoi  sea  loosed  or  started  for  a race.  Joying  in 
mountains : coming  from  plants  grown  on  hills. 

fren  ^0w,^’ec^  % her  sire ; meaning,  perhaps,  possessed  of  property  inherited 

4 I) eft-handed  : suhastyah,  cannot  be  satisfactorily  accounted  for.  Suhastyd , 
* dual,  may  have  been  the  original  reading.  See  Ludwig’s  Commentary,  Vol. 
Jj  V P 347,  348. 


800  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IX, 

HYMN  XLVII.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Great  as  he  was,  Soma  hath  gained  strength  by  this  high 
solemnity  : 

Joyous  he  riseth  like  a bull. 

2 His  task  is  done : his  crushings  of  the  Dasyus  are  made 

manifest : 

He  sternly  reckoneth  their  debts. 

3 Soon  as  his  song  of  praise  is  born,  the  Soma,  Indra’s  juice, 

becomes 

A thousand- winning  thunderbolt. 

4 Seer  and  Sustainer,  he  himself  dcsireth  riches  for  the  sage 
When  he  embellisheth  his  songs. 

5 Fain  would  they  both  win  riches  as  in  races  of  the  steeds.  In  wai 
Thou  art  upon  the  conquerors’  side. 

HYMN  XLVITI.  Soma  Pavatoftna 

With  sacrifice  we  seek  to  thee  kind  Cherisher  of  manly  might 
In  mansions  of  the  lofty  heavens  ; 

2 Gladdening,  crusher  of  the  bold,  ruling  with  very  mighty  sway, 
Destroyer  of  a hundred  forts. 

3 Hence,  Sapient  One ! the  Falcon,  strong  of  wing,  unwearied 

brought  thee  down, 

Lord  over  riches,  from  the  sky. 

4 That  each  may  see  the  light,  the  Bird  brought  us  the  guarc 

of  Law,  the  Friend 
Of  all,  the  speeder  through  the  air. 

5 And  now,  sent  forth,  it  hath  attained  to  mighty  power  anc 

majesty, 

Most  active,  ready  to  assist. 

1 Riseth  : or,  roareth.  Sabdam  karoti — SAyapa. 

2 He  sternly  reckoneth  their  debts  : ‘ rcbolute  lie  acquits  the  debts  (of  tli 
wot  shipper)  ’ — Wilson. 

3 A thousand-winning  thunderbolt : all-powerful  to  slay  the  wicked  and  t 
reward  worshipped. 

4 Sustainer  ■ I follow  Ludwig  in  taking  vidhartdri  as  a nominative  singulai 
Hut  see  Cowell’s  note  in  Wilson’s  Translation. 

5 They  both  * Soma  and  the  sage  or  singer — Ludwig.  SAyana  interpret 
the  stanza  differently  : — ‘ Thou  desirest  to  give  wealth  to  those  who  conque 
in  combat  as  (men  offer  fodder)  to  horses  in  battle.’ — Wilson. 

1 Kind  Cherisher  of  manly  might : 1 2 3 4 auspicious  bearing  wealth.* — Wilson. 

2 Hundred  fort* : cf.  IY  20.  3. 

3 The  Falcon  : see  IV.  26  and  27.  . 

4 The  Friend  of  all : or,  the  common  possession.  The  speeder  through  tl 
air ; rajasttiram ; * the  showerer  of  water.' — Wilson, 


BY MN  50.] 


THE  RIGVEDA. 


301 


HYMN  XLIX.  Soma  PavamUna. 

Pour  down  the  rain  upon  us,  pour  a wave  of  waters  from  the 

sky, 

And  plenteous  store  of  wholesome  food. 

2 Flow  onward  with  that  stream  of  thine,  whereby  the  cows 

have  come  to  us, 

The  kine  of  strangers  to  our  home. 

3 Chief  Friend  of  Gods  in  sacred  rites,  pour  on  us  fatness  with 

thy  stream, 

Pour  down  on  us  a flood  of  rain. 

4 To  give  us  vigour,  with  thy  stream  run  through  the  fleecy 

straining  cloth  : 

For  verily  the  Gods  will  hear. 

5 Onward  hath  Pavnmana  flowed  and  beaten  off  the  Rakshasas, 
Flashing  out  splendour  as  of  old. 

HYMN  L.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

Loud  as  a river’s  roaring  wave  thy  powers  have  lifted  up 
themselves : 

Urge  on  thine  arrow’s  sharpened  point. 

2 At  thine  effusion  upward  rise  three  voices  full  of  joy,  when  thou 
Flo  west  upon  the  fleecy  ridge. 

3 On  to  the  fleece  they  urge  with  stones  the  tawny  well-beloved 

One, 

Even  Pavamana,  dropping  meath. 

4 Flow  with  thy  current  to  the  sieve,  0 Sage  most  powerful  to 

cheer, 

To  seat  thee  in  the  place  of  song. 

5 Flow,  Most  Exhilarating  ! flow  anointed  with  the  milk  for 

halm, 

Indu,  for  Tndra,  for  his  drink. 


4 The  Gods  will  hear : the  sound  that  thou  makes t in  flowing  — S&yana, 

5 Flashing  out  splendour  as  of  old  . or,  ‘ Making  lights  shine  as  erst  they 

shone  ’ 

1 Urge  on  thine  arrow's  sharpened  point : vdrtdsya  chad  ay  d pa  vim  : apparent- 
ly a bold  metaphorical  expression  for  ‘make  a noise  like  that  of  a discharged 
arrow.’  ‘ Emit  thy  sound  like  that  of  a (rushing)  arrow  ’ —Wilson.  Or 
winds ij a may  mean  of  (thy)  reed,  pipe,  flute,  oi  other  musical  instrument,  and 
htyana  explains  pavim  by  sabdam.  Benfey  accoidinglv  (Sftmaveda,  II.  5.  1. 
5.  1.)  renders  the  passage  : ‘ Erhebe  deiner  Flote  Schall.’  ' Lift  up  the  music 
°f  thy  flute.’  According  to  Hillebrandt,  V.  M , I.  p.  43,  the  reed  or  arrow 
weans  the  sharp-pointed  stalk  of  the  Soma-plant. 

2 Three  voices  full  of  joy : or,  three  several  joyful  words.  See  IX.  33.  4. 
I he  fleecy  ridge : * the  summit  of  the  fleece.’ — Wilson. 

4 In  the  place  of  song : see  IX.  25,  6.  * On  Indra’s  lap.’— Wilson. 


302  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IX, 

HYMN  LI.  Soma  Pavam&na, 

Adiivaryu,  on  the  filter  pour  the  Soma  juice  expressed  with 
stones, 

And  make  it  pure  for  Indra’s  drink. 

2 Pour  out  for  Indra,  Thunder-armed,  the  milk  of  heaven,  the 

Soma’s  juice, 

Most  excellent,  most  rich  in  sweets. 

3 These  Gods  and  all  the  Marut  host,  Indu ! enjoy  this  juice  o 

thine, 

This  Pavamana’s  flowing  meath. 

4 For,  Soma,  thou  hast  been  effused,  strengthening  for  the  wilt 

carouse, 

O Steer,  the  singer,  for  our  help. 

5 Flow  with  thy  stream,  Far-sighted  One,  effused,  into  the  cleans 

ing  sieve : 

Flow  on  to  give  us  strength  and  fame. 

HYMN  LI  I.  Soma  PavRmftm 

Wealth-winner,  dwelling  in  the  sky,  bringing  us  vigour  wit' 
the  juice, 

Flow  to  the  filter  when  effused. 

2 So,  in  thine  ancient  ways,  may  lie,  beloved,  with  a thousand 

streams 

Run  o’er  the  fleecy  straining-cloth. 

3 Him  who  is  like  a caldron  shake  : 0 Indu,  shake  thy  gift  to  u 
Shake  it,  aimed  Warrior  ! with  thine  arms. 

4 Indu,  invoked  with  many  a prayer,  bring  down  the  vigour o 

these  men, 

Of  him  who  threatens  us  with  war. 

5 Indu,  Wealth  giver,  with  thine  help  pour  out  for  us  a hundred 

yea, 

A thousand  of  thy  pure  bright  streams. 


4 For  the  ivild  carouse : ‘ for  speedy  exhilaration.’ — Wilson. 

2 May  he : the  juice,  regarded  as  distinct  from  Soma  who  is  addressed. 

3 Him  who  is  Wee  a caldron  - beat  or  bruise  the  Soma  that  is  full  of  j|1,c 
as  a caldron  is  of  water.  With  thine  arms  : or,  with  the  blows  (of  the  pressing 
stones)  The  meaning  of  the  second  and  third  ‘shake’  seems  to  be  ‘sen 
rapidly.’  ‘ (Soma),  send  (us)  him  who  is  like  a pot ; Indu,  send  us  now  wealth 
swift-flowing  (Soma),  send  it  with  blows  (of  the  stones).’ — Wilson.  Professc 
Grassmann  says  that  by  ‘ him  who  is  like  a caldron’  the  wealthy  enemy 
intended,  whose  possessions  are  to  be  poured  out  upon  the  pious  worshipped 


HYMN  55.] 


THE  III  GV ED  A. 


303 


HYMN  LI II.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

0 thou  with  stones  for  arms,  thy  powers,  crushing  the  fiends, 
have  raised  themselves  : 

Chase  thou  the  foes  who  compass  us. 

2 Thou  conquerest  thus  with  might  when  car  meets  car,  and 

when  the  prize  is  staked  : 

With  fearless  heart  will  I sing  praise. 

3 No  one  with  evil  thought  assails  this  Pavamana’s  holy  laws : 
Crush  huu  who  fain  would  fight  with  thee 

4 For  Indra  to  the  streams  they  drive  the  tawny  rapture-drop- 

ping Steed, 

I nd u the  bringer  of  delight. 

HYMN  LTV.  Soma  Pavamdna. 

After  his  ancient  splendour,  they,  the  bold,  have  drawn  the 
bright  milk  from 

The  Sage  who  wins  a thousand  gifts. 

2 In  aspect  he  is  like  the  Sun ; he  runneth  forward  to  the  lakes, 
Seven  currents  flowing  through  the  sky. 

3 He,  shining  in  his  splendour,  stands  high  over  all  things  that 

exist — 

Soma,  a God  as  Surya  is. 

4 Tliou,  Indu,  m thy  brilliancy,  ponrest  on  us,  as  Iudra’s  Friend, 
Wealth  from  the  kino  to  feast  the  Gods. 

HYMN  LV.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

Four  on  us  with  thy  juice  all  kinds  of  corn,  each  sort  of  nourish- 
ment, 

And,  Soma,  all  felicities. 

- As  thine,  0 Indu,  is  the  praise,  and  thine  what  springeth  from 
the  juice, 

Seat  thee  on  the  dear  sacred  grass. 

} With  stones  for  arms : adriruh . generally  an  appellative  of  Indra,  the 
^linger  or  caster  of  the  stone  : thunderbolt;  hero,  acemding  to  Sayana,= 
'Jr<ivnvan  soma , 0 Soma,  possessor  of,  that  is,  expressed  by,  the  stones. 

2 11  ken  car  meets  car : in  battle.  1 Vhen  the  prize  is  staked : in  the  chariot- 
rave  ; or  the  reference  may  be  also  to  battle. 

4 To  the  streams ; the  vasativuri  waters. 

1 They,  the  hold  : the  Soma-pressers.  The  Sage : or  Rishi  ; Soma. 

2 The  lakes : of  air.  Seven  currents : corresponding  to  the  seven  earthly 
rivers.  ‘ He  unites  with  the  seven  down-descending  rivers  of  heaven. 
Wilson . 

4 From  the  kine : consisting  of  milk,  curds,  etc. 


304  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IX 

3 And,  finding  for  us  kine  and  steeds,  0 Soma,  with  thy  juiCe 

flow  on 

Through  days  that  fly  most  rapidly. 

4 As  one  who  conquers,  ne’er  subdued,  attacks  and  slays  the 

enemy, 

Thus,  Vanquisher  of  thousands  ! flow. 

HYMN  LVI.  Soma  Pavam&na 

Swift  to  the  purifying  sieve  flows  Soma  as  exalted  Law, 
Slaying  the  fiends,  loving  the  Gods. 

2 When  Soma  pours  the  strengthening  food  a hundred  ever 

active  streams 

To  lndra’s  friendship  win  their  way. 

3 Ten  Dames  have  sung  to  welcome  thee,  even  as  a maide 

greets  her  love : 

0 Soma,  thou  art  decked  to  win. 

4 Flow  hitherward,  0 Indu,  sweet  to  Tndra  and  to  Vishnu  : guar 
The  men,  the  singers,  from  distress. 

HYMN  LVJI.  Soma  Pavamftn 

Thy  streams  that  never  fail  or  waste  flow  forth  like  shouci 
of  rain  from  heaven, 

To  bring  a thousand  stores  of  strength. 

2 He  flows  beholding  on  his  way  all  well-beloved  sacred  lore, 
Green-tinted,  brandishing  his  arms. 

3 He,  when  the  people  deck  him  like  a docile  king  of  elephant 
Sits  as  a falcon  in  the  wood. 

4 So  bring  thou  hitherward  to  us,  Indu,  while  thou  art  purifie 
All  treasures  both  of  heaven  and  earth. 

HYMN  LVIII.  SomaPavamfti 

SwrFT  runs  this  giver  of  delight,  even  the  stream  of  flowii 
juice : 

Swift  runs  this  giver  of  delight. 

4 Vanquisher  of  thousands : or,  thou  who  winnest  thousands,  i.  e.  countie 

spoils  or  treasures.  

3 Ten  Dames  : the  fingers,  whose  sound  is  heard  in  the  operation  of  pressi 

the  Soma  juice.  

3 Like  a docile  king  of  elephants : von  Roth,  in  the  St.  Petersbu' 
Lexicon,  suggests  ibhe  for  ibhuh,  * like  a pious  king  among  his  retinue  ; ’ b 
no  alteration  is  necessary,  ibhah  and  r&jd  being  taken  together  in  the  ser 
of  elephant-king  or  stately  and  noble  elephant.  See  Vedische  Stvdien,  l- 
XV.  Sits  as  a falcon  in  the  wood : in  the  wood,  as  referring  to  the  Sot 
meaning  the  wooden  trough  or  vat.  * Sits  on  the  waters  like  a hawk.’ — Wih 

1 SwifU  t drat : * rescuing  (his  worshippers  from  sin).'— Wilson. 


BTMN  60.]  THE  RIG  VEDA.  805 

2 The  Morning  knows  all  precious  things,  the  Goddess  knows  her 

grace  to  man : 

Swift  runs  this  giver  of  delight. 

3 We  have  accepted  thousands  from  Dhvasra’s  and  Purushanti;s 

hands  : 

Swift  runs  this  giver  of  delight. 

4 From  whom  we  have  accepted  thus  thousands  and  three  times 

ten  besides  : 

Swift  runs  this  giver  of  delight. 

HYMN  LIX.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Flow  onward,  Soma,  winning  kine,  and  steeds,  and  all  that 
gives  delight : 

Bring  hither  wealth  with  progeny. 

2 Flow  onward  from  the  waters,  flow,  inviolable,  from  the  plants  : 
Flow  onward  from  the  pressing-boards. 

3 Soma,  as  Pavamana,  pass  over  all  trouble  and  distress  : 

Sit  on  the  sacred  grass,  a Sage. 

4 Thou,  Pavamana,  foundest  light;  thou  at  thy  birth  becamest 

great : 

0 Indu,  thou  art  over  all. 

HYMN  LX.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Sing  forth  and  laud  with  sacred  song  most  active  Pavamana, 
laud 

Indu  who  sees  with  thousand  eyes. 

2 Thee  who  hast  thousand  eyes  to  see,  bearer  of  thousand  bur- 
thens, they 

Have  filtered  through  the  fleecy  cloth. 


3 Dhvusra  and  Purushanti  were  ‘ two  kings  who  conferred  great  wealth  on 
Taranta  and  PurumUha,  two  rishis  of  the  family  of  Vidadasva.  See  p. 
XXX.III.  of  Max- Muller’s  Rig-veda,  Vol.  V.’— Cowell’s  note  in  Wilson’s 
Translation. 

4 Thus  thousand * and  thre  times  ten  : SAynna,  taking  tdnd  (thus,  in  this 
manner)  to  mean  ‘garments,’  mistaking  triiisdtam,  thirty,  for  tiisatam , three 
hundred,  and  neglecting  the  cha  (and),  interprets  ‘ three  hundred  thousand 
garments.’  ‘ Thuty  robes  and  thousands  ’ — E.  B Cowell.  Urasbmann  places 
this  hymn  in  his  Appendix  as  a composition  of  fragments  and  out  of  place 
where  it  stands  in  the  text. 

* The  waters:  the  vnsatfvari  waters  The  pressing -boards : dhishdndbhyah  : 
according  to  S&yaria,  yr&v&bh'jah,  the  piessing-stones. 

1 With  sacred  song  ; gdyatrina  : * with  a Gdyatri  hymn.’ — Wilson. 

2 Bearer  of  thousand  burthens : or,  bringer  of  thousand  bounties. 


306  TEE  BYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IX 

3#He,  Pavamana,  hath  streamed  through  the  fleece:  he  runs 
into  the  jars, 

Finding  his  way  to  Indra’s  heart. 

4  That  Indra  may  be  bounteous,  flow,  most  active  Soma,  for  our 
weal : 

Bring  genial  seed  with  progeny. 

HA  MN  LX  I.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Flow  onward,  Indu,  with  this  food  for  him  who  in  thy  wild 
delight 

Battered  the  nine-and-ninety  down, 

2 Smote  swiftly  forts,  and  Sambara,  then  Yadu  and  that  Turvasa 
For  pious  Divodasa’s  sake. 

3 Finder  of  horses,  pour  on  us  horses  and  wealth  in  kine  and 

gold, 

And,  Indu,  food  in  boundless  store. 

4 We  seek  to  win  thy  friendly  love,  even  Pavamana's  flowin' 

o'er 

The  limit  of  the  cleansing  sieve. 

5 With  those  same  waves  which  in  their  stream  o'erflow  th 

purifying  sieve, 

Soma,  be  gracious  unto  us. 

6 0 Soma,  being  purified,  bring  us  from  all  sides, — for  the 

canst, — 

Riches  and  food  with  hero  sons. 

7 Him  here,  the  Child  whom  streams  have  borne,  the  ten  awi 

fingers  beautify  : 

With  the  Adityas  is  he  seen. 

8 With  Indra  and  with  V&yu  he,  effused,  flows  onward  with  t’ 

beams 

Of  Surya  to  the  cleansing  sieve. 

9 Flow  rich  in  sweets  and  lovely  for  our  Bhaga,  Vayu,  Pusha 

flow 

For  Mitra  and  for  Varuna. 

10  High  is  thy  juice’s  birth  : though  set  in  heaven,  on  earth 
hath  obtained 

Strong  sheltering  power  and  great  renown. 


1 The  nine-and-ninety : * ninety -nine  (cities  of  the  foe).’— Wilson. 

3 In  boundless  store  : literally,  in  thousands. 

7 Whom  streams  have  borne : sindhumdtccram : * whose  parents  are 
rivers,’ — Wilson.  B<>rn  as  the  Moon  in  the  ocean  of  air.  With  the  Adti 
tis  he  seen  : that  is,  he  is  counted  as  one  of  the  Adityas. 


THE  MOV  EM. 


ttyUR  61.] 


m 


11  Striving  to  win,  with  him  we  gain  all  wealth  from  the  ungodly 

man, 

Yea,  all  the  glories  of  mankind. 

12  Finder  of  room  and  freedom,  flow  for  Indra  whom  we  must 

adore, 

For  Varuna  and  the  Marut  host. 

[3  The  Gods  have  come  to  Indu  well-descended,  beautified  with 
milk, 

The  active  crusher  of  the  foe. 

14  Even  as  mother  cows  their  calf,  so  let  our  praise-songs  strength- 

en him, 

Yea,  him  who  winncth  Indra’s  heart. 

15  Soma,  pour  blessings  on  our  kine,  pour  forth  the  food  that 

streams  with  milk  : 

Increase  the  sea  that  merits  laud. 

16  From  heaven  hath  Pavamana  made,  as  ’twere,  the  marvellous 

thunder,  and 

The  lofty  light  of  all  mankind. 

17  The  gladdening  and  auspicious  juice  of  thee,  of  Pavamana, 

King  ! 

Flows  o’er  the  woollen  straining-cloth. 

18  Thy  juice,  0 Pavamana,  sends  its  rays  abroad  like  splendid 

skill, 

Like  lustre,  all  heaven’s  light,  to  see. 

,9  Flow  onward  with  that  juice  of  thine  most  excellent,  that 
brings  delight, 

.Slaying  the  wicked,  dear  to  Gods. 

10  Killing  the  foeman  and  his  hate,  and  winning  booty  evfery 

i d;iy> 

Gainer  art  thou  of  steeds  and  kine. 

!1  Rcd-hued,  be  blended  with  the  milk  that  seems  to  yield  its 
^ lovely  breast, 

l'alcon-like  resting  in  thine  home. 


13  Wdl-deicended : literally,  well-born  or  well-produced;  ‘(who  is)  com* 
'letely  geneiated.’— Wilson. 


15  fhe  sea  : samudr&m:  according  to  S&yana,  water  generally. 

J ® 4 The  purified  [Soma]  has  generated  the  great  light  which  is  common  to 
V n(h  like  the  wonderful  thundering  of  the  sky.’— Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  ( 
■ i . The  great  light  common  to  all  men,  or  vaifvdnardm  or  the  lofty' 
mankind,  is  Agui  Vaisvftnara. 

0 The  foeman  and  hit  Kate:  ‘the  hostile  Yritra.’ — Wilson. 


MS  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  lx 

22  Flow  onward  thou  who  strengthenedst  Indra  to  slaughte 

Vritra  who 

Compassed  and  stayed  the  mighty  floods. 

23  Soma  who  rainest  gifts,  may  we  win  riches  with  our  her 

sons : 

Strengthen,  as  thou  art  cleansed,  our  hymns. 

24  Aided  by  thee,  and  through  thy  grace,  may  we  be  slayei 

when  we  war : 

Watch,  Soma,  at  our  solemn  rites. 

25  Chasing  our  foemen,  driving  off  the  godless,  Soma  floweth  o 
Going  to  Indra’s  special  place. 

26  0 Pavamana,  hither  bring  great  riches,  and  destroy  our  foe 
0 Indu,  grant  heroic  fame. 

27  A hundred  obstacles  have  ne’er  checked  thee  when  fain 

give  thy  boons, 

When,  being  cleansed,  thou  combatest. 

28  Indu,  flow  on,  a mighty  juice;  glorify  us  among  the  folk  : 
Drive  all  our  enemies  away. 

29  Indu,  in  this  thy  friendship  most  lofty  and  glorious  may  wt 
Subdue  all  those  who  war  with  us. 

30  Those  awful  weapons  that  thou  hast,  sharpened  at  point 

strike  men  down — - 
Guard  us  therewith  from  every  foe. 

HYMN  LXII.  Soma  Pavamf 

These  rapid  Soma-drops  have  been  poured  through  the  pi 
fyiug  sieve 

To  bring  us  all  felicities. 

2 Dispelling  manifold  mishap,  giving  the  courser’s  progeny, 

Yea,  and  the  warrior  steed,  success. 


26  The  godless:  drdvnah:  those  who  present  no  sacrificid  offerings; 
with  holders  (of  wealth).’ — Wilson,  Special  place:  that  is,  the  vessel 
•part  for  his  libations. 

26  Heroic  fame : or,  fame  with  brave  sons. 

27  Obstacles:  or  enemies,  according  to  S&yana.  Thou  combatest:  ma 

lyase:  according  to  Styana.  ‘ when  thou  wi.shes't  to  give  us  wealth.’ 
meanings  “fight,"  “strive,”  etc.,  aie  foreign  to  S&ya.a,  being  derived 
• comparison  of  macto,  etc,’ — Editor’s  note  in  Wilson’s  T 

lation. 


'30.  Weapons : the  Moon  being  the  warrior  who  overcomes  the  darkn< 
ght.  See  Hillebrandt,  V.  M.,  I.  340.  Cf.  ‘The  moon  ....  advances  HI 
at  warrior  through  a fleeing  army.’— S.  T.  Coleridge. 


THE  R1QVEDA. 


809 


XYMN  62.] 

3 Bringing  prosperity  to  kine,  they  make  perpetual  IlsL  flow 
To  us  for  noble  eulogy. 

4 Strong,  mountain-born,  the  stalk  hath  been  pressed  in  the 

streams  for  rapturous  joy  : 

Iiawk-like  he  settles  in  his  home. 

5 Fair  is  tho  God-loved  juice;  the  plant  is  washed  in  waters, 

pressed  by  men  : 

Tho  milch-kine  sweeten  it  with  milk. 

6 As  drivers  deck  a courser,  so  have  they  adorned  the  meath’s 

juice  for 

Ambrosia,  for  tho  festival. 

7 Thou,  Indu,  with  thy  streams  that  drop  sweet  juices,  which 

were  poured  for  help, 

Hast  settled  in  the  cleansing  sieve. 

8 So  flow  thou  onward  through  the  fleece,  for  Indra  flow,  to  be 

his  drink, 

Finding  thine  home  in  vats  of  wood. 

9 As  giving  room  and  freedom,  as  most  sweet,  pour  butter  forth 

an  l milk, 

0 Indu,  for  the  Angirases. 

0 Most  active  and  benevolent,  this  Pavamana,  sent  to  us 
For  lofty  friendship,  meditates. 

1 Quellerof  curses,  mighty,  with  strong  sway,  this  Pavamina 

shall 

Bring  treasures  to  the  worshipper. 

.2  Pour  thou  upon  us  thousandfold  possessions,  both  of  kine  and 
steeds, 

Exceeding  glorious,  much-desired. 

13  Wandering  far,  with  wise  designs,  the  juice  here  present  is 
effused. 

Made  beautiful  by  living  men. 


3 III : here,  according  to  SAyana,  meaning  ‘ food.’  ‘ Labetrank/  refreshing 
draught. — Grasbmann. 


^ The  stalk : the  Soma-plant,  which  is  said  to  have  grown  on  tho  mountain#. 
6 In  waters : the  vasalivarl  waters. 

\ ® ^or  ambrosia:  amritdya:  ‘for  the  sake  of  immortality.’ — Wilson, 

L ^ For  the  Angirases : or,  from  the  Angirases.  The  Jamadagnis  were  not 
joembers  of  that  family. -Ludwig. 

10  Meditates:  He  known  (to  all).’ -Wilson. 

r ^a>lder*ng  far : urugdydfr:  according  to  SAyana,  much-lauded,  or  praised 


810  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  t 

14  For  Indra  flows  the  gladdening  drink,  the  me&surer  of  W 

region,  Sage, 

With  countless  wealth  and  endless  help. 

15  Born  on  the  mountain,  lauded  here,  Indu  for  Indra  is  set  dow 
As  in  her  sheltering  nest  a bird. 

1 6 Pressed  by  the  men,  as  ’twere  to  war  hath  Soma  Pavam& 

sped, 

To  rest  with  might  within  the  vats. 

17  That  he  may  move,  they  yoke  him  to  the  three-backed  trip 

seated  car 

By  the  Seven  Rishis’  holy  songs. 

18  Drive  ye  that  Tawny  Courser,  0 ye  pressers,  on  his  way  to  w 
Swift  Steed  wTho  carries  off  the  spoil. 

19  Pouring  all  glories  hither,  he,  effused  and  entering  the  jar 
Stands  like  a hero  mid  the  kine. 

20  Indu,  the  living  men  milk  out  thy  juice  to  make  the  raptur 

draught : 

Gods  for  the  Gods  milk  out  the  meath. 

21  Pour  for  the  Gods  into  the  sieve  our  Soma  very  rich  in  swe 
Him  whom  the  Gods  most  gladly  hear. 

22  Into  his  stream  who  gladdens  best  these  Soma  juices  1 

been  poured, 

Lauded  with  songs  for  lofty  fame. 

23  Thou  flowest  to  enjoy  the  milk,  and  bringost  valour,  b 

cleansed  : 

Winning  tho  spoil  flow  hitherward. 

24  And,  hymned  by  Jamadagnis,  let  all  nourishment  that 

supply, 

And  geueral  praises,  flow  to  us. 

25  Soma,  as  leader  of  the  song  flow  onward  with  thy  wonc 

aids, 

For  holy  lore  of  every  kind. 


14  The  measurer  of  the  region : who  measured  out  and  made  the  firma 

15  Born  on  the  mountain  : or,  perhaps,  as  S£\  ana  takes  it,  ‘ made  mi 
by  song  ’ 

17  By  the  Seven  Rishis’  holy  songs : or  ‘ Of  Rishis,  with  seven  holy  s 
the  car  being  the  sacrifice,  the  three  backs  or  ridges  being  the  thre< 
libations,  the  thiee  seats  being  the  three  Vedas. 

19  Mid  the  kine : among  the  enemy’s  cattle,  for  whose  possessioi 
fighting.  So,  says  SHyana,  Soma  stands  among  the  sacrifices. 

20  The  living  men  : the  worshippers,  according  to  S&yapa ; but  perb 
Ludwig  suggests,  his  t totdruh  should  be  sotdrah,  presaers,  Qods ; dtvi 1 
priests. 


TEE  RIGTEDA. 


nntx  63.] 


&ii 


2G  r>0  thou  as  leader  of  the  song,  stirring  the  waters  of  the  sea, 
Flow  onward,  thou  who  mo  vest  all. 

27  0 Soma,  0 thou  Sage,  these  worlds  stand  ready  to  attest  thy 

might : 

For  thy  behoof  the  rivers  flow. 

28  Like  showers  of  rain  that  fall  from  heaven  thy  streams  per- 

petually flow 

To  the  bright  fleece  spread  under  them. 

29  For  potent  Indra  purify  Indu  effectual  and  strong, 

Enjoyment-giver,  Mighty  Lord. 

30  Soma,  true,  Pavatnana,  Sage,  is  seated  in  the  cleansing  sieve, 
Giving  his  praiser  hero  strength. 

HYMN  LX  1 1 1.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

Pour  hitherward,  0 Soma,  wealth  in  thousands  and  heroic 
strength, 

And  keep  renown  secure  for  us. 

2 rimu  mikest  food  andvigmr  swell  for  Indra,  best  of  glad' 

deners  ! 

Within  the  cups  thou  seatest  thee. 

3 For  Indra  and  for  Vishnu  poured,  Soma  hath  flowed  into 

the  jar : 

May  Vayu  find  it  rich  in  sweets. 

4 These  Somas  swift  and  brown  of  hue,  in  stream  of  solemn 

sacrifice 

Have  flowed  through  twisted  obstacles, 

5 Performing  every  noble  work,  active,  augmenting  Indra’s 

strength, 

Driving  away  the  godless  ones. 

Brown  Soma-drops,  effused,  that  seek  Indra,  to  their  appro* 

^ priate  place 

I low  through  the  region  hitherward. 

1 low  onward  with  that  stream  of  thine  wherewith  thou  gavest 
S irya  light,  & 

Drging  on  waters  good  to  men. 

8 Pavamana,  high  o’er  man  yoked  the  Sun’s  courser  Etasa 
travel  through  the  realm  of  air. 

28  Waters  of  the  sea:  of  the  sea  of  air,  the  firmament. 

ma<le^ fth*.  °^tac!es ; the  twigs  of  which  the  frame  of  the  filter  was 

the  Rikshasa*  •i8urf<lCe  of  tlie  Wuo1  of  the  strainer.  ‘Are  let  loose  upon 

g j • ™ GoOD, 

11  his  and  the  following  stanza  Soma  ia  identified  with  the  Sun. 


81 1 THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  IX, 

9 And  those  ten  Coursers,  tawny-hued,  ho  harnessed  that  the 
Sun  might  come  : 

Indu,  he  said,  is  Indra’s  self. 

10  Hence,  singers,  pour  the  gladdening  juice  to  V&yu  and  to 
Indra,  pour 

The  drops  upon  the  fleecy  cloth. 

110  Soma  Pavamana,  find  wealth  for  us  not  to  be  assailed, 
Wealth  which  the  focnaan  may  not  win. 

12  Send  riches  hither  with  thy  stream  in  thousan  Is,  both  ol 

steeds  and  kino, 

Send  spoil  of  war  and  high  renown. 

13  Soma  the  Cod.  expressed  with  stones,  like  Surya,  floweth  or 

his  way, 

Pouring  the  juice  within  the  jar. 

14  These  brilliant  drops  have  poured  for  us,  in  stream  of  solemr 

sacrifice, 

Worshipful  laws  and  strength  in  kine. 

15  Over  the  cleansing  sieve  have  flowed  the  Somas,  blent  witl 

curdled  milk, 

Effused  for  Indra  Thunder-nrmed. 

16  Soma,  do  thou  most  rich  in  sweets,  a gladdening  drink  moa 

dear  to  Gods, 

Flow  to  the  sieve  to  bring  us  tvealth. 

17  For  Indra,  living  men  adorn  the  Tawny  Courser  in  the  streams 
Indu,  the  giver  of  delight. 

18  Pour  for  us,  Soma,  wealth  in  gold,  in  horses  and  heroic  sons, 
Bring  hither  strength  in  herds  of  kine. 

19  For  Indra  pour  ye  on  the  fleece  him  very  sweet  to  taste,  wh 

longs 

For  battle  as  it  were  in  war. 

20  The  singers,  seeking  help,  adorn  the  Sage  who  must  be  deckc 

with  songs  : 

Loud  bellowing  the  Steer  comes  on. 

21  The  singers  with  their  thoughts  and  hymns  have,  in  the  streai 

of  sacrifice, 

Caused  Soma,  active  Steer,  to  roar. 


9 Couriers:  or  Harita.  Cf.  IV.  6.  9 and  13.  3. 

10  Hence  ; from  this  vessel. 

14  Worshipful  laics : the  meaning  of  dhXmdnyftryd  is  not  clear.  ‘ (Flowir 
towards  the  dwellings  of  respectable  (worshippers).’— Wilson.  ‘ Veneral 
might.’— Ludwig. 


\YUN  64«J  THE  RIQVEDA.  813 

2 God,  working  with  mankind,  flow  on ; to  Indra  go  thy  gladden- 

ing juice  1 

To  Vayu  mount  as  Law  commands- 

3 0 Soma  Pavamana,  thou  poureat  out  wealth  that  brings  re* 

nown 

Enter  the  lake,  as  one  we  love. 

1 Soma,  thou  flowest  chasing  foes  and  bringing  wisdom  and  de- 

light : 

Drive  off  the  folk  who  love  not  Gods. 

5 The  Pavamanas  have  been  poured,  the  brilliant  drops  of  Soma 

juice, 

For  holy  loro  of  every  kind. 

6 The  Pavamanas  have  been  shed,  the  beautiful  swift  Soma- 

drops, 

Driving  all  enemies  afar. 

7 From  heaven,  from  out  the  firmament,  hath  Pavamana  been 

effused 

Upon  the  summit  of  the  earth. 

8 0 Soma,  Indu,  very  wise,  drive,  being  purified,  with  thy  stream 
All  foes,  all  lUkshasas  away. 

9 Driving  the  Rakshasas  afar,  0 Soma,  bellowing,  pour  for  us 
Most  excellent  and  splendid  strength. 

0 Soma,  do  thou  secure  for  us  the  treasures  of  the  earth  and 
heaven, 

Indu  1 all  boons  to  be  desired. 

HYMN  LXIV.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Soma,  thou  art  a splendid  Steer,  a Steer,  0 God,  with  steerlike 
sway  : 

Thou  as  a Steer  ordainest  laws. 

2 Steer-strong  thy  might  is  as  a steer’s,  steer  strong  thy  wood, 

steer-like  thy  drink  : 

A Steer  indeed,  0 Steer,  art  thou. 

3 Thou,  Indu,  as  a vigorous  horse,  hast  neighed  together  steed* 

and  kine : 

Unbar  for  us  the  doors  to  wealth. 


23  The  lake  : the  dronakala^a,  vat  or  reservoir. 
27  The  summit  of  the  earth  : the  raised  altar. 


1 Steer SAyana,  as  usual,  explains  vrUhi  by  varshakah  * Sprinkler.'— Wilson. 
Weighed  togethei' : collected,  through  the  efficacy  of  the  sound  thou 
***  in  di  opping  through  the  filter,  and  enriched  us  with,  steeds  and  kin*. 


314  THE  HYMNS  OP  [kook 

4 Out  of  desire  of  cows  and  steeds  and  heroes  potent  Soma-dr 
Brilliant  and  swift,  have  been  effused. 

5 They  purified  in  both  the  hands,  made  beautiful  by  holy  i 
Flow  onward  to  the  fleecy  cloth. 

6 These  Soma  juices  shall  pour  forth  all  treasures  for  the 

shipper 

From  heaven  and  earth  and  firmament. 

7 The  streams  of  Pavamana,  thine,  Finder  of  all,  have  1 

effused, 

Even  as  Surya’s  rays  of  light. 

8 Making  the  light  that  shines  from  heaven  thou  flowestc 

every  form  : 

Soma,  thou  swellest  like  a sea. 

9 Urged  on  thou  sendest  out  thy  voice,  0 Pavamana;  thou 

moved, 

Like  the  God  Surya,  to  the  sieve. 

10  Indu,  Enlightener,  Friend,  hath  been  purified  by  the  si 

hymns  : 

So  starts  the  charioteer  his  steed — 

11  Thy  God-delighting  wave  which  hath  flowed  to  the  purif 

sieve, 

Alighting  in  the  home  of  Law. 

12  Flow  to  our  sieve,  a gladdening  draught  that  hath  most  ii 

course  with  Gods, 

Indu,  to  Indra  for  his  drink. 

13  Flow  onward  with  a stream  for  food,  made  beautiful  by  saj 

men  : 

Indu  with  sheen  approach  the  milk. 

14  While  thou  art  cleansed,  Song-Lover,  bring  comfort 

vigour  to  the  folk, 

Poured,  Tawny  One ! on  milk  and  curds, 
lo  Purified  for  the  feast  of  Gods,  go  thou  to  Indra’s  special  ph 
Resplendent,  guided  by  the  strong 

16  Accelerated  by  the  hymn,  the  rapid  drops  of  Soma  juice 
Have  flowed,  urged  onwatd,  to  the  lake. 

17  Easily  have  the  living  dtops,  made  beautiful,  approa* 

the  lake, 

Yea,  to  the  place  of  sacrifice. 

8 To  every  form : to  bring  us  blessings  in  every  shape. 

9 To  the  sieve  : vidhavmani : ‘ in  observance  of  the  law,’  according  t 
Bergaigne.  See  La  Religion  Ved ique,  III  218,  note. 

1#  The  lake : samudrdm : according  to  Sftyana,  the  sea  of  air,  the  firmai 
The  dronakalofa,  vat  or  reservoir,  is  probably  intended. 


ffYMN  64.]  THE  RIO  VEDA,  315 

18  Com  pass  about,  our  faithful  Friend,  all  our  possess'ons  with 

thy  might : 

Guard,  hero  like,  our  sheltering  home. 

19  Loud  neighs  the  Courser  Etasa,  with  singers,  harnessed  for 

the  place, 

Guided  for  travel  to  the  lake. 

20  What  time  the  Swift  One  resteth  in  the  golden  place  of  sacrifice, 
He  leaves  the  foolish  far  away. 

21  The  friends  have  sung  in  unison,  the  prudent  wish  to  sacrifice  : 
Down  sink  the  unintelligent. 

22  For  Indra  girt  by  Maruts,  flow,  thou  Indu,  very  rich  in  sweets, 
To  sit  in  place  of  sacrifice. 

23  Controlling  priests  and  sages  skilled  in  holy  song  adorn  thee 

well : 

The  living  make  thee  beautiful. 

24  Aryaman,  Mitra,  Varuna  drink  Pavamana’s  juice,  yea,  thine: 
0 Sage,  the  Maruts  drink  thereof. 

25  0 Soma,  Indu,  thou  while  thou  art  purified  urgest  onward 

speech 

Thousandfold,  with  the  lore  of  hymns. 

26  Yea,  Soma,  Indu,  while  thou  art  purified  do  thou  bring  to  us 
Speech  thousandfold  that  longs  for  war. 

27  0 Indu,  Much-invoked,  while  thou  art  purifying,  as  the  Friend 
Of  these  men  enter  thou  the  lake. 

28  Bright  are  these  Somas  blent  with  milk,  with  light  that  flashes 

brilliantly 

And  form  that  utters  loud  acclaim. 

29  Led  by  his  drivers,  and  sent  forth,  the  Strong  Steed  hath  come 

nigh  for  spoil, 

Like  warriors  when  they  stand  arrayed. 

30  Specially,  Soma,  coming  as  a Sage  from  heaven  to  prosper  us, 
Flow  like  tho  Sun  for  us  to  see. 


19  The  Courser  Etasa  : here  meaning  Soma.  Vdhnih  (from  vah,  Lat.  veh  o) 
is  properly  a horse  of  burden,  or  draught-horse. 

21  The  friends  : the  piiests  ; or  perhaps  the  Maruts.  Down  sink:  narakc, 
into  hell,  says  Sfcyana. 

26  That  longs  for  war  : makhasyucam : ‘ desiring  wealth.’ — Wilson.  See 
IX.  61.  27,  note. 

28  Form : krip$  .*  stream,  according  to  S&yana. 

80  Specially ; yidhak : said  by  Y&ska  to  be  the  Vedic  form  of  pritkak,  and 
to  be  used  in  the  seuse  of  prospering.  See  Wilson’s  Translation,  Editor’s  note. 

Tt(ihak  may  mean,  lightly,  easily,  without  eflbrt. 


516  TUB  HYMNS  OF  [BOOR  /j 

HYMN  LXV.  Soma  Pavamin 

The  glittering  maids  send  Sura  forth,  the  glorious  sisters,  clos 
allied^ 

Send  Indu  fortl»,  their  mighty  Lord. 

2 Pervade,  0 Pavamana,  all  our  treasures  with  repeated  light, 
God,  coming  hither  from  the  Gods. 

3 Pour  on  us,  Pavamana,  rain,  as  service  and  fair  praise  f< 

Gods : 

Pour  all  to  be  our  nourishment. 

4 Thou  art  a Steer  by  lustre  : we,  0 Pavamana,  faithfully 
Call  upon  thee  the  Splendid  One. 

5 Do  thou,  rejoicing,  nobly  armed  ! pour  upon  us  heroic  strengtl 
O Indu,  come  thou  hitherward. 

6 When  thou  art  cleansed  with  both  the  hands  and  dipped 

waters,  with  the  woo  l 
Thou  corniest  to  the  gathering-place. 

7 Sing  forth  your  songs,  as  Yyasva  sang,  to  Soma  Pavamana, 
The  Mighty  One  with  thousand  eyes; 

8 Whose  coloured  sap  they  drive  with  stones,  the  yellow  meat 

distilling  juice, 

Indu  for  Indra,  for  his  drink. 

9 We  seek  to  gain  the  friendly  love  of  thee  that  Strong  ai 

Mighty  One, 

Of  thee  the  winner  of  all  wealth. 

10  Flow  onward  with  thy  stream,  a Steer,  inspiriting  the  Maru 

Lord, 

Winning  all  riches  by  thy  might. 

11  I send  thee  forth  to  battle  from  the  press,  0 PuvamlU 

Strong, 

Sustainer,  looker  on  the  light. 

12  Acknowledged  by  this  song  of  mine,  flow,  taw»y-colour< 

with  thy  stieam  : 

Incite  to  battle  thine  ally. 

13  0 Indu,  visible  to  nil  pour  out  for  us  abundant  food  : 

Somn,  be  thou  our  prospered 

1 The  glittering  maids:  the  fingers,  perhaps  with  reference  to  the  g 
rings  worn  by  the  pi  ieats  when  they  press  the  Soma.  SHm : here  said 
mean  Soma  ; ‘ the  invigorating  ’ — Wilson.  The  glorious  sisters : the  fiugei 
3 As  service  • as  the  cause  of  worship. 

6 With  the  wood:  ‘(taken  up)  with  the  wooden  vessel.’- -Wilson.  Cf. 

1.  2. 

7 Vyafva:  a Risbi  frequently  mentioned  in  Book  VIII. 

12  Thine  ally:  India. 


THE  RIOVEDA. 


317 


HYMN  65.] 

14  The  pitchers,  Indu,  with  thy  streams  have  sung  aloud  in 

vigorous  might  : 

Enter  them,  and  let  Indra  d)  ink. 

15  0 thou  whose  potent  gladdening  juice  they  milk  out  with  the 

stones,  flow  on, 

Destroyer  of  our  enemies. 

16  King  Pavamana  is  implored  with  holy  songs,  on  man’s  behalf, 
To  travel  through  the  fiimameut. 

17  Bring  us,  0 Indu,  hundredfold  increase  of  kine,  and  noble 

steeds, 

The  gift  of  fortune  for  our  help. 

18  Pressed  for  the  banquet  of  the  Gods,  0 Soma,  bring  us  might, 

and  speed, 

Like  beauty  for  a brilliant  show. 

19  Soma,  flow  on  exceeding  bright  with  loud  roar  to  the  wooden 

vats, 

Falcon-like  resting  in  thine  homo. 

20  Soma  the  Water-winner  flows  to  Indra,  Y.iyu,  Varuna, 

To  Vishnn  and  the  Mavut  host. 

21  Soma,  bestowing  food  upon  our  progeny,  from  every  side 
Pour  on  us  riches  thousandfold  ! 

22  The  Soma  juices  which  have  been  expressed  afar  or  near  at 

hand, 

Or  there  on  Saryanavan’s  bank, 

23  Those  prossed  among  Arjikas,  pressed  among  the  active,  in 

men’s  homes, 

Or  pressed  among  the  Races  Five- 

24  May  these  celestial  drops,  expressed,  pour  forth  upon  us,  as 

they  flow, 

Rain  from  the  heavens  and  hero  strength. 

25  Urged  forward  o’er  the  ox-hide  flows  the  Lovely  One  of 

tawny  hne, 

Lauded  by  Jamad.igni’s  song. 

26  Like  horses  urged  to  speed,  the  drops,  bright,  stirring  vital 

power,  when  blent 

With  milk,  are  beautified  in  streams. 

22  Sxryandvdn’s  bank : this  lake  is  said  to  be  on  the  borders  of  the  Kuru- 
kihetra  country. 

apparently  a non- Aryan  people  in  the  North-West.  See  VIII. 

25  O’er  the  ox-hide : the  leather  sheet  that  received  the  droppings  of  the 
boma. 


318  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  1 

27  So  they  who  toil  with  juices  send  thee  forward  for  the  Goc 

repast  : 

So  with  this  splendour  flow  thou  on. 

28  VVe  choose  to-day  that  chariot-steed  of  thine,  the  Strong,  th 

brings  us  bliss, 

The  Guardian,  the  desire  of  all, 

29  The  Excellent,  the  Gladdener,  the  Sage  with  heart  that  n 

derstands, 

The  Guardian,  the  de-ire  of  all ; 

30  Who  for  ourselves,  0 thou  Most  Wise,  is  wealth  and  U 

intelligence, 

The  Guardi, tn,  the  desire  of  all. 

HYMN  LXVI.  Soma  Pavanri 

For  holy  lore  of  every  sort,  flow  onward  thou  whom  all  men  loi 
A Friend  to  be  besought  by  fiiends. 

2 O’er  all  thou  rulest  with  these  Two  which,  Soma  Pavamac 

stand, 

Turned,  as  thy  stations,  hitherward.  . 

3 Wise  Soma  Pavanvma,  thou  encompassest  on  every  side 
Thy  stations  as  the  seasons  come. 

4 Flow  onward,  generating  food,  for  precious  boons  of  every  kir 
A Fiiend  for  fiiends,  to  be  our  help. 

5 Upon  the  lofty  ridge  of  heaven  thy  bright  rays  with  tli 

essences, 

Soma,  spread  purifying  power. 

6 0 Soma,  these  Seven  Rivers  flow,  as  being  thine,  to  g: 

command  : 

The  streams  of  milk  run  forth  to  thee. 

7 Flow  onward,  Soma  in  a stream,  effused  to  gladden  Indra’s  hea 
bringing  imperishable  fame. 

8 Driving  thee  in  Vivasvan’s  course,  the  Seven  Sisters  w 

their  hymns 

Made  melody  round  thee  the  Sage. 

23  The  guardian:  pflntam  • according  to  Piscliel,  ‘den  schwelleud 
* the  swelling  one.’  Sec  his  exhaustive  excursus  on  the  word  in  Vedu 
Studien , I.  pp.  191—194. 

The  Rishis  are  the  hundred  Vaikhnnasas,  said  to  have  been  a race  of  sail 
hermits  sprung  fiom  the  nails  of  Prnj&pati. 

2 With  these  Tm  : probably  a double  asterism.  See  Rillebrandt,  V. 
p.  446  ; and  Gaidicke,  Der  Accusativ  im  Veda , p 199. 

8 The  stream  of  Soma  is  likened  to  the  course  of  Vivasvftn  or  the  Sun. 
The  Seven  Sisters  are  probably  the  Seven  Rivers  of  stanea  6.  Accordiui 
S4)ana  ‘ the  seven  kindred  (priests)’  aie  intended. 


TJfy  66  J TBE  RIG  VEDA.  31$ 

9 The  virgins  deck  thee  o’er  fresh  streams  to  drive  thee  to  the 
sieve  when  thou , 

A singer,  bathest  in  the  wood. 

) The  streams  of  Pavamana,  thine,  Sage,  Mighty  One,  have 
poured  them  forth 
Like  coursers  eager  for  renown. 

1 They  have  been  poured  upon  the  fleece  towards  the  meath- 

distilling  vat : 

The  holy  songs  have  sounded  forth. 

2 Like  milch-kinc  coming  home,  the  drops  of  Soma  juice  have 

reached  the  lake, 

Have  reached  the  place  of  sacrifice. 

3 0 Indu,  to  our  great  delight  the  running  waters  flow  to  us, 
When  thou  wilt  robe  thyself  in  milk. 

f In  this  thy  friendship,  and  with  thee  to  help  us,  fain  to 
sacrifice, 

Indu,  we  crave  thy  friendly  love. 

5 Flow  on,  0 Soma,  for  the  great  Viewer  of  men,  for  gain  of  kine 
Enter  thou  into  Indra’s  throat. 

5 Lest  ait  thou,  Soma,  of  the  great,  Strongest  of  strong  ones, 
Indu  : thou 

As  Wunior  ever  hast  prevailed. 

7 Mightier  even  than  the  strong,  more  valiant  even  than  the 
bravo, 

More  liberal  than  the  bountiful, 

£ Soma,  as  Sura,  bring  us  food,  win  offspring  of  our  bodies  : wo 
Elect  thee  fur  our  friendship,  we  elect  thee  for  companionship. 
3 Agni,  thou  pourest  life;  send  down  upon  us  food  and  vigorous 
strength : 

Drive  thou  misfortune  far  away. 

'0  Agni  is  Pavamana,  Sage,  Chief  Priest  of  all  the  Races  Five : 

To  him  whose  wealth  is  great  we  pray. 

I Skilled  in  thy  task,  0 Agni,  pour  splendour  with  hero  strength 
on  us, 

Granting  me  wealth  that  nourishes. 
v^'lni  •’  the  fingei  s. 

..  ^ C the  dronakalagd  or  reservoir. 

' Eor  gain  of  kinc  : gdvishiaye : according  to  Sftyana,  * for  the  seeker  of 
is.  °f  the  Angirases.* 

aid  wig  ^ra:  8ee  65.  1.  ‘ Who  art  a hero.’— Wilson.  * From  the  Sun.' — 

t!!  : duchchhtinfim : frequently  personified  as  an  evil  power ; 

u*R«hhasat:— Wilson. 


920 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK 


22  Beyond  his  enemies  away  to  sweet  praise  Pavam&na  Aowb 

Like  S{irya  visible  to  all.  ' 

23  Adorned  by  living  men,  set  forth  for  entertainment,  rich 

food, 

Far-sighted  Indu  is  a Steed. 

24  He,  Pavamana,  hath  produced  the  lofty  Law,  the  brilli 

light, 

Destroying  darkness  black  of  hue. 


25  From  tawny  Pavamana,  the  Destroyer,  radiant  streams  h 

sprung, 

# Quick  streams  from  him  whose  gleams  are  swift. 

26  Best  rider  of  the  chariot,  praised  with  fairest  praise 

beauteous  ones, 

Gold-gleaming  with  the  Marut  host, 

27  May  Pavamana,  best  to  win  the  booty,  penetrate  with  rayi 
Giving  the  singer  hero  strength. 

28  Over  the  fleecy  sieve  hath  flowed  the  drop  effused  : to  b 

comes 

Indu  while  he  is  purified. 

29  This  Soma,  through  the  pressing-stones,  is  Bporting  on  th< 

hide,  and 

Summoning  Fndra  to  the  draught. 

30  0 Pavamana,  bless  us,  so  that  we  may  live,  with  that  bri 

milk 

Of  thine  which  hath  been  brought  from  heaven. 


HYMN  LXVII.  Soma  and  Ot 

Thou,  Soma,  hast  a running  stream,  joyous,  most  strong 
sacrifice  : 

Flow  bounteously  bestowing  wealth. 

2 Effused  as  chccrer  of  the  men,  flowing  best  gladdener,  thou 
A Prince  to  India  with  thy  juice. 

3 Poured  forth  by  pressiug-stones,  do  thou  with  loud  roar  i 

us  in  a stream 

Most  excellent  illustrious  might. 


23  Is  a Steed:  ‘ one  who  continually  goes  to  the  Gods/  is  SAyapa’s  exj 
tion  of  dtyah,  horse  or  courser. 

25  The  Destroyer  • of  darkness.  Cf.  IX.  61.  30. 

27  Penetrate  • the  whole  world. — SAyana. 

29  On  the  ox-hide  : see  IX.  65.  25. 

2 A Prince  : t&Hh : a rich  and  liberal  patron. 


THE  RIO  VELA. 


321 


{TMN  67  ] 


4 Indu,  urged  forward,  floweth  through  the  fleecy  cloth  : the 

Tawny  One 

With  his  loud  roar  hath  brought  us  strength. 

5 Indn,  thou  flowest  through  the  fleece,  bringing  felicities  and 

fame, 

And,  Soma,  spoil  and  wealth  in  kine. 

6 Hither,  0 Indu,  bring  us  wealth  in  steeds  and  cattle  hundred- 

fold : 

Bring  wealth,  0 Soma,  thousandfold. 

7 In  purifying,  through  the  sieve  the  rapid  drops  of  Soma  juice 
Come  nigh  to  Indra  in  their  course. 

8 For  Indra  floweth  excellent  Indu,  the  noblest  Soma  juice, 
The  Living  for  the  Living  One. 

9 The  glittering  maids  send  Sura  forth  : they  with  their  song 

have  sung  aloud 
To  Pavamana  dropping  mcath. 

0 May  Pushan,  drawn  by  goats,  be  our  protector,  and  on  all  his 
paths 

Bestow  on  us  our  share  of  maids. 


1 This  Soma  flows  like  gladdening  oil  for  him  who  wears  the 

braided  locks  : 

He  shall  give  us  our  share  of  maids. 

2 This  Soma  juico,  0 glowing  God,  flows  like  pure  oil,  eftused 

for  thee : 

Ho  shall  give  us  our  share  of  maids. 


3 Flow  onward,  Soma,  in  thy  stream,  begetter  of  the  sages’ 
speech  : 

; Wealth-giver  among  Gods  art  thou. 

J The  Falcon  dips  within  the  jars : he  wraps  him  in  his  robe 
• and  goes 

Loud  roaring  to  tho  vats  of  wood. 

1 Soma,  thy  juico  hath  been  effused  and  poured  into  the 
pitcher : like 

A rapid  hawk  it  rushes  on. 

1 ^or  Indra  flow  most  rich  in  sweets,  0 Soma,  bringing  him 
delight. 


10  maids  send  SUra  forth:  repeated  from  IX.  65.  1. 

11  i • are  maidt : desirable  and  appioved  wives. — S&yana. 

I o °L  'Llm  who  wears  the  braided  lochs : kanardlne  : see  I.  11*4. 1,  and  VII. 

Here  Pashan  is  intended. 

4 Wkmng  (fod : PiUhan. 

Le  ^con : the  falcon-like  Soma, 

21 


322  THE  HYMNS  OF  [B00K 

17  They  were  sent  forth  to  feast  the  Gods,  like  chariots  tl 

display  their  strength. 

18  Brilliant,  best  givers  of  delight,  these  juices  have  sent  V2 

forth. 

19  Bruised  by  the  press-stones  and  extolled,  Soma,  though 

to  the  sieve,  ° 

Giving  the  worshipper  hero  strength. 

20  This  juice  bruised  by  the  pressing-stones  and  lauded  pa; 

through  the  sieve, 

Slayer  of  demons,  through  the  fleece. 

21  0 Pavamana,  drive  away  the  danger,  whether  near  at  h 
Or  far  remote,  that  finds  me  here. 

22  This  day  may  Pavamana  cleanse  us  with  his  purifying  po 
Most  active  purifying  Priest. 

23  0 Agni,  with  the  cleansing  light  diffused  through  all  thy  f 

glow, 

Purify  thou  this  prayer  of  ours. 

24  Cleanse  us  with  thine  own  cleansing  power,  0 Agni,  th 

bright  with  flame, 

And  by  libations  poured  to  thee. 

25  Savitar,  God,  by  both  of  these,  libation,  purifying  pc 
Purify  me  on  every  side. 

26  Cleanse  us,  God  Savitar,  with  Three,  0 Soma,  with  subli 

forms, 

Agni,  with  forms  of  power  and  might. 

27  May  the  Gods'  company  make  me  clean,  and  Vasus  mak 

pure  by  song. 

Purify  me,  ye  General  Gods  ; 0 Jata vedas,  make  me  pur 

28  Fill  thyself  full  of  juice,  flow  forth,  0 Soma,  thou  with  al 

stalks, 

The  best  oblation  to  the  Gods. 

29  We  with  our  homage  have  approached  the  Friend  who 

our  wondering  praise, 

Young,  strengthener  of  the  solemn  rite. 


18  Have  sent  Vdyn  forth:  have  drawn  him  down  from  heaven.  * 
forth  for  V&yu.’ — Wilson. 

26  The  Three  sublimest  forms  are  said  to  be  Agni,  VAyu,  and  S fi; 
Fire,  Wind,  and  Sun. 

27  The  Gods’  company : the  yajamdnas  or  sacrificers,  or  the  troop  oi 
Indra  and  others.— SAyaua.  General  Gods ; visve  devdh ; or,  all  ye  Gto 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


323 


jYMX  68.] 

0 Lost  is  Alayya’s  axe,  0 Soma,  God  : do  thou  send  it  back  hither 

in  thy  flow 

Even,  Soma,  God,  if  ’twero  a mole. 

1 The  man  who  reads  the  essence  stored  by  saints,  the  Pavam&nr 

hymns, 

Tastes  food  completely  purified,  made  sweet  by  Matarisvan’s 
touch. 

2 Whoever  reads  the  essence  stored  by  saints,  the  P&vamant 

hymns, 

Sarasvati  draws  forth  for  him  water  and  butter,  milk  and 
meath. 

HYMN  LXVIII.  Soma  PavamAna. 

The  drops  of  Soma  juice  like  cows  who  yield  their  milk  have 
flowed  forth,  rich  in  meath,  unto  the  Shining  One, 

And,  seated  on  the  grass,  raising  their  voice,  assumed  the  milk, 
the  covering  robe  wherewith  the  udders  stream. 

2 He  bellows  with  a roar  around  the  highest  twigs  : the  Tawny 

One  is  sweetened  as  he  breaks  them  up. 

Then,  passing  through  the  sievo  into  the  ample  room,  the  God 
throws  off  the  dregs  according  to  his  wish. 

3 The  gladdening  drink  that  measured  out  the  meeting  Twins 

fills  full  with  milk  the  Eternal  Ever-waxing  Pair. 

: Bringing  to  light  the  Two  great  Regions  limitless,  moving 
| above  them  he  gained  sheen  that  never  fades. 

[30  This  stanza  is  well-nigh  unintelligible!  Alayya  may,  as  is  suggested 
the  St  Petersburg  Lexicon,  be  a name  of  Indra,  and  the  lost  axe  may  be 
e thunderbolt  which  the  poet  thinks  has  long  lain  idle,  and  which  Soma 
prayed  to  replace  in  the  hands  of  the  Thunderer,  even  though  it  were 
irthless  and  mischievous  like  a mole.  SAyana’s  interpretation  is  different : — 
lay  the  battle-axe  of  the  foe  destroy  the  foe  alone  : flow  to  us,  bright  Soma  ; 
ay)  the  villain  only,  bright  Soma.’— Wilson. 

31  .By  mints : by  the  Rishis  to  whom  they  were  revealed.  Prfvamdni 
W?i8 ; the  hymns  in  this  Book  dedicated  to  the  purification  of  the  Soma 
ice.  By  Mdtarisvan's  touch:  * SAyana says  Matarisvan  means  Vdyu  because 
breathes  in  the  atmosphere  antarikshe  swasiti : the  food  is  sweetened  and 
irified  by  the  purifying  wind  and  the  man  eats  it.’ — Wilson.  MAtarisvan 
•obably  represents  Agni.  

1 The  Shining  One : devdm : the  radiant  Indra.  The  second  line  is  obscure, 
pcording  to  SAyapa,  usriydji  here  means  ‘ cows’  and  not  milk  : — ‘the  lowing 
ie  sitting  on  the  barhis  grass  hold  in  their  udders  the  pure  (juice)  welling 
'•  —Wilson. 

^ The  highest  twigs:  of  the  Soma-plant,  which  as  being  the  tenderest  and 
■ciest  are  crushed  first. —Ludwig.  ‘ He  with  a noise  reechoes  the  principal 
> * 8eParating  the  growing  herbs,  the  green-tinted  (Soma)  sweetens 
-m.-WHson. 

1 ne  Meeting  Twins ; Soma  is  called  the  Creator  and  Preserver  of  heaven 
* earth. 


mu  a ijujxo  vu 


IMVK  ) 


4 Wandering  through  the  Parents,  strengthening  the  flooc 

the  Sage  make$  his  place  swell  with  liis  own  native  mig] 
The  stalk  is  mi^cd  with  grain  : he  comes  led  by  the  m 
together  with  the  sisters,  and  preserves  the  Head. 

5 With  energetic  intellect  the  Sage  is  born,  deposited  as  gei 

of  Law,  far  from  the  Twins. 

They  being  young  at  first  showed  visibly  distinct  the  Creati 
that  is  half-concealcd  and  half-exposed. 

6 The  sages  knew  the  form  of  him  the  Gladdener,  what  ti 

the  Falcon  brought  the  plant  from  far  away. 

Him  who  assures  success  they  beautitied  in  streams,  the  st 
who  yearned  therefor,  mighty  and  meet  for  praise. 

7 Together  with  the  Hishis,  with  their  prayers  and  hymns 

women  deck  thee,  Soma,  friendly  when  effused. 

Led  by  the  men,  with  invocations  of  the  Gods,  through 
fleece,  thou  hast  given  us  strength  to  win  the  spoil. 

8 Songs  resonant  with  praise  have  celebrated  him,  Soma,  Frie 

springing  forth,  with  his  fair  company. 

Even  him  who,  rich  in  meath,  with  undulating  stre 
Winnner  of  Wealth,  Immortal,  sends  his  voice  from  hea^ 

9 He  sends  it  into  all  the  region  forth  from  heaven.  So 

while  he  is  filtered,  settles  in  the  jars. 

With  milk  and  waters  is  he  decked  when  pressed  with  sto 
Indu,  when  purified,  shall  find  sweet  rest  and  room. 

10  Even  thus  poured  forth  flow  on  thy  way,  0 Soma,  vouchsa 
us  most  manifold  lively  vigour. 

Wo  will  invoke  benevolent  Earth  and  Heaven.  Give  us 
Gods,  riches  with  noble  heroes. 

HYMN  LXIX.  Soma  Pavan 

Laid  like  an  arrow  on  the  bow  the  hymn  hath  been  lo 
like  a young  calf  to  the  udder  of  its  dam. 

4 The  Parents  : heaven  and  earth.  The  floods  : the  waters  of  the  f 
meut.  Grain  : especially  barley.  Makes  his  place  swell : enriches  bis 
station,  the  uttaravedi  or  northward  altar.  The  sisters : the  fingers.^ 
Head:  apparently  Sftrya.  * S;\yana’s  explanation  of  shah,  viz., 
hhutajatam  (the  withered  world  ?),*  needs  explaining  more  than  the  or 
itself.’ — Wilson. 

5 The  Sage:  the  Sun.  Far  from  the  Twins : rising  in  a distant  i 
beyond  heaven  and  earth,  The  Creature  that  is  half- concealed  and 
exposed : the  meaning  appears  to  be,  as  Ludwig  says,  that  heaven  and 
while  they  were  yet  unseparated,  produced  the  Moon  : the  Sun  came 
being  only  when  they  had  been  separated  through  Soma’s  energetic  ager 

7 Ten  women  : the  fingers. 

1 Hath  been  loosed , dec. : * is  let  loose  to  (Indra)  the  fosterer  as  a calf  i 
udder  of  it?  mother,’  * S&yana  takes  Hdhani  [to  the  udder]  twice  oyo 


jytfN  69-1  Tm  MQySbA,  325 

As  one  who  cometh  first  with  full  stream  she  is  milked  : thus 
Soma  is  impelled  to  this  man’s  holy  rites. 

2 The  thought  is  deeply  fixed ; the  savoury  j uice  is  shed ; the 

tonguo  with  joyous  sound  is  stirring  in  the  mouth ; 

And  Pavamfma,  like  the  shout  of  combatants,  the  drop  rich 
in  sweet  juice,  is  flowing  through  the  fleece. 

3 He  flows  about  the  sheep-skin,  longing  for  a bride  : he  loosens 

Aditi’s  Daughters  for  the  worshipper. 

The  sacred  drink  hath  come,  gold-tinted,  well-restrained : like 
a strong  Bull  he  shines,  whetting  his  manly  might. 

4 The  Bull  is  bellowing ; the  Cows  are  coming  nigh  : the  God- 

desses approach  the  God’s  own  resting-place. 

Onward  hath  Soma  passed  through  the  sheep's  fair  bright 
fleece,  and  hath,  as  ’twero,  endued  a garment  newly  washed. 

5 The  golden-hued,  Immortal,  newly  bathed,  puts  on  a brightly- 

sinning  vesture  that  is  never  harmed. 

He  made  the  ridge  of  heaven  to  be  his  radiant  robe,  the 
sprinkling  of  the  bowls  from  moisture  of  the  sky. 

6 Even  as  the  beams  of  Surya,  urging  men  to  speed,  that  cheer  and 

send  to  sleep,  together  rush  they  forth, 

These  swift  outpourings  in  long  course  of  holy  rites  : no 
form  save  only  Indra  shows  itself  so  pure. 

7 As  down  the  steep  slope  of  a river  to  the  vale,  drawn  from 

tho  Steer  the  swift  strong  draughts  have  found  a way. 


ays  it  is  used  of  Indra  because  he  is  the  noui idler  of  everything.’ — Wilson, 
is  one  uho  cometh  first : according  to  S&yana,  as  a cow  coining  before  her 
lah  yields  her  milk,  (so  Indra,  coming  before  his  worship]  ers  pours  various 
>lessings  upon  them).  First : dgre : at  the  head;  at  the  beginning  of  the 
digious  ceremony. 


2 The  tongue  with  joyous  sound  is  stirring  in  the  mouth : probably  the 
wiest's  tongue  influenced  by  the  exhilarating  Soma  juice.  ‘ The  Soma  stream, 
fitting  pleasant  juice  is  diiven  into  (Indra’s)  mouth.' — Wilson. 

3 Longing  for  a bride  : seeking  tho  waters  with  which  he  is  to  be  united. 
dtti  s Daughters : probably,  tho  plants,  whose  buds  Soma  as  the  Moon  opens 

fertilizes  with  his  uectareous  beams.  ‘ The  daughters  of  Infinity  [Aditi] 
re  Pr°hably  the  quarters  of  the  sky.’ — Ludwig. 

4 The  Bull Soma.  According  to  S&yana,  the  Cows  are  the  propitiatory 
jmns  of  praise,  which  are  called  also  Goddesses  or  divine. 

5 Brightly  shining  vesture : the  milk  with  which  the  Soma  juice  is  mixed, 
yana  explains  the  second  half  of  the  stanza  differently,  taking  chamvbh , 
111  +v>r  ^ea^ers  *uto  which  the  Soma  juice  is  poured,  as  meaning  metaphor i- 

1 y the  two  great  receptacles  of  all  living  beings,  or  heaven  and  earth,  and 
hn°  ^C11]8  Aditya  who  is  not  mentioned  in  the  text : — ‘ he  has  created  ( Aditya) 
tirl  *)>  18  on  the  back  of  the  sky  for  the  destruction  (of  sin)  and  purification, 
48  created)  Aditya’s  brilliauce,  the  cover  of  the  two  worlds.’— Wilson. 


326  TEE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK , 

Well  be  it  with  the  men  and  cattle  in  our  home.  May  powe 
0 Soma,  may  the  people  stay  with  us. 

8 Pour  out  upon  us  wealth  in  goods,  in  gold,  in  steeds,  in  cat 

and  in  corn,  and  great  heroic  strength. 

Ye,  Soma,  are  my  Fathers,  lifted  up  on  high  as  heads 
heaven  and  makers  of  the  strength  of  life. 

9 These  Pavamanas  here,  these  drops  of  Soma,  to  Indra  hi 

sped  forth  like  cars  to  booty. 

Effused,  they  pass  the  cleansing  fleece,  while,  gold-hued,  tl 
cast  their  covering  off  to  pour  tho  rain  down. 

10  0 Indu,  flow  thou  on  for  lofty  Indra,  flow  blameless,  vi 
gracious,  foe-destroyer. 

Bring  splendid  treasures  to  the  man  who  lauds  thee 
Heaven  and  Earth,  with  all  the  Gods  protect  us. 

HYMN  LXX.  Soma  Pavami 

Tiie  three  times  seven  Milch-kino  in  the  eastern  heaven  h 
for  this  Soma  poured  the  genuine  milky  draught. 

Four  other  beauteous  Creatures  hath  he  made  for  his  ad 
ment,  when  he  waxed  in  strength  through  holy  rites. 

2 Longing  for  lovely  Amrit,  by  his  wisdom  he  divided,  ( 

apart  from  other,  earth  and  heaven. 

He  gladly  wrapped  himself  in  the  most  lucid  floods,  w 
through  their  glory  they  found  the  God’s  resting-place. 

3 May  those  his  brilliant  rays  be  ever  free  from  death,  inviol 

for  both  classes  of  created  things, — 

Rays  wherewith  powers  of  men  and  Gods  are  purified, 
even  for  this  have  sagos  welcomed  him  as  King. 

4 He,  while  he  is  adorned  by  the  ten  skilful  ones,  that  he  tc 

the  Midmost  Mothers  may  create, 

7 Vftj4h  and  krishtdyah,  powers  and  people,  are  explained  by  S&yai 
‘ food  ’ and  * offspring.’ 

8 Ye,  Soma  : * Soma  is  treated  as  plural  by  attraction  ; or,  as  SAyana 
it  the  plurality  of  the  pitris  is  applied  to  Soma.’—  Wilson.  Probably 
and  Stars  are  intended.  See  Hillebrandt,  V,  M.,  I.  p.  398. 

10  With  all  the  Gods:  devaih : ‘ subhagairdhanaih  with  auspicious  rich 
SAyana.  * 

1 The  three  times  seven  Milch -Jcine  are,  according  to  SAyana,  the  t 
months,  the  five  seasons,  the  three  worlds,  and  Aditya  or  the  Sun.  Pro! 
as  Ludwig  says,  the  seven  celestial  rivers,  multiplied  by  three  to  corre 
with  the  threefold  division  of  the  heavens,  are  intended.  These  suppj; 
genuine  draught,  in  contrast  to  the  four  other  beauteous  creatures,  the  V 
vari  and  the  three  EkadhanA  waters,  which  are  terrestrial  and  factitious, 
to  adorn  or  purify  Soma. 

8 Both  classes : animate  and  inanimate.  Or  Gods  and  men. 

i The  ten  skilful  ones : the  fingers.  The  Midmost  Mothers : the 


THE  MOVED  A. 


327 


tTMS  70.] 

While  ho  is  watching  o’er  the  lovely  Amrit’s  ways,  looks  on 
both  races  as  Beholder  of  mankind. 

5 He,  while  he  is  adorned  to  stream  forth  mighty  strength, 

rejoices  in  his  place  between  the  earth  and  heaven. 

The  Steer  dispels  the  evil-hearted  with  his  might,  aiming  at 
offerings  as  an  archer  at  the  game. 

6 Beholding,  as  it  were,  Two  Mother  Cows,  the  Steer  goes  roar- 

ing on  his  way  even  as  the  Maruts  roar. 

Knowing  Eternal  Law,  the  earliest  light  of  heaven,  he,  pas- 
sing wise,  was  chosen  out  to  tell  it  forth. 

7 The  fearful  Bull  is  bellowing  with  violent  might,  far-sighted, 

sharpening  his  yellow-coloured  horns. 

Soma  assumes  his  seat  in  the  well-fashioned  place  : the  cowhide 
and  the  sheepskiu  are  his  ornament. 

8 Bright,  making  pure  his  body  free  from  spot  and  stain,  on 

the  sheep’s  back  the  Golden-coloured  hath  flowed  down. 
Acceptable  to  Mitra,  Vfiyu,  Varuna,  be  is  prepared  as  three- 
fold meath  by  skilful  men. 

9 Flow  on  for  the  Gods’  banquet,  Soma,  as  a Steer,  and  enter 

Indra’s  heart,  the  Soma’s  reservoir. 

Bear  us  beyond  misfortune  ere  we  be  oppressed : the  man  who 
knows  the  laud  directs  the  man  who  asks. 

10  Urged  like  a car-stecd,  flow  to  strength,  0 Soma:  Iudu,  flow 
onward  to  the  throat  of  Indra. 

Skilled,  bear  us  past,  as  in  a boat  o’er  water : as  battling 
Hero  save  us  from  the  foeman. 


that  hang  between  heaven  and  earth,  in  which,  perhaps,  Soma  aids  in  produc- 
ing  the  rain.  But  the  meaning  is  uncertain.  Sdyana  explains  pramt  by 
man  pramdtum,  ‘ to  measure  out,  or  create,  the  worlds.’  Doth  races:  Gods 
and  men. 


6 As  U were,  Two  Mother  Cows : Heaven  and  Earth.  Sityana  explains  the 
cond  PAda  of  the  second  line  differently: — ‘the  intelligent  (Pavamina) 
wse  man  to  be  the  offerer  of  his  praise.’ — Wilson. 

8 Threefold : according  to  Sflyana,  mixed  with  the  Vasattvarl  water,  curds, 
nd  milk.  Probably,  poured  into  three  separate  vessels,  one  for  each  of  the 
t&ree  deities  mentioned. 


i q.  ^ man  who  knows  the  land  : who  i«  acquainted  with  the  roads  or  ways. 

yana  completes  the  simile : “ as  by  telling  him  he  protects  (helps)  him,  so 
0 who  knowest  the  roads  of  the  sacrifice  protect  us  by  telling  us  the 
^general  ’ — Wilson.  But,  of  course,  the  application  is  intended  to 


10  Bear  us  past : carry  us  over  all  difficulties  and  dangers.  From  the  foe 
1X1(111 : the  reviling  (of  the  foe).’— -Wilson. 


HYMN  LXXI.  SomaPavamftns 

The  guerdon  is  bestowed : the  Mighty  takes  his  seat,  and,  evei 
watchful,  guards  from  fiend  and  evil  sprite. 

Gold-hucd,  ho  makes  the  cloud  his  diadem,  the  milk  bi3  carpe 
in  both  worlds,  and  prayer  his  robe  of  state. 

2 Strong,  bellowing,  he  goes,  like  one  who  slays  the  folk;  he  let 

this  hue  of  Asuras  flow  off  from  him, 

Throws  off  his  covering,  seeks  his  father’s  meeting-place,  an 
thus  makes  for  himself  the  bright  robe  ho  assumes. 

3 Onward  he  flows,  from  both  the  hands,  pressed  out  wit 

stones : excited  by  the  prayer,  the  water  makes  him  wild 
He  frolics  and  draws  near,  completes  his  work  witli  song,  am 
bathes  in  streams  to  satisfy  the  wTorshipper. 

4 They  pour  out  meath  around  the  Master  of  the  house,  Celestia 

Strengthener  of  the  mountain  that  gives  might ; 

In  whom,  through  his  great  powers,  oblation-eating  cows  ii 
their  uplifted  udder  mix  their  choicest  milk. 

5 They,  the  ten  sisters,  on  the  lap  of  Aditi,  have  sent  him  for 

ward  like  a car  from  both  the  arms. 

He  wanders  and  comes  near  the  Cow’s  mysterious  place,  ove 
the  place  which  his  inventions  have  produced. 

6 Like  as  a falcon  to  his  home,  so  speeds  the  God  to  his  ow 

golden  wisely-fashioned  place  to  rest. 


1 The  guerdon  : the  honorarium  given  to  the  priests,  consisting  original 
of  a cow.  The  Mighty  : Soma.  His  carpet : upustirc  : that  which  is  sprew 
scattered,  orspiinkied.  Cp.  IX.  69.  5,  where  upasturanam  is  translated  1> 
1 sprinkling.’ 

2 Hue  of  Asuras:  or,  celestial  hiightness  ; ‘ Himmelsglanz.’ — Grassmanr 

* He  puts  forth  that  daum-slaying  tint  of  liis’. — Wilson.  Seeks  his  father 
•meeting place  : goes  to  meet  the  yajamdna  or  sacrifieer  According  to  Sayana 

* the  food  (jritith),  that  is,  the  Soma,  goes  to  the  prepared  reservoir.’ 

3 The  water  makes  him  wild:  vrishdyate  nabhasd : nabhas  in  the  Soma 
hymns  is  used  to  signify  either  the  rain-water  in  which,  or  the  cloud  frou 
which,  the  Soma  flows  to  the  earth.  Here  it  means  the  water  with  whiol 
the  Soma-plant  is  spiinklcd.  See  Vedische  Studien , I.  p 135.  According  t 
Ludwig  : ‘ he  act3  like  a bull  in  the  sea  of  cloud.’  To  satisfy  the  worshipper 
I adopt  Ludwig’s  suggestion  and  take  ydjate  as  a dative  of  the  participle 
Wilson  translates,  after  Sdyana  : — ‘he  is  honoured  at  the  (god)— protecte 
(sacrifice)  ’ 

4 The  Master  of  the  house : according  to  Sayana,  the  conqueror  of  the  for 
of  the  enemy.  See  IX.  78  3.  The  mountain  that  gives  miyht : the  clout 
In  the  second  half  of  this  stanza  I adopt  SAyana’s  interpretation  as  a maki 
shift,  although  it  seems  impossible  that  mdrdhan , ‘ head,’  should  here  mca 
‘uplifted.’  Ludwig  takes  tidhani,  ‘ udder,’  in  the  sense  of  ‘behalter,’  or  r( 
ceptacle  into  which  the  Soma  flows. 

5 On  the  lap  of  Aditi:  on  the  earth,  ‘near  to  the  ground.’ — Wilsoi 
The  Cow's  mysterious  place : or,  distant  place,  is  the  udder  of  heaven,  tb 
cloud. 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


829 


WMN  72.] 

With  song  they  urge  the  darling  to  the  sacred  grass : the 
Holy  One  goes  like  ft  courser  to  the  Gods. 

7 From  far  away,  from  heaven,  the  red-hued  noted  Sage,  Steer 

of  the  tuple  height,  hath  sung  unto  the  kine. 

With  thousand  guidings  he,  leading  this  way  and  that,  shines, 
as  a singer,  splendidly  through  many  a morn. 

8 His  covering  assumes  a radiant  hue;  where’er  he  comes  into 

Mie  fight  he  drives  the  foo  afar. 

The  Winner  of  the  Floods,  with  food  he  seeks  the  host  of 
heaven,  ho  comes  to  praises  glorified  with  milk. 

9 Like  a bull  roaming  round  the  herds  he  bellows : he  hath 

assumed  the  brilliancy  of  Surya. 

Down  to  the  earth  hath  looked  the  heavenly  Falcon  : Soma 
with  wisdom  views  all  living  creatures. 

HYMN  LXX1I.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

They  cleanso  the  Gold-hued  : like  a red  Steed  is  he  yoked,  and 
Soma  in  the  jar  is  mingled  with  the  milk. 

He  sendeth  out  his  voice,  and  many  loving  friends  of  him  the 
highly-lauded  hasten  with  their  songs. 

2 The  many  sages  utter  words  in  unison,  while  into  Indra,’ s 

throat  they  pour  the  Soma  juice, 

When,  with  the  ten  that  dwell  together  closely  joined,  the 
men  whose  hands  are  skilful  cleanse  the  lovely  meath. 

3 He  goes  upon  his  way,  unresting,  to  the  cows,  over  the  roaring 

sound  which  Surya’s  Daughter  loves. 

The  Falcon  brought  it  to  him  for  his  own  delight:  now  with 
the  twofold  kindred  sisters  is  his  home. 

4 Washed  by  the  men,  stone-pressed,  dear  on  the  holy  grass, 

faithful  to  seasons,  Lord  of  cattle  from  of  old, 

Most  liberal,  completing  sacrifice  for  men,  0 Indra,  pure  bright 
Soina,  Indu,  flows  for  thee. 


7 0/  the  triple  heirjkt : working  in  heaven,  firmament,  and  earth. — Ludwig 
aee  IX.  75.  3. 

9 The  heavenly  Falcon : divyu a suparnah:  ‘celestial,  flying  gracefully.’ — 
Vils°n.  Soma,  says  Sftyana,  is  said  to  go  gracefully,  * becauso  it  is  carried 
by  Gdyatrl  in  the  shape  of  a hawk.’ 

2 Indra’ s : throat : literally,  belly  ; the  dronaJcalasa  or  reservoir.  The 
,cn ' the  fingers. 

2 The  cows:  the  milk  and  curds.  The  roaring  sound  of  the  effused  Soma 
s said  to  be  dear  to  Sfirya’s  Daughter,  Ushas  or  Dawn,  because  it  is  chiefly 
thart  fln  ^ie  ear]y  m°rning.  The  Falcon : I adopt  Ludwig’s  interpretation  of 

Q strange  word  vinamgrisdh  as  no  other  meaning  seems  suitable  here. 

saya”a»  the  word  means  praiser,  or  worshipper.  The  twofold 
red  sisters ; the  fingers  of  both  hauds. 


5 0 Indra,  urged  by  arms  of  men  and  poured  in  streams,  Soma 

flows  on  for  thee  after  his  Godlike  kind. 

Plans  thou  fulfillcst,  gatherest  thoughts  for  sacrifice : in  the 
bowls  sits  the  Gold-hued  like  a roosting  bird. 

6 Sages  well-skilled  in  work,  intelligent,  drain  out  the  stalk  that 

roars,  the  Sage,  the  Everlasting  One. 

The  milk,  the  hymns  unite  them  with  him  in  the  place  of 
sacrifice,  his  seat  who  is  produced  anew. 

7 Earth’s  central  point,  sustainer  of  the  mighty  heavens,  distil- 

led into  the  streams,  into  the  waters’  wave, 

As  Indra’s  thunderbolt,  Steer  with  far-spreading  wealth,  Soma 
is  flowing  on  to  make  the  heart  rejoice. 

8 Over  the  earthly  region  flow  thou  on  thy  way,  helping  the 

praiser  and  the  pourer,  thou  Most  Wise. 

Let  us  not  lack  rich  treasure  reaching  to  our  home,  aud  may 
we  clothe  ourselves  in  manifold  bright  wealth. 

9 Hither,  0 Indu,  unto  us  a hundred  gifts  of  steeds,  a thousand 

gifts  of  cattle  and  of  gold, 

Measure  thou  forth,  yea,  splendid  ample  strengthening  food; 
do  thou,  0 Pavamana,  heed  this  laud  of  ours. 

HYMN  LXXIII.  Soma  Tavamilna. 

They  from  the  spouting  drop  have  sounded  at  the  rim  : naves 
speed  together  to  the  place  of  sacrifice. 

That  Asura  hath  formed,  to  seize,  three  lofty  heights.  The 
ships  of  truth  have  borne  the  pious  man  across. 

2 The  strong  Steers,  gathering,  have  duly  stirred  themselves, 

and  over  the  stream’s  wave  the  friends  sent  forth  the  song. 
Engendering  the  hymn,  with  flowing  streams  of  meath,  Indra s 
dear  body  have  they  caused  to  wax  in  strength. 

3 With  sanctifying  gear  they  sit  around  the  song  : their  ancient 

Father  guards  their  holy  work  from  harm. 


7 The  heart:  of  Indra.  As  Indra's  thunderbolt:  cp.  IX.  77.  1. 

1 They : the  pressing  stones,  from  whose  rim  or  edge  the  Soma-drops  fall 
noisily.  Naves : by  synecdoche  wheels,  again  by  the  same  figure,  chariots, 
and  then  by  metaphor  the  swiftly-running  Soma-drops.  That  Asura:  the 
divine  Soma.  To  seize : to  be  held  and  used.  Three  lofty  heights  : the  three 
elevated  worlds.  The  ships  of  truth:  or,  of  the  truthful  (Soma).  According 
to  Sftyana,  the  four  vessels  which  hold  the  Aditya,  Agrayana,  Uktkya,  an 
Dhruva  libations. 

2 The  strong  Steers : the  priests. 

3 Their  ancient  Father:  Soma;  or,  perhaps,  Agni.  Varuna.'  'Soma 
all-envelopper.' — Wilson.  Him:  Soma.  In  sustaining  Hoods : in  the  Vasa 
vart  waters.-  SAyana, 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


331 


UYUN  74.] 

Varuna  hath  o’erspreacl  the  mighty  sea  of  air.  Sages  had 
power  to  hold  him  in  sustaining  floods. 

4 Sweet-tongued,  exhaustless,  they  have  sent  their  voices  down 

together,  in  heaven’s  vault  that  pours  a thousand  streams. 
His  wildly-restless  warders  never  close  an  eye : in  every  plac» 
are  found  the  bonds  that  bind  man  fast. 

5 O’er  Sire  and  Mother  they  have  roared  in  unison,  bright  with 

the  verse  <Jf  praise,  burning  up  riteless  men, 

Blowing  away  with  supernatural  might  from  earth  and  from 
the  heavens  the  swarthy  skin  which  Indra  hates. 

6 Those  which,  as  guides  of  song  and  counsellors  of  speed,  were 

manifested  from  their  ancient  dwelling  place, — 

From  these  the  eyeless  and  the  deaf  have  turned  aside : the 
wicked  travel  not  the  pathway  of  the  Law. 

7 What  time  the  filter  with  a thousand  streams  is  stretched, 

the  thoughtful  sages  purify  their  song  therein. 
Bright-coloured  aro  their  spies,  vigorous,  void  of  guile,  excel- 
lent, fair  to  see,  beholders  of  mankind. 

8 Guardian  of  Law,  most  wise,  he  may  not  be  deceived : three 

Purifiers  hath  he  set  within  his  heart. 

With  wisdom  he  beholds  all  creatures  that  exist : he  drives  into 
the  pit  the  hated  riteless  ones. 

9 The  thread  of  sacrifice  spun  in  the  cleansing  sieve,  on  Varuna’s 

tongue-tip,  by  supernatural  might, — 

This,  by  their  striving,  have  the  prudent  ones  attained : ho 
who  hath  uot  this  power  shall  sink  into  the  pit. 

HYMN  LXXIV.  Soma  Pavamdna* 

Born  like  a youngling  he  hath  clamoured  in  the  wood,  when 
he,  the  Red,  the  Strong,  would  win  the  light  of  heaven. 

4 They:  the  beams  that  radiate  from  Soma  ; somarasmayah  : Soma-rays. — 
Siyana. 

5 Sire  and  Mother : the  general  parents,  Heaven  and  Earth.  The  swarthy 
skin  • ‘ the  black -skinned  ( Rakshasas  ).' — Wilson. 

6 Time:  rays.  I follow  S&yana's  interpretation.  The  first  line  is  very 
obscure. 

7 The  filter : the  tip  of  their  tongue.  Cf . stanza  9,  and  hymn  7 5. 2.  See  Ber- 
gaigne,  La  Religion  Vddiquc,  I.  283,  Bright  coloured : rudrttsah  : sons  of 
Rudra,  according  to  S&yana.  But  see  Vedische  Studien , I.  pp.  55,  56. 

.8  Of  Law : of  law-ordained  sacrifice.  The  three  Purifiers  whom  Soma  sets 
within  his  heart  and  combines  in  his  own  being  are  Agni,  V&yu,  Surya,  the 
P'^yiHg  powers  of  fire,  wind,  and  sun. 

» On  Varuna’s  tongue-tip:  the  Yasatlvarl  waters  in  which  Soma  dwells 
(vasati)  stand  on  the  tip  of  Varuna’s  tongue. — S&yana.  He  who  hath  not  this 
power;  ‘he  who  is  incompetent  for  the  rite.1 — Wilson. 

1 In  the  wood:  in  the  wooden  vat.  According  to  S&vana,  ‘in  the  water.' 


332  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IX, 

He  comes  with  heavenly  seed  that  makos  the  water  swell : him 
for  wide-spreading  shelter  we  implore  with  prayer. 

2 A far-extended  pillar  that  supports  the  sky,  the  Soma-stalk, 

filled  full,  moves  itself  every  way. 

He  shall  bring  both  these  great  worlds  while  tho  rite  proceeds: 
the  Sago  holds  these  who  move  together  and  all  food. 

3 Wide  space  hath  he  who  follows  Aditi’s  right  path,  and  mighty 

well-made  food,  meath  blent  with  Soma  juice  ; 

He  who  from  hence  commands  the  rain,  Steer  of  the  kino, 
Leader  of  floods,  who  helps  us  hence,  who  claims  our  laud. 

4 Butter  and  milk  are  drawn  from  animated  cloud;  thence 

Amrit  is  produced,  centre  of  sacrifice. 

Him  tho  Most  Bounteous  Ones,  ever-united,  lovo ; him  as  our 
Friend  the  Men  who  make  all  swell  rain  down. 

5 The  Soma-stalk  bath  roared,  following  with  the  wave : lie 

swells  with  sap  for  man  the  skin  which  Gods  enjoy. 

Upon  the  lap  of  Aditi  he  lays  the  germ,  by  means  wherof  we 
gain  children  and  progeny. 

6 In  tho  third  region  which  distils  a thousand  streams,  may  the 

Exhaustless  Ones  descend  with  procreant  power. 

The  kindred  Four  have  been  sent  downward  from  tho  heav- 
ens : dropping  with  oil  they  bring  Amrit  and  sacred  gifts. 

7 Soma  assumes  white  colour  when  he  strives  to  gain : the 

bounteous  Asura  knows  full  many  a precious  boon. 

Down  the  steep  slope,  through  song,  he  comes  to  sacrifice, 
and  he  will  burst  the  water-holding  cask  of  heaven, 

2 He  shall  briny  both  these  yreat  worlds  : Bhall  bring  Heaven  and  Earth  to 
the  sacrifice. 

3 He  who  follows  Aditi’ 8 right  path:  the  regularly  moving  moon.  Sayana 
takes  ddit(h  with  gdvydtih  : ‘ the  way  to  eaith  is  broad.’ — Wilson.  Somewhat 
similarly  lidlebrandt,  V.  M.,  I.  360. 

4 The  Most  Bounteous  Ones,  the  Men  who  make  all  swell , are,  probably,  the 
Maruts  who  fertilize  the  earth,  and  send  Soma  down  in  the  rain.  S&yana’a 
explanation  is  different : — ‘ the  assembled  liberal  givers  [the  yajamdnas  or 
aacrificers]  delight  him  : (the  Soma  juices)  the  leaders,  the  protectors  shower 
down  the  accumulated  (water)  ’ — Wilson.  For  the  meaning  of  pdravah,  those 
who  swell,  or  cause  to  swell,  * protectors’  according  to  SAyana,  see  Vedische 
Studien , / p.  85. 

5 For  man  : for  the  sacrificer.  The  skin : his  own  body. — S&yana.  Upon 
the  lap  of  Aditi : of  the  earth,  according  to  Sayana.  The  meaning  is  that 
Soma  is  the  source  of  all  Nature’s  productive  power. 

6 In  the  th  ird  region  : dwelling  in  heaven.  The  Exhaustless  Ones : these 
are  the  kindred  Four  of  the  following  line,  meaning,  according  to  S&yap&>  f°,ir 
rays  or  digits  of  Soma.  It  is  most  probable  that  tho  four  Goddesses  Sinivilh 
Kuhil  or  Gungfi,  R4k&,  and  Anumati  are  meant.  Cp.  II.  32.  6,  7.’— ;Ludwig- 

7 Strives  to  gain : seeks  to  enjoy  heaven. — S&yana.  The  water-holding  cm: 
the  water- laden  cloud. 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


333 


3YMN  75.] 


8 Yea,  to  the  shining  milk-anointed  beaker,  as  to  his  goal,  hath 

stepped  the  conquering  Courser. 

Pious-soulcd  men  have  sent  their  gifts  of  cattle  unto  Kak- 
shivan  of  the  hundred  winters. 

9 Soma,  thy  juice  when  thou  art  blended  with  the  streams, 

flows,  Pavamana,  through  the  long  wool  of  the  sheep. 

So,  cleansed  by  sages,  0 best  giver  of  delight,  grow  sweet  for 
Indra,  Pavamana  ! for  his  drink. 

HYMN  LXXV.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Graciously-minded  he  is  flowing  on  his  way  to  wiu  dear 
names  o’er  which  the  Youthful  One  grows  great. 

The  Mighty  and  Far-seing  One  hath  mounted  now  the  mighty 
Surya’s  car  which  moves  to  every  side. 

2 The  Speaker,  unassailable  Master  of  this  hymn,  the  Tongue  of 
saciifice  pours  forth  the  pleasant  meath. 

Within  the  lustrous  region  of  the  heavens  the  Son  makes  the 
third  secret  name  of  Mother  and  of  Sire. 

\ Sending  forth  flashes  he  hath  bellowed  to  the  jars,  led  by  the 
men  into  the  golden  reservoir. 

The  milky  streams  of  sacrifice  have  sung  to  him : he  of  the 
triple  height  shines  brightly  through  the  morns. 

4 Pressed  by  the  stones,  with  hymns,  and  graciously  inclined, 

illuminating  both  the  Parents,  Heaven  and  Earth, 

He  Hows  in  ordered  season  onward  through  the  fleece,  a cur- 
rent of  sweet  juice  still  swelling  day  by  day. 

5 Flow  onward,  Soma,  flow  to  bring  prosperity  : cleansed  by  the 

men,  invest  thee  with  the  milky  draught. 

What  gladdening  drinks  thou  hast,  foaming,  exceeding  strong, 
even  with  these  incite  Indra  to  give  us  wealth. 


8 The  conquering  Courser : the  swiftly-flowing  Soma,  A al'shtvdn : the 
tishi  of  the  hymn. 

1 O'er  which:  that  is  the  Youthful  Ono,  the  fresh  and  strong  Soma, 
ixceedg  iu  greatness  even  the  high  titles  which  he  wins  by  his  gracious  deeds. 

2 Speaker ; Master;  Tongue  of  sacrifice:  Soma,  the  giver  of  eloquence. 
The  Son : Soma.  Of  Mother  and  of  Sire : of  his  parents,  Heaven  and  Earth. 
^Vhat  the  third  secret  name , that  is,  probably,  a name  in  addition  to  those  of 
deaven  and  Earth,  and  comprising  both  deities,  may  be,  does  not  appear. 
% ana’s  explanation  is  different  ' 1 the  son  (the  sacrifice^  assumes  a third 
name  unknown  to  his  parents  ; ' that  is,  Wilson  adds,  * a name  not  given  at 
kkth  ..He  [Sdyana]  cites  Baudhftyana,  who  gives  Somaydjin  [Somayfiga  sacri* 
freer)  as  an  iustance  of  a third  name.’ 

3 The  milky  streams : cf.  1. 144.  2.  Of  the  triple  height:  dwelling  in  three 
nigh  places,  heaven,  the  firmament  or  the  mountain-top,  and  the  place  of  sac- 
nfree.  Cf.  IX.  71,  7, 


334 


[BOOK  IX. 


THE  HYMNS  OP 

HYMN  LXXYI.  Soma  PavamAna. 

On  flows  the  potent  juico,  sustainer  of  the  heavens,  the  strength 
of  Gods,  whom  men  must  hail  with  shouts  of  joy. 

The  Gold-hued,  started  like  a courser  by  brave  men,  impe- 
tuously winneth  splendour  in  the  streams. 

2 He  takes  his  weapons,  like  a hero,  in  his  hands,  fain  to  win 

light,  car-borne,  in  forays  for  the  kine. 

Indu,  while  stimulating  Indra’s  might,  is  urged  forward  and 
balmed  by  sages  skilful  in  their  task. 

3 Soma,  as  thou  art  purified  with  flowing  wave,  exhibiting  thy 

strength  enter  thou  Indra’s  throat. 

Make  both  worlds  stream  for  us,  as  lightning  doth  the  clouds : 
mete  out  exhaustless  powers  for  ns,  as  ’twere  through  song. 

4 Onward  he  flows,  the  King  of  all  that  sees  the  light : the 

Rishis’  Lord  hath  raised  the  song  of  sacrifice ; 

Even  he  who  is  adorned  with  Surya’s  arrowy  beam,  Father  of 
hymns,  whose  wisdom  is  beyond  our  reach. 

5 Like  as  a bull  to  herds,  thou  flowest  to  the  pail,  bellowing  as 

a steer  upon  the  waters’  lap. 

So,  best  of  Oheerers,  thou  for  Indra  flowest  on  that  we,  with 
thy  protection,  may  o’ercome  in  fi^bt. 

HYMN  LXXVII.  Soma  Pavamana. 

More  beauteous  than  the  beautiful,  as  Indra’s  bolt,  this  Soma, 
rich  in  sweets,  hath  clamoured  in  the  vat. 

Dropping  with  oil,  abundant,  streams  of  sacrifice  flow  unto  him 
like  milch-kine,  lowing,  with  their  milk. 

2 On  flows  that  Ancient  One  whom,  hitherward,  from  heaven, 

sped  through  the  region  of  the  air,  the  Falcon  snatched. 
He,  quiveriug  with  alarm  and  terrified  in  heart  before  bow- 
armed  Krisauu,  holdeth  fast  the  sweet. 

3 May  those  first  freshest  drops  of  Soma  juice  effused  flow  oil 

their  way  to  bring  us  mighty  strength  in  kine. 

Beauteous  as  serpents,  worthy  to  be  looked  upon,  they  whom 
each  sacred  gift  and  all  our  prayers  have  pleased. 

3 As ’twere  through  song : ‘now  with  the  rite,  i.  e.  at  the  very  time  the 
rite  is  being  performed.’  —'Wilson. 

2 The  Falcon : see  I.  93.  5.  He : Soma,  according  to  SAyana,  but  more 
probably  the  falcon.  Kritdnu ; the  archer  who  guards  the  celestial  Soma. 
Seel.  112.21. 

3 Serpents : the  meaning  of  ahydh  is  uncertain  here.  SAyana  explains  it 
by  striyah,  women ' 1 pleasing  to  look  upon  like  beautiful  well-adorned 
(women).’— Wilson. 


THE  MOVED  A. 


335 


BYMN  78.] 

4 May  that  much-lauded  Indu,  with  a heart  iuclined  to  us,  well- 

knowing, fight  against  oul*  enemies. 

He  who  hath  brought  the  germ  beside  the  Strong  One's  seat 
moves  onward  to  the  widely-opened  stall  of  kine. 

5 The  active  potent  juice  of  heaven  is  flowing  on,  great  Varuna 

whom  the  fro  ward  man  can  ne'er  deceive. 

Mitra,  the  Holy,  hath  been  pressed  for  troubled  times,  neigh- 
ing like  an  impatient  horse  amid  the  herd. 

HYMN  LXXVIir.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

Raising  his  voice  the  King  hath  flowed  upon  his  way : invest- 
ed with  the  waters  he  would  win  the  kme. 

The  fleece  retains  his  solid  parts  as  though  impure,  and  bright 
and  cleansed  he  seeks  the  special  place  of  Gods. 

2 Thou,  Soma,  art  effused  for  Indra  by  the  men,  balmed  in  the 

wood  as  wave,  Sage,  Viewer  of  mankind. 

Full  many  are  the  paths  whereon  thou  mayest  go  : a thousand 
bay  steeds  hast  thou  resting  in  the  bowls. 

3 Apsarases  who  dwell  in  waters  of  the  sea,  sitting  within,  have 

flowed  to  Soma  wise  of  heart. 

They  urge  the  Master  of  the  house  upon  his  way,  and  to  the 
Eternal  Pavamana  pray  for  bliss. 

4 Soma  flows  on  for  us  as  winner  of  the  kine,  winner  of  thousands, 

cars,  water,  and  light,  and  gold ; 

Ho  whom  the  Gods  have  made  a gladdening  draught  to  drink, 
the  drop  most  sweet  to  taste,  weal-bringing,  red  of  hue. 

4 He  who  hath  brought  the  germ : here  the  sacrificer  and  not  Soma  is 
meant.— Ludwig.  The  Strong  One : Agni. 

5 In  this  stanza  Soma  is  compared  to,  or  mystically  identified  with,  Varuna 
and  Mitra.  S&yana  leaves  Varuna  unexplained,  but  interprets  Mitra  by 
mveshdm  mitrabhiUah,  ‘ (Soma)  the  ftiend  of  all.’ 

1 Thejlecce:  literally,  the  sheep  ; the  filter  made  of  wool.  Solid  parts: 
tanvd : the  fragments  of  stalk  which  will  not  pass  through  the  strainer. 
According  to  Sftyana,  ‘ with  its  own  covering,’ — ‘ the  sheep  with  its  fleece.’ — 
Wilson.  The  special  place  of  Gods : the  vessels  which  hold  the  libations 
assigned  to  various  Qods. 

2 Balmed  in  the  wood  : according  to  SAyana,  ‘art  driven  into  the  water.’ 
Eay  steeds : swiftly-running  tawny  drops, 

3 Apsarases  who  dwell  in  waters  of  the  sea  : * nymphs  of  the  firmament.’ — 
Wilson.  The  mymphs  are  identified  with  their  element,  and  represent  the 
water  with  which  the  Soma  juice  is  mixed.  The  Master  of  the  house:  Aar- 
*iya>sya  sakshdnim : Soma.  In  IX.  71.  4,  Sdyana  explaius  these  words  as 

overpowerer,  or  stormer  of  the  foit  of  the  enemy,’  and  in  this  place  as  ‘the 
sprinkler  of  the  hall  of  sacrifice.’  Sakshani,  from  the  root  sah,  means  over- 
powerer, and  from  the  root  mht  connected  with,  especially  as  master  wad 
possessor. 


330  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK 

5 Soma,  as  Pavamana  thou,  our  faithful  Friend,  making  for  U8 
these  real  treasures,  flowest  on. 

Slay  thou  the  enemy  both  near  and  far  away : grant  iis  secur- 
ity  and  ample  pasturage. 

HYMN  LXXIX.  * Soma  PavamSna, 
Spontaneous  let  our  drops  of  Soma  juice  flow  on,  pressed,  go]. 

den-hucd,  among  the  Gods  of  lofty  heaven. 

Perish  among  us  they  who  give  no  gifts  of  food  ! perish  the 
godless  ! May  our  prayers  obtain  success. 

2 Forward  to  us  the  drops,  distilling  meath,  shall  flow,  like  riches 

for  whose  sake  we  urge  tho  horses  on. 

Beyond  the  crafty  hindering  of  all  mortal  men  may  we  conti- 
nually bear  precious  wealth  away. 

3 Yea,  vetily,  foe  of  hate  shown  to  himself  is  he,  yea,  verily,  des- 

troyer too  of  other  hate. 

As  thirst  subducth  in  the  desert,  conquer  thou,  0 Soma  Pava- 
mana, men  of  evil  thoughts. 

4 Near  kin  to  tlicc  is  he,  raised  loftiest  in  the  heavens  : upon  the 

earth’s  high  ridge  thy  scions  have  grown  forth. 

The  press-stones  chew  and  crunch  thee  on  the  ox’s  hide : sages 
have  milked  thee  with  their  hands  into  the  streams. 

5 So  do  they  hurry  on  thy  strong  and  beauteous  juice,  0 Indu, 

as  the  first  ingredient  of  the  draught. 

Bring  low,  thou  Pavamana,  every  single  foe,  and  be  thy  might 
shown  forth  as  sweet  and  gladdening  drink. 

HYMN  LXXX.  Soma  Pavamana. 

On  flows  the  stream  of  Soma  who  beholds  mankind : by  ever- 
lasting Law  ho  calls  the  Gods  from  heaven. 

He  lightens  with  the  roaring  of  Brihaspati : the  lakes  have  not 
contained  the  pourings  of  the  juice. 


1 They  who  give  no  gifts  of  food  : I can  find  no  satisfactory  explanation  of 
tiketh  ardtiyah,  so  I give  Sayana’s  interpretation  as  a makeshift.  ‘ May  they 
be  destroyed  who  are  the  withholders  of  food  from  us.’ — Wilson. 

2 Urge  the  horses  on:  Sdyana  explains  drvatah , horses,  by  ‘ strong  enemy. 
‘By  whoso  aid  we  encounter  the  powerful  (enemy).’ — Wilson. 

3 * Soma  knows  how  to  defend  not  only  himself,  but  us  also,’ — Ludwig. 
Destroyer : literally,  the  wolf. 

4 He:  ‘the  Moon.’ — Ludwig.  ‘Thy  best  juice  dwells  in  the  navel  of 

heaven,  that  which  receives  (the  oblation).’ — Wilson.  On  the  ox's  hide- 
* Although  men  of  the  present  time  pour  out  the  Soma  upon  the  skin  of  * 
black  antelope  and  not  on  a cowhide  or  oxhide,  still  it  is  measured  out  fof 
sale  on  an  oxhide.’— Sdyana.  _ t . 

1 The  roaring  of  Brihaspati : that  is,  says  Sdyana,  the  voice  or  praise  of 
the  worshipper.  Agni  may  be  intended,  as  Ludwig  suggests.  The  lakes : or 
seas  ( samudrttsah )f  probably  the  Soma-reservoirs.  Sdyana  takes  na  a9  fl 
particle  of  comparison ‘the  libations  cover  (the  earth)  like  rivers.’ — 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


337 


0MN  81.] 

2 Thou,  powerful  Soma,  thou  to  whom  the  cows  have  lowed,  as- 

eendest,  bright  with  sheen,  thine  iron-fashioned  home. 

Thou,  lengthening  our  princes’  life  and  high  renown,  fiowest  for 
India  as  his  mighty  gladdening  drink. 

3 Best  giver  of  delight,  he  flows  to  Indra’s  throat,  robing  him- 

self in  might,  Auspicious  One,  for  fame. 

He  spreads  himself  abroad  to  meet  all  things  that  be : the 
vigorous  Tawny  Steed  flows  sporting  on  his  way. 

4 The  men,  the  ten  swift  fingers,  milk  thee  out  for  Gods,  even 

thee  most  rich  in  meath,  with  thousand  flowing  streams. 
Soma  who  winnest  thousands,  driven  by  the  men,  expressed 
with  stones,  bring,  as  thou  fiowest,  all  the  Gods. 

5 Deft-handed  men  with  stones,  the  ten  swift  fingers,  drain  thee 

into  waters,  thee,  the  Steer  enriched  witli  sweets. 

Thou,  Soma,  gladdening  Indra  and  the  Heavenly  Host,  fiowest 
as  Pavamana  like  a river’s  wave. 

HYMN  LX  XXL  Soma  PavamAna. 

Onward  to  Tndra’s  throat  move,  beauteously  adorned,  the 
waves  of  Soma  a*  lie  purifies  himself, 

When  they,  brought  forward  with  tho  lovely  curd  of  kine, 
effused,  have  cheered  the  Hero  to  bestow  his  gifts. 

I 2 Hither  hath  Soma  flowed  unto  the  beakers,  like  a chariot- 
horse,  a stallion  swift  upon  his  way. 

Thus,  knowing  both  the  generations,  he  obtains  the  rights  and 
dues  of  Gods  from  yonder  and  from  hence. 

1 While  thou  art  cleansed,  0 Soma,  scatter  wealth  on  us ; 
Indu,  bestow  great  bounty  as  a liberal  Prince. 

Giver  of  life,  with  wisdom  help  to  opulence ; strew  not  our 
home  possessions  far  away  from  us. 

1 Hither  let  Pushan  Pavamana  come  to  us,  Varuna,  Mitra, 
bountiful,  of  one  accord, 

The  Maruts,  Asvins,  Vayn,  and  Brihaspati,  Savitar,  Tvashtar, 
ti  actable  Sarasvati. 


2 Ivon-fashioned  home : see  IX.  1.  2. 

2 Both  the  generations : of  Gods  and  men.  S&yana  takes  ubhdyasya  jdn - 

with  devfltndn i: — ‘and  knowing  both  races  of  gods — those  who  come 
J (the  sacrifice)  from  the  other  world  and  those  who  (come)  from  this  world.’ 
"Wllsou. 

3 Udp  to  opnknee : according  to  S&yana,  ‘help  Vasu  (the  Rishi  of  the 
ymn)  to  prosperity.’ 

‘f'vuctuble •'  suyumd:  easily  led  (by  prayer).  According  to  Sdyana  = stm- 

beautiful  in  form. 

22 


838  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  /£ 

5 Both  Heaven  and  Earth,  the  all-invigorating  Pair,  Vidhatar 
Aditi,  and  Aryaman  the  God, 

Bhaga  who  blesses  men,  the  spacious  Firmament, — let  all  the 
Gods  in  Pavamana  take  delight. 

HYMN  LXXXII.  soma  Pavamftn,. 

Even  as  a King  hath  Soma,  red  and  tawny  Bull,  been  presbed; 
the  Wondrous  One  hath  bellowed  to  the  kine. 

While  purified  he  passes  through  the  filtering  fleece  to  seat 
him  hawk-like  on  the  place  that  drops  with  oil. 

2 To  glory  goest  thou,  Sage  with  disposing  skill,  like  a groomed 

steed  thou  rushest  forward  to  the  prize. 

0 Soma,  be  thou  gracious,  driving  off  distress  : thou  goest, 
clothed  in  l utter,  to  a robe  of  state. 

3 Parjanya  is  the  Father  of  the  Mighty  Bird  : on  mountains, 

in  earth’s  centre  hath  be  made  his  home. 

The  waters  too  have  flowed,  the  Sisters,  to  the  kine  : he  meets 
the  pressing-stones  at  the  beloved  rite. 

4 Thou  givest  pleasure  as  a wife  delights  her  lord.  Listen,  0 

Child  of  Pajra,  for  to  thee  I speak. 

Amid  the  holy  songs  go  on  that  we  may  live  : in  time  of 
trouble,  Soma,  watch  thou  free  from  blame. 

5 As  to  the  men  of  old  thou  earnest,  Induy  unharmed,  to 

strengthen,  winning  hundreds,  thousands, 

So  now  for  new  felicity  flow  onward  : the  waters  follow  as  thy 
law  ordaineth. 

HYMN  LXXXIII.  Soma  Pavamtna 

Spread  is  thy  cleansing  filter,  Brahmanaspati : as  Prince, 
thou  entered  its  limbs  from  every  side. 

5 All-invigorating:  visvaminvt:  ‘ all -invading.’ — S&yana.  YidMtar . the 
Disposer,  regarded  as  a separate  deity,  as  Dh&tar  is  the  Maker,  Ordainer,  or 
Establishes  

1 ^ a King:  ‘ magnificent  as  a king/ — Wilson.  That  drops  with  oil • 
S&yana  here  explains  ghritdvantam  l>y  udakuvantum,  watery. 

2 To  a robe  of  stale  : mrnijam  : ‘ to  the  cleansing  (vessel).’ — Wilson.. 

3 Parjanya:  the  God  of  the  rain-cloud  and  wateia  of  the  air  in  which  the 
mighty  Bird,  the  Moon,  is  born.  In  earth’ a centre : at  the  altar,  in  the 
oblation. 

4 Pujrd : according  to  S&y  an  a,  the  earth.  The  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon 

explains  the  word  as  meaning  the  moist  fre»h  Soma-plant  of  which  Soma,  the 
juice,  is  the  child.  Pei  haps,  as  Ludwig  suggests,  PajrA  may  be  the  name  of 
the  sacrificer's  wife,  , 

1 Brahmauaspatl’s  filter  appears  to  be  the  heavenly  filter  through  whicj1 
the  rain  descends  to  earth.  See  Bergaigne,  La  Religion  Vtdique,  I.  79,  20  . 
The  raw  : uncooked  oblation.  Which  bear : 1 bearing  (the  sacrifice).’— W”800’ 
This : according  to  Sftyana,  to  this  filter.  Ludwig  thinks  that  Agni  or  Surf 
is  meant  by  * tat.' 


THE  RIGVEDA, 


330 


HYMN  84.] 


The  raw,  whose  mass  hath  not  been  heated,  gains  not  this  : 
they  only  which  are  dressed,  which  bear,  attain  to  it. 

2 High  in  the  seat  of  heaven  is  spread  the  Scorcher’s  sieve  : its 

threads  are  standing  separate,  glittering  with  light. 

The  Swift  Ones  favour  him  who  purifieth  this  : with  cons- 
ciousness they  stand  upon  the  height  of  heaven. 

3 The  foremost  spotted  Steer  hath  made  the  Mornings  shine, 

md  yearning  after  strength  sustains  all  things  that  be. 

By  his  high  wisdom  have  the  Mighty  Sages  wrought:  the 
Fathers  who  behold  mankind  laid  down  the  germ. 

4 Gandharva  verily  protects  his  dwelling-place ; Wondrous,  he 

guards  the  generations  of  the  Gods. 

Lord  of  the  snare,  he  takes  the  foeman  with  the  snare  : those 
who  are  most  devout  have  gained  a share  of  meath. 

5 Rich  in  oblations  ! robed  in  cloud,  thou  compassest  oblation, 

sacrifice,  the  mighty  scat  of  Gods. 

King,  on  thy  chariot-sieve  thou  goest  up  to  war,  and  with  a 
thousand  weapons  winnest  lofty  fame. 

HYMN  LXXXIV.  Soma  PavamAna. 


Flow,  cheering  Gods,  most  active,  winner  of  the  flood,  for 
ludra,  and  for  Vayu,  and  for  Varuna. 

Bestow  on  us  to-day  wide  room  with  happiness,  and  in  thine 
ample  dwelling  laud  the  Host  of  Heaven. 

! He  who  hath  come  anear  to  creatures  that  have  life,  Immortal 
Soma  flows  onward  to  all  of  them. 

Effecting,  for  our  aid,  both  union  and  release,  Indu,  like 
Surya,  follows  closely  after  Dawn. 

2 The  Scorcher's  sieve:  ‘ The  filter  of  the  foe-scorching  (Soma).’ — Wilson, 
ic  Swift  Ones:  ‘his  swift-flowing  (juices)  protect  the  purifier  (the  worship- 
er) ’—Wilson. 

3 The  Mighty  Sages : those  who  possess  supernatural  wisdom  ; the  Gods. 

Fathers ; ‘The  fruitfulness  of  heaven  and  earth,  which  give  birth  to  gods 

id  men,  is  described  as  produced  by  the  fathers.’ — Wallis,  Cosmology  of  the 
• 72.  SeeX.  64.  14. 

4 Gavdkarva : here,  the  Sun.  Ilis:  Soma’s. 

5 Robed  in  cloud:  ndbhah : meaning,  water  from  the  clouds.  With  a thou - 
wd  weapons : more  literally,  having  a thousand,  that  is,  countless,  sharp 
wits.  ‘Thousand-rayed.’ — Ludwig. 


1 In  thine  ample  dwelling ; ‘on  the  spacious  sacrificial  ground.’ — S&yana. 

2 The  second  line  is  obscure.  Wilson  translates,  after  Sdyana  : — ‘Indu, 
mding  and  loosing,  accompanies  the  sacrifice  (for  its  protection)  as  the  sun 
le  dawn  that  is,  binding  or  connecting  the  sacrifice  with  the  gods  and  loos- 

or  separating  it  from  the  Asuras  or  evil  spirits.  But  this  explanation  is 
satisfactory.  Ludwig  suggests  that  ‘union’  refers  to  Soma’s  binding^ to- 
pther  heaven  and  earth,  Gods  and  men,  and  for  the  meaning  of  ‘release  ’ he 
‘fer»  to  IX.  68.  5. 


340  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IX. 

3 He  who  is  poured  with  milk,  he  who  within  the  plants  hastes 

bringing  treasure  for  the  happiness  of  Gods, 

He,  poured  forth  in  a stream  flows  with  the  lightning’s  flash, 
Soma  who  gladdens  Indra  and  the  Host  of  Heaven. 

4 Winner  of  thousands,  he,  this  Soma,  flows  along,  raising  a 

vigorous  voice  that  wakens  with  the  dawn. 

Indu  with  winds  drives  on  the  ocean  of  the  air,  he  sinks 
within  the  jars,  he  rests  in  Iudra’s  heart. 

5 The  kine  with  milk  dress  him  who  makes  the  milk  increase, 

Soma,  amid  the  songs,  who  finds  the  light  of  heaven. 
Winner  of  wealth,  the  effectual  juice  is  flowing  on,  Singer 
and  Sage  by  wisdom,  dear  as  heaven  itself. 

HYMN  LXXXV.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

Flow  on  to  Indra,  Soma,  carefully  effused : let  sickness  stay 
afar  together  with  the  fiends. 

Let  not  the  double-tongued  delight  them  with  thy  juice  : here 
be  thy  flowing  drops  laden  with  opulence. 

2 0 Pavamana,  urge  us  forward  in  the  fight : thou  art  the 

vigour  of  the  Gods,  the  well  loved  drink. 

Smite  thou  our  enemies  who  raise  the  shout  of  joy : India, 
drink  Soma  juice,  and  drive  away  our  foes. 

3 Unharmed,  best  Cheerer,  thou,  0 Indu,  flowest  on:  thou, 

even  thou  thyself,  art  Indra’s  noblest  food. 

Full  many  a wise  man  lifts  to  thee  tho  song  of  praise,  and 
hails  thee  with  a kiss  as  Sovran  of  this  worl  1. 

4 Wondrous,  with  hundred  streams,  hymned  in  a thousand  songs, 

Indu  pours  out  for  Indra  his  delightful  meath. 

Winning  ms  laud  and  waters,  flow  thou  hitherward  : Rainer 
of  bounties,  Soma,  make  broad  way  for  us. 

5 Rou'ing  within  the  beaker  thou  art  balmed  with  milk:  thou 

• passest  through  the  fleecy  filter  all  at  once. 

Carefully  cleansed  and  decked  like  a prize- winning  steed,  0 
Soma,  thou  hast  flowed  down  within  Indra’s  throat. 

6 Flow  onward  sweet  of  flavour  for  the  Heavenly  Race,  for 

Indra  sweet,  whose  name  is  easily  invoked  : 

Flow  sweet  for  Mitra,  Varuna.  and  V&yu,  rioh  in  meath,**1* 
violable  for  Brihaspati. 

7 Ten  rapid  fingers  deck  the  Courser  in  the  jar : with  hyi»I1!) 

the  holy  singers  send  their  voices  forth. 

The  filtering  juices  hasten  to  their  eulogy,  the  drops  that 
gladden  find  their  way  to  Iudra’s  heart. 


THE  MOVED  A. 


341 


HYMN  86,] 

8 While  tlioii  art  purified  pour  on  us  hero  strength,  great,  far- 

extended  shelter,  spacious  pasturage. 

Let  no  oppression  master  tins  our  holy  work : may  we,  0 
Indu,  gain  all  opulence  through  thee. 

9 The  Steer  who  sees  afar  hath  risen  above  the  sky : the  Sage 

hath  caused  the  lights  of  heaven  to  give  their  shine. 

The  Kiug  is  passing  through  the  filter  with  a roar  : they  drain 
the  milk  of  heaven  from  him  who  looks  on  men. 

10  High  in  the  vault  of  heaven,  unceasing,  honey-tongued,  the 

Loving  Ones  drain  out  the  mountain-haunting  Steer, — 

The  drop  that  hath  grown  great  in  waters,  in  the  lake,  meath- 
rich,  in  the  stream’s  wave  and  in  the  cleansing  sieve. 

11  The  Loving  Ones  besought  with  many  voices  the  Eagle  who 

had  flown  away  to  heaven. 

Hymns  kiss  the  Youngling  worthy  of  laudation,  resting  on 
earth,  the  Bird  of  golden  colour. 

12  High  to  heaven's  vault  hath  the  Gandharva  risen,  beholding 

all  his  varied  forms  and  figures. 

His  ray  hath  shone  abroad  with  gleaming  splendour  : pure, 
lie  hath  lighted  both  the  worlds,  the  Parents. 

HYMN  LXXXYI.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

Thy  gladdening  draughts,  0 Pavamana,  urged  by  song  flow 
swiftly  of  themselves  like  sons  of  fleet-foot  mares. 

The  drops  of  Soma  juice,  those  eagles  of  the  heavens,  most 
cheering,  rich  in  meuth,  rest  in  the  reservoir. 

2 As  rapid  chariot-steeds,  so  turned  in  several  ways  have  thine 
exhilarating  juices  darted  forth, 

Soma-drops  rich  in  meath,  waves,  to  the  Thunder-armed,  to 
Iudra,  like  milch-kme  who  seek  their  calf  with  milk. 

5 Like  a steed  urged  to  battle,  finder  of  the  light,  speed  on- 
ward to  the  cloud-horn  reservoir  of  heaven, 

A Steer  that  o’er  the  woolly  surface  seeks  the  sieve,  Soma 
while  purified  for  II  Ira’s  nourishment. 


9 The  Steer  icho  sees  afar : wise  Soma,  the  Moon. 

Pt  ^ov^n(J  ®ne8  ■'  wntfh. : the  Gods  or,  specially,  the  Maruts.  Accord- 
S o oayan.t,  great  Rishis,  called  Venae.  The  mountain-haunting  Steer : Soma, 
st  8,  en  0Ver  the  mountain  heights.  See  Hillebrandt,  V.  M.,  I.  389. 
p ^ain  this  stanza  is  the  Eagle,  the  Youngling  or  infant,  and  the  Bird 

12  2’he  Gandharva:  here  Soma,  the  Moon.  See  Hillebrandt,  V.  M.,  I.  429. 
^Jtyeed  onward : hasten  to  pour  down  the  rain  from  the  cloud. 


342 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK  IX. 

4 Fleet  as  swift  steeds,  thy  drops,  divine,  thought-swift,  have 

been,  0 Pavamana,  poured  with  milk  into  the  vat. 

The  Kishis  have  poured  in  continuous  Soma-drops,  ordainera 
who  adorn  thee,  Friend  whom  Rishis  love. 

5 0 thou  who  seest  all  things,  Sovran  as  thou  art  and  passing 

strong,  thy  rays  encompass  all  abodes. 

Pervading  with  thy  natural  powers  thou  flowest  on,  and  as 
the  whole  world’s  Lord,  O Soma,  thou  art  King. 

6 The  beams  of  Pavamana,  sent  from  earth  and  heaven,  hig 

ensigns  who  is  ever  stedfast,  travel  round. 

When  on  the  sieve  the  Golden-hued  is  cleansed,  he  rests 
within  the  vats  as  ono  who  seats  him  in  his  place. 

7 Served  with  fair  rites  he  flows,  ensign  of  sacrifice : Soma 

advances  to  the  special  place  of  Gods. 

Ho  speeds  with  thousand  currents  to  the  reservoir,  and  passes 
through  the  filter  bellowing  as  a bull. 

8 The  Sovran  dips  him  in  the  sea  and  in  the  streams,  and  set 

in  rivers  with  the  waters’  wave  moves  on. 

High  heaven’s  Sustainer  at  the  central  point  of  earth,  raisod 
on  the  fleecy  surface  Pavamana  stands. 

9 He  on  whose  high  decree  the  heavens  and  earth  depend  hath 

roared  and  thundered  like  the  summit  of  the  sky. 

Soma  flows  on  obtaining  Indra’s  friendly  love,  and,  as  they 
purify  him,  settles  in  the  jars. 

10  He,  light  of  sacrifice,  distils  delicious  meath,  most  wealthy, 

Father  and  begetter  of  the  Gods. 

He,  gladdening,  best  of  Chcerers,  juice  that  Indra  loves,  enrich- 
es with  mysterious  tieasure  earth  and  heaven. 

11  The  vigorous  and  far-seeing  one,  the  Lord  of  heaven,  flows, 

shouting  to  the  beaker,  with  his  thousand  streams. 
Coloured  like  gold  he  rests  in  seats  where  Mitra  dwells,  the 
Steer  made  beautiful  by  rivers  and  by  sheep. 

12  In  forefront  of  the  rivers  Pavamana  speeds,  in  forefront  of 

the  hymn,  foremost  among  the  kine. 

4 Friend  whom  Rishis  love  : rishishdna  : the  word  does  not  occur  elsewheifii 
and  its  precise  meaning  is  unceitain.  ‘ 0 mAi-enjoyed.’ — Wilsou.  ‘ Thou  who 
playest  the  part  of  a Rishi.’ — Ludwig. 

8 The  sea  and  the  streams  are  the  firmament  and  its  waters.  Soma,  who 
is  at  the  same  time  the  God  in  heaven  and  the  earthly  beverage,  is  saiu 
combine  with  the  solar  rays  in  the  clouds,  and  thus  to  cause  the  rain  to 
descend.  See  HiUebrandt,  V,  I.  215.  Central  point  of  earth  : the  p’a(* 
of  sacrifice. 

11  By  rivers  and  by  sheep  : by  the  purifying  waters  and  the  wool 
strainer. 


BYMN  86.]  27 78  R1GVBDX.  343 

He  shares  the  mighty  booty  in  the  van  of  war : the  well-armed 
Steer  is  purified  by  worshippers. 

13  This  heedful  Pavam&na,  like  a bird  sent  forth,  hath  with  his 
wave  flowed  onward  to  the  fleecy  sieve. 

0 Indra,  through  thy  wisdom,  by  thy  thought,  0 Sige,  Soma 
flows  bright  and  pure  between  the  earth  and  heaven. 

U He,  clad  in  mail  that  reaches  heaven,  the  Holy  One,  filling 
the  firmament,  stationed  amid  the  woilds, 

Knowing  the  lealm  of  light,  hath  come  to  us  in  rain:  he  sum- 
mons to  himself  his  own  primeval  Sire. 

15  He  who  was  first  of  all  to  pcnetiate  his  form  bestowed  upon 
his  race  wide  shelter  and  defence. 

From  that  high  station  which  he  hath  in  loftiest  heaven  he 
comes  victorious  to  all  encounters  here. 

LG  Indu  hath  started  forth  for  lndra’s  special  place,  and  slights 
not  as  a Friend  the  promise  of  his  Fiiend. 

Soma  speeds  onward  like  a youth  to  youthful  maids,  and  gains 
the  beaker  by  a course  of  hundred  paths. 

17  Your  songs,  exhilarating,  tuneful,  uttering  praise,  are  come  into 

the  places  where  the  people  meet. 

Worshippers  have  exilted  Soma  with  their  hymns,  and  milcli- 
kiue  have  come  near  to  meet  him  with  their  milk. 

18  0 Soma,  Indu,  while  they  cleanse  thee,  pour  on  ns  accumu- 

lated, plentiful,  nutritious  food, 

Which,  ceaseless,  tin  ice  a day  shall  yield  us  hero  power  en- 
riched with  store  of  nourishment,  and  strength,  and  tneath. 

19  Far-seeing  Soma  flows,  the  Steer,  the  Lord  of  hymns,  the 

Furtherer  of  day,  of  morning,  and  of  heaven. 

Mixt  with  the  stieams  he  ciuscd  the  beakers  to  resound,  and 
with  the  singers’  aid  they  entered  Indra’s  heart. 

20  On,  with  the  prudent  singers,  flows  the  ancient  Sage  and  guided 

by  the  men  hath  roared  about  the  vats. 

Producing  Trita’s  name,  maybe  pour  forth  the  meath,  that 
Vayuaud  that  India  may  become  his  Friends. 

H HU  own  primeval  Sire : or,  the  ancient  Father  of  this  (All).  Indra  is 
meant. 

He:  Sonia  His  form:  India's.  IIU  race  : Indra  and  the  Gods. 

16  Slights  not  as  a Fiiend  the  promise  of  his  Friend : ‘the  friend  leaves 
n°t  the  stomach  of  hi?  friend.’  — Wilson  S&yana  derives  sarhgiram  from 
P'Ottyrt,  to  shallow,  instead  of  from  samjrl , to  assent.  Hundred  paths  : 
the  interstices  of  th  . wool. 
ot\  a day  : at  the  three  appointed  sacrifices. 

| Producing  Trita't  name : literally,  begetting,  that  is,  making  (jandyan) 
1 ihe  of  Trita  ; meaning  probably,  as  Prof.  Ludwig  suggests,  reminding 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


344 


[BOOK  IX. 


21  He,  being  purified,  hath  made  the  Mornings  shine  : this,  even 

this  is  he  who  gave  the  rivers  room. 

He  made  the  Three  Times  Seven  pour  out  the  milky  flow: 
Soma,  the  Cheerer,  yields  whatever  the  heart  finds  sweet. 

22  Flow  onward,  Soma,  in  thine  own  celestial  forms,  flow,  Indu, 

poured  within  the  beaker  and  the  sieve. 

Sinking  into  the  throat  of  Indra  with  a roar,  led  by  the  men 
thou  madcst  Surya  mount  to  heaven. 

23  Pressed  out  with  stones  thou  flowest  onward  to  the  sieve,  0 

Indu,  entering  the  depths  of  India’s  throat. 

Far-sighted  Soma,  now  thou  lookest  on  mankind  : thou  didst 
unbar  the  cow-stall  for  the  Angirases. 

24  In  thee,  0 Soma,  while  thou  purifiedst  thee,  high-thoughted 

sages,  seeking  favour,  have  rejoiced. 

Down  from  the  heavens  the  Falcon  brought  thee  hitherward, 
even  thee,  O Indu,  thee  whom  all  our  hymns  adorn. 

25  Seven  Milch-kine  glorify  the  T i wny-coloured  One  while  with 

his  wave  in  wool  he  purifies  himself. 

The  living  men,  the  mighty,  have  impelled  the  Sage  into  the 
waters’  lap,  the  place  of  sacrifice. 

26  Indu,  attaining  puritv,  plunges  through  the  foe,  making  his 

ways  all  easy  for  the  pious  man. 

Making  the  kine  his  mantle,  he,  the  lovely  Sage,  runs  like  a 
sporting  courser  ornvaid  through  the  fleece. 

27  The  ceaseless  watery  fountains  with  their  hundred  streams 

sing,  as  they  hasten  near,  to  him  the  Golden-hucd. 

Him,  clad  in  robes  of  milk,  swift  fingers  beautify  on  the  third 
height  and  in  the  luminous  realm  of  heaven. 

28  These  are  thy  generations  of  celestial  seed  : thou  art  the 

Sovran  Lord  of  all  the  world  of  life. 

This  universe,  0 Pavarnana,  owns  thy  sway;  thou,  Indu,  art 
the  first  establisher  of  Law. 


us  of  Trita,  with  whom  he  is  closely  connected.  1 Generating  the  water  of 
the  threefold  (Indra)  ’ — Wilson 

21  The  Three  Times  Seven  : the  seven  celestial  rivers,  corresponding  to  the 
rivers  of  earth,  multiplied  by  three  to  accord  with  the  threefold  division  or 
the  heavens.  According  to  Sftyana,  cows  are  meant. 

23  Thou  didst  unbar  the  cow  stall : didst  recover  the  cattle  stolen  by  th® 
Panis,  that  is  the  rays  of  light  that  the  fiends  of  darkness  had  carried  on  * 
the  great  deed  of  Indra  being  ascribed  to  Soma  bis  inspirer. 

25  Seven  Milch-kine:  the  celestial  rivers. 

26  Making  the  kine  his  mantle : he  who  is  afterwards  covered  or  rniugl^ 
with  milk. 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


345 


HYMN  86.] 

29  Thou  art  the  sea,  0 Sage  who  bringest  all  to  light : under 

thy  Law  are  these  five  regions  of  the  world. 

Thou  readiest  out  beyond  the  earth,  beyond  the  heavens  : 
thine  are  the  lights,  0 Pavamana,  thine  the  Sun. 

30  Thou  in  the  filter,  Soma  Pavamana,  art  purified  to  support 

the  region  for  the  Gods. 

The  chief,  the  longing  ones  have  sought  to  hold  thee  fast, 
and  all  these  living  creatures  have  been  turned  to  thee. 

31  Onward  the  Singer  travels  o’er  the  fleecy  sieve : the  Tawny 

Steer  hath  bellowed  in  the  wooden  vats. 

Ilymns  have  been  sung  aloud  in  resonant  harmony,  and  holy 
songs  kiss  him,  the  Child  who  claims  our  praise. 

32  He  hath  assumed  the  rays  of  Sun  a for  his  robe,  spinning,  as 

he  knows  how,  the  triply-twisted  thread. 

He,  guiding  to  the  newest  rules  of  Holy  Law,  comes  as  the 
Women’s  Consort  to  the  special  place. 

33  On  flows  the  King  of  rivers  and  the  Lord  of  heaven  : he 

follows  with  a shout  the  paths  of  Holy  Law. 

The  Golden-hucd  is  ponied  foith  with  his  hundred  streams, 
Wealth-bringer,  lifting  up  his  voice  while  purified. 

34  Fain  to  he  cleansed,  thou,  Pavamana,  ponrest  out,  like  wond- 

rous Sura,  through  the  fleece,  an  ample  sea. 

Purified  with  the  hands,  pressed  by  the  men  with  stones,  thou 
speedest  on  to  mighty  booty-bunging  war. 

35  Thou,  Pavamana,  sendest  food  and  power  in  streams:  thou 

sit  test,  in  the  beakers  as  a hawk  on  trees, 

For  Indra  poured  as  cheering  juice  to  make  him  glad,  as  near- 
est and  far-seeing  bearer-up  of  heaven. 

36  The  Sisters  Seven,  the  Mothers,  stand  around  the  Babe,  the 

noble,  new-horn  Infant,  skilled  in  holy  song, 

Gandharva  of  the  floods,  divine,  beholding  men,  Soma,  that  he 
may  reign  as  King  of  all  the  world. 


29  Thou  art  the  sea:  Soma  and  the  sea  being  alike  producers  of  rain. 
A(jhh:  stars. 

SO  The  region:  mid-air;  the  firmament.  The  chief,  the  longing  ones:  the 
the  Maruts. 

32  Spinning.,  the  triply-twisted  thread  • beating  his  part  in  morning,  noon- 
and  evening  saciifice.  The  Women's  Con  sot  t : Loid  and  husband  of  the 
1 ater8  °f  heaven.  The  special  place  : ‘ the  consecrated  (vessel).’ — Wilson. 

3f  Like  wondrous  SHra  : adorable  like  the  Sun. 

^ The  Sitters  Seven  : the  great  rivers  which  may  provide  water  for  Soma- 
Oandharva : frequently  identified  with  the  Sun,  heie  meaus  Soma, 


THE  BYMNS  OP 


846 


[BOOK  i 


37  As  Sovran  Lord  thereof  thou  passest  through  these  worlds, 

Indu,  harnessing  thy  tawny  well-winged  Mares. 

May  they  pour  forth  for  thee  milk  and  oil  rich  in  sweets  ; 
Soma,  let  t lie  folk  abide  in  thy  decree. 

38  0 Soma,  thou  beholdest  men  from  every  side  : 0 Pavaman 

Steer,  thou  w. inderest  through  these. 

Pour  out  upon  us  wealth  in  treasure  and  in  gold  : may  v 
have  strength  to  live  among  the  things  that  be. 

30  Winner  of  gold  and  goods  and  cattle  flow  thou  on,  set  as  ir 
pregner,  Indu,  mid  the  worlds  of  life. 

Rich  in  brave  men  art  thou,  Soma,  who  winnest  all : these  ho! 
singers  wait  upon  thee  with  the  song. 

40  The  wave  of  flowing  mcath  hath  wakened  up  desires  : tli 

Steer  enrobed  in  milk  plumres  into  the  streams. 

Borne  on  his  chariot-sieve  the  King  hath  risen  to  war,  au 
with  a thousand  rays  hath  won  him  high  renown. 

41  Dear  to  all  life,  he  sends  triumphant  praises  forth,  abundant 

bringing  offspring,  each  succeeding  day. 

From  Indra  crave  for  us,  Indu,  when  thou  art  quaffed,  the  bice 
sing  that  gives  children,  wealth  that  harbours  steeds. 

42  When  days  begin,  the  strong  juice,  lovely,  golden-hued,  i 
recognized  by  wisdom  more  and  more  each  day, 

He,  stirring  both  the  Rices,  goes  between  the  two,  the  bcare 
of  the  word  of  men  and  word  of  Gods. 

43  They  balm  him,  balm  him  over,  balm  him  thoroughly,  cares 
the  mighty  strength  and  balm  it  with  the  mcath. 


37  Tawny  . Marcs:  haritah  ; Haiits  Cf  IV.  6.  0 ; 13.  3 ; VII  66.  15 
IX.  63.  9. 

38  Through  these : there  is  no  substantive.  SAyana  supplies  apah,  waters. 

40  Desires  : the  meaning  of  vandnrfh  is  not  certain  ; ‘voices  (of  praise) 
Wilson  With  a thousand  rays : sahisrabhrisht/h  : literally,  having  a thousand 
edges  or  sharp  points.  Cp.  IX.  83.  5 

41  The  blessing:  this  seems  to  be  very  nearly  the  meaning  of  brdhma  here, 
But  the  word  may  as  usual  le  rendeied  by  prayer,  or  devotion.  ‘Solicit 
Indra  (to  give)  us  food  productive  of  progeny.’— -Wilson. 

42  When  days  begin  : according  to  SAyana,  early  in  the  morning.  Thfl 
commencement  of  the  year  is  inoie  probably  intended  The  second  half  of 
the  stanza  is  obscurely  expressed.  It  appears  to  mean  that  Soma  acts  as  a 
mediator  between  heaven  and  earth,  urging  men  to  offer,  and  the  Gods 
receive,  worship,  bearing  up  to  heaven  the  hymns  and  praises  of  huoiftn 
worshippers  and  biinging  back  to  tbein  the  assurance  that  their  petifci‘,n® 
will  be  granted.  SAyana’s  explanation  is  different:  ‘approaching  the 
men  (the  praiser  and  the  worshipper  or  secular  and  sacred  people)  he  l,R8P® 
in  the  midst  (of  heaven  and  earth,  bestowing),  upon  the  upholder  (of  . 
rite)  both  human  and  divine  (riches).’ — Wilson.  I follow  Ludwig  who  w 
dhartdri  os  nominative  singular. 


THE  R1QVEDA. 


347 


nr mn  87 1 

They  seize  the  flying  Steer  at  the  stream’s  breathing-place : 
cleansing  with  gold  they  grasp  the  Animal  herein. 

{{  Sins?  forth  to  Pavamana  skilled  in  holy  song : the  juice  is 
flowing  onward  like  a mighty  stream. 

He  glideth  like  a serpent  from  his  ancient  skin,  and  like  a 
playful  horse  the  Tawny  Steer  hath  run. 

45  Dweller  in  floods,  King,  foremost,  ho  displays  his  might,  set 

among  living  things  as  measurer  of  days. 

Distilling  oil  he  flows,  fair,  billowy,  golden-hued,  borne  on  a 
car  of  light,  sharing  one  home  with  wealth. 

46  Loosed  is  the  heavens’  support,  the  uplifted  cheering  juice  : 

the  triply-mingled  draught  flows  round  into  the  worlds. 

The  holy  hymns  caress  the  stalk  that  claims  our  praise,  when 
singers  have  approached  his  beauteous  robe  with  song. 

47  Thy  streams  that  flow  forth  rapidly  collected  run  over  the 

tine  fleece  of  the  sheep  as  thou  art  cleansed. 

When,  Indu,  thou  art  balrned  with  milk  within  the  bowl, 
thou  sinkest  in  the  jars,  0 Soma,  when  expressed. 

48  Winner  of  power,  flow,  Soma,  worthy  of  our  laud  : run  on- 

ward to  the  fleece  as  well-beloved  meath. 

Destroy,  0 Indu,  all  voracious  Rakshasas.  With  brave  sons 
in  the  assembly  let  our  speech  be  bold. 

HYMN  LXXXVII.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Run  onward  to  the  reservoir  and  seat  thee  : cleansed  by  the 
men  speed  forward  to  the  battle. 

Making  thee  beauteous  like  an  able  courser,  forth  to  the 
sacred  grass  with  reins  they  lead  thee. 

2 Indu,  the  well-armed  God,  is  flowing  onward,  who  quells  the 

curse  and  guards  from  treacherous  onslaught, 

Father,  begetter  of  the  Gods,  most  skilful,  the  buttress  of 
the  heavens  and  earth’s  supporter. 

3 Rishi  and  Sage,  the  Champion  of  the  people,  deft  and  sagaci- 

ous, Usana  in  wisdom, 

43  At  the  stream!  s breathing -place : whore  the  stream  seems  to  stay  still 
a moment  to  recover  breath.  Cleansing  with  gold : with  gold-ringed 
ingers.  The  Animal:  Soma. 

45  -4s  measurer  of  days : Soma  being  identified  with  the  Moon. 

46  Triply. mingled : or,  poured  into  three  vessels,  the  dronakalasn,  ddhava- 
'fya>  and  pHtabhrit.  Robe : the  integuments  which  cover  the  juice  : that  is 

exterior  of  the  stalk  and  shoots. 

3 l^and  in  wisdom:  as  wise  as  the  celebrated  Usanft.  S&yana  explains 
Afferent! y,  regarding  Usanft  as  the  discoverer  : ‘ Usanas—ha  verily  by  Ins 


348  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOR  /; 

He  bath  discovered  even  their  hidden  nature,  the  Cows’  coi 
cealed  and  most  mysterious  title. 

4 This  thine  own  Soma  lich  in  meath,  0 Indra,  Steer  for  tl 

Steer,  hath  flowed  into  the  filter. 

The  strong  Frce-gi\er,  winning  hundreds,  thousands,  hat 
reached  the  holy  grass  that  never  fails  him. 

5 These  Somas  are  for  wealth  of  countless  cattle,  renown  ther 

for.  and  mighty  strength  immortal. 

These  have  been  sent  forth,  purified  by  strainers,  like  stee( 
who  rush  to  battle  fain  for  glory. 

6 He,  while  he  cleanses  him,  invoked  of  many,  hath  flowed  i 

give  t fie  people  all  enjoyment. 

Thou  whom  the  Falcon  brought,  bring  dainty  viands,  best 
thyself  and  send  us  wealth  and  booty. 

7 This  Soma,  pressed  into  the  cleansing  filter,  hath  run  i 

’twere  a host  let  loose,  the  Courser; 

Like  a strong  bull  who  whets  his  horns  keen-pointed,  like 
brave  wan  ior  in  the  fray  for  cattle. 

8 He  issued  forth  from  out  the  loftiest  mountain,  and  four 

kine  hidden  somewhere  in  a stable. 

Soma’s  stream  clears  itself  for  thee,  0 Indra,  like  lightnin 
thundering  through  the  clouds  of  heaven, 

9 Cleansing  thyself,  and  home  along  with  Indra, Soma,  thou  goes 

round  the  herd  of  cattle. 

May  thy  praise  help  us,  Mighty  One,  prompt  Giver,  to  tli 
full  ample  food  which  thou  bestowest. 

HYMN  LXXXVIII.  Soma  Pavamto 

For  thee  this  Soma  is  effused,  0 India:  diink  of  this  juice 
for  thee  the  stream  is  flowing — 

Soma,  which  thou  thyself  hast  made  and  chosen,  even  Iudi 
for  thy  special  drink  to  cheer  thee. 


poetic  gift  discovered  the  secret  milk  of  those  cows  which  was  hidden  an 
concealed  ’ — Wilson.  By  title  or  name  of  the  Cows,  water  appears  to  1) 
intended 

4 Steer  for  the  Steer : or,  Strong  for  the  Strong. 

5 Mighty  strength  immortal:  ‘ample  food  and  ambrosia.’ — Wilson. 

8 From  oat  the  loftiest  mountain  : S&yana  makes  antdrddreh  depend  up0 
Jctichit,  somewhere  : ‘ This  Soma  stream  has  come  from  on  high  and  b 
detected  the  cattle  which  were  in  a stall  i hidden)  somewhere  within  tb 
mountain.’ — Wilson.  Grussmann  translates  : ‘Er  ist  entsprungen  aus  den 
hochsten  Pressstein.’  * lie  hath  sprung  forth  from  the  most  lofty  preas-stone. 

9 The  hei'd  of  cattle : Soma  accompanies  Indra  in  his  expedition  to  recove 
the  stolen  cattle.  —SAyana.  Or  the  cattle  or  cows  may  be  the  milk  with  wM 
Soma  is  mixed. 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


349 


UYM$  89.] 

2 Like  a capacious  car  hath  it  been  harnessed,  the  Mighty,  to 

acquire  abundant  treasures. 

Then  in  the  sacrifice  they  celebrated  all  triumphs  won  by 
Nah us  in  the  battle. 

3 Like  Vayu  with  his  team,  moving  at  pleasure,  most  gracious 

when  invoked  like  both  Nasatyas, 

Thou  art  thyself  like  the  Wealth-Giver,  Soma!  who  grants 
a'l  boons,  like  song-inspiring  Pashau. 

4 Like  Indra  who  hath  done  great  deeds,  thou,  Soma,  art  slayer 

of  the  Vritras,  Fort-drstrovcr. 

Like  Pedu’s  horse  who  killed  the  brood  of  serpents,  thus  thou, 
0 Soma,  slayest  every  Dasyu. 

5 Like  Agni  loosed  amid  the  forest,  fiercely  he  winneth  splen- 

dour in  the  running  waters. 

Like  one  who  fights,  the  roaring  of  the  mighty,  thus  Soma 
Pavamana  sends  his  current. 

G These  Somas  pissing  thiough  the  fleecy  filter,  like  rain  de- 
scending from  the  clouds  of  heaven, 

Have  been  effused  and  poured  into  the  beakers,  swiftly  like 
rivers  running  lowly  seaward. 

,7  Flow  onward  like  the  potent  band  of  Maruts,  like  that 
1 Celestial  Host  whom  none  revileth. 

Quickly  be  gracious  unto  us  like  waters,  like  sacrifice  victo- 
rious, thousand-fashioned. 

Thine  are  King  Vanina’s  eternal  statutes,  lofty  and  deep,  0 
Soma,  is  thy  glory. 

All-pure  art  thou  like  Mitra  the  beloved,  adorable,  like  Arya- 
nian,  0 Soma. 

HYMN  LXXXIX.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

This  Chariot-horse  hath  moved  along  the  pathways,  and  Pava- 
n ia n a flowed  like  rain  from  heaven. 

' I can  make  nothing  out  of  the  second  line  of  this  stanza.  The  version 
lcli  I give  as  a temporary  makeshift  is  founded  on  Ludwig’s  remarks  in 
Commentary  on  the  passage,  Vol.  V.  p.  308,  of  his  Riyvcda.  Wilson, 
owing  &\yana,  translates : — ‘ After  this  ( i . e.  after  the  harnessing  of  the 
>gon  —Note  ) miy  all  the  races  of  men  expecting  our  (attack)  go  to  the 
mble  battle.’  ‘ Now  let  the  races  of  all  men,  rising  up  like  trees,  come 
r to  him  in  order  to  obtain  success,’  would,  according  to  Grassmann,  be 
irt“r  the  meaning. 

■ Pedu’s  horse:  given  to  him  by  the  Asvins.  See  I.  116.  6 ; 117.  9 ; 118. 
119.10. 

Like  sacrifice : according  to  S<iyana,  yctjndh,  sacrifice,  means  here,  worthy 
aenfice (thou  art)  of  a thousand  shapes,  adorable  like  (Indra)  the 
J0'm  battle ’-Wilson, 
his  stanza  is  found  also  in  Book  I.  91.  3. 


350  THE  HYMNS  OF  [ BOOK  IX, 

With  us  hath  Soma  with  a thousand  currents  sunk  in  the  wood, 
upon  his  Mother’s  bosom. 

2 King,  he  hath  clothed  him  in  the  robe  of  rivers,  mounted  the 

stiaightest-going  ship  of  Order. 

Sped  by  the  Hawk  the  drop  hath  waxed  in  waters:  the  father 
drains  it,  drains  the  Father’s  offspring. 

3 They  come  to  him,  red,  tawny,  Lord  of  Heaven,  the  watchful 

Guardian  of  the  meath,  the  Lion. 

First,  Hero  in  the  fight,  he  seeks  the  cattle,  and  with  his  eye 
the  Steer  is  our  protector. 

4 They  harness  to  the  broad-wheeled  car  the  mighty  Courser 

whose  back  bears  meath,  unwearied,  awful. 

The  twins,  tho  sisters  brighten  him,  and  strengthen — these 
children  of  one  dame — the  vigorous  Racer, 

5 Four  pouring  out  the  holy  oil  attend  him,  sitting  together 

in  the  same  container. 

To  him  they  flow,  when  purified,  with  homage,  and  still, 
from  every  side,  are  fiist  about  him. 

G He  is  the  buttress  of  the  heavens,  supporter  of  earth,  and  in 
his  hand  are  all  the  people. 

Be  the  team’s  Lord  a well  to  thee  the  singer  : cleansed  is  the 
sweet  plant’s  stalk  for  deed  of  glory. 

7 Fighting,  uninjured  come  where  Gods  arc  feasted ; Soma,  as 
Vritra-slayer  flow  for  Indra. 

Vouchsafe  us  ample  riches  very  splendid  : may  we  be  masters 
of  heroic  vigour. 

HYMN  XC.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Urged  ou,  the  Father  of  the  Earth  and  Heaven  hath  gone 
foith  like  a car  to  gather  booty, 

Going  to  India,  sharpening  his  weapons,  and  in  his  hand 
containing  every  treasure. 

2 The  father  drains  it : 1 The  scholiast  finds  it  difficult  to  make  sense  of 
this:  piUi  (palako  lokah)  he  supposes  to  mean  the  Adhvaryu,  who  extracts 
the  juice  of  the  Soma  which  is  born  from  the  heaven  as  from  a father  ;or  th0 
first  milker  may  be  the  yajamdna  and  the  second  the  Adhvaryu;  or  duht 
may  be  repeated  out  of  respect.’ — Wilson. 

4 Sisters  ..  . children  of  one  dame:  the  priest’s  fingers. 

5 Four:  the  quarters  of  the  sky.  Container : the  firmament. 

6 The  team's  Lord:  Soma  as  resembling  VAyu.  Cp  IX.  88.  3.  Sifyan® 
explains  differently  : ‘ may  ( Soma ) the  fountain  (of  desires)  be  possessed  ° 
horses  for  thee  (his)  adorer.’ — Wilson. 

1 Father : janitd : generator,  of  earth  hy  sending  rain,  and  of  heaven 
obtaining  oblations  for  the  godB,— SAyana. 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


351 


HYMN  91.] 

2 To  him  the  tones  of  sacred  song  have  sounded,  Steer  of  the 

triple  height,  the  Life-bestower. 

Dwelling  in  wood  as  Varuna  in  rivers,  lavishing  treasure  he 
distributes  blessings. 

3 Gieat  Conqueror,  warrior-girt,  Lord  of  all  heroes,  flow  on 

thy  way  as  he  who  winneth  riches ; 

With  sharpened  arms,  with  swift  bow,  never  vanquished  in 
battle,  vanquishing  in  fight  the  foemen. 

4 Giving  security,  Lord  of  wide  dominion,  send  us  both  earth 

and  heaven  with  all  their  fulness. 

Striving  to  win  the  Dawns,  the  light,  the  waters,  and  cattle, 
call  to  us  abundant  vigour. 

5 0 Soma,  gladden  Varuna  and  Mitra ; cheer,  Indu  Pavamana ! 

India,  Vishnu. 

Cheer  thou  the  Gods,  the  Company  of  Maruts : Indu,  cheer 
mighty  Indra  to  rejoicing. 

6 Thus  like  a wise  and  potent  King  flow  onward,  destroying 

with  thy  vigour  all  misfortunes. 

For  our  well-spoken  hymn  give  life,  0 Indu.  Do  ye  preserve 
us  evermore  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XCI.  Soma  Pavamfttia. 

As  for  a chariot-race,  the  skilful  Speaker,  Chief,  Sage,  In- 
ventor, hath,  with  song,  been  started. 

The  sisters  ten  upon  the  fleecy  summit  drive  on  the  Car-horse 
to  the  resting-places. 

1 The  drop  of  Soma,  pressed  by  wise  Nahushyas,  becomes  the 

banquet  of  the  Heavenly  People — 

Indu,  by  hands  of  mortal  men  made  beauteous,  immortal, 
with  the  sheep  and  cows  and  waters. 

3 Steer  roaring  unto  Steer,  this  Pavamana,  this  juice  runs  to 

the  white  milk  of  the  milch-cow. 

Through  thousand  fine  hairs  goes  the  tuneful  Singer,  like 
Sura  by  his  fair  and  open  pathways. 

2 Of  the  triple  height:  see  IX.  71.  7. 

4 VaR  to  «« ; send  us  with  thy  shout  or  roar. 

6 The  liymu  ends  with  the  usual  concluding  half-line  of  the  hymns  ascribed 
^ the  Vasishthas. 

,1  The  skilful  Speaker : Soma  who  makes  us  eloquent.  The  resting-places : 
hdandni : the  seat*,  the  reservoirs  in  which  he  settles. 

2 Nahushyas : probably  a neighbouring  people.  See  YI.  46.  7,  and  note  on 

hhuahaa  which  has  the  same  meaning.  . , 

3 Sdra : Stirya.  the  Sun.  Fair  and  open : adhvatmdWh : ‘ imperishable.  — 
ulson. 


852  THE  HYMNS  OF  [ BOOK  ij  | 

4 Break  down  the  strong  seats  even  of  the  demons  : cleansing 

thee,  Indu,  robe  thyself  in  vigour. 

Rend  with  thy  swift  bolt,  coming  from  above  them,  those  who 
are  near  and  those  who  yet  are  distant. 

5 Prepare  the  forward  paths  in  ancient  manner  for  the  new  hymn, 

thou  Giver  of  all  bounties. 

Those  which  are  high  and  hard  for  foes  to  conquer  may  we 
gain  from  thee,  Active  ! Food-bestower  ! 

6 So  purifying  thee  vouchsafe  us  waters,  heaven's  light,  and  cows, 

offspring  and  many  children. 

Give  us  health,  ample  land,  and  lights,  0 Soma,  and  grant  us 
long  to  look  upon  the  sunshine. 

HYMN  XCII.  Soma  Pavam&m. 

The  gold-hued  juice,  poured  out  upon  the  filter,  is  started  like 
a car  sent  forth  to  conquer. 

He  hath  gained  song  and  vigour  while  they  cleansed  him,  and 
hath  rejoiced  the  Gods  with  entertainments. 

2 He  who  beholdeth  man  hath  reached  the  filter:  bearing  his 

name,  the  Sage  hath  sought  his  dwelling. 

The  Rishis  came  to  him,  seven  holy  singers,  when  in  the  bowls 
he  settled  as  Invoker. 

3 Shared  by  all  Gods,  most  wise,  propitious,  Soma  goes,  while 

they  cleanse  him,  to  his  constant  station. 

Let  him  rejoice  in  all  his  lofty  wisdom  : to  the  Five  Tribes 
the  Sage  attains  with  labour. 

4 In  thy  mysterious  place,  0 Pavamana  Soma,  are  all  the  Gods, 

the  Thrice-Eleven. 

Ten  on  the  fleecy  height,  themselves,  self-prompted,  and  seven 
fresh  riyers,  brighten  and  adorn  thee. 

5 Now  let  this  be  the  truth  of  Pavamana,  there  where  all  singers 

gather  them  together, 

That  he  hath  given  us  room  and  made  the  daylight,  hath  holpen 
Manu  and  lepellcd  the  Dasyu. 


5 Those : portions  of  thee,  according  to  S.iyatia 

6 In  the  second  half  of  the  stanza,  instead  of  taking  urii,  wide,  aiople> 
with  ksJUtram,  field,  land.  S&yana  joins  it,  ws—urUni,  with  jydtthshi,  lights 

* make  our  laud  prosper,  diffuse  the  luminaries  widely  (in  the  firmament).’' 
Wilson.  

2 The  Rishis : according  to  S&yana,  Bharadvdja,  Kasyapa,  Gotarna,  Ah’i 
Visv,\mitra,  Jamadagni,  Vasishtha. 

3 The  Five  Tribes : the  five  Aryan  tribes.  According  to  Sftyana,  ‘ the  fiye 
classes  of  beings,'  i e.}  four  castes  and  the  Nish&das. 

4 The  Thrice-Eleven : see  I.  139.  11.  Ten:  the  fingers. 

5 Manu:  as  the  representative  of  the  Aryan  race. 


TEE  RIO  VEDA. 


353 


rMN  94.] 

j As  the  priest  seeks  the  station  rich  in  cattle,  like  a true  King 
who  goes  to  great  assemblies, 

Soma  hath  sought  the  beakers  while  they  cleansed  him,  and, 
like  a wild  bull,  in  the  wood  hath  settled. 

HYMN  XCIII.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

Ten  sisters,  pouring  out  the  rain  together,  swift-moving  think- 
ers of  the  sage,  adorn  him. 

Hither  hath  run  the  gold-hued  Child  of  Sftrya  and  reached 
the  vat  like  a fleet  vigorous  courser. 

2 Even  as  a youngling  crying  to  his  mothers,  the  bounteous 
Steer  hath  flowed  along  to  waters. 

As  youth  to  damsel,  so  with  milk  he  hastens  on  to  the  chosen 
meeting-place,  the  beaker. 

5 Yea,  swollen  is  the  udder  of  the  milch-cow  : thither  in  streams 
goes  very  sapient  Indu. 

The  kine  make  ready,  as  with  new-washed  treasures,  the 
Head  and  Chief  with  milk  within  the  vessels. 

1 With  all  the  Gods,  0 Indu  Pavatuana,  while  thou  art  roaring 
send  us  wealth  in  horses. 

Hither  upon  her  car  come  willing  Plenty,  inclined  to  us,  to 
give  us  other  treasures. 

) Now  unto  us  mete  riches,  while  they  cleanse  thee,  all-glorions, 
swelling  wealth,  with  store  of  heroes. 

Long  he  his  life  who  worships  thee,  0 Indu.  May  he,  enriched 
with  prayer,  come  soon  and  early. 

HYMN  XCIV.  Soma  Pavara&na. 

When  beauties  strive  for  him  as  for  a charger,  then  strive 
the  songR  like  soldiers  for  the  sunlight. 

Acting  the  Sage,  he  flows  enrobed  in  waters  and  song  as 
’twere  a stall  that  kine  may  prosper. 


6 The  station  rich  in  cattle : ‘ the  hall  where  the  victim  is  stationed  ’ — 
rilson.  To  great  assemblies  : or,  to  war  and  battle.  The  wood : the  wooden 
it  or  reservoir.  

\ Ten  sisters:  the  finders  wl  eh  press  out  the  juice  of  the  Soma -plant. 
hinlcers:  or  thoughts,  devotions.  According  to  S&yara,  fingers.  Child  of 
S&yana  explains  jffh,  offspring,  by  j'lytih  wives,  i e.,  the  quarters  of 
^heaven,  called  SUrya’s  wives  because  they  are  made  manifest  by  his  ra^s. 

3 The  Head  and  Chief  ■ ‘the  elevated  Soma  ’ — Wilson. 

4 Send  us ; more  literally,  open  or  disclose  to  us 

* The  hymn  ends  with  the  half-line  which  i«  the  special  conclusion  of  the 
> wns  asci  ibed  to  Nodhaa.  See  Book  l.  58,  60 — 64. 

1 The  meaning  is  apparently  : when  the  beautifying  'waters  hasten  emu- 
r ,s v.  b>  cleanse  Soma  as  though  he  wei'e  a horse,  the  voices  of  singing 
01  shippers  vie  with  each  other  like  the  shouts  of  men  who  aie  fighting  for 


THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  /*  ’ 

2 The  worlds  expand  to  him  who  from  aforetime  fouud  light  to 

spread  the  law  of  life  eternal. 

The  swelling  songs,  like  kine'  within  the  stable,  in  deep 
devotion  call  aloud  on  Indu. 

3 When  the  Sage  bears  his  holy  wisdom  round  him,  like  a cur 

visiting  all  worlds,  the  Hero, 

Becoming  fame,  mid  Gods,  unto  the  mortal,  wealth  to  the 
skilled,  worth  praise  mid  the  Ever-present, 

4 For  glory  born  he  hath  come  foith  to  glory : he  giveth  life 

and  glory  to  the  singers. 

They,  clothed  in  glory,  have  become  immortal.  He,  measured 
in  his  course,  makes  frays  successful. 

5 Stream  to  us  food  and  vigour,  kine  and  horses  : give  us  broad 

lights  and  fill  the  Gods  with  rapture. 

All  these  are  easy  things  for  thee  to  master : thou,  Pavamuna 
Soma,  quellest  foemcn. 

HYMN  XCV.  Soma  Pavamftna, 

Loud  neighs  the  Tawny  Steed  when  started,  settling  deep  in 
the  wooden  vessel  while  they  cleanse  him. 

Led  by  the  men  he  takes  the  milk  for  raiment : then  shall  he, 
through  his  powers,  engender  praise-songs. 

2 As  one  who  rows  drives  on  his  boat,  he,  Gold-hued,  sends 

forth  his  voice,  loosed  on  the  path  of  Order. 

As  God,  the  secret  names  of  Gods  he  utters,  to  be  declared  on 
sacred  grass  more  widely. 

3 Hastening  onward  like  the  waves  of  waters,  our  holy  hymns 

are  pressing  nigh  to  Soma. 

To  him  they  come  with  lowly  adoration,  and,  longing,  enter 
him  who  longs  to  meet  them. 

4 They  drain  the  stalk,  the  Steer  who  dwells  on  mountains, 

even  as  a Bull  who  decks  him  on  the  upland. 


light  and  life.  Soma  flows  on  in  his  wisdom,  blent  with  the  waters,  and 
surrounded  with  hymns  into  the  midst  of  which  he  enters  as  into  a stable 
full  of  kine  in  order  to  make  them  iucrease  and  multiply. 

3 The  stanza  is  somewhat  obscure.  Worth  praise:  or,  adorable.  The  Ever- 
present • the  Gods  who  come  to  help  men  Wilson,  following  SAya.a,  trans- 
lates the  second  line  : 1 2 then  desirous  of  bestowing  upon  mortals  the  weftM 
that  abides  with  the  gods,  he  (is)  to  be  glorified  in  the  many  places  of  sacrifice 
for  the  preservation  of  the  riches  he  has  given  ’ 

5 All  these:  all  the  R&kshasas,  according  to  SAyana. 

1 Deep  in  the  wooden  vessel:  literally  *in  the  belly  of  the  wood.' 

2 He  utters : reveals  to  the  priest  who  is  to  declare  them  at  sacrifice. 


THE  XIQVEDA. 


355 


HMN  96.] 

Hymns  follow  and  attend  him  as  he  bellows : Trita  bears 
Varuna  aloft  in  ocean. 

5 Sending  thy  voice  out  as  Director,  loosen  the  Invoker’s  thought, 
0 Indu,  as  they  cleanse  thee. 

■While  thou  and  Indra  rule  for  our  advantage,  may  we  be 
masters  of  heroic  vigour. 

HYMN  XCYI.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

In  forefront  of  the  cars  forth  goes  the  Hero,  the  Leader,  win- 
ning spoil : his  host  rejoices. 

Soma  endues  his  robes  of  lasting  colours,  and  blesses,  for  his 
friends,  their  calls  on  Indra. 

2 Men  decked  with  gold  adorn  his  golden  tendiil,  incessantly 
with  steed-impelling  homage. 

The  Friend  of  fudra  mounts  his  car:  well-knowing,  he  comes 
thereon  to  meet  the  prayer  we  offer. 

\ 0 God,  for  service  of  the  Gods  flow  onward,  for  food  sublime, 
as  Indra’s  diiuk,  0 Soma. 

Making  the  floods,  bedewing  earth  and  heaven,  come  from  the 
vast,  comfort  us  while  we  cleanse  thee. 
t Flow  for  prosperity  and  constant  vigour,  flow  on  for  happi- 
ness and  high  perfection. 

This  is  the  wish  of  all  these  friends  assembled : this  is  my 
wish,  0 Soma  Pavamana. 

Father  of  holy  hymns,  Soma  flows  onward,  the  Father  of  the 
earth,  Father  of  heaven  ; 

Father  of  Agui,  Surya’s  generator,  the  Father  who  begat  Indra 
and  Vishnu. 

Brahman  of  Gods,  the  Leader  of  the  poets,  Rishi  of  sages, 
Bull  of  savage  creatures, 

Falcon  amid  the  vultures,  Axe  of  forests,  over  the  cleansing 
sieve  goes  Soma  singing. 


Trita : the  preparer  of  the  celestial  Soma.  Varuna : here  meaning 
>a;  ‘the  defeater  of  enemir  .' — Wilson.  In  ocean:  in  the  firmament. 

4s  Director : upavakttva : upavaktft  here  appears  to  meau  Adhvaryu : 
M dhvaryuh . — S&yana.  Loosen  the  Invoker's  thought : aid  the  Hotar  or 
Aing  piiest  to  give  free  utterance  to  his  thought  or  hymn. 

Of  lasting  colours : rabhasflni:  ‘hastily  made.’— Wilson.  ‘Brilliant.’— 
ssmann. 

Steed- impelling : urging  him  on,  as  a whip  urges  on  a horse. 

Prom  the  vast ; from  the  wide  firmameut.  There  is  no  substantive  in 
text. 

brahman  of  Gods : thou  art  Brihaspati,  the  Lord  of  Prayer,  among  the 
°r,  chief  among  the  priests.  Axe ; the  handle  of  the  axe  being 


356  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOR  ft 

7 He,  Soma  Pavamana,  like  a river,  hath  stirred  the  wave  of 

voice,  our  songs  and  praises 

Beholding  these  infoi  ior  powers  in  cattle,  he  rests  among  them 
as  a Steer  well- knowing. 

8 As  Gladdcner,  Warrior  never  harmed  in  battle,  with  thousand 

genial  streams,  pour  strength  and  vigour. 

As  thoughtful  Pavamana,  urge  0 Indu,  speeding  the  kine, 
the  plant’s  wave  on  to  Indra. 

9 Dear,  grateful  to  the  Gods,  on  to  the  beaker  moves  Somn, 

sweet  to  Indra,  to  delight  him. 

With  hundred  powers,  with  thousand  currents,  Indu,  like 
a strong  car-horse,  goes  to  the  assembly. 

10  Born  in  old  time  as  finder-out  of  treasures,  drained  with  the 

stone,  decking  himself  in  waters, 

Warding  off  curses,  King  of  all  existence,  ho  shall  find  way 
for  prayer  the  while  they  cleanse  him. 

11  For  our  sago  fathers.  Soma  Pavamana,  of  old  performed,  by 

thee,  their  sacred  duties. 

Fighting  unvanquhhed,  open  the  enclosures : enrich  us  with 
huge  gifts  of  steeds  and  heroes. 

12  As  thou  didst  flow  for  Mann  Life-bestowing,  Foe-quoller, 

Comforter,  rich  in  oblations, 

Even  thus  flow  onward  now  con fei ring  riches  : combine  with 
Indra,  and  bting  foith  thy  weapons. 

13  Flow  onward,  Soma,  rich  in  sweets  and  holy,  enrobed  in 

waters  on  the  fleecy  summit. 

Settle  in  vessels  that  are  full  of  fatness,  as  cheering  and  most 
gladdening  drink  for  Indra. 

14  Pour,  hundred-streamed,  winner  of  thousands,  mighty  at  the 

Gods’  banquet,  pour  the  rain  of  heaven, 

While  thou  with  rivers  roarest  in  the  beaker,  and  blent  with 
milk  prolongest  our  existence. 

15  Purified  with  our  holy  hymns,  this  Soma  o’ertakes  maligni- 

ties like  some  strong  charger, 

naturally  made  of  the  strongest  wood  — M.  Muller.  Ludwig  thinks  tint 
lightning  may  be  intended.  According  to  the  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon, 
svadhitih  here  means  a tree  with  very  h.»rd  wood.  See  V.  32  10. 

7 The  second  line  i«  obscure.  Wilson  translates:  ‘ the  showerer  (of  bene- 
fits) beholding  the  hidden  (treasure)  presides  over  these  irresistible  power*) 
knowing  about  the  cattle.’ 

9 Goes  to  the  assembly  * ‘ proceeds  like  a strong  horse  to  battle  ’ — Wilson. 
11  The  enclosures:  the  obstructions  which  keep  the  rain  from  falling. 

13  Full  of  fatness:  ghritdvdnti : according  to  SAyana,  ' water- holding* 


jjYMH  96. J THE  R1GVEDA.  357 

Like  fresh  milk  poured  by  Aditi,  like  passage  in  ample  room, 
or  like  a docile  car-horse. 

16  Cleansed  by  the  prossers,  armed  with  noble  weapons,  stream 

to  us  the  fair  secret  name  thou  beared. 

Pour  booty,  like  a horse,  for  love  of  glory  : God,  Soma,  send 
us  kine,  and  send  us  Vayu. 

17  They  deck  him  at  his  birth,  the  lovely  Infant,  the  Maruts 

with  their  troop  adorn  the  Car-horse. 

By  songs  a Poet  and  a Sage  by  wisdom,  Soma  goes  singing 
through  the  cleansing  filter. 

18  Light-winner,  Rishi-minded,  Rishi-maker,  hymned  in  a thou- 

sand hymns,  Leader  of  sages, 

A Steer  who  strives  to  gain  his  third  form,  Soma  is,  like 
Yiraj,  resplendent  as  a Singer. 

19  Hawk  seated  in  the  bowls,  Bird  wide-extended,  the  Banner 

seeking  kine  and  wielding  weapons, 

Following  close  the  sea,  the  wave  of  waters,  the  great  Bull 
tells  his  fourth  form  and  declares  it. 

20  Like  a fair  youth  who  decorates  his  body,  a courser  rushing 

to  the  gain  of  riches, 

A steer  to  herds,  so,  flowing  to  the  pitcher,  he  with  a roar 
hath  passed  into  the  beakers. 

21  Flow  on  with  might  as  Pavamaua,  Indu  : flow  loudly  roaring 

through  the  fleecy  filter. 

Enter  the  beakers  sporting,  as  they  cleanse  thee,  and  let  thy 
gladdening  juice  make  Indra  joyful. 

22  His  streams  have  been  efl'uscd  in  all  their  fulness,  and  he 

hath  entered,  balined  with  milk,  the  goblets. 

Singing  his  psalm,  well-skilled  in  song,  a Chanter,  he  comes 
| as  ’twere  to  his  friend’s  sister  roaring. 

123  Chasing  our  foes  thou  comest,  Pavamana ! Indu,  besung,  as 
lover  to  his  darling. 

As  a bird  flies  and  settles  in  the  forest,  thus  Soma  settles, 
purified,  in  goblets. 

15  By  Aditi:  regarded  as  the  Cosmic  Cow. 
h>  Vdyu:  the  breath  of  life,  life. — Say  ana. 
f 1^  JiiH  third  form  : the  fortn  that  he  wears  in  heaven  ; 1 the  third  region 
keav^n).’— Wilson.  Virdj ; splendid  or  most  illustrious  Indra. — Silyana. 

19  The  banner : drapsuh  • usually  meaning,  a drop,  or  a spark.  See  IV.  13.  2. 
fourth  form  ; the  Moon.  According  to  S&yana,  the  region  of  the  Moon 
's  8a^  to  be  above  that  o*  the  Sun.  . p 

.p  * twere  to  his  friend's  sister:  SAyana  explains  jdmitn,  sister,  by  jdyam, 

I : ‘ like  (a  libertine)  to  the  wife  of  a friend.’ — Wilson.  The  meaning  is 
Probably  no  more  than  ‘as  lover  to  his  darling’  in  the  following atansaa. 


358  TBh  BTMiVS  OP  [POOP 

24  With  full  stream  and  abundant  milk,  0 Soma,  thy  beams 
come,  like  a woman,  as  they  cleanse  thee. 

He,  gold-hued,  rich  in  boons,  brought  to  the  waters,  hath 
roared  within  the  goblet  of  the  pious. 

HYMN  XCVII.  Soma  Pavamilna. 

Made  pure  by  this  man’s  urgent  zeal  and  impulse,  the  God 
hath  to  the  Gods  his  juice  imparted. 

He  goes,  effused  and  singing,  to  the  filter,  like  priest  to  mea- 
sured seats  supplied  with  cattle. 

2 Robed  in  fair  raiment  meet  to  wear  in  battle,  a mighty  Sage 

pronouncing  invocations, 

Roll  onward  to  the  beakers  as  they  cleanse  thee,  far-seeing  at 
the  feast  of  Gods,  and  watchful. 

3 Dear,  he  is  brightened  on  the  fleecy  summit,  a Prince  among 

us,  nobler  than  the  noble. 

Roar  out  as  thou  art  purified,  run  forward.  Do  ye  preserve 
us  evermore  with  blessings. 

4 Let  us  sing  praises  to  tho  Gods : sing  loudly,  send  ye  the 

Soma  forth  for  mighty  riches. 

Let  him  flow,  sweetly-flavoured,  through  the  filter,  and  let  our 
pious  one  rest  in  the  pitcher. 

5 Winning  tho  friendship  of  the  Deities,  Indu  flows  in  a thou- 

sand streams  to  make  them  joyful. 

Praised  by  the  men  after  the  ancient  statute,  he  hath  como 
nigh,  for  our  great  bliss,  to  India. 

6 Flow,  Gold-hucd,  cleansing  thee,  to  enrich  the  singer : let  thy 

juice  go  to  Indra  to  support  him. 

Come  nigh,  together  with  the  Gods,  for  bounty.  Do  ye  pre- 
serve us  evermore  with  blessings. 

7 The  God  declares  the  Deities’  generations,  like  Usand,  pro- 

claiming lofty  wisdom. 

With  brilliant  kin,  far-ruling,  sanctifying,  the  Boar  advances, 
singing,  to  tho  places. 

1 Urgent  zeal  and  impulse:  hemdnd,  by  impulse  (from  the  root  hi)  is  sai(l 
by  SAyana  to  mean  ‘ by  gold,’  that  is,  by  the  gold-adorned  hand  of  the  priest, 
Measured  seats  supplied  with  cattle : ‘the  halls  prepared  (for  sacrifice)  con- 
taining victims.’ — Wilson.  Singing : the  sound  of  the  flowing  juice  is  com- 
pared to  the  priest’s  recitation  of  Bacred  tests.  , 

7 The  Ood .-  Soma,  who  has  been  called  the  Father  of  the  Gods.  Ly 
U$and : the  souud  of  the  flowing  and  dropping  Sonia  juice  is  likened  to  tue 
song  of  the  famous  sage  and  sacred  poet.  The  Boar : strong,  swift  Soma- 
Singing:  making  a sound  with  the  descending  drops  of  juice.  SAyana  explain 
diflerently  : — ‘ making  a noise  (as)  a wild  boar  (makes  a noise)  with  its  foot-  ~ 
Wilson,  Thfc  places ; the  filters. 


THE  RIOVEDA. 


359 


ffY^y  97.] 

8 The  Swans,  the  Vrishaganas  fiom  anear  us  have  brought  their 

restless  spirit  to  onr  dwelling. 

Friends  come  to  Pavam&na  meet  for  praises,  and  sound  in  con- 
cert their  resistless  music. 

9 He  follows  the  Wide-strider’s  rapid  movement : cows  low,  as 

’twere,  to  him  who  sports  at  pleasure. 

He  with  the  sharpened  horns  brings  forth  abundance : the 
Silvery  shines  by  night,  by  day  the  Golden. 

10  Strong  Indu,  bathed  in  milk,  flows  on  for  India,  Soma  ex- 

citing strength,  to  make  him  joyful, 
lie  quells  malignities  and  slays  the  demons,  the  King  of  mighty 
power  who  brings  us  comfort. 

11  Then  in  a stream  he  flows,  milked  out  with  press-stones, 

mingled  with  sweetness,  through  the  fleecy  filter — 

Indu  rejoicing  in  the  love  of  Indra,  the  God  who  gladdens, 
for  the  God’s  enjoyment. 

12  As  he  is  purified  he  pours  out  treasures,  a God  bedewing  Gods 

with  bis  own  juices. 

Indu  hath,  wearing  qualities  by  seasons,  on  the  raised  fleece 
engaged  the  ten  swift  fingers. 

3 The  Red  Bull  bellowing  to  the  kine  advances,  causing  the 
heavens  and  earth  to  roar  and  thunder. 

Well  is  he  hoard  like  Indra’s  shout  in  battle  : letting  this  voice 
be  known  he  hastens  hither. 

A Swelling  with  milk,  abounding  in  sweet  flavours,  urging  the 
meath-rich  plant  thou  goest  ouwnid. 

Raising  a shout  thou  flowest  as  they  cleanse  thee,  when  thou, 
0 Soma,  art  effused  for  India. 

.5  Su  flow  thou  on  inspiriting,  for  rapture,  aiming  death-shafts 
at  him  who  stays  the  waters. 

Flow  to  us  wearing  thy  resplendent  colour,  effused  and  eager 
for  the  kine,  0 Soma. 


8 The  Swans  * the  singers,  descendants  of  the  Rishi  Vrishagana. 

9 The  Wide- strider' s rapid  movement:  the  swift  course  of  the  Sun.  Com 
w as  'twere : Sayana  explains  gXvah  cows,  by  anye  gantdrah . other  goers. 

no  ns  negative,  and  derives  minuite  from  md.  to  moa^uie,  instead  of 
•roro  md,  to  bleat  or  low  : — ‘ other  goers  cannot  overtake  him  (though  he  is) 
noving  easily.’— Wilson.  He  with,  the  sharpened  horns : Soma  as  the  Moon. 
Tc  silvery  light  by  night  and  the  golden-coloured  juice  by  day. 

12  Wearing  qualities  by  seasons:  ‘clothed  in  pleasaut  radiance  according  to 
he  season.’ — Wilson. 

15  Him  who  stays  the  waters ; Vritra, 


860  THE  HYMNS  OF  [ BOOK  II 

16  Pleased  with  us,  Indu,  send  us  as  thou  flowest  good  easy  paths 

in  ample  space  and  comforts. 

Dispelling,  as  ’twere  with  a club,  misfortunes,  run  o’er  the 
height,  run  o’er  the  fleecy  summit. 

17  Pour  on  us  rain  celestial,  quickly  streaming,  refreshing,  fraught 

with  health  and  ready  bounty. 

Flow,  Indu,  send  these  Winds  thy  lower  kinsmen,  setting  them 
free  like  locks  of  hair  unbraided. 

18  Part,  like  a knotted  tangle,  while  they  cleanse  thee,  0 Soma, 

righteous  and  unrighteous  conduct. 

Neigh  like  a tawny  courser  who  is  loosened,  come  like  a youth, 
0 God,  a hou>e-posi>e»sor. 

19  For  the  Gods’  service,  for  delight,  0 Indu,  run  o’er  the  height, 

run  o’er  the  fleecy  summit. 

With  thousand  streams,  inviolate,  sweet  scented,  flow  on  for 
gain  of  strength  that  conquers  heroes. 

20  Without  a car,  without  a rein  to  guide  them,  unyoked,  like 

coursers  started  in  the  contest, 

These  brilliant  drops  of  Soma  juice  run  forward.  Do  ye,  0 
Deities,  come  nigh  to  drink  them. 

21  So  for  our  banquet  of  the  Gods,  0 Indu,  pour  down  the  rain 

of  heaven  mto  the  vessels. 

May  Soma  grant  us  liches  sought  with  longing,  mighty,  ei 
ceeding  strong,  with  store  of  heroes. 

22  What  time  the  loving  spirit’s  word  had  formed  him  Chief  o 

all  food,  by  statute  of  the  Highest, 

Then  loudly  lowing  came  the  cows  to  Indu,  the  chosen,  well 
loved  Mastei  in  the  beaker. 

23  The  Sage,  Celestial,  liberal,  raining  bounties,  pours  as  he  flow 

the  Genuine  for  the  Truthful. 

The  King  shall  be  effectual  strength’s  upholder  : he  by  the  te 
bright  reins  is  mostly  guided. 

24  He  who  beholds  mankind,  made  pure  with  filters,  the  Kin 

supreme  of  Deities  and  mortals, 

From  days  of  obi  is  Treasure-Lord  of  riches:  he,  Indu,  cher 
shes  fair  wrell-kept  Order. 


17  Winds:  cf.  ‘ V&yu  ia  Soma’s  guardian  God’  (X.  85.  5). 

22  Sftyana’s  explanation  of  the  first  line  is  extremely  laboured  : 
the  piahe  of  the  zealous  worshipper  sanctifies  him  as  that  of  a noisy 
in  front  (praises)  a distinguished  (prince)  for  the  support  (he  affords).’— 

23  Tke  Genuine  for  the  Truthful ; ritivn  ritHya  : the  Soma  juice  for  h^1 
The  ten  bright  reins  ; or  rays,  i.  e.,  the  fingers.  The  half -line  is  difficult. 


TIIE  RIQVEDA. 


361 


YMN  97.] 

5 Haste,  like  a Bteed,  to  victory  for  glory,  to  Indra’s  and  to 
Vayu’s  entertainment. 

Give  us  food  ample,  thousandfold  : be,  Soma,  the  finder-out 
of  riches  when  they  cleanse  thee. 

3 Effused  by  us  let  God-delighting  Somas  bring  as  they  flow  a 
home  with  noble  heroes — 

Rich  in  all  boons  like  priests  acquiring  favour,  the  worship^ 
pers  of  heaven,  the  best  of  Cheerers. 

1 So,  God,  for  service  of  the  Gods  flow  onward,  flow,  drink  of 
Gods,  for  ample  food,  0 Soma. 

For  we  go  forth  to  war  against  the  mighty  : make  heaven  and 
earth  well  stablished  by  thy  cleansing. 

3 Thou,  yoked  by  strong  men,  neighest  like  a courser,  swifter 
than  thought  is,  like  an  awful  lion. 

By  paths  directed  hitherward,  the  straightest,  send  thou  us 
happiness,  Indu,  while  they  cleanse  thee 

) Sprung  from  the  Gods,  a hundred  streams,  a thousand,  have 
been  effused  : sages  prepare  and  purge  them. 

Bring  us  from  heaven  the  means  of  winning,  lndu;  thou  art 
forerunner  of  abundant  riches. 

) The  streams  of  days  were  poure  l as’twere  from  heaven  : the 
wise  King  doth  not  treat  his  friend  unkindly. 

Like  a son  following  his  father’s  wishes,  grant  to  this  family 
success  and  safety. 

I Now  are  thy  streams  poured  forth  with  all  their  sweetness, 
when,  purified,  thou  goest  through  the  filter. 

The  race  of  kine  is  thy  gift,  Pavanuna : when  born  thou 
madest  Surya  rich  with  brightness. 

1 Bright,  bellowing  along  the  path  of  Order,  thou  shinest  as  the 
form  of  life  eternal. 

Thou  flowest  on  as  gladdening  drink  for  Indra,  sending  thy 
voice  out  with  the  hymns  of  sages. 

1 Pouring  out  streams  at  the  Gods’  feast  with  seivice,  thou, 

^ Soma,  lookest  down,  i heavenly  Eagle. 

Enter  the  Soma-holding  beaker,  Indu,  and  with  a roar  ap- 
proach the  ray  of  Surya. 

I lhrce  are  the  voices  that  the  Courser  utters:  he  speaks  the 
thought  of  prayer,  the  law  of  Order. 

SO  rite  streams  of  days : the  libations  of  Soma  juice  which  we  offered  eve»y 
a son  : the  Soma  juice  is  regarded  us  the  son  of  the  yajamdna  or 

34  ‘n  W^°  causes 't  to  be  prepared. 

Me  Courser  is  Soma,  and  the  three  voices  (vychah)  or  words  which  he 

er«  urc  according  to  S&yaua  praises  or  sacred  texts  in  the  form  of  the  thiee 


362  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOR 

To  the  Cow’s  Master  come  the  Cows  inquiring:  the  hymns 
with  eager  longing  come  to  Soma. 

35  To  Soma  come  the  Cows,  the  Milch-kine  longing,  to  Soma 

sages  with  their  hymns  inquiring. 

Soma,  effused,  is  purified  and  blended  : our  hymns  and  Trish- 
tup  songs  unite  in  Soma. 

36  Thus,  Soma,  as  we  pour  thee  into  vessels,  while  thou  art  puri- 

fied How  for  our  welfare. 

Pass  into  Indra  with  a mighty  roaring  : make  the  voice  swell 
and  generate  abundance. 

37  Singer  of  true  songs,  evcr-watchful,  Soma  hath  settled  in  the 

ladles  when  they  cleanse  him. 

Him  the  Ad  h vary  us,  paired  and  eager,  follow,  leaders  of  sacri- 
fice and  skilful-hauded. 

38  Cleansed  near  the  Sun  as  ’twere,  he  as  Creator  hath  filled  full 

heaven  and  earth,  and  hath  disclosed  them. 

He  by  whose  dear  help  men  gain  all  their  wishes  shall  yield 
the  precious  meed  as  to  a victor. 

39  He,  being  cleansed,  the  Strengthener  and  Increaser,  Soma  the 

Bounteous,  helped  us  with  his  lustre, 

Wherewith  our  sires  of  old  who  knew  the  footstops  found 
light  and  stole  the  cattle  from  the  mountain. 

40  In  the  first  vault  of  heaven  loud  roared  the  Ocean,  King  of 

all  being,  generating  creatures. 

Steer,  in  the  filter,  on  the  fleecy  summit,  Soma,  the  Drop 
effused,  hath  waxen  mighty. 

41  Soma  the  Steer,  in  that  as  Child  of  Waters  he  chose  the  Gods, 

performed  that  great  achievement. 

He,  Pavamina,  granted  strength  to  Indra;  he,  Indu,  gene- 
rated light  in  Surya. 

42  Make  Vayu  glad,  for  furtherance  and  bounty  : cheer  Vanina 

and  Mitra,  as  they  cleanse  thee. 

Gladden  the  Gods,  gladden  the  host  of  Maruts  : make  Heaven 
aud  Earth  rejoice,  0 God,  0 Soma. 

43  Flow  onward  righteous  slayer  of  the  wicked,  driving  away 

our  enemies  aud  sickness, 

Blending  thv  milk  with  milk  which  cows  afford  us.  We  are 
thy  friends,  thou  art  the  Friend  of  Indra. 


Vedas.  The  three  tones,  low,  middle,  and  high,  are  probably  intended.  Oi 
vdhmh  (the  courser)  may  mean  the  bearer  of  the  oblation,  yajawlna,  ** 
Sdyana  explains. 

40  In  the  first  vault ; that  is  in  the  highest  firmament.  The  Ocean : Som* 


THE  RIGVEDA. 


363 


jfJflT  07.] 

4 pour  us  a fount  of  meath,  a spring  of  treasure ; send  us  a 

hero  son  and  happy  fortune. 

Be  sweet  to  Indra  when  they  cleanse  thee,  Indu,  and  pour 
down  riches  on  us  from  the  ocean. 

5 Strong  Soma,  pressed,  like  an  impetuous  courser,  hath  flowed 

in  stream  as  a flood  speeding  downward. 

Cleansed,  he  hath  settled  in  his  wooden  dwelling  : Indu  hath 
flowed  with  milk  and  with  the  waters. 

6 Strong,  wiso,  for  thee  who  longest  for  his  coming,  this  Soma 

here  flows  to  the  bowls,  0 Indra. 

He,  chariot-borne,  sun-bright,  and  truly  potent,  was  poured 
forth  like  the  longing  of  the  pious. 

1 He,  purified  with  ancient  vital  vigour,  pervading  all  his 
Daughter’s  forms  and  figures, 

Finding  his  threefold  refuge  in  the  waters,  goes  singing,  as  a 
priest,  to  the  assemblies. 

] Now,  chn riot-borne,  flow  unto  us,  God  Soma,  as  thou  art 
purified  flow  to  the  saucers, 

Sweetest  in  waters,  rich  in  meath,  and  holy,  as  Savitar  the 
God  is,  truthful-minded. 

J To  feast  him,  flow  mid  song  and  hymn,  to  V&yu,  flow  purified 
to  Vanina  and  Mitra. 

Flow  to  the  song-inspiring  car-borne  Hero,  to  mighty  Indra, 
him  who  wields  the  thunder. 


• Pour  on  us  garments  that  shall  clothe  us  meetly,  send, 
purified,  milch-kine,  abundant  yielders. 

God  Soma,  send  us  chariot -drawing  horses  that  they  may 
bring  us  treasures  bright  and  golden. 

I Send  to  us  in  a stream  celestial  riches,  send  us,  when  thou 
art  cleansed,  what  earth  containeth, 
l So  that  thereby  we  may  acquire  possessions  and  Rishihood  in 
Jamadagni’s  manner. 

Pour  forth  this  wealth  with  this  purification  : flow  onward  to 
the  yellow  lake,  0 Indu. 

Here,  too,  the  Ruddy,  wind-swift,  full  of  wisdom,  shall  give 
a son  to  him  who  cometh  quickly. 


his^8  Pl}u9^tr'8  forms  and  figures  : Soma  pervades,  and  imparts  a share 
s nutritious  power  to,  the  grass,  herbs,  and  shrubs  which  are  the  vaiied 
^ assumed  by  Earth  his  daughter, 

in  Jamadagni's  manner ; ‘make  qur  saprsd  prayer  (sweet)  &3 
g2a7ni-’-Wil80n.  ' r f N 

I e ow  •'  the  meaning  of  mdnfc&aM  is  uncertain.  See  VII.  44.  3,  note 


364  THE  HYMNS  OF  [ROOK  Ji 

53  Flow  on  for  us  with  thi©  purification  to  the  famed  ford  of  thee 

whose  due  is  gloiy. 

May  the  Foe-queller  shake  us  down,  for  triumph,  like  a tree’s 
ripe  fruit,  sixty  thousnnd  treasures, 

54  Eagerly  do  we  pray  for  those  two  exploits,  at  the  blue  lake 

and  Prisana,  wrought  in  battle. 

He  sent  our  enemies  to  sleep  and  slew  them,  and  turned  away 
the  foolish  and  unfriendly. 

55  Thou  comest  unto  three  extended  filters,  and  hastencst 

through  each  one  as  they  cleanse  thee. 

Thou  ait  the  giver  of  the  gift,  a Bliaga,  a Maghavan  for 
liberal  lords,  0 Indu. 

56  This  Soma  here,  the  Wise,  the  All-obtainer,  flows  on  his  way 

as  King  of  all  existence. 

Driving  the  drops  at  our  assemblies,  Indu  completely  traverses 
the  fleecy  filter. 

57  The  Great  Inviolate  are  kissing  Indu,  and  singing  in  his  place 

like  eager  sages. 

The  wise  men  send  him  forth  with  ten  swift  fingers,  and  balm 
his  form  with  essence  of  the  waters. 

58  Soma,  may  we,  with  thee  as  Pavaniana,  pile  up  together  all 

our  spoil  in  battle. 

This  boon  vouchsafe  us  Varuna  and  Mitra,  and  Aditi  and 
Sindliu,  Earth  and  Heaven  ! 

HYMN  XCVIII.  Soma  PavarnHus 

Stream  on  us  riches  that  are  sought  by  many,  best  at  wining 
strength, 

Riches,  0 Indu,  thousandfold,  glorious,  conquering  the  great. 


53  To  the  fumed  ford:  possibly,  as  Ludwig  suggests,  the  aid  of  Somai 
ciaved  at  some  ford  of  a neighbouring  river,  famous  on  account  of  a battl 
that  has  been  fought  there,  and  destined  to  be  the  scene  of  an  approachinj 
conflict. 

64  The  first  line  is  conjecturally  tianslated  after  Ludwig,  who  take 
pvhdna  to  be  the  name  of  a place.  Sily ana’s  elaborate  explanation  is  d'l 
feient: — ‘These  two  gieat  acts,  the  raining  (of  arrows)  and  the  humiliatic 
(of  foes),  are  the  givers  of  happiness  ; tin  y aie  deadly  either  in  a tight  o 
boiseback  or  in  a hand-to-hand  fight’ — Wilson.  Here  SAyana  explatf 
vndnschatvt  (at  the  blue  or  yellow  lake  by  ‘in  battle  with  horses,’  an 
prisane  (at  Piisana ?)  by  ‘in  close,  or  hand-to-hand  encounter.’  Two  victoro 
appear  to  be  refened  to,  and  that  is  about  all  that  can  be  said. 

66  The  three  extended  filters  are  Baid  to  be  fire,  wind,  and  sun,  in  additio 
to  the  one  artificial  filter  of  wool. 

57  The  Great  Inviolate : the  Qods.  Kissing : or  sipping. 

53  All  our  spoil  in  battle : yet  t<»  be  won  in  the  approaching  fight  wlier« 
we  look  to  Soma  for  help  and  victory. 


THE  RIGVEDA. 


365 


rrjriv  98  ] 

2 Effused,  he  hath,  as  on  a cur,  invested  him  in  fleecy  mail  : 
Onwaid  hath  Indu  flowed  in  streams,  impelled,  surrounded  by 

the  wood. 

3 Effused,  this  Indu  hath  flowed  on,  distilling  rapture,  to  the 

fleece  : 

He  goes  erect,  as  seeking  kine,  in  stream,  with  light,  to  sacrifice. 

4 For  thou  thyself,  0 Indu,  God,  to  every  mortal  worshipper 
Attractest  nches  thousandfold,  made  manifest  in  hundted 

forms. 

5 Good  Vritra -slayer,  may  we  be  still  nearest  to  this  wealth  of 

thine 

Which  many  crave,  nearest  to  food  and  happiness,  Resistless 
One  ! 

6 Whom,  bright  with  native  splendour,  crushed  between  the 

pair  of  pressing-stones — 

The  wavy  Friend  whom  Indra  loves — the  twiee-five  sisters 
dip  and  bathe, 

7 Hun  with  the  fleece  they  purify,  brown,  golden-hued,  beloved 

of  all, 

Who  with  exhilarating  juice  goes  forth  to  all  the  Deities. 

B Through  longing  for  this  sap  of  yours  yo  drink  what  brings 
ability, 

Even  him  who,  dear  as  heaven’s  own  light,  gives  to  our  princes 
high  renown. 

Indu  at  holy  rites  produced  you,  Heaven  and  Earth,  the 
Friends  of  men, 

Hill-haunting  God  the  Goddesses.  They  bruised  him  where 
the  roar  was  loud. 

For  Vritra-slaying  Indra,  thou,  Soma,  art  poured  that  he  may 
drink, 

Poured  for  tho  guerdon-giving  man,  poured  for  the  God  who 
sitteth  there. 

These  ancient  Somas,  at  the  break  of  day,  have  flowed  into 
the  sieve, 

Snorting  away  at  early  morn  these  foolish  evil-hearted  ones. 


, My  the  wood  : the  wooden  vat  or  trough. 

P ‘.c eking  Line:  desirouH  of  the  milk  which  is  to  be  mixed  with  his  juice. 

I ®tanz«i  is  difficult  S Ay  ana  explains  it  differently  ‘ Divine  heaven 
^ earth  the  progeny  of  Manu,  the  Soma  juice  is  generated  at  your  sacrifices, 
’’  hiding  in  the  grinding  stones  ; (the  priests)  bruise  him  at  the  loud- 
ceremony.’— Wilson.  Hill-haunting:  cf.  IX.  85.  10. 

man : for  the  good  of  the  institutor  of  the 

1 Snorting  away : driving  away  with  the  bubbling  sound  they  make. 


366  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOR  jj 

12  Friends,  may  the  princes,  ye  and  we,  obtain  this  Most  He 
splendent  One, 

Gain  him  who  hath  the  smell  of  strength,  win  him  whosi 
home  is  very  strength. 

HYMN  XCIX.  Soma  Pa™** 

They  for  the  Bold  and  Lovely  One  ply  manly  vigour  like  a bow 
Joyous,  in  front  of  songs  they  weave  bright  raiment  for  the 
Lord  Divine. 

2 And  he,  made  beautiful  by  night,  dips  forward  into  strength- 

ening food, 

What  time  the  sacrificer’s  thoughts  speed  on  his  way  the 
Golden-hucd.  i 

3 We  cleanse  this  gladdening  drink  of  his,  the  juice  which  Indra 

chiefly  drinks, — 

That  which  kine  took  into  their  mouths,  of  old,  and  princes 
take  it  now. 

4 To  him,  while  purifying,  they  have  raised  the  ancient  psalm 

of  praise : 

And  sacred  songs  which  bear  the  names  of  Gods  have  suppli- 
cated him. 

5 They  purify  him  as  he  drops,  courageous,  in  the  fleecy  sieve. 

Him  they  instruct  as  messenger  to  bear  the  sage’s  morning 

prayer. 

6 Soma,  best  Cheerer,  takes  his  seat,  the  while  they  cleanse  him 

in  the  bowls. 

He  as  it  were  impregns  the  cow,  and  babbles  on,  the  Lord  of  Song. 

12  Who  hath  the  smell  of  strength  : vlljagandhyam : ‘fragrant  and  invigo- 
rating.'— Wilson.  ‘ Forming  or  having  a wagon-load  of  goods  or  spoil.’— S.^P. 
Lexicon.  Him  whose  home  is  strength:  vttja  past  yam : ‘food  and  dwellings.’— 
Wilson.  ‘ Him  who  ha8  a house  full  of  goods.’ — S.  P.  Lexicon. 

1 They:  the  priests.  Ply  manly  vigour  like  a bow:  ‘stretch  the  bow  of 
manhood.’ — Wilson.  They  exert  all  their  manly  strength,  or  as  Bcnfey, 
suggests,  attack  and  storm  the  God  with  prayer  and  sacrifice,  ‘ beseeching  ona 
besieging  ’ as  Milton  say b.  The  Lord  Divine : the  Asura  (Zend,  Ahuia),  here 
meaning  Soma. 

2 By  night : kshap/t : * at  the  end  of  the  night.’ — Wilson.  Ludwig  tran- 
slates kshapft  by  * der  fiirBt,’  ‘ the  prince.’ 

3 Which  kine  took  into  their  mouths  : in  the  form  of  the  juices  of  gra*1 2 3 4 * 6 * 8 
from  which  the  milky  portion  of  the  libation  is  evolved. 

4 S&yana’s  explanation  of  the  second  line  of  this  stanza,  is  different 

the  fingers  exercising  their  pressure  are  able  (to  prepare  the  oblation)  f°r  1 
gods.’ — Wilson.  w 

6 He  as  it  were  impregns  the  coio : meaning,  perhaps,  as  Ludwig.  eugge®  ’ 

that  the  milk  becomes  efficacious  as  a libation  only  when  it  is  mixed  w 

Soma  juice. 


THE  RIOVEDA . 


367 


STIW  100.] 

7 He  is  effused  and  beautified,  a God  for  Gods,  by  skilful  men. 
lie  penetrates  tho  mighty  floods  collecting  all  he  knows  therein. 

8 Pressed,  Indu,  guided  by  the  men,  thou  art  led  to  the  clean- 

ing sieve. 

Thou,  yielding  Iudra  highest  joy,  takest  thy  seat  within  the 
bowls. 


HYMN  C.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

TnE  Guilcloss  Ones  are  singing  praise  to  Indra’s  well  belovM 
Fiiend, 

As,  in  the  morning  of  its  life,  the  mothers  lick  the  new  horn 
calf. 

2 0 Indu^while  they  cleanse  thee,  bring,  0 Soma,  doubly-waxing 

Thou  in  the  worshipper’s  abode  causest  all  treasures  to  in- 
increase. 

3 Set  free  the  song  which  mind  hath  yoked,  even  as  thunder 

frees  the  rain  : 

All  treasures  of  the  earth  and  heaven,  0 Soma,  thou  dost 
multiply. 

4 Thy  stream  when  thou  art  pressed  runs  on  like  some  victorious 

warrior’s  steed, 

Hastening  onward  through  the  fleece  like  a swift  horse  who 
wins  the  prize. 

5 Flow  on,  Sage  Soma,  with  tby  stream  to  give  us  mental  power 

and  strength, 

Effused  for  Indra,  for  his  drink,  for  Mitra  and  for  Varuna. 

6 Flow  to  the  filter  with  thy  stream,  effused,  best  winner,  thou, 

of  spoil, 

0 Soma,  as  most  rich  in  sweets  for  Indra,  Vishnu,  and  the 
Gods. 

? The  mothers,  void  of  guiles,  caress  thee,  Golden-coloured,  in 
the  sieve, 

I As  cows,  0 Pavamana,  lick  the  new-born  calf,  as  Law  com- 
mands. 


J Collecting  aif  fa  knowg  tfarefn  : the  meaning  of  this  half-line  is  not  clear  : 
he  is  recognized  amongst  these  (people)  as  the  giver  (of  riches)/ 

J OuUelcss  Ones  : the  vamtivart  waters. 

II  commandi : vtdharnani : see  Bergaigne,  La  Religion  Vtdiqne, 

^wuiann*10*6  ^ ^ 8acr^oe*,~^ Wilson.  ‘ In  the  realm  of  heaven/ — 


368  THE  HYMNS  OF  [HOOK  /* 

8 Thou,  Pavamana,  movest  on  with  wondrous  rays  to  great  re- 

nown. 

Striving  within  the  votary’s  house  thou  drivest  all  the  glooms 
away. 

9 Lord  of  great  sway,  thou  liftest  thee  above  the  heavens,  above 

the  earth. 

Thou,  Pavamana,  hast  assumed  thy  coat  of  mail  in  majesty. 

HVMN  Cl.  Soma  Pavam&na, 

For  first  possession  of  your  juice,  for  the  exhilarating  drink,  j 
Drive  ye  away  the  dog,  my  friends,  drive  ye  the  long-tongued ! 
dog  away. 

2 He  who  with  purifying  stream,  effused,  comes  flowing  hither- 

ward, 

Indu,  is  like  an  able  steed. 

3 The  men  with  all-pervading  song  send  unassailable  Soma  forth, 
By  pressing-stones,  to  sacrifice. 

4 The  Somas,  very  rich  in  sweets,  for  which  the  sieve  is  des- 

tined, flow, 

Effused,  the  source  of  Indra’s  joy : may  your  strong  juices 
reach  the  Gods. 

5 Indu  flows  on  for  Indra’s  sake  : thus  have  the  Deities  declared. 
The  Lord  of  Speech  exerts  himself,  Ruler  of  all,  because  of 

might. 

6 Inciter  of  the  voice  of  song,  with  thousand  streams  the  ocean 

flows, 

Even  Soma,  Lord  of  opulence,  the  Friend  of  Indra,  day  to 
day. 

7 As  Pushan,  Fortune,  Bhaga,  comes  this  Soma  while  they  mak 

him  pure. 

He,  Lord  of  all  the  multitude,  hath  looked  upon  the  eart 
and  heaven. 

8 The  dear  cows  lowed  in  joyful  mood  together  to  the  gladd? 

ing  drink. 

The  drops  as  they  were  purified,  the  Soma  juices,  made  the 
paths. 

9 0 Pavamana,  bring  the  juice,  the  mightiest,  worthy  to 

famed. 

Which  the  Five  Tribes  have  over  them,  whereby  we  may  # 
opulence. 

6 The  coat  of  mail:  drdpim ; aee  IX.  86.  14. 

1 Drive  ye  away : prevent  dogs  or  R&kshasas  from  drinking  the  Soffit  J11 


THE  R1QVEDA . 


369 


UYMN  102  J 

10  For  us  the  Soma  juices  flow,  the  drops  best  furtherers  of  our 

weal, 

Effused  as  friends,  without  a spot,  benevolent,  finders  of  the 
light. 

11  Effused  by  means  of  pressing-stones,  upon  the  ox-hide  visible, 
They,  treasure-tinders,  have  announced  food  unto  us  from 

every  side. 

12  These  Soma  juices,  skilled  in  song,  purified,  blent  with  milk 

and  curd, 

When  moving  and  when  firmly  laid  in  oil,  resemble  lovely  Suns. 

13  Let  not  the  power  of  men  restrain  the  voice  of  the  outpour- 

ing juice  : 

As  Bhrigu’s  sons  chased  Makha,  so  drive  ye  the  greedy  hound 
away. 

14  The  Friend  hath  wrapped  him  in  his  robe,  as  in  his  parents’ 

arms,  a son. 

He  went,  as  lover  to  a dame,  to  take  his  station  suitor-like. 

15  That  Hero  who  produces  strength,  he  who  hath  propped  both 

worlds  apart, 

Gold-hued,  hath  wrapped  him  in  the  sieve,  to  settle,  priest- 
like, in  his  place. 

to  Soma  upon  the  ox’s  skin  through  the  sheep’s  wool  flows  purified. 

I Bellowing  out,  the  Tawny  Steer  goes  on  to  indra’s  special 
place. 

HYMN  Cl  I.  Soma  PavamUna. 

Tub  Child,  when  blended  with  the  streams,  speeding  the  plan 
of  sacrifice, 

Surpasses  all  things  that  are  dear,  yea,  from  of  old. 

)j  ^ie  place,  near  the  two  pressing-stones  of  Trita,  hath  he 
occupied, 

Secret  and  dear  through  seven  lights  of  sacrifice. 

igveda^'  Hppareutl^»  a (icalon  whose  name  does  not  occur  again  in  the 

liiPedal  pl"ce:  ‘Prepaid  station.’— Wilson.  The  vessel  containing  the 
nation  appropriated  to  Indra. 

he  streams : literally  ‘ the  great,*  ‘waters’  being  understood. 

>.  457.I8/?deI>.ted  10  Pro.f‘  Macdo»ell  (Journal  of  the  R.  A S.,  July,  1893, 
fficult  Lor  10  t'Nmslatiou  aud  explanation  of  this  and  the  following  very 
leparfta  »i  ftnzas*  . place:  faraway  in  heaven  where  Trita  presses  and 
K,  0f  16  celestial  Soma  for  Indra.  He : Soma.  Bear : to  Soma.  Seven 
toll  whipKC  Q e ’ Pr°Lahly  the  seven  rays  or  tongues  of  the  sacrificial  fire 
Pfifices  w closely  connected.  4 Through  the  seven  ordinance*  of 


370 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[ZOOK  IX, 


3 Urge  to  three  courses,  on  tho  heights  of  Trita,  riches  in  a 

stream : 

He  who  is  passing  wise  measures  his  courses  out. 

4 Even  at  his  birth  the  Mothers  Seven  taught  him,  for  glory, 

like  a sage, 

So  that  he,  firm  and  sure,  hath  set  his  mind  on  wealth. 

5 Under  his  sway,  of  one  accord,  are  all  the  guileless  Deities: 
Warriors  to  be  envied,  they,  when  they  are  pleased. 

6 The  Babe  whom  they  who  strengthen  Law  have  generated, 

fair  to  see, 

Much  longed  for  at  the  sacrifice,  most  liberal  Sage, — 

7 To  him,  united,  of  themselves,  conic  the  young  Parents  of  the 

rite, 

When  they  adorn  him,  duly  weaving  sacrifice. 

8 With  wisdom  and  with  radiant  eyes  unbar  to  us  the  stall  of 

heaven, 

Speeding  at  solemn  rite  the  plan  of  Holy  Law. 


HYMN  CTII.  Soma  ravamftua. 

To  Soma  who  is  purified  as  ordering  Piiest  the  song  is  raised: 
Bring  meed,  as  ’twere,  to  one  who  makes  thee  glad  with  hymns. 

2 Blended  with  milk  and  curds  he  flows  on  through  the 

wool  of  the  sheep. 

The  Gold-hued,  purified,  makes  him  throe  seats  for  rest. 

3 Ou  through  tho  long  wool  of  the  sheep  to  the  meath-droppui| 

vat  he  flows  : 

The  ltishis’  sevenfold  quire  hath  sung  aloud  to  him. 

4 Shared  by  all  Gods,  Infallible,  the  Leader  of  our  holy  hymn 
Golden-hued  Soma,  being  cleansed,  hath  reached  the  bowls. 


3 sTli<>  n»am  justification  of  my  interpretation/  nays  Prof.  Macdouell, 
that  l supply  no  extraneous  wool  with  ‘tifoi,’  but,  explain  it  by  the  thu 
hue.  The  meaning  of  my  translation  is  : ‘ Do  thou,  Soma,  on  the  heights 
Trita,  direct  the  fertilizing  streams  which  produce  wealth  into  the  ebanfl; 
of  Trita,  for  thou  knovvest  these  chanuels,  having  measured  them  out  wi 
thy  sti  earns/  Three  courses:  or  chanuels,  of  Tiita.  He  who  is  passing  mi 
Soma  His  : Trita’s. 

4 The  Mothers  Seven : the  Seven  Rivers. 

f>  Warriors  to  be  envied  : the  meaning  of  tho  line  is  uncertain. 

6 They  who  strengthen  law : according  to  S&yana,  the  vasativari  waters^ 

7 The  young  Parents  of  the  rite : ever-young,  fresh  and  strong  Heaven 

Earth.  

2 Three  seats  for  rest : three  reservoirs  in  which  he  may  settle.  Tbe<* 
nakalata,  the  ddhavantya,  and  the  pdtabhrit.  , 

' 3 The  Rtshis ’ sevenfold  quire:  ‘ the  seven  metres  of  the  Rmis.  — 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


371 


1YMN  105.] 

5 After  thy  Godlike  qualities,  associate  with  Indra,  go, 

As  a Priest  purified  by  priests,  Immortal  One. 

6 Like  a car-horse  who  shows  his  strength,  a God  effused  for 

Deities, 

Tlie  penetrating  Pavamana  flows  along. 

HYMN  CIV.  Soma  PavamUna. 

Sit  down,  0 friends,  and  sing  aloud  to  him  who  purifies  himself  : 
Deck  him  for  glory,  like  a child,  with  holy  rites. 

2 Unite  him  bringing  household  wealth,  even  as  a calf,  with 

mother  kino, 

Him  who  hath  double  strength,  the  God-delighting  juice. 

3 Purify  him  who  gives  us  power,  that  he,  most  Blessed  One, 

maybe 

A banquet  for  the  Troop,  Mitra,  and  Varuna. 

4 Voices  have  sung  aloud  to  thee  as  finder-out  of  wealth  for  us  : 
We  clothe  the  hue  thou  nearest  with  a robe  of  milk. 

5 Thou,  Indu,  art  the  food  of  Gods,  0 Sovran  of  all  gladdening 

drinks : 

As  Friend  for  friend,  be  thou  best  finder  of  success. 

6 Drive  utterly  away  from  us  each  demon,  each  voracious  fiend, 
The  godless  and  the  false  : keep  sorrow7  far  away. 

HYMN  CV.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Sing  ye  aloud,  0 friends,  to  him  who  makes  him  pure  for  glad- 
dening drink  : 

rlhey  shall  make  sweet  the  Child  with  sacrifice  and  laud. 

2 Like  as  a calf  with  mother  cows,  so  Indu  is  urged  forth  and  sent, 
Glorified  by  our  hymns,  the  God-delighting  juice. 

3 Effectual  means  of  power  is  he,  he  is  a banquet  for  the  Troop, 
He  who  hath  been  eft  used,  most  i ich  in  meath,  for  Gods. 

I Flow  to  us,  Indu,  passing  strong,  effused,  with  wealth  of  kine 
and  steeds  : 

I will  spread  forth  above  the  milk  thy  radiant  hue. 

5 Lord  of  the  tawny,  Indu,  thou  who  art  the  Gods’  most  special 
food, 

As  Friend  to  friend,  for  splendour  be  thoq  good  to  men. 

« AAer  thy  Qodlike  qualities  : according  to  SAyana,  ‘ to  the  hosts  of  the  gods.' 
enetrating ; vydnasih : ‘spreading  widely  iuto  the  vessels.’ — Wilson. 

* ; ' Associate  him  the  support  of  the  mansion  with  the  mater- 

o J?)  aa  ca^  (with  the  mother).’— Wilson 
< Troop : the  banded  Maruta. 

5 of  the  tamy;  hartndm : SAyana  supplies  paidntfm,  cattle. 


8?2  THE  HYMXS  OF  [ BOOK  a. 

6  Drive  utterly,  far  away  from  us  each  godless,  each  voracious 
foe : 

0 Indu,  overcome  and  drive  the  false  afar. 

HYMNCVI.  Soma  Pitvanifon 

To  Indra,  to  theMighty  Steer,  may  these  gold-coloured  juices  go 
Drops  rapidly  produced,  that  find  the  light  of  heaven.  8 ’ 

2 Effused,  this  juice  victorious  flows  for  Indra,  for  his  maintc- 

nance. 

Soma  bethinks  him  of  the  Conqueror,  as  he  knows. 

3 May  India  in  his  raptures  gain  from  him  tho  grasp  that  gath- 

ers spoil, 

And,  winning  waters,  wield  the  steer-strong  thunderbolt. 

4 Flow  vigilant  for  Indra,  thou  Soma,  yea,  Indu,  run  thou  on : 
Bring  hither  splendid  strength  that  finds  the  light  of  heaven. 

5 Do  thou,  all-beautiful,  purify  for  Indra’s  sake  the  mighty  juice, 
Path-maker  thou,  far  seeing,  with  a thousand  ways. 

6 Best  finder  of  prosperity  for  us,  most  rich  in  sweets  for  Gods, 
Proceed  thou  loudly  roaring  on  a thousand  paths. 

7 0 Indu,  with  thy  streams,  in  might,  flow  for  the  banquet  of 

the  Gods : 

Rich  in  meath,  Soma,  in  our  beaker  take  thy  place. 

8 Thy  drops  that  swim  in  water  have  exalted  Indra  to  delight- 
The  Gods  have  drunk  thee  up  for  immortality. 

9 Stream  opulence  to  ns,  ye  drops  of  Soma,  pressed  and  purified, 
Pouring  down  rain  from  heaven  in  Hoods,  and  finding  light. 

10  Soma,  while  filtered,  with  his  wave  flows  through  the  long  wool 

of  the  sheep, 

Shouting  while  purified  before  the  voice  of  song, 

11  With  songs  they  send  the  Mighty  forth,  sporting  in  wood, 

above  the  fleece : 

Our  psalms  have  glorified  him  of  the  triple  height. 

12  Into  the  jars  hath  he  been  loosed,  like  an  impetuous  steed 

for  war, 

And  lifting  up  his  voice,  while  filtered,  glided  on. 

13  Gold-hued  and  lovely  in  his  course,  through  tangles  of  the 

wool  he  flows, 

And  pours  heroic  fame  upon  the  worshippers. 


Tbe  hymn  is  a sort  of  rifaccimento  of  Hymn  104. 

2 For  hit  maintenance  : bhdrdya:  or.  for  battle.  The  Conqueror:  Indra. 
11  Him  of  the  triple  height .-  tripruhthdm : the  three  heights  are  probaW 
the  firmament,  the  mountain,  and  the  altar.  ‘ Abiding  in  three  recoptade* 
—Wilson. 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


373 


HYMN  107.] 

14  Flow  thus,  a faithful  votary : the  streams  of  meath  have 
been  effused. 

Thou  eomest  to  the  filter,  singing,  from  each  side. 


HYMN  CVII.  Soma  PavamAna> 


Hence  sprinkle  forth  the  juice  effused,  Soma,  the  best  of 
sacred  gifts, 

Who,  friend  of  m«n>  hath  run  amid  the  water-streams. 

He  hath  preyed  Soma  out  with  stones. 

2 Now,  being  purified,  flow  hither  through  the  fleece  inviolate 

and  most  adoious. 

We  gladden  thee  in  waters  when  thou  art  effused,  blending 
thee  dtill  with  juice  and  milk. 

3 Pressed  out  for  all  to  see,  delighting  Gods,  Indu,  Far-sighted 

0*0,  is  mental  power. 

4 finalising  thee,  Soma,  in  thy  stream,  thou  flowest  in  a watery 

robe  : J 

Giver  of  wealth,  thou  sittest  in  the  place  of  Law,  0 God,  a 
fountain  made  of  gold. 

5 Milking  the  heavenly  udder  for  dear  meath,  he  hath  sat  in 

the  ancient  gathering-place. 

Washed  by  the  men,  the  Strong,  Far-seeing  One  streams  forth 
nutritious  food  that  all  desire. 

6 0 Soma,  while  they  cleanse  thee,  dear  and  watchful  in  the 

sheep’s  long  wool, 

Thou  hast  become  a Singer  most  like  Angiras  : thou  madest 
Surya  mount  to  heaven. 

7 Bountiful,  best  of  furtherers,  Soma  floweth  on,  Rishi  and 

Singer,  keen  of  sight. 

Thou  hast  become  a S <ge  most  welcome  to  the  Gods  : thou 
madest  Surya  mount  to  heaven. 

8 Pressed  out  by  pressers,  Soma  goes  over  the  fleecy  backs  of 

sheep,  J 

boes,  even  as  with  a mare,  in  tawny-coloured  stream,  goes 
m exhilarating  stream. 

9 Down  to  the  water  Soma,  rich  in  kino,  hath  flowed  with  cows, 

with  cows  that  have  been  milked. 


1 Se : the  priest. 

5 ^aCt  ^ aW  P*ace  Law-ordained  sacrifice. 

? 6 udder  for  dear  meath : extracting  the  sweet  and 

us  3uice  from  the  stalk  and  tendrils  of  the  Soma  plant. 


374  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IX, 

They  have  approached  the  mixing- vessels  as  a sea  : the  cheerer 
streams  for  the  carouse, 

10  Effused  by  stones,  0 Soma,  and  urged  through  the  long  wool 

of  the  sheep, 

Thou,  entering  the  saucers  as  a man  the  fort,  gold-hued  hast 
settled  in  the  wood. 

11  He  beautifies  himself  through  the  shea's  long  fine  wool,  like 

an  impetuous  steed  in  war, 

Even  Soma  Pavamana  who  shall  be  the  y>y  of  sages  and  of 
holy  bards. 

12  0 Soma, — for  the  feast  of  Gods,  river-liko  he  hath  swelled 

with  surge, 

With  the  stalk’s  juice,  exhilarating,  resting  not,  into  the  vat 
that  drops  with  meath. 

13  Like  a dear  son  who  must  bo  decked,  the  Lovely  hath 

clad  him  in  a shining  robe. 

Men  skilful  at  their  work  drive  him  forth,  like  a car,  into  *,e 
rivers  from  their  hands. 

14  The  living  drops  of  Soma  juice  pour,  as  they  flow,  the  glad- 

dening drink, 

Intelligent  drops  above  the  basin  of  the  sea,  exhilarating, 
finding  light. 

15  May  Pavamana,  King  and  God,  speed  with  his  wave  over  the 

sea  the  lofty  rite : _ . 

May  he  by  Mitra’s  and  by  Varuna’s  decree  flow  furthering  the 

lofty  rite. 

1G  Far-seeing,  lovely,  guided  by  the  men,  the  God  whose  borne  is 
in  the  sea — 

17  Soma,  the  gladdening  juice,  flows  pressed  for  I ndra  with  his 

Marut  host : , m 

He  hastens  o'er  the  fleece  with  all  his  thousand  streams:  mei 
make  him  bright  and  beautiful. 

18  Purified  in  the  howl  and  gendering  the  hymn,  wise  Soma  joy* 

among  the  Gods.  , , . .. 

Robed  in  the  flood,  the  Mighty  One  hath  clad  himself  w 
milk  and  settled  in  the  vats. 


9 They  have  approached  the  mixing-vessels  like  a sea:  samvdraydni,  ^ 
tamvri,  to  cover,  enclose,  surround,  must,  apparently,  mean  the  vessel  ^ 
contain  the  juices  and  not  the  juices  themselves  as  Sftyana  explains . 

enjoyable  juices  go  (to  the  pitcher  as  waters)  to  the  ocean.  —Wilson. . 

12  0 Soma he,  is  a sort  of  periphrasis  for  Soma  in  the  nominftbve 

14  Of  the  sea  : of  the  firmament,  or  sea  ot  air. 


THE  RIG  VEDA . 


375 


BYXN  108.] 

19  0 Soma,  Indu,  every  day  thy  friendship  hath  been  my  delight. 
Many  fiends  follow  me ; help  me,  thou  Tawny-hued ; pass  on 

beyond  these  barriers. 

20  Close  to  thy  bosom  am  I,  Soma,  day  and  night,  0 Tawny-hued, 

for  friendship  sake. 

Surya  himself  refulgent  with  his  glow  have  we  o’ertaken  in  his 
course  like  birds. 

>1  Deft-handed  ! thou  when  purified  liftest  thy  voice  amid  the  sea. 
Thou,  Pavamanu,  makcst  riches  flow  to  us,  yellow,  abundant, 
much-desired. 

12  Making  thee  pure  and  bright  in  the  sheep’s  long  wool,  thou 

hast  bellowed,  steer-like,  in  the  wood. 

Thou  flowcsfc,  Soma  Pavamana,  balmcd  with  milk  unto  the 
special  place  of  Gods. 

13  Flow  on  to  win  us  strength,  flow  on  to  lofty  lore  of  every  kind. 
Thou,  Soma,  as  Exhilarator  wast  the  first  to  spread  the  sea 

abroad  for  Gods, 

H Flow  to  the  realm  of  earth,  flow  to  the  realm  of  heaven,  0 
Soma,  in  thy  righteous  ways. 

Fair  art  thou  whom  the  sages,  0 Far-sccing  One,  urge  onward 
with  their  songs  and  hymns. 

25  Over  the  cleansing  sieve  have  flowed  the  ravamanas  in  a stream, 
Girt  by  the  Mai  uts,  gladdening,  Steeds  with  Inra’s  strength, 
for  wisdom  and  for  dainty  food. 

!6  Urged  onward  by  the  pressers,  clad  in  watery  robes,  Indu  is 
speeding  to  the  vat. 

He  gendering  light,  hath  made  the  glad  Cows  low,  the  while 
lie  takes  them  as  his  garb  of  state. 

HYMN  CYIIf.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

For  Indra,  flow  thou  Soma  on,  us  gladdening  jnice  most  • 
sweet,  intelligent, 

Great,  cheering,  dwelling  most  in  heaven. 

2 Thou,  of  whom  having  drunk  the  Steer  acts  like  a steer  : 
drinking  of  this  that  finds  the  light, 

19  Many  fiends  ■ the  text  has  only  purftni,  many,  in  the  neuter  plural, 
ayaoa  supplies  rakshdhsi  R&kshasas  or  fiends.  Pass  on  beyond  these  barriers  : 
overcome  those  who  surround  me.’ — Wilson. 

^0  C lose  to  thy  bosom  am  l : ‘I  (delight)  in  thy  presence.’ — Wilson. 

'G/urf  the  sea:  antarikshe  kalasc  vd , in  the  firmament  or  in  the  beaker, 
Sftyana 

^ The  Pavamdnas : * thy  purified  juices.’ — Wilson. 

^ The  Steer  acts  like  a steer : vrishabhd  vrtshdydte:  ‘the  showerer  Indra  is 
v,^ora^d.’— -Wilson.  Etasa : one  of  the  horses  of  the  Sun;  or  a horse  in 
neral  a horse  coxnee  to  the  battle.’— SAyana. 


376  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  H 

He,  Excellently  Wise,  is  come  to  strengthening  food,  to  spoil 
and  wealth  like  Etasa. 

3 For,  verily,  Pavamana,  thou  hast,  splendidest,  called  all  the 

generations  of 
The  Gods  to  immortality. 

4 By  whom  Dadhyach  Navagva  opens  fastened  doors,  by  whom 

the  sages  gained  their  wish, 

By  whom  they  won  the  fame  of  lovely  Amrita  in  the  felicity  of 
Gods. 

5 Effused,  he  flo'weth  in  a stream,  best  rapture-giver,  in  the  long 

■wool  of  the  sheep, 

Sporting,  as  ’twere  the  waters'  wave. 

6 He  who  from  out  the  rocky  cavern  took  with  might  the  red- 

refulgent  watery  Cows, — 

Thou  masterest  the  stable  full  of  kine  and  steeds  : burst  it, 
brave  Lord,  like  one  in  mail. 

7 Press  ye  and  pour  him,  like  a steed,  laud- worthy,  speeding 

through  the  region  and  the  flood, 

Who  swims  in  water,  roars  in  wood ; 

8 Increaser  of  the  water,  Steer  with  thousand  streams,  dear  to 

the  race  of  Deities ; 

Who  born  iu  Law  hath  waxen  mighty  by  the  Law,  King,  God, 
and  lofty  Ordinance. 

9 Make  splendid  glory  shine  on  us,  thou  Lord  of  strengthening 

food,  God,  as  the  Friend  of  Gods  : 

Unclose  the  fount  of  middle  air. 

10  Roll  onward  to  the  bowls,  0 Mighty  One,  effused,  as  Prince 

supporter  of  the  tribes. 

Pour  on  us  r.tiu  from  heaven,  send  us  the  waters7  flow : incite 
our  thoughts  to  win  the  spoil. 

11  They  have  drained  him  the  Steer  of  heaven,  him  with  ft 

thousand  streams,  distilling  rapturous  joy, 

Him  who  brings  all  thing  excellent. 

12  The  Mighty  One  was  born  Immortal,  giving  life,  lightening 

darkness  with  his  shine.  , 

Well-praised  by  sages  he  hath  by  his  wondrous  power  assume 
the  Threefold  as  his  robe.  

4 Dadhyach  Navagva  : Padhyach  was  the  son  of  Atharvan  the  pviest  wbo 
first  obtained  fire  and  offered  Sonia  and  pi  ayer  to  the  Gods  Here  he  w c 
a Navagva  and  consequently  one  of  the  Angirases.  See  both  names  m • 
I„  Index.  Won  the  fame  of  lovely  Amrita  : * obtained  the  sustenance  oi 
delicious  (ambrosial)  water.’ — Wilson. 

12  The  Threefold:  the  morning,  noon,  and  evening  libation. 


THE  RIGVEHA. 


377 


UYHN  109.] 

13  Effused  is  he  who  brings  good  things,  who  brings  us  bounteous 

gifts  and  sweet  refreshing  food, 

Soma  who  brings  us  quiet  homes  : 

14  He  whom  our  Indra  and  the  Marut  host  shall  drink,  Bhaga 

shnll  drink  with  Aryaman,  ° 

By  whom  we  bring  to  us  Mitra  and  Varuna  and  Indra  for  our 
great  defence. 

15  Soma,  for  Indra’s  drink  do  thou,  led  by  the  men,  well-weapon- 

ed  and  most  gladdening, 

Flow  on  with  greatest  store  of  sweets. 

16  Enter  the  Soma-holder,  even  Indra’s  heart,  as  rivers  pass  into 

the  sea, 

Acceptable  to  Mitra,  Vayu,  Varuna,  the  noblest  Pillar  of  the 
heavens. 


HYMN  CIX.  Soma  Pavamlna. 

Pleasant  to  Indra’s,  Mitra’s,  Piishan’s  Bhaga’s  taste,  speed 
onward,  Soma,  with  thy  flowing  stream. 

2 Let  Indra  drink,  0 Soma,  of  thy  juice  for  wisdom,  and  all 

Deities  for  strength. 

3 So  flow  thou  on  as  bright  celestial  juice,  flow  to  the  vast,  im- 

mortal dwelling-place. 

4 Flow  onward,  Soma,  as  a mighty  sea,  as  Father  of  the  Gods, 

to  every  form. 

o How  on,  0 Soma,  radiant  for  the  Gods  and  Heaven  and  Earth, 
and  bless  our  progeny. 

6 Thou,  bright  Juice,  art  Sustainer  of  the  sky  : flow,  mighty,  in 

accordance  with  true  Law. 

7 Soma,  flow  splendid  with  thy  copious  stream  through  the 

great  fleece  as  in  the  olden  time. 

8 Born,  led  by  men,  joyous,  and  purified,  let  the  Light-finder 

make  all  blessings  flow\ 


m’  °f  this  stanza  is  G&yatri  YavamadhyA.  that  is  G&yatri  having 

firat  ? 1 c ® barley-corn,  thick  in  the  middle  and  tapering  at  both  ends  : 
na  of  eight  syllables,  then  one  of  twelve,  and  lastly  another  of  eight, 


The  Rishis 
&ons  of *A 


's  iis  are  the  Agnayo  DhishnyAh,  sacrifical  Agnis  or 
■ara  the  Supreme  Deity  of  post-Yedic  times. 


Fires,  said  to  be 

5pacioua°abod^— \vflso^m0ria"  -place : ‘flow  for  immortality  and 

enteiT°  of?  f°rm  * to  *orms  °r  essences  of  the  Gods  into  which  he 

to  every  power,  to  aid  us  in  every  way. 


378  THE  HYMNS  OF  {BOOK  ft, 

9  Indu,  while  cleansed,  keeping  the  people  safe,  shall  give  us 
all  possessions  for  our  own. 

10  Flow  on  for  wisdom,  Soma,  and  for  power,  as  a strong  courser 

bathed,  to  win  the  prize. 

11  The  pressers  purify  this  juice  of  thine,  tho  Soma,  for  delight, 

and  lofty  fame. 

1 2 They  deck  the  Gold-hucd  Tnfant,  newly-born,  even  Soma, 

Indu,  in  the  sieve  for  Gods. 

13  Fair  Indu  hath  flowed  on  for  rapturous  joy,  Sage  for  good 

fortune  in  the  waters’  lap. 

14  He  hears  the  beauteous  name  of  Indra,  that  wherewith  he 

overcame  all  demon  foes. 

15  All  Deities  are  wont  to  drink  of  him,  pressed  by  the  men  and 

blent  with  milk  and  curds. 

16  He  hath  flowed  forth  with  thousand  streams  effused,  flowed 

through  the  filter  and  the  sheep’s  long  wool. 

17  With  endless  genial  flow  the  Strong  hath  run,  purified  hy  the 

waters,  blent  with  milk. 

18  Pressed  out  with  stones,  directed  by  the  men,  go  forth,  0 

Soma,  into  India’s  throat. 

19  The  mighty  Soma  with  a thousand  streams  is  poured  to  Indra 

through  the  cleansing  sieve. 

20  Indu  they  balm  with  pleasant  milky  juice  for  Indra,  for  the 

Steer,  for  his  delight. 

21  Lightly,  for  sheen,  they  cleanse  thee  for  the  Gods,  gold-colour- 

ed, wearing  water  as  thy  robe. 

22  Indu  to  [ndra  streams,  yea,  downward  streams,  Strong,  flow- 

ing to  the  floods,  and  mingling  there. 

HYMN  CX.  Soma  Pavam&nft. 

O’erpowering  Vritras,  forward  run  to  win  great  strength  : 
Thou  speedest  to  subdue  like  one  exacting  debts. 

2 In  thee,  effused,  0 Soma,  we  rejoice  ourselves  for  great  su- 

premacy in  tight: 

Thou,  Pavamana,  enterest  into  mighty  deeds. 

3 0 Pavamana,  thou  didst  generate  the  Sun,  and  spread  the  m 

ture  out  with  power, 

Hasting  to  us  with  plenty  vivified  with  milk.  

14  He  bears:  according  to  Sftyana,  the  translation  of  the  first  h»l 
would  be  : Indra’ s fair  body  he  supports,  wherewith,  etc. 

3 With  plenty  vivified  with  milk ; ‘with  abundant  wisdom  that  proC 
cattle  (for  thy  worshippers)/— Wilson,  _ 


q?MN  111.]  THE  RtGVEDA. 


379 


4 Thon  didst  produce  him,  Deathless  God ! mid  mortal  men 

for  maintenance  of  Law  and  lovely  Amrita : 

Thou  evermore  hast  moved  making  stiength  flow  to  us. 

5 All  round  about  hast  thou  with  glory  pierced  for  us  as  'twere 

a never-failing  well  for  men  to  drink, 

Borne  on  thy  way  in  fragments  from  the  pressor's  arms. 

6 Tk3n,  beautifully  radiant,  certain  Heavenly  Ones,  have  sung 

to  him  their  kinship  as  they  looked  thereon, 

And  Savitar  the  God  opens  as  'twere  a stall. 

7 Soma,  the  men  of  old  whose  grass  was  trimmed  addressed  the 

hymn  to  thee  for  mighty  strength  and  for  renown  : 

So,  Hero,  urge  us  onward  to  heroic  power. 

8 They  have  drained  forth  from  out  the  great  depth  of  the  sky 

the  old  primeval  milk  of  heaven  that  claims  the  laud : 

They  lifted  up  their  voico  to  Indra  at  his  birth. 

9 As  long  as  thou,  0 Pavamana,  art  above  this  earth  and  heaven 

and  all  existence  in  thy  might, 

Thou  standest  like  a Bull  the  chief  amid  the  herd. 

10  In  the  sheep's  wool  hath  Soma  Pavamana  flowed,  while  they 

cleanse  him,  like  a playful  infant, 

Indu  with  hundred  powers  and  hundred  currents. 

11  Holy  and  sweet,  while  purified,  this  Tndu  flows  on,  a wave  of 

pleasant  taste,  to  Indra, — 

Strength- wiuncr,  Treasure-finder,  Life-bes tower. 

1^  S 

* Ouflow  thou  on,  subduing  our  assailants,  chasing  the  demons 
w n 1 to  encountered, 

Weii-arin-xd.  and  conquering  our  foes,  0 Soma. 


HYMN  CXI.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Wirii  this  his  goi^n  splendour  purifying  him,  he  with  his 
own  allies  subdues  an  enemies,  as  Sura  with  his  own  allies. 
eaii8ing  himself  with  stit*m  of  juice  he  shines  forth  yellow- 
med  and  red,  when  with  the  ^raisers  he  encompasses  all 
^ forms,  with  praisers  having  seven  mouths. 


6 famVFfp1* : pieCea  of  the  cru8hed  8talk  and  sh(>ots  of  the  Soma- plant. 
Vasiiruohaa  ? radiant:  vasnvitchah : according  to  SAyana,  a proper  name, 

^ away  the 


AU  enemies  : the  fieuds  of  darkness. 


allies  ; 


,^e  ®un  with  his  attendant  beams  of  light.  All  foi'ms : 

brand t * 1 a 1 lunar  mansion*  nnonivlinor  to  fiAimne  A 


As  Silva  with  his  own 


ilfn  ’’  aP  ^he  lunar  mansions,  according  to  SAyana.  According  to 
irases  aSr8U™xSt\ftj  ^eau^*  With  the  praisevs : rikvahhih : perha 


A,1girases 


Hille- 
perhaps  the 


• are  intended.  Havina  seven  mouths • that,  is,  one  mouth  each,  the 


3S0  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  H 

2 That  treasure  of  the  Panis  thou  discoveredst ; thou  with  thy 

mothers  deckest  thee  in  thine  abode,  with  songs  of  worship 
in  thine  home. 

As  ’twere  from  far,  the  hymn  is  heard,  where  holy  songs 
resound  in  joy.  He  with  the  ruddy-hued,  threefold  hatl 
won  life-power,  he,  glittering,  hath  won  life-power. 

3 He  udvcs  intelligent,  directed  to  the  East.  The  very  beau 

teous  car  rivals  the  beams  of  light,  the  beautiful  celestia 
car. 

Hymns,  lauding  manly  valour,  came,  inciting  Indi  a to  success 
that  ye  may  be  unconquered,  both  thy  bolt  and  thou,  botl 
be  uncouquered  in  the  war. 

HYMN  CXII.  Soma  Pavamftna 


We  all  hive  various  thoughts  and  plans,  and  diverse  are  the 
ways  of  men. 

The  Brahmin  seeks  the  worshipper,  wright  seeks  the  cracked, 
and  leech  the  maimed.  Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra’s  sake, 


2 The  smith  with  ripe  and  seasoned  plants,  with  feathers  of  tli 

birds  of  air, 

With  stones,  and  with  enkindled  flames,  seeks  him  who  hatl 
a store  of  gold.  Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  India’s  sake. 

3 A bard  am  I,  my  dad’s  a leech,  mammy  lays  corn  upon  th 

stones. 

Striving  for  wealth,  with  varied  plans,  we  follow  our  desire 
like  kine.  Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra’s  sake. 


2 Treasure  of  the  Panis  : the  rays  of  light  carried  off  and  con£P  ‘ oZau! 
demons  of  darkness.  Th>/  Mothers:  apparently  the  Dawns.  Ac.co/ue  fext  andi 
the  vasal)  vari  waters.  Threefold:  there  is  no  substantive J*  ’ 

is  uncertain  what  tridhatuhhih  refers  to.  S&yana  refe*-  , n mau, 
waters,  and  explains  it  by  ‘ the  supporters .of  the 

thinks  that  the  beverages,  consisting  of  three  Aa*  ken  of  as  tire 

Soma  juice  are  intended.  Probably  the  sometimes  spoken  of  ss  tw 

(cf.  VIII.  41.  3),  are  meant.  , 

1 3 The  very  beauteous  car : of  Son's-  Beams  of  light ; sunbeams. 


The  hymn  app-ars  to  be  an  old  popular  song  transformed  into  an  a^dre 
to  Soma  by  aching  to  each  stanza  a ref™,,,  whmh  has  no  con , 
the  subject  of  the  song  But  see  Vedische  Studient  . p. 
translated  in  Muir’s  0 S.  Texts , V.  424.  b , , ea(] 

1 The  Brahman:  ‘This  verse  distinctly  proves  that  the  pnes  o 

formed  a profession  ’ — Muir,  0.  S.  Texts , I.  252  # With  tto# 

2 Plants  : meaning  here  reeds  which  were  made  into  - gton* 

and  with,  enkindled  fames : according  to  SHyana,  with ‘ ®nI  be  ab 

form  the  heads  of  the  arrows  Who  hath  a store  of  gold . and  win 

to  pay  well  for  the  arrows  which  the  artisan  makes 

3 My  dad:  tatdh : a familiar  expression,  corresponding  to  noni»,  “ 


THE  RIQVEDA. 


381 


YMN  113.] 

. The  horse  would  draw  an  easy  car,  gay  hosts  attract  the  laugh 
and  jest. 

The  male  desires  his  mate’s  approach,  the  frog  is  eager  for  the 
flood.  Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra’s  sake. 

HYMN  CXIII.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

Let  Vritra-slaying  Indra  drink  Soma  by  Saryana van’s  side, 
Storing  up  vigour  in  his  heart,  prepared  to  do  heroic  deeds. 
Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra’s  sake. 

> Lord  of  the  Quarters,  flow  thou  on,  boon  Soma,  from  Arjika  land, 
Effused  with  ardour  and  with  faith,  and  the  true  hymn  of 
sacrifice.  Plow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra’ s sake. 

I Hither  hath  Surya’s  Daughter  brought  the  wild  Steer  whom 
Parjanya  nursed. 

Gandharvas  have  seized  hold  of  him,  and  in  the  Soma  laid 
the  juice.  Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra’s  sake. 

1 Splendid  by  Law  ! declaring  Law,  truth-speaking,  truthful  in 
thy  works, 

Enouncing  faith,  King  Soma ! thou,  0 Soma,  whom  thy  maker 
docks.  Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra’s  sake. 

5 Together  flow  the  meeting  streams  of  him  the  Great  and  truly 

Strong. 

The  juices  of  the  juicy  meet.  Made  pure  by  prayer,  0 Golden- 
lined,  flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra’s  sake. 

6 0 Pavamana,  where  the  priest,  as  he  recites  the  rhythmic 

prayer, 

Lords  it  o’er  Soma  with  the  stone,  with  Soma  bringing  forth 
delight,  flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra’s  sake. 

* 0 Pavamana,  place  me  in  that  deathless,  undecaying  world 
^herein  the  light  of  heaven  is  set,  and  everlasting  lustre  shines. 
F]uv,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra’s  sake. 

I®  Make  me^amortal  in  that  realm  where  dwells  the  King,  Vivas- 
van’s  Son, 

Where  is  the  secret  shrine  of  heaven,  where  are  those  waters 
young  and  fresh.  Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra’s  sake. 

1 Saryandvdn : a lake  in  the  Kurukshetra  district. 

2 Of  the  Quarters : of  the  four  regions  of  the  sky.  Arjika  land:  accord- 
8onSaW  country  of  the  Rijlkas.  Cf  VIII.  7.  29. 

, it w^om  P^janya  nursed : the  mighty  Soma-plant  whose 
been  Petered  by  the  God  of  the  rainy  cloud.  Sfirya's  Daughter: 
«or  *"alth.  Cf.  IX.  1.6.  Qandharvas:  guardians  of  the  heavenly 
See  Vol.  I.,  Index.  * 

ma^er  •'  the  Soma-presser,  or  the  institutor  of  the  sacrifioe 1 2 the 
Wer  (°f  the  rite)/— Wilson. 

°]  j Yama,  the  ruler  of  departed  spirits,  son  of  Vivasv&n.  See 


332 


THE  MOVE  DA, 


Wok  i 

9 Makemeimmort  ilin  that  realm  where  they  move  evenas  they  ljs 
In  the  third  sphere  of  inmost  heaven  where  lucid  worlds  a; 
full  of  light.  Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra’s  sake. 

] 0 Make  me  immortal  in  that  realm  of  eager  wish  and  strong  desir 
The  region  of  the  radiant  Moon,  where  food  and  full  deligl 
are  found.  Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra’s  sake, 
ll  Make  me  immortal  in  that  realm  where  happiness  and  trai 
sports,  where 

Joys  and  felicities  combine,  and  longing  wishes  are  fulfill# 
Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra’s  sake. 

HYMN  CX1V.  Soma  Pavamdm 

The  man  who  walketh  as  the  Laws  of  Indu  Pavam&na  bid, — 
Men  call  him  rich  in  children,  him,  0 Soma,  who  hath  met  th; 
thought.  Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra’s  sake. 

2 Kasyapa,  Rishi,  lifting  up  thy  voice  with  hymn-composers’  lauds 
Pay  reverence  to  King  Soma  born  the  Sovran  Ruler  of  thi 

plants.  Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra’s  sake. 

3 Seven  regions  have  their  several  Suns ; the  ministering  priests 

are  ^even ; 

Seven  are  the  Aditya  Deities, — with  these,  0 Soma,  guard  thou 
us.  Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra’s  sake. 

4 Guard  us  with  this  oblation  which,  King  Soma,  hath  been 

dressed  for  thee. 

Let  not  malignity  conquer  us,  let  nothing  evil  do  us  bam 
Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra’s  sake. 

9 Where  they  move  even  as  they  list : ‘where  action  is  unrestiaiued.’— Muir. 
‘ Wlieie  the  sun  wanders  at  will.’ — Wilson. 

10  0/  the  radiant  Moon : the  adjective  bmdhndsya,  of  the  ruddy  or  IrilliM 
stands  without  a substantive.  ‘Sun’  is  supplied  by  S&yaua.  ‘Dean'** 
tralenden.’ — Ludwig.  See  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologic,  I.,  390. 

As  regards  the  joys  of  the  departed,  referred  to  iu  stanzas  7 — 12._rroJf  , 
von  Roth  observes  (Jouru.  Amer.  Orient,  Soc.  iii.  343,  quoted  ^y  P1’1  l'  1 
0.  8.  Texts,  V.  307)  ‘ The  place  where  these  glorified  ones  are  hve  13  . v 7 
In  order  to  show  that  not  merely  an  outer  court  of  the  divine  dwellings 
set  apart  for  them,  the  highest  heaven,  the  midst  or  innermost  part  of  heav 
is  expressly  spoken  of  ns  their  seat.  This  is  tbefr  place  of  rest  ; an 
divine  splendour  is  not  disfigured  by  any  specification  of  particular  eau  ^ 
or  enjoyments,  such  as  those  with  which  other  religions  have  been  wo 
adorn  the  mansions  of  the  blest  ..  . There  they  are  happy  : the  language 
to  describe  their  condition  is  the.  same  with  which  is  denoted  the  moB  e 
felicity.’  

2 Kasyapa:  the  peer  of  the  hymn  addresses  himself.  > , y|#ti 

3 Seven  regions : the  regions  of  the  sky,  the  four  quarters  with  mterw  ^ 

points.  They  arc  sometimes  said  to  be  five,  Bix,  or  seven  in  num  • 
more  frequently  eight.  Aditya  Deities:  Varuua,  Mitra,  Airyatnan, 
Daksha,  Ansa,  and  perhaps  Dh&tar.  Other  enumerations  i are  j, 

their  number  is  sometimes  said  to  be  eight  See  M.  Muller,  VtnM  y 

p.  252f  (Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  XXXI I). 


II io ii  hath  the  Mighty  risen  before  the  dawning,  and  come  to 
us  with  light  from  out  the  darkness. 

Fair-shapcn  Agni  with  white-shining  splendour  hath  filled  at 
birth  all  human  habitations. 

2 Thou,  being  bom,  art  Child  of  Earth  and  Heaven,  parted 

among  the  plants  in  beauty,  Agni  ! 

The  glooms  of  night  thou,  Brilliant  Babe,  subduest,  and  art 
come  forth,  loud  roaiiug,  from  thy  Mothers. 

3 Here,  being  manifested,  lofty  Vishnu,  full  wise,  protects  his 

own  supremest  station. 

When  they  have  offered  in  his  mouth  their  sweet  milk,  to 
him  with  one  accord  they  sieg  forth  piaises. 

4 Thence  bearing  food  the  Mothers  come  to  meet  thee,  with 

food  for  thee  who  givest  food  its  increase. 

These  in  their  altered  form  again  thou  meetest.  Thou  art 
Invoking  Priest  in  homes  of  mortals. 

5 Priest  of  the  holy  rite,  with  car  that  glitters,  refulgent  Ban- 

ner of  each  act  of  worship, 

Shaimg  in  every  God  through  might  and  glory,  even  Agni 
Guest  of  men  I summon  hither. 

6 So  Agni  stands  on  earth's  most  central  station,  invested  in 

wcJl-decorated  garments. 

horn,  red  of  hue,  where  men  pour  out  libations,  0 King,  as 
great  High  Priest  bring  the  Gods  hither. 

^ 0\cr  the  earth  and  over  heaven,  0 Agni,  thou,  Son,  hast  over 
spread  above  thy  Parents. 

0lU0>  Yonthfullest ! to  hose  who  long  to  meet  thee,  and 
hither  bring  the  Gods,  0 Mighty  Victor. 

1 The  Mighty:  Agni.  ~ “ ~ 

g ^on9  the  plants : according  to  S&yana,  in  the  fire-sticks. 

"Shippers  * ^ *orm  °*  Ag n i who  is  his  manifestation  on  earth.  They : 

n ; the  plants  wh'ch  nourish  life.  In  their  altered,  form:  a» 

5 l^  Wh!ch  **  fire>  consumes. 

Gods  ^ *W  ’ ^ecause  as  the  bearer  of  men’s  oblations  supports  all 


384 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK, 


HYMN  IT.  Ag 

Gladden  the  yearning  Gods,  0 thou  Most  Youthful : brii 
them,  0 Lord  of  Seasons,  knowing  seasons, 

With  all  the  Priests  Celestial,  0 Agni.  Best  worshipper  a 
thou  of  all  Invokers. 

2 Thine  is  the  Herald’s,  thine  the  Cleanser’s  offioe,  thinker  a 

thou,  wealth-giver,  true  to  Order. 

Let  us  with  Svahi  offer  up  oblations,  and  Agni,  worthy  Go 
pay  the  Cods  worship. 

3 To  the  Cods’  pathway  have  we  travelled,  ready  to  execu 

what  work  we  may  accomplish. 

Let  Agni,  for  he  knows,  complete  the  worship.  He  is  tl 
' Priest : let  him  fix  rites  and  seasons. 

4 When  we  most  ignorant  neglect  the  statutes  of  you,  0 Deiti 

with  whom  is  knowledge, 

Wise  Agni  shall  correct  our  faults  and  failings,  skilled  i 
assign  each  Cod  his  fitting  season. 

5 When,  weak  in  mind,  of  feeble  understanding,  mortals  bethin 

them  not  of  sacrificing, 

Then  shall  the  prudent  and  discerning  Agni  worship  the  God: 
best  worshipper,  in  season. 

6 Because  the  Father  hath  produced  time,  Leader  of  all  ou 

solemn  rites,  their  brilliant  Banner: 

So  win  by  worship  pleasant  homes  abounding  in  heroes,  an 
rich  food  to  nourish  all  men. 

7 Thou  whom  the  Heaven  and  Earth,  thou  whom  the  Water' 

and  Tvashtar,  maker  of  fair  things,  created, 

Well  knowing,  all  along  the  Fathers’  pathway,  shine  vritl 
resplendent  light,  enkindled,  Agni. 

HYMN  II I.  Agni 

0 King,  the  potent  and  terrific  envoy,  kindled  for  strength,  a 
manifest  in  beauty. 

He  shines,  all-knowing,  with  his  lofty  splendour : chasing 
black  Night  he  comes  with  white  rayed  Morning.  

1 Seasons:  the  proper  times  of  worship.  Priests  Celestial : Agni  being  tht 

Hotar,  the  Asvins  the  Adlivaryus,  Tvashtar  the  Agnldh,  and  Mitrft 
Upavaktar.  AsvalAyana,  as  cited  by  SAyana,  gives  a different  enumeiatw 
See  Wilson,  note.  _ , .. 

2 The  Herald  is  the  Hotar  or  invoking  priest : the  Cleanser  is  the  * j| 
Purifier,  the  assistant  of  the  Brahman.  Svdhd  : an  exclamation  = Ave  ! or 

3 The  Gods'  pathway  : ‘ the  path  that  leads  to  the  gods  ’ — Wilson. 

<J  The  father : PrajApati  ; or  the  insfcitutor  of  the  sacrifice. — SAyapa. 

7 The  Fathers'  pathway  : the  way  that  leadg  to  the  home  of  the  Man 

Ancestral  Spirits.  _ nr.fh  m- 

1 0 Kitty  : Ludwig  takes  vdjan  here  as  the  nominative  case,  wn  ^ 
rayed  Morning:  I follow  Ludwig  in  taking  rusatlm  as  inatrunisuw 
rusatvdm. 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


385 


jYMN  L] 


2 Having  o’ercome  the  glimmering  Black  with  beauty,  and 

bringing  forth  the  Diime,  the  Great  Sire’s  Daughter, 

Holding  aloft  the  radiant  light  of  JSurya,  as  messenger  of  heav 
en  lie  shines  with  treasures. 

3 Attendant  on  the  Blessed  Dame  the  BlessM  hath  come  : the 

Lover  follovveth  his  Sister. 

Agni,  far-spreading  with  conspicuous  lustre,  hath  compassed 
Night  with  whitely-shming  garments. 

4 His  goings-forth  kindle  as  ’twere  high  voices,  the  goings  of  the 

auspicious  Friend  of  Agni. 

The  rays,  the  bright  beams  of  the  strong-jawed,  mighty, 
adorable  Steer  are  visible  as  he  cometh. 

5 Whose  radiant  splendours  flow,  like  sounds,  about  us,  his  who 

is  lofty,  brilliant,  and  effulgent, 

Who  reaches  heaven  with  best  and  brightest  lustres,  sportive 
and  piercing  even  to  the  summit. 

6 His  powers  whoso  chariot  fellies  gleam  and  glitter  have  loudly 

ro.ired  wlulo,  as  with  teams,  he  hasted, 
lie,  the  most  Godlike,  far-extending  envoy,  shines  with  flames 
ancient,  resonant,  whitely-shining. 

I  So  bring  us  ample  wealth  : seat  thee  as  envoy  of  the  two 
youthful  Matrons,  Earth  and  Heaven. 

Let  Agni  rapid  with  his  rapid  horses,  impetuous  with  impe- 
tuous Steeds,  come  hither. 


IIYMN  IV. 


Agni. 


To  thee  will  I send  praise  and  bring  oblation,  as  thou  hast 
merited  lauds  when  we  invoked  thee. 

A fountain  m the  desert  art  thou,  Agni,  0 Ancient  King,  to 
man  who  fain  would  worship. 

2 Thou  unto  whom  resort  the  gathered  people,  as  the  kine  seek 

the  warm  stall,  0 Most  Youthful, 

Thou  art  the  messenger  of  Gods  and  mortals,  and  goest  glori- 
ous with  thy  light  between  them. 

3 Making  thee  grow  as  ’twere  some  noble  Infant,  thy  Mother 

nurtures  thee  with  sw.  et  affection. 

Over  the  desert  slopes  thou  passes t longing,  and  seekest,  like 
somo  beast  set  free,  thy  fodder. 

2 Glimmering  Black : dark  night,  faintly  lighted  by  stars.  The  Great  Sire  » 
yr  Dawn,  daughter  of  Dyaua  or  Heaven, 
i £,  ^ter  ' Agni  who  appears  together  with  Dawn, 
i ■ j e i'ue  is  almost  unintelligible.  ‘The  blazing  flames  of  that  mighty 
bs’ndo  nut  (deter)  his  adorers.’-  Wilson. 


1 To 


Man : 


to  Pfiru. 


ooo  m/s  hi  mm  8 \jf  L &O0R  } 

4 Foolish  arc  we,  0 Wise  and  free  from  error : verily,  Agni,  th0 

dost  know  thy  grandeur. 

There  lies  the  form  : he  moves,  and  licks,  and  swallows,  ant 
as  llouse-Lord,  kisses  the  Youthful  Maiden. 

5 He  rises  ever  fresh  in  ancient  fuel  : smoke-bannered,  gray,  \ 

makes  the  wood  his  dwelling. 

No  swimmer,  Steer,  he  presses  through  the  waters,  and  to  h 
place  accordant  mortals  bear  him. 

6 Like  thieves  who  risk  their  lives  and  haunt  the  forest,  tl 

twain  with  their  ten  girdles  have  secured  him. 

This  is  a new  hymn  meant  for  thee,  0 Agin  : yoke  as  it  wei 
thy  car  with  parts  that  glitter. 

7 Homage  and  prayer  are  thine,  O Jatavedas,  and  this  my  son 

shall  evermore  exalt  thee. 

Agni,  piotect  our  children  and  descendants,  and  guard  wit 
ever-wdtehful  care  our  bodies. 

HYMN  V.  Agn 

His  only  is  the  Sea,  holder  of  treasures:  born  many  a tun 
he  views  the  hearts  within  us. 

He  hides  him  in  the  secret  couple’s  bosom.  The  Bird  dwell 
in  the  middle  of  the  fountain. 

2 Inhabiting  one  dwelling-place  in  common,  strong  Stallions  ant 

the  Mares  have  come  together. 

The  sages  guard  the  seat  of  Holy  Order,  and  keep  the  highea 
names  concealed  within  them. 

3 The  Holy  Pair,  of  wondrous  power,  have  coupled  : they  formec 

the  Infant,  they  who  bred  produced  him, 

The  central  point  of  all  that  moves  and  moves  not,  the  whili 
they  wove  the  Sage’s  thread  with  insight. 

4 The  form ; the  Ahavanfya  fire.  The  Youthful  Maiden  : according  tc 
Silyana,  either  the  mixed  oblation,  oi  the  young  earth  as  compared  with  hK 
witheicd  plants. 

(5  The  twain  : the  two  arms,  with  their  grasping  fingers  which  pi oduce  to 
by  agitation  of  the  fire-stick. 

1 He  : Agni  as  the  Sun.  The  secret  couple's  bosom, : the  meaning  is  uncer 
tain.  The  fire-sticks  in  which  Agni  is  latent  may  be  intended.  ‘He  wait* 
on  the  cloud  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  hidden  (firmament).’ — Wilson.  1" 
Bird:  the  Sun.  The  fountain  : the  source  of  light  in  the  east. 

2 Strong  Stallions  ■ pei  haps  the  flames  of  the  Sun.  Mares  : waters  of  ® 

firmament.  The  highest  names  : of  Agni,  such  as  JfHavedas  and  VaisvAnafl 
Concealed  within  them  • in  their  secret  hearts,  for  worship.  . 

3 The  Holy  Pair:  Heaven  and  Earth.  The  Infant : Agni.  The  while  W 
wove:  viyanta h in  the  text  is  unintelligible,  and  I follow  Wallis  hJ.reftfj 
vayantt  in  its  stead.  The  Sage's  thread;  the  series  of  sacrifices  to  which  AJ® 
is  entitled. 


TBE  ElQVEDA. 


S8T 

4 Fof  tracks  of  Order  and  refreshing  viands  attend  from  ancient 

times  the  goodly  Infant. 

Wearing  him  as  a mantle,  Earth  and  Heaven  grow  strong  by 
food  of  pleasant  drink  and  fatness. 

5 lie,  calling  loudly  to  the  Seven  red  Sisters,  hath,  skilled  in 

sweet  drink,  brought  them  to  be  looked  on. 

Ho,  born  of  old,  in  middle  air  hath  halted,  and  sought  and 
found  the  covering  robe  of  Pushan. 

6 Seven  are  the  pathways  which  the  wise  have  fashioned ; to 

one  of  these  may  come  the  troubled  mortal. 

He  standeth  in  the  dwelling  of  the  Highest,  a Pillar,  on  sure 
ground  where  paths  are  parted. 

7 Not  Being,  Being  in  the  highest  heaven,  in  Aditi’s  bosom  and 

in  Daksha’s  birthplace, 

Is  Agni,  our  first-born  of  Holy  Order,  the  Milch-cow  and  the 
Bull  in  life’s  beginning. 

HYMN  VI.  Agni. 

This  is  that  Agni,  he  by  whose  protection,  favour,  and  help 
the  singer  is  successful  \ 

Who  with  the  noblest  flames  of  glowing  fuel  comes  forth  en- 
compassed with  far-spreading  lustre. 


5 The  Seven  red  Sisters : the  seven  tongues  or  flames  of  Agni,  called  kdlt, 
rdli,  etc.— Sfiyana.  And  found  the  covering  robe  of  Pdshan : and  hath 
appeared  in  the  form  of  Pushan  or  the  Sun. 

6 Pathways : long  lines  of  light.  The  Wise ; the  Fathers.  The  troubled 
V'tal:  the  man  who  is  longing  for  daybreak  may  approach  the  pathway  of 
[ht  Wallis  translates  the  second  line  differently  : — ‘ The  support  of  life  in 
e home  of  the  highest,  at  the  divergence  of  the  ways,  standeth  on  sure 
ouud  ’ I/e  : apparently  Agni  as  the  Sun,  to  whom  the  troubled  or  sinful 
*n  comes  for  light  or  forgiveness.  Pillar:  support  and  stay  of  the  uni- 
!r8ej  like  the  Skambha  of  Atharva-veda,  X.  7.  Where  paths  are  parted: 
here  ends  the  dark  road  which  the  Sun  travels  by  night,  and  the  bright 
Mi  of  his  daily  course  begins. 

7 Not  Being,  Being:  nonexistent,  existent.  ( asachcha  sachcha,  ‘both 
evolved  and  evolved,’  identifying  Agni  with  the  first  cause  and  first  effect, 

. a reference  to  such. texts  as  Asad  evarn  ulam  agra  dsit  ‘the  non  existent 
ist^nt  (or  unevolved)  was  verily  before  this  (creation) ' — Wilson,  from 
tyapa  Aditi  = Svvafiig}  Daksha  = lvlpytl(l'  Heie  Agni  is  lopiesented  as 
rajapati  who  as  a yet  undeveloped  embryo  is  at  the  same  time  both  male 
'finale. — Ludwig.  Or  Daksha  may  be  the  Sun  and  Aditi  the  Earth.  ‘In 
c Agui  is  identified  with  all  things.  These  latter  hymns  to  Agni  are  veiy 
;*CU!ei,:  the  notions  are  mystical;  many  of  the  terms  are  unusual,  or  are 
filBoii  » Hn<*  construction  is  singularly  elliptical  and  loose.’ — 

This  Hymn  has  been  wholly  translated,  with  comments,  by  Wallis.  Sed 
0im ology  of  the  Rigveda , pp.  48 — 50. 


3S8 


THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  X. 


2 Agni,  the  Holy  One,  the  everlasting,  who  shines  far  beaming 

with  celestial  splendours ; 

He  who  hath  come  unto  his  friends  with  friendship,  like  a 
fleet  steed  who  never  trips  or  stumbles. 

3 He  who  is  Lord  of  all  divine  oblation,  shared  by  all  living 

men  at  break  of  morning, 

Agni  to  whom  our  offerings  are  devoted,  in  whom  rests  he 
whose  car,  through  might,  is  scatheless. 

4 Increasing  by  his  strength,  while  lauds  content  him,  with 

easy  flight  unto  the  Gods  he  travels. 

Agni  the  cheerful  Priest,  best  Sacriticer,  balms  with  his  tongue 
the  Gods  with  whom  he  mingles. 

5 With  songs  and  adorations  bring  ye  hither  Agni  who  stirs 

himself  at  dawn  like  Indra, 

Whom  sages  laud  with  hymns  as  Jataved.is  of  those  who  wield 
the  sacrificial  ladle. 

6 In  whom  all  goodly  treasures  meet  together,  even  as  steeds 

and  riders  for  the  booty. 

Inclining  hither  bring  us  help,  0 Agni,  even  assistance  most 
desired  by  Indra. 

7 Yea,  at  thy  birth,  when  thou  hadst  sat  in  glory,  thou,  Agni, 

wast  the  aim  of  invocations. 

The  God.  came  near,  obedient  to  thy  summons,  and  thus  at- 
tained their  rank  as  chief  Protectors. 

HYMN  VII.  Agni, 


O Agni,  shared  by  all  men  living  bring  us  good  luck  for 
sacrifice  from  earth  and  heaven. 

With  us  be  thine  intelligence,  Wonder-Worker!  Protect  us, 
God,  with  thy  far-reaching  blessings. 

2 These  hymns  brought  forth  for  thee,  O Agni,  land  thee  f»r 
bounteous  gifts,  with  cattle  and  with  horses.  


3 The  exact  meaning  "of  the  second  line  is  uncertain  and  in  whow  (tl>« 
sacriticer),  whose  sacrifice  is  undisturbed  by  his  foes,  throws  his  choice 

tl°5  A tdawT:  with  Grassmann  I take  uarXm  here  to  be  a locative.  sa.VH,’a 


5 At  dawn  : witn  urassmann  x «•*■*«*  ~ — A^^wto 

explains  it  as  bhogdndm  utsrdiinam,  the  bestowe.  of  enjoyments.  According 
Ludwig’s  interpretation,  the  translation  of  the  first  line  would  be  s Witji 
and  adorations  bring  ye  hither  the  Lord  of  mommy  shine,  the  qinveniifc 

6 Riders  : sdpttvantah:  the  word  properly  means  possessed  of  hoi  > or 
is  applicable  todiivers  as  well  as  riders.  For  the  booty : to  win  the  sj  > 
to  guard  it  from  others. 

1 Thine  intelligence : the  meaning  of  praketaih  heus  is  n ot  clear. 
translates  it  by  * indications  (of  favour)  ’ ; Ludwig  by  wishes  , 
mann  by  ‘light.’ 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


389 


HYHS  8.] 

Good  Lord,  when  man  from  thee  hath  gained  enjoyment,  by 
hymns,  0 nobly-born,  hath  he  obtained  it. 

3 Agni  I deem  my  Kinsman  and  my  Father,  count  him  my 

Brother  and  my  Friend  for  ever. 

I honour  as  the  face  of  lofty  Agni  in  heaven  the  bright  and 
holy  light  of  Stirya. 

4 effectual,  Agni,  are  our  prayers  for  profit.  He  whom,  at  home, 

thou,  Priest  for  ever,  guardest 

Is  rich  in  food,  drawn  by  red  steeds,  and  holy : by  day  and 
night  to  him  shall  all  be  pleasant. 

5 Men  with  their  arms  have  generated  Agni,  helpful  as  some  kind 

friend,  adorned  with  splendours, 

And  stal dished  as  Invoker  mid  the  people  the  ancient  Priest, 
the  sacrifice’s  lover. 

6 Worship,  thyself,  0 God,  the  Gods  in  heaven : what,  void  of 

knowledge,  shall  the  fool  avail  thee  ? 

As  thou,  0 God,  hast  worshipped  Gods  by  seasons,  so,  nobly- 
born  ! to  thine  own  self  pay  worship. 

7 Agni,  be  thou  our  Guardian  and  Protector : bestow  upon  us 

life  and  vital  vigour. 

Accept,  0 Mighty  One,  the  gifts  we  offer,  and  with  unceasing 
care  protect  our  bodies. 

HYMN  Yin.  Agni. 

Agni  advances  with  his  lofty  banner : the  Bull  is  bellowing  to 
the  earth  and  heavens. 

He  hath  attained  the  sky’s  supremest  limits : the  Steer  hath 
waxen  in  the  lap  of  waters. 

2 The  Bull,  the  youngling  with  the  hump,  hath  frolicked,  the 
strong  and  never-ceasing  Calf  hath  bellowed. 

Bringing  our  offerings  to  the  Gods’  assembly,  he  moves  as 
Chief  in  his  own  dwelling  places. 


® The  second  line  is  remarkable  as  a direct  declaration  of  the  relationship 
and  Siirya. — Ludwig. 

? Ee  thou  our  Guardian  and  Protector : aritd,  says  S&yana,  is  a protector 
)ln  °bvious  dangers  and  gopit  a preserver  from  perils  that  are  unseen, 

} Advances : through  the  firmament.  His  lofty  banner:  the  lightning. 
a<er» ' <>f  the  firmament. 

2 ^ever-ceasing : asremA f ; according  to  S&yana,  ‘ undecaying.’  * Glorious.’-— 


890 


THE  HYMNS  OF  [ BOOR  * 


3 Him  who  hath  grasped  his  Parents’  head,  they  stablished  at 
sacrifice  as  a wave  of  heavenly  lustre. 

In  his  swift  flight  the  red  Dawns  borne  by  horses  refresh  their 
bodies  in  the  home  of  Order. 


4 For,  Vasu,  thou  precedost  every  Morning,  and  still  hast  been 
the  Twins’  illuminator. 

For  sacrifice,  seven  places  thou  retainest  while  for  thine  own 
self  thou  engendercst  Mitra. 


5 Thou  art  the  Eye  and  Guard  of  mighty  Order,  and  Varuna 

when  to  sacrifice  thou  comest. 

Thou  art  the  Waters’  Child,  0 Jatavedas,  envoy  of  him  whose 
offering  thou  acceptest. 

6 Thou  art  the  Leader  of  the  rite  and  region,  to  which  with  thine 

auspicious  teamB  thou  tendest. 

Thy  light-bestowing  head  to  heaven  thou  liftest,  making  thy 
tongue  the  oblation-bearer,  Agni. 

7 Through  his  wise  insight  Trita  in  the  cavern,  seeking  as  ever 

the  Chief  Sire’s  intention, 

Carefully  tended  in  his  Parents’  bosom,  calling  the  weapons 
kin,  goes  forth  to  combat. 

8 Well-skilled  to  use  the  weapons  of  his  Father,  Aptya,  urged 

on  by  Indra,  fought  tho  battle. 

Then  Trita  slew  the  foe  seven-rayed,  three-headed,  and  freed 
the  cattle  of  the  Son  of  Tvashtar. 


3 His  Parents'  hccul : the  head  or  forehead  of  Heaven  and  Earth,  or  of  the  ‘w 
fire-sticks.  The  red  Dawns  ■ or  the  flames,  according  to  Sdyana.  There  is 
substantive  in  the  text.  The  home  of  Order  • probably  tho  bun, : if : the  Da* 
are  spoken  of  ; and  the  place  of  law-ordained  sacrifice  according  to  Stya?» 

explanation.  ulum{nator  . fighter-up  of  day  and  night,  that  ib,  of  the  erf 
of  night,  or  very  early  morning.  But  see  H.llebrandt,  Vavu^  «**  **' 
p 116.  Seven  places:  seven  altars  for  the  sacrificial  fire.  Mitr  . 

5 Varuna:  King  and  Governor.  , firmament. 

6 And  region:  thou  knowest,  and  canst  show  the  way  through,  t ^ 

7 In  the  cavern:  in  the  secret  depth  of  the  firmament  ( 

Chief  Sire’s  intention : wishing  to  carry  out  the  design  Ind™  h P_Wil»o»- 
Dyaus  or  Dyu.  His  Parents:  ‘the  parental  heaven  andeart^  w 
Calling  the  weapons  kin : calling  the  weapons,  » e.  t 'e  loolte  which 
duced  from  tho  sky,  akin,  simply  means  claiming  them **  °, _ftrjsui).- 

father  Dyu  as  they  are  in  the  next  stanza  spoken  of  as  paternal  (p  y 
Macdonell,  J.  R-  A.  S.,  July,  1893,  p.  428  ^ 

8 Of  his  Father:  belonging  to  the  Chief  Sire  of  stanza  7.  0r 

■necial  enemy  of  Trita  is  Trisiraa  the  son  of  Tvashtar,  called  . . by 

tL  Multiform.  The  cattle  of  the  Son  of  Tvashtar : the  cows  impr 

him,  the  showers  obstructed  by  the  fiend.  see  Muir. 

For  the  legends  founded  on  the  last  three  stanzas  *h  ®. J.  I1 
0.  S.  Texts,  V.  PP.  229  -233.  See  also  Bergaigne,  La  Rehgwn  vw  x 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


891 


HYMS  10  ] 

9 Lord  of  the  brave,  Tndra  cleft  him  in  pieces  who  sought  to 
gain  much  strength  and  deemed  him  mighty. 

He  smote  his  throe  heads  from  his  body,  seizing  the  cattle  of 
the  omniform  Son  of  Tvashtar. 

HYMN  IX.  Waters. 

Yu,  Waters,  are  beneficent:  so  help  ye  us  to  energy 
That  we  may  look  on  great  delight. 

2 (live  us  a portion  of  the  sap,  the  most  auspicious  that  ye  have, 
bike  mothers  in  their  longing  love. 

3 To  you  we  gladly  come  for  him  to  whose  abode  ye  send  us  on  ; 
And,  Waters,  give  us  procreant  strength. 

4 The  Waters  be  to  us  for  drink,  Goddesses  for  our  aid  and  bliss  : 
Let  them  stream  to  us  health  and  strength. 

5 I beg  the  Floods  to  give  us  balm,  these  Queens  who  rule  o’er 

precious  things, 

And  have  supreme  control  of  men. 

6 Within  the  Waters — Soma  thus  hath  told  me — dwell  all  balms 

that  heal, 

And  Agni,  ho  who  blcsseth  all. 

7 0 Waters,  teem  with  medicine  to  keep  my  body  safe  from  harm, 
So  that  1 long  may  see  the  Sun. 

8 Whatever  sin  is  found  in  me,  whatever  evil  I have  wrought, 

If  I have  lied  or  falsely  sworn,  Waters,  remove  it  far  from  me. 

9 The  Waters  1 this  day  have  sought,  and  to  their  moisture 

have  we  come : 

0 Agni,  rich  in  milk,  come  thou,  and  with  thy  splendour  cover  me. 

HYMN  X.  Varna.  Yam!. 

Fain  would  I win  my  friend  to  kindly  friendship.  So  may  the 
S.igc,  come  through  the  air’s  wide  ocean, 

Remembering  the  earth  and  days  to  follow,  obtain  a son,  the 
issue  of  his  father.  « 

1 Great  delight : according  to  the  scholiast,  meaning  perfect  knowledge  of 
Brahma.  See  Wilson’s  note. 

3 The  meaning  of  the  stanza  is  obscure.  It  appears  to  have  been  recited 
by  the  priest  at  the  consecration  of  a new  house. 

'the  first  three  stanzas  are  to  be  repeated  by  Br&hmans  at  their  morning 
ablutions.  See  Colebrooke’s  Essays,  Essay  I.  On  the  Rcliyious  Ceremonies  of 
Me  Hindus.  See  also  Lainuan,  Sanskrit  Raider,  p.  370 
6 Stauzas  6—9  aie  repeated  from  Book  I.  23.  20—23. 

Ya,nia  and  Yarnt,  son  and  daughter  of  VivasvAn,  are  the  Ilishis  as  well  as 
tho  deities  of  the  hynm  which  is  a dialogue  between  them. 

^ma  and  Yami  are,  says  von  Roth,  ‘as  their  names  denote,  twin  brother 
aQ<l  sister,  and  are  the  first  human  pair,  the  originators  of  the  race.  As  the 


392  TUE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  z 

2 Thy  friend  loves  not  the  friendship  which  considers  her  who i8 

near  in  kindred  as  a stranger. 

Sons  of  the  mighty  Asura,  the  Heroes,  supporters  of  the 
heavens,  see  far  around  them. 

3 Yea,  this  the  Immortals  seek  of  thee  with  longing,  progeny  of 

the  sole  existing  moitnl. 

Then  let  thy  soul  and  mine  be  knit  together,  and  as  a loving 
husband  take  thy  consort. 

4 Shall  we  do  now  what  we  ne’er  did  aforetime  ? we  who  spake 

righteously  now  talk  impurely  ? 

Gandharva  in  the  floods,  the  Dame  of  Waters  - such  is  our 
bond,  such  our  most  lofty  kinship. 

5 Even  in  the  womb  God  T.aditar,  Vivificr,  shaping  all  forms, 

Greater,  made  us  consorts. 

None  violates  his  holy  ordinances  : that  we  are  his  the  heavens 
and  earth  acknowledge. 

G Who  knows  that  earliest  day  whereof  thou  speak est  HVlio 
hath  beheld  it  1 Who  can  here  declare  it  1 

Hebrew  conception  closely  connected  the  parents  of  mankind  by  making  the 
woman  formed  fiom  a poition  of  the  body  of  the  man,  so  by  the  Indian 
tradition  they  are  placed  in  the  relationship  of  twins.  This  thought  is  laid 
by  the  hymn  in  question  in  the  mouth  of  Yarn!  herstdf,  when  she  is  made  to 
say  : ‘ Even  in  the  womb  the  Creator  made  us  for  husband  and  wife.’  ’ Profes- 
sor Muller,  on  the  other  hand,  says  (Lectures  on  the  Science  of  Language, 
second  series,  p 510) : ‘ There  is  a curious  dialogue  between  her  (Yami)  and 
her  brother,  where  she  (the  night)  implores  her  brother  (the  day)  to  make  her 
bis  wife,  and  where  he  declines  her  offer,  ‘because,’  as  he  says,  ‘they  have 
called  it  a sin  that  a brother  should  marry  his  sister.”  Again,  p.  521,  ‘There 
is  not  a single  word  in  the  Veda  pointing  to  Yama  and  Yaml  as  the  first  couple 
of  mortals,  the  Indian  Adam  and  Eve  . ..  If  Yamahad  been  the  first  created 
of  men,  surely  the  Vedic  poets,  in  speaking  of  him,  could  not  have  passed  tins 
over  in  silence.’  See,  however,  the  passage  from  the  Atbarva-veda,  XVIII. 
3,  13,  to  be  quoted  further  on.  [Reverence  ye  with  an  oblation  Yauia,  the  Min 
of  Vivasvat,  the  assembler  of  men,  who  was  the  fust  of  men  that  died, 
the  first  that  depaited  to  this  (celestial)  world].’  Muir,  0.8.  Texts,  V . p. 
288.  Yama  as  the  fir-*t  man  may  peihaps  be,  as  Prof.  Max  Muller  holds,  i 

Inter  phase  of  leligion.s  thought.’ 

1 Yaml  speaks  The  Sage:  red/dh  : Yama.  whom  she  wishes  to  give  her  a 

son.  Come:  SAvana  explains  the  masculine  participle  jaganvitn  by  the  femi- 
nine gatavatl,  that  is,  I,  Yarn!  who  have  come.  The  earth  : which,  otherwise, 
will  remain  without  human  inhabitants.  » 

2 Yama  replies.  .4  strait  per : of  a different  family,  and  so  a lawful  wife-  ^ 0 
of  the  mighty  Asura : the  spies  or  sentinels  spoken  of  in  stanza  8. 

3 Yaml  speaks.  . 

4 Yama  replies.  Gandharva:  VivaavAn  or  the  Sun.  In  the  floods:  in  _ 
waters  of  the  firmament.  The  Dame  of  Waters:  fWnnyu.  ‘ His  aqueous  • 
— Muir.  Such  in  our  hand : these  are  our  parents.  But  see  Ludwig,  tcoe 
nenesten  Arheiten,  u.  9.  w,  p.  107. 

5 Vat  tit  HnMilcti. 


JIYMN  10].  THE  MOVED  A.  S93 

Great  is  the  Law  of  Varuna  and  Mitra.  What,  wanton  t wilt 
thou  say  to  men  to  tempt  them  1 

7 I,  Yami.  am  possessed  by  love  of  Yama,  that  I may  rest  on  the 

same  couch  beside  him. 

I as  a wife  would  yield  me  to  my  husband.  Like  car-wheels 
let  us  speed  to  meet  each  other. 

8 They  stand  not  still,  they  never  close  their  eyelids,  those 

sentinels  of  Gods  who  wander  round  us. 

Not  me— go  quickly,  wanton,  with  another,  and  hasten  like  a 
chariot  wheel  to  meet  him. 

9 May  Surya  3 eye  with  days  and  nights  endow  him,  and  ever 

may  his  light  spread  out  before  him. 

In  heaven  and  earth  the  kindred  Pair  commingle.  On  Yami 
lie  the  unbrotherly  act  of  Yama. 

10  Sure  there  will  come  succeeding  times  when  brothers  and 

sisters  will  do  acts  unmeet  for  kinsfolk. 

Not  me,  0 fair  one, — seek  another  husband,  and  make  thine 
arm  a pillow  for  thy  consort. 

11  Is  he  a brother  when  no  lord  is  left  her  1 Is  she  a sister  when 

Destruction  cometh  ? 

Forced  by  my  love  these  many  words  I utter.  Come  near, 
and  hold  me  in  thy  close  embraces. 

12  I will  not  fold  mine  arms  about  thy  body  : they  call  it  sin 

when  one  comes  near  his  sister. 

Not  me, — prepare  thy  pleasures  with  another:  thy  brother 
seeks  not  this  from  thee,  0 fair  one. 


6 Yama  replies.  To  tempt  them  : the  meaning  of  itchyd  is  uncertain.  The 
5 P.  Lexicon  explains  it  by  ‘deceitfully.’  ‘ Falsely.’— Grassmann.  ‘What 
wye^t  thou,  who  punishest  men  with  hell  ? ’ — Wilson. 

7 Same  couch  : see  Benfey,  Vedica  und  Verwandtcs , pp  39  — 42,  for  a difter- 
!ut  explanation  of  samdnt f y6nan. 

8 Yuma  replies.  Sentinels  of  Gods:  recording  angels  who  watch  men’s 

ictums. 

9 Yami  speaks  The  meaning  seems  to  be  : if  there  be  any  guilt  let  me 
e it  upon  myself,  and  let  not  Yama’s  life  be  shortened  by  way  of  punish* 

went.  The  kindred  Pair  : Day  and  Night. 

10  Yama  replies.  ‘ Make  thine  arm  a pillow.'— Wilson. 

U Yami  speaks.  De&tmction  : Nirriti  ; the  utter  extinction  of  the  human 
niff  + The  meaning  is,  a true  brother  will  not  let  his  sifter  lack  a husband, 
ft  true  sister  will  not  let  her  brother  lack  a wife.’ — Wibou’s  Translation, 
Star's  note. 

12  Yama  replies. 


394  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  X, 

13  Alas  ! thou  art  indeed  a weakling,  Yama  ; we  find  in  thee  u0 

trace  of  heart  or  spirit. 

As  round  the  tree  the  woodbine  clings,  another  will  cling 
about  thee  girt  as  with  a girdle.  0 

14  Embrace  another,  Yami ; let  another,  even  as  the  woodbine 

rings  the  tree,  enfold  thee 

Win  thou  his  heart  and  let  him  win  thy  fancy,  and  he  shall 
form  with  thee  a blest  alliance. 


HYMN  XL 


Agni, 


Tiie  Bull  hath  yielded  for  the  Bull  the  milk  of  heaven  : the 
Son  of  Adi ti  can  never  be  deceived. 

According  to  his  wisdom  Varuna  knoweth  all : may  he,  the 
Holy,  hallow  times  for  sacritice. 

2 Gandharvi  spake : may  she,  the  Lady  of  the  flood,  amid  the 
river’s  roaring  leave  my  heart  untouched. 

May  Aditi  accomplish  all  that  we  desire,  and  may  our  eldest 
Brother  tell  us  this  as  Chief. 


3 Yea,  even  this  blessed  Morning,  rich  in  store  of  food,  splendid, 
with  heavenly  lustre,  hath  shone  out  for  man, 

Since  they,  as  was  the  wish  of  yearning  Gods,  brought  forth 
that  yearning  Agni  for  the  assembly  as  the  Priest. 


13  Yarn!  speaks.  | 

SAy ana's  interpretation  of  this  difficult  hymn  differs  in  many  places  from 
that  which  I have  adopted,  and  Wilson's  Translation  should  be  consulted  for 
the  views  of  the  gre.it  Indian  Commentate  and  the  Pandits  of  his  tiin<\  The 
hymn  has  been  tiamlitmated,  translated,  and  annotated  by  Dr  Muir,  0 8. 
Texts,  V.  288 — 291.  It  has  also  been  translated  by  the  authors  of  the  Sic 
benzig  Liedcrt  and  fully  di-eusscd  by  Di  J Ehni  in  Der  Vcdische  Aiytliusdet 
Yama.  fcsee  also  llillebrandt,  Vcdische  Mythologie , I.  p.  495. 

The  subject  of  the  hymn  is  the  origin  and  institution  of  sacrifice,  first  j 
established  by  Agni  under  the  authority  of  Varuna,  who  must  be  regarded  as  j 
the  deity  of  the  first  otanza. 

1 The  Bull:  the  mighty  Soma.  For  the  Bull:  for  mighty  Varuna.  The 

mill:  of  heaven  : the  divine  Soma  juice,  to  be  used  at  sacrifice.  The  Son  of 
Aditi  • Varuna.  According  to  his  wisdom  : yathd  dhiyet : the  two  words  tnken 
together  as  an  adverbial  phrase.  According  to  S-lyana,  it  is  Agni  who  nnlk9 
the  streams  of  prosperity  from  heaven  for  the  worshipper.  I have  generally 
followed  Piscbel’s  interpretation  of  the  first  five  stanzas  ( Vedische  Sludien , l. 
pp  188,  189).  . 

2 Gandharvi : said  to  be  the  daughter  of  Surabhi  (one  of  the  daughters') 
Daks  ha),  and  the  mother  of  the  race  of  horses.  Here  she  appears  to  be  j111 
Apsaras  or  water-nymph,  haunting  the  banks  of  rivers  and  practising  ti® 
seductive  arts  of  a siren.  The  meaning  seems  to  be,  let  no  disturbing1^ 
ence  unsettle  my  devout  thoughts.  Our  eldest  Brother : Varuna,  legatdeo 
the  founder  of  society  united  by  common  religious  observances. 

3 The  poet  regards  the  coming  of  the  dawn  as  a proof  that  the  sacrince 
successful.  Since  they:  the  piies ts. 


THE  RIGVEDA. 


gYMN  12.] 


395 


4 And  the  fleet  Falcon  brought  for  sacrifice  from  afar  this  flow- 

ing Drop  most  excellent  and  keen  of  sight, 

Then  when  the  Aryan  tribes  chose  as  Invoking  Priest  Agni 
the  Wondor- Worker,  and  the  hymn  rose  up. 

5 Still  art  thou  kind  to  him  who  feeds  thee  as  with  grass,  and, 

skilled  in  sacrifice,  offers  thee  holy  gifts. 

When  thou,  having  received  the  sage’s  strengthening  food 
with  lauds,  after  long  toil,  comest  with  many  more. 

6 Urge  thou  thy  Parents,  as  a lover,  to  delight:  the  Lovely 

One  desires  and  craves  it  from  his  heart. 

The  priest  calls  out,  the  sacrificer  shows  his  skill,  the  Asura 
tries  his  strength,  and  with  the  hymn  is  stirred. 

7 Far-famed  is  he,  the  mortal  man,  0 Agni,  thou  Son  of  Strength, 

who  hath  obtained  thy  favour. 

He,  gathering  power,  borne  onward  by  his  horses,  makes  his 
days  lovely  in  his  might  and  splendour. 

8 When,  Holy  Agni,  the  divine  assembly,  the  sacred  synod  mid 

the  Gods,  is  gathered, 

And  when  thou,  Godlike  One,  dealest  forth  treasures,  vouch- 
safe us,  too,  our  portion  of  the  riches. 

9 Hear  us,  0 Agni,  in  your  common  dwelling  : harness  thy  rapid 

car,  the  car  of  Amrit. 

Bring  Heaven  and  Earth,  the  Deities’  Parents,  hither : stay 
with  us  here,  nor  from  the  Gods  he  distant. 


HYMN  XU.  Agni. 

Hkaven  and  Earth,  first  by  everlasting  Order,  speakers  of 
truth,  are  near  enough  to  hear  us, 

When  the  God,  urging  men  to  worship,  sitteth  as  Priest,  as- 
suming all  his  vital  vigour. 


rJ  PU8  ftowin9  Drop  : the  Soma,  brought  from  heaven  by  the  Falcon.  See 
iv.  26  ail(j  27. 

nr,^ou  ’ As  with  grass : ‘ as  pasture  satisfies  (the  herds).’ — Wilson. 

! ^ many  more : bringing  many  other  Gods  to  the  sacrifice. 

6 /Is  a lover  : woos  his  mistress.  Agni  is  called  upon  to  entreat  his  parents, 
an^  reproduce  him  perpetually.  The  Lovely  One:  Agni. 

in  A Y°V  malchah  ; see  Vcdic  Hymns , I.  p.  47.  The  original  hymn  appears 
^e«d  with  this  difficult  stanza. 

dishMr^ii  ^ravjiniim  ; taken  by  S Ay  ana  with  amrUasya  and  explained  by 
the  !ngi  , drink  of  Gods.’  Nor  from  the  Gods  be  distant : ‘ let  none  of 
16  gods  be  absent.’— Wilson. 

to  IWof-  m(J8^  exftlfced  as  well  as  most  ancient.  The  God:  Agni.  As  Priest  ; 
Uotar,  mvoker,  or  herald. 


896  THE  HYMtfS  OF  [BOOR  * 

2 As  God  comprising  Gods  by  Law  Eternal,  bear,  aB  the  Chief 

who  knoweth,  our  oblation, 

Smoke-bannered  with  the  fuel,  radiant,  joyous,  better  to  praise 
and  worship,  Priest  for  ever. 

3 When  the  cow’s  nectar  wins  the  God  completely,  men  here 

below  are  heaven’s  and  earth’s  sustainers. 

All  the  Gods  came  to  this  thy  heavenly  Yajus,  which  from  the 
motley  Pair  milked  oil  and  water. 

4 I praise  your  work  thatj^e  may  make  me  prosper  : hear,  Heaven 

and  Earth,  Twain  Worlds  that  drop  with  fatness. 

While  days  and  nights  go  to  the  world  of  spirits,  here  let  the 
Parents  with  sweet  meath  refresh  us. 

5 Hath  the  King  seized  us  1 How  have  we  offended  against  h.s 

holy  ordinance  ? Who  knoweth  1 

For  even  Mitra  mid  the  Gods  is  angry  : there  are  both  song 
and  strength  for  those  who  come  not. 

6 ’Tis  hard  to  understand  the  Immortal’s  nature,  where  she  who 

is  akin  becomes  a stranger. 

Guard  ceaselessly,  great  Agni,  him  who  ponders  Yama’s  name, 
easy  to  be  comprehended. 

7 They  in  the  synod  where  the  Gods  rejoice  them,  where  they 

are  seated  in  Vivasvan’s  dwelling, 

Have  given  the  Moon  his  beams,  the  Sun  his  splendour  • the 
Two  unweariedly  maintain  their  brightness. 

2 Btttcr  to  praise:  more  skilled  than  men  in  praising  the  Gods. 

3 This  stanza  is  very  obscure.  The  meaning  seems  to  be  that,  by  poof's- 
ing  the  am  rib,  ambrosia,  or  nectar  contained  in  the  milk  of  the  sacrificial  coff 
and  iu  the  Soma  juice  which  wins  and  captivates  Agni,  men  are  enabled  to 
offer  acceptable  sacrifices  to  the  Gods,  and  thus  to  support  the  heavens  aud 
earth.  Heavenly  Yajus:  divine  sacrificial  prayer  or  formula.  But  ihvyfimhj 
its  position  in  the  verse  seems  rather  to  belong  to  ghritdm,  butter  or  sacri* 
ficial  oil.  The  motley  Pair : ini:  many-coloured  heaven  and  earth. 

* When  the  self-aggregated  ambrosia  of  the  divine  Agni  is  generated  from 
his  radiance,  then  the  pioducts  from  it  sustain  both  heaven  and  earth,  a 
the  worshippers  glorify  this  thy  oblation,  the  celestial  nutritious  water  wnic 
thy  white  radiance  milks  forth.’  — Wilson.  According  to  S&yana,  t he  pro<  m < 
from  it  are  the  plants  and  trees  which  spring  from  the  amrit  or  rain  v-nic 
rewards  the  oblations  of  men,  and  the  vlsve  devflh  of  the  text  a,e 
Mtotdrak.  all  the  worshippers.  Some  meaning  is  appaient  in  this  paraphras , 
but  it  cannot  be  extracted  from  the  words  of  the  text. 

5 The  Kim,:  Varuna.  For  even  Mitra:  we  must  have  committed  som 

sin.  for  even  Mitra,  the  Friend,  the  gracious  God,  is  wroth  with  us. 
strengthening  sacrificial  viands.  For  those  who  come  not:  for  the  Gods 
will  not  yet  come  to  receive  our  worship  and  oblations.  , 1 

6 This  stanza  is  apparently  a later  addition.  The  latter  half  of  the  tns  j 

is  taken  from  X.  10.  2,  but  its  application  here  is  not  obvious.  Heaven! 

7 In  VivasvAn's  dwelling : ‘ on  the  altar  of  the  sacrificer.’ — Wilson.  « 
or  the  realm  of  the  Sun  is  iuteuded. 


tfif  I 


g The  counsel  which  the  Gods  meet  to  consider,  their  secret 
pl.m, — of  that  we  have  no  knowledge. 

There  let  God  Savitar,  Aditi,  and  Mitra  proclaim  to  Varuna 
that  we  are  sinless. 

9 Hear  us,  0 Agni,  in  your  common  dwelling  : harness  thy  rapid 
car,  the  car  of  Ami  it. 

Biing  Heaven  and  Earth,  the  Deities’  Parents,  hither:  stay 
with  us  here,  nor  from  the  Gods  be  distant. 

HYMN  XIII.  HavhdhW 

I  yoke  with  prayer  your  ancient  inspiration  : may  the  laud 
rise  as  on  the  prince’s  pathway. 

All  Sons  of  Immortality  shall  hear  it,  all  the  possessors  of  ce- 
lestial natures. 

2 When  speeding  ye  came  nigh  us  like  twin  sisters,  religious- 

hearted  votaries  brought  you  forward. 

Take  your  place,  ye  who  know  your  proper  station  : be  near, 
be  very  near  unto  our  Soma. 

3 Five  paces  have  I risen  from  Eaith:  I follow  her  who  hath 

four  feet  with  devout  obsei  vance 
This  by  the  Sacied  Syllable  have  I measured:  I purify  in  the 
central  place  of  Order. 

4 He,  for  Gods’  sake,  chose  death  to  be  his  portion.  Ho  chose 

not,  for  men’s  good,  a life  eternal. 

They  sacrificed  Brihaspati  the  Rishi.  Yama  delivered  up  his 
own  dear  body. 

‘Tuc  deities  are  the  two  Sakutas,  small  carts  or  ban ows  used  at  sacrifices 
) carry  the  materials  especially  the  •Som-plant,  heuee  called  HavirU/uiaas, 
lation-bearers.’ — W l Ison 

1 The  prince  is.the  noble  who  institutes  the  sacriGce.  4 Like  the  path  of 
e worshipper  ' — Wilson. 

3 Tins  stanza  is  most  obscure.  Wilson,  following  Stlyana,  translates:  ‘I 
ake  the  five  st  ages  of  the  sacrifice  a&cend  ; I take  four  steps  by  pious 
i&orvances ; with  the  sacred  syllable  I perfect  this  (adoraiion)  ; I purify 
he  Soma.)  on  the  navel  of  the  saetifiee.’  The  filestores  ate,  according  to 
L'ana.  the  five  elements  of  the  saorifice,  grain,  Soma,  the  kine,  the  Purod&sa 
ke,aud  the  clarified  butter.  The  / ir  steps  ate  the  metres  must  commonly  used 
The  words  as  they  stand  in  the  text  do  not  appear  to  be  susceptible  of  any 
■tistactary  explanation. 

4 tfe.  Yania  See  X.  14.  1.  For  Gods  sake : his  death  being  the  type  of 
lo  sacrifices  which  support  and  delight  the  Gods.  For  rnen’s  yood : See  X. 

■ 3—14  for  the  results  of  the  sacrifice  of  Purusha,  with  whom  Yama  may  be 
°Qbned.  Ttieoj : the  Gods  This  Pada  is  unintelligible  as  it  stands. 

of  brili  ispdt ini  yujilim  akrinmto  nshim , Prof.  Ludwig  would  read 
'WasccUan  y tjhani  atanuta  rishih,  the  Rishi  pet  formed  the  Vaivasvata, 
uiieral  sacufice  (Uebcr  die  neucsten , u.  8.  w , p.  110).  I have  mainly 
°wed  Elini,  Der  Vedische  Mythus  des  Yuma,  pp.  1450 — 162,  but  the  exact 
ani1^  of  the  stanza  is  still  doubtful  to  me. 


wcrg 


5 The  Seven  flow  to  the  Youth  on  whom  the  Maruts  wait : the 
Sons  unto  the  Father  brought  the  sacrifice. 

Both  these  are  his,  as  his  they  are  the  Lords  of  both : both 
toil ; belonging  unto  both  thoy  prosper  well. 

HYMN  XIV.  Yam, 

Honour  the  King  with  thine  oblations,  Yama,  Vivasvan’s  Son, 
who  gathers  men  together, 

Who  travelled  to  the  lofty  heights  above  us,  who  searches  out 
and  shows  the  path  to  many. 

2 Yama  first  found  for  us  a place  to  dwell  in  : this  pasture  never 

can  be  taken  from  us. 

Men  horn  on  earth  tread  their  own  paths  that  lead  them 
whither  our  ancient  Fathers  have  departed. 

3 Matali  prospers  there  with  Kavyas,  Yama  with  Angiras’  sons, 

Brihaspati  with  Rikvans  : 

Exniters  of  the  Gods,  by  Gods  exalted,  some  joy  in  praise  and 
some  in  our  oblation. 

4 Como,  seat  thee  on  this  bed  of  giass,  0 Yama,  in  company 

with  Angirases  and  Fathers. 

Let  texts  recited  by  the  sages  bring  thee:  O King,  let  this 
oblation  make  thee  joyful. 

5 Come,  Yama,  with  the  Angirases  the  Holy,  rejoice  thee  here 

with  children  of  Virupa. 

To  sit  on  sacred  grass  at  this  our  worship,  I call  Vivasvan,  too, 
thy  Father  hither. 

5 The  Seven : rivers.  According  to  Sdyana,  metres.  The  Youth : Indra. 
The  Sons : theMaiuts.  The  Father:  Iudra.  Both  these:  havirdhdnns . Of 
both : Gods  and  men.  Unto  both : to  Gods  uud  men,  or  to  Heaven  and  Earth. 

The  hymn  is  a funeral  address,  partly  to  Yama  the  God  of  the  Dead  and 
partly  to  the  Soul  of  the  departed  whose  body  is  being  consumed  on  the  pi  «• 

1 Yama  • the  deified  Loid  of  the  Dead  : originally  the  first  who  died  aiid 
so  showed  the  souls  of  his  successors  the  way  to  the  home  of  the  departe 
See  X.  12.  Lofty  heights : of  heaven,  the  abode  of  the  Bleat. 

3 Mdtatt : a divine  being,  identified  by  the  Commentators  with  Indra  whose 
charioteer  was  Mil  tali.  Kavyas  : a class  of  Manes,  the  spirits  of  a PloU. 
race  of  ancient  time.  Angiras  sons  : the  Angirases,  the  typical  first  sacr 
ficers.  See  Vol.  I.,  Index.  Rikvans:  or  singers,  a class  of  spirits  or  dei 1 
who  attend  and  sing  the  praises  of  Brihaspati.  See  VII.  1 0.  4.  Some  joy  ^ 
praise  : the  Gods  delight  in  Svahit,  the  sacrificial  exclamation,  worship 
praise.  Some  in  our  oblation : the  Manes  delight  in  SvadhA,  the  sweet 

or  oblation  which  is  presented  to  them.  j 

4 Angirases  and  Fathers  : or,  perhaps,  Angirases  our  Fathers. 

5 Children  of  Virdpa:  Vairupas,  a sub-division  of  the  Angiiases. 


0MN  14.]  THE  RIQVEDA.  8 M 

(j  Oar  Fathers  are  Angirases,  Navagvas,  Atharvans,  Bhrigus  who 
deserve  the  Soma. 

May  these,  the  Holy,  look  on  us  with  faVotir,  may  we  enjoy 
their  gracious  loving-kindness. 

7 (Jo  forth,  go  forth  upon  the  ancient  pathways  whereon  our 

sires  of  old  have  gone  before  us. 

There  shalt  thou  look'on  both  the  Kings  enjoying  their  sacred 
food,  God  Varuna  and  Yama. 

8 Meet  Yama,  meet  the  Fathers,  meet  the  merit  of  free  or  or- 

dered acts,  in  highest  heaven. 

Leave  sin  and  evil,  soek  auew  thy  dwelling,  and  bright  with 
glory  wear  another  body. 

9 Go  hence,  depart  ye,  fly  in  all  directions : this  place  for  him 

the  Fathers  have  provided. 

Yama  bestows  on  him  a place  to  rest  in  adorned  with  days 
and  beams  of  light  and  waters. 

10  Rim  and  outspeed  the  two  dogs,  Sarama's  offspring,  brindled, 

four-eyed,  upon  thy  happy  pathway. 

Draw  nigh  then  to  the  gracious-minded  Fathers  where  they 
rejoice  in  company  with  Yama. 

11  And  those  two  dogs  of  thine,  Yama,  the  watchers,  four-eyed, 

who  look  on  men  and  guard  the  pathway, — 

Entrust  this  man,  0 King,  to  their  protection,  and  with  pros- 
perity and  health  endow  him. 

12  Dark-lined,  insatiate,  with  distended  nostrils,  Yama’s  two  en- 

voys roam  among  the  people ; 

May  they  restore  to  ns  a fair  existence  here  and  to-day,  that 
we  may  see  the  sunlight. 

'13  To  Yama  pour  the  Soma,  bring  to  Yama  consecrated  gifts: 

To  Yama  sacrifice  prepared  and  heralded  by  Agni  goes. 

1 Offer  to  Yama  holy  gifts  enriched  with  butter,  and  draw  near: 
So  mav  he  grant  that  we  may  live  long  days  of  life  among 
the  Gods. 


6 Ntivayvas,  Atharvans,  Bhriyus  • priestly  families  of  ancient  times. 

7 This  and  tho  following  st’mza  are  addressed  to  the  spirit  of  the  dead 
lan  whose  funeral  rites  are  being  celebrated 

8 h ree  or  ordered  acts:  voluntary  good  works  and  prescribed  sacrifices, 
|hose  merit  is  stored  up  in  heaven  to  be  enjoyed  on  arrival  by  the  spirits  of 

* pious  who  have  performed  them. 

: According  to  Sdyapa,  this  stanza  is  addressed  to  the  Pis&chas  and  other 
in' n^6 7 8  *hat  haunt  the  place  of  cremation. 

, ^ The  spirit  of  the  departed  is  addressed.  The  two  dogs : offspring  of 
the  hound  of  lndra.  See  Vol.  I.,  Index. 

The  three  following  stanzas  are  addressed  to  the  priests. 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


400 


l BOOK  l 


15  Offer  to  Yuma,  to  the  King,  oblation  very  rich  in  meath  : 
Bow  down  before  the  Kish  is  of  the  ancient  times,  who  made 

this  path  in  days  of  old. 

16  Into  the  six  Expanses  flies  the  Great  One  in  Trikadrukas. 
The  Gayatri,  the  Tushtup,  all  metres  in  Yuma  are  contained, 

HYMN  XV.  Fathers. 


May  they  ascend,  the  lowest,  highest,  midmost,  the  Fathers 
who  deserve  a sh  ire  of  Soma. 

May  they  who  have  attained  the  life  of  spirits,  gentle  and 
righteous,  aid  us  when  we  call  them. 

2 Now  let  us  pay  this  homage  to  the  Fathers,  to  those  who 

passed  of  old  and  those  who  followed, 

Those  who  have  rested  in  the  eaithly  region,  and  those  who 
dwell  among  the  Mighty  Races. 

3 I have  attained  the  gracious-minded  Fathers,  I have  gained 

son  and  progeny  from  Vishnu. 

They  who  enjoy  pressed  juices  with  oblation,  seated  on  sacied 
grass,  come  oftenest  hither. 

4 Fathers  who  sit  on  sacred  grass,  come,  help  us  : these  offer- 

ings have  we  made  for  you ; accept  them. 

So  come  to  us  with  most  auspicious  favour,  and  give  us  health 
and  strength  without  a trouble. 

5 May  they,  the  Fathers,  worthy  of  the  Soma,  invited  to  their 

favourite  oblations 

Laid  on  the  sacred  grass,  come  nigh  and  listen  : may  they  e 
gracious  unto  us  and  bless  us. 


16  The  meaning  appears  to  be  that  the  Great  Unit,  Yams  as  All-God,  bro'd 
ena  and  fill*  the  universe  after  plentiful  libations  of  Soma  juice  in  he 
Kadruka  days,  or  first  three  days  of  the  Abhipltva  festival,  bee  .mi.  > 
pp  154—157.  For  different  explanations,  see  Bergai^ne,  I.  178, 11.  1-  . 

This  hvrnn  with  the  exception  of  the  last  stanza,  has  been  translated, 
annotated”  by  Muir,  0.  S.  tU  V pp  291  -295,  by  the  author,  of  th, 
Siebenzi'j  Lieder,  and  by  Prof.  Peterson,  llymne  from  the  Rojieda. 


1 Atcend  ■ rise  to  higher  rank ; obtain  the  best  oblation,  according  to 

LoJJ  , the  Fathers  are  classified  accord, ng  to  then 

of  merit  acquired  on  earth.  e Vrrr  77  j, 

2 The  earthly  region  : the  firmament  nearest  to  the  earth.  See  V in- 

The  Mighty  Races:  of  the' Gods.  (# 


the  bathers  uy  — . tj 

Zm  ia  an  unintelligible  express, on  m this  connexion. 

Alharvaveda,  XVUI.  1.  *5,  note 


mix  is.] 


the  rigveda. 


401 


6 Bowing  your  bended  knees  and  seated  southward,  accept  this 
sacrifice  of  ours  with  favour.  r 

Punish  us  not  for  any  sin,  0 Fathers,  which  we  through 
human  frailty  have  committed. 

i Lapped  in  the  bosom  of  the  purple  Mornings,  give  riches  to 
the  man  who  brings  oblations. 

Giant  to  your  sons  a portion  of  that  treasure,  and,  present 
give  them  energy,  ye  Fathers.  ? 

5 Our  ancient  Fathers  who  deserve  the  Soma,  who  came,  most 
noble,  to  our  Soma-banquet, — 

With  these  let  Yama,  yearning  with  the  yearning,  rejoicing 
eat  our  offerings  at  his  pleasure.  " ^ c> 

) Come  to  us,  Agni,  with  the  gracious  Fathers  who  dwell  in 
glowing  light,  the  very  Kavyas, 

Who  thirsted  mid  the  Gods,  who  hasten  hither,  oblation- 
winners,  theme  of  singers’  praises. 

) Como,  Agni,  come  with  countless  ancient  Fathers,  dwellers  in 
light,  primeval,  God-adorers, 

Eaters  and  drinkers  of  oblations,  truthful,  who  travel  with 
the  Deities  and  Indra. 


Fathers  whom  Agni’s  flames  have  tasted,  come  ye  ni^h  • ve 
kindly  leaders,  take  ye  each  your  proper  place.  ° ’ 0 

Eat  sacrificial  food  presented  on  the  grass  : grant  riches  with 
a multitude  of  hero  sons. 


Thou,  Agni  Jata vedas,  when  entreated,  didst  bear  the  offer- 
ings  which  thou  madest  fragrant, 

And  give  them  to  the  Fathers  who  did  eat  them  with  Svadha. 
Eat,  thou  God,  the  gifts  we  bring  thee. 

Thou,  Jatavedas,  knowest  well  the  number  of  Fathers  who  are 
here  and  who  are  absent, 

Of  Fathers  whom  we  know  and  whom  wo  know  not : accent 
the  sacrifice  well-prepaied  with  portious. 


thi  TarPle  Mornings : ‘Seated  in  the  proximity 
ramant  flames  (of  the  altar).’— Wilson. 

: see  X.  14.  3.  ' 

8flarn€8  have  tasted  : whose  bodies  have  been  burnt.  A class 

2 nr  a ed  Aguishvattas,  according  to  S&yana. 

tted  portion^  '*  sacri®c^  exclamation  Svadhft,  or,  with  their 

3 T*  portion, : or,  with  Svadhis. 

is 


402  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  £ 

14  They  who,  consumed  by  fire  or  not  cremated,  joy  in  their 
offering  in  the  midst  of  heaven, — 

Grant  them,  0 Sovran  Lord,  the  world  of  spirits  and  then 
own  body,  as  thy  pleasure  wills  it. 


HYMN  XYI. 


Agni 


Burn  him  not  up,  nor  quite  consume  him,  Agni  : let  not  hii 
body  or  his  skin  be  scattered. 

0 Jatavedas,  when  thou  hast  matured  him,  then  send  him  or 
his  way  unto  the  Fathers. 


2  When  thou  hast  made  him  ready,  Jatavedas,  then  do  thor 
give  him  over  to  the  Fathers. 

When  he  attains  unto  the  life  that  waits  him,  he  shall  becorar 
the  Deities’  controller. 


3 The  Sun  receive  thine  eye,  the  Wind  thy  spirit ; go,  as  thj 

merit  is,  to  earth  or  heaven. 

Go,  if  it  be  thy  lot,  unto  the  waters  ; go,  make  thine  horai 
in  plants  with  all  thy  members. 

4 Thy  portion  is  the  goat  : with  heat  consume  him  ; let  thy 

fierce  flame,  thy  glowing  splendour,  burn  him. 

With  thine  auspicious  forms,  0 Jatavedas,  bear  this  man  t( 
the  region  of  the  pious. 

5 Again,  0 Agni,  to  the  Fathers  send  him  who,  offered  iu  thee 

goes  with  our  oblations. 

Wearing  new  life  let  him  increase  his  offspring : let  bin 
rejoin  a body,  J&tavedas. 


14  The  world  of  spirits  : asunUim  : a difficult  word  whose  meaning  issom 
what  uncertain.  Sftyana  joins  it  with  tanvilm,  and  explains  the  two  words b; 
‘ the  body  that  leads  to  life/  ‘ that  body  that  is  endowed  with  breath, 
Wilson.  See  X.  12.  4. 

This  hymn  has  been  partially  transliterated,  translated,  and  annotated  bj 
Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  Y.  pp.  295—297. 

Stanzas  1 — 6 are  to  be  repeated  while  the  body  of  the  departed  is  beiaj 
partially  consumed  on  the  funeral  pile. 

2 The  life  that  waits  him:  asunitim:  see  X.  15, 14.  Controller:  by  winnin| 
their  favour. 

3 The  Sun  receive  thine  eye,  the  Wind  thy  spirit : let  like  return  to  lik* 
See  Muir’s  note,  0.  S.  Texts , V.  298. 

4 Agni  is  addressed.  The  goat : that  was  slaughtered  and  laid  limb  by  li®1 
on  the  corpse. 

5 Let  him  increase  his  offspring : when  he  becomes  one  of  the  Fatkenjj 
whom  is  ascribed  the  fruitfulness  of  heaven  and  earth,  the  parents  of  Gjjj 
and  men.  See  X.  64.  14.  Let  him  rejoin:  or,  let  life  rejoin  his  body- 
nominative  is  not  expressed. 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


403 


VYMN  16.] 

6 What  wound  soe’er  the  dark  bird  bath  inflicted,  the  emmet, 

or  the  serpent,  or  the  jackal, 

May  Agni  who  devoureth  all  things  heal  it,  and  Soma  who 
hath  passed  into  the  Brahmans. 

7 Shield  thee  with  flesh  against  the  flames  of  Agni,  encompass 

thee  about  with  fat  and  marrow, 

So  will  the  Bold  One,  eager  to  attack  thee  with  fierce  glow 
fail  to  girdle  and  consume  thee. 

8 Forbear,  0 Agni,  to  upset  this  ladle  : the  Gods  and  they  who 

merit  Soma  love  it. 

This  ladle,  this  which  serves  the  Gods  to  drink  from,  in  this 
the  Immortal  Deities  rejoice  them. 

9 I send  afar  flesh-eating  Agni,  bearing  off  stains  may  he  depart 

to  Yama’s  subjects. 

But  let  this  other  Jatavedas  carry  oblation  to  the  Gods  for 
he  is  skilful.  ' 


0 I choose  as  God  for  Father-worship  Agni,  flesh-eater,  who 

hath  past  within  your  dwelling,  ’ 

While  looking  on  this  other  J&tavedas.  Let  him  light  flames 
in  the  supreme  assembly. 

1 With  offerings  meet  let  Agni  bring  the  Fathers  who  support 

the  Law. 

Let  him  announce  oblations  paid  to  Fathers  and  to  Deities. 

2 Eight  gladly  would  we  set  thee  down,  right  gladly  make  thee 

burn  and  glow. 

Gladly  bring  yearning  Fathers  nigh  to  eat  the  food  of  sacrifice. 

3 Cool,  Agni,  and  again  refresh  the  spot  which  thou  hast 

scorched  and  burnt. 

Here  let  the  water-lily  grow,  and  tender  grass  and  leafy  herb. 
I 0 full  of  coolness,  thou  cool  Plant,  full  of  fresh  moisture, 
freshening  Herb, 

Come  hither  with  the  female  frog:  fill  with  delight  this  Agni 
here. 


• rfie  ??rP8e  ia  addressed.  Flt*\ : the  caul  and  other  parts  of  a slaughtered 
mai  which  covered  the  corpse  to  prevent  too  quick  and  complete  cremation. 
P staim6  °f  Sin  °r  impurity  whi°k  may  have  attached  to  the  departed* 

11  typically  offer  sacrifice  in  the  assembly  of  the  Gods. 

offpnV  7* meet  **  literally,  bearing  Kavyas  or  Kavya-worship,  that 
19  m/n^8  to  tke  ^av^>  sages,  or  Fathers. 

\i  wV  £,gni;  .the firo- 

!ciydmbu:  *°me  kind  of  ^uatio  plant.  Tender  graft; 
H F'lf  ,a  varie.fcy  grass  (Panicum  Dactylon). 

rehaswJ***  dai9^’  meaning,  euphemistically,  extinguish.  ‘After  the 
usuined  the  corpse,  water  is  poured  upon  it  to  extinguish  it.  Then 


404 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOKl 

HYMN  XVII.  Various  Deiti*. 

Tvashtar  prepares  the  bridal  of  his  Daughter : all  the  world 
hears  the  tidings  and  assembles. 

But  Yama’s  Mother,  Spouse  of  great  Vivasv&n,  vanished  as 
she  was  carried  to  her  dwelling. 

2 From  mortal  men  they  hid  the  Immortal  Lady,  made  one  like 

her  and  gave  her  to  Vivasvan. 

Saranyu  brought  to  him  the  Asvin  brothers,  and  then  deserted 
both  twinned  pairs  of  children. 

3 Guard  of  the  world,  whose  cattle  ne’er  are  injured,  may  Pd- 

shan  bear  thee  hence,  for  lie  hath  knowledge. 

May  he  consign  thee  to  these  Fathers’  keeping,  and  to  the 
gracious  Gods  let  Agni  give  thee. 

4 May  Ayu,  giver  of  all  life,  protect  thee,  and  bear  thee  forward 

on  the  distant  pathway. 

Thither  let  Savitar  the  God  transport  theo,  where  dwell  the 
pious  who  have  passed  before  thee. 

5 Pushan  knows  all  these  realms : may  ho  conduct  us  by  ways 

that  are  most  free  from  fear  and  danger. 

Giver  of  blessings,  glowing,  all-heroic,  may  he,  the  wise  ami 
watchful,  go  before  us. 


furthermore  certain  water-plants  are  put  there  In  addition  to  these  a frog- 
here  a female,  elsewhere  a male—  is  put  upon  the  place  where  the  fire  ha? 
burned.  These,  as  representatives  of  life  in  the  waters,  are  symbolically 
supposed  both  to  prevent  and  extinguish  fire  ' (M.  Bloomfield,  Contributions 

to  the  Interpretation  of  the  Veda , Second  Series,  Baltimore  : 1800). 

Dr.  Muir’s  Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  V.  pp.  297 — 299,  should  be  consulted 
with  regard  to  this  funeral  hymn  addiossed  to  Agni,  and  much  additional 
information  on  the  subject  may  be  obtained  from  the  essays,  there  referred 
to,  by  von  Roth  and  Max  Muller. 

1 The  first  two  stanzas  are  difficult,  and  appear  to  have  no  connexion  with 

the  rest  of  the  hymn.  Tvashtar : a God  often  regarded,  as  here,  as  an  agent 
in  natural  phenomena.  Ilis  Daughter  • Saranyft,  the  stormy  cloud  ; or,  Fr 
haps,  the  dawn.  Vivasvdn:  representing  the  bright  heavens,  or  the  Sun. 
Yuma's  Mother : Saranyft,  who  afterwards  gave  birth  to  Yama  and  Yami. 
See  X.  10,  note.  Vanished:  or  was  stolen  away.  Carried  : as  a bride,  in  pre- 
cession. , , 

2 They : the  Gods.  The  Immortal  Lady  : Saranyfi.  Brought  to  him : 

another  form  bore  to  Vivasv&n.  Both  twinned  pairs : Yama  and  Yainl  and  tie 
Asvins.  For  the  legend  which  has  been  formed  out  of  these  obscure  hints,  see 
Wilson’s  Translation,  and  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts , V.  228.  _ , 

3 Here  the  funeral  hymn  begins,  with  an  address  to  the  spirit  of  the 

parted.  Pilshan  : as  a Sun-God  and  the  heavenly  Herdsman  who  knows 
path  through  the  heavens  and  is  therefore  a good  conductor  of  the  spin 
the  departed.  , , 

4 iyu : according  to  SAyana,  Vdyu  is  intended,  the  letter  * v ’ being  eh  e 
Or  the  meaning  may  be,  life  of  full  vitality. 


THE  RIOt ED  A. 


405 


VYMX  17.] 

6 Puahan  was  born  to  move  on  distant  pathways,  on  the  road  far 

from  earth  and  far  from  heaven. 

To  both  most  wonted  places  of  assembly  he  travels  and  returns 
with  perfect  knowledge. 

7 The  pious  call  Saras vati,  they  worship  Sarasvati  while  sacri- 

fice proceedeth. 

The  pious  called  Sarasyati  aforetime.  Sarasvati  send  bliss  to 
him  who  giveth. 

8 Sarasvati,  who  earnest  with  the  Fathers,  with  them  rejoicing 

thee  in  our  oblations, 

Seated  upon  this  sacred  grass  be  joyful,  and  give  us  strength- 
ening food  that  brings  no  sickness. 

0  Thou,  called  on  as  Sarasvati  by  Fathers  who  come  right  for- 
ward to  our  solemn  service, 

Give  food  and  wealth  to  present  sacrifices,  a portion,  worth 
a thousand,  of  refreshment. 

0 The  Mother  Floods  shall  make  us  bright  and  shining,  cleans- 

ers of  holy  oil,  with  oil  shall  cleanse  us : 

For,  Goddesses,  they  bear  off  all  defilement : I rise  up  from 
them  purified  and  brightened. 

1 Through  days  of  earliest  date  the  Drop  descended  on  this 

place  and  on  that  which  was  before  it. 

I offer  up,  throughout  the  seven  oblations,  the  Drop  which 
still  to  one  same  place  is  moving. 

2 The  Drop  that  falls,  thy  stalk  which  ar*lS  have  shaken,  which 

from  the  bosom  of  the  press  hath  Allen, 

Or  from  the  Adhvaryu’s  purifying  filter,  I offer  thee  with  heart 
and  cry  of  Vashat  I 

3 That  fallen  Drop  of  thino  the  stalk  which  from  tho  ladle  fell 

away, 

This  present  God  TVhaspati  shall  pour  it  forth  to  make  us  rich. 

4 The  plants  of  -arth  are  rich  in  milk,  and  rich  in  milk  is  this 

my  spee^n; 

And  r^h  in  milk  the  essence  of  the  Waters : make  me  pure 
therewith. 


7 hratvatf:  see  I.  8.  10. 

8t,anza  is  not  very  intelligible.  The  Drop  is  apparently  the  Soma  ; 
* ®xPlaiua  alternatively,  by  Aditya  or  the  Sun.  See  Satapatha * 
4*  F 20  (Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  XLI.  368). 
ic^ Milk;  full  of  sap,  vigour,  vital  and  vivifying  power. 


406  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  l 

HYMN  XVIII.  Various  Deities, 

Go  hence,  0 Death,  pursue  thy  special  pathway  apart  from 
that  which  Gods  are  wont  to  travel. 

To  thee  I say  it  who  hast  eyes  and  hearest : Touch  not  our 
offspring,  injure  not  our  heroes. 

2 As  ye  have  come  effacing  Mrityu’s  footstep,  to  further  times 

prolonging  your  existence, 

May  ye  he  rich  in  children  and  possessions,  cleansed,  purified, 
and  meet  for  sacrificing. 

3 Divided  from  the  dead  are  these,  the  living : now  be  our 

calling  on  the  Gods  successful. 

We  have  gone  forth  for  dancing  and  for  laughter,  to  further 
times  prolonging  our  existence. 

4 Here  I erect  this  rampart  for  the  living ; let  none  of  these, 

none  other,  reach  this  limit. 

May  they  survive  a hundred  lengthened  autumns,  and  may 
they  bury  Death  beneath  this  mountain. 

5 As  the  days  follow  days  in  close  succession,  as  with  the  sea- 

sons duly  come  the  seasons, 

As  each  successor  fails  not  his  foregoer,  so  form  the  lives  of 
these,  0 great  Ordainer 

5 Live  your  full  lives  and  find  old  ago  delightful,  all  of  you 
striving  one  behind  the  other. 

May  Tvashtar,  maker  of  fair  things,  be  gracious  and  lengthen 
out  the  days  your  existence. 


1 Death:  Mrityu,  the  God  of  'Jeath  ; distinct  from  Yama  the  judge  and 
ruler  of  the  departed.  Our  offspring.  prajflm  : meaning  here,  says  SAyana, 
female  offspring,  duhitridauhitrdtmika ju  the  form  Gf  daughters  and  their 
daughters.  Our  heroes:  sons  and  their  so^,.__s&yana. 

2 Addressed  to  the  kinsmen  of  the  decease , £ facing  Mrityu'* 

a wisp  or  clog  was  fastened  to  the  foot  of  the  corp.*,  which  represented  M.rityu 
or  Death,  in  order  to  prevent  the  premature  return  vf  Death  to  carry  ott 
living.  See  A.  V.,  V.  19.  12.  Cleansed : from  sins  of  a«ormer  life.  Pww*' 
from  sins  of  the  present  life. 

3 Dancing  and  laughter  : the  enjoyments  of  ordinary  life  */ter  the  «* 

ment  of  our  duties  to  the  dead.  , 

4 This  rampart:  of  stone,  or  earth,  raised  by  the  Adhvaryu  as  * hue 

demarcation  between  the  dead  and  the  living,  and  limiting,  as  ^ 

jurisdiction  of  Death  until  the  natural  time  for  his  approach.  This 

the  mound  or  bank.  . . Ordafo** 

5 So  form  the  live* : let  them  pass  away  in  due  order  of  Bemwty. 

Dhdtar : the  name  of  a divine  being  who  is  the  creator,  arrang  , j 

and  manager  of  all  things.  ..  . . rneV  first. 

6 One  behind  the  other : the  oldest  reaching  the  end  of  their  jou  i 


THE  RIGVEDA, 


407 


qYUy  13*] 

7 Let  these  unwidowed  dames  with  noble  husbands  adorn  them- 
\ selves  with  fragrant  balm  and  unguent. 

Decked  with  fair  jewels,  tearless,  free  from  sorrow,  first  let  the 
dames  go  up  to  where  he  lieth. 

8 Eise,  come  unto  the  world  of  life,  0 woman : come,  he  is  life- 

less by  whose  side  thou  liest. 

Wifehood  with  this  thy  husband  was  thy  portion,  who  took  thy 
hand  and  wooed  thee  as  a lover. 

9 From  his  dead  hand  I take  the  bow  he  carried,  that  it  may  be 

our  power  aud  might  and  glory. 

There  art  thou,  there;  and  here  with  noble  heroes  may  we 
overcome  all  hosts  that  fight  against  us. 

10  Betake  thoc  to  the  lap  of  Earth  the  Mother,  of  Earth  far-spread- 

ing, very  kind  and  gracious. 

Young  Dame,  wool-soft  unto  the  guerdon-giver,  may  she  pre- 
serve thee  from  Destruction’s  boso«u- 

11  Heave  thyself,  Earth,  nor  press  thee  downward  heavily;  afford 

him  easy  access,  gently  ten-*lng  him. 

Cover  him,  as  a mother  wraps  her  skirt  about  her  child,  0 Earth. 

12  Now  let  the  heaving  ea-’^h  be  free  from  motion  : yea,  let  a thou- 

sand clods  remain  above  him. 

Be  they  to  him  a Aome  distilling  fatness,  here  lot  them  ever  be 
his  place  of  refuge. 

13  I stay  the  oarth  from  thee,  while  over  thee  I place  this  piece 

of  ea^h.  May  I be  free  from  injury. 

Here  *et  the  Fathers  keep  this  pillar  firm  for  thee,  and  there 
let  Yama  make  thee  an  abiding-place. 

14  .Sven  as  an  arrow’s  feathers,  they  have  set  me  on  a fitting  day. 
/ The  fit  word  have  I caught  and  held  as  'twere  a courser  with 

the  rein. 


7 First : agve ; to  begin  with  ; i.  e.  before  the  ceremonies  begin.  See  M. 
duller,  Chips,  IV.  35 — 39  (edition  of  1895).  On  the  whole  stanza,  see  Dr.  F. 
Sail,  Jouriiai  of  H A S.,  Vol.  III.  Part  I.,  p.  185f. 

o ‘This  verse  is  to  be  spoken  by  the  husband’s  brother,  etc  , to  the  wife  of 
he  dead  man,  and  he  is  to  /lake  her  leave  her  husband’s  body.  See  the 
tswalayana  Grihya  Sittras,  IV.  2.’ — Editor’s  note,  in  Wilson’s  Translation. 

9 This  stanza  is  applicable  only  when  the  deceased  was  a Ksliatriya  or  man 
►i  the  princely  aud  military  order. 

19  Addressed  to  the  body.  Guerdon-giver : the  liberal  rewarder  of  the 
meats.  Destruction's  bosom  : or  the  lap  of  Nirriti. 

& I stay  the  earth:  * I keep  off  the  earth  above  thee  with  thy  lid.’  * This 
J addressed  to  the  urn  containing  the  bones  and  ashes,  which  is  buried  after 
' e c?rpse  has  been  burnt.’—  Wilson.  PiUar  : perhaps  a beam  laid  over  the 
emams. 

H This  stanza,  which  seems  to  be  a later  addition,  is  not  noticed  in  SAyana’s 
' mQientary>  and  the  meaning  of  the  second  line  is  not  very  clear.  I have 


408 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOR  xt 


HYMN  XIX.  Waters  or  Co*9l 

Turn,  go  not  farther  on  your  way ; visit  us,  0 ye  Wealth 
Ones. 

Agni  and  Soma,  ye  who  bring  riches  again,  Becure  us  weoith. 
2 Make  these  return  to  us  again,  bring  them  beside  us  once 
again. 

May  Indra  give  them  back  to  us,  and  Agni  drive  them  hither- 
ward. 


3 Let  them  return  to  us  again  : under  this  herdsman  let  them 

feed. 

Do  thou,  0 Agni,  keep  them  here,  and  let  the  wealth  we 
have  remain. 

4 I call  upon  their  herdsman,  him  who  knoweth  well  their  coming 

Their  parting  and  their  home-return,  and  watcheth  their 
approach  and  rest. 

5 Yea,  let  the  herdsman,  to*,  return,  who  marketh  well  their 

driving-forth ; 

Marketh  their  wandering  away,  their  turning  back  and  com- 
ing home. 

6 Home-leader,  lead  them  home  to  us;  Indra,  restore  to  us  our 

kine  : 

We  will  rejoice  in  them  alive. 


followed  Prof.  Whitney’s  rendering  (Lanman,  p.  386).  The  verse,  says 
Lanman,  ‘ seems  to  express  the  poet’s  satisfaction  at  having  mae<»  a good 
hymn  at  the  right  time  and  place,  and  with  as  good  skill  as  a skilfm  horse- 
man has.’ 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  the  authors  of  the  Siebenzig  Lieder. 
Zimmer’s  Altmdisches  Lcben,  pp.  400—407,  Mr.  Rnmesh  Chunder  Dutt’i 
Civilization  in  Ancient  India , pp.  108,  and  278,  279,  Lanman’s  Sanskrit 
Reader , pp.  382-  386,  and  Zdnaide  Ragozin’s  Vedic  India,  pp.  351—353. 
The  essays  of  von  Roth  and  Max  Muller  have  already  been  referred  to. 


The  hymn  is  a prayer  for  the  return  of  strayed  cows,  to  whom  the  first 
line  is  addressed. 

1 Ye  who  bring  riches  again  : punarvasd : ( ye  who  clothe  (your  worship* 
pers)  again.’ — Wilson.  See  Hillebrandt,  V.  M.,  I.  460. 

2 These : cows,  or  waters. — Slyana.  Make  return  is  the  imperative  ^ingulat 
and  S&yana  says  that  the  seer  of  the  hymn  addresses  himself.  The  address 
is  to  Indra. 

4 Sdyana  explains  this  stanza  somewhat  differently  : — ‘ I.  invoke  the 
knowledge  of  the  place,  of  their  going,  of  their  coming,  of  their  departure* 
of  their  wandering,  of  their  returning  : (I  invoke)  him  who  is  their  keeper 
— Wilson.  This  is  a more  strictly  literal  rendering  of  the  abstract  nouns 
the  text. 


THE  RIQVEDA . 


409 


fffMN  20.] 

7 I offer  you  on  every  side  butter  and  milk  and  strengthening  food. 
May  all  the  Holy  Deities  pour  down  on  us  a flood  of  wealth. 

8 0 thou  Home-leader,  lead  them  home,  restore  them  thou  who 

bringest  home. ' 

Four  are  the  quarters  of  the  earth ; from  these  bring  back  to 
us  our  kine. 

HYMN  XX.  Agni. 

Send  unto  us  a good  and  happy  mind. 

2  I worship  Agni,  Youthf idlest  of  Gods,  resistless,  Friend  of  laws; 
Under  whose  guard  and  heavenly  light  the  Spotted  seek  the 
Mother’s  breast : 


3 Whom  with  their  mouth  they  magnify,  bannered  with  flame 

and  homed  in  light. 

He  glitters  with  his  row  of  teeth. 

4 Kind,  Furtherer  of  men,  he  comes,  wrhen  he  hath  reached  the 

ends  of  heaven, 

Sage,  giving  splendour  to  the  clouds. 

5 To  taste  man’s  offerings,  ho,  the  Strong,  hath  risen  erect  at 

sacrifice : 

Fixing  his  dwelling  he  proceeds. 

6 Here  are  oblation,  worship,  rest : rapidly  comes  his  furtherance. 
To  sword-armed  Agni  come  the  Gods. 

7 With  service  for  clxief  bliss  1 seek  the  Lord  of  Sacrifice,  Agni. 

whom  b 

They  call  the  Living,  Son  of  Cloud. 

8 Blest  evermore  be  all  the  men  who  come  from  us,  who  magnify 
^gm  with  sacrificial  gifts. 

9 Ihe  path  he  treads  is  black  and  white  and  red,  and  striped, 

and  brown,  crimson,  and  glorious. 

His  sire  begat  him  bright  with  hues  of  gold. 

8 Thus  with  his  thoughts,  0 Son  of  Strength,  0 Agni,  hath 
Vimada,  accordant  with  the  Immortals, 

Ottered  thee  hymns,  soliciting  thy  favour.  Thou  hast  brought 
a 5 *oocb  strength,  a prosperous  dwelling. 


2 'pi  r,  1_  ' — — _________ 

)pear  ^erf  110  noun-  The  variegated  oblations,  as  Say  ana  says, 

•mameut  T1.nfce^ded  J.and  the  Mother  s breast  maybe  the  clouds 'of  the 

3 Homed  dlfficult.’  and  translation  must  be  tentative. 

rayer/ acomvi;  ± t *7e.mean‘ng  °f  kripanflam  is  uncertain.  ‘Pitying 

5 He  vvocerj  n^-t0  Ludwig.  ‘ Sustainer  of  pious  works.’— Wilson. 

6 ^onLn  *j  18  Carnfd  ?rom.°ne  fire  receptacle  or  altar  to  another. 

The  men  Jh  '*  arm?d  witdl  hw  sword  or  knife  of  pieiciug  flame. 

9 The  mth  w ’ Bona  and  grandsons  of  the  worshippers. 

10  VlLL  according  to  Sdyana,  his  chariot. 

m . the  Rishi  of  the  hymn. 


410 


THE  HYMNS  OP 


[BOOR  x, 


HYMN  XXI.  Agni 

With  offerings  of  our  own  we  choose  thee,  Agni,  as  Invokiug 
Priest, 

For  sacrifice  with  trimmed  grass, — at  your  glad  carouse- 
piercing  and  brightly  shining.  Thou  art  waxing  great. 

2 The  wealthy  ones  adorn  thee,  they  who  bring  us  horses  as 

their  gift : 

The  sprinkling  ladle,  Agni, — at  your  glad  carouse— and  glow- 
ing offering  taste  thee.  Thou  art  waxing  great. 

3 The  holy  statutes  rest  by  thee,  as  ’twere  with  ladles  that  o’er 

flow. 

Black  and  white-gleaming  colours,— at  your  glad  carouse-all 
glories  thou  assumest.  Thou  art  waxing  great. 

4 0 Agni,  what  thou  deemest  wealth,  Victorious  and  Immortal 

One  ! 

Bring  thou  to  give  us  vigour,— at  your  glad  carouse— splendid 
at  sacrifices.  Thou  art  waxing  groat. 

5 Skilled  in  all  lore  is  Agni,  he  whom  erst  Atharvan  brought  to 

He  was  VivasvaiVs  envoy,  at  your  glad  carouse— the  well-loved 
friend  of  Yama.  Thou  art  waxing  great. 

6 At  sacrifices  they  adore  thee,  Agni,  when  the  rite  proceeds. 
All  fair  and  lovely  treasures — at  your  glad  carouse— thou 

givest  him  who  offers.  Thou  art  waxing  great. 

7 Men,  Agni,  have  established  thee  as  welcome  Priest  at  holy 

rites, 

Thee  whose  face  shines  with  butter,— at  your  glad  carouse- 
bright,  with  eyes  most  observant.  Thou  art  waxing  grea 

8 Wide  and  aloft  thou  spreadest  thee,  0 Agni,  with  thy  brilliant 


flame.  , , _ f},nu 

A Bull  art  thou  when  bellowing,— at  your  glad  carouse— 
dost  impregn  the  Sisters.  Thou  art  waxiug  great. _ 

1 At  your  glad  carouse:  apparently  a Soma-drinking  ref ^1  # 
the  Vievedevas  or  All-Gods.  Thou  art  waxing  great ; a 8 “““r  nll  „„iu 
burden  addiessed  to  Agni.  See  Wilson's  Translation,  note.  Grassms 
both  refrains,  which  he  considers  to  be  later  interpolations. 

2 Taste  thee:  feel  the  power  of  the  fire.  wor8hip  th* 

3 The  first  line  is  difficult ‘ The  estabhshers  (of  . kling  (shower4 
with  their  ladles  (filled  with  the  oblation),  like  (earth  ) P ,• 

—Wilson.  I follow  Ludwig’s  interpretation.  Those  who  woreh  p 8 

ing  to  his  Law  are  regarded  as  his  own  statutes  incarnate.  Obtaio  ^ 

5 Atharvan:  the  priest  who  is  said  to  have  been  the  gacrificer- 

and  offer  Soma  and  prayers.  Viyasvdn the  Soma-pnest,  o th^  fruitiuL 
8 Toe  Sisters ; the  plants,  which  Agw,  descending  m rai  , 


HYMN  22.] 


TEE  RTOVEDA. 


411 


HYMN  XXII.  Indra. 

Where  is  famed  Indra  heard  of?  With  what  folk  is  he  renown- 
ed to-day  as  Mitra  is, — 

Who  in  the  home  of  Rishis  and  in  secret  is  extolled  with  song? 

2 Even  here  is  Indra  famed,  and  among  us  this  day  the  glorious 

Thunderer  is  praised, 

He  who  like  Mitra  mid  the  folk  hath  won  complete  and  full 
renown. 

3 He  who  is  Sovran  Lord  of  great  and  perfect  strength,  exerter 

of  heroic  might, 

Who  bears  the  fearless  thuuder  as  a father  bears  his  darling 
son. 

4 Harnessing  to  thy  car,  as  God,  two  blustering  Steeds  of  the 

Wind-God,  0 Thunderer, 

That  speed  along  the  shining  path,  thou  making  ways  art 
glorified. 

5 Even  to  these  dark  Steeds  of  Wind  thou  of  thyself  hast  come 

to  ride, 

Of  which  no  driver  may  be  found,  none,  be  he  God  or  mortal 
man. 

6 When  ye  approach,  men  ask  you,  thoe  and  Usan&  : Why  come 

ye  to  our  dwelling-place? 

Why  are  ye  come  to  mortal  man  from  distant  realms  of  earth 
and  heaven  ? 

7 0 Indra,  thou  shalt  speak  us  fair : our  holy  prayer  is  offered 

up. 

We  pray  to  thee  for  help  as  thou  didst  strike  the  monster 
Sushna  dead. 

8 Around  us  is  the  Dasyu,  riteless,  void  of  sense,  inhuman, 

keeping  alien  laws. 

Baffle,  thou  Slayer  of  the  foe,  the  weapon  which  this  Dasa 
wields. 

9 Hero  with  Heroes,  thou  art  ours  : yea,  strong  are  they  whom 

thou  dost  help. 

In  many  a place  are  thy  full  gifts,  and  men,  like  vassals,  sing 
thy  praise. 

1 In  secret : in  the  forest,  according  to  SAyana. 

' 18  a ^°d  °*  hght,  making  paths  through  the  pathless 

i or  Usanas  K&vya,  who  has  been  frequently  mentioned  as 

7w  friend  and  of  Indra‘ 

Eeroet ; the  attendant  Maruts. 


412 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK i 

10  Urge  thou  these  heroes  on  to  slay  the  enemy,  brave  Thunder 

er ! in  the  fight  with  swords, 

Even  when  hid  among  the  tribes  of  Sages  numerous  as  stars 

11  Swift  come  those  gifts  of  thine  whose  hand  is  prompt  to  rent 

and  burn,  0 Hero  Thunder-armed  : 

As  thou  with  thy  Companions  didst  destroy  the  whole  o 
Sushna’s  brood. 

12  Let  not  thine  excellent  assistance  come  to  us,  0 Hero  Indra 

profitless. 

May  we,  may  we  enjoy  the  bliss  of  these  thy  favours,  Thun 
derer ! 

13  May  those  soft  impulses  of  thine,  0 Indra,  be  fruitful  am 

innocent  to  us. 

May  we  know  these  whose  treasures  are  like  those  of  milch 
kine,  Thunderer  ! 

14  That  Earth,  through  power  of  knowing  things  that  maybf 

known,  handless  and  footless  yet  might  thrive, 

Thou  slewest,  turning  to  the  right,  Sushna  for  every  living 
man. 

15  Drink,  drink  the  Soma,  Hero  Indra;  be  not  withheld  as  thou 

art  good,  0 Treasure-giver. 

Preserve  the  singers  and  our  liberal  princes,  and  make  us 
wealthy  with  abundant  riches. 

HYMN  XXIII.  Indra 

Indra,  whose  right  hand  wields  the  bolt,  we  worship,  drivel 
of  Bay  Steeds  seeking  sundered  courses. 

Shaking  his  beard  with  might  he  hath  arisen,  casting  hif 
weapons  forth  and  dealing  bounties. 

2 The  treasure  which  his  Bay  Steeds  found  at  sacrifice,  this 
wealth  made  opulent  Indra  slayer  of  the  foe.  

10  The  enemy  : or  Vritra.  Hid  among  ike  tribes  of  Sages  : dwelling  atn°Dj 

the  wise  Gods  and  invisible  to  men.  Numerous  as  stars : the  meaning 
ualcshatrasavasdm  is  uncertain.  . , . . 

11  Whose  hand  is  prompt  to  rend  and  burn  • I follow  Ludwig  s in  erP 
tion,  but  the  meaning  which  he  gives  to  dkshdni  is  doubtful. 

13  Soft  impulses  of  thine  : * our  (praises)  reaching  thee.’ — Wilson.  , 

14  For  every  living  man:  visvdyave : according  to  S&yana,  for  t c ,.g. 
Visv&yu,  a king,  the  son  of  Urvasl,  the  Apsaras  or  nymph  of  heaven 
came  the  wife  of  Purftravas.  Turning  to  the  right:  circumambulating j . 
with  the  right  hand  towards  him  for  good  luck  ; performing  the  Gae 

1 Seeking  sundered  courses : vlvratdndm  : unruly,  and  pulling 

each  other,  or  wandering.  According  to  S&yana,  having  many  functio  forest' 

2 At  saci'ijice : S&yana  explains  vdne  by  ‘ at  sacrifice,  or,  in  t y^ 
The  exact  meaning  of  the  word  here  is  not  certain.  Of  the  foe : or,  o 


YMX  24.]  THE  RIGVEDA.  m 

Bibhu,  Ribhukshan,  V&ja,— he  is  Lord  of  Might.  The 
very  name  I utterly  destroy. 

; When,  with  the  Princes,  Maghavan,  famed  of  old,  comes  nigh 
the  thunderbolt  of  gold,  and  the  Controller’s  car  6 

Which  his  two  Tawny  Coursers  draw,  then  Indra  is  the 
Sovran  Lord  of  power  whose  glory  spreads  afar. 

With  him  too  is  this  rain  of  his  that  comes  like  herds : Indra 
throws  drops  of  moisture  on  his  yellow  beard. 

When  the  sweet  juice  is  shed  he  seeks  the  pleasant  place,  and 
stirs  the  worshipper  as  wind  disturbs  the  wood. 

We  laud  and  praise  his  several  deed3of  valour  who,  fatherlike, 
with  power  hath  made  us  stronger ; * 

Who  with  his  voice  slew  many  thousand  wicked  ones  who 
spake  in  varied  manners  with  contemptuous  cries. 

Indra,  the  Vimadas  have  formed  for  thee  a laud,  copious 
unparalleled,  for  thee  Most  Bountiful. 

We  know  the  good  we  gain  from  him  the  Mighty  One  when  we 
attract  him  as  a herdsman  calls  the  kine. 

Ne’er  may  this  bond  of  friendship  be  dissevered,  the  Rishi 
Vhnada’s  and  thine,  0 Indra. 

We  know  thou  carest  for  us  as  a brother : with  us,  0 God,  be 
thine  auspicious  friendship. 

HYMN  XXIV.  Indra.  Asvins. 

0 Indra,  drink  this  Soma,  pressed  out  in  the  mortar,  full  of 
sweets. 

Send  down  to  us  great  riches, — at  your  glad  carouse — in  thou- 
sands, 0 Most  Wealthy.  Thou  art  waxing  great. 

To  thee  with  sacrifices,  with  oblations,  and  with  lauds  we  come. 
I''1  of  ali  strength  and  power,  grant— at  your  glad  carouse— 
the  best  choice-worthy  treasure.  Thou  art  waxing  great. 

Thou  who  art  Lord  of  precious  boons,  inciter  even  of  the  churl, 

ouardiau  0f  singers,  Indra, -at  your  glad  carouse— save  us 
rorn  woe  ail(d  hatred.  Thou  art  waxing  great. 

m"’  VdJa  ■ Indru,  combining  the  three  Ribhus  in  his  own 


With  the  Princes : with  the  Maruts. 

;h  moutur' J ■’  P^haps  the  rain  which  he  pours  upon  the  lightning 

“beroLac°n-fiGgard^  **  h2".  b^d.-Ludwig.  The  pleasant  place,  the 
‘ ' ntioe-  The  worshipper : or,  according  to  SAyana,  his  own  body. 


t*xt\ 


‘as  no  word  to  express  the  object  here. 
e stauza^0  ^ur^en  or  r®fralQ  of  Hymn  XXI.  is  employed  in  the  first 


Of  8^gers : 


worshippers  ; * eulogists.’— Wilson. 


414 


THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  X 


4 Strong,  Lords  of  Magic  power,  ye  Twain  churned  the  united 

worlds  apart, 

When  ye,  implored  by  Viinada,  Nasatyas,  forced  apart  the  pair 

5 When  the  united  pair  were  rent  asunder  all  the  Gods  com 

plained. 

The  Gods  to  the  N&satyas  cried,  Bring  these  together  onci 


6 


again. 

Sweet  be  my  going  forth,  and  rich  in  sweets  be  my  approacl 
to  home. 

So,  through  your  Deity,  both  Gods,  enrich  us  with  all  plea 
santness. 


HYMN  XXV.  • Some 


Send  us  a good  and  happy  mind,  send  energy  and  mental  power 
Then — at  your  glad  carouse — let  men  joy  in  thy  love,  Swec 
Juice  ! as  kine  in  pasture.  Thou  art  waxing  great. 


2 In  all  thy  forms,  0 Soma,  rest  thy  powers  that  influence  th 

heart. 

So  also  these  my  longings— at  your  glad  carouse— sprea< 
themselves  seeking  riches.  Thou  art  waxing  great. 

3 Even  if,  O Soma,  I neglect  thy  laws  through  my  simplicity, 
Be  gracious— at  your  glad  carouse — as  sire  to  son.  Preserv 

us  even  from  slaughter.  Thou  art  waxing  great. 

4 Our  songs  in  concert  go  to  thee  as  streams  of  water  to  th 

wells.  , , 

Soma,  that  we  may  live,  grant— at  your  glad  carouse  fui 
powers  of  mind,  like  beakers.  Thou  art  waxing  great. 

5 0 Soma,  through  thy  might  who  art  skilful  and  strong,  thes 

longing  men,  . 

These  sages,  have  thrown  open— at  your  glad  carouse- to 
stall  of  kine  and  horses.  Thou  art  waxing  great. 

6 Our  herds  thou  guardest,  Soma,  and  the  moving  world  sprea 

far  and  wide.  , , ■ 

Thou  fittest  them  for  living,— at  your  glad  carouse-loo*  , 
upon  all  beings.  Thou  art  waxing  great. 


4 Churned  ...apart : or  perhaps,  produced  by  churning  < °r  violent  agj^01 * * 4 5 
SAyana  explains  diffeiently  ‘ you  have  ckurued  forth  (the  nre;. 


1 The  first  half  line  of  this  stanza  has  occurred  before  as  the  „ 

X.  20.  The  double  burden  or  refrain  is  again  employed,  wita 

connexion  with  the  rest  of  the  stanza. 

4 Like  beaker t : filled  full,  like  chalices  of  Soma  juice.  h e by  & 

5 The  longing  men : the  priests.  Have  thrown  open,  etc. : av  > 
sacrifices,  opened  the  way  to  wealth. 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


415 


1YJ0  26.] 

7 On  all  sides,  Soma,  be  to  us  a Guardian  ne’er  to  be  deceived. 

1 King,  drive  away  our  foemen-— at  your  glad  carouse  let  not 
the  wicked  rule  us.  Thou  art  waxing  great. 

; J3C  watchful,  Soma,  passing  wise,  to  give  U3  store  of  vital 

strength. 

More  skilled  than  man  to  guide  us, — at  your  glad  carouse — 
save  us  from  harm  and  sorrow.  Thou  art  waxing  great. 

3 Chief  slayer  of  our  foemen,  thou,  Indu,  art  Indra’s  gracious 
Friend, 

When  warriors  invoke  him — at  your  glad  carouse— in  fight, 
to  win  them  offspring.  Thou  art  waxing  great. 

) Victorious  is  this  gladdening  drink  : to  Indra  dear  it  grows  in 
strength. 

This — at  your  glad  carouse — enhanced  the  mighty  hymn  of  the 
great  sage  Kakshivan.  Thou  art  waxing  great. 

1 This  to  the  sage  who  offers  gifts  brings  power  that  comes  from 

wealth  in  kine. 

This,  better  than  the  seven,  hath — at  your  glad  carouse — fur- 
thered the  blind,  the  cripple.  Thou  art  waxing  great. 

HYMN  XXVI.  Pashan. 

Forward  upon  their  way  proceed  the  ready  teams,  the  lovely 
songs. 

Further  them  glorious  P&shan  with  yoked  chariot,  and  the 
Mighty  Twain  ! 

2 With  sacred  hymns  let  this  man  here,  this  singer,  win  the 

i God  to  whom 

j Belong  this  majesty  and  might.  He  hath  observed  our  eulogies. 

Pushan  the  Strong  hath  knowledge  of  sweet  praises  even  as 
Indu  hath. 

He  dews  our  corn  with  moisture,  he  bedews  the  pasture  of 
our  kine. 

^ We  will  bethink  ourselves  of  thee,  0 Pushan,  0 thou  God, 
as  One, 


Adex^V^  ’*  a f^amous  Ptishi,  th.©  seer  of  some  hymns  of  Book  I.  See 

kplai^!vff^an  B€v1n:.  more  effectually  than  the  seven  priests.  SAyana 
L(7  .n?,  1 ,®ren%  : — ‘ it  gives  wealth  to  the  seven  (priests). — Wilson.  The 
L F e Dirghatamas,  according  to  SAyana.  The  cripple:  ParAvrij. 

^ both  names  in  Vol.  I.,  Index.  * 


[ccordimf  ' ordered  series  of  ogr  words.  The  Mighty  Twain : the  As  vine, 
r,  the  tw.>  ^ 7a-a>  da*r& = daffantya^, of  goodly  aspect,  applied  to Pftshan ; 
f tW0  P^formers  of  the  rite;the  Yajamdna  IndU*  wife. 


416  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  X. 

Who  brings  fulfilment  of  our  hymns,  and  stirs  the  singer  and 
the  snge.  iU 

5 Joint-sharer  of  each  sacrifice,  the  driver  of  the  chariot  steeds 

The  Rishi  who  is  good  to  man,  the  singer’s  Friend  and  faith- 
ful Guard. 

6 One  who  is  Lord  of  Sucha,  Lord  of  Sucha  caring  for  herself; 
Weaving  the  raiment  of  the  sheep  and  making  raiment  bean- 

tiful. 

7 The  mighty  Lord  of  spoil  and  wealth,  Strong  Friend  of  all 

prosperity ; 

He  with  light  movement  shakes  his  beard,  lovely  and  ne’er  to 
be  deceived. 

8 0 Pushan,  may  those  goats  of  thine  turn  hitherward  thy 

chariot-pole. 

Friend  of  all  suppliants  art  thou,  born  in  old  time,  and  firm 
and  sure. 

9 May  the  majestic  Pushan  speed  our  chariot  with  his  power 

and  might. 

May  he  increase  our  store  of  wealth  and  listen  to  this  call  of 
Ours. 


HYMN  XXVII.  Iudra 

This,  singer,  is  my  firm  determination,  to  aid  the  worshipper 
who  pours  the  Soma. 

I slay  the  man  who  brings  no  milk-oblation,  unrighteous, 
powerful,  the  truth’s  perverter. 

2 Then  will  I,  when  I lead  my  friends  to  battle  against  the 
radiant  persons  of  the  godless, 

Prepare  for  thee  at  home  a vigorous  bullock,  and  pour  for 
thee  the  fifteenfold  strong  juices. 


6 Sucha  and  SucM : names  of  a man  and  woman. — Ludwig.  According  M 
Sayana  and  Wilson,  ‘ the  pure  (he-goat)  and  the  pure  (she-goat).’ , Weaving 
the  raiment : * making  woollen  cloths  such  as  the  woollen  filter,  etc.'— Wilson. 
And  making  raiment  beautiful : or,  he  hath  made  vesture  pure  and  brig  in 
that  is,  says  Silyana,  he  hath  purified  all  aiound  with  his  heat  and  light. 

7 Friend : the  augmenter.  Shakes  his  beard : when  he  drinks  the 

* 8 Those  goats : Pilahan’s  chariot  is  said  to  be  drawn  by  a team  of  g°at0, 
Cf.  I.  38.  4. 

1 Indra  addresses  the  Rishi.  Powerful : dbhum : perhaps,  possessed  of  tb 

means  that  would  enable  him  to  offer  sacrifices.  ^ 

2 The  Rishi  replies.  Fifteenfold  strong  juices : according  to  ’ th 

juices  of  the  Soma-plant  whose  leaves  grow  during  the  light  half  of  the 
and  die  away  during  the  dark  half. 


THE  RIQVEDA. 


417 


tfMH  27.] 

3 I know  not  him  who  sayeth  and  declareth  that  he  hath  slain 

the  godless  in  the  battle. 

Soon  as  they  see  the  furious  combat  raging,  men  speak  forth 
praises  of  my  vigorous  horses. 

4 While  yet  my  deeds  of  might  were  unrecorded,  all  passed  for 

Maghavans  though  I existed. 

The  potent  one  who  dwelt  in  peace  I conquered,  grasped  by 
the  foot  and  slew  him  on  the  mountain. 

5 None  hinder  me  in  mine  heroic  exploits,  no,  not  the  moun- 

tains when  I will  and  purpose. 

Even  the  deaf  will  tremble  at  my  roaring,  and  every  day  will 
dust  be  agitated. 

6 To  see  the  Indraless  oblation-drinkers,  mean  offerers,  o’ertaken 

by  destruction  ! 

Then  shall  the  fellies  of  my  car  pass  over  those  who  have 
blamed  my  joyous  Friend  and  scorned  him. 

7 Thou  wast,  thou  grewest  to  full  vital  vigour : an  earlier  saw, 

a later  one  shall  see  thee. 

Two  canopies,  as  ’twere,  are  round  about  him  who  reacheth  to 
the  limit  of  this  region. 

3 The  freed  kino  eat  the  barley  of  the  pious.  I saw  them  as 

they  wandered  with  the  herdsman. 

Tiie  calling  of  the  pious  rang  around  them.  What  portion 
will  these  kine  afford  their  owner  ? 

) When  we  who  eat  the  grass  of  men  are  gathered  I am  with 
barley-eaters  in  the  corn-land. 

There  shall  the  captor  yoke  the  yokeless  bullock,  and  he  who 
hath  been  yoked  seek  one  to  loose  him. 

. l?^ra  8Pea,kB>  rebuking  the  Rishi  and  asciibing  all  victories  to  himself. 

4 The  potent  one:  the  powerful  fiend  Sambara,  for  instance. 
b Bust:  of  battle,  stirred  up  by  India. 

o see:  ddrsan  • according  to  S&yana,  I,  Indra,  see.  Obi ation -drinkers : 
o nemselves  consume  the  offerings  that  should  be  presented  to  Indra. 
an  offerers,  bdhukshdda h : literally,  arm-cutters.  Accoiding  to  von  Roth, 
simomoue  worshippeis  who  offer  the  forelegs,  or  inferior  parts  of  the 
ilsnn  rnima1,  ‘Who  cut  (the  worshippers)  to  pieces  with  their  hands.' — 
roiia  V ; Vishnu.— Ludwig.  Or  the  meaning  may  be,  your 

<1  rmtr  ’ ludra  himself,  the  friend  of  his  worshippers. 
jftr<  1 8Peaks.  An  earlier  saw:  the  meaning  of  the  half-line  is  not 

■lie  ^8t  *oes  ^av®  aIready  felfc  fchy  power,  and  otbeis  yet  shall  feel  it 
i *nc*ra  veriIy  destroys  (his  foe),  the  other  does  not  d«*troy 

5 Indr  ]■  Tw°  canopies : heaven  and  earth.  Him:  Indra. 

offer  h^6**8’  feariHgi  apparently,  that  the  worshipper  will  h*ve  no  milk 

) Opl 

L 18  ®°.  comment  on  this  obscure  verse,  and  WU^on  leaves  a blank 
! Editor  of  Wilson's  Translation,  Vol.  \L  Ludwig  says  that 

27 


418  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  I 

10.  There  wilt  thou  hold  as  true  my  spoken  purpose,  to  bring 
together  quadrupeds  and  bipeds. 

I will  divide,  without  a fight,  his  riches  who  warreth  here 
agaiust  the  Bull,  with  women. 

11  When  a man’s  daughter  hath  been  ever  eyeless,  who,  knowing, 

will  be  wroth  with  her  for  blindness? 

Which  of  the  two  will  loose  on  him  his  anger — the  man  \^c 
leads  her  home  or  he  who  woos  her? 

12  How  many  a maid  is  pleasing  to  the  suitor  who  fain  would 

many  for  her  splendid  riches? 

If  the  girl  be  both  good  and  fair  of  feature,  she  finds,  herself, 
a friend  among  the  people. 

13  His  feet  have  grasped  : he  eats  the  man  who  meets  him 

Around  his  head  lie  sets  the  head  for  shelter. 

Sitting  anear  and  right  above  he  smites  us,  and  follows  eaitli 
that  lies  spread  out  beneath  him. 

14  High,  leafless,  shadowlcss,  and  swift  is  Heaven  : the  Mother 

stands,  the  Youngling,  loosed,  is  feeding. 

Loud  hath  she  lowed,  licking  Another’s  offspring.  In  what 
woild  hath  the  Cow  laid  down  her  udder? 


Indra  declares  that  he  lias  brought  mou  and  cattle  together  and  made  the 
latter  subject  to  the  foitnor,  to  be  yoked  and  to  remain  yoked  when  and  u 
long  as  their  masters  please  According  to  this  interpretation,  the  first  half 
of  the  stanza  might  be  rendered  : ‘ Grass-eating  beasts  with  men  have  I con 
nected,  and  those  who  eat  grain  in  the  wide  spicad  corn-land.’ 

10  Against  the  Bull:  agaiust  me,  the  mighty  Indra.  ^With,  women,  with 
weak  allies. 

11  ‘Hitherto,’  says  Prof.  Ludwig,  ‘ it  is  possible  to  establish  a connexion 
and  interdependence  of  the  separate  strophes  ; with  sttophe  11  the  difficulty 
begins.’  On  him  • on  the  father.  Who  woos  her:  seeks  her  in  maruagefor 
his  fiiend  or  employer. 

12  Herself:  svaydm  chit : by  her  own  woi  th,  independently  of  her  dowry. 

13  His  feet  have  grasped  : Indra,  as  the  Sun,  has  seized  and  drawn  up  the 
water  of  the  riveis  with  the  rays  which  are  his  feet.  Eats  the  man  who  Mil 
him:  peihaps,  merely,  scorches  the  man  who  exposes  himself  to  his  burning 
rays.  According  to  S&yana,  ‘ feeds  upon,  i.  e.  takes  into  his  orb,  the  water 
that  approaches  him.’  Another  explanation  is,  that  the  pious  after  death  go 
to  the  Sun  and  become  sunbeams.--  Ludwig.  He  sets  the  head  for  shelter  :«* 
takes  the  height  of  heaven  as  a covering.  Anear  and  right  above  : in  his  meri- 
dian height.  Follows  earth  : descends  to  the  horizon  and  sets  beyond  it. 

14  LeajlesSy  shadowless : heaven  being  compared  to  a tree  that  overshadow 
the  earth.  According  to  S&y ana,  drvd  here  is  the  ever-moving  Sun. 
Mother : Ushas  or  Dawn.  According  to  S&yana,  mdt<X  here  means  ‘ the  hm 1 
(of  the  world).’  The  Youngling : or  Calf  ; Agni  who  feeds  on  the  °',la  1 
Sfo  : Heaven,  or  the  atmospheric  Prithivi,  roaring  as  the  rain  come*  J . 
Anothei'' * offspring  : Iudra  as  Aditya  or  the  Sun,  the  offspring  of  Adi 
what  world , etc . ; that  is,  who  knows  where  the  rain  cornea  from  1 

the  Sky.  The  second  half-stanza  has  occurred  before.  See  III.  55. 1 ■ j 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


HYMN  27.] 


419 


15  Seven  heroes  from  the  nether  part  ascended,  and  from  the 

upper  part  came  eight  together. 

Nine  from  behind  came  armed  with  winnowing-baskets  : ten 
from  the  front  pressed  o’er  the  rock’s  high  ridges. 

16  One  of  the  ten,  the  tawny,  shared  in  common,  they  send  to 

execute  their  final  purpose. 

The  Mother  carries  on  her  breast  the  Infant  of  noble  form 
and  soothes  it  while  it  knows  not. 

17  The  Heroes  dressed  with  fire  the  fatted  wether : the  dice  were 

thrown  by  way  of  sport  and  gaming. 

Two  reach  the  plain  amid  the  heavenly  waters,  hallowing  and 
with  means  of  purifying. 

18  Crying  aloud  they  ran  in  all  directions  : One  half  of  them  will 

cook,  and  not  the  other. 

To  me  hath  Savitar,  this  God,  declared  it  : lie  will  perform, 
whose  food  is  wood  and  butter. 

19  I saw  a troop  advancing  from  the  distance,  moved,  not  by 

wheels  but  their  own  Godlike  nature. 

The  Kiiondly  One  seeks  human  generations,  destroying,  still 
new,  bands  of  evil  beings. 

20  These  my  two  Bulls,  even  Pramara's,  are  harnessed : drive 

them  not  far ; here  let  them  often  linger. 

The  waters  even  shall  aid  him  to  his  object,  and  the  all-cleans- 
ing Sun  who  is  above  us. 


15  Seven  heroes : according  to  SAyana,  Visv&mitra  and  other  Rishis,  sons  of 
Prajftpati.  Eight : the  VAlakhilyas,  a numerous  race  of  divine  pygmies.  Nine: 
the  Bln igus.  Ten . Angirases.  Or,  alternatively,  seven  Maruts,  on  Indra’s 
right,  eight  on  Jus  left,  nine  behind  him,  and  ten  in  fiont.  These  explanations 
hy  Sdyana  cannot  be  accepted  ; but  it  is  hard  to  say  what  is  meant.  Ludwig 
thinks  Mat  the  various  classes  of  letters  of  the  alphabet  arc  intended.  His  iu- 
genicns  explanation  will  be  found  in  the  Pieface  to  his  fourth  volume  of  the 
B.gvcda,  pp.  xxxiii.— xxxv. 

16  The  tawny:  kapildm  • according  to  Sftyana,  the  famous  Ilishi  Kapila, 
,,  ^un  ? ’ — Grassmann.  The  Mother  : Night  1 — Grassmaun.  The  Infant : 
the  young  Sun,  if  the  Mother  is  Night. 

1 7 7 lie  fatted  wether : perhap  , the  swollen  rain-cloud  The  dice  * the  stars. 

Ti  ^UU  an<*  ^oon*  These  are  Ludwig’s  suggestions. 

I hey;  according  to  SAy ana,  the  Angirases.  Perhaps  the  contentious 
Agn*i  wk°m  Agni  the  veritable  priest  is  contrasted. — Ludwig.  Be : 

st*r8,  The  Friendly  One:  Indra  as  the  Sun.  Evil  beings: 
Sun  *^shasa«  an<*  spirits  of  darkness  that  vanish  at  the  coming  of  the 

best  ' 8t’eed«  according  to  SAyana.  Pramara's  : belonging  to  me,  the 
^ ^er  or. Death.  But  the  whole  stanza  is  obscure.  All-cleansing:  so 
fckint  auX^ain8  mar^>  which  von  Roth  interprets  by  * obscuration.'  Ludwig 

8 that  the  Moon,  ‘ the  obscurer  of  the  Sun’  is  meant. 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


420 


[BOOK  i 


21  This  is  the  thunderbolt  which  often  whirleth  down  from  the 

lofty  misty  realm  of  Surya. 

Beyond  this  realm  there  is  another  glory  : so  through  old  age 
they  pass  and  feel  no  sok-ow. 

22  Bound  fast  to  every  tree  the  cow  is  lowing,  and  thence  the  man- 

consuming birds  are  flying, 

Then  all  this  world,  though  pressing  juice  for  Indra  and 
strengthening  the  Rishi,  is  affrighted. 

23  In  the  Gods’  mansion  stood  the  first-created,  and  from  their 

separation  came  the  later. 

Three  warm  the  Earth  while  holding  stores  of  water,  and  Two 
of  these  convey  the  murmuring  moisture. 

24  This  is  thy  life  : and  do  thou  mark  and  know  it.  As  such,  hide 

not  thyself  in  time  of  battle. 

He  manifests  the  light  and  hides  the  vapour : his  foot  is  never 
free  from  robes  that  veil  it. 

HYMN  XXVIII.  Indra.  Vasukra, 

Now  all  my  other  friends  are  here  assembled:  my  Sire-in-Uw 
alone  hath  not  come  hither. 

So  might  he  eat  the  grain  and  drink  the  Soma,  and,  satisfied, 
return  unto  his  dwelling. 


21  This  is  the  thunderbolt : the  meaning,  probably  is,  ‘thin  dahhinA  or 
honorarium  given  to  the  priests  is  a veritable  thunderbolt.’ — Ludwig.  Bat,  as 
Wilson  observes,  the  stanza  may  be  ‘ intended  to  express  the  usual  themy  of 
rain  ; the  moisture  of  the  earth  being  drawn  up  into  the  solar  region  as  vapour, 
and  thence  descending  as  rain  by  the  action  of  the  Thunderbolt  and  the  wind’ 

22  According  to  S Ay  ana,  tree  here  means  ‘ bow,*  cw.  means  * bowstung,' 
and  man-consuming  birds  ‘deadly  arrows.’  The  general  meaning  is  that 
sacrifices  to  Indra  and  liberal  gifts  to  priests  will  not  free  men  from  the  fear 
of  death. 

23  The  first-created : the  ^clouds.  The  later:  the  waters  of  the  rain. 

Three:  Parjanya,  Vftyu.  and  Aditya  or  the  Sun.  Holding  stores  of  wiler: 
antiptth  : ‘Sowing  in  succession.’ — Wilson.  ‘ Following  the  water.’ — Ludwig. 
‘ Rich  in  water.’ — Grassmann  Two  : Vftyu  and  Aditya.  ..... 

24  According  to  Siiyana,  Indra  is  addressed.  The  following  is  Wilsons 
translation  of  Sdyana’s  paraphrase  of  the  stanza  : — ‘ That  thy  (divine  nature 
identified  with  the  sun)  is  the  cause  of  life  : and  know  such  (solar  form)  o 
his  (to  be  worthy  of  adoration)  at  the  sacrifice  ; conceal  nothing  : that  motion 
of  him  the  aU-cle&nsing  (sun)  makes  manifest  the  universe  ; it  absorbs  j 
moisture  ; it  is  nevei  discontinued  ’ The  robes  that  veil  the  foot,  or  rays,  o 
the  Sun  are  the  waters  into  which  they  are  supposed  to  vaniso. 

The  hymn  is  enigmatical  and  difficult  in  the  highest  degree,  and  neit 
S4yana  nor  later  scholars  have  succeeded  in  making  it  intelligible  throug  o 

The  Rishi  is  Vasukra  son  of  Indra,  and  the  hymn  is  mainly  ft 
between  the  Father  and  the  son.  Vasukra’s  wife  is  the  seer  as  well  as 
speaker  of  stanza  1.  . ^ 

1 This  stanza  is  spoken  by  Vasukra’s  wife  in  ignorance,  says  tM » e 
that  her  Father-in-law  Indra  is  present  in  disguise. 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


421 


nrMN  28.] 

2 Load  belloweth  the  Bull  whose  horns  are  sharpened : upon 

the  height  above  earth’s  breadth  he  standeth. 

That  man  I guard  and  save  in  all  his  troubles  who  fills  my 
flanks  when  he  hath  shed  the  Soma. 

3 Men  with  the  stone  press  out  for  thee,  0 Indra,  strong,  glad- 

dening Soma,  and  thereof  thou  driukest. 

Bulls  they  dress  for  thee,  and  of  these  thou  eatest  when, 
Maghavan,  with  food  thou  art  invited. 

4 Resolve  for  me,  0 singer,  this  my  riddle  : The  rivers  send  their 

swelling  water  backward  : 

The  fox  steals  up  to  the  approaching  lion : the  jackal  drives 
the  wild-boar  from  the  brushwood. 

5 How  shall  I solve  this  riddle,  I,  the  simple,  declare  the 

thought  of  thee  the  Wise  and  Mighty  1 
Tell  us,  well  knowing,  as  befits  the  season ; Whitherward  is 
thy  prosperous  car  advancing? 

6 Thus  do  they  magnify  me,  me  the  mighty  : higher  than  e^en 

high  heaven  is  my  car-pole. 

I all  at  once  demolish  many  thousands  : my  Sire  begot  me  with 
no  foe  to  match  me. 

7 Yea,  and  the  Gods  have  known  me  also,  Indra,  as  mighty,  fierce 

and  strong  in  every  exploit. 

Exulting  with  the  bolt  I slaughtered  Vritra,  and  for  the  offerer 
oped  with  might  the  cow-stall. 

8 The  Deities  approached,  they  carried  axes  \ splitting  the  wood 

they  came  with  their  attendants. 

They  laid  good  timber  in  the  fire-receivers,  and  burnt  the  grass 
up  where  they  found  it  growing, 

9 The  hare  hath  swallowed  up  the  opposing  razor : I sundered 

with  a clod  the  distant  mountain. 

The  great  will  I make  subject  to  the  little  : the  calf  shall  wax 
in  strength  and  eat  the  bullock. 

2 Indra  speaks.  The  Dull : tit  mighty  India. 

3 Vasukra  speaks. 

Indra  must  be  the  speaker,  although  S&yana  gives  the  stanza  to  Vasukra. 
ra  declares  his  power  to  alter  the  course  of  nature.  See  Wilson’s  Trans- 
lJ°n,  note  by  the  Editor. 

5 vasukra  speaks. 

ndra  speaks.  My  Sire:  or,  the  general  Father  Praj&pati.— SAyana. 

8 T)1*  I0,  sPR&ks,  and  tella  what  he  has  done  with  Indra’s  help. 

;-GUre  8tttnza  probably  an  account  of  the  Gods’  fin>t  sacrifice.  See 
aclea  ,eillsche  Studien,  I.  pp.  1/8 — 180.  According  to  Sftyana,  it  refers  to 
ferenc'Vl?®'  °I  .°l°u^8 9»  and  the  filling  of  the  rivers.  Ludwig  sees  in  it  a 

9 Of 2 3 * 5  6 * S,  0 beginning  of  agriculture.  Their  attendant t:  the  Maruts. 

w‘th  stanza  4. 


422 


THE  HYMNS  OP 


[fiOOtfj 

10  There  hath  the  strong-winged  eagle  left  his  talon,  as  a snared 

lion  leaves  the  trap  that  caught  him.  a 

Even  the  wild  steer  in  his  thirst  is  captured  : the  leather 
still  holds  his  foot  entangled.  P 


11  So  may  the  leather  strap  their  foot  entangle  who  fatten  on 

viands  of  the  Brahman. 

They  all  devour  the  bulls  set  free  to  wander,  while  they  them, 
selves  destroy  their  bodies’  vigour.  * J 

12  They  were  well  occupied  with  holy  duties  who  sped  in  person 

with  their  lauds  to  Soma. 

Speaking  like  man,  mete  to  us  wealth  and  booty  : in  heaven 
thou  hast  the  name  and  fame  of  Hero. 


2 


HYMN  XXIX. 


hidra, 


As  sits  the  young  bird  on  the  tree  rejoicing,  ye,  swift  Pair 
have  been  roused  by  clear  laudation, 

Whose  Herald-Priest  through  many  days  is  Indra,  earth’s  Guar- 
dian, Friend  of  men,  the  beat  of  Heroes. 


May  we,  when  this  Dawn  and  the  next  dance  hither,  be  thy 
best  servants,  most  heroic  Hero ! 

Let  the  victorious  cu*  with  triple  splendour  bring  hitherward 
the  hundred  chiefs  with  Kutsa. 


3 What  was  the  gladdening  draught  that  pleased  thee,  Indra  I 

Speed  through  our  doors  to  songs,  for  thou  art  mighty. 
Why  comest  thou  to  me,  what  gift  attracts  thee?  Fain  would 
I bring  thee  food  most  meet  to  offer. 

4 Indra,  what  fame  hath  one  like  thee  mid  heroes?  With  what 

plan  wilt  thou  act?  Why  hast  thou  sought  us? 

As  a true  Friend,  Wide-Strider ! to  sustain  us,  since  food 
absorbs  the  thought  of  each  among  us. 


10  The  application  of  this  stanza  is  not  apparent.  SAyana’s  explanation  of 
this  and  the  following  veiae  is  entirely  different  from  that  of  most  recent 
scholars. 

1 The  meaning  of  the  stanza  h obscure,  and  the  text  of  the  first  half-lin® 

is  unintelligible.  I follow  the  reading  which  SAyana  gives  in  his  Com- 
mentary, vdyo  instead  vd  y6,  * As  (the  bird)  who  deposits  its  young  (in  »w 

nest)  in  the  tree  (is)  eagerly  looking  around.’ — Wilson  Sioift  Paw  ' Asvina* 

2 Dance  hither : or,  come  dancing.  Cp  Milton’s  ‘Now  the  bright  morning 

star,  day’s  harbinger,  Comes  dancing  from  the  east.’  Triple  splendor  ■ 
perhaps  with  reference  to  Agni,  V.iyu,  and  S Cry  a.  — Ludwig.  Hundred 
the  Maruta  may  be  intended,  ‘hundred’  being  used  indefinitely.  Am*  ■ 
Indra’s  favourite  companion.  < . ^ 

4 Indra  is  reminded  that  the  protection  of  his  worshippers  is  hw  8P**V 
glory.  Wide-Strider ! : as  identified  with  the  Sun  ; ‘widely  renowned,  an 
ing  to  SAyana.  Pood : the  hymn  appears  to  have  been  * seen  ’ or  reveaie 
time  of  dearth  or  famine. ’—Ludwig, 


THE  RIQVEDA . 


423 


YMS  30.] 

5 Speed  happily  those,  as  SArya  ends  his  journey,  who  meet  his 

wish  as  bridegrooms  meet  their  spouses ; 

Hen  who  present,  0 Indra  strong  by  nature,  with  food  the  many 
sangs  that  tell  thy  praises. 

6 Thine  are  two  measures,  Indra,  wide,  well-meted,  heaven  for 

thy  majesty,  earth  for  thy  wisdom. 

Here  for  thy  choice  are  Somas  mixed  with  butter : may  the 
sweet  meath  be  pleasant  for  thy  drinking. 

7 They  have  poured  out  a bowl  to  him,  to  Indra,  full  of  sweet 

juice,  for  faithful  is  his  bounty. 

O’er  earth’s  expanse  hath  he  grown  great  by  wisdom,  the 
Friend  of  man,  and  by  heroic  exploits. 

8 India  hath  conquered  in  his  wars,  the  Mighty  : men  strive  in 

multitudes  to  win  his  friendship. 

Ascend  thy  chariot  as  it  were  m battle,  which  thou  slut  It 
drive  to  us  with  gracious  favour. 

HYMN  XXX.  Waters. 

As  ’twerc  with  swift  exertion  of  the  spirit,  let  the  priest  speed 
to  the  celestial  Waters, 

The  gloiious  food  of  Varuna  and  Mitra.  To  him  who  spreaded 
far  this  laud  I offer. 

2 Adhvaryus,  be  ye  ready  with  oblations,  find  come  long- 

ing to  the  longing  Waters, 

Down  on  which  looks  the  purple-tinted  Hag1"*  Dour  ye  that 
flowing  wave  this  day,  deft-handed. 

3 Go  to  the  reservoir,  0 ye  Adhv.iryu*”  worship  the  W aters 

Child  with  your  oblations. 

A consecrated  wave  he  now  wil’give  you>  80  Press  for  him  the 
Soma  rich  in  sweetness. 


5 Meet  his  wish : satisfy  b:‘>  Indra’s,  longing  for  Soma-libations. 

6 Thiae  are  two  mcaaur*  : Thy  maj**uty  or  gieatuess  is  vast  and  lofty  as 
heaven,  and  thy  wisdor  13  wide  as  earth  ; or.  4 with  confusion  of  the  measure 
and  the  thing  measv  otV  thou  h -at  measured  out  the  heaven  by  thy  greatness 
and  the  earth  by  *iy  wisdom.  See  Wallis,  Cosmology  of  the  Rigveda , p.  18. 

The  subj^t  is  the  ceremony  of  fetching  the  sacred  waters  required  for  the 
prquratioi  of  the  Soma  juice. 

1 T>  him  who  spreadeth  far ; Indra,  according  to  Sftyana. 

9 Tht  Purple-tinted  Eagle:  Soma,  the  Moon. 

3 2o  the  reservoir:  to  fetch  the  holy  Waters.  The  Waters' Child  usually 

S'n,  as  the  lightning  that  springs  from  the  clouds  or  waters  of  the  firraa- 
T.t?®  ^ Deity  who  produces  the  rain,  the  Moon.  See  Hillebrandt, 
* I.  3/4. 


424 


THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOO^i 


4 He  who  shines  bright  in  floods,  unfed  with  fuel,  whom  sage* 

worship  at  their  sacrifices  : 

Give  waters  rich  in  sweets,  Child  of  the  Waters,  even  those 
which  gave  heroic  might  to  Indra: 

5 Those  in  which  Soma  joys  and  is  delighted,  as  a young  man 

with  fair  and  pleasant  damsels. 

Go  thou  unto  those  Waters,  0 Adhvaryu,  and  purify  with  herha 
what  thou  infusest. 


6 So  maidens  bow  before  the  youthful  gallant  who  conies  with 

love  to  them  who  yearn  to  meet  him. 

In  heart  accordant  and  in  wish  one-minded  are  the  Adhvarytig 
and  the  heavenly  Waters. 

7 He  who  made  room  for  you  when  fast  imprisoned,  who  freed 

you  from  the  mighty  imprecation, — 

Even  to  that  Indra  send  the  meuth-rich  current,  the  wave  that 
gratifies  the  Gods,  0 Waters. 

8 Send  forth  to  him  the  meath-rich  wave,  0 Rivers,  which  is 

your  offspring  and  a well  of  sweetness, 

Oil-balmed,  to  be  implored  at  sacrifices.  Ye  wealthy  Waters, 
hear  mine  invocation. 


3 Send  forth  the  rapture-giving  wave.  0 Rivers,  which  Indra 
drinks,  which  sets  the  Twain  in  motion ; 

The  'veil  that  springeth  from  the  clouds,  desirous,  that 
wandt>.0th  triple-formed,  distilling  transport. 

10  These  winch. ,,  Streams  which  with  their  double  current,  like 

cattle-raiders,  the  l0Wer  pastures, — — 

Waters  which  dwell  ^gether,  thrive  together,  Queens,  Mothers 
of  the  world,  these,  ^shi,  honour. 

11  Send  forth  our  sacrifice  >;th  j,oly  worship,  send  forth  the 

hymn  and  prayer  for  gain  ‘''-riches. 

For  need  of  sacrifice  disclose  the  Mdder.  Give  gracious  hear- 
ing to  our  call,  0 Wateis. 


4 In  floods:  of  the  aerial  ocean.  Op  II  35.  4. 

5 With  herbs  • probably  Darbha  or  Ku*a  grass. 

C The  Waters  bow  to  Soma  as  maidens  to  their  lovers. 

9 The  Twain  : ubh6:  probably,  Heaven  and  Eartli  . Sity-na  explains  dif- 
ferently : — ‘which  sends  us  both  (kinds  of  fruit)  that  is,  ‘ thee,  uit,  whether 
reward  or  punishment,  of  the  present  life,  and  of  a former  life  — 1 *Vilson,#nd 
Editor’s  note.  Desirous  ■ eager  to  mix  with  the  Soma,  according 

but  the  meaning  of  auslndm  is  uncertain.  Ludwig  and  Hillebrandb  um^la 
it  by  * des  Usanas,’  belonging  to  Usanas  or  UsanV  Triple-forme  . 
with  two  admixtures.— Grassmnnn. 

10  Double  current : meaning,  probably,  the  two  kinds  of  watc 
respectively  Ekadhand  and  Vasatlvarl. 

11  Ditcbte  the  udder ; let  your  streams  flow. 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


JYMN  81.] 


425 


2 For,  wealthy  Waters,  ye  control  all  treasures : ye  brine 

auspicious  intellect  and  Amrit.  6 

Ye  are  the  Queens  of  independent  riches.  Sarasvati  give  full 
life  to  the  singer  ! 

3 When  I behold  the  Waters  coming  hither,  carrying  with  them 

milk  and  meath  and  batter, 

Bearing  the  well-pressed  Soma  juice  to  India,  they  harmonize 
in  spirit  with  Adhvaryus. 

|4  Rich,  they  are  come  with  wealth  for  living  beings.  0 friends, 
Adhvaryus,  seat  them  in  their  places. 

Seat  them  on  holy  grass,  ye  Soma-bringers,  in  harmony  with 
the  Offspring  of  the  Waters.  J 

5 Now  to  this  grass  are  come  the  longing  Waters  : the  Pious 
Ones  are  seated  at  our  w’orship. 

Adhvaryus,  press  the  Soma  juice  for  India:  so  will  the  service 
of  the  Gods  be  easy. 


HYMN  XXXI.  Visvedevaa. 

May  benediction  of  the  Gods  approach  us,  holy,  to  aid  us  with 
all  rapid  succours. 

Therewith  may  we  be  happily  befriended,  and  pass  triumphant 
over  all  our  troubles. 

i A man  should  think  on  wealth  and  strive  to  win  it  by  adora- 
tion on  the  path  of  Order, 

Counsel  himself  with  his  own  mental  insight,  and  grasp  still 
nobler  vigour  with  his  spirit. 

The  hymn  i3  formed,  poured  are  the  allotted  portions  : as  to 
a ford  friends  come  unto  the  Wondrous. 

, have  obtained  the  power  of  case  and  comfort,  we  have 
Decome  acquainted  with  Immortals. 

Tleased  be  the  Eternal  Lord  who  loves  the  household  with  this 
man  whom  God  Savitar  created. 

? hnga  Ary  a man  grace  him  with  cattle;  may  he  appear 
to  him,  and  be,  delightful.  F 

'theism .I]a.Wna,  dwclljng-placo  be  this  assembly,  where  in 
light  men  rich  in  food  have  gathered, 


2 faamtt:  as  chief  and  wisest  of  the  Water- Goddesses. 

,raisinnhe  I*“,Jation;  that  is>  Lu(lwig  suggests,  ‘ May  the  power 

The  Wondmu.  d . the  8anie  t,me  the  Gods  themselves  come  to  us/ 
The  EterZ,  Vn  P^haps.  Soma. 

lnstitiitor  of  f ''  .f”1.  According  to  SAyana,  PrajApati.  This  man  : 
18  him.  Bhaaa  a aacn"ce'  Savitar  has  given  him  life  and  now  let  Agni 
y • Aiyaman  as  Bhaga  who  distributes  wealth. 


426 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


IBOOK  \ 

Striving  to  share  the  praises  of  this  singer.  To  us  com 
strengthening  and  effectual  riches ! 

6 This  Bull’s  most  gracious  far-extended  favour  existed  first 

all  in  full  abundance. 

By  his  support  they  are  maintained  in  common  who  m ty 
A sura's  mansion  dwell  together. 

7 What  was  the  tree,  what  wood,  in  sooth,  produced  it,  froi 

which  they  fashioned  forth  the  Earth  and  Heaven  ? 

These  Twain  stand  fast  and  wax  not  old  for  ever:  these  hat 
sung  praise  to  many  a day  and  morning. 

8 Not  only  here  is  this  : more  is  beyond  us.  He  is  the  Bui 

the  Heaven’s  and  Earth’s  supporter. 

With  power  divine  he  makes  his  skin  a filter,  when  the  Ba 
Coursers  bear  him  on  as  Surya. 

9 He  passes  o’er  the  broad  earth  like  a Stega : he  penetrates  th 

world  as  Wind  the  mist-cloud. 

He,  balmcd  with  oil,  near  Vanina  and  Mitra,  like  Agni  in  th 
wood,  hath  shot  forth  splendour. 

10  When  suddenly  calved  the  cow  that  erst  was  barren,  she 

self-protected,  ended  all  her  troubles. 

Earth,  when  the  first  son  sprang  from  sire  and  mother,  cas 
up  the  Sami,  that  which  men  were  seeking. 

11  To  Nrishad’s  son  they  gave  the  name  of  Kanva,  and  lie  th 

brown  hued  courser  won  the  treasure. 

For  him  dark-coloured  streamed  the  shining  udder:  non 
made  it  swell  for  him.  Thus  Order  willec^it. 

6 This  B ill : Agni  as  the  Sun  The  Asura  is  Dyaus. 

8 Not  only  here  the  first  half-line  is  obscure.  ‘ Not  such  (is  their  power) 
there  is  another  greater  than  they’ — Wila<>n.  ‘There  is  no  other  thm| 
besides  like  unto  him  ’ — Wallis,  A filter  : puvltrain:  which  purifies  the  raji 
of  light  which  stream  through  it. 

9 A Stega.  said  to  be  a certain  biting  or  stinging  insect.  According 

S.iyana,  ‘ the  aggregation  of  rays,  the  Sun.’  Ludwig  conjectures  that  *pbuK 
share  ’ may  be  the  meaning.  . „ : 

10  This  stanza  is  very  obscure.  ‘The  cow  which  was  barren  is  the  * 
tree,  which  brings  forth  the  Aiionttha , and  from  the  wood  of  these  tw»  1 ^ 
are  made  the  arani,  the  two  pieces  of  wood  which  are  rubbed  toget  ®r^ 
produce  the  sacred  fire — the  upper  and  harder  piece  is  the  Stmi  (the 
Surna),  and  the  low^r  and  soft  is  the  Aswattha  (the  Ficus  religion).  — 

‘ The  verses  [7  —10]  deal  with  the  formation  of  the  three  main  com  poo  ^ 
of  the  universe,  heaven,  earth,  and  the  sun.  Of  the  first  two  the  po ' . 

little  to  tell  us  and  passes  on  at  once  to  the  third.  The  sun  is  ^ 
with  the  bull,  Agui  of  the  sacrifice,  and  the  earth  with  the  lower  ^ 
stick  anointed  with  ghee,  which  is  licked  up  [‘devours*  instead  ^ ^ 
up’  ] as  soon  as  fire  is  struck.’  —Wallis,  Co»inology  of  the  Rigveda,  pp  ^ \|ieJ 

11  This  stanza  appears  to  have  no  counexiou  with  the  hymn,  »n'  ^ 

plicable  as  it  stands  here.  See  I.  117.  8,  where  the  eon  of  Nrisha 
turned  as  a favourite  of  the  Asvins. 


Yuly  32  ] THE  RIO  HE  DA.  i2J 

HYMN  XXXII.  Indra, 

Forth  speed  the  Pair  to  bring  the  meditating  God,  benevolent 
with  boons  sent  in  return  for  boons. 

May  Indra  graciously  accept  both  gifts  from  us,  when  he  hath 
knowledge  of  the  flowing  Soma  juice. 

: Thou  wanderest  far,  0 Indra,  through  the  spheres  of  light  and 
realms  of  earth,  the  region,  thou  whom  many  praise  ■ 

j Let  those  who  often  bring  thee  to  their  solemn  rites  conquer 
the  noisy  babblers  who  present  no  gifts. 

3 More  beautiful  than  beauty  must  this  seem  to  me,  when  the 
son  duly  careth  for  his  parents’  line. 

Tho  wife  attracts  the  husban  1 : with  a about  of  joy  the  man’s 
auspicious  marriage  is  performed  aright.  * “ 

} This  beauteous  place  of  meeting  have  I looked  upon,  where 
like  milch-cows,  the  kine  order  the  marriage  train;  ? 

Where  the  Herd’s  Mother  counts  as  first  and  best  of  all,  and 
round  her  are  the  seven-toned  people  of  the  choir. 

5 The  Pious  One  hath  reached  your  place  before  the  rest : One 

only  moves  victorious  with  the  Rudras’  band. 

To  these  your  helpers  pour  out  meath,  Immortal  Gods,  with 
whom  your  song  of  praise  hath  power  to  win  their  gifts. 

6 He  who  maintains  the  Laws  of  Gods  informed  me  that  thou 

wast  tying  hidden  in  the  waters. 

Indra  who  knoweth  well,  beheld  and  showed  thee.  By  him 
instructed  am  I come,  0 Agni. 

' a3j3  *he  way  of  him  who  knows  it:  taught  by 

the  skilful  gmde  he  travels  onward. 


Iud-a-  My ^Version  of  the  Brat  line  follows  the 
•tifferent  < inrZ,  ud'Y18  *n  his  Commentary.  S.tyana’s  interpretation 
io,s|LW)  eJelm  • hl3 . llor8es  to  the  service  of  the 

rdise.  expectant  (of  his  arrival).’ — Wilson.  Both  gifts : oblation  and 

ht* Parents’  line:  by  marrying  and  becoming  a father  ; or  aa 
is  ^u*th  proclaimed  according  to  custom  in 


nw purema  line: 

lya£a  explains,  by  having  his 

iOrd  !n*tituted  him 
Wording  to  sTvana .the  meaning  of  this  half-line  is  uncertain. 

is  Stuti  o?  Praise  18  ^ c.omPany  °f  sacrifices  and  priests,  its 

toons,  or  tho  Hot-ir  nr?’  se%en  tone(f,  or  sevenfold,  are  the  metres,  or  the 
other  of  the  Mirtitf  Jm’  JIe,'d  s Mother  is  more  probably  Prisui,  the 
,(lra>  upon  this'  Wl u°le  s^uzai»  translated  by  Wilson  Shine, 

>Pr°ach)  as  milch  lrint^Ch-an?b<J1’  .°f  sacrlfice>  when  our  praises  desire  (thy 
^Pper  precedes^ C/J'kln«(de83re)  their  stalls  ; since  the  praise  of  me  the  wor- 
r th»  seven  of,  the  coinPauy>  a°d  this  person  accompanied 

5 The  Pioxii  n a^ln|>  Prints  is  the  offerer  of  praise.* 

6 ^c*  Perhans^Vam  sP°f3iid  worshipper  of  Gods,  One  only : Indra. 

Peiuaps  Soma,  Thou : Agni.  Cp.  I,  23.  20. 


423  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  * 

This  is,  in  truth,  the  blessing  of  instruction  : he  finds  the  path 
that  leads  directly  forward. 

8 Even  now  he  breathed  : these  days  hath  he  remembered.  Con- 

cealed,  he  sucked  the  bosom  of  his  Mother. 

Yet  in  his  youth  old  nge  hath  come  upon  him  : he  hath  grown 
gracious,  good,  and  free  from  anger. 

9 0 Kalasa,  all  these  blessings  will  wo  bring  them,  0 Kuruara- 

vana,  who  give  rich  presents. 

May  he,  0 wealthy  princes,  and  this  Soma  which  I am  bearir 
in  my  heart,  reward  you. 

HYMN  XXXIII.  Various  Deitii 

The  urgings  of  the  people  have  impelled  me,  and  by  the  nea 
est  way  I bring  you  PiUhnn. 

The  Universal  Gods  have  brought  me  safely.  The  cry  wi 
heard,  Behold,  Duhsasu  cometh  ! 

2 The  ribs  that  compass  me  give  pain  and  trouble  me  like  riv 

wives. 

Indigence,  nakedness,  exhaustion  press  me  sore  : my  mind 
fluttering  like  a bird’s. 

3 As  rats  eat  weavers’  threads,  cares  are  consuming  me,  tl 

singer,  Satakratu,  me. 

Have  mercy  on  us  once,  0 Indra,  Bounteous  Lord : be  thou 
Father  unto  us. 

4 I the  priests’  Kishi  chose  as  prince  most  liberal  Kurusravani 

The  son  of  Trasadasyu’s  son,  m 


8 Even  now  he  breathed  : began  to  show  signs  of  life.  The  connexion  be 
ween  stanzas  1 — 4 and  5 — 8 is  not  apparent.  Sucked  the  bosom  of  his  Mothe\ 
enjoyed  oblations,  in  the  shape  of  Soma  juice,  etc.,  produced  by  the  eaitb. 

9 The  meaning  of  Kalasa,  literally  ‘ pitcher*  or  ‘beaker,'  here  is  uncertai 
‘(Indra),  the  possessor  of  the  pitchers.’ — Wilson.  Ludwig  suggests  kaldsn 
as  the  right  reading  : — ‘ We  will  perform  these  holy  ceremonies  in  the 
minutest  details.’  Kurvsravuna  : accoiding  to  S&yana,  ‘ hearer  of  the  praif 
of  priests ; ’ but  probably  the  name  of  a prince,  as  in  the  following  hymn. 


1 Dvhsdsit:  literally,  ‘the  malevolent.’  Perhaps,  as  Ludwig  suggests, 
hostile  prince  whose  victory  over  Kurusravana  has  caused  the  distress  mei 
tioned  in  the  following  stanza. 

2 The  first  line  is  taken  from  I.  105.  8. 

3 This  first  line  is  taken  from  I.  105.  5 Weavers'  threads:  threads  steep® 

In  water,  according  to  Sdyana.  Once : ‘after  having  so  often  given  us  up 
misery.'— Ludwig.  ‘ , , 

4 The  Priests'  Rishi : higher  in  rank  than  the  other  priests.  Chose  ^ 
chose  to  keep  him  as  my  master  iu  order  to  go  out  to  battle  with  Hi®-  — 
man,  Sansh'it  Reader , p.  386. 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


429 


YMN  34.1 

Whose  three  bays  harnessed  to  the  car  bear  me  straight  on- 
ward : I will  laud 
The  giver  of  a thousand  meeds, 

The  sire  of  Upamasravas,  even  him  whose  words  were  passing 
sweet, 

As  a fair  field  is  to  its  lord. 

Mrrk,  Upamasravas,  his  son,  mark,  grandson  of  Mitratithi : 

I am  thy  father’s  eulogist. 

If  I controlled  Immortal  Gods,  yea,  even  were  I Lord  of  men, 
My  liberal  prince  were  living  still. 

None  lives,  even  had  he  hundred  lives,  beyond  the  statute  of 
the  Gods  : 

So  am  I parted  from  my  friend. 

HYMN  XXXI V.  Dice,  Etc. 

Sprung  from  tall  trees  on  windy  heights,  these  rollers  trans- 
port me  as  they  turn  upon  the  table. 

Dearer  to  me  the  die  that  never  slumbers  than  the  deep 
draught  of  Mujavan’s  own  Soma. 

She  never  vexed  me  nor  was  angry  with  me,  but  to  my  friends 
and  me  was  ever  gracious. 

For  the  die’s  sake,  whoso  single  point  is  final,  mine  own  devot- 
ed wife  l alienated. 

My  wife  holds  me  aloof,  her  mother  hates  me  : the  wretched 
man  finds  none  to  give  him  comfort. 

As  of  a costly  horse  grown  old  and  feeble,  I find  not  any  profit 
of  the  gamester. 

Others  caress  the  wife  of  him  whose  riches  the  die  hath  covet- 
ed, that  rapid  courser : 

This  and  tho  three  following  stanzas  are  said  to  be  consolatory  verses 
'eased  by  the  Rishi  Kavasha  to  Upamasravas  oil  the  death  of  his  father 

r&tithi. 

Were  I Lord  of  men;  as  one  of  the  Gods.  My  liberal  prince : Mitr&tithi. 
Beyond  the  statute  of  the  Gods .'  beyond  the  time  fixed  for  the  duration 

his  life. 

his  h7mn  has  been  placed  by  Grassmann  in  his  Appendix  as  a composite 
uction  consisting  of  incoherent  fragments.  See  Lauman,  Sanskrit  Reader, 
386,  389. 

, later,  Vibhltaka, 
times.  Rollers : 
which  the  finest 

8*nyh  point  is  final : the  speaker  has  apparently  lost  all  by  throw* 


' jj?nn9from  tall  trees : the  nuts  of  the  Vibhtdaka,  or 
ftl  erfVna^a  Bellerica)  were  used  as  dice  in  early 
7 rolling  dioe.  MtLjavin:  said  to  be  a mountain  on 


430  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  J 

Of  him  speak  father,  mother,  brothers  saying,  We  know  hin 
not : bind  him  and  take  him  with  you. 

5 When  I resolve  to  play  with  these  no  longer,  my  friend 

depart  from  me  and  leave  me  lonely. 

When  the  brown  dice,  thrown  on  the  board,  have  rattled,  lit 
a fond  girl  I seek  the  place  of  meeting. 

6 The  gamester  seeks  the  gambling-house,  and  wonders,  hi 

body  all  afire,  Shall  I be  lucky  ? 

Still  do  the  dice  extend  his  eager  longing,  staking  his  gain 
against  his  adversary. 

7 Dice,  verily,  are  armed  with  goads  and  driving-hooks,  deceiv 

iug  and  tormenting,  causing  grievous  woe. 

They  give  frail  gifts  and  then  destroy  the  man  who  wins 
thickly  anointed  with  the  player’s  fairest  good. 

8 Merrily  sports  their  troop,  the  three-and- fifty,  like  Savita 

the  God  whose  ways  are  faithful. 

They  bend  not  even  to  the  mighty’s  anger  : the  King  himsel 
pays  homage  and  reveres  them. 

9 Downward  they  roll,  and  then  spring  quickly  upward,  and 

handless,  force  the  man  with  hands  to  servo  them. 

Cast  on  the  board,  like  lumps  of  magic  charcoal,  though  cull 
themselves  they  burn  the  heart  to  ashes. 

10  The  gambler’s  wife  is  left  forlorn  nnd  wretched  : the  mothfl 

mourns  the  son  who  wanders  homeless.  j 

In  constant  fear,  in  debt,  and  seeking  riches,  he  goes  bl 
night  unto  the  home  of  others.  • 

11  Sad  is  the  gambler  when  he  sees  a matron,  another’s  wife,  ai 

his  well-ordered  dwelling. 

He  yokes  the  brown  steeds  in  the  early  morning,  and  whi 
the  fire  is  cold  sinks  down  an  outcast. 


4 Bind  him : he  has  staked  his  personal  freedom,  and  lost ; and  hia  peoi 
renounce  him 

7 Driving  hooks  : used  by  mahouts  or  elephant-drivers.  The  last  half  line 
the  stanza  is  difficult : — ‘ they  appear  to  the  gambler  covered  with  honey.’ 

8 Three  and-jifty : or,  perhaps,  thrice  five  in  number.  It  would  »PP® 

from  SAyana’s  Commentary  that  fifty-three  was  the  usual  number  of  dice  e 
ployed  ; and  yet  this  seems  hardly  probable.  Ludwig  suggests  ‘three  tin 
five’  as  the  meaning  heie  of  tripancMpih.  and  Prof.  Weber  w°u*“L 
tripafichatiuh  instead  of  tripafichdsah(Ueber  den  RdjasHya,  p.  72).  LikeSavi  , 
‘[disposing  men's  destinies]  like  the  god  S.’ — Muir.  I 

10  Riches : wealth  gained  by  robbery,  according  to  SAyapa.  J 

11  Yokes  the  brown  steeds:  begins  throwing  the  nut-dice.  When  the  /J 

cold:  * by  the  time  when  the  file  goes  out  he  has  stink  into  a e8  1 
wretch,’ — Muir.  f 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


431 


fifiV  35.] 

To  the  great  captain  of  your  mighty  army,  who  hath  become 
the  host’s  imperial  leader, 

To  him  I show  my  ten  extended  fingers  ; I speak  the  truth. 
No  wealth  am  I withholding. 

[ play  not  with  dice  : no,  cultivate  thy  corn-land.  Enjoy  the 
gain,  and  deem  that  wealth  sufficient. 

There  are  thy  cattle,  there  thy  wife,  0 gambler.  So  this  good 
Savitar  himself  hath  told  me. 

[ Make  me  your  friend  : show  us  some  little  mercy.  Assail  us 
not  with  your  teriific  fierceness. 

Appeased  be  your  malignity  and  anger,  and  let  the  brown 
dice  snare  some  other  captive. 

HYMN  XXXV.  Visvedevas. 

Thkse  fires  associate  with  Indra  are  awake,  bringing  their 
light  when  first  the  Dawn  begins  to  shine. 

May  Heaven  and  Earth,  great  Pair,  observe  our  holy  work. 
We  claim  for  us  this  day  the  favour  of  the  Gods. 

2 Yea,  for  ourselves  we  claim  the  grace  of  Heaven  and  Earth, 

of  Saryanavan,  of  the  Hills  and  Mother  Streams. 

For  innocence  we  pray  to  Surya  and  to  Dawn.  So  may  the 
flowing  Soma  bring  us  bliss  to-day. 

3 May  the  great  Twain,  the  Mothers,  Heaven  and  Earth,  this 

day  preserve  us  free  from  sin  for  peace  and  happiness. 

May  Morning  sending  forth  her  light  drive  sm  afar.  We  pray 
to  kindled  Agni  for  felicity. 

May  this  first  Dawn  bring  us  the  host  of  gracious  Gods  : 

rich,  may  it  richly  shine  for  us  who  strive  for  wealth. 

The  wrath  of  the  malignant  may  we  keep  afar.  We  pray  to 
kindled  Agni  for  felicity. 

> Dawns,  who  come  forward  witli  the  bright  beams  of  the  Sun, 
and  at  your  earliest  flushing  bring  to  us  the  light, 

12  The  great  captain : the  highest-numbered  of  all  the  dice.  Ten  fingers  : 
8W  that  I have  nothing  left. 

b This  stanza  is  a farewell  address  to  the  Dice.  Some  other : our  enemy. — 

iyana.  

The  hymn  or  lay  has  been  transliterated,  translated  in  prose,  and  freely 
produced  in  rhymed  octosyllabic  verse,  by  Dr.  J.  Muir,  0 S.  Texts,  V. 

It  has  also  been  translated  by  the  authors  of  the  Siebenzig  Lieder. 
J Indra:  as  a God  of  the  morning  light. 

r Of  Saryaniivdrif  of  the  Mills : according  to  S&yana,  ‘ of  the  mountains  of 
pyanftv&n/  a lake  in  the  distri*  t of  Kurukshetra.  I follow  Ludwig  in 
[iln£ ' both  pdrvatdn  and  sargafUlmtah  as  genitives. 

L I°ur  ‘ according  to  the  text  * their/  the  verb  iu  the  first  line  being  in 

,e  “*ird  person. 


432  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  l 

Shine  yo  on  us  to-day  auspicious,  for  renown.  We  pray  to 
kindled  Agni  for  felicity. 

6 Free  from  all  sickness  may  the  Mornings  come  to  us,  and  let 

our  fires  mount  upward  with  a lofty  blaze. 

The  Asvin  Pair  have  harnessed  their  swift-moving  car.  We 
pray  to  kindled  Agni  for  felicity. 

7 Send  us  tc-day  a portion  choice  and  excellent,  0 Savitar,  for 

thou  art  he  who  dealeth  wealth. 

I cry  to  DhishanA,  Mother  of  opulence.  We  pray  to  kindled 
Agni  for  felicity. 

8 Further  me  this  declaring  of  Eternal  Law,  the  Law  of  Gods, 

as  we  mortals  acknowledge  it ! 

The  Sun  goes  up  beholding  all  the  rays  of  morn.  We  pray  to 
kindled  Agni  for  felicity. 

9 This  day  we  pray  with  innoeonce  in  strewing  grass,  adjusting 

pressing-stones,  and  perfecting  the  hymn. 

Thou  in  the  Adityas’  keeping  movest  restlessly.  We  pray  to 
kindled  Agni  for  felicity. 

10  To  our  groat  holy  grass  I bid  the  Gods  at  morn  to  banquet, 

and  will  seat  them  as  the  seven  priests,— 

Varuna,  Indra,  Mitra,  Bhaga  for  our  gain.  We  pray  to  kindl- 
ed Agni  for  felicity. 

11  Come  hither,  0 Adityas,  for  our  perfect  weal : accordant  help 

our  sacrifice  that  we  may  thrive.  # 

Pushan,  Brihaspati,  Bhaga,  both  Asvins,  and  enkindled  Agni 
we  implore  for  happiness. 

12  Adityas,  Gods,  vouchsafe  that  this  our  home  may  be  praise 

worthy,  prosperous,  our  heroes’  sure  defence, 

For  cattle,  for  our  sons,  for  progeny,  for  life.  We  pray  t( 
kindled  Agni  for  felicity. 

13  This  day  may  all  the  Maruts,  all  be  near  us  with  aid : maj 

all  our  fires  be  well  enkindled. 

May  all  Gods  come  to  us  with  gracious  favour.  May  spoil  an 
wealth  be  ours,  and  all  possessions. 

7 Dhishand : a Goddess  who  presides  over  prosperity  ; according  to  Hill 

braudt,  the  Earth.  _ ^ In 

8 Further  me:  ‘May  that  glorification  of  the  gods  which  men  repe 

connexion  with  the  rite  preserve  me.’— Wilson. 

9 Movest  restlessly : perforinest  thy  duties,  according  to  SAya?*-  S 
pidly  burning  the  fuel  appears  to  be  intended. 


THE  EIQ VEDA. 


433 


rtfN  36.] 

He  whom  ye  aid,  0 Deities,  in  battle,  whom  ye  protect  and 
rescue  from  affliction, 

Who  fears  no  danger  at  your  milk-libation, — such  may  we  be 
to  feast  the  Gods,  ye  Mighty. 

HYMN  XXXVI.  Visvedevas. 

There  are  the  Dawn  and  Night,  the  grand  and  beauteous 
I’air,  Earth,  Heaven,  and  Varuna,  Mitra,  and  Aryaman. 

Indra  I call,  the  Maruts,  Mountains,  and  the  Floods,  Adityas, 
Heaven  and  Earth,  the  Waters,  and  the  Sky. 

May  Dyaus  and  Prithiv1,  wise,  true  to  Holy  Law,  keep  us  in 
safety  from  distress  and  injury. 

Let  not  malignant  Nirriti  rule  over  us.  We  crave  to-day  this 
gracious  favour  of  the  Gods. 

Mother  of  Mitra  and  of  opulent  Varuna,  may  Aditi  preserve 
us  safe  from  all  distress. 

May  we  obtain  the  light  of  heaven  without  a foe.  We  crave 
this  gracious  favour  of  the  Gods  to-day. 

May  ringing  press-stones  keep  the  Rakshasas  afar,  ill  dream, 
and  Nirriti,  and  each  voracious  fiend. 

May  the  Adityas  and  the  Maruts  shelter  us.  We  crave  this 
gracious  favour  of  the  Gods  to-day. 

I Full  flow  libations  ; on  our  grass  let  Indra  sit;  Brihaspati  the 

singer  laud  with  Sama  hymns  ! 

Wise  be  our  hearts’  imaginings  that  wo  may  live.  We  crave 
this  gracious  favour  of  the  Gods  to-day. 

> Ye  Asvius,  make  our  sacrifice  ascend  to  heaven,  and  animate 
the  rite  that  it  may  send  us  bliss, 

Offered  with  holy  oil,  with  forward-speeding  rein.  We  crave 
the  gracious  favour  of  the  Gods  to-day. 

r Hither  I call  the  band  of  Maruts,  swift  to  hear,  great,  purify- 
ing, bringing  bliss,  to  be  our  Friends. 

May  we  increase  our  wealth  to  glorify  our  name.  We  crave 
this  gracious  favour  of  the  Gods  to-day. 

' bring  the  Stay  of  Life,  who  makes  the  waters  swell,  swift- 
hearing, Friend  of  Gods,  who  waits  on  sacrifice. 

14  Who  fears  no  danger  ; who  feels  assured  that  his  worship  ot  the  Gods 

II  Protect  him. 

I ^ Waters : of  the  firmamer*. 

g Vywis  and  Pfithivi : Heaven  and  Earth.  Nirriti : Death  or  Destruction. 
males  the  waters  swell : apflm  ptrum  : * protector  of  the  waters.’ — 
’Drinker  of  the  waters.’— Ludwig.  Soma  is  meant.  See  IX.  76.  4. 
28 


434 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK 


May  we  control  that  Power,  Soma  whose  rays  are  bright.  ] 
crave  this  gracious  favour  of  the  Gods  to-day. 

9  Alive  ourselves,  with  living  sons,  devoid  of  guilt,  may  we* 
this  with  winners  by  fair  means  to  win. 

Let  the  prayer-haters  bear  our  sin  to  every  aide.  We  era 
this  gracious  favour  of  the  Gods  to-day. 

10  Hear  us,  O ye  who  claim  the  worship  of  mankind,  and  gi 

us,  0 jre  Gods,  the  gift  for  which  we  pray, 1 *  3 

Victorious  wisdom,  fame  with  heroes  and  with  wealth.  ]] 
crave  to-day  this  gracious  favour  of  the  Gods. 

11  We  crave  the  gracious  favour  of  the  Gods  to-day,  great  favo 

of  great  Gods,  sublime  and  free  from  foes, 

That  we  may  gain  rich  treasure  sprung  from  hero  sons.  11 
crave  this  gracious  favour  of  the  Gods  to-day. 

12  In  great  enkindled  Agni’s  keeping,  and,  for  bliss,  free  froma 

sin  before  Mitra  and  Vanina, 

May  we  share  Savitar’s  best  animating  help.  Wo  crave  thi 
gracious  favour  of  the  Gods  to-day. 

13  All  ye,  the  Gods  whom  Savitar  the  Father  of  truth,  and  Va 

run  a and  Mitra  govern, 

Give  ns  prosperity  with  hero  children,  and  opulence  in  kirn 
and  various  treasure. 

14  Savitar,  Savitar  from  east  and  westward,  Savitar,  Savitai 

from  north  and  southward, 

Savitar  send  us  perfect  health  and  comfort,  Savitar  let  ow 
days  of  life  be  lengthened  ! * ~ 

HYMN  XXXVII.  Sury« 

Do  homage  unto  Vanina’s  and  Mitra’s  Eye  : offer  this  solemi 
worship  to  the  Mighty  God, 

Who  seeth  far  away,  the  Ensign,  born  of  Gods.  Sing  praia 
unto  Sftrya,  to  the  Son  of  Dyaus. 

2 May  this  my  truthful  speech  guard  me  on  every  side,  wbf 

ever  heaven  and  earth  and  days  are  spread  abroad. 

All  else  that  is  in  motion  finds  a place  of  rest : the  wate 
ever  flow  and  ever  mounts  the  Sun. 

3 No  godless  man  from  time  remotest  draws  thee  down  wbf 

thou  art  driving  forth  with  winged  dappled  Steeds. 

One  lustre  waits  upon  thee  moving  to  the  east,  and,  Sfirya,  the 
arisest  with  a different  light. 

1 Vanina's  and  Mitra' s Eye:  Surya  or  the  Sun.  ‘The  eye  of  Hitt 

Varuna  and  Agni.’— I.  115.  1. 

3 Dappled  Steeds : ‘ with  Eta*as.’ — Ludwig.  Oneluttre:  by  night. 

115.  5 ; and  AitareyQ'Brdhinuna , III,  4.  44.  ‘One  ancient  radiance 


<YIUX  37.] 


TUB  BIG  VEDA . 


435 


0 saryft,  with  the  light  whereby  thou  seatterest  gloom,  and 
with  thy  ray  impellest  every  moving  thing, 

Keep  far  from  us  all  feeble,  worthless  sacrifice,  and  drive  awav 
disease  and  every  evil  dream.  J 


5 Sent  forth  thou  guardest  well  the  Universe’s  law  and  in  thv 
wonted  way  ariscst  free  from  wrath.  ’ J 

When  Sfirya,  we  address  our  prayers  to  thee  to-day,  may  the 
Gods  favour  this  our  purpose  and  desire.  J 


5 This  invocation,  these  our  words  may  Heaven  and  Earth  and 
Indra  and  the  Waters  and  the  Maruts  hear. 1 * * *  S * * ^ 

Ne’er  may  we  suffer  want  in  presence  of  the  Sun,  and,  living 
happy  lives,  may  we  attain  old  age.  b 

r Cheerful  in  spirit,  evermore,  and  keen  of  sight,  with  store 
of  children,  free  from  sickness  and  from  sin, 

Long-living,  may  we  look,  0 Surya,  upon  thee  uprising  day  by 
day,  thou  great  as  Mitra  is  1 J 


8 Sfirya,  may  we  live  long  and  look  upon  thee  still,  thee,  0 Far- 

seeing  One,  bringing  the  glorious  light, 

The  radiant  God,  the  spring  of  joy  to  every  eye,  as  thou  art 
mounting  up  o’er  the  high  shining  flood. 

9 Thou  by  whose  lustre  all  the  world  of  life  comes  forth,  and  by 

thy  beams  again  returns  unto  its  rest, 

0 Surya  with  the  golden  hair,  ascend  for  us  day  after  day, 
still  bringing  purer  innocence. 

10  ^ss  1,8  with  shine,  bless  us  with  perfect  daylight,  bless  us 

with  cold,  with  feivent  heat  and  lustre. 

Bestow  on  us,  0 Surya,  varied  riches,  to  bless  us  in  our  home 
and  when  wo  travel. 

1 to  our  living  creatures  of  both  kinds  vouchsafe  protection, 
both  to  bipeds  and  to  quadrupeds, 

That  they  may  drink  and  eat  invigorating  food.  So  grant  us 
health  aud  stiength  and  perfect  innocence. 

' ^ by  sorue  grievous  sin  we  have  provoked  the  Gods,  0 Deities, 
with  the  tongue  or  thoughtlessness  of  heart, 

that  guilt,  0 Vasus,  lay  upon  the  Evil  One,  on  him  who  ever 
leads  us  into  deep  distress. 

' %S«8p  17  riSest  another.’— Wilson.  See  Wallis,  Cosmology  of 

! % wonted  way  : wadkX  anu : ‘ after  the  swadhd  offerings. —Wilson. 

12  00c* ; or  floor  of  heaven. 

dwig^  ^ V ^ : here  probably  a kind  of  Diabolus  or  Devil.-— 


436 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOR  i 


HYMN  XXXVIII.  x 

0 Indra,  in  this  battle  great  and  glorious,  in  this  loud  din  c 
war  help  us  to  victory, 

Where  in  the  strife  for  kine  among  bold  ring-decked  me 
arrows  fly  all  around  and  heroes  are  subdued. 

2 At  homo  disclose  to  us  opulence  rich  in  food,  streaming  wit- 

milk,  0 Indra,  meet  to  be  renowned. 

Sakra,  may  we  be  thine,  the  friendly  Conqueror’s  : even  as  w 
desire,  0 Vasu,  so  do  thou. 

3 The  godless  man,  much-lauded  Indra,  whether  he  be  Dim  c 

be  Arya,  who  would  war  with  us, — 

Easy  to  conquer  be  for  thee,  with  us,  these  foes : with  thee  ma 
we  subdue  them  in  the  clash  of  fight. 

4 Him  who  must  bo  invoked  by  many  and  by  few,  who  standetl 

nigh  with  comfort  in  the  war  of  men, 

India,  famed  Hero,  winner  in  the  doadly  strife,  let  us  biiq 
hitherward  to-day  to  favour  us. 

5 For,  Indra,  I have  heard  thee  called  Self-capturer,  One,  Steer 

who  never  yields,  who  urges  even  the  churl. 

Release  thyself  from  Kutsa  and  come  hither.  How  shallow 
like  thee  sit  still  bound  that  be  may  not  move? 

HYMN  XXXIX.  Asvins 

Aa  ’twere  the  name  of  father,  easy  to  invoke,  we  all  assembler 
here  invoke  this  Car  of  yours, 

Asvins,  your  swiftly-rolling  circumambient  (far  which  he  whe 
worships  must  invoke  at  eve  and  dawn. 

2 Awake  all  pleasant  strains  and  let  the  hymns  flow  forth  : raisf 
up  abundant  fulnoss  : this  is  our  desire. 

Asvins,  bestow  on  us  a glorious  heritage,  and  give  our  princeH 
treasure  fair  as  Soma  is. 

1 Ring-decked : adorned  with  armlets,  or  quoits  as  weapons. 

5 Self-ca/pturer  : it  is  difficult  to  assign  a reasonable  and  appropriate  mean 
ing  to  fvavrijam.  Sftyana  explains  it  by  svayam  eva  chhettdram,  1 one  who  cut) 
himself;’  ‘ self  mutilator.’ — Wilson.  According  to  the  St.  Petersburg  t®*1' 
coo,  the  meaning  is  ‘one  who  appropriates  or  takes  to  himself;’  according tj 
Ludwig  ‘ the  self- rescuer,’  and  according  to  Geklner  ‘ one  who  suffers  hiu^ 
to  be  captured.’  The  poet  calls  on  Indra  to  tear  himself  away  from  his  f&voU. 
ite  Kutsa  in  order  to  aid  his  worshippers  in  the  coming  fight.  ‘ A legen 
here  somewhat  obscurely  related,  that  KuUa  and  Lufa  having  aummone  ^ 
dra  at  the  same  time  to  their  respective  sacrifices,  he  went  first  to  Atdja 

then  detained  him,  having  fastened  him  with  a hundred  leather  t M 

This  verse  is  addressed  to  Indra  by  Lmat  exhorting  him  to  free  hinwe  1 
Wilson.  

The  Rishi  is  Ghoshft,  daughter  of  Kakshlv&n. 


THE  kIGVEDA. 


437 


l$YMN  39.] 

3 Yc  are  the  bliss  of  her  who  groweth  old  at  home,  and  helpers 

of  the  slow  although  he  linger  last. 

Men  call  you  too,  Nasatyas,  healers  of  the  blind,  the  thin  and 
feeble,  and  the  man  with  broken  bones. 

4 Ye  made  Chyavann,  weak  and  worn  with  length  of  days, 

young  again,  like  a car,  that  he  had  power  to  move. 

Ye  lifted  up  the  sou  of  Tugra  from  the  floods.  At  our  liba- 
tions must  all  these  your  acts  be  praised. 

5 We  will  declare  among  the  folk  your  ancient  deeds  heroic ; 

yea,  ye  were  Physicians  bringing  health. 

You,  you  who  must  be  lauded,  will  we  bring  for  aid,  so  that 
this  foe  of  ours,  0 Asvins,  may  believe. 

6 Listen  to  me,  0 Asvins ; I have  cried  to  you.  Give  me  your 

aid  as  sire  and  mother  aid  their  son. 

Poor,  without  kin  or  friend  or  ties  of  blood  am  I.  Save  me, 
before  it  be  too  late,  from  this  my  curse. 

7 Ye,  mounted  on  your  chariot  brought  to  Vimada  the  comely 

maid  of  Purumitra  as  a bride. 

Ye  came  unto  the  calling  of  the  weakling’s  dame,  and  granted 
noble  offspring  to  the  happy  wife. 

8 Ye  gave  again  the  vigour  of  his  youthful  life  to  the  sage  Kali 

when  old  age  was  coming  nigh. 

Ye  rescued  Vandana  and  raised  him  from  the  pit,  and  in  a 
moment  gave  Vispala  power  to  move. 

9 Ye,  Asvins  Twain,  endowed  with  manly  strength,  brought 

forth  Rebha  when  hidden  in  the  cave  and  well-nigh  dead, 
Freed  Saptavadhri,  and  for  Atri  caused  the  pit  heated  with 
fire  to  be  a pleasant  resting-place. 

10  On  Pedu  ye  bestowed,  Asvins,  a courser  white,  mighty  with 

nine-and-uiuety  varied  gifts  of  strength, 

A horse  to  be  renowned,  who  bore  his  friend  at  speed,  joy-giv- 
ing, Bhaga-like  to  be  invoked  of  men. 


3 Of  her  who  groweth  old  at  home : referring  to  Ghoshft  herself.  See  I.  17.  7. 
Healers  of  the  blind  ; see  I.  112.  8. 

4 Chyavdna : see  I.  118.  10,  and  117.  13.  Son  of  Tugra:  Bhujyu.  See 
Vol*  1.,  Index. 

3 My  curse : leprosy,  which  prevented  her  marriage. 

7 Vimada  .*  see  I.  117.  20.  Th <;  weakling's  dame : see  I.  117.  24. 

8 For  Kali,  Vandana,  and  Vispald  in  this  stanza,  and  Rebha , Atri , and 

iu  9 and  10,  see  Yol.  I.,  Index.  For  Saptavadhn  (stanza  9)  see  V.  78.  6. 


438  THE  HYMtiS  OP  [BOOK  l 

11  From  no  side,  ye  Two  Kings  whom  none  may  check  or  stav 

doth  grief,  distress,  or  danger  come  upon  the  man 
Whom,  Asvins  swift  to  hear,  borne  on  your  glowing  path,  y, 
with  your  Consort  make  the  foremost  in  the  race. 

12  Come  on  that  Chariot  which  the  Ribhus  wrought  for  you 

the  Chariot,  Asvins,  that  is  speedier  than  thought, 

At  harnessing  whereof  Heaven’s  Daughter  springs  to  birth 
and  from  Vivasvan  come  auspicious  Night  and  Day. 

13  Come,  Conquerors  of  the  sundered  mountain,  to  our  home 

Asvins  who  made  the  cow  stream  milk  for  Sayu’s  sake, 

Ye  who  delivered  even  from  the  wolf’s  deep  throat  and  sei 
again  at  liberty  the  swallowed  quail. 

14  We  have  prepared  this  laud  for  you,  0 Asvins,  and,  like  thi 

Bhrigus,  as  a car  have  framed  it, 

Have  decked  it  as  a maid  to  meet  the  bridegroom,  and  brough 
it  as  a son,  our  stay  for  ever. 

HYMN  XL.  Asviua 

Your  radiant  Chariot — whither  goes  it  on  its  way  ? — who  decks 
it  for  you,  Heroes,  for  its  happy  course, 

Starting  at  daybreak,  visiting  each  morning  every  house,  borne 
hitherward  through  prayer  unto  the  sacrifice? 

2 Where  are  ye,  Asvins,  in  the  evening,  where  at  mom  ? Where 

is  your  halting-place,  where  rest  ye  for  the  night? 

Who  brings  you  homeward,  as  the  widow  bedward  draws  hei 
husband’s  brother,  as  the  bride  attracts  the^room? 

3 Early  ye  sing  forth  praise  as  with  a herald’s  voice,  and,  mcel 

for  worship,  go  each  morning  to  the  house. 

Whom  do  ye  ever  bring  to  ruin  ? Unto  whose  libations  come 
ye,  Heroes,  like  two  Sons  of  Kings? 


11  Whom,  none  may  check  or  stay  : adite  — adinau. — S&yana.  Your  Consort: 
SuryA.  The  foremost  in  the  race  : that  is,  generally,  preeminent. 

12  Heaven's  Daughter : Ushas  or  Dawn.  Vivasvdn:  the  morning  Sun. 

18  Conquerors  of  the  sundered  mountain:  probably  with  reference  to  the 

deliverance  of  Jjfliusha, — Ludwig.  See  I.  110.  20.  The  swallowed  quail : 

I.  112.  8 The  quail  is  probably  Dawn  delivered  from  the  jaws  of  the  wolf 
Night  by  the  twin  Light-Gods. 

14  Our  stay  for  ever : who  will  perpetuate  our  family  ; ‘ the  eternal  per* 
former  of  rites.’ — Wilson. 

2 As  the  widow : in  certain  circumstances  a widow  was  bound  to  marry  her 
deceased  husband’s  brother.  See  Manu  ( MdnavadharmoffistraJ,  IX.  69.  < • 
The  law  of  the  Jews  was  the  Bnme.  See  Deuteronomy,  xxv.  6. 

8 A*  with  a herald's  voice ; Hpayd  is  thus  explained  by  Sftya^a.  The hQVi  * 
of  the  sacrifioer. 


THE  RIGVEDA. 


439 


1YMN  40.] 


4 Even  as  hunters  follow  two  wild  elephants,  we  with  oblations 

call  you  down  at  morn  and  eve. 

To  folk  who  pay  you  offerings  at  appointed  times,  Chiefs,  Lords 
of  splendour,  ye  bring  food  to  strengthen  them. 

5 To  you,  0 Asvins,  came  the  daughter  of  a King,  Ghosha,  and 

said,  0 Heroes,  this  I beg  of  you  : 

Be  near  me  in  the  day,  be  near  me  in  the  night:  help  me  to 
gain  a car-borne  chieftain  rich  in  steeds. 

6 0 Asvins,  ye  are  wise  : as  Kutsa  comes  to  men,  bring  your  car 

nigh  the  folk  of  him  who  sings  your  praise. 

The  bee,  0 Asvins,  bears  your  honey  in  her  mouth,  as  the 
maid  carries  it  purified  in  her  hand. 

7 To  Bhujyu  and  to  Vasa  ye  came  near  with  help,  0 Asvins,  to 

Sinjara  and  to  Usana. 

Your  worshipper  secures  your  friendship  for  himself.  Through 
your  protection  I desire  felicity. 

Krisa  and  Suyu  ye  protect,  ye  Asvins  Twain  : ye  Two  assist 
the  widow  and  the  worshipper; 

And  ye  throw  open,  Asvins,  unto  those  who  win  the  cattle-stall 
that  thunders  with  its  sc\ enfold  mouth. 

) The  Woman  hath  brought  forth,  the  Infant  hath  appeared, 
the  plants  of  wondrous  beauty  stiaightway  have  sprung  up. 
To  him  the  rivers  run  as  down  a deep  descent,  and  ho  this 
day  becomes  their  master  and  their  lord. 

) They  mourn  the  living,  cry  aloud,  at  sacrifice:  the  men  have 
set  their  thoughts  upon  a distant  cast. 

A lovely  thing  for  fathers  who  have  gathered  here, — a joy  to 
husbands, — are  the  wives  their  arms  shall  clasp. 


5 The  second  half  of  the  second  line  is  difficult : ' be  able  (to  grant  favour) 

) the  son  of  my  brother,  who  has  horses  and  a chariot.  Wilson. 

6 As  Kutsa  comes  to  men  • borne  on  India’s  chariot.  Bears  yow  honey  . 
ps  honey  when  the  Asvins  have  ushered  in  the  day.  As  the  maid : Dr. 
luirand  Prof.  Qrassmaun  explain  this  half-line  ditfeiently,  ‘as  a maid,  or  a 
foman,  resorts  to  her  rendezvous  (with  her  lover).’ 

7 Vasa:  see  I 112.  10  Sinjdt .„ : see  VIII.  5.  25.  VftnA  • see  Vol.  I.,  Index. 

8 Krisa:  a Rishi  favoured  by  Indra  ; or.  as  Sdyana  explains  the  word  hare, 
:he  feeble  man  in  general.  Styn:  lias  been  mentioned  frequently.  Me 
'dttle-stall : the  rain-cloud  whose  watei  s are  the  cows. 

9 The  Woman ; perhaps  the  water  of  the  cloud.  The  Infant : the  lightuing. 
Io  him : the  sacriftcer  may  perhaps  be  intended. 

,10  They  mourn  the  living  : perhaps,  show  their  sorrow  for  the  widower  at 
Ike  fuueral  of  his  wife.  See  Lanmau  {Sanlkrit  Reader,  p 38J).,fl0“  ^ “ 
have  bon  owed.  Set  their  thoughts  upon  a distant  cast :< of  the 
&n&ring.net : apparently  a periphrasis  for,  bav*  taken  thought  for  the  distan 
Lture  and  children  to  live  after  them. 


440  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  i 

1 1 Of  this  we  have  no  knowledge.  Tell  it  forth  to  us,  how  the 

youth  rests  within  the  chambers  of  the  bride. 

Fain  would  we  reach  the  dwelliug  of  the  vigorous  Steer  whc 
loves  the  kine,  0 Asvins : this  is  our  desire. 

12  Your  favouring  grace  hath  come,  ye  Lords  of  ample  wealth 

Asvins,  our  longings  are  stored  up  within  your  hearts. 

Ye,  Lords  of  splendour,  have  become  our  twofold  guard : mai 
we  as  welcome  friends  reach  Aryaman’s  abode. 

13  Even  so,  rejoicing  in  the  dwelling-place  of  man,  give  hero  sou 

and  riches  to  the  eloquent. 

Make  a ford,  Lords  of  splendour,  where  men  well  may  drink 
remove  the  spiteful  tree-stump  standing  in  the  path. 

14  0 Asvins,  Wonder-Workers,  Lords  of  lustre,  where  and  witl 

what  folk  do  ye  delight  yourselves  to-day? 

Who  hath  detaiued  them  with  him?  Whither  are  they  gone 
Unto  what  sage’s  or  what  worshipper’s  abode? 

HYMN  XLI.  Asvinf 

That  general  Car  of  yours,  invoked  by  many  a man,  thai 
comes  to  our  libations,  three-wheeled,  meet  for  lauds, 

That  circumambient  Car,  worthy  of  sacrifice,  we  call  with  oui 
pure  hymns  at  earliest  flush  of  dawn. 

2 Ye,  O Nasatyas,  mount  that  early-harnessed  Car,  that  travel 

early,  laden  with  its  freight  of  balm, 

Wherewith  ye,  Heroes,  visit  clans  who  sacrifice,  even  the  pool 
man’s  worship  where  the  priest  attends. 

3 If  to  the  deft  Adhvaryu  with  the  meath  in  hand,  or  to  the 

Kindler  firm  in  strength,  the  household  frieud, 

Or  to  the  sage’s  poured  libations  ye  approach,  come  thence,  0 
Asvins,  now  to  drink  the  offered  meath. 


11  Gliosliit  appears  to  speak  of  herself  in  the  plural  number.  She  plainlj 
expresses  her  wishes  for  marriage. 

12  Aryaman' $ abode : Aryaman  is  here  used  in  the  original  sense  of  tb 
word,  bosom-friend  and  companion,  especially  the  friend  who  asks  a womai 
in  marriage  for  another. 

Prof.  Grassmatm  places  stanzas  10—14  in  his  Appendix  as  being  obscun 
and  in  his  opinion  forming  no  part  of  the  original  hymn. 


1 Three-wheeled,:  see  I.  34.  9. 

3 The  Kindler : the  Aguidh,  the  priest  who  kindles  the  sacrificial  fire. 


BTMX  42] 


THE  MOVED  A. 


441 


HYMN  XLII.  Indra. 

Even  as  an  archer  shoots  afar  his  arrow,  offer  the  laud  to  him 
with  meet  adornment. 

Quell  with  your  voice  the  wicked’s  voice,  0 sages.  Singer, 
make  Indra  rest  beside  the  Sonia. 

2 Draw  thy  Friend  to  thee  like  a cow  at  milking : 0 Singer, 

wnke  up  Indra  as  a lover. 

Make  thou  the  Hero  haste  to  give  us  riches  even  as  a vessel 
filled  brimful  with  treasure. 

3 Why,  Maghavan,  do  they  call  thee  Bounteous  Giver  1 Quicken 

me  : thou,  I hear,  art  he  who  quickens. 

Sakra,  let  my  intelligence  be  active,  and  bring  us  luck  that 
finds  great  wealth,  0 Indra. 

4 Standing,  in  battle  for  their  rights,  together,  the  people, 

Indra,  in  the  fray  invoke  thee. 

Him  who  brings  gifts  the  Hero  makes  his  comrade  : with  him 
who  pours  no  juice  he  seeks  not  friendship. 

5 Whoso  with  plenteous  food  for  him  expresses  strong  Somas  as 

much  quickly-coming  treasure, 

For  him  ho  overthrows  in  early  morning  his  swift  well-weapon- 
ed  foes,  and  slays  the  tyrant. 

6 He  unto  whom  we  offer  praises,  Indra,  Maghavan,  who  hath 

joined  to  ours  his  wishes, — 

Before  him  even  afar  the  foe  must  tremble  : low  before  him 
must  bow  all  human  glories. 

7 With  thy  fierce  bolt,  0 God  invoked  of  many,  drive  to  a 

distance  from  afar  the  foeman. 

0 Indra,  give  us  wealth  in  com  and  cattle,  and  make  thy 
singer’s  prayer  gain  strength  and  riches. 

8 Indra,  the  swallower  of  strong  libations  rich  in  the  boons 

they  bring,  the  potent  Somas, 

He,  Maghavan,  will  not  restrict  his  bounty  : he  brings  much 
wealth  unto  the  Soma-presser. 

9 Yea,  by  superior  play  he  wins  advantage,  when  he,  a gambler, 

piles  his  gains  in  season. 

Colestial-iiatured,  he  o’erwhelms  writh  riches  the  devotee  who 
keeps  not  back  his  treasure. 

1 weed's  voice : ‘ the  praises  of  your  adversaries.' — Wilson. 

4 The  Her  o:  Indra. 

jn  ’ wucA  quickly -coming  treamre  : representing  the  wealth  which  the  oEfer- 
| ot  the  libations  is  expected  to  produce. 

nto  whom  we  offer  praites : or,  iu  whom  we  have  placed  our  hope. 
y H am  he,  a gambltr : cp.  X.  43.  5. 


442 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK  % 


10  0 Much-invoked,  may  we  subclue  all  famine  and  evil  want 
with  store  of  grain  and  cattle. 

May  we  allied,  as  first  in  rank,  with  princes  obtain  possessions 
by  our  own  exertion. 


1 1 Brihaspati  protect  us  from  the  rearward,  and  from  above,  and 
from  below,  from  sinners  ! 

May  Indra  from  the  front,  and  from  the  centre,  as  Friend  to 
friends,  vouchsafe  us  room  and  freedom. 


HYMN  XLIII.  Indra. 

In  perfect  unison  all  yearning  hymns  of  mine  that  find  the 
light  of  heaven  have  sum*  forth  Indra’s  praise. 

As  wives  embrace  their  lord,  the  comely  bridegroom,  so  they 
compass  Magh.ivan  about  that  he  may  help. 

2 Directed  unto  thee  my  spirit  never  strays,  for  I have  set  my 

hopes  on  thee,  0 Much-invoked  ! 

Sit,  Wonderful1  as  King  upon  the  sacred  grass,  and  let  thy 
drinking-placo  be  by  the  Soma  juice. 

3 From  indigence  and  hunger  Indra  turns  away  : Maghavan 

hath  dominion  over  precious  wealth. 

These  the  Seven  Rivers  flowing  on  their  downward  path  in- 
crease the  vital  vigour  of  the  potent  Steer. 

4 As  on  the  fair-leafed  tiee  rest  birds,  to  Indra  flow  the  gladden- 

ing Soma  juices  that  the  bowls  contain. 

Their  face  that  glows  wi(h  splendour  through  their  mighty 
power  hath  found  the  shine  of  heaven  fo%man,  the  Arps’ 
light. 

5 As  in  the  game  a gambler  piles  his  winnings,  so  Maghavan, 

sweeping  all  together,  gained  the  Sun. 

This  mighty  deed  of  thine  none  other  could  achieve,  none, 
Maghavan,  before  thee,  none  in  recent  time. 

6 Maghavan  came  by  turns  to  all  the  tribes  of  men  : the  Steer 

took  notice  of  the  people’s  songs  of  praise. 

The  man  in  whose  libations  Sakra  hath  delight  by  means  of 
potent  Somas  vanquisheth  bis  foes. 

10  With  prince*  : with  men  eminent  for  their  wealth  : rdjabhir-dhandnd 
mlfvaraih. — SAyana. 


8 Turns  away : SAyana  makes  vukuvrit  transitive  : — ‘ May  Indra  be  tb« 
remover  of  thirst  and  haugt-r.’ — Wilson.  , ^ 

5 Gained  the  Sun:  conquers  him  by  taking  away  hie  moisture,  that 
water  that  he  has  absorbed.— SAyana. 


gYMN  44.]  THE  R10VEDA . 443 

7 When  Soma  streams  together  unto  Indra  flow  like  waters  to 

the  river,  rivulets  to  the  lake, 

In  place  of  sacrifice  sages  exalt  his  might,  as  the  rain  swells 
the  corn  by  moisture  sent  from  heaven. 

8 He  rushes  through  the  region  like  a furious  Hull,  he  who  hath 

made  these  floods  the  dames  of  worthy  lords. 

This  Maghavan  hath  found  light  for  the  man  who  biings  ob- 
, lation,  sheds  the  juice,  and  promptly  pours  his  gifts. 

9 Let  the  keen  axe  come  forth  together  with  the  light : here  be, 

as  erst,  the  teeming  cow  of  sacrifice. 

Let  the  Red  God  shine  bright  with  his  refulgent  ray,  and  lot 
the  Lord  of  heroes  glow  like  heaven’s  clear  sheen. 

10  0 Much-invoked,  may  we  subdue  all  famine  and  evil  want  with 

store  of  grain  and  cattle. 

May  we  allied,  as  first  in  rank,  with  princes  obtain  possessions 
by  our  own  exertion. 

11  Brihaspati  protect  us  from  the  rearward,  and  from  above,  and 

from  below,  from  sinners. 

May  Indra  from  the  front,  and  from  the  centre,  as  Friend  to 
friends,  vouchsafe  us  room  and  freedom. 

HYMN  XLIV.  Indra. 

May  Sovran  Indra  come  to  the  carousal,  he  who  by  Holy  Law 
is  strong  and  active, 

The  overcomer  of  all  conquering  forces  with  his  great  steer- 
like power  that  hath  no  limit. 

2 Firm-seated  is  thy  car,  thy  Steeds  are  docile ; thy  hand,  0 

King,  holds,  firmly  grasped,  the  thunder. 

On  thy  fair  path,  0 Lord  of  men,  come  quickly : we  will  in- 
crease thy  powers  when  thou  hast  drunken. 

3 Let  strong  and  mighty  Steeds  who  bear  this  Mighty  Indra,  the 

Lord  of  men,  whose  arm  wields  thunder, 

Bring  unto  us,  as  sharers  of  our  banquet,  the  Steer  of  conquer- 
[ ing  might,  of  real  vigour. 

td! fames  °f  unrthy  lords:  that  is,  subjected  them  to  the  Aryans, 

9 eas  tht>y  had  been  the  thralls  of  D^as.  See  I.  32.  11. 

tod  nhn  aXe:  w^°  *8  frefluenfcly  likened  to  an  axe.  See  I.  127.  3, 

(ndra’  • 'u'  * The  Red  Ood:  aruehah : according  to  SAyana,  ‘the  radiant 
prefers  *8  Pr°bably  intended,  or  perhaps  ‘ the  red  bolt'  as  M.  Milller 

10  two  concluding  stanzas  are  identical  in  Hymns  52,  53,  54. 


444  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  \ 

4 So  like  a Bull  thou  rushest  to  the  Lord  who  loves  the  trougl 

the  Sage,  the  prop  of  vigour,  in  the  vat. 

Prepare  thine  energies,  collect  them  in  thyself : be  for  ou 
profit  as  the  Master  of  the  wise. 

5 May  precious  treasures  come  to  us, — so  will  I pray.  Come  t 

the  votaiy’s  gift  offered  with  beauteous  laud. 

Thou  art  the  Loid,  as  such  sit  on  this  holy  grass  : thy  vessel 
are  inviolate  as  Law  commands, 

6 Far  went  our  earliest  invocations  of  the  Gods,  and  won  u 

glories  that  can  never  be  surpassed. 

They  who  could  not  ascend  the  ship  of  sacrifice,  sink  down  i: 
desolation,  trembling  with  alarm. 

7 So  be  the  others,  evil-hearted,  far  away,  whose  horses,  difficul 

to  harness,  have  been  yoked. 

Here  in  advance  men  stand  anear  to  offer  gifts,  by  whom  ful 
many  a work  that  brings  reward  is  done. 

8 He  firmly  fixed  the  plains  and  mountains  as  they  shook 

Dyaus  thundered  forth  and  made  the  air’s  mid-region  quake 
He  stays  apart  the  two  confronting  bowls ; he  sings  lauds  ii 
the  potent  Soma’s  joy  when  he  hath  drunk. 

9 I bear  this  deftly-fashioned  goad  of  thine,  wherewith  thou 

Maghavan,  shalt  break  the  strikers  with  the  hoof. 

At  this  libation  mayst  thou  be  well  satisfied.  Partake  th 
juice,  partake  the  worship,  Maghavan. 

10  0 Much-invoked,  may  we  subdue  all  famine  and  evil  wan 

with  store  of  grain  and  cattle. 

May  we  allied,  as  first  in  rank,  with  princes  offtain  possession 
by  our  own  exertion. 

1 1 Brihaspati  protect  us  from  the  rearward,  and  from  above,  an( 

from  below,  from  sinners. 

May  Indra  from  the  front  and  from  the  centre,  as  Friend  t 
friends,  vouchsafe  us  room  and  freedom. 

4 The  Lord:  pat im:  the  Soma.  Collect  them  in  tkytelf:  ‘take  us  hit 
thj  self.’— Wilson.  Of  the  wise:  kenipflnam  is  thus  explained  by  the  CommeD 
tators,  but  the  meaning  seems  doubtful.  Ludwig  thinks  that  ‘the  maste 
of  the  oars,'  that  is,  the  steersman,  is  intended. 

6 In  desolation : trmd' = tpr)/iOi. — Ludwig.  Trembling  in  alarm : or,  tloer 
of  ill  deeds,  according  to  YAska’s  interpretation  of  kipayah, 

7 Whoie  horses,  difficult  to  harness,  have  been  yoked:  whose  ill- manage 
attempts  to  perform  acceptable  sacrifice  have  failed.  In  advance:  hew*1 
death,  according  to  SAyana. 

8 He : Indra.  As  they  shook : cp.  II.  12.  2.  Two  confronting  bowls:  bea?ei 

and  earth.  # ■. 

9 Goad:  the  hymn  of  praise  which  urges  Indra  to  action.  The  striker/  w* 
the  hoof:  a class  of  Y&tudhAnas  or  demons.  See  X.  87.  12. 


HYMN  45.]  THE  RIQVELA.  445 

HYMN  XLV.  Agni. 

First  Agni  sprang  to  life  from  out  of  Heaven : the  second 
time  from  us  came  Jata  vedas. 

Thirdly  the  Manly-souled  was  iu  the  waters.  The  pious  lauds 
and  kindles  him  the  Eternal. 

2 Agni,  we  know  thy  three  powers  in  three  stations,  we  know 

thy  forms  in  many  a place  divided. 

We  know  what  name  supremo  thou  hast  in  secret : we  know 
the  source  from  which  thou  hast  proceeded. 

3 The  Manly-souled  lit  thee  in  sea  and  waters,  man’s  Viewer 

lit  thee  in  the  breast  of  heaven. 

There  as  thou  stoodest  in  the  third  high  region  the  Steers 
increased  thee  in  the  waters’  bosom. 

4 Agni  roared  out,  like  Dyaus  what  time  he  thunders  : he  licked 

the  ground,  about  the  plants  he  flickered. 

At  once,  when  born,  he  looked  around  enkindled,  and  lightened 
heaven  and  earth  within  with  splendour. 

5 The  spring  of  glories  and  support  of  riches,  rouser  of  thoughts 

and  guardian  of  the  Soma, 

Good  Son  of  Strength,  a King  amid  the  waters,  in  forefront 
of  the  Dawns  he  shines  enkindled. 

6 Germ  of  the  world,  ensign  of  all  creation,  be  sprang  to  life 

and  filled  the  earth  and  heavens. 

Even  the  firm  rock  he  cleft  when  passing  over,  when  the  Five 
Tribes  brought  sacrifice  to  Agni. 

7 So  among  mortals  was  Immortal  Agni  stablished  as  holy 

wise  and  willing  envoy. 

He  waves  the  red  smoko  that  he  lifts  above  him,  striving  to 
reach  the  heavens  with  radiant  lustre. 


1 From  out  of  Heaven  : or,  from  Dyaus  or  Heaven  his  father;  in  the  shape 
of  the  Sun.  From  us : produced  by  men  in  the  shape  of  sacrificial  and  do- 
mestic fire.  In  the  waters ; of  the  firmament,  in  the  shape  of  lightning,  the 
third  form  of  Agni. 

2 In  secret : unknown  to  those  who  know  not  the  Veda. — S&yana. 

3 The  Manly-souled ; or,  the  Friend  of  men;  Varuna,  according  to  S&yana, 
and  PrajApati,  according  to  Mahidhara.  Perhaps  Dyaus  (cp.  stanza  8)  may 

^ lutended.— Ludwig.  Grassmann  thinks  that  Indra,  the  kindler  of  the 
1'ghtning,  is  meant.  The  Steers : or,  the  Mighty  Ones;  the  Maruts. 

.1 2 3 * *  6 The  hrm  rock : ‘the  solid  cloud.’— Wilson.  Some  extraordinary  conflagra- 
tion of  jungle  may  perhaps  be  referred  to.  The  Five  Ti'ibes  : pdftcha  jandh  : 
literally,  the  five  men,  meaning,  according  to  S&yana,  men  in  general,  and, 
according  to  Mahtdhara,  the  institutor  of  the  sacrifice  and  the  four  chief 

priests. 


446  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  X 

8 Like  gold  to  look  on,  far  he  Bhone  refulgent,  beaming  itnper- 

ishable  life  for  glory, 

Agni  by  vital  powers  became  immortal  when  his  prolific  Father 
Dyaus  begat  him. 

9 Whoso  this  day,  O God  whoso  flames  are  lovely,  prepares  a 

cake,  0 Agni,  mixt  with  butter, 

Lead  thou  and  further  him  to  higher  fortune,  to  bliss  bestowed 
by  Gods,  0 thou  Most  Youthful. 

10  Endow  him,  Agni,  with  a share  of  glory,  at  every  song  of 

praise  sung  forth  enrich  him. 

Dear  let  him  be  to  Sfirya,  dear  to  Agni,  preeminent  with  sou 
and  children’s  children. 

11  While,  Agni,  day  by  day  men  pay  thee  worship  they  win 

themselves  all  treasures  worth  the  wishing. 

Allied  with  thee,  eager  and  craving  riches,  they  have  disclos- 
ed the  stable  filled  with  cattle. 

12  Agni,  the  Friend  of  men,  the  Soma’s  keeper,  Vaisvanara, 

hath  been  lauded  by  the  liishis. 

We  will  invoke  benignant  Earth  and  Heaven  : ye  Deities, 
give  us  wealth  with  hero  children. 

HYMN  XLVL  Agni. 

Stabushed  for  thee,  to  lend  thee  vital  forces,  Giver  of  wealth, 
Guard  of  his  servant’s  body. 

The  Great  Priest,  born,  who  knows  the  clouds,  Abider  with 
men,  is  seated  in  the  lap  of  waters.  • 

2 Worshipping,  seeking  him  with  adoration  like  some  lost  crea- 

ture followed  by  its  footprints, 

Wise  Bhrigus,  yearning  in  their  hearts,  pursued  him,  and 
found  him  lurking  where  the  floods  are  gathered. 

3 On  the  Cow’s  forehead,  with  laborious  searching,  Trita,  the 

offspring  of  Vibhuvas,  found  him. 

Born  in  our  houses,  Youthful,  joy-bestower,  he  now  becomes 
the  central  point  of  brightness. 

12  Soma  s keeper : as  identified  with  the  Muon,  the  great  receptacle  of  the 
celestial  Soma,  the  nectar  or  ambrosia  of  the  Gods.  See  Hillebrandt,  V.  M I- 
330—336.  

1 For  thee : the  Rishi  addresses  himself.  Who  knows  the  clouds:  fr°m 
which  he  (Agni)  comes  in  the  form  of  Lightning.  Of  waters : of  the  firm*' 
ment. 

2 Wise  Bhrigus : frequently  mentioned  as  specially  connected  with  the 
worship  of  Agni.  Cf  II  4.  2.  Pursued  him  : seel.  65.  1. 

3 On  the  Cow' s forehead : ‘on  the  head  of  the  cloud.’  Trita : Agni  in  ntf 
third  form  as  lightuing.  The  abstract  personified  form  of  the  celestial  Ag®1 


THE  R1QVEDA. 


447 


01ifH  46.] 


4 Yearning,  with  homage,  they  have  set  and  made  him  blithe 

Priest  among  mankind,  oblation-bearer, 

Leader  of  rites  and  Purifier,  envoy  of  men,  as  sacrifice  that 
still  advances. 

5 The  foolish  brought  the  ne’er-bewildered  forward,  great,  Victor, 

Song-inspirer,  Fort-destroyer. 

Leading  the  Youth  gold-bearded,  like  a courser  gleaming  with 
wealth,  they  turned  their  hymn  to  profit. 

6 Holding  his  station  firmly  in  the  houses,  Trita  sat  down  within 

his  home  surrounded. 

Thence,  as  Law  bids,  departs  the  Tribes’  Companion,  having 
collected  men  with  no  compulsion. 

7 His  are  the  fires,  eternal,  purifying,  that  make  the  houses 

move,  whose  smoke  is  shining, 

White,  waxing  in  their  strength,  for  ever  stirring,  and  sitting 
in  the  wood  ; like  winds  are  Somus. 

8 The  tongue  of  Agni  bears  away  the  praise-song,  and,  through 

Ids  care  for  Earth,  her  operations. 

Hun,  bright  and  radiant,  living  men  have  stablished  as  their 
blithe  Priest,  the  Chief  of  Sacnficers. 

9 That  Agni,  him  whom  Heaven  and  Earth  engendered,  the 

Waters,  Tvashtar,  and,  with  might,  the  Bhrigus, 

Him  Matarisvan  and  the  Gods  have  fashioned  holy  for  man 
aud  first  to  be  entreated. 


is  hei e represented  as  endeavouring  to  find  the  lurking  fire  in  the  sky. — 
Maedonell.  Offspring  of  Vibhuvas:  or,  connected  with  Vibhuvasu,  the  very 
wealthy,  Soma. 

4 da  sacrifice,  that  still  advances  : ‘ids  das  sieh  vorwarts  bewegende  opfer.' 
—Ludwig  Accoid  ng  to  Siy.ina,  ‘the  object  of  sacrifice,  him  who  goes  forward 
[h’"tn  one  tire  receptacle  to  another]  ’ 

5 The  foolish  liuman  priests,  weak  and  foolish  in  comparison  with  the  wise 
Agni.  Gleaming  with  wealth:  the  meaning  of  dhanai chain  is  uncertain.  The 
St.  Petersburg  Lexicon  offers  dhanarjam,  * striving  to  win  the  prize/  as  pro- 
bably the  light  reading. 

6 On  stanza*  3 and  6 see  Maedonell  (J.  K.  A.  SM  July,  1893,  pp.  450 — 452), 
w ho  tianslates  the  second  half  of  6 .as  follows  : From  hence  the  house-friend 
(>f  settlers  collecting  (them)  goto  among  men  by  distiibutiou,  not  by  (means 
"f)  bonds  ; i e.,  carried  from  place,  not  freshly  produced  by  cord  and  drill 

7 That  make  the  houses  move  : this  seems  to  be  what  the  words  danictm 
w'ltrd  should  mean,  though  how  flames  can  be  thus  qualified  is  not  clear. 
'The  lcscueib  from  the  humiliated  (spirits  of  ill).’ — Wilson.  * Protectors  of 
the  bouses.' — Mahidhara.  Like  winds  are  Somaa : as  winds  fan  flame,  so 
Soma  libations  increase  the  might  of  Agni.  Accoiding  to  S.lyana,  the  flames 
a'e  ‘ like  the  fast-flowing  juices  of  the  Soma.' — Wilson.  I follow  Ludwig’s 
explanation,  but  the  meaning  ^f  the  passage  is  doubtful. 

® operations  : holy  works  performed  by  men 

9 Mdtarifvan : a divine  or  semi-divine  being  who  brought  Agni  from 
he*ven.  See  I.  31  3,  and  60.  1. 


448  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  X 

10  Agni,  whom  Gods  have  made  oblation-bearer,  and  much-desk, 
ing  men  regard  as  holy, 

Give  life  to  him  who  lauds  thee  when  he  worships,  and  then 
shall  glorious  men  in  troops  adore  thee. 

HYMN  XLVII.  Inclra  Vaikuntha. 

Thy  right  hand  have  we  grasped  in  ours,  0 Indra,  longiu» 
for  treasure,  Treasure-Lord  of  treasures  ! 0 

Because  we  know  thee,  Hero,  Lord  of  cattle  : vouchsafe  us 
mighty  and  resplendent  riches 

2 Wealth,  fully  armed,  good  guard  and  kind  protector,  sprung 

from  four  seas,  the  prop  and  stay  of  treasures, 

Fraught  with  great  bounties,  meet  for  praise  and  glory  ■ 
vouchsafe  us  mighty  and  resplendent  riches. 

3 Wealth,  with  good  Brahmans,  Indra!  God-attended,  high, 

wide,  and  deep,  and  based  on  broad  foundations, 

Strong,  with  famed  Rishis,  conquering  our  foernen  : vouch 
safe  us  mighty  and  resplendent  riches. 

4 Victorious,  winning  strength,  with  hero  sages,  confirmed  in 

power,  most  useful,  wealth-attracting, 

True,  Indra ! crushing  forts  and  slaying  Dasyus : vouchsafe 
us  mighty  and  resplendent  riches. 

5 Wealthy  in  heroes  and  in  cars  and  horses,  strength  hundred- 

fold and  thousandfold,  0 Indra, 

With  manly  sages,  happy  troops,  light- winning:  vouchsafe  us 
mighty  and  resplendent  riches.  # 

6 To  Saptagu  the  sage,  the  holy-minded,  to  him,  Brihaspati,  the 

song  approaches, 

Angiras’  Son  who  must  be  met  with  homage : vouchsafe  us 
mighty  and  resplendent  riches. 

7 My  lauds,  like  envoys,  craving  loving-kindness,  go  forth  to 

Iudra  with  their  strong  entreaty, 

Moving  his  heart  and  uttered  by  my  spirit : vouchsafe  us 
mighty  and  resplendent  riches. 

Vaikuntha  is  said  to  mean  son  of  Yikunthft,  an  Asufl  or  female  demon  who 
was  allowed  by  Indra  to  become  his  second  mother. 

2 Wealth:  S&yana  gives  another  interpretation  : — ‘ (We  know  thee  to  be) 
well  armed/  etc. — Wilson.  Sprung  from  four  seas : regarded  as  the  store- 
houses of  jewels,  ‘ (Renowned  throughout)  the  four  oceans,’— [applied  to 
Indra]  Wilson. 

6 Brihaspati:  according  to  the  Scholiast  meaning  Saptagu,  ‘the  lord 
much  (praise)  ’ — Wilson.  According  to  others,  the  God  Brihaspati  calj«^ 
Saptagu  as  being  drawn  by  seven  oxen  : ‘ der  fahrt  mit  sieben  Bindero 
Grassmann.  4.ngiras'  Son:  meaning  apparently  Brihaspati  as  especially  lyVea 
and  honoured  by  Angiras  and  his  descendants.  See  VI.  78.  1. 


TEE  RIQVEDA, 


449 


0MX  48.] 

8 Grant  us  the  boon  for  which  I pray,  0 Indra,  a spacious  home 
unmatched  among  the  people. 

To  this  may  Heaven  and  Earth  accord  approval : vouchsafe  us 
mighty  and  resplendent  riches. 

HYMN  XLVIII.  Indra  Vaikuntha. 

I  was  the  first  possessor  of  all  precious  gear : the  wealth  of 
every  man  I win  and  gather  up. 

On  me  as  on  a Father  living  creatures  call : I deal  enjoyment 
to  the  man  who  offers  gifts. 

2 I,  Indra,  am  Atharvan’s  stay  and  firm  support : I brought  forth 

kiue  to  Trita  from  the  Dragon’s  grasp. 

I stripped  the  Dasyus  of  their  manly  might,  and  gave  the 
cattle-stalls  toMatarisvan  and  Dadhyach. 

3 For  me  hath  Tvashtar  forged  the  iron  thunderbolt : in  me  the 

Gods  have  centred  intellectual  power. 

My  sheen  is  like  the  Sun’s  insufferably  bright : mon  honour 
me  as  Lord  for  past  and  future  deeds. 

4 I won  myself  these  herds  of  cattle,  steeds  and  a me,  and  gold 

in  ample  store,  with  my  destructive  bo[i; 

I give  full  many  a thousand  to  thp  •'Shipper,  what  time  the 
Somas  and  the  lauds  have  *'aae  me  ^a(*- 

5 Indra  am  I : none  e'"-  wins  my  weillth  from  me : never  at 

any  time  <*;r  * a thrall  to  death. 

the  Soma,  ask  riches  from  me  alone : ye,  Purus,  in 
my  friendship  shall  not  suffer  harm. 

6 These,  breathing  loud  in  fury,  two  and  two,  who  caused  Indra 

to  bring  his  bolt  of  thunder  to  the  fray, 

The  challengers,  I struck  with  deadly  weapon  down : firm 
stand  what  words  the  God  speaks  to  his  worshippers. 


$ Unmatched  : dsamam:  ‘not  held  in  common.’— Wilson. 

Itidra,  Vaikuntha  is  the  Hishi  of  this  hymn,  which  is  a self-laudatorv  reulv 
to  Saptagu  in  Hymn  XLVII.  y p y 

Atharvan  is  the  name  of  the  priest  who  first  obtained  fire  and  offered 
^oma  and  prayers  to  the  Gods.  See  I.  80.  10,  and  83,  B.  The  Dragon  is  an- 
of  •/  > * °F  ^ fffra.  ‘ I generated  the  waters  above  the  cloud  for  the  sake 
‘M^taris' ~~’^r^80n  Mtttarifvan  and  Dadhyach:  or,  according  to  Sdyana, 


Alatarisvan’s  son  Dadhyach.’ 

* Hru*:  ‘O  men.’— Wilson. 


6 T)  v — vv  uHon. 

riar  i n;.who  these  were  i3  uncertain.  Two  a**'  tw0  •;  probably  the  war- 
latinW  t 011  chariot  and  the  chariot<^r*~ Ludwig.  The  literal  tians- 
SDeivVWf  c last  half-line  of  the  stanza  pri,ears  to  be  ‘ the  non-worshipper 
vorfi  g f1"?1  worda  to  worshippers  ; ^namasynh,  he  who  has  no  other  to  re- 
brolr1106’  t ing  Indra»  whose  proviso  of  victory  to  his  worshippers  is  never 
o*en.  —bud  wig. 

29 


450  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOKl 

7 This  One  by  stronger  might  I conquered  Bingly ; yea,  also  two; 

shall  three  prevail  against  mel 
Like  many  sheaves  upon  the  floor  I thrash  them.  How  can 
my  foes,  the  Indraless,  revile  me  ? 

8 Against  the  Gungus  I made  Atithigva  strong,  and  kept  him' 

mid  the  folk  like  Vritra- conquering  strength, 

When  I won  glory  in  the  great  foe-slaying  fight,  in  battle 
where  Karanja  fell,  and  Parnaya. 

9 With  food  for  mine  enjoyment  Sapya  Nairn  came:  he  joined 

me  as  a friend  of  old  in  search  of  kine. 

As  I bestowed  on  him  an  arrow  for  the  fight  I made  him 
worthy  of  the  song  and  hymn  of  praise. 

10  One  of  the  two  hath  Soma,  seen  within  it;  the  Herdsman  with 

the  bone  shows  forth  the  other.  j 

He,  fain  to  fight  the  Bull  whose  horns  were  sharpened,  stood 
fettered  in  the  demon’s  ample  region. 

11  I,  as  a Q0d,  ne’er  violate  the  statutes  of  Gods,  of  Vasus,  Ru- 

driyas,  Aav^Hg 

These  Gods  have  me  for  auSpicious  vigour,  unconquer- 

ed and  invincible  for  ^ .or# 

HYMN  Xi^v  Indra  Vaikuntha, 

I have  enriched  the  singer  with  surpassing  — dth  ; I have  al- 
lowed the  holy  hymn  to  strengthen  me. 

I,  furtherer  of  him  who  offers  sacrifice,  have  conquered  in  each 
fight  the  men  who  worship  not.  * 


7 This  One  • or,  this  one  thing,  that  is,  ‘ the  primordial  substance  or  unit 
out  of  which  the  universe  was  developed.’-  Wallis,  Cosmology  of  the  Riovrf* 

V’s  Against  the  Omgus : or,  to  aid  the  Gang"*. » 

these  people  were  is  uncertain.  A tithigva : Divodasa  son  of  Atith  g , J 

tag  to  slyana.  See  Vol.  I.,  Index.  Karanja  ..and  Parnaya:  apparent 
tree-demons : see  I.  53. 8.  % 

9 Sdpya;  a family  name  of  Indra’s  friend  Nam!,  who  in  VI*  • 18 

Sayya’s  son.  , , , 

10  One  of  the  two  : the  Moon.  The  Herdsman  : Indra.  With  the  ^ 
of  Dadhyach.  See  I.  84.  13.  The  other:  Vritra.  He:  Vnfcnj.  £ db  th0 
Indra.  The  demow , awp[e  region  • mid-air,  which  was  then  domm  ^ Aion 
Druh  or  malignant  spuv.  drought.  I follow  Prof.  Ludwig  s int  P 

of  this  obscure  stanza  whiOt  i8  evidently  an  interpolation  motivea  y 
mention  of  Dadhyach  in  stanza  Q For  a somewhat  different  mterpr  ^ 

eee  Hillebraudt,  V.  M.,  I.  337. 

11  Rudriyas:  the  Maruts,  sons  of  Rua,*t 


Indra  Vaikuntha  is  the  Riahi  also. 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


451 


lYMX  49.] 


2 The  People  of  the  heavens,  the  waters,  and  the  earth  have 

stablished  me  among  the  Gods  with  India’s  nnme. 

I took  unto  myself  the  two  swift  vigorous  Bays  that  speed  on 
divers  paths,  and  the  fierce  bolt  for  strength. 

3 With  deadly  blows  I smote  Atka  for  Kavi’s  sake  ; I guarded 

Katsa  well  with  these  my  saving  helps. 

Ao  Sushna’s  slayer  I brandished  the  dart  of  death  : I gave  not 
up  the  Aryan  name  to  Dasyu  foes. 

4 Smadibha,  Tugra,  and  the  Vetasus  I gave  as  prey  to  Kutsa, 

father-like,  to  succour  him. 

I was  a worthy  King  to  rule  the  worshipper,  when  I gave  Tuji 
dear  inviolable  gifts. 


1 I gave  up  Mrigaya  to  Srutarvan  as  his  prey  because  he  ever 
followed  me  and  kept  my  laws. 

For  Ayu’s  sake  I caused  Vesa  to  bend  and  bow,  and  into  Sa- 
vya’s  hand  delivered  Padgribhi. 

i I,  I crushed  Navavastva  of  the  lofty  can  the  Dasa,  as  the 
Vritra-slayer  kills  the  fiends ; 

When  straightway  on  the  region’s  farthest  edge  I brought  the 
God  who  makes  the  lights  to  broaden  and  increase. 

’ I travel  round  about  borne  onward  in  my  might  by  the -Met. 
footed  dappled  Horses  of  the  Sun. 

When  man’s  libation  calls  me  to  the  robe  of  state  P 

the  powerful  Dasyu  with  my  blows-  


Kavi : the  father  of 


3 Atka:  mentioned  again  in  H*-“  09  »«  Bo^ 

India's  friend  Usand.  ...  ...  1'ugra,  ‘ with  all  his  followers/ 

4 Smadibha : or,  ^Ataliumd  Tuara  are  -<>eiitioned  as  having  been  con- 

See  VI.  20.  8,  wher,  ^ 4 where  t*jir  nauie8  occur  together  with 
quered  by  Ind^’  ana  V * ’ 

that  of  Tiv-'  ...  . IV.  16.  13,  and^VIII.  3.  19.  Smtarvan  : 

5 .rWa:adernonof  theair.^  -n  VUI  63  Ayu  . sometimes  spoken 

- prince  whose  liberality  is  p ftncj  other  times  as  conquered  by  him.  See 
of  as  a King  favoui  ed  by  Inj^  nofc  again.  Savya : the  Rishi  of  Hymns 
index.  The  nameof  ^ Bome  ^einoQ  or  savage  enemy  who  is  not 

oi — 67  of  Book  I.  PocH* 

mentioned  again.  &nd  VI.  20.  11.  Of  the  lofty  ear:  or  Bri- 

« Navavdstva  • “ -»wayavft»tva.  The  lights : the  stars,  or  perhaps  light 
Xensrar  m would  be  Dyau,  or  Varuna,  and  in 

latUr  case  9Qrya  or  the  Sun.  Ludwig. 

7 The  rote  of  state : apparently  the  milk  wh.ch  is  the  royal  mantle  where- 
with  Soma  is  invested. 


462 


THE  HYMNS  UJ? 


IEVVK  X, 


8 Stronger  am  I than  Nahus,  I who  slew  the  seven : I glorified 

with  might  Yadu  and  Turvasa.  ^ I 

I  brought  another  low,  with  strength  I bent  his  strength : \ 
let  the  mighty  nine-and-ninety  wax  in  power. 

9 Bull  over  all  the  streams  that  flow  along  the  earth,  I took  the 

Seven  Rivers  as  mine  own  domain. 

I,  gifted  with  great  wisdom,  spread  the  floods  abroad : by  war 
I found  for  man  the  way  to  high  success. 

10  I set  within  these  cows  the  white  milk  which  no  God,  not  even 

Tvashtar’s  self,  had  there  deposited, — 

Much-longed-for,  in  the  breasts,  the  udders  of  the  kine,  the 
savoury  sweets  of  meath,  the  milk  and  Soma  juice. 

11  Even  thus  hath  Indra  Maghavan,  truly  bounteous,  sped  Gods 

and  men  with  mighty  operation. 

The  pious  glorify  all  these  thine  exploits,  Lord  of  Bay  Cours- 
es, Strong,  and  Self-resplendent. 


HYMN  L.  Indra  Vaikunth*. 

I laud  your  Mighty  One  who  joyeth  in  the  juice,  him  who  is 
shared  by  all  it\en,  who  created  all ; 

Indra,  whoso  conquering  strength  is  powerful  in  war,  whose 
fame  and  manly  vigour  Heaven  and  Earth  revere. 

2 He  with  his  friend  is  active,  lauded,  good  to  man,  Indra  who 

*>ust  be  glorified  by  one  like  me. 

Hero,Tj0ra  0f  the  brave,  all  cars  are  thy  delight,  warring  with 
Vritra  or  fov  waters,  or  for  spoil.  * 

3 Who  are  tVnmen  whom  thou  wilt  further,  Indra,  who  strive 

to  win  thy  «;gs  allied  witK  riches  ? 

Who  urged  thee  i rward  to  exert  thy  power  divine,  to  valour 
in  the  war  for  waurg  on  their  fieiCr,  ? 


8 Stronger  ant  I than  Nahus  : sjl0  ndhushtarah  ; '-Orally,  more  Nairn 

than  Nahua  ; I out-NahuB  Nahus,  a *{ng  who  contended  wu,  indra  ; ‘ I aD 
nearer  than  the  neighbour,’  according  to  Roth  whom  Grassy^ u follow 
• T the  especial  bond  of  bonds.  — Wilsoi.  X folloW  Ludwig’s  inters  +atioi 
J Who  »Uw  the  >even:  the  seven  perhaps,  a.  the  chief  of  the  demons  a. 
+i»nvftd  bv  Indra.  Ludwig  takes  saptaha  to  sr.ean  ‘seven  times  . 
SSZ times  Stronger  than  Nahus.’  Another:  A is  uncertain 

: until  they  became  worthy  antagonists.  1 have  demolished  nine 

ftQ10n  XMilk  and  Soma  juice : sweet  ambrosial  rain;  the  fas*  being  the  teem*1 

clouds^  ^ Bianza  Indra  aa  RUhi  addresses  himself  asthedefty  of  the  by® 

2 His  friend:  hia  constant  companion,  tho  thunderbolt.  . 

s Mfad  With  riches:  the  happiness  which  Indra  sends  being  K 
return  for  costly  sacrificial  offerings, 


453 


HYMN  51.]  mE  r1GV]? $A, 

4 Thou,  Indra,  through  holy  prayer  art  mighty,  worthy  of 

sacrifice  at  all  libations. 

In  every  fight  thou  castest  herot-ii  on  the  ground  : thou  art  the 
noblest  song,  0 Lord  of  all  the  folk. 

5 Help  now,  as  Highest,  those  who  toil  at  sacrifice : well  do  the 

people  know  thy  great  protecting  might. 

Thou  shalt  be  Everlasting,  Giver  of  success  : yea,  on  all  these 
libations  thou  bestowest  strength. 

6 All  these  libations  thou  makest  effectual,  of  which  thou  art 

thyself  supporter,  Son  of  Power. 

Therefore  thy  vessel  is  to  be  esteemed  the  best,  sacrifice,  holy 
text,  prayer,  and  exalted  speech. 

7 They  who  with  flowing  Soma  pray  to  thee,  0 Sage,  to  pour  oil 

them  thy  gifts  of  opulence  and  wealth, 

May  they  come  forward,  through  their  spirit,  on  the  path  of 
bliss,  in  the  wild  joy  of  Soma  juice  effused. 

HYMN  LI.  Agni.  Gods. 

Large  was  that  covering,  and  firm  of  texture,  folded  wherein 
thou  enteredst  the  waters. 

One  Deity  alone,  0 Jatavedas  Agni,  saw  all  thy  forms  in  sun- 
dry places. 

2 What  God  hath  seen  me  7 Who  of  all  their  number  clearly  be- 

held my  forms  in  many  places? 

Where  lie,  then,  all  the  sacred  logs  of  Agni  that  lead  him  God- 
ward,  Varuna  and  Mitra  7 

3 In  many  places,  Agni  J&tavedas,  we  sought  thee  hidden  in  the 

plants  and  waters. 

Then  Yama  marked  thee,  God  of  wondrous  splendour!  effulgent 
from  thy  tenfold  secret  dwelling. 

4 Song : mdntrah : subject  of  thy  worshippers’  songs  of  praise. 

6 Vessel : pfttram ; * protection.’— Wilson. 

The  legend  says  that  Agni,  fearing  to  share  the  fate  of  his  three  elder 
brothers  who  had  perished  in  the  service  of  the  Gods,  fled  away  and  hid 
himself  in  the  waters.  The  Gods  discovered  him  and  persuaded  him  to 
return  to  his  sacred  duties. 

(Stanzas  1,  3,  5,  7,  9 are  spoken  by  the  Gods,  and  2,  4,  6,  8 by  Agni. 

| He  must  have  been  very  well  wrapped  up,  the  Gods  ironically  say,  or  the 
ter  would  have  extinguished  him.— Ludwig.  Forma:  literally,  ‘bodies/ 

^ Sacred  logs : pieces  of  Sam!  and  Asvattha  wood,  from  whioh  alone  the 
uncial  fire  j8  produced.  Others  explain  samtdhah  by  * flames/ 

* oy  Unfold  secret  dwelling:  according  to  S&yana,  ‘the  three  worlds,— 
^ven,  mid-air,  earth  ; three  divinities,  Agni,  VUyu,  Aditya  ; the  Waters, 
r 8bruhs,  the  trees,  and  the  bodies  of  living  beings.’ — Wilson.  The  mean- 
> appears  to  be,  as  Ludwig  conjectures,  that  Yama  knew  that  Agni  wOuld 
Pear  again  from  the  fire-sticks  worked  by  the  fingers  of  both  hands. 


454  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOS  X. 

4 I fled  in  fear  from  sacrificial  worship  Varuna,  lest  the  Godj 

should  thus  engage  me. 

Thus  were  my  forms  laid  do**-**  in  many  places.  This,  as  my 
goal,  I Agni  saw  before  me. 

5 Come ; man  is  pious  and  would  fain  do  worship ; he  waits  pre- 

pared  : in  gloom  thou,  Agni,  dwellest. 

Make  pathways  leading  God-ward  clear  and  easy,  and  bear  ob- 
lations with  a kindly  spirit. 

6 This  goal  mine  elder  brothers  erst  selected,  as  he  who  drives  a 

car  the  way  to  travel. 

So,  Varuna,  I fled  afar  through  terror,  as  flies  the  wild-bull 
from  an  archer’s  bowstring. 

7 We  give  thee  life  un wasting,  Jatavedas,  so  that,  employed, 

thou  never  shalt  be  injured. 

So,  nobly  born  ! shalt  thou  with  kindly  spirit  bear  to  the  Gods 
their  share  of  men’s  oblations. 

8 Grant  me  the  first  oblations  and  the  latter,  entire,  my  force- 

ful share  of  holy  presents, 

Tlio  soul  of  plants,  the  fatness  of  the  waters,  and  let  there  be 
long  life,  ye  Gods,  to  Agni. 

9 Thine  be  the  first  oblations  and  the  latter,  entire,  thy  forceful 

shares  of  holy  presents. 

Let  all  this  sacrifice  be  thine,  0 Agni,  and  let  the  world’s  four 
regions  bow  before  thee. 

♦ 

HYMN  LII.  °0(k 

Instruct  me,  all  ye  Gods,  how  I,  elected  your  Priest,  must 
seat  me  here,  and  how  address  you. 

Instruct  me  how  to  deal  to  each  his  portion,  and  by  what  path 
to  bring  you  man’s  oblation. 

2 I sit  as  Priest  most  skilled  in  sacrificing : the  Maruts  and  all 
Deities  impel  me. 

Asvins,  each  day  yours  is  the  Adhvaryus*  duty  : Brahman  and 
wood  are  here  : ’tis  yours  to  offer. 

8 The  fir  it  oblation a and  the  latter:  or  the  PrayUjas  and  the  Anuytljaa,  th 
former  being  texts  and  oblations  forming  part  of  the  introductory  ce'cn' , 
at  a Soma  sacrifice,  and  the  latter  the  secondary  or  final  offerings.  MW 
share:  the  potent  concentrated  portion.  The  fatness:  ghritam:  yhh  c R 
butter. 

1 Agni*  having  been  elected  Oblation -bearer,  asks  the  Gods  to  instru< 
him  in  hia  duties. 


ffjlll  53.]  THE  RIO  VEDA.  455 

3 Who  is  this  Priest. t io  he  the  Priest  of  Yamal  On  whom  is 

thrust  this  God-appointed  honour] 

He  springs  to  life  each  month,  each  day  that  passes;  so  Gods 
have  made  him  their  oblation-bearer. 

4 The  Gods  have  made  me  bearer  of  oblations,  who  slipped  away 

and  passed  through  many  troubles. 

Wise  Agni  shall  ordain  for  us  the  worship,  whether  five-wayed, 
threefold,  or  seven-threaded. 

5 So  will  t )ou  strength  and  life  for  ever,  0 Gods,  that  I 

may  give  you  room  and  freedom. 

To  Indra’s  arms  would  I consign  the  thunder;  in  all  these 
battles  shall  he  then  be  victor. 

6 The  Deities,  three  thousand  and  three  hundred  and  thirty- 

nine,  have  served  and  honoured  Agni, 

Strewn  sacred  grass,  anointed  him  with  butter,  and  seated 
him  as  Priest,  the  Gods’  Invoker. 

HYMN  LIII.  Agni  Sauchika.  Gods. 

Hr  hath  arrived,  he  whom  wo  sought  with  longing,  who  skil- 
led in  sacrifice  well  knows  its  courses. 

Let  him  discharge  his  sacrificial  duties : let  him  sit  down  as 
Friend  who  was  before  us. 

2 Best  Priest,  he  hath  been  wron  by  being  seated,  for  he  hath 
looked  on  the  well-ordered  viands. 

Come,  let  us  worship  Gods  who  must  be  worshipped,  and 
pouring  oil,  laud  those  who  should  be  lauded. 


3 The  first  line  is  spoken  by  some  God  who  doubts  Agni’s  competence.  Is 
he  the  Priest  of  Yama  ? : can  he  convey  offerings  to  the  Blest  in  the  realms  of 
tbe  God  of  the  departed  ? In  the  second  half  of  the  first  line  I follow  L«d- 

but  the  meauing  is  uncertain.  The  second  line  is  the  answer  of  soother 
Owl.  Each  month , each  day  ; the  PitriyajAa , or  sacrifice  to  the  -'&thets,  is 
offered  monthly,  and  the  Agnihotra , or  oblation  to  Agni  and  Gods,  daily, 
these  comprehend  all  dther  periodical  rites. 

4 The  first  line  is  spoken  by  Agni.  Slipped  away  *jee  the  preceding  hymn, 
the  second  line  is  what  the  Goc1 2 » said.  Five-wan ; consisting  of  five  courses 
or  Parts,  seeX.  124.  1.  Threefold:  consisting  the  three  daily  Soma-libations, 
860  X.  124  l.  Seven-threaded:  perform-1  by  scven  priests.  See  X.  124.  1. 

Stanza  5 is  spoken  by  Agni.  St“jZa  ® Is  the  poet’s  conclusion. 

For  an  explanation  of  the  number  of  the  Gods  (33  + 303  + 3003)  Bee  The 
Hymns  of  the  Athdrva-ved '*>  x-  7.  13,  note. 

I °Q  Hymns  51 — 53  *ee  Macdonell,  J.  R.  A.  S.,  January,  1894,  pp.  11—22. 


fl\SS\0N  If 


1 The  Gods  speak.  Courses : or  portions. 

2 % being  seated : * by  his  seat  (at  the  altar).’— Wilson, 


THE  HYMNS  OP 


m 


[BOOR  x, 


3 Now  hath  he  made  the  feast  of  Gods  effective  : now  have  we 

found  the  secret  tongue  of  worship. 

Now  hath  he  come,  sweet,  robed  iu  vital  vigour,  and  made  our 
calling  on  the  Gods  effective. 

4 This  prelude  of  my  speech  I now  will  utter,  whereby  we  Gods 

may  quell  our  Asura  foemen. 

Eaters  of  strengthening  food  who  merit  worship,  0 ye  Five 
Tribes,  bo  ploaood.  mir>a  oblation. 

5 May  the  Five  Tribes  be  pleased  with  mine  omaim..,  Qn<i  the 

Cow’s  Sons  and  all  who  merit  worship. 

From  earthly  trouble  may  the  earth  protect  us,  and  air’s  mid 
realm  from  woe  that  comes  from  heaven. 

6 Spinning  the  thread,  follow  the  region’s  splendid  light : guard 

thou  the  pathways  well  which  wisdom  hath  prepared. 
Weave  ye  the  knotless  labour  of  the  bards  who  sing  : be  Manu 
thou,  and  bring  the  Heavenly  People  forth. 

7 Lovers  ef  Soma,  bind  the  chariot  traces  fast  : set  ye  the  reins 

iu  order  and  embellish  them. 

Bring  hitherward  the  car  with  seats  where  eight  may  sit, 
whereon  the  Gods  have  brought  the  treasure  that  we  love. 

8 Here  flows  Asmanvatl ; hold  fast  each  other,  keep  yourselves 

up,  and  pass,  my  friends,  the  river. 

There  let  us  leave  the  Powers  that  brought  no  profit,  and 
cross  the  flood  to  Powers  that  are  auspicious. 

9 Tvashfcar,  most  deft  of  workmen,  knew  each  magic  art,  bring- 

ing most  blessed  bowls  that  hold  the  drin^  of  Gods. 

His  axe,  wrought  of  good  metal,  he  is  sharpening  now,  where- 
with the  radiant  Brahmanaspati  will  cut.  _____ 

3 Tongue  of  worship  • Agni,  by  whose  fiery  tongues  the  Gods  drink  libations, 

4 Agni  speaks.  Asura  foemen : the  Asuras  in  the  later  hymns  of  the  Veda 

are  evil  ^oirits  in  perpetual  hostility  with  the  Gods,  not  to  be  confounded  v.i 
the  great  ecuatiai  Asuras,  the  chiefs  of  the  Gods,  nor  with  the  K&kshasas,  (le- 
mons or  ogres,  ,.v.0  disturb  the  saciifices  of  men.  , 

5 The  Five  Tribe.,  according  to  some,  says  Yftska,  4 the  Gandharvas,  gods. 

Fathers,  Asuras,  and  h^sjla8ag  » gee  Muir,  O.  S.  Texts,  I.  177.  But  the  nv 
Aryan  tribes  may  be  intend.  The  Cow's  Sons:  the  Maruts,  children  ox 
Piisni.  Yon  lioth  explains  as  ^orn  jn  the  starry  heaven.’  See  vn. 

35.  14. 

fi  The  Gods  speak.  The  region's  splena-.j  fyM  . the  Sun.  Weave  ye : fla®6® 
of  Agni.  Assist  the  singer  in  his  holy  taan  and  let  there  be  no  difficultie 
in  his  way.  . _j. 

7 This  stanza  appears  to  begin  a new  hymn,  made  0f  fragments.  Accor 

ing  to  Sftynna  it  is  spoken  by  the  Gods  to  one  another.  , 

8 A smanvatt : or,  the  stony  stream,  S ee  The  Hymns  of  the  Atharva-w  > 

XII  2*  26 

9 Will  cut : perhaps,  will  cut  and  destroy  demons  ; but  the  meaning 1 
uncertain. 


yyiMY  54.]  THE  RIQVEDA.  4 BY 

0  Now,  0 ye  Sapient  Ones,  make  ye  the  axes  sharp  wherewith 
ye  fashion  bowls  to  hold  the  Amrita. 

Knowing  the  secret  places  make  ye  ready  that  whereby  the 
Gods  have  gotten  immortality. 

H Ye  with  a secret  tongue  and  dark  intention  laid  the  maiden 
deep  within,  the  calf  within  the  mouth. 

They  evermore  are  near  us  with  their  gracious  help  : successful 
is  the  song  that  strives  for  victory. 

HYMN  LIV.  Indra. 

I  sing  thy  fame  that,  Maghavan,  through  thy  greatness  the 
I'AovArw  and  earth  invoked  thee  in  th^ir 
Thou,  aiding  Gods,  didst  quell  the  power  of  Dasas,  what  time 
thou  holpest  many  a race,  0 Indra. 

2 When  thou  wast  roaming,  waxen  strong  in  body,  telling  thy 

might,  Indra,  among  the  people, 

All  that  men  called  thy  battles  was  illusion  : no  foe  hast  thou 
to-day,  nor  erst  hast  found  one. 

3 Who  are  the  Bishis,  then,  who  comprehended  before  our  time 

the  bounds  of  all  thy  greatness  ? 

For  from  thy  body  thou  hast  generated  at  the  same  time  the 
Mother  and  the  Father. 

4 Thou,  Mighty  Steer,  hast  four  supremest  natures,  Asura 

natures  that  may  ne’er  be  injured. 

All  these,  0 Maghavan,  thou  surely  knowest,  wherewith  thou 
hast  performed  thy  great  achievements. 

5 Thou  hast  all  treasures  in  thy  sole  possession,  treasures  made 

manifest  and  treasures  hidden. 


10  0 ye  Sapient  Ones  : ye  llibhus.  That : perhaps  Amrita  or  celestial  Soma 
]uice.  Cf.  1.  20.  6;  110.  3. 

. 11  The  first  line  is  obscure.  ‘(The  Maruta)  placed  a female  in  the  envelop, 
ing  hide  (of  a dead  cow),  and  a calf  in  the  mouth  (of  a dead  cow).’ — Wilson. 
According  to  this  interpretation  the  miracle  ascribed  to  them  would  somewhat 
resemble  that  mentioned  in  I.  110.  8.  See  Bergaigue,  La  Religion  V6diquet 
!•  27.  The  first  half  of  these  jnd  line  is  hard  to  construe.  Wilson  para- 
P uases i the  line  : — ‘daily  the  generous  (fraternity  of  the  Ribhus)  offers  suita- 
le  praises  (to  the  gods),  granting  victory  over  our  foes.’  Prof.  Geldner  takes 
tiw  Jpinst  the  Pada  text,  as  a locative,  and  renders  the  last  half-line  to 
e following  effect ‘ ‘May  he  (the  Bacrificer),  when  he  wishes  to  win,  gaiu 
the  victory  in  the  race/ 

con  clues^'011  is  rhetorical.  The  great  Pish  is  of  the  olden  time  could  not 
m?re'lenci  thy  greatness,  much  less  can  we  comprehend  it. 

| e Mother  and  the  Father  : Earth  and  Heaven,  parents  of  all.  See  M. 

1 u4ller>  India,  What  can  it  Teach  us  f,  p.  1(51. 

sura:  diviue,  with  a vague  sense  of  supreme  grandeur. 


458 


THE  HYMNS  OP 


6 


[POOR  x. 


Defer  not  thou,  0 Maghavan,  my  longing : thou  art  Direct™ 
Indra,  thou  art  Giver.  * 


To  him  who  set  the  light  in  things  of  splendour,  and  with  all 
sweetness  blent  essential  sweetness, 

To  Indra  hath  this  welcome  hymn  that  strengthens  been 
uttered  by  the  votary  Brihaduktha. 


HYMN  LY.  Indra. 

Far  is  that  secret  name  by  which,  in  terror,  the  worlds  invoked 
thee  and  thou  gavest  vigour. 

The  earth  and  heaven  thou  settest  near  each  other,  and,  Ma- 
ghavan, madest  bright  thy  Brother’s  Children. 

2 Great  is  that  secroo  mime  c*uvi  f...  >,«ivUatug,  wuureDy  thou 
madest  all  that  is  and  shall  be. 

The  Five  Tribes  whom  he  loveth  well  have  entered  the  light 
he  loveth  that  was  made  aforetime. 


3 He  filled  the  heavens  and  earth  and  all  between  them,  Gods 

five  times  sevenfold  in  their  proper  seasons. 

With  four-and-thirty  lights  he  looks  around  him,  lights  of  one 
colour  though  their  ways  are  divers. 

4 As  first  among  the  lights,  0 Dawn,  thou  shonest,  whereby  thou 

broughtest  forth  the  Stay  of  Increase, 

Great  art  thou,  matchless  is  thine  Asura  nature,  who,  high 
above,  art  kin  to  those  beneath  thee. 

5 The  old  hath  waked  the  young  Moon  from  his  slumber  who 

runs  his  circling  course  with  many  round  him. 

6 Who  set  the  light : the  first  essential  light. 


1 Far  is  that  secret  name  : thou  art  not  present  with  us  now.  In  tenor : 
terrified  by  Vritra.  Thy  Brother's  Children:  according  to  SAyana,  Indru’s 
brother  is  Parjanya,  the  God  of  the  rain-cloud,  and  his  children  are  the  gath- 
ered waters.  Varuna  and  his  stars  are  probably  intended. — Ludwig. 

3 Gods  five  times  sevenfold:  ‘It  cannot  be  doubted  that  the  original  Gods 
were  the  constellations.’— Ludwig.  According  to  SAyana,  the  five  orders  of 
beings  Rnd  the  classes  of  seven ; that  is,  Gods,  men,  Fathers  and  RAkshasas, 
and  the  Beven  troops  of  Maruta,  the  seveu  rays  of  the  Sun,  the  seven  souses, 
etc.  The  four-and-thirty  lights : are  probably  the  sun,  moon,  and  five  plauets, 
and  the  twenty-seven  lunar  asterisms  or  mansions  of  the  moon.  According 
to  SAyana,  the  four  and  thirty  are  eight  Vasus,  eleven  Rudras,  twelve  Adityas, 
PrajApati,  VashatkAra,  and  VirAj. 

4 The  Stay  of  Increase:  that  which  is  the  foundation  and  support  of  all  sub- 

sistence; according  to  SAyana,  the  Sun.  Art  kin  to  those  beneath  thee:  art 
allied  and  connected  with  men  as  provider  of  their  food.  The  second  line  w 
difficult,  and  is  differently  interpreted  by  otherB.  . . 

5 SAyana  explains  this  stanza  differently,  making  Indra,  identified  wit 
Time,  the  subject.  I follow  Ludwig’s  interpretation  (Commentary,  II.  P- 
which  seems  to  be  nearer  to  the  sense  of  the  words,  aud  is  simpler  and  wor 
rational.  With  many  round  him : stars  of  the  asterisms  through  which  he  p*980  * 


THE  RIGVEDA. 


450 


tftfN  56*] 

Behold  the  Gods’  high  wisdom  in  its  greatness  : he  who  died 
yesterday  to-day  is  living. 

6 Strong  is  the  Red  Bird  in  his  strength,  great  Hero,  who  from 

of  old  hath  had  no  nest  to  dwell  in. 

That  which  he  knows  is  truth  and  never  idle  : he  wins  and 
gives  the  wealth  desired  of  many. 

7 Through  these  the  Thunderer  gained  strong  manly  vigour, 

through  whom  he  waxed  in  power  to  smite  down  Vritra, — 
Who  through  the  might  of  Indra’s  operation  came  forth  as 
Gods  in  course  of  Law  and  Order. 

8 All-strong,  performing  works  with  his  companion,  AU-marking, 

rapid  Victor,  Curse-averter, 

The  Hero,  waxing,  after  draughts  of  Soma,  blew  far  from  heav- 
en the  Dasyus  with  his  weapon. 

HYMN  LVI.  Visvedevas. 

Here  is  one  light  for  thee,  another  yonder : enter  the  third  and 
be  therewith  united. 

Uniting  with  a body  be  thou  welcome,  dear  to  the  Gods  in  their 
sublimest  birth-place. 

2 Bearing  thy  body,  Vajin,  may  thy  body  afford  us  blessing  and 

thyself  protection. 

Unswerving,  stablish  as  it  were  in  heaven  thine  own  light  as 
the  mighty  Gods’  supporter. 

3 Strong  Steed  art  thou  : go  to  the  yearning  Maidens  with  vigour, 

happily  go  to  heaven  and  praises  : 

6 The  Red  Bird : the  Sun,  with  whom  Indra  is  identified. 

7 Through  these:  probably  the  stars  are  iuteutbd,  ‘(Accompanied)  by 
these  Maruts.'— Wilson. 

8 His  companion : the  thunderbolt. 

‘The  mystical  union  of  the  Fathers  with  the  rays  of  light  is  the  funda- 
mental idea  underlying  the  abstruse  allusions  * of  this  funeral  hymn.  ‘ The 
poet  bids  the  deceased  man  unite  himself  with  the  beams  of  the  heavenly 
light ; he  takes  occasion  to  celebrate  the  power  and  greatness  of  the  Fathers, 
to  wham  the  spirit  of  the  depan  ed  is  journeying  ; and  ends  with  a statement 
of  the  success  of  the  journey  for  which  he  has  prayed.’  See  Wallis,  Cos • 
oology  of  the  Rigveda,  pp.  72,  73. 

1 One  light:  the  earthly,  fire  of  the  funeral  pile.  Another:  in  the  firma- 
®eut.  The  third  : the  light  in  the  highest  region  above  the  firmament.  A 

•'  a new  body  after  cremation.  Their  sublimest  birth-place  • the  Sun. 

2 Vdjin : apparently  the  name  of  the  deceased,  the  son  of  Brihaduktha 
uie  Rishi  of  the  hymn.  The  word  means  originally  * strong,  strong  Bteed 

j 48  in  stanza  3. 

1 . ° The  yearning  Maidens : perhaps  the  Dawns  ; but  the  meaning  of  suvenih 
18  uncertain.  To  heaven  and  praises : ' to  the  (land  of)  praise,  and  to  the 
•V— Wallis. 


*0U  Tills  MXMJMS  UJf  l BOOK  X 

Fly  happily  to  the  Gods  with  easy  passage,  according  to  the 
first  and  faithful  statutes. 

4 Part  of  their  grandeur  have  the  Fathers  also  gained : the 

Gods  have  seated  mental  power  in  them  as  Gods. 

They  have  embraced  within  themselves  all  energies,  which 
issuing  forth,  again  into  their  bodies  pass. 

5 They  strode  through  all  the  region  with  victorious  might,  es- 

tablishing the  old  immeasurable  laws. 

They  compassed  in  their  bodies  all  existing  things,  and  stream- 
ed forth  offspring  in  many  successive  forms. 

6 In  two  ways  have  the  sons  established  in  his  place  the  Aaura 

who  finds  the  light;  by  the  third  act, 

As  fathers,  they  have  set  their  heritage  on  earth,  their  off- 
spring, as  a thread  continuously  spun  out. 

7 As  in  a ship  through  billows,  so  through  regions  of  air,  with 

blessiugs,  through  all  toils  and  troubles 

Hath  Brihaduktha  brought  his  seed  with  glory,  and  placed  it 
here  and  in  the  realms  beyond  us. 

HYMN  LVH.  Viavedevas. 

Let  us  not,  Indra,  leave  the  path,  the  Soma-presser’s  sacrifice: 

Let  no  malignity  dwell  with  us. 

2 May  we  obtain,  completely  wrought,  the  thread  spun  out  to 
reach  the  Gods, 

That  perfectcth  the  sacrifice.  ^ 

4 Of  their  grandeur : ff  the  greatness  of  the  Gods. 

5 Establishing  the  old  immeasurable  laws  : or,  in  accordance  with  the  more 
generally  received  interpretation  of  dfuXmdni  here,  ‘measuring  aucient 
stations  never  measured  out.* 

6 In  two  ways : in  heaven  and  on  earth.  The  sons  : explained  by  Sfiyana 
as  the  Augirases,  sons  of  Aditya.  The  Fathers  in  general  appear  to  be  in- 
tended. The  A sura:  Agi.i.  The  third  act:  or  third  sacred  duty,  that  of 
continuing  their  family  ; religious  Btudy  and  sacrifice  being  the  first  ana 
second. — Silyana. 

7 Placed  it  here  and  in  the  realm  beyond  us : established  his  offspring  in 
heavenly  regions  as  well  as  here  upon  earth. 

Mr  Wallis,  from  whuse  translation  I .have  borrowed,  remarks: — ‘The  in- 
terpretation of  one  or  two  expressions  is  uncertain  ; the  general  sense  iff 
clear.  The  rays  of  light  are  hero  the  bodies  of  the  fathers,  which  emanate 
from  the  sun,  assume  the  forms  of  all  things  on  the  earth  and  of  the  later 
sacrificers,  the  descendants  of  the  fathers,  and  again  return  to  their  birtn* 
place  in  the  sky  from  which  they  had  extended  themselves.’ — Cosmology 
the  Rigveda , pp.  74,  75. 

For1  Prof.  Max  M tiller’s  translation  of  Hymns  57 — 60,  with  the  legend  fmindj 
ed  upon  them,  and  ample  elucidative  matter,  se£  Journal  R.  A.  S.,  VoL  II- 
II.,  1866,  pp.  426—465, 


THE  RIOVEDA . 


461 


UMH  58.] 


3 ’i Te  call  the  spirit  hither  with  the  Soma  of  our  parted  sirea, 

Yea,  the  Fathers’  holy  hymns. 

4 Thy  spnvv  come  to  thee  again  for  wisdom,  energy,  and  life, 

That  thou  murjgt  long  behold  the  sun  ! 

5 01  athers,  may  thv  Heavenly  Folk  give  ns  our  spirit  once  again, 
That  we  may  be  with  ^ose  who  live. 

6 0 Soma,  with  the  spirit  stm  within  us,  blest  with  progeny, 

May  we  be  busied  in  thy  law. 

HYMN  LVII1.  Manas  or  Spirit. 

Tiiy  spirit,  that  went  far  away  to  Yama,  to  Yivasvan’s  Son, 

We  cause  to  come  to  thee  again  that  thou  mayst  live  and  so- 
journ here. 

2 Thy  spirit,  that  went  far  away,  that  passed  away  to  earth  and 

heaven, 

We  cause  to  come  to  thee  again  that  thou  mayst  live  and  so- 
journ here. 

3 Thy  spirit,  that  went  faraway,  away  to  the  four-cornered  earth, 
We  cause  to  come  to  thee  again  that  thou  mayst  live  and  so- 
journ here. 

4 Thy  spirit,  that  went  far  away  to  the  four  quarters  of  the  world, 
We  cause  to  come  to  thee  again  that  thou  mayst  live  and  so- 
journ here. 

5 Thy  spirit,  that  went  far  away,  away  unto  the  billowy  soa, 

We  cause  to  come  to  thee  again  that  thou  mayst  live  and  so- 
journ here. 

6 Thy  spirit,  that  went  far  away  to  beams  of  lights 

flow, 

We  cause  lu  uoim?  tu  oii^  oiiau  tnou  mayst  live  aud  so- 

journ here. 

7 Thy  spirit-,  that  went  far  away,  went  to  the  waters  and  the 

plants, 

We  cause  to  come  to  thee  again  that  thou  mayst  live  and  so- 
journ here. 

8 Thy  spirit,  that  went  far  away,  that  visited  the  Sun  and  Dawn, 
We  cause  to  come  to  thee  again  that  thou  mayst  live  and  so- 
journ here. 

3 The  spirit : of  the  deceased  whose  obsequies  are  performed.  Of  our  sires  : 
!rVn*4na;  explained  as  meaning,  suited  to  man;  that  is  to  deified  men, 
e Fathers  or  Spirits  of  the  Blest. 

death6  ^mn  *a  ftn  address  to  recall  the  fleeting  spirit  of  a man  at  the  point  of 
7 w«teri .plant! of.  X,  16,  S. 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


462 


[BOOK  1 


9 Thy  spirit,  that  went  far  away,  away  to  lofty  mountain  A0Ights 
We  cause  to  come  to  thee  again  that  thou  mayst  A've  and  sc 
journ  here. 

10  Thy  spirit,  that  went  far  away  into  tb~  A11  that  llves  aai 

We  cause  to  some  to  thee  again  <;na^  thou  mays^  ^ve  an^  s< 
journ  iiere. 

1 1 Thy  spirit,  that  went  faraway  to  distant  realms  beyond  our  kei 
We  cause  to  come  to  thee  again  that  thou  mayst  live  ■and  s< 

journ  here. 

12  Thy  spirit,  that  went  far  away  to  all  that  is  and  is  to  be, 

We  cause  to  come  to  thee  again  that  thou  mayst  live  an 

sojourn  here. 

LIX.  Nirriti  and  Other 


His  life  hath  been  renewed  and  carried  forward  as  two  mei 
car-borne,  by  the  skilful  driver.  . 

One  falls,  then  seeks  the  goal  with  quickened  vigour.  Le 
Nirriti  depart  to  distant  places. 

2 Here  is  the  psalm  for  wealth,  and  food,  in  plenty  : let  us  c 

many  deeds  to  bring  ns  glory.  . 

All  these  our  doings  shall  delight  the  singer.  Let  Nnri 
depart  to  distant  places. 

3 May  we  o’ercome  our  foes  with  acts  of  valour,  as  heaven 

over  earth,  hills  over  lowlands.  . 

All  these  our  deeds  the  singer  hath  considered.  Let  JNiifi 
aepait  to  diwtuut  places. 

4 Give  us  not  uP  r*.QJT  +n  O Soma  • still  let  us  lo( 

upon  the  Sun  arising. 

Let  our  old  age  with  passing  days  be  kindly.  Let  Nirri 
depart  to  distant  places. 


5  0 Asuntti,  keep  the  soul  within  us,  and  make  the  days  ' 
have  to  live  yet  longer. 

Grant  that  we  still  may  look  upon  the  sunlight  : strength 
thy  body  with  the  oil  we  bring  thee. 


1 HU  life  : the  life  of  Subandhu  one  of  the  Rishis  of  the  hymn.  Accor 
ing  to  S&yana  the  first  line  is  a prayer  : — ‘ May  the  life  of  Subandhu^ 
augmented  so  as  to  be  more  lasting  and  newer.’ — Wilson.  Subandhu 
mentioned  in  the  text.  Two  men  : the  warrior  and  the  charioteer.  UwJ  . 
S&yana  explains  differently  : — ‘he  who  falls  (from  life)  increases  (his; 
to  live.’ — Wilson.  Nirriti : the  Goddess  of  death  and  destruction.  a 

6 Asn,nUi : apparently  the  personification  of  a deity  presiding  <Jver  to  ^ 
It  may  be  a name  for  Yama,  or  it  may  mean  ‘ guide  to  life,  or  way 
See  Muir,  0 S,  Texts , V.  297,  and  Bergaigne,  La  Religion  Vcdtque,  i. 


THE  RIQVEDA . 


463 


ffYAfN1  60.] 

6 Give  us  our  sight  again,  O Asuniti,  give  us  again  our  breath 

and  our  enjoyment. 

Long  may  we  look  upon  the  Sun  uprising : 0 Anumati, 

. favour  thou  and  bless  us. 

7 May  Earth  restore  to  us  our  vital  spirit,  may-  Heaven  the 

Goddess  and  mid-air  restore  it. 

May  Soma  give  us  once  again  our  body,  and  Pushan  show 
the  Path  of  peace  and  comfort. 

8 May  both  Worlds  bless  Subandhu,  young  Mothers  of  ever- 

lasting Law. 

May  Heaven  and  Earth  uproot  and  sweep  iniquity  and  shame 
away  : nor  sin  nor  sorrow  trouble  thee.  ** 

9 Health-giving  medicines  descend  sent  down  from  heaven  in 

twos  and  threes, 

Or  wandering  singly  on  the  earth.  May  Heaven  and  Earth 
uproot  and  sweep  iniquity  and  shame  away  : nor  sin  nor 
sorrow  trouble  thee. 

10  Drive  forward  thou  the  wagon-ox,  0 Indra,  which  brought 

UsiuaianPs  wagon  hither. 

May  Heaven  and  Earth  uproot  and  sweep  iniquity  and  shame 
away  : nor  sin  nor  sorrow  trouble  thee. 

HYxMN  LX.  Asam&ti  and  Others. 

Bringing  our  homage  we  have  come  to  one  maguificent  in 
look. 

Glorified  of  the  mighty  Gods  ; 

Q T'*  Asamati,  spring  of  gifts,  lord  of  the  brave,  a radiant  car, 
The  conqueror  of  Bhajeratha  ; _ 

„ , I - xnTDTrr-wnn  winch  the  Gods  regard 

the  sacrifices  and  prayers  of  the  pious.  ‘Gracious  (goddess).’— -Wilson. 

8 Iniquity  and  shame  : rdpas,  according  to  Williams’s  Dictionary  means, 
defect,  fault,  sin  ; hurt,  iujuiy.  In  Ris  Commentaiy  on  I.  .69.  4,  Sftyana 
paraphrases  rdpdnsi,  the  plural  of  the  word,  by  bddhakdni  rdkshasddhii,  dis- 
tuibing  K&kshasas,  etc. 

9 In  twos  and  threes  : according  to  Srlyana,  in  the  persons  of  the  two 
Asvins  and  of  the  three  Godder^es  lift,  Sarasvat!,  and  Bh&ratl. 

10  Uftnardnl  must  mean  the  wife  of  Usfnara,  chief  of  the  Ustnaras  who 
®re  mentioned  in  later  times  as  living  iu  Madhyadesa  or  the  Midland  country. 
The  meaning  of  the  line  is  not  obvious. 

Stanzas  8,  9,  10,  which  Prof.  Grassmann  places  in  his  Appendix,  are  of  a 
different  character  from  that  of  the  preceding  part  of  the  hymn,  and  seem 
! he  a separate  song  or  fragment  of  a song. 

^ Asamdti ; according  to  S&yana,  the  name  of  a King.  But  the  won!  is 
J10re  probably  an  adjective,  as  m stanza  5,  qualifying  rdtham,  car,  and  sigui- 
ying  unequalled.  Bhajeratha : it  is  unceitaiu  whether  this  is  the  name  of  a 
Prmce  or  of  a country. 


464  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  l 

3 Who,  when  the  spear  hath  armed  his  hand,  or  even  weaponless 

o’erthrows 

Men  strong  as  buffaloes  in  fight ; 

4 Him  in  whose  service  flourishes  Ikshvaku,  rich  and  dazzling. 

bright 

As  the  Five  Tribes  that  are  in  heaven. 

5 Iudra,  support  the  princely  power  of  Rathaproshthas  matched 

by  none, 

Even  as  the  Sun  for  all  to  see. 

6 Thou  for  Agastya’s  sister’s  sons  yokest  thy  pair  of  ruddy 

steeds. 

Thou  troddest  niggards  under  foot,  all  those,  0 King,  who 
brought  no  gifts. 

7 This  is  the  mother,  this  the  sire,  this  one  hath  come  to  bo 

thy  life. 

What  brings  thee  forth  is  even  this.  Now  come,  Subandhu, 
get  thee  forth. 

8 As  with  the  leather  thong  they  bind  the  chariot  yoke  to  hold 

it  fast, 

So  have  I held  thy  spirit  fast,  held  it  for  life  and  not  for 
death,  held  it  for  thy  security. 

9 Even  as  this  earth,  the  mighty  earth,  holds  fast  the  monarehs 

of  the  wood, 

So  have  I held  thy  spirit  fast,  held  it  for  life^and  not  for  death, 
held  it  for  thy  security.  __ 


4 YfJtftim  Agamati,  according  to  Sftyana. 

Rigveda.  The  Five  Tribes : the  deities  repfarrtetrftS  cojbuu 

iiig  to  the  five  tribes  on  earth,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  seven  rivers  of  the 
laud  of  the  Aryans  have  their  counterparts  in  heaven.  See  Muir,  0 S.  Texts, 
I.  p.  177  Sftyana  explains  differently  : — ‘(so  that)  the  five  orders  of  men 
(are  as  happy)  as  if  they  were  in  heaven.’— Wilson. 

5 Batftaproshlhas : the  family  of  the  prince,  AsamAti  or  another,  whose  praises 
the  poet  celebrates. 

6 Agastya's  sister's  sons : Bandhu  and  his  brothers,  the  Rishis  of  the  hymn. 
Stanzas  1 — 6 have  no  apparent  connexion  with  the  six  stanzas  that  follow. 

7 This:  Agni,  according  to  Sdyana.  The  speaker  probably  raean3  him- 
self.— Ludwig.  Subandhu  seems  to  have  been  in  a trance  and  apparen  y 
dead.  * It  is  supposed  that  the  brothers  of  Subandhu  have  addressed  t e 
supplications  to  Agni,  to  restore  him  to  life,  and  that  he  has  come  acco 
ingly,  being,  as  it  were,  his  parent  and  begetter.  Another  interpre  ■ 
explains  the  terms  literally  as,  Subandhu,  your  father,  mother,  an  » 
have  come  to  mourn  your  decease  ’ — Wilson. 

8 So  ftavc  I held : 1 so  has  Agni  placed/  according  to  SAyana. 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


465 


flYMN  61.] 

10  Subaudhu’s  spirit  I have  brought  from  Yama,  from  Vivas- 
vaii's  Son, 

Brought  it  for  life  and  not  for  death,  yea,  brought  it  for 
security. 

H The  wind  blows  downward  from  on  high,  downward  the  Sun- 
God  sends  his  heat, 

Downward  the  milch-cow  pours  her  milk  : so  downward  go  thy 
pain  and  grief. 

12  Felicitous  is  this  mine  hand,  yet  more  felicitous  is  this. 

This  hand  contains  all  healing  balms,  aud  this  makes  wholo 
with  gentle  touch. 

HYMN  LX I.  Visvedevaa. 

Thk  welcome  speaker  in  the  storm  of  battle  uttered  with 
might  this  prayer  to  win  the  Asvins, 

When  the  most  liberal  God,  for  Paktha,  rescued  his  parents, 
and  assailed  tho  seven  Ilotars. 

2 Chyavana,  purposing  deceptive  presents,  with  all  ingredients, 
made  the  altar  ready. 

Most  sweet-voiced  Turvayana  poured  oblations  like  floods  of 
widely  fertilizing  water. 


11  Thy  pain  and  grief:  * thy  sitt  ’ — 

12  More  felicitous  is  this  ■ my  other  ’‘and,  probably  the  right.  With  gentle 
touch,  with  light  friotiou,  layiug-on  **  hands,  or  hypnotizing  passes. 


This  Hymn,  as  Ludwig  obse,vres>  belongs  to  the  most  difficult,  one  might 
almost  say  most  hopeless,  p<*  tions  of  the  Rigveda.  It  is  made  up  of  several 
parts  which  are  in  no  inte^’K’ble  connexion  with  one  another. 

1 According  to  the  v>^w  taken  by  Pischel  who  has  most  carefully  studied 
and  elaborately  discu^d  the  first  three  stanzas  ( Vedische  Studien,  I.  pp.  71 — 
77),  they  contain  i*  brief  the  ancient  story  of  Turvayftna,  the  young  King 
<>f  the  Pakthas.  «11(1  Chyav&na.  Chyav&nu,  a favourite  of  the  Asvins  who 
had  restored  Ik01  to  youth  (l.  116.  10,  and  117.  13),  intended  to  sacrifice  to 
them,  hoping  with  their  aid  to  conquer  TOrvay&na  and  his  parents.  But 
Iudra  stay*  the  sacrifice,  drives  the  priests  away,  and  enables  Turvay4na  who 
had  poured  rich  libations  to  him  jo  gain  the  victory  over  his  opponent. 

The  welcome  speaker : TQrvayAua,  whose  words  were  welcome  to  the  Gods. 
To  y/n  the  Asvins : raUdram:  not  ‘ addressed  to  Rudra,’  but  to  the  AsVtns 
^ are  called  raiidrau  in  stanza  15,  and,  elsewhere,  rudrd  and  rudrdvartant, 
m mst  liberal  God : Indra.  Paktha : King  of  the  Pakthas  (see  Vll.  18.  7), 
that  in,  apparently,  T&rvayftna,  who  has  been  mentioned  in  I.  53.  10,  and  VI. 
j8- 13,  as  especially  aided  by  Indra.  Stven  Ilotars:  tho  usual  number  of 
hotar  priests  employed  at  important  sacrifices. 

2 Deceptive  presents : his  intended  sacrifice  was  displeasing  to  Indra,  whom, 
possibly,  Chyav&na  falsely  pretended  that  he  was  about  to  worship.  With 
«« ingredients : required  for  the  preparation  of  the  Soma  juice.  Poured 
dtomt:  to  Indra. 

30 


466  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  l 

3 To  his  oblations,  swift  as  thought,  ye  hurried,  and  welcomed 

eagerly  the  prayers  he  offered. 

With  arrows  in  his  hand  the  Very  Mighty  forced  from  him  all 
obedience  of  a servant. 

4 I call  on  you  the  Sons  of  Dyans,  the  Asvins,  that  a dark  cow 

to  rny  red  kine  be  added. 

Enjoy  my  sacrifice,  come  to  my  viands,  contented,  not  deceiv- 
ing expectation. 

10  Uttering  praise  to  suit  the  rite  Navagvas  came  speedily  to 

win  the  damsel's  friendship. 

They  who  approached  the  twice-strong  stable's  keeper,  meed- 
less, would  milk  the  rocks  that  naught  had  shaken. 

11  Swift  was  new  friendship  with  the  maid  : they  quickly  accept- 

ed it  as  genuine  seed  and  bounty. 

Milk  which  the  cow  Sabardugha  had  yielded  was  the  bright 
heritage  which  to  thee  they  offered. 

12  When  afterwards  they  woke  and  missed  the  cattle,  the  speaker 

thus  in  joyful  mood  addressed  them  : 

Matchless  are  singers  through  the  Vasu’s  nature  ; he  bringeth 
them  all  food  and  all  possessions. 

13  His  followers  then  who  dwelt  in  sundry  places  came  and  desired 

to  slay  the  son  of  Ntishad. 

Resistless  foe,  he  found  tht  hidden  treasure  of  Sushna  multi- 
plied m numerous  offspring. 

3 To  his  oblations:  to  the  offerings  of  Chy*v.lna.  Ye 7 Asvins.  The  Very 
Mighty : Indra,  who  threatened  Chyavdna,  madp  him  his  obedient 
servant. 

4 The  Rishi  now  prays  to  the  Asvins  on  lus  own  tecount,  and  a*ks  for  a 
dark-coloured  cow  as  a reward.  Sttyana,  whom  lipfessors  Ludwig  and 
Grassm.mn  follow,  explains  the  second  half  of  the  hist  lim  more  poetically 

• When  the  dark  night  retires  before  the  purple  oxen  (of  tuj  chaiiot  of  the 
dawn).’ — Wilson.  * When  the  black  sits  among  the  red  cows  , that  is,  while 
it  is  still  dark,  but  the  grey  of  morning  is  beginning  to  appear.’— Ludwig 

5 I pa^s  over  stanzas  5 — 9,  which  contain  an  ancient  legend,  p’obably  the 
germ  of  the  later  story  of  Brahmft  or  Pnjftpati  and  his  daughter,  toncernmg 
two  deities  or  powers  of  natuie,  male  and  female.  See  Appendix. 

10  Navagvas:  ‘ the  A ngirasas.' — Wilson.  The  damsel's : S&y  ana  say?  that 
Prfeni  may  be  meant.  Perhaps  Saramd  is  intended  The  twice-strong  sttWi 
keeper : the  Pani  or  Panis  who  kept  the  stolen  cows  or  vanished  rays  of  light 
concealed.  Meedless  • as  the  Panis  refused  to  give  up  the  cows.  Would  nut 
the  rocks  : would  force  from  the  rocky  prison  the  meed  or  honorarium  which 
they  deserved  in  the  shape  of  the  cows. 

11  Sabardughd:  ‘nectar-yielding;’  the  general  name  of  cows  milked  at 
sacrifices.  Which  to  thee  they  offered  : which  the  Angirases  offered  to  Indra. 

12  The  Vasu  is  India. 

13  The  son  of  Nrishad:  Ndrshada,  usually  a patronymic  of  Knflva, 

Vu.  in  this  nlac.e  the  name  of  a ceibiin  rlAnmn  foe  : Iudr®> 


THE  RIGVEDA. 


467 


0MN  61.] 

[4  Thou,  called  Effulgence,  in  whose  threefold  dwelling,  as  in  the 
light  of  heaven,  the  Gods  are  sitting, 

Thou  who  art  called  Agni  or  Jatavedas,  Priest,  hear  us,  guile- 
less Priest  of  holy  worship. 

15  And,  Indra,  bringr,  that  I may  laud  and  servo  them,  those 
Two  resplendent  glorious  Nasatyas, 

Blithe,  bounteous,  man-like,  to  the  sacrifices  honoured  among 
our  men  with  offered  viands. 

1G  This  King  is  praised  and  honoured  as  Ordainer ; himself  the 
bridge,  the  Sage  speeds  o’er  the  waters. 

He  hath  stirred  up  Kakshivan,  stirred  up  Agni,  as  the  steed’s 
swift  wheel  drives  the  felly  onward. 

17  Vaitarana,  doubly  kinsman,  sacrificer,  shall  milk  the  cow  who 

ne’er  hath  calved,  Sabardhu, 

When  I encompass  Varuna  and  Mitra  with  lauds,  and  Arya 
man  in  safest  shelter. 

18  Their  kin,  the  Prince  in  heaven,  thy  nearest  kinsman,  turning 

his  thought  to  thee  thus  speaks  in  kindness : 

This  is  our  highest  bond  : I am  his  offspring.  How  many 
others  came  ere  I succeeded  7 

19  Here  is  my  kinship,  here  the  place  I dwell  in  : these  are  my 

Gods ; I in  full  strength  am  present. 

Twice-born  am  I,  the  first-born  Son  of  Order : the  Cow  milked 
this  when  first  she  had  her  being. 


14  Here  begins  another  part  of  tho  hymn.  Agni  is  addressed.  Effulgence  : 
identified  with  the  Sun.  Threefold  dwelling : earth,  firmament,  and  heaven. 

15  Man  like:  as  men  reward  one  who  institutes  a saciifice  for  their  benefit. 

16  This  King:  Sflrya,  the  Sun-God.  ‘This  royal  Soma.’ — Wilson.  Him- 
itlf  the  bridge:  the  long  beams  of  light  foun  the  bridge  by  which  Surya 
passes  over  the  waters  of  the  firmament  or  sea  of  air  Kakshtvdn  . the  cele- 
brated Kishi.  See  Vo).  I , Index. 

17  Vaitarana  : ‘(Agni),  the  conveyer  (of  all).’  -Wilson.  Agni  is  so  called, 
probably,  as  sacrificer  for  a prince  Vitarana.  Doubly  kinsman : closely  allied 
to  heaven  and  earth.  Sabardhu : the  Cow  whose  milk  is  used  in  sacrifice  ; 
also  called  Sabaiduglifl,  as  in  starza  11.  According  to  Ludwig,  the  New  Year 
which  has  not  yet  distributed  its  treasures  is  meant. 

18  Their  kin  : akin  to  Mitra,  Varuna,  and  Aryaman.  The  Prince  : sdri : 
Shrya,  the  Sun  God.  Thy  nearest  kinsman:  Sfirya.  I adopt  Ludwig’s  inter- 
polation of  nflbhdntdishthah,  which  appeals  unintelligible  as  the  name  of  the 
Jon  of  Manu  who  was  deprived  of  his  inheritance  by  his  father  according  to 
P Yajur-vcda,  and  by  his  brothers  according  to  the  A itareya- Brdhmana. 
fiut  seo  Weber,  Episches  im  V.  Ritual,  pp.  40f.  This : Dyaus.  How  many 
whers:  many  Savitars  (suns  that  introduce  the  new  year)  have  been  before 
“fc— Ludwig. 

I**  These  are  my  Gods:  ‘these  are  my  resplendent  (rays).’— Wilson.  Pro- 

b'y  the  priests  are  intended. —Ludwig.  The  Cow:  Aditi.  Milked  this: 

hked  foi th  this  universe,’— Wilson.  Agni  is  the  speaker  of  this  stanza. 


469  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  X I 

20  So  mid  these  tribes  he  rests,  the  friendly  envoy,  borne  on  two 

paths,  refulgent,  Lord  of  fuel. 

When,  like  a lino,  the  Babe  springs  up  erectly,  his  Mother 
straight  hath  borne  him  strong  to  bless  us. 

21  Then  went  the  milch-kine  forth  to  plea«Pi  the  damsel,  and  for 

the  good  of  every  man  that  liveth. 

Hear  us,  O wealthy  Lord;  begin  our  worship.  Thou  j)a^ 
grown  mighty  through  Asvaghn&’s  virtues. 

22  And  tako  thou  notice  of  us  also,  Indra,  for  ample  riches,  King 

whose  arm  wields  thunder  ! b 

Protect  our  wealthy  nobles,  guard  our  princes  unmenaced  near 
thee,  Lord  of  Tawny  Coursers. 

23  When  he  goes  forth,  ye  Pair  of  Kings,  for  booty,  speeding  to 

war  and  praise  to  please  the  singer, — 

I was  the  dearest  sage  of  those  about  him, — let  him  lead  those 
away  and  bring  them  safely. 

24  Now  for  this  noble  man’s  support  and  comfort,  singing  with 

easy  voice  we  thus  implore  thee : 

Impetuous  be  his  son  and  fleet  his  courser : and  may  I be  his 
priest  to  win  him  glory. 

25  If,  for  our  strength,  the  priest  with  adoration  to  win  your  friend- 

ship made  the  laud  accepted, 

That  laud  shall  be  a branching  road  to  virtue  for  every  one  to 
whom  the  songs  are  suited.  ^ 

26  Glorified  thus,  with  holy  hymns  and  homage  : — Of  noble  race, 

with  Waters,  God-attended— 

May  he  enrich  us  for  our  prayers  and  praises  : now  can  the  cow 
be  milked  ; the  path  is  open. 


20  He  Agni.  Two  paths ; from  earth  to  heaven  and  from  heaven  to  earth, 

21  The  reference  iu  the  first  line  is,  apparently,  to  the  imprisoned  cows  and 
Sararrift  (see  stanza  10);  but  all  explanations  of  the  allusions  in  this  hymn  are 
moie  or  less  conjectural.  Ludwig  thinks  that  the  reference  may  be  to  the  act- 
ual milking  of  the  sacrificial  cows  at  the  ceremony  which  this  hymn  accompa- 
nied. Wilson  translates  : — ‘ The  words  of  a desirable  praise.  of,a  certain  tian 
quil  person  (N&bhluedishtha),  attain  the  prototype  (Indra)’  Aqvaghna:  pro- 
bably the  patronymic  of  Vitarana.— Ludwig.  See  note  on  Vaitarana  iu  stanza 

17. 

23  He : Asvaghna  Vitarana.  Ye  Pair  of  Kings : Mitra  and  Varuna. 

26  Glorified,  thus:  that  is,  May  Varuna  glorified  with  song  beginning, 
noble  race,  etc.,  ’ enrich  us.  Now  can  the  cow  be  milked : it  is  now  time 
the  morning  Agnihotram. — Ludwig. 

Prof.  Grajwmann  has  banished  this  almost  unintelligible  hymn  to  hisApfe“ 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


yLtfiV  62.] 


466 


27  Be  to  us,  then,  ye  Gods  who  merit  worship,  be  ye  of  one  accord 
our  strong  protection, 

Who  went  on  various  ways  and  brought  us  vigour,  ye  who  are 
undeceivable  explorers. 

HYMN  LXII.  ^ Visvedevas,  Etc. 

Ye  who,  adorned  with  guerdon  through  the  sacrifice,  have  won 
you  Indra’s  friendship  and  eternal  life, 

Even  to  you  be  happiness,  Angirases.  Welcome  the  son  of 
Manu,  ye  who  are  most  wise. 

2 The  Fathers,  who  drave  forth  the  wealth  in  cattle,  have  in  the 

year’s  course  cleft  Vala  by  Eternal  Law  : 

A lengthened  life  be  yours,  0 ye  Angirases.  Welcome  the 
son  of  Manu,  ye  who  are  most  wise. 

3 Ye  raised  the  Sun  to  heaven  by  everlasting  Law,  and  spread 

broad  earth,  the  Mother,  out  on  every  side. 

Fair  wealth  of  progeny  be  yours,  Angirases.  Welcome  the 
son  of  Manu,  ye  who  are  most  wise. 

4 This  kinsman  in  your  dwelling-place  speaks  pleasant  words  : 

give  ear  to  this,  ye  Rishis,  children  of  the  Gods. 

High  Hrahrnan  dignity  be  yours,  Angirases.  Welcome  the 
son  of  Manu,  ye  who  are  most  wise. 

5 Distinguished  bv  their  varied  form,  these  Rishis  have  been 

deeply  moved. 

These  ar»  the  sons  of  Angiras : from  Agni  have  they  sprung 
to  life. 

6 Distinguished  by  their  varied  form,  they  sprang  from  Agni, 

from  the  sky. 

Navagva  and  Dasagva,  noblest  Angiras,  he  givcth  bounty 
with  the  Gods. 

7 With  Indra  for  associate  the  priests  have  cleared  the  stable 

full  of  steeds  and  kine, 

Diving  to  me  a thousand  with  their  eight-marked  ears,  they 
gained  renown  among  the  Gods. 

1 The  ton  of  Manu:  N&bhflnedishtha  Mtbuva.  See  X.  61.  18  note. 

2 JZ’/ic  Fathers;  the  Angirases.  Vala:  the  demon  who  stole  the  cows  of 
lie  GUIs.  6 

. ll?  ^'lasting  Law:  ‘ by  means  of  your  sacrifice.’ — Wilson. 

1 This  kinsman : or,  this  NftbhA,  that  is,  Nabhauedishtha. 

UutUnguished  by  their  varied  form  : or,  Virfipas.  See  III.  53.  7. 
n the  sky:  or,  from  Dynus  Noblest  Angiras:  Agni  himself,  accord - 

>r\  h *va”a*  R®  ifl  al80  called  Navagva  and  Dasagva  as  these  piiestiy  names 
belong  to  or  are  closely  connected  with  the  Angirases. 
ton*.  right-marked  ears : having  marks  branded  on  their  ears  ; or  per* 
r P',  with  slit  ears.  Cf.  Hymns  of  the  Athana-vcda,  YI.  141.  2. 


470 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK  X. 

8 May  this  man’s  sons  be  multiplied  ; like  springing  corn  niav 

Manu  grow,  ^ 

Who  gives  at  once  in  bounteous  gift  a thousand  kiue  a 
hundred  steeds. 

9 No  one  attains  to  him,  as  though  am  in  would  grasp  the 

heights  of  heaven.  * 

Savarnya’s  sacrificial  meed  hath  broadened  like  an  ample  flood. 

10  Yadu  and  Turva,  too,  have  given  two  Dasas,  well  disposed,  to 

serve, 

Together  with  great  store  of  kine. 

1 1 Blest  be  the  hamlet’s  chief,  most  liberal  Manu,  and  may  his 

bounty  rival  that  of  Sui  ya. 

May  the  Gods  let  Savarni’s  life  be  lengthened,  with  whom, 
unwearied,  we  have  lived  and  prospered. 

HYMN  LX  III.  Visvedevas, 

May  they  who  would  assume  kinship  from  far  away,  Vivasvan’s 
generations,  dearly  loved  of  men, 

Even  the  Gods  who  sit  upon  the  sacred  grass  of  Nahusha’s 
son  Yayati,  bless  and  comfovt  us. 

2 For  worthy  of  obeisance,  Gods,  are  all  your  names,  worthy  of 

adoration  and  of  sacrifice. 

Ye  who  were  born  from  waters,  and  from  Aditi,  and  from  the 
earth,  do  ye  here  listen  to  my  call. 

3 I will  rejoice  in  these  Adityas  for  my  weal,  lor  whom  the  Mo- 

ther pours  forth  water  rich  in  balm, 

And  Dyaus  the  Infinite,  firm  as  a rock,  sweet  milk, — Gods  act- 
ive, strong  through  lauds,  whose  might  the  Bull  upholds. 

8 Manu : here  apparently  the  name  of  SAvarui  the  prince  whose  munificence 
is  the  subject  of  stanzas  8 — 11.  A thousand  kine,  a hundred  steeds : * kine’^  is 
conjecturally  supplied.  ‘A  thousand  and  a hundred  horses.’ — Wilson.  ‘A 
thousand  times  a hundred  horses. ’ — Ludwig. 

9 Sdvarnya  here  means  SAvarni. 

10  Turva:  equivalent  to  Turvasa  ; a prince  of  the  clan  called  after  the 
eponymus  Turva.  Ddsas  : enslaved  natives. 

1 Kinship ; relationship  with  us,  and  the  duties  of  protection  and  aid  which 
relationship  implies.  Cf.  I.  109.  7,  note.  V ivasvdn’s  generations : SAyairieuP' 
plies  a verb,  and  explains  differently  : — ‘(support)  the  generations  of  (Manu 
the  son  of)  Yivasvat.’ — Wilson.  Yaydti:  see  I.  81.  17,  and  108.  8,  note.  ^ 

2 From  toaters  : the  aerial  waters,  or  intermediate  region  of  air.  Addi:  w 
Roth  understands  Aditi  here  to  mean  ‘ infinity,’  the  boundlessness 
heaven  as  opposed  to  the  limitation  of  earth.  See  Muir,  O.  S.  Texts,  V. 
SAyana’s  explanation  is  similar. 

3 The  Mother:  Earth.  Dyaus:  Heaven.  Tht  Bull:  the  Sun,  . 
explains  vrishabharftn  as  ‘ bringers  of  rain,’ 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


471 


63.] 


a Looking  on  men,  ne’er  slumbering,  they  by  their  deserts  at- 
tained as  Gods  to  lofty  immortality. 

Borne  on  refulgent  cars,  sinless,  with  serpents’  powers,  they 
robe  them,  for  our  welfare,  in  the  height  of  heaven. 

5 Great  Kings  who  bless  us,  who  have  come  to  sacrifice,  who, 

ne’er  assailed,  have  set  their  mansion  in  the  sky, — a 
These  I invite  with  adoration  and  with  hymns,  mighty  Adityas, 
Aditi,  for  happiness. 

6 Who  offereth  to  you  the  laud  that  ye  accept,  0 ye  All-Gods  of 

Manu,  many  as  ye  are  ? 

Who,  Mighty  Ones,  will  prepare  for  you  the  sacrifice  to  bear 
us  over  trouble  to  felicity ) 

7 Ye  to  whom  Manu,  by  seven  priests,  with  kindled  fire,  offered 

the  first  oblation  with  his  heart  and  soul, 

Vouchsafe  us,  ye  Adityas,  shelter  free  from  fear,  and  make  us 
good  and  easy  paths  to  happiness. 

8 Wise  Deities,  who  have  dominion  o’er  the  world,  ye  thinkers 

over  all  that  moves  not  and  that  moves, 

Save  us  from  uncommitted  and  committed  sin,  preserve  us 
from  all  sin  to-day  for  happiness. 

9 In  battles  we  invoke  Iudra  still  swift  to  hear,  and  all  the  holy 

Host  of  Heaven  who  banish  grief, 

Agni,  Mitra,  and  Varuna  that  we  may  gain,  Dyaus,  Bhaga, 
Maruts,  Prithivi  for  happiness : 

10  Mightily-caving  Earth,  incomparable  Heaven,  the  good  guide 

Aditi  who  gives  secure  defence. 

The  well-oared  heavenly  Ship  that  lets  no  waters  in,  free  from 
defect,  will  we  ascend  for  happiness. 

H Bless  us,  all  Holy  Ones,  that  we  may  have  your  help,  guard 
and  protect  us  from  malignant  injury. 

With  fruitful  invocation  may  we  call  on  you,  Gods,  who  give 
ear  to  us  for  grace,  for  happiness. 

12  Keep  all  disease  afar  and  sordid  sacrifice,  keep  off  the  wicked 

man’s  malicious  enmity. 

Keep  far  away  from  us  all  hatred,  0 ye  Gods,  and  give  us 
ample  shelter  for  our  happiness. 

13  Untouched  by  any  evil,  every  mortal  thrives,  and,  following 

the  Law,  spreads  in  his  progeny, 

Whom  ye  witli  your  good  guidance,  0 Adityas,  lead  safely 
through  all  his  pain  and  grief  to  happiness. 

f With  serpents'  powers : ‘of  unsurpassable  wisdom.’ — Wilson. 

^ heavenly  Ship according  to  Slyana,  a metaphorical  expression  for 


472  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  * 

14  That  which  ye  guard  and  grace  in  battle,  O ye  Gods,  ye  Ma. 

ruts,  where  the  prize  is  wealth,  where  heroes  win, 

That  conquering  Car,  0 India,  that  sets  forth  at  dawn,  that 
never  breaks,  may  we  ascend  for  happiness. 

15  Vouchsafe  us  blessing  in  our  paths  and  desert  tracts,  blessing 

in  waters  and  in  battle  for  the  light ; 

Blessing  upon  the  wombs  that  bring  male  children  forth,  and 
blessing,  0 ye  Maruts,  for  the  gain  of  wealth. 

16  The  noblest  Svasti  with  abundant  riches,  who  comes  to  wbal 

is  good  by  distant  pathway, — 

May  she  at  home  and  far  away  preserve  us,  and  dwell  with  ui 
under  the  Gods’  protection. 

17  Thus  hath  the  thoughtful  sage,  the  son  of  Plati,  praised  you, 

0 Aditi  and  all  Adityas. 

Men  are  made  rich  by  those  who  are  Immortal : the  Heavenlj 
Folk  have  been  extolled  by  Gaya. 

HYMN  LX IV.  Viavedevai 

What  God,  of  those  who  hear,  is  be  whose  well-praised  name  wi 
may  record  in  this  our  sacrifice  ; and  how  1 
Who  will  be  gracious?  who  of  many  give  us  bliss  ? Who  ou 
of  all  the  Host  will  come  to  lend  us  aid? 

2 The  will  and  thoughts  within  my  breast  exevt  their  power 

they  yearn  with  love,  and  fly  to  all  the  regions  round. 
None  other  Comforter  is  found  save  only  these  : my  longing 
and  my  hopes  are  fixt  upon  the  Gods.  * 

3 To  Narasansa  and  to  Pushan  I sing  forth,  to  unconcealabl 

Agni  kindled  by  the  Gods; 

To  Sun  and  Moon,  two  Moons,  to  Yama  in  the  heavens,  to  Trit 
Vata,  Dawn,  Night,  and  the  Asvins  Twain. 

4 How  is  the  Sage  extolled  whom  the  loud  singers  praise 

What  voice,  what  hymn  is  used  to  laud  Brihaspati  ? 

May  Aja-Ekaprtd  with  Rikvans  swift  to  hear,  and  Ahi  of  tl 
Deep  listen  into  our  call. 

14  For  happiness : svastrfye,  for  happiness  or  welfare,  recurs  at  the  end 
all  the  stanzas  from  3 to  14  inclusive. 

16  Svasti : PathyA  Svasti,  According  to  the  Index;  the  Goddess  of  prosperi 
and  happiness. 

17  The  son  of  Plati : Gaya,  the  Itishi  of  the  hymn. 

3 Unconcealahle  Agni : or,  to  the  unconcealable  (Savitar)  and  Agni-  f 
Moons:  New  Moon  and  Full  Moon. 

4 Aja-tikapdd:  see  VI.  50.  14.  Rikvans • singers;  minor  deities  v 
attend  and  sing  the  praises  of  some  superior  God.  A hi  of  the  Deep : the  gr 
Diagon  of  the  depths  of  the  aerial  oceau  ; Ahibudhuya.  See  Yol.  I-i 


BYXN  64.]  THE  RIO  VEDA . 473 

5 Aditi,  to  the  birth  of  Daksha  and  the  vow  thou  summonest  the 

Kings  Mitra  and  Vanina. 

With  course  unchecked,  with  many  chariots  Aryaman  comes 
with  the  seven  priests  to  tribes  of  varied  sort. 

6 May  all  those  vigorous  Coursers  listen  to  our  cry,  hearers  of 

invocation,  speeding  on  their  way  ; 

Winners  of  thousands  where  the  priestly  meed  is  won,  who 
gather  of  themselves  great  wealth  in  every  race. 

7 Bring  ye  Purandhi,  bring  Vayu  who  yokes  his  steeds,  for 

friendship  bring  ye  Pushan  with  your  songs  of  praise  : 

They  with  one  mind,  one  thought  attend  the  sacrifice,  urged 
by  the  favouring  aid  of  Savitar  the  God. 

8 The  thrico-seven  wandering  Rivers,  yea,  the  mighty  floods, 

the  forest  trees,  the  mountains,  Agni  to  our  aid, 

Krisinu,  Tishya,  archers  to  our  gathering-place,  and  Rudra 
strong  amid  the  Rudras,  we  invoke. 

9 Let  the  great  Streams  come  hither  with  their  mighty  help, 

Sindlm,  Sarasvati,  and  Sarayu  with  waves. 

Ye  Goddess  Floods,  ye  Mothers,  animating  all,  promise  us 
water  rich  in  fatness  and  m balm. 

10  And  let  BrihaddivA,  the  Mother,  hear  our  call,  and  Tvashtar, 

Father,  with  the  Goddesses  and  Dames. 

Ribhukshan,  Vaja,  Bhnga,  and  Rathaspati,  and  the  sweet 
speech  of  him  who  labours  guard  us  well  ! 

11  Pleasant  to  look  on  as  a dwelling  rich  in  food  is  the  blest 

favour  of  the  Maruts,  Rudra’s  Sons. 

May  we  be  famed  among  the  folk  for  wealth  in  kine,  and  ever 
come  to  you,  ye  Gods,  with  sacred  food. 


5 Dahlia : meaning  here  the  Sun,  according  to  S&yana.  Ludwig  thinks 
hat  the  sacrificer,  regarded  as  Daksha  or  PrajApati,  and  said  to  be  born  again 
hrougli  completion  of  his  vow,  is  intended.  In  the  second  line  also  Aryaman 
i considered  by  SAyana  to  be  the  Sun: — ‘Ataman,  whose  course  is  not 
urnetl,  the  giver  of  delight  to  many,  having  seven  ministering  (lays)  proceeds 
a hi.s  multiform  births.’ — Wilson. 

6 Coursers  ; the  horses  which  bring  the  Gods  to  men’s  sacrifices. 

7 Purandhi:  Plenty  personified  as  a deity.  Or  purandhim  may  be  an  ad* 
Active  ‘ the  spirited,  or  liberal,  Pushan  ’ 

[ 8 Thrice- seven : the  seven  rivers  of  the  land  of  the  Aryans  having  their  coun* 
Pats  in  heaven  and  in  the  firmament.  Krishna:  the  archer  who  guaids 
e heavenly  Soma.  Tishya:  an  asterism  regarded  ns  being  in  the  form  of 
a,Tow>  and  so  here  identified  with  KrisAnu. 

10  Brihaddivd:  a Goddess  associated  with  I1A,  Sarasvati,  and  others. 
1>ne the  consorts  of  the  Gods.  Rathaspati:  the  God  who  presides  over 
'*nots  of  war.  Sptech : or  prayer.  Who  labours:  at  the  sacnfice. 


474  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  X. 

12  The  thought  which  ye,  0 Maruts,  Indra,  find  ye  Gods  have 

given  to  me,  and  ye  Mitra  and  Varuna, — 

Cause  this  to  grow  and  swell  like  a milch-cow  with  milk.  Will 
ye  not  bear  away  my  songs  upon  your  car? 

13  0 Maruts,  do  ye  never,  never  recollect  and  call  again  to  mind 

this  our  relationship  ? 

When  next  we  meet  together  at  the  central  point,  even  there 
shall  Aditi  confirm  our  brotheihood. 

14  The  Mothers,  Heaven  and  Earth,  those  mighty  Goddesses 

worthy  of  sacrifice,  come  with  the  race  of  Gods. 

These  Two  with  their  support  uphold  both  Gods  and  men,  and 
with  the  Fathers  pour  the  copious  genial  stream. 

15  This  invocation  wins  all  good  that  we  desire:  Brihaspati,  highly- 

praised  Aramati,  are  here, 

Even  where  the  stone  that  presses  meath  rings  loudly  out, 
and  where  the  sages  make  their  voices  heard  with  hymns. 

16  Thus  hath  the  sage,  skilled  in  loud  singers’  duties,  desiring 

riches,  yearning  after  treasure, 

Gaya,  the  priestly  singer,  with  his  praises  and  hymns  content- 
ed the  Celestial  People. 

17  Thus  hath  the  thoughtful  sage,  the  son  of  Plati,  praised  you, 

0 Aditi  and  all  Adityas. 

Men  are  made  rich  by  those  who  arc  Immortal : the  Heavenly 
Folk  have  been  extolled  by  Gaya.  ^ 

IlYMN  LXV.  Visvedevas. 

May  Agni,  Indra,  Mitra,  Varuna  consent,  Aryaman,  V&yu,  Tush- 
an,  and  Sarasvati, 

Adityas,  Maruts,  Vishnu,  Soma,  lofty  Sky,  Rudra,  and  Aditi, 
and  Brahmanaspati. 

2 India  and  Agni,  Hero-lords  when  Vritra  fell,  dwelling  together, 

speeding  emulously  on, 

And  Soma  blent  with  oil,  putting  his  greatness  forth,  have 
with  their  power  filled  full  the  mighty  firmament. 

3 Skilled  in  the  Law  I lift  the  hymn  of  praise  to  these,  Law- 

strengtheners,  unassailed,  and  great  in  majesty. 

13  At  the  central  point : the  place  of  sacrifice. 

14  With  the  Father  s : 1 The  fruitfulness  of  heaven  and  earth,  ^fhich  &j'e 
birth  to  gods  and  men,  is  described  as  produced  by  the  fathers.’  See  « 
Cosmology  of  the  Rigvcda,  p.  72. 

15  Aramati:  the  Genius  of  Devotion. 

17  The  concluding  stanza  of  Hymu  63  is  repeated  here. 


THE  MOVED  A. 


475 


BYliti  65.] 

These  in  their  wondrous  bounty  send  the  watery  sea : may 
they  as  kindly  Friends  send  gifts  to  make  us  great. 

4 They  with  their  might  have  stayed  Heaven,  Earth,  and  Prithi- 

vi,  the  Lord  of  Light,  the  firmament,  the  lustrous  spheres. 
Even  as  fleet-foot  steeds  who  make  their  masters  glad,  the 
princely  Gods  are  praised,  most  bountiful  to  man. 

5 Bring  gifts  to  Mitra  and  to  Vanina  who,  Lords  of  all,  in  spirit 

never  fail  the  worshipper, 

Whose  statute  shines  on  high  through  everlasting  Law,  whose 
places  of  sure  refuge  are  the  heavens  and  earth. 

6 The  cow  who  yielding  milk  goes  her  appointed  way  hither  to 

us  as  leader  of  our  holy  rites, 

Speaking  aloud  to  Varuna  and  the  worshipper,  shall  with 
oblation  serve  Vivasvan  and  the  Gods. 

7 The  Gods  whose  tongue  is  Agni  dwell  in  heaven,  and  sit,  aid- 

ers of  Law,  reflecting,  in  the  seat  of  Law. 

They  propped  up  heaven  and  then  brought  waters  with  their 
might,  got  sacrifice  and  in  a body  made  it  fair. 

8 Born  in  the  oldest  time,  the  Parents  dwelling  round  are  shar- 

ers of  one  mansion  in  the  home  of  Law. 

Bound  by  their  common  vow  Dyaus,  Prithivi  stream  forth  the 
moisture  rich  in  oil  to  Varuna  the  Steer. 

9 Parjanya,  Vata,  mighty,  senders  of  the  rain,  Indra  and  Vayu, 

Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman  : 

We  call  on  Aditi,  A lityas,  and  the  Gods,  those  who  are  on 
the  earth,  in  waters,  and  in  heaven. 

10  Tvashtar  and  Vayu,  those  who  count  as  Ribhus,  both  celestial 

Hotar-priests,  and  Dawn  for  happiness, 

Winners  of  wealth,  we  call,  and  wise  Brihaspati,  destroyer  of 
our  foes,  and  Soma  Indra’ s Friend. 

11  They  generated  prayer,  the  cow,  the  horse,  the  plants,  the 

forest  trees,  the  earth,  the  waters,  and  the  hills. 


3 The  watery  tea  : the  clouds  aud  rain. 

4 Prithivi : meaniug  here  the  region  of  raid-air. 

^ Maces  of  sure  refuge:  SAyaua  explains  nddhasi  differently  upon  whom 
e ^Wo  solicitous  worlds  remain  dependent.’ 

6 The  cow : who  is  milked  at  sacrifice.  According  to  S4yana,  thunder  may 
)enieant,  and  by  ‘milk’  strength  may  be  intended. 

1 In  a body : that  is,  personified.  Of.  X.  66.  9,  note. 

8 The  Parents : Heaven  and  Earth. 

19  Celestial  Hotar-priests:  see  I.  13.  8. 


476 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


t BOOK  x. 

These  very  bounteous  Gods  made  the  Sun  mount  to  heaven 
and  spread  the  righteous  laws  of  Aryas  o’er  the  land. 

12  0 Asvins,  ye  delivered  Bhujyu  from  distress,  ye  animated 

Syava,  Vadhrimati’s  son. 

To  Vimada  ye  brought  his  consort  KamadyG,  and  gave  his 
lost  Vishnapd  back  to  Visvaka. 

13  Thunder,  the  lightning’s  daughter,  Aja-Ekapad,  heaven’s  bear- 

er, Sindhu,  and  the  waters  of  the  sea : 

Hear  all  the  Gods  my  words,  Sarasvati  give  ear  together  with 
Purandhi  and  with  Holy  Thoughts. 

14  With  Holy  Thoughts  and  with  Purandhi  may  all  Gods,  know- 

ing the  Law  immortal,  Manu’s  Holy  Ones, 

Boon-givers,  favourers,  finders  of  light,  and  Heaven,  with  gra- 
cious love  accept  my  songs,  my  prayer,  my  hymn. 

15  Immortal  Gods  have  I,  Vasishtha,  lauded,  Gods  set  on  high 

above  all  other  beings. 

May  they  this  day  grant  us  wide  space  and  freedom  : ye  Gods, 
preserve  us  evermore  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXYI.  Yisvedem 

I  call  the  Gods  of  lofty  glory  for  our  weal,  the  makers  of  the 
light,  well-skilled  in  sacrifice ; 

Those  who  have  waxen  mightily,  Masters  of  all  wealth,  Im- 
mortal, strengthening  Law,  the  Gods  whom  Indra  leads. 

2 For  the  strong  band  of  Maruts  will  we  frame  ajiymn:  the  chiefs 

shall  bring  forth  sacrifice  for  Indra’s  troop, 

Who,  sent  by  Indra  and  advised  by  Varuna,  have  gotten  for 
themselves  a share  of  Surya’s  light. 

3 May  Indra  with  the  Yasus  keep  our  dwelling  safe,  and  Aditi 

with  Adityas  lend  us  sure  defence. 

May  the  God  Rudra  with  the  Rudras  favour  us,  and  Tvashtar 
with  the  Dames  further  us  to  success. 

4 Aditi,  Heaven  and  Earth,  the  great  eternal  Law,  Indra,  Vishnu, 

the  Maruts, Aand  the  lofty  Sky. 

We  call  upon  Adityas,  on  the  Gods,  for  help,  on  Vasus,  Rudras, 
Savitar  of  wondrous  deeds. 


12  These  deeds  of  the  Asvins  are  told  in  I.  16  and  17. 

13  Aja-Ekapdd : see  VI.  50,  14.  Holy  Thoughts:  Devotions  personified. 

14  Mann's  Holy  Ones : deities  whom  Manu  worshipped. 

15  Vasishtha:  that  is,  a descendant  of  the  great  Rishi  Vasishtha. 

4 The  names  in  the  first  line  are  in  the  nominative  case  and  without  a verb ; 
‘ are  invoked/  may  be  understood. 


THE  R1QVEDA. 


ill 


JIYMH  66.] 

5 With  Holy  Thoughts  Sarasv&n,  firm-lawed  Varuna,  great  V&yu, 

Pushan,  Vishnu,  and  the  Asvins  Twain, 

Lords  of  all  wealth,  Immortal,  furtherers  of  prayer,  grant  us 
a triply-guarding  refuge  from  distress. 

6 Strong  be  the  sacrifice,  strong  be  the  Holy  Ones,  strong  the 

preparers  of  oblation,  strong  the  Gods. 

Mighty  be  Heaven  and  Earth,  true  to  eternal  Law,  strong  be 
Parjanya,  strong  bo  they  who  laud  the  Strong. 

7 To  wm  us  strength  I glorify  the  Mighty  Twain,  Agni  and 

Soma,  Mighty  Ones  whom  many  laud. 

May  these  vouchsafe  us  shelter  with  a triple  guard,  these 
whom  the  strong  have  served  in  worship  of  the  Gods. 

8 Potent,  with  firm-fixt  laws,  arranging  sacrifice,  visiting  solemn 

rites  in  splendour  of  the  day, 

Obeying  Order,  these  whose  priest  is  Agni,  free  from  falsehood, 
poured  the  waters  out  when  Vritra  died. 

9 The  Holy  Ones  engendered,  for  their  several  laws,  the  heavens 

and  earth,  the  waters,  and  the  plants  and  trees. 

They  filled  the  firmament  with  heavenly  light  for  help  : the 
Clods  embodied  Wish  and  made  it  beautiful. 

10  May  they  who  bear  up  heaven,  the  Riblms  deft  of  hand,  and 

Vata  and  Parjanya  of  the  thundering  Bull, 

The  waters  and  the  plants,  promote  the  songs  we  sing:  come 
Bhaga,  Rati,  and  the  Vajins  to  my  call. 

11  Sindhu,  the  soa,  the  region,  and  the  firmament,  the  thunder, 

and  the  ocean,  Aja-Ek.ipad, 

The  Dragon  of  the  Deep,  shall  listen  to  my  words,  and  all 
the  Deities  and  Princes  shall  give  ear. 

12  May  we  be  yours,  we  men,  to  entertain  the  Gods  : further 

our  sacrifice  and  give  it  full  success. 

Adityas,  Rndras,  Vasus,  givers  of  good  gifts,  quicken  the  holy 
hymns  which  wo  are  singing  now. 

t ^ Strong:  vrishan  repeated  in  the  way  loved  by  some  of  the  Vcdic  poets  ; 
showerer  of  benefits,’  according  to  SAyana.  The  Gods : meaning,  says  S&yana, 
ll>e  priests. 

: , 9 Jjflm  : courses  of  action.  Embodied  Wish  : gave  a body  to  the  wishes  and 
j wpes  of  worshippers,  and  personified  them  in  the  same  manner  as  sacrifice  is 
ai!  to  have  been  embodied  and  beautified  in  X.  65.  7. 

tj?  and  ^arJanya  °fthe  thundering  Bull : meaning  the  wind  and  storm 
\ attend  the  thundorous  lain-cloud.  Rdti : divine  Favour  or  Bounty. 
tjm  ; a bl^s  of  divinities  according  to  S&yana.  See  VII,  88.  7. 

Ekapid : see  VI.  50.  14.  Dragon  of  the  Deep:  Ahibudhnya.  See 


478  • THE  IIYMN3  OF  [BOOK  l 

13  1 follow  with  success  upon  the  path  of  Law  the  two  celestial 

Hotars,  Priests  of  oldest  time. 

We  pray  to  him  who  dwelleth  near,  Guard  of  the  Field,  to  all 
Immortal  Gods  who  never  are  remiss. 

14  Vasishtha’s  sons  have  raised  their  voices,  like  their  sire,  Ilishi- 

like  praying  to  the  Gods  for  happiness. 

Like  f»iendly-minded  kinsmen,  come  at  our  desire,  0 Gods,  and 
shake  down  treasures  on  us  from  above. 

15  Immortal  Gods  have  I,  Vasishtha,  lauded,  Gods  set  on  high 

above  all  other  beings. 

May  they  this  day  grant  us  wide  space  and  freedom  : ye  Gods, 
preserve  us  evermore  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXVIL  Brihaspati. 

This  holy  hymn,  sublime  and  seven-headed,  sprung  from  eter- 
nal Law,  our  sire  discovered. 

Ayasya,  friend  of  all  men,  hath  engendered  the  fourth  hymn 
as  he  sang  his  laud  to  Indra. 

2 Thinking  aright,  praising  eternal  Order,  the  sons  of  Dyausthe 

A sura,  those  heroes, 

Angirases,  holding  the  rank  of  sages,  first  honoured  sacrifice’s 
holy  statute. 

3 Giit  by  his  friends  who  cried  with  swan-like  voices,  bursting 

the  stony  barrieis  of  the  prison , 

Brihaspati  spake  in  thunder  to  the  cattle,  Aid  uttered  praise 
and  song  when  he  had  found  them. 

4 Apart  from  one,  away  from  two  above  him,  he  drave  the  kine 

that  stood  in  bonds  of  falsehood. 

Brihaspati,  seeking  light  amid  the  darkness,  drave  forth  the 
bright  cows : three  he  made  apparent. 


13  Two  celestial  Hotars:  Agni  and  Aditya,  according  to  Silyana.  Guard  o) 
the  Field:  probably  Indra. 

15  Repeated  from  the  preceding  hymn. 


1 Seven  headed : having  seven  divisions.  Accompanied  by  seven  bands  o! 
the  Maruts,  or  having  seven  metres,  according  to  S&yara.  Our  sire  : Angna« 
Fourth  : or,  extending  to  all  four  sides,  mighty. 

3 The  cattle : the  lost  cows  of  the  Angirases,  representing  metaphorical 
the  rays  of  light  which  had  been  stolen  by  the  fiends  of  darkness.  See  I.  #2. 

4 Apart  from  one , away  from  two  : the  meaning  is  uncertain.  Perhaps,  & 
a distance  from  the  earth,  down  from  heaven  and  the  firmament.  FalseM0 
the  wickedness  of  the  treacherous  Pams.  Three : heaven,  firmament, 
earth. 


THE  RIGVEDA. 


470 


UrMX  07.] 

5 When  he  had  cleft  the  lairs  and  western  castle,  he  cut  off  three 

from  him  who  held  the  waters. 

Brihaspati  discovered,  while  he  thundered  like  Dyaus,  the 
dawn,  the  Sun,  the  cow,  the  lightning. 

6 As  with  a hand,  so  with  his  roaring  Indra  cleft  Vala  through, 

the  guardian  of  the  cattle. 

Seoking  the  milk-draught  with  sweat-shining  comrades  he  stole 
the  Pani’s  kine  and  left  him  weeping. 

7 He  with  bright  faithful  Friends,  winners  of  booty,  hath  rent 

the  milker  of  the  cows  asunder. 

Brihaspati  with  wild  boars  strong  and  mighty,  sweating  with 
heat,  hath  gained  a rich  possession. 

8 They,  longing  for  the  kine,  with  faithful  spiiit  incited  with 

their  hymns  the  Lord  of  cattle. 

Brihaspati  freed  the  radiant  cows  with  comrades  self-yoked, 
averting  shame  from  one  another. 

9 In  our  assembly  with  auspicious  praises  exalting  him  who 

roareth  like  a lion, 

May  we,  in  every  fight  where  heroes  conquer,  rejoice  in  strong 
Brihaspati  the  Victor. 

10  When  he  had  won  him  every  sort  of  booty  and  gone  to  heaven 

and  its  most  lofty  mansions, 

Men  praised  Brihaspati  the  Mighty,  bringing  the  light  within 
their  mouths  from  sundry  places. 

11  Fulfil  the  prayer  that  begs  for  vital  vigour : aid  in  your  wont- 

ed manner  even  the  humble. 

Let  all  our  foes  be  turned  an  l driven  backward.  Hear  this, 
0 Heaven  and  Earth,  ye  All-producers. 

12  Indra  with  mighty  strength  hath  cleft  asunder  the  head  of 

Arbuda  the  watery  monster, 

i Slain  Ahi,  and  sot  free  the  Seven  Rivers.  0 Heaven  and  Earth, 
with  all  the  Gods,  protect  us. 

5 Western  castle : this  is  obscure.  Ludwig  suggests  that  rf pdchlm  may  mean 
inutile  * or  ‘ detested.’  Three:  heaven,  firmament,  and  earth.  Him  who  held 
« waters:  the  demon  Vala,  who  kept  the  rain,  as  well  as  the  cows  or  rays  of 
?ht,  imprisoned.  The  cow  - the  cattle  ; the  beams  of  light. 

*1  Comrades : his  faithful  friends  tho  Maruts.  Wild  boars:  the  strong  fierce 
Lruts ; according  to  Sdyana,  ‘ bearers  of  excellent  water.’ 

8 The  Lord  of  cattle  : Brihaspati,  so  called  because  he  had  released  them. 

10  The  lUfht : that  is,  the  hj  mns  of  praise  which  will  bring  them  the  light 
help,  The  stanza  is  difficult 

H The  watery  monster  • the  fiend  who  dominated  the  ocean  of  air.  Ahi : 
,r>the  Dragon,  Vritra  or  his  brother. 


480  THE  IIYMNS  OF  [BOOR  % 

HYMN  LXVIII.  Biihwpau. 

Like  birds  who  keep  their  watch,  plashing  in  water,  like  the 
loud  voices  of  the  thundering  rain-cloud, 

Like  merry  streamlets  bursting  from  the  mountain,  thus  to 
Brihaspati  our  hymns  have  sounded. 

2 The  Son  of  Angiras,  meeting  the  cattle,  as  Bhaga,  brought  in 

Arvaman  among  us. 

As  Friend  of  men  ho  decks  the  wife  and  husband  : as  for  the 
race,  Brihaspati,  nerve  our  coursers. 

3 Brihaspati.  having  won  them  from  the  mountains,  strewed 

down,  like  barley  out  of  winnowing-baskets, 

The  vigorous,  wandering  cows  who  aid  the  pious,  desired  of 
all,  of  blameless  form,  well-coloured. 

4 As  the  Sun  dews  with  mcath  the  seat  of  Order,  and  casts  a 

flaming  meteor  down  from  heaven, 

So  from  the  rock  Brihaspati  forced  the  cattle,  and  cleft  the 
earth’s  skin  as  it  were  with  water. 

5 Forth  from  mid-air  with  light  he  drave  the  darkness,  as  the 

gale  blows  a lily  from  the  river. 

Like  the  wind  grasping  at  the  cloud  of  Vala,  Brihaspati  ga- 
thered to  himself  the  cattle. 

€ Brihaspati,  when  he  witli  fiery  lightnings  cleft  through  the 
weapon  of  reviling  Vala, 

Consumed  him  as  tongues  eat  what  teeth  have  compassed:  he 
threw  the  prisons  of  the  red  cows  open. 

7 That  secret  name  borne  by  the  lowing  cattle  within  the  cave 
Brihaspati  discovered, 

And  dravo,  himself,  the  bright  kine  from  the  mountain,  like  a 
bird’s  young  after  the  eggs’  disclosure. 

2 The  Son  of  Angiras  : Brihaspati,  especially  worshipped  and  cherished  b; 
Angiras.  Aryaman : the  institution  of  marriage,  represented  by  Aryaman 
one  meaning  of  the  name  being  groomsman  or  matchmaker. 

3 Out  of  winnowing-baskets : sthivibhyah : the  exact  meaning  of  the  word 
is  somewhat  uncertain,  but  it  is  evidently  a measure,  basket,  or  iustrumea 
connected  with  corn.  Sthivimdntah , ‘ armed  with  sthivis ,’  occurs  in  X. 
and  is  said  by  Sflyana  to  mean  ‘occupants  of  stations.’  Wilson  render 
sthivibhyah  in  this  place  by  ‘ from  the  granaries.’  The  cows  bestowed  > 
Biihaspati*  are  countless  as  grains  of  barley  on  the  threshing-floor  or  wtnno 
ing- place. 

4 Cleft  the  earth's  skin : or  surface,  with  the  hoofs  of  many  cattle. 

5 A lily : $pdla : according  to  S&yana  the  same  as  (jlaivala,  the  Vftllwner 

Octandra,  a common  aquatic  plant.  # . • y *13 

6 Weapon : I adopt  S&yana’a  explanation  of  jasum , although  in  a.  • 
the  same  word  means  ‘ exhaustion.’ 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


481 


TVV  M.1 

g He  looked  around  on  rock-imprisoned  sweetness  as  one  who 
eyes  a fish  in  scanty  water. 

Brihaspati,  oleaving  through  with  varied  clamour,  brought  it 
forth  like  a bowl  from  out  the  timber. 

9 He  found  the  light  of  heaven,  and  fire,  and  Morning  : with 
lucid  rays  he  forced  apart  the  darkness. 

As  from  a joint,  Brihaspati  took  the  marrow  of  Vala  as  he 
gloried  in  his  cattle. 

0 As  trees  for  foliage  robbed  by  winter,  Vala  mourned  for  the 

cows  Brihaspati  had  taken. 

He  did  a deed  ne’er  done,  ne’er  to  be  equalled,  whereby  the 
Sun  and  Moon  ascend  alternate. 

1 Like  a dark  steed  adorned  with  pearl,  the  Fathers  have  deco- 

rated heaven  with  constellations. 

They  set  the  light  in  day,  in  night  the  darkness.  Brihaspati 
cleft  the  rock  and  found  the  cattle. 

i This  homage  have  we  offered  to  the  Cloud-God  who  thunders 
out  to  many  in  succession. 

May  this  Brihaspati  vouchsafe  us  fulness  of  life  with  kine  and 
horses,  men,  and  heroes. 


HYMN  LX IX.  Agni. 

Auspicious  is  the  aspect  of  Vadhryasva’a  fire ; good  is  its 
guidance,  pleasant  are  its  visitings. 

When  first  the  people  of  Sumitra  kindle  it,  with  butter  pour- 
ed thereon  it  crackles  and  shines  bright. 

2  Butter  is  that  which  makes  V idhryasva’s  fire  grow  strong  : 
the  butter  is  its  food,  the  butter  m ikes  it  fat. 

It  spreads  abroad  when  butter  h ith  been  offered  it,  and  balm- 
ed  with  streams  of  butter  shines  forth  like  the  Sun. 


5 Sweetness:  the  sweet  milk  ; that  is,  the  cows  who  pioduced  it. 

Like  a bo  ml : which  already  exists  potentially  in  the  wood  from  which  it  is 
educed  by  cutting. 

* Wilson,  following  S4yana,  paraphrases  the  second  line  ‘ he  seized  (the 
Me  from  the  rock)  of  Vala  surrounded  by  the  kine  as  (one  extracts)  mar- 

* from  a bone.’ 

B The  Fathers  : 1 The  connection  of  the  fathers  with  the  light,  of  which 
7 are  both  the  embodiments  and  the  guardians,  is  alone  sufficient  to  ex- 
mo  their  action  in  placing  the  stars  iu  the  sky.’ — Wallis,  Cosmology  of  the 
arg  ’ P*  Or,  as  Ludwig  remarks,  the  Fathers  themselves  may  he  the 


12  To  many : *oows  ' is,  apparently,  understood.  Slyaua  supplies  rtcAai 
v 0 recitsa  in  order  many  (sacred  stanzas).’ — Wilson. 


itt  Vldfi,'yaiva  has  been  mentioned,  in  VI.  61.  1,  as  a worshipper  of  Saras- 
■ here  he  appears  as  a special  worshipper  of  Agni.  • 

31 


482  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  X, 

3 Still  newest  is  this  face  of  thine,  0 Agni,  which  Mauu  and  Su- 

mitra  have  enkindled. 

So  richly  shine,  accept  our  songs  with  favour,  so  give  us  strength, 
ening  food,  so  send  us  glory. 

4 Accept  this  offering,  A^ni,  whom  aforetime  Vadhryasva  hath 

entreated  and  enkindled. 

Guard  well  our  homes  and  people,  gnard  our  bodies,  protect 
thy  gift  to  us  which  thou  hast  granted. 

5 Be  splendid,  guard  us,  Kinsman  of  Vadhryasva  : let  not  the 

eumity  of  men  o’ercome  thee. 

Like  the  bold  heroChyavana,  I Sumitra  tell  forth  the  title  of 
Vadhryasva’s  Kinsman. 

6 All  treasures  hast  thou  won,  of  plains  and  mountains,  and 

quelled  the  Dasas’  and  the  Aryas’  hatred. 

Like  the  bold  hero  Chyavana,  O Agni,  mayst  thou  subdue  the 
men  who  long  for  battle. 

7 Deft  Agni  hath  a lengthened  thread,  tall  oxen,  a thousand 

heifers,  numberless  devices. 

Decked  by  the  men,  splendid  among  the  splendid,  shine 
brightly  forth  amid  devout  Smnitras. 

8 Thine  is  the  teeming  cow,  0 Jatavedas,  who  pours  at  once  her 

ceaseless  flow,  Sabardhuk. 

Thou  art  lit  up  by  men  enriched  with  guerdon,  0 Agni,  by 
the  pious-souled  Sumitias. 

9 Even  Immortal  Gods,  0 Jafatvedas,  Vadhiyasva's  Kinsman, 

have  declared  thy  grandeur. 

When  human  tribes  drew  near  with  supplication  thou  conquer 
edst  with  men  whom  thou  hadst  strengthened. 

10  Like  as  a father  hears  his  son,  0 Agni,  Vadhryasva  bare  the< 

in  his  lap  and  served  thee. 

Thou,  Youngest  God,  having  enjoyed  his  fuel,  didst  vanquisl 
those  of  old  though  they  were  mighty. 

11  Vadhryasva’s  Agni  evermore  hath  vanquished  his  foes  will 

heroes  who  had  pressed  the  Soma. 

Lord  of  bright  rays,  thou  burntest  up  the  battle,  subduing 
as  our  help,  e’en  mighty  foemeu. 

3 Sumitra  : sou  of  Vadhryasva  and  RLhi  of  the  hymn.  , f f 

6 Chyavana:  a son  of  Bhiigu.  Or  tlie  word  may  mean  * conquerirg» 

SAyana  interprets  it.  Vadhryasva' t Kinsman : as  having  been  espeoa 
worshipped  and  cheiished  by  that  Bishi.  See  stanza  10.1  .. 

7 A lengthened  thread : continual  facrifices,  from  ancient  to  present  1 
Devices:  ways  of  attaining  his  object.  Or  fatdnUha  may baVL; 
hundred  or  many  musical  modes  or  sacred  song*  ; ' or  ‘ praised  by  ' 

» the  leader  of  hundreds  (of  burnt  offerings).’ — Wilsba. 


THE  RIQVEDA, 


481 


rryzv  70.] 

2  This  Agni  of  Vadhryasva,  Vritra-slayer,  lit  from  of  old,  must 
be  invoked  with  homage. 

As  such  aBsail  our  enemies,  Vadhryasva,  whether  the  foes  be 
strangers  or  be  kinsmen. 

HYMN  LXX.  Xprt*. 

Enjoy,  0 Agni,  this  my  Fuel,  welcome  the  oil-filled  ladle  wheie 
we  pour  libation. 

Rise  up  for  worship  of  the  Gods,  wise  Agni,  on  the  earth's 
height,  while  days  are  bright  with  beauty. 

2 May  he  who  goes  before  the  Gods  come  hither  with  steeds 

whose  shapes  are  varied,  Nurasansa. 

May  he,  most  Godlike,  speed  our  offered  viands  with  homage 
God-ward  on  the  path  of  Order. 

3 Men  with  oblations  laud  most  constant  Agni,  and  pray  him  to 

perform  an  envoy’s  duty. 

With  lightly-rolling  car  and  best  draught-horses,  bring  the 
Gods  hither  and  sit  dowui  as  Hotar. 

4 May  the  delight  of  Gods  spread  out  transversely  : may  it  be 

with  us  long  in  length  and  fragrant. 

0 Holy  Grass  divine,  with  friendly  spirit  bring  thou  the  wil- 
ling Gods  whose  Chief  is  Indra. 

5 Touch  ye  the  far-extending  height  of  heaven,  or  spring  apart 

to  suit  the  wide  earth’s  measure. 

Yearning,  ye  Doors,  with  those  sublime  in  greatness,  seize 
eagerly  the  heavenly  Car  that  cometh. 

6 Here  in  this  shrine  may  Dawn  and  Night,  the  Daughters  of 

Heaven,  the  skilful  Goddesses,  be  seated. 

In  your  wide  lap,  auspicious,  willing  Ladies,  mtfy  the  Gods  seat 
them  with  a willing  spirit. 

7 Up  stands  the  stone,  high  burns  the  fire  enkindled : Aditi’s  lap 

contains  the  Friendly  Natures. 

Ye  Two  Chief  Priests  who  serve  at  this  our  worship,  may  ye, 
more  skilled,  win  for  us  rich  possessions. 

Other  Apr!  hymns  may  be  compared  ; I.  13,  142,  and  188  ; II.  3 ; IH.  4 ; 
Vi  6 ; VII.  2,  aud  IX.  5.  The  usual  deities  and  deified  objects,  with  the  ex* 
Option  of  Tanllnap&t,  are  invoked. 

a m*  ^°^ar  •’  * M ministrant  priest.’ — Wilson. 

■ T&e  delight  of  Ood»  : the  sacred  grass. 

® The  heavenly  Car : which  brings  the  Gods.  * 

7 Tfoitone:  with  which  the  Soma  juice  is  expressed.  Aditi't  lap:  the 
wrface  of  the  earth.  The  Friendly  Nature t:  the  Gods.  According  to 
7^,‘the  acceptable  sacrificial  vessels.*  Tuo  Chief  Priertt:  pvrdhftau  : 
Pwxap*  Agni  and  Aditya.  More  ikilUd : than  human  priests. 


484 


THE  HYMNS  OP 


[hook  X, 


8 On  our  wide  grasps,  Three  Goddesses  be  seated  : for  you  have 

we  prepaid  and  made  it  pleasant. 

May  I1&,  she  whose  foot  drops  oil,  the  Goddess,  taste,  man-like 
sacrifice  and  well-set  presents.  ’ 

9 Since  thou,  God  Tvashtar,  hast  made  beauty  perfect,  since 

thou  hast  been  the  Augirases’  Companion, 

Willing,  most  wealthy,  Giver  of  possessions,  grant  us  the  Gods’ 
assembly,  thou  who  knowest. 

10  Well  knowing,  binding  with  thy  cord,  bring  hither,  Lord  of 

the  Wood,  the  Deities’  assembly. 

The  God  prepare  and  season  our  oblations : may  Heaven  and 
Earth  be  gracious  to  my  calling. 

11  Agni,  bring  hither  Varuna  to  help  us,  Indra  from  heaven, 

from  air’s  mid-realm  the  M a ruts. 

On  sacred  grass  all  Holy  Ones  be  seated,  and  let  the  Immortal 
Gods  rejoice  in  Svaha. 


HYMN  LXXI.  JMnara, 

When  men,  Brihaspati,  giving  names  to  objects,  sent  out  V&k's 
first  and  earliest  utterances, 

All  that  was  excellent  and  spotless,  treasured  within  them,  was 
disclosed  through  their  affection. 

2 Where,  like  men  cleansing  corn-flour  in  a cribble,  the  wise  in 
spirit  have  created  language, 

Friends  see  and  recognize  the  marks  of  friendship  : their  speech 
retains  the  blessed  sign  imprinted. 


8 Three  Goddesses : 114,  Sarasvati,  and  BhAratt.  Taste  • the  verb  is  pluul 
meaning,  may  114  and  the  others  taste.  Man-like:  as  at  the  sacrifice  of  Manu 
according  to  Siyana. 

9 Grant  us  the  Gods'  assembly : the  Commentators  explain  pflthas  some 
'times  as  ‘ place,’  sometimes  as  ‘ food  ’ or  ‘air  ’ or  1 water.’  Here  Wilson,  follow 
ing  SAyana,  translates  : — ‘ offer  the  food  of  the  gods  (to  them).’ 

10  Binding  with  thy  cord : it  is  not  clear  what  is  to  be  bound,  or  ra»g^ 
in  order.  According  to  SAyana,  the  pftthns,  which  he  explains  ns  an  nan i 
devdndm,  food  of  the  Gods,  is  to  be  fastened  with  a rope.  Lord  of  the  Wood, 
vanaspati : the  yOtpa  or  Sacrificial  Post. 

11  Svdhd : that  is,  in  the  sacrificial  offerings  presented  with  the  exclamafcior 
SvAhA,  Ave,  or  Hail. 

JfiAnam  or  Knowledge,  the  subject  of  this  very  difficult  hymn,  is 
SAyana  to  mean  Paramabrahm  «jfiAn  un,  knowledge  of  the  higher  truths  o 
Religion,  which  teaches  man  lus  own  nature  and  how  he  may  be  reunited 
the  Supreme  Spirit.  . , 

1 Vdk : Voice  or  Speech,  the  Sacred  Word.  Here  specially  the  voice 
the  hymn  regarded  as  the  means  of  communication  between  men  end  1 
Set  Vedic  India  (Story  of  the.  Nations  Seiies),  pp  269 — 27b 


THE  MOVED  A, 


485 


ttSlS  7t] 

3 With  sacrifice  the  trace  of  Vak  they  followed,  and  found  her 

harbouring  within  the  Rishis. 

They  brought  her,  dealt  her  forth  in  many  places : seven 
singers  make  her  tones  resound  in  concert. 

4 One  man  hath  ne’er  seen  Vak,  and  yet  he  seeth : one  man 

hath  hearing  but  hath  never  heaid  her. 

But  to  another  hath  she  shown  her  beauty  as  a fond  well- 
dressed  woman  to  her  husband. 

5 One  man  they  call  a laggard,  dull  in  friendship:  they  never 

urge  him  on  to  deeds  of  valour. 

He  wanders  on  in  profitless  illusion  : the  Voice  he  heard  yields 
neither  fruit  nor  blossom. 

6 No  part  in  Vak  hath  he  who  hath  abandoned  his  own  dear 

friend  who  knows  the  truth  of  friendship. 

Even  if  he  hears  her  still  in  vain  he  listens  : naught  knows 
i he  of  the  path  of  righteous  action. 

7 Unequal  in  the  quickness  of  their  spirit  are  friends  endowed 

alike  with  eyes  and  hearing. 

Some  look  like  tanks  that  leach  the  mouth  or  shoulder,  others 
like  pools  of  water  fit  to  bathe  in. 

8 When  friendly  Brahmans  sacrifice  together  with  mental  im- 

pulse which  the  heart  hath  fashioned, 

They  leave  one  far  behind  through  their  attainments,  and  some 
who  count  as  Brahmans  wander  elsewhere. 

9 Those  meu  who  step  not  back  and  move  not  forward,  nor 

Brahmans  nor  preparers  of  libations, 

Having  attained  to  Vak  in  sinful  fashion  spin  out  their  thread 
in  ignorance  like  spinsters. 

10  All  friends  are  joyful  in  the  friend  who  cometh  in  triumph, 

having  conquered  in  assembly. 

He  is  their  blame-averter,  food-provider  : prepared  is  he  and 
fit  for  deed  of  vigour. 

3 Harbouring  within  the  Rishi* : they  discovered,  in  the  course  of  sacrifice, 

that  the  inspiied  Rishis  nloue  understood  Speech  as  required  for  religious 

purposes,  /n  many  places : among  the  Hotar-priests.  Seven  singers : * the 

®even  n°i3 * * * * 8y  (birds)  meet  together.’ — Wilson  : referring,  says  S&yaya,  to  the 

»eveu  metres,  the  G&yatri,  etc. 

8 Some  who  count  as  Brahmans  wander  elsewhere : ( others  walk  about 
jjsting  to  be  brahmans'— Muir, 

Step  not  back  and  move  not  forward : take  no  active  part  in  religious 
«««*  * Those  who  do  not  walk  (with  the  Brdhmans)  in  this  lower 
toxfk-°r  (with  the  gods)  in  the  upper  world,’  is  Wilson’s  paraphrase  of  the 
Such  • lC^  * kRve  rendered  literally.  Like  spinsters:  ‘(like)  female  weaver*. 
^ sense  which  Prof.  Aufrecht  thinks  may,  with  probability,  be 
iwa  to  *irls,  a word  which  occurs  only  here.’— Muir. 


486  THE  HYMNS  OP  [ BOOK  X 

11  One  plies  his  constant  task  reciting  verses:  one  sings  the  holy 
psalm  in  Sakvari  measures. 

One  more,  the  Brahman,  tells  the  lore  of  being,  and  one  lays 
down  the  rules  of  sacrificing. 


HYMN  LXXII.  The  God®. 

Lbt  us  with  tuneful  skill  proclaim  these  generations  of  the  Gods 
That  one  may  see  them  when  these  hymus  are  chanted  in  a 
future  age. 

2 These  Brahmanaspati  produced  with  blast  and  smelting,  like 

a smith. 

Existence,  in  an  earlier  age  of  Gods,  from  Non-existence  sprang, 

3 Existence,  in  the  earliest  age  of  Gods,  from  Non-existence  sprang, 
Thereafter  were  the  regions  born.  This  sprang  from  the  Pro- 
ductive Power. 


4 Earth  sprang  from  the  Productive  Power ; the  regions  from 

the  earth  were  born. 

Daksha  was  born  of  Aditi,  and  Aditi  was  Daksha’s  Child. 

5 For  Aditi,  0 Daksha,  she  who  is  thy  Daughter,  was  bronghl 

forth. 

After  her  were  the  blessed  Gods  born  Bharers  of  immortal  life, 

6 When  ye,  0 Gods,  in  yonder  deep  close-clasping  one  anothei 

stood, 

11  Reciting  verses  : repeating  richas  or  verses  of  thejligveda.  This  if»  tin 
duty  of  the  Hotar.  The  holy  psalm  : the  Gftyatra  or  Smraan.  The  Udg&ta 
or  Chanter,  one  of  the  four  chief  priests  is  intended.  The  lore  of  being  •'  thi 
knowledge  of  all  that  exists.  Lays  down  the  rules : 1 prescribes  the  order, 

Muir.  * Measures  the  materials.'— Wilson.  This  is  the  duty  of  the  Adh 

▼arvu  another  of  the  chief  priests.  The  hymn  has  been  transliterate! 
and  translated  by  Dr.  J.  Muir,  0 S.  Texts,  I.  pp.  254  -256.  It  has  also  beei 
metrically  rendered  by  the  authors  of  the  Siebenzig  Lieder  des  Rtgveaa,  wn 
have  endeavoured,  by  transposing  some  of  the  stanzas,  to  bring  them  in 
closer  connexion.  According  to  SAyana,  the  subject  of  the  who  e hymn  J 
1 the  eulogy  of  tho  understanding  of  the  Veda  as  essential  to  divme  knowledge 

2 These : all  beings.  Like  a smith : as  a blacksmith  blows  up  his  fire  an' 

The  regions:  ‘the  quarters  (of  the  horizon).’— Wilson.  This: 
earth.  Productive  Power : the  meaning  of  uttdnapadah  is  uncertain.  ™ 
renders  it  by  ‘the  begetter  (the  sky)’;  Wilson  by  ‘ the  upwaH-growwg  WJ ^ 

4 And  Aditi  was  Daksha' s Child:  ‘Yaska  remarks,  .....How  can  th^t 
possible  ? They  may  have  had  the  same  origin  ; or,  according  to  the  nw 
the  gods,  they  may  have  been  born  from  each  other,— have  derived  tne 
teuce  from  one  another.’- 0.  5.  Texts,  IV.  13.  Aditi  ia  Infinity  or  the  Infinite 
and  Daksha  is  Force  or  Power  personified.  See  Vedic  Hymns,  L.  p _ ,’gtor 

6 4 The  two  verses  6 and  7 are  interesting  as  containing  an  mdepena 
of  the  origin  of  the  world  : the  gods  are  said  to  have  kicked  up  4S 
the  atoms  which  formed  the  earth.’— Wallis,  Cosmology  of  the  Riyvcda,  p 


THE  R10VEH1 . 


487 


73.] 

Thence,  as  of  dancers,  from  your  feet  a thickening  cloud  of  dust 
arose. 

7 When,  0 ye  Gods,  like  Yatis,  ye  caused  all  existing  things  to 

grow, 

Then  ye  brought  S&rya  forward  who  was  lying  hidden  in 
the  sea. 

8 Eight  are  the  Sons  of  Aditi  who  from  her  body  sprang  to  life. 
With  seven  she  went  to  meet  the  Gods : she  cast  Martanda 

far  away. 

9 So  with  her  Seven  Sons  Aditi  went  forth  to  meet  the  earlier 

age- 

She  brought  Martanda  thitherward  to  spring  to  life  and  die 
again! 

HYMN  LXXI1I.  Indra. 

Tnou  wast  born  mighty  for  victorious  valour,  exalting,  strong- 
est, full  of  pride  and  conrigo. 

There,  even  there,  the  Maruts  strengthened  Indra  when  his 
most  rapid  Mother  stirred  the  Hero. 

2 There  with  fiend’s  ways  e’en  Prismi  was  seated  : with  much 

laudation  they  exalted  Indra. 

As  if  encompassed  hy  the  Mighty-footed,  from  darkness,  near 
at  hand,  forth  came  the  Children. 

3 High  are  thy  feet  when  on  thy  way  thou  gocst : the  strength 

thou  foundest  here  hath  lent  thee  vigour. 

Thousand  hyenas  in  thy  mouth  thou  boldest.  O Indra,  mayst 
thou  turn  the  Asvins  hither. 


7 Yatis : devotees. 

8 Eight  are  the  Sons:  according  to  the  Commentator,  Mitra,  Varurm,  Dh&tar, 
Iryanun,  Ansa,  Bluga,  Vivasv&n,  and  Adilya  {the  Sun).  Mdrtlndn:  Surya, 
'he  Sun.  His  exposure  probably  refers  to  his  sweeping  through  the  sky, — 
judwig.  But  see  Bergaigne,  La  Religion  Vddique,  III.  107. 


1 Mother:  Aditi.  Stirred  Hero:  gave  him  free  motion  ns  soon  as  lie  was 
joru,  or  incited  him  to  action  by  telling  him  of  his  future  opponent  See  VIII 

l5- 5,  and  66.  2. 

, 2 This  stanza  is  unintelligible  to  mo  PrUant  ■ meaning  perh  p*  Vn?tn  m 
■jiKlwig  conjectures.  The  On  ughty- footed . Indra.  The  ChtUit  en  * tin  i i 
aruta.  Wilson  translates,  aft^r  Siya.ia  : — 1 Tlie  m.iriial  roopofluir-  he 
“Jurer  encamped  around  Indra  (accompanied)  by  the  swift-moving  i^Alarute) : 

. eT  ^tuiated  him  with  abundant  piaise;  like  (cattle)  penned  up  within  a great 
, > the  embryonic  (waters)  issued  from  the  ( V vitro.)  who  had  arrived  in  the 
rm  of  darkness.’ 

iacf  w a e : M travelling  through  the  heavens.  Hyena* : tdluvriUtn : 


438 


TUF  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK  X, 

4 Speeding  at  once  to  sacrifice  thou  comest  : fur  friendshin 

thou  art  bringing  both  N&satyas.  ^ 

Thou  hitdst  a thousand  treasures  in  possession.  The  Asvins 
0 thou  Hero,  gave  thee  riches.  ‘ 1 

5 Glad,  for  the  race  that  rests  on  holy  Order,  with  friends  whc 

hasten  to  their  gonl,  hath  Indra 
With  these  his  rnngic  powers  assailed  the  Dasyu  : he  cast 
away  the  gloomy  mists,  the  darkness. 

6 Two  of  like  name  for  him  didst  thou  demolish,  as  Indra  strik 

ing  down  the  car  of  Ushas. 

With  thy  beloved  lofty  Friends  thou  earnest,  and  with  th< 
assurance  of  thine  heart  thou  slowest. 


7 War-loving  Namuchi  thou  smotest,  robbing  the  T)&sa  of  hit 

magic  for  the  Rishi. 

For  man  thou  madest  ready  pleasant  pathways,  paths  lead 
ing  as  it  were  directly  God-ward. 

8 These  names  of  thine  thou  hast  fulfilled  completely  : as  Lord 

thou  boldest  in  thine  arm,  0 Indra. 

In  thee,  through  thy  great  might,  the  Gods  are  joyful : thi 
roots  of  trees  hast  thou  directed  upward. 

9 May  the  sweet  Soma  juices  make  him  happy  to  cast  his  quoit 

that  lies  in  depth  of  waters. 

Thou  from  the  udder  which  o’er  earth  is  fastened  hast  pourec 
the  milk  into  the  kine  and  herbage. 

10  When  others  call  him  offspring  of  the  Courier,  my  meaning  i 
that  Mighty  Power  produced  him. 

He  came  from  Manyu  and  remained  in  houses  : whence  h 
hath  sprung  is  known  to  Indra  only. 


6 Two  of  like  name  : or,  of  similar  nature;  gloomy  mists  and  darkness,  Th 

ear  of  Ushas ; see  IV.  30.  8—11.  The  assurance  of  thy  heart:  thy  trusts 
thunderbolt. 

8 Thou  hast  fulfilled : hast  acted  in  full  accordance  with  the  names  tho 
bedrest,  such  as  Vritra-slayer,  Sakra,  etc.  Thou  boldest:  the  thuuderb  1 
The  roots  of  trees  ■ the  clouds  are  often  compared  to  trees.  Th®  ™in  , 
fruit,  and  when  they  pour  it  down  their  roots  are  supposed  to  be  um 
ward. 

9 Quoit : chaJcrdm  : meaning  the  thunderbolt.  The  udder : the 

10  The  Courser:  meaning  Heaven.  Manyu  : wrath,  PaBB1JD,°?^5 
personified,  My  meaning  is  : the  speaker  declares  that  h^6 * 8 9 10  ™ls™ve  8prliu 
common  mytl  ol<»gical  explanations.  He  considers  the  God  to 

from  a transcendental  Power.— Ludwig.  obgcu, 

Grassmanu  banishes  this  hymn  to  his  Appendix  as  being  g«ncraI  yfVvve 
and  in  parts  absolutely  unintcliigiole.  I ha\e,  for  the  most  pa  > 
Ludwig’s  interpretation. 


Tm  RlGVEDA. 


nru  Ar  74.] 


489 


11  Like  birds  of  beauteous  wing  the  Priyamedhas,  Rishis,  im- 
ploring, have  come  nigh  to  Indra  : 

Dispel  the  darkness  and  fill  full  our  vision  : deliver  us  as  men 
whom  snares  entangle. 


HYMN  LXXIV.  In(lra< 

I  \m  prepared  to  laud  with  song  or  worship  the  Noble  Ones 
who  are  in  earth  and  heaven, 

Or  Coursers  who  have  triumphed  in  the  contest,  or  those  who, 
famed,  have  won  the  prize  with  glory. 

2 Their  call,  the  call  of  Gods,  went  up  to  heaven  : they  kissed 

the  ground  with  glory-seeking  spirit, 

There  where  the  Gods  look  on  for  happy  fortune,  and  like 
the  kindly  heavens  bestow  their  bounties. 

3 This  is  the  song  of  those  Immortal  Beings  who  long  for  trea- 

sures in  their  full  perfection. 

May  these,  completing  prayers  and  sacrifices,  bestow  upon  us 
wealth  where  naught  is  wanting. 

4 Those  living  men  extolled  thy  deed,  0 Indra,  those  who  would 

fain  burst  through  the  stall  of  cattle, 

Fain  to  milk  her  who  bare  but  once,  great,  lofty,  whose  Sons 
are  many  and  her  streams  past  number. 

5 Sachivan,  win  to  your  assistance  Indra  who  never  bends,  who 

overcomes  his  focmen, 

Ribhukshan,  Maghavan,  the  hymn’s  upholder,  who,  rich  in 
food,  beais  man’s  kind  friend,  the  thunder. 

6 Since  he  who  won  of  old  anew  hath  triumphed,  India  hath 

earned  his  name  of  Yntra-slayer. 

Ho  hath  appeared,  the  mighty  Lord  of  Conquest.  What  we 
would  have  him  do  let  him  accomplish. 


The  Rubjeot  of  the  hymn  is  a coming  horse-race,  and  the  Rishi  invokes  in 
ivour  of  the  Yaj.tmftna,  the  Vasus,  racers  who  have  won  the  prize  in  former 
imes,  and  the  men  who  owned  diem.  Indra  also  is  appealed  to  for  help. 
)ee  VedUchc  Studien , I.  p.  129. 

2 The  call  of  Gods : the  Gods  are  imagined  as  present  and  interested  in  the 
,^e*  ^kty  kissed  the  ground : the  horses  lightly  touched  the  earth  as  they 


^ Those  living  men:  the  Angirases.  Her  who  hare  hut  once:  Heaven,  accord* 
8 ■o  bAyaua  ; Earth,  according  toGiassmann.  Prisni,  the  mother  of  the 
ruts^  wust  be  meant. — Ludwig.  See  VI.  48.  22.  ’ ' 

8'tthtmn;  apparently  a man’s  name.  4 Celebrator  of  holy  rites.’ — Wilson. 

wtl°  won  of  old : the  YajnmAua.  lie  hath  appeared : the  poet  ima* 
glUe«  bidra  himself  to  be  present. 


490 


[BOOK  J 


THE  HYMNS  OP 

HYMN  LXXV.  The  River, 

Thk  singer,  0 ye  Waters,  in  Vivasv&n’s  place,  shall  tell  you 
grandeur  forth  that  is  beyond  compare. 

The  Rivera  have  come  forward  triply,  seven  and  seven.  Sindhi 
in  might  surpasses  all  the  streams  that  flow. 

2 Varuria  cut  the  channels  for  thy  forward  course,  0 Sindhu, 

when  thou  rannest  on  to  win  the  race. 

Thou  speedest  o’er  precipitous  ridges  of  the  earth,  when  thoi 
art  Lord  and  Leader  of  these  moving  floods. 

3 His  roar  is  lifted  up  to  heaven  above  the  earth : he  puts  foitl 

endless  vigour  with  a flash  of  light. 

Like  floods  of  rain  that  fall  in  thunder  from  the  cloud,  so  Sin 
dhu  rushes  on  bellowing  like  a bull. 

4 Like  mothers  to  their  calves,  like  milch-kine  with  their  milk 

so,  Sindhu,  unto  thee  the  roaring  rivers  run. 

Thou  leadest  as  a warrior  king  thine  army’s  wings  what  tinu 
thou  comest  in  the  van  of  these  swift  streams. 

6 Favour  ye  this  my  laud,  0 Gang  i,  Yamun&,  0 Sutudrl,  Paru 
shin,  and  Sarasvati : A 

With  Asikni,  Vitasta,  0 Marudviidha,  0 Arjikiyjk  with  Su 
shorn. i hear  my  call. 

6 First  with  Trishtama  thou  art  eager  to  flow  forth,  with  Rasa, 
and  Susartu,  and  with  Svetya  here, 

With  Kubh& ; and  with  these,  Sindhu!  ar^l  Mehatnu,  thou 
seekest  in  thy  course  Krumu  and  Gomat?. 

1 0 ye  Waters  : apparently  the  Rivera  are  addressed  as  representing  all  the 
divine  Waters.  Vivasvdns  place : where  the  singers  stand  when  th«y  sing 
hymns.  7’riply , seven  and  seven  : twenty-one  rivers  ; two  other  sets  of  seven 
each  being  added  to  the  seven  chief  rivers  of  the  Panj&b.  SAyapa  explains 
differently: — ‘ they  flowed  by  sevens  through  the  three  (worlds),’— Wilson. 
1 Each  set  of  seven  [streams]  has  followed  a threefold  course.’ — Muir.  By 
seven  and  seven iu  three  courses.’ — M.  Muller. 

5 The  poet  addresses  first  the  most  distant  rivers.  Oangd : the  Ganges  is 

mentioned,  indirectly,  in  only  one  other  verse  of  the  Rigveda,  and  even A qf’ 
the  word  is  said  by  some  to  be  the  name  of  a woman.  See  VI  45  > 

Yamund:  the  Jumna.  S ttudri : the  Sutlej  or  Satlaj.  Parushnl : the  K * ■ 
Sarasvati:  see  VI.  61.  2.  Asikni:  the  ancient  Acesines  : the  Vedic  name 
the  ChandrabhAgA,  the  present  ChenAb.  Vitastd:  probably  the  Jhelum, 
Hydaspes  of  the  ^Greeks.  Marudvridhd : meaning,  increased  by  the  Mai  u • 
not  identified.  Arjtktyd  and  Sushomd  are  said  by  YAska  to  be  the  Vip  •» 
the  Sindhu  ; but  this  is  not  possible,  and  it  is  uncertain  what  river 
meant. 

6 Kubhd,  Krumu , and  Oomati  have  been  mentioned  in  previous  Boo  ^ 
The  other  streams  whose  names  oocur  in  this  stanza  are  probably  unl'nP  , 
affluents  of  the  Indus.  All  that  is  known  regarding  the  rivers  naeni  10 
stanzas  5 and  6 may  be  found  in  Zimmer’s  AltinUischet  Leben , pp- 


THE  JUG  VEDA. 


m 


hymn  7«.] 

7 Flashing  and  whitely-gleaming  in  her  mightiness,  she  moves 

along  her  ample  volumes  through  the  realms, 

Most  active  of  the  active,  Sindhu  unrestrained,  like  to  a dap- 
pled mare,  beautiful,  fair  to  see. 

8 Rich  in  good  steeds  is  Siudhu,  rioh  in  cars  and  robes,  rich  in 

gold,  nobly-fashioned,  rich  in  ample  wealth. 

B^st  Silam&vati  and  young  Ornavati  invest  themselves  with 
raiment  rich  in  store  of  sweets. 

9 Sindhu  hath  yoked  her  car,  light-rolling,  drawn  by  steeds, 

and  with  that  car  shall  she  win  booty  in  this  fight. 

So  have  I praised  its  power,  mighty  and  unrestrained,  of 
independent  glory,  roaring  as  it  runs. 

HYMN  LXXVL  Press-stones. 

I  grasp  at  you  when  power  and  strength  begin  to  dawn : 

bedew  ye,  Indra  and  the  Maruts,  Heaven  and  Earth, 

That  Day  and  Night,  in  every  hall  of  sacrifice,  may  wait  on  us 
and  bless  us  when  they  first  spring  forth. 

2 Press  the  libation  out,  m >st  excellent  of  all : the  Pressing- 

stone  is  grasped  like  a hand-guided  steed. 

So  let  it  win  the  valour  that  subdues  the  foe,  and  the  fleet 
courser’s  might  that  speeds  to  ample  wealth. 

3 Juice  that  this  Stone  pours  out  removes  defect  of  ours,  as  in 

old  time  it  brought  prosperity  to  man. 

1 In  her  mightiness  : in  the  preceding  stanzas  Sindhu  appears  to  be  a River- 
God,  but  in  this  and  following  verses  the  epithets  are  feminine. 

8 Stlamdvatt  and  ftrn tvati  appear  to  be  names  of  rivers.  According  to 
S&yana,  the  words  are  epithets  of  Siudhu  and  mean  respectively  ‘ abounding 
hSllanui  plants,’  said  to  be  used  for  cordage,  and  ‘rich  in  wool.’  The 
meaning  of  the  second  half  of  the  second  line  is  uncertain  : — ‘ wears  [as  only 
one  river  is  supposed  to  be  the  subject]  honey-growing  (flowers).’ — Wilson. 

9 In  this  fight:  the  hymn  may,  as  Prof.  Ludwig  suggests,  be  a prayer 
for  aid  in  a battle  that  is  to  be  fought  on  the  banks  of  the  Sindhu  or  Indus. 
The  hymn  has  been  transliterated  and  translated  by  Dr.  J Muir,  0.  S.  Texts , 
V-  343—345,  and  a version  of  st.  uzas  1 — 8 is  given  by  Prof.  Zimmer,  Altindis- 
. Itben,  p.  4.  A complete  translation,  with  full  explanatory  notes,  is  given 

10  Max  Mailer’s  India , What  can  it  Teach  us  pp.  164—168. 

1 1 grasp  at  you:  'I  propitiate  you  ’ — Wilson.  Power  and  strength:  the 
orn*]18  beams  which  bring  new  vigour.  Day  and  Night : or,  ‘ both  day-halves.* 
^ J0  man  •'  or> 10  Manu.  Tvasktar’s  milk-blent  juice : the  Soma  juice  brewed 
y ivashtar  for  the  year,  which  represents  the  life-sustaining  power  of  Nature. 
diffU  B^ht  with  the  hue  of  steeds : tawny-coloured.  SAyaua  interprets 

^erently ‘when  the  son  of  Twashtri,  hidden  by  the  (stoleu)  cows,  and 
Tv!TnS  the  of  a horse,  (was  to  be 'slain).’— Wilson.  Trisiras  the  son  of 

rr  was  regarded  as  an  euemy  of  the  Clods.  Indra  slew  him  and  took 
P°^esB,on  of  the  Soma> 


492  THE  HYMNS  OF  [SO OK  X, 

At  sacrifices  they  established  holy  rites  on  Tvash tar’s  milk, 
blent  juice  bright  with  the  hue  of  steeds. 

4 Drive  ye  the  treacherous  demons  far  away  from  us:  keep 

Nirriti  afar  and  banish  penury. 

Pour  1 iches  forth  for  us  with  troops  of  hero  sons,  and  bear  ye 
up,  0 Stones,  the  song  that  visits  Gods, 

5 To  you  who  are  more  mighty  than  the  heavens  themselves, 

who,  finishing  your  task  with  more  than  Vihhvan’s  speed, 
More  rapidly  than  Vayu  seize  the  Soma  juice,  better  than 
Agni  give  us  food,  to  you  I sing. 

6 Stirred  be  the  glorious  Stones:  let  it  press  out  the  juice,  the 

Stone  with  heavenly  song  that  reaches  up  to  heaven, 
There  where  the  men  diaw  fortji  the  rneath  for  which  they 
long,  sending  their  voice  around  in  rivalry  of  speed. 

7 The  Stones  press  out  the  Soma,  swift  as  car-borne  men,  and, 

eager  for  the  spoil,  drain  forth  the  sap  thereof. 

To  fill  the  beaker,  they  exhaust  the  udder’s  store,  as  the  men 
purify  oblations  with  their  lips. 

8 Yc,  present  men,  have  been  most  skilful  in  your  work,  even 

ye,  0 Stones  who  pressed  Soma  for  lndra’s  drink. 

May  all  ye  have  of  fair  go  to  the  Heavenly  Race,  and  all  your 
treasure  to  the  earthly  worshipper. 

HYMN  LXXVII.  Manila. 

As  with  their  voice  fiom  cloud  they  sprinkle  (Measure  so  are  the 
wise  man’s  liberal  sacrifices. 

I praise  their  Company  that  merits  worship  as  the  good  Maruts’ 
priest  to  pay  them  honour. 


4 Nirriti:  the  Goddess  of  Death  and  Destruction. 

5 Vibhvan:  one  of  the  three  Ribhus.  Vdyu:  or,  the  wind. 

6 The  men  : meaning  the  press-stones.  Cf.  stanza  8. 

7 The  udder's  store : the  juice  contained  in  the  milky  Soma- plant.  With 
their  lips : with  the  praises  that  they  utter. 

8 Worshipper : SAyana  explains  sunvaM  by  ynjamdnaya,  to  the  Yajamina 
or  sacrifioer.  The  more  literal  translation  would  be  ‘ to  the  presser,’  the  nian 
who  pi  esses  out  or  effuses  the  Soma  juice. 


1 This  stanza  is  obscure.  According  to  SAyana.  vijdntishafy  (the  wise  men «) 
is  formed  from  jan,  to  generate,  and  not  from  jhd,  to  know  : — ‘ they  are  tn« 
generators  (of  the  world)  like  sacrifices  abounding  in  libations.’ — Wil*oD>  * t 
pood  Maruts ’ priest : either  the  band  of  the  Maruts  themselves  regarded  m* 
Brahman,  or  a human  priest  specially  skilled  in  propitiating  them,  Pr0*'  ' 
Muller  translates  differently.  Uymntt  I.  p.  412, 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


493 


HYMN  77.] 

2 The  youths  have  wrought  their  ornaments  for  glory  through 

many  nights, — this  noble  band  of  Maruts. 

Like  stags  the  Sons  of  Dyaus  have  striven  onward,  the  Sons 
of  Aditi  grown  strong  like  pillars. 

3 They  who  extend  beyond  the  earth  and  heaven,  by  their  own 

mass,  as  from  the  cloud  spreads  Surya ; 

Like  mighty  Heroes  covetous  of  glory,  like  heavenly  gallants 
who  destroy  the  wicked. 

4 When  ye  come  nigh,  as  in  the  depth  of  waters,  the  earth  is 

loosened,  as  it  were,  and  shaken. 

This  your  all-feeding  sacrifice  approaches : come  all  united, 
fraught,  as  ’twere,  with  viands. 

5 Ye  are  like  horses  fastened  to  the  chariot  poles,  luminous  with 

your  beams,  with  splendour  as  at  dawn ; 

Like  self-bright  falcons,  punishers  of  wicked  mon,  like  hover- 
ing birds  urged  forward,  scattering  rain  around. 

6 When  ye  come  forth,  0 Maruts,  from  the  distance,  from  the 

great  treasury  of  rich  possessions, 

Knowing,  0 Vasus,  boons  that  should  be  granted,  even  from 
afar  drive  back  the  men  who  hate  us. 

7 He  who,  engaged  in  the  rite’s  final  duty,  brings,  as  a man, 

oblation  to  the  Maruts, 

Wins  him  life’s  wealthy  fulness,  blest  with  heroes  : he  shall 
be  present,  too,  where  Gods  drink  Soma. 

8 For  these  are  helps  adored  at  sacrifices,  bringing  good  fortune 

by  their  name  Adityas. 

Speeding  on  cars  let  them  protect  our  praises,  delighting  iu 
our  sacrifice  and  worship. 


2 This  noble  band  of  Maruts  : Prof.  Ludwig  suggests  that  svrmlrutam 
means  hero  a festival  held  in  honour  of  the  Maruts  at  the  end  of  the  periodi- 
cal  rains,  and  that,  after  many  nights,  the  Maruts  adorn  themselves  for  this. 
Pillars . I follow  Ludwig  ; but  I be  meaning  of  ah' ft  h is  uncertain.  Geldner 
taken  it  to  mean  ‘ horses,'  a parallelism  to  stags,  or  autelopes.  S&yana  ma  es 
mi,  like,  negative,  and  explains  akrfth  by  dfcramana$d<1h : — the  swif -goiug 
sons  of  Aditi  do  not  increase  in  glory,’ — Wilson. 

4 This  your  all-feeding  sacrifice  approaches  : ‘ this  manifold  sacrifice  cornea 
towards  you.’ — Wilson. 

7 In  the  rite's  final  duty : Sftyana  explains  udrlchi  yajHe  by  yajrle 
\ sampUrne  sati . when  the  sacrifice  has  its  praise  peifected,  when  t 
j jacufice  ie  complete.  As  a man:  according  to  Ludwig,  ‘ no  ,on£er  * . • * 

1 ^at  U,  not  in  hie  human  character  but  having  b^™e_  dm“e  A £the 
the  Gods  drink  Soma:  he,  a God  himself,  Bhall  be  admitted  to  the 
Gods’  — 


society. 


404 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


C book  X, 


HYMN  LXXVIII.  Marnt,. 

Yb  by  your  hymns  are  like  high-thoughted  singers,  skilful, 
inviting  Gods  w ith  sacrifices ; 

Fair  to  behold,  like  Kings,  with  bright  adornment,  like  spot- 
less gallants,  leaders  of  the  people : 

2 Like  fire  with  flashing  flame,  breast-bound  with  chains  of  gold, 

like  tempest-blasts,  self-moving,  svs ift  to  lend  your  aid; 

As  best  of  all  foreknowers,  excellent  to  guide,  likeSomas,  good 
to  guard  the  man  who  follows  Law. 

3 Shakers  of  all,  like  gales  of  wind  they  travel,  like  tongues  ol 

burning  fires  in  their  effulgence. 

Mighty  are  they  as  Warriors  clad  in  armour,  and,  like  the 
Fathers’  piayeis,  Most  Bounteous  Givers. 

4 Like  spokes  of  car-wheels  in  one  nave  united,  ever  victorioui 

like  heavenly  Heroes, 

Shedding  their  precious  balm  like  youthful  suitors,  they  raise 
their  voice  and  chant  their  psalm  as  singers. 

5 They  who  are  fleet  to  travel  like  the  noblest  steeds,  long  tc 

obtain  the  prize  like  bounteous  charioteers, 

Like  waters  speeding  on  with  their  precipitous  floods,  like 
omniform  Angirases  with  S&nia-hymns. 

6 Bom  from  the  stream,  like  preBS-stones  are  the  Princes,  foi 

ever  like  the  stones  that  crush  in  pieces ; 

Sons  of  a beauteous  Dame,  like  playful  children,  like  a grea 
host  upon  the  march  with  splendour.  6- 

7 Like  ra\s  of  Dawn,  the  visitors  of  sacrifice,  they  shine  witl 

ornaments  as  eager  to  be  bright. 

Like  rivers  hasting  on,  glittering  with  their  spears,  from  fa 
away  they  measure  out  the  distances. 

8 Gods,  send  us  happiness  and  make  us  wealthy,  letting  us  sine 

ers  prosper,  0 y e Maruts. 

Bethink  you  of  our  praise  and  of  our  friendship:  ye  from  of  ol 
have  riches  to  vouchsafe  us. 


HYMN  LXXIX.  ^ 

I have  behold  the  might  of  this  Great  Being,  Immortal  in  th 
midst  of  tribes  of  mortals. 

His  jaws  now  opeu  and  now  shut  together  : much  they  ae 
insatiately  chewing.  * ^ 

4 Shedding  their  precious  halm : pouring  out  the  fertilizing  rain  as  liberal 

M young  wooers  give  presents.  . Ahl.  the  Indt 

6 Born  from  the  stream : from  the  sea  of  air,  or  from  Bin  ’ 

7 They  measure  out  the  distances:  ‘have  traversed  league*. 

‘They  measure  many  miles/ — M.  Miiller. 


TUB  RIG  VEDA. 


495 


ffYjftf  80.] 

2 His  eyes  are  turned  away,  his  head  is  hidden  : unsated  with 

his  tongue  he  eats  tlie  fuel. 

With  hands  upraised,  with  reverence  in  the  houses,  for  him 
they  quickly  bring  his  food  together. 

3 Seeking,  as  ’twere,  his  Mother’s  secret  bosom,  he,  like  a child, 

creeps  on  through  wide  spread  bushes. 

One  he  finds  glowing  like  hot  food  made  ready,  and  kissing 
deep  within  the  earth’s  recesses. 

4 Tins  holy  Law  I tell  you,  Karth  and  Heaven  : the  Infant  at 

his  birth  devours  his  Parents. 

No  knowledge  of  the  God  have  I,  a mortal.  Yea,  Agni  know- 
eth  best,  for  he  hath  wisdom. 

5 This  man  who  quickly  gives  him  food,  who  offers  his  gifts  of 

oil  and  butter  and  supports  him, — 

Him  with  his  thousand  eyes  he  closely  looks  on  : thou  showest 
him  thy  face  from  all  sides,  Agni. 

6 Agni,  hast  thou  committed  sin  or  treason  among  the  Godst  In 

ignorance  I ask  thee. 

Playing,  not  playimr,  hegold-hued  and  toothless,  hath  cut  his 
food  up  as  the  knife  a victim. 

7 He,  born  in  wood  hath  yoked  his  horses  rushing  in  all  direc- 

tions, held  with  reins  that  glitter. 

The  well-born  friend  hath  carved  his  food  with  Vasus:  in  all 
his  limbs  he  hath  increased  and  prospered. 

HYMN  LXXX.  Agni. 

Aqni  bestows  the  fleet  prize-winning  courser;  Agni,  the  hero 
famed  and  firm  in  duty. 

Agni  pervades  and  decks  the  earth  and  heaven,  and  fills  the 
fruitful  dame  who  teems  with  heroes. 


2 His  eye s : according  to  S&yana,  the  eyes  of  Agni  are  the  distant  Sun  and 
Moon,  aud  his  head  is  hidden  in  mens’  stomachs,  in  the  shape  of  the  heat 
which  enables  them  to  digest  their  food.  His  food : the  sticks  for  fuel,  which 
&re  bound  up  into  fagots. 

3 This  stanza  is  very  obscure.  Agni,  born  from  the  wood  of  the  fire-sticks, 
weins,  as  he  creeps  through  the  brushwood  that  he  is  burning,  to  seek 
Entrance  again  into  his  mother’s  side.  He  then  fmdB  an  old  dry  tree  or  log, 

diich  had  been  deeply  rooted  in  the  earth,  and  feeds  ou  it  as  on  food  that 
li*8  been  specially  prepared  for  him. 

4 His  Parents  > the  two  fire-sticks  from  which  he  has  been  produoed. 

6 Hast  thou  committed  sin  t : Art  thou  as  voracious  and  destructive  in 
ie<wtn  as  th<»u  art  on  earth  ? Playing , not  playing : playing  about  the  fuel, 
U 5 Earnestly  intent  on  devouiing  his  food.  * Sporting  (here),  not  sporting 
‘ 7*' '“Wilson.  A victim : p dm : ox  or  cow. 

* Jhe  well-born  Pnend : Agni.  In  all  his  limbs : parvabhih : * with  logs  of 
Wood , — . \v  ilsota .  2 3 4 *  6 


2 Blest  be  the  wood  that  feeds  the  active  Agni : within  the  two 

great  worlds  hath  Agni  entered.  * j 

Agni  impels  a single  man  to  battle,  and  with  him  rends  in 
pieces  many  a foeman. 

3 Agni  rejoiced  the  ear  of  him  who  praised  him,  and  from  the 

waters  burnt  away  Jarutha. 

Agni  saved  Atri  in  the  fiery  cavern,  and  made  Nrimedha  rich 
with  troops  of  children. 

4 Agni  hath  granted  woaUh  that  decks  the  hero,  and  sent  the 

sage  who  wins  a thousand  cattle. 

Agni  hath  made  oblations  rise  to  heaven : to  every  place  are 
Agni’s  laws  extended. 

5 With  songs  of  praise  the  Rishis  call  on  Agni ; on  Agni,  heroes 

worsted  in  the  foray. 

Birds  flying  in  the  region  call  on  Agni : around  a thousand 
cattle  Agni  wanders. 

6 Races  of  human  birth  pay  Agni  worship,  men  who  have  spruit 

from  Naims’  line  adore  him. 

Stablished  in  holy  oil  is  Agni’s  pasture,  on  the  Gandharva 
path  of  Law  and  Order. 

7 The  Ribhus  fabricated  prayer  for  Agni,  and  we  with  mighty 

hymns  h;ive  called  on  Agni. 

Agni,  Mist  Youthful  God,  protect  the  singer  : win  us  by  wor- 
ship, Agni,  great  possessions. 

HYMN  LX XX I.  Viavakarman 

He  who  site  down  as  Ilotar-priest,  the  H*shi,  our  Father, 
offering  up  all  things  existing. — 

He,  seeking  through  his  wish  a great  possession,  came  among 
men  on  earth  as  archetypal. 

3 Jar&tha : see  VII  1.  7,  and  9 6.  Atri:  his  deliverance  is  ascribed  tr 
the  Aavins  in  I 112  7,  Ud  8,  117.  3 and  118.  7. 

5 Around  a thousand  cattle : in  the  fires  lighted  to  keep  off  wild  beast* 
and  demon*  of  darkness. 

6 Gandharva  path : sublime  ; that  which  the  G-mdharvas  in  heaven 
to  travel. 

7 The  Ribhus  : or  Rishis  skilful  as  the  Ribhus. 

Visvakarman,  the  Omnific,  is  represented  in  this  hymn  as  the  univero 
Father  and  Generator,  the  Creator  of  all  things  and  Architect  of  the  woilds 

1 Ali  things  existing : regarded  as  being  contained  in  the  offerings  pre^entei 
by  Viavakarman.  Through  hi*  wish:  through  his  desire  to  create.  Arche  ^ 
pal : the  meaning  of  prothnmachhdd  is  uncertain.  In  Wilson's  Tr’ansm'^^1 
‘inventor’  is  a misprint  for  ‘investor,’  that  is,  ‘first  investing  Agni  with 
worlds,’  accoiding  to  SAyana s explanation.  ‘First  appearing.’— bud'  » 

‘ The  first  worshipper.’— -Wallis. 


THE  BIG  VEDA. 


497 


0} (N  81 -1 

2 What  was  the  place  whereon  he  took  his  station  ? What  was 

it  that  supported  him?  How  was  it? 

Whence  Visvakarman,  seeing  all,  producing  the  earth,  with 
mighty  power  disclosed  the  heavens. 

3 He  who  hath  eyes  on  all  sides  round  about  him,  a mouth  on 

all  sides,  arms  and  feet  on  all  sides, 

He,  the  Sole  God,  producing  earth  and  heaven,  weldeth  them, 
with  his  arms  as  wings,  together. 

4 What  was  the  tree,  what  wood  in  sooth  produced  it,  from  which 

they  fashioned  out  the  earth  and  heaven  ? 

Ye  thoughtful  men  inquire  within  your  spirit  whereon  he  stood 
when  he  established  all  things. 

5 Thine  highest,  lowest,  sacrificial  natures,  and  these  thy  mid- 

most here,  0 Visvakarman, 

Teach  thou  thy  friends  at  sacrifice,  0 Bless6d,  and  come  thy- 
self, exalted,  to  our  worship. 

6 Bring  thou  thyself,  exalted  with  oblation,  0 Visvakarman, 

Earth  and  Heaven  to  worship. 

Let  other  men  around  us  live  in  folly  : here  let  us  have  a rich 
! and  liberal  patron. 

7 Let  us  invoke  to  day,  to  aid  our  labour,  the  Lord  of  Speech, 

the  thought-swift  Visvakarman. 

May  he  hear  kindly  all  our  invocations  who  gives  all  bliss  for 
aid,  whose  works  are  righteous. 

3 Weldeth  them:  cp.  IV.  2.  17,  and  X.  72.  2.  With  his  arms  as  wings  : 
lanniug  the  flame  in  which  the  matter  is  smelted.  Ludwig  thinks  that 
whirlwinds,  produced  by  the  action  of  hands,  feet,  and  wings,  are  intended. 

4 The  first  half-line  occurs  also  in  X.  31.  7.  They:  the  makers  of  the 
world  directed  by  Paramesvara  — Sfiyana. 

5 Or  the  first  half -line  may  be  rendered  ‘ Thy  sacrificial  forms,  the 
highest,  lowest  ’ Come  thyself , exalted,  to  our  worship:  1 exhilarated,  thyself 
offer  up  thyself.’— Muir.  ‘ Do  thou  sacrifice  to  thyself  delighting  thyself.’  - 
Wallis.  ‘According  to  Mahidhara  the  moaning  is  that  man  is  incompetent 
to  worship  the  creator,  that  is,  in  his  forms,  and  it  must  be  done  by 
himself; -Wilson.  I have  adopted  Prof.  Ludwig’s  explanation  of  the  last  clause. 

6 Briny to  worship  : or,  sacrifice  to  Heaven  and  Earth. 

7 Oar  labour:  the  arduous  work  of  sacrificing.  ‘In  our  conflict ’—Muir. 
The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Dr.  J.  Muir,  0 S.  Texts , IV.  pp.  6,  7,  by 
Mr.  Wallis,  Cosmology  of  the  Rigveda,  pp.  81—83,  and,  partly,  by  Prof.  F. 
Max  Muller  in  his  Hibbert  Lectu,  es , p.  293f. 

See  also  Mme.  Zdnaide  Ragozin,  Vedic  India,  pp.  263,  416. 


m 


THE  HYMXS  OF 


IBOOK  X 


HYMN  LXXXII.  Vi?vabrman 

The  Father  of  the  eye,  the  Wise  in  spirit,  created  both  the^ 
worlds  submerged  in  fatness. 

Then  when  the  eastern  ends  were  firmly  fastened,  the  heaven 
aud  the  earth  wete  far  extended. 

2 Mighty  in  mind  and  power  is  Visv.ikarman,  Maker,  Disposer 

and  most  lofty  Presence. 

Their  offerings  joy  in  rich  juico  where  they  value  One,  onl; 
One,  beyond  the  Seven  Rishis. 

3 Father  who  mide  us,  he  who,  as  Disposer,  knoweth  all  race 

and  all  things  existing, 

Even  he  alone,  the  Deities’  name-giver,— him  other  being 
seek  for  information. 

4 To  him  in  sacrifice  they  offered  treasures, — Rishis  of  old,  n 

numerous  troops,  as  singers, 

AY  ho,  in  the  distant,  near,  and  lower  region,  made  ready  al 
these  things  that  have  existence. 

5 That  which  is  earlier  than  this  earth  and  heaven,  before  thi 

Asuras  and  Go  Is  had  being, — 

AY  hat  was  the  germ  primeval  which  the  waters  received  when 
all  the  Gods  were  seen  together'? 

6 The  waters,  they  received  that  germ  primeval  wherein  tin 

Gods  were  gathered  all  together. 

It  rested  set  upon  the  Unbirn’s  navel,  that  One  wherein  abut 
all  things  existing. 

7 Ye  will  not  find  him  who  produced  these  creatures:  anothc 

thing  hath  risen  up  among  )oa. 

En wrapt  in  rnKty  cloud,  with  lips  that  stammer,  hymi 
chanters  wander  and  are  discontented. 


1 The  Father  of  the  eye  : Visvakarinau,  who  made  the  light  which  enabh 

the  eve  to  see.  Sagged  U fames,:  Sftyans  explain,  ghplam  here  b 
‘watei  ‘engendered  the  water,  (and  theu)  these  two  (heaven  and  eartb 
floating  (on  the  waters).’— Wilson.  , , . , . i e 

2 Mod  lofty  Presence:  literally,  the  h.ghoat  apparition  ; the  highest  nn»6 

or  object  of  spiritual  contemplation.  Their  offering, : the  offering, , or  I 
l,a[M  the  wishes,  of  the  Fathers,  semi-person,  fled.  The  ^ 

constellation  Ursa  Major,  the  seven  stare  of  which  are  the  ‘tb 

Atri  Aneiras  Pulastya,  Pulaha,  Kratu,  and  VaBishtha.  The  meaning  is 

’enjoy  tho.  fulfilment  of  all  their  desire*  beyond 
starry  heavens  where  the  One  Being,  the  great  Creator,  dwe  a.  ge>( 

3 For  information : to  learn  who  is  the  bupieme  God  , or 

ral  functions  are.  . Upavenlv.  tb 

4 Distant,  near . and  loioer  region  : meaning,  apparently,  the  heaie  j» 

earthly,  and  the  intermediate  atmosphere  vi«ftkarman.  S« 

6 The  Unborn,  Aia,  seems  here  to  be  identified  with  Vifeva 


P*itc  India , pp.  423,  424. 

7 Another  thing : meaning,  according  to  the  Commentator, 


Visvakarma 


f tHX  83.] 


THE  RIQVEDA. 
HYMN  LXXXIII. 


499 


Manyu. 


gK  who  hath  reverenced  thee,  Manyu,  destructive  bolt,  breeds 
for  himself  forthwith  all  cotiqueiing  energy. 

Irya  and  D&sa  will  we  conquer  with  thine  aid,  with  thee  the 
Conqueror,  with  conquest  conquest-sped. 


2 Manyu  was  Indra,  yea,  the  God  was  Manyu,  Manyu  was 
Hotar,  Varuna,  J&ta vedas. 

Tie  tribes  of  human  lineage  worship  Manyu.  Accordant  with 
thy  fervour,  Manyu,  guard  us. 


3 Come  hither,  Manyu,  mightier  than  the  mighty  ; chase,  with 
thy  feivour  for  ally,  our  foemen. 

Slayer  of  foes,  of  Vritra,  and  of  Dasyu,  bring  thou  to  us  all 
kinds  of  wealth  and  treasure. 


4 For  thou  art,  Manyu,  of  surpassing  vigour,  fierce,  queller  of 

the  foe,  and  self-existent, 

Shared  by  all  men,  victorious,  subduer : vouchsafe  to  us 
supeiior  strength  m buttles. 

5 I have  departed,  still  without  a portion,  wise  God  ! according 

to  thy  will,  the  Mighty. 

I,  feeble  man,  was  wioth  with  thee,  0 Manyu  : I am  myself; 
come  thou  to  give  me  vigour. 

6 Come  hither,  I am  all  thine  own  ; advancing  turn  thou  to 

me,  Victorious,  All-suppoiter  ! 


a a different  entity  from  you  wlio  are  sentient  beings,  who  have  individual 
xmsciousness,  and  so  foith*— See  Editor’s  note  in  WiKou’s  transition. 
Siyaua ‘gives  the  geueial  sense  of  the  la«t  clause  [of  the  stanza]  as  “You 
ire  merely  anxious  fur  enjoytneut  in  this  world  and  in  the  next,  therefore 
(Ton  kuow  nothing  of  Vifnakarman.”  taking  ukthuslsah  as  implying  singing 
hymns  with  a view  to  gaming  felicity  in  a future  state  Malildhara  has  a 
similar  explanation  : “you  who  ate  engaged  in  the  enjoyments  of  this  world 
or  the  next,  being  subject  to  false  knowledge  or  ignorance,  Lave  no  knowledge 
of  the  Truth.”  ’—Wilson. 

With  legal d to  this  and  the  preceding  hymn  Mr.  Wallis  observes  that 
they  make  no  attempt  to  explain  in  what  way  the  process  of  saciifice  could 
bj  regarded  as  an  act  of  creation.  We  are  told  little  more  thau  that  Visva*. 
kirman  was  a primeval  sacrifice)'  and  al&o  a creator  ; we  huve  no  hint  how  to 
combine  the  two  ideas  into  a harmonious  unity.  See  Cosmology  of  the  Rigveda, 
pp.  83,  84,  and  Muir,  0.  S Texts,  IV.  7,  8,  where  the  hymn  is  tianslated  aud 
some  of  ita  difficulties  are  discussed.  Prof  Ludwig’s  Commentary  is  especi- 
a v full  and  valuable,  and  should  be  consulted  by  all  students  of  the  Veda. 

\ ’*  ^nger,  Passion,  personified. 

Wif/i  thy  fervour : tdpasd : tdpas  means  * heat/  4 burning,’  and,  secondly, 
rigorous  abstraction.  • 

, & Without  a portion:  without  a share  in  thy  favours.  I am  myself : I *m 
'jpwhat  I am  ; a weak  mortal,  for  whose  infirmity  allowance  should  be  made, 
eiQg  (incorporated  with)  my  body,  approach  me.’— Wilsou. 


500 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


Wok  x, 

Come  to  me,  Manyu,  Wielder  of  the  Thunder  : bethink  thee  oj 
thy  friend,  and  slay  the  Dasyus. 

7 Approach,  and  on  my  right  hand  hold  thy  station  : so  shall  w< 
slay  a multitude  of  foemen. 

The  best  of  meath  I offer  to  suppoit  thee  : may  we  be  first  t< 
. drink  thereof  in  quiet. 

HYMN  LXXXIY.  Manyi 

Borne  on  with  thee,  0 Manyu  girt  by  Maruts,  let  our  brav 
men,  impetuous,  bursting  forward, 

March  on,  like  flames  of  fire  in  form,  exulting,  with  pointei 
arrows,  sharpening  their  weapons. 

2 Flashing  like  fire,  be  thou,  0 conquering  Manyu,  invoked,  ( 

Victor,  as  our  aimy’a  leader. 

Slay  thou  our  foes,  distribute  their  possessions  : show  fort 
thy  vigour,  scatter  those  who  hate  us. 

3 0 Manyu,  overcome  thou  our  assailant : on  ! breaking,  slaj 

ing,  crushing  down  the  foemen. 

They  have  not  hindered  thine  impetuous  vigour  : Might] 
Solo  born  ! thou  makest  them  thy  subjects. 

4 Alone  of  many  thou  art  worshipped,  Manyu  : sharpen  th 

spirit  of  each  clan  for  battle. 

With  thee  to  aid,  0 thou  of  perfect  splendour,  we  will  uplift  th 
glorious  shout  for  conquest. 

5 Unyielding,  bringing  victory  like  Indra,  6 Manyu,  be  tho 

here  our  Sovran  Ruler. 

To  thy  dear  name,  0 Victor,  wo  sing  praises  : we  know  tl 
spriug  from  which  thou  art  come  hither. 

6 Twin-born  with  power,  destructive  bolt  of  thunder,  the  highe 

conquering  might  is  thine,  Subduer  ! 

Be  friendly  to  us  in  thy  spirit,  Manyu,  0 Much-invoked,  i 
shock  of  mighty  battle. 

7 For  spoil  let  Varuna  and  Manyu  give  us  the  wealth  of  bo! 

sides  gathered  and  collected  ; 

And  let  our  enemies  with  stricken  spirits,  o’erwhelmed  wi 
terror,  slink  away  defeated. 

1 Like  flames  of  fire  inform:  agnirUpdh-  Homer’s  Si  flag  nvpog  alifoptvoi 
3 Sole  born  : ‘ 0 thou  who  art  without  companion — Wilson. 

5 The  spring  : the  source.  _„:7ur0 

7 For  spoil : the  preservation  of  their  own  property  and  tne  b 
their  enemies’  goods  being  regarded  as  a double  conquest,  ur 
ubhdyam  may  mean  wealth  of  both  kinds,  horses  and  cows.  orifices 

This  hymn  and  the  preceding  are  to  be  lepeated,  S&yaya  says,  atsa 
ensure  the  destruction  of  enemies. 


SYMN  85.]  the  MQVEDA.  501 

HYMN  LXXXV.  Sfiryft’s  Bridal. 

Truth  is  the  base  that  bears  the  earth  ; by  S&rya  are  the  heav- 
ens sustained. 

By  Law  the  Adityas  stand  secure,  and  Soma  holds  his  place  in 
heaven. 

2 By  Joma  are  the  Adityas  strong,  by  Soma  mighty  is  the  earth. 
Thus  Soma  in  tho  midst  of  all  these  constellations  hath  his  place. 

3 One  thinks,  when  they  have  brayed  the  plant,  that  he  hath 

drunk  the  Soma’s  juice ; 

Of  him  whom  Brahmans  truly  know  as  Soma  no  one  ever  tastes. 

4 Soma,  secured  by  sheltering  rules, guarded  by  hymns  inBrihati, 
Tbou  standost  listening  to  the  stones  : none  tastes  of  thee  who 

dwells  on  earth. 

5 When  they  begin  to  drink  thee,  then,  0 God,  thou  swellest  out 

again. 

Vayu  is  Soma’s  guardian  God.  The  Moon  is  that  which  shapes 
tho  years. 

6 Raibhi  was  her  dear  bridal  friend,  and  Narasansi  led  her  home. 
Lovely  was  Sftrya’s  robe : she  came  to  that  which  G&tha,  had 

adorned. 

7 Thought  was  the  pillow  of  her  couch,  sight  was  the  unguent 

for  her  eyes : 

Her  treasury  was  earth  and  heaven  when  Surya  went  unto 
her  Lord. 


The  main  sublet  of  this  composite  hymn,  which  is  one  of  the  latest  in  the 
tigveda,  is  the  ceremony  of  marriage  in  general  and  more  especially  the  wed* 
mg  of  StiryA,  the  Daughter  of  the  Sun,  another  form  of  Dawn,  who  is  re- 
dded as  the  typical  bride. 

1 Truth  : or  reality  ; sdlyam,  used  interchangeably  with  rltam , the  Law 
nd  Order  of  the  universe. 

2 By  Soma  ; by  the  power  of  the  deified  Soma  whoso  influence  pervades, 
[uickens,  and  supports  all  existence.  In  the  second  line  Soma  is  the  Moon, 

pei  haps  there  is  an  allusion  to  the  other  sense  also  of  the  word.  These 
'ontfellatiom : the  nakshatras  or  lunar  mansions.  ‘In  the  centre  of  these 
itara.’ — Muir. 

3 Know  as  Soma  : know  to  be  the  Moon,  regarded  as  the  food  of  Gods  only. 
* By  hymns  in  Brihatt ; that  is  by  hymns  in  that  metre.  But  the  meaning 
bhhataih  is  uncertain.  According  to  SAyana,  the  BArhatas  are  the  seven 

Suaidians  of  the  Soma,  SvAna,  BhrAja,  AnghA  ri,  aud  otheis. 

5 They:  the  Gods.  Thee:  the  ambrosia  contained  in  thee,  which  the 
bods  drink  during  the  waning  of  the  Moou.  0 Qod : Soma,  the  Moom 
^ Soma  is  the  deity  of  tho  preceding  five  stanzas.  SuryA’s  Bridal  i6  the 
subject  of  6—17.  Raibhi,  Ndrdfansi,  aud  Qdthd  are  ritual  verse,  eulogistic 
and  non*Vedic  song  personified. 

. ' Treasury  • hdfafx : meaning,  probably,  trousseau  or  bridal  outfit.  Accoru- 
inS  th$  or  body  of  the  chariot  is  intended. 


502  THE  HYMNS  OF  [ BOOK  X, 

8 Hymns  were  the  cross  bars  of  the  pole,  Kurira-metre  decked 

the  car  : 

The  bridesmen  were  the  Asvin  Pair  : Agni  was  leader  of  the 
train. 

9 Soma  was  he  who  wooed  the  maid  : the  groomsmen  were  both 

Asvins,  when 

The  Sun-God  Savitar  bestowed  his  willing  SftryA  on  her  Lord 

10  Her  spirit  was  the  bridal  car ; the  covering  thereof  wai 

heaven  : 

Bright  were  both  Stceis  that  drew  it,  when  S&rya  approaches 
her  husband’s  home. 

11  Tfry  Steers  were  steady,  kept  in  place  by  holy  verse  auc 

Sama  hymn  : 

All  ear  were  thy  two  chariot  wheels  : thy  path  was  tremuloui 
in  the  sky. 

12  Clean,  as  thou  wentest,  were  thy  wheels;  wind  was  the  ash 

fastened  there. 

Surya,  proceeding  to  her  Lord,  mounted  a spirit-fashioned  car 

13  The  bridal  pomp  of  Surya,  which  Savitar  started,  movee 

along. 

In  Mag  ha  days  are  oxen  slain,  in  Arjunis  they  wed  the  bride 

14  When  on  your  three-wheeled  chariot,  0 Asvins,  ye  came  a 

wooers  unto  Surya’s  bridal, 

Then  all  the  Gods  agreed  to  your  proposal:  F&shan  as  So1 
elected  you  as  Fathers. 

15  0 ye  Two  Lords  of  lustre,  then  when  ye  to  Surya’s  wooing  came 
Where  was  one  chariot-wheel  of  yours?  Where  stood  ye  fo 

the  Sire’s  command  ? 

8 Decked  her  car : formed  its  canopy.  But  the  meaning  of  opotrih  here  i 
uncertain.  1 Kurira  metre  was  the  thong  of  the  whip’ — Wilson.  Th 
bridesmen : in  I.  119.  7 and  elsewheie  the  Asvins  are  said  to  be  the  husband 
of  S&ryft.  Here  they  are  represented  as  the  frieuds  who  had  asked  her  i 
marriage  for  Soma. 

11  All  ear : the  text  has  srdtram,  an  ear,  which  SAyana  says,  means  srotri 
two  ears.  ‘The  two  wheels  were  thy  e;irs  ' — Wilson 

13  In  Maghd  days : or  in  stricter  accordance  with  the  text,  ‘ In  AghA  days 
when  the  Moon  is  iu  the  lunar  mansion  MaghA  See  Jacobi,  Festgruss  an  1 
von  Roth,  p.  69,  and  Weber,  Vedische  Btitrdge,  p 32 f.  Slain : only  o 
especially  festive  occasions,  weddings  for  instance  ‘Are  whipped  along  - 
Wilson.  In  Arjunts  : two  asterisms  or  lunar  mansions,  more  commonly  calie 
Phalgunis.  They  wed  the  bride  • she  is  escorted  to  her  husband’s  home. 

14  As  wooers:  on  behalf  of  Soma.  Pdshan  : here  meaning  Savitar. 

and  Fathers:  intended  to  express  close  relationship  and  Savitar ’s  obhgft  10 
to  the  Asvins  who  had  arranged  the  marriage.  # , . 

15  For  the  Sire's  command : to  receive  Savitar*  s invitation  to  take  patt  i 
the  bridal  procession.  According  to  SAyana,  ‘ to  offer  your  gift.’ 


THE  RIQVEDA. 


503 


*f|%V  85.] 

6 The  Brahmans,  by  their  seasons,  know,  0 Sury&,  those  two 

wheels  of  thine  : 

One,  kept  concealed,  those  only  who  are  skilled  in  highest 
truths  have  learned. 

7 To  Surya  and  the  Deities,  to  Mitra  and  to  Varnna, 

Who  know  aright  the  thing  that  i^,  this  adoration  have  I paid. 

$ By  their  own  power  these  Twain  in  close  succession  move  ; 

They  go  as  playing  children  round  the  sacrifice. 

One  of  the  Pair  beholdeth  all  existing  things ; the  other 
ordereth  seasons  and  is  born  again. 

[9  He,  born  afresh,  is  new  and  new  for  ever:  ensign  of  days  be 
goes  before  the  Mornings. 

Coming,  he  orders  for  the  Gods  their  portion.  The  Moon  pro* 
longs  the  days  of  our  existence. 

M Mount  this,  all-shaped,  gold  hued,  with  stiong  wheels,  fash- 
ioned of  Kinauka  and  S.tlmali,  light-rolling, 

Bound  for  the  world  of  life  immortal,  Surya  : make  for  thy  lord 
a happy  bridal  journey. 

21  Riso  up  from  hence : this  m ddcn  hath  a husband.  I laud 

Visvavasu  with  hymns  and  homage. 

Seek  in  her  father’s  homo  another  fair  one,  and  find  the 
portion  from  of  old  assigned  thee. 

22  Rise  up  from  hence,  Visvavasu  : with  reverence  we  worship  thee. 
Seek  thou  another  willing  maid,  and  with  her  husband  leave 

the  bride. 

23  Straight  in  direction  be  the  pa‘hs,  and  thornless,  whereon 

our  fellows  travel  to  the  wooing. 

Let  Aryamati  and  Bhaga  lead  us : perfect,  0 Gods,  the  union 
of  the  wife  and  husband. 


13  The  two  wheels  are  probably  heaven  and  earth,  and  the  thiid,  one  lept 
cwcealed,  is  the  mysterious  invbible  world  beyond  them. 

18  In  this  stanza  and  the  following  one,  which  arc  but  loosely  connected 
; with  the  rest  of  the  hymn,  Surya  represents  the  Sun,  and  Soma  is  the  j>Iaon. 

| 20  Stanzas  20—33  contain  a collection  of  formula  repeated  when  the  bride 
mounts  her  chariot,  while  she  is  tiavelling  to  her  husband  s house,  when  she 
Arrives  there,  and  on  the  following  nv-rniug.  Thit,  - eh. tr  ot.  Kintula  • the 
*or»d  of  the  Butea  frondosa.  Stimuli : the  dlk  cotton  tree  ; Salmaha  mala- 
b trica.  SHryd:  the  girl  is  addressed  by  the  name  of  S try.1,  the  typical 
bride. 

21  Vwfousu:  one  of  the  Gandharvas,  the  protector  of  viigina.  He  is  told 
to  leave  the  bride  who  no  lougm  needs  his  care,  and  to  transfer  his  guardian- 
to  some  marriageable  maiden  who  has  not  yet  found  a husband.  Fair 
0ne:  vyhktdm : ‘decorated  with  ornaments.’  - Wilson 
P To  the  wooing  : to  the- father,  to  whom  the  intei e ders  are  to  apply  for 
111  daughter’s  hand  on  behalf  of  their  friend,  according  t<>  £ Ay  ana. 


504  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  X 

2i  Now  from  the  noose  of  Varuna  I free  thee,  wherewith  Mo* 
Blessed  Savitar  hath  bound  thee. 

Iu  Law’s  seat,  to  the  world  of  virtuous  action,  I give  thee  tit 
uninjured  with  thy  consort. 

25  Hence,  and  not  thence,  I send  thee  free.  I make  thee  softh 

fettered  there, 

That,  Bounteous  Indra,  she  may  live  blest  in  her  fortuue  anc 
her  sons. 

26  Let  Pushan  take  thy  hand  and  hence  conduct  thee ; may  th< 

two  Asvins  on  their  car  transport  thee. 

Go  to  the  house  to  he  the  household’s  mistress  and  speak  as 
lady  to  thy  gatheied  people. 

27  Happy  be  thou  and  prosper  with  thy  children  here:  be  vigi 

lant  to  rule  thy  household  in  this  home. 

Closely  unite  thy  body  with  this  man,  thy  lord.  So  shall  ye 
full  of  years,  address  your  company. 

28  Her  hue  is  blue  and  red  : the  fiend  who  clingeth  close  is 

driven  off. 

Well  thrive  the  kinsmen  of  this  brido  : the  husband  is  bound 
fast  in  bonds. 

29  Give  thou  the  woollen  robe  away  : deal  treasure  to  the  Brah 

man  priests. 

This  female  fiend  hath  got  her  feet,  and  as  a wife  attend? 
her  lord.  * 

30  Unlovely  is  his  body  when  it  glistens  with  this  wicked  fiend, 
What  time  the  husband  wraps  about  his  limbs  the  g'armenl 

of  his  wife. 


24  The  noose  of  Varuna  : the  girdle  with  which  the  bride  is  girded  aftei 
she  has  been  bathed,  combed,  and  dressed  for  the  marriage  ceremony  Se< 
Prof  Max  Muller’s  Rigveda - San  hit  *1,  Vol.  VI,  Preface,  p 14.  Or,  as  Lanmar 
suggests,  the  noose  may  mean  the  tie  by  which  a girl  is  bound  to  her  fathei 
till  mairiage.  Law's  seat . the  place  of  saciifice,  the  altar. 

Stanzas  24 —26  and  32,  33  are  spoken  just  before  the  biide’s  depaiturt 
from  her  father’s  house. 

25  Hence  and  not  thence  : from  thy  father’s  house  and  not  from  thy 
husband’s. 

27  Be  vigilant  to  mile  thy  household:  this  is  S&yana’s  explanation.  & 
watchful  over  the  domestic  hie.’ — Wilson.  The  verse  is  addressed  to  if 
bride,  and  to  the  newly- wedded  pair  on  arrival  at  the  bridegtoom’s  house. 

28  Her  hue : the  colour  of  Kiity.1,  Magic  personified,  a female  deity  & 
fiend. 

29  The  woollen  robe : ‘ the  garment  soiled  by  the  body.’ — Wilson.  Atfen  J 
her  lord:  the  magic,  or  evil  spell,  returns  to  its  oiigiua tor. —Ludwig. 


TUB  RIQVBDA. 


805 


n'.i/.v  85-1 

SI  Consumptions,  from  her  people,  which  follow  the  hide's  re- 
splendent  train, — 

These  let  the  Holy  Gods  again  bear  to  the  place  from  which 
they  came. 

J2  Let  not  the  highway  thieves  who  lie  in  ambush  find  the  wed- 
ded pair. 

By  pleasant  ways  let  them  escape  the  danger,  and  let  foes 
depart. 

Signs  of  good  fortune  mark  the  bride  : come  all  of  you  and 
look  at  her. 

Wish  her  prosperity,  and  then  return  unto  your  homes  again. 

J4  Pungent  is  this,  and  bitter  this,  filled,  as  it  were,  with  arrow- 
barbs,  Empoisoned  and  not  fit  for  use. 

The  Brahman  who  knows  Suiya  well  deserves  the  garment  of 
the  bride. 

15  The  fiinge,  the  cloth  that  decks  her  head,  and  then  the  triply 

parted  robe,  — 

Behold  the  hues  which  Surya  wears  : these  doth  the  Brahman 
purify. 

16  I take  thy  hand  in  mine  for  happy  fortune  that  thou  mayst 

reach  old  age  with  me  thy  husband. 

Bods,  Anaman,  Bhaga,  Savitar,  Purandhi,  have  given  thee  to 
be  my  household’s  mistress. 

17  0 Pushnn,  send  her  on  as  most  auspicious,  her  who  shall  be  the 

sharer  of  my  pleasures  ; 

Hor  who  shall  twine  her  loving  arms  about  me,  and  welcome  all 
my  love  aud  mine  embraces. 

38  For  thee,  with  bridal  train,  they,  first,  escorted  Suiya  to  her 
home. 

Bive  to  the  husband  in  return,  Agni,  the  wife  with  progeny. 


her  people : ‘ a most  remarkable  and  direct  assumption  of  “here- 
of as  a lurking  danger/ — Mmc.  Zduaide  ltagoziii,  Vedic  India,  p.  371. 

?,erjlal>s  spoken,  on  the  way,  to  the  spectators  of  the  procession. 

Biklal  US  Lode’s  garment.  Sdnjd:  meaning  here  the  song  of  SftryA’a 

Prof  wVneaning  ^^8aiiavii  risosanam , and  adhivikdrtanam  is  uncertain. 
*kirt ’ P * 6,0,1  ron<^era  these  words  by  ‘ border-cloth/  ‘ head-cloth,’  and  ‘divided 
r;  ‘ 1()^  Weber  and  the  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon  explain  the  passage  as  refer- 

fortl  °f le.PreParation  of  the  carcass  of  the  animal  that  has  l et-n  slaughtered 
'Tkel  According  to  this  view  the  first  line  might  be  rendered 

, Bering,  the  cutting  up,  the  severing  of  limb  and  joint’ ; and  for 
36  rr.  ,0llnH ' In,fibt  be  substituted, 
m ° ^l'^e8rooin  addt esses  the  bride. 
lfe  •’  Agni.  1'hey  : the  Gaudhaiv&s,  accoiding  to  SAyana. 


50(5  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  x 

3S  Agni  hath  given  the  bride  again  with  splendour  and  with 
ample  life. 

Long-lived  be  he  who  is  her  lord  ; a hundred  autumns  let  hm 
live. 

40  Soma  obtained  her  first  of  all ; next  the  Gandharva  was  hei 

lord. 

Agni  was  thy  third  husband  : now  one  born  of  woman  is  thi 
fourth. 

41  Soma  to  the  Gandharva,  and  to  Agni  the  Gandharva  gave : 
And  Agni  hath  bestowed  on  me  riches  and  sons  and  this  nr 

spouse. 

42  Be  ye  not  parted  ; dwell  ye  here ; reach  the  full  time  of  huraai 

life. 

With  sons  and  grandsons  sport  and  play,  rejoicing  in  you 
own  abode. 

43  So  may  Prajapati  bring  children  forth  to  us;  may  Aryama 

adorn  us  till  old  age  come  nigh. 

Not  inauspicious  enter  thou  thy  husband’s  house  : bring  bless 
ing  to  our  bipeds  and  our  quadrupeds. 

44  Not  evil-eyed,  no  slayer  of  thy  husband,  bring  weal  to  cattli 

radiant,  gentle  hearted  ; 

Loving  the  Gods,  delightful,  bearing  heroes,  bring  blessing  t 
our  quadrupeds  and  bipeds. 

45  0 Bounteous  India,  make  this  bride  blest  Hi  her  sons  and  fo 

t unate.  . , 

Vouchsafe  to  her  ten  sons,  and  make  her  husband  the  elevent 


man. 

46  Over  thy  husband’s  father  and  thy  husband’s  mother  bear  fu 

sway.  . 

Over  the  sister  of  thy  lord,  over  his  brothers  rule  supreme. 

47  So  may  the  Universal  Gods,  so  may  the  Wateis  join  our  heart 
May  Matarisvan,  Dhatar,  and  Dcshtri  together  bind  us  cios 


40  As  the  typical  brute  Si.rjft  was  first  mairied  to  “^""rgi™ 

originally  belong*  to  him,  then  to  the  Gandliat  va,  as  g Ultirriage  cei 
then  to  Agni  as  the  sacred  fire  .ound  winch  she  walks  m the  uiair  b 
inony,  and  fourthly  to  her  human  husband  — Orassmann.  b,« 

48  The  formula!  contained  in  stanzas  42-47  a.e  '«P“te<™e  mth  6 
gn>om  has  returned  with  hi*  biide  to  his  home,  and  . exhorted  a 

The  wedded  pair  aie  addressed  first,  and  then  the  . jf 

blessed.  Stanza  47  is  spoken  by  the  bridegroom  for  his  wife  and  ^ ( 

47  DethtA:  Instructress,  a female  deity,  not  mentioned  ,, 

lligveda.  'According  to  SAyana,  ddtrt  phuldadm  ,ara,vatt  » mea 

bountiful  (Saraswati).’— Wilson.  . , ,i,-  Hindis,  derived  b 

For  a full  account  of  the  marriage  ceremonies  of  the 


ri'j/y 


THE  ft  IQ  VEDA, 


507 


HYMN  LXXXVI. 


Indra. 


Men  have  abstained  from  pouring  juice  : they  count  not  Indra 
as  a God 

Where  at  the  votary's  store  my  friend  Vrishakapi  hath  drunk 
his  fill.  Supreme  is  Indra  over  all. 

2 Thou,  Indra,  heedless  passest  by  the  ill  Vrishakapi  hath  wrought; 
Yet  nowhere  else  thou  tindest  place  wherein  to  drink  the  Soma 

juice.  Supreme  is  Indra  over  all. 

3 What  hath  he  done  to  injure  thoe,  this  tawny  beast  Vrishakapi, 
With  whom  thou  art  so  nngiy  now  ? What  is  the  votary’s  food- 
ful store?  Supreme  is  Indra  over  all. 

4 Soon  may  the  hound  who  hunts  the  boar  seize  him  and  bite 

him  in  the  ear, 

0 Indra,  that  Vrishakapi  whom  thou  protectest  as  a fiiend. 
Supreme  is  Indra  over  all. 


5 Kapi  hath  marred  the  beauteous  things,  all  deftly  wrought, 

that  were  my  joy. 

In  pieces  will  I rend  his  head ; the  sinner’s  portion  shall  be 
woe.  Supreme  iB  Indra  over  all. 

6 No  Dame  hath  ampler  charms  than  I,  or  greater  wealth  of 

love’s  delights. 

None  with  more  ardour  offers  all  her  beauty  to  her  loid’s  em- 
brace. Supreme  is  Indra  over  all. 


be  ritual  of  Brahmans  who  use  the  SAina-veda,  see  Colebrooke’s  Miscellaneous 
wap,  No.  Ill , and  Weber  and  Haas,  Ivdigcke  Studien,  V.  pp,  177  ft*.  See 
Iso  Hymns  of  the  Atharva-vcda,  Book  XIV.,  and  Dr.  J.  Ehni’s  paper,  Zeits- 
wft  der  Deutschen  Morgenlandischen  Qescllschaft,  XXXIII.  pp.  166  ft'  I 
iave  relied  mainly  on  Ludwig’s  Commentary.  Pi  of.  Grassmauu  has  banished 
he  hymn  to  his  Appendix.  

1 SAyana  ascribes  this  stanza  to  Indra  ; otheis  make  Indian!  the  speaker. 
pshAkapi  is  said  to  have  monopolized  the  offeiings  that  should  have  been 
resented  to  Indra.  Vrishd.capi— literally  ‘ the  stiong  ape,’  or  ‘ the  male  ape’ 
-appears  to  be  a sort  of  intermediate  being  between  a demigod  and  a demon  ; 
M it  is  not  easy  to  determine  his  nature  S Ay ana  calls  him  the  son  of  Indra. 

. 16  said  to  be  the  setting  sun,  and  the  sun  who  diaws  up  vapour  and 
n igatea  with  mist.  According  to  M.  Bergaigue,  La  Religion  Vtdique,  II.  270, 
6 *js  a mythical  saerifleer. 

»dWtnf  blames  Indra  for  his  apathy. 

riat'  ^ BPea^8,  What  is  the  votary's  food fnl  store  i ; why  should  his  appto* 

4 I a ^.e  worshipp®v,s  offerings  make  thee  so  angry  ? 

5 V,?  is  the  speaker  of  this  stanza  and  of  the  two,  or  three,  that  follow, 
fliu  th^’  ‘‘  aPe>  Bn  abbreviation  of  VrishAkapi.  Hath  maned  the  heuu- 
Vui  m^8  ! ,RCCOI'ding  to  S&ya  a,  bath  sp-dled  the  oblations  piepared  foi  me 
1 Ind  !°!fclliPPerR«  But  it  seejns  more  probable  that  VrisbAkapi  lias  assault- 
g j ? ' and  inflicted  injuries  on  her  person. 

ibi  t l • 8Pcak8  with  pride  of  her  voluptuous  charms  which  incited  VribhA- 
1)1  amoiouB  assault. 


508 


THE  HYMXS  OP 


l&OOR  x, 

7 Mother  whose  love  is  quickly  won,  I say  what  verily  will  bo, 
My  breast,  0 Mother,  and  my  head  and  both  my  hips  seen 

quivering.  Supreme  is  Indra  over  all. 

8 Dame  with  the  lovely  hands  and  arms,  with  broad  hair-plait 

add  ample  hips, 

Why,  0 thou  Hero’s  wife,  art  thou  angry  with  our  Vrishakapi 
Supreme  is  Indra  over  all. 

9 This  noxious  creature  looks  on  me  as  one  bereft  of  hero’s  love 
Yet  Heroes  for  my  sons  have  I,  the  Maruts’  Friend  and  Indra’ 

Queen.  Supreme  is  Indra  over  all. 

10  From  olden  time  the  matron  goes  to  feast  and  general  sacrifice 
Mother  of  Heroes,  Indra’s  Queen,  the  rite’s  ordainer  is  extolled 

Supreme  is  Indra  over  all. 

11  So  have  I heard  Indrant  called  most  fortunate  among  these  Dames 

For  never  shall  her  Consoit  die  in  future  time  through  lengt 
of  days.  Supreme  is  Indra  over  all. 

12  Never,  Inchani,  have  I joyed  without  my  friend  Vribhakapi, 
Whose  welcome  offering  here,  made  pure  with  water,  goeth  t 

the  Gods.  Supreme  is  Indra  over  all. 

13  Wealthy  Vpshakap&yi,  blest  with  sons  and  consorts  of  thy  son.5 
Indra  will  eat  thy  bulls,  thy  dear  oblation  that  effecteth  much 

Supreme  is  Indra  overall. 

14  Fifteen  in  number,  then,  for  mo  a score  of  bullocks  they  prepare 
And  I devour  the  fat  thereof : they  fill  my  nelly  full  with  foot 

Supreme  is  Indra  over  all. 

15  Like  as  a bull  with  pointed  horn,  loud  bellowing  amid  the  herds 
Sweet  to  thine  heart,  0 Indra,  is  the  brow  which  she  'vh< 

tends  thee  pours.  Supremo  is  Indra  over  all. 

7 This  stanza  is  ascribed  by  SAyana  to  VrisbAkapi.  It  is  hardly  intelligible 
but,  as  Ludwig  says,  it  seems  to  be  spoken  by  IndiAni,  expressing  her  in  ign 
tion  at  VrishAknpi’s  audacity  which  makes  all  her  body  quiver  with  rage. 

8 Iudra  speaks.  , . . i 

9 Indr  Ant  speaks  this  and  the  following  stanza.  Bereft  of  hero  8 love. 

has  no  brave  husband  to  protect  her.  _ . ^ 

10  The  matron  goes  to  feast:  IndrAnt  means  that  VrisbAkapi  assau  e ^ 
when  she  was  on  her  way  to  a festival',  which  women  were  accustoine  o • 
tend  ; and  that  her  rank  as  Indra’s  consort  did  not  preserve  her  from  ms 

11  Indra  speaks  this  and  the  following  stanza.  p Mer 

13  Spoken  by  Vrishftkapi  to  his  wife  V i iwhAkapA)  i who  is  said  to  r P 
the  dawn,  or,  by  others,  the  gloaming  which  follows  the  setting  snn  vri 

14  Indra  speaks.  Fifteen:  sacrificers  ; probably  YrishAkapi  an  

and  their  sons  and  daughters-in-law.  SAyana  explains  differently . 
worshippers  dress  for  me  fifteen  (and)  twenty  bulls. —Wilson.  • te8 

15  IndrAnt  speaks,  endeavouring  to  attract  him  to  her  own  liba 

of  the  offerings  of  VrishAkapi.  . j^ntEngli*1 

I pass  over  stanzas  10  and  17,  which  I cannot  translate  into  ae  ^ 


THE  MOVED  A. 


509 


HYMN  86.] 

18  0 Indra  this  Vyish&kapi  bath  found  a slain  wild  animal, 
Dresser,  and  new-made  pan,  and  knife,  and  wagon  with  a load 

of  wood.  Supreme  is  Indra  over  all. 

19  Distinguishing  the  Dasa  and  the  Arya,  viewing  all,  I go. 

I look  upon  the  wise,  and  drink  the  simple  votary*®  Soma  juice. 
Supreme  is  Indra  over  all. 

20  The  desert  plains  and  steep  descents,  how  many  leagues  in 

length  they  spread  ! 

Go  to  the  nearest  houses,  go  unto  thine  home,  Vrishakapi. 
Supreme  is  Indra  over  all. 

21  Turn  thee  again  Vrishakapi ; we  twain  will  bring  thee  happiness. 
Thou  goest  homeward  on  thy  way  along  this  path  winch  leads 

to  sleep.  Supreme  is  India  over  all. 

22  When,  Indra  and  Vrishakapi,  ye  travelled  upward  to  your  home, 
Where  was  that  noisome  beast,  to  whom  went  it,  the  beast 

that  troubles  man  ? Supreme  is  Indra  over  all. 

23  Daughter  of  Mann,  Parsu  bare  a score  of  children  at  a birth. 
Her  portion  verily  was  bliss  although  her  burtheu  caused  her 

grief. 


18  I nd r A .i  speaks,  but  her  speech  is  difficult  to  understand.  Wild  ani- 
mal: vou  Roth  conjectures  ‘wild  ass’  as  the  meaning  of  parasvantam 
here  Dresser:  or  slaughter-bench.  ‘A  fiie-pl.ice  (to  cook  it).’  -Wilson. 
Indrani  seems  to  speak  depreciatingly  of  a sacuiice  otfeied  by  Vtishftkapi  as 
consisting  of  an  unsuitable  victim,  prepared  with  instruments  and  means 
which  chance  has  thrown  in  his  way.  Ludwig  thinks  that  Vnsli&kapi  may 
represent  the  Moon  whose  spots  are  fancifully  cousideied  to  be  the  objects 
mentioned  by  Indrdnl. 

19  I look : with  favour.  The  simple  votary  is  the  worshipper  who  offers  his 
libation  in  a sincere  spirit  of  devotion.  The  stanza  and  the  two  following 
a,e  spoken  by  Indra. 

20  Viishdkapi  appears  to  meditate  flight  into  distant  deserts  to  escape 
from  the  wrathful  Indrdnt.  Indra  dissuades  him,  and  promises  to  reconcile 
Indr.lnS  to  him. 

22  The  two  concluding  stanzas  seem  to  be  spoken  by  Indr&ni.  Stanza  22  is 
obscure,  and  stanza  23  has  no  disc  verable  connexion  with  the  lost  of  the  hymn. 

23  Daughter  of  Manu : that  is,  of  the  progenitor  of  men.  Nothing  more 
js  known  of  Parsu,  which  means  a rib  Much  of  this  hymn  appears  to  be 
^explicable.  M.‘  Bergaigne  thinks  that  Vrishakapi,  India’s  f-riend,  represents 
feoma-  and  Infant  the  wife  of  Indra  represents  Prayer.  ‘ This  bizarre  mj  th 
would  symbolize  the  frequently  expressed  idea  that  Indra  loves  neither  the 
^cred  beverage  without  prayer  nor  prayer  without  the  sacred  beverage.  He 
plshes  therefore  his  union  with  Prayer  to  be  accompanied  by  the  union  of 

'a'er  wkh  Soma,  and  he  neglects  sacrifice  as  long  as  this  union  of  the  two 
1^‘al  elements  of  worship  remains  unaccomplished/ — See  La  Religion 
pVe,  II  270,271.  * 

‘(jf'  Geldner  gives  a different  interpretation  of  the  hymn,  whieh  he  has 

f,  Vlte^  anfl  exhaustively  discussed  in  Vrdincke  Studicn,  II.  pp.  22-4-. 

80  Oldenberg,  Religion  da  Veda , 172—174. 


510 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[book  x 


I1.YMN  LXXXVII.  Agai 

I  balm  with  oil  the  mighty  Rakshas-slayer  j to  the  nl0s 
famous  Friend  I come  for  shelter. 

Enkindled,  sharpened  hy  our  rites,  may  Agni  protect  us  h 
the  day  and  night  from  evd. 

2 0 Jatavedas  with  the  teeth  of  iron,  enkindled  with  thy  flam 

attack  the  demons. 

Seize  with  thy  tongue  the  foolish  gods*  adorers  : rend,  pu 
within  thy  mouth  the  raw-flesh  eaters. 

3 Apply  thy  teeth,  the  upper  and  the  lower,  thou  who  has 

both,  enkindled  and  destroying. 

Roam  also  in  the  nir,  0 King,  around  us,  and  with  th.y  jaw 
assail  the  wicked  spirits. 

4 Bending  thy  shafts  through  sacritices,  Agni^whetting  the 

points  with  song  as  if  with  whetstones, 

Pierce  to  the  heart  therewith  the  Yatudhanas,  and  break  the 
arms  uplifted  to  attack  thee. 

5 Pierce  through  the  Yatudhana’s  skin,  0 Agni ; let  the  destro 

ing  dart  with  lire  consume  him. 

Rend  his  joints,  Jatavedas,  let  the  eater  of  flesh,  flesh-seekin 
track  his  mangled  body. 

6 Where  now  thou  seest  Agni  J&tavedas,  one  of  these  demo: 

standing  still  or  roaming, 

Or  flying  on  those  paths  in  air's  mid-regiotf,  sharpen  the  shs 
and  as  an  archer  pierce  him. 

7 Tear  from  the  evil  spirit,  Jatavedas,  what  he  hath  seized  a 

with  his  spears  hath  captured. 

Blazing  before  him  strike  him  down,  0 Agni ; let  spott 
camon-eating  kites  devour  him. 

8 Here  tell  this  forth,  0 Agni : whesoever  is,  he  himself,  or  act< 

as,  a demon, 

Him  giasp,  0 thou  Most  Youthful,  with  thy  fuel : to  the  Mi 
seer’s  eye  give  him  as  booty. 

9 With  keen  glance  guard  the  sacrifice,  0 Agni : thou  Sa 

conduct  it  onward  to  the  Vasus. 

Let  not  the  fiends,  0 Man-beholder,  harm  thee  burning  agai 
the  Rak'-hasas  to  slay  them. 

'I  The  demons  : Y&tudh&naa,  explained  by  S&yana  as  = R&keha8a*.  See 
104.15  Foolish  gods'  adorers:  mitradevdn:  according  to  S4y«Pa>  a er 
class  of  evil  spiiits  called  Mflnulevaa  because  they  make  destruction  t ieir 
5 The  eater  of  flesh  : the  wolf  or  other  carnivorous  animal. 

8 The  Man-seer  here  is  either  Agni  himself  or  Sfbya  the  Sun. 

9 To  the  Yams . to  the  Gods  to  whom  the  oblations  are  made,  o 7 • 


Tin:  RIO  VEDA. 


511 


n'M .v  87  ] 

0 Look  on  the  fieuil  mid  men,  as  Man-beholder:  rend  thou  his 

three  extremities  in  pieces. 

Demolish  with  thy  flume  his  ribs,  0 Agni;  the  Y&tudiiana’s 
root  destroy  thou  triply. 

1 Thrice,  Agni,  let  thy  noose  surround  the  demon  who  with  his 

falsehood  injures  Holy  Order. 

Loud  roaring  with  thy  flame,  0 Jatavedas,  crush  him  and 
cast  him  down  before  the  singer. 

[2  Lend  thou  the  worshipper  that  eye,  0 Agni,  wherewith  thou 
lookest  on  the  hoof-armed  demon. 

With  light  celestial  in  Atharvan’s  manner  burn  up  the  fool 
who  ruins  truth  with  falsehood. 

3 Agni,  what  curse  the  pair  this  day  have  uttered,  what  heated 
word  the  worshippers  have  spoken, 

Each  arrowy  taunt  sped  from  the  angry  spirit, — pierce  to  the 
heart  therewith  the  Yatudhanas. 

I With  fervent  heat  exterminate  the  demons  ; destroy  the  fiends 

with  burning  flame,  0 Agni. 

Destroy  with  file  the  foolish  gods’  adorers;  blaze  and  destroy 
the  insatiable  monsters. 

5 May  Cods  destroy  this  day  the  evil-doer:  may  each  hot  curse 
of  his  return  and  blast  him. 

Let  arrows  pierce  the  liar  in  his  vitals,  and  Visva's  net  enclose 
the  Yatudhana. 

16  The  fiend  who  smears  himself  with  flesh  of  cattle,  with  flesh 
of  horses  and  of  human  bodies, 

Who  steals  the  nnloh-cow’s  milk  away,  0 Agni, — tear  off  the 
heads  of  such  with  fiery  fury. 

7 The  cow  gives  milk  each  year,  0 Man-regarder  : let  not  the 
Yatudhana  ever  taste  it. 

If  one  would  glut  him  with  the  biestings,  Agni,  pierce  with 
! thy  flame  his  vitals  as  he  meets  thee. 

vasubhyaK  here  by  vastinimarthdya : — ‘ to  (the  acquisition  of)  riches.’ — 
ilson. 

tO  His  three  extremities : his  three  heads,  according  to  S&yana.  * Kopf 
k‘.  kchultern,’  head  and  shoulders. — Grassmann.  Root : meaning  hie  feet. 

■ used  vaguely,  to  correspond  with  the  three  upper  extremities. 
°/T  ^ie  f°°t  of  the  Ydtndhan a.’— Wilson. 

II  iwf-M'mcd : striking  with  the  hoof.  According  to  S&yapa,  ‘having 
_ hoofs.’  In  Atharvan’s  manner  : like  Atharvau,  the  ancient  priest 

^ave  been  the  first  who  obtained  fire, 
sin  ^ r ’ married  pair  ; perhaps  the  sacrificer  and  his  wife.  The 
(^.Prays  that  every  hasty  word  that  nuy  have  been  uttered  by  pious  people 
nia.v  be  used  aa  a weapon  to  wound  the  Y&tudhAaa. 

IJlCl  3 net  : thr*  nnnaa  nf  oll.narvftdint?  Affni. 


512 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK  j 


18  Let  the  fiends  drink  the  poison  of  the  cattle;  may  Aditi  cas 

oft’  the  evil-doers. 

May  the  God  Savitar  give  them  np  to  ruin,  and  bo  their  sliar 
of  plants  and  herbs  denied  them. 

19  A<mi,  from  days  of  old  thon  slayest  demons:  never  sha 

°Rfikshasas  in  fight  o’ercome  thee. 

Burn  np  the  foolish  one*,  the  flesh-devourers  : let  none  of  tliei 
escape  thine  heavenly  arrow. 

20  Guard  us,  0 Agni,  from  above  and  under,  protect  us  froi 

behind  us  and  before  us  ; . 

And  may  thy  flames,  most  fierce  and  never  wasting,  glowii 
with  fervent  heat,  consume  the  sinner. 

21  From  rear,  from  front,  from  under,  from  above  us,  0 Kinj 

protect  us  as  a Sage  with  wisdom.  . 

Guard  to  old  age  thy  friend,  0 Friend,  Eternal : 0 Agm, 
Immortal,  guard  us  mortals. 

22  We  set  thee  round  us  as  a fort,  victorious  Agni,  thee  a Sag 
Of  hero  lineage,  day  by  day,  destroyer  of  our  treacherous  foe 

23  Burn  with  thy  poison  turned  against  the  treacherous  brood 

Rakehasas,  , ... 

0 Agni,  with  thy  sharpened  glow,  with  lances  armed  with  pom 


of  flame.  A 

24  Burn  thou  the  paired  Kimidins,  burn,  Agni,  the  Yatudhanapai 
I sharpen  thee,  Infallible,  with  hymns.  <7  Sage,  be  vigihui 

25  Shoot  forth, 0 Agni,  with  thy  flame : demolish  them  on  every  sii 
Break  thou  the  Yatudhina’s  strength,  the  vigour  of  the  IU 


shasa.  Ac 

IIYMN  LXXXVUI.  Af 

Dear,  ageless  sacrificial  driuk  is  offered  in  light-discovcni 

heaven-pervading  Agni.  f 

The  Gods  spread  forth  through  his  Celestial  Nature, 
might  bear  the  world  up  and  sustain  it. 

2 The  world  was  swallowed  and  concealed  in  darkness . c 
was  born,  and  light  became  apparent.  . 

The  Deities,  the  broad  earth,  and  tho  heavens,  a P 
and  waters  gloried  in  his  friendship.  - 

18  The  poison  of  the  cattle : if  they  /l.  ink  '(which  is  k 

According  to  S&yana,  let  them  drink  the  poison  f used  for  extci 

in  the  house),  meaning  pei  haps  some  poisonous  oiutmen 

application  only.  , , , . . • See  VII.  104.  % not 

24  Kimidins : treacherous  and  malevolent  spirits.  » 

1 Sacrificial  drink  : ‘ swelling  oblation/  according  to  Prof.  r,8che1'  ^ 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


YMN  88-] 


513 


Inspired  by  Gods  who  claim  our  adoration,  I now  will  laud 
Eternal  Lofty  Agui, 

Him  who  hath  spread  abroad  the  earth  with  lustre,  this  heaven, 
and  both  the  worlds,  and  air’s  mid-region. 

: Earliest  Priest  whom  all  the  Gods  accepted,  and  chose  him, 
ami  anointed  him  with  butter, 

He  sivifty  made  all  things  that  fly,  stand,  travel,  all  that  hath 
motion,  Agni  J&tavedas. 

, Because  thou,  Agni,  Jata vedas,  stoodest  at  the  world’s  head 
with  thy  refulgent  splendour, 

We  sent  thee  forth  with  hymns  and  songs  and  praises  : thou 
filledst  heaven  and  earth,  God  meet  for  worship. 

i Head  of  the  world  is  Agni  in  the  night-time ; then,  as  the 
Sun,  at  morn  spriugs  up  and  rises. 

Then  to  his  task  goes  the  prompt  Priest  foreknowing  the 
wondrous  power  of  Gods  who  must  be  honoured. 

' Lovely  is  he  who,  kindled  in  his  greatness,  hath  shone  forth, 
seated  in  the  heavens,  refulgent. 

With  resouant  hymns  all  Gods  who  guard  our  bodies  have 
offered  up  oblation  in  this  Agni. 

1 First  the  Gods  brought  the  hymnal  into  being;  then  they 
engendered  Agni,  then  oblation. 

He  was  their  sacrifice  that  guards  our  bodies  : him  the  heav- 
ens kuow,  the  earth,  the  waters  know  him. 

I He,  Agni,  whom  the  Gods  have  generated,  in  whom  they 
offered  up  all  worlds  and  creatures, 

He  with  his  bright  glow  heated  earth  and  heaven,  urging  him- 
self right  onward  in  his  grandeur. 

) Then  by  the  laud  the  Gods  engendered  Agni  in  heaven,  who 
fills  both  worlds  through  strength  and  vigour. 

They  made  him  to  appear  in  threefold  essence : he  ripens 
plants  of  every  form  and  nature. 

Mfe  sent  thee  forth : the  Rishi  glorifies  the  power  of  the  priests  who 
Ue  their  messenger  to  the  Gods. 

® ^?ni,  who  is  the  Moon  by  night,  at  dawn  becomes  Siirya  or  the  Sun-God 
io  when  he  sets  again  becomes  Agni. 

* in  WorMs  and  creatures : proleptically  : meaning  that  the  oblation 
-I’ea  by  the  gods  was  destined  to  produce  the  universe.  — Ludwig.  Accord- 
L n ' ya?a;— ‘ in  whom  all  beings  have  offered  oblations  but  it  is  clear 
10  f oblationf»  of  the  Gods  are  intended. 

*tren& 1th  and  vigour:  qiJctbhih:  ‘by  his  functions  Wilson, 
^rretiri/ Ce  '*  °r  *n  t^iree  conditions,  or  places,  as  the  Sun,  lightning, 

33 


514 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOR] 

1 1 What  time  the  Gods,  whose  due  is  worship,  set  him  as  Stay- 

Son  of  Aditi,  in  heaven,  ^ 

When  the  Pair,  ever  wandering,  sprang  to  being,  all  create 
that  existed  looked  upon  them. 

12  For  all  the  world  of  life  the  Gods  made  Agni  Vaisvanara 

be  the  days’  bright  Banner, — 

Him  who  hath  spread  abroad  the  radiant  Mornings,  and,  coi 
mg  with  his  light,  unveils  the  darkness. 

13  The  wise  and  holy  Deities  engendered  Agni  Vaisvanara  who 

age  ne’er  touches, 

The  Ancient  Star  that  wanders  on  for  ever,  lofty  and  stroi 
Lord  of  the  Living  Being. 

14  We  call  upon  the  Sage  with  holy  verses,  Agni  Vnisvauara  t 

ever-beaming, 

Who  hath  surpassed  both  heaven  and  earth  in  greatness 
is  a God  below,  a God  above  us. 

15  I have  heard  mention  of  two  several  pathways,  ways  of  i 

Fathers  and  of  Gods  and  mortals. 

On  those  two  paths  each  moving  creature  travels,  each  thi 
between  the  Father  and  the  Mother. 

16  These  two  united  paths  bear  him  who  journeys  born  from 

head  and  pondered  with  the  spirit. 

He  stands  directed  to  all  things  existing,  hasting,  unrest 
in  his  fiery  splendour. 

17  Which  of  us  twain  knows  where  they  ^oeak  together,  up 

and  lower  of  the  two  rite-leaders  ? 

Our  friends  have  helped  to  gather  our  assembly.  They  cf 
to  sacrifice;  who  will  announce  it? 

18  How  many  are  the  Fires  and  Suns  in  number  ? What  is 

number  of  the  Dawns  and  Wateis? 

Not  jestingly  I speak  to  you,  0 Fathers.  Sages,  I ask 
this  for  information. 


11  The  Pair  : tho  Sun  and  Moon.  Accruing  to  SAyana,  Ushas  and  Sil 

13  Lord  of  the  Living  Being:  the  meaning  of  yaleshdsya  ia  uncer 
S&yana  explains  it  by  pdjyasya  devasya,  of  the  adorable  Qod.  ‘The  obsi 
of  what  ia  fum.' — Ludwig.  ‘Tho  lord  of  meteors.' — Grassmaun.  ‘Sui 
lant  du  Yaksha.’—  Bcrgaigue. 

14  Below:  on  earth. 

15  Two  several  pathways  : the  way  to  the  other  world  and  the  way  ha 

the  earth.  The  Father  and  the  Mother : heaven  and  earth.  * 

1G  Him  who  journeys : Agni.  From,  the  head : of  the  world.  From  Ac 
the  he~td  or  chief  of  all  exintence,  according  to  S&yana.  , 

Il  Us  twain ; Agni  and  the  Rishi.  Upper  and  lower : according  to 
the  upper  tire  is  VAyu  aud  the  lower  is  terrestrial  Agni.  Who  ww 
it  * : Agni  alone  will  make  the  sacrifice  known  to  the  Gods. 


WE  RIO  VEDA. 


515 


VtMir  39.1 

19  As  great  as  is  the  fair-winged  Morning's  presence  to  him  who 
dwells  beside  us,  Matarisvan  ! 

Is  what  the  Brahman  does  when  he  approaches  to  sacrifice 
and  sits  below  the  Hotar. 

HYMN  LXXXIX.  India. 

I  wmn  extol  the  most  heroic  Indra  who  with  his  might  forced 
earth  aud  sky  asunder  ; 

Who  hath  filled  all  with  width  as  man's  Upholder,  surpassing 
floods  and  rivers  in  his  greatness.  55 

2 Sirya  is  he  : throughout  the  wide  expanses  shall  Indra  turn 

him,  swift  as  car-wheels,  hither, 

Like  a stream  resting  not  but  ever  active  : he  hath  destroyed, 
with  light,  the  black-hued  darkness. 

3 To  him  I sing  a holy  prayer,  incessant,  new,  matchless,  common 

to  the  earth  and  heaven, 

Who  marks,  as  they  were  backs,  all  living  creatures : ne'er 
doth  he  fail  a friend,  the  noble  Indra. 

4 I will  send  forth  my  somrs  in  flow  unceasing,  like  water  from 

the  ocean’s  depth,  to  Indra 

Who  to  his  car  on  both  its  sides  securely  hath  fixed  the  earth 
and  heaven  as  with  an  axle. 

5 Rousing  with  droughts,  the  Shaker,  rushing  onward,  im- 

petuous, very  strong,  armed  as  with  arrows 
Is  Soma;  forest  trees  and  all  the  bushes  deceive  not  Indra 
with  their  offered  likened* 


1?  Morning's  presence : the  light  of  Dawn  which  spreads  over  heaven  and 
eaith.  Him  who  dwells  bes^e  us  the  Yajamftna,  or  iustitutor  of  the 
satin fice  —Ludwig  Belo°o  the  Hotar  below  the  legular  Hotar-priest. 
%ana explains  this  st»,iza  differently  ‘ As  long,  M.ttamvan,  as  the  swiftly- 
moving  (uights)  co»0«*  the  face  of  the  dawn,  (so  long)  the  Brahman,  the 
Nifeuor  sitting  down  (to  perform  the  work)  of  the  llotri , approaching  the 
sacrifice  supports  (the  ceremony).' — Wilson. 

1 With  width:  with  his  own  extended  magnitude.  ‘With  radiance. 
Wilson 

2 Sthya  is  he:  Indra  is  identified  with  the  Sun  whose  course  he  directs. 
Wording  to  S4yana,  s&ryah  here  •=  suviryah,  heroic. 

3 Incessant:  or  unerring*  that  is,  in  strict  accordance  with  the  rules  of 
he  ritual.  As  they  were  backs : as  if  they  were  horses  or  oxen,  the  length 
nid  tihape  of  whose  backs  must  be  carefully  considered  in  forming  a judgment 

'Wr  worth. 

5 Pi  of.  Wilson  observes  'This  verse  is  obscure,  partly  because  the  words 
1*  u.DU8nal,  partly  because  there  is  a confusion  between  Indra  and  Soma.' 
biTir  n0t  fodra : he  will  not  accept  any  substitutes  : he  will  have  nothing 
I 1 2 3 * 5 genuine  Soma-plant  and  its  juice. 


516  THE  nYMNS  OF  [HOOK  X. 

6 Soma  hath  flowed  to  him  whom  naught  can  equal,  the  earth, 

the  heavens,  the  firmament,  the  mountains, — 

When  heightened  in  his  ire  his  indignation  shatters  the  firm 
and  breaks  the  strong  in  pieces. 

7 As  an  axe  fells  the  tree  so  he  slew  Vritra,  brake  down  tin 

strongholds  and  dug  out  the  rivers. 

He  cleft  the  mountain  like  a new-made  pitcher.  Indra  brouglr 
forth  the  kine  with  his  Companions. 

8 Wise  art  thou,  Punisher  of  guilt,  0 Indra  The  sword  lops 

limbs,  thou  smitest  down  the  sinner, 

The  men  who  injure,  as  it  were  a comrade,  the  lofty  Law  of  Ya 
runa  and  Mitra. 

9 Men  who  lead  evil  lives,  who  break  agreements,  and  injun 

Varuna,  Aryaman,  and  Mitra, — 

Against  these  foes,  O Mighty  Indra,  sharpen,  as  furious  death 
thy  Bull  of  fiery  colour. 

10  Indra  is  Sovran  Lord  of  Earth  and  Heaven,  Indra  is  Lord  o 

waters  and  of  mountains. 

Indra  is  Lord  of  prosperers  and  sages  : Indra  must  be  invoke( 
in  rest  and  effort. 

11  Vaster  than  days  and  nights,  Giver  of  increase,  vaster  tha 

firmament  and  flood  of  ocean, 

Vaster  than  bounds  of  earth  and  wind’s^extension,  vasto 
than  rivers  and  our  lands  is  Tndra. 

12  Forward,  as  herald  of  refulgent  Morning,  let  thine  insatiat 

arrow  fly,  0 Indra, 

And  pierce,  as  ’twere  a stone  launched  forth  from  heaven,  wit 
hottest  blaze  the  men  who  love  deception. 

13  Him,  verily,  the  moons,  the  mountains  followed,  the  talltrei 

followed  and  the  plants  and  herbage. 

Yearning  with  love  both  Worlds  approached,  the  Watois  wai 
ed  on  Indra  when  he  first  had  being. 

7 His  Companions  : the  Maruts,  who  assisted  him  in  performing  his  exploil 

8 Punisher  of  guilt : here  Indra  is  said  to  discharge  the  duties  whic 
more  ancient  hymns  are  ascribed  to  Agni  and  to  Mitra  and  Varuna.  ^ 

0 Thy  Bull:  thy  thunderbolt.  ‘The  heavy  strong  red  weapon. -J 
Muller.  . 

10  In  rest  and  effort : ‘for  the  acquirement  and  preservation  of  w 
Wilson.  * , ij 

18  The  moons:  or,  the  months.  Waited  on  Indra:  as  the  ropresen 
of  the  Sun,  the  originator  of  all  life.— Ludwig. 


THE  niGVEDA, 


517 


HYMN  90.] 


14  Where  was  the  vengeful  dart  when  thou,  0 Indra,  clavest  the 

demon  ever  bent  on  outrage  ? 

When  fiends  lay  there  upon  the  ground  extended  like  cattle  in 
the  place  of  immolation  ? 

15  Those  who  are  set  in  enmity  against  us,  the  Ogapas,  0 Indra, 

waxen  mighty,— 

Let  blinding  darkness  follow  those  our  foemen,  while  these 
shall  have  bright  shining  nights  to  light  them. 

16  May  plentiful  libations  of  the  people,  and  singing  Rishis’  holy 

prayers  rejoice  thee. 

Hearing  with  love  this  common  invocation,  come  unto  us,  pass 
by  all  those  who  praise  thee. 

17  0 Indra,  thus  may  we  be  made  partakers  of  thy  new  favours 

that  shall  bring  us  profit. 

Singing  with  love,  may  we  the  Visvamitras  win  daylight  even 
now  through  thee,  0 Iudra. 

18  Call  we  on  Maghavan,  auspicious  Indra,  best  Hero  in  the  fight 

where  spoil  is  gathered, 

The  Strong  who  listens,  who  gives  aid  in  battles,  who  slays 
j the  Vritras,  wins  and  gathers  riches. 


HYMN  XC.  Parasha. 


A thousand  heads  hath  Purusha,  a thousand  eyes,  a thousand 
feet. 

On  every  side  pervading  earth  he  fills  a space  ten  fingers  wide. 

2 This  Purusha  is  all  that  yet  hath  been  and  all  that  is  to  be ; 
The  Lord  of  Immortality  which  waxes  greater  still  by  food. 


H Fiends ,*  mitrakruvafa : the  exact  meaning  of  the  word  is  uncertain. 
Prof.  Ludwig  takes  it  as  a geuitive  case  : ‘ What  time  they  lay  there  on  the 
earth  extended  like  oxen  in  a demou’s  place  of  slaughter.’ 

15  Oganas  : probably  the  name  of  some  hostile  clan.  According  to  SAyana, 
enemies  assembled  in  numbers.  These  • us  and  our  friends  here, 

16  All  those  who  praise  thee : all  other  worshippers. 

18  This  is  the  concluding  stu.iza  of  several  hymns  of  the  VisvAmitras. 
66  HI.  30.  22  ; 31.  22  ; 32.  17  j 34.  11  ; 35.  11  ; 36.  11. 


Pitruska,  embodied  spirit,  or  Man  personified  and  regarded  as  the  soul 
jr  source  of  the  universe,  the  personal  and  life-giving  principle  in 

animated  beings,  is  said  to  have  a thousand,  that  is,  innumerable,  heads, 
W,  and  feet,  as  being  one  with  all  created  life.  A space  ten  fingers  wide : 

of  the  heart  of  man,  wherein  the  soul  was  supposed  to  reside. 
JW  aa  the  Universal  Soul  he  pervades  the  universe,  as  the  Individual 
he  is  enclosed  in  a space  of  narrow  dimensions.  See  Hymns  of  the 
lf^-veda,  XIX.  6.  I,  note, 

Ntna  ®econd  line  is  explained  in  various  ways.  The  meaning  of  the  words 
kj ei  0 : he  is  lord  of  immortality  or  the  immortal  world  of  the  Gods, 

f u grows  greater  by  food,  that  is,  by  the  sacrificial  offerings  of  men. 


518 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK  j 


3 So  mighty  is  his  greatness  ; yea,  greater  than  this  is  Puruslu 
All  creatures  are  one-fourth  of  him,  three-fourths  eternal  hf 

in  heaven. 

4 With  three-fourths  Purusha  went  up  : ono-fourth  of  him  agai 

was  here. 

Thence  he  strodo  out  to  every  side  over  what  eats  not  and  wht 


eats. 

5 From  him  Viraj  was  born  ; again  Purusha  from  Viraj  was  bon 
As  soon  as  he  was  born  he  spread  eastward  and  westward  o’i 

the  earth. 

6 When  Gods  prepared  the  sacrifice  with  Purusha  as  the 

offering, 

Its  oil  was  spring,  the  holy  gift  was  autumn  ; summer  w 
the  wood. 

7 They  balmed  as  victim  on  the  grass  Pnrushaborn  in  earliest  tim 
With  him  the  Deities  and  all  Sadhyas  and  Rishis  sacrificed. 


According  to  Sfryana  : he  is  the  lord  or  distributer  of  immortality  becau 
he  becomes  the  visible  world  in  order  that  living  beings  may  obtain  the  frui 
of  their  actions  and  gam  moks/ui  or  final  liberation  from  their  bonds,  he 
also  the  lord  of  immortality  ; for  he  mounts  beyond  (lus  own  conditio 
r r.  food  (of  living  beings).’  —Wilson.  Oolebrooke  translates  the  line: 
^e^i^thatf  whichgrowsby^  nourishment,  and  he  is  the  dist.ibuter  of  immo 
talitv’  Di-  Muir  renders  it  by  lie  is  also  the  lord  of  immortality,  Bin 
by  food  he  expands  1 According  to  the  paraphrase  in  the  Dhigavata-P iml< 
the  meaning  of  the  last  clause  is:  ‘since  he  ha*b  tranaceuded  moi' 
» Prof  Ludwisr’s  version  is:  ‘auch  uber  die  unsterbhchb 
Bebietend  [da  er.]  was  durch  speise  [ist,]  weit  uberragt,’  ruling  also  ov 
fmmortaHty,  [since  he]  far  transcends  what  [exists]  through  food  i ' but  m 
Commentary  a somewhat  different  explanation  is  given.  Ruling 
mortality,  he  was  all  that  grows  by  food.  —1  eterson. 

3 Eternal  life:  amrUam:  immoitality,  or  the  immortal  Qoda. 

me°.U  oTgooVlnd  ^evU^io^s^  suchas  aod^men,  »»d  lowe^animsM 

those  who  are  incapable  thereof,  such  as  mountains  and  rivers 
conscious,  achetanam,  or  unconscious,  creation.  ^ Kansas  3 a 

5 From  him  : or,  from  that,  the  onc-f.ni.  th  mentioned . m ^ fo 
4.  VirAjy  or,  in  the  nominative  form,  Virftt,  is  said  to  h®L  ® h ’or  presid 
of  the  mundane  egg,  from  Adi- Purusha,  the  primeval  P ’ imates  as 

TnXs  passage V.  pp.  369,  370;  a^Wallis.CoJvioyy  • 

ing  to  Siyana.  Summer : grtshmd  does  not  ocour  in  any 
Spring  : vasantd  occurs  in  only  one  other  R.  V.  ; a «1 

7 On  the  grass : on  the  sacred  grass  used  in  sacrifices. 
oi  celestial  beings,  probably  ancient  divine  sacrifices, 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


519 


iWtf  90.] 

8 From  that  great  general  sacrifice  the  dripping  fat  wasgither- 

ed  up. 

He  formed  the  creatures  of  the  air,  and  animals  both  wild  and 
tame. 

9 From  that  great  general  sacrifice  Richas  and  Sama-hymns 

were  born : 

Therefrom  were  spells  and  charms  produced;  the  Taj  us  had 
its  birth  from  it. 

0 From  it  were  horses  born,  from  it  all  cattle  with  two  rows  of 

teeth : 

From  it  were  generated  kine,  from  it  the  goats  and  sheep  were 
born. 

1 When  they  divided  Purusha  how  many  portions  did  they  make  ? 
What  do  they  call  his  mouth,  his  arms  ? What  do  they  call  his 

thighs  and  feet  ? 

2 The  Brahman  was  his  mouth,  of  both  his  arms  was  the  Rajanya 

made. 

His  thighs  became  the  Vaisya,  from  his  feet  the  Sfrdra  was 
produced. 

3 The  Moon  was  gendered  from  his  mind,  and  from  his  eye  the 

Sun  had  birth  ; 

Iudra  and  Agui  from  his  mouth  were  born,  and  Vayu  from 
his  breath. 

1 Forth  from  his  navel  came  mid-air ; the  sky  was  fashioned 
from  his  head ; 

Earth  from  his  feet,  and  from  bi<*  ear  the  regions.  Thus  they 
formed  the  worlds. 


8 The  dripping  fat ; * the  mixture  of  curds  and  butter.*  Wilson.  He : 
r,  it ; the  sacrificed  victim  Purusha,  or  the  sacred  clarified  butter.  The  ere  a 
tow  of  the  air:  1 those  animals  over  whom  VAvu  piesides.’ — Wilson. 

9 Spells  and  charms : probably  those  of  the  latei  collection  of  the  Atharva- 
e(la.  The  Yajus.  the  Yajur-veda. 

12  Rijanyn:  the  second  or  Kshatriya  caste,  the  regal  and  military  class. 
hisi/a  • the  husbandman  ; lie  whose  business  is  agriculture  and  trade.  SiHra  : 
he  labourer.  The  BrAhmau  is  called  the  mouth  of  Purusha,  as  having  the 
special  privilege,  as  a ptiest,  of  addressing  the  Gods  in  prayer.  The  anus  of 
urusha  became  the  RAjanya,  the  prince  and  soldier  who  wields  the  sword 
l'd  spear.  His  thighs,  the  strongst  parts  of  his  body,  became  the  agricul- 
u'lst  and  tradesman,  the  chief  support  of  society  ; and  his  feet,  the  emblems 
>»* vigour  and  activity,  became  the  S idra  or  labouring  man  on  whose  toil  and 
,u  U3try  ah  ultimately  rests.  This  is  the  only  passage  in  the  Rigveda  which 
""iTr?te8  *our  C)wte8. 

: the  creation  myth  6f  the  world-giant  Yrnir  or  Hymir  in  old  Northern 

f?e  f The  hills  are  his  bones,  the  vault  of  the  sky  his  skull,  the  sea  his 
00(*j  aud  the  clouds  his  brains. — Corpus  Poeticum  Borea\e , Vol.  II.  P-  468. 


520 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[bOOK} 


15  Seven  fencing-sticks  had  he,  thrice  seven  layers  o!  fuel  wei 

prepared, 

When  the  Gods,  offering  sacrifice,  bound,  as  their  victin 
Purusha. 

16  Gods,  sacrificing,  sacrificed  the  victim:  these  were  the  earliei 

holy  ordinances. 

The  Mighty  Ones  attained  the  height  of  heaven,  there  whei 
the  Sadhyas,  Gods  of  old,  are  dwelling. 


HYMN  XCI.  Ag. 

Brisk,  nt  the  place  of  Ila,  hymned  by  men  who  wake,  oi 
own  familiar  Friend  is  kindled  in  the  house; 

Hotar  of  all  oblation,  worthy  of  our  choice,  Lord,  beaming 
trusty  friend  to  one  who  loveth  him. 

2 He,  excellent  in  glory,  guest  in  every  house,  finds  like  aswif 

winged  bird  a home  in  every  tree. 

Benevolent  to  men,  he  scorns  no  living  man:  Friend  to  th 
tribes  of  men  he  dwells  with  every  tribe. 

3 Most  sage  with  insight,  passing  skilful  with  thy  powers  at 

thou,  O Agni,  wise  with  wisdom,  knowing  all. 

As  Vasii,  thou  alone  art  Lord  of  all  good  things,  of  all  th 
treasures  that  the  heavens  and  earth  produce. 

4 Foreknowing  well,  0 Agni,  thou  in  I]a’s  place  hast  occopie 

thy  regular  station  balmed  with  oil. 

Marked  are  thy  comings  like  the  coming*  of  the  Dawns,  tl 
rays  of  him  who  ahineth  spotless  as  the  Sun. 


15  Fencing-sticks : guards,  or  pieoes  of  wood  laid  round  the  sacrificial  f 
to  enclose  it.  Sftyana  explains  paridhdiyih  as  the  seven  metres,  or  as  six  slialk 
trenches  dug  round  the  fire,  and  an  imaginary  one  round  the  Sun.  Mahidha 
says  that  the  seven  oceans  may  be  intended. 

This  pantheistic  hymn,  which  is  generally  called  the  Purushasfikta,  is 
comparatively  recent  origin,  and  appeats  to  be  an  attempt  to  harmonize  t 

two  ideas  of  sacrifice  aud  creation.  For  further  information  regarding  it,  s 

Muir,  0 S.  Texts,  I.  pp  6 — 11,  and  Y.  368—377,  Prof.  Max  Muller,  Ancu 
Sanskrit  Literature,  pp.  570f,  and  Dr.  Scherman,  Philosophische  Hymnen  a 
der  Rig-und  Atharva-veda-Sunhitdfpp.  11-23.  The  hymn  has  also  been  trai 
lated  by  Colebrooke,  Miscellaneous  Essays , pp,  167,  168;  by  Wains,  ^ 
mology  of  the  JRigveda,  pp.  87,  88;  and  by  Peterson,  Hymns  from  the  Kvf  M 
pp.  289,  290;  also  by  liurnouf,  Bhdgavata  Purdna , Preface  to  Vol.  1.,  auu 
Weber,  Indische  Studicn,  IX.  p.  5.  Qrassmann’s  Translation  m his  Appem 
to  Vol.  II.,  and  Ludwig’s  Translation  aud  Commentary  should  be  cousu 
See  also  Hymns  of  the  Atfuirva-veda , XIX.  6,  which  is  ft  re  proa  u 
this  hymn  with  transpositions  and  variations. 


1 The  place  of  lid:  the  shrine  where  clarified  butter  is  poured  upon 

fire.  Our  own  familiar  Friend:  Agni,  the  Friend  of  the  house.  . 

2 Swift-winged  bird:  or,  bird  of  prey.  ‘ Hunter/  according  to  Luaw  * 

3 Vasu  ■ the  word  meaning  abo  good  and  treasure. 


521 


i/n/iV  91.] 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


5 Thy  glories  are,  as  lfehtnings  from  the  rainy  cloud,  marked, 

mauy-hued,  like  heralds  of  the  Dawns’  approach, 

When,  loosed  to  winder  over  plants  and  forest  trees,  thou 
cnimmest  by  thyself  thy  food  into  thy  mouth. 

6 Him,  duly  comingas  their  germ,  have  plants  received:  this 

Agni  have  maternal  Waters  brought  to  life. 

So  in  like  manne*  do  the  forest  trees  and  plants  bear  him 
within  them  aid  produce  him  evermore. 

7 When,  sped  and  urged  by  wind,  thou  spreadest  thee  abroad, 

swift  piercingthrough  thy  food  according  to  thy  will, 

Thy  never-ceasng  blazes,  longing  to  consume,  like  men  on 
chariots,  Agii,  strive  on  every  side. 

8 A <>' ni,  the  Hotir-priest  who  fills  the  assembly  full,  Waker  of 

"knowledge,  Hiief  Controller  of  the  thought, — 

Him,  yea,  noie  other  than  thyself,  doth  man  elect  at  sacri- 
ficial offeriigs  great  and  small  alike. 

9 Hero,  Agni,  the  arrangers,  those  attached  to  thee,  elect  thee 

as  thcT  P’iest  in  sacred  gatherings, 

When  men  with  strewn  dipt  grass  and  sacrificial  gifts  offer 
thee  entertainment,  piously  inclined. 

10  Thine  is  tlie  Herald’s  task  and  Cleanser’s  duly  timed;  Leader 

art  thou,  and  Kindler  for  the  pious  man. 

Thou  art  Director,  thou  the  ministering  Priest  : thou  art  the 
1 Brahman,  Lord  and  Master  in  our  homo. 

When  mortal  man  presents  to  thee  Immortal  God,  Agni,  his 
fuel  or  his  sacrificial  gift, 

Then  thou  art  his  Adhvaryu,  Hotar,  messsenger,  callest  the 
Gods  and  orderest  the  sacrifice. 

From  us  these  hymns  in  concert  have  gone  forth  to  him,  these 
holy  words,  these  Richas,  songs  and  eulogies, 

Eager  for  wealth,  to  Jatavedas  fain  for  wealth  : when  they 
have  waxen  strong  they  please  their  Strengthened 


6 is  produced  in  the  form  of  lightning  by  the  waters  of  the  firma- 
B11t,  O!  the  cloud and  descends  with  the  rain  into  plants  and  > 
e wood  of  which  he  ia  brought  forth  by  attrition, 

^ and  small : with  Soma  or  without  it. 

9 The  o 


fr : wn-n  oorna  or  wii/uwiiu  ,w. 

Grangers ; priests  who  order  and  conduct  the  sacrificial  ceremonies. 
t1}  Agni  discharges  the  duties  of  the  seven  chief  priest*,  officiating  as 

Potav  a ».iu  r»-«eAQfar>  Adhvarvu.  and  Biahuiau.  been. 


scharges  the  dutiw  of  the  seven  ctnet  priest*.  ,, 

„ Nesh^ar,  Agntdh,  Pras&star,  Adhvaryu,  and  Biahuiau.  bee  u. 

inhere  this  stanza  originally  occurs. 

the  Gods:  ‘Bavest  the  formula.’ — Ludwig. 


--  -■•-V  urn*.,  ‘sayest  the  fwwulw. 
^ Richat : veiBes  of  praise, 


522  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  X. 

13  This  newest  eulogy  will  I speak  forth  to  him,  the  Ancient  One 

who  loves  it.  May  he  heat*  our  vohe. 

May  it  come  near  his  heart  and  maki  it  stir  with  love,  as  a 
fond  well-dressed  matron  clings  abort  her  lord. 

14  He  in  whom  horses,  bulls,  oxen,  and  barren  cows,  and  rami 

wheu  duly  set  apart,  are  offered  up, — 

To  Agni,  Soma-sprinkled,  drinker  of  swed;  juice,  Disposer,  witl 
my  heart  I bnug  a fair  hymn  forth. 

15  Into  thy  mouth  is  poured  the  offering,  Agui,  as  Soma  int 

cup,  oil  into  ladle. 

Vouchsafe  us  wealth,  strength-winning,  blest  with  heroe 
wealth  lofty,  praised  by  men,  and  full  ofsplendour. 

HYMN  XCII.  VisveJeva 

I  praise  your  Charioteer  of  sacrifice,  the  Lo*d  of  men,  Pne 
of  the  tribes,  refulgent,  Guest  of  night. 

Blazing  amid  dry  plants,  snatching  amid  the  gieen,  the  Stronj 
the  Holy  Herald  hath  attained  to  heaven. 

2 Him,  Agui,  Gods  and  men  have  male  their  chiff  support,  w\ 

drinks  the  fatness  and  completes  the  sacrifice 
With  kisses  they  caress  the  Grandson  of  the  Red,  like  t 
swift  ray  of  light,  the  Household  Priest  of  Dt-wn. 

3 Yea,  we  discriminate  his  and  the  niggard’s  ways:  his  brand 

evermore  are  sent  forth  to  consume. 

When  his  terrific  flames  have  reached  the  I nrnortals’  wor 
then  men  remember  and  extol  the  Heavenly  Folk. 

4 For  then  the  net  of  Law,  Dyaus,  and  the  wide  expanse,  Ear 

Worship,  and  Devotion  meet,  for  highest  praise, 

Varuna,  Indra,  Mitra  were  of  one  accord,  and  Savitar  i 
Bhaga,  Lords  of  holy  might. 

5 Onward,  with  ever-roaming  liudra,  speed  the  floods:  ovei  i 

mati  the  Mighty  have  they  run. 

With  them  Parijman,  moving  round  his  vast  domain,  1 
bellowing,  bedews  all  things  that  are  within. 

2 Completes  the  sacrifice:  or,  fills  the  assembly  full.  Grandson  of  the 
* son  of  the  brilliant  V\y a.’ -Wilson.  Sprung  from  his  own  red  gl^. 
being  kindled  fiom  another. 

3 Men  remember : because  then  their  prayers  are  granted. 

5 Aramati  : the  earth. — SAyana.  Armaiti,  of  the  Avesta, 
personified  as  well  as  Devotion  or  Piety,  Parijman:  ‘the  circumambie 
— Wilson. 

6 The  Asura  ; Dyaus  himself. 


THE  RIQ  VEDA . 


623 


nYMS  92.] 

6 Straightway  the  Rudras,  Maruts  visiting  all  men,  Falcons  of 

Dyaus,  home-dwellers  with  the  Asura, — 

Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman  look  on  with  these,  and  the  swift- 
moving  Indra  with  swift-moving  Gods. 

7 With  Indra  have  they  found  enjoyment,  they  who  toil,  in  the 

light’s  beauty,  in  the  veiy  Strong  One’s  strength ; 

The  singers  who  in  men’s  assemblies  forged  for  him,  according 
to  his  due,  his  friend  the  thunderbolt. 

8 Even  the  Sun’s  Bay  Coursers  hath  he  held  in  check  : each  oue 

fears  Imjra  as  the  mightiest  of  all. 

Unhindered,  from  the  air’s  vault  thunders  day  by  day  the  loud 
triumphant  breathing  of  the  fearful  Bull. 

9 With  humble  adoration  show  this  day  your  song  of  praise  to 

mighty  Rudra,  Ruler  of  the  brave  : 

With  whom,  the  Eager  Ones,  going  their  ordered  course,  he 
comes  from  heaven  Self-bright,  auspicious,  strong  to  guard. 

10  For  these  have  spread  abroad  the  fame  of  human  kind,  the 

Bull  Brihaspati  and  Soma’s  brotherhood. 

Atharvan  first  by  sacrifices  made  men  sure  : through  skill  the 
Bhrigus  were  esteemed  of  all  as  Gods. 

11  For  those,  the  Earth  and  Heaven  with  their  abundant  seed, 

four-bodied  NaiAsansa,  Yairia,  Aditi, 

God  Tvashtar  Wealth-bestower,  the  Ribhukshanas,  Rodasi 
Maruts,  Vishnu,  claim  and  merit  praise. 

12  And  may  he  too  give  ear,  the  Sage,  from  far  away,  the  Dragon 

of  the  Deep,  to  this  our  yearning  call. 

Ye  Sun  and  Moon  who  dwell  in  heaven  and  move  in  turn,  and 
with  your  thought,  0 Earth  and  Sky,  observe  this  well, 
f 3 Dear  to  all  Gods,  may  Pushan  guard  the  ways  we  go,  the 
' Waters’  Child  and  Vayu  help  us  to  success. 

Sing  lauds  for  your  great  bliss  to  Wind,  the  breath  of  all : ye 
Asvins  prompt  to  hear,  hear  this  upon  your  way. 

7 Worshippers  are  rewarded  in  heaven  for  the  hymns  and  prayers  with 
!ch  they  have  strengthened  aud  armed  Indra  for  his  great  deeds. 

9 whom  : the  Maruts. 

^Soma's  brotherhood:  all  Gods  who  are  entitled  to  drink  Soma  juice. 
a sure : gave  them  assurance  of  obtaining  what  they  asked. 

If  Pour-bodied  Nardsansa : Agni  provided  with  four  fires,  or  complete  in 
18  parfcH.  Ribhukshanas  .•*  Ribhus.  Rodasi : consort  of  the  Maruts. 

12  The  &ra gon  of  the  Deep : Ahibudhnya,  regent  of  the  sea  of  air. 

® ^'*e  Waters'  Child : Asrni.  born  as  lightniug  from  the  clouds. 


524 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


Wok  i 

14  With  hymns  of  praise  we  sing  him  who  is  throned  as  Lor 

over  these  fearless  tribes,  the  Self-resplendent  One. 

We  praise  Night’s  youthful  Lord  benevolent  to  men,  the  foelee 
One,  the  free,  with  all  celestial  Dames. 

15  By  reason  of  his  birth  here  Angiras  first  sang:  the  pressing 

stones  upraised  beheld  the  sacrifice — 

The  stones  through  which  the  Sage  became  exceeding  vast,  an 
the  sharp  axe  obtains  in  fight  the  beauteous  place. 

HYMN  XCI1I.  Vi.vedeva 

Mighty  are  ye,  and  far-extended,  Heaven  and  Earth : bot 
Worlds  are  evermore  to  us  like  two  young  Dames. 

Guard  us  thereby  from  stronger  foe  ; guard  us  hereby  to  giv 
us  strength. 

2  In  each  succeeding  sacrifice  that  mortal  honoureth  the  God: 
He  who,  most  widely  known  and  famed  for  happiness,  invitet 
them. 


3 Ye  who  are  Rulers  overall,  great  is  your  sovran  power  as  God 
Ye  all  possess  all  majesty  : all  must  be  served  in  sacrifice. 

4 These  are  the  joyous  Kings  of  Immortality,  Parijman,  Mitn 

Aryaman,  and  Vanina. 

What  else  is  Rudra,  praised  of  men  ? the  Maruts,  Bhag; 
Pdshana? 

5 Come  also  to  our  dwelling,  Lords  of  amp^s  wealth,  comrno 

partakers  of  our  waters,  Sun  and  Moon, 

When  the  great  Dragon  of  the  Deep  hath  settled  down  upo 
their  floors. 

6 And  let  the  Asvins,  Lords  of  splendour,  set  us  free, —bot 

Gods,  and,  with  their  Laws,  Mitra  and  Varuna. 

Through  woes,  as  over  desert  lands,  he  speeds  to  ample  opulenc 

14  The  Self- resplendent  One:  Agni.  Night's  youthful  Lord:  the  Moo 

Celestial  Dames  : the  lunar  asterisma.  . 

15  The  Sage:  Indra,  according  to  SAyapa.  Sharp  axe;  the  tbunderoo, 
The  meaning  of  this  stanza  is  obscure. 


1 Thereby...  . hereby  : literally  * by  those  . ‘by  these.’  SAyapa  snppl 
pAlanaih , protections,  iu  loth  cases.  The  former  may  refer  to  the  Maghava 
and  the* latter  to  the  people  in  general.  , . V4v 

4 Immortality  : or,  the  immoi  tal  world.  Parijman : Roamer  round  ’ . * 

What  else : that  is,  Rudra  is  also  one  of  these  Kings.  PAshana : a lengt 
form  of  the  usual  Piishan.  . ...  * rAtrt 

5 Waters : libations  of  Soma  juice.  SAyana  explains 

‘by  night.’  It  is,  as  Prof.  Ludwig  has  pointed  out,  a shorten  firiu 

nakshtam,  ‘come  ye.’  Upon  their  floors  : ‘in  their  company  1U 
mental  (clouds).’— Wilson.  The  meaning  is  obscure. 

6 He : the  sacri&cer  whom  these  Gods  protect, 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


525 


YA1N  93.] 

j Yea,  let  the  Asvins  Twain  he  gracious  unto  us,  even  Rudras, 
and  all  Gods,  Bhaga,  Rathaspati ; 

Pan  j man,  Ribhu,  V&ja,  0 Lords  of  all  wealth  Ribhukshanas. 

5 Prompt  is  Ribhukshan,  prompt  the  worshipper’s  strong  dnnk  : 
may  thy  fleet  Bay  Steeds,  thine  who  speedest  on,  approach. 

Not  man’s  but  God’s  is  sacrifice  whose  psalm  is  unassailable. 

9 o God  Savitar,  harmed  by  none,  lauded,  give  us  a place  among 
wealthy  princes. 

With  his  Car-steeds  at  once  hath  our  Indra  guided  the  reins 
and  the  car  of  these  men. 

0 To  these  men  present  here,  0 Heaven  and  Earth,  to  us  grant 

lofty  fame  extending  over  all  mankind. 

Give  us  a steed  to  win  us  strength,  a steed  with  wealth  for 
victory. 

[1  This  speaker,  Indra— for  thou  art  our  Friend  — wherever  he 
may  he,  guard  thou,  Victor  ! for  help,  ever  for  help  : 

Thy  wisdom,  Vasu  ! prosper  him. 

|2  So  have  they  strengthened  this  mine  hymn  which  seems  to 

1 tike  its  bright  path  to  the  Sun,  and  reconciles  the  men  : 

Thus  forms  a carpenter  the  yoke  of  horses,  not  to  be  displaced. 

Whose  chariot-seat  hath  come  again  laden  with  wealth  and 
bright  with  gold, 

Lightly,  with  pierciug  ends,  as  ’twere  two  ranks  of  heroes 
ranged  for  fight. 

This  to  Duhsima  Prithavana  have  I sung,  to  Vena,  Rama,  to 
the  nobles,  and  the  King. 

They  yoked  five  hundred,  and  their  love  of  us  was  famed 
upon  their  way. 

> Besides,  they  showed  us  seven-and-seventy  horses  here. 

T&nva  at  once  displayed  his  gift,  Parthya  at  once  displayed 
his  gift,  and  straightway  Mayava  showed  his. 

7 Rathaspati:  the  guardian  of  war-chariots.  Cf.  X.  64.  10.  Ribhukshanas: 

•ibhus. 

I KMiukshan  : ‘ the  mighty  (Indra).’— Wilson. 

* his  Car-steeds : with  ua  priests,  who  draw  the  chariot  of  sacrifice. 

So  have  they  strengthened : « May  (the  priests)  strengthen.’— Wilson. 

t yoke:  as  the  yoke  keeps  a pair  of  horses  together  so  the  hymn  addressed 

>vol'  recoliciles  worshippers  and  fills  them  with  like  feelmgs  of 

u ; of  the  axle,  \ hich  pa^  through  the  naves. 

" Ppithavdna , Vena , and  Rdma  were  Maghavans  or  wealthy 

t'ltorsof  sacrifices.  TotheJCing:  dsure : to  the  Asura,  lord  or  chief. 

.•  horseB  or  chariots.  . 

Worses : there  is  no  substantive  in  the  text.  SAyaya  supplies  gavam, 


52$ 


THE  HYMNS  OP 


[BOOK  l 


HYMN  XCIV\  Preston* 

Let  these  speak  loudly  forth ; let  us  speak  out  aloud  : to  t\ 
loud  speaking  Pressing-stones  address  the  speech  ; 

When,  rich  with  Soma  juico,  Stones  of  the  mountain,  y 
united,  swift  to  Indra  bring  the  sound  of  praise. 

2 They  speak  out  like  a hundred,  like  a thousand  men  : tin 

cry  aloud  to  us  with  their  green-tinted  mouths, 

While,  pious  Stones,  they  ply  their  task  with  piety,  and,  evi 
before  the  Hotar,  taste  the  offered  food. 

3 Loudly  they  speak,  for  they  have  found  the  savoury  meatl 

they  make  a humming  sound  over  the  meat  prepared. 

As  they  devour  the  branch  of  the  Red-coloured  Tree,  the< 
the  well-pastured  Bulls,  have  uttered  bellowings. 

4 They  cry  aloud,  with  strong  exhilarating  drink,  calling  i 

Indra  now,  for  they  have  found  the  meath. 

Bold,  with  the  sisters  they  have  danced,  embraced  by  thei 
making  the  earth  reecho  with  their  ringing  sound. 

5 The  Eagles  have  sent  forth  their  cry  aloft  in  heaven;  in  t 

skys^vault  the  dark  impetuous  ones  have  danced. 

Then  downward  to  the  nether  stone’s  fixt  place  they  sin 
and,  splendid  ns  the  Sun,  effuse  their  copious  stream. 

6 Like  strong  ones  drawing,  they  have  put  forth  all  tb 

strength : the  Bulls,  hat ne*scd  together, bear  the  ehariot-pol 
When  they  have  bellowed,  panting,  swallowing  their  fo< 
the  sound  of  their  loud  snorting  is  like  that  of  steeds. 

7 To  these  who  have  ten  workers  and  a tenfold  girth,  to  tin 

who  have  ten  yoke-strups  and  ten  binding  thongs, 

To  these  who  bear  ten  reins,  the  eternal,  sing  ye  praise, 
these  who  bear  ten  car-poles,  ten  when  they  are  yoked. 

cows.  These  horses,  or  cows,  were  presented  to  the  priests.  Tnnva,Vdrt ) 
and  Mdyava  are  patronymics  which  do  not  occur  again  in  the  Rigveda. 

Ludwig  thinks  that  a quanel  had  arisen  between  the  Maghavans  on 
(stanza  14)  and  the  Visas  or  people  (stanza  9),  »nd  that  the  priests,  w o 
reconciled  the  two  parties,  were  piescuted  with  the  chanots  which 
prepared  for  battle.  See  stanza  13,  in  which,  accoiding  to  this  explan. 
nd  should  be  lendered  by  ‘and  not’  instead  of  ‘as  ’twere.  The  y > 
is  difficult  and  in  parts  almost  unintelligible,  is  placed  by  Grassmann 

* Hotar:  1 (Agni)  the  invoker  (of  the  gods).’— Wilson.  Or  the  human  Ho 
priest  may  be  intended. 

V 3 Red-coloured  Tree:  the  Soma-plant.  WeU-pavtured : the  m 
stibharrd  is  obscure.  See  Hillebrandt,  V,  I.  18. 

4 The  sisters : the  fingers. 

5 The  Eagles  : the  rapidly  moving  celestial  press-stones, 

7 Ten  workers ; the  fingers  of  both  bands. 


THE  110  VEDA. 


527 


HYMN  95  ] 

8 These  Stones  with  ten  concuctors,  rapid  in  their  course,  with 

lovely  revolution  travel  nund  and  round. 

They  have  been  first  to  driik  the  flowing  Soma  juice,  first  to 
enjoy  the  milky  fluid  of  tin  stalk. 

9 These  Soma-eaters  kiss  Indrds  Bay-coloured  Steeds  : draining 

the  stalk  they  sit  upon  theox’s  hide. 

1 idra,  when  he  hath  drunk  Sona  meath  drawn  by  them,  waxes 
in  strength,  is  famed,  is  mighty  as  a Bull. 

10  Strong  is  your  stalk  ; ye,  verib,  never  shall  be  harmed  : yc 

have  refreshment,  ye  are  eve-  satisfied. 

Fair  aie  ye,  as  it  were,  througl  splendour  of  his  wealth,  his 
in  whose  sacrifice,  0 Stones,  y?  find  delight. 

11  Bored  deep,  but  not  pierced  though  with  holes,  are  ye;  0 

Stones,  not  loosened,  never  wciry,  and  exempt  from  death, 
Eternal,  undiseased,  moving  in  smdry  ways,  unthirst  mg,  full 
of  fatness,  void  of  all  desire. 

12  Your  fathers,  verily,  stand  fiim  from  age  to  age  : they,  loving 

rest,  arc  not  dissevered  from  their  scat. 

Untouched  by  time,  ne’er  lacking  greeu  pl.mts  and  green 
| tiees,  they  with  their  voice  hav*  caused  the  heavens  and 
earth  to  hear. 

13  This,  this  the  Stones  proclaim,  wha\  time  they  are  disjoined, 

and  when  with  1 inging  sounds  they  nove  and  di  ink  the  balm. 
Like  tillers  of  the  ground  when  thej  are  sowing  seed,  they 
mix  the  Soma,  nor,  devouring,  minsh  it. 

14  They  have  raised  high  their  voice  for  juice,  for  sacrifice,  strik- 

ing the  Mother  Earth  as  though  thc\  danced  thereon. 

So  loose  thou  too  his  thought  who  hath  eifused  the  !*ap,  and 
let  the  Stones  which  we  arc  honouring  be  disjoined. 

HYMN  XCV.  Uiv.Bi.  Pururavas. 

Ho  theie,  mv  consort!  Stay,  thou  fierce-souled  lady,  and  let 
us  reason  for  a while  together. 

Such  thoughts  as  the  e of  ours,  while  yot  unspoken  in  days 
gone  by  have  never  brought  11s  comfort. 

® The  ox's  hide:  spreul  underneath  to  c.iuh  and  hold  tue  droppings. 

12  lour  fathers:  the  mountains  from  width  aou  came. 

14  Striking  the  Mother  Euith  ‘ Eaith  ’ is  not  in  the  text ‘they  made  a 
p01^  hke  (children)  at  play,  eti  iking  their  mother.’ — Wilson.  I have  followed 
Iot  Ludwig’s  explanation. 

Hie  hymn  is  a dialogue  between  Pururavas  and  Urvasi,  and  they  are 
i ®evt‘rally  the  Itishis  of  the  stanzas  which  they  speak.  The  dialogue,  wic  1 
f,"irietime8  almost  unintelligible,  contains  the  germs  of  a legend  which  is 
elal(Ki  in  the  §atapatka-E)&}manat  reappears  in  the  MuhMMa  and 


628  THE  HYRtfs  OP  [BOOR  j 

2 What  am  I now  to  do  with  t/iis  thy  saying  1 I have  gone 

from  thee  like  the  first  of  Mornings. 

Purdravas,  return  thou  to  thy  dwelling  : I,  like  the  wind,  am 
difficult  to  capture. 

3 Like  a shaft  sent  for  gloryfrom  the  quiver,  or  swift  steed 

winning  cattle,  winning  hundreds, 

The  lightning  seemed  to  flfsh,  as  cowards  planned  it.  The 
minstrels  bleated  like  a l<mb  in  trouble. 

4 Giving  her  husband’s  father  life  and  riches,  from  the  near 

dwelling,  when  her  love,'  craved  her, 

She  sought  the  home  wherein  she  found  her  pleasure,  accept- 
ing day  and  night  her  jbrd’s  embraces. 

5 Thrice  in  the  day  didst  thou  embrace  thy  consort,  though 

coldly  she  received  thy  fond  caresses. 

To  thy  desires,  Purfiravis,  I yielded:  so  wast  thou  king,  0 
hero,  of  my  body. 

C The  maids  Sujurni,  Snni,  Sumne-api,  Charanyu,  Granthini, 
and  Hradechakshus,'— 

These  like  red  kine  have  hastened  forth,  the  bright  ones,  and 
like  milch-cows  hav«  lowed  in  emulation. 


Purdnas,  and  forms  the  plot  d the  well-known  drama,  Vih'amorvast,  or  The 
Hero  and  the  Nymph.  According  to  this  legend,  Urvari,  an  Apsaras  or 
Nymph  of  heaven,  has  been  panished  to  earth  where  she  consents  to  live 
with  King  PurCiravas  on  coujhtion  that  ho  takes  care  of  her  two  pet  rams, 
and  that  she  never  sees  him  unclothed.  She  lives  witH  Pururavas  for  four 
years,  when  the  Gandbarvaf  or  heavenly  minstrels  resolve  to  bring  her  hack. 
They  steal  one  of  the  ram?  by  night.  Purflravas  springs  from  his  bed  ; the 
Gandharvas  send  on  him  a flash  of  magic  lightning,  and  Urvasi  Rees  her 
husband  naked.  One  of  the  conditions  of  the  continuance  of  their  union  u 
broken,  and  the  nymph  instantly  vanishes.  Purdravas  meets  her  afterwards 
and  in  vain  implores  her  to  return.  At  last  she  relents,  and  in  clue  time  a 
eon  is  born  to  them.  These  are  the  main  outlines  of  a somewhat  variously 
told  story. 

1 Pururavas  speak*,  when  he  has  met  Urvasi  again  after  her  sudden 
departure. 

2 Urvasi  replies.  , 

3 Purflravas  spetks,  reminding  her  of  the  circumstances  in  which  she 
vanished.  ‘Yea,’  he  says,  ‘thou  wentest  from  me  with  the  speed  of  anarrw 
or  a racer.  The  cowardly  Gandharvas  deluded  us.  They  bleated  like  a lam 
to  make  us  think  that  one  of  thy  pets  was  in  pain  or  danger,  and  then,  by  a 
flash  of  factitious  lightning,  made  me  visible  to  thee  in  my  nakedness. 

4 Life  and  riches ; meaning,  perhaps,  as  Prof.  Ludwig  suggests, 
future  grandson.  The  near  dwelling : her  father-in-law’s  house,  where  s 
spent  much  of  her  time.  Her  lover : her  husband  Purflravas. 

This  stanza  and  the  next  are  spoken  by  Urvsi.  # s 

6 This  stanza  is  ascribed  by  SAyana  to  Purflravas,  who  mentions  the  na  ^ 
of  the  Apsarases  who  were  the  companions  of  Urvadl  after  her  flight.  ^ 
are  compared  to  red  kine,  meaning,  perhaps,  bright  flashes  of  lightning 
lowed  by  the  lowing  or  bellowing  of  the  thunder. 


WMN  95.  J THE  RIG  VEDA. 


529 


7 While  he  was  born  the  Dames  sate  down  together,  the  Rivers 
with  free  kindness  gave  him  nurture*  ? 

And  then,  Purfiravas,  the  Gods  increased  thee  for  mighty 
battle,  to  destroy  the  Dasyus.  6 3 


8 When  I,  n mortal,  wooed  to  mine  embraces  these  heavenly 
lymphs  who  laid  as-'de  their  raiment,  J 

Like  a scared  snake  they  fled  from  ine  in  terror,  like  chariot 
horses  when  the  (ar  has  touched  them. 

i When,  loving  these  Immortal  Ones,  the  mortal  hath  converse 
with  the  nymphs  as  they  allow  him. 

Like  swan’s  they  show  the  beauty  of  their  bodies,  like  horses 
m their  play  they  bite  and  nibble. 


0 She  who  flushed  brilliant  as  the  failing  lightning  brought  me 

delicious  pieseuts  fmm  the  waters. 

Now  from  tie  flood  be  bom  a strung  young  hero ! May  Urvasi 
probing  l£r  life  for  ever ! ’ * 

1 Thy  birth  hath  made  me  drink  from  earthly  miloh-kine : this 

power,  Pururavas,  hast  thou  vouchsafed  me. 

I knew,  And,  warned  thee,  on  that  day.  Thou  wouldst  not 
hear  jAe.  What  sayest  thou,  when  naught  avails  thee  ? 

2 When  Ml  the  son  be  born  and  seek  his  father?  Mourner-like, 

will  ho  weep  when  brst  he  knows  him? 

Who, shall  divide  the  accordant  wife  and  husband,  while  fire 
lsshining  with  thy  consort’s  parents? 


1 Ui»yusi  speaks,  reminding  Purtiiavas  of  the  favour  shown  him  at  his  birth, 
y tbycelestial  Dames  who  were  present,  the  Rivers  Who  nursed  him.  and 
ie(/odswhogave  him  strength.  Another  explanation  is  that  in  the  first 
alymthe  stanza  Urvaal  speaks,  by  anticipation,  of  the, son  whom  she  will 
wt 0 Puriiravas. 

> Purfiravas  complains  of  the  shyness  of  the  nymphs  mentioned  in  stanza  6, 
h Taif  80C*e^  h.id  sought  to  console  himself.  A mortal : meaning  that 
I®  iac*  keen  :i  God  their  behaviour  would  have  been  different.  Raiment  : 
gU,|l  explained  by  Sfiyana  as  wu kiyam  rtipam,  their  own  proper  form, 
rvasl  replies,  Tlie  Apsarases,  she  says,  as  a rule  only  coquet  with  mor- 
As  they  allow  him  : kratuhhir  nd ; see  Geldner,  V.  8.,  I.  276.  Like 
m, .ya?a  explains  nd  here  differently  : —‘they  (becoming)  ducks  do  not 
19  p r bodies. ’--Wilson. 

k w?a<e,rLlra^a8  BPe,a^8,  Drvast,  he  says,  did  not  treat  him  so  coldly.  From 
eWa?,;  °*  fbe  firmament.  ’ From  the  flood:  from  Urvast  who  comes  from 
hurl  /•'  re£'oa8  above.  SAyana  explains  apdh  differently  : — ‘a  sou  able  m 
\\  ynendly  to  man  has  been  boon/ — Wilson. 

fitter  |1 * * * Vip  8Peaks.  According  to  SAyapa,  whom  Wilson,  Grassmann,  and 
enbomV°W’  translation  of  the  first  half-line  would  be  : — ‘Thou  hast 
ien  \ , SlVe  the  earth  protection.’  Warned  thee  on  that  dan : told,  tb^, 
^menf  ' ^ to  wRh  thee  what  would  happen  if  the  conditions  of 

u ..  ^ere  not.  ..Um.j 


530  THE  HYMNS  OF  [Bm , 

13  I will  console  him  when  his  tears  are  falling:  he  shall 

weep  and  cry  for  care  that  blesses  ° h 

That  which  is  thine,  between  us,  will  I send  thee.  G0  j,0n 
again,  thou  fool ; thou  hast  not  won  me.  ° 

14  Thy  lover  shall  flee  forth  this  day  for  ever,  to  seek,  wilho 

return,  the  faithcst  distance. 

Then  let  his  bed  be  in  Destrnct:on » bosom,  am]  there! 
fierce  rapacious  wolves  devour  him. 

15  Nay,  do  not  die,  Pururavas,  nor  vanish  : «t  not  the  evil-omen 

wolves  devour  thee. 

With  women  there  can  be  no  lasting  friendship  : hearts 
hyenas  are  the  hearts  of  women. 

16  When  amid  men  in  altered  shape  I sojouried,  and  thron 

four  autumns  spent  the  nights  among  then, 

I tasted  once  a day  a drop  of  butter  ; and  evej  now  with  tli 
am  1 contented. 

17  1,  her  best  love,  call  Urvasi  to  meet  me,  her  win  fills  air  ai 

measures  out  the  region. 

Let  the  gift  brought  by  piety  approach  thee.  Wn  thou 
me  again  : my  heait  is  troubled. 

18  Thus  speak  these  hods  to  thee,  0 son  of  la:  As  (oath  ha 

verily  got  thee  for  his  subject, 

Thy  sons  shall  serve  the  Gods  with  thqjj'  oblation,  aid  tli 
moreover,  shalt  rejoice  in  S.arga 


when  he  knows  my  story,  know.-,  how  his  father  has  been  deserted.  Wide 
it  brining:  so  long  as  the  father-in  law’  and  mother-in-law  who  sancUomd 
union  live  and  maintain  their  household  fire. 

13  Urvasi  answers.  That  which  is  thine,  between  vt:  our  child,  our  i 
nion  treasure. 

14  Pururavas  threatens  to  destroy  himself. 

36  UrvasI  speaks  this  and  the  next  hLmiz» 

16  A- drop  of  butter  : oue  of  the  conditions  on  which  the  contimianc 
their  union  depended  was  that  she  should  e.it  nothing  but  a small  qua) 
of  ghritu  or  clarified  butter  daily.  See  stanza  11. 

17  Pur.  ravos  speaks.  Her  best  love : v muhlhoh  here  is  evidently,  ^8 
Scholiast  siiys,  an  ejpithet  and  not  a name,  meaning  ‘most  excellent, 
precious/  Fills  air : representing  the  morning  mi-t,  or  the  first  Ah* 
light,  that  spreads  over  the  heavens  before  the  rising  of  the  sun. 

18  There  is  an  hiatus  between  this  stanza  and  17,  au  entire  break  ot 
tinuity.  The  fragment  is  ascribed  t.»  UrvasI,  who  consoles  Fururava 
te’ling  him  of  the  promise  of  the  deities  that  after  his  death  bis  sons 
offer  sacrifice  to  the  Gods,  and  lie  himself  shall  he  blest  in  heaven. 
lid:  Purfiravas,  called  Aila  or  son  of  I|&  who  was  the  daughter  of 

Some  of  the  stanzas  should  be  transposed,  and  their  order  should  ot, 
5,  4.  6,  16,  6.  7,  8.  9,  1!.  12  13,  14  15,  10. -Ludwig.  . 

Of  this  very  difficult  hvmn  there  is  a complete  translation,  witn 

- i -it-  .f  1 am  ml* 


fffjf.v  96.] 


THE  MOVED  A. 


531 


HYMN  XOV[. 


Indra. 


i , , iuura. 

Is  the  g'eat  ■ynod  w,l>  I laud  thy  two  Bay  Steeds  • 1 orize 
the  sweet  strong  drink  of  thee  the  Warrior-God  ' 1 

His  who  pours  lovely  oil  as  ’twere  with  yellow  drops  Let 
my  songs  enter  thee  whose  form  hath  golden  tints  ’ 

2 Ye  who  in  concert  sing  .into  the  gold-hued  place,  like  Bav 

Steeds  driving  onward  to  the  heavenly  seat,  * 

For  Indra  laud  ye  strength  allied  with  Tawny  Steeds  laud 
him  whom  cows  content  as  ’twere  with  yellow  drops.  ’ 

3 His  is  that. thunderbolt,  of  iron,  goldcn-hued,  gold-coloured 

very  dear,  and  yellow  in  his  arms  ; ’ 

Bright  with  strong  teeth,  destroying  with  its  tawny  rage  In 
indra  are  set  fast  all  forms  of  golden  line.  b t 

4 As  if  a lovely  ray  were  laid  upon  the  sky,  the  golden  thunder- 

bolt spread  out  as  in  a race. 

That  iron  bolt  with  yellow  jaw  smote  Ahi  down.  A thousand 
flames  had  he  who  bore  the  tawiy-hued. 


5 Thou,  thou,  when  praised  by  mer  who  sacrificed  of  old,  hadst 
pleasure  in  their  lauds,  0 IrnVa  golden-haired. 

All  that  befits  thy  song  of  prabe  thou  welcomest,  the  perfect 
pleasant  gift,  0 Golden-hue*  from  birth. 


6 These  two  dear  Bays  biing  bther  Indra  on  his  car,  Thunder- 
armed,  joyous,  meet  for  hud,  to  drink  Ins  fill. 

Many  libations  flow  for  bin  who  loveth  them  ■ to  Indra  have 
the  gold-hued  Soma  juices  run. 


r much  assistance),  by  Prof.  (»eldner,  Vedwhe  Studien,  I pp  243—295. 
lie  myth  has  beeu  discussed  by  von  Roth,  Illustrations  of  the  Nirnkta , and* 
wwhe  Studies,  l . 196;  by  Prof  Max  Muller,  Oxford  Essays  (Chips,  IV. 
p)  I by  Tr  >f-  Adalbert  Knhn,  Dir  Hmibhmft  des  Feuers,  pp.  85  ff;  and 
AM^8S°rS  Boltzmann  and  Oldenberg  in  more  recent  days.  Professor 
Muller  considers  the  stoiy  to  be  ‘one  of  the  myths  of  the  Vedas  which 
ipre8Bee  the  coi  relation  of  the  dawn  and  the  sun.’  According  to  Dr.  Gold- 
U q ia  the  morning  mist  which  vanishes  away  as  soon  as  Purtiravas 

U , n displays  himself.  See  Chambers's  Encyclopedia,  1st  edition , under 

uruhavas.  

Throughout  the  hymn  the  poet  rings  the  changes  on  words  said  to  be 
dr/h* 8 ^'e  r0ut  Ar*,  to  take,  as  haryatd,  delightsome,  harydn,  loving, 
Va  bay  or  taw°y>  hdrit,  gieen,  yellow,  or  gold -coloured  Cp.  Ill  44. 

are  conjectuiaUy  explained  by  the  Commentate.  and  are 
of  various  renderings. 

2 ^ ‘ or  fatness,  fertilizing  rain, 
g ‘ ^Bked  for  aaeriftciil  purposes. 

•udwigW?n^  ra9e:  Perkap8  with  reference  to  the  effect  of  anger  on  the  face..— 


THE  HYMNS  OP 


582 


WOK  X 


7 The  gold-hued  drops  have  flowed  to  gratify  his  wish : tht 

yellow  drops  have  urged  the  swift  Bays  to  the  Strong. 

He  who  speeds  on  with  Bay  Steeds  even  as  he  lists  hath  satis 
fled  his  longing  for  the  golden  drops. 

8 At  the  swift  draught  the  Soma-drinker  waxed  in  might,  th 

Iron  One  with  yellow  beard  and  yellow  hair. 

He,  Lord  of  Tawny  Coursers,  Lord  of  fleet-foot  Mares,  wi1 
bear  his  Bay  Steeds  safely  over  all  distress. 

9 His  yellow-coloured  jaws,  like  Indies,  move  apart,  what  timi 

for  strength,  he  makes  the  yellow-tinted  stir, 

When,  while  the  howl  stands  there,  he  grooms  his  Tawn 
Steeds,  when  he  hath  drunk  strong  drink,  the  sweet  jui< 

* that  he  loves. 

10  Yea,  to  the  Dear  One’s  seat  in  homes  of  heaven  and  earth  tl 

Bay  Steeds’  Lord  hath  whinnied  like  a horse  for  food. 
Then  the  great  wish  hath  seized  upon  him  mightily,  and  th 
Belovfed  One  hath  gtmed  high  power  of  life. 

11  Thou,  comprehending  w'th  thy  might  the  earth  and  heavei 

acceptest  the  dear  hynn  for  ever  new  and  new. 

0 Asnra,  disclose  thou  ard  make  visible  the  Cow’s  belovi 
home  to  the  bright  goldei  Sun. 

12  0 Indra,  let  the  eager  wishes  the  folk  tying  thee,  delightf 

golden-visored,  on  thy  car, 

That,  pleased  with  sacrifice  wherein  ten  fingers  toil,  th 
mayest,  at  the  feast,  drink  of  our  offered  meath. 

13  Juices  aforetime,  Lord  of  Bays,  thou  drankest;  and  th 

especially  is  this  libation. 

Gladden  thee,  Indra,  with  the  meath-rich  Soma:  pour  it dc 
ever,  Mighty  One ! within  thee. 


7 To  the  Strong : to  Indra ; that  they  may  be  harnessed  and  come  to 
sacrifice. 

8 The  Iron  One:  * iron*hearted  Indra.’— Wilson. 

9 For  ttrength : for  strengthening  food.  The  yellow-tinted : his  yellow , 

10  The  Dear  One  muBt  be  the  Soma,  found  both  in  heaven  and  earth 
homes  of  Gods  and  men.  According  to  SAyana,  Indra  himself  is  meant. 
Belovld  One : Indra,  whose  vital  vigour  is  increased  by  Soma-draughts. 

11  T><e  Covti  beMd  home : the  Cow  may  be  the  Sun  whose  home  i 
universe  which  Indra  will  allow  Surya  to  illumine. 

12  Sacrifite : according  to  S4yapa,  the  sacrificial  Soma  juice  which  i« 
aed  and  prepared  by  the  fingers  of  the  priest. 


HYMN  97.] 


TUB  RIO  FED  A. 


533 


HYMN  XCVII.  Praise  of  Herbs. 

Herbs  that  sprang  up  in  time  of  old,  three  ages  earlier  than 
the  Gods, — 

Of  these,  whose  hue  is  brown,  will  I declare  the  hundred 
powers  and  seven. 

2 Ye,  Mothers,  have  a hundred  homes,  yea,  and  a thousand  are 

your  growths. 

Do  ye  who  have  a thousand  powers  free  this  my  patient  from 
disease.  * 4 

3 Be  glad  and  joyful  in  the  Plants,  both  blossoming  and  bearing 

fruit, 

Plants  that  will  lead  us  to  success  like  mares  who  conquer  in 
the  race. 

4 Plants,  by  this  name  I speak  to  you,  Mothers,  to  you  the 

Goddesses : 

Steed,  cow,  and  garment  may  I win,  win  back  thy  very  self, 
0 man. 

5 The  Holy  Fig  tree  is  your  home,  your  mansion  is  the  Parna  tree  : 
Winners  of  cattle  shall  ye  be  it  ye  regain  for  me  this  man. 

6 He  who  hath  store  of  Herbs  at  hand  like  Kings  amid  a crowd 

of  men, — 

Physician  is  that  sage’s  name,  fiend-slayer,  chaser  of  disease. 

1 Herbs  rich  in  Soma,  rich  in  steeds,  in  nourishment,  in  strength- 
ening power, — 

All  these  have  I provided  here,  that  this  man  may  be  whole  again. 

8 The  healing  virtues  of  the  Plants  stream  forth  like  cattle 
from  the  stall, — 

Plants  that  shall  win  me  store  of  wealth,  and  save  thy  vital 
breath,  0 man. 

$ Reliever  is  your  mother’s  name,  and  hence  Restorers  are  ye 
called. 

1 Rivera  are  ye  with  wings  that  fly  : keep  far  vshutever  brings 
i disease. 

I®  J^vsr  all  fences  have  they  passed,  as  steals  a thief  into  the  fold. 
Plants  have  driven  fiom  the  frame  whatever  malady  was 
there. 


\Jkree  *9**  earlier  than  the  Gods : ‘for  the  gods  before  the  three  ages.'— 
See  Satapalka  Brdhmajpi,  VII.  2.  4.  26  ( S . B.  E„  XLI.  p.  339). 

5 nil’ nav'  and  ffwmenl:  as  my  fee  for  curing  you. 

utea  V tree ; Aevattha,  or  Ficus  Religiose.  Parna  tree : the  Pal&ea, 

l1  i r°ad08a  SfLOnfiniol  vnacolfl  nrA  mnrta  nf  the  wood  of  ttl686  treCfl 


5S4  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  X 

11  When,  bringing  back  the  vanished  strength,  I hold  these  herb 

within  my  hand, 

The  spirit  of  disease  departs  ere  he  can  seize  upon  the  life. 

12  He  through  whose  frame,  0 Plants,  ye  creep  member  b 

member,  joint  by  joint, — 

From  him  yednve  away  disease  like  somestrongarbiter  of  strif 

13  Flv,  Spirit  of  Disease,  begone,  with  the  blue  jay  and  kingfkhe 
Fly  with  the  wind’s  impetuous  speed,  vanish  together  wit 

the  storm. 

14  Help  every  one  the  other,  lend  assistance  each  of  you  to  cacl 
All  of  you  be  accordant,  give  furtherance  to  this  speech  of  nnn 

15  Let  fruitful  Plants,  and  fruitless,  those  that  blossom,  and  tl; 

blossomless, 

Urged  onward  by  Byihaspati,  release  us  from  our  pain  and  grie 

16  Release  me  from  the  emse’s  plague  and  woe  that  comes  fro 

Varuna ; 

Free  me  from  Yama’s  fetter,  fromsinand  offence  against  the  Got 

17  What  time,  descending  from  the  sky,  the  Plants  flew  cart! 

ward,  thus  they  spake  : 

No  evil  shall  befall  the  man  whom  while  he  liveth  wepervad 

18  Of  all  the  many  Plants  whose  King  is  Soma,  Plants  of  hundr 

forms, 

Thou  art  the  Plant  most  excellent,  prompt  to  the  wish,  swe 
to  the  heart. 

19  0 all  ye  various  Herbs  whose  King  is  Soma,  that  o ers pro 

the  earth, 

Urged  onward  by  Byihaspati,  combine  your  virtue  in  this  l la 

20  Unharmed  be  he  who  digs  you  up,  unharmed  the  man 

whom  I dig : 

And  let  no  malady  attack  biped  or  quadruped  of  ours. 

21  All  Plants  that  hear  this  speech,  and  those  that  have  dep? 

ed  far  away,  , 

Come  all  assembled  and  confer  your  healing  power  upon 
Herb. 

12  Like  some  strong  arbiter  of  strife:  ‘like  a mighty  (prince)  »tati 

the  midst  of  his  Lost.’— Wibon.  . bj, 

13  With  the  bine  jay  and  kingfisher : with  the  speed  of  . 

Together  with  the  storm  : according  to  S4yana,  ‘ perish  along  wi  ^ ( 

15  Urged  onward : Brihaspati,  says  S&yana,  is  the  deity  who  prew 
mantras  or  spells  and  charms.  . a^ouj 

19  This  Plant : the  medicinal  herb  which  I,  the  physician,  am 
make  use  of. 


gYMI*  38  ] THE  RW  VEDA.  a3i 

22  With  Soma  as  their  Sovran  Lord  the  Plants  hold  colloquy 
and  say  : ^ J 

0 King,  we  save  from  death  the  man  whose  cure  a Brahman 
undertakes. 

«3  Most  excellent  of  all  art  thou,  0 Plant : thy  vassals  are  the  trees. 
Let  him  be  subject  to  our  power,  the  man  who  seeks  to  in- 
jure  us. 

HYMN  XCVIII.  The  Gods. 

Comb,  he  thou  Mitra,  Varuna,  or  Pushan,  come,  0 Brihasp&ti, 
to  mine  oblation  : 

With  Maruts,  Vasus,  or  Adityas,  make  thou  Parjanya  pour 
for  Santanu  his  rain-drops. 

2 The  God,  intelligent,  the  speedy  envoy  whom  thou  hast  sent 

hath  come  to  me,  Devapi  : 

Address  thyself  to  me  and  turn  thee  hither  ; within  thy  Ups 
will  I put  brilliant  language. 

3 Within  my  mouth,  Brihaspati,  deposit  speech  lucid,  vigorous, 

and  fiee  from  weakness, 

Thereby  to  win  for  Santanu  the  rain-fall.  The  meath-nch 
drop  from  heaven  hath  passed  within  it. 

4 Let  the  sweet  drops  descend  on  us,  0 Indra : give  us  enough 

to  lade  a thousand  wagons. 

Sit  to  thy  Hotar  task ; pay  worship  duly,  and  serve  the  God'*, 
Devdpi,  with  oblation. 

5 Knowing  the  Gods'  good-will,  Devapi,  Rishi,  the  son  of  Rish- 

tiaheua,  sate  as  Hotur. 

He  hath  brought  down  from  heaven’s  most  lofty  summit  the 
ocean  of  the  lain,  celestial  waters. 


‘This  StikU  is  remarkable  as  representing  one  of  two  brothers,  both  of  the 
Kshatiiya  caste,  becoming  the  Pu.ohita , or  farnilv  pnest,  and  Jlotri  or  sacrific- 
H Priest,  of  the  other  who  is  the  ltdjA’— Wilson. 

1 Devlpi  addresses  Brihaspati,  who  is  identifiable  with  Mitt  a,  Varuna, 
ushaa  and  otheig,  in  his  special  character  of  Purohita,  or  family  Priest,  «>f 
■ eOods,  and  as  the  prototype  of  all  human  Purohitas.  With  Maiutt: 
l e^ler  fhou  be  attended  by  Maruts,  Vasus,  or,  Adiryas.  For  Sxntanu:  the 
br^her  of  DevApi. 

)u  ®rihaspati  replies.  Brilliant  language  * a * brilliant  hymn.’ — Muir. 

3 Devftpi  speaks,  praying  Brihaspati,  as  Lord  of  Speech  (cp  X 71.  1.),  to 
Jhun  with  eloquence  that  he  may  address  the  G >«1r  efleetually.  The 
U f'nc^  drop : the  sweet  eloquence  for  which  he  has  pr  ued. 

r *wtei  drop* : of  rain.  This  stanza  is  spoken  by  Santanu. 

•>  A linn : . i 


53$  THE  HYMHS  OF  [BOOK] 

6 Gathered  together  in  that  highest  ocean,  the  waters  stood,  fc 

deities  obstructed. 

They  hurried  down  set  free  by  Arshtishena,  in  gaping  cleft 
urged  onward  by  Devapi. 

7 When  as  chief  priest  for  Santanu,  Devapi,  chosen  for  Hotai 

duty,  prayed  beseeching, 

Graciously  pleased  Brihaspati  vouchsafed  him  a voice  tin 
reached  the  Gods  and  won  the  waters. 

8 0 Agni  whom  Devapi  Arshtishena,  the  mortal  man,  hal 

kindled  in  his  glory, 

Joying  in  him  with  all  the  Gods  together,  urge  on  the  send 
of  the  rain.  Parjunya. 

9 All  ancient  Rishis  with  their  songs  approached  thee,  eve 

thee,  0 Much-invoked,*  at  sacrifices. 

We  have  provided  wagon-loads  in  thousands : come  to  tl 
solemn  rite,  Lord  of  Red  Horses. 

10  The  wagm-loads,  the  nine-and-ninety  thousand,  these  lm 

been  offered  un  to  thee,  0 Agni. 

Hero,  with  these  increase  thy  many  bodies,  and,  stimulate 
send  us  rain  from  heaven. 

11  Give  thou  these  ninety  thousand  loads,  0 Agni,  to  Indra, 

the  Bull,  to  be  his  portion. 

Knowing  the  paths  which  Deities  duly  tiavel,  set  mid  tl 
Gods  in  heaven  Aulana  also. 

12  0 Ajni,  drive  afar  our  foes,  our  troubles  ; chase  malady  aw 

and  wick'  d demons. 

From  this  air-ocean,  from  the  lofty  heavens,  send  down  on 
a mighty  flood  of  waters. 


Q Ai shtishenn  ’ pationytmc,  son  of  Rishnshcna  ; DevApi. 

7 Chief  priest  <>r  family  or  household  p’iest ; PurohitA 
9 Wagon-loads:  an  exfci  acid' nary  quantity  of  fuel  for  the  sacrifice, as 
occasion  was  one  of  the  gieate*t  iinpoitance 

1 1 A uldnn  : Sin l ami,  as  a descendant,  of  TTla,  nppenrs  to  l>e  meant.  Acer 
ing  to  some  scholars,  auHnhn  means  oMati<m  or  sacrificial  offering, 
fact  of  D3v.1ni  being  reputed  as  the  author  of  this  hymn,  and  as  tie  p< >1*0 
and  hotri  of  his  brother  *eei»s  to  have  led  the  legendary  writers  to  in 
the  story  of  his  becoming  a Bifthman.  which  (as  mentioned  y 
Weber,  Indische  Studies,  i p.  203)  is  lecorded  in  the  *alya;pr\‘Liuci 
Mahftbharat  1,  verses  2281  ff,  where  he  is  said  tp  have  attained  this  dr  ^ 
at  a certain  place  of  pilgrimage  called  Piithadaka  ; where  ‘■"I  „ 
VisvSmitra  also  were  received  into  the  higher  caste.  -Muir,  v.  ^ 
270  ff.  For  the  legend  on  which  the  hymn  is  said  to  be  base  > H 
SAyana  from  the  Nirukta,  see  Wilson’s  Translation. 


rrtfy  99.] 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


537 


HYMN  XCIX. 


ludra. 


What  Splendid  One,  Loud-voiced,  Far-striding,  dost  thou  well 
knowing,  urge  us  to  exalt  with  praises? 

What  give  we  him  ? When  his  might  dawned,  he  fashioned 
the  Vritra-slaymg  bolt,  and  sent  us  waters. 


2 He  sroo-  to  end  his  work  with  lightning  flashes  : wide  is  the 
seat  his  Asura  glory  gives  him. 

With  his  Companions,  not  without  his  Brother,  he  quells  this 
Saptatha’s  magic  devices. 


! On  most  auspicious  path  he  goes  to  battle;  he  toiled  to  win 
heaven’s  light,  full  fain  to  gam  it; 

He  seized  the  hundred-gated  cattle’s  treasure  by  craft,  un- 
checked, and  slew  the  lustful  demons. 


[ Fighting  for  kine,  the  prize  of  war,  and  roaming  among  the 
heid  he  biings  the  young  streams  hither, 

Where,  footles,  joined,  without  a car  to  bear  them,  with  jar3 
i\)i  .steeds,  they  pour  their  flood  like  butter. 

i Bold,  unsolicited  for  wealth,  with  Itudras  he  came,  the  Blame- 
less, having  left  his  dwelling, 

Caiue,  seized  the  food  of  Yamra  and  his  consoit,  and  left  the 
couple  weeping  and  unsheltered. 

• Lord  of  the  dwelling,  he  subdued  the  demon  who  i oared  aloud, 
fcix-eved  and  triple-headed. 

Tuta,  mado  stronger  by  the  might  ho  lent  him,  struck  down 
flie  boar  with  shaft  whose  point  was  iron. 

He  raised  himself  on  high  and  shot  his  at  row  against  the  guileful 
and  oppressive  foeman. 

•String,  glorious,  manliest,  for  us  he  shattered  the  forts  of 
Naims  when  lie  slew  the  D.isyus. 

| Hie  question  m the  first  line  is  a ihetorical  figure,  the  meaning  being, 
t'liihd  is  he  (Indra)  whon  thou  (the  Yaj  uniiu  ?)  urgent  us  to  exalt ! 

, ^'/i vewehim?  what  can  we  give  linn  in  M'tuin  for  what  he  ha*  done 

une^  9)W'0(7n?0,M  •’  the  Maruts  II  s Brother  Vi-hnn,  Who  S> tpbttha  was 
ceii-am.  The  word  m.  ans  Septimus,  tiie  seventh,  and  probably  some 
3 “y  demon  is  intended. 

II  demons ; the  exact  meaning  of  s’s  la.levAii  is  uncertain.  See 

5 6 and  note. 

^1'ents)1  no^hig  intelligible  of  the  second  line  ‘I  think  of  the  two 
iod  hrt  . ii  j mra»  w^°  rtre  free  f,om  fever  Having  obtained  (the  enemy’s) 
1 i . jJ'iJ  jg  ^loud  whilst  stealing  it.’ — Wilson.  Vamra  is  mentioned  in  I. 

+ dwelling:  or,  with  Ludwig,  The  Lord  and  Giver.  The 

f 1 «i  „Ha8ft  Visvardpa.  son  of  Tvashtar.  See  X.  8.  8.  The  boar ; Yritra. 


1 1J.  Ld  JJL  1 ill  j>0  l/r 


1^00^ 


8 He,  like  a cloud  that  rains  upon  the  pasture,  hath  found 

us  the  way  to  dwell  in  safety. 

When  the  Hawk  comes  in  body  to  the  Soma,  armed  with 
iron  claws  he  slays  the  Dasyus. 

9 He  with  his  potent  Friends  gave  up  the  mighty,  gave  Susl 

up  to  Kutsa  for  affliction. 

He  led  the  lauded  Kavi,  he  delivered  Atka  as  prey  to  him  i 
to  his  heroes. 

10  He,  with  his  Gods  who  love  mankind,  the  Wondrous,  giv 

like  Varuna  who  works  with  magic, 

Was  known,  yet  young,  as  guardian  of  the  seasons;  and 
quelled  Aiaru,  four-footed  demon. 

11  Through  lands  of  him  hath  Ausija  Rijisvan  burst,  with 

Mighty's  aid,  the  stall ^f  Pipru. 

When  the  >amt  pressed  the  juice  and  shone  as  singer,  he  sei 
the  forts  and  with  Ins  craft  subdued  them. 

12  S.\  swiftly  Asma,  for  exaltation,  hath  the  great  Vamrakacc 

nigh  to  indra. 

Ho  will,  when  supplic  <ted,  bring  hnn  blessing  : he  hath  brouj 
ail,  food,  strength,  a happy  dwelling. 

HYMN  C.  ViBvedc 

Be,  like  thyself,  O Indra,  strong  for  our  delight  : here  laud 
aid  us,  Maghavan,  di  inker  of  the  juice# 

Savitar  with  the  Gods  protect  us : hear  ye  Twain.  We  ask 
freedom  and  complete  felicity. 


8 The  H av'k  the  fierce  and  swift  Indra. 

9 A Atci  • according  to  SAyuna,  Usanl  KAvya  or  son  of  Kavi  is  intern 
Alia:  see  X 49.  8 

10  If  is  G\t<h : theMirnt*  Aram  1 follow  Sly arn.  Cf.  Satapatha -Bi 
mana , I.  2 4.  17  (8.  B.  R XII.  57)  According  to  Prof  Ludwig’s  conject- 
explanation  the  translation  would  be: — ‘he  measured  out  the  year  111 
divisions  ’ 

11  A»sijtt  • son  of  U«ij.  But  as  this  patronymic  does  not  properly  be 
to  Bijiflvan,  the  word  here  may  perhaps  mean,  * vehement,’  ‘eagerly  e8l,° 
Pipru : one  of  the  demons  of  drought. 

12  Asuvu  • 0 divine  and  mighty  Indra.  For  exaltation:  of  1)1 

Vamraka:  a lengtln-ued  form  of  Vauira,  the  Rishi  of  the  hymn, 
clause  of  the  standi  is  borrowed  from  X.  20.  10.  . 

This  hymn,  which  is  obscure  and  in  some  places  unintelligible,  in  P 
Prof.  Gra^smaim  in  Ids  Appendix  Dr  Muir  has  translated  stan 
O.  6*.  Texts,  IV.  pp.  408,  409  (2nd  edition). 

1 Ye  Twain  : Indra  and  Savitar.  Freedom  * aditim.  Pj^*, 
translates  diffciently  : “ We  implore  Aditi  for  health  and  weal  i. 


THE  R1GVEDA . 


0MS  100.] 


539 


2 Bring  swift,  for  offering,  the  share  that  suits  the  time,  to  the 

pure-drinkcr  Vayu,  roaring  as  he  goes, 

To  him  who  hath  approached  the  draught  of  shining  milk. 
We  ask  for  freedom  and  complete  felicity.  ~ 

3 May  Savitar  the  God  send  us  full  life,  to  cacli  who  sacrifices, 

lives  aiight  and  pours  the  juice; 
rl hat  we  with  simple  hearts  may  wait  upon  the  Gods.  We  ask 
for  freedom  and  complete  felicity. 

1 May  [mini  evermore  be  gracious  unto  us,  and  may  King  Soma 
meditate  our  happiness, 

Even  as  men  secure  the  comfort  of  a friend.  We  ask  for  free- 
dom and  complete  felicity. 

5 Tndra  hath  given  the  body  with  its  song  and  strength  : Brihas- 

pati,  thou  art  the  lengthener  of  life. 

The  sacrifice  is  Manu,  Providence,  our  Sire.  We  ask  for 
freedom  and  complete  felicity. 

6 Indra  possesseth  might  celestial  nobly  formed:  the  singer  in 

the  house  is  Agni,  prudent  Sage. 

He  is  the  sacrifice  in  synod,  fair,  most  near.  We  ask  for  free- 
dom and  complete  felicity. 

7 Not  often  have  we  sinned  against  \ou  secretly,  nor,  Vasus, 

have  we  openly  provoked  the  Gods. 

Notone  of  us,  ye  Gods,  hath  worn  an  alien  shape.  We  ask 
for  freedom  and  complete  felicity. 

8 May  Savitar  remove  from  us  our  malady,  and  may  the  Moun- 

tains liecp  it  far  away  from  where 
The  pre$s-st>ne  as  it  sheds  the  meath  lings  loudly  forth.  We 
ask  for  freedom  and  complete  felicity. 

9 Ye  Vasua,  let  the  stone,  the  pressor,  stand  erect:  avert  all 

enmities  and  keep  them  far  remote. 

Our  guard  to  bo  adored  is  Savitar  this  God.  We  ask  for  free- 
dom and  complete  felicity. 

10  Eat  strength  and  fatness  in  the  pasture,  kine,  who  are  balmed 

at  the  reservoir  and  at  the  seat  of  Law. 
ho  let  your  body  be  our  body’s  medicine.  We  ask  for  freedom 
an(f  complete  felicity. 

5 ^re  ^ ^er:  drinker  of  pure  Soma  juice, 
whi  h • 8UC)'$ce  u Manu  : we  o ve  our  existence  ami  preservation  to  sacrifiqe, 
c is  to  us  another  Manu,  the  fathor  of  Aryan  men. 

1 . le  sacrifice  in  synod  : ‘ jyorthy  of  sacrifice  at  the  altar.’ — YVilhOii. 

10  S , en  8^aPe  > sorcerers  are  accustomed  to  do. 

Plain#  ^ at  tfle  reservoir:  anointed  befoie  being  milked.  SAvana  ex- 
'tani,,-.  ?e  ffoshlhe , ‘in  the  cow-stall.’  Ltt  your  body : may  the  milk,  thy 


540  TIIE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK ; 

1 1 The  singer  fills  the  spirit : all  mens’  love  hath  he.  Indra  taki 

kindly  care  of  those  who  pour  the  juice. 

For  his  libation  is  the  heavenly  udder  full.  We  ask  for  fre 
dom  and  complete  felicity. 

12  Wondrous  thy  spirit-filling  light,  triumphant;  thy  hosts  sa 

from  decay  and  are  resistless. 

The  pious  votary  by  straightest  pathway  speeds  to  possi 
the  best  of  all  the  cattle. 

HYMN  Cl.  Visvedei 

Wake  with  one  mind,  my  friends,  and  kindle  Agni,  ye  w 
are  many  and  who  dwell  together. 

Agni  and  Dadhikras  and  Dawn  the  Goddess,  you,  Gods  w 
Indra,  I call  down  to  help  us. 

2 Make  pleasant  hymns,  spin  out  your  songs  and  praises:  bi 

ye  a ship  equipped  with  oars  for  transport. 

Prepare  the  implements,  make  all  things  ready,  and  let 
sacrifice,  my  friends,  go  forward. 

3 Lay  on  the  yokes,  and  fasten  well  the  traces:  formed  is 

furi ow,  sow  the  seed  within  it.. 

Through  song  may  we  find  heating  fraught  with  plenty  : i 
to  the  ripened  grain  approach  the  sickle. 

4 Wise,  through  desire  of  bliss  from  Gods,  the  skilful  l 

the  traces  fast,  * 

And  lay  the  yokes  on  either  side. 

Arrange  the  buckets  in  their  place:  securely  fasten  on 
straps. 

We  will  pour  forth  the  well  that  hath  a copious  stream, 
flowing  well  that  never  fails. 

* may  the  body  of  the  cow  offered  in  Baciifice  be  the  expiation  for  the  b< 
the  saci  ificer,  enabling  him  to  attain  sivurya.  Or  may  the  milk  be  tl 
rective  «>f  the  Soma  ’--Wilson. 

11  The.  heaienltj  udder .*  the  clouds  of  the  firmament 

12  Save  from  demy : thin  i-s  Piof.  Ludwig’s  inteipictotion  of  the  o 
word  jaiuniptffh,  winch  me.iii',  necoiding  to  SAyana,  replenishing  the 
of  thy  worshippers  The  last  line  is  explained  differently  by  SAyana.— 
fore)  Duvasyu  hastens  in  front  of  ihe  \ictim  cow,  (leading  it)  with  a 8 
c<»rd.’ — WiLon.  According  to  the  same  authority  i he  meauing  of  tie 
of  stanzas  1 — 11  is  : — ‘ We  long  for  the  universal  Aditi.’ 

*1  Dadhikr&s : probably  a personification  of  the  Morning  Sun.  *■ 

20  1 ; IV.  38.  2 ; 40.  5 note. 

2 Ship:  sacrifice,  repiesented  under  this  figure.  . , 

3 In  this  and  the  follow  ing  stanzas  sacrifice  is  figuratively  *P° 

* ploughing,  sowing  and  reaping.  See  Satapatha-Br^limuna,  > It* 

n TC  XLI.  320). 


TBE  RIQVEDA. 


stun  101.] 


m 


$ I pour  the  water  from  the  well  with  pails  prepared  and  goodly 
straps, 

Unfailing,  fall,  with  plenteous  stream. 

7 Refresh  the  horses,  win  tho  prize  before  you  : equip  a chariot 

fraught  with  happy  fortune. 

Pour  forth  the  well  with  stone  wheel,  wooden  buckets,  the 
drink  of  heroes,  with  the  trough  for  armour. 

8 Prepare  the  cow-stall,  for  there  drink  your  heroes  : stitch  ye 

the  coats  of  armour,  wide  and  many. 

Make  iron  forts,  secure  fiom  all  assailants  : let  not  your  pit- 
cher leak  : stay  it  securely. 

9 Hither,  for  help,  I turn  the  holy  heavenly  mind  of  you  the 

Holy  Gods,  that  longs  for  sacrifice. 

May  it  pour  milk  for  us,  even  as  a stately  cow  who,  having 
sought  the  pasture,  yields  a thousand  streams. 

10  Pour  golden  juice  within  the  wooden  vessel ; with  stone-made 

axes  fashion  ye  and  form  it. 

Embrace  and  compass  it  with  tenfold  giidle,  and  to  both 
chariot-poles  attach  the  car-horse. 

11  Between  both  poles  the  car-horse  goes  pressed  closely,  as  in 

his  dwelling  moves  the  doubly-wedded. 

Lay  in  the  wood  the  Sovran  of  the  Forest,  and  sink  the  well 
although  yo  do  not  dig  it. 

10  Indra  is  he,  0 men,  who  gives  us  happiness  : sport,  urge  the 
giver  of  delight  to  win  us  strength. 

Bring  quickly  down,  0 priests,  hither  to  give  us  aid,  to  drink 
the  Soma,  Indra  Son  of  Nishtigrt. 


f The  sacrifice  is  a chariot ; and  the  ritual  is  a race.  The  well : the  stream 
Soma  juice.  Stone  wheel : with  allusion  to  the  pi  ess-stones. 

8 The  cow-stall : figuratively,  for  the  place  where  the  Swna  is  pressed. 
fits  of  armour;  the  filters  for  straining  the  juice.  Iron  forts:  the 
guards  obtained  by  sacrificing. 

& Milk:  abundant  blessing. 

with  allusion  to  the  press  stones.  Tenfold  girdle : the  fingers 
both  hands.  Both  chariot- poles : the  arms.  The  car-horse:  the  upper 
*>*8tone  ; or  the  pestle. 

J1  The  doubly- wedded : the  man  who  has  two  wives.  The  comparison  is 
fear.  The  Sowan  of  the  F<rrcst : the  Soma  plant.  Sin*  the  well : ‘store 
1 juice.'— Wilson. 

J?  J follow  Siyana  in  hid  interpretation  of  the  first  line.  Von  Roth, 
L & *nd  Gra8smann  explain  it  differently.  Nishtigrt  : meaning  according 
M th*’  W^°  8waH°w8  UP  her  rival  wife  Nisbti,  i.  e,  Diti,’  is  said  to  be 


542  TO#  HYMNS  OF  [HOOK  X 


HYMN  HU.  India 


For  thee  may  Indra,  boldly  speed  the  car  that  works  on  eithei 
side. 

Favour  us,  Much-invoked  ! in  this  most  glorious  fight  ag.unsi 
the  raiders  of  our  wealth. 

2 Loose  in  the  wind  the  woman’s  robe  was  streaming  what  tiim 

she  won  a car-load  worth  a thousand. 

The  charioteer  in  fight  was  Mudgalani : she,  India’s  dart,  heap 
ed  up  the  prize  of  battle. 

3 0 Indra,  cast  thy  bolt  among  assailants  who  would  slaughte 

us  : 

The  weapon  both  of  Dasa  and  of  Arya  foe  keep  far  away,  ( 
Maghavan. 

4 The  bull  in  joy  had  drunk  a lake  of  water.  His  shattering 

horn  encountered  an  opponent. 

Swiftly,  in  vigorous  strength,  eager  for  glory,  he  stretched  In 
forefeet,  fain  to  win  and  triumph. 

5 They  came  anear  the  bull ; they  made  him  thunder,  made  him 

pour  rain  down  ere  the  fight  was  ended.  * 

And  MudgaU  thereby  won  in  the  contest  well-pastured  kirn 
m hundreds  and  in  thousands. 

6 In  hope  of  victory  that  bull  was  harnessed  : Kesi  the  drive 

urged  him  on  with  shouting.  * 

As  lie  ran  swiftly  with  the  car  behind  him  his  lifted  heels  presi 
ed  close  on  Mudgalani. 


The  deified  subject  of  the  hymn  is  said  to  be,  alternatively,  Drughana  (Mac 
Club  or  Hammer.  See  stanza  9).  The  Rislii  is  Mudgala 
According  to  the  legend  quoted  by  Sftyuna,  all  Mudgala’. 

Helen  except  an  old  ox  which  he  barneyed  to  hi.  wagon  and  wnt  in  punu 
of  the  Jobbers  He  threw  his  club  or  mace  before  him,  which  showed  him 
*ay  to  the  thieves,  and  thus  recovered  his  property. 

1 For  thee : 0 Mudgala.  That  workt  on  either  tide : mitlMAtam : accon 
ing  to  Siyana = aeahtljam,  ‘ that  has  uo  companion.  The  meaning 

t*2>  tiudgaWit . Mudgala’.  wife.  Indra' s dart : sped  swiftly  on  her  way  1 
I ndra. 

3 This  stanza  seems  to  be  an  interpolation. 

4 The  bull . apparently  one  of  the  buffaloes  which  drew  the  cario 

gal  Ant's  chief  opponent  Had  drunk  : just  before  the  fig  ? hei 

Led  an  : meaning,  perhaps,  that  fee  ng  uneaa.T  he  tung  h^  ^ 

aod  struck  the  ground  with  his  horns.  He  cleft  the  tnou  P 
against  the  enemy.' — Wilson.  . • according 

* 6 In  hope  of  victory  : kaU>’dave : the  meanmg  ^ tlut  the  farth 

SAyana,  ‘ for  the  destruction  of  the  enemy.  Ludwig  think 


//r.v.v  n/2  j 


THE  MOVE  I)  A 


M3 


■ Deftly  for  Mm  lu*  stretched  the  car-pole  forward,  guided  the 
bull  thereto  and  firmly  yoked  bun.  6 

Iudra  vouchsafed  the  lo-d  of  cows  his  favour : with  mighty 
steps  tlie  buffalo  ran  onward.  ° 7 


8 Touched  by  the  go  id  the  shagjry  beist  went  nobly,  bound  to 

the  pole  by  the  yoke's  thong  of  leather. 

Performing  deeds  of  might  for  many  people,  he,  looking  on  the 
cows,  gamed  strengrh  and  vigour.  ° 

9 Hire  look  upon  this  mace,  this  bull’s  companion,  now  lying 

midway  on  the  field  of  bitt’e.  J 

Therewith  hath  Mndgala  m ordered  contest  won  for  cattle  fur 
himself,  a hundred  thousand 


:0  Far  is  the  evil : who  hath  here  beheld  it*  Hither  they  bi in* 
the  bull  whom  they  are  yoking.  * ° 

To  this  they  gi  ve  not  either  food°or  water  Reaching  beyond 
the  pole  it  gives  direct  ions. 

I Like  one  forsaken,  she  hath  found  a husband,  and  teemed  as 
if  her  breast  were  full  and  flowing. 

With  swiftly-racmg  chariot  m ly  we  conquer,  and  rich  and 
blessed  be  our  gains  in  battle. 

i Thou,  Iudra,  art  the  mark  whereon  the  eyes  of  all  life  rest, 
when  thou, 

A Bull  who  drivest  with  thy  bull,  wilt  win  the  race  together 
with  thy  weakling  friend. 


7 Mud^ala  a better  fortune  is  now  reined  j For  him  fur  bin  own  buffalo. 

!e:  Hudgala.  Car-pole  • I full  ow  Ludwig's  conjecture  , but  it  is  uncertain 
f"at  P'Wt  °f  the  chariot  the  pvadhl  wis  , * the  periphery  of  the  wheel,’  aceurd- 
w»  the  St.  Petersbmg  Lexicon;  ‘the  fiarnc  of  the  waggon  ’--Wilson. 

• 8 explanation  is  not  very  ch’ar,  but  he  oecins  to  think  that  the  linchpin 

'intended.  Non*  of  these  three  explanations  seems  suitable  here.  Tne  lord 
Uoin  • the  bull  buffalo. 

mace;  drxujhandm  • according  to  Slyina,  the  club  which  MudgaU  had 
!mc(1  with  him  on  his  expedition,  and  which,  together  with  the  ox  that  drew 
118  car  had  enabled  him  to  recover  hie  cattle,  /.y/717  midway  after  the  vic- 
^f18,  had  thrown  down  tna  tmve  upon  the  field  of  bbtile.-  Ludwig 
' find  tliie  stanza  unintelligiule  l'erhup*  the  second  line  contains  the 
S®rui  of  that  part  of  the  legend  which  mentions  the  club  throw  u m front  of 
jciariot  to  point  out  the  way  that  the  robber  h id  taken. 
nlktAii*  01‘-  : P'lrirrUcUv  a:  ‘Apparently  Mudgalftnt  was  a pari- 

ttiad**  a hghtly  esteemed  in  comparison  with  the  favourite  wife]  who 
lirii)6  aine,.,^M  i°r  her  sterility  by  driving  her  husband’s  chariot  to  battle  and 
him  buck  victorious,  with  the  booty  which  she  had  helped  him  to 
°f  'he  child1  on  that  she  bid  not  borne  him  ’—Ludwig. 

1 , My  bull : tby  fierce  and  strong  thunderbolt  With  thy  weakling 

tlWnr.  ^e  mortal  man  whom  thou  protected,  and  who  is  weak  and 


*44 


TEE  HYMNS  OF 


[ BOOK  } 


HYMN  CIII.  Indr, 

Swift,  rapidly  striking,  like  a bull  who  sharpens  his  horn 
terrific,  Stirling  up  tho  people, 

With  eyes  that  close  not,  bellowing,  Sole  Hero,  Indra  subdue 
at  once  a hundred  armies. 

2 W7ith  him  loud-roaring,  ever  watchful,  Victor,  bold,  hard  1 

overthrow’,  Rouser  ot‘  battle, 

Indra  the  Strong,  whose  hand  bears  arrows,  conquer,  i 
warriors,  now,  now  vanquish  in  the  combat. 

3 He  rules  with  those  who  carry  shafts  and  quivers,  Indra  wl 

with  his  band  brings  hosts  together, 

Foe  conquering,  strong  of  arm,  the  Soma-drinker,  with  mighi 
bow,  shooting  with  well-laid  arrows. 

4 Brihaspati,  fly  with  thy  chariot  hither,  slayer  of  demon 

driving  off  our  focmen. 

Be  thou  protector  of  our  cars,  destroyer,  victor  in  battl 
breaker-up  of  armies. 

5 Conspicuous  by  thy  strength,  firm,  foremost  fighter,  might 

and  fierce,  victorious,  all-subduing, 

The  Son  of  Conquest,  passing  men  and  heroes,  kino-winne 
mount  thy  conquering  car,  0 Indra. 

6 Cleaver  of  stalls,  kiuc  winner,  armed  with^hunder,  who  que 

an  army  and  with  might  destroys  it, — 

Follow  him,  brothers!  quit  yourselves  like  heroes,  and  lii 
this  Indra  show  your  zeal  and  coinage. 

7 Piercing  the  cow-stalls  with  surpassing  vigour,  Indra,  t 

pitiless  Hero,  wild  with  atiiier, 

Victor  in  fight,  unshaken  and  resistless, — may  he  protect  o 
armies  in  our  battles. 

8 Indra  guide  these : Brihaspati  precede  them,  the  guerdc 

and  the  sacrifice,  and  Soma ; 

And  let  the  banded  Maruts  march  in  forefront  of  heaver 
hosts  that  conquer  and  demolish. 

satisfactorily.  I have  followed  in  some  stanzas  tho  interpretations  of  I 
authors  of  Vedixche  Studien,  I.  pp.  124  and  138.  But  see  the  later  tranBlat 
and  exhaustive  dir'cu^sion  by  Prof.  Geldner  in  Part  II.  pp.  1—22,  and  Pi 
Ludwig’s  remarks  theieon  ia  Ueber  die  neuesten  Arbeiten  uuf  dm  Qebitle\ 

Fgveda-forsch  u n g.  

The  hymn  is  a prayer  for  aid  and  victory  in  battle. 

8 Guide  thete : be  the  leader  of  our  troops.  The  guerdon:  ddktkind: 
reward  of  the  nriesLs  who  oerfoim  tho  saciiftce  offered  before  battle. 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


UYXV  104.] 


545 


9 Ours  be  the  potent  host  of  mighty  Indra,  King  Varuna,  and 

Maruts,  and  Adityas. 

Uplifted  is  the  shout  of  Gods  who  conquer  high-minded  Gods 
who  cause  the  worlds  to  tremble. 

10  Bristle  thou  up,  0 Maghavan,  our  weapons : excite  the  spirits 

->f  my  warring  heroes. 

Urge  on  the  strong  steeds’  might,  0 Vritra-slayer,  and  let  the 
din  of  conquering  cars  go  upward. 

11  May  Indra  aid  us  when  our  flags  are  gathered  : victorious  be 

the  arrows  of  our  army. 

May  our  brave  men  of  war  prevail  in  battle.  Ye  Gods,  protect 
us  in  the  shout  of  onset. 

12  Bewildering  the  senses  of  our  foemcn,  seize  thou  their  bodies 

and  depart,  0 Apva. 

Attack  them,  set  their  hearts  on  fire  and  burn  them  : so  let 
our  foes  abide  in  utter  darkness. 

13  Advance,  0 heroes,  win  the  day.  M;iy  India  be  your  sure 

defence. 

Exceeding  mighty  be  your  arms,  that  none  may  wound  or  in- 
jure you. 

HYMN  CIV.  Indra. 


Soma  hath  flowed  for  thee,  Invoked  of  many  ! Speed  to  our 
sacrifice  with  both  thy  Coursers. 

To  thee  have  streamed  the  songs  of  mighty  singers,  imploring 
Indra,  drink  of  our  libation 

2 Drink  of  the  juice  which  men  have  washed  in  waters,  and  fill 

thee  full,  0 Lord  of  Tawny  Horses. 

0 Indra,  hearer  of  the  laud,  with  Soma  which  stonos  have 
mixed  for  thee  enhance  thy  rapture. 

3 To  make  thee  start,  a strong  true  draught  I offer  to  thee,  the 

Bull,  0 thou  whom  Bay  Steeds  carry. 

Here  take  delight,  0 Indra,  in  our  voices  while  thou  art 
hymned  with  power  and  all  our  spirit. 

4 0 Mighty  Indra,  through  thine  aid,  thy  prowess,  obtaining 

life,  zealous,  and  skilled  in  Order, 

}}  When  our  flags  are  gathered:  ‘apparently  comparable  with  the  signis 
C0,ktu of  the  Romans.— Ludwig. 

12  4pvd ; according  to  S&yana,  a female  deity  who  preside*  over  sin: 
cording  to  M'thtdhara,  fiickn&s,  or  fear.  Apparently  Apvi  waa  a sort  of 
lJ»or  dysentery,  likely  to  attack  Boldiers  in  the  field.  And  depart : or,  p<vs 

U,X^°  not  attack  ui  


,546 


tu&  nxuiva  vr 


1*00*  , 


Men  in  the  house  who  share  the  Bacred  banquet  stand  aingin 
praise  that  brings  them  store  of  children. 

5 Through  thy  directions,  Lord  of  Tawny  Coursers,  thine  wti 

art  firm,  splendid,  and  blest,  the  people 
Obtain  most  liberal  aid  for  their  salvation,  and  praise  the 
Indra,  through  thine  excellencies. 

6 Lord  of  the  Bays,  come  with  thy  two  Bay  Horses,  come 

our  prayers,  to  drink  the  juice  of  Soma. 

To  thee  comes  sacrifice  which  thou  acceptest : thou,  skilh 
in  holy  rites,  art  he  who  giveth. 

7 Him  of  a thousand  powers,  subduing  foeioen,  Maghavan  pra 

cd  with  hymns  and  pleased  with  Soma, — 

Even  him  our  songs  approach,  resistless  Indra  : the  adoratio: 
of  the  singer  laud  him. 

8 The  way  to  bliss  for  Gods  and  man  thou  foundest,  Inch 

seven  lovely  floods,  divine,  untroubled, 

Wherewith  thou,  rending  forts,  didst  move  the  ocean,  ai 
nine-and-ninety  flowing  streams  of  water. 

9 Thou  from  the  curse  didst  free  the  mighty  Waters,  and: 

their  only  God  didst  watch  and  guard  them. 

0 Indra,  cherish  evermore  thy  body  with  those  which  th( 
hast  won  in  quelling  Vritra. 

10  Heroic  power  and  noble  praise  is  Indra:  ^rea,  the  song  w< 

ships  him  invoked  of  nouny. 

Vritra  he  quelled,  and  g we  men  room  and  freedom : Saki 
victorious,  hath  conquered  armies. 

11  Call  we  on  Maghavan,  auspicious  Indra,  best  Hero  in  tl 

fight  where  spoil  is  gathered, 

The  Strong,  who  listens,  who  gives  aid  in  battles,  who  sla 
the  Vritras,  wins  and  gathers  riches. 

HYMN  CV.  I* 


When,  Vasu,  wilt  thou  love  the  laud?  Now  let  the  chani 
bring  the  stream. 

The  juice  is  ready  to  ferment.  __ 

8 Didst  move  the  ocean : didst  bring  the  sea  of  rain  from  heaven. 

9 Those:  waters.  W+rag 

11  This  is  the  concluding  verse  of  several  hymns  of  the  Visvamwr 

B°l°Va«it:  Indra.  Let  the  channel  bring  the  stream .*  to  the  Somajj 
which  has  stood  long  enough  for  fermentation —Ludwig.  The  P™*® 
is  very  obscure,  and  Sayana  gives  a totally  different  explanation* 
will  he,  (like)  a dam,  obstruct  and  let  loose  the  long* protracted  h 
the  sake  of  wind-driven  (lain).  Wilson. 


THE  RIOVEDA. 


547. 


jlYMN  105.] 

2 He  whose  two  Bay  Steeds  harnessed  well,  swerving,  pursue 

the  Bird’s  tail-plumes, 

With  flowing  manes,  like  heaven  and  earth,  he  is  the  Lord 
with  power  to  give. 

3 Bereft  of  skill  is  Indra,  if,  like  some  out-wearied  man  he  fears 
The  sinner,  when  the  Mighty  hath  prepared  himself  for  victory. 

4 Indra  with  these  drives  round,  until  he  meets  with  one  to  wor- 

ship him  : 

Indra  is  Master  of  the  pair  who  snort  and  swerve  upon  their  way. 

5 Borne  onward  by  the  long-maned  Steeds  who  stretch  them- 

selves as  ’twere  for  food, 

The  God  who  wears  the  he^m  defends  them  with  his  jaws. 

6 The  Mighty  sang  with  Lofty  Ones : the  Hero  fashioned  with 

his  strength, 

Like  skilful  Matarisvan  with  his  power  and  might, 

7 The  bolt,  vhich  pierced  at  once  the  vitals  of  the  Dasyu  easy 

to  be  slain, 

With  jaw  uninjured  like  the  wondrous  firmament. 

8 Grird  off  our  9ins : with  song  will  we  conquer  the  men  who 

sing  no  hymns : 

Not  easily  art  thou  pleased  with  prayerless  sacrifice. 

9 When  threefold  flame  burns  high  for  thee,  to  rest  on  poles  of 

sacrifice, 

Thou  with  the  living  joyest  in  the  self-bright  Ship. 

2 The  Bird : the  allusion  seems  to  be  to  a race  between  the  horses  of  Indra 
and  those  of  Sfirya  or  the  Sun  who  is  the  Bird  of  the  heavens.— -Ludwig.  Like 
heaven  and  earth  : the  meaning  of  rajf  is  unknown.  SAyana  explains  the  word 
by  ‘heaven  and  earth,’  or  ' sun  and  moon  ; ’ but  these  are  mere  guesses.  Prof. 
Ludwig  thinks  that  two  animals  of  some  kind  (‘ rajitiere,’  ‘ raj i -beasts’)  are 
meant.  In  YI . 26  6,  Raji  is  said  by  Sftyana  to  be  the  name  of  a maiden. 

3 The  timers  : Vritra,  the  chief  of  sinners,  according  to  Sftyana.  Or  pffpaje 
may  be  a verb,  and  the  stanza  maj  be  rendered  : — ‘ Without  them  Indra  holds 
bin  still,  like  a man  weary  and  alarmed,  Vf  hen  he  hath  made  himself  ready 
jbr  noble  deed.’ — See  Pischel,  Vedische  Studien}  I.  p.  198. 

4 Is  Master : literally  ‘ hero.’  The  meaning  apparently  is  that  when  Indra 
meets  with  a worshipper  he  stops  his  horses  and  attends  the  sacrifice. 

5 Who  wears  the  helm:  fiprinivdn ; 1 possessing  mighty  jaws.’— Wilson.  With 
his  jaws : with  his  roar,  the  thunder. 

$ Lofty  Ones:  the  Maruta.  , . , . A , * .... 

7 The  stanza  is  obscure.  I follow  Prof  Ludwig’s  interpretation  of  Atrf- 
^ hirim/in , which  mean,  according  to  Sftyana,  * gold-bearded  ’ and  ‘ lord  of 
horses.’  * 

J J l^nd  off:  remove  them  by  whetting.  * Comminute,’— Wilson. 

~~  Threefold  fhrpo  naored  fires.  The  living:  the  sacnficer. 


548 


TEE  HYMNS  OP 


[BOOR  i 


1 0 Thy  glory  waa  the  speckled  cup,  thy  glory  was  the  flawless  scoon 
Wherewith  thou  pourest  into  thy  receptacle. 

1 1 As  hundreds,  0 Immortal  God,  have  sung  to  thee,  so  hat! 

Sumitra,  yea,  Durmitra  praised  thee  here, 

What  time  thou  holpest  Kutsa’s  son,  when  Dasyus  fell,  ye; 
holpest  Kutsa’s  darling  when  the  Dasyus  died. 


o 


3 


HYMN  CYI. 


Asvin 


This  very  thing  ye  Twain  hold  as  your  object : ye  weave  you 
songs  as  skilful  men  weave  garments. 

That  ye  may  come  united  have  I waked  you : ye  spread  on 
food  like  days  of  lovely  weather. 

Like  two  plough-bulls  ye  move  along  in  traces,  and  seek  lik 
eager  guests  your  bidder’s  banquet. 

Ye  are  like  glorious  envoys  mid  the  people  : like  bulls,  ai 
proach  the  place  where  ye  are  watered.  * 1 

Like  the  two  pinions  of  a bird,  connected,  like  two  choice  an 
mals,  ye  have  sought  our  worship. 

Bright  as  the  fire  the  votary  hath  kindled,  ye  sacrifice  i 
many  a spot  as  roamers. 


4 Ye  are  our  kinsmen,  like  two  sons,  two  fathers,  strong,  i 
your  splendour  and  like  kings  for  conquest ; 

Like  rays  for  our  enjoyment,  Lords  to  feed  us,  ye,  like  quii 
hearers,  have  obeyed  our  calling.  * 

9 Like  giants,  ye  will  find  firm  ground  to  stand  on  in  dept! 
like  feet  for  one  who  fords  a shallow. 

Like  ears  ye  will  attend  to  him  who  orders  : ye  Two  enj 
our  wondrous  work  as  sharers. 


Like  toiling  bees  ye  bring  to  us  your  honey,  as  bees  into  t 
hide  that  opens  downward. 


10  Cup : upastchant:  a ladle  or  cup  used  for  sprinkling.  Thy  receptac 
drinking-yessel,  or  perhaps  Agni,  that  is,  the  fire,  may  be  intended. 

11  Svmitra  and  Durmitra  are  alternative  names  of  the  llishi  of  the  hyr 
Kutsa's  son:  Durmitra  himself,  according  to  Sllyana. 

The  metres  in  some  places  are  Home  what  irregular,  the  meanings  of  bo 
words  are  uncertain,  and  the  hymn  generally  is  obscure.  Prof.  Grassim 
has  placed  the  hymn  in  his  Appendix. 

4 Like  rays  for  our  enjoyment : Mike  brooms  to  sweep  with,’  according 
Prof.  Ludwig. 

I do  not  attempt  the  hopeless  task  of  translating  stansas  5,  6,  7, 8 
which  nearly  every  word  is  a difficult  riddle.  See  Appendix. 

10  The  hide  that  opens  downward : the  honey*comb  is  compared  to  a 
akin  inverted.  I cannot  translate  intelligibly  the  second  line ‘like  1 
labourers  you  are  dripping  with  perspiratiou,  like  a tired  cow  eating  a* 
herbage,  you  attend  (the  sacrifice!/ — Wil«nn 


THE  RJQVEDA. 


549 


BYMS  107.] 

11  May  we  increase  the  laud  and  gain  us  vigour:  come  to  our 
80ng,  ye  whom  one  chariot  carries. 

Filled  be  our  kine  with  ripened  meath  like  "glory  : Bhutansa 
hath  fulfilled  the  Asvins’  longing. 


HYMN  CVII.  Dakshiul 


Thbsb  men’s  great  bounty  hath  been  manifested,  and  the 
whole  world  of  life  set  free  from  darkness. 

Great  light  hath  come,  vouchsafed  ns  by  the  Fathers:  ap- 
parent is  the  spacious  path  of  Guerdon. 

2 High  up  in  heaven  abide  the  Guerdon-givers : they  who  give 

steeds  dwell  with  the  Sun  for  ever. 

They  who  give  gold  are  blest  with  life  eternal : they  who  give 
robes  prolong  their  lives,  0 Soma. 

3 Not  from  the  niggards— for  they  give  not  freely— comes  Meed 

at  sacrifice,  Gods’  satisfaction  : 

Yea,  many  men  with  hands  stretched  out  with  Guerdon 
present  their  gifts  because  they  dread  dishonour. 

4 These  who  observe  mankind  regard  oblation  as  streamy  Vayu 

and  light-finding  Arka. 

They  satisfy  and  give  their  gifts  in  synod,  and  pour  in  streams 
the  seven-mothered  Guerdon. 

b He  who  brings  Guerdon  comes  as  first  invited  : chief  of  the 
hamlet  conics  the  Guerdon-hearer. 

Him  I account  the  ruler  of  the  people  who  was  the  first  to 
introduce  the  Guerdon. 

6 They  call  him  llishi,  Brahman,  Sima-chanter,  reciter  of  the 
laud,  leader  of  worship. 

The  brightly-shining  God’s  three  forms  he  knoweth  who  first 
bestowed  the  sacrificial  Guerdon. 


The  hymn  eulogitee  Dakshint,  the  largess,  guerdon,  or  ''^^'“ZTere' 
'1  by  the  inatitutors  of  the  sacrifices  to  the  priests  who  p ,,  xj  j 
Mies.  The  yajamina,  who  give  this  guerdon  liberally  are  alternatively 

he  deified  subjects  of  the  hymu . 

1 Tutu  men : the  wealthy  inatitutors  of  the  sacrifice.  Fatter • : who  are 
the  embodiments  and  guardiaus  of  the  light. 

4 These  toko  obterve  mankind . the  Maghavans  or  weaH^Jio  ^ 

ftot  consider  the  coet  of  sacrifice,  but  regard  it  as  an  Wind-God 

to  show  their  liberality?  and  to  gain  the  avourofVJyuthe  ms 

*ho  brings  counties,  showers  of  rain,  and  Arka  or  the  Sun  ww  g. 

SaiMwrtW;  originating  in,  and  accompanying,  seven  ««“• 

*«e;or.  t-  *«  ’ 1 


560  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOR  l 

7 Guerdon  bestows  the  horse,  bestows  the  bullock,  Guerdoi 

bestows,  moreover,  gold  that  glisters. 

Guerdon  gives  food  which  is  our  life  and  spirit.  He  who  i 
wise  takes  Guerdon  for  his  armour. 

8 The  liberal  die  not,  never  are  they  ruined  : the  liberal  sufFe 

neither  harm  nor  trouble. 

The  light  of  heaven,  the  universe  about  us, — all  this  dot] 
sacrificial  Guerdon  give  them. 

9 First  have  the  liberal  gained  a fragrant  dwelling,  and  go 

themselves  a bride  in  fair  apparel. 

The  liberal  have  obtained  their  draught  of  liquor,  and  cod 
quered  those  who, unprovoked,  assailed  them. 

10  They  deck  the  fleet  steed  for  the  bounteous  giver:  the  mai< 

adorns  herself  and  waits  to  meet  him. 

His  home  is  like  a lake  with  lotus-blossoms,  like  the  Gods 
palaces  adorned  and  splendid. 

11  Steeds  good  at  draught  convey  the  liberal  giver,  and  light!1 

rolling  moves  the  car  of  Guerdon. 

Assist,  ye  Gods,  tho  liberal  man  in  battles  : the  liberal  give 
conquers  foes  in  combat. 

HYMN  CVIII.  SaramA.  Pani, 

What  wish  of  Sarama  hath  brought  her#hither  ? The  patl 
leads  far  away  to  distant  places. 

What  charge  hast  thou  for  us  ? Where  turns  thy  journey  ? Ho\ 
hast  thou  made  thy  way  o’er  Rasa’s  waters. 

2 I come  appointed  messenger  of  Indra,  seeking  your  ampl 
stores  of  wealth,  0 Panis. 

This  hath  preserved  me  from  the  fear  of  crossing : thus  hav 
I made  my  way  o’er  RasA’s  waters. 

9 Draught  of  liquor:  antahptyam  stirdydh:  ‘deep  potations  of  wine.’— Wilsor 

10  The  maid  adorns  hei  sdf ; ‘ he  obtains  a brilliant  damsel  for  his  portioi 
— Muir. 

11  Car  of  Guerdon:  ct  I.  123.  1. 

The  hymn  ig  a colloquy  between  SaramA,  the  messenger  of  the  Gods  or  c 
Indra  (see  I.  62.  3,  note  ; 72.  8 ; III.  31.  6;  V.  45.  8),  and  the  Panis  or  enviou 
demons  who  have  carried  off  the  cows  or  rays  of  light  which  Indra  wiBhes  t 
recover.  SaramA  and  the  Panis  are  alternately  subject  and  Riahi. 

1 The  Papis  address  SaramA  who  has  found  her  way  to  the  rocky  strong 
hold  i»  whioh  the  stolen  cows  are  imprisoned.  The  Panis  speak  the  uneve 
stanzas*  with  the  exception  of  stanza  11,  and  SaramA  the  even.  “ 
this  place  a mythical  stream  that  flows  round  the  atmosphere  and  the  ear 
See  V.  41.  16.  In  I.  112.  12,  and  V.  63.  9,  Ras&  appear®  to  be  a river  of  tn 
Paniftb.  nrobablv  an  affluent  of  the  Indus.  Sea  Zimmer.  Altinduehes  l* 


THE  R1QVEDA. 


551 


$YMX  108.] 


3  What  is  that  Indra  like,  what  is  his  aspect  whose  envoy,  Sarama, 
from  afar  thou  comest  1 

Let  him  approach,  and  we  will  show  him  friendship  : he  shall 
be  made  the  herdsman  of  our  cattle. 


4 I know  him  safe  from  harm : but  he  can  punish  who  sent  me 

hither  from  afar  as  envoy. 

Him  rivers  flowing  with  deep  waters  hide  not.  Low  will  ye  lie, 
0 Panis,  slain  by  Indra. 

5 These  are  the  kine  which,  Sarama,  thou  seekest,  flying,  0 Blest 

One,  to  the  ends  of  heaven. 

Who  will  loose  these  for  thee  without  a battle  1 Yen,  and  sliai  p- 
pointed  are  our  warlike  weapons, 
ti  Even  if  your  wicked  bodies,  0 ye  Panis,  were  arrow-proof,  your 
words  are  weak  for  wounding ; 

And  were  the  path  to  you  as  yet  unmastered,  Brihaspati  in 
neither  case  will  spare  you. 

7 Paved  with  the  rock  is  this  our  treasure-chamber ; filled  full 

of  precious  things,  of  kine,  and  horses. 

These  Panis  who  are  watchful  keepers  guard  it.  In  vain  hast 
thou  approached  this  lonely  station. 

8 Ilishis  will  come  inspirited  with  Soma,  Angirases  unwearied, 

and  Navagvas. 

This  stall  of  cattle  will  they  part  among  them  : then  will  the 
Panis  wish  these  words  unspoken. 

9 Even  thus,  0 Sarama,  hast  thou  come  hither,  forced  by  celest- 

ial might  to  make  the  journey. 

Turn  thee  not  back,  for  thou  shalt  be  our  sister  : 0 Blest  One, 
we  will  give  thee  of  the  cattle. 

10  Brotherhood,  sisterhood,  I know  not  either:  the  dread  Angi- 

rases  and  Indra  know  them. 

They  seemed  to  long  for  kine  when  I departed.  Hence,  into 
distance,  be  ye  gone,  0 Panis. 

H Hence,  far  away,  ye  Panis!  Let  the  cattle  lowing  come  forth 
as  holy  Law  commandeth, 

Kine  which  Brihaspati,  and  Soma,  Rishis,  sages,  and  pressing- 
stones  have  found  when  hidden. 


6 Weak  for  wounding : 1 not  in  the  place  of  armies,’— Wilson.  Brihaspati  .- 
48  M*’8  companion  and  ally  in  battle.  . 

8 Navaga;  members  of  a mythological  family,  forming  a division  the 
Angiraaea  or  closely  connected  with  them.  With  Am  words  unspoken ; more 
7allL  reject  them  from  th«ir  mouths  ; retract  their  threats, 
p f^n.0tc  ; allied  by  such  ties  of  kinship. 


SAvana  assiens  it 


552  Tllh  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK 

HYMN  CIX.  Vwedev 

These  first,  the  boundless  Sea,  and  Matarisvan,  fierce-glowi 
Fire,  the  Strong,  the  Bliss-bestower, 

And  heavenly  Floods,  first-born  hy  holy  Order,  exclaiir 
against  the  outrage  on  a Brahman. 

2 King  Soma  first  of  all,  without  reluctance,  made  restitution 

the  Brahman’s  consort. 

Mitra  and  Varuna  were  the  inviters : Agni  as  Hotar  took  1 
hand  and  led  her. 

3 The  man,  her  pledge,  must  by  her  hand  be  taken  when  tl] 

have  cried,  She  is  a Brahman’s  consort 
She  stayed  not  for  a herald  to  conduct  her  : thus  is  the  kii 
dom  of  a ruler  guarded. 

4 Thus  spake  of  her  those  Gods  of  old,  Seven  Rishis  who  si 

thorn  down  to  their  austere  devotion  : 

Dire  is  a Brahman’s  wife  led  home  by  others  : in  the  Bupre 
est  heaven  she  plants  confusion. 

5 The  Brahmach&ri  goes  engaged  in  duty:  he  is  a member 

the  Gods’  own  body. 

Through  him  Brihaspati  obtained  his  consort,  as  the  Gc 
gained  the  ladle  brought  by  Soma.  ^ 

6 So  then  the  Gods  restored  her,  so  men  gave  the  woman  ba 

again. 

The  Kings  who  kept  their  promises  restored  the  Brahmai 
wedded  wife. 

7 Having  restored  the  Brahman’s  wife,  and  freed  them,  withGui 

aid,  from  sin, 

, They  shared  the  fulness  of  the  earth,  and  won  themseb 
extended  sway. 

The  hymn  haa  been  translated  by  thrt  author*  of  Sltbwzig  Lieder  den  It 
i-da.  See  also  Mme.  ZiSnalde  It.igozin,  Vcdic  India , p.  256. 

1 Outrage  on  a Brahman  : ‘ BrahmA’s  sin,’  according  to  SAyana. 

5 Rrah mac h 4 rt : a religious  student.  For  his  glorification,  see  Hymn* 
the  Atharva  veda.  XI.  5 ' The  ladle : juhvAm : Prof  Ludwig  takes  it  to  b< 
} roper  name  : — * Juhd.  0 Gods,  conducted  home  by  Sotna.’ 

The  wife  of  a Brahman  appears  to  have  been  taken  to  his  home  by  a 
triya,  and  then  restored  A legend  quoted  by  SAyana  says  that  Junu  or 
t*ie  wife  of  Brihaspati  who  is  identifiod  with  Brahmft,  had  been  deser 
her  hush'nd.  The  Gods  then  consulted  together  rs  to  the  means  of  expi 
his  sin.  and  restored  her  to  him.  See  Wilson's  Translation.  ^ 

fru-  ktrmn  ta  an  almrut  uni  n tallied  hie  fragment  4Ud  of  OODQpatatively 


553 


\ffygN  110.]  THE  E 10  VEDA. 

HYMN  CX.  Aprta. 

| Thou  in  the  house  of  man  this  day  enkindled  worshippest 

1 GodB  as  God,  0 Jatavedas. 

Observant,  bright  as  Mitra,  bring  them  hither : thou  art  a 
sapient  and  foreknowing  envoy. 

2 Tanflnap&t,  fair-tongued,  with  sweet  meath  balming  the  paths 

and  ways  of  Order,  make  them  pleasant. 

Convey  our  sacrifice  to  heaven,  exalting  with  holy  thoughts 
our  hymns  of  praise  and  worship. 

3 Invoked,  deserving  prayer  and  adoration,  0 Agni,  come  ac- 

cordant with  the  Vasus. 

Thou  art,  0 Youthful  Lord,  the  Gods’  Invoker,  so,  best  of 
Sacrifices,  bring  them  quickly. 

4 By  rule  the  Sacred  Grass  is  scattered  eastward,  a robe  to 

clothe  this  earth  when  dawns  are  breaking. 

Widely  it  spreads  around  and  far-extended,  fair  for  the  Gods 
and  bringing  peace  and  freedom. 

5 Let  the  expansive  Doors  be  widely  opened,  like  wives  who 

deck  their  beauty  for  their  husbands. 

Lofty,  celestial,  all-impelling  Portals,  admit  the  Gods  and 
give  them  easy  entrance. 

\ Pouring  sweet  dews  let  holy  Night  and  Morning,  each  close 
to  each,  be  seated  at  their  station, — 

Lofty,  celestial  Dames  with  gold  to  deck  them,  assuming  all 
their  fair  and  radiant  beauty. 

i Come  the  two  first  celestial  sweet-voiced  Hotars,  arranging 
sacrifice  for  man  to  worship, 

As  singers  who  inspire  us  in  assemblies,  showing  the  eastward 
light  with  their  direction. 

R Let  Bharati  come  quickly  to  our  worship,  and  I]a  showing  like 
a human  being. 

•So  let  Saras vati  and  both  her  fellows,  deft  Goddesses,  on  this 
fair  grass  bo  seated. 

9 Hotar  more  skilled  in  sacrifice,  bring  hither  with  speed  to-day 
God  Tvashtar,  thou  who  knowest, 

Even  hun  who  formed  these  two,  the  Earth  and  Heaven,  the 
Parents,  with  their  forms,  and  every  creature. 

^®®  preceding  hymns  addressed  to  the  Bame  deities  and  deifiod  objects  . 

1 8 1 142, 188  ; II.  8 ; III.  4 ; V.  5 ; VII.  2 ; and  IX.  5. 

, 1 J4tavtda$  aud  Tan&nnnAt  are  names  of  A*ni  The  Door t of  the  sacrificial 


554 


THE  HYMNS  OP 


[BOOK  . 


10  Send  to  our  offerings  which  thyself  thou  balmest  the  Cot 
panies  of  Gods  in  ordered  season.  Ui 

Agni,  Vanaspati  the  Immolator  sweeten  our  offered  gift  WI* 
meath  and  butter.  * 11 


11  Agni,  as  soon  as  he  was  born,  made  ready  the  sacrifice  an 
was  the  Gods’  preceder.  ’ 

May  the  Gods  eat  our  offering  consecrated  according  to  thi 
true  Priest’s  voice  and  guidance. 


HYMN  CXI.  Imlt. 

Bring  forth  your  sacred  song  ye  prudent  singers,  even  as  at 
the  thoughts  of  human  beings. 

Let  us  draw  Indra  with  true  deeds  anear  us : he  loves  ou 
songs,  the  Hero,  and  is  potent. 

2 The  hymn  shone  brightly  from  the  seat  of  worship  : to  tli 

kme  came  the  Bull,  the  Heifer’s  Offspring. 

With  mighty  bellowing  hath  he  arisen,  and  hath  pervadci 
even  the  spacious  regions. 

3 Indra  knows,  verily,  how  to  hear  our  singing,  for  he,  victori 

ous,  made  a path  for  Sfirya. 

Ho  made  the  Cow,  and  he  became  the  Sovran  of  Heaven 
primeval,  matchless,  and  unshaken.  * 

4 Praised  by  Angirases,  Indra  demolished  with  might  the  work 

of  the  great  watery  monster. 

Full  many  regions,  too,  hath  he  pervaded,  and  by  his  trutl 
supported  earth’s  foundation. 

5 The  counterpart  of  heaven  and  earth  is  Indra  : he  knowetl 

all  libations,  slayeth  Sushna. 

The  vast  sky  with  the  Sun  hath  he  extended,  and,  best  o 
pillars,  stayed  it  with  a pillar. 

6 The  Vritra-slayer  with  his  bolt  felled  Vritra:  the  magic  of 

the  godless,  waxen  mighty, 

Here  hast  thou,  Bold  Assailant,  boldly  conquered.  Yea,  thei 
thine  arms,  0 Maghvan,  were  potent. 


2 The  hint:  who  are  milked  for  sacrificial  purposes.  The  Bull : Indra.  Th 
Heifer' t Offering : cp.  IV.  18.  10  : ‘ The  Heifer  bath  brought  forth  the  strong 
the  mighty,  the  unconquerable  Bull,  the  furious  Indra  ’ The  Heifer  is  Aditi. 

3 He  made  the  Cow : the  words  mfruton gdh,  the  cow,  ‘ the  female  oi 

the  bull.’ — Huir;  * Des  Stieres  Weib,’ — Grasamann, — are  difficult.  * r0 
Ludwig  suggests  that  the  earth  may  be  intended. 


THE  RIGVEDA. 


555 


HYMN  112.] 

] When  the  Dawns  come  attendant  upon  S&rya  their  rays  dis- 
cover wealth  of  divers  colours. 

The  Star  of  heaven  is  seen  as  ’twere  approaching : none 
knoweth  aught  of  it  as  it  departeth. 

8 Far  have  they  gone,  the  first  of  all  these  waters,  the  waters 
that  flowed  forth  when  Indra  sent  them. 

Where  is  their  spring,  and  where  is  their  foundation  1 Where 
now,  ye  Waters,  is  your  inmost  centre  ] 

Q Thou  didst  free  rivers  swallowed  by  the  Dragon ; and  rapidly 
they  set  themselves  in  motion, 

Those  that  were  loosed  and  those  that  longed  for  freedom. 
Excited  now  to  speed  they  run  unresting. 

10  Yearning  together  they  have  sped  to  Smdhu  : the  Fort-des- 
troyer, praised,  of  old,  hath  loved  them. 

Indra,  may  thy  terrestrial  treasures  reach  us,  and  our  full 
songs  of  joy  approach  thy  dwelling. 

HYMN  CXII  Indra. 

Drink  of  the  juice,  0 Indra,  at  thy  pleasure,  for  thy  first 
draught  is  early  morn’s  libation. 

Rejoice,  that  thou  mayst  slay  our  foes,  0 Hero,  and  we  with 
lauds  will  tell  thy  mighty  exploits. 

2 Thou  hast  a car  more  swift  than  thought,  0 Indra ; thereon 

come  hither,  come  to  drink  the  Soma. 

Let  thy  Bay  Steeds,  thy  Stallions,  hasten  hither,  with  whom 
thou  comest  nigh  and  art  delighted. 

3 Deck  out  thy  body  with  the  fairest  colours,  with  golden  splend- 

our of  the  Sun  adorn  it. 

0 Indra,  turn  thee  hitherward  invited  by  us  thy  friends ; be 
seated  and  be  joyful. 

4 0 thou  whose  grandeur  in  thy  festive  transports  not  even  these 

two  great  worlds  have  comprehended. 

Come,  Indra,  with  thy  dear  Bay  Horses  harnessed,  come  to  our 
dwelling  and  the  food  thou  lovest. 

0 Pressed  for  thy  joyous  banquet  is  the  Soma,  Soma  whereof 
thou,  Indra,  ever  drinking, 

Hast  waged  unequalled  battles  with  thy  foemen,  which  prompts 
the  mighty  flow  of  thine  abundance. 

Star  of  heaven;  the  Sun.  Departeth:  on  its  nightly  journey  from 
to  e&at 


556 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


{BOOK 


6 Found  from  of  old  is  this  thy  cup,  0 Indra : 0 Satakrat 

drink  therefrom  the  Soma. 

Filled  is  the  beaker  with  the  moath  that  gladdens,  the  beak 
which  all  Deities  delight  in. 

7 From  many  a side  with  proffered  entertainment  the  folk  a 

calling  thee,  0 Mighty  Indra. 

These  our  libations  shall  for  thee  be  richest  in  sweet  meatl 
drink  thereof  and  find  them  pleasant. 

8 I will  declare  thy  deeds  of  old,  0 Indra,  the  mighty  acts  whic 

thou  hast  first  accomplished. 

In  genuine  wrath  thou  loosenedst  the  mountain  so  that  tl 
Brahman  easily  found  the  cattle. 

9 Lord  of  the  hosts,  amid  our  bands  be  seated : they  call  thi 

greatest  Sage  among  the  sages. 

Nothing  is  done,  even  far  away,  without  thee : great,  wondrou 
Maghavan,  is  the  hymn  I sing  thee. 

10  Aim  of  our  eyes  be  thou,  for  we  implore  thee,  0 Maghavai 
Friend  of  friends  and  Lord  of  treasures. 

Fight,  Warrior  strong  in  truth,  fight  thou  the  battle:  given 
our  share  of  undivided  riches. 

HYMN  CXIII.  Indr 


The  Heavens  and  the  Earth  accordant  with  all  Gods  encou 
aged  graciously  that  vigorous  might  of  his. 

When  he  came  showing  forth  his  majesty  and  power,  he  (Iran 
of  Sonia  juice  and  waxed  exceeding  strong. 

2 This  majesty  of  his  Vishnu  extols  and  lauds,  making  the  stal 

that  gives  the  meath  flow  forth  with  might. 

When  Indra  Maghavan  with  those  who  followed  him  had 
ten  Vritra  he  deserved  the  choice  of  Gods. 

3 When,  bearing  warlike  weapons,  fain  to  win  thee  praise,  t o 

mettest  Vritra,  yea,  the  Dragon,  for  the  fight*  , 

Then  all  the  Maruts  who  were  gathered  with  thee  tne 
tolled,  0 Mighty  One,  thy  poweiful  majesty. 

4 Soon  as  ho  sprang  to  life  he  forced  asunder  hosts  : forwar 

Hero  looked  to  manly  deed  and  war.  , 

He  cleft  the  rock,  he  let  concurrent  streams  flow  ton ■ . 
with  his  skilful  art  stablished  the  heavens  wi 

5 Indra  hath  evermore  possessed  surpassing  P^er  * e 

far  from  each  other,  heaven  and  earth  apart.  . yavU 
He  hurled  impetuous  down  his  iron  thunderbolt,  J j 

fla’s  and  Mitra’s  worshipper. 

8 The  Brahman : according  to  SAvana.  BrahmA  who  is  identic 


THE  RIO  VEDA . 


BYW  1H*J 


557 


« Th«n  t0  the  powers  of  Indra,  to  his  wrath,  his  the  fierce 

Stormer,  loud  of  voice,  they  came  with  speed  • 

What  time  the  Potent  One  rent  Vritra  with  his  Strength,  who 
held  the  waters  back,  whom  darkness  compassed  round. 

1 Even  in  the  first  of  those  heroic  acts  which  they  who  strove 
together  came  with  might  to  execute, 

Deep  darkness  fell  upon  the  slain,  and  Indra  won  bv  victor* 
the  right  of  being  first  invoked.  ' ^ 


8 Then  all  the  Gods  extolled,  with  eloquence  inspired  by  draughts 

of  Soma  juice,  thy  deeds  of  manly  might.  & 7 8 9 

As  Agni  eats  the  dry  food  with  his  teeth,  he  ate  Vritra  the 

Dragon,  maimed  by  Imira’s  deadly  dart. 

9 Proclaim  his  many  friendships,  met  with  friendship,  made 

with  singers,  with  the  skilful  and  the  eloquent. 

Indra,  when  he  subdues  Dhuni  and  Churnuri,  lists  to  Dabhlti 
for  his  faithful  spirit’s  sake. 


10  Give  riches  manifold  with  noble  horses,  to  be  remembered 
while  my  songs  address  thee. 

May  we  by  easy  paths  pass  all  our  troubles : find  us  this  day 
a ford  wide  and  exteusive. 


HYMN  CXIV.  Visvedeva, 

Two  perfect  springs  of  heat  pervade  the  Threefold,  and  come 
for  their  delight  is  Matarisvan. 

Craving  the  milk  of  heaven  the  Gods  are  present : well  do 
they  know  the  praise-song  and  the  Saman. 

2 The  priests  heard  far  away,  as  they  are  ordered,  serve  the 
three  Nirfitis,  for  well  they  know  them. 

Sages  have  traced  the  cause  that  first  produced  them,  dwelling 
in  distant  and  mysterious  chambers. 

6 They  came : it  is  uncertain  * aether  the  Gods,  or  the  Maruts,  or  thr  waters 
the  understood  subject. 

7 Deep  darkness  fell  upon  the  slain:  ‘ Vritra  being  slain,  the  thick  darkness 
wm  destroyed.’— Wilson. 

8 Ut  ate:  Indra  utterly  destroyed  him.  Sftyarm  explains  in  a more  matter* 
<>Mact  way  : people  devoured  Vritra,  that  is,  the  food  produced  by  the  waters 

o nWer?  00  l°n£er  obstructed  by  him. 

9 Dhuni  and  Chumuri  were  demons  and  enemies  of  Indra’s  friend  Dabhtti. 

S#?  Ml.,  Index.  

, 1 Springs  of  heat : gharmA  : Agni  and  Sftrya.  The  Threefold : the  universe, 
8 y«  firmament,  and  earth.  tyldtari$van  : VAyu,  according  to  SAyana.  ‘ Thu* 
5 },Vo  here  the  well-known  triad,  Agni,  Vftyu,  Stirya.’— Ludwig. 

Three  Nirpitis  : according  to  S&yapa,  heaven,  mid-air,  and  earth,  or  the 
aeities  that  control  them.  Prof.  Ludwig  thinks  that  the  Dawns  are  meant, 


553 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[book 


3 The  Youthful  One,  well-shaped,  with  four  locks  braided  bm 

ened  with  oil,  puts  on  the  ordinances.  * 

Two  Birds  of  mighty  power  are  seated  near  her,  there  wl 
the  Deities  receive  their  portion. 

4 One  of  these  Birds  hath  passed  into  the  sea  of  air  : thence 

looks  round  and  views  this  universal  world. 

With  simple  heart  I have  beheld  him  from  anear  : his  Mol 
kisses  him  and  he  returns  her  kiss. 


5  Him  with  fair  wings  though  only  One  in  nature,  wise  sin1 
shape,  with  songs,  in  many  figures. 

While  they  at  sacrifices  fix  the  metres,  they  measure 
twelve  chalices  of  Soma. 

* 

fi  While  they  arrange  the  four  and  six-and-thirty,  and  ( 
order,  up  to  twelve,  the  measures, 

Having  disposed  the  sacrifice  thoughtful  sages  send* the 
forward  with  the  Rich  and  Saman. 


7 The  Chariot’s  majesties  are  fourteen  others  : seven  sages  ] 
it  onward  with  their  voices. 

Who  will  declare  to  us  the  ford  Apnana,  the  path  whei 
they  drink  first  draughts  of  Soma? 

S The  fifteen  lauds  are  in  a thousand  places:  that  is  as  vas 
heaven  and  earth  in  measure.  4 

A thousand  spots  contain  the  mighty  tnousand.  Yak  spi 
eth  forth  as  far  as  Prayer  extendeth. 


3 The  Youthful  One  • the  altar,  represented  as  a woman.  With  four 
braided  quadrangular,  according  to  Sftyana.  Puts  on  the  ordinandi 
dressed  or  arranged  in  the  manner  prescribed  for  sacrifice.  Two  B 
probably  A"ni  and  Soma.  According  to  Sftyana,  the  husband  and  his 
or  the  Yftjamfina  and  the  Brahman. 

4 One : Agni  as  the  Sun.  His  mother  • perhaps,  as  Prof.  Ludwig 
Dawn. 

*>  Thirty-six  fjrahas , chalices,  or  saucers  for  Soma  juioe  or  other  libs 
are  to  be  used  at  the  Agnishtoma,  and  four  in  addition  at  the  Atyagniel 
sacrifice.  The  meysures  • the  proper  metres  for  particular  rites  or  pw 
the  service.  The,  Car  : the  sacrifice.  Rich : the  holy  verse  that  is  re 
Siman  : the  psalm  that  is  sung  or  chanted. 

7 Majesties : the  abstract  used  for  the  concrete,  the  mighty  ones,  pro 
the  priests.  The  ford  Apndna : the  passage  leading  to  the  place  of  sac 
They  : the  Gods. 

8 That : meaning  the  fifteen  lauds  regarded  as  a whole.  Tht  * 
thousand : the  meaning  is  uncertain  : ‘ the  thousand  great  (functions! 
a thousand  places.’ — Wilson.  This  mefcns,  according  to  S&yanib  tna 
function  of  the  body  has  its  appropriate  object.  Dr.  Muir  transJ 

‘ t’u.m  a thousand  times  fifteen  ukthas A thousand  times 

a—  Y 71  an 


THE  RIGVEDA. 


ok/v 


(0  115.] 

i What  sage  hath  learned  the  metres’  application?  Who  hath 
gained  VAk,  the  spirit’s  aim  and  object? 

Which  ministering  priest  is  called  eighth  Hero  ? Who  then 
hath  tracked  the  two  Bay  Steeds  of  Indra? 

I Yoked  to  his  chariot-pole  there  stood  the  Coursers : they  only 
travel  round  earth’s  farthest  limits.  J J 

These,  when  their  driver  in  his  home  is  settled,  receive  the 
allotted  meed  of  their  exertion. 

HYMN  CXV.  Agni. 

Verily  wondrous  is  the  tender  Youngling’s  growth  who  never 
draweth  nigh  to  drink  his  Mothers’  milk. 

As  soon  as  she  who  hath  no  udder  bore  him,  he,  faring  on  his 
great  errand,  suddenly  grew  strong. 

! Then  Agni  was  his  name,  most  active  to  bestow,  gathering  up 
the  trees  with  his  consuming  tooth ; b 

Skilled  in  fair  sacrifice,  armed  with  destroying  tongue,  im- 
petuous as  a bull  that  snort eth  in  the  mead. 

1 Pr.iise  him,  your  God  who,  bird-like,  rests  upon  a tree,  scatter- 
ing drops  of  juice  and  pouring  forth  his  flood, 

Speaking  aloud  with  flame  as  with  his  lips  a priest,  and  broad- 
ening his  paths  like  one  of  high  command. 

1 Thou  Everlasting,  whom,  far-striding  fain  to  burn,  the  winds, 
uninterrupted,  never  overcome, 

They  have  approached,  as  warriors  eager  for  the  fight,  heroic 
rrita,  guiding  him  to  gain  his  wish. 

')  This  Agni  is  the  best  of  Kanvas,  Kanvas’  Friend,  Conqueror 
of  the  foe  whether  afar  or  near. 

May  Agni  guard  the  singers,  guard  the  princes  well : may 
Agni  grant  to  us  our  princes’  gracious  help. 

® thou,  Supitrya,  swiftly  following,  make  thyself  the  lord  of 
Jatavedas,  mightiest  of  all, 

^ Eighth  Hero : Agni  is  meant,  as  presiding  over  the  seven  ritvijas  or 
^mistering  priests.  * " 

. 1 Mother*  are  the  two  fire-sticks,  the  lower  of  which,  in  which  the  spark 
produced,  being  the  who  hath  no  udder. 

Fnta : according  to  S&yana,  him  who  is  stationed  in  the  three  fire- 
eceptaclea,  that  is,  Agni 

o Kpvas:  a well-known  family  with  which  Upastuta  was  connected, 
f ' , ln8  to  S&yana,  worshippers  in  general  are  meant : — ‘the  most  earnest 
the  friend  of  those  who  praise  him  ’—Wilson. 
tj^rya  (*  who  hast  fair  ancestors.’ — Wilson)  seems  to  be  an  epithet  of 
To  h AS  Pressed  by  himself.  S&yana  applies  it  to  Agni.  The  con- 
* hin  0Ur  \ the  stapes  is  difficult,  and  the  translation  of  the  first  half,  which 
rtJj  P?  hf  udwig,  is  somewhat  conjectural.  Thirtty  land : Agni  by  his 


560  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK 

Who  surely  gives  a boon  even  in  thirsty  land,  most  powerf 
prepared  to  aid  us  in  the  wilds.  . 

7 Thus  noble  Agni  with  princes  and  mortal  men  is  lauded 

cellent  for  conquering  strength  with  chiefs, 

Men  who  are  well-disposod  as  friends  and  true  to  Law,  e\ 
as  the  heavens  in  majesty  surpass  mankind. 

8 0 Son  of  Strength,  Victorious,  with  this  title  Upastuta’s  m 

potent  voico  reveres  thee. 

Blest  with  brave  sons  by  thee  we  will  extol  thee,  and  lengt 
out  the  days  of  our  existence. 

9 Thus,  Agni,  have  the  sons  of  Vrishtihavya,  the  hiatus, 

Upastutas  invoked  thee. 

Protect  them,  guard  the  singers  and  the  princes.  V 
Vashat ! have  they  come,  with  hands  uplifted,  with  t 
uplifted  hands  and  cries  of  Glory  ! 

HYMN  CXVI.  h 

Drink  Soma  juice  for  mighty  power  and  vigour,  drink,  Strc 
est  One,  that  thou  mayst  smito  down  Vritru. 

Drink  thou,  invoked,  for  strength,  and  riches  : drink  thou 
fill  of  meath  and  pour  it  down,  0 fndra. 

2 Drink  of  the  foodful  juice  stirred  into  motion,  drink  what ! 

choosest  of  the  flowing  Soma. 

Giver  of  weal,  be  joyful  in  thy  spirit,  tAd  turn  thee  hit 
ward  to  bless  and  prosper. 

3 Let  heavenly  Soma  gladden  thee,  0 Indra,  let  that  efft 

among  mankind  delight  thee. 

Rejoice  in  that  whereby  thougavest  freedom,  and  that  wher 
thou  conquerest  thy  foemen. 

4 Let  Indra  come,  impetuous,  doubly  mighty,  to  the  po’ 

juice,  the  Bull,  with  two  Bay  Coursers. 

With  juices  pressed  in  milk,  with  meath  presented,  glut  1 
more  thy  bolt,  0 Foe-destroyer. 

5 Dash  down,  outflaming  their  sharp  flaming  weapons,  the  6ti 

holds  of  the  men  urged  on  by  demons. 

I give  thee,  Mighty  One,  great  strength  and  conquest 
meet  thy  foes  and  rend  them  in  the  battle. 

Prof.  Grassmann  observes  : * Das  Lied  enthalt,  namentlich  in  Vers 
manches  Dunkle,  godasa  bier  die  Auslegung  zwuifelhaft  bleibt. 

1 Pour  it  down  : Shower  down  (blessings).’— Wilson.  oat  e 

3 Qnvest  freedom  : by  slaying  Vritra  : or,  riches,  according  translate 
i.  Pne.rUntrouer : a rittahft  „•  according  to  the  8t.  Petersburg/times  a t 

- * - *** ’«*  y 71  and 


TUB  niOVBDA. 


561 


J-W-V  117.] 


Extend  afar  the  votary’s  fame  and  glory,  as  the  firm  archer's 
strength  drives  off  the  foeman. 

Ranged  on  our  side,  grown  strong  in  might  that  conquers, 
never  defeated,  still  increase  thy  b*»dy. 

To  thee  have  we  presented  this  oblation : accept  it,  Sovran 
Ruler,  free  from  anger. 

Juice,  Maghavan,  for  thee  is  pressed  and  ripened  : eat,  Indra, 
drink  of  that  which  stirs  to  meet  thee. 

Eat,  Indra,  these  oblations  which  approach  thee:  be  pleased 
with  food  made  ready  and  with  Soma. 

With  entertainment  we  receive  thee  friendly : effectual  he 
the  sacrificer’s  wishes. 

I send  sweet  speech  to  Indra  and  to  Agni  : with  hymns  I 
speed  it  like  a boat  through  waters. 

Even  thus,  the  Gods  seem  moving  lound  about  me,  the  foun- 
tains and  bestowers  of  our  riches. 

HYMN  CXVll.  Liberality. 

The  Gods  have  not  ordained  hunger  to  be  our  death  : even  to 
the  well-fed  man  comes  death  in  vaned  shape. 

The  riches  of  the  liberal  never  waste  away,  while  he  who  will 
not  give  finds  none  to  comfort  him. 

The  man  with  food  in  store  who,  when  the  needy  comes  in 
miserable  case  begging  for  bread  t.o  eat, 

Hardens  his  heart  against  him— even  when  of  old  he  did  hint 
sorvico — finds  not  one  to  comfort  him. 


Bounteous  is  he  who  gives  unto  the  beggar  who  comes  to  him 
in  want  of  food  and  feeble. 

Success  attends  him  in  the  shout  of  battle.  lie  makes  a friend 
of  him  in  future  troubles. 


No  friend  is  he  who  to  his  friend  and  comrade  who  comes  im- 
ploring food,  will  offer  nothing. 

Let  him  depart — no  home  is  that  to  rest  in  — , and  rather  seek 
a stranger  to  support  him. 

Let  the  rich  satisfy  the  poor  implorer,  and  bend  his  eye  upon 
a longer  pathway. 

the  firm  archet't  strength:  the  construction  is  obscure ‘ (stretch 
% strength  like  strong  bows  against  our  enemies.’ — Wilson. 


eu,08?i5e8  Liberality  or  Bounty  in  the  shape  of  gifts  of  wealth 

k our  death : men  must  not  attempt  to  justify  their  refusal  of  food 
S“u]‘^y  by  saying  that  the  Gods  send  hunger  as  & punishment  for  sm  ^ 


Niches  come  now  to  one,  now  to  another,  and  like  the  wheels 
of  cars  are  ever  rolling. 

The  foolish  man  wins  food  with  fruitless  labour:  that  food- 
1 speak  the  truth — shall  be  his  ruin. 

He  feeds  no  trusty  friend,  no  man  to  love  him.  All  guilt  1 
he  who  eats  with  no  partaker. 

The  ploughshare  ploughing  makes  the  food  that  feeds  us,  an 
with  its  feet  cuts  through  the  path  it  follows. 

Better  the  speaking  than  the  silent  Brahman  : the  liberal  frien 
outvalues  him  who  gives  not. 

He  with  one  foot  hath  far  outran  the  biped,  and  the  two-foot e 
catches  the  threc-footed. 

Four-footed  creatures  come  when  bipeds  call  them,  and  xtan 
aud  look  where  five  are  met  together. 

The  hands  are  both  alike : their  Inbour  differs.  The  yield  < 
lister  mileh-kine  is  unequal 

T v ins  even  differ  in  their  strength  and  vigour  : two,  even  km: 
men,  differ  in  their  bounty. 

HYMN  CXVIII.  Agi 

Aunt,  refulgent  among  men  thou  slayest  the  devouring  fitm 

Bright  Ruler  in  thine  own  abode. 

> Thou  springest  up  when  woi shipped  well  : the  drops  of  butt 
aie  thy  joy 

When  ladles  are  brought  near  to  thee. 

:$  Honoured  with  gifts  he  shines  afar,  Agni  adorable  with  son 

Tike  dripping  ladle  balms  his  face. 


6 Shull  be  hit  rvLn:  with  reference  to  stanza  I. 

7 Active  exertion  is  necessary  for  success.  The  speakinff  Brahman  ' 
liest  who  duly  discharges  the  task  of  recitation  for  which  he  is  eug  g 
A Brahman  expounding  (the  Veda).’— Wilson. 

8 The  victory  is  not  always  theirs  who  appear  t©  be  more  richly 

ban  others.  He  vrith  one  foot ; tkapdd . the  Sun  appears  to  be  m« 
Uo where  called  Aja-Ekapftd.  See  VI  50.  1 4.  The  biped  is  man.  Jhe  tn 
bated  is  the  old  man  who  walks  with  a staff’  and  is  overtaken  by  one 
|.»es  not  require  such  assistance  Four-footed  creatures  : dogs.  _ Fm:  *& 
nen  together  ; the  dogs  being  at  first  uncertain  whether  their  ““Tl 
ktn0Dcr  them  or  not.  Pahktth,  sets  of  five,  is  apparently  used  with  rei 
o the  one,  two,  three,  and  four  in  the  preceding  competed  words, 
xpl.iin  nahktfh  by  ‘steps’  or  ‘traces.’  ^ 

I have  adopted  the  explanation  given  by  the  authors  of  the 

9^  All  men  should  be  liberal ; but  we  must  not  expect  all  to  be  equ 
The  hymn  has  been  translated'  by  Dr.  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts , V.  no.  431 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


fflfN  119.] 


563 


4 Agni  with  honey  in  his  mouth,  honoured  with  gifts,  is  balmed 

with  oil,  ~ ' 

Refulgent  in  his  wealth  of  light. 

5 Praised  by  our  hymns  thou  kindlestthee,  Oblation-bearer  for 

the  Gods : 5 

As  such  do  mortals  call  on  thee. 

6 To  that  Immortal  Agni  pay  worship  with  oil,  ye  mortal  men  — 

Lord  of  the  house,  whom  none  deceive.  ’ 

7 0 Agni,  burn  the  IUkshasas  with  thine  unconquerable  flame  ■ 
Shine  guardian  of  Eternal  Law. 

* So,  Agni,  with  thy  glowing  face  hum  fierce  against  the  female 
fiends, 

Shining  among  Urukshayas. 

(I  Urukshayas  have  kindled  thee,  Oblation-bearer,  thee,  with 
hymns. 

Best  Worshipper  among  mankind. 


HYMN  CX1X.  Indra. 

I HIS,  even  this  was  my  resolve,  to  win  a cow,  to  win  a steed  : 
Have  I not  drunk  of  Soma  juice? 

'I  Like  violent  gusts  of  wind  the  draughts  thai  I have  drunk 
have  lifted  me  : 

Have  I not  drunk  of  Soma  juice? 

3 The  draughts  I drank  have  borne  me  ap,  as  fleet-foot  horses 
draw  a car : 

Have  I not  drunk  of  Soma  juice? 

* hymn  hath  reached  me,  lik-  a cow  who  lows  to  meet  her 
darling  calf : 

Have  I not  drunk  of  Soma /trice? 

a wright  bends  a chaKot-seat  so  round  my  heart  I bend  the 
hymn : 

Wave  l not  drunk  of  *i>oma  juice  ? 

^ Not  as  a mote  within  the  eye  count  the  Five  Tribes  of  men 
with  me : 

^Have  I not  dr«nk  of  Soma  juice  ? 

8 Urukshay as • members  of  the  Riahi’s  family. 

i°&8  *-8  ^ra  himself  in£he  form  of  Lava.  He  describes  his  sensa- 

ota  r drinking  Soma  juice.  But  Bee  Bergaigne,  1. 151,  who  considers  it 
\ m 6 .iterance  of  an  exhilarated  mortal. 

°ov):  to  strengthen  and  inspirit  himself  for  battle,  and  so  to 
6 S&van  h°r8es  for  his  worshippers. 

explains  diffi»tAnHv  •— .^THa  fivo  pastes  have  nnt  eluded  the  plane® 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


564 


fBOOI  X 


U The  heavens  and  earth  themselves  have  not  grown  equal  to  one 
half  of  me : 

Have  I not  drunk  of  Soma  juice  ? ! 

8 I in  my  grandeur  have  surpassed  the  heavens  aud  all  thi^ 

spacious  earth  : 

Have  I not  drunk  of  Soma  juice  ? 

9 Aha ! this  spacious  earth  will  I deposit  either  here  or  there : 
Have  I not  drunk  of  Soma  juice  ? 

10  In  one  short  moment  will  I smite  the  earth  in  fury  here  or 

there : 

Have  I not  drunk  of  Soma  juice? 

11  One  of  my  flanks  is  in  the  sky ; I let  the  other  trail  below  : 
Havo  I not  drunk  of  Soma  juice  ? 

12  I,  greatest  of  the  Mighty  Ones,  am  lifted  to  the  firmament: 
Have  I not  drunk  of  Soma  juice? 

13  1 seek  the  worshipper’s  abode  ; oblation-bearer  to  the  Gods : 

Have  I not  drunk  ot  Soma  juice?  j 

HYMN  CXX.  hidr&i 


In  all  tht  worlds  That  was  the  Best  and  Highest  whence  sprang 
the  Migf.ty  Gods,  of  splendid  valour. 

As  soon  as  bu»*n  he  overcomes  his  foemen,  he  in  whom  all  wlu 
lend  him  ail  are  joyful.  ^ 

2 Grown  mighty  in  his  strength,  with  ample  vigour,  he  as  a fix 

strikes  fear  into  Fae  Dasa, 

Eager  to  wm  the  breaking  and  the  breathless.  All  sang  th] 
praise  at  banquet  anu  oblation. 

3 All  concentrate  on  thee  their  mental  vigour,  what  time  these 

twice  or  thrice,  are  thine  u^istunts. 


11  Cp.  III.  32.  11.  , 

13  This  stanza  is  difficult.  The  word  <7>i‘Ad  is  unintelligible,  ana  grmani 
as  Prof.  Ludwig  suggests,  should,  perhaps,  bo  *ead  instead.  Oblation-bearer 
Indra,  in  his  excitement,  fancies  that  he  is  Agn\  prof.  Grasstnann,  who  wit 
Dr.  Muir,  considers  grih6  to  mean  servant  or  minuter,  places  the  stanea  * 
his  Appendix  as  a fragment  fiom  a hymu  to  Agni. 

The  hymn  has  been  tianslited  by  Dr.  Muir.  0 8 T^xts,  V.  p.  9L  by 
authors  of  the  Siebeuzig  Lieder,  aud  by  Prof.  Peterson,  Hymns  from  the  mp 
(Bombay  Sanskrit  Series). 

1 Th.it:  meaning,  according  to  SAyana,  Brahma  the  original  cause  of 

**2  %*gertoiam:  Prof.  Ludwig  makes  sasni  an  infinitive. 
the  correct  reading.  See  Grasnmann,  Wtirterbuch  sum  Rxgwta* 

4m  and  the  breathless : the  animate  and  the  inanimate  world.  --  ^uioei 

8 Mental  vigour:  knitum:  ‘ adoration.’ — Wilson.  Tmu:  ^ 

m. — . .Mitt  MfaMinna  nAfk&nu  thn  three  daily  UoW 


THE  RIGVE DA. 


565 


f 0 120*1 


Blend  what  is  sweeter  than  the  sweet  with  sweetness : win 
quickly  with  our  meaththat  meath  in  battle. 

I Therefore  in  thee  too,  thou  who  winnest  riches,  at  every  ban- 
quet are  the  sages  joyful. 

\yph  mightier  power,  Bold  God,  extend  thy  firmness  -.  let  not 
malignant  Yatudhanas  harm  thee. 
i proudly  we  put  our  trust  in  thee  in  battles,  when  we  behold 
great  wealth  the  prize  of  combat. 

I with  my  words  impel  thy  weapons  onward,  and  sharpen 
with  my  prayer  thy  vital  vigour. 

Worthy  of  praises,  many-shaped,  most  skilful,  most  energetic, 
Aptya  of  the  Aptyns  : 

He  with  his  might  destroys  the  seven  Danus,  subduing  many 
who  were  deemed  his  equals. 

Tuou  in  that  hous'e  which  thy  protection  guardeth  bestowest 
wealth,  the  higher  and  the  lower. 

Thou  stablishest  the  two  much-wandering  Mothers,  and  bring- 
est  many  deeds  to  their  completion. 

j Brihaddiva,  the  foremost  of  light-winners,  repeats  these  holy 
prayers,  this  strength  to  India, 
lie  rules  the  great  self-luminous  fold  of  cattle,  and  all  the 
do  »rs  of  light  hath  he  thrown  open. 

Thus  hath  Brihaddiva,  tVie  great  Atharvan,  spoken  to  Indra 
as  himself  in  person. 

The  spotless  Sisters,  they  who  are  his  Mothers,  with  power 
exalt  him  and  impel  him  onward. 


meter  than  the  sweet : thine  own  celestial  Soma.  SAyana  explains  the 
mza differently  ‘To  thee  all  (worshippers)  offer  adoration,  whether  those 
ipitiators  be  two  or  three.  Combine  that  which  is  sweeter  than  the  sweet 

tb  sweetness,  unite  that  honey  with  honey.’— Wilson.  The 

sording  to  SAyana.  are  the  sacrifi  *3r  and  his  wife  and  child,  and  the  second 
If  of  the  stanza  contaius  a reference  to  the  propagation  of  children. 

I % a : the  name  of  a class  of  deities,  of  which  Trite  Aptya  is  the  chief . 
tat  accessible  of  the  accessible.’-Wilson.  The  first  line  is  without  a verb  . 
wise  him,  may  be  understood.  D&nus : a class  of  demons. 

1 Tkehigherandtkelower:  heavenly  and  earthly.  Mothers:  Heaven  and  Earth. 
foremost  of  lujkt-mnners : according  to  SAyana,  ‘chief  of  Xujja* 
m of  heaven,  or  servant  of  Aditya,  the  Sun,  Indra.  / 

Region  of  light. 

Atharvan ; ‘the  peat  prieet’-Orassmaun.  At  Mmdftte 
“kSe*  himself  with  the  Ood  whom  he  worships.  The  epotUu  ^ 

“ « U.  Mother, : according  to  Sftyans,  tbs  sisternvers  which  abide  mth. 
**r  earth.  Von  Roth  adopts  the  reading  of  A£am-veda  V.U™» 
of  the  mdtarttWtfr  of  Hw  text  Heaven  and  Bsrth  »PP«« 


566  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  X, 

HYMN  CXXI.  Ka 

In  the  beginning  rose  Hiranyagarbha,  born  Only  Lord  of  all 
created  beings. 

He  fixed  and  holdeth  up  this  earth  and  heaven.  What  God 
shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation  ? 


2 Giver  of  vital  breath,  of  power  and  vigour,  he  whose  command 
ments  all  the  Gods  acknowledge  : 

The  Lord  of  death,  whose ‘shade  is  life  immortal.  What  Goo 
shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation  ? 


3 Who  by  his  grandeur  hath  become  Sole  Ruler  of  all  the 

moving  world  that  breathes  and  slumbers  ; 

He  who  is  Lord  of  men  and  Lord  of  cattle.  What  God  sliul 
we  adore  with  our  oblation  ? 

4 His,  through  his  might,  are  these  snow-covered  mountains 

and  men  call  sea  and  Rasa  his  possession  : 

His  arms  are  these,  his  are  these  heavenly  regions.  What  Got 
shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation  1 

5 By  him  the  heavens  are  strong  and  earth  is  stedfast,  by  hi ii 

light’s  realm  and  sky-vault  are  supported  : 

By  him  the  regions  in  mid-air  wore  measured.  What  Gmi 
shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation  ? 


C To  him,  supported  by  his  help,  two  arrffioa  embattled  loot 
while  trembling  in  their  spirit,  , „ 

When  over  them  the  risen  Sun  is  shining.  What  God  shall  w 


adore  with  our  oblation  ? 

7 What  time  the  mighty  waters  came,  containing  the  univcisi 
germ,  producing  Agni,  _ w,  . 

Thence  sprang  the  Gods'  one  spirit  into  being, 
shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation  1 


Ka,  kah,  (quis)  meaning  Who  ? that  is.  the  Unknown  God,  . tion  0f  tl 
aa  a name  to  Praj&pau,  and  to  other  Gods,  from  a forced  l P ‘ 
interrogative  pronoun  which  occurs  in  the  refrain  of  each  v ,.  ^ 

1 Hiranyagarbha:  literally  ‘the  gold-germ  ; * source  o 8°  er  .c 
the  Sun-god  ‘ as  the  great  power  of  the  universe,  from  wb.ch  all  J*  ^ „ 
and  existences,  divine  aud  earthly,  are  derived,  a c^“ceP  tue  creator 
nearest  approach  to  the  later  mystical  conception  ofBrahm  , ^ other 

the  world.’— Wallis.  What  Qod : kdsmai  derfya:  cui  de°?  Acoorai  g ^ ^ 
* Worship  we  Ka  the  God  with  our  oblation.’  According  ( ’ 

ing  is  ‘ What  other  God  than  Praj&pati  shall  we  worship  ^ 

P 3 Breathes  and  slumbers : that  is  of  Gods  aud  men.  Of  men  an 
literally, 4 of  quadruped  and  biped.’  rf  v 108.  !• 

4 Sea:  air.  Ilasd:  the  mythical  river  of  the  firmament.  * iu  t 

7 Thence : from  the  coming  of  the  waters.  One  spirit : * . > 


567 


jl%Y  122.]  THE  RIQVEDl. 

8 He  in  his  might  surveyed  the  floods  containing  productive 
force  and  generating  Worship. 

He  is  the  God  of  gods,  and  none  beside  him.  What  God  shall 
we  adore  with  our  oblat-iou  ? 

g Ne’er  may  he  harm  us  who  is  earth’s  Begetter,  nor  he  whose 
laws  are  sure,  the  heavens’  Creator, 

He  who  brought  forth  the  great  and  lucid  waters.  What  God 
shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation? 

[0  Prajapati!  thou  only  comprehendest  all  these  created  things, 
and  none  beside  thee. 

Grant  us  our  hearts’  desire  when  we  invoke  thee  : may  we 
have  store  of  riches  in  possession. 

HYMN  CXXIL  AwiI. 

I  praisb  the  God  of  wondrous  might  like  Indra,  the  lovely 
pleasant  Guest  whom  all  must  welcome. 

May  Agni,  Priest  and  Master  of  the  household,  give  hero 
strength  and  all-sustaining  riches. 

2 0 Agni,  graciously  accept  this  song  of  mine,  thou  jmssi n- 

wise  who  knowest  every  oidmance. 

Enwrapped  in  holy  oil  further  the  course  of  prayer:  the  Gods 
bestow  according  to  thy  holy  law. 

3 Immortal,  wandering  round  the  seven  stations,  give,  a liberal 

Giver,  to  the  pious  worshipper, 

Wealth,  Agni,  with  brave  sons  and  ready  for  his  use  : welcome 
the  man  who  comes  with  fuel  unto  thee. 

4 The  seven  who  bring  oblations  worship  thee,  the  Strong,  the 

first,  the  Great  Chief  Priest,  Ensign  of  sacrifice, 

The  oil-anointed  Bull,  Agni  who  hears,  who  sends  as  God  full 
hero  strength  to  him  who  freely  gives. 

8 Generating  Worship:  ‘giving  biith  to  sacrifice.’— Wilson. 

10  Prajdpati : Lord  of  life,  creatures  or  creation.  Savitav  the  Sun  God 
18  so  called  in  1Y.  53.  2,  and  Soma  Pav.imdna  iu  IX.  5.  9.  Prajdpati  w^s&fter- 
wa^  the  name  of  a separate  God,  the  bestower  of  progeny  and  caitle.  and 
iometiuaes  invoked  as  the  Creator 

Tta  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Dr.  Muir,  0 S . Texts , IV.,  pp.  16,  17  ; 
prof.  Max  Muller,  A . 8.  Lit.,  p.  569,  and  Vedic  Hymn*,  Part  I.  (Sacred 
°f  the  East.  XXXII)  p.  1.-  by  Mr.  Wallis,  Comolagy  of  the  Riywl«, 
L v ’ *\v  Prof-  Peterson,  Hymns  from  theRigivda  . and  by  Dr.  L Scherm-n, 
1 QMphischt  Hymnen  Am  Rig -and  Atharva- vedu-Sankitd,  p.  24. 

ini  Indra : vdsnm  na : like  the  Vasu,  or  chief  Vasu.  ‘ Like  the  sun  — 
o^n'  Riches:  or  viands. 

i rr»€H  Motions:  regions  of  the  universe,  according  to  Sftyana. 
fcAlAe  seven  • 


BC8  THE  HYMNS  OF  [EOOK  } 

5 First,  messenger  art  thou,  meet  for  election : drink  thou  th 
iil!  invited  to  the  Amiit. 

The  Maiuta  in  the  vot&rv’s  bou86  adorned  thoe;  ^ ith  laud 
the  Bhrigus  gave  thee  light  and  glory. 

t'>  M .Iking  the  teeming  Cow  for  all-sustaining  food,  0 Wise  One 
for  the  worship-loving  worshipper, 

Toon,  Agm,  dropping  oil,  thrice  lighting  works  of  Law,  show 
est  thy  wisdom  circling  home  and  sacrifice. 

7 They  who  at  flushing  of  this  dawn  appointed  thee  their  mee 

senger.  these  men  have  paid  thee  reverence. 

(h'ds  strengthened  thee  for  work  that  must  be  glorified,  Agm 
while  they  made  butter  pure  for  sacrifice. 

8 Arrangers  in  our  synods,  Agni,  while  they  sang,  Vasishtha’i 

sons  have  called  thee  down,  the  Potent  One. 

Maintain  the  growth  of  wealth  with  men  who  sacrifice.  Y( 
Guds,  preserve  us.  with  your  biosing.?  eveimore. 

HYMN  CXXIII.  Ven» 

Sbk,  Vena,  born  in  light,  hath  driven  hither,  on  chariot  of  the 
air,  the  Calve*  of  Pri  ni. 

Singers  with  hymns  caress  him  as  an  infant  there  where  th( 
waters  and  the  sunlight  mingle. 

2 Vena  draws  up  his  wave  from  out  the  oisan : mist-born,  the 

fair  one’s  hack  is  made  apparent. 

Brightly  he  shone  aloft  on  Order’s  summit:  the  hosts  Bang 
glory  to  their  common  birthplace. 

3 Full  many,  lowing  to  their  joint-possession,  dwelling  togethei 

stood  the  Darling’s  Mothers. 

Ascending  to  the  lofty  height  of  Order,  the  bands  of  singer* 
sip  the  tueiU  of  Amrit. 

7 Uadi : here  meaning  piiesta  1 Verily  there  are  two  kinds  of  god9j  for, 
indeed,  the  gods  are  the  gods,  and  the  BrAlimmia  who  have  studied  and  teach 
holy  lore  are  the  human  gods’  {8 itapatha-  llrdhmana,  II.  2 2.  6 ; S.  B.  K, 

XII.  802).  * 

Vena,  ‘the  loving  Sun  ’ of  I.  83.  5,  Kdvta  or  4 the  beloved,'  is  said  by  the 
Scholiast  in  this  place  to  be  rrvidkyazthiino  devaK  ‘the  God  of  the  middle 

region.*  He  is,  apparently,  the  Sun  as  he  rises  in  the  mist  and  dew  of  tue 

morning. 

1 Prifni,  the  Speckled  Cow,  is  the  variegated  cloud,  and  her  Calve*  are  the 

masses  of  mist  which  the  Sun  dispel*.  , 

2 Ocean : the  sea  of  air.  On  Order's  summit : 1 on  the  summit  of  J 
course.* — Wallis.  Order , here  and  in  the  following  stanaa,  is  Kosmos, 
ordered  or  law- regulated  universe.  Common  birthplace:  the  sky. 

3 Joint-possession : the  child  which  they  have  produced  in  coaMM®* 
Darling's  Mothers : the  Dawns,  or  the  Waters,  or  the  songs. 


THE  RIOVEDA. 


569 


flWV  123.] 

4 Knowing  his  form,  the  sa^es  yearned  to'meet  him  : they  have 

come  nigh  to  hear  the  wild  Bull’s  bellow. 

Performing  sacrifice  they  reached  the  river : for  the  Gandbarva 
found  the  immortal  waters. 

5 The  Apsaraa,  the  Lady,  sweetly  smiling,  supports  her  Lover 

in  aublimest  heaven. 

Id  his  Friend’s  dwelling  as  a Friend  he  wanders:  he,  Vena, 
rests  him  on  his  golden  pinion. 

6 They  gaze  on  thee  with  longing  in  their  spirit,  as  on  a strong- 

winged  bird  that  mounteth  sky-ward  ; 

On  thee  with  winizs  of  gold,  Vanina’s  envoy,  the  Bird  that 
hasteneth  to  the  home  of  Yama. 

T Erect,  to  heaven  hath  the  Gandlmrva  mounted,  pointing  at 
us  Ids  many-coloured  weapons ; 

Clad  in  sweet  raiment  beautiful  to  look  on,  for  he,  as  light, 
produceth  forms  that  please  us. 

8 When  as  a spark  he  cometh  near  the  ocean,  still  looking  with 
a vulture’s  eye  to  heaven, 

His  lustre,  joying  in  its  own  bright  splendour,  maketh  dear 
glories  in  the  lowest  region. 


4 The  wild  Hull's  bellow:  the  sound  mile  by  the  dropping  Soma  juice, 

% Gandhantu : Vena,  the  rising  Sun. 

5 The  Apsaras:  the  celesti.il  nymph  who  symbolizes  the  waters  of  heaven. 

'fc Lover:  Vena,  the  Gandhaiva,  Surya  ‘Ourhjmn  illustrates  the  two 
enses  in  which  the  sun  is  bioueht  into  connection  with  t.lio  waters  , nrs  , na 
minting  with  his  beams  the  watery  masses  of  the  skv,  and  secondly  m tne 
wiinilatiou  of  hn  light  to  the  waters,  a*  soma  ot  ambrosia,  whence  the  deptns 
I light  become  the  aerial  ocean.  This  association  is  stereotyped  in  e un*°n 
i the  Gandh  irvus  and  the  Apsarases.’— Wallis.  H*3  Friend  s dwe  mg.  e 
fusion  of  his  father  Heaven. 

8 Varuna'8  envoy : the  setting  sun  Cf  VII  87  5 Yama . Cf.  X.  1 
7 dad  in  sweet  raiment : surabhi,  sweet,  may.  as  Mr  Wallis  conjecture,  be 
phy  on  the  word  gundhtiy  occurring  in  the  nome  Gandhaiva. 

J‘l  8 merely  recapitulate,  as  Ludwig  observes,  the  deeds  o y\i  . » , 

he  light  of  living  men  and  then  as  the  illuminator  of  the  regions  below 
»rtli 

The  hymn  is  one  of  the  obsourest  in  the  whole  Higveda.  Mahtdhara 
» by  ckandra,  the  Moon.  Wilton  : • Thegeneral  pu  po>t of  tb. 
I*1"  "tales  it  [Venal  equivalent  to  the  tlmnd>r-doud  Von  Both, J™®” 
follows,  identifies  Vena  Gandhsrv*  with  the  Rainbow.  According 
nd-wig  Vena  is  the  Moon  and  the  Gandbarva  is  the  Sun.  • g,  « 
aad  explained  the  hymn  in  hiB  Cosmoiooi/o/  tAe  • [P'dwj_.j 

£ .d«*rent  interpretation  see  Hiliebreodt,  V.  if  .,  I « “ X 

fe  “nlhere,'n  *<*  «««“«  *«•■>  *•  * > P-  109f)' 8 

11  88— an 


570 


TUB  HYMNS  OP 


[kook 


HYMN  CXXIV.  Agui,  Kt 

Comb  to  this  sacrifice  of  ours,  0 Agni,  threefold,  with  sevc 
threads  and  five  divisions. 

Be  our  oblation-bearer  and  preceder:  thou  hast  lain  loi 
enough  in  during  darkness, 

2 I come  a God  foreseeing  from  the  godless  to  immortality  \ 

secret  pathways, 

While  I,  ungracious  one,  desert  the  gracious,  leave  mine  ow 
friends  and  seek  the  kin  of  strangers. 

3 I,  looking  to  the  guest  of  other  lineage,  have  founded  many 

rule  of  Law  and  Order. 

I bid  farewell  to  the  Great  God,  the  Father,  aud,  for  neglec 
obtain  my  share  of  worship. 

4 I tarried  many  a year  within  this  altar : I leave  the  Fathe: 

for  my  choice  is  Indra. 

Away  pass  Agni,  Varuna,  and  Soma.  Rule  ever  changes : tli 
I come  to  favour. 

5 These  Asuras  have  lost  their  powers  of  magic.  But  thou, ' 

Varuna,  if  thou  dost  love  me, 

0 King,  discerning  truth  and  right  from  falsehood,  come  an 
be  Lord  and  Ruler  of  my  kingdom. 

6 Here  is  the  light  of  heaven,  here  all  is  ^ovely ; here  there 

radiance,  here  is  air’s  wide  region. 

Let  us  two  slaughter  Vritia.  Forth,  0 Soma  ! Thou  art  obi. 
tiou  : we  therewith  will  serve  thee. 

1 Indra  speaks.  Threefold  : performed  with  three  daily  libations  ; or  con 
prising  the  pdkayajfla , the  haviryajila,  and  the  somayajfla,  the  simple  dome 
tic  oblation,  the  oblation  of  claiified  butter,  etc.,  und  the  offering  of  Son 
juice.  With  seven  threads  : conducted  by  the  seven  chief  priests.  With  in 
divisions:  with  five  oblations,  or  regulated  by  the  YajamAna  and  four  of  ti 
chief  priests,  according  to  SAyana.  The  exact  meaning  is  uncertain 

2 A^ni  speaks.  He  has  left  Varuna,  originally  the  Supieme  Deity,  ww 

power  was  waning,  aud  associated  hitnself  with  Indra  who  has  superset  f1 
that  God.  From  the  godless  : fiorn  Varuna  who  iu  the  decline  of  his  sup 
macy  has  neglected  Agni  and  sacrifice.  SAyana  interprets  the  first  m®  ^ 
ferently  : — ‘ From  being  no  divinity  I issue  a divinity  from  the  cave  * , 0] 
solicitation  (of  the  gods),  aud  being  manifest  I attain  immortality.  - 
Seek  the  kin  of  strangers  : come  to  be  born  and  domesticated  m a ne\  I 
with  Indra.  , yrtrljn, 

3 Of  other  lineage : of  the  other  branch  ; terrestrial  fire.  Father.  ■ 

4 Within  this  altar:  or,  close  to  this  Varuna.  This:  the  supr 

Indra.  Onme  uwd  I 

5 Indra  speaks.  These  Asuras:  Agni,  Varuna,  and  Soma.  ~ 

Lord:  Indra  offers  Varuna  spiritual  and  moral  sovereignty  as  <>  p 

for  Ins  loss  of  general  supremacy.  Q VriW 

8 Let  us  two:  the  exhortation  is  addressed  by  Indra  to  ?°  ‘f  virus! 
. xr «nemv  in  tb«  ab^ew 


Jin  a kiuvh;da\ 


571 


1 The  Sage  hath  fixed  his  form  by  wiadoh  in  the  heavens  • Va- 
runa  with  no  violence  let  the  waters  (low 
Like  women-folk,  the  floods  that  bring  rosperity  have  caught 
his  hue  and  colour  as  they  gleamed  nd  shone. 

3 These  wait  upon  his  loftiest  power  am  vigour:  he  dwells  in 
these  who  triumph  in  their  Godhead] 

And  they,  like  people  who  elect  their  Viler,  have  in  abhor- 
rence turned  away  from  Vritra. 

) They  call  him  Swan,  the  abhorrent  flood’ Companion,  moving 
in  friendship  with  celestial  Waters.  I 
The  poets  in  their  thought  have  looked  In  Indra  swiftly  ap- 
proaching when  Anushtup  calls  him. 

HYMN  CXXY.  Vtik. 

I travel  with  the  Rudras  and  the  Vasul  with  the  Adityas 
and  All-Gods  I wander.  1 

I hold  aloft  both  Varuna  and  Mitra,  Indrl  and  Agni,  and  the 
Pair  of  Asvins. 

I I cherisji  and  sustain  high-swelling  Soma,  ;nd  Tvashtar  1 sup- 
port, Pushan,  and  Bliaga.  ' * 

I load  with  wealth  the  zealous  sacrificer  vfyo  pours  the  juice 
aud  offers  his  oblationi? 

3 I am  the  Queen,  the  gatherer-up  of  treasureSjmost  thoughtful,  - 
first  of  those  who  merit  worship.* 

Thus  Gods  have  stablished  me  in  many  pbces  with  many 
homes  to  enter  aud  abide  in. 

1 Through  mo  alone  all  eat  the  food  that  feeds  them, — each 
man  who  sees,  breathes,  hears  the  word  outspoken. 

They  know  it  not,  but  yet  they  dwell  beside  me.  Hear,  one 
and  all,  the  truth  as  I declare  it. 


\ The  Sage:  perhaps  Soma,  in  answer  to  Indra's  appeal  ; Mitra,  according 
a S&yana. 

5 %!*.  power : the  supreme  might  of  Indra. 

Inis  stanza  appears  to  have  been  added  on  account  of  the  occurrence  of 

6 btbkatsftndm  (abhorrentium)  which  seems  to  connect  it  with  the 

[receding  stanza  where  btbhatsilvah  (abhorrentes)  occurs.  Swan:  kahsa  • 
J[lrya  Sun-God  is  sometimes  so  called.  Cf.  IV.  40.  5 Swiftly  approach- 
9 when  Anushtup  calls  him : ‘or  the  ceaselessly  moving  Indra,  who  is  worthy 
^•Prai9ed  ’with  ^4 nushtabh. ' — Wilson.  Or,  ‘dancing  the  Anushtup, 

mg  to  Prof.  Max  Mtiller’s  interpretation.  . 

VmL,' S?Tlgne  haa  translated  and  explained  this  hymn.  See  La  Rclxjum 
)et2’vLpP-  U5-l<9-  See  also  Book  IV.  42,  for  hints  of  the  rivalry 
"eim  v»nma  and  Indra. 


/alto  3P«f<*  personified,  the  Word,  the  first  creation  and  representative 
ihfiinJ’iRDd  t^e  means  of  communication  between  men  aud  Gods.  neie 


572 


THE  HYMNS  OP 


[BOOK  X 

5 I,  verily,  myself  announce  and  utter  the  word  that  Gods  ant 

men  alike  shall  welcome. 

1  make  the  man  Itove  exceeding  mighty,  make  him  a sage,  s 
Rishi,  and' a Brhman. 

6 I bend  the  bow  foi  Uudra  that  his  arrow  may  strike  and  slaj 

the  hater  of  deotion. 

I rouse  and  order  cattle  for  the  people,  and  I have  penetrate 
Earth  and  Hvaeti. 

7 On  the  world’s  simmit  I bring  forth  the  Father:  my  home  if 

in  the  waters,  h the  ocean. 

Thence  I extend  j’er  all  existing  creatures,  and  touch  ever 
yonder  heavenwith  toy  forehead. 

8 I breathe  a strong  breath  like  the  wind  and  tempest,  the  whili 

I hold  togethc  all  existence. 

Beyond  this  wid«  earth  and  beyond  the  heavens  I have  becomi 
so  mighty  in  ny  grandeur. 

HYMN  CXXVI.  Visvedevai 

No  peril,  no  severe  di^tres^,  ye  Gods,  affects  the  mortal  man 

Whom  Aryamm  and  Mitra  lead,  and  Varu^a,  of  one  accord 
beyond  his  fees. 

2 This  very  tiling  do  we  desire,  Vanina,  Mitra,  Aryaman, 

Whereby  ye  giard  the  mortal  man  from  s<yje  distress,  and  lea 

him  safe  beyond  his  foes.  . 

3 These  are,  ea«h  one,  our  present  helps,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Arya 

man, 

Best  leaders,  best  deliverers  to  lead  us  on  and  bear  us  sai 
beyond  our  foes.  _____ 

7 The  Father  ■ Heaven  or  Sky,  produced  from  VAk  identified  with  Para 
tnA&niA,  the  supreme  and  univeisal  Soul.  .. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Colebrooke,  Miscellaneous  Essays,  1*  « 
by  the  authois  of  the  Sitbenziy  Lieder ; by  Prof.  Peterson,  Hymn*  from 
Rigvtda  (Bombay  Sxnskiit  Senes);  and  by  Prof.  Whitney,  Notes  to  to 
bi  ooke’s  Essay  on  the  Vedas,  p.  113.  # . , 

Mr.  Wallis  observes:  ‘Vac,  ‘Speech*  is  celebrated  alone  in  two  wnoi 
hymns,  X 71.  and  X.  125.,  of  which  the  former  shows  that  the  pnW 
application  of  the  name  was  to  the  voice  of  the  hymn,  the  means  o w 
munication  between  heaven  and  earth  at  the  sacrifice.  The  t 

illustrates  tli«  constant  assimilati-m  of  the  varied  phenomena  of  na 
the  eaciifice;  all  that  has  a voice  in  nature,  the  thunder  of  tbesto  ^ 
reawaking  of  life  at  dawn,  with  songs  of  rejoicing  over  the  new riLBWkti 
world,  are  embodied  in  this  Vac  in  the  same  way  as  it  is  said  of  n 
that  he  embraces  all  things  that  are.  It  is  thus  another  expression 
idea  of  the  unity  of  the  world,  which  we  have  seen  crowning  t j yC 
speculations  of  all  the  more  abstract  hymna  of  the  collection,  u ^ 
the  Rigveda,  p.  85.  See  also  Weber,  V4o  und  \6yo  C,  MU  At  SI «««•> 

U..  Mull...  TU*  DkUrwnkv.  144—4*7.  


THE  MOVED  A. 


573 


0ME  127.] 

4 Ye  compass  round  and  guard  each  mai,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Arya- 

mau : 

In  your  dear  keeping  may  we  be,  ye  vho  are  excellent  as 
guides  beyond  our  foes. 

5 iUityas  are  beyond  all  foes,— Varuna,  Vitra,  Aryaman  : 

Strong  Rudra  with  the  Marut  host,  inda,  Agni  let  us  call  for 

weal  beyond  our  foes. 

6 These  lead  us  safely  over  all,  Varuna,  Mtra,  Aryaman, 

These  who  are  Kings  of  living  men,  ov-r  all  troubles  far  away 

beyond  our  foes. 

1 May  they  give  bliss  to  aid  us  well,  Vauna,  Mitra,  Aryaman  : 
May  the  Adityas,  when  we  pray,  grait  us  wide  shelter  and 

defence  beyond  our  foes. 

8 As  in  this  place,  0 Holy  Ones,  ye  Vasts  freed  even  the  Gatiri 
when  her  feet  were  fettered, 

So  free  us  now  from  trouble  and  affliclou : and  let  our  life  be 
lengthened  still,  0 Agni. 

HYMN  CXXVII.  Night. 

With  all  her  eyes  the  Goddess  Night  looks  forth  approaching 
many  a spot : 

She  hath  put  all  her  glories  oo. 

2 Immortal*  she  hat.lt  filled  the  waste  the  Goddess  hath  filled 
j height  and  depth  : 

She  conquers  darkness  with  her  ligb. 

3 The  Goddess  as  she  comes  hath  set  -he  Dawn  her  Sister  in  her 

place : 

' And  then  the  darkness  vanishes. 

1 So  favour  us  this  night,  0 thou  wh*se  pathways  we  have  visited 
As  birds  their  uest  upon  the  tree 
5 The  villagers  have  sought  their  homes,  and  all  that  walks 
and  all  that  flies, 

Even  the  falcons  fain  for  prey. 

® ^eeP  off  the  she- wolf  and  the  waif ; 0 Ormya,  keep  the  thief 
away : 

Easy  be  thou  for  us  to  pass. 


the  wild-cow,  the*  female  of  the  Gaura  or  Bos  Gaunit.  The 
^ *aid  to  have  delivered  her  from  Visvavneu  the  Gaadharva, 

) the  expanded  (firmament).’— Wttaen. 

Al/r n«4  t - - 


574  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK 

7 Clearly,  bath  shecone  nigh  to  me  who  decks  the  dark  wii 

richest  hues : 

0 Morning,  caned  it  like  debts. 

8 These  have  I brought  to  thee  like  kine.  0 Night,  thou  Chi 

of  Heaven,  nec^t 
Tins  laud  as  for  aconqueror. 

HYMN  CXXVIII.  Visvedev; 

Let  me  win  glory,  Agni,  in  our  battles  : enkindling  thee,  ni; 
we  support  our  belies. 

May  the  four  regiois  bend  and  bow  before  me : with  thee  f 
guardian  may  \v»  win  in  combat. 

2 May  all  the  Gods  b on  my  side  in  battle,  the  Maruts  led  1 

ludra,  Vishnu,  .gni. 

Mine  be  the  middh  air’s  extended  region,  and  may  the  wii 
blow  favouring  tlese  my  wishes. 

3 May  the  Gods  gram  me  riches;  may  the  blessing  and  imoc 

tion  of  the  Gods  issist  me. 

h oremost  in  fight  bethe  divine  Invokers  : may  we,  unwounde 
have  brave  heroesround  us. 

4 For  me  let  them  preent  all  mine  oblatioi^,  and  let  my  mine 

intention  be  accurrphshed.  # 

May  I be  guiltless  of  ,he  least  transgression  : and,  all  ye  Goc 
do  ye  combine  to  Hess  us. 

5 Ye  six  divine  Expansei,  grant  us  freedom:  here,  all  ye  Goc 

acquit  yourselves  lilie  heroes. 

Let  us  not  lose  our  chidren  or  our  bodies : let  us  not  bene; 
the  foe,  King  Soma  ! 

6 Baffling  the  wrath  of  oir  opponents,  Agni,  guard  us  as  o 

infallible  Protector. 

Let  these  thy  foes  turn  hack  and  seek  their  bouses,  and  1 
their  thought  who  wTatdi  at  home  be  ruined. 


8 These:  verses. 

1 The  four  regions  : the  King  who  is  praying  for  assistance  is  about  to  u 
Her  take  a Digvijaya , the  subjugation  of  all  neighbouring  countries  in 
directions. 

8 Divine  Invokers : the  Hotar-priests  of  the  Gods.  SAyana  explains  A 
Terentiy  : — ‘ may  my  invokers  of  the  gods  be  the  first  to  propitiate  them, 
Wilson. 

5 Six  divine  Expanset : the  four  cardinal  points  and  upper  and  lower  spacer 
or,  according  to  S4yan».  Heaven.  Earth  TW  NtVht  w»t*r  1 Plnnta^ 


THE  MOVED  A. 


675 


y1%V  129] 

7 Lord  of  the  world,  Creator  of  creators  : the  saviour  God  who 

overcomes  the  foeman. 

May  Gods,  Brihaspati,  both  Asvins  shelter  from  ill  this  sacri- 
fice and  sacrificer. 

8 Foodful,  and  much-invoked,  at  this  our  calling  may  the  great 

Bull  vouchsafe  us  wide  protection. 

Lord  of  Bay  Coursers,  India,  bless  our  children  : harm  us  not, 
give  us  not  as  prey  to  others. 

9 Let  those  who  are  our  foemen  stay  afar  from  us : with  Indra 

and  with  Agm  we  will  drive  them  off. 

Vagus,  Adityas,  Rudras  have  exalted  me,  made  me  far-reach- 
ing, mighty,  thinker,  sovran  lord. 

HYMN  CXXIX.  Creation. 


Then  was  not  non-existent  nor  existent : there  was  no  realm 
ot  air,  no  sky  beyond  it. 

What  covered  in,  and  where?  and  what  gave  shelter ? Was 
water  there,  unfathomed  depth  of  water  ? 

2 Death  was  not,  then,  nor  was  there  aught  immortal : no  sign 
vas  there,  the  days  and  night’s  divider. 

That  One  Thing,  breathless,  breathed  by  its  own  nature  : apart 
frtm  it  was  nothing  whatsoever. 

•j  Darkness  there  was  : at  first  concealed  in  darkness  this  All 
was  indiscriminated  chaos. 

All  that  existed  then  was  void  and  formless : by  the  great 
powet  of  Warmth  was  born  that  Unit. 

1 Thereafter  rose  Desire  in  the  beginning,  Desire,  the  primal 
seed  and  germ  of  Spirit. 

Sages  who  searched  with  their  heart’s  thought  discovered  the 
existent’s  kinship  in  tiie  non-existent. 


- After  Creator  of  creators  Sftyana  supplies  tarn  devamstaumi,  ‘that  Cod  l 
pAisr  ’ Indra  or  S.ivitar  i»  intended. 

Th*  great  Buff : Indra,  , , . „ 

1 Then : in  the  beginning.  Non-existent : dsat : that  does  not  yet  actually 
but  which  has  in  itself  the  latent  potentiality  of  existence  There  whs 
unapparent  condition,’  says  an  Indian  Commentator,  which,  from 
:he  absence  ot  distinctness,  was  not  an  ‘ entity,’  while  from  its  being  the 
of  the  world’s  product" on,  it  was  not  a ‘ non  entity, 
i “ T,l"t  One  Thing : the  single  primordial  substance,  the  unit  out  of  winch 
Flle  umverue  «*“»  j-— i -j  r S and  46. 


i 


s was  developed.  Op.  I.  164*  6 and  46. 

L?  .-  pmf.  Wilson,  following Siyana,  translates  tdpamh  by  ‘austen- 

| "leaning  the  cntempl.tion  of  the  things  that  were  to  be  created. 

" U Snence  l,  Religion*,  pp.  207ff,  has  shown  how  mAw 
^ ^ *>y  the  Arjraj  as  the  prineiple  explaining  movement,  life,  and  tliougl  t. 


576 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK'S 


5 Transversely  was  their  severing  line  extended:  what  wa 

above  it  then,  and  what  below  it  ? 

There  were  begetters,  there  were  mighty  forces,  free  action  hen 
and  energy  up  yonder. 

6 Who  verily  knows  and  who  can  here  declare  it,  whence  it  wai 

born  and  whence  comes  this  creation  ? 

The  Gods  are  later  than  this  world’s  production.  Whoknowi 
then  whence  it  first  came  into  being  ? 

7 He,  the  first  origin  of  this  creation,  whether  be  formed  it  all  o: 

did  not  form  it, 

Whose  eye  controls  this  world  in  highest  heaven,  he  verify 
knows  it,  or  perhaps  he  knows  not. 

HYMN  CXXX.  Creation 


The  sacrifice  drawn  out  with  threads  on  every  side,  stretchec 
by  a hundred  sacred  ministers  and  one, — 

This  do  these  Fathers  weave  who  hitherward  are  come:  the) 
sit  beside  the  warp  and  cry,  Weave  forth,  weave  back. 

2 The  Man  extends  it  and  the  Man  unbinds  it : even  to  this 

vault  of  heaven  hath  he  out^pun  it. 

These  pegs  are  fastened  to  the  seat  of  worship  : they  mad< 
the  Sama-hym ns  their  weaving  shuttles. 

3 What  were  the  rule,  the  order  and  the  fcodeH  What  wen 

the  wooden  fender  and  the  butter? 

What  were  the  hymn,  the  cn ant,  the  recitation,  when  to  tm 
God  all  Deities  paid  worship  ? . 


5 Line:  a line  drawn  by  the  ancient  lthhia  to  make  a ^vwion 
upper  world  and  the  lower,  and  to  bring  duality  out  pathera 

theFathera  may  be  meant.  Free  action:  the  hi v^8.  An  io 
The  stanza  is  obscure,  and  its  connexion  with  stanza  4 is  not 
tervening  stanza  may,  perhaps,  have  been  lost  „ . Rssavs,  I P!1 

The  hymn  has  b *eu  translated  by  Cal®b™oke’  ore  0f  the  Siebcn 

33,  34  ; by  Dr.  Muir,  0.  5.  Texts , V 355,  357  ; by  the  autho  » of  ^ ^ 
zig  Litder,  and  by  Mr.  Wallis  Cosmology  of  the  w^fcney  in  th- 

of  the  many  Commentators  on  this  hymn  are  Professor  gjhennsn 

Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  vol.  xi.  p-  c'x’  * .337  *__Walln 

Philoaophische  Hyninen  au*  der  K.g-und i Atharva-vedaSamh  tft,  i 559_.563. 

See  Prof.  Max  Miilier,  History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,  1>P- 

AS  the  subject  of  the  hymn  is  creation  typified  and 
terious  primeval  aacrihce  (cp.  X.  90),  Prajftpati  the  Ct 

U>  be  th? deity.  The  R-shi  is  Yajtta  (Simrifice)  Prajftpati  h crtfttioI 

1 The  sacrifice:  su.gdtmako  yajhah ; the  s* cnfice  whw i* >”umber  Fatkeri 
— SAyana.  A hundred  and  one : meaning  an  indenmtely  larg 
SAyana  explains  pitdryfr  here  Uy glMjtjroMtor*,  the<h£*  p j^tif  **<*! 

I The  Man : the  first  Man  or  Male ; Purusha,  Adipurusha,  rny  t- 
ing  toSAyana.  ^ ^ 


-*UV.  mA  round  the  •acrific»LSi 


TEE  RIG  VEDA, 


577 


4 Closely  was  G&yatr!  conjoined  with  Agni,  and  closely  Savitar 

combined  with  Ushnih. 

Brilliant  with  Ukthas,  Soma  joined  Anushtup:  Brihaspatis 
voice  by  Bvihati  was  aided. 

5 Vid]  adhered  to  Varuna  and  Mitra : here  Trisbtup  day  by  day 

was  Indra’a  portion. 

Jagati  entered  all  the  Gods  together : so  by  this  knowledge  men 
were  raised  to  Rishjs. 


$ So  by  this  knowledge  men  were  raised  to  Rishis,  when  ancient 
sacrifice  sprang  up,  our  Fathers. 

With  the  nund’s  eye  I think  that  I behold  them  who  first  per- 
formed this  saciificial  worship. 


7 They  who  were  versed  in  ritual  and  metre,  in  hymns  and  rules, 
were  the  Seven  Godlike  Rishis 

Viewing  the  path  of  those  of  old,  the  sages  have  taken  up  the 
reins  like  chariot-drivers. 

HYMN  CXXXr.  Indr*. 

Drive  all  our  enemies  away,  0 lndra,  the  western,  mighty 
Conqueror,  and  the  eastern. 

Hero,  drive  otF  our  northern  foes  and  southern,  that  we  in  thy 
wide  shelter  may  be  joyful. 

2 What  then  ? As  men  whose  fields  are  full  of  barley  reap  the 

ripe  corn  removing  it  in  order, 

So  bring  the  food  of  those  men,  bring  it  hither,  who  went  not 
to  prepare  the  grass  for  worship. 

3 Men  come  not  with  oue  horse  at  sacred  seasons ; thus  they 

obtain  no  honour  in  assemblies. 

Sage3  desiring  herds  of  kine  and  horses  strengthen  the  mighty 
lndra  for  his  friendship.  


UlriUiant  with  Ukthas:  'gladdening  (us)  through  hymns  (ukt/un).'-- 
Muir.  Brikaspati’t  voice:  because  tije  duty  was  to  speak  as  Priest.  Accor 
hg  to  the  Aitareya.Dr4hm.ana,  Ul.  13,  Pr.ij*pati  ‘allotted  to  the  deities 
their  (different)  parts  in  the  sacrifice  and  metres  ’ r, 

' 5 flay  by  day:  was  Indra’s  portion  of  the  mid-day  (oblation).  Wilson. 

* I behold  them:  or,  according  to  Prof.  Ludwig’s  interpretation  these 
uh  the  eyos  of  mind,  I think,  beheld  them  ’ ~ 

1 ‘Tun  Sevan  Hishis  here  ere  not  the  Angirases,  but  Bharadvija,  Kasyapo, 
Atri,  Vasiehtha,  VUvSmitra,  and  Jamadagni.  Jte  knowleclge  .. 
Ritual  is  derived  frJm  the  divine  priests ; the  sages  or^shiahavefollowl 
in  sacrificing,  and  moderu  priests  are  only  imitators  of  those  wlm 

]Swt^Z..aas  sa>V*«S'’' 

Nty  prof<  Whitney,  Notes  to  Golebrooke’s  bmy  on  the  Vedas , p.  U4. 


D 


JJ ^ horse : it  seem*  to  have  been  considered  *nd. 

stable  for  a wealthy  man  to  come  to  the  sacrifice  m a one-horse  car , 
meaning../  u 


578 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK  l 

4 Ye,  Asvins,  Lords  of  Splendour,  drank  full  draughts  of  grata 

ful  Soma  juice, 

Aud  aided  India  in  his  work  with  Namuchi  of  Asura  birth 

5 As  parents  aid  a son,  both  Asvins,  Indra,  aided  thee  with  thei 

wondrous  powers  and  wisdom. 

When  tliou,  with  might,  hadst  drunk  the  draught  that  glad 
dens,  Sarasvati,  0 Maghavan,  refreshed  thee. 

6 Indra  is  strong  to  save,  rich  in  assistance  : may  he,  possessing 

all,  be  kind  and  gracious. 

May  he  disperse  our  foes  and  give  us  safety,  and  may  we  bi 
the  lords  of  hero  vigour. 

7 May  we  enjoy  his  favour,  his  the  Holy : may  we  enjoy  hn 

blesshd  loving-kmdness. 

May  this  rich  Indra,  as  our  good  Protector,  drive  off  and  keej 
ijfar  all  those  who  hate  us. 

HYMN  CXXXII.  Mitra.  Varur 

May  Dyaus  the  Lord  of  lauded  wealth,  and  Earth  stand  l 
the  man  who  offers  sacrifice, 

And  may  the  Asvins,  both  the  Gods,  strengthen  the  worshi 
per  with  bliss. 

t As  such  we  honour  you,  Mitra  and  Vayjna,  with  hasty  zea 
most  blest,  you  who  sustain  the  folk. 

So  may  we,  through  your  frienship  for  the  worshipper,  subdu 
the  fiends. 

3 And  when  we  seek  to  win  your  love  and  friendship,  we  wh 

have  precious  wealth  in  our  possession, 

Or  when  the  worshipper  augments  his  riches*  let  not  his  ties 
sures  be  shut  up. 

4 That  other,  Asura ! too  was  bom  of  Heaven  : thou  art,  0 Vs 

runa,  the  King  of  all  men. 

The  chariot’s  Lord  was  well  content,  forbearing  to  anger  Deatl 
by  sin  so  great. 


4 Hillebrandt,  7 if.,  1. 146,  and  Eggeling,  Sacred'  Bookt  of  the  Eiut.n 
135,  interpret  differently.  The  myth  referred  to  in  the  following  stwl  “] 
not  been  preserved.  See  Weber,  father  den  Rdjasdya,  pp.  95,  10-1. 

4 That  other:  Mitra.  The  chariot' n Lord:  literally,  ‘ h8a<’ °,P!'Acl“pS 
The  meaning  is  uncertain.  I find  the  rest  of  the  hymn  unintelUf?1  • ^ 
I.udwig  conjectures  that  two  brothers,  Nriraedhas  and  Sumedhas,  t 
tended  for  sovereignty,  and  that  the  adherents  of  one  had  wished  to  p: 
other  brother  to  death,  but  had  not  carried  out  their  purpose*  . 

- * — tit*  firmin',  and  the  brothers  ere  reconciled. 


THE  RIG  VEDA. 


m 


ffJfiV  1*3 1 

5 This  sin  bath  Sakapfita  here  committed.  Heroes  who  fled  to 
° their  dear  friend  he  slayeth, 

When  the  Steed  bringeth  down  your  grace  and  favour  in 
bodies  dear  and  worshipful 

(j  Your  Mother  Aditi,  ye  wise,  was  purified  with  water  even  as 
earth  is  purified  from  heaven. 

Show  love  and  kindness  here  below : wash  her  in  rays  of 
heavenly  light. 

1 Ye  Twain  have  seated  you  as  Lords  of  Wealth,  as  one  who 
mounts  a car  to  him  who  sits  upon  the  pole,  upon  the  wood. 
These  our  disheartenod  tribes  Nrimedhas  saved  from  woe, 
Sumedhas  saved  from  woe. 

HYMN  CXXXIII.  Indra. 

Sing  strength  to  Indra  that  shall  set  his  chariot  in  the  fore- 
most place. 

Giver  of  room  in  closest  fight,  slayer  of  foes  in  shock  of  war, 
be  thou  our  great  encourager.  Let  the  weak  bowstrings 
break  upon  the  bows  of  feeble  enemies. 

2 Thou  didst  destroy  the  Dragon  : thou  sentest  the  rivers  down 

to  earth. 

Foeless,  0 Indra,  wast  thou  born.  Thou  tendest  well  each 
choicest  thing.  Therefore  we  draw  us  close  to  thee.  Let 
the  weak  bowstrings,  etc. 

3 Destroyed  be  all  malignities  and  all  our  enemy’s  designs. 

Thy  bolt  thou  castest  at  the  foe,  0 Indra,  who  would  smite  us 
dead : thy  liberal  bounty  gives  us  wealth, 
jt  The  robber  people  round  about,  Indra,  who  watch  and  aim  at 
' us,— 

Trample  them  down  beneath  thy  foot ; a conquering  scatterer 
art  thou. 

Whoso  assails  us,  Indra,  be  the  man  a stranger  or  akin, 
king  down,  thyself,  his  strength  although  it  be  as  vast  as  are 
the  heavens. 

Close  to  thy  friendship  do  we  cliug,  0 Indra,  and  depend  on 
thee.  * 

Lead  us  beyond  all  pain  and  grief  along  the  path  of  holy  Law. 

I Tke  Steed : the  Sun.— Ludwig.  Tour  grace : Mitra’s  and  Yanina’s. 

Mother  Aditi:  p^rbapa  the  mother  of  the  two  brothers  is  intended.- 

%J***mk  bowitrirun  • IiTZm*  « -**1  **• 


580  TBE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  : 

7 Do  thou  bestow  upon  us  her,  0 Indra,  who  yields  according  t 
the  singer’s  longing, 

That  the  great  Cow  may,  with  exhaustless  udder,  pouring 
thousand  streams,  give  milk  to  feed  us. 

HYMN  CXXXIV.  Indr, 

As,  like  the  Morning,  thou  hast  filled,  0 Indra,  both  the  eartl 
and  heaven, 

So  as  the  Mighty  One.  great  King  of  all  the  mighty  world  o 
men,  the  Goddess  Mother  brought  thee  forth,  the  Bleask 
Mother  gave  thee  life. 

2 Relax  that  mortal’s  stubborn  strength  whose  heart  is  bent  oi 

wickedness. 

Trample  him  down  beneath  thy  feet  who  watches  for  and  ainj 
at  us.  The  Goddess  Mother  brought  thee  forth,  etc. 

3 Shake  down,  0 Slayer  of  the  foe,  those  great  all-splendid  energiei 
With  all  thy  powers,  0 Sakra,  all  thiue  helps,  0 Indra,  ahak 

them  down ; 1 

4 As  thou,  0 Satakratu,  thou,  0 Indra,  shakest  all  things  dov 
As  wealth  for  him  who  sheds  the  juice,  with  thine  assiatan 

thousandfold. 

5 Around,  on  every  side  like  drops  of  sweatflet  lightning-flash 

fall. 

Let  all  malevolence  pass  away  from  us  like  threads  of  Dur 
grass. 

6 Thou  bearest  in  thine  hand  a lance  like  a long  hook,  gre 

Counsellor  ! 

As  with  his  foremost  foot  a goat,  draw  down  the  branch, 
Maghavan. 

7 Never,  0 Gods,  do  we  offend,  nor  are  we  ever  obstinate : i 

walk  as  holy  texts  command. 

Closely  we  clasp  and  cling  to  you,  cling  to  your  sides,  bene' 
your  arms. 


7 The  great  Caw : probably  the  Earth. 

1 Tkt  Qoddest  Mother : Aditi,  The  retrain  is  repeated  in  all  the  »tw 
except  the  \a»t. 

8 Bnergiet : influence*  in  the  shape  of  rain  and  sunlight 
4 §atakratu ; or,  Lord  of  Hundred  Powers. 

8  D&rtd  grate : Paniouro  Daotylon ; a species  of  bent  grass  whose  fils® 
stretch  horizontally  away  from  the  stem. 


HYMN  CXXXV.  Tama. 

In  the  Tree  clothed  with  goodly  leaves  where  Yama  drinketh 
with  the  Gods, 

The  Father,  Master  of  the  house,  tendeth  with  love  our  an- 
cient Sires. 

I looked  reluctantly  on  him  who  cherishes  those  men  of  old, 

On  him  who  treads  that  evil  path,  and  then  I yearned  for 
this  again. 

Thou  mountest,  though  thou  dost  not  see,  0 Child,  the  new 
and  wheel-less  car 

Which  thou  hast  fashioned  mentally,  one-poled  but  turning 
every  way* 

The  car  which  thou  hast  made  to  roll  hitherward  from  the 
Sages,  Child  ! 

This  hath  the  Saman  followed  close,  hence,  laid  together  on  a ship. 

Who  was  the  father  of  the  child  ? Who  made  the  chariot  roll 
away? 

Who  will  this  day  declare  to  us  how  the  funereal  gift  was  made  1 

When  the  funereal  gift  was  placed,  straightway  the  point  of 
flame  appeared. 

A depth  extended  in  the  front : a passage  out  was  made  behind 

Here  is  the  seat  where  Yama  dwells,  that  which  is  called  the 
Home  of  Gods : 

Here  minstrels  blow  the  flute  for  him : here  he  is  glorified 
with  songs. 


The  Tree : where  the  spirits  of  the  pious  dead  rest  after  their  labours. 
i Father:  Yama. 

' The  spirit  of  the  dead  child  speaks.  1 yearned  for  this : to  return  to 
> world  of  life. 

i Yama  speaks.  Fashioned  mentally : figuratively  prepared  by  being  burnt 
the  funeral  pile. 

)Ship:  meaning,  apparently,  the  funeral  pile.  The  funereal  gift:  the 
a?ing  of  anudiyi  is  uncertain  ‘ Restitution/— Wilson.  ‘Surrender*  or 
ilivery/  according  to  Prof.  Zimmer.  Stansas  5 — 7 are  spoken  by  the  poet. 

5 4 depth : the  meaning  is  obscure.  Postage  out : probably  for  the  removal 
the  ashes. 

The  subject  of  the  hymn  appears  to  be  the  funeral  ceremony  of  a boy 
*2*'*«.  said  by  some  to  be  the  name  of  a man).  According  to  the  legend 
**  by  S&yapa  a youth  named  Nachiketaa  was  sent  by  his  father  to  the 
of  Yama  who  treated  him  kindly  and  allowed  ,him  to  return  to  this 
j • 'The  hymn  is  made  throughout  applicable  to  Aditya  as  well  as  to 
i if  possible,  a still  greater  degree  of  obscurity.  It  seems  to  have 
fotK  o *****  of  the  discussion  in  the  Taittirfya  BrAhmana  (III.  12.  8)  and 
diii  * Upanishad.  respecting  what  becomes  of  the  soul  after  death,  m 
between  Nachiketat  and  Yama.’-Wilaon, 


m THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOR  jj 

HYMN  CXXXVI.  Kesind 

Hb  with  tbe  long  loose  looks  supports  Agni,  and  moisture 
heaven,  and  earth  : 

He  is  all  sky  to  look  upon  : he  with  long  hair  is  called  thii 
light. 

2 The  Munis,  girdled  with  the  wind,  wear  garments  soiled  o 

yellow  hue. 

They,  following  the  wind's  swift  course  go  where  the  Gods 
have  gone  before. 

3 Transported  with  our  Munihood  we  have  pressed  on  into  th< 

winds : 

You  therefore,  mortal  men,  behold  our  natural  bodies  an»] 
no  more. 

4 The  Muni,  made  associate  in  the  holy  work  of  every  God, 
Looking  upon  all  varied  forms  flies  through  the  region  of  the  ail 

5 The  Steed  of  Vata,  Yayu’s  friend,  the  Muni,  by  the  Godi 

impelled, 

In  both  the  oceans  hath  his  home,  in  eastern  and  in  western  sea 

6 Treading  the  path  of  sylvan  beasts,  Gandharvas,  and  Ap 

sarases, 

He  with  long  locks,  who  knows  the  wish,  is  a sweet  moa 
delightful  friend.  ^ 

7 Vayu  hath  churned  for  him  : for  him  he  poundeth  thin^ 

most  hard  to  bend, 

When  he  with  loOg  loose  locks  hath  drunk,  with  Rudra,  wat( 
from  the  cup. 


The  Resins,  Iceflnah , wearers  of  long  loose  hair,  are  Agni,  V&yu,  and  Sfirj 
Each  stanza  has  for  its  Rishi  one  of  the  seven  sons  of  VAtarasana.  See  lnct< 

°£?/^n with  the  long  loote  loch : probably  the  ascetic,  the  Mum  or  Yoj 
According  to  S4yana,  the  radiant  Sun.  Moisture : visham,  usually  m 
‘poison’  is  so  explained  in  this  place.  , ... 

*2  Munis:  ascetics  inspired  or  in  a state  of  ecstasy.  Girdled  vnth  the 
exposed  without  girdles  to  the  wind.  According  to  Sftyana,  sons  oi 
rasana,  or  Wiud-Girdled.  t j 

5 In  both  the  oceans : everywhere  in  the  firmament  from  its  eastern 

Wt^Tbe  hymn^hows  the  conception  that  by  a life  of  sanctity 
attain  to  the  fellowship  of  the  deities  of  the  atr  the  V»yns,  th.  ,( 

Apsarasas,  and  the  Gandharvas  ; and,  furnished  like  them  with  won 
powers,  can  travel  along  with  them  on  their  course  ••  •I^ti^Trf  b fe  austa 
the  long-haired,  that  is  to  say,  the  Mum,  who  during  the  tame  of  "Lb.  •> 
tiea  doe#  not  akave  his  hair,  upholda  fire,  moisture,  heaven,  an^  Iy  w 
resembles  the  World  of  light,  ideas  whiab  the  later  htorature  »1 ^rgj  ^ 
tains.’— Von  Roth,  quoted  by  Dr.  Muir,  0.  S.  Tcxti,  IV.  310,  the  by 

&nd  translated  on  nase  318.  _ 


0 138.] 


THE  MOVED  A,  583 

HYMN  CXXXVII.  VisvedevM. 

Yb  Gods,  raise  up  once  more  the  man  whom  y«  have  humbled 
and  brought  low. 

0 Gods,  restore  to  life  again  the'  man  who  hath  committed  sin. 
Two  several  winds  are  blowing  here,  from  Sindhu/  fioui  a 

distant  land. 

May  one  breathe  energy  to  thee,  the  other  blow  disease  away. 
Hither,  0 Wind,  blow  healing  balm,  blow  all  disease  away, 
thou  Wind ; 

For  thou  who  hast  all  medicine  comest  as  envoy  of  the  Gods. 

1 am  come  nigh  to  thee  with  balms  to  give  thee  real  and  keep 
thee  safe. 

Ibringthee  blessed  strength,  l drive  thy  weakening  malady  away. 
Here  let  the  Gods  deliver  him,  the  Maruts’  band  deliver  him  . 
AH  things  that  be  deliver  him  that  he  be  freed  from  his  disease. 
The  Waters  have  their  healing  power,  the  Waters  drive  disease 
away. 

The  Waters  have  a balm  for  all:  let  them  make  medicine  for  thee. 
The  tongue  that  leads  the  voice  precedes.  Then  with  our  ten- 
fold branching  hands, 

With  these  two  chasers  of  disease  we  stroke  thee  with  a gentle 
touch, 

HYMN  CXXXVIII.  Judra. 

Allied  with  thee  in  friendship,  Indra,  these  thy  piiests,  re- 
membering Holy  Law,  rent  Vritra  limb  from  limb, 

When  they  bestowed  the  Dawns  aud  let  the  waters  flow,  and 
wheu  thou  didst  chastise  dragous  at  Kntsa’s  call. 

Thou  seuteat  forth  productive  powers,  clavest  the  hills,  thou 
dravest  forth  the  kiue,  thou  d rankest  pleasant  meath. 

Thou  gavest  increase  through  this  Tree’s  surpassing  might. 
The  Sun  shone  by  the  hymn  that  sprang  from  Holy  Law. 

^ach  stanza  ia  ascribed  to  one  of  the  seven  great  Rishis.  See  Index  of 
mas.  The  hymn  ia  a charm  to  restore  a sick  man  to  health.  Cf.  Hymns  of 
Atkarva-veda,  IV.  13. 

WAo  hath  committed  tin:  aicknesa  and  death  being  regaided  as  the  conse- 
eQce  of  Bin. 

2 Sindhu:  or,  ooean. 

1 The  Wind  speaka.  Weakening  malady : yakshna  may  he  sickness  in  gene- 
i°r  the  name  of  a large  class  of  diseases,  probably  of  a consumptive  nature. 
. The  stanza  ia  importaut  as  showing  that  the  Indians  employed  touches 
hyiog.on  of  hands  to  relieve  suffering  or  to  restore  health.  Cp.  X.  60.  12. 

[Tty  prieifc . the  Angiraaes.  But  see  Vedic  Hymn s,  I.  p.  44.  Didst 

2 this  clause  is  very  difficult.  I adopt  Prof.  GrassmamTs  interpretation. 
Aii  Tret's  surpassing  miakt : the  power  of  the  juice  of  the  Soma  plaut. 


5&4 


THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  £ 


3 In  the  mid-way  of  heaven  the  Sun  unyoked  his  oar : the  Arya 
found  a match  to  meet  his  Disa  foe. 

Ay.^oeiate  with  RijiBvan  Indra  overthrew  the  solid  forts  of 
Piprii,  conjuring  Asura.  • 


4 He  boldly  cast  down  forts  which  none  had  e’er  assailed:  un 

weaned  ho  destroyed  the  godless  treasure-stores. 

Like  Sun  and  Moon  he  took  the  stronghold’s  wealth  away,  and 
praised  in  song,  demolished  foes  with  fhshing  dart. 

5 Aimed  witli  resistless  weopons,  with  vast  power  to  cleave,  the 

Vritra-slayer  whets  Ins  darts  and  deals  forth  wounds. 
Blight  Ushas  was  afraid  of  Indra’s  slaughtering  bolt  : she  weni 
upon  her  wav  and  left  her  chariot  there. 

6 These  are  thy  famous  exploits,  only  thine,  when  thou  alone 

hast  left  the  other  reft  of  sacrifice. 

Thou  in  the  heavens  hast  set  the  ordering  of  the  Moons  : the 
Father  bears  the  feliv  portioned  out  by  tbee. 

HYMN  CXXXIX.  Sami 

Savitab,  golden-haired,  hath  lifted  eastward,  bright  with  the 
sunbeams,  his  eternal  lustre; 

He  in  whose  energy  wise  Pushau  marchos,  surveying  all  exist 
ence  like  a herdsman. 

2 Beholding  men  he  sits  amid  the  heavens,  filling  the  two  world 

halves  and  air’s  wide  region. 

He  looks  upon  the  rich  far-spreading  pastures  between  th 
eastern  and  the  western  limit. 

3 He,  root  of  wealth,  the  gatherer-up  of  treasures,  looks  witl 

his  might  on  every  form  and  figure. 

Savitar,  like  a God  whose  Law  is  constant,  stands  in  theb&tti 
for  the  spoil  like  India. 

4 Waters  from  sacnfico  came  to  the  Gandharva  Visv&vasu, 

Soma,  when  they  s-»w  him. 

Indra,  approaching  quickly,  marked  their  going,  and  looka 
around  upon  the  Sun’s  enclosures.  _ 

3 Unyoled  his  car : the  alluri  »n  is  perhaps,  u>  an  eclipse,  or  a detent 
of  th«  Sun  to  euaMn  the  Aryan  < to  complete  the  overthrow  of  their  enem 
Rijuvan:  & pious  worshipper  befriended  by  Indra.  Pipt'u:  a demon 
drought.  See  Vol.  I.,  Index.  _ v **  * 

5 Bright  Uskas  wan  afraid:  see  II.  15.  6,  IV.  30.  8 — 11,  and  X.  73.  • # 

6 The  other:  thy  foe,  the  demon  or  RAksh-iea.  The  Father : *7  j 
Heaven.  The  felly  ’portioned  out  by  thee : the  course  of  the  Moon 

the  asterisms,  which  thou  hast  art  anged. 


2 Pasture* : there  is  no  substantive  in  the  text.  Sfcyan*  supplies  * quW>tel 
of  space  Ludwig  * ladles  and  Grassmann  ‘ pastures.’  rtnmAia* 

4 Waters:  used  in  the  preparation  of  the  Soma  juice. 
regarded  as  the  custodian  of  the  celestial  Soma*  Tht  * endow 

*1—  * — WtluAn 


TJf.V  140  J 


rzri?  RIG  VEDA. 


585 


5 This  son^r  Visvavasu  ahull  sing  us,  meter  of  air’s  mid-realm, 

celestial  Gandharva, 

That  we  may  know  aright  both  truth  and  falsehood  : may  he 
inspire  our  thoughts  and  help  our  piaises. 

6 In  the  floods’  track  he  found  the  booty-seeker:  the  rocky 

cow-pen’s  doors  he  threw  wide  open. 

These,  the  Gandharva  told  him,  flowed  with  Amrit.  Indra 
knew  well  the  puissance  of  the  dragons. 

HYMN  CXL.  Agni. 

Agni,  life-power  and  fame  ore  thine  : thy  fires  blaze  mightily, 
thou  rich  in  wealth  of  beams  ! 

Sage,  passing  bright,  thou  givest  to  the  worshipper,  with 
strength,  the  food  that  merits  laud. 

2 With  brilliant,  purifying  sheen,  with  perfect  sheen  thou  liftest 

up  thyself  in  light. 

Thou,  visiting  both  thy  Mothers,  aidest  them  as  Son : thou 
joinest  close  the  earth  and  heaven. 

3 0 Jitavedas,  Son  of  Strength,  rejoice  thyself,  gracious,  in  our 

fair  hymns  and  songs. 

In  thee  are  treasured  various  forms  of  strengthening  food, 
born  nobly  and  of  wondrous  help. 

4 Agni,  spread  forth,  as  Ruler,  over  living  things:  give  wealth 

to  us,  Immortal  God. 

Thou  shinest  out  from  beauty  fair  to  look  upon  : thou  leadest 
us  to  conquering  power. 

5 To  him,  the  wise,  who  orders  sacrifice,  who  hath  great  richeB 

under  his  control, 

Thou  givest  blest  award  of  good,  and  plenteous  food,  givest 
him  wealth  that  conquers  all. 

6 The  men  have  set  before  !hem  for  their  welfare  Agni,  strong, 

visible  to  all,  the  Holy. 

Thee,  Godlike  One,  with  ears  to  hear,  most  famous,  men’s 
generations  magnify  with  praise-songs. 


5 bfwiiKwtt : the  celestial  Gandharva,  here  the  Suu-God.  Ht : Visvftvaeu. 
Pfo  booty^seeker : Indi  a who  sought  to  win  the  waters.  Of  the  dragon # * the 
^pent-demons  who  obstructed  die  floods  of  heaven.  The  last  three  ptanses 
|r®  very  difficult  and  obscure.  See  Hillebrandt,  V.  M.t  I.  pp.  436,  487,  and 
Lu(bdR,  Ueberdie  neweten  A,  * #.  w.,  p.  101. 


Thy  Mother t : Heaven  and  Earth.  Join  ext  clote : or,  fillest  full. 

J To  him : to  the  inetitutor  of  the  sacrifice. 

the  exposition  of  the  hymn  in  tapatha  BrdhtM ija,  VII,  8, 1,  -34 


m 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK  X 


HYMN  CXLI.  ViBvedevas 

Turn  hither,  Agni,  speak  to  us : come  to  us  with  a gracious 
mind.  # 

Enrich  us,  Master  of  the  house  : thou  art  the  Giver  of  our 
wealth. 

3  Let  Aryaman  vouchsafe  us  wealth,  and  Bhaga,  and  Brihaspati, 
Let  the  Gods  give  their  gifts,  and  let  Sunrita,  Goddess,  grant 
us  wealth. 

3 We  call  King  Soma  to  our  aid,  and  Agni  with  our  songs  and 

hymns, 

Adityas,  Vishnu,  Surya,  and  the  Brahman  Priest  Brihaspati. 

4 Indra,  Vayu,  Brihaspati,  Gods  swift  to  listen,  we  invoke, 

That  in  the  synod  all  the  folk  may  be  benevolent  to  us. 

5 Urge  Aryaman  to  send  us  gifts,  and  Indra,  and  Brihaspati, 
Vata,  Vishnu,  Sarasvati  and  the  Strong  Courser  Savitar. 

6 Do  thou,  0 Agni,  with  thy  fires  strengthen  our  prayer  and 

sacrifice  : 

Urge  givers  to  bestow  their  wealth  to  aid  our  service  of  the 
Gods. 

HYMN  CXLI  I.  Agm 

With  thee,  0 Agni,  was  this  singer  of  th|  laud  : he  hath  no! 

other  kinship,  O thou  Son  of  Strength. 

Thou  givest  blessed  shelter  with  a triple  guard.  Keep  the 
destructive  lightning  far  away  from  us. 

2 Thy  birth  who  seekest  food  is  in  the  falling  flood,  Agni;  ai 

Comrade  thou  win  nest  all  living  things. 

Our  coursers  and  our  songs  shall  be  victorious  : they  of  them 
selves  advance  like  one  who  guards  the  herd. 

3 And  thou,  0 Agni,  thou  of  Godlike  nature,  sparest  the  stones, 

while  eating  up  the  brushwood. 

Then  are  thy  tracks  like  deserts  in  the  corn-lands.  Let  us  not 
stir  to  wrath  thy  mighty  arrow. 

4 O’er  hills,  through  vales  devouring  as  thou  goest,,  thou  partes* 

like  an  army  fain  for  booty. 

As  when  a barber  shaves  a beard,  thou  shavest  earth  when 
the  wind  blows  on  thy  flame  and  fans  it. 

$ Apparent  are  his  lines  as  he  approaches : the  course  is  singly 
hut  the  cars  are  many, 


2 S&nritA  : Pleasantness  ; Gladness,  personified.  Of.  I.  40.  3. 

3 Sparest  the  stones : see(Pischel,  Veditche 8tudien,  I,  p.  180.  Cp.  Ill-  ^ \ 


VN  143.] 


THE  RIO  FED  A. 


587 


When,  Agni,  thou,  making  thine  arms  resplendent,  advancest 
o’er  the  land  spread  out  beneath  thee. 

How  let  thy  strength,  thy  burning  flames  fly  upward,  thine 
energies,  0 Agni,  as  thou  toilest. 

Gape  widely,  bend  thee,  waxing  in  thy  vigour:  let  all  the 
Vasus  sit  this  day  beside  thee. 

This  is  the  waters’ reservoir,  the  great  abode  of  gathered  streams. 
Take  thou  another  path  th^n  this,  and  as  thou  listest  walk 
thereon. 

On  thy  way  hitherward  and  hence  let  flowery  Durva  grass 
spring  up. 

Let  there  be  lakes  with  lotus  blooms.  These  are  the  mansions 
of  the  flood. 

HYMN  CXLIII.  Asvin*. 

Yk  made  that  Atri,  worn  with  eld,  free  as  a horse  to  win  the  goal. 
When  ye  restored  to  youth  and  strength  Kakshivan  like  a car 
renewed, 

Ye  freed  that  Atri  like  a horse,  and  brought  him  newly-born 
to  earth. 

Ye  loosed  him  like  a firm-tied  knot  which  Gods  unsoiled  by 
dust  had  bound. 

Heroes  who  showed  most  wondrous  power  to  Atri,  strive  to 
win  fair  songs ; 

For  then,  0 Heroes  of  the  sky,  your  hymn  of  praise  shall 
cease  no  more. 

This  claims  your  notice,  Bounteous  Gods  1 — oblation,  Asvins  ! 
and  our  love, 

That  ye,  0 Heroes,  in  the  fight  may  briug  us  safe  to  ample  room. 
Ye  Twain  to  Bhujyu  tossed  about  in  ocean  at  the  region’s  end, 
Nasatyas,  with  your  wiugM  steeds  caine  nigh,  and  gave  him 
strength  to  win. 

Come  with  your  joys',  most  liberal  Gods,  Lords  of  all  treasures, 
bringing  weal. 

Like  fresh  full  waters  to  a well,  so,  Heroes,  come  and  be  with  us. 

5 Stanzas  7 and  8 seem  to  belong  to  some  other  hymn,  being  a prayer  to  Agni 
»the  may  spare  the  speaker’s  houie  where,  he  says,  there  is  nothing  to  invite 
e devouring  God.  See  ffymns  of  the  Atharva-veda,  VI.  106. 

1 Atri:  see  1. 112.  7.  KahiKlvdn:  the  Scholiast  says  that  this  Rishi  was 
finally  dull  of  understanding  and  that  the  Aavins  endowed  him  with  know- 
^ Prof.  Ludwig  takes  kakshKvantam  to  be  an  adjective  agreeing  with 
: ‘ Again  ye  made  him  youthful  like  a chariot  that  is  braced  with  bauds. 
jjfttt/yw:  see  Vol.  I.,  Index. 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[BOOK  X 


M8 


HYMN  CXLIV.  Indra 

This  deathless  Indu,  like  a steed,  strong  and  of  full  vitality 
Belongs  to  thee,  the  Orderer. 

2 Here,  by  ns,  for  the  worshipper,  is  the  wise  bolt  that  workj 

with  skill. 

It  brings  the  bubbling  beverage  as  a dexterous  man  brings  th< 
effectual  strong  drink. 

3 Impetuous  Ahisuva,  a bull  among  these  cows  of  his, 

Looked  down  upon  the  restless  Hawk.  V 

4 That  the  strong-pinioned  Bird  hath  brought,  Child  of  the 

Falcon,  from  afar, 

What  moves  upon  a hundred  wheels  along  the  female  Dragon’s 
path. 

5 Which,  fair,  unrobbed,  the  Falcon  brought  thee  in  his  foot, 

the  red-hued  dwelling  of  the  juice  ; 

Through  this  came  vital  power  which  lengthens  out  our  days, 
and  kinship  through  its  help  awoke. 

6 So  Indra  is  by  Indu’s  power:  e’en  among  Gods  will  it  repel 

great  treachery. 

Wisdom,  Most  Sapient  One,  brings  force  that  lengthens  life. 
May  wisdom  bring  the  juice  to  us. 

HYMN  CXLV.  4 SapatnlbAdhanamj 

From  out  the  earth  I dig  this  plant,  an  herb  of  most  effectua’ 
power, 

Wherewith  one  quells  the  rival  wife  and  gains  the  husban 
for  oneself. 


1 Indu : Soma.  The  Orderer  ; disposer  and  arranger  of  the  universe. 

2 Bolt:  the  VashatkAra,  or  sacrificial  exclamation,  is  to  the  priests  whi 
the  thunderbolt  is  to  Indra. 

3 I find  this  and  the  following  stanza  unintelligible,  Ahtfuva  in  oth< 
places  is  the  name  of  a demon  ; but  the  meaning  here  is  uncertain.  Gw* 
there  is  no  substaative  to  dud  srdsu,  1 these  his  own,’  in  the  feminine  gender 

4 What  mopes  upon  a hundred  wheels:  fatdehakran : ‘the  bestower  < 
many  boons.'— Wilson. 

5 Dwelling  of  the  juice:  the  Soma- plant,  which  the  Falcon  brought  froi 
heaven.  See  IV.  26  and  27. 

6 It : or  he  ; Indu  or  the  Soma  juice.  # . < 

Prof.  Grassmatm  places  this  hymn  in  his  Appendix  as  being  in  hie  op®* 

made  up  of  fragments.  He  consider*  Ahisuva  (stanza  3)  to  be  ‘the  arc 
KrisAnu,’  of  IV  27.  3 and  other  places,  who  guards  the  celestial  Som*,*o<J> , 
stead  of  4 cows  ’ he  understands  ‘ wives.’ 

The  hymn  is  a spell  to  rid  a jealous  wife  of  a more  favoured 
Rishi  is  IndrAnt,  the  Consort  of  Indra. 

1 Thit  plant : said  to  be  the  PAtA,  probably  identioal  with  P4|hA  1 Jr. 

H ,rn a.Tw4l fnli l 'I  a nlim V\i n fw  nlunf  nnatoaiino  MWAiia  m OTOPW"*' 


S7MN  146.] 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


2 Auspicious,  with  expanded  leaves,  sent  by  the  Gods,  victorious 

plant, 

Blow  thou  the  rival  wife  away,  and  make  my  husband  only  mine. 

3 Stronger  am  I,  0 Stronger  One,  yea,  mightier  than  the  mightier; 
And  she  who  is  my  rival  wife  is  lower  than  the  lowest  dames. 

4 Her  very  name  I utter  not : she  takes  no  pleasure  in  this  man. 
Far  into  distance  most  remote  drive  we  the  rival  wife  away. 

5 I am  the  conqueror,  and  thou,  thou  also  art  victorious : 

As  victory  attends  us  both  we  will  subdue  my  fellow-wife. 

6 I have  gained  thee  for  vanquisher,  have  grasped  thee  with  a 

stronger  spell. 

As  a cow  hastens  to  her  calf,  so  let  thy  spirit  speed  to  me, 
hasten  like  water  on  its  way. 

HYMN  CXLVI.  Aranyftnt. 

Goddess  of  wild  and  forest  who  seemest  to  vanish  from  the  sight. 
How  is  it  that  thou  seekest  not  the  village?  Art  thou  uot  afraid? 

2 What  time  the  grasshopper  replies  and  swells  the  shrill  cicala’s 

voice, 

Seeming  to  sound  with  tinkling  bells,  the  Lady  of  the  Wood  exults , 

3 And,  yonder,  cattle  seem  to  graze,  what  seems  a dwelling-place 

appears: 

Or  else  at  eve  the  Lady  of  the  Forest  seems  to  free  the  wains. 

4 Here  one  is  calling  to  his  cow,  another  there  hath  felled  a tree  : 
At  eve  the  dweller  in  the  wood  fancies  that  somebody  hath 

screamed. 

5 The  Goddess  never  slays,  unless  some  murderous  enemy  ap- 

proach. 

Maneatsof  savoury  fruit  and  then  takes,  even  us  he  wills,  his  rest. 
® Thy  spirit ; the  husband'd. 


The  deity,  Aranyftnt,  is  the  tutelary  Goddess  of  the  forest  and  wilderness. 

. Oftotohopper..,.., cicala ; the  chichchikd  is  said  to  be  a little  creature  that 
chichi:  and  the  vrithiravd  is  said  to  be  a sort  of  cricket.  Others  take 
wm  to  be  birds  of  some  unascertained  kind. 

ZCuttlc  teem  to  grate : deer  feeding  in  the  glades.  What  teems  a dwelling 
***:  4 natural  bower  of  branches  and  creepers, 

®°nndi  are  heard  as  of  a cowmau  calling  bis  cattle,  or  of  a woodman  at 
| JrV  We  must  imagine  the  thousund  strange  sounds  and  delusions  which 
tJ®ncolnpsss  the  solitary  listener  of  an  evening  in  the  darkening  forest.’— 
5 fogozin,  Vedio  India  (Story  of  the  Nations),  p.  272. 

be  tf qa’0*11  enmy **  text  has  only  anydfr.  ‘ another,’  by  which,  accord- 

K to  aftyana,  a tiger  or  robber  is  meant.  Prof.  Ludwig  suggests  that  the 
should  be  kanyah,  1 one  who  is  destined  to  be  killed.’  The  hymn  has 
Muir,  0.  8 , Texts,  V.  p.  423  ; and  by  the  authors  >f 


590 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


l BOOK  X 


6 Now  have  I praised  the  Forest  Queen,  sweet-scented,  redolenl 
of  balm, 

The  Mother  of  all  sylvan  things,  who  tills  not  but  hath  store* 
of  food. 

HYMN  CXLVII.  Indra 


I  trust  in  thy  first  wrathful  deed,  0 Indra,  when  thou  slewes 
Vritra  aud  didst  work  to  profit  man  ; 

What  time  the  two  world-halves  fell  short  of  thee  in  might 
and  the  earth  trembled  at  thy  force,  0 Thunder-armed. 

2 Thou  with  thy  magic  powers  didst  rend  the  conjurer  Vritrs 

0 Blameless  One,  with  heart  that  longed  for  fame. 

Heroes  elect  thee  when  they  battle  for  the  prey,  thee  in  al 
sacrifices  worthy  of  renown. 

3 God  Much-invoked,  take  pleasure  in  these  princes  here,  wh( 

thine  exalters,  Maghavati,  have  come  to  wealth. 

In  synods,  when  the  rite  succeeds,  they  hymn  the  Strong  fc 
sons  and  progeny  and  riches  undisturbed. 

4 That  man  shall  find  delight  in  well-protected  wealth  who* 

care  provides  for  him  the  quick-sought  joyous  draught. 
Bringing  oblations,  strengthened,  Maghavan,  by  thee,  he  swif 
ly  wins  the  spoil  with  heroes  in  the  fight. 

5 Now  for  our  band,  0 Maghavan,  when  jauded,  make  amplej 

room  with  might,  and  grant  us  riches. 

Magician  thou,  our  Varuna  and  Mitra,  deal  food  to  us,  0 
Wondrous,  as  Dispenser. 

HYMN  CXLVIII.  lndr* 


2 


3 


When  we  have  pressed  the  juice  we  laud  thee,  Indra,  and 
when,  Most  Valorous  ! we  have  won  the  booty. 

Bring  us  prosperity,  as  each  desires  it : under  thine  own  pro- 
tection may  we  conquer. 

Sublime  from  birth,  mayst  thou  0 Indra,  Hero,  with  Sfirya 


overcome  the  Dasa  races.  . 

As  by  a fountain’s  side,  we  bring  the  Soma  that  lay  concealed, 
close-hidden  in  the  waters. 

Answer  the  votary’s  hymns,  for  these  thou  knowest,  craving 
the  Rishis’  prayer,  thyself  a Singer.  j 

May  we  be  they  who  take  delight  in  Somas  : these  witn  s 
food  for  thee,  0 Chariot-rider. 


3 Princes : the  SQria,  the  wealthy  insti tutors  of  the  sacrifice.,  The  Stion$ 
thee,  the  mighty  Indra. 

3 These  with  sweet  food : * these  (praises  are  offered)  with  sacrificial  viandf 
— Wilson.  _ 


HYMN  149.]  THE  RIG  VEDA.  m 

4 These  holy  prayers,  0 Indra,  have  I sung  thee  : grant  to  the 

men  the  strength  of  men,  thou  Hero. 

Be  of  one  mind  with  those  in  whom  thou  joyest : keep  thou* 
the  singers  safe  and  their  companions. 

5 Listen  to  Prithi  s call,  heroic  Indra,  and  be  thou  lauded  by 

the  hymns  of  V enya, 

Him  who  hath  sung  thee  to  thine  oil-rich  dwelling,  whose  rob 
ling  songs  have  sped  thee  like  a torrent. 

HYMN  CXLIX.  Savitar. 

Savitar  fixed  the  earth  with  bands  to  bind  it,  and  made  heaven 
stedfast  where  no  prop  supported. 

Savitar  milked,  as  'twere  a restless  courser,  air,  sea  bound  fast 
to  what  no  foot  had  trodden. 

2 Well  knoweth  Savitar,  0 Child  of  Waters,  where  ocean,  firmly 
, fixt,  overflowed  its  limit. 

Thence  sprang  the  world,  from  that  uprose  the  region  : thence 
heaven  spread  out  and  the  wide  earth  expanded. 

3 Then,  with  a full  crowd  of  Immortal  Beings,  this  other  realm 

came  later,  high  and  holy. 

First,  verily,  Savitar’s  strong-pinioned  Eagle  was  born : and 
he  obeys  his  law  for  ever. 

As  warriors  to  their  steeds,  kine  to  their  village,  as  fond  milk- 
giving  cows  approach  their  youngling, 

As  man  to  wife,  let  Savitar  come  downward  to  us,  heaven's 
bearer,  Loid  of  every  blessing. 

Like  the  Angirasa  Hiranyastilpa,  I call  thee,  Savitar,  to  this 
achievement  : 

So  worshipping  and  lauding  thee  for  favour  I watch  for  thee 
as  for  the  stalk  of  Soma. 


Companion » : or,  dependent®. 

PrithVt  call : the  invocation  of  Prithu,  the  Risbi  of  the  hymn,  according 
toyaoa.  Prof.  Ludwig  suggests  that  Prithu’s  wife  is  intended.  Venya: 
^1,  son  of  Vena. 

To  what  no  foot  had  trodden . at&rte : * to  the  indestructible  (ether).’ — 
l>on, 

Btyk  • identified  by  SAyanaVith  TArkshya,  brother  of  Garuda,  who  brought 
soma  from  the  Moon  at  Savitar’s  command. 

A'lgiroia : a descendant  of  the  Angirases.  Achievement:  vSje:  food, 
3[(ling  to  SAyaua,  i.  e.  oblation.  Lauding ; drehan : or,  I,  Arehan,  honour- 

than  al—  * 


59a 


TUB  HYMNS  OP 


[BOOK  J 


HYMN  Cl.  Agn 

Thou,  bearer  of  oblations,  though  kindled,  art  kindled  for  th 
Gods. 

With  the  Adityas,  Rudras,  Vasus,  come  to  us:  to  show  us  f 
vour  come  to  us. 

2 Come  hither  and  accept  with  joy  this  sacrifice  and  hymn  of  our 

0 kindled  God,  we  mortals  are  invoking  thee,  calling  oil  the 
to  show  us  grace. 

3 I laud  thee  Jatavedas,  thee  Lord  of  all  blessings,  with  my  son] 
Agni,  bring  hitherward  the  Gods  whose  Laws  we  love,  wh<>t 

Laws  we  love,  to  show  ua  grace. 

4 Agni  the  God  was  made  the  great  High-Priest  of  Gods,  Rishi 

have  kindlod  Agni,  men  of  mortal  mould. 

Agni  I invoeate  for  winning  ample  wealth,  kindly  disposed  ft 
winning  wealth. 

5 Atri  and  Bharadv&ja  and  Gavishthira,  Kanva  and  Trasadaayi 

in  our  fight  he  helped. 

On  Agni  calls  Vasishtha,  even  the  household  priest,  the  hous 
hold  priest  to  win  his  grace. 

HYMN  CLI.  Fait 

By  Faith  is  Agni  kindled,  through  Faith  ^ oblation  offered  u 
We  celebrate  with  praises  Faith  upon  the  height  of  happmes 

2 Bless  thou  the  man  who  gives,  0 Faith ; Faith,  bless  the  mi 

who  fain  would  give. 

Bless  thou  the  liberal  worshippers  : bless  thou  the  word  th 
I have  said. 

3 Even  as  the  Deities  maintained  Fuith  in  the  mighty  Asuras 
So  make  this  uttered  wish  of  mine  true  for  the  liberal  Wl 

shippers. 

4 Guarded  by  V&yu,  Gods  and  men  who  sacrifice  draw  near 

Faith. 

Man  winneth  Faith  by  yearnings  of  the  heart,  and  opulen 
by  Faith.  _ 

1 Though  kindled : although  thou  art  already  burning  fresh  fire  is  added 
thee.  To  ehow  ut  favour : mrdik/tya ; this  play  upon  the  Eishi's  name 

is  repeated  in  each  stansa. 

The  Risbi  is  Sraddhft  (Faith)  of  the  family  of  K&ma  (Love).  ( , 

1 Upon  the  height  of  happinees  : ‘(who  la  seated)  ou  Bbaga*  ft 
Wilson.  . 

3 A*ura»:  the  primeval  Aryan  Gods,  Dyaua,  Varuna,  and  some  ot,I\  ' 
were  venerated  by  Indra  and  other  Indo-  Aryan  deities  of  a later  areaw 

4 Guarded  by  Vdyu : the  meaning  is  nob  clear. 


0\LV  154.] 


THE  RIG V FA) A. 


5D3 


5 Faith  in  the  early  morning.  Faith  at  noond  »y  will  we  invocate, 
Faith  at  the  setting  of  the  Sim.  0 Faith,  endow  us  with  belief. 

HYMN  CL  1 1.  Indra. 

A mighty  Governor  art  thou,  Wondrous,  Destroyer  of  the  foe, 
Whose  frien  l is  never  done  to  death,  and  nev  er,  never  overcome. 

2 Lord  of  the  dan,  who  brings  us  bliss,  Strong,  Warrior,  Slayer 

of  the  fiend, 

May  Indra,  Soma-drinker,  go  before  us,  Bull  who  gives  uspeace. 

3 Drive  Bikshas.is  and  foes  away,  break  l lmu  in  pieces  Vritra’s  jaws: 
0 Vritra-sUying  Indra,  quelf  the  foeman’s  wrath  who  threat- 
ens us. 

4 0 Indra,  beat  our  foes  away,  humble  the  men  who  challenge  ns  : 
Send  down  to  nether  darkness  him  who  serks  to  do  us  injury. 

5 Baffle  the  foeman’s  plan,  ward  off  Ins  weapon  who  would  con- 

quer H8. 

Give  shelter  from  his  furious  wrath,  and  keep  his  murdering 
dart  afar. 

HYMN  CLIIl.  Indra. 

Swaying  about,  the  Active  Ones  came  nigh  to  Indra  at  his  birth, 
And  shared  his  great  heroic  might. 

2 Based  upon  strength  and  victory  and  power,  0 Indra  is  thy  birth  ; 
Thou,  Mighty  One,  art  strong  indeed. 

Thou  art  the  Vritra-slayer,  thou,  Indra,  hast  spread  the  firma- 
ment : 

Thou  hast  with  might  upheld  the  heavens. 

Thou,  Indra,  bearest  m thine  arms  the  lightning  that  accords 
with  thee, 

Whetting  thy  thunderbolt  with  might. 

Thou,  Indra,  art  preeminent  over  all  creatures  in  thy  might : 
Thou  hast  pervaded  every  place. 

HYMN  CUV.  New  Life. 

For  some  is  Soma  purified,  some  sit  by  sacrificial  oil  : 

To  those  for  whom  the  meath  flows  forth,  even  to  those  let 
him  depart. 

Tht  Active  Ones : the  Water-Goddeases  may  be  meant.  The  Consorts  of 
according  to  SAynna. 

iAou,  Mighty  One : or,  ‘0  Bull,  thou  art  a Bull  indeed.’  ‘Thou,  0 hero, 
l»deed  a hero’.-MaX  MUller  * 

ty/Uning;  or,  prai*«-soug,  hymn.  Sltyana  explains  arkam  hereby 
91  ‘ % laudable  or  adorable  thunderbolt. 

talthhiof  this  funeral  hymn  is  Yatnl,  sister  of  Yama. 

- 0 Mo*#  him  liepart : let  the  spirit  of  the  dead  go  to  the  realm  of  the 


594 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


{BOOK 


2 Invincible  through  Fervour,  those  whom  Fervour  hath  ad 

vanned  to  heaven, 

Who  showed  great  Fervour  in  their  lives, — even  to  those  le 
him  depart. 

3 The  heroes  who  contend  in  war  and  boldly  cast  their  lives  away 
Or  who  give  guerdon  thousandfold, — even  to  those  let  bin 

depart. 

4 Yea,  the  first  followers  of  Law,  Law’s  pureandholy  strengthened 
The  Fathers,  Yama  ! Fervour-moved, — even  to  those  let  bin 

depart. 

5 Skilled  in  a thousand  ways  and  means,  the  sages  who  protec 

the  Sun,  , . 

The  Rishis,  Yama  l Fervour-moved, — even  to  those  let  hir 

depart.  _T  . 

HYMN  CLV.  Vl'™! 

Arayi,  one-eyed  limping  hag,  fly,  ever-screeching,  to  the  hill 
We  frighten  thee  away  with  these,  the  heroes  ot  Sinmbitha. 

2 Scared  from  this  place  and  that  is  she,  destroyer  of  each  gem 

fh,  sharp-homed  Brahmanaapati  and  drive  Arayi  far  away. 

3 Yon  log  that  floats  without  a man  to  guide  it  on  the  river 

SeSt’Thou  thing  with  hideous  jaws,  tnd  go  thou  far  awa 

4 When,  foul  with  secret  stain  and  spot,  ye  hastened  onward  I 

Ah  Indra’s  enemies  were  slain  ami  passed  away  like  frot 
and  foam.  — - 

to  the  Fathers  who  receive  offerings  of  Soma  juice  am)  clarM  b. 
uLth  • according  to  SAyana,  honey,  which  is  offered  to  the  ot  , 

IZZr^pas:  literally,  warmth,  heat;  religion,  fervour,  ascetic* 

* ** v' p' 

by  Prof.  Zimmer,  Altindinhe 8 Ltbtn , p.  41o. 

The  subject  or  object  of  the  hymn  ie  the 
i »l  .according  to  SAyana’.  explanation  of. oddnve;  $ tb,  bym» 

ed  with  DAnus,  DAnavas,  or  demons.  ?(nm6«tA<».  tb  A 

2 Skarp-horntd : aimed  with  piercing  rays  of and  S"1 
4 The  meaning  of  this  stanza  » eot  clear.  MarydtraUMMK  9 
J/tZh  are  difficult  word,  that  do  not  occur  agau>.  _ 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


595 


lYMN  157.] 

5 These  men  have  led  about  the  cow,  have  duly  carried  Agni 
round,  * 

And  raised  their  glory  to  the  God3.  Who  will  attack  them 
with  success  ? 

HYMN  CLYI.  Agni. 

Let  songs  of  ours  speed  Agni  forth  like  a fleet  courser  in  the  race, 
And  we  will  win  each  prize  through  him. 

2 Agni,  the  dart  whereby  we  gain  kine  for  ourselves  with  help 

from  thee, — 

That  send  us  for  the  gain  of  wealth. 

3 0 Agni,  bring  us  wealth  secure,  vast  wealth  in  horses  and  in  kine: 

| Oil  thou  the  socket,  turn  the  wheel. 

jiOAgni,  thou  hast  made  the  Sun,  Eternal  Star,  to  mount  the 

sky, 

Bestowing  light  on  living  men. 

5 Thou,  Agni,  art  the  people’s  light,  best,  dearest,  seated  in 
thy  shrine  : 

Watch  for  the  singer,  give  him  life. 

j HYMN  CLVII.  Viavedevas. 

We  will,  with  Indra  and  all  Gods  to  aid  us,  bring  these  exist- 
ing worlds  into  subjection. 

2 Our  sacrifice,  our  bodies,  and  our  offspring,  let  Indra  form  to- 

gether with  Adityas. 

3 With  the  Adityas,  with  the  band  of  Maruts,  may  Indra  be 

Protector  of  our  bodies. 

As  when  the  Gods  came,  after  they  had  slaughtered  the 
Asuras,  keeping  safe  their  Godlike  nature, 

Brought  the  Sun  hitherward  with  mighty  powers,  and  looked 
about  them  on  their  vigorous  Godhead. 


5 Then  men : the  text  had  only  inti,  ‘ these.’  According  to  SAyana,  the 
?vedevas  are  meant,  who  have  brought  back  the  stolen  cattle.  But  the 
[er*nce  is  probably  to  the  sacrifice  which  the  priests  are  performing. 


The  dart ; ‘ that  army/— Wilson. 

3 Turn  the  wheel : I adopt  the  reading  of  the  SAmaveda,  pavim,  instead  of 
J'lm-  According  to  the  text,  the  rendering  would  be  : * Balm  heaven  and 
^thePani  hence.  * 

I first  three  verses  of  this  hymn  were  recited  at  the  Asyamedha  or  Horse- 

Fmee. 

ih  uya?a  €*pl»»ns  the  second  half  of  the  stanza  differently  ‘ then  (men) 
e <* around  them  the  swift  descending  rain/ — Wilson. 


59$ 


[BOOK  } 


THE  HYMNS  OF 

HYMN  CLVItl.  SQry; 

MAYSurya  guard  us  out  of  heaven,  and  Vata  from  the  firmamenl 
And  Agni  from  terrestrial  spots. 

2 Thou  Savitar  whose  flame  deserves  hundred  libations,  be  tho 

pleased  : 

From  falling  lightning  keep  us  safe. 

3 May  Savitar  the  God,  and  may  Parvata  also  give  us  sight : 
May  the  Creator  give  us  sight. 

4 Give  sight  unto  our  eye,  give  thou  our  bodies  sight  that  the' 

may  see  : 

May  we  survey,  discern  this  world. 

5 Thus,  Surya,  may  we  look  on  thee,  on  thee  most  lovely  to  behold 
See  clearly  with  the  eyes  of  men. 

HYMN  CLIX.  Sachf  Pauloml 

Yon  Sun  hath  mounted  up,  and  this  my  happy  fate  hath 
mounted  high. 

I  knowing  this,  as  conqueror  have  won  my  husband  for  mine  own. 

2 I am  the  banner  and  the  head,  a mighty  arbitress  am  I : 

I am  victorious,  and  my  LorcT  shall  be  submissive  to  my  will. 

3 My  Sons  are  slayers  of  the  foe,  my  Daughter  is  a ruling  Queen : 
I am  victorious  : o’er  my  Lord  my  song  of^riumph  is  supreme. 

4 Oblation,  that  which  Indra  gave  and  thus  grew  glorious  and 

most  high, — 

This  have  I offered,  0 ye  Gods,  and  rid  me  of  each  rival  wife. 

5 Destroyer  of  the  rival  wife,  Sole  Spouse,  victorious,  conqueror, 
The  others’  glory  have  I seized  as  'twere  the  wealth  of  weaker 

Dames. 

6 I have  subdued  as  conqueror  these  rivals,  these  my  fellow-wives, 
That  I may  hold  imperial  sway  over  this  Hero  and  the  folk. 

HYMN  CLX.  Indra. 

Taste  this  strong  draught  enriched  with  offered  viands : with; 

all  thy  chariot  here  unyoke  thy  Coursers. 

Let  not  those  other  sacrificers  stay  thee,  Indra  : these  juice 
shed  for  thee  are  ready.  ' 

1 Out  of  heaven  : ‘ from  (foes  dwelling  in)  Leaven.’ — Wilson. 

3 The  Creator : Dh&tar. 

Sachl  Pauloml,  called  also  IndrAnl,  the  Consort  of  Indra,  is  also  the 
of  the  hymn.  ' Literally,  this  is  a song  of  exultation  by  §*chi  over  her 
wives  ; but  faehi  means  also  an  " act,”  “ exploit,”  and  this  hymn  is  metyph011: 
cally  the  praise  of  Indra’i  glorious  acts.’ — Wilson. 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


BY  MX  161] 


597 


2 Thine  is  the  juice  effused,  thine  are  the  juices  yet  to  be  pressed  : 

our  resonant  songs  invite  thee.  * 

0 Indra,  pleased  to-day  with  this  libation,  come,  thou  who 
knowest  all  and  drink  the  Soma. 

3 Whoso,  devoted  to  the  God,  effuses  Soma  for  him  with  yearn- 

ing heart  and  spirit, — 

Never  doth  Indra  give  away  his  cattle  : for  him  he  makes  the 
lovely  Soma  famous. 

j He  looks  with  loving  favour  on  the  mortal  who,  like  a vich 
man,  pours  for  him  the  Soma. 

Maghavan  in  his  bended  arm  supports  him  : lie  slays,  unasked, 
the  men  who  hate  devotion. 

5 We  call  on  thee  to  come  to  us,  desirous  of  goods  and  spoil,  of 
cattle,  and  of  horses. 

For  thy  new  love  and  favour  are  wre  present  : let  us  invoke 
thee,  Indra,  as  our  welfare. 


HYMN  CLXI.  Indra. 

Fob  life  I set  thee  free  by  this  oblation  from  the  unknown 
decline  and  from  Consumption  ; 

Or,  if  the  grasping  demon  have  possessed  him,  free  him  from 
her,  0 Indra,  thou  and  Agni. 

2 Be  his  days  ended,  be  he  now  departed,  be  he  brought  very 

near  to  death  already, 

Out  of  Destruction’s  lap  again  I bring  him,  save  him  for  life 
to  last  a hundred  autumns. 

3 With  hundred-eyed  oblation,  himdred-autumned,  bringing  a 

hundred  lives,  have  I restored  him, 

That  Indra  for  a hundred  years  may  lead  him  safe  to  the 
farther  shore  of  all  misfortune. 

* Live,  waxing  in  thy  strength,  a hundred  autumns,  live  through 
a hundred  springs,  a hundred  winters. 

Through  hundred-lived  oblation  Indra,  Agni,  Brihaspati,  Savi- 
or yield  him  for  a hundred  ! 


4  fir.  Qaedicke  [Aceusativ  im  Veda , p.  127)  translates  P&das  1—3  of  the 
[Muza  differently  : der  wird  von  ihm  erspaht,  der,  obvobl  reich,  ihm  keinen 
otaa  presat,  den  holt  der  machtige  heraus  aus  dem  Winkel  (Versteck). 

According  to  the  Index  the  subject  of  the  hymn  is  the  cure  of  the  disease 
V^jayakshma  (Consumption  or  Atrophy). 

‘eh  ^noww  : some  insidious  disease,  differing  from  ItAjayakBhma. 

lii*8  ’ Pr°L  zimm«r  suggests,  hypertrophy  and  atrophy  are  the  two 

^tended.  See  AUindisches  Leben,  p.  377.  The  grasping  demon; 
y from  grahf  to  seize  ; a female  spirit  who  seizes  men  and  kills  them. 

I * « hundred ; years,  understood. 


598  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK ; 

5 So  have  I found  and  rescued  thee : thou  haBt  returned  *it 
youth  renewed. 

Whole  in  thy  members ! I have  found  thy  sight  and  all  th 
life  for  thee. 

HYMN  CLXIV.  Dream-chart 

Avaunt,  thou  Master  of  the  mind  ! Depart,  and  vanish  far  awai 
Look  on  Destruction  far  from  hence.  The  live  man’s  mind 
manifold. 

2 A happy  boon  do  men  elect,  a mighty  blessing  they  obtain. 
Bliss  with  Vaivasvata  they  see.  The  live  man’s  mind  seek 

many  a place. 

3 If  by  address,  by  blame,  by  imprecation  we  have  committe 

sin,  awake  or  sleeping, 

All  hateful  acts  of  ours,  all  evil  doings  may  Agni  bear  away  t 
distant  places. 

4 When,  Indra,  Brahmanaspati,  our  deeds  are  wrongful  an<j 

unjust,  . 

May  provident  Angirasa  prevent  our  foes  from  troubling 

5 We  have  prevailed  this  day  and  wou  : we  are  made  free  f 

sin  and  guilt. 

Ill  thoughts,  that  visit  us  awake  or  sleeping,  seize  the  i 
we  hate,  yea,  seize  the  man  who  Kateth  us. 

HYMN  CLXV.  * Visved 

Gods,  whatsoe’er  the  Dove  came  hither  seeking,  sent  to  ui 
the  envoy  of  Destruction, 

For  that  let  us  sing  hymns  and  make  atonement.  Wei 
it  with  our  quadrupeds  and  bipeds. 

2 Auspicious  be  the  Dove  that  hath  been  sent  us,  a harm 
bird,  ye  Gods,  within  our  dwelling. 

May  Agni,  Sage,  be  pleased  with  our  oblation,  and  may 
Missile  borne  on  wings  avoid  us. 

For  Hymns  CLXII.,  CLXIII.,  and  CLXXXIV.  see  Appendix. 

1 Matter  of  the  mind : the  spirit  of  evil  dreams  is  addressed.  M 
tion : the  Goddess  Nirriti.  Manifold : * attentive  to  various  objects, 
soon  diverted  from  any  regard  to  evil  dreams.’ — Wilson. 

2 Vaivasvata : Yams,  the  son  of  VivasvAn,  who  presides  over  evil  area 
S&yan*. 

4 Angirasa : according  to  Siyana,  Varuna,  the  wise  God  who  is  espjW 
connected  with  his  worshippers  the  Angiraaes,  may  be  intended.  U.  H 
of  the  Atharva-veda,  VI.  45.  8.  — — , - *u 

1 A dove,  regarded  as  an  ill-omened  bird  and  the  messenger  of 
flown  into  the  house.  Similarly,  in  North*  Lincolnshire,  * If * 
sitting  on  a tree,  or  comes  into  the  house,  or  from  bein^f  wild  suaa  j 
comes  tame,  it  is  a sign  of  death.’ — Notes  and  Queries,  viii.  p.  ooA. 

2 Missile  borne  on  wings : the  ill-omened  bird. 


JTHS  16«.]  THE  RIO  VEDA.  m 

3 Let  not  the  Arrow  that  hath  wings  distract  us:  beside  the 
fire-place,  on  the  hearth  it  settles. 

May  it  bring  welfare  to  our  men  and  cattle:  here  let  the 
Dove,  ye  Gods,  forbear  to  harm  us. 

i The  screeching  of  the  owl  is  ineffective;  and  when  beside  the 
tire  the  Dove  hath  settled, 

To  him  who  sent  it  hither  as  an  envoy,  to  him  be  reverence 
paid,  to  Death,  to  Yama. 

1 5 Diive  forth  the  Dove,  chase  it  with  holy  verses  i rejoicing 

I bring  ye  hither  food  and  cattle, 

Barring  the  way  against  all  grief  and  trouble.  Let  the  swift 
bird  fly  forth  aud  leave  us  vigour. 

HYMN  CLXVI/  SapatnanA  sanam. 

Make  me  a bull  among  my  peers,  make  me  my  rivals’  con- 
queror : 

Make  me  the  slayer  of  my  foes,  a sovran  ruler,  lord  of  kine. 

! I am  ray  rivals’  slayer,  like  Indra  unwounded  and  unhurt, 

And  all  these  enemies  of  mine  are  vanquished  and  beneath 
my  feet. 

I Here,  verily,  I bind  you  fast,  as  the  two  bow-ends  with  the  string. 

Press  down  these  men,  0 Lord  of  Speech,  that  they  may 
humbly  speak  to  me. 

Hither  I came  as  conqueror  with  mighty  all-effecting  power, 

Aud  1 have  mastered  all  your  thought,  your  synod,  aud  your 
holy  work. 

> May  I be  highest,  having  gained  your  strength  in  war,  your 
skill  in  peace : my  feet  have  trodden  on  your  heads. 

Speak  to  me  from  beneath  my  feet,  as  frogs  from  out  the 
water  croak,  as  frogs  from  out  the  water  croak. 

HYMN  CLXYII.  Indra. 

This  pleasant  meath,  0 iudra,  is  effused  for  thee : thou  art 
the  ruling  Lord  of  beaker  and  of  juice. 

Bestow  upon  us  wealth  with  many  hero  sons  : thou,  having 
glowed  with  Fervour,  wonnest  heavenly  light. 

with  it&yamAndh,  understood 

object  is  the  Destruction  of  Rivals. 

^is  are  VievAmifcra  and  Jamadagni.  Stanzas  1—3  are  spoken  by  the 

“JK  and  4 by  Indra. 

' o /lvia9  9^ed  with  Fervour ; * performing  arduous  penance.’ — Wilson. 

4 Divine  Favour  personified. 

e prut : the  wealth  won  for  you. 


With  holy  vertet : SAyana  takes  richfL 
^ued)  by  our  hymn  (0  Gods). 


600  THE  HYMX. S'  OF  [BOOK  X. 

2 Let  us  call  S ikra  to  libations  here  effused,-  winner  of  light  who 

joveth  in  the  patent  juice. 

Mark  well  tins  sacrifice  of  ours  end  come  to  us : we  pray  to 
Maghavan  the  Vanquisher  of  hosts. 

3 By  royal  Soma’s  and  by  Varuna’s  decree,  under  Brihaspati’s 

:i nd  An utna 1 1 ’s  guard, 

Tins  day  by  thine  authority,  0 Maghavan,  Maker,  Disposer 
thou  ! have  I enjoyed  the  jars. 

' 4 I,  t >o,  urged  on,  have  had  my  portion,  in  the  howl,  and  as  first 
Prince  I drew  forth  this  my  hymn  of  praise, 

When  with  the  prize  I came  unto  the  flowing  juice,  0 Visva- 
initra,  Jamadagui,  to  your  home. 

HYMN  CLXV11I.  Vdyu. 

0 the  Wind’s  chariot,  0 its  power  and  glory  ! Crashing  it  goes: 
and  hath  a voice  of  thunder.  i 

It  makes  the  regions  red  and  touches  heaven,  and  as  itmovci 
the  dust  of  earth  is  scattered. 

2 Along  the  traces  of  the  Wind  they  hurry,  they  come  to  him  as 
dames  to  an  assembly. 

Borne  on  his  car  with  those  for  his  attendants,  the  Godspeeds 
forth,  the  universe's  Monarch.  ^ 

3.  'fr.* veiling  on  the  paths  of  air’s  mid-region,  no  singlcday  doff 

. lie  take  rest  or  slumber. 

Holy  and  earliest-born,  Friend  of  the  waters,  where  did  he 
spring  and  fiom  what  region  came  he? 

4  Germ  of  the  world,  the  Deities’  vital  spirit,  this  God  moves  evei 
as  his  will  inclines  him. 

His  voice  is  heard,  his  shape  is  ever  viewless.  Let  us  adore 
this  Wind  with  our  oblation. 

HYMN  CT.XTX.  Com 

May  the  wiml  Mow  upon  our  Cows  with  healing:  may 
eat  herbage  full  of  vigorous  juices. 

May  they  drink  waters  rich  in  life  and  fatness:  to  food  that 
moves  on  feet  he  gracious,  Rudra. 

2 Like-coloured,  varions-hued,  or  single-coloured,  whose  name* 
through  sacrifice  are  known  to  Agni, 

2 'They : the  Waters  Prof.  Max  Muller  interprets  differently.  See  to* 
translation,  Vedic  Hymns,  I.  449. 

1 Pood  that  moves  on  feet : the  wandering  milch*cow8.  But  see  Bergw'P^ 
III.  159.  ^ 


tiie  Riarr.hA. 


601 


fl\'M  V 17M 

Whom  the  Vngirases  produced  by  Fervour,— vouchsafe  to 
these,  Parjauya,  great  protection. 

3 Those  who  have  offered  to  the  Gods  their  bodies,  whose  varied 
forms  are  all  well  known  to  Soma, — 

Those  grant  us  in  our  cattle-pen,  0 Indra,  with  their  full  streams 
of  milk  and  plenteous  offspring. 

1 Prajapati,  bestowing  these  upon  me,  one  minded  with  all  Gods 

and  with  the  Fathers, 

H.ith  to  our  cow-pen  brought  auspicious  cattle  : so  may  we  own 
the  oflkpiiug  they  will  bear  us. 

HYMN  CLXX.  Surya. 

May  the  Bright  God  drink  glorious  Soma-mingled  meath, 
giving  the  sacrifice’s  lord  uninjuied  life; 

He  who,  wiud-nrged,  in  person  guards  our  offspring  well,  hath 
nourished  them  with  food  and  shines  o’er  many  a laud. 

2 Radiant,  as  high  Truth,  cherished,  best  at  winning  strength, 

Truth  based  upon  the  statute  that  supports  the  heavens, 
lie  rose,  a light,  that  kills  Vritras  and  enemies,  best  slayer 
of  the  Dasyus,  Asuras,  and  foes. 

3 This  light,  the  best  of  lights,  supreme,  all-conquering,  winner 

of  riches,  is  exalted  with  high  laud. 

All-lighting,  radiant,  mighty  as  the  Sun  to  see,  he  spreadeth 
wide  unfailing  victory  and  strength. 

4 Beaming  forth  splendour  with  thy  light,  thou  hast  attained 

heaven’s  lustrous  realm. 

By  thee  were  brought  together  all  existing  things,  possessor 
of  all  Godhead,  All-effecting  God. 

HYMN  CLXXI.  Indra. 

For  Ita’s  sake  who  pressed  the  juice,  thou,  Indra,  didst  protect 
his  car, 

And  hear  the  Soma-giver’s  call. 

|2  Thou  from  his  skin  hast  borne  the  head  of  the  swift-moving 
combatant, 

And  sought  the  Soma-pourer’s  home. 

""  " JL  — — 

4  PTajdpati hath  brought  : ' may  Prajfipati  bring/  according  to  Sftyana 

[2 '%« ,•  here  meaning  ‘body.’  Combatant:  mabhdipa:  according  to  the 
P"1  cited  by  SAyana.  Sacrifice  personified,  whose  head,  as  he  attempted  to 
BffiLi!1  human  form  from  the  Gods,  was  cut  off  by  Indra.  See  'Wilton. 


602  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  X. 

3 Venya,  that  mortal  man,  hast  thou,  for  Astrabudhna  the 

devout, 

0 Indra,  many  a time  set  free. 

4 Bring,  Indra,  to  the  east  again  that  San  who  now  is  in  the 

west, 

Even  against  the  will  of  Gods. 

HYMN  CLXXII.  Dawn 

With  all  thy  beauty  come:  the  kine  approaching  with  ful] 
udders  follow  on  thy  path. 

2 Come  with  kind  thoughts,  most  liberal,  rousing  the  warrior's 

hymn  of  praise,  with  bounteous  ones. 

3 As  noumhers  we  tie  the  thread,  aud,  liberal  with  our  bounty 

offer  sacrifice. 

4 Dawn  drives  away  her  Sister’s  gloom,  and,  through  her  ex 

cellence,  makes  her  retrace  her  path. 

HYMN  CLXXIII.  The  King 

Bk  with  us ; I have  chosen  thee : stand  stedfast  and  im- 
movable. 

Let  all  the  people  wish  for  thee  : let  not  thy  kingship  fall  away. 

2 Be  even  here;  fall  not  away  ; be  like  a mountain  unremoved. 
Stand  stedfast  here  like  Indra’s  self,  and  Hold  the  kingship  in 

thy  grasp. 

3 This  man  hath  Indra  stablished,  made  secure  by  strong  obla- 

tion’s power. 

May  Soma  speak  a benison,  and  Brahmanaspati,  on  him. 

4 Firm  is  the  sky  and  firm  the  earth,  and  stedfast  also  are  these 

hills. 

Stedfast  is  all  this  living  world,  and  stedfast  is  this  King  of  men. 

5 Stedfast,  may  Varuna  the  Kins:,  stedfast,  the  God  Brihaspati' 
Stedfast,  may  Indra,  Btedfast,  too,  may  Agui  keep  thy  sted 

fast  reign. 

3 Venya:  Baid  to  be  Prithu,  the  son  of  Vena.  See  X.  148. 5.  Attrabudhna 
the  name  of  a man  not  mentioned  elsewhere,  the  son  of  Astrabudhna*  "tt 
free : Cp.  L 24.  15. 

2 Mott  liberal : Sfirya  appears  to  be  meant.  Routing  the  loamor’i  h** 

of  praite:  jdraydn>mkhaK  : the  meaning  is  uncertain  : — • briuging  1 
sacrifice  to  completion,’  according  to  S&yana.  mo 

3 At  nonrithert : because  sacrifice  brings  the  food  that  nourishes  Uf©-  1 i 
thread:  of  sacrifice. 

4 Her  Sitter's  gloom : the  darkness  of  Night.  j 


The  subject  is  the  benediction  of  a newly*elected  king. 


THE  RIOVEDA. 


603 


IYMN  176.] 


6 On  constant  Soma  let  us  think  with  constant  sacrificial  gift. 

And  then  may  Indra  make  the  clans  bring  tribute  unto  thee 
alone. 

HYMN  CLXXIV,  The  King. 

With  offering  for  success  in  fight  whence  Indra  was  victorious. 
With  this,  0 Brahmanaspati,  let  us  attain  to  royal  sway. 

2 Subduing  those  who  rival  us,  subduing  all  malignities, 
Withstand  the  man  who  menaces,  withstand  the  man  who 

angers  us. 

3 Soma  and  Savitar  the  God  have  made  thee  a victorious  King  : 
All  elements  have  aided  thee,  to  make  thee  general  conqueror. 

4 Oblation,  that  which  Indra  gave  and  thus  grew  glorious  and 

most  high, — 

This  have  I offered,  Gods ! and  hence  now,  verily,  am  rivalless. 

5 Slajer  of  rivals,  rivalless,  victorious,  with  royal  sway, 

Over  these  beings  may  I rule,  may  I be  Sovran  of  the  folk. 

HYMN  CLXXV.  Press*,  stones. 

May  Savitar  the  God,  0 Stones,  stir  you  according  to  the 
Law : 

Be  harnessed  to  the  shafts,  and  press. 

: Stones,  drive  calamity  away,  drive  ye  away  malevolence  : 

Make  ye  the  Cows  our  medicine. 

] Of  one  accord  the  upper  Stones,  giving  the  Bull  his  bull-like 
strength, 

Look  down  with  pride  on  those  below. 

4 May  Savitar  the  God,  0 Stones,  stir  you  as  ‘Law  commands 
for  him 

Who  sacrifices,  pouring  juice. 

HYMN  CLXXVI.  Agni. 

With  hymns  of  praise  their  sons  have  told  aloud  the  Ribhus 

mighty  deeds  . ^ 

Who,  all-supporting,  have  enjoyed  the  earth  as  twere  a mo- 
ther cow. 

1 With  offering  for  success : ‘ By  the  a Mvarta  oblatioo.’-Wilson. 

< Cp.  X.  169.  4. 

1 TktkafU:  or  chariot- pofes ; here  meaning  the  guiding  arms  of  the 

* 1 %e  Corns  ,*  or,  the  rays  of  morning,  at  whoee  approach  robbers 
tolls  fly, 

^ The  Bull : Soma. 


604  THE  HYMNS  OF  [ BOOR  X 

2 Bring:  forth  the  God  with  song  divine,  bring  Jatavedas  hither 

ward, 

To  bear  our  gifts  at  once  to  heaven. 

3 He  here,  a God-devoted  Priest,  led  forward  comes  to  sncrifice. 
Like  a car  covered  for  the  road,  he,  glowing,  knows,  himself 

the  way.  i 

4 ThisAgni  rescuesfromdistre8s,as  ’twere  from  the  Immortal  Race, 
A God  yet  mightier  than  strength,  a God  who  hath  been  made 

for  life. 

HYMN  CLXXVII.  MAyAbheda. 

The  sapient  with  their  spirit  and  their  mind  behold  the  Bird! 

adorned  with  all  an  Asura’s  magic  might.  j 

Sages  observe  him  in  the  ocean’s  inmost  depth  : the  wise  disJ 
posers  seek  the  station  of  his  rays. 

2 The  flying  Bird  bears  Speech  within  his  spirit : erst  the  Gan 

dharva  in  the  womb  pronounced  it : 

And  at  the  seat  of  sacrifice  the  sages  cherish  this  radiant 
heavenly-bright  invention. 

3 I saw  the  Herdsman,  him  who  never  resteth,  approaching  anc 

departing  on  his  pathways. 

He,  clothed  in  gathered  and  diffusive  splendour,  within  tin 
worlds  continually  travels.  * 

HYMN  CLXXVIII.  Tlrkshyi 

This  very  mighty  one  whom  Gods  commission,  the  Conquero 
of  cars,  ever  triumphant, 

Swift,  fleet  to  battle,  with  uninjured  fellies,  even  Tarkshy 
for  our  weal  will  we  call  hither. 

3 Like  a car:  perhaps,  as  Prof.  Ludwig  suggests,  like  ft  chariot  which, a 

the  driver  is  concealed  from  sight  by  the  canopy,  Beema  to  find  its  way  with 
out  a guide.  . 

4 As  'twere  from  the  Immortal  Race : ‘ as  (well  as)  from  peril  caused  by  to 
immortals  Wilson.  Stanzas  2—4  are  recited  at  the  Agni-pranayana,  to 
ceremony  of  cauying  the  sacrificial  fire  to  the  altar  used  for  animal  ai 
Soma  sacrifices.  See  Haug’s  Aitareya  Brdhmanarn , II.  60,  61. 

The  subject  is  MAyAbheda,  ‘the  discernment  of  Mdy&,  or  illusion  (t! 
cause  of  material  oreatiou).’ — Wilson.  , . 

1 The  Bird : the  Sun,  In  the  ocean's  inmost  depth:  in  tne  solar  ^ 
according  to  SAyana.  Wise  disposes : * ordainera  (of  solar  worship).  *- 

2 Speech : or  song  ; the  morning  song  of  the  Sun-Bird.  _ TheGan 
the  breath  of  life,  according  to  SAyana.  The  ray  of  the  Sun  is  probabl ly 

3 This  stanza  has  occurred  before.  See  1. 164.  31.  The  Herdsman: 

Resteth : or,  stumbleth  ; literally,  sinks  or  falls  down. 

1 Tdrkshya : a personification  of  the  Sun,  usually  described  w a ^ 
horse,  Cp.  I.  89.  6.  — 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


605 


0MS  180.] 

2 As  though  we  offered  up  our  gifts  to  Indra,  may  we  asceud 
him  as  a ship  for  safety. 

Liko  the  two  wide  worlds,  broad,  deep,  far-extended,  may  we 
be  safe  both  when  he  comes  and  leaves  you. 

He  who  with  might  the  Five  Lands  hath  pervaded,  like  Surya 
with  his  lustre,  and  the  waters, — 

His  strength  wins  hundreds,  thousands ; none  avert  it,  as  the 
young  maid  repelleth  not  her  lover. 

HYMN  CLXXIX.  Indra. 

Now  lift  ye  up  yourselves  and  look  on  Indra’s  seasonable  share. 

If  it  be  ready,  offer  it ; unready,  ye  have  been  remiss. 

1 Oblation  is  prepared  : come  to  us,  Indra;  the  Sun  hath  travel- 

led over  half  his  journey. 

Friends  with  their  stores  are  sitting  round  thee  waiting  liko 
lords  of  clans  for  the  tribe’s  wandering  chieftain. 

) Dressed  in  the  udder  and  on  fire,  I fancy ; well-dressed,  I 
fancy,  is  this  recent  present. 

Drink,  Indra,  of  the  curd  of  noon’s  libation  with  favour, 
Thunderer,  thou  whose  deeds  are  mighty. 

HYMN  CLXXX.  Indra. 

0 much-invoked,  thou  hast  subdued  thy  foemen  : thy  might  is 
loftiest ; here  display  thy  bounty. 

In  thy  right  hand,  0 Indra,  bring  us  treasures  : thou  art  the 
Lord  of  rivers  filled  with  riches. 

2 Like  a dread  wild  beast  roaming  on  the  mountain  thou  hast 

approached  us  from  the  farthest  distance. 

Whetting  thy  bolt  and  thy  sharp  blade,  0 Indra,  crush  thou 
the  foe  and  scatter  those  who  hate  us. 

3 Thou,  mighty  Indra,  spraugest  into  being  as  strength  for 

lovely  lordship  o’er  the  people. 

Thou  droveat  off  the  folk  who  were  unfriendly,  and  to  the 
Gods  thou  gavest  room  and  freedom. 

.•  I adopt,  with  a modification,  Professor  Pisohel’s  interpretation 
2 difficult  words  yavatim  n&  tdrydm.  See  Vedische  Studien , I.  p.  106. 

is  twice  cooked;  first  matured  in  the  cow's  udder  and  then 
rein  °n  ' the  hymn  was  employed  in  the  Dadhigharma 

i|k  ony  when  Soma  jnio*  was  offered  mixt  with  curd  or  *<our  inspissated 
bL.Cf*  VIII.  2.  9,  and  IX  11.  6.  See  Hillobrandt,  F.  .V,  I.  221. 


60S 


THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  X. 

HYMN  CLXXXI.  Viavedevas. 

Vasishtha  mastered  the  Rathantava,  took  it  from  radiant 
Dh&tar,  Savitar,  and  Vishnu, 

Oblation,  portion  of  fourfold  oblation,  known  by  the  names  of 
Saprathas  and  Prathas. 

2 These  sages  found  what  lay  remote  and  hidden,  the  sacrifice’s 

loftiest  secret  essence. 

From  radiant  Dhatar,  Savitar,  and  Vishnu,  from  Agm,  Bharad- 
vaja  brought  the  Brihat. 

3 They  found  with  mental  eyes  the  earliest  Yajus,  a pathway  to 

the  Gods,  that  had  descended. 

From  radiant  Dhatar,  Savitar,  and  Vishnu,  from  Sfirya  did 
these  sages  bring  the  Gharma. 


HYMN  CLXXXII. 


Brihaspati. 


Brthaspati  lead  us  safely  over  troubles,  and  turn  his  evil 
thought  against  the  sinner  \ 

Repel  the  curse,  and  drive  away  ill-feeling,  and  give  the  sacri 
ticer  peace  and  comfort ! 

2 May  Na.asansa  aid  us  at  Prayfija  : blest,  be  our  Anuyaja  a' 

invokings.  . 

May  he  repel  the  curse,  and  chase  ill-feeling,  and  give  th 
sacrificer  peace  and  comfort. 

3 May  he  whose  head  is  flaming  burn  the  demons,  haters  < 

prayer,  so  that  the  arrow  slay  them. 

May  he  repel  the  curse  and  chase  ill-feeling,  and  give  the  sacr 
ficer  peace  and  comfort.  _ 

ts:  rzsSTv*-  »* 

warm  libation  of  milk  or  other  beverage.  ,, 

«*•  ►’ 

2 Narinanta  : Agni.  PrayAja:  part  of  the  introductory  ceremony  »' 

Soma  sacrifice.  Aauydj.:  a aecondar,  or  finalsacnficm 

3 He  whole  head,  i«  flaming:  taparmdrdhan . Bnhaapati 

Lightning.  ^ 


a Xitx  187.J 


THE  RIO  VEDA. 


SOT 


HYMN  CLXXXIII.  The  Sacrifice,  Ete. 

1 saw  the©  meditating  in  thv  spirit  what  sprang  from  Fervour 
and  hath  thence  developed. 

Bestowing  offspring  here,  bestowing  riches,  spread  in  thine  off- 
spring, thou  who  cravest  children. 

2 I saw  thee  pondering  in  thine  heart,  and  praying  that  in  due 

time  thy  body  might  be  fruitful. 

Come  as  a youthful  woman,  rise  to  meet  me  : spread  in  thine 
offspring,  thou  who  cravest  children. 

3 In  plants  and  herbs,  in  all  existent  beings  I have  deposited  the 

germ  of  increase. 

All  progeny  on  earth  have  I engendered,  and  sons  in  women 
who  will  be  hereafter. 

HYMN  CLXXXV.  Aditi 

Great,  unassailable  must  be  the  heavenly  favour  of  Three  Gods, 
Vanina,  Mitra,  Aryaman. 

2 O’er  these,  neither  at  home  nor  yet  abroad  on  pathways*  that 

are  strange, 

The  evil-minded  foe  hath  power  : 

3 Nor  over  him,  the  man  on  whom  the  Sons  of  Aditi  bestow 
Eternal  light  that  he  may  live. 

HYMN  CLXXXVI.  Vftyu. 

Filling  our  hearts  with  health  and  joy,  may  Vata  breathe  his 
balm  on  us  : 

May  he  prolong  our  days  of  life. 

2 Thou  art  our  Father,  Vata.  yea,  thou  art  a Brother  and  a friend: 
So  give  us  strength  that  we  may  live. 

1 1 The  store  of  Amrit  laid  away  yonder,  0 Vata,  in  thine  home, — 
Give  us  thereof  that  we  may  live. 

HYMN  CLXXXVII.  Agni. 

To  Agni  send  I forth  my  song,  to  him  the  Bull  of  all  the  folk  : 
So  may  he  bear  us  past  our  foes. 

lie  deities  are  the  Sacrificer,  bis  Wife,  and  the  Hotar-priest. 

According  to  SAyaua,  the  wife  is  the  speaker  of  the  first  stanza,  'the 
atnftna  or  sacrificer  of  the  second,  and  the  Hotar-priest  of  the  third. 
I'vig  considers  Agni  to  be  the  speaker  of  the  whole  hymn.  Whai  sprang 
Jj  &n>our ; the  results  of  ardent  devotion  or  tdpas. 

The  Hotar-priest  regards  himself  as  the  procreator  of  all  living  beings 
°ugh  the  efficacy  of  the  sacrifices  which  he  performs  : matsddhyena  ydgcna 
myotpatteraham  iarvajanaheturbhavdmi.—i&jbn&. 

Ijkfl  • chief  and  lord,  as  the  indispensable  household  fire. 


608  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  X. 

2 Who  from  the  distance  far  away  shines  brilliantly  across  the 

wastes  : 

So  may  he  bear  us  past  our  foes. 

3 The  Bull  with  brightly-gleaming  flame  who  utterly  consumes 

the  fiends : 

So  may  he  bear  us  p*st  our  foes. 

4 Who  looks  on  all  existing  things  and  comprehends  them  with 

his  view  : 

So  may  he  bear  us  past  our  foes. 

5 Resplendent  Agni,  who  was  born  in  farthest  region  of  the  air 
So  may  he  bear  us  past  our  foes. 

HYMN  CLXXXVIII.  Agni 

Now  send  ye  Jativedas  forth,  send  hitherward  the  vigorou 
Steed 

To  seat  him  on  our  sacred  grass. 

2 I raise  the  lofty  eulogy  of  Jatavedas,  raining  boons, 

With  sages  for  his  hero  band. 

3 With  flames  of  Jatavedas  which  carry  oblatiou  to  the  Gods, 
May  he  promote  our  sacrifice. 

HYMN  CLXXXIX.  * Surya. 

This  spotted  Bull  hath  come,  and  sat  before  the  Mothei  in 
the  east, 

Advancing  to  his  Father  heaven. 

2 Expiring  when  he  draws  his  breath,  she  moves  along  the  lucid 

spheres  : 

The  Bull  shines  out  through  all  the  sky. 

3 Song  is  bestowed  upon  the  Bird  : it  rules  stlpreme  through 

thirty  realms 

Throughout  the  days  at  break  of  morn.  I 


2 Across  the  wattes : as  the  fire  that  burns  the  jungle  and  prepares  tb«j 
ground  for  cultivation. 

5 In  farthest  region  of  the  air : or  beyond  the  firmament,  as  the  Sun. 

The  deity  is  alternatively  SArpar&jfi!,  the  Serpent-Queen,  Kadru,  wlio 
also  the  Riehi  of  the  hymn. 

1 This  spotted  Bull : the  Sun.  The  Mother : Vann  . f[t{ 

3 The  Bird:  the  Sun.  Hi*  morning  song,  representing  prayer,  i«  ®uPr*j  g, 

through  all  the  divisions  of  the  world,  the  nuiabei  thirty  being  used  m 
witely.  Of,  I.  123.  8.  * 

1 Fran  Fervour : from  the  tapas.  devotional  ardour  or  asceticism  of 
according  to  SAyana  But  the  meaning  heie  may  be  ‘ from  warmth 

220,  ® !in'l  nnU  ¥ht>n/i*  • ft-/. it,  tiiaf  f>v«ntt«  a*  warmftl. 


i fl)XV  191.)  27/£  RIG  VEDA.  609 

HYMN  CXC.  Creation. 

From  Fervour  kindled  to  its  height  Eternal  Law  and  Truth 
were  born  : 

Thence  was  the  Night  produced,  and  thence  the  billowy  flood 
of  sea  arose.  J 


! From  that  same  billowy  flood  of  sea  the  Year  was  afterwards 
produced, 

Odainer  of  the  days  and  nights,  Lord  over  all  who  close  the 
eye. 

! Dhatar,  the  great  Creator,  then  formed  in  due  order  Sun  and 
Moon. 

He  formed  in  order  Heaven  and  Earth,  the  regions  of  the  air 
and  light.  ’ 


HYMN  CXCI.  Agn, 

Thou,  mighty  Agin,  gatherest  up  all  that  is  precious  for  thv 
friend.  J 

Bring  us  all  treasures  as  thou  art  enkindled  in  libation’s  place. 

! Assemble,  speak  together  : let  your  minds  be  all  of  one  accord, 
As  ancient  Gods  unanimous  sit  down  to  their  appointed  share! 

I The  place  is  common,  common  the  assembly,  common  the 
mind,  so  be  their  thought  united. 

A common  purpose  do  I lay  before  you,  and  worship  with 
your  general  oblation. 


l One  and  the  same  be  your  resolve,  and  be  your  minds  of  one 
accord. 

United  be  the  thoughts  of  all  that  all  may  happily  agree. 


The  dteity  or  subject  of  stanzas  2 - 4 is  SailijMuam,  Agreement  or  Unani- 
>ty  in  assembly.  * 

3 Common  the  assembly : this  sdmiti  appears  to  have  been  a general  assem- 
y of  the  people  on  some  import  * it  occasion,  such  as  the  election  of  a Kintr 
'■  Uynm  of  ike  Atkarva-veda , VI.  64.  K' 


APPENDIX. 


Page  466,  Hymn  LXI. 

I subjoin  a Latin  version  of  stanzas  5 — 8,  and  borrow  Wilson’s 
translation  of  stanza  9. 

5 Membrum  suum  virile,  quod  protentum  fuerat,  mas  ille  re- 

traxit. Itursus  illud  quod  in  juvenem  filiam  sublatum  fuerat, 
non  aggressurus,  ad  se  retrahit. 

6 Quum  jam  in  medio  congressu,  semiperfecto  opere,  amorem  in 

puellam  pater  impleverat,  ambo  discedentes  seminispaulum 
in  terrae  superficie  in  sacrorum  sede  effusum  emiserunt. 
juum  pater  suam  filiam  adiverat,  cum  esi,  congressus  suum 
semen  supra  terram  effudit.  Turn  Dii  benigni  precem 
(brahma)  progenuerunt,  et  Vastosbpatim,  legum  sacrarum 
custodem,  formaverunt. 

lie  tauro  similis  spumam  in  certamine  jactavit ; tunc  discedens 
pusillanimis  hue  profectus  est.  Quasi  dextro  pede  claudus 
processit,  “ inutiles  fueruut  illi  mei  complexus,”  ita  locutus. 
The  fire,  burning  the  people,  does  not  approach  quickly  (by 
day):  the  naked  ( Rdkshasas  approach)  not  Agniby  night; 
the  giver  of  fuel,  and  the  giver  of  food,  he,  the  upholder 
( of  the  rite),  is  born,  overcoming  enemies  by  his  might.’ 


lie  whole  passage  is  difficult  and  obscure,  and  stanza  9 is  unintelligible, 
h regard  to  the  myth  of  Prajfipati  and  his  daughter,  Prof.  Max  Muller 
i When  Kumftrila  is  hard  pressed  by  his  opponents  about  the  unmoral- 
i of  his  gods,  he  answers  with  all  the  freedom  of  a comparative  my- 
logist : “ It  is  fabled  that  Prajftpati,  the  Lord  of  Creation,  did  violence  to 
daughter.  But  what  does  it  mean  ? Praj&pati,  the  Lord  of  Creation,  is 
wne  of  the  sun,  and  he  is  called  so,  because  he  protects  all  creatures, 
'daughter  Ushas  is  the  dawn.  And  when  it  is  said  that  he  was  in  love 
Her,  this  only  means  that,  at  Bunrise,  the  sun  runs  after  the  dawD,  the 
"a  being  at  the  same  time  called  the  daughter  of  the  sun,  because  she 
when  he  approaches  History  of  Anc.  Sara.  Literature,  pp.  529,  530. 
e Muir,  0.  S. Texts,  IV.  pp.  46,  47,  where  stanzas  4—7  are  translated. 

7 1 TMtothpatim:  VAstoshpati,  the  guardian  of  the  houBe  ; ‘ the  ]ord  of  the 
arth  (of  sacrifice).’— Wilson.  The  word  may  be  in  apposition  with  brVma, 
tyer. 

tokte  fn  flATTJtnft  RAkuhasas  who  consume  like  fire. 


612 


APPENDIX. 


Page  548,  Hymn  CVI. 

I  borrow  Wilson’s  translation  of  the  omitted  stanzas. 

5 ‘You  are  like  two  pleasantly  moving  well-fed  (hills)  like  Mitrn 

and  Varuna,  the  two  bestowers  of  felicity,  veracious,  p0* 
sessors  of  infinite  wealth,  happy,  like  two  horses  plump  with 
fodder,  abiding  in  the  firmament,  like  two  rams  (are  you)  tc 
be  nourished  with  sacrificial  food,  to  be  cherished  (with 
oblations). 

6 ‘ You  are  like  two  mad  elephants  bending  their  forequarten 

and  smiting  the  foe,  like  the  two  sons  of  Nitosa  destroying 
(foes),  and  cherishing  (friends) ; you  are  bright  as  two  water 
born  (jewels),  do  you,  who  are  victorious,  (render)  my  decay 
ing  mortal  body  free  from  decay. 

7 ‘ Fierce  (Aswins),  like  two  powerful  (heroes),  you  enable  this 

moving,  perishable  mortal  (frame)  to  cross  over  to  the  ob- 
jects (of  its  destination)  as  over  water;  extremely  strong 
like  the  Ribhus,  your  chariot  attained  its  destination  swift 
as  the  wind,  it  pervaded  (everywhere),  it  dispensed  riches. 

8 ‘ With  your  bellies  full  of  the  Soma,  like  two  saucepans,  preserv- 

ers  of  wealth,  destroyers  of  enemies,  (you  are)  armed  with 
hatchets,  moving  like  two  flying  (birds^with  forms  like  the 
moon,  attaining  success  through  the  mind,  like  two  laudable 
beings,  (you  are)  approaching  (the  sacrifice).’ 

Page  598,  Hymn  CLXTI. 

May  Agni,  yielding  to  our  prayer,  the  Rakshas-slayer,  drive 
away  . 

The  malady  of  evil  name  that  hath  beset  thy  labouring  wombj 

2 Agni,  concurring  in  the  prayer,  drive  off  the  eater  of  thy  fleshj 
The  malady  of  evil  name  that  hath  attacked  thy  babe  au 

womb. 

3 That  which  destroys  the  sinking  germ,  the  settled,  roovw 

embryo,  . . , • 

That  which  will  kill  the  babe  at  birth,— oven  this  will  we  am 


far  away. 

4 That  which  divides  thy  legs  that  it  may  lie  between  the 
ried  pair,  ...  ter 

That  penetrates  and  licks  thy  side, — tTen  this  will 


minate.  __ . — - 

Th*  subject  is  the  Prevention  of  Abortion.  The  Rishi  is  Kakshobft  (S  J, 

of  RAkshaaas),  son  of  BrahmA.  . . .» -rtirits  wM 

Stanzas  1,  2 are  directed  against  diseases,  and  S— 6 against  evil'  P ^ 
attack  women  who  are  about  to  become  mothers.  __ 


APPENDIX. 


613 


5 What  rests  by  thee  in  borrowed  form  of  brother,  lover,  or  of  lord, 
And  would  destroy  thy  progeny,-- even  this  will  we  exterminate. 

6 That  which  through  sleep  or  darkness  hath  deceived  thee  and 

lies  down  by  thee, 

And  will  destroy  thy  progeny,— even  this  will  we  exterminate. 
Page  698,  Hymn  CLXIII. 

From  both  thy  nostrils,  from  thine  eyes,  from  both  thine  ears 
and  from  thy  chin, 

Forth  from  thy  head  and  brain  and  tongue  I drive  thy  malady 
away. 

2 From  the  neck-tendons  and  the  neck,  from  the  breast-bones 

and  from  the  spine, 

From  shoulders,  upper,  lower  arms,  I drive  thy  malady  away. 

3 From  viscera  and  all  within,  forth  from  the  rectum,  from  the 

heart, 

From  kidneys,  liver,  and  from  spleen,  I drive  thy  malady  away. 

4 From  thighs,  from  kuee-caps,  and  from  heels,  and  from  the 

forepart  of  the  feet, 

From  hips,  from  stomach,  and  from  groin,  I drive  thy  malady 
away. 

5 From  what  is  voided  from  within,  and  from  thy  hair,  and  from 

thy  nails, 

From  all  thyself  from  top  to  toe,  I drive  thy  malady  away. 

6 From  every  member,  every  hair,  disease  that  comes  in  everyjoint, 
From  all  thyself,  from  top  to  toe,  I drive  thy  malady  away. 

Page  607,  Hymn  CLXXXIV. 

May  Vishnu  form  and  mould  the  womb,  may  Tvashtar  duly 
shape  the  forms, 

Praj&pati  infuse  the  stream,  and  Dhatar  lay  the  germ  for  thee. 

2 0 Sinfvalt,  set  the  germ,  set  thou  the  germ,  Sarasvati : 

May  the  Twain  Gods  bestow  the  germ,  the  Asvins  crowned 
with  lotuses. 

3 That  which  the  Asvins  Twain  rub  forth  with  the  attrition- 

sticks  of  gold, — 

That  germ  of  thine  we  invocate,  that  in  the  tenth  month  thou 
may  st  bear. 

The  deity  or  subject  is  th^  cure  of  Yakshma  or  phthisis  or  consumption. 

2 Sinivdlt ; a lunar  Goddess,  who  aids  the  birth  of  children.  Cp.  II.  32. 6. 
verses  1 and  2 are  incorporated  in  Atharva*veda,  V.  25,  which  is  a charm 
10  accompany  the  GarbhAdWna  ceremony  to  ensure  or  facilitate  and  bless 
Option. 


INDEX  OF  HYMNS. 
BOOK  VII. 


s Rishi.  Deity . Metre. 

1 Vasishtba  Mai-  Agni.  Vir&j.  19-25  Trishtup. 

trAvaruni. 

2 The  same  Aprls.  Trishtup. 

3 Agni.  The  same. 

4  The  same.  

5 Vaisv&nara  Agni.  

6 The  same.  

7 Agni.  

8  The  same.  


9 

10 
11 
12 


13  VaisvAnara  Agni.  

U Agni.  1 Brihati.  2, 3 Trishtup. 

15  The  same.  GAyatri. 

16  Brihati  and  Satobrihatl 

alternately. 

17  DvipadA  Trishtup. 

18  Indra.  Munificence  of  Trishtup. 

SudAs  (22-25). 

19  Indra.  The  same. 

*9 ' The  same.  

11  

12  Viriij.  9 Trishtup. 

: Trishtup. 

1 The  same. 


S 

7 

8 

!» 


IndrA, 

The  tame. 


Trishtup. 

GAyatrl  10-12  VirAj. 


616 


INDEX  OF  HYMNS. 


s 

Riski. 

Deity. 

Metre. 

32 

Vasishtha.  Sakti  Indra. 

Vasishtha. 

Brihatl  and  Satobrihatt 
alternately.  3 DvipadJt 
Virftj. 

33 

V.tsishtha.  His 
sons  (10-14). 

Vasishtha’s  sons. 
Vasishtha  (10-14). 

Trishtup. 

34 

Vasiahtha. 

Visvedevas.  Ahi.  Ahi- 
budhnya. 

DvipadA  22-25  Trishtup, 

35  The  same. 

Visvedevas. 

Trishtup. 

36 

37 

The  same. 

The  Bame. 

38 

Savitar.  Savitar  or 

Bhaga.  Vdjins  (7-8). 

39 

40 

VisvedevaB. 

The  same. 

41 

Various  (1).  Bhaga.  Ushas. 

Trishtup.  1 Jagatl. 

42 

Visvedevas. 

Trishtup. 

43 

The  same. 

The  same. 

44 

Various  (1).  Dadhikr&s. 

Trishtup.  1 Jagatl. 

4i* 

Savitar. 

Trishtup. 

46 

Iiudra. 

Jajjpti.  4 Trishtup. 

47 

Waters. 

Trishtup. 

48 

Ribhus.  Ribhus  or 
Visvedevas. 

The  same. 

49 

Waters. 

50 

Mitra  and  Varuna.  Agni  Jagatl.  4 Atijagati  or 
Visvedevas.  Praise  of  UiverB.  Sakvart. 

51 

Aditya3. 

Trishtup. 

52 

The  same. 

The  same. 

53 

Heaven  and  Earth. 

54 

V&stoshpatL 

55 

Vistoshpati.  Indra. 

1 Gftyatrf.  2-4  Upamhf> 
brihatl.  5-8  Anuehtup. 

56 

Maruts. 

1-11  DvipadA  VirAj.  12-‘ 
Trishtup. 

57 

The  same. 

Trishtup. 

58 

The  same. 

59 

Maruts.  Rudra  (12). 

I,  8,  6 Brihatt.  2,  l 6 s»' 
briliktl.  7,  8Tr»htui)  9-i 
Gftyatrl.  12  AnusUtup. 

60 

SCtrya  Mitra  and  Varuna. 

Trishtup. 

61 

Mitra  and  Varuna. 

The  same. 

62  . 

SOrya.  Mitra  and  Varupa* 

63 

The  tame. 

II  t/mn. 


INDEX  OP  HYMNS. 


617 


Rishi. 

64  Vasishtha. 

65  The  same. 

66  


68  

69  

70  

71  


73  

74  

76  

77  

78  

79  

80  

81 

82  

83  

Isu 


S .. 

1 ... 

) 

1 ... 
>2  . 
•3  ... 
>4  ... 
to  ... 
to 


Deity . 


Metre. 


Mitra  and  Vanina. 
The  same. 

Mitra  and  Varuna. 
Adityas.  Sdrya. 

Abvius. 

The  same. 


Trishtup. 

The  same. 

G&yatrt.  10-15  Brihati  and 
Satobrihat!  alternately. 
16  Pura-ushnih. 
Trishtup.  ; 

VirAj.  8,  9 Trishtup. 
Trishtup. 

The  same. 


Brihati  and  Satobrliatt 

alternately. 

Ushas  or  Dawn.  Trishtup. 

The  same.  The  same. 


Indra  and  Varuna. 
The  same. 


Varuna. 
The  Bame. 


Vi\yu.  Indra  and  V&yu. 
The  same. 


Indra  and  Agni. 
The  same. 

Saraavatt.  Saraavftn. 
The  sam£ 


Brihati  and  Satobiihatt 
alternately. 

Jagatl. 

The  same. 

Trishtup. 

The  same. 


G&yatit,  5 Jagatt. 
Trishtup. 

The  same. 


G&yatii.  12  Auuslitup. 
Trishtup. 

1 Brihati.  2 Satobrihati.  3 
PtastArapankti  4-6G4ytrt. 
Trishtup. 


Indra.  Brihaspati.  Indra 
andBrahraanaspati.  Indra 
and  Bfihaapati. 

Tnriyo  onri  RHhasnati.  The  same. 


618 


INDEX  OP  HYMNS. 


Deity.  Metre. 

Vishnu.  Indra  and  Vishnu.  Trishtup. 

Vishnu.  The  same. 

Parjanya.  

The  same.  1,3  GAyatri.  2 PAdanichrit. 

Frogs.  Trishtup.  1 Anushtup. 

Indra  and  Soma.  Indra.  Trishtup.  1-6,  18,  21,  23 

Soma  Agni.  The  Gods.  Jagati.  7 Jagati  or  Tritfh 
Press-stones.  Maruts.  tup.  25  Anushtup. 
VasiBhtha’s  Prayer.  Earth 
and  Firmament. 


BOOK  VIII. 

1 PrajAtha  K&nva  Indra.  Asanga’s  Munifi-  Brihati.  2,  4 Satobrihatl. 


(1,2),  MedbAti-  cence.  Asanga. 
thi  and  Medh- 
yAtithi  (3-29), 

Asinga  (30-33), 

33,  34  Trishtup. 

Saarati  (34). 

2 MedtAtithi  and  Indra.  Vibhindhu’s 

GAyatri.  28  Anushtup. 

Priyamedha. 

Munificence. 

4 

MedhAtithi 

(41-42). 

3 MedhyAtithi. 

Indra.  PAkasthAman's 
Munificence. 

Brihati  and  Satobrihatl 
alternately.  21  Anushtup. 
22,23  GAyatri.  24  Brihati. 

4 Devatithi. 

Indra.  Indra  or  POshan. 
Kurunga’s  Munificence. 

Brihati  and  Satobrihatl  al- 
ternately. 21  Pura-ushnih. 

5 BrahmAtithi. 

Asvins.  Kasu’s  Munificence.  GAyatri.  37,  38  Brihati.  35 
Anushtup.  GAyatri. 

6 Vatsa. 

Indra.  Tirindira’s 
Munificence. 

GAyatri. 

7 Punarvatsa, 

Maruts. 

The  same. 

8 Sadhvansa. 

Asvins. 

Anushtup. 

9 Sasakarna. 

The  same. 

1,  4,  #,  U,  16,  Brihati.  2, 
3,  20,  21,  Giyatrl.  5 
kup.  7,9,13,16.19.  Ana- 
shtup.  10  Trishtup.  B 
VirAj.  12  Jagati. 

10  PragAtha. 

1,5  Brihati.  2 Madhyejyotu- 

3 Anushtup.  4 Astara- 
pankti.  6 Satobfibatl. 

11  Vatsa. 

Agni. 

GAyatri.  1 PratishthA.  2Vtf 
dhamAnA.  10  Trishtup. 

12  Parvata. 

Indra. 

Ushnih. 

13  NArada. 

The  same. 

The  same. 

S Risk*. 
$ 

99  Vasishtha. 

100  The  same. 

101  

102  

103  

104  


Hymn . 


INDEX  OF  HYMNS. 


619 


Riihi. 


Deity. 


Metre. 


14  Goshfiktin  and 

Asvasfiktin. 

15  The  same. 

16  Irimbithi. 

17  The  same. 

18  

19  Sobhari. 


20  The  same. 

21  

22  


Visvamanas. 
The  same. 


Indra. 
The  same. 


Adityas.  Asvins.  Agni. 

Sfirya,  Vdta  or  Wind. 
Agni.  Adityas.  Trasa- 
dasyu's  Munificence. 


Maruts. 

Indra.  Chitra’s  Munificence, 
Asvins. 


Agni. 

Indra.  A Prince’s 
Munificence. 


Gdyat 

Ushih. 

Gdy<ri. 

Gdyd.  14  Brihati. 

1 Satobrihati. 

Ush:h. 

1-26^8-33  Kakup  and  Sato- 
bhati  alternately.  27 
Dipadd  Virdj.  34  Ushnih. 
3Satobrihati.  36  Kakup. 
3<Pankti. 

Kakp  and  Satobrihati 
ahrnately. 

The  ame. 

1-7  kihati  and  Satobrihati 
alternately.  8 Anushtup. 
9,  D,  13-18  Kakup  and 
Satobrihati  alternately.il 
Kakip.  12  Madhyejyotis. 
Ushnih 

Ushnih.30  Anushtup. 


Mitra  and  Varuna. 

Visvedevas. 
Asvins.  Vdyu. 

Manu  VaivM-  Visvedevas. 
vata. 

The  same.  The  same. 

Manu,  or  Kas- 
yapa. 

Manu. 


The  same. 

Medhdtithi. 

Medhydtithi. 


The  Yajamftna  and  his 
Wife.  Their  Benediction. 
Indra. 

The  same. 


Tje  looi  Vmu- 
r°chishas. 

?y4v(Uva. 


Ushnih.  23  Ushniggarbhd. 

Ushnih.  16,19,  21, 25  Gdya- 
tri, 20  Anushtup. 

Brihati  and  Satobrihati 
alternately. 

Gdyatri.  4 Pura-ushnih. 

Dvipadd  Virdj. 

1 Gdyatri.  2 Pura-ushnih. 
3 Brihati.  4 Anushtup. 

Gdyatri.  9,  14  Anushtup.  10 
Pddanichpt.  15-18  Pankti. 

Gdyatri. 

Brihati.  36-18  Gdyatri.  19 
Anushtup. 

Anushtup.  16-18  Gdyatri. 


Asvins. 


UparishtAjjyotis.  22-24 
Pankti.  23  Mah&brihatt. 


620 


INDEX  OF  HYMNS. 


§ Rlshi. 

>2*  * 

k! 

36  SyAvAsva. 

37  .. 

38  

39  NAbhAka. 

40  The  same. 


Indra. 

The  same, 
ndra  and  Agni. 
Lgni. 

udra  and  Agni. 


42  ArchanAnaa,  or  aruna,  Alvins. 
NAbhAka. 


Sakvarl.  7 MahApankti. 
MahApankti.  1 Atijagiti. 
GAyatri. 

MahApankti. 

MahApankti.  2 Sakvari. 

12  Trishtup. 
MahApankti. 

1-3  TriBh$up.  4-6  Anushtu 


43  Viriipa. 

44  The -same. 

45  Trisoka. 

46  Vasa  Asvya. 


,gni.  GAyatri. 

lie  same  The  Bame. 

,gni  and  Indra.  Indra 

ndra.  Munificence  of  1 PAdani$hrit.  2-4,  6,  10 


Prithuaravas. 


47  Trita  Aptya. 

48  PragAtha. 
49*  Bharga. 


51  PragAtha. 

52  The  same. 


53  

54  

55  Kali. 


Adityas.  Adityas  and 
Ushas. 

Soma. 

Agni. 

Indra. 

The  same. 

Indra.  The  Gods. 

Indra. 

The  same. 


23,  29,  33,  GAyatri.  ! 
Kakup.  7,11,19,25,2; 
Brihatt.  8AnuBhtup.  9 
26,  28  Satobrihatl.  12  Vi 
paritA.  13  Chaturvinfla 
tikA  DvipadA.  14  Pipili- 
bamadhyA  Brjjhati.  15  Ki 
kip  NyankusirA.  16  VirA 
17  Jagati.  18  Uparishtto 
brihati.  20  Vishamapjid 
21,  22,  24,  32  Pankti.  i 
DvipadA  VirAj.  31  U«h?i 
MahApankti. 


Trishtup.  5 Jagatt. 
Brihatt  and  Satobrihatl 
alternately. 

The  same. 

Pankti.  7, 9 Brihati. 
Giyatrt.  1, 4, 5, 7 AnusM0! 

12  Trishtup. 

GAyatri. 

The  same. 

Brihatt  and  Satobrihatl 
'alternately.  15  Anushti 
GAyatri. 

GAystri.  1,4, 7, 10  Anush? 


66  MatayaorMAnya.Adityaa.  GAyatri. 

57  Priyamedha.  Indra.  Munificence  of  GAyatri.  M,  7,1°  nus  * 
two  Princes.  * _____ 

* Eleven  must  be  added  to  the  numbers  of  this  and  ft 

this  Book  to  make  them  correspond  with  the  numbers  in  Prof. 
editions  of  the  text.  See  note  p.  267 . 


INDEX  or  HTMNB. 

. i 621 

| Ruki. 

Deity. 

Metre. 

58  The  same. 

Indra.  Visvedevas.  Varung  Anushtup.  2 Ushnih.  4-6 
Gdyatri.  11,  16*Paukti. 
17,  18  Brihati. 

59  Puruhanman. 

Indra. 

Brihati  and  Satobrihati 
alternately.  7*12  Brihati. 
13  Ushnih.  14  Anush  tup. 
15  Pura-ushnih. 

60  Sadi fci  and  Puru 

- Agni. 
r 

Gdyatri.  10-15  Brihati  and 

mil  ha, or  ei  the: 

Satobrihati  alternately. 

of  them. 

61  H&ryata. 

The  same. 

Gdyatit. 

62  Gopavana,  or 

Asvins. 

The  same. 

Saptavadhri, 

63  Gopavana. 

Agni-Srutarvan’s 

Munificence. 

Gdyatri.  1,  4,  7,  10,  13-15 
Anushtup. 

64  VirCipa. 

Agni. 

Gdyatri. 

! 66  Kurusuti. 

Indra. 

The  same. 

66  The  same. 

The  same. 

Gldyatrl.  10  Brihati.  11 
Satobrihati. 

57  

Gdyatri.  10  Brihati. 

58  Kritnu. 

Soma. 

Gdyatri.  9 Anushtup 

59  Ekadyfi. 

Indra.  The  Gods. 

Gdyatri.  10  Trishtup. 

73  Kusidin. 

Indra. 

Gdyatri. 

(1  The  same. 

The  same. 

Tie  same. 

n 

Visvedevas. 



73  Uflanft  K&vya. 

Agni. 

74  Krishna. 

Asvins. 

75  Visvaka. 

The  same. 

Jagatt 

76  Dyumnlka  or 
Priyamedha 

Brihati  and  Satobrihati 
alternately. 

or  Krishna. 

77  Nodhas. 

Tndra. 

The  same. 

78  Nrimedha  and 
Purumedha. 

The  same. 

1,  3,  7 Brihati.  2,  4 Satobri- 
hati. 5,  6 Anushtup. 

79  The  same. 

Pragdtha. 

*>  Ap4U. 

Anushtup.  1,  2 Pankti. 

81  Srutakaksha,  or  ...rr 

Gdyatri.  1 Anushtup. 

Bukaksha. 

82  Sukaksha. 

Indra.  Indra  and  Ribhus. 

Gdyatri. 

Vindu.  or  P4t»-  M*rutg.  • 

The  same. 

dakaha. 

1 3*  Tiraschl. 

Indra. 

Anushtup. 

i 85  DyutAna,  or 
[ Tiraschl. 

Indra.  Maruts.  Indra 
and  Buhasp&tl. 

Trishtup.  4 Virdj. 

622 


INDEX  OF  HYMNS. 


I ^ 

tej 

86  Rebha. 


87  Nrfmedha. 

88  The  same. 

89  Nema.  Indra 

(45). 

90  Jamadagni. 


91  Prayoga,  or 
Agni  BArhas- 
patya,  or  Agni 
Grihapati,  or 
Yavishtha. 


Indra.  Brihati.  10, 13  Atijagatl.  11 

12  UparishtAdbrihati.  1 
Trishtup.  1*6  Jagati. 

The  san.  Ushnih.  7,  10, 11  Kakup.  9 

12  Para-ushnih. 

PragAtha. 

Indra.  Vc.  Trishtup.  6 Jagati.  7-9 

Anushtup. 

Mitra  an<Varuna.  Adi-  1,  6,  7, 9, 11, 13  Brihati.  2,  < 
tyas.  Alins.  V&yu.  Surya.  6,  8,  10, 12  Satobrihati. 
Ushas.  ‘avamAna.  Cow.  Gayatri.  14-16  Trishtu] 
Agni.  GAyatri. 


Agni.  Agni  \nd  Maruts. 


vAlakhil^a  HYMNS.* 

1 Praskanva.  Indra  Brihati  and  Satobrihati 

al^rnately. 

2 Pushtigu.  The  same.  The  same. 

3 Srushtigu.  

4 Ayu.  

5 Medhya.  

6 MAtarievan,  Indra.  Visvedevas. 

7 Krisa  Praekanva’e  Munificence.  GAyatrt.  3-5  Anushtup. 

8 Prishadra.  The  Bame.  Agni  and  Sfirya.  QAyatri.  5 Pankti. 

9 Medhya.  Asvins.  Trishtup. 

10  The  same.  Visvedevas. The  Priests  . The  same. 

11  Suparna.  Indra  and  Varuna.  Jagati. 


BOOK  IX. 

1 Madhuchchhan*  Soma  PavamAna.  GAyatri. 

das. 

2 MedhAtith^  The  same.  The  same. 

3 $unahsepa.  

4 Hirnnyaatfipa 

5 Asita,orDevala.  Apris.  GAyatrl.  8-11  Anushtup. 

6 The  same.  Soma  PavamAna.  Gayatri. 

7-24  The  same.  The  same. 

* These  eleven  hymns  are  numbered  49—59  in  Prof. 
editions  of  the  text. 


IWDEX  OF  HYMNS. 


623 


• DdlV-  Metre. 

'ii 

^ Jrilhachyuta.  Soma  PavamAua.  GAyatrl. 

9^  IdhmavAha 

Nrimedha.  

?,8  Priyamedha.  

h9  Nrimedha.  

30  Vindu.  

31  Gotama.  

32  SydvAsva.  

33  Trita  Aptya 

34  The  same.  

35  Prabhfivasu 

, 36  The  same.  

3/  Rahtigana.  

38  The  same.  

39  Brihanmati,  

40  The  same.  

41  MedhyAtithi 

'2  The  same.  

6 

4 AyAsya.  

The  same.  

it * 

47  Ravi. 

48  The  same.  

49  • 

50  Uchathya.  

*1  The  same. 

i2 

'8-60  AvatsAra 

1 Amahiyu.  

^ Jamadagni.  1 

3 Nidhruvi. 

1 *%apa.  

J Bhrigu  or  

Jamadagni, 

VaikhAnasas.  Soma  PavamAna.  Agni.  GAyatrt.  18  Anushtup. 
BharadvAja.  PavamAna  Soma.  Pavam&na  GAyatrl.  16-18  DvipadA  GA- 
^wyapa.  Gota-  PAshan.  Agni.  Savitar.  All-  yatrl.  27,  31,  32  Anuah- 
m*Atri.VisvA-  Gods.  Praise  of  Students,  tup.  30  Pura-ushnih. 
nntra.  Jama- 
Jagnl  Vaaish- 
l.U.  Pavitra. 


Hymn . 


624 


INDEX  OF  HYMNS. 


RUM.  Deity. 


Metre . 


68 

69 

70 

71 

72 

73 

74 

75 

76 

77 

78 

79 

80 
81 
82 

83 

84 

85 

86 


V&teaprt.  Soma  Pavamtaa. 

Hiranyaatftpa.  The  same. 

Renu  

Rishabha.  

Harimanta.  

Pavitra.  

Kakshiv&u.  

Kavi.  

The  same.  


Vasu. 

The  same. 


Pavitra. 

Praj&pati. 

V ena. 

The  Akrwhta  . ■ 
M5ahas.  The 
Sikata  Ni\&va- 
ris.  The  Pi  is’/1 
Ajas.  Atri. 
Gritsamada. 


87  UsiiA. 

88  The  same. 

89  

90  Vasishtha. 

91  Kasyapa. 

92  The  same. 

93  Nodhas. 

94  Kanva. 

95  Praskanva. 

96  Pratardana. 

97  Vasishtha.  In- 

drapramati. 

Manyu.  Upa- 
raanyu.  Vy4- 
ghrapftd.  Sakti 
Karnaarnt. 

Mri]ika.  Vasu* 
kra.  Partora. 
KuUa. 


Jagati.  10  Trishtup. 
Jagatl.  9,  10  Trishtup. 
Jagati.  10  Trishtup. 
jagatl.  9 Trishtup. 
Jagatl. 

The  same. 

Jagatl.  8 Trishtup 
Jagati.  ( 

The  same. 


Jagatl.  5 Trishtup. 

The  same. 

Jagati. 

The  same. 

Jagatl.  11,  12  Trishtup. 
Jagati. 

It 


Trishtup. 
The  same. 


INDEX  OF  HYMNS. 


625 


^ Rishi.  Deity. 

98  Ambarteha  and  Soma  PavamAna. 
Rijisvan. 

9S  TheRebhasdnus.  The  same. 

00  The  same.  

01  Andhigu.  YayA-  

ti.  Nahusha. 

Manu.  PrajApati. 

02  Trita  Aptya 

03  Dvita  Aptya 

04  Parvata  and  

NArada,  or  the 

SikhandinK 

(Apsaras). 

105  Parvata  and  

NArada. 

,Ut>  Agni.  Chakahus  

Manu. 

0?  Seven  Riahis 

■OS  Gauriviti.  Sak-  

ti.  Oru.  Uijis- 
I van.  Ordhva- 
sadman.  Kii- 
tayasl  Rinau- 
chaya. 

9 Agnia  of  Sacr>-  

fice. 

0 Tryaruna  and  

Trasadaayu. 

1 AnAnata.  

12  Sisu.  

12  Kasyapa.  

U The  same.  


re. 

Anushtup,  11  Brihatt. 

Anushtup.  1 Brihatl. 
Anushtup. 

Anushtup.  2,  5 GAyatrl. 


Uahnih. 
The  same. 


PrAgAtha.  3,  16  DvipadA  Vi- 
rAj.  8,  10  Brihati. 

1*12  Kakup  and  Satobrihat! 
alternately.  13  GAyatrl 
YavainadhyA.  14,16  Sato- 
bnhati.  lo  Kakup. 


DvipadA  VirAj. 

1-3  Anushtup  Pipihkam&dh- 
yA.  4-9  Ordhvabrihnti. 
10-12  Viraj. 

Atyashti. 

Pankti. 

The  same.  t 


BOOK  X. 

1 Trita  Aptya.  Agni.  Trishtup. 

^ The  same.  The  Bftzne.  The  same 


26 


index  ok  hymns. 


§ Risk? 

Deity. 

Metre. 

9 Trisirasor  Sin- 

Waters. 

GAyatrl.  5 VardhamA_. 

dliudvipa. 

PratUhtUA.  8,9  Anuehtup 

10  Yaren.  Yami. 

Yama.  Yarn!. 

Trishtup. 

11  H.i%ird  liana 

Agni. 

Jagati.  7-9  Trishtup. 

A up. 

12  The  same 

'fiie  Hatno 

Ti  ishtup. 

13  Vivasvan. 

The  Two  CarK 

Trishtup.  5 Jagati. 

14  Yamu 

Yanm.  The  PciticH  men- 

Trhhtup.  13,  14.  16  Anush 

turned  The  Fatheis.  The 
Hound*.  Minn  of  Sarnnui. 

tup.  15  Brihatl. 

15  Si'ikha. 

The  Fathers. 

Trishtup.  11  J.igati 

16  Damana 

Agni 

Trishtup.  11-14  Anush  tup 

17  De\a»r.ivas. 

Saranvu  P mhan.  Sarasvati.  Trishtup  14  Anuahtup  LJ 

Waters.  Soma. 

Anush  tup  or  PuraatAd 
blihati. 

18  Sankus-uka. 

Mritvu  Dhatar.  Tvnshtar. 

Trhhtup.  1 1 PrasUrapankti, 

The  Pitnmedha.  Praj.ipati 

i 13  Jagati.  14.  Annshtup 

19  M.ithita.Bhrigu,  Waters,  oi  Cows.  Agni 

Anush  tup.  6 GAyatii, 

or  Chvavnna. 

and  Soma. 

20  VimadaorYa- 

Agm. 

G&vftri.  1 EkapadA  Vir4j. 

suhrit. 

2 Anush  tup.  9 Vir&j.  10 
Trishtup. 

21  The  same. 

Tiic  same. 

Astarapankti. 

22  . 

Indra. 

PurastAdbrihati,  5,7,9  Auu 

shtup.  15  Trishtup. 

21 

The  same 

Jng.it t.  1,  7 Trishtup.  5 

Abhis&rini. 

24  

Indra.  Asvins. 

AstArapankti. 4-6  Anush tu 

25 

Soma. 

A-tArapankti. 

26 

Pushan. 

Amiehtup,  1,  4 Uehnih. 

27  Vanukra 

Indra. 

Trishtup. 

2 S Ya^nkra’H^kYife  Imlrn.  Vasukra. 

The  same. 

Indra.  Vamkra. 

29  Va>ukr ». 

Indra. 

30  K-nrab'irt. 

Waters,  or  Child  of  Waters 

31  The  .same. 

Visvedevas. 

32  

Indra. 

1-5  Jagati.  6*9  Trishtup- 

33  

Vi»vedevftR.  Indra.  Kuril- 

1 Trishtup.  2 Brihatl.  3 5 

uravana.  Upamasravus. 

brihatl.  4-9  GAyatr . 

34  Ka  vasln,  or 

Dice.  Agriculture. 

Trishtup.  7 Jagati. 

Aksha. 

35  Lusa. 

Vifvedevaa. 

Jagati.  13,  14  Trishtup- 

36  The  same. 

The  same. 

The  same. 

37  AbhitapA. 

Suiya. 

t ii  -t  n T • 1 ( in  wM 

INDSX  OF  UTMNS. 


627 


1 

Rishi. 

Deity. 

Metre. 

38 

Indra  Mushka* 
via. 

Indra. 

Jagati. 

39 

Ghosh  A. 

Asvina. 

Jagati.  14  Trishtup. 

40 

The  aame. 

The  same. 

Jagatt. 

41 

Suhaatya. 

The  same. 

42 

Krishna. 

Indra. 

Trishtup. 

43 

The  same. 

The  same. 

Jagatt.  10,  11  Trishtup. 

44 

45 

Vatsapri. 

Agni. 

Jagatt.  1*3, 10, 11  Trishtup. 
Trishtup. 

45 

The  bame. 

The  same. 

The  same. 

47 

Saptagu. 

Indra  Vaikuntha. 

48 

Indra  Vaikun- 
tha. 

The  same. 

Jagatt.  7,  10,  11  Trishtup. 

49 

The  same. 

Jagati.  2,  11  Trishtup, 

50 

. 

1,  2,  6,  7 Jagati.  3,  4 Abhi* 
sArini.  5 Trishtup. 

51 

Agni  Sauchfka. 

Agni.  Gods. 

Trishtup. 

52 

The  same. 

Gods. 

The  same. 

53 

Agni  Sauchika. 
Gods. 

Agni.  Gods. 

Trishtup.  6,  7,  9-11  Jagati. 

54 

Brihaduktha. 

Indra. 

Trishtup. 

55 

The  same. 

The  same. 

The  same. 

56 

Viavedevas. 

Trishtup.  4,  6 Jagatt, 

57 

Bandhu,  Sruta* 
bandhu,  Vi- 
prabandhu. 

The  Bame. 

GAyatrl. 

58 

The  same. 

Tim  Spit  it. 

Anushtup. 

59 

Nirriti.  Soma.  Asuniti.  The  Trishtup.  8 Pankti.  9 Ma- 

Deities  mentioned.  Heav- 
en and  rarth.  Indra. 

hApankti.  1 OPankty  uttarA 

60 

The  GaupAya- 

AsamiUi.  Indra.  Subandhu’s  Anushtup.  1-5  GAyatri.  8’ 

nas  amt  their 
Mother. 

Recall  to  Life.  The  Hands. 

9 Pankti. 

^ NAbbAuedishtha.Visvedevaa.  Trishtup. 

82  The  aame.  Yisvedevaa,  or  Augirases,  1-4  Jagati.  5,8,9  Anush 
Viavedevas.  S&varni’a  tup.  6 Brihatt.  7 Sato- 
Liberality.  brihatt.  10  GAyatrt.  11 

Trishtup. 

63  0*7*.  VisTed»ya».  Patliy#  Svaati.  Jagat!.  16, 17  Trishtup.  15 

Trishtup  or  Jagati. 

^ The  same.  Viavedevas.  Jagatt.  12, 16, 17  Trishtup, 

f°  ^ukarna.  The  same.  Jagatt.  15  Trishtup. 

J The  same.  The  aame. 


— BrihaiPftti. 


Trishtup. 


Hymn. 


623 


index  of  hymns- 


68  AyAsya. 

69  Sumitra. 

70  The  same. 

71  Brihaspati. 

72  Brihaspati,  or 

Aditi. 

73  GaurivTti. 

74  The  same. 

75  Sindhukshit. 

76  Jaratkarna. 

77  Syumarasmi. 

78  The  same. 

79  Agni,  or  Sapt 

80  Agni. 

81  Visvakarman 

82  The  same. 

83  Manyu. 

84  The  same. 

85  SuryA. 


Brihaspati. 

Agni. 

Aprls. 

JZttnam. 

Gods. 

Indra. 

The  same. 

The  Rivers 

The  Press-stones 

Marut.s. 

The  same. 


Agni. 

The  same. 

Visvakarman. 
be  same.  The  same, 

tlanvu  Manyu.  Tnshtup.  1 Jagat! 

7 Th„  1 STiiahtup.  4-7  Jagait 

rh0  rme'  ^ B,  nlal.  Gods.  An.htup,  1 4 ]M1  23 

Son.’*  and  Ark.  ThrMoon.  24,  26  36  37.  44  Tr, 
Benedictions.  S.irya.  ^ 

Indra.  IndrAnt.  lndra.  IndrA.l  VribhAkapi.  Pankti. 


Tiishtup. 

Trishtup.  1,2  Jagati. 
Trishtup. 

Trishtup.  9 Jagaii. 
Anush  tup. 

Tiishtup. 

The  same. 

.1  agati. 

The  same 
Trishtup  5 .1  agatt. 

1,  3,  4,  8 Trishtup  2 
Jagati 

Tiishtup. 

The  same. 


VrishAkapi. 
87  PAyu. 

gg  MurdhanvAn. 

89  Kenn. 

90  HArAyana. 

91  Aruna. 

92  §AryAta. 

93  TAnva. 


94  Arbuda. 

95  Purftravaa. 

Urvasl. 

96  Barn,  or 

garvahari. 

97  Bbishaj. 

98  DavApi. 


Agui  Rakshohl. 

Surya  and  VaisvAnara. 
Indra  and  Soma. 
PuruBha. 

Agni 

Visvedevas 
The  same 


The  Press-stones. 
Urvafi.  Pururavas. 

Indra’s  Horses. 

Medicinal  Herbs. 
Gods. 

Indra. 


Trishtup.  22,25  Amiebtu 
Trishtup. 

The  same. 

Anushtup.  13  Trifhtup. 
Jagati.  15  Trishtup. 
Jagati. 

PraetArapankti.  2.3,13  Ai 

shtup.  9 Pankti.  11  Ny 
ku^rini.  15  PurasUdl 
hail.  ’ 

Jagati.  5.  7,  14  Trishtup 
Trishtup. 

Jagati.  12,  13  TribhWP 

Anush^up. 

Trishtup. 

The  same. 


INDEX  OF  HYMNS. 


629 


Rishi. 


Deity. 


Metre. 


100  Duvasyu. 
lljl  Hudlu. 


M udgala. 
Apratiiatha. 

A ah  taka. 
Durmitra  or 
Sumitra. 
BhutAnra. 


ViswdevaB. 

Visvedevas,  or  Priests. 

Tndi  a,  or  the  Mace, 
lndra.  Bnhaspati.  Apwi. 

M aruts. 
lndra. 

The  same. 

Alvins. 


Divya,  or  Dak-  Guerdou. 
shir.  A. 

SaramA.  Panis.  SaramA  Pams 


H'8 

1(9  Juhfl.  Visvedevas. 

Jamadagui  or  Apiis. 

Rama. 

A^htrAdanshtra.  lndra. 
Nahhabprabhe-  The  same, 
dana. 

Sataprabhedana 

14  Sadhri  or  Ghar-  Visvedevas. 
ma. 

Ppastuta.  Agni. 


110 


13 


15 


1° 


Agniyuta  or 
Aguiyupa. 
Bhikshu. 
Lrukshuya 
Lava. 

Brihaddiva. 

Hiranyagarbha. 

Phitrainaha. 

Vena. 

Agni.  Agni,  Va- 
runa,  and  Soma 
Vdk. 

Rulmalabarhi- 
•J'a,  or  Anho- 
much. 

Kusika  or  Ratri 

Vihavya. 
Praj4pati  Para* 
meshthin. 

Yajha. 


lndra. 

Libei  ality. 

Agni  RakshohA. 
lndra  as  Lava, 
lndra. 

Ka. 

Agni. 

Vena. 

Agni.  lndra. 
VAk. 

Visvedevas. 


Night.* 

Visvedevas. 

Creation. 

The  same. 


Jagati.  12  Trishtup. 
Tnshtup.  4,  6 GAyatri. 

5 Brihatl  9.  12  Jagati. 
Trishtup,  1,  3, 12  Brihatt. 
Trishtup.  13  Anushtup. 

Trishtup. 

Ushnih.  2,  7 Pipilikamadh* 
V;l.  11  Tiishtup 
Tnshtup, 

TrUhtup.  4 Jagati. 
Trishtup. 

Trishtup.  6,  7 Anufhtup, 
Trishtup. 

The  same. 


Jagati.  10  Trishtup. 
Trishtup  4 Jagati. 

Jagati.  8 Trishtup. 

Sakvari. 

Tnshtup. 

Trishtup  1,  2 Jagatt. 
UAyatii. 

The  same. 

Trishtup. 

The  same. 

Jagati.  1,  5 Trishtup. 
Trishtup. 

Trishtup.  7 Jagati. 

Trishtup.  2 Jagati. 
UparishtAdbrihati. 

8 Trishtup. 

GAyatri. 

Trishtup.  9 Jagati. 
Trishtup. 

Trishtup.  1 Jagatt. 


630 


INDEX  OF  HYMNS. 


I 

Riahi.  Deity. 

Metre. 

131 

Suktrti.  Indira.  Asvins. 

Triahtup.  4 Anushtup. 

132 

Sakaputa.  Heaven  and  Earth,  Asvins. 

Mitra  and  Varu'ja. 

1 Nyankusdrini.  2,  6 Prag 
tdrapankti.  3-5  Virddru 
pA.  7 Mahdsatobrihat!. 

133 

Sudds.  Indra. 

1-3  Sakvari.  4-6  Mahdpank 
ti.  7 Triahtup. 

134 

Mandhdtar.  The  same. 

Godhd. 

Mahdpankti.  7 Pankti. 

135 

Kumdra.  Yama. 

Anushtup. 

136 

Seven  Munis  : The  Kevins. 

Juti.  Vdtajdti. 

ViprajQti.  Vri- 
shinaka.  Etasa. 
ltisyasringa. 

The  same. 

137 

The  Seven  Visvedevaa. 

Risbis. 

Anushtup. 

138 

Anga.  Indra. 

Jagati. 

139 

Visvdvasu.  Sfirya.  Visvdvasu. 

Triahtup. 

140 

Agni  Pavaka.  Agui. 

1 Vishtdrapankti.  2-4  Sa- 
tobrihati.  5 Uparisbtdj- 
jyotis.  6 Tritshtup. 

141 

Agni  Tlpasa.  Visvedevas. 

AnuAtup. 

142 

Jaritar.  Drona.  Agni. 

Sdriarikva. 

Stambamitra. 

Triahtup.  1,  2 Jagatt.  7,  8 
Anushtup. 

143 

Atri.  Alvins. 

Anushtup. 

144 

Supar’a,  Ordh-  Iudra. 
vakriaana. 

1,  3,  4 Gdyatri.  2 Brihati. 
5 Satobrihati.  6 Viahtdra- 
pankti. 

145 

Indrdnt.  Removal  of  Rival. 

Anushtup.  6 Pankti. 

U6 

Devamuni.  Aranydni. 

Anushtup. 

147 

Suvedas.  Indra. 

Jagatf.  5 Trishtup. 

148 

Prithu  Vainya.  The  same. 

Trishtup. 

149 

Archan.  Savitar. 

The  same. 

150 

Mrillka.  Agni, 

1-3  Brihatt.  4 Uparisht.1 
jyotia  or  Jagati,.  5 Up 
riahtdjjyotis. 

151 

Sraddhl  Sraddhd  (Faith). 

Anushtup. 

152 

SAaa.  Indra, 

The  same. 

153 

Indra’*  Mothers.  The  same. 

Gdyatri. 

154 

Yamt.  New  Life. 

Anushtup. 

155 

Sirimbitha.  Averting  of  Misfortune. 

Brahman&ipati.  ViBve- 
devag. 

The  »auoe. 

156 

Ketu.  Agni. 

Gdyatri. 

INDEX  OF  HYMNS. 


7 Bhuvaua,  or  Visvedevas. 

Sadhana. 

8 Chakshua.  Sftrya. 

9 Sachf  Paulomi.  Saclii  Pauloint 

0 Purana.  Indra. 

1 Yakshm.urisana.  Removal  of  Phthisic 

2 Rakuhoha.  Against  Mihcamage 

J Vivriha.  Removal  of  Phthisis. 

4 Piadieta*.  Dissipation  ot  Bad  Dreams 

5 Kapota.  Visvedevas. 

t)  Rishuhha.  Removal  of  Rivals 

7 ViavAmitr.i  and  India. 

Jam.idagut. 

8 Anils.  V.ivu. 


Anils.  Y.iyu. 

Sahara.  Cows. 

Vibhiiij.  Surya. 

Ita.  Indra. 

Samvarta.  Ushas 
Dhrnva.  The  King 

Abhivarfa.  The  »>ame. 

Oidh  vagi  .Ivan.  Tiie  Pieas-shmes. 

Siinu.  Hibhuit.  Agn\ 

Pstanga.  M iyabheda. 

Arishtauemi.  T.iik»hya. 

Sibi.  Pratarda-  India, 

na.  VdsuLmuias. 

Jay  a.  The  same. 

Piacha.  Sapia-  Visvedevai. 
ilia,  (ihanua. 

Tapunu  irdliau.  Brihaspati. 

PrujdvAu  The  SaentKvr.  Hu  Wife 

The  Hotai. 

Tvaaht  ir  or  Benediction  of  the  Kanin  }o 


Tvaaht  ir  or 
Vishnu. 

Sutyadhriti.  Aditi. 

Ula.  * Vayu. 

Vatsa.  Agni. 

Hyena.  Agni  Jitavedas. 

bdipaidjfti.  Silipardjhi,  or  S.uya. 

AgUamarshana.  (J  teat  ion. 

Samvanana.  Agni.  Unanimity. 


Dvipidi  Tihhtup. 

Gsyati  i. 

\nushtup. 

Tiishtup. 

Tiiditup.  j Anushtup. 

A mi'll  tup. 

I lie  f-ame. 

12,  1 Anush  tup.  I?  Tudi 
tup  5 IViukti. 

Tn-hiup. 

Auu  dii  up.  5 Malidpankti. 


Tiishtup. 

The  same. 

Jagati.  4 Astarapanku. 
G.iy.itii. 

Iivip.uhi  Viraj. 

Anush  tup. 

The  same. 
it  t}atn. 

Anushtup  2 Gfiyatii. 
i Jagati  2.  J 7h  wlitujt, 
Tiishtup. 

1 Annshtup.  2,  J Tiithtup. 

Ti  ithtup. 

The  uame. 


Anushtup. 

Gay  alt  5. 
The  same. 


Aniwhtup. 

Anushtup.  3 Tiishtup. 


GENERAL  INDEX  OF  HYMNS. 

AU'ORDINU  TO  DEITIES  AND  SUBJECTS.* 


X 27. 
*7. 


I)  KIT  IKS  OF  DUVN. 


COSMIC  DEITIES. 

Ribhm.  1.20.110.111  HI.  60.  IV 


lap.  Dawn.  Morning  — l 48.49.  92 
13  128  124  III.  61.  IV.  51.  52  V. 

9 80.  VI.  64.65.  VIJ.  75-81.  X 172 
■ Alvins.  —I.  84  46.  47  112.  116- 
20.  157  158.  180-184.  II  39.  Ill  58 
V 43-45.  V 73-77  VI.  62.  63  VI 1. 
17-74.  VIII.  5 8-10  22.  26.  35  62. 
'4  76  V&lakhilya  Hymns,  at  the 
wPof  VIII  9 X 39-41.  106  143. 
dhikiivan,  Dadlnkr.ia  - IV.  38  40. 
HI  44 

m as  a Clod  of  Morning.—  IV.  13  14 

YA  HUN  A AND  SUN-GODS 
nnin. — I.  21  25.  II.  28.  V.  85  VII 
36.  89  VIII  41.42. 
tr«  - HI.  59  VII.  41. 
runa,  Mitra,  Aryaman  -I.  41 
itra  and  Vanina. — 1.136  137  151- 
153.  V.  62-72.  VI.  67.  VI  l 60-66 
VIII.  25.  X.  132.  185. 
lityas  - U.  27.  VII.  51.  52.  VI II 
IS.  47.  56. 

irya.-l.  50  116.  X.  37.  158. 
witar.-I.35.  II.  38.  IV.  53.54  V 81. 
vl  VI.  71.  VII  38  45  X 139.  149. 
(khan  -I  42.  138.  VI.  53-56  58. 
X 26. 

"•linn  -I  154  156.  VII  99  luO. 
w.nkannan. — X 81.  82. 

X.  1 23. 

’iklir/Lj.—  X.  170. 

'bkshyn.-.-X.  178. 

^rI.arAjfiU  or  Stirya  X 189 


33-37  VII.  48 

Heaven  and  Earth.- -I  159  160.  185 
IV  56  VI  70.  VII.  53. 

Pntlml  -V.  84. 

Saras  vat  i VI.  61.  VII  95-96 

Wateis— VII.  17.  49.  X.  9 Waters 
or  Cows.  -X.  19 

Son  of  Waters.  Ap&mnapsU  -II  35 

Soma  —I  91.  VIII.  48.  68  X.  25 

COLLECTIVE  AND  MISCELLA- 
NEOUS DEITIES. 

Visvedevas,  All  Gods — 1.14.89  90 
106.  107  122.  139.  186.  II.  29.  31 
III  54-57  IV.  »5o.  V.  41-51.  VI. 
49  52  VII  34  36.  37.  39.  40.  42. 
43.  VIII  27-30.  72.  X.  31.  35  36 
63-66.  92  93  100. 

Asvm«  Savitar,  Agni.  Heaven  and 
E nth.  Vishnu  I 22 

Vitvu,  India.  MitVa,  Vanina.  Visve- 
devas P.^han, Wateis.  Agni.— 1.23. 

Heaven  and  Earth,  Indra,  Tvashtar, 
fvilkft,  Sinivali  — II.  32 

Indra,  Vftvu.  Mitra.  Varuna,  Asvin*, 
Visvedevas,  Sarasv.it.t,  Dvans,  Pii- 
thivi  -II  41. 

Imlra.  Varuna,  Buhaspati.  PiisImd, 
Sivitar  Soma  Miua.  Vanina  —III. 
62 

Mitra,  Varuna  Adit } as,  Aavins,  V:\yu, 
Siirva,  PavimAna,  the  Cow. — X III. 
90. 


I follow  tlie  classification  Hiid  Hirangemenl  adopted  hy  Professor  Lud« 
iu  !ii«  Tianelntion  The  names  of  many  of  the  deities  are  repeated  in 
Sections  in  accordance  with  the  subjects  of  the  hymns  addressed  to 
. Plr^  For  instance,  the  great  deeds  of  Imlra  are  i elated  in  hymns  placed  lu 
e ^ORUiogomcftl  and  Mythical  Section. 


,NI  {JATAVEDAS  and 
VAISVANARA). 

I.  1.  12.  26.  27.  31.  36.  44.  45.  58-60. 
65-70.  94*99.  127.  128.  140.  141. 
143-150.  189.  II.  1.  2.  4-10.  III.  1- 
3.  5-7.  9-11.  13-28.  IV.  1-12.  15. 
V.  1-4.6-11.  13-28.  VI.  1-16.  48. 
VII.  1.  3.  4-17.  VIII.  11.  19.  23. 
39,  43.  44.  49.  60.  61.  64.  64.  73. 
91.  92.  X.  1-8.  11.  12.  20.  21.  45. 
46.  79.  80  87.  88.  91.  115.  118.  122. 
140.  142.  150.  156.  176.  187.  188. 


INDRA  (SATAKRATU,  SAKRA, 
MANYU.) 

I 4-11.  16.  30.  54-57.  61-63.  80-84. 
100-104.  121.  129  133.  135.  169. 
173-178.  II  11-22.  30.  III.  30-32. 
34-52.  IV.  16.  17.  19.  25.  29.  31. 
32.  46  V.  29-39.  VI.  17-26.  28-47. 
VII  19-32  VIII  1-4.  6,  12-17.  21. 
24  32-34.  36.  37.  45.  46.  50-55.  57. 
59  65  67.  69.  71.  77-79.  81.  82.84- 

88.  VALkhilyft,  1-6.  X 22-24.  29. 
32.  42-44.  47  50.  54.  55.  73.  74. 

89.  96.  104  105.  112.  113. 116.  120. 
131.  133.  134.  138.  144.  147.  148. 
152  153.  160. 171  179. 180.  Manyu. 
X.  83  84 


GODS  OF  STORM,  WIND, 
AND  RAIN. 

Maruts  — I.  37-39.  64.  85-88.  166-168. 
171  II  34.  V.  52-60.  87.  VI.  66.  VII. 
56-59.  VIII.  7.  *20.  83.  X.  77.  78. 
Rudra. — I.  43.  114.  II.  33.  VII.  46. 
VAyu. — 1.  2.  134.  IV.  47.  48.  VII. 

90-92.  X.  168.  186. 

Parjanya.— V.  83.  VII.  101.  102. 

LORD  OF  PRAYER. 
Br&hinanasp&ti  or  Brihaspati. — I.  18. 
40  190.  II.  23-26.  IV.  50.  VI.  73. 
VII.  97.  98.  X-  182. 

Indra  and  Brahmanaspati.— IV.  49. 


DUAL  DEITIES. 
Indra-Varuna.— I.  17.  IV.  41.  VI.  68. 

VII.  82.  84.  85.  V&Iakhilya,  11. 
Iudra-Pushan. — VI.  57. 
lndra-Vishnu. — VI.  69.  • 

Indra- Agni — I.  21.  108.  109.  III.  ] 2. 
V.  86.  VI.  59.  60.  VII.  93.  94.  VIII. 
88.  40. 

Agni-Maruts.— I.  19. 

Iudra-Soma — VI.  72.  VII.  104. 
Agni-Soina. — I.  93. 

Soma-Rudm.-  VI.  74. 

Soina-Pushan. — II.  40. 


LITURGICAL  HYMNS.  PRAYERS 
CHARMS. 


Visvedevas — X.  114.  Sacred  Metres- 
— X.  130.  Praise  of  the  Angina 
ses. — X.  62.  The  Sacrificer  and  hii 
Wife. — VIII.  31.  The  Sacrificer, 
Wife,  and  Hotar.  — X.  183  Faith,  i 
X.  151.  Visvedevas. — X.  157.  Staid 
of  the  Doad^-X.  154.  DaksM 
(Priests’  Guerdon). — X.  107.  Ilitvi- 
jas  (Priests).— Vdlakhilya.  10.  X 

101.  Apris. — I 13.  142.  188.  II.  3 
III.  4.  V.  5.  VII.  2.  IX.  5-  X.  70 
110.  Production  of  Sacrificial  1’ ire 
—III.  29.  Sacrificial  Stake.— Ill 
8.  Pestle  and  Mortar. -1. 28.  Pre* 
stones. — X.  76.  94.  175.  Havirdld 
mis.— X.  13.  Ritus  (Seasons).-! 


36.  37.  Soma  PavamAna  — IX.  !-■ 
1-114.  Praise  of  the  Horse- 
162.  163.  Waters,  or  Son  of  Waten 
-X.  30.  Saranyft,  Sar* 

iratl,  Waters,  Soma.— X.  17.  Sur) 
BridaL-X.  85  VAstoshpati  (G«»> 
iian  of  the  House).— VII.  « • 

tshetrapati  (Lord  of  < * 

rod  S1U  (Furrow).— IV.  67-  ) 

af  Food.  I.  187. 

less  of  the  Forest).— X . 1 - , 

—X.  127.  Averting  Misfort**  J 
X.  165.  Benediction  of  the  Lm 


general  index  of  hyhnb. 


X 187.  Against  Miscarriage.— 
162.  Asvins. — V.  78.  Maruts.— 
172.  Soma  Pavamdna. — IX.  114. 
isvedevas. — X.  137.  Cows. — X. 
59.  Water,  Grass,  Surya.-- I.  191. 
idra  —VIII.  80.  Mitra,  Varuna, 
gni,  Visvedevas,  Praise  of  Rivers. 
-VII.  50.  Visvedevas. — X.  126. 
harm  against  Phthisis.— X.  161. 
53.  Charm  against  Evil  Dreams.— 
164.  Indra. — I.  29.  The  Bird 
f Good  Omen.— II.  42.  43.  The 
irdof  111  Omen. — X.  165.  Charm 
gainst  a rival  Wife. — X.  145.  SachS 
aulomi  —X.  159.  Visvedevas.— 
128.  141.  Removal  of  a Rival  — 
166  Benediction  of  the  King.— 
i.  173.  174.  Unanimity.— X.  191. 
aine,  the  Fathers,  the  Dogs. — X. 
4.  The  Fathers.— X.  15.  Agni  — 
L 16.  Mrityu,  Dhdtar,  TvashUr, 
he  Pitrimedha,  Praj&pati.— X.  18. 
/isvedevas  — X.  56.  Pavamdua 
loma. — IX.  14.  6414. 

YMNS  RELATING  TO  COSMO- 
10NY,  MYTHS,  HISTORY,  AND 
CIVILIZATION 
cation  of  the  World. — X.  129  190. 
I'reatiou  by  Sacrifice  of  Purusha  — 
X.  90.  Ka.— X.  121.  The  Gods. 

X 52  72.  ViavedevaB. — I.  105  164 
181.  Miyftbheda.— X.  177.  Agni, 
Smya,  Waters,  the  Cow,  Ghrita  — 
IV.  58.  Rivalry  of  Indra  and 
Varuna.— IV.  42.  X.  124.  India’s 
Birth.— IV.  18.  Indra.  Praise  of 
die  Falcon. — IV.  26.  Praise  of  the 
falcon  — IV.  27.  Indra  and  Soma. 
"IV.  28.  Indra  and  Usha*.— IV. 


30.  Indra.— I.  32.  33. 51.  53.  X 27. 
48.  49.  67.68.99. 102.111.119.167. 
Indra.  Vaaukra. — X.  28.  Indra. 
Maruts.  Agastya. — X.  165.  170 
Maruts.— V.  61.  Indra.  Vdk  — VIIL 
89.  Agni.  The  Gods.— X.  51.  Agni 
Sauchika.  The  Gods.— X.  53.  Indra. 
Surya.  Atii. — V.  40.  Vrishdkapi. 
Indrdnt.  Indra.  — X.  86.  Urvasi. 
Pururavaa  — X 95.  Saramd.  Pams. 
—X  108.  Visvedevas.— X.  57.  Re- 
call of  the  Spirit. — X 58.  Nirriti. 
Soma.  Asuniti.  Earth.  Heaven  and 
Earth.— X.  59.  Asanviti.  Iudra- 
Subandhu’s  Recall  to  Life.  The 
Hands  — X.  60.  Vak  Ambhrini. — X. 
125.  J&anacu—  X 71.  Yama. — X. 
135  Praise  of  the  Rivers. — X 75. 
Vasishtha  and  the  RiverB.— III.  33. 
Indra  and  Parvata,  Indra,  Vak  Sa- 
sarpaii.  Praise  of  the  Chariot. — 
III.  53.  India,  Chdyatndnu’s  Muni- 
ficence.— V.  27.  Indra.  Sudds’* 
Munificence. — VII.  18  Vasishlha’s 
Sons.  Vasishtha. — VII.  33.  Indra 
and  Varuna. — V 1 1. 83  Dadhikrdv  an. 
— IV.  38.  Agni.— V,  12.  Savanaya’s 
Munificence. — I.  125.  Bhdvayavya 
and  Romasd.— 1 126.  Lopdmudrd 

and  Agastya. — 1. 179  Asvins.—  V 1 1 1 . 
75  Agui.-X  69.  The  Gods.— X. 
98.  Visvedevas.  Kurusravana’s  Mu 
nificence  — X.33.  Praskanva’s  Muni- 
ficence.— Vdlakhily a.  7.  8.  Kesins. 
—X.  136.  Visvedevas.— X.  109. 
The  Frogs.— VII.  103.  Weapons  of 
War.— VI.  75.  Indra.— X.  38.  103. 
Soma  Pavamdna.- -IX  112.  Medi- 
cinal Herbs.— X.  97.  The  Dice.  - 
X.  34.  Liberality.— X 117. 


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC. 

hiflwa,  a certain  So-  486,  487,  493,512,  514,  182,  185-189,  199  202 

lift  ceremony,  136,  400  523,  5 18,  5 10,  5 11, 55 1,  217-220,  222-224  23?' 

“,tes  579,607.  250,254-257,  266,267,’ 

hiv.u  ta,  a hymn  or  of  Aditi  = Agm,  145.  272,273,309  319  322, 

firing  for  success,  603  = the  Earth,  288.  323,331,  349, 355,’ 383- 

^c.  = the  Cosmic  Cow,  391,394,395,397,401- 

ortum,  charm  against,  357.  401,408  410,419  422 

>1 2,  613.  Adit}  a,  son  of  Aditi,  es-  423-427,432,  434,415- 

c-enes,  Latin  name  of  pccially  Varuna  and  448,  453  456,  460  464 

he  Asiknt,  the  river  the  Sun, 4,  81,  219,253,  4‘>7-t69  471-4 7.5  477 

Hhen&b,  150,  490  note  263,  326,330,  405,  418,  478,  481-4, si,  192,  491- 

mn  and  Eve,  the  In-  453,  460,  478,  483,487,  496,502,505,506,510- 

hxn,  392  note.  514,565,581.  514,519-522,530,539, 

lhavaniya,  one  of  the  Adityas  Gods,  seven  or  510,  549,  552-554,  557, 

three  large  Soma  re-  eight  in  number,  12,  559,  560-564,  566-568, 

1 epUcles,  108,124,347,  35,39,40,48,  52,60,  570,571,573,574,  577, 

370  notes.  6 1,  81  83. 130, 142-144,  582,  585-587,  592  595- 

Ihrigu,  a Rishi  o t a 147,  164. 165, 168, 1 75,  598, 600,  602-604, 606- 

prince,  132,  153.  3 76,  193,  196,197,210,  609,  611,  612 

ihvaryu(s)  priest,  211,  230,  253, 306,  382,  Agm,  Lord  of  Heaven 
priests  who  perform  432,431,450,458,470-  and  Lai th,  8 ; Lord  of 

the  practical  work  of  472,  474-177.  487,501,  Light,  144,  189  , idem 

sacrifice,  3,  97,  171,  535.  545, 571, 573,  575,  titled  with  the  Sun, 

219,277,278,302,350.  586,  592,  595.  9,  187,  386,  426,  467,' 

355,  362,  384,  405,406,  the  eight  names  of,  513,  51 1;  the  Moon  at, 

111,423-425,440,454,  487.  night.  513.  identified 

4*6,521.  Adoption  of  children,  6.  with  Varuna,  390;  with 

fii-Purusha,  the  Prime-  Agastye  a great  Vedic  Varuna  and  Mi tra,  13  ; 

V*1  Presiding  Male  or  Risht,  36,  118,  464.  created  by  the  G<>ds, 

Embodied  Spirit,  518,  Agh.l  days,  when  the  513,514,  Son  of  Dyaus, 
376  notes.  moon  is  m the  eonstel-  415,  4 16  ; son  of  Dawn, 

Infinity,  Infinite  lation  Magh.-l,  502.  558  ; of  Earth,  385  ; 

Nature,  the  Mother  of  Agni,  God  of  Fiic  and  of  Heaven  and  Earth, 
the  Gods,  4,  12,  15,  22,  Light,  1 10,  20,  30,  9,  3S3.  390,  395,  447, 

30,  43-45,  52,  60,  05,  35,  37-40,  43-48,  51.  585  ; of  Heaven  and 

:ri'  80>  83-85,  89,  131,  52,  56,  58,  61,  65,  72,  Earth,  Waters,  Tvash- 

l43>  160, 164,  190,  197,  7?,  76,  84,  88,  89,  94,  tar,  Brigus,  447  ; com- 

198>  210,  253,  254,  288,  96,99.100,125,  126,  prising  other  Gods, 

3l5>  328,  332,  338,  357,  131  133,143  147,  154-  396  ; produced  bv  at- 

337,  894,  397,418,  156, 161,  163,  164,  166,  tuition,  1,  201,  386, 

*■  467>  470-470,  483,  168, 109, 174,  175, 179-  389,  195,  559  ; man’s 


638 


INDEX  OP  NAMES,  ETC. 


father  & brother,  389;  Agni’  a religious  cere-  Ajas,  a non- Aryan  tribe 

head  and  height  of  mony,  558.  20. 

heaven,  188;  born  from  AgnishvAttaa,  a class  of  Akhandala,  Destroyer,  a 
the  mouth  of  Purusha,  Manes,  401  note.  name  of  Indra,  142. 

519;  spiritual  husband  Agrayana,  a certain  Soma  Aksha,  said  to  be  a man’s 
of  maidens,  506  ; con-  libation,  330  note.  name,  195  note. 

secrator  of  marriage,  Agriculture,  519  ; thebe-  AksharA,  Speech,  V4k 
506  ; giver  of  children  ginning  of,  421  note  ; 14,41. 

495  ; invoked  in  battle,  ploughing,  150,  1 53,  Al&yya,  perhaps  a name 
132,  222,  224, 482, 496  ; 548, 563  ; sowing,  527  ; of  Indra,  323. 

jungle-clearing  fire,  reaping, 152, 577;sickle,  All-God,  Indra,  248; 
218,586,608;  slayer  227;  threshing,  450;  Yama  400  note. 

of  fiends,  510-512;  winnowing,  419,  480;  All-Gods,  51,  52,  410, 5/1 

punisher  of  sin,  3 ; barley,  grain,  480,577.  See  Visvedeyas. 
ripener  of  plants,  513;  Ahavanlya,  one  of  the  Amrit,  Amrita,  nectar 
his  installation  # as  three  sacrificial  fires,  ambrosia,  rain,  milk, 

Priest  of  Gods,  454,  186,  386  notes.  6,  57,  207,  253,  263, 

455;  his  flight  from  Ahi,  the  Dragon  or  Ser-  271,326,327,332,376, 
his  duties,  446,453,  pent-demon  who  with-  379,395,425,457,568, 

454;  Piiest,  Meseen-  holds  the  rain,  113,  585,607. 

ger,  oblation -bearer,  239,  240, 245,  449,  472,  Anava,  Anavas,  descen- 

146,  447,  483;  bis  479,  555.  d^its  of  the  epony- 

divine  functions,  146,  Ahibudhnya,  the  Dragon  mous  chief  Anu. 

512;  his  three  births,  of  the  Deep,  regent  of  Aucestral  spirits,  74.  Sr 

445  ; three  forms,  513,  of  the  sea  of  air,  37,  Fathers. 

549  ; three  homes,  467;  39,43,472,477,523.  AnghAii,  one  of  the  guar 

three  powers,  445;  AhtBuva,  a demon  of  the  diansof  Soma, 501  note 
three  stations,  445.  air,  169,  171,  225,  588.  Angiras,  a semi-diviu« 
4gn!dh,  kindler,  priest  Ahnav&yy a,  said  to  be  a patriarchal  Bishi ; als< 
who  kindles,  the  sa-  man’s  name,  191  note.  a name  of  Agni,  135, 

crificial  fire,  384,  440,  Ahura,  Zend  form  of  174,  186-188,200,222, 
521.  Asura,  High  God,  366  2 23,  231,255,373, 398, 

ignihotra,  daily  oblation  note.  448, 469,  478, 480,  498, 

to  Agni  and  Gods,  455  Aija,  Pururavas  son  of  524. 
note.  111.  530  note.  Angiras«s,  descendants 

ignimftruta,  a ceremony  Aindrav&yava,  a libation  of  Angiras,  46,  48,  52, 
in  which  Agni  is  wor*  to  Indra  and  V&yu,  73,  76,  86,  121,  138, 

shipped  first  and  then  106  note.  167,  176,  183, 205,  235 

the  Maruts,  126  note.  Aitareya-Br&hmana,  186.  309,  344,  376, 379, 898, 

gni  pranayana,  ceremo-  242,  484, 467, 577, 604.  399,  419,  460,  466, 469 

ny  of  carrying  fire  to  Aja,  the  Unborn,  the  478,  484, 489, 494, 5 
the  altar,  604  note.  Birthless,  498.  554, 583, 591, 598,  0 • 

gnis,  Agni  in  various  Aja  Ekap&d,  the  Unborn  Angirasa,  a descen 
forms,  166,  337.  Oue-footed,  the  Sud,  of , or  belonging  to>^, 

• • . — iW«a  a£_  nn  * llM 


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC. 


639 


mate,  tame  and  wild,  crifice,  558.  Arjtkas,  name  of  a people, 

orse, bull,  cow,  passim;  ApnnvAna,  an  ancient  , 317. 
oat,  19,  321,402,  418  ; Rishi,  254.  Arjikiya,  »=  Arjika,  207, 

ss,  232,  286 ; dog,  53,  Apif,  Aprts,  a class  of  490. 

14,  101,  265,  368  ; lion  propitiatory  hymns,  3,  Arjuna,  a man’s  name,  21. 

.9,  361,  421,  422,479;  272,  483,  553.  Arjuneya,  Kutsa  descen 

‘lephant,  172, 190,304;  Apsaras,  a celestial  dant  of  Arjunar  21, 
mffalo,  119,  1*23,  176,  nymph,  394,  528,  589.  104. 

292  ; Gaul'S,  114,  191,  the,  the  chief,  Ur-  Arjunis,  two  lunar  man 

573  ; antelope,  114  ; vast,  35,  38,  412.  sions,  50*2. 

deer,  107,  291  ; ape,  Apsarases,  335,  528,  529,  Arks,  the  Sun,  549. 

r>07 ; wild-boar,  226,  582:  Aiksha,  patronymic,  son 

421,  479  ; wolf,  174,  names  of  six,  528.  of  RiUha,  213. 

‘209,211,281,530,573;  Aptya,  Aptyas,  dwelling  Armaiti,  in  the  Areata—  4 
jackal,  4*21  ; hyena,  in  water,  a class  of  earth,  522  note. 

487;  fox,  421  ; serpent,  deities,  134,  197,  198,  Aimour.  31.  119,  197, 

99,  471  ; emmet,  403  ; 39<»,  565.  343,  365, 368,  376,  494, 

vulture,  101,  355,  569  ; Apvd,  colic  personified,  541. 

owl,  100,  101;  swan,  545.  Arrian,  148. 

176,  291  ; dove,  593,  Arodiosia,  175  note.  Arrow,  the  stroke  of  dis- 

599  ; cuckoo,  101  ; Ara<Ju,  a kind  of  tree,  ease  or  death.  71,  143. 

starling,  176;  king-fish-  195.  the  thunderbolt, 

er,  534  ; blue  jay,  634.  Aradva,said  to  bea  man’s  226. 
tiisa,  one  of  the  Adityas,  name,  195  note.  Arshtishena,  son  of  Rish- 

7,82,  487  note*.  Aramati,  the  Goddess  of  tishena,  536. 

Ausu,  a protect  of  the  Devotion,  38,  41,  46,  Artificer  of  Gods  ; see 
Anvius,  118.  68,  474,  522.  Tvaditar. 

Ansimiatf,  a mystical  =*  Karth,  522.  Arushah,  the  Red,  Agni 

river  of  air,  246,  483.  Aranis,  fire-sticks,  186,  or  the  thunderbolt, 
i Anu,  the  eponymits  of  426  notes.  443  note. 

an  Aryau  tribe,  19,  Arany Ant.  Goddess  of  the  Arushas,  Agui’s  horses, 
113,  131.  ‘ Wood,  589,  599.  ^ 48  note. 

loumati,  Divine  Favour  Ararn,  name  of  a fiend,  Arya,  Aiyan,  Aryas,  8, 
Personified,  699,  600  ; 538.  18,  72,  70,  91, 144, 153, 

* Lunar  Goddess,  332.  AiAyi,  a witch  or  she-  159,256,262,352,395, 
to'wbtup,  a Vedic  and  fiend,  594.  436, 442, 451,  464,  473, 

dttsical  metre,  53,571,  Arbuda,  name  of  a de-  475,482,499,509,539, 
5'7.  mou,  113, 169,171,479,  584,592. 

*nuy4ja,  after-sacrifioe,  554.  Ary aman,  one  of  the  chief 

final  sacrifice,  608.  Ardihn,  said  to  be  a Ri*  Adityas,  38,  40,  43-45, 
kpAlfc,  a girl  healed  by  ahi’s  name,  591  note.  52,  58,  60-63,  65;  66, 

hdra,  236.  Architect  of  the  worlds,  78,  80,  89,  143,  146, 

^ 507.  497  ^ 147,  160.162,164-366, 

JMna,  the  passage  lead-  Arjtka,a  district  in  N.-W*  168, 193, 197, 210, 230, 

, ...  .A.  A1Q  oeo  O RQ  Q1  ^ 338, 


640 


index  of  names,  etc. 


349,377,382.  425,  433,  AsvaUyana.  a famous 
440,  407,  473,474.  4S0,  writer  on  ritual,  384, 

487,  503,  505,  506,  516,  407  notes. 

523  5° 4 572.573,586,  Asvamedha,  Horse-sacri- 
«06:  “ ’ ' fice,  595  «o<e. 

Aaamkti,  said  to  be  the  AmameOha,  a man  . 
name  of  a king,  468,  name,  21b,  .IS. 

46-1  now.  Asvamedha,  aon  of  Asva- 

Asanea,  the  name  of  a medha,  ‘214. 

chieftain,  106,107,173.  Asva.tha,  a aaevnd  tree 
Asikni,  the  liver  Cheuib,  426,  4j  ., 


150,  490. 

Asmanvatl,  Stony,  the 
name  of  a stream,  456 
Ass,  the  steed  of  the  As- 
vins,  232. 

Asses,  presented  to 
priests,  *266. 

Asterism(s),  318,  458, 

473,  5*24  notes. 
Aatrabudhna,  a man  8 
name,  602  note. 
Aatrabudhna,  sou  of  As- 
trabudhna,  602 
Asunlti,  Spirit- world  ; 
deity  of  funeiala,  402, 
462,  463. 

Asura,  High  God,  3,  8, 30, 
56,  146,  149,  184,  236, 
330,  306,392,395,  426, 
457,  460,  478,  522,  523, 
532.  537,538,578,601. 

lord,  king,  525  note. 

Aauras,  5,  8,  4»8,  670. 
592. 

Asura,  a demon,  246,  456, 
578,  584 

AsUras,  40,  61,160,  245 


Asvins,  the  Horsemen, 
Twin  heralds  of  Dawn, 
11,  39,  15,  48,  52,  67- 
73,  116-119,  126-131, 
143  111.  U6,  152-154, 
166-164,  167,  175  177, 
195,  220,  221,  231-233, 
242,  *261 , ‘266,  2*>7.  275, 

337,349,384,404.413, 

415,  422,  426,  432,  436- 
410.454,463,  405,  466, 
472,  176,  477,496,502, 
501,523-525,548,  549, 

; 571,575,578,587,613. 

their  Consoi  t,  69, 

438  , their  character, 
487  ; their  miracles, 
220,  *221,  437-439  ; 

physicians,  129,  143 

232,  137  ; first  teachers 
of  agricultme,  153  ; 
their  chariot,  67-69, 
71,  118,  152,  153,220, 
232,  267,  436,  438,  440, 
502. 

Asvya,  a family  name, 
195,  196. 


»th~  . 

A8ura  »l»y«r,  Agm,  13.  1». ""  1 

A»uri, » female  fiend,  418  ^ m 

k tii,hi  158  A tharva- veda,  The  Hymns 

Asva,  a ol tbe>86>  166, 199, 387, 

Aavaghna,  the  pair  y ^ tQ()  ^ 46t-  4C9^ 
mic  of  a prince,  468. 


507,519,520,  552,565, 
583,  587,  594.  598,  609, 
613. 

Atir&tra,  a certain  Soma 
ceremony,  97. 

Atitlugu,  said  to  be  a 
man’s  name,  450  note. 
Atithigva,  a name  of  Di- 
vod&sa.  22,  212,  213, 
263,  450. 

Atithyeshti,  a certain  re- 
ligious cetemony,  196 
note. 

Atka,  a man’s  name,  451, 
538. 

Atmospheres,  three,  498. 
Atri,  an  ancient  Hislii, 
68,  71,  118,  177-179, 
2 20,  221,3  52,437,496, 
498,  577,  587,  592. 
Atris,  167,178,180. 
At^trgnibhtoma,  a religi- 
ous ceiemony,  the 
cond  part  of  the  Jyo 
tibhtonia,  558  note. 
Aufrecht,  Prof.  Th.,  54 
205,  237,  485. 
AnlAna,  son  of  Ula,  53b 
AurnavAbha,  son  of  Ui 
navabha,  a demon  < 
drought,  171,  225. 
Aurva,  an  ancient  lhsli 
254. 

Auaija,  Kakshlvftn  son  - 

Usij,  538. 

Automat,  Vanina,  78. 
Autumn,  518. 
Autumns,  42,  61. 

Avabhritha,  a bath 
cleansing  Soma  p a 

241. 

Axe,  5,  79,  100,  5221, 3. 

456,  467,  541- 

Agoi,  443  ; 

. i javVv 


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC. 


641 


AyAsya,  a Rishi's  name,  Name,  463. 

278  note , 478.  Bhal&nas,  a non- Aryan 

Ayu,  a Proper  Name  ; tribe,  18. 
man  ; living  being,  86,  Bharadv&ja,  a great  Rishi, 
139, 262, 203, 404, 451.  352,  577,  592,  606* 

Bharata,  Warrior ; a name, 
Babb,  the,  Agni,  468.  See  10. 

Infant.  Bharatas,  10,  35. 

Babhru,  a king  or  a Rishi,  Bh&rati,  a Goddess  of 
153.  Speech,  4,  273,  463, 

Balbaja,  a kind  of  coarse  484,  553. 

grass,  265.  Bheda,a  non- Aryan  king, 

Balbdtha,  a non- Aryan  20,  80. 

chief  190.  BhrAja,  a guard  of  Soma, 

Bandhu,  a Rishi,  464.  501  note. 

Barber,  115,  586.  Bhrigu,  an  ancient  Rishi, 

B4rbatas,  guards  of  Soma,  112,  186,  254,  482. 

501  note.  Bhrigus,  17, 112, 121, 175, 

Barhis,  altar  or  seat  of  254, 369,  399,  419,  438, 
sacred  grass,  323  note.  446,  447,  523,  568. 
Barley,  5,  107,  227,  237,  Bhujyu,  a prottgt  of  the 
4^  577.  Asvins,  68,  70,  113, 

Battle,  436,  465.  117,  171,  192,  223,  250 

Beard,  171, 530;  of  Indra,  437,  439,  476,  587. 

412,  413,  532.  Bhutinsa,  a Rishi,  549. 

Bee,  439,  548.  Bird,  Soma,  341.  357 

B<nfey,  Prof.,  19,  277,  the,  the  Sun,  386,  459, 
278,  288,  301, 366, 393.  547, 557 , 569,  604,  608 ; 

Bergaigne,  Prof.  A.,  95,  the  Moon,  338. 

98. 205,  287,  292,  314,  Birds, Agni  and  Soma.  358. 

331, 338, 367,  390, 400,  & -■  Animals. 

457,462,  487  , 507  , 509,  Black  Drop,  the  darken- 
514,  563,  571,  600.  . ed  Moon,  246. 

iBhaga,  an  Aditya,  God  of  Black  skin,  aborigines, 296 
| Good  Fortune,  14,  15,  Bloomfield,  Prof.  M„  404. 

; 38,41-46,  48,  05,  143,  Boar,  54,  220,  537  ; - 
[ 146, 265, 275,  298,306,  Soma,  358. 

338,  364,368,377,382,  Boat,  64,  84,  245,  327, 
425, 432, 471, 473, 477,  384,  561.  See  Ship- 

480,  487, 503,  505,622,  Body,  parts  of  the,  613. 
524, 525,  571,  586.  Boldness,  personified,  38. 
^gmta-Pur4ua,  520.  Bowls,  the  two,  heaven 
a Proper  and  earth,  444. 


Bradke,  P.  von,  64. 

Brahma,  391,  564  notes. 

Brahma,  466,  552,  556, 
566  notes. 

Brahmaoh&ri,  a religious 
student,  552. 

Brahman,  9,  25,  125, 140, 
167,  173,  207,  239,355, 
380,  384,  422,  454,469, 
486,  492,505,515,  521, 
549,552,556,558,  562, 
572,  586. 

Brahmans,  46,  65,  170, 
225,  245,  448,  485, 
501,  503 

BiAiman,  98,  244,  267, 
519,  535,  536. 

Brahmans,  96,  97,  191, 
391,  403,  485. 

Brahmanaspati,  Lord  of 
Prayer,  45,  48,  91,  92, 
163,  338,  456,  474, 
486,  594,  598,  602,603. 

Bridal,  of  Suryil,  501.502. 

ceremonies,  503-506. 

Bride,  benediction  on  a, 
506. 

Bridge,  296. 

Brihaddiva,  a Rishi,  565. 

Brihaddivd,  a Goddess 
connected  with  111  and 
Sarasvat!,  473. 

Brihadratha,  name  of  a 

. chief,  45 1 . 

Brihaduktha,  a Rishi, 
458-460. 

Brihaspati  = Brahmanas- 
pati, 12,  91-93,  131, 
246,  273,  336,  337,340, 
355,  397,  398,  405, 
432,  433,  442-444,  472, 
474,  475,  478*481,523, 
534-536,  539,  544,  551, 


042 


INDEX  OP  NAMES,  BTC. 


552, 575, 577, 586, 597,  Varuna,  62 ; strong  he*  Children,  prayer  for  , 
600, 602,  606.  roes,  263.  see  Prayer. 

Brihaspati  = the  Cloud*  Burial  of  ashes  of  the  the  gift  of  Agni,  2r 

God,  481.  dead,  407.  406  ; of  the  Asvina, 

Brihat,  great,  important  Burnouf,  Prof.  E.  520,  67  ; of  the  Maruts,  56r 

SI  man,  606.  575.  of  Tvashtar,  38. 

Brihat- SAman,  235.  Chitra,  a liberal  princ 

Brihatt,  a Vedic  metre,  Calf,  Agni,  219,389, 418.  152. 

263,501,577.  Camels,  119,  123,  195,  Chumuri,  a fiend  or  sav- 

Buffalo  = Cloud,  215.  196.  age,  21,  557. 

Buffaloes,  119,  123,  176,  Car  - hymn  or  sacrifice,  Chyavana,  a bou  of  Bhri 
292.  64,310,558.  gu,  482. 

= Clouds,  133, 226.  Carpenter,  223,  380, 525,  Chyavlna,  a prottgi  of 

Bull,  strohg,  mighty  one,  563.  the  Aavins,  68,  71,  437, 

hero,  Agni,  5,  7,  155,  Cask  = cloud,  332.  465,  466. 

219,  385-387,  389,  410,  Castes,  the  four,  519.  Circumambulation.  412 
507,  607,  608.  Castles,  19,21,23,28,94,  Clay,  house  of = grave, 85 

Indra,  22,  51,  122,  106,  249.  Cleanser,  Potar,  one  of 

149, 172, 173, 207,  348,  Cattle  — rays  of  light,  40,  the  priests,  15,384,521. 
372,375,378,418,421,  74,  76,  86,  110,  240,  Clouds « trees,  488. 

4:36,  441,  443, 450,  523,  361,  478,  556.  Colebrooke,391, 507,518, 

536,  543,  545,  554,  560,  Cattle -raiders,  264.  ^20,  672,  576,  577. 

575,  593.  Cattle -stealing,  223.  Coleridge,  308. 

Parjanya,  40, 95, 96.  Centre  of  earth,  the  altar,  Consorts  of  the  Gods, 

Rain-cloud,  125,477.  342.  116,593. 

Brihaspati,  523.  Chaidya,souof  Chedi,119.  Constellations,  501. 

vSoma,  206, 270, 272-  Chambers’s  Encyclopee-  Consumption,  505,  597, 

274, 281,  284,  288,  289,  dia,  531.  613. 

294,302,312,313,316,  ChandrabhAgl,  the  river  Corpus,  Poetieum  Bore 
325,  327,  329, 330, 332,  ChenAb,  490  note.  ale,  519. 

337-339,  341,  343,346-  Chanter,  Udgltar,  one  of  Courser,  the  Sun,  He* 
348,  350,  353-355, 357,  the  priests,  486  note.  ven,  75,  488,  586. 
359.362,369,376,394,  Charanyu,  name  of  an  - — Soma,276,340,350, 


603. 

the  Sun,  58, 84, 267, 

470,  008. 

- — Dyaus,  22. 

Varuna,  394,  475. 

the  thunderbolt, 5 1 6. 

Bulls,  MaAta,  56,58,150, 
445;  Press-stones, 5 26  ; 
Asvins,  71, 72;  Indra- 
Soma,  98 ; Indra- 
Varuna,  78  ; Mitra- 


Apearaa,  528. 

Chariot = sacrifice,  558, 

Chariot-race,  228,  303, 
351,  360. 

Chayamlna,  said  to  be  a 
man’s  name,  18  note. 

Chedi,  the  name  of  a 
prince,  119. 

Chedis,  a tribe,  119. 

Chenlb,  a river  of  the 
Pan  jib,  150, 490  notes. 


361. 

Coursers  of  the  Gods, 473 
Cow,  the  Cosmic,  357 ; 
type  of  Aditi  or  Na- 
ture, 253 ; Aditi,  83, 
467  ; Pfifnl,  40,  83, 
149,  242,.  456,  568; 
Earth,  654, 680;  hear 
to,  828,  «8i  tl,e 

Sunt  582;V4k,  Spew*- 

ao  OCO  • nnfc 


643 


INDBX  OP  NAMES,  ETC. 


ffended,  253;  type  362 ; Maruts,  125,  243.  Ddnajituti,  eulogy  of  a 
tf  munificence,  207  ; Creation  myth,  Scandi*  prince’s  liberality,  20 ; 
he  priest’s  guerdon,  navian,  510  ; creation  «€  Liberality  to  priests! 
28; « cloud,  446.  connected  with  sacri-  Dancer  (in  war),  Indra, 

re,  subject  of  hymns,  fice,  513,  576.  ]57)  212,  237. 

08,  000  ; as  Heaven  A Creator,  the,  Soma,  362;  Dancers,  the  Maruts,  150. 
larth,  327;  Waters  of  Visvakarnian,  497,498;  Dancing,  406,  422,  486 
eaven,  348  ; rays  of  Dyaus,  149;  Prajdpati,  487,526,527. 
ght,  376,  .480,  650,  566,  567,  576  ; Tvash-  Ddnus,  a class  of  fiends, 

51,  603  ; the  Maruts,  tor,  392  ; Dhdtar,  596,  565,  594. 

24,  150  ; streams  of  609.  Darbha  grass,  424  note. 

iin,  192;  hymns,  325; of  Creators,  Indra  Dark  One,  the,  Night,  71. 

siw,  ripe  milk  set  in,  or  Savitor,  575.  Dark  races,  7. 

71,  235  ;|black]  and  Cuckoo,  101.  Ddsa,  hostile  native,  sa- 

,hite,  white  milk  set  Cucumber,  59.  vage,  demon,  21, 79,94, 

i,  240.  159,  169, 182, 196,216,' 

pell,  Prof.  E.  B.,  92,  DabhIti,  a prottgi  of  In-  221,411,413,436,451, 
7,148,  186,192,200,  dra,  21, 557.  488,  499,  537,  564, 

208,  212,  237,  241,  Dadhigharma, an  offering  584,590. 
42,245,246,249,251,  of  warm  inspissated  Ddsae,*  118,  147,  246, 
53,  256,  269, 260,263,  milk,  605  note.  262,  457,  470,  482. 

64,  206-268,  276, 279,  Dadhikrds,  a famous  ra-  Dasagva,  one  of  an  anci- 
:85,  293,  294, 300, 305.  cer  or  war-horse  ; a ent  priestly  family, 

ation,  375,  376,  591,  personification  of  the  132,469. 
i09.  Sun,  48.  540.  Dasasipra,  a Proper  Name, 

-origin  unknown, 576.  Dadhikrdvan  = Dadhi-  262. 

- various  accounts  of,  krds,  46,  48.  DaBavraja,  a Proper  Name, 


wcribed  to  Indra,  111,  Dadhyach,  a son  of  128,  260,  261. 
138,178,235,245,262,  Atharvan,  376,  449,  Dasonya,  a man’s  name, 
263,  458  ; to  Visva-  450.  262. 

tarman,  497,  498  ; Daksba,  Creative  Power,  Dasyave-vrika,  Wolf -to- 

Agni,  513;  Varupa,  Strength,  65, 160,  206,  the-Dasyu,  name  of  a 

183,  184;  Hiranya*  232,  382,  887,  394,  man,  261, 265, 266. 


gvrbhft,  566  ; Brahma*  473,  486. 
naspati,  486  ; the  Un*  Dakshind,  priests’  guer- 
born,  the  Sun,  184  ; don,  180,  544,  549. 
the  Asvins,  414 ; Tvash*  Dame,  wife  of  a God,  50 7 . 

t»r,  553,  392  ; Gods  Pfwni,  494. 

filing  the  cosmic  duet  ——the,  Dawn,  385. 

dancing,  480,  487  ; Dame*  of  Trifca  ; tee 
i°°da  in  general,  475.  Trita's  dames. 


W » the  sacrifioe  of  —ten,  the  fingers  of 
?uru»ha,  519  ; Indra-  the  priest,  304. 

78 ; Vi*pu,  Dames,  Celestial,  lunar 
Serna,  Mteriims,  524. 


Dasyu(s),  savage  foe(s), 
demon(s),  8,  21,  120, 
139,153,181,210,225, 
249,  201,265,266, 296, 
300,  352,411,448,  451, 
459, 488, 499, 500,  529, 
537,538, 547,548,  601. 

Dasyu-dayer,  the,  Indra, 
225. 

Dawn,  11,  35,  45,  48,  71, 
73*78,81,94,101,115, 
116,  130, 159, 175*177, 


644 


1HDBX  OF  NAMIB,  fTC. 


197, 198, 221, 253,  267,  Destructive  powers,  158.  Disposer,  the,  186  49c 

296, 329,  839,  385, 422,  Deuteronomy,  438.  600.  ' 

431, 438,  458, 472, 475,  Devaka,  afiend  or  savage,  Disposers,  priests,  249 
494,501,515,522,540,  20.  Diti,  the  antithesis  0 

558,  578,  602,  608.  Devftpi,  a Kshatriya  who  Aditi,  15,  641, 

Dawn  and  Night,  433,  acted  as  Hotar, 535,536  Divoddsa,  a liberal  prince 
483.  Devavdn,  father  or  an-  20,  21,  256,  306, 450. 

Dawns,  11,20, 46,  72, 76,  cestor  of  Sudds,  20.  Dog,  101,368, 562;  house 
84,  86,  164,  185,  223,  Devil,  435.  dog,  54  ; boar-hound 

294,  351,  380,  390,  Devotion,  168 ; Genius  64  ; hound  of  Imira 
425,431,445.459,514,  of,  38,  46,  168,  474,  53  ; figurative,  100. 

520,  521,  555,  557.  522  ; blessiugs  of,  168,  Dogs,  of  Yama,  53,  399, 

husband  of  the,  169,  205.  - — given  to  priests,265 

Agni  or  the  Sun,  8.  Devout  spirit  makes  hum-  Doors,  divine,  of  sacrif 
Day  and  Night,  393,  491.  ble  offering  acceptable,  cial  enclosure,  4,  1( 

Deasil,  the  Gaelic,  412.  255.  273,  483,  557.  * 

Death,  42,  58,  99,  158,  Dharma,  duty  personi-  Dove,  598,  599. 

406,  419,  462,  492,  fied,  173.  Dragon,  the,  great  cloud 

578,  599.  Dh&tar,  Maker,  Creator,  serpent,  24,  113,  24( 

the  punishment  of  338,  382,  406,  487,  245,  449,  479,  555,55) 

sin,  583.  506, 606,  609,  613.  579. 

return  to  earthly  Dhishani,  a Goddess  of  4 female,  68 8.  ] 

life  after,  581.  prosperity,  86,  432.  — — of  the  Deep,  regeij 

Deer,  107,  294.  Dhishnydh  ( Agnayah ),  of  air-sea,  37,  39, 47] 

spotted,  of  the  Ma-  sacrificial  Fires,  377.  477,  523,  524. 

ruts,  125.  Dhuni,  a demon,  21,  557.  Dragons, serpent-demon: 

Demons,  forms  assumed  Dhruva,  a special  Soma  583,  585. 
by,  100,  101.  libation,  330  note.  Dream,  evil,  197,  19 

imprecation  on,  98-  Dhvasra,  the  name  of  a 445,  598. 

101.  king,  305.  Dronakalasa,a  large  Sot 

Demon-slayers,  the  As-  Diabolua,  435  note,  reservoir,  108,124,2! 

vine,  72.  Dice,  429-  43 1 ; the  stars  ? 279, 282, 286, 293, 2 

Departed,  home  and  bliss  419.  313,314,319,329,3 

of  the,  381,  382,  498,  Digvijaya,  conquest  of  870  notes. 

594.  neighbouring  count-  Drop,  the  Moon,  2> 

King  of  the,  381 ; riee,  574  note.  Soma,  405. 

tee  Yama.  Director,  one  of  the  Drub(s),  spirit(s)  of  r 

Deehtrl,  Instructress,  a priests,  355,  521.  chief,  59,  450. 

Goddess,  506.  Disease,  the  Spirit  of,  534.  Drtfhyu(s)eponymus 

Desire,  576  ; tee  Kdma.  Diseases,  colic,  545  ; con-  men  of  a Vedic  ti 


Destroyer,  the,  Indr  a, 
114;  Death,  419  notet. 
Destruction,  42,  58,  99, 
158,393,  407,462,  492, 
***0  7 BUS. 


sumption,  683,  597,  37-19, 131, 

613  ; dropsy,  85  ; ph*  Duljsdsu,  the  name 
thuds,  613  ; SimidA,  prince,  428. 

52  ; Sipada,  52.  DulisOtia,  nsttie  of » 
Dispenser,  Ittdre,  -^tlltiflT  flffljjfljg 


ttfpBX  OP  NAMES,  ETC. 


645 


lurg&ha,  a chief,  208.  Eggeling,  Dr.  J. , 2 13,578.  Falcons,  the  Marute,  523. 
Durmitra,  a ^tiahi,  548,  Ehni,  Dr.  J.,  394,  397,  Falsehood,  punishers  of, 
pdrvfi  grass,  580,  fi87«  400,507.  60,  66,  81,  99. 

)utt,  R.  Ch.,  408.  Eight  sons  of  Aditi,  487.  False-swearing,  prayer 

)uty,  Right,  Law,  Virtue,  Eight-footed  metre,  225.  for  removal  of  sin  of, 
personified,  170.  EkadhanAb,  waters  in  391. 

)vita,  Second,  perhaps  Soma  ceremonies,  241,  Famine,  143,  210,  442. 
a form  of  Agni,  197.  326,  424  notes.  Father,  the,  Heaven,  96, 


mda§4ha,  a twelve-  Ekadhenus,  sacrificial 
day  sacrifice,  242  note.  waters,  43. 
raus,  Heaven,  the  an-  Ekadyu,  the  name  of  a 
cient  Aryan  God— the  Rishi,  229. 

Greek  Zeua,  44,80,149,  Elephant,  172,  190,  304, 
168,174,175,385,390,  612. 

426,433,  444,445,451,  Eros,  KAma,  Desire,  575 
466,467,  469-471,  475,  note. 

478, 479,  493,  522, 523,  Etasa,  the  horse  of  the 
578,  584,  592.  Sun  ; a man’s  name, 

yu=Dyaus,  44,  390  63,  66,  104,  122,  261, 

notes.  311,  315,  375,  376. 

Etasaa,  216,  434. 

AGL8, 101,  422-  Evil-eyed,  506. 

|—  the  Moon,  423;  Existence,  sprung  from 
Soma,  341  361;  Savi-  non-existence,  486. 
Vs^TArkshy*,  591.  Expanses,  the  Bix,  400, 
;les,  Celestial  press-  574. 
tones,  526  ; Soma-  Eye,  of  the  dead  goes  to 
the  Sun,  402  ; of  Va- 


irops,  341. 

••ornaments,  227. 
rth,  38,  48,  164,  265, 
563, 383,385,387,407, 
126,433,447, 463, 470, 


rug*  and  Mitra,  the 
Sun,  63,  484  ; of  the 
Gods,  75;  of  Order, 
Agni,  890. 


514,  572,  584;  Indra, 
343 ; Visvakarman,  496 ; 
Yama,  581 ; Manu,2Q5. 

Father,  Agni,  450  ; In- 
dra, 250  ; Prajftpati, 
384 ; Soma  or  Agni, 
330  ; Tvashtar,  473  ; 
VAyu,  607  ; the  Yaja- 
mAna,  384. 

Father  and  Mother, Heav- 
en and  Earth,  331,  333, 
457. 

Fathers,  Manes,  Spirits  Qf 
the  Departed,  39,  74, 
83,  199,  339,  384, 

387,  398-405,  407,  458- 
461,469,  474,  481,494, 
498,  514,  549,  576,  577, 
581,  594,  601. 

— = Moon  and  stars  ? 
326  ; stars?  481. 

three  classes  of, 

dwelling  in  heaven, 
firmament,  lower  fir- 
mament, 408  ; created 
light,  74  ; produce  the 
fruitfulness  of  hegven 
and  earth,  474  ; their 
home,  581. 


171,495,522,578,580.  Eye,  the,  the  Sun;  the 
- son  of,  m*n,  262.  single,  the  Moon,  276. 
p sprung  from  Puru- 

fha’s  feet,  519,  Faith,  269>  381,  592, 

kand  Heaven,  38,  693. 

- 52,  66,  72,  88, 181,  F»lcon  («),  63,  149,  174,  Fencing  or  enclosing 
5, 240, 8150, 8*4,  864,  M0,  205,  304,  307,  stick,  round  the  racri 

5, 488, 448, 4#7, 513.  809,317, 388,  493,678.  ficial  fire,  620,  678. 

Iw,  216,  Falcon,  Agni,  14  ; Soms,  Fervour,  religious  an- 

P«e,  of  Sun,  581  321,  389, 365.  aterity,  penance,  694, 

*i  172  note.  — bringer  of  the  Soma,  699,  601,,  606,  60S. 

■ the  Mundane,  618  243,  251,  800,  821  Kell  Lord  or  Protectee 

*4  834,844,848,396,588.  of  the,  89,  478. 


64$ 


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  BTC. 


Fiends,  prayer  for  des-  Forest-Trees,  39.  GangA,  the  river  Gang? 

truction  of,  98*101  ; Forests,  Lord  of,  Van  as-  490. 
forms  assumed  by,  100.  pati,  the  sacrificial  Ganges,  159,  490. 

See  RAkshasas,  YAtu-  stake,  4.  GarbhAdhAna,  a cerenj 

‘ihfiaas.  Fort-destroyer,  Agni,  8,  to  facilitate  and  blto 

Fig-tree,  the  Holy,  sec  447 ; Iudra,  103,  172,  conception,  613  note. 

Asvattha.  190,202,203,263,555;  Garuda,  the  name  of  a 

Filter,  for  Soma  juice,  Soma,  300,  349.  mythical  bird, 591  note. 

107,  171,269,275,278,  Forte*  cloud  castles  of  GAthA,  non-Yedic  song, 
280,  285,  287,  289,  fiends,  584  ; of  abori-  501. 
302,331,335,338,340,  gines,  256;  of  iron,  Gaura,  BosGavaeus,  114 
342, 348,  362,  426.  251, 540.  191,  573. 

Fire,  322,  552.  Fortune,  368.  Gaurt,  278,  572. 

Fire-sticks,  5,  180,  390,  Fo  ur,  the,  Lunar  God dea-  Gaviahthira,  a Rishi,  592 
426.  see,  332.  Gaya,  a man’s  name,  472, 

Firmament,  personified,  Beauteous  creatures,  474. 

,338  ; two  divisions  of  326  ; quarters  of  the  GAyatra,  a hymn,  305, 
the,  234  note.  sky,  292  ; seas,  292,  480. 

Fish,  481.  448.  GAyatri,  a Vedic  metre, 

Five  races,  tribes,  10, 14,  Fox,  421.  53,  179,  305.  400, 577. 

72,  73,  76,  129,  171,  Friend,  the,  Mitra,  390  Geldner,  Prof.  K.,  36, 
205, 280, 317, 319,  352,  note.  2*0, 436, 457, 509, 529, 

368, 445, 450,  458, 563;  Friendship,  485  ; Rishi’s  531,  544. 
tribes  of  heaven,  464  ; with  Varuna,  84.  Gharrna,  a warm  libation, 

rivers,  floods,  159,  Frog,  an  emblem  of  cool-  70,  97,  219,  238,  235, 

183  ; courses  or  divi-  ness,  403.  606. 

sions  of  sacrifice,  570  ; Froga,  90-98,  599.  GhoshA,  a woman's  name, 

companies,  280  ; ele-  Fruit,  580,  588.  436,  439. 

mentsof  sacrifice,  397  Funeral  hymns,  398-407,  Ghrita(ra),  clarified  but* 
note  ; lands  or  settle-  459-461,  581,  593,594.  ter,  3,  694. 

ments,  605 ; regions  Funerals,  deity  of,  462  GnAa,  Consorts  of  Gods, 
of  the  world,  845.  note.  166. 

Fivefold  beings,  69  ; Funereal  gift,  581.  Goal,  293, 
people,  72.  Goat  (s),  19,  821;  atfu- 

Flesh-eater,  Agni,  403.  Gaidicke,  Prof., 318, 597.  nerals,  402;  team  of 

Floods,  rivers,  168, 175,  Gambler,  429-431,  441,  Pdshan,  321,  416. 

405,  433,  473,  552 ; 442.  God,  One  Supreme,  498. 

waters  of  the  air,  187.  Gambling  house,  430.  — — of  Gods,  567  ; the 

Floods'  (waters'  of  air)  Gamester,  430.  Unknown,  560. 

offspring,  Agni,  50.  Gandharva,  104,225,339,  Goddess,  43,  74-76.  78 
Force,  personified,  486.  841, 345, 892, 496, 506,  91,  189,  148, 252,  253. 

Fonsst-Lord,  205 ; Forest*  569, 573, 584, 585, 604.  305, 468, 540, 573, 580 

Sovran,  88;  Sovran  of  Gandharos,  381,  456,  586,588. 

the  Forest,  Soma,  541 ; 498,  595,  528,  582.  Goddesses,  88, 48, 50, 

Forest-Queen, 589,590.  Gandharvt,  394.  229^ 


wm  cs»  urns,  ttc. 


«7 


565,W\,W5,«a,«4)  ot  S&ntor,  «;  Quest  ot  men,  kgm,  5, 
555, M3.  0tttve\sVmB,U6,U6;  10,  11,  41,  l&l,  2io 

iGoddesses,  Three,  4,  484.  reinB  ol  the  Asvins,  257,383,520. 
l^ods,  passim ; hymn  to,  153  ; Hero,  Agni,  11  ; Gumti,  a river,  159  note. 
486  ; all  invoked,  470-  ornaments  of  the  Ma-  Gungfi,  a lunar  Goddess 
478  ; primeval  Aryan,  ruts,  57 ; sword  of  Bri-  332. 

592 ; number,  167,455;  haspati,  92  ; thunder-  Gungus,  a non-Aryan 
origin,  52, 92, 395,  397,  bolt,  211,  531.  people,  450. 

470,  486  ; immortal,  Goldstiicker,  Prof.  Th., 

4,  7,  12,  63,  92,  472,  531.  Haas,  Prof.,  507. 

476-478,482,  486,522;  Gomati,  the  name  of  a Hair,  braided,  34,  80,  321. 
born  immortal,  486  ; river,  159,  490.  Hall,  Dr,  F.,  407. 

made  immortal  by  Good  Works,  399.  Hammer  = lightning, 21 9. 


Agni,  13  ; by  Soma,  Gopavana,  a Rishi,  222.  Hands,  joined  in  marri- 
372,376,457;  by  their  Gosarya,  a protege  of  the  age,  407,  505. 

merits,  471  ; produced  Asvins,  128,  260,  261.  healing  by  touch  of. 

after  the  world,  576  ; Gotama,  an  ancient  Rishi,  465,  583. 
earlier,  24  ; General,  352,  579.  Hansa,  the  Sun,  571  note. 

322;  of  heaven,  waters,  Grfthi,  Grasper,  a deadly  Haray&na,  a chief,  161. 
earth,  39,  475  ; omni-  female  fiend,  597  note.  Hants,  horses  of  Agni, 
potent,  166 ; reward  GraDthini,  the  name  of  46  ; of  the  Sun,  66, 
the  pious,  165 ; punish  an  Apsaras,  528.  253,312;  of  Sonia,  346. 

sin,  516  ; punish  the  Grass,  Sacred,  3,  16,  18,  Harivahsa,  98. 
undevout,  32, 109, 169,  34,  39,  44,  47,  57,  74,  Havirdhdnas,  Soma  carts. 

464;  Priests  of  the,  117, 125, 137, 139, 142,  397,  398  notes. 

384;  Queen  of  the,  251.  191,  205,  215,  233, 247,  Haviryajiia,  oblation  of 

ods = priests, 3, 31 0,568.  273,303,305,348,430,  clarified  butter,  570 


old,  5,  30,  65, 166, 168, 
170,172,196,197,208,  I 
226,296,312,330,346, 
380,449,525,531,549, 
550,  553;  chariot 
wrought  of  or  decked 
with,  69,  118, 195  ; on 
priest’s  finger,  166,289, 
316,  347,  355,  358; 
gold-bearded,  Agni, 
117 ; gold  coursers  of 
toe  Sun,  60 ; gold 
talma  of  Maruts,  125; 
gold  sword*  of  Maruts, 
126. 

tolen,  Savitar,  68;  arms 
QfSavitar,87,48;  hair 
435 1 hands 


483,553. 

Grasamaun,  Prof.,  20,  29, 
41,  45,  48,  49,  54,  57, 
66,79,81.107,142,152, 
226,232,  233,241,242, 
245,  253,264,  266,  268, 
290,299,302,305, 309, 
328,348,349,355,380, 
388,  393,410,419,  420, 
424,429,439,440,445, 

; 448,452,  463,489,511, 

514,520,529,538,541, 
560,564,565,569,583. 

, Great  One,  the,  Yama, 
400. 

■ Grimm,  Jacob,  172, 
r Guerdon, priests’ fee,247, 
i 323,  544,  549. 


note. 

Haug,  Prof.  M.,  186,604. 
Hawk,  176, 230,  345,350, 
588.  See  Falcon. 

Indra,  538  ; Soma, 

357. 

Hawks,  the  Maruts,  54. 
Healer,  Rudra,  39,  49  : 

Vdstoshpati,  53. 
Heaven,  a Goddess,  463. 

Dyaus,  5,  33,  66, 

67,73,78,96,  125,197, 
433,  438,  445,470,471 
, 476,  483,  514,  569, 

572,  578. 

— home  of  the  Blest, 
, 381,382,399,  402,404, 

498. 


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC. 


64tr 

Heaven  and  Earth,  9, 
31,  38,  39,  48,  62,  53, 
62,  64,  91,92,133,139, 
143,  161,  175,219,246, 
275,  326,331*333,  338, 
362,  365, 370,  377,  334, 
386,  390,  395,424,431, 
433,  435,  447,  449,452, 
463,474,477,  479,484, 
491,524,525,556,565, 
585,  609. 

separated  by  the 

Aavins,  414;  by  Indra 
179,515,  556,  593  ; by 
Savitar,  591  ; by  Va- 
runa,  82, 184;  by  Vish- 
nu, 94. 

Heaven's  Daughter, Ushaa. 
Datorn,  67,  73,  75,  76, 
197,  433. 

Heaven’s  Child,  Soma, 
292,  295;  Night,  574. 

Heifer,  the,  Aditi,  554. 

Hell,  315  note. 

Herald,  Hotar,  Invoker, 
Agni.  15,  30,  174,  384, 
395,  521,  522,  tt  patsim. 

Heralds.two  celestial, 273. 

Herbert,  George,  180. 

Herbs,  38,  39,  533-535. 

Herd,  the,  the  Maruts, 
427. 

Herdsman,  the,  Indra, 
450;  the  Sun,  604. 

Hesiod,  184. 

Hillebrandt,  Prof.  A.,  36, 
84.91,  108,  163,  219, 
251,269,  279,296,301, 
30M18, 326,332,  341, 
342,379,382, 390, 394, 
406;  423,  424,  450,  526, 
569,  578,  585,  605. 

Hill*,  168,  431. 

Hinva.  Benefactor,  a title 
of  Indra,  182. 


Hiranyagarbha,  Gold* 
germ,  Sun-God,  566. 

Hiranyastupa,  a Rishi, 
591. 

Holtzmann,  Prof.,  531. 

Holy  Ladies,  the  Rivers, 
90. 

Homer,  500. 

Homestead,  Guardian  of 
the,  53. 

Hoof -armed  demons,  511. 

Horace,  59. 

Horse  Sacrifice,  595. 

Horses  — flames  of  Agni, 
2 ; = hymns,  7 ; of  the 
Alvins,  69,  70,73,  116; 
of  Brihaspati,  92  ; of 

, Dawn,  74,  76  ? of  the 
Sun,  216,312,  451,523. 

Hotar,  9,  201,  355,  384; 
395,  465,  483,  485,486, 
499,  515,  620,  526,535, 
552,  607. 

Hotars,  the  Celestial,  4, 
475,  478,  483,  553,574. 

Hound,  507. 

Hounds = clouds,  196. 

Household  Lord,  Agni, 
201 ;— Priest, Agni, 522. 

Hradechakshus,  the  name 
of  an  Apsar&s,  528. 

Humble  offering,  255. 

Hundred  autumns,  na- 
tural duration  of  hu- 
man life,  66,  96,  406, 
506,  597  ; springs, dit- 
to, 597 ; winters,  ditto, 
333,  597. 

Hundred  Chiefs,  the 
Maruts?,  422. 

Hundred  Powers,  Lord 
of,  170, 173  ; tee  $ata- 
kratu. 

Hunger,  deprecated,  2, 

202. 


Hunter,  192. 

Hunting,  deer,  107  ; ele 
phants,  489;  boar,  507; 
wild  bull,  454. 

Husband  and  wife,  hap- 
piness of  the  pious, 168. 

Husbandman,  519 ; ue 
Vaisya. 

Hydaspes,  Greek  name 
of  the  Jhelum,  490. 

Hyena,  487. 

Hymir,  Scandinavian 
World-giant,  519. 

Hymn  = car,  64  ; gene- 
rated or  begotten  by 
the  bard,  10,  13,  25  ; 
new,  18,  27,  40,  62, 
133,  150,  155,  222,244, 
261,  296,  352,  386; 
made,  formed,  fashion- 
ed, 33,  37,40, 120,122; 
fought  with  skill,  9 ; 
thought  out,  129, 235, 
244. 

Hymns  = milk-streams, 
135." 

Hypnotism,  583  note. 

IkshvAko,  the  name  of 
a prince,  464. 

Ill,  a Goddess  of  Prayer, 
4, 16,  48,273,309  463, 
484,  520,  553. 

I1A?b  place,  where  butter  is 
poured  on  the  Are,  520. 

Immolator,  the,  Agni,  4, 
554. 

Immortality,  afterdeft*  5, 
69,  168,  253  ; in  one'* 
children,  168 ; pray* 
for,  W;  the  gift  °f 
Some,  872 ; Lord  of. 
Puruoha,  817 ! Sioij 
of,  824;  the  world  o' 
the  Oode, _2»- 


Incantation,  against  an 
ill-omened  bird,  598  ; 
against  miscarriage, 
612.613;  against  phthi- 
sis, 61 3;  against  poison, 
51  ; against  a rival 
wife,  588. 

Indigence,  3,  438. 

Indigenous  races,  see  D4- 
saa,  Dasyus,  Dark  races, 
nrfra,  4,  8,  12,  17-35, 
37-40,  44,  47,  48,  50- 
54,  56,  76,  78,  80,  81, 
85-89,  91-94,  98-101, 
103-115,  119-123,  125, 
126,  130,132-142,140, 
151,152,  157-160,  104, 
167-175,  178-180,  189- 
196,  198,  199,  202-209, 
211-216,  219,  220,  224, 
231,  234-252,  259,265, 
209,  270, 273-275,  278, 
279,281,282,  286, 287, 
292,296,297-299,  301- 
308,  310-316,318-321, 
323,325, 327, 329,*  330, 
333-335,  387,  339,  340, 
342-346,  348,  350,  351, 
355-363,  365  369,  371, 
372,374,  375,  377-382, 
388,390, 391,398, 408, 
<11-413, 418, 417,  420, 
<23, 425,  427.431-488, 
441  444,  4 48-453,  457, 
453,460,  463,  464-467, 
469,471,474,  476,478, 
<19,483,  484, 487, 489, 
491,408,600,501,604, 
607-500,  516-617,  688, 
527,531, 632,636,637- 
547,550,664-667,660, 
561,563-666,670,  671, 
! 573-680, 883-586, 6»8, 
590,581,  698-607, 599, 
LAWS,  608- 


INDEX  OP  NAMES,  BTC.  649 

Indra, his  parents,  Heaven  Indra-Agni,  88,  89,  178- 
and  Earth,  202.  215  ; 180  ; Indra-Soma,  98  ; 

his  father,  22;  his  mo-  Indra- Varuna,  78-81, 
ther,  22,  190,  225, 487,  267,  268  ; Indra- Vdyu, 

580  ; born  from  Puru-  85-89. 
sha’s  month,  519  ; his  Indr&ni,  Indra’s  Consort, 
wife,  507-509  ; his  507-509,  588,  596. 
greatness,  120,  134,  Indrota,aprince,212,213. 
234,249,417,423,449,  Indu,  drop,  = Soma,  198, 
515,  516,  554,  590  ; his  199,  213,  236,  and 
battles  with  demons,  Book  IX.  passim. 

120, 134,138,  171,516,  Indus,  the  river,  90,159, 
517  ; Lord  of  Heaven,  160,  183,491,494,550. 
248,  554  ; Chief  of  Infant,  the,  Agni  as 

Gods,  134,  204  ; Ma-  lightning,  95,  439; 

ker  of  all  things,  452,  Agni,  386,  387,  468, 
458  ; identified  with  495  ; the  young  Sun, 
Sun,  133,  240,419,422.  419. 

426,  451,  515,  510  ; Infinity,  470,  486. 
supersedes  Varuna,  Inspiration,  92,  231, 397. 
570;  punisher  of  sin,  Inspirer(B',  3,  13,  261, 
516  ; Warrior  God,  298,  349,  354,  447. 

21,  22,  34,  103,  141,  Instructress,  the, Deshtri, 
190,202,203,216,237,  506. 

250,  265,  417,  441, 531,  Invoker,  355,  395. 

544  ; tutelary  God  of  Invokers,  Hotar=t,  the  two 
Aryans,  18,  144,  190;  Celestial,  4,  574. 
his  attributes  and  I«on,  or  other  metal,  5, 
deeds,  120,  449-452  ; 15,  90,  244,  251,  269, 

his  love  of  Soma,  122,  337, 449,  510, 531, 532, 

202  ; hie  rapture  after  537,  540. 
drinllng,  132,  133,  lavara,  Lord,  Supreme 

139,  171,  563,  564  ; Deity  of  post-Vedic 
aided  by  the  Maruts,  time,  877  note. 

120,  245  ; priest,  140 ; Ita,  a Rinhi,  601. 
his  chariot,  172,  413, 

* 423 ; his  horses,  see  Jackal,  421. 

Horses  ; his  existence  Jacobi,  Dr.  H.,  602. 
doubted,  250.  Jagatl,  a Vedic  metre, 

^and  Agni,  38, 88, 89;  577 

—and  POehan,  38  ; J&husha,  a protigi  of  the 

and  Soma,  88,  98,  Asms,  71. 

99,  101,  284  ; and  Jamadagni,  a famous 

Varuna,  88  ; — and  ancient  Hishi,  91,  253, 
Viyu,  106.  317, 352, 577, 599, 600- 


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  BTC. 


$50 

Jamadagnis,  309, 310, 363. 

Jarfitha,  name  of  a fiend 
or  Ravage,  1,  11,  496. 

JAtavedas,  the  Omnis- 
cient, Agni,  5,  8,  11, 
18,  16,  100,  132,  154- 
156,185,187, 217,218, 
222,322, 386, 388, ,390, 
401-403,  445,453,  454, 
467,482,  499,510,513, 
521, 553, 559, 585,  592, 
604,  608. 

Jhelum,  the  river,  490  note 

JftAnam,  knowledge,  484. 

J uhd,  a sacrificial  ladle  ; 
possibly  aProperName, 
552  note. 

Jumna,  the  modern  name 
of  the  river  YamunA, 
20,  246,  490. 

Ka,  Who?,  the  God  Pra- 
jApati,  566  note. 

K5bul,  the  river,  148 
note. 

Kadrft,  apparently  a Ri- 
shi,  191 ; Queen  of  Ser- 
pents, 608  note. 

Kadruka  days, days  of  the 
Abhiplava  festival,  400. 

KakshlvAn,  an  ancient 
sage,  129,  333,  415, 
486,  467,  687. 

Kakuha,  the  name  of  a 
prince,  123, 

Kalasa,  of  uncertain 
meaning,  428. 

Kali,  a Rishi,  210,  437, 

KAli,  name  of  a flame  of 
Agni,  387  note. 

KalmAshapAda,  name  of 
a King,  100  note. 

K&ma,  Lore,  Desire,  575 
note;  said  to  be  a Ri* 

*W'«  name.  592. 


Kamadyd,  the  wife  of  Kine,  rays  of  light,  74, 


Vimada,  476 
Kanita,  the  name  of  a 
chief,  195. 

Kanva,  an  ancient  Rishi, 
103,110,112,117,118, 
120,124,127,128,130, 


75,  208,  348,  376,  516, 
583  ; heavens  A earths, 
216;  waters,  449;  milk, 
284,  344,  359,  S65 ; 
rain-clouds,  291,  452  ; 
sacrificial  waters,  371. 


131,174,259,261,263,  King,  benediction  of  a, 


266,  426,  466,  592. 

Kanvas,  108-110,  112, 

114-116,  119-122,  126, 
169,  172,174,  265,559. 

j.K&nva,  a descendant  of 
Kanva,  103,  115,  125, 
128,  129. 

KAnvAy  anas,  descendants 
of  Kanva,  266. 

Kapardiu,  wearing  braid- 
ed hair,  321  note. 

Kapi,  an  ape,  607  note. 


602,603  ; Indra,3l, 

140,229,243,248,442, 
443,464,468,580;  — 
Agui,  10,  187,  383- 

385,445,510,512; 

Soma,  198,  199,  228, 

Book  IX.  passim ; 

the  Sun,  467  ; — Va- 
runa, 37, 51, 82, 83, 184, 

396,  545,  602  ; Ya- 

ma,  381,  398-400  ; 

of  Kings,  Varuna,  37. 


Kapila,  a famous  Rishi,  Kings,  the,  Vanina,  Arya 


419. 

KarAli,  name  of  a flame 
of  Agui,  387  nofe. 
Karanja,  a demon,  450. 
Kasu,  a prince,  119. 
Kasyapa,  a famous  Rishi, 
22,  352,  382,  577. 
KathA  Upanishad,  681. 


mpi,  Mitra,  45, 66;- 

the  Ten,  36, 79, 80; 

Varuna,  and  Mitra,  68- 
65,  167,252,  468,473; 

Varuna,  Mitra, 

Aryamau,  147,  573 ; 
the  Asvins,  488. 

Kinsuka,  a tree,  503. 


KaurayAna,  patronymic  K6phAn,  Greek  name  of 
of  a prince,  113.  the  Kabul  river,  148. 

Kavasha,  the  name  of  a Kratu,  one  of  the  Seven 
priest,  19,  429.  Rid»«,  ***- 

Kavi,tbe  father  of  Usa-  Kripa,  a prince,  112,1  ■ 
nA,  18,  451,  538.  Krisa, aKUhi,264,268,439. 

Kavis,  403  note.  Krirtnu,  a guardian  of 

Kavyas,  a class  of  Manes,  the  Celestial  Soma, 

398,401,403.  473,  588. 

Resins,  long- haired,  Agni  Krishna,  a Rishi,  232  , a 
VAyu,  Sfirya,  582.  demon,  246. 

Khela,  a king,  118  note.  KrityA, Magic  person^  * 
Kimldini,  mischievous  505  note. 

fiends,  98, 101,  512.  Krivi,  the  eponymus 
Kindler,Agnldh, lighter  of  » warlike  tnbe,  ’ 

sacrificial  f " 


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC. 


651 


Krumu,  the  name  of  a 
river,  490. 

Ksbatram,  the  Ruling 
power,  the  military 
and  princely  order, 
177  note. 

j Kshatriya,  99,  177,  407, 
519,552. 

Kshatriyas, 

Brihman 
note. 

— Adityas,  210. 

(ubhA,  a river,  159,  183, 
490. 

Kuhn,  Prof.  A.,  531. 

KuhO,  a luuar  Goddess, 
332. 

Kumdra,  said  to  be  a 
Proper  Name,  581  note. 
Kumdrila,  a celebrated 
philosopher,  011  note. 
iundap&yya,  a Proper 
Name,  142. 

Kuraylna,  a Proper  Name, 
113  note. 

Kurlra,  a kind  of  metre, 
502. 


73  ; Lady  of  the  world  Life,  duration  of  human, 
—73  ; Lady  of  sweet  see  Hundred  Autumns; 
strains— 78,  130;  Lady  appointed  by  Gods,  429. 
of  the  Wood,  Aranyd-  Light,  48. 


ni,  589 

Lakes,  Soma  receptacles 
124. 

Lances,  149,  166. 
raised  to  Langlois,  Prof.,  98. 
rank,  536  Language,  484. 

Lanman,  Prof.  C.  R., 
54,  55,  139,  391,  408, 
428,  429,  439,  504. 
Law,  Moral  and  Cosmic, 


Lightning,  252 ; Vasishtha 
an  embodiment  of,  36. 

Lion,  19,  361,  421,  422, 
479 ; trap  for,  422  ; 
Soma,  350. 

Lord  of  Heaven,  Indra, 
248,  219;  of  Light, 
Indra,  241,  247,  248. 

Lotus,  36, 107,  550,  587, 
613. 


43,  45,  55,  60,  65,  66,  Ludwig,  Prof.  A , Der 
71,  73,  74,  79-81,  112,  Rigveda,  5 Vols.,  and 


119,120,128,132.134,  Ueber  die  neuesten 

155,156,159,160,165,  Arbeiten  im  Gebiete 

108,  220,  221,  230,  233,  der  Rgveda-forschung, 

248,  274  276,  293,  297,  passim. 

300,  304, 313, 320,  324,  Lusa,  a favourite  of  Indra, 
3 7,344.345,370,  377,  436  note. 

379,  381,  396,  403, 432,  Lying,  prayer  for  remov- 
433,  445,447.  459,  469,  al  of  sin  of,  391. 
474-478,494,  496,  522, 

551,  500,563,  579,  583,  Macdonbll,  Prof.  A.  A., 
609.  197,226,369,370,392, 

|Kuru-krivi«,  the  name  of , sacrifice,  155,  225,  447,  455. 

a tribe,  19  note.  251,314,331,345,373,  Madhyadesa,  Midland 

[Kimikshetra,  a district  504, 539,  568, 570,  594,  country,  463  note. 
in  N.-W.  India,  122,  603. 

207,  317,  381  notes.  Leader,  Neahtar,  one  of 
Kurungi,  a prince,  115.  the  priests,  521 
turusrava  ia,  a prince.  Leather,  63. 

Kutua,  a favourite  of  Leech,  physician,  380  ; . 

Indra,  21, 104, 159,283,  see  Physician.  Maghavans,  nobles,  ins 

436,  439,  451,  Liberal  Ones,  Hods,  80.  titutore  of i eMnfice.21, 

638, 548,  583.  Liberality,  56 1 ; to  priests,  32,  l2o,  267, 524,  526, 


M&ghd,  a lunar  mansion, 
502. 

Maghavan,  Lord  of  Boun- 
ty, a title  of  Indra, 
passim. 


Ntsas,  27. 

Nava,  a demon 
bought,  21. 


of 


20,106,107,111,113,  549. 

ltf,  119,123,  147,  148,  Magic,  personified,  504 
159*  181,  175,  195.196,  note  ; of  Gods,  183,224, 


the  Holy,  Rivers, 

90, 

ths  Light.  Dawn, 


208,  212,  213, 223,265, 
266,  305,  429, 470,5-5; 
heavenly  end  earthly 
rewards  of,  549,  550, 


436;590, 604;  of  fiends, 
1,  2,  93,  94,  101,  139, 
184,  202,  554,534  ; of 
men,  155, 


652 


INDEX  OF  NAUBft,  ETC. 


MahAbhSrata,  99,  527,  Mann,  Man,  father  of  450,  456-458,  471-474, 
536.  mankind,  3,  12,  181,  476,479,  484,487,491- 

MahA\  Ira,  a sacrificial  cal-  139, 153, 155, 167, 174,  494,500,508,516,  523, 

dron,  219  note.  205,  261,  262,  352, 356,  524, 535,  537, 538, 544, 

Mabldhara,  a celebrated  471,  476,  482,  484,  509,  545,  547,  556,  557, 568, 

Commentator  on  the  530,  539.  573,  574,  583,  595. 

VAjasaneyi-SanhitA,43, Laws  of,  36,  438.  as  healers,  150  ; 

241,249,445,447,497,  the  father  of  NA-  their  number,  245  note. 

499,  518, 520,  545,569.  bhineduihtha,  456,467,  MAtali,  the  charioteer  of 
Maiden,  the,  StiryA,  69  ; 469,  470.  Indra,  398  note. 

earth  or  the  oblation,  Manus  =■  Manu,  146,  164,  MAtalt,  said  to  be  Indra, 
386.  186,  187,  260.  398. 

Maidens,  the  Dawns,  459.  Manyamlna,  a Proper  MAtari$van,  VAyu,  or  Ag- 
Maids,  the  Dawns,  8 ; Name,  20.  ni,  or  the  bringer  of 

fingers  of  the  priest,  Manyu,  Passiou  personi-  Agni  from  heaven,  323, 
316.  fied,  488-500.  447,  449,  506, 515, 547, 

Maker,  38.  Mares,  swift  rivers,  83  ; 552,  557  ; the  name  of 

Makba,  apparently  a de*  waters  of  the  firma-  a Rishi,  262. 

mon,  369.  ment,  386.  Match-makerB,  418,  502, 

Male,  the  presiding,  518  Marichi,  one  of  the  Seven  503  notes, 
note  ; the  first,  576  Rishis,  498.  Matrons,  Heaven  and 

note.  Marriage  and  marriage  Ea^h,  385. 

Man,  the  first,  676  ;per-  ceremonies,  501-506.  Matsyas,  fishes  ; said  to 
sonified,  the  Soul  of  — presiding  deities  of,  be  the  name  of  a tribe, 
the  univeiBe,  517  note ; 505,  506.  17. 

son  of  Heaven  and  MArtAnda,  a name  of  the  MAyA,  Illusion,  the  cause 
Earth,  62;  akin  to  Sun,  487.  of  material  creation, 

Gods,  71,  131,  144,  MarudvridhA,  name  or  604  note. 

364,  186,  206,231,247,  epithet  of  a river,  490.  MAyAbheda, Discernment 
264,  470,  474,  548,  Marutg,  Storm-Gods,  11,  of  MAyA  or  Illusion, 
607.  18,  21,  31,  32,  34,  37-  604. 

MAna,  said  to  be  a name  41,  44,  47,  52,  54-59,  MAyava,  the  name  of  a 

<>t  Agastya,  36.  78,  89.  91,100,  110,  liberal  noble,  525,  526. 

ManA,two  chains  or  rings?,  113,  123-126,  134,  185,  MedhAtithi,  a Rishi,  10? 

226  note.  137,139,144,148-150,  107,128. 

Manas,  Spirit,  461.  160, 163, 164, 166, 175,  Medhya,  a Rishi,  262. 

MAnava,  son  of  Manu,  176, 178, 183,  193, 194,  MedhyAtithi,aRishi,10f 
469  note.  206,  214, 224,  225, 231,  106,  107, 110,  172, 260 

MandhAtar,  MAndhAtar,  234, 242, 243,  245, 246,  261,  297. 

names  of  a Rishi,  181,  265, 268, 287,  292, 302,  Medicine,  Soma,  220 ; o 

188.  ’ 307, 315-317,  320,  382,  the  Maruts,  150,  583 

Manes,  398,  401;  see  Fa-  387, 341, 345, 349, 351,  of  Rudra,  49,  167  i : « 

there,  357,362,371,374,375,  the  Water.,  891,  58 

Maneion.  of  the  Moon,  377,398,411,419,421,  of  Wind,  683. 

AM  nnu.  427, 432, 483, 435, 445,  Mehatnu,  ‘ jilli 


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  Vtt. 


653 


Merit,  rewarded  in  hea-  Monotheism,  498.  and  cloud,  Genius 

ven,  399.  Moon,  Moon-God,  166,  of,  42. 

Metal,  see  Gold,  Iron.  199,  219,  230,  246,269,  Mountains,  38,  39,  175, 
Metres,  558,  559  ; allot-  271,272, 279,  281,  2s2,  265,  433,  539. 

ted  to  various  Gods,  289, 306,  308, 3$4,  325,  Mrigaya,  a fiend  or  hos- 

577.  332,336,338,  341,345,  tile  savage,  113,  451. 

Milch  cow,  Indra,  104;  347,357,  359,382,419,  Mnlika,  the  name  of  a 

thetypeof  beueficence,  423,450,458,501,503,  Riahi,  592. 

153  ; Agni,  387.  519,523,  560,584,591.  Mrityu,  Death,  406. 

Milch  kine,  clouds,  46  ; the  food  of  Gods,  Mudgala,  a Hishi,  542, 

rivers,  326,  344.  501  note ; sprung  from  543. 

Milk,  rain,  149,  291,452;  Purusha’s  mind,  519.  Mudgal&ni,  Mudgala’s 
sap,  vigour,  105  ; of  Moon  and  stars,  326.  wife,  542,  543. 
heaven,  Soma  juice,  Moons,  two,  New  and  Muir,  Dr.  J..  22,  34,  36, 
394,  557  ; white  in  Full,  472.  40,  41,  49,  81-83,  85, 

coloured  cows,  452.  = months,  516.  94  98,100,  142,  152, 

Milton,  366,  422.  Morning,  personified,  35,  161,  179, 192, 198,205, 

Jliti a,  8,  13,  36,  38-40,  45,  48,  67,  73-76,  86,  244,  269,  307,  380, 

43-45.  47,  52,  60-66,  305,  384,  394,  431,  382,  390,  392,  394, 

78  80,  88,  89, 139,143,  515,  580  ; see  Dawn.  400,403,  430,  439,462, 

144,  146,147,156,159 and  Night,  4.  464,  470,  485,486,  490, 

162,  164-168,  176, 188,  Mornings,  11,  39,  46,  491,497,499,501,518, 

193,196,197,200,2:0,  63,  72,  74,  77,  147,  520, 535, 536,538,550, 

220,222,230,243,245,  244,  339,  344,  401,  558, 562, 564,567,576, 

352,255,257,263,270,  432,  502.  577,582,  589,  594,  611. 

306,315,335,337,340,  Mother,  Aditi,  4,  93,  Mfijavau, a mountain  fam- 
342,349,351,362-364,  159,  231  ; Dawn,  78,  ed  for  Soma  plants,  429. 

i 367,371,374,377,382,  418,  608  ; Earth,  96,  Muller,  Prof.  F.  Max,  6, 

384,390,393,396,397,  407,  469,  514,  527;  15,  31,  32,  34,  36, 

411,423,426,  432-435,  of  Floods,  Sarasvati,  46,  49,  54,  57,  74,  82, 

453,467,468,471,  473-  41  ; of  kine  (rays  of  85,  90,  96,  97,  100, 

475,487,503,516,  522-  light),  Dawn,  75.  131,136,144, 152, 181, 

524,535,552,553,  556,  Mothers,  Rivers,  24 4,  184,200,226,226,237, 

571-573,578,  590,607,  345,  370,  405,  431,  245,  259, 269,305,355, 

612.  473;  the  Waters,  235,  382,  392,  404,  407,408, 

Mitra-Varuna,  51, 6065,  425  ; Heaveu  A Earth,  443,  457,  460,  490-492, 

159,  252,  275.  431,  463,  474,  565  ; 494,  497,504,  516,520, 

MitrAtithi,  the  name  of  Plante,  383,  533  ; of  531,538,  567,  571,  572, 

* prince,  429.  Law  (Heaven  A Earth),  576,  593,  600. 

Moksha,  final  liberation,  -T53;  of  Agni  (Dawns),  Mundane  Egg,  the,  518 
Ovation,  518  note.  380.  note. 

i Mole,  323.  midmost,  clouds  ? Muni,  Munis,  inspired 

Wch,  Indra,  78.  326.  aaint(sj,  55,  142,  582. 

Monogamy,  indications  Mountain,  38  cloud,  Mfiradevaa,  mpious,men 
8,  77,123,125,328,362.  or  demoae  101,510. 


654 


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  BTC. 


Music,  214,  >269,  581  ; 252,  266,267,349,414,  Nodhas, a Rishi,  853 note.. 

of  the  Maruts,  55.  437,  440,  447,  448,587.  Noose  (for  catching  sin- 

Myiiantheus,  Prof.,  221.  Nature,  263  note.  ners),  of  Agni,  6li  • 0f 

Navogva,  member  of  a Rudra,  49;  of  Varnna, 
Na  BHA  = N&bb4uedifih*  mythical  priestly  604  ; of  ViBva,  511 

tha,  469.  family,  376,  469.  Nooses  of  Indra-Varuna, 

Nabh8ka,  a llishi,  182.  Navav&stva,  the  name  of  80  ; of  Mitra  and  Va- 
N&bh&ka,  the  son  of  Na-  a chief,  451.  runa,  64. 

bh&ka,  182,  183.  Nectar,  253,  269,  271.  North  altar,  137,  163 

N&bh&nedishtha,  son  of  Nema,  said  to  be  a Jti-  notes . 

Manu,  467,  468.  shi,  250  note.  Notes  and  Queries,  598. 

Nachiketas,  a Proper  Neeh  tar,  one  of  the  priests,  Nrimedha,  a prottg6  of 
Name,  581  note.  521  note.  Agni,  496. 

Nahus,  aPioper  Name,  New  Year,  467  note.  Nrimedhas,  a man’a 
8, 9, 349, 452, 496,  537.  Night,  1 64,  384,  385,  name,  578,  579. 
Nahusha,  a Proper  Name,  419, 438, 472, 573, 574,  Nrishad,  aProper  Name, 
195,  470.  602,  609.  426,  466. 

N4husha,  said  to  be  the  — and  dawn  or  morn- 
name  of  a king,  90.  ing,  44,  47,  273,  553.  Ocean,  39,  51,  70,  84, 
Nahuahas,  a people,  90,  — and  day,  438.  111,122,184,249,569, 

* 121,  126,  351.  — Lord  of,  the  Moon,  583,  591. 

Nahushyas,  ape<»ple,351.  524.  Af  air,  251,  855,  391, 

Nakahatras,  lunar  man*  Nights,  244.  477,536,568,572,604. 

aions,  501  note.  Nine,  the  Bhrigus?  419.  Varu^ia,  184  ;Soma, 

Names,  four,  of  a deity,  Ninety,  indefinite  for  362. 

22  h many,  536.  Oceans,  seven,  520  note. 

Naml,  a friend  of  Indra,  Ninety-nine,  ditto,  Oganas,  men  of  some 
450#  rivers,  546;  castles,  hostile  tribe,  517. 

Namucbi,  a demon  of  21,  94,  239,  306  ; Old  age,  406,  462. 

drought,  21,  139,  246,  fiends,  452  ; loads  Oldeuberg,  Prof.  H.,  96, 

488,  578.  of  fuel,  536.  269,  509,  531. 

Narieansa,  a title  of  Nlpltithi,  a Rishi,  174,  Om,  95. 

Agni,  3,  4,  72,  483,  260,  261.  Omen,  bird  of  ill,  598, 

523,  606.  Nirriti,  Goddess  of  des-  599. 

NaiAf ansi, eulogistic  song,  traction,  42,  58,  99,  Omnific,  Vimkarnian, 
501.  158,  393,  407,  433,  496  note. 

Nkrshada,  said  to  be  the  462,  492,  598.  Omniscient,  Soma,  288, 

name  of  a fiend,  466  Nirritis,  destructive  289. 
note.  pow ere,  557.  On*,  498  ; One  All,  267;  j 

N4rya,  a liberal  prince,  Nirukta,  49.  One  Supreme,  498.  j 

159.  Nishti,  said  to  be  Diti,  0»e*horae  car,  577 ; One- , 

Nksatyas,  a name  of  the  541  note.  footed,  the  Sun  > tee 

Aavins,  44,  67,  70-73,  Niahtigrl,  Indra'i  mother,  Aja*ekapAd. 

117, 118, 127*130, 153,  541.  Op!,  implement  toty^ 


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC. 


655 


Ordainer,  the,  DhAtar,  PAkayajfta, simple  domes-  Parna,  the  PalAsa  tree, 

406  • the  Sun,  467,  tic  oblation,  57<>  note . Butea  Frondosa,  533. 

Order,  Cosmic  and  Mo-  Paktha,  a king,  153,260,  Parnaya,atree-demon,450. 
ral,  48,  63,  64,  384,  465.  . Parsu,  Rib,  daughter  of 

386,  390,  395,  459,  Pakthas,  18,  465.  Manu,  509, 

467*  478,  480,  488,  PalAsa,  a tree,  Butea name  of  a chief,  123, 

496,552.  SeeLaw.  Frondosa,  533  note.  Parsus,  79. 

sacrifice,  40,  47,  90,  PanchAlas,  a tribe  in  the  PArthya,  a liberal  chief, 

119,  350,  354,  360,  PanjAb,  150  note.  525,526. 

361  387,  390,  397,  Pani,  a demon  of  dark-  Farushnt,  the  river  RAvi, 

425,  511,  545,  553,  uess,  466,  479,  595.  17,  18,  223,  490. 

570.  &c  Law.  Panis,  11, 162,  235,  286,  Parvata,  the  Genius  of 

Kosmoa,  the  Uni-  344,  380,  466,  478,  Mountain  and  Cloud, 

verse,  568.  550,  551,  556.  42,  596. 

Orderer,  disposer  of  the  PanjAb,  20,  150,  159,  PAsadyumna,  a king,  34 
Universe,  Indra,  588,  490,  550  notes.  PAtA,  PAthA,  a medicinal 

Ornameuts,  of  the  Ma-  Pantheism,  517-520.  plant,  588  note, 
ruts,  148-150,  494 ; of  Paramabrahmaj&Anam,  Paulomi,  IndrAnl,  59  . 
women,  196  ; of  men,  knowledge  of  the  hi-  Paura,  son  of  King  Puru, 

208,  226  ; of  cows,  gher  truths  of  religion,  112,260. 

208  4 8 4 note  Pauras,  264. 

inranos  = Varuna,  184  Paramajyi,  a liberal  chief,  Pautakratu,  son  ofPuU- 
, ' krati  or  POtakratu, 

note.  iU0* 

)wl,  100, 101;  owlet,  101.  ParamAtmA,  the  supreme  266  note. 

k hide,  278,  317,  320,  soul  or  self,  572  note.  PavamAna,  269,  273; 

336,  369.  Paramesvara,  the  sup-  Agm,  2^° 7i0^  ’ 

reme  God,  497  note.  ‘272,  and  Book  IX.  pas- 

PadqribH!,  a demon  or  ParAsara,  a Hishi,  20.  *tm  Pushau,  33 
| savage,  451.  PArAvata  (n\  name  of  a PavamAuas  Soma  juices 

i&v&na,  patronymic  of  distant  tribe,  175  or  roP8’ 

1 -SL- 

r,  the,Karth  and  Hea-  415  note.  „ 

m,  38, 283, 386,  396;  Parents,  the,  Heaven  of  Soma.  • 

Bay  and  Night,  393  ; and  Earth,  62, 63,  62,  Paviru,  chief 
Niglit  and  Dawn,  273,  92,  824,  841,  396,  J s0,  481. 

433;  Sun  and  Moon,  475,  553.  Pe»rl-  , o{  the 

514.  Parijman,  the  Reamer  Pedu.  a 

>ir4,  a woman's  name  ? round,  Indra  as  the  Aarms,  , ’ 

333.  gun,  522;Viyu,  Wind,  Penury,  prayer  against, 

'i™.  a Proper  Name,  5*4,  625.  71,  492. 

115,123.  Parjanya,  God  of  the  Peterson  Prof.  P.  79, 

N™,  a priestly  family,  Rain-cloud,  39,  95, 96,  *4,  85,  , . 

115  119,  152,  254,270,285,  564,567,  572. 

‘WUnum,  a liberal  338,  381,  458,475,477.  Phelgunte,  » double  ta- 
^ fins.  536.  601.  narmanaion,  502nofs. 


656 


INDEX  OP  NAUES,  ETC. 


Phthisis,  613  note.  Potar,  Cleanser,  one  of 
Physician,  380,  533  ; his  the  priests,  15,  384, 
fee,  533.  421- 

Physicians,  Waters,  143,  Poverty,  deprecated,  2, 

437.  89’  192- 


the  blessings  of,  Praise  of  Men,  Narisanaa, 
a title  of  Agai,  3. 

father  or  an-  Prajilpati,  Lord  of  Crea- 
tion or  Creatures,  52, 


Piety, 

165,  522  ; see  Devotion. 
Pijavana, 

cestor  of  KingSudfts,20. 
Pillar  of  the  Universe 
Agni,  387. 

Pillars,  sacrificial,  39. 


240,  242,  253,  273, 
318,  387,  419,  421, 
425,  445,  458,  466, 
473,  506,  566,  567, 
576,  611,  613. 

Destroyer, 


Pipru,  a demon  < 
ught,  538,  584. 

Pisichas,  demons,  399  Pramara, 


note . ucau1’ 

Pischel,  Prof.  R , 25,  48,  Prapathi,  a liberal  chief, 

82,  15*2,  163,  168,  193,  106. 

213,  257,  277,  288,  Pias&star,  one  of  the 

318',  394,  421,  465,  chief  priests,  521  note. 

512,  547,  586,  605.  Praskanva,  a Rishi,  112, 

Pitaras,  Pitns,  199  ; tee  261,  265,  266. 

Fathers.  Prastotar,  one  of  the 


Pitriyajfta,  sacrifice  to  priests,  229  note. 

the  Fathers,  455  note.  Prathas,  extending,  the 
Planets,  458  note.  aarne  of  an  oblation, 

Plants,  56  ; descended  606. 

from  heaven,  534  ; me-  Pratiprasth4tar,  the  de- 
diciuai,  533-535;  po  signatiou  of  one  of  the 

* isonous,  51;  king  of,  assistant  priests,  219 

Soma,  382,  534,  535.  note. 

Plati,  a Rishi,  472,  474.  Pratridas,  a name  of  the 
Playoga,  the  father  of  Tritsus,  36. 

King  Asanga,  107,  173.  Pravargya,  an  introduc- 
Pleasantness, personified,  tory  Soma  ceremony, 

586.  219 

Plenty,  personified,  33,  Prayfija, fore-offering, 606. 

38,  353,  473.  Prayer,  peraonified,  38, 

Plough,  153,  563.  , 558 ; Lord  of,  91,  92  ; 

Poiaon,  charm  against, 51.  made,  inspired,  by  Gods, 

Poisonous  reptiles, charm  92  ; lor  health,  wealth 

acainat,  5.  and  happineaa,  3,  53, 

Polygamy,  17,  28,  428,  73,  75,  143,  340,  361, 

112  541.  688,  689  ; 391,  481,  432  471. 


homes,  231,  431;  for 
long  life,  59,  66, 

75,  96,144,  189,  198, 
199,  211,  268,  272, 
352,  406,  435,  462, 
607  ; for  safety,  37, 
79,  89,  110,  117,  154- 
160,  164,  165,  196, 

197,  200,  210,  341, 
361,  471;  for  goodness, 

198,  271,  272  ; for  in- 
nocence, 143,  431,435, 
471,  574  ; for  mercy, 
85, 192 ; for  purification, 
322,  391;  for  forgive- 
ness of  sins,  37,  58, 
82,  84,  85,  89,  199  , 
for  freedom  from  sin, 
431,  435,  471,  598, 
for  immortal  life  m 


heaven,  381,  382,399; 
fir  wisdom,  1,  5,  34, 
198,  291,  367,  378, 
414,  434  ; for  fanip, 

27,  80,  156,  276,  284, 
291,  302,  308,  311, 
312,  432,  434,  462 
525  ; for  wives,  321 
for  children,  1,  2,  6, 


, 87,  91,  92, 121 
176,  268,  306 
3 52,  361,  391 
>67  ; for  aid  i> 
24,  27,  30,  56 
93,  HI.  140 
151,  190-  20l< 
>4, 364,  364,436 
>90;  for  victor; 
•ace,  228,  6® 
othes,  863 ; W 

is,  64,  n.  * 

1«°,  275,  * 
316,  317, 

372,  376,  53 


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETO. 


657 


turage,  341,  352  ; for  58,  433,  471,  475.  Purohita,  a family  or 
eloquence, 535;  against  Prithu,  a Rishi,  591,602.  tribal  priest,  10,  11, 
penury  and  sickness,  Pritlius,  79.  163,  535. 

71,  H3,  210,  432,471;  Prithusravas,  a liberal  — of  Gods,  Briha&pati, 

for  freedom  from  evil  prince,  195,  196.  535. 

dreams,  445,  for  re-  Priyamedha,  a famous  Puru,  a King,  112. 

,uval  of  the  sin  of  Kishi,  112,  118,  171,  Puru,  the  eponymus  of 
ing  aud  false  swear-  233.  a Vedic  tribe,  7,  10, 

ig,  391  ; for  the  de-  Priyamedhas,  110,  115,  19,  21,  385. 

ruction  of  fiends,  90,  123,  128,  215,233,489.  Purus,  10,  91,  449. 

5-101,  352.  Productive  Power,  486.  Puruhanman,  a Rishi, 

?oga,  a poor  Rishi,  Professions,  crafts, trades,  215. 

»5  note.  indications  of,  agricul-  Purukutsa,  a prince,  21, 

s-atones,  43,  46,491,  ture,  150,  153,  157,  147. 

'2,  526,  527,  603.  519,  563  ; barber, 115,  Purumdyya,  a Rishi,  212. 

&kus4nu,  a Proper  586;  bard,  380;  boat*  Purumilha,  a Rishi,  218, 

arne,  142.  builder,  230,  327  ; 305. 

ithood,  a profession,  caq>enter,  wright,  285,  Purumitra,  a Rishi,  437. 

0 note.  380  ; currier,  63,  265;  Purfiravas,  au  ancient 

>t’s  daughters,  fingers,  rope-making,  80;  phy-  King,  139,  412,  527- 

0.  sician.  380,  523;  smelt-  531. 

sts,  modern,  imita-  er,  486,  497  ; smith,  Purus,  men  of  a Vedic 

ps  of  divine,  577.  380,  486  ; trafficker,  tribe,  207. 

of  the  Gods,  483;  merchant,  190,  209  ; Purusha,  Embodied  Spirit, 
Hotars,  Celestial.  usurer,  209;  weaver,  Man,  397,  517-520, 
called  Gods,  3,  144,  416.  576. 

0,  568.  Protecting  Goddesses,  Purushanti,  a liberal 

liberality  to,  see  38  ; see  Varfi tils.  prince,  305. 

berality  to  Priests.  Protectress,  the,  43  ; sec  Pushan,  a Sun-God,  39, 
i&dhra,  a Rishi,  262.  Varfitri.  41,  44,  45,  48,  115, 

indv&na,  a Proper  Providence,  30,  147,  539.  164,  167,  168,  265, 

Line,  261.  Ptolemy  175.  306,  321,  337,  349, 

na,  the  name  of  a Pulaha,  one  of  the  Seven  368,  377,  387,  404, 

tec?  364.  Itishis,  498  note.  405,  415,  416,  428, 

ai  = Prisni,  487.  Pulastya,  ditto,  498  note.  432,  463,  472-474, 

>i,  mother  of  the  Punarvatsa,  a Rishi,  125.  502,  504,  523,  535, 

ruts,  18,  40,  55,83,  Purftnas,  95,  528.  571,  534. 

\ 124, 149, 150,242,  Purandhi,  Plenty  or  Bold-  Pushana=  Pfishan,  524. 
M27, 456, 466, 487,  ness  personified,  38,  Pushtigu.a  Proper  Name, 

&, 568.  41n44,  473,  476,  505.  261. 

Mina,  the  name  of  Purifying,  the,  253.  Putabhrit,  a Soma  reser- 
i°ble,  525.  Purod&s,  a Proper  Name?  voir,  108,  124,  243, 

the  first  anoint-  17. 

129,  591.  Puroddsa,  Bacrificiulcake,  POtakratd,  a Proper  Name, 
ill)  Earth.  Mid-air.  397  note.  266*. 


658 


INDEX  OP  NAMES,  ETC. 


PQtakratu,  a Proper  201,247,  296,301,313,  Ribhus,  three  deities  of 
Name,  218,  266.  331,347,868,375,419,  mid-air,  39,  41,  50,  52 

433,456,458,463,  510,  111,  130,  176,192,226’ 

QUAiD  = Dawn,  438.  512,  563,  593.  242,247,413,  438,  457’ 

Quarters  of  the  sky,  39.  RAhshasi,  a female  fiend,  475,  477,  492,496,523, 
Queen,  the,  VAk,  571  ; 100.  603,  612. 

of  Gods,  VAk,  251.  Ham,  the  Warrior  Indra,  Rich,  richas,  sacred 
Queens,  the  Waters,  391,  110,248.  verse(s)  for  recitation, 

424,  425.  RAma,  the  name  of  a 586,  519,  521,  558. 

Questionings  regarding  noble,  525.  Riches  personified,  38 ; 

Nature,  Gods,  and  RAmAyana,  166.  like  chariot- wheels, 

Man,  497,  514,  555,  R&sA,  a semi-mythical  562. 

600.  river, 297, 490,550, 566.  ltijika?, name  of  a people,] 

Quintus  Curtius,  150.  Rathantara,  an  import-  381  note. 

Quoit,  245,  436,  488.  ant  SAman,  606.  Rijisvau,  a protigi  of 

Rathaprosht.has,  men  of  Indra,  200,  538,  584. 
Race,  291,  300,  480,  489.  a regal  family,  464.  Rijunas,  a man's  name, 

Kace-course,  88.  Rathaspati,  God  of  war-  262. 

Racers,  46,  282  note.  chariots,  473,  525.  Riksha,  a prince,  212, 

Ragozin,  Mme.  Z.,  408,  RAti,  Divine  Favour  or  213,  222,  223. 
497,505,552,589,606;  Bounty,  477.  Rikvana,  divine  singers, 

see  Vedic  India.  RAvI,  a river  in  the  Tan-  398,  472. 

Raibhi,  ritual  verse,  501.  jAb,  17, 223,  490  notes.  Rishi,  84,  112,  572; 

Rain,  89  ; produced  by  Razor,  115,  421.  Indra,  122,  140. 

the  Moon,  423,  424  Rebha,  a proUgt  of  the  Rishis,  70,  74,  111,  120, 
notes ; Lords  of,  160  ; Asvina,  437.  127,  218,  235, 268, 323, 

prayer  for,  63,  64, 160,  Red,  the,  the  Sun,  76;  352,  469,385,518,594: 

275.  Red  Bird, the  Sun, 459 ; old  and  recent,  25 ; aiv 

Rains,  the,  97,  98,  148.  Red  Treasure,  the,  the  cient,  400, 577  ; raisec 
RAjanya,  a Kshatriya,  Sun,  252.  to  their  rank  by  know 

519.  Regal  Class,  the,  519;  ledge,  577  ; childlik* 

Rajas,  the  firmament,  see  Kshatriya.-?.  questions  of,  514 

234.  Resuscitation  of  Subau-  childlike  address  to  ! 

RAjayakshma,  Conaump-  dhu,  401-465.  God,  33,  138, 146, 147 

tion,  597.  Revelation,  268.  189  ; the  Seven,  498 

Raji,  a word  of  unknown  Ribhu,  the  eldest  of  the  552,  677,  588. 

meaning,  547.  Ribhus,  41,  242,  413,  Rishtishena,  a prince 

RAkA,  a lunar  Goddess,  525.  635,  530. 

332.  Ribhukshan  — Ribhu  ; a Rivers,  4,  39,  490,  529 

Rakshas,  the  demon  race,  title  of  Indra ; 41,  42,  the  Seven,  20,  4l, 

154.  50,  192,  247,  413,  473,  214 ; twenty-one,  49(1 

RAkshasa,  a nocturnal  489, 525.  Lords  of,  63.  j 

fiend,  1,  11,  100.  Ribhukshans,  Ribhuk-  Robber,  53,  99;  m TW 

RAkehaws,  14,  43,  72,  ’ sh&naa  = Ribhus, 41, 42,  Kodatl,  the  Consort 
98,100,  155,  177  137,  60,  124,  148,  523,  525.  the  Maruts,  38,  W 


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC. 


659 


Rohitas,  the  horses  of  43,  57,  213,  405,  567, 
Agni,  46  note.  578,  585. 

Roth,  Prof,  von,  8,  34,  Sacred  Grass,  see  Grass, 
40,  48,  54,  57,  68,  84,  Sacred. 

91, 105, 116, 118,  147,  Sacred  syllable,  397. 
184,214,218,256,259,  Sacrifice,  219,  540,  541  ; 


109,  115,134,136,168, 
170,  190,  227,236,238, 
239,  241,247, 248,262, 
441,  442,546,  580,600. 
Sakti,  a son  of  Vasishtha, 
’ 20. 


260,  264,  266,304,382, 
391,392,404,  408,  452, 
456,  470,509,531,  541, 
565,  569,  582. 

Rudra,  the  Tempest- 
God,  12,  39,  41,  46, 
49,54,56.58,  137,149, 
167,331,450,473,474, 

522-525, 572, 573,  582, 
600. 

Rudras,  sons  of  Rudra, 
the  Maruts,  8,  12,  35, 
39,  40,  124,  137,  148, 
206,253,265, 427,  458, 
473,476,  477,525,537, 
571,575,582,592;  the 
Asvins,  154,  162. 
Rudriyas  = Rudras,  450. 
Ruma,  a favourite  of 
Indra,  114. 

Rusama,  a prince,  112, 
114,  262. 

Rusamas,  a people,  262. 


personified,  576,  601  Sakvarl,  a Vedic  metre, 
no/e$;asan  actofcrea-  35,  486. 
tion,  499,513,520,576;  Salmali,  the  silk-cotton 
morning  and  evening,  tree,  51,  503. 

14,  15;  morning,  noon,  Salt,  not  mentioned, 
and  evening,  165,  345,  S&ma,  S&man,  song,  chant 
376;  priest  of,  Agni,  ed hymn, 36, 123,  141, 


156,  167,  229,  235,  244, 
248, 433,  486,  494,  502, 
519,  557,  558,576,  581, 
606. 


13,16  ; herald  of,  Agni, 

’passim  ; a web,  woven, 

11,  268,  370,  575; 
a thread,  spun,  136, 

186,  238,  345, 456, 482,  SAma-chanter,  one  of  the 
602  ; a ship,  444,  540,  priests,  486,  549. 

547  ; a chariot,  525,  Sdmaveda,  594,  595,  60 
540;  ploughing,  sow-  note s. 
ing,  reaping,  540 ; with  Sambara,  a demon  or 
the  heart,  255 ; head  savage,  20,  94,  239, 
of,  Soma,  283 ; the  246, 306. 

Gods’  first,  421 ; three-  Sami,  a tree,  Acacia  Su- 
fold,  455,  570 ; seven-  ma,  426,  453. 
threaded,  455,  570;  SamjMuam,  Agreement, 
with  five  divisions,  570;  609. 

unpleasing  without  Samvarana,  a Rishi,  261. 
prayer,  547 ; sordid,  SAmvarani,  son  of  Samva- 
prayer  against,  471.  rana,  261. 

Sacriiicer,  the,  607  ; tee  Samvarta,  a man’s  name, 
Yajam&na. 

the  first,  Atharvan,  ?ausa,  Prayer,  Wish,  per- 

523  ; wife  of,  associat-  sonified,  38. 
ed  in  worship,  168,  Santanu,  a prince,  535, 

415,607.  636t  ^ . , 

Sadhyaa,  a class  of  Gods,  Saprathaa,  Far-eitend- 
. 518,  520.  ing,  tb.  -me  of  au 

B'S'),.",  ’VS.--  >»  *- 

tir  • jiST-  4^  • “ •* *' 

of  Indra,  22, 100, 105,  haspati,  443, 


Sxbakdhu,  name  of  the 
cow  milked  at  sacrifice, 
467. 

Snbardhuk,  ditto,  482. 
SabardughA,  ditto,  104, 
466,  467. 

Sacbi,  power,  Indra’s 
Consort,  140,  596. 
?Hchigo,  of  uncertain 


660 


INDEX  OP  NAMES,  ETC. 


Saptavadhri,  a protegi  of  Sauchika,  a title  of  Agui,  Serpents,  99,  471. 

the  Asvins,  221,  437.  455.  Seven,  the,  the  Maruta, 

Sara,  the  name  of  a man,  Sdvarni,  a liberal  prince,  166. 

216,  217.  470.  Seven,  Adityas,  382  ; 

Sarabha,  the  name  of  a Sdvarnya  = Sdvarni,  470.  castles,  19  ; cowunu- 

ltishi,  251.  Savasi,  the  Mighty  Dame,  nities,  238;  fiends, 

Saramd,  Indra’s  messen-  Aditi,  190,  225.  246;  ftamea  of  Agui, 

ger,  53,  399,  466,  468,  Savishtha,  a liberal  prince,  370,  387  ; glories, 166, 
550,  551.  223.  Guards  of  Soma,  5ui  ; 

Sararaeyas,  Yama’s  watch  Savitar,  the  Sun  as  Im-  heavenly  singers,  261  ; 
dogs,  sous  of  Saramd,  peller,  Vivifier,  15,  37,  heroes,  419  ; horses  of 
53  note.  39,  42-44,  48,  49,  52,  the  Sun,  60,  66;  hotars 

Saranyu,  the  mother  of  63,  65,  74,  76,  79,  80,  427;  465;  lights  of 

Yama,  163,  404.  143,  165,  233,254,322,  sacrifice,  370  ; metres, 

Sarasvdn,  the  Consort  of  337,368,379,  397,404,  370,  427,  478,  520 

Sarasvati,  90,  477.  419,  425,430-432,  434,  notes;  mothers  (rivers), 

Sarasvati,  River  an  d God-  467,  472,  473,  476,  244,  345,  370  ; obla 

dess,  4,  11,  39,  41,  44,  502,  505,  512,522,525,  tions,  405  ; oceans, 

45,90,  91,152,  180,  538,539,567,575,584,  520  note;  priests,  181, 

265,  273,  323,337,405,  586,  591,  597,  603,606.  201,  219,  238,268,275, 

425,463,473,474,476,  Savitri  = Savitar,  242 note.  27J,  281,  310,  352, 

484,490,553,575,586,  Sdyana,  Achdrya,  the  great  37(f  882,  415,  432, 

613.  Commentator,  passim.  455,471,  473,  559,567, 

Sarayu,  a river,  473.  Sayu,  a proUge  of  the  570 ; regions;  382,567, 
Sdrpaidjfli,  Kadrd,  Ser-  Asvins,  69,  438,  439.  ridges  of  mountains, 

pent-Queen,  608.  Schermao,  Dr.  520,  567,  211  ; Rishis  498,  552  ; 

Saryandvdn,  a lake  and  576.  see  Rishis,  Seven ; ri- 

district,  122,  125,207,  Scorpion  ?,  5 i . vers,  20,  41,  67,  159, 

317,381,431.  Sea, 9,35, 51, 117,119,120,  183,  184,  214,  265, 

Sasakarna,  a $ishi,  128.  149,  239,  307,  345,  303,  318,  344,  345, 

Sasvati/the  wife  of  386,  476,  4 7 7,552,566,  , 352,  370,  4 4 2,  452, 

Asanga,  107.  582;  of  air,  9,  131, 132,  479;  546;  rivers  of 

Satakratu,  Lord  of  a 134,  136,  162,  207,  air,  303 ; singers,  485, 

Hundred  Powers,  I ndra,  224,  247,  254,  279,  sisters,  183,  268,  318, 

137,  170,173,178,203,  307,  311,  331,  374,  345,  387  ; sons  of  Adi 

224,225,228,234,236-  375,  487,  494,  609;  a ti,  487;  spea/s  of  the 

238,241,242,249,250,  Soma  reservoir,  121,  Maruts,  166;  splen ■ 

263, 284, 423, 556,  580.  289,  293;  water  into  dours,  166;  statious, 

Satapatha-Brdhmana,43,  which  the  S<>ma  juice  567  ; Sun’s  rays,  220, 

* 95,  253,  269,  405,527,  falls,  279  ; cloud  and  458  ; threads  of  sacri- 

533,  538,  540,  568,585.  rain,  475.  fice,  570;  tones,  427 , 

Sataydtu=Sakti,Vasish-  Seas,  four,  292,  448.  troops  of  Maruts,  458, 
tha’sson,  20.  Serpent,  the,  90,  113;  478. 

Sdtydyana  Brdhmana,35,  assassin,  43  ; Serpent-  Sevenfold  Race  of  mb, 
Queen,  608.  101  — ■ 


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC. 


661 


Seven-beaded, hymn,261;  to  Brahman  rank,  536  154,257. 

sacrifice,  478.  note.  Sobharis,  147,  149. 

Seventy  Hymns,  the,  62  ; Singers,  Rikvans,  12.  Sole  bom,  Manyu,  500. 

sec  Siebenzig  Lieder.  Siniv&ll,  a lunar  Goddess,  Sole  God,  497. 

Shadvinsa  Br&hinana,110.  332,613.  Soma,  the  God,  38,  45, 

Ship,  143,  224,  230,330,  Sinjflra,  a proUg6  of  the  53,98-101,  166,  269, 
359,  605  ; hymn,  185;  Asvins,  118,  439.  325,  391,  414,  415,474, 

sacrifice,  185,350,  444,  Sipada,  a kind  of  disease,  52.  477,  501,  515,  534,535, 


471,  540, 547,  = funeral  Sipivishta,  a title  of  Vishnu,  539,  570,  571,  574,577, 
pile,  581.  94,  95.  586,  600-603;  the  plant, 

Sickle,  227,  540.  Sirimbitha,  a ltishi,  594.  habitat  of,  283,  309, 

Sickness,  71;  sec  Disease.  Slshtas,  an  unimportant  310,  354,  preparation 

iebenzig  Lieder des Rig-  tribe,  264  of,  107,  270,309;  rap- 

veda  (Geldner  and  SisnSt  = RAkshasas,  etc.,  tare  produced  by,  169, 

Kaegi),  7,  62,  84,  85,  419  note.  194,  198;  powers  of, 

394,  400,  408,  431,  Sisnadevdh,  lewd  savages,  193,  198,  199;  elo- 
486,  552,  562,  572,  24,  537  notes.  quence  produced  by, 

576,589.  Sisters,  fingers,  283,289,  259,288,293,315,321, 


iigrus,  a non- Aryan  tribe  316, 324, 323,  329,  350, 

20.  351,  353,  365,  526  ; 

silam&vati,  name  or  epi-  rivers,  345;  plants,  410; 

thet  of  a river,  491.  Heaven  and  Earth,  565; 
Siraidii,  a kind  of  disease,  Dawns,  294  ; flames  of 
52.  Agni,  387. 

Simyus,  a savage  tribe,  Sivas,anon-Ary  an  tribe, 

* 11  ' 18’ 

Sin,  the  bonds  of,  82,85,  Six  Expanses,  400,  574. 
210,  211  ; prayer  for  Skambha,  Pillar  of  the 
removal  or  forgiveness  Universe,  38/  note, 
of,  82,  89,  210,  211,  Sky,  personified,  76,77, 
431 ; of  others,  prayer  433,  474,  476  ; sprung 
for  freedom  from,  52,  from  Puruslia’s  head, 
82;  punisher  of,  64,82,  519. 

362,  493.  516  ; punish*  Slaves,  147,  266. 
ment  of,  583;  sinless,  Sleep  song,  54. 

60,  62,  65,  82,  210;  Smadibha,  a Proper  Name, 
dinner,  576.  451. 

Siodhu,  the  Indus,  river,  Smelting  of  metals,  4S6, 
^ 83,  90,  132,  150,  497. 

160,163,  364, 473,477,  Smith,  380,486,497. 

490,  494,  555,  583,  Snowy  Mountains,  566. 
chief  of  rivers,  490;  Soastos,  Arrian’s  name 
feminine,  491.  ^pf  SuvAstu,  148. 

Sindhudvlpa,  the  name  ofehari,  a Vedic  Rishi, 
MkjlfltlltTT'  --;-J  118,144,148.160,  152 


325,  333,  351  356,308; 
Pavam&na  (in  course 
of  purification),  269- 
382,  567  ; deified,  198, 
199,  227,  269,  271,273, 
374,  376,  501 ; celes- 
tial, 134,  206,  207,292, 
296,  369,  381,  560  ; 
Guard  of,Krisdnu,473; 
guards  of,  501 ; Father 
of  Gods,  342,  347,  355, 
377 ; Father  of  Heaven 
and  Earth,  350,  355  ; 
identified  with  the  Sun, 
311  ; with  the  Moon, 

306,  601;  omnisqent, 
288,  289 ; producer  of 
the  Gods,  297  ; maker 
of  the  firmament,  310; 
giver  of  rain,  295,  301; 
8la  yer  of  sinners,  289, 
300 ; healer  of  the  sick 
and  giver  of  sight, 227. 
Somayajha,  an  offering 
of  Soma  juice,  570  note. 
Son  of  Strength,  «« 
Strength,  Son  of. 


662 


INDEX  OP  NAMES,  ETC. 


Sorcererfa),  sorcery,  100,  Stallions,  flames  of  the  Sumne-iipl,  the  name  of 
101.  Sun,  386.  an  Apsaras,  528. 

Soul, Individual, 517no*e  ; Star,  the  Sun,  77, 82, 555,Sun,  Sun-God,  8, 9,35,39, 
Universal, 517, 572 notes,  595  ; the  ancient, Agni  60,  68,  74,  77,  78,  82, 

Soul  of  the  Universe,  as  the  Sun,  514.  111,113,124,133,146, 

Man,  Embodied  Spirit,  Starlings,  176.  221,  234,  239,244,  270, 

517  note.  Steed,  the,  the  Sun,  579.  286,  289,  297,311,  322, 

Speech,  130,  251,  484,  Steeds’ Lord,  Agui,  2.  339,378,  386,387,390, 

485,  458,  571,  604 ; Steer,  Steers,  see  Bull,  392,405,418-420,431, 
Lord  of,  Bfihaspati,  Bulls.  434,451,458,465,467, 

535  note  ; Soma,  288,  Stega,  a word  of  uncertain  473,487,501,502,514, 
368;  Viavakarman,  497.  meaning,  426  519,  520,525,  547,  554, 

Spies  of  Varuna,  83;  of  Stotar,  a praising  priest,  562,565.566,  569,571, 
the  Gods,  392,  393.  237.  584,585,601,604,608, 

Spinsters,  485.  Streams,  50,  431,  472  ; sprung  from  Purushi's 

Spirit,  Boldness,  personi-  see  Rivera.  eye,  519;  the  daughter 

fled,  38.  Strength,  Son  of,  Agni,  of,  Sur)&,  501 ; protec* 

the  Supreme,  484  2,  3,  5,  10,  14,  15, 188,  tors  of,  594. 

note  ;— sprung  from  200, 201,  217, 218,  223,  Sun  and  Moon,  182,  242, 
Desire  or  Love,  575  ; 231,395,  409,  445,  585,  419,  472,  481,  495,503, 

the  Embodied,  Purusha,  586;  Indra,  235,  238.  5*4,  523,  524,  584,609, 

517  ; the  presiding,  Stuti,  Praise,  427  note.  the  eyes  of  Agni,  495 

518  ; human,  goes  to  Subandhu,  a Rishi,  462-  note. 

the  wind  at  death. 402  ; 465.  Suuritd,  Pleasantness, 586. 

recall  of  the  departed,  Sueha,  Suchd,  Proper  Supttrya,  epithet  of  a 
461,462.  Names,  416.  Rishi,  559. 

Spirits,  the  world  of, 402.  Sudaksha,  a Rishi,  237.  Supporter,  Indra,  249. 
Spring,  518,  597.  Sudds,  King  of  the  Trit-  Supieme  Deity,  original- 

SraddhA,  Faith,  528.  au»,  17-22,  27,  34,  35,  ly  Varuna,  570;— God, 

Srent,  the  name  of  an  53,  60,61,64,79,  80.  377  note Soul,  572. 

Apsaras,  528.  Sudeva,  a Proper  Name,  Sflra,  the  Sun,  49,  104, 

Sribinda,  a demon  of  116.  316,  319,  821,345,351, 

drought,  169.  Sudlti,  said  to  be  a Pro-  379. 

Srinjavrish,  a Proper  per  Name,  218.  Surabhi,  the  daughter  of 

Name,  142.  S,.dra,  a man  of  the  Daksha,  394. 

Srutakakaba,  a Vedic  fourth  class,  519.  S tirade va,  a prince,  21 7. 

Rishi,  239.  Sujflrnl,  the  name  of  an  Surgery,  104. 

Srutarvan,  a prince,  222,  Apsaras,  528.  Sir  is,  princes,  institu  tors 

223,  451,  SumUrutam,  the  band  of  of  sacrifice,  161,  590. 

St.  Petersburg  Lexicon,  Maruts,  493.  Surya,  the  Sun,  3,  ^ 

40,  49,  101,  156,  187,  Sumedhas,  a ProperName,  48,  50,  60*63,  66,  OS 
191,  223,226, 240,  259,  578 , 579.  74,  83,  86,  93,  94, 10' 

285,  287,288,  299, 323,  Sumitra,  a Rishi,  482, 5$  121, 126,148, 152, 

338,  856,  366,  393,436,  Sumitraa,  482,  171,  175*177, 187, 19 


INDEX  OP  NAMES,  ETC. 


663 


253,  266,  267,  269,278,  SvAna,  the  name  of  a Ten,  the,  the  fingers, 329; 
289,  290,  303,  306,311,  guard  of  Soma,  501  arm b = regions,  253  ; 
312,314,320,  322,325,  note.  confederate  kings,  35, 

329,  331,  333,  334,339,  Svanadratha,  a prince,  106,  79,  80;  dames,  women, 
344,  345,  351,  353.355,  Svarga,  heaven,  530.  the  fingers,  274,  304, 
361,  362,  373,  375,381,  Svarnara,  a prince,  112,  324,  326;  fingers’  space, 

389,  393,  420,  422,423,  Svasti,  Prosperity,  472.  the  region  of  the  heart, 

426,  431,  434,  435,446,  SvetyA,  a river,  490.  617;  horses  of  the  Sun, 

451,  467,  470,476,  487,  Swan,  176, 291  ; the  Sun,  312 ; priests,  219  ; 

493,501,  510,514.515,  .571.  regious,  253  ; Bisters, 

547,  554,  555,  557,569,  Swans,  bards,  359  ; the  the  fingers,  269  ; 289; 
571,  682,  586,  590,596,  Maruts,  59.  Angirases,  419. 

601,  605,  606,  608  ; Swarthy  skin,  the  abori-  Tenfold  dwelling  of  Agni, 
High  Priest  of  Gods,  gines,  331.  453. 

253.  Swat,  148  note.  Thief,  thieves,  53, 82, 99, 

urya’s  Daughter,  Faith,  Swing,  boat,  84;  golden,  223,  386,  505. 

381.  the  Sun,  83.  Thiity-four  lights,  458. 

\ryA,Sunlight,Daughter  Sword,  or  knife,  of  Agni,  Thirty-three  Gods,  166, 
of  Surya,  68,  69,  127,  flame,  400.  167,  175,  181,  265,352. 

152,  167,  232,438,501-  SyAva,  a protigt  of  the  Thirty-Bix  chalices  for 
505;  the  typical  bride,  Asvins,  476.  Soma  libations,  558. 

501-505.  SyAvaka,  a favourite  of  Thousand,  branches,  of 

urya’s  Bridal,  501-503.  ' Iudra,  112,  114.  the  Sun-God  or  the 

usartu,  a river,  490.  SyAvAsva,a  Proper  Name,  World-Tree,  35;  eyes 

neliAman,  the  name  of  177-180.  of  Varuna,  37. 

a prince,  156,  161.  Syumarastni,  a favourite  ThOrr,  172  note. 
ishna,  a demon  of  of  the  Asvins,  262.  Thread  of  sacrifice,  136, 

drought,  21,  106,  120,  286,  345,  482,  485,482, 

182, 246, 262, 41 1,  412,  Taittir!  y a Brahman  a,  485,  576, 602. 

451,  406,  538,  554.  581.  Three,  the,  heaven,  air, 

aslioma,  a district  fam-  Tanfina  pAt,  Son  of  Him-  earth,  252  ; Viiyu, 

ed  for  Soma,  125.  self,  Agui,  272, 483,  553.  Parjanya,  Aditya,  420; 

udiomA,  a river,  207,  TAnva,  a liberal  noble,  attendants  on  Dawn, 

490.  525,  526.  35  ; backs  or  ridges, 

Stainer,  38,  56.  Tapas,  Austerity,  Fervour,  310  ; beakers,  108, 136; 

aitlej,  493  note.  Penance,  499,  594,  607.  daily  libations,  12, 376, 

utudrl,  the  Sutlej,  490.  Tapurmdrdhin,  Flame-  570  ; Dawns,  183,  dis- 

'uvlstu,  the  name  of  a headed,  Brihaspati  or  tauces,l  16,171;  earths, 

district,  148.  Agni,  606!  83,  99,  184;  fertilizing 

Wad,  148.  Tfranta,  a liberal  prince,  deities,  35;  filters,  364; 

ivadhA,  oblation  to  305.  receptacles, 12, 559 ; 

Manes,  398,  401.  TArkshy a, a personification  friends  of  Indra,  42; 

5vlH  Ave  1 HaU  l 59,  of  the  Sun,  591,  604.  gatherings,  66;  gather- 
177,273, 884. 898,  Taruksha,  a non-A^an  ing* places,  181;  gene- 

chief.  190.  rations,  263;  Goddei* 


664 


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC. 


ses,  4 ; Gods,  607  ; Time,  458  note.  Tritsu,  SudAs,  king  of 

heights,  380  ; holy  Times  (watches)  of  night,  Tritsus. 
words,  292,  301 ; lumi-  116,  Tritsus,  a tribe,  17-21, 3Z 

nous  realms  of  heaven,  Tiraschi,  a Rudd,  243.  36,  79,  80, 

213,  282 ; noble  crea-  Tirindira,  a liberal  prince, Troop,  the,  the  Maruts, 
tures,  35  ; places  of  the  123.  371  ; a,  stars,  419. 

Asviua,  128  ; plaees  of  Tishya,  an  asterism,  473.  Truth,  the  Law  of  the 
Soma,  243  ; Purifiers,  Trafficker,  190,  209.  Universe,  501,  601, 

331;  reservoirs,  96, 108,  Trap,  for  lions,  422  ; for  609;  Lords  of,  the 
370  ; sacrificial  fires,  wild  bulls,  422.  Gods,  39. 

547 ;8eats,  310;  spheres  Trasadasyu,  Terror  of  Tryambaka,  a name  of 
of  light,  282  ; steps  of  Dasyus,  the  name  of  a Rudra,  59. 

Vishnu,  93,  95,  130,  prince, 21, 128,147, 153,  Tugra,  a prince,  104, 113, 
134,  167,  263;  sublim-  178, 179,  260,  428,  592.  117, 192,  223, 250, 437, 

eet  forms,  322  ; times  Tree,  the  Soma  plant,  451. 

(watches)  of  night,  583  ; the  home  of  the  Tugrya,  Bhujyu  son  of 
116  ; tones,  362  ; Ve-  Blest,  581.  Tugra,  113,  171,  250. 

das,  310  note;  voices,  Trees,  38,56;  clouds, 488.  Tugryas,  104. 

361 ; wheels  of  SOryA's  Trikadrukus,  three  Soma  Tuji,  a prince  aided  by 
car,  503;  Worlds,  109,  vessels,  or  first  three  Indra,  451. 

478.  days  of  the  Abhiplava  Turva4=  Turvasa, 

Threefold,  the,  the  Uni-  ceremony,  136,  238,  Turvasa,  thi  eponymus 

verse,  557;  the  three  400.  of  a Vedic  tribe,  17,  22, 

daily  sacrifices,  376  ; — Trikshi,  a prince,  153,  113, 114, 124, 130,131 ; 

light,  95;  grass  (in  Triocular,  Rudra  59  note.  191,  306,  452. 

three  layers),  255  ; Tuple,  height,  329,  333,  Turvasas,  115, 
wealth,  33.  351,  372;  splendour,  TOrvayAna,  a King  aided 

Three-footed,  old  man  422.  by  Indra,  465. 

with  staff,  562.  TrishtAmd,  a river,  490.  Tvashtar,  the  Divine  Ar- 

Thrice,  in  connexion  Triahtup,  one  of  the  chief  tificer,  4,  38,  39,  163, 
with  the  Asvins,  176.  Vedic  metres,  123, 362,  166,  254, 273,  337, 384, 

Thrice-Eleven,  Gods,  400,  577.  390-392,  404,  406, 447, 

352;  tee  Thirty-three  Trisiras,  Three-headed,  449,  452,  456, 473, 475, 

Goite.  son  of  Tvashtar,  390,  476,484,491,492,523, 

Thrice-seven,  Maruts,  83,  491  notes.  537, 553, 571, 613;  giver 

214,  268;  metres,  83;  Trisoka,apro%^of  Indra,  of  children,  38. 
rivers, 326, 344, 473, 490;  192.  Twain,  the,  HeaveD  and 

sorts  of  sacrifice,  83.  Trita,  a Vedic  deity,  125,  Earth,  424. 
Thunderbolt, of  iron, 244,  184,  183, 197,  262,292,  Twins,  the,  Heaven  and 

449,  531 ; of  gold,  211,  294,  295, 343,  355,369,  Earth,  823,  324  ; day 

413,  531 ; = sacrifice,  37u,  390,  446,  447,449,  and  night,  390. 

211 ; 5ss  priest’s  fee,  472,  537,  559,  585. 

420 ; m the  sacrificial  Trita’s  maidens,  dames,  Uddir,  the  Soma  plant, 
exclamation,  588  ; the  priest’s  fingers,  492 ; the  heavenly,  So- 

- ■- «">  onl  OQ*  mu  ftTfti  rtU 


INDEX  OP  NAMES,  ETC. 


665 


Odgfttar,  the  Chanter  of  Ushas,  Dawn,  45,  74-77,  41,  42,  50,  242,  413, 

SAmans,  1 29,  486.  159, 197,  253,  267,  329,  473,  525. 

UkshanyAyana,  a Proper  385,438,488,514,584,  VAjas,  VAja  and  hia  bro- 
Naine,  161.  611;  see  Dawn;  her  thers,  the  Rtbhua,  41, 

Hktha,  a hymn  of  praise,  chariot  shattered  by  50,  176. 

163,  577.  Indra,  488,  584  Vajina,  a class  of  divine 

Ukthya,  the  name  of  a Ushnih,  a Vedic  metre,  beings,  43,  477. 

Soma  libation, 330 note.  577.  Vak,  Speech,  the  Word 

Fla,  a Proper  Name,  536  Usij , mother  of  Kakshi-  personified,  41,  83,130, 
jiote.  vAn,  538  note  250-252, 484,  485,  552, 

Unborn,  Birthless,  the,  Uainara,  Usinaras,  names  558,559,571. 
the  Sun,  184;  Visva-  of  a chief  and  his  peo*  Vala,  the  imprisoning 
karman,  498.  pie,  463  note.  cloud,  a demon  of 

Unit, the, whence  the  uni-  UsinarAni,wifeof  Usinara,  drought,  138,  159,469, 
verse  was  evolved,  575.  463.  479,481. 

Universal  Gods,  52,  see  Usurers,  209.  Villakhilya,  the  title  of 

Visvedevas.  eleven  hymns  of  Book 

Upamasravas,  a prince,  VadhrimatI,  a woman  VIII,  199,  259-268. 

429.  aided  by  the  Asvins,  VAlakhilyas,  a race  of 

U parish  tAdbrihati,  a Ve-  476.  pygmies,  419  note. 

die  metre,  53  note.  Vadhryasva,  a famous  Vamra,  a Rislii,  537,538. 
Upaatuta,  a Ilislii,  118,  Rishi,  481-483.  Vamraka  = Vamra,  538. 

560.  Vaikarna,  the  name  of  a Vanaspati,  the  Sacrificial 

Upastutas,  singers,  wor-  tribe,  18, 19.  Post,  265,  273,  553,554. 

shippers,  256.  Vaikhftuasas,  a race  of  Vandana,  a protfye  of  the 

Upavaktar  (upavaktA),  hermits,  318.  Asvins,  437. 

Director,  one  of  the  Vaikuntha,  a title  of  V archin,  a non- Aryan 
priests,  355,  384  notes.  Indra,  448-450,  452.  prince  regarded  as  a 

frrmyft,  a name  of  Night,  Vainya,  son  of  Vena,  129.  fieud,  94. 

573.  Vairftpas,  a prievStly  f.uni-  VarosushAman,  a Proper 

OrnavAbha,  a demon  of  ly,  °93  note.  Name,  156, 159,  161. 

drought,  171,  225  notes.  Vaisanta,  probably  the  Varuna,  the  Encompasser, 
OrnAvatl,  Fleecy,  name  name  of  a river,  34.  God  of  the  Starry 

or  epithet  of  a river,  VaisvAnara,  Dea*  to  All  Heaven,  4,  13,  29*35- 

491.  Meu,  Agui,  7-9,  13,  51,  40,  43-45,  47,  48,  51, 

Ursa  Major,  493.  181,307,386,446,514.  52,54,56,  58,  60-66, 

Urukshay as,  members  of  Vaisya,  a man  of  the  78-85,  88,  139,  143, 

i & Rishi’s  family,  563.  agricultural  and  mer-  144,  146,  147,  156, 

I Urvast,  a celebrated  Ap-  (jautile  class,  177,  519.  159-162,164-168,175, 

Raras,36, 139,  412,527-  Vaitarana,  a title  of  Agui,  176,  183-185,  196,  197, 
531.  467.  * 210,  214,  220,  230,  243 

JsftnA  KAvya,  a Riahi,  Vftivasvata,  Yaraa,  son  252,  263,  292, 306,  307, 

8onof  Kavi  and  friend  of  VivasvAn,  261,  397,  315,  817,  327,  331,335, 

of  Indra,  155, 847, 358,  598.  337,839,  840,  849, 351, 

fcm  in  I I in  *oa  tn:.  DiU.ii  S6K  862-384.  867.  371, 


INDEX  OP  NAMES,  ETC. 


666 


374,  377,  382,  393,  394, 
423,  426,  432-434, 445, 
451,453,454,  458,467, 
468,  471,  473-477,  484, 
437,  490,  499,  500, 503, 
504,  516, 522, 524,534, 
535,  538,545,  552,556, 
569-573,  577,  590,  592, 
598,600, 602, 607,612; 
the  Supreme  Deity, 
570;  discoverer  of  sin, 
29  ; discriminator  of 
truth  and  falsehood, 


100,352,  476.  478,  498, 
568,577,592,606;  the 
embodiment  of  light- 
ning, 36 ; the  birth  of, 
36. 

Vasishthas,  10,  13,  26, 
34,  35,  42,  44,  45,  75, 
77,  79,  86,  357,  478. 

VAstoshpati,  the  Genius 
of  Home,  53,  611  note . 

Vasu,  Good  Lord,  106, 
107,145,147,  151,  163, 
172,  200, 209,217,  218, 


195,  196,  203,  273,275, 
279,  287,  288,  290,292, 
298,  299,  306,  311*313, 
317,  322,  323,327,331, 
337,339,  340,343,349, 
350,  357,  360-363,377, 
404,  420,  422,  453,473- 
475,  477,  492,  501,514 
519,  522,  523,  539,557 
582,  586,  592,  600,607 
sprung  from  Purusha’ 
navel,  519  ; Tvashtar’t 
son-in-law,  163. 


51  ; forgiver  of  sin,  29,  256,  257,  390,  436,  466,  VAyus,  582  note. 

83, 84;  type  of  royalty,  520,  525,  546.  Veda,  144  note ; the  bum 

61 ; ruler  of  the  depths  Vasus,  a class  of  Gods,  of  grass  used  as  sacrific 

of  the  sea,  83  ; identi-  1,  8,  12,  35,  39,  40,  43,  144  note. 

fied  with  Soma,  355  ; 47,  48,  50,  52,  56,  59,  Vedas,  three,  95  note. 

brother  of  man,  394  ; 74,  75,  143,  164,  165,  Vedic  Hymns  (Part  I), 

founder  of  society,  394  1 75, 180,  253,  265, 322,  90,  136,  205,  395,  480, 

note  ; superseded  by  435,450,458,476,477,  492,^67,  683; see  Mill 

Indra,  570.  ’ 493,  510,  535, 539,  553,  ler,  Prof.  Max. 

VarunAni,  Consort  of  571, 573, 575, 581,  592.  Vedic  India  (Mme.  Z 
Varuna,  38.  Vasukra,  a son  of  Indra,  Ragozin),  17,  408, 484, 

Varuna-p&sa,  dropsy,  85  420,421.  497,  498,  522,589,606 

note.  Vasurochis,  a Proper  Vedische  Studien  (Geld 


Varfitri,  Protectress,  a 
Goddess,  43,  45. 

Varfitrls,  38. 

Vasativari  waters,  used 
in  preparing  Soma,  241 , 
274, 230,284, 303,309, 
326,  327,  331,370,380, 
rtf  note*. 

Vashat,  a sacrificial  ex- 
clamation, 14,  94,  166, 
405,  460. 

VashatkAra,  the  exclama- 
tion deified,  458,  488 

nolei, 

Vasishtha,  a famous  Ri* 
ahi,  seer  of  Book  VII., 
1,10,11,17,  20,25,28, 
34, 36,  47,52,54,58,69, 


Name,  175. 

Vasurochisas,  174,  175. 
Vasuruch,  Vasuruchas, 
said  to  be  Proper 
Names,  379  note. 

VAta,  the  Wind-God,  39, 
45,  104.  472,  475,  477, 
582,  586,  596,  607. 


ner  and  Pischel),  36 
48,  62,  82,  103,  105 
114,  152,168. 193,213 
257,  277,  280,  283 
304,  318,  323,332,380 
421,465,  489,  531, 54^ 
547,  586,  605. 

Vena,  the  loving  Sun 


VAtarasaual  Wind-girdled,  568, 669 ; aProperNam 
the  name  of  a hermit,  129,  625,  591,  602. 
582  note.  Venas,  the  Gods,  or  tin 

VaUa,  a Vedic  Rishi,119,  Maruts,  341,  345. 

127-1 30,  1 32.  Venya,  son  of  Vena*  59 

VfivAtar,  said  to  be  a 602. 

King,  103  note.  Vesa,  a demon  or  savage, 

Vavata.  a prince,  34.  451. 

VAyu,  the  Wind-God,26,  Vetasu,  Vetasus,  fWP* 
35,  39,  44,  62,  64,  85-  Names,  . ^ 

1A4I  1<2K  ISO.  lftfl.  VihhldaksJjmAttiiM 


index  ok  names,  etc. 


667 


ec  whose  nuts  were  Vishnu,  Pervader, 


jdd  as  dice,  429  note. 
hindu,  a prince,  111. 
litis,  a uatne  of  the 
,ibhus,  50. 

luivas,  father  of  Trita, 
46. 

huvasu,  the  very 
eal  thy, perhaps  Soma, 
47  note. 

bit  van,  one  of  the 
tihhus,  41,  50,  492. 
ladasva,  a Rishi,  305 

i ote. 

llidtar,  the  Disposer, 
38. 


Active  Worker  ; a per- 
sonification of  the  Sun, 
39,  41,  44.  45,  48,  89, 
93-95,  130,  131,  134, 
139,  148,  160,  164,167, 


52,  163,  166,  167,  230, 
234,  267,410,  425,431, 
433,  459,  460,  465,  468, 
470,  472,  476,  522,  524 
538,  540,  552.  557,  574 
583,  586,  595,  593,606. 


168,  175,  176,  226,231,  Vitarana,  the  name  of 
252,  263,  265,  292,304,  priuce,  467,  m notes. 
311,  317,351,355,367,  Vitastd,  a river,  prohab- 
383,  400,  474,  476,477,  ly  the  Jhelum,  490. 
523,  537,  556,  574,586,  Vivasvln,  the  Sun;  a sa 
606,  613;  Guardian  of  crificer,  163,211,219. 


221,  262,  277,288,318, 
381,  391,  392,398,404, 
410,  438,  461,465,475, 
437,  490,  598. 


the  unborn  babe,  41 ; 
three  strides  of,  93, 

167,  263  ; Vishnu’s 
baud,  the  Maruts,  148. 
iivramorvast,  the  title  Vispalii,  a woman  warrior  Voice,  Speech,  Sacred 
tft  x celebrated  drama,  aided  by  the  Asvins,  Word,  434,  485  ; see 

;28  note.  437.  VAk. 

.kunthft,  an  Aaurt,  In-  Visva,  Dyaus,  168;  Agni,  Vrika,  wolf,  probably  a 
Ira’s  second  mother,  511.  man’s  name,  69. 

U8  note.  Visvddevah,  All-God,  248  Vrishck,  strong,  male, Bulb 

Itge,  589, 591.  note.  137,  172,  313  notes. 

m^da,  a proteyc  of  the  Visvaka,a  Rishi, 232,233,  Viisbagana,  VrUhag&nas, 
.bvins,  130,  409,  413,  476.  a Rishi  and  ln»  family, 

114,  437,  476.  Viavakarman,  Omnific,  the  359. 

imadas,  413.  Creator  of  the  Uni  verse,  Vrish&kapiyi,  the  wife  of 

inunlb,  said  to  be  a 496-499.  Vrishakapi,  508. 

jRishi,  432.  Visvamanas,  a Rishi,  154,  Vrishakapi,  Strong  Ape, 

is,  a river,  the  Beds,  157,  158.  a being  between  a denri- 

iO  note.  ' Visv&raitr-,  100,  352,419,  god  and  a demon,  507- 

ij,a  divine  being,  357,  536,  577,  599,  600.  509. 

*8, 519;  a metre,  577.  VisvAmitraa.  517.  Vrishau,  stroug,  play  on, 

5ms,  priest's  fingers,  Visvarupa,  Omuiform,son  or  repetition  of'jhe 
'19  ; see  Maids.  of  Tvashtar,  390,  537.  word,  477. 

"jpa,  a Rishi,  223,  898.Visvdvasu,  the  chief  Gan-  Vrishanvati,  the  name  of 
■upas,  469  note.  dharva,  503,  573,584,  a mare,  213. 

M,  the  people,  as  dis-  585.  Vrishaaipra,  Bull- jawed, 

^nct  from  the  priestly  Visvdyu,  said  to  be  the  a savage,  94. 

M princely  classes,  name  of  Umars  son,  Vrishtihavya,a  Rishi,  560. 

526  nofes.  412  note.  Vritra,  Encloser,  the  chief 

^dninuj  a non- Aryan  Visvedevas,  All -Gods,  cloud-demon,  21,  22, 

18.  Universal  Gods;  a class  24,  110, 113, 120, 125, 

a Proper  Name,  of  deities,  36,  38,  40,  126,  134,  139, 157, 164 

n AS  11  Ifl  17  SK  171i  178.  190. 204.206, 


668 


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC. 


224,  226,235,239,240,  Waters,  11.38,39,  43,48,  1 14,  191,  233,  422 

245-247,  250-252,  307,  50,  51,  56,  81,265, 384,  454  ; trap  for,  422  ; = 

308,  359, 412,  421,449,  391,  405,  423,  433,435,  Soma  juice,  569. 

450,  452,  459,  474,  477,  417,  490,506,  514,  516,  Williams,  Prof. Sir M ,465 

479,  516,  537,  546,554-  521,  546, 571, 583,  600;  Wilson, Prof.  H.H  ,pa$M 

557,560,  570, 571 , 583,  Mothers,  Queens,  424,  Wind,  143,  265,  322,523, 

590,  593  ; said  to  have  426;  their  healing  583,  600  see  Vd,yu,V;vt! 

been  a Br&hman,  244  ]>ower,  391 ; removers  Wind-girdled,  582  m tt. 
note.  <>f  sin,  391  ; 405;  cere-  Wine,  108,  550. 

Vritras,  fiends,  enemies,  mouy  of  fetching  the  Winter,  481 ; demons  o; 

*80.113,122,  139-141,  sacrificial,  423;  Dame  241  note. 

166,  234,  235,  238,  of,  Saranyu,  392  ; Son  Winters,  hundred,  » 

244,246,  270,  282,349,  of  the,  11,  37,  40,  50,  Hundred  winters. 

37, S,  517,  546,  601.  181,  362,  390.  523,591.  Wish,  personified, 38,4 ?J 

A ntra- slayer  (s) ; Indra,  Watery  monster,  Arbu-  Wizard,  100. 

31,32,104,  109,113,  da,  554.  Wolf,  wolves,  174,209, 

115,  122, 136,  141,157,  Wealth,  lowest, midmost,  211,  261,  530,  573. 

164,170,171,173,178,  highest,  of  earth,  air,  Wolf-  robber.  43,  209 
190,  191,  194,  203,205,  heaven,  33.  -Night,  438. 

207,  209,  215,225,227,  Weaver’s  web,  485.  Women,  censured,  173 

229,234,235,  239-242,  Weaving,  416,  576.  5J0,  prize  of  war,  196 

246,  247,  265,365,3.81,  Weber,  Prof.  A.,  123,190,  attend  festivals,  508, 

451,  458,  489,  499,545,  226,  430,  467,  502,505,  600  ; take  part  in  sa 

584,  593;  Agni,  222,  507,520,536,572,578.  orifice,  168,  415,  553 

482;  Soma,  269,  287,  Webster,  W.F.,  393,  407,  607. 

2^4,  350,  365;  Manyu,  421,  424,  499.  Wood,  Lord  of  the,  tin 

499;  Asvius,  127 ; In*  Wheel,  the  Sun,  206.  Sacrificial  Post,  481 

dra-Agni,  179.  Whip,  Indra' a golden,  see  Vanaspati. 

Vyasra,  a Rishi,  12S,  lightning,  173.  Lady  of  the,  Arany 

154-156,158,159,162,  Whitney,  Prof.  W.  D.,  ftnl,  589. 

31G.  408,  572,  576,  677.  Word,  the  Sacred,  484 

Widow,  407;  re-marriage  Vfik,  571  note . 
Wallis,  H.  W , 93,  234,  of,  438.  Words,  play  upon,  541 

386, 387,  423,  428,  Wife,  her  position  in  the  Worship, personified, 52 
435,450,459,460,474  household,  504,  506;  Wright,  380;  ««  C-i 
431,  486,  496,  497,499,  chosen  for  her  goodness  peuter,  Smith, 
518.520,  566*569,572,  and  beauty,  418;  pa- 

576.  tient  and  gentle,  506;  Yadavas,  descendants 


Warmth,  creative,  575,  adorns  herself  for  her  Yadu. 

809.  husband,  553 ; takes  Yadu,  the  eponymus  ' 

Warrior  oKshatriya,  99.  partin  sacrifice,  164,  a Vedic  tribe,  22,  ’ 

Warriors,  the  Marut*,18.  415,  658,  607.  114, 123, 124,  M 

Watches  of  night,  3 16.  Wild  ass,  509  boar,  191,  306,  452,  4 
Water,  first  of  created  421  ; —boars,  the  Ma-  Yadus,  123. 


-•*-  4 70*— bull.  93.  Y 


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC. 


669 


ivnuiia,  sacrifieer,  461,462,  465,  472,523,  Year,  the,  609. 

litiiseholder,  237,  322,  534, 569,  5S1,  593,594,  Ymir,  a mythic  Scandi- 

’,28,  362,  415,  489,  492,  598,  599  ; his  dogs,  53,  navian  World-giant, 

>15,  549.  558,  607;  399.  519. 

iif,  wife,  415.  Yitmas,  night-watches  of  Yogi,  a devotee,  582  note, 

jim  (Sacrifice),  said  to  about  three  hours  each,  Young,  youthfulleat,  Agtii 
bp  a Rishi’s  name, 576.  116  note.  1,  5,  6,  9,  10,  12,  13,’ 

ijiii’veda,  the  Veda  of  Y.irni,  Yama’s  sister, 391-  16,  156,  223,  255,  384, 

Mcrificial  texts  and  for-  394,  104,  593.  385,  409,  446,  482,496, 

nnikis  59,  467,  519,606  Yamunil,  the  river  now  510,553. 

[ihin  sacrificial  text  and  called  Jumua,  20,  35,  Youthful  One,  the  altar, 
'■iiiuula,  396,  519,606.  216,490.  558. 

->ha,  meaning  uncer-  Y,i*ka,  an  ancient  Com-  Y udhy&madhi,  a Proper 
un,  51 1 note.  mentator,  24,  241,315,  Name,  20, 

slima,  consumptive  441,  456,  486,  490.  Yupa,  190,  484  , m Sa - 

583  note,  613.  Yati%  an  ancient  race  of  crificial  Post. 
liliU',  a non*  Ary  an  hermit-,,112,121,  487.  Yuvanasva,  a Rishi,  131 

Jibe,  20.  YatudLauas,  sorcerers,  note. 

:n,  King  of  the  Dead,  demons,  93,  100,  414, 

o,  36,  53,  381,  391-  510-512,  565.  Zimmer,  Prof.  11 , 18,  19, 

'91.  396*401,  403,404,  Y.iyati,  an  aneieut  patri*  125,  207,  226,  408,490, 
|6,  -K,  110,453,  455,  arch,  470.  491,  550,  581,  594,  597. 


CORRIGENDA. 


VOL.  I.  (Additional). 

Page  239  line  7 read  honours  (i.  e.  song  honours)  for  honour 
» 370  * 9 from  below  read  Here,  Indra,  girt  by  Maruts,  drink  thou 

Soma,  for  Here,  Indra,  drink  thou  Soma  with  the  Maruts, 
■ 684  » 17  from  below  of  middle  column  read  Hotar,  chief  priest  for 

Hotar,  thief  priest 

VOL.  II. 

ge  3 line  2 from  below  read  2 for  1 

48  - 2 read  HYMN  for  HYMN 

72  » 8 from  below  read  a comma  after  you  for  the  broken  stop 

76  • 5 from  below  read  pathya  for  patky'd 

89  « 6 read  blessings  for  blesssngs 

97  • 7 from  below  read  performing  for  performin 

i 105  • 18  read  ecstasy  for  ectstasy 

• 114  » 2 of  verse  9 read  radiant  for  radian 

» 121  » 3 of  verse  22  read  soon  for  suoo 

« 131  " 3 of  verse  5 read  Turvasa  for  Turvna 

« 135  ■ 1 of  verse  4 insert  a full  stop  after  flows 

» 245  » last  of  notes  read  of  for  o 

» 256  ■ 2 from  below  read  in  for  n 

*•  302  • 16  from  below  read  us.  for  us 

» 303  n 2 of  note  1 read  i comma  for  the  broken  stop  after  here 

» 327  s 2 from  below  insert  a hyphen  after  foe 

. 328  ■ 3 of  note  1 read  sprinkled  for  sprinkled 

• 333  t 3 of  notes  insert  a comma  after  is 

• 369  • last  of  uotea  read  sacrifice  for  sacrifices 

" 375  * 2 of  verse  25  read  Indra’s  for  Iura's 

" 377  t 4 of  notes  read  sacrificial  for  sacrifical 

1 - 402  i 1 of  notes  insert  a hyphen  after  some 

403  ■ 9 of  notes  re$d  aquatic  for  acquatie 

406  » 4 of  verse  5 insert  a full  stop  after  Ordainer 

467  • 3 of  verse  17  insert  a hyphen  after  Arya 

468  r 1 of  note  23  read  Asvaghna  for  ABvagbna 

469  ■ last  of  notes  read  The  Hymns  for  Hymns 

- 1 insert  a comma  after  Goddesses 


AQ  i 


672 


CORRIGENDA. 


Page  490  line  7 from  below  read  Vipfa  for  Vip&u 
m 508  ■ 5 read  and  for  add 

« 520  • 0 read  The  Hymns  for  Hymns 

» ...»  9 from  below  read  Purdna  for  Purdna 

a 538  i*  1 of  verse  12  insert  a coming  after  swiftly 

H 545  * 8 insert  a comma  after  conquer 

» 543  «*  last  but  one  of  text  prefix  the  numeral  10 

■ 549  • 1 of  verse  4 read  VUyu  for  V&yu 

« 550  • 4 of  verse  1 read  waters  ? for  waters. 

» 552  » 4 of  verse  1 The  Hymns  for  Hymns 

it  557  • 1 of  notes  read  the  for  thr 

* 5S3  ■»  2 of  notes  read  The  Hymns  for  Hymns 

0 587  * 3 of  notes  make  the  same  correction 

■ 597  • 2 of  notes  read  obwobl  for  obvohl 

* 598  • 2 of  note  load  The  Hymns  for  Hymns 

0 602  • 2 of  veise  5 insert  a hyphen  after  sted 

* 609  » last  of  uotU'>  lead  The  Hymns  for  Uynm* 


<«»  IdA'i'iW 


