===== Internet Archive OCR: 3712_djvu.txt =====

THE 


HYMNS OF THE RIGVEPA 

MANSLATED WITH A POPULAR COMMENTARY 

BV* 

RALPH T. II. GRIFFITH, 

FORMERLY PRINCIPAL OF BENARES COLLEGE. 

VUL III. 


BENARES: 

E. J. LAZARUS AND CO. 


] 891 . 





TABLE OF CONTENTS, 
VOLUME III 


Pages. 

Book VII. 1—130 

Book VIII. 131—346 

Vir.AKHiLYA. 347—360 

Book IX.—Hymns 1.—LX. 361—412 

Index of Hymns. i.— xi. 

Index of Names, Etc. xui,— xxi. 





ERRATA. 


Page 5G line 8. For Vayu read Vayu. 

» 136 Note « 13. For drashta read d rash tit. 

> 24 » <17. For Anavas read Anavas. 

• 279 » < 4. For Gayatn read Brihati and Satobrihati 

alternately. 

» 316 19. for Soma hymns read Sama-hymns. 





THE HYMNS OF THE RIGVEDA. 


BOOK THE SEVENTH. 


HYMN I. Agni. 

The men from fire-sticks, with their hands’ swift 
movement, have, in deep thought, engendered 
glorious Agni, 

Far-seen, with pointed flame, lord of the homestead. 

2 The Vasus set that Agni in the dwelling, fair to 

behold, for help from every quarter: 

Who, in the home for ever, must be honoured. 

3 Shine thou before us, Agni, well-enkindled, with 

flame, most youthful god, that never fadeth. 

To thee come all our sacrificial viands. 

4 Among all fires these fires have shone most brightly, 

splendid with light, begirt by noble heroes, 

Where men of lofty birth sit down together. 

5 Victorious Agni, grant us wealth with wisdom, 

wealth with brave sons, famous and independent, 
Which not a foe who deals in magic conquers. 

6 To whom, the strong, at morn and eve comes, maid¬ 

like, the ladle dropping oil, with its oblation : 
Wealth-seeking comes to him his own devotion. 

All the hymns of this Hook are ascribed to the Rishi Vasisbtha, 
with whom his sons are associated as the seers of parts of two 
hymns. See Vol. I , Index.* The metre is Viraj in stanzas 1—18, 
and Trishtnp in the rest. 

1 In. deep thought: ‘ with their fingers,’ according to Sayana, tin's 
moaning having been attributed without any philological grounds 
to the word dulhitihhih from its uso in this and similar passages. 

0 lit* own devotion : the worship which belongs especially to him. 



2 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK Vll. 


7 Burn up all malice with those flames, 0 Agni, 

wherewith of old thou burntest up Jarfttha, 

And drive away in silence pain and sickness. 

8 With him who lighteth up thy splendour, Agni, 

excellent, pure, refulgent, purifier, 

Be present, and withes through these our praises. 

9 Agni, the patriarchal men, the mortals who have in 

many p laces spread thy lustre,— 

Be gracious to us here for their sake also. 

10 These men here, heroes in the fight with foemen, 

let them o’ercome all godless arts of magic,— 
These who have bought the noble song I sing thee. 

11 Let us not sit in want of men, O Agni, without 

descendants, heroless, about thee : 

But, 0 house-friend, in houses full of children. 

12 By sacrifice which the steeds’ lord ever visits, there 

make our dwelling rich in seed and offspring 
Increasing still with lineal successors. 

13 Guard us, O Agni, from the hated Rakshas, guard 

us from malice of the illiberal sinner: 

Allied with thee may I subdue assailants. 

14 May this same fire of mine surpass all others, this 

fire where offspring vigorous and firm-handed, 
Wins, on a thousand paths, what ne’er shall perish. 

15 This is that Agni, saviour from the foeman, who 

guards the kindler of the flame from sorrow : 
Heroes of noble lineage serve and tend him. 

16 This is that Agni, served in many places, whom the 

rich lord who brings oblation kindles, 

And round him goes the priest at sacrifices. 


7 Jarhtha : a ltakshasa or demon with a loud harsh voice.—Sayana. 
10 'Those who have bought: have rewarded me for. ‘Who com¬ 
mend.’—Wilson. 

12 The steeds’ lord: Agni, whose swift flames are called horses. 



3 


HYMN 1 .] THE RIG VEDA. 

17 Agni, may we with riches in possession bring thee 

continual offerings in abundance, 

Using both means to draw thee to our worship. 

18 Agni, bear thou, eternal, these most welcome obla¬ 

tions to the deities’ assembly : 

Let them enjoy our very fragrant presents. 

19 Give us not up, Agni, to want of heroes, to Wretched 

clothes, to need, to this destruction. 

Yield us not, holy one, to fiend or hunger ; injure us 
not at home or in the forest. 

20 Give strength and power to these my prayers, O Agni; 

0 god, pour blessings on our chiefs and nobles. 
Grant that both we and they may share thy bounty, 
and with prosperity evermore protect us. 

21 Thou Agni, swift to hear, art fair of aspect : beam 

forth, O son of strength, in full effulgence. 

Let me not want, with thee, a son for ever : let not 
a manly hero ever fail us. 

22 Condemn us not to indigence, O Agni, beside these 

flaming fires which gods have kindled ; 

Nor, even after fault, let thy displeasure, thine as a 
god, O son of strength, o’ertake us. 

23 O Agni, fair of face, the wealthy mortal who to the 

immortal offers his oblation, 

Hath him who wins him treasure by his godhead, 
to whom the prince, in need, goes supplicating. 

24 Knowing our chief felicity, 0 Agni, bring hither 

ample riches to our nobles, 

17 Both means : prayer and praise. 

21 Forever: nityam; perpetualj who shall live for ever in his 
posterity. 

22 Which gods have kindled : lighted by the ministering priests. 

23 Hath him: possesses, or enjoys the favour of, Agni. “ That 
deity (Agni) favours the presenter of (sacrificial) wealth.”—Wilson. 

24 Knowing our chief felicity : understanding what we want to 
make us happy, that is, riches. 



* WHS HYMNS OF {BOOK VII. 

Wherewith we may enjoy ourselves, 0 victor, with 
undiminished life and hero children. 

25 Give strength and power to these my prayers, 0 Agni; 
0 god, pour blessings on our chiefs and nobles. 
Grant that both we and they may share thy bounty, 
and with prosperity evermore protect us. 

HYMN II. Apris. 

Gladly accept, this day, our fuel, Agni: send up thy 
sacred smoke and shine sublimely. 

Touch the celestial summits with thy columns, and 
overspread thee with the rays of Sftrya. 

2 With sacrifice to these we men will honour the 

majesty of holy Narasansa— 

To these the pure, most wise, the thought-inspirers, 
gods who enjoy both sorts of our oblations. 

3 We will extol at sacrifice for ever, as men may do, 

Agni whom Manu kindled, 

Your very skilful Asura, meet for worship, envoy 
between both worlds, the truthful speaker. 

4 Bearing the sacred grass, the men who serve him 

strew it with reverence, on their knees, by Agni. 
Calling him to the spotted grass, oil-sprinkled, adorn 
him, ye Adhvaryus, with oblation. 


25 This stanza i3 a repetition of stanza 20. 

The metre is Trishtup. The Apits are the divine or deified beings 
and objects to which the propitiatory verses are addressed. For 
other Apri hymns see Vol. I. 

1 Narasansa: the desire of men; Agni. Both sorts of our obla¬ 
tions: offerings of ghrita, ghl, or clarified butter and libations of 
Soma juice. 



.HYMN 2 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


5 


5 With holy thoughts the pious have thrown open 

doors fain for chariots in the gods’ assembly. 

Like two full mother cows who lick their youngEng, 
like maidens for the gathering, they adorn them. 

6 And let the two exalted heavenly ladies, Morning 

and Night, like a cow good at milking, 

Come, much-invoked, and on our grass be seated, 
wealthy, deserving worship, for our welfare-. 

7 You, bards and singers at men’s sacrifices, both filled 

with wisdom, I incline to worship. 

Send up our offerings when we call upon you, and so 
among the gods obtain us treasures. 

8 May Rh&rati with all her sisters, I1& accordant with 

the gods, with mortals Agni, 

Sarasvatl with all her kindred rivers, three goddesses 
—come to this grass and be seated. 

S> Well pleased with us do thou, O god, O Twashtar, 
give ready issue to our procreant vigour, 

Whence springs the hero, powerful, skilled in action, 
lover of gods, adjuster of the press-stones. 

10 Send to the gods the oblation, lord of forests, and 
let the immolator, Agni, dress it. 

He as the truer priest shall offer worship, for the 
gods’ generations well he knoweth. 

5 Doors : the doiifiied doors of the hall of sacrifice wherejdie gods- 
assemble. 

Fain for chariots: welcoming the approach of the cars in which 
the priests come to the ceremony. The latter half of the stauza is 
obscure: “ (the ladles) placed to the east are plying the fire with 
ghi at sacrifices, as the mother cows lick the calf, or as rivers (water 
the fields).”—Wilson. 

6 Like a cow : the dual dhend, two cows, instead of dhenuh, would, 
as Professor Ludwig suggests, seem to us to bo preferablo. 

7 Bards and singers: the hotdrd, or ‘two invokers’ of I. 13. 8; 
perhaps Agni and Varuna, or Varuna and Aditya, 

8 Stanzas 3—11 are identical with stanzas 8—11 of Book III. 4, 
in Vol. I. 



6 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VII, 


11 Come thou to us, 0 Agni, duly kindled, borne on 
one ear with the fleet gods and Indra. 

On this our grass sit Aditi, happy mother, and let 
our Hail! delight the gods immortal. 

HYMN III, Agni. 

Associate with fires, make your god Agni envoy at 
sacrifice, best skilled in worship, 

Established firm among mankind, the holy, flame- 
crowned and fed with oil, the purifier. 

2 Like a steed neighing eager for the pasture, when he 

hath stepped forth from the great enclosure : 

Then the wind following blows upon his splendour, and, 
straight, the path is black whioh thou hast travelled. 

3 From thee a bull but newly born, O Agni, the kind¬ 

led everlasting flames rise upward. 

Aloft to heaven thy ruddy smoke ascendeth : Agni, 
thou speedest to the gods as envoy. 

4 Thou whose fresh vigour o’or the earth advanceth 

when greedily with thy jaws thy food thou eatest. 
Like a host hurried onward comes thy lasso : fierce, 
with thy tongue thou piercest, as ’twere barley. 

5 The men have decked him both at eve and morning, 

most youthful Agni, as they tend a courser. 

They kindle him, a guest within his dwelling: bright 
shines the splendour of the worshipped hero. 


The metre is Trishtup. 

1 Associate: sajoshdh being a shortened form of sajoshasah, tlio 
nominative plural. Sayana explains it as an accusative singular, 
qualifying Agni. 

2 From the great enclosure: ‘ from the vast enclosing (forest).’— 
Wilson. Others understand it as the enclosure in which the horse is 
confined, 

4 Thou piercest as ’twere barley: the comparison is somewhat 
compressed : the meaning is, thou penetratest and fellest the trees of 
the forest with thy topgue as men cut down barley with a reaping-hook. 



HYMN 4 .] 


THE R1QVEDA. 


7 


6 0 fair of faoe, beautiful is thine aspect when, very 

near at hand, like gold thou gleamest. 

Like Heaven’s thundering roar thy might approaches, 
and like the wondrous Sun thy light thou showest. 

7 That we may worship, with your Hail to Agni! with 

sacrificial cakes and fat oblations, 

Guard us, 0 Agni, with those boundless glories as 
with a hundred fortresses of iron. 

8 Thine are resistless songs for him who offers, and 

hero-giving hymns wherewith thou savest; 

With these, O son of strength, 0 J&tavedas, guard 
and preserve these princes and the singers. 

9 When forth he cometh, like ah axe new-sharpened, 

pure in his form, resplendent in his body, 

Sprung, sought with eager longing, from his parents, 
for the gods’ worship, sage and purifier : 

10 Shine this felicity on us, 0 Agni: may we attain to 
mental power and wisdom. 

All happiness be theirs who sing and praise thee: 
ye gods, preserve us evermore with blessings. 

HYMN IY. Agni. 

Bring forth your gifts to his refulgent splendour, 
your hymn as purest offering to Agni, 

To him who goes as messenger with knowledge be¬ 
tween all sons of men and gods in heaven. 

2 Wise must this Agni be, though young and tender, 
since he was born, most youthful, of his mother; 
He who with bright teeth seizeth fast the forests, 
and eats his food, though plenteous, in a moment. 

9 From, his parents: the two fire-sticks. 

The metre is Trishtup. 



8 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VII. 


3 Before his presence must we all assemble, this god’s 

whom men have seized in his white splendour. 

This Agni who hath brooked that men should seize 
him hath shone for man with glow insufferable. 

4 Far-seeing hath this Agni been established, deathless 

mid mortals, wise among the foolish. 

Here, O victorious god, forbear to harm us: may we 
for over share thy gracious favour. 

5 He who hath occupied his god-made dwelling, Agni, 

in wisdom hath surpassed immortals. 

A babe unborn, the plants and trees support him, 
and the earth beareth him the all-sustainer. 

6 Agni is lord of Amrit in abundance, lord of the gift 

of wealth and hero valour. 

Victorious god, let us not sit about thee without 
religious zeal and food and heroes. 

7 The foeman’s treasure may be won with labour: may 

we be masters of our own possessions. 

Agni, no son is he who springs from others: lengthen 
not out the pathways of the foolish. 

8 Unwelcome for adoption is the stranger, one to be 

thought of as another’s offspring, 

Though grown familiar by continual presence. May 
our strong hero come, freshly triumphant. 


3 Must we all assemble: I follow Professor Ludwig in his inter¬ 
pretation of samsadi : as we are forsaken, and our protector is far 
away (st. 6, 7, 8), we must crowd to the god of firo for defenco. 

7 Let us remain in undisturbed possession of our own property, and 
let us have sons of our own begetting and not the adopted children 
of others. 

8 Men do not look with pleasure and affection on adopted sons; 
but we are longing to see our absent protector return to us.—L.. 
Others explain the last half-verse differently : “ therefore let there 
come to us (a son) new-born, possessed of food, victorious over 
foes." —Wilson. 




HYMN 5 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


9 


9 Guard us from him who would assail us, Agni; pre¬ 
serve us, O thou victor, from dishonour. 

Here let the place of darkening come upon thee_: 
may wealth be ours, desirable, in thousands. 

10 Shine this felicity on us, O Agni: may we attain to 
mental power and wisdom. 

All happiness be theirs who sing and praise thee: 
ye gods, preserve us evermore with blessings. 

HYMN V. Agni. 

Bring forth your song of praise to mighty Agni, the 
speedy messenger of earth and heaven, 

Vaisv&nara, who, with those who wake, hath waxen 
great in the lap of all the gods immortal. 

2 Sought in the heavens, on earth is Agni stablished, 

leader of rivers, Bull of standing waters. 
Vaisv&nara, when he hath grown in glory shines on 
the tribes of men with light and treasure. 

3 For fear of thee forth fled the dark-hued races, scattered 

abroad, deserting their possessions, 

When, glowing, O Vaisv&nara, for Pflru, thou, Agni, 
didst light up and rend their castles. 

4 Agni Vaisvanara, both Earth and Heaven submit 

them to thy threefold jurisdiction. 

9 This stanza is a repetition of VI. 15, 12, whore Bee Note. 

10 Repeated from stanza 10 of the preceding hymn. 

The hymn is addressed to Agni as Vaisvanara, tho god who is 
present with, and beuefits, all Aryan men. The metro is Trishtup. 

1 With those, who wake: tended by tho priests. According to 
Sayana ‘ associated witli the wakened gods.’ 

2 I lull of standing waters : tho meaning of stiydndm is uncertain. 
Perhaps, as Professor Ludwig suggosts, plants aud bushes are intended 
■which Agni like a bull levels with the ground, 

3 The dark-hued races: according to Professor Roth, the spirits of 
darkness For Pilrv : or, for man. 

4 Threefold jurisdiction: in heaven, mid-air, and earth. 




10 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII. 

Refulgent in thine undecaying lustre thou hast in¬ 
vested both the worlds with splendour. 

5 Agni, the tawny horses, loudly neighing, our reso¬ 

nant hymns that drop with oil, attend thee ; 

Lord of the tribes, our charioteer of riches, ensign of 
days, Vaisvanara of mornings. 

6 In thee, 0 rich in friends, the Vasus seated the might 

of Asuras, for they loved thy spirit. 

Thou dravest Dasyus from their home, 0 Agni, and 
broughtest forth broad light to light the Arya. 

7 Born in the loftiest heaven thou in a moment readi¬ 

est, like wind, the place where gods inhabit. 

Thou, favouring thine offspring, roaredst loudly 
when giving life to creatures, Jatavedaa. 

8 Send us that strength, Vaisv&nara, send it, Agni, 

that strength, O Jatavedas, full of splendour, 
Wherewith, all-bounteous god, thou pourest riches, 
as fame wide-spreading, on the man who offers. 

9 Agni, bestow upon our chiefs and nobles that famous 

power, that wealth which feedeth many. 

Accordant with the Vasus and with Rudra, Agni, 
Vaisvanara, give us sure protection. 

HYMN VI. Agni. 

Praise of the Asura, high imperial ruler, the manly 
one in whom the folk shall triumph— 

I laud his deeds who is as strong as Indra, and laud¬ 
ing celebrate the fort-destroyer. 


5 The tawny horses: the hymns that hasten to Agni like eager 
horses. Professor Ludwig translates the haritah of the text by 1 gold- 
yellow,’ qualifying ‘ hymns;’ that is, hymns with libations of yellow 
Soma-juice. 

6 0 rich in friends: ‘ reverenoer of friends.’—Wilson. ‘ Bright as 
Mitra.’—Ludwig. 

The metre is Trishtup. 

1 Fort-destroyer: demolisher of the cloud-castles of the demons of 
drought, or of the strong-holds of the non-Aryan tribes. 




HYMN 6 .] THE RIG YE DA. 11 

2 Sage, sign,food,light,—they bring him from the moun¬ 

tain, the blessed sovran of the earth and heaven. 

I decorate with songs the mighty actions which 
Agni, fort-destroyer, did aforetime. 

3 The foolish, faithless, rudely-speaking niggards, 

without belief or sacrifice or worship,— 

Far far away hath Agni chased those Dasyus, and, 
in the east, hath turned the godless westward. 

4 Him who brought eastward, manliest with his prowess, 

the maids rejoicing in the western darkness, 

That Agni I extol, the lord of riches, unyielding 
tamer of assailing foemon. 

5 Him who brake down the walls with deadly weapons 

and gave the Mornings to a noble husband, 

Young Agni, who with conquering strength subduing 
the tribes of Nahus made them bring their tribute. 

6 In whose protection all men rest by nature, desiring 

to enjoy his gracious favour— 

Agni Vaisvanara in his parents’ bosom hath found 
the choicest seat in earth and heaven. 

7 Vaisvanara the god, at the sun’s setting, hath taken 

to himself deep-hidden treasures : 

Agni hath taken them from earth and heaven, from 
the sea under and the sea above us. 


2 Trom the mountain : from the cloud, as lightning. 

3 Westward: into the darkness of night. 

4 Who brought eastward: brought back the vanished lights of dawn. 

5 To a noble husband: the Sun, or Agni himself. The tribes of Nahus : 
or, according to Prof. Roth, neighbouring people. 

7 Agni becomes the representative of the Sun, and in his absence 
gives light and other blessings to man. The sea above us: the firma¬ 
ment. 




12 


THE HYMNS OF 


{BOOK VII. 


HYMN VII. Agni. 

I send forth even your god, victorious Agni, like a 
strong courser, with mine adoration. 

Herald of sacrifice be he who knoweth: he hath 
reached gods, himself, with measured motion. 

2 By paths that are thine own come hither, Agni, 

joyous, delighting in the gods’ alliance, 

Making the heights of earth roar with thy fury, 
burning with eager teeth the woods and forests. 

3 The grass is strewn; the sacrifice advances: ador¬ 

ed as priest, Agni is made propitious, 

Invoking both all-boon-bestowing mothers of whom, 
most youthful! thou wast born to help us. 

4 Forthwith the men, the best of these for wisdom, 

have made him leader in the solemn worship. 

As lord in homes of men is Agni stablished, the holy 
one, the joyous, sweetly speaking. 

5 He hath come, chosen bearer, and is seated in man’s 

home, Brahman, Agni, the supporter, 

Whom Heaven and Earth have strengthened and 
exalted, whom, giver of all boons, the priest brings 
hither. 

6 These have passed all in glory, who, the manly, have 

wrought with skill the hymn of adoration; 

Who, listening, have advanced the people’s welfare, 
and set their thoughts on this my holy statute. 


The metre is Trishtup. 

1 Like a strong coierser: glorified with my praises, like a horse that 
has been groomed and adorned. Or, perhaps, merely, rapid as a 
horse. With measured motion : or, a speedy runner. Say ana explains 
the word mitadruh in this place as ‘ consumer of trees,’ but in IV. 6.5, 
as parimitayatih, ‘with measured motion. 

3 Both . mother*: Heaven and Earth. 

6 Who set their thoughts on this my holy statute: that is, apparently, 
who duly observe the law which requires us to worship Agui. “ Who 
are glorifiers of this truthful (deity).”—Wilson. 



HYMN 8 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


13 


7 We, the Vasishthas, now implore thee, Agni, O son 
of strength, tiie lord of wealth and treasure. 

Thou hast brought food to singers and to nobles. Ye 
gods, preserve us evermore with blessings. 

HYMN VIII. Agni. 

The king whose face is decked with oil is kindled 
with homage offered by his faithful servant. 

The men, the priests adore him with oblations. 
Agni hath shone forth when the dawn is breaking. 

2 Yea, he hath been acknowledged as most mighty, 

the joyous priest of men, the youthful Agni. 

He, spreading o’er the earth, made light around him, 
and grew among the plants with blackened fellies. 

3 How dost thou decorate our hymn, 0 Agni ? What 

power dost thou exert when thou art lauded ? 
When, bounteous god, may we be lords of riches, win¬ 
ners of precious wealth which none may conquer ? 

4 Far famed is this the Bharata’s own Agni: he shineth 

like the sun with lofty splendour. 

He who hath vanquished Phru in the battle, the 
heavenly guest hath glowed in full refulgence. 

5 Full many oblations are in thee collected: with all 

thine aspects thou hast waxen gracious. 

Thou art already famed as praised and lauded, yet 
still, O nobly-born, increase thy body. 

6 Be this my song, that winneth countless treasure, 

engendered with redoubled force for Agni, 

That, splendid, chasing sickness, slaying demons, it 
may delight our friend and bless the singers. 


The metre is Trishtup. 

2 With blackened fellies : leaving black tracks behind him : ‘ dark- 
pathed.’—Wilson. 

4 The Bharata, is Vasishtha, the purohita of tho Bharatas. 

6 Countless treasure: literally, hundreds, thousands. Our friend : 
the institutor of the sacrifice. 



14 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIl. 

7 We, the Vasishthas, now implore thee, Agni, 0 son 
of strength, the lord of wealth and riches. 

Thou hast brought food to singers and to nobles. 
Ye goda, preserve us evermore with blessings. 

HYMN IX. Agni. 

Roused from their bosom is the Dawns’ beloved, the 
joyous priest, most sapient, purifier. 

He gives a signal both to gods and mortals, to gods 
oblations, riches to the pious. 

2 Most wise is he who, forcing doors of Panis, brought 

the bright Sun to us who feedeth many. 

The cheerful priest, men’s friend and home-companion, 
through still night’s darkness he is made apparent. 

3 Wise, ne’er deceived, uncircumscribed, refulgent, 

our gracious guest, a friend with good attendants, 
Shines forth with wondrous light before the Mornings: 
the young plants hath he entered, child of waters. 

4 Seeking our gatherings, he, your Jatavedas, hath 

shone adorable through human ages, 

Who gleams refulgent with his lovely lustre: the 
kine have waked to meet him when enkindled. 

5 Go on thy message to the gods, and fail not, 

O Agni, with their band who pray and worship. 
Bring all the gods that they may give us riches, 
Sarasvat!, the Maruts, Asvins, Waters. 

6 Vasishtha, when enkindling thee, O Agni, hath slain 

Jarutha. Give us wealth in plenty. 

Sing praise in choral song, O Jatavedas. Ye gods, 
preserve us evermore with blessings. 

The metre is Trishtup. 

The Dawns' beloved: Agni, as lighted up at day-break. A signal: 
of sacrifice, which men are to offer and gods are to rcceh j. 

6 Jar At ha: see VII. 1. 7, where the destruction of Jarfttha is 
ascribed to Agni himself. Jarutha, said by Sayana to have been a 
Kakshasa or demon, was probably an enemy who was slain in a battle 
at which Vasishtha was present as purohita .—L. 



VYMN 11 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


15 


HYMN X. Agni. 

He hath sent forth, bright, radiant, and refulgent, 
like the Dawn’s lover, his far-spreading lustre. 

Pure in his splendour shines the golden hero : our 
longing thoughts hath he aroused and wakened. 

2 He, like the Sun, hath shone while morn is breaking, 

and priests who weave the sacrifice sing praises, 
Agni, the god, who knows their generations and 
visits gods, most bounteous, rapid envoy. 

3 Our songs and holy hymns go forth to Agni, seeking 

the god and asking him for riches, 

Him fair to see, of goodly aspect, mighty, men’s 
messenger who carries their oblations. 

4 Joined with the Vasus, Agni, bring thou Indra, 

bring hither mighty Rudra with the Rudras, 

Aditi good to all men with the Adityas, Brihaspati 
all-bounteous, with the singers. 

5 Men eagerly implore at sacrifices Agni, most youth¬ 

ful god, the joyous herald. 

For he is lord and ruler over riches, and for gods’ 
worship an unwearied envoy. 

HYMN XI. Agni. 

Great art thou, Agni, sacrifice’s herald : not with¬ 
out thee are deathless gods made joyful. 

Come hither with all deities about thee : here take 
thy seat, the first, as priest, O Agni. 


The metro is Trishtup. 

1 Like the Dawn’s lover: the Sun. See I. 69. 1. 

2 And prists : I adopt Sayana’s interpretation of this half-line. 

4 Singers: or Rikvans, deities who attend and sing the praises of 
some god : ‘ the adorable (Angirasas).’—Wilson. 


The metre is Trishtup. 



16 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII. 

2 Men with oblations evermore entreat thee, the swift, 

to undertake an envoy’s duty. 

He on whose sacred grass with gods thou sittest, to 
him, O Agni, are the days propitious. 

3 Three times a day in thee are shown the treasures 

sent for the mortal who presents oblation. 

Bring the gods hither like a man, 0 Agni: be thou 
our envoy, guarding us from curses. 

4 Lord of the lofty sacrifiee is Agni, Agni is lord of 

every gift presented. 

The Vasus were contented with his wisdom, so the 
gods made him their oblation-bearer. 

5 O Agni, bring the gods to taste our presents: with 

Indra leading, here let them be joyful. 

Convey this sacrifice to gods in heaven. Ye gods, 
preserve us evermore with blessings. 

HYMN XII. Agni. 

We with great reverence have approached theyoungest 
who hath shone forth well-kindled in his dwelling, 
"With wondrous light between wide earth and heaven, 
well-worshipped, looking forth in all directions. 

2 Through his great might o’ercoming all misfortunes, 

praised in the house is Agni J&taved&s. 

May he protect us from disgrace and trouble, both 
us who laud him and our noble patrons. 

3 0 Agni, thou art Varu^a and Mitra: Vasishthas 

with their holy hymns exalt thee. 

With thee be most abundant gain of treasure. Ye 
gods, preserve us evermore with blessings. 

3 Three times a day: at the morning, the noon, and the evening 
libation. Or the meaning may be, in the three fire-receptacles. Like 
a man: acting like a human priest. The Commentators explain 
manushvat by ‘ns (at the sacrifice) of Mann.’ 

The metre is Trishtup. 

1 The youngest: Agni, most youthful of the gods, as being conti¬ 
nually reproduced. 



HYMN 14 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


17 


HYMN XIII. Agni. 

Bring song and hymn to Agni, Asura-slayer, enlight¬ 
ener of all and thought-bestower. 

Like an oblation on the grass, to please him, I bring 
this to Vaisv&nara, hyrnn-inspirer. 

2 Thou with thy flame, 0 Agni, brightly glowing, hast 

at thy birth filled full the earth and heaven. 

Thou with thy might, Vaisvanara Jatavedas, settest 
the gods free from the curse that bound them. 

3 Agni, when born, thou lookedst on all creatures, like 

a brisk herdsman moving round his cattle. 

The path to prayer, Vaisvanara, thou foundest. Ye 
gods, preserve us evermore with blessings. 

HYMN XIV. Agni. 

With reverence and with offered gifts serve we the 
god whose flame is bright: 

Let us bring Jataved&s fuel, and adore Agni when 
we invoke the gods. 

2 Ao-ni, may we perform thy rites with fuel, and 

honour thee, 0 holy one, with praises : 

Honour thee, priest of sacrifice ! with butter, thee, 
god of blessed light! with our oblation. 

3 Come, Agni, with the gods to our invoking, come, 

pleased, to offerings sanctified with Vashat. 

May we be his who pays thee, god, due honour. 
Ye gods, preserve us evermore with blessings. 

The metre is Trishtup. 

2 The curse that bound them.: the gods seem to have been subject 
to the infirmities of old age until India, or, as is here said, Agni, 
freed them. See IV. 10. 2. 

The metre is Brihuti in stanza 1, and Trishtup in 2 and 3. 

3 Sanctified with Vashat : Vashat (may he bear it. to the gods) is 
the exclamation used at the moment of pouring the sacrificial oil or 
clarified buttor on the fire. 

2 



18 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VII. 

HYMN XY. U Agni. 

Offer oblations in his mouthy the bounteous god’s 
whom we must serve, 

His who is nearest kin to us : 

2 Who for the fivefold people’s sake hath seated him in 

every home, 

Wise, youthful, master of the house. 

3 On all sides may that Agni guard our household folk 

and property, 

And keep us from calamity. 

4 I have begotten this new hymn for Agni, falcon of 

the sky : 

Will he not give us of his wealth ? 

5 Whose glories when he glows in front of sacrifice are 

fair to see, 

Like wealth of one with hero sons. 

6 May he enjoy this hallowed gift, Agni accept our 

songs, v bears 
Oblations, nest of worshippers. 

7 Lord of the house, whom men must seek, we set thee 

down, O worshipped one ! 

Bright, rich in heroes, Agni ! god ! 

8 Shine forth at night and morn : through thee with 

fires are we provided well. 

Thou, rich in heroes, art our friend. 

9 The men come near thee for their gain, the singers 

with their songs of praise : 

Speech, thousandfold, comes near to thee. 

10 Bright, purifier, meet for praise, immortal with re¬ 
fulgent glow, 

Agni drives B&kshasas away. 


The metre is Trishtnp. 

9 Speech: akshard, the imperishable; here speech in the shape of 
praise. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


19 


QYMN 16 .] 

11 As such, bring us abundant wealth, young child of 

strength, for this thou canst: 

May Bhaga give rs what is choice. 

12 Thou, Agni, givest hero fame : Bhaga and Savitar 

the god, 

And Diti give us what is good. 

13 Agni, preserve us from distress: consume our enemies, 

O god, 

Eternal, with thy hottest flames. 

14 And, irresistible, be thou a mighty iron fort to us, 
With hundred walls for man’s defence. 

15 Do thou preserve us, eve and morn, from sorrow, 

from the wicked man, 

Infallible 1 by day and night. 

HYMN XVI. Agni. 

With this my reverent hymn I call Agni for you, 
the son of strength, 

Dear, wisest envoy, served with no’- /.sacrifice, im¬ 
mortal messenger of all. 

2 His two red horses, all-supporting, let him yoke : 

let him, well-worshipped, urge them fast. 

Then hath the sacrifice good prayers and happy end, 
and heavenly gift of wealth to men. 

3 The flame of him the bountiful, the much-invoked, 

hath mounted up, 

And his red-coloured smoke-clouds reach and touch 
the sky: the men are kindling Agni well. 

4 Thee, thee most glorious one we .make our messenger. 

Bring the gods hither to the feast. 

Give us, O son of strength, all food that feedeth 
man : give that for which we pray to thee. 


12 Diti: generally regarded as the opposite of Aditi; here a bene¬ 
ficent goddess. 


The metre is Brihati and Satobrihati in alternate stanza*. 



SO THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII, 

5 Thou, Agni, art the homestead’s lord, our herald at 
the sacrifice. 

Lord of all boons, thou art the cleanser and a sage. 
Pay worship, and enjoy the good. 

■6 Give riches to the sacrificer, 0 most wise, for thou 
art he who granteth wealth. 

Inspire with zeal each priest at this our solemn rite, 
all who are skilled in singing praise. 

7 0 Agni who art worshipped well, dear let our princes 

be to thee, 

Our wealthy patrons who are governors of men, who 
part, as gifts, their stalls of kine. 

8 They in whose home, her hand bearing the sacred 

oil, Ila sits down well-satisfied— 

Guard them, victorious god, from slander and from 
harm : give us a refuge famed afar. 

9 Do thou, a priest with pleasant tongue, most wise, 

and very near to us, 

Agni, bring riches hither to our liberal chiefs, and 
speed the offering of our gifts. 

10 They who bestow as bounty plenteous wealth of 

steeds, moved by desire of great renown— 

Do thou with saving help preserve them from dis¬ 
tress, most youthful! with a hundred forts. 

11 The god who gives your wealth demands a full liba¬ 

tion poured to him. 

Pour ye it forth, then fill the vessel full again : then 
doth the god pay heed to you. 

12 Him have the gods appointed priest of sacrifice, 

oblation-bearer, passing wise. 

Agni gives wealth and valour to the worshipper, to 
folk who offer up their gifts. 

5 Herald: hotar, or invoking priest. Cleanser: pntar, or purifier, 
another of the officiating priests. Agni performs the duties of all 
human priests. 

8 lid: the goddess who is regarded as the sacrificial food or oblation 
personified : annardpd havirlakskand devt. —Sayana. 



HYMN 18.] 


THE RTG VEBAL 


21 


HYMN XVII. Agni. 

Agnt, be kindled well with proper fuel, and let the 
grass be scattered wide about thee. 

2 Let the impatient portals be thrown open : bring 
thou the gods impatient to' come hither. 

3- Taste, Agni: serve the gods with our oblation. 
Offer good sacrifices, J&tavedas! 

4 Let Jatavedits pay fair sacrifices,, worship and gratify 

the gods immortal. 

5 Wise god, win for us things that are all-goodly, and 

let the prayers we pray to-day be fruitful. 

6 Thee, even thee, the son of strength, 0 Agni, those 

gods have made the bearer of oblations. 

7 To. thee the god may we perform our worship : do 

thou, besought, grant us abundant riches. 

HYMN XVIII. Indra. 

All is with thee, O Indra, all the treasures which 
erst our fathers won who sang thy praises. 

With thee are milch-kine good to milk and horses : 
best winner thou of riches for the p’ous. 

2 For like a king among his wives thou dwellest: with 

glories, as a sage, surround and help us. 

Make us, thy servants, strong for wealth, and honour 
our songs with kine and steeds and decoration. 

3 Here these our holy hymns with joy and gladness 

in pious emulation have approached thee. 
Hitherward come thy path, that leads to riches : may- 
we find, shelter in thy favour, Indra. 

The metre is Dvipada.Trishtup, or Trishtup in half-stanzas. 

2 The impatient portals : the doors of the saorifieial chamber whioh. 
long to bear their part in the holy ceremony. 

6 Those gods: the famous gods. 

The metre is Trishtup. The hymn glorifies Indra as the protector 
of Sudas, the king of the Tritsus, and praise* the liberality of that 
priuce. 



23 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII, 

4 Vasiah^ba hath poured forth his prayers, desiring to 

milk thee like a cow in goodly pasture. 

All these my people call thee lord of cattle: may 
Indra come to us in loving-kindness. 

5 What though the floods spread widely, Indra made 

them shallow and easy for Sud&s to traverse. 

He, worthy of our praises, caused the Simyu, foe of 
our hymn, to curse the rivers’ fury. 

6 Eager for spoil was Turvasa Purod^s, fain to win 

wealth, like flshes urged by hunger. 

The Bhpigus and the Hruhyus quickly listened : 
friend rescued friend mid the two distant peoples. 

7 Together came the Pakthas, the Bhal^nas, the Alinas, 

the Sivas, the Vish&ipns. 

Yet to the Tritsus came the Arya’s oomrade, through 
love of spoil and heroes’ war, to lead them, 

4 Vasishtha: the Rishi of the hymn, and the chief priest who had 
accompanied the warlike expedition of Sudfts. To milk thee: to 
obtain riches through thy favour by means of my hymn, as men 
milk the oow at sacrifice for the milk whioh is required for libatious. 

5 The poet begins to reoount the events of Sudas’s victorious 
expedition. These are not always intelligible partly on account of 
the obscure phraseology employed, and partly on aocount of our 
ignorance of details which are vaguely alluded to. In this stanza 
Sudas, king or chief of the Tritsu tribe, has, with the aid of Indra, 
crossed a deep river (the Parushni whioh is now called the Ravi), and 
put the Simyus to flight, some of the fugitives being drowned in its 
waters. The Simyus are mentioned together with the Dasyus in 
I. 100. 18, as hostile barbarians slain by Indra. The second half of tho 
stanza is difficult, the meaning of two of the words being uncertain. 

6 Turvasa Purodds: Turvasa appears here as one of the enemies 
of Sudils. I follow, with much hesitation, Professor Ludwig in 
taking Purodis as an appellative of Turvasa : ‘ Turvasa, who was pre¬ 
ceding (at solemn rites).'—Wilson. The Bhfiyus and the Druhyus : 
here, apparently, allies of Turvasa. Fishes: according to others, 
Matsyas, a people. 

7 The Pakthas, and the rest mentioned in the first line of tho 
stanza appear to have been non-Aryan tribes opposed to the Tpitsua, 



HYMN 18 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


23 


8 Fools, in their folly fain to waste her waters, they 

parted inexhaustible Parushni. 

Lord of the earth, he with his might repressed them : 
still lay the herd and the affrighted herdsman. 

9 As to their goal they sped to their destruction: they 

sought Parushpi; e’en the swift returned not. 
Indra abandoned, to Sudas the manly, the swiftly 
flying foes, unmanly babblers. 

10 They went like kine unherded from the pasture, 

each clinging to a friend as chance directed. 

They who drive spotted steeds, sent down by Prism, 
gave ear, the warriors and the harnessed horses. 

11 The king who scattered one-and-twenty people of 

both Vaikarija tribes through lust of glory— 

According to the scholiast theso names are the denominations of 
various ministers at religious rites, and following this interpretation 
Professor Wilson translates the stanza as follows : “ Those who dress 
the oblation, those who pronounce auspicious words, those who 
abstain from penance, those who bear horns (in their hands), those 
who bestow happiness (on the world by sacrifice), glorify that Indra 
who recovered tho cattle of the Arya from the plunderers, who slew 
the enemies in battle.” The Arya's comrade: Indra, the ally of 
Tritsu against the non-Aryan confederacy. 

8 The confederates, who were on the right or further bank of the 
Parushni, intending to attack Sudas and the Tritsus, appear to have 
attempted to make the river fordable by digging channels and so 
diverting the water, which, it seems, rushed back into its natural bed 
and drowned the men who were crossing the stream. The second 
line of the stanza is obscure and the translation is conjectural. Pro¬ 
fessor Wilson translates: “but he by his greatness pervades the earth, 
Kavi, the son of Cbayamana, like a falling victim, sleeps (in death).” 
The herd and the herdsman are, of course, tire hostile band and its leader. 

10 They went: the fugitives who escaped drowning. They who- 
drive spotted steeds: the Maruts, sent down by their mother Prisni to 
aid Sud&s. 

11 Both Vaikarna tribes : perhaps some allies of the Druhyusj 
but the meaning of vaikarnayoh is uncertain. See Zimmer, Allin- 
ditches Leben, p. 103. Clips grass: with one clean cut. 




24 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII 1 . 

As tne skilled priest clips grass within the chamber, 
so hath the hero Indra wrought their downfall. 

12 Thou, thunder-armed, o’erwhelmedst in the waters 

famed ancient Kavasha and then the Druhyu. 
Others here claiming friendship to their friendship, 
devoted unto thee in thee were joyful. 

13 Indra at once with conquering might demolished all 

their strong places and their seven castles. 

The goods of Anu’s son he gave to Tritsu. May we 
in sacrifice conquer scornful P&ru. 

14 The Anavas and Druhyus, seeking booty, have slept, 

the sixty hundred, yea, six thousand, 

And six-and-sixty heroes. For the pious were all 
these mighty exploits done by Indra. 

15 These Tritsus under Indra’s careful guidance came 

speeding like loosed waters rushing downward. 

The foemen, measuring exceeding closely, abandoned 
to Sudtts all their provisions. 

16 The hero’s side who drank the dressed oblation, 

Indra’s denier, far o’er earth he scattered. 


12 Kavasha : perhaps the priests of the two Vaikarna tribes whioh 
Professor Zimmer is inclined to identify with the Kuru—Krivis. See 
Altindisches Leben, p. 127. Others here: “for they, Indra, who are 
devoted to thee and glorify thee, preferring thy friendship, enjoy it.”— 
Wilson. The exact meaning is uncertain. 

13 To I'ritsv: to Sudas, the king of the Tritsus. 

14 The Anavas : men of the Anu tribe. The sixty hundred: “ The 
enumeration is very obscurely expressed, shashtih *atd shat sahasrd 
shashtir adhi shat, literally, sixty hundreds, six thousands, sixty, with 
six more : S&yapa understands by satdni, thousands, sahasr&nilyar- 
thah." —Wilson. “ Sixty-six thousand six hundred and six.” Profes¬ 
sor Ludwig suggests that </as4 should be read instead of said, whioh 
would make the number GG66, 

15 Measuring exceeding closely: though taking great caro of their 
goods and reluctantly giving them up. 

16 The hero’s side : the party of the hostile leader, the non-Aryans 
•who denied Iudra, and themselves devouied the oblations that should 
have beeu presented to him. He gave them various roads : made 
them fly in all directions. 




tfYMN 18 .] THE RIO VEDA. & 

Indra brought down the fierce destroyer’s fury. He 
gave them various roads, the path s controller. 

17 E’en with the weak he wrought this matchless 

exploit: e’en with a goat he did to death a lion. 

He pared the pillar’s angles with a needle. Thus to 
Sud&s Indra gave all provisions. 

18 To thee have all thine enemies submitted : e’en the 

fierce Bheda hast thou made thy subject. 

Cast down thy sharpened thunderbolt, 0 Indra, on 
him who harms the men who sing thy praises. 

19 YamunA and the Tritsus aided Indra. There he 

stripped Bheda bare of all his treasures. 

The Ajas and the Sigrus and the Yakshus brought 
in to him as tribute heads of horses. 

20 Not to be scorned, but like dawns past and recent, 

0 Indra, are thy favours and thy riches. 

Devaka, Manyamana’s son, thou slewest, and smotest 
Sambara from the lofty mountain. 

21 They who, from home, have gladdened thee, thy 

servants, Paritsara, Vasishtha, Satayatu, 

Will not forget thy friendship, liberal giver. So, 
shall the days dawn prosperous for the princes. 


17 Hen with a goat: impossible) deeds mentioned as illustrations 
of Indra’s miraculous power. 

18 Bheda : an enemy of Sudas, or an unbeliever, says Sayana. 

19 Yamund: the Jumna. But it is not easy to see how the ex¬ 
pedition reached so far. The Ajas, Sigrus, and Yakshus were perhaps 
subject to Bheda, but nothing is known regarding them. Heads of 
horses: that had been killed in battle. 

20 Like dawns : renewed every day. Devaka : not mentioned else¬ 
where. According to Professor Grassmann devakam mdnyamdnam 
refers to Sambara ‘ thinking himself a god.’ 

21 Pardsara, is said by one authority to have been the son, and by 
another the grandson of the Rishi Vasishtha. Sataydtv, is said to bo 
Sakti, Vasishtha’s sou. 



THE HYMNS OF 


26 


f BOOK VII. 


22 Priest-like, with praise, I move around the chamber 

earning Paijavana’s reward, O Agni, 

Two hundred cows from Devav&n’s descendant, two 
chariots from Sud&s with mares to draw them. 

23 Gift of Paijavana, four horses bear me in foremost 

place, trained steeds with pearl to deck them. 

Sudis’s brown steeds, firmly-stepping, carry me and 
my son for progeny and glory. 

24 Him whose fame spreads between wide earth and 

heaven, who, as dispenser, gives each chief his 
portion, 

Seven flowing rivers glorify like Indra. He slew 
Yudhy&madhi in close encounter. 

25 Attend on him, O ye heroic Maruts as on Sud&s’s 

father Divodasa. 

Further Paijavana’s desire with favour. Guard 
faithfully his lasting firm dominion. 

HYMN XIX. Indra. 

He like a bull with sharpened horns, terrific, singly 
excites and agitates all the people : 

Thou givest him who largely pours libations his goods 
who pours not, for his own possession. 

22 Here begins the ddnastuti or praise of the prince’s liberality. 
The chamber: or hall of sacrifice. Paijavana : Sudas, descendant of 
Pijavana. 

Devavdn’s descendant: Sudas, Devavan being either the same as 
Divodasa, the father of Sudas or one of his forefathers. 

24 Seven flowing rivers glorify: the seven chief rivers of the Panjab 
glorify him as they glorify Indra. Or, they (men) praise him as the 
seven rivers praise Indra. See, I. 102. 2, “The seven rivers bear his 
glory far and wide.” Yudhydmidhi: not mentioned elsewhere. 

25 Maruts : here, perhaps, the Magbavans or wealthy nobles are 
intended, who stand in the same relation to Sudas as the Maruts to 
Indra. 

The metre is Trishtup, 

1 Excites and agitates: as god of battles. Thou: Indra. This 
abrupt change from the third person to the second is not unusual in 
the Veda. 



JJYMN 19.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


27 


2 Thou, verily, Indra, gavest help to Kutsa, willingly 

giving ear to him in battle, 

When, aiding Arjuneya, thou subduedst to him both 
Kuyava and the D&sa Sushna. 

3 0 bold one, thou with all thine aids hast boldly 

holpen Sudfls whose offerings were accepted, 

Pflru in winning land and slaying foemen, and 
Trasadasyu son of Purukutsa. 

4 At the gods’ banquet, hero-souled! with heroes, 

lord of bay steeds, thou slewest many Vntras. 
Thou sentest in swift death to sleep the Dasyu, both 
Chumuri and Dhuni, for Dabhiti. 

5 These were thy mighty powers that, thunder-wielder, 

thou swiftly crushedst nine-and-ninety castles : 
Thou capturedst the hundredth in thine onslaught; 
thou slewest Namuchi, thou slewest Vritra. 

6 Old are the blessings, Indra, which thou gavest 

Sud&s the worshipper who brought oblations. 

For thee, the strong, I yoke thy strong bay horses: 
may our prayers reach thee and win strength, 
most mighty! 

7 Give us not up, lord of bay horses, victor, in this 

thine own assembly to the wicked. 

Deliver us with true and faithful succours: dear 
may we be to thee among the princes. 

8 May we men, Maghavan, the friends thou lovest, 

near thee be joyful under thy protection. 


2 Arjuneya: Kutsa, descendant of Arjuna. See I. 112. 23. 
Kuyava: See I. 103. 8, 

4 For Chumuri, Dhuni , and Dabhiti, see Vol. I., Index. 

5 Namuchi: another demon of drought. In thine onslaught: 
according to S&yana, for thy dwelling : “ thou hast occupied the 
hundredth as a place of abode.”—Wilson. 

6 Sudds: the king of the Tritaus, celebrated in the preceding 
hymn. 


28 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII. 

Fain to fulfil the wish of Atithigva humble the 
pride of Turvasa son of Yadu. 

9 Swiftly, in truth, 0 Maghavan, about thee men 
skilled in hymning sing their songs and praises. 
Elect us also into their assembly who by their calls 
on thee despoiled the niggards. 

10 Thine are these lauds, O manliest of heroes, lauds 

which revert to us and give us riches. 

Favour these, Indra, when they fight with foemen, 
as friend and hero and the heroes’ helper. 

11 Now, lauded for thine aid, heroic Indra, sped by our 

prayer, wax mighty in thy body. 

Apportion to us strength and habitations. Ye gods, 
protect us evermore with blessings. 

HYMN XX. Indra. 

Strong, godly-natured, born for hero exploit, man’s 
friend, he doth whatever deed he willeth. 

Saving us e’en from great transgression, Indra, the 
youthful, visiteth mans home with favour. 

2 Waxing in greatness Indra slayeth Vritra : the hero 

with his aid hath helped the singer. 

He gave Sudtis wide room and space, and often hath 
granted wealth to him who brought oblations. 

3 Soldier unchecked, war-rousing, battling hero, un¬ 

conquered from of old, victorious ever, 


8 Atithigva: probably a descendant of Sudas who must have lived 
long before the composition of this hymn, as the favour bestowed 
upon him by Indra is spoken of as old in stanza 6 . Turvata son of 
Yadu: or Turvasa aud Yadva or Yadu’s son may be separate persons: 
‘humiliate Turvasa; (humiliate) the son of Yadu.’—Wilson. 

9 Elect us alto: that is, let us share the blessings which thou with- 
holde8t from the illiberal churls who offer uo oblations and givest to 
those who call upon thee and worship thee. 


The metre is Trishtup. 




HYMN 20.] THE RIO VEDA. 29 

Indra the very strong hath scattered armies; yea, he 
hath slain each foe who fought against him. 

4 Thou with thy greatness hast filled full, 0 Indra, even 

both the worlds with might, O thou most mighty. 
Lord of bays, Indra, brandishing his thunder, is 
gratified with Soma at the banquet. 

5 A Bull begat the Bull for joy of battle, and a 

strong mother brought forth him the manly. 

He who is chief of men, their armies’ leader, is a 
strong hero, bold, and fain for booty. 

€ The people falter not, nor suffer sorrow, who win 
themselves this god’s terrific spirit. 

He who with sacrifices worships Indra, is lord of 
wealth, law-born and law’s protector. 

7 Whene’er the elder fain would help the younger, 

the greater cometh to the lesser’s present. 

Shall the immortal sit aloof inactive ? 0 wondrous 
Indra, bring us wondrous riches. 

8 Thy dear folk, Indra, who present oblations, are, 

in chief place, thy friends, O thunder-wielder. 

May we be best content in this thy favour, sheltered 
by one who slays not, but preserves us. 

9 To thee the mighty hymn hath clamoured loudly, 

and, Maghavan, the eloquent hath besought thee. 
Desire of wealth hath come upon thy singer : help 
us, then, Sakra, to our share of riches. 

5 A Bull begat the Bull: “A vigorous (god) begot a vigorous (son).”— 
Muir. The father of India is Kiisyapa, according to Savana; but 
probably Dyaus is intended. A strong mother: Aditi. 

6 Law-born : legitimately born. 

7 The relations between gods and men resemble those between 
elders and juniors, superiors and inferiors among men. The inferior 
comes to his superior with some offering in bis hand and is assisted by 
him in return. So Indra should accept our oblations, and reward us 
with wealth. 

9 The, eloquent: stAmvh; according to Prof. Ludwig, the Greek 
<TT(i)juoXoe (from arAga, mouth), mouthy, talkative, and, in a good sense, 
flueut, eloquent. The Commentators explaiu the word as praiser. 



30 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VII,. 


10 Place us by food which thou hast given, 0 Indra, 
us and the wealthy patrons who command us. 

Let thy great power bring good to him who lauds thee. 
Ye gods, preserve us evermore with blessings. 

HYMN XXI. Indra. 

Pressed is the juice divine with milk commingled : 

thereto hath Indra ever been accustomed. 

We wake thee, lord of bays, with sacrifices: mark 
this our laud in the wild joy of Soma. 

2 On to the rite they move, the grass they scatter, 

these Soma-drinkers eloquent in synod. 

Hither, for men to grasp, are brought the press-stones, 
far-thundering, famous, strong, that wait on heroes. 

3 Indra, thou settest free the many waters that were 

encompassed, hero, by the dragon. 

Down rolled, as if on chariots borne, the rivers: 
through fear of thee all things created tremble. 

4 Skilled in all manly deeds the god terrific hath 

with his weapons mastered these opponents. 

Indra in rapturous joy shook down their castles : he 
slew them in his might, the thunder-wielder. 

5 No evil spirits have impelled us, Indra, nor fiends, 

0 mightiest god, with their devices. 

Let our true god defy each hostile creature : let not 
the lewd approach our holy worship. 

6 Thou in thy strength surpassest earth and hea¬ 

ven : the regions comprehend not all thy greatness. 
With thine own power and might thou sle west Vritra: 
no foe hath found the end of thee in battle. 


The metre is Triahtup. 

1 We wake thee: or, we think of thee. 

4 These opponents: according to Sayana, the demons of the air. 
The text has no noun for ‘ these.’ 

5 The lewd: those who do not follow Vedic observances, according to 
Y&ska. For a full discussion of the meaning of sisnadevdh see Muir, 
0. S. Texts, IV. 406-411. 




HYMN 22.] 


THE RIGVEDA. 


31 


7 Even the earlier deities submitted their powers to 

thy supreme divine dominion. 

Indra wins wealth and deals it out to others : men in 
the strife for booty call on Indra. 

8 The humble hath invoked thee for protection, thee, 

lord of great felicity, 0 Indra. 

Thou with a hundred aids hast been our helper: ono 
who brings gifts like thee hath his defender. 

9 May we, 0 Indra, be thy friends for ever, eagerly, 

conqueror, yielding greater homage. 

May, through thy grace, the strength of us who 
battle quell in the shock the onset of the foeman. 
10 Place us by food which thou hast given, O Indra, 
us and the wealthy patrons who command us. 

Let thy great power bring good to him who lauds 
thee. Ye gods, preserve us evermore with blessings. 

HYMN XXII. Indra. 

Drink Soma, lord of bays, and let it cheer thee : 

Indra, the stone, like a well guided courser, 
Directed by the presser’s arms hath pressed it. 

2 So let the draught of joy, thy dear companion, by 

which, 0 lord of bays, thou slayest Vritras, 
Delight thee, Indra, lord of princely treasures. 

3 Mark closely, Maghavan, the words I utter, this 

eulogy recited by Vasishtha : 

Accept the prayers I offer at thy banquet. 

4 Hear thou the call of thejuice-drinkingpress-stone: hear 

thou the Brahman’s hymn who sings and lauds thee. 
Take to thine inmost self these adorations. 

8 One who brings gifts like thee: Sayana interprets differently: “ be our 
defender against every overpowering (assailant) like to thee.”—Wilson. 

The metre is Vir&j in stauzas 1 —8, and Trishtup in 9. 

4 Juice-drinking: that presses out the juice of the plant, and so 
may be said to drink it. The scholiast inserts mama , of me : Hear 
the invocation of the (grinding) stone (of me) repeatedly drinking 
(the Soma). —Wilson. 



32 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VII, 


5 I know and ne’er forget the hymns and praises of 

thee, the conqueror, and thy strength immortal. 
Thy name I ever utter, self-refulgent! 

6 Among mankind many are thy libations, and many a 

time the pious sage invokes thee. 

O Maghavan, be not long distant from us. 

7 All these libations are for thee, 0 hero : to thee I 

offer these my prayers that strengthen. 

Ever, in every place, must men invoke thee. 

8 Never do men attain, 0 wonder-worker, thy great¬ 

ness, mighty one, who must be lauded, 

Nor, Indra, thine heroic power and bounty. 

9 Among all Rishis, Indra, old and recent, who have 

engendered hymns as sacred singers, 

Even with us be thine auspicious friendships. Ye 
gods, preserve us evermore with blessings. 

HYMN XXIII. Indra. 

Prayers have been offered up through love of glory: 

Vasishtha, honour Indra in the battle. 

He who with might extends through all existence 
hears words which I, his faithful servant, utter. 

2 A cry was raised which reached the gods, 0 Indra, a 

cry to them to send us strength in combat. 

None among men knows his own life’s duration : bear 
us in safety over these our troubles. 

3 The bays, the booty-seeking car I harness: my 

prayers have reached him who accepts them gladly. 
Indra, when he had slain resistless Vritras, forced 
with his might the two world-halves asunder. 

4 Like barren cows, moreover, swelled the waters : the 

singers sought thy holy rite, 0 Indra. 

Come unto us as with his team comes Vdyu : thou, 
through our solemn hymns bestowest booty. 

The metre is Trishtup. 

2 A cry was raised : I follow Professor Pischel’s interpretation of 
this very difficult stanza. See Vedische Studien, I. p. 34-36. 

4 Barren coivs : which are fatter than others. 



HYMN 24 ] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


33 


5 So may these gladdening draughts rejoice thee, Indra, 

the mighty, very bounteous to the singer. 

Alone among the gods thou pitiest mortals : O hero, 
make thee glad at this libation. 

6 Thus the Vasishthas glorify with praises Indra the 

powerful one, whose arm wields thunder. 

Praised, may he guard our wealth in kine and heroes. 
Ye gods, preserve us evermore with blessings. 

HYMN XXIV. Indra. 

A home is made for thee to dwell in, Indra: O much- 
invoked, go thither with the heroes. 

As thou, to prosper us, art our defender, vouchsafe 
us wealth, rejoice with draughts of Soma. 

2 Indra, thy wish, twice-strong, is comprehended: 

pressed is the Soma, poured are pleasant juices. 
This hymn of praise, from loosened tongue, made 
perfect, draws Indra to itself with loud invoking. 

3 Come, thou impetuous god, from earth or heaven 

cortie to our holy grass to drink the Soma. 

Hither to me let thy bay horses bring thee to listen 
to our hymns and make theo joyful. 

4 Como unto us with all thine aids, accordant, lord of 

bay steeds, accepting our devotions, 

Fair-helmcted, o’ercoming with the mighty, and lend¬ 
ing us the strength of bulls, 0 Indra. 

5 As to the chariot pole a vigorous courser, this laud 

is brought to the great strong upholder. 

This hymn solicits wealth of thee : in heaven, as 
’twere above the sky, set thou our glory. 

6 With precious things, 0 Indra, thus content us : may 

we attain to thine exalted favour. 

Send our chiefs plenteous food with hero children. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

The metre is Trishlup. 

1 A home: in the sacrificial chamber. 

4 Fair-helmeted: or fair cheeked, or haudsome-chinued. 

3 




34 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII. 

HYMN XXV. Indra. 

When with thy mighty help, O potent Indra, the 
armies rush together in their fury, 

When from the strong man’s arm the lightning flieth, 
let not thy mind go forth to side with others. 

2 0 Indra, where the ground is hard to traverse, smite 

down our foes, the mortals who assail us. 

Keep far from us the curse of the reviler: bring us 
accumulated store of treasures. 

3 God of the fair helm, give Sud&s a hundred succours, 

a thousand blessings, and thy bounty. 

Strike down the weapon of our mortal foeman: 
bestow upon us splendid fame and riches. 

4 I wait the power of one like thee, O Indra, gifts of 

a helper such as thou art, hero. 

Strong, mighty god, dwell with me now and ever: 
lord of bay horses, do not thou desert us. 

5 Here are the Kutsas supplicating Indra for might, 

the lord of bays for god-sent conquest. 

Make our foes ever easy to be vanquished : may we, 
victorious, win the spoil, O hero. 

6 With precious things, 0 Indra, thus content us : may 

we attain to thine exalted favour. 

Send our chiefs plenteous food with hero children. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 


The metre ia Trishtup. The battle has begun, and the singer 
prays to Indra for aid. 

1 The lightning : the swift and flashing arrow. Others : the enemy. 
3 Sudds: according to Sayana, ‘ the liberal donor (of oblations!.’— 
Wilson. 

The Kutsas : apparently the priests of the hostile party. 



HYMN 27.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


35 


HYMN XXVI. Indra. 

Soma unpressed ne’er gladdened liberal Indra, no 
juices pressed without a prayer have pleased him. 

I generate a laud that shall delight him, new and 
heroic, so that he may hear us. 

2 At every laud the Soma gladdens Indra: pressed 

juices please him as each psalm is chanted, 

What time the priests with one united effort call 
him to aid, as sons invoke their father. 

3 These deed's he did; let him achieve new exploits, 

such as the priests declare at their libations. 

Indra hath taken and possessed all castles, like as 
one common husband doth his spouses. 

4 Even thus have they declared him. Famed is Indra 

as conqueror, sole distributor of treasures; 

Whose many succours come in close succession. May 
dear delightful benefits attend us. 

5 Thus, to bring help to men, Vasishtha laudeth Indra, 

the peoples’ hero at libation. 

Bestow upon us strength and wealth in thousands. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XXVII. Indra. 

Men call on Indra in the armed encounter that he 
may make the hymns they sing decisive. 

Hero, rejoicing in thy might, in combat give us a 
portion of the stall of cattle. 


The metro is Trishtup. 

1 Soma unpressed.: cp. VI. 41. 4, Soma when pressed excels the 
unpressed Soma. Not only must the juice be duly expressed, but it 
must be expressed and ottered with prayer. 

3 All castles : all the strong holds of the demons of drought, the 
cloud-castles in which the rain is imprisoned. 

The metre is Trishtup. 

1 Give us a jx»-tion , etc : aid us to capture and carry off the cattle 
of the enemy. 




36 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII., 

2 Grant, Indra Maghavan, invoked of many, to these 

my friends the strength which thou possessest. 
Thou, Maghavan, hast rent strong places open: 
unclose for us, wise god, thy hidden bounty. 

3 King of the living world, of men, is Indra, of all in 

varied form that earth containeth. 

Thence to the worshipper he giveth riches : may he 
enrich us also when we laud him. 

4 Maghavan Indra, when we all invoke him, bountiful 

ever sendeth strength to aid us : 

Whose perfect guerdon, never failing, bringeth 
wealth to the men, to friends the thing they covet. 

5 Quick, Indra, give us room and way to riches, and 

let us bring thy mind to grant us treasures, 

That we may win us cars and steeds and cattle. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XXVIII. Indra. 

Come to our prayers, O Indra, thou who knowest: 

let thy bay steeds be yoked and guided hither. 
Though mortal men on every side invoke thee, still 
give thine ear to us, 0 all-impeller. 

2 Thy greatness reacheth to our invocation, the sages’ 

prayer which, potent god, thou guardest. 

What time thy hand, O mighty, holds the thunder, 
awful in strength thou hast become resistless. 

3 What time thou drewest both world-halves together, 

like heroes led by thee who call each other— 

For thou wast born for strength and high dominion 
—then e’en the active overthrew the sluggish. 


The metre is Trishtup. 

2 Thy greatness reacheth to our invocation : thou hast the power to 
come to our call if thou wilt. 

3 Drewest both world-halves together : softest heaven and earth oppo¬ 
site to each other, like armies arrayed for battle. Een the active : 
the meauing of the half-line is doubtful, and chit, even, seeuas to be 



ffYMN 29.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


37 


4 Honour us in these present days, 0 Indra, for hostile 

men are making expiation. 

Our sin that sinless Varuna discovered, the wondrous 
wise hath long ago forgiven. 

5 We will address this liberal lord, this Indra, that he 

may grant us gifts of ample riches, 

Best favourer of the singer’s prayer and praises. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XXIX. Indra. 

This Soma hath been pressed for thee, O Indra: 

come hither, lord of bays, for this thou lovest. 
Drink of this fair, this well-effused libation : 0 
Maghavan, give us wealth when we implore thee. 

2 Come to us quickly with thy bay steeds, hero, come 

to our prayer, accepting our devotion. 

Enjoy thyself aright at this libation, and listen thou 
unto the prayers we offer. 

3 What satisfaction do our hymns afford thee ? When, 

Maghavan ? Now let us do thee service. 

Hymns, only hymns, with love for thee, I weave thee: 
then hear, O Indra, these mine invocations. 

4 They, verily, were also human beings whom thou 

wast wont to hear, those earlier sages. 

Hence I, O Indra Maghavan, invoke thee : thou art 
our providence, even as a father. 


out of place. Professor Wilson translates, after Sayana : ‘ whence the 
presenter of offerings overcomes him who offers them not.' According 
to Professor Grassmam, ‘the active’ is Indra, and ‘the inactive’ is 
the sluggish demon. Professor Ludwig suggests an alteration of the 
text. 

4 Are making expiation : or, possibly, set themselves in order, that 
is, equip and prepare themselves for battle. The wondrous wise : 
m&yt; Varuna. 

The metre is Trishtup. 

3 Now let ms do thee service : nUnam ; 1 uo time like the prosent.’—L. 



38 THE HYMNS OF [BOpK F// v 

5 We will address this liberal lord, this Indra, that he 
may grant us gifts of ample riches. 

Best favourer of the singer’s prayer and praises. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XXX. Indra. 

With power and strength, O mighty god, approach 
us : be tbe augmenter, Indra, of these riches; 
Strong thunderer, lord of men, for potent valour, for 
manly exploit and for high dominion. 

2 Thee, worth invoicing, in the din of battle heroes in¬ 

voke in fray for life and sunlight. 

Among all people thou art foremost fighter: give up 
our enemies to easy slaughter. 

3 When fair bright days shall dawn on us, O Indra, 

and thou shalt bring thy banner near in battle, 
Agni the Asura shall sit down as herald, calling gods 
hither for our great good fortune. 

4 Thine are we, Indra, thine, both these who praise 

thee, and those who give rich gifts, O god and hero. 
Grant to our princes excellent protection : may they 
wax old and still be strong and happy. 

5 We will address this liberal lord, this Indra, that he 

may grant us gifts of ample riches, 

Best favourer of the singer’s prayer and praises. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

IIYMN XXXI. Indra. 

Sing ye a song, to make him glad, to Indra, lord of 
tawny steeds, 

The Soma-drinker, 0 my friends. 


The metre is Trishtup. 

1 For potent valour : that is, to give us potent valour. 

2 Foremost fighter: caster of the spear, warrior, according to Rothj 
but the meaning of senyah is somewhat uncertain. 

The metre is Gayatri in Btanzas 1—9, and Viraj in 10—12. 



JIYMN 31 .] THE RIG7EDA. 39 

2 To him the bounteous say the laud, and let us glorify, 

as men 

May do, the giver of true gifts. 

3 0 Indra, lord of boundless might, for us thou winnest 

strength and kine, 

Thou winnest gold for us, good lord. 

4 Faithful to thee we loudly sing, heroic Indra, songs 

to thee : 

Mark, O good lord, this act of ours. 

5 Give us not up to man’s reproach, to foeman’s hate¬ 

ful calumny : 

In thee alone is all my strength. 

6 Thou art mine ample coat of mail, my champion, 

Vritra-slayer, thou : 

With thee for friend I brave the foe. 

7 Yea, great art thou whoso conquering might two in¬ 

dependent powers confess, 

The heaven, O Indra, and the earth. 

8 So let the voice surround thee, which attends the 

Maruts on their way, 

Reaching thee with the rays of light. 

9 Let the ascending drops attain to thee, the wondrous 

god,in heaven : 

Let all the folk bow down to thee. 

10 Bring to the wise, the great, who waxeth mighty, 

your offerings, and make ready your devotion : 

To many clans he gocth, man’s- controller. 

11 For Indra, the sublime, the far-pervading, have 

singers generated prayer and praises : 

The sages never violate his statutes. 

12 The choirs have stablished Indra king for ever, for 

victory, him whose anger is resistless : 

And, for the bays’ lord, strengthened those he loveth. 

7 Independent: svadhdvart; ‘ abounding in food.’—Wilson. 

8 T'he voice ‘ the praises of thine adorers.’—Wilson. 

12 Strengthened: “ barhaya: for abarhayan, as is clear from what 
precedes.”—L. Sayana takes barhayd as the imperative : “urge tby 
kinsmen, (worshipper, to glorify) the lord of bay steeds.”—Wilson, 



40 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII. 

HYMN XXXII. Indra. 

Let none, no, not thy worshippers, delay thee far 
away from us. 

Even from far away come thou unto our feast, or 
listen if already here. 

2 For here, like flies on honey, these who pray to thee 

sit by the juice that they have poured. 
Wealth-craving singers have on Indra set their hope, 
as men set foot upon a car. 

3 Longing for wealth I call on him, the thunderer with 

the strong right hand, 

As a son calleth on his sire, 

4 These Soma-juices, mixed with curd, have been ex¬ 

pressed for Indra here. 

Come with thy bay steeds, thunder-wielder, to our 
home, to drink them till they make thee glad. 

5 May he whose ear is open hear us. He is asked for 

wealth : will he despise our prayer ? 

Him who bestows at once a hundred thousand gifts 
none shall restrain when he would give. 

6 The hero never checked by men hath gained his 

strength through Indra, he 
Who presses out and pours his deep libations forth, 
O Yritra-slayer, unto thee. 

7 When thou dost drive the fighting men together be, 

thou mighty one, the mighty’s shield. 


The chief Rishi of the hymn is Vasishtha, the first half of stanza 
26 beiug by some ascribed to his sou Sakti, 

The metre is Brihati and Satobrihati iu alternate stanzas, with the 
exception of stanza 3, in which it is Dvipada Viraj which I have 
treated as Gayatri. I am indebted to Professor Max Miiller’s trans¬ 
lation of this hymn in his Ancient Sanskrit Literature for many of 
the renderings which I have adopted. 

3 With the strong right hand : or, giver of good gifts. 

7 The mighty's shield : ‘ the shield of the mighty (Vasishthas).’— 
M. M. ‘a protection of the Maghavans,’ i. e. the institutors of the 
sacrifice. —Ludwig. 



HYMN 32.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


41 


May we divide the wealth of him whom thou hast 
slain : bring us his gear, invincible ! 

8 For Indra, Soma-drinker, armed with thunder, press 

the Soma-juice. 

Make ready your dressed meats: cause him to 
favour us. The giver blesses him who gives. 

9 Grudge not, ye Soma-pourers; stir you, pay the 

rites, for wealth, to the great conqueror. 

Only the active conquers, dwells in peace, and thrives: 
not for the niggard are the gods. 

10 No one hath overturned or stayed the car of him 

who freely gives. 

The man whom Indra and the Marut host defend 
comes to a stable full of kine. 

11 Indra, that man when fighting shall obtain the spoil, 

whose strong defender thou wilt be. 

Be thou the gracious helper, hero ! of our cars, be 
thou the helper of our men. 

12 His portion is exceeding great like a victorious sol¬ 

dier’s spoil. 

Him who is Indra, lord of bays, no foes subdue. 
He gives the Soma-pourer strength. 

13 Make for the holy gods a hymn that is not small, 

but well-arranged and fair of form. 

Full many snares and bonds subdue not him who 
dwells with Indra through his sacrifice. 

14 Indra, what mortal will attack the man who hath his 

wealth in thee ? 

The strong will win the spoil on the decisive day 
through faith in thee, 0 Maghavan. 

15 In battles with the foe urge on our mighty ones who 

give the treasures dear to thee, 


8 The giver blesses him who gives: Indra rewards the liberal 
worshipper. 

10 Comes to a stable full of kine . carries off rich booty. 




42 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII 

And may we with our princes, lord of tawny steeds! 
pass through all peril, led by thee. 

16 Thine, Indra, is the lowest wealth, thou cherishest 

the midmost wealth, 

Thou ever rulest all the highest: in the fray for 
cattle none resisteth thee. 

17 Thou art renowned as giving wealth to every one in 

all the battles that are fought. 

Craving protection, all these people of the earth, O 
much-invoked, implore thy name. 

18 If I, 0 Indra, were the lord of riches ample as thine 

own, 

I should support the singer, god who scatterest wealth! 
and not abandon him to woe. 

19 Each day would I enrich the man who sang my 

praise, in whatsoever place he were. 

No kinship is there better, Maghavan, than thine : a 
father even is no more. 

20 With Plenty for his true ally the active man will 

gain the spoil. 

Your Indra, much-invoked, I bend with song, as 
bends a wright his wheel of solid wood. 

21 A mortal wins no riches by unworthy praise : wealth 

comes not to the niggard churl. 

Light is the task to give, 0 Maghavan, to- one like 
me on the decisive day. 

22 Like kine umnilked we call aloud, hero, to thee, and 

sing thy praise, 

Looker on heavenly light, lord of this moving world, 
lord, Indra, of what moveth not. 

23 None other like to thee, of earth or of the heavens, 

hath been or ever will be born. 

Desiring horses, Indra Maghavan ! and kine, as men 
of might we call on thee. 



HYMN 33.] 


THE RIGVEDA. 


43 


24 Bring, Indra, the victorious ones; bring, elder thou, 

. the younger host. 

For, Maghavan, thou art rich in treasures from of 
old, and must be called in every fight. 

25 Drive thou away our enemies, O Maghavan: make 

riches easy to be won. 

Be thou our good protector in the strife for spoil: 
cherisher of our friends be thou. 

26 0 Indra, give us wisdom as a sire gives wisdom to 

his sons. 

Guide us, 0 much-invoked, in this our way : may we 
still live and look upon the light. 

2 7 Grant that no mighty foes, unknown, malevolent, 

unhallowed, tread us to the ground. 

With thine assistance, hero, may we pass through all 
the waters that are rushing down. 

HYMN XXXIII. Vasishtha. 

These who wear hair-knots on the right, the movers 
of holy thought, white-robed, have made me joyful. 
I warned the men, when from the grass I raised me, 
Let the' Vasishthas be at hand to help me. 


24 Bring, Indra, the victorious ones: these would be the Maruts. 
But 1 am not sure that the translation, in which I follow Prof. Lud¬ 
wig, is correct. “ Elder Indra, bring that (wealth to me) being the 
junior.”—Wilson. “ Bring all this to those who are good, 0 Indra, 
be they old or young.”—M. M. 

The hymn is a glorification of Vasishtha and his family, the latter 
part relating his birth and the earlier verses referring to his con¬ 
nexion with king Sudas. Vasishtha is the Rishi of stanzas 1—9, and 
the deity of 10—14, his sons being the Risbis of 10—14 and the 
deities of 1—9. 

The motre is Trishtup. 

1 Hair-knots : “ Kaparda is the chtida or single lock of hair left on 
head at tonsure, which, according to the scholiast, it is characteristic 
of the Vasishthas to wear on the right of the crown of the head, 



44 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII. 

2 With Soma they brought Indra from a distance, over 

Vaisanta, from the strong libation. 

Indra preferred Vasishthas to the Soma pressed by 
the son of Yayata, P&sadyumna. 

3 So, verily, with these he crossed the river, in com¬ 

pany with these he slaughtered Bheda. 

So in the fight with the ten kings, Vasishthas ! did 
Indra help Sud&s through your devotions. 

4 I gladly, men ! with prayer prayed by our fathers 

have fixed your axle : ye shall not be injured : 
Since, when ye sang aloud the Sakvari verses, 
Vasishthas ! ye invigorated Indra. 

5 Like thirsty men they looked to heaven, in battle 

with the ten kings, surrounded and imploring. 
Then Indra heard Vasishtha as he praised him, and 
gave the Tritsus ample room and freedom. 

6 Like sticks and staves wherewith they drive the 

cattle, stripped bare, the Bharatas were found de¬ 
fenceless : 

Vasishtha then became their chief and leader : then 
widely were the Tritsus’ clans extended. 


dakshine siraso bhage.” —Wilson. White-robed: white-coloured, ac¬ 
cording to Sayana. “ Sayana thinks that Vasishtha is the speaker, and 
rofers here to his own sons. Professor Roth (under the word av) re¬ 
gards Indra as the speaker. May it not be Sudasl”—Muir, 0. S. 
Texts, I. 319, 320, whero stanzas 1—13 are translated. From the 
grass: the sacred grass laid on the floos of the sacrificial chamber. 

2 Vaisanta : probably the name of a river. Fd.sadyv.mna : another 
king who was sacrificing to Indra at the same time as Sudas. 

3 The river: Yamuna. See VII. 18. 19. Ten kings: of the con¬ 
federate tribes who opposed Sudas. See VII. 18. 

4 Sakvari verses: hymns of praise in the Sakvari metre (14 x 4). 

6 Tritsus: the tribe of which Sudas was king. Bharatas: ap¬ 
parently the same as the Tritsus. 



HYMN 33 ] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


45 


7 Three fertilize the worlds with genial moisture : three 

noble creatures cast a light before them. 

Three that give warmth to all attend the Morning. 
All these have they discovered, these Vasishthas. 

8 Like the Sun’s growing glory is their splendour, and 

like the sea’s is their unfathomed greatness. 

Their course is like the wind’s. Your laud, Vasishthas, 
can never be attained by any other. 

9 With meditations of the heart they traverse the 

secret lore that hath a thousand branches. 

Wearing the vesture spun for them by Yama, near 
to the Apsarasas sate the Vasishthas. 

10 When Varuna andMitra both beheld thee springing, 
a form of splendour, from the lightning, 

This was one birth of thine, and one, Vasishtha, 
what time Agastya brought thee to the people. 


7 “ In explanation of this, Sayana quotes a passage from tho 
Satyayana Brahmana: (1) Agni produces a fertilizing fluid on the 
earth, Vayu in the air, the Sun in the sky. (2) The ‘ three noble 
creatures’ are the Vasus, Rudras, and Adityas. The Sun is their 
light. (3) Agni, Vayu, and the Sun each attend tho Dawn.”—Muir, 
0. S. Texts, 1 . 320. 

9 The secret lore that hath a thousand branches: according to 
Sayana, the revolving world of various living beings; or the succes¬ 
sion of many births. The. vesture: the body. The stanza is very 
obscure, and Sayana’s explanation, which overrides grammar and 
syntax, is not satisfactory: “ By the wisdom seated in the heart the 
Vasishthas traverse the hidden thousand-branched world, and the 
Apsarasas sit down, wearing the vesture spread out by Yama.”— 
Wilson. 

10 Vasishtha appears here as an embodiment of lightning, light, or 
fire, and to have been brought down to men by Agastya who was 
born in tho same way as Vasishtha. 


46 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII. 

11 Born of their love for Urvasl, Vasishtha, thou, priest, 

art son of Varuna and Mitra ; 

And as a fallen drop, in heavenly fervour, all the 
gods laid thee on a lotus-blossom. 

12 He, thinker, knovver both of earth and heaven, endow¬ 

ed with many a gift, bestowing thousands, 
Destined to wear the vesture spun by Yama, sprang 
from the Apsaras to life, Vasishtha. 

13 Born at the sacrifice, urged by adorations, both with 

a common flow bedewed the pitcher. 

Then from the midst thereof there rose up Mana, 
and thence they say was born the sage Vasishtha. 

14 He brings the bearer of the laud and S&man : first 

shall he speak bringing the stone for pressing. 

With grateful hearts in reverence approach him : to 
you, 0 Pratridas, Vasishtha cometh. 

HYMN XXXIV. Visvedevas. 

May our divine and brilliant hymn go forth, like a 
swift chariot wrought and fashioned well. 

2 The waters listen as they flow along : they know 
the origin of heaven and earth. 


11 Urvasl: the most celebrated of the Apsarasas or nymphs of 
heaven. On a lotus-blossom: or, according to others, ‘ in the sacred 
pitcher,’ or water-jar used in sacrifice. ‘In the lake.’—Wilson. 

For a full account of this production of Vasishtha, the curious 
reader is referred to Muir, 0. S. Texts, I. 321. 

12 The Apsaras : Urvasi. 

13 31 Ana : said to be another name of Agastya. 

14 The bearer of the laud and S&man: the pressing-stone, which 
was worked during the recitation of sacred verses. Pratridas: a 
name used here to designate the Tritsus. 

The metre is Viraj (10 x 2) in stanzas 1—21, and Trishtup in the rest. 

2 “ An allusion, perhaps, to the subsequently received cosmogony, 
as iu Manu , that water was the first of created things.”—Wilson. 




HYMN 34 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


47 


3 Yea, the broad waters swell their flood for him : of 

him strong heroes think amid their foes. 

4 Set ye for him the coursers to the pole : like Indra 

thunderer is the golden-armed. 

5 Arouse you, like the days, to sacrifice: speed gladly 

like a traveller on the way. 

6 Go swift to battles, to the sacrifice: set up a flag, 

a hero for the folk. 

7 Up from his strength hath risen as ’twere a light : 

it bears the load as earth bears living things. 

8 Agni, no demon I invoke the gods: by law complet¬ 

ing it, I form a hymn. 

9 Closely about you lay your heavenly song, and send 

your voice to where the gods abide. 

10 Varuna, mighty, with a thousand eyes, beholds the 

paths wherein these rivers run. 

11 He, king of kings, the glory of the floods, o’er all 

that liveth hath resistless sway. 

12 May he assist us among all the tribes, and make the 

envier’s praise devoid of light. 

13 May the foes’ threatening arrow pass us by : may he 

put far from us our bodies’ sin. 

14 Agni, oblation-eater, through our prayers aid us : to 

him our dearest laud is brought. 

15 Accordant with the gods choose for our friend the 

waters’ child : may he be good to us. 

16 With lauds I sing the Dragon born of floods : he sits 

beneath the streams in middle air. 


3 For Mm : Indra. 

4 The golden-armed.: Savitar. 

6 A hero : a sort of personification of the sacrifice. “ An ex¬ 
piatory 8acrifico for (the good of) mankind.”—Wilson. 

16 The Dragon bom of floods : Ahirbudhnya, or the Dragon of the 
Deep of the following stanza; the regent of the sou of air. 



48 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII. 

17 Ne’er may the Dragon of the Deep harm us : ne’er 

fail this faithful servant’s sacrifice. 

18 To these our heroes may they grant renown : may 

pious men march boldly on to wealth. 

19 Leading great hosts, with fierce attacks of these, 

they burn their foes as the sun burns the earth. 

20 What time our wives draw near to us, may he, deft¬ 

handed Twashtar, give us hero sons. 

21 May Twashtar find our hymn acceptable, and may 

Aramati, seeking wealth, be ours. 

22 May they who lavish gifts bestow those treasures : 

may Rodasi and Varunani listen. 

May he, with the Varhtris, be our refuge, may boun¬ 
tiful Twashtar give us store of riches. 

23 So may rich mountains and the liberal waters, so 

may all herbs that grow on ground, and Heaven, 
And Earth accordant with the forest sovrans, and 
both the world-halves round about protect us. 

24 To this may the two wide worlds lend approval, and 

Varuna in heaven, whose friend is Indra. 

May all the Maruts give consent, the victors, that we 
may hold great wealth in firm possession. 

25 May Indra, Varuna, Mitra, and Agni, waters, herbs, 

trees accept the praise we offer. 

May we find refuge in the Maruts’ bosom. Protect 
us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 


IS They: the gods. 

19 0/ these: gods, or Maruts, according to the scholiast. 

21 Aramati: variously interpreted by Sayana in the various places 
■where the word occurs. Here it is said to mean a being of perfect 
intelligence, or whose intelligence reaches to all objects. The Genius 
of Devotion. 

22 Vardtris: protecting goddesses. See Index. 

23 Forest sovrans: tall timber trees. Vanaspati, corrupted in the 
peasant's mouth, now means grass and bushes. 




HYMN 35 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


49 


HYMN XXXV. Visvedevas. 

Bkfrif.nd us with their aids Indra and Agni, Indra 
and Varuna who receive oblations ! 

Indra and Soma give health, wealth, and comfort, 
Indra and Pftshan be our strength in battle. 

2 Auspicious friends to us be Bhaga, Sansa, auspicious 

be Purandhi and all Riches ; 

The blessing of the true and well-conducted, and 
Aryaman in many forms apparent. 

3 Kind unto us be Maker and Sustainer, and the far- 

reaching pair with godlike natures. 

Auspicious unto us be Earth and Heaven, the Moun¬ 
tain, and the gods’ fair invocations. 

4 Favour us Asjni with his face of splendour, and 

Varuna and Mitra and the Asvins. 

Favour us noble actions of the pious, impetuous V&ta 
blow on us with favour. 

5 Early invoked, may Heaven and Earth be friendly, 

and air’s mid-region good for us to look on. 

To us may herbs and forest-trees be gracious, gra¬ 
cious the lord victorious of the region. 

6 Be the god Indra with the Vasus friendly, and, with 

the Adityas, Varuna who blessetb. 

Kind, with the Rudras, be the healer Rudra, and, 
with the Dames, may T wash tar kindly listen. 


The metre is Trishtup. 

1 Befriend vs : sam no bhavatdm. The indeclinable word sam, 
signifying happy, auspicious, pleasant, sweet, kind, agreeable, etc., 
etc., is used with or without the verb hkd, in the first thirteen 
stauzas. I have varied the expression here and there. 

2 Sansa: prayer or wish personified. Or it may be Naiasansa, 
Agni. Purandhi: Plenty. 

3 Far-reaching pair : Heaven and Earth. 

5 The. lord victorious : Indra. 

4 



50 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VI/. 

7 Blest unto us be Soma, and devotions, blest be the 

sacrifice, the stones for pressing. 

Blest be the fixing of the sacred pillars, blest be the 
tender grass, and blest the altar. 

8 May the far-seeing Sun rise up to bless us: be the 

four quarters of the sky auspicious. 

Auspicious be the firmly-seated mountains, auspicious 
be the rivers and the waters. 

9 May Aditi through holy works be gracious, and may 

the Maruts, loud in song, be friendly. 

May Vishnu give felicity’’, and Phshan, the air that 
cherisheth our life, and V&yu. 

10 Prosper us Savitar, the god who rescues, and let the 

radiant Mornings be propitious. 

Auspicious to all creatures be Parjanya, auspicious 
be the field’s benign protector. 

11 May all the fellowship of gods befriend us, Sarasvati, 

with Holy Thoughts, be gracious. 

Friendly be they, the liberal ones who seek us, yea, 
those who dwell in heaven, on earth, in waters. 

12 May the great lords of truth protect and aid us: 

blest to us be our horses and our cattle. 

Kind be the pious skilful-handed Ribhus, kind be 
the Fathers at our invocations. 

13 May Aja-Ekapad, the god, be gracious, gracious the 

Dragon of the Deep, and Ocean. 

Gracious be he, the swelling child of waters, gracious 
be Prisni who hath gods to guard her. 

14 So may the Rudras, Vasus, and Adityas accept the 

new hymn which we now are making. 


10 The field's benign protector : Agni, or Rudra. See IV. 57. 

13 Aja-Ekapdd: perhaps, the Sun. See VI. 60. 14, and footnote. 
The Dragon of the Deep: Ahirbudhnya, regent of the depths of 
the firmament. See Index. 




HYMN 36 .] 


THE RIO VEDA. 


51 


May all the holy ones of earth and heaven, and the 
Cow’s offspring hear our invocation. 

15 They who of holy gods are very holy, immortal, 
knowing Law, whom man must worship,— 

May these to-day give us broad paths to travel. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XXXYI. ViBvedevas. 

Let the prayer issue from the seat of Order, for 
Sflrya with his beams hath loosed the cattle. 

With lofty ridges earth is far extended, and Agni’s 
flame hath lit the spacious surface. 

2 0 Asuras, O Varuna and Mitra, this hymn to you, 
like food, anew I offer. 

One of you is a strong unerring leader, and Mitra, 
speaking, stirreth men to labour. 


14 Cow’s offspring: the Maruts. According to Roth, those who 
are born and live in radiant heaven, 

15 Broad paths to travel: perhaps, generally, an easy road to 
prosperity. 

The metre is Trishtup. 

1 The seat of Order: ‘ the hall of the sacrifice.’—Wilson. The 
cattle : rays of light. 

2 “ One of you (Varuna) is the lord and unassailable guide, and he 
who is called Mitra, (t. «. the friend) calls men to activity. Here so 
much at least is declared (and the same thing is expressed in nearly 
the same words in other places), that the light of day, which awakens 
life, and brings joy and activity into the world, is the narrower 
sphere of Mitra’s power; though, however, Varujja is not relegated 
to the night alone, for he continues to be the lord and the first.”— 
Roth, quoted by Muir, 0. S. Texts, V. 70. The meaning of inah, 
translated by ‘lord’ in this extract, is, in the Veda, rather ‘strong,’ 
‘energetic,’ and is so given in the St, Petersburg Lexicon, the 
roeaniug ‘lord’ belonging to later literature. The second half of 
the second line is repeated from 111. 59. 1. 



52 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VJl 


3 The movements of the gliding wind come hither : 

like cows, *the springs are filled to overflowing. 

Born in the station e’en of lofty heaven the Bull 
hath loudly bellowed in this region. 

4 May I bring hither with my song, 0 Indra, wise 

Aryaman who yokes thy dear bay horses, 
Voracious, with thy noble car, 0 hero, him who 
defeats the wrath of the malicious. 

3 In their own place of sacrifice adorers worship to 
gain long life and win his friendship. 

He hath poured food on men -when they have praised 
him ; be this, the dearest reverence, paid to Kudra. 

6 Coming together, glorious, loudly roaring—Sarasvati, 

mother of floods, the seventh— 

With copious milk, with fair streams, strongly flowing, 
full-swelling with the volume of their water; 

7 And may the mighty Maruts, too, rejoicing, aid our 

devotion and protect our offspring. 

Let not swift-moving Akshara neglect us: they 
have increased our own appropriate riches. 

8 Bring ye the great Aramati before you, and Pflshan 

as the hero of the synod, 

Bhaga who looks upon this hymn with favour, and, 
. as our strength, the bountiful Purandhi. 


3 The springs: the fountaius of rain; the clouds. The Bull: 
Parjanya, god of the rain-cloud. This region : literally, this udder; 
the firmament. 

4 Voracious: epithet of horses; but the meaning of dh&yu is uncer¬ 
tain. According to Sayana, it means ‘holding,’ ‘vigorous;’ according 
to Professor Ludwig, ‘pouring forth rain;’ according to Professor 
Grassman, ‘thirsty.’ 

5 His friendship : Rudra’s. 

<5 The seventh: with the Bis other celebrated rivers. Seel. 32. 12. 

7 Akshard: Vak, or Voice; ‘the imperishable goddess of speech.’— 
Wilson. 

8 Aramati: the personification of religious worship, or active 
piety. Accordiug to Sayana, aranvatim here is au epithet of mahim, 



BYMN 37 .] 


THE EIGVEDA. 


53 


9 May this our song of praise reach you, 0 Maruts, 
and Vishnu guardian of the future infant. 

May they vouchsafe the singer strength for offspring. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XXXVII. Visvedevas. 

Let your best-bearing car that must be lauded, ne’er 
injured, bring you V&j’as and Ribhukshans. 

Fill you, fair-helmeted! with mighty Soma, thrice- 
mixed, at our libations, to delight you. 

2 Ye who behold the light of heaven, Ribhukshans, 

give our rich patrons unmolested riches. 

Drink, heavenly-natured, at our sacrifices, and give 
us bounties for the hymns we sing you. 

3 For thou, O mighty one, art used to giving, at 

parting treasure whether small or ample. 

Filled full are both thine arms with great possessions : 
thy goodness keeps thee not from granting riches. 

4 Indra, high-famed, as V&ja and Ribhukshan, thou 

goest working, singing to the dwelling. 

Lord of bay steeds, this day may we Vasishthas- 
offer our prayers to thee and bring oblations. 


‘the never resting Earth.’ For the various meanings assigned by 
Sayana to this word in the various places in which it occurs, see- 
Muir, 0. S. Texts, IV. 317. 

Purandhi: Plenty, personified ; * the sustainer of old.’—Wilson, 

The metre is Trishtup. 

1 Vdjas and, Ribhukshans : that is, Ribhukshan or Ribhu, Vibhvan, 
and Vaja, commonly called the Ribhus from the name of the first of 
the three. Fair-helmeted: ‘ handsome-chinned.’—Wilson. * Strong- 
jawed.'—Ludwig. Thrice-mixed: with milk, curds, and meal, 

3 Mighty one: Maghavan; Indra. 

4 Working : 1 the fulfiller (of wishes).’—Wilson. The first lino i* 
somewhat obscure. 



54 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII. 

5 Thou winnest swift advancement for thy servant, 

through hymns, lord of bay steeds, which thou 
hast favoured. 

For thee with friendly succour have we battled, and 
when, O Indra, wilt thou grant us riches ? 

6 To us thy priests a home, as ’twere, thou givest: 

when, Indra, wilt thou recognize our praises? 

May thy strong steed, through our ancestral worship 
bring food and wealth with heroes to our dwelling. 

7 Though Nirriti the goddess reigneth round him, 

Autumns with food in plenty come to Indra. 

With three close friends to length of days he cometh, 
he whom men let not rest at home in quiet. 

8 Promise us gifts, 0 Savitar: may riches come unto 

us in Parvata’s full bounty. 

May the celestial guardian still attend us. Preserve 
us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XX XVIII. Savitar. 

On high hath Savitar, this god, extended the golden 
lustre which he spreads around him. 

Now, now must Bhaga be invoked by mortals, lord 
of great riches who distributes treasures. 


7 Nirriti: the goddess of death and destruction, who has no 
power over Indra. Three close friends: the Ribhus, who represent 
the year, the annual course of Indra as the sun. Siyana’s explana¬ 
tion is different: “ Indra, the upholder of the three regions, whom 
the divine Nirriti acknowledges as ruler, whom abundant years pass 
over, whom mortals detain from his own abode, approaches to (recruit) 
his decaying strength.”—Wilson; who observes: “ the explanation 
is not very clear.” 

8 Parvata’s full bounty: the institutor of the sacrifice must be 
meant. 


The metre is Trishtup. 



HYMN 38 ] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


55 


2 Rise up, 0 Savitar whose hands are golden, and hear 

this man while sacrifice is offered, 

Spreading afar thy broad and wide effulgence, and 
bringing mortal men the food that feeds them. 

3 Let Savitar the god be hymned with praises, to 

whom the Vasus, even, all sing glory. 

Sweet be our lauds to him whose due is worship: 
may he with all protection guard our princes. 

4 Even he whom Aditi the goddess praises, rejoicing 

in god Savitar’s creation : 

Even he whose praise the high imperial rulers, 
Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, sing in concert. 

5 They who come emulous to our oblation, dispensing 

bounty, from the earth and heaven, 

May they and Ahirbudhnya hear our calling: guard 
us Var&tri with the Ekadhenus. 

6 This may the lord of life, entreated, grant us,—the 

wealth which Savitar the god possesses. 

The mighty calls on Bhaga for protection, on Bhaga 
calls the weak to give him riches. 

7 Bless us the Vajins when we call, while slowly they 

‘ move, strong singers, to the gods’ assembly. 
Crushing the wolf, the serpent, and the demons, may 
they completely banish all diseases. 

8 Deep-skilled in law eternal, deathless, singers, 0 

V&jins, help us in each fray for booty. 

Drink of this meath, be satisfied, be joyful: then go 
on paths which gods are wont to travel. 


3 The Vasus : the gods in general, according to Sayaija. 

5 Vardtri: ‘the protectress (the goddess of speech).'—Wilson. 
See Index. 

Ekadhenus : the Waters are probably meant: ‘ excellent cattle.’— 
Wilsou. 

7 V&jins: a class of divinities so named, according to S&yana; 
but, according to Mahidhara, horses, ». e. the teams which draw the 
chariots of the gods. The wolf: or the robber. The serpent: or the 
assassin. The demons: the Rakshasas. 




56 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VII. 


HYMN XXXIX. Visvedevas. 

Agni, erect, hath shown enriching favour : the flame 
goes forward to the gods’ assembly. 

Like car-borne men the stones their path have chosen: 
let the priest, quickened, celebrate our worship. 

2 Soft to the tread, their sacred grass is scattered: 

these go like kings amid the band around them, 

At the folk’s early call on Night and Morning,— 
Yayu, and Phshan with his team, to bless us. 

3 Here on their path the noble gods proceeded : in 

the wide firmament the beauteous decked them. 
Bend your way hither, ye who travel widely : hear 
this our envoy who hath gone to meet you. 

4 For they are holy aids at sacrifices: all gods ap¬ 

proach the place of congregation. 

Bring these, desirous, to our worship, Agni, swift 
the N&satyas, Bhaga, and Purandhi. 

5 Agni, to these men’s hymns, from earth, from heaven, 

bring Mitra, Varuna, Indra, and Agni, 

And Aryaman, and Aditi, and Vishnu. Sarasvati 
be joyful, and the Maruts. 

6 Even as the holy wish, the gift is offered : may he, 

unsated, come when men desire him. 

Give never-failing ever-conquering riches : with gods 
for our allies may we be victors. 

7 Now have both worlds been praised by the Vasish- 

thas, and holy Mitra, Varuna, and Agni. 

May they, bright deities, make our song supremest. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

The metre is Trishtup. 

1 The stones : the pressing-stoneB have begun their course. 

2 These go like kings: according to Say ana, ‘ may the two lords of 

people (Vayu and Pushau).appear now.’ 

3 Our envoy: Agni. 

5 Agni: in his own form as a celestial god, not in that of terres¬ 
trial fire. 

6 He, untated: Agni. 




HYMN 40 .] 


THE RIQVEDA. 


57 


HYMN XL. Visvedevas. 

Be gathered all the audience of the synod : let us 
begin their praise whose course is rapid. 

Whate’er god Savitar this day produces, may we be 
where the wealthy one distributes. 

2 This, dealt from heaven, may both the worlds vouch¬ 

safe us, and Varuna, Indra, Aryaman, and Mitra. 
May Aditi the goddess show us riches, V&yu and 
Bhaga make them ours for ever. 

3 Strong be the man and full of power, O Maruts, 

whom ye, borne on by spotted coursers, favour. 
Him, too, Sarasvati and Agni further, and there is 
none to rob him of his riches. 

4 This Yaruna is guide of Law, he, Mitra, and Arya¬ 

man, the kings, our work have finished. 

Divine and foeless Aditi quickly listens. May these 
deliver us unharmed from trouble. 

5 With offerings I propitiate the branches of this 

swift-moving god, the bounteous Yishnu. 

Hence Rudra gained his Rudra-strength : 0 Asvins, 
ye sought the house that hath celestial viands. 

6 Be not thou angry here, O glowing Phshan, for what 

Vardtrl and the bounteous gave us. 


The metre is Trishtup. 

1 Their praise : praise of the gods. 

2 Dealt from, heaven : or, distributed by Dyu or Dyaus. 

4 Our work : the sacrifice. 

5 The branches : “vaydh , branches: all other deities are, as it were, 
branches of Vishnu, anye de.vdh sdkha iva bhavcinti: as by a text 
cited by the scholiast, Vishnu is all divinities, Vishnuh sarva devatd 
■iti sruteh.” —Wilson. This, Professor Ludwig remarks, gives no satis¬ 
factory interpretation; but I a in unable to offer any thing better at 
present. Professor Grassmann alters vaydh, into vay&ma: wo with 
our offerings approach the banquet of this swift-moving god, the 
bounteous Vishnu; i. e. come to offer him sacrificial food, 




58 


THE HYMNS OF 


f. BOOK VII. 


May the swift-moving gods protect and bless us, and 
Y&ta send us rain, who wanders round us. 

7 Now have both worlds been praised by the Vasish- 
thas, and holy Mitra, Varuna, and Agni. 

May they, bright deities, make our song supremest. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XLI. Bhaga. 

Agni at dawn, and Indra we invoke at dawn, and 
Varuna, and Mitra, and the Asvins twain : 

Bhaga at dawn, Pftshan, and Brahmapaspati, Soma 
at dawn, Rudra we will invoke at dawn. 

2 We will invoke at dawn strong conquering Bhaga, 

the son of Aditi, the great disposer : 

Thinking of whom, the poor, yea, even the mighty, 
even the king himself says, give me Bhaga. 

3 Bhaga our guide, Bhaga whose gifts are faithful, 

favour this song, and give us wealth, O Bhaga. 
Bhaga, augment our store of kine and horses, Bhaga, 
may we be rich in men and heroes. 

4 So may felicity be ours at present, and when the 

day approaches, and at noontide ; 

And may we still, 0 mighty one, at sunset be happy 
in the deities’ loving-kindness. 

5 May Bhaga verily be bliss-bestower, and through 

him, gods ! may happiness attend us. 

As such, O Bhaga, all with might invoke thee: as 
such be thou our champion here, O Bhaga. 


The hymn is addressed chiefly to Bhaga the bountiful, whose name, 
slightly corrupted, survives in the Slavonic languages as a general 
name for God; but the gods mentioned in stanza 1, and Ushas, 
Dawn or Morning, are also regarded as the deities of the verses in 
which their names occur. 

The metre is Jagatl in stanza 1, and Trishtup in the rest. 

2 Give me Bhaga: or riches. 



11YMN 42.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


59 


6 To this our sacrifice may all Dawns incline them, and 

come to the pure place like Dadhikr&van. 

As strong steeds draw a chariot may they bring us 
hitherward Bhaga who discovers treasure. 

7 May blessed Mornings dawn on us for ever, with 

wealth of kine, of horses, and of heroes, 
Streaming with all abundance, pouring fatness. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XLII. Visvedevas. 

Let Brahmans and Angirasas come forward, and 
let the roar of cloudy heaven surround us. 

Loud low the milch-kine swimming in the waters: 
set be the stones that grace our holy service. 

2 Fair, Agni, is thy long-known path to travel : yoke 

for the juice thy bay and ruddy horses, 

Or red steeds, hero-bearing, for the chamber. Seated, 
I call the deities’ generations. 

3 They glorify your sacrifice with worship, yet the 

glad priest near them is left unequalled. 

Bring the gods hither, thou of many aspects : turn 
hitherward Aramati the holy. 

9 ______ 

6 The pure place: the chamber of sacrifice. Like Dadhikrdvan: 
swift as Dadhikravan, the famous horse, the type and model of racers. 

The metre is Trishtup. 

1 Angirasas: Rishis so uamed, aocording to Sayana. The milch- 
Line: the clouds in the watery firmament, with allusion also to the 
milk and water mixed with the Soma juice. The stones: the press- 
atones. Sayana’s explanation is different: “ may the pious couple, 
(the Yajam&na and his wife) conjointly appreciate the beauty of the 
sacrifice.”—Wilson. 

2 Hero-hearing : carrying the hero Agni. 

3 The human priests cannot equal Agni in efficiency. Aramati: the 
genius of devotion. See VII. 36. 8. 



60 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK YU. 


4 What time the guest hath made himself apparent, at 

ease reclining in the rich man’s dwelling, 

Agni, well-pleased, well-placed within the chamber 
gives to a house like this wealth worth the 
choosing. 

5 Accept this sacrifice of ours, 0 Agni; glorify it with 

Indra and the Maruts. 

Here on our grass let Night and Dawn be seated : 
bring longing Varuna and Mitra hither. 

6 Thus hath Vasishtha praised victorious Agni, yearn¬ 

ing for wealth that giveth all subsistence. 

May he bestow on us food, strength, and riches. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XLIII. Visvedevas. 

Sing out the pious at your sacrifices to move with 
adorations Earth and Heaven—• 

The holy singers, whose unmatched devotions, like a 
tree’s branches, part in all directions. 

2 Let sacrifice proceed like some fleet courser : with 

one accord lift ye on high the ladles. 

Strew sacred grass meet for the solemn service : 
bright flames that love the gods have mounteS 
upward. 

3 Like babes in arms reposing on their mother, let the 

gods sit upon the grass’s summit. 

Let general fire make bright the flame of worship : 
scorn us not, Agni, in the gods’ assembly. 


4 The guest: Agni. 


The metre is Trishtup. 

3 Let general fire: or, according to Sayana, Let the full ladle balm 
the fire of worship. The exact meaning is uncertain as both subject 
and object are adjectives without substantives. 



H¥MN 44.] THE RIG VEDA. Cl 

4 Gladly the gods have let themselves bo honoured, 

milking the copious streams of holy Order. 

The highest might to-day is yours, the Vasus’: come 
ye, as many as ye are, one-minded. 

5 So, Agni, send us wealth among the people : may we 

be closely knit to thee, O victor, 

Unharmed, and rich, and taking joy together. Pre¬ 
serve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XLIV. Dadhikras. 

I call on Dadhikr&s, the first, to give you aid, the 
Asvins, Bhaga, Dawn, and Agni kindled well, 
Indra, and Vishriu, Pfishan, Brahmanaspati, Adityas, 
Heaven and Earth, the Waters, and the Light. 

2 When, rising, to the sacrifice we hasten, awaking 

Dadhikr&s with adorations, 

Seating on sacred grass the goddess 114, let us invoke 
the sage swift-hearing Asvins. 

3 While I am thus arousing Dadhikr4van I speak to 

Agni, Earth, and Dawn, and Sfirya, 

The red, the brown of Varuna ever mindful: may 
they ward off from us all grief and trouble. 


4 Milking the copious streams: enjoying the libations of law- 
ordained sacrifice. “ Who are the bestowers of water, the sheddera 
of showers.”—Wilson. 

The metre is Trishtup. 

1 Dadhikr&s: see. IV. 38. 1. 

3 Dadhikr&van: a lengthened form of Dadhikras. See IV. 39. 2, and 
40. The red , the brown: apparently the two horses of Varuna are in¬ 
tended. Ever mindful: ‘ who is mindful of his adorers.’—Wilson. The 
meaning of the word manschatoh, or mdnsrhaloh, is uncertain. Pro¬ 
fessor Roth thinks that a colour, dun or yellow, is meant. Professor 
Ludwig would explain it as ‘ knotting snares or nooses.’ Professor 
Grassmann translates it by, ‘des Moudverscheuchers,’ ‘who scares 
away the moon.’ 



62 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII. 

4 Foremost is Dadhikrdvan, vigorous courser; in fore¬ 

front of the cars, his way he knoweth, 

Closely allied with Stirya and with Morning, Adityas, 
and Angirasas, and Vasus. 

5 May Dadhikris prepare the way we travel that we 

may pass along the path of Order. 

May Agni hear us, and the heavenly army : hear us 
all mighty ones whom none deceiveth. 

HYMN XLY. Savitar. 

Mat the god Savitar, rich in goodly treasures, fill¬ 
ing the region, borne by steeds, come hither, 

In his hand holding much that makes men happy, 
lulling to slumber and arousing creatures. 

2 Golden, sublime, and easy in their motion, his arms 

extend unto the bounds of heaven. 

Now shall that mightiness of his be lauded : even 
Sftra yields to him in active vigour. 

3 May this god Savitar, the strong and mighty, the 

lord of precious wealth, vouchsafe us treasures. 

May he, advancing his far-spreading lustre, bestow 
on us the food that feedeth mortals. 

4 These songs praise Savitar whose tongue is pleasant, 

praise him whose arms are full, whose hands are 
lovely. 

High vital strength, and manifold, may he grant us. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

4 In, forefront of the cars : according to Sayana, the chariots of the 
gods are intended. But, as Professor Pischel observes (Vedische Stu- 
dien, I. 124.) Dadhikravau, the famous race-horse, was for “the 
gentlemen of the turf” in king Trasadasyu’s time what the matchless 
English horse Eclipse was in recent days. It seems probable that 
Dadhikravan may have been originally only a most distinguished racer, 
glorified and deified by the exaggerated praises of the bards of a 
people who were passionately fond of chariot racing. 

The metre is Trishtup. 

2 Stira : the Sun as distinguished from, or a different form of, Savitar 
who is said by Sayana to be the Sun before his rising. 



HYMN 46.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


63 


HYMN XLVI. Rudra. 

To Rudra bring these songs, whose bow is firm and 
strong, the god of heavenly nature, with swift¬ 
flying shafts, 

Disposer, conqueror whom none may overcome, 
armed with sharp-pointed weapons : may he hear 
our call. 

2 He through his lordship thinks on beings of the 

earth, on heavenly beings through his high impe¬ 
rial sway. 

Come willingly to our doors that gladly welcome 
thee, and heal all sickness, Rudra, in our families. 

3 May thy bright arrow which, shot down by thee from 

heaven, flieth upon the earth, pass us uninjured by. 
Thou, very gracious god, hast thousand medicines : 
inflict no evil on our sons or progeny. 

4 Slay us not, nor abandon us, 0 Rudra : let not thy 

noose, when thou art angry, seize us. 

Give us trimmed grass and rule over the living. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 


The metre is Jagati in 1—3, and Trishtup in 4. 

3 Very gracious god: svapivdta. “This word is not explained in 
the printed text of Sayana, although in the “ Varietas Lectionis,” ap¬ 
pended to his preface, Prof. Muller notes that in one MS., B. 4, svapivdta 
is rendered hy jitaprana, “he by whom life (or breath) is conquered.” 
In the Nirukta, X. 7, it is explained by svapta-vachana, “ thou whose 
words are very suitable or authoritative.”—Muir, 0. S. Texts, IV. 314, 
where an exhaustive note on the word will be found. Professor Wilson 
renders svapivdta by ‘ wind-appeaser,’ and Professor Grassmann by 
‘ vielbegehrter,’ ‘ much-desired.’ 

4 Give us trimmed grass : let us share in sacrifice. Rule over the 
living: I follow the St. Petersburg Lexicon which takes jivasanse to 
be a substantive with this meaning. Others take the word as quali¬ 
fying barkishi , trimmed grass, i. e. sacrifice, and signifying ‘ desired 
by the living,’ ‘ to be praised among men,’ ‘ promising (long) life.’ 



64 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII. 

HYMN XLVIL Waters. 

May we obtain this day from you, 0 Waters, that 
wave of pure refreshment, which the pious 
Made erst the special beverage -of Indra, bright, 
stainless, rich in sweets and dropping fatness. 

2 May the floods’ offspring, he whose course is rapid, 

protect that wave most rich in sweets, O Waters, 
That shall make Indra and the Vasus joyful. This 
may we gain from you to-day, we pious. 

3 All-purifying, joying in their godhead, to paths of 

gods the goddesses move onward. 

They never violate the laws of Indra. Present the 
oil-rich offering to the Rivers. 

4 Whom Sflrya with his bright beams hath attracted, 

and Indra dug the path for them to travel, 

May these streams give us ample room and freedom. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XLVIII. Ribhus. 

Ye liberal heroes, VSjas and Ribhukshans, come and 
delight you with our flowing Soma. 

May your strength, Vibhus, as ye come to meet us, 
turn hitherward your car that brings men profit. 

2 May we as Ribhu with your Ribhus conquer strength 
with our strength, as Vibhus with the Vibhus. 


The metre is Trishtup. 

1 Wave of pure refreshment: “sweet essence of the earth;” urmi 
is said here to imply the Soma juice produced from the earth.”—Wilson. 

3 All-purifying : satapavitrdh ; literally, with a hundred, that is, 
countless, means of purification. The goddesses ; the divine Waters. 

The metre is Trishtup. 

1 Vdjas and Ribhukshans: ye three, Ribhu, Vibhvan, and Vaja. 

2 The meaning is, inav we be as powerful as Ribhu, as mighty as 
the company of the Vibhus (another name of the Ribhus). Sayana 
explains ribhu as great, and vibhvah as powerful. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


65 


I^YMN 49.] 


May V&ja aid us in the fight for booty, and helped 
by Indra may we quell the foeman. 

3 For they rule many tribes with high dominion, and 

conquer all their foes in close encounter. 

May Indra, Vibhvan, VAja, and Ribhukshan destroy 
by turns the wicked foeman’s valour. 

4 Now, deities, give us ample room and freedom: be 

all of you, one-minded, our protection. 

So let the Vasus grant us strength and vigour. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 


HYMN XLIX. Waters. 

Forth from the middle of the flood the Waters— 
their chief the Sea—flow cleansing, never sleeping. 
Indra, the Bull, the thunderer, dug their channels : 
here let those Waters, goddesses, protect me. 

2 Waters which come from heaven, or those that wander 

dug from the earth, or flowing free by nature, 
Bright, purifying, speeding to the Ocean, here let 
those Waters, goddesses, protect me. 

3 Those amid whom goes Varuna the sovran, he who 

discriminates men’s truth and falsehood— 
Distilling meath, the bright, the purifying, here let 
those Waters, goddesses, protect me. 

4 They from whom Varuna the king, and Soma, and 

all the deities drink strength and vigour, 

They into whom Vaisvanara Agni entered, here let 
those Waters, go.ddesses, protect me. 


In the fight for booty : v&jasdtau ; a play on the word and name vdja. 
4 The, Vasus: according to Sayana, vasavah here is an epithet of 
Ribkavah, understood; ‘the exalted (Ribhus).’—Wilson. 

Tiie metre is Triahtup. 

1 The flood.: the ooeau of air, the firmament, 

5 


66 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII, 

HYMN L. Varioua Deities. 

O Mitra, Varuna, guard and protect me here : let 
not that come to me which nests within and swells. 
I drive afar the scorpion hateful to the sight: let not 
the winding worm touch me and wound my foot. 

2 Eruption that appears upon the twofold joints, and 

that which overspreads the ancles and the knees, 
May the refulgent Agni banish far away : let not 
the winding worm touch me and wound my foot. 

3 The poison that is formed upon the Salmali, that 

which is found in streams, that which the plants 
produce, 

All this may all the gods banish and drive away : 
let not the winding worm touch me and wound 
my foot. 

4 The steep declivities, the valleys, and the heights, 

the channels full of water, and the waterless— 
May those who swell with water, gracious goddesses, 
never afflict us with the Sipada disease, may all 
the rivers keep us free from Simid4. 


The deities are (1) Mitra and Yanina, (2) Agni, (3) Vi eve Devah, 
(4) Praise of the Rivors. Each stanza of the hymn is to be repeated 
as an antidote to the poison or disease which it specifies. The metre 
is Jagati in the first three stanzas and Atijagati or Sakvari in the last. 

1 That which nests within and swells : ‘ the insidious and spreading 
(poison).’—Wilson. Sayana supplies the substantive visham. 

The scorpion : ajakdvam ; the exact meaning is uncertain. 

2 Twofold joints: of the arms and legs. Sayana's interpretation 
is different: ‘ the poison which is generated in the manifold knots (of 
trees).’—Wilson. 

3 The Salmali: the silk-cotton tree. All the gods: or, the All¬ 
gods or Visvedevas. 

4 The Sipada disease: “perhaps the Vaidik form of Slipada, the 
Cochin leg.”—Wilson. Simidd: apparently a female demon, or a 
disease attributed to her malevolence. 


IfYME 52.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


67 


HYMN LI. Adilyas. 

Through the Adityas’ most auspicious shelter, through 
their most recent succour may we conquer. 

May they, the mighty, giving ear, establish this 
sacrifice, to make us free and sinless. 

2 Let Aditi rejoice and the Adityas, Varuria, Mitra, 

Aryaman, most righteous. 

May they, the guardians of the world, protect us, 
and, to show favour, drink this day our Soma. 

3 All universal deities, the Maruts, all the Adityas, 

yea, and all the ^dibhus, 

Indra, and Agni, and the Asvins, lauded, preserve 
us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LII. Adityas. 

May we be free from every bond, Adityas ! a castle 
among gods and men, ye Vasus. 

Winning, may we win Varunaand Mitra, and, being, 
may we be, 0 Earth and Heaven. 

2 May Varupa and Mitra grant this blessing, our 

guardians, shelter to our seed and offspring. 

Let us not suffer for another’s trespass, nor do the 
thing that ye, 0 Vasus, punish. 

3 The over-prompt Atigirasas imploring riches from 

Savitar the god obtained them. 

So may our Father who is great and holy, and all 
the gods, accordant, grant this favour. 


The metre is Trishtup. 

3 Universal deities : vieve dev&h ; the All-gods. 

The metre is Trishtup. 

1 Being : really and truly being, rich, powerful, and distinguished. 
3 Our Father: Varuna, the father of Vasisbtha; or Savitar, or 
Prajapati may be intended. 




68 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK YU. 

HYMN LIII. Heaven and Earth. 

As priest with solemn rites and adorations I worship 
Heaven and Earth, the high and holy. 

To them, great parents of the gods, have sages of 
ancient time, singing, assigned precedence. 

2 With newest hymns set in the seat of Order those 

the two parents, born before all others. 

Come, Heaven and Earth, with the celestial people, 
hither to us, for strong is your protection. 

3 Yea, Heaven and Earth, ye hold in your possession 

full many a treasure for the liberal giver. 

Grant us that wealth which comes in free abundance. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LIV. Vastoshpati. 

Acknowledge us, 0 Guardian of the Homestead: 

bring no disease, and give us happy entrance. 
Whate’er we ask of thee, be pleased to grant it, and 
prosper thou our quadrupeds and bipeds. 

2 Protector of the Home, be our promoter: increase 

our wealth in kine and steeds, O Indu. 

May we be ever-youthful in thy friendship: be 
pleased in us as in his sons a father. 

3 Through thy dear fellowship that bringeth welfare, 

may we be victors, Guardiati of the Dwelling! 
Protect our happiness in rest and labour. Preserve 
us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 


The metre is Trishtup, 

3 For the liberal giver : or, for Sudas. 

The metre is Trishtup. Vastoshpati is the genius or tutelary god 
of the house. In this hymn he is addressed also as Indu, another 
name of Soma. 



HYMN 55.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


G9 


HYMN LV. Vastoshpati. 

Vastoshpati, who killest all disease and wearest 
every form, 

Be an auspicious friend to us. 

2 When, O bright son of Saram&, thou showest, tawny- 

hued! thy teeth, 

They gleam like lances’ points within thy mouth 
when thou vrouldst bite: go thou to sleep. 

3 Sarama’s son, retrace thy way : bark at the robber 

and the thief. 

At Indra’s singers barkest thou ? Why dost thou 
seek to terrify us ? Go to sleep. 

4 Be on tby guard against the boar, and let the boar 

beware of thee. 

At Indra’s singers barkest thou ? Why dost thou 
seek to terrify us ? Go to sleep. 

5 Sleep mother, let the father sleep, sleep dog and 

master of the house. 

Let all the kinsmen sleep, sleep all the people who 
are round about. 

6 The man who sits, the man who walks, and whoso¬ 

ever looks on us, 

Of these we closely shut the eyes, even as we closely 
shut this house. 


Vastoshpati is the deity of tho first stanza, and Indra of the rest. 

The metre is Gayatri in stanza I, Uparishtadbriluiti (8 x 3 + 12) in 
2 — 4, and Annshfcup in 5 —S, and the hymn appears to be made up 
of three corresponding pieces unconnected by their subjects. 

2 Son of Saramd: Sarama., the hound of Indra, is mother of the 
two brindled watch-dogs of Yatna, god of the dead. This stanza 
and the two following appear to be addressed by the spirits of 
India's worshippers to one of the dogs who would prevent their 
entering the home of the pious dead. 

5 This and the three following stanzas form a lullaby or sleep- 
song. 


70 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK YIJ. 

7 The Bull who hath a thousand horns, who rises up 

from out the sea,— 

By him the strong and mighty one we lull and 
make the people sleep. 

8 The women sleeping in the court, lying without, or 

stretched on beds, 

The matrons with their odorous sweets—these, one 
and all, we lull to sleep. 

HYMN LVI. Maruts. 

Who are these radiant men in serried rank, Rudra’s 
young heroes borne by noble steeds? 

2 Yerily no one knoweth whence they sprang: they, 

and they only, know each other’s birth. 

3 They strew each other with their blasts, these hawks: 

they strove together, roaring like the wind. 


7 The Bull who hath a thousand horns: the bud, whose setting 
brings the time of rest and sleep; or perhaps the Btarry heaven is 
intended. 

8 With their odorous sweets: wearing garlands of fragrant flowers 
on festive occasions, according to Sayana: ‘ decorated with holiday 
perfumes.’—Wilson. According to a legend mentioned by Sayana, 
Vasishtha, having fasted for three days was entering tho houso of 
Varuna in hope of food, when the watch-dog set upon him and was 
put to sleep by the repetition of tbe last four verses, which are to 
be recited on similar occasions by thieves and house-breakers. See 
Professor Wilson’s Note. 

The metre of stanzas 1-11 is Dvipadsl Viraj, and Trisbtup of 
the rest. 

3 They strew each other with their blasts : the meaning of svapdbhih 
is uncertain. “ They go together by their own pure paths.”—Wilson. 
“They plucked each other with their beaks (?) ”—M. Muller. They 
bestrew each other with light.”—Grassmann “They scatter dust 
over each other with besoms.”—Roth. I follow Professor Ludwig, but 
am not satisfied with his interpretation. 




E.YMN 56.] 


THE RIGVEDA. 


71 


4 This mystery the sage hath understood, and known 

what udder mighty Prisni bore. 

5 Ever victorious, through the Maruts, be this band 

of heroes, nursing manly strength, 

6 Most bright in splendour, fleetest on their way, 

close-knit to glory, strong with varied power. 

7 Yea, mighty is your power and firm your strength : 

effectual, with the Maruts, be the band. 

8 Bright is your spirit, wrathful are your minds : your 

bold troop’s minstrel is like one inspired. 

9 Ever avert your blazing shaft from us, and let not 

your displeasure reach us here. 

10 Your dear names, conquering Maruts, we invoke, 

calling aloud till we are satisfied. 

11 Well-armed, impetuous in their haste, they deck, 

themselves, their forms, with ornaments of gold. 

12 Pure, Maruts, pure yourselves, are your oblations: 

to you, the pure, pure sacrifice I offer. 

By Law they came to truth, the Law’s observers, 
bright by their birth, and pure, and sanctifying. 

13 Your rings, O Maruts, rest upon your shoulders, 

and chains of gold are twined upon your bosoms. 
Gleaming with drops of rain, like lightning-flashes, 
after your wont ye whirl about your weapons. 

14 Wide in the depth of air spread forth your glories, 

far, most adorable, ye bear your titles. 

4 What udder: according to Sayana, what beings (Maruts, etc.) 
mighty Pyisni bore at her udder or in the firmament. 

8 Your bold troop’s minstrel ; the leader of the Maruts’ thunder- 
psalm. Like one inspired: muniriva, like a Muni or inspired saint. 
“The sounds produced by the shaking of the trees are like the varied 
intonations of a reciter of praises, is Sayana’s explanation.”—Wilson. 

14 Ye bear your titles : you make yourselves known. “You send 
down (the waters) that beat down (tho dust).”—Wilson. Ndm&ni, 
names, according to Sayana, moans waters, because they bend down 
the dust, pdnsun namayanti. 




72 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII. 

Maruts, accept this thousandfold allotment of house¬ 
hold sacrifice and household treasure. 

15 If, Maruts, ye regard the praise recited here at this 

mighty singer’s invocation, 

Vouchsafe us quickly wealth with noble heroes, 
wealth which no man who hateth us may injure. 

16 The Maruts, fleet as coursers, while they deck them 

like youths spectators of a festal meeting, 

Linger, like beauteous colts, about the dwelling, like 
frisking calves, these who pour down the water. 

17 So may the Maruts help us and be gracious, bring¬ 

ing free room to lovely earth and heaven. 

Far be your bolt that slayeth men and cattle. Ye 
Vasus, turn yourselves to us with blessings. 

18 The priest, when seated, loudly calls you, Maruts, 

praising in song your universal bounty. 

He, Bulls! who hath so much in his possession, free 
from duplicity, with hymns invokes you. 

19 These Maruts bring the swift man to a stand-still, 

and strength with mightier strength they break 
and humble. 

These guard the praise-song of the man who battles, 
and lay their sore displeasure on the wicked. 

20 These Maruts stimulate even the poor and needy: 

the Vasus love him as an active champion. 

Drive to a distance, 0 ye Bulls, the darkness : give 
us full store of children and descendants. 

21 Never, O Maruts, may we lose your bounty, nor, 

car-borne lords! be hindmost when ye deal it. 

Give us a share in that delightful treasure, the 
genuine wealth that, Bulls ! is your possession. 

22 What time the men in fury rush together for running 

streams, for pastures, and for houses, 

Then, 0 ye Maruts, ye who sprang from Rudra, 
be our protectors in the strife with foemen. 



HYMN 57 .] 


THE RIOVEDA. 


73 


23 Full many a deed ye did for our forefathers worthy 

the lauds which, even of old, they sang you. 

The strong man, with the Maruts, wins in battle, 
the charger, with the Maruts, gains the booty. 

24 Ours, 0 ye Maruts, be the vigorous hero, the lord 

divine of men, the strong sustainer, 

With whom to fair lands we may cross the waters, 
and dwell in our own home with you beside us. 

25 May Indra, Mitra, Varuna, and Agni, Waters, and 

Plants, and Trees accept our praises. 

May we find shelter in the Maruts’ bosom. Preserve 
us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LVII. Maruts. 

Yea, through the power of your sweet juice, ye holy ! 

the Marut host is glad at sacrifices. 

They cause even spacious heaven and earth to 
tremble, they make the spring flow when they 
come, the mighty. 

2 The Maruts watch the man who sings their praises, 

promoters of the thought of him who worships. 
Seat you on sacred grass in our assembly, this day, 
with friendly minds, to share the banquet. 

3 No others gleam so brightly as these Maruts with 

their own forms, their golden gauds, their weapons. 
With all adornments, decking earth and heaven, they 
heighten, for bright show, their common splendour. 


24 The lord divine : literally, the Asura. We may cross the waters : 
the Maruts are besought to favour an expedition for the acquisition 
of new settlements on the farther side of a river. 

The metre is Trishtup. 

1 Ye holy : according to Sayana, the Maruts are addressed; but it is 
difficult to understand how this can be. The Marut host: n&nia 
Mdrutam: the Marut name, i. e. thoso who are called Maruts. 




74 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VJJ. 


4 Far from us be your blazing dart, 0 Maruts, when 

we, through human-frailty, sin against you. 

Let us not be exposed to that, ye holy ! May your 
most loving favour still attend us. 

5 May even what we have done delight the Maruts, 

the blameless ones, the bright, the purifying. 
Further us, O ye holy, with your kindness : advance 
us mightily so that we may prosper. 

6 And may the Maruts, praised by all their titles, 

heroes, enjoy the taste of our oblations. 

Give us of Amrit for the sake of offspring : awake 
the excellent fair stores of riches. 

7 Hither, ye Maruts, praised, with all your succours, 

with all felicity come to our princes 
Who, of themselves, a hundredfold increase us. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LVIII. Maruts. 

Sing to the troop that pours down rain in common, 
the mighty company of celestial nature. 

They make the world-halves tremble with their 
greatness: from depths of earth and sky they 
reach to heaven. 


6 Give ms of Amrit: the secret essenoo which pervades the world 
and nourishes and sustains all must naturally also be the element 
that promotes reproduction.—L. Professor Roth explains the passage 
differently: “Add us to (the number of) the people of eternity, i. e. 
to the blessed." “Vouchsafe our children long life.”—Grassmann. 
“Bestow water upon our progeny."—Wilson. 

The metre is Trishtup. 

1 From depths of earth and shy : nirriti here is said to be synony¬ 
mous with bhdmi, earth, and avansa, the unsupported, with antarik- 
sha, firmament. But nirriti , Death, Destruction, as identified with 
bhtlmi, may be tho Prithivi of the atmosphere (see V. 84.), which 
must originally have been considered to be the place of departed 
spirits. 



HYMN 59 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


75 


2 Yea, your birth, Maruts, was with wild commotion, 

ye who move swiftly, fierce in wrath, terrific. 

Ye all-surpassing in your might and vigour, each 
looker on the light fears at your coming. 

3 Give ample vital power unto our princes: let our 

fair praises gratify the Maruts. 

As the way travelled helpeth people onward, so 
further us with your delightful succours. 

4 Your favoured singer counts his wealth by hundreds : 

the strong steed whom ye favour wins a thousand. 
The sovran whom ye aid destroys the foeman. May 
this your gift, ye shakers, be distinguished. 

5 I call, as such, the sons of bounteous Rudra : will 

not the Maruts turn again to us-ward ? 

What secret sin or open stirs their anger, that we 
implore the swift ones to forgive us. 

6 This eulogy of the mighty hath been spoken : accept, 

ye Maruts, this our hymn of praises. 

Ye Bulls, keep those who hate us at a distance. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LIX. Maruts. 

Whomso ye rescue here and there, whomso ye guide, 
0 deities, 

To him give shelter, Agni, Mitra, Varuna, ye 
Maruts, and thou Aryaman. 

2 Through your kind favour, gods, on some auspicious 
day, the worshipper subdues his foes. 

That man extends his home and multiplies ample 
food who brings you offerings as ye list. 


2 Each looker on the light: visvah svardrik: according to Sayana, 
every tree. 

The metre in stanzas 1—6 is Brihati and Satobribati alternately; 
in 7 and 8 Trishtup; in 9, 10, 11 G&yatri, and in 12 Pankti. 



76 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIJ. 

3 Vasishtha will not overlook the lowliest one among 

you all. 

0 Maruts, of our Soma-juiee effused to-day drink 
all of you with eager haste. 

4 Your succour in the battle injures not the man to 

whom ye, heroes, grant your gifts. 

May your most recent favour turn to us again. 
Come hither quickly, fain to drink. 

5 Come hitherward to drink the juice, 0 ye whose 

bounties give you joy. 

These offerings are for you, these, Maruts, I present. 
Go not to any place but this. 

6 Sit on our sacred grass, be graciously inclined to 

give the wealth for which we long, 

To take delight, ye Maruts, friends of all, with 
Svaha, in sweet Soma-juice. 

7 Decking the beauty of their forms in secret the 

swans with purple backs have flown down hither. 
Around me all the company hath settled, like joyous 
heroes glad in our libation. 

8 Maruts, the man whose wrath is hard to master, he 

who would slay us ere we think, O Vasus, 

May he be tangled in the toils of mischief: smite ye 
him down with your most flaming weapon. 

9 O Maruts, ye consuming gods, enjoy this offering 

brought for you, 

To help us, ye who slay the foe. 


4 Injures not: a litotes for, is of the greatest advantage to. 

5 Whose bounties give you joy : or follow each other closely, and are 
ever frosh and ready. 

6 SvAhd : an exclamation, like Ave ! or Hail! used in making obla¬ 
tions to the gods. 

7 With purple backs : nilapris/Uhdh : cf. Horace’s purpurei olores. 

8 Mischief: or one of the malicious spirits called JDruhs. 



H¥MN 60 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


77 


10 Sharers of household sacrifice, come, Maruts, stay 

not far away, 

That ye may help us, bounteous ones. 

11 Here, self-strong Maruts, yea, even here, sages 

whose skin is like the Sun’s ! 

I dedicate your sacrifice. 

12 Tryambaka we worship, sweet augmenter of prosperity. 
As from its stem the cucumber, so may I be released 

from death, not reft of immortality. 

HYMN LX. Mitra-Varuna. 

When thou, 0 Sun, this day, arising sinless, shalt 
speak the truth to Varuna and Mitra, 

O Aditi, may all the deities love us, and thou, 0 
Aryaman, while we are singing. 

2 Eyed like a man, 0 Varuna and Mitra, this Sun 
ascendeth up by both the pathways, 

Guardian of all things fixt, of all that moveth, be¬ 
holding good and evil acts of mortals. 


11 Whose skin is like the Sun's : sAryavarndh, coloured like the Sun, 
is Sayana's explanation : ‘ glorious as the sun.’— Wilson. 

12 Tryambaka: a name of Rudra. Sweet: according to Saynna, 
sugandkim, sweet-smelling, means here, ‘whose fame is fragrant.’ 
“The verse oocurs in the Yajur- Veda, 6, 30, and is, in some instances, 
differently interpreted ; Tryambaka is termed netratrayopetam Rudram, 
the triocular Rudra : sugandhim , divyagandhopetam, of celestial frag¬ 
rance : the urvdruka is said to mean the karkandhu [fruit of the 
jujube-tree], which, when ripe, falls of itself from its stalk.”—Wilson. 

The hymn is addressed chiefly to Mitra and Varuna, but Sfirya or 
the Sun is the deity of the first stanza. The metre is Trishtup. 

1 Sinless: Sayana makes andgdh = andgasah: “declare the truth... 
that we are void of sin.”—Wilson. But this seems forced, and the 
implied meaning of the poet is clear enough if the word is taken 
in its usual signification. 

2 Both the pathways : near the earth and high in the firmament. 




78 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK vn. 


3 He from their home hath yoked the seven gold 

coursers who, dropping oil and fatness, carry Surya. 
Yours, Varuna and Mitra, he surve_yeth the worlds 
and living creatures like a herdsman. 

4 Your coursers rich in store of sweets have mounted : 

to the bright ocean Sdrya hath ascended, 

For whom the Adityas make his pathway ready, 
Aryaman, Mitra, Varuna, accordant. 

5 For these, even Aryaman, Varuna, and Mitra, are 

the chastisers of all guile and falsehood. 

These, Aditi’s sons, infallible and mighty, have 
waxen in the home of law eternal. 

6 These, Mitra, Varuna, whom none deceiveth, with 

great power quicken even the fool to wisdom, 

And, wakening, moreover, thoughtful insight, lead 
it by easy paths o’er grief and trouble. 

7 They ever vigilant, with eyes that close not, caring 

for heaven and earth, lead on the thoughtless. 
Even in the river’s bed there is a shallow ; across 
this broad expanse may they conduct us. 

8 When Aditi and Varuna and Mitra, like guardians, 

give Sudds their friendly shelter, 

Granting him sons and lineal succession, let us not, 
bold ones I move the gods to anger. 

9 May he with offerings purify the altar from any 

stains of Varuna’s reviler. 

Aryaman save us from all those who hate us : give 
room and freedom to Sudds, ye mighty. 


6 Mitra , Varuna: and Aryaman, understood: the verbs are in 
the plural. 

8 Bold ones: the warning is addressed to the people of Sudas, 
who has beeu frequently mentioned in preceding hymns. 

9 May he: Agni may be intended. Varuna’s reviler: those who 
speak evil of princes, like Sudas, Varuna being the king’s proto¬ 
type.—L. 



HYMN 61.] THE RIG VEDA. 79 

10 Hid from our eyes is their resplendent meeting : by 

their mysterious might they hold dominion. 

O steers, we cry trembling in fear before you, even 
in the greatness of your power have mercy. 

11 He who wins favour for his prayer by worship, that 

he may gain him strength and highest riches, 

That good man’s mind the mighty ones will follow : 
they have brought comfort to his spacious dwelling. 

12 This priestly task, gods! Varuna and Mitral hath 

been performed fur you at sacrifices. 

Convey us safely over every peril. Preserve us ever¬ 
more, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXI. Mitra-Varuna. 

O Varuna and Mitra, Stirya spreading the beautiful 
light of you twain gods ariseth. 

He who beholdeth all existing creatures observeth 
well the zeal that is in mortals. 

2 The holy sage, renowned afar, directeth his hymns 

to you, O Varuna and Mitra,—• 

He whose devotions, sapient gods, ye favour so that 
ye fill, as ’twere, with power his autumns. 

3 From the wide earth, O Varuna and Mitra, from the 

great lofty heaven, ye, bounteous givers, 

Have set in fields amid the plants your warders who 
visit every spot and watch unceasing. 

4 I praise the strength of Varuna and Mitra: that 

strength, by mightiness, keeps both worlds asunder. 
Heroless pass the months of the ungodly : he who 
loves sacrifice makes his home enduring. 

10 Their resplendent meeting: that of Mitra, Varuna, aud Aryaman. 

11 Have brought comfort to his spacious dwelling: “bestow a 
spacious mansion for a dwelling upon him.”—Wilson. 

The metre is Trishtup. 

2 Autumns: years of his lifo. 



80 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Vll. 

5 Steers, all infallible are these your people in whom 

no wondrous thing is seen, no worship. 

Guile follows close the men who are untruthful: no 
secrets may be hidden from your knowledge. 

6 I will exalt your sacrifice with homage : as priest, I, 

Mitra Varuna, invoke you. 

May these new hymns and prayers that I have 
fashioned delight you to the profit of the singer. 

7 This priestly task, gods ! Varuna and Mitra ! hath 

been performed for you at sacrifices. 

Convey us safely over every peril. Preserve us ever¬ 
more, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXII. Mitra-Varnna. 

SOrya hath sent aloft his beams of splendour o’er all 
the tribes of men in countless places. 

Together with the heaven he shines apparent, formed 
by his makers well with power and wisdom. 

2 So hast thou mounted up before us, Sfirya, through 
these our praises, with fleet dappled horses. 
Declare us free from all offence to Mitra, and Varuna, 
and Aryaman, and Agni. 


5 This stanza is difficult. SSyana’s interpretation as given by 
Professor Wilson is: “ Unperplexed, all-pervading showerers (of 
benefits), these praises are for yon, in which nothing surprising, no 
adoration (worthy of you), is beheld : the insincere commendations 
of men serve as offences: eulogies of you, although offered in secret 
are not unappreciated.” The version of the Seventy Hymns is some¬ 
what as follows: “All your avenging spirits, 0 ye mighty, follow 
unerringly the sinner’s traces. They have no sigu that men may 
mark, no figure. Naught is so secret that ye fail to know it.” This 
latter involves a slight alteration of the text. I prefer Professor 
Ludwig’s interpretation, although it is not absolutely convincing. 

6 To the profit of the singer: see Vedische Stvdien, I., 43. 


Tbo metre is Trishtup. 



THE RIG VEDA. 


HYMN 63 .] 


01 


3 May holy Agni, Varupa, and Mitra send down their 

riches upon us in thousands. 

May they, the bright ones, make our praise-song per¬ 
fect, and, when we laud them,grant us all our wishes. 

4 0 undivided Heaven and Earth, preserve us, us, 

lofty ones ! your nobly-born descendants. 

Let us not anger Varuna, nor V&yu, nor him, the 
dearest friend of mortals, Mitra. 

5 Stretch forth your arms and let our lives be lengthen¬ 

ed : with fatness dew the pastures of our cattle. 

Ye youthful, make us famed among the people: hear, 
Mitra, Varuna, these mine invocations. 

6 Now Mitra, Varuna, Aryaman vouchsafe us freedom 

and room, for us and for our children. 

May -we find paths all fair and good to travel. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXIII. Mitra-Varuna. 

Common to all mankind, auspicious Sftrya, he who 
beholdeth all, is mounting upward; 

The god, the eye of Varuna and Mitra, who rolleth 
up the darkness as ’twere leather. 

2 Surya’s great ensign, restless as the billow, that 

urgeth men to action, is advancing; 

Onward he still would roll the wheel well-rounded, 
which Etasa harnessed to the car-pole moveth, 

3 Refulgent from the bosom of the Mornings, he in 

whom singers take delight ascendeth. 

This Savitar, god, is my chief joy and pleasure, who 
breaketh not the universal statute. 


The metre is Trishtup. Sdrya is the deity of stansas 1—4 and of 
half of 5. 

2 Etasa : or, the bright or dappled steed; one of the horses of 
the Sun. 

Breaketh not: faithfully observes and supports. 

6 



82 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII. 

4 Golden, far-seeing, from the heaven he riseth: far is 

his goal, he hasteth on resplendent. 

Men, verily, inspirited by Shrya speed to their aims 
and do the work assigned them. 

5 Where the immortals have prepared his pathway 

he flieth through the region like a falcon. 

With homage and oblations will we serve you, O 
Mitra Varuna, when the Sun hath risen. 

6 Now Mitra, Varuna, Aryaman vouchsafe us freedom 

and room, for us and for our children. 

May we find paths all fair and good to travel. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXIV. Mitra-Varuna. 

Ye twain who rule, in heaven and earth, the region, 
clothed be your clouds in robes of oil and fatness. 
May the imperial Varuna, and Mitra, and high-born 
Aryaman accept our presents. 

2 Kings, guards of mighty everlasting Order, come 

hitherward, ye princes, lords of rivers. 

Send us from heaven, 0 Varuna and Mitra, rain 
and sweet food, ye who pour down your bounties. 

3 May the dear god, and Varuna, and Mitra conduct 

us by the most effective pathways, 

That foes may say unto Sudas our chieftain, May we, 
too, joy in food with gods to guard us. 


The metre is Trishtup. 

1 Clothed be your clouds : “ A covering cloud of sacred oil attends 
you.”—Book V. 62. 4. “Impelled by you, (the clouds) assume the 
form of rain.”—Wilson. 

3 The second half of the stanza is obscure. The meaning appears 
to be that even our foes, the godless who offer no sacrifices, shall 
envy the prosperity which we enjoy through the liberality of Sudas, 
and shall wish to follow our example, to sacrifice to the gods and to 
enjoy their protection and the blessings which they send. 



HYMN 65 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


83 


4 Him who hath wrought for you this car in spirit, 

who makes the song rise upward and sustains it, 
Bedew with fatness, Varuna and Mitra: ye kings, 
make glad the pleasant dwelling-places. 

5 To you this laud, O Varuna and Mitra, is offered 

like bright Soma-juice to Vayu. 

Favour our songs of praise, wake up abundance. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXV. Mitra-Varuna. 

With hymns T call you, when the Sun hath risen, 
Mitra, and Varuna whose thoughts are holy, 
Whose power divine, supreme and everlasting, comes 
with good heed at each man’s supplication. 

2 They are gods’ Asuras, they are the friendly : may 

the twain make our lands exceeding fruitful. 

May we obtain you, Varuna and Mitra, wherever 
heaven and earth and days may bless us. 

3 Bonds of the sinner, they bear many nooses : the 

wicked mortal hardly may escape them. 

Varuna, Mitra, may your path of Order bear us o’er 
trouble as a boat o’er waters. 

4 Come, taste our offering, Varuna and Mitra: bedew 

our pasture with sweet food and fatness. 


4 This car : this carefully-formed hymn which goes, like a chariot, 
to the gods. 

5 To Vdyu: who receives the first draught of Soma-juice at the 
morning libation. 

The metre is Trishtup. 

1 Power divine: asuryam: Asurahood. Whose: refers to Mitra and 
Varuna. 

2 Gods’ Asuras: the high or ruling gods of all the deities. 

3 Bonds : binders. Many nooses: '■ Your guiles, ye holy ones, to 
quell oppressors, your snares spread out against the foe, Adityas,”— 
Book II. 27. 16. 



8 * THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK VIJ. 

Pour down in plenty here upon the people the 
choicest of your fair celestial water. 

5 To you this laud, O Varuna and Mitra, is offered, 
like bright Soma-juice to Vayu. 

Favour our songs of praise, wake up abundance. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXVI. Mitra-Varnna. 

Let our strong hymn of praise go forth, the laud of 
Mitra Varuna, 

With homage to that high-born pair. 

2 The two endowed with noble strength, whom Daksha’s 

sons, the gods, ordained 
For lordship, excellently great. 

3 Such, guardians of out homes and us, O Mitra, 

Varuna, fulfil 

The thoughts of them who sing your praise. 

4 So when the Sun hath risen to-day, may sinless Mitra, 

Aryaman, 

Bhaga, and Savitar, send us forth. 

5 May this our home be guarded well: forward, ye 

bounteous, on the way, 

Who bear us safely o’er distress. 

6 And those self-reigning, Aditi, whose statute is in¬ 

violate, 

The kings who rule a vast domain. 


Mitra and Varuna are the deities of stanzas 1—3 and 17 19, the 

Adityas of 4—13, and Surya of 14—16. The metre is Brihati and 
Satobrihatl alternately in 10—15, Puraushnih in 16; and Uayatn 
in the rest. 

2 Daksha's sons : see VI. 50. 2. 

For lordship: literally, for Asurahood. 

4 Sinless : Sayana here, as in VII. 60. 1, takes and<j<th as - andgamh, 
so that, according to his interpretation the translation would be : 
■ may Savitar, Mitra, Aryaman, and Bhaga send ns sinless forth. 

6 Aditi: is out of place here, as there is no copulative ia the text: 
whose mother is Aditi, seems to be intended. 



HYMN 66 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


85 


7 Soon as the Sun hath risen, to you, to Mitra Varuna, 

I si nor, 

And Aryaman who slays the foe. 

8 With wealth of gold may this my song bring un¬ 

molested power and might, 

And, Brahmans, gain the sacrifice. 

9 May we be thine, god Varuna, and with our princes, 

Mitra, thine : 

Food and. heaven’s light will we obtain. 

10 Many are they who strengthen Law, sun-eyed, with 
Agni for their tongue, 

They who direct the three great gatherings with their 
thoughts, yea, all things with surpassing might. 

11 They who have stablished year and month and then 
the day, night, sacrifice and holy song, 

Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, the kings,, have won do¬ 
minion which none else may gain. 

12 So at the rising of the Sun we think of you with 

hymns to-day, 

Even as Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman deserve: ye are 
the charioteers of Law. 

13 True to Law, born in Law, the strengthened of 

Law, terrible, haters of the false, 

In their felicity which gives the best defence may 
we men and our princes dwell. 


8 And', Biahmans, gain the sacrifice : the exact meaning is uncertain : 
“ May it (be effective), sages, for the fulfilment of (the objects of) the 
sacrifice.”;—Wilson. 

10 The three great gatherings: or throe assemblies. The meaning 
is not clear. Professor Ludwig is of opinion that the three oastes are 
intended. 

11 Holy song : richam : the 1 Rich' [t. e. Rigveda verse],—Muir. 
The meaning of stanzas 10 and 11 is that although there be many 

deities Varuna, Mitra, and A-iyaman are supreme. 




86 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII. 

14 Uprises, on the slope of heaven, that marvel that 

attracts the sight, 

As swift celestial Etasa bears it away, prepared for 
every eye to see. 

15 Lord of each single head, of fixt and moving things, 

equally through the whole expanse, 

The seven sister bays bear Sftrya on his car, to bring 
us wealth and happiness. 

16 A hundred autumns may we see that bright eye, 

god-ordained, arise: 

A hundred autumns may we live. 

17 Infallible through your wisdom, come hither, re¬ 

splendent Varuna, 

And Mitra, to the Soma draught. 

18 Come as the laws of heaven ordain, Varuna, Mitra, 

void of guile: 

Press near and drink the Soma-juice. 

19 Come, Mitra, Varuna, accept, heroes, our sacrificial 

gift: 

Drink Soma, ye who strengthen Law, 

HYMN LXVII. Asvins. 

I with a holy heart that brings oblation will smg 
forth praise to meet your car, ye Princes, 

Which, much-desired ! hath wakened as your envoy. 
I call you hither as a son his parents. 

2 Brightly hath Agni shone by us enkindled: the 
limits even of darkness were apparent. 

Eastward is seen the banner of the Morning, the 
banner born to give Heaven’s daughter glory. 


18 Come as the laws of heaven ordain : ‘ Come with your glories 
from the sky.’—Sayana. ‘Como hither with the hosts of heaven.’— 
Grassmann. 

The metre is Trishtup. 

1 Muck-desired : ‘ adorable.’—Wilson. 




RYMN 67 .] 


THE RIOVEDA. 


87 


3 With hymns the deft priest is about you, Asvins, 

the eloquent priest attends you now, N&satyas. 
Come by the paths that ye are wont to travel, 
on car that finds the light, laden with treasure. 

4 When, suppliant for your help, lovers of sweetness ! 

I seeking wealth call you to our libation, 
Hitherward let your vigorous horses bear you: drink 
ye with us the well-pressed Soma-juices. 

5 Bring forward, Asvins, gods, to its fulfilment my 

never-wearied prayer that asks for riches. 
Vouchsafe us all abundance in the combat, and with 
your powers, 0 lords of power, assist us. 

6 Favour us in these prayers of ours, O Asvins. May 

we have genial vigour, ne’er to fail us. 

So may we, strong in children and descendants, go, 
wealthy, where the gods and ye are feasted. 

7 Lovers of sweetness, we have brought this treasure 

to you as ’twere an envoy sent for friendship. 

Come unto us with spirits free from anger, in homes 
of men enjoying our oblation. 

8 With one, the same, intention, ye swift movers, o’er 

the seven rivers hath your chariot travelled. 

Yoked by the gods, your strong steeds never weary 
while speeding forward at the pole they bear you. 

9 Exhaustless be your bounty to our princes who with 

their wealth incite the gift of riches, 

Who further friendship with their noble natures, 
combining wealth in kine with wealth in horses. 

10 Now hear, 0 youthful twain, mine invocation : come, 
Asvins, to the home where food aboundeth. 
Vouchsafe us wealth, do honour to our nobles. Pre¬ 
serve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 


9 Incite the gift of riches: move the gods to give riches in roturo. 
Friendship : or, a kinsman, meaning, apparently, the priest. 




88 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VII. 


HYMN LXVIII. Asvins. 

Come, radiant Asvins, with your noble horses : accept 
your servant’s hymns, ye wonder-workers : 

Enjoy oblations which we bring to greet you. 

2 The gladdening juices stand prepared before you: 

come quickly and partake of mine oblation. 

Pass by the calling of our foe and hear us. 

3 Your chariot with a hundred aids, O Asvins, beareth 

you swift as thought across the regions, 

Speeding to us, 0 ye whose wealth is Sfiryd. 

4 What time this stone of yours, the gods’ adorer, 

upraised, sounds forth for you as Soma-presser, 
Let the priest bring you, fair ones, through oblations. 

5 The nourishment ye have is, verily, wondrous: ye 

gave thereof a quickening store to Atri, 

Who, being dear to you, receives your favour. 

6 That gift, which all may gain, ye gave Chyavana, 

when he grew old, who offered you oblations, 
When ye bestowed on him enduring beauty. 


The metre is Viraj in stanzas 1—7, and Trishtup in 8 and 9. 

3 Whose wealth, is SAryd: having Surya for your possession or 
treasure. Surya, the daughter of the Sun, is the consort of the Asvins. 
See Vol. I., Index. 

4 The gods’ adorer : devay&h : literally, turning or going to the 
gods, iuasmuch as it is employed in preparing the Soma-juice. The 
priest : here, perhaps, the pressing-stone. 

5 A quickening store : the meaning of mahishvantam, which does 
not occur elsewhere, is uncertain. According to Sayana it means a 
pit or cavern: ye liberated Atri from the cavern, or, literally, ya 
separated the cavern from Atri. For the legend, see I. 116. 12. 

6 Which all may gain : which you Asvins are ready to grant to 
every worshipper who needs it. For the story of Chyavana see Vol. 
I., Iudex. 



KYMN 69.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


8D 


7 What time his wicked friends abandoned Bhujyu, 

O Asvins, in the middle of the ocean, 

Your horse delivered him, your faithful servant. 

8 Ye lent your aid to Vrika when exhausted, and 

listened when invoked to Sayu’s calling. 

Ye made the cow pour forth her milk like water, and, 
Asvins, strengthened with your strength the barren. 

9 With his fair hymns this singer, too, extols you, 

waking with glad thoughts at the break of morning. 
May the cow nourish him with milk to feed him. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXIX. Asvins. 

May your gold chariot, drawn by vigorous horses, 
come to us, blocking up the earth and heaven, 
Bright with its fellies while its way drops fatness, 
food-laden, rich in coursers, man’s protector. 

2 Let it approach, yoked by the will, three-seated, ex¬ 

tending far and wide o’er fivefold beings, 

Whereon ye visit god-adoring races, bending your 
course whither ye will, 0 Asvins. 

3 Renowned, with noble horses, come ye hither: drink, 

wondrous pair, the cup that holds sweet juices. 


7 Bhujyu: see Vol. I., Index. Your horse: this meaning is sug¬ 
gested by Professor Roth for the uncertain word ardvd, which generally 
appears to mean hostile or illiberal but may perhaps stand in this 
passage for arvd, a common word signifying horse. So I. 117. 14 :— 
With horses brown of hue that flew with swift wings ye brought back 
Bhujyu from the sea of billows. See also VII. 69. 7. 

8 Vrika : literally wolf, or robber. Some man so named seoms to 
be meant. Sayu: see Vol. I., Index. 

9 This singer : the Rishi Vasishtha. The cow : that is brought 
to supply the milk that is required for libations. 

The metre is Trishtup. 

2 Fivefold beings : sarvaprdninah, all living beings, says Sayana, 



90 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VII. 


Your car whereon your spouse is wont to travel 
marks with its track the farthest ends of heaven.' 

4 When night was turning to the grey of morning the 

maiden, Sdrya’s daughter, chose your splendour. 
When with your power and might ye aid the pious 
he comes through heat to life by your assistance. 

5 0 chariot-borne, this car of yours invested with rays 

of light comes harnessed to our dwelling. 
Herewith, O Asvins, while the dawn is breaking, to 
this our sacrifice bring peace and blessing. 

6 Like the wild cattle thirsty for the lightning, heroes, 

come nigh this day to our libations. 

Men call on you with hymns in many places, but let 
not other worshippers detain you. 

7 Bhujyu, abandoned in the midst of ocean, ye raised 

from out the water with your horses 
Uninjured, winged, flagging not, undaunted, with 
deeds of wonder saving him, O Asvins. 

8 Now hear, O youthful twain, mine invocation : come, 

Asvins, to the home where food aboundeth. 
Vouchsafe us wealth, do honour to our nobles. Pre¬ 
serve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXX. Asvins. 

Rich in all blessings, Asvins, come ye hither : this 
place on earth is called your own possession. 

Like a strong horse with a fair back it standeth, 
whereon, as in a lap, ye seat you firmly. 

3 Your spouse : S&rya, daughter of the Sun. 

4 Chose your splendour : see I. 116. 17. 

6 Thirsty for the lightning: which immediately preoedes, or ac¬ 
companies, the rain they long for. 

7 Horses: not in the text, but supplied by Sayana and obviously 
understood. See Vol. I., Index, under Bhujyu. 

The metre is Trishtup. 

1 This place: the altar. 



HYMN 71.] THE RIGVEDA. 91 

2 This most delightful eulogy awaits you : in the 

man’s house drink-offering hath been heated, 
Which bringeth you over the seas and rivers, yoking 
as ’twere two well-matched shining horses. 

3 Whatever dwellings ye posses, 0 Asvins, in fields of 

men or in the streams of heaven, 

Resting upon the summit of the mountain, or bringing 
food to him who gives oblation, 

4 Delight yourselves, ye gods, in plants and waters 

when Rishis give them and ye find they suit you. 
Enriching us with treasures in abundance ye have 
looked back to former generations. 

5 Asvins, though ye have heard them oft aforetime, 

regard the many prayers which Rishis offer. 

Come to the man even as his heart desireth : may 
we enjoy your most delightful favour. 

6 Come to the sacrifice offered you, Nasatyas, with 

men, oblations, and prayer duly uttered. 

Come to Vasishtha as his heart desi*eth, for unto 
you these holy hymns are chanted. 

7 This is the thought, this is the song, O Asvins : 

accept this hymn of ours, ye steers, with favour. 
May these our prayers addressed to you come nigh 
you. Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXXI. Asvins. 

The Night retireth from the Dawn her sister; the 
Dark one yieldeth to the Red her pathway. 

Let us invoke you rich in steeds and cattle : by day 
and night keep far from us the arrow. 

2 Drink-offering: gharma: the libation of hot milk; or, the 
caldron in which it is prepared. 

4 Ye have looked hack to former generations: Sayataa explains yugdni 
differently : “(favour us) as you have favoured former couples [i. e. 
sacrificers and their wives].”—Wilson. 

5 The man : the institutor of the sacrifice. 


The metro is Trishtup. 

1 The Red: the Sun. The arrow : of disease and death. 




92 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V4I. 

2 Bearing rich treasure in your car, 0 Asvins, come 

to the mortal who presents oblation. 

Keep at a distance penury and sickness; lovers of 
sweetness, day and night preserve us. 

3 May your strong horses, seeking bliss, bring hither 

your chariot at the earliest flush of morning. 

With coursers yoked by Law drive hither, Asvins, 
your car whose reins are light, laden with treasure. 

4 The chariot, Princes, that conveys you, moving at 

daylight, triple-seated, fraught with riches, 

Even with this come unto us, N&satyas, that laden 
with all food it may approach us. 

5 Ye freed Chyavana from old age and weakness : ye 

brought the courser fleet of toot to Pedu. 

Ye rescued Atri from distress and darkness, and 
loosed for Jahusha the bonds that bound him. 

6 This is the thought, this is the song, O Asvins : ac¬ 

cept this hymn of ours, ye steers, with favour. 

May these our prayers addressed to you come nigh 
you. Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXXII. A ? vi„ 3 . 

Come, O N&satyas, on your car resplendent, rich in 
abundant wealth of kine and horses. 

As harnessed steeds, all our laudations follow you 
whose forms shine with most delightful beauty. 

2 Come with the gods associate, come ye hither to us, 

N&satyas, with your car accordant. 

’Twixt you and us there is ancestral friendship and 
common kin : remember and regard it. 

3 Awakened are the songs that praise the Asvins, the 

kindred prayers and the celestial Mornings. 

Inviting those we long for, Earth and Heaven, the 
singer calleth these N&satyas hither. 

3 Seeking bliss : for men. 

5 For Chyav&na , Pedu , Atri, and Jithusha, see Vol. I., Index. 

The metre is Trishtup, 



HYMN 73.] 


THE R1GVEDA. 


93 


4 What time the Dawns break forth in light, 0 Asvins, 

to you the poets offer their devotions. 

God Savitar hath sent aloft his splendour, and fires 
sing praises with the kindled fuel. 

5 Come from the west, come from the east, N&satyas, 

come, Asvins, from below and from above us. 
Bring wealth from all sides for the fivefold people. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN' LXXIII. Aevins. 

We have o’erpassed the limit of this darkness while, 
worshipping the gods, we sang their praises. 

The song invoketh both immortal Asvins, far-reach¬ 
ing, born of old, great wonder-workers. 

2 And, O Nasatyas, man’s dear priest is seated, who 

brings to sacrifice and offers worship. 

Be near and taste the pleasant juice, 0 Asvins : with 
food, I call you to the sacrifices. 

3 Choosing you, we have let the sacrifice follow its 

course: ye steers, accept this hymn with favour. 
Obeying you as your appointed servant, Vasishtha 
singing hath with lauds aroused you. 

4 And these two priests come nigh unto our people, 

united, demon-slayers, mighty-handed. 

The juices that exhilarate are mingled. Injure us 
not, but come with happy fortune. 

5 Come from the west, come from the east, Nasatyas, 

come, Asvins, from below and from above us. 
Bring wealth from all sides for the fivefold people. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

5 The, fivefold people: the five Aryan tribes, bee I. 7. 9. - 
The metre is Trishtnp. 

1 The first half-line has occurred licforc in I. 92. 6, and 183. 6. 

2 Man’s dear priest: Agni. 

4 These two priests: the Asvins. Demon-slayers: slayers of Rak- 
shasas and evil spirits of the night which disappear at the coming of 
the heralds of day. 



94 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII. 

HYMN LXXIV Asvins. 

These morning sacrifices call you, Asvins, at the 
break of day. 

For help have I invoked you rich in power and 
might: for, house by house, ye visit all. 

2 0 heroes, ye bestow wonderful nourishment: send it 

to him whose songs are sweet. 

Accordant, both of you, drive your car down to us, 
and drink the savoury Soma-juice. 

3 Approach ye and be near to us: drink, O ye Asvins, 

of the meath. 

Draw forth the milk, ye mighty, rich in genuine 
wealth : injure us not, and come to us. 

4 The horses that convey you in their rapid flight 

down to the worshipper’s abode, 

With these your speedy coursers, heroes, Asvins, 
come, ye gods, come well-inclined to us. 

5 Yea, verily, our princes seek the Asvins in pursuit 

of food. 

They shall give lasting glory to our liberal lords, 
and, O Nasatyas, shelter us. 

6 Those who have led the way, like cars, offending 

none, those who are guardians of the men : 

Also through their own might the heroes have 
grown strong, and dwell in safe and happy homes. 


The metre is Brihati in stanzas 1—3 and 5, and Satobrihatl in 4 
and 6. 

3 Draw forth the milk: milk the sweet rain from the firmament. 

6 Who have led the way , like cars : ‘ who repair to you, like waggons 
(to the farm).'—Wilsou. 



HYMN 75.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


95 


HYMN LXXV. Dawn. 

Born in the heavens the Dawn hath flushed, and 
showing her majesty is come as Law ordaineth. 

She hath uncovered fiends and hateful darkness: best 
of Angirasas, she hath waked the pathways. 

2 Rouse us this day to high and happy fortune: to 

great felicity, O Dawn, promote us. 

Vouchsafe us manifold and splendid riches, famed 
among mortals, man-befriending goddess ! 

3 See, lovely Morning’s everlasting splendours, bright 

with their varied colours, have approached us, 
Filling the region of mid-air, producing the rites of 
holy worship, they have mounted. 

4 She yokes her chariot far away, and swiftly visits 

the lands where the five tribes are settled, 

Looking upon the works and ways of mortals, 
daughter of Heaven, the world’s imperial lady. 

5 She who is rich in mares, the spouse of Svtrya, 

wondrously opulent, rules all wealth and treasures. 
Consumer of our youth, the seers extol her: lauded 
by priests rich Dawn shines out refulgent. 

6 Apparent are the steeds of varied colour, the red 

steeds carrying resplendent Morning. 

On her all-lovely car she comes, the fair one, and 
brings rich treasure for her faithful servant. 

7 True with the true and mighty with the mighty, 

with gods a goddess, holy with the holy, 

She brake strong fences down and gave the cattle : 
the kine were lowing as they greeted Morning. 


The metre is Trishtup. 

1 Best of Angirasas: endowed with the noblest characteristics of 
the holy Angirasas. Waked the pathways : lighted them for men to 
use. 

7 Gave the cattle : restored the rays of light that had been impri¬ 
soned by the demons of darkness. 



THE HYMNS OF 


96 


[BOOK YU. 


8 0 Dawn, now give us wealth in kine and heroes, 
and horses, fraught with manifold enjoyment. 
Protect our sacred grass from man’s reproaches. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXXVI. Dawn. 

Savitar god of all men hath sent upward his light, 
designed for all mankind, immortal. 

Through the gods’ power that eye was first created. 
Dawn hath made all the universe apparent. 

2 I see the paths which gods are wont to travel, 

innocuous paths made ready by the Yasus. 
Eastward the flag of Dawn hath been uplifted; she 
hath come hither westward o’er the houses. 

3 Great is, in truth, the number of the Mornings 

which were aforetime at the Sun’s uprising, 

Since thou, O Dawn, hast been beheld repairing as 
to thy love, as one no more to leave him. 

4 They were the gods’ companions at the banquet, the 

ancient sages true to Law eternal. 

The Fathers found the light that lay in darkness, 
and with effectual words begat the Morning. 

5 Meeting together in the same enclosure, they strive 

not, of one mind, one with another. 

They never break the gods’ eternal statutes, and 
injure none, in rivalry with the Vasus. 

6 Extolling thee, blest goddess, the Vasishthas, awake 

at early morn, with lauds implore thee. 

Leader of kine and queen of all that strengthens, 
shine, come as first to us, O high-born Morning. 


The metre is Trishtup. 

3 As to thy love: to the Sun, who is sometimes called the lover 
and sometimes the husband of Ushas or Dawn. 

4 The Fathers: the ancestors of the Rislns in the spirit-world are 
associated with the gods as companions, friends, uud assistants. See 
Wallis, Cosmology of the Iligveda, pp. 66-75. 

5 In the same enclosure: the vast aerial hall in which the gods 
assemble. 



HYMN 77 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


97 


7 She bringeth bounty and sweet charm of voices. 
The flushing Dawn is sung by the Vasishthas, 
Giving us riches famed to distant places. Preserve 
us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXXVII. Dawn. 

She hath shone brightly like a youthful woman 
stirring to motion every living creature. 

Agni hath come to feed on mortals’ fuel. She hath 
made light and chased away the darkness. 

2 Turned to this All, far-spreading, she hath risen and 

shone in brightness with white robes about her. 

She hath beamed forth lovely with golden colours, 
mother of kine, guide of the days she bringeth. 

3 Bearing the gods’ own eye, auspicious lady, leading 

her courser white and fair to look on, 

Distinguished by her beams Dawn shines apparent, 
come forth tcrall the world with wondrous treasure. 

4 Draw nigh with wealth and dawn away the foeman : 

prepare for us wide pasture free from danger. 

Drive away those who hate us, bring us riches: 
pour bounty, opulent lady, on the singer. 

5 Send thy most excellent beams to shine and light us, 

giving us lengthened days, O Dawn, O goddess, 
Granting us food, thou who hast all things precious, 
and bounty rich in chariots, kine, and horses. 
f» O Ushas, nobly-born, daughter of Heaven, whom 
the Vasishthas with their hymns make mighty, 
Bestow thou on us vast and glorious riches. Preserve 
us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 


The metre is Trishtnp. 

1 Agni hath come to feed oh mortals’ fuel: “Agni is to be kindled 
for the good of men.”—Wilson. 

2 Kine : rays of light. 

3 The gods’ own eye, and Dawn’s while courser are the Sun. 



08 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK YU, 

HYMN LXXVIII. Dawn. 

We have beheld her earliest lights approaching; her 
many glories part, on high, asunder. 

On car sublime, refulgent, wending hither, 0 Ushas, 
bring the wealth that makes us happy. 

2 The fire well-kindled sings aloud to greet her, and 

with their hymns the priests are chanting Avelcome. 
Ushas approaches in her splendour, driving all evil 
darkness far away, the goddess. 

3 Apparent eastward are those lights of Morning, 

sending out lustre, as they rise, around them. 

She hath brought forth Stfn, sacrifice, and Agni, 
and far away hath fled detested darkness. 

4 Rich daughter of the Sky, we all behold her, yea, 

all men look on Dawn as she is breaking. 

Her car that moves self-harnessed hath she mounted, 
the car drawn onward by her well-yoked horses. 

5 Inspired with loving thoughts this day to greet thee, 

we and our wealthy nobles have awakened. 

Show yourselves fruitful, Dawns, as ye are rising. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXXIX. Dawn. 

Rousing the lands where men’s five tribes are settled. 
Dawn hath disclosed the pathways of the people. 
She hath sent out her sheen with beauteous oxen. 
The Sun with light hath opened earth and heaven. 


The metro is Trial)tup. 

Tho metre is Trishtup. 

1 Five tribes: of Aryans. Pathways: pathyl here has apparently 
the same meauing as in VII. 75. 1. Jitit according to the Pada text 
aud Sayaiju it is an adjective agreeing with Ush&K (Dawn), and signi¬ 
fying beneficial. 



HYMti 80 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


99 


2 They paint their bright rays on the sky’s far limits ; 

the Dawns come on like tribes arrayed for battle. 
Thy cattle, closely shutting up the darkness* as 
Savitar spreads his arms, give forth their lustre. 

3 Wealthy, most like to Indra, Dawn hath risen, and 

brought forth lauds that shall promote our welfare. 
Daughter of Heaven, a goddess, she distributes, 
best of Angirasas, treasures to the pious. 

4 Bestow on us, O Dawn, that ample bounty which 

thou didst send to those who sang thy praises ; 
Thou whom with bellovvings of a bull they quickened: 
thou didst unbar the firm-set mountain’s portals. 

6 Impelling every god to grant his bounty, sending to 
us the charm of pleasant voices, 

Vouchsafe us thoughts, for profit, as thou breakest. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXXX. Dawn. 

The priests, Vasisbthas, are the first awakened to 
welcome Usljas with their songs and praises, 

Who makes surrounding regions part asunder, and 
shows apparent all existing creatures. 

2 Giving fresh life when she hath hid the darkness, this 
Dawn hath wakened there with new-born lustre. 
Youthful and unrestrained she cometh forward : she 
hath turned thoughts to Sun and fire and worship. 


2 They: the Dawns. For battle: supplied by Sayana. 

3 Best of Angirasas: see VII. 75. 1. 

4 The second line is translated by Prof. Wilson: “thou whom (thy 
worshippers) welcomed with clamour (loud as the bellowing) o,f a bull.” 

Portals : the doors of the mountain in which the cows or rays of 
light were imprisoned. Ushas is by implication entreated to open 
these doors now for the singer of the hymn. 

The metre is Trishtup. 

2 She hath turned thoughts: or, with Sayana, she hath made mani¬ 
fest sacrifice, Sun, aud Agni. Compare VII. 78, 3. 



100 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOON VII. 


3 May blessed Mornings shine on us for ever, with 
wealth of kine, of horses, and of heroes, 

Streaming with all abundance, pouring fatness. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXXXI. Dawn. 

Advancing, sending forth her rays, the daughter of 
the Sky is seen. 

Uncovering, that we may see, the mighty gloom, the 
friendly lady makes the light. 

2 The Sun ascending, the refulgent star, pours down 

his beams together with the Dawn. 

O Dawn, at thine arising, and the Sun’s, may we 
attain the share allotted us. 

3 Promptly we woke to welcome thee, O Ushas, 

daughter of the Sky 

Thee, bounteous one, who bringest all we long to 
have, and to the offerer health and wealth. 

4 Thou, dawning, workest fain to light the great world, 

yea, heaven, goddess ! that it may be seen. 

We yearn to be thine own, dealer of wealth : may 
we be to this mother like her sons. 

5 Bring us that wondrous bounty, Dawn, that shall be 

famed most far away. 

What, child of Heaven, thou hast of nourishment 
for man, bestow thou on us to enjoy. 

■6 Give to our princes opulence and immortal fame, and 
strength in herds of kine to us. 

May she who prompts the wealthy, lady of sweet 
strains, may Ushas dawn our foes away. 

3 This stanza is repeated from VII. 41. 7. 

The metre is Brihati and Satobrihati in alternate stanzas. 

2 Star: nakshatram: usually a constellation, asterism or lunar 
mansion, aud in the plural, the stars in general. 

6 Lady of sweet strains : sunritdvali: according to Say ana, ‘ speaker 
of truth.’ ‘Possessing all that is excellent.’—Ludwig. 



HYMN 82 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


101 


HYMN LXXXII. Indra-Varuna. 

Grant us your strong protection, Indra Varuna, our 
people, and our family, for sacrifice. 

May we subdue in fight our evil-hearted foes, him 
who attacks the man stedfast in lengthened rites. 

2 0 Indra Varuna, mighty and very rich ! one of you 

is called monarch and one autocrat. 

All gods in the most lofty region of the air have, 
O ye steers, combined all power and might in you. 

3 Ye with your strength have pierced the fountains of 

the floods: the Sun have ye brought forward as the 
lord in heaven. 

Cheered by this magic draught ye, Indra Varuna, 
made the dry places stream, made songs of praise 
flow forth. 

4 In battles and in frays we ministering priests, kneel¬ 

ing upon our knees for furtherance of our weal, 
Invoke you, only you, the lords of twofold wealth, 
you prompt to hear, we bards, 0 Indra Varuna. 

5 O Indra Varuna, as ye created all these creatures of 

the world by your surpassing might, 

In peace and quiet Mitra waits on Varuna, the other, 
powerful, with the Maruts seeks renown. 

6 That Varuna’s high worth may shine preeminent, 

these twain have measured each his proper power 
and might. 

The one subdueth the destructive enemy ; the other 
with a few furthereth many a man. 

The metre ia Jagati. 

1 Strong protection: ‘ a spacious chamber.’—Wilson. 

2 One of you : Varuna is called samrdj or universal ruler (thoroughly 
resplendent, according to Sayana), and Indra svardj, independent 
ruler, or, according to Sayana, self-resplendent. 

4 Twofold wealth : celestial and terrestrial. 

5 Waits on Varum: and so acknowledges his supremacy. The 
Other: Indra, 

6 The one: Varuna. 



102 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VH. 

7 No trouble, no misfortune, Indra Varuna, no woe 

from any side assails the mortal man 
Whose sacrifice, O gods, ye visit and enjoy : ne’er 
doth the crafty guile of mortal injure him. 

8 With your divine protection, heroes, come to us : 

mine invocation hear, if ye be pleased therewith. 
Bestow ye upon us, O Indra Varuna, your friendship 
and your kinship and your favouring grace. 

9 In battle after battle, Indra, Varuna, be ye our 

champions, ye who are the peoples’ strength, 
When both opposing bands invoke you for the fight, 
and men that they may gain offspring and progeny, 
10 May Indra, Varuna, Mitra, and Aryaman vouchsafe 
us glory and great shelter spreading far. 

We think of the beneficent light of Aditi,and Savitar’s 
song of praise, the god who strengthens Law. 

HYMN LXXXIII. Indra-Varuna. 

Looking to you and your alliance, O ye Men, armed 
with broad axes they went forward, fain for spoil. 
Ye smote and slew his D&sa and his Aryan enemies, 
and helped Sudas with favour, Indra Varuna. 

2 Where heroes come together with their banners raised, 
in the encounter where is naught for us to love, 
Where all things that behold the light are terrified, 
there did ye comfort us, O Indra Varuna. 


The metre is Jagati. Indra and Varuna are praised by the Vasish- 
thas, the family priests of Sudas king; of the Tritsus. for having 
given him the viotory over the ten confederate kings. See VII. 33. 3. 

1 0 ye Men: or heroes; Indra and Varuna. Armed with broad 
axes: ‘armed with large sickles.’—Wilson. Professor Ludwig declares 
that the former moaning is perfectly impossible, and argues that 
prithuparsavah must mean ‘ the Prithus and the Tarsus.’ 

2 Where is naught for us to low: Prof. Grassmann, whom Prof. 
Peterson follows, explains differently : * where all that is dear is at 
stake.’ 



HYMN 83 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


103 


3 The boundaries of earth were seen all dark with dust: 

0 Indra Varuna, the shout went up to heaven. 

The enmities of the people compassed me about. Ye 
heard my calling' and ye came to me with help. 

4 With your resistless weapons, Indra Varuna, ye 

conquered Bheda and ye gave Sud&s your aid. 
Ye heard the prayers of these amid the cries of war : 
effectual was the service of the Tritsus’ priest. 

5 0 Indra Varuna, the wickedness of foes and mine 

assailants’ hatred sorely trouble me. 

Ye twain are lords of riches both of earth and 
heaven: so grant to us your aid on the decisive day. 

6 The men of both the hosts invoked you in the fight, 

Indra and Varuna, that they might win the wealth, 
What time ye helped Sudas, with all the Tritsu folk, 
when the ten kings had pressed him down in their 
attack. 

7 Ten kings who worshipped not, O Indra Varuna, 

confederate, in war prevailed not o’er Sud&s. 

True was the boast of heroes sitting at the feast: 
so at their invocations gods were on their side. 

8 0 Indra Varuna, ye gave Sudas your aid when the 

ten kings in battle compassed him about, 

There where the white-robed Tritsus with their 
braided hair, skilled in song worshipped you. with 
homage and with hymn. 

9 One of you twain destroys the Vritras in the fight, 

the other evermore maintains his holy laws. 

We call on you, ye mighty, with our hymns of praise. 
Vouchsafe us your protection, Indra Varuna. 


4 Bheda: see VII. 18. 19. 

5 Both of earth and heaven : or, perhaps, belonging to both sides. 
8 With their braided hair : see VII. 33. 1. 





104 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VIJ. 


10 May Indra, Varuna, Mitra, and Aryaman vouchsafe 
us glory and great shelter spreading far. 

We think of the beneficent light ofAditi,and Savitar’s 
song of praise, the god who strengthens Law. 

HYMN LXXXIV. Indra-Varuna. 

Kings, Indra Varuna, I would turn you hither to 
this our sacrifice with gifts and homage. 

Held in both arms the ladle, dropping fatness, goes 
of itself to you whose forms are varied. 

2 Dyaus quickens and promotes your high dominion 

who bind with bonds not wrought of rope or 
cordage. 

Far from us still be Varupa’s displeasure: may Indra 
give us spacious room to dwell in. 

3 Make ye our sacrifice fair amid the assemblies: make 

ye our prayers approved among our princes. 

May god-sent riches come for our possession: fur¬ 
ther ye us with your delightful succours. 

4 O Indra Varuna, vouchsafe us riches with store of 

treasure,^food, and every blessing ; 

For the Aditya, banisher of falsehood, the hero, 
dealeth wealth in boundless plenty. 

5 May this my song reach Varuna and Indra, and, 

strongly urging, win me sons and offspring. 

May we go wealthy where the gods are feasted. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 


10 This stanza is repeated from the preceding hymn. 

The metre 13 Trishtup. 

2 Dyaus : compare VI. 62. 9. 

Not wrought of rope: moral and figurative, not material. 

4 The Aditya : Varuna. 

5 Varuna and Indra : here the names are separate, not combined 
in a dual compound. 



HYMN 85 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


105 


HYMN LXXXV. Indra-Varuna. 

For you I deck a harmless hymn, presenting the 
Soina-juice to Varuna and Indra— 

A hymn that shines like heavenly Dawn with fat¬ 
ness. May they be near us on the march and 
guard us. 

2 Here where the arrows fall amid the banners both 

hosts invoke the gods in emulation. 

O Indra Varuna, smite back those our foemen, yea, 
smite them with your shaft to every quarter. 

3 Self-lucid in their seats, e’en heavenly Waters keep 

Varuna and Indra in their godhead. 

One of these holds the folk distinct and sundered, 
the other smites and slays resistless Vritras. 

4 Wise be the priest and skilled in law eternal, who 

with his sacred gifts and adoration 
Brings you to aid us with your might, Adityas : let 
him have viands to promote his welfare. 

5 May this my song reach Varuna and Indra, and, 

strongly urging, win me sons and offspring. 

May we go wealthy where the gods are feasted. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 


The metre is Trishtup. 

1 On the march : the Rishi prays for aid in an expected battle. 

3 In their godhead: libations of Soma-juice, with which water is 
mingled, support the gods in their several stations : somendpy&yitd hi 
devatdh sve sve sthdne 'vatishlhante. —S. 

Distinct and sundered: differently treated, rewarded or punished in 
accordance with their deserts. “ The other sustains the separate crea¬ 
tures."—Muir. “ The one protects the tribes which are scattered 
abroad.”—Grassmann. 

4 Wise he the priest: or, wiso must the priest be, skilled, etc. 

lie,: the institutor of sacrifice. Viands ; sacrificial food to be offer¬ 
ed to the god3. 




106 


[BOOK 7.11. 


THE HYMNS OF 

HYMN LXXXVI. Varuna, 

The tribes of men have wisdom through his greatness 
who stayed even spacious heaven and earth asunder ; 
Who urged the high and mighty sky to motion, and 
stars of old, and spread the earth before him. 

.2 With mine own heart I commune on the question 
how Varuna and I may be united. 

What gift of mine will he accept unangered ? When 
may I calmly look and find him gracious ? 

3 Fain to know this my sin I question others: I seek 

the wise, 0 Varuna, and ask them. 

This one same answer even the sages gave me, 
Surely this Varuna is angry with thee, 

4 What, Varuna, hath been my chief transgression, that 

thou wouldst slay the friend who sings thy praises? 
Tell me, unconquerable lord, and quickly sinless will 
1 approach thee with mine homage. 

5 Loose us from sins committed by our fathers, from 

those wherein we have ourselves offended. 

O king, loose, like a thief who feeds the cattle, as 
from the cord a calf, set free Vasishtha. 

6 Not our own will betrayed us, but seduction, thought¬ 

lessness, Varupa! wine, dice, or anger. 

The old is near to lead astray the younger: even 
slumber leadeth men to evil-doing. 


The metre is Trishtup. 

5 Like a thief who feeds the cattle: who has performed penance for 
his theft, and, at the completion of the service, offered fodder to the 
stolen animal: ‘ who has feasted on stolen cattle.’—M. Muller. But 
see Pischel, Vedische Studien, p. 106. 

6 Seduction: or, as Sayana explains, * the settled course of fate’: 
‘ necessity.’—M. M. 

The old is near : ‘ The stronger perverts the weaker.’—Muir. ‘ There 
is a senior [God] in the proximity of the junior [man].’—Wilson. 




HI'MN 87 .] 


TIIE RIG VEDA. 


107 


7 Slavelike may I do service to the bounteous, serve, 

free from sin, the god inclined to anger. 

This gentle lord gives wisdom to the simple: the 
wiser god leads on the wise to riches. 

8 0 lord, O Varuna, may this laudation come close to 

thee and lie within thy spirit. 

May it be well with us in rest and labour. Preserve 
us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXXXVII. Varuna. 

Varuna dug a pathway out for Shrya, and led the 
watery floods of rivers onward. 

The mares, as in a race, speed on in order. He made 
great channels for the days to follow. 

2 The wind, thy breath, hath sounded through the region 

like a wild beast that seeks his food in pastures. 
Within these two, exalted earth and heaven, O 
Varuna, are all the forms thou lovest. 

3 Varuna’s spies, sent forth upon their errand, survey 

the two world-halves well formed and fashioned. 
Wise are they, holy, skilled in sacrifices, the fur- 
therers of the praise-songs of the prudent. 

4 To me who understand hath Varuna spoken, the 

names borne by the Cow are three times seven. 


The metre is Trishtup. 

1 The mares: the swift rivers. The half line is difficult. “Has¬ 
tening (to his task) as a horse let loose rushes to (a flock of) mares, 
he divided the great nights from the days.”—Wilson. “ Like a troop 
(of horses) let loose, following the mares, he has made great channels 
for the days.’’-~Muir. 

3 Varuna’s spies : the other Adityas, or perhaps the Fathers. 

4 The Cow: Vak or Speech in the form of a cow having twenty-one 
metres attached to her breast, throat, and head, or holding the names 
of twenty-one kinds of sacrifice; or Aditi may be intended, or Prisni 
with the thrice-seven Maruts. 




108 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOON ViI. 


The sapient god, knowing the place's secret, shall 
speak as ’twere to teach the race that cometh. 

5 On him three heavens rest and are supported, and 

the three earths are there in sixfold order. 

The wise king Varuna hath made in heaven that 
golden swing to cover it with glory. 

6 Like Varuna from heaven he sinks in Sindhu, like a 

white-shining spark, a strong wild creature. 

Ruling in depths and meting out the region, great 
saving power hath he, this world’s controller. 

7 Before this Varuna may we be sinless—him who 

shows mercy even to the sinner— 

While we give strength to Aditi’s ordinances. Pre¬ 
serve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN LXXXVIII. Varuna. 

Present to Varuna thine hymn, Vasishtha, bright, 
most delightful to the bounteous giver, 

Who bringeth on to us the Bull, the lofty, the holy, 
laden with a thousand treasures. 

The sapient god: “ The wise god, though he knows them, has not 
revealed the mysteries of (her) place, which he desires to grant to a 
future generation."—Muir. According to Sayana, na iu this line is 
not negative. 

5 For the three heavens and three earths see Vol. I., Index. In six¬ 
fold order: perhaps referring to the heavens aud earths, or else the 
three earths arbitrarily doubled. “The three earths with their six 
seasons.”—Wilson. That golden swing : the Sun. 

6 He: the Sun. Sindhu : or the sea. Ruling in depths : referring 
to Varuna whose dominion, following the setting sun, reaches to the 
depths of the ocean. Meting out the region : or, who measured out the 
firmament. Sayana’s interpretation of this stanza is different: 
“ (Radiant) as the sun, Varuna placed the ocean (in its bed), white 
as a drop (of water), vigorous as an antelope, object of profouud praise, 
distributor of water, the powerful transporter beyond sin, the ruler 
of this existing (world).”—Wilson. 

7 Aditi’s ordinances: according to Sayana, Aditi here means ‘ the 
mighty,’ that is, Varuna. 

The metre is Trishtup. 

1 The Bull: the Sun. 



IlYJfF 88 .] 


THE KIGVEDA. 


109 


2 And now, as I am come before his presence, Varuna’s 

face of flame will I remember, 

That he may bring—lord also of the darkness— 
the light in heaven that I may see its beauty. 

3 When Varuija and I embarked together and urged 

our boat into the midst of ocean, 

When we rode o’er the ridges of the waters, we 
swung within that swing and we were happy. 

4 Varuna placed Vasishtha in the vessel, and deftly 

with his might made him a Kishi. 

When days shone bright the sage made him a singer, 
while the heavens broadened and the Dawns were 
lengthened. 

5 What hath become of those our ancient friendships, 

when without enmity we walked together ? 

O Varuna, thou glorious lord, I entered thy lofty 
home, thine house with thousand portals. 

6 If he thy true ally hath sinned against thee, still, 

Varuna, he is the friend thou lovedst. 

Let us not, Living One, as sinners, know thee : give 
shelter, as a sage, to him who lauds thee. 

7 While we abide in these fixed habitations, and from 

the lap of Aditi win favour, 

May Varupa untie the bond that binds us. Pre¬ 
serve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 


2 Face of flame : ‘ aggregated radiance.’—Wilson. 

3 “The kernel of the hymn lies in verses 3 to 6. The singer be¬ 
lieves that he has been forsaken by his helper Varuna: with anguish he 
remembers his communion with the god in former times. In a vision 
he sees himself translated into Varuna’s realm, he goes sailing with 
tho god, is called to be Rishi or holy singer to the god, and is in his 
palace with him. Now, Varuna has withdrawn his favour, yet let 
him have mercy on his singer, and not punish him so grievously for 
his sin. The hymn perhaps originally closed with verse 6.”—Prof. 
Roth’s Note in the Siebenzi !</ hinder, translated by Prof. Peterson. 

7 Aditi: here said to mean earth. 



no 


[BOOK VI t. 


tHF HYMNS OF 

HYMN LXXXIX. Varuna. 

Let me not yet, king Varuija, enter into the house 
of clay: 

Have mercy, spare me, mighty lord. 

2 When, thunderer! I move along tremulous like a 

wind-blown skin, 

Have mercy, spare me, mighty lord. 

3 O bright and powerful god, through want of strength 

I erred and went astray : 

Have mercy, spare me, mighty lord. 

4 Thirst found thy worshipper though he stood in the 

midst of water-floods: 

Have mercy, spare me, mighty lord. 

5 O Varuna, whatever the offence may be which we 

as men commit against the heavenly host, 

When through our want of thought we violate thy 
laws, punish us not, O god, for that iniquity. 

HYMN XC. Vayu. 

To you pure juices, rich in moath, are offered by 
priests through longing for the pair of heroes. 
Drive, V4yu, bring thine harnessed horses hither; 
drink the pressed Soma till it makes thee joyful. 

The metre is Jagiti ill the last stanza and Gayatri in the rest. 

The hymn lias been translated by Dr. Muir, 0. S. Texts, V. 67, Prof. 
M. Muller, Anc. Sansk. Lit., 540, the authors of Siebenzig Lieder, p. 12, 
and Prof. Peterson, Hymns from the Rigveda, p. 287. 

1 The house of clay : so, cited by Dr. Muir, Atharvaveda, V. 30,14: 
mdnu bk&migriho bhuvat , lot not the house of earth be his. 

2 Thunderer: adrivah, caster of the stone, a common epithet of 
Jndra, but not suitable to Varuna. Tremulous : Say ana adds saityena, 
with cold; and Prof. Wilson observes that ‘the Varuna-pdsa, a kind 
of dropsy, seems to be referred to.’ 

4 Thirst: avarice. In the midst of water-Jloods: when surrounded 
by abundant wealth. According to the commentator, the allusion 
is to Vasishtha’s sea voyage; or perhaps the perpetual thirst of 
dropsy may be intended. 

The metre is Trishtup. The last three stanzas are addressed to 
Indra and V&yu. 

1 The pair of heroes : Indra and Vayu. 



UYMH 90 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


Ill 


2 Whoso to thee, the mighty, brings oblation, pure 

Soma unto thee, pure-drinking Vayu, 

That man thou makest famous among mortals : to 
him strong sons are born in quick succession. 

3 The god whom both these worlds brought forth for 

riches, whom heavenly Dhishafld for our wealth 
appointeth, 

His team of harnessed horses waits on Vdyu, and, 
foremost, on the radiant treasure-bearer. 

4 The spotless Dawns with fair bright days have 

broken; they found the spacious light When they 
were shining. 

Eagerly they disclosed the stall of cattle : floods 
streamed for them as in the days aforetime. 

5 These with their truthful spirit, shining brightly, 

move on provided with their natural insight. 
Viands attend the car that beareth heroes, your car, 
ye sovran pair, Indra and Vdyu. 

6 May these who give us heavenly light, these rulers, 

with gifts of kine and horses, gold and treasures, 
These princes, through full life, Indra and Vdyu ! 
o’ercome in battle with their steeds and heroes. 

7 Like coursers seeking fame will we Vasishthas, 

0 Indra, Vayu, with our fair laudations, 

Exerting all our power call you to aid us. Preserve 
us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 


3 The god: apparently, Indra. Dhishand: a goddess of prosperity 
and gain. 

The radiant treasure-bearer : perhaps the Soma. 

4 They found: the Angirasas. “They are not named in the text, 
but Sayana refers the whole to them; by their praise of Vdyu the 
dawn broko, the stolen cattle were rescued, uud the obstructed rain 
set at liberty.”—Wilson. 

5 These: the iustitutors of sacrifice. 

fi These ru'r.rs, these princes, are the wealthy uoblos who defray the 
expenses and reward the priests. 



112 


THE HYMN'S OF 


[BOOK V-II. 


HYMN XCI. Vayu. 

Were not, in sooth, the gods aforetime blameless, 
whose pleasure was increased by adoration ? 

For V&yu and for man in his affliction they caused 
the Morning to arise with Sftrya. 

2 Guardians infallible, eager as envoys, preserve us 

safe through many months and autumns. 
Addressed to you, our fair praise, Indra, V&yu, 
implores your favour and renewed well-being. 

3 Wise, bright, arranger of his teams, he seeketh men 

with rich food whose treasures are abundant. 

They have arranged them of one mind with V&yu : 
the men have wrought all noble operations. 

4 So far as native power and strength permit you, so 

far as men behold whose eyes have vision, 

0 ye pure drinkers, drink with us pure Soma: sit 
on this sacred grass, Indra and V&yu. 

5 Driving down teams that bear the lovely heroes, 

hitherward, Indra, Vayu, come together. 

To you this prime of savoury juice is offered: here 
loose your horses and be friendly-minded. 

6 Your hundred and your thousand teams, O Indra 

and Vayu, all-munificent, which attend you, 

With these most gracious-minded come ye hither, 
and drink, O heroes, of the meath we offer. 

7 Like coursers seeking fame will we Vasishthas, 

O Indra, Vayu, with our fair laudations, 

Exerting all our power, call you to aid us. Pre¬ 
serve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 


The metre is Trishtup. Indra is associated with Vayu in almost 
every stanza. 

1 For V&yu: I translate the vdyave of the text, bnt it is evident 
that Ayave, for Ayu, or the living one, should be read in its stead. 

3 He seeketh: Vayu. The meaning of the stanza is obscure, 

5 The lovely heroes : Indra and Vayu. 



HYMN 93 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


113 


HYMN XCII. Vayu. 

O VAyu, drinker of the pure, be near us : a thousand 
teams are thine, all-bounteous giver. 

To thee the rapture-bringing juice is offered, whose 
first draught, god, thou takest as thy portion. 

2 Prompt at the holy rites forth came the presser with 

Soma-draughts for Indra and for V&yu, 

When ministering priests with strong devotion bring 
to you twain the first taste of the Soma. 

3 The teams wherewith thou seekest him who offers, 

within his home, O V&yu, to direct him, 

Therewith send wealth to us with full enjoyment, a 
hero son and gifts of kine and horses. 

4 Near to the gods and making Indra joyful, devout 

and offering precious gifts to VAyu, 

Allied with princes, smiting down the Vritras, may 
we*with heroes conquer foes in battle. 

5 With thy yoked teams in hundreds and in thousands 

come to our sacrifice and solemn worship. 

Come, VAyu, make thee glad at this libation. Pre¬ 
serve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XCIII. Indra-Agni. 

Slayers of enemies, Indra and Agni, accept this day 
our new-born pure laudation. 

Again, again I call you prompt to listen, best to 
give quickly strength to him who craves it. 

2 For ye were strong to gain, exceeding mighty, grow¬ 
ing together, waxing in your vigour. 

Lords of the pasture filled with ample riches, bestow 
upon us strength both fresh and lasting. 


The metre is Trishtup. 

1 Drinker of the pure : or bright, Soma. 

4 The Vritras : or enemies in general. The priests are the allies 
and moral supporters of the princes in war. 


The metre is Trishtup. 
8 



114 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V}I. 

3 Yea, when the strong have entered our assembly, 

and singers seeking with their hymns your favour, 
They are like steeds who come into the race-course, 
those men who call aloud on Indra Acmi. 

o 

4 The singer, seeking with his hymns your favour, 

begs splendid riches of their first possessor. 
Further us with new bounties, Indra Agni, armed 
with strong thunder, slayers of the foeman. 

5 Whentwogreathosts,arrayedag&insteach other, meet, 

clothed with brightness, in the fierce encounter, 
Stand ye beside the godly, smite the godless, and 
still assist the men who press the Soma. 

6 To this our Soma-pressing, Indra Agni, come ye 

prepared to show your loving-kindness, 

For not at any time have ye despised us. So may 
I draw you Avith all strengthenings hither. 

7 So Agni, kindled mid this adoration, invite thou 

Mitra, Varuna, and Indra. 

Forgive whatever sin we have committed: may 
Aryaman and Aditi remove it. 

8 While we accelerate these our sacrifices, may we win 

strength from both of you, 0 Agni: 

Ne’er may the Maruts, Indra, Vishnu slight us. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN XCIV. Indra-Agni. 

As rain from out the cloud, for you, Indra and Agni, 
from my soul 

This noblest praise hath been produced. 

3 The strong: the nobles who institute sacrifices. 

4 Their first possessor: each god who is invoked. 

5 Great hosts: ‘hosts’ must be supplied. The femiuine dual 
adjectives have no substantive in the text. 

7 Aryaman and Aditi : Mitra and others being understood, as the 
verb is plural. 

8 0 Agni: that is, India and Agni. 

The metre is Av.cshtup in stanza 12, and Gayatri in the rest. 

1 From my soul: manmanah : explained by the commentator here 




ffXMtf 94 ] 


THE RIGTEDA. 


125 


2 Do ye, 0 Indra Agni, hear the singer’s call: accept 

his songs. 

Ye rulers, grant his heart’s desire. 

3 Give us not up to sinfulness, ye heroes, Indra Agni, 

nor 

To slander and reproach of men. 

4 To Indra and to Agni we bring reverence high and 

holy hymn, 

And, craving help, soft words with prayer. 

5 For all these holy singers here implore these twain 

to succour them, 

And priests that they may win them strength. 

6 Eager to laud you, we with songs invoke you, bearing 

sacred food, 

Fain for success in sacrifice. 

7 Indra and Agni, come to us with favour, ye who 

conquer men; 

Let not the wicked master us. 

8 At no time lot the injurious blow of hostile mortal 

fall on us : 

0 Indra Agni, shelter us. 

9 Whatever wealth we crave of you, in gold, in cattle 

or in steeds, 

That, Indra Agni, let us gain ; 

10 When heroes prompt in worship call Indra and Agni 

lords of steeds, 

Beside the Soma-juice effused. 

11 Call hither with the song and lauds those who best 

slay the Vritras, those 
Who take delight in hymns of praise. 


and in the corresponding passage of the Samaveda by stotufx , praiser 
or worshipper. As rain: the hymn of praiso is copious in its flow, 
and is doubly beneficial, gratifying the gods and bringing blessings 
to the worshipper. 

11 Call hither : I follow Prof. Ludwig in reading dviv&sata, instead 
of ilvivdsatah which iuvolves a very harsh construction. 




116 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII. 

12 Slay ye the wicked man whose thought is evil, of the 
demon kind. 

Slay him who stays the waters, slay the serpent with 
your deadly dart. 

HYMN XCY. Sarasvati. 

This stream Sarasvati with fostering current comes 
forth, our sure defence, our fort of iron. 

As on a car, the flood flows on, surpassing in majesty 
and might all other waters. 

2 Pure in her course from mountains to the ocean, 

alone of streams Sarasvati hath listened. 

Thinking of wealth and the great world of creatures 
she poured for N&husha her milk and fatness. 

3 Friendly to man he grew among the women, a strong 

young steer amid the holy ladies. 

He gives the fleet steed to our wealthy princes, and 
decks their bodies for success in battle. 

4 May this Sarasvati be pleased and listen at this our 

sacrifice, auspicious lady, 

When we with reverence, on our knees, implore her 
close-knit to wealth, most kind to those she loveth. 


12 Him who stays the waters: udtulhim : according to Sayana, like 
ar> udadhih, water-holder or pitcher. The serpent: Abhogam, the 
coder, explained differently by Sayana, as one who enjoys good things 
taken from the worshippers. 

The metre is Trishtnp. Sarasvan is the deity of stanza 3. 

1 Sarasvati: Sindhu or Indus appears to be intended under this 
name. See VI. 61. 2. 

2 NAhmha: according to the legend, a king who prayed to 
Sarasvati who gave him butter and milk sufficient for the thousand- 
year sacrifice which he was about to perform. The Nahushas, the 
people living on the banks of the river, are probably intended. 

3 lie grew : Sarasvan, the consort of Sarasvati. 


HYMN 96 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


117 


5 These offerings have ye made with adoration : say 

this, Sarasvati, and accept our praises ; 

And, placing us under thy dear protection, may we 
approach thee, as a tree, for shelter. 

6 For thee, 0 blest Sarasvati, Vasishtha hath here 

unbarred the doors of sacred order. 

Wax, bright one, and give strength to him who lauds 
thee. Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with bless¬ 
ings. 

HYMN XCVI. Sarasvati. 

I sing a lofty song, for she is mightiest, most divine 
of streams. 

Sarasvati will I exalt with hymns and lauds, and, 0 
Vasishtha, heaven and earth. 

2 When in the fulness of their strength the Pftrus 

dwell on thy two beautiful grassy banks, 

Favour us thou who hast the Maruts for thy friends 
stir up the bounty of our chiefs. 

3 So may Sarasvati auspicious send good luck; she 

rich in mares, is never niggardly in thought, 

When praised in Jamadagni’s way and lauded as 
Vasishtha lauds. 


6 These offerings: this half-line is very obscure. Prof. Ludwig 
thinks that these words may be supposed to be spoken by Sarasvati 
to her worshippers, but he is not satisfied of the correctness of his 
conjecture. I have nothing better to offer at present. “Presenting 
to thee, S., these oblatious with reverence (may we receive from thee 
affluence).”—Wilson. 

Sarasvan is the deity of stanzas 4—6. The metre is Brihati in 
stanza 1, Satobrihati in 2, Prastarapankti (12 + 12 + 8 + 8) in 3, and 
Gayatri in 4—6. 

1 Heaven and earth: heaven as the home of the goddess, and 
earth where she flows as a river. 

2 The Pdrus: au Aryan tribe settled on both banks of the 
Sarasvati or Indus. See Vol. I, Index. Grassy banks: this, at 
Professor Roth has suggested, seems to be the meaning of andhasi , 
but the expression is difficult. 

3 Jamadagni: a celebrnted ancient Rishi. 



118 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK YU. 

4 We call upon Sarasv&n, as unmarried men who long 

for wives, 

As liberal men who yearn for sons. 

5 Be thou our kind protector, 0 Sarasv&n, with those 

waves of thine 

Laden with sweets and dropping oil. 

6 May we enjoy Sarasv&n’s breast, all-beautiful, that 

swells with streams, 

May we gain food and progeny. 

HYMN XCVII. Brihaspati. 

Where heaven and earth combine in men’s assembly, 
and those who love the gods delight in worship, 
Where the libations are effused for Indra, may he 
come first to drink and make him stronger. 

2 We crave the heavenly grace of gods to guard us— 

so may Brihaspati, 0 friends, exalt us— 

That he, the bounteous god, may find us sinless, who 
giveth from a distance like a father. 

3 That Brahmanaspati, most high and gracious, I 

glorify with offerings and with homage. 

May the great song of praise, divine, reach Indra 
who is the king of prayer the gods’ creation. 

4 May that Brihaspati who brings all blessings, most 

dearly loved, be seated by our altar. 

Indra is the deity of stauza 1 , Indra and Brahmanaspati are the 
deities of 3 and 9, Indra and Brihaspati of 10, and the rest of the 
hymn is addressed to Brihaspati. Brihaspati and Brahmanaspati are 
ono and the same god, the Lord of Prayer. See I. 14 . 3. 

The metre is Trishtup. 

1 Where heaven and earth combine : where gods and men meet at 
the place of sacrifice. And make him stronger: Sayana explains 
vayascha differently : ‘(may his) swift (horses approach).’—Wilson. 

2 Like a father: although he is far away he gives us what we ask 
like a father who is near at baud.—L. 

3 The gods' creation : devakntasya: inspired, or, literally, made, 
by the gods. 




HYMN 97.] THE RIG VEDA. 119 

Heroes and wealth we crave; may he bestow them, 
and bear us safe beyond the men who vex us. 

5 To us these deathless ones, erst born, have granted 

this laud of ours which gives the immortal pleasure. 
Let us invoke Brihaspati, the foeless, the clear¬ 
voiced god, the holy one of households, 

6 Him, this Brihaspati, his ruddy horses, drawing 

together, full of strength, bring hither. 

Robed in red colour like the cloud, they carry the 
lord of might whose friendship gives a dwelling. 

7 For he is pure, with hundred wings, refulgent, with 

sword of gold, impetuous, winning sunlight. 
Sublime Brihaspati, easy of access, grauteth his 
friends most bountiful refreshment. 

8 Both Heaven and Earth, divine, the deity’s parents, 

have made Brihaspati increase in grandeur. 

Glorify him, O friends, who merits glory : may he 
give prayer fair way and easy passage. 

9 This, Rrahtnanaspati, is your laudation : prayer hath 

been made to thunder-wielding Indra. 

Regard our songs with favour, wake abundance: 
destroy the godless and our foemen’s malice. 

10 Ye twain are lords of wealth in earth and heaven, 
thou, 0 Brihaspati, and thou, 0 Indra. 

Mean though he be, give wealth to him who lauds 
you. Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

5 Our hymns of praise which are acceptable to the immortal god 
have been given to us by tiro everlasting deities themselves. Sayana’s 
explanation is different: “ may the first-born immortals (by bis com¬ 
mand) bestow upon us the food that is necessary for existence. —• 
Wilson. 

6 Whose friendship gives a dwelling: I adopt the interpretation 
given by Professor Cowell iu his note ou the passage in Wilson’s 
translation. 

7 With hundred wings. ‘ born a by numerous conveyances.'— 
Wilson. 

8 In grandeur: or, by their might. 

10 Mean : or, poor. 



120 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VII. 


HYMN XCVIII. Indra. 

Priests, offer to the lord of all the people the inilked- 
out stalk of Soma, radiant-coloured. 

No wild-bull knows his drinking-place like Indra who 
ever seeks him who hath pressed the Soma. 

2 Thou dost desire to drink, each day that passes, the 

pleasant food which thou bast had aforetime. 

O Indra, gratified in heart and spirit, drink eagerly 
the Soma set before thee. 

3 Thou, newly-born, for strength didst drink the Soma; 

thy mother told thee of thy future greatness. 

0 Indra, thou hast filled mid-air’s wide region, and 
given the gods by battle room and freedom. 

4 When thou hast urged the arrogant to combat, 

proud in their strength of arm, we will subdue them, 
Or, Indra, when thog tightest girt by heroes, we in 
the glorious fray with thee will conquer, 

5 I will declare the earliest deeds of Indra, and recent 

acts which Maghavan hath accomplished. 

When he had conquered godless wiles and magic, 
Sorna becanje his own entire possession. 

6 Thine is this world of flocks and herds around thee, 

which with 'the eye of Sdrya thou beholdest. 

Thou, Indra, art alone the lord of cattle : may we 
enjoy the treasure which thou givest. 

7 Ye twain are lords of wealth in earth and heaven, 

thou, O Brihaspati, and thou, 0 Indra. 

Mean though ho be, give wealth to him who lauds 
you. Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

Byihaspati is associated with Indra in the last stanza which is a 
repetition of stan?a 10 of tho preceding hymn, The metre is 
Trishtup. 

I Radiant-coloured: arunarn , red, ruddy, here explained by the 
commentator as drochamdnam, shining. 

3 Thy future greatness: see IV. 18. 4, where Aditi says:—No peer 
hath he among those born already, nor among those who shall be 
bora hereafter. 



HYMN 99 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


121 


HYMN XCIX. Vishnu. 

Men come not nigh thy mnjesty who growest beyond 
all bound and measure with thy body. 

Both thy two regions of the earth, 0 Vishnu, we 
know : thou, god, knowest the highest also. 

2 None who is born or being born, god Vishnu, hath 

reached the utmost limit of thy grandeur. 

The vast high vault of heaven hast thou supported, 
and fixed earth’s eastern pinnacle securely. 

3 Rich in sweet food be ye, and rich in milch-kine, 

with fertile pastures, fain to do men service. 

Both these worlds, Vishnu, hast thou stayed asunder, 
and firmly fixed the earth with pegs around it. 

4 Ye have made spacious room for sacrificing by 

generating Sfirya, Dawn, and Agni. 

O heroes, ye have conquered in your battles even 
the bull-jawed Dasa’s wiles and magic. 

.5 Ye have destroyed, thou, Inrlra, and thou, Vishnu, 
Sambara’s nine-and-ninety fenced castles. 

Ye twain smote down a hundred times a thousand 
resistless heroes of the royal Varchin. 

£ This is the lofty hymn of praise, exalting the lords 
of mighty stride, the strong and lofty. 

I laud you in the solemn synods, Vishnu : pour ye 
food on us in our camps, O Indra. 


Indra ia the joint-deity of stanzas 4, 5, 6. The metre is Trishtup. 

The hymn is translated in Muir's 0. S. Texts, IV. 86, 87. 

1 Two regions of the earth : that is, the earth and the firmament. 
"The two lower regions are within the range of our perception; the 
third belongs to Vishiju, whither he stepped with the third of his 
ascending strides."—Wallis, Cosmology of the Rigveda, p. 115. 

3 The first line appears to be Vishnu’s blessing on heaven and 
earth when he parted and supported them. 

4 Bull-jawed: or Vrishasipra may be the natno of the Dasa, 

5 Royal Varchin : see II. 14. 6. 



122 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK YU. 

7 0 Vishnu, unto thee my lips cry Vashat! Let thi3 
mine offering, Sipivishta, please thee. 

May these my songs of eulogy exalt thee. Preserve 
us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN C. Vishrm. 

Ne’er doth the man repent, who, seeking profit, 
bringeth his gift to the far-striding Vishnu. 

He who adoreth him with all his spirit winneth him¬ 
self so great a benefactor. 

2 Thou, Vishnu, constant in thy courses, gavest good¬ 

will to all men, and a hymn that lasteth, 

That thou mightst move us to abundant comfort of 
very splendid wealth with store of horses. 

3 Three times strode forth this god in all his grandeur 

over this earth bright with a hundred splendours. 
Foremost be Vishnu, stronger than the strongest: 
for glorious is his name who lives for ever. 

4 Over this earth with mighty step strode Vishnu, 

ready to give it for a home to Manu. 

In him the humble people trust for safety : he, nobly 
born, hath made them spacious dwellings. 

5 To-day I laud this name, O Sipivishta, I, skilled in 

rules, the name of thee the noble. 

Yea, I the poor and weak praise thee the mighty who 
dwellest in the realm beyond this region. 


7 Vashat: the exclamation used on making an oblation. Sipivishta: 
a name of Vishnu of uucertaiu etymology aud meaning. * Invested 
with rays of light,’ according to Sayana, 

The metre is Trislitup. 

2 A hymn that lasteth: continually recurring occasion to praise 
thee. 

3 This earth: meauiug, says the commentator, earth, firmament, 
and heaven. 




jivmx id] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


123 


6 Wliat was there to be blamed in thee, 0 Vishnu, 

when thou declaredst, I am Sipivishta ? 

Hide not this form from us, nor keep it secret, since 
thou didst wear another shape in battle. 

7 O Vishnu, unto thee my lips cry Vashat! Let this 

mine offering, Sipivishta, please thee. 

May these my songs of eulogy exalt thee. Preserve 
us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN Cl. Parjanya. 

Recite three holy words which light precedeth, 
which milk this udder that produceth nectar. 
Quickly made manifest, the Bull hath bellowed, en¬ 
gendering the germ of plants, the infant. 

2 Giver of growth to plants, the god who ruleth over 

the waters and all moving creatures, 

Vouchsafe us triple shelter for our refuge, and three¬ 
fold light to succour and befriend us. 

3 Now he is sterile, now begetteth offspring, even as 

he willeth doth he change his figure. 


6 This stanza is unintelligible. The commentator on the corres¬ 
ponding passage of the Samaveda says : “ Vishnu formerly abandon¬ 
ing his own form, and assuming another artificial shape, succoured 
Vusishtha in battle. Recognizing the god, the Rishi addresses him 
with the verse.” Sipivishta, is said to be a word of equivocal mean¬ 
ing, ‘ clothed with rays of light,’ aud ‘ denuded.’ See Wilson’s 
Note, and 0. S. Texts, IV. 86. 

Hymn 83 of Book V. is a more poetical address to Parjanya the 
god of the stormy rain-cloud. The metre is Trishtup. 

1 Three holy words : or texts of the three Vedas. Which fight 
precedeth: introduced by the sacred syllable Om. 

Milk this udder: draw down the sweet rain from the cloud. 

The Bull: Parjanya. The infant: Agni in the form of lightning. 

2 Threefold light: with reference to the divisions of the day and 
the seasons, 

3 lie is sterile: sends no rain, like a barren cow that gives no milk. 



124 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VII. 


The father’s genial flow bedews the mother; there¬ 
with the sire, therewith the son is nourished. 

4 In him all living creatures have their being, and 

the three heavens with triply-flowing waters. 

Three reservoirs that sprinkle down their treasure shed 
their sweet streams around him with a murmur. 

5 May this my song to sovran lord Parjanya come 

near unto his heart and give him pleasure. 

May we obtain the showers that bring enjoyment, 
and god-protected plants with goodly fruitage. 

6 He is the Bull of all, and their impregner : he holds 

the life of all things fixed and moving. 

May this truth save me till my hundredth autumn. 
Preserve us evermore, ye gods, with blessings. 

HYMN OIL Parjanya. 

Sing forth and laud Parjanya, son of Heaven, who 
sends the gift of rain : 

May he provide our pasturage. 

2 Parjanya is the god who forms in kine, in mares, in 

plants of earth, 

And womankind, the germ of life. 

3 Offer and pour into his mouth oblation rich in 

savoury juice: 

May he for ever give us food. 


The father's genial flow : “The father is the sky, earth the mother, 
who receives the rain from the former, which, producing the means of 
offering libations and oblations, returns again to the parent heaven, 
as well as supports his offspring—all living creatures.”—Wilson. 

4 Three reservoirs: according to Sslyana, clouds in the east, west, 
and north. 

6 The Bull of all • the plants, understood. 

The metre is Gayatri. 

3 Into his mouth: that is, Agni, who is the mouth by which the 
other gods consume the offerings that are made to them. 




HJMX 103.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


125 


HYMN CIII. Froga. 

They who lay quiet for a year, the Br&hmans who 
fulfil their vows, 

The frogs have lifted up their voice, the voice 
Parjanya hath inspired. 

2 What time on these, as on a dry skin lying in the 

pool’s bed, the floods of heaven descended, 

The music of the frogs comes forth in concert like 
the cows’ lowing with their calves beside them. 

3 When at the coming of the Rains the water has 

poured upon them as they yearned and thirsted, 
One seeks another as he talks and greets him with 
cries of pleasure as a son his father. 

4 Each of these twain receives the other kindly, while 

they are revelling in the flow of waters, 

When the frog moistened by the rain springs forward, 
and Green and Spotty both combine their voices. 

5 When one of these repeats the other’s language, as 

he who learns the lesson of the teacher, 

Your every limb seems to be growing larger as ye 
converse with eloquence on the waters. 

6 One is Cow-bellow and Goat-bleat the other, one frog 

is Green and one of them is Spotty. 

They bear one common name, and yet they vary, and, 
talking, modulate the voice diversely. 

The metre is Anushtup in stanza 1 and Trishtup in the rest. 

The hymn has been translated by Dr. Muir, O. S. Texts, V. 436, 
and by Professor F. Max Muller in his Ancient Sanskrit Literature, 

pp. 494 f., who remarks: “The hymn.which is called a panegyrio 

of the frogs, is clearly a satire on the priests; and it is curious to 
observe that the same animal should have been chosen by the Vedic 
satirist to represent the priests, which, by the earliest satirist of 
Greece, was selected as the representative of the Homeric heroes.” 
The hymn evidently belongs to a late period of Vedic poetry. 

3 With cries of pleasure : akhkhalikritya: uttering the imitative 
exclamation akhkhala. 

5 Your every limb : this abrupt change of person is not unfrequent 
in the Veda. 




126 THE HYMNS OF {BOOK VII. 

7 As BrAbmans, sitting round the brimful vessel, talk 

at the Soma-rite of AtirAtra, 

So, frogs, ye gather round the pool to honour this 
day of all the year, the first of Rain-time. 

8 These BrAhmans with the Soma-juice, performing 

their year-long rite, have lifted up their voices; 
And these Adhvaryus, sweating with their kettles, 
come forth and show themselves, and none arehidden. 

9 They keep the twelvemonth’s god-appointed order, 

and never do the men neglect the season. 

Soon as the Rain-time in the year returneth, these 
who were heated kettles gain their freedom. 

10 Cow-bellow and Goat-bleat have granted riches, and 
Green and Spotty have vouchsafed us treasure. 
The frogs who give us cows in hundreds lengthen 
our lives in this most fertilizing season. 

7 Atirdtra: according to the commentary, a ceremony accompanied 
by the recitation of hymns at night. 

8 Year-long rite: “ Say an a makes it refer to Gavdm ayanam, a 
sacrificial session, which commences and ends with the atirdtra, and 
lasts a whole year.”—Cowell, in Wilson’s Translation. 

Sioeating with their kettles: “ There is a quibble on the word 
gharminafi, having or bearing the vessel, or performing the rite so 
termed; or, suffering from gharma, heat, or the hot season.”—Wilson. 

And none are hidden: guhyd na ke chit: some take ha here as ‘like’: 
“ issue forth like persons who have been hidden.”—Muir. “ Pop out 
like hermits."—M. Muller. 

9 The men: the priestlike frogs. These who were heated kettles: 
the frogs who had been burnt and scorched by the hot weather. 

10 Have granted riches: as the earliest proclaimers of the advent 
of the Rains which revive and fertilize the earth. 

“ It is possibly an echo of this production that we find in a des¬ 
cription of autumn in the Harivamsa, V. 8803, where the poet 
compares the noise made by a frog, after his rest of sixteen half 
months, along with his wives, to the recitation of the Rig-veda by a 

Brahman surrounded by his pupils.On this verse the late M. 

Langlois somewhat naively remarks as follows: Dans nos mceurs 
rien n’ 6galorait 1’ impertinence d’ une comparaison dans laquelle une 
grenouille serait assimilee a un respectable eccl^siastique. Les 
Indiens, a ce qu’ il parait, tie voyaient dans telle espece de rappro¬ 
chement aucuue teiute d’ intpiel6,”—Muir, 0. S. Texts, V. 438. 





HYMN 104.] 


THE RIG 7ED A. 


127 


HYMN CIV. Indra-Soma. 

Indra and Soma, burn, destroy the demon foe, send 
downward, 0 ye Bulls, those who add gloom to 
gloom. 

Annihilate the fools, slay them and burn them up : 
chase them away from us, pierce the voracious 
ones. 

2 Indra and Soma, let sin round the wicked boil like 

as a caldron set amid the flames of fire. 

Against the foe of prayer, devourer of raw flesh, 
the vile fiend fierce of eye, keep ye perpetual hate. 

3 Indra and Soma, plunge the wicked in the depth, 

yea, cast them into darkness that hath no support, 
So that not one of them may ever thence return : so 
may your wrathful might prevail and conquer them. 

4 Indra and Soma, hurl your deadly crushing bolt down 

on the wicked fiend from heaven and from the earth. 
Yea, forge out of the mountains your celestial dart 
wherewith ye burn to death the waxing demon race. 


The hymn consists chiefly of imprecations directed against demons 
and evil spirits, ltakslmsas and Yiltudhanas. The deities are various: 
Indra and Soma of stanzas 1—7; Indra of 8, 16, 19—22, and 24; 
Soma of 9, 12, 13; Agni of 10, 14; the gods of 11 ; the press-8tone3 
of 17; the Maruts of 18; Vasishtha’s personified prayer of the first 
half of 23; and earth and firmament or mid air of the second half. 

The metre is Jagati in stanzas 1—7, 18, 21, 23; Anushtup in 25; 
and Trishtup in the rest. I have treated stanzas 18, 21, 23 as 
hendekasyllabic. 

1 The demon foe : rakshah: the llakshasas, fiends, demons, goblins, 
going about at night, disturbing sacrifices and devout men, ensnaring 
and even devouring human beings, and generally hostile to the 
human race. 

2 The vile fiend: kimtdine: explained by the commentator as one 
who goes about saying, Kimiddnhti or What now 1 , a vile and 
treacherous spy and informer. The word seems to be used as the 
name of a class of evil spirits. 




128 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VII. 


5 Indra and Soma, cast ye downward out of heaven 

your deadly darts of stone burning with fiery flame, 
Eternal, scorching darts; plunge the voracious ones 
within the depth, and let them sink without a sound. 

6 Indra and Soma, let this hymn control you both, 

even as the girth encompasses two vigorous steeds— 
The song of praise which I with wisdom offer you : 
do ye, as lords of men, animate these my prayers. 

7 In your impetuous manner think ye both thereon : 

destroy these evil beings,slay the treacherous fiends. 
Indra and Soma, let the wicked have no bliss who 
evermore assails us with malignity. 

8 Whoso accuses me with words of falsehood when 

I pursue my way with guileless spirit, 

May he, the speaker of untruth, be, Indra, like 
water w'hich the hollowed hand compresses. 

9 Those who destroy, as is their wont, the simple, 

and with their evil natures harm the righteous, 
May Soma give them over to the serpent, or to the 
lap of Nirriti consign them. 

10 The fiend, 0 Agni, who designs to injure the essence 
of our food, kine, steeds, or bodies, 

May he, the adversary, thief, and robber, sink to 
destruction, both himself and offspring. 

It May he be swept away, himself and children: may 
all the three earths press him down beneath them. 
May his fair glory, O ye gods, be blighted, who in 
the day or night would fain destroy us. 

12 The prudent finds it easy to distinguish the true and 
false : their words oppose each other. 

Of these two that which is the true and honest, 
Soma protects, and brings the false to nothing. 


5 Without a sound: so suddenly that they have not time to cry out. 
9 To the serpent: or to death by serpent ’ bites. Nirriti: Death 
and Destruction. 



n YMN 104.] 


TIIE RIG VEDA. 


129 


13 Never doth Soma aid and guide the wicked or him 

who falsely claims the warrior’s title. 

He slays the fiend and him who speaks untruly: 
both lie entangled in the noose of Indra. 

14 As if I worshipped deities of falsehood, or thought 

vain thoughts about the gods, O Agni. 

Why art thou angry with us, Jdtavedas 1 Destruc¬ 
tion fall on those who lie against thee. 

15 So may I die this day if I have harassed any man’s 

life or if I be a demon. 

Yea, may he lose all his ten sons together who with 
false tongue hath called me Yatudhana. 

16 May Indra slay him with a mighty weapon, and let 

the vilest of all creatures perish, 

The fiend who says that he is pure, who calls me 
a demon though devoid of demon nature. 

17 She too who wanders like an owl at night-time, 

hiding her body in her guile and malice, 

May she fall downward into endless caverns. May 
press-stones with loud ring destroy the demons. 

13 The warrior’s title: the rank of a Kshatriya or prince of the 
military order. 

The first eleven stanzas “are considered to be a malediction upon 
the Rakshasas by the Rishi. To account for the change of tone [in 
12—16], Sdyana gives an unusual version of the legend told in the 
Mahdbhdrata of king Kalmdshapdda being transformed to a Rdkshasa, 
and devouring the 100 sons of Vasishtha : here it is said that a 
Rdkshasa, having devoured the Rishi’a sons, assumed his shape, and 
said to him, “I atn Vasishtha, thou art the Rdkshasa;’’ to which 
Vasishtha replied by repeating this verse [stanza 12], declaratory of 
his discriminating between truth and falsehood.”—Wilson. 

“ The verses may, as Professor Max Muller supposes, have arisen 
out of Vasishtha’s contest with Visvamitra [see III. 52. 21], and it 
may have been the latter personage who brought those charges of 
heresy, and of murderous and demoniacal character against his 
rival.”—Muir, 0. S. Texts, I. 327, 328. 

15 Ydtudhdna; explained by Sayana as — Eakshasa. The Yatu¬ 
dhana probably was rather the goblin or spook while the Rakshasa 
was the violent and voracious ogre. 

17 Here the malediction on evil spirits in general is resumed and 
continued to the end of the hymn. Eke too: the Rdkshasi, or she-fiend. 



130 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VII. 


18 Spread out, ye Maruts, search among the people : 

seize ye and grind the Rakshasas to pieces, 

Who fly abroad, transformed to birds, at night-time, 
or sully and pollute our holy worship. 

19 Hurl down from heaven thy bolt of stone, 0 Indra : 

sharpen it, Maghavan, made keen by Soma. 
Forward, behind, and from above and under, smite 
down the demons with thy rocky weapon. 

20 They fly, the demon dogs, and, bent on mischief, 

fain would they harm indomitable Indra. 

Sakra makes sharp his weapon for the wicked: now 
let him cast his bolt at fiendish wizards. 

21 Indra hath ever been the fiends’ destroyer who spoil 

the oblations of the gods’ invokers : 

Yea, Sakra, like an axe that splits the timber, at¬ 
tacks and smashes them like earthen vessels. 

22 Destroy the fiend shaped like an owl or owlet, de¬ 

stroy him in the form of dog or cuckoo. 

Destroy him shaped as eagle or as vulture: as with 
a stone, O Indra, crush the demon. 

23 Let not the fiend of witchcraft-workers reach us : 

may Dawn drive off the couples of Kimidins. 
Earth keep us safe from earthly woe and trouble: from 
grief that comes from heaven mid-air preserve us. 

24 Indra destroy the demon, male and female, joying 

and triumphing in arts of magic. 

Let the fools’ gods with bent necks fall and perish, 
and see no more the sun when he arises. 

25 Look each one hither, look around : Indra and Soma, 

watch ye well. 

Cast forth your weapon at the fiends; against the 
sorcerers hurl your bolt. 


23 Kimidins : or vile spirits. See Note on stanza 2. 

24 Fools’gods: muradev&h: explained by Sayana as = mdranakrlddh, 
«those who make killing their sport.’ According to the St. Petersburg 
Lexicon, mdradevdh - muladevdh, a species of demons or goblins. 


BOOK THE EIGHTH. 


HYMN I. Indra. 

Glorify naught besides, O friends ; so shall no sor¬ 
row trouble you. 

Praise only mighty Indra when the juice is shed, 
and say your lauds repeatedly : 

2 Even him, eternal, like a bull who rushes down, men’s 

conqueror, bounteous like a cow ; 

Him who is cause of both, of enmity and peace, to 
both sides most munificent. 

3 Although these men in sundry ways invoke thee to 

obtain thine aid, 

Be this our prayer, addressed, 0 Indra, unto thee, 
thine exaltation every day. 

4 Those skilled in song, 0 Maghavan, among these 

men o’ercome with might the foeman’s songs. 

Come hither, bring us strength in many a varied 
form most near that it may succour us. 


India is the deity of stanzas 1—29; Asanga of 34; Asanga’s 
liberality is eulogized in 30—33. 

The Rishi of stanzas 1, 2 is Pragatha Ghaura, the brother and 
adoptive son of Kanva; 3—29 are ascribed to Medbatithi and Medhya- 
tithi, both of the family of Kapva; 30—33 to Asanga, son of Playoga, 
and 34 to Sasvati the wife of Asanga. 

The metre is Trishtup in stanzas 33, 34, Satobrihatl in 2, 4, and 
Brihati in the rest. 

2 Bounteous like a cow : the adjective is not in the text, but must 
be supplied in order to make the comparison intelligible. See 
Vedische Studien, I., 103. To both sides: to the singers and the in- 
stitutors of sacrifice. 




132 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIIJ. 

5 0 caster of the stone, I would not sell thee for a 

mighty price, 

Not for a thousand, thunderer! nor ten thousand, 
nor a hundred, lord of countless wealth ! 

6 0 Indra, thou art more to me than sire or niggard 

brother is. 

Thou and my mother, O good lord, appear alike, to 
give me wealth abundantly. 

7 Where art thou ? Whither art thou gone ? For 

many a place attracts thy mind. 

Haste, warrior, fort-destroyer, lord of battle’s din, 
haste, holy songs have sounded forth. 

8 Sing out the psalm to him who breaks down castles 

for his faithful friend, 

Verses to bring the thunderer to destroy the forts 
and sit on Kanva’s sacred grass. 

9 The horses which are thine in tens, in hundreds, yea, 

in thousands thine, 

Even those vigorous steeds, fleet-footed in the course, 
with those come quickly near to us. 

10 This day I call Sabardugha who animates the holy 
song, 

Indra the richly-yielding milch-cow who provides 
unfailing food in ample stream. 


5 I would not sell thee: cp. IV. 24. 10. A hundred: meaning 
1 infinite,’ according to the commentator. 

8 For his faithful friend: Professor Ludwig takes Vavatar to be 
the name of a king who has been deserted by Indra and consequently 
defeated in battle. Kdnva’s sacred grass: trimmed and prepared by 
Medhatithi and Medhyatithi, each of whom is a son of Kanva. 

10 Sabardughd : the general name of cows which supply the milk 
required for sacrificial purposes. Here Indra himself is intended, as is 
shown in the following line. 




HYMN 1.) 


THE RIG VEDA. 


133 


11 When Sdra wounded Etasa, with Yata’s rolling 

winged car 

Indra bore Kutsa Arjuneya off, and mocked Gan- 
dharva the unconquered one. 

12 He without ligature, before making incision in the 

neck, 

Closed up the wound again, most wealthy Maghavan, 
who healeth the dissevered parts. 

IS May we be never cast aside, and strangers, as it were, 
to thee. 

We, thunder-wielding Indra, count ourselves as trees 
rejected and unfit to burn. 

14 O Vritra-slayer, we were thought slow and unready 

for the fray. 

Yet once in thy great bounty may we have delight, 
O hero, after praising thee. 

15 If he will listen to my laud, then may our Soma- 

drops that flow 

Rapidly through the strainer gladden Indra, drops 
due to the Tugryas’ strcngthener. 

16 Come now unto the common laud of thee and of 

thy faithful friend. 

So may our wealthy nobles’ praise give joy to thee. 
Fain would I sing thine eulogy. 


11 Sdra: Su-rya, the Sun-god. Wounded: ‘harassed.’—Wilson. 
Etasa: a proUgi of Indra’s. See Vol. I., Index. Vdta : *the Wind- 
god. Kutsa: see Vol. I., Index. Ga.ndharva: the Sun. The mea¬ 
ning of the stanza is somewhat obscure. 

12 Closed up the wound again: healed Etasa who had been wounded 
by Surya. 

13 Count ourselves as trees: or, ‘count us not as trees,’ the meaning 
of na, ‘not’ and ‘like’ being ambiguous. 

15 Due to the Tugryas' strcngthener: that belong to Indra the 
protector of the chiefs of the race of Tugra, who appear to have 
been the patrons of the Rishis of Kanva’s family. 

16 Faithful friend: see Btanza 8. 



134 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

17 Press out the Soma with the stones, and in the waters 

wash it clean. 

The men investing it with raiment made of milk 
shall milk it forth from out the stems. 

18 Whether thou come from earth or from the lustre of 

the lofty heaven, 

Wax stronger in thy body through my song of praise : 
fill full all creatures, 0 most wise. 

19 For Indra press the Soma out, most gladdening and 

most excellent. 

May Sakra make it swell sent forth with every prayer 
and asking, as it were, for strength. 

20 Let me not, still beseeching thee with earnest song 

at Soma rites, 

Anger thee like some wild beast. Who would not 
beseech him who hath power to grant his prayer ? 

21 The draught made swift with rapturous joy, effectual 

with its mighty strength, 

All-conquering, distilling transport, let him drink : 
for he in ecstasy gives us gifts. 

22 Where bliss is not, may he, all-praised, god whom 

the pious glorify, 

Bestow great wealth upon the mortal worshipper 
who sheds the juice and praises him. 


17 From, out the stems: see Vedische Studien, I. 133. 178. Sayana 
explains the second line differently : “ (for by so doing) the leaders 
(of the rain, the Maruts) clothing (the sky with clouds) as with 
a vesture of the hide of the cow, milk forth (the water) for the 
rivers.”—Wilson. 

21 Let him drink : pibatu: supplied by the scholiast; there being 
no verb in the text. 

22 Where bliss is not: that is, in defeat and trouble. But the 
meaning of qevdre is uncertain. ‘ At the sacrifice,’ is Sayana’s ex¬ 
planation. Professor Roth suggests ‘in the treasure-chamber.’ I 
adopt Professor Ludwig’s interpretation. 



HYMN 1.] 


THE MOVED A. 


135 


23 Come, Indra, and rejoice thyself, 0 god, in manifold 

affluence. 

Thou fillest like a lake thy vast capacious bulk with 
Soma and with draughts besides. 

24 A thousand and a hundred steeds are harnessed to 

thy golden car. 

So may the long-maned bays, yoked by devotion, 
bring Indra to drink the Soma-juice. 

25 Yoked to thy chariot wrought of gold, may thy two 

bays with peacock tails, 

Convey thee hither, steeds with their white backs, 
to quaff sweet juice that makes us eloquent. 

26 So drink, thou lover of the song, as the first drinker, 

of this juice. 

This the outpouring of the savoury sap prepared is 
good and meet to gladden thee. 

27 He who alone by wondrous deed is mighty, strong 

by holy works, 

May he come, fair of cheek ; may he not stay afar, 
but come and turn not from our call. 

28 Sushna’s quick moving castle thou hast crushed to 

pieces with thy bolts. 

Thou, Indra, from of old, hast followed after light, 
since we have had thee to invoke. 

29 My praises when the sun hath risen, my praises at 

the time of noon, 

My praises at the coming of the gloom of night, 
O Vasu, have gone forth to thee. 


23 With draughts besides : ‘ with thy fellow-topers (the Maruts).’— 
Wilson. 

26 As the first drinker: “ According to the scholiast, purvapdk 
means V&yu, who, having arrived first in the race, drank the Soma 
before the other gods. The allusion is to the principal graha libation, 
called Aindravdyava, which Indra and Vdyu share together.”—Wilson. 

28 Castle: of cloud. Followed after light: to find and bring 
it back. 




THE HYMNS OF 


136 


[BOOK VILL 


30 Praise, yea, praise him. Of princes these are the 

most liberal of their gifts, 

These, Paratnajy4, Ninditasva, Prapathi, most boun¬ 
teous, 0 Medhy&tithi. 

31 When to the car, by faith, I yoked the horses longing 

for the way— 

For skilled is Yadu’s son in dealing precious wealth, 
he who is rich in herds of kine. 

32 May he who gave me two brown steeds together 

with their cloths of gold, 

May he, Asanga’s son Svanadratha, obtain all joy 
and high felicities. 

33 Playoga’s son Asanga, by ten thousand, 0 Agni, 

hath surpassed the rest in giving. 

For me ten bright-hued oxen have come forward 
like lotus-stalks from out a lake upstanding. 


30 Praise him: Indra. ParamajyA, Ninditasva, and Prapathi ap¬ 
pear to be the names of the chiefs who are praised for their liberality. 
Sayana makes Asanga the speaker : Praise me, for we are the most 
liberal givers : (praise me as one) who boars the best arras (parama- 
jy&), follows the right path (prapathi), and outstrips a horse in 
speed (ninditdsva). 

31 The horses: presented by the prince. Tho sentence is incom¬ 
plete. The scholiast supplies at the end of the line taddnim evam 
mdni stuhi , then praise me thus. Yadu’s sort: Asanga, descendant 
of the ancient eponymous hero Yadu. See Vol. I., Iudex. Rich in 
herds of kine: pasuh, which appears to be in apposition with Yddvah , 
is hardly intelligible hero. Sayana explains it as pasumdn, having 
beasts or cattle, or as a derivative of pas , to see, and meaning one 
who sees what is subtile, stikshmasya drashla. Neither of these 
explanations has anything but Sayana’s name to recommend it, 
but I adopt the former as a makeshift. 

33 Ten hright-hued oxen: meaniug ten thousand, according to 
Sayana. 




HYMN 2.] 


THE BIG VEDA. 


137 


34 What time her husband’s perfect restoration to his 
lost strength and manhood was apparent, 

His consort Sasvati with joy addressed him, Now 
art thou well, my lord, and shalt be happy. 

HYMN II. Indra. 

Here is the Soma-juice expressed ; 0 Vasu, drink 
till thou art full : 

Undaunted god, we give it thee. 

2 Washed by the men, pressed out with stones, strain¬ 

ed through the filter made of wool, 

’Tis like a courser bathed in streams. 

3 This juice have we made sweet for thee like barley, 

blending it with milk. 

Indra, I call thee to our feast. 


34 Asanga, the king whoso liberality, with that of his son (32), 
and perhaps his grandsons (30), has been eulogized in the four pre¬ 
ceding stanzas, had, the legend says, been changed to a woman by 
the imprecation of the gods and afterwards restored to his manhood 
in consequence of his repentance and the intercession of Medhatithi 
and Medhyitithi whom he richly rewarded. In this stanza Sasvati 
congratulates him on his restoration. Professor Ludwig and Grass- 
mann have translated the stanza more literally. 


The Rish'm are Medhatithi of the family of Kanva, and Priyamedhas 
of the family of Angiras. In stanzas 41, 42, the liberality of Vibhindu 
is said to be the deified object. The metre is Gayatri, except in 
stanza 28 where it is Auushtup. 

1 0 Vas-u: or, good lord, ‘Giver of dwellings,’ according to 
Sayana. 

2 Strained through the filter made of ivool: more literally, * cleansed 
by the tail-wool of the sheep,’ the material of which tlio sieve, 
strainer, or filter used for clearing and purifying tho Soma-juice was 
made. 

3 Like barley: or, like the sacrificial cake made of barley-meal. 




138 THE IIYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

4 Life of all life, Indra alone drinks up the flowing 

Soma-juice 

Among the gods and mortal men. 

5 The friend, whom not the brilliant-hued, the badly- 

mixt or bitter draught 
Repels, the far-extending god ; 

6 While other men than we with milk chase him as 

hunters chase a deer, 

And with their kine inveigle him. 

7 For him, for Indra, for the god, be pressed three 

draughts of Some-juice 
In the juice-drinker’s own abode. 

8 Three reservoirs exude their drops, filled are three 

beakers to the brim, 

All for one offering to the god. 

9 Pure art thou, set in many a vase, and blended in 

the midst with milk 
And curd, to cheer the hero best. 

10 Here, Indra, are thy Soma-draughts pressed out by 

us, the strong, the bright: 

They crave admixture of the milk. 

11 O Indra, pour in milk, prepare the cake, and mix the 

Soma-draught: 

I hear them sav that thou art rich. 

%/ 


4 Alone drinks up: he alone is to receive the entire libation, which 
other gods only share among them. 

5 Brilliant-hued: without sufficient mixture with milk to thicken 
it and change its colour. The meaning of this and the following 
stanza is : Indra prefers our libations, imperfectly prepared as they 
may be, to the milk-offerings with which other men endeavour to 
attract him. 

8 Three reservoirs : or troughs used in the preparation of the Soma- 
libations. They are called severally, dronakalasa, piltabhrit, and 
ddhavanlya. 




HYMN 2.] 


THE RIO VEDA. 


139 


12 Quaffed juices fight within the breast. The drunken 

praise not by their wine, 

The naked praise not when it rains. 

13 Rich be the praiser of one rich, munificent and 

famed like thee : 

High rank be his, O lord of bays. 

14 Foe of the man who pours no milk, he heeds not 

any chanted hymn 
Or holy psalm that may be sung. 

15 Give us not, Indra, as a prey unto the seornful or 

the proud: 

Help, mighty one, with power and might. 

16 This, even this, 0 Indra, we implore: as thy devoted 

friends, 

The Kanvas praise thee with their hymns. 

17 Naught else, O thunderer, have I praised in the 

skilled singer’s eulogy : 

On thy laud only have I thought. 


12 This stanza breaks the connexion between stanzas 11 and 13, 
and is in itself almost unintelligible. Professor Wilson paraphrasos, 
after Sayana : “ The potations (of Soma) contend in thy interior (for 
thine exhilaration) like the ebriety caused by wine : thy worshippers 
praise thee (filled full of Soma ) like the udder (of a cow with milk).” 
Sayana’s explanation of nagndh, naked men, as worshippers, stotdrah, 
‘who do not desert the verses of the Veda,’ is obviously impossible. 
Udkah, udder, frequently means the rainy sky, and it may have this 
meaning here; so that the sense of the passage may possibly be, as 
Professor Ludwig suggests, that neither great wealth nor abject 
poverty tends to make a man devout. The rich man when he drinks 
his wine at home and the ill clad wretch exposed to the drenching 
rain are equally regardless of the gods. 

13 Rich he the praiser of the rich : this appears to be the continu¬ 
ation of ‘ thou art rich’ of stanza 11. 

14 Indra will not accept worship without oblation. 




140 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VEIL 

18 The gods seek him who presses out the Soma ; they 

desire not sleep : 

They punish sloth unweariedly. 

19 Come hither swift with strengthening gifts—he not 

thou angry with us—like 
A great man with a youthful bride. 

20 Let him not, wrathful with us, spend the evening 

far from us to-day, 

Like some unpleasant son-in-law. 

21 For well we know this hero’s love, most liberal of 

the boons he gives, 

His plans whom the three worlds display. 

22 Pour forth the gift which Kapvas bring, for none 

more glorious do we know 
Than the strong lord with countless aids. 

23 0 presser, offer Soma first to Indra, hero, Sakra, 

him 

The friend of man, that he may drink ; 

24 Who, in untroubled ways, is best provider, for his 

worshippers, 

Of strength in horses and in kine. 

25 Prossers, for him blend Soma-juice, each draught 

most excellent, for him 
The brave, the hero, for his joy. 

26 The Vritra-slayer drinks the juice. May ho who 

gives a hundred aids 
Approach, nor stay afar from us. 


19 A great man: the exact meaning of makan, great, is not certain. 
Sayana explains it by gunairadhikah, eminent on account of his good 
qualities. “ Be not bashful, like the ardent husband of a new bride.”— 
Wilson. “ Like a rich man, newly married."—Grassmann. 

20 Like some unpleasant son-in-law : who sees that his company is 
unwelcome and consequently stays at home. 

23 First to Indra: see VIII. 1. 26. Sakra: Iudra, the mighty one. 



IIYMN 2.] 


THE R1GVEDA. 


141 


27 May the strong bay steeds, yoked by prayer, bring 

hither unto us our friend, 

Lover of song, renowned by songs. 

28 Sweet are the Soma-juices, come ! Blent are the 

Soma-juices, come ! 

Pushi-like, mighty, fair of cheek, come hither quick¬ 
ly to the feast. 

29 And lauds which strengthen thee for great bounty 

and valour, and exalt 
Indra who doeth glorious deeds, 

30 And songs to thee who lovest song, and all those 

hymns addressed to thee— 

These evermore confirm thy might. 

31 Thus he, sole doer of great deeds whose hand holds 

thunder, gives us strength, 

He who hath never been subdued. 

32 Vritra he slays with his right hand, even Indra, 

great with mighty power, 

And much-invoked in many a place. 

33 He upon whom all men depend, all regions, all 

achievements, he 

Takes pleasure in our wealthy chiefs. 

34 All this hath he accomplished, yea, Indra, most 

gloriously renowned, 

Who gives our wealthy princes strength. 

35 Who drives his chariot seeking spoil, even from afar, 

to him he loves : 

For swift is he to bring men wealth. 

36 The sage who, winning spoil with steeds, slays 

Vritra, hero with the men, 

His servant’s faithful succourer. 


34 All this hath he accomplished: the slaughter of Vritra and other 
great deeds; or, he mado all these creatures. 

3G The sage: Indra. With the men: accompanied by the Maruts.— S. 




142 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

37 O PriyamedMs, worship with collected mind this 

Indra whom 

The Soma hath full well inspired. 

38 Ye Kapvas, sing the mighty one, lord of the brave, 

who loves renown, 

All-present, glorified by song. 

39 Strong friend, who, with no trace of feet, restores 

the cattle to the men 
Who rest their wish and hope on him. 

40 Shaped as a ram, stone-hurler! once thou earnest 

hither to the son 
Of Kanva, wise Medhyatithi. 

41 Vibhindu, thou hast helped this man, giving him 

thousands four times ten, 

And afterward eight thousand more. 

42 And these twain who increase the milk, creative, 

daughters of delight, 

For wedlock sake hath he bestowed. 


37 Priyamedhds : one of the ftishis of the hymn. 

39 With no trace of feet: without tracking the lost cattle (the rays 
of light) by their footsteps. 

40 Shaped as a ram: ace I. 51. 1. The legend is told in the 
Shadvinsa Brdhmana, I. 1. 

41 Vibhindu : the prince, the institutor of the sacrifice. 

42 The stanza is obscure, the meaning of mdki , a feminine dual 
which Sayana explaius by nirm&tryau, makers or creators, i. e. heaven 
and earth, being uncertain. As Professor Ludwig observes, if mdki 
meant ‘great’ or ‘adult,’ two maidens given in marriage to the singer 
might be intended. Or if mdki stood for mdmaki the meaning might 
be, ‘lie has helped these two daughters of mine to marriage.’ Saya- 
na’s paraphrase of the stanza is : “I glorify these two (heaven and 
earth), the augmenters of water, the originators (of beings), the bene¬ 
factors of the worshipper, on account of their generation (of the 
wealth so given to me).”—Wilson. 



II K.J/iV 3 ] 


THE RWVEDA. 


M3 


HYMN III. Indra. 

Drink, Indra, of the savoury juice, and cheer thee 
with our milky draught. 

Be, for our weal, our friend and sharer of the feast, 
and let thy wisdom guard us well. 

2 In thy kind grace and favour may we still be strong: 

expose us not to foe’s attack. 

With manifold assistance guard and succour us, and 
bring us to felicity. 

3 May these my songs of praise exalt thee, lord, who 

hast abundant wealth. 

Men skilled in holy hymns, pure, with the hues of 
fire, have sung them with their lauds to thee. 

4 He, with his might enhanced by Rishis thousandfold, 

hath like an ocean spread himself. 

His majesty is praised as true at solemn rites, his 
power where holy singers rule. 

5 Indra for worship of the gods, Indra while sacrifice 

proceeds, 

Indra, as warriors in the battle-shock, we call, Indra 
that we may win the spoil. 

6 With might hath Indra spread out heaven and earth, 

with power hath Indra lighted up the Sun. 

In Indra are all creatures closely held ; in him meet 
the distilling Soma-drops. 

7 Men with their lauds are urging thee, Indra, to 

drink the Soma first. 

The Ribhus in accord have lifted up their voice, 
and Rudras sung thee as the first. 

In the last four stanzas the liberality of Pakasthaman is eulogized 
and regarded as the deified object. The Rishi is Medbyatithi of the 
family of Kanva. The metres are Brihati and Satobrihati in alternate 
verses, with Anushtup in stanza 21, Gayatri in 22, 23, and Brihati in 24. 
3 With the hues of fire: or, radiant as Agni. 

7 The Ribhus: as deities connected with the seasons which are 
regulated by the Sun whom Indra has caused to shine. 



144 TIIB HYMNS OF [BOOK V1H. 

8 Indra increased his manly strength at sacrifice, in the 

wild rapture of this juice. 

And living men to-day, even as of old, sing forth 
their praises to his majesty. 

9 I crave of thee that hero strength, that thou mayst 

first regard this prayer, 

Wherewith thou holpest Bhyigu and the Yatis and 
Praskanva when the prize was staked. 

10 Wherewith thou sentest mighty waters to the sea, 

that, Indra, is thy manly strength. 

For ever unattainable is this power of him to whom 
the worlds have cried aloud. 

11 Help us, 0 Indra, when we pray to thee for wealth 

and hero might. 

First help thou on to strength the man who strives 
to win, and aid our laud, 0 ancient one. 

12 Help for us, Indra, as thou holpest Paura once, this 

man’s devotions bent on gain. 

Help, as thou gavest Rusama and Sy&vaka and Svar- 
nara and Kripa aid. 

13 What newest of imploring prayers shall, then, the 

zealous mortal sing? 

For have not they who laud his might and Indra- 
power won for themselves the light of heaven ? 

14 When shall they keep the Law and praise thee mid 

the gods ? Who counts as Rishi and as sage ? 
When ever wilt thou, Indra Maghavan, come nigh 
to presser’s or to praiser’s call ? 

9 Bhrigu: see Vol. I., Index. Yatis : an ancient race of ascetics 
connected with the Bhrigus, aud, according to one legend, said to havo 
taken part in the creation of the world. Praskanva: a Rishi, sou of 
Kanva, the seer of some hymns of Book I. 

10 The worlds : all men, or all living creatures. 

12 Paura: the son of king Puru. Rusama, Sy&vaJca, Svarnara, 
and Kripa appear to have been princes especially favoured by Indra. 



HYMN 3 ] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


145 


15 These songs of ours exceeding sweet, these hymns 

of praise ascend to thee, 

Like ever-conquering chariots that display their 
strength, gain wealth and give unfailing aid. 

16 The Bhrigus are like suns, like Kanvas, and have 

gained all that their thoughts were bent upon. 

The living men of Priyamedhas’ race have sung 
exalting Indra with their lauds. 

17 Best slayer of the Vritras, yoke thy bay steeds, 

Indra, from afar. 

Come with the high ones hither, Maghavan, to us, 
mighty, to drink the Soma-juice. 

18 For these, the bards and singers, have cried out 

to thee with prayer, to gain the sacrifice. 

As such, O Maghavan, India, who lovest song, even 
as a lover hear my call. 

19 Thou from the lofty plains above, O Indra, hurledst 

Vritra down. 

Thou dravest forth the kine of guileful Mrigaya 
and Arbuda from the mountain’s hold. 

20 Bright were the flaming fires, the Sun gave forth 

his shine, and Soma, Indra’s juice, shone clear. 
Indra, thou blewest the great dragon from the air: 
men must regard that valorous deed. 

21 The fairest courser of them all, who runneth on as 

’twere to heaven, 

Which Indra and the Maruts gave, and Pakasth&man 
Kaurayan, 

22 To me hath Pakasthaman given a ruddy horse, good 

at the pole, 

Filling his girth and rousing wealth, 

18 To gain the sacrifice.: to ensure its proper performance and the 
blessings which flow from it. 

19 Mrigaya: see IV. 16. 13. Arbuda: see Vol. I., Index. Both 
were demons of the air. 

20 The. great dragon : or serpent, Ahl. 

21 Kaurayan: or Kaurayami, the son of Kuruyana, 

10 



THE HYMNS OP 


146 


[BOOK vm. 


23 Compared with whom no other ten strong coursers 

harnessed to the pole 
Bear Tugrya to his dwelling-place. 

24 Raiment is body, food is life, and healing ointment 

giveth strength. 

As the free-handed giver of the ruddy steed, I have 
named P4kasth4man fourth. 


HYMN IV. Indra. 

Though, Indra, thou art called by men eastward 
and westward, north and south, 

Thou chiefly art with Anava and Turvasa, brave 
champion ! urged by men to come. 

2 Or, Indra, when with Ruma, Rusama, Sy4vaka, and 

Kripa thou rejoicest thee, 

Still do the Kanvas, bringing praises, with their 
prayers, 0 Indra, draw thee hither: come. 

3 Even as the wild-bull, when he thirsts, goes to the 

desert’s watery pool, 

Come hither quickly both at morning and at eve, 
and with the Kanvas drink thy fill. 

4 May the drops gladden thee, rich Indra, and obtain 

bounty for him who pours the juice. 

Pressed Soma in the ladle didst thou take and drink, 
and hence hast won surpassing might. 


23 Tugrya: Bhujyu, son of Tngra. See Vol. I., Index. 

The deity of stanzas 15—18 is Pushan or Indra under that name; 
of 19—21 the liberality of Kurunga is the deified object. The Rishi 
is Devatithi of the family of Kanva. Tho metro is Brihati and 
Satobrihati in alternate stanzas with the exception of 21 in which it 
is Pina ushnih. 

1 Anava: descendant of the eponymous Anu. Turvasa: see 
Vol. 1., Index. 

2 Rusama, Sydvaka, and Kripa have been mentioned in stanza 12 
of the preceding hymn. Ruma was another of Indra’s favourites. 

3 The wild-bull: or Ganra (Bos Gaums), a kind of buffalo. 



HYMN 4 .] 


THE K1GVEDA. 


147 


5 With mightier strength he conquered strength, with 

energy he crushed their wrath. 

O Indra, strong in youth, all those who sought the 
fray bent and bowed down to thee like trees. 

6 He who wins promise of thine aid goes girt as with 

a thousand mighty men of war. 

He makes his son preeminent in hero might: he 
serves with reverential prayer. 

7 With thee, the mighty, for our friend, we will not 

fear or feel fatigue. 

May we see Turvasa and Yadu : thy great deed, O 
hero, must be glorified. 

8 On his left hip the hero hath reclined himself: the 

proffered feast offends him not. 

The milk is blended with the honey of the bee: 
quickly come hither, haste, and drink. 

9 Indra, thy friend is fair of form and rich in horses, 

cars, and kine. 

He evermore hath food accompanied by wealth, and 
radiant joins the company. 

10 Come like a thirsty antelope to the drinking-place: 

drink Soma to thy heart’s desire. 

Raining it down, 0 Maghavan, day after day, thou 
gainest thy surpassing might. 

11 Priest, let the Soma-juice flow forth, for Indra longs 

to drink thereof. 

He even now hath yoked his vigorous bay steeds: 
the Vritra-slayer hath come near. 

12 The people count themselves as pious offerers where 

thou with Soma fillest thee. 

This thine appropriate food is here poured out for 
thee : come, hasten forward, drink of it. 


7 May ive fee Titnasa and Yadu : enjoying happiness through thy 
favour.—S. 

10 Rain-inn it down : pouring down the transformed Soma in the 
shape of rain. See Vedische Studicn , I. 88. 




148 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VYtl. 

13 Press out the Soma-juice, ye priests, for Indra borne 

upon his car. 

The pressing-stones speak loud of Indra, while they 
shed the juice which, offered, honours him. 

14 To the brown juice may his dear vigorous bay steed3 

bring Indra, to our holy task. 

Hither let thy ear-steeds who seek the sacrifice 
bring thee to our drink-offerings. 

15 Pfishan, the lord of ample wealth, for firm alliance 

we elect. 

May he with wisdom, Sakra! looser! much-invoked! 
aid us to riches and to seed. 

16 Sharpen us like a razor in the barber’s hands; send 

riches, thou who settcst free. 

Easy to find with thee are treasures of the Dawn 
for mortal man whom thou dost speed. 

17 Phshan, I long to win thy love, I long to praise thee, 

radiant god. 

Excellent lord, ’tis strange to me, I like it not that 
Pajra should sing Sama songs. 

18 My kine, O radiant god, seek pasture where they 

will, my during wealth, immortal one. 

Be our protector, P&shan! be, most liberal lord, 
propitious to our gathering strength. 

19 Rich was the gift Kurunga gave, a hundred steeds 

at morning rites. 

Among the gifts of Turvasas we thought of him, 
the opulent, the splendid king. 

20 What by his morning songs Kanva, the powerful, 

hath, with the Priyamedhas, gained— 


15 Ptishan: may here be a name of Indra, according to Sayana. 
Looser: of thy chariot-horses when thou comest to sacrifices; or, 
according to Sayana, liberator (from sin). 

17 Pajra: one of the Pajras, a celebrated priestly family, with 
whom the Kanvas appear to have been on hostile terms. 

19 Kurunga: this prince’s name does not occur again. 




HYMN 5 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


149 


The herds of sixty thousand pure and spotless kine, 
have I, the Rishi, driven away. 

21 The very trees were joyful at my coming: kine 
they obtained in plenty, steeds in plenty. 

HYMN Y. Asvins. 

When, even as she were present here, red Dawn 
hath shone from far away, 

She spreadeth light on every side. 

2 Like heroes on your will-yoked car far-shining, won¬ 

der-workers ! ye 

Attend, O Asvins, on the Dawn. 

3 By you, 0 lords of noble mares, our songs of praise 

have been observed : 

As envoy have I brought the prayer. 

4 Kanvas must praise the Asvins dear to many, making 

many glad, 

Most rich, that they may succour us. 

5 Most liberal, best at winning strength, inciters, lords 

of splendour who 
Visit the worshipper’s abode. 

6 So for devout Sudeva dew with fatness his unfailing 

mead, 

And make it rich for sacrifice. 


20 iPure and spotless : I follow Sayana’s interpretation of nirmajdm, 
but its correctness is at least doubtful. Professor Itoth suggests 
* to the watering place ’ as the meaning of the word, and Professor 
Ludwig ‘so that nono remained behind.’ 


The donation of Kasu is the deified object of the latter half of 
stanza 37 and of 38 and 39. The Rishi is Brahmatithi of the family 
of Kanva. The metre is Brihati in stanzas 37, 38, Auusbtup in 39, 
and G&yatrt in the rest of the hymn. 

3 Lords of noble mares: ‘affluent in sacrifices.’—Wilson. See V. 
74. 7. 

As envoy : as the messenger of the patron of the sacrifice. 




ISO THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V-I1I. 

7 Hitherward running speedily with horses, as with 
rapid hawks, 

Come, Asvins, to our song of praise : 

R Wherewith the three wide distances, and all tho 
lights that are in heaven 
Ye traverse, and three times of night. 

9 O finders of the day, that we may win us food of 
kine and wealth, 

Open the paths for us to tread. 

10 O Asvins, bring us wealth in kine, in noble heroes, 

and in cars: 

Bring us the strength that horses give. 

11 Ye lords of splendour, glorified, ye wonder-workers 

borne on paths 

Of gold, drink sweets with Soma-juice. 

12 To us, ye lords of noble mares, and to our wealthy 

chiefs extend 

Wide shelter, ne’er to be assailed. 

13 Come quickly downward to the prayer of people 

whom ye favour most: 

Approach not unto other folk. 

14 Ye Asvins whom our minds perceive, drink of this 

lovely gladdening draught, 

The meath which we present to you. 

15 Bring riches hither unto us in hundreds and in 

thousands, source 
Of plenteous food, sustaining all. 

16 Verily sages oall on you, ye heroes, in full many a 

place. 

Moved by the priests, 0 Asvins, come. 

17 Men who have trimmed the sacred grass, bringing 

oblations and prepared, 

O Asvins, are invoking you. 


8 Times of night: ydmas, night-watches of three hours each. 

11 Sweets: or meath, madhu ; here, perhaps, the milk.—L. 

16 By the priests: vdghadbhih: according to Sayaria, ‘ with horses.’ 



1IYMN 5.) 


THE RIG VEDA. 


151 


18 May this our hymn of praise to-day, most powerful 

to bring you, be, 

0 Asvins, nearest to your hearts. 

19 The skin filled full of savoury meath, laid in the 

pathway of your car— 

O Asvins, drink ye both therefrom. 

20 For this, ye lords of noble mares, bring blessing for 

our herd, our kine, 

Our progeny, and plenteous food. 

21 And open unto us like doors the heavenly sources 

of our food, 

The rivers, ye who find the day. 

22 When did the son of Tugra serve you, men ? Ab¬ 

andoned in the sea, 

That with winged steeds your car might fly. 

23 Ye, O Nasatyas, ministered to Kanva every kind 

of aid, 

When blinded in the prison-house. 

24 Come near with those most recent aids of yours 

which merit eulogy, 

When I invoke you, wealthy gods. 

25 As ye protected Kartva erst, Priyamedha and Upas- 

tuta, 

Atri, Sinjara, Asvins twain ! 


19 The Asvins appear to ho invited to halt and drink the libations 
prepared for them by their worshippers, and not, as Sayana explains, 
to drink from the skin suspended in their own car.—L. 

22 The son of Tugra: Bhujyu, whose rescue by the Asvins has 
frequently been related and referred to. The meaning is, I do not 
honour you only when I am in distress, as others whom you have 
aided have done. 

23 Ministered to Kanva : see I. 112. 5, and 118. 7. 

24 Wealtlty gods : the meaning of vrishanvasA is uuccrtain : ‘ rich 
in showers' is Sayana’s explanation, and ‘ excellent as steers’ Professor 
Ludwig’s. I follow Professor Roth, but his interpretation is conjectural. 

25 Kanva, Priyamedha, Upastuta, and Atri have been mentioned iu 
Book I. Sayana takes sinj&ram to he an epithet of Atri, ‘repeating 
praises.’ 



152 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VILI. 

26 And Ansu in decisive fight, Agastya in the fray 

for kine, 

And, in his battles, Sobhari. 

27 For so much bliss, or even more, O Asvins, wealthy 

gods, than this, 

We pray while singing hymns to you. 

28 Ascend your car with golden seat, O Asvins, and 

with reins of gold, 

That reaches even to the sky. 

29 Golden is its supporting shaft, the axle also is of gold, 
And both the wheels are made of gold. 

30 Thereon, ye lords of noble mares, come to us even 

from afar, 

Come ye to this mine eulogy. 

31 From far away ye come to us, Asvins, enjoying 

plenteous food 
Of D&sas, O immortal ones. 

32 With splendour, riches, and renown, 0 Asvins, hither 

come to us, 

Nasatyas, shining brilliantly. 

33 May dappled horses, steeds who fly with pinions, 

bring you hitherward 
To people skilled in sacrifice. 

34 The wheel delayeth not that car of yours accom¬ 

panied by song, 

That cometh with a store of food. 


26 Ansu: a worshipper so named.—S. Agastya: appears in Book 
I. 117. 11, where he is said to have been the family-priest of Khela. 
The great Rishi Agastya is the sour of Hymus 106—191 of Book I. 
See also VII. 33. 10. Sobhari: a Rishi.—S. 

31 Plenteous food of F&sas : the meaning appears to be that even 
far away in the east the Dasas or non-Aryan inhabitants sacrifice to 
the Asvins. Sayana explains the stanza differently: “ Immortal 
Asvins, destroyers of the cities of the D&sas, ye bring to us food from 
afar.”—Wilson. 




HYMN G.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


153 


35 Borne on that chariot wrought of gold, with coursers 

very fleet of foot, 

Come, O Nasatyas, swift as thought. 

36 O wealthy gods, ye taste and find the brisk and 

watchful wild-beast good. 

Associate wealth with food for us. 

37 As such, O Asvins, find for me my share of new- 

presented gifts, 

As Kasu, Chedi’s son, gave me a hundred head of 
buffaloes, and ten thousand kine. 

38 He who hath given me for mine own ten kings like 

gold to look upon. 

At Chaidya’s feet are all the people round about, 
all those who think upon the shield. 

39 No man, not any, goes upon the path on which the 

Chcdis walk. 

No other prince, no folk is held more liberal of gifts 
than they. 

HYMN YI. Indra. 

Indra, great in his power and might, and like 
Parjanya rich in rain, 

Is magnified by Vatsa’s lauds, 


36 According to Sayana the watchful wild-beast is the Soma which 
must be chased or sought after by the gods. Professor Ludwig would 
read svapatho, with a transitive and causal meaning, instead of svadatho, 
i. e., ye when ye appear in the morning send to sleep the wild-beasts 
that have been awake all night. The stanza is obscure. 

37 Buffaloes : or camels. 

38 This stanza appears to be spoken by Kasu who is called Chaidya 
or son of Chedi. Who think upon the shield: who are practised in 
wearing armour of leather, according to Sayana. 

The donation of Tirindira is said to be the deified object of the last 
three stanzas. The Rishi is Vatsa of the family of kauva. The 
metre is Uayatri. 



154 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VHI. 

2 When the priests, strengthening the son of holy law, 

present their gifts, 

Singers with Order’s hymn of praise. 

3 Since Kanvas with their lauds have made Indra 

complete the sacrifice, 

Words are their own appropriate arms. 

4 Before his hot displeasure all the peoples, all the men, 

bow down, 

As rivers bow them to the sea. 

5 This power of his shone brightly forth when Indra 

brought together, like 
A skin, the worlds of heaven and earth. 

6 The fiercely-moving Vritra’s head he severed with 

his thunderbolt, 

His mighty hundred-knotted bolt. 

7 Here arc—we sing them loudly forth—our thoughts 

among the best of songs, 

Even lightnings like the blaze of fire. 

8 When hidden thoughts, spontaneously advancing, 

glow, and with the stream 
Of sacrifice the Kanvas shine. 

9 Indra, may we obtain that wealth in horses and in 

herds of kine, 

And prayer that we may know it first. 

10 I from my father have received deep knowledge of 

the holy law: 

I was born like unto the Sun. 

11 After the lore of ancient time I make, like Kanva, 

beauteous songs, 

And Indra’s self gains strength thereby. 


3 Words are their own appropriate arms.: ‘ they declare all weapons 
needless.’—Wilson. 

10 From my father; ‘from Indra, the true protector,' according to 
Sayana, 


HYMN 6.] 


THE RIGVEDA. 


155 


12 Whatever Rishis have not praised thee, Indra, or 

have lauded thee, 

By me exalted wax thou strong. 

13 When his wrath thundered, when he rent Vritra to 

pieces, limb by limb, 

Ho sent the waters to the sea. 

14 Against the Dasyu Sushna thou, Indra, didst hurl 

thy during bolt: 

Thou, mighty one, hast a hero’s fame. 

15 Neither the heavens nor firmaments nor regions of 

the earth contain 

Indra, the thunderer, with his might. 

16 0 Indra, him who lay at length staying thy copious 

waters thou, 

In his own footsteps, smotest down. 

17 Thou hiddest deep in darkness him, 0 Indra, who 

had set his grasp 

On spacious heaven and earth conjoined. 

18 Indra, whatever Yatis and Bhrigus have offered 

praise to thee, 

Listen, thou mighty, to my call. 

19 Indra, these spotted cows yield thee their butter 

and the milky draught, 

Aiders, thereby, of sacrifice; 

20 Which, teeming, have received thee as a life-germ, 

Indra, with their mouth, 

Like Sfirya who suStaineth all. 

12 Have not praised thee: have not praised thee yet, that is, will 
praise thee hereafter.—L, 

16 In his own footsteps: or, in the (waters) at his feet. ‘Into the 
rushing streams.’—Wilson. 

17 Conjoined; like two bowls turned towards each other. 

18 Yatis: • pious sages.’—Wilson. Angirasas, according to Sayana. 
20 The stanza is unintelligible to me. Sayana says that ‘ thee 

means Indra in the shape of the grass which bis fertilizing energy 
causes to grow, and by feeding on which the cows multiply. This 
energy of Indra’s is all-supporting like the sun. See Professor Wilson s 
Note. Professor Ludwig proposes an alteration of the text. 



156 THE HYMNS OF [EOOK VIII. 

21 0 lord of might, with hymns of praise the Kanvas 

have increased thy power, 

The drops poured forth have strengthened thee. 

22 Under thy guidance, Indra, mid thy praises, lord of 

thunder, shall 

The sacrifice be soon performed. 

23 Indra, disclose much food for us, like a strong-hold 

with store of kine : 

Give progeny and heroic strength. 

24 And, Indra, grant us all that wealth of fleet steeds 

which shone bright of old 
Among the tribes of Nahushas. 

25 Hither thou seeinest to attract heaven’s fold which 

shines before our eyes, 

When, Indra, thou art kind to us. 

26 Yea, when thou puttest forth thy power, Indra, 

thou governest the folk, 

Mighty, unlimited in strength. 

27 The tribes who bring oblations call to thee, to thee 

to give them help, 

With drops to thee who spreadest far. 

28 There where the mountains downward slope, there 

by the meeting of the streams 
The sage was manifest with song. 

29 Thence, marking, from his lofty place downward he 

looks upon the sea, 

And thence with rapid stir he moves. 

30 Then, verily, they see the light refulgent of prime¬ 

val seed, 

Kindled on yonder side of heaven. 

24 Tribes of Nahushas : or, perhaps, the neighbouring tribes. 

28 The. sage: Indra. “Sayana’s conclusion of the purport of the 
verse is, that meu ought to sacrifice in those places where Indra is 
said to bo manifested.”—Wilson. 

29 The sea : the reservoir of Soma-juice, 

30 The light: the sue which is lighted up beyond the range of 
men’s sight. 



HYMN 6.] 


THE RtGVEDA. 


157 


31 Indra, the Kapvas all exalt thy wisdom and thy 

manly power, 

And, mightiest! thine heroic strenath. 

1 o o 

32 Accept this eulogy of mine, Indra, and guard me 

carefully : 

Strengthen my thought and prosper it. 

33 For thee, 0 mighty, thunder-armed, we singers 

through devotion have 
Fashioned the hymn that we may live. 

34 To Indra have the Kanvas sung, like waters speed¬ 

ing down a slope: 

The song is fain to go to him. 

35 As rivers swell the ocean, so our hymns of praise 

make Indra strong, 

Eternal, of resistless wrath. 

36 Come with thy lovely bay steeds, come to us from 

regions far away : 

O Indra, drink this Soma-juice. 

3 7 Best slayer of the Yritras, men whose sacred grass is 

ready trimmed 

Invoke thee for the gain of strength. 

38 The heavens and earth come after thee as the wheel 

follows Etasa: 

To thee flow Soma-drops effused. 

39 Rejoice, O Indra, in the light, rejoice in Saryaijitv&n 

lake, 

Be joyful in Vivasvan’s hymn. 

40 Grown strong in heaven, the thunder-armed hath 

bellowed, Vritra-slayer, bull. 

Chief drinker of the Soma-juice. 


38 As the wheel follows Etasa : as the chariot of the Sun follows the 
horse that draws it. 

39 Saryandvdn lake : said to be on the borders of the district called 
Kuruhshetra. The name appears to have been applied by metaphor 
to a largo receptacle of Soma-juice. 



158 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

41 Thou art a Itishi born of old., sole ruler over all by 

might: 

Thou, Indra, guardest well our wealth. 

42 May thy bay steeds with beauteous backs, a hundred, 

bring thee to the feast, 

Bring thee to these our Soma-draughts. 

43 The Kanvas with their hymns of praise have magni¬ 

fied this ancient thought 
That swells with streams of meath and oil. 

44 Mid mightiest gods let mortal man choose Indra at 

the sacrifice, 

Indra, whoe’er would win, for help. 

45 Thy steeds, by Priyamedhas praised, shall bring 

thee, god whom all invoke, 

Hither to drink the Soma-juice. 

46 A hundred thousand have I gained from Parsu, from 

Tirindira, 

The presents of the Yadavas. 

47 Ten thousand head of kine, and steeds three times 

a hundred they bestowed 
On Pajra for the Sama-song. 

48 Kakuha hath reached up to heaven, bestowing buffa¬ 

loes yoked in fours, 

And matched in fame the Yadavas. 

HYMN VII. Maruts. 

0 Maruts, when the singer bids the Trishtup flow as 
food for you, 

Ye shine upon the mountain tops. 

4(> From Parsu , from Tirindira: ‘from Tirindira the son of 
Parsu.’—Wilson. 

Yddavas: or Yadus, descendants of the hero Yadu. 

47 Pajra: soo VI LI. 4. 17. 

48 Kakuha: or, the lofty one, meaning Tirindira. Buffaloes: or camels. 

The Rishi is Punarvatsn of the family of Kanva. The metre is Gayatri. 
1 The Trishtup: according to one of Havana's three interpretations, 
the Soma offering at the mid-day libation accompanied by hymns in 
the Trishtup metre. 



HYMN 7 .] THE RIG VEDA. 159 

2 When, bright ones, fain to show your might ye have 

determined on your course, 

The mountains bend and bow themselves. 

3 Loud roaring with the winds the sons of Prisni lift 

themselves aloft: 

They will milk out abundant food. 

4 The Maruts spread the mist abroad and make the 

mountains rock and reel, 

When with the winds they go their way; 

5 What time the rivers and the hills before your com¬ 

ing bow them down, 

So to sustain your mighty force. 

6 We call on you for aid by night, on you for succour 

in the day, 

On you while sacrifice proceeds. 

7 These, verily, wondrous, red of hue, speed on their 

courses with a roar 
Over the ridges of the sky. 

8 With might they drop the loosened rein so that the 

Sun may run his course, 

And spread themselves with beams of light. 

9 Accept, ye Maruts, this my song, accept ye this 

mine hymn of praise, 

Accept, Ttibhukshans, this my call. 

10 The dappled cows have poured three lakes, meath 

for the thunder-wielding god, 

From the great cask, the watery cloud. 

11 0 Maruts, quickly come to us when, longing for 

felicity, 

We call you hither from the sky. 

8 They drop the. loosened rein : they speed forward to prepare the 
■way for the Sun. 

9 Ribhukshnns: mighty ones, according to Sayana. 

10 The dappled cows : the Maruts. Three lakes : three large Soma 
receptacles, tho Dronakatasn, the Adhuvaniya, and the Piltabhrit. 
The meaning is, the Maruts have poured down abundant water from 
the rain cloud. 



160 TI1E HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

12 For, Rudras and Ribhukshans, ye, most bountiful, 

are in the house, 

Wise when the gladdening draught is drunk. 

13 0 Maruts, send us down from heaven riches distil¬ 

ling rapturous joy, 

With plenteous food, sustaining all. 

14 When, bright ones, hither from the hills ye have 

resolved to take your way, 

Rejoice you in the drops effused. 

15 Man should solicit with his lauds happiness which 

belongs to them, 

So great a band invincible. 

16 They who like fiery sparks with showers of rain 

blow through the heaven and earth, 

Milking the spring that never fails. 

17 With chariots and tumultuous roar, with tempests 

and with hymns of praise 
The sons of Prisni hurry forth. 

18 For wealth, we think of that whereby ye aided 

Yadu, Turvasa, 

And Kapva who obtained the spoil. 

19 May these our viands, bounteous ones! that flow in 

streams like holy oil, 

With Kanva’s hymns, increase your might. 

20 Where, bounteous lords for whom the grass is trim¬ 

med, are ye rejoicing now? 

What Brahman is adoring you ? 

21 Is it not there where ye of old, supplied with sacred 

grass, for lauds 

Inspired the strong in sacrifice ? 

22 They brought together both the worlds, the mighty 

waters, and the Sun, 

And, joint by joint, the thunderbolt. 

19 With Kdnva’s hymns : hymns of the llishi Punarvatsa, a descen¬ 
dant of Kanva. 

21 The strong in sacrifice : the Maghavans, wealthy worshippers. 



&YMR 7.] THE RIO VEDA. 161 

23 They sundered Vritra limb from limb and split the 

gloomy mountain-clouds, 

Performing an heroic deed. 

24 They reinforced the power and strength of Trita as 

he fought, and helped 
Indra in battle with the foe. 

25 They deck themselves for glory, bright, celestial, 

lightning in their hands, 

And helms of gold upon their heads. 

26 When eagerly ye from far away came to the cavern 

of the bull, 

He bellowed in his fear like Heaven. 

27 Borne by your golden-footed steeds, 0 gods, come 

hither to bestow 
Your gifts at this our festival. 

28 When on their car the spotted deer and the red 

leader bear them on, 

The bright ones go, and shed the rain. 

29 Sushoma, Saryao&vHn, and Arjika full of homes, 

have they, 

These heroes, sought with downward car. 

30 When, Maruts, will ye come to him, the singer 

who invokes you thus, 

With favours to your suppliant? 


24 Trita: a Vedic deity generally associated with Indra, Vayu, and 
the Maruts. See Vol. I., ludex. In battle with the foe: or, to over¬ 
come Vritra. 

26 The cavern of the bull: ‘ the opening of the rainy (firmament).’— 
Wilson. 

28 Leader : or side-horse. 

29 SaryandvAn: has occurred before (see I. 84, 14, and VII. 6. 39) 
as the name of a lake, used also to denote a Soma-receptacle. Arjika 
is said by Sayana to be the name of a district, and he takes sushoma 
(containing excellent Soma) to be an adjective qualifying it. Tho 
three words in this place probably denote celestial_reservoirs or vessels 
in which the heavenly Soma is purified. 

11 



m THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

81 When was it now, ye friends of whom? that ye left 
Indra all alone ? 

Who counteth on your friendship now ? 

32 The Kanvas sing forth Agni’s praise together with 

our Maruts’ who 

Wield thunder and wear swords of gold. 

33 Hither for new felicity may I attract the adorable, 
The heroes with their wondrous strength. 

34 Before them sink the very hills deeming themselves 

abysses : yea, 

Even the mountains bend them down. 

35 Steeds Hying on their tortuous path through mid¬ 

air carry them, and give 
The man who lauds them strength and life. 

36 Agni was born the first of all, like Sftrya lovely 

with his light: 

With lustre these have spread abroad. 

HYMN VIII. Asvins. 

With all the succours that are yours, O Asvins, 
hither come to us : 

Wonderful, borne on paths of gold, drink ye the 
meath with Soma-juice. 

2 Come now, ye Asvins, on your car decked with a 
sun-bright canopy, 


31 Ye friends of whom 1 : kadhapriyah : according to Sayana, ‘ye 

who are gratified by praise.’ Left Indra all alone f: This is merely a 

rhetorical question meaning, ye never did desert him. The Maruts 

alone stood by him when he fought with Vritra. 

33 The adorable : or, the impetuous ones, according to Roth. 

36 With lustre these have spread abroad: “then they (the Maruts) 

stood round in their radiance.” “ The scholiast intimates that this 

/ 

verse refers to the ceremony called Agnimdruta, when Agni is first 
worshipped, then the Maruts." —Wilson. 

The Rishi is Sadhvanaa of the family of Knnva. The metre is 
Anushtup. 



HJTMN 8.) 


THE RIG VEDA. 


163 


Bountiful, with your golden shapes, sages with depth 
of intellect. 

3 Come hither from the Nahushas, come, drawn by pure 

hymns, from mid-air: 

O Asvins, drink the savoury juice shed in the Kanvas’ 
sacrifice. 

4 Come to us hither from the heavens, cotoe from mid¬ 

air, well-loved by us: 

Here Kanva’s son hath pressed for you the pleasant 
meath of Soma-juice. 

5 Come, Asvins, to give ear to us, to drink the Soma, 

Asvins, come. 

Hail, strengtheners of the praise-song ! speed onward, 
ye heroes, with your thoughts. 

6 As, heroes, in the olden time the Rishis called you 

to their aid, 

So now, O Asvins, come to us, come near to this 
mine eulogy. 

7 Even from the luminous sphere of heaven come to 

us, ye who find the light, 

Carers for Vatsa, through our prayers and lauds, O 
ye who hear our call. 

8 Do others more than we adore the Alvins with their 

hymns of praise ? 

The Rishi Vatsa, Kaijva's son, hath magnified you 
with his songs. 

9 The holy singer with his hymns hath called you, 

Asvins, hitherward; 

Best Vritra-slayers, free from stain, as such bring 
us felicity. 


3 From the Nahushas: or, according to others, from the neigh¬ 
bouring people. 

7 Carers for Vatsa : ye wbo favour and provide for Vatsa, the 
Riahi of Hymn VI. of this Book. 




THE HYMNS OF 


164 


[BOOK VIII. 


10 What time, ye lords of noble mares, the lady moun¬ 

ted on your car, 

Then, 0 ye Asvins, ye attained all wishes that your 
hearts desired. 

11 Come thence, O Asvins, on your car that hath a 

thousand ornaments: 

Vatsa the sage, the sage’s son, hath sung a song of 
sweets to you. 

12 Cheerers of many, rich in goods, discoverers of 

opulence, 

The Asvins, priestly ministers, have welcomed this 
my song of praise. 

13 0 Asvins, grant us all rich gifts wherewith no man 

may interfere. 

Make us observe the stated times : give us not over 
to reproach. 

14 Whether, Nasatyas, ye be nigh, or whether ye be 

far away, 

Come thence, 0 Asvins, on your car that hath a 
thousand ornaments. 

15 Vatsa the Rishi with his songs, Nasatyas, hath 

exalted you: 

Grant him rich food distilling oil, graced with a 
thousand ornaments. 

16 Bestow on him, O Asvins, food that strengthens, and 

that drops with oil, 

On him who praises you for bliss, and, lords of 
bounty, prays for wealth. 

17 Come to us, ye who slay the foe, lords of rich 

treasure, to this hymn. 

0 heroes, give us high renown and these good things 
of earth for help. 

18 The Priyamedhas have invoked you with all succours 

that are yours, 

You, Asvins, lords of solemn rites, with calls entreat¬ 
ing you to come. 

10 The lady; Surja, daughter of the Sun, See, I. 116. 17. 



HYMN 9.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


1(5 


19 Come to as, Asvins, ye who bring felicity, aus¬ 

picious ones, 

To Vatsa who with prayer and hymn, lovers of song, 
hath honoured you. 

20 Aid us, O heroes, for those hymns for which ye 

helped Gosarya erst, 

Gave Vasa, Dasavraja aid, and Kanva and Medh&- 
tithi ; 

21 And favoured Trasadasyu, ye heroes, in spoil-deciding 

fray: 

For these, O Asvins, graciously assist us in acquiring 
strength. 

22 O Asvins, may pure hymns of ours, and songs and 

praises, honour you : 

Best slayers everywhere of foes, as such we fondly 
yearn for you. 

23 Three places of the Asvins, erst concealed, are made 

apparent now. 

Both sages, with the flight of Law come hither unto 
those who live. 

HYMN IX. Asvins. 

To help and favour Vatsa now, O Asvins, come ye 
hitherward. 

Bestow on him a dwelling spacious and secure, and 
keep malignities away. 


20 Gosarya : said by Say ana to be a name of Sayu. See I. 116, 
22. Vasa and Dasavraja are known only as protigis of the Asvins. 

21 Trasadasyu: see Vol. II., Index. 

23 Three places: according to Sayana, the three wheels of the 
Asvins’ chariot are intended. The three places can only be heaven, 
firmament, and earth, hidden during the darkness of night and made 
visible by the coming of the Asvins and Dawn. 

The Rishi is Sasakarna of tiie family of Kaijva. The metre is 
Gayatri in stanzas 2, 3, 20, 21 ; Brihati in 1, 4, 6, 14, 15; Kakup 
in 5; Trishtup in 10; Viraj in 11 ; Jagati in 12; and Anusbtup in 
the rest of the hymn. 

1 Vatsa : apparently auother name of the Rishi of the hymn. 




166 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

2 All manliness that is in heaven, with the five tribes, 

or in mid-air, 

Bestow, ye Asvins, upon us. 

3 Remember K&nva first of all among the singers, 

Asvins, who 

Have thought upon your wondrous deeds. 

4 Asvins, for you with song of praise this hot oblation 

is effused, 

This your sweet Soma-juiee, ye lords of noble mares, 
through which ye think upon the foe. 

5 Whatever ye have done in floods, in the tree, wonder¬ 

workers, and in growing plants, 

Therewith, O Asvins, succour me, 

6 What force, N&satyas, ye exert, whatever, gods, ye 

tend and heal, 

This your own Vatsa gains not by his hymns alone ; 
ye visit him who offers gifts. 

7 Now hath the Rishi splendidly thought out the 

Asvins’ hymn of praise. 

Let the Atharvan pour the warm oblation forth, 
and Soma very rich in sweets. 

8 Ye Asvins, now ascend your car that lightly rolls 

upon its way. 

May these my praises make you speed hitherward 
like a cloud of heaven. 


3 Thought upon : or touohed upon, handled. 

4 Think upon, the foe : meditate the destruction of Vritra. 

5 Whatever ye have done: Professor Wilson paraphrases after 
Sayana: “ preserve me with that (healing virtue) deposited by you 
in the waters, in the trees, in the herbs.” 

7 J'he Atharvan : the priest who has special charge of the fire and 
the Soma. I follow Professor Ludwig in taking atharvani as a nomi- 
[ pative and not as a locative as Sayana does: “ he will sprinkle the 
Bweet-flavoured Soma and the gharma (oblation) on the Atharvan 
fire.”—Wilson. 




HYMN 9 ] THE RIG VEDA. 167 

9 When, 0 Ndsatyas, we this day make you speed 
hither with our hymns, 

Or, Asvins, with our songs of praise, remember 
K&nva specially. 

10 As erst Kakshlvan and the Bishi Vyasva, as erst 

Dirghatam&s invoked your presence, 

Or, in the sacrificial chambers, Vainya Prithi, so 
be ye mindful of us here, 0 Asvins. 

11 Come as home-guardians, saving us from foemen, 

guarding our living creatures and our bodies, 

Come to the house to give us seed and offspring, 

12 Whether with Indra ye be faring, Asvins, or resting 

in one dwelling-place with Vayu, 

In concord with the Bibhus or Adityas, or standing 
still in Vishnu’s striding-places. 

13 When I, O Asvins, call on you to-day that I may 

gather strength, 

Or as all-conquering might in war, be that the 
Asvins’ noblest grace. 

14 Now come, ye Asvins, hitherward : here are oblations 

set for you; 

These Soma-draughts to aid Yadu and Turvasa, 
these offered you mid Kanva’s sons. 

15 Whatever healing balm is yours, Nasatyas, near or 

far away, 

Therewith, great sages, grant a home to Vatsa and 
to Vimada. 


10 Kakshtv&n : see I. IS. 1. Vyasva: see 1. 112. 15. Dlrghatamds: 
see Vo! I., Index. Vainya: son of Vena. Prithi: see I. 112. 15. 

11 Our living creatures : our dependents and our cattle. 

12 Vishnu's striding-places: from which he made bis three great 
strides, his rising, culmination, and setting as the sun. 

13 That: the granting of my request. 

15 And to Vimada: as ye did to Vimada,—S. See Vol. 1., Index. 


468 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

16 Together with the goddess, with the Alvins’ Speech 

have I awoke. 

Thou, goddess, hast disclosed the hymn, and holy 
gift from mortal men. 

17 Awake the Asvins, goddess Dawn! Up, mighty 

lady of sweet strains ! 

Rise, straightway, priest of sacrifice! High glory to 
the gladdening draught! 

18 Thou, Dawn, approaching with thy light shinest 

together with the Sun, 

And to this man-protecting home the chariot of 
the Asvins comes. 

19 When yellow stalks give forth the juice, as cows 

from udders pour their milk, 

And voices sound the song of praise, the Asvins’ 
worshippers show first. 

20 Forward for glory and for strength, protection that 

shall conquer men, 

And power and skill, most sapient ones ! 

21 When, Asvins, worthy of our lauds, ye seat you 

in the father’s house. 

With wisdom or the bliss ye bring. 


16 The goddess : Dawn. The A wins’ Speech : Vak or Speech who 
glorifies the Asvins; i.e. the hymn that praises them. 

19 Yellow stalks : of Soma plants. 

20 Forward for glory : advance and come to give us glory, etc. 

21 In the father’s house : in the sacrificial hall of the father of 
the family, the wealthy householder who institutes the sacrifice. 
This stanza is a continuation of 19, although the connexion is inter¬ 
rupted by the intervening stanza. 


H¥MN 10.] 


THE RIGVEDA. 


1&9 


HYMN X. Asvins. 

Whether ye travel far away or dwell in yonder light 
of heaven, 

Or in a mansion that is built above the sea, come 
thence, ye Asvins, hitherward. 

2 Or if for Manu ye prepared the sacrifice, remember 

also Kanva’s son. 

I call Brihaspati, Indra, Vishnu, all the gods, the 
Asvins borne by rapid steeds. 

3 Those Asvins I invoke who work marvels, brought 

hither to receive, 

With whom our friendship is most famed, and kin¬ 
ship passing that of gods. 

4 On whom the solemn rites depend, whose worship¬ 

pers rise without the sun. 

These who foreknow the holy work of sacrifice, and 
by their godhead drink the sweets of Soma-juice. 

5 Whether ye, lords of iloble mares, now linger in the 

east or west, 

With Druhyu, or with Anu, Yadu, Turvasa, I call 
you hither, come to me. 

6 Lords of great riches, whether through the firma¬ 

ment ye fly, or speed through heaven and earth, 
Or with your godlike natures stand upon your cars, 
come thence, 0 Asvins, hitherward. 


The Rishi is Pragatha of the family of Kanva. The metre is Brihati 
in Btanzas 1, 5; Madhycjyotistrishtup (a different arrangement of the 
44 syllables) in 2 ; Anushtup in 3; Astarapankti (8 + 8 + 12 + 12) in 
4; and Sato brihati in 6. 

1 Above the sea : above the ocean of air. 

3 To receive : our oblations. 

4 Without the sun : Sayana explains asilre differently, connecting it 
with s&ri instead of s Hra : “ of whom there are worshippers in a place 
where there is no worship.”—Wilson. 

5 Druhyu and the other names stand for the tribes called after 
these ancient chieftains. See Yol. I., Index. 



170 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK mi. 


HYMN XI. Agni. 

Thou, Agni, god mid mortal men, art guard of sacred 
rites, thou art 
To be adored at sacrifice. 

2 O mighty Agni, thou must be glorified at our festivals, 
Bearing our offerings to the gods. 

3 O Jltavedas Agni, fight and drive our foes afar from 

us, 

Them and their godless enmities. 

4 Thou, J&tavedas, seekest not the worship of a hos¬ 

tile man, 

However nigh it be to thee. 

5 We sages, mortals as we are, adore the mighty name 

of thee, 

Immortal Jatavedas’ name. 

6 Sages, we call the sage to help, mortals, we call the 

god to aid : 

We call on Agni with out songs. 

7 May Vatsa draw thy mind away even from thy loft¬ 

iest dwelling-place, 

Agni, with song that yearns for thee. 

8 Thou art the same in many a place: mid all the 

people thou art lord. 

In fray and fight we call on thee. 

9 When we are seeking strength we call Agni to help 

us in the strife, 

The giver of rich gifts in war. 

10 Ancient, adorable at sacrifices, priest from of old> 
meet for our praise, thou sittest. 

Fill full and satisfy thy body, Agni, and win us 
happiness by offering worship. 

The Rishi is Vatsa of the family of Kanva. The metre is Gayatri 
fin the'shorter forms called Pratishth* and Vardham&na in stanzas 
1 2), with Trishtnp in the last stanza. The hymn is translated m 
Professor Max Mtiller’s History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature. 

2 Bearing our offerings to the gods : literally, ‘ the charioteer of 
solemn rites.’ 



HYMN 12] 


TUB RIG VEDA. 


171 


HYMN XII. Indra. 

Joy, mightiest Indra, known and marked, sprung 
most from Soma-draughts, wherewith 
Thou smitest down the greedy fiend, for that we 
long. 

2 Wherewith thou holpest Adhrigu, the great Dasagva, 
and the god 

Who stirs the sunlight, and the Sea, for that we 
long. 

8 Wherewith thou dravest forth like cars Sindhu and 
all the mighty floods 

To go the way ordained by Law, for that we long. 

4 Accept this laud for aid, made pure like oil, thou 

caster of the stone, 

Whereby even in a moment thou hast waxen great. 

5 Be pleased, song-lover, with this song: it flows 

abundant like the sea. 

Indra, with all thy succours thou hast waxen great. 

6 The god who from afar hath sent gifts to maintain 

our friendship’s bond, 

Thou, spreading them like rain from heaven, hast 
waxen great. 

7 The beams that mark him have grown strong, the 

thunder rests between his arms, 


The Riahi is Parvata of the family of Kanva. The metre is Ushnib 
(8 + 8 + 12 ). 

1 Joy: madah: the rapturous exhilaration produced in Indra by 
drinking the Soma-juice. For that we long: the short refrain or 
burthen which generally concludes each stanza of each triplet of this 
hymn is sometimes rather loosely attached and cannot alwaya be 
clearly brought out in the proper place in translation. 

2 Adhrigu : according to Sayana a Rishi so named. See I. 112. 20. 
Dasagva: one of the priestly family connected with, or identical with, 
the Angirasas; * the acoomplisher of the ten (months’ rite).’—Wilson. 
Professor Ludwig thinks that Dasagva here may mean the Sun. The 
Sea; of air. 



172 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

When, like the Sun, he hath increased both heaven 
and earth. 

8 When, mighty lord of heroes, thou didst eat a 

thousand buffaloes, 

Then grew and waxed exceeding great thine Indra- 
power. 

9 Indra consumeth with the rays of Sftrya the mali¬ 

cious man : 

Like Agni conquering the woods, he hath grown 
strong. 

10 This newest thought of ours that suits the time ap¬ 

proaches unto thee : 

Serving, beloved in many a place, it metes and 
marks. 

11 The pious germ of sacrifice directly purifies the soul. 
By Indra’s lauds it waxes great, it metes and marks. 

12 Indra who wins the friend hath spread himself to 

drink the Soma-draught : 

Like worshipper’s dilating praise; it metes and 
marks. 

8 Didst eat a thousand buffaloes: the buffaloes probably represent 
the clouds which the sun dissipates or consumes.—L. “ When thou 
hast slain thousands of mighty foes."—Wilson. 

10 It metes and marks: defines and discriminates Indra’s good 
qualities.—S. 

11 The germ of sacrifice is probably the wish that prompts the 
offering. 

Sayana oxplains differently: “The devout praiser of the adorable 
(Indra) purifies in due succession the offering (of the Soma); with 
aacred hymns he magnifies (the might) of Indra; be verily proclaims 
the measure (of his merits).” 

12 Worshipper’s dilating praise: I follow Sayana: but the stanza is 
unintelligible to me. “ Indra, the benefactor of his friend (the wor¬ 
shipper), has enlarged himself to drink the Soma, in like manner 
as the pious praise dilates and proclaims the measure of his merits.”— 
Wilson. The meaning of vdsi (praise, according to Sayana) is uncer¬ 
tain. Professor Roth thinks that the two press-Btones are meant, and 
others explaiu it as the sword, knife, or axe used iu sacrifice. 



HY'MN 12 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


173 


13 He whom the sages, living men, have gladdened, 

offering up their hymns, 

Hath swelled like oil of sacrifice in Agni’s mouth. 

14 Aditi also hath brought forth a hymn for Indra, 

sovran lord : 

The work of sacrifice for help is glorified. 

15 The ministering priests have sung their songs for 

aid and eulogy : 

God, thy bays turn not from the rite which Law 
ordains. 

16 If, Indra, thou drink Soma by Vishnu’s or Trita 

Aptya’s side, 

Or with the Maruts take delight in flowing drops; 

17 Or, Sakra, if thou gladden thee afar or in the sea of 

air, 

Rejoice thee in this juice of ours, in flowing drops. 

18 Or, lord of heroes, if thou aid the worshipper who 

sheds the juice, 

Or him whose laud delights thee, and his flowing 
drops. 

19 To magnify the god, the god, Indra, yea, Indra for 

your help, 

And promptly end the sacrifice—this have they 

20 With worship, him whom men adore, with Soma, 

him who drinks it most, 

Indra with lauds have they increased—this have 
they gained. 

21 His leadings are with power and might and his in¬ 

structions manifold : 

He gives the worshipper all wealth : this have they 
gained. 

16 Trita Aptya : a mythical being who dwells in the most distant 
part of the heavens. See I. 105. 9. 




174 THE HYMNS OF fj BOOK VMI. 

22 For slaying Vritra have the gods set Indra in the 

foremost place. 

Indra the choral bands have sung, for vigorous 
strength. 

23 We to the mighty with our might, with lauds to him 

who hears our call, 

With holy hymns have sung aloud, for vigorous 
strength. 

24 Not earth, nor heaven, nor firmaments contain the 

thunder-wielding god : 

They shake before his violent rush and vigorous 
strength. 

25 What time the god8, 0 Indra, set thee foremost in 

the furious fight, 

Then thy two beautiful bay steeds carried thee on. 

26 When Vritra, stayer of the floods, thou slewest, 

thunderer, with might, 

Then thy two beautiful bay steeds carried thee on. 

27 When Vishnu, through thine energy, strode wide 

those three great steps of his, 

Then thy two beautiful bay steeds carried thee on. 

28 When thy two beautiful bay steeds grew great and 

greater day by day, 

Even then all creatures that had life bowed down to 
thee. 

29 When, Indra, all the Marut tribes humbly submit¬ 

ted them to thee, 

Even then all creatures that had life bowed down to 
thee. 

30 When yonder Sun, that brilliant light, thou settest 

in the heaven above, 

Even then all creatures that had life bowed down to 
thee. 



HYMN 13 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


175 


31 To thee, 0 Indra, with his thoughts the sage lifts 

up this eulogy, 

Akin and leading as on foot to sacrifice. 

32 When in thine own dear dwelling all gathered have 

lifted up the voice, 

Milk-streams at worship’s central spot, for sacrifice, 

33 As priest, 0 Indra, give us wealth in brave men and 

good steeds and kine 

That we may first remember thee for sacrifice. 

HYMN XIII. Indra. 

Indra, when Soma-juices flow, makes his mind pure 
and meet for lauds. 

He gains the power that brings success, for great 
is he. 

2 In heaven’s first region, in the seat of gods, is he 

who brings success, 

Most glorious, prompt to save, who wins the water- 
floods. 

3 Him, to win strength, have I invoked, even Indra 

mighty for the fray. 

Be thou most near to us for bliss, a friend to aid. 

4 Indra, song-lover, here for thee the worshipper’s 

libation flows. 

Rejoicing in this sacred grass thou shinest forth. 


31 The second line is difficult. Professor Wilson, following Sayana, 
paraphrases the stanza : “ The wise (worshipper), Indra, offers thee this 
gratifying sincere praise along with pious rites at the sacrifice, as (a 
man places) a kinsman in (a prominent) position.” 

32 Milk-streams: the sweetly flowing hymns. 

Professor Wilson remarks : “ This is probably an ancient hymn, both 
by its repetitions and combination of simplicity and obscurity.” 


The Rishi is Narada of the family of Kanva. The metre is 
Ushnih. 



176 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Till. 

5 Even now, 0 Indra, give us that which, pressing 

juice, we crave of thee. 

Bring us wealth manifold which finds the light of 
heaven. 

6 What time the zealous worshipper hath boldly sung 

his songs to thee, 

Like branches of a tree up-grows what they desire. 

7 Generate songs even as of old, give ear unto the 

singer’s call: 

Thou for the pious hast grown great at each carouse. 

8 Sweet strains that glorify him play like waters 

speeding down a slope, 

Yea, him who in this song is called the lord of 
heaven; 

9 Yea, Vho alone is called the lord, the single ruler of 

the folk, 

By worshippers seeking aid : may he joy in the 
draught. 

10 Praise him, the glorious, skilled in song, lord of the 

two victorious bays : 

They seek the worshipper’s abode who bows in 
prayer. 

11 Put forth thy strength : with dappled steeds come, 

thou of mighty intellect, 

With swift steeds to the sacrifice, for ’tis thy joy. 

12 Grant wealth to those who praise thee, lord of 

heroes, mightiest Indra : give 
Our princes everlasting fame and opulence. 

13 I call thee when the sun is risen, I call thee at the 

noon of day: 

With thy car-horses, Indra, come well-pleased to us. 


7 Generate songs: by granting the prayers of the singers. 



HYMN 13 .] 


TIIE RIG VEDA. 


177 


14 Speed forward hither, come to us, rejoice thee in the 

milky draught: 

Spin out the thread of ancient time, as well is known. 

15 If, Sakra, Vritra-slayer, thou be far away or near 

to us, 

Or in the sea, thou art the guard of Soma-juice. 

16 Let songs we sing and Soma-drops expressed by us 

make Indra strong: 

The tribes who bring oblations find delight in him. 

17 Him sages longing for his aid, with offerings brought 

in eager haSte, 

Him, even as branches, all mankind have magnified. 

18 At the Trikadrukas the gods span sacrifice that 

stirred the mind: 

May our songs strengthen him who still hath 
strengthened us. 

19 When, true to duty, at due times the worshipper 

offers lauds to thee, 

They call him purifier, pure, and wonderful. 

14 Spin out the thread of ancient times: ‘extend the ancient 
sacrifice.’—Wilson. 

The due performance of sacrifice is regarded as an uubroken thread 
reaching through a succession of Rishis from ancient to modern times. 

15 In the sea: in the firmament, or ocean of air. 

17 Even as branches: kshonih (mankind) is differently explained 

by Sayana : ‘ the earth, (and other worlds, spread out) like the 

branches of a tree.’—Wilson. 

18 At the Trikadrukas : according to Sayana these are the first 
three days of the Abhiplava ceremony. According to some modern 
scholars they are probably three peculiar Soma-vessels, or an oblatiou 
consisting of three offerings of Soma. 

That stirred the mind: that urged others to follow the example. 
Span sacrifice: see above, note on 14. 

19 Him: a change of person, Indra being meant. 

12 



THE HYMNS OF 


178 


[book vrri. 


20 That mind of Rudra, fresh and strong, moves 
conscious in the ancient ways, 

With reference whereto the wise have ordered this. 

2J If thou elect to be my friend drink of this sacrificial 
juice, 

By help whereof we may subdue all enemies. 

22 0 Indra, lover of the song, when shall thy praiser 

be most blest ? 

When wilt thou grant us wealth in herds of kine 
and steeds I 

23 And thy two highly-lauded bays, strong stallions, 

draw thy car who art 

Untouched by age, most gladdening car for which 
we pray. 

24 With ancient offerings we implore the young and 

strong whom many praise. 

He from of old hath sate upon dear sacred grass. 

25 Wax mighty, thou whom many laud for aids which 

Rishis have extolled. 

Four down for us abundant food and guard us well. 

26 O Indra, caster of the stone, thou helpest him 

who praises thee : 

From sacrifice I send to thee a mind-yoked hymn. 

27 Here, yoking for the Soma-draught these horses, 

sharers of thy feast, 

Thy bay steeds, Indra, fraught with wealth, consent 
to come. 

28 Attendants on thy glory, let the Rudras roar assent 

to thee, 

And all the Marut companies come to the feast. 


20 Have, ordered tin's : song of praise, or holy ceremony.—L. 

26 Mind-yoked: made ready l>y the poet’s mind, as a chariot—to 
which flu; hvmn is frequently compared—is equipped for a journey. 
28 The Rudras: the sous of Rudra, the Maruts. 




■HYMN 14 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


179 


29 These his victorious followers hold in the heavens 

the place they love, 

Leagued in the heart of sacrifice, as well we know. 

30 That we may long behold the light, what time the 

ordered rite proceeds, 

He duly measures, as he views, the sacrifice. 

31 0 Indra, strong is this thy car, and strong are these 

bay steeds of thine : 

O Satakratu, thou art strong, strong is our call. 

32 Strong is the press-stone, strong thy joy, strong is 

the flowing Soma-juice : 

Strong is the rite thou furtherest, strong is our call. 

33 As strong I call on thee the strong, O thunderer 

with thy thousand aids : 

For thou hast won the hymn of praise. Strong is 
our call. 

HYMN XIV. Indra. 

If I, O Indra, were, like thee, the single sovran of 
all wealth, 

My worshipper should be rich in kine. 

2 I should be fain, O lord of power, to strengthen 
and enrich the sage. 

Were I the lord of herds of kine. 


29 The heart, literally navel, that is the central point, of sacrifice, 
is the receptacle on which oblations are placed or the ittlaravedi or 
north altar. 

31 Stron;/: vrithA: as has been noticed before (see I. 177. 2, 3.) 
some of the Vedic poets delight in the repetition of this word and 
derivatives from the same root. Say ana explains vrishd: as‘showerer 
of benefits,’ and Professor Ludwig translates it by ‘ stierkriiftig,’ 
strong as a bull. The original meaning of the word is male, mascu¬ 
line, and, hence, strong. 

The Rishis are Goshuktin and Asvasdktin of the family of Kanva. 
The metre is Gayatri. 




180 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIIf. 

3 To worshippers who press the juice thy goodness, 

Indra, is a cow 

Yielding in plenty kine and steeds. 

4 None is there, Indra, god or man, to hinder thy 

munificence, 

The wealth which, lauded, thou wilt give. 

5 The sacrifice made Indra strong when he unrolled 

the earth, and made 
Himself a diadem in heaven. 

6 Thine aid we claim, 0 Indra, thine who after thou 

hast waxen great 

Hast won all treasures for thine own. 

7 In Soma’s ecstasy Indra spread the firmament and 

realms of light, 

When he cleft Vala limb from limb. 

8 Showing the hidden he drave forth the cows for 

the Angirasas, 

And Vala he cast headlong down. 

9 By Indra were the luminous realms of heaven estab¬ 

lished and secured, 

Firm and immoveable from their place. 

10 Indra, thy laud moves quickly like a joyous wave of 

water-floods: 

Bright shine the drops that gladden thee. 

11 For thou, O Indra, art the god whom hymns and 

praises magnify : 

Thou blessest those who worship thee. 

12 Bay horses with their long manes bring Indra to 

drink the Soma-juice, 

The bountiful to our sacrifice. 

13 With waters’ foam thou torest off, Indra, the head 

of Namuchi, 

Subduing all contending hosts. 

13 With waters’ foam : with a thunderbolt in the form of foam, 
according to a later legend. See Muir, 0. S. Texts, V. 94. 



BYMiV 15 } 


THE RIG VEDA. 


181 


14 The Dasyus, when they fain would climb by magic 

arts and mount to heaven, 

Thou, Indra, castest down to earth. 

15 As Soma-drinker conquering all, thou seatteredst to 

every side 

Their band who poured no gifts to thee. 

HYMN XY. Indra. 

Sing forth to him whom many men invoke, to him 
whom many laud: 

Invite the powerful Indra with your songs of praise. 

2 Whose lofty might—for doubly strong is he—sup¬ 

ports the heavens and earth. 

And hills and plains and Hoods and light with manly 
power. 

3 Such, praised by many ! thou art king : alone thou 

smitest Vritras dead, 

To gain, O Indra, spoils of war and high renown. 

4 We sing this strong and wild delight of thine which 

conquers in the fray, 

Which, caster of the stone ! gives room and shines 
like gold. 

5 Wherewith thou also foundest lights for Ayu and for 

Manu’s sake : 

Now joying in this sacred grass thou beamest forth. 

6 This day too singers of the hymn praise, as of old, 

this might of thine : 

Win thou the waters day by day, thralls of the 
strong. 


The Rishis ate Goshuktin and Asvasuktiii. The metre is Ushnih. 

4 Wild delight: Soma-juice, the cause of thy rapture. 

5 For Ayu and for ilanus sale.: that is for man. Ayu was the 
son of Pururavas and Urvasi. 

6 Thralls of the slrony: controlled and imprisoned by Vritra. 



182 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK VIII. 

7 That lofty Indra-power of thine, thy strength and 

thine intelligence, 

Thy thunderbolt for which we long, the wish makes 
keen, 

8 0 Indra, heaven and earth augment thy manly 

power and thy renown : 

The waters and the mountains stir and urge thee on, 

9 Vishnu the lofty ruling power, Varujja, Mitra sing 

thy praise : 

In thee the Maruts’ company have great delight. 

JO O Indra, thou wast born the lord of men, most 
liberal of tl^ gifts : 

Excellent deeds for evermore are all thine own. 

J1 Ever, alone, 0 highly-praised, thou sendest Vritras 
to their rest: 

None else than Indra executes the mighty deed. 

12 Though here and there, in varied hymns, Indra, men 
call on thee for aid, 

Still with our heroes fight and win the light of 
heaven. 

J3 Already have all forms of him entered our spacious 
dwelling-place : 

For victory make thou Indra glad, the lord of might, 

HYMN XVI. Indra. 

Praise Indra whom our songs must laud, sole sovran 
of mankind, the chief 
Most liberal who controlleth men. 


7 The wish: onr wishes expressed in prayer and praise. 

13 All forms of him: the various qualities of India have been 
celebrated. 

Make thou: the Rishi addresses himself. Lord of might: sachl- 
patim: in later literature, lord or husband of Sachi or his might 
personified and regarded as his consort. 

The Rishi is Irimbithi of the family of Kanva. The metre iq 
Gayatri. 



HYMN 16 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


183 


2 In whom the hymns of praise delight, and all the 

glorv-giving songs, 

Like the floods’ longing for the sea. 

3 Him I invite with eulogy, best king, effective in the 

fight, 

Strong for the gain of mighty spoil. 

4 Whose perfect ecstasies are wide, profound, victori¬ 

ous, and give 

Joy in the field where heroes win. 

5 Him, when the spoils of war are staked, men call 

to be their advocate : 

They who have Indra win the day. 

G Men honour him with stirring songs, and magnify 
with solemn rites : 

Indra is he who giveth ease. 

7 Indra is priest and Rishi, he is much invoked by 

many men, 

And mighty by his mighty powers. 

8 Meet to be lauded and invoked, true hero with his 

deeds of might, 

Victorious even when alone. 

9 The men, the people magnify that Indra with their 

SHma songs, 

With hymns and sacred eulogies : 

10 Him who advances them to wealth, sends light to 

lead them in the war, 

And quells their foemcn in the fray. 

11 May he, the saviour much-invoked, may Indra bear 

us in a ship 

Safely beyond all enemies. 

12 As such, 0 Indra, honour us with gift of strength, 

further thou us, 

And lead us to felicity. 

7 Priest: brahmA, meaning, according to Sayana, greater than all. 
See VI. 45. 7, “ The Brahman who accepts the prayer,” that is, Indra 
regarded as a priest. Rishi: according to Sayana, ‘ the beholder of 
all the Aryan race.' 



184 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

HYMN XVII. Indra. 

Come, we have pressed the juice for thee ; O Indra, 
drink this Soma here : 

Sit thou on this my sacred grass. 

2 O Indra, let thy long-maned bays, yoked by prayer, 

bring thee hitherward: 

Give ear and listen to our prayers. 

3 We Soma-bearing Brahmans call thee Soma-drinker 

with thy friend, 

We, Indra, bringing Soma-juice. 

4 Come unto us who bring the juice, come unto this 

our eulogy, 

Fair-visored ! drink thou of the juice. 

5 I pour it down within thee, so through all thy 

members let it spread : 

Take with thy tongue the pleasant drink. 

6 Sweet to thy body let it be, delicious be the savoury 

juice : 

Sweet be the Soma to thine heart. 

7 Like women, let this Soma-draught, invested with 

its robe, approach, 

O active Indra, close to thee. 

8 Indra, transported with the juice, vast in his bulk, 

strong in his neck 

And stout arms, smites the Vritras down. 

9 0 Indra, go thou forward, thou who rulest over all 

by might: 

Thou Vritra-slayer slay the fiends. 


The Rishi is Irimbithi of the family of Kanva. The metre of 
Btanza 14 is Brihati, of 15 Satobrihati, and of the rest Gayatri. 

3 With thy friend: Indra’a companion, the thunderbolt. ‘With 
suitable praise.’—Wilson. 

7 Like women dressed in white garments and moving slowly. Its 
robe: the milk that colours it. 



HYMN 17 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


185 


10 Long be thy grasping-hook wherewith thou givest 

ample wealth to him 
Who sheds the juice and worships thee. 

11 Here, Indra, is thy Soma-draught, made pure upon 

the sacred grass: 

Run hither, come and drink thereof. 

12 Famed for thy radiance, worshipped well! this juice 

is shed for thy delight : 

Thou art invoked, Akhandala ! 

13 To Kundapayya, grandson’s son, grandson of Sringa¬ 

vrish ! to thee, 

To him have I addressed my thought. 

14 Strong pillar thou, lord of the home! armour of 

Soma-offerers: 

The drop of Soma breaketh all the strong-holds 
down, and Indra is the Rishis’ friend. 


12 Famed for thy radiance, worshipped well: the words thus ren¬ 
dered, Sdchigo and Sdchijriljana, have not been satisfactorily explained 
by the commeutator, and their meaning is still uncertain. According 
to Sayana the former may mean ‘ thou whose cattle are strong,’ or 
‘ thou whose radiance is renowned,’ and the latter ‘ thou of renowned 
adoration’ or ‘ whose hymns ate renowned.’ See Professor Wilson’s 
Note. 

Thou art invoked , Akhandala!: or, Thou, 0 destroyer, art invoked. 
This appellation of Indra does not occur again in the Rigveda. 

13 Kundapdyya and Sringavrish appear here to be names of men. 
According to Sayana kundapdyya is the name of a particular Soma- 
ceremony, and the offspring of Sringavrish is Indra himself. “ (Indra), 
who wast the offspring of Sringavrish, of whom the kundapdyya rite 
was the protector, (the sages) have fixed (of old) their minds upon 
this ceremony.” See Professor Wilson’s note who observes that “ the 
construction is loose, and the explanation not very satisfactory,” 

14 Lord of the home: apparently the householder who institutes 
the sacrifice i3 addressed, he vdstoshpate grihapate. —S. 

The Rishis’ friend: munindm sakhd, the friend of the Munis, sages, 
saiutly men or ascetics; of us Rishis, according to Sayana. 



THE HYMNS OF 


186 ' 


[BOOK VIII. 


15 Holy Prid&kus&nu, winner of the spoil, one eminent 
o’er many men, 

Lead on the wild horse Indra with his vigorous 
grasp forward to drink the Soma-juice. 

HYMN XVIII. Adityas. 

Now let the mortal offer prayer to win the unex¬ 
ampled grace 

Of these Adityas and their aid to cherish life. 

2 For not an enemy molests the paths which these 

Adityas tread : 

Infallible guards they strengthen us in happiness. 

3 Now soon may Bhaga, Savitar, Varuna, Mitra, 

Aryaman 

Give us the shelter widely spread which we implore. 

4 With gods come thou whose fostering care none 

cheeks, 0 goddess Aditi: 

Come, dear to many, with the lords who guard us well. 

5 For well these sons of Aditi know to keep enmities 

aloof: 

Unrivalled, giving ample room, they save from woe. 

6 Aditi guard our herd by day, Aditi, free from guile, 

by night, 

Aditi, ever strengthening, save us from grief. 


15 Priddkusdnu : I follow Professor Ludwig in taking this to be 
the name of the institutor of the sacrifice. According to Sayana who 
explains it as ‘ lifting up the head or back like a serpent,’ or ‘ to be 
propitiated, as a serpent is, with gems, charms, medicaments, etc.,’ it 
is an epithet of Indra; and the leader forward of Indra in the second 
line is the worshipper, understood. Professor Grassmann bauishes 
the last three stanzas to his Appendix as not originally forming part 
of the hymn. 

The Asvins are the deities of stanza 8, and Agni, Surya, and Vata 
(Wind) of stanza 9. The Rishi is Irimbithi. The metre is Ushnih. 

1 Adityas: see I. 14. 3. 

4 With the lords: suribhih: that is, the gods. 



HYMN 18 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


187 


7 And in the day our hymn is this: May Aditi come 

nigh to help, 

With loving-kindness bring us weal and chase our foes. 

8 And may the Asvins, the divine pair of physicians, 

send us health : 

May they remove iniquity and chase our foes. 

9 May Agni bless us with his fires, and Shrya warm 

us pleasantly : 

May the pure Wind breathe sweet on us, and chase 
our foes. 

10 Drive ye disease and strife away, drive ye away 

malignity : 

Adityas, keep us ever far from sore distress. 

11 Remove from us the arrow, keep famine, Adityas! 

far away : 

Keep enmities afar from us, lords of all wealth ! 

12 Now, 0 Adityas, grant to us the shelter that lets 

man go free, 

Yea, even the sinner from his sin, ye bounteous gods ! 

13 Whatever mortal with the power of demons fain 

would injure us, 

May he, impetuous, suffer harm by his own deeds. 

14 May sin o’ertake our human foe, the man who 

speaketh evil things, 

Him who would cause our misery, whose heart is 
false, 

15 Gods, ye are with the simple ones, ye know each 

mortal in your hearts : 

Ye, Vasus. well discriminate the false and true. 

16 Fain would we have the sheltering aid of mountains 

&nd of water-floods: 

Keep far from us iniquity, O Heaven and Earth. 

17 So with auspicious sheltering aid do ye, O Yasus, 

carry us 

Beyond all trouble and distress, borne in your ship. 
J3 With the power of demons: 1 from his diabolical nature.’—Wilson, 



THE HYMNS OF 


188 


[BOOK VIII. 


18 Adityas, ye most mighty ones, grant to our children, 

and their seed, 

Extended term of life that they may live long days. 

19 Sacrifice, O Adityas, is your inward monitor: be 

kind, 

For in the bond of kindred we are bound to you. 

20 The Maruts’ high protecting aid, the Asvins, and 

the god who saves, 

Mitra and Varuna for weal we supplicate. 

21 Grant us a home with triple guard, Aryaman, Mitra, 

Varuna! 

Unthreatened, Maruts ! meet for praise, and filled 
with men. 

22 And as we human beings, 0 Adityas, are akin to 

death, 

Graciously lengthen ye our. lives that we may live. 

HYMN XIX. Agni. 

Sing praise to him, the lord of light. The gods have 
made the god to be their messenger, 

And sent oblation to the gods. 


19 Your imvard monitor : or near remembrancer, not suffering you 
to rest until you have rewarded men for their devotions. Professor 
Ludwig says that the hllah of the text is really hi i[ah : For sacrifice, 
Adityas, is your nearest dwelling-place. 

20 The god who saves: Indra, who is especially the tutelary god of 
Aryans. 

21 With triple guard: or, triply defending or defended. According 
to Sayana, protecting from heat, cold, and wet; or three-storeyed. 

22 Akin to death: born subject to death. 


The Rishi is Sobhari. The Adityas are the deities of stanzas 34, 
35, and the liberality of Trasadasyu is eulogized in 36, 37. The 
metre in 1—26 and 21—33 is alternately Kakup (8+12 + 8) and 
Satobrihatl (12 + 8 + 12 + 8); in 27 Dvipada Viraj; in 34 Ushiiih; in 
35 Satobrihatl; in 36 Kakup; and in 37 Pankti. 

1 The gods: in the first line are, according to Sayana, the priests, 
i. e. those who praise : dimjanti stuvantiti devil ritvijo ; but the word 
may be taken in its ordinary signification. 



HYMN 19 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


189 


2 Agni, the bounteous giver, bright with varied flames, 

laud thou, 0 singer Sobhari— 

Him who controls this sacred food with Soma blent, 
who hath first claim to sacrifice. 

3 Thee have we chosen skilfullest in sacrifice, im¬ 

mortal priest among the gods, 

Wise finisher of this holy rite : 

4 The son of strength, the blessed, brightly-shining 

one, Agni whose light is excellent. 

May he by sacrifice win us in heaven the grace of 
Mitra, Varuna, and the Floods. 

5 The mortal who hath ministered to Agni with obla¬ 

tion, fuel, ritual lore, 

And reverence, skilled in sacrifice, 

6 Verily swift to run are his fleet-footed steeds, and 

most resplendent fame is his. 

No trouble caused by gods or wrought by mortal 
man from any side o’ertaketh him. 

7 May we by thine own fires be well supplied with fire, 

(3 son of strength, O lord of might: 

Thou as our friend hast worthy men. 

8 Agni, who praises like a guest of friendly mind, is as 

a car that brings us gear. 

Also in thee is found perfect security : thou art the 
sovran lord of wealth. 

9 That man, moreover, merits praise who brings, 

auspicious Agni, sacrificial gifts : 

May he win riches by his thoughts. 


5 Ritual lore : vedena here can hardly mean, as Sayana explains it, 

1 by studying the Veda.’ It may perhaps mean ‘ by knowledge of the 
proper use of the sacred formulas,’ or as Professor M, Muller says, 
‘ by the bundle of grass ’ used in sacrifice. See Anc. <$’. Literature, 
p. 28, note, and p. 205. 

7 Hast worthy men : in us thy worshippers. 



THE HYMNS OF 


190 


f .BOOK VIII. 


10 He for whose sacrifice thou standest up erect is 

prosperous and rules o’er men. 

He wins with coursers and with singers skilled in 
song : with heroes he obtains the prize. 

11 He in whose dwelling Agni is chief ornament, and, 

all-desired, loves his laud well, 

And zealously tends his offerings— 

12 His, or the lauding sage’s word, his, son of strength ! 

who is most prompt with sacred gifts, 

Set thou beneath the gods, Vasu, above mankind, 
the speech of the intelligent. 

13 He who with sacrificial gifts or homage bringeth very 

skilful Agni nigh, 

Or him who flashes fast with song, 

14 The mortal who with blazing fuel, as his laws com- 

maud, attends the perfect god, 

Blest with his thoughts in splendour shall exceed all 
men, as though he overpassed the floods. 

15 Give us the splendour, Agni, which may overcome 

each greedy fiend in our abode, 

The wrath of evil-hearted folk. 

1G That, wherewith Mitra, Varuija, and Aryaman, the 
Asvins, Bhaga give us light, 

That may we, by thy power finding best furtherance, 
worship, O Indra, helped by thee. 

17 O Agni, most devout are they, the sages who have 
set thee sage exceeding wise, 

0 god, for men to look upon : 


10 With courser* and with, singers: is successful in chariot-races 
and is rewarded by the gods for his sacrifices. 

12 Set thou beneath the. gods and above mankind , is said to mean 
‘spread through all the sky.’ The meaning of this and the preceding 
stanza is somewhat obscurely expressed. 

14 The />n feet god: aditim, explained by Sayuna as akhandaniyam, 
indivisible, complete. 

16 That: radiance or splendour. 



HYMN 19 ] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


191 


18 Who have arranged thine altar, blessed god, at morn, 

brought thine oblation, pressed the juice. 

They by their deeds of strength have won them 
mighty wealth, who have set all their hope in thee. 

19 May Agni worshipped bring us bliss, may the gift, 

blessed one, and sacrifice bring bliss : 

Yea, may our praises bring us bliss. 

20 Show forth the mind that brings success in war 

with fiends, wherewith thou eonquerest in fight. 
Bring down the many firm hopes of our enemies, 
and let us vanquish with thine aid. 

21 I praise with song the friend of man, whom gods 

sent down to be herald and messenger, 

Best worshipper, bearer of our gifts. 

22 Thou unto sharp-toothed Agni, young and radiant 

god, proclaimest with thy song the feast— 

Agni, who for our sweet strains moulds heroic 
strength when sacred oil is olfered him, 

23 While, as the Asura moves his shape, so Agni, 

worshipped with the drops of holy oil, 

Upward and downward waves his sword. 

24 The god, the friend of man, who bears our gifts to 

heaven, the god with his sweet-smelling mouth, 
Distributes, skilled in sacrifice, his precious things, 
invoking priest, immortal god. 

25 Son of strength, Agni, if thou were the mortal, 

bright as Mitra 1 worshipped with our gifts ! 

And I were the immortal god, 


20 Bring down the many Jinn hopes . there is no substantive in the 
text, and hopes, resolves, thoughts or something similar must be 
supplied. 

21 The friend of man : or mnnurhitam may mean him who was 
established by Manus. 

29 The Asura: the Sun, according to Say ana. His sword: the 
flashing flame. 



192 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

26 I would not give tliee up, Vasu, to calumny or sin¬ 

fulness, O bounteous one. 

My worshipper should feel no hunger or distress, 
nor, Agni, should he live in sin. 

27 Like a son cherished in his father’s house, let our 

oblation rise unto the gods. 

28 With thine immediate aid may I, excellent Agni, 

ever gain my wish, 

A mortal with a god to help. 

29 O Agni, by thy wisdom, by thy bounties, by thy 

leading may I gather wealth. 

Excellent Agni, thou art called my providence: 
delight thou to be liberal. 

30 Agni, he conquers by thine aid that brings him store 

of noble heroes and great strength, 

Whose bond of friendship is thy choice. 

31 Thy spark is black and crackling, kindled in due 

time, O bounteous, it is taken up. 

Thou art the dear friend of the mighty Mornings: 
thou shinest in glimmerings of the night. 

32 We Sobharis have come to him, for succour, who is 

good to help, with thousand powers, 

The sovran, Trasadasyu’s friend. 

33 O Agni, thou on whom all other fires depend, as 

branches on the parent stem, 

I make the treasures of the folk, like songs, mine 
own, while I exalt thy sovran might. 

34 The mortal whom, Adityas, ye, guileless, lead to the 

farther bank, 

Of all the princes, bounteous ones !— 


26 In sin : such as neglect of the gods iu consequence of poverty. 
33 The meaning of the second line appears to be : I praise Agni 
better than other men. I overpower their hymns and secure for 
myself the rewards which they were intended to obtain. 



HYMN 20 .] 


THE RIGVEDA. 


193 


35 Whoever he be, man-ruling kings! the regent of the 

race of men— 

May we, 0 Mitra, Varuna, and Aryaman, like him 
be furtherers of your law. 

36 A gift of fifty female slaves hath Trasadasyu given 

me, Purukutsa’s son, 

Most liberal, kind, lord of the brave. 

37 And Sy£va too for me led forth a strong steed at 

Suv&stu’s ford : 

A herd of three times seventy kine, good lord of 
gifts, he gave to me. 

HYMN XX. Maruts. 

Let none, swift travellers! check you : come hither, 
like-spirited, stay not far away, 

Ye benders even of what is firm. 

2 Maruts, Ribhukshans, Rudras, come ye with your 

cars strong-fellied and exceeding bright. 

Come, ye for whom we long, with food, to sacrifice, 
come ye with love to Sobhari. 

3 For well we know the vigorous might of Rudra’s 

sons, the Maruts, who are passing strong. 

Swift Vishnu’s band, who send the rain. 


36 Female slaves: vadhdndm: vadhd means usually a bride, a wife, 
a woman in general, and here handmaids or female slaves, the wives 
or daughters of conquered Dasas, appear to be meant. According to 
Prof. Roth, mares or other female draught-animals are intended. 

37 SuvAstxi is in all probability the Soastos of Arrian (Suwad or Swat) 
near the KdphSn or Kabul river. Kine: there is no substantive in 
the text. The stanza, which has no comment in the printed edition, is 
very obscure and can be only conjecturally translated. See Professor 
Ludwig’s Translation and Commentary, I. 427, and IV. 380. 

The Rishi is Sobhari. The metres are Kakup and Satobribati in 
alternate stanzas. 

13 




m THE HYMNS OF [BOOK fill. 

4 Islands are bursting forth and misery is stayed: the 

heaven and earth are joined in one. 

Decked with bright rings, ye spread the broad expanses 
out, when ye, self-luminous, stirred yourselves. 

5 Even things immovable cry and roar, the mountains 

and the forest trees at your approach, 

And the earth trembles as ye come. 

6 To lend free course, 0 Maruts, to your furious rush, 

heaven high and higher still gives way, 

Where they, the heroes mighty with their arms, dis¬ 
play their gleaming ornaments on their forms. 

7 After their godlike nature they, the bull-like heroes, 

dazzling and impetuous, wear 
Great splendour as they show erect. 

8 The music of the Sobharis is adorned with milk, 

borne on the chariot’s golden seat. 

May they the well-born, mighty, kindred of the Cow, 
aid us to food and to delight. 

9 Bring, ye who sprinkle balmy drops, oblations to 

your vigorous Marut company, 

To those whose leader is the Bull. 


4 Sayana seems to explain this verse, “ The islands fall asunder, 
the firmest (trees) experience distress; they (the winds) distress 
heaven and earth; the waters hurry onward, 0 brightweaponed, self- 
shining ones, when you agitate them.”—E. B. C.’s Note in Wilson’s 
Translation. The stanza is difficult. I have followed, generally, Pro¬ 
fessor Ludwig’s version. Islands : the higher unsubmerged grounds. 
Misery : caused by the preceding hot and dry weather. Are joined in 
one : as the heavy rain obscures the horizon. Bright rings : worn on 
the arms or the ankles or carried by the Maruts on their shoulders. 
See I. 166. 9. 

7 Bvll-like: the exact meaning of vrishapsavah is uncertain. Show 
erect : uhrutapsavah is conjecturally translated. 

8 With milk: with fertilizing rain sent by the Maruts. The Cow: Prisni. 

9 Ye who sprinkle balmy drops : priests who offer libations. Whose 
leader is the Bull : whom Indra leads. Or, it may be, whose chariot 
is drawn by bulls, as in the following stanza. 



HYMN 20.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


195 


10 Come hither, Maruts, on your chariot drawn by 

bulls, solid in look, with solid naves. 

Lightly like winged falcons, 0 ye heroes, come, 
come to enjoy our offerings. 

11 Their decoration is the same: their ornaments of 

gold are bright upon their arms; 

Their lances glitter splendidly. 

12 They toil not to defend their bodies from attack, 

strong heroes with their mighty arms. 

Strong are your bows and strong the weapons in 
your cars, and glory sits on every face. 

13 Whose name extendeth like a sea, alone, resplendent, 

so that all have joy in it, 

And life-power like ancestral might. 

14 Pay honour to these Maruts and sing praise to them, 

for of the wheel-spoke.s of the car 
Of these loud roarers none is last: this is their 
power, this moves them to give mighty gifts. 

15 Blest by your favouring help was he, O Maruts, 

at the earlier flushings of the morn. 

And even now shall he be blest. 

16 The strong man to whose sacrifice, 0 heroes, ye 

approach that ye may taste thereof, 

With glories and with war that winneth spoil shall 
gain great bliss, ye shakers of the world. 

17 Even as Rudra’s sons, the brood of the creator 

Dyaus, the Asura, desire, 

The youthful ones, so shall it be : 

18 And these the bounteous, worthy of the Maruts 

who move onward pouring down the rain- 


10 Solid in look : or with bull-like, or strong look. 

14 None is last: no part of their chariot wheel is behind tbe rest 
in speed. This moves them, to give mighty gifts: or, this (charac¬ 
teristic belongs to them) through greatness of their gifts. 

15 He: your worshipper. 

18 The bounteous: the liberal institutors of sacrifice. 



196 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

Even for their sake, 0 youthful ones, with kindest 
heart take us to you to be your own. 

19 0 Sobhari, with newest song sing out unto the 

youthful purifying bulls, 

Even as a plougher to his steers. 

20 Who, like a celebrated boxer, overcome the chal¬ 

lengers in every fight: 

They who, like shining bulls, are most illustrious- 
honour those Maruts with thy song. 

21 Allied by common ancestry, ye Maruts, even the 

cows, alike in energy, 

Lick, all by turns, each other’s back. 

22 Even mortal man, ye dancers breast-adorned with 

gold, attains to brotherhood with you. 

Mark ye and notice us, 0 Maruts; evermore your 
friendship is secured to us. 

23 O Maruts, rich in noble gifts, bring us a portion of 

the Maruts’ medicine, 

Ye coursers who are friends to us. 

24 Haters of those who serve you not, bliss-bringers, 

bring us bliss with those auspicious aids 
Wherewith ye are victorious and guard Sindhu well, 
and succoured Krivi in his need. 


19 Purifying bulls : the strong Maruts who send the sweet rain. 

21 Allied by common ancestry: as the offspring of Prisni. The 
cows: the Maruts. Lick....each other’s head: as they crowd together in 
their oourse. Acoording to Sayana, “ the cows severally liok up the 
quarters of the sky." 

22 Ye dancers: ye who dance through the air. 

24 Krivi: the eponymus of a warrior tribe in the Panj4b, in later 
times combined with, or identical with the Pancbalas. S&yana takes 
krivim here to mean a well: ‘ with which you provided a well (for 
Gotama)—W ilson. 



HYMN 21] 


TUB RIGYEDA. 


197 


25 Maruts, who rest on fair trimmed grass, what balm 

soever Sindhu or Asikn! hath, 

Or mountains or the seas contain, 

26 Bring with you for our bodies, ye who see it all, and 

bless us graciously therewith. 

Cast, Maruts, to the ground our sick man’s malady: 
replace the dislocated limb. 

HYMN XXI. Indra. 

We call on thee, 0 matchless one ! We seeking help, 
possessing nothing firm ourselves, 

Call on thee wonderful in fight: 

2 On thee for aid in sacrifice. This youth of ours, 

the bold, the mighty, hath gone forth. 

We therefore, we thy friends, Indra, have chosen 
thee, free-giver, as our guardian god. 

3 Come hither, for the drops are here, O lord of corn- 

lands, lord of horses, lord of kine: 

Drink thou the Soma, Soma’s lord ! 

4 For we the kinless singers have drawn hither thee, 

O Indra, who hast numerous kin. 

With all the forms thou hast, come thou of bull-like 
strength, come near to drink the Soma-juice. 

5 Sitting like birds beside thy meath, mingled with 

milk, that gladdeneth and exalteth tbee, 

Indra, to thee we sing aloud. 


25 Asiknt: the Acesines of Quintus Curtius, the Vedic name of 
the Chandrabhaga, the modern Chenab. 

26 Replace Ike dislocated limb: ‘ re-establish his enfeebled frame.’— 
Wilson. 

The liberality of Chitra is the deified object of stanzas 17, 18. 
The Rishi is Sobhari. The metres are Kakup and Satobj'ihati alter¬ 
nately. 

2 This yo-utk of ours • the noble who has instituted the sacrifice. 




198 THE HYMNS OF f BOOK VIII. 

-6 We speak to thee with this our reverential prayer. 
Why art thou pondering yet awhile ? 

Here are our wishes; thou art liberal, lord of bays: 
we and our hymns are present here. 

7 For not in recent times alone, O Indra, thunder- 

armed, have we obtained thine aid. 

Of old we knew thy plenteous wealth. 

8 Hero, we knew thy friendship and thy rich rewards : 

these, thunderer, now we crave of thee. 

0 Vasu, for all wealth that cometh of the kine, 
sharpen our powers, fair-visored god. 

9 Him who of old hath brought to us this and that 

blessing, him I magnify for you, 

Even Indra, O my friends, for help: 

10 Borne by bay steeds, the lord of heroes, ruling men, 

for it is he who takes delight. 

May Maghavan bestow on us his worshippers hun¬ 
dreds of cattle and of steeds. 

11 Hero, may we, with thee for friend, withstand the 

man who pants against us in his wrath, 

In fight with people rich in kine. 

12 May we be viotors in the singer’s battle-song, and 

meet the wicked, much-invoked ! 

With heroes smite down Vritra and show forth our 
strength. 0 Indra, further thou our thoughts. 

13 0 Indra, from all ancient time rivalless ever and 

companionless art thou: 

Thou seekest comradeship in war. 

14 Thou findest not the wealthy man to be thy friend : 

those scorn thee who are flown with wine. 

What time thou thunderest and gatherest, then thou, 
even as a father, art invoked. 


12 Smite down Vritra : or the enemy. 

13 Thou seekest comradeship in war: befrieudest thy worshippers 
when they need thine assistance in battle. 

14 Gatherest: the clouds.—M. M. 




BYif If 22.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


129 

15 0 Indra, let us not, like fools who waste their lives 

at home, with friendship such as thine 
Sit idly by the poured-out juice. 

16 Giver of kine, may we not miss thy gracious gifts: 

let us not rob thee of thine own. 

Strip even the strong places of the foe, and bring : 
thy gifts can never be made vain. 

17 Indra or blest Sarasvati alone bestows such wealth, 

treasure so great, or thou, 

O Cbitra, on the worshipper. 

18 Chitra is king, and only kinglings are the rest who 

dwell beside Sarasvati. 

He, like Paijanya with his rain, hath spread himself 
with thousand, yea, with myriad gifts. 

HYMN XXII. Asvins. 

Hithkrward have I called to-day, for succour, that 
most wondrous car 

Which ye ascended, Aisvins, ye whose paths are red, 
swift to give ear, for Sury&’s sake. 


17 Chitra: the name of this king does not oocur elsewhere in th* 
Rigveda. 

18 King: rdjd. Kinglings: r&jakt. Parjanya : god of the rain- 
cloud, regarded u the type of liberal beneficence. 

The ^tishi is Sobhari. The metres are Brihati and Satobjihatf 
alternately in stanzas 1—7; Anushtup in 8; Kakup and Satobpihati 
alternately in 9, 10, 13—18; Kakup in 11; and Mftdhyejyotis in 12. 

1 Ye whoie paths are red: rudravartani : this epithet of the Asvins 
is variously explained; ‘having a path which causes weeping in 
battle,’ or, ‘whose paths are praised,’—Sayana; ‘advancing on the 
path to battle.'—Wilson; ‘proceeding on terrible roads.’—Muir; 
‘going on Rudra’s path.’—Ludwig; ‘on your light path.’—Grasa- 
mann; ‘going on a reddish path.’—Pischel. See Vedische Studien, 
pp. 15 and 55-60. 

For SdryA’s sake: who chose the AsvinB as her husbands. See 1. 
116. 17. 



SOO THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

2 Car ever young, much longed-for, easily invoked, 

soon guided, first in deeds of might, 

Which waits and serves, O Sobhari, with bene¬ 
volence, without a rival or a foe. 

3 These Asvins with our homage, these two omni¬ 

present deities 

Hitherward will we bring for kind help, these who 
seek the dwelling of the worshipper. 

4 One of your chariot wheels is moving swiftly round, 

one speeds for you its onward course. 

Like a milch-cow, 0 lords of splendour, and with 
haste let your benevolence oome to us. 

5 That chariot of yours which hath a triple seat and 

reins of gold, 

The famous car that traverseth the heaven and earth, 
thereon N&satyas, Asvins, come. 

6 Ye with your plough, when favouring Manu with 

your help, ploughed the first harvest in the sky. 

As suoh will we exalt you, lords of splendour, now, 
Asvins, for your benevolent acts. 

7 Come to us, lords of noble mares, by paths of ever¬ 

lasting law, 

Whereby to high dominion ye with mighty strength 
raised Trikshi, Trasadasyu’s son. 

8 This Soma pressed with stones is yours, ye heroes, 

lords of plenteous wealth. 

Approach to drink the Soma, come, drink in the 
worshipper’s abode. 

4 The movements of the two wheels are not very intelligibly de¬ 
scribed. See I. 30. 19, and V. 73. 3. Like a milch<ow: a common 
type of liberality. 

6 Ploughed the first harvest: first ploughed the ground, and sowed 
and reaped : that is, taught, by example, men to do so. Cp. 1.117. 
21: Ploughing and sowing barley, 0 ye Asvins, milking out food for 
men, ye wonder-workers, Blasting away the Dasyu with your trumpet, 
ye have bestowed wide light upon the Arya. 

7 Trikshi : see VI. 46, 8, 



HYMN 22.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


201 


9 O Asvins, mount the chariot, mount the golden seat, 
ye who are lords of plenteous wealth, 

And bring to us abundant food. 

10 The aids wherewith ye helped Paktha and Adhrigu, 

and Babhru severed from his friends,— 

With those, O Asvins, come hither with speed and 
soon, and heal whatever is diseased. 

11 When we continually invoke the Asvins, the resist¬ 

less, at this time of day, 

We lovers of the song, with songs, 

12 Through these, ye mighty ones, come hither to my 

call which brings all blessings, wears all forms,— 
Through which, all-present heroes, lavishest with 
food ye strengthened Krivi, come through these. 

13 I speak to both of these as such, these Asvins whom 

I reverence at this time of day : 

With homage we entreat them both. 

14 Ye who are lords of splendour, ye whose paths are 

red, at eve, at morn, at sacrifice, 

Give us not utterly as prey to mortal foe, ye Rud- 
ras, lords of noble mares. 

15 For bliss I call the blissful car, at morn the insepar¬ 

able Asvins with their car 
I call, like Sobhari our sire. 

16 Rapid as thought, and strong, and speeding to the 

joy, bringing their swiftly-coming help, 

Be to us a protection even from far away, lords of 
great wealth, with many aids. 

17 Come, wonder-workers, to our home, our home, 

O Asvins, rich in cattle, steeds, and gold, 

Chief drinkers of the Soma’s juice ! 

10 Paktha, Adhrigu, and Babhru are said to have been kings. 

12 Krivi: see VIII. 20. 24. 

14 Ye Rudras: ye red-hued or bright gods. 

17 Rich in cattle; prolepticj whioh your ooming will make rich. 



202 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

18 Choice-worthy strength, heroic, firm and excellent, 
uninjured by the Rakshas foe, 

At this your coming nigh, ye lords of noble steeds, 
and all good things, may we obtain. 

HYMN XXIII. Agni. 

Worship thou Jataved&s, pray to him who willingly 
accepts, 

Whose smoke wanders at will, and none may grasp 
his flame. 

2 Thou, all men’s friend, Visvamanas, exaltest Agni 

with thy song, 

The giver, and his flames with which no cars contend. 

3 Whose resolute assault, to win vigour and food, de¬ 

serves our praise,— 

Through whose discovering power the priest ob- 
taineth wealth. 

4 Up springs the i 

refulgent one 

Most bright, with glowing jaws and glory in his 
train. 

5 Skilled in fair sacrifice, extolled, arise in godlike love¬ 

liness, 

Shining with lofty splendour, with effulgent light. 

6 Called straight to our oblations, come, 0 Agni, 

through our eulogies, 

As thou hast been our envoy bearing up our gifts. 


mperishable flame, the flame of the 


The Rishi is Visvamanas the son of Vyasva. Tbe metre is Usbnib- 

1 Who willingly accepts: prativyam: according to Sayapa, ‘dis¬ 
posed to encounter enemies.’ 

2 The second line is difficult, as the adjective vishpardhasdh stands 
without a substantive and may be either the accusative plural or the 
genitive singular: ‘ who is the giver of chariots to the unenvious 
(worshipper).’—Wilson. 

3 Assault: on the oblations which the fire consumes. 




HYMN 23.] THE RI6YEDA. 203 

7 I call your Agni, from of old invoking priest of 

living men: 

Him with this song I laud and magnify for you. 

8 Whom, wondrous wise, they animate with solemn 

rites and his fair form, 

Kind as a friend to men who keep the holy law. 

9 Him, true to Law, who perfecteth the sacrifice, Law- 

loving one! 

Ye with your song have gratified in the place of 
prayer. 

10 May all our sacrifices go to him the truest Angiras, 
Who is among mankind the most illustrious priest. 

11 Imperishable Agni, thine are all these high enkindled 

lights, 

Like horses and like stallions showing forth their 
strength. 

12 So give us, lord of power and might, riches com¬ 

bined with hero strength, 

And guard us with our sons and grandsons in our frays. 

13 Soon as the eager lord of men is friendly unto Manu’s 

race, 

Agni averteth from us all the demon host. 

14 0 hero Agni, lord of men, on hearing this new laud 

of mine, 

Burn down the Rakshasas, enchanters, with thy flame. 

15 No mortal foe can e’er prevail by arts of magic over 

him 

Who serveth Agni well with sacrificial gifts. 

16 Vyasva the sage, who sought the Bull, hath won 

thee, finder of good things : 

As such may we enkindle thee for ample wealth. 


9 Law-loving ones: ‘ pious worshippers.’—Wilson, Have gratified: 
or, must gratify. 

16 Who sought the Bull: the strong Agni. According to Sayan u, 
‘ the showerer (of rain).' 



[BOOK VIM 


$504 THE HYMNS OF 

17 TJsana Kdvya stablished thee, 0 Agni, as invoking 

priest: 

Thee, J&taved&s, sacrificing priest for man. 

18 All deities of one accord appointed thee their mes¬ 

senger : 

Thou, god, through hearing, hadst first claim to 
sacrifice. 

19 Him may the mortal hero make his own immortal 

messenger, 

Far-spreading, purifier, him whose path is black. 

20 With lifted ladles let us call him splendid with his 

brilliant flame, 

Men’s ancient Agni, wasting not, adorable. 

21 The man who pays the worship due to him with 

sacrificial gifts 

Obtains both plenteous nourishment and hero fame. 

22 To J&tavedas Agni, chief in sacrifices, first of all 
With homage goes the ladle rich with sacred gifts. 

23 Even as Vyasva did, may we with these most high 

and liberal hymns 

Pay worship unto Agni of the splendid flame. 

24 Now sing, as Sthflrayflpa sang, with lauds to him 
who spreadeth far, 

To Agni of the home, 0 Rishi, Vyasva’s son. 

25 As welcome guest of human kind, as offspring of the 

forest kings, 

The sages worship ancient Agni for his aid. 

26 For men’s oblations brought to him who is the 

mighty lord of all, 

Sit, Agni, mid our homage, on the sacred grass. 


17 VsanA KAvya: see Vol. I., Index. 

18 Through hearing: and by causing the gods to bear, men’s prayers. 

24 SthUrayupa : said by Siyana to be the name of a Rishi. 

25 Forest kings : tall trees, or trees in general. 


HYMN 24 .] THE RIQVEDA. 205 

27 Grant us abundant treasures, grant the opulence 

which many crave, 

With store of heroes, progeny, and high renown. 

28 Agni, most youthful of the gods, send evermore the 

gift of wealth 

Unto Varosush&man and to all his folk. 

29 A mighty conqueror art thou, O Agni, so disclose 

to us 

Food in our herds of kine and gain of ample wealth. 

30 Thou, Agni, art a glorious god : bring hither Mitra, 

Varuija, 

Imperial sovrans, holy-minded, true to Law. 

HYMN XXIV. Indra. 

Companions, let us learn a prayer to Indra whom the 
thunder arms, 

To glorify your bold and most heroic friend. 

2 For thou by slaying Vritra art the Vritra-slayer, 

famed for might. 

Thou, hero, in rich gifts surpassest wealthy chiefs. 

3 As such, when glorified, bring us riches of very 

wondrous fame, 

Set in the highest rank, wealth-giver, lord of bays! 

4 Yea, Indra, thou disclosest that preeminent dear 

wealth of men: 

Boldly, 0 bold one, glorified, bring it to us. 


28 VarotwMman: I follow the St. Petersburg Lexicon in joining 
two to sutkdmne and taking the whole as one word and the name of a 
chief. Professor Ludwig translates somewhat as follows : * Agni, send 
quickly to the folk who know the goodly S&man well, the gift of wealth, 
for ever, youngest god! to all.’ But in a later volume of his work 
(III. p. 162) he comes to the conclusion that Sushaman is a proper 
name, and that varo (which may, he thinks, be an interaction) must 
not be combined with it. 

The Rishi is Visvamanas the son of Vyasva. The last triplet is a 
Ddnattuti or eulogy of a prince's liberality. The metre is Uehpih, 
with Anushtup in the last stanza. 




306 THE HYtflfS OF [BOOK FIJI: 

5 The workers of destruction stay neither thy right 

hand nor thy left: 

Nor hosts that press about thee, lord of bays, in 
fight. 

6 0 thunder-armed, I come with songs to thee as to a 

stall with kine: 

Fulfil the wish and thought of him who sings thy 
praise. 

7 Chief Vritra-slayer, through the hymn of Visvama- 

n&s think of all, 

All that concerneth us, excellent, mighty guide. 

8 May we, O Vritra-slayer, 0 hero, find this thy 

newest boon, 

Longed-for, and excellent, thou who art much in¬ 
voked ! 

9 0 Indra, dancer, much-invoked ! as thy great power 

is unsurpassed, 

So be thy bounty to the worshipper unchecked. 

10 Most mighty, most heroic one, for mighty bounty 

fill thee full: 

Though strong, strengthen thyself to win wealth, 
Maghavan! 

11 0 thunderer, never have our prayers gone forth to 

any god but thee : 

So help us, Maghavan, with thine assistance now. 

12 For, dancer, verily I find none else for bounty, sav¬ 

ing thee, 

For splendid wealth and power, thou lover of the 
song. 

13 For Indra pour ye out the drops; meath blent with 

Soma let him drink : 

With bounty and with majesty will he further us. 


9 Dancer: of the dance of war. According to Sayana, “ dancer, 
or who causes to dance, i. e. agitator, exciter, from Indra’s faculty of 
internal impulse in all beings.' 1 —Wilson. 




HYMN 24 .] THE RIG VEDA. 207 

14 I spake to the bay coursers’ lord, to him who gives 

ability: 

Now hear the son of Asva as he praises thee. 

15 Never was any hero born before thee mightier than 

thou: 

None certainly like thee in goodness and in wealth. 

16 O ministering priest, pour out of the sweet juice 

what gladdens most: 

So is the hero praised who ever prospers us. 

17 Indra, whom tawny coursers bear, praise such as 

thine, preeminent, 

None by his power or by his goodness hath attained. 

18 We, seeking glory, have invoked this master of all 

power and might 

Who must be glorified by constant sacrifice. 

19 Come, sing we praise to Indra, friends, the hero who 

deserves the laud, 

Him who with none to aid o’ercomes all tribes of 
men. 

20 To him who wins the kine, who keeps no cattle back, 

celestial god, 

Speak wondrous speech more sweet than butter and 
than meath. 

21 Whose hero powers are measureless, whose bounty 

ne’er may be surpassed, 

Whose liberality, like light, is over all. 

22 As Vyasva did, praise Indra, praise the strong un¬ 

fluctuating guide, 

Who gives the foe’s possessions to the worshipper. 


14 Son of Aava: i. e. of Vyasva, the Rishi Visvamanas. 

20 Who keeps no cattle back: either literally who aids his worship¬ 
pers to win cattle in their raids and gives them all the booty; or, 
who sends forth all the kine or rays of light that he has recovered 
from the powers of darkness. According to Sayana, ‘ who rejects no 
praise.’ 



208 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

23 Now, son of Vyasva, praise thou him who to the 

tenth time still is new, 

The very wise, whom living men must glorify. 

24 Thou knowest, Indra, thunder-armed, how to avoid 

destructive powers, 

As one secure from pitfalls each returning day. 

25 0 Indra, bring that aid wherewith of old, most 

wondrous ! thou didst slay 
His foes for active Kutsa: send it down to us. 

26 So now we seek thee fresh in might, most wonderful 

in act! for gain : 

For thou art he who conquers all our foes for us. 

27 Who will set free from ruinous woe, or Arya on the 

seven streams: 

O valiant hero, bend the D&sa’s weapon down. 

28 As to Varosushaman thou broughtest great riches, 

for their gain, 

To Vyasva’s sons, blest lady, borne by noble mares ! 

29 Let N&rya’s sacrificial meed reach Vyasva’s Soma¬ 

bearing sons : 

In hundreds and in thousands be the great reward. 


23 Who to the tenth time still is new: continually renews his liber¬ 
ality to us. This seems to be the meaning of the dasamam navam 
(tenth new) of the text S&yana explains differently : “ who is the 
tenth (of the pervading vital principles), the adorable.” 

24 Destructive powers: the plural of Nirriti, Death or Destruction. 
I adopt Professor Ludwig's interpretation of the second line. 

27 Arya on the seven streams : from any Aryan enemy in the land 
of the Seven Rivers, probably the Indus, the five rivers of the 
Panjab, and the Kubha. See Vol. I. p. 58. 

28 Varosushdman: see VIII. 23. 28. Blest lady: Ushas or Dawn 
is addressed. 

29 Ndrya’s sacrificial meed: Narya appears to be the name of the 
institutor of the sacrifice. 




BYMN 25.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


209 


80 If one should ask thee, Where is he who sacrificed? 
Whither lookest thou ? 

Like Vala he hath passed away and dwelleth now on 
Gomati. 

HYMN XXV. Mitra-Varuna. 

I worship you who guard this All, gods holiest among 
the gods, 

You, faithful to the Law, whose power is sanctified. 

2 So, too, like charioteers are they, Mitra and mightiest 

Varuija, 

Sons high-born from of old, whose holy laws stand 
fast. 

3 These twain, possessors of all wealth, most glorious, 

for supremest sway 

Aditi, mighty mother, true to Law, brought forth. 

4 Great Varuna and Mitra, gods, Asuras and imperial 

lords, 

True to eternal law proclaim the high decree. 


30 Professor Ludwig observes: “ This stanza clearly refers to the 
greatness of the reward given by Narya and itB meaning is : here 
are so many cows (presented by Narva) that one might think that, in 
consequence of the sacrifice, Vala had given up his cows [which he 
had stoleu from the gods, and hidden in a cave], and taken his 
departure.” Ushas says also, “my cows are quite superfluous here, 
and I will drive them away to some other place." The stanza is 
addressed to UBhas, and the second line is the answer she is to give 
to the question contained in the first. Gomati: some affluent of the 
Indus, which in later times lent its name to the Gomati, or Gumti, 
which flows through Oudh and falls into the Ganges, 

The Visvedevas are the deities of stanzas 10—12, and the last 
triplet, stanzas 22—24, is a D&nastuti or eulogy of the liberality of 
three princes. The Bishi is Visvamanas, son of Vyasva. The metre 
is Ushnih, with the variety called Ushniggarbha (6 + 7 + 11 syllables) 
in the last stanza, which I have treated uniformly with the rest. 

2 Charioteers; furtherers of eternal Law. See VII. 66. 12. 




* 1.0 TVS HYMNS OF [BOOK Pill. 

5 The offspring of a lofty power, Daksha’s two sons 

exceeding titrong, 

Who with their wide-spread gifts dwell in the place 
of food. 

6 Ye who have gathered up your gifts, celestial and 

terrestrial food, 

Let your rain come to us fraught with the mist of 
heaven. 

7 The twain, who from the lofty sky seem to look 

down on herds below, 

Holy, imperial lords, are set to be revered. 

8 They, true to Law, exceeding strong, have sate 

them down for sovran rule : 

Princes whose laws stand fast, they have obtained 
their sway. 

9 Pathfinders even better than the eye, with unob¬ 

structed sight, 

Even when they close their lids, observant, they 
espy. 

10 So may the goddess Aditi, may the Nasatyas guard 

us well, 

The Maruts guard us well, endowed with mighty 
strength. 

11 Do ye, O bounteous gods, protect our dwelling-place 

by day and night: 

With you for our defenders may we go unharmed. 

12 May we, unharmed, serve bountiful Vishnu, the god 

who slayeth none: 

Self-moving Sindhu hear and be the first to mark. 


5 Daksha’s two eons: or sons of power or energy, according to 
Sayana. Daksha, as a creative power, is frequently associated with 
Aditi. Place of food: heaven from which the foodproduoiog rain 
comes. 

12 Sindhu : the Indus. According to S&yana, Vishnu who causes 
wealth to flow to his worshippers. 



HYMN 25 ] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


211 


13 This sure protection we elect, desirable and reaching 

far, 

Which Mitra, Varuna, and Aryaman afford. 

14 And may the Sindhu of the floods, the Maruts, and 

the Asvin pair, 

Boon Indra, and boon Vishnu have one mind with 
us. 


15 Because these warring heroes stay the enmity of 

every foe, 

As the fierce water-flood repels the furious ones. 

16 Here this one god, the lord of men, looks forth ex¬ 

ceeding far and wide : 

And we, for your advantage, keep his holy laws. 

17 We keep the old accustomed laws, the statutes of 

supremacy, 

The long-known laws of Mitra and of Varuna. 

18 He who hath measured with his ray the boundaries 

of heaven and earth, 

And with his majesty hath filled the two worlds full, 

19 Sttrya hath spread his light aloft up to the region 

of the sky, 

Like Agni all aflame when gifts are offered him. 

20 With him who sits afar the word is lord of food that 

comes from kine, 

Controller of the gift of unempoisoned food. 

21 So unto Sftrya, Heaven, and Earth, at morning and 

at eve I speak. 

Bringing enjoyments ever rise thou Up for us. 


20 Varuna has only to command and men have milk and whole¬ 
some food. Siyana explains differently : “ Raise your voice in the 

gpaoious ball of sacrifice to him who is lord over food derived froni 
cattle.”—Wilson. 

21 Thou: Surya, that is, according to Sayana, Mitra and Varuna 
in Sfirya’s shape. 



212 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

22 From Ukshany&yana a bay, from Haray&ria a white 

steed, 

And from Sush&man we obtained a harnessed car. 

23 These two shall bring me farther gain of troops 

of tawny-coloured steeds, 

The carriers shall they be of active men of war. 

24 And the two sages have I gained who hold the reins 

and bear the whip, 

And the two great strong coursers, with my newest 
song. 

HYMN XXVI. Asvins. 

I call your chariot to receive united praise mid 
princely men, 

Strong gods who pour down wealth, of never- 
vanquished might! 

2 Ye to Varosushaman come, N&satyas, for this glorious 
rite, 

With your protecting aid, strong gods, who pour 
down wealth. 


22 Sush&man: here without Varo, the prefix or interjection or 
whatever it may be. See VIII. 23. 28. 

23 These two : horses. 

24 Two sages: viprd: the meaning is uncertain. According to 

Sayana the word is an epithet of ‘ coursers ’: ‘ sagacious.’—Wilson, 
Professor Ludwig thinks that the grooms (probably enslaved enemies) 
are ironically called sages, or, as he translates, Brahmans. Dr. Muir 
translates the stanza differently: “ I have celebrated at the same 

time with a new hymn, these two sages and mighty [princes], strong, 
swift, aud carrying whips.” But this rendering has little to recom¬ 
mend it. 

Vayu, god of wind, is the deity of stanzas 20—25. The Rishi is 
Visvainanas, son of Vyasva. The metres are Gayatri in stanzas lb, 19, 
21, 25; Anushtup in 20; and Ushnih in the rest of the hymn. 

1 Princely men : the SHris or institutors of the sacrifice. 

2 Varosushdman : see VIII. 23. 28. 



HYMN 26 ] THE RIGVEDA. 213 

3 So with oblations we invoke you, borne by noble 

mares, to-day, 

When night hath passed, O ye who send us plenteous 
food. 

4 0 Asvins, heroes, let your ear, famed, best to travel, 

come to us, 

And, for his glory, mark your zealous servant’s lauds. 

5 Asvins, who send us precious gifts, even when 

offended, think of him : 

For ye, O Rudras, lead us safe beyond our foes. 

6 For, wonder-workers, with fleet steeds ye fly in 

order round this All, 

Stirring our thoughts, ye lords of splendour, honey- 
hued. 

7 With all-sustaining opulence, Asvins, come hither¬ 

ward to us, 

Ye rich and noble heroes, ne’er to be o’erthrown, 

8 To welcome this mine offering, O ye Indralike : 

N&satyas, come 

As gods of best accord this day with other gods. 

9 For we, like Vyasva, lifting up our voice like oxen, 

call on you : 

With all your loving-kindness, sages, come to us. 

10 0 Rishi, laud the Asvins well. Will they not listen 

to thy call ? 

Will they not burn the Panis who are nearer them ? 

11 0 heroes, listen to the son of Vyasva, and regard 

me here, 

Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, of one accord. 

12 Gods whom we yearn for, of your gifts, of what ye 

bring to us, bestow 

By princes’ hands on me, ye mighty, day by day. 


5 Rudras : bright gods. 

6 Honey-hued: madhuvarnA: ‘ of fascinating complexion.’—Wilson. 



21i THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V1TJ. 

13 Him whom your sacrifices clothe, even as a womttn 

with her robe, 

The Asvins help to glory honouring him well. 

14 Whoso regards your care of men as succour widest 

in its reach, 

About his dwelling go, ye Asvins, loving us. 

15 Come to us ye who pour down wealth, come to the 

home which men must guard : 

Like shafts, ye are made meet for sacrifice by song. 

16 Most fetching of all calls, the laud, as envoy, heroes, 

called to you : 

Be it your own, 0 Asvin pair. 

17 Be ye in yonder sea of heaven, or joying in the home 

of food, 

Listen to me, immortal ones. 

18 This river with his lucid flow attracts you, more than 

all the streams,— 

Even Sindhu with his path of gold. 

19 0 Asvins, with that glorious fame come, hither, 

through our brilliant song, 

Come ye whose ways are marked with light. 

20 Harness the steeds who draw the car, O Yasu, bring 

the well-fed pair. 

O V&yu, drink thou of our meath: come unto our 
drink-offerings. 

21 Wonderful Vayu, lord of Right, thou who art 

Twashtar’s son-in-law, 

Thy saving succour we elect. 


15 Like shafts: as arrows are sharpened for their work, so the 
^evinB are prepared for the sacrifice by the Rishi’s hymn. The word 
vishudruhA, explained by Sayana as two arrows, is difficult, and other 
readings and explanations have been suggested. 

18 With his lucid flow : svetayAvari: taken by Sayana as the name 
of a river. 

21 Twashtar's son-in law: the commentators give no satisfactory 
explanation. Saranyu, Twashtar’s daughter, was the wife of Vivasvslu, 
■who cannot be identified with Vayu, 



ETMN 27.] 


THE RIG VIDA. 


215 


22 To Twashtar’s son-in-law we pray for wealth whereof 

he hath control: 

For glory we seek V&yu, men with juice effused. 

23 From heaven, auspicious Vajrft, come; drive hither 

with thy noble steeds : 

Come on thy mighty car with wide-extending seat. 

24 We call thee to the homes of men, thee wealthiest in 

noble food, 

And liberal as a press-stone borne upon a horse. 

25 So, glad and joyful in thine heart, do thou, god, 

V&yu, first of all 

Vouchsafe us water, strength, and thought. 

HYMN XXVII. Vi&vedevas. 

Chief priest is Agni at the laud, as stones and grass 
at sacrifice : 

With song I seek the Maruts, Brahmanaspati, gods 
for help much to be desired. 

2 I sing to cattle and to Earth, to trees, to Dawns, 
to Night, to plants. 

O all ye Vasus, ye possessors of all wealth, be ye the 
furtherers of our thoughts. 


24 The second line is difficult. The press-stone which produoes the 
Soma-juice which makes the gods bountiful is regarded as a type of 
liberality, but why it is called atvapriththam, literally, horse-baoked, 
is not clear. 

The Rishi is Manu Vaiyasrata or son of Viyasvin. The metres 
are Bjihati and Satobrihati in alternate stanzas. 

1 Chief prieet: acoording to Sayana, pwohitah here is taken in its 
primary sense of ‘ placed in front,’ that is, set by the priests on the 
Mttaravedi or northern altar or fire-receptacle. The land . uktha: a 
kind of religious service consisting of the recitation of certain eulo¬ 
gistic verses. 

2 I ting to: or I glorify, in order that 1 may win or propitiate them. 




216 TEE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

3 Forth go, with Agni, to the gods our sacrifice of 

ancient use, 

To the Adityas, Varupa whose law stands fast, and 
the all-lightening Marut troop. 

4 Lords of all wealth, may they be strengtheners of 

man, destroyers of his enemies. 

Lords of all wealth, do ye, with guards which none 
may harm, preserve our dwelling free from foes. 

5 Come to us with one mind to-day, come to us all 

with one accord, 

Maruts with holy song, and, goddess Aditi, mighty 
one, to our house and home. 

6 Send us delightful things, ye Maruts, on your steeds: 

come ye, O Mitra, to our gifts. 

Let Indra, Varuna, and the Adityas sit, swift heroes, 
on our sacred grass. 

7 We who have trimmed the grass for you, and set the 

banquet in array, 

And pressed the Soma, call you, Varuna, like men, 
with sacrificial fires aflame. 

8 O Maruts, Vishnu, Asvins, Pfishan, haste away with 

minds turned hitherward to me. 

Let the strong Indra, famed as Vritra’s slayer, come 
first with the winners of the spoil. 

9 Ye guileless gods, bestow on us a refuge strong on 

every side, 

A sure protection, Vasus, unassailable from near at 
hand or from afar. 

10 Kinship have I with you, and close alliance, O ye 
gods, destroyers of our foes. 

Call us to our prosperity of former days, and soon 
to new felicity. 


6 Come ye, 0 Mitra : Varuna and Aryaman being understood. 

7 Like men: manushvat: or after the manner of Manus. 



HYMN 27.] THE RIG VEDA. 217 

11 ■ For now have I sent forth to you, that I may win a 

fair reward, 

Lords of all wealth, with homage, this my song of 
praise like a milch-cow that faileth not. 

12 Excellent Savitar hath mounted up on high for you, 

ye sure and careful guides. 

Bipeds and quadrupeds, with several hopes and aims, 
and birds have settled to their tasks. 

13 Singing their praise with godlike thought let us in¬ 

voke each god for grace, 

Each god to bring you help, each god to strengthen 
you. 

14 For of one spirit are the gods with mortal man, co¬ 

sharers all of gracious gifts. 

May they increase our strength hereafter and to-day, 
providing ease and ample room. 

15 I laud you, 0 ye guileless gods, here where we meet 

to render praise. 

None, Varuna and Mitra, harms the mortal man who 
honours and obeys your laws. 

16 He makes his house endure, he gathers plenteous 

food who pays obedience to your will. 

Born in his sons anew he spreads as Law commands, 
and prospers every way unharmed. 

17 E’en without war he gathers wealth, and goes his 

way on pleasant paths, 

Whom Mitra, Varuna, and Aryaman protect, sharing 
the gift, of one accord. 


11 Like a milch-cow that faileth not: the meaning of any Am here 
is somewhat uncertain. Sayana explains it by adrishtapdrvAm , un¬ 
precedented, and Prof. Grassmann by ‘ a stream that never dries up.’ 
I have adopted Prof. Ludwig’s interpretation. 

12 Ye sure and careful guides: supranttayah: ‘Devoutly praised 
(Maruts).’—W. 




THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Will. 

18 E’en on the plain for him ye make a sloping path, 

an easy way where road is none : 

And far away from him the ineffectual shaft must 
vanish, shot at him in vain. 

19 If ye appoint the rite to-day, kind rulers, when the 

sun ascends, 

Lords of all wealth, at sunset or at waking-time, or 
be it at the noon of day, 

20 Or, Asuras, when ye have sheltered the worshipper 

who goes to sacrifice, at eve, 

May we, 0 Vasus, ye possessors of all wealth, come 
then into the midst of you. 

21 If ye to-day at sunrise, or at noon, or in the gloom 

of eve, 

Lords of all riches, give fair treasure to the man, 
the wise man who hath sacrificed, 

22 Then we, imperial rulers, claim of you this boon, 

your wide protection, as a son. 

May we, Adityas, offering holy gifts, obtain that 
which shall bring us better still. 

HYMN XXVIII. Visvedevas. 

The thirty gods and three besides, whose seat hath 
been the sacred grass, 

From time of old have found and gained. 

2 Varurja, Mitra, Aryaman, Agnis, with consorts, 
sending boons, 

To whom our Vashat! is addressed : 


The Rishi is Manu Vaivasvata. The metre is Gajetri, with the 
exception of stanza 4 where it is Para uahnih (12 + 8 + 8.) 

1 Thirty gods and three: see I. 139. 11. 

2 Agnis : Agni in his various forms and under different names. 
With consorts : with the Gnas, oelestial dames, wives of the gods, 
y ashat! the exclamation made when the oblation is offered. 



HYMN 29.) 


TUB RIG VEDA. 


219 


3 These are our guardians in the west, and northward 

here, and in the south, 

And on the east, with all the tribe. 

4 Even as the gods desire so verily shall it be. None 

minishetb this power of theirs, 

No demon, and no mortal man. 

5 The Seven carry seven spears ; seven are the splen¬ 

dours they possess, 

And seven the glories they assume. 

HYMN XXIX. Visvedevas. 

One is a youth brown, active, manifold: he decks the 
golden one with ornament. 

2 Another, luminous, occupies the place of sacrifice, 

sage, among the gods. 

3 One brandishes in his hand an iron knife, firm, in his 

seat amid the deities. 

4 Another holds the thunderbolt, wherewith he slays 

the Vritras, resting in his hand. 

4 No demon and no mortal man: or no mortal who presents no 
offerings to the gods. 

5 The Seven: the Maruts, seven, or seven times nine, or seven 
times seven in number. Sayana mentions the legend of their birth, 
which will be found in the RdmAyana, Book I., Cantos 46, 47. The 
meaning is merely that the Maruts carry lances, that is, their light¬ 
nings. and are splendidly adorned. See I. 37. The connexion of this 
Btan*a with the preceding is not obvious. 

The Rishi is Manu Vaivasvata, or Kasyapa, the son of Marichi. 
The metre is Dvipada Viraj (10+ 10). 

One : Soma. “ The yellow Soma-juice is itself an ornament to the 
gold on the finger (Atharvaveda, V. XVIII. 3. 18. hiranyapavah) of 
the priest. ”—L. According to others, Soma as the Moon is intended, 
who ‘decorates (himself) with golden ornaments.’—Wilson. 

2 Another, luminous : Agni. 

3 One brandishes: Twashtar, as the artificer of the gods. 

4 Another holds the thunderbolt: Iudra. 


220 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK YIIT. 

5 Another bears a pointed weapon : bright is he, and 

strong, with healing medicines. 

6 Another, thief-like, watches well the ways, and 

knows the places where the treasures lie. 

7 Another with his mighty stride hath made three 

steps where deities rejoice themselves. 

8 Two with one dame ride on with wingbd steeds, and 

journey forth like travellers on their way. 

9 Two, highest, in the heavens have set their seat, 

worshipped with holy oil, imperial kings. 

10 Some, singing lauds, conceived the S&ma-hymn, great 
hymn whereby they caused the Sun to shine. 

HYMN XXX. Visvedevas. 

Not one of you, ye gods, is small, none of you is a 
feeble child: 

All of you, verily, are great. 

2 Thus be ye lauded, ye destroyers of the foe, ye three- 

and-thirty deities, 

The gods of man, the holy ones. 

3 As such defend and succour us, with benedictions 

speak to us : 

Lead us not from our fathers’ and from Manu’s path 
into the distance far away. 

5 Another: Rudra. See I. 43. 4. 

6 Another: Pusban. See I. 42, 

7 Another with his mighty stride : Vishnu. 

8 Two with one dame : the Asvins with Stiryl See I. 116. 17. 

9 Two, highest: Mitra and Varuna. 

10 Some, singing lands: the Angirasas, or, according to Sajaria, 
the Atris. 

The Rishi is Manu Vaivasvata. The metres are Gayatri in stanza 
1, Pura-ushnih in 2, Brihati in 3, and Anushtup in 4. 

2 Three-and-thirty deities: see I. 139. 11. The gods of man: or, 
gods whom Manu worshipped, which interpretation is supported by 
stanza 3. 




HYMN 31.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


221 


4 Ye deities who stay with us, and all ye gods of all 
mankind, 

Give us your wide protection, give shelter for cattle 
and for steed. 


HYMN XXXI. Various Deities. 

That Brahman pleases Indra well, who worships, 
sacrifices, pours 

Libation, and prepares the meal. 

2 Sakra protects from woe the man who gives him 

sacrificial cake, 

And offers Soma blent with milk. 

3 His chariot shall be glorious, sped by gods, and 

mighty shall he be, 

Subduing all hostilities. 

4 Each day that passes, in his house flows his libation, 

rich in milk, 

Exhaustless, bringing progeny. 

5 O gods, with constant draught of milk, husband and 

wife with one accord 
Press out and wash the Soma-juice. 

6 They gain sufficient food: they come united to the 

sacred grass, 

And never do they fail in strength. 


4 Who stay with us : or are present at this sacrifice. 

The deities of stanzas 1—4 are the praises of the yajam&na or 
institutor of the sacrifice ; of 5—9, the yajam&na and his wife; of 
10—18, benedictions addressed to the pair. The Rishi is Manu 
Vaivasvata. The metres are Anushtup in stanzas 9, 14 ; Padanichrit 
in 10 ; Pankti in 15—18 ; and Gayatri in the rest. 

1 Brahman : here any pious worshipper, not one of the regular 
professional priests, but the institutor of sacrifice who during the 
ceremony may be regarded as their chief. 

Prepares the meal : pasupurod&s&dikam pachati : S. ‘ cooks the cake 
which is an essential part of the animal sacrifice, etc. ’ 



>132 THE HYMNS OF [MOOR tTII. 

7 Never do they deny or seek to hide the favour of 

the gods: 

They win high glory for themselves. 

8 With sons and daughters by their side they reach 

their full extent of life, 

Both decked with ornaments of gold. 

9 Serving the immortal one with gifts of sacrificial 

meal and wealth, 

They satisfy the claims of love and pay due honour 
to the gods. 

10 We claim protection from the Hills, we claim 

protection of the Floods, 

Of him who stands by Vishnu’s side. 

11 May Ptishan come, and Bhaga, lord of wealth, all- 

bounteous, for our weal : 

Broad be the path that leads to bliss : 

12 Aramati, and, free from foes, Visva with spirit of 

a god, 

And the Adityas’ peerless might. 

13 Seeing that Mitra, Aryaman, and Varuna are 

guarding us, 

The paths of Law are fair to tread. 


9 The immortal one: amritdya: Agni, or the immortal (host), that 
is, the gods io general. According to Sayana, ‘ that they may obtain 
immortality (in their sons and descendants).' They satisfy: this 
pdda is considered by some, on metrical and other grounds, to be an 
interpolation. According to Professor Pischel (Vedische Studien, 
p, 278), the half line refers to the beating and preparation of the 
rough stalks of the Soma-plant. 

10 Of him who stands by Vishnu's side: of Vishnu and his associate 
Indra.—L. 

12 Aramati: the Genius of Devotion. Visva: Dyaus 1 —Lj ‘ All 
the worshippers,’ according to SAyana. 



HYMN 32 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


223 


14 I glorify with song, for wealth, Agni the god, the 

first of you. 

We honour as a well-loved friend the god who 
prospereth our fields. 

15 As in all frays the hero, so swift moves his car whom 

gods attend. 

The man who, sacrificing, strives to win the heart of 
deities will conquer those who worship not. 

16 Ne’er are ye injured, worshipper, presser of juice, or 

pious man. 

The man who, sacrificing, strives to win the heart 
of deities will conquer those who worship not. 

17 None in his action equals him, none holds him far 

or keeps him off. 

The man who, sacrificing, strives to win the heart of 
deities will conquer those who worship not. 

18 Such strength of heroes shall be his, such, mastery 

of fleet-foot steeds. 

The man who, sacrificing, strives to win the heart of 
deities will conquer those who worship not. 

HYMN XXXII. Indra. 

Kanvas, tell forth with song the deeds of Indra, the 
impetuous, 

Wrought in the Soma’s wild delight. 

2 Strong god, he slew Anarsani, Sribinda, Pipru, and 
the slave 

Ahisuva, and loosed the floods. 

14 Wko prosptreth our fields: kskelras&dhasam: Sayana explains 
kshetra (the modern Hindi khet, a field), as sacrifice : * the bountiful 
perfecter of the sacrifice.’—Wilson. 

The Rishi is Medhatithi of the family of Kanva. The metre is G&yatri. 

1 The impetuous: rijishincih: ‘ the drinker of the stale Soma.’ —Wilson. 

2 The slave: the Dasa, fiend, or savage. All the names are names 
of demons of drought, of whom Pipru has been mentioned frequently 
in preceding Books. 



224 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

3 Thou broughtest down the dwelling-place, the height 

of lofty Arbuda. 

That exploit, Indra, must be famed. 

4 Bold, to your famous Soma I call the fair-visored 

god for aid, 

Down like a torrent from the hill. 

5 Rejoicing in the Soma-draughts, hero, burst open, 

like a fort, 

The stall of horses and of kine. 

6 If my libation gladdens, if thou takest pleasure in 

my laud, 

Come with thy godhead from afar. 

7 O Indra, lover of the song, the singers of thy praise 

are we: 

0 Soma-drinker, quicken us. 

8 And, taking thy delight with us, bring us still un¬ 

diminished food : 

Great is thy wealth, 0 Maghavan. 

9 Make thou us rich in herds of kine, in steeds, in 

gold : let us exert 
Our strength in sacrificial gifts. 

10 Let us call him to aid whose hands stretch far, 

to whom high laud is due, 

Who worketh well to succour us. 

11 He, Satakratu, even in fight acts as a Vritra-slayer 

stili: 

He gives his worshippers much wealth. 

12 May he, this Sakra, strengthen us, boon god who 

satisfies our needs, 

Indra, with all his saving helps. 


3 Arbuda: see Vol, I., Index. 

4 Like a torrent from the hill: ‘ as (a traveller invokes) the water 
from a cloud.’—Wilson. 

11 Satakratu: lord of a hundred powers. 

12 Sakra : the mighty. 



HYMN 32 ] 


THE RIGYEDA. 


225 


13 To him, the mighty stream of wealth, the Soma- 

presser’s rescuing friend, 

To Indra sing your song of praise ; 

14 Who bringeth what is great and firm, who winneth 

glory ia his wars, 

Lord of vast wealth through power and might. 

15 There liveth none to check or stay his energies and 

gracious deeds : 

None who can say, He giveth not. 

16 No debt is due by Brahmans now, by active men 

who press the juice : 

Well hath each Soma-draught been paid. 

17 Sing ye to him who must be praised, say lauds to 

him who must be praised, 

Bring prayer to him who must be praised. 

18 May he, unchecked, strong, meet for praise, bring 

hundreds, thousands forth to light, 

Indra who aids the worshipper. 

19 Go with thy godlike nature forth, go where the folk 

are calling thee : 

Drink, Indra, of the drops we pour. 

20 Drink milky draughts which are thine own, this too 

which was with Tugrya once, 

This is it, Indra, that is thine. 

21 Pass him who pours libations out in angry mood or 

after sin : 

Here drink the juice we offer thee. 


16 The Brahmans or worshippers have, hy offering libationB, dis¬ 
charged their obligations to t.he gods, and the gods have repaid them, 
or will soon repay them for their offerings. 

L8 Hundreds, thousands : countless treasures for us to enjoy. 

20 Which was with Tugrya: like that which thy favourite Bbujyu 
(see Vol. I., Index) formerly offered thee. 



226 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VIII. 


22 Over the three great distances, past the five peoples 

go thy way, 

0 Indra, noticing our voice. 

23 Send forth thy ray like Sftrya : let my songs attract 

thee hitherward 

Like waters gathering to the vale. 

24 Now to the hero fair of check, Adhvaryu, pour the 

Soma forth : 

Bring of the juice that he may drink : 

25 Who cleft the water-cloud in twain, loosed rivers for 

their downward flow, 

And set the ripe milk in the kine. 

26 He, meet for praise, slew Vritra, slew Ahisuva, 

A 

Urnavabhi’s son, 

And pierced through Arbuda with frost. 

27 To him your matchless mighty one, unconquerable 

conqueror, 

Sing forth the prayer which gods have given. 

28 Indra, who in the wild delight of Soma-juice con¬ 

siders well 

All holy laws among the gods. 

29 Hither let these thy bays who share thy banquet, 

steeds with golden manes, 

Convey thee to the feast prepared. 

30 Hither, 0 thou whom many laud, the bays whom 

Priyamedha praised 
Shall bring thee to the Soma-draught. 

22 The three great distances: the space in front of thee, behind 
thee, and at thy side. Noticing our voice: bearing and attending to 
our invocations. Come to us who are thy true worshippers, and pass 
by otliors who worship thee in the hope of being avenged upon their 
enemies or of obtaining pardon for some sin. 

26 UrnavAbhi’s son: Aurnavabha: a demon of drought. With frost: 
making the piercing cold of winter his weapon. 



HYMN 3*.j 


THE RIG VEDA 


227 


HYMN XXXIII. Indfa. 

We compass thee like waters, we whose grass is 
trimmed and Soma pressed. 

Here where the filter pours its stream, thy worship¬ 
pers round thee, O Vritra-slayer, sit. 

2 Men, Vasu! by the Soma, with lauds call thee to 

the foremost place : 

When comest thou athirst unto the juice as home, 
O Indra, like a bellowing bull ? 

3 Boldly, bold hero, bring us spoil in thousands for the 

Katjtvas’ sake: 

0 active Maghavan, with eager prayer we crave the 
yellow-hued with store of kine. 

4 Medhy£tithi, to Indra sing, drink of the juice to 

make thee glad. 

Close-knit to his bay steeds, bolt-armed, beside the 
juice is he : his chariot is of gold. 

5 He who is praised as strong of hand both right and 

left, most wise and bold : 

Indra who, rich in hundreds, gathers thousands up, 
honoured as breaker-down or forts. 

6 The bold of heart whom none provokes, who stands 

in bearded confidence ; 

Much-lauded, very glorious, overthrowing foes, strong 
helper, like a bull with might. 

The Riahi ia Medhyatithi. The metres are Gayatri in stanzas 
16—18, Anushtup in 19, and Brihati in the rest. 

1 The construction is difficult and the comparison is not obvious. 
The filter: or woollen strainer through which the Soma-juice is 
run to purify it. 

2 As Jwme : as familiar to thee as thine own home. 

3 The yellow-hued: there is no substantive, but gold must be in¬ 
tended. 

t) In bearded confidence: a conjectural paraphrase. §ma»rushu 
(in (his) beard) is said by Saysna to mean here 1 in combats,’ that is, 
perhaps, as Professor Ludwig suggests, among ranks of men bristling 
with spears. But this can hardly be the meaning of the word which 
“is probably an idiomatic expression for the fierce look of a warrior 
who challenges the foe.”—L. 



228 THE HYMN'S OF [BOOK VIII. 

7 Who knows what vital power he wins, drinking 

beside the flowing juice ? 

This is the fair-cheeked god who, joying in the 
draught, breaks down the castles in his strength. 

8 As a wild elephant rushes on, this way and that 

way, mad with heat, 

None may compel thee, yet come hither to the 
draught: thou movest mighty in thy power. 

9 When he, the mighty, ne’er o’erthrown, stedfast, 

made ready for the tight, 

When India Maghavan lists to his praiser’s call, he 
will not stand aloof, but come. 

10 Yea, verily, thou art a hull, with a bull’s rush, 

whom none may stay : 

Thou, mighty one, art celebrated as a bull, famed 
as a bull both near and far. 

11 Thy reins are very bulls in strength, bulls’ strength 

is in thy golden whip. 

Thy car, 0 Maghavan, thy bays are strong as bulls : 
thou, Satakratu, art a bull. 

12 Let the strong presser press for thee. Bring hither, 

thou straight-rushing bull. 

The mighty makes the mighty run in flowing streams 
for thee whom thy bay horses bear. 

13 Come, thou most potent Indra, come to drink the 

savoury Soma-juice. 

Maghavan, very wise, will quickly come to hear the 
songs, the prayer, the hymns of praise. 


8 Mad with heal: that is, mast, or as -corruptly spelt, must. 

10 Thou art bull: vrishd: or strong and mighty. As has bean 
pbserved before, some of the Vedic poets delight in the repetition 
of this word and its derivatives. 

11 Golden whip : the lightning, with which Indra lashes the cloudi, 
his horses. 

12 The mighty makes the mighty run : the priest makes the Soma- 
juice flow. 



HYMS 34.] 


THE RIOVEDA. 


229 


14 When thou hast mounted on thy ear let. thy yoked 

bay steeds carry thee 

Past other mens’ libations,, lord of hundred powers, 
thee, Vritra-slayer, thee our friend. 

15 0 thou most lofty one, accept our laud as nearest to 

thine heart. 

May our libations be most sweet to make thee glad, 
O Soma-drinker, heavenly lord. 

16 Neither in thy decree nor mine, but in another’s he 

delights,— 

The man who brought us unto this. 

17 Indra himself hath said, The mind of woman brooks 

not discipline, 

Her intellect hath little weight. 

18 His pair of horses dropping down joy-giving beverage, 

draw his car : 

High-lifted is the stallion’s pole. 

19 Cast down thine eyes and look not up. More closely 

set thy feet. Let none 

See what thy garment veils, for thou, a Brahman, 
hast become a dame. 

HYMN XXXIY. Indra. 

Come hither, Indra, with thy bays, come thou to 
Kanva’s eulogy. 

Ye by command of yonder Dyaus, god bright by 
day ! have gone to heaven. 

10 The last four stanzas of the by mu are not very intelligible, 
nor is their connexion with the preceding verses obvious. Stanzas 
16 and 18 appear to be spoken by a woman and 17 by a man. Stanza 
19 is said to be addressed by Indra to Asanga son of Playoga who had 
been chauged to a woman by the imprecation of tbe gods, and who 
was afterwards restored to manhood 

Tbe Rishi is Nipatithi of the family of Kanva, but stanzas 16—18 
are ascribed in tbe Index to the thousand Vnsurochi&has who are 
said to have been a division of the family of Angiras. The metre 
is Anushtup in stanzas 1—13, and Gayatri in 16—18. 

1 The exact meaning of the second line, which is tbe burden of 
the first fifteeu stanzas, is obscure. Ye probably means India’s 



230 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

2 May the stone draw thee as it speaks, the Soma- 

stone with ringing voice. 

Ye by oommand of yonder Dyaus, god bright by day! 
have gone to heaven, 

3 The stones’ rim shakes the Soma here like a wolf 

worrying a sheep. 

Ye by command of yonder Dyaus, god bright by 
day! have gone to heaven. 

4 The Kanvas call thee hitherward for sucoour and to 

win the spoil. 

Ye by command of yonder Dyaus, god bright by 
day! have gone to heaven. 

5 I set for thee, as for the strong, the first draught of 

the juices shed. 

Ye by command of yonder Dyaus, god bright by 
day ! have gone to heaven. 

6 Come with abundant blessings, come with perfect 

care to succour us. 

Ye by command of yonder Dyaus, god bright by 
day ! have gone to heaven. 

7 Come, lord of lofty thought, who hast infinite wealth 

and countless aids. 

Ye by command of yonder Dyaus, god bright by 
day ! have gone to heaven. 

8 Adorable mid gods, the priest good to mankind shall 

bring thee near. 

Ye by command of yonder Dyaus, god bright by 
day ! have gone to heaven. 

9 As wings the faloon, so thy bays rushing in joy shall 

carry thee. 

Ye by oommand of yonder Dyaus, god bright by 
day ! have gone to heaven. 

horses, and god bright by day l (divdvaso) Indra himself; that is, ye, 
horses, and thou, Indra, have gone to heaven. The soholiast ofitera 
two different explanations, in one oase boldly altering two words of 
the text. See Wilson’s Translation, Note. 

8 The. priest good to mankind : or, the invoking priest, invoker or 
herald established by M.anu, namely Agni. 



HYMN 34 .] 


THE R1GVEDA. 


231 


10 Come from the enemy to us, to Svaha! and the 

Soma-draught. 

Ye by command of yonder Dyaus, god bright by 
day ! have gone to heaven. 

11 Come hither with thine ear inclined to hear, take 

pleasure in our lauds. 

Ye by command of yonder Dyaus! god bright by 
day ! have gone to heaven. 

12 Lord of well-nourished horses, come with well-fed 

steeds alike in hue. 

Ye by command of yonder Dyaus, god bright by 
day ! have gone to heaven. 

13 Come hither from the mountains, come from regions 

of the sea of air. 

Ye by command of yonder Dyaus, god bright by 
day! have gone to heaven. 

14 Disclose to us, O hero, wealth in thousands both of 

kine and steeds. 

Ye by command of yonder Dyaus, god bright by 
day ! have gone to heaven. 

15 Bring riches hitherward to us in hundreds, thousands, 

myriads. 

Ye by command of yonder Dyaus, god bright by 
day ! have gone to heaven. 

16 The thousand steeds, the mightiest troop, which we 

and Indra have received 
From Vasurochis as a gift, 

17 The brown that match the wind in speed, and bright 

bay coursers fleet of foot, 

Like suns, resplendent arc they all. 


10 Svdhd: an exclamation used in sacrifice; Ave ! or Hail! 

16 Vasurochis: vasurochishah is prnbably the ablative singular, 
and not the nominative plural, of the name of the institutor of the 
sacrifice. Professor Wilson, following Savana, translates: “We, the 
thousand Vasurochmhas, and Indra (our leader), when we obtain 
vigorous herds of horaes,— 


232 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

18 Mid the P&r&vata’s rich gifts, swift steeds whose 
wheels run rapidly, 

I seemed to stand amid a wood. 

HYMN XXXV. Asvins. 

With Agni and with Indra, Vishnu, Varuna, with 
the Adityas, Rudras, Vasus, closely leagued; 
Accordant, of one mind with Sftrya and with Dawn, 
O Asvins, drink the Soma-juice. 

2 With all the Holy Thoughts, all being, mighty ones l 

in close alliance with the Mountains, Heaven, and 
Earth; 

Accordant, of one mind with Shrya and with Dawn, 
O Asvins, drink the Soma-juice. 

3 With all the deities, three times eleven, here, in 

close alliance with the Maruts, Bhrigus, Floods; 
Accordant, of one mind with Sftrya and with Dawn, 
O Asvins, drink the Soma-juice. 

4 Accept the sacrifice, attend to this my call : come 

nigh, O ye twain gods, to all libations here. 
Accordant, of one mind with Sftrya and with Dawn, 
O Asvins, bring us strengthening food. 

5 Accept our praise-song as a youth accepts a maid. 

Come nigh, O ye twain gods, to all libations here. 
Accordant, of one mind with S6rya and with Dawn, 
O Asvins, bring us strengthening food. 


18 The P&rdvata is Vasurochis. The ParSvatas are probably the 
irupitnrai of Ptolemy, who were settled northwards of Arachosia.—L. 

The Rishi is Syavasva of the family of Atri. The metres are 
Uparishtajjyotis (8x4 + 11 or 12, i, e. 43 or 44 syllables) in stanzas 
j_21; Paukti in 22, 24; and Mahdbrihatl in 23. 

5 A yovth: literally, two youths. “ As youths are delighted (by 
the voices) of maidens.”—Wilaou. 



HYMN 35.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


233 


6 Accept the songs we sing, accept the solemn rite. 

Come nigh, O ye twain gods, to all libations here. 
Accordant, of one mind with Sftrya and with Dawn, 
O Asvins, bring us strengthening food. 

7 Ye fly as starlings fly unto the forest trees ; like 

buffaloes ye seek the Soma we have shed. 
Accordant, of one mind with Sftrya and with Dawn, 
come thrice, O Asvins, to our home. 

8 Ye fly like swans, like those who travel on their way ; 

like buffaloes ye seek the Soma we have shed. 
Accordant, of one mind with Sffrya and with Dawn, 
come thrice, O Asvins, to our home. 

9 Ye fly to our oblation like a pair of hawks; like 

buffaloes ye seek the Soma we have shed. 
Accordant, of one mind with Sflrya and with Dawn, 
come thrice, 0 Asvins, to our home. 

10 Come hitherward and drink and satisfy yourselves, 

bestow upon us progeny and affluence. 

Accordant, of one mind with Shrya and with Dawn, 
O Asvins, grant us vigorous strength. 

11 Conquer your foes, protect us, praise your worship¬ 

pers ; bestow upon us progeny and affluence. 
Accordant, of one mind with Shrya and with Dawn, 
O Asvins, grant us vigorous strength. 

12 Slay enemies, animate men w r hom ye befriend; be¬ 

stow upon us progeny and affluence. 

Accordant, of one mind with Sffrya and with Dawn, 
O Asvins, grant us vigorous strength. 

13 With Mitra, Varuna, Dharma, and the Maruts in 

your company approach unto your praiser’s call. 
Accordant, of one mind with Sffrya and with Dawn, 
and with the Adityas, Asvins ! come. 


8 Ye come eagerly to the Soma as thirsty hansat, (geese or flamin¬ 
goes) travellers, and buffaloes hasten to the water. 

13 Dharma : Right, Justice, Law, Virtue or Duty personified. 



234 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VIII. 


14 With Vishnu and the Angirasas attending you, and 

with the Maruts come unto your praiser’s call. 
Accordant, of one mind with Stirya and with Dawn, 
and with the Adityas, Asvins ! come. 

15 With Ribhusand with V&jas, 0 ye mighty ones, leagued 

with the Maruts come ye to your praiser’s call. 
Accordant, of one mind with Stirya and with Dawn, 
and with the Adityas, Asvins ! come. 

16 Give spirit to our prayer and animate our thoughts ; 

slay ye the R&kshasas and drive away disease. 
Accordant, of one mind with Sftrya and with Dawn, 
the presser’s Soma, Asvins ! drink. 

17 Strengthen the ruling power, strengthen the men 

of war; slay ye the R&kshasas and drive away 
disease. 

Accordant, of one mind with S&rya and with Dawn, 
the presser’s Soma, Asvins ! drink. 

18 Give strength unto the milch-kine, give the people 

strength, slay ye the Rakshasas and drive away 
disease. 

Accordant, of one mind with Sfirya and with Dawn, 
the presser’s Soma, Asvins ! drink. 

19 As ye heard Atri’s earliest eulogy, so hear Syavasva, 

Soma-presser, ye who reel in joy. 

Accordant, of one mind with Sftrya and with Dawn, 
drink juice, 0 Asvins, three days old. 

20 Further like running streams Sy&vasva’s eulogies 

who presses out the Soma, ye who reel in joy. 
Accordant, of one mind with Stlrya and with Dawn, 
drink juice, O Asvins, three days old. 


17 The ruling power: kshatram: hence Kshatriya, a man of the 
princely or military order. 

18 The people: visas: hence Vaisya, a man of the mercantile class 
or order. 

19 Atri’s: as he was the progenitor of the Rishi of the Hymn. 
See Vol. I., Index, 


HYMN 36.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


235 


21 ’Seize, as ye grasp the reins, Syav&sva’s solemn rites 

who presses out the Soma, ye who reel in joy. 
Accordant, of one mind with Sflrya and with Dawn, 
drink juice, 0 Asvins, three days old. 

22 Drive down your chariot hitherward: drink ye the 

Soma’s savoury juice. 

Approach, ye Asvins, come to us : I call you, eager 
for your aid. Grant treasures to the worshipper. 

23 When sacrifice which tells our reverence hath begun, 

heroes ! to drink the gushing juice, 

Approach, ye Asvins, come to us : I call you, eager 
for your aid. Grant treasures to the worshipper. 

24 Sate you with consecrated drink, with juice effused, 

ye deities. 

Approach, ye Asvins, come to us: I call you, eager 
for your aid. Grant treasures to the worshipper. 

HYMN XXXVI. Indra. 

Thou helpest him whose grass is trimmed, who sheds 
the juice, O Satakratu, drink Soma to make thee 
glad, 

The share which they have fixed for thee, thou, 
Indra, victor o’er all hosts and space, begirt with 
Maruts, lord of heroes, winner of the floods. 

2 Maghavan, help thy worshipper : let him help thee. 
O Satakratu, drink Soma to make thee glad, 

21 Solemn riles: that is, the oblations presented thereat. 

24 Consecrated drink; libations offered with the sacrificial excla¬ 
mation Svahlv! Ave ! or Hail! 

The Rishi is Syavasva. The metre is Sakvari (14x4, or 56 syl¬ 
lables) in stanzas 1—6, and Mah&pankti (12 x 4) in 7. 

1 Which they have fixed: which all the gods have assigned. 

And space, begirt: or, and wide space, girt. The floods: the waters 
of heaven, the rain. 

2 Let him help thee: acoording to S&yant, ‘ protect thyself (by 
drinking the Soma).’ “ The mutual relation between the god and his 
worshipper is expressed, and the translation ‘help thyself' is 
ridiculous."—L. 



236 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VIII. 


The share which they have fixed for thee, thou, 
Indra, victor o’er all hosts and space, begirt with 
Maruts, lord of heroes, winner of the floods. 

3 Thou aidest gods with food, and that with might aids 

thee. O Satakratu, drink Soma to make thee glad, 
The share which they have fixed for thee, thou, 
Indra, victor o’er all hosts and space, begirt with 
Maruts, lord of heroes, winner of the floods. 

4 Creator of the heaven, creator of the earth, O Sata¬ 

kratu, drink Soma to make thee glad, 

The share which they have fixed for thee, thou, 
Indra, victor o’er all hosts and space, begirt with 
Maruts, lord of heroes, winner of the floods. 

5 Father of cattle, father of all steeds art thou. O 

Satakratu, drink Soma to make thee glad, 

The share which they have fixed for thee, thou, 
Indra, victor o’er all hosts and space, begirt with 
Maruts, lord of heroes, winner of the floods. 

6 Stone-hurler, glorify the Atris’ hymn of praise. O 

Satakratu, drink Soma to make thee glad, 

The share which they have fixed for thee, thou, 
Indra, victor o’er all hostB and space, begirt with 
Maruts, lord of heroes, winner of the floods. 

7 Hear thou Syav&sva while he pours to thee, as erst 

thou heardest Atri when he wrought his holy rites. 
Indra, thou only gavest Trasadasyu aid in the fierce 
fight with heroes, strengthening his prayers. 

HYMN XXXVII. Indra. 

This prayer, and those who shed the juice, in wars 
with Vritra thou holpest, Indra, lord of strength, 
with all thy succours. 

3 Food : sacrificial food. Tiuii: food, especially in the shape of Soma. 
7 Trasadasyu: an especial favourite of Indra and the Asvins, 
celebrated for his victories and liberality. See Index. 

The Rishi is Syavasva. The metres are Atijagati (13 x 4) in Stanza 
1, and Mahapaukti in the rest. 




HYMN 37 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


237 


O Vritra-slayer, from libation poured at noon, drink 
of the Soma-juice, thou blameless thunderer. 

2 Thou mighty conquerer of hostile armaments, O 

Indra, lord of strength, with all thy saving help; 
0 Vritra-slayer, from libation poured at noon, drink 
of the Soma-juice, thou blameless thunderer. 

3 Sole ruler, thou art sovran of this world of life, O 

Indra, lord of strength, with all thy saving help; 
0 Vritra-slayer, from libation poured at noon, drink 
of the Soma-juice, thou blameless thunderer. 

4 Thou only sunderest these two consistent worlds, 0 

Indra, lord of strength, with all thy saving help; 
O Vritra-slayer, from libation poured at noon, drink 
of the Soma-juiee, thou blameless thunderer. 

5 Thou art the lord supreme o’er rest and energy, O 

Indra, lord of strength, with all thy saving help; 
O Vritra-slayer, from libation poured at noon, drink 
of the Soma-juice, thou blameless thunderer. 

6 Thou helpest one to power, and one thou hast not 

helped, O Indra, lord of strength, with all thy 
saving aid; 

0 Vritra-slayer, from libation poured at noon, drink 
of the Soma-juice, thou blameless thunderer. 

7 Hear thou Syavasva while he sings to thee, as erst 

thou heardest Atri when he wrought his holy rites. 
Indra, thou only gavest Trasadasyu aid in the fierce 
fight with heroes, strengthening his powers. 


4 Consistent worlds: there is uo substantive iu the text, and lokau 
(worlds) is supplied by Sayana. 

5 Rest and energy: or peace and war. ‘ Prosperity and gains.’ — 
Wilson. 

6 To power : ksatrdya : the rule exercised by princes. 

7 Repeated from the preceding hymn with the alteration of two 
words— rebhatah, singing, instead of sunvatah, pouring (libations), 
and hhatrdni (princely) powers instead of brahmini, prayers, “ as 
if,” observes Dr. Muir, “the former (brahmdni,) contained a reference 
to the functions of the priest, and the latter to those of the prince.”— 
0. S. Texts, 1. 263. 



23S THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK VIII. 

HYMN XXXVIII. Indra-Agni. 

Ye twain are priests of sacrifice, winners in war 
and holy works : 

Indra and Agni, mark this well. 

2 Ye bounteous riders on the car, ye Vritra-slayers 

unsubdued: 

Indra and Agni, mark this well. 

3 The men with pressing-stones have pressed this meath 

of yours which gives delight: 

Indra and Agni, mark this well. 

4 Accept our sacrifice for weal, sharers of praise! the 

Soma shed: 

Indra and Agni, heroes, come. 

5 Be pleased with these libations which attract you to 

our sacred gifts: 

Indra and Agni, heroes, come. 

6 Accept this eulogy of mine whose model is theGayatri: 
Indra and Agni, heroes, come. 

7 Come with the early-faring gods, ye who are lords of 

genuine wealth : 

Our Soma, Indra ! Agni! drink. 

8 Hear ye the call of Atris, hear Syav&sva as he sheds 

the juice : 

Our Soma, Indra ! Agni! drink. 

9 Thus have I called you to our aid as sages called on 

you of old : 

Our Soma, Indra ! Agni! drink. 

10 Indra’s and Agni’s grace I claim, Sarasvatl’s associates 
To whom this psalm of praise is sung. 

The Rishi is Syiivasva. The metre is Gayatri. 

1 Mark this well: ‘hear(thepraise)of tbis(thy worshipper).’—Wilson. 

2 Bounteous : tosdsd: according to Sayana, ‘ destroyers (of foes).’ 

6 Whose model is the. Gdyatri : composed in GAyatri metre. 

7 Early-faring gods: “But Thou wast up at break of day."—George 
Herbert. Our Soma, Indra! Agni! drink: literally, ‘Indra Agni, 
to the Soma-draught! 

lu Sarasvatl’s associates: accordingtoSayana, ‘to whom praise belongs.’ 



HYMN 39 ] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


239 


HYMN XXXIX. Agni. 

The glorious Agni have I praised, and worshipped 
with the sacred food. 

May Agni deck the gods for us. Between both 
gathering-places he goes on his embassy, the sage. 
May all the others die away. 

2 Agni, burn down the word within their bodies 

through our newest speech, 

All hatreds of the godless, all the wicked man’s 
malignities. Away let the destroyers go. May 
all the others die away. 

3 Agni, I offer hymns to thee, like holy oil within thy 

mouth. 

Acknowledge them among the gods, for thou art the 
most excellent, Vivasvan’s blissful messenger. Let 
all the others die away. 

4 Agni bestows all vital power oven as each man sup¬ 

plicates. 

He brings the Vasus strengthening gifts, and grants 
delight, in health and wealth, for every calling on 
the gods. Let all the others die away. 

5 Agni hath made himself renowned by wonderful vic¬ 

torious act. 

He is the priest of all the tribes, chosen with sacri¬ 
ficial meeds. He urges deities to receive. Let 
all the others die away. 


The Rishi is Nabhika of the family of Kanva. The metro is 
Mahapankti, each stanza containing forty-eight syllables. 

1 Deck the gods for us: ‘ brighten the gods with the oblations at 
our sacrifice.’ —Wilson. 

Both gathering-places: heaven and earth. All the others: anyake 
same: meaning, according to Sayana, all our enemies. 

2 All haired of the godless . aratir ardvndm must be read instead 
of ardtl rardvndm .— L. 

5 With sacrificial meeds : dakshinabhih : his dakshinds or honoraria 
as priest are the oblations which he receives as a god. 




240 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

6 Agni knows all that springs from gods, he knows 

the mystery of men. 

Giver of wealth is Agni, he uncloses both the doors 
to us when worshipped with our newest gift. Let 
all the others die away. 

7 Agni inhabiteth with gods and men who offer sacrifice. 
He cherisheth with great delight much wisdom, as 

all things that be, god among gods adorable. May 
all the others die away. 

8 Agni who liveth in all streams, lord of the seven¬ 

fold race of men, 

Him dweller in three homes we seek, best slayer of 
the Dasyus for Mandh&tar, first in sacrifice. Let 
all the others die away. 

9 Agni the wise inhabiteth three gathering-places, 

triply formed. 

Decked as our envoy let the sage bring hither and 
conciliate the thrice eleven deities. Let all the 
others die away. 

10 Our Agni, thou art first among the gods, and first 
mid living men. 

Thou only irulest over wealth. Round about thee, 
as natural dams, circumfluous the waters run. Let 
all the others die away. 


6 That springs from, gods : the past and the present, while the 
mystery of men is the future.—L. Both the doors: of wealth, or, 
perhaps of heaven also. 

8 Lord of the sevenfold race of men: perhaps meaning, god of all 
men, like Vaisvauara; or the reference may be to the seven priests: 
‘Who is ministered to by seven priests.’—Wilson. ‘Acting as seven 
priests.’—Prof. M. Muller. Mandk&tar : said to be the same aB M&u- 
dhatar, son of Yuvanasva, and Rishi of X. 134. 

9 Three gathering-places : heaven, firmament, and earth. 

10 Round about thee...the waters run: “Him, pure, resplendent, 
offspring of the waters, the waters pure have on all sides encompassed.” 
See 11. 135.3. 



HYMN 40 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


HYMN XL. Indra-Agni. 

Indra and Agni, surely ye as conquerors will give 
us wealth, 

Whereby in fight we may o’ercome that which is 
strong and firmly fixed, as Agni burns the woods 
with wind. Let all the others die away. 

2 We set no snares to tangle you, Indra we worship 

and adore, hero of heroes mightiest. 

Once may he come unto us with his steed, come 
unto us to win us strength, and to complete the 
sacrifice. Let all the others die away. 

3 For, famous Indra, Agni, ye are dwellers in the 

midst of frays. 

Sages in wisdom, ye are knit to him who seeketh 
you as friends. Heroes, bestow on him his wish. 
Let all the others die away. 

4 Nabhaka-like, with sacred song Indra’s and Agni’s 

praise I sing, 

Theirs to whom all this world belongs, this heaven 
and this mighty earth which bear rich treasure in 
their lap. Let all the others die away. 

5 To Indra and to Agni send your prayers, as was 

Nabhaka’s wont,— 

Who oped with sideway opening the sea with its 
foundations seven—Indra all-powerful in his might. 
Let all the others die away. 

6 Tear thou asunder, as of old, like tangles of a creep¬ 

ing plant, 


The Riahi is Nabhaka. The metres are Sakvari in stauza 2, Trish- 
tup in 12, and Mahapankti in the rest. 

2 Once : kaddchit . expressive of impatience.—L. 

4 Nabhdka-liJce: Nabhaka may have been the father of Nabhaka. 
Who oped: ‘who overspread (with their lustre).’—Wilson. The 
Commentator does not explain the passage. 

16 



242 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VIII. 


Demolish thou the D&sa’s might. May we with 
Indra’s help divide the treasure he hath gathered 
up. Let all the others die away. 

7 What time with constant song these men call Indra 

Agni hitherward, 

May we with our own heroes quell those who pro¬ 
voke us to the fight, and conquer those who strive 
with us. Let all the others die away. 

8 The two refulgent with their beams rise and come 

downward from the sky. 

By Indra’s and by Agni’s hest, flowing away, the 
rivers run which they released from their restraint. 
Let all the others die away. 

9 0 Indra, many are thine aids, many thy ways of 

guiding us, 

Lord of the bay steeds, Hinva’s son. To a good 
hero come our prayers, which soon shall have 
accomplishment. Let all the others die away. 

10 Inspire him with your holy hymns, the hero bright 

and glorious, 

Him who with might demolisheth even the brood of 
Sushna, and winneth for us the heavenly streams. 
Let all the others die away. 

11 Inspire him worshipped with fair rites, the glorious 

hero truly brave. 

He brake in pieces Sushna’s brood who still expected 
not the stroke, and won for us the heavenly 
streams. Let all the others die away. 

12 Thus have we sung anew to Indra Agni, as sang 

our sires, Angirasas, and Mandh&tar. 

Guard us with triple shelter and preserve us: may 
we be masters of a store of riches. 

8 The two refulgent with their beams: apparently the sun and moon. 
According to Sayana, Indra and Agui are intended. 

9 Hinva’s son : Hinva (the driver, impeller, instigator of actions),, 
a father invented for Indra by the poet. To a good hero : to Indra. 
“The meaning of the verse, even with the help of the scholiast, is- 
far from intelligible.” —Wilson. 



HYMN 41.| 


THE RJQYEDA. 


243 


HYMN XLI. Varuna. 

To make this Varuna come forth, sing thou a song 
unto the band of Maruts wiser than thyself,— 

This Varuna who guardeth well the thoughts of men 
like herds of kine. 

Let all the others die away. 

2 Him altogether praise I with the song and hymns 

our fathers sang, and with N&bh&ka’s eulogies,—• 
Him dwelling at the rivers’ source, surrounded by 
his sisters seven. Let all the others die away. 

3 The nights he hath encompassed, and stablished the 

morns with magic art: visible over all is he. 

His dear ones, following his law, have prospered the 
three dawns for him. Let all the others fall away. 

4 He, visible o’er all the earth, stablished the quarters 

of the sky : 

He measured out the eastern place, that is the fold 
of Varuna: like a strong herdsman is the god. 
Let all the others die away. 

5 He who supports the worlds of life, he who well 

knows the hidden names mysterious of the morn¬ 
ing-beams, 

He cherishes much wisdom, sage, as heaven brings 
forth each varied form. Let all the others die away. 


The Rishi is N&bhstka of the family of Kanva. The metre is 
Mahapankti. 

1 To make this Varuna come forth : Sayana explains prabhdtaye, as 
an adjective - prakrishtadhandya: ‘to that opulent Varuria.'—Wilson. 

Wiser: more skilled in singing. The thoughts : holy thoughts and 
devotions. 

2 NAbhAka’s: that is, mine own. Sisters seven: the five rivers of 
the Panjab, the Indus, and perhaps the Kubha. See Vol. I. p. 58. 

3 His dear ones : apparently the nights, which give place to the 
mornings. 

Three daunts: according to Sayana, morning, noon, and evening. 

4 The fold: or, perhaps, the course, meaning the place from which 
he starts. 




244 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

6 In whom all wisdom centres, as the nave is set with¬ 

in the wheel. 

Haste ye to honour Trita, as kine haste to gather in 
the fold, even as they muster steeds to yoke. Let 
all the others die away. 

7 He wraps these regions as a robe ; he contemplates 

the tribes of gods and all the works of mortal men. 
Before the home of Varuna all the gods follow his 
decree. Let all the others die away. 

8 He is an ocean far-removed, yet through the heaven 

to him ascends the worship which these realms 
possess. 

With his bright foot he overthrew their magic, and 
went up to heaven. Let all the others die away. 

3 Ruler, whose bright far-seeing rays, pervading all 
three earths, have filled the three superior realms 
of heaven. 

Firm is the seat of Varupa: over the seven he rules 
as king. Let all the others die away. 


6 Trita: Varuna, here identified with this mysterious god. Ac¬ 
cording to Sayana, (Varuna) ‘who abides in the three worlds.’ 

7 This stanza is very obscure, and my reudering is conjectural. The 
commentary is defective, and Professors Roth and Ludwig think that 
the correctness of one word in the text is doubtful. According to the 
slight alteration suggested by the latter scholar, ‘under the lead’ 
would stand instead of ‘ before the home.’ 

8 The first line of this stanza also is difficult. Professor Wilson, 
following Sayana, translates: “He is the bidden ocean; swift he 
mounts (the heaven) as (the sun) the sky; when he has placed the 
sacrifice in those (regions of the firmament).’’ Professor Ludwig’s 
interpretation, which I follow, requires lirah to be read instead of turah 
(swift). 

Their magic: the magical arts of the fiends of darkness. 

9 The seven : rivers, understood. 




HYMN 42 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


245 


10 Who, after his decree, o’erspread the dark ones with 
a robe of light; 

Who measured out the ancient seat, who pillared 
both the worlds apart as the Unborn supported 
heaven. Let all the others die away. 

HYMN XLII. Vanina. 

Lord of all wealth, the Asura propped the heavens, 
and measured out the broad earth’s wide expanses. 
He, king supreme, presides o’er all existence. All 
these are Varui^a’s holy operations. 

2 So humbly worship Varuga the mighty; revere the 

wise guard of the world immortal. 

May he vouchsafe us triply-barred protection* 0 
Earth and Heaven, within your lap preserve us. 

3 Sharpen this song of him who strives his utmost, 

sharpen, god Varuna, his strength and insight; 
May we ascend the ship that bears us safely, where¬ 
by we may pass over all misfortune. 

4 Asvins, with songs the singer stones have made you 

hasten hitherward, 

N^satyas, to the Soma-draught. Let all the others 
die away. 

5 As the sage Atri with his hymns, O Asvins, called 

you eagerly, 

Nisatyas, to the Soma-draught. Let all the others 
die away. 


10 The dark ones.' the nights, which Varupa turns into days. 

The Unborn: the primeval, everlasting, uncreated Divine Being. 
According to Sayana, the Sun. 


The Asvins are the deities of the second triplet. The Rishi is 
Archananas or Nabhaka. The metre is Trishtup in stanzas 1—3, and 
Anushtup in 4—6. 

1 The Asura : the high god, Varuna. 

2 Of the world immortal: amritasya . according to Sayana, of 
amrit or ambrosia. 




246 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

6 So have I called you to our aid, even as the wise 
have called of old, 

N&saty'as, to the Soma-draught. Let all the others 
die away. 

HYMN XLIII. Agni. 

These songs of mine go forth as lauds of Agni, the 
disposing sage, 

The sacrificer ne’er o’erthrown. 

2 Wise Agni J&tavedas, I beget a song of praise for 
thee 

Who willingly receivest it. 

8 Thy sharpened flames, 0 Agni, like the gleams of 
light that glitter through, 

Devour the forests with their teeth. 

4 Gold-coloured, bannered with the smoke, urged by 

the wind, aloft to heaven 
Rise, lightly borne, the flames of fire. 

5 These lightly kindled fiery flames are all around 

made visible, 

Even as the gleamings of the Dawns. 

6 As Jatavedas speeds along, the dust is black beneath 

his feet, 

When Agni spreads upon the earth. 

7 Making the plants his nourishment, Agni devours 

and wearies not, 

Seeking the tender shrubs again. 

8 Bending him down with all his tongues, he flickers 

with his fiery glow : 

Splendid is Agni in the woods. 

9 Agni, thine home is in the floods; into the plants 

thou forcest way, 

And as their child art born anew. 


The Rishi is Virupa of the family of Angiras. The metre is Gayatrh 




HYMN 43 .} THE RIG VEDA. 247 

10 Worshipped with offerings shines thy flame, 0 Agni, 

from the sacred oil, 

With kisses on the ladle’s mouth. 

11 Let us serve Agni with our hymns, disposer, fed 

like ox and cow, 

Who bears the Soma on his back. 

12 Yea, thee, O Agni, do we seek with homage and 

with fuel, priest 

Whose wisdom is most excellent. 

13 0 worshipped with oblations, pure Agni, we call on 

thee as erst 

Did Bhrigu, Manus, Angiras. 

14 For thou, O Agni, by the fire, sage by the sage, 

good by the good, 

Friend by the friend, art lighted up. 

15 So wealth in thousands, food with store of heroes 

give thou to the sage, 

O Agni, to the worshipper. 

16 0 Agni, brother, made by strength, lord of red 

steeds and brilliant sway, 

Take pleasure in this laud of mine. 


11 Fed like ox and cow : ‘the eater of the ox, the eater of the 
marrow.’—Wilson. 

Who hears the Soma on his back : somaprishthdya : ‘ on whose back 
the libation is poured.’—Wilson. 

14 Sayana refers to the Aitareya Brdhmana, I. 16, “which de¬ 
scribes how the fire produced by friction from the two aranis [fire- 
sticks] is thrown into the Ahavaniva fire, in the Atithyeshti ceremony. 
“ In the verse twam hyagne [For thou, 0 Agni] etc., the one vipra 
(a sage) means one Agni, the other vipra the other Agni; the one san 
(beiug, existing) meaus the one, the other san (in said) the other 
Agni.” (Haug's traus.).” Note by E. B. C. in Wilson’s Translation. 
San and satd may also moan good. 

16 Made by strength: produced by violent agitation of the fire-stick. 



248 THE HYMNS OF [ROOK VIII. 

17 My praises, Agni, go to thee, as the cows seek the 

stall to meet 

The lowing calf that longs for milk. 

18 Agni, best Angiras, to thee all people who have 

pleasant homes 

Apart, have turned as to their wish. 

19 The sages skilled in holy song and thinkers with 

their thoughts have urged 
Agni to share the sacred feast. 

20 So, Agni, unto thee the priest, invoker, strong in 

forays, pray 

Those who spin out the sacrifice. 

21 In many a place, the same in look art thou, a prince 

o’er all the tribes : 

In battles we invoke thine aid. 

22 Pray thou to Agni, pray to him who blazes served 

with sacred oil: 

Let him give ear to this our call. 

23 We call on thee as such, as one who hears, as Jata- 

vedas, one, 

Agni! who beats away our foes. 

24 I pray to Agni, king of men, the wonderful, the 

president 

Of holy laws : may he give ear. 

25 Him like a bridegroom, him who stirs all people, like 

a noble horse, 

Like a fleet steed, we instigate. 

26 Slaying things deadly, burning up foes, Rakshasas, 

on every side, 

Shine, Agni, with thy sharpened flame. 

27 Thou whom the people kindle even as Manus did, 

best Angiras! 

O Agni, mark thou this my speech. 



HYME 44 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


249 


28 O Agni, made by strength! be thou born in the 

heavens or born in floods, 

As such we call on thee with songs. 

29 Yea, all the people, all the folk who have good 

dwellings, each apart, 

Send food for thee to eat thereof. 

30 0 Agni, so may we, devout, gazed at by men, 

throughout our days 
Pass lightly over all distress. 

31 We venerate with cheerful hearts the cheerful Agni, 

dear to all, 

Burning, with purifying flame. 

32 So thou, 0 Agni, rich in light, beaming like Sflrya 

with thy rays 

Boldly demolishest the gloom. 

33 We pray to thee for this thy gift, victor! the gift 

that faileth not, 

O Agni, choicest wealth from thee. 

HYMN XLIY. Agni. 

Pay service unto Agni with your fuel, rouse your 
guest with oil: 

In him present your offerings. 

2 Agni, do thou accept my laud, be magnified by this 
my song: 

Welcome my sweetly-spoken words. 


28 In the heavens: as the Sun. In floods : in the waters of the 
firmament as lightning. 

30 Gazed at by men : objects of their admiration. ‘ Beholding 
men.’—Wilson. 

‘ Living (among men).’—St. Petersburg Lexicon. 

The Rishi is Virupa of the family of Angiras. The metre is 
Gayatri. 




250 THE-HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

3 Agni, envoy, I place in front; the oblation-bearer I 

address : 

Here let him seat the deities. 

4 Agni, the lofty flames of thee enkindled have gone 

up on high, 

Thy bright flames, thou refulgent one. 

5 Belovhd ! let my ladles full of sacred oil come near 

to thee : 

Agni, accept our offerings. 

6 I worship Agni—may he hear !—the cheerful, the 

invoker, priest 

Of varied splendour, rich in light. 

7 Ancient invoker, meet for praise, beloved Agni, wise 

and strong, 

The visitant of solemn rites. 

8 Agni, best Angiras, accept straightway these offer¬ 

ings, and guide 
The seasonable sacrifice. 

9 Excellent god, with brilliant flames, enkindled bring 

thou hitherward, 

Knowing the way, the heavenly host. 

10 Him, sage and herald, void of guile, ensign of sacri¬ 

fices, him 

Smoke-bannered, rich in light, we seek. 

11 O Agni, be our guardian thou, god, against those 

who injure us: 

Rend thou our foes, thou son of strength. 

12 Making his body beautiful, Agni the sage hath 

waxen by 

The singer and his ancient hymn. 

13 I invocate the child of strength, Agni with, purify¬ 

ing flame, 

At this well-ordered sacrifice. 


8 Seasonable: kdle kale. —S. ‘ At due seasons.’—Wilson. 



HYMN 44 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


251 


14 So Agni, rich in many friends, with fiery splendour, 

seat thyself 

With gods upon our sacred grass. 

15 The mortal man who serves the god Agni within 

his own abode, 

For him he causes wealth to shine. 

16 Agni is head and height of heaven, the master of the 

earth is he: 

He quickeneth the waters’ seed. 

17 Upward, 0 Agni, rise thy flames, pure and resplend¬ 

ent, blazing high, 

Thy lustres, fair effulgences. 

18 For, Agni, thou as lord of light rulest o’er choicest 

gifts: may I, 

Thy singer, find defence in thee. 

19 0 Agni, they who understand stir thee to action with 

their thoughts : 

So let our songs enhance thy might. 

20 We ever claim the friendship of Agni, the singing 

messenger, 

Of godlike nature, void of guile. 

21 Agni who bears most holy sway, the holy singer, 

holy sage, 

Shines holy when we worship him. 

22 Yea, let my meditations, let my songs exalt thee 

evermore: 

Think, Agni, of our friendly bond. 

23 If I were thou and thou were I, O Agni, everj 

prayer of thine 

Should have its due fulfilment here. 


14 Rich in many friends : ‘ thou who hast Mitra’s splendour.’—L. 

15 For him he causes wealth to shine: or, to him he shines forth 
opuleuee. * To him he gives riohes.’—Wilson. 

16 The waters' seed: as lightning, he impregnates the waters ol 
the air. 



252 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VIII. 


24 For excellent and lord of wealth art thou, 0 Agni, 

rich in light: 

May we enjoy thy favouring grace. 

25 Agni, to thee whose laws stand fast our resonant 

songs of praise speed forth 
As rivers hasten to the sea. 

26 Agni, the youthful lord of men, who stirreth much 

and eateth all, 

The sage, I glorify with hymns. 

27 To Agni let us haste with lauds, the guide of sacri¬ 

ficial rites, 

Armed with sharp teeth, the mighty one. 

28 And let this man, good Agni, be with thee the 

singer of thy praise : 

Be gracious, holy one, to him. 

29 For thou art sharer of our feast, wise, ever watchful 

as a sage : 

Agni, thou shinest in the sky. 

30 0 Agni, sage, before our foes, before misfortunes 

fall on us, 

Excellent lord, prolong our lives. 

HYMN XLV. I„dra. 

Hitherward ! they who light the flame and straight¬ 
way trim the sacred grass, 

Whose friend is Indra ever young. 


26 Eateth all: consumes the entire oblation.—Sayana, But the 
meaning is probably general. 

28 This man : the Rishi or singer himself. 

29 In the sky : or, up to heavcu. 

Agni is associated with Indra as one of the deities of the first 
stanza. The Rishi is 'L’risoka of the family of Kanva. The metre is 
Gayatri. 





HYMN 45 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


253 


2 High is their fuel, great their laud, wide is their 

splinter from the stake, 

Whose friend is Indra ever young. 

3 Unquelled in fight the hero leads his army with the 

warrior chiefs, 

Whose friend is Indra ever young. 

4 The new-born Vritra-slayer asked his mother, as he 

seized his shaft, 

Who are the fierce? Who are renowned ? 

5 Savasi answered, He who seeks thine enmity will 

battle like 

A stately elephant on a hill. 

6 And hear, O Maghavan; to him who craves of thee 

thou grantest all : 

Whate’er thou raakest firm is firm. 

7 What time the warrior Indra goes to battle, borne 

by noble steeds, 

Best of all charioteers is he. 

8 Repel, 0 thunder-armed, in all directions all attacks 

on us : 

And be our own most glorious god. 

9 May Indra set our car in front, in foremost place 

to win the spoil, 

He whom the wicked injure not. 


2 Splinter: the first shaving, splinter, or strip of wood, cut from 
the yupa or sacrificial post, and used in the sacrifice. See Wilson’s 
Translation, Note. 

4 As soon as he was horn Indra showed his warlike disposition, 
and asked what worthy opponents he Bhould have. 

5 Savasi or, the stroug dame ; his mother Aditi. A stately elephant : 
I follow Sayana who explains apsah as darsaniyo gajah, a beautiful 
elephant, although in other places the word seems to mean beauty 
(I. 124. 7), and forehead (V. 80. 6). The allusion is to the size and 
strength of Vritra, Indra’s future antagonist 



254 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK YIU. 

10 Thine enmity may we escape, and, Sakra, for thy 

bounty, rich 

In kine, may we come near to thee ; 

11 Softly approaching, thunder-armed! wealthy by 

hundreds, rich in steeds, 

Unrivalled, ready with our gifts. 

12 For thine unceasing excellence gives to thy worship¬ 

pers each day 

Hundreds and thousands of thy boons. 

13 Indra, we know thee breaker-down even of strong 

forts, winner of spoil, 

As one who conquers wealth for us. 

14 Though thou art highest, sage and bold! let the 

drops gladden when we come 
To thee as to a trafficker. 

15 Bring unto us the treasure of the opulent man who, 

loth to give, 

Hath slighted thee for gain of wealth. 

16 Indra, these friends of ours, supplied with Soma, 

wait and look to thee, 

As men with fodder to the herd. 

17 And thee who art not deaf, whose ears are quick to 

listen, for our aid, 

We call to us from far away. 

18 When thou hast listened, make our call one which 

thou never wilt forget, 

And be our very nearest friend. 

19 When even now, when we have been in trouble, 

we have thought of thee, 

O Indra, give us gifts of kine. 

20 O lord of strength, we rest on thee, as old men rest 

upon a staff: 

We long to have thee dwell with us. 


14 ,4 s to a trafficker: as to one who knows the value of our wor¬ 
ship and oblations and will give us something in return. 



HYMN 45 .] 


THE RIG VEDA 


255 


21 To Indra sing a song of praise, hero of mighty 

valour, him 

Whom no one challenges to war. 

22 Hero, the Soma being shed, I pour the juice for 

thee to drink: 

Sate thee and finish thy carouse. 

28 Let not the fools, or those who mock, beguile thee 
when they seek thine aid : 

Love not the enemies of prayer. 

24 Here let them with rich milky draught cheer thee to 

great munificence : 

Drink as the wild-bull drinks the lake. 

25 Proclaim in our assemblies what wealth, new and 

old, from far away 

The Vritra-slayer hath poured down. 

26 In battle of a thousand arms Indra drank Kadrh’s 

Soma-juice : 

There he displayed his manly might. 

27 True undeniable strength he found in Yadu and in 

Turvasa, 

And conquered through the sacrifice. 

28 Him have I magnified, our lord in common, guardian 

of your folk, 

Discloser of great wealth in kine; 


23 The, enemies of prayer: according to Say ana those who hate 
Brahmans. 

24 The wild-hull: the gaura. 

26 Kadrd’s Soma-juice: the meaning is somewhat uncertain. Kadru 
was celebrated in later times as a daughter of Daksha and mother of 
the Nigas or serpent race. Sayana explains kudruvah here as, of a 
Rishi named Kadru. The St. Petersburg Lexicon takes it to mean, 
from a kadru or Soma-vessel. 

27 Undeniable : ahnavdyyam, according to Sayana, is the name of 
the enemy of Turvasa and Yadu: “he overcame Abnavayya in 
battle.”—Wilson. 



256 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK VIII. 

29 Ribhukshan, not to be restrained, who strengthened 

Tugra’s son in lauds, 

Indra beside the flowing juice ; 

30 Who for Trisoka clave the hill that formed a wide 

receptacle, 

So that the cows might issue forth. 

31 Whate’er thy plan or purpose be, whate’er, in trans¬ 

port, thou would do, 

Do it not, Indra, but be kind. 

32 But little hath been heard of done upon the earth 

by one like thee : 

Let thine heart, Indra, turn to us. 

33 Thine then shall be this high renown, thine shall 

these lofty praises be, 

When, Indra, thou art kind to us. 

34 Not for one trespass, not for two, O hero, slay us, 

nor for three, 

Nor yet for many trespasses. 

35 I fear one powerful like thee, the crusher-down of 

enemies, 

Mighty, repelling all attacks. 

36 0 wealthy god, ne’er may I live to see my friend or 

son in need : 

Hitherward let thy heart be turned. 

29 Ribhukshan: Indra, lord of the Ribhus. Tugra’s son: Bhujyu. 
According to Sayana, tugryavridham means ‘augmenter of water.’ 

30 The hill is the massive rain-cloud, and the cows are streams of 
water. 

31 Do it not: “Sayana understands this, “do it not, for thou 
hast done it for us,—only make us happy.” Could it be that the 
worshipper had a feeling of nemesis ? or would he monopolize all?”— 
Note by E. B. C. in Wilson’s Translation. 

32 “ In the following verses (32—36) the poet seems to express dis¬ 
appointment at the inadequate manifestation of Indra’s power, while 
he at the same time entreats his grace and forgiveness.”— 0. S. Texts, 
V. p. 111. 



HYMN 46 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


257 


37 What friend, 0 people, unprovoked, hath ever said 

unto a friend, 

He turns and leaves us in distress ? 

38 Hero, insatiate enjoy this Soma-juice so near to thee, 
Even as a hunter rushing down. 

39 Hither I draw those bays of thine yoked by our 

hymn, with splendid car, 

That thou mayst give unto the priests. 

40 Drive all our enemies away, smite down the foes 

who press around, 

And bring the wealth for which we long: 

41 O Indra, that which is concealed in strong firm 

place precipitous : 

Bring us the wealth for which we long: 

42 Great riches which the world of men shall recognize 

as sent by thee : 

Bring us the wealth for which we long. 

HYMN XLVI. Indra. 

We, Indra, lord of ample wealth, our guide, depend 
on one like thee, 

Thou driver of the tawny steeds. 

2 For, hurler of the bolt, we know thee true, the 
giver of our food, 

We know thee giver of our wealth. 

37 Tins stanza is In lira’s answer to the poet’s complaint. The 
meaning seems to be : no friend without good cause calls his friend a 
traitor. What then have I done, or left undone, that thou shouldst 
say (hat I have forsaken thee 'I See Professor Ludwig’s Commentary 
on the very difficult jahd kali or jalALah. 

In stanzas 21—24 the liberality of Prithusravas is lauded, and 
Vayu is the deity of 25—28 and 32. The Rishi is Vasa Asvya. 
The hymn appears to he composed of two or more originally separate 
hymns (see Pischel, Vedische Studien, pp. 7—9). There are seven¬ 
teen varieties of metre (see Index of Hymns). The hymn is difficult 
and obscure in parts, where only conjectural translations can be given. 



258 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

3 0 thou whose majesty the bards celebrate with their 

songs, thou lord 

Of hundred powers and hundred aids. 

4 Fair guidance hath the mortal man whom Aryaman, 

the Marut host, 

And Mitra, void of guile, protect. 

5 Kine, steeds, and hero strength he gains, and pros¬ 

pers, by the Adityas sped, 

Ever in wealth which all desire. 

6 We pray to Indra for his gift, to him the fearless 

and the strong, 

We pray to him the lord of wealth. 

7 For verily combined in him are all the fearless 

powers of aid. 

Him, rich in wealth, let swift steeds bring to us, his 
bays, to Soma-juice for his carouse : 

8 Yea, that most excellent carouse, Indra, which slays 

most enemies, 

With heroes wins the light of heaven, and is invin¬ 
cible in war: 

9 Which merits fame, all-bountiful! and, unsubdued, 

hath victory in deeds of might. 

So come to our libations strongest! excellent! May 
we obtain a stall of kine. 

10 Responding to our wish for cows, for steeds, and 

chariots, as of old, 

Be gracious, greatest of the great! 

11 For, hero, nowhere can I find the bounds of thy 

munificence. 

Still do thou favour us, O bolt-armed Maghavan : 
with strength hast thou rewarded hymns. 

12 High, glorifier of his friend, he knows all genera¬ 

tions, he whom many praise. 

All races of mankind with ladles lifted up invoke 
that mighty Indra’s aid. 


7 Powers -of aid: or, succourers; the Maruts may be intended. 



HYMN 46 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


259 


13 Be he our champion and protector in great deeds, 

rich in all wealth, the Vritra-slayer, Maghavan. 

14 In the wild raptures of the juice sing to your hero 

with high laud, to him the wise, 

To Indra, glorious in his name, the mighty one, even 
as the hymn alloweth it. 

15 Thou givest wealth to me myself, thou givest trea¬ 

sure, excellent! and the strong steed, 

O much-invoked, in deeds of might, yea, even now. 

16 Him, sovran ruler of all precious things, who even 

hath power o’er this fair form of his, 

As now it taketh shape, and afterward, 

17 We praise, so that the mighty one may speed to 

you, pourer of bounties, traveller, prepared to go. 
Thou favourest the Maruts known to all, by song 
and sacrifice. With song and praise I sing to thee. 

18 We in the sacrifice perform their will whose voice is 

lifted high, 

The worship of those thundering ones who o’er the 
ridges of these mountains fly in troops. 

19 0 Indra, mightiest, bring us that which crushes 

men of evil minds, 

Wealth suited to our needs, 0 stirrer of the thought, 
best wealth, 0 thou who stirrest thought. 


13 This stanza may have been the conclusion of one of the original 
hymns. 

14 jls the hymn alloweth it: in due accordance with the metre. 

16 S&yana explains the latter part of the first line and the 
following part of the second as, ‘ who overcomes this obstructor (the 
enemy) as he wages war.’ I follow Professor Ludwig’s interpretation 
who refers to III. 53. 8, ‘ Maghavan weareth every shape at pleasure, 
effecting magic changes in his body;’ and VI. 47. 18, ‘ Indra moves 
multiform by his illusions.’ 

18 Their will : the pleasure of the Maruts. 



*260 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

20 O winner, noble winner, strong, wondrous, best 

thinker, excellent, 

Sole lord of victory, bring all-overpowering wealth, 
joy-giving, chief in deeds of might. 

21 Now let the godless man approach who hath reoeived 

reward so great 

As Vasa Asvya, when this light of morning dawned, 
received from Prithusrav&s, from Kanita’s son. 

22 Steeds sixty thousand and ten thousand kine, and 

twenty hundred camels I obtained ; 

Ten hundred brown in hue, and other ten red in 
three spots : in all, ten thousand kine. 

23 Ten browns that make my wealth increase, fleet 

steeds whose tails are long and fair, 

Turn with swift whirl my chariot wheel; 

24 The gifts which Prithusrav&s gave, Kanita’s son 
munificent. 

He gave a chariot wrought of gold : the prince was 
passing bountiful, and won himself most lofty fame. 

25 Come to this mighty one of ours, Vayu! to give 

him lively power. 

We have served thee that thou mightest give much 
to us, yea, mightest quickly give great wealth. 

26 Who with thrice seven times seventy horses comes 

to us, invested with the rays of morn, 

Through these our Soma-draughts and those who 
press, to give, drinker of pure bright Soma-juice. 


20 0 winner: of wealth to be given to thy worshippers. ‘ O 
bountiful, most bountiful.’—Wilson. 

22 In all, ten thousand kine : the exact meaning is not very clear. 
The last line is reudered differently in Wilson’s Translation: “a 
thousand brown mares,—and ten times ten thousand cows with three 
red patches." 

26 Who : apparently Vayu, but, according to Sayana, Prithusravaa, 
See Wilson’s Translation. 




HYMN 46 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


261 


27 Who hath inclined this glorious one, bounteous him¬ 

self, to give me gifts, 

Borne on firm chariot with the prosperous Nahusha, 
wise, to a man yet more devout. 

28 Sole lord in beauty meet for praise, 0 Vayu, drop¬ 

ping fatness down, 

Hurried along by steeds, by camels, and by hounds, 
spreads forth thy train : even this it is. 

29 So, as a prize dear to the strong, the sixty thousand 

have I gained, 

Bulls that resemble vigorous steeds. 

30 To me come oxen like a herd, yea, unto me the oxen 

come. 

31 And in the grazing herd he made a hundred camels 

bleat for tne, 

And twenty hundred mid the white. 

32 A hundred has the sage received, Dasa Balbfitha/s 

and Taruksha’s gifts. 

These are thy people, Vayu, who rejoice with Indra 
for their guard, rejoice with gods for guards. 

33 And now to Vasa Asvya here this stately woman 

is led forth, 

Adorned with ornaments of gold. 


27 On firm chariot: literally, ou a car made of the wood of the 
Aradu tree (Caloaanthes Indioa). But Sayana makes two proper 
names of the words, ‘ with Aradva and Aksha.’ 

28 The steeds, camels, and hounds, are apparently the fantastic 
forms of the clouds that fly beforo Vayu or the wind. 

31 Mid the while : herds of cows. 

32 Ddsa Balhuiha .- probably an aboriginal ally of Prithusravas. 

33 This stately woman: probably the wife of the conquered 
king.—L. 




262 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

HYMN XLVII. Adityas. 

Great help ye give the worshipper, Varuna, Mitra, 
mighty ones! 

No sorrow ever reaches him whom ye, Adityas, keep 
from harm. Yours are incomparable aids, and good 
the succour they afford. 

2 0 gods, Adityas, well ye know the way to keep all 

woes afar. 

As the birds spread their sheltering wings, spread 
your protection over us. Yours are incomparable 
aids, and good the succour they afford. 

3 As the birds spread their sheltering wings let your 

protection cover us. 

We mean all shelter and defence, ye who have all 
things for your own. Yours are incomparable 
aids, and good the succour they afford. 

4 To whomsoever they, most wise, have given a home 

and means of life. 

O’er the whole riches of this man they, the Adityas, 
have control. Yours are incomparable aids, and 
good the succour they afford. 

5 As drivers of the car avoid ill roads, let sorrows 

pass us by. 

May we be under Indra’s guard, in the Adityas’ 
favouring grace. Yours are incomparable aids, 
and good the succour they afford. 

6 For verily men sink and faint through loss of wealth 

which ye have given. 

Much hath he gained from you, O gods, whom ye, 
Adityas, have approached. Yours are incompara¬ 
ble aids, and good the succour they afford. 


Uahas or Dawn is associated with the Adityas as one of the deities 
of stanzas 14—18. The Rishi is said to be Trita Aptya. The metre 
[is Mahapankti. 




HYMN 47 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


268 


7 On him shall no fierce anger fall, no sore distress 

shall visit him, 

To whom, Adityas, ye have lent your shelter that 
extendeth far. Yours are incomparable aids, and 
good the succour they afford. 

8 Resting in you, 0 gods, we are like men who fight 

in coats of mail. 

Ye guard us from each great offence, ye guard us 
from each lighter fault. Yours are incomparable 
aids, and good the succour they afford. 

9 May Aditi defend us, may Aditi guard and shelter us, 
Mother of wealthy Mitra and of Aryaman and 

Varuna. Yours are incomparable aids, and good 
the succour they afford. 

10 The shelter, gods, that is secure, auspicious, free from 

malady, 

A sure protection, triply strong, even that do ye 
extend to us. Yours are incomparable aids, and 
good the succour they afford. 

11 Look down on us, Adityas, as a guide exploring from 

the bank. 

Lead us to pleasant ways as men lead horses to an 
easy ford. Yours are incomparable aids, and good 
the succour they afford. 

12 Ill be it for the demons’ friend to find us or come 

near to us. 

But for the milch-cow be it well, and for the man 
who strives for fame. Yours are incomparable 
aids, and good the succour they afford. 

13 Each evil deed made manifest, and that which is 

concealed, 0 gods, 

The whole thereof remove from us to Trita Aptya 
far away. Yours are incomparable aids, and good 
the succour they afford. 


13 To Trita Aptya far away: Trita Aptya was a divinity or 
mythical personage dwelling in (he remotest part of the heavens to 



264 TllE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

14 Daughter of Heaven, the dream that bodes evil to 

us or to our kine, 

Remove, 0 lady of the light, to Trita Aptya far 
away. Yours are incomparable aids, and good the 
succour they afford. 

15 Whether, 0 Child of Heaven, he make a garland or 

a chain of gold, 

All evil dreams, whate’er they be, to Trita Aptya 
we consign. Yours are incomparable aids, and 
good the succour they afford. 

16 To him whose food and work is this, who comes to 

take his share therein, 

To Trita, and to Dvita, Dawn ! bear thou the evil 
dream away. Yours are incomparable aids, and 
good the succour they afford. 

17 As we collect the utmost debt, even the eighth and 

sixteenth part, 

So unto Aptya we transfer together all the evil 
dream. Yours are incomparable aids, and good 
the succour they afford. 

18 Now have we conquered and obtained, and from our 

trespasses are free. 

Shine thou away the evil dream, O Dawn, whereof 
we are afraid. Yours are incomparable aids, and 
good the succour they afford. 

■whom it was customary to wish away and consign any threatened 
calamity or unpleasantness. As Sayana regards Trita Aptya as the 
Eishi of the hymn, he is compelled to force a different interpretation 
on the first half of the second line : “(let it not be found) in Trita 
Aptya, keep it far from us.”—Wilson. 

14 Daughter of Heaven: Ushas or Dawn. 

15 He make a garland: all evil-boding dreams, whatever may be 
the occupation of the dreamer or the person threatened, we consign 
to Trita Aptya. 

16 To him: to Trita whose business it is to receive these 
consignments. 

To Dvita: a similar being, sometimes associated with Trita. See 
V. 18. 2. “ Here Sayana has only the proper interpretation.”—Note 
in Wilson’s Translation. 



HYMN 48 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


265 


HYMN XLVIII. Soma. 

Wisely have I enjoyed the savoury viand, religious- 
tho&ghted, best to find out treasure, 

The food to which all deities and mortals, calling it 
meath, gather themselves together. 

2 Thou shalt be Aditi as thou hast entered within, 

appeaser of celestial anger. 

Indu, enjoying Indra’s friendship, bring us—as a swift 
steed the car—forward to riches. 

3 We have drunk Soma and become immortal; we 

have attained the light, the gods discovered. 

Now what may foeman’s malice do to harm us? 
What, O immortal, mortal man’s deception ? 

4 Absorbed into the heart, be sweet, 0 Indu, as a kind 

father to his son, O Soma, 

As a wise friend to friend: do thou, wide-ruler, O 
Soma, lengthen out our days for living. 

5 These glorious drops that give me freedom have I 

drunk. Closely they knit my joints as straps 
secure a car. 

Let them protect my foot from slipping on the way: 
yea, let the drops I drink preserve me from disease. 

6 Make me shine briglt like fire produced by friction : 

give us a clearer sight and make us better. 

For in carouse I think of thee, O Soma, Shall I, as 
a rich man, attain to comfort? 

7 May we enjoy with an enlivened spirit the juice thou 

givest, like ancestral riches. 

0 Soma, king, prolong thou our existence as Sfirya 
makes the shining days grow longer. 

The Rishi is Pragatha of the family of Kanva. The metre is 
Jagatf in stanza 5, and Trishtup in the rest of the hymn, 

1 Meath : madhu : or, sweet. 

2 Within: within my heart. Indu: Soma. 

3 We have drunk Soma : see Muir, 0. S. Texts. III. 264, 265. 

5 From slipping on the way . ‘may they keep us from a loosely- 
knit worship.’—W. 




266 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

8 King Soma, favour us and make us prosper : we are 

thy devotees ; of this be mindful. 

Spirit and power are fresh in us, 0 Indu: give us 
not up unto our foeman’s pleasure. 

9 For thou hast settled in each joint, 0 Soma, aim of 

men’s eyes and guardian of our bodies. 

When we offend against thine holy statutes, as a kind 
friend, god, best of all, be gracious. 

10 May I be with the friend whose heart is tender, who, 

lord of bays ! when quaffed will never harm me— 
This Soma now deposited within me. For this, I 
pray for longer life to Indra. 

11 Our maladies have lost their strength and vanished : 

they feared, and passed away into the darkness. 
Soma hath risen in us, exceeding mighty, and we 
are come where men prolong existence. 

12 Fathers, that Indu which our hearts have drunken, 

immortal in himself, hath entered mortals. 

So let us serve this Soma with oblation, and rest 
securely in his grace and favour. 

13 Associate with the Fathers thou, O Soma, hast 

spread thyself abroad through earth and heaven. 
So with oblation let us serve thee, Indu, and so let 
us become the lords of riches, 

14 Give us your blessing, O ye gods, preservers. Never 

may sleep or idle talk control us. 

But evermore may we, as friends of Soma, speak to 
the synod with brave sons around us. 

15 On all sides, Soma, thou art our life-giver: aim of 

all eyes, light-finder, come within us. 

Indu, of one accord with thy protections both from 
behind and from before preserve us. 

9 Aim of men’s'eyes: or, beholder of men. 

12 Immortal in himself: see note on 1. 18. 4. 



HYMN 49 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


267 


HYMN XLIX. A uni. 

Agni, come hither with thy fires; we choose thee as 
invoking priest. 

Let the extended ladle full of oil balm thee, best 
priest, to sit on sacred grass. 

2 For unto thee, 0 Angiras, 0 son of strength, move 

ladles in the sacrifice. 

To Agni, child of force, whose locks drop oil, we 
seek, foremost in sacrificial rites. 

3 Agni, thou art disposer, sage, herald, bright god ! 

and worshipful, 

Best offerer, cheerful, to be praised in holy rites, 
pure lord ! by singers with their hymns. 

4 Most youthful and eternal, bring the longing gods 

to me, the guileless, for the feast. 

Come, Vasu, to the banquet that is well-prepared : 
rejoice thee, gracious, with our songs. 

5 Famed art thou, Agni, far and wide, preserver, 

righteous, and a sage. 

The holy singers, O refulgent kindled god ! the 
arrangers call on thee to come. 

6 Shine, most resplendent ! blaze, send bliss unto the 

folk, and to thy worshipper : great art thou. 


1 place at the end of this Book the eleven spurious or apocryphal 
hymns, called the Valakhilya, which are usually inserted after Hymn 
XLVIII. These hymns are not reckoned in the division of the 
Rigveda into Mandalas (Rooks) and Anuvakas (chapters), and Sayana 
does not notice them in his Commentary. See Wilson’s Translation, 
Note by Professor Cowell. 

Eleven must be added to the number of this hymn and of all 
that follow in this Book to make them correspond with the numbers 
in Professor Max Muller’s edition of the text. 

The Rishi of Hymn XLIX. is Bharga son of Pragatha. The metre 
is Pragatha, consisting of strophes combining two verses, viz. a Bri- 
hati or Kakup followed by a Satobrihati. 

2 IF/tose locks drop oil: ‘ butter-haired.’—Wilson. 



268 THE HYMNS OF {BOOK VIII. 

So may my princes, with good fires, subduing foes, 
rest in the keeping of the gods. 

7 0 Agni, as thou burnest down to earth even high- 

grown underwood, 

So, rich in many friends, burn him who injures us, 
him who plots ill against thy friend. 

8 Give us not as a prey to mortal enemy, nor to the 

wicked friend of fiends. 

With conquering guards, auspicious, unassailable, 
protect us, O most youthful god. 

9 Protect us, Agni, through the first, protect us through 

the second hymn, 

Protect us through three hymns, 0 lord of power and 
might, through four hymns, Yasu, guard thou us. 

10 Preserve us from each fiend who brings the gods no 

gift, preserve thou us in deeds of strength : 

For we possess in thee the nearest friend of all, for 
service of the gods and weal. 

11 0 holy Agni, give us wealth renowned with men and 

strengthening life. 

Bestow on us, O helper, that which many crave, 
more glorious still by righteousness. 

12 Wherewith we may o’ereome qur rivals in the war, 

o’erpowering the foe’s designs. 

So wax thou by our food, O excellent in strength. 
Quicken our thoughts that find out wealth. 

13 Agni is even as a bull who whets and brandishes his 

horns. 

Well-sharpened are his jaws which may not be with¬ 
stood : the child of strength hath powerful teeth. 


5 The arrangers : of the ritual of sacrifice. 

6 Princes: wealthy patrous. According to Sayana, the Rishi’s 
own sons and others may he intended. 

9 The numbers probably have reference to the four quarters of the 
sky.—L. 

12 Wherewith : referring to the wealth which Agni is asked to give. 



HYMN 49 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


269 


14 Not to be stayed, O bull, O Agni, are thy teeth 

when thou art spreading far and wide. 

Make our oblations duly offered up, 0 priest, and 
give us store of precious things. 

15 Thou liest in the wood: from both thy mothers 

mortals kindle thee. 

Unweariedly thou bearest up the offerer’s gifts, then 
shinest bright among the gods. 

16 And so the seven priests, 0 Agni, worship thee, free 

giver, everlasting one. 

Thou cleavest through the rock with heat and fervent 
glow. Agni, rise up above the men. 

17 For you let us whose grass is trimmed call Agni, 

Agni, restless god. 

Let us whose food is offered call to all the tribes 
Agni the invoking priest of men. 

18 Agni, with noble psalm that tells his wish he dwells, 

thinking on thee who guardest him. 

Speedily bring us strength of many varied sorts to 
be most near to succour us. 

19 Agni, praise-singer! lord of men, god! burner-up 

of Rakshasas, 

Mighty art thou, the ever-present household-lord, 
home-friend and guardian from the sky. 

20 Let no fiend come among us, 0 thou rich in light, 

no spell of those who deal in spells. 

To distant pastures drive faint hunger : far away, O 
Agni, chase the demons’ friends. 

15 In the wood: in tho pieces of wood used for the production of 
Agni. 

16 Seven priests: minor hotar priest3, such as the Maitravaruna 
and others. 

The rock : adrim, explained by Siiyana as megham , the cloud. 

17 The restless god : or, ‘ the irresistible.’—Wilson. 

18 He dwells: that is, the pious institutor of sacrifice. 

20 Spell of those who deal in spells: ydturydtvmdvatdm : ‘ torment 
of the evil spirits.’—Wilson. 



270 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VIII. 


HYMN L. Indra. 

Both boons,—may Indra, hitherward turned, listen 
to this prayer of ours, 

And mightiest Maghavan with thought inclined to 
us come near to drink the Soma-juice. 

2 For him, strong, independent ruler, Heaven and 

Earth have fashioned forth for power and might. 
Thou seatest thee as first among thy peers in place, 
for thy soul longs for Soma-juice. 

3 Fill thyself full, O lord of wealth, 0 Indra, with the 

juice we shed. 

We know thee, lord of bay steeds! victor in the fight, 
vanquishing e’en the invincible. 

4 Changeless in truth, O Maghavan Indra, let it be as 

thou in wisdom wiliest it. 

May we, 0 fair of check, win booty with thine aid, 
0 thunderer, swiftly seeking it. 

5 Indra, with all thy saving helps give us assistance, 

lord of power. 

For after thee we follow even as glorious bliss, thee, 
hero, finder-out of wealth. 

6 Increaser of our steeds and multiplying kine, a golden 

well, 0 god, art thou, 

For no one may impair the gifts laid up in thee. 
Bring me whatever thing I ask. 

7 For thou,—come to the worshipper !—wilt find great 

wealth to make us rich. 

Fill thyself full, O Maghavan, for gain of kine, full, 
Indra, for the gain of steeds. 

8 Thou as thy gift bestowest many hundred herds, yea, 

many thousands dost thou give. 

With singers’ hymns have we brought the fort-render 
near, singing to Indra for his grace. 

The Rishi is Bharga, and the metre is Pragatha, as in the preceding 
hymn. 

1 Both boons: Indra is asked to hear the prayer and to drink 
the Soma. 



HYMN 50 .] 


THE Rid VEDA. 


271 


9 Whether the simple or the sage, Indra, have offered 
praise to thee, 

He, Satakratu ! by his love hath gladdened thee, 
ambitious ! ever pressing on ! 

10 If he the strong of arm, the breaker-down of forts, 

the great destroyer, hear my call, 

Wealth-seeking let us cry to Indra, lord of wealth, 
to Satakratu with our lauds. 

11 We count not then as sinners, nor as niggardly or 

foolish men, 

When with the Soma-juice which we have shed we 
make Indra, the mighty one, our friend. 

12 Him have we yoked in fight, the powerful conqueror, 

debt-claimer, not to be deceived. 

Best charioteer, the victor marks each fault, he knows 
the strong to whom he will come near. 

13 Indra, give us security from that whereof we are 

afraid. 

Help us, 0 Maghavan, let thy succour give us this : 
drive away foes and enemies. 

14 For thou, O liberal lord of bounty, strengthenest his 

ample home who worships thee. 

So Indra, Maghavan, thou lover of the song, we with 
pressed Soma call on thee. 

15 Indra is Vritra-slayer, guard, our best defender from 

the foe. 

May he preserve our last and middlemost, and keep 
watch from behind us and before. 


9 The simple or the sage: ‘ the unskilled or the skilled.’—W. 

12 Marks each fault: the meaning of bhrimam is uncertain: 
according to Professor Ludwig it is ‘ his supporter or feeder,’ that is, 
the worshipper who presents him with sacrificial food. Sayana takes 
it with vdjinam : ‘ the strong racer.’—W. The strong: the rich and 
powerful worshipper. 

15 Our last and middlemost: pulram, son, being understood, 
according to Sayana. The expression probably means all of us. 



‘272 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

16 Defend us from behind, below, above, in front, on all 

sides, Indra, shield us well. 

Keep far away from us the terror sent from heaven : 
keep impious weapons far away. 

17 Protect us, Indra, each to-day, each morrow, and 

each following day. 

Our singers, through all days, shalt thou, lord of the 
brave, keep safely both by day and night. 

18 A crushing warrior, passing rich is Maghavan, 

endowed with all heroic might. 

Thine arms, O Satakratu, are exceeding strong, those 
arms which hurl the thunder down. 

HYMN LI. Indra. 

Offer ye up as praise to him that wherein Indra 
takes delight. 

The Soma-bringers magnify Indra’s great energy 
with hymns. Good are the gifts that Indra gives. 

2 Sole among chiefs, companionless, impetuous, and 

peerless, he 

Hath waxen great o’er many folk, yea, over all things 
born, in might. Good are the gifts that Indra 
gives. 

3 Lord of swift bounty, he will win e’en with a steed 

of worthless sort. 

This, Indra, must be told of thee who wilt perform 
heroic deeds. Good are the gifts that Indra gives. 


16 The terror sent from heaven: ‘ supernatural alarm.’—W. 


The Rishi is Pragatha. The metres are Brihati in stanzas 7—9, 
and Pankti in the rest of the hymn. 

2 Chiefs: nribhih: men, meaning gods, according to Sayana. 
Folk: or, tribes. 

3 He will win e’en with a steed of worthless sort: “ He.wishes 

to bestow blessings (upon us) with his unurged courser.”—Wilson. 




HYMN 51.] 


THE RIUVEDA. 


1>7S 


4 Come to us hither: let us pay devotions that enhance 

thy might, 

For which, most potent! thou wouldst fain bless the 
man here who strives for fame. Good are the gifts 
that Indra gives. 

5 For thou, O Indra, makest yet more bold the spirit 

of the bold 

Who with strong f^ouia serveth thee, still ready with 
his reverent prayers. Good are the gifts that 
Indra gives. 

6 Worthy of song, ho looketh down as a man looketh 

into wells. 

Pleased with the Soma-bringer’s skill he maketh 
him his mate and friend. Good are the gifts that 
Indra gives. 

7 In strength and wisdom all the gods, Indra, have 

yielded unto thee. 

Be thou the guard of all, O thou whom many praise. 
Good are the gifts that Indra gives. 

8 Praised, Indra, is this might of thine, best for the 

service of the gods, 

That thou with power dost slay Vritra, O lord of 
strength. Good are the gifts that Indra gives. 

9 He makes the races of mankind like synods of the 

beauteous one. 

Indra knows this his manifest deed, and is renowned. 
Good are the gifts that Indra gives. 

10 Thy might, 0 Indra, at its birth, thee also, and thy 
mental power, 


6 He looketh down: kindly on us as a thirsty man looks e&garly 
into a well. 

9 Like synods of the beavteous one : like assemblies that meet to 
honour, him ; but the meaning is obscure. See Professor Cowell's 
Note in Wilson’s Translation. 

IB 



274 


THE HYMNS OF 


f BOOK Till. 


In thy care, Maghavan rich in kine! they have 
increased exceedingly. Good are the gifts that 
Indra gives. 

H 0 Vritra-slayer, thou and I will both combine for 
winning spoil. 

Even malignity will consent, O bolt-armed hero, 
unto us. Good are the gifts that Indra gives. 

12 Let us extol this Indra as truthful and never as 
untrue. 

Dire is his death who pours no gifts : great light 
hath he who offers them. Good are the gifts that 
Indra gives. 

HYMN LI I. Indra. 

With powers of mighty ones hath hp, ancient, be¬ 
loved, been equipped, 

Through whom the Father Manu made prayers 
efficacious with the gods. 

2 Him, maker of the sky, let stones wet with the 

Soma ne’er forsake, 

Nor hymns and prayer that must be said. 

3 Indra who knew full well disclosed the kine to the 

Angirasas. 

This his great deed must be extolled. 

4 Indra, promoter of the song, the sage’s strengthener 

as of old, 


10 They: thy worshippers. 

11 Malignity: or the malignant man. ‘The niggard.’—Wilson. 

12 Dire is his death : or, great is his destruction. 

The Deva8, or gods in general, are the deities of the last stanza. 
The ltisbi is Pragatlm. The metres are Anushtup in stanzas 1, 4, 
5, 7 ; Trishtnp iu 12; and Cayatri in the rest of the hymn. 

1 This difficult verse is variously interpreted both by Indinn Com¬ 
mentators and by European scholars. I fullow partly Professor 
Aufieclit’s translation os given by Dr. Muir, and partly Professor 
Ludwig’s Commentary. See 0. S. Texts, I. pp. 163-164; Ludwig’s 
Jiigveda, V. pp. 167-1G8; and Wilson’s Translation, V. p. 11)7. The 
ancient, beloved appears to be Soma and not Indra. 




HYMN 52.] THE RIO VEDA. 275 

Shall come to bless and succour us at presentation 
of this laud. 

5 Now after their desire’s intent the pious singers with 

the cry 

Of Hail! have sung loud hymns to thee, Indra, 
to gain a stall of kine. 

6 With Indra rest all deeds of might, deeds done and 

yet to be performed, 

Whom singers know devoid of guile. 

7 When the five tribes with all their men to Indra 

have sent out their voice, 

And when the priest hath strewed much grass, this 
is the friend’s own dwelling-place. 

8 This praise is verily thine own : thou hast performed 

these manly deeds, 

And sped the wheel upon its way. 

9 At the o’erflowing of this steer, boldly he strode for 

life, and took 

Soma as cattle take their corn. 

10 Receiving this and craving help, we, who with you 

are Daksba’s sons, 

Would fain exalt the Maruts’ lord. 

11 Yea, hero, with the singers we sing to the duly- 

coming band. 

Allied with thee may we prevail. 

12 With us are raining Rudras, Hills accordant in call 

to battle, at the death of Vritra, 

The strong assigned to him who sings and praises. 
May gods with Indra at their head protect us. 

7 The friend’s : Indra's. 

8 The wheel: the Sun. 

9 This steer: Soma. He: Indra. 

10 Dakshfi's sons: of the same origin with you. ‘Lords of food,’ 
according to Siyana. 

11 Duly-coming band: of Maruts, led by Indra. 

12 The strong: perhaps the thunderbolt with which Indra aidl. 
the worshipper. 



THE HYMNS OF 


‘276 


[boon vru. 


HYMN LI 11. Indra. 

May our hymns give thee great delight. Display 
thy bounty, thunderer. 

Drive off the enemies of prayer. 

2 Crush with thy foot the niggard churls who bring 

no gifts. Mighty art thou : 

There is not one to equal thee. 

3 Thou art the lord of Soma pressed, unpressed 

is also thine. 

Thou art the sovran of the folk. 

4 Come, go thou forth, dwelling in heaven and listen¬ 

ing to the prayers of men: 

Thou fillest both the heavens and earth. 

5 Even that hill with rocky heights, with hundreds, 

thousands, held within, 

Thou for thy worshippers brakest through. 

6 We call on thee both night and day to taste the 

flowing Soma-juice: 

Do thou fulfil our hearts’ desire. 

7 Where is that ever-youthful steer, strong-necked 

and never yet bent down ? 

What Brahman ministers to him ? 

8 To whose libation doth the steer betake him with 

delight therein ? 

Who takes delight in Indra now ? 

9 Whom, Vritra-slayer, have thy gifts and hero powers 

accompanied ? 

Who is thy dearest in the laud ? 


The Rishi is Pragaha. The metre is Gayatri. 

3 Unjrr&sed: in its natural state in the stalks of the plant. Gr, 
as Professor Ludwig suggests, the Soma which Indra drinks in heaven 
may be meant. See VII. 26. 1. 

5 That hill: the cloud with its countless treasures of rain. 

6 Nighl . just before dawn. 



HtMX 54 .] 


THE RrG TED A. 


im 


10 For thee among mankind, among the Pfirus is this 

Soma shed. 

Hasten thou hither : drink thereof. 

11 This, growing by Sushoma and by Saryan&v&n, dear 

to thee, 

And Arjlkiya, cheers thee best. 

12 Hasten thou hitherward, and drink this for muni¬ 

ficence to-day, 

Delightful for thine eager draught. 

HYMN LIV. Iftdra. 

Though, Indra, thou art called by men from east and 
west, from north and south. 

Come hither quickly with fleet steeds ; 

2 If in the effluence of heaven, rich in its light, thou 

takest joy, 

Or in the sea in Soma-juice. 

3 With songs I call thee, great and wide, even as ft 

cow to profit us, 

Indra, to drink the Soma-draught. 

4 Hither, O Indra, let thy bays bear up and bring 

upon thy car 

Thy glory, god l and majesty. 


10 Among the Pdrus : among men, or among kings named P&ros.— 
Sayana, 

11 Svshomd and Arjikiya : are apparently names of rivers which 
cannot now be identified. The latter is said by Yaska to be a name' 
of the Vipas, and by Sayana to be a country or district. 

Saryandvdn is said to be a lake in the district of Knrukshetra. See 
Vol. I., Index. For conjectures regarding Sushoma and Arjikiya see 
Zimmer, Altindisches Leben, pp. 12, 13. 

The Rishi is PragStha. The metre is GJyatri. 

2 The effluence of heaven : or the place in heaven from which the 
*mrit flows. In the, sea : of air; the firmament. 

3 As a cow: aB the most useful of all animals. 



278 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

5 0 Indra, thou art sung and praised as great, strong, 

lordly in thy deeds : 

Come hither, drink otir Soma-juice. 

6 We who have shed the Soma and prepared the feast 

are calling thee 

To sit on this our sacred grass. 

7 As, Indra, thou art evermore the common lord of all 

alike, 

As such we invocate thee now. 

8 The men with stones have milked for thee this nectar 

of the Soma-juice : 

Indra, be pleased with it, and drink. 

9 Neglect all pious men with skill in sacred song : 

come hitherward 

With speed, and give us high renown. 

10 Gods, may the mighty rest unharmed, the king who 

gives me spotted kine, 

Kine decked with golden ornaments. 

11 Beside a thousand spotted kine I have received a 

gift of gold, 

Pure, brilliant, and exceeding great. 

12 Durgaha’s grandsons, giving me a thousand kine, 

munificent, 

Have won renown among the gods. 


9 All pious men : all other worshippers. 

10 The king: who instituted the Bacriftce. According to Sayana, 
Indra is meant; but this is impossible. 

12 Durgaha’s grandsons: Sayana explains durgahasya by duhkham. 
g&hamdnasya me, of me plunged in grief, and napdtah (nepotes) as 
arakshitasya, unprotected : “ Unprotected as I am, and plunged in 
sorrow (my descendants) by the favour of the gods obtain food, and 
are blessed with abundance in a thousand cattle.” See Wilson’s 
Translation, and Professor Cowell’s Note. 



YMN 55.] 


THE BIG VEDA. 


279’ 


HYMN LV. Indra. 

Loud singing at the sacred rite where Soma flows 
we priests invoke 

With haste, that he may help, as the bard’s cheri- 
sher, Indra who findeth wealth for you. 

2 Whom with fair helm, in rapture of the juice, the 

firm resistless slayers hinder not: 

Giver of glorious wealth to him who sings his praise, 
honouring him who toils and pours : 

3 Sakra, who like a curry-comb for horses or a golden 

goad, 

Indra, the Vritra-slayer, urges eagerly the opening 
of the stall of kine : 

4 Who for the worshipper scatters forth ample wealth, 

even though buried, piled in heaps : 

Indra, lord of bay steeds, the fair-helmed thunderer, 
acts at his pleasure, as he lists. 

5 Hero whom many praise, what thou hast longed for, 

even of old, from men, 

All that we offer unto thee, 0 Indra, now, sacrifice, 
laud, effectual speech. 

6 To Soma, much-invoked, bolt-armed, for thy carouse, 

celestial, Soma-drinker, come. 

Thou to the man who prays and pours the juice 
hast been best giver of delightful wealth. 


The Rishi is Kali, the sou of Pragatha. The metre is Gayatri, 
with Anushtup in the last stanza. 

1 We priests invoke: the construction is difficult. I follow Pro¬ 
fessor Ludwig, and take huve, an infinitive, as equivalent to the first 
person plural. 

3 Curry-comb for horses: the purifier of his worshippers and well- 
skilled in horses, according to Savana. Golden goad: wonderful and 
golden-bodied, according to Sayana. The meaning of kljah, as well 
as of mrikshah, is uncertain, but both seem to signify instruments 
connected with horses. 



380 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK .VIII. 

7 Here, verily, yesterday we let the thunder-wielder 

drink his fill. 

So in like manner offer him the juice to-day. Now 
range you by the glorious one. 

8 Even the wolf, the savage beast that rends the sheep, 

follows the path of his decrees. 

So graciously accepting, Indra, this our praise, with 
wondrous thought come forth to us. 

9 What manly deed of vigour now remains that Indra 

hath not done ? 

Who hath not heard his glorious title and his fame, 
the Vritra-slayer from his birth ? 

10 How great his power resistless! how invincible the 
Vritra-slayer’s matchless might! 

Indra excels all usurers who see the day, excels all 
traffickers in strength. 

110 Indra, Vritra-slayer, we, thy very constant wor¬ 
shippers, 

Bring prayers ne’er heard before to thee, O much- 
invoked, 0 thunder-armed, to be thy meed. 

12 0 thou of mighty acts, the aids that are in thee call 

forward many an eager hope. 

Past the drink-offerings, Vasu, even of the good, 
hear my call, strongest god, and come. 

13 Verily, Indra, we are thine, we worshippers depend 

on thee. 

For there is none but only thou to show us grace, 
0 Maghavan, thou much-invoked. 

14 From this our misery and famine set us free, from 

this dire curse deliver us. 


8 The wolf: acoording to Sayana, the robber. The reason of 
mentioning either in this place is not obvious. 

10 Who see the ddy : who live. According to Sayana, who look upon 
the sun in their present lifo but will be sunk in darkness after death. 

14 From this our misery : the hymn was 4 seen ’ and employed in 
a time of dearth and famine. Finder of the -way : to prosperity. 



HYMN 56.] 


THE RI(! VEDA. 


881 


Succour us with thine help and with thy wondrous 
thought, most mighty, finder of the way. 

15 Now let your Soma-juice be poured : be not afraid, 
0 Kali’s sons. 

This darkening sorrow goes away ; yea, of itself it 
goes away. 

HYMN LVI. Adityas. 

Now pray we to these Kshatriyas, to the Adityas 
for their aid, 

These who are gracious to assist. 

2 May Mitra bear us o’er distress, and Varupa and 

Aryaman, 

Yea, the Adityas, as they know. 

3 For wonderful and meet for praise is these Adityas’ 

saving help 

To him who offers and prepares. 

4 The mighty aid of you, the great, Varuna, Mitra, 

Aryaman, 

We claim to be our sure defence. 

5 Guard us, Adityas, still alive, before the deadly 

weapon strike: 

Are ye not they who hear our call ? 

6 What sheltering defence ye have for him who toils 

in pouring gifts, 

Graciously bless ye us therewith. 

7 Adityas, gods, from sorrow there is freedom, for the 

sinless, wealth, 

0 ye in whom no fault is seen. 

8 Let not this fetter bind us fast : may he release us 

for success; 

For strong is Indra and renowned. 


The Rishi is Matsya the son of Sammada, or Manya son of Mitra- 
Varnna. The metre is Gayatri. 

1 Kshatriyas : royal [innces. 



28? THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VHt. 

9 O gods who fain would lend your aid, destroy not us 
as ye destroy 

Your enemies who go astray. 

10 And thee too, O great Aditi, thee also, goddess, 

I address, 

Thee very gracious to assist. 

11 Save us in depth and shallow from the foe, thou 

mother of strong sons : 

Let no one of our seed be harmed. 

12 Far-spread, wide-ruling, grant that we, unharmed 

by envy, may stretch forth : 

Grant that our progeny may live. 

13 Those who, the princes of the folk, in native glory, 

ne’er deceived, 

Maintain their statutes, void of guile— 

14 As^ such, from mouth of ravening wolves, O ye 

Adityas, rescue us, 

Like a bound thief, 0 Aditi. 

15 Adityas, let this arrow, yea, let this malignity depart 
From us or e’er it strike us dead. 

16 For, bountiful Adityas, we have evermore enjoyed 

your help, 

Both now and in the days of old. 

17 To every one, O ye most wise, even him who cometh 

near from sin, 

Vouchsafe, 0 gods, that he may live. 

18 May this new mercy profit us, which, ye Adityas, 

frees like one 

Bound from his bonds, O Aditi. 

19 O ye Adityas, this your might is not to be despised 

by us: 

So be ye graciously inclined. 


11 Of strong sons . the Adityas. 

17 Who cometh near from sin : who comes to you for forgiveness, 



HYMN 57-1 THE RIG VEDA. 283 

20 Let not Vivasv4n’s weapon nor the shaft, Adityas, 

wrought with skill, 

Destroy us ere old age be nigh. 

21 On every side dispel all sin, Adityas, all hostility, 
Indigence, and combined attack. 

HYMN LVII. Indra. 

Even as a car to give us aid, we draw thee hither for 
our bliss, 

Strong in thy deeds, checking assault, lord, mightiest 
Indra, of the brave ! 

2 Great in thy power and wisdom, strong, with thought 

that comprehendeth all ! 

Thou hast filled full with majesty. 

3 Thou very mighty one, whose hands by virtue of 

thy greatness grasp 
The golden bolt that breaks its way. 

4 Your lord of might that ne’er hath bent, that ruleth 

over all mankind, 

I call, that he, as he is wont, may aid the chariots 
and the men. 

5 Whom, ever furthering, in frays that win the light, 

in both the hosts 
Men call to succour and to help. 

6 Indra, the strong, the measureless, worthy of praise, 

most bountiful, 

Sole ruler even over wealth. 


20 Vivasvdn's weapon : the deadly bolt of Yatna the sod of Vivasvan. 

21 Combined attack : ‘ the closely drawn net.’—Wilson. 

The liberality of the princes is the deified object of the last six 
stanzas. The Kishi is Priyamedha of the family of Angiras. The 
metre is Anushtup in stanzas 1. 4, 7, 10, and Gayatri in the rest of 
the hymn. 

2 Thou hast filled full: the universe. 



28 * THE HYMNS OF [ROOK tilt. 

7 Him, for his ample bounty, him, this Indfa do I Urge 

to drink, 

Who, as his praise was sung of old, the dancer, is the 
lord of men. 

8 Thou mighty one, whose friendship none of mortals 

ever hath obtained : 

None will attain unto thy might. 

9 Aided by thee, with thee allied, in frays for water 

and for sun, 

Bolt-armed! may we win ample spoil. 

10 So seek we thee with sacrifice and songs, chief lover 

of the song, 

As, in our battles, Indra, thou to Purum&yya gavest 
help. 

11 O thunderer, thou whose friendship and whose on¬ 

ward guidance both are sweet, 

Thy sacrifice must be prepared. 

12 Give to this body ample room, give to 6ur dwelling 

ample room: 

Give ample room to us to live. 

13 We count the banquet of the gods a spacious path¬ 

way for the men, 

And for the cattle, and the car. 

14 Six men, yea, two and two, made glad with Soma- 

juice, come near to mo 
With offerings pleasant to the taste. 

15 Two brown-hued steeds, Indrota’s gift, two' bays 

from itiksha’s son were mine, 

From Asvamedha’s son two red. 


7 The dancer: in the dance of war. 

10 PurumAyya: according to SayanB, ‘me (tbe Rishi) the possessor 
of much wisdom.’ 

13 Sacrifice to the gods procures freedom and security for nS-atJif 
*11 who bek)Dg to us. 

15 “ These princes with their respective fathers are the 6»X of V. 
14. The sons of Rikska and A»»amedha had originally commenced 



HYMN 58. 


THE RIO VEDA. 


285 


16 From Atithigva good car-steeds, from Arksha rein- 

obeying steeds, 

From Asvamedha beauteous ones. 

17 Indrota, Atithigva’s son, gave me six horses matched 

with mares: 

And P&takratu gave besides. 

18 Marked above all, amid the brown, is the red mare 

Vrishanvatl, 

Obedient to the rein and whip. 

19 0 bound to me by deeds of might, not even the man 

who loves to blame 
Hath found a single fault in you. 

HYMN LVIII. Iudra. 

I send you forth the song of praise for Indu, hero- 
gladdener. 

With hymn and plenty he invites you to complete 
the sacrifice. 


the sacrifice, but Indrota and his father Atithigva came to Boe it and 
added their gifts. The sons alone are mentioned; the son is the 
father’s second self, pitri-putrayor abhedAt." —Professor Cowell’s Note 
in Wilson's Translation. 

16 Arksha : the son of Riksha. Asvamedha : the son of Asvamedha. 

17 Piltakratu : sou of Asvamedha. 

18 Vrishanvati : according to Professor Roth, “perhaps, that may 
be found among stallions.” 

19 0 bound to me: this stanza is addressed to the princes who in- 
tituted the sacrifice and gave the rewards which have been mentioned. 

The All-gods are the deities of half of stanza II, and Varuna is 
the deity of the remaining half-stanza and of 12. The Risbi is 
Priyamedha. 

The metres are IJsbnih in stanza 2; Gayatri in 4—6; Pankti in 11, 
16; Brihati in 17, 18; and Anushtup in the rest of the hymn. 

1 The song of praise : trishtubham : used in a general sense for any 
hymu of praise. Indu : Soma. According to S&yarWj Indrais meant. 



286 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

2 Thou wishest for thy kine a bull, for those who long 

for his approach, 

For those who turn away from him, lord of thy cows 
whom none may kill. 

3 The dappled kine who stream with milk prepare his 

draught of Soma-juice: 

Folk in the birth-place of the gods, in the three 
luminous realms of heaven. 

4 Praise, even as he is known, with song Indra the 

guardian of the kine, 

The son of truth, lord of the brave. 

5 Hither his bay steeds have been sent, red steeds are 

on the sacred grass 
Where we in concert sing our songs. 

6 For Indra thunder-armed the kine have yielded 

mingled milk and meath, 

What time he found them in the vault. 

7 When I and Indra mount on high up to the bright 

one’s place and home, 


2 The stanza is difficult. I adopt Professor Pischel's explanation of 
nadam and odatindm. 

3 Folk: visah: possibly the cows are meant. Professor Pischel 
observes : “ The connexion of the first three stanzas is probably this : 
Somu shall be celebrated by you in your song of praise iu order that 
he may liberally reward jou. What thou wishest for thyself is a bull 
for the cows, in order that they may be propagated aud provide Indra 
with milk to be mixed with his Soma-juice, while they serve the race 
of gods in all the three realms of heaven.”— Vedische Studien, p. 197. 

6 In the vault: ‘in the cavity of the Soma-vessel.’—Roth; ‘on 
the horizon.’—Ludwig; ‘near at hand.’—Siyana. 

7 The bright one’s place: the station of the Sun. Whose friends are 
three times seven: Indra who is the friend of the Maruts. I follow 
Professor Ludwig in combining the trih sapta sakhyvh of the text into 
one compound word. Savana’s explanation is different: ‘let U8 be 
united in the twetity-first sphere of the (universal) friend.’—See Note 
in Wilson’s Translation. 



HYMN 58.] 


THE RIOVEDA 


287 


We, having drunk of meath, will reach his seat 
whose friends are three times seven. 

8 Sing, sing ye forth your songs of praise, ye Priya- 

medhas, sing your songs : 

Yea, let young children sing their lauds : as a strong 
castle praise ye him. 

9 Now loudly let the viol sound, the brace send out 

its voice with might, 

And let the bowstring’s clang be shrill. To Indra is 
the hymn upraised. 

10 When hither speed the dappled cows, unflinching, 

easy to be milked, 

Seize quickly, as it bursts away, the Soma-juice for 
Indra’s drink. 

11 Indra hath drunk, Agni hath drunk : all deities have 

drunk their fill. 

Here Varuna shall have his home, to whom the floods 
have sung aloud as mother-kine unto their calves. 

12 Thou, Varuija, to whom belong the seven streams, 

art a glorious god. 

The waters flow into thy throat as ’twere a pipe with 
ample mouth. 

13 He who hath made the fleet steeds spring, well- 

harnessed, to the worshipper, 

He, the swift guide, is that fair form that loosed the 
horses near at hand. 

14 Indra, the very mighty, holds his enemies in utter 

scorn. 

He, far away, and yet a child, cleft the cloud smitten 
by his voice. 


9 The viol: gargara: ‘a kind of musical instrument’, says S&yana. 
Brace : godhd: the leather guard worn by bowmen on the left arm. 

12 Varuna’a throat, or palate, is said to mean the sea, into which 
the seven rivers flow. 



288 THE HYMNS OF [ROOK Fill. 

15 He, yet a boy exceeding small, mounted his newly- 

fashioned car. 

He for his mother and his sire cooked the wild 
mighty buffalo. 

16 Lord of the home, fair-helmeted, ascend thy chariot 

wrought of gold. 

We will attend the heavenly one,'the thousand-footed, 
red of hue, matchless, who blesses where he goes. 

17 With reverence they come hitherward to him as to a 

sovran lord, 

That they may bring hirri near for this man’s good 
success, to prosper and bestow his gifts. 

18 The Priyamedhas have observed the offering of the 

men of old, 

Of ancient custom, while they strewed the sacred 
grass, and spread their sacrificial food. 

HYMN LIX. indra. 

He who, as sovran lord of men, moves with his 
chariots unrestrained, 

The Yritra-slayer,. vanquisher of fighting hosts, 
preeminent, is praised with song. 

2 Honour that Indra, Puruhanman ! for his aid, in 
whose sustaining hand of old 
The splendid bolt of thunder was deposited, as the 
great Sun was set in heaven. 


If) His mother and his sire: Earth and Heaven. The buffalo is 
the dark rain-cloud which Indra pierces with his lightning, or perhaps 
the demou Vala is intended. 

1G The heavenly one : t he Sun, which iR Indi a’s chariot. Thousand¬ 
footed : bright with countless rays of light. 

17 This man’s; who institutes the sacrifice. 

The Rishi is Puruhanman of the family of Angiras. The metres 
are Pragatha in stanzas 1—6; Brihati in 7—12; Usbnihinl3; 
Auushtup in 14; and Pura ushnih in 15. 



HYMN 59.] THE RIG VEDA. 28 9 

3 No one by deed attains to him who works and 
strengthens evermore : 

No, not by sacrifice, to Indra praised of all, resistless, 
daring, bold in might. 

4The powerful conqueror, invincible in war, him at 
whose birth the mighty ones, 

The kine who spread afar, sent their loud voices out, 
heavens, earths sent their loud voices out. 

5 O Indra, if a hundred heavens and if a hundred 

earths were thine— 

No, not a thousand suns could match thee at thy 
birth, not both the worlds, 0 thunderer. 

6 Thou, hero, hast performed thy hero deeds with 

might, yea, all with strength, O strongest one. 
Maghavan, help us to a stable full of kine, O 
thunderer, with wondrous aids. 

7 Let not a godless mortal gain this food, O thou whose 

life is long! 

But one who yokes the bright-hued steeds, the Etasas, 
even Indra yoker of the bays. 

8 Urge ye the conqueror to give, your Indra greatly 

to be praised, 

To be invoked in shallow waters and in depths, 
to be invoked in deeds of might. 

9 O Vasu, 0 thou hero, raise us up to ample opulence. 
Raise us to gain of mighty wealth, O Maghavan, 

O Indra, to sublime renown. 

10 Indra, thou justifiest us, and tramplest down thy 
slanderers. 

Guard thyself, valiant hero, in thy vital parts : strike 
down the D4sa with thy blows. 


4 The kine : the heavens and the earths. 

7 Etasas: the horses of the Sun. 

10 In thy vital parts: literally, between thy thighs. ‘ Shelter us 
between thy thighs.’—Wilson. 

19 



THE HYMNS OF 


290 


{BOOK YUl. 


11 The man who brings no sacrifice, inhuman, godless, 

infidel. 

Him let his friend the mountain cast to rapid death, 
the mountain cast the Dasyu down. 

12 O mightiest Indra, loving us, gather thou up, 

as grains of corn 

Within thine hand, of these their kine, to give away, 
yea, gather twice as loving us. 

13 O my companions, wish for power. How may w T e 

perfect Sara’s praise, 

The liberal princely patron, never to be harmed ? 

14 By many a sage whose grass is trimmed thou art 

continually praised, 

That thou, 0 Sara, hast bestowed here one and here 
another calf. 

15 The noble, Suradeva’s son, hath brought a calf, 

led by the ear, to three of us, 

As a chief brings a goat to milk. 

HYMX LX. Agni. 

O Agni, with thy mighty wealth guard us from all 
malignity, 

Yea, from all hate of mortal man. 


11 IHs friend: in which he hopes to find refuge: according to 
Sayana, Parvata (mountain) is a Rishi, the friend of Indra. 

12 Their kine: the property of the hostile aborigines. 

13 Sara’s praise: Sara must be the institutor of the sacrifice: accord¬ 
ing to Say ana he is Indra, 1 the destroyer.’ 

14 Here one and here another .- ekam ekam : meaning many.—S. 

15 Sdradeva’s son: Sara. Sayana explains Sauradevyah as cows 
won in battle. “May Maghavan, taking them by the ears, lead tho 
cows with their calves from our tbreo (destructive enemies), as tho 
owner leads a goat to drink.”--Wilson. 

The Rishis are SudSti and Purumijha, both of the family of 
Angiras, or either of them may be the Rishi. The metre is GSyatri 
iu stanzas 1 — 9, and Pragathu in 10—15. 



HYMN 60 .] 


THE RIGVEDA. 


291 


2 For over thee, 0 friend from birth, the wrath of 

man hath no control: 

Nay, guardian of the earth art thou. 

3 As such, with all the gods, O son of strength, 

auspicious in thy flame, 

Give us wealth bringing all things good. 

4 Malignities stay not from wealth the mortal man 

whom, Agni, thou 
Protectest while he offers gifts. 

5 Sage Agni, he whom thou dost urge, in worship of 

the gods, to wealth, 

With thine assistance winneth kine. 

6 Riches with many heroes thou hast for the man who . 

offers gifts : 

Lead thou us on to higher bliss. 

7 Save us, O Jatavedas, nor abandon us to him who 

sins, 

Unto the evil-hearted man. 

8 0 Agni, let no godless man avert thy bounty as a 

god : 

Over all treasures thou art lord. 

9 So, son of strength, thou aidest us to what is great 

and excellent, 

Those, Vasu ! friend ! who sing thy praise. 

10 Let our songs come anear to him beauteous and 

bright with piercing flame, 

Our offerings, with our homage, to the lord of wealth, 
to him whom many praise, for help : 

11 To Agni Jataved&s, to the son of strength, that he 

may give us precious gifts, 

Immortal, from of old priest among mortal men, the 
most delightful in the house : 


2 Guardian of the earth . kshapdvdn: ‘ Lord of the night.’—S&yana. 
5 Winneth kine: literally, is a goer among cows: ‘walks (lord) 
among crowds of cattle.’—Wilson. 



!2S-: the HYMNS OF [ BOOK VIII. 

12 Agni, made yours by sacrifice, Agni, while holy rites 

advance; 

Agni, the first in songs, first with the warrior steed; 
Agni to win the land for us. 

13 May Agni who is lord of wealth vouchsafe us food 

for friendship sake. 

Agni we ever seek for seed and progeny, the Vasu 
who protects our lives. 

14 Solicit with your chants, for help, Agni the god with 

piercing flame, 

For riches famous Agni, Purumilha and ye men, 
Agni to light our dwelling well. 

15 Agni we laud that he may keep our foes afar, Agni 

to give us health and wealth. 

Let him as guardian be invoked in all the tribes, the 
lighter-up of glowing brands. 

HYMN LX I. Agni. 

Prepare oblation : let him come ; and let the minis¬ 
ter serve again 

Who knows the ordering thereof. 


12 With the warrior steed: arvati: the fierce and rapid fire that 
clears the jungle for the advance of the Aryan settlers. 

14 To light our dwelling well: I follow Professor Ludwig’s ex¬ 
planation. Sayana takes suditaye as a proper name; ‘ a house for 
(me) Suditi.’—Wilson. 

15 The lighter-up of glowing brands : vasturrishUnam: according to 
Sayana, ‘ the giver of homes to us Rishis.’ 

The Rishi is said to be Haryata son of Pragatha. The metre 
is Gayatri. 

The language of the hymn is intentionally obscure, and much of 
my tr&uslation (in which I generally follow Professor Ludwig) must 
be regarded as conjectural. 

1 Let him come: Agni. The minister: or, the Adbvaryu. 



HYMN 61 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


293 


2 Rejoicing in his friendship, let the priest be seated 

over man, 

Beside the shoot of active power 

3 Him, glowing bright beyond all thought, they seek 

among the race of man ; 

With him for tongue they seize the food. 

4 He hath inflamed the twofold plain : life-giving, he 

hath climbed the wood, 

And with his tongue hath struck the rock. 

5 Wandering here the radiant calf finds none to fetter 

him, and seeks 

The mother to declare his praise. 

6 And now that great and mighty team, the team of 

horses that arc his, 

And traces of his car, are seen. 

7 The seven milk a single cow ; the two set other five 

to work, 

On the stream’s loud-resounding bank. 

8 Entreated by Vivasvan’s ten, Indra cast down the 

water-jar 

With threefold hammer from the sky. 

2 The shoot: Agni, according to Sayana : the stalks of the Soma- 
plant, according to Professor Roth. 

3 They seek: that is, the gods. 

4 The twofold plain: the expanses of earth and heaven. Climbed, 
the wood: a forest conflagration is referred to. 

6 The radiant calf: Agni in the form of lightning. Here: in the 
Bky above us. 

The mother: the cloud, which will praise him with a thunder-psalm. 

7 The seven: officiating priests, or assistants. See II. 1. 2. A single 
cow: the text has only ekdm (unam). Sayana supplies, cow, which 
he explains as the gharma, pitcher or caldrou used for heating milk, 
etc., in the Pravargya ceremony. 

The two: the Pratiprasthatar and the Adhvaryu direct the five 
others in the performance of the ceremony. 

8 Entreated by Vivasvdn’s ten: according to Sayana, the ten 
fingers of the worshipper, Teu priests are probably meant. Indra . 



294 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

9 Three times the newly-kindled flame proceeds around 
the sacrifice: 

The priests anoint it with the meath. 

10 With reverence they drain the fount that circles 

with its wheel above, 

Exhaustless, with the mouth below. 

11 The pressing-stones are set at work : the meath is 

poured into the tank, 

At the out-shedding of the fount. 

12 Ye cows, protect the fount: the two mighty ones 

bless the sacrifice. 

The handles twain are wrought of gold. 

13 Pour on the juice the heated milk which reaches 

both the heaven and earth : 

Supply the liquid to the Bull. 

14 These know their own abiding-place : like calves 

beside the mother cows 
They meet together with their kin. 

15 Devouring in their greedy jaws, they make sustain¬ 

ing food in heaven, 

To Indra, Agni light and prayer. 

Agni or Aditya may be meaut.—Say ana The water-jar: the rainy 
cloud. Hammer: the meaning of khtdayd is uncertain. Sayana 
explains it by raeminA, with his ray. 

10 The fount: avatam : the gharma or mahdvira, the contents of 
which are poured into the fire. Its wheel: apparently, the oircular 
rim on which it usually stands and which is now inverted that all 
the liquid may flow out. 

12 The two mighty ones: Heaven and Earth. But as the meaning 

or rapsudd is unknown, the sentenoe can be only conjecturally 
translated : “ (The two kinds of milk) in the sacrifice are plentiful 

and fruit-giving.”—Wilson. 

13 To the Bull: to Agni. 

14 These know: the cows know, and come to, the place where 
they are to be milked for sacrificial purposes as well as they know 
their own stable. 

15 Devouring : perhaps the flames; but the Btanza is obscure. 



ItVMS 62.] 


THE MG VEDA. 


295 


16 The pious one milked out rich food, sustenance dealt 

in portions seven, 

Together with the Sun’s seven rays. 

17 I took some Soma when the sun rose up, O Mitra, 

Varuiya. 

That is the sick man’s medicine. 

18 From where oblations must be laid, which is the 

well-beloved’s home, 

He with his tongue hath compassed heaven. 

HYMN LX 11. Asvins. 

Rouse ye for him who keeps the Law, yoke your 
steeds, Asvins, to your car : 

Let your protecting help be near. 

2 Come, Asvins, with your car more swift than is the 

twinkling of an eye : 

Let your protecting help be near. 

3 Asvins, ye overlaid with cold the burning heat for 

Atri’s sake : 

Let your protecting help be near. 

4 Where are ye ? whither are ye gone ? whither, like 

falcons, have ye flown ? 

Let your protecting help be near. 

5 If ye at any time this day are listening to this my 

call, 

Let your protecting help be near. 

16 The pious one : Agni. Dealt in portions seven : one for each priest. 
18 This well-beloved's home: ‘ the place which I, the eager offerer, 
choose.’—Wilson. 

Haryata, ‘ the well-beloved.’ is perhaps the Soma. 

The Rishi is Gopavana of the race of Atri, or Saptavadhri of the 
same family. The metre is Gayatri. 

1 Who keeps the Law: which enjoins sacrifice. The Rishi means 
himself. 

3 For Atri’s sake: see I. 116. 8. 



286 THE HYMNS OF [SOON VIII . 

6 The Asvins, first to hear our prayer, for closest 

kinship I approach: 

Let your protecting help be near. 

7 For Atri ye, O Asvins, made a dwelling-place to 

shield him well. 

Let your protecting help be near. 

8 Ye warded off the fervent heat for Atri when he 

sweetly spake: 

Let your protecting help be near. 

9 Erst Saptavadhri by his prayer obtained the trenchant 

edge of fire: 

Let your protecting help be near. 

10 Come hither, 0 ye lords of wealth, and listen to this 

call of mine: 

Let your protecting help be near. 

11 What is this praise told forth of you as elders in the 

ancient way ? 

Let your protecting help be near. 

12 One common brotherhood is yours, Asvins, your 

kindred is the same : 

Let your protecting help be near. 

13 This is your chariot, Asvins, which speeds through 

the regions, earth and heaven : 

Let your protecting aid be near. 

14 Approach ye hitherward to us with thousands both 

of steeds and kine : 

Let your protecting help be near. 

15 Pass us not by, remember us with thousands both 

of kine and steeds : 

Let your protecting help be near. 


9 Saptavadhri: see V. 78. 6. His release seems to have been effected 
by employing fire. 

11 “ Why is this (repeated invocation) addressed to you as if you 
were decrepit like old men ? ”—Wilson. 

12 One common brotktrhood: as twin children of the consort of 
the Sun. 



HYMN 63 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


297 


16 The purple-tinted Dawn hath risen, and true to 

Law hath made the light: 

Let your protecting help be near. 

17 He looked upon the Asvins, as an axe-armed man 

upon a tree : 

Let your protecting help be near. 

18 By the black band encompassed round, break it 

down, bold one, like a fort. 

Let your protecting help be near. 

HYMN LXIII. Agni. 

Exerting all our strength with thoughts of power 
we glorify in speech 

Agni your dear familiar friend, the darling guest in 
every home. 

2 Whom, served with sacrificial oil like Mitra, men 

presenting gifts 

Eulogize with their songs of praise; 

3 Much-lauded Jatavedas, him who bears oblations up 

to heaven 

Prepared in service of the gods. 


17 The meaning is obscure. “ Asvins, the splendidly-brilliant (sun 
cleaves the darkness) as the woodman with his axe a tree.”—Wilson. 
“ He [the demon] looked at the Asvins.”—Grassmann. 

18 The first line is said by Sayana to be addressed to Saptavadhri. 
It seems to express self-encouragement before an attack upon a Dasa 
enemy. 

The donation of Srutarvan is the deified object of the last three 
stanzas. 

The Rishi is Gopavana. The metres are Anushtup in stanzas 1, 4, 
7, 10, 13—15, and Gayatri in the rest of the hymn. 

1 I follow Professor Ludwig in his interpretation of this stanza, 
the construction of which is difficult. 

2 Like Mitra: or as a friend; or like the Sun,—Sayana. 




298 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

4 To noblest Agni, friend of man, best Vritra-slayer, 

are we come, 

Him in whose presence Riksha’s son, mighty Srutar- 
van waxes great; 

5 To deathless Jatavedas, meet for praise, adored with 

sacred oil, 

Visible through the gloom of night; 

6 Even Agni whom these priestly men worship with 

sacrificial gifts, 

With lifted ladles offering them. 

7 0 Agni, this our newest hymn hath been addressed 

from us to thee, 

O cheerful guest, well-born, most wise, worker of 
wonders, ne’er deceived. 

8 Agni. may it be dear to thee, most grateful, and ex¬ 

ceeding sweet: 

Grow mightier, eulogized therewith. 

9 Splendid with splendours may it be, and in the battle 

with the foe 

Add loftier glory to thy fame. 

10 Steed, cow, a lord of heroes bright like Indra who 

shall fill the car, 

Whose high renown ye celebrate, and people praise 
each glorious deed. 

11 Thou whom Gopavana made glad with song, O Agni 

Angiras, 

Hear this my call, thou holy one. 

12 Thou whom the priestly folk implore to aid the 

gathering of the spoil, 

Such bo thou in the fight with foes. 

13 I, called to him who reels with joy, Srutarvan, 

Riksha’s son, shall stroke 

10 Steed, cow: there is no verb to govern these accusatives. 
Perhaps, let it, that is, the hymn, give, may be understood. Sayana 
explains g&m, cow, by ganl&ram, goer. “(Worship) ye men, the 
bright (Agni) who goes like a horse and fills our chariots (with 
spoil).”—Wilson. 



HYMN 64 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


299 


The heads of four presented steeds, like the long 
wool of fleecy ranis. 

14 Four coursers with a splendid car, Savistha’s horses, 

fleet of foot, 

Shall bring me to the sacred feast, as flying steeds 
brought Tugra’s son. 

15 The very truth do I declare to thee, Parushnl, 

mighty flood. 

Waters! no man is there who gives more horses 
than Savishfcha gives. 

HYMN LXIV. Agni. 

Yoke, Agni, as a charioteer, thy steeds who best 
invite the gods: 

As ancient herald seat thyself. 

2 And, god, as skilfullest of all, call for us hitherward 

the gods: 

Make all things precious sure for us. 

3 For thou, most youthful, son of strength, thou to 

whom sacrifice is paid, 

Art holy, faithful to the Law. 

4 This Agni, lord of strengthening food hundredfold, 

thousandfold, is head 
And chief of riches and a sage. 

5 As craftsmen bend the felly, so bend at our general 

call: come nigh, 

Angiras, to the sacrifice. 

6 Now, 0 Virupa, rouse for him, strong god who 

shines at early morn, 

Fair praise with voice that ceases not. 

14 Tugra’s son: Bhujyu. See Vol. I., Index. 

15 Parushni: now the llavi, the river on whose bank Srutarvau 
offered his sacrifice. 

The Risbi is Virupa of the family of Angiras. The metre is Gayatri. 
1 Ancient herald: or, chief invoker. 

6 Who shines at early morn : or, aspiring heavenward, 



300 TIIE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

7 With missile of this Agni, his who looks afar, will 

we lay low 

The thief in combat for the kine. 

8 Let not the companies of gods fail us, like dawns 

that float away, 

Like cows who leave the niggardly. 

9 Let not the hateful tyranny of any evil-hearted foe 
Smite us, as billows smite a ship. 

10 O Agni, god, the people sing reverent praise to thee 

for strength: 

With terrors trouble thou the foe. 

11 Wilt thou not, Agni, lend us aid in winning cattle, 

winning wealth ? 

Maker of room, make room for us. 

12 In this great battle cast us not aside as one who 

bears a load: 

Snatch up the wealth and win it all. 

13 O Agni, let this plague pursue and fright another 

and not us: 

Make our impetuous strength more strong. 

14 The reverent or unwearied man whose holy labour 

he accepts, 

Him Agni favours with success. 

15 Abandoning the foeman’s host pass hither to this 

company: 

Assist the men with whom I stand. 

16 As we have known thy gracious help, as of a father, 

long ago, 

So now we pray to thee for bliss. 


7 The thief: the hymn is a prayer for aid in an expedition for the 
recovery of stolen cattle. 

8 Like Dawns that float away: ‘like cows that bathe them in the 
stream,’ according to the explanation given in the St. Petersburg 
Lexicon. Like cows who leave the niggardly : ‘ the kine abandon not 
a little (calf).’— Wilson. 



HYMN 65 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


301 


HYMN LXV. Indra. 

Not to forsake me, I invoke this Indra girt by 
Maruts, lord 

Of magic power who rules with might. 

2 This Indra with his Marut friends clave into pieces 

Vritra’s head 

With hundred-knotted thunderbolt. 

3 Indra, with Marut friends, grown strong, hath rent 

asunder Vritra, and 
Released the waters of the sea. 

4 This is that Indra who, begirt by Maruts, won the 

light of heaven 

That he might drink the Soma-juice. 

5 Mighty, impetuous, begirt by Maruts, him who 

loudly roars, 

Indra we invocate with songs. 

6 Indra begirt by Maruts we invoke after the ancient 

plan, 

That he may drink the Soma-juice. 

7 0 liberal Indra, Marut-girt, much-lauded Satakratu, 

drink 

The Soma at this sacrifice. 

8 To thee, 0 Indra, Marut-girt, these Soma-juices, 

thunderer ! 

Are offered from the heart with lauds. 

9 Drink, Indra, with thy Marut friends, pressed Soma 

at the morning rites, 

Whetting thy thunderbolt with strength. 

10 Arising in thy might, thy jaws thou shookest, Indra, 
having quaffed 

The Soma poured into the bowls. 


The Rishi is Kurusuti of the family of Kariva. The metre is 
Gayatri. 

3 Of the sea : of the firmament or ocean of air. 


302 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

11 Indra, both worlds complained to thee when uttering 

thy fearful roar, 

What time thou smotest Dasyus dead. 

12 From Indra have I measured out a song eight-footed 

with nine parts, 

Delicate, faithful to the Law. 

HYMN LXVI. Indra. 

Scarcely was Satakratu born when of his mother 
he inquired, 

Who are the mighty ? Who are famed ? 

2 Then Savasl declared to him Aurnav&bha, Ahisuva : 
Son, these be they thou must o’erthrow. 

3 The Vritra-slayer smote them all as spokes are ham¬ 

mered into naves : 

The Dasvu-killer waxed in might. 

4 Then Indra at a single draught drank the contents 

of thirty pails, 

Pails that were filled with Soma-juice. 


11 Complained to thee : in terror. When uttering thy fearful roar : 
the meaning of krakshawhiam, rendered thus conjecturally, is 
uncertain. 

12 Eight-footed with nine parts: the hymn consists of triplets, 
each of which contains nine Padas, parts or half-lines, of eight feet or 
syllables each. That is, the metre is octosyllabic (8 x 3), and the triplet 
contains three stanzas in that metro or nine octosyllabic Padas. 
From Indra: originating in him as its subject or inspirer. Faithful 
to the Law: closely connected with sacrifice. 

The Rishi is Kurusuti. The metres are Brihati in stanza 10, 
Satobrihati in 11, and Gayatri in the rest of the hymn. 

1 Cp. VIII. 45. 

2 Savasl: or, the mighty one, Indra’s mother. Aurnavdbha: or 
Urnavabhi's son. See VIII. 32, 26. These: and other fiends, as te, 
these, is plural. 

4 Pails: or bowls; literally, lakes. The meaning of the word 
kdnukd in this stanza is uncertain. It appears to be an adjective 
qualifying sardnsi, pails or lakes. See Note in Wilson’s Translation. 




HYMN 00.] 


THE R 1(1 VEDA. 


30S 


5 Indra in groundless realms of space pierced the Gan- 

dharva through that he 
Might make the Brahmans’ strength increase. 

6 Down from the mountains Indra shot hither his 

well-directed shaft: 

Ho gained the ready brew of rice. 

7 One only is that shaft of thine, with thousand fea¬ 

thers, hundred barbs, 

Which, Indra, thou hast made thv friend. 

8 Strong as the Riblius at thy birth, therewith to 

those who praise thee, men 
And women, bring thou food to eat. 

9 By thee these exploits were achieved, the mightiest 

deeds, abundantly : 

Firm in thy heart thou settest them. 

10 All these things Vishnu brought, the lord of ample 

stride whom thou hadst sent— 

A hundred buffaloes, a brew of rice and milk : and 
Indra a ferocious boar. 

11 Most deadly is thy bow, successful, fashioned well; 

good is thine arrow, decked with gold. 

Warlike and well equipped thine arms are, which 
increase sweetness for him who drinks the sweet. 

.*) The Ganilharva : a heavenly being who dwells in the region of 
the air and guards the celestial Sulim. Sue I. 22. 14, and 163. 2. 
According to Sfiyana, the (iandharva is the rain cloud, which Indra 
shattered, and so released the fertilizing water. 

6 This stanza is similarly explained hv Saynna. Indra smote the 
rain from the clouds, and obtained food for men. 

7 One only: Indra alone is the wiolder of the thunderbolt. 

10 T his stanza is inexplicable as it refers to some forgotten legend 
of which only obscure hints arc found in the Rigveda. From these 
hints the story recorded in the llrahmana of the Black Ynjurveda 
(see 0. S. Texts, IV. pp. 1)2,93; and Wilson’s Translation, Note) 
appears to have been constructed. See also I. Gl. 7. 

11 Which increase sweetness for him who drinks the sweet: this is 
Professor Ludwig’s interpretation of two very difficult words which 
mean according to Wilson’s Translation, ‘destructively overthrowing, 
destructively piercing;’ according to the St. Petersburg Lexicon, ‘like 
two bees delighting in sweetness;’ and according to Professor 
Grassmanti, ‘sweetness loves thv two lies.’ 



304 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

HYMN LXVII. Indra. 

Bring us a thousand, Indra, as our guerdon for the 
Soma-juice : 

Hundreds of kine, O hero, bring. 

2 Bring cattle, bring us ornament, bring us embellish¬ 

ment and steeds, 

Together with a weight of gold. 

3 And, bold one, bring in ample store rich jewels to 

adorn the ear, 

For thou, good lord, art far renowned. 

4 None other is there for the priest, hero! but thou, 

to give him gifts, 

To win much spoil and prosper him. 

5 Indra can never be brought low, Sakra can never be 

subdued : 

He heareth and beholdeth all. 

6 He spieth out the wrath of man, he who can never 

be deceived: 

Ere blame can come he marketh it. 

7 He hath his stomach full of might, the Vritra-slayer, 

conqueror, 

The Soma-drinker, ordering all. 

8 In thee all treasures are combined, Soma ! all blessed 

things in thee, 

Uninjured, easy to bestow. 

9 To thee speeds forth my hope that craves the gift 

of corn, and kine, and gold, 

Yea, craving horses, speeds to thee. 


The Riahi is Kurusuti. The metre is Brihati t in stanza 10, and 
Gayatri in the rest of the hymn. 

1 A thousand: cows, understood. 

2 A weight: mand : apparently the Hebrew maneh, the Greek mn&, 
and the Latin mina. See Zimmer, Altindisckes Leben, pp, 50, 51. 

8 Soma: here said to mean India himself. 



HYMN 68 


THE RIG VEDA. 


805 


10 Indra, through hope in thee alone I take the sickle 
in mine hand. 

Fill it, O Maghavan, with all that it can grasp of 
barley cut or gathered up. 

HYMN LXVIII. Soma. 

This here is Soma, ne’er restrained, active, all-con¬ 
quering, bursting forth, 

Rishi and sage by sapience. 

2 All that is bare he covers o’er, all that is sick he 

medicines: 

The blind man sees, the cripple walks. 

3 Thou, Soma, givest wide defence against the hate of 

alien men, 

Hatreds that waste and weaken us. 

4 Thou by thine insight and thy skill, impetuous one, 

from heaven and earth 
Driveat the sinner’s enmity. 

5 When to their task they come with zeal, may they 

obtain the Giver’s grace, 

And satisfy his wish who thirsts. 

6 So may he find what erst was lost, so may he speed 

the pious man, 

And lengthen his remaining life. 


10 “It would appear as if the field were a barren ODe and the poet 
sought from Indra a harvest which he had not sown.”—VV. 


The Rishi is Kritnu of the family of Bhrigu. The metre is 
Auushtup in the last stanza aud Gayatri in the rest of the hymn. 

1 Bursting forth: according to Say ana, causing (fruit) to spring 
forth. 

4 Impetuous one: rijtskin: according to Sayana, ‘ possessed of the 
remains or dregs of the Soma-juice offered in the third savana.' 

5 They: the priests. The Giver’s: bountiful India’s. His wish: 
Indra's longing for Soma-libations. 

20 




306 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII , 

7 Gracious, displaying tender love, unconquered, 

gentle in thy thoughts, 

Be sweet, O Soma, to our heart. 

8 O Soma, terrify us not; strike us not with alarm, 

O king : 

Wound not our heart with dazzling flame. 

9 When in my dwelling-place I see the wicked ene¬ 

mies of gods, 

King, chase their hatred far away, thou bounteous 
one, dispel our foes. 

HYMN LXIX. Indra. 

O Satakratu, truly I have made none else my 
comforter. 

Indra, be gracious unto us. 

2 Thou who hast ever aided us kindly of old to win 

the spoil, 

As such, O Indra, favour us. 

3 What now ? As prompter of the poor thou helpest 

him who sheds the juice. 

Wilt thou not, Indra, strengthen us? 

4 O Indra, help our chariot on, yea, thunderer, though 

it lag behind: 

Give this my car the foremost place. 

5 Ho there! why sittest thou at ease ? Make thou 

my chariot to be first: 

And bring the fame of victory near. 

6 Assist our car that seeks the prize. What can be 

easier for thee ? 

So make thou us victorious. 


9 The wicked enemies: or, the enmities; that is, when I see that 
the gods are displeased with me. 

The Rishi is Ekadyu the sou of Nodhas. The metre is Trishtup in 
the last stanza and Gayatri in the rest of the hymn. 

4 The hymn is a prayer for success in a coming chariot race. 



HYMN 70.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


307 


7 Indra, be firm : a fort art thou. To thine appointed 

place proceeds 

The auspicious hymn in season due. 

8 Let not our portion be disgrace. Broad is the 

course, the prize is set, 

The barriers are opened wide. 

9 This thing we wish, that thou mayst take thy fourth, 

thy sacrificial name. 

So art thou held to be our lord. 

10 EkadyA hath exalted you, immortals: both goddesses 
and gods hath he delighted. 

Bestow upon him bounty meet for praises. May he, 
enriched with prayer, come soon and early. 

HYMN LXX. Indra. 

Indra, god of the mighty arm, gather for us with 
thy right hand 

Manifold and nutritious spoil. 

2 We know thee mighty in thy deeds, of mighty 

bounty, mighty wealth, 

Mighty in measure, prompt to aid. 

3 Hero, when thou art fain to give, neither may gods 

nor mortal men 

Restrain thee like a fearful bull. 

4 Come, let us glorify Indra, lord supreme of wealth, 

self-ruling king : 

In bounty may he harm us not. 


7 To thine appointed place: 1 to thee the repeller (of enemies).’— 
Wilson. 

9 Thy fourth , thy sacrificial name : the other three are the constel¬ 
lation-name, the secret name, and the revealed name. 

10 The gods in general are the deities of this stanza. 

The Rishi is Kusidin of the family of Kanva. The metre is Gayatri. 




308 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

5 Let prelude sound and following chant: so let him 

hear the Saman sung, 

And with his bounty answer us. 

6 0 Indra, with thy right hand bring, and with thy 

left remember us : 

Let us not lose our share of wealth. 

7 Come nigh, 0 bold one, boldly bring hither the 

riches of the churl 
Who giveth least of all the folk. 

8 Indra, the booty which thou hast with holy singers 

to receive, 

Even that booty win with us. 

9 Indra, thy swiftly-coming spoil, the booty which 

rejoices all, 

Sounds quick in concert with our hopes. 

HYMN LXXI. Indra. 

Haste forward to us from afar, or, Vritra-slayer, 
from an ear, 

To meet the offering of the meath. 

2 Strong are the Soma-draughts; come nigh: the 
juices fill thee with delight: 

Drink boldly even as thou art wont. 


5 Let prelude sound: pra sloshat upagAsishat: let the prastotar and 
the udgdtar, two of the officiating priests at a Saman, disoharge their 
functions: the former siuging the prelude and the latt" 1 ' the accom¬ 
paniment. 

8 Win with us: make us thy allies. 

9 Sounds in concert with, our hopes: answers to our expectation. 
Perhaps, as Prof. Ludwig thinks, the word ‘sounds’ refers to the 
herd of cattle which probably constituted the spoil that is spoken of. 

The Rishi is Kusidin of the family of Kanva. The metre is 
Giyatrl. 




HYMN 72.] 


THE RJGVEDA. 


30) 


3 Joy, Indra, in the strengthening food : let it content 

thy wish and thought, 

And be delightful to thine heart. 

4 Come to us thou who hast no foe : we call thee 

down to hymns of praise, 

In heaven’s sublimest realm of light. 

5 This Soma here expressed with stones and dressed 

with milk for thy carouse, 

Indra, is offered up to thee. 

6 Graciously, Indra, hear my call. Come and obtain 

the draught, and sate 
Thyself with juices blent with milk. 

7 The Soma, Indra, which is shed in saucers and in 

cups for thee, 

Drink thou, for thou art lord thereof. 

8 The Soma seen within the bowls, as in the flood the 

moon is seen, 

Drink thou, for thou art lord thereof. 

9 That which the hawk brought in his claw, inviolate, 

through the air to thee, 

Drink thou, for thou art lord thereof. 

HYMN LXXII. Visvodevag. 

We choose unto ourselves that high protection of 
the mighty gods 

That it may help and succour us. 

2 May they be ever our allies, Varuga, Mitra, Arya- 
man, 

Far-seeing gods who prosper us. 


8 Within the bowls: or saucers. The moon: in allusion to the 
double meaning of Soma, the plant and its juice, and the moon. 

9 The hawk : see I. 80. 2, and 93. 6. 


The Rishi is Kutddin. The metre is Gayatrt, 




310 THE HYMNS OF {BOOK VIII. 

3 Ye furtherera of holy law, transport us safe o’er 

many woes, 

As over water-floods in ships. 

4 Dear wealth be Aryaman to us, Varuna dear wealth 

meet for praise: 

Dear wealth we choose unto ourselves. 

5 For sovrans of dear wealth are ye, Adityas, not of 

sinner’s wealth, 

Ye sapient gods who slay the foe. 

6 We in our homes, ye bounteous ones, and while we 

journey on the road, 

Invoke you, gods, to prosper us. 

7 Regard us, Indra, Vishnu, here, ye Alvins and the 

Marut host, 

Us who are kith and kin to you. 

8 Ye bounteous ones, from time of old we here set 

forth our brotherhood, 

Our kinship in the mother’s womb. 

9 Then come with Indra for your chief, at early day, 

ye bounteous gods : 

Yea, I address you now for this. 

HYMN LXXIII. Agai. 

Agni, your dearest guest, I laud, him who is loving 
as a friend, 

Who brings us riches like a car. 

2 Whom as a far-foreseeing sage the gods have, from 

the olden time, 

Established among mortal men. 

3 Do thou, most youthful god, protect the men who 

offer, hear their songs, 

And of thyself preserve their seed. 

The Rishi is Usana Kavya. The metre is Gayatri. 

3 And of thyself preserve their seed: or, and guard our offspring and 
ourselves. 



HYMN 74.] THE RJGVEDA. 311 

4 What is the praise wherewith, O god, Angiras, 

Agni, son of strength, 

We, after thine own wish and thought, 

5 May serve thee, O thou child of power, and with 

what sacrifice’s plan ? 

What prayer shall I now speak to thee ? 

6 Our god, make all of us to dwell in happy habita¬ 

tions, and 

Reward our songs with spoil and wealth. 

7 Lord of the house, what plenty fills the songs which 

thou inspirest now, 

Thou whose hymn helps to win the kine? 

8 Him wise and strong they glorify, the foremost 

champion in the fray, 

And mighty in his dwelling-place. 

9 Agni, he dwells in rest and peace who smites and no 

one smites again : 

With hero sons he prospers well. 

HYMN LXXIV. A.vins. 

To this mine invocation, O ye Asvins, ye Nasatyas, 
come, 

To drink the savoury Soma-juice. 

2 This laud of mine, ye Asvins twain, and this mine 

invitation hear, 

To drink the savoury Soma-juice. 

3 Here Krishna is invoking you, O Asvins borne by 

rapid steeds, 

To drink the savoury Soma-juice. 


9 He : tby faithful worshipper. 


The Rishi is Krishna of the family of Angiras. The metre is 
Gayatri, 



312 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

4 List, heroes, to the singer’s call, the call of Krishna 

lauding you, 

To drink the savoury Soma-juice. 

5 Chiefs, to the sage who sings your praise grant an 

inviolable home, 

To drink the savoury Soma-juice. 

6 Come to the worshipper’s abode, Asvins, who here 

is lauding you, 

To drink the savoury Soma-juice. 

7 Yoke to the firmly-jointed car the ass which draws 

you, lords of wealth, 

To drink the savoury Soma-juice. 

8 Come hither, Asvins, on your car of triple form with 

triple seat, 

To drink the savoury Soma-juice. 

9 0 Asvins, O Nasatyas, now accept with favouring 

grace my songs, 

To drink the savoury Soma-juice. 

HYMN LXXV. Asvins. 

Ye twain are wondrous strong, well-skilled in arts 
that heal, both bringers of delight, ye both won 
Daksha’s praise. 

Visvaka calls on you as such to save his life. Break 
ye not off our friendship, come and set me free. 


5 To drink: ao that ye may drink. 

7 The ats: cf. I. 34. 9, 116. 2, and 162. 21. 

8 Of triple form, with triple seat: see I. 34. 2, 9. 

The Rishi is Visvaka son of Krishna. The metre is Jagati. 

1 Dakska’s praise: on the occasion mentioned in I. 116. 2; or 
when the Asvins won Sdrya for their bride, I. 116. 17. To save his 
life : according to Sayana, ‘ for the sake of his son.’ Come and set 
me free: ‘flying loose (your reins and gallop hither).’—Wila&n. 
‘ Unyoke your horses.'—Grassmann. 



HYMN 76.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


313 


2 How shall he praise you now who is distraught in 

mind? Ye twain give wisdom for the gain of 
what is good. 

Visvaka calls on you as such to save his life. Break 
ye not off our friendship, come and set me free. 

3 Already have ye twain, possessors of great wealth, 

prospered Vishndph thus for gain of what is good. 
Visvaka calls on you as such to save his life. Break 
ye not off our friendship, come and set me free. 

4 And that impetuous hero, winner of the spoil, 

though he is far away, we call to succour us, 
Whose gracious favour, like a father’s, is most sweet. 
Break ye not off our friendship, come and set me free. 

5 About the holy law toils Savitar the god : the horn 

of holy law hath he spread far and wide. 

The holy law hath quelled even mighty men of war. 
Break ye not off our friendship, come and set me free. 

HYMN LXXVI. Asvins. 

Splendid, O Asvins, is your praise. Come, fountain¬ 
like, to pour the stream. 

Of the sweet juice effused—dear is it, chiefs, in 
heaven—drink like two wild-bulls at a pool. 


2 Distraught in mind: referring either to Visvaka himself, or the 
man for whom lie invokes the Asvins’ aid. According to Saynna, 
Viraankh (distraught in mind) here is the name of a Rishi. 

3 ViskndpH: the Rmhi’s son or grandson. 

4 That impetuous hero: Indra. “ These two verses,” says Pro¬ 
fessor Grassmann, are taken from another hymn. Verse 5 is ad¬ 
dressed to Savitar, and verse 4, as it appears, to Indra. The refrain, 
which is altogether unsuitable here, has been added in order to con¬ 
nect the verses with the preceding hymn.” 


The Rishi is Dyumnika son of Vasisbtha, or Priyamedha of the 
family of Angiras, or Krishna. 




314 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

2 Drink the libation rich in sweets, 0 Asvins twain: 

sit, heroes, on the sacred grass. 

Do ye with joyful heart in the abode of man pre¬ 
serve his life by means of wealth. 

3 The Priyamedhas bid you come with all the succours 

that are yours. 

Come to his house whose holy grass is trimmed, to 
dear sacrifice at the morning rites. 

4 Drink ye the Soma rich in meath, ye Asvins twain : 

sit gladly on the sacred grass. 

So, waxen mighty, to our eulogy from heaven come 
ye as wild-bulls to the pool. 

5 Come to us, O ye Asvins, now with steeds of many 

a varied hue, 

Ye lords of splendour, wondrous, borne on paths of 
gold, drink Soma, ye who strengthen Law. 

6 For we the priestly singers, fain to hymn your praise, 

invoke you for the gain of strength. 

So, wondrous, fair, and famed for great deeds come 
to us, through our hymn, Asvins, when ye hear. 

HYMN LXXVII. Indra. 

As cows low to their calves in stalls, so with our 
songs we glorify 

This Indra, even your wondrous god who checks 
attack, who joys in the delicious juice. 

2 Celestial, bounteous giver, girt about with might, 
rich, mountain-like, in precious things, 

Him swift we seek for foodful booty rich in kine, 
brought hundredfold and thousandfold. 

2 The libation : gharmam : the heated milk or other beverage, or 
the vessel in which it is heated. 

3 The Priyamedhas, Priyamedha and his family. 

The Rishi is Nodhas of the family of Gotaraa. The metre is 
Pr&gatha. 

1 ,4s cows . the cows who are milked for sacrificial purposes, whose 
calves are shut up duriug the ceremony. 


HYMN 78.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


315 


3 Indra, the strong and lofty hills are powerless to bar 

thy way. 

None stays that act of thine when thou wouldst fain 
give wealth to one like me who sings thy praise. 

4 A warrior thou by strength, wisdom, and wondrous 

deed, in might excellest all that is. 

Hither may this our hymn attract thee to our help, 
the hymn which Gotamas have made. 

5 For in thy might thou stretohest out beyond the 

boundaries of heaven. 

The earthly region, Indra, comprehends thee not. 
After thy godhead hast thou waxed. 

6 When, Maghavan, thou honourest the worshipper, 

no one is there to stay thy wealth. 

Most liberal giver thou, do thou inspire our song of 
praise that we may win the spoil. 

HYMN LXXVIII. Indra. 

To Indra sing the lofty hymn, Maruts ! that slays 
the Vritras best, 

Whereby the holy ones created for the god the light 
divine that ever wakes. 

2 Indra who quells the curse blew curses far away, 
and then in splendour came to us. 

Indra, refulgent with thy Marut host! the gods 
strove eagerly to win thy love. 


5 The earthly region: the rajas, region, middle air, or firmament is 
frequently divided into two, one half belonging to the earth and the 
other to the Bky. See Wallis, Cosmology of the Rigveda, pp. 114, 115. 


The RiBhis are Npmedha and Purumedha of the family of Angiras. 
The metre is Pr&gatha in stanzas 1—4, Anushtup in 5, 6, and Brihati 
in 7. 

1 Maruts: here meaning the singers of the hymn of praise. 
‘ Priests.’—Wilson. 

The light divine: the Sun, whioh the Visvedevas generated or 
created for Indra. 



316 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

3 Sing to your lofty Indra, sing, Maruts, a holy hymn 

of praise. 

Let Satakratu, Vritra-slayer, kill the foe with 
hundred-knotted thunderbolt. 

4 Aim and fetch boldly forth, 0 thou whose heart is 

bold : great glory will be thine thereby. 

In rapid torrent let the mother waters spread. Slay 
Vritra, win the light of heaven. 

5 When thou, unequalled Maghavan, wast born to 

smite the Vritras dead, 

Thou spreadest out the spacious earth and didst 
support and prop the heavens. 

6 Then was the sacrifice produced for thee, the laud, 

and song of joy. 

Thou in thy might surpassest all, all that now is and 
yet shall be. 

7 Raw kine thou filledst with ripe milk. Thou madest 

Sftrya rise to heaven. 

Heat him as milk is heated with pure Soma hymns, 
great joy to him who loves the song. 

HYMN LXXIX. Indra. 

May Indra, who in every fight must be invoked, 
be near to us. 

May the most mighty Vritra-slayer, meet for praise, 
come to libations and to hymns. 

7 Raw kine: cf. I. 62. 9. Thou madest Stirya rise to heaven: Sayana 
relates a legend that when the Panis had carried off the cows of the 
Atigirasas and placed them in a mountain enveloped in darkness, 
Indra, at the prayer of the Rishis, set the sun in heaven in order 
that he might see and recover their cattle. Heat him as milk is 
heated: this line is difficult. "(Priests) eicite (Indra) with your 
praises as men heat the Gharma with 5drrea» hymns.”—Wilson. Gharma 
means either the hot milk or other beverage offered in the Pravargya 
ceremony, or the vessel in which it is heated. Great joy to him who 
loves the song : or perhaps the meaning is, the Brihat-Sdman is dear 
to him who loves song. 

The Rishis are Nrimedha and Purumedha. The metre is Prag&tha. 



HYMN 80.] THE RIG VEDA. 317 

2 Thou art the best of all in sending bounteous gifts, 

true art thou, lordly in thine act. 

We claim alliance with the very glorious one, yea, 
with the mighty son of strength. 

3 Prayers unsurpassed are offered up to thee the lover 

of the song. 

Indra, lord of bay steeds, accept these fitting hymns, 
hymns which we have thought out for thee. 

4 For thou, 0 Maghavan, art truthful, ne’er subdued, 

and bringest many a Vritra low. 

As such, O mightiest lord, wielder of thunder, send 
wealth hither to the worshipper. 

5 O Indra, thou art far-renowned, impetuous, 0 lord 

of strength. 

Alone thou slayest with the guardian of mankind 
resistless never-conquered foes. 

6 As such we seek thee now, O Asura, thee most wise, 

craving thy bounty as our share. 

Thy sheltering defence is like a mighty cloak. So 
may thy glories reach to us. 

HYMN LXXX. Indra. 

Down to the stream a maiden came, and found the 
Soma by the way. 

Bearing it to her home she said, For Indra will I 
press thee out, for Sakra will I press thee out. 

2 Thou roaming yonder, little man, beholding every 
house in turn, 

3 Fitting hymns: yojand : see Wilson’s Translation and Note. 

5 The guardian of mankind: Indra’s thunderbolt with which he 
slays the demons of drought. 

6 0 Asura: ‘Living one.’—Wilson. 

The Rishi is Apali of the family of Atri. The metre is Pankti in 
stanzas i, 3, and Anusbtup in the rest of the hymn. 

1 A maiden : Ap&la. 

2 Little man: vtrahah: according to Sayana, hero. Indra is in¬ 
tended, perhaps as Surytt the Sun-god. 



316 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VIII. 


Drink thou this Soma pressed with teeth, accompani¬ 
ed with grain and curds, with cake of meal and 
song of praise. 

3 Fain would we learn to know thee well, nor yet can 

we attain to thee. 

Still slowly and in gradual drops, O Indu, unto 
lndra flow. 

4 Will he not help and work for us ? Will he not make 

us wealthier ? 

Shall we not, hated by our lord, to lndra now unite 
ourselves ? 


5 0 lndra, cause to sprout again three places, these 

which I declare,— 

My father’s head, his cultured field, and this the 
part below my waist. 

6 Make all of these grow crops of hair, yon cultivated 

field of ours, 

My body, and my father’s head. 

7 Cleansing Apala, lndra ! thrice, thou gavest sunlike 

skin to her 

Drawn, Satakratu! through the hole of car, of wagon, 
and of yoke. 

3 Indu: Soma. 

4 He: lndra. Hated by our lord: Apala, it is said, was afflicted with 
a cutaneous disease and was consequently repudiated by her husband. 

6 This stanza should contain thirty-two syllables as in the original, 
but a literal translation in English does not take more than twenty-four. 

7 Sunlike: bright and clear. “ Sayana says that lndra dragged her 
through the wide hole of his chariot, the narrower hole of the cart 
and the small hole of the yoke, and she cast off three skins. The 
first skin became a hedgehog, the second an alligator, the third a 
chameleon. I suppose, with Prof. Aufrecht, that the hole or space 
of the chariot and cart represents the opening between the four 
wheels; the hole of the yoke seems to me to mean the opening 
through which the animal’s head passed, corresponding to Homer’s 
ltvy\r,, 11- 19. 406.”—Prof. Cowell. 

For the legend from the Satyayana Brahmana, founded on the 
hiuts coutained in this hymn and repeated by Sayana in his Com¬ 
mentary, see also Wilson’s Translation, Vol. V. 



HYMN 81. J 


THE RIG VEDA. 


SI 9 


HYMN LXXXI. Indra. 

Invite ye Indra with a song to drink your draught 
of Soma-juice, 

All-conquering Satakratu, most munificent of all who 
live. 

2 Lauded by many, much-invoked, leader of song, re¬ 

nowned of old : 

His name is Indra, tell it forth. 

3 Indra the dancer be to us the giver of abundant 

strength : 

May he, the mighty, bring it near. 

4 Indra whose jaws are strong hath drunk of worship¬ 

ping Sudaksha’s draught, 

The Soma-juice with barley mixt. 

5 Call Indra loudly with your songs of praise to drink 

the Soma-juice, 

For this is what augments his strength. 

6 When he hath drunk its gladdening drops the god 

with vigour of a god 
Hath far surpassed all things that are. 

7 Thou speedest down to succour us this ever-con¬ 

quering god of yours, 

Him who is drawn to all our songs; 

8 The warrior not to be restrained, the Soma-drinker 

ne’er o’erthrown, 

The chieftain of resistless might. 


The UUhi is Srutakaksha or Sukaksha of tho family of Angiras. 
The metre is Anushtup in stanza 1, and Gdyatrl in the rest of the 
hymn. 

3 The dancer: active in battle, dancer of the war-dance. Near : 
abhijnu: or, up to our knees. 

4 Sudaksha’s draught: offered by a Rishi of that name. 

7 According t'> Sayana this stanza is addressed by the yajamdna or 
sacrificer to the stotar or praisiug priest, and he gives an imperative 
sense to the indicative, thou speedest down ; ' Bring hither.’—Wilson. 




320 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Till. 

9 0 Indra, send us riches, thou omniscient, worthy of 
our praise : 

Help us in the decisive fray. 

10 Even thence, 0 Indra, come to us with food that 

gives a hundred powers, 

With food that gives a thousand powers. 

11 We sought the wisdom of the wise. Sakra, kine- 

giver, thunder-armed! 

May we with steeds o’ercome in fight. 

12 We make thee, Satakratu, find enjoyment in the 

songs we sing, 

Like cattle in the pasture lands. 

13 For, Satakratu, thunder-armed, all that we craved, 

as men are wont, 

All that we hoped, have we attained. 

14 Those, son of strength, are come to thee who cherish 

wishes in their hearts : 

0 Indra, none excelleth thee. 

15 So, hero, guard us with thy care, with thy most 

liberal providence, 

Speedy, and terrible to foes. 

15 0 Satakratu Indra, now rejoice with that carouse 
of thine 

Which is most splendid of them all; 

17 Even, Indra, that carouse which slays the Vritras 

best, most widely famed, 

Best giver of thy power and might. 

18 For that which is thy gift we know, true Soma- 

drinker, thunder-armed, 

Mighty one, amid all the folk. 

10 Even thence: from where thou art, from heaven. 

11 Of tlue wise: Indra. Kine giver : godare : perhaps, ‘ burster open 
of the cow-stall;’ ‘ cleaver of mountains.’—Wilson. 

12 Like cattle : as the cowherd refreshes his cattle.— Sayana. 

18 Thy gift: the wealth which thou givest. Amid all the folk: 
among all the worshippers who offer thee Soma.—S. 



HYMN 81 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


321 


19 For Indra, lover of carouse, loud be our songs about 

the juice: 

Let poets sing the song of praise. 

20 We summon Indra to the draught, in whom all 

glories rest, in whom 
The seven communities rejoice. 

21 At the Trikadrukas the gods span sacrifice that stirs 

the mind : 

Let our songs aid and prosper it. 

22 Let the drops pass within thee as the rivers flow 

into the sea: 

O Indra, naught exeelleth thee. 

23 Thou, wakeful hero, by thy might hast taken food 

of Soma-juice, 

Which, Indra, is within thee now. 

24 O Indra, Vritra-slayer, let Soma be ready for thy 

maw, 

The drops be ready for thy forms. 

25 Now Srutakaksha sings his song that cattle and the 

steed may come, 

That Indra’s very self may come. 

26 Here, Indra, thou art ready by our Soma-juices shed 

for thee, 

Sakra, at hand that thou mayst give. 

27 Even from far away our songs reach thee, O caster 

of the stone: 

May we come very close to thee. 

28 For so thou art the hero’s friend, a hero, too, art 

thou, and strong : 

So may thine heart be won to us. 

20 Seven communities : sapta sansadah: probably = all the folk, in 
stanza 18; ‘the seven associated priests.’—Wilson. 

21 At the Trikadrukas: see VIII. 13. 18, and note. 

24 Thy forms : thy various bodies or splendours.—S. 

25 Srutakaksha : the Rishi of the hymn. 

21 




322 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

29 So hath the offering, wealthiest lord, been paid by 

all the worshippers: 

So dwell thou, Indra, even with me. 

30 Be not thou like a slothful priest, O lord of strength¬ 

ening food : rejoice 
In the pressed Soma blent with milk. 

31 O Indra, let not ill designs surround us in the sun¬ 

beams’ light: 

This may we gain with thee for friend. 

32 With thee to help us, Indra, let us answer all our 

enemies: 

For thou art ours and we are thine. 

33 Indra, the poets and thy friends, faithful to thee, 

shall loudly sing 
Thy praises as they follow thee. 

HYMN LXXXII. Indra. 

Sukya, thou mountest up to meet the hero famous 
for his wealth, 

Who hurls the bolt and works for man ; 

2 Him who with might of both his arms brake nine- 

and-ninety castles down, 

Slew Vritra and smote Ahi dead. 

3 This Indra is our gracious friend. He sends us in a 

full broad stream 
Riches in horses, kine, and corn. 

4 Whatever, Vritra-^layer! thou, Shrya, hast risen 

upon to-day, 

That, Indra, all is in thy power. 


30 Priest: brahmd : Brahman or praying priest. 

31 In the sunbeams’ light: as Indra stands in the closest relationship 
to the Sun.— L. 

The Ribhus are associated with Indra as deities of stanza 34. Th® 
Rishi isSukaksha The metre is Gayatri. 

2 Nine-and-ninety castles: cloud castles of the demon Sambara. 



HYMN 82.1 


THE RIQVEDA. 


323 


5 When, mighty one, lord of the brave, thou thinkest 

thus, I shall not die, 

That thought of thine is true indeed. 

6 Thou, Indra, goest unto all Soma lib'ations shed for 

thee, 

Both far away and near at hand. 

7 We make this Indra very strong to strike the mighty 

Vritra dead : 

A vigorous hero shall he be. 

8 Indra was made for giving, set, most mighty, o’er the 

joyous draught, 

Bright, meet for Soma, famed in song. 

9 By song as ’twere, the powerful bolt which none 

may parry was prepared : 

Lofty, invincible he grew. 

10 Indra, song-lover, lauded, make even in the wilds 

fair ways for us, 

Whenever, Maghavan, thou wilt. 

11 Thou whose commandment and behest of sovran 

sway none disregards, 

Neither audacious man nor god. 

12 And both these goddesses, Earth, Heaven, lord of 

the beauteous helm ! revere 
Thy might which no one may resist. 

13 Thou in the black cows and the red and in the cows 

with spotted skin 
This white milk hast deposited. 

14 When in their terror all the gods shrank from the 

Dragon’s furious might, 

Fear of the monster fell on them. 


8 Was made: was created by Pr.-ijapati.—Sayana. 

12 Lord of the beauteous helm or, ‘ deity of the handsome jaw.’_ 

Wilson. 

13 In the black cows . of. I. 6'2. 9. 

14 The Dragon’s furious might: the fierce attack of the demon Ahi. 
Of the monster or, of the wild beast, Ahi. 



334 


THE HYMNS OF 


BOOK VIII, 


I5r Then he was my defender, then, invincible, whose 
foe is not, 

The Vritra-slayer showed his might. 

16 Him your best Vritra-slayer, him the famous champion 

of mankind 

I urge to great munificence, 

17 To come, much-lauded! many-named! with this 

same thought that longs for milk, 

Whene’er the Soma-juice is shed. 

18 Much-honoured by libations, may the Vritra-slayer 

wake for us : 

May Sakra listen to our prayers. 

19 O hero, with what aid dost thou delight us, with 

what succour bring 
Riches to those who worship thee ? 

20 With whose libation joys the strong, the hero with 

his team who quells 
The foe, to drink the Soma-juice ? 

21 Rejoicing in thy spirit bring thousandfold opulence 

to us: 

Enrich thy votary with gifts. 

22 These juices with their wedded wives flow to enjoy¬ 

ment lovingly : 

To waters speeds the restless one. 

15 Then he, was my defender ; ‘Then was my Indra the repeller.’ — 
Wilson. 

16 Champion : I join pra to sardham, as suggested in the St. 
Petersburg Lexicon. 

17 To come : that is, that thou, Indra, may come. This abrupt 
change of person is not uncommon in the Veda. 

33 The wedded wives : of the Soma-juices are said to be the two 
waters called vasativaryah and ekadhandh, used in the Soma ceremonies. 
To enjoyment: to be drunk by Indra. 

To "later s speeds the restless one : or, with Professor Grassmann, the 
lover of the waters speeds. The exact meaning of nichumputiah is 
uncertaiu, Yaska deriving it from cham, to eat, and Mahidbara from 
ehup, to creep or move slowly. The meauiug of the sentence is, ac¬ 
cording to the scholiast, that, at the time of the concluding purificatory 


HYMN 82 .] 


THE RIO VEDA. 


m 

23 Presented strengthening gifts have sent Indra away 

at sacrifice, 

With might, unto the cleansing bath. 

24 These two who share his feast, bay steeds with 

golden manes, shall bring him to 
The banquet that is laid for him. 

25 For thee, 0 lord of light, are shed these Soma-drops, 

and grass is strewn : 

Bring Indra to his worshippers. 

26 May Indra give thee skill and lights of heaven, 

wealth to his votary 

And priests who praise him : laud ye him. 

27 0 Satakratu, wondrous strength and all our lauds I 

bring to thee : 

Be gracious to thy worshippers. 

28 Bring to us all things excellent, 0 Satakratu, food 

and strength : 

For, Indra, thou art kind to us. 

29 0 Satakratu, bring to us all blessings, all felicity : 
For, Indra, thou art kind to us. 

30 Bearing the Soma-juice we call, best Vritra-slayer, 

unto thee: 

For, Indra, thou art kind to us. 

31 Come, lord of rapturous joys, to our libation with 

thy bay steeds, come 
To our libation with thy steeds. 

32 Known as best Vritra-slayer erst, as Indra Satakratu, 

come 

With bay steeds to the juice we shed. 

33 O Vritra-slayer, thou art he who drinks these drops 

of Soma : come 

With bay steeds to the juice we shed. 

.. . - » - - -- - -------- 

ceremony which is to atone for errors and omissions in the principal 
sacrifice, the stale Soma is thrown into the waters. See Prof. Cowell’s 
Note in Wilson’s Translation. 

23 The cleansing bath; the avabhritha, here, apparently, the bath 
or vessel in which the Somaa were rinsed ar. d purified. 



626 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Vljt> 

34 May Indra give, to aid ua, wealth handy that rules 
the skilful ones : 

Yea, may the strong give potent wealth. 

HYMN LXXXIII. Maruts. 

The Cow, the famous mother of the wealthy Maruts, 
pours her milk, 

Harnessed to draw their chariots on. 

2 She in whose bosom all the gods, and Sun and Moon 

for men to see, 

Maintain their everlasting laws. 

3 This all the pious sing to us, and sacred poets ever¬ 

more : 

The Maruts to the Soma-draught! 

4 Here is the Soma ready pressed : of this the Maruts 

drink, of this 

Self-luminous the Asvins drink. 

5 Of this, moreover, purified, set in three places, pro- 

creant, 

Drink Varuna, Mitra, Aryaraan. 

34 Handy: ribhum. That rules the skilful ones: ribhukshanam. 
The strong: vdji. These words are used as plays upon the names 
of the Ribhus, or as Professor Grassmann says, the verse may have 
been taken from a hymn addressed to the Ribhus. “ May Indra bring 
to us the bounteous Ribhu Ribhukshana to partake of our sacrificial 
viands; may he, the mighty, bring the mighty (Vaja).”—Wilson. 
Professor Cowell remarks: “Ribhukshana was the eldest and'V&ja 
the youngest of the three brothers, The Ribhus have a share in the 
evehiug libation between Prajapati, and ISavitri, see Ait. Br&hm. iii, 
30. This verse is addressed to the Ribhus in the evening libatiou on 
the ninth day of the Dw&das&ba ceremony ( ib. v. 21).” 

The Rishi is Vindu or Putadaksha of the family of Angiras. The 
metre is Gayatri. 

1 'The Cow : Prism. Harnessed to draw : Professor Ludwig takes 
vahni as a dual: yoked are the two steeds that draw their cars. 

2 In whose bosom,: ‘in whose presence.’—Wilson. 

3 The Maruts : are to be invoked, understood. 

5 Set in three places : first, in a trough ; then in a straining-cloth; 
then iu a third trough or vessel called PdtabhriL Procreant: grant¬ 
ing progeny to the worshipper. 




HYMN 84 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


327 


6 And Indra, like the herald priest, desirous of the 

milky juice, 

At early morn will quaff thereof. 

7 When have the princes gleamed and shone through 

waters as through troops of foes? 

When hasten they whose might is pure ? 

8 What favour do I claim this day of you great deities, 

you who are 

Wondrously splendid in yourselves ? 

9 I call, to drink the Soma, those Maruts who spread 

all realms of earth 
And luminous regions of the sky. 

10 You, even such, pure in your might, you, O ye 

Maruts, I invoke 

From heaven to drink this Soma-juice. 

11 The Maruts, those who have sustained and propped 

the heavens and earth apart, 

I call to drink this Soma-juice. 

12 That vigorous band of Maruts that abideth in the 

mountains, I 

Invoke to drink this Soma-juice. 

HYMN LXXXJiV. i ndra . 

Song-lover ! like a charioteer come songs to thee 
when Soma flows. 

O Indra, they have called to thee as mother-kine 
unto their calves. 

2 Bright juices hitherward have sped thee, Indra, 
lover of the song. 

Drink, Indra, of this flowing sap : in every house 
’tis set for thee. 


6 The herald priest: Agni. 

The Riahi is Tiraschi of the family of Angiras. The metre is 

Anushtup. 

1 Like a charioteer : straight and swift to their object, 




328 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Till. 

3 Drink Soma to inspirit thee, juice, Indra, which the 

falcon brought: 

For thou art king and sovran lord of all the families 
of men. 

4 O Indra, hear Tiraschl’s call, the call of him who 

serveth thee. 

Satisfy him with wealth of kine and valiant off¬ 
spring : great art thou. 

5 For he, 0 Indra, hath produced for thee the newest 

gladdening song, 

A hymn that springs from careful thought, ancient, 
and full of sacred truth. 

6 That Indra will we laud whom soDgs and hymns of 

praise have magnified. 

Striving to win, we celebrate his many deeds of hero 
might. 

7 Come now and let us glorify pure Indra with pure 

S&ma hymn. 

Let the pure milky draught delight him strengthen¬ 
ed by pure songs of praise. 

8 O Indra, come thou pure to us, with pure assistance, 

pure thyself. 

Pure, send thou riches down to us, and, meet for 
Soma, pure, be glad. 

9 O Indra, pure, vouchsafe us wealth, and, pure, enrich 

the worshipper. 

Pure, thou dost strike the Vritras dead, and strivest, 
pure, for strengthening food. 


3 Which the falcon brought : see I. 80. 2, and 93. 6. 

5 Newest . ancient: recent in form and expression, but 

aDcient in substance. See Muir, 0. S. Texts , III. 238, 239. 

7 Pure Indra with pure Sdma hymns : according to Sayaria, ‘ Indra, 
purified with pure Sauia-hymna,' from the pollution he bad incurred 
by killing the Brahman Vritra. See Wilson’s Translation, Note. 




HYMN 85 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


329 


HYMN LXXXV. i„d™. 

For him the Mornings made their courses longer, 
and Nights with pleasant voices spake to Indra. 
For him the floods stood still, i;he seven mothers, 
streams easy for the heroes to pass over. 

2 The darter penetrated, though in trouble, thrice- 

seven close-pressed ridges of the mountains. 
Neither might god nor mortal man accomplish what 
the strong hero wrought in full-grown vigour. 

3 The mightiest force is Indra’s bolt of iron when 

firmly grasped in both the arms of Indra. 

His head and mouth have powers that pass all others, 
and all his people hasten near to listen. 

4 I count thee as the holiest of the holy, the caster- 

down of what hath ne’er been shaken. 

I count thee as the banner of the heroes, I count 
thee as the chief of all men living. 

5 What time, O Indra, in thine arms thou tookest thy 

wildly-rushing bolt to slay the Dragon, 

The mountains roared, the cattle loudly bellowed, 
the Brahmans with their hymns drew nigh to 
Indra. 


The Maruts are the deities of part of stanza 11, and Indra and 
Brihaspati of 15. The Rishi is Dyutana son of the Maruts, or 
Tiraschi. The metre is Trishtup except in stanza 4, where it is 
Viraj (10 x 4). 

1 The heroes : perhaps Turvasa. and Yadu—L. 

2 The darter : of the thunderbolt; Indru. Though in trouble : 
because he had none to aid him. What the thrice-seven close-pressed 
ridges of the mountains are, is uncertain. See Wilson’s Translation, 
Note. Professor Ludwig thinks that the bat tle of the Suu with the 
demons of winter may be meant. 

3 To listen : to the commands which issue from bis mouth. 

4 I have treated this Viraj stanza as if it were Trishtup like the 
rest. 

5 Wildly-rushing : this is Prof. M. Mullers’e translation of mada- 
chyutam. It might be rendered also ‘sped iD thy rapturous joy.’ 
‘ Rauschbeschleunigteu.’—Ludwig, TheDrogon: Ahi. 



350 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

6 Let us praise him who made these worlds and crea¬ 

tures, all things that after him sprang into being. 
Fain would we win by song a friend in Indra, and 
wait upon our lord with adoration. 

7 Flying in terror from the snort of Vritra, all deities 

who were thy friends forsook thee. 

So, Indra, be thy friendship with the Maruts: in all 
these battles thou shalt be the victor. 

8 Thrice-sixty Maruts, waxen strong, were with thee, 

like piles of beaming light, worthy of worship. 
We come to thee: grant us a happy portion. Let 
us adore thy might with this oblation. 

9 A sharpened weapon is the host of Maruts. Who, 

Indra, dares withstand thy bolt of thunder ? 
Weaponless are the Asuras, the godless: scatter 
them with thy wheel, impetuous hero. 

10 To him the strong and mighty, most auspicious, 

send up the beauteous hymn for sake of cattle. 
Lay on his body many songs for Indra invoked with 
song, for will not he regard them ? 

11 To him, the mighty, who accepts laudation, send 

forth thy thought as by a boat o’er rivers. 

Stir with thy hymn the body of the famous and 
dearest one, for will not he regard it ? 

12 Serve him with gifts of thine which Indra welcomes : 

praise with fair praise, invite him with thine 
homage. 


7 With the Maruts: as they alone stood by him in the oonflict. 

8 Thrice-sixty: or siity-three, according to Sayana, nine companies 
consisting of seven each. See Prof. Cowell’s Note in Wilson’s Trans¬ 
lation. 

Like piles of beaming light : ‘ like cows gathered together.’— 
Wilson; ‘like morning stars.’—Grussmann. I have followed Prof. 
Ludwig. 

9 With thy wheel or discus, a sharp-edged quoit used as a weapon 
of war, 




HYMN 85.] 


THE RIG VEDA 


3S1 


Draw near, O singer, and refrain from outcry. Make 
thy voice heard, for will not he regard it ? 

13 The black drop sank in Ansumati’s bosom, advancing 

with ten thousand round about it. 

Indra with might longed for it as it panted: the 
hero-hearted laid aside his weapons. 

14 I saw the drop in the far distance moving, on the 

slope bank of Ansumati’s river, 

Like a black cloud that sank into the water. Heroes, 
I send you forth. Go, fight in battle. 

15 And then the drop in Ansumati’s bosom, splendid 

with light, assumed its proper body ; 

And Indra, with Brihaspati to aid him, conquered 
the godless tribes that came against him. 

16 Then, at thy birth, thou wast the foeman, Indra, of 

those the seven who ne’er bad met a rival. 

The hidden pair, the heavens and earth, thou found- 
est, and to the mighty worlds thou gavest pleasure. 


17 So, thunder-armed! thou with thy bolt of thunder didst 
boldly smite that power which cone might equal; 



12 Draw near, 0 singer, and refrain from outcry: ‘ 0 priest, adorn 
thyself, grieve not (for poverty).’—Wilson. 


13 The black drop : the darkened moon. Anmmati: a mystical 
river of the air. Ten thousand: probably, demons of darkness; 
the numerals are without a substantive. As it panted: while 
striving against its assailants. Laid aside his weapons: after 
conquering the demons and restoring the darkened moon. 

14 Indra addresses the Maruts. 

Sayana explains stanzas 13—15 differently, in accordance with a 
legend which was probably suggested by this passage. He takes 
drapsah krishnah, black drop, to mean ‘ the swift moving Krishnah,’ 
an Asura or demon who with ten thousand of his kind had occupied 
the banks of the river Ansumati, which, he says, is the Yamuna or 
Jumna, and was there defeated by Indra, Brinaspati, and the Maruts. 
See Prof. Cowell’s Note in Wilson's Translation. 

16 The seven: Krishna, Vritra, Namuchi, Slarabara, and others.—S, 



332 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V1H. 

With weapons broughtest low the might of Suah^a, 
and, Indra, foundest by thy strength the cattle. 

18 Then wast thou, chieftain of all living mortals, the 

very mighty slayer of the Vritras. 

Then didst thou set the obstructed rivers flowing, 
and win the floods that were enthralled by D&sas. 

19 Most wise is he, rejoicing in libations, splendid as 

day, resistless in his anger. 

He only doth great deeds, the only hero, sole Vritra- 
slayer he, with none beside him. 

20 Indra is Vritra’s slayer, man’s sustainer : he must be 

called, with fair praise let us call him. 

Maghavan is our helper, our protector, giver of 
strengthening food to make us famous 

21 This Indra, Vritra-slayer, this Kibhukshan, even at 

his birth, was meet for invocation. 

Doer of many deeds for man’s advantage, like Soma 
quaffed, for friends we must invoke him. 

HYMN LXXXVI. ludra. 

0 Indra, lord of light, what joys thou broughtest 
from the Asuras, 

Prosper therewith, O Maghavan, him who lauds 
that deed, and those whose grass is trimmed for 
thee. 

2 The unwasting share of steeds and kine which, Indra, 
thou hast fast secured, 

Grant to the worshipper who presses Soma and 
gives guerdon, not unto the churl. 

21 Ribhukshan: or, lord of Ribhus. 

The Rishi is Rebha of the family of Kasyapa. The metres are 
Atijagati in stanzas 10, 13; Upariahtadbfihati in 11, 12; Trishtupin 
14; Jagatl in 15; and Brihati in the rest of the hymn. 

1 Joys: riches.—S. From the Asuras: from the powerful Rik- 
shasas.—S. 

2 Gives guerdon: liberally rewards the priests. 




BYMN 86.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


333 


3 The riteless, godless man who sleeps, O Indra, hia 

unbroken sleep,— 

May he by following his own devices die. Hide 
from him wealth that nourishes. 

4 Whether, 0 Sakra, thou be far, or, Vjitra-slayer, 

, near at hand, 

Thence by heaven-reaching songs he who hath pressed 
the juice invites thee with thy long-maned steeds. 

5 Whether thou art in heaven’s bright sphere, or in 

the region of the sea ; 

Whether, chief Vritra-slayer, in some place on earth, 
or in the firmament, approach. 

6 Thou Soma-drinker, lord of strength, beside our flow¬ 

ing Soma-juice 

Delight us with thy bounty rich in pleasantness, O 
Indra, with abundant wealth. 

7 O Indra, turn us not away : be: the companion of 

our feast. 

For thou art our protection, yea, thou art our kin : 
O Indra, turn us not away. 

8 Sit down with us, O Indra, sit beside the juice to 

drink the meath. 

Show forth great favour to the singer, Maghavan ; 
Indra, with us, beside the juice. 

9 O caster of the stone, nor gods nor mortals have 

attained to thee. 

Thou in thy might surpassest all that hath been 
made : the gods have not attained to thee. 

10 Of one accord they made and formed for kingship 

Indra, the hero who in all encounters overcometh, 
Most eminent for power, destroyer in the conflict, 
fierce and exceeding strong, .'stalwart and full oi 
vigour. 

11 Bards joined in song to Indra so that he might 

drink the Soma-juice, 

The lord of light, that he whose laws stand fast 
might aid with power and with the help he gives. 



334 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII. 

12 The holy sages form a ring, looking and singing to 

the Ram. 

Inciters, full of vigour, not to be deceived, are with 
the chanters, nigh to hear. 

13 Loudly I call that Indra, Maghavan the mighty, 

who evermore possesses power, ever resistless. 
Holy, most liberal, may he lead us on to riches, and, 
thunder-armed, make all our pathways pleasant 
for us. 

14 Thou knowest well, 0 Sakra, thou most potent, 

with thy strength, Indra, to destroy these castles. 
Before thee, thunder-armed ! all beings tremble : the 
heavens and earth before thee shake with terror. 

15 May thy truth, Indra, wondrous hero! be my guard: 

bear me o’er much woe, thunderer! as over floods. 
When, Indra, wilt thou honour us with opulence, 
all-nourishing and much-to-be-desired, O king ? 

HYMN LXXXVII. indra. 

To Indra sing a S£ma hymn, a lofty song to lofty 
sage, 

To him who guards the Law, inspired, and fain for 
praise. 

2 Thou, Indra, art the conqueror : thou gavest splend¬ 

our to the Sun. 

Maker of all things, thou art mighty and all-god. 

3 Radiant with light thou wentest to the sky, the 

luminous realm of heaven. 

The deities, Indra, strove to win thee for their friend. 


12 The Ram : Indra See 1.51. 1, and VJII. 2. 40. Inciters: 
apparently, the gods themselves. 

The Rishi is Nrimedha of the family of Angiras. The metre is 
Kakup in stanzas 7, 10, 11; Pura ushnih in 9, 12, and Usbnih in the 
rest of the hymn. 

2 AU-god: vitvadevah : ‘the lord of all the gods.’—Wilson. 

3 Unconcealable : as the Sun-god. 



HYMN 88.] THE RIG VEDA. 336 

4 Come unto us, O Indra, dear, still conquering, un- 

concealable, 

Vast as a mountain spread on all sides, lord of heaven. 

5 O truthful Soma-drinker, thou art mightier than 

both the worlds. 

Thou strengthenest him who pours libation, lord of 
heaven. 

6 For thou art he, O Indra, who sformeth all castles 

of the foe, 

Slayer of Dasyus, man’s supporter, lord of heaven. 

7 Now have we, Indra, friend of song, sent our great 

wishes forth to thee, 

Coming like floods that follow floods. 

8 As rivers swell the ocean, so, hero, our prayers 

increase thy might, 

Though of thyself 0 thunderer, waxing day by day. 

9 With holy song they bind to the bioad wide-yoked 

car the bay steeds of the rapid god, 

Bearers of Indra, yoked by word. 

10 0 Indra, bring great strength to us, bring valour, 

Satakratu, thou most active, bring 
A hero conquering in war. 

11 For, gracious Satakratu, thou hast ever been a mother 

and a sire to us, 

So now for bliss we pray to thee. 

12 To thee, strong, much-invoked, who showest forth 

thy strength, 0 Satakratu, do 1 speak : 

So grant thou us heroic strength. 

HYMN LXXXVUI. Indra. 

O Thunderer:, zealous worshippers gave thee drink 
this time yesterday. 

7 Coming like floods: in crowds. But tho half-line is very obscure. 
'As men going by water (splash their friends) with handfuls.’— 
Wilson. 

10 A hero : an heroic son. 

The Rishi is Npmedha. The metre is Priigatha. 



336 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VI11. 

So, Indra, listen here to those who bring the laud : 
come near unto our dwelling-place. 

2 Lord of bay steeds, fair-helmed, rejoice thee: this 

we crave. Here the disposers wait on thee. 

Thy loftiest glories claim our lauds beside the juice, 
0 Indra, lover of the song. 

3 Turning, as ’twere, to meet the Sun, enjoy from 

Indra all good things. 

When he who will be born is born with power we 
look to treasures as our heritage. 

4 Praise him who sends us wealth, whose bounties 

injure none: good are the gifts which Indra grants. 
He is not wroth with one who satisfies his wish: 
he turns his mind to giving boons. 

5 Thou in thy battles, Indra, art subduer of all hostile 

bands. 

Father art thou, all-conquering, cancelling the curse, 
thou victor of the vanquisher. 

6 The earth and heaven cling close to thy victorious 

might, as sire and mother to their child. 

When thou attackest Vritra all the hostile bands 
shrink and faint, Indra, at thy wrath. 

7 Bring to your aid the eternal one, who shoots and 

none may shoot at him, 

Inciter, swift, victorious, best of charioteers, Tugrya’s 
unvanquished strengthener; 

8 The arranger of things unarranged, e’en Satakratu, 

source of might, 

Indra, the friend of all, for succour we invoke, guardian 
of treasure, sending wealth. 

2 Disposers: the priests whu order religious ceremonies. 

3 This stanza, is difficult aud obscure. Mahidhara's explanation 
ia: “The gathering (rajs) proceeding to the sun distribute all Indra’s 
treasures (to living beings, sc. as rain, corn, etc.); may we too by 
our power leave those treasures as an inheritance to him who has been 
or will be born.” See Professor Cowell’s Note in Wilson’s Translation. 

7 Tugrya is Bhujyu, the son of Tugra. See Vol. I., Index. 

8 The arranger of things unarranged: ‘ the conseorator of others 
but himself consecrated by none.’—Wilson. 



HYMN 89.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 

HYMN LXXXIX. 


337 


Indra. Vak. 


I move before thee here present in person, and all 
the deities follow behind ine. 

When, Indra, thou securest me my portion, with me 
thou shalt perform heroic actions. 

2 The food of meath in foremost place I give thee, 

thy Soma shall be pressed, thy share appointed. 
Thou on my right shalt be my friend and comrade : 
then shall we two smite dead full many a foeman. 

3 Striving for strength bring forth a laud to Indra, 

a truthful hymn if he in truth existeth. 

One and another say, There is no Indra. Who hath 
beheld him ? Whom then shall v'e honour ? 

4 Here am I, look upon me here, O singer. All that 

existeth I surpass in greatness. 

The holy law’s commandments make me mighty. 
Rending with strength I x - end the worlds asunder. 

5 When the Law’s lovers mounted and approached me 

as I sate lone upon the dear sky’s summit, 

Then spake my spirit to the heart within me, My 
friends have cried unto me witli their children. 

6 All these thy deeds must be declared at Soma-feasts, 

wrought, Indra Maghavan, for him who sheds 
the juice, 


The Rishi is said to be Nema of the family of Bhriguj but stanzas 
4, 5 are ascribed to Indra, The metre is Jagati in stanza 6, Anush- 
tup in 7, 8, 9, and Trishtup in the rest of tin} bymu. 

1 This stanza is spoken by Agni. 

2 Indra answers. 

3 Addressed to the priests. One and anothir : nema: but according 
to Sayana, Nema is the name of the Risk;. ‘Nema says, “verily 
there is no Indra.’’ ’—Wilson. 

4 Indra speaks this and the following stance. 

5 The Law’s lovers: the priests who in sac .-ifice ascend to Indra. 

6 The priest addresses Iudra. Sarabha: a Rishi of that name.— 
Sayana. The original hymn appears to end with this stanza. 

22 



338 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VIIt. 


When thou didst open wealth heaped up by many, 
brought from far away, to Sarabha, the Rishi’s 
kiri. 

7 Now run ye forth your several ways : he is not here 

who kept you back. 

For hath not Indra sunk his bolt deep down in 
Vritra’s vital part ? 

8 On-rushing with the speed of thought within the 

iron fort he pressed : 

The eagle went to heaven and brought the Soma to 
the thunderer. 

9 Deep in the ocean lies the bolt with waters compassed 

round about, 

And in continuous onward flow the floods their 
tribute bring to it. 

10 When, uttering words which no one comprehended, 

Vak, queen of gods, the gladdener, was seated, 
The heaven’s four regions drew forth drink and 
vigour : now whither hath her noblest portion 
vanished ? 

11 The deities generated V&k the goddess, and animals 

of every figure speak her. 

May she, the gladdener, yielding food and vigour, 
the milch-cow V&k, approach us meetly lauded. 

7 Addressed to the waters of heaven after Indra’s battle with 
Vritra. 

8 He : the eagle or falcon. The iron fort: the strong-hold in 
which the Soma was kept. 

9 In the ocean: as produced naturally in the sea of air. 

10 This and the following stanza have no apparent connexion with 
what precedes. Vdk: or Vach, vox, voice, or Speech personified. 
Her unintelligible words are the thunder. Her noblest portion: 
according to Sayana, the rain which follows thunder. Or the 
thunder itself may be intended. See Prof. Cowell's Note in Wilson’s 
Translation. Was seated: at the sacrifice offered to her. 

11 Speak her: articulately-speaking men and lower animals all 
derive their voices from her. 



tftMN 90.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


339 


12 Step forth, with wider stride, my comrade Vishnu; 
make room, O Dyaus, and give the bolt free 
passage. 

Let us slay Vritra, let us drain the rivers : let them 
flow loosed at the command of 'tndra. 

HYMN XC. Various. 

Yea, specially that mortal man hath toiled for service 
of the gods, 

"Who quickly hath brought near Mitra and Varuna 
to share his sacrificial gifts. 

2 Supreme in sovran power, far-sighted, chiefs and 

kings, most swift to hear from far away, 

Both, wondrously, set them in motion as with 
arms, in company with Surya’s beams. 

3 The rapid messenger who runs before you, Mitra 

Varuna, wuth iron head, swift to the draught, 

4 He whom no man may question, none may summon 

back, who stands not still for colloquy,— 

From hostile clash with him keep ye us safe this 
day ; keep us in safety with your arms. 

5 To Aryaman and Mitra sing a reverent song, O 

pious one, 

A pleasant hymn that shall protect, to Varuna : 
sing forth a laud unto the kings. 


12 This stanza, which is out of place here, is spoken by Indra 
when he ia about to attack Vritra. See IV. 18. 11, 


The deities are, stanzas 1—5 Mitra-Varuna; 5, 6 the Adityas; 
7, 8 the Asvins; 9, 10 Vayu; 11, 12 Surya; 13 Usbas or Dawn; 
14 Pavamana (Vayu or Agni); 15, 1G the Cow. The Risbi is Jama- 
dagni of the family of Bhrigu. 

The metre is Pragatba in stanzas 1, 2, and 5—12; GAyatri in 3; 
Byihati in 13; and Triahtup in 14—16. 

3 The rapid, messenger: the lightning, as one of the forms of Agni, 




340 THE HYMNS OF [EOOK Till. 

6 The true, red treasure they have sent, one only son 

born of the three. 

They, the immortal ones, never deceived, survey the 
families of mortal men. 

7 My songs are lifted up, and acts most splendid are 

to be performed. 

Come hither, ye N&satyas, with accordant mind, 
to meet and to enjoy my gifts. 

8 Lords of brave steeds, when we invoke your bounty 

which no demon checks, 

Both of you, furthering our eastward-offered 
praise, come, chiefs whom Jamadagni lauds ! 

9 Come, Vdyu, drawn by fair hymns, to our sacrifice 

that reaches heaven. 

Poured on the middle of the straining-cloth, and 
cooked, this bright drink hath been offered thee. 

10 He comes by straightest paths, as ministering priest, 

to taste the sacrificial gifts. 

Then, lord of harnessed teams ! drink of the twofold 
draught, bright Soma mingled with the milk. 

11 Verily, Surya, thou art great; truly, Aditya, thou 

art great. 

As thou art great indeed, thy greatness is admired : 
yea, verily, thou, god, art great. 

12 Yea, Shrya, thou art great in fame : thou evermore, 

O god, art great. 

Thou by thy greatness art the gods’ high-priest, 
divine, far-spread unconquerable light. 

13 She yonder, bending lowly down, clothed in red 

hues and rich in rays, 

Is seen, advancing as it were with various tints, 
amid the ten surrounding arms. 


6 The true, red treasure: the Sun. The three: heaven, mid-air, 
and earth. 

13 She yonder: Tishas or Dawn, The ten surrounding arms: the 
ten regions of the world, 



BYMlV 91.] 


THE BIG VEDA. 


341 


14 Past and gone are three mortal generations: the 

fourth and last into the Sun hath entered. 

He mid the worlds- his lofty place hath taken. Into 
green plants is gone the Purifier. 

15 The Rudras’ mother, daughter of the Yasus, centre 

of nectar, the Adityas’ sister— 

To folk who understand will I proclaim it—slay ye 
not Aditi, the cow, the sinless. 

16 Weak-minded men have as a cow adopted me who 

came hither from the gods, a goddess, 

Who, skilled in eloquence, her voice uplifteth, who 
standeth near at hand with all devotions. 

HYMN XCI. Agni. 

Lord of the house, sage, ever young, high power of 
life, O Agni, god, 

Thou givest to thy worshipper. 

14 Three mortal generations : according to the legend, Prajapati 
produced in succession three kinds of creatures who all died. The 
fourth generation lived and enjoyed the light and warmth of the Sun. 
See Professor Cowell’s Note in Wilson’s Translation. 

Into green plants: Sayana explains karitah £,s the quarters of the 
sky, and pavamdnah (the Purifier) as Vayu cr the Wind. Professor 
Graasmann takes pavamAnah, to be the Soma, and haritah to be the 
horses of the Sun. I have followed Professor Ludwig’s interpretation ; 
but I find the stanza almost unintelligible. 

15 Centre of nectar: or, of amrit, or immortality, or the world of 
the immortal gods. The cow : the earthly cow, as the type of Aditi or 
universal Nature, must not be slain. The stanza is spoken by the 
priest who has received the cow as his reward. 

16- Weak-minded men: “ Men are too feeble in their intellect to com¬ 
prehend me in my true form and my real nature: they can only 
understand my worth in the shape of a cow.”—See Ludwig, R. V., 
IV. 245, 246. 

The concluding stanza is spoken by Aditi as a cow. 


The Rishi is Prayoga of the family of Bhrigu, or one or more of 
others named in the Index of Hymns. The metre is Gayatri. 




342 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII, 

2 So with our song that prays and serves, attentive, 

lord of spreading light, 

Agni, bring hitherward the gods. 

3 For, ever-youthful one, with thee, best furtherer, as 

our ally, 

We overcome, to win us strength. 

4 As Aurva Bhrigu used, as Apnav£na used, I call 

the pure 

Agni who clothes him with the sea. 

5 I call the sage who sounds like wind, the might that 

like Parjanya roars, 

Agni who clothes him with the sea. 

6 As Savitar’s productive power, as him who sends 

down bliss, I call 

Agni who clothes him with the sea, 

7 Hither, for powerful kinship, I call Agni, him who 

prospers you, 

Most frequent at our solemn rites. 

8 That through this famed one’s power, he may stand 

by us even as Twashtar comes 
"Unto the forms that must be shaped. 

9 This Agni is the lord supreme above all glories mid 

the gods: 

May he come nigh to us with strength. 

10 Here praise ye him the most renowned of all tfle 

ministering priests, 

Agni, the chief at sacrifice ; 

11 Piercing, with purifying flame, enkindled in our 

homes, most high, 

Swiftest to hear from far away. 


4 Aurva Bhrigu : or, perhaps, Aurva and Bhrigu. The ancient 
Rishi Aurva is said to have been the grandson of Bhrigu. Apnavdna : 
another ancient Rishi, mentioned in connexion with the Bhrigus and 
the earliest worship of Agni, in Booh IV, 7. 1. 



HYMN 91.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


S43 


12 Sage, laud the mighty one who wins the spoil of 

victory like a steed, 

And, Mitra-like, unites the folk. 

13 Still turning to their aim in thee, the oblation- 

bearer’s sister hymns 
Have come to thee before the wind. 

14 The waters find their place in him, for whom the 

threefold sacred grass 
Is spread unbound, unlimited. 

15 The station of the bounteous god hath, through his 

aid which none impair, 

A pleasant aspect like the Sun. 

16 Blazing with splendour, Agni, god, through pious 

gifts of sacred oil, 

Bring thou the gods and worship them. 

17 The gods as mothers brought thee forth, the im¬ 

mortal sage, 0 Angiras, 

The bearer of our gifts to heaven. 

18 Wise Agni, gods established thee, the seer, the 

noblest messenger, 

As bearer of our sacred gifts. 

19 No cow have I to call mine own, no axe at hand 

wherewith to work, 

Yet what is here I bring to thee. 


12 Sage : the priest is addressed. 

13 Before the wind: or, in front of the wind, with which the flame 
is fauned. 

14 “The waters rest in Agni, who abides as lightning in the firma¬ 
ment.”—Note in Wilson's Translation whict 1 have followed closely 
in this stanza. 

15 Or, a comma being substituted for the full stop at the end of 
the preceding stanza, and pado.m (station) taken as in apposition to 
padam (place) in 14 : The station of the bounteous : he hath, through 
his aid which none impair, A pleasant aspect like the Sun. 

19 As Prayoga has no cow and no axe to cut wood, Agni is asked in 
this and the two following stanzas to dispense with the customary 
offerings of milk and to accept such wood as the worshipper can 
pick up. 



THE HYMNS OF 


344 


[book nit 


20 O Agni, whatsoever be the fuel that we lay for 

thee, 

Be pleased therewith, most youthful god. 

21 That which the white-ant eats away, that over which 

the emmet crawls— 

May all of this be oil to thee. 

22 When he enkindles Agni, man should with his heart 

attend the song: 

I with the priests have kindled him. 

HYMN XC1I. Agni. 

That noblest furtherer hath appeared, to whom 
men bring their holy works. 

Our songs of praise have risen aloft to Agni who 
was born to give the Arya strength. 

2 Agni of Divod&sa turned, as ’twere in majesty, to 

the gods. 

Onward he sped along the mother earth, and took 
his station in the height of heaven. 

3 Him before whom the people shrink when he 

performs his glorious deeds, 

Him who wins thousands at the worship of the gods, 
himself, that Agni, serve with songs. 

4 The mortal man whom thou wouldst lead to opulence, 

O Yasu, he who brings thee gifts, 


22 With hit heart: a devout spirit will compensate the want of 
milk and properly prepared fuel. 

Agni and the Maruts are the doities of stanza 14. The Rishi is 
Sobhari of the family of Kanva. The metres are, 1 — 4, 6 Brihati; 
5 Viradrupa; 7, 9, 11, 13 Satobrihati; 8, 12 Kakup; 10 Gayatri 
hrasiyasi (6x2 + 7); and 14 Anush tup. 

2 Of Divoddsa: whom Divodasa especially worshipped and claimed 
as his tutelary god. The stanza is obscure, and my translation 
founded on Professor Roth’s interpretation of praviv&vrite, which has 
been accepted by Professor Cowell, must be regarded as conjectural. 
See Wilson’s Translation and Note. 



HYMN 92.] 


TUB RIG VEDA. 


345 


He, Agni, wins himself a hero singing lauds, yea, 
one who feeds a thousand men. 

5 He with the steed wins spoil eve a in the fenckd^fort, 

and gains imperishable fame. 

In thee, 0 lord of wealth, continually we lay all 
precious offerings to the gods. 

6 To him who dealeth out all wealth, who is the cheer¬ 

ful priest of men, 

To him, like the first vessels filled with savoury juice, 
to Agni go the songs of praise. 

7 Votaries, richly-gifted, deck him with their songs, 

even as the steed who draws the car. 

On both, strong lord of men ! on child and grand¬ 
son pour the bounties which our nobles give. 

8 Sing forth to him, the holy, most munificent, sublime 

with his refulgent glow, 

To Agni, ye Upastutas. 

9 Worshipped with gifts, enkindled, splendid, Maghavan 

shall win himself heroic fame. 

And will not his most newly shown benevolence 
come to us with abundant strength ? 

10 Priest, presser of the juice ! praise now the dearest 

guest of all our friends, 

Agni, the driver of the cars. 

11 Who, finder-out of treasures open and concealed, 

bringeth them hither, holy one ; 

4 A hero : a brave son. 

7 The second line is obscure. “ Graceful lord of men, grant 
wealth to us rich in children and grandchilc ren.”—Wilson. 

8 Upastutas: singers so named after the Rishi Upastuta. See 
I. 36. 10. 

10 Priest, presser of the juice : dsdva : stotah. —Sayana. ‘Singer of 
hymns.’—Wilson. 

11 Whose waves: billowy floods of flarr crushing on like waters 
falling down a precipice. “ Whose (flan es), as he hastens to wage 
the battle by means of our sacred rite, are hard to be passed through 
as waves rushing down a declivity.”—Wilson. See also Pischel, 
Vedische Studien, p. 181. 



346 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK VIII. 


Whose waves, as in a cataract, are hard to pass, 
when he, through song, would win him strength. 

12 Let not the noble guest, Agni, be wroth with us : 

by many a man his praise is sung, 

Good herald, skilled in sacrifice. 

13 0 Vasu, Agni, let not them be harmed who come in 

any way with lauds to thee. 

Even the lowly, skilled in rites, with offered gifts, 
seeketh thee for the envoy’s task. 

14 Friend of the Maruts, Agni, come with Rudras to 

the Soma-draught, 

To Sobhari’s fair song of praise, and be thou joyful 
in the light. 


Through song : inspirited and strengthened by our hymns. 
13 For the envoy’s task : to bear his oblations to the gods. 



VALAKHILYA HYMNS. 


HYMN I. Indra. 

To you will I sing Indra’s praise who gives good 
gifts as well we know ; 

The praise of Maghavan who, rich in treasure, aids 
his singers with wealth thousandfold. 

2 As with a hundred hosts, he :rushes boldly on, and 

for the offerer slays his foes. 

As from a mountain flow the water-brooks, thus flow 
his gifts who feedeth many a one. 

3 The drops effused, the gladdening draughts, 0 Indra, 

lover of the song, 

As waters seek the lake where they are wont to 
rest, fill thee, for bounty, thunderer. 

4 The matchless draught that strengthens and gives 

eloquence, the sweetest of the meath drink thou, 
That in thy joy thou mayst scatter thy gifts o’er us, 
plenteously even as the dust 

See Hymn XLIX., Note. Professor Cowell’s version of these eleven 
Apocryphal hymns will be found in Appendix I. of Wilson’s Transla¬ 
tion, Vol. V. Professor Cowell has consulted “ the St. Petersburg 
Dictionary, Grassmaun’s Lexicon and translation, and Ludwig’s trans¬ 
lation and notes,” and in addition to the guidance of these authorities, 
lam indebted to him for Borne improve ments on the version which 
I had previously prepared. The Rishi of Hymn I. is Praskanva of 
the family of Kanva. The metres are Brihati and Satobrihati in 
alternate stanzas. 

2 As with, a hundred hosts: 1 like a weapon with a hundred edges.’_ 

Cowell.. 

4 That... gives eloquence: vivahshanam: from vach; ‘swelling, - 
from vaksk = uksh. —Roth, and Cowell. 

Plenteously, even as the dust: the meani ng of the text is obscure. 
The St. Petersburg Lexicon takes dhrishad ■= drishad, the nethor 
millstone; ‘just as the mill-stone pours out meal.’—Cowell. 



348 TUB HYMNS OF [VlLAKHfLYA, 

5 Come quickly to our laud, urged on by Soma-pressers 

like a horse— 

Laud, godlike Indra, which milch-kine make sweet 
for thee : with Kanva’s sons are gifts for thee. 

6 With homage have we sought thee as a hero, strong, 

preeminent, with unfailing wealth. 

0 thunderer, as a plenteous spring pours forth its 
stream, so, Indra, flow our songs to thee. 

7 If now thou art at sacrifice, or if thou art upon the earth, 
Come thence, high-thoughted ! to our sacrifice with 

the swift, come, mighty with the mighty ones. 

8 The active, fleet-foot, tawny coursers that are thine 

are swift to victory, like the Wind, 

Wherewith thou goest round to visit Manus’ seed, 
wherewith all heaven is visible. 

9 Indra, from thee so great we crave prosperity in 

wealth of kine, 

As, Maghavan, thou favouredst Medhyatithi, and, 
in the fight, Nipatithi. 

10 As, Maghavan, to Kanva, Trasadasyu, and to 
Paktha and Dasavraja ; 

As, Indra, to Gosarya and Rijisvan thou vouch- 
safedst wealth in kine and gold. 

HYMN II. Indra. 

Sakra I praise, to win his aid, far-famed, exceeding 
bountiful, 

Who gives, as ’twere in thousands, precious wealth 
to him who sheds the juice and worships him. 

7 The swift and the mighty ones, are Indra’s horses. 

9 Medhydtithi; a Rishl whose name has frequently occurred. 
Nipdtithi: mentioned only here and Valakhilya Hymn III. 

10 Trasadasyu: see. Vol. I., Index. Paktha: a favourite of the 
Asvins. See VIII. 22. 10. Dasavraja: see VIII. 8. 20. Gosarya: 
see VIII. 8. 20. Rijisvan: see Vol. I., Index. 

The Rishi is Pusbtigu of the family of Kanva. The metres are 
Brihati and Satobrihati iu alternate stanzas. 



HYMN 2 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


349 


2 Arrows with hundred points, unconquerable, are this 

Indra’s mighty arms in war. 

He streams on liberal worshippers like a hill with 
springs, when juices poured have gladdened him. 

3 What time the flowing Soma-drops have gladdened 

with their taste the friend, 

Like water, gracious lord! were my libations made, 
like milch-kine to the worshipper. 

4 To him the peerless, who is cal ,ing you to give you 

aid, forth flow the drops of pleasant meath. 

The Soma-drops which call on 1;hee, 0 gracious lord, 
have brought thee to our hymns of praise. 

5 He rushes hurrying like a steeci to Soma that adorns 

our rite, 

Which hymns make sweet to thee, lover of pleasant 
food. The call to Paura thou dost love. 

6 Praise the strong, grasping hero, winner of the spoil, 

ruling supreme o’er mighty wealth. 

Like a full spring, O thunderer, from thy store hast 
thou poured on the worshipper evermore. 

7 Now whether thou be far away, or in the heavens, 

or on the earth, 

0 Indra, mighty-thoughted, harnessing thy bays, 
come lofty with the lofty ones. 

8 The bays who draw thy chariot, steeds who injure 

none, surpass the wind’s impetuous strength— 
With whom thou sileneest the enemy of man, with 
whom thou goest round the sky. 

9 0 gracious hero, may we leai n anew to know thee 

as thou art: 


5 The call to Paura: the invitation to Paura’s house. According 
to Professor Roth paura means the filler, the satisfier : ‘ thou approv- 
est the summons to the satisfying beverage.’—Cowell. See V. 74. 4. 
7 This stanza is almost a repetition of stanza 7 of Hymn I. 

9 Etaea : see I. 61. 15. Vasa; mentioned as a favourite of the 
Asvins in X. 40. 7. 




350 


THE RIGYEDA. 


vAlakuilta , 


As in decisive fight thou holpest Etasa, or Vasa 
’gainst Dasavraja, 

10 As, Maghavan, to Kanva at the sacred feast, to 
Dlrghanitha thine home-friend, 

As to Gosarya thou, stone-darter, gavest wealth, 
give me a gold-bright stall of kine. 

HYMN III. Indra. 

As with Manu Samvarani, Indra, thou drankest 
Soma-juice, 

And, Maghavan, with Nip&tithi, Medhy&tithi, with 
Pushtigu and Srushtigu.— 

2 The son of Prishadv&na was Praskapva’s host, who 

lay decrepit and forlorn. 

Aided by thee the Rishi Dasyave-vrika strove to 
obtain thousands of kine. 

3 Call hither with thy newest song Indra who lacks 

not hymns of praise, 

Him who observes and knows, the inspirer of the 
sage, him who seems eager to enjoy. 

4 He unto whom they sang the seven-headed hymn, 

three-parted, in the loftiest place, 

He sent his thunder down on all these living things, 
and so displayed heroic might. 

Dasavraja : said iu stanza 10 of Hymn I. to have been helped by 
Indra. 

10 Dlrghanitha: Professor Ludwig takes this word to be an 
adjective qualifying medke adhvare, ‘at the sacrificial feast of long 
duration.’ 

A gold-bright stall of Icine : according to Professor Ludwig, a stall 
graced with bay steeds, would be a better translation. 

The Rishi is Pushtigu of the family of Kanva. The metres are 
Brihati and Satobrihati in alternate stanzas. 

1 Sdmvarani: son of the Vedic Rishi Samvarana. See V. 33. 10. 
At the end of the stanza, so drink with us, is to be understood. 

2 Forlorn : rejected and cast out by his kiudred. Dasyave-vrika : 
literally, the Wolf-to-the Dasyu. 

4 The seven-headed : sung by seven heavenly singers. 




HYMN 4 ] THE RIGVEPA. 351 

5 We invocate that Indra who bestoweth precious 

things on us. 

Now do we know his newest favour ; may we gain 
a stable that is full of kine. 

6 He whom thou aidest, gracious lord, to give again, 

obtains great wealth to nourisli him. 

We with our Soma ready, lover of the song ! call, 
Indra Maghavan, on thee. 

7 Ne’er art thou fruitless, Indra ; ne’er dost thou 

desert the worshipper: 

But now, 0 Maghavan, thy bounty as a god is 
poured forth ever more and more. 

8 He who hath overtaken Krivi with his might, and 

silenced Sushna with death-bolts,— 

When he supported yonder heaven and spread it 
out, then first the son of earth was born. 

9 Good lord of wealth is he to whom all Aryas, D&sas 

here belong. 

Directly unto thee, the pious Rusama Paviru, is that 
wealth brought nigh. 

10 In zealous haste the singers have sung forth a song 
distilling oil and rich in sweets. 

Riches have spread among us and heroic strength, 
with us are flowing Soma-drops. 

HYMN IV. Indra. 

As, Sakra, thou with Manu called Vivasvan drankest 
Soma-juice, 

As, Indra, thou didst love^ the* hymn which Trita 
sang, enjoy thyself with Ayu now. 

9 Rusama Paviru: the Rusamas are mentioned in V. 30. 13—15. 
The name of Paviru does not occur again. 

The Rishi is Ayu. The metres are Brihati and Stobrihati in alter¬ 
nate stanzas. 

1 Vivasv&n : or Vivasvat, was the father of Manu who is generally 
called Vaivasvata, Triin : a Rishi favoured by India. See 1. 52. ", 
and 105. 





352 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ 1 VlLAKEllYA . 


2 As thou with M&tarisvan, Medhya, Prishadhra, hast 

cheered thee, Indra, with pressed juice, , 

Drunk Soma with Rijftnas, Syftmarasmi, by 
Dasonya’s, Dasasipra’s side. 

3 ’Tis he who made the lauds his own and boldly drank 

the Soma-juice, 

He to whom Vishnu came striding his three wide 
steps, as Mitra’s statutes ordered it. 

4 In whose laud thou didst joy, Indra, at the great 

deed, 0 Satakratu, mighty one ! 

Seeking renown we call thee as the milkers call the 
cow who yields abundant milk. 

5 He is our sire who gives to us, great, mighty, ruling 

as he will. 

Unsought, may he the strong, rich, lord of ample 
wealth, give us of horses and of kine. 

6 He to whom thou, good lord, givest that he may 

give increases wealth that nourishes. 

Eager for wealth we call on Indra, lord of wealth, 
on Satakratu with our lauds. 

7 Never art thou neglectful: thou guardest both races 

with thy care. 

The call on Indra, fourth Aditya! is thine own. 
Amrit is stablished in the heavens. 

8 The offerer whom thou, Indra, lover of the song, 

liberal Maghavan, favourest,— 

As at the call of Kanva so, 0 gracious lord, hear 
thou our songs and eulogy. 

2 Mdtariavan : the Rishi of Hymn VI. of the Valakhilya. Medhya : 
the Rishi of Hymns V. IX. and X. Prishadhra: the Rishi of Hymn 
VIII. Sy&marasmi: mentioned, as a favourite of the Asvins in I. 
112. 16. The names of Rijunas, Dasonya, and Dasasipra do not 
occur again in the Rigveda. 

5 Ruling as he will: ‘ he who acts as the sovereign.’—Cowell. 

7 Both races: gods and men. Fourth Adilya: Yaruna, Mitra, and 
Aryaman being the other three. Amrit: ‘ambrosia.’—Cowell. 

8 As thou hearest, must be supplied at the beginning of the stanza. 




HYMN 5 .] 


THE RIGVEDA. 


353 


9 Sung is the song of ancient time : to Indra have ye 

said the prayer. 

They have sung many a Brihati of sacrifice, poured 
forth the worshipper’s many thoughts. 

10 Indra hath tossed together mighty stores of wealth, 

and both the worlds, yea, and the sun. 

Pure, brightly-shining, mingled with the milk, the 
draughts of Soma have made Indra glad. 

HYMN Y. In dra . 

As highest of the Maghavans, preeminent among 
the bulls, 

Best breaker-down of forts, kine-winner, lord of 
wealth, we seek thee, Indra Maghavan. 

Thou who subduedst Ayu, Kutsa, Atithigva, waxing 
daily in thy might, 

As such, rousing thy power, we invocate thee now, 
thee Satakratu, lord of bays. 

3 The pressing-stones shall pour for us the essence of 

the meath of all, 

Drops that have been pressed out afar among the 
folk, and those that have been pressed near us. 

4 Repel all enmities and keep them far away: let all 

win treasure for their own. 

Even among Sishtas are the stalks that make thee 
glad, where thou with Soma ss.test thee. 


9 Brihati : verse in the Brihati metre. 

The Rishi is Medhya, The metre is Brihati and Satobrihati in 
alternate stanzas. 

1 Highest: or, nearest. The bulls : strong heroes. 

2 Ayu , Kutsa, Atithigva: see I. 53. 10. 

4 Sishtas: apparently a tribe of no groat importance. Stalks: 
of the Soma-plant. 



354 THE HYMNS OF [VaLAKHILT A. 

5 Come, Indra, very near to us with aids of firmly- 

based resolve; 

Come, most auspicious, with thy most auspicious 
help, good kinsman, with good kinsmen, come ! 

6 Bless thou with progeny the chief of men, the lord 

of heroes, victor in the fray. 

Aid with thy powers the men who sing thee lauds 
and keep their spirits ever pure and bright. 

7 May we be such in battle as are surest to obtain thy 

grace: 

With holv offerings and invocations of the gods,we 
mean, that vve may win the spoil. 

8 Thine, lord of bays, am I. Prayer longeth for the 

spoil. Still with thy help I seek the fight. 

So, at the raiders’ head, I, craving steeds and kine> 
unite myself with thee alone. 

HYMN VI. Indra. 

Indra, the poets with their hymns extol this hero 
might of thine : 

They strengthened, loud in song, thy power that drOp- 
peth oil. With hymns the Pauras came to thee. 

2 Through piety they came to Indra for h:s aid, they 
whose libations give thee joy. 

As thou with Krisa and Sarnvarta hast rejoiced, so, 
Indra, be thou glad with us. 


8 At the raiders 1 head: at the head of the band who are going forth 
to seize the cattle of their enemies. Professor Roth thinks that 
viatindm should be read instead of mathindm, and Professor Gi assmann 
translates accordingly, in Anfaug nieiuer Bitten, at the beginning 
of my prayers. 

The Visvedevas are the deities of stanzas 3, 4. The Rishi is 
Matarisvan. The metres are Brihati and Satobrihati in alternate 
stanzas. 

1 Pauras: ‘the offerers.'—Cowell. See \ alakhilya, II. 5. 

2 Krisa: the Rislu of Hymn VII. of the Valakhilya. Sarnvarta : 
not mentioned elsewhere. 



XYMX ?.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


355 


3 Agreeing in your spirit, all ye deities, come nigh 

to us. 

Vasus and Rudras shall come near to give us aid, 
and Maruts listen to our call. 

4 May Pftshan, Vishnu, and Sarasvatl befriend, and 

the seven streams, this call of mine : 

May Waters, Wind, the Mountains, and the Forest- 
lord, and Earth give ear unto my cry. 

5 Indra, with thine own bounteous gift, most liberal of 

the mighty ones, 

Be our boon benefactor, Vritra-slayer, be our feast- 
companion for our weal. 

6 Leader of heroes, lord of battle, lead thou us to 

combat, thou most sapient one. 

High fame is theirs who win by invocations, feasts 
and entertainment of the gods. 

7 Our hopes rest on the faithful one: in Indra is the 

people’s life. 

O Maghavan, come nigh that thou mayst give ua 
aid : make plenteous food stream forth for us. 

8 Thee would we worship, Indra, with our songs of 

praise : O Satakratu, be thou ours. 

Pour down upon Praskanva bounty vast and firm, 
exuberant, that shall never fail. 

HYMN VII. Praskanva’s Gift. 

Great, verily, is Indra’s might. I have beheld, and 
hither comes 

Thy bounty, Dasyave-vrika ! 

4 The Forest-lord : vanaspati : the tall timber tree. 

5 Benefactor: or Bhaga, the god who distributes wealth. 

The Rishi is Krisa. The metres are Anushtup in stanzas 3—5, and 
Gayatri in the rest of the hymn. 

1 Great is Indra’s power, and the gifts which I have received 
from thee, 0 destroyer of the Dasyus, can be compared only to bis 
bounty. Dasyave-vrika, here, is the name, not of the Rishi, but 
6 f a hero who in alliance with the Kanvas has been victorious 14 
bis attack on the hostile barbarians. See Ludwig, Vol. III. p. 164. 


356 THE HYMNS OF [VlLAKHILYA . 

2 A hundred oxen white of hue are shining like the 

stars in heaven, 

So tall, they seem to prop the sky. 

3 Bamboos a hundred, hundred dogs, a hundred skins 

of beasts well-tanned, 

A hundred tufts of Balbaja, four hundred red-hued 
mares are mine. 

4 Blest by the gods, Kaijv&yanas t be ye who spread 

through life on life : 

Like horses have ye stridden forth. 

5 Then men extolled the team of seven : not yet full- 

grown its fame is great. 

The dark mares rushed along the paths, so that no 
eye could follow them. 

HYMN VIII. Praskanva’s Gift. 

Thy bounty, Dasyave-vyika, exhaustless hath dis¬ 
played itself: 

Its fulness is as broad as heaven. 

3 Balbaja: a kind of coarse grass (Eleusine Indica), used in 
religious ceremonies, and for other purposes when plaited. 

4 K&nvdyanas: descendants of Kanva. 

6 The team of seven: ‘ siebengespannes.’—Grassmann; ‘seven- 
yoked team.’—Cowell. But the exact meaning here of s&ptasya is 
uncertain. Professor Roth thinks that it is probably a proper name. 
Professor Ludwig takes it in the sense of a bond of friendship or 
alliance. The dark mares : there is no substantive, and * mares ’ is 
conjecturally supplied. According to Professor Ludwig, the dark 
hosts of the Dasyus conquered by Dasyave-vyika are intended, and 
the whole stanza would be more correctly translated : 

Then no more thought they of the great renown of the collective 
bond. 

The dark tribes rushed along the paths so that no eye could reach 
to them. See Prof. Ludwig’s Commentary, Vol, V. p. 552. 

Agni and Surya are the deities of stanza 5. The Rishi is Prishadhra. 
The metre is Pankti in stanza 5, and Gayatri in the rest of the hymn. 



HYMN 9 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


357 


2 Ten thousand Dasyave-vrika, the son of PAtakratd, 

hath 

From his own wealth bestowed on me. 

3 A hundred asses hath he given, a hundred head of 

fleecy sheep, 

A hundred slaves, and wreaths besides. 

4 There also was a mare led forth, picked out for 

Piltakrata’s sake, 

Not of the horses of the herd. 

5 Observant Agni hath appeared, oblation-bearer with 

his car. 

Agni with his resplendent flame hath shone on high 
as shines the Sun, hath shone: like Sflrya in the 
heavens. 

HYMN IX. Asvins. 

Endowed, 0 gods, with your primeval wisdom, come 
quickly with your chariot, O ye holy. 

Come with your mighty powers, O ye N&satyas; 
come hither, drink ye this the third libation. 

2 The truthful deities, the three-and-thirty, saw you 

approach before the ever-truthl'ul. 

Accepting this our worship and libation, O Asvins 
bright with fire, drink ye the Soma. 

3 Asvins, that work of yours deserves our wonder,— 

the Bull of heaven and earth and air’s mid region ; 

2 The son of Pdtakratd: or, more probably, called Pautakrata 
after hia father Putakratu.—L. 

3 Slaves : ddsdn : conquered barbarians. 

4 Picked out: or, adorned. Putakratd : the wife of P&takratu. 

The Rishi is Medhya. The metre is Trishtup. 

1 Ndsalyas : ‘ truthful ones.’—Cowell. See Vol. I., Index. 

2 The three-and-thirty: or, thrice-eleven. See I. 34. 11. The ever- 
truthful: the Sun, whose approach is heralded by the Asvins. 

3 The Bull: the Sun, whom, as his heralds and revealers, they may 
be said to have created. Thousand promises • ‘ a characteristic peri¬ 
phrasis for the Maghavans, or wealthy nobles.—L, 



358 THE HYMNS OF [VlLAKHILYA. 

Yea, and your thousand promises in battle,—to all of 
these come near and drink beside us. 

A Here is your portion laid for you, ye holy: come to 
these songs of ours, 0 ye N&satyas. 

Drink among us the Soma full of sweetness, and 
with your powers assist the man who worships. 

HYMN X. Visvedevas. 

He whom the priests in sundry ways arranging the 
sacrifice, of one accord, bring hither, 

Who was appointed as a learned Br4hman,—what is 
the sacrifioer’s knowledge of him? 

2 Kindled in many a spot, still One is Agni ; Sftrya is 

One though high o’er all he shineth. 

Illumining this All, still One is Ushas. That which is 
One hath into All developed. 

3 The chariot bright and radiant, treasure-laden, three- 

wheeled, with easy seat, and lightly rolling, 

Which she of wondrous wealth was born to harness,— 
this car of yours I call. Drink what remaineth. 

HYMN XI. Indra-Varuna. 

In offerings poured to you, 0 Indra Varuna, these 
shares of yours stream forth to glorify your state. 
Ye haste to the libations at each sacrifice when ye 
assist the worshipper who sheds the juice. 


The first stanza is addressed to the priests. The Rishi is Medhya. 
The metre is Trishtup. 

1 The hymn appears to consist of unconnected fragments, and the 
purport of this stanza is not obvious. 

3 She of wondrous wealth : Ushas or Dawn. Was born to harness : or, 
as Prof. Cowell translates : ‘ At whose yoking the Dawn was born.’ 
The chariot of the Aavins precedes that of the Dawn. 


The Rishi is Suparna of the family of Kanva. The metre is Jagati. 



HYMN 11 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


359 


2 The waters and the plants, O Imdra Varuna, had 

efficacious vigour, and attained no might: 

Ye who have gone beyond, the pat h of middle air,— 
no godless man is worthy to be called your foe. 

3 True is your Krisa’s word, Indra and Varuna: The 

seven holy voices pour a wave of meath. 

For their sake, lords of splendour ! aid the pious man 
who, unbewildered, keeps you ever in his thoughts. 

4 Dropping oil, sweet with Soma, pouring forth their 

stream, are the seven sisters in ;he seat of sacrifice. 
These, dropping oil, are yours, 0 Indra Varuna: 
with these enrich with gifts and ielp the worshipper. 

5 To our great happiness have we ascribed to these two 

brightones truthfulness,great st rength, and majesty. 
O lords of splendour, aid us through the three-times- 
seven, as we pour holy oil, 0 Indra Varuna. 

6 What ye in time of old, Indra and Varuna, gave 

Itishis—revelation, thought, and power of song, 
And places which the wise made, weaving sacrifice,— 
these through my spirit’s fervic, glow have I beheld. 


2 The waters and the plants: used in sacrifice; the Soma-plants 
and the water employed in preparing the juice for libation. The 
meaning of the stanza seems to be : although you are far away in the 
most distant firmament, our libations have had power to attract you. 
Kegard us only: the godless man is unworthy of your consideration 
even as an enemy. 

3 The seven holy voices : the voices of th ; seven priests or sacred, 
bards. See IX. 103. 3. 

A wave of meath : ‘ a stream of honey.’—Cowell. 

4 The seven sisters: ‘ sister-streams of tie Soma.’—Cowell. 

5 The three-times-seven : perhaps the Marut s, thrice seven being used 
indefinitely for a larger uuniber consisting of troops of seven. See 
1.133.6. 

6 Revelation: qrulam: that which was heard (from tie beginning); 
sacred knowledge. ‘Fame.’—Cowell. Places: perhaps, as Professor 
Ludwig suggests, homes in the world to come, which the wise Rishis 
have prepared for themselves by performing sacrifice here below. 




360 THE HYMNS OF [ VALAKUILYA. 

7 0 Indra Varupa, grant to the worshippers cheerful¬ 
ness void of pride, and wealth to nourish them. 
Vouchsafe us food, prosperity, and progeny, and 
lengthen out our days that we may see long life. 


Through my spirit’s fervid glow: tapasd: according to Professors 
Grassmann and Cowell, this tapas means ‘ the holy austerities’ 
of the Rishis, and not the sacred fervour of the seer of the hymn. 
I have followed Professor Ludwig. 



BOOK THE NINTH. 


HYMN I. Soma Pavamana. 

In sweetest and most gladdening stream flow pure, 
0 Soma, on thy way. 

Pressed out for Indra, for his drink. 

2 Fiend-queller, friend of all men, he hath with the 

plank attained unto 
His place, his iron-fashioned horn e. 

3 Be thou best Vritra-slayer, best granter of bliss, 

most liberal: 

Promote our wealthy princes ’ gi fts. 

4 Flow onward with thy juice ur to the banquet of 

the mighty gods: 

Flow hither for our strength and fame. 

5 0 Indu, we draw nigh to thee, with this one object 

day by day: 

To thee alone our prayers arc said. 


Nearly all the hymns ot' this Book are addressed to Soma, the god 
who represents and animates the juice of the Soma-plant, lie is 
addressed and spoken of as Pavamana, representing the juice as 
it flows through the wool which is used as a strainer, and thus under¬ 
going purification. See Muir, 0. 8. Texts , V. 258 fT. 

The Rishi is Madhuchchhandas of the family of Visv&mitra. The 
metre is Gayatri. 

1 Flow pure : pavasva : ‘purify thyself.’—Ludwig. 

2 With the plank: of the Soma-press. Iron-fashioned, home: 
receptacle that has been hammered or formed with a tool of ay as, 
iron or other metal. It is not clear what vessel is intended. 

5 0 Indu: ‘ 0 dropping (Soma).’—Wilson. 



362 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX. 

6 The daughter of the Sun by means of this eternal 

fleece makes pure 
Thy Soma that is gushing forth. 

7 Ten sister maids of slender form seize him amid 

the press and hold 
Him firmly on the final day. 

8 The virgins send him forth : they blow the skin 

musician-like, and fuse 
The triple foe-repelling meath. 

9 The inviolable mileh-kine round about him blend, for 

Indra’s drink, 

The fresh young Soma with their milk. 

10 In the wild raptures of this draught, Indra slays, 
all the Vritras : he, 

The hero pours his wealth on us. 

HYMN II. Soma PavainUna. 

Soma, flow on, inviting gods, speed to the purifying 
cloth : 

Pass into Indra, as a bull. 

2 As mighty food speed hitherward, Indu, as a most 

splendid steer : 

Sit in thy place as one with strength. 

3 The well-loved meath was made to flow, the stream 

of the creative juice : 

The sage drew waters to himself. 

6 The daughter of the Sun: Sraddhi or Faith. 

7 Ten sister maids : the priest’s fingers. The final day : on which 
the Sonia is effused. 

8 Virgins: the unwedded ones; the fingers. Musician-like : or, as 
men blow a bagpipe; but the meaning of bdkuram and the second 
half-line is not clear. “ They seize it glittering like a water-skin.”— 
Wilson. 


The Rishi is Medhatithi of the family of Kanva. The metre is 
Gayatri. 

3 The sage: the Soma. Waters: with which the stalks of the 
plant are sprinkled. 



HYMN 3 .} 


THE RIGVEDA. 


363 


4 The mighty waters, yea, the Hoods accompany thee 

mighty one, 

When thou wilt clothe thee with ’she milk. 

5 The lake is brightened in the Hoods. Soma, our 

friend, heaven’s prop and stay, 

Falls on the purifying cloth. 

6 The tawny bull hath bellowed, fair as mighty Mitra 

to behold : 

He shines together with the Sun. 

7 Songs, Indu, active in their might are beautified for 

thee, wherewith 

Thou deckest thee for our delight. 

8 To thee who givest ample room we pray, to win the 

joyous draught: 

Great are the praises due to thee. 

9 Indu, as Indra’s friend, on us pour with a stream of 

sweetness, like 
Parjanya sender of the rain. 

10 Winner of kine, Indu, art thou, winner of heroes, 
steeds, and strength: 

Primeval soul of sacrifice. 

HYMN III. Soma Pavamana. 

Here present this immortal god flies, like a bird 
upon her wings, 

To settle in the vats of wood. 


6 The tawny bull: ‘the golden-lined showei er of blessings.’—Wilson. 
The strong greenish-yellow Soma-juice. Hath bellowed: an exag¬ 
gerated expression for the sound made by the juice as it drops, 
but in keeping with its representation as a bull. 

9 Like Parjanya : enriching and blessing us as the rain-cloud 
fertilises the ground. 

The Rishi is Sunahsepa, eon of Ajigarta (see I. 24, Note). The 
metre is Gayatri. 

1 The vats of wood: drondni : large wooden vessels, tubs or 
troughs, which receive the Soma-juice, 



304 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX. 

2 This god, made ready with the hymn, runs swiftly 

through the winding ways, 

Inviolable as he flows. 

3 This god while flowing is adorned, like a bay steed 

for war, by men 

Devout and skilled in holy songs. 

4 He, like a warrior going forth with heroes, as he 

flows along 

Is fain to win all precious boons. 

5 This god, as he is flowing on, speeds like a car and 

gives his gifts : 

He lets his voice be heard of all. 

6 Praised by the sacred bards, this god dives into 

waters, and bestows 
Rich gifts upon the worshipper. 

7 Away he rushes with his stream, across the regions, 

into heaven, 

And roars as he is flowing on. 

8 While flowing, meet for sacrifice, he hath gone up 

to heaven, across 
The regions, irresistible. 

9 By generation long ago this god, engendered for 

the gods, 

Flows tawny to the straining-cloth. 

10 This lord of many holy laws, even at his birth en¬ 
gendering strength, 

Effused, flows onward in a stream. 


2 The winding ways: of the wool which forms the strainer.—L. 
‘Rushes against the enemies.’—Wilson. 

6 Dives into waters: called vasativaryah , with which the stalks of 
the Soma-plant are sprinkled. 



HYMN 4 .] 


TllE RIG VEDA. 


365 


HYMN IV. Soma Pavamana. 

0 Soma flowing on thy way, win thou and conquer 
high renown; 

And make us better than we are. 

2 Win thou the light, win heavenly light, and, Soma, 

all felicities; 

And make us better than we are, 

3 Win skilful strength and mental power. O Soma, 

drive away our foes; 

And make us better than we are. 

4 Ye purifiers, purify Soma for Indra, for his drink : 
Make thou us better than we are. 

5 Give us our portion in the Sun through thine own 

mental power and aids; 

And make us better than we are. 

6 Through thine own mental power and aid long may 

we look upon the Sun ; 

Make thou us better than we arc. 

7 Well-weaponed Soma, pour to us a stream of riches 

doubly great; 

And make us better than we are. 

8 As one victorious, unsubdued in battle pour forth 

wealth to us; 

And make us better than we are 

9 By worship, Pavamana! men have strengthened 

thee to prop the Law : 

Make thou us better than we an;. 

10 O Indu, bring us wealth in steeds, manifold, quicken¬ 
ing all life ; 

And make us better than we are. 

TheRishiis Hiranyastupaof tho family of Angiras. The metre isGayatri. 
1 Better than we are ; or, happier than wc are. 

4 Purifiers : priests whose business is to purify the juice. Make 
thou: 0 Soma. 

9 To prop the Law: vidharmani: ‘ for their own upholding.’—Wilson. 

10 Quickening all life: visvdyum: explained by Sayana as = 
sarvagdminam : ‘ all-reaching.’—Wilson. 



'366 


THE HYMNS OF 


[HOOK IX 


HYMN V. Apris. 

Enkindled, Pavamana, lord, sends forth his light on 
every side ; 

In friendly show, the bellowing bull. 

2 He, Pavanv&na, Self-produced, speeds onward sharp¬ 

ening his horns : 

He glitters through the firmament. 

3 Brilliant like wealth, adorable, with splendour Pava¬ 

mana shines, 

Mightily with the streams of meath. 

4 The tawny Pavamana, who strews from of old the 

grass with might, 

Is worshipped, god amid the gods. 

5 The golden, the celestial doors are lifted with their 

frames on high, 

By Pavamana glorified. 

6 With passion Pavamana longs for the great lofty 

pair, well-formed, 

Like beauteous maidens, Night and Dawn. 

7 Both gods who look on men I call, celestial heralds : 

Indra’s self 

Is Pavam&na, yea, the Bull. 


The deities are the Apris other than Narasansa. See I. 13, and 
A in is, Vol. I., Index. In this hymn attributes of Agni are trans¬ 
ferred to Soma Pavamana. The Rishi is Asita or Devala of the 
family of Kasyapa. The metres are Gayatri in stanzas 1—7, and 
Annshtnp in 8—11. 

1 Enkindled: mmiddhah: properly applicable to Agni. The 
be.Uowing bull: * the shotvcrer of blessings, uttering a loud sound.’—• 
Wilson. 

2 Self-produced: TanilnapAt: properly a name of Agni. 

5 The celestial doors : the doors of the hall of sacrifice are here 
identified with the portals of the east through which light comes into 
the world. See II. 3. 5. 

7 Celestial heralds: see I. 13. 8. Indra's self: indrah here is 
explained by Sayana as = diptoh ; ‘radiant.’—Wilson. 



HYMN 6 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


367 


8 This, Pavam&na’s sacrifice shall the three beauteous 
goddesses, 

Sarasvati and Bh&rati and IIS., mighty one, attend. 
'9 I summon Twashtar hither, our protector, champion, 
earliest-born, 

Indu is Indra, tawny steer ; PavamSna is Praj&pati. 

10 0 PavamSna, with the meath in streams anoint 

Yanaspati, 

The ever-grecn, the golden-huod, refulgent, with 
a thousand boughs. 

11 Come to the consecrating rite of Pavam&na, all ye 

gods,— 

VSyu, Shrya, Brihaspati, Indra, and Agni, in accord. 

HYMN VI. Soma Pavamana. 

Soma, flow on with pleasant stream, a bull devoted 
to the gods, 

Our friend, unto the woollen sieve. 

2 Pour hitherward, as Indra’s self, Indu, that gladden¬ 

ing stream of thine, 

And send us coursers full of strength. 

3 Flow to the filter hitherward, pouring that ancient 

gladdening juice, 

Streaming forth power and high renown. 

4 Hither the sparkling drops have flowed, like waters 

down a steep descent: 

They have reached Indra purified. 


10 Vanaspati: nee I. 13. 11, and Note. 

11 The consecrating rite : svdhdkritim : o ration accompanied with 
the utterance of the sacred formula Svaha. 

The Rishi is Asita or Dcvala. The metre is Gayatri. 

2 As Indra x self: ‘ as sovereign.’—Wilson. 

4 Sparkling : ‘ quickly-falling.’---tV ilson. 




3G8 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX. 

5 Whom, having passed the filter, ten dames cleanse, 

as ’twere a vigorous steed, 

While he disports him in the wood,— 

6 This steer-strong juice with milk pour forth, for feast 

and service of the gods, 

To him who bears away the draught. 

7 Effused, the god flows onward with his stream to 

Indra, to the god, 

So that his milk may strengthen him. 

8 Soul of the sacrifice, the juice effused flows quickly 

on : he keeps 

His ancient wisdom of a sage. 

9 So pouring forth, as Indra’s friend, strong drink, 

best gladdener ! for the feast, 

Thou, even in secret, storest hymns. 

HYMN VII. Soma Pavamana. 

Forth on their way the glorious drops have flowed 
for maintenance of Law, 

Knowing this sacrifice’s bond. 

2 Down in the mighty waters sinks the stream of 

meath, most excellent, 

Oblation best of all in worth. 

3 About the holy place, the steer true, guileless, 

noblest hath sent forth 
Continuous voices in the wood. 


5 Whom: relative to juice in the following stanza. Ten dames: 
the fingers. The wood: the vat or trough. 

6 To him who hears away the draught: to Indra. Others take 
hhar&ya to mean for strongth or prowess in battle. 

9 Even in secret: wisdom lies hidden in the Soma, and cannot be 
recognized until one drinks the juice.—L. 

The Risbi is Asita or Devala, The metre is Gayatri. 

2 The mighty waters: the holy waters called vasativaryah. 

3 In the wood: according to Sayana, vane here = udahe, in the water. 
The stanza is very difficult, and I am unable to offer a satisfactory 
translation. 



hyme 8.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


363 


4 When, clothed in manly strength., the sage flows in 

celestial wisdom round, 

The strong would win the light of heaven. 

5 When purified, he sits as king above the hosts, 

among his folk, 

What time the sages bring him n:gh. 

6 Dear, golden-coloured, in the fleece he sinks, and 

settles in the wood : 

The singer shows his zeal in hymns. 

7 Hegoes toIndra,V4yu,to theAsvins,as his custom is, 
With gladdening juice which gives them joy. 

8 The streams of pleasant Soma flow to Bhaga, Mitra 

Varuna,— 

Well-knowing through his mighty powers. 

9 Gain for us, O ye Heaven and Earth, riches of meath 

to win us strength : 

Gain for us treasures and renown. 

HYMN VIII. Soma Pavamtlna. 

Oheying Indra’s dear desire these Soma-juices have 
flowed forth, 

Increasing his heroic might. 

2 Laid in the bowl, pure-flowing on to Vayu and the 
Asvins, may 

These give us great heroic strength. 


4 The strong: Indra. ‘ Then the mighty (Indra) in heaven is 
eager to repair to the oblation.’—Wilson. 

5 Above the hosts, among his folk : or, as prefjrred by Prof. Ludwig in 
his Commentary, above the contending tribes or people (visah). 

8 Well-knowing, through his mighty powers: that is, the streams that, 
through the power of Soma, know the way they should go. ‘ The 
worshippers knowing its (virtues are rewarded) with happineBS.’—• 
Wilson. 

The Rishi is Asitaor Devula. The metre ij Gayatri. 

24 



370 THE HYMNS OF f BOOK IX. 

3 Soma, as thou art purified, incite to bounty Indra’a 

heart, 

To sit in place of sacrifice. 

4 The ten swift fingers deck thee forth, seven ministers 

impel thee on.: 

The sages have rejoiced in thee. 

5 When through the filter thou art poured, we clothe 

thee with a robe of milk 
To be a gladdening draught for gods. 

6 When purified within the jars, Soma, bright-red and 

golden-hued, 

Hath clothed him with a robe of milk. 

7 Flow on to us and make us rich. Drive all our 

enemies away : 

O Indu, flow into thy friend. 

8 Send down the rain from heaven that it may shine 

upon the earth. Give us, 

O Soma, victory in war. 

9 May we obtain thee, Indra’a drink, who viewest men 

and findest light, 

Gain thee, and progeny and food, 

HYMN IX. Soma Pavamitna. 

The sage of heaven whose heart is wise, when laid 
between both hands and pressed, 

Sends us delightful powers of life. 

2 On, onward to a glorious home; dear to the people 
void of guile, 

With excellent enjoyment, flow. 


7 Flow on to us and make us rick: or, Flow to us wealthy worship¬ 
pers. Thy friend: Indra, Cf. IX 2. 1. 

The Rishi is Asita or Devala. The metre is Gayatrl. 

1 The sage of heaven : the Soma. Both hands : naptyoh : literally, 
two granddaughters. According to Sayana, two boards used in pres¬ 
sing the Soma are intended. See Professor Cowell’s Note in Wilson’s 
Translation. 



HYMN 10 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


371 


3 He, the pure son, when born illumed his parents who 

had sprung to life, 

Great son great strengthened of Law. 

4 Urged by the seven devotions he hath stirred the 

guileless rivers which 
Have made one eye increase in strength. 

5 These helped to might the youthful one, high over 

all, invincible, 

Even Indu, Indra ! in thy law. 

6 The immortal courser, good to draw, looks down 

upon the seven : the fount 
Hath satisfied the goddesses. 

7 Aid us in holy rites, O Man : O purifier, drive away 
Dark shades that must be met in fight. 

8 Make the paths ready for a hymn newer and newer 

evermore: 

Make the lights shine as erst they shone. 

9 Give, Pavam&na, high renown, give kine and steeds 

and hero sons : 

Win for us wisdom, win the light. 

HYMN X. Soma Pavam&na. 

Like cars that thunder on their way, like coursers 
eager for renown, 

Have Soma-drops flowed forth for wealth. 


3 His parents : mdtard: literally, his two mothers; Heaven and 
Earth. 

4 Seven devotions : practised in the preparation of the Soma. Sayana 
takes sapta with nadyah : ‘ gladdens the seven guileless rivers.’— 
Wilson. 

One eye : Soma, the Moon, being the other.---L. 

6 Courser . the flowing Soma. The seven: rivers. The fount: 
‘ Full, as a well, he has satisfied the divine streams.’—Wilson. 

7 0 Man .- manly Soma. 

The Rishi is Asita or Devala. The metre b Gayatri. 



372 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX. 

2 Forth have they rushed from holding hands, like 

chariots that are urged to speed, 

Like joyful songs of singing-men. 

3 The Somas deck themselves with milk, as kings are 

graced with eulogies, 

And, with seven priests, the sacrifice. 

4 Pressed for the gladdening draught, the drops flow 

forth abundantly with song, 

The Soma-juices in a stream. 

5 Winning Vivasv4n’s glory and producing Morning’s 

light, the suns 

Pass through the openings of the cloth. 

6 The singing-men of ancient time open the doors of 

sacred songs,— 

Men, for the mighty to accept. 

7 Combined in close society sit the seven priests, 

the brotherhood, 

Filling the station of the One. 

O 

8 He gives us kinship with the gods, and with the Sun 

unites our eye: 

The sage’s offspring hath appeared. 

5 The suns : so called as being creators of the light: * the sun- 
bright juices.’—Wilson. 

6 Men, for the mighty to accept: ‘men, offerers of Soma,’ according 
to Sayana. 

7 The seven priests: the adhvaryus who bring the water with which 
the stalks of the Soraa-plauts are sprinkled. The One: the Soma.— 
Sayana. 

8 He gives us kinship with the gods: I follow Prof. Pischel’s inter¬ 
pretation of this difficult passage. “Soma unites our navel with the 
navel of the Gods, our eye with the Sun, that is, he brings us into 
union with the Gods in heaven,”— Vedische Studien , p. 69. “I take 
into my navel the navel of the sacrifice [the Soma].”—Wilson. “He 
[Soma] as kinsman has brought us a kinsman [Surya].”—Ludwig. 

The sage’s offspring: a periphrasis for the sage himself, that is 
Soma,—L. 



HYMN 11 .] THE RIGVEDA. 373 

9 The Sun with his dear eye beholds that quarter of 
the heavens which priests 
Have placed within the sacred cell. 

HYMN XI. Soma Pavamana. 

Sing forth to Indu, 0 ye men, to him who now is 
purified. 

Fain to pay worship to the gods. 

2 Together with thy pleasant juice t he Atharvans have 

commingled milk, 

Divine, devoted to the gods. 

3 Bring by thy flowing weal to kine, weal to the peo¬ 

ple, weal to steeds, 

Weal, 0 thou king, to growing plants. 

4 Sing a praise-song to Soma brown of hue, of inde¬ 

pendent might, 

The red, who reaches up to heaven. 

5 Purify Soma when effused with stones which hands 

move rapidly, 

And pour the sweet milk in the meath. 


9 This stanza is very obscure. I have adopted Benfey’s explanation 
who “here follows an occasional interpretation of div or dyuloka, 
given by the Scholiast, which identifies it with the dronakalasa or 
large Soma-trough. He takes it as meaning that the Sun looks to¬ 
wards the place where the Soma lies while it: is pressed.Sayana 

seems to interpret this verso as meaning that Indra views the Soma 
with affection even after it has been drunk by the priests [fixed in 
the heart].”—Prof. Cowell, in Wilson’s Translation. 

The Rishi is Asita or Devala. The metre is Gayatri. 

2 The Atharvans: the priests, who perform the duties of tha 
Adhvaryus. 

3 King : the usual designation of Soma in the Brahmans.—L. 

4 The red: kad&rhidarunavarnAya: sometimes red-coloured.— 
Sayana. 




374 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX. 

6 With humble homage draw ye nigh ; blend the liba¬ 

tion with the curds: 

To Indra offer Indu up. 

7 Soma, foe-queller, chief o’er men, doing the will of 

gods, pour forth 
Prosperity upon our kine. 

8 Heart-knower, sovran of the heart, thou art effused, 

O Soma, that 

Indra may drink thee and rejoice. 

9 O Soma Pavam&na, give us riches and heroic 

strength,— 

Indu ! with Indra for ally. 

HYMN XII. Soma Pavatnana. 

To Indra have the Soma-drops, exceeding rich in 
sweets, been poured, 

Shed in the seat of sacrifice. 

2 As mother kine low to their calves, to Indra have 

the sages called, 

Called him to drink the Soma-juice. 

3 In the stream’s wave wise Soma dwells, distilling 

rapture, in his seat, 

Resting upon a wild-cow’s hide. 

4 Far-sighted Soma, sage and seer, is worshipped in 

the central point 

Of heaven, the straining-cloth of wool. 


The Rishi is Asita or Devala. The metre is Gayatri. 

S In the stream’s wave: in the water with which the stalks are 
sprinkled. 

Upon a wild-cow’s hide: this which is Ben fey’s explanation of gauri 
seems to be borne out by gor adhi tvachi, upon the ox-hide, of IX. 
101.11. Sayana’s interpretation is different: 'to a chant in the 
middle tone.’—Wilson. 

4 Of heaven : divah : see IX. 10. 9, and note. 




HYMN 13 ] 


THE RIO VEDA. 


37 b 


5 In close embraces Indu holds Soma when poured 

within the jars, 

And on the purifying sieve. 

6 Indu sends forth a voice on high to regions of the 

sea of air, 

Shaking the vase that drops with meath. 

7 The tree whose praises never fail yields heavenly 

milk among our hymns, 

Urging men’s generations on. 

8 The wise one, with the sage’s stream, the Soma urged 

to speed flows on 
To the dear places of the sky. 

9 0 Pavam&na, bring us wealth bright with a thousand 

splendours, yea, 

O Indu, give us ready help. 

HYMN XIII. Soma Pavatn&na. 

Passed through the fleece in thousand streams the 
Soma, cleansed, flows to the place 
Where Indra and where V&yu meet. 


5 Indu holds Soma : “ the deity seems to 1 e thus opposed to the 
mere plant.”—Prof. Cowell’s Note. Prof. Ludwig suggests that Indu 
here may be the Moou, as the time of important liturgical ceremonies 
depends upon the Moon’s phases. 

6 To regions of the sea of air: or samudrasya here may mean, of 
the sea or water into which the Soma-juice falls. Shaking: or, per¬ 
haps, stirring (with joy). The vase: kosan : the dronakalasa, the 
large wooden vessel for holding the juice. According to Sayana, whose 
interpretation I have followed in the first line, kosam here means the 
cloud. 

7 The tree : Soma. Men’s generations: sacrificial seasons, according 
to Sayana. 

The Rishi is Asita or Devala. The metre is Gayatri. 

1 The place Where Indra and where V&yu meet: the vessel especially 
prepared to hold libatious intended for Indra and Vayu. 



376 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK IX. 

2 Sing forth, ye men who long for help, to Pavam&na, 

to the sage, 

Effused to entertain the gods. 

3 The Soma-drops with thousand powers are purified 

to win us strength, 

Hymned to become the feast of gods. 

4 Yea, as thou flowest bring great store of food that 

we may win us strength : 

Indu, bring splendid manly might. 

5 May they in flowing give us wealth in thousands, 

and heroic power,— 

These godlike Soma-drops effused. 

6 Like coursers by their drivers urged, they were 

poured forth, to win us strength, 

Swift through the woollen straining-cloth. 

7 Noisily flow the Soma-drops, like milch-kine lowing 

to their calves: 

They have run forth from both the hands. 

8 As gladdener whom Indra loves, O Pavamana, 

crying out 

Drive all our enemies away. 

9 O Pavamanas, driving off the godless, looking on 

the light, 

Sit in the place of sacrifice. 

HYMN XIV. Soma Pavamana. 

Reposing on the river’s wave the sage hath widely 
flowed around, 

Bearing the hymn which many love. 

3 To win us strength : vAjas&tayr : ‘ for the attainment of food.’— 
Wilson. So Sayana in stanzas 3 and 4; but in 6 the word is 
explained by sangr&m&ya, to battle, in the first clause where he 
inserts it after hiy&ndh, urged, and by annaldbkdya, for the attain¬ 
ment of food, in the second clause. 

8 Crying out : making a loud noise in dropping. 


The Rishi is Asita or Devala. The metre is Gayatri. 

1 On the river’s wave: in the vasalivari waters, which are used to 



HYMN 14 .] 


THE RIGVEDA. 


377 


2 When the five kindred companies, active in duty, 

with the song 

Establish him, the powerful, 

3 Then in his juice whose strength is great, have all 

the gods rejoiced themselves, 

When he hath clothed him in the milk. 

4 Descending, on he flows and.runs through the sieve’s 

small interstices : 

Here with his own ally he meets. 

5 He by Vivas van’s daughters, like a beauteous youth 

hath been adorned, 

Making the milk, as ’tvvere, his robe. 

6 O’er the fine fingers, through desire of milk, in 

winding course he goes, 

And utters voice which he hath found. 

7 The nimble fingers have approached, adorning him 

the lord of strength : 

They grasp the vigorous courser’s back. 

8 Comprising all the treasures that are in the heavens 

and on the earth, 

Come, Soma, as our faithful friend. 


spriukle the stalks. Bearing the hymn: I'rof. Geldner explains this 
as meaning, Bearing away the much coveted prize, Soma being 
regarded as a courser or race horse. See Vedische Studien, p. 120. 

2 Five kindred companies: referring, probably, to some sacrifice 
instituted in common by representatives of the five Aryan tribes. 

4 His own ally: India. He meets : this (langato bhavati) is Sayana’s 
explanation of samjighnate ; but it is not easy to see how the word 
can bear this signification. 

5 Vivasv&n's daughters : or granddaughters; the fingers. 

6 Which he hath found: ‘ which the worshipper recognizes.’— 
Wilson. 



378 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK IX. 


HYMN XV. Soma Pavam&na. 

Through the fine fingers, with the song, this hero 
comes with rapid cars, 

Going to Indra’s meeting-place. 

2 In holy thought he ponders much for the great 

worship of the gods, 

Where the immortals have their seat. 

3 Like a good horse is he led out, when on the path 

that shines with light 
The mettled steeds exert their strength. 

4 He brandishes his horns on high, and whets them, 

bull who leads the herd, 

Doing with might heroic deeds. 

5 He moves, a vigorous steed, adorned with beauteous 

rays of shining gold, 

He who is sovran of the streams. 

6 He, over places rough to pass, bringing rich trea- 

' sures closely packed, 

Descends into the reservoirs. 

7 Men beautify him in the vats, him worthy to be 

beautified, 

Him who brings forth abundant food. 

8 Him, even him, the fingers ten and the seven songs 

make beautiful, 

Well-weaponed, best of gladdeners. 


The Rishi ia Aaita or Devala. The metre is Gayatrl. 

1 Indra’s meeting-place : ‘ Indra’s abode.’—Wilson. In Hymn XIII. 1, 
nishkritam is explained by Sayana as the vessel prepared and set apart. 

3 Like a good horse: the text has only hitah which may mean 
either good or placed. ‘ Placed (in the cart) he is brought.’—Wilson. 

5 Rays of shining gold: perhaps with reference to the gold ring 
which the priest who expresses the juice wears on his finger.— L. 
The streams : of Soma-juice. 

6 Places rough to pass : the wool of the strainer. Sayana gives a 
totally different explanation of this stanza. See Wilson’s Translation. 
I have followed Prof. Ludwig. 

8 Seven songs: the songs of the seven priests. 



HYMN 16 .] 


THE RIGVEDA. 


379 


HYMN XVI. Soma Pavamana. 

The pressers from the Soma-press send forth thy 
juice for rapturous joy : 

The speckled sap runs like a flood. 

2 With strength we follow through the sieve him who 

brings might and wins the kine, 

Enrobed in water with his juice. 

3 Pour on the sieve the Soma, ne’er subdued in waters, 

waterless, 

And make it pure for Indra’s drink. 

4 Moved by the purifier’s thought, the Soma flows 

into the sieve: 

By wisdom it hath gained its home. 

5 With humble homage, Indra, have the Soma-drops 

flowed forth to thee, 

Contending for the glorious prh:e. 

6 Purified in his fleecy garb, attaining every glory, he 
Stands, hero-like, amid the kine. 

7 Swelling, as ’twere, to heights of heaven, the stream 

of the creative juice 
Falls lightly on the cleansing sieve. 

8 Thus, Soma, purifying him who knoweth song ’mid 

living men, 

Thou wanderest through the cloth of wool. 


The Rishi is Asita or Devala. The metre is Gayatri. 

1 From, the Soma-press: onyoh, ablative dual of oni, signifying 
apparently an implement or a vessel, consisting of two pieces, used 
in the preparation of the Soma-juice, The word is said to be 
employed to denote, metaphorically, heaven and earth. ‘ They who 
express thee, the juioe of heaven and earth.’—Wilson. 

3 Waterless: anaptam, which Sayana explains by andptam, not 
reached, or overtaken, by enemies. The meaning is not clear. 

4 Its home: in the large wooden vessel called dronakalasa. 

5 Contending for the glorious prize : like race-horses. ‘Giving thee 
vigour for the great conflict.’—Wilson. 



380 


THE HYMNS OF 


[ROOK IX. 


HYMN XVII. Soma Pavam&na. 

Like rivers down a steep descent, slaying the Vritras, 
full of zeal, 

The rapid Soma-streams are poured. 

2 The drops of Soma-juice effused fall like the rain 

upon the earth : • 

To Indra flow the Soma-streams. 

3 With swelling wave the gladdening drink, the Soma, 

flows into the sieve, 

Loving the gods and slaying fiends. 

4 It hastens to the pitchers, poured upon the sieve it 

waxes strong 

At sacrifices through the lauds. 

5 Soma, thou shinest mounting heaven as ’twere above 

light’s triple realm, 

And moving seem’st to speed the Sun. 

6 To him, the head of sacrifice, singers and bards have 

sung their songs, 

O O' 

Offering what he loves to see. 

7 The men, the sages with their hymns, eager for help, 

deck thee strong steed, 

Deck thee for service of the gods. 

8 Flow onward to the stream of meath: rest efficacious 

in thy home, 

Fair, to be drunk at sacrifice. 


The Rialii is Asita or Devala. The metre is Gayatri. 

6 The head of sacrifice: the most important element of the 
ceremony. According to Sayana, at the head, that is, on the last and 
most important day, of the effusion of the Soma-juice. Offering what 
he. loves to see : ‘ entertaiuing affection for him the all-beholding.’— 
Wilson. 

8 In thy home : in the dronahnlam. 



HYMN 19 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


381 


HYMN XVIII. Soma Pavamana. 
Thou, Soma, dweller on the hills, effused, hast flowed 
into the sieve : 

All-bounteous art thou in carouse. 

2 Thou art a sacred bard, a sage ; the meath is off¬ 

spring of thy sap : 

- All-bounteous art thou in carouse. 

3 All deities of one accord have come that they may 

drink of thee : 

All-bounteous art thou in carouse. 

4 He who containeth in his hands all treasures much 

to be desired : 

All-bounteous art thou in carouse. 

5 Who milketh out this mighty pair, the earth and 

heaven, like mother kine : 

All-bounteous art thou in carouse. 

6 Who in a moment mightily floweth around these two 

world-halves : 

All-bounteous art thou in carouse. 

7 The strong one, being purified, hath in the pitchers 

cried aloud : 

All-bounteous art thou in carouse. 

HYMN XIX. Soma Pavam&na. 

0 Soma, being purified bring us the wondrous 
treasure, meet 

For lauds, that is in earth and. heaven. 

2 For ye twain, Indra, Soma, are lords of the light, 

lords of the kine: 

Great rulers, prosper ye our songs. 

3 The tawny steer, while cleansed among the living, 

bellowing on the grass. 

Hath sunk and settled in his home. 

The Rishi is Asita or Devala. The me ;re is Gayatri. 

1 Dweller on the hills: ‘ pressed between the stones.’—Wilson. 


The Rishi is Asita or Devala. The metre is Gayatri. 



382 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX. 

4 Over the steer’s productive flow the sacred songs 

were resonant, 

The mothers of the darling son. 

5 Hath he not, purified, impregned the kine who long 

to meet their lord, 

The kine who yield the shining milk ? 

6 Bring near us those who stand aloof: strike fear 

into our enemies: 

O Pavam&na, find us wealth. 

7 Soma, bring down the foeman’s might, his vigorous 

strength and vital power, 

Whether he be afar or near. 

HYMhi XX. Soma Pavamana. 

Forth through the straining-cloth the sage flows 
to the banquet of the gods, 

Subduing all our enemies. 

2 For he, as Pavamana, sends thousandfold treasure in 

the shape 

Of cattle to the singing-men. 

3 Thou graspest all things with thy mind, and purifiest 

thee with thoughts : 

As such, 0 Soma, find us fame. 

4 Pour lofty glory on us, send sure riches to our liberal 

lords, 

Bring food to those who sing thy praise. 

5 As thou art cleansed, O wondrous steed, O Soma, 

thou hast entered, like 
A pious king, into the songs. 


4 Hymu8 are sung over the Soma-stream, and are called mothers of 
the precious juice because it is prepared while they are sung. 

5 The kine: the vasativari waters which long to mingle with the 
Soma. 

The Fishi is Asita or Devala. The metre is Gayatri. 
ft Steed: rahne : ‘ hearer (of our offerings).’— Wilson. 



HYMN 21.1 


THE RIG YE HA. 


383 


6 He, Soma, like a coarser in the floods invincible, 

made clean 

With hands, is resting in the jars. 

7 Disporting, like a liberal chief, thou goest, Soma, 

to the sieve, 

Lending the laud a hero’s strength. 

HYMN XXI. Sorna Pavamana. 

To Indra flow these running drops, these Somas 
frolicsome in mood, 

Exhilarating, finding light; 

2 Driving off foes, bestowing room upon the presser, 

willingly 

Bringing their praiser vital force. 

3 Lightly disporting them, the drops flow to one 

common reservoir, 

And fall into the river’s wave. 

4 These Pavam&nas have obtained all blessings much 

to be desired, 

Like coursers harnessed to a car. 

5 With view to us, O Soma-drops, bestow his manifold 

desire 

On him who yet hath given us naught. 

6 Bring us our wish with this design, as a wright 

brings his new-wrought wheel : 

Flow pure and shining with the stream. 

7 These drops have cried with resonant voice: like 

swift steeds they have run the course. 

And roused the good man’s hymn to life. 

6 Like a courser : ‘ the bearer (of oblations/.—Wilson. 

7 Chief: Sayana explains makhah by di'.nam, gift. 

The Rishi is Asita or Devala. The metre is Gayatri. 

5 This stanza is obscure, and Saynna’s commentary is imperfect. It 
seems that the Soma-drops are prayed to enrich the institutor of the 
sacrifice who has not as yet rewarded the priests. 

fi As a wright brings his new-wrought wheel: ‘As a great man sets 
before him a commendable charioteer.’—Wilson. 

7 Run the course • reached the tfrmiakn'am. 



384 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK IX. 


HYMN XXII. Soma Pavamana. 

These rapid Soma-streams have stirred themselves 

to motion like strong steeds, 

Like cars, like armies harried forth. 

2 Swift as wide winds they lightly move, like rain¬ 

storms of Parjanya, like 
The flickering flames of burning fire. 

3 These Soma-juices, blent with curds, purified, skilled 

in sacred hymns, 

Have gained by song their hearts’ desire. 

4 Immortal, cleansed, these drops, since first they 

flowed, have never wearied, fain 
To reach the region and their paths. 

5 Advancing they have travelled o’er the ridges 

of the earth and heaven, 

And this the highest realm of all. 

6 Over the heights have they attained the highest 

thread that is spun out, 

And this which must be deemed most high. 

7 Thou, Soma, holdest wealth in kine which thou 

hast seized from niggard churls : 

Thou called st forth the outspun thread. 

The Rishi is Asita or Devala. The metre is Gayatri, 

3 By song: vipA : by knowledge, according to Sayana. “The St. 
Petersb. Diet, explains vip as the twigs (cf. vepres) which form the 
bottom of the funnel and support the filtering-cloth.”—Prof. Cowell, 
in Wilson’s Translation. 

6 Or, Streams rushing down have filled the threads, most excellent, 
spread out beneath; that is, the threads of the straiuing-cloth. See 
Note in Wilson. Accordiug to Sayana * the thread ’ is sacrifice ; and 
‘ this which must be deemed most high ’ may be, as Prof. Ludwig 
suggests, the place of sacrifice which is also to be held holy. Professor 
Wilson translates the second line :—‘ this rite is glorified thereby.’ 

7 From niggard churls: or from the Panis. Thou calledst out the 
outspun thread: ‘ thou hast called aloud at the outspread sacrifice.’— 
Wilsou. 



HYMN 24 .] 


THE R ICY ED A. 


m 


HYMN XXIII. Soma Pavamana. 
Swift Soma-drops have been effused in stream of 
meath, the gladdening drink, 

For sacred lore of every kind. 

2 Hither to newer resting-place the ancient living ones 

are come. 

They made the Sun that he might shine. 

3 0 Pavamdna, bring to us the unsacrificing foeman’s 

gear, 

And give us food with progeny. 

4 The living Somas being cleansed diffuse exhilarating 

drink, 

Turned to the vat which drips wi :h meath. 

5 Soma flows on intelligent, possessing sap and mighty 

strength, 

Brave hero who repels the curse. 

6 For Indra, Soma! thou art clear.sed, a feast-compa¬ 

nion for the gods : 

Indu, thou fain wilt win us strength. 

7 When he had drunken draughts of this, Indra smote 

down resistless foes : 

Yea, smote them, and shall smite them still. 

HYMN XXIV. Soma Pavamana. 

Hitherward have the Somas streamed, the 'drops 
while they are purified : 

When blent, in waters they are rinsed. 

2 The milk hath run to meet them like floods rushing 
down a precipice : 

They come to Indra, being cleansed. 


The Rishi is Asita or Devala. The metre is Gayatrt. 

2 Newer resting-place: a newly-prepared place of sacrifice. The 
ancient living ones: the Soma-drops. 

3 Gear: gayam: house with all that it contains; goods and chattels. 


The Rishi is Asita or Devala. The metre is Gayatri. 



386 THE HYMNS OF [ROOK IX. 

3 O Soma Pavam&na, thou art flowing to be Indra’s 

drink: 

The men have seized and lead thee forth. 

4 Victorious, to be hailed with joy, O Soma, flow, 

delighting men, 

To him who ruleth o’er mankind. 

5 Thou, Indu, when, effused by stones, thou runnest to 

the filter, art 

Ready for Indra’s high decree. 

6 Flow on, best Vritra-slayer; flow meet to be hailed 

with joyful lauds, 

Pure, purifying, wonderful. 

7 Pure, purifying is he called, the Soma of the meath 

effused, 

Slayer of sinners, dear to gods. 

HYMN XXV. Soma Pavamana. 

Green-hued ! as one who giveth strength flow on for 
gods to drink, a draught 
For Vayu and the Marut host. 

2 O Pavam&na, sent by song, crying around thy dwell¬ 

ing-place, 

Pass into Vayu as Law bids. 

3 The steer shines with the deities, dear sage in his 
. appointed home, 

Foe-slayer, most beloved by gods. 

4 Pervading every form, he goes, desirable, while puri¬ 

fied, 

Thither where the immortals sit. 

4 To him who ruleth o’er mankind: to Indra. 

5 Ready for Indra’s high decree: Professor Wilson, following 
Sayana, translates : ‘ an ample portion for Indra’s belly.’ See Bergaigne, 
La Religion Ve'dique, III. 210 ff., for the meaning of dhdman in the 
■Rigveda. 

The Rish i is Drilhachynta, son of Agastya. The metre is Gayatri. 
2 Into Vdyu: into the vessel appropriated to Yayu.—Sayana. 



HYMN 26 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


387 


5 To Indra Soma flows, the red. engendering song, 

exceeding wise, 

The visitor of living men. 

6 Flow, best exhilarator, sage, flow to the filter in a 

stream 

To seat thee in the place of song. 

HYMN XXVI. Soma Pavamana. 

The sages with the fingers’ art have dressed and 
decked that vigorous steed 
Upon the lap of Aditi. 

2 The kine have called aloud to him exhaustless with a 

thousand streams, 

To Indu who supporteth heaven. 

3 Him, nourisher of many, sage, creative Pavam&na, 

they 

Have sent, by wisdom, to the sky. 

4 Him, dweller with Vivasv&n, they with use of both 

arms have sent forth, 

The lord of speech infallible. 


5 The. red: arushah : hero explained by Say ana as = drochamAnah, 
shining or radiant. The visitor of living men: Ayushak: the mean¬ 
ing of this adverb is uncertain. The St. Petersburg Lexicon explains 
it as, conjointly with men; with human co-operation. Professor 
Ludwig in his translation renders it by, der den lebenden besucht, 
who visits the living man; but in his Commentary suggests that it 
may mean, during the whole of life. ‘Constantly.’—Wilson. 

6 Of song : arkasya: archaniyasyendrasya, of the adorable Indra, 
according to Sayana. Arka has two meanings in the Rigveda (1), 
song or hymn of praise and (2) light or splendour. See Pischel, 
Vedische Studien, pp. 23-26. 

The Rishi is Idhmav&ha, son of Drilhaehyuta. The metre is Gayatrl. 

1 Aditi: the earth. 

2 The kine : who supply the milk that is mixed with the Soma- 
juice. 

4 Of both arms: bhvrijoh: according to Sayana = bdhvoh, the arms 
of the body. The St. Petersburg Leiicon explains the word as mean¬ 
ing a sort of vice or implement for holding wood while it is being cut. 



388 THE HYMNS OF [ROOK IX. 

5 Him, green, beloved, raany-eyed, the sisters with the 

pressing-stones 

Send down to ridges of the sieve. 

6 0 PavamUna, Indu, priests harry thee on to Indra, 

thee 

Who aidest song and cheerest him. 

HYMN XXVII. Soma Pavamana. 
This sage, exalted by our lauds, flows to the purify¬ 
ing cloth, 

Scattering foes as he is cleansed. 

2 As giving power and winning light, for Indra and 

for Vdyu he 

Is poured upon the filtering-cloth. 

3 The men conduct him, Soma, steer, omniscient, and 

the head of heaven, 

Effused into the vats of wood. 

4 Longing for kine, longing for gold hath Indu Pava- 

m4na lowed, 

Still conqueror, never overcome. 

5 This Pavam&na, gladdening draught, drops on the 

filtering-cloth, and then 
Mounts up with Surya to the sky. 

6 To Indra in the firmament this mighty tawny steer 

hath flowed, 

This Indu, being purified. 


5 Many-eyed : ‘ far-beholding.’—Wilson. The sisters: the fingers 

of the officiating priest. 

The Rishi is Nrimedlia, of the family of Angiras. The metre is 
Gayatri. 

3 Omniscient : or, all-possessing. Vats bf wood : vaneshu : accord¬ 
ing to Benfey, into tho streams of water. 

4 Longing for kine: who supply milk to mix with the Soma-juice. 
Gold: woru on the finger of the priest who presses out the juice. 
Lowed: made a noise iu dropping. 



HYMN 28 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


389 


HYMN XXVIII. Soma Pavamana. 
Urged by the men, this vigorous steed, lord of the 
mind, omniscient, 

Runs to the woollen straining-cloth. 

2 Within the filter hath he flowed, this Soma for the 

gods effused, 

Entering all their essences. 

3 He shines in beauty there, this god immortal in his 

dwelling-place, 

Foe-slayer, dearest to the gods. 

4 Directed by the sisters ten, bellowing on. his way 

this steer 

Runs onward to the wooden vats. 

5 This Pavamana, swift and strong, omniscient, gave 

splendour to 

The Sun and all his forms of light. 

6 This Soma, being purified, flows mighty and infallible, 
Slayer of sinners, dear to gods. 

HYMN XXIX Soma Pavamana. 

Forward with mighty force have flowed the currents 
of this steer effused, 

Of him who sets him by the gods. 

2 The singers praise him with their song, and learned 

priests adorn the steed, 

Brought forth as light that merits laud. 

o o 

3 These things thou winnest lightly, while purified. 

Soma, lord of wealth : 

Fill full the sea that claims our praise. 

The Rishi is Priyamedha, of the family of Angiras. The metre is 
Gayatri. 

The Rishi is Nrimedha, of the family of Angiras. The metre is 
Gayatri. 

1 Who sets him. hy the gods: or, who decorates the gods. ‘Who 
seeks to surpass the gods.’—Wilson. 

3 These things: for which we pray. The sea : the Soma-vat or 
reservoir. 



390 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK IX. 


4 Winning all precious things at once, flow on, 0 

Soma, with thy stream : 

Drive to one place our enemies. 

5 Preserve us from the godless, from ill-omened voice 

of one and all, 

That so we may be freed from blame. 

6 0 Indu, as thou flowest on bring us the wealth of 

earth and heaven, 

And splendid vigour, in thy stream. 

HYMN XXX. Soma Pavamana. 

Streams of this potent one have flowed easily to the 
straining-cloth : 

While he is cleansed he lifts his voice. 

2 Indu, by pressers urged to speed, bellowing out 

while beautified, 

Sends forth a very mighty sound. 

3 Pour on us, Soma, with thy stream man-conquering 

might which many crave, 

Accompanied with hero sons. 

4 Hither hath Pavamana flowed, Soma flowed hither 

in a stream, 

To settle in the vats of wood. 

5 To waters with the stones they drive thee tawny- 

hued, most rich in sweets, 

O Indu, to be Indra’s drink. 

6 For Indra, for the thunderer press the Sotaa very 

rich in sweets, 

Lovely, inspiriting, for strength. 


5 Ill-omened voice: avandt, explained by Sayana as = mbddnnin- 
ddrdpdt, sound or word in the form of blame; the raging fury of the 
demon or the godless man, according to Professor Grassmann. 

The Rishi is Bindu, of the family of Angiras. The metre is 
Gayatri. 

2 A very mighty sound: or, a sound which Indra loves. 



HYMN 32 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


391 


HYMN XXXI Soma Pavamana, 
The Soma-drops, benevolent, come forth as they are 
purified, 

Bestowing wealth which all may see. 

2 O Indu, high o’er heaven and earth be thou, increaser 

of our might: 

The master of all strength be thou. 

3 The winds are gracious in their love to thee, the 

rivers flow to thee : 

Soma, they multiply thy power. 

4 Soma, wax great. From every side may vigorous 

powers unite in thee : 

Be in the gathering-place of strength. 

5 For thee, brown-hued ! the kine have poured im¬ 

perishable oil and milk 
Aloft on the sublimest height. 

6 Friendship, 0 Indu, we desire with thee who bearest 

noble arms, 

With thee, O lord of all that is. 

HYMN XXXII. Soma Pavamana. 
The rapture-shedding Soma-drops, effused in our 
assembly, have 

Flowed forth to glorify our prince. 


The Risbi is Rahugana Gotama. The metre is Gayatri. 

1 Wealth which all may see: ‘intellectual wealth.’—Wilson. 

4 This stauza has occurred before. See [. 91. 16. Be in the gather¬ 
ing place of strength : be the central point and source of all power. 

5 The kine : of the clouds, the waters. Oil and milk: sweet and 
fertilizing rain. Or the cows who supply milk for the libation may 
be intended, in which case ‘ the sublimest ’ would be the place of 
sacrifice. 

The Rishi is Syavasva, of the family of Atri. The metre is Gayatri, 

1 Our prince : the noble who institutes the sacrifice. 



392 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX. 

2 And Trita’s maidens onward urge the tawny-eoloured 

with the stones, 

Indu for Indra, for his drink. 

3 Now like a swan he maketh all the company sing 

each his hymn : 

He, like a steed, is bathed in milk. 

4 0 Soma, viewing heaven and earth, thou runnest 

like a darting deer : 

Set in the place of sacrifice. 

5 The cows have sung with joy to him, even as a 

woman to her love : 

He came as to a settled race. 

6 Bestow illustrious fame on us, both on our liberal 

lords and me, 

Glory, intelligence, and wealth. 

HYMN XXXIII. Soma Pavamana. 
Like waves of waters, skilled in song the juices of 
the Soma speed 
Onward, as buffaloes to woods. 

2 With stream of sacrifice the brown bright drops 

have flowed with strength in store 
Of kine into the wooden vats. 

3 To Indra, Vayu, Varuna, to Vishnu, and the Maruts, 

flow 

The drops of Soma-juice effused. 


2 Trila’s maidens : the fingers of the priest. See IX. 38. 2. 

3 Like a steian : as a sentinel hanxa (wild-goose, or flamingo) at the 
approach of danger Bounds a note of alarm which is answered by all 
the rest.—L. 

4 Darting: Sayana a/es taktah with ‘thou,’ Soma, and explains it 
by gavyaih payaddibhirmwritah sc in, being mixed with milk, curds, 
etc. Elsewhere Sayana explains it by 1 swift.’ 

5 As to a settled race: as a horse is brought to run a race that has 
been arranged. ‘ As a hero hastens to the welcome contest.’—Wilson. 

The Eishi is Trita. The metre is Uayutri. 



HYMN 34 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


303 


4 Three several words are uttered : kine are lowing, 

cows who give their milk : 

The tawny-hued goes bellowing on. 

5 The young and saered mothers of the holy rite have 

uttered praise : 

They decorate the child of heaven. 

6 From every side, 0 Soma, for-cur profit, pour thou 

forth four seas 

Filled full of riches thousandfold. 

HYMN XXXI V. Soma Pa vara ana. 

The drop of Soma-juice effused flows onward with 
this stream impelled, 

Kending strong places, with its might. 

2 Poured forth, to Indra, Varuna, to Vayu and the 

Marut host, 

To Vishnu, flows the Soma-juice. 

3 With stones they press the Soma forth, the strong 

conducted by the strong : 

They milk the liquor out with skill. 

4 ’Tis he whom Trita must adorn, ’tis he who shall 

make Indra glad : 

The tawny one is decked with tints. 


4 Three several words: according to Say an a, trividhd slutih, praise of 
three kinds, from the three Vedas. “The priests utter the three 
sacred texts.”—Wilson. 

5 Mothers of the holy rite: apparently, the cows who supply milk 
for libations. 

The child of heaven : the Soma, which, according to a text quoted 
by Sayana, ‘ was in the third heaven from hence.’ 

6 Four seas: imaginary seas, to correspond with the four quarters 
of heaven. 

The Rishi is Trita. The metre is Gayatri. 

1 Strong places ; the strong-holds of CDCimes. 



394 


THE HYMiVS OF 


[BOOK IX. 


5 Him do the sons of Prisni milk, the dwelling-place 

of sacrifice, 

Oblation lovely and most dear. 

6 To him in one united stream these songs flow on 

straightforward : he, 

Loud-voiced, hath made the milch-kine low. 

HYMN XXXV. Soma Pavamana. 
Pour forth on us abundant wealth, O Pavamana, 
with thy stream, 

Wherewith thou givest us the light. 

2 0 Indu, swayer of the sea, shaker of all things, flow 

thou on, 

Bearer of wealth to us with might. 

3 With thee for hero, valiant one ! may we subdue our 

enemies: 

Let what is precious flow to us. 

4 Indu arouses strength, the sage who strives for 

victory, winning power, 

Discovering holy works and means. 

5 Mover of speech, we robe him with our songs as he 

is purified, 

Soma, the guardian of the folk; 

6 On whose way, lord of holy law, most rich, as he 

is purified, 

The people all have set their hearts. 


5 The dwelling-place of sacrifice : the Soma-plant contains within 
itself the chief element of sacrifice, and the preparation of the juice 
is only the development of its nature. —L. 

The Rishi is Prabhuvasu, of the family of Angiras. The metre is 
Gayatri. 

2 The sea: the reservoir of Soma juice. 

4 Discovering holy works and means : ‘ acquainted with sacred rites 
and arms.’—Wilson. 

6 On whose way : on whose statutes or decrees. 



HYMN 37.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


395 


HYMN XXXYI. Soma Pavamana. 
From the two press-boards is the juice sent, like a 
car-horse, to the sieve : 

The steed steps forward to the goal. 

2 Thus, Soma, watchful, bearing well, cheering the 

gods, flow past the sieve, 

Turned to the vat that drops with meath. 

3 Excellent Pavamana, make the lights shine brightly 

out for us: 

Speed us to mental power and skill. 

4 He, beautified by pious men, and coming from their 

hands adorned, 

Flows through the fleecy straining-cloth. 

5 May Soma pour all treasures of the heavens, the 

earth, the firmament 
Upon the liberal worshipper. 

6 Thou mountest to the height of heaven, O Soma, 

seeking steeds and kine, 

And seeking heroes, lord of strength ! 

HYMN XXXVII. Soma Pavamana. 
Soma, the steer, effused for draught, flows to the 
purifying sieve, 

Slaying the fiends, loving the gods. 

The Rishi is Prabhuvasu, of the family of Angiras. The metre is 
Gayatri. 

1 From, the two press-boards: two planks, between which the stalks 
of the Soma-plant, after they have been bruised by the pressing- 
stones, are thoroughly squeezed so that £.11 the juice may be extracted. 
To the goal: kdrshman: apparently, a line or furrow drawn across the 
■end of the race-course. In I. 116. 17, Sayana explains kdrshman as 
a piece of wood serving as a goal, be t in this place he takes it to 
mean, ‘the god-attracting battle-field called a sacrifice,’ devdndmdkar- 
shanavati yajndkhye sangrdme. See Professor Cowell's Note in 
Wilson’s Translation, 

2 The vat the dronakalasa. 

The Rishi is Rahugana, of the family of Angiras. The metre is 
Gayatri. 

1 For draught: pltaye: 1 for the drinking (of the gods).’—Wilson, 



306 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK IX. 

2 Far-sighted, tawny-coloured, he flows to the sieve, 

intelligent, 

Bellowing, to his place of rest. 

3 This vigorous Pavamana runs forth to the luminous 

realm of heaven, 

Fiend-slayer, through the fleecy sieve. 

4 This Pavam&na up above Trita’s high ridge hath 

made the Sun, 

Together with the sisters, shine. 

5 This Vritra-slaying steer, effused, Soma, room-giver, 

ne’er deceived, 

Hath gone, as ’twere, to win the spoil. 

6 Urged onward by the sage, the god speeds forward 

to the casks of wood, 

Indu to Indra willingly. 

HYMN XXXVIII. Soma Pavamana. 
This steer, this chariot, rushes through the woollen 
filter, as he goes 

To war that wins a thousand spoils. 

2 The dames of Trita with the stones onward impel 
this tawny one, 

Indu to Indra for his drink. 


2 Intelligent: or, endowed with strength. 

4 Trita's high ridge: according to Say ana, ‘ the high place (of the 
sacrifice) of Trita’ the Rishi. But probably the heavenly home of 
Trita, the celestial preparer of the Soma-juice for Indra, is intended. 

The sisters: the Dawns. 

6 Willingly: manhand: ‘plenteously.’—Ludwig. ‘In his might.’— 
Cowell. 

The Rishi is Rahugana, of the family of Angiras. The metre is 
Gayatri. 

1 To war that wins a thousand spoils: more literally, to thousand¬ 
fold booty, or deed of might. 

2 The dames of Trita: as Trita is the celestial purifier of the 
Soma, the fingers of the earthly purifiers are called his dames, or bis 
maidens as in IX. 32. 2. 



1IYMV 39 ] THE RIGVEDA. 397 

3 Him, here, the gold-decked skilful ten adorn with 

care, who make him bright 
And beauteous for the gladdening draught. 

4 He like a falcon settles down amid the families of 

men, 

Speeding like lover to his love. 

5 This young exhilarating juice looks downward from 

its place in heaven, 

This Soma-drop that pierced the sieve. 

6 Poured for the draught, this tawny juice flows forth, 

intelligent, crying out, 

Unto the well-beloved place. 

HYMN XXXIX. Soma Pavamana. 
Flow on, 0 thou of lofty thought, flow swift in thy 
beloved form, 

Saying, 1 go where dwell the gods. 

2 Preparing what is unprepared, and bringing store 

of food to man, 

Make thou the rain descend from heaven. 

3 With might, bestowing power, the juice enters the 

purifying sieve, 

Far-seeing, sending forth its light. 

4 This is it which in rapid course hath with the river’s 

wave flowed down 

From heaven upon the straining-cloth. 


3 The gold-decked skilful ten : the fingers wearing gold-rings. Iiari- 
tah , is explained by Sayana as ‘grasping;’ by Professor Urassmauu 
as ‘mares;’ and by Professor Wilson as ‘ fingers.’ 

5 From its place in heaven or divah may be the genitive case, 
taken with sisuh, the child of heaven, as in IX. 33. 5. 

6 The well-beloved place : the dronakala-.ia or vat in which it rests. 


The Rishi is Brihanmati of the family of Angiras. The metre is 
Gayatri. 

2 Preparing what is unprepared: ' con?ecrating the unconsecrated 
worshipper or place,’ is Sayana’s explanation. 




398 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK IX. 

5 Inviting him from far away, and even from near 

at hand, the juice 

For Indra is poured forth as meath. 

6 In union they have sung the hymn: with stones they 

urge the tawny one. 

Sit in the place of sacrifice. 

HYMN XL. Soma Pavauiana. 

The very active hath assailed, while purified, all 
enemies : 

They deck the sage with holy songs. 

2 The red hath mounted to his place; to Indra goes 

the mighty juice: 

He settles in his firm abode. 

3 0 Indu, Soma, send us now great opulence from 

every side, 

Pour on us treasures thousandfold. 

4 O Soma Pavatnana, bring, Indu, all splendours hither¬ 

ward : 

Find for us food in boundless store. 

5 As thou art cleansed, bring hero strength and riches 

to thy worshipper, 

And prosper thou the singer’s hymns. 

6 0 Indu, Soma, being cleansed, bring hither riches 

doubly-piled, 

Wealth, mighty Indu, meet for lauds. 


6 Sit: 0 gods.—Sayana. 

The Rishi iB Brihanmati, of the family of Angiras. The metre is 
Gayatri. 

2 The red: Soma. His place: the dronakalasa, or reservoir. His 
firm abode: heaven. 

6 Doubly-piled: dvibarhasam: according to Sayana, ‘ from both 
worlds, heaven and earth. 



HYMN 42 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


399 


HYMN XLI. Soma Pavamana. 

Active and bright have they come forth, impetuous 
in speed like bulls, 

Driving the black skin far away 

2 Quelling the riteless Dasyu, may we think upon the 

bridge of bliss, 

Leaving the bridge of woe behind. 

3 The mighty Pavam&na’s roar is heard as ’twere the 

rush of rain : 

Lightnings are flashing to the sky. 

4 Pour out on us abundant food, when thou art press¬ 

ed, 0 Indu, wealth 

In kine and gold and steeds and strength. 

5 Flow on thy way, most active, thou : fill full the 

mighty heavens and earth, 

As Dawn, as Sftrya with his beams. 

6 On every side, 0 Soma, flow round us with thy pro¬ 

tecting stream, 

As Ras& flows around the world. 

HYMN XLI 1. Soma Pavamana. 

Engendering the Sun in floods, engendering heaven’s 
lights, green-hued, 

Robed in the waters and the milk, 

2 According to primeval plan this Soma, with his 

stream, effused 

Flows purely on, a god for gods. 

3 For him victorious, waxen great, the juices with a 

thousand powers 
Are purified for winning spoil. 

The Riahi is Medhyatithi, of the family of itanva. The metre is Gayatri. 

1 They: the Soma-juices. The black skin : meaning, apparently, 
both the black pall or covering of night and the Rikshasas or dark- 
akinned Dasyus or hostile aborigines. 

6 Rasd: a mythical stream that flows round the atmosphere and 
the earth. See V. 41. 15, and X. 108. 1. 

The Rishi is Medhyatithi, of the family of Kanva. Themetre is Gayatri. 
1 In floods: in the waters on high; in the firmament. 



400 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK IX. 

4 Shedding the ancient fluid he is poured into the 

cleansing sieve: 

Roaring, he hath produced the gods. 

5 Soma, while purifying, sends hither all things to be 

desired, 

He sends the gods who strengthen Law. 

6 Soma, effused, pour on us wealth in kine, in heroes, 

steeds, and strength, 

Send us abundant store of food. 

HYMN XLIII. Soma Pavamana. 

We will enrobe with sacred song the lovely one who, 
as a steed, 

Is decked with milk for rapturous joy. 

2 All songs of ours desiring grace adorn him in the 

ancient way, 

Indu for Indra, for his drink. 

3 Soma flows on when purified, belovbd and adorned 

with songs, 

Songs of the sage Medhyatithi. 

4 0 Soma Pavamana, find exceeding glorious wealth 

for us, 

Wealth, Indu, fraught with boundless might. 

5 Like courser racing to the prize Indu, the lover of 

the gods, 

Roars, as he passes, in the sieve. 

6 Flow on thy way to win us strength, to speed the 

sage who praises thee : 

Soma, bestow heroic power. 

4 Hi hath produced the gods: yat.ra somo ’bhishuyate latra devA 
niyatdtn pr&durbhavanti; where Soma is effused, there the gods 
constantly appear.—Sayana. 

The Rishi is Medhyatithi. The metre is GUyatri. 

1 4s a steed : is bathed in water. For rapturous joy: ‘ for the 
exhilaration (of the gods).’—Wilson. 

5 Racing to the prize: vdjasrit: ‘rushing into battle.’—Wilson. 

6 Heroic power: ‘ excelleut male offspring.’— Wilson. 



HYMN 45.j 


the mar eda. 


401 


HYMN XLIV. Soma Pavam&na. 

Indu, to us for thfs great rite, bearing as ’twere thy 
wave to gods, 

Unwearied, thou art flowing forth. 

2 Pleased with the hymn, impelled by prayer, Soma is 

hurried far away, 

The seer in the sage’s stream. 

3 Watchful among the gods, this juice advances to 

the cleansing sieve: 

Soma, most active, travels on. 

4 Flow onward, seeking strength for us, embellishing 

the sacrifice : 

The priest with trimmed grass calleth thee. 

5 May Soma, ever bringing power to Btiaga and to 

Vtyyu, sage 

And hero, lead us to the gods. 

6 So, to increase our wealth to-day, inspirer, best of 

furtherers, 

Win for us strength and high renown. 

HY MN XLV. Soma Pavamina. 

Flow, thou who viewest men, to give delight, to 
entertain the gods, 

Indu, to Iudra for his drink. 


The Rishi is Ayasya, of the family of Angiras. The metre is 
Gayatri. 

1 For this great rite: ‘to give us abundant wealth.’—Wilson. 
According to the St. Petersburg Lexicon, the meaning of lane is * for 
duration or oontinuauoe,' i. e. that we may have a sueoeasion of 
children and descendants. Unwearied: aydsyah: aocordiug to Saynpa, 
this is the name of the Rishi: ‘ Ayasya (goeth) towards the gods (in 
sacrifice).’—Wilsou. 

The Rishi is Ayasya, of the family of Angiras. The metre is 
Gayatri. 




THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX. 

2 Stream to thine embassy for us: thou hastenest, for 

Indra, to 

The gods, O better than our friends. 

3 We balm thee, red of hue, with milk to fit thee for the 

rapturous joy : 

Unbar for us the doors of wealth. 

4 He through the sieve hath passed, as comes a courser 

to the pole, to run : 

Indu belongs unto the gods. 

5 All friends have lauded him as he sports in the wood, 

beyond the fleece : 

Singers have chanted Indu’s praise. 

C Flow, Indu, with that stream wherein steeped thou 
announcest to the man 
Who worships thee heroic strength. 

HYMN XLVI. Soma Pavamana. 
Like able coursers they have been sent forth to be 
the feast of gods, 

Flowing and strengthening the clouds. 


2 Thou hastenest: Sayana gives a different explanation of this part 
of the staueu: ‘ thou (who) art drunk for Iudra, (pour) on the gods 
wealth for (us their) friends.’—Wilson. I have adopted Professor 
Ludwig’s interpretation. 

3 We balm thee, red of hue: or, Yea, we adorn thee, red. For the 
rapturous joy : maddya: ‘ for the purpose of exhilaration.’—Wilson. 

4 'To the pole: the meaning of dhuram here is not clear, and the 
comparison is not obvious. ‘ As a horse in going passes the shaft 
(of the chariot,).’—Wilsou. 1 As a home (presses) through the yoke.’— 
Grnssman. Professor Ludwig suggests ‘hedge’ or ‘barrier’ as the 
probable meaning of the word in this place. 

5 In the wood, beyond the. fleece: when he has passed through the 
woollen straiuer and fallen into the wooden trough or vat. Singers: 
ndvdh : shouts of joy, according to the St Petersburg Lexicon. 

The Rishi is Ayasya, of the family of Angiras. The metre is Gayatri. 

I 'They have been sent forth: asrigran, effusi sunt, is applicable 
both to the effused Soma-drops aud to horses loosed or started for a 
race. Strengthening the clouds: or, produced upon the hills. 




HYMN 47.j 


THE RIG VEDA. 


403 


2 To Vayu How the Soma-streams, the drops of juice 

made beautiful 

Like a bride dowered by her sire. 

3 Poured on the pressing-planks, these drops of juice, 

the Somas rich in food, 

Give strength to Indra with their work. 

4 Deft-handed men, run hither, seize the brilliant 

juices blent with meal, 

And cook with milk the gladdening draught. 

5 Thus, Soma, conqueror of wealth ! flow, finding fur¬ 

therance for us, 

Giver of ample opulence. 

6 This Pavamana, meet to be adorned, the fingers ten 

adorn, 

The draught that shall make Indra glad. 

HYMN XLVII. Soma Pavamana. 
Great as he was, Soma hath gained strength by this 
high solemnity : 

Joyous he riseth like a bull. 

2 His task is done: his crushings of the Dasyus are 

made manifest : 

He sternly reckoneth their debts. 

3 Soon as his song of praise is born, the Soma, Indra’s 

juice, becomes 

A thousand-winning thunderbolt. 


2 Dowered by her sire: meaning, perhaps, possessed of property in¬ 
herited from her father. 

4 Deft handed: suhastyah cannot ho satisfactorily accounted for. 
Suhastyd, a dual, may have been the original reading. See Ludwig’s 
Commentary, Vol. V. pp. 347, 348. 

The Rishi is Kavi, of the family of Bhrigu. The metre isGayatri. 

1 Riseth : or, roareth. Sabdam karoti: —Sayana. 

2 He sternly reckoneth their debts: ‘ resolute he acquits the debts 
(of the worshipper).’—Wilson. 

3 A thousand-winning thunderbolt . all-poworful to Slay the wicked 
and to reward worshippers, 



404 THF. HYMNS OF [BOOK IX. 

4 Seer, sustainer, he himself ilesireth riches for the sage 
When he embellisheth his songs. 

5 Fain would they both win riches as in races of the 

steeds. In war 

Thou art upon the conquerors’ side. 

HYMN XLVIII. Soroa Pavamana. 
With -sacrifice we seek to thee kind cherisher of 
manly might 

In mansions of the lofty heavens ; 

2 Gladdening, crusher of the bold, ruling with very 

mighty sway, 

Destroyer of a hundred forts. 

3 Hence, sapient one! the falcon, strong of wing, 

unwearied, brought thee down, 

Lord over riches, from the sky. 

4 That each may see the light, the bird brought us the 

guard of Law, the friend 
Of all, the speeder through the air. 

5 And now, sent forth, it hath attained to mighty 

power and majesty, 

Most active, ready to assist 


4 Sustained: I follow Professor Ludwig in taking vidkartari as 
a nominative singular, But see Professor ■Cowell’s Note in Wilson’s 
Translation. 

5 They both : Soma and the sage or singer.—L. Sayana interprets 
the stansa differently :—‘ Thou desiroat to give wealth to those who 
conquer in combat as {mcu offer fodder) to horses in battle.’—Wilson. 

The Rishi is Kavi, of the family of Bbrigu. The metre is Gayatri. 

1 Kind cherisher of manly mi'jht: ‘ auspicious bearing wealth.’— 
Wilson. 

2 Forts: cloud-castles of the demons of the air, or strong-holds 
of the hostile aborigines. 

3 The falcon: see Vols. I. aud II., Index, under lfaiok, aud 
Falcon. 

4 The friend of all: or, the common possession. The speeder 
throuyh the air: rgjasturam,: ‘ the showerer of water.’—Wilsou. 



HYMN 50.] 


THE RIG VET) A: 


405 


HYMN XLIX Soma Pavam&na. 

Pour down the rain upon us, pour a wave of waters 
from the sky,. 

And plenteous store of wholesome food'. 

2 Flow onward with that stream, of thine, whereby 

the cows have come to us, 

The kine of strangers to our home. 

3 Chief friend of gods in sacred rites, pour on us 

fatness with thy stream-, 

Pour down on us a flood of rain*. 

4 To give us vigour, with thy stream run. through the 

fleecy straining-cloth : 

For verily the gods will hear. 

5 Onward hath Pa vain ana flowed and beaten off the 

Rakshasas, 

Flashing out splendour as of old. 

HYMN- L. Soma Pavaniana. 

Loud as a river’s roaring wave thy powers have lifted 
up themselves: 

Urge on thine arrow’s sharpened point. 


The Rishi is Kavi, of the family of Bhrigu. The metre is Gayatri. 

4 The gods will hear: the sound that thou nvakest in flowing.— 
Sayan a. 

5 Flashing out splendour as of old: or, Making lights Bliine as 
erst they shone. 

The Risbi is Uchathya, of the family of Angirae. The metre is 
Gayatri. 

1 Urge on thine arrow's sharpened point: xxhutsya chodayd puvim : 
apparently a bold metaphorical expression for, make a noise like that 
of a discharged arrow. ‘Emit thy Bound like that of a (rushing) 
arrow.’—Wilson, Or vdnasya may mean of (thy) reed, pipe, fluto, or 
other musical instrument, and Sayaiia explains pavim by sabdam. 
Benfey accordingly (Samaveda, II. 5. I. 5. 1.) renders the passag# ; 
Eibebe deiner Ftbte Sohall, Lift up the music of thy flute. 



406 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX. 

2 At thine effusion upsvard rise three voices full of joy, 

when thou 

Flowest upon the fleecy ridge. 

3 On to the fleece they urge with stones the tawny 

well-beloved one, 

Even Pavam&na, dropping meath. 

4 Flow with thy current to the sieve, O sage most 

powerful to cheer, 

To seat thee in the place of song. 

5 Flow, most exhilarating! flow anointed with the 

milk for balm, 

Indu, for Indra, for his drink, 

HYMN LI. Soma Pavamaua. 

Adhvaryu, on the filter pour the Soma-juice express¬ 
ed with stones, 

And make it pure for Indra’s drink. 

2 Pour out for Indra, thunder-armed, the milk of 

heaven, the Soma’s juice. 

Most excellent, most rich in sweets. 

3 These gods and all the Marut host, Indu ! enjoy this 

juice of thine, 

This Pavamana’s flowing meath. 

4 For, Soma, thou hast been effused, strengthening 

for the wild carouse, 

O steer, the singer, for our help. 

5 Flow with thy stream, far-sighted one, effused, iutc 

the cleansing sieve: 

Flow on to give us strength and fame. 


2 Three voices full of joy: or, three several joyful words. See IX. 
33. 4. The fleecy ridge: ‘ the summit of the fleece.’—Wilson. 

4 In the place of song: see IX. 25. 6. ‘Ou Indra’s Jap.’—Wilson, 


The Rishi is Uchathya, of the family of Angiras. The metre is 
Gayatri. 

4 For the wild carouse ; ! for speedy exhilaration.’—Wilson. 



408 THE 71YIf NS OF [ROOK IX. 

2 Thou conquerest thus with might when car meets car, 

and when the prize is staked : 

With fearless heart will I sing praise. 

3 No one with evil thought assails this Pavam&na’s 

holy laws: 

Crush him who fain would fight with thee. 

4 For Indra to the streams they drive the tawny 

rapture-dropping steed, 

Indu the bringer of delight. 

HYMN LIV. Soma Pavam&na. 

After his ancient splendour, they, the bold, have 
drawn the bright milk from 
The sage who wins a thousand gifts. 

2 In aspect he is like the Sun; he runneth forward to 

the lakes : 

Seven currents flowing to the sky. 

3 He, while they purify him, stands high over all 

things that exist— 

Soma, a god as Sfirya is. 

4 Thou, Indu, being purified, pourest on us, as Indra s 

friend, 

Strength from the kine to feast the gods. 

2 When car meets car: in battle. When the prize i» staked: iu tbe 
chariot-race; or the reference may be also to battle. 

4 To the streams : the vasativari waters. 

The Risbi is Avatsira, of tbe family of Kasyapa, The metre is 
G&yatri. 

1 They, the bold: tbe Soraa-pressers. The sage : or rishi; tbe Soma- 
plant. 

2 The lakes: according to Say ana, thirty ukthap&tra's, vessels or 
libations offered during tbe recitation of an vktha. Seven currents floio 
ing to the sky: corresponding to the seven earthly rivers. ‘ He unites 
with the Beven down-descending rivers of heaven.’—Wilson. 

4 Strength: strengthening food. From the kine: consisting of 
milk, ourds, etc. 


HYMN 53 ] 


THE RWVEDA. 


40T 


HYMN ^ Soma Pavamanft. 

Wealth-winner, dwelling in the sky, bringing us 
vigour with the juice, 

Flow to the filter when effused. 

2 So, in thine ancient ways, may he, beloved, with 

a thousand streams 
Run o’er the fleecy straining-cloth. 

3 Him who is like a caldron shake: 0 Indu, shake 

thy gift to us. 

Shake it, armed warrior! with thine arms. 

4 Indu, invoked with many a prayer, bring down the 

vigour of these men, 

Of him who threatens us with war. 

5 Indu, wealth-giver, with thine help pour out for us 

a hundred, yea, 

A thousand of thy pure bright streams. 

HYMN LIII. Soma Pavamana. 

O thou with stones for arms, thy powers, crushing 
the fiends, have raised themselves : 

Chase thou the hosts that compass us. 

The Rishi is Uchathya, of the family of Angiraa. The metre is 
Gayatri. 

2 May he: the juice, regarded as distinct from Soma who is ad-' 
dressed. 

3 Him who is like a caldron: beat or bruise the Soma that is full 
of juice as a caldron is of water. With thine anus: or, with the 
blows (of the pressing-stones) The meaning of the second and 
third ‘ shake’ seems to be ‘ send rapidly.’ ‘ (Soma), send (us) him 
who is like a pot; Indu, send us uow wealth; swiff-flowing (Soma), 
send it with blows (of the stones).'—Wilson. Professor Grassmann 
says that by 1 him who is like a caldron’ the wealthy enemy is intended, 
•whose possessions are to be poured out upon the pious worshipper. 


The Rishi is Avatsara, of the family of Kasyapa. The metre is 
Gayatri. 

I With stones for arms : adrivah: generally an appellative of Indra, 
the slinger or caster of the stone or thunderbolt; here, according to 
Sayana, = grdvavan soma, 0 Soma, possessor of, that is, expressed by, 
the atones. 




IIYMN 56.] 


THE RIGVEDA. 


409 


HYMN LV. Soma Puvamana. 

Pour on us with thy juice all kinds of corn, each 
sort of nourishment, 

And, Soma, all felicities. 

2 As thine, O Indu, is the praise, and thine what 

springeth from the juice, 

Seat thee on the dear sacred grass. 

3 And, finding for us kine and steeds, O Soma, with 

thy juice flow on 

Through days that fly most rapidly. 

4 As one who conquers, ne’er subdued, attacks and 

slays the enemy, 

Thus, vanquisher of thousands ! flow. 

HYMN LYI. Soma Pavamana. 

Swift to the purifying sieve flows Soma as exalted 
Law, 

Slaying the fiends, loving the gods. 

2 When Soma pours the strengthening food a hundred 

ever-active streams 
To Indra’s friendship win their way. 

3 Ten dames have sung to welcome thee, even as a 

maiden greets her love : 

O Soma, thou art decked to win. 

4 Flow hitherward, O Indu, sweet to Indra and tc 

Vishnu : guard 

The men, the singers, from distress. 


The Rishi is Avatsara, of the family of Kasyapa. The metro is 
Gayatrt 

4 Vanquisher of thousands: or, thou who winnest thousands, i. e. 
countless spoils or treasures. 

The Rishi is Avatsara, of the family of Kasyapa. The metre is 
G&yatri. 

3 Ten dames: the fingers, whose sound is heard in the operation of 
pressing the Soma-juice. 



410 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK IX. 


HYMN LVII. Soma PnvaniA.ua. 

Thy streams that never fail or waste flow forth like 
showers of rain from heaven, 

To bring a thousand stores of strength. 

2 He flows beholding on his way all well-belovkd 

sacred lore, 

Green-tinted, brandishing his arms. 

3 He, when the people deck him like a docile king of 

elephants, 

Sits as a falcon in the wood. 

4 So bring thou hitherward to us, Indu, while thou 

art purified, 

All treasures both of heaven and earth. 

HYMN LYIII. Soma Ptivanianu. 
Swift runs this giver of delight, even the stream of 
flowing juice : 

Swift runs this giver of delight. 

2 The Morning knows all precious things, the goddess 
knows her grace to man : 

Swift runs this giver of delight. 


The Kishi is Avatsara, of the family of Kasyapa. The metre is 
Gayatri. 

3 Like a docile king of elephants: Professor Roth, in the St. 
Petersburg Lexicon, suggests Me for ibhah, ‘ like a pious king among 
his retinue;’ but no alteration is necessary, ibhah and rdjd being 
taken together in the sense of elephant-king or stately and nobks 
elephant. See Vedische Studien, p. XV. Sits as a falcon in the wood; 
in the wood, as referring to the Soma, meaning the wooden trough 
or vat. ‘Sits on the waters like a hawk.—Wilson. 

The Kishi is Avatsara, of the family of Kasyapa. The metre 
is Gayatri. 

1 Swift; tarat: 1 rescuing (his worshippers from sin).’—Wilson. 



HYMN 59.] 


i'HE RIO VEDA. 


411 


3 We have accepted thousands from Dhvasra’s and 

Purusbanti’s hands: 

Swift runs this giver of delight. 

4 From whom we have accepted thus thousands and 

three times ten besides : 

Swift runs this giver of delight. 

HYMN LIX. Soma Pavaniana. 

Flow onward, Soma, winning kine, and steeds, and 
all that gives delight: 

Bring hither wealth with progeny. 

2 Flow onward from the waters, flow, inviolable, from 

the plants: 

Flow onward from the pressing-boards. 

3 Soma, as Pavamdna, pass over all trouble and distress. 
Sit on the sacred grass, a sage. 

4 O Pavam4na, find the light; great wast thou even 

at thy birth: 

O Indu, thou art over all. 


3 Dhvasra and Purushanti were “ two kiugs who conferred great 
wealth ou Taranto, and Purumitha, two yishis of the fumily of Vida- 
dasiva. See p. XXXIII of Max-Muller's Rig-veda, Yol. V.” Frofcssor 
Cowell’s Note iu Wilson’s Translation. 

4 Thus thousands and three times ten: Sayana, taking land (thus, 
in this manner) to mean ‘garments,’ mistaking trihsatam, thirty, for 
trisatam, three hundred, and neglecting the cha (and), interprets 
‘three hundred thousand garments.’ ‘Thirty robes and thousands.’— 
E. B. Cowell. Professor Grassmann places this hymn in his Appendix 
as a composition of fragments and out of place where it stands iu 
the text. 

The Rishi is Avatsara, of the family of Kasyapa. The metre is 

ayatri. 

2 The waters : the vasativari, waters. The pressing-hoards : dhishand- 
bhyah : according to Sayana, yrdvdbhyah, the pressing stones. 

4 Find the light: svak vidah.: ‘ grant all boons.’—Wilson. Thou 
art over all: ‘ thou ovcrcomest iu might all enemies.’—Sayana. 



412 


THE RIGVEDA. 


[BOOK IX. 


HYMN LX. Soma Pavamana. 

Sino forth and laud with sacred song most active 
Pavamana, laud 

Indu who sees with thousand eyes. 

2 Thee who hast thousand eyes to see, bearer of 

thousand burthens, they 
Have filtered through the fleecy cloth. 

3 He, Pavamana, hath streamed through the fleece : 

he runs into the jars, 

Finding his way to Indra’s heart. 

4 That Indra may be bounteous, flow, most active 

Soma, happily: 

Bring genial seed with progeny. 


The Ristii is Avatsara, of the family of Kasyapa. The metre is 
Gayatri. 

1 With sacred song: gdyatrena : ‘ with a Gdyatri hymn.’—Wilson. 

2 Bearer of thousand burthens: or, bringer of thousand bounties. 

4 Happily: or, for our weal. 



INDEX OF HYMNS. 

BOOK VII. 


I 1Deity. Metre. 

£ 

1 Vasishthn Mai- Agni. Vnaj. 19-25 Trishtup. 

travaruni. 

2 The same Apris Trishtup. 

3 . Agni. The saute. 

4 . Agni. . 

5 . Vaiavanara Agni. . 

Q . The same. . 

7 . Agni. . 

8 . The same. . 

9 . .. . 

10 . . . 

11 . . . 

12 .. . . 

13 . Vaiavanara Agni. . 

. Agni. 1 Biihati. 2,3 Trishtup. 

15 . The same. Gayatri. 

jg . . Brilmtt and Satohrihatt 

alternately. 

17 . .. Dvi pad a Trishtup. 

]8 .... Imlr.'i- Munificence Trishtup. 

of Sudii-i (22-25). 

19 . India. . 

20 . The same. . 

21 . . . 

22 . . Viraj. 9 Trishtup. 

23 . . Trishtup. 

24 . . .. 

25 . . . 

26 . . . 

27 . . . 

28 . . . 

29 . . . 































































11 


l.NTFX OF HYMN'S. 


30 

31 

32 


33 


34 


35 

36 

37 

38 

39 

40 

41 


42 

43 
.44 

45 

46 

47 

48 

49 

50 


51 

52 

53 

54 

55 


50 


Iiishi. 


Duty. 


Metre. 


Vasislitha. Indra. 


Vasishtha. Sakti 
Vasishtha. 


Vasishtha. His 
sons (10-14). 
Vasislitha. 

The same. 


Vasishtlia’s sons. 

Vasislitha (10-14). 
Visvedevas. Ahi. 

Ahirhudhnya. 

Visvedevas. 

The same. 


Trishtup. 

Gayatri. 10-12 Viraj. 

Brihati and Satobrihati 
alternately. 3 Dvipa- 
da Viraj. 

Trishtup. 

Dvipadi. 22-25 Trish- 
tnp. 

Trishtup. 


Savitar. Savitar or 
Bhaga. Vajiiis (7-8). 

Visvedevas. . 

The same. . 

Various (1). Bhaga. Trishtup. 1 Jngati. 

Uslias. 

Visvedevas. Trishtup. 

The same. . 

Various (1). Dadhikras. Trishtup. 1 Jagath 

Savitar. Trishtup. 

Kudra. Jagati. 4 Trishtup. 

Waters. Trishtup. 

Rihhus. Riblius or . 

Visvedevas. 


Waters. . 

Mitra and Varuna. Jagati. 4 Atijngati 
Agni. Visvedevas. or Sakvari. 

Praise of Rivers. 

Adityas. Trishtup. 

The same. . 

Heaven and Earth. . 

Vastoshpati. . 

V&stoshpati. Iudra. 1 Gayatri. 2-4 Uparish- 
tadbrihati. 5 8 Anuah- 
tup. 

Maruts. Ill Dvipada Vivaj. 

12-25 Trishtup. 





































INDEX OF HYMNS. 


Ill 


1 Rtshi. Deity. Metre. 

£ 

57 . The same. Trishtnp. 

58 . . . 

59 . Marnts. Kndra (12). 1, 3. 5 Brihati. 2, 4, 6 

Satobriliati. 7, 8 Tri- 
shtup. 9-11 Gayatri. 
12 Anushtnp. 

CO . .. Siirya. Mitra and Trishtnp. 

Vanina 

61 . Mitra and Vanina. .. 

62 . Siirya. Mitra and . 

Vanina. 

63 . Siirya. Mitra and . 

Vanina. 

64 Vasishtha. Mitra and Varmia. Trishtnp. 

65 The same. The same. . 

66 .. Mitra and Varnna. Gayatri. 10-15 Brihati 

Adityas. Surya, and Satobrihati alter¬ 

nately. 1G Para nsh- 
nih. 


07 . 

.. Aavins. 

Trishtnp. 

68 . 

.. The same. 

Viraj. 8 , 9 Trishtnp 

69 . 

.. . • • * •iffiS' 

Trishtnp. 

?n 



i-r | 


72 

73 


74 . . Brihati and Satobriliati - 

alternately. 

75 . Ushas or Dawn. Trishtnp. 

76 . . 

77 . . . 


78 

79 

80 


87 . . Brihati and Satobriliati 

alternately. 

82 . Indra and Varnna. Jagati. 

83 . The same. . 

84 . . Trishtup. 

85 . . . 




























































IV 


INDEX OF HVMNA 


8 liisMi. Deity. Metre. 

& 

*s 

86 . Vanina. . 

87 . The same. . 

88 . . . 

89 . . Gayatri. 5 Jftgath 

90 . Vayu. India and Vayu. Trishtup. 

91 . ... The same. ... 

92 . The same. .. 

93 . Indra and Agui. . 

94 . The same. Gayatri. 12 Anush tup. 

95 ~t .. Sarasvati, Sarasvau. Trishtup. 

96 . The same. 1 Brihati. 2 Satobriha- 

li. 3 Prastarapankti. 
4 6 Gayatri. 

97 YMtahtha. Indra. Brihaspati. In- Trishtup. 

dra and Brahmanas- 
pati. Indra and Bri- 
iiaspati. 

98 . Indra. Indra aud . 

Brihaspati 

99 .. Vishnu. Indra . 

and Vishnu. 

100 . Vishnu. . 

101 .. Parjanya. 

102 . The same. 1, 3 GaLyatri. 2 Padani- 

chrit. 

]03 . Frogs. Trishtup. 1 Anushtup. 

|04 . Indiaund Soma. Indra. Trishtup. 1-6, 18,21, 

Soma. Agui. The 23 Jagati. 7 Jagati or 

gods. Press-stones. Trishtup. 25 Anusb- 

Maruts. Vasishttia’s tup. 

Prayer. Earth aud 
Firmament. 


BOOK VIII. 

1 Pragatlm Kknva Indra. Asanga’s Muni- Brihati. 2, 4 Satobri 
(l,2),Medti4tit.hi fieeuce. Asanga. hath33, 34 Trishtup 

<feMedhya.tithit3- 
29), Asanga (30- 
33), S.isvati (34). 































