===== Internet Archive OCR: 6827_djvu.txt =====

X 




THE 


\ 




\ 


HYMNS OF THE RIGVEDA 

TRANSLATED WITH A POPULAR COMMENTARY 


BY 


RALPH T. H. GRIFFITH, 

FORMERLY PRINCIPAL OF REN ARES COLLEGE. 



. IA 


VOL. IV. 

<# 


Y,fU- 


BENARES: 

E. J. LAZARUS AND CO 


,/Y >' 

/ t | 

>X, 0 .. 

\ 

v < 



v i. n 



1892. 


• *> it - 






4 





3937 

’V l; ‘' 



<8L 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


VOLUME IV. 

Pages, 

Book IX —Hymns LXI.—CXIV. 

1—106 

Book X.— „ * 

107 — 416 

Appendix. 

I.—V. 

Index of Hymns. 

VII.—XVI. 

Index of Names, Etc. 

XVII—XXVI 

General Index. I, v 

XXVII.—XXX, 

General Index. II. 

XXXI.—Lit, 

General Index. III. 

• ■ *s ' , 

Lin.— liv. 


* For Hymn* CLXlt, CLXIII., CLXXXIV. see Appendix. 







MiNisr^ 



THE HYMNS OP THE BIGVEDA. 


BOOK THE NINTH (continued). 

* — k 

H YMN LX I. Soma PavamAna. 

Fr.ow onward, Inclu, with this food for him who in 
thy wild delight 

Battered the nine-and-ninety down, 

2 Smote swiftly forts, and Sambara, then Yadu and 

that Turvasa, 

For pious Divodasa’s sake. 

3 Finder of horses, pour on us horses and wealth in 

kine and gold, 

And, Tndu, food in boundless store. 

4 We seek to win thy friendly love, even Pavamana’s 

flowing o er 

The limit of the cleansing sieve. 

5 With those same waves which in their stream o’er- 

flow the purifying sieve, 

Soina, be gracious unto us. 

6 O Soma, being purified, bring us from all sides,—for 

thou canst,— 

Riches and food with hero sous. 


The Rishi is Amahiyu, of the family of Augiraa. The metre is 
Gayatri, 

1 The nw.-v.ndninety : ‘ninety-nine (cities of the foe).’— Wilson. 

2 For Yadu and Turvasa see Vol. I., Index. 

J In lvund!m store : literally, in thousands. 








misrfy 



THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK IX. 


7 Him here, the child whom Sindhu bare, the ten swift 

fingers beautify : 

With the Adityas is he seen. 

8 With Indra and with Vilyu he, effused, flows onward 

with the beams 

Of SArya to the cleansing sieve. 

9 Flow rich in sweets and lovely for our Bhaga, V&yu, 

Ptishan, flow 

For Mitra and for Vanina. 

10 High is thy juice’s birth: though set in heaven, on 

earth it hath obtained 
Strong sheltering power and great renown. 

11 Striving to win, with him we gain all wealth from 

the ungodly man, 

Yea, all the glories of mankind. 

12 Finder of room and freedom, flow for Indra whom we 

must adore, 

For Varuna and the Marut host. 

13 The gods have come to Indu well-descended, beauti¬ 

fied with milk, 

The active crusher of the foe. 

14 Even as mother cows their calf, so let our praise-songs 

. strengthen him, 

Yea, him who winneth Indra’s heart. 

15 Soma, pour blessings on our kine, pour forth the 

food that streams with milk : 

Increase the sea that merits laud. 


7 Whom. Sindhu bare: sindhwmdtaram: ‘whose parents are the 
rivers.'—Wilson. ‘Sprung from the sea.’—Grassmaun. With the 
Adityas is he seen: that is, he is counted as oue of the Adityas. 

13 Well-descended: sujdktm : literally, well-born or well-produced; 
’ (who is) completely generated.—Wilson. 

15 The sea: samudram: according to Siiyana, water generally. 





misr/?y 


THE RIG VEDA. 


a 



61 .] 


16 From heaven hath Pavamtiiia made, as twere, the 

marvellous thunder, and 
The lofty light of all mankind* 

17 The gladdening and auspicious juice of thee, of 

Pavam&na, king! 

Flows o’er the woollen strainning cloth. 

18 Thy juice, O Pavamflna, sends its rays abroad like 

splendid skill, 

Like lustre, all heaven’s light, to see. 

19 Flow onward with that juice of thine most excellent, 

that brings delight, 

Slaying the wicked, dear to gods. 

20 Killing the foeman and his hate, and daily winning 

strengthening food, 

Gainer art thou of steeds and kine. 

21 Red-hued, be blended with the milk that seems to 

yield its lovely breast, 

Falcon-likc resting in thine home. 

22 Flow onward thou who strengthenedst Indra to 

slaughter Vritra who 
Compassed and stayed the mighty floods. 

23 Soma who rainest gifts, may we win riches with our 

hero sons : 

Strengthen, as thou art cleansed, our hymns, 

24 Aided by thee, and through thy grace, may we be 

slayers when we war : 

Watch, Soma, at our solemn rites. 

25 Chasing our foemen, driving off the godless, Soma 

floweth on, 

Going to Iadra’s meeting-place. 

16 “The purified [Soma] has generated the great light which is 
common to all mankind, like the wonderful thundering of the sky.’'— 
Muir, 0. S. Texts, IV. 112. The great light common to all meu, or 
visvAnnram, or the lofty light of oil mankind, is Agni Vaisvanam. 

20 The foeman and his hate . ‘the hostile Vritra.’ — Wilson. 

25 The godless ; ardvnah : those who present, no sacrificial offerings ; 
‘ the wiihholders (of wealth).’—Wilson. Meeting-place : that is, tho 
vessel set. apart for his libations. 





MIN/Sr^ 


THE HYMNS OF 



[BOOK IX, 


<SL 


26 Q Pavamuna, hither bring great riches, ana destroy 

our foes : 

O Indu, grant heroic fame. 

27 A hundred obstacles have ne’er checked thee when 

fain to give thy boons, 

When, being cleansed, thou combatest. 

28 Indu, flow on, a mighty juice ; glorify us among the 

folk : 

Drive all our enemies away. 

29 Indu, in this thy friendship most lofty and glorious 

may we 

Subdue all those who war with us. 

30 Those awful weapons that thou hast, sharpened at 

point to strike men down— 

Guard us therewith from every foe. 

HYMN LXII. Soma Pavatnana. 

These rapid Soma-drops have been poured through 
the purifying sieve 
To bring us all felicities. 

2 Dispelling manifold mishap, giving the courser’s 

progeny, 

Yea, and the warrior steed, success. 

3 Bringing prosperity to kine, they make perpetual 

III 5 flow 

To U 3 for noble eulogy. 


26 IIeroi<: fame : or, fame with brave sons. 

27 Obstacles: or enemies, according to SAvana. Thou combatest.: 
makhasyaee: according to Sayan a, ‘when thou wisbest to give us 
wealth/ The meanings “fight," “strive," etc., arc foreign to Sayana, 
I eiui derived from a comparison of pa^io/tcHt, macto > etc.- Editor’s 
Note in Wilson’s Translation. 


The rtibhi is Jiunadagni, of the family of Bbrign. 
Crftvitt it. 

:? M: here, according to Sayana, meaning ‘food. 

refreshing draught.-^-Grasbrnaun. 


The metre i. 

4 Labeferank.' 








misr/ty 


■ <SL 

TIIE RIG VEDA. & 

4 Strong, mountain-born, the stalk hath been pressed 

in the streams for rapturous joy : 

Hawk-like he settles in his home. 

5 Fair is the god-loved juice ; the plant is washed iii 

waters, pressed by priests : 

The milch-ldne sweeten it with milk. 

6 As drivers deck a courser, so have they adorned the 

meath’s juice for u 

Ambrosia, for the festival. 

7 Thou, Indu, with thy streams that drop sweet juices, 

which were poured for help, 

Hast settled in the cleansing sieve. 

8 So flow thou onward through the fleece, for India 

flow, to be his drink, 

Finding thine home in vats of wood. 

9 As giving room and freedom, as most sweet, pour 

butter forth and milk, 

O Indu, for the Angirasas. 

10 Most active and benevolent, this Pavamana, sent to us 
For lofty friendship, meditates. 

11 Queller of curses, mighty, with strong sway, this 

Pavam&na shall 

Bring treasures to the worshipper. 

12 Pour thou upon us thousandfold possessions, both of 

kiue and steeds, 

Exceeding' glorious, mueli-desired. 



7 'iff 

HYMN 62.] 


4 The stalk: the .Soma plant, which is said to have grown on the 
mountains. 

5 Ju waters: the vaSativari waters. 

6 For ambrosia : amritdya: ‘for the sake of immortality - - V* iison. 
» For the Anoirasm: or, from the Angirasas. The Jamadugnh 

were not members of that family,—L. 

10 Meditates: ‘ is known (to all)/—Wilson. 





C 



<SL 

THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX, 


13 Wanderin* far, with wise designs, the juice here 

present is effused, 

Made beautiful by living men. 

14 For Indra flows the gladdening drink, the measurer 

of the region, sage, 

With countless wealth and endless help. 

15 Born on the mountain, lauded here, Indu for Indra 

is set down, 

As in her sheltering nest a bird. 

16 Pressed by the men, as ’twere to war hath Soma 

Pavamfina sped, 

To rest with might within the cups. 

17 That he may move, they yoke him to the three- 

backed triple-seated car 
By the seven Bishis* holy songs. 

18 Drive ye that tawny courser, O ye pressers, on his 

way to war, 

Swift steed who carries off the spoil. 

19 Pouring all glories hither, he, effused and entering 

the jar, 

Stands like a hero ’mid the kine. 


13 Wandeing far; urug&yah: according to Sayana, mueh-lauded, 
or prated by many. 

14 The meavwer of the region ; who measured out and made the 
firmament. 

15 Born om the mountain: or, perhaps, as Sayana takes it, ‘made 
manifest by song.’ 

16 Within the cups : ehamihhu ; ‘ upon the ladles.’—Wilson. 

17 By th' seven Ri. skis’ holy songs: or, Of Risbis, with seven holy 
sonf's, the car being the sacrifice, the three backs or ridges being the 
thrsc daily libations, the throe seats being the three Vedas. 

19 ’Mid the kine : among the enemy’s cattle, for whose possession 
ho is fighting. So, says Sayana, Soma stands among the sacrifices. 






20 Indu, the living men milk out thy juice to make the 

rapturous draught: 

Gods for the gods milk out the meath. 

21 Pour for the gods mte the sieve our Soma very rich 

in sweets, 

Him whom the gods most gladly hear. 

22 Into his stream who gladdens best these Soma-juices 

have been poured, 

Lauded with songs for lofty fame. 

23 Thou flowest to enjoy the milk, and bringest valour, 

being cleansed: 

Winning the spoil flow hitherward. 

24 And, hymned by Jamadagnis, let all nourishment 

that kine supply, 

And general praises, flow to us. 

25 Soma, as leader of the song flow onward with thy 

wondrous aids, 

For holy lore of every kind. 

26 Do thou as leader of the song, stirring the waters of 

the sea. 

Flow onward, thou who movest all. 

27 0 Soma, 0 thou sage, these worlds stand ready to 

attest thy might: 

For thy behoof the rivers flow. 

28 Like showers of rain that fall from heaven thy streams 

perpetually flow 

To the bright fleece spread under them. 

20 For potent Indra purify Indu effectual and strong, 
Enjoyment-giver, mighty lord. 

30 Soma, true, Pavam&na, sage, is seated in the clean¬ 
sing sieve, 

Giving his praiser hero strength. 


20 The living men: the worshippers, according to Sayapa; but 
perhaps, as Professor Ludwig suggests, his stotdrah should be sotdrah, 
pressers. Gods : devdh: the priests. 

% IFa<ers of the sea; of the sea of air, the firmament. 




misr/f). 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK IX 



HYMN LXI1I. Soma Pavam&ua. 

Pouu hitherward, O Soma, wealth in thousands and 
heroic strength. 

And keep renown secure for us. 

2 Thou makest food and vigour swell for Indra, best 

of gladdeners! 

Within the cups thou seatest thee. 

3 For Indra and for Vishnu poured, Soma hath flowed 

into the jar: 

May Vayu find it rich in sweets. 

4 These Somas swift and brown of hue, in stream of 

solemn sacrifice 

Have flowed through twisted obstacles, 

5 Performing every noble work, active, augmenting 

Indra’s strength, 

Driving away the godless ones. 

6 Brown Soma-drops, effused, that seek Indra, to their 

appropriate place 

Flow through the region hitherward. 

7 Flow onward with that stream of thine wherewith 

thou gavest SArya light, 

Urging on waters good to men. 

8 He, Pavam&na, high o’er man yoked the Sun’s 

courser Etasa 

To travel through the realm of air. 

9 And those ten horses, tawny-hued, he harnessed that 

the Sun might come : 

Indu, he said, is Indra’s self. 

10 Hence, singers, pour the gladdening juice to VAyu 
and to Indra, pour 
The drops upon the fleecy cloth. 

Tht- Riahi is Nidhruvi, of the family of Kasyapa. The metre ia 
Gayatri. 

4 Twitted obstacles: either the twigs of which the frame of the 
filter was made, or the rough surface of tho wool of the strainer. 
‘Are let loose upo» the /?dXWi«s«*.’-~Wilson. 

10 Hence : from this vessel. 





11 0 Soma Pavam&na, find wealth for us not to be 

assailed, 

Wealth which the foemaii may not win. 

12 Send riches hither with th} r stream in thousands, 

both of steeds and kine, 

Send strengthening food and high renown. 

13 Soma the god, expressed with stones, like Sftrya, 

floweth on his way, 

Pouring the juice within the jar. 

14 These brilliant drops have poured for us, in stream 

of solemn sacrifice, 

Worshipful laws and strength in kine. 

15 Over the cleansing sieve have flowed the Somas, 

blent with curdled milk, 

Effused for Indra tliunder-armed. 

16 Soma, do thou most rich in sweets, a gladdening 

drink most dear to gods, 

Flow to the sieve to bring us wealth. 

17 For Indra, living men adorn the tawny courser in 

the streams, 

Indu, the giver of delight. 

18 Pour for us, Soma, wealth in gold, in horses and 

heroic sons, 

Bring hither strength in herds of kine. 

19 For Indra pour ye on the fleece him very sweet to 

taste, who longs 
For battle as it were in war. 

20 The singers, seeking help, adorn the sage who must 

be decked with songs : 

Loud bellowing the steer comes on. 

21 The singers with their thoughts and hymns have, 

in the stream of sacrifice, 

Caused Soma, active steer, to roar. 

14 Worshipful laws: the meaning of dhdmdny&i'ijd is not dear. 
‘(Flowing) towards the dwellings of respectable (worshippers)' 

IV ilson. 'Veuerable might.’—Ludwig. 





10 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK IX. 


22 God, working with mankind, flow on; to Indra go 

thy gladdening juice: 

To V&yu mount as Law commands. 

23 0 Soma Pavam&na, thou pourest out wealth that 

brings renown : 

Enter the lake, as one wo love. 

24 Soma, thou flowest chasing foes and bringing wis¬ 

dom and delight: 

Drive off the folk who love not gods. 

25 The Pavamanas have been poured, the brilliant drops 

of Soma-juice, 

For holy lore of every kind. 

26 The Pavamdnas have been shed, the beautiful swift 

Soma-drops, 

Driving all enemies afar. 

27 From heaven, from out the firmament, hath Pava- 

mana been effused 
Upon the summit of the earth. 

28 0 Soma, Indu, very wise, drive, being purified, with 

thy stream 

All foes, all Kdkshasas away. 

29 Driving the R&kshasas afar, O Soma, bellowing, 

pour for us 

Most excellent and splendid strength. 

30 Soma, do thou secure for us the treasures of the 

earth and heaven, 

Indu! all boons to be desired. 

HYMN LXIV. Soma Pavamanrt, 
Soma, thou art a splendid steer, a steer, O god, with 
steerlike sway: 

Thou as a steer ordainest laws. 

23 The. lake: the dr ay aka!am, vat or reservoir. 

27 The summit of the earth: the raised altar. 

The Rishi is Kasyapa, of the family of Martohi. The metre is Gayatrl, 
1 Steer: Sfiyana, as usual, explains vrisM by vanhakah ‘ Sprinkler,'— 
Wilaou. 




THE RIG VEDA. 




2 Steer-strong thy might is as a steer’s, steer-strong 

thy wood, steer-like thy drink: 

A steer indeed, O steer, art thou. 

3 Thou, .Indu, as a vigorous horso, hast neighed to¬ 

gether steeds and kine: 

Unbar for us the doors to wealth. 

4 Out of desire of cows and steeds and heroes potent 

Soma-drops, 

Bri/Jjant and swift, have been effused. 

5 They purified in both the hands, made beautiful by 

holy men, 

Flow onward to the fleecy cloth. 

6 These Soma-juices shall pour forth all treasures for 

the worshipper 

From heaven and earth and firmament. 

7 The streams of Pavam&na, thine, finder of all, have 

been effused, 

Even as Shrya’s rays of light. 

8 Making the light that shines from heaven thou flow- 

est on to every form : 

Soma, thou swellest like a sea. 

9 Urged on thoU sendest out thy voice, O Pavam&na ; 

thou hast moved, 

Like the god Sftrya, to the sieve. 

10 Indu, enlightener, friend, hath been purified by the 

sages’ hymns: 

So starts the charioteer his steed— 

11 Thy god-delighting wave which hath flowed to the 

purifying sieve, 

Alighting in the home of Law. 


3 Neighed together: collected, through the efficacy of the sound 
thou makest iu dropping through, the filter, and enriched us with, 
stoeds and kine. 

8 To every form: to bring us blessings in every shape. 

9 To the sieve: vidharmani: ‘in observance of the law,’ according 
*° bergaigne. See La Religion Vddique, III. 218, Note. 





12 Flow to our sieve, a gladdening draught that hath 

most intercourse with gods, 

Indu, to Indra for his drink. 

13 Flow onward with a stream for food, made beautiful 

by sapient men: 

Indu, with sheen approach the milk. 

14 While thou art cleansed, song-lover, bring comfort 

and vigour to the folk, / 

Poured, tawny one ! on milk and curds. / 

15 Purified for the feast of gods, go thou to India’s 

resting-place, 

Resplendent, guided by the strong. 

16 Accelerated by the hymn, the rapid drops of Sorna- 

juice 

Have flowed, urged onward, to the lake. 

17 Easily have the living drops, made beautiful, ap¬ 

proached the lake, 

Yea, to the place of sacrifice. 

18 Compass about, our faithful friend, all our possessions 

with thy might: 

Guard, hero-like, our sheltering home. 

19 Loud neighs the courser Etasa, with singers, har¬ 

nessed for the place, 

Guid< d for travel to the lake. 

20 What time the swift one resteth in the golden place 

of sacrifice, 

He leaves the foolish far away. 

21 The friends have sung in unison, the prudent wish 

to sacrifice: 

Down sink the unintelligent. 


1G The lake : samudram: cording to Sayana, the «ea of air, the 
firmament. The dronakalae% vat or reservoir, is probably intended. 

19 The courser Utaea: l ore meaning Soma. VaJinih (from vah } 
Lut. veh-o) is properly a horse of burden, or draught--horse. 

21 Dovn sink: narake , iuto heli, says Siiyarm. 





MINfSr^ 



THE RIG VEDA. 



22 For Indra girt by Maruts, flow, thou Indu, very rich 

in sweets, 

To sit in place of sacrifice. 

23 Controlling priests and sages skilled in. holy song 

adorn thee well: 

The living make thee beautiful. 

24 Aryaman, Mitra, Varuija drink Pavamana’s juice, 

yea, thine: 

O sage, the Maruts drink thereof. 

25 0 Soma, Indu, thou while thou art purified urgest 

onward speech 

Thousandfold, with the lore of hymns. 

20 Yea, Soma, Indu, while thou art purified do thou 
bring to us 

Speech thousandfold that longs for war. 

27 O Indu, much-invoked, while thou art purifying, 

as the friend 

Of these men enter thou the lake. 

28 Bright are these Sonias blent with milk, With light 

that flashes brilliantly 
And form that utters loud acclaim. 

29 Led by his drivers, and sent forth, the strong steed 

hath come nigh for spoil, 

Like warriors when they stand arrayed. 

30 Specially, Soma, coming as a sage from heaven to 

prosper us, 

Like Sdrya flow for us to see. 

26 That longs for war : makhasyuvam : ‘desiring wealt!>,’—W. 
See IX. 61. 27, Note. 

28 Form: kripd: stream, according to Say ana. 

:K> Specially : ? idhak: said by Yaska to be tho Vedic form of 
prithak, and to be used in the sense of prospering. See Wilson’s 
Tr.iHalation, Editor's Note. Or ridhui may mean, bgbtly, easily, 
without effoirt. 







<SL 

TUN HYMNS ON [BOON IN, 

HYMN LXV. Soma Pavamana. 

The glittering maids send Sftra forth, the glorious 
sisters, close-allied, 

Send Indu forth, their mighty lord. 

2 Pervade, O Pavam&na, all our treasures with repeat¬ 

ed light, 

God, coming hither from the gods. 

3 Pour on us, Pavamana, rain, as service and fair praise 

for gods : 

Pour all to be our nourishment. 

4 Thou art a steer by lustre : wo, O Pavamana, faith¬ 

fully 

Call upon thee the splendid one. 

5 Ho thou, rejoicing, nobly-armed! pour upon us heroic 

strength : 

O Indu, come thou hitherward. 

6 When thou art cleansed wit J. both the hands and 

dipped in waters, with the wood 
Thou comest to the gathering-place. 

7 Siug forth your songs, as Vyas< r a sang, to Soma 

Pavam&na, to 

The mighty one with thousand eyes; 
b Whose coloured sap they drive with stones, the yel 
low meath-distilling juice, 

Indu for mdra, for his drink. 



The Rrnhi is Bhrigu son of Varuna, or Jamadagni of the family of 
Bhrigu. The metre is Gayatri, 

I The glittering maids: the fingers, perhaps with reference to the 
gold rings worn by the priests when they press the Soma. Siira : here 
said to mean Soma; 4 the invigorating/—Wilson. The glorious sisi rs: 
the fingers. 

3 As service : as the cause of worship. 

G With the wooil * ‘(taken up) with the wooden vessel/— Wilson. 

7 Vyasva : a Rishi frequently mentioned in Book VIII. Sec Vol 
III., Index. 



'MU 65 .] 


THE MOVED A. 




9 We seek to gain the friendly love of thee that strong 
and mighty one, 

Of thee the winner of all wealth. 

10 Flow onward with thy stream, a steer, inspiriting 
the Maruts’ lord, 

Winning all riches by thy might. 

Ill send thee forth to battle from the press, O Pava- 
m&na, strong, 

Sustainer, looker on the light. 

12 Acknowledged by this song ot mine, flow, tawny- 

coloured, with thy stream: 

Incite to battle thine ally. 

13 0 Xndu, visible to all pour out for us abundant food: 
Soma, be thou our prosperer. 

14 Ihe pitchers, Indu, with thy streams have sun o' 

aloud in vigorous might: 

Enter them, and let Iudra. drink. 

15 O thou whose potent gladdening juice they milk 

out with the stones, flow on, 

Destroyer of our enemies. 

16 King Pavam&na is implored with holy songs 0 n 

man's behalf, • 

To travel through the firmament. 

1/ Pring us, O Indu, hundredfold increase of kino, 
and noble steeds, 

The gift of fortune for our help. 

18 Pressed for the banquet of the gods, O Soma, bring 

us might, and speed, 

Like beauty for a brilliant show. 

19 Soma, flow on exceeding bright with loud roar to 

the wooden vats, 

Falcon-like resting in thine home. 

20 Soma who wins the waters flow to Indra, Vayu 

Varuna, J * 

To Vishnu and the Marut host. 

12 Thine ally : Iudra! 






WNlSTffy, 


THE JIYMXS OF 



<SL 

[BOOK IX. 


21 Soma, bestowing food upon our progeny, fromevery side 
Pour on us riches thousandfold. 

22 The Soma-juices which have been expressed afar or 

near at hand, 

Or there on Saryan&v&n’s^ bank, 

23 Those pressed among Arjikas, pressed among the 

active, in men’s homes, 

Or pressed among the fivefold tribes— 

24 May these celestial drops, expressed, pour forth upon 

us, as they flow, 

Rain from the heavens and hero strength. 

25 Urged forward o’er the ox-hide flows the lovely one 

of tawny hue, 

Lauded by Jamadagni’s song. 

23 Like horses urged to speed, the drops, bright, stir¬ 
ring vital power, when blent 
With milk, are beautified in streams. 

27 So they who toil with juices send thee forward for 

the gods’ repast: 

So with this splendour flow thou on. 

28 We choose to-day that chariot-steed of thine, the 

strong, that brings us bliss, 

The guardian, the desire of all, 

29 The excellent, the gladdcner, the sage with heart 

that understands, 

The guardian, the desire of all; 

30 Who for ourselves, O thou most wise, is w r ealth and 

fair intelligence, 

The guardian, the desire of all. 

22 SaryanAvdn's hank: this lake is said to be on the borders of the 
It hi ukbhetra country. 

23 Arjikas: apparently a non Aryan people in the North-west. Sec 
VIII. 53. 11. 

25 O’er the or, hide ' the leather sheet or bag that received the drop¬ 
pings of the Soma. 

2ft Th, r n lim li in ■■ p&ntam: according to Prof. Piscliel, 1 den schwe!- 
Icndcn ’ ‘ the swelling one.' Sco his exhaustive excursus on the word 
hi Vtdhlu Studies pp. 191—191. 




MINIS/*,, 


THE RIG VEDA. 




HYMN LXVI. Soma Pavamaua. 

For holy lore of every sort, flow onward thou whom 
all men love, 

A friend to friends adorable. 

2 O’er all thou rulest with these two which, Pavam&na, 
as thy forms 

Turned hitherward, O Soma, stand. 

8 Wise Soma Pavam&na, thou compassest with the 
seasons all 

These forms of thine on every side. 

4 Flow onward, generating food, for precious boons of 

every kind, 

A friend for friends, to be our help. 

5 Upon the lofty ridge of heaven thy bright rays with 

their essences, 

Soma, spread purifying power. 

6 O Soma, these seven rivers flow, as being thine, to 

give command : 

The streams of milk run forth to thee. 

7 Flow onward, Soma in a stream, effused to gladden 

Indra’s heart, 

Bringing imperishable fame. 


Agiii, in the form of Pavam&na, is the deity of stanzas 19—21. The 
Rishio are the hundred Vaikhanasas, said to have been a race of saintly 
hermits sprung from the nails of Praj&pati. The metre is Auushtup 
in stanza 18, and G&yatri in the rest of the hymn. 

2 With these two: apparently, heaven and earth. As thy jot ms: 
the meaning of dhdmant here is uncertain. For Sstyana’s explanation, 
see Wilson’s Translation, Vol. V. But it is not probable that, as Sayana 
suggests, the word means either * the first and seoond fortnights of 
the lunar month,’ or * the two names’ of Soma. The editors add, 
“The word dkdmanl probably means the two abodes (or stations) of the 
Soma.” See also Bergaigne, La Religion Vedique, III. 210 f. 

3 With the seasons : at the times appointed for sacrifice. 



miSTffy. 


le 


THE HYMNS OF 



<SL 

[BOON IX. 


8 Driving thee in Vivasvau’s course, the seven sisters 

with their hymns 
Made melody round thee the sage. 

9 The virgins deck thee o’er fresh streams to drive thee 

to the sieve when thou, 

A singer, bathest in the wood. 

10 The streams of PavamAna, thine, sage, mighty one, 

have poured them forth 
Like coursers eager for renown. 

11 They have been poured upon the fleece towards the 

meath-distilling vat: 

The holy songs have sounded forth. 

12 Like milch-kine coming home, the drops of Soma- 

juice have reached the lake, 

Have reached the place of sacrifice. 

13 O Indu, to our great delight the running waters 

flow to us, 

When thou wilt robe thyself in milk. 

14 In this thy friendship, and with thee to help us, 

fain to sacrifice, 

Indu, we crave thy friendly love. 

15 Flow on, O Soma, for the great viewer of man, for 

gain of kine : 

Enter thou into Indra’s throat. 

16 Best art thou, Soma, of the great, strongest of 

strong ones, Indu : thou 
As warrior ever hast prevailed. 

17 Mightier even than the strong, more valiant even 

than the brave, 

More liberal than the bountiful, 


8 The stream of Soma is likened to the com-Be of Vivasvan or the Sun. 
The seven sisters are probably the seven rivers of atau/a 6. According 
tj Siiyurii * 1 the seven kindred (priests)' are inteuded. 

9 The virgins ' the fingers. 

1 2 The take : the dromkalasa or reservoir. 

In tor gain of kine: gavishlaye; according to Dayana, for the seeker 
of the kme of the Angirukaa/ 





mtSTfiy 



VttE RIG?EDA. 



18 Soma, as Shra* bring us food, win offspring of our 

bodies : we 

Elect thee for our friendship, We elect thee for 
companionship* 

19 Agni, thou pourest life; send down upon us food 

and vigorous strength * 

Drive thou misfortune far away; 

20 Agni is Pavam&na, sage, chief priest of all tile 

fivefold tribes : 

To him whose wealth is great we pray. 

21 Skilled in thy task, O Agni, pour splendour with 

hero strength on us> 

Granting me wealth that nourishes. 

22 Beyond his enemies away to sweet praise Pavamana 

flows > 

Like SOrya visible to all. 

23 Adorned by living men, set forth for entertainment, 

rich in food, 

Far-sighted Indu is a steed. 

24 He, Pavam&na, hath produced the lofty law, the 

brilliant light* 

Destroying darkness black of hue. 

25 From tawny Pavam&na, the destroyer, radiant streams 

have sprung, 

Quick streams from him whose gleams are swift. 

26 Best rider of the chariot, praised with fairest praise 

’mid beauteous ones, 

Gold-gleaniing with the Marut host, 


1 8 As Sura : see IX. 65. 1 . ‘Who art. a hero.’—Wilson. ‘From 
the fcSuri.’— Ludwig. 

19 Misfortune : duchchhundm: frequently personified as an evil 
power; ‘the Rdkshasns.' —Wilflon. 

23 Is a steed: ‘one who continually goes to the gods,’ is Sayanu’a 
explanation of atyah , horse or courser. 

35 The destroyer: of darkness. 






20 THE HYMNS OF {BOOK IX. 

27 May Pavamaiui, best to win the booty, penetrate 
with rays, 

Giving the singer hero strength. 

.28 Over the fleecy sieve hath flowed the drop effused : 
to Indra comes 
Indu while he is purified. 

29 This Soma, through the pressing-stones, is sporting 
on the ox-hide, and 
Summoning Indra to the draught, 

'30 O Pavam&na, bless us, so that we may live, with 
that bright milk 

Of thine which hath been brought from heaven. 

HYMN LXVII. Soma and Others. 
Thou, Soma, hast a running stream, joyous, most 
strong at sacrifice : 

Flow bounteously bestowing wealth. 

2 Effused as cheerer of the men, flowing best gladdener, 

thou art 

A prince to Indra with thy juice. 

3 Poured forth by pressing-stones, do thou with loud 

roar send us in a stream 
Most excellent illustrious might. 

4 Indu, urged forward, floweth through the fleecy 

cloth : the tawny one 

With his loud roar hath brought us strength. 


27 Penetrate : the whole world.—S&yana. 

29 On the ox-hide: see IX. 65. 25. 

Agni, Pushau, Savitar aud others are associated with Soma Pavamana 
nQ deities of the hymn (see Index of Hymns). The Rishis are Blmra- 
dvajn, of the race of Brihaspati, Kasyapa and others (see Index). The 
metre is Gayatri, with the oxoeption of stanzas 16-18 where it is 
Dvipada Gayatri, 27, 31, 32, where it is \nnsbfcup, and 30 where it 
is Punt ushnih. 

2 A primt : » rich Hlld hberal P^rou. 





MiNfsr^ 


THE RIG VEDA, 



• <SL 


r MN 67.J 


AHUj JX1 \jr V JyJL/Jx* 2 ]• 

5 Indu, thou flowest through the fleece, brinoiha feli¬ 

cities and fame, 

Aud,. Soma, strengthening food from kine. 

6 Hither, O Indu, bring us wealth in. steeds and cattle 

hundredfold : 

Bring wealth, O Soma thousandfold. 

7 In purifying, through the sieve the rapid drops of 

ooma-juice 

Come nigh to Ind’ra in their course. 

8 For Indra floweth excellent Indu, the noblest Sorna- 

juiee, 

The living for the living one. 

d The glittering maids send Stir a forth : they with 
their song have sung aloud 
To Pavamana dropping meath. 

10 May Phshan, drawn by goats, be our protector, and 

on all his paths 

Bestow on us our share of maids. 

11 This Soma flows like gladdening oil for him who 

wears the braided locks : 

He shall give us our share of maids. 

12 This Soma-juice,. 0 glowing god, flows like pure oil 

effused for thee 

He shall give us our share of maids. 

13 Flow onward, Soma, in thy stream, begetter of the 

sages speech : 

Wealth-giver among gods art thou. 

11 The falcon dips within the jars: he wraps him in his 
robe and goes 

Loud roaring to the vats of wood. 


9 T keg littering maids send Sura forth : repeated from iX. 65. 1. 

10 Our share of maids: desirable and approved wives.-SAyana. 

l 11 mms braided locks: kapardine: Bee. 1.114 

1, and VII. 83. 8. Here Ptahan is intended. 

12 0 glowing god: Pushan. 

1* The falcon: the falcon-liite Soma. 





MiNfsr^ 



<SL 

THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX, 


15 Soma, thy juice hath been effused and poured into 

the pitcher: like 
A rapid hawk it rushes on. 

16 For Indra flow most rich in sweets, 0 Soma, bring¬ 

ing him delight. 

] 7 They were sent forth to feast the gods, like chariots 
that display their strength, 

18 Brilliant, best givers of delight, these juices have 

sent Vayu forth, 

19 Bruised by the press-stones and extolled, Soma, 

thou goest to the sieve. 

Giving the worshipper hero strength, 

20 This juice bruised by the pressing-stones and lauded 

passes through the sieve, 

Slayer of demons, through the fleece. 

21 O Pavam&na, drive away the danger, whether near 

at hand 

Or far remote, that finds me here. 

22 This day may Pavam&na cleanse us with his purify¬ 

ing power, 

Most active purifying priest, 

23 O Agni, with the cleansing light diffused through 

all thy fiery glow, 

Purify thou this prayer of ours, 

24 Cleanse us with thine own cleansing power, O Agnl, 

that is bright with flame, 

And by lihatioos poured to thee, 

25 Savitar, god, by both of these, libation, purifying 

power, 

Purify me on every side. 


18 Have sent Vdyu forth: have drawn him down from heaven. * Are 
let forth for Vayu.’— Wil90 »- 

33 This prayer of w rs ■' brahma nah: ‘ our divine (body)’—Wilson, 
« Divine," because it causes increase, viz, sons, etc. 




MIN/Sr^ 


67.] THE RIG VEDA. 

26 Cleanse us, god Savitar, with three, O Soma, with 

subliraest forms, 

Agni, with forms of power and might. 

27 May the gods’ company make me clean, and V asus 

make me pure by song. 

Purify me, ye general gods ; O Jatavedas, make mo 
pure. 

28 Fill thyself full of juice, flow forth, O Soma, thou 

with all thy stalks, 

The best oblation to the gods. 

29 We with our homage have approached the friend 

who seeks our wondering praise, 

Young, strengthener of the solemn rite. 

30 Lost is Al&yya’s axe, 0 Soma, goddo thou send it 

back hither in thy flow 
Even, Soma, god, if tvvere a mole. 

31 The man who reads the essence stored fey saints, the 

P&varu&na hymns. 

Tastes food completely purified,, made sweet by 
M^tar is van’s touch. 




26 The three siihlimst forms are said, to be Agni, Vayu, and Sfirya, 
or Fire, Wiud, and Sun. 

27 The goth’ company: the yajamdnas or sacrificers, or the troop of 
gods, Indra and others.—Sayana. General gods: visve devdh : or alt 
ye gods. 

30 This stanza is woll-oigh unintelligible. Alftyya may, as is sug¬ 
gested in the St. Petersburg Lexicon, he a name of Indra, and tho 
lost axe may be the thunderbolt which the poet thinks has long lain 
idle, and which Soma is prayed to replace in the hands of the Thun¬ 
derer, even though - it were worthless and mischievous like a mole. 
Say ana’s interpretation is different:—“May the battle-axe of the 
foe destroy the foe alone : flow to us, bright Soma; (slay) tho villain 
only, bright Soma.”—Wilson. 

31 By saints : by the Rishis to whom they were revealed. Pdva- 
mdna hymns . all the hymns in this Book addressed to Soma Pava- 
tn&ua. By Mdtari\van's touch: “Sayana says Mdtar/ivan means 
Vdyu beoause it breathes in the atmosphere antarikshe swasi/i • the 
food is sweetened and purified by the purifying wind and the man 
eats it."—Wilson. 




MINlSr^j, 


THE HYMNS OF 



<SL 

[BOOK IX. 


32 Whoever reads the essence stored by saints, the 
P&vatn&na hymns, 

Sarasvati draws forth for him water and butter, milk 
and meath. 


HYMN LXVIIX. Soina Pavarpana. 

The drops of Soma-juice like cows who yield their 
milk have flowed forth, rich in meath, unto the 
shining one, 

And, seated on the grass, raising their voice, assumed 
the milk, the covering robe wherewith the udders 
stream. 

2 He bellows with a roar around the highest twigs : 

the tawny one is sweetened as he breaks them up. 

Then, passing through the sieve into the ample room, 
the god throws off the dregs and puts on noble 
strength. 

3 The gladdening drink that measured out the united 

twins fills full with milk the eternal ever-waxing 
pair. 

Bringing to light the two great regions limitless, 
moving above them he gained power that ne’er 
decays. 

The Rishi is Vatsapri, son of Bhalandana. The metre is Trisbfcup 
in sta- /a 10, and Jagati in the rest of the hymn. 

1 The shining one: devam : the radiant Iudra. The second line is 
obscuro. According to S&yana, usriydh here means * cows’ aud not 

: _< the lowing kine sitting on the barhis grass hold in their 

udders the pure (juice) welling up.’—Wilson. 

2 Thi highest twigs: of the Soma-plant, which as being the teq- 
derest and juiciest are crushed first.—L. * 1 2 3 He with a noise reechoes 
the principal (praises): separating the growing herbs, the green-tinted 
(Soma) sweetens them.’—Wilson, The meaning of tary&ni, * dregs ? ’ 
in the Leoond line is uncertain. Sityann says that the Rakshasas whom 
Soma destroys are intended. 

3 Soma is called the creator and preserver of heaven and earth. 




MINlSr^ 


i MN 08.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 



4 Wandering through the parents, strengthening the 

floods, the sage makes his place swell with his 
own native might. 

The stalk is mixed with grain : he comes led by the 
men together with the sisters, and preserves the 
head. 

5 With energetic intellect the sage is born, deposited 

as germ of Law, far from the twins. 

They being young at first showed visibly distinct 
the creature that is half concealed and half exposed. 

6 The sages knew the form of him the gladdener, what 

time the falcon brought the juice from far away. 
Him who assures success they beautified in streams, 
the stalk who yearned therefor, mighty and 
meet for praise. 

7 Together with the Rishis, with their prayers and 

hymns ten women deck thee, Soma, friendly when 
effused. 

Led by the men, with invocations of the gods, 
through the fleece, thou hast given us strength to 
win the spoil. 

8 Songs resonant with praise have celebrated him, 

Soma, friend, springing forth, with his fair company. 


4 The parents: heaven and earth. The floods: the waters of the 
firmament. Makes his place swell: enriches his owu station, the 
uttaravedi or northward altar. The sisters: the fiugers. The head: 
apparently Surya, “Sayana’s explanation of sirah, viz. s imam 
hhutajdtam (the withered world?), needs explaining more thau the 
original itself.”—Wilson. 

5 The sage: the Sun. Far from the twins: rising in a distant region 
beyond heaven and earth. The creature that is half concealed and 
half exposed: the meauing appears to be, as Professor Ludwig says, 
that heaven and earth while they were yet unseparated, produoed the 
moon ; the 8uu came into being only when they had been separated 
through Soma’s energetic agency. 

7 Ten women • the fingers. 


3937 




miSTffy 


<SL 

THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IN 

Even him who, rich in meath, with undulating stream, 
winner of wealth, immortal, sends his voice from 
heaven. 

9 He sends it into all the region forth from heaven. 

Soma, while he is filtered, settles in the jars. 

With milk and waters is he decked when pressed 
with stones : Indu, when purified, shall find sweet 
rest and room. 

10 Even thus poured forth flow on thy way, O Soma, 
vouchsafing us most manifold lively vigour. 

We will invoke benevolent Earth and Heaven. Give 
us ; ye gods, riches with noble heroes. 

HYMN LXIX. Soma Pavain&na, 

Laid like an arrow on the bow the hymn hath been 
loosed like a young oalf to the udder of its dam. 

As one who eometh first with full stream she is milked; 
thus Soma is impelled to this man’s holy rites. 

2 The thought is deeply fixed; the savoury juice is 
shed ; the tongue with joyous sound is stirring in 
the mouth; 

And Pavam&na, like the shout of combatants, the drop 
rich in sweet juice, is flowing through the fleece. 



The Rishl is Hiranyastflpa, of the family of Angiras. The metre 
is Triebtup in stanzas 9 and 10, and Jagati in the rest of the hymn. 

1 Hath been hosed, Sec.: ‘ is let loose to (India) the fosterer as a 
calf to the udder of its mother.’ “ S&yana takes 4dhani [to the 
udder] twice over: he says it is used of lnd.ro> because he is the 
nourisher of everything.”—Wilson. 

M one who eometh first: according to Sayana, as a cow coming bo- 
fo'-e her calf yields her milk, (so Indra, coming before his worship¬ 
pers pours various blessings upon them). First: a<jre: at the head; 
probably means, willingly.- not forced, or dragged forward. 

' 2 Tkr tongue with joyous sound is stirring in the month : the exact 
meaning is uncertan. ‘ The Soma stream, emitting pleasant juice ia 
driven into (tudm’.) mouth.’-Wilaon. 




MINI sr^ 


THE RIG VEDA. 


2 7 





3 He flows about the sheep-skin, longing for a bride : 

he liberates Aditi’s daughters for the worshipper. 
The sacred drink hath come, gold-tinted, well- 
restrained : like a strong bull he shines, whetting 
his manly might. 

4 The bull is bellow ing ; the cows are coming nigh : the 

goddesses approach the god’s own resting-place. 
Onward hath Soma passed through the sheep’s fair 
bright fleece, and hath, as ’twere, endued a gar¬ 
ment newly washed, 

5 The golden-hued, immortal, newly bathed, puts on a 

- brightly-shining vesture that is never harmed. 

He made the ridge of heaven to be his radiant robe, 
the sprinkling of the bowls from moisture of the 
sky. 

C Even as the beams of S&rya, urging men to speed, 
that cheer and send to sleep, together rush they 
forth, 

These swift outpourings in long course of holy rites : 
no form save only Indra shows itself so pure. 


3 Longing for a bride: seeking the waters with which he is to be 
united. Aditi’s daughters: probably, the plants, whose buds Soma 
as the moon opens and fertilizes with his nectareous beams. “ The 
daughters of Infinity [Aditi] are probably the quarters of the sky.”— 
Ludwig. 

4 The Bull: Soma. According to Sayana, the cows are the propi¬ 
tiatory hymns of praise* which are called also goddesses or divine. 

5 Brightly shining vesture: the milk with which tho Soma-juice is 
mixed. Sayana explains the second half of tho stanza differently, 
taking charnvoh , bowls or reservoirs into which the Soma-juice is 
poured, as meaning metaphorically the two great receptacles of all 
living beings, or heaven ^ud earth, and introducing Aditya who is 
not mentioned in the text:-—‘he has created (Aditya) who stands ou 
?he back of the sky for the destruction (of sin) and pmitication, 

(and has created) Aditya's brilliance, the cover of it* two worlds/’ - 
Wilson, 




28 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK IX. 


7 As down the steep slope of a river to the vale, 

drawn from the steer the swift strong draughts 
have found a way. 

Well be it with the men and cattle in our home. 
May powers, 0 Soma, may the people stay with us. 

8 Pour out upon us wealth in goods, in gold, in steeds, 

in cattle, and in corn, and great heroic strength. 
Ye, Soma, are my fathers, lifted up on high as heads 
of heaven and makers of the strength of life. 

9 These Pavam&nas here, these drops of Soma, to 

Indra have sped forth like cars to booty. 

Effused, they pass the cleansing fleece, while, gold- 
hued, they cast their covering off to pour the rain 
down. 

10 O Indu, flow thou on for lofty Indra, flow blameless, 
very gracious, foe-destroyer. 

Bring splendid treasures to the man who lauds thee. 
O Heaven and Earth, with all the gods protect us. 

HYMN LXX. Soma PrtTam&tia. 
The three times seven railch-kine in the eastern 
heaven have for this Soma poured the genuine 
milky draught. 

Four other beauteous creatures hath he made for his 
adornment, when he waxed in strength through 
holy rites. 

7 Ydj&h and krisktayah, powers aud j people, are explained by Sayana 
as ‘food 7 8 and ‘offspring. 7 

8 Ye, Soma: “Soma is treated as plural by attraction; or, as 
Sayana puts it, the plurality of the pitris is applied to Soma.”— 
Wilson. 

With all the gods: devaih: svbhagairdhanaih , with auspicious 
riches.*—Sayana. 

The Risbi is R#pu, of the family of Yisvamitra. The metre is 
Trisbfcup iu stanza Id, aud Jagati in the rest of the hymn. 

1 The three times seven milch-hi tie, are according to Sayana, the 
twelve months, the five seasons, the three worlds, and Aditya or the 





HYMN 70 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


29 


2 Longing for lovely Amrit, by his wisdom he divided, 

each apart from other, earth and heaven. 

He gladly wrapped himself in the most lucid floods, 
when through their glory they found the god’s 
resting-place. 

3 May those his brilliant rays be ever free from death, 

inviolate, for both classes of created things,— 
Kays wherewith powers of men and gods are puri¬ 
fied. Yea, even for this have sages welcomed him 
as king. 

4 He, while he is adorned by the ten skilful ones, that 

he too in the midmost mothers may create, 

While he is watching o’er the lovely Amrit’s ways, 
looks on both races as beholder of mankind. 

-5 He, while he is adorned to stream forth mighty 
strength, rejoices in his place between the earth 
and heaveij. 

The steer dispels the evil-hearted with his mhdit 
aiming at offerings as an archer at the game. ° 

6 Beholding, as it were, two mother cows, the steer 
goes roaring on his way even as the Maruts roar. 


b "n- aS Prof - Ludwi S says, the seven celestial rivers, 

multiplied by three to correspond with the threefold division of the 
heavens, are intended. These supply the genuine draught, in contrast 

.?, V!® J ™ r other ***** beings, the Vasatlvari and the three 
i-.feadoana waters, which are terrestrial and factitious, made to adorn 


6 hoth classcs • animate and inanimate. Or gods and men. 

4 The ten skilful ones: the fingers. The midmost mothers: the clouds 
ia- nmg etweeu heaven and earth, in which, perhaps, Soma as 
a? 1 a11 s 111 P rod ucitig the rain. But the meaning is uncertain, 
ayanu exp ains promt by / 'okdnpramdtum , ‘to measure out, or create, 
the worlds.’ Both races: gods and men. 

i As 1 1 wete, tw<) mother cows: heaven and earth. Sayana explains 
Sji.oin lada o! the second line differently:—‘the intelligent 
<'«. na) chose man to be the offerer of his praise.’—Wilson. 




MINISr^ 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOON iX. 



Knowing eternal law, tlie earliest light of heaven, he, 
passing wise, was chosen out to tell it forthi 

7 The fearful bull is bellowing with violent might, far* 

sighted, sharpening his tawny-coloured horns. 
Soma assumes his seat in the well-fashioned place 
the cowhide and the sheepskin are his ornament. 

8 Bright, making pure his body free from spot and 

stein, on the sheep’s back the golden-coloured hath 
flowed down. 

Acceptable to Mitra, Vayu, Varulja, he is prepared 
as threefold meath by skilful men. 

9 Flow on for the gods’ banquet, Soma, as a steer, and 

enter Indra’s heart, the Soma’s reservoir. 

Bear us beyond misfortune ere we be oppressed : the 
man who knows the land directs the man who asks. 

10 Urged like a car-steed, flow to strength. 0 Soma : 
Indu, flow onward to the throat of ludra. 

Skilled, bear us past, as in a boat o’er water : as 
battling hero save us from the foeman. 


8 Threefold: according to Sayana, mixed with tho Vasativar? 
water, curds, and milk. Probably, poured into three separate vessels, 
one for each of the three deities mentioned* 

9 The man who knows the land: who is acquainted with the roads 
or way8. “Siyana completes the simile: “aa by telling him be 
protects (helps) him, ho do thou who kuowest the roads of the sacri¬ 
fice protect us by telling us the sacrificial paths.”—” Wilson. But, 
of course, tho application is intended to be geueral. 

10 Bear us past : carry us over all difficulties and dangers. 

l orn the foeman : ntduh : 1 from the reviling (of the foe).’- Wilson 
Nid means both censuro or contempt, and, in the masculine, one 
who blames or contemns, a mocker or an enemy in general, 




MIN tST/fr 


fa# 71 .) THE R1GVEDA. 

HYMN liXNT. Soma Pavaruana. 

The guerdon is bestowed •. the mighty takes his seat, 
and, ever “Watchful, guards from fiend and evil sprite. 
Gold-hued, he makes the cloud his diadem, the milk his 
carpet in both bowls, and prayer his robe of state. 

2 Strong, bellowing, he goes, like one who slays the 
fcdk ! he lets this hue of Asuras flov^off from him, 
Throws off his covering, seeks his father’s meeting- 
place, and thus makes for himself the bright robe 
he assumes. 

o Onwaid he flows, from both the hands, pressed 
our With stones: excited by the prayer, the water 
makes him wild. 

ilci holies and draws near, completes his work with 
song, and bathes in streams to satisfy the worshiper. 




The Rtsiln is Rishsibha, sou or doscondant of Visv&mitm. The 
metre rs Tnshtup m stanza 9, and Jagati in the rest of the hymn. 

origi h< "‘“ r “ r ' u ™ S* vea •« too priotta, counting 

TT"r ,t ' thid ' is •***< 

translated bj ‘sprinkling.’ ' ' ’ where v P ctt ^anam in 

oaT ttVSSS; " eavcn a ” d 

««“"fi.fTrrortT.tal 6 !,"* 1 bri , ghtness ’ 

f “" h tort tint of his'.-Wilwm. 

mo,, A^t'Z^iC’-iuTT ?r*7'“ OT *»°- 

goe, to the prepared retorvoi?' d th,lt is ' th « S «“». 

■*»?*! «“7 ** «• 

p. 135 According M ^P^inkled. See Vetfisoht tituclioi 

L or dooT Tol’- r ° , L, " hri f ! ‘ho act, like a h„H i„ ,h. 

suggestion and take ^ ^'shipper: I adopt Prof. Ludwig’s 
Wilson translate- a dal,Ve of the participle. Professor 

protected' (sacrifice)’ ^ S<l - ya " il: ~‘ Le » honoured at the (god) - 





MINlSr/iy 



THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK IX. 


4 They pouroutmeath around the master of the house, qe- 

lestial strep gthener of the mountain that gives might; 
In whom, through his great powers, the.oblation-eating 
cows in their uplifted udder mix their choicest milk. 

5 They, the ten sisters, on the lap of Aditi, have sent 

him forward like a car from both the arms. 

He wanders and comes near the cow’s mysterious place, 
even the place which his inventions have produced. 

6 Like as a falcon to his home, so speeds the god to 

his own golden wisely-fashioned place to rest. 

With song they urge the darling to the sacred grass : 
the holy one goes like a courser to the gods. 

7 From far away, from heaven, the red-hued noted sage, 

the steer with triple back, hath sung unto the kine. 
With thousand guidings he, leading this way and that, 
shines, as a singer, splendidly through many a morn. 

8 His covering assumes a radiant hue; where er he 

comes into the fight he drives the foe afar. 

Flood-winner, with his own essence he seeks the host 
of heaven, he comes to praises glorified with milk, 
n T.;i {e a bull roaming round the herds he bellows : 

he hath assumed the brilliancy of S4rya 

Down to the earth hath looked the heavenly falcon : 
Soma with wisdom view's all l iving creat ures. 


° f t , h , M. I» the second half of this Mm I adopt 
might. tne 0K V . makeshift although it seems impossible that 
interpretauon a id ^ * uplifted.’ Professor Ludwig 

m t dk Ihoni 1 udder,’ in the sense of * behalter,’ or receptacle into 
Itch *i.e Soma flows, and, if 1 understand bis rendering rightly, 
*, e 0WH cook or mix the ruilk on their head. 

th l C ° „f Aditi: on the earth, ‘near to the ground.— 

Wi'Lm The cow’ « mysterious place : or, distant place, is the udder of 

b^aveti, the obud. ^ Rt the three libations.-Sayana. Or, 

working in he suparnah ; ‘celestial, flying grace- 

9 The heaved _ y tQ g0 gracefully, “be- 

fully.’— is carried oil by G&yatrl in the shape of a hawk.” 






THE RIG VEDA. 




HYMN LXXII. Soma PavamAna* 
They cleanse the gold-hued: like a red steed is he 
yoked, and Soma in the jar is mingled with the milk. 
He sendeth out his voice, and all the many friends 
of him the highly-lauded, hasten with their songs. 

2 The many sages utter words in unison, while into 

Indra’s throat they pour the Soma-juice, 

When, with the ten that dwell together olosely 
joined, the men whose hands are skilful cleanse 
tho lovely meath. 

3 He goes upon his way, unresting, to the cows, over 

the roaring sound which Surya’s daughter loves. 
The falcon brought it to him for his own delight : 
now with the twofold kindred sisters is his home. 

4 Washed by the men, stone-pressed, dear on the holy 

grass, faithful to seasons, lord of cattle from of old, 
Most liberal, completing sacrifice for men, 0 Indra, 
pure bright Sonia, Inrlu, flows for thee. 

5 O Indra, urged by arms of men and poured in stm\ms 4 

Soma flows on for thee after his godlike kind. 

Plans thou fulfillest, gatherest thoughts for sacrifice : 

on the boards sits the g old-hued like a roosting bird. 

-?--- { --- : _ 

fhe Riabi is Ilarimant 2 the family of Anginas. The metre is 
Jagati. ** 

2 Indra’s throat: literally, belly; the dronakalasa or reservoir. 
The fan : the fingers. 

3 The cows: the milk and curds. The roaring sound of the effused 
^'oma is said to be dear to .Sfirya’s daughter, Ushns or Dawn, 
because it is chiefly heard in the early morning. The falcon: I 
ad' -j i Prof. Ludwig’s interpr *ation of the. strange word vinamgptah 
as no other meaning seems suitable he.’e. According to Sayana, tho 
Mand means p raiser, or worshipper. The twofold kindred sisters: the 
fingers of both hands. 

<*> On the boards; of the Somapvess. ‘Upon the cups.’—Wilson. 

3 





misT/fy 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK IX. 



6 Sages well-skilled in work, intelligent, dram out the 

stalk that roars, the sage, the everlasting one. 

The milk, the hymns unite them with him in the 
place of sacrifice, his seat who is produced anew. 

7 Earth’s central point, sustainer of the mighty 

heavens, distilled into the streams, into the waters’ 

wave, . 

As Indra’s thunderbolt, steer with far-spreading 
wealth, Soma is flowing on to make the heart re¬ 
joice. 

8 Over the earthly region flow thou on thy way, help¬ 

ing the praiser and the pourer, thou most wise. 
Let us not lack rich treasure reaching to our home, 
and may we clothe ourselves in manifold bright 
Avealth. 

9 Hither, O Indu, unto us a hundred gifts of steeds, 

a thousand gifts of cattle and of gold, 

Measure thou forth, yea, splendid ample strengthen¬ 
ing food : do thou, 0 Pavam&na, heed this laud ot 
ours. 

HYMN LXXIII. Soma Pavamaua. 

They from the spouting drop have sounded at the rim: 

naves speed together to tch© place of saciifice.^ 

That Asura hath formed, to seize, three lofty heights. 
The ships of truth have borne the pious man across. 


7 The heart: of Iudra. As Inara's thunderbolt: cp. IX. 77. 1. 

The Risiii is Pa vitro, of the family of Augiras. The metro is 

Jftgati, , . c 

1 They: the pressing stone3, from whose rim or edge the Soma- 

drops fall noisily. Naves by synecdoche wheels, agniu by the 
same figure chariots, and then by metaphor the swiftly-running Soma- 
drops * That Asura: the divine Soma. To seize: to be held and 
' Thrfe lofty heir/hts: the three elevated worlds. The ships of 
trulh . or of the truthful (Soma).^ According to i&jana, the four 
vessels which hold the Aditya, A gray ana, Ukthya, and Dhruva 

libations. 





whists 


THE RIG VEDA. 




2 The strong steers, gathering, have duly stirred 

themselves, and over the stream’s wave the friends 
sent forth the song. 

Engendering the hymn, with flowing streams of 
meath, Indra’s dear body have they caused to 
wax in strength. 

3 With sanctifying gear they sit around the song: 

their ancient Father guards their holy work from 
harm. , 

Varuna hath o’erspread the mighty sea of air. Sages 
Dad power to hold him in sustaining floods. 

4 Sweet-tongued, exhaustless, they have sent their 

voices down together, in heaven’s vault that pours 
a thousand streams. 

His wildly-restless warders never close an eye : in 
? ever y place are found the bonds that bind man fast. 

5 O er sire and mother they have roared in unison, bright 

with the verse of praise, burning up riteless men, 
b lowing away with supernatural might from earth 

and from the heavens the swarthy skin which 
Indra hates. 

Those which, as guides of song and counsellors of 
speed, were manifested from their ancient dwelling- 
place,— 

I 1 rom these the eyeless and the deaf have turned 

aside : the wicked traverse not the pathway of the 
Law. 1 17 


2 The strong steers : the prieats. 

( ® Thar aru-ient Father: Soma; or, perhaps, Agm. Yanina: 
‘Soma the all-on velopper.'—Wilson. Him: Soma. In sustaining 
floods : in the Vasativart waters.—Sayan a. 

4 They ; the beams that radiate from Soma; somarasmayah: 
Soma-rays.—S. 

0 ,l>tre an< t mother: the general parents, heaven and earth. The 
swarthy shin: £ the black-skinned ( AtfMusrts/-—Wilson. 

Those: rays. I follow Say ana's interpretation. The tirst line 
18 very obscure. 



Ml HlST/ff 


THE HYMN'S OF 



<SL 

[BOOK IX. 


7 What time the cleansing sieve with thousand streams 

is stretched, the thoughtful sages purify their song 
therein. 

Bright-coloured are their spies, vigorous, void of 
guile, excellent, fair to see, beholders of mankind. 

8 Guardian of Law, most wise, he may not be deceived: 

three purifiers hath he set within his heart. 

With wisdom he beholds all creatures that exist: he 
drives into the pit the hated riteless ones. 

9 The thread of sacrifice spun in the cleansing sieve, 

on Varuga’s tongue-tip, by supernatural might,— 
This, by their striving, have the prudent ones 
attained: he who hath not this power shall sink 
into the pit. 

HYMN LXXIV. Soma Pavatuana. 

Bobn like a youngling he hath clamoured in the 
wood, when he, the red, the strong, would win the 
light of heaven. 

He comes with heavenly seed that makes the water 
swell • to him for wide-spread shelter, through his 
grace, we pray. 


7 Bright coloured. rudrdsah : sons of Iludi'a, according to Siiyana. 
But sec Vcdincke Slvdien, pp. 55, 56. 

8 Of Law: of law-ordained sacrifice. The three purifiers whom 
goma sets within his heart and combines in his own being are Agni, 
Vitju, Surya, the purifying powers of fire, wind, and sun. 

0 On Varnna’s tongue-tip: the Vasativari waters in which Soma 
dwells (vasati) stand on the tip of Varuna’s tongue. Sayana. He 
who hath not this pouter: ‘he who is incompetent for the rite.'— 
Wilson. 

The Rislii is Kaksbivan, son of Dirgbatamaa The metre is Trish- 
tup in stanza 8, and Jagati in the rest of the hymn. 

1 In the wood: in the wooden vat. According to Sayapo, ‘in 
the water.' 



MINlSr^ 


THE MOVED A. 




2 A far-extended pillar that supports the sky, the 

Soma-stalk, filled full, moves itself every way. 

He shall bring both these great worlds while the 
rite proceeds: the sage holds these who move 
together and all food. 

3 He who seeks Aditi’s rite hath ample pasture-land, 

and mighty, well-made food, meath blent with 
Soma-juice; 

He who from hence commands the rain, steer of the 
kme, leader of floods, who helps us hence, who 
claims our laud. 

4 Butter and milk are drawn from animated cloud; 

thence Amrit is produced, centre of sacrifice. 

Him the most bounteous ones, ever-united, love; 
him as our friend the men who make all swell 
rain clown. 

5 The Soma-stalk hath roared, following with the wave: 

he swells with sap for man the skin which gods enj oy. 

Upon the lap of Aditi he lays the germ, by means 
wherof we gain children and progeny. . 


2 lie shall bring both these great worlds: shall bring Heaven and 
Earth to the sacrifice. 

3 lie who seeks Aditi's rite: Indra who comes to the sacrifice. 
Sayana takes aditeh with gavyiltih: ‘the way to earth is broad $— 
Wilson. 

4 The most bounteous ones, the men who make all swell, are, pro¬ 
bably, the Maruts who fertilize the earth, and send Soma down in the 
rain. Sayana’s explanation is different:—‘ the assembled liberal 
givers [the yagamdnas or sacrificers] delight him : (the Soma-juices) 
the leaders, the protectors shower do wn the accumulated (water).’— 
Wilson. For tho meaning of peravah, those who swell, or ’cause to 
swell, 1 ‘protectors’ according to S&yana, see Vedischc Stiulien, p. 85. 

5 Forman: for the sacrificer.— S. The skin: his own body.— S. 
Upon the lap of Aditi: of the earth, according to Sayrnn. The 
moaning is that Soma is the source of all Nature's reproductive 
power. 




misr^ 



<SL 

THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX. 


6 In the third region which distils a thousand streams, 

may the exhaustless ones desceud with procreant 
power. 

The kindred four have been sent downward from the 
heavens: dropping with oil they bring Amrit and 
sacred gifts, 

7 Soma assumes white colour when he strives to gain : 

the bounteous Asura knows full many a precious 
boon. 

Down the steep slope, through song, he comes to 
sacrifice, and he will burst the water-holding cask 
of heaven, 

8 Yea, to the shining milk-anointed beaker, as to his 

goal, hath stepped the conquering courser. 
Pious-souled men have sent their gifts of cattle unto 
Kakshivan of the hundred winters. 

9 Soma, thy juice when thou art blended with the streams, 

flows, Pavam&na, through the long wool of the sheep. 
So, cleansed by sages, O best giver of delight, grow 
sweet for Indra, Pavamana ! for his drink. 


HYMN LXXV. Soma Pavamana. 

Graciously-minded he is flowing on his way to win dear 
names o’er which the youthful one grows great. 
The mighty and far-seeing one hath mounted now 
the mighty Shrya’s car which moves to every side. 


6 In ike third, region: dwelling in heaven. The exkaustless c. 
these are the kindred four of the following line, meaning, according 
to Sav ina, four rays or digits of Soma. “It is most probaole t.mt 
the four goddosaes Sinivali, Kuhu or Gungu, Ilaka, and Aram&ti aie 
meant. Op. II. 32. 6, 7.”—Ludwig. 

7 Strives to gain: seeks to enjoy heaven.—SAyana. The water¬ 
holding caek: the water-laden cloud. 

• 8 The conquering courser: the swiftly-flowing Soma. 

The Rihhi is Kavi, of the family of Blifigu. The metre is Jagati. 

1 O’er u'Airh • 'that is, the youthful one, the fresh and strong Soma, 
exceeds in greatness even the high titles which he wins by his gracious 

deeds* 




39 



THE RIGVEDA. 


2 The speaker, unassailable master of this hymn, the 

tongue of sacrifice pours forth the pleasant rneath. 
Within the lustrous region of the heavens the son 
makes the third secret name of mother and ot sire. 

3 Sending forth flashes he hath bellowed to the jars, 

led by the men into the golden reservoir. 
iThe milkers of the sacrifice have sung to .him, and he, 
the triple-backed, shines brightly through the 
morns. 

4 Pressed by the stones, with hymns* and graciously 

inclined, illuminating both the parents, heaven 
and earth, 

He flows in ordered season onward through the 
fleece, a current of sweet juice still swelling day 
by day. 

5 Plow onward, Soma, flow to bring prosperity: cleans¬ 

ed by the men, invest thee with the milky draught. 
What gladdening drinks thou hast, foaming, exceed¬ 
ing strong, even with these incite Indra to give 
us wealth. 


2 Speaker; master; tongue of sacrifice: Soma, the giver of elo¬ 
quence. The son: Soma. Of mother and of sire: of his parents. 
Heaven and Earth. What the third secret name, that is, probably, a 
name in addition to those-of Heaven and Earth, and comprising both 
deities, may be, does not appear. Si'iyana’s explanation is difierent• 
‘tho son (the sacrificer) assumes a third name unknown to his 
parents;’ that is* Professor Wilson adds, “a name not given at 
birth...He [S&yana] cites BaudhajaW, who gives Somaydjin [Soma- 
y&ga sacrificer] as an instance of a thi rd name.” 

3 The milkers : the priests Who'express the juice. Triple-backed: 
bearer of, or worshipped with, three libations or sacrifices, according 
to S&yana; but more probably, dwelling in three high places, henvdn, 
the mouutain-top, and the place of sacrifice. 



miST/fy 


THE HYMNS OF 




40 


[BOOK IX. 


HYMN LXXVI. Soma PavamSna. 


On flows the potent juice, sustainer of the heavens, 
the strength of gods, whom men must hail with 
shouts of joy. 

The gold-hued, started like a courser by brave men, 
impetuously shows his vigour in the streams. 

2 He takes his weapons, like a hero, in his hands, 

fain to win light, car-borne, in forays for the kine. 
Indu, while stimulating Indra’s might, is urged for- 
ward and balmed by sages skilful in their task. 

3 Soma, as thou art purified with flowing wave, 

exhibiting thy strength enter thou Indra’s throat. 
Make both worlds stream for us, as lightning doth the 
clouds: mete out exhaustless powers for us, as 
’twere through song. 

4 Onward he flows, the king of all that sees the light. 

the Eishis’ lord hath raised the song of sacrifice ; 
Even he who is adorned with Shrya’s arrowy beam, 
father of hymns, whose wisdom is beyond our 
reach. 

5 Like as a bull to herd ,, thou flowest to the trough, 

bellowing as a steer upon the waters’ lap. 

So, best of cheerers, thou for Indra flowest on that 
we, with thy protection, may o’ercome in fight. 


HYMN LXXVII. Soma Pavamatia. 


More beauteous than the beautiful, as Indra’s bolt, 
this Soma, rich in sweets, hath clamoured in the vat. 

Dropping with oil, abundant, streams of sacrifice 
flow unto him liko mileh-kine, lowing, with their 
milk. 


The Itisbi is Kavi, of the family of JJhfig'i. The motro is Jagati. 
3 At ’(were throng}' tons: “now with the rite; i- e. at the very 
time the rite is being performed.”—Wilson. 

The ^ishi is Kavi, of the family of Bhrigu, The metre is Jagati. 


•* fc 






WNisr/fy 


THE RIG VEDA. 



HYMN 78.] 



2 On flows that ancient one whom, hitherward, from 

heaven, sped through the region of the air, the 
falcon snatched. 

He, quivering with alarm and terrified in heart 
before bow-armed Kris&uu, holdeth fast the sweet. 

3 May those first freshest drops of Soma-juice effused 

flow on their way to bring us mighty strength 
in kine. m 

Beauteous as serpents, worthy to be looked upon, 
they whom each sacred gift and all our prayers 
have pleased. 

4 May that much-lauded Indu, with a heart inclined 

to us, well-knowing, fight against our enemies. 

He who hath brought the germ beside the strong 
one’s seat moves onward to the widely-opened 
stall of kine. 

5 The active potent juice of heaven is flowing on, great 

Varuna whom the fro ward man can ne’er deceive. 
Mitra, the holy, hath been pressed for troubled times, 
neighing like an impatient horse amid the herd. 

HYMN LXXVIII. Soma Pavam&ua. 
Raising his voice the king hath flowed upon his way : 
invested with the waters he would win the kine. 


2 The falcon: see I, 93. 5. He: Soma, according to S&yana, but 
more probably the falcon. Krisinu: a divine archer who guards the 
celestial Soma. 

3 Serpents: the meaning of ahyah is uncertain here. Sayana ex¬ 
plains it by striyah, women ; —‘ pleasing to look upon like beautiful 
well-adorned (women).’—Wilson. 

4 He who hath brought the germ: here the sacrificer and not Soma 
is meant.—L. The strong one : Agnt. 

5 In this stanza Soma is compared to, or mystically identified with, 
Vuruna and Mitra. Sayana leaves Varum unexplained, but inter¬ 
prets Mitra by sarveshdm mitrabhutah , c (Sorna) the friend of all.’ 

The Rishi is Kavi, of the family of Bhrigu. The metre is Jagatt 




WHlST/fy 



<SL 

f BOOK IX. 

The fleece holds solid parts as though they were 
impure, and bright and cleansed he seeks the 
meeting-place of gods. 

2 Thou, Soma, art effused for Indra by the men, baltned 

in the wood as wave, sage, viewer of mankind. 

Full many are the paths whereon thou mayest go : 
a thousand bay steeds hast thou resting on the 
boards. 

3 Apsarasas who dwell in waters of the sea, sitting 

within, have flowed to Soma wise of heart. 

They urge the master of the house upon his way, 
and to the eternal Pavara&na pray for bliss. 

4 Soma flows on for us as winner of the kine, winner 

of thousands, cars, water, and light, and gold; 

He whom the gods have made a gladdening draught 
to drink, the drop most sweet to taste, weal-bring¬ 
ing, red of hue. 

5 Soma, as Pavamana thou, our faithful friend, mak¬ 

ing for us these real treasures, flowest on. 

Slay thou the enemy both near and far away : grant 
us security and ample pasturage. 


42 


THE IIYMNS OF 


1 The fleece : literally, the aheep; the filter made of wool. Solid 
parts • tdnvd : tho fragments of stalk which will not paS3 tliroug i the 
strainer. According to Siyana, ‘with its own covering. 1 2 3 -* the sheep 
with its fleece.’—Wilson. The meeting-place of gods : the vessels 
which hold the libations assigned to various gods. 

2 Bahned in the wood ; according to Saynna, ‘art driven iDto the 
water.’ Bay steeds : swiftly-running tawny drops. Boards : of the 
Soma-press. 

3 Apsarasas who dwell in waters of the sea: ‘ nymphs of the 

firmam3ut/—Wilson. # T 

The master of the home; hannyasya sakshanirn : the Soma, in 
IX 71 4, Say ana explains these words as * overpowerer, or stormer 
of the fort of the enemy,’ and in this place as ‘ the sprinkler ot the 
h'dl of sacrifice.’ Sahshani, from the root st:h, means overpowerer, 
and from tho root sack, connected with, especially as master and 

possessor. 









THE RIGVEDA. 



9.] 



HYMN LXXIX. Soma Pavainana. 

Spontaneous let our drops of Soma-juice flow on, 
pressed, golden-hued, among the gods of lofty 
heaven. 

Perish among us they who give no gifts of food: 
perish the godless, may our prayers obtain success. 

2 Forward to us the drops, distilling meath, shall flow, 

like riches for whose sake we urge the horses on. 
Beyond the crafty hindering of all mortal men may 
we continually bear precious wealth away. 

3 Yea, verily, foe of hate shown to himself is he, yea, 

verily, the destroyer too of other hate. 

As thirst subduetli in the desert, conquer thou, O 
Soma Pavam&na, men of evil thoughts. 

4 Near kin to thee is he, raised loftiest in the 

heavens: upon the earth’s high ridge thy scions 
have grown forth. 

The pressing-stones devour thee on the ox’s hide: 
sages have milked thee with their hands into 
the streams. 

5 So do they hurry on thy strong and beauteous juice, 

O Indu, as the first ingredient of the draught. 
Bring low, thou Pavam&na, every single foe, and be thy 
might shown forth as sweet and gladdening drink. 


The Ttishi is Kavi, of the family of Bbrigu. The metre is Jagnti. 

1. The;/ who give, no gifts of food: I can find no satisfactory expla¬ 
nation of isknh ardtiyah, so I give Sayana’s interprctaiou as "a make¬ 
shift. ‘ May they be destroyed who are the withbolders of food from 
us.’—Wilson. 

2 Urge, the horses on: Sayana explains arvatah, horses, by ‘strong 
enemy.' ‘ By whose aid we encounter the powerful (enemy).'—W. 

3 “Soma knows how to defend not only himself, but us also.”—L. 
The destroyer . literally, the wolf. 

4 He: ‘the moon.’—L. ‘Thy best juice dwells in the navel of 
heaven, that which receives (the oblation).’— Wilson. On the ox’s 
hide: “Although men of the present time pour out the Soma upon 
the skin of a black antelope and not on a cowhide or oxhide, still it 
is measured out for sale on au oxhide.”—Sayana. 




MIN/Sr^ 



<SL 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK IX. 


HYMN LXXX. Soma Pavamuiia. 

On flows the stream of Soma who beholds mankind; 

by everlasting law he calls the gods from heaven. 
He lightens with the roaring of Brihaspati: the lakes 
have not contained the outpourings of the juice. 

2 Thou, powerful Soma, thou to whom the cows have 

lowed, ascendest, bright with sheen, tlnne iron- 
fashioned home. 

Thou, lengthening our princes’ life and high renown, 
flowest for Indra as his mighty gladdening drink. 

3 Best giver of delight, he flows to Indra’s throat, 

robing himself in might, auspicious one, lor lame. 
He spreads himself abroad to meet all things that 
be : the vigorous tawny steed flows sporting on his 

4 The men, the ten swift fingers, milk thee out for gods, 

even thee most rich in meath, with thousand flowing 
streams. 

Soma who winnest thousands, driven by the men, 
expressed with stones, bring, as thou flowest, all 

the gods. 

5 Deft-handed men with stones, the ten swift fingers 

drain thee into waters, thee, the steer enriched 
with sweets. 

Thou Soma, gladdening Indra and the heavenly host, 
flowest as Pavam&na like a river’s wave. 


The Rishi is Vasu, of the family of Bharadvaja. The metre is 

^Tmrom^ofBiHrnpaU: that is, says Sayana, the voice or 
praise of the worshipper. Agni may be intended, as Professor 

Lu i"! g ,J,!?. 6 or’ seas (mmudrAso.h), probably the Soma-reservoirs, 
savnna takes »* as a particle of comparisonthe libations cover 
(the earth) like rivers’-Wilson. 

2 frWrfwhion&l h 'W: see IX. 1. 







MINlSr^ 


THE RIG VEDA. 


15 



MN 81.] 




HYMN LXXXI. Soma Pavamana. 

Onward to Itidra’s throat move, beautiful in form, 
the waves of Soma as he purifies himself, 

When they, brought forward with the lovely curd 
of kine, effused, have cheered the hero to bestow 
his gifts, 

2 Hither hath Soma flowed unto the beakers, like a 

chariot-horse, a stallion swift upon his Way. 

Thus, knowing both the generations, he obtains the 
rights and dues of gods from yonder and from 
hence. 

3 While thou art cleansed, 0 Soma, scatter wealth on 

us; Indu, bestow great bounty as a liberal prince. 
Giver of life, with wisdom help to opulence: strew 
not our home possessions far away from us. 

4 Hither let Pfishan Pavamana come to us, Varuna, 

Mitra, bountiful, of one accord, 

The Maruts, Asvins, Vfiyu, and Briliaspati, Savitar, 
T wash tar, tractable Sarasvati. 

5 Both Heaven and Earth, the all-invigorating pair, 

Vidhatar, Aditi, and Aryaman the god, 

Bhaga who blesses men, the spacious Firmament,— 
let all the gods in Pavam&na take delight. 


^ The Rishi is Vasu, of the family of Bharadvaja. The metre is 
Trishtup in stanza 5, and Jagatl in the rest of the hymn. 

2 Roth the generations: of gods and men. Sayana takes ubhai> xsya 
jinmanah with dev&n&m: — ‘and knowing both races of gods—those 
who come to (the sacrifice) from the other world and thoso who 
(come) from this world.’—Wilson. 

3 Help to opulence: according to Sayana, ‘help Vasu (tho Rishi 
of the hymn) to prosperity.’ 

! Tractable: suyamA: easily led (by prayer). According to 
Sayana = suvigrahd, beautiful in form. 

o Ail invigorating: vitsveuninve.: ‘all-pervading.* 1 2 3 —Sayana. 1 ulhdtar: 
the Disposer, regardod as a separate deity, as DhiUiU' is iho Ordaincr 
or Establishes 



WNlST/f^ 


§L 

[BOOK IX. 

HYMN LXXXII. Soma Pavamana. 

Even as a king hath Soma, red and tawny bull, 
been pressed : the wondrous one hath bellowed to 
the kine. 

While purified he passes through the filtering fleece 
to seat him hawk-like on the place that drops 
with oil. 

2 To glory goest thou, sage with disposing skill, like 

a groomed steed thou rushest forward to the 
prize. 

0 Soma, be thou gracious,,driving off distress : thou 
goest, clothed in butter, to a robe of state. 

3 Parjanya is the sire of the leaf-bearing bull. on 

mountains, in earth’s centre hath he made his 
home. 

The waters too have flowed, the sisters, to the kine : 
he meets the pressing-stones at the belovbd rite. 

4 Thou givest pleasure as a wife delights her lord. 

Listen, O child of Pajr&, for to thee I speak. 

Amid the holy songs go on that we may live: in 
time of trouble, Soma, watch thou free from blame. 

5 As to the men of old thou earnest, Indu, unharmed, 

to strengthen, winning hundreds, thousands, 

So now for new felicity flow onward: the waters 
follow as thy law ordaineth. 



46 ' TIIE HYMNS OF 


The Rishi is Vnsu, of the family of Bbaradvaja. The metre is 
Trishtup in stanza 5, and Jagati in the rest of the hymn. 

1 As a king: -'magnificent as a king.’—Wilson. That drops with 
oil: Sayana here explains ghritavantam by udakavantam. watery. 

2 To a robe of stale: nirnijom : ‘to the cleansing (vessel).—Wilson. 

3 Parjanya: the god of the rain cloud, who makes the leafy Soma 
plant grow. In earth V centre : in the oblation. 

4 Pajrd: according to Sayana, the earth. The St. Petersburg 
Leyit’on explains the word as meaniag the moist fresh Soma-plant of 
which Soma, the juice, is the child. 



THE RIG VEDA. 



YMN 83.] 



HYMN LXXXIH. Soma Pavamfuia. 

Spread is thy cleansing filter, Brahmanaspati.: as 
prince, thou enterest its limbs from every side. 

The raw, whose mass hath not been heated, gains 
not this : they only which are dressed, which bear, 
attain to it. 

2 High in the seat of heaven is spread the scorcher’s 

sieve : its threads are standing separate, glittering 
with light. 

The swift ones favour him who purifietli this: with 
consciousness they stand upon the height of heaven. 

3 The foremost spotted steer hath made the Mornings 

shine, and yearning alter strength sustains all 
things that be. 

By liis high wisdom have the mighty sages wr6ught: 

the X athers who behold mankind laid down°the 
germ. 

4 Gandharva verily protects his dwelling-place; wond¬ 

rous, he guards the generations of the gods. 

Lord of the snare, he takes the foeman with the 
snare : those who are most devout have gained a 
share of meath. & 


The Rishi is Pavitra. The metre is Jagati. 

* Wha \B^.hmanaspati’s filter is, is noUlear. The ordinary Soma- 
hlter can hardly be intended. J 

w2r^r° 00ked ° l ' latlou - WMch iear - ' bearing (the sacrifiee).’- 
Ta?:™? •' . aGC0 ^»g ta s&yana, to this filter. Professor Ludwig 
Umiks that Agru or Sfirya is meant by ‘tat.’ 

Wil^m 8COrcker ’ S 8ieW •' ‘ The biter of the foo-scorching (Soma 


The swtft ones : 1 his swift-flowing (juices) protect the purifier (the 

3 Ihe mighty sages: those who possess supernatural wisdom; the 
gods. Ike Fathers: “ The fruitfulness of heaven and earth, which 
« f° g°ds and men, is described as produced by the fathers.” — 
ualhs, Cosmology of the R. V., p. 72. See X. 64 14. 

4 Gandharva: here, the Sun. His: Soma’s. 






48 - THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX. 

5 Rich in oblations! robed in cloud, thou compassest 
oblation, sacrifice, the mighty seat of gods. 

King, on thy chariot-sieve thou goest up to war, and 
with a thousand weapons winnest lofty fame. 

HYMN LXXXIV. Soma Pavamaua, 

Flow, cheering gods, most active, winner of the 
flood, for Indra, and for Vayu, and for "Varuna. 
Bestow on us to-day wide room with happiness, and 
in thine ample dwelling laud the host of heaven. 

2 He who Lath come anear to creatures that have life, 

immortal Soma flows onward to all of them. 
Effecting, for our aid, both union and release, Indu, 
like Sflrya, follows closely after Dawn. 

3 He who is poured with milk, he who within the plants 

hastes bringing treasure for the happiness of gods, 
He, poured forth in a stream flows with the lightning’s 
flash, Soma who gladdens Indra and the host of 
heaven. 

4 Winner of thousands, he, this Soma, flows along, 

raising a vigorous voice that wakens with the dawn. 
Indu with winds drives on the ocean of the air, he 
sinks within the jars, he rests in Indra’s heart. 


5 Robed in cloud: nabkah: meaning, water from the clouds. With 
a thousand weapons: more literally, having a thousand, that is, count¬ 
less, sharp points. ‘ Thousand-rayed.’—Ludwig. 


The Rishi is Prajapati, son of V&k. The metre is Jagati. 

1 In thine ample dwelling: ‘on the spaoious sacrificial grouud.’— 


Sayana. 

2 The second line is obscure. Professor Wilson translates, after 
-ivana—‘ Indu, binding and loosing, accompanies the saenbee (tor 
il protection) as the sun the dawn;’ that is, b.nding or connecting 
die sacrifice with the gods and loosing or separating it fioin the 
' uras or evil spirits. But this explanation is unsatisfactory. Profe'i- 
, 0 r Ludwig suggests that ‘ union’ refers to Soma’s binding together 
mavcnand oarth,gods and men, and for the meaning of release ho 

•cfers to IX. 68. 






MINI ST^ 


THE RIG VEDA. 




5 The kine with milk dress him who makes the milk 
increase, Soma, amid the songs, who finds the 
light of heaven. 

Winner of wealth, the effectual juice is flowing on, 
singer and sage by wisdom, dear as heaven itself. 


HYMN LXXXV. Soma Pavamaua, 


Flow on to India, Soma, carefully effused: let 
sickness stay afar together with the fiend. 

Let not the double-tongued delight them with thy 
juice: here be thy flowing drops laden with 
opulence. 

2 O Pavam&na, urge us forward in the fight ; thou 

art the vigour of the gods, the well-loved drink. 
Smite thou our enemies who raise the shout of joy . 
Jndra, drink Soma-juice, and drive away our foes. 

3 Unharmed, best cheerer, thou, O Indu, (lowest on- 

thou, even thou thyself, art Indra’s noblest food. 
Full many a wise man lifts to thee the son* of 
praise, and hails theo with a kiss as sovran” 1 * * 4 of 
this world. 


4 Wondrous, with hundred streams, hymned in a 

thousand songs, Indu pours out for Indra his de¬ 
lightful meath. 

Winning us land and waters, flow thou hitherward : 
rainer of bounties, Soma, make broad way for us. 

5 Roaring within the beaker thou art balmed with 

milk: thou passest through the fleecy filter all at once. 
Laretully cleansed and decked like a prize-winning 

s eec, t Soma, thou hast flowed down within 
J ndra s throat. 


I Iks Rishi is Vena, of t he family of Blmgu. The metre is Trish- 

lu 8tauzas 11 and 12, and Jngfttf in the rest of the hymn. 

Wt’h the fiend: raicskasd saha: ‘and the lidhhasas.’ —Wilson. 

4 





50 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK IX. 


C Flow onward sweet of flavour for the heavenly race, 
for Indra sweet, whose name is easily invoked : 
Flow sweet for Mitra, Varuna, and V&yu, rich in 
meath, inviolable for Brihaspati. 

7 Ten rapid fingers deck the courser in the jar: with 

hymns the holy singers send their voices forth. 

The filtering juices hasten to their eulogy, the drops 
that gladden find their way to Indra’s heart. 

8 While thou art purified pour on us hero strength, 

great, far-extended shelter, spacious pasturage. 

Let no oppression master this our holy work: may 
we, O lndu, gain all opulence through thee. 

9 The steer who sees afar hath risen above the sky: 

the sage hath caused the lights of heaven to give 
their shine. 

The king is passing through the filter with a roar: 
they drain the milk of heaven from him who looks 
on men. 

10 High in the vault of heaven, unceasing, honey- 
tongued, the loving ones drain out the mountain- 
haunting steer,— 

The drop that hath grown great in waters, in the 
lake, meath-rioh, in the stream’s wave and in the 
cleansing sieve. 

l i The loving ones besought with many voices the eagle 
who had flown away to heaven. 

Hymns kiss the youngling worthy of laudation, rest¬ 
ing on earth, the bird of golden colour. 


9 The. steer who sees (far: wise Soma. 

10 The loving ones : vendh : the gods. According to Rayana, great 
lir lus called Veims. The mountain-haunting steer: the Son kv plant 
w hioh grew on mountains. 

j j j n this stanza is the eagle, the youngling or infant, and 

the bird of golden colour. 





miSr^y. 


THE RIG VEDA. 



<sl 


TUN 86.] 


51 


12 High to the vault of heaven Gandharva rises, be¬ 
holding all the varied forms of Soma. 

His ray hath shone abroad with gleaming splendour: 
pure, he hath lighted both the worlds, the parents. 

HYMN LXXXYI. Soma Pavam-lua. 

Thy gladdening draughts, O Pavamana, urged by 
song flow swiftly of themselves like sobs of fleet- 
foot marea » 

The drops of Soma-juice, those eagles of the heavens, 
most cheering, rich in meath, rest in the reservoir. 

2 As rapid chariot-steeds, so turned in several ways 

have thine exhilarating juices darted forth, 

Soma-drops rich in meath, waves, to the thunder- 

a med, to Indra, like milch-kiue who seek their 
calf with milk. 

3 Llke a , steecl , ur & ecl to battle, finder of the light. 

speed onward to the cloud-born reservoir of heaven, 

A steer that o’er the woolly surface seeks the sieve 
^ Soma while purified for India’s nourishment. 

4 Fleet as swift steeds, thy drops, divine, thomdit- 

swdt, have been, 0 Pavamftna, poured with milk 
into the vat. 

The Rishia have poured in continuous Soma-drons 
ordamers who adorn thee, friend whom Rishis love! 


*** <* tbe Sun. See Wallis, Coeneolo^ „/ 

Mnu. ? e hiS T ; Soe Hymns, and Professor Max 

.... , Ru J"’f a Smlatd ( Hfmns to the Mamie), Introduction, p Lxv 

the metre is Jagati throughout the hymn. 

Spud omvaid . hasten to pour down the rain from the cloud. 

BhoJu™ 1 W A° m ® sh f* l0W: -' ishisft& ^ a ■ the word does not occur 
Wi^r.r ' tS P recise meaning is uncertain. ‘ 0 ftVit-enjoyed.’- 
1 hou who playost the part of a Riahi/—Ludwig. 




[BOOK 1%. 


5g THE HYMNS OF 

O thou who seest all things, sovran as thou art and 
passing strong, thy rays encompass every form. 
Pervading with thy natural powers thou flowest on, 
and as the whole world’s lord, 0 Soma, thou art king. 

6 The beams of Pavamdna, sent from earth and heaven, 

his ensigns who is ever stedfast, travel round. 

When on the sieve the golden-hued is cleansed he rests 
within the vats as one who seats him in his place. 

7 Served with fair rites he flows, ensign of sacrifice : 

Soma advances to the meeting-place of gods. 

Jle speeds with thousand currents to the reservoir, 
and passes through the filter bellowing as a bull. 

8 The sovran dips him in the sea and in the streams, 

and set in rivers with the waters’ wave moves on. 
High heaven’s sustainer at the central point of earth,' 
raised on the fleecy surface Pavamana stands. 

9 He on whose high decree the heavens and earth depend 

hath roared and thunderedlike the summitof the sky. 
Soma flows on obtaining Indra’s friendly love, and, 
as they purify him, settles in the jars. 

10 He, light of sacrifice, distils delicious meath, most 

wealthy, father and begetter of the gods. 

He, gladdening, best of c-heerers, juice that Indra loves, 
enriches with mysterious treasure earth and heaven. 

11 The vigorous and far-seeing one, the lord of heaven, 

flows, shouting to the beaker, with his thousand 
streams. 

Coloured like gold he rests in seats where Mitra 
dwells, the steer made beautiful by rivers and by 
sheep. 


8 The sea and tk streams are the firmament and its waters. Soma 
is said to combine with the solar rays in the clouds, and thus to 
oause the rain to descend. Central point of earth: the place of 

sacrifice. , .. 

11 By rivers awl by sheep; by the purifying waters and the woclleo 

strainer. 





MINI ST/fy. 


THE R1GVEDA. 




12 In forefront of the rivers Pavamana speeds, in fore¬ 

front of the hymn* foremost among the kine. 

He shares the mighty booty in the van of war : the 
well-armed steer is purified by worshippers. 

13 This heedful PavamSna, like a bird sent forth, hath 

with his wave flowed onward to the fleecy sieve. 

O Indra, through thy wisdom, by thy thought, O 
sage, Soma flows bright and pure between the 
earth aud heaven. , 

14 He, clad in mail that reaches heaven, the hoi}' - one, 

filling the firmament, stationed amid the worlds, 
Knowing the realm of light, hath come to us in rain: 
he summons to himself his own primeval sire. 

13 He who was first of all to penetrate his form bestow- 
^ ed upon his race wide shelter and defence, 
h roni that high station which he hath in loftiest 
heaven he comes victorious to all encounters here. 
16 Inau hath started forth for Indra’s meeting-place, and 
slights not as a friend the promise of his friend. 
Soma comes onward like a youth with youthful maids 
^ an d gains the beaker by a course of hundred paths. 

1 / Y our songs, exhilarating, tuneful, uttering praise are 
come into the places where the people meet. 
Worshippers have exalted Soma with their hymns, 
and milch-kine have come near to meet him with 
their milk. 

18 0 Soma, Indu, while they cleanse thee, pour on us 
accumulated, plentiful, nutritious food, 


14 His own primeval sire ; or, the ancieufc father of this (All). 
Inara is meant. 

It* He : Soma. His form ;■ Indra’s. ffi$ race i Indra and the gods. 
, 16 Might* not ct$ a friend the promise of his friend: ‘the friend 
vj1' CS n °r t ' 16 stonlac k of his friend.—Wilson. Snynna derives 
r. <>t \[ ‘ !0m to swallow, instead of from samgr>, to assent, 

m >e P^-hs: through the interstices of the wool. 




54 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK IX. 


Which, ceaseless, thrice a clay shall yield us hero 
power enriched with store of nourishment, and 
strength, and meatb. 

19 Far-seeing Soma flows, the steer, the lord of hymns, 

the furtherer of day, of morning, and of heaven. 
Mixt with the streamshe caused the beakers to resound, 
and with the singers’ aid they entered Indra’s heart. 

20 On, with the singers, flows the sage upon his way, 

and guided by the men hath roared about the vats. 
He, showing Trita’s name, hath caused the meath to 
flow, that Vilyu and that Indra may become his 
friends, 

21 He, being purified, hath made the Mornings shine : 

this, even this is he who gave the rivers room. 

He made the three times seven pour out the milky 
flow: Soma, the cheerer, yields whate’er the heart 
finds sweet. 

22 Flow onward, Soma, in thine own celestial forms, 

flow, Indu, poured within the beaker and the sieve. 
Sinking into the throat of Indra with a roar, led by 
the men thou madest Stirya mount to heaven. 

28 Pressed out with stones thou flowest onward to tho 
sieve, O Indu, entering the depths of Indra^ throat. 
Far-sighted Soma, now thou lookest on mankind: 
thou didst unbar the oow-stall for the Angirasas. 


18 Thrice a day : at the three appointed sacrifices. 

20 Shovrn j Tritahe name : literally, begetting, that is, making 
(janayaa) the name of Trite; meanvug probably, as Prof. Ludwig 
s ingests, remin ling us of Trita* * Generating the water of the three* 
fold (Indra)/—Wilson. 

21 The three times seven: the seven celestial rivers, corresponding 
to the rivers of earth, multiplied by three to accord with the three** 
fold division of the heavens. According to SiVyana, cows arc meant* 

23 Thou didst unbar the cow Mall : didst recover the cattle stolen 
by tho Pan! 9 , that is the rays of light that the fiends of darkness 
Lad oarried off; the great deed of Indra being ascribed to Soma his 
iuspirer. 



THE RIG VEDA. 



MN 86.] 



24 In thee, O Soma, while thou purifiedst thee, high- 

thoughted sages, seeking favour, have rejoiced. 
Down from the heavens the falcon brought thee 
hitherward, even thee, 0 Indu, thee whom all our 
hymns adorn. 

25 Seven milch-kine glorify the tawny-coloured one 

while with his wave in wool he purifies himself. 
The living men, the mighty, have impelled the sage 
into the waters’ lap, the place of sacrifice. 

26 Indu, attaining purity, plunges through the foe, 

making his ways all easy for the pious man. 
Making the kine his mantle, he, the lovely sage, runs 
like a sporting courser onward through the fleece. 

27 The ceaseless watery fountains with their hundred 

streams sing, as they hasten near, to him the 
golden-hued. 

Him, clad in robes of milk, swift fingers beautify on 
the third height and in the luminous realm of 
heaven. 

28 These are thy generations of celestial seed : thou’ art 

the sovran lord of all the world of life. 

This universe, O Pavamftna, owns thy sway , thou, 
Indu, art the first establisber of Law. 

29 Thou art the sea, 0 sage who bringest all to light: 

under thy law are these five regions of the world. 
Thou art removed beyond the earth, beyond tho 
heavens: thine are the lights, O Pavamftna, thine 
the Sun. 

30 Thou in the filter, Soma Pavam&na, art purified to 

support the region for the gods. 


25 Seven milch-kine; the celestial rivers. 

26 Making the kine his mantle ; he who is aftorwavcb covered or 
mingled with milk. 

29 Thau art the sea : Soma and the sea beingaliko producers of rain, 

30 The region: mid-air j the firmament. The chief , the longing 
men: the zealous priests. 



M'Nisr^ 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK IX 



The chief, the longing men have sought to hold 
thee fast, and all these livirg creatures have been 
turned to the®. 

31 Onward the singer travels o’er the fleecy sieve : the 

tawny steer hath bellowed in the wooden vats. 

H ymns have beensung aloud in resonant harmony, and 
holy songs kiss him, the child who claims our praise. 

32 He hath assumed the rays of Sfirya for his robe, 

spinning, as he knows how, the triply-twisted thread. 
He, guiding to the newest rules of holy law, comes 
as the lord of women to the meeting-place. 

33 On flows the king of rivers and the lord of heaven : 

he follows with a shout the paths of holy law. 

The golden-hued is poured forth with his hundred 
streams, wealth-bringer, lifting up his voice while 
purified. 

34 Fain to be cleansed, thou, Pavamana, poorest out, like 

wondrous Stir a, through the fleece, an ample sea. 
Purified with the hands, pressed by the men with stones, 
thou speedest on to mighty booty-bringing war. 

35 Thou, Pavamana, sendest food and power in streams : 

thou sittest in the beakers as a hawk on trees, 

For India poured as cheering juice to make him 
glad, as nearest and far-seeing bearer-up of heaven. 

36 The waters seven, t he mothers, stand around the babe, 

the noble, new-born infant, skilled in holy song, 


3 2 Sj nr- tV' 2’1 >**<:<f thread z bearing liir> part m morn¬ 

ing, noon day, and evening sacrifice. The lord: patilh: explained by 
Sfiyana aa p/i!akah y protector. The meeting-place: ‘the consecrated 
(veb: el)/—Wilson. 

;>t Like wmdrovs : adorable like the Sun. 

36 The siders seven : the great rivers which may provide water for 
Soma-sacrifices. Gandharva . frequently identified with the Sun, 
hern means Soma who “ symbolizes at the same time the fructifying 
wafers of heaven and liquid light/' See Wallis, Cownalogy of the 
jftigvedai p, 37, 






misr/fy 


TIIE RIG VEDA. 



'HYMN 86 .] 


<SL 


Gandharva of the floods, divine, beholding men, 
Soma, that he may reign as king of all the world. 

37 As sovran lord thereof thou passest through these 

worlds, 0 Indu, harnessing thy tawny well-winged 
mares. 

May they pour forth for thee milk and oil rich in 
sweets : O Soma, let the folk abide in thy decree. 

38 O Soma, thou belioldest men from every side : O 

Pavamana, steer, thou wanderest through these. 
Pour out upon us wealth in treasure and in gold: 
may we have strength to live among the things 
that be. 

39 Winner of gold and gear and cattle flow thou on, set 

as impregner, Indu, ’mid the worlds of life. 

Rich in brave men art thou, Soma, who winnest all . 
these holy singers wait upon thee with the song. 

40 The wave of flowing meath hath wakened up desires : 

the steer enrobed in milk plunges into the streams. 
Borne on his chariot-sieve the king hath risen to 
war, and with a thousand weapons won him high 
renown, 

41 Dear to all life, he sends triumphant praises forth, 

abundant, bringing offspring, each succeeding day. 
From Indra crave for us, Indu, when thou art quaff¬ 
ed, the blessing that gives children, wealth that 
harbours steeds. 


38 Ihrcnifjh these: there ia no substantive. Sayana auplics apah 
waters, 

40 j Desire*: the meaning of vanan&h: is not certain: ‘voices 
(of praise).'—Wilson. With a thousand lucapons: mha&abhruhtih ; 
more literally, having a thousand edges or sharp points. Up, IX. 
83. 5. 

41 The blessing: this seems to be very nearly the meaning of 
brahma hero. But the word may as usual be rendered by prayer, or 
dcrotion. ‘Solicit Indra (to give) us food productive of progeny,’— 
Wilson, 




NllNisr^ 


58 


THE HYMNS OF 




[BOOK IX. 


42 When days begin, the strong juice, lovely, golden- 

hued, is recognized by wisdom more and more 

each da} T . 

He, stirring both the races, goes between the two, 
the bearer of the word of men and word of gods. 

43 They balm him, balm him over, balm him thoroughly, 

caress the mighty strength and balm it with the 
meath. 

They seize the flying steer at the stream s breathing- 
place : cleansing with gold they grasp the animal 
herein. 

44 Sin«- forth to Pavam&na skilled in holy song: the 

juice is flowing onward like a mighty stream. 

He glideth like a serpent from his ancient skin, and 
like a playful horse the tawny steer hath run. 

45 Dweller in floods, king, foremost, he displays his 

might, set among living things as measurer of days. 
Distilling oil he flows, fair, billowy, golden-hued, 
borne on a car of light, sharing one home with 
wealth. 


42 When days begin: according to Sayana, early in the morning. 
The commencement of the year is more probably intended. The 
half of the stanza is obscurely expressed. It appears to 





MINlSr^ 


TI1E RIG VEDA. 




46 Loosed is the heavens’ support, the uplifted cheer- 

ins' iuice: the triply-mingled draught flows round 
into the worlds. 

The holy hymns caress the stalk that claims our 
praise, when singers have approached his beaute¬ 
ous robe with song. 

47 Thy streams that flow forth rapidly collected run 

over the fine fleece of the sheep ' as thou art 
eleansed. 

When, Indu, thou art balmed with milk between 
the boards, thou sinkest in the jars, 0 Soma, 
when expressed. t 

48 Winner of power, flow, Soma, worthy of our laud: 

run onward to the fleece as well-belovM meath. 
Destroy, O Indu, all voracious Rakshasas: with 
brave sons in the assembly let our speech be bold. 


HYMN LXXXVIL Soma Pavamiina. 

Run onward to the reservoir and seat thee : cleansed 
by the men speed forward to the battle. 

Mat ing thee beauteous like an able courser, forth to 
the sacred grass with reins they lead thee. 

2 Indu, the well-armed god, is flowing onward, who 
quells the curse and guards from treacherous 
onslaught, 

Father, begetter of the gods, most skilful, the 
buttress of the heavens and earth’s supporter. 


46 Triply-mingled;. or, poured into three vessels, the Jronakahisa, 
Mhavinlya, aud p&tabhrit . Robe: the integuments which cover the 
juice : that is the exterior of the stalk and shoots. 

47 Between the boards: of the Soma-press : * in the ladles.’—Wilson. 
The (miming with milk follows the pressing, and i 3 h° re nroutioued 
proleptically. 

The ftishi is Usaufl, sou of Kavi, The metre is Trishtup, 






TIIE UniltS OF 



60 


<SL 

f BOOK IX. 


3 Rishi and sage, the champion of the people, deft 

and sagacious, Usana in wisdom, 

He hath discovered even their hidden nature, the 
cows 3 4 5 * 7 concealed and most mysterious title. 

4 This thine own Soma rich in meath, 0 Indra, steer 

for the steer, hath flowed into the filter. 

The strong free-giver, winning hundreds, thousands, 
hath reached the holy grass that never fails him. 

5 These Somas are for wealth of countless cattle, 

renown therefor, and mighty strength immortal. 
These have been sent forth, purified by strainers, 
like steeds who rush to battle fain for glory. 

C He, while he cleanses him, invoked of many, hath 
flowed to give the people all enjoyment. 

Thou whom the falcon brought bring dainty viands, 
bestir thyself and send us strength and riches. 

7 This Soma, pressed into the cleansing filter, hath run 

as ’twere a host let loose, the courser ; 

Like a strong bull who whets his horns keen-pointed, 
like a brave warrior in the fray for* cattle. 

8 He issued forth from out the loftiest mountain, and 

found kine hidden somewhere in a stable. 

Soma’s stream clears itself for thee, O Indra, like 
lightning thundering through the clouds of heaven. 


3 Usand in wisdom: as wise as the celebrated Usana. S&yana ex¬ 
plains differently, regarding UssmH as the discoverer : ‘ Ufctnas— lie 
vci ily by his poetic gift discovered the secret milk of those cows which 
was hidden and concealed.’—Wilson. By title or name of the cows, 
water appears to be intended. 

4 Steer for the steer; or, strong for the strong. 

5 Mighty strength immortal: ‘ample food and ambrosia.’—Wilson. 

8 From out the loftiest mountain: Siiyana makes antaradreh depend 

upon Uchit, somewhere : ‘This Soma stream has come from on high 
and has detected the cattle which were in a stall (hidden) some¬ 
where within the mountain.’—Wilson. Professor Grassmann tarns- 
j ateB . «j 8 fc entsprungen aus dem hocbsten Presssteiu.’ ‘ He hath 
sprung forth from the most lofty press-stone.’ 





r N 88 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 



L 


9 Cleansing thyself, and borne along with Indra, 
Soma, thou goest round the herd of cattle. 

May thy praise help us, mighty one, prompt giver, 
to the full ample food which thou bestowest. 



For thee this Soma is effused, O Indra : drink of 
this juice ; for thee the stream is flowing— 

Soma, which thou thyself hast made and chosen, 
even Indu, for thy special drink to cjieer thee. 

2 Like a capacious car hath it been harnessed, the 

i mighty, to acquire abundant treasures. 

Ihen in the sacrifice they celebrated all triumphs 
won by Nalius in the battle. 

3 Like Yftyu with his team, moving at pleasure, most 

gracious when invoked like both N&satyas, 

Thou, Soma, of thyself, hast every blessing, giver of 
wealth like song-inspiring Pftshan. 

4 Like Indra who hath done great deeds, thou. Soma, 

art slayer of the Vritras, fort-destroyer. 

Like Pedus horse who killed the brood of serpents, 
thus thou, 0 Soma, slayest every Dasyu. 


9 The herd of cattle: Soma accompanies Indra in his expedition 
to recover tho stolen cattle.—Sayana. Or the cattle or cows may be 
the milk with which Soma is mixed. 

The Rishi is Usana the son of Kavi. The metro is Tfishtup. 

3 I can make nothing out of the second lino of this stanza. Tho 
version which I give as a temporary makeshift is founded on Professor 
Ludwig’s remarks in his Commentary on the passage, Vol. V. p. 308, 
of his Eigveda. Professor Wilson, following Sayana, translates 
After this (i. e. after the harnessing of the waggon.—Note ) may all 
the races of men expecting our (attack) go to the desirable battle.' 
- Now let the races of all men, rising up like trees, come near to him 
in order to obtain success,’ would, according to Professor Grussmanu, 
be nearer the meaning. 

{ horse: given to him by the Asvins. Seo I. 116. G: 11?. 


9 ; 118 . 9 ; 119 . 10 . 




o 


THE HYMNS OF 


<SL 

[BOOK IX. 


5 Like Agni loosed amid the forest, lightly he shows 

his fury in the running waters. 

Like one who fights, the roaring of the mighty, thus 
Soma Pavam&na sends his current. 

6 These Sonias passing through the fleecy filter, like 

rain descending from the clouds of heaven, 

Have been effused and poured into the beakers, lightly 
like rivers running lowly seaward. 

7 Flow onward like the potent band of Maruts, like 

that celestial host whom none revileth. 

Quickly be gracious unto us like waters, like sacri- 
flee victorious thousand-fashioned. 

8 Thine are king Var una’s eternal statutes, lofty and 

deep, O Soma, is thy glory. 

All-pure art thou like Mitra the beloved, adorable, 
like Aryaman, O Soma. 

HYMN LXXXIX. Soma Pavara&na. 

This chariot-horse hath moved along the pathways, 
and Pavaro&na flowed like rain from heaven. 

With us hath Soma with a thousand currents sunk 
in the wood, upon his mother’s bosom. 

2 King, he hath clothed him in the robe of rivers, 
mounted the straightest-going ship of Order. 

Sped bv the hawk the drop hath waxed in waters: 
the father drains it, drains the father’s offspring. 


7 Like sacrifice: according to Sayana, yajnah, sacrifice, means hero, 
worthy of sacrifice ‘ (thou a t) of a thousand shapes, adorable 
like (India) the victor in battle.’—Wilson. 

8 'ibis stanza is found also in R»<ok I. 91 . o. 


The Rishi is Usani son of Kavi. Tho metro is Tiishtup. 
o f, : cker drains it : “The scholiast finds it difficult to make 

/ / / / 7 III. . 1 ^ A s / A 


uenso of (his: piUi (pdlaio lokah) he supposes to moan the Ad 
who extracts tlm juice of tho Soma winch is born from h 


dh- 

wary a. who extract *7'"" .. ' ~. . ' ,l ® 

heii’en as from ft father; or the first milker may be tho yyamdnd 
and the second the Adhuxxryu; or duke may be repeated out of 

respect.’ -Wilson. 




misr/f^ 


TEE RIGVEDA. 




3 They come to him, red, tawny, lord of heaven, the 
watchful guardian of the meath, the lion. 

First, hero in the fight, he seeks the cattle, and 
with his eye the steer is our protector. 


They harness to the broad-wheeled car the mighty 
courser whose back bears meath, unwearied, awful. 

The kindred sisters brighten him, and strengthen_ 

these children of one dame—the vigorous racer. 

Four pouring out the holy oil attend him, sitting 
together in the same container. 

To him they flow, when purified, with homage, and 
still, from every side, are first about him. 

He is the buttress of the heavens, supporter of earth 
^and in his hand are all the people. 

Be the team s lord a well to thee the singer: cleansed 
is the sweet plant’s stalk for deed of glory. 

Fighting, unconquered, come where gods are feasted ; 
feoma, as Vritra-slayer flow for Indra. 

Vouchsafe us ample riches very splendid : may we 
be masters of heroic vigour. 


HYMN XC. Soma ravaraana. 

Urged on, the father of the earth and heaven hath 
^ gone forth like a ear to gather booty, 

Going to Indra, sharpening his weapons, and in his 
hand containing every treasure. 

2 To him the tones of sacred song have sounded, the 
steer with triple back, the life-bestower. 

5 Four : lbo quarters of the sky. Container: the rimi,une.7t __ 
i^ <: t-eam’s lord: Soma, as resembling Vayu. Op. IX. 88. 3. Suy.ina 
oxplaius differently s : may (Soma) the fountain (of desires’) be 
possessed of horses for thee (bis) adorer.’— Wilson. 


The liishi is Vasishlha. The metre is Trishtup. 

1 Father: jamtd: generator, of earth by"sending rain, and of 
heaven by obtaining oblations for the gods. —g:\yana. 

" b ilk (rip!,: b(wl: or, found on three heights, firmament, moitn- 
bun, nnd altar. See IX. 71. 7. 




WHlST/fy. 


THE nniiYS OF 



<SL 

[BOOK IX. 


Dwelling in wood as Varupa in rivers, lavishing 
treasure lie distributes blessings. 

3 Great conqueror, warrior-girt, lord of all heroes, flow 

on thy way as he who winneth riches; 

With sharpened arms, with swift bow, never van¬ 
quished in battle, vanquishing in fight the foemen. 

4 Giving security, lord of wide dominion, send us both 

earth and heaven with all their fulness. 

Striving to win the Dawns, the light, the waters, 
and cattle, call to us abundant vigour. 

5 O Soma, gladden Varuria and Mitra; cheer, Indu 

PavamUna! Indra, Vishnu. 

Cheer thou the gods, the company of Maruts : Indti, 
cheer mighty Indra to rejoicing. 

6 Thus like a wise and potent king flow onward, de¬ 

stroying with thy vigour all misfortunes. 

For our well-spoken hymn give life, O Indu. Do ye 
preserve us evermore with blessings. 

HYMN Xd. Soma Pavamana. 

As for a chariot-race, the skilful speaker, chief, sage, 
inventor, hath, with song, been started. 

The sisters ten upon the fleecy summit drive on the 
car-horse to the resting-places. 

2 The drop of Soma pressed by wise Nahushyas be¬ 
comes the banquet of the heavenly people-— 

Indu, by hands of mortal men made beauteous, immor¬ 
tal’ with the sheep and cows and waters. 


4 Cull to «*• send ns with thy shout or roar. 

6 The hymn ends with tho usual concluding half-line of the 
hymus ascribed to the Vasishthas. 

The Rishi is Kasyapa son of Mariohi. The metre is Trishtup. 

1 The skilful speaker: Soiua who makes us eloquent. The resting- 
places : sculanAni: the seats, the reservoirs in which he Betties. 

2 NahwhydS • probably a neighbouring people, bee Vl. lb. I, and 
note on Fahashas which has the Barne meaning. 






MINlSr^ 


THE RIG VEDA. 




3 Steer roaring unto steer, this Pavamana, this juice 

runs to the white milk of the milch-cow. 

Through thousand fine hairs goes the tuneful singer, 
like Sftra by his fair and open pathways. 

4 Break down the strong seats even of the demons : 

cleansing thee, Indu, robe thyself in vigour. 

Rend with thy swift bolt, coming from above them, 
those who are near and those who yet ate distant. 

5 Prepare the forward paths in ancient manner for the 

new hynm, thou giver of all bounties. 

Those which are high and hard for foes to conquer 
may we gain from thee, active ! food-bestower! 

6 So purifying thee vouchsafe us waters, heaven’s 

light, and cows, offspring and many children. 

Give us health, ample land, and lights, O Soma, and 
grant us long to look upon the sunshine. 


HYMN XCII. Soma Pavaniana. 

The gold-hued juice, poured out upon the filter, is 
started like a car sent forth to conquer. 

He hath gained song and vigour while they cleansed 
him, and hath rejoiced the gods with entertainment*. 

2 He who beholdcth man hath reaehed the filter : bear- 
^ ing his name, the sage hath sought his dwelling. 

The Rishis came to him, seven holy singers, when 
in the bowls he settled as invoker. 


3 Sura: Surya. the Sun. Fair and open: adhvasmabhih: ‘im¬ 
perishable.’—Wilson. 

5 Those: portions of thee, according to Sayaua. 

6 In the second half of the stanza, instead of taking urn, wide, 
ample, with kshetram, field, land, S&yana joins it., as = uriini, with 
jyotinishi, lights:—‘make our land prosper, diffuse tho luminaries 
widely (in the firmament).’—Wilson. 

The Rishi is Ivnsyapa son of Marichi. The metre is Trishtup. 

2 The #isM $; according to Sfiyana, Bharadvfvja, Rneyapa. Uotarno, 
Alri, Vievamitra, Jamadagni, Vasishtha. 

5 







misfy 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK IX. 




3 Shared by all gods, most wise, propitious, Soma goes, 

while they cleanse him, to his constant station. 
Let him rejoice in all his lofty wisdom: to the five 
tribes the sage attains with labour. 

4 In thy mysterious place, O Pavamdna Soma, are all 

the gods, the thriee-eleven. 

Ten on the fleecy height with godlike natures, and 
seven fresh rivers, brighten and adorn thee. 

5 Now let this be the truth of Pavamdna, there where 

all singers gather them together, 

That he hath given us room and made the daylight, 
hath holpen Manu and repelled the Dasyu. 

6 As the priest seeks the station rich in cattle, like a 

true king who goes to great assemblies, 

Soma hath sought the beakers while they cleansed 
him, and, like a wild bull, in the wood hath settled. 

HYMN XCI1I. Soma Pavamana. 

Ten sisters, pouring out the rain together, swift- 
moving thinkers of the sage, adorn him. 

Hither hath run the gold-hued child of Shrya, and 
reached the vat like a fleet vigorous courser. 


3 The Jive tribes: the five Aryan tribes. According to Sly ana, 
< t.lie five classes of beings,’ i. e., four castes and the Nish&das. 

4 Th. thriee-eleven: see I. 139. 11. Ten: the fingers. 

5 Manu: as the representative of the Aryan race. 

6 The station rich in cattle: ‘the hall where the victim is sta¬ 
tioned.’— Wilson. To great assemblies: or, to war and battle. The 
wood: the wooden vat or reservoir. 


The Jtishi is Nodhus, the son of Gotama. The metre is Trishtup. 

1 Ten sisters: the fingers which press out the juice of the Sotnn- 
plunt. Thinkors : or thoughts, devotions. According to S&ynim, 
fingers. Child of SArga: Saynna explains jAh, offspring, by jdgdh 
w j ve8 7 - quarters of the heaven, oalled Sfiryus wives because 

they are made manifest by his rays. 





MINlSr^ 


THE RIGVEDA. 




2 Even as a youngling shouting with his mothers, the 
bounteous steer hath flowed along with waters. 

As youth to damsel, so with milk he hastens on to 
the appointed meeting-place, the beaker. 

0 Yea, swollen is the udder of the milch-cow : thither 
in streams goes very sapient Jndu. 

The kine make ready, as with new-washed treasures, 
the head and chief with milk within tlie vessels. 

4 With all the gods, O Indu Pavam&ua, while thou 

art roaring send us wealth iu horses. 

Hither upon her car come willing Plenty, inclined 
to us, to give us of her treasures. 

5 ISow unto us mete riches, while they cleanse thee, 

all-glorious, swelling wealth, with store of heroes. 
Long be his life who worships thee, O Indu. May 
he enriched with prayer, come soon and early. 

' H\ MN XCIV. Soma Pavamana. 

W hiln beauties strive for him as for a charger, then 
strive the songs like soldiers for the sunlight. 
Acting the sage, he flows enrobed in waters and sono * 1 
as twere a stall that kine may prosper. 


3 The head and chief: * the elevated Soma.’ —Wilson. 

4 Said us: more literally, open or disclose to us. 

'> 14*® hymn ends with the half-line which is the special conclusion 
of the hymns ascribed to Nodbits. See Book I. 58, 60—64. 

The Rishi is Kanva, of the family of Angiras. The metre is 
Trishtnp. 

1 The meaning is apparently : when the beautifying waters hasten 
euiulously to cleanse Soma as though he were a horse, tho voices of 
singing worshippers vie with each other like the shouts of men who 
are fighting for light and life. Soma flows on in his wisdom, blent 
with the waters, and surrounded with hymns into the midst of which 
he outers as into a stable full of kine in order to make them increase 
&nd multiply. # 






5 

THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX. 

2 The worlds expand to him who from aforetime lound 

light to spread the law of life eternal. 

The swelling songs, like kine within the stable, in 
deep devotion call aloud on Indu. 

3 When the sage bears his holy wisdom round him, 

like a car visiting all worlds, the hero, 

Becoming fame, ’mid gods, unto the mortal, wealth 
to the skilled, worth praise ’mid the ever-present. 

4 For glory born he hath come forth to glory: he 

givetli life and glory to the singers. 

They, clothed in glory, have become immortal. He, 
measured in his course, makes frays successful. 

5 Stream to us food and vigour, kine and horses : give 

us broad lights and fill the gods with rapture. 

All these are easy things for thee to master: thou, 
Pavamana Soma, quellest foemen. 

HYMN XCV. Soma Pavamana. 

Loud neighs the tawny steed when started, settling 
deep in the wooden vessel while they cleanse him. 
Led by the men he takes the milk for raiment: then 
shall he, through his powers, engender praise-songs. 
2 As one who rows drives on his boat, he, gold-hued, 
sends forth his voice, loosed on the path of Order. 
As god, the secret names of gods he utters, to be 
declared on sacred grass more widely. 


3 The stansa is somewhat obscure. Worth praise : or, adorable. 

The ever-present : the gods who come to help men. Professor Wilson, 
following Sayana, translates the second line: ‘ then desirous of bestow¬ 
ing upon mortals the wealth that abides with the gods, he (is) to be 
glorified in the many places of sacrifice for the preservation of the 
riches he has given.' 

S All these: All the Rikshasas, according to Siyana. 


The Rida is Praskanva of the family of Kanva. The metre is 

m the wooden vessel: literally, 3 4 S in the belly of the wood.’ 

2 I ft utters . 


irveals to the priest win is toMeclare them at sacrifice, 







MINlSr/f,, 


THE RIGYEDA. 



e& 


3 Hastening onward like the waves of waters, our 

holy hymns are pressing nigh to Soma. 

To him they come with lowly adoration, and, longing, 
enter him who longs to meet them. 

4 They drain the stalk, the steer who dwells on 

mountains, even as a bull who decks him on the 
upland. 

Hymns follow and attend him as he bellows : Trita 
receives the mighty lord in ocean. 

5 Sending thy voice out as director, loosen the invoker’s 

thought, O Indu, as they cleanse thee. 

While thou and Indra rule for our advantage, may 
we be masters of heroic vigour. 

HYMN XCVI. Soma Pavam&na. 

In forefront of the cars forth goes the hero, the 
leader, winning spoil: his host rejoices. 

Soma endues his robes of lasting colours, and blesses, 
for his friends, their calls on Indra. 

2 Men decked with gold adorn his golden tendril, 
incessantly with steed-impelling homage. 

The friend of Indra mounts his car: well-knowing, 
he comes thereon to meet a glad reception. 


4 Trita: the preparer of the celestial Soma. 

The mighty lov'd: vai'miam,: here meaning Soma; ‘ the defeater of 
enemies/—Wilson. In ocean; in the firmament. 

5 As director: upavakteva : upavalctb here appears to mean Adh- 
varyu : Yathddhvarynh. —Savana. Loosni the invokers though! aid 
the Hotar or' invoking priest to give free utterance to his thought 
or hymn. 

The Risbi is Pratardana son of Divodasa, The metre is Trishtup. 

1 Of lasting colours: rabhasAai: ‘hastily made/— Wilson. ‘Bril¬ 
liant/—(Jrassmann. 

2 Steed-impelling: urging him oti> us a whip urges- on a horse. 



70 ' tue uymNS OF {BOOK IX. 

3 O god, for service of the gods flow onward, ior food 

sublime, as Indra’s drink, O Soma. 

Making the floods, bedewing earth and heaven, come 
from the vast, comfort us while we cleanse thee. 

4 Flow for prosperity and constant vigour, flow on for 

happiness and high perfection. 

This is the wish of all these friends assembled : this 
is my wish, O Soma Pavam&na. 

5 Father of holy hymns, Soma flows onward, the father 

of the earth, father of heaven ; 

Father of Agni, Siirya’s generator, the father who 
begat Indra and Vishnu. 

(j Brahman of gods, the leader of the poets, Rishi of 
sages, bull of savage creatures, 

Falcon amid the vultures, axe of forests, over the 
cleansing sieve goes Soma singing. 

7 Fie, Soma Pavamana, like a river, hath stirred the 

wave of voice, our songs and praises. 

Beholding these inferior powers in cattle, he rests 
among them as a steer well-knowing. 

8 As gladdener, warrior ne’er subdued in battle, with 

thousand genial streams, pour strength and vigour. 
As thoughtful Pavam&na, urge O Indu, speeding 
the kine, the plant’s wave on to Indra. 

9 Dear, grateful to the gods, on to the beaker moves 

Soma, sweet to Indra, to delight him. 


3 From the vast: from the wide firmament. There is subs¬ 
tantive in the text. 

6 Brahman of gods: thou art Brihaspati, tho Lord Prayer, 

among the gods, or, chief among the priests. A re : rhaps, the 

lightning.—L. According to the St. Petersburg Lexicon, svadhitik 
hero means a tree with very hard wood. See 32. 10. 

7 The second line is obscure. Professor Wilson translates; “the 
showerer (of benefits) beholding the hidden (treasure) presides over 
these irresistible powers, lowing about the cattle.'” 

b JSc'cr oabdned in MtU: 0l V in fight unwounded. 





MINlSr^ 



MN 9G.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


71 


With hundred powers, with thousand currents, Indu, 
like a strong car-horse, goes to the assembly. 

10 Born in old time as finder-out of treasures, drained 

with the stone, decking himself in waters. 

Warding olf curses, king of all existence, he shall 
find way for prayer the while they cleanse him. 

11 For our sage fathers, Soma Pavamana, of old per¬ 

formed, by thee, their sacred duties.' 

Fighting unvanquished, open the enclosures : enrich 
us with large gifts of steeds and heroes. 

* % As thou didst flow for Manu life-bestowing, foe- 
queller, comforter, rich in oblations, 

Even thus flow onward now conferring riches: com¬ 
bine with Indra, and bring forth thy weapons. 

13 Flow onward, Soma, rich in sweets and holy, enrobed 

in waters on the fleecy summit. 

Settle in vessels that are full of fatness, as cheering 
and most gladdening drink for Indra. 

14 Pour, hundred-streamed, winner of thousands, mighty 

at the gods’ banquet, pour the rain of heaven, 
While thou with rivers roarest in the beaker, and 
blent with milk prolongest our existence. 

15 Purified with our holy hymns, this Soma o’ertakes 

malignities like some strong charger, 

Like fresh milk poured by Aditi, like passage in 
ample room, or like a docile car-horse. 

16 Cleansed by the pressers, armed with noble weapons, 

stream to uS the fair secret name thou bearest. 
Pour booty, like a horse, for love of glory : god, 
Soma, send us kino, and send us Vayu. 


9 Goes to the assembly: ‘proceeds like a strong horse to battle.’ — 
Wilson. 

11 The, enclosures: the obstructions which keep the rain from falling. 
13 Full of fatness: ghritav&nti: according to Sayana, ‘water-holding.' 
1 5 By Aditi : regarded as the Cosmic Cow. 
it* Vdyu: the breath of life, life.—Sayaya, 




WNlSTfty 



<SL 

THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX. 


17 They deck him at his birth, the lovely infant, the 

Maruts with their troop adorn the car-horse. 

By songs a poet and a sage by wisdom, Soma goes 
singing through the cleansing filter. 

18 Light-winner, Rishi-minded, Kishi-maker, hymned in 

a thousand hymns, leader of sages, 

A steer who strives to gain his third form, {Soma is, 
like Vir&j, resplendent as a singer. 

10 Hawk seated in the bowls, bird wide-extended, the 
banner seeking kine and wielding weapons, 
Following close thy sea, the wave of waters, the 
great bull tells his fourth form and declares it. 

20 Like a fair youth who decorates his body, a courser 

rushing to the gain of riches, 

A steer to herds, so, flowing to the beaker, he with 
a roar hath passed into the ladles. 

21 Flow on with might as Pavam&na, Indu : flow loudly 

roaring through the fleecy filter. 

Enter the ladles sporting, as they cleanse thee, and 
let thy gladdening juice make Indra joyful. 

22 His streams have been effused in all their fulness, and 

he hath entered, balmed with milk, the beakers. 
Binging liis psalm, well-skilled in song, a chanter, he 
comes as ’twere to his Friend’s sister roaring. 


IB Uu third form; the form that he wears in heaven; ‘the third 
region (heaven).’—Wilson. Virdj .* splendid or most illustrious 
Indra.—Say ana. 

19 The banner, drapsah: usually meaning, a drop, or a spark. 
See IV. 13. 2. 

Hie fourth form : the Moon. According to Sayapn, the region of 
the moon which is said to be above that of the sun. 

22 Ae 'twere to hit friend 1 :: gt*'cr: Siyana explains. jdmim, sister, by 
flydni, wife: ‘like (a libertine) to the wife of a friend,’—Wilson 
The meaning is probably no more than ' as lover to his darling’ i u 
the following stanza* 





WHlST/f), 


THE RIG VEDA. 




23 Chasing our foes thou comest, Pavamana! Indu, 

besung, as lover to his darling. 

As a bird flies and settles in the forest, thus Soma 
settles, purified, in beakers. 

24 With full stream and abundant milk, O Soma, thy 

beams come, like a woman, as they cleanse thee. 
He, gold-hued, rich in boons, brought to the waters, 
hath roared within the beaker of the pious. 

.H YMN XCVII. Soma Pavamana. 

Made pure by this man’s urgent zeal and impulse, 
the god hath to the gods his juice imparted. 

He goes, effused and singing, to the filter, like priest 
to measured seats supplied with cattle. 

2 Robed in fair raiment meet to wear in battle, 

a mighty sage pronouncing invocations, 

Roll onward to the press-boards as they cleanse thee, 
far-seeing at the feast of gods, and watchful. 

3 .Dear, he is brightened on the fleecy summit, a prince 

among us, nobler than the noble. 

Roar out as thou art purified, run forward. Do ye 
preserve us evermore with blessings. 

4 Let us sing praises to the gods : sing loudly, seud ye 

the Soma forth for mighty riches. 

Let him flow, sweetly-flavoured, through the filter, 
and let our pious one rest in the beaker. 

5 Winning the friendship of the deities, Indu flows in 

a thousand streams to make them joyful. 


The liiahis are Yasishtha and others, whose names are given in the 
Index of Hymns. The metre is Trishtup. 

1 .Urgent zeal and impulse: hemand, by impulse (from the root hi) 
is said by S&yana to mean ‘ by gold,’ that is, by the gold-adorned 
hand of the priest. Measured seats supplied with cattle: * the halls 
prepared (for sacrifice) containing victims.’—Wilson. Singing : the 
sound of the flowing juice is compared to the priest’s recitation of 
sacred texts. 



74 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK IX. 


Praised by the men after the ancient statute, ho 
hath come nigh, for our great bliss, to Inclra. 

G Plow, gold-hued, cleansing thee, to enrich the singer: 
let thy juice go to Indra to support him. 

Come nigh, together with the gods, for bounty. Do 
ye preserve us evermore with blessings. 

7 The god declares the deities’ generations, like Usana, 

proclaiming lofty wisdom. 

With brilliant kin. far-ruling, sanctifying, the wild- 
boar, singing with his foot, advances. 

8 The swans, the Vrishaganas from anear us have 

brought their restless spirit to our dwelling. 
Friends come to Pavamdna meet for praises, and 
sound in concert their resistless music. 

9 He follows the Wide-strider’s rapid movement: cows 

low, as ’twere, to him who sports at pleasure. 

He with the sharpened horns brings forth abundance: 
the silvery shines by night, by day the golden. 

10 Strong Indu, bathed in milk, flows on for Indra, 
Soma exciting strength, to make him joyful. 

He quells malignities and slays the demons, the 
king of mighty power who brings us comfort. 


7 The yul : Sonin, who has been called the father of the gods. 
Like TIaand: the sound of the flowing and dropping Soma-juice is 
likened to the song of the famous sago and sacred poet. The wild-lorn : 
strong, swift Soma- Singing with his foot: making a sound with 
each descending drop of juice. Sayana explaius differently 

* making a noise (as) a wild boar (makes a noise) with its foot/—Wilson* 
Or <pad& may b s-pad&ni, the places, i. e., the filters, 

8 The stvans: tbe singers, descendants of the Hishi Vrishagana. 

9 The Wide-strid*rapid movement: the swift course of the Sun, 
Cmvs low as r twere Sayana explains gdvah , cows, by anye gant&rah, 
other goers takes na as negative, and derives mimate from md, to 
measure, instead of from wd, to bleat or low :— 1 other goers cannot 
overtake him (though he is) moving easily/—Wilson, lie with thv 
sharpened horns: Soma as the Moon : tho silvery light by night and 
the golden coloured juice by day. 




misr^ 


THE III GVED A. 


75 



11 Then in a stream he flows, milked out with press- 

stones, mingled with sweetness, through the fleecy 
filter— 

Indu rejoicing in the love of Indra, the god who 
gladdens, for the god’s enjoyment. 

12 As he is purified he pours out treasures, a god 

bedewing gods with his own juices. 

Indu hath, wearing qualities by seasons, on the 
raised fleece engaged the ten swift fingers. 

13 The red bull bellowing to the kine advances, causing 

the heavens and earth to roar and thunder. 

Well is he heard like Indra’s shout in battle : letting 
this voice be known he hastens hither. 

14 Swelling with milk, abounding in sweet juices, urging 

the meath-rich plant thou goest onward. 

Raising a shout thou flowest as they cleanse thee, 
when thou, O Soma, art effused for Indra. 

15 So flow thou on inspiriting, for rapture, aiming 

death-shafts at him who stays the waters. 

Flow to us wearing thy resplendent colour, effused 
and eager for the kine, O Soma. 

16 Pleased with us, Indu, send us as thou flowest good 

easy paths in ample space and comforts. 

Dispelling, as ’twere with a club, misfortunes, run 
o’er the height, run o’er the fleecy summit. 

1/ Pour on us rain celestial, refreshing, wandering, 
^ fraught with health and ready bounty. 

I low, Indu, send these winds thy lower kinsmen, 
setting them free like locks of hair uubraided. 

18 Part, like a knotted tangle, while they cleanse thee, 
P Soma, righteous and unrighteous conduct. 

Neigh like a tawny courser who is loosened, come 
like a youth, 0 god, a house-possessor. 


1' Wearing qualities by seasons: ‘clothed in pleasant ladianc® 
according to the season/ — Wilson. 

15 Him who stays the waters. Yjitm. 





MiNisr^ 


THE HYMNS OF 



<SL 

[BOOK ZX 


19 For the gods’ service, for delight, O Indu, run o’er 

tile height, run o’er the fleecy summit. 

With thousand streams, inviolate, sweet-scented, 
flow on for gain of strength that conquers heroes. 

20 Without a car, without a rein to guide them, unyok¬ 

ed, like coursers started in the contest, 

These brilliant drops of Soma-juice run forward. Do 
ye, O deities, come nigh to drink them. 

21 So for our banquet of the gods, O Indu, pour down 

the rain of heaven into the vessels. 

May Soma grant us riches sought with longing, 
mighty, exceeding strong, with store of heroes. 

22 What time the loving spirit’s word had formed bum 

chief of all food, by statute of the highest, 

Then loudly lowing came the cows to Indu, the 
chosen, well-loved master in the beaker. 

23 The sage, celestial, liberal, raining bounties, pours 

as he flows the genuine for the truthful. 

The king shall be effctual strength’s upholder: he by 
the ten bright reins is mostly guided. 

24 He who beholds mankind, made pure with filters, 

the king supreme of deities and mortals. 

From days of old is treasure-lord of riches: he, Indu, 
cherishes fair well-kept Order. 

25 Haste, like a steed, to victory for glory, to Indra’s 

and to V&yu’s entertainment. 

Give us food ample, thousandfold: be, Soma, the 
finder-out of riches when they cleanse thee. 


22 Sayana’s explanation of the first liue is extremely laboured :— 
« When the praise of the zealous worshipper sanctities him as that of 
a noisy (crowd) in front (praises) a distinguished (prince) for tl*e 
support (he affords).’— Wilson. 

23 The f/enitinc for the truthful ; riunn rit&ya : the Soma juice for 
Tndra. The ten bright runs: or rays, i. e., the lingers. The half-line 
is difficult. 




THE RIGVEDA. 


HYMN 97 .] 


77 


2G Effused by us let god-delighting Somas bring as 
the}' flow a home with noble heroes—• 

Rich in all boons like priests acquiring favour, the 
worshippers of heaven, the best of cheerers. 

2 7 So, god, for service of the gods flow onward, flow, 

drink of gods, for ample food, O Soma. 

For we go forth to war against the mighty: make 
heaven and earth well stablished by thy cleansing. 

28 Thou, yoked by strong men, neighest like a courser, 

swifter than thought is, like an awful lion. 

By paths directed hitherward, the straightest, send 
thou us happiness, Indu, while they cleanse thee. 

29 Sprung from the gods, a hundred streams, a thousand, 

have been effused : sages prepare and purge them. 
Bring us from heaven the means of winning, Indu ; 
thou art forerunner of abundant riches. 

30 The streams of days were poured as ’twere from heaven : 

the wise king doth not treat his friend unkindly. 
Like a son following his father’s wishes, grant to this 
family success and safety. 

3 1 Now are thy streams poured forth with all their sweet¬ 

ness, w hen, purified, thou goest through the filter. 
Tire race of kitie is thy gift, Pavam&na: whenborn 
thou madestSfirya rich with brightness. 

32 Bright, bellowing along the path of Order, thou 

shinest as the form of life eternal. 

Thou flowest on as gladdening drink for Indra, send¬ 
ing thy voice out with the hymns of sages. 


30 The streams of days: the libations of Soma-juice which we 
offered every day. Like a son : the Soma-juice is regarded as the son 
of the yajamdna or sacrificer who causes it to be prepared. 

34 The courser is Soma, and the three voices (vdchah) or words 
which he utters are according to Sayana praises or sacred texts in the 
form of the three Vedas. The three tones, low, middle, and high, 
are probably intended. Or vafinih (the courser) may mean the bearer 
the oblation, the y tjamdna y as S&yana explains. 




THE HYMNS OF 



<SL 

[BOOK IX. 


33 Pouring out streams at the gods’ feast with service, 

thou, Sonia, lookest down, a heavenly eagle. 

Enter the Soma-holding beaker, Indu, and with a 
roar approach the ray of Sfirya. 

34 Three are the voices that the courser utters: he 

speaks the thought of prayer, the law of Order. 
To the cow’s master come the cows inquiring: the 
hymns with eager longing come to Soma. 

35 To Soma come the cows, the mileh-kine longing, to 

Soma sages with their hymns inquiring. *" ° 

Soma, effused, is purified and blended: our hymns 
and Trishtup songs unite in Soma. 

36 Thus, Soma, as we pour thee into vessels, while 

thou art purified flow for our welfare. 

Pass into Indra with a mighty roaring: make the 
voice swell, and generate abundance. 

37 Singer of true songs, ever-watchful, Soma hath set¬ 

tled in the ladles when they cleanse him. 

Him the Adhvaryus, paired and eager, follow, leaders 
of sacrifice and skilful-handed. 

38 Cleansed near the Sun as ’twere, he as Creator hath 

filled full heaven and earth, and hath disclosed them. 
He by whose dear help men gain all their wishes 
.shall yield the precious meed as to a victor. 

39 Hu, being cleansed, the strengthener and increaser, 

Soma the bountiful, helped us with his lustre, 
Wherewith our sires of old who knew the footsteps 
found light and stole the cattle from the mountain. 

40 In the first vault of heaven loud roared the ocean, 

king of all being, generating creatures. 

Steer, in the filter, on the fleecy summit, Soma, the 
drop effused, hath waxen mighty. 


40 In' the first vast ft: that is in the highest firmament. The 
ocean. Seam. 




THE RIG VEDA. 


71 ) 


V MN 97 .] 

41 Soma the steer, in that as child of waters he chose 

the gods, performed that great achievement. 

He, Pavam&na, granted strength to Indra; he, Indu, 
generated light in Surya. 

42 Make V&yu glad, for furtherance and bounty : cheer 

Varuna and Mitra, as they cleanse thee. 

Gladden the gods, gladden the host of Maruts : 
make Heaven and Earth rejoice, O Goff, O Soma. 

43 Flow onward righteous slayer of the wicked, driving 

away our enemies and sickness, 

Blending thy milk with milk which cows afford us. 
We are thy friends, thou art the friend of Indra. 

44 Pour us a fount of meath, a spring of treasure; 

send us a hero son and happy fortune. 

Be sweet to Indra when they cleanse thee, Indu, 
and pour down riches on us from the ocean. 

45 Strong Soma, pressed, like an impetuous courser, 

hath flowed in stream as a flood speeding downward. 
Cleansed, he hath settled in his wooden dwellino-; 
Indu hath flowed with milk and with the waters° * 
4G Strong, wise, for thee who longest for his coming 
this Soma here flows to the bowls, O Indra. 

He, chariot-borne, sun-bright, and truly potent, was 
poured forth like the longing of the pious. 

4/ He, purified with ancient vital vigour, pervading’ all 
his daughter’s forms and figures, 

Finding his threefold refuge in the waters, goes 
singing, as a priest, to the assemblies. 

48 Isiow, chariot-borne, flow unto us, god Soma, as 
thou art purified between the press-boards, 
Sweetest in waters, rich in meath, and holy, as 
Savitar the god is, truthful-minded. 

4To feast him, flow ’mid song and hymn, to VViyu, 
_ flow purifie d to Varuna and Mitra. 

47 Ilia daughter a formt and Jigures: Sonin pervades, aud imparts 
V ne 0 , * a nutritious power to, the grass, herbs, ami shrubs 
01 aro t,le varied forms assumed by Earth his daughter. 





MINlSr^ 



/ N \ '‘ 



THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK IX. 


Flow to the song-inspiring car-borne hero, to mighty 
Indra, him who wields the thunder. 

50 Pour on us garments that shall clothe us meetly, 

send, purified, milch-kine, abundant yielders. 

God Soma, send us chariot-drawing horses that they 
may bring us treasures bright and golden. 

51 Send to us in a stream celestial riches, send us, when 

thou art cleansed, what earth containeth, 

50 that thereby we may acquire possessions and 
Rishihood in Jamadagni’s manner. 

52 Pour forth this wealth with this purification : flow 

onward to the yellow lake, O Indu. 

Here, too, the ruddy, wind-swift, full of wisdom, 
shall give a son to him who cometh quickly. 

53 Flow on for us with this purification to the famed 

ford of thee whose due is glory. 

May the foe-queller shake us down, for triumph, 
like a tree’s ripe fruit, sixty thousand treasures. 

54 Eagerly do we pray for those two exploits, at the 

blue lake and Prisana, wrought in battle. 

He sent our enemies to sleep and slew them, and 
turned away the foolish and unfriendly. 

51 Rishihood. in Jamadagni’s manner : ‘ make our sacred prayer 
(sweet) as Jamadagni.’—Wilson, 

52 Yellow: the meaniug of mdm-haive is uncertain. Seo VII. 
44. 3, Note. 

53 To the. famed fin'd: possibly, as Prof. Ludwig suggests, the 
aid of Soma is craved at some ford of a neighbouring river, famous 
on account of a battle that lias been fought there, and destined to 
be the scene of an approaching conflict. 

54 The first line is coujecturally translated after Prof. Ludwig, 
who takes Prisana to be the name of a place. Sayana’s elaborate 
explanation is different:—' 1 These two great acts, the raining (of arrows) 
and die humiliation (of foes), are the givers of happiness; they are 
deadly either in a fight on horseback or ir hand to hand fight.’— 
Wilson. Here Sayana explains mlinschatve (at tho blue lake '() by ‘in 
battle with horses,’ and pristine (at Prisana?) by ‘in close, or hand- 
to-hand encounter.’ Two victories appear to be referred to, and that 
is about nil that can be said. 



MINlSr^ 


\ > 




THE' RIG VEDA. 


81 


55 Thou coniest unto three extendt 1 filters, and hast- 

enest through each one as they cleanse thee. 

Thou art the giver of the gift, a Bhaga, a Magha- 
van for liberal lords, 0 Indu. 

56 This Soma here, the wise, the all-obtainer, flows on 

his way as king of all existence. 

Driving the drops at our assemblies, IndU completely 
traverses the fleecy filter. 

57 The great inviolate ones are kissing Indu, and sing- 

^ ing in his place like eager sages. 

Ihe wise men send him forth with ten swift fingers, 
and balm his form with essence of the waters. 

58 Soma, may we, with thee as Pavam&na, pile up 

together all our spoil in battle. 

This boon vouchsafe us Varuija and Mitra, and Aditi 
and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven! 


HYMN XCVIII. Soma Pavani&na. 

Stream on us ..riches that are sought by many, best 
at winning strength, 

Riches, G indu, thousandfold, glorious, conquering' 
the great. 1 6 

Effused, he hath, as on a car, invested him in fleecv 
mail: J 

Onward hath Indu flowed in streams, impelled, sur¬ 
rounded by the wood. 


The three extended Jitters are said to be fire, wind, and sun, iu 
addition to th© odg fiPtifiuiul filter of* wool* 

57 The great inviolate ones : the gods. Kissing : or sipping. 

58 All oht spoil in buttle: yet to be won in the approaching fight 
wherein we look to Soma for help and victory. 

The Rishis are Ambarhha, son of R&j4 Vrish&gir, and Rijisvan, son 

°.‘ Ri,w «<h-&ja. The metre is Bjihati in sta.ua 11, aud Anuohtnp in 
the rest of the hymn, * 

2 By the s wood : the wooden vat or trough. 






THE HYMNS OF 


BOOK IX. 


82 


■i Effused, this Indu hath flowed on, distilling rapture, 
to the fleece : 

He goes erect, as seeking kine, in stream, with light, 
to sacrifice. 

4 For thou thyself, O Indu, god, to every mortal 

worshipper 

Attraetest riches thousandfold, made manifest in 
hundred forms. 

5 Good Vritra-slayer, may we be still nearest to this 

wealth of thine 

Which many crave, nearest to food and happiness, 
resistless one ! 

6 Whom, bright with native splendour, crushed be¬ 

tween the pair of pressing-stones— 

The wavy friend whom Indra loves—the twiee-five 
sisters dip and bathe, 

7 Him with the fleece they purify, brown, golden-hued, 

beloved of all, 

Who with exhilarating juice goes forth to all the 
deities. 

8 Through longing for this sap of yours ye drink what 

brings ability, 

Even him who, dear as heaven’s own light, gives to 
our princes high renown. 

0 Indu at holy rites produced you, Heaven and Earth, 
the friends of men, 

Hill-haunting god the goddesses. They bruised him 
where the roar was loud. 

10 For Vritra slaying Indra, thou, Soma, art poured 
that he may drink, 


3 Seeking kine: desirous of the milk which is to be mixed with 
his juice. 

9 This stanza is difficult. S&yana explaius it differently :—‘Divino 
•lion van 'mid earth the progeny of Mami, tie S<mn jiv.ee is gen, tU. d 
,Y vonr sacrifices, radiant, abiding in the grinding .'toues; (the pvie6ts) 
Shim at the loud-sounding ceremony .’-Wilson, 




MINI ST/fy 


THE RTGVEDA. 



YMN 99.] 



Poured for the guerdon-giving man, poured for the 
god who sitteth there. 

11 These ancient Somas, at the break of day, have 

flowed into the sieve, 

Snorting away at early morn these foolish evil-heart¬ 
ed ones. 

12 Friends, may the princes, ye and we; obtain this 

most resplendent one, 

Gain him who hath the smell of strength, win him 
whose home is very strength. 

HYMN XCIX. Sonm Pavam&na. 

They for the bold and lovely one ply manly vigour 
like a bow: 

Joyous, in front of songs they weave bright raiment 
for the lord divine. 

2 And he, made beautiful by night, dips forward in 
the strengthening food, 


10 For the guerdvn-giving man: for tho good of the institutor of 
the sacrifice. 

11 I reader this Brihati stanza uniformly with the rest. Snorting 
away: driving away with the bubbling sound they make. 

12 Who ko.ih the smell of strength: vdjagandhyam : ‘fragrant and 
invigorating.’—Wilson. * 1 2 * 4 Forming or having a wagon load of goods or 
spoil.’—S. P. Lexicon. Him vjhose home is strength: vdjapastya/n: 4 food 
and dwellings.’—Wilson. ‘Him who has a house full of goods/—• 
St. Petersburg Lexicon. 

The Rishis are the two Rebbasiinus, or Rebbasons, of the family oi 
Kasyapa. The metre of stanza 1—which I have treated uniformly 
with the rest—is Brihati, and of the remaining stanzas Anush tup. 

1 They : the priests. Ply manly rigour like a bow "'stretch tho 
bow of manhood.’—Wilson. They exert all their manly strength, 
or as Benfey suggests, attack and storm the god with prayer and 
sacrifice, 4 beseeching and besieging’ as Milton says. The lord divine: 
the Aeura (Zend, Ahura), here meaning Soma. 

2 By night kshapd: 4 at the end of the night/—Wilson. Pro- 

feasor Ludwig translates kshapd by 4 der ftirst’, ‘the prince/ Vivasvdn's 
phvr the chapel or sacrificial chamber. See Vedische Stud ten, pp, 

241,242. 






When prayers impel the golden-hued to hasten from 
Vivasv&n’s place. 

3 We cleanse this gladdening drink of his, the. juice 

which Indra chiefly drinks,-— . 

That which kine took into their mouths, of. old, and 
princes take it now. 

4 To him, while purifying, they have raised the ancient 

psalm of pi’aise: » ^ - 

And sacred songs which hear the names of gods have 

supplicated,him, \ . ,'•'»* ' . 

5 They purify him as. he drops, courageous, in the 

fleecy sieve. . : 

Him they instruct as messenger to bear the sage’s 
morning prayer.' 

6 Soma, best cheerer, takes his seat, the while they 

cleanse him, in the bowls. 

He as it were impregns the cow, and babbles on, 
the lord of song. 

7 He is effused and beautified, a god for gods, by skil¬ 

ful men. . 

He penetrates the mighty floods collecting all lie 

knows therein. 

8 Pressed, Indu, guided by the men, thou art led to 

the cleansing sieve. 

Thou, yielding Indra highest joy, takest thy seat 
within the bowls. 


3 Which kine took into their mouths: in the form of the juices of 
grass 

4 Saytina’s explanation of the second line of this stanza, is differ- 
mil —* and the fingers exercising their pressure are able (to prepare 
the oblation) for the gods.’-Wilson. 

f He 06 it w»re impregns the cow: moaning, perhaps, as Trof. 
Lu hvi" siurgosts, that, the milk becomes efficacious as a libation 
only when it is mixed with Soma-juice. 

7 r He •tin// (dl Afl Anew* therein: the meaning of this half lme is 
, f _‘‘whoii ho is recognized amongst those (people) as the 




Mi msr^ 



100 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


85 


HYMN C. Soma Pavaruatia. 

The guileless ones avo singing praise to Indra’s well- 
beloved friend,. 

As, in. the morning of its life, the mothers lick the 
new-born calf. 


2 O Indu, while they cleanse thee, bring, O Soma, 

doubly-waxing wealth : 

Thou in the worshipper's abode eausest all treasures 
to increase. 

3 Set free the song which mind hath yoked, even as 

thunder frees the rain: 

All treasures of the earth and heaven, O Soma, thou: 
dost multiply. 

4 Thy stream when thou art pressed runs on like some 

victorious warrior’s steed. 

Hastening onward through the fleece like a swift 
horse who wins the prize. 

5 Flow on, sage Soma, with thy stream to give us 

mental power and strength,. 

Effused for Indra, for his drink, for Mitra and for 
Varuija. 

6 Flow to the Alter with thy stream, effused, best 

winner, thou, of strength, 

O Soma, as most rich in. sweets for India, Vishnu, 
and the gods. 

7 The mothers, void of guile, caress thee, golden- 

coloured, in the sieve. 

As cows, O Pavam&na, lick the new-born, calf, at 
Law commands. 


The "Rishis are the two Rebhasfinus. The metre is Anusbtup. 

1 The guildess ones : the vasativari waters. 

7 As Law commands : uidkarmani: see Bergaigne, La Rsligion 
YMiqve, lit 218, Note 2. ‘At the eaoiifice.’—Wilson. ‘In that: 
realm of heaveu.’—GxuB&mann. 



<SL 

86 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX. 

8 Thou, Pavam&na, movest on with wondrous rays to 

great renown. 

Striving within the votary’s house thou drivest all 
the glooms away. 

9 Lord of great sway, thou liftest thee above the 

heavens, above the earth. 

Thou, Pavam&na, hast assumed thy coat of mail in 
majesty. 

HYMN Cl. Soma Pavamana. 

For first possession of your juice, for the exhilarat¬ 
ing drink, 

Drive ye away the dog, my friends, drive ye the 
long-tongued dog away. 

2 He who with purifying stream, effused, comes flowing 

hitherward,— 

Indu—is like an able steed. 

3 The men with all pervading song send unassailable 

Soma forth, 

JBy pressing-stones, to sacrifice. 

4 The Somas, very rich in sweets, for which the sieve 

is destined, flow, 

Effused, the source of Indra’s joy : may your strong 
juices reach the gods. 

5 Indu flows on for Indra’s sake,—thus have the 

deities declared. 

The lord of speech exerts himself, ruler of all, because 
of might. 

6 Inciter of the voice of song, with thousand streams 

the ocean flows, 


0 The coat of mail: drdjiim: see IX. 86. 14. 

The Rishis fire vftrioun. See Index of Hymns. The motro is 
G&yatri in stanzas 2 and 3, and Anushtup in the rest. 

I Drive ye away: prevent dogs or EAkshasas from drinking the 
Soma-juice. 




THE RIG VEDA: 


87 



'^1 

Even Soma, lord of opulence, the friend of Indra- 
day by day. 

7 As Phshan, Fortune, Bhaga, comes this Soma while 

they make him pure. 

He, lord of all the multitude, hath looked upon the 
earth and heaven. 

8 The dear cows sang in joyful mood together to the 

gladdening drink. 

The drops as they were purified, the Soma-juices, 
made them paths, 

9 O Pavam&na, bring the juice, the mightiest, worthy 

to be famed, 

Which the five tribes have ever them, whereby we 
may win opulence. 

10 For us the Soma-juices flow, the drops best furtherers 
^ of our weal, 

Effused as friends, without a spot, benevolent, finders 
of the light. 

11 Effused by means of pressing-stones, upon the ox-hide 

visible, 

They, treasure-finders, have announced food unto us 
from every side. 

12 These Soma-juices, skilled in song, purified, blent 

with milk and curd, 

When moving and when firmly laid in oil, resemble 
lovely suns. 

13 Let not the power of men restrain the voice of the 

outpouring juice: 

As Bhrigu’s sons chased Makha, so drive ye the 
greedy hound away. 

14 The friend hath wrapped him in his robe, as a son in 

his parents’ arms. 

He went, as lover to a dame, to take his station 
suitor-like. 


1 ’ Vakha : apparently, a demon whose name does not occur again 
in ilit; Rigveda. 







THE HYMNS OF 



<SL 

[BOOK IX. 


15 That hero who produces strength, he who hath prop¬ 

ped both worlds apart, 

Gold-hued, hath wrapped him in the sieve, to settle, 
priest-like, in his place. 

16 Soma upon the ox’s skin through the sheep’s wool 

flows purified. 

Bellowing out, the tawny steer goes on to Indra’s 
meeting-place. 

HYMN CII. Soma Pavamaua. 

The child, when blended with the streams, speeding 
the plan of sacrifice, 

Surpasses all things that are dear, yea, from of old. 

2 The place that is concealed hath gained a share of 

Triia’s pressing-stones, 

By the seven laws of sacrifice, even that dear place. 

3 He hath sent forth unto the heights the three, in 

stream, as Trita’s wealth : 

He who is passing wise measures his pathways out. 

4 Even at his birth the mothers seven taught him, for 

glory, like a sage, 

So that he, firm and sure, hath set his mind on wealth. 


16 Afeeling-place: ‘prepared station/—Wilson. The vessel con 

taiuinj* the libation appropriated to lndra. 

The R : sbi is Trita Aptja. The metre is Ushrhh. 

1 The streams : literally, ‘the great,’ ‘waters’ being understood. 

2 This stanza is almost unintelligible. The place that i* concealed 
is apparently heaven, where the celestial saoriheer Trita prepares the 
divine Soma for lndra. According to S&yana, the meaning of the 
second line is:—‘then with the seven supports of the sacrifice (the 
priests praise) the conciliating (Soma).’ —Wilson. The ‘seven sup 
ports' are said to be the seven metre ). Adha piyam: ‘and beloved/ 
‘ even that dear place,’ properly, it seems, refers to Soma, but then 
the regimen of priyam is not nppareut. 

3 The three: oblations. Tbe construction here i 3 difficult and the 
meaning obscure. ‘ (Support, Serna,) with ehy stream Trita’s three 
(oblations); cause the giver of riches (lndra) to come to the sacred 

songs.’—Wilson. 

4 The mothers seven : the seven rivers. 





'MN 103.] 


THE RIGVEDA. 


89 



5 Under bis sway, of one accord, are all the guileless 

deities : 

Warriors to be envied, they, when they are pleased. 

6 The babe whom they who strengthened Lav/ have 

generated, fair to see, 

Much longed for at the sacrifice, most liberal sage,— 

7 To him, united, of themselves, come the young 

parents of the rite, 

"When they adorn him, duly weaving sacrifice. 

8 With wisdom and with radiant eyes unbar to us the 

stall of heaven, 

Speeding at solemn rite the plan of holy law. 

HYMN CIII. Soma Pavamana. 

To Soma who is purified as ordering priest the song 
is raised : 

Bring meed, as ’twere, to one who makes thee glad 
with hymns. 

2 Blended with milk and curds he flows on through the 

long wool of the sheep. 

The gold-hued, purified, makes him three seats for 
rest. 

3 On through the long wool of the sheep to the 

meath-dropping vat he flows : 

The Rishis’ sevenfold quire hath sung aloud to him. 


5 Warriors to be envied the meaning of the line is uncertain. 

6 They who strengthen Law : according to Sayana, the vasativa 
waters. 

7 The young parents of the rite: ever-yonng, frestj and strong 
Heaven aud Earth. 

The Rishi is Dvita Aptya. The metre is Ushpih. 

2 Three seats for rest: three reservoirs in which ho may settle. 
The dromkalam, the ddhavaniya, and the pxUabhrit. 

3 Thv Rishis’sevenfold quin : 1 the seven metres of the Rishis .'— 
Wilson, 






mtSTiiy 


THE HYMNS OF 



<SL 

[BOOK IX. 


4 Sliared by all gods, infallible, the leader of our holy 

hymns, 

Golden-hued Soma, being cleansed, hath reached the 
bowls. 

5 After thy godlike qualities, associate with Indra, go, 
As a priest purified by priests, immortal one. 

6 Like a car-horse who shows his strength, a god 

effused for deities, 

The penetrating Pavam&na flows along. 

HYMN CIV. Soma Pavanmua. 

Sit down, O friends, and sing aloud to him who 
purifies himself: 

Deck him for glory, like a child, with holy rites. 

2 Loose him who bringeth household wealth, even as a 

calf with mother kine, 

Him who hath double strength, thegod-deligh ting juice. 

3 Purify him who gives us power, that he, most blessed 

one, may be 

A banquet for the troop, Mitra, and Varuna. 

4 Voices have sung aloud to thee as finder-out of wealth 

for us: „ 

We clothe the hue thou wearest with a robe of milk. 

5 Thou, Indu, art the food of gods, O sovran of all 

gladdening drinks : 

As friend for friend, be thou best tinder of success. 


5 After thy yodlike qualities : according to Sayan a, 4 to the hosts 
of the gods/ 

f, Poutrating • vydnasih: ‘spreading widely into the vessels/— 
Wilson. __ 

Tho Rishin fire Par vat a and Nirada of the family of Kanva; or the 
been; may be the two Bikhandiim, Apsarasas, daughters of Knsyapa. 
The metre is Ushnih. 

2 Loose him : 1 2 3 Associate him the support of the mansion with the 
nmtonml (waterc) as (ho call' (with tho mother).’- Wilson 

3 The troop: tho banded Marufca. 







misrftr 


THE RIG VEDA. 




6 Drive utterly away from us each demon, each vora¬ 
cious fiend, 

The godless and the false : keep sorrow far away. 


HYMN CV. Soma Pavamaua. 


Sing ye aloud, O friends, to him who makes him pure 
for gladdening drink: 

They shall make sweet the child with sacrifice and laud. 

2 Like as a calf with mother cows, so Indu is urged 

forth and sent, 

Glorified by our hymns, the god-delighting juice. 

3 Effectual means of power is he, he -r a banquet for 

the troop, 

He who hath been effused, most rich in meath, 
for gods. 

4 Flow to us, Indu, passing strong, effused, with 

wealth of kine and steeds : 

I will spread forth above the milk thy radiant hue. 

5 Lord of the tawny, Indu, thou who art the gods’ 

most special food, 

As friend to friend, for splendour be thou good 
to men, 

6 Drive utterly, far away from us each godless, each 

yoracious foe: 

O Indu, overcome and drive the false afar. 


H\ MN C VI. Soma Pavamana. 

To Indra, to the mighty steer, may these gold- 
coloured juices go, 

Drops rapidly produced, that find the light of heaven. 


Hie Ri.ihia aro Parvata and Narada. The metre is Uehnih. TU@ 
hymn is a. sort of rifacoimento of CIV. 

6 LorJ oj the tawny: harin&in: Sayana supplies pnsuadm, cattle. 

1aro Agni sou of Chakshush, Ctmkshush sou of Mail". 
ucl Manu 6011 of Apsu. The metre is Ushnih. 




THE H7MNS OF 



S3 


<SL 

[BOOK IK. 


2 Effused, this juice victorious flows for Indra, for his 

maintenance. 

Soma bethinks him of the conqueror, as he knows. 

3 May Indra in his raptures gain from him the grasp 

that gathers spoil, 

And, winning waters, wield the steer-strong thunder¬ 
bolt. 


4 Flow vigilant for Indra, thou Soma, yea, Indu, run 

thou on: 

Bring hither splendid strength that finds the light 
of heaven. 

5 Do thou, all-beautiful, purify for Indra’s sake the 

mighty juice, 

Path-maker thou, far-seeing, with a thousand ways. 

6 Best finder of prosperity for us, most rich in sweets 

for gods, 

Proceed thou loudly roaring on a thousand paths. 

7 O Indu, with thy streams, in might, flow for the 

banquet of the gods : 

Rich in meath, Soma, in our beaker take thy place. 

8 Thy drops that swim in water have exalted Indra 

to delight: 

The gods have drunk thee up for immortality. 

9 Stream opulence to us, ye drops of Soma, pressed 

and purified, 

Pouring down rain from heaven in floods, and finding 
light. 

10 Soma, while filtered, with his wave flows through 

the long wool of the sheep, 

Shouting while purified before the voice of song. 

11 With songs they send the mighty forth, sporting in 

wood, above the fleece : ...... 

Our psalms have glorified, him of the triple height. 


2 For hit maintendnee; hhar&ya or, for battle. The conqueror: ludm. 
ii m m „f the triple height: tnprish{ham: the three heights are 
nrobartv the firmament, the mountain, aud the altar. < Abiding » 
the three receptacles.’—Wilson. 





MN 107.] 


TUB RIGVEDA. 




12 Into the jars hath he been loosed, like an impetuous 

steed for war, 

And lifting- up his voice, while filtered, glided on. 

13 Gold-hued and lovely in his course, through tangles 

of the wool he flows, 

And pours heroic fame upon the worshippers. 

14 Flow thu3, a faithful votary : the streams of meath 

have been effused. 

Thou comest to the filter, singing, from paeh side. 

HYMN CVII. Soma Pavamaim. 

Hence sprinkle forth the juice effused, Soma, the 
best of sacred gifts, 

Who, friend of man, hath run amid the water-streams. 
He hath pressed Soma out with stones. 

2 Now, being purified, flow hither through the fleece 

inviolate and most odorous. 

We gladden thee in waters when thou art effused, 
blending thee still with juice and milk. 

3 1 ressed out for all to see, delighting- gods, Indu, 

far-sighted one, is mental power. 

4 Cleansing thee, Soma, in thy stream, thou flowest 

in a watery robe : 

Giver of wealth, thou sittest in the place of Law, 
O god, a fountain made of gold. 

o Milking the heavenly udder for dear meath, he hath 
sat in the ancient gathering-place. 

Washed by the men, the strong, far-seeing one 
streams forth nutritious food that all desire. 


IY T, qo^o hi %r tbe feveD^is, BharadvAja/ Kasyapa, etc. See 
li IT , . St 3 and 16 are » n Dvipada Viraj metre (10+10 
syllables), stanzas 8—10 are in Brihati, and the rest of the hymn in 
Pragatha, t. e., Brihati and Satobribati alternately. 

1 He: tbe priest. 

4 In the place of Law : in the place of Law-ordained sacrifice. 
Making the heavenly udder for dear meath : extracting the sweet, 
pieoions juice trom the stalk and tendrils of tbe Soma plant. 







U - TEE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX. 


6 0 Soma, while they cleanse thee, dear and watchful 

in the sheep’s long wool, 

Thou hast become a singer most like Angiras : thou 
niadest Surya mount to heaven. 

7 Bountiful, best of furtherers, Soma floweth on, Itishi 

and singer, keen of sight. 

Thou hast become a sage most welcome to the gods: 
thou madest Sftrya mount to heaven. 

8 Pressed out by pressers, Soma goes over the fleecy 

backs of sheep, 

Goes, even as with a mare, in tawny-coloured stream, 
goes in exhilarating stream. 

9 Down to the water Soma, rich in kine, hath flowed 

with cows, with cows that have been milked. 

They have approached the mixing-vessels as a sea : 
the cheerer streams for the carouse. 

10 Effused by stones, 0 Soma, and urged through the 

long wool of the sheep, 

Thou, entering the saucers as a man the fort, gold- 
hued hast settled in the wood. 

11 He beautifies himself through the sheep’s long fine 

wool, like an impetuous steed in war, 

Even Soma Favam&na who shall be the joy of sages 
and of holy bards. 

12 0 Soma,—for the feast of gods, river-like he hath 

swelled with surge, 

With the stalk’s juice, exhilarating, resting not, into 
the vat that drops with meath. 


9 They have approached the mixing-vessels like a sea: samvarandni, 
from samvri, to cover, enclose, surround, must, apparently, menu the 
vessels that contain the juices and not the juices themselves as S&yana 
explains :—‘his enjoyable juices go (to the pitcher os waters) to the 
ocean.’—Wilson. 

12 0 Soma . he, is a sort of periphrasis for Soma in the nomi¬ 

native case. 






THE RIGYEDA. 




13 Like a dear soil who must be decked, the lovely one 

hath clad him in a shining robe. 

Men skilful at their work drive him forth, like a car, 
into the rivers from their hands. 

14 The living drops of Soma-juice pour, as they flow, 

the gladdening drink, 

Intelligent drops above the station of the sea, ex¬ 
hilarating, finding light. 

15 May Pavam&rta, king and god, speed with his wave 

over the sea the lofty rite : 

May he by Mitra’s and by Varuna’s decree flow 
furthering the lofty rite. 

16 Far-seeing, lovely, guided by the men, the god whose 

home is in the sea- 

17 Soma, the gladdening juice, flow's pressed for Indra 

with his Marut host: 

He hastens o’er the fleece with all his thousand 
streams : men make him bright and beautiful. 

18 Purified in the bowls and gendering the hymn, wise 

Soma joys among the gods. 

Robed in the flood, the mighty one hath clad him¬ 
self with milk and settled in the vats. 

19 0 Soma, Indu, every day thy friendship hath been 

my delight. 

Many fiends follow me; help me, thou tawny-hued; 
pass on beyond these barriers. 

20 Close to thy bosom am I, Soma, da}' and night, 

O tawny-hued, for friendship sake. 

Sfirya himself refulgent with his glow have wc o’cv- 
taken in his course like birds. 


14 Of the sea: of the firmament, or sea of air. 
li* Many fiends: the test has only puriini, many, in the neuter 
11 ,• kayana supplies vakshdrisi Rakshasas or fiends. Pass on be- 
ifoiui th se barriers: ‘overcome those who surround me,*—Wilson. 

^ Close to thy bosom, am I: ‘I (delight) in thy presence.'—Wilson. 







MINlSr^ 



THE JIYMXS OF 


[BOOK IX. 



21 Deft-handed! thou when purified liftest thy voice 

amid the sea. 

Thou, Pavam&na, makest riches flow to us, yellow, 
abundant, much-desired. 

22 Making thee pure and bright in the sheep’s long 

wool, thou hast bellowed, steer-like, in the wood. 
Thou flowest. Soma Pavam&na, balmed with milk 
unto the meeting-place of gods. 

23 Flow on to win us strength, flow on to lofty lore of 

every kind. 

Thou, Soma, as exhilarator wast the first to spread 
the sea abroad for gods. 

24 Flow to the realm of earth, flow to the realm of 

heaven, O Soma, in thy righteous ways. 

Fair art thou whom the sages, O far-seeing one, urge 
onward with their songs and hymns. 

25 Over the cleansing sieve have flowed the Pavamftnas 

in a stream, 

Girt by the Maruts, gladdening, steeds with India’s 
strength, for wisdom and for dainty food. 

26 Urged onward by the pressers, clad in watsry robes, 

Indu is speeding to the vat. 

He gendering light, hath made the glad cows low, 
the while he takes them as his ' ' 2 state. 


HYMN CVIII. 


Soma Pavamana. 


For India, flow thou Soma on, as gladdening juice 
most sweet, intelligent, 

Great, cheering, dwelling most in heaven. 


21 Amid the sea: antcu LI:she kalase vd y in the firmament or in the 
beaker, says Sayana. 

25 The Pavam&nds : * thy purified juices/—Wilson, 

Tim Rjehis are Oaurivfti and others whose names are given in the 
Index oi Hymns. The metre in stains I — 12 ia Knlcup and S’atohrb 
hati alternately; in 13 G&yatr? Yavamadh)* (8+12 + 8); i n H, ifc 
JSatobrilmti; amt in 15 Kakup. 




WNisr/fy 


• <SL 

THE RIO VIE A. 97 

2 Thou, of whom having drunk the steer acts like a 

steer : drinking of this that finds the light, 

He excellently wise is come to strengthening food 
and deeds of might like Etasa. 

3 For, verily, Pavam&na, thou hast, splendidest, called 

all the generations of 
The gods to immortality. . 

4 By whom Dadhyach Navagva opened fastened doors, 

by whom the sages gained their wish, / 

By whom they won the fame of lovely Amrita in 
the felicity of gods, 

5 Effused, he floweth in a stream, best rapture-giver, 

in the long wool of the sheep, 

Sporting, as ’twere the waters’ wave. 

6 He who from out the rocky cavern took with might 

the red-refulgent watery cows, —- 
Thou masteredst the stable full of kine and steeds : 
burst it, brave lord, like one in mail. 

7 Press ye and. pour him, like a steed, laud-worthy, 

speeding through the region and the flood, 

Who swims in water, roars in wood ; 

8 Increaser of the water, steer with thousand streams, 

dear to the race of deities ; 

Who born in Law hath waxen mighty by the Law, 
king, god, and lofty ordinance. 

9 Make splendid glory shine on us, thou lord of strength¬ 

ening food, god, as the friend of gods : 

Unclose the fount of middle air. 


2 The- steer acta like a steer: vrishabko vrish&yatc: ‘ the showeref 
Indi'a is invigorated.'—-Wilson. Etaaa : one of the horses of the Sun ; 
or a horse in general;— ‘ aa a horse comes to the battle.’ — Saytma. 

4 Dadhyach Navagva: Dadhyach was the son of At bar van the 
priest who first obtained fire and offered Soma and prayer to the god,? 
Here he is called a Navagva and consequently one of the Aftgiraraa. 
See bo'h names in Vol, I., Index. Won the feme of lovely Atirita : 
oh unad the sustenance of the delicious (ambrosial) water,’*- -Wikotj 
7 



HYMN 108.] 




MiNisr^y 


THE HYMJS OF [BOOK IX. 

!0 Roll onward to the bowls, O mighty one, effused, as 
prince supporter of the tribes. 

Pour on us rain from heaven, send us the waters’ 
flow : incite our thoughts to win the spoil. 

11 They have drained him the steer of heaven, him 

with a thousand streams, distilling rapturous joy, 
Him who brings all things excellent. 

12 The mighty one was born immortal, giving life, 

lightening darkness with his shine. 
vVell-praised by sages he hath by his wondrous power 
assumed the threefold as his robe. 

13 Effused is he who brings good things, who brings us 

bounteous gifts and sweet refreshing food, 

Soma who brings us quiet homes : 

14 He whom our India and the Marut host shall drink, 

Bhaga shall drink with Aryaman, 

By whom we bring to us Mitra and Yaruna and 
Indra for our great defence. 

15 Soma, for Indra’s drink do thou,.led by the men, 

well-weaponed and most gladdening, 

Flow on with greatest store of sweets. 

1C Enter the Soma-holder, even Indra’s heart, as rivers 
pass into the sea, 

Acceptable to Mitra, V&yu, Yaruna, most excellent 
pillar of the heavens. 

HYMN CIX. Soma- Pavamana. 

Pleasant to Indra’s, Mitra’s, Phshan’s, Bhaga’s taste, 
speed onward, Soma, with thy flowing stream 

12 Tkt threefold: the morning, noon, and eveuing libation. 

13 The metre of this stanza is G&yatri Yavaruarlhya, that is 
( ayatri having the middle like a barley corn, thick in the middle and 
tapering at both ends : first a Pada of eight syllables, then one of 
twelve, and lastly another of oight. 

The ^Kshia are A « n °y° Dhiahny&h, sacrificial Agnis or Fires, 
naid to be sons of Jevara the Supreme Deity of post Vedic times, 
The metre is Dvipada Vir&j. 




misr/fy 


THE RIO VEDA. 


99 



2 Let Indra drink, O Soma, of thy juice for wisdom, 

and all deities for strength. 

3 So flow thou on as bright celestial juice, flow to the 

vast, immortal dwelling-place. 

4 Flow onward, Soma, as a mighty sea, as father of 

the gods, to every form. 

5 Flow on, O Soma, radiant for the gods and Heaven 

and Earth, and bless our progeny. 

6 Thou, bright juice, art sustainer of the sky : flow, 

mighty, in accordance with true law. 

7 Soma, flow splendid with thy copious stream through 

the great fleece as in the olden time. 

8 Born, led by men, joyous, and purified, let the light- 

finder make all blessings flow. 

9 Indu, while cleansed, desiring progeny, shall give us 

all possessions for our own. 

10 Flow on for wisdom, Soma, and for power, as a strong 

courser, bathed, to win the prize. 

11 The pressers purify this juice of thine, the Soma, for 

delight and lofty fame. 

12 They deck the gold-hued infant, newly-born, even 

Soma, Tndu, in the sieve, for gods. 

13 Fair Indu hath flowed on for rapturous joy, sage for 

good fortune in the waters’ lap. 
i 4 He bears the beauteous name of Indra, that where¬ 
with he overcame all demon foes. 

•15 All deities are wont to drink of him, pressed by the 
men and blent With milk and curds. 


3 Flow to the. vast immortal dwelling-place: ‘flow for immortality 
and spacious abode.’—Wilson. 

•4 To every form: to all the- forms or essences of the gods into 
which he enters. See Borgaigne, La Religion Vldique, III. p. 212. 

9 Desiring progeny: loving his own people, according to Prof. 

Gnuwniann. 

H He bears: aocorditig to S&yana, the translation of the first half- 
l' no would be : Indra’B fair body he supports, wherewith, etc. 







100 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK IX . 



16 He hath flowed forth with thousand streams effused, 

flowed through the filter and the sheep’s long wool. 

17 With endless genial flow the strong hath run, puri¬ 

fied by the waters, blent with milk. 

18 Pressed out with stones, directed by the men, go 

forth, O Soma, into Indra’s throat. 

19 The mighty Soma with a thousand streams is poured 

to Indra through the cleansing sieve. 

20 Indu they balm with pleasant milky juice for Indra, 

for the steer, for his delight. 

21 Lightly, for strength, they cleanse thee for the gods, 

gold-coloured, wearing water as thy robe. 

22 Indu to Indra streams, yea, downward streams, strong, 

flowing to the floods, and mingling there. 


HYMN CX. 


Soma Pavamana. 


O’erpowerino Yritras, forward run to win great 
strength: 

Thou speedest to subdue like one exacting debts. 

2 In thee, effused, O Soma, we rejoice ourselves for 

great supremacy in fight: 

Thou, Pavamana, enterest into mighty deeds. 

3 O Pavam&na, thou didst generate the Sun, and 

spread the moisture out with power, 

Hasting to us with plenty vivified with milk. 

4 Thou didst produce him, deathless god ! 'ndd mortal 

men, for maintenance of Law and lovely Arnrita: 
Thou evermore hast moved making strength flow 
to us. 


The Kisbis are the princes Try ar up a and Trasadasyu. The metre 
of stanzas 1—13 is PipilikamadhyS, Anush tup (haviug the middle 
P& ia of the first three shorter than the first aud third, or 8 + 4 + 8); 
of 4—9 Urdhvabfihatt, a variety of Bp hat i; and of 10, 11, 12 

Viraj (11 * 3). 


8 II tih plenty irivijied v.‘ith milk: 1 with abundant wisdom that 
procures cattle (for thy worshippers).’-Wilson. 





MINIST-^ 


THE RIG VEDA. 


1 




5 All round about hast thou with glory pierced for us 

as ’twere a never-failing well for men to drink, 
Borne on thy way in fragments from the presser's 
arms. 

6 Then, beautifully radiant, certain heavenly ones, 

have sung to him their kinship as they looked 
thereon, 

And Savitar the god opens as ’twere a stall. 

7 Soma, the men of old whose grass was trimmed ad¬ 

dressed the hymn to thee for mighty strength and 
for renown : 

So, hero, urge us onward to heroic power. 

8 They have drained forth from out the great depth 

of the sky the old primeval milk of heaven that 
claims the laud: 

They lifted up their voice to Indra at his birth. 

9 As long as thou, O Pavamdna, art above this earth 

and heaven and all existence in thy might, 

Thou standest like a bull the chief amid the herd. 

10 In the sheep’s wool hath Soma Pavamana, flowed, 

while they cleanse him, like a playful infant, 

Indu with hundred powers and hundred currents. 

11 Holy and sweet, while purified, this Indu flows on, a 

wave of pleasant taste, to Indra,— 
Strength-winner, treasure-finder, life-bestower. 

12 So flow thou on, subduing our assailants, chasing the 

demons hard to be encountered, 

Well-armed and conquering our foes, O Soma. 


<> hi fragments: in pieces of the crushed stalk and shoots of 
the Soma-plant. 

6 Beautifully radiant: vasuruchah : according to Sayana, a proper 
n»ime, Vusuruchas, plural of Vasuruch. Opens as 9 twere a stall ; 
(lnvee * awa y tlj e obstructing (darkness)/—Wilson, 




102 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK IX. 


HYMN CXI. Soma Pavamana. 

With this his golden splendour purifying him, he 
with his own allies subdues all enemies, as Stlra 
with his own allies. 

Cleansing himself with stream of juice he shines 
forth yellow-hued and red, when with the praisers 
he encompasses all forms, with praisers having 
seven mouths. 

2 That treasure of the Panis thou discoveredst; thou 

with thy mothers deckest thee in thine abode, 
with songs of worship in thine home. 

As ’twere from far, the hymn is heard, where holy 
songs resound in joy. He with the triple dames 
red-hued hath won life-power, he, glittering, hath 
won life-power. 

3 He moves intelligent, directed to the east. The 

very beauteous car rivals the beams of light, the 
beautiful celestial car. 

Hymns, lauding manly valour, came, inciting Indra 
to success, that ye may be unconquered, both thy 
bolt and thou, both be unconquered in the war. 


Tli Kish: is An&nata, son of Paruchchhepa, The metre is Atya- 
shti. consisting of four Padas of seventeen syllables each, or sixty- 
eight in the stanza, 

1 He: Soma. All enemies: the fiends of darkness. As SHra with 
his own allies: as Surya or the Sun with his attendant beams of light. 
All forms: viqv&rftpd: all constellations, according to Sayana. With 
the praisers: rikva hhih: perhaps the Augirasas are intended. Having 
seven mouth*: that is, one mouth each, the mouth beiug mentioned 
in reference to their love of Soma-juice. 

2 Treasure of the Panis: tho rays of light carried oft' and concealed 
by the demons of darkness. Thy mothers: apparently the Dawns. 
According to Say..na, the vasatlvart waters. The triple dames: theie 
is no substantive in the text, aud it is uncertain what tridh&f-ubhih 
refers to. S&yana refers i 4 to the vasativart waters, and explains it 
by 4 the supporters of the throe worlds/ Professor Grnssmann thinks 
that, the beverages, consisting of three ingredionts, mixed with the 
SuKmi'juioe are intended. 

3 The verff beauteous ear of Soma, Beams of light : sunbeams, 





Miwsr^ 


THE EIGYEDA. 


103 



MN 112.] 


HYMN CXII. Soma Pavamana. 

We all have various thoughts and plans, and diverse 
are the ways of men. 

The priest seeks one who pours the juice, wright 
seeks the cracked, and leech the maimed. Flow, 
Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

2 The smith with ripe and seasoned plants, with feathers 

of the birds of air, 

With stones, and with enkindled flames, seeks biui 
who hath a store of gold. Flow, Indu, flow for 
Indra’s sake. 

3 A bard am I, my dad’s a leech, mammy lays corn 

upon the stones. 

Striving for wealth, with varied plans, we follow our 
desires like kine. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s 
sake. 

4 The horse would draw an easy car, gay hosts attract 

the laugh and jest. 

The male desires his mate’s approach, the frog is 
eager for the flood. Flow, Indu, flow for Indr&’s 
sake. 


The Rishi is Sieu of the family of Angiras. The metre is Pankti. 
The hymn appears to be an old popular song transformed into an 
address to Soma by attaching to each stanza a refrain which has no 
connexion with the subject of the song. But see Vedische Studien , 
p. 107. The hymn is translated iu Muir’s 0. S. Texts, V. 424, 

1 The priest: the Brahman. “This verse distinctly proves that the 
priesthood already formed a profession.”—Muir, 0. 3. Texts, I. 252. 

2 Plants : meaning here reeds which were made into arrows. With 
stones, and with enkindled flames: according to Say ana, with gliBten 
ing stones, to form the heads of the arrows. Who hath a store of 
gold and will be able to pay well for the arrows which the artisan 
makes for him. 

3 My dad: tatah a child's word originally. Mammy : nand. 






THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IK. 

HYMN CXIII. Soma Pavamaua. 
Let Vritra-slaying Indra drink Soma by Saryanav&n’s 
side, 

Storing up vigour in his heart, prepared to do heroic 
deeds. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

2 Lord of the quarters, flow thou on, boon Soma, from 

Arjika land, 

Effused with ardour and with faith, and the true 
hymn of sacrifice. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

3 Hither hath Sftrya’s daughter brought the wild steer 

whom Parjanya nursed. 

Gaudharvas have seized hold of him, and in the Soma 
laid the juice. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

4 Splendid by Law! declaring Law, truth-speaking, 

truthful in thy works, 

Enouncing faith, king Soma! thou, O Soma, whom 
thy maker decks. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

5 Together flow the meeting streams of him the great 

and truly strong. 

The juices of the juicy meet. Made pure by prayer, 
O golden-hued, flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

6 0 Pavamana, where the priest, as he recites the 

rhythmic prayer, 

Lords it o’er Soma with the stone, with Soma bring¬ 
ing forth delight, flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 


The Rishi ia Kasyapa son of Maricbi. The metre is Pankti. 

1 §aryan&vdn: a lake in the Kurukshetra district. The word is 
used metaphorically, according to some scholars, as the name of a 
certain vessel which holds the Soma-juice, 

3 Of the quarters: of the four regions of the sky. Arjika land: 
according to Sayunn, the country of the Eijikas. Apparently, a cel¬ 
estial Soma-reservoir ie intended. 

3 The wild steer whom Farjanya nursed: the mighty Soma-plant 
whose growth has been fostered by the god of the rainy cloud. 
S&rya’s daughter: Sraddhd or Faith. Oandharvat: guardians of the 
heavenly Soma. See Pols. I., II., Index. 

4 Thy maker: the Somr.-presser, or the inetitutor of the sacri- 
fice ‘ xhe upholder (of the rite).’— Wilson. 




misTfy 



HYMN 113.] TU ’ E RIG VEDA. 



7 


8 


9 


10 


O Pavam&ua, place me in tliat deathless, undecaying 

world . 

Wherein the light of heaven is set, and everlasting 

lustre shines. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 
Make me immortal in that realm where dwells the 
king, Vivasv&n’s son, 

Where is the secret shrine of heaven, where are 
those waters young and fresh. Flow, Indu, flow 
for Indra’s sake. w 


Make me immortal in that realm where they move 
even as they list, 

In the third sphere of inmost heaven where lucid 
worlds are full of light. Flow, Indu, flow for 
Indra’s sake. 


Make me immortal in that realm of eager wish and 
strong desire, 

The region of the golden Sun, where food and full 
delight are found. Flow,Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 



8 The king: Yama, the ruler of departed spirits, son of Vivasvau. 
$ee Vol. I-, Index. 

9 Where they move even as they list: ‘ where action is unrestrain¬ 
ed.’—Muir. ‘Where the sun wanders at will.'—Wilson. 

10 Food: this is one of S&yana’s explanations of svadkd. The 
region of the golden Sun: Sun, is supplied by Sfiyana. Or Soma may 
be intended. 

As regards the joys of the departed, referred to in stanzas 7—12, 
Professor Roth observes (Journ. Amer. Orient. Soc. iii. 343, quoted 
by Dr. Muir, 0. S. Texts, Y_307) “The place where these glorified 
ones are to live is heaven. In order to show that not merely an 
outer court of the divine dwellings is set apart for there, the highest 
heaven, the midst or innermost part of heaven, is expressly spoken 
of as their seat. This is their place of rest; and its divine splendour 
: :j not disfigured by any specification of particular beauties or enjoy¬ 
ments, such as those with which other religions have been wont to 
adorn the mansions of the blest.....There they ^ro happy: the lang¬ 
uage used to describe their condition is the same with which is de¬ 
noted the most exalted felicity.'’ 




WHlSTffy 



106 ' THE BIG VEDA. [BOOK IX. 


11 Make me immortal in that realm where happiness 
and transports, where 

Joys and felicities combine, and longing wishes are 
fulfilled. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

HYMN CXIV. Soma Pavamina. 

The man who walketh as the laws of Indu Pavam&na 
bid,— 

Men call him rich in children, him, 0 Soma, who 
hath met thy thought. Flow, Indu, flow for 
Indra’s sake. 

2 Kasyapa, Rishi, lifting up thy voice with hymn- 

composers’ lauds, 

Pay reverence to king Soma born the sovran ruler 
of the plants. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

3 Seven regions have their several suns; the minister¬ 

ing priests are seven ; 

Seven are the Aditya deities,—with these, O Soma, 
guard thou us. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 

4 Guard us with this oblation which, king Soma, hath 

been dressed for thee. 

Let not malignity conquer us, let nothing evil do us 
harm. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake. 


The Riabi is Kasyapa son of Marichi. The metre is Pankti. 

3 Seven regions: the regions of the sky, the four quarters with 
intermediate points. They are sometimes said to be five, six, or 
seven in number, but more frequently eight. Aditya deities: Varuria, 
Mitra, Aryaman, Bhaga, Dakbha, Antja, and perhaps Dhatar. Other 
©numerations also are given, and their number is sometimes said to be 
eight. 




MiNisr^ 


BOOK THE TENTH. 



<SL 


HYMN I. Agni. 

High hath the mighty risen before the dawning, and 
come to us with light from out the darkness. 
Fair-bodied Agni, with his radiant splendour, hath 
filled at birth all human habitations. 

2 Thou, being born, art child of Earth and Heaven, 

i parted among the plants in beauty, Agni! 

I he glooms of night thou, brilliant babe, hast 
conquered, and art come forth, loud roaring, from 
thy mothers. 

3 Here, being manifested, lofty Vishnu, full wise, 

protects his own supremest station. 

When they have offered in his mouth their sweet 
milk, to him with one accord they sing forth praises. 

4 Thence bearing food the mothers come to meet thee 

with food for thee who givest food its increase. 
These in their altered form again thou meetest. 
ihou art invoking priest in homes of mortals. 

5 Priest of the holy rite, with ear that glitters, reful- 

gent banner of act of worship, 
ohanng m every god through might and glory, even 
Agni guest of men I summon hither. 


Ihe^uhi is Trita Aptya. The,tnetra M Trisbtup. 

1 The mighty: Agni. . N V\ . \ . \ , 

2 Among fa plant* ) accordingto Silyana, in the fire-Stic^, 

They : worahi Jpers . 6 °* W,?0 ia h ' B “ auifo8tfttiou * e,u tb 

f<JL n "Jf thers •' the r P^ 8 which nourish life. In fair altered 
a 8 dry wood wh ich Agni, as fire, consumes, ' 

B ull oibcr'g 0( j J y CaUSe as ^ be Nearer of meu’s oblations sup 






MINIS;*,. 




108 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK X. 


6 So Agni stands on earth’s most central station, 

invested in well-decorated garments. 

Born, red of hue, where men pour out libations, 
O king, as great high priest bring the gods hither. 

7 Over the earth and over heaven, O Agni, thou, son, 

hast ever spread above thy parents. 

Come, youthfullest! to those who long to meet thee, 
and hither bring the gods, O mighty victor. 


HYMN II. 


Agni. 


Gladden the yearning gods, O thou most youthful: 

bring them, O lord of seasons, knowing seasons, 
With all the priests celestial, 0 Agni. Best worship¬ 
per art thou of all invokers. 

2 Thine is the Herald’s, thine the Cleanser’s office, 

thinker art thou, wealth-giver, true to Order. 

Let us with Sv&hft offer up oblations, and Agni, 
worthy God, pay the gods worship. 

3 To the gods’ pathway have we travelled, ready to 

execute what work we may accomplish. 

Let Agni, for he knows, complete the worship. He 
is the priest: let him fix rites and seasons. 

4 When we most ignorant neglect the statutes of you, 

O deities with whom is knowledge, 

Wise Agni shall correct our faults and failings, 
skilled to assign each god his fitting season. 


Tbs Rishi is Trita Aptya. The metre is Trishtup. 

1 Seasons: the proper times of worship. Priests celestial: Agui 
being the liotar, the Asvins the Adhvaryus, Twashtar the Agnidh, 
and Mitra the Upavahtar. Asvalayaua, as oited by S6yana, gives a 
different enumeration. See Wilson, Note. 

2 The Herald is the Hotar or invoking priest: the Cleanser is the 
Potar or Purifier, the assistant of the Brahman. Sv 'hd: au excla¬ 
mations Ave ! or Hail! 

3 The <jods’ pathway: ‘the path that, leads to the gods.’—.Wilson. 




MINlSr^ 



5 When, weak in mind, of feeble understanding, 
mortals bethink them not of sacrificing, 


Then shall the prudent and discerning Agni worship 
the gods, best worshipper, in season. 

6 Because the Father hath produced thee, leader of 

all our solemn rites, their brilliant banner : 

So win by worship pleasant homes abounding in 
heroes, and rich food to nourish all men. 

7 Thou whom the heavens and earth, thou /whom the 

waters, and Twashtar, maker of fair things, created, 
Knowing the full length of the Fathers’ pathway, 
shine with resplendent light, enkindled, Agni. 

HYMN III. Agni. 

O king, the potent and terrific envoy, kindled for 
strength, is manifest in beauty. 

He shines, all-knowing, with his lofty splendour: 
chasiug black night he comes with white-rayed 
morning. 

2 Having o’ercome the glimmering black with beauty, 
and bringing forth the dame, the great sires 
daughter, 

Holding aloft the radiant light of Sftrya, as messen¬ 
ger of heaven he shines with treasures. 


6 The Father: Prajapati; or the institutor of the sacrifice.—Say ana. 

V The Fathers’ pathway: the way that leads to the home of the 
Wanes or Ancestral Spirits. 

The Rishi is Trita Aptya. The metre is Trisbtup. 

1 0 ling: Professor Ludwig takes rdjan here as the nominative 

case. <> , v- |5-:1 

With white-raged morning: I follow Prof. Ludwig in taking rufatim 
aB instrumental for rusatgdm. 

2 Glimmering black: dark night, faintly lighted by stars. The 
great tire's daughter: Ushas or Dawn, daughter of Dyaus or Heaven. 

3 The /owAgni who appears together with Dawu. 





WHlSTfty. 


<SL 

THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X. 

3 Attendant on the blessed dame the blessed hath come: 

the lover followeth his sister. 

Agni, far spreading with conspicuous lustre, hath 
compassed night with whitely-shining garments. 

4 His goings-forth kindle as ’twere high voices, the 

goings of the auspicious friend of Agni. 

The rays, the bright beams of the strong-jawed, 
mighty, adorable steer are visible as he cometh. 

5 Whose radiant splendours flow, like sounds, about us, 

his who is lofty, brilliant, and effulgent, 

Who reaches heaven with best and brightest lustres, 
sportive and piercing even to the summit. 

6 His powers whose chariot fellies gleam and glitter have 

loudly roared while, as with teams, he hasted. 

He, the most godlike, far-extending, envoy, shines 
with flames ancient, resonant, whitely-shining. 

7 So bring us ample wealth : seat thee as envoy of 

the two youthf ul matrons, Earth and Heaven. 

Let Agni rapid with his rapid horses, impetuous 
with impetuous steeds, como hither. 

HYMN IV. Agui. 

To thee will I send praise and bring oblation, as 
thou hast merited lauds when we invoked thee. 

Like a spring in the desert art thou, Agni, O ancient 
king, to man who fain would worship. 

2 Thou unto whom resort the gathered people, as the 
kine seek the warm stall, O most youthful, 

Thou art the messenger of gods and mortals, and 
goest glorious with thy light between them. 


4 The first line is almost unintelligible. ‘The blazing flames of 
that mighty Agni do not (detn-) his adorers.’— Wihi- a. 

The Ui>dit is Tritft Aptya. The metre is Trishtup. 

1 To man: or, to Puru. 





THE RIG VEDA. 


Ill 



N 5.] 


3 Making thee grow as ’twere some noble infant, thy 

mother nurtures thee with sweet affection. 

Over the desert slopes thou passest longing’, and 
seekest, like some beast set free, thy fodder. 

4 Foolish are we, 0 wise and free from error: verily, 

Agni, thou dost know thy grandeur. 

There lies the form : he moves, and licks, and swal¬ 
lows, and, as houselord, kisses the youthful maiden. 

5 He rises ever fresh in ancient fuel : smo^e-bannered, 

gray, he makes the wood his dwelling. 

No swimmer, steer, he presses through the waters, 
and to his place accordant mortals bear him. 
o Like thieves who risk their lives and haunt the forest, 
the twain with their ten girdles have secured him. 
This is a- new hymn meant for thee, O Agni: yoke 
as it were thy car with parts that glitter. 

7 Homage and prayer are thine, O J&tavedas, and this 
my song shall evermore exalt thee. 

Agni, protect our children and descendants, and 
guard with ever-watchful care our bodies. 


. HYxMN V. Agni . 

He only is the Sea, holder of treasures : born many 
a time he views the hearts within us. 

He hides him. in the. secret couple’s bosom. The 
Bud dwells in the middle oi the fountain. 


3 Thy mother: Earth. 

to Sa^rt/piThi ^ Akava fy«; fire. The youthful maiden: according 

»ifhi,rxSe^“,r d ob "‘ ti “' or " ,e >-* •*"»»—*•** 

<•«£•£ b7»«it.ton *"“•** *"*•” " l ' iCh <*“• 

The Risln is Trita Aptva. Theatre is Trishtup. 

■tntmOsL a V h9 Sl ! n ' . Tfie secret bosom : the meaning is 

4 He Wo it Vf ^ l , e ” st ! c ^ 3 111 w * 1,c h Agni is Intent may he intended. 
tu ent).’ JV;] s c ou< ^ * n ^ ie neighbourhood of the hidden (firma 

^ f/c '' Tht fountain: the source of light in the ea.it. 







MINfSr^ 


<SL 

THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X. 

2 Inhabiting one dwelling-place in common, strong 

stallions and the mares have come together. 

The sages guard the seat of holy Order, and keep 
the highest names concealed within them. 

3 The holy pair, of wondrous power, have coupled: they 

formed the infant, they who bred produced him, 

The central point of all that moves and moves not, 
the while they wove the sage’s thread with insight. 

4 For tracks of Order and refreshing viands attend 

from ancient times the goodly infant. 

Wearing him as a mantle, Earth and Heaven grow 
strong by food of pleasant drink and fatness. 

5 He, calling loudly to the seven red sisters, hath, 

skilled in sweet drink, brought them to be looked on. 

He, born of old, in middle air hath halted, and sought 
and found the covering robe of Pftshan. 

6 Seven are the pathways which the wise have fashioned; 

to one of these may come the troubled mortal. 

He standeth in the dwelling of the Highest, a pillar, 
on sure ground where paths are parted. 


2 Strong stallions: perhaps the flames of theSuu. Mares: waters of 
the firmament. The highest names: of Agni, such as Jatavedas and 
Vaisvauara. Concealed within them: in their secret hearts, for worship. 

3 The holy pair: Heaven and Earth. The infant: Agni. The 
while they wove: viyait/ah in the text is unintelligible, and I fol¬ 
low Mr. Wallis in reading vayanti in its stead. The sage’s thread: 

the serio s of sacrifices to which Agni is entitled. 

5 The. seven red sisters: the seven tongues or flames of Agni, called 
hd/t, kardli, etc. —Sayana. And found the covering role of PUshan : 
and hath reappeared in the form of Pushau or the Sun. 

6 Pathways: long lines of light. The wise: the Fathers. The 

troubled mortal: the man who is longing for daybreak may approach 
the pathway of light. Mr. Wallis translates the second line dif¬ 
ferently :_‘ The support of life in the home of the highest, at the 

divergence of the ways, standeth on sure ground.’ Where paths are 
parted: where ends the dark road which the Sun travels by night, 
and the bright path of his daily conrse begins. 





MINIS/*,. 


THE lllG VEDA. 


113 



6 .] 

7 Not being, being, ill the highest heaven, in Aditi’s 
bosom and in Daksha's birthplace, 

Is Agni, our first-born of holy Order, the milch-cow 
and the bull in life’s beginning. 

HYMN VI, Agni. 

This is that Agni, he by whose protection, favour, 
and help the singer is successful; 

Who with the noblest flames of glowing fuel comes 
forth encompassed with far-spreading lustre. 

2 Agni, the holy one, the everlasting, who shines far 

beaming with celestial splendours; 

He who hath come unto his friends with friendship 
like a fleet steed who never trips or stumbles. 

3 He who is lord of all divine oblation, shared by all 

living men at break of morning, 

Agni to whom our offerings are devoted, in whom 
rests he whose car, through might, is scathless. 


7 Not being, being: non existent, existent, “amckcka sackcko., ‘both 
unevolved and evolved, 7 8 identifying Agni with the first cause and 
first effect, with a reference to such texts as Asad tram idam agra dsU 
‘the non-existent (or unevolved) was verily bofore this (creation).’ ” 
Wilson, from Say ana. Aditi- Suva/iiQ,' Daksha- Ivipyem* Here Agni 
is represented as Prajapati who as a yet undeveloped embryo is at the 
same time both male and female.—Ludwig. Or Dabsha may be the 
sun and Aditi the earth. “ In fact Agni is identified with all things. 
These latter hymns to Agni are very obscure: the notions are 
mystical; many of the terms are unusual, or are unusually applied; 
and the construction is singularly elliptical and loose.”—Wilson. 

This Hymn has been wholly translated, with comments, by 
Mr. Wallis.. See The Cosmology of the Rigveda, pp. 48—50. 

A 

The Rishi is Trita Aptya, The metre is Trishtup. 

3 The exact meaning of the second line is uncertain and in 
*bom (the sacrificer), whose sacrifice is undisturbed by hie foes, 
i * ,rows bis choice oblation.*—Wilson. 

8 



rtiNisr^ 


THE HYMNS OF 



> ^ 

.vx&y* 



114 


[500X X 


4 Increasing by his strength, while lauds content him, 

with easy flight unto the gods he travels. 

Agni the cheerful priest, best sacrificer, balms with 
his tongue the gods with whom he mingles. 

5 With songs and adorations bring ye hither Agni 

who stirs himself at dawn like Indra, 

Whom sages laud with hymns as Jataved&s of those 
who wield the sacrificial ladle. 

G In whom all goodly treasures meet together, even as 
steeds and riders for the booty. 

Inclining hither bring us help, 0 Agni, even assist¬ 
ance most desired by Indra. 

7 Yea, at thy birth, when thou hadst sat in glory, 
thou, Agni, wast the aim of invocations. 

The gods came near, obedient to thy summons, and 
thus attained their rank as chief protectors, 


HYMN VII. 


Agni. 


O Agni, shared by all men living bring us good luck 
for sacrifice from earth and heaven. 

With us be thine intelligence, wonder-worker! Rescue 
us, god, with thy far-reaching blessings. 

2 These hymns brought forth for thee, O Agni, laud 
thee for bounteous gifts, with cattle and with horses. 


5 At dawn: with Prof. Grassmann I take usrdm here to be a loca¬ 
tive. Say an a explains it as bhogdndm vtsrdvinam , the bestower of 
enjoyments.. According to Prof. Ludwig's interpretation, the trans¬ 
lation of the first line would be: With songs and adorations bring 
ye hither the lord of mommy's kine , the quivering Agni. 

6 Riders: saptivantah: the word properly means ‘ possessed of 
horses/ and is applicable to drivers as well as riders. For the boot}/: 
to win the spoil, or to guard it from others. 

The Rishi is Trita Aptya. The metre is Trishtup. 

1 Thine intelligent' the meauing of praketaifc here is not clear. 
Prof. Wilson translates it by ‘ indications (of favour);’ Prof, Ludwig 
by ‘wishes;’ and Prof. Grassmaun by ‘light.’ 



MINlSr/fj, 


<SL 

THE RIG VEDA. 115 

Good lord, when man from thee hath gained enjoy¬ 
ment, by hymns, O nobly-born, hath he obtained it. 

3 Agni I deem my kinsman and my father, count him 

my brother and my friend for ever. 

I honour as the face of lofty Agni in heaven the 
bright and holy light of Sftrya. 

4 Effectual, Agni, are our prayers for profit. He whom, 

at home, thou, priest for ever, guardest 
Is rich in food, drawn by red steeds, and holy : by 
day and night to him shall all be pleasant. 

5 Men with their arms have generated Agni, helpful 

as some kind friend, adorned with splendours, 

And stablished as invoker ’mid the people the ancient 
priest, the sacrifice’s lover. 

6 Worship, thyself, O god, the gods in heaven : what, 

void of knowledge, shall the fool avail thee ? 

As thou, O god, hast worshipped gods by seasons, 
so, nobly-born ! to thine own self pay worship. 

7 Agni, be thou our guardian and protector : bestow 

upon us life and vital vigour. 

Accept, O mighty one, the gifts we offer, and with 
unceasing care protect our bodies. 

HYMN fill. Agui< 

Agni advances with his lofty banner: the bull is 
bellowing to the earth and heavens. 

He hath attained the sky’s supremest limits: the 
steer hath waxen in the lap of waters. 



3 The second line is remarkable as a direot declaration of the re¬ 
lationship of Agni and Surya.—Ludwig. 

7 Be thou our guardian and protector . avitci, says Say ana, is a pro¬ 
tector from obvious dangers, aud gopA a preserver from perils that 
are unseen. 

Tndra is the deity of stanzas 6—9. The Riski is Trisiras the son 
°* * wa shtar. The metre is Trishtup, 

lAdmnces: through the firmn^ent. His loft,y banner: the lightning 

Waters: of the firmaoacttt, 



MINfSr^ 



TUB HYMNS OF 


{BOOK 


2 The bull, the youngling with the hump, hath frolicked, 

the strong and never-ceasing calf hath bellowed. 
Bringing our offerings to the gods assembly, he 
moves as chief in his own dwelling-places. 

3 Him who hath grasped his parents’ head, they stab- 

lished at sacrifice as a wave of heavenly lustre. 

In his swift flight the red Dawns borne by horses 
rejoice their bodies in the home of Order. 

4 For, Vasu, thou precedest every Morning, and still 

hast been the twins’ illuminator. 

For sacrifice, seven places thou retainest while for 
thine own self thou engenderest Mitra. 

5 Thou art the eye and guard of mighty Order, and 

Varuna when to holy Law thou goest. 

Thou art the waters’ child, O Jatavedas, envoy of 
him whose offering thou acceptest. 

6 Thou art the leader of the rite and region, when 

following with auspicious teams of horses. 

Agni, glorious head to heaven thou liftest, mak¬ 
ing thy tongue the bearer of oblations. 


2 Never-eeasmg: asremd: according to Sayapa, * * undecaying.’ 

* Glorious.’—Wilson. 

3 His parents' head: the head or forehead of Heaven and Earth / 
or of the two fire sticks. The red Dawns: or the flames, according 
to S^yana. There is no substantive iu the text. The home of Order : 
probably the Sun, if the Dawns are spoken of; and the place of 
law-ordained sacrifice according to S&yana’s explanation. 

4 The tiuins' illuminator: lighter-up of day and night, that is, of 
the end of night, or very early morning. Seven plcuces : seven altars 
for the sacrificial fire. Mitra : the Sum 

5 Varuna: king allC * governor. When to holy Law thou goest: 
‘.wbeu thou proceedest to the rite.'—Wilson. 

6 And region: thou kp.owost, and ennst t-how the way through, 

the firmament. . 



<SL 

nr 

7 Through his wise insight Trita in the caterri, seeking 

as ever the chief sire’s intention, 

Following in the bosom of his parents, calling him¬ 
self a brother, tries the weapons. 

8 Well-skilled to use the weapons of his father, Aptya, 

urged on by Indra, fought the battle. 

Then Trita slew the foe seven-rayed, three-headed, 
and freed the cattle of the son of Twashtar. 

9 Lord of the brave, Xndra cleft him in pieces who sought 

to gain much strength and deemed him mighty. 

Tie smote his three heads from his body, seizing the 
cattle of the omniform son of Twashtar. 

HYMN IX. Waters. 

\ e, Waters, are the source of bliss : so help ye us 
to energy 

That we may look on great delight. 



HYMN 9.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


7 In the cavern: or well or pit into which he had been thrown or 

had fallen. Se6 I. 105. 7. Seeking . the chief sire's intention: wish¬ 

ing to carry out the design of Indra or perhaps of Dyaus. His parents : 
‘ the P ar e»tal heaven and earth.’—Wilson Calling himself a brother : 
of Indra. ‘Reciting appropriate praise.’—Wilson. 

8 °f his father • belonging to the chief sire of stanza 7. The foe: 
the special enemy of trita is the son of Twashtar called Visvarupa 

or the Multiform. The cattle of the soil Of Twashtar: the cows im¬ 
prisoned by him. 


I or the legends founded on the last three stanzas of this hymn, 

/w .^ n ' r ’ ^ Texts, V. pp. 229—233. See also Bergaig'ue, La 
Religion V6dique, II, 329, 330. 


The Rishi is Sindhudvipa son of Raja Ambarisha, or Trisiras sou 
o fwashtar. The metre is Amishfcup in stanzas 8 aud 9, Gayatri 
in i i and 6, and Vardhamana aud Pfatishtlia (slight variations 
,l0m the standard Gayatri) in 5 and 7. 

* G/eat delight: according to the scholiast, meaning perfect know- 
l«dg» of Brahes. WA'iVHWii 





misr^ 


<SL 

THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X 

2 Give us a portion of the juice, the most auspicious 

that ye have, 

Like mothers in their longing love. 

3 To you we gladly come for him to whose abode ye - 

send us on; 

And, Waters, give us procreant strength. 

4 The Waters be to us for drink, goddesses for our aid 

and bliss : 

Let them stream to us health and wealth. 

5 I beg the Floods to give us balm, these queens who 

rule o’er precious things, 

And have supreme control of men. 

6 Within the Waters— Soma thus hath told me—, 

dwell all balms that heal, 

And Agni, he who blesseth all. 

7 0 Waters, teem with medicine to keep my body safe 

from harm, 

So that I long may see the sun. 

8 Whatever sin is found in me, whatever evil I have 

wrought, 

If I have lied or fhlsely sworn, Waters, remove it 
far from me. 

9 The Waters I this day have sought, and to their 

moisture have we come ; 

O Agni, rich in milk, come thou, and with thy 
splendour cover me. 



3 The meaniug of the stanza is obscure. “ The purport is possibly 
a recommendation to be regular ip practising ablution.”—Wilson. 

The first three stanzas are to be repeated by Brahmans at their 
morning ablutions. See Colebrooke’s Essays, Essay I. On the Religious 
Ceremonies of the Hindus. 

6 Stanzas 6—9 wo repeated from Book I. 23. 20—23, 




tmsr/fy 


THE RIG VEDA. 



tEYMN 10.] 


* 119 
Yama. Yami. 



HYMN X. 


Fain would I win my friend to kindly friendship. 

So may the sage, come through the air’s wide ocean, 
Remembering the earth and days to follow, obtain a 
son. the issue of his father. 

2 Thy friend loves not the friendship which considers 
her who is near in kindred as a stranger. 

Sons of the mighty Asura, the heroes, supporters of 
the heavens, see far around them. 


Yama aud Yami, son and daughter of Vivasvan, are the Risliis 
as well as the deities of the hymn which is a dialogue between 
them. The metre is Trishtup. 

Yama aud Yami are, says Professor Roth, “as their names denote, 
twin brother and sister, and are the first human pair, the originators 
of the race. As the Hebrew conception closely connected the parents 
of mankind by making the woman formed from a portion of the 
body of the man, so by the Indian tradition they are placed in the 
relationship of twins. This thought is laid by the hymn in question 
in the mouth of Yami herself, when she is made to say: ‘ Even in 
the womb the Creator made us for husband and wife,’” Professor 
Muller, on the other hand, says (lectures on the Scieuce of Language, 
second series, p. 510): “ There is a curious dialogue between her' 
(Yami) and her brother, where she (the night) implores her brother 
(the day) to make her his wife, and where he deolines her offer, 
‘because,’ as he says, ‘they have called it a sin that a brother should 
marry his sister.’” Again, p. 521, “There is uot a single word 
in the Veda pointing to Yama and Yami as the first couple of mortals, 

the Indian Adam and Eve.If Yama had been the first created of 

men, surely the Vedic poets, in speaking of him, could uot have 
passed this over in silence.” See, however, the passage from the 
Atharva-veda, XVIII. 3, 13, to be quoted further on. [Reverence ye 
with an oblation Yama, the son of Vivasvat, the assembler of men, 
tvho was the first of men that died, and the firsi that departed to 
this (celestial) world]." Qubted from Muir, 0. S. Texts, V. p. 288. 

1 Yarn! speaks. The. sage: ved&k : Yama, whom she wishes to 
give her a son. Come: S&yana explains the masculine participle 
jaganvd:i by the feminine gatavatt, that is, I, Yami, who have come. 
Thz earth : which, otherwise, will remain without human inhabitants, 

2 Yama replies. A stranger: of a different family) and so a lawful wife. 
8tanT S 8°^ ^ mi9hty ^ swm; ^ ie s P‘ es or seu ttncls spokeu of in 





120 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X. 

3 Yea, this the immortals seek of thee with longing 1 , 

progeny of the sole existing mortal. 

Then let thy soul and mine be knit together, and as 
a loving husband take thy consort. 

4 Shall we do now what we ne’er did aforetime ? we 

who spake righteously now talk impurely? 
Gandharva in the floods, the dame of waters— such 
is our bond, such our most lofty kinship. 

5 Even in the womb god Twashtar, vivifier, shaping 

all forms, creator, made us consorts. 

None violates his holy ordinances: that we are his 
the heavens and earth acknowledge. 

6 Who knows that earliest day whereof thou speakest? 

Who hath beheld it ? Who can here declare it ? 
Great is the law of Varuria and Mitra. What, wan¬ 
ton 1 wilt thou say to men to tempt them ? 

7 I, Yamt, am possessed by love of Yama, that I may 

rest on the same couch beside him. 

I as a wife would yield me to my husband. Like 
car-wheels let us speed to meet each other. 

8 They stand not still, they never close their eyelids, 

those sentinels of gods who wander round us. 

Not me—go quickly, wanton, with another, and hast¬ 
en like a chariot wheel to meet him. 


3 Yarai speaks. 

4 Yama replies. GaniVearva: Vivas van or the Sun. In the floods: 
in the waters of the firmament. The dame, of waters: Saranyu. * His 
aqueous wife.’—Muir, Such in our bond: these are our parents. 

5 Yamt speaks. 

(! Yama replies. To tempt them: the meaning of vtchyd is un¬ 
certain. The S. P. Lexicon explains it by ‘deceitfully.’ ‘Falsely.’— 
Grattsmann. ‘What sayest thou, who puniahest men with hell?’— 
Wilson. 

8 Yama replies. Smtinels of gods: recording angels who watch 
men’s actions. 




tv 10.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 



10 


11 


May SOrya’s eye with days and nights endow him, 
and ever may his light spread out before him. 

In heaven and earth the kindred pair commingle. 
On Yaml be the unbrotherly act of Yama. 

Sure there will come succeeding times when brothers 
and sisters will do acts unmeet for kinsfolk. 

Not me, O fair one,—seek another husband, and 
make thine arm a pillow for thy consort. 

Is he a brother when no lord is left her ? Is she a 
sister when Destruction cometh ? 


Forced by my love these many words I ut|er. Come 
near, and hold me in thy close embraces. 

12 I will not fold mine arms about thy body : they call 
it sin when one comes near his sister. 


Not me,—prepare thy pleasures with another: thy 
brother seeks not this from thee, O fair one. 

13 Alas! thou art indeed a weakling, Yama; we find in 
thee no trace of heart or spirit. 

As round the tree the woodbine clings, another will 
cling about thee girt as with a girdle. 


9 \ami speaks. I he meaning seems to bet if there be any guilt 
let me take it upon myself, and let not Yanm’s life be shorteuod by 
way of punishment. The kindred pair: Day and Night. 

10 Varna replies. ‘Make thine arm a pillow.'—Wilson. 

11 Yami speaks. Destruction : Nirriti; the utter extinction of the 
human race “ The meaning is, a true brother will not let his sister 
lack a husband, and a true sister will not let her brother laok » wife".”— 
Wilson’s Translation, Editor’s Note. 

12 Yama replies. 

13 Yami speaks. 

Sayanas interpretation of this difficult hymn differs in many places 
from that which I have adopted, and Wilsou’s Translation should be 
consulted for the views of the great Indian Commentator and the 
1 audits of his time. The hymn has been transliterated, translated, 
and annotated by Dr. Muir, Or. S. Texts, V. 288—291. It has also 
ecu translated by the authors of the Siebcnzig Lieder. 




THE HYMNS OF 



[BOOK X. 


14 Embrace another, Yami; let another, even as the 
woodbine rings the tree, enfold thee. 

Win thou his heart and let him win th) r tancy, and 
he shall form with thee a blest alliance. 


HYMN XI. Agui. 

The Bull hath yielded for the Bull the milk of 
heaven : the son of Aditi can never be deceived. 

According to his wisdom Varuna knoweth all: may 
he, the holy, hallow times for sacrifice. 

2 Gandharvi spake : may she, the lady of the flood* 
amid the river’s roaring leave my heart untouched. 

May Aditi accomplish all that we desire, and may 
our eldest brother tell us this as chief. 


The Rishi is Hftvirdhana Angi. The metre is Jagati in stanzas 
1—6, and Trishtup in 7—9. 

The subject of the hymn is the origin and institution of sacrifice, 
first established by Agui under the authority of Varuna, who must 
be regarded as the deity of the first stauza. 

1 The Bull: the mighty Soma. For the Bull: for mighty Varuna, 
The milk of heaven: the divine Soma-juice, to be used at sacrifice. 
The son of Aditi: Varuna. According to his wisdom: yathd dhiyd: 
the two words taken together as au adverbial phrase. According to 
Sayana, it is Agui who milks the streams of prosperity from heaven 
for the worshipper. I have generally followed Professor Pisohel’s 
interpretation of the first five stanzas (Vedische Studien, pp. 188, 189). 

2 Gandharvi: said to be the daughter of Surabhi (one of the 
daughters of Daksha), and the mother of the race of horses. 

Here she appears to be au Apsara:- or water-uymph, haunting the 
hanks of rivers and practising the seductive arts of a siren. The 
meaning seems to be, lot no disturbing influence unsettle my devout 

thoughts. 

Our eldest brother: Varuna, regarded as the founder of sooiety 
united by common religious observances. 



HYMN 11.] 


THE RIGVEDA. 


123 


3 Yea, even this blessed Morning, rich in store of food, 

splendid, with heavenly lustre, hath shone out for 
man, 

Since they, as was the wish of yearning gods, brought 
forth that yearning Agni for the assembly as the 
priest. 

4 And the fleet falcon brought for sacrifice from afar 

this flowing drop most excellent and passing wise, 
Then when the Aryan tribes chose as invoking priest 
Agni the wonder-worker, and the hymn rose up. 

£> Still art thou kind to him who feeds thee as with 
grass, and, skilled in sacrifice, offers thee holy gifts. 
When thou, having received the sage’s strengthening 
food with lauds, after long toil, comest with many 
more. 

6 Urge thou thy parents, as a lover, to delight: the 

lovely one desires and craves it from his heart. 

As priest he calls aloud, as warrior shows his skill, as 
Asura tries his strength, and with the hymn is 
stirred. 

7 Far-famed is he, the mortal man, O Agni, thou son 

of strength, who hath obtained thy favour. 

He, gathering power, borne onward by his horses, 
makes his days lovely in his might and splendour. 


3 The poet regards the coming of the dawn as a proof that the 
sacrifice is successful. Since they : the priests. 

4 This flowing drop: the Soma, brought from heaven by the falcon. 
See Book I., Jude*. 

5 Thou: Agni. As ivitk grass: ‘as pasture satisfies (the herds).'— 

Wilson. * 

With many more: bringing many other gods to the sacrifice. 

6 A a lover-: woos his mistress. Agni is called upon to entreat 
his parents, Heaven and Earth, to reproduce him perpetually. The 
lovely one: Agni, The original hymn appears to end with this 
difficult stanssa, 




miST/fy 


THE HYMNS ON 



<SL 

[BOOK X. 


8 When, holy Agni, the divine assembly, the holy 

synod ’mid the gods, is gathered, 

And when thou, godlike one, dealest forth treasures, 
vouchsafe us, too, our portion of the riches. 

9 Hear us, O Agni, in the great assembly: harness thy 

rapid car, the car of Amrit. 

Bring Heaven and Earth, the deities’ parents, hither: 
stay with us here, nor from the gods be distant. 

HYMN XII. Agni. 

Heaven and Earth, first by everlasting Order, speak¬ 
ers of truth, are near enough to hear us, 

When the god, urging men to worship, sitteth as 
priest, assuming all his vital vigour. 

2 As god comprising gods by Law eternal, bear, as the 

chief who knoweth, our oblation, 

Smoke-bannered with the fuel, radiant, joyous, 
better to praise and worship, priest for ever. 

3 When the cow’s nectar wins the god completely, men 

here below are heaven’s and earth’s sustainers. 

All the gods came to this thy heavenly Yajus, which 
from the motley pair milked oil and water. 


9 In the great assembly: ‘in the dwelling common to the deities.’— 
Wilson. 

Rapid: dravitnum : taken by Sayana with amritasya and explained 
by ‘ distilling the drink of gods.’ Nor from the gods be distant : 
Met none of the gods be absents—Wilson. 

The Rishi is HavirdMtm Angi, The metre is Trishtup; 

1 First: most exalted as well as most ancient. The god: Agni. 

As priest: as Hotar, invoker, or herald. 

2 Better to pt'aise: more skilled than men in praising the gods. 

3 This stanza is very obscure. The meaning seems to be that, by 
possessing the amrit, ambrosia, or nectar contained in the milk of 
the sacrificial cow and in the Soma-juice which wins and daptivates 
Agni, men are enabled to offer acceptuhle sacrifices to the gods, and 
thus to support the heaveus and earth. Heavenly Yajm ; divide 




HYMN 12 .] 


THE RIGVEDA. 


125 


4 # 


4 I praise your work that ye may make me prosper: 

hear, Heaven and Earth, twain worlds that drop 
with fatness. 

While days and nights pursue their normal courses, 
here let the Parents with sweet meath refresh us. 

5 Hath the king seized us ? How have we offended 

against his holy ordinance ? Who knoweth ? 
hor even Mitra mid the gods is angry: there are 
both song and strength for those who come not. 

6 Tis hard to understand the immortal’s nature, where 
^ she, who is akin becomes a stranger. 

Gimrd ceaselessly, great Agni, him who ponders 
Yamas name, easy to be comprehended. 

V They in the synod where the gods rejoice them, 
where they are seated in Vivasv&n’s dwelling, 


sacrificial prayer or formula. But divyavi by its position in the verse 
seems rather to belong to ghritam, butter or sacrificial oil. The 
motley pair : eni : many-coloured heaven and earth. 

When the self-aggregated ambrosia of the divine Agni is generated 
from his radiance, then the products from it sustain both heaven and 
earth, all the worshippers glorify this thy oblation, the celestial 

nutritious water which thy white radiance milks forth.” Wilson. 

According to Sayana, the products from it are the plants and trees 
which spring from the amrit or rain which rewards the oblations of 
men, and the vine devdh of the text are sarve stotdrah, all the 
worshippers. Some meaning is apparent in this paraphrase, but it 
cannot be extracted from the words of the text. 

^ teir norma l courses : asunttim: * * their pious purpose/—Wilsou. 

‘ life or world of spirits/ according to the S. P. Lexicon. 

' *' m g* y ,lln W* even Mitra: we must have committed some 
mo, oi e\cn Miba, the hriend, the gracious God, is wroth with us. 
strength: strengthening sacrificial viands. For those who come not: 

* e s " 0 ri0 ^ )' et come to receive our worship and oblations. 
« I bis stanza is apparently a later addition. The latter half of 

ie !1!St "‘ ,le * B biken trom X 10. 2, but its application here is 
not obvious. 


7 In I imuvdns dwelling : ‘ on the altar of the aacrificer.’—Wilson, 
caveu oi the realm ot the Sun is intended. 





MINIS;*,, 


THIS HYMNS ON 




126 


[BOOK X. 


Have given the Moon his beams, the Sun his splend¬ 
our: the two unweariedly maintain their brightness. 

8 The counsel which the gods meet to consider, their 

secret plan,—of that we have no knowledge. 
There let god Savitar, Aditi, and Mitra proclaim to 
Vanina that we are sinless. 

9 Hear us, O Agni, in the great assembly: harness 

thy rapid ear, the car of Amrit. 

Bring Heaven and Earth, the deities’ parents, 
hither : stay with us here, nor from the gods be 
distant. 


HYMN XIII. 


Havirdhaims. 


For you I fit the ancient prayer with homage : may 
the laud rise as on the prince’s pathway. 

All sons of immortality shall hear it, all the possessors 
of celestial natures. 

2 When speeding ye came nigh us like twin sisters, 

religious-hearted votaries brought you forward. 
Take your place, ye who know your proper station : 
be near, be very near unto our Soma. 

3 Five paces have I risen from Earth : I follow her 

who hath four feet with devout observance. 

This by the sacred syllable have I measured; I purify 
in the central place of Order. 


9 This is (he concluding stanza of the preceding hymn also. 

“ The deities are the two Salotas, small carts or barrows used at 
sacrifices to carry the materials, especially the Soma plant, hence 
called Itavirdhdnas , oblation-bearers."—Wilson. The Rishi is Havir 
dhina Angi, or Vivasviu son of Aditi. The metre is Trishtup in 
stanzas 1—4, and Jagati in 5. 

1 The prince is the noble who institutes the sacrifice. ‘Like the 
path of the worshipper VV ilson. 

.'I This stanza is most obscure. Professor Wilson, following Sayan*, 
translates: “ I make the ** ve of the sacrifice ascend; I take 

four steps by pious observances; with the sacred syllable I perfect 
this (adoration); I purify (the Sow) on the navel of the sacrifice.” 



YMN 14.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


%L 

127 

4 What death for deities hath he appointed, what 

immortality for men not chosen ? 

Their sacrifice was Brihaspati the Rishi, and our dear 
bodies have been saved by Yama. 

5 The seven flow to the youth on whom the Maruts 

wait: the sons instruct the sire to lead the sacrifice. 
Both these are his, as his they are the lords of both: 
both toil; belonging unto both they prosper well. 

HYMN XIV. Yama. 

Honour the king with thine oblations, Yama, 

V ivasvan’s son, who gathers men together, 

Who travelled to the lofty heights above us, who 
searches out and shows the path to many. 


Che five stages are, according to Sayana, the five elements of the 
sacrifice, grain, Soma, the kine, the Purodasa cake, and the clarified 
butter. The four steps are the metres most commonly used. 

The words as they stand in the text do not appear to be susceptible 
of any satisfactory explanation. 

4 1 he gods are not subject to death, and immortality in another 
world awaits mankind. The gods owe their preservation to Brb 
haspati, and men to Yama. 

i> The seven: rivers. According to Siyana, metres. The youth: 
Indra. The, sons: the Maruts. * The sire: Indra. Both these: havir- 
dudnas. Of both : gods and men. Unto both : to gods and men, or 
to heaven and earth. 

The Fathers, and the Dogs are the deities of the stanzas in which 
' toy aro y ,eutl01 >ed. Yama, son of Vivasvan, is the Rishi. The 
metre is Trisbtup in stauaas 1—12; Anushtup in 13, 14, 16; and 

•' ati m 6. Ihe hymn is a funeral address, partly to Yama the 
god of the dead and partly to the soul of the departed whose body 
is being consumed on the pile, 

1 lurm: the deified lord of the dead; originally the first man 
•v io led and so showed the souls of his successors the way to the 

mme o the departed. See X. 12. Lofty heights: of heaven, the 

abode of the Blest. ‘ J ’ 






miSTfty. 


THE HYMNS OF 



<SL 

[BOOK X. 


2 Yama first found for us the road to travel: this 

pasture never can be taken from us. 

Men born on earth tread their own paths that lead 
them whither our ancient Fathers have departed. 

3 M&talt prospers there with Kavyas, Yama with 

Angiras’ sons, Brihaspati with Rikvans : 

Exalters of the gods, by gods exalted, some joy in 
praise and some in our oblation. 

4 Come, seat thee on this bed of grass, O Yama, 

in company with Angirasas and Fathers. 

Let texts recited by the sages bring thee: O king, 
let this oblation make thee joyful. 

5 Come, Yama, with the Angirasas the holy, rejoice 

thee here with children of Virtipa. 

Seated on sacred grass at this our worship: I call 
Vivasv&n, too, thy father hither. 

6 Our Fathers are Angirasas, Navagvas, Atharvans, 

Bhrigus who deserve the Soma. 

Mav these, the holy, look on us with favour, may we 
enjoy their gracious loving-kindness. 

7 Go forth, go forth upon the ancient pathways where¬ 

on our sires of old have gone before us. 

There shalt thou look on both the kings enjoying 
their sacred food, god Varuna and Yama. 

3 Mdtali: a divine being, identified by the Commentators with 
India whose charioteer was Matali. Kavyo.s: a class of Manes, the 
spirits of a pious race of ancient time. Angiras 1 sons: the Angirasas, 
the typical first sacrifices. See Vol. I., Index. Rikvans: or singers, 
a class of spirits or deities who attend and sing the praises of 
Brihaspati. See VII. 10. 4. Some joy in praise : the gods delight in 
Svaha, the sacrificial exclamation, worship or praise. Some in our 
ablation : the Manes delight in Svadha, the sweet food or oblation 
which is presented to them. 

4 Angirasas and Fathers : or, perhaps, Angirasas our Fathers. 

tj Children of Virdpa: Vairupas, a sub division of the Angirasas. 

6 Navagvas, Atharmns, Bhrigus: priestly families of ancient times. 

7 Tlih* Ind the following Btkoea are addressed to the spirit of the 




MIN ISTfy 



THE RIG VEDA. 



8 Meet Yama, meet the Fathers, meet the merit of 

free or ordered acts, in highest heaven. 

Leave sin and evil, seek anew thy dwelling, and 
bright with glory wear another body. 

9 Go hence, depart ye, fly in all directions ; this place 

for him the Fathers have provided. 

Yama bestows on him a place to rest in adorned with 
days and beams of light and waters. 

10 Run and outspeed the two dogs, Saramas offspring, 
brindled, four-eyed, upon thy happy pathway. 
l)ra\v nigh, then to. the gracious-minded Fathers 
where they rejoice in company with Yama. 
i 1 And those two dogs of thine, Yama, the watchers, 
four-eyed, who look on men and guard the path¬ 
way?— 

Entrust this man, 0 king, to their protection, and 
with prosperity and health endow him. 

12 Dark-hued, insatiate, with distended nostrils, Yama’s 

two envoys roam among the people ; 

May they restore to us a fair existence here and to¬ 
day, that we may see the sunlight. 

13 To Yama pour the boma, bring to Yama consecradjid 

guts: 

To Yama sacrifice prepared and heralded by Agni 


goes. 


14 Offer to Yama holy gifts enriched with butter, and 
draw near : 

So may he grant that we may live long days of life 
among the gods. 



by the spirits of the pious who have performed therm 



? --"-I ™»uu vi uiuia, aee voi. i., index, 

ibe three following stanzas are addressed to the priests. 





MiNfsr^ 



<SL 

THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X. 

15 Offer to Yama, to the king, oblation very rich in 

meath : 

Bow down before the Rishis of the ancient times, 
who made this path in days of old. 

16 Into the three great jars it falls : six realms, the 

only lofty place, 

The G&yatri, the Trishtup, all metres in Yama are 
contained. 

HYMN XV. Fathers. 

May they ascend, the lowest, highest, midmost, the 
Fathers who deserve a share of Soma. 

May they who have attained the life of spirits, 
skilled in Law, harmless, aid us when we call them. 

2 Now let us pay this homage to the Fathers, to those 
who passed of old and those who followed, 

Those who have rested in the earthly region, and 
those who dwell among the mighty races. 


16 This stanza is unintelligible. Three great jars: Trikadrukas , 
or three Soma-reservoirs. It falls: apparently, the Soma. Six 
realms the six earths, according to Sayana, or substances, viz., heaven, 
earth, w»£er, plants, the sun aud truth. The only lofty place: ‘the 
one great (moving world).’—Wilson. 

This hymn with the exception of the last stanza, has been trans¬ 
lated, and annotated by Muir, 0 . S . Texts, V. pp. 291—295, by the 
authors of the Skbenzig Lieder , and by Prof. Peterson, Hymns 
from the Eigveda. 

The Rishi is Sankha son of Yuma. The metre is Jagali in stanza 
11, and Trishtup in the rest of the hymn. 

1 Ascend: rise to higher rank; obtain the best oblation, according 
to Sayana, 

Lowest , highest , midmost: the Fathers are classified in heaven 
according to their degrees of merit acquired ou earth. 

2 The earthly region : the firmament nearest to the earth. See 
vi n 77 t 5, The mighty races : of the gods. 



MINlSr^ 



OT 15] 


THE RIG VEDA. 



3 I have attained the gracious-minded Fathers, I have 

gained son and progeny from Vishnu. 

They who enjoy pressed juices with oblation, seated 
on sacred grass, come oftenest hither. 

4 Fathers who sit on sacred grass, come, help us : 

these offerings have we made for you; accept them. 
So come to us with most auspicious favour, and 
give us health and wealth without a trouble. 

5 May they, the Fathers, worthy of the Soma, invited 

to their favourite oblations 
Laid on the sacred grass, come nigh and listen : may 
they be gracious unto us and bless us. 

6 Bowing your bended knees and seated southward, 

accept this sacrifice of ours with favour. 

Punish us not for any sin, O Fathers, which we 
through human frailty have committed. 

7 Lapped in the bosom of the purple Mornings, give 

^ riches to the man who brings oblations. 

Grant to your sons a portion of that treasure, and, 
present, give them energy, ye Fathers. 

8 Our ancient Fathers who deserve the Soma, who 

came, most noble, to our Soma-banquet, — 
w ith these let Yama, yearning with the yearning 
rejoicing eat our offerings at his pleasure. 

9 Come to us, Agni, with the gracious Fathers who 

j ve “ \ n glowing light, the very Kavyas, 

Who thirsted ’mid the gods, who hasten hither, 
oblation-winners, theme of singers’ praises. 

10 Come, Agni, come with countless ancient Fathers, 
^ dwellers in light, primeval, god-adorers, 

Laters and drinkers of oblations, truthful, who travel 
with the deities and Indra*. 


o Son and progeny: napdtai/i ckq vikramanam cha : the meaning 
these words here is doubtful. 





132 


THE HYMNS OF 


<SL 

[BOOK X . 

11 Fathers whom Agni’s flames have tasted, come ye nigh. 

in perfect order take ye each your proper place. 

Eat sacrificial food presented on the grass. gran; 
riches with a multitude of hero sons. 

12 Thou, Agni Jatavedas, when entreated, didst bear 

the offerings which thou madest fragrant, 

And ^ive them to the Fathers who did eat them with 
Svadhft. Eat, thou god, the gifts we bring thee. 

13 Thou, Jatavedas, knowest well the number of Fathers 

who are here and who are absent, 

Of Fathers whom we know and whom we know not, 
accept the sacrifice well-prepared with portions. ■ 

14 They who, consumed by fire or not cremated, joy in 

their offering in the midst of heaven,— 

Grant them, O sovran lord, the life they merit, and 
their own body, as thy pleasure wills it. 

HYMN XVI. A g ,u. 

Burn him not up, nor quite consume him, Agni: let 
not his body or his skin be scattered. 

O Jatavedas, when thou hast matured him, then 
send him on his way unto the h athers. 


11 Whom, Agni’s flams have tasted: whose bodies have been burnt. 
A class of Manes called Agniahvattas, according to Sayana. ^ 

12 With StadM: with tho sacrificial exclamation Svadhu, or, with 


their allotted portion. 

13 With portions: or, with Svadhaa. 

14 The life they merit: asimitim: a difficult word whose meaning 
is somewhat uncertain. S&yana joins it with tanvam, and explaius 
the two words by * the body that leads to life,’ ‘ that body that is 
endowed with breatb.’-Wilson. See X. 12. 4. 

This hymn has been partially transliterated, translated, and 
•annotated by Muir, 0 . S. Texts, V. pp. 235-297. 


tv h : is [>rrv.>«a, aon of Yama. Tho metre is Trishtup in 
Ihe^ . ^ au( j ^ UU8 htup in 11—14. Stanaas 1—6 are to he rc- 

pcS S while the body of 'the departed is being partially consumed 
on the funeral pile. 





MINlSr^ 


THE RIG VEDA. 




2 When thou hast made him ready, Jatavedas, then do 

thou give him over to the Fathers. 

When he attains unto the life that waits him, he will 
obey the deities’ commandment, 

3 The sun receive, thine eye, the wind thy spirit; go, 

as thy merit is, to earth or heaven. 

Go, if it be thy lot, unto the waters; go, make thine 
home in plants with all thy members. 

4 Thy portion is the goat: with heat, consume him ; let 

lierce flame, thy glowing splendour, burn him. 
With thine auspicious forms, O JAtavedaS, bear this 
man to the region of the pious. 

5 Again, O Agni, to the Fathers send him, who, offered 

in thee, goes with our oblations. 

Wearing new life let him increase liis offspring : let 
him rejoin a body, J&tavedas. 

G What wound soe’er the dark bird hath inflicted, the 
emmet, or the serpent, or the jackal, 

May Agni who devoureth all things heal it, and 
Soma who hath passed into the Br&limans. 

7 Mail thee with milk against the flames of Agni, 

encompass thee about with fat and marrow, 

So will the bold one, eager to attack thee with fierce 
glow fail to girdle and consume thee. 

8 Forbear, 0 Agni, to upset this ladle ; the gods and 

they who merit Soma love it. 

This ladle, this which serves the gods to drink from, 
in this the immortal deities rejoice them. 


2 The life that waits him : asnnilim : see X 15. 14. 

3 The sun receive thine'eye, the wind thy spirit : let like 
like. See Muir’s Note, O. S. Texts, V. 2&8. 

4 Agni is addressed. 


return to 


5 Let him increase his offspring: when be becomes one of the Fathers 
to whom is ascribed the fruitfulness of heaven and earth, the parents 

,£ uos ail< ^ mcn - See X. 64. 14. Let him rejoin : or, let life reioiu 
ns oony : the nominative is not expressed. 

7 1 be corpse is addressed. 








MIN/Sr^ 


134 


THE HYMNS OF 




[HOOK X. 


9 I send afar, flesh-eating Agni, bearing off stains may 
he depart to Yama’s subjects. 

But let this other J&taved&s carry oblation to the 
gods,, for he is skilful. 

10 I choose as god for Father-worship Agni, flesh-eater, 

who hath past within your dwelling, 

While looking on this other J&taved&s. Let him 
light flames in the supreme assembly. 

11 With offerings meet let Agni bring the Fathers who 

support the Law. 

Let him announce oblations paid to Fathers and to 
deities. 

12 With yearning do we set thee down, with yearning* 

we enkindle thee. 

Yearning, bring yearning Fathers nigh to eat the 
food of sacrifice. 

13 Cool, Agni, and again refresh the spot which thou 

hast scorched and burnt. 

Here let the water-lily grow, and tender grass and 
leafy herb. 

14 0 freshness, with thy cooling powers, O gladdener 

with thy pleasantness, 

Come with the female of the frog and fill this Agni 
with delight. 

9 Stairis : of sin or impurity which may have attached to the 
departed. Cp. stanza 6. 

10 Light flames! typically offer sacrifice In the assembly of the gods. 

11 With offerings meet: literally, bearing Kavyas or Kavya-worship, 
that is. offerings to the kavis, sages, or Fathers, 

12 Thee: Agni; the fire. 

13 Water-lily: kiyAm.hu • some kind of aquatic plant. Tender grass : 
V&kaddrvA: a variety of dOrvd grass (Pnnicum Dactylon). 







MiNisr^y. 


THE RIG VEDA. 




HYMN XVII. Various Deities. 

Twashtar prepares the bridal of his daughter: all 
the world hears the tidings and assembles. 

But . Yama’s mother, spouse of great Vivasvan, 
vanished as she was carried to her dwelling. 

2 From mortal men they hid the immortal lacly, made 

one like her and gave her to Vivasvan. 

SaragyA brought to him the Asvin brothers, and 
then deserted both twinned pairs of children. 

3 Guard of the world, whose cattle ne’er are injured, 

may Pftshan bear thee hence, for he hath knowledge. 
May he consign thee to these Fathers’ keeping, and 
to the gracious gods let Agni give thee. 

4 May Ayu, giver of all life, protect thee, and bear 

thee forward on the distant pathway. 

Thither let Savitar the god transport thee, where 
dwell the pious who have passed before thee. 

5 Pftskan knows all these realms : may he conduct us 

by ways that are most free from fear and danger. 


The deities are Saranyfi (stanzas 1, 2), Pushan (3—6), Sarasvat! 
(7—9), the Waters (10—14), the Waters or Soma (15—17). The 
Rishi is Devaeravas, son of Yama. 

1 The first two stanzas are difficult, and appear to have no 
connexion with the rest of the hymn. Twashtar: a god often 
regarded, as here, as au agent in natural phenomena. His daughter ; 
SaranyQ, the stormy cloud; or, perhaps, the dawn. Vivasvdn; 
representing the bright heavens. Varna’s mother: Saranyu, who 
gave birth to Yama and Yam!. See X. 10, Note. Vanished: or was 
stolen away. 

2 They: the gods. The immorted lady: Saranyu. Brought to him : 
under another form bore to Vivasvan. Both twinned pairs : Yama 
and Yam! and the Asvius. For the legeud which has been formed 
out of these obscure hints, see Wilson’s Translation, and Muir, 
O. S. Texts, V. 228. 

3 Here the funeral hymn begins, with an address to the spirit of 
the departed. 

j j ' acc °rding to Sayana, Vayu is intended, the letter ‘v’ being 
eiided. Or the meaning may be, life of full vitality. 




<5L 

13C THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X. 

Giver of blessings, glowing, all-heroic, may he, the 
wise and watchful, go before us. 

6 Pfishan was born to move on distant pathways, 

on the road far from earth and far from heaven. 

To both most lovely places of assembly he travels 
and returns with perfect knowledge. 

7 The pious call Sarasvatl, they worship Sarasvatl 

while sacrifice proceedeth. 

The pious called Sarasvatl aforetime. Sarasvatl send 
bliss to him who giveth. 

8 Sarasvatl, who earnest with the Fathers, with them 

rejoicing thee in our oblations, 

Seated upon this sacred grass be joyful, and give us 
strengthening food that brings no sickness. 

9 Thou called on as Sarasvatl by Fathers who come 

right forward to our solemn service, 

Give food and wealth to present sacrifices, a portion, 
worth a thousand, of refreshment. 

10 The mother Floods shall make us bright and shining, 

cleansers of holy oil, with oil shall cleanse us : 

For, goddesses, they bear off all defilement: I rise 
up from them purified and brightened. 

11 Through days of earliest date the drop descended 

on this place and on that which was before it. 

I offer up, throughout the seven oblations, the drop 
which still to one same place is moving. 

12 The drop that falls, thy stalk which arms have shaken, 

which from the bosom of the press hath fallen, 

Or from the Adhvaryu’s purifying filter, I offer thee 
with heart and cry of Vashat! 

13 That fallen drop of thine, the stalk which from the 

ladle fell away, 



7 Sarasvatl : see I. 3. 10. 

11 This stanza is not very intelligible. The drop is apparently 
the Soma; but Sayana explains it, alternatively, by Aditya or the Sim. 






MIN isr^ 



This present god Brihaspati shall pour it forth to 
make us ricli. 


14 The plants of earth are rich in milk, and ricli in 
milk is this my speech ; 

And rich in milk the essence of the waters : make 
me pure therewith. 

HYMN XVIII. Various Deities. 

Go hence, O Death, pursue thy special pathway 
apart from that which gods are wont to travel. 

To thee I say it who hast eyes and hearest : touch 
not our offspring, injure not our heroes. 

2 As ye have come effacing Mrityu’s footstep, to 

farther times prolonging your existence, 

May ye be rich in children and possessions, cleansed, 
purified, and meet for sacrificing. 

3 Divided from the dead are these, the living: now 

is our calling on the gods successful. 

We have come forth for dancing and for laughter, 
to farther times prolonging our existence. 


14 li’.ch in milk: full of sap, vigour, vital aud vivifying power. 

The deities are Mrityu or Death (stanzas 1—4), Dliatar or the 
Creator (5), T wash tar (6), the Pitriinedha or offering to the Fathers 
(7~ 13), and the Pitrimedha, or Prajapati (14). The Rishi is Sanku- 
suka son of Yama. The metres are Prastarapankti (112 + 12 + 8+ 8) 

in stanza 11, Jagatf in 13, Anushtup in 14, aud Triahtup in the rest 
of tlie hymn. 

1 Death: Mrityu, the god of death; distinct from Yama the 
judge and ruler of the departed. Our offspring : praj&m: meaning 
June, says Sayaha, female offspring, duh i t rida v hit nit m i Mm 7 in the 

foim of daughters and their daughters. Our heroes: sons and their 
sons.—S. 

2 Addressed to the kinsman of the deceased. Effacing Mrir-m's 
footstep: ‘avoiding the path of • death.’—Wilson. Cleanse,!: from 
8,118 a Urnier life- Purified: from sins of the present life. 




MiN/sr^ 



THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK X. 



4 Here I erect'this rampart for the living; let none 

of these, none other, reach this limit. 

May they survive a hundred lengthened autumns, 
and may they bury Death beneath this mountain. 

5 As the days follow days in close succession, as with 

the seasons duly come the seasons, 

As each successor fails not his foregoer, so form the 
lives of these, O great Ordainer. 

6 Live your full lives and find old age delightful, all of 

you striving one behind the other. 

May Twashtar, maker of fair things, be gracious, 
and lengthen out the days of your existence. 

7 Let these unwidowed dames with noble husbands 

adorn themselves with fragrant balm and unguent. 
Decked with fair jewels, tearless, free from sorrow, 
first let the matrons pass unto their houses. 

8 Rise, come unto the world of life, 0 woman: come, 

he is lifeless by whose side thou liest. 

Wifehood with this thy husband was thy portion, 
who took thy hand and wooed thee as a lover. 

9 From his dead hand I take the bow he carried, that 

it may be our power and might and glory. 

There art thou, there; and here with noble heroes 
may we o’ercome all hosts that fight against us. 

4~77 Us rampart: of stone, or earth, raised by the Adhvaryu as a 
line of demarcation between the dead and the living, and limiting, 
aB it were, the jurisdiction of Death until the natural time for his 
approach. ' This mountain: the mound or bank. 

5 So form the lives : let them pass away in due order of seniority. 
Ordainer: Dh&tur: the name of a divine being who is the creator, 
arranger, maintaiuer, and manager of all things. 

(> One behind the other: the oldest reaching the end of their 


journey first. 

8 “ This verse is to be spoken by the hnsband’a brother, etc., to 
the wife of the dead man, and he is to make her leave her husband's 
body" See the 'AsivaUyana Gfihya Sutras, IV. 2.”—Editor’s Note, 

in Wilson’s Translation. 

o ti iq stanza is applicable only when the deceased was a Kshatriya 
or man of ii'C , “ <l ord “ r ' 







MINlSr^ 


^ • G <W 



10 Betake thee to the lap of earth the mother, of earth 

far-spreading, very kind and gracious. 

Young dame, wool-soft unto the guerdon-giver, may 
she preserve thee from Destruction's bosom. 

11 Heave thyself, Earth, nor press thee downward 

heavily : afford him easy access, gently tending him. 
Earth, as a mother wraps her skirt about her child, 
so cover him. 

12 Now let the heaving earth be free from motion : yea, 

let a thousand clods remain above him. 

Be thejr to him a home distilling fatness, here let 
them ever be his place of refuge. 

13 I stay the earth from thee, while over thee I place 

this piece of earth. May I be free from injury. 
Here let the Fathers keep this pillar firm for thee, 
and there let Yama make thee an abiding-place. 

14 Even as an arrow’s feathers, they have laid me down 

at day’s decline. 

My parting speech have I drawn back as ’twere a 
courser with the rein. 


10 Addressed to the body. Guerdon-giver: the liberal rewardcr 
of the priests. Destruction’s bosom: or the lap of Nirfiti. 

13 / stay the earth: “ I keep off the earth above thee with thy lid.” 
“ This is addressed to the urn containing the bones and ashes, which 
is buried after the corpse has been burnt.”—Wilson. 

14 This stanza, which seems to be a later addition, is not noticed 
in Sayana’s Commentary, and the meaning of the second line is not 
very clear. 

The hymn has been translated by the authors of the Siebenzig 
Lader. See Professor Zimmer’s Altindisches Leben, pp. 400 407, 

or Mr. liomesli Chunder Dutt’s Civilization in Ancient India , pp. 
108, and 278, 279. The essays .of Professor Koth and Professor 
Max Muller have already been referred to. 






THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK A' 




HYMN XIX. Waters or Cows. 

Turn,' go not farther on your way ; visit us, O ye 
wealthy ones. 

Agni and Soma, ye who bring riches again, secure us- 
wealth. 

2 Make these return to us again, bring them beside us- 

once again. 

May Indra give them back to us, and Agni drive 
them hitherward. 

3 Let them return to us again : under this herdsman 

let them feed. 

Do thou, O Agni, keep them hero, and let the 
-wealth we have remain. 

4 I call upon their herdsman, him who knoweth well 

their coming nigh, 

Their parting and their home-return, and watcheth 
their approach and rest. 

5 Yea, let the herdsman, too, return, who marketh 

well their driving-forth. 

Marketh their wandering away, their turning back 
and coming home. 


Agni and Soma are the deities of the second half of stanza 1. 

The Rishi is Mathita son of Yama, or Bhrigu son of Varuna, or 
Chyavana of the family of Bhrigu. The metre is Gilyatri in stanza 6, 
and Anushtup in the rest of the hymn. The hymn is a prayer for 
the return of strayed cows, to whom the first line is addressed. 

1 Ye ivko bring riches again, : punarvasil : ‘ye who clothe (your 
worshippers) again.'—Wilson. 

2 These: cows, or waters.—Savana. Make return is the imperative 
singular, and Sayana says that the seer of the hymn addresses himself. 
The address is to India. 

4 Say ana explains this stanza somewhat differently :—“ I invoke the 
knowledge of the place, of their going, of thoir coming, of their de¬ 
parture, of their wandering, of their returning: (I invoke) him who is 
their keeper.”— Wilson. This is a more strictly literal rendering of 
the abstract nouns in the text. 




HYMN 20 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


141 


6 Home-leader, lead them home to us; Indra, restore 

to us our kiue : 

We will rejoice in them alive. 

7 I offer you on every side butter and milk and 

strengthening food. 

May ail the holy deities pour down on us a flood of 
wealth. 

8 O thou home-leader, lead them home, restore them 

thou who bringest home. 

h oui are the quarters of the earth ; from these bring 
back to us our kine. 


HYMN XX. Agui. 

Send unto us a mind that brings delight. 

_2 I worship Agni, youthfullest of gods, resistless, 
triend of laws; 

In whose decree and heavenly light the spotted seek 
the mothers breast: 

8 Whom with their mouth they magnify, bannered 
with flame and homed in light. 

He glitters with his row of teeth. 

4 Kind, furtherer of men, he comes, when he hath 

reached the ends of heaven, 

Sage, giving splendour to the clouds. 

5 To taste man’s offerings, he, the strong, hath risen 

erect at sacrifice : 

.Fixing his dwelling he proceeds. 


Aindra ( son of Indra )- The metro is VirAj 

i» “8." tanla '• An " sh * *"P in2 ' Vit *i 9 > 

1 is taken from X. 2j. 1. The spotted: fckero is no noun. The 
vauegated oblations, as Sayana says, appear to be intended; and the 
mother s breast may be the clouds of the firmament, 

* U T ed Vl l*$ht • the meaning of kripanUam is uncertain. * Pitying 
Wilson accordlD S to ^ r °t- Ludwig. ‘Sustaiuer of pious works.’— 

o He ptoeeeds: is carried from one fire receptacle or altar to another. 







THE HYMNS OF 



[BOOK X. 



142 


6 Here are oblation, worship, rest: rapidly comes his 

furtherance. 

To sword-armed Agni come the gods. 

7 With service for chief bliss I seek the lord of sacri¬ 

fice, Agni, whom 
They call the living, son of rock. 

8 Blest evermore be all the men who come from us, 

who magnify 

Agni with sacrificial gifts. 

9 The path he treads is black and white and red, and 

striped, and brown, crimson, and glorious. 

His sire begat him bright with hues of gold. 

10 Thus with his thoughts, O son of strength, O Agni, 
hath Vimada, accordant with the immortals, 
Offered thee hymns, soliciting thy favour. Thou hast 
brought all, food, strength, a prosperous dwelling. 


HYMN XXL 


Agni. 


With offerings of our own we choose thee, Agni, as 
invoking priest, 

For sacrifice with trimmed grass,—at your glad 
carouse—piercing and brightly shining. Thou art 
waxing great. 

2 The wealthy ones adorn thee, they who bring us 
horses as their gift: 

The sprinkling ladle, Agni,—at your glad carouse—and 
glowing offering taste thee. Thou art waxing great. 

6 Sword-armed: armed with his sword or knife of piercing flame. 

8 The men who come from us : sons and grandsons of the worshippers. 

9 The path he treads: according to Savona, bis chariot. 

The Bis hi is Vimada. The metre is Ast&rapankti (8 + 3 + 12 + 12). 

1 At your glad carouse: apparently a Soma drinking refrain, ad¬ 
dressed to the Visvcdevas or AU-goda. Thou art waiving great: a 
similar refrain or burthen addressed to Agni, See Wilson’s Trans¬ 
lation. Note. Professor GrusBmaun omits both refrains, which ho 
considers to be later interpolations. 

2 Taste thee : feel the power of the fire. 





MINlSr/f^ 


THE BIG VEDA. 


<0** • GOfc 





HYMN 21.] 



143 


4 m 

3 The holy statutes rest by thee, as ’twere with ladles 

that o’erflow. 

Black and white-gleaming colours,—at your glad 
carouse—all glories thou assumest. Thou & art 
waxing great. 

4 0 Agni, what thou deemest wealth, victorious and 

immortal one! 

Bring thou to give us vigour,—at your glad carouse 
splendid at sacrifices. Thou art waxing great. 

5 Skilled in all lore is Agni, he whom erst Atharvan 

brought to life. 

He was Vivasvan’s envoy, at your glad carouse—the 
well-loved triend of Yama. Thou art waxing great. 

6 At sacrifices they adore thee, Agni, when the rite 

proceeds. 

All fair and lovely treasures—at your glad carouse— 
thou givest him who offers. Thou art waxing great. 

7 Men, Agni, have established thee as welcome priest 

at holy rites, * 1 * * * 

Thee whose face shines with butter,—at your glad 
carouse—bright, with eyes most observant. Thou 
art waxing great. 

8 Wide and aloft thou spreadest thee, O Agni, with 

thy brilliant flame. 

A bull art thou when bellowing,—at your glad 
carouse—thou dost impregn the sisters. Thou 
art waxing great. 


tui If di “ : - <The establishes (of the rite) worship 

f llir ?Jhower 8 rl! d w S | (fi ed r tho ob,ation )> lik « (earth-) sprink- 
Thosi ivlm J i- 1 A° n ‘- * fo ow Ludwig’s interpretation. 

1, ' P Agm accordi "g to his Law are regarded as his 

own statutes incarnate. * ° 

the priest who is said to have been the first to obtain 

sacrSr 6C S ° ma and P ra y ers ’ Vivasvdn: the Soma-priest, ortho 

fruitf^if 6 s * sters ' ^ be pLiuts, which Agni, descending in rain, makes 





THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK X. 



HYMN XXII. 


India. 


Where is famed Indra heard of? With what folk 
is he renowned to-day as Mitra is,—• 

Who in the home of Rishis and in secret is extolled 

with song ? 

2 Even here is Indra famed, and among us this day 

the glorious thunderer is praised, 

He who like Mitra ’mid the folk hath won complete 
and full renown. 

3 He who is sovran lord of great and perfect strength, 

exerter of heroic might, 

Who bears the fearless thunder as a father bears his 
darling son. 

4 Harnessing to thy car, as god, two blustering steeds 

of the Wind-god, O thunderer, 

That speed along the shining path, thou making 
ways art glorified. 

5 Even to these dark steeds of Wind thou of thysell 

hast come to ride, 

Of which no driver may be found, none, be he god 
or mortal man. 

6 When ye approach, men ask you, thee and Usana: 

Why come ye to our dwelling-place ? 

Why are ye come to mortal man from distant realms 
of earth and heaven ? 

7 O Indra, thou shalt speak us fair: our holy prayer 

is offered up. 

We pray to thee for help as thou didst strike the 
monster Sushna dead. 

The Ribhi is Vitnada. The metre is Annshtup in stanzas 5, 7, 9, 
Trishtup in 15, and Purost&dbpkat! (12 + 8 + 8 + 8) in the vest of 
the hymn, 

1 In secret: in the forest, according to Sayana, 

4 Making ioay$: as a god of light, making paths through the 
pathless darkness. 

y 9 an fi- Usana or U sanaa Kavya, who has been frequently naon- 
tioned as a favoured friend and companion of Indra. 



MIN IST^ 



MN 22 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 




% 

3 Around us is the Dasyu, rifceless, void of sense 
inhuman, keeping alien laws. 

Baffle, thou slayer of the foe, the weapon which this 
D&sa wields. 

9 Hero with heroes, thou art ours: yea, strong are 
they whom thou dost help. 

In many a place are thy full gifts, and men, like 
vassals, sing thy praise. 

10 Urge thou these heroes on to slay the enemy, brave 

thunderer ! m the fight with swords, * 

^aTstar- 311 ^ amon £ ^ le bribes of sages numerous 

11 S 'nfvn C °fT th °f e ?\ fts of thine whose hand is 

P pt to rend and burn, 0 hero thunder-armed*: 

1 S , with thy companions didst destroy the 
whole of Sushna’s brood. * 

Let not thine excellent assistance come to us, 
O hero Indra, profitless. 

M tLundeS ^ enj ° y the bli " ° f these 

13 M ^uitfuiT„dtLSt es u s 0f thiue - 0 Indra ’ be 
M o V f Z^neXn'ZT, * ** th ° Se 

14 T lj , at ® arth ’ th ;’ougb power of knowing things that mav 

be known, handless and footless yet might thrive^ 


9 mA keroe * • attendant Manila. 

an . 'Vi e>i ' Hy ' V -' !tna ' Hid among the tribes of sages, dwelling 

among the wise gods and invisihi., y 

mMn j t , , isiole to meu. Numerous as stars the 

meaning of nakthatraaavasdm is uncertain. 

^ i \ pr0mpt 10 rend burn: I follow Prof. Ludwig’s 
P , ,0n ’ but the meaning which he gives to dhMne is doubtful. 

' !' 0 ' 7mj>vlses °f thine : • our (praises) reaching theo.’— Wilaor,. 





MINlSr^ 



<SL 

THE HYMNS OF [KOOK X. 


Thou slowest, turning to the right, Sushna lor every 
living man. . , 

15 Drink, drink the Soma, hero Indra ; be not with¬ 
held as thou art good, O treasure-gi\ei. 

Preserve the singers and our liberal princes, and 
make us wealthy with abundant riches. 


HYMN XXIII. Indra. 

Indra, whose right hand wields the bolt, we worship, 
driver of bay steeds seeking sundered courses. 
Shaking his beard with might lie hath arisen, cast¬ 
ing his weapons forth and dealing bounties. 

2 The treasure which his bay steeds found at sacrifice,— 

this wealth made opulent Indra slayer of the foe. 
Eibhu, Ribhukshan, Vaja,—he is lord of might. The 
DAsa’s very name I utterly destroy. 

3 When, with the princes, Magliavan, famed of old, 

comes nigh the thunderbolt of gold, and the con¬ 
troller’s car . 

Which bis two tawny coursers draw, then Indra is 
the sovran lord of power whose glory spreads afar. 


14 For every living m&n: msvdycive : according to bayana, for the 
sake of Visvayu, a king, the son of Urvasi, the Ap^aras or ny™P 0 
heaven who became the wife of Pururavas. fuming to the light. 
circumambulating Sushna with the right hand towards him for good 
luck; performing the (Jaelic densil. 

The Riahi is Vimada. The metre is Trishtup in stanzas^ 1, 7, 
Ahhisarini (approximate Trishtup. i. e. 12+12+ 11+ 11) in 5, and 
Jagati in the rest of the hymn. 

° Seeking sundered courses : vivratdndm: unruly, and pulling away 
from each other. According to Saynna, having many functions. 

0 At sacrifice: S&yniia explains vane by ‘at sacrifice, or, in the 
forest.’ The exact meaning of the word here is not certain. / the 
foe • or, of Vritra. 

Ribhu, Ribhuksham, V&ja: Indra, combining the three Ribli us in 
his owu person. 

3 With the princes •' with the Maruts. 







WNIST/fy 


• oote ' 



4 With him too is this rain of his tlmt comes like 

herds : India throws drops of moisture on his 
yellow beard. 

When the sweet juice is shed he seeks the pleasant 
place, and stirs the worshipper as the wind disturbs 
the wood. 

5 We laud and praise his several deeds of valour who, 

fatherlike, with power hath made us stronger. 

Who with his voice slew many thousand wicked 
ones who spake in varied manners with contemp¬ 
tuous cries. 

6 India, the Vimadas have formed for thee a laud, 

copious, unparalleled, for thee most bountiful. 

We know the good we gain from him the mighty one 
when we attract him as a herdsman calls the kine. 

7 Ne’er may this bond of friendship be dissevered, the 

Rishi Vimada’s and thine, O India. 

We know thou carest for us as a brother: with us, 
O god, fee thine auspicious friendship. 

HYMN XXIV. India. Asvina. 

O Tndra, drink this Soma full of sweets, poured from 
the pressing-planks. 

Send down to us great riches,—at your glad carouse— 
in thousands, 0 most wealthy. Thou art waxing 
great. 

2 To thee with sacrifices, with oblations, and with lauds 
we come. 


4 Drops of moisture: perhaps the rain which he pours upon the 
lightning which may he regarded as his beard.—L. The pleasant 
place : the chamber of sacrifice. The worshipper: or, according to 
Siviina. his owu body. The text has no word to express the 
object here. 

The Itishi is Vimnda. The metre is Astarapankti in stanzas 1 — 3, 
and Anush tup iu 4 — 6 . The double burthen or refrain of Hymn 
XXL is employed in the first three stanzas. 






THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK X. 


Lord of all strength and power, grant at your glad 
carouse—the best choice-worthy treasure, ihou 
art waxing great. # . 

3 Thou who art lord of precious boons, inciter even ox 

the churl, 

Guardian of singers, Indra,—at your glad carouse- 
save us from woe and hatred. Thou art waxing great. 

4 Strong, with the great magician, ye churned the 

united worlds apart, 

When ye, implored by Vimada, N&satyas, forced the 
pair apart. 

5 When the united twain were rent asunder all the 

gods complained. 

The gods to the Nftsatyas cried, Bring these to¬ 
gether once again. 

6 Sweet be my going forth, and rich in sweets be my 

approach to home. 

So, through your deity, both gods, enrich us with 
all pleasantness. 


HYMN XXV. Soma. 

Send us a mind that brings delight, send energy 

and mental power. , ,, 

Then—at your glad carouse—-let men joy m thy 
love, sweet juice! as kine in pasture. Thou ait 
waxing great. 


3 Of singers: worshippers; ‘ eulogists.'—Wilson. 

4 With the great magician : with the aid of the supeniaturnlly 
mi id) tv Vimada. Others take mdydvind as the vocative dual. ‘Saga- 

■ ° (A-Svins).’—Wilson. Churned . apart: or, perhaps, pro¬ 

duced bv churning or violent agitation. S&yana explains differently:— 
‘you have churned forth (the tire).’—Wilson. 


The Rishi is Vimada, son of Prajdpati or of Indra, or Vasukrit son 

r ir Tha metre is Astarapankti. 

of vaBukra. \ , . * * . r 

i ti f Rt liue of this stanza has occurred before as the first line 
. v A £? double hurtheu or ref.aiD is again employed, with 

Moor no •* * «“• 






miSTfiy 



THE RIG VEDA. 



2 In all thy forms, O Soma, rest thy powers that in¬ 

fluence the heart. 

So also these my longings—at your glad carouse— 
spread themselves seeking riches. Thou art wax¬ 
ing great. 

3 Even if, 0 Soma, I neglect thy laws through my 

simplicity, 

Be gracious —at your glad carouse—as sire to son. 
Preserve us even from slaughter. Thou art wax¬ 
ing great. 

4 Our songs in concert go to thee as streaibs of water 

to the wells. 

Soma, that we may live, grant — at your glad car¬ 
ouse— full powers of mind, like beakers. Thou 
art waxing great. 

5 O Soma, through thy might who art skilful and 

strong, these longing men, 

These sages, have thrown open —at your glad car¬ 
ouse—the stall of kine and horses. Thou art 
waxing great. 

6 Our herds thou guardest, Soma, and the moving 

world spread far and wide. 

Thou Attest them for living,—at your glad carouse— 
looking upon all beings. Thou art waxing great. 

7 On all sides. Soma, be to us a guardian ne’er to be 

deceived. 

King, drive away our foemen—at your glad car- 

ouse . * not the wicked rule us. Thou art 
waxing great. 

8 Be watchful, Soma, passing wise, to give us store of 

vital strength. * 


3 From slaughter: ( from being killed (by our enemies).’—Wilson. 

4 Like beakers: filled full, like chalices of Soma juice. 

5 These longing men: the priests. Have thrown open , etc.: have, 
y their sacrifices, opened the way to wealth. 





misT^ 


- 






77//; HYMKS OF 


BOOK X. 


More skilled than man to guide us, — at your glad 
carouse — save us from harm and sorrow. Thou 
art waxing great. 

9 Chief slayer of our foemen, thou, Indu, art Indr.a’s 
gracious friend, 

When warriors invoke him—at your glad carouse— 
in light, to win them offspring. Thou art waxing 
great. 

10 Victorious is this gladdening drink : to Indra dear 

it grows in strength. 

This—at your glad carouse—enhanced the mighty 
hymn of the groat sage Kakshiv&n. Thou art 
waxing great. 

11 This to the sage who offers gifts brings power that 

comes from Wealth in kino. 

This, better than the seven, hath—at your glad 
carouse—furthered the blind, the cripple. Thou 
art waxing great. 


HYMX XXVI. 


Pushan. 


Forward upon their way proceed the ready teams, 
the lovely songs. 

Further them glorious Ptishan with yoked chariot, 
and the mighty twain. 


10 KakMvda : a famous Rishi, the seer of some hymns of Book 
I. See Index, Vol. I. 

11 Better than the seven, more effectually than the seven priests, 
gay ana explaius differently : — * i it gives wealth to the seven (priests).’— 
Wilson. The blind: the Rishi Dirghatumas, according to Sfiyana. 
The cripple Faravrij. See both names in Vol. I., Index. 

The Rishi is Vim ad a or Vasukrit. The metre is Usbnih m stanzas 

1 4 and Anushtup iu the rest of the hymn. I have treated all the 
stanzas as Auusbtup. 

j fi ea€ [y teams: ordered senes of our words. The mighty tivain : 
the ARvi us. According to S&yana, dasr&= darqaniyah, of goodly 
aspect, applied to Pftsban; or, the two performers of the rite, the 
Tajaindna and bis wife. 








2 With sacred hymns let this man here, this singer 

win the god to whom 

Belong this majesty and might. He hath observed 
our eulogies. 

3 Pftshan the strong hath knowledge of sweet praises 

even as Indu hath. 

He dews our corn with moisture, he bedews the 
pasture of our kine. 

4 We will bethink ourselves of thee, O Pushan, O 

thou god, as one * 

Who brings fulfilment of our hymns, and stirs the 
singer and the sage. 

5 Joint-sharer of each sacrifice, the driver of the 

chariot steeds ; 

The Rishi who is good to man, the singer’s friend 
and faithful guard. 

6 One who is lord of Sucha, lord of Sueha caring for 

herself: 

Weaving the raiment of the sheep and making 
raiment beautiful. 


7 The energetic lord of power, strong friend of all 

nutritious food. 

He with light movement shakes his beard, lovely 
and ne’er to be deceived. 

8 0 Pftshan, may those goats of thine turn hitherward 

thy chariot pole. 

Friend of all suppliants art thou, born in old time, 
and firm and sure. 


6 Sucha and Suchd: Tiatnes of a man aud woman.—L. According 
to Hiitv and Wilson, ‘the pure (he-goat) aud the pure (slug Mat).’ 
Weaving the raiment: “making woollen cloths snch as the woollen 
filter, etc/’—Wilson. And. making raiment beautiful: or, he hath n.alo 
vesture pure and bright; that is, says Sayana, he hath purified all 
around with his heat aud light. 

7 Friend: the augmenter. Shakes hie beard: wheu he drinks the 
Soma juice. 

Those goats: Pusban's chariot is said to be drawn by a team of goats. 





9 May the majestic Pftshan speed our chariot with his 
power and might. 

May he increase our strengthening food and listen 
to this call of ours. 

HYMN XXVII. Iudra. 

This, singer, is my firm determination, to aid the 
worshipper who pours the Soma. 

I slay the man who brings no milk-oblation, un¬ 
righteous, powerful, the truth’s perverter. 

2 Then will I, when I lead my friends to battle against 

the radiant persons of the godless, 

Prepare for thee at home a vigorous bullock, and 
pour for thee the fifteenfold strong juices. 

3 I know not him who sayeth and declareth that he 

hath slain the godless in the battle. 

Soon as they see the furious battle raging, men 
speak forth praises of my vigorous horses. 

4 While yet my deeds of might were unrecorded, all 

passed for Maghavans though I existed. 

The potent one who dwelt in peace I conquered, 
grasped by the foot and slew him on the mountain. 

5 None hinder me in mine heroic exploits, no, not the 

mountains when I will and purpose. 

Even the deaf will tremble at my roaring, and every 
day will dust be agitated. 


The Risbi is Vaaukra, son of Iudra. The metre is Trisbtup. 

1 Indra addresses the Rishi. Powerful: dbhum: perhaps, possessed 
of the moans that would enable him to offer sacrifices. 

2 The Rishi replies* Fifteenfold strong juices : according to Saynna, 
the juices of the Soma-plant whose leaves grow during the light half 
of the month and die away during the dark half. 

3 Indra speaks, rebuking the Rishi and ascribing all victories 

to himself. 

4 The intent one : the powerful fiend Sambara, for instance. 

5 Dust > of battle, stirred up by Indra. 



MINlSr^ 


THE RIG VEDA. 



153 


6 To see the Indraless oblation-drinkers, mean offerers, 

o’ertaken by destruction. 

Then shall the fellies of my car pass over those who 
have blamed my joyous friend and scorned him. 

7 Thou wast, thou grewest to full vital vigour : an 

earlier saw, a later one shall see thee. 

Two canopies, as ’twere, are round about him who 
reaeheth to the limit of this region. 

8 The freed kine eat the barley of the pious. I saw 

them as they wandered with the herdsman. 

The calling of the pious rang around thfem. What 
portion will these kine afford their owner ? 

9 When we who eat the grass of men are gathered 

I am with barley-eaters in the corn-land. 

There shall the captor yoke the yokeless bullock, 
and he who hath been yoked seek one to loose him. 


6 To see: darean: according to Sayana, I, Indra, see. Oblation - 
drinkers: who themselves consume the offerings that should he pre¬ 
sented to Indra, 

Mean offerers: bdhukshadah : literally, arm-cutters. According to 
Prof, Roth, parsimonious worshippers who offer the forelegs, or in¬ 
ferior parts of the sacrificial animal, 1 Who cut (the worshippers) to 
pieces with their hands.’—Wilson. Joyous friend : Vishnu.—L. Or 
the meaning maybe, your joyous friend; Indra himself, the friend 
of his worshippers. 

7 The Rishi speaks. An earlier saw: the meaning of the half-line 
is not clear. Perhaps, foes have already felt thy power, and others 
yet shall feel it. ‘The ancient Indra verily destroys (his foe), the 
other does not destroy Indra.’—Wilson. Two canopies: heaven and 
earth. Him : Indra. 

8 Indra speaks, fearing, apparently, that the worshipper will have 
no milk to offer him. 

9 “There is no comment on this obscure verse, and Wilson leaves 
a blank in his Ms.”—Editor of Wilson’s Translation, Vol. VI. Prof. 
Ludwig says that Indra declares that he has brought men and cattle 
together and made the latter subject to the former, to he yoked and 
to remain yoked when and as long as their masters please. According 
to this interpretation, the first half of the stanza might be rendered : 
Grass-eating beasts with men have I connected, and those who eat 
grain in the wide-spread corn-laud. But there are objections to the 
acceptance of this translation. 



THE HYMNS OF 



154 


<SL 

[BOOK X 


10 There wilt thou hold as true my spoken purpose, 

to bring together quadrupeds and bipeds. 

1 will divide, without a fight, his riches who warreth 
here, against the Bull, with women. 

11 When a man’s daughter hath been ever eyeless, who, 

knowing, will be wroth with her tot blindness . 
Which of the two will loose on him his anger—the 
man who leads her home or he who woos her ? 

12 llow many a maid is pleasing to the suitor who fain 

woll ld marry for her splendid riches ? 

If the girl be both good and fair of feature, she finds, 
herself, a friend among the people. 

13 His feet have grasped : he eats the man who meets 

him. Around his head he sets the head tor shelter. 
Sitting anear and right above he smites us, and fol¬ 
lows earth that lies spread out beneath him. 


10 Against the Bull: against me, the mighty Indra. With women : 
with weak allies. 

11 “Hitherto,” says Prof. Ludwig, “it is possible to establish a 
connexion and interdependence of the separate strophes; with strophe 
11 the difficulty begins. On him. on the father. Who woos her 
seeks her in marriage for his friend or employer. 

12 Herself: svayo.ru chit: by her own worth, independently of her 

dowry. 

13 His feet have grasped . Indra, as the Sun, has seized and drawn 
up the water of the rivers with the rays which are his feet. Eats 
the man who meets him : perhaps, merely, scorches the man who 
exposes himself to his burning rays. Acoordiug to Sayana, ‘feeds 
upou. i. e. takes into bis orb, the water that approaches him.’ An¬ 
other explanation is, that the pious after death go to the Suu and 
become sunbeams. -L. He sets the head far shelter : he tabes the 
height of Leaven as a covering. Anear and right above: in his meri 
dian height. Follows earth : descends to the horizon and sets beyond it. 




MINlSr^ 


THE lilG VEDA. 



•1 



14 High, leafless, shadowless, and swift is heaven : the 

mother stands, the youngling, loosed, is feeding. 
Loud hath she lowed, licking another’s offspring. On 
what world hath the milch-cow laid her udder ? 

15 Seven heroes from the nether part ascended, and * 

from the upper part came eight together. 

Nine from behind came armed with winno wine-bas¬ 
kets : ten from the front pressed o’er the rock’s 
high ridges. 

lit 

16 One of the ten, the tawny, shared in commou, they 

send to execute their final purpose. 

Hie mother carries on her breast the infant of noble 
form and soothes it while it knows not. 


I t Leafless, shadowiest: heaven being compared to a tree that 
overshadows the earth. According to Sayana, arvd here is the ever- 
moving Sun. The mother: Ushas or Dawn. According to Sayan,i 
md'A here means ‘the builder (of the world).’ The youngling: & 
On 1 f ^ Agni who feeds on the oblations. She: Heaven, or the atmos¬ 
pheric Prithivi, roaring ns the rain comes down. Another’s off.sprint/ : 
Indra as Aditya or the Sun, the offspring of Aditi. On what world, 
etc.: that is, who knows where the rain comes from 1 The milch-cow, is 
the Sky. ! lie second halt-stanza has occurred before. See III. 55 Id 
15 Seven heroes: according to S&yana, Visvamitra and other Riehis 
sous of Prajapnti. Eight : the Valakhilyas, a numenms race of divine 
pygmies. .Vine: the Bhrigus. Ten: Angirasas. Or, alternatively, 
seven Maruts, on Indra’,s right, eight on his left, nine bebiud him, and 
tea m front. These explanations by Sfiyana cannot be aocepted; but 
it is hard to say what is meant. Professor Ludwig thinks that, the 
vanous classes of letters of the alphabet are intended. His ingenious 
explanation will be i mud in the Preface to his fourth volume of the 
Rigveda, pp. xxxin.—xxxv. 

The tawny: kapilam : according to Sayana, the famous Rishi 
vapi a. I be Sim? —Giassmann. The mother: Nigh: ?•—Oraasmnmi. 
Jhe infant : the young Sun, if the mother is Night. 





misr/tr 


THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 

17 The heroes dressed with fire the fatted wether : the 

dice were thrown by way of sport and gaming. 

Two reach the plain amid the heavenly waters, hal¬ 
lowing and with means of purifying. 

18 Crying aloud they ran in all directions: One half 

of them will cook, and not the other. 

To me hath Savitar, this god, declared it: He will 
perform, whose food is wood and butter. 

19 I saw a troop advancing from the distance, moved, 

not by wheels but their own godlike nature. 

The friendly one seeks human generations destroying 
still new bands of evil beings. 

20 These my two bulls, even Pramara's, are harnessed : 

drive them not far ; here let them often linger. 
The -waters even shall aid him to his object, and the 
all-cleansing Sun who is above us. 

21 This is the thunderbolt which often whirleth down 

from the lofty misty realm of Sftrya. 

Beyond this realm there is another glory: so 
through old age they pass and feel no sorrow. 




17 The fatted wether: perhaps, the swollen rain-cloud. The dice : 
the stars. The two: the sun and moon. These are Professor 
Ludwig’s suggestions. 

18 They: according to Sayana, the Angirasas. Perhaps the con¬ 
tentious priests with whom Agni the veritable priest is contrasted.— 
Ludwig. He: Agui. 

19 A troop: the stars. The friendly one : Indra as the Sun. Evil 
beings: eisnd: Rakshasas and spirits of darkness that vanish at the 
coming of the Sun. 

20 Bulls: steeds according to Sayana. PramarcYs: belonging to 
me the destroyer or Death. But the whole stanza is obscure. All - 
deansing: so Sayana explains mar ha, which Prof. Roth interprets by 
‘ obscuration.’ Prof. Ludwig thinks that the Moon, * the obscurer of 


the Sun * is meant. 

91 This is the thunderbolt: the meaniug, probably is, ‘this dakshind 
or honorarium given to the priests is a veritable thunderbolt.’—L, 
Put os Professor Wilson, observes, the stanza may he “ inteuded to 
ox Dross the usual theory of rain; the moisture of the earth being 
j r ,' un into the solar region as vapour, and thence descending as 

the action of the thunderbolt and the wind.” 



MINlSr/?^ 


THE RIG VEDA. 



’MN 27.] 



22 Bound fast to every tree the cow is lowing, and 

thence the man-consuming birds are flying, 

Then all this world, though pressing juice for Indra 
and strengthening the Rishi, is affrighted. 

23 In the gods’ mansion stood the first-created, and 

from their separation came the later. 

Three warm the Earth while holding stores of water, 
and two of these convey the murmuring moisture. 

24 This is thy life : and do thou mark and know it. As 

such, hide not thyself in time of battle. 

He manifests the light and hides the vapour : his 
foot is never free from robes that veil it. 


22 According to S&yana, tree hero means ‘ bow/ cow means ‘ bow¬ 
string 1 and man-consuming birds ‘deadly arrows/ The general mean¬ 
ing is that sacrifices to Indra and liberal gifts to priests will not free 
men from the fear of death. 

23 The first-wealed; the clouds. The later: the waters of the 
rain. Three: Parjanya, Vayu, and Aditya or the Sun. Holding 
stores of water: anttpdh: ‘ Sowing in succession/—Wilson. ‘Follow¬ 
ing the water/—Ludwig. ‘Rich in water/—Grassmann. Two; 
Vayu and Aditya. 

24 According to Sayana, Indra is addressed. The following is 
Prof. Wilson’s translation of Sayana’s paraphrase of the stanza :— 
“That thy (divine nature identified with the sun) is the cause of 
life * and kuow such (solar form) of his (to be worthy of adoration) 
at the sacrifice; conceal nothing: that motion of him the all-clean¬ 
sing (sun) makes manifest the universe; it absorbs the moisture; it 
is never discontinued/’ The robes that veil the foot, or ravs, of the 
Sun are the waters into which they are supposed to vanish. 

The hymn is enigmatical and difficult in the highest degree, and 
neither Sayana nor later scholars have succeeded in making it 
intelligible throughout, 



MINIS Tfty 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK X. 



HYMN XXVIII. Indra. Vasukra. 
Now all my other friends are here assembled; my 
sire-in-law alone hath not come hither. 

So might he eat the grain and drink the Soma, and, 
satisfied, return unto his dwelling. 

2 Loud belloweth the Bull whose horns are sharpened: 

upon the height above earth’s breadth he standeth. 
That man I guard and save in all his troubles who 
fills my flanks when he hath shed the Soma. 

3 Men with the stone press out for thee, 0 Indra, strong, 

gladdening Soma, and thereof thou drinkest. 

Bulls they dress for thee, and of these thou eatest 
when, Maghavan, with food thou art invited. 

4 Resolve for me, O singer, this my riddle: The 

rivers send their swelling water backward : 

The fox steals up to the approaching lion : the jackal 
drives the wild-boar from the brushwood. 

5 How shall I solve this riddle, I, the simple, declare 

the thought of thee the wise and mighty ? 

Tell us, well knowing, as befits the season : Whither¬ 
ward is thy prosperous car advancing? 

6 Thus do they magnify me, me the mighty: higher 

than even high heaven is my car-pole. 

I all at once demolish many thousands: my sire 
begot me with no foe to match me. 


The Rishi is Vnsukra son of Indra, and the hymn is mainly a 
clinic ; ne between the father and the sod. Vasukra’s wife is the seer 
ais well as the speaker of stanza h The metre is Trishtup. 

1 This st:inzft is spoken by Vasukra's wife in ignorance, says the 
legend, that her father in-law India is present in disguise. 

2 Indra speaks. The Bull: the mighty Indra. 

3 Vasukra speaks. 

4 India must he the speaker, although Say ana gives the stanza to 
Vnsukra. India declares his power to alter the course of nature. 
See Wilson's Translation, Note by the Editor. 

fl Vasukra speaks. 

6 I n d ra speaks. My or, the general father Prajapati.—S. 






misr/fy. 


THE RIG VEDA. 



YMN 28.] 


<SL 


7 Yea, and the gods have known me also, India, as 

mighty, fierce and strong in every exploit. 

Exulting with the bolt I slaughtered Vritra, and for 
the offerer oped with might the cow-stall. 

8 .The deities approached, they carried axes; splitting 

the wood they came with their attendants. 

They laid good timber in the fire-receivers, and 
burnt the grass up where they found it growing. 

9 The hare hath swallowed up the opposing razor: I 

sundered with a clod the distant mountain. 

The great will I make subject to the little : the calf 
shall wax in strength and eat the bullock. 

10 There hath the strong-winged eagle left his talon, as 

a snared lion leaves the trap that caught him. 
Even the wild steer in his thirst is captured . the 
leather strap still holds his foot entangled. 

11 So may the leather strap their foot entangle who 

fatten on the viands of the Brahman. 

They all devour the bulls set free to wander, while 
they themselves destroy their bodies’ vigour. 

12 They were, well occupied with holy duties who sped 

in person with their lauds to Soma. . 

Speaking like man, mete to us food that strengthens: 
in heaven thou hast a name and fame as hero. 


7 \ asukra speaks, and tells what he has done with Iudra’s help, 

8 1 his ©hs'jure stanza is probably an account of the gods’ first 
sattiliee. See 1‘ischel, Vedische Studicn, pp. 178—180. According 
to Saynna, it refers to the cleaving of the clouds, and the filling of 
■ he rivers. Professor Ludwig sees in it a reference to the beginning 
of agriculture. Their attendants: the M aruts. 

9 Cf. with stanza 4. 

10 I ho application of this stanza is not apparent. Sayana’s evpla 
nation of this and the following verse is entirely different from that 
of most recent scholars. 





ISO * TllE HYMNS OF [BOOK X. 

HYMN XXIX. IndriL 

As sits the young bird on the tree rejoicing, ye, 
swift pair, have been roused by clear laudation 
Whose herald-priest through many days is Indra, 
earth’s guardian, friend of men, the best of heroes. 

2 May we, when this Hawn and the next dance hither, 

be thy best servants, most heroic hero! 

Let the victorious car with triple splendour bring 
hitherward the hundred chiefs with Kutsa. 

3 What was the gladdening draught that pleased thee, 

Indra? Speed to our doors, our songs, for thou 
art mighty. 

Why comest thou to me, what gift attracts thee ? 
Fain would I bring thee food most meet to offer. 

4 Indra, what fame hath one like thee ’mid heroes ? 

With what plan wilt thou act? Why hast thou 
sought us ? 

As a true friend, wide-strider! to sustain us, since 
food absorbs the thought of each among us. 


The llishi is Vaaukra. The metre is Triehtup. 

1 The meaning of the stanza is obscure, and the text of the first 
half-line is unintelligible. I follow the reading which Sayana gives 
in his Commentary, vAyo instead of vd yo. ‘As (the bird) who depo¬ 
sits its young (in its nest) in the tree (is) eagerly looking around.’—• 
Wilson. Swift pair: Asvins, 

2 Dance hither: or, come dancing. Cp. Milton’s “Now the bright 
morning star, day’s harbinger, Comes dancing from the east.” Triple 
splendour: perhaps with reference to Agni, Vayu, and Surya.—L. 
Hundred, chiefs : as Professor Grassmann suggests, the Maruts may be 
intended, ‘hundred’ being used indefinitely." Kutsa: India’s favourite 
companion. 

4 India is reminded that tlio protection of his worshippers is his 
special glory. 

Wide strider /; ‘ widely renowned,’ according to Sayana. Food : 
the hymn appears to have been ‘soon’ or revealed in a time of dearth 

or famine.'—Ludwig. 




Ml NtST/fy. 





5 Speed happily those, as SGrya ends liis journey, %vho 
meet his wish as bridegrooms meet their spouses ; 
Men who support, 0 Indra strong by nature, with 
food the many songs that tell thy praises. 

G Thine are two measures, Indra, wide, well-meted, 
heaven for thy majesty, earth for thy wisdom. 
Here for thy choice are Somas mixed with butter: 
may the sweet meath be pleasant for thy drinking. 

7 They have poured out a bowl to him, tp Indra, full 

of sweet juice, for faithful is his bounty. 

O’er earth’s expanse hath he grown great by wisdom, 
the friend of man, and by heroic exploits. 

8 Indra hath conquered in his wars, the mighty : men 

strive in multitudes to win his friendship. 

Ascend thy chariot as it were in battle, which thou 
shalt drive to us with gracious favour. 

HYMN XXX. Waters. 

As ’tw^ere with swift exertion of the spirit, let the 
priest speed to the celestial Waters, 

The glorious food of Varuna and Mitra. To him 
who spreadeth far, this laud I offer. 

2 Adhvaryus, be ye ready with oblations, and come 
with longing to the longing Waters, 


5 Meet his wish, satisfy his, Indra’s, longing for Somali hat ions. 

6 Thine are two Measures: thy majesty or greatness is vast ami 
lofty as heaven, and thy wisdom is wide as earth; or, ‘with confusion 
of the measure and the thing measured,’ thou hast measured out the 
heaven by thy greatness and the earth by thy wisdom. See Wallis, 
Co&mokigy of the Rigveda, p. 18. 


The deity is, alternatively, Apamnap&t, the Child of the Waters. 
J he Ridii is Kavasha son of Ilusha. The metre is Trishtiip. The 
subject is the ceremony of fetching the sacred waters required for the 
preparation of the Soma juice. 

1 To hm who spreadeth far: Indra, according to Sitytuta. 

11 






THE HYMNS OF 



[BOON 



Down on which looks the purple-tinted eagle. Pour 
ye the wave on him this day, deft-handed. 

3 Go to'the reservoir, 0 ye Adhvaryus: worship the 

Waters’ Child with your oblations. 

A consecrated wave he now will give you, so press 
for him the Soma rich in sweetness. 

4 He who hath shone in floods, unfed with fuel, whom 

sages worship at their sacrifices : 

Give waters rich in sweets, Child of the Waters, even 
those which gave heroic might to Indra : 

5 Those in which Soma joys and is delighted, as a 

young man with fair and pleasant damsels. 

Go thou unto those Waters, 0 Adhvaryu, and purify 
with herbs what thou infusest. 

6 So maidens bow before the youthful gallant who 

comes with love to them who yearn to meet him. 
In heart accordant and in wish one-minded are the 
Adhvaryus and the heavenly Waters. 

7 He who made room for you when fast imprisoned, 

who freed you from the mighty imprecation,— 
Even to that Indra send the meath-rich current, 
the wave that gratifies the gods, 0 Waters. 

8 Send forth to him the meath-rich wave, 0 Rivers, 

which is your offspring and a well of sweetness, 
Oil-balmed, to be implored at sacrifices. Ye wealthy 
Waters, hear mine invocation. 


2 The purple-tinted eagle: probably the setting sun. According 
to Sayaria, ‘ the Sonia descending gracefully from the firmament.’ 

3 To the reservoir : to fetch the holy Waters. The Waters Child: 
usuallv Agni, as the lightning that springs from the clouds or waters 
of the" firmament, but here ,said[ to mean the deity appointed to 
produce the rain. 

4 In foods: of the aerial ocean. Op. II. 35". 4, 

5 With herbs: probably Darbha or Kusa grass. 

6 The Waters bow to Soma aa maidens to their lovers 



W 30.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


163 



9 Send forth the rapture-giving wave, O Rivers, which 
Indra drinks, which sets the twain in motion; 

The well that springeth from the clouds, desirous, 
that wandereth triple-formed, distilling transport. 

10 These winding streams which with their double cur¬ 

rent, like cattle-raiders, seek the lower pastures,— 
Waters which dwell together, thrive together, queens, 
mothers of the world, these, Rishi, honour. 

11 Send forth our sacrifice with holy worship, send 

forth the hymn and prayer for gain of riches. 

For need of sacrifice disclose the udder. Give gra¬ 
cious hearing to our call, O Waters. 

12 For, wealthy Waters, ye control all treasures: ye 

bring auspicious intellect and Amrit. 

Ye are the queens of independent riches. Sarasvat! 
give full life to the singer ! 

13 When I behold the Waters coming hither, carrying 

with them milk and meath and butter, 

Bearing the well-pressed Soma-juice to Indra, they 
harmonize in spirit with the Adhvaryus. 

14 Rich, they are come with wealth for living beings. 

0 friends, Adhvaryus, setft them in their places. 
Seat them on holy grass, ye Soma-britigers, in har¬ 
mony with the offspring of the Waters. 


9 The twain: ubhe: probably, Heaven and Earth. S&yana explains 
differently :—‘ which sends us both (kinds of fruit)that is, the 
fruit, whether reward, or puuishment, of the present life, and of a 
former life.”—Wilson, and Editor’s Note. Desirous: eager to mix 
with the Soma according to Sayana; but the moauing of auadnam is 
uncertain. Prof. Ludwig translates it by ‘des Usauas,’ belonging 
to Usanas or Usana. Triple-formal: Soma with two admixtures.—G. 

10 Double cm-rent: meaning, probably, the two kinds of waters 
called respectively Ekadhana and Yasatlvari. 

11 Disclose the -udder : let your streams flow. 

12 Sarasvatt: as chief and wisest of the Water-goddesses. 





THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK X. 



15 Now to this grass are come the longing Waters: the 
pious ones are seated at our worship. 

Adhvaryus, press the Soma-juice for Indra : so will 
the service of the gods be easy. 


HYMN XXXI, 


Yisvedevas. 


Mat benediction of the gods approach us, holy, to 
aid us with all rapid succours. 

Therewith may we be happily befriended, and pass 
triumphant over all our troubles. 

2 A man should think on wealth and strive to win it 

by adoration on the path of Order, 

Counsel himself with his own mental insight, and 
grasp still nobler vigour with his spirit. 

3 The hymn is formed, poured are the allotted portions: 

as to a ford friends come unto the wondrous. 

We have obtained the power of ease and comfort, 
we have become acquainted with the immortals. 

4 Pleased be the eternal lord who loves the household 

with this man whom god Savitar created. 

May Bhaga Ary am an grace him with cattle; may 
he appear to him, t and be, delightful. 

5 Like the Dawns’ dwelling-place be this assembly, 

where in their might men rich in food have gathered, 
Striving to share the praises of this singer. To us 
come strengthening and effectual viands ! 


The Rishi is Kavasha. The metre is Trisbtup. 

1 Benediction : or, the laudation; that is, Prof. Ludwig suggests, 
May tho power of praising the gods, and at the same time the gods 
UiomselvoB, come to us.’ 

3 The wondrous: meaning, perhaps, Soma. 

4 The eternal lord: Agni. According to Sayana, Prajapati. This 
man the institutor of the sacrifice. Savitar has given him life, and 
now let Agui bjess bun. Bha<ja Aryaman: Aryaman as Bhaga who 

distributes wealth. 






misTfy 



6 This Bull’s most gracious far-extended favour existed 

first of all in full abundance. 

By his support they are maintained in common who 
in the Asura’s mansion dwell together. 

7 What was the tree, what wood, in sooth, produced it, 

from which they fashioned forth the earth ancl 
heaven ? 

These twain stand fast and wax not old for ever : 
these have sung praise to many a day and morning. 

8 Not only here is this: more is beyond us. He is 

the Bull, the heaven’s and earth’s supporter. 

W ith power divine he makes his skin a filter, when 
the bay coursers bear him on as Sftrya. 

9 He passes o’er the broad earth like a Stega: he 

penetrates the world as Wind the mist-cloud. 

He, balmed with oil, near Varuna and Mitra, like 
Agni in the wood, hath shot forth splendour. 

10 When suddenly calved the cow that erst was barren, 
she, self-protected, ended all her troubles. 

Earth, when the first son sprang from sire and mother, 
cast up the Sami, that which men were seeking. 


6 This Bull: is Agni as the Sun. The Arnra is Dyaus. 

8 Aot only here: tho first half-line is obscure. ‘ Not such, (is their 
power); there is another greater than they.’—Wilson. ‘There is no 
other tiling besides like unto him.’—Wallis. A Alter: pavitrani: 
which purifies the rays of light which stream through it. 

9 A Stega: said to be a certain biting or stinging insect. According 
to Sayana, ‘ the aggregation of rays, the Sun.’ Prof. Ludwig con¬ 
jectures that ‘plough-share’ may be the meaning. 

10 This stanza is very obscure. “The cow which was barren is 
the Sami tree, which briugs forth the Asvrattha, and from the wood 
of these two trees are made the arant, the two pieces of wood which 
are rubbed together to produce the sacred fire—the upper and harder 
piece is the Sami (the Acacia Suma), and the lower and soft is the 
Amatlha (the Ficus religiosa).”—Wilson. 

‘ .1 ho verses [7—10] deal with the formation of the three mohi 
components of the uni/erse, heaven, earth, and the sun. Of the first 
two the poet has little to tell us, aud passes on at onoe to the third. 



miST/fy 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK X. 



11 To Nrishad’s son they gave the name of Kanva, 
and he the brown-hued courser won the treasure. 
For him dark-coloured streamed the shining udder : 
none made it swell for him. Thus Order willed it. 

HYMN XXXII, Indra. 

Forth speed the pair to bring the meditating god, 
benevolent with boons sent in return for boons. 
May Indra graciously accept both gifts from us, 
when he hath knowledge of the flowing Soma- 
juice. 

2 Thou wanderest far, 0 India, through the spheres 

of light and realms of earth, the region, thou whom 
many praise! 

Let those who often bring thee to their solemn rites 
conquer the noisy babblers who present no gifts. 

3 More beautiful than beauty must this seem to me, 

when the son duly careth for hife parents’ line. 

The wife attracts the husband : with a shout of joy 
the man’s auspicious marriage is performed aright. 


The sun is identified with the bull, Agni of the sacrifice, and the earth 
with the lower rubbing-stick anointed with ghee, which is licked up 
[‘devoureth’ instead of ‘cast up’] as soon as fire is struck.”—Wallis, 
Cosmology of the [ligveda, pp. 47, 48. 

11 This stanza appears to have no connexion with the bymu, and 
in inexplicable as it stands here. See I. 117. 8, where the son of 
Nriahad is mentioned as a favourite of the Alvins. 

The Rishi is Kavasha- The metre is Jagat! iu stanzas 1—5, and 
Trishtnp in the rest of the hymn. 

1 The meditating god: Indra. My version of the first line follows 
the explanation given by Prof. Ludwig in his Commentary. S&yana’s 
interpretation is different‘ Indra sends his quick-going horses to 
the service of the (worshipper) expectant (of his arrival).’—Wilson, 
Both gifts: oblation and praise. 

3 Coreth for hie parents’ line; by marrying and becoming a father; 
or as Sapiia explains, by having his birth proclaimed according to 
custom in sacrifices instituted by him. 






misT/tf 



4 This beauteous place of meeting have I looked upon, 

where, like milch-cows, the kine order the mar¬ 
riage train; 

Where the herd’s mother counts as first and best of 
all, and round her are the seven-toned people of 
the choir. 

5 The pious one hath reached your place before the rest : 

one only moves victorious with the Rudras’ band. 
To these your helpers pour out meath, immortal 
gods with whom your song of praisfe hath power 
to win their gifts. 

6 He who maintains the laws of gods informed me 

that thou wast lying hidden in the waters. 

Indra, who knoweth well, beheld and showed thee. 
By him instructed am I come, 0 Agni. 

7 The stranger asks the way of him who knows it 

taught by the skilful guide he travels onward. 

This is, in trhth, the blessing of instruction : he 
finds the path that leads directly forward. 

8 Even now he breathed: these days hath he remembered. 

Concealed, he sucked the bosom of his mother. 

Yet in his youth old age hath come upon him : he 
hath grown gracious, good, and free from anger. 

4 Order the marriage train: tlie meaning of this half-line is uncer¬ 
tain. According to Sayana, the herd is the company of sacrificers 
and priests, its mother is Stuti or Praise, the seven-toned , or sevenfold, 
;;re the metres, or the seasons, or the Hotar priests. The herd's 
mother is more probably Prisni, the mother of the Maruts. Tho 
whole stanza is translated by Prof. Wilson:—“Shine, Indra, upon 
this elogant chamber- of sacrifice, when our praises desire (thy 
approach) as milch kine (desire) their stalls; since the praise of me the 
worshipper precedes (the adoration) of the company, and this person 
accompanied by the seven officiating priests is the offerer of praise." 

5 The pious one: Agni, the special worshipperof gods. One only: Indra. 

6 He: perhaps Soma. Thau: Agni. Cp. I. 23. 20. 

8 Even now he breathed: began to show signs of life. The con¬ 
nexion between stanzas 1—4 and 5—-8 is not apparent. Suckthe bosom 
°.f hin mother: enjoyed oblations, in the Bhape of S^ma-juice, etc , 
produced by the earth. 




WNtST/fy. 


THE HYMNS OF 



<SL 

[BOOK X 


9 0 Kalasa, all these blessings will we bring them, 
O Kurusravana, who give rich presents. 

May he, 0 wealthy princes, and this Soma which I 
am bearing in my heart, reward you. 

HYMN XXXIII. Various Deities. 

The urgings of the people have impelled me, and by 
the nearest way I bring you Pushan. 

The universal gods have brought me safely. The 
cry was heard, Behold, Duhslsu cometh ! 

2 The ribs that compass me give pain and trouble me 

like rival wives. 

Indigence, nakedness, exhaustion press me sore : my 
mind is fluttering like a bird’s. 

3 As rats eat weavers’ threads, cares are consuming 

me, thy singer, Satakratu, me. 

Have mercy on us once, O Indra, bounteous lord: 
be thou a father unto us. 

4 I the priests’ Eishi choose as prince most liberal 

Kurusravana, 

The son of Trasadasyu’s son, 

9 The meaning of Kalasa , literally ‘ pitcher ’ or * beaker,’ here is 
uncertain. ‘(Indra), the possessor of the pitchers.’—Wilson, Prof. 
Ludwig suggests kaldsah as the right reading‘ We will perform 
these holy ceremonies in their minutest details.’ Kurusravana : ac¬ 
cording to iSuyana, ‘hearer of the praise of priests;’ but probably the 
name of a prince, as in the following hymn. 

The deities are, stanza 1 the Visvcdevas or All-gods; 2, 3 Indra; 
4, 5 Prince KuruBravana; aud G—9 Uparnanravas. 

The Risbi is Kavasha. The metre is, stanza 1 Trishtup, 2 Brihati, 

3 Satobrihatl, 4—9 GAyatrL 

1 Duhs&su: literally, ‘ the malevolent.’ Perhaps, as Prof, Ludwig 
suggests, a hostile prince whose victory over Kurusravana has caused 
the distress mentioned in the following stanza. 

2 The first line is taken from I. 105. 8 . 

3 -phis fj r8 fc line is taken from 1.105.5. Weavers’ threads : threads 
steeped in water, according to SAyana, Once: ‘ after having so often 
given us up to misery.’—Ludwig. 

4 The priests' Bishi: higher iu rank than the other priests. Choose: 
solicit (wealth) of.’—Wilsou. 





THE RIGVEDA. 



YMN 34.] 



5 Whose three bays harnessed to the car bear me 

straight onward : I will laud 

The giver of a thousand meeds. 

© 

6 The sire of Upamasravas, to whom the songs were 

passing sweet, 

As a fair field is to its lord. 

7 Mark, Upamasravas, his son, mark, grandson of 

Mitratithi: 

I am thy father’s eulogist. 

8 If I controlled immortal gods, yea, even were I lord 

of men, 

My liberal prince were living still. 

9 None lives, even had he hundred lives, beyond the 

statute of the gods : 

So is he parted from his friend. 

HYMN XXXIV. Dice, Etc. 

Sprung from tall trees on windy heights, these rollers 
transport me as they turn upon the table. 

Dearer to me the die that never slumbers than the 
deep draught of Mftjav&n’s own Soma. 


6 This and the three following stanzas are said to be consolatory 
verses addressed by the RiBhi Kavasha to UpamaBravas on the death of 
his father Mitr&tithi. ' \ 

8 Wot I lord of men: as one of the gods. My liberal jmnee: 
Mitratithi. 

0 Beyond the statute of the gods : beyond tho time fixed foi tho 
duration of his life. 

This hymn has been .placed by Prof. Grassmann in his Appendix 
as a composite production consisting of incoherent fragments. 

The deities of stanzas 1, 7, 9, 12 are the Dice; of 13 Agriculture; 
and of the rest the Gambler and the Dice. The Rishi is lvavasba, or 
Aksha son of Mujavau. The metre is Jagati in stanza 7, and Trisli- 
tup in the rest of the hymn. 

1 Sprung from tall trees: tho nuts of the Vibhidaka, or, later, 
v ibhitaka, tree (Terminalia Belleriea) were used as dice in early times. 
llo/Ui's : swiftly rolling dice. Miljavdn; a mountain on which tho 
finest Sonia plants grew. 





WHlSTffy 


THE HYMN'S OF 



<SL 

[BOOK X. 


2 She never vexed me nor was angry with me, but to 

my friends and me was ever gracious. 

For the die’s sake whose single point is final mine 
own devoted wife I alienated. 

3 My wife holds me aloof, her mother hates me: the 

wretched man finds none to give him comfort. 

As of a costly horse grown old and feeble, T find not 
any profit of the gamester. 

4 Others caress the wife of him whose riches the die 

hath coveted, that rapid oourser : 

Of him speak father, mother, brothers saying, We 
know him not: bind him and take him with you. 

5 When I resolve to play with these no longer, my 

friends depart from me and leave me lonely. 

When the brown dice, thrown on the board, have 
rattled, like a fond girl I seek the place of meeting. 

6 The gamester seeks the gambling-house, and wonders, 

his body all afire, Shall I be lucky ? 

Still do the dice extend his eager longing, staking his 
gains against his ad versary. 

7 Dice, verily, are armed with goads and driving-hooks, 

deceiving and tormenting, causing grievous woe. 
They give frail gifts and then destroy the man who 
wins, thickly anointed with the player’s fairest good. 

8 Merrily sports their troop, the three-and-fifty, like 

Savitar the god whose ways are faithful. 

They bend not even to the mighty’s anger : the king 
nimself pays homage and reveres them. 

2 Whose single point is final: the speaker has apparently lost all 
by throwing aces. 

4 Bind him. he has staked his personal freedom, and lost; and 
Ins people renounce him. 

7 Dri vinq-hooks: u- ad by mahouts or elephant-drivers. The last 
half-line of the stanza is difficult:—* they appear to the gambler 
cove red with honey.’—Muir. 

8 Three and-fifty •' it would appear from Sryana’s Commentary that- 
••i 'j '.v.t-j the usual number of dice employed; and yet this sterns 
hardly probable. Prof. Ludwig suggests * three times five ’ as the 




WHlSTffy. 


TtlE RIG VEDA. 



:MN 34.] 



0 Downward they roll, and then spring quickly upward, 
and, handless, force the man with hands to ser ve them. 
Cast on the board, like lumps of magic charcoal, 
though cold themselves they burn the heart to ashes. 

10 The gambler’s wife is left forlorn and wretched : the 

mother mourns the son who wanders homeless. 

In constant fear, in debt, and seeking riches, he goes 
by night unto the home of others. 

11 Sad is the gambler when he sees ai. matron, 

another’s wife, and his well-ordered dwelling. 

He yokes the brown steeds in the early morning, and 
when the fire is cold sinks down an outcast. 

12 To the great captain of your mighty army, who hath 

become the host’s imperial leader, 

To him I show my ten extended fingers: I speak 
the truth. No wealth am I withholding, 
ltf Play not with dice : no, cultivate thy corn-land. En¬ 
joy the gain, and deem that wealth sufficient. 

There are thy cattle, there thy wife, 0 gambler. So 
this good Savitar himself hath told me. 

14 Make me your friend : show us some little mercy. 
Assail us not with your terrific fierceness. 
Appeased be your malignity and anger, and let the 
brown dice snare some other captive. 

cleaning here of tripanchdsah, and other explanations have beovT 
offered. The poiuts or marks on the dice may, perhaps, be intended. 
Like, Savitar: ‘[disposing men’s destinies] like the god S.’_Muir. 

10 Riches: wealth gained by robbery, according to Sayana. 

11 Yokes the brown, steeds: begins throwing the uut-dice. When 
the jive is cold: ‘ by the time when the fire goes out he has sunk into 
a degraded wretch.’—Muir. 

1 3 The great captain; the highest-numbered of all the dice. Ten 
Lingers: to show that I have nothing left. 

14 This stanza is a farewell address to the Dice. Some other : our 

enemy.—Sayapa, 

^ hymn or lay has been transliterated, translated in prose, and 
ree y reproduced in rhymed octosyllabic verse, by Dr. J. Muir. 

i V- —429. It has also been translated by the authors 

ot the b’.cbentig Liedev. 





MiNisr^ 


THE HYMNS OF 



[BOOK X . 


<SL 


HYMN XXXV. Visvedevas. 

These fires associate with Indra are awake, bringing 
their light when first the dawn begins to shine. 
May Heaven and Earth, great pair, observe our holy 
work. We claimfor us this day the favour of the gods. 

2 Yea, for ourselves we claim the grace of Heaven and 

Earth, of Saryanav&n, of the Hills and mother 
Streams. 

For innocence we pray to Surya and to Dawn. So 
may the flowing Soma bring us bliss to-day. 

3 May the great twain, the mothers, Heaven and Earth, 

this* day preserve us free from sin for peace and 
happiness. 

May Morning sending forth her light drive sin afar. 
We pray to kindled Agni for felicity. 

4 This, the first dawning, is a happy time for gods : rich, 

may it richly shine for us who strive for wealth. 
The wrath of the malignant may we keep afar. 
We pray to kindled Agni for felicity. 

5 Dawns, who come forward with the bright beams 

of the Sun, and at your earliest flushing bring to 
us the light, 

Shine ye on us to-day auspicious, for renown. We 
pray to kindled Agni for felicity. 

C Free from all sickness may the Mornings come to us, 
and let our fires mount upward with a lofty blaze. 
The Asvin pair have harnessed their swift-moving car. 
We pray to kindled Agni for felicity. 

7 Send us to-day a portion choice and excellent, O 
Savitar, for thou art he who dealeth wealth. 

jrjje JJiahi is Lusa son of Dhun&ka. The metre iB Trishtup in 
stanzas 13, 14, and jagati in the rest of the hymn. 

1 With Indra i as a god of the morning light. 

2 Of Saryandvdn, of the Hills; according to Sayana, ‘of the rooun- 
taina of Saryanav&n,’ a lake in the district of KunLsbetra. I follow 
Prof. Ludwig in tailing both parvatdn and mnjandvatah as genitives. 

5 Your: according to the text ‘their,’ the verb in the first line 
bciDg iu the third person. 





MIN/Sr^ 



N 35.] 


TIIE RIG VEDA. 



I cry to Dhishana, mother of opulence. We pray 
to kindled Agni for felicity. 

8 Further me this declaring of the eternal law, the law 

of gods, as we mortals acknowledge it. 

The Sun goes up beholding all the rays of morn. 
We pray to kindled Agni for felicity. 

9 This day we pray with innocence in strewing grass, 

adjusting pressing-stones, and perfecting the hymn. 
Thou in the Adityas’ keeping movest restlessly. 
We pray to kindled Agni for felicity. 

10 To our great holy grass I bid the gods at morn to 

banquet, and will seat them as the seven priests,— 
Varuna, Indra, Mitra, Bhaga for our gain. We pray 
to kindled Agni for felicity. 

11 Come hither, 0 Adityas, for our perfect weal: accord¬ 

ant help our sacrifice that we may thrive. 

Pilshan, Brihaspati, Bhaga, both Asvins, and en¬ 
kindled Agni we implore for happiness. 

12 Adityas, gods, vouchsafe that this our home may be 

praiseworthy, prosperous, our heroes’ sure defence, 
For cattle, for our sons, for progeny, for life. We 
pray to kindled Agni for felicity. 

13 This day may all the Maruts, all be near us with 

aid : may all our fires be well enkindled. 

May all gods come to us with gracious favour. All 
strengthening food be ours, and all possessions. 

14 He whom ye aid, 0 deities, in battle, whom ye pro¬ 

tect and rescue from affliction, 

Who fears no danger at your milk-libation,—such 
may we be to feast the gods, ye mighty. 


7 DhishanA: a goddess who presides over prosperity. 

8 Further me: 'May that glorification of the gods which men 
repeat in connexion with the rite preserve me.’—Wilson. 

- Movest restlessly: performest thy duties, according to Sayana. 
Agm rapidly burning the fuel appears to be intended. 

11 Who fears no dmger ; who feels assured that his worship of 
the gods will protect him. 


* 





THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 


<fy 

HYMN XXXYI. Visvedevas. 

There are the Dawn and Night, the grand and 
beauteous pair, Earth, Heaven, and Varuna, Mitra, 
and Aryaman. 

Indra I call, the Maruts, Mountains, and the Floods, 
Adityas, Heaven and Earth, the Waters, and tbe 
Sky. 

2 May Dyaus and Prithivl, wise, true to holy law, 

keep us in safety from distress and injury. 

Let not malignant Nirriti rule over us. We crave 
to-day this gracious favour of the gods. 

3 Mother of Mitra and of opulent Varuna, may Aditi 

preserve us safe from all distress. 

May we obtain the light of heaven without a foe. 
We crave this gracious favour of the gods to-day. 

4 May ringing press-stones keep the R&kshasas afar, 

ill dream, and Nirriti, and each voracious fiend. 
May the Adityas and the Maruts shelter us. We 
crave this gracious favour of the gods to-day. 

5 Full flow libations ; on our grass let Indra sit; 

Biihaspati the singer laud with Silma hymns. 
Wise be our hearts’ imaginings that we may live. 
We crave this gracious favour of the gods to-day. 
G Ye Asvins, make our sacrifice ascend to heaven, 
and animate the rite that it may send us bliss, 
Offered with holy oil, with forward-speeding rein. 
We crave the gracious favour of the gods to-day. 

7 Hither I call the band of Maruts, swift to hear, 
great, purifying, bringing bliss, to be our friends. 
May we increase our wealth to glorify our name. 
We crave this gracious favour of the gods to-day. 


The Ttishi is Lusa son of Dhanaka. Tbe metre is Trishtup in stanzas 
ID, 14, and Jagfttt in the rest of the hymn. 

1 The Waters ; of the firmnmont. 

2 Dyaus and Fnthivi: Heaven and Earth. Nirriti .* Death or 
Destruction. 





MiNisr^ 


• e Okc> 



8 We bring the stay of life, who makes the waters 

swell, swift-hearing, friend of gods, who waits on 
sacrifice. 

May we control that power, Soma whose rays are 
bright. We crave this gracious favour of the 
gods to-day. 

9 Alive ourselves, with living sons, devoid of guilt, 

may we win this with winners by fair means to 
win. 

Let the prayer-haters bear our sin to every side. 
We crave this gracious favour of the gods to-day. 

10 Hear us, O ye who claim the worship of mankind, 

and give us, 0 ye gods, the gift for which we pray, 
Victorious wisdom, fame with heroes and with 
wealth. We crave to-day this gracious favour 
of the gods. 

11 We crave the gracious favour of the gods to-day, 

great favour of great gods, sublime and free from 
foes, 

That wc may gain rich treasure sprung from hero 
.^ons. We crave this gracious favour of the gods 
to-day. 

12 In great enkindled Agni’s keeping, and, for bliss, 

free from all sin before Mitra aud Vanina. 

May we share Savitar’s best animating help. We 
crave this gracious favour of the gods to-day. 

13 O all ye gods whom Savitar the father of truth, and 

Varuna and Mitra govern, 

Give us prosperity with hero children, and opulence 
in kine and various treasure. 

14 Savitar, Savitar from east and westward, Savitar, 

Savitar from north and southward, 

Savitar send us perfect health and comfort, Savitar 
let our days of life be lengthened. 

8 )l h.o makes the waters swell: apdm perum.: ' protector of tho 
vvoiers •—Sayana, ‘ Drinker of the waters.’—Ludwig. Soma is meant. 
See IX. 76. 4. ’ 






THE HYMNS OF 



<SL 

[BOOK X. 


HYMN XXXVII. Surya. 

Do homage unto Varuna’s and Mitra’s eye : offer this 
solemn worship to the mighty god, 

Who seeth far away, the ensign, born of gods. Sing' 
praises unto Sflrya, to the son of Dyaus. 

2 May this my truthful speech guard me on every side, 
wherever heaven and earth and days are spread 
abroad. 

All else that is in motion finds a place of rest: the 
waters ever flow and ever mounts the Sun. 

u No godless man from time remotest draws thee down 
when thou art driving forth with winged dappled 

steeds. 

He turns him to an alien region of the east, and, 
Sflrya, thou arisest with a different light. 

4 0 Sflrya, with the light whereby thou scatterest gloom, 

and with thy ray impellest every moving thing, 
Keep for from us all feeble, worthless sacrifice, and 
drive away disease and every evil dream. 

5 Sent forth thou guardest well the path of every man, 

and in thy wonted way arisest free from wrath. 


The Pislii is Abhitapas son of Surya. The metre is Trishtup in 
stanza 10, and Jagatt in the rest of the hymn. 

1 Virun'/’s and Mitra's eye: Surya or the Sun. “The eye of 

Mitra, Varuna and Agni.”—I. 11$. 1. 

3 Dappled steeds: c with Etasasd—Ludwig. 

The second line of the stanza is difficult. Sayaua takes rajah 
(region) as the subject and explains it by jt/otis (light). ‘One ancient 
radiance follows (thee) whilst thou risest with another. * 1 * 3 * 5 —Wilson. See 
Wallis, Cosmology of the Rigv'da , p. 117. Professor Ludwig suggests 
that the moaning maybe:—He, that is the wicked man, does not 
turn to the right east, i. e. hie mere turning to the east in his prayer 
will not, avail him, and the light with which Surya rises i ; not the 
light which he, the wicked, desires, for, instead of blessing him, Surya 
will accuse him before Mitra and Vanina. This interpretation is 
somewhat farfetched, but it is more intelligible than Sayaiw’s 
paraphrase of the text which he does not attempt to explain. 

5 In thy ivonted way : svadhd com: ‘after the swadkd offerings.’— 
Wilson. 



miST/fy. 


THE IilGVEDA. 




When, Sflrya, we address our prayers to thee to¬ 
day, may the gods favour this our purpose and 
desire. 

G This invocation, these our words may Heaven and 
Earth, and Indra and the Waters and the Maruts 
hear. 

Ne’er may we suffer want in presence of the Sun, 
and, living happy lives, may we attain old age. 

7 Cheerful in spirit, evermore, and keen of sight, with 

store of children, free from sickness and from sin, 
Long-living, may we look, O SCirya, upon thee up¬ 
rising day by day, thou who art rich in friends ! 

8 Surya, may we live long and look upon thee still, 

thee, 0 lar-seeing one, bringing the glorious light, 
j.he radiant god, the spring of joy to every eye, as 
art mounting up o’er the high shining flood. 

9 Thou by whose lustre all the world of life comes forth, 

and by thy beams again returns unto its rest, 

O Surya with the golden hair, ascend for us day after 
day, still bringing purer innocence. 

10 Bless us with shine, bless us with perfect daylight, 

bless us with cold, with fervent heat and lustre! 
Bestow on us, O Sflrya, varied riches, to bless us in 
our home and when we travel. 

11 Gods, to our living creatures of both kinds vouch- 

safe protection, both to bipeds and to quadrupeds, 
lhat they may drink and eat invigorating food. So 
giant us health and wealth and perfect innocence. 

12 If by some grievous sin we have provoked the gods, 

heart* 168 ’ W1 ^ ^ on £ ue or thoughtlessness of 

That guilt, O Vasus, lay upon the evil one, on him 
who ever leads us into deep distress. 


8 Flood: or floor of heaven, 

■■ iJ - C C ^ here probabl, a kind of Diabolus or 

12 






HYMN XXXVIII. Indra. 

O Indra, in this battle great and glorious, in this 
loud din of war help us to victory, 

Where in the strife for kine among bold ring-decked 
men arrows fly all around and heroes are subdued, 

2 At home disclose to us opulence rich in food, stream¬ 

ing with milk, O Indra, meet to be renowned. 
Sakra, may we be thine, the friendly conqueror’s : 
even as we desire, O Vasu, so do thou. 

3 The godless man, much-lauded Indra, whether he be 

Dasa or bo Arya, who would war with us,— 

Easy to conquer be for thee, with us, these foes : 
with thee may we subdue theni in the clash of fight. 

4 Him who must be invoked by many and by few, who 

standeth nigh with comfort in the war of men, 
Indra, famed hero, winner in the deadly strife, let us 
bring hitherward to-day to favour us. 

5 For, Indra, I have heard thee called self-capturer, 

one, steer ! who never yields, who urges even the 
churl. 

Release thyself from Kutsa and come hither. How 
shall one like thee sit still bound that he may not 
move ? 


The Rishi is Indra Mushkavan. The metre is Jagatf. 

1 Ring-decked: adorned with armlets. 

5 Self-capturer: it is difficult to assign a reasonable and appropriate 
meaning to svavrijaw. Rayana explains it by mayam cva c/iheUdram, 
‘one who cuts himself;’—‘ self mutilator.’—Wilson. According to 
the St. Petersburg Lexicon, the meaning is ‘one who appropriates 
or takes to himself;’ according to Prof. Ludwig ‘the self rescue r,’ 
and according to Prof, tieldncr ‘one who suffers himself to bo cap¬ 
tured.’ The poet culls on fodra to tear himself away from his 
favourite Kutsa in order to aid his worshippers in the coraiug fight. 
«A legend is here somewhat obscurely related, that Kulsa and f vsa 
having summoned Indra at the same iime to their respective sacrifices, 
tm went firdt to Kutsa who then detained him, having fastened 

him.with a hundred leather thongs. This verse is acldroseed to 

Indvo by Ltm, exhorting‘him to free himself.”—Wibou. 





THE RIG VEDA. 



?I0¥MN 39. 


1 

J 



HYMN XXXIX. Asvius. 

As ’fcwere the name of father, easy to Invoke, we all 
assembled here invoke this car of yours, 

Asvins, your swiftly-rolling circumambient car which 
he who worships must invoke at eve and dawn, 

2 Awake all pleasant strains and let the hymns flow 

forth: raise up abundant fulness: this is our desire. 
Asvins, bestow on us a glorious heritage, and give 
our princes treasure fair as Soma is. 

3 Ye are the bliss of her who groweth old at home, 

and helpers of the slow although he linger last. 
Men call you too, N&satyas, healers of the blind, the 
thin and feeble, and the man with broken bones. 

4 Ye madeChyav&na, weak and worn with length of days, 

young again, like a car, that he had power to move. 
Ye lifted up the son of Tugra from the floods. At 
our libations must all these your acts be praised. 

5 We will declare among the folk your ancient deeds 

heroic ; yea, ye were physicians bringing health. 
You, you who must be lauded, will we bring for aid. 
so that this foe of ours, O Asvins, may believe. 

G Listen to me, O Asvins ; I have cried to you. Give 
me your aid as sire and mother aid their son. 

Poor, without kin or friend or ties of blood am I. 
feave me, before it be too late, from this my curse. 
7 Ye, mounted on your chariot brought to Vimada the 
comely maid of Purumitra as a bride. 

Ye came unto the calling of the weakling’s dame and 
granted noble offspring to the happy wife. 


The Ribhi is Ghoshd, daughter of Kakshivdu. The metro is Trish- 
tup in stanza 14 and Jagati in the rest of the hymn. 

t k Z W , h ° old at home: referring to Ghosh* herself. Seo 

l. 17. t. Healers of the blind: see I. 112. 8, 

See. vtf fTndeT * 116 ' l0 ’ a “ d lI7 - 13 ‘ Sm °/ T ^ m: Bbl, jyu. 


G % curse: leprosy, which prevented her marriage. 

wiada: see I. 117, 20. The zveakling’s dame: see I. 117. 24, 








Ml HlSTfty 



8 Yc gave again the vigour of his youthful life to the 

sage Kali when old age was coining nigh. 

Ye rescued Vandana and raised him from the pit, 
and in a moment gave VispalA power to move. 

9 Ye, Asvins twain, endowed with manly strength, 

brought forth Reblia when hidden in the cave and 
well-nigh dead, 

Freed Saptavadhri, and for Atri caused the pit 
heated with fire to be a pleasant resting-place. 

10 On Pedu ye bestowed, Asvins, a courser white, 

mighty with nine-and-ninety varied gifts of strength, 
A horse to be renowned, who bore his friend at speed, 
joy-giving, Bhaga-like to be invoked of men. 

11 From no side, ye two kings whom none may check 

or stay, doth grief, distress, or danger come upon 
the man 

Whom, Asvins swift to hear, borne on your glowing 
path, ye with your consort make the foremost in 
the race. 

12 Come on that chariot which the Ribhus wrought for 

you, the chariot, Asvins, that is speedier than 
thought, 

At harnessing whereof Heaven’s daughter springs 
to birth, and from Vivasv&n come auspicious 
Night and Day. 

13 Come, conquerors of the sundered mountain, to our 

home, Asvins who made the cow stream milk for 
Sayu’s sake, 


•J For Kali, Vandana, and Vispald in thia stanza, and Relha, Atri , 
And ledv, in 6 and 10, ace Vol. I., Index. For Saptavadhri (siunaa 9) 
aco V. 78. 6. 

11 Whom none may check or stay: adite - adviau. —Sayana. Your 
onsort: Surya. The foremost in the race: that is, generally preeminent. 

i 2 U‘■aval's daughter: UBhas or Dawn. Vivasvdn: the morning Sun. 

13 Conquerors of the swidered mountain : probably with reference 
to tbo deliverance of J&huaha.— Li. Sec 1.116. 20. The swallowed quail .* 
ace 1.112. 8. 



misT/fy 


TllE RJGYEDA. 




Ye who delivered even from the wolfs deep throat 
and set again at liberty the swallowed quail, 

14 We have prepared this laud for you, 0 Asvins, and, 
like the Bhrigus, as a car have framed it, 

Have decked it as a maid to meet the bridegroom, 
and brought it as a son, our stay for ever. 


HYMN XL. Asvins. 

Your radiant chariot—whither goes it on its way ?_ 

who decks it for you, heroes, for its happy course, 
Starting at day break, visiting each morning everv 
house, borne hitherward through prayer unto the 
sacrifice ? 

2 Where are ye, Asvins, in the evening, where at 

morn? Where is your halting-place, where rest 
ye for the night ? 

Who brings you homeward, as the widow bedward 
draws her husband’s brother, as the bride attracts 
the groom ? 

3 Early ye sing forth praise as with a herald’s voice, and, 

meet for worship, go each morning to the house. 
Whom do ye ever bring to ruin ? Unto whose 
libations come ye, heroes, like two sons of kind's ? 

4 Even as hunters follow two wild elephants, we with 

oblations call you down at morn and eve. 

To folk who bring you offerings at appointed times, * 
chiefs, lords of splendour, ye give food to strengthen 
them. 


performer 

The Rishi is GhosM, daughter^of Kakshivau. The metre is Jagatt. 

^ As the widow: in certain circumstances a widow was bound to , 
marry her deceased husband's brother. See Manu (Afdnavadharma- ' v 
§dstra), IX. 69. 70. The law of the Jews was the same. Seo Deu- ' 
terouomy, XXV. 5. 

3 ■&$ with a herald's voice: Mpayd i 3 thus explained by S&y&nn. 

fhe house: of the sacrificer. 






TAIMSr^ 



5 To you, O Asvins, came the daughter of a king, 

Ghoshd, and said, O heroes, this I beg of you: 

Be near me in the day, be near me in the night; 
help me to gain a car-borne chieftain rich in steeds. 

6 0 Asvins, ye are wise : as Kutsa comes to men, bring 

your car nigh the folk of him who sings your praise. 
The bee, O Asvins, bears your honey in her mouth, 
as the maid carries it purified in her hand. 

7 To Bhujyu and to Vasa ye came near with help, 

O Asvins, to SiujAra and to Usan&. 

Your worshipper secures your friendship for himself. 
"Through your protection I desire felicity. 


8 Krisa and Sayu ye protect, ye Asvins twain : ye two 
assist the widow and the worshipper; 

And ye throw open, Asvins, unto those who win the 
cattle-stall that thunders with its sevenfold mouth. 


9 The woman hath brought forth, the infant hath 
appeared, the plants of wondrous beauty straight¬ 
way have sprung up. 

To him the rivers run as down a deep descent, and 
he this day becomes their master and their lord. 


5 The second half of the second lino is difficult! ‘be able (to grant 
favour) to the son of my brother, who has horses and a chariot.’— 
Wilson. 

6 As Kutm comes to men ; horde on Indra’s chariot. Sears your 
honey: sips honey when the Asvins have ushered in the day. As the. 
Di-red: Dr. Muir and Prof. Grassmann explain this half-line differently, 
‘as a n aid, or a woman., resorts to her rendezvous (with her lover),’ 

7 Vasa: seel. 112. 10. Sinj&ra: see VIII, 5. 25. Uqand: see 
Vol. I., Index. 

8 Krisa : a Rishi favoured by Indra; or, a3 S&yapa explains tiio 
•word here, the feeble man in general. %ayu i has been mentioned 
frequently. The cattle-stall: the rain-cloud whose waters are the cows. 

9 The woman: perhaps the water of the cloud. The infant ; the 
lightning. To him: the sacrificor may perhaps be intended. 




misr/fy 


THE RIG VEDA. 


t is; 



MN 40-1 


10 They mourn the living, bring him forth at sacrifice : 

the men have set their thoughts upon a distant cast. 
They who have brought the Fathers this delightful 
gift when wives allowed their lords the joy of 
their embrace. 

11 Of this we have no knowledge. Tell it forth to us, 

how the youth rests within thechambers of the bride. 
Fain would we reach the dwelling of the vigorous 
steer who loves the kine, O Asvins: this is our desire. 

12 Your favouring grace hath come, ye lords of noble 

mares : Asvins, our longings are stored up within 
your hearts. 

Ye, lords of splendour, have become our twofold 
guard: may we as welcome friends reach Arya- 
rnan’s abode. 

13 Even so, rejoicing in the dwelling-place of man, give 

hero sons and riches to the eloquent. 

Make a ford, lords of splendour, where men well may 
drink : remove the spiteful tree-stump standing in 
the path. 

14 O Asvins, wonder-workers, lords of lustre, where and 

with what folk do ye delight yourselves to-day? 
Who hath detained them with him ? Whither are 
they gone ? Unto what sage’s or what worship¬ 
per’s abode ? 

10 They mourn the living: “ Sdyana explains this as “weep fc* 
the life (of their wives),” “ by their very weeping they desiret (to 
pray for) their wives* lives.’*”—Wilson. I' fiud the half-line abso¬ 
lutely unintelligible. Set their thoughts upon at distant cast: of the 
noose or suaving-net: apparently a periphrasis for, have taken thought 
for the distant future aud children to live after them. This delight¬ 
ful gift' the sons who will perpetuate the service of ancestral Manes. 

11 Ghosba appears to speak of herself in the plural number. 
She plainly expresses her wishes for marriage. 

12 Aryaman's abode: Aryamau is here used in the original sonso 
of the word, bosom-friend and companion, especially the friend who 
asks a woman in marriage for another; 

Prof. Grassmann places stanzas 10—14 in his Appendix as being 
obsoure and in his opinion forming no part of the original hyiuu 




ItWtSTfi^ 



TI1E HYMNS OF 


[BOOK : 



HYMN XLI. 


Asvins. 


That general car of yours, invoked by many a man, 
that comes to our libations, three-wheeled, meet 
for lauds, 

That circumambient car, worthy of sacrifice, we call 
with our pure hymns at earliest flush of dawn. 

2 Ye, O Nusatyas, mount that early-harnessed car, 

that travels early, laden with its freight of balm, 
"Wherewith ye, heroes, visit clans who sacrifice, even 
the poor man’s worship where the priest attends. 

3 If to the deft Adhvaryu with the rneath in hand, or 

to the Kindler firm in strength, the household 
friend, 

Or to the sage’s poured libations ye approach, come 
thence, O Asvins, now to drink the offered meath. 


HYMN XLII. 


India. 


Even as an archer shoots afar his arrow, offer the 
laud to him with meet adornment. 

Quell with your voice the wicked’s voice, O sages. 
Singer, make Indra rest beside the Soma. 

2 Draw thy friend to thee like a cow at milking: 

0 Singer, wake up Indra as a lover. 

Make thou the hero haste to give us riches even as 
a vessel filled brimful with treasure. 

3 Why, Maghavan, do they call thee bounteous giver? 

Quicken me: thou, I hear, art he who quickens. 
Sakra, let my intelligence be active, and bring us 
luck that finds great wealth, O Indra. 


Tho Eishi is Su hasty a son of Ghoaha. Tne metre is Jagati. 

1 Three-wheeled; see I. 34. I'. 

3 The Kindler: the Agnidh, tho priest who kindles the Baori- 


licial fire. 


Tho Eishi is Krishna of the family of Angiras. Tho metre w 









YMN 42.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 



4 Standing, in battle for their rights, together, the 

people, Indra, in the fray invoke thee. 

Him who brings gifts the hero makes his comrade : 
with him who pours no juice he seeks not friendship. 

5 Whoso with plenteous food for him expresses strong 

Somas as much quickly-coming treasure, 

For him he overthrows in early morning his swift 
well-weaponed foes, and slays the tyrant. 

6 He unto whom we offer praises, Indra, Maghavnn, 

who hath joined to ours his wishes,— 

Before him even afar the foe must tremble: low 
before him must bow all human glories. 

7 Y* ith thy fierce bolt, 0 god invoked of many, drive 

to a distance from afar the foeman. 

O Indra, give us wealth in corn and cattle, and make 
thy singer’s prayer gain strength and riches. 

8 Indra, the swallower of strong libations with their 

thick residue, the potent Somas, 

He, Maghava?i, will not restrict his bounty: he 
brings much wealth unto the Soma-presser. 

9 Yea, by superior play he wins advantage, when ho, 

a gambler, piles his gains in season. 

Celestial-natured, he o’erwhelms with riches the 
devotee who keeps not back his money. 

10 0 much-invoked, may we subdue all famine and evil 
want with store of grain and oattle. * 

May we allied, as first in rank, with princes obtain 
possessions by our own exertion. 


4 The hero: Iudra. 

5 As much quickly-coming treasure: representing tho wealth which 
the offering of the libations is expected to produco. 

6 Unto whom toe offer praises : or, in whom we have placed our hope. 

9 When he, a gambler: cp. X. 43. 5. 

10 With, pnnees: with men emiuont for thoir wealth; rAjabhir- 
mandndnusvaraili. —SsLynna, 





THE HYMNS OF 



[.BOOK X. 



11 Brihaspati protect us from the rearward, and from 
above, and from below, from sinners. 
jVEay Indra from the front, and from the centre, as 
friend to friends, vouchsafe us room and freedom. 


HYMN XLIII. 


Indra. 


In perfect unison all yearning hymns of mine that find 
the light of heaven have sung forth Indra’s praise. 
As wives embrace their lord, the comely bridegroom, 
so they compass Maghavan about that he may help. 

2 Directed unto thee my spirit never strays, for I have 

set my hopes on thee, O much-invoked! 

Sit, wonderful! as king upon the sacred grass, and 
let thy drinking-place be by the Soma-juice. 

3 From indigence and hunger Indra turns away: 

Maghavam hath dominion over precious wealth. 
These°the seven rivers flowing on their downward 
path increase the vital vigour of the powerful steer. 

4 As on the fair-leafed treo rest birds, to Indra flow 

the gladdening Soma-juices that the bowls contain. 
Their lace that glows with splendour through their 
mighty power hath found the shine of heaven for 
man, the Aryas’ light. 

5 As in the game a gambler piles his winnings, so 

Maghavan, sweeping all together, gained the Sun. 
This mighty deed of thine none other could achieve, 
none, Maghavan, before thee, none in recent time. 
C Maghavan came by turns to all the tribes ot men: 
the steer took notice of the people’s songs of praise. 
The man in whose libations Sakra hath delight by 
means of potent Somas vanquisheth his foes. 


The Ijlisbi is Krishna. The metre is Trislitup in stanzas 10, 11, 



and Jagati in the rest of the hymn. 







NlINlSr^ 



N 44.] 


THE EIGVEDA. 


„§L 


As waters flow together to the river, thus Somas to 
Indra flow, as rivulets to the lake. 

In place of sacrifice sages exalt his might, as the 
rain swells the corn by the kind gift of heaven. 

8 He rushes through the region like a furious bull, he who 

hath made these floods the dames of worthy lords. 
This Maghavan hath found light for the man who 
brings oblation, sheds the juice, and promptly 
pours his gifts. 

9 Let the keen axe come forth together with the light: 

here be, as erst, the teeming cow of sacrifice. 

Let the red god shine pure with his refulgent ray, 
and let the lord of heroes glow like heaven’s 
clear sheen. 

10 0 much-invoked, may we subduo all famine and ovil 

want with store of grain and cattle. 

May we allied, as first in rank, with princes obtain 
^ possessions by our own exertion. 

11 Brihaspati protect us from the rearward, and from 

above, and from below, from sinners. 

May Indra from the front, and from the centre, as 
friend to friends, vouchsafe us room and freedom. 

HYMN XLIV. Indra. 

May sovran Indra come to the carousal, he who by 
holy law is strong and active, 

The overeomer of all conquering forces with his great 
steer-like power that hath no limit. 

8 The davu i of worthy lords : that is, subjected them to the Aryans, 

whereas they had beeu the thralls of Dasas. See I. 32. 11. 

127 3 4< and VlT 4 ^°''' wh ° ia fm l ueutl y likened to an axe. See I. 

The red god; am-skah: according to Sayana, ‘the radiant India;’ 
but Agm is probably intended. * 

concluding stanzas are identical in Hymns XLII, XLIII, 

and XLIV, 


1 bi 8 * 1 * is Krishna. The metre is Trishtup in stanzas 1 

i 1 , and Jagatl in the rest of the hymn. 


-3,10, 




WHlST/fy^ 



<s 


THE I1YMNS OF 


[BOOK X 



2 Firm-seated is thy car, thy steeds are docile; thy 

hand, 0 king, holds, firmly grasped, the thunder. 
On thy fair path, 0 lord of men, eomo quickly : wc 
will increase thy powers when thou hast drunken. 

3 Let strong and mighty steeds who bear this mighty 

Indra, the lord of men, whose arm wields thunder, 
Bring unto us, as sharers of our banquet, the steer of 
conquering might, of real vigour. 

4 So like a bull thou rushest to the lord who loves the 

trough, the sage, the prop of vigour, in the vat. 
Prepare thine energies, collect them in thyself: be 
for our profit as the master of the wise. 

5 May precious treasures come to us,—so will I pray. 

Come to the votary’s gift offered with beauteous 
laud. 

Thou art the lord, as such sit on this holy grass: thy 
vessels are inviolate as the Law commands. 

6 Far went our earliest invocations of the gods, and 

won us glories that can never be surpassed. 

They who could not ascend the ship of sacrifice, 
sink down in desolation, trembling with alarm. 

7 So be the others, evil-hearted, far away, whose 

horses, difficult to harness, have been yoked. 

Here in advance men stand anear to offer gifts, by 
whom full many a work that brings reward is done. 


4 The. lord : pativi: tho Soma. Collect them in thyself; ‘ tako us 
into thyself.’—Wilson. Of the wise: kenipdndm is thus explained by 
tho Commentators, but the meaning seems doubtful. Prof. Ludwig 
thinks that ‘ the master of the oars ,’ that is, the steersman, is intonded. 

6 In desolation : irmd = cprj/ioi. —L. Trembling in alarm i or, doers 
of 01 deeds, according to Y&ska’s interpretation of kvpayah. 

7 Whose horses, difficult to harness, have been yoked: whose ill 
managed attempts to perform acceptable sacrifice have foiled. In 
advance: before- death, according to Sayana. 


1 




7MN 45 .] THE RIG VEDA. ' 189 

8 He firmly fixed the plains and mountains as they 

shook. Dyaus thundered forth and made the air’s 
mid-region quake. 

He stays apart the two confronting bowls; he sings 
lauds in the potent Soma’s joy when he hath drunk. 

9 I bear this deftly-fashioned goad of thine, wherewith 

thou, Maghavan, shalt break the strikers with 
the hoof. 

At this libation mayst thou be well satisfied. 
Partake the juice, partake the worship, Maghavan. 

10 O much-invoked, may we subdue all famine and evil 

want with store of grain and cattle. 

May we allied, as first in rank, with princes obtain 
possessions by our own exertion. 

11 Brihaspati protect us from the rearward, and from 

above, and from below, from sinners. 

May Indra from the front and from the centre, as 
friend to friends, vouchsafe us room and freedom. 

HYMN XLV. Agui 

h irst Agni sprang to life from out of Heaven: the 
second time from us came Jatavedfts. 

Thirdly the fnanly-souled was in the waters. The 
pious lauds and kindles him the eternal. 


8 He: Indra, As they shook: cp. II. 12. 2, Two confronting bowls: 
Leaven and earth. 

9 Goad: the hymn of praise which urges Indra to action. The 
strikers with the hoof: a class of Yatudhauaa or demons. SeeX. 87. 12. 

The Riahi is Vatsapri sou of Bhalaudana. The metre is Trishtup. 

1 F,om out of Heaven: or, from Dyaua his father; in the shape of 
the Sun. 

From us • produced by men in tho shape of sacrificial and domestic 
fire. 

In the waters: of the firmament, in the shape of lightning. 



THE HYMNS OF 



[BOOK X, 


<SL 


2 Agni, we know thy three powers in three stations, 

we know thy forms in many a place divided. 

We know what name supreme thou hast in secret: we 
know the source from which thou hast proceeded. 

3 The manly-souled lit thee in sea and waters, man’s 

viewer lit thee in the breast of heaven. 

There as thou stoodest in the third high region the 
steers increased thee in the waters’ bosom. 

4 Agni roared out, like Dyaus what time he thunders: 

he licked the ground, about the plants he flickered. 
At once, when born, he looked around enkindled, and 
lightened heaven and earth within with splendour. 

5 The spring of glories and support of riches, rouser of 

thoughts and guardian of the Soma, 

Good son of strength, a king amid the waters, in 
forefront of the Dawns he shines enkindled. 

6 Germ of the world, ensign of all creation, he sprang 

to life and filled the earth and heavens. 

Even the firm rock he cleft when passing over, when 
the five tribes brought sacrifice to Agni. 

7 So among mortals was immortal Agni stablished as 

holy wise and willing envoy. 

He waves the red smoke that he lifts above him, 
striving to reach the heavens with radiant lustre. 


2 In seer ': unknown to those who know not the Veda.—Sa.ya.rui. 

3 The manly-souled : or, the friend of men; Varuna, accoi’ding to 
Sayana, and Prajapati, according to Mahidhara. Porhape Dyaus (cp. 
stanza 8) may be intended.—L. Prof. Grassmann thinks that India, 
the kindler of the iigktning, is meant. The steers: or, the mighty 
ones i the Maruts. 

6 The firm rock • ' the solid cloud.’—Wilson. Some extraordinary 
conflagration of jungle may perhaps be referred to. The five tribes: 
paikha janM: literally, the five men, meaning, according to S4yana, 
men in general, and, according to Mahidhara, the institutor of the 
sacrifice and the four chief priests. 





wiNisr^ 


TEE R1GVEDA. 


191 


46.) 

8 Like gold to look on, far he shone refulgent, beaming 

imperishable life for glory, 

Agni by vital powers became immortal when his 
prolific father Dyaus begat him. 

9 Whoso this day, 0 god whose flames are lovely, pre¬ 

pares a cake, O Agni, mixt with butter, 

Lead thou and further him to higher fortune, to bliss 
bestowed by gods, O thou most youthful. 

10 Endow him, Agni, with a share of glory, at every 

song of praise sung forth enrich him. 

Dear let him be to Sftrya, dear to Agni, preeminent 
with son and children’s children. 

11 W hile, Agni, day by day men pay thee worship 

they win themselves all treasures worth the wishing. 
Allied with thee, eager and craving riches, they have 
disclosed the stable filled with cattle. 

12 Agni, the friend of men, the Soma’s keeper, Yais- 

vanara, hath been lauded by the Rishis. 

We will invoke benignant Earth and Heaven: ye 
deities, give us wealth with hero children. 

HYMN XLVI. Agni 

Stablished for thee, to lend thee vital forces, giver 
of wealth, guard of hi3 servant’s body, 

The great priest, born, who knows the clouds, abider 
with men, is seated in the lap of waters. 

2 Worshipping, seeking him with adoration like some 
lost creature followed by its footprints, 

Wise Bhrigus, yearning in their hearts, pursued him, 
and lound him lurking where the floods are gathered. 



The Rishi is Vatsapri. The metre is Trishtup. 

1 For thee: the Rishi addresses himself. Who Jcmws the, clouds: 
from which he (Agni) comes in the form of lightning. Of v oters: of 
tho firmament. ° 


2 I! '5, Bhrtgm: frequently mentioned na especially connected 
" l,h ,hc »f Agni. Purmd him: nee I. 65. 1. 








3 On the cow’s forehead, with laborious searching Trita, 

the offspring of Vibhfivas, found him. 

Born in our houses, youthful, joy-bestower, he now 
becomes the central point of brightness. 

4 Yearning, with homage, they have set and made him 

blithe priest among mankind, oblation-bearer, 
Leader of rites and purifier, envo} 7 of men, as sacrifice 
that still advances. 

5 The foolish brought the ne’er-bewildered forward, 

great, victor, song-inspirer, fort-destroyer. 

Leading the youth gold-bearded, like a courser gleam¬ 
ing with wealth, they turned their hymn to profit. 

6 Holding his station firmly in the houses, Trita hath 

sat within his home surrounded. 

Thence, as Law 7 bids, departs the tribes’ companion, 
having collected men with no compulsion. 


3 Ok the cow’s forehead: according to Sayana, ‘on the summit of 
the earth.’ Prof. Ludwig suggests, with more probability, that the 
surface of the lower piece of wood used in producing fire by motion 
is intended. With laborious searching: referring, probably, to the 
difficulty of producing fire by the means employed. This, it seems, 
as Prof. Wilson has observed, is the real meaning of the flight, dis¬ 
covery, and capture of Agni. Trita: perhaps Trita Aptya, appearing 
as a human priest. Or possibly Vayu, the Wind, may be meant. 
See V. 9. 3. Of brightness : of the realm of light, as tho Sun. 

4 As sacrifice that still advances: ‘ als das sich vorwarts bewegendo 
0 pf er> »—Ludwig. According to Sayana, ‘ the Object of sacrifice, him 
who'goea forward [from one fire-receptacle to another].’ 

5 The foolish: human priests, weak and foolish in comparison with 
the wise Agni. 

Gleaming with wealth: tho moaning of dhanarcham is uncertain. 
The St. Petersburg Lexicon offers dhanarjam, ‘ striving to win tho 
prize,’ as probably the right reading. 

6 Trita: according to Sayana, Agni as occupying three places or 
fire-receptacles. More probably be is so called on account of bis res¬ 
toration by Triln (stanza 3).--L. Surrounded : by flames. Departs: 
on his errand to the gods. The tribes’ companion • Agni, the familiar 
h ie vl of the Aryan clans. Tho stanza is obscure, and tho last 
half-line'is unintelligible. Prof. Wilson thus paraphrases the second 
line ‘ from thence, having accepted (the oblations) of. tho people, 
with int-ut to give (them to the gods), in various ways, he (Agni) 
goes to the gods holding (his foes) in check.’ 






7 His are the fires, eternal, purifying, that make the 

houses move, whose smoke is shining, 

White, waxing in their strength, for ever stirring, 
and sitting in the wood : like winds are Sornas. 

8 The tongue of Agni bears away the praise-song, and, 

through his care for Earth, her operations. 

Him, bright and radiant, living men have stablished 
as their blithe priest, the chief of sacrificers. 

9 That Agni, him whom Heaven and Earth engendered, 

the Waters, Twashtar, and, with might, the Bhrigus, 
Him Matarisvan and the gods havd fashioned holy 
for man and first to be entreated. 

1° Agni, whom gods have made oblation-bearer, and 
much-desiring men regard as holy, 

Give life to him who lauds thee when he worships, 
and then shall glorious men in troops adore thee. 

HYMN XLVII. Indra Vaikuntha. 

Thy right hand have we grasped in ours, O India, 
longing, thou very lord of wealth, for treasures, 
Because we know thee, hero, lord of cattle : vouch¬ 
safe us mighty and resplendent riches. 


7 That make.'the houses move: this seems to be what the words 
daindm aritrd should mean, though how flames can be thus qualified 

is not clear. ‘The rescuers from the humiliated (spirits of ill; ’_ 

Wilson. ‘Protectors of the houses.’—Mahidhara. Like winch arc 
Lomas: as winds fan flame, so Soma-libations increase tho might of 
Agni. According to S&yana, the flames are ‘like the fast-flowing 

JT*'° the /SW -Wdson. I follow Prof. Ludwig’s explanation, 
but the meaning of the passage is doubtful. 1 

8 the operations : holy works performed by men. 

9 Matarisvan: ^divine or semi-divine being who brought Agni 

from heaven. See I. 31. 3, and 60. 1. - 


Vaikuntha is said to mean son of VikunthS, an Asuri or female 
dirnon who was allowed by Indra to become his second mother. 

The Rishi is Saptagu of the family of Angiras. The metre is 


1 Longing, thou very lord of wealth, for treasures: literally, longing 
lor treasure, treasure-lord of treasures, 

13 





THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK X. 


2 Wealth, fully armed, good guard and kind protector, 

sprung from four seas, the prop and stay of 
treasures, 

Fraught with great bounties, meet for prais? and 
glory: vouchsafe us mighty and resplendent riches. 

3 Wealth, with good Brahmans, India, god-attended, 

high, wide, and deep, and based on broad founda¬ 
tions, 

Strong, with famed Bisliis, conquering our foemen : 
vouchsafe us mighty and resplendent riches. 

4 Victorious, winning strength, with hero sages, 

confirmed in power, most useful, wealth-attracting, 
True, Indra, crushing forts and slaying Dasyus: 
vouchsafe us mighty and resplendent riches. 

5 Wealthy in heroes and in cars and horses, strength 

hundredfold and thousandfold, O Indra, 

With manly sages, happy troops, light-winning: 
vouchsafe us mighty and resplendent riches. 

6 To Saptagu the sage, the holy-minded, to him, 

Brihaspati, the song approaches, 

Angiras’ son who must be met with homage : vouch¬ 
safe us mighty and resplendent riches. 

7 My lauds, like envoys, craving loving-kindness, 

go forth to Indra with their strong entreaty, 
Moving his heart and uttered by my spirit: vouch¬ 
safe us mighty and resplendent riches. 


2 iVealtk: S&yana gives another interpretation :—‘(We know tlieo 
to he) well armed/ etc.— WilsoD. Sprung from four seas: regarded 
as the storehouses of jewels. ‘(Renowned throughout) the four 
oceans/r—[applied to Indra] Wilson. 

6 Brihaspati: according to the scholiast meaning Saptagu, * the 
lord of much (praise).’—Wilson. According to others, the god Bri¬ 
haspati called Saptagu as being drawn by seven oxen : * der fahrt nut 
eieben Riudern.’—Grassmanu. Angiras’ son: meaning apparently 
Hyilmspatias especially loved and honoured by Angiras and his 
descendants. See VI. 73. 1. 






8 Grant us the boon for which I pray, O Indra, 
a spacious home unmatched among the people. 

To this may Heaven and Earth accord approval: 
vouchsafe us mighty and resplendent riches. 

HYMN XLVIII. India Yaikuntha. 

I was the first possessor of all precious gear: the * 
wealth of every man I win and gather up. 

On me as on a father living creatures call: I deal 
enjoyment to the man who offers gifts. 

2 I, Indra, am Atharvan’s stay aud firm support: I 

brought forth kine to Trita from the Dragon’s 
grasp. 

I stripped the Dasyus of their manly might, and 
gave the cattle-stalls to Mfttarisvan and Dadhyach. 

3 For me hath T wash tar forged the iron thunderbolt : 

in me the gods have centred intellectual power. 

My sheen is like the Sun’s insufferably bright: men 
honour me as lord for past and future deeds. 

4 I won myself these herds of cattle, steeds and kine, 

and gold in ample store, with my destructive bolt. 

I give full many a thousand to tbe worshipper, what 
time the Somas and the lauds have made me glad. 


8 Unmatched: asamam: ‘ not held m commou.’—Wilson. 


India Yaikuntha is the Rishi of this hymn, which is a self-laudatory 

reply to Sap toga in Hymn XLVII. The metre is Trishtup in stands 
7, ! 0, 1 1, and Jagati in the rest. 


_ Atharvan is the name of the priest who first obtained fire and 
offered Soma aud'prayers to the gods. See I. 70. 10, and 83, f». 
'lhc Dragon is apparently Ahi or Vritra. Saynna gives a different 
mteipietation . I generated the waters above the cloud for the sake 
ot liitu Wilson. M&tanqvan and Dadhyach: or, according to 
i.<n.inn M.itaiisvftii s son. Dadhyach,’ in which case the latter cannot 

r Jfl t1,0 celebrated Dadhyach who was the son of Atharvan. See Vol, 
Index. 





TIIE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 


5 Indra am I; none ever wins my wealth from me: 

never at any time am I a thrall to death. 

Pressing the Sonia, ask riches from me alone: ye, 
Ptirus, in my friendship shall not suffer harm. 

6 These, breathing loud in fury, two and two, who 

caused Indra to bring his bolt of thunder to the fray, 
The challengers, I struck -with deadly weapon down: 
firm stand what words the god speaks to his 
worshippers. 

7 This one by stronger might I conquered singly ; yea, 

also two : shall three prevail against me ? 

Like many sheaves upon the floor I thrash them. 
How can my foes, the Indraless, revile me ? 

8 Against the Gungus I made Atithigva strong, and kept 

him ’mid the folk like Vritra-conquering strength, 
When I won glory in the great foe-slaying fight, 
in battle where Karanja fell, and Parnaya. 

9 With food for mine enjoyment S&pya Nami came: 

he joined me as a friend of old in search of kine. 
As I bestowed on him an arrow for the fight I made 
him worthy of the song and hymn of praise. 


5 Ye, P4rm: * 0 men.’—Wilson. 

G These: who these were is uncertain. Two and two: probably 
the warrior who fights on the chariot and the charioteer.—L. The 
literal translation of the last half-line of the stanza appears to be :— 
the uoii-worshipper speaking firm words to worshippers; anamasyuh, 
he who has no other to reverence, being Indra, whose promise of • 
victory to his worshippers is never broken.—Ludwig. 

7 This one . or, this one thing, that is, “the primordial substance 
or unit out of which the universo was developed.”—Wallis, Cosmology 
of the Rlgvcda, p. 58. 

8 Against the Gungus; or, to aid the Gungus, as Sayana explains. 
Who these people were is uncertain. Atithigva: Divodasa, son of 
Atithigu, according to S&yana. See Vol. I., Index, Karanja...and 
Parnaya : See I. 53. 8. 

9 Sdpya: a family name of India’s friend Narnt, who in VI. 20. 6 
is called Sayya’s son. 



YMN 40.] THE RIG VEDA. 

10 One of the two hath Soma, seen within it; the 

Herdsman with the bone shows forth the other. 
He, fain to fight the Bull whose horns were slar- 
pened, stood fettered in the demon’s ample region. 

11 I, as a god, ne’er violate the statutes of gods, of 

Vasus, Rudriyas, Adityas. 

These gods have formed me for auspicious vigour, 
unconquered and invincible for ever. 

II a MN XLIX. Indra VaikunHia. 
I have enriched the singer with surpassing wealth ; 

I have allowed the holy hymn to strengthen me. 

I, furtherer of him who offers sacrifice, have con¬ 
quered in each fight the men who worship not. 

2 The people of the heavens, the waters, and the 

earth have stablished me among the gods with 
Indra’s name. 

I took unto myself the two swift vigorous bays that 
speed on divers paths, and the fierce bolt for 
strength. 

3 With deadly blows I smote Atka for Kavi’s sake ; 

I guarded Kutsa well with these my saving helps. 
As Sushna’s slayer I brandished the dart of death: 

I gave not up the Aryan name to Dasyu foes. 

10 One of the two: the moon. The Herdsman Indra. With the 
lone - of Dadhyach. See I. 84. 13. The other: Vritrft. He: Yritra. 
The Bull: indra. The demon's ample region: mid-air, which was 
then dominated by the Druh or malignant spirit of drought. I follow k 
Prof. Ludwigs interpretation of this obscure stanza which is evidently V 
an interpolation motived by the mention of Dadhyach in stanza 2. 

11 Rudnyas: the Maruts, sons of Rudra. 

Indra Yaikuntha i3 the Ivishi also. The metre is Trial)tup iu 
stanzas 2, 11, and Jagati in the rest of the hymn. 

3 A tic a mentioned again in Hymn X*. IX of this Bsofc, Ravi: 
tho father of Indra’s friend Usana.' 




\ 





MINIS?*,, 



4 Smadibha, Tugra, and the Vetasus I gave as prey to 
^ Kutsa, father-like, to succour him. 

I was a worthy king to rule the worshipper, when 
I gave Tuji dear inviolable gifts. 

5 I gave up Mrigaya to Srutarvan as his prey because 

he ever followed me and kept my laws. 

For Ayu’s sake I caused Vesa to bend and bow, and 
into Savya’s hand delivered Padgribhi. 

6 I, I crushed Navavastva of the lofty car, the Dasa, 

as the Vritra-slayer kills the fiends; 

When straightway on the region’s farthest edge I 
brought the god who makes the lights to broaden 
and increase. 

7 I travel round about borne onward in my might by 

the fleetfooted dappled horses of the Sun. 

When man’s libation calls me to the robe of state I 
soon repel the powerful Dasyu with my blows. 


4 Smadibha: or, as an adjective joined with Tugra, ‘ with all 
his followers.’ See VI. 20. 8, where Vetasu and Tugra are mentioned 
as having been conquered by Indra, aud VI. 26. 4, where their names 
occur again together with that of I uji. 

5 Mrigaya: a demon of the air. See IV. 16. 13, and VIII. 3.^lQg # 
Srutarvan: a prince whose liberality is lauded in VIII. 63, Ayu-t 
Bometimes spoken of as a king favoured by Indra and at other times 

as conquered by him. See Vols. I., II., III., Index. The name of 
j, ,fefa does not occur again. Savya : the Rishi of Hymns LI.—LVII. 
of Hook I. Padgribhi: some demon or savage enemy who is not 

mentioned again. 

6 Navavdstva: seel. 36. 18, and VI. 20 11. Of the lofty car: 
or Brihadratha, as a name of Navavastva, The lights: the stars, 
or perhaps light in general. In the former case the god would be 
Pyau.s or Varuna, and in the latter case Sftrya or the Sun.—Ludwig. 

7 The role of stale: apparently the milk which is the royal mantle 
wherewith Soma is invested. 




WMStyy 


THE RIGVEDA. 




8 Stronger am I than Naliush, I who slew the seven : 

I glorified with might Yadu and Turvasa. 

I brought another low, with strength I bent' j his 
strength: I let the mighty nine-and-ninety wax 
in power. 

9 Bull over all the streams that flow along the earth 

I took the seven rivers as mine own domain. 

I, gifted with great wisdom, spread the floods abroad: 
by war I found for man the way to high success. 

10 I set within these cows the white milk which no god, 

not even Twashtar’s self, had there deposited,— 
Much-longed -for, in the breasts, the udders of the kine, 
the savoury sweets of meath,the milk and Soma-juice. 

11 Even thus hath Indra Maghavan, truly bounteous, 

sped gods and men with mighty operation. 

The pious glorify all these thine exploits, lord of 
bay coursers, strong, and self-resplendent. 


HYMN L. Indra Vaikuntha. 

I laud your mighty one who joyeth in the juice, 
him who is shared by all men, who created all; 

Indra, whose conquering strength is powerful in war, 
whose fame and manly vigour heaven and earth 
revere. 


8 Stronger aw. I than Nahush : nakusho nahushtarah : * I am nearer 
1 thau the neighbour,’ according to Prof. Roth whom Prof. Grassmaim 
follows. ‘ I am the especial bond of bonds.’—Wilson. 1 follow Prof. 
Ludwig’s interpretation. I toko slew the seven : the seven, perhaps, 
are the chief of the demons destroyed by Indra. Prof. Ludwig takes 
saptakd to moan * seven limes’:—‘I am Beven times stronger than' 
Nahush.’ Another: whom, is uncertain. Wax in power: until they 
became worthy antagonists. ‘I have demolished ninety-and-nine 
powerful (foes).’—Wilson. 

II In this stanza Indra as Rishi addresses himself as the deity 
of the hymn. 

‘The Rishi is Indra Vaikuntha. The metre is Jagati in stanzas 1, 2, 
6, t, Abhisarinl in 3, 4, and Trishtup in 5. 




MINlSr/^ 



TEE HYMNS OF 



2 He with his friend is active, lauded, good to man, 

Indra who must be glorified by one like me. 

Hero, lord of the brave, all cars are thy delight, 
warring with Vritra, or for waters, or for spoil. 

3 Who are the men whom thou wilt further, Indra, 

who strive to win thy bliss allied with riches? 
Who urged thee forward to exert thy power divine, 
to valour, in the war for waters on their fields ? 

4 Thou, Indra, through the holy prayer wast mighty, 

worthy of sacrifice at all libations. 

In every fight thou castest heroes on the ground : 
thou w'ast the noblest hymn, 0 lord of all the folk. 

5 Help now, as highest, those who toil at sacrifice : 

well do the people know thy great protecting might. 
Thou shalt be everlasting, giver of success: yea, on 
all these libations thou bestowest strength. 

6 All these libations thou makest effectual, of which 

thou art thyself supporter, son of power. 

Therefore thy vessel is to be esteemed the best, 
sacrifice, holy text, prayer, and exalted speech. 

7 They who with flowing Soma pray to thee, 0 sage, 

to pour on them thy gifts of opulence and wealth, 
May they come forward, through their spirit, on the 
path of bliss, in the wild joy of Soma-juice effused. 


2 His friend.: his constant companion, the thunderbolt. 

3 Allied with riches : the happiness which Indra sends being given 
s *iu return for costly sacrificial offerings, 

4 Hymn: mantrah: or perhaps ‘charm.’ * Talisman.’—Ludwig. 

6 Vessel: p&tram: protection.’—Wilson. 

V Opulence and wealth: “According to the comment vasundm 
implies “abundant wealth,'’ and vasunas “wealth for one house,” 
or as ho further explains, the plural implies earthly wealth, the 
singular wealth suited for an abode, that is, the wealth called Swarga 
(heaven).”—Wilson. 



MINISr^ 


THE RIGVEDA. 




HYMN LI. • Agni. Gods. 

Large was that covering, and firm of texture, folded 
wherein thou enteredst the waters. 

One deity alone, 0 Jatavedas Agni, saw all thy 
forms in sundry places. 

2 What god hath seen me ? Who of all their number 

clearly beheld my forms in many places ? 

Where lie, then, all the sacred logs of Agni that 
lead him god-ward, Varuna and Mitra ? 

3 In many places, Agni Jltavedas, we sought thee 

hidden in the plants and waters. 

Then Itama marked thee, god of wondrous splend¬ 
our ! effulgent from thy tenfold secret dwelling. 

4 I fled in fear from sacrificial worship, Varuna, lest 

the gods should thus engage me. 

Thus were my forms laid down in many places. 
This, as my goal, I Agni saw before me. 


The Rishis are Agni called Sauchika and the gods. The metre is 
Trishtup. 

The legend says that Agni, fearing to share the fate of his three 
elder brothers who had perished in the service of the gods, fled away 
and hid himself in the waters. The gods discovered him aud persuaded 
him to return to his sacred duties. 

Stanzas 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 are spoken by the gods, and 2, 4, 6, 8 by Agni. 

1 He must have been very well wrapped up, the gods ironically 
say, or the water would have extinguished him.—Ludwig. Fonns; 
literally, ‘ bodies.' 

2 Sawed logs: pieces of Sami and Asvattha wood, from which alone 
the sacrificial fire is produced. Others explain sarriidhah by ‘flames.’ 

3 Thy tenfold secret dwelling: according to Say ana, ‘ the three 
worlds,—heaven, mid-air, earth; three divinities, Agni, Vayu, Aditya; 
the waters, the shrubs, the trees, aud the bodies of living beiugs,’— 

ilsou. The meaning appears to be, as Prof. Ludwig conjectures, 
* ^ ama knew that Agni would appear again from the fire-sticks 
worked by the fingers of both hands. 




miST/fy^ 



THE HYMNS OF 


[B001 



5 Come ; man is pious and would fain do worship ; 

he waits prepared : in gloom thou, Agni, dwellest. 
Make pathways leading god-ward clear and easy, 
and bear oblations with a kindly spirit. 

6 This goal mine elder brothers erst selected, as he 

who drives a car the way to travel. 

So, Varuija, I fled afar through terror, as flies the 
wild-bull from an archer’s bowstring. 

7 We give thee life unwasting, J&ta vedas, so that, 

employed, thou never shalt be injured. 

So, nobly born I shalt thou with kindly spirit bear 
to the gods their share of men’s oblations. 

8 Grant me the first oblations and the latter, entire, 

my forceful share of holy presents, 

The soul of plants, the fatness of the waters, and 
let there be long life, ye gods, to Agni. 

9 Thine be the first oblations and the latter, entire, 

thy forceful shares of holy presents. 

Let all this sacrifice be thine, 0 Agni, and let the 
World’s four regions bow before thee. 


HYMN LI I, 


Gods. 


Instruct me, all ye gods, how I, elected your priest, 
must seat me here, and how address you. 

Instruct me how to’ deal to each his portion, and by 
what path to bring you man’s oblation. 


8 The first oblations and the latter: or, the Prayajas and the 
Anuyajas, the former being texts and oblations forming part of the 
introductory ceremony at a Soma sacrifice, and the latter the second¬ 
ary or final offerings. Forceful share: the potent concentrated 
portion The fatness: gkritam: ght, clarified butter. 

The Rishi is Agni Sauchika. The metre is Trisbtup. 

1 This stanza must be assigned to the human Hotar priest, as Agni 
who speaks the second stanza would not ask the gods to instruct him 
in his duties. 




misr^ 


THE BIG VEDA 



- 4P 


HYMN 52.] 



2 1 sit as priest most skilled in sacrificing : the Maruts 

and all deities impel me. 

Asvins, each, day yours is the Adhvaryus’ duty : 
Brahman and wood are here : ’tis yours to offer. 

3 Who is this priest ? Is he the priest of Yama ? On 

whom is thrust this god-appointed honour ? 

He springs to life each month, each day that passes; 
so gods have made him their oblation-bearer. 

4 The gods have made me bearer of oblations, who 

slipped away and passed through many troubles. 
Wise Agni shall ordain for us the worship, whether 
five-wayed, threefold, or seven-threaded. 

5 So will I win you strength and life for ever, 0 gods, 

that I may give you room and freedom. 

To Indra’s arms would I consign the thunder; in ail 
these battles shall he then be victor. 

6 The deities, three thousand and three hundred and 

thirty-nine, have served and honoured Agni^ * 
Strewn sacred grass, anointed him with butter, and 
seated him as priest, the gods’ invoker. 


3 The first line is spoken by the human priest.. Is he the priest of 
Yamal: can he convey offerings to the Blest in the realms of the god 
of the departed? In the second half of the first line I follow Prof. 
Ludwig, bat the meaning is uncertain. The second line is spoken by 
Agni. Each month, each day: the Pitriyajha, or sacrifice to the 
Fathers, i:-: offered monthly, and the Agnihotra, or oblation to Agni 
and the gods, daily. These comprehend all other periodical rites. 

1 The first line is spoken by Agni. Slipped away: see the pre¬ 
ceding hymn. The second line is what the gods said. Five-wayed: 
consisting of five courses or parts, see X. 1241. Threefold: consisting 
of the three daily Soma-libations, see X. 124. 1, Seven-threaded: 
performed by seven priests. See X. 124. 1. 

Stanzas 5 and 6 are spoken by Agni. 



MINIS Tfty 


THE HYMNS OF 



<SL 

[BOOK X. 


HYMN LIII. Agni Sauchika. Gods. 
He hath arrived, he whom we sought with longing, 
who skilled in sacrifice well knows its courses. 

Let him pronounce the bidding text at worship: 
let him sit down as friend who was before us. 

2 Best priest, he hath been won by being seated, 

for he hath looked on the well-ordered viands. 
Come, let us worship gods who must be worshipped, 
and, pouring oil, laud those who should be lauded. 

3 Now hath he made the feast of gods effective : now 

have we found the secret tongue of worship. 

Now hath he come, sweet, robed in vital vigour, and 
made our calling on the gods successful. 

4 This prelude of my speech I now will utter, where¬ 

by we gods may quell our Asura foemen. 

Eaters of strengthening food who merit worship, 
0 ye five tribes, be pleased with mine oblation." 

5 May the five tribes be pleased with mine oblation, 

and the Cow s sons and all who merit worship. 
’Erom earthly trouble may the earth protect us, and 
air’s midrealm from woe that comes from heaven. 


Agni Sanchika and the gods are the Rishis as well as the deities. 
The metre is Trishtup in stanzas 1—5, and 8, and Jagati in the rest 
of the hymn. 

t The gods speak. Courses: or portions. Bidding text: which 
iuviteB the gods. 

2 By being seated: * by his seat (at the altar).'—Wilson. 

3 Tongue of worship: Agni, by whose fiery tongues the gods drink 
libations. 

4 Agni speaks. Asura foemen: the Asuras in the later hymns of 
the Veda are evil spirits in perpetual hostility with the gods, not to 
be confounded with the great celestial Asuras, the chiefs of the gods, 
nor with the RAksbasas, demons or ogres, who disturb the sacrifices 

of men. 

5 The five tribes: according to some, says Yaska, ‘ the Gaudharvas, 
gods, Fathers, Asuras, and Rakshasas.' See Muir, 0. S. Texts, I. 177. 
But thri five Aryan tribes may be intended. The Cow's sons: the 
Marute, children of Prisni. Prof. Roth explains gojdtdh as ‘born in 
the starry heaven.’ See VII. 55. 13, 



WNisr/fy 



N 53.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 



6 Spinning the thread, follow the region’s splendid 

light : guard thou the pathways well which 
wisdom hath prepared. 

Weave ye the knotless labour of the bards who sing : 
•be Manu thou, and bring the heavenly people forth. 

7 Lovers of Soma, bind the chariot traces fast: set ye 

the reins in order and embellish them. 

Bring hitherward the car with seats where eight 
may sit, whereon the gods have brought th§ trea¬ 
sure that we love. 

8 Here flows Asmanvati: hold fast each other, keep 

yourselves up, and pass, my friends, the river. 
Here let us leave the powers that brought no profit, 
£tnd cross the flood to powers that are auspicious. 

9 Twashtar, most deft of workmen, knew each magic 

art, bringing most blessed bowls that hold the 
drink of gods. 

His axe, wrought of good metal, he is sharpening 
now, wherewith the radiant Brahmanaspati wifl cut. 
10 Low, O ye sapient ones, make ye the axes sharp 
wherewith ye fashion bowls to hold the Amrita. 
Knowing the secret places make ye ready that 
whereby the gods have gotten immortality. 


6 The gods speak. The region's splendid light: the Sun. Weave. 

ye. flames oi Agni. Assist the singer in his holy task and let there 
bo no difficulties in his way. 

7 This stanza appears to begin a new hymn, made up of fragments, 
ccording to >S;tyana it is spoken by the gods to one another. 

8 Asmanvati: or, the stony stream. 

§ Will cut: perhaps, will cut arid destroy demons; but the mean- 
,n g is uncertain. 

« i ?<? € m P™ nt ones: ye Rtbhus. That; perhaps Amrita or 

celestial Soma-juice. ' 





MIMSr/fj, 



THE HYMNS OF 



11 Ye with a secret tongue and dark intention laid the 
maiden deep within, the calf within the mouth. 
They evermore are near us with their gracious help: 
successful is the song that strives for victory. 

HYMN LIV. India. 

I sing thy fame that, Maghavan, through thy great¬ 
ness the heavens and earth invoked thee in their 
terror. 

Thou, aiding gods, didst quell the power of Dasas, 
what time thou holpest many a race, 0 Indra. 

2 When thou wast roaming, waxen strong in body, 

telling thy might, Indra, among the people. 

All that men called thy battles was illusion : no foe 
hast thou to-day, nor erst hast found one. 

3 Who are the fvishis, then, who comprehended before 

our time the bounds of all thy greatness ? 

For from thy body thou hast generated at the same 
time the mother and the father. 


11 The first line is obscure. ‘(The Maruts) placed a female in the 
enveloping hide (of a dead cow), and a calf in the mouth (of a dead 
cow).’—Wilson. According to this interpretation the miracle ascribed 
to them would somewhat resemble that mentioned in I. 110. 8. The 
first half of the second line is hard to construe. Prof. Wilson para¬ 
phrases the line:—‘daily the generous (fraternity of the Ribhus) 
offers suitable praises (to the gods), granting victory over our fees.’ 
Prof. (Jeldner takes hdra, against the Pada text, as a locative, and 
renders the last half-line to the following effect‘ May he (the sacri- 
ficer), when he wisheB to win, gain the victory in the race.’ 

The Rishi is Brihaduktha of the family of Vamadeva The metre 
is Trishtup. 

3 The question is rhetorical. The great Rishis of the olden time 
could not comprehend thy greatness, much leas cau we comprehend it. 

'l'he mother and the father: earth and heaven, parents of all. 



mtSTfiy 


THE RIG VEDA. 



YMN 55.] 



4 Thou, mighty steer, hast four supremest natures, 

Asura natures that may ne’er be injured. 

All these, 0 Maghavan, thou surely knowest, where¬ 
with thou hast performed thy great achievements. 

5 Thou hast all treasures in thy sole possession, trea¬ 

sures made manifest and treasures hidden. 

Defer not thou, 0 Maghavan, my longing: thou art 
director, Indra, thou art giver. 

6 To him who set the light in things of splendour, and 

with all sweetness blent essential sweetness, 

To Indra hath this welcome hymn that strengthens 
been uttered by the votary Brihaduktha. 

HYMN LY. Indra. 

Far is that secret name by which, in terror, the 
worlds invoked thee and thou gavest vigour. 

The earth and heaven thou settest near each other, and, 
Maghavan, madest bright thy brother’s children. 

2 Great is that secret name and far-extending, where¬ 

by thou madest all that is and shall be. 

The five tribes whom he loveth well have entered 
the light he' loveth that was made aforetime. 

3 He filled the heavens and earth and all between them, 

gods five times sevenfold in their proper seasons. 
With four-and-thirty lights he looks around him, 
lights of one colour though their ways arc divers. 

4 Asura: divine, with a vague sense of supreme grandeur. 

G Who set the light: the first essential light. 

The jlishi is Brihaduktha of the family of Vamadeva. The metre 
is Tnshtup, 

i Mar is that secret name: thou art not present with us now. In 
te-> ror : terrified hy Vritra. Thy brother's children : according to 
Savana, Indr'a s brother is Parjanya, the god of the rain-cloud, and his 
children are the gathered waters. Varuna and his stars are probably 
intended.—L. * 

3 Gods five times sevenfold: “ It cannot be doubted that the origi- 
nal gcds were the constellations."—Ludwig. According to Say a via, 
t le five orders of beings and the classes of seven; that is, gods, men, 




misr^ 



4 As first among the lights, O Dawn, thou shonest, 

whereby thou broughtest forth the stay of increase, 
Great art thou, matchless is thine Asura nature, 
who, high above, art kin to those beneath thee. 

5 The old hath waked the young Moon from his slumber 

who runs his circling course with many round him. 
Behold the gods’ high wisdom in its greatness: he 
who died j^esterday to-day is living. 

6 Strong is the red bird in his strength, great hero, 

who from of old hath had no nest to dwell in. 

That which he knows is truth and never idle: he 
wins and gives the wealth desired of many. 

Y Through these the thunderer gained strong manly 
vigour, through whom he waxed in power to smite 
down Vritra, — 

Who through the might of Indra’s operation came 
forth as gods in course of Law and Order. 

8 All-strong, performing works with his companion, 
all-marking, rapid victor, eurse-averter, 

The hero, waxing, after draughts of Soma, blew far 
from heaven the Dasyus with his weapon. 

Fathers and Rakshasas, and the seven troops of Maruts, the seven 
rays of the Sun, the seven senses, etc. The four-and-thirt.y lights arc 
probably the sun, moon, and five planets, and the twenty-seven lunar 
asterisms or mansions of the moon. According to^, Say ana, the four- 
and-tkirty are eight Vasus, eleven Rudr&s, twelve Adityas, Prajapati, 
Vashatkara, and Virfij. 

4 The stay of increase : that which is the foundation and support of 
all Hubsistence; according to Sayana, the Sun. Art kin to those beneath 
thee : art allied and connected with men as provider of their food. 
The second line is difficult, and is differently interpreted by others. 

5 Sayana explains this stanza differently, making Indra, identified 
with Time, the subject. I follow Prof. Ludwig’s interpretation which 
seems to be nearer to the sense of the words, and is simpler and more 
rational. With many round km: stars of the asterisms through which 
he passes. 

6 The red bird: the Sun, with whom Tudra is identified, 

7 Through these : probably the stars are intended. ‘ (Accompanied) 
by these Maruts.’- Wilson. 

8 Uis companion : the thunderbolt. 



NlINlSr^ 


THE RIG VEDA. 



’N 56 J 


HYMN LVI. 



Vievcdevas. 


Herb is one light for thee, another yonder: enter the 
third and be therewith united. 

Uniting with a body be thou welcome, dear to the 
gods in their sublimest birth-place. 

2 Bearing thy body, V4jin, may thy body afford us 

blessing and thyself protection. 

Unswerving, stablish as it were in heafen thine own 
light as the mighty gods* supporter. 

3 Strong steed art thou: go to the yearning maidens 

with this strength, happily go to heaven and praises: 
Fly happily to the gods with easy passage, according 
# to the first and faithful statutes. 


The liishi is IMhaduktha. The metro is Ttfishtup in stanzas 1—3, 
7, and Jagatl in the rest of the hymn. 

“The mystical uuion of the Fathers with the rays of light is the 
fundamental idea underlying the abstruse allusions ” of this funeral 
hymn. “ lhe poet bids the deceased man unite himself with the 
beams of the heavenly’ light; he takes ocoasion to celebrate the power 
and greatness of the Fathers, to whom the spirit of the doparted is 
journeying; and ends with a statement of the success of the journey 
fa which he has prayed.” See Wallis, Cosmology of the Iligveda , 
pp. 72, 73. 

1 One light: the earthly fire of the funeral pile. Anottur: in the 
firmament. The third: the light in the highest region above the 
firmament. A body: a new body after cremation. Thdr sublimest 
birth-place: the.Sun. 

2 Vdjin : apparently the name of the deceased, the son of Brihad- 
uktlia. I lie word means originally ‘strong steed’ as in stanza 3. 

3 I he yearning maidens: perhaps the Dawns; but the meaning 
of suvenili i 3 uncertain. To heaven and praises: ‘ to the (laud of) 
pmisi', and to the sky.’—Wallis. 

14 




MIN ISTfiy. 


<SL 

THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X. 

4 Part of their grandeur have the Fathers also gained: 

the gods have seated mental power in them as gods. 
They have embraced within themselves all energies, 
which, issuing forth, again into their bodies pass. 

5 They strode through all the region with victorious 

might, establishing the old immeasurable laws. 

They compassed in their bodies all existing things, 
and streamed forth offspring in many successive 
forms. 

G In two ways have the sons established in his place 
the Asura who finds the light; by the third act, 

As fathers, they have set their heritage on earth, 
their offspring, as a thread continuously spun out.. 

7 As in a ship through billows, so through regions #f 
air, with blessings, through all toils and troubles 
Hath Brihaduktha brought his seed with glory, and 
placed it here and in the realms beyond us. 



4 Of their grandeur : of the greatness of the gods. 

5 Establishing the old immeasurable laws: or, in accordance with 
the more generally received .interpretation of dhdmdni hero, ‘mea¬ 
suring ancient stations never measured out.’ 

G In two wags : in heaven and on earth. The sons : explained l>y 
Say .na as the- Angirasas, sons of Aditya. The Fathers in general 
appear to be intended. The, Asura: Agni. The third act: or third 
sacred duty, that of continuing their family; the study of the Veda 
and sacrifice being the first and third.—S. 

7 Placed it here and in the realms beyond us : established his off¬ 
spring in heavenly regions as well as here upon earth. 

Mr. Wallis, from whose translation I have borrowed, remarks :_ 

“The interpretation of one or two expressions is uncertain; the 
general sense is clear. The rays of light are here the bodies of the 
fathers, which emanate from the sun, assume the forms of all things 
on the earth and of the later sacii fleers, the descendants of the fathers, 
and again return to their birth-place in the eky from which they had 
extended themselves .’—Cosmology of the, Rigveda, pp. 74, 75. 



MIN ISTq,, 


THE EIGYEDA. 


211 



HYMN LVII. Visvedovas. 

Let us not, Indra, leave the path, the Soma-presser’s 
sacrifice: 

Let no malignity dwell with us. 

2 May we obtain, completely wrought, the thread spun 

out to reach the gods, 

That perfecteth the sacrifice. 

3 We call the spirit hither with the Soma of our 

parted sires, 

Yea, with the Fathers’ holy hymns. 

4 Thy spirit come to thee again for wisdom, energy, 

and life, 

That thou mayst long behold the sun. 

5 0 Fathers, may the heavenly folk give us our spirit 

once again, 

That we may be with those who live. 

0 O Soma, with the spirit still within us, blest with 
progeny, 

May we be busied in thy law. 

HYMN LVIII. Manas or Spirit. 

Thy spirit, that went far away to Yama, to Vivas- 
v&n’s son, 

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst 
live and sojourn here. 

2 Thy spirit, that went far away, that passed away to 
earth and heaven, 

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live 
and sojourn here. 


fhsli.s are Bandhu, Subandhu, Srutabaudhu, and Viprabandhu, 
alHjivupayanas or Laupayauas, the priests of king Aikshvaka Asaniati. 

o The spirit : of the deceased whose obsequies are performed. Of 
our tires: ndi Isaiisena : explained as moaning, suited to man; that 1 s 
to deified men, the Fathers or Spirits of the Blest. 

Tlio Ilishis are Bandhu, Subaudhu, Srutabandlm, and Viprabandhu. 
The metre is Auushtup. 




THE HYMKS OF [BOOK 

3 Thy spirit, that went far away, away to the four- 

pointed earth, 

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst 
live and sojourn here. 

4 Thy spirit, that went far away to the four quarters 

of the world,. 

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live 
and sojourn here. 

5 Thy spirit, tho.t went far away, away unto the 

billowy sea, 

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst 
live and sojourn here. 

(> Thy spirit, that went far away to beams of light 
that flash and flow, 

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live 
and sojourn here. 

7 Thy spirit, that went far away, went to the waters- 

and the plants, 

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst 
live and sojourn here. 

8 Thy spirit, that went far away, that visited the Sun 

and Dawn, 

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst 
live and sojourn here. 

9 Thy spirit, that went far away, away to lofty moun¬ 

tain heights, 

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst 
live and sojourn here. 

10 Thy spirit, that went far away into this All that 

lives and moves, 

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst 
live and sojourn here. 

11 Thy spirit, that went far away to distant realms 

beyond our ken, 

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst 
live and sojourn here. 




MINlSr^ 




HYMN 59.] THE RIG VEDA. 


213 


12 Thy spirit, that went far away to all that is and is 
to be, 

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst 
live and sojourn here. 


LIX. 


Nirriti and Others. 


His life hath been renewed and carried forward as 
two men, car-borne, by the skilful driver. 

One falls, then seeks the goal with quickened vigour. 
Let Nirriti depart to distant places. 

2 Here is the psalm for wealth, and food, in plenty: 

let us do many deeds to bring us glory. 

All these our doings shall delight the singer. Let 
Nirriti depart to distant places. 

3 May we o’ercome our foes with acts of valour, as 

heaven is over earth, hills over lowlands. 

All these our deeds the singer hath considered. Let 
Nirriti depart to distant places. 

4 Give us not up as prey to death, O Soma: still let 

us look upon the sun arising. 

Let our old age with passing days be kindly. Let 
Nirriti depart to distant places. 

5 0 Asuniti, keep the soul within us, and make the 

days we have to live yet longer. 





WNlSTfty. 



THE HYMNS OF 



Grant that we still may look upon the sunlight: 
strengthen thy body with the oil we bring thee. 

6 Give us our sight again, 0 Asuniti, give us again our 

breath and our enjoyment. 

Long may we look upon the sun uprising: 0 Anu- 
mati, favour thou and bless us. 

7 May Earth restore to us our vital spirit, may Heaven 

the goddess and mid-air restore it. 

May Soma give us once again our body, and Pftshan 
show the Path of peace and comfort. 

8 May both worlds bless Subandhu, young mothers of 

everlasting Law. 

May Heaven and Earth uproot and sweep iniquity 
and shame away : nor sin nor sorrow trouble thee. 

9 Health-giving medicines descend sent down from 

heaven in twos and threes, 

Or wandering singly on the earth. May Heaven and 
Earth uproot and sweep iniquity and shame away: 
nor sin nor sorrow trouble thee. 

10 Drive forward thou the wagon-ox, 0 Indra, which 
brought Uslnar&nfs wagon hither. 

May Heaven and Earth uproot and sweep iniquity 
and shame away : nor sin nor sorrow trouble thee. 


6 Anumati: a personification of the favour with which the gods 
regard the sacrifices and prayers of the pious. 4 Gracious (goddess).’ — 
Wilson. 

8 Iniquity and shame . rapas , according to Williams’s Dictionary 
means, defect,, fault, sin; hurt, injury. In his Commentary on I. 69. 4, 
Siiyana paraphrases rap&mi, the plural of the word, by bddkaMni 
rdkshasddtni, disturbing Rakshasas, etc. 

9 In twos and threes: according to Sayana, in the persons of tho 
two Asvins and of the three goddesses I]&, Sarasvatl, and Bhfirati. 

10 Vbhuirdnl must mean the wife of Usinara, chief of the Usinaras 
who are mentioned in later times as living in Madhyadesa or the 
Midland country. The meaning of the line is not obvious. 

Stanzas 8, 9, 10, which Prof. Grassmann plaoes in his Appendix, 
are of a different character from that of the preceding part of tho 
hymn, and seem to be a separate song or fragment of a song. 



MINlSr^ 




IIYMN 60.] 


THE RIG7EDA. 


215 


HYMN LX. Asamati and Others. 


Bringing our homage we have come to one magni- 
ficent in look, 

Glorified of the mighty gods ; 

2 To Asamati, spring of gifts, lord of the brave, 

a radiant car, 

The conqueror of Bhajeratha ; 

3 Who, when the spear hath armed his hand, or even 

weaponless, o’erthrows 
Men strong as buffaloes in fight ; 

4 Him in whose service flourishes Ikshvaku, rich and 

dazzling-bright 

As the five tribes that are in heaven. 

5 Indra, support the princely power of Rathaproshthas 

matched by none, * s 

Even as the Sun for all'to see. s 

G Thou for Agastyaf > sisterh sons yokest thy pair of 
ruddy steeds., v 


The deities are Asamati (1—4, 6). Indra (5). Subandlm’s call to 
life (7—11). Praise of the healing hand (12). The Rishis are 
Baudhu, Subandhu, Srutabandhu, and Viprabaudhu, and of stanza 6, 
their mother, the sister of Agastya. 

2 Asam&ti: according to Sayana, the name of a king. Bui the 
word is more probably an adjective, as in stanza 5, qualifying ratham , 
car, and signifying unequalled. Blmjwatha: it is uncertain whether 
this is the name of a prince or of a country. 

3 Who: Asamati, according to Sayana. 

4 IJcshvdku: this man’s name does not occur again in the Rigveda. 

The five tribes: the deities regarded as forming five tribes corres¬ 
ponding to tho five tribes on earth, in the same manner as the seven 
rivers of the land of the Aryans have their counterparts in heaven. 
See Muir, 0. S . Texts , I. p. 177. Sayana explains differently :— 
‘(so that) the five orders of men (are as happy) as if they were in 
heaven.’—Wilson. 

5 Rathaproshthas: the family of the prince, Asamati or another, 
whose praises the poet celebrates. 

G Agastya's sisters sons: Bandhu and his brothers. Stanzas 1-—6 
have apparent connexion with the six stanzas that follow. 




mi$T/fy. 


THE HYMNS OF [HOOK 

Thou troddest niggards under foot, all those, 0 king, 
who brought no gifts. 

7 This is the mother, this the sire, this one hath come 

to be thy life. 

What brings thee forth is even this. Now come, 
Subandhu, get thee forth. 

8 As with the leather thong they bind the chariot 

yoke to hold it fast, 

So have I held thy spirit fast, held it for life and not 
for death, held it for thy security. 

9 Even as this earth, the mighty earth, holds fast the 

monarchs of the wood, 

So have I held thy spirit fast, held it for life and not 
for death, held it for thy security. 

10 Subandhu’s spirit I have brought from Yama, from 

Vivasvdn’s son, 

Brought it for life and not for death, yea, brought it 
for security. 

11 The wind blows downward from on high, downward 

the Sun-god sends his heat, 

Downward the milch-cow pours her milk : so down¬ 
ward go thy pain and grief. 

12 Felicitous is this mine hand, yet more felicitous is this. 
This hand contains all healing balms, and this makes 

whole with gentle touch. 


7 This : Agni, according to Sayana. The speaker probably means 
himself.—L. Subandhu seerns to have been in a trance and ap¬ 
parently dead. “ It is supposed that the brothers of Subandhu havo 
addressed their supplications to Agni, to restore him to life, and that 
he has come accordingly, being, as it were, his parent and begetter. 
Another interpretation explains the terms literally as, Subandhu, your 
father mother, and son, have come to mourn your decease,”—Wilson. 

8 So have I held: ‘so has Agni placed/ according to Say ana. 

11 Thy pain and grief: * thy sin/—S&yana. 

12 More felicitous is this: my other hand, probably the right. 
Wi:h gentle touch with light friction, laying-on of hands, or hyp • 
notizing passes. 






MINlSr^ 



THE RIGYEDA. 


217 


HYMN LXI. Visvedevas. 


The welcome speaker in the storm of battle uttered 
with might this prayer to win the Asvins, 

When the most liberal god, for Paktha, rescued his 
parents, and assailed the seven Hotars. 

2 Chyavana, purposing deceptive presents, with all 
ingredients, made the altar ready. 

Most sweet-voiced Tuvvay&na poured oblations like 
floods of widely fertilizing water. 


The Tiislii is Nabhanedishtha of the race of Manu. The metre is 
Trishtup. The Hymn, as Prof. Ludwig observes, belongs to the 
most difficult, one might almost say most hopeless, portions of the 
lligveda. It is made up of several parts which are in no intelligible 
connexion with each other. 

1 According to the view taken by Prof. Pisohcl who has most care¬ 
fully studied and elaborately discussed the first three stanzas ( Vedische 
Studien, pp. 71—77), they contain in brief the ancient story of 
Turvay&na, the young king of the Pakthas aud Chyavana. Chyavana, 
ft favourite of the Asvin3 who had restored him to youth (I. 116. 10, 
nud 117. 13), intended to sacrifice to them, hoping with their aid to 
conquer Turvayfiua and his parents. But Indra stays the sacrifice, 
drives the priosts away, and enables Turvayana who had poured rich 
libations to him to gain the victory over his opponent. 

The welcome speaker : Turvayana, whose words were welcome to 
the gods. To win the Asvins: raudram : not ‘addressed to Rudra,’ 
but to tb f ' Asvins who are called rudrau in stanza 15, and, elsewhere, 
rudr& and rudravartani. The most libeml god: Indra. Raktha : king 
of the Pakthas (see VII. 18. 7), that is, apparently, Turvayana, who 
has been mentioned in I. 53.. 10, and VI. 18. 13, as especially aided 
\.y Indra. Seven Hotars : thg usual number of Hotar priests em¬ 
ployed at important sacrifices. ' 

2 Deceptive pi'esents : his intended sacrifice was displeasing to Indra, 
whom, possibly, Chyavana % falsely pretended that he was about to 
worship. With all ingredients : required for the preparation of the 
Soma-juice. ' Toured oblations: to Indra. . , V- 


x\ 



misTfy 



THE HYMNS OF 


(gT 

BOOKSi^ 


3 To his oblations, swift as thought, ye hurried, and 

welcomed eagerly the prayers he offered. 

With arrows in his hand the very mighty forced from 
him all obedience of a servant. 

4 I call on you the sons of Dyaus, the Asvins, that a 

dark cow to my red kine be added. 

Enjoy my sacrifice, come to my viands, contented, 
not deceiving expectation. 

10 Uttering praise to suit the rite Navagvas came 
speedily to win the damsel’s friendship. 

They who approached the twice-strong stable’s 
keeper, meedless, would milk the rocks that naught 
had shaken. 


3 his oblationz: to the offerings of Chyavana. Ye: Asvins. 
The very mighty : Imlra, who threatened Chyavana and made him 
his obedient servant. 

4 The Iiishi now prays to the Asvins on his own account, and asks 

for a dark-coloured cow as a reward. Sayana, whom Professors 

Ludwig and Grassmann follow 3 4 * * 7 * * 10 , explains the second half of tlio iiist 

line more poetically : —‘ when the dark night retires before the purple 
oxen (of the chariot of the dawn).’—Wilson. ‘When the black sits 

among the red cows; that is, while it is still dark, but the grey of 
morning is beginning to appear.’—Ludwig. 

^ I. pass over stanzas 5—9,* which contain an ancient legend, probably 
the germ of the la ter story of Brahma or Prajapati and his daughter, 
concerning two deities or powers of nature, male and female. 
See Appendix. 

10 Navagvas: ‘the Angirasas.' — Wilson. The maiden: Sayana 
says that Prisni may be meant. Perhaps Sarama is intended. The 
tivice-strong stable’s keeper: the Pani or Panis who kept the stolen 
cows or vanished rays of light concealed. Meedless: as the Panis 
refused to give up the cows. Would milk the rocks : would force from 
the rocky prison the meed or honorarium which they deserved iu the 
shape of the cows. 




mist#,. 


THE RIG VEDA. 219 

11 Swift was new friendship with the maid: they quick¬ 

ly accepted it as genuine seed and bounty. 

Milk which the cow Sabardugha had yielded was the 
bright heritage which to thee they ottered. 

12 When afterwards they woke and missed the cattle, 

the speaker thus in joyful mood addressed them : 
Matchless are singers through the Yasu’s nature ; he 
bringeth them all food and all possessions. 

13 His followers then who dwelt in sundry places came 

and desired to slay the son of Nrishad. 

Resistless foe, he found the hidden treasure of Sushna 
multiplied in numerous offspring. 

14 Thou, called Effulgence, in whose threefold dwelling, 

as in the light of heaven, the gods are sitting, 
Thou who art called Agni or Jatavedds, priest, hear 
us guileless priest of holy worship. 

15 And, Indra, bring, that I may laud and serve them, 

those two resplendent glorious Nasatyas, 

Blithe, bounteous, man-like, to the sacrificer, honour- 
* r * ed among our men with offered viands. 



YMN 61.] 


11 SdbardughA: ‘nectar-yielding;’ the general name of cows milked 

at sacrifices. Which to thee they offered : which the Ahgirasas offered 
to Indra. a % 

12 The Vasu is Indra. 

13 The son of Nrishad: Nitrshada, usually a patronymic of Kanva, 
but said to be in this place the name of a certain demon. Resistless 
foe: Indra. 

14 Here begins another part of the hymn. Agni is addressed. 
Effulgence: identified with the Sun. Threefold dwelling: earth, 
firmament, and heaven. 

15 Man-like: as men reward one who institutes a sacrifice for thoir 
benefit. 



MINlSr^ 



THE HYMNS OF 



16 This king is praised and honoured as ordainer : him¬ 

self the bridge, the sage speeds o’er the waters. 

He hath stirred up Kakshlvdn, stirred up Agni, 
1 as the steed’s swift wheel drives the felly onward. 

17 Vaitarana, doubly kinsman, sacrificer, shall milk the 

cow who ne’er hath calved, Sabardhuk, 

When I encompass Varuna and Mitra with lauds, 
and Aryaman in safest shelter. 

18 Their kin, the prince in heaven, thy nearest kinsman 

turning his thought to thee thus speaks in kindness: 
This is our highest bond : I am his offspring. How 
many others came ere I succeeded ? 

19 Here is my kinship, here the place I dwell in : these 

are my gods ; I in full strength am present. 

Twice -born am I, the first-born son of Order : the 
Cow milked this when first she had her being. 

20 So ’mid these tribes he rests, the friendly envoy, 

borne on two paths, refulgent, lord of fuel. 


16 This Icing: Sfirya, the Sun-god. ‘This royal Soma.’—-Wilson. 
Himself the bridge: the long beams of light form the bridge by 
which Surya passes over the waters of the firmament or sea of air. 
KakshivCtn : the celebrated Rishi. See Vol. I., Index. 

17 Vaitarana: ‘(Agni), the conveyer (of all).’—Wilson. Agni is 
so called, probably, as sacrificer for a prince Vitarana. Doubly 
kinsman : closely allied to heaven and earth. Sabardhuk: the Cow 
,vl\ooe milk is used in sacrifice; also called Sabardugha, as in stanza 11, 

18 Their kin: akin to Mitra, Varuna, and Aryaman. The prince : 
$4ri: Surya, the Sun-god. Thy nearest kinsman: Surya. This: 
Xiyaus. How many others: many Savitars (suns that introduce the 
now year) have been before me.—L. 

19 These are my gods : 1 these are my rosplendent (rays).—Wilson. 
Probably the priests are intended.—L. The Oovj : Aditi. Milked this : 
‘milked forth this universe.’—Wilson. Agni is the speaker of 
this stanza. 

20 He: Agni. Two paths . from earth to heaven and from heaven 
to earth. 






miSTffy 


THE RIG VEDA. 



HYMN 61.] 



When, like a line, the babe springs up erectly, his 
mother straight hath borne him strong to bless us. 

21 Then went the miick-kme forth to please the maiden, 

and for the good of every man that livetli. 

Hear us, O wealthy lord ; begin our worship. Thou 
hast grown mighty through Asvaghna’s virtues. 

22 And take thou notice of us also, Indra, for ample 

riches, king whose arm wields thunder ! 

Protect our wealthy nobles, guard our princes un- 
meuaced near thee, lord of tawny coursers. 

23 When he goes forth, ye pair of kings, for booty, 

speeding to war and praise to please the singer,—> 
I was the dearest sage of those about him,—let 
him lead these away and bring them safely. 

24 Now for this noble man’s support and comfort, sing¬ 

ing with easy voice we thus implore thee: 
Impetuous be his son and fleet his courser: and may 
I be his priest to win him glory. 

25 If, for our strength, the priest with adoration to win 

your friendship made the laud accepted, 

That laud shall be a branching road to virtue for 
every one to whom the songs are suited. 


21 I he reference in the first line is, apparently,. to the iraprisonled 
cow i and Sarama (see stanza 10); but all explanations of the allusions 
in this hymn are more or less conjectural. Prof. Ludwig, thinks that 
she reference may be to the actual milking of the sacrificial cows at 
the ceremony whieh this hymn accompanied.. Professor Wilson 
translates:—‘The wppds of a desirable praise, of a certain tranquil 
person (Nabhanedishtha), attain the prototype (Indra).’ Awaghna: 
probably the patromymic of Vitarana.—L. See note on Vaitarana 
in stanza 17. 

2h He: Asvaghna Vitarana, Ye pair cf kings . Mitra and Vanma, 



mist#,. 



TEE HYMN'S OF 



26 Glorified thus, with holy hymns and homage Of 

noble race, with Waters, god-attended— 

May he enrich us for our prayers and praises : now- 
can the cow be milked; the path is open. 

2 7 Be to us, then, ye gods who merit worship, be ye of 

one accord our strong protection, 

Who went on various ways and brought us vigour, 
ye w r ho are undeceivable explorers. 


HYMN LXII. Visvedevas, Etc. 

Ye who, adorned with guerdon through the sacrifice, 
have won you Indra’s friendship and eternal life, 

Even to you be happiness, Angirasas. Welcome the 
son of Manu, ye who are most wise. 

2 The Fathers, who drave forth the wealth in cattle, 
have in the year’s course cleft Yala by eternal 
Law: 

A lengthened life be yours, 0 ye Angirasas. Wel¬ 
come the son of Manu, ye who are most Nvise. 


26 Glorified thus: that is, May Varuna glorified with sorg begin¬ 
ning, “Of noble race, etc.,” enrich us. Noio can the cow be milked: 
it is now time for the morning Agnihotram.—Ludwig. 

Prof. Grassmann has banished this almost unintelligible hymn to 
his Appendix. 

The Visvedevas, or the Angirasas, are the deities of stanzas !—6, 
and the Visvedevas alone of 7. The munificence of S&varni is the 
deified object of the rest. The Rishi is Nabhauedishtha. The metre 
is Jagati in stanzas 1—4, Anushtup in 5, 8, 9, Brihati in 6, Satobri- 
hati iu 7, G&yatri in 10, and Trisbtnp in 11. 

1 The son of Manu ; Nabhauedishtha MAuava. 

2 The Fathers: the Angirasas. Vala ; the demon who stole the 
cows of the gods. 


* 



<SL 

THE RIG VED A, 223 

3 Ye raised the Sun to heaven by everlasting Law, and 

spread broad earth, the mother, out on every side. 

Fair wealth of progeny be yours, Angirasas. Wel¬ 
come the son of Manu, ye who are most wise. 

4 This kinsman in your dwelling-place speaks pleasant 

words: giveear to this, ye Rishis, children of the gods. 

High Brahman dignity be yours, Angirasas. Wel¬ 
come the son of Manu, ye who are most wise, 

5 Distinguished by their varied form, these Rishis 

have been deeply moved. 

These are the sons of Angiras : from Agni have they 
sprung to life. 

6 Distinguished by tlieir varied form, they sprang 

from Agni, from the sky. 

Navagva and Dasagva, noblest Angiras, he giveth 
bounty with the gods. 

7 With Indra for associate the priests have cleared 

the stable full of steeds and kine, 

Giving to me a thousand with their eight-marked 
ears, they gained renown among the gods. 

8 May.this man’s sons be multiplied; like springing; 

corn may IVfanu grow, 

Who gives at once in bounteous gift a thousand kine, 
a hundred steeds. 


3 Ly eve.' lasting Law : ‘by meaus of yoiu - sacrifice.’—Wilson. 

4 This kinsman : or, this Nabha, tlmt is Nabhanedishtha. 

5 Distinguished by their varied form: or, Virupas. See III. 53. 6. 

6 From the sky: or, from Dyaus. Noblest Angiras : Agni himself, 
according to Sayana. He is also called Navagva and Dasagva as these 
] mostly names or titles belong to or are closely connected with the 
Angirasas. 

^ ^ their eight-marked ears : having the figure 8 branded on 
their ears; or perhaps, with slit ears. 

8 Alarm: here apparently the name of Savarni. A thousand line, 
a hundred steeds: ‘ kine ’ is conjectnrally supplied. ' A thousand 
and a hundred horses.’—Wilson. ‘A thousaud times a hundred 

horses.’— Ludwig. 





MiNisr^ 



THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 



9 No one attains to him, as though a man would grasp 
the heights of heaven. 

S&varrtya’s sacrificial meed hath broadened like an 
ample flood. 

10 Yadu and Turva, too, have given two D&sas, well-' 

disposed, to serve, 

Together with great store of kine. 

11 Blest be the hamlet’s chief, most liberal Manu, and 

may his bounty rival that of Sfirya. 

May the gods let Savariji’s life be lengthened, with 
whom, unwearied, we have lived and prospered. 


HYMN LXIII. Visvedevas. 

May they who would assume kinship from far away, 
Vivasv&n’s generations, dearly loved of men, 

Even the gods who sit upon the sacred grass of 
Nahusha’s son Yayati, bless and comfort us. 

2 For worthy of obeisance, gods, are all your names, 
worthy of adoration and of sacrifice. 

Ye who were bom from waters, and from Aditi, and 
from the earth, do ye here listen to my call. 


9 Sdvarnya here means Savarni. 

10 Turva: equivalent to Turvasa; a prince of the clan called after 
the eponytana Turva. Ddscts : enslaved natives. 

The deity of stanzas 16 and 17 is Svasti, or Happiness personified. 
The Rishi is Gaya, son of Plati. The metre is Trisbtup in stanzas 
16 and 17, and Jagati iu the rest of the hymn. 

1 Kinship: relationship with us, and the duties of protection and 
aid which relationship implies. Vivasvdn’s generations: Siyana sup 
plies a verb, and explains differently ‘(support) the generations of 
(Manu the son of) Vivas vat.'—Wilson. Yaydti: see I. 7.9, and 108.8. 

2 From 'waters: the aerial waters, or intermediate region of air. 
ji‘ilt • Prof. Roth understands Aditi here to mean “ infinity,” tho 
boundlessness cf heaven as opposed to the limitation of earth. Sec 
Muir, 0. S. Texts, V. 39. SEyana’s explanation is similar. 




MIN/Sr^ 



3 I will rejoice in these Adityas for my weal, for whom 

the Mother pours forth water rich in balm, 

And Dyaus the infinite, firm as a rock, sweet milk,— 
gods active, strong through lauds, whose might 
the Bull upholds. 

4 Looking on men, ne’er slumbering, they by their 

deserts attained as gods to lofty immortality. 

Borne on refulgent cars, sinless, with serpents’ 

E owers, they robe them, for our welfare, in the 
eight of heaven. 

5 Great kings who bless us, who have come to sacrifice, 
who, ne’er assailed, have set their mansion in the 
sky,— 

These I invite with adoration and with hymns, 
mighty Adityas, Aditi, for happiness. 

C W ho offereth to you the laud that ye accept, O ye 
All-gods of Manu, many as ye are ? 

Who, mighty ones, will prepare for you the sacrifice 
• to bear us over trouble to felicity ? 

7 Ye to whom Manu, by seven priests, with kindled 
fire, offered the first oblation with his heart 
and soul, 

Vouchsafe us, ye Adityas, shelter free from fear, and 
make us good and easy paths to happiness. 

8 Wise deities, who have dominion o’er the world, ye 
^ thinkers over all that moves not and that moves, 
Save us from uncommitted and committed sin, pre¬ 
serve us from all sin to-day for happiness. 

9 In battles we invoke Indra still swift to hear, and 
. ^he . h °ly host ot heaven who banish grief, 
Mitra, and Varuna that we may gain, Dyaus, 
Bhaga, Maruts, Prithivl for happiness : 


1he Mother: Earth. Dyaus.: Heaven. The Bull, the Sun, 
Sftyana explains vrishabhar&n as ‘ bringers of rain.’ 

•! With serpents’powei’S : ‘of unsurpassable wisdom,’—Wilson. 

15 







10 Mightily-saving Earth, incomparable Heaven, the 

good guide Aditi who gives secure defence. 

The well-oared heavenly ship that lets no waters in, 
free from defect, will vte ascend for happiness. 

11 Bless us, all holy ones, that we may have your help, 

guard and protect us from malignant injury. 

With fruitful invocation may we call on you, gods, 
who give ear to us for grace, for happiness. 

12 Keep all disease afar and sordid sacrifice, keep off 

the wicked man’s malicious enmity. 

Keep far away from us all hatred, 0 ye gods, and 
give us ample shelter for our happiness. 

* 13 Untouched by any evil, every mortal thrives, and, 
following the Law, spreads in his progeny, 

Whom ye with your good guidance, O Adityas, lead 
safely through all his pain and grief to happiness. 

14 That which ye guard and grace in battle, 0 ye gods, ye 

Maruts, where the prize is wealth, where heroes win, 
That conquering car, 0 Indra, that sets forth at dawn, 
that never breaks, may we ascend for happiness. 

15 Vouchsafe us blessing in our paths and desert tracts, 

blessing in waters and in battle for the light; 
Blessing upon the wombs that bring male children 
forth, and blessing, O ye Maruts, for the gain of 
wealth. 

16 The noblest Svasti with abundant riches, who comes 

to what is good by distant pathway,— 

May she at home and far away preserve us, and 
dwell with us under the gods’ protection. 


10 The heavenly ship: according to Sayana, a metaphorical expres¬ 
sion for sacrifice. 

14 For happiness: svo.staye, for happiness or welfare, recurs at the 
end of all the stanzas from 3 to 14 inclusive. 

16 Svasti: Puthya Svasti, according to the Index; tho goddess of 
prosperity and happiness. 






• 17 Thus hath the thoughtful sage, the son of Plati, 
praised you, O Aditi and all Adityas. 

Men are made rich by those who are immortal : the 
heavenly folk have been extolled by Gaya. 

HYMN LXIV. Visvedevas. 

What god, of those who hear, is he whose wen- 
praised name we may record in this our sacrifice ; 
and how ? 

\V ho will be gracious ? who of many give us bliss ? 
Who out of all the host will come to lend us aid ? 

2 The will and thoughts within my breast exert their 

power: they yearn with love, and fly to all the 
regions round. 

None other comforter is found save only these : my 
longings and my hopes are fixt upon the gods. 

3 To Nar&sansa and to Phshan I sing forth, to uncon¬ 

ceal able Agni kindled by the gods ; 

To Sun and Moon, two bright Moons, Yama in the 
heavens, to Trita, V&ta, Hawn, Night, and the 
Asvins twain. 

4 How is the sage extolled whom the loud singers 

praise? What voice, what hymn is used to-laud 
Brihaspati ? 

May Aja-Ekap&d with Rikvans swift to hear, and 
Alii of the deep listen unto our call. 


. * s Ga y a > 8on Pluti. The metre is Trialitup in stanzas 

K, 16, 17, and Jagatf in the rest of the hymn. 

3 Unconcealable Agni: or, to the uncoucealable (Savitar) and Agni. 

la,, bright Moont: two great lights. Trita: said by S&yana to 
mean Indra diffused through the three worlds. 

i AjarEkapM: see VI. 50. 14. Rikvans . singers ; minor deities 
who attend and sing the praises of some superior god. A hi of the 
: the great dragon of the depths of the aerial ocean; Ahirbudhnya. 
See Vol. II,, Index, 





MINIS 



5 Aditi, to the birth of Daksha and the vow thou 

summonest the kings Mitra and Varuna. 

With course unchecked, with many chariots Arya- 
man comes with the seven priests to tribes of 
varied sort. 

6 May all those vigorous coursers listen to our cry, 

hearers of invocation, speeding on their way ; 
Winners of thousands where the priestly meed is 
won, who gather of themselves great wealth in 
every war. 

7 Bring ye Purandhi, bring V&yu who yokes his steeds, 

for friendship bring ye Phshan with your songs 
of praise : 

They with one mind, one thought attend the sacrifice, 
in the creative work of Savitar the god. 

8 The thrice-seven wandering rivers, yea, the mighty 

floods, the forest trees, the mountains, Agni to 
our aid, 

Krisanu, Tishya, archers to our gathering-place, and 
Budra strong amid the Budras, we invoke. 


!j Daksha ; meaning hero the Son, according to Siyana. Prof. 
Ludwig thinks that the sacrificer, regarded as Daksha or Trajapati, 
aud said to be born again through completion of his vow, is intended. 
In the second line also Aryanmn is considered by Say an a to be the 
Sun ‘ Aryaman, whose course is not harried, the giver of delight 
to many, having seven ministering (rays) proceeds in his multiform 
births.’—Wilson. 

<\ Coursers: the horses which bring the gods to men’s sacrifices. 

7 Purandhi ; Plenty personified as a deity. Or purandhim may be 
an adjective ‘the fruitful Tuskm.' In the creative work: included 
among the creatures of Savitar. 

g 2'hrice-seven : the seven rivers of the land of the Aryans having 
their counterparts in heaven and in the firmament. Kris&nu: the 
divine archer who guards the heavenly Soma. Tishya: an aeterism 
i , f.vded as being in the form of an arrow, and so here identified with 

Krisauu, 





misT/if 


FITE RIG VEDA. 




9 Let the great streams come hither with their mighty 
help, Sindhu, Sarasvati, and Sarayu with their 
waves. 

Ye goddess floods, ye mothers*, animating all, promise 
us water rich in fatness and in balm. 

J O And let Brihaddivfi,, the mother, hear our call, and 
T wash tar, father, with the goddesses and dames. 
Ribhukshan, V&ja, Bhaga, and Rathaspati, and the 
sweet speech of him who labours guard us well, 

11 Pleasant to look on as a dwelling rich in food is the 

blest favour of the Maruts, Rudra's sons. 
j.*Iay we be famed among the folk for wealth in kine, 
and ever come to you, ye gods, with sacred food. 

12 l Be thought which ye, O Maruts, Indra, and ye 
.. gods have given to me, and ye Mitraand Varuna,— 

Cause this to grow and swell like a milch-cow with 
milk. Will ye not bear away my songs upon 
your car ? 

13 O Maruts, do ye never, never recollect and call again 

to mind this our relationship? 

When next we meet together at the central point, 
even there shall Aditi confirm our brotherhood, 

14 The mothers, Heaven and Earth, those mighty god¬ 

desses, worthy of sacrifice, come with the race of 
gods. 

These two with their support uphold both gods and 
men, and with the Fathers pour the copious 
genial stream. 


7 , l0Bl -' i/l f ddivd - a goddess associated with Tja, Sarasvati, and others. 

' : h0 eou sorts of the gods. Labours, in prayer and praise. 
tia'hnspati: the god who presides over chariots of war. 

tl ! J y * n ^his 'R'ishtup stanza the forty-eight syllables of 

Jo At the central point: the place of sacrifice. 

14 With the Fathers: “The fruitfulness of heaven and earth, 
which give birth to gods and men, is described as produced by the 
fathers.” See Wallis, Cosmology of the IiUpmla, p. 72. 







15 This invocation wins all good that we desire: 

Brihaspati, highly-praised Aramati, are here, 
Even where the stone that presses meath rings 
loudly out, and where the sages make their, voices 
heard with hymns. 

16 Thus hath the sage, skilled in loud singers’ duties, 

desiring riches, yearning after treasure, 

Gaya, the priestly singer, with his praises and 
hymns contented the celestial people. 

17 Thus hath the thoughtful sage, the son of Plati, 

praised you, 0 Aditi and all Adityas. 

Men are made rich by those who are immortal: 
the heavenly folk have been extolled by Gaya. 

HYMN LXV, Vievedevas. 

May Agni, Indra, Mitra, Varuna consent, Aryaman, 
^ V&yu, PftsHn, and Sarasvati, 

Adityas, Maruts, Vishnu, Soma, lofty Sky, Rudra, 
and Aditi, and Brahmanaspati. 

2 Indra and Agni, hero-lords when Vritra fell, dwelling 

together, speeding enmlously on,. 

And"Soma blent with oil, putting his greatness forth, 
have with their power filled full the mighty firma¬ 
ment. 

3 Skilled in the Law I lift the hymn of praise to these, 

Law-strengtheners, unassailed, and great in ma¬ 
jesty. 

These in their wondrous bounty send the watery sea: 
may they as kindly friends send gifts to make us 
great. 


15 Aramati: the Genius of Devotion. 

17 The concluding stanza of Hymn LXIII. is repeated here. 

The Rishi is Vaeukarna, sun of Vasukra, The metre is Jagatt, with 
Trishtup in stauza 15. 

3 The watery sea: the clouds and rain, 



MINlSr^ 


231 



THE RIG VEDA. 

4 They with their might have stayed Heaven, Earth, 

and Prithivi, the lord of light, the firmament, the* 
lustrous spheres. 

Even as fleet-foot steeds who make their masters 

glad, the princely gods are praised, most bountiful 
to man. 

5 Bring gifts to Mitra and to Varuna who, lords of 

alJ, in spirit never fail the worshipper, 

"Whose statute shines on high through everlasting 

Paw, whose places of sure refuge are the heavens 
and earth. 

6 The eo\t who yielding milk goes her appointed way 

-iitliGi to us as leader of our lioly rites, 

Speaking aloud to Varupa and the worshipper, shall 
.vith oblation serve Vivasv&n and the gods. 

t The gods whose tongue is Agni dwell In heaven, and 
sit, aiders of Law, reflecting, in the seat of Law. 
They propped up heaven and then brought waters 
with their might, got sacrifice and in a body made 
it fair. J 

8 Born in the oldest time, the parents dwelling round 

are sharers of one mansion in the home of Law. 
Bound by their common vow Dyaus, Prithivi stream 
forth the moisture rich in oil to Varuna the steer. 

9 Parianya, Vata, opulent and mighty lords, India and 

V&yu, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman : 

V e call on Aditi, the Adityas, and the gods, those 
who are on the earth, in waters, and in heaven. 


4 1 rithivl: meaning here the region of mid-air. 

5 Places of sure refuge: Sayana explains nddhast differently;— 
upon whom the two solicitous worlds remain dependent.’ 

6 The cow: who is milked at sacrifice. According to Savana, 
thunder may be meant, and by ‘ milk ’ strength may be intended. ' 

8 The parents: Heaven and Earth, 




MIN/Sr^ 



THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 


$L 


10 Twashtar and Vayu, those who count as Bibhus, 

both celestial Hotar-priosts, and Dawn for happi- 
ness, 

Winning as wealth, we call, and wise Brihaspati, 
destroyer of our foes, and Soma Indra’s friend. 

11 They generated prayer, the cow, the horse, the plants, 

the forest trees, the earth, the waters, and the 


hills. 


These very bounteous gods made the Sun mount to 
heaven, and spread the holy rites of Aryas o’er 
the land. 

12 0 Alvins, ye delivered Bhujyu from distress, ye 

animated Sy&va, Yadhrimati’s son. 

To Vimada ye brought his consort Kamadyd, and 
gaVe his lost Vishn&pG back to Visvaka. 

13 Thunder, the lightning’s daughter, Aja-Ekapad, 

heaven’s bearer, Sindhu, and the waters of the sea : 
Hear all the gods my words, Saras vati give ear to¬ 
gether with Purandhi and the Holy Thoughts. 

14 With Holy Thoughts and with Purandhi may all 

gods, knowing the Law immortal, Manu’s holy 
ones, 

Boon-givers, favourers, finders of light, and Heaven, 
with gracious love accept my songs, my prayer, my 
hymn. 

15 Immortal gods have I, Vasishtha, lauded, gods set 

on high above all other beings. 

May they this day grant us wide space and freedom : 
ye gods, preserve us evermore with blessings. 


10 Celestial Hotar-priests: see I. 13. 8. 

12 These deeds of the Asvins are told in I. 16, and 17. 

13 Aja-Ekapdd ; see VI. 50 14. Purandhi: the deity of Plenty. 
fhly Thoughts: Devotions personified. 

\*' r Manus holy ones: deities whom Matin worshipped. 

15* Vasishtha : that is, a descendant of the great Vasishthih 


\ 




WNlST/f^ 


THE RIG VEDA. 



HYMN 66.] 



HYMN LXVL Visvcdevas. 

I call the gods of lofty glory for our weal, the 
makers of the light, well-skilled in sacrifice ; 

Those who have waxen mightily, masters of all 
wealth, immortal; strengthening Law, the gods 
whom Indra leads. 

2 For the strong band of Maruts will we frame a hymn: 

tho ohiefs shall bring forth sacrifice for Indra’s 
troop, 

Who, sent by Indra and advised by Yaruna, have 
gotten for themselves a share of Sdrya’s light. 

3 May Indra with the Vasus keep our dwelling safe, 

and Aditi with the Adityas lend us sure defence. 
May the god Rudra with the Rudras favour us, and 
Twashtar with the dames further us to success. 

4 Aditi, Heaven and Earth, the great eternal Law, 

Indra, Vishnu, the Maruts, and the lofty Sky. 

We call upon the Adityas, on the gods, for help, on 
Vasus, Rudras, Savitar of wondrous deeds. 

5 With Holy Thoughts Sarasv&n, firm-la wed Varuria, 

great Vdyu, Pftshan, Vishnu, and the Asvins 
twain, 

Lords of all wealth, immortal, furtherers of prayer, 
grant us a triply-guarding refuge from distress. 

6 Strong be the sacrifice, strong be the holy one 

strong the preparers of oblation, strong tho gods. 
Mighty be Heaven and Earth, true to eternal Law, 
strong be Parjanya, strong be they who laud the 
strong. 


] he lliahi is Vasukarna. The metre is Jagatl, with Trishtup in 
stanza 15. 

4 ihe names in the first line are in the nominative case and with¬ 
out, a verb: ‘ate invoked,’ may be understood. 

6 Strong: vriskan repeated in the way loved by some of the Yedio 
poets; 'showerer of benefits’, according to S&yana. The gods: mean¬ 
ing, aays S&yana, the priests. 


R 






MINIS 



THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 



7 To win us strength I glorify the mighty twain, 

Agni and Soma, mighty ones whom many laud. 
May these vouchsafe us shelter with a triple guard, 
these whom the strong have served in worship 
of the gods. 

8 Potent, with firm-fixt law r s, arranging sacrifice, 

visiting solemn rites in splendour of the day, 
Obeying Order, these whose priest is Agni, free from 
falsehood, poured the waters out when Vritra died. 

9 The holy ones engendered, for their several laws, 

the heavens and earth, the waters, and the plants 
and trees. 

They filled the firmament with heavenly light for 
help: the gods embodied Wish and made it 
beautiful. 


10 May they who bear up heaven, the Ribhus deft of 

hand, and V6ta and Parjanya of the thundering 
Bull, 

The waters and the plants, promote the songs we 
sing : come Bhaga, Rati, and the Vajins to my call. 

11 Sindhu, the sea, the region, and the firmament, the 

thunder, and the ocean, Aja-Ekap&d, 

The Dragon of the Deep, shall listen to my words, 
and all the deities and princes shall give ear. 

12 May we be yours, we men, to entertain the gods: 

further our sacrifice and give it full success. 


9 Laws: courses of action. Embodied Wish: gave a body to tlio 
wishes and hopes of worshippers and personified them in the same 
manner as sacrifice is said to have been embodied and beautified in 
X. 65, 7. 

10 Vdta and Parjanya of the thundering Bull: meaning the wind 
and storm that attend the thunderous rain-oloud. Rdti: divine 
Favour. Vdjins: a class of divinities according to Sayana. See VII. 

38. 7* 

Ip Aja-Ekap&d: see VI. 50. 14. Dragon of the Deep : Ahirbu- 
dhnya. See VI. 49. 14. 





MINlSr^ 




HYMN C7,] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


235 


Adityas, Rudras, Yasus, givers of good gifts, quicken 
the holy hymns which we are singing now. 

13 I follow with success upon the path of Law the two 

celestial Hotars, priests of oldest time. 

We pray to him who dwelleth near, guard of the 
field, to all immortal gods who never are remiss. 

14 Vasishtha’s sons have raised their voices, like their 

sire, Rishi-like praying to the gods for happiness. 
Like friendly-minded kinsmen, come at our desire, 
O gods, and shake down treasures on us from above. 

15 Immortal gods have I, Vasishtha, lauded, gods set 

on high above all other beings. 

May they this day grant us wide space and freedom : 
ye gods, preserve us evermore with blessings. 


HYMN LXVII. 


Brihaspati. 


This holy hymn, sublime and seven-headed, sprung 
from eternal Law, our sire discovered. 

Ay&sya, friend of all men, hath engendered the fourth 
hymn as he sang his laud to Indra. 

2 Thinking aright, praising eternal Order, the sons of 

Dyaus the Asura, those heroes, 

Angirasas, holding the rank of sages, first honoured 
sacrifice’s holy statute. 

3 Girt by his friends who cried with swan-like voices, 

bursting the stony barriers of the prison, 


13 Two celestial Hotars: Agui and Aditya, according to S&ynna. 
Guard of the field; probably India. 

15 Repeated from the preoeding hymn. 

The Rishi is Ayasya of the family of Angiras. The metre is 
Trishtup. 

1 Seven-headed: having seven divisions. Accompanied by seven 
bands of the Maruts, or having seven metres, according to Sayaria. 
Our sire; Angiras, 

fourth: or, extending to all four sides, mighty, 




THE I1YMNS OF 


[BOOK 



Brihaspati spake in thunder to the cattle, and uttered 
praise and song when he had found them. 

4 Apart from one, away from two above him, he drave 

the kine that stood in bonds of falsehood. 
Brihaspati, seeking light amid the darkness, drave 
forth the bright cows : three he made apparent. 

5 When he had cleft the lairs and western castle, he 

cut off three from him who held the waters. 
Brihaspati discovered, while he thundered like Dyaus, 
the dawn, the sun, the cow, the lightning. 

6 As with a hand, so with his roaring Indra cleft 

Vala through, the guardian of the cattle. 

Seeking the milk-draught with sweat-shining com¬ 
rades he stole the Paiji’s kine and left him weeping. 

7 He with bright faithful friends, winners of booty, 

hath rent the milker of the cows asunder. 
Brihaspati with wild boars strong and mighty sweat- 
ing with heat hath gained a rich possession. 

8 They, longing for the kine, with faithful spirit incited 

with their hymns the lord of cattle. 

Brihaspati freed the radiant cows with comrades 
self-yoked, averting shame from one another. 


3 The cattle: the lost cows of the Angirasas, representing meta¬ 
phorically the rays of light which had been stolen by the fiends of 
darkness. See I. 62. 3. 

4 Apart from one , away from two: the meaning is uncertain. Per¬ 
haps at a distance from the earth, down from heaven and the firrna- 
rnont. Falsehood: the wickedness of the treacherous Panis. Three : 
heaven, firmament, and earth. 

5 Western castle: this is obscure. Prof. Ludwig suggests that 
avdchtm may mean ‘hostile’ or ‘detested.’ Three: heaven, firma- 
ment and earth. Him who held the waters: the demon Vala, who 
kept the rain, as well as the cows or rays of light, imprisoned. The 
cow: the cattle; the beams of light. 

g Comrades - his faithful friends the Maruts. Wild boars: the 
strong n i ce Maruts; according to S4yai» # ‘bearers of excellent water.’ 

8 The lord of cattle : Brihaspati, so called because he had released 
them. 





^tsim 



HYMN 68.] 


<SL 

THE RIG VEDA. ' 037 


9 In our assembly with auspicious praises exalting 
him who roareth like a lion, 

May we, in every fight where heroes conquer, rejoice 
in strong Brihaspati the victor. 

10 When he had won him strength of every nature 

and gone to heaven and its most lofty mansions, 
Men praised Brihaspati the mighty, bringing the 
light within their mouths from sundry places. 

11 Fulfil the prayer that begs for vital vigour: aid in 

your wonted manner even the humble. 

Let all our foes be turned and driven backward. 
Hear this, 0 Heaven and Earth, ye all-producers. 

12 Indra with mighty strength hath cleft asunder the 

head of Arbuda the watery monster, 

Slain Ahi, and set free the seven rivers. 0 Heaven 
and Earth, with all the gods, protect us. 


HYMN LXVIII. Brihaspati. 

Lias birds who keep their watch, plashing in water, 
lri.o the loud voices of the thundering rain-cloud, 
Like merry streamlets bursting from the mountain, 
thus to Brihaspati our hymns have sounded. 

2 The son of Angiras, meeting the cattle, as Bhacm, 
brought in Aryanian among us. 

me B b> e decks the wife and husband : as 
or the race, Brihaspati, nerve our coursers. 


JO The hjht: that is, the hymns of praise whioh will bring them 
the light of help. The stanza is difficult. 

12 Ihe.uatvy monster: the fiend who dominated the ocean of air. 
Atu: or, the dragon, Vrifcra or his brother. 


The Riahi is Ayfisya, The metre is Trishtup, 

<'hoi islu'd \ brihaspati, especially worshipped and 


* 






WHisr#,, 



THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 



3 Brihaspati, having won them from the mountains, 

strewed down, like barley out of winnow ing-baskets, 
The vigorous, wandering cows who aid the pious, 
desired of all, of blameless form, well-coloured. 

4 As the Sun dews with meath the seat of Order, and 

casts a flaming meteor down from heaven, 

So from the rock Brihaspati forced the cattle, and 
cleft the earth’s skin as it were with water. 

5 Forth from mid-air with light he drave the darkness, 

' as the gale blows a lily from the river. 

Like the wind grasping at the cloud of vala, Brihas- 
pati gathered to himself the cattle. 

6 Brihaspati, when he with fiery lightnings cleft through 

the weapon of reviling Vala, 

Consumed him as tongues eat what teeth have com¬ 
passed: he threw the prisons of the red cows 


8 


That secret name borne by the lowing cattle within 
the cave Brihaspati discovered, 

And drave, himself, the bright kine from the moun¬ 
tain, like a bird’s young after the eggs disclosure. 
He looked around on rock-imprisoned sweetness as 
one who eyes a fish in scanty water. 


3 Out of winnoxoing-baskets : sthivibhyah : the exact meanin o 
the word is somewhat uncertain, hut it is evidently a measure, basket, 
or instrument connected with corn. Sthivimantuh, armed with 
atkivis.’ occurs in X. 27. 15, and is said by S&yana to mean occupants 

f stations.’ Prof. Wilson renders sthivibhyah in this place by from 
the granaries.’ The cows bestowed by Brihaspati are countless as 
grains of barley on the threshing-floor or winnowmg-p'ace. 

4 Cleft the earth's skin: or surface, with the hoofs of many cattle. 

5 A lily: eipdlct: according to SAyana the same as Saivala, the 

Vallisneria Octaudra, a common aquatic plant. . 

6 Weapon: I adopt Sayana’s explanation of jasum, although in X. 
33 2 the same word means ‘ exhaustion. 

8 Sweetness: the sweet milk; that is the cows who produced it. 







THE RIGVEDA. 


230 



Brihaspati, cleaving through with varied clamour, 
brought it forth like a bowl from out the timber. 

9 He found the light of heaven, and fire, and Morning: 
with lucid" rays he forced apart the darkness. 

As from a joint, Brihaspati took the marrow of 
Vala as he gloried in his cattle. 

10 As trees for foliage robbed by winter, Vala mourned 

for the cows Brihaspati had taken. 

He did a deed ne’er done, ne’er to be equalled, 
whereby the sun and moon ascend alternate. 

11 Like a dark steed adorned with pearl, the Fathers 

have decorated heaven with constellations. 

They set the light in day, in night the darkness. 
Brihaspati cleft the rock and found the cattle. 

12 This homage have we offered to the cloud-god who 

thunders out to many in succession. 

May this Brihaspati vouchsafe us fulness of life with 
kine and horses, men, and heroes. 


HYMN LXIX. Agui . 

Auspicious is the aspect of Vadhryasva’s fire : good 
is its guidance, pleasant are its visitings. 

When first the people of Sumitra kindle it, with 
butter pdured thereon it crackles and shines bright. 


Like a boivl: which already exists potentially in the wood from” 
which it is produced by cutting. 

9 Prof. Wilson, following S&yana, paraphrases the second line--- 
lic seized (the cattle from the rock) of Vala surrouuded by the kine 
as (one extracts) marrow from a bone/ 

.11 The fathers : “ The connection of the fathers with the light, of 
winch they are both the embodiments and the guardians, is alone 
Bufficient to explain .their action in placing the stars in the sky."— 
W allis, Cosmology of the Rigveda, p. 68. 

I.-. 7 o many: ‘ cows ’ is, apparently, understood. Sayana supplies 
richas‘ who recites in order many (sacred stanzas).’—Wilson. 


The Rishi is Sumitra, son of Vadhrynsva. The metro is Jaga, in 
stanzas 1. 2, hnd Trishtup in the rest. 

1 l adhryaava has been mentioned, in VI. 61. 1, as a worshipper of 
uuasvftU: here he appears as a special worshipper of Agni, 








THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 


<<§L 


2 Butter is that which makes Vadhryasva's fire grow 
strong: the butter is its food, the butter makes 


it fat. 

It spreads abroad when butter bath been ofieied it, 
and balmed with streams of butter shines forth 
like the sun. 


3 Still newest is this face of thine, O Agni, which 
Manu and Sumitra have enkindled. 


So richly shine, accept our songs with favour, so 
o-ive us strengthening food, so send us glory. 

4 Accept this offering, Agni, whom aforetime Yadlir- 
yasva hath entreated and enkindled. 

Guard well our homes and people, guard our bodies, 
protect thy gifts to us which thou hast granted. 

- j 3 0 splendid, guard us, kinsman of Vadhryasva : let 
not the enmity of men o’ercoine thee. 

Like the bold hero Chyavana, I Sumitra tell forth 
the title of Vadhryasva’s kinsman. 

6 All treasures hast thou won, of plains and mountains, 

and quelled the D&sas’ and the Aryas* hatred. 
Like the bold hero Chyavana, 0 Agni, mayst thou 
subdue the men who long for battle. 

7 Deft Agni hath a lengthened thread, tall oxen, 

a thousand heifers, numberless devices. 

Decked by the men, splendid among the splendid, 
ghiae brightly forth amid devout Sumitras. 


6 Chyavana: a son of Bhrigu. Or the word may mean ‘conquer- 

J > a8 Savana interprets it. Vadhryasva’s linmari: as hav.ng been 

especially worshipped and cherished by that R.shu bee stanza 10. 

, , ) ,,atkened thread: continual sacrifices, from ancient to present 

fumes v'vices: ways of attaining his object. Or eatmtiha may 

<i nv ; in , a hundred or many musical modes or sacred songs, 

.",'L many •’ ‘the leader of hundreds (of burnt offer- 
* prulaeft by * 

ings).’—Wilson. 









THE RtGVEDA. 



HYMN 70.] 


8 Thine is the teeming cow, O J&tavedas, who pours 

at once her ceaseless flow, Sabardhuk. 

Thou art lit up by men enriched with guerdon, 
0 Agni, by the pious-souled Sumitras. 

9 Even the immortal gods, O J&tavedas, Vadhryasva’s 

kinsman, have declared thy grandeur. 

When human tribes drew near with supplication 
thou conqueredst with men whom thou hadst 
strengthened. 

10 Like as a father bears his son, O Agni, Vadhryasva 

bare thee in his lap and served thee. 

Thou, youngest god, having enjoyed his fuel, didst 
vanquish those of old though they were mighty. 

11 Vadhryasva’s Agni evermore hath vanquished his 

foes with heroes who had pressed the Soma. 
Lord of bright rays, thou burntest up the battle, 
subduing, as our help, e’en mighty foemen. 

12 This Agni of Vadhryasva, Vritra-slayer, lit from 

of old, must be invoked with homage. 

As such assail our enemies, Vadhryasva, whether 
the foes be strangers or be kinsmen. 


HYMN LXX. 


A pi ts. 


Enjoy, 0 Agni, this my Fuel, welcome the oil-filled 
ladle where we pour libation. 

Rise up for worship of the gods, wise Agni, on the 
earth’s height, while days are bright with beauty. 

2 May he who goes before the gods come hither with 
steeds whose shapes are varied, Nar&sansa. 

May he, most godlike, speed our offered viands with 
homage god-ward on the path of Order. 


Other Aprf hymns may be compared; I. 13, 142, and 188; II. 3; 
HI 4; V. 5j VII. 2, and IX. 5. The usual deities and deified 
objects} with the exception of Tan&nup&t, are intoned. The Rishi i» 
Sumitra. The metre is Trisbtup, 




THE HYMNS OF 



[BOOK 


<2r 

z 


3 Men with oblations laud most constant Agni, and 

pra} T him to perform an envoy’s duty. 

With lightly-rolling car and best draught-horses, 
bring the gods hither and sit down as Hotar. 

4 May the delight of gods spread out transversely: 

may it be with us long in length and fragrant. 

O Holy Grass divine, with friendly spirit bring thou 
the willing gods whose chief is Indra. 

5 Touch ye the far-extending height of heaven, or 

spring apart to suit the wide earth’s measure. 
Yearning, ye Doors, with those sublime in greatness, 
seize eagerly the heavenly car that cometb. 

6 Here in this shrine may Dawn and Night, the 

daughters of Heaven, the skilful goddesses, be seated 1 . 
In your wide lap, auspicious, willing ladies, may the 
gods seat them with a willing spirit. 

7 Up stands the stone, high burns the fire enkindled; 

Aditi’s lap contains the friendly natures. 

Ye two Chief Priests who serve at this our worship, 
may ye, more skilled, win for us rich possessions. 

8 On our wide grass, Three Goddesses, be seated: for 

you have we prepared and made it pleasant. 

May 114, she whose foot drops oil, the goddess, 
taste, man-like, sacrifice and well-set presents. 


3 As Hotar: ‘ as ministrant priest.’—Wilson, 

4 The delight of gods: the sacred grass. 

5 The heavenly car: which brings the gods. 

7 The stone: with which tho Soma juice is expressed. Aditi’s lap . 
the surface of the earth. The friendly natures: the gods. According 
to Sltyana, * the acceptable sacrificial vessels,’ Two Chi-ef Priests: 
purohitau: perhaps Agni and Aditya. More shilled: ’ban human 
priests. 

8 Three Goddam: Ija, Saragvati, and Bharati, Taste: the verb is 
plum?, meaning, may ila and the others taste. Man-like : as at the 
sacrifice of Mauu, according to Sayana, 




wtosT^ 


THE RIG VEDA. 




9 Since thou, God Twaslitar, hast made beauty perfect, 
since thou hast been the Angirasas’ companion, 
Willing, most wealthy, giver of possessions, grant 
us the gods’ assembly, thou who knowest. 

10 Well knowing, binding with thy cord, bring hither, 

Lord of the Wood, the deities’ assembly. 

The god prepare and season our oblations : may 
Heaven and Earth be gracious to my calling. 

11 Agni, bring hither Yaruna to help us, Iridra from 

heaven, from air’s mid-realm the Maruts. 

On sacred grass all holy ones be seated, and let the 
immortal gods rejoice in Svaha. 

HYMN LXXI. Jnanam. 


When men, Brihaspati, giving names to objects, sent 
out Vfik’s first and earliest utterances, 

All that was excellent and spotless, treasured within, 
them, was disclosed through their affection. 


9 Grant us thegods’ assembly: the Commentators oxplain pdthas 
sometimes as ‘place,’ sometimes as ‘food’ or ‘air’ or ‘water.’ Here 
Prof. Wilson, following Sayana, translates:—‘ offer the food of tbo 
gods (to them).’ 

10 Binding with thy cord; it is not clear what is to bo bound, or 
ranged in order. According to Sayana, the pdthas , which he explains 
as annam devdndm, food of the gods, is to be fastened with a rope. 
Lord of the Wood: vanat/pati: according to Sayana, the yUpa or 
sacrificial post. 

11 Svdhd: that is, in the sacrificial offerings presented with the 
exclamation Svaha, Ave, or Hail. 

Jinn am or Knowledge, the subject of this very difficult hymn, is 
said by Sayana to mean Pavamabrahmajnauam, knowledge of tho 
higher truths of Religion, which teaches man his ow r u nature and 
how he may bo reuuited to the Supreme Spirit. 

'l’ho Rishi is Brihaspati, of tho family of Angiras. Tho metre is 
Jagati in stanza 9,.and Trishtup in the rest of the hymn. 

1 Vdk; Voice or Speech, 




TUB HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 


2 Where, like men cleansing corn-flour in a cribble, the 

wise in spirit have created language, 

Friends see and recognize the marks of friendship ; 
their speech retains the blessed sign imprinted. 

3 With sacrifice the trace of V&k they followed, and 

found her harbouring within the Rishis. 

They brought her, dealt her forth in many places : 
seven singers make her tones resound in concert. 

4 One man hath ne’er seen V&k, and yet he seeth; 

one man hath hearing but hath never heard her. 

But to another hath she shown her beauty as a fond 
well-dressed woman to her husband. J 

3 One man they call a laggard, dull^ in friendship : 
they never urge him on to deeds of valour. 

He wanders on in profitless illusion: the Voice he 
heard yields neither fruit nor blossom. * 

6 No part in V&k hath he who hath abandoned his 

own dear friend who knows the truth of friendship. 
Even if he hears her still in vain he listens : naught 
knows he of the path of righteous action. 

7 Unequal in the quickness of their spirit are friends 

endowed alike with eyes and hearing. 

Some looked like tanks that reach the mouth or 
shoulder, others like pools of water fit to bathe in. 

3 When friendly Brahmans sacrifice together with 
mental impulse which the heart hath fashioned., 
They leave one far behind through their attainments, 
and sorno who count as Brahmans wander elsewher e. 


3 Harbouring within the Rishis: they discovered, in tho course of 
sacrifice that the inspired Rishis alone understood Speech as required 
ifv-v religious purposes. I* many places: among the Hotar-pnests. 
Seven , angers: tho seven noisy (birds) meet together. —Wilson: 
referring, says Sayane, to the seven metres, the Giyatri etc. 

P Some who count as Brahmans wander elsewhere: ‘others walkabout 
boasting to be Ir&hm&nt. Muir. 






HYMN 72.] 


THU RIG VEDA. 


245 


9 Those men who step not back and move not forward, 
nor Br&hmans nor preparers of libations, 

Having attained to Yak in sinful fashion spin out 
their thread in ignorance like spinsters. 

10 All friends are joyful in the friend who cometk in 

triumph, having conquered in assembly. 

He is their blame-averter, food-provider: prepared 
is he and fit for deed of vigour. 

11 One plies bis coustant task reciting verses: one 

sings the holy psalm in Sakvarl measures. 

One more, the Brahman, tells the lore of being, and 
one lays down the rules of sacrificing. 


HYMN LXXII. The Gods. 

Let us with tuneful skill proclaim these generations 
of the gods, 

That one may see them when these hymns are chant¬ 


ed in a future age. 

O 


2 Step not back and move not forward: take no active part in reli¬ 
gious ceremouies. ‘ Those who do not walk (with the Brahmans) in 
this lower world, nor (with the gods) in the upper world,’ is Professdr 
Wilson s paraphrase of the text which I have rendered literal 1~. 
Like spinsters ■ “(like) female weavers. Such is the soneo which 
J.rof, Aufrecht thinks may, with probability, be assigned to «Vr a 
word whicn occurs only here.”—Muir. 

H Reciting verm: repeating richds or verses of the Rigveda. 

£ u 3 th \ H0tar ’ T ¥ Mypealm: the Gftyatra or 

■ \ , chanter, one of the four chief priests is 

rfrl * * d // • T T l0r * ° f bem , g • th<J kuowkd g° of all that exists. Lays 
mater kti >i.wV pr m." lb . e8 the order.’—Muir. ‘Measures tho 

the chiof'u-i7 t(j 8 ° D 'ri u* S 3 ^ 6 tbe Adhvavyn, another of 

t. -rL T ? f . 3 ‘ The hymn has been transliterated and translated 

*2* L W- 254 2 56. It has also been metri- 
wl 1®? d b k tbe authors °f the Siebenzig Lieder des Rigveda, who 
j f n flavoured, by transposing some of the stanzas, to bring them 
» ‘ m ? 8e * ecnn ®*>en* According to S&yana, the subject of the whole 

^ understanding of the Veda as essential 

The'me^is"AnuJhlup^’ 8 ° Q ° f ™ Mt ’ daUgbterof Dak " hft ' 




mtsTfy 


THE HYMNS OF 




2 These Brahmanaspati produced with blast and smelt¬ 

ing, like a smith. 

Existence, in an earlier age of gods, from non-exist¬ 
ence sprang. 

3 Existence, in the earliest age of gods, from non¬ 

existence sprang. 

Thereafter were the regions born. This sprang irom 
the Productive Power. 

4 Earth sprang from the Productive Power; the 

regions from the earth were born. } 

Daksha was born of Aditi, and Aditi was Daksha’s 
child. 

5 For Aditi, 0 Daksha, she who is thy daughter, was 

brought forth. 

After her were the blessed gods born ot immortal 
parentage. 

6 When ye, 0 gods, in yonder deep close-clasping 

one another stood, 

Thence, as of dancers, from your feet a thickening 
cloud of dust arose. 

7 When, 0 ye gods, like Yatis, ye caused all existing 

things to grow, 

2 These: all beings. Like a smith: as a blacksmith blows up his fire 

and smelts metal. • . . , mi . . 

3 regions: ‘the quarters (of the horizon).—•Wilson. Inn. 

meaning earth. Productive Power: the meaning of uttdnapadah is 
uncertain. Mr. Wallis renders it by ‘the begetter (the sky);’ Pi of. 
tvjjson by ‘ the upward-growing (tree).’ 

4 And Aditi um Daksha’s child: “ Yaska remarks.How can 

this bo possible? They may have had the same origin; or, according 
to the nature of the gods, they may have been bom from each other,— 
have derived their substance from one another.” 0. S. Texts , IV. M. 

6 “Tim two verses 6 and 7 are interesting as containing an indepen 
dent story of the origin of the world; the gods are said to have 
kicked up in dancing the atoms which formed the earth. —Wallis, 
Cosmology of the Rigveda , p. 43. 

7 Yatis: devotees. 



ViQN\ 4° 


HYMN 73.] 


THE RTGYEDA. 





247 


Then ye brought Sftrya forward who was lying 
hidden in the sea. 

8 Eight are the sons of Aditi who from her body 

sprang to life. 

With seven she went to meet the gods: she cast 
M&rt&nda far away. 

9 So with her seven sons Aditi went forth to meet 

the earlier age. 

She brought Martanda thitherward to spring to 
life and die again. 

HYMN LXXIII. Indra. 

Thou wast born mighty for victorious valour, exult¬ 
ing, strongest, full of pride and courage. 

There, even there, the Maruts strengthened Indra 
when his most rapid mother stirred the hero. 

2 There with fiend’s ways e’en Prisani was seated: 
with much laudation they exalted Indra. 

As if encompassed by the mighty-footed, from dark¬ 
ness, near at hand, forth came the children. 


8 Eight are the sons.- according to. the Commentator, Mitra, 
Vanina, Dbatar, Aryaman, Ansa, Bhaga, Vivasvau, and Aditya (the 
Sun). Mdrt&nda: Surya, the Sun. His exposure probably referu to 
hia sweeping through the sky.—Ludwig. 


The Eiahi is Gauriviti, son of Sakti. The metre is Triehtup. 
f Mother . Aditi. Stirred the hero: gave him free motion as Boon 
as he was born, or incited him to action by telling him of his future 
opponent. See VIII. 45. 5, and 66. 2. 

2 4 hia stanza is unintelligible to me. Prisani: meaning perhaps 
Prisoi, as Prof. Ludwig conjectures. The mighty-footed: Indra. The 
children: the new-born Maruts. Prof. Wilson translates, after 
Sayann : “The martial troop of (Indra) the injiucr encamped around 
Indra (accompanied) by the swift-moving (Maruts): they animated 
him with abundant praise; like (cattle) penned up within a great 
stall, the embryonic (waters) issued from the ( Vritra) who had arrived 
iu the form of darkness/’ 


* 




NllNISr^ 


THE HYMNS OF 

3 High, are thy feet when on thy way thou goest: the 

strength thou foundest here hath lent thee vigour. 
Thousand hyenas in thy mouth thou holdest. 
O Indra, mayst thou turn the Asvins hither. 

4 Speeding at once to sacrifice thou comest: for 

friendship thou art bringing both Nasatyas. 

Thou hadst a thousand treasures in possession. The 
Asvins, O thou hero, gave thee riches. 

5 Glad, for the race that rests on holy Order, with 

friends who hasten to their goal, hath Indra 
With these his magic powers assailed the Dasyu: 
he cast away the gloomy mists, the darkness. 

6 Two of like name for him didst thou demolish, as 

Indra striking down the car of Ushas. 

With thy beloved lofty friends thou earnest, and with 
the assurance of thine heart thou slewest. 

7 War-loving Namuehi thou smotest, robbing the 

D&sa of his magic for the Rishi. 

For man thou madest ready pleasant pathways, 
pnths leading as it were directly god-ward. 

3 These names of thine thou hast fulfilled completely: 
as lord, thou holdest in thine arm, O Indra. 

In thee, through thy great might, the gods are joy¬ 
ful : the roots of trees hast tliou directed upward. 

3 High are thy fed: as travelling through the heavens. Hyenas: 
tM&vrik&n: ‘jackals.’—Wilson, 

0 Two of like name: or, of similar nature} gloomy mists and 
darkness. The car of Ushas: see IV. 30. 8—II* | The assurance of 
thy heart: thy trusted thunderbolt. 

8 Thou hast fulfilled . hast acted in full accordance with the names 
thou bearcat, such as Vritra-slayer, Saba, etc. Thou holdest: the 
thunderbolt. The roots of trees: the ©loads are. often compared to , 
trees. The rain is their fruit, and when they pour it down their 
roots are supposed to be turned upward. 







HYMN 74 .] 


THE HIGVEDA .. 


249 


9 May the sweet Soma-juices make him happy to cast 
his quoit that lies in depth of waters. 

Thou from the udder which o’er earth is fastened 
hast poured the milk into the kine and herbage. 

10 When others call him offspring of the Courser, my 

meaning is that mighty power produced him. 

He came from Manyu and he dwells in houses: 
whence he hath sprung is known to Indra only. 

11 Like birds of beauteous wing the Priyamedhas, 

Pishis, imploring, have come nigh to Indra : 
Dispel the darkness and fill full our vision : deliver 
us as men whom snares entangle. 


HYMN LXXIV. Indra. 

I am prepared to laud with song or worship the noble 
ones who are in earth and heaven, 

Or coursers who have triumphed in the contest, or 
those who, famed, have won the prize with glory. 
2 Their call, the call of gods, went up to heaven: 
they kissed the ground with glory-seeking spirit, 


meaning the thunderbolt. The wider; the 


9 Quoit; chakram, 
firmament. 

10 The Courser; meaning Heaven. Manyu : -wrath, passion or 
tu dour, personified. My meaning is : the speaker declares that he is 

Tl w°T th6 COmmou m ? tholo gical explanations. He considers 
the god to have sprung from a transcendental power.-Ludwig. 

tbia h ? ran tohie Appendix as being 
? hr mo f pSt C follow j p P f tS ab30lutel y unintelligible. I have, for 

the most part, followed ProfessorLudwig’s interpretation. 

saKftVeS" 1 - 1 * 5, 80n ° f The metre is Trishtup. The 
favonv r f h v y " U " a ° 0min g ^ orse " ra ce, and the Rielii invokes in 
f rmep r " 6 a,/ ' a “' iaa ’ Vasus, racers who have won the prize in 

oTor h T\ ^ men Wh ° ™ d *** ^ ^ * 4eakd 

to for help See fednehe Studien, p. 129. 

in thn v ‘>T ^ tbe 2 odB are imagined as present and interested 

earth as they rm ^ lS8e< * ^ ie T'ound: the horses lightly touched tho 




MIN1S7V 


THE HYMNS OF 




There where the gods look on for happy fortune, 
and like the kindly heavens bestow their bounties, 

3 This is the song of those immortal beings who long 

for treasures in their full perfection. 

May these, completing prayers and sacrifices, bestow 
upon us wealth where naught is wanting. 

4 Those living men extolled thy deed, O Indra, those 

who would fain burst through the stall of cattle, 
Fain to milk her who bare but once, great, lofty, whose 
sons are many and her streams past number. 

5 Sachlvan, win to your assistance Indra who never 

bends, who overcomes his foemen, 

Ribhukshan, Maghavan, the hymn’s upholder, who, 
rich in food, bears man’s kind friend, the thunder. 

6 Since he who won of old anew hath triumphed, 

Indra hath earned his name of Vritra-slayer. 

He hath appeared, the mighty lord of conquest. 
What we would have him do let him accomplish. 


HYMN LXXV. The Rivers. 

The singer, 0 ye Waters, in Vivas van s place, shall 
tell your grandeur forth that is beyond compare. 

The Rivers have come forward triply, seven and 
seven. Sindhu in might surpasses all the streams 
that flow. • , 


•1 Those living men: the AngirasaB. Her who bare but once: Heaven, 
according to Sayana; Earth, according to Prof. Grassmann, Prism, 
the mother of the Maruts, must be meant.—Ludwig. See \ I. 48. 2‘J. 

5 Sachivan: apparently a man’s name. ‘Celebrators of holy 
rites.’—Wilson. 

6 He who won of old: the Yajamana. He hath appeared: the 
poet imagines Indra himself to be presen!. 

The Rishi is Sindhukahit, son of Privamedha. The metre is Jngati. 

1 0 ye Waters: apparently the Rivers are addressed as represent¬ 
ing all the divine Waters. Vivasvdns place: where the singers 
stand when they sing hymns. Triply, seven and smn: twenty-out- 









THE RIG VEDA. 


251 



YMN 75.] 


2 Varuna dug the channels for thy forward course, 

O Sindhu, when thou rannest on to greater strength, 
thou speedest o’er precipitous ridges of the earth, 
when thou art lord and leader of these moving 
floods. 

3 His roar is lifted up to heaven above the earth : he 

puts forth endless vigour with a flash of light. 
Like floods of rain that fall in thunder from the 
cloud, so Sindhu rushes ou bellowing like a bull. 

4 Like .mothers to their calves, like milch-kine with 

their milk, so, Sindhu, unto thee the roarin' 1, 
rivers run. 

Thou leadest as a warrior king thine army’s wings 
what time thou contest in the van of these swift 
streams. 

5 Favour ye this my laud, O Gangd, Yamuna, O 

Sutudri, Parushni, and Sarasvati: 

With Asikhl, Vitasta, O Marudvridha, O Arjikiyd 
with Sushoma hear my call. 

G First, with TriagrtfUnA thou art eager to flow forth, 
with Piasa, and Susartu, and with Svety& here, 
With Jvubha; a.nd with these, Sindhu’! and Mehatnu, 
thou seekest in thy course Krurnu and Gomati. 


rivers j two other sets of seven each being added to the seven chief 

rivers of the Pnnjib. Siyana explains differently they flowed by 

f Se . VCnS i r U f 11 th % three (worlda )* , -Wil8on. ‘Each set of seven 
[streams] has followed a threefold course.’—Muir 

thC most ^tant rivers. GangA: tltf 
° Rationed, indirectly, in only one other verse of the Rijveda, 

J vV j r . _ 8 wou ‘ * s sa ‘d by some to be the nauio of a woman, 
bee , I. io. 31. lamunA : the Jumna. SutttdA; the Sutlej or Sntlaj. 
Parushni: the Ravi; Sarasvati: see VI. 61. 2. Asikni: the ancient 
AeesiucB; the Vedic name of the Ohandrabhagi, the preseut Chouab. 
Vitastd: probably the tfhelum, the Hydaspes of the Greeks, Mavud- 
vridhd: meaning, increased by the Maruts ; not identified. Arjikiyd 
and Sushomd are said by Yftska to be the Vip&s and Die Sindhu; but 
this is not posstbll, and it is uncertain what rivers are meant. 





NlINlSr^ 



THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 


(flT 


7 Flashing and whitely-gleaming in her mightiness, 

she moves along her ample volumes through the 
realms, 

Most active of the active, Sindhu unrestrained, like 
to a dappled mare, beautiful, fair to see. 

8 Rich in good steeds is Sindhu, rich in ears and robes, 

rich in gold, nobly-fashioned, rich in vigorous 
mares. 

Blest Silam&vati and young Urriavati invest them¬ 
selves with raiment rich in store of sweets. 

9 Sindhu hath yoked her car, light-rolling, drawn by 

steeds, and with that car shall she win booty in 
this fight. 

JSo have I praised its power, mighty and unrestrained, 
of independent glory, roaring as it runs. 


6 Kubhd, Krumu, and Gomati have been mentioned in previous 
Books. Tbe other streams whose names occur in this stanza are 
probably unimportant affluents of tbe Indus. All that is known 
regarding the rivers mentioned in stanzas 5 and 6 may be found iu 
Zimmer’s AUindisch.es Leben, pp. 4 ff. 

7 In her mightiness: in the preceding stanzas Sindhu appears to be 
a river-god, but in this and following verses the epithets are feminine, 

8 SilamAvati and Urndvali appear to be names of rivers. According 
to Say ana, the words arc epithets of Sindhu and moan respectively 
‘ abounding in Stlamd plants,' said to be used for cordage, and ‘ rich 
in wool.’ Tbe meaning of tbe second half of tbe second line is 
uncertain :—‘ wears [as only one river is supposed to be the subject] 
honey-growing (flowers).’—Wilson. 

9 In this fight: the hymn may, as Prof. Ludwig suggests, be a 
prayer for aid in a battle that is to be fought on the banks of the 
Sindhu or Indus. The hymn has been transliterated and translated 
by Dr. J. Muir, 0. S. Texts, V. 343—345, and a ver sion of stanzas 
I— b is given by Prof, Zimmer, Aliindisc/tes Leben, p i, 




MiNisr^ 


253 



THE RIG VEDA. 


HYMN LXXVI. Press-stones. 

I grasp at you when power and strength begin to 
dawn: bedew ye Indra and the Maruts, Heaven 
and Earth, 

That day and night, in every hall of sacrifice, may 
wait on us and bless us when they first spring 
forth. 

2 Press the libation out, most excellent of all: the 
Pressing-stone is grasped like a hand-guided steed. 

So let it win the valour that subdues the foe, and 
the fleet courser’s might that speeds to ample 
wealth. 


3 Juice that this Stone pours out removes defect of 

ours, as in old time it brought prosperity to man. 
At sacrifices they established holy rites on Twash- 
tar’s milk-blent juice bright with the hue of steeds. 

4 Drive ye the treacherous demons far away from us : 

keep Nirriti afar and banish penury. 

Pour riches forth for us with troops of hero sons, and 
bear ye up, 0 Stones, the song that visits gods. 


The Rishi is Jaratkarna Sarpaj&ti, sou of Iravau. The metre ia 
Jagatt. ( 

1 I grasp at you: ‘I propitiate you.’—Wilson. Power and 
strength : the morning beams which bring new vigour. Day and 
night : or, * both day-halves.’ 

3 Toman: or, to Maim. Tivasktars milk blent juice: the Soma-juice 
brewed by xwashtar for ihe year, which represents tho life-sustainin<* 
power of Nature. JiUdwig, Bright with ihe hue of steeds: tawny" 
coloured. S&yana interprets differently ‘when the son of Twashtri, 
hidden by the (stolen) cows, and assuming the form of a horse, (was 
i<» be slain), Wilson. Trisiras the son of Twashtar was regarded as 

an enemy of the gods. Indra slew him and took possession of the 
Soma. 

4 Nirriti: the goddess of death and destruction. 




Ml toSTfty. 



THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 


(flT 


5 To you who are more mighty than the heavens 

themselves, who, finishing your task with more 
than Yibh van’s speed, . . 

More rapidly than Vftyu seize the Soma-juice, better 
than Agni give us food, to you I sing. 

6 Stirred be the glorious Stones: let it press out the 

juice, the Stone with heavenly song that reaches 
up to heaven, 

There where the men draw forth the meath for 
which they long, sending their voice around in 
rivalry of speed. 

7 The Stones press out the Soma, swift as car-borne 

men, and, eager for the spoil, drain forth the sap 
thereof. 

To fill the beaker, they exhaust the udder’s store, as 
the men purify oblations with their lips. 

8 Ye, present men, have been most skilful in your work, 

and ye, O Stones who pressed Soma lor Indra s 


May all* ye have of fair go to the heavenly race, and 
all your treasure to the earthly worshipper. 


HYMN LXXVH. 


Maruts. 


As with their voice from cloud they sprinkle treasure 
so are the wise man’s liberal sacrifices. 

I praise their company that merits worship as the 
good Maruts’ priest to pay them honour. 






r MN 77 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


233 


2 The youths have wrought their ornaments for glory 

through many nights,—this noble band of Maruts. 
Like stags the sons of Dyaus have striven onward, 
the sons of Aditi grown strong like pillars. 

3 They who extend beyond the earth and heaven, by 

their own mass, as from the cloud spreads Sftrya ; 
Like mighty heroes covetous of glory, like heavenly 
gallants who destroy the wicked. 

4 When ye come nigh, as in the depth of waters, the 

earth is loosened, as it were, and shaken. 

This your all-feeding sacrifice approaches : come all 
united, fraught, as ’twere, with viands. 

5 Ye are like horses fastened to the chariot poles, 

luminous with your beams, with splendour as at 
dawn ; 

Like self-bright falcons, punishers of wicked men, 
like hovering birds urged forward, scattering rain 
around. 

6 When ye come forth, O Maruts, from the distance, 

from the great treasury of rich possessions, 
Knowing, O Vasus, boons that should be granted, 
even from afar drive back the men who hate us. 


know :—‘ they are the generators (of the world) like sacrifices abound¬ 
ing in libations.’—Wilson. The good Maruts' priest: either the band 
of the Maruts vhemsclves regarded as a Brahman, or a human priest 
specially skilled in propitiating them. 

2 This nolle band of Maruts: Prof. Ludwig suggests that sumd- 
rut-am means here a festival held in honour of the Maruts at the end 
of the periodical raius, and that, after many nights, the Maruts adorn 
themselves for this. Pillars: I follow Prof. Ludwig j but the meaning 
of akrdh is uncertain. Professor Geldner takes it to mean ‘horses,’ 
a parallelism to stags, or antelopes. Sayana makes na, like, negative, 
and explains akrah by akravianeisillh :—‘the swift-going sons of Aditi 
do not increase in glory,’—Wilson. 

4 This your all-feeding sacrifice approaches: ‘ this manifold sacrifice 
comes towards you.'—Wilsou. 




imSTffy 



TEE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 



7 He who, engaged in the rite’s final duty, brings, as a 

man, oblation to the Maruts, 

Wins him life’s wealthy fulness, blest with heroes : 
he shall be present, too, where gods drink Soma. 

8 For these are helps adored at sacrifices, bringing 

good fortune by their name Adityas. 

Speeding on cars let them protect our praises, de¬ 
lighting in our sacrifice and worship. 


HYMN LXXVIII 


Maruts. 


Ye by your hymns are like high-thoughted singers, 
skilful, inviting gods with sacrifices ; 

Fair to behold, like kings, with bright adornment, 
like spotless gallants, leaders of the people : 

2 Like fire with flashing flame, breast-bound with 

chains of gold, like tempest-blasts, self-moving, 
swift to lend your aid ; 

As best of all foreknowers, excellent to guide, like 
Somas, good to guard the man who follows Law. 

3 Shakers of all, like gales of wind they travel, like 

tongues of burning fires in their effulgence. 

Mighty are they as warriors clad in armour, and, like 
the Fathers’ prayers, most bounteous givers. 


7 In the .'Vs final dvty : S&yaiia explains udrichi yajhe by yajfle 
mvi&ptcistutike sam/drne sati, when the sacrifice has its praise per¬ 
fected, when the sacrifice is complete. As a man . according to Prof. 
Ludwig, 'no longer a man,’ that is, not in his human character but 
having become divine by worship. Where the gods drink Soma : he, 
a god himself, shall be admitted to the gods’ society. 

Prof. Grassma m places this hymn in his Appendix as being, in 
liis opinion, a composite production. 

The Rishi is SyUmarasmi. The metre is Trishtup in stanzau 1, 3, 
4. 8, and Jagat? in the rest of the hymu. 






4 Like spokes of ear-wheels in one nave united, ever 

victorious like heavenly heroes, 

Shedding their precious balm likeyouthful suitors, they 
raise their voice and chant their psalm as singers. 

5 They who are lEleet to travel like the noblest steeds, 

long to obtain the prize like bounteous charioteers, 
Like waters speeding on with their precipitous floods, 
like omniform Angirasas with Sdma-hymns. 

6 Born from the stream, like press-stones are the 

^ princes, for ever like the stones that crush in pieces; 
Sons of a beauteous dame, like playful children, like 
a great host upon the march with splendour. 

/ Like rays of Lawn, the .visitors of sacrifice, they 
. _ shine with ornaments as eager to be bright. 

Like rivers hasting on, glittering with their spears, * 
from far away they measured out the distances. 

8 Gods, send us happiness and make us wealthy, 
Ov letting us singers prosper, O ye Maruts. 

Bethink you of our praise and of our friendship : ye 
from of old have riches to vouchsafe us. 

HYMN LXXIX. Agni 

I have beheld the might of this great being immortal 
in the midst of tribes of mortals. 

His jaAvs now open and now shut together : much 
they devour, insatiately chewing. 


4 Shedding their precious falm: pouring out the fertilizing rain 
ns liberally as young wooers give presents. 

1 They niMsio'ed out the distances: ‘have traversed leagues."—•- 
Wilson. * b 

The Fishi is Agni Sauchika, or Agui Vaisvanara, or Sapti bou of 
Vujamhbara. The metre is Trishtup. 

1 His eyes: according to Sayana, the eyes of Agni are the distant 
euu aUL ^ moon, and his head is hidden iu mens’ stomachs, in the 
shape of the heat which enables them to digest their food. His food: 
the sticks for fuel, which are bound up into fagots. 




MINISr/^ 


THE HYMNS OF [HOOK 

2 His eyes are turned away, his head is hidden: unsated 

with his tongue he eats the fuel. 

"With hands upraised, with reverence in the houses 
they bind with bands and hold his food together. 

3 Seeking, as ’twere, his mother’s secret bosom, he, like 

a child, creeps on through wide-spread bushes. 

One he finds glowing like hot food made ready, aud 
licking deep within the earth’s recesses. 

4 This holy law I tell you, Earth and Heaven : the 

infant at his birth devours his parents. 

No knowledge of the god have I, a mortal. Yea, 
Agni knoweth best, for he hath wisdom. 

5 The man who quickly gives him food, who offers his 

gifts of oil and butter and supports him,— 

Him with his thousand eyes he closely looks on : 
thou showest him thy face from all sides, Agni. 

6 Agni, hast thou committed sin or outrage among the 

gods ? In ignorance I ask thee. 

Playing, not playing, he gold-hued and toothless, 
hath'cut his food up as the knife a victim. 

7 He, born in wood, hath yoked his horses rushing in 

all directions, held with reins that glitter. 

The well-born friend hath carved his food with Vasus: 
in all his limbs he hath increased and prospered. 


3 This stanza is very obscure. Agni, born from the wood of the 
fire-sticks, seems, as he creeps through the brushwood that he is 
burning, to seek entrance again into ^is mother’s side. He theu 
finds an old dry tree or log, which had been deeply rooted in the 
earth, and feeds on it as on food that has been specially prepared 
for him. 

4 His parents : the two fire-sticks from which he has been produced. 

6 Hast thou committed tint: Art thou as voracious aud destructive 
in heaven as thou art on earth 1 Playing , not playing : playing about 
the fuel, and yet earnestly intent on devouring his food. ‘ Sporting 
(here), not sporting (there).’—Wilson. A victim : gdm : ox or cow. 

7 The well-born friend: Agni. In all his limbs: parvabhih : 1 with 
logs of wood.'—Wilson. 







tYMN 80 .] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


250 


HYMN LXXX. \ Agni. 

Agni bestows the fleet prize-winning courser ; Agni, 
the hero famed and firm in duty. \ 

Agni pervade#and decks the earth and heaven, and 
fills the fruitful dame who teems with heroes. 

2 Blest be the wood that feeds the active Agni: within 

the two great worlds hath Agni entered. 

Agni impels a single man to battle, and with him 
rends in pieces many a foeman. 

3 Agni rejoiced the ear of him who praised him, and 

from the waters burnt away. Jarfktha. 

Agni saved Atri in the fiery cavern, aild made 
Nrimedha rich with troops of'children* 

4 Agni hath granted wealth that decks the hero, and 

sent the sage who wins a thousand cattle* 

Agni hath made oblations rise to heaven : to every 
place are Agni’s laws extended. 

6 With songs of praise the Risbis call on Agni ; on 
Agni, heroes worsted in the foray. 

Birds flying in the region call on Agni : around a 
thousand cattle Agni wanders. 

6 Races of human birth pay Agni worship, men who 

have sprung .from Naims’ line adore him. 
Stablished in holy oil is Agni’s pasture, on the 
Gandharva path of Law and Order. 

7 The Ribhus fabricated prayer for Agni, and we with 

mighty hymns have called on Agni. 

Agni, most youthful god, protect the singer: win 
U3 by worship, Agni, great possessions. 

The Rishi is Agni Sauchjka or Vaisvauara. The metre is Trishtup. 

3 Jar&tka: see VII. 1. 7, and 9. 6. Atri: his deliverance is 
ascribed to the Asvius in I. 112. 7, 116. 8, 117, 3, and 118. 7. 

5 Around a thousand cattle: in the fires lighted to keep off wild 
boasts. 

6 Gandharva path : sublime; that which the Gaudharvas in heaven 
use to travel. 

7 The Ribhus: ov Ttishis skilful as the Riblius. 



THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 

HYMN LXXXI. Visvakarman. 

He who sate down as Hotar-priest, the itishi, our 
father, offering up all things existing,— 

He, seeking through his wish a great possession, 
came among men on earth as archetypal. 

2 What was the place whereon he took his station ? 

What was it that supported him ? How was it ? 
Whence Visvakarman, seeing all, producing the earth, 
with mighty power disclosed the heavens. 

3 He who hath eyes on all sides round about him, a 

mouth on all sides, arms and feet on all sides, 

He, the sole god, producing earth and heaven, 
weldeth them, with his arms as wings, together. 

4 What was the tree, what wood in sooth produced 

it, from which they fashioned out the earth and 
heaven ? 

Ye thoughtful men inquire within your spirit where¬ 
on he stood when he established all things. 




Visvakarman, the omuifio, is represented in this hymn as the uni¬ 
versal Father and Generator, the creator of all things and architect 
of the worlds. The Rishi is Visvakarman Bhauvana or son of Bhu- 
vana. The metre is Triehtup. 

1 All things existing ■ regarded as being contained in the offerings 
presented by Visvakarman. Through his wish: through his desire to 
create. Archetypal: ire meaning of yrathamachhad i3 uncertain. 
In Prof. VVilson’s Translation ‘inventor’ is a misprint for ‘investor,' 
that is, ‘ iirst investing Agni with the worlds,’ according to Sayana’s 
explanation. ‘First appearing.’—Ludwig. ‘The first worshipper.’— 
Wallis. 

3 Weldeth them : cp. IV. 2. 7, and X. 72. 2. With his arms as 
wings: fanning the flame in which the matter is smelted. Prof. 
Ludwig thinks that whirlwinds, produced by the action of bands, 
feet, and wings, are intended. 

4 The fust half-line occurs also in X. 31. 7. They : the makers 
of the world directed by Paramt vara.-—Sdyana. 



misr^ 


TEE RIG VEDA. 



*. 261 


5 Thine highest, lowest, sacrificial natures, and these 

thy midmost here, O Visvakarman, 

Teach thou thy friends at sacrifice, O blessed, and 
come thyself, exalted, to our worship. 

6 Bring thou thyself, exalted with oblation, 0 Visva¬ 

karman, Earth and Heaven to worship. 

Let other men around us live in folly: here let us 
have a rich and liberal patron. 

7 Let us invoke to-day, to aid our labour, the lord of 

speech, the thought-swift Visvakarman. 

May he hear kindly all our invocations who gives 
all bliss for aid, whose works are righteous. 

HYMN LXXXII. YisvaVarnmn. 

The father of the eye, the wise in spirit, created 
both these worlds submerged in fatness. 

Then when the eastern ends were firmly fastened, 
the heavens and the earth were far extended. 


5 Or the first half-line may he rendered :—Thy sacrificial forms, 
the highest, lowest. Come thyself, exalted, to our ivorship : ‘exhila¬ 
rated, thyself offer up thyself.’—Muir. ‘ Do thou sacrifice to thyself 
del: ,hting thyself.’—Wallis. “ According to .Mahidhara the meaning 
is that man is incompetent to worship the creator, that is, in his 
forms, and it must be done by himself.”—Wilson. I havo adopted 
Prof. Lndwig’s explanation of the last clause) 

6 Bring . to worship : or, sacrifice to Heaven and Earth. 

7 Our labour: the arduous work of sacrificing. 1 In our comlict.'— 
Muir. The hymn has been translated by Dr. J. Muir, 0. S.' Texts, 
IV. pp. 6, 7, by Mr. Wallis, Cosmology of the Rigveda, pp. 81—83, 
and, partly, by Prof. F. Max Mtiller in his Ilibbert Lectures, p. 2J3 f. 

The Rishi is Visvakarman, sou of Bhuvana. The metre isTrishtup. 

I The father of the eye: Vifvakarman, who made the light which 
enables tho eye to see. • Submerged in fatness : S&yaua explains ghn- 
t2ni oete by ‘ water : ’— 1 engendered the water, (and then) thee^ two 
(heaven and earth) floating (on the waters).’—Wilson, % . 





THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 


2 Mighty in mind and power is Visvakarman, Maker, 
Disposer, and most lofty Presence. 

Their offering’s joy in rich juice where they speak of 
One, only One, beyond the Seven Rishis. 

3 Father who made us, he who, as Disposer, knoweth 
all races and all things existing, 

Even he alone* the deities’ name-giver,—him other 


beings seek for information. 

4 To him in sacrifice they offered treasures,—Rishis of 
old, in numerous troops, as singers, 

Who, in the distant, near, and lower region, made 
ready all these things that have existence. 

« 5 „ That which is earlier than this earth and heaven, 
before the Asuras and gods had being,— 

What was the germ primeval which the waters 
received where all the gods were seen together ? 

6 The waters, they received that germ primeval where¬ 
in the gods were gathered all together. 

It rested set upon the Unborn’s navel, that One 
wherein abide all things existing. 


2 Moat lofty Presence: literally, the highest apparition; the highest 
imago or object of spiritual contemplation, l'heir offerings : the 
offerings, or perhaps the wishes, of the Fathers, semi-personified. 
The Seven Ifishis: the constellation Ursa Major, the seven stars of 
which are the great Itishis Mariohi, Atrl, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulahag 
Kiatu, and Vasishtha. The meaning is that the spirits of the blest 
enjoy the fulfilment of all their desires beyond the starry heavens 
where tho Ouc Being, the great Creator, d.Wells. 

3 Fat information : to learn who is the Supreme God; or what 
their several functions are. 

4 Distant, near, and lower regin meaning, apparently, the hea¬ 
venly, the earthly, and the intermediate atmosphere, 

0 The Unltorn: Aja, seems here to be identified with Visvakarman. 





THE RIGVEDA. 



<SL 


7 Ye will not find him who produced these creatures : 
another thing hath risen up among you. 

Enwrapt in misty cloud, with lips that stammer, 
hymn-chanters wander and are discontented. 


HYMN LXXXIII. Manyu. 

He who hath reverenced thee, Manyu, destructive 
bolt, breeds for himself forthwith all conquering 
energy. 

Arya and Dasa will we conquer with thine aid, with 
thee the conqueror, with conquest conquest-sped. 

--- <4 — 

7 Another thing: meaning, according to the Commentator, *Yipva- 
karman is a different entity from you who are sentient beings, who 
have individual consciousness, and bo forth.’—See Editor’s Note in 
Wilson’s translation. Sayana “gives the general 3 ense of the last 
clause [of tho stanza] as “ You are merely anxious for enjoyment in 
this world and in the next, therefore you know nothing of Visvakar- 
man,' 1 taking ukthasasah as implying singing hymns with a view to 
gaining felicity in a future state. Mahidhara has a similar explanation; 
“you who are engaged in the enjoyments of this world or the next, 
being subject to false knowledge or ignorance, have no knowledge of 
the Truth.”—Wilson. 

With regard to this aud tho preceding hymn Mr. Wallis observes 
that they mal^ no attempt to explain in what way the process of 
sacrifice could be regarded as an act of creation. We are told little 
more than that Visvakarman was a primeval sacrifice!* and also a 
creator; we have no hint how to combine the two ideas into a 
harmonious unity. See Cosmology of the Rigveda , pp. 83, 84, and 
Muir, 0. S. Texts, IV. 7, 8, where the hymn is translated and some of 
irs difficulties are discussed. Prof. Ludwig’s Commentary is especially 
full and valuable, and should be consulted by all students of the 
Veda who read German. 

The Rjshi is Manyu son of Tapas. The metre is Jagati in stanza 
1. and 1 rishtup in the rest of the hymn. 

1 Manyu : Anger, Passion, personified. 





misty,. 



* 


THIS HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 


<SL 


2 Manyu was Indra, yea, the god was Manyu, Manyu 

was Hotar, Varuna, J&tavedas. 

The tribes of human lineage worship Manyu. Ac¬ 
cordant with thy fervour, Manyu, guard us. 

3 Come hither, Manyu, mightier than the mighty; 

chase, with thy fervour for ally, our foernen. 
Slayer of foes, of Vritra, and of Dasyu, bring thou 
to us all kinds of wealth and treasure. 

4 For thou art, Manyu, of surpassing vigour, fierce, 

queller of the foe, and self-existent, 

Shared by all men, victorious, subduer : vouchsafe 
to us superior strength in battles. 

5 I have departed, still without a portion, wise god 1 

according to thy will, the mighty. 

I, feeble man, was wroth with thee, O Manyu : I am 
myself; come thou to give me vigour. 

6 Come hither, I am all thine own; advancing turn 

thou to me, victorious, all-supporter ! 

Come to me, Manyu, wielder of the thunder : bethink 
thee of thy friend, and slay the Dasyus. 

7 Approach, and on my right hand hold thy station : 

so shall we slay a multitude of foemen. 

The best of meath I offer to support thee : may we 
be first to drink thereof in quiet. 


S With thy fervour ■ tapa.&d: tapas means ‘heat,’ ‘burning,’ and, 
secondly, rigorous abstraction. 

5 Without a portion : without a share in thy favours. I am myulf: 
i am just what I am; a weak mortal, for whoBe infirmity allowance 
should bo made. ‘Being (Incorporated with) my body, approach 
me.’—Wilson. 



MINlSr^ 



THE RIG VEDA. 
HYMN LXXXIV. 



Many a. 


Borne on with thee, O Manyu girt by Maruts, let 
our brave men, impetuous, bursting forward, 

March on, like flames of fire in form, exulting, with 
pointed arrows, sharpening their weapons. 

2 Flashing like fire, be thou, O conquering Manyu, 

invoked, O victor, as our army’s leader. 

Slay thou our foes, distribute their possessions : show 
forth thy vigour, scatter those who hate us. 

3 0 Manyu, overcome thou our assailant: on 1 break¬ 

ing, slaying, crushing down the foemen. 

They have not hindered thine impetuous vigour : 
mighty, sole born ! thou makest them thy subjects. 

4 Alone of many thou art worshipped, Manyu : 

sharpen the spirit of each clan for battle. 

With thee to aid, O thou of perfect splendour, I 
we will uplift the glorious shout for conquest. 

5 Unyielding, bringing victory like Indra, O Manyu, 

be thou here our sovran ruler. 

To thy dear name, 0 victor, we sing praises: we 
know the spring from which thou art come hither. 

6 Twin-bornF’with power, destructive bolt of thunder, 

the highest conquering might is thine, subduer ! 

Be friendly to us in thy spirit, Manyu, O much- 
invoked, in shock of mighty battle. 


The Rishi is Manyu son of Tapaa. The metre is Trishtup in atanta 
1—3, and Jagati in the rest. I have treated all uniformly. 

1 Like flames of fire in form: agnirtipdh: Comer’s Sipas irvpbg 
aldofxtvmo. 

3 Sole bom: ' 0 thou who art without companion.’—Wilson, 
h The spring: the source. 



NUMsr^ 


THE HYMNS OF 


{BOOK 2 



7 For spoil let Varuna and Manyu give us the wealth 
of both sides gathered and collected ; 

And let our enemies with stricken spirits, o’erwhelmed 
with terror, slink away defeated. 

HYMN LXXXV. Sftryft’s Bridal. 

Truth is the base that bears the earth; by Sfirya 
are the heavens sustained. 

By Law the Adityas stand secure, and Soma holds 
his place in heaven. t 

2 By Soma are the Adityas strong, by Soma mighty 
is the earth. 

Thus Soma in the midst of all these constellations 
hath his place. 


? For '-poil: the preservation of their own property aud the seizure 
of their enemies’ goods being regarded as a double conquest. Or 
dhanam vhhayam may mean wealth of both kinds, horses and cows. 

This hymn and the preceding are to be repeated, Sayapa says, 
at sacrifices to ensure the destruction of enemies. 

The main subject of this composite hymn, which is one of the latest 
in the Rigveda, is the ceremony of marriage in general and more 
especially the wedding of Surytl, the daughter of the Sun, w 7 ho is re¬ 
garded a 3 the typical bride. The various deities an^..deified objects, of 
which Soma, Sftrytl, and Marriage are the chief, are enumerated in tho 
Index of Hymns, The Rishi or seer is Surya. 

The rne^re is Trishtup in stanzas 14, 1&-21, 23, 24, 26, 36, 37, 44 ; 
Jagati in 18, 37, 43 ; Urobrihati (8 + 12 + 8 + 8) in 34 j aud Anushtup 
in the rest of the hymn. 

1 Truth- or reality; <Uyarti, u3ed interchangeably with ritam, the 
Law and Order of (ho universe. 

2 By So)na: by^the power of the deified Soma whoso influence 
pervades, quickens, aud supports all existence. In the secoud line 
Somv apparently means the Moon, but perhaps there is an allusion to 
tha other sense also of the word. These co>*stdlatione: the mk- 
shalras or lunar mansions. ‘ In the centre of these stars.’ —Muir. 






MIN ISTfiy 



3 One thinks, when they have brayed the plant, that 

he hath drunk the Soma’s juice ; 

Of him whom Brahmans truly know as Soma no one 
ever tastes. 

4 Soma, concealed by covering rules, guarded by hymns 

in Brihati, 

Thou standest listening to the stones : none tastes 
of thee who dwells on earth. 

5 -When they begin to drink thee, then, O god, thou 

swellest out again. 

Vftyu is Soma’s sentinel. The month is that which 
shapes the years. 

6 Baibhi was her dear bridal friend, and Narasansi led 

her home. 

Lovely was Sdrya’s robe: she came to that which 
Gathd had adorned. 

7 Thought was the pillow of her oouch, sight was 

the unguent for her eyes : 

Her treasury was earth and heaven when Sdrya 
went unto her lord. 


3 Know as Soma: know to be the Moon, regarded as the food of 
gods only. 

4 By hymns in Brihati : that is, by hymns in that metre. But the 

noraning of hdrkataih is uncertain. According to Silvana, the B&rhatas 
are the seven guardians of the Soma, Svana, Bhraja, A'lgbaryn, and 
others. i 

5 Vdyu is Soma’s sentinel : the wind keeps the Soma fresh. The 
month : apparently an allusion to Soma as the Moon. 

j Soma is the deity of the preceding five staiujps. Surra's Bridal 
is the subject of 6—17. Baibhi, JVdrdsanst, and GdihA are sacred 
song and praise personified. 

i Treasury; iosah: meaning, probably, trousseau or bridal outfit. 
According o some the bos or body of the chariot is intended. 





8 Hymns were the cross-bars of the pole, Kurlra-metre 
decked the car: 


The bridesmen were the Asvin pair: Agni was leader 
of the train. 

9 Soma was he who wooed the maid: the groomsmen 
were both Asvins, when 

The Sun-god Savitar bestowed his willing Sftry& on 
her lord. 

10 Her spirit was the bridal car; the covering thereof 

was heaven : 

Bright "were both steers that drew it, when SOryd 
approached her husband’s home. 

11 Thy steers were steady, kept in place by holy verse 

and Sflma-hymn: 

All ear were thy two chariot wheels : thy path was 
tremulous in the sky. 

12 Clean, as thou wen test, were thy wheels ; wind was 

the axle fastened there. 

Sftry&, proceeding to her lord, mounted a spirit- 
fashioned car. 

13 The bridal pomp of Sftryd, which Savitar started, 

moved along. 

In MagM days are oxen slain, in Arjunls they wed 
the bride. 


8 Decked her car: formed its canopy. But the meaning of opamh 
here is uncertain. ' Kwrira metre was the thong of the whip.’—; 
Wilson. The bridesmen : ini. 119. 7 and elsewhere the Asvins are 
riaid to be the husbands of S&ryi. Here they are represented as the 
bridesmen who had asked her in marriage for Soma. 

11 All ear : the text has srotram, an ear, which Sayana says, means 
Sl otre, two ears. ‘The two wheels were thy ears.'—Wilson. 

13 In MagM day s: or in stricter accordance with the text, 'In 
Agha days,' when Ike moon is in the lunar mansion MagM. Slain: 
only on especially festive occasions, weddings for instance. ‘ Are whipped 

a j on g >_Wilson. In Ar junta: two asterisms or lunar mansions, more 

commonly called Phalgmm. They wed the bride: she i6 esc n-t6d tc 
her husband’s home. 




mnisr/f y 



THE RIG VEDA. 

14 When on your three-wheeled chariot, 0 Asvins, yo 

came as wooers unto Suryas bridal, 

Then all the gods agreed to your proposal: Pftshan 
as son elected you as fathers. 

15 0 ye two lords of lustre, then when ye to SAry&’s 

wooing came, 

Where was one chariot-wheel of yours? Where 
stood ye for the sire’s command ? 

,16 The Brahmans, by their seasons, know, O Si\ry&, 
those two wheels of thine : 

One, kept concealed, those only who are skilled in 
highest truths have learned/ 

17 To Stiryd and the deities, to Mitra and to Yaruna, 

Who know aright the thing that is, this adoration 
have I paid. 

18 Moving in close succession by their magic power, 

these children twain come dancing to the sacrifice. 
One of the pair bcholdeth all existing things; the 
other ordereth seasons and is born again. 

19 He, born afresh, is new and new for ever: ensign 

of days he goes before the Mornings. 

Coming, he orders for the gods their portion. The 
Moon prolongs the days of our existence. 



14 As wooers: on behalf of Soma. PUskan : here moaning Savitav. 
Sort aud fathers : intended to express close relationship md Savitar’s 
obligation to the x^svins who had arranged the marriage. 

l y For the sire's command : to receive Savitar’s invitation to tithe 
part in the bridal procession. According to S&yaha, * to offer your 
gift/ 

16 The tioo wheels are probably heaven and earth, or day and night, 
and tho third, one kejit concealed , is the year. 

15 In this stanza and the following one, which are but loosely con* 
neefft / with the rest of the hymn, S&rya represents the Sun, aud Soma 
is the Moon, 




20 Mount this, all-shaped, gold-hued, with strong wheels, 

fashioned of Kinsuka and Salmali, light-rolling, 
Bound for the world of life immortal, Sury& : make 
for thy lord a happy bridal journey. 

21 Rise up from hence : this maiden hath a. husband. 

I laud Visv&vasu with hymns and homage. 

Seek in her father’s home another fair one, and find 
the portion from of old assigned thee. 

22 Rise up from hence, Visv&vasu : with reverence we 

worship thee. 

Seek thou another willing maid, and with her hus* 
band leave the bride. 

23 Straight in direction be the paths, and thornless, 

whereon our fellows travel to the wooing. 

Let Aryaman and Bhaga lead us: perfect, O gods, 
the union of the wife and husband. 

24 Now from the noose of Varuna I free thee, where¬ 

with most blessbd Savitar hath bound thee. 

In Law’s seat, to the world of virtuous action, I 
give thee up uninjured with thy consort. 

~ 20 Stanzas 20—33 contaiu a collection of formulae repeated when 
the bride mouuts her chariot, while she is travelling to her husband’s 
house, when she arrives there, and on the following morning. This : 
chariot Kinsuka .* the wood of the Butea froudosa. $almaU: the 
siik cotton t ee; Salmalia malabarica. Fury A : the girl is addressed 

by the name of Shrift, the typical bride. 

21 VuvAvasv: one of the Gandharvas, the protector of virgins. 
He is told to leave the bride who no longer needs his care, and to 
transfer his guardianship to some marriageable maiden who has not 
vet found a husband. Fair owe.* vyaktAm: ‘decorated with orna¬ 
ments.’—Wilson. 

23 To the ivooiny: to the father, to whom the intercedes are to 
apply f or his daughter's hand on behalf of their friend, according to 

' The noose, of Varuna : the girdle with which the bride is girded 
after lie has been bathed, combed, and dressed for the marriage cere¬ 
mony. See Prof. Max Mailer’s Kiyveda-Sunhitd, Vol. \1., Prcfcc , 
p. M. A uoosjo is one of Varuna’s usual accompaniments. 





misr/tr 


THE MIG VEDA. 



7 MN 85.] 



25 Hence, and not thence, I send thee free. I make 

thee softly fettered there, 

That, bounteous Indra, she may live blest in her 
fortune and her sons. 

26 Let Pftshan take thy hand and hence conduct thee ; 

may the two Asvins on their car transport thee. 
Go to the house to be the household’s mistress and 
speak as lady to thy gathered people. 

27 Happy be thou and prosper with thy children here : 

be vigilant to rule thy household,‘in tliis home. 
Closely unite thy body with this man, thy lord. So 
shall ye, full ot years, address your company. 

28 Her hue is blue and red : the fiend who clingeth 

close is driven off. 

W ell thrive the kinsmen of this bride ; the husband 
is bound fast in bonds. 

29 Give thou the woollen robe away ; deal treasure to 

the Brahman priests. 

This female fiend hath got her feet, and as a wife 
attends her lord. 

30 Unlovely is his body when it glistens with this 

wicked fiend,- 

What time the husband wraps about his limbs the 
garment of his wife. 

3J. Diseases, which from various folk follow the bride’s 
resplendent train,— 

These let the holy gods again bear to the place from 
which they came. 


- Hence and not thence: from thy father’s house and not from thy 
husband’s. 


2/ Be vigilant to rule thy household: this is Silyana’s explanation, 
f fro watchful over the domestic fire.’—Wilson. 

28 Ha hue: the colour of Kritya, Magic personified, a femalo 
deny or fiend. 1 


, Jhe woollen robe: ‘the garment soiled by the body.’— Wilson. 
Ludwig^ '' mu S*°> or ov *l returns to its originator.— 


jf* 





MiNisr^ 



32 Let not the highway thieves who lie in ambush find 

the wedded pair. 

By pleasant ways let them escape the danger, and 
let foes depart. 

33 Signs of good fortune mark the bride: come all oi 

you and look at her. 

Wish her prosperity, and then return unto your 
homes again. 

34 Pungent is this, and bitter this, filled, as it were, 

with arrow-barbs, Empoisoned and not fit to eat. 

The Brahman who knows SuryA, well deserves the 
garment of the bride. 

35 The fringe, the cloth that decks her head, and then 

the triply-parted robe,— 

Behold the hues which SfiryA wears: these doth the 
Brahman purify. . 

36 I take thy hand in mine for happy fortune that thou 

mayst reach old age with me thy husband. 

Gods" Aryaman, Bhaga, Savitar, Purandhi, have 
given thee to be my household’s mistress. 

37 0 Pttshan, send her on as most auspicious, her who 

shall be the sharer of my pleasures; 

Her who shall twine her loving arms about me, and 
welcome all my love and mine embraces. 


31: This: the bride’s garment. Not fit to eat: no longer fit for 
her use. SilryA : meaniug here the song of Surya. 

35 The meaning of dsasanam, ‘ visasanam > and adhivikartanam is 
uncertain. Prof. Wilson readers these words by ‘ border-cloth/ 
‘head-cloth,’ and ‘dividedskirt.’ Prof, Weber and the St. Petersburg 
Lexicon explain the passage as referring to the preparation of the 
carcass of the animal that has been slaughtered for the festivity. 
According to this view the first line might be t endered The butcher¬ 
ing, the cutting up, the severing of limb mid joint j and for * hues’ 
‘forms’ might be substituted. 

36 Tho bridegroom addresses tbe bride. 




WNfsr^ 


THE E10 VEDA. 



’MN 85.] 



38 For thee, with bridal train, they, first, escorted Sftry& 

to her home. 

Give to the husband in return, Agni, the wife with 
progeny. 

39 Agni hath given the bride again with splendour and 

with ample life. 

Long-lived be he who is her lord; a hundred autumns 
. let him live. 

40 Soma obtained her first of all; next the Gandharva 

was her lord. 

Agni was thy third husband: now one born of 
woman is thy fourth. 

41 Soma to the Gandharva, and to Agni the Gandharva 

gave: 

And Agni hath bestowed on me riches and sons and 
this rny spouse. 

42 Be ye not parted; dwell ye here; reach the full 

time of human life. 

With sons and grandsons sport and play, rejoicing 
in your own abode. 

13 So may Praj&pati bring children forth to us; may 
Aryaman adorn us till old age come nigh. 

Not inauspicious enter thou thy husband’s house: 
bring blessing to our bipeds and our quadrupeds. 


38 TfiAt: Agni. They; the Gandharvas, according to Sayana. 

40 As the typical bride SdryfL was first married to Soma, so the 
young maid originally belongs to him, then to the Gandharva, as the 
guardian of virginity, then to Agni as the sacred fire round which 
die walks in the marriage ceremony, and fourthly to her human 
husband.—Urassmann. 

42 The formulae contaiued in stanzas 42—47 are repeated when 
the bridegroom has returned with his bride to his home, and offers 
sacrifice with fire. The wedded pair are addressed first, and then 
the brido is exhorted and blessed* Stanza 47 is spokon by the bride¬ 
groom for his wife and himself. 

18 


4 * 





NilNisr^ 



44 Not fierce of eye, no slayer of thy husband, bring 
weal to cattle, radiant, gentle-hearted; 

Loving the gods, delightful, bearing heroes, bring 
blessing to our quadruped and bipeds. 

\ 45 0 bounteous Indra, make this bride blest in her sons 
and fortunate. 

Vouchsafe to her ten sons, and make her husband 
the eleventh man. 

40 Over thy husband’s father and thy husband’s mother 
bear full sway. 

Over the sister of thy lord, over his brothers rule 
supreme. 

47 So may the Universal gods, so may the Waters join 
our hearts. 

May MAtarisvan, DhAtar, and Deshtrl together bind 
us close. 

HYMN LXXXVI. India. 

Men have abstained from pouring juice: they count 
not Indra as a god 

Where at the votary’s store my friend Vrishakapi 
hath drunk his fill. Supreme is Indra over all. 


47 Deshtrl: a female deity, not mentioned elsewhere in the Rig- 
Tcdu. According to Saynna, ddtri pkaldndm sarasvati is meant: ‘ the 
bountiful (Saraswati) ’—Wilson. 

For a full account of the marriage ceremonies of the Hindus, 
derived from the ritual of Brahmans who use the Saooa-veda, see 
Coltbrooke’s Miscellaneous Essay'; No. III., and Weber and Haas, 
In&itehe Stndim, V. pp. 177 IT. I have relied mainly on Professor 
Ludwig’s Commentary. Prof. Grassmaun has banished the hynm to 
his Appendix. _ 

The deities ate Indra, his consort Indr&pt, and Vrish&kapi; and 
they arc also the Riabis of the several stanzas ascribed to thorn as 
speakers. 4 The metre is Pankti, consisting of five Fade ; of t ight 
syllables each. 

*1 S;V alia ascribes this stanza to Indra; others make Indium tho 
sneaker. Yyioh&kapi is said to have monopolized the offerings that 
should have been presented to Indra. VrUMkapi— literally ‘the 





MINlSr^ 



2 Thou, Indra, heedless passest by the ill Vrishi\kapi 

hath wrought; 

Yet nowhere else thou findest place wherein to drink 
the Soma-juice. Supreme is Indra over all. 

3 What hath he done to injure thee, this tawny beast 

Yrish&kapi, 

With whom thou art so angry now ? What is the 
votary’s foodful store ? Supreme is Indra over all. 

4 Soon may the hound who hunts the boar seize him 

and bite him in the ear, 

O Indra, that \ rishilkapi whom thou protectest as a 
friend. Supreme is Indra over all. a 

5 Kapi hath marred the beauteous things, all deftly 

wrought, that were my joy. 

In pieces will I rend his head ; the sinner’s portion 
shall be woe. Supreme is Indra over all. 

6 !s r o dame hath ampler charms than I, or greater 

wealth of love’s delights. 

None with more ardour offers all her beauty to her 
lord’s embrace. Supreme is Indra over all. 


strong ape, or ‘the male ape’—appears to be a sort of intermediate 
K.'iut; between a demigod and a demon; but it is not easy to exactly 
determine his nature. S&yana calls him the son of Indra. He is 
also said to be the setting sun, and the sun who draws up vapour and 
irrigates with mist. According to M. Bergaigne, La Religion Vtdique, 
II. 270, he was a mythical sacrificer. 

2 Indrani blames Indra for his apathy. 

3 Indra speaks. What is the votary's foodful store ?: why should 
bis appropriation of the worshipper’s offerings make thee so angry? 

4 1 2 3 4 nlrani ig the speaker of this stanza and of the two, or three, 

that follow. • 

J hayi the ape; an abbreviation of Vrisbakapi. Hath marred the 
■ .>euu!°oy.:, things : according to Say an a, hath spoiled the oblations pre 
paicc for me by my worshippers. But it seems more probable that 
■ >is lalapi has assaulted IndrAni and inflicted injuries on her persou. 

o fmhanl speaks with pride of her voluptuous channs which incited 
4 risuftkupi to Iiia amorous assault. 






THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 

7 Mother whose love is quickly won, I say what veri¬ 

ly will be. 

My breast, O mother, and my head and both my 
hips seem quivering. Supreme is Indra over all. 

8 Dame with the lovely hands and arms, with broad 

hair-plaits and ample hips, 

Why, O thou hero’s wife, art thou angry with our 
Vrish&kapi ? Supreme is Indra over all. 

9 This noxious creature looks on me as one bereft of 

hero’s love. 

Yet heroes for my sons have I, the Maruts’ friend 
and Indra’s queen. Supreme is Indra over all. 

10 From, olden time the matron goes to feast and 

general sacrifice. 

Mother of heroes, Indra’s queen, the rite’s ordainer 
is extolled. Supreme is Indra over all. 

11 So have I heard Indr&ni called most fortunate among 

these dames, 

For never shall her consort die in future time 
through length of days. Supreme is Indra over all. 

12 Never, Indr&pl, have I joyed without my . friend 

Vrishakapi, 

Whose welcome offering here, made pure with water, 
goeth to the gods. Supreme is Indra over all. 




7 This stanza is ascribed by Sayana to Vrishakapi. It 13 hardly 
intelligible; but, as Prof. Ludwig says, it seems to be spoken by 
Indrilni, expressing her indignation at Vrish&kapi’s audaoity which 
makes all her body quiver with rage. 

8 Indra Bpeuks. 

9 Indranl speaks this and the following stanza. Bereft of hero's 
love: who lias no brave husband to protect her. 

10 The matron goes to feast: lndrani means that Vrishakapi assault¬ 
ed her when she was on her way to a festival, which women were 
accustomed to pttend; and that her rank as India’s consort dr 1 not 
presorve her from insult. 

11 Indra speaks this and the following stanza. 




misr^ 


THE RIG VEDA. 


27 



'MN 86 .] 




13 Wealthy Vrish&kapayi, blest with sons and consorts 

of thy sons, 

Indra will eat thy bulls, thy dear oblation that 
effecteth much. Supreme is Indra over all. 

14 Fifteen in number, then, for me a score of bullocks 

they prepare, 

And I devour the fat thereof : they fill my belly full 
with food. Supreme is Indra over all. 

15 Like as a bull with pointed horn, loud bellowing 

amid the herds. 

Sweet to thine heart, 0 Indra, is the threw which 
she who tends thee pours. Supreme is Indra over 
all. 

18 0 Indra this Vrishakapi hath found a slain wild 
animal, 

Dresser, and new-made pan, and knife, and wagon 
with a load of wood. Supreme is Indra over all. 


13 Spoken by Vrishakapi to his wife Vrishakapayi who is said 
to represent the dawn, or, by others, the gloaming which follows 
the setting sun Vrishakapi. 

14 Indra speaks. Fifteen: sacrifices; probably Vrishakapi and 
his wife, and their sons and daughters-in-law. S&ya$a explains dif¬ 
ferently ;— * 1 The worshippers dress for me fifteen (and) twenty 
bulls.’—Wilson. 

15 Indian! speaks, endeavouring to attract him to her own libation 
instead of the offerings of Vrishakapi. 

I pass over stanzas 1& and 17, which cannot be decently translated. 

18 Indram speaks, but her speech is difficult to understand. Wild 
animal: Prof, Roth conjectures ‘wild ass' as the meaning of 
parasvantam here. The wild buffalo may perhaps bo inteuded. 
Dresser: or slaughter-bench. ‘A fire-place (to cook it),’—Wilson. 
Indini/i seems to speak depreciatingly of a sacrifice offered by 
Vrishakapi as consisting of an unsuitable victim, prepared with in¬ 
struments and means which chance has thrown in his way. Prof. 
Ludwig thinks that Vrishakapi may represent the Moon whose spots 
are fancifully considered to be the objects mentioned by Indrapt, 



WiNisr^ 



TIIE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 



19 Distinguishing the D&sa and the Arya, viewing all, 

I go. 

I look upon the wise, and drink the simple votary’s 
Soma-juice. Supreme is Indra over all. 

20 The desert plains and steep descents, how many 

leagues in length they spread! 

Go to the nearest houses, go unto thine home, 
Vrishakapi. Supreme is Indra over all. 

21 Turn thee again Vrish&kapi; we twain will bring 

thee happiness. 

Thou goest homeward on thy way along this path 
which leads to sleep. Supreme is Indra over all. 

22 When, Indra and Vrish&kapi, ye travelled upward 

to your borne, 

Where w’as that noisome beast, to whom went it, the 
beast that troubles man ? Supreme is Indra over all. 

23 Daughter of Manu, Parsu bare a score of children 

at a birth. 

Her portion verily was bliss although her burthen 
caused her grief. 


19 I look; with favour. Tk,e simple votary is the worshipper who 
offers his libation in a sincere spirit of devotion. The stanza aud 
the two following are spoken by Indra. 

20 Yrishikapi appears to meditate flight into distant deserts to 
escape from the wrathful Indrihii. Indra dissuades him, and promises 
to reconcile Tndrartf to him. 

22 The two concluding stanzas seem to be spoken by Indram. 
Stanza 22 is obscure, and stanza 23 has uo discoverable connexion 
with the rest of the hymn. 

23 Daughter of Maau: that is, of human race. Nothing more is 
known of Farm. Much of this hymn appears to be inexplicable. 
M. Bergai rno thinks that Yfish&kapi, Iudra’s friend, represents Soma, 
and Indian} the wife of Indra represents Prayer. “This bizarre myth 
would symbolize the fr-ijncntly expressed idefy that Indra loves neither 
the sacred beverage without prayer no** prayer without the sacred 
beverage. Ho wishes therefore his union with Prayer to be accom¬ 
panied by the union of Prayer with Soma, aud ho neglects sacrifice 
as long as this union of the two essential elements of worship remains 
^accomplished.”- Sec h<x Rdiyion Yidigue t II. 27Q, 271. 



miSfyy 



HYMN LXXXVII. Agni. 


I balm with oil the mighty Rakshas-slayer; to the 
most famous friend I come for shelter. 

Enkindled, sharpened by our rites, may Agni protect 
us in the day and night from evil. 

2 O Jatavedas with the teeth of iron, enkindled with 

thy tiame attack the demons. 

Seize with thy tongue the foolish gods’ adorers: 
rend, put within thy mouth the raw-flesh eaters. 

3 Apply thy teeth, the upper and the lower, thou who 

hast both, enkindled and destroying. y 
Roam also in the air, O king, around us, arid with 
thy jaws assail the wicked spirits. 

4 Bending thy shafts through sacrifices, Agni, whet¬ 

ting their points with song as if with whetstones, 
Pierce to the heart therewith the Y&tudluinas,. and 
break their arms uplifted to attack thee. 

5 Pierce through the Yatudhdna’s skin, O Agni; iPt 

the destroying dart with fire consume him-. 

Rend his joints, J&ta vedas, let the eater of flesh, 
flesh-seeking, track his mangled body. 

6 Where now thou seest, Agni J&tavedas, one of these 

demons standing stifl or roaming, 

Or flying on those paths in air’s mid-region, sharpen 
thy shaft and as an archer pierce him. 

7 Tear from the evil spirit, Jatavedas, what, he hath 

seized and \Vith his spears hath captured 
Blazing before him strike him down, O Agni; let 
spotte'd carrion-eating kites devour him. 

' ' _ y . i _ 

The lij’tnn is addressed to Agui Rakshoh.i, the Slayer of Rak dunas. 

The Rishi is Payu of the family of Bharudv&ja. . The metre is Trishtup 
iti Btanz&s 1—21, and Anushtup in 22—25. v \ 

2 The demons: Yatudhanas, explained by Siyana as=» R&kshusas. 

Sae VII. 104. 15. Foolish god*' adorers: muradtv&n : according to* 
Siyana, v special class of evil apirits called Mumdevaa because they \ *- 
make destruction their sport. . > 

5 The coMr of flesh: the wolf or other carnivorous animal* ' \ 






THE HYMNS OF 



[BOOK 



8 Her,e tel) this forth, 0 Agui: whosoever is, he him¬ 

self, or acteth as, a demon, 

Him grasp, O thou most youthful, with thy fuel: to 
the man-seer’s eye give him as booty. 

9 "With keen glance guard the sacrifice, 0 Agni: thou 

sage, conduct it onward to the Vasus. 

Let not the fiends, O man-beholder, harm thee burn 
ing against the Rakshasas to slay them. 

10 Look on the fiend ’mid men, as man-beholder: rend 

thou his three extremities in pieces. 

Demolish with thy flame his ribs, O Agni; the 
YatudMna’s root destroy thou triply. 

11 Thrice, Agni, let tby noose surround the demon 

who with his falsehood injures holy Order. 

Loud roaring with thy flame, 0 J&tavedas, crush him 
and cast him down before the singer. 

12 Lend thou the worshipper that eye, O Agni, where¬ 

with thou lookest on the hoof-armed demon. 

With light celestial in Atharvan’s manner burn up 
the fool who ruins trutli with falsehood. 

13 Agni, what curse the pair this day have uttered, 

what heated word the worshippers have spoken, 


8 The man-seer here is either Agui himself or Sftrya tho Sun. 

9 To the Fastis: to the gods to whom the oblations are niade. 
Siyam explains veisubhyah here by vasAndmarthdpa: —‘ to (the 
acquisition of) riches.’—Wilson. 

10 His three extremities: his three heads, according to Sayana. 

*Kopf und Scbultern,’ head aud shoulders:—Grassmant). Root: 
meaning his feet. 'Triply: used vaguely, to correspond with tho three 
upper extremities. ‘Cut off the triple foot of the Y&tvdhdna.* *— 
Wilson. 

12 Hoof-armed: striking with the hoof. According to Sayana, 
‘having nails like hoofs.’ In Atharvan’s manner: like Atbarvan, the 
ancient priest who is said to have been the first who obtained fire. • 

13 The pair: tho married pair; perhaps the saorifioerand his wife. 
The Ri b! ptvys that every hasty word that may have been uttered 
by pious people in their anger may be used as a weapon to wound 
the Y&tndhdna, 




misTfy 


' '' ' ' 

■^§^MN 87.] THE 

Each arrowy taunt sped from the angry spirit,— 
pierce to the heart therewith the Yatudhanas. 

14 With fervent heat exterminate the demons; destroy 

the fiends with burning flame, O Agni. 

Destroy with fire the foolish gods’ adorers; blaze 
and destroy the insatiable monsters. 

15 May gods destroy this day the evil-doer : may each 

hot curse of his return and blast him. 

Let arrows pierce the liar in his vitals, and Visva’s 
net enclose the Yatudhana. 

16 The fiend who smears himself with flesh of cattle, 

with flesh of horses and of human bodies, 

Who steals the milch-cow’s milk away, O Agni,— 
tear off the heads of such with fiery fury. 

17 The cow gives milk each year, 0 man-regarder let 

not the Y&tudh&na ever taste it. 

If one would glut him with the biestings, Agni, 
pierce with thy flame his vitals as he meets thee. 

18 Let the fiends drink the poison of the cattle; may 

Aditi cast off the evil-doers. 

May the god Savitar give them up to ruin, and be 
their share of plants and herbs denied them. 

If) Agni, from days of old thou slayest demons: never 
shall R&kshasas in fight o’ercome thee. 

Durn up the foolish ones, the flesh-devourers: let 
none of them escape thine heavenly arrow. 

20 Guard us, 0 Agni, from above and under, protect 
us from behind us and before us ; 

And may thy flames, most fierce and never wasting, 
glowing with fervent heat, consume the sinner. 


15 V ism's net • the noose of the all-pervading Agni. 

J8 The poison of the cattle : if they driuk milk, let it poison them. 
Aooor.liug to S&yana, let them drink the poison of the cattle (which is 
kq>t in the house), meaning perhaps some poisonous ointmeut used 
for external application only. 


RIG VEDA.- 


<SL 

281 





21 From rear, from front, from under, from above us, 

O' king, protect us as a sage with wisdom. 

Guard to oid age thy friend, O friend, eternal: O 
Agni, as immortal, guard us mortals. 

22 We set thee round us as a fort, victorious Agni, 

thee a sage, 

In conquering colour day by day, destroyer of our 
treacherous foes. 

23 Burn with thy poison turned against the treaoher- 

ous brood of R&kshasas, 

O Agni, with thy shapened glow, with lances armed 
with points of flame. 

24 Burn thou the paired Kimidins, burn, Agni, the 

Y&tudh&na pairs. 

I sharpen thee, infallible, with hymns. O sage, be 
vigilant. 

25 Shoot forth, O Agni, with thy flame : demolish them 

on every side. 

Break thou the Yatudhana’s strength, the vigour of 
the Bttkshasa. 

HYMN LXXXVIII. Agni. 

Dear, ageless sacrificial drink is offered in light-dis¬ 
covering, heaven-pervading Agni. 

The gods spread forth through his celestial nature, 
that he might bear the world up and sustain it. 

2 The world was swallowed and concealed in darkness; 
Agni was born, and light became apparent. 

The deities, the broad earth, and the heavens, and 
plants, and waters gloried in his friendship. 


24 Kimhlins: treacherous and malevolent wpirits. See VII. 104. 
2, Note. 


The deities arc Agni Vaisvanara aud Surya. The Rishi in lilur- 
dhanvan of the family of Anginas, or of the family of Vamadefa. 
The metre iB Trishtup. 

1 Sacrificial drink: ' swelling oblatioD,’ according to Prof. Piecheh 





■IN 88.] 


THE R1GVEDA. 




3 Inspired by gods who claim our adoration, I now 

will laud eternal lofty Agni, 

Him who hath spreaa abroad the earth with lustre, 
this heaven, and both the worlds, and air’s mid 
region. 

4 The earliest priest whom all the gods accepted, and 

chose him, and anointed him with butter, 

He swifty made all things that fly, stand, travel, all 
that hath motion, Agni Jt'itavedfts. 

5 Because thou, Agni, J&tavedas, stoodest at the 

^ world’s head with thy refulgent splendour, 

\Ve sent thee lorth with hymns and songs Mnd praises: 
thou filledst heaven and earth, god meet for worship. 

6 Head of the earth is Agni in the night-time; then, 

as the Sun, at morn springs up and rises. 

Then to his task goes the prompt priest foreknowing 
the wondrous power of gods who must be honoured. 

7 Lovely is he who, kindled in his greatness, hath 

shone forth, seated in the heavens, refulgent. 

With resonant hymns all gods who guard our bodies 
have offered up oblation in this Agni. 

8 First the gods brought the hymnal into being; then 

they engendered Agni, then oblation. 

He was their sacrifice that guards our bodies: him 
the heavens know, the earth, the waters know him. 

9 He, Agni, whom the gods have generated, in whom 

they offered up all worlds and creatures, 

He with his bright glow heated earth and heaven, 
urging himself right onward in his grandeur. 


o JVe smt thee forth: the Rishi glorifies the power of the priests 
who mado Agni their messenger to tlie gods. 

6 Agni at dawn becomes Surya or the Sun-god who when he sets 
again, becomes Agni. 

0 All worlds aiid creatures: prolepticaily : meaning that the oblation 
offered by the gods was destined to produce the universe—Ludwig. 
According to Sayana ‘in whom all beings have differed oblations 
but o if* clear that the oblations of the gods are intended, 







THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 

10 Then by the laud the gods engendered Agni in 

heaven, who fills both worlds through strength 
and vigour. 

They made him to appear in threefold essence: he 
ripens plants of every form and nature. 

11 What time the gods, whose due is worship, set him 

as Sftrya, son of Aditi, in heaven, 

When the pair, ever wandering, sprang to being, 
all creatures that existed looked upon them. 

12 For all the world of life the gods made Agni 

Vaisvanara to be the days’ bright banner,— 

Him who hath spread abroad the radiant Mornings, 
and, coming with his light, unveils the darkness. 

13 The wise and holy deities engendered Agni Vais- 

v&nara whom age ne’er touches, 

The ancient star that wanders on for ever, lofty and 
strong, the lord of what w r e worship. 

14 We call upon the sage with holy verses, Agni 

Vaisvanara the ever-beaming, 

Who hath surpassed both heaven and earth in great¬ 
ness : he is a god below, a god above us. 

15 I have beard mention of two several pathways, ways 

of the Fathers and of gods and mortals. 

On these two paths each moving creature travels, 
each thing between the father and the mother. 


10 Through strength and vigour: naktibhih : 1 by bis functions : ’ 
Wilson. In threefold essence: or in three conditions, or places, as the 
Sun, lightning, and terrestrial fire. 

11 Th pair: the sun and moon. According to Sayapa, Ushas 
and Surya. 

13 The lord of what we worship: the meaning of yakshasyaiti 
uncertain. Sayana explains it by ptijyasya devasya , of the adorable 
god. * The observer of what is firm/—Ludwig. i The lord of 
meteors/—Grassmann, 

14 Below: on earth. 

15 Two several pathways : the way to the other world and the way 
back to the earth. The father and the mother ; heaven and earth. 







MINlSr/f,, 


<SL 

THE RIG VEDA. * 285 

16 These two united paths bear him who journeys born 

from the head and pondered with the spirit. 

He stands directed to all things existing, hasting, 
unresting in his fiery splendour. 

17 Which of us twain knows where they speak together, 

upper and lower of the two rite-leaders? 

Our friends have helped to gather our assembly. 
They came to sacrifice ; who will announce it ? 

18 How many are the Fires and Suns in number? 

What is the number of the Dawns and Waters? 

Not jestingly I speak to you, 0 Fathers. Sages, 

I ask you this for information. 

19 As great as is the fair-winged Morning’s presence to 

him who dwells beside us, M&tarisvan ! 

Is what the Br&hman does when he approaches to 
sacrifice and sits below the Hotar. 

HYMN LXXXIX. indra. 

I will extol the most heroic Indra who with his 
might forced earth and sky asunder; 

Who hath filled all with width as man’s upholder, 
surpassing floods and rivers in his greatness. 

16 Him who journeys: Agni. From the head: of the world. From 
Adityn, the head or chief of all existence, according to Say,' 

17 Us twain: Agni and the Bishi. Upper and lower: according to 
Sayana, the upper fire is V&yuand the lower, is terrestrial Agni, Who 
will announce it?: Agni alone will make the sacrifice known to the gods, 

19 Moiming’s presence: the light, of Dawn which spreads over 
heaven and earth. Him toko dwells beside us: the yajamana, or 
institutor of the sacrifice.—Ludwig. Below the Hotar: below the 
regular Hotar-priest. Sayana explains this stanza differently :-~As 
long, Matarisvau, as the swiftly-moving (nights) cover the face of the 
dawn, (so long) the Brahman, the inferior sitting down (to perform 
the work) of the Hotri , approaching the sacrifice supports (the 
ceremony)/—Wilson. 

The Kishi is Itcnu of the family of Yisv&mitra, The metre is 
Tri fih tup. 

1 With -width: with his own extended magnitude. ‘With 
radiance/ —Wilson, 



YMN 89 .] 




\ 

‘2 Shrya is he : throughout the wide expanses shall 
Indra turn him, swift as car-wheels, hither, 

Like a stream resting not but ever active ; he hath 
destroyed, with light, the blaek-hued darkness. 

3 To him I sing a holy prayer, incessant, new, match¬ 

less, common to the earth and heaven, 

Who marks, as they were backs, all living creatures: 
ne’< r doth he want a friend, the noble Indra. 

4 I will send forth my songs in flow unceasing, like 

water from the ocean’s depth, to Indra 
Who to his car on both its sides securely hath fixed 
the earth and heaven as with an axle., 

5 Rousing with draughts, the shaker, rushifig onward, 

impetuous, very strong, armed as' with arrows 
' i s Sonia ; forest trees and all the bushes deceive not 
Indra witl^ their offered likeness. 

6 Soma hath flowed to him whom naught can equal, 

the earth, the heavens, the firmament, the mou'n- 

tains — - \ \ f * * \ 

When heightened in his ire liis indignation shatters" 
the firni and breaks the* strong'irr pieces. 

7 As an axe fells the tree so he slew-Vritra, brake 

down the strongholds and dug out the rivers. 

He cleft the mountain ' like 'a new-made pitcher. 
Indra brought forth the kine with his companions. 


2 SdruCt is he : India seems to be identified with the Sun whose 
course lie directs. According to Sa.yana, silrj/ah here ^suvtryah, heroic. 

3 Incessant: or unerring, that is, in strict accordance with the 

rules of the ritual. As they were bads: if they were horses or 

oxen, the length and shape of whose .backs must be carefully con¬ 
sidered in forming a judgiueut of their worth. 

r> Prof. Wilson observes ‘ This verse ia obscure, partly because 
t i„> won j K are unusual, partly because them is a confusion between 
r '/ Soma." Deceive not Indr- ; he will not accept-any substi¬ 

tutes : he will have nothing but the genuine Soma-plant and ita juice. 

7 His companions : the Manila, who assisted him 'in performing 
hia expluit* \ k 




THE mo VEDA. 


287 


\YMN 89.} 


8 Wise art thou, punisher of guilt, 0 Indra. The 

sword lops limbs, thou smitest down the sinner, 
The men who injure, as it were a comrade, the lofty 
law of Varuna and Mitra. 

9 Men who lead evil lives, svho break agreements, and 

injure Varuna, Aryaman, and Mitra,— 

Against these foes, O mighty Indra, sharpen, as 
furious death, thy bull of fiery colour. 

10 Indra is sovran lord of Earth and Heayen, Indra is 

lord of waters and of mountains. 

Indra is lord of prosperers and sages : Indra must 
be invoked in rest and effort. 

11 Vaster than days and nights, giver of increase, 

vaster than firmament and flood of ocean, 

Vaster than bounds of earth and wind’s extension, 
vaster than rivers and our lands is Indra. 

12 Forward, as herald of refulgent Morning, let thine 

insatiate arrow fly, O Indra, 

And pierce, as ’twere a stone launched forth from 
heaven, with hottest blaze the men who love 
deception. 

13 Him, verily, the moons, the mountains followed, the 

tall trees followed and the plants and herbage. 
Yearning with love both worlds approached, the 
waters waited on Indra when he first had being. 


8 Punisher of guilt: , here Indra is said to discharge the duties 
which in more ancient hymns are ascribed to Agni and to Mitra and 
Varuna. 

9 Thy bull: thy thunderbolt. 

10 In rest and effort: ‘for the acquirement and preservation of 
wealth.—Wilson. 

* 3 The moons : or, the months. Waited on Indra: as the repre¬ 
sentative of the Sun, the originator of all life.—Ludwig. 




MINI STfi), 



THE HYMNS OF- 


[BOOK 



14 Where was the vengeful dart when thou, 0 Indra, 

clavest the demon ever bent on outrage ?■ 

When fiends lay there upon the ground extended 
like cattle in the place of immolation ? 

15 Those who are set in enmity against us, the Ogatas, 

O Indra, waxen mighty,— 

Let blinding darkness follow .those our foemen, 
while these shall have bright shining nights to 
light them. 

16 May plentiful libations of the people, and singing 

Itishis’ holy prayers rejoice thee. 

Hearing with love this common invocation, come 
unto us, pass by all those who praise thee. 

17 0 Indra, thu3 may we be made partakers of thy new 

favours that shall bring us profit. 

Singing with love, may we the Visvamitras win day¬ 
light even now through thee, O Indra. 

18 Call we on Maghavan, auspicious Indra. best hero 

in the fight where spoil is gathered, 

The strong who listens, who gives aid in battles, 
who slays the Yritras, wins and gathers riches. 


14 Fiends: milralruvah: the exact meaning of the v»rl is un¬ 
certain. Prof. Ludwig takes it as a genitive case: ‘What time 
they lay there on the earth extended like oxen in a demon’s place 
of slaughter.’ 

15 Oganas: probably the name of some hostile clan. According 
to Saynna, euemics assembled in numbers. These: us and our friends 

hero. 

1G All those who praise thee: all other worshippers. 

18 This is the concluding stanza of several hymns of the Visvamitras, 

See HI. 30. 22; 31. 22; 32. 17; 34. 11; 35. 11; 36. 11. 





MIN IST/fy. 



THE RIG VEDA. 



HYMN XC, 


Purusha. 


A thousand heads liad Purusha, a thousand eyes, 
a thousand feet. 

He covered earth on every side, and spread ten 
fingers’ breadth beyond. 

2 This Purusha is all that yet hath been and all that 
is to be; 

The lord of immortality which waxes greater still 
by food. 


The Rishi is Narayaaa. The metre is Trishtup in stanza 1C, and 
Anushtup in the rest of the hymn, 

1 Purusha, embodied spirit, or Man personified and regarded aa 
the soul and original source of the universe, the personal and life- 
giving principle in all animated beings, is said to have a thousand, 
that is, innumerable, heads, eyes, and feet, as being ono with all 
created life. Ten fingers * 1 2 breadth beyond: “All that seems to be 
intended is that the supreme soul, having animated the universe, is 
moreover present in man, either in a minute form or of definite 
dimensions”—Wilson. 

2 The second line is explained in various ways. The meaning of 
tho words seems to be: he is lord of immortality or the immortal 
world of the gods, which grows greater by food, that is, by the 
sacrificial offerings of men. According to Sayana : he is the lord or 
distributor of immortality because he becomes the visible world in 
order that living beings may obtain the fruits of their actions and 
gain moksha or final liberation from their bonds, *he is also the lord 
of immortality; for he mounts beyond (his own condition) for the 
food (of living beings)/—Wilson. Colebrooke translates the lino :—* 
1 he is that which grows by nourishment, and he is the distributor 
of immortality.’ Dr. Mu^r renders it by:—‘He is also the lord of 
immortality, since by food he expands.’ According to the paraphrase 
in the Bhdgavata Pur Ana , the meaning of the last clause is: ‘ since 
he barb transcended mortal nutriment.' Prof. Ludwig's version is : 
‘ auch liber die unsterbliohkeit gebietend, [da er,] was durch speise 
|is.:,] weit uberragt/ ruling also over immortality, [since he] far 
transcends what [exists] through food; but in his Commentary a 
w.mewhftt different explanation is given. ‘Ruling over immortality, 
he was all that grows by food/—Peterson. 


19 




THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 

3 So mighty is his greatness; yea, greater than this is 

Purusha. 

All creatures are one-fourth of him, three-fourths 
eternal life in heaven. 

4 With three-fourths Purusha went up: one-fourth of 

him again was here. 

Thence he strode out to every side over what eats 
not and what eats. 

5 From him VirAj was born; again Purusha from 

VirAj was born. 

As soon as he was born he spread eastward and west¬ 
ward o’er the earth. 

6 When gods prepared the sacrifice with Purusha as 

their offering, 

Its oil was spring, the holy gift was autumn ; summer 
was the wood. 


3 Eternal life: amritam: immortality, or the immortal gods. 

4 Over what eats not and what eats: over animate and inanimate 
creation. According to S&yaiia and Mahidhara, over both classes of 
created things, those capablo of enjoyment, that is, who can taste 
the reward and punishment of good and evil actions, such as gods, 
men, and lower animals, and those who are incapable thereof, such as 
mountains and rivers— chetanam, or conscious, and acketanam , or 
unconsoious, creation. 

5 From, him,: or, from that, the ‘ one-fourth' mentioned in stanzas 
3 and 4. YirAj, or, in the nominative form, Virat, is sa’.d to have 
cone, in the form of the mundane egg, from Adi-Purusha, the 
primeval Purusha, or presiding Male or Spirit, u who then entered 
into this egg, wliiob be animates as its vital soul or divine principle ” 
Or Vi;aj may ‘ be the female counterpart of Purusha as Aditi o( 
Daksha in X. 72. 4. 5.’ See Dr. Muir’s exhaustive Note on this 
passage, 0. S. Texts , V. pp. 379, 380; and \ v all is, Cosmotogy o/ the 
Rigveda. p. 87. Eastward and westward . or, before and behind. 

6 The sacrifice : mdnasam yajnam, a mental or imaginary sacrifice, 

according to S&yana. t ' , 






MINlSr^ 



7 They balmed as victim on the grass Purusha, born 
in earliest time. 


With him the deities and all S&dhyas and Rishi3 
sacrificed. 

8 From that great general sacrifice the dripping fat 
was gathered up. 

He formed the creatures of the air, and animals both 
wild and tame. 


9 From that great general sacrifice Pachas and S&ma- 
hyinns were born : 

Therefrom the metres were produced, the Yajus had 
its birth from it. 

10 From it were horses born, from it all creatures with 

two rows of teeth : 

From it were generated kine, from it the goats and 
sheep were born. 

11 When they divided Puruslia how many portions did 

they make ? 

What do they call his mouth, his arms ? What do 
they call his thighs and feet ? 

12 The Br4hman was his mouth, of both his arms was 

the R&janya made. 

His thighs became the Vaisya, from his feet the 
Shdra was produced. 




/ 

/ 


7 On the grass ; on the sacred grass used in sacrifices. Sddhyas : 
a class of celestial beings, probably aucient divine saerificers. 

8 The dripping fat; ‘ the mixture of curds and butter,’—Wilson. 
He: or, it; the sacrificed victim Purusha, or the sacred clarified 
butter. The creatures of the air: vdyavydn: ‘those animals over 
whom Vayu presides.’—Wilson. 

9 Metres : or spells and incantations. The Yajus : the Yajur-voda. 

J 3 mjanya : the second or Kshatriya caste, the regal and military 

class. Ymsya : the husbandman; he whose business is agriculture 
and trade. <S Ctdra: the labourer. The Brahman is called the mouth 
of Purusha, as having the special pi ivilege, as a priest, of addrcssiug 
the gods iu prayer. The arms of Purusha became the Rftjanya, the 





MINlSr^ 



THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 

13 The Moon was gendered from Lis mind, and from 

his eye the Sun had birth ; 

Indra and Agni from his mouth were born, and Vayu 
from his breath. 

14 Forth from his navei came mid-air ; the sky was 

fashioned from his head ; 

Earth from his feet, and from his ear the regions. 
Thus they formed the worlds. 

15 Seven fencing-logs had he, thrice seven layers of fuel 

were prepared, 

When the gods, offering sacrifice, bound, as their 
victim, Purusha, 



prince and soldier who wiolda tlio ovvord uud tspour. His thighs, 
the utrongest parts of his body, became tho agriculturist and trades¬ 
man, the chief support of society; and his feet, tho emblems of 
vigour and activity, became the Sudra or labouring man on whose 
toil and industry all ultimately rests, 'i bis is the only passage in the 
Rigveda whioh enumerates the four castes. 

i 5 Fencing-logs: guards, frames, or pieces of wood laid round a 
sacrificial fire to keep it together. Sayana explains pandhayah as 
the seven metres, or as six shallow trenches dug round the fire, and 
an imaginary one round the Sun. Mahidhara says that the seven 
Oceans may be intended. 

This pantheistic hymn, whieh is generally called the Purusha- 
suknv, is of comparatively recent origin, and appears to be an attempt 
to harmonize the two ideas of sacrifice and creation. For further 
information regarding it, see Muir, 0. S. Texts, I. pp. 6 —11, aud V. 

g (58 _ 377 , and Prof. Max Muller, Ancient Sanskrit Literature, pp, 

r >70 f. The hymn has also been translated by Colebrooke, 
Miscellaneous Essays, pp. 167, 168; by Wallis, Cosmology of Hie 
lii!vida, pp- 87, 88 ; and by Professor Fetersou, Hymns from the 
Rigveda, pp. 28!), VjO; also by Burnouf, Bhdgavata Tur&na, Preface 
to Vol. I., and by Professor Weber, Indiscke Studien, IX, p. 5. 
Profeasor Grassmauu's Translation in his Appendix to Vol. II., and 
Professor Ludwig’s Translation and Commentary should be consulted. 








THE RIG VEDA. 


2 


T fMN 91 .] 

16 Gods, sacrificing, sacrificed the victim: these were 
the earliest holy ordinances. 

The mighty ones attained the height of heaven, 
there where the S&cthyas, gods of old, are dwelling. 

HYMN XCI. Agm. 

Brisk, at the place of 114, hymned by men who wake 
our own familiar friend is kindled in the house; 
Hotar of all oblation, worthy of our choice, lord, 
beaming, trusty friend to one who loveth him. 

2 He, excellent in glory, guest in every house, finds 

like a swift-winged bird a home in every tree. 

J3onovolenfc to men, lie scorns no- living man friend 
to the tribes of men he dwells with every tribe, 

3 Most sage with insight, passing skilful with thy 

powers art fhou, O Agni, wise with wisdom, 
knowing all. 

As Vusu, thou alone art lord of all good things, 
of all the treasures that the heavens and earth 
produce. 

4 Foreknowing well, O Agni, thou in IUVs place hast 

occupied thy regular station balmed with oil. 
Marked are thy comings like the comings of the 
Dawns, the rays of him who shineth spotless as 
the Sun. 


The Rishi is Arana, son of Vitihavya. The metro is Trishtup in 
etauza 15, and Jagati in the rest of the hymn. 

1 The place of lid: the shrine where clarified butter is poured 
upon the fire. Our own familiar friend.: damtinds: Agni, the friend 
of the house. 

2 Swift-winged bird: or, bird of prey. ‘ Hunter, according to 
I’rof. Ludwig. 




THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 


5 Thy glories are, as lightnings from the rainy cloud, 

marked, many-hued, like heralds of the Dawns’ 
approach, 

When, loosed to wander over plants and forest trees, 
thou crammest by thyself thy food into thy mouth. 

6 Him, duly coming as their germ, have plants 

received : this Agni have maternal Waters brought 
to life. 

So in like manner do the forest trees and plants 
bear him within them and produce him evermore. 

7 When, sped and urged by wind, thou spreadest thee 

abroad swift piercing through thy food according 
to thy will, 

Thy never-ceasing blazes, longing to consume, like 
men on chariots, Agni, strive on every side. 

8 Agni, the Hotar-priest who fills the assembly full, 

waker of knowledge, chief controller of the 
thought,— 

Him, yea, none other than thyself, doth man elect 
at sacrificial offerings great and small alike. 

9 Here, Agni, the arrangers, those attached to thee. 

elect thee as their priest in sacred gatherings, 
When men with strewn dipt grass and sacrificial 
gifts offer thee entertainment, piously inclined. 

10 Thine is the Herald’s task and Cleanser’s duly timed ; 
Leader art thou, and Kindler for the pious man. 
Thou art Director, thou the ministering priest: thou 
art the Brahman, lord and master in our home. 


6 Agni is produced in the form of lightning by the waters of the 
firmament, or the clouds, and* descends with the rain into plants 
and trees, from the wood of which he is brought forth by attrition. 

8 Great a id small: with Soma or without it. 

9 The arrangers: priests who order and conduct the sacrificial 
ceremonies. 

10 Agni discharges the duties of the seven chief priests, officiating 
as Hotar, Potai. Neshtar, Agnidh, Prasastar, Adhvaryu, and Brahman. 
See II. I. 2, where this stanza originally occurs. 



mist#,. 


‘ G <W 



11 When mortal man presents to thee immortal god, 
Agni, his fuel or his sacrificial gift, 


Then thou art his Adhvaryu, Hotar, messenger, 
callest the gods and orderest the sacrifice. 

12 From us these hymns in concert have gone forth to 

him, these holy words, these Eichas, songs and 
eulogies, 

Eager for wealth, to Jatavedas fain for wealth: when 
the}' have waxen strong they please their strength- 
ener. •*.. 

13 This newest eulogy will I speak forth to him, the 

ancient one who loves it. May he hear our voice. 
May it come near his heart and make it stir with love, 
as a fond well-dressed matron clings about her lord. 

14 He in whom horses, bulls, oxen, and barren cows, 

and rams, when duly set apart, are offered up,— 

To Agni, Soma-sprinkled, drinker of sweet juice, 
disposer, with my heart I bring a fair hymn forth. 

15 Into thy mouth is poured the offering, Agni, as 

Soma into cup, oil into ladle. 

Vouchsafe us wealth, strength-winning, blest with 
heroes, wealth lofty, praised by men, and full of 
splendour. 

HYMN XCII. Visvedevas. 

I praise your charioteer of sacrifice, the lord of men, 
priest of the tribes, refulgent, guest of night. 

Biasing amid dry plants, snatching amid the green, 
the strong, the holy herald hath attaind to heaven. 


11 Callest the gods: 4 sayest the formulae/—Ludwig, 

12 ftichas: verses of praise. 

The Bishi is Saryata, son of Manu, The metre is Jagati, 




2 Him, Agni/gods and men have made their chief 

support, who drinks the fatness and completes the 
sacrifice. 

With kisses they caress the grandson of the red, like 
the swift ray of light, the household priest of 
Dawn. 

3 Yea, we discriminate his and the niggard’s ways : 

his branches evermore are sent forth to consume. 
When his terrific flames have reached the immortals’ 
world, then men remember and extol the heavenly 
folk. 

4 For then the net of Law, Dyaus, and the wide 

expanse. Earth, Worship, and Devotion meet for 
highest praise, 

Varuna, Indra, Mitra were of one accord, and 
Savitar and Bhaga, lords of holy might. 

5 Onward, with ever-roaming Rudra, speed the floods: 

over Aramati the mighty have they run. 

With them Parijman, moving round his vast domain, 
loud bellowing, bedews all things that are within. 

6 The active Rudras, Maruts visiting all men, falcons 

of Dyaus, home-dwellers with the Asura,— 
Yaruna, Mitra, Aryaman look on with these, and 
the swift-moving Indra with swift-moving gods. 


2 CompUte* the sacrifice-: or, fills the assembly fall Grandson of 
the red: ‘son of the brilliant Vttyu.’—Wilson. Sprung from his 
own rod glow, one fire being kindled from another. 

3 Men remember ■ because then their prayers are granted. 

5 Aramati: the earth.—Sayana, Parijman; ‘the circumambient 
(Indra).’—Wilson. 

6 The Asura: Dyaus himself. 




MINfSr^ 



'N 02 .] 


THE RIGVEDA. 


=*SL 


10 


With Indra have they found enjoyment, they who 
toil, in the light’s beauty, in the very strong one’s 
strength ; 

The singers who in men’s assemblies forged for him, 
according to his due, his friend the thunderbolt. 

Even the Sun’s bay coursers hath he held in check : 
each one fears Indra as the mightiest of all. 

Unhindered, from the air’s vault thunders day by day 
the loud triumphant breathing of the fearful Bull. 

With humble adoration show this day your song of 
praise to mighty Rudra, ruler of the brave : 

With whom, the eager ones, going their ordered 
course, be comes from heaven self-bright, auspicious, 
strong to guard. 

For these have spread abroad the fame of human 
kind, the Bull Brihaspati and Soma’s brotherhood. 

Atharvan first by sacrifices made men sure : through 
skill the Bhrigus were esteemed of all as gods. 


11 For these, the earth and heaven with their abundant 

seed, four-bodied Nar&sansa, Yama, Aditi, 

God Twashtar wealth-bestower, the Ribhukshanas, 
Rodasi, Maruts, Vishnu, claim and merit praise. 

12 And may he too give ear, the sage, from far away, 

the Dragon of the Deep, to this our yearning call. 


7 Worshippers are rewarded in heaven for the hymns and prayers 
with which they have strengthened and armed Indra for his great 
deeds. 

0 With whom: the Maruts. 

10 Soma’s brotherhood: all gods who are entitled to drink Soma-juice. 
/ o.it men sure: gave them assurauce of obtaining what thoy a3koil. 

11 Four bodied Fcirdeansa: Agni provided with four iires, or 
complete in all his parts. Ribhukshanas: Ribhus. Rodasi: mother 
ol’ the Maruts. 

12 The Dr( 0 / n of the Deep: Ahirbudknya, rogeut of the sea of air. 




mtsTQf 



<SL 

THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X. 


Ye Sun and Moon who dwell in heaven and move in 
turn, and with your thought, O Earth and Sky., 
observe this well. 

/ 13 Dear to all gods, may Pushan guard the ways we 
go, the Waters’ child and V&yu help us to success. 
Sing lauds for your great bliss to Wind, the breath 
of all: ye Asvins prompt to hear, hear this upon 
your way. 

14 With hymns of praise we sing him who is throned 
as lord over these fearless tribes, the self-resplen¬ 
dent one. 

We praise Night’s youthful lord benevolent to man, 
the foeless one, the free, with all celestial Dames. 
15 By reason of his birth here Angiras first sang: the 
pressing-stones upraised beheld the sacrifice— 

The stones through which the sage became exceeding 
vast, and the sharp axe obtains in fight the beau¬ 
teous place. 

HYMN XCIII. Visvedevas. 

Mighty aro ye, and far-extended, Heaven and Earth . 
both worlds are evermore to us like two young 

Guard 's tl 3reby from stronger foe; guard us hereby 
to giv. u strength. 

13 The Waters’ child: Agni, born as lightning from the clouds. 

14 The self-resplendent one: Agni. Night's youthful lord: the 
Moon. Celestial Dames: the lunar asterisms. 

15 The sage: Indra, according .to Say ana, Sharp axe : the tbuuder- 
bolt. The meaning of this stanza is obscure. 


The Rishi is said to be Tilnva, son of Prithu. The metre is 
Anuahtup in stanzas 2, 3, 13; Aksharapankti (40 syllables, dactyls 
and spondees) in 9; Nyankus&ripi 12 + 8 + 8) in 11 ; Puras- 

tadbi;ihatl (12 + 8 + 8 + 8) in 15; and Prastarapankti (12 4* 1~■ + S + 8) 
in the refit of the hymn. 

1 Thereby . hereby: literally 4 by those ’. * by these.' Spy ana 

supplies piilanaih, protections, in both cases. The former may refer 
to their magnitude, and the letter to their gentle feminine nature. 







MlNisr^ 


THE RIG VEDA. 



WIN 93.] 



2 In each succeeding sacrifice that mortal honoureth 

the gods, 

He who, most widely known and famed for happi¬ 
ness, inviteth them. 

3 Ye who are rulers over all, great is your sovran 
• power as gods. 

Ye all possess all majesty: all must be served in 
sacrifice. 

4 These are the joyous kings of immortality, Parij- 

man, Mitra, Aryaman, and Varuija. 

What else is Rudra, praised of men? the Maruts, 
Bhaga, Ptishana ? 

5 Come also to our dwelling, lords of ample wealth, 

common partakers of our waters, Sun and Moon, 
When the great Dragon of the Deep hath settled 
down upon their floors. 

G And let the Asvins, lords of splendour, set us free,— 
both gods, and, with their laws, Mitra and Varuna. 
Through woes, as over desert lands, he speeds to 
ample opulence. 

7 Yea, let the Asvins twain be gracious unto us, even 
Rudras, and all gods, Bhaga, Rathaspati; 
Parijman, Ribhu, V&ja, O lords of all wealth 
Ribhukshanas. 


4 Immortality: or, the immortal world. Parijman: V&yu. What 
else : that is, Rudra is also one of these kings. 

5 Waters: jibatious of Soma-juice. Say ana explains naktam by 
rdlrau, ' by night.’ It is, as Prof. Ludwig has pointed out, a shortened 
form of nakshtam, ‘come ye.' Upon their floors: ‘in their company 
in the firmamental (clouds).’—Wilson. The meaning is obscure. 

6 He: toe sacrifice!’ whom these gods protect. 

7 Rathaspati: the guardian of war-chariots. Ribhukskatias: 
Ribhus. 

I 4 

\' v\V \ \.\ 

' ‘ > V \ -v > 





mtsTftr 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 



8 Prompt is Ribhukshan, prompt the worshipper’s 

strong drink : may thy fleet bay steeds, thine who 
speedest on, approach. 

Not man’s but god’s is sacrifice whose psalm is un¬ 
assailable. 

9 O god Savitar, harmed by none, lauded, give us 

a place among wealthy princes. 

With his car-steeds at once hath our Indra guided 
the reins and the car of these men. 

10 To these men present here, O Heaven and Earth, 

to us grant lofty fame extending over all mankind. 
Give us a steed to win us strength, a steed with 
wealth for victory. 

11 This speaker, Indra—for thou art our friend—wher¬ 

ever he may be, guard thou, victor ! for help, 
ever for help: 

Thy wisdom, Vasu ! prosper him. 

12 So have they strengthened this mine hymn which 

seems to take its bright path to the Sun, and 
reconciles the men: 

Thus forms a carpenter the yoke of horses, not to be 
displaced. 

13 Whose chariot-seat hath come again laden with 

wealth and bright with gold, 

Lightly, with piercing ends, as ’twere two ranks of 
heroes ranged for fight. 


8 tfibkv/cshan: ‘ the mighty (Indra).’—Wilson. 

0 With his carstrds; with us priests, who draw the chariot of 
sacrifice. 

12 So hove they strengthened: ‘May (the priests) strengthen.’— 
Wilson. The yoke: as the yoke keeps a pair of horses together so 
the hymn addressed to the gods reconciles wors! ippers and fills them, 
with like feelings of devotion. 

13 PUrcing ends: of the asle, which pass through the naves. 



MINlSr^ 


THE RIG VEDA. 


3 



'N 94.] 


14 This to Dulisima Prithav&na have I sung, to Vena, 

Rama, to the nobles, and the king*. 

They yoked five hundred, and their love of us was 
famed upon t'heir way. 

15 Besides, they showed us seven-and-seventy horseshere. 
Titnva at once displayed his gift, P&rthya at once dis¬ 
played his gift, and straightway Mayava showed his. 


HYMN XCIV.. Press-stonea. 

■' Let these speak loudly forthlet-us speak out aloud : 
to the loud speaking Pressing-stones address the 
speech; 

When, rich with Soma-juice, Stones of the mountain, 
ye, united, swift to Indra bring the sound of praise. 

2 They speak out like a hundred, like a thousand men: 
they cry aloud to us with their green-tinted mouths, 

While, pious Stones, they ply their task .with piety, 
and, even before the Hotar, taste the offered food. 


14 Duhsfma Prithavdna, Vena, and Rdma were Maghavans or 
wealthy iustitutors of sacrifices. To the king: asure: to "the insure, 
lord or chief. Five hundred: horses or chariots. 

15 Horses; there is no substantive in the text. Sayapa supplies'. 
gavAm , cows. These horses, or cows, were presented to the priests'" 
Tdhvci, P(IfihyOy and Mdyava are patronymics which do not occur 
again in the Rigveda. 

Professor Ludwig thinks that a quarrel had arisen between tho 
Mag ha vans or nobles (stanza 14) and the Visas or people (stanza 9), 
and that the priests, who had reconciled the two parties, were 
presented with the chariots which had been prepared for battle. See 
stanza 13, in which, according to this explanation, no should be 
rondeicu ly and not instead of ‘as ’twered The hymn, which is 
difficu.t and in parts almost unintelligible, is placed by Prof. 
Orassmann m his Appendix. 

Th<3 Rishi is -rbuda, the Serpent, sou of Kadrfi. The metro is 
Tnshtup in stanzas 5, 7, 14, and Jagafci (which I have followed in all 
stanzas) m the rest of the hymn. 

- Hotar: v (Agni) the invoker (of the gods). 1 —Wilson. Or tin- 
human Hotar-pnest may he intended. 



MiNisr^ 


THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 

3 Loudly they speak, for they have found the savoury 

meath: they make a humming sound over the 
meat prepared. 

As they devour the branch of the red-coloured tree, 
these, the well-pastured Bulls, have uttered bel- 
lowings. 

4 They cry aloud, with strong exhilarating drink, cal¬ 

ling on Indra now, for they have found the meath. 
Bold,°with the sisters they have danced, embraced 
by them, making the earth reScho with their 
ringing sound. 

5 The Eagles have sent forth their cry aloft in heaven ; 

in the sky’s vault the dark impetuous ones have 
danced. 

Then downward to the nether stone’s fixt place they 
sink, and, splendid as the Sun, effuse their copious 
stream 

6 Like strong ones drawing, they have put forth all 

their strength : the Bulls, harnessed together, 
bear the chariot-poles. 

When they have bellowed, panting, swallowing their 
food, the sound of thier loud snorting is like that 

of steeds. 

7 To these who have ten workers and a tenfold girth, 

to these who have ten yoke-straps and ten bind¬ 
ing thongs, 

To these who bear ten reins, the eternal, sing ye 
praise, to these who bear ten car-poles, ten when 
they are yoked. 

8 These Stones with ten conductors, rapid in their course, 

with lovely revolution travel round and round. 




3 J?ed-coloureci tree : the Soma-plant. 

4 The titters : the fingers. 

5 The Eagles: the rapidly moving press-stones, 
7 Ten workers . the fingers of both hand?. 





THE RIG VEDA. 


30 


MN 94 .] 


They have been first to drink the flowing Soma-juice, 
first to enjoy the milky fluid of the stalk. 

9 These Soma-eaters kiss Xndra’s bay-coloured steeds : 
draining the stalk they sit upon the ox’s hide. 
Indra when he hath drunk Soma-meath drawn by them, 
. waxes in strength, is famed, is mighty as a bull. 

10 Strong is your stalk; ye, verily, never shall be harm¬ 

ed : ye have refreshmen % ye are ever satisfied. 

Fair are ye, as it were, through splendour of his wealth, 
his in whose sacrifice, 0 Stones, ye find delight. 

11 Bored deep, but not pierced through with holes, are 

ye, O Stones, not loosened, never weary, and exempt 
from death, 

Eternal, undiseased, moving in sundry ways, un¬ 
thirsting, full of fatness, void of all desire. 

12 Your fathers, verily, stand firm from age to age: 

they, loving rest, are not dissevered from their seat. 
Untouched by time, ne’er lacking green plants and 
green trees, they with their voice have caused the 
heavens and earth to hear. 


13 This, this the Stones proclaim, what time they are 

disjoined, and when with ringing sounds they move 
and drink the balm. 

Like tillers of the ground when they are sowing 
seed, they mix the Soma, nor, devouring, minish it. 

14 They have raised high their voice for juice, for sacri¬ 

fice, striking the mother earth as though they 
danced thereon. 

So loose thou too his thought who hath effused the 
sap, and let the Stones which we are honouring be 
disjoined. 


9 The ox’s hide: spread underneath to catch and hold the droppings. 
12 Jour fathers: the mountains from which you came. 

14 Striking the. mother earth: ‘earth’ is not iu the text:—‘they 
made n noise like (children) at play, striking their mother.’—Wilson. 
I have followed Prof. Ludwig’s explanation. 





THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK Nr 



HlMX XCV. Urvafli. ^uiuravas. 


Ho there my consort ! Stay, thou fierce-soulecl lady, 
and let us reason for awhile together. 

Such thoughts as these of ours, while yet unspoken 
in days gone by have never brought us comfort. 

2 What am I now to do with this thy saying ? I have 

gone from thee like the first of Mornings. 
Pururavas, return thou to thy dwelling : I, like the 
wind, am difficult to capture. 

3 Like a shaft sent for glory from the quiver, or swift 

steed winning cattle, winning hundreds, 

The lightning seemed to flash, as cowards planned it. 
The minstrels bleated like a lamb in trouble. 


The hymn is a dialogue between Pururavas and Urvast, and they 
are severally the Rishis of the stanzas which they speak. The metre 
is Trishtup. The dialogue, which is sometimes almost unintelligible, 
contains the germs of a legend which is related in the Satapathcb 
Brdhmana, reappears in the Mah&bhdrata and Purdnas , and forms the 
plot of the well-known drama, Vikrarnorvasi , or The Hero and the 
Nymph. According to this legend, Urvosi, an Apsaras or Nymph of 
heaven, Inc been banished to earth where she consents to live with 
King Pururavas on condition that he takes care of her two pot rams, 
and that she never sees him unclothed. She lives with Punlravas for 
four years, when the Gaudharvas or heavenly minstrels resolve to 
bring her back. They steal one of the rams by night. Purfiravas 
springs from his bed; the Gaudharvas send on him a flash of magic 
lightning, and Urvasi sees her husband naked. One of the conditions 
of the continuance of their union is broken, and the nymph instantly 
vanishes. Pururav&s meets her afterwards and in vain implores her to 
return. At last she relents, and'in due time a son is born to them. 
These arc the m;i ; n outlines of a somewhat variously told story. 

1 Punlravas speaks, when he has met Urvani again after her sudden 
departure. 

2 Urvasi replies. 

3 PurflravHB speaks, reminding her of the circumstances in which 
she vanished, u Yes,” he says, “ thou wentest from me with the speed 
of an arrow or a racer. The cowardly Gaudharvas deluded ns. They 
bleated like a lamb to make us think that one of thy pets was in 
pain or danger, and then, by a flash of factitious lightning, made mo 
visible to thee in my nakedness.” 




mtsTfy 



’MN 95.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 



L 


4 Giving her husband’s father life and riches, from the 

near dwelling, when her lover craved her, 

She sought the home wherein she found her pleasure, 
accepting day and night her lord’s embraces, 

5 Thrice in the day didst thou embrace thy consort, 

though coldly she received thy fond caresses. 

To thy desires, Purftravas, I yielded : so wast thou 
king, O hero, of my body. 

G The maids Sujurni, Sreni, Sumne4pi, Charanyu, 
Granthini, and Hradechakshus,— 

These like red kine have hastened forth, the bright 
ones, and like milch-cows have lowed in emulation. 

7 While he was born the Dames sate down together, 

the Rivers with free kindness gave him nurture ; 
And then, Purhravas, the gods increased thee for 
mighty battle, to destroy the Dasyus. 

8 When I, a mortal, wooed to mine embraces these 

heavenly nymphs who laid aside their raiment, 
Like timid does they fled from me in terror, like 
chariot horses when the car has touched them. 


4 Life and riches . meaning, perhaps, as Prof. Ludwig suggests, tho 
future grandson. TJie near dwelling : her father-in-law’s house, where 
she speut much of her time. Her lover: her husband Purftravas. 

This stanza and the next are spoken by Urvasi. 


6 This stanea is ascribed ’ Sayana to Turftravas, who mentions 
the names of the Apsarasas who were the conmnnirmn r>f TTr„,» H } 



20 




minis;*,. 


THE HYMNS OF 



<SL 

[BOOK X. 


9 When, loving these immortal ones, the mortal hath 
converse with the nymphs as they allow him, 

Like swans they show the beauty of their bodies, 
like horses in their play they bite and nibble. 

10 She who flashed brilliant as the falling lightning 

brought me delicious presents from the waters. 
Now from the flood be born a strong young hero! 
May Urvasi prolong her life for ever! 

11 Thy birth hath made me drink from earthly milch- 

kine : this power, Pururavas, hast thou vouchsafed 
me. 

I knew, and warned thee, on that day. Thou 
wouldst not hear me. What sayest thou, when 
naught avails thee ? 

12 When will the son be born and seek his father? 

Mourner-like, will he weep when first he knows 
him ? 

Who shall divide the accordant wife and husband, 
while fire is shining with thy consort’s parents? 


9 Urvasi replies. The Apsarasas, she says, as a rule only coquet 
with mortal men. Like swans: Sayana explains na here differently: 

' they (becoming) ducks do not show their bodies.’—Wilson. 

10 Pururavas speaks. Urvasi, he says, did not treat him so coldly. 
From the waters: of the firmament. From the flood: from Urvasi 
who comes from the watery regions above. Sayana explains opah 
differently -‘a son able in act and friendly to man has been born.’ 
Wilson. 

11 Urvasi speaks. According'to Sayana, whom Professors Wilson, 
Grassrnaan, and Geldner follow, the translation of the first half-line 
would be.—Thou hast been bom to give the earth protection. 
Warned tune on that day: told thee, when I agreed to live witb thee 
what would happen if the conditions of the agreement were not 
strictly observed. 

12 I\irurav&s speaks. Knows him: * on recognizing (me) ’—Wilson. 
Or, when be know a my story, knows how his father has been deserted. 
While fire is shining: so long as tho father-in-law aud mother-in-law 
who sanctioned the union live and maintain their household fire. 




MINlSr^ 



r 2V 95.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 



13 I will console him when his tears are falling: he 

shall not weep and cry for care that blesses. 

That which is thine, between us, will I send thee. 
Go home again, thou fool; thou hast not won me. 

14 Thy lover shall flee forth this day for ever, to seek, 

without return, the farthest distance. 

Then let his bed be in Destruction’s bosom, and there 
let fierce rapacious wolves devour him. 

15 Nay, do not die, Purfiravas, nor perish : let not the 

evil-omened wolves devour thee. 

With women there can be no lasting friendship: 
hearts of hyenas are the hearts of women. 

16 When amid men in altered shape I sojourned, and 

through four autumns spent the nights among 
them, 

I tasted once a day a drop of butter; and even now 
with that am I contented. 

17 I, her best love, call Urvasi to meet me, her who 

fills air and measures out the region. 

Let the gift brought by piety approach thee. Turn 
thou to me again : my heart is troubled. 


lo Ui vast answers. That which is thine, between ; our child. 

14 Pui'dravils threatens to destroy himself. 

15 Urvasi speaks this and the nest stanza. 

15 A drop of butter: one of the conditions on which the continuance 
of theii union depended was that she should eat nothing but a small 
quantity of gkrita or clarified butter daily. See stanza 11. 

1* Puiuravas speaks. Her best love: vasiehlha here is evidently, 
as the Scholiast says, an epithet and not a namo, meaning ‘most 
excellent, ‘most precious.’ Fills air: representing the morning 
uust, or the first flush of light, that spreads over tho heavens before 
the rising of the sun. 




THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK X. 


18 Thus speak these gods to thee, 0 son of 114: As 
Death hath verily got thee for his subject, 

Thy sons shall serve the gods with their oblation, 
and thou, moreover, shalt rejoice in Svarga. 


HYMN XCVL Indra. 

In the great synod will I laud thy two bay steeds : I 
prize the sweet strong drink of thee the warrior-god, 
His who pours lovely oil as ’twere with yellow drops. 
Letmysongsenter thee whose form hath golden tints. 


18 There is au hiatus between this stanza and 17, an entire break 
of continuity. The fragment is ascribed to Urvasi, who consoles 
Pururavas by telling him of the promise of the deities that after his 
death his sons shall offer sacrifice to the gods, and he himself shall be 
blest in heaven. Son of lid: Pururavas, called Aila or son of Ha 
who was the daughter of Manu. 

Some of the stanzas should be transposed, and their order sliou d 
be 1 2, 3, 4, 5, 16, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14 15, lO.-Ludwig. 

Of this very difficult hymn there is a complete translation, with a 
•very full and generally convincing commentary (to both of which 
I am indebted for much assistance), by Prof. Qeldner, Vtdhche Studien, 
_ 243—295. The myth has been discussed by Prof. Roth, Illut- 

tmlions of ike Nirv.Ua , and Indischc Studien, I. 196; by Prof. Max 
Milller, Oxford Essays ; by Prof. Adalbert Kuhn, Die Hierabhmft des 
Fevers’, pp. 85 ff; and by Professors Holtzmann aud Oldenberg in 
more recent days. Professor Max Muller considers the story to be 
“one of the myths of the Vedas which expresses the correlation of 
the dawn and the sun." According to Dr. Goldstucker, Urvaei is the 
morning mist which vanishes away oa soon as Pururavas the sun 
dis days himself. See Ckamh- -s's Encyclopaedia under Pururavas. 


The Rishi is Baru of the family of Angiras, or Sarvahari, son of 
India. The metre is Trishtup in Btanzas 12 and 13, and Jagati in 
the rest. Throughout the hymn the poet rings the changes on words 
8&M to be derivatives oT the root hri, to take, as haryata, deliglrt- 
Bome harydn, loving, hari, hay or tawny, harit, green, yellow, or 
gold-coloured. Op. III. 44. These words are conjeoturally explained 
by the Commentator, and are susceptible of various renderings, 

1 Oil: or fatness, fertilizing rain. 




WNisr^ 


THE BIG VEDA. 




2 Ye who in concert sing unto the gold- buecl place, 

like bay steeds driving onward to the heavenly 
seat, 

For Indra laud ye strength allied with tawny steeds, 
laud him whom cows content as ’twere with yellow 
drops. 

3 His is that thunderbolt, of iron, golden-hued, gold- 

coloured, very dear,, and yellow in his arms ; 

Bright with strong teeth, destroying with its tawny 
rage. In Indra are set fast all forms of golden hue. 

4 As if a lovely ray were laid upon the sky, the golden 

thunderbolt spread out as in a race. 

That iron bolt with yellow jaw smote Ahi down. A 
thousand flames had he who bore the tawny-hued. 

5 Thou, thou, when praised by men who sacrificed of old, 

hadst pleasure in their lauds, 0 Indra golden-haired. 
All that befits thy song of praise thou welcomest, 
the perfect pleasant gift, O golden-hued from birth. 
G These two dear bays bring hither Indra on his ear, 
thunder-armed, joyous, meet for laud, to drink his fill. 
Many libations flow for him who loveth them : to 
Indra have the gold-hued Soma-juices run. 

7 The gold-hued drops have flowed to gratify his wish : 

the yellow drops have urged the swift bays to the 
strong. 

He who speeds on with bay steeds even as he lists 
hath satisfied his longing for the golden drops. 

8 At the switt draught the Soma-drinker waxed in might, 

the iron one with yellow beard and yellow hair. 


2 Cows: milked for sacrificial purposes. 

3 Tawny rage : perhaps with reference to tho effect of anger on 
the face.—Ludwig. 

1 The tawny-hued : the thunderbolt wielded by Indra. 

t To ike strong: to Indra: that they may be harnessed and come 
to the sacrifice. 

8 The iron one : ‘.iron-hearted Indra/—'Wilson. 




THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 


He, lord of tawny coursers, lord of fleet-foot mares, 
will bear his bay steeds safely over all distress. 

9 His yellow-coloured jaws, like ladles, move apart, 
what time, for strength, he makes the yellow- 
tinted stir, 

When, while the bowl stands there, he grooms his 
tawny steeds, when he hath drunk strong drink, 
the sweet juice that he loves. 

10 Yea, to the dear one’s seat in homes of heaven and 

earth the bay steeds’ lord hath whinnied like a 
horse for food. 

Then the great wish hath seized upon him mightily, 
and the beloved one hath gained high power of life. 

11 Thou, comprehending with thy might the earth and 

heaven, acceptest the dear hymn for ever new and 

O Asura, disclose thou and make visible the Cow s 
beloved home to the bright golden Sun. 

12 O Indra, let the eager wishes of the folk bring thee, 

delightful, golden-visored, on thy car, 

That, pleased with sacrifice wherein ten fingers toil, 
thou mayest, at the feast, drink of our offered meath. 

13 Juices aforetime, lord of bays, thou drunkest; and 

thine especially is this libation. 

Gladden thee, Indra, with the meath-rich Soma: 
pour it down ever, mighty one! within thee. 

0 For Strength : for strengthening food. The yellow-tinted ; his 
yellow jaws. 

10 The dear one must be the Soma, found both in heaven and 
earth, the homes of go^Js and men. According to Sayana, Indra him- 
aclf ia meant. The belovH one: Indra, whose vital vigour is increased 
by Soma-draughts. 

11 The Cow's Moved home: the Cow may be the Sun whose home 
is the universe which Indra will allow Surya to illumine, 

12 Sacrifice: according to Sayana, the sacrificial Some-juice which 
is pressed and prepared by the fingers of the priest. 





r N 07.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 



HYMN XCVII. Praiso of Herbs. 
Herbs that sprang up in time of old, three ages 
earlier than the gods,— 

Of these, whose hue is brown, will I declare the 
hundred powers and seven. 

2 Ye, Mothers, have a hundred forms, yea, and a 

thousand are your growths. 

Do ye who have a thousand powers free this my 
patient from disease. 

3 So gladly lend your aid, ye Plants, both blossoming 

and bearing fruit, 

Plants that will lead us to success like mares who 
conquer in the race. 

4 Plants, by this name I speak to you, Mothers, to 

you the goddesses : 

Steed, cow, and garment may I win, win back thy 
vital breath, O man. 

5 The Holy Fig-tree is your home, your mansion the 

Pal&sa-tree : 

Winners of cattle shall ye be if j'e regain for me 
this man. 

G He who hath store of Herbs at hand like kings 
amid a crowd of men,— 

Physician is that sage’s name, fiend-slayer, chaser of 
disease. 

7 Herbs rich in Soma, rich in steeds, in nourishment, 
in strengthening power,— 


The Rishi ia Bhishaj (the Physician], of thp family of Atharvan. 
The metre is Anushtup. 

1 Three ages earlier than the gods: * 1 for the gods before the three 
ages.'—Wilson. 

4 Steed, car, and garment: as my fee for curing you. 

■' Holy Fig-tree: the Asvattha, or Ficus Religiosa. Paldta-tret: 
the Botoa Frondosa. Sacrificial vessels are made of the wood f 
these trees which are therefore said to be the home of plants. 




MINIS 



<SL 

THE HYMNS OF [BOOR X. 


All these have I provided here, that this man may 
be whole again. 

8 The healing virtues of the Plants stream forth like 

cattle from the stall,— 

Plants that shall win me store of wealth, and save 
thy vital breath, 0 man. 

9 Believer is your mother’s name, and hence Restorers 

are ye called. 

Rivers are ye with wings that fly : keep far what¬ 
ever brings disease. 

10 Over all fences have they passed, as steals a thief 

into the fold. 

The Plants have driven from the frame whatever 
malady was there. 

11 When, bringing back the vanished strength, I hold 

these herbs within my hand, 

The spirit of disease departs ere he can seize upon 
the life. 

12 He through whose frame, O Plants, ye creep mem¬ 

ber by member, joint by joint,— 

From him ye drive away disease like some strong 
arbiter of strife. 

13 Fly, Spirit of Disease, begone, with the blue jay and 

kingfisher. 

Fly with the wind’s impetuous speed, vanish to¬ 
gether with the storm. 

14 Help every one the other, lend assistance each of 

you to each, 

All of you be accordant, give furtherance to this 
speech of mine. 


12 Like some strong arbiter of strife: ‘like a mighty (prince) 
stationed in the midst of his host.’—Wilson. 

13 With the blue jay and kingfisher: with the speed of the swiftest 
birds. Together with the storm: according to Sajana, ‘ perish along 
with the iguana,’ 




^9 .wV**' 


XN 97.] 


TJIE RIG VEDA. 




15 Let fruitful Plants, and fruitless, those that blossom, 

and the blossomless, 

Engendered by Brihaspati, release us from our pain 
and grief ; 

16 Release me from the curse’s plague and woe that 

comes from V aruna; 

Free me from Yama’s fetter and from sin occasioned 
by the gods. 

17 What time, descending from the sky, the Plants flew 

earthward, thus they spake : w 

No evil shall befall the man whom while he liveth 
we pervade. 

18 Of all the many Plants whose king is Soma, Plants 

of hundred forms, 

Thou art the Plant most excellent, prompt to the 
wish, sweet to the heart. 

19 0 all ye various Herbs whose king is Soma, that 

o’erspread the earth, 

Engendered by Brihaspati, combine your virtue in 
this Plant. 

20 Unharmed be he who digs you up, unharmed the 

man for whom I dig : 

And let no malady attack biped or quadruped of ours. 

21 All Plants that hear this speech, and those that 

have departed far away, 

Come all assembled and confer your healing power 
upon this Herb. 

22 With Soma as their sovran lord the Plants hold 

colloquy and say: 

0 king, we save from death the man whose cure a 
Brahman undertakes. 


15 Engendered: or, Commissioned. Brihaspati, says Sayana, is 
Uu> deity who presides over mantras or spells and channa, 

10 ■ 'his Plant: the medicinal herb which I, the physician, am 
about to make use o£ 




[BOOK 



THE HYMNS OF 



L 


23 Most excellent of all art thou, 0 Plant: thy vassals 
are the trees. 

Let him be subject to our power, the man who seeks 
to injure us. 


HYMN XCVIII. 


The Gods. 


Come, be thou Mitra, Varuna, or Pftshan, approach 
me, O Brihaspati, with godhead : 

With Maruts, Vasus, or Adityas, make thou Parjanya 
pour for Santanu his rain-drops. 

2 The god, intelligent, the speedy envoy whom thou 
hast sent hath come to me, Devftpi: 

Address thyself to me and turn thee hither: within 
thy lips will I put brilliant language. 

Within my mouth, Brihaspati, deposit speech lucid, 
vigorous, and free from weakness, 

Thereby to win for Santanu the rain-fall. The 
meath-rich drop from heaven hath passed within it. 

4 Let the sweet drops descend on us, 0 Indra: give 
us enough to lade a thousand wagons. 


The Rishi is Devapi, son of Rishtishena. The meti’e is Trisbtup. 
u Sukta is remarkable as representing one of two brothers, both 
of the Ksbatriya caste, becoming the Pv.rokita, or family priest, and 
llotri or sacrificing priest, of the other who is the Rija.”—Wilson. 

1 Devapi addresses Brihaspati, who is identifiable with Mitra, 
Varuna, Push an and others, in his special character of Purohita, or 
family pries , of the gods, and as the prototype of all human Puro- 
hitas. With Marutt: whether thou be attended by Maruts, Vasus, 
or, Adityas. For Santanu: the brother of Devapi. 

2 Brihaspati replies. Brilliant language: a ‘ brilliant hymn.’— 
Muir. 

5 Devi pi speaks, praying Brihaspati, as Lord of Speech (cp. X. 

1 ), to inspire him with eloquence that he may address the gods 
, factually. The meath-rich drop: the sweet eloquence for which he 
has prayed. 

4 The siveet drops: of rain. This stanza is spoken by Santanu. 





TUE RIG VEDA. 


315 


W 98 .] 

Sit. to thy Hotar task; pay worship duly, and serve 
the gods, Devapi, with oblation, 

5 Knowing the gods’ good-will, Dev&pi, Rigid, the son 

of Rishtishena, sate as Hotar. 

Ho hath brought down from heaven’s most lofty 
summit the ocean of the rain, celestial waters, 

6 Gathered together in that highest ocean, the waters 

stood, by deities obstructed. 

They hurried down set free by Arshtishena, in gap¬ 
ing clefts, urged onward by Dev&pi. / 

7 When as chief priest for Santanu, Dev&pi chosen for 

Hotar’s duty prayed beseeching, 

Graciously pleased Briliaspati vouchsafed him a voice 
that reached the gods and won the waters, 

8 0 Agni whom Dev&pi Arshtishena, the mortal man, 

hath kindled in his glory, 

Joying in him with all the gods together, urge on 
the sender of the rain, Parjanya. 

9 All ancient Rishis with their songs approached thee, 

even thee, O much-invoked, at sacrifices. 

We have provided wagon-loads in thousands: come 
to the solemn rite, lord of red horses. 

10 The wagon-loads, the nine-and-ninety thousand, these 

have been offered up to thee, O Agni. 

Hero, with these increase thy many bodies, and, 
stimulated, send us rain from heaven. 

11 Give thou these ninety thousand loads, O Agni, to 
Indra, to the Bull, to be his portion. 


5 Knowing: how to win, 

C Arshtishena: patronymic, son of Rishtishena; Devapi, 

7 Chief priest: or family or housoliold priest; Purohita. 

0 Wagon-locuh: an extraordinary quantity of fuel for the sacrifice, 
as the voeasion was one of the greatost importance* 




fyq . 'tu 7- * 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 


Knowing the paths which deities duly travel, set 
’mid the gods in heaven Aulana. also. 

12 0 Agni, drive afar our foes, our troubles; chase 
malady away and wicked demons. 

From this air-ocean, from the lofty heavens, send 
down on us a mighty flood of waters. 

HYMN XCIX. Iudra. 

What splendid one, loud-voiced, far-striding, dost 
thou, well knowing, urge us to exalt with praises? 

What give we him ? When his might dawned, he 
fashioned the Vritra-slaying bolt, and sent us waters. 

2 He goes to end his work with lightning flashes: 
wide is the seat his Asura glory gives him 

With his companions, Dot without his brother, he 
quells this Saptatha’s magic devices. 


11 Aiddna: Santanu, ns a descendant of Ula, appears to be meant. 
According to some scholars, auldmm means oblation or sacrificial 
otic-ring. ° “ Tho fact of Devapi being reputed as the author of this 
hymn, and as the purohita and hotri of his brother seems to have 
led the legendary writers to invent the story of his becoming a 
Brahman, which (as mentioned by Professor Weber, Indische Studien, 
i. p. 203) is recorded in the 6alya-parvau of the Mahabh&rata, verses 
2281 h. where he is said to have attained this distinction at. a certain 
place of pilgrimage called PrithQdaka; where Siudhudvlpa and 
Visvainitra also wore received into the higher caste.’—Muir, 
q $ Tc.'i f I. 270 it’. For tho legend on which the hymn is said to 
be based, quoted by S&yuua from the Nirulcta, see Wilson’s Translation. 

The Rishi is Vamra, the son of Vikhanasa. The metro is Trishtup. 

1 The question in the first line is a rhetorical figure, the meaning 
being, How splendid is he (Indra) whom thou (the yajnuuina?) urgost 
us to exalt! What give we him ? what can we give him in return for 
what be has done for us 1 

2 His companions : the Maruts. His brother: Vishnu. Who 
Soptalha was is uncertain. The word means Septimus, tho seventh, 
and probably some RakBhasa or demon is intended. 







MINlSr^ 



3 On most auspicious path he goes to battle: he toiled 

to win heaven’s light, full fain to gain it; 

He seized the hundred-gated castle’s treasure by 
craft, unchecked, and slew the lustful demons. 

4 Fighting for kine, the prize of war, and roaming 

among the herd he brings the young streams hither, 
Where, footless, joined, without a car to bear them, 
with jars for steeds, they pour their flood like butter. 

5 Bold, unsolicited for wealth, with Rudras he came, 

the blameless, having left his dwelling, 

Came, seized the food of Vamra arid his consort, 
and left the couple weeping and unsheltered. 

6 He, lord and giver, hath subdued the Dasa who 

roared aloud, six-eyed and triple-headed; 

And through his strength hath Trita, waxen mighty, 
smitten the boar with shaft whose point was iron. 

7 He raised himself on high audshot his arrow against 

the guileful and oppressive foeman. 

Strong, glorious, manliest, for us he shattered the 
forts of Nahus when he slew the Dasyus. 

8 He, like a cloud that rains upon the pasture, hath 

found for us the way to dwell in safety. 

When the-Hawk comes in body to the Soma, armed 
with his iron claws he slays the Dasyus. 

9 He with his potent friends gave up the mighty, gave 

Sudnja up to Kutsa for affliction. 

He led the lauded Kavi, he delivered Atka as prey 
to him and to his heroes. 


3 Tk ( lustful demons ; the exact meaning of s'madcvAu is uncertain. 
See VII. 21,5 and ttote. 

,r ' I can make nothing'intelligible of the second line. “I think of 
tlio two (i>; rents) of Vamra, who are free from fever. Having obtained 
(the enemy's) food, he called aloud whilst stealing it.”—Wilson. 

6 The hoar: the water-bearing cloud, according to SAyana. 

8 The Hawk: the fierce and swift ludra. 

9 Aat:: aocording to Sayana, USana Kavya or son of Kavi is 
intended. Atka: s<*o X. 49. 3. 




THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 


10 He, with his gods who love mankind, the wondrous, 

giving like Varuna who works with magic, 

Was known, yet young, as guardian of the seasons ; 
and he quelled Araru, four-footed demon. 

11 Through lauds of him hath Ausija Itijisvan burst, 

with the mighty’s aid, the stall of Pipru. 

When the saint pressed the juice and shone as singer, 
he seized the forts and with his craft subdued them. 

12 So, Asura, on his feet, for exaltation, hath the great 

Vamraka come nigh to Indra. 

He will, when supplicated, bring him blessing: he 
hath brought all, food, strength, a happy dwelling. 

HYMN C. Visvedcvas. 

Be, like thyself, O Indra, strong for our delight: 

here lauded, aid us, Maghavan, drinker of the juice. 
Savitar with the gods protect us: hear ye twain. 
We ask for freedom and complete felicity. 


10 His gods: the Maruts. Araru: I follow Sayana. According 
t,.. Prof. Ludwig’s conjectural explanation the translation would be 

«he measured out the year in four divisions/ 

11 Autija : sou of Usij. But as this patronymic does not properly 
belong to Rijisvao, the word here may perhaps mean, ‘vehement,’ 
‘ eagerly desirous.’ Pipru: one of the demons of drought. 

12 Asura: 0 divine and mighty Indra. On his feet: padbkih : 
I follo w Sayana’s explanation. The change of d into d is explained 
in Vedisehe Studien, p. 239. According to Prof. Ludwig, * with snares,’ 
to capture the good-will of- the god. For exaltation: of Indra. 
Vamraka: a lengthened form of Vamra, tho Rishi of the hymn. 
Tbo last clause of the stanza is borrowed from X. 20. 10. 

This hymn, which is obscure and in some places unintelligible, is 
placed by Prof. Grassmann in his Appendix. Dr. Muir has translated 
stanzas 1—7 in 0. S. Texts, IV. pp. 403, 409 (2nd edition). 

Tho Rishi is Duvasyu, son of Vandana. The metre is Triflhtup ic 
the last stanza and Jagati in the rest of the hymn, 
i Ye twain : Indra and Savitar. 






misr/ff 


TEE RIGVEDA. 



<SL 


2 Bring swift, for offering, the share that suits the 

time, to the pure-drinker V&yu, roaring as he goes, 
To him who hath approached the draught of shining 
milk. We ask for freedom and complete felicity. 

3 May Savitar the god send us full life, to each who 

■ sacrifices, lives aright and pours the juice; 

That we with simple hearts may wait upon the gods. 
We ask for freedom and complete felicity. 

4 May Indra evermore be gracious unto us, and may 

king Soma meditate our happiness, 

Even as men secure the comfort of a friend. We 
ask for freedom and complete felicity. 

5 Indra hath given the body with its song and strength : 

Brihaspati, thou art the lengthener of life. 

The sacrifice is Manu, providence, our sire. We ask 
for freedom and complete felicity. 

G Indra possesseth might celestial nobly formed: the 
singer in the house is Agni, prudent sage. 

He is the sacrifice in synod, fair, most near. We 
ask for freedom and complete felicity. 

S' Not often have we sinned against you secretly, nor, 
Vasus, have we openly provoked the gods. 

Not one of us, ye gods, hath worn an alien shape. 
We ask for freedom and complete felicity. 

8 May Savitar remove from us our malady, and may 
the Mountains keep it far away from where 
The press-stone as it sheds the meath rings loudly 
forth. We ask for freedom and complete felicity. 


2 Purc-drinktr: drinker of pure Soma-juice. 

» The sacrifice \s Manu : we owe our existence and preservation to 
sacrifice, which ia to us another Manu, the father of Aryan men. 
fi The sacrifice in synod: ‘worthy of sac. ifice at the altar.’—Wilson 
7 An alien shape: as sorcerers are accustomed to do. 





NlINlSr^ 



9 Ye Yasus, let the stone, the presser, stand erect: 
avert all enmities and keep them far remote. 


Our guard to be adored is Savitar this god. We 
ask for freedom and complete felicity. 

10 Eat strength and fatness in the pasture, kine, who 
are balmed at the reservoir and at the seat of Law. 


So let your body be our body’s medicine. We ask 
for freedom and complete felicity. 

11 The singer fills the spirit: all mens’ love hath he. 

Indra takes kindly care of those who pour the juice. 
For bis libation is the heavenly udder full. We ask 
for freedom and _ complete felicity. 

12 Wondrous thy spirit-filling light, thy succour; thy 

hosts save from decay and are resistless. 

The pious votary by straightest pathway speeds to 
possess the best of all the cattle. 


10 Balmed at the reservoir: anointed before beiug milked. Sayana 
explains ko§e by goshlke * in the cowstall.’ Let your body: may the 

milk, the produce of your bodies, offered in libation, keep our bodies 
in health. Or “may the body of the cow offored in sacrifice be the 
expiation for the body of the sacrificer, enabling him to attain sivauja. 
Or may the milk be the corrective of the Soma.”—Wilson. 

11 The heavenly udder: the clouds of the firmament. 

12 Save from Stray: this is Prof. Ludwig's interpretation of the 
obscuro word jaratfprdh, which means, according to Sayana, re¬ 
plenishing the wealth of thy worshippers. The last line is explained 
differently by SAyana.—‘(therefore) Duvasyu hastens in front of the 
victim cow, (leading it) with a straight cord.’- Wilson. According to 
the .cime authority the meaning of the refrain of stanzas 1—11 is :— 
‘ We long for the universal Aditi.' 




MINlSr/fj, 


THE RIG VEDA. 




HYMN CL Visvcdevas. 

Wake with one mind, my friends, and kindle Agni, 
ye who are many and who dwell together. 

Agni and Dadhiknls and Hawn the goddess, you, 
gods with Indra, I call down to help us. 

2 Make pleasant hymns, spin out your songs and 

praises: build ye a ship equipped with oars for 
transport. 

Prepare the implements, make all things ready, and 
let the sacrifice, my friends, go forward. 

3 Lay on the yokes, and fasten well the traces: form¬ 

ed is the furrow, sow the seed within it. 

Through song may we find hearing fraught with 
plenty : near to the ripened grain approach the 
sickle. 

4 Wise, through desire of bliss from gods, the sages 

bind the traces fast, 

And lay the yokes on either side. 

5 Arrange the buckets in their place : securely fasten 

on the straps; 

We will pour forth the well that hath a copious 
stream, fair-flowing well that never fails. 

G I pour the water from the well with pails prepared 
and goodly straps, 

Unfailing, full, with plenteous stream. 


The Praise of the Kitvijas or chief priests is Raid to be Lilternativi'- 
ly the deified subject of the hymn. The Rishi is Budha, son of 
Soma. The metre is G&yatri in stanzas 4 and 0; Byihati n. i>; 
JagatS in 9 and 12; find Trial)tup in the rest of the hymn. 

1 Dadhikr&s; probably a personification of the morning sun. See 
Vols. I. and ILL, Index. 

2 Ship : sacrifice, represented under this figure. 

3 iii this and the following stanzas sacrifice ia figuratively spoken 
of m ploughing, sowing, and reaping. 

■f The flowing Soma is an iuexhaustible well. 

21 . V: \4 > i 




WHlSfyy 



THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 


Sl 


7 Refresh the horses, win the prize before you : equip 

a chariot fraught with happy fortune. 

Pour forth the well with stone wheel, wooden buckets, 
the drink of heroes, with the trough for armour. 

8 Prepare the cow-stall, for there drink } T our heroes: 

stitch ye the coats of armour, wide and many. 
Make iron forts, secure from all assailants: let not 
your pitcher leak ; stay it securely. 

9 Hither, for help, I turn the holy heavenly mind of 

you the holy gods, that longs for sacrifice. 

May it pour milk for us, even as a stately cow who, hav¬ 
ing sought the pasture, yields a thousand streams. 

10 Pour golden juice within the wooden vessel: with 

stone-made axes fashion ye and form it. 

Embrace and compass it with tenfold girdle, and to 
both chariot-poles attach the car-horse. 

11 Between both poles the car-horse goes pressed close¬ 

ly, as in his dwelling moves the doubly-wedded. 
Lay in the wood the sovran of the forest, and sink 
the well although ye do not dig it. 

12 Indra is he, O men, who gives us happiness: sport, 

urce the giver of delight to win us strength. 
Bring quickly down, 0 priests, hither to give us aid, 
to drink the Soma, Indra son of Nishtigri. _ 

7 ~The sacrifice is a chariot; and the ritual is a race. The well: the 
stream of Soma juice. Stone wheel: with allusion to the press stones. 

- 3 The. cow-stall : figuratively, for the place where the Soma is press¬ 
ed. Coats of armour : the filters for straining the juice. Iron forts . 
tho safeguards obtained by sacrificing, 
q Mill- • abundant blessing. 








mtsTf?,, 


THE RIG VEDA. 



YMN 102. 


1 



HYMN CII. India. 

For thee may Indra boldly speed the car that works 
on either side. 

Favour us, much-invoked! in this most glorious race, 
that we may win and hold the prize. 

2 Loose in the wind the woman’s robe was streaming 

what time she won a car-load worth a thousand. 
The charioteer in fight was Mudgal&ni: she, Indra’s 
dart, heaped up the prize of battle. 

3 0 Indra, cast thy bolt among assailants who would 

slaughter us: 

The weapon both of Ditea and of Arya foe keep far 
away, O Maghavan. 

4 The bull in joy had drunk a lake of water. His 

shattering horn encountered an opponent. 

Swiftly, in vigorous strength, eager for glory, he 
stretched his forefeet, fain to win and triumph. 


The deified subject of the hymn is said to be, alternatively, 
Drughana (Mace, Club or Hammer. See stanza 9). The Rishi is 
Mudgala. The metro is Bphati in stanzas 1, 3, 12, and Trishtup iu 
the rest. 

According to the legend quoted by S&yana, all Mudgala's cattle 
had been stolen except an old ox which he harnessed to his wagon 
and went iu pursuit of the robbers. He threw his club or maco 
before him, which showed him the way to the thieves, and thus re¬ 
covered his property. 

The first eight stanzas—with the exception of stanza 3—appear to 
describe a somewhat unusual kind of chariot-race. 

1 For thee: 0 Mudgala. That works on either side: mithtikritam : 
according to S&yana = asakdyam^ ‘that has no companion,* Race . dji 
means both ‘fight' and ‘race.' 

2 In fight: perhaps in the race which is represented as a battle. 
Mudgcddnl: Mudgala's wife. Indra's dart: sped swiftly on her way 
by ludru. 

3 This stanza seems to be an interpolation. 

4 The hull: apparently one of the buffaloes which drew the chariot 
of Mudg ilaui's chief oppouent. Had drunk: just before the race 
began. Encountered an opponent: meaning, perhaps, that feeling 
uneasy he hung his head and struck the ground with his horns. ‘ Ho 
cleft the mountain peak, he went against the enemy/—Wilson. 





THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 




They eame anear the bull; they made him thunder, 
made him pour rain do wo ere the race was ended. 
And Mudgala thereby won in the contest well- 
pastured kine in hundreds and in thousands. 

6 In hope of victory that bull was harnessed : Kesi 

the driver urged him on with shouting. 

As he ran swiftly with the car behind him his lifted 
heels pressed close on Mudgalani. 

7 Deftly for him he stretched the car-pole forward, 

guided the bull thereto and firmly yoked him. 
Indra vouchsafed the lord of cows his favour: with 
mighty steps the buffalo ran onward. 

8 Touched by the goad the shaggy beast went nobly, 

bound to the pole by the yoke’s thong of leather. 
Performing deeds of might for many people, he, 
looking on the cows, gained strength and vigour. 

9 Here look upon this mace, this bull’s companion, 

now lying in the middle of the race-course. 
Therewith hath Mudgala in ordered contest won for 
himself a hundred thousand cattle. 


5 The buffalo was unable to finish the race, and consequently 
Mudgala and Mudgalani won the prize. 

0 In hope of victory: kakardave: the meaning is uncertain ; accord¬ 
ing to Sayarn, ‘for ti e destruction of the enemy.’ Professor Ludwig 
thinks that the farther end of the chariot-pole is intended. Pressed 
close: Real's chariot was leading, just before Mudgalanl’s, when the 
• atustrophe mentioned iu stanza 5 put him out of the running. 

7 MiiJgala’s better fortune is now related. For him : for his own 
buffalo. lies Mudgala. Car-pole: I follow Prof. Ludwig’s con¬ 
jecture; but it is uncertain what part of the chariot the pradhi was; 

« he periphery of the wheel,’ according to the St. Petersburg Lexicon; 
‘the frame of the waggon.’—Wilson. S&yanu’s explanation is not 
very clear, but he seems to think that the liuehpin is intended. Rone 
of these three explanations seems suitable here. 

The lord of cows: the bull buffalo. 

3 Many people: the spectators of the raoe. 

9 Mtvx : drughanam: according to Suyana, the club which Mud- 
gala had carried with him on his expedition, and which, together 





WNisr/fy 


THE RIG VEDA. 



YMN 102.] 



325 


10 Far is the evil: who hath here beheld it? Hither 

they bring the bull whom they are yoking. 

To this they give not either food or water. Reach¬ 
ing beyond the pole it gives directions. 

11 Like one forsaken, she hath found a husband, and 

teemed as if her breast were full and flowing. 
With swiftly-racing chariot may we conquer, and 
rich and blessed be our gains in battle. 

12 Thou, India, art the mark whereon the eyes of all 

life rest, when thou, 

A Bull who drivest with thy bull wilt win the race 
together with thy weakling friend. 


T\itn the ox that drew hia car had euabled him to recover his cattle. 
Lying in the middle of the race-course: ' resting in the midst of the 
conflict.' Wilson. “After the victory, the king had thrown down 
his mace upon the field of battle.’—Ludwig. 

10 I find this stanza unintelligible. Perhaps the second lino 
columns the germ of that part of tbo legend which mentions the 
chib thrown in front of the chariot to point out tho way that the 
robbers had taken. J 







THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 



HYMN CIII. 


Indra. 


S^ift, rapidly striking, like a bull who sharpens his 
horns, terrific, stirring up the people, 

With eyes that close not, bellowing, sole hero, Indra 
subdued at once a hundred armies. 

2 With him loud-roaring, ever watchful, victor, bold, 

hard to overthrow, rouser of battle, 

Indra the strong, whose hand bears arrows, eonquer, 
ye heroes, now, now vanquish in the combat. 

3 He rules with those who carry shafts and quivers, 

India who with his band brings hosts together, 
Foe-conquering, strong of arm, the Soma-drinker, 
with mighty bow, shooting with well-laid arrows. 

4 Brihaspati, fly Avith thy chariot hither, slayer of 

demons, driving off our foemen. 

Be thou protector of our oars, destroyer, vjptor in 
battle, breaker-up of armies. 

5 Conspicuous by thy strength, firm, foremost fighter, 

mighty and fierce, victorious, a]l-subduing, 

The son of conquest, passing men and heroes, kine- 
winner, mount thy conquering car, 0 Indra. 

6 Cleaver of stalls, kine-winner, armed with thunder, 

who quells an army and with might destroys it,— 
Follow him, brothers! quit yourselves like heroes, 
and like this Indra show your zeal and courage. 

7 Piercing the cow-stalls with surpassing vigour, Indra, 

the pitiless hero, wild with anger, 

Victor in fight, unshaken and resistless,—may he 
protect our armies in our battles. 


Brihaspati, Apva, and the Mnruts are also deities of the hymn. 
The Riahi >s Apratiratha, son of Indra. The metre is Anusbtup in 
atanaa 13, and Trishtup in the rest. The hymn is a prayer for aid 
and victory in battle. 





misr/fy 



8 Indra guide these: Brihaspati precede them, the 
guerdon, and the sacrifice, and Soma; 

And let the banded Maruts march in forefront of 
heavenly hosts that conquer and demolish. 


9 Ours be the potent host of mighty Indra, king 
Varuna, and Maruts, and Adityas. 

Uplifted is the shout of gods who conquer, high- 
minded gods who cause the worlds to tremble. 

10 Bristle thou up, O Maghavan, our weapons: excite 

the spirits of my warring heroes. 

Urg'- on the strong steeds’ might, 0 Vritra-slayer, 
and let the din of conquering cars go'upward. 

11 May Indra aid us when our flags are gathered : vic¬ 

torious be the arrows of our army. 

May our brave men of war prevail in battle. Ye 
gods, protect us in the shout of onset. 

12 Bewildering the senses of our foemen, seize thou 

their bodies and depart, 0 Apvd 
Attack them, set their hearts on Are and burn them : 
so let our foes abide in utter darkness. 

13 Ad v ance, 0 heroes, win the day.. May Indra be 

your sure defence.. 

.Exceeding mighty be your arms, that none may 
wound or injure you. 


8 Guide these: be the leader of out- troops. The guerdon: dahkind : 
the reward of tho priests who perform the sacrifice offered before 
battle. 

11 When our flags are gathered: u apparently comparable with the 
fcigniB collatis of the Romans.”—Ludwig. 

12 ApvA: according to Sayana, a female deity who presides over 
8m * ^cording to Mahidhava, sickness, or fear. Apparently Apva 

the lt° rt ° f de ' fied Colic ’ or d ? senter y> likely to attack soldiers in 
1 'W. And depart > or, pasB us by ; do not attack us. 





MlNiSr^ 


TEE BY3!NS OF [BOOK 

HYMN CIV. Indra. 

Soma hath flowed for thee, invoked of many! Speed 
to our sacrifice with both thy coursers. 

To thee have streamed the songs of mighty singers, 
imploring. Indra, drink of our libation. 

2 Drink of the juice which men have washed in waters, 

and fill thee full, 0 lord of tawny horses. 

0 Indra, hearer of the laud, with Soma which stones 
have mixed for thee enhance thy rapture. 

3 To make thee start, a strong true draught I offer to 

thee, the Bull, O thou whom bay steeds carry. 
Here take delight, O Indra, in our voices while thou 
art hymned with power and all our spirit. 

4 O mighty Tndra, through thine aid, thy prowess, 

obtaining life, zealous, and skilled in Order, 

Men in the house who share the sacred banquet stand 
singing praise that brings them store of children. 

5 Through thy directions, lord of tawny coursers, thino 

who art firm, splendid, and blest, the people 
Obtain most liberal aid for their salvation, and praise 
thee, Indra, through thine excellencies. 

C Lord of the bays, come with thy two bay horses, 
come to our prayers, to drink the juice of Soma. 
To thee comes sacrifice which thou acceptest: thou, 
skilled in holy rites, art he who giveth. 

7 Him of a thousand powers, subduing foemen, Magha- 

van praised with hymns and pleased with Soma,— 
Even him our songs approach, resistless Indra: the 
adorations of the singer laud him. 

8 The way to bliss for gods and man thou foundest, 

Indra, seven lovely floods, divine, untroubled, 




Tbe Rishi is Ashfa.ka, of the family of Visvamitra, The metre is 
Trishtup. 

3 True: which produces the results expected in the shape of 
favour. 



miSTfty 


THE RIG VEDA. 




Wherewith thou, rending forts, didst move the ocean, 
and nine-and-ninety flowing streams of water. 

9 Thou from the curse didst free the mighty waters, 
and as their only god didst watch and guard them. 
0 Indra, cherish evermore thy body with those 
which thou hast won in quelling Vritra, 

10 Heroic power and noble praise is Indra: yea, the 

song worships- him invoked of many. 

Vritra he quelled, and gave men room and freedom : 
Sakra hath conquered hosts in close encounter. 

11 Call we on Maghavan, auspicious Indra, best hero 

in this fight where spoil is gathered, 

The strong, who listens, who gives aid in battles, 
who slays the Vritras, wins and gathers riches. 


HYMN CV. Indra. 

When, Vasu, wilt thou love the laud? Now let the 
channel bring the stream. 

The juice is ready to ferment. 

2 He whose two bay steeds, harnessed well, swerving, 
pursue the Bird’s tail-plumes, 


8 I)i ht move the ocean: didst briug the sea of rain from heaven. 

9 Those: waters. 

11 This iF the concluding vorse of several hymns of tho Visvitmitras 
in Book III. 


The Rishi is Sumitra or Durmitra, son of lvutsa. Tho metre is 
Cayatvt in stanza 1, Pipitikamadhyd in 2 and 7, Trishtup in 11, and 
Ushnih in tho rest. 

1 Vasu: Indra. Let the-channel bring the stream: to the Soma- 
juioe which has stood long enough for fermentation.—Ludwig. Tho 
pm-aseology is very obscure, and Sayana gives a totally different expla¬ 
nation.--' When will he, (like) a dam, obstruct and let loose the long- 
protracted libation for the sake of wind-driven (rain).'!’—Wilson. 

‘ lhe Tiyd: the allusion seems to be to a race between the horses 
heavens* ^ 08e °* Surya or the Suu who is the Bird of the 







misr/fy 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 




With flowing raanes, like heaven and earth, he is the 
lord with power to give. 

3 Bereft of skill is Indra, if, like some out-wearied 

man he fears 

The sinner, when the mighty hath prepared himselt 
for victory. 

4 Indra with these drives round, until he meets with 

one to worship him : 

Indra is master of the pair who snort and swerve 
upon their way. 

5 Borne onward by the long-maned steeds who stretch 

themselves as ’twere for food, 

The god who wears the helm defends them with his 

jaws. 

6 The mighty sang with lofty ones : the hero fashioned 

with his strength, . . 

Like skilful Matarisvan with his power and might, 

7 The bolt, which pierced at once the vitals of the 

Dasvu easy to be slain, 

With jaw uninjured like the wondrous firmament. 


Like heaven and earth: the meaning of raji 13 unknown, oayana 
QxnX&viB he word by ‘heaven and earth/ or ‘sun and n oon; but 
these are mere guesses. Prof. Ludwig thinks that two animals of 
Borne kind (‘ rajitiere/ ‘raji-beasts’) are meant. 

3 The sinner: Vritra, the chief of sinners, according to Sayana, 
Or vdpaje may bo a‘verb, and the stanza may be rendered Without 
them Indra holds him still, like a man weary and alarmed, when he 
hath made himself ready for noble deed.’—See Pischel, Vcdische 

Studien, p. 108. . 

4 Jsviaso-: literally ‘hero/ The meaning apparently is that 
when India meets with a worshipper he stops his horses and attends 

the sacrifice. .... . 

i) }Vhn man the helm: tipriniv&n: ‘ possessing mighty jaws. 
Wilson. With his jaws : with his roar, the thunder. 

6 Lofty ones . the Maruts. 

7 The stanza is obscure. I follow Prof, Ludwig’s interpretation of 
hirtmaso fdrtmdn , which mean, according to Sayana, ‘ go d-bearded 
and ‘ lord of bay horses. 






MiNisr^ 



MS -10G.] 


THE RIGVEDA. 


331 


8 Grind off our sins: with song will we conquer the 

men who sing no hymns : 

Not easily art thou pleased with prayerless sacrifice. 

9 When threefold flame burns high for thee, to rest 

on poles of sacrifice, 

Thou with the living joyest in the self-bright ship. 

10 Thy glory was the speckled cup, thy glory was the 

flawless scoop 

Wherewith thou pourest into thy receptacle. 

11 As hundreds, O immortal god, have 6ung to thee, so 

hath Sumitra, yea, Durmitra praised thee here, 
What time thou holpostKutsa’s son, when Dasyus fell, 
yea, holpest Kutsa’s darling when the Dasyus died. 


HYMNCVI. Aavins. 

This very thing ye twain hold as your object: ye 
weave your songs as skilful men weave garments. 

That ye may come united have I waked you : ye 
spread out food like days of lovely weather. 

Like two plough-bulls ye move along in traces, 
seek like eager guests your bidder's banquet. 

Y ® { j re llke glorious envoys ’mid the people. 

11 -L> approach the place where ye are watered. 

Like the two pinions of a bird, connected, like twe 
t- hoice animals, ye have sought our worship. 


and 

like 


8 Grind off: remove them by whetting. ‘ Comminute.’—Wilson. 

°; f , th f. thrB ® 8acred fire8 ‘ The tho 

glory."’—Wilson. * l ^ bright SUp: the sacrifice; ‘the vessel of thy 

rJritarh- : A l ? a l ec}M ??' : t lad!e 0r CU P Uhe( l for sprinkling. Thy 
intended C <a 1Q ” Vesae ’ or perhaps Agui, that is, the firo, may be 

1 ** Su ™ li ™ Durmitra are alternative names of the Rishi of tho 
u U * a * S SOrl ' ©wrnitra himself, according to Sdyajia. I havo 
tica ed this stanza as Jagati instead of Trishtup 

nf 8ome P* acea arc somewhat irregular, the meanings 

p A r rf ' ,0tffl are uncertain, and the hynm generally i " obscure. 
Pr0f G,M8mann P^ced the hymn in his Appendix 

The 8-islii is Bhutansu, son of Kasyapa. The metre is Trishtup, 






Bright as the fire the votary hath kindled, ye sacrifice 
in many a spot as roamers. 

4 Ye are our kinsmen, like two sons, two fathers, strong 
inyour splendour and like kings for conquest; 
Like rays for our enjoyment, lords to feed us, ye, 
like quick hearers, have obeyed our calling. 

9 Like giants, ye will find firm ground to stand on in 
depths, like feet for one who fords a shallow. 

Like earajjl will attend to him who orders : ye two 
enjoy our wondrous work as sharers. 

10 Like toiling bees ye bring to us your honey, as bees 

into the hide that opens downward. 

11 May we increase the laud and gain us vigour : come 

to our song, ye whom one chariot carries. 

Filled be our kine with ripened meath like glory : 
Bkfit&nsa hath fulfilled the Asvins* longing. 


HYMN CVII. Dakshina. 

These men’s great bounty hath been manifested, 
and the whole world of life set free from darkness. 

Great light hath come, vouchsafed us by the Fathers : 
apparent is the spacious path of Guerdon. _ 

4 Like rays for our enjoyment: ‘like brooms to sweep with, 

acoording to Prof. Ludwig. - „ 

I do not attempt the hopeless task ol translating stanzas 5, o, /, o, 
in which nearly every word is a difficult riddle. See Appendix. 

10 The hide that opens downward: the honoy-comb is compared to 
a water-skin inverted. I cannot translate intelligibly the second 
liuo —‘like two labourers you are dripping with perspiration, like a 
tired csw eating sweot herbage, you a ttend (the sacrifice). —W nsou. 

The hymn eulogizes Dakshina, the largess, guerdon, or honorarium 
presented by the iiistitutors of the sacrifices to the priests who per 
formed t he ceremonies. The yajanuUas wno give this guerdon liberally 
are alternatively the deified subjects of the hymn. 

The Itishi is Divya of race of Angiras, or Dakshina personified,, 
daughter of Prajapati. The metre is Jagati in stanza 4, and Irish tup 
in the rest of the hymn. 

1 These men are the wealthy instilutors of the sacrifice. Falla 
who arc the embodiments and guardians of the light. 


trs 




MINlSr^ 


THE MOVED A. 


333 



MN 107.] 


2 High up in heaven abide the Guerdon-givers: they 

who give steeds dwell with the Sun foe ever. 

They who give gold are blest with life eternal: they 
wiio give robes prolong their lives, 0 Soma. 

3 Not from the niggards—for they give not freely_ 

comes Meed at sacrifice, gods’ satisfaction : 

Yea, many men with hands stretched out with 
Guerdon present their gifts because they dread 
dishonour. 

4 These who observe mankind regard oblation as 

streamy V ayu and light-finding Arka 
They satisfy and give thoir gifts in synod, and pour 
in streams the seven-mothered Guerdon. 

5 He who brings Guerdon comes as first invited : chief 

, comes the Guerdon-bearer, 

linn J. account the ruler ot the people who was the 
first to introduce the Guerdon. 

G They call him Itislii, Brahman, Sdma-chanter, reciter 
ol the laud, leader of worship. 

The brightly-shining gods three forms he knoweth 
who hrst bestowed the sacrificial Guerdon. 

7 Guerdon bestows the horse, bestows the'bullock 
Guerdon bestows, moreover, gold that glisters. 
Guerdon gives food which is our life and spirit 
who is wise takes Guerdon for his armour. 

3 r1 !?. bberal die not, never are they ruined ; 
liberal sutler neither harm nor trouble. 

1 hc Jheaven, the universe about us,—all this 

doth sacrificial Guerdon give them. 


He 

the 


4 • hose . ho observe mankind: the Maghavans or wealthy nobles, 
who do not consider the cost of sacrifice, but regard it as nn occasion 
that enables them to show their liberality, and to gain the favour of 
\ : } uin Wind-god who brings countless showers of rain, and Arlui 
or the Sun who brings the light. 

n mothered: originating in, and accompanying, seven forms of 
bi ; Titico \ or, reguhtod by the seven priests. 

b 1/u'u forms: Agui as the Sun, lightning, aud fire. 







misr/fy 



THE HYMNS OF 



9 First have the liberal gained a fragrant dwelling, 
and gpt themselves a bride in fair apparel. 

The liberal have obtained their draught of liquor, 
and conquered those who, unprovoked, assailed them. 

10 They deck the fleet steed for the bounteous giver: 

the maid adorns herself and waits to meet him. 

His home is like a lake with lotus-blossoms, like the 
gods’ palaces adorned and splendid. 

11 Steeds good at draught convey the liberal giver, and 

lightly rolling moves the car of Guerdon. 

Assist, ye gods, the liberal man in battles: the 
liberal giver conquers foes in combat. 


HYMN - CVIII. Sarama. Panis. 

What wish of Sarami hath brought her hither ? The 
path leads far away to distant places. 

What charge hast thou for us ? W here turns thy 
journey ? How hast thou made thy way o er 
Rasa’s waters. 


9 Draught of liquor: antahpeyam sur&ydh: ‘ deep potations of 
wine.’—Wilson. 

10 The maid adorns herself: ‘he obtains a brilliant damsel for his 
portion.’—Muir. 

The hymn 13 a colloquy between Sarama, who is called tbo hound 
of the gods or of Indra, and the Panis or envious demons who have 
carried off the cows or rays of light which Indra wishes to recover. 
Sarama and the Panis are alternately subject and Rishi. The metre 
i3 Trishtup. 

1 The Panis address SaramA who has found her way to the rocky 
btroughold in which the stolen cows are imprisoned. The Panis speak 
the uneven stanzas, with the exception of stanza 11, and Saramtt the 
even. Jiasd is in this place a mythical stream that flows round the 
atmosphere and the earth. See V. 41.15. In I. 112. 12, and V. 53.9, 
RubA appears to bo a river of the Punjab, probably an affluent of the 
Indus, See Zimmer, AltUdf'/iet Lcben, pp. 15, 16. 





NllNISr^ 


THE MOVED A. 



AIN 108.] 


<SL 

330 


2 T come the appointed messenger of Tndra, seeking 

your ample stores of wealth, O Panis., 

Her fear to be o’erleapt hath helped me onward : 
thus have I made my way o’er Ra.-a's waters. 

3 What is that Indra like, what is his aspect whose 

envoy, Saram&, from afar thou comest? 

Let him approach, and we will show him friendship : 
he shall be made the herdsman of our cattle. 

4 I know him safe from harm : but he can punish who 

sent me hither from afar as envoy. 

Him rivers flowing with deep water/* hide not. Low 
will ye lie, 0 Panis, slain by Indra. 

5 These are the kine which, Saramti, thou seekest, fly¬ 

ing, 0 blest one, to the ends of heaven. 

Who will loose these for thee without a battle? Yea, 
and sharp-pointed are our warlike weapons. 

6 Even if your wicked bodies, O ye Panis, were arrow- 

proof, your words are weak for wounding ; 

And were the path to you as yet unmastered, Bri- 
liaspati in neither case will spare you. 

7 Paved with the rock is this our treasure-chamber; 

filled full of precious things, of kine, and horses. 
These Panis who are watchful keepers guard it. In 
vain hast thou approached this lonely station. 

8 Pishis will come inspirited with Soma, Angirasas 

unwearied, and Navagvas. 

This stall ot cattle will they part among them : then 
will the 1 apis wish these words unspoken. 


‘J Her feer to be o’erleapt: Rasii feared that I should disgrace her 
by leaping over her stream, and therefore allowed me to swim across. 

G Weak for xoounding: ‘not in the place of armies.’—Wilson. 
Bnhaspati: as Indra’s companion and ally in battle. 

8 Bavayvaa: members of a mythological family, forming a division 
of the Angiiasas or closely connected with them. Wish these ivords 
unspoken: more literally, reject them from their mouths; retract 
their threats. 






9 Even thus, O Saramfl, hast thou conic hither, forced 
by celestial might to make the journey. 

Turn thee not back, for thou shalt be our sister : O 
blest one, we will give thee of the cattle. 

10 Brotherhood, sisterhood, I know not either: the 

dread Angirasas and Indra know them. 

They seemed to long for kine when I departed. 
Hence, into distance, be ye gone, O Panis. 

11 Hence, far away, ye Panis ! Let the cattle lowing 

come forth as holy Law commandetb, 

Kine which Brihaspati, and Soma, Itishis, sages, 
and pressing-stones have found when hidden. 

HYMN CIX. Visvcdcvas. 

These first, the boundless Sea, and Mfttarisvan, fierce- 
glowing Fire, the strong, the bliss-bestower, 

And heavenly Floods, first-born by holy Order, ex¬ 
claimed against the outrage on a Brahman. 

2 King Soma first of all, without reluctance, made 

restitution of the Brahman’s consort. 

Mitra and Yaruna were the inviters : Agni as Hotar 
took her hand and led her. 

3 The man, her pledge, must by her hand be taken 

when they have cried, She is a Brahman’s consort. 
She stayed not for a herald to conduct her : thus is 
the kingdom of a ruler guarded. 

4 Thus spake of her those gods of old, seven Bishis 

who sate them down to their austere devotion : 

10 Know (hail: are Allied by such ties of kiiHi.p 

11 It is uncertain to whom this stanza is to. l a ascribed. Suyana 
assign-.* it to Sararua. Prof. Ludwig thinks that brihaspati may tie 
the speaker. Pressing-stones: which prepare the Soma-juice that 
inspirits Irnlra. 

The hymn has been translated by the authors of Siebenzig Lieder 

dcs Rigotda. - - 

The Umhi is JuhA, the wifo of Brahma, or Urdhvaniibhii, son of 
Brahma. The metre is Anushtup iu stanza.. 6 and 7, aud Triahpip in 
the rost. 

1 Outrage on a Brahman : ‘Brahma’s siu,’ according to Say ana, 





MUNIS/)?,. 


THE RIG VEDA. 


33 ' 



MN 110 .] 


Dire is a Brahman’s wife led home by others: in 
the supremesfc heaven she plants confusion. 

5 The Brahmacharin goes engaged in duty: he is 
a member of the gods’ own body. 

Through him Brihaspati obtained his consort, as 
the gods gained the ladle brought by Soma. 

G So then the gods restored her, so men gave the 
woman back again. 

The kings who kept their promises restored the 
Brahman’s wedded wife. 


7 Having restored the Brahman’s wife, and freed them, 
with gods’ aid, from sin, 

They shared the fulness of the earth, and won them¬ 
selves extended sway. 

HYMN CX. Apris. 

Thou in the house of man this day enkindled worship- 
pest gods as god, O Jfitavedas. 

Observant, bright as Mitra, bring them hither: thou 
art a sapient and foreknowing envoy. 

2 Tanuuapat, fair-tongued, with sweet meath balming 
the paths and ways of Order, make them pleasant. 

5 Brahmo.ch&riit: a religious studeut. 

The lo.dJc: juhilm: Prof. Ludwig takes it to bo a proper name:— 
JuIju, 0 gods, conducted home by Soma, 

The wife of a Brahman appears to have been taken to his homo 
by a Ksbatriya, and then restored. A legend quoted by S3.y;tna says 
that Juhu or Yak, the wife of Brihaspati who is i«tour^tied with 
Brahma, had been deserted by her husbaud. The gods then consulted 
togeth r a - to the means of expiating hi^ sin, tiud restored her to him* 
See Wilson’s Translation. * * 

fhe hyaiu is uu almost unintelligible fragment and of comparatively 
late origin. __ 

The Kishi in Jamadagni, son of Bhrigu, or Jamadagui’s sou, llama, 
generally’called Paiaaur&ma. The metre is Trishtup. 

See preceding hymns addressed to the same deities deified 
objects : 1. 13; U2, 188; II. 3; III, 4; V. 5; VII. 2; and IX. 0. 

JdiuiiiUiA and Tanilaap&l are names of Agni. The Doors of the 
ftacrifk:a l chamber represent the portals of the eastern Lax you, 
I ana&pati is the sacrificial post to which the victim is tied, 

22 



WHIST#,, 


THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 

Convey our sacrifice to heaven, exalting with holy 
thoughts our hymns of praise and worship. 

3 Invoked, deserving prayer and adoration, O Agni, 

come accordant with the Vasus. 

Thou art, O youthful lord, the gods’ invoker, so, 
best of sacrificers, bring them quickly. 

4 By rule the Sacred Grass is scattered eastward, a 

robe to clothe this earth when dawns are breaking. 
Widely it spreads around and far-extended, fair for 
the gods and bringing peace and freedom. 

5 Let the expansive Doors be widely opened, like 

wives who deck their beauty for their husbands. 
Lofty, celestial, all-impelling Portals, admit the gods 
and give them easy entrance. 

6 Pouring sweet dews let holy Night and Morning, 

each close to each, be seated at their station,— 
Lofty, celestial Dames with gold to deck them, 
assuming all their fair and radiant beauty. 

7 Come the two first celestial sweet-voiced Hotars, 

arranging sacrifice for man to worship, 

As singers who inspire us in assemblies, showing the 
eastward light with their direction. 

8 Let Bh&rat! come quickly to our worship, and I]il 

showing like a human being. 

So let Sarasvati and both.her fellows, deft goddesses, 
on this fair grass be seated. 

9 Hotar more skilled in sacrifice, bring hither with 

speed to-day god Twasbtar, thou who knowest, 
Even him who formed these two, the Earth and 
Heaven, the parents, with their forms, and every 
creature. 

10. Bring thou to our oblations which thou balmest the 
nothpailies of gods in ordered season. 

Agni Vanaspati the Immolator sweeten our offered 
gift with ineatli and butter. 




MINlSr^ 


THE EIGVEDA. 


333 



11 Agni, as soon as he was born, made ready the sacri¬ 
fice, and was the gods’ preceder. 

May the gods eat our offering consecrated according 
to this true priest’s voice and guidance. 

HYMN CXI. Indra. 

Bring forth your sacred song ye prudent singers, 
even as are the thoughts of human beings. 

Let us draw Indra with true deeds anear us : he 
Joves our songs, the hero, and is potent. 

2 The hymn shone brightly from the seat of worship: 

to the kine came the Bull the heifer’s offspring. 
With mighty bellowing hath he arisen, and hath 
pervaded even the spacious regions. 

3 Indra knows, verily, how to hear our singing, for he, 

victorious, made a path for Sfirya. 

He made the cow, aud he became the sovran of 
heaven, primeval, matchless, and unshaken. 

4 Praised by Angirasas, Indra demolished with might 

the works of the great watery monster. 

Full many regions, too, hath he pervaded, and by hia 
truth supported earth’s foundation. 

5 The counterpart of heaven and earth is Indra : he 

knoweth all libations, slayeth Sushna. 

The vast sky with the Sun hath he extended, and, 
best of pillars, stayed it with a pillar. 


The Rishi ig Asihtradanshtra, son of Virfipa. The metre is Trisbjmp. 

2 The kine: who are milked for sacrificial purposes. The Bull * 
Indra. The heifer's offspring:, cp. IV, 18. 10: ‘The heifer hath 
brought forth the strong, the mighty, the uuoonquerallo bull, 
the furiouo Indra/ The heifer 13 Aditi. 

•3 He made the cow: the words mmdm . goh , the cow, •* llio 

female of the hull/—Muir; ‘Des Stieres Wei^ 1 2 * 4 — Orasamann,— are 
difficult. Prof. Ludwig suggests that tho earth may be intended. 

4 ffatr/g monster: Avbuda, a demon of the clouds. Soo X, G7. 12. 






MINIS?*,, 



THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK X. 



6 The Vritra-slayer with his bolt felled Vritra: the 

magic of the godless, waxen mighty, 

Here hast thou, bold assailant, boldly conquered. 
Yea, then thine arms, 0 Maghavan, were potent. 

7 When the Dawns come attendant upon S&rya their 

rays discover wealth of divers colours. 

The star .of heaven is seen as ’twerc approaching: 
none knoweth aught of it as it departeth. 

8 Far have they gone, the first of all these waters, the 

waters that flowed forth when Indra sent them. 
Where is their spring, and where is their foundation? 
Where noAV, ye waters, is your inmost centre ? 

9 Thou didst free rivers swallowed by the Dragon ; and 

rapidly they set themselves in motion, 

Those that were loosed and those that longed for 
freedom. Excited now to speed they run unresting. 

10 Yearning together they have sped to Sindhu : the 
Fort-destroyer, praised of old, hath loved them. 
Indra, may thy terrestrial treasures reach us, and 
our full songs of joy approach thy dwelling. 


HYMN CXII 


Indra. 


Drink of the juice, O Indra, at thy pleasure, for thy 
first draught is early morn’s libation. 

Rejoice, that thou mayst slay our foes, O hero, .and 
we with lauds will tell,thy mighty exploits. 

2 Thou hast a car more swift than thought, O Indra; 
thereon come hither, come to drink the Soma. 

Let thy bay steeds, thy stallions, hasten hither, with 
whom thou comest nigh and art delighted. 


9 The Dragon: Ahi; Vfitra or his brother fiend, 

10 The Fort-destroyer; Indra. 

The Riohi Nalhuhpraohedaun, sou of Virupa, The metre is 
Trishfaip* 




n in 112.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


34 


3 Deck out thy body with the fairest colours, with 

golden splendour of the Sun adorn it. 

O Indra, turn thee hitherward invited by us thy 
friends; be seated and be joyful. 

4 O thou whose grandeur in thy festive transports not 

even these two great worlds have comprehended, 
Come, Indra, with thy dear bay hordes harnessed, 
come to our dwelling and the food thou lovest. 

5 Pressed for thy joyous banquet is the Soma, Soma 

whereof thou, Indra, ever drinking 

Hast waged unequalled battles with thy foemen, 
which prompts the mighty flow of thine abundance. 

G Found from of old is this thy cup, O Indra: O 
Satakratu, drink therefrom the Soma. 

Filled is the beaker with the meath that gladdens, 
the beaker which all deities delight in. 

7 From many a side with proffered entertainment the 

folk are calling thee, O mighty Indra. 

These our libations shall for thee be richest in sweet 
meath : drink thereof and find them pleasant. 

8 1 will declare thy deeds of old, O Indra, the mighty 

acts which thou hast first accomplished. 

In genuine wrath thou loosenedst the mountain so 
that the Brahman easily found the cattle. 

9 Lord of the hosts, amid our bands be seated: they 

call thee greatest sage among the sages. 

Nothing is done, even far away, without thee : great, 
wondrous, Maghavan, is the hymn I sing thee. 

10 Aim oi our eyes be thou, for we implore thee, O 
Maghavau, friend of friends and lord of treasures. 
Fight, warrior strong in truth, fight thou the battle : 
give us our share of undivided riehos. 


8 '/'hi Riahnan: according to S&ynna, Brahma who is identified 
with Lphaspati, the own#r of tho cows which the Tunis had stolen. 




THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 

HYMN CXIII. Indra. 

The Heavens and the Earth accordant with all gods 
encouraged graciously that vigorous might of his. 
When he came showing forth his majesty and power, 
he drank of Soma-juioe and waxed exceeding strong. 

2 This majesty of his Vishnu extols and lauds, making 

the stalk that gives the meath flow forth with might. 
When Indra Maghavan with those who followed him 
had smitten Vritra he deserved the choice of gods. 

3 When, bearing warlike weapons, fain to win thee praise, 

thou mettest Vritra, yea, the Dragon, for the fight, 
Then all the Maruts who were gathered with thee 
there extolled, O mighty one, thy powerful majesty. 

4 Soon as he sprang to life he forced asunder hosts : 

forward the hero looked to manly deed and war. 
He cleft the rock, he let concurrent streams flow 
forth, and with his skilful art stablished the heavens’ 
wide vault. 

5 Indra hath evermore possessed surpassing power: he 

forced, far from each other, heaven and earth apart. 

He hurled impetuous down his iron thunderbolt, a 
joy to Varuna’s and Mitra’s worshipper. 

6 Then to the mighty powers of Indra, to his wrath, 

his the fieroe stormer, loud of voice, they came 
with speed; 

What time the potent .one rent Vritra with his 
strength, who held the waters back, whom dark¬ 
ness compassed round. 

7 E' en in the first of those heroic acts which they 

who strove together came with might to execute, 


The R a).r;iUi • ■ i• Boa Gf Vit'6p*u The motre is Trishtup 

in stansK 10, and Jagati in the rent. 

<; They came: it is uncertain whether the gods, or the Maruts, or 
the v,aters arc the understood subject. 










Deep darkness fell upon the slain, and Indra won 
by victory the right of being first invoked. 

8 Then all the gods extolled, with eloquence inspired by 

draughts of Soma-juice, thy deeds of manly might. 
As Af'-ni eats the dry food with his teeth, he ate 
Vritra, the Dragon, maimed by Indra’s deadly dart. 

9 Proclaim his many friendships, met with friendship, 

made with singers, with the skilful and the eloquent. 
Indra, when he subdues Dhuni and Chumuri, lists 
to Dabhiti for his faithful spirit’s sake. 

10 Give riches manifold with noble horses, to be re¬ 
membered while my songs address thee. 

May we by easy paths pass all our troubles: find us 
this day a ford wide and extensive. 

HYMN CXIV. Visvedovns. 

Two perfect springs of heat pervade the threefold, 
and come for their delight is MAtarisvan. 

Craving the milk of heaven the gods are present • 
well do they know the praise-song and the Suman. 


7 Beep dai'kness fell upon the dam: ‘Vritra being slain, the thick 
darkness was destroyed.’—Wilson. 

8 flc ale: Indra utterly destroyed him. Sayana explains in a uioro 
matter-of-faot way : people devoured Vritra, that its, the food produced 
by the waters which were no longer obstructed by him. 

9 j Dhuni and Chumuri were demons and enemies of Indra’b friend 
Dabhiti. See Vul. I., Index. 

The IJishi is Sadhri> sou of Vinipa, or Ghamm, son of Tap as. The 
metre is Jagati iu stanza 4, and Trishtup in the rest. The hymn is 
mystical and abstruse. 

i Springs of heat: ghavmd : Agm and Siirya. Th thrtefdd: the 
universe, sky, firmament, and earth. Mdtarisvan: \ayii, 
to Say ana, “Thus wc have hero the woll-kuowu triad, Agui, \ ay u, 
Suryn. Ludwig, 





THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK X. 


2 The priests heard far away, as they are ordered, 

serve the three Nirritis, for well they know them. 
Sages have traced the cause that first produced them, 
dwelling in distant and mysterious chambers. 

3 The youthful one, well-shaped, with four locks braided, 

brightened with oil, puts on the ordinances. 

Two birds of mighty power are seated near her, 
there where the deities receive their portion. 

4 One of these birds hath passed into the sea of air: 

thence he looksround and views this universal world. 
With simple heart I have beheld him from anear : 
his mother kisses him and he returns her kiss. 

5 The other bird, though only one in nature, wise 

singers shape, with songs, in many figures. 

While they at sacrifices fix the metres, they measure 
out twelve chalices of Soma. 

6 While they arrange the four and six-and-thirty, and 

duly order, up to twelve, the measures, 

Having disposed the sacrifice thoughtful sages send 
the car forward with the Rich and S&man. 


2 Three Nirritis: according to Saynna, heaven. mid-air, and earth, 
or the deities that control them. Prof. Ludwig thinks that the 
Downs aro meant, which by their regular appearance bring 
men nearer to death. The plural appears in one other place, VIII- 
24. 24. 

2. The youthful one : the altar, represented as a woman. With four 
lo<ln braided' quadrangular, according to Say ana. Puts on the. 
ordinances: i- dressed or arranged in, the manner prescribed for -aeri- 
fico. Two birds: probably Agni and Soma. According to Sayuna, 
the husband and bis wife, or the vajamana and tbo Brahman. 

4 One: Agni ns the Sun. Ilis mother: perhaps, as Prof. Ludwig 
says, Dawn. 

5 The other: Soma, who, though really only one, has mauy forms 
ascribed to him by the poets. 

G Thirty six ;jraha$, chalices or cups, for Soma juice or other liba¬ 
tions, nr. to he used at the Agnishtoma, and four in addition at the 
Atyngnisht arm. saorifioe. The measures: the proper metres for parti¬ 
cularrites or parts of the service. The car: the sacrifice. Rich ; 
the holy verse that is recited. Sdmun ; the psalm that is sung or 
chanted. 




WHlST/fy. 


THE UIGVEDA. 


3 45 



YMN 115.] 


7 The chariot’s majesties are fourteen others: seven 

sages lead it onward with their voices. 

Who will declare to us the ford Apnfma, the path 
whereby they drink first draughts of Soma ? 

8 The fifteen lauds are in a thousand places: that is 

as vast as heaven and earth in measure. 

A thousand spots contain the mighty thousand. 
Viik spreadeth forth as far as Prayer extendcth, 

9 What sage hath learned the metres’ application ? 

Who hath gained Vak, the spirit’s aim and object ? 
Which ministering priest is called eighth hero ? 
Who then hath tracked the two bay steeds of Indra? 

10 Yoked to his chariot-pole there stand the coursers : 
they only travel round earth’s farthest limits. 
These, when their driver in his home is settled, 
receive the allotted meed of their exertion. 


HYMN CXY. Agni. 

\ erily wondrous is the tender youngling’s growth 
who never draweth nigh to drink his mothers 5 milk. 
As soon as she who hath no udder bore him, he, 
faring on his great errand, suddenly grew strong. 


4 Majesties: the abstract used for the concrete, the mighty ones, 
probably the priests. The ford Apn&na: the passage leading to tho 
place of sacrifice. They: the gods. b ° 


Si hat. meaning the fifteen lauds regarded as a whole. The 
mighty thousand: the meaning is uncertain: ‘tho thousand meat 
(functions) are in a thousand places.’—Wilson. This means, according 
r ' : - ; ‘vana, that every function of the body has its appropriate object, 
in - . Muir translates :—“There area thousand times fifteen ukthu s 

•;. ^ thouyand times a thousand are their glorious tuauifesia- 

tions.” Vak: or Speech. See X. 71 and 125. 

'<) Eighth hero: Agui is meant, as presiding over the seven rilvijat 
or iiitiiistoriug priestB. 


. TV^hi is Upaatnta, son of Vrishtihayya. Tho metre is Tn 3 h- 
Lup iv stanza 8 , S ikvari in 9, and Jagati in the rest of the hymn. 

f h 1 J * l \ ai '° the two Ike-sticks, the lower of which, in which 

Xx ‘ «pai r. js produced, being she who hath ;io udder. 







2 Then Agni was his name, most active to bestow, 

gathering up the trees with his consuming tooth ; 
Skilled in fair sacrifice, armed with destroying tongue, 
impetuous as a bull that snorteth in the mead. 

3 Praise him,your god, who rests, bird-like,upon the tree, 

scattering drops of juice, and pouring forth his flood, 
Speaking aloud with flame as with his lips a priest, and 
broadening his paths like one of high command. 

4 Thou everlasting, whom, expanding, fain to burn, 

the winds, uninterrupted, never overcome, 

They have approached, as warriors and comforters, 
heroic Trita, guiding him to gain his wish. 

5 This Agni is the best of Kanvas, Kanvas’ friend, 

conqueror of the foe whether afar or near. 

May Agni guard the singers, guard the princes well: 
may Agni grant to us our princes’ gracious help. 

G Do thou, Supitrya, swiftly following, make thyself 
the lord of Jatavedas, mightiest of all, 

Who surely gives a boon even in thirsty land, most 
powerful, prepared to aid us in the wilds. 

7 Thus noble Agni with princes and mortal men is lauded, 

excellent for conquering strength with chiefs, 

Men who are well-disposed as friends and true to Law, 
even as the heavens in majesty surpass mankind. 

8 O Son of Strength, Victorious, with this title Upas- 

tuta’s most potent voice reveres thee. 

Blest with brave sons by thee we will extol thee, 
and lengthen out the days of our existence. 

4 Trita ' according to S&yaija, him who is ^filioued in the three 
iiro-rooeptaclus, that is, Agni. 

5 Kanvas : a well-known family with which Upastuta was connected. 
According to Siiyana, worshippers in general are meant ‘ the moat 
earnest. of eulogists, the friend of those who praise hith.’—Wilson. 

h Supibrya (‘who hast fair ancestors.’— Wils-..) seems to ho an 
enithot of the Rislii addressed by h, - If. .‘jay ana applies i* to 
Agni The construction <»f the stanza is difficult, and the iran.-dahon 
of t | in c r3 t half, which follows Prof. Ludwig, is somewhat coupctural. 
Thirsty land: Agni by bia intercession causes rain to full. 








THE RIGVEDA. 


347 



r MN 116.] 


9 Thus, Agni, have the sons of Vrishtihavya, the 
Rishis, the Upastutas invoked thee. 

Protect them, guard the singers and the princes. 
With Vashat! have they come, with hands up¬ 
lifted, with their uplifted hands and cries of Glory! 


HYMN CXVI. 


Indra. 


Drink Soma-juice for mighty power and vigour, .drink, 
strongest one, that thou mayst smite down Vritra. 
Drink thou, invoked, for strength, and riches: drink 
thou thy fill of ineath and pour it down, 0 Indra. 

2 Drink of the foodful juice stirred into motion, drink 

what thou choosest of the flowing Soma. 

Giver of weal, be joyful in thy spirit, and turn thee 
hitherward to bless and prosper. 

3 Let heavenly Soma gladden thee, O Indra, let that 

effused among mankind delight thee. 

Kejoice in that whereby thou gavest freedom, and 
that whereby thou conquerest thy foernen. 

4 Let Indra come, impetuous, doubly mighty, to the 

_ poured juice, the Bull, with two bay coursers. 
With juices pressed in milk, with meath presented, 
glut evermore thy bolt, O foe-destroyer. 

.) Dash down, outflaming their sharp flaming weapons, 
the strongholds of the men urged on by demons. 

I g've thee, mighty one, great strength and conquest: 
go, meet thy foes and rend them in the battle. 


1 lie Risisi is Agniyula or Aguiyupa, son of Sthura. The metre is 
Trishtup. 

i / jur it down: ( shower down (blessings)/—Wilson. 

3 tjfamt freedom: by slaying Vritra: or* riches* accordinp to 



explanation. 





WIN ISTfy 



THE HYMNS OF 


{BOOK X. 


6 Extend afar the votary’s fame and glory, as the firm 

archer’s strength drives off the foeman. 

Ranged on our side, grown strong in might that 
conquers, never defeated, still increase thy body. 

7 To thee have we presented this oblation: accept it, 

sovran ruler, free from anger. 

Juice, Maghavan, for thee is pressed and ripened r 
eat, Indra, drink of that which stirs to meet thee. 

8 Eat, Indra, these oblations which approach thee: 

be pleased with food made ready and with Soma. 
With entertainment we receive thee friendly : effec¬ 
tual be the sacrificer’s wishes. 

9 I send sweet speech to Indra and to Agni : with 

hymns I speed it like a boat through waters. 

Even thus, the gods seem moving round about me, 
the fountains and bestowers of our riches. 


HYMN CXVII. Liberality. 

The gods have not ordained hunger to be our death: 
even to the well-fed man comes death in varied shape. 

The riches of the liberal never waste away, while he 
who will not give finds none to comfort him. 

2 The man with food in store who, when the needy 
comes in miserable case beggiug for bread to eat, 

Hardens his heart against him—even when of old 
he did him service—finds not one to comfort him. 


G As the friti archer’s strength : the* construction is obaoure :— 
‘(stretchout) thy strength like strong bows agaiust our enemies.’— 
Wilson. 

The hymn eulogizes Liberality or Bounty in the sbnpo of gifts ol 
wealth and food. The Rishi is Bbikshu (the Beggar) son of Angirns, 

The metre is Jagatl in stanzas 1 uud 2, and Trisbtup in the rest. 

1 To be our death: men must not attempt to justify their refusal 
of food to tiio hungry by saying t hat tho gods Bond hunger as a 
punishment for tun. 





misTfy 


THE RIG VEDA. 


31D 



3 Bounteous is he who gives unto the beggar who 

comes to him iu want of food and feeble. 

Success attends him in the shout of. battle. He 
makes a friend of him in future troubles. 

4 No friend is he who to his friend and comrade who 

conies imploring food, will offer nothing. 

Let biiii depart—no home is that to rest in—, and 
rather seek a stranger to support him. 

5 Let the rich satisfy the poor implorer, and bend his 

eye upon a longer pathway. 

Riches come now to one, now to another, and like 
the wheels of cars are ever rolling. 

6 The foolish man wins food with fruitless labour: that 

food—I speak the truth—shall be his ruin. 

He feeds no trusty friend, no man to love him. All 
guilt is he who eats with no partaker. 

7 The ploughshare ploughing makes the food that feeds 

us,and with its feet cuts through the path it follows. 
Better the speaking than the silent Brahman : the 
liberal friend outvalues him who gives not. 

8 He with one foot hath far outrun the biped, and the 

two-footed catches the three-footed. 

Four-footed creatures come when bipeds call them, 
and stand and loolc where five are met together. 

O 


5 Bend his eye upon a. longer pathway: carefully consider the future 
a iu not the present only. He himself may need the same a ? iatance 
hereafter. 

6 Shall he his rum: with reference to stauza 1. 

7 Active exertion is necessary for success. The speaking Brahman: 
^ 1° i Jney t v, *-° (1u ly ^ sob urges the task of recitation for which ho is 
engaged. ‘ A Brahman expounding (tho Veda)/—Wilson. 

victory is not always theirs who appear to be more richly 
endowed than others. He with one foot, ekapdd: the Sun appe-us 
to be meant, elsewhero called Aja-Ekap&d. Seo VI. 60. 14. The. 

: 1R lnan * y'fa three footed is tho old man who walks with a stall' 
/ oveHa k° n I'.V “He who does not require such assistance. i ' :;v 
; c} Sturts : dogs. Five: several men together; the dogs being 
}it * u,K ’ cr tum whether their masters are among them or not. 




MiN/sr^ 


<SL 

THE IIYMNS OF [BOOK X. 

9 The hands are both alike : their labour difiers. The 
yield of sister milch-kine is unequal. 

Twins even differ in their strength and vigour : two, 
even kinsmen, differ in their bounty. 

HYMN CXVIII. Agni. 

Agni, refulgent among men thou slayest the devour¬ 
ing fiend, 

Bright ruler in thine own abode. 

2 Thou springest up when worshipped well: the drops 

of butter are thy joy 
When ladles are brought near to thee. 

3 Honoured with gifts he shines afar, Agni adorable 

with song: 

The dripping ladle balms his face. 

4 Agni with honey in his mouth, honoured with gifts, 

is balmed with oil, 

Refulgent in his wealth of light. 

5 Praised by our hymns thou kindlest thee, oblation- 

bearer, for the gods : 

As such do mortals call on thee. 

6 To that immortal Agni pay worship with oil, ye 

mortal men,— 

Lord of the house, whom none deceive. 



Pav.ldih, cots f>f five, is apparently used with reference to the one, 
two, three, and four in the preceding compound words. OtheiB 
explain panktih by ‘steps’ or ‘traces. 

f have adopted the explanation given by the authors of the 

<$'itbtnsig Irieder. 

9 All men should be liberal; but we must not expect all to be 
equally generous. 

The hymn lias been translated by Dr. Muir, 0. S. Texts, V. pp. 
431433. _ 

The deity is Agni as Rnkahohd or Destroyer of the Rakshnsns. 'A 11 '** 
Ki dii is Urukshaya of the family of Amahiyn, The m it . is Gayntn. 






MiN/sr^ 


THE BIG VEDA. 


351 



ME 110.] 


7 0 Amii, burn the R&kshosas with thine infallible 

flames of fire: 

Shine guardian of eternal Law. 

8 So, Agni, with thy glowing face burn fierce against 

the female fiends, 

Shining among Urukshayas. 

9 Urukshayas have kindled thee, oblation-bearer, thee, 

with hymns. 

Best worshipper among mankind. 


HYMN CXIX. Indra. 

This, even this was my resolve, to win a cow, to win 
a steed : 

Have I not drunk of Soma-juice? 

2 Like violent gusts of wind the draughts that I have 

drunk have lifted me : 

Have I not drunk of Soma-juice ? 

3 The draughts I drank have borne me up, as fleet- 

foot horses draw a car : 

Have I not drunk of Soma-juice ? 

4 The hymn hath reached me, like a cow who lows to 

meet her darling calf: 

Have I not drunk of Soma-juice? 

5 As a wright bends a chariot-seat so round my heart 

I bend the hymn : 

Have I not drunk of Soma-juice ? 


8 Ui ukaho.!,-, ]. members of the Riabi’s family. 

The Rishi is Indva himself in the form of Lava. He describes his 
sensations after drinking Somn-juice. The metre is G&yntri, 

1 «"•>. t cow ■ to Htrongthon and inspirit himsolf for buttle, and 

so to win kino and horses for ins worshippers. 






6 Not as a mote within the eye count the five tribes 

of men with me : 

Have I nOt drunk of Soma-juice ? 

7 The heavens and earth themselves have not grown 

equal to one half of me : 

Have I not drunk of Soma-juice? 

8 I in my grandeur have surpassed the heavens and 

all this spacious earth : 

Have I not drunk of Soma-juice ? 

9 Aha! this spacious earth will I deposit either here 

or there: 

Have I not drunk of Soma-juice. 

10 In one short moment will I smite the earth in fury 

here or there: 

Have I not drunk of Soma-juice ? 

11 One of my flanks is in the sky ; I let the other trail 

below: 

Have I not drunk of Soma-juice ? 

12 I, greatest of the mighty ones, am lifted to the 

firmament: 

Have I not drunk of Soma-juice ? 

13 I seek the worshipper’s abode: the oblation-bearer 

goes to gods: 

Have I not drunk of Soma-juice? 


0 ttyin.ru explains differently ‘The "five castes have not eluded 
tho glance <>f iuy eye.’—Wilson. 

11 Cp. HI- 32. 11. 

13 This stanza is difficult. The word gfUio is unintelligible, and 
arikam. as Prof. Ludwig suggests, should, perhaps, be read instead. 
A-ni ‘the oblation-bearer’ roust be Agui and not India. Prof. tJrass- 
niTinn. who with I)r. Muir, considers grino to mean servant or 
minister, places the stanza in his Appendix as a fragment from a 

^The hymn has boen translated by Dr. Muir, 0. S. Te.^s, V. p. 01, 
„ 10 i U1 ,.hors of tho Sirbemig Under, and Prof. Peterson, Hymns from 
,hc liigvtda (Bombay Sanskrit Series). 





YMN 120.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 


<SL 


HYMN CXX. iudta. 

In all the worlds That was the best and highest 
whence sprang the mighty god, of splendid valour. 
As soon as born he overcomes bis focmen, he in 
whom all who lend him aid are joyful. 

2 Grown mighty in his strength, with ample vigour, 

lie as a foe strikes fear into the J)asa, 

Eager to win the breathing and the bieathless. 
All sang thy praise at banquet and oblation. 

3 All concentrate on thee their mental vigour, what 

time these, twice or thrice, are thine assistants. 
Blend what is sweeter than the sweet with sweetness, 
win quickly with our tncath that meath in battle 

4 Therefore in thee too, thou who winnest riches, 

at every banquet are the sages joyful. 

With mightier power, bold god, extend thy firmness : 
let not malignant Yatudhanas harm theo. 

5 Proudly we put our trust in thee in battles, when 

wo behold great wealth the prize of combat. 

I with my words impel thy weapons onward, and 
sharpen with my prayer thy vital vigour. 


The Rishi is Brihaddiva, son of Atharvan. The metre is Trishtnp. 

1 That: meaning, according to Say ana, Brahma the original cause 
of the universe. 

2 Eager to ■win: Prof. Ludwig makes sasni an infinitive. Sasnih 
nviy ho the correct reading. See Grassmaun, Wurtcrbvxh Zwn 
Iiigvcda. The breathing and the breathless: the animate and tho 
inanimate world. 


3 Mental vigour: bratum: ‘adoration.’—Wilson. These: Soma- 

juii-es. Twice or thrice: with reference, perhaps, to the three daily 
libations. What is sweeter than the sweet: thine own celestial Soma. 
Bay ana explains the stanza .differently :—■ To thee all (woishippcis) 
offer adoration, whether thoso propitiators be two or threi 
that which is sweeter than the sweet with sweetness, unite that honey 
with honey.’—Wilson. The - two or three,’ according to SAyana, are 
11n saorilicur and his wife and child, and the second hall of tho 
stanza contains a reference to the propagation of children. 


2d 




THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 


6 Worthy of praises, many-shaped, most skilful, most 

energetic, Aptya ot the Aptyas : 

He with his might destroys the seven DAnus, subdu¬ 
ing many who were deemed his equals. 

7 Thou in that house which thy protection guardeth 

bestowest wealth, the higher and the lower. 

Thou stablisheit the two much-wandering mothers, 
and bringest many deeds to their completion. 

3 Bribaddiva, the foremost of light-winners, repeats 
these holy prayers, this strength to Indra. 

He rules the great self-lrminous fold of cattle, and 
all the door^ of light hath he thrown open. 

9 Thus hath Brihaddiva the great Atharvan spoken 
to Indra as himself in person. 

The spotless sisters, they who are his mothers, with 
power exalt him and impel him onward. 


N N . * 

6 Aptya y the name of a class of deities, of which Trita Aptya 
is'Olio. • Most accessible of the accessible/—Wilson. Tho first line 
is , ithout a verb: 1 praise him, may be understood. Ddtius: a 
class of demons, 

7 The hiyhtr a/ul the lower: heavenly and earthly. Mother»: 
heaven <u»d earth. 

8 V 'an ■ f of tigkt-u'imers: according to Suynna. f chief of Rishis, 
and enjoyer of heaven, or servant of Aditya, the Sun, Indra/ fold of 
cat lU ■ i he region of light. 

Thf. great Ada wan: 1 the great priest/—Gruasnmun. As himself: 
he identifies himself with the god whom be worships. The spotlm 
iot-: they oho are Ids mother*: according to Savnna, the sister 
rivers which nhide in the mother earth. Prof. Hath adopts he 
> aiding of the Alharva-veda, m&tari&mrt, instead of the m&tarthhwi iIt 
of the text. Heaven and Earth appear to be intended. 



mtsr/ty. 


THE RIG VEDA. 


35 



HYMN CXXI. 


K.a, 


In the beginning rose Hiranyagarbha, born only 
lord of all created beings. 

He fixed and holdeth up this earth and heaven* 
What god shall we adore with our oblation ? 

2 Giver of vital breath, of power and vigour, he whose 

commandments all the gods acknowledge : 

Whose shade is death, whose lustre makes immortal. 
What god shall we adore with our oblation ? 

3 Who by his grandeur hath become sole ruler of all 

the moving world that breathes and slumbers ; 

He who is lord of men and lord of cattle. What 
god shall we adore with our oblation ? 


4 His, through his might, are these snow-covered 

mountains, and men call sea and Kasd his possession: 
His arms are these, his are these heavenly regions. 
What god shall we adore with our oblation ? 

5 By him the heavens are strong and earth is stcdfust, 

by him light’s realm and sky-vault are supported ; 


ka, kah, (quis) meaning Who t that is, the unknown god. h;\3 
hoen applied as a name to Prajupati, and to other gods, from a forced 
interpretation of the interrogative pronouu which occurs iu tho 
refrain oi each vet so of tho hymn. 

Th. Rishi is Hiranyagarbha, son of Prajapati, Tho metro is 
Trisbpip. 

1 lliranyagarh Act: literally ‘the gold-germ;’ ‘source of golden- 
light;’ tho Sun-god “as the great power of the universe, from which 
o.lI other powers and existences, divine and earthly, arc derived, 
o. concoplion which is the nearest approach to the later mystical 
conception of Rrahma, the creator of the world."—Wallis. 

What nod: katmai- devdya: cui deal According to others ; ‘ Worship 
we Ka the god with our oblation.’ 

3 JircatJie.fi and slumbers: that is of gods and men. Of men 

a .d... literally, ‘of quadruped and biped.’ 

4 : air. fiasd; the mythical river of the firmament. 




mtsr$y 


<SL 

THE HYMNS OF {BOOK' X. 

By him the regions in mid-air were measured. What 
god shall we adore with our oblation ? 

6 To him, supported by his help, two armies embattled 

look while trembling in their spirit, 

When over them the risen sun is shining. W T hat 
god shall we adore with our oblation ? 

7 What time the mighty waters came, containing the 

universal germ, producing Agni, 

Thence sprang the gods’ one spirit into being. What 
god shall we adore with our oblation? 

8 He in his might surveyed the floods containing 

productive force and generating Worship. 

He is the god of gods, and none beside him. What 
god shall we adore with our oblation ? 

D Ne’er may he harm us who is earth s begetter, nor 
he whose laws are sure, the heavens’ creator, 

He who brought forth the great and lucid waters. 
What god shall we adore with our oblation? 

10 Prajapati! thou only comprehcndest all these created 

things, and none beside thee. 

Grant us our hearts’ desire when we invoke tlice: 
may we have store of riches in possession. 


7 Thence: from tho coming of the waters. One spirit: ekah, one, 
in the tox ( gives two superfluous syllables, and is suspicious. 

8 (■> at ivy Worship : ‘ giving'birth to sacrifice.’—Wilson. 

i') Praj&pati: lord of life, creatures or creation. Savitar the Suu- 
goil i„ so culled in IV. 53. 2, and Soma Pavamana in IX. 5. 1). l'rnja- 
pali was afterwards tho name of a separate) god, the bestowor of 
progeny and ecu tic, and sometimes invoked as the Creator. 

Tho hymn baa been translated by Dr. Muir, 0. S. Texts, IV., 
pp. 16, 17; by Prof. Max Mdller, A. S. Lit. p. 509; by Mr. Wallis, 
c 'DBTtwloyy of the Ljva/a, p. 50 f., and by Prof. Potewon, Hymns 
from the ltigveda. 





WNlSr/fy. 


THE ItIG VEDA. 


357 



122 .] 



HYMN CXXII. Agni. 

I praise the god of wondrous might like Indra, the 
lovely pleasant guest whom all must welcome. 

May Agni, priest and master of the household, give 
hero strength and all-sustaining riches. 

2 O Agni, graciously accept this song of mine, thou 

passing wise who knowest every ordinance. 
Enwrapped in holy oil further the course of prayer: 
the gods bestow according to thy holy law. 

3 Immortal, wandering round the seven regions, give, 

a liberal giver, to the pious worshipper, 

Wealth, Agni, with brave sons and ready for his us : 
welcome the man who comes with fuel unto thee. 

4 The seven who bring oblations worship thee, tlio strong, 

-the first, the great chief priest, ensign of sacrifice, 
The oil-anointed Bull, Agni who hears, who sends as 
god full hero strength to him 'who freely gives. 

5 First messenger art thou, meet for election : drink 

thou thy fill invited to the Arnrit. 

The Maruts in the votary’s house adorned thee; with 
lauds the Bhrigus gave thee light and glory. 

C Milking the teeming Cow for all-sustaining food, 
O wise one, for the worship-loving worshipper, 
Thou, Agni, droppi ng oil, thrice lighting works of Law, 
showest thy wisdom circling home and sacrifice. 

7 They who at flushing of this dawn appointed thee 
their messenger, these men have paid thee reverence. 
Gods strengthened thee for work that must be glorified, 
Agni, white they made butter pure for saorifieo. 


The Riabi is Chitrnmahli, son of Vosishthn. Tho metro is Trishtup 
in stanzas 1, 5, nud Jagati in the rest. 

1 Lik< Indra: vasum na: like the Yasu, or chief Vasu. ‘Like the 
Bun —Wilson. Riches: or viands. 

3 Seven rerjinns : of the universe, according to Sfcyana. 

4 The seven : the priests. 

7 Genii: here meaning priests. 





NIINlSr^ 



THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 



8 Arrangers in our synods, Agni, while they sang, 
Vasishtha’s sons have called thee down, the potent 

one. . , . 

Maintain the growth of wealth with men v ho sacri¬ 
fice. Ye gods, preserve us with your blessings 
evermore. 

HYMN CXXIII. Vena. 


2 


3 


4 


See, Vena, born in light, hath driven hither, on 
chariot of the air, the calves of Prisni. 

Singers with hymns caress him as an infant there 
where the waters and the sunlight mingle. 

Yena draws up his wave from out the ocean : mist- 
born, the fair one’s back is made apparent. 

Bn^htly he shone aloft on Order’s summit: the 
hosts sang glory to their common birthplace. 

Full many, lowing to their joint-possession, dwelling 
together stood the darling’s toothers. 

Ascending to the lofty height of Order, the bands 
of singers sip the sweets ot Ami it. 

Knowing his form, the sages yearned to meet .him : 
they have come nigh to hear the wild bull s bellow. 

Performing sacrifice they reached the river: tor the 
Gandliarva found the immortal waters. 


Yena, ‘ the loving Sun’ of I. 83. 5, A 'Ant* or ‘ the beloved,’ is snid 

tbe Scholiast in this place to bo madhyaath&no &ew$ * 1 2 the god <>i 
tWo middle region.’ He is, apparently, the Suu as he rises m the 
mist and dew of the morning. 

The Ri.-ihi is said to be Vena, sou of lll.yigu. The metre is Trishtup. 

1 /Vs**', the Speckled Cow, is the variegated cloud, and her calvea 
me the masses of mist which the Sun dispels. 

2 Oc 'a • the sea of air. On Order's summit; ‘on the summit of 
nature’s course.’— Wallis. Order, here and in the following stanza, 
is (Cosmos, the ordered or law-regulatod universe. Common birth 

pl'"i : the sky. . 

.3 r „; vt .MwstUm: the child which thoy have produced in corn 
men The darling's mothers : the Dawns, or tbe Waters 

,J w iH Irll's bellow : the sound nmdo by the dropping Soma 
juice!' The Qandharva Vena, the rising Suu. 





mist#,. 


THE RIG VEDA. 


359 



123^] 


5 The Apsaras, the lady, sweetly smiling, waits on her 
lover in sublimest heaven. 

In his friend’s dwelling as a friend he wanders : he, 
Vena, rests him on his golden pinion. 

G They gaze on thee with longing in their spirit, as on 
a strong-winged bird that mounteth sky-ward ; 

On thee with wings of gold, Vanina’s envoy, the 
bird that hasteneth to the home of Yama. 

7 Erect, to heaven hath the Gandharva mounted, 

pointing at us his many-coloured weapons ; 

Clad in sweet raiment beautiful to look on, for he, 
as light, produceth forms that please us. 

8 When as a spark he cometh near the ocean, still 

looking with a vulture’s eye to heaven, 

His lustre, joying in its own bright splendour, 
maketb dear glories in the loftiest region. 


f> The A/><arm: the celestial nymph who symbolizes the waters of 
heaven. Her (over: Vena, the Gandharva “Our hymn illustrator 
t hr two Reuses in which the sun is brought into connection with the 
waters; first, as penetrating with his beams tho watery masses of 
the sky, and secondly in the assimilation of his light to the waters, 
as soma or ambrosia, whence the depths of light become the aerial 
ocean, This association is stereotyped in the union of the Gatulhitrvns 
and tin’ Apsarases.”—Wallis, lizs friend s divelling: the mansion of 
his father Heaven. 

7 Clad in sweet raiment: surabhi , sweet, may, as Mr. Wallis 
conjectures, be a play on the word gandha^ occurring in the name 
Gandharva. 

3 The ocean: the sea of air. 

The hymn is oue of the obscurest in the whole Rigvedo. Mo.hb 
dhara interprets Vena by chandra , the Moon. Prof. Wilson says: 
“ The general purport of the Sdkta makes it [Vena] equivalent to 
the thunder-cloud.” Prof. Roth, whom Prof. Grassmann follows, 
identifies Vena Gandharva with the Rainbow According to Prof. 
Ludwig Vena is the Moon and the Gandharva is the Sun Mr. Wallis 
has translated and explained the hymn in his Cosmology of the Rigvcda % 
pp. 31 ff. 



THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 


HYMN CXXIY. Agni, Etc. 

Come to this sacrifice of ours, O Agni, threefold, 
with seven threads and five divisions. 

Be our oblation-bcnrer and preceder : thou hast lain 
long enough in during darkness. 

2 I come a god foreseeing from the godless to immor¬ 

tality by secret pathways. 

While I, ungracious one, desert the gracious, leave 
mine own friends and seek the kin of strangers. 

3 I, looking to the guest of other lineage, have found¬ 

ed many a rule of Law and Order. 

I bid farewell to the great god, the Father, and, for 
neglect, obtain my share of worship. 

4 I tarried many a year within this altar : I leave the 

Father, for my choice is Indra. 


Agni is the deity of stanzas 1—4, and Indra of 9: the remaining 
stanzas arc said to be irregular in this respect. Stanzas 2 —4 are 
ascribed to Agni as their Rishi, and I, 5—9 to Agni, Varuna, and Soma. 

1 Indra speaks. Threefold; performed with three doily libations; 
or comprising the pdhiyajna, the haviryajna, aud tho somayaji «?, the 
simple domestic oblation, the oblation of clarified butter, etc., and 
llio o In ring of Soma-juico. With seven threads: conducted by tho 
seven oliief priests. With fire divisions: with five oblations, or 
regulated by the yajamuna aud four of the chief priests, according to 
Sayan i. Tho exact meaning is uncertain. 

2 Agni speaks. He has left Varuna, originally tho supreme deity, 
tshuso power was waning, and associated himself with Indra who has 
superseded that god. From the ycxl/ess: from Varuna who in the 
decline of his supremacy has neglected Agni and sacrifice. Sityana 
interprets the first line differently :—‘From being no divinity 1 issue 
a diunity from the cave at the solicitation (of tho gods), and being 
manifest I attain in •mortality.'- —YV ihon. aSWv the km <d Uran<jt.,s: 
come to be born and domesticated in a new place, with Indra. 

;; f)f other Un>:r<j~: of the other branch; terrestrial fn 'her: 

Yarn)pa. ^ 

4 Within- this altar: or, close to this Varuna. This: the mi pro- 
maty of Indra, 




MIN/Sr^ 


THE RIG VEDA. 



YMN 124.] 



Aw&y pass Agni, Varuna, and. fe>oma. Kingship 
alternates: this I come to favour. 

5 These Asuras have lost their powers of magic. But 
thou, 0 Varuna, if thou dost love me, 

O King, discerning truth and right from falsehood, 
come and be lord and ruler of my kingdom. 

G Hero is the light of heaven, here all is lovely ; here 
there is radiance, here is air’s wide region. 

Let us two slaughter Vritra. Forth, O Soma ! Thou 
art oblation : we therewith will serve thee. 

7 The sage hath fixed his form by wisdom in the 

heavens : Varuna with no violence let the waters 
flow. 

Like women-folk, the floods that bring prosperity, 
have caught his hue and colour as they gleamed 
and shone. 

8 These wait upon his loftiest power and vigour : he 

dwells in these who triumph in their godhead ; 
And they, like people who elect their ruler, have in 
abhorrence turned away from Vritra. 


5 Indra speaks. These Asuras; Agui, Varuna, and Soma. Come 
and hi lord: Indra oilers Varuna spiritual and moral sovereignty as 
compensation for his loss of general supremacy. 

»i Let tts two: the exhortation is addressed by Indm to Soma. 
Vr*'tra: regarded c„s iu league with Varuna, the 1 ; ndish onomy in thu 
Bhupe of Varuna. 

7 The sage: perhaps Soma, in answer to Iudra’s appeal; Mitra, 
according to Sayana. 

8 His loftiest power ; the supreme might of ludra, 






THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK X. 



9 They call him Swan, the abhorrent floods’ com- ^ 
panion, moving in friendship with celestial waters. 
The poets in their thought have looked on Indra 
swiftly approaching when the Anushtup calls him. 


HYMN CXXV. 


Vak. 


I travel with the Rudras and the Vasus, with the 
Adityas and All-gods I wander. 

I hold aloft both Varuna and Mitra, I hold aloft 
Indra and both the Asvins. 

2 I cherish and sustain high-swelling Soma, and 

Twashtar I support, Phshan, and Bhaga. 

I load with wealth the zealous sacrificer who pours 
the juice and offers his oblation. 

3 I am the Queen, the gatherer-up of treasures, most 

thoughtful, first of those who merit worship. 

Thus gods have stablished me in many places with 
many homes to enter and abide in. 


9 This stanza appears to hr ve been added on account of the occur¬ 
rence of the word btbhatsdndm (abhorrentimn) which seems to con¬ 
nect it with the preceding stanza where bibhatmvah (abhorrentes) 
occurs. Swan: Entsa: Surya the Sun-god is sometimes so called. 
Swiftly approaching token the Anushtup calls him: “or the ceaselessly 
moving Indra, who is worthy to bo praised with an Anush ubh. — 
Wilson, Or, dancing the Anushtup, according to Prof. Max Muller’s 
interpretation. 

M. P.irgaigue has translated and explained this hymn. See La 
Religion VMique, III. pp. 145—149. See also Book IV. 42, for hints 
of the rivalry between Varuna and Indra. 

Yak is Speech persouified, the Word, the first oreation and represen¬ 
tative of Spirit, and tho means of communication between men and 
g.de. Here she is said to bo the daughter of thetiishi Amhhrina. The 
Riahi in Vilk, The metro is Jagati iu stanza 2, and Trishtup in the rest. 









THE RIG VEDA. 



YMN 12 


5.] 


<SL 

363 


4 Through me alone all eat the food that feeds them, 

eac]° man who sees, breathes, hears the word 

outspoken. 

They know it not, but yet they dwell beside me. 
Hear, one and all, the truth as I declare it. 

5 I verily, myself announce and utter the word that 

’ gods and men alike shall welcome. 

I make the man I love exceeding mighty, make 
him a sage, a Rishi, and a Brahman. 

6 I bend the bow for Rudra that his arrow may strike 

and slay the hater of devotion. 

I rouse and order battle for the people, and I have 
penetrated Earth and Heaven. 

7 On the world’s summit I bring forth the Father: 

my home is in the waters, in the ocean. 

Thence I extend o’er all existing creatures, and touch 
even yonder heaven with my forehead. 

8 I breathe a strong breath like the wind and tempest, 

the while I hold together all existence. 

Beyond this wide earth and beyond the heavens 
I have become so mighty in my grandeur. 


7 Thi Father: Heaven or Sky, produced from Vak identified with 
Panumitmi, the supreme and universal Soul. 

The hymn lip , been translated by Colebrooke, Miscellaneous 
I. 32; by the authors of the Sitbenzig Liedar; and by Prof. Peterson, 
Hymn* from the Rljveda (Bombay Sanskrit Series), 

Mr, Wallis observes: “Vac, ‘Speech’ is celebrated alone in two 
whole hymns, X. 71. and X. 125., of which the former shows that the 
primaly application of the name was to the voice of the hymn, 
the rn ans of communication between heaven and earth at the sacrifice. 
The other hymn illustrates the constant assimilation of the varied 
phenomena of nature to the sacrifice; all that has a voice in nature, 
the thunder of the storm, the reawaking of life at dawn, with songs 
of rejoicing over the new birth of the world arc embodied in this 
Vac iu the same way as it is said of Brih&spati, that he embraces all 
things that are. It is thus another expression for that idea of the 
noity of i he >rld, which we Imve seen crowning tho mystical spevu- 
Ifi ' n. of all the more abstract hymns of the collection .”—Cosmology 
of the lUgvcda, p. 85. 



imSTfty 



THE HYMNS OF 


[LOOK X 


<SL 


HYMN CXXVI. Visvedcvas. 

No peril, no severe distress, ye gods, affects the 
mortal man 

Whom Aryaman and Mitra lead, and Varuna, 
of one accord, beyond his foes. 

2 This very thing do we desire, Varuna, Mitra, 

Aryaman, 

Whereby ye guard the mortal man from sore distress, 
and lead him safe beyond his foes. 

3 These are, each one, our present helps, Varuna, Mitra, 

Aryaman, 

Best leaders, best deliverers, so may they safely 
carry us beyond our foes. 

4 Yo compass round and guard each man, Varuna, 

Mitra, Aryaman : 

In your dear keeping may we be, ye who are excellent 
as guides beyond our foes. 

5 Adityas are beyond all foes,—Varuna, Mitra, 

Aryaman : 

Strong Rudra with the Marut host, Indra, Agm let 
us call for weal beyond our foes. 

6 These lead us safely over all, Varuna, Mitra, 

Aryaman, 

These who are kings of living men, over all troubles 
far away beyond our foes. 

7 May they give bliss to aid us well, "V aruija, Mitra, 

Aryaman : , 

May the Adityas, when wc pray, grant us wide 
shelter and defence beyond our foes. 

3 As in this place, O holy ones, yo Vagus freed even 
the Gaurl when her feet were fettered, 

So free us now from trouble and affliction : and let 
our life be lengthened still, O Agni._ 

The 'Rill! is Kultfiftlsd arhiaha, sou of Silfteha, or Auburn ih 1 
Vamadeva The metro is Trl htup in stanza 8, and UparishtAdlirihati 

in the rcBt. - 

8 Court: tho wild cow, the female of the t-nnm or Bos fiaurn;-. L m 
V ihu8 are said to have delivered her from Visvavnau the ttmtlharva. 








TMN 127.] 


TIIE RIG VEDA. 


3C5 

Night. 


HYMN CNXYII. 


With all her eyes the goddess Night looks forth 
approaching many a spot: 

She hath put all her glories on. 

2 Immortal, she hatli filled the waste, the goddess hath 

filled height and depth : 

She conquers darkness with her light. 

3 The goddess as she comes hath set the Dawn her 

sister in her place : 

And then the darkness vanishes. 

4 So favour us this night, 0 thou whose pathways we 

have visited 

As birds their nest upon the tree. 

5 The villagers have sought their homes, and all that 

walks and all that flies, 

Even the falcons fain for prey. 

6 Keep off the she-wolf and the wolf; 0 Urmyfi, 

keep tho thief away: 

Ea*y bo thou for us to pass. 

7 Clearly hath she come nigh to me who decks the 

dark with richest hues : 

O Morning, cancel it like debts. 

8 These have I brought to thee like kine. O Night, 

thou child of heaven, accept 
This laud as for a conqueror. 


The Tvishi is Kusiku, son of Sobhaii, or R&tri (Night) daughter of 
Dlinradv.ija. The motro is (IiVyatri. 

_! The waste: 'the expanded (firmament).’—Wilson, 

0 UrwjA : * undulating j’ Night. 

8 Tkm: versos. 




TAINlSr^ 


THE HYMNS OF 



<SL 

[hoof x< 


HYMN CXXYIIL Visvedevas* 

Let roc win glory, A.gni, in our battles ; enkindling 
thee, may we support our bodies. 

May the four regions bend and bow before me : with 
thee for guardian may we win in combat. 

2 May all the gods be on my side in battle, the Maruts 

led by Indra, Vishnu, Agni. 

Mine be the middle air’s extended region, and may 
the wind blow favouring these my wishes. 

3 May the gods grant me riches; may the blessing 

and invocation of the gods assist me. 

Foremost in tight be the divine invokers; may we, 
uu wounded, have brave heroes round us. 

4 For me let them present all mine oblations, and let 

my mind’s intention be accomplished. 

May I be guiltless of the least transgression : and, 
all ye gods, do ye combine to bless us. 

5 Ye six divine Expanses, grant us freedom: here, 

all ye gods, acquit yourselves like heroes. 

Let us not lose our children or our bodies : lot us not 
benefit the foe, king Soma 1 

G Baffling the wrath of our opponents, Agni, guard us 
as our infallible protector. 

Let these thy foes turn back and seek their houses, 
and let their thought who watch at home be ruined. 


The Ilishi is Vihavya of the family of Angiraa. The metre is 
Ja 'ari ui stanza 8, and Trishtup in the rest, of the hymn. 

1 The four regions : the king who is praying for assistance is nbout 
to undertake a Diyvijaya, tbe subjugation of all neighbouring 
countries in all directions. 

3 Divine invokers: the Hotor-priests of the gods. Sayuna explains 
differently ‘ may my invokers of the gods be the fust to propitiate 

them.’—Wilson. 

o Su divine Expanses: the four cardinal points, aud tipper and 
lower spaces; or Heaven, Earth, Day, Night, Water, and Plants. 


* 





miST/fy. 


THE RIG 7ED A. 




7 Lord of the world, creator of creators: the saviour 

god who overcomes the foeman. 

May gods, Brihaspati, both Asvins shelter from 
ill this sacrifice and sacrificer. 

8 Foodful, and much-invoked, at this our calling may 

the great Bull vouchsafe us wide protection. 

Lord of bay coursers, Indra, bless our children: 
harm us not, give us not as prey to others. 

9 Let those who are our foemen stay afar from us: 

with Indra and with Agni we will drive them off. 
Vasus, Adityas, Rudras have exalted me, made me 
lar-reaching, mighty, thinker, sovran lord. 

HYMN CXXIX. Creation. 

Then was not non-existent nor existent: there was 
no realm of air, no sky beyond it. 

What covered in, and where? and what gave shelter ? 
Was water there, unfathomed depth of water? 

2 Death was not then, nor was there aught immortal: 
no sign was there, the day’s and night’s divider. 
That One Thing, breathless, breathed by its own 
nature : apart from it was nothing whatsoever. 


7 After creator of creators Sayan.i supplies tam devam staumi, ‘that 
god 1 praise.’ Indra or Savitar is intended* 

8 The great Bull: Indra. 

The Kiahi is Fnijapati JParameshthin or the Supreme. The metro 
is Trishtup. 

1 Then: in the beginning. Non-existent: amt: that does not yet 
act nail' exist, bill which has in itself the latent potentiality of exis¬ 
tence. i here was a certain unapparent condition,’ says an Indian 
Comment .tor. ‘ which, from the absence of distinctness, was not an 
( eutoty, while from its being the instrument of the world’s prod u 
turn, it was not a 4 non-entity.’ * 1 2 

2 I hat (far /king: the single primordial substance, the unit out 
of which the universe was devel pud. Cp. I. 164. 6 and 40. 








THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK X. 


<SL 




3 Darkness there was: at first concealed in darkness 

this All was indiscrirninated chaos. 

All that existed then was void and formless: by 
the great power of Warmth was born that Unit. 

4 Thereafter rose Desire in the beginning, Desire, the 

primal seed and germ of Spirit. 

Saves who searched with their heart’s thought dis¬ 
covered the existent’s kinship in the non-existent. 

5 Transversely was their severing line extended : what 

was above it then, and what below it ? 

There were begetters, there were mighty forces, free 
action here and energy up yonder. 

6 Who verily knows and who can here declare, it, 

whence it was born and whence comes this creation? 
The gods are later than this world’s production. 
Who knows then whence it first came into being? 

7 He, the first origin of this creation, whether he 

formed it all or did not form it, 

Whose eye controls this world m highest heaven, 
he verily knows it, or perhaps he knows not. 


3 Warmth: Prof. Wilson, following Say ana, translates tapasajb by 

‘austerity,’ meaning the contemplation of ike things that were to *« 
created. M. Buvnouf, in La Science des Religions, pp. 20/ fl. has shown 
how warmth was regarded by the Aryas as the principle explaining 
movement, life, and thought. # 

4 Desire : Kinia, Eros, or Lovo. Sages: ancient Ruins. 

5 Line a lint drawn by the ancient Rishis to make a division between 
11 ,.. upper v. uid and the lower, and to bring duality out of unity. 
F-niter*: the Fathers may be meant., Free action■: the happiness <*f 
th - Fathers. The stanza is obscure, and its couuexion with stanza ‘1 
u nor. obviou i. An intervening stanza may, perhaps, hare been last. 

The hymn has been translated by Uolehtooko, Miscellaneous E- my-'- 
l : by l)r. Muir, 0 . -S’. Texts, V. 356, 351 : by the authors 

If 'the Sk -alzig Ueder, and by Mr. Wallis, Cosmology oj the Li,neda 
' y, ,(• «The late;l. if the many Commoutators -n this hymn aio 

Professor Wliitney in the Journal of the American Oriental Society, 
vi.l ,\i. p, ei>:. and Dr. Scherniftiiu, Phil > ho Ilymueu aus dm 

Remind Atharva-Voda SumhiU, 18*7”—Wallis. 

; ee Prof. Max Muller, History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, pp. 


55‘J- 


503. 




MiNisr^ 


THE RIG VEDA 


369 



HYMN CXXX. Creation. 

The sacrifice drawn out with threads on every side, 
stretched by a hundred sacred ministers and one,—. 
This do these Fathers weave who hitherward are 
come: they sit beside the warp and cry, Weave 
forth, weave back. 

2 The Man extends it and the Man unbinds it: even 

to this vault of heaven hath he outspun it. 

These pegs are fastened to the seat of worship : they 
made the S&ma hymns their weaving-shuttles. 

3 What was the rule, the type, the first occasion? 

What were the wooden fender and the butter ? 
What were the metre, Pra-uga, and Uktha, when to 
the god all deities paid worship ? 

4 Closely was G:\yatri conjoined with Agni, and closely 

Savitar combined with Ushijih. 

Brilliant with Ukthas, Soma joined Anushtup : Bri- 
haspati’s voice by Briliati was aided. 


Aa tho subject of the hytnn is creation typified and originated by tlio 
mysterious primeval sacrifice (cp. X. 90), Pm.ja.pati tho Creator is said 
by Sayana to be tho deity. The Rishi is Yajfia (Sacrifice) Prajaputi'a 
son. The metre is Jagatl iu the first stanza, and Trishtnp in the rest. 

1 The sacrifice: sargdtviako yajhah: the sacrifice which constitutes 

creation.—Sfiyana. A hundred and one: meaning an indefinitely largo 
munber. Fathers: Sayana explains pitarah here by iMakdlt, protec¬ 
tors, the gods. “ 

2 The Man: the first Man or Male; Purusha, Adipurusha, Praia- 
pati, Recording to SiVyana* 

8 Wooden foider: the frame of wood, or logs of wood, that lcopfc 
the sacrificial fire together. Pra-uga: the second Sastra or hymn 
ut tho morning libatiou. Verses 4 and 5 answer the question what 
was t ie metic? Iwoot the other questions—those relating to the 
htulu i djyci) and the enclosure (paridhi) —have been answered, 
bilyaiia says, iu the Purusha-Siikta , X, 90 "—Wilson. 

/ 1 . vu ' /l Ukthat: ‘gladdening (us) through hymns 

(.t .t uxh) Muir, ftr/ha spall's voice : because his duty was to Speak 
as priest. * 1 2 

24 




THE HYMNS OF 



[BOOK 



5 Vi raj adhered to Varan a and Mitra: here Trishtup 

day by day was India’s portion. 

Jagati entered all the gods together: so by this 
knowledge men were raised to Kishis. 

6 So by this knowledge men were raised to Kishis, 

when ancient sacrifice sprang up, our Fathers. 
With the mind’s eye I think that I behold them who 
first performed this sacrificial worship. 

7 They who were versed in ritual and metre, in hymns 

and rules, were the seven godlike Kishis. 

Viewing the path of those of old, the sages have 
taken up the reins like chariot-drivers. 


HYMN CXXXI. ludm. 

Drive all our enemies away, O Indra, the western, 
mighty conqueror, and the eastern. 

Hero, drive off our northern foes and southern, that 
we in thy wide shelter may be joyful. 

2 What then? As men whose fields are full of barley 
reap the ripe corn removing it in order, 

So bring the food of those men, bring it hither, who 
come not to prepare the grass for worship. 


5 Day by day: was Indra’s portion of the mid-day (oblation).’— 
Wilson. 

6 I behold them: or, according to Prof Ludwig's interpretation:— 
These with the eyes of mind, I think, beheld them. 

7 “ The seven Kishis here arc not the Angirusas, but Bharadvilja, 
Kfisynpa, Gotama, Atri, Vasisbtha, Vi§vamitra, and Jamadagip, The 
knowledge of the ritual is derived from the divine priests; the sages 
or Kishis have followed them in sacrificing, and modern priests are 
only .imitators of those who preceded them.”— Ludwig. 

The hymn has been translated by Dr. Muir, 0 , S. Tests, III. pp 
278, 279. 

The Asvins are the deities of stanzas i and 5. The Kislii is 
Sukirti, son of Kukshivan. The metre is Anuehtup in stauaa 4, and 
Trishtup in the rest. 





HYMN M2.] 


TTIE RIG VEDA 


371 


•• 


3 Men come not with one horse at sacred seasons; 

thus they obtain no honour in assemblies. 

Sages desiring herds of lcine^and horses strengthen 
the mighty Indra for his friendship. 

4 Ye, Asvins, lords of splendour, drank full draughts 

of grateful Soma-juice, 

And aided Indra in his work with Namuchi of Asura 
birth. id 

5 As parents aid a son, both Asvins, Indra, aided thee 

with their wondrous powers and wisdom. 

When thou, with might, liadst drunk the draught that 
gladdens, Sarasvati, 0 Maghavan, refreshed thee. 

6 Indra is strong to save, rich in assistance: may lie, 

possessing all, be kind and gracious. 

May he disperse our foes and give us safety, and 
may we be the lords of hero vigour. 

7 May we enjoy his favour, his the holy : may wc 

enjoy his blesskl loving-kindness. 

May this rich Indra, as our good protector, drive off 
and keep afar all those who hate us. 

HYMN CXXXII. Mitra. Vanina. 
May Dyaus the lord of lauded wealth, and Earth 
stand by the man who offers sacrifice, 

And may the Asvins, both the gods, strengthen the 
worshipper with bli&s. 


3 With one horse: it seems to have been considered undignified and 
disreputable foi a wealthy man to come to the sacrifice iu a onedmwse 
car; but the precise meaning of the first line is somewhat uncertain. 

4 The myth referred to in this and the following stanza boa not 
been preserved. 

The Rishi is Sakap&ta, son of Nrimedhas. The metre is Nyan- 
kusftrini (8+12 + 84* 8) in stanza 1; PraaU rapankti (12 + 12 + 8 f 8) 
in 2 and 6 j Uahtaatobrih&t! in 7; and Yir&drfipfc in the rest ot tue 
hymu. 





THE U Y.UNS OF 


[BOOK X. 



2 As such we honour you, Mifcra and Varuna, with 

hasty zeal, most blest, you who sustain the laud. 
So through our friendship with you both may we 
subdue the Rfikshasas. 

3 And when we seek to win your love and friendship, 

we who have precious wealth in our possession, 

Or when the worshipper augments his riches, let 
not his treasures be shut up. 

4 That other, Asura! too was born of Heaven: thou 

art, O Varuna, the king of all men. 

The chariot’s lord was well content, forbearing to 
anger Death by sin so great. 

5 This sin hath Sakaputa here committed. Heroes 

who fled to their dear friend he slayeth, 

When the steed bringetli down your grace and favour 
in bodies dear and worshipful. 

6 Your mother Aditi, ye wise, was purified with water 

even as earth is purified from heaven. 

Show love and kindness here below : wash her in 
rays of heavenly light. 

7 Yo twain have seated you as lords of wealth, as one 

who mounts a car to him who sits upon the polo, 
upon the wood. 

Ther e our disheartened tribes Nnmedbas saved from 
woe, Sumcdlias saved from woe. 


\ Tho. I odor : Mitnv. The chariot’s lord .■ literally, ‘head of tho 
chariot.’ Tho mcauing is uncertain 1 find the rest of the hymn 
unintelligible. Prof. Ludwig conjectures that two brothers, NYiuiedhas 
and Suri.rcUms, had contended for sovereignty, and that tho adherents 
of . ne had wished to put the other brother to death, but had not 
carried out their purpose. Saknpiita absolves and purifies the former, 
and the brothers are reconciled. 

5 Tho if. ed: the Sun.—Ludwig. Tour <p-acc : Mitra’s and Vanina's. 

(5 Your mother Aditi: perhaps lhe mother of tho two brothers is 
ini jnued.—Ludwig. 




0 f\NDW 


r MN 133.] 


TIIE RIG VEDA. 




HYMN CXXXIII. Iudra. 

Sing strength to Indra that shall set his chariot 
in the foremost place. 

Giver of room in closest fight, slayer of foes in shock 
of war, be thou our great encourager. Let the 
weak bowstrings break upon the bows of our weak 
enemies. 

2 Thou didst destroy the Dragon ; thou sentest the 

rivers down to earth. 

Focless, O Indra, wast thou born. Thou tendcst. 
v eil each choicest thing. Therefore wo draw us 
close to thee. Let the weak bowstrings break 
upon the bows of our weak enemies. 

3 Destroyed bo all malignities and all our enemy’s 

designs. 

luy bolt thou castert at the foe, O Indra, who would 
smite us dead : thy liberal bounty gives us wealth. 
Let the weak bowstrings break upon the bows of 
our weak enemies. 

* Tlie robber people round about, Indra, who watch 
and aim at us,— 

Trample them down beneath thy foot; a conqucriim 
scatterer art thou. Let the weak bowstrings break 
upon the bows of our weak enemies. 

5 Wh .°?° assails us, Indra, be the man a stranger or 

akin, & 

Bring down, thyself, his strength although it be as 
yas as aie the heavens. Let the weak bowstrings 
, leak upon the bows of our weak enemies. 

6 Close to thy friendship do we cling, O Indra, and 

depend on thee. 

Lead us beyond all pain and grief along the path of 
holy Law. Let the weak bowstrings break upon 
the bows of our weak enemies. 


Tlio rtiahi is Sndas, son of Fijavtum. The metre is Sakvari m 
i 1 uizai 1—3, Mnhapaakti in 1—6, and Trishtup in 7. 



M\NtSr$y 


THE HYMNS OF [BOOK 

7 Do thou bestow upon us her, O Indra, who yields 
according to the singer’s longing, 

That the great Cow may, with exhaustloss udder, 
pouring a thousand streams, give milk to feed us, 

HYMN CXKNIV. India. 

As, like the Morning, thou hast filled, O Indra, both 
the earth and heaven, 

So as the mighty one, great king of all the mighty 
world of men, the goddess mother brought thee 
forth, the blessed mother gave thee life. 

l 2 Relax that mortal's stubborn strength whose heart 
is bent on wickedness. 

Trample him down beneath thy feet who watches for 
and aims at us. The goddess mother brought thee 
forth, the blessbd mother gave thee life. 

o Shake down, O slayer of the foe, those great all- 
splendid energies. 

With ail thy powers, 0 Sakra, all thine helps, 0 Indra, 
shake them down. The goddess mother brought, 
thee forth, the blessbd mother gave thee life. 

4 As thou, O Satakratu, thou, Q Indra, shakest all 
things down 

As wealth for him who sheds the juice, with thine 
assistance thousandfold. The goddess mother 
brought thee forth, the blessed mother gave thee 
life. 




7 Thj> great Cow : probably the Karth. 

OhxlWt is the Jtishi of the seeoud half of stai -a G and of 7, and 
Miiudluiiur, boh of Yuvannsva, of the rest of the hymn. The metro 
is Punk!i iu stanza 7, and Muhupaukti in tho rest, 

1 7'he. goddess ufothcr: Aditi. 

;; ; influences in the shape of rain and sunlight. 

4 ,S 'utakratu: or, Lord of Hundred PoworiL 





THE RIG VEDA. 



YMN 135.] 



5 Around, on every side like drops of sweat let light¬ 

ning-flashes fall. 

Let all malevolence pass away from us like threads 
of DiVva grass. The goddess mother brought 
thee forth, the blessbd mother gave thee life. 

6 Thou bearest in thine hand a lance like a long hook, 

great counsellor! 

As with his foremost foot a goat, draw down the 
branch, O Maghavan. The goddess mother brought 
thee forth, the blesskl mother gave thee birth. 

7 Never, O gods, do we offend, nor are we ever 

obstinate : we walk as holy texts command. 
Closely we clasp and cling to you, cling to your 
sides, beneath your arms. 


HYMN CXXXV. Yam a. 

In the tree clothed with goodly leaves where Yama 
drinketh with the gods, 

The father, master of the house, tendeth with love 
our aneieut sires. 

2 I looked reluctantly on him who tended well those 
men of old, 

On him who treads that evil path, and then I yearned 
for this again. 


5 DO, d g-ms *; Pauicnm Dactylon; a species of bent grass whoso 
filament h stretch horizontally away from the stem. 

6 The branch: that is loaded with fruit for us, 

The Ttishi is Kumara of the race of Yuma. The metre is Anushtup. 

1 The tree: where tho spirits of the pious dead rest after tii.iv 
labours. The father: Yama. 

2 The spirit of the dead child speaks, I yearned for this to 
return to the world of life, 








THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 



3 Thou mountest, though thou dost not see, O child, 

the new and wheel-less car 
Which thou hast fashioned mentally, one-poled but 
turning every way. 

4 The car which thou hast made to roll hitherward 

from the sages, child ! 

This hath the SSman followed close, hence, laid to¬ 
gether on a ship. 

5 Who was the father of the child ? Who made the 

chariot roll away ? 

Who will this day declare to us how the funereal gift 
was made ? 

?> When the funereal gift was placed, straightway the 
point of flame appeared. 

A depth extended in the front: a passage out was 
made behind. 

7 Here is the seat where Yama dwells, that which is 
called the home of gods : 

Here minstrels blow the flute for him : here he is 
glorified with songs. 


•> Yama speaks. Fashioned mentally: figuratively prepared by 
beiii;/ burnt ou the funeral pile. 

5 Skip: meaning, apparently, the funeral pile. The funereal gift: 
the meaning of anudeyi is uncertain. ‘.Restitution.’—Wilson, •Sur¬ 
render’ or ; delivery,’ according to Prof, Zimmer. 

6 A depth: tho meaning ia obscure. Passage out: probably for 
the removal of the ashes. 

The nobject of the hymn appears to be the funeral ceremony of 
n boy {/cumdra, said by some to be the namo of a man). According 
to tho legend cited by Say ana a youth named Nachikotas was sent 
by liia father to tho kiugdom of Yama who treated him kiudly and 
allowed him to return to tins world. “The hymn is made throughout 
applicable to Adilya as well as to Yama, with, if possible, a still 
greater degroo of obscuiity. It seems to have been tho basis of tho 
diiioussion in the Taittirfya Briihmnna (III. 11. 8) and in tho Kathii 
Upmiishtul, respecting wlmt becomes of Iho soul after death, in 
dialogues botwoon Nachiket u and Yama.”—Wilson. 



MINIS Tfty 


THE RIG VEDA. 


377 



YifN 13G.] 


HYMN CXXXVI. Kosins. 

He with the long loose locks supports Agni, and 
moisture, heaven, and earth : 

He is all sky to look upon: ho with long hair is 
called this light. 

2 The Munis, girdled with the wind, wear garments 

soiled of yellow hue. 

They, following the wind’s swift course go where the 
gods have gone before. 

3 Transported with our Munihood we have pressed on 

into the winds : 

You therefore, mortal men, behold our natural bodies 
and no more. 

4 The Muni, made associate in the holy v r ork of every 

god, 

Looking upon all varied forms flies through the 
region of the air. 

5 The steed of Vata, Vi\yu’s friend, the Muni, by the 

gods impelled, 

The Kesins, keainah, wearers of long loose hair, are Agni, Vayu, 
mid S&iya. Each stanza has for its Rishi one of tho seven sons of 
Yatarasana. .See Index of Hymns. The metre is Anushtup. 

1 lie with the long loose loch: probably tho ascotic, tho Muni or 
Yogi. According to Sayana, the radiant Sun, Moisture: t isham, 
usually meaning ‘poison' is so explained in this place. ‘Poison* 
and ‘notion, * 1 2 * * 5 * * it will be remembered, are different forms of one word. 

2 Munis : ascetics inspired or in a state of ecstasy. Girdled with 

:/ ■ wind: exposed without girdles to the w ind. According to Sayana, 

sons of V&tarasana. 

5 In both the oceans: everywhere in the firmament from its eastern 
to its western extremity. 

1 ho hymn shows tho conception that by a life of sanctity the 
Muni can attain to the fellowship of the deities of tho air, the 
Va ? u -;> Hudras, the Apsarasas, and the Gandharvas; and, fur¬ 
nished lilie thorn v/ith wopderful powers, can travel along with 

Uiora on their course.The beautiful-b ored, the long-haired, that 

is to aay, the Muni, who during the time of his austerities docs not 
shave his hair, upholds fire, moisture, heaven, and earth, and 
lescmbles the world of light, ideas which tho later literature so 

tv gl lTa 0 u. tai u 8 ‘”~ Pr ® f ' Koth < quoted by Dr. Muir, 0. S. Tex?*, 
V. ■ •; the hymn being transliterated and translated on pago 31S, 




miSffty 


s l > 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 



In both the oceans hath his home, in eastern and in 
western sea. 

6 Treading the path of sylvan beasts, Gandharvas, and 

Apsarasas, 

He with long locks, who knows the wish, is a sweet 
most delightful friend. 

7 V&yu hath churned for him: for him he poundeth 

things most hard to bend, 

When he with long loose locks hath drunk, with 
Rudra, water from the cup. 

HYMN CXXXVII. Visvedevas. 

Yfc gods, raise up once more the man whom ye have 
humbled and brought low. 

O gods, restore to life again the naan who hath com¬ 
mitted sin. 

2 Here these two winds are blowing far as Sindhu, 

from a distant land. 

May one breathe energy to thee, the other blow 
away thy fault. 

3 Hither, o\vind, blow healing balm, blow every fault 

away, thou wind ; 

For thou who hast all medicine eomest as envoy ot 
the gods. 

4 I am come nigh to thee with balms to give thee rest 

and keep thee safe. 

I bring thee blessed strength, I drive thy weakening 
malady away. 

ICach stanza is ascribed to one of tho seven great ^isbis. ,Seo 
Index of Hymns. The metre is Annshtaip. The hymn is a charm 
to roBtore a sick man to health, 

1 Who hath committed *»».■ sickness and death being regarded ns 
the cniisequouce of siu. 

2 Sind/in: or, ocean. 

4 The Wind sneaks. Weakening rmtady: yakshma may be sick¬ 
ness in general, or the name of a largo class of diseases, probably 
of a consumptive uaturc. 






WHlST/fy. 


THE RIG VEDA. 




5 Here let the gods deliver him, the Maruts’ band 

deliver him : 

All things that be deliver him that he be freed from 
his offence. 

6 The waters have their healing power, the waters 

drive disease away. 

The waters have a balm for all : let them make 
medicine for thee. 

7 The tongue that leads the voice precedes. Then 

with our tenfold-branching hands, 

With these two chasers of disease we stroke thee 
with a gentle touch. 

HYMN CXXXVIII. indr*. 

Allied with thee in friendship, Indra, these thy 
priests, remembering holy Law, rent Vritra limb 
from limb, 

When they bestowed the Dawns and let the waters 
flow, and when thou didst chastise dragons at 
Kutsa’s call. 

2 Thou sentest forth productive powers, clavest the 
hills, thou dravest forth the kine, thou drunkest 
pleasant meath. 

Thou gavest increase through this tree’s surpassing 
might. The sun shone by the hymn that sprang 
from holy Law. 


7 1 ho stanza is important as showing that the Indians employed 
touches or iaying-on of hands to relieve suffering or to restore 
health. Cp. X. 60. 12. 

The Rishi is Anga, son of Uru. The metre is Jagatl. 

1 Iky priests: the Angirasas. Didst chastise: this clause is very 
difficult. I adopt Prof. Grasamami’a interpretation. 

2 This hxe's surpasmiy miyht: the power of the juice of the Soma 




mtSTfiy 



THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 


Sl 


3 In the mid-way of heaven the Sun unyoked his car: 

the Arya found a match to meet his Dfisa loe. 
Associate with II ij is van Indra overthrew the solid 
forts of Pipru, conjuring Asura. 

4 He boldly cast down forts which none had e er 

assailed: unwearied he destroyed the godless 
treasure-stores. 

Like Sun and Moon he took the stronghold s wealth 
away, and, praised in song, demolished foes with 
flashing dart. 

5 Armed with resistless weapons, with vast power to 

cleave, the Vritra-slayer whets his darts and deals 
forth wounds. 

Bright Uskas was afraid of Indra’s slaughtering 
bolt: she went upon her way and left her 
chariot there. 

C These are thy famous exploits, only thine, when thou 
alone hast left the other reft of sacrifice. 

Thou in the heavens hast set the ordering of the 
moons : the Father bears the felly portioned out 
by thee. 


HYMN CXXXIX. 


Savitar. 


Savitar, golden-haired, hath lifted eastward, bright 
with the sunbeams, his eternal lustre ; 

He in whose energy wise Ptlshan marches, surveying 
all existence like a herdsman. 


•{ Unyoked his car: tho allusion’is, perhaps, to an eclipse.—Ludwig. 
llijfvcn. : a pious worshipper befriended by Indra. Pipru ; a demou 
of drought. See Vol. I., Index. 

5 liriijht Ushai wa» afraid: seo II. 15. G, IV. 30. 8 11, and X 1 3. G. 

0 The other: thy foe, the demou or lUkahasu. The Father 
Dya’.Ki or Heaveu, The felly portioned, out by thee: tho course of tho 
Mona through the asterisks, which thou hast arranged. 

Visvavaau is tho deity of stanae. 1—G, and tho Rislu of the 
hymn. The metre is Triahtup. 





THE RIG YE'D A. 


361 


IYMN 


110,] 


2 Beholding men he sits amid the heavens, filling the 

two world-halves and air’s wide region. 

He looks upon the rich far-spreading pastures 
between the eastern and the western limit. 

3 He, root of wealth, the gatherer-up of treasures, 

looks with his might on every form and figure. 
Savitar, like a god whose law is constant, stands in 
the battle for the spoil like Indra. 

4 Waters from sacrifice came to the Gandharva 

Visv&yasu, O Soma, when they saw him. 

Indra, approaching quickly, marked their going, and 
looked around upon the Sun’s enclosures. 

5 This song Visvavasu shall sing us, meter of air’s 

mid-realm, celestial Gandharva, 

That we may know aright both truth and falsehood: 
may he inspire our thoughts and help our praises. 
G In tho floods’ track he found the booty-seeker: the 
rocky cow-pen’s doors he threw wide open. 

These, the Gandharva told him, flowed with Aniril. 
Indra knew well the puissance of the dragons. 

HYMN CNL. Agui. 

Ac nt, life-power and fame are thine : thy fires blaze 
forth on high, O thou refulgent god. 

Sage, passing bright, thou givest to the worshipper, 
with strength, the food that merits laud. 

2 Pastures: there is no substantive in the text. Sayana supplies 
‘ quarters of space; ’ Ludwig «ladles; ’ and Grassmann ‘ pastures.’ 

-1 Halers.- used ia the preparation of the Soma-juice. The Gan- 
dhar-a : regarded as the custodian of the celestial Soma. The Sun’s 
enclosures . ‘the rims of the sun.’—Wilson. 

5 > tsvdeasu: the celestial Gandharva, is hero the Sun-god. 

' ' p vavasu. The booty-seeker: Indra who sought to win tho 

waters. Oj the Wagons: the serpent-demons who obstructed tho 
floods or heaven. 

The Rishi ia Agni Puvaka. The metro is Vishtarapankti (3 + 12 + 
in stanza 1* Satobrihftti in 2—4; Upari^htujjyotidb in o; uiul 
Tnshtup mi C. 1 




MiMsr #> , 


THE I1YMNS OF 



[BOOK X. 


<SL 


2 With brilliant,.purifying sheen, with perfect sheen 

thou liftest up thyself in light. 

Thou, visiting both thy mothers, aidest them as son. 
thou joinest close the earth and heaven. 

3 0 J&tavedas, son of strength, rejoice thyself, gracious, 

in our fair hymns and songs. 

In thee are treasured various forms ot strengthening 
food, born nobly and of wondrous help. 

4 Agni, spread forth, as ruler, over living things : give 

wealth to us, immortal god. 

Thou shinest out from beauty fair to look upon : thou 
leadest us to conquering power. 

5 To him, the wise, who orders sacrifice, who hath great 

riches under his control, 

Thou givest blest award of good, and plenteous food, 
givest him wealth that conquers all. 

0 The men have set before them for their welfare Agni, 
strong, visible to all, the holy. 

Thee, godlike one, with ears to hear, most, famous 
men's generations magniiy with praise-songs. 


HYMN CXLI. Visvedevas. 

Turn hither, Agni, speak to us : come to us with a 
gracious mind. 

Enrich us, master of the house : thou art the giver 
of our wealth. 

2 Let Aryaman vouchsafe us wealth, and Bb.aga, and 

Brilnispati. t , . c . . 

Let the gods give their gifts, and let ounrita, 

goddess, grant us wealth. 

o Thy mothers: heaven and earth. Joinest- dost: or, fiileat full. 

5 To him ; to the insti tutor of the sacrifice. 


The l.tishi i« Agni Tftpnsa (the Ascetic). The metre is Anushtup. 

>> St' iri.t-i: Pleusaatness; in the form ot true and pleasant Speech. 

Cp. I. 40. 






MINlSr^ 


THE RIG VEDA. 



IIY AIN 142.] 



3 We call king Soma to our aid, and Agni with our 

songs and hymns, 

The Adityas, Vishnu, Shrya, and the Brahman priest 
Brihaspati. 

4 Xndra, VAyu, Brihaspati, gods swift to listen, wc 

invoke, 

That in the synod all the folk may be benevolent 
to us. 

5 Urge Aryaman to send us gifts, a'nd Indra, and 

Brihaspati, 

Vata, Vishnu, Sarasvati, and the strong courser 
Savitar. 

6 Do thou, 0 Agni, with thy fires strengthen our 

prayer and sacrifice: 

Incite them to bestow their wealth to aid our service 
of the gods. 


HYMN CXLIL Agni. 

With thee, O Agni, was this singer of the laud : 

he hath no other kinship, O thou son of strength. 
Thou givest blessbd shelter with a triplo guard. 
Keep the destructive lightning far away from us. 

2 Thy birth who seekest food is in the falling flood, 

Agni: as comrade thou winnest all living things. 
Our coursers and our songs shall be victorious: they of 
themselves advance like one who guards the herd. 

3 And thou, O Agni, thou of godlike nature, sparest 

the stones, while eating up the brushwood. 

Then are thy tracks like deserts in the corn-lands. 
Bet us not stir to wrath thy mighty arrow. 


The K .;hin are Jaritar, Drona, Sarisrikva, and Stiunbamitra, of tho 
race of Sirnga, a couplet being ascribed to each. The metro is 
Jngat! in stanzas 1, 2; Trishtup in 3, <3; and Aunshtup in 7, 8. 

3 Sparest (he ston.s: see Piaohel, Veditoke Stuilien, p. 180. Cp. 
III. 29. 6 . 






the iiymns of 


[BOOK 


4 O’er hills, through vales devouring as thou goost, 

thou partest like an army fain for booty. 

As when a barber shaves a beard, thou shavest earth 
when the wind blows on thy flame and fans it. 

5 Apparent are his lines as he approaches : the course 

is single, but the cars are many, 

When, "Agni, thou, making thine arms resplendent, 
advancest o’er the land spread out beneath thee. 

G Now let thy strength, tliy burning flames fly upward, 
thine energies, O Agni, as thou toilest. 

Gape widely, bend thee, waxing in thy vigour: let 
all the Vasus sit this day beside thee. 

7 This is the waters’ reservoir, the ocean’s great 

receptacle. 

Take thou another path than this, and as thou 
listcst walk thereon. 

8 On thy way hitherward and hence let flowery Durvix 

grass spring up. 

Let there be lakes with lotus blooms. These are 
the mansions of the sea. 


HYMN CXLIIL Asvins. 

Ye made that Atri, worn with eld, free as a horse to 
win the goal. 

When ye restored to youth and strength Kaksbiv&n 
like a car renewed, 


6 Stanzas C—9 seem to belong to some other hymn, being a prayer 
to Agni that he may spare the speaker's house where, he says, there 
is nothing to invite the devouring god. 

The Riahi is Atri, son of Sankhya. The metre is Anushtup. 

1 At i • seel. 112. 7. KahthUAn: the scholiast says that this 
Rishi was originally dull of understanding and that the Asvins endowed 
him with knowledge. Prof. Lndwig takes kaksMvmtam to be an 
adjective agreeing with ralham: ‘Again ye made him youthful like 
a chariot that ib braced with bands. 






TMN 144.] 


THE RIOVEDA. 



2 Yc freed that Atri like a horse, and brought him 

newly-born to earth. 

Ye loosed him like a firm-tied knot which gods 
unsoiled by dust had bound. 

3 Heroes who showed most wondrous power to Atri, 

strive to win fair songs ; 

For then, O heroes of the sky, your hymn of praise 
shall cease no more. 

4 This claims ) r our notice, bounteous gods!—oblation, 

Asvins! and our love, 

That ye, O heroes, in the fight may bring us safe to 
ample room. 

5 Ye twain to Bhujyu tossed about in ocean at the 

region’s end, 

N&satyas, with your ■winged steeds came nigh, and 
gave him strength to win. 

C Come with your joys, most liberal gods, lords ol all 
treasures, bringing weal. 

Like fresh full waters to a well, so, heroes, come and 
be with us. 


HYMN CXLIV. 


I ndrft. 


Tn is deathless Indu, like a steed, strong and of full 
vitality, 

Belongs to thee, the orderer. 

2 Here, by us, for the worshipper, is the wise bolt 
that works with skill. 

It brings the bubbling beverage as a dexterous man 
brings the effectual strong drink. 


5 Jikvjyu; see Vol. I t , Index. 

The Riahi is Sopnraa, son of T&rkshya, or Urclhvakrisann, of the 
race of Uwa. The metro is tiiyatri in ataueas 1, it/ 4; Bvihati in 
2 ; SfttoLrihati in 5; and Vishtitnipanktr in 0. 


tvhur* ura utuuuorOOU IB tO lUdra. 







MINlSr^ 



THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 



3 Impetuous Ahisuva, a bull among these cows of his, 
Looked down upon t.he restless hawk. 

4 That the strong-pinioned bird hath brought, child of 
x the falcon, from afar, 

What moves upon a hundred wheels along the female 
dragon’s path. 

5 Which, fair, unrobbed, the falcon brought thee in 

his foot, the red-hued dwelling of the juice; 
Through this came vital power which lengthens out 
our days, and kinship through its help awoke. 

6 So Indra is by Indu’s power: e’en among gods will 

it keep great destruction off. 

Wisdom, most sapient one, brings force that lengthens 
life. May wisdom bring the juice to us. 


UYMjM CXLV. Sapatnibadhanam. 
From out the earth I dig this plant, an herb of most 
effectual power, 

Wherewith one quells the rival wife and gains the 
husband for oneself. 


3 I find this and the following stanza unintelligible. Ahisuva in 
other places is the name of a detnon; but the meaning here is 
uncertain. Cows: there is no substantive to dsu svdsu, ‘these his 
own/ in tho feminine gender. 

4 What moves upon a hundred wheels: satachahram: ‘the bestower 
of many boons.’—Wilsoiu 

5 Dwelling of the juice: the Soma-piant, which the falcon brought 
from heft veil. 

6 It : or he; Indu or the Soma-juice. 

Prof. Grasomaim places this hymn in his Appendix as being in bis 
opinion made up of fragments. He considers Ahisuva (stanza 3) to 
he ‘ L he archer Krisauu’ of IV. 27. 3 and other places who guards 
tho celestial Soma, and instead of ‘cows’ he understands ‘wives.’ 

The hymn is a spell to rid a jealous wife of a more favoured rival. 
The Ki- bi 1 b Indr&nt, the consort of India. The metre ib I’ankti in 
stanza (i, and Anush tup in the rest. 

1 Phi- plant said to lie tho Pitta, probably identical with Pat hit 
(C'lyp:,, Hornondifolia), a climbing plant possessing various medicinal 
properties. 






YMN 146 .] 


T1IE RIG VEDA. 


387 


2- Auspicious, with expanded leaves, sent by the gods, 
victorious plant, 

Blow thou the rival wife away, and make my 
husband only mine. 

3 Stronger am I, 0 stronger one, yea, mightier than 

the mightier; 

And she who is my rival wife is lower than the 
lowest dames. 

4 Her very name I utter not: she takes no pleasure 

in this man. 

Far into distance most remote drive we the rival 
wife away. 

5 I am the conqueror, and thou, thou also art victori¬ 

ous : 

As victory attends us both w f e will subdue my fellow- 
wife. 

6 I have gained thee for vanquisher, have grasped thee 

with a stronger spell. 

As a cow hastens to her calf, so let thy spirit speed 
to me, hasten like water on its way. 

HYMN CXLVI. Arayyint. 

Goddess of wild and forest who seemest to vanish 
from the sight, 

How is it that thou seekest not the village ? Art 
thou not afraid ? 

2 What time the grasshopper replies and swells the 
shrill cicala’s voice, 

Seeming to sound with tinkling bells, the lady of 
the wood exults. 


6 Thy spirit: the husband's. 

The deity, Aranyaui, is the tutelary goddess of the forest and 
wilderness. The Rishi is •Devamuni, son of Iraramada. The metro is 
Anush t up* 

2 0) cv . iricaid: the c'/uchchikd is said to bo a little even. 

tine that cried chichi; aud the vrish&ravt is said to be a sort of 
cricket, Others take theca to be birds of some unascertained kind. 






MIN/Sr^ 



TIIE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 



3, And, yonder, cattle seem to graze, what seems a 
dwelling-place appears : 

Or else at ere the lady of the forest seems to free 
the wains. 

4 Here one is calling to his eow, another there hath 

felled a tree: 

At eve the dweller in the wood fancies that some¬ 
body hath screamed. 

5 The goddess never slays, unless some murderous 

enemy approach. 

Man eats of savoury fruit and then takes, even as 
he wills, his rest. 

C Now have I praised the forest queen, sweet-scented, 
redolent of balm, 

The mother of all sylvan things, who tills not but 
hath stores of food. 


HYMN CXLVII. ludra, 

I trust in thy first wrathful deed, 0 Indra, when 
thou slewest Vritra and didst work to profit man ; 
What time the two world-halves fell short of thee in 
might, and the earth trembled at thy force, 
0 thunder-armed. 


3 Cattle scan to graze: deer feediug in the glades. What seems a 
di'/eii' uy-place: a natural bower of branches and creepers. 

4 Sounds are heard as of a cowman calling his cattle, or of a 
woodman at work. 

0 Murderous enemy : the text has only any ah, ‘another,’ by which, 
accord;i.g to Saya^a, a tiger or robber is meant. Prof. Ludwig 
suggests that tbo reading should bo nan yah, ‘ oi;o who is destined to 
he killed.’ The hymn has been translated by Dr. Muir, 0. S. Texts, 
V. p. 4 23 j and by the authors of the Siehenzig Lieder des Bigveda, 

7 hi; Risi'i is Suvcclas, son of Sirisha. The metre is Trishtup in 
stanza 5, and Jugatl in the rest of the hymn, 




TI1E RIG VEDA. 


389 


MN 


148.] 


2 Thou with thy magic powers didst rend tho conjurer 

Vritra, 0 blameless one, with heart that longed tor 
fame. 

Heroes elect thee when they battle for the prey, thee 
in all sacrifices worthy of renown. 

3 God much-invoked, take pleasure in these princes 

here, who, thine exalters, Maghavan, have come to 
wealth. ik 

In synods, when the rite succeeds, they hymn the 
strong for sons and progeny and riches undisturbed. 

4 That man shall find delight in well-protected wealth 

whose care provides for him the quick-sought joyous 
draught. 

Bringing oblations, strengthened, Maghavan. by thee, 
he swiftly wins the spoil with heroes in tho fight. 

5 Now' for our band, 0 Maghavan, when lauded, make 

ample room with might, and grant us riches. 
Magician thou, our Varuna and Mitra, deal food to 
us, O wondrous, as dispenser. 

HYMN CXLVIIL indra. 

When we have pressed the juice we laud thee, Indra, 
and when, most valorous ! we have won the booty. 
Bring us prosperity, as each desires it: under thine 
own protection may we conquer. 

2 Sublime from birth, mayst thou O Indra, hero, with 
Surya overcome the Ddsa races. 

As by a fountain’s side, we bring the Soma that lay 
concealed, close-hidden in the waters. 


3 Princes: the Suris, tho wealthy institutors of tho sacrkice. 
The strong : thee, tho mighty Indra. 

Tho Rishi is Pritku, son of Vena. The metro is Trishtup. 





THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 


3 Answer the votary’s hymns, for these thou knowest, 

pleased with the Itishis’ love, thyself a singer. 

May we be they who take delight in Somas: these 
with sweet food for thee, O chariot-rider. 

4 These holy prayers, O Indra, have I sung thee ; giant 

to the men the strength of men, thou hero. 

Be of one mind with those in whom thou joyest,: keep 
thou the singers safe and their companions. 

5 Listen to Prithi’s call, heroic Indra, and be thou 

lauded by the hymns of Venya, 

Who hath sung to thee, to thine oil-rich dwelling, 
whose rolling songs have sped thee like a torrent. 

HYMN CXLIX. Savitar. 

Savitar fixed the earth with bands to bind it, and 
made heaven stedfast where no prop supported; 
Savitar milked, as ’twere a restless courser, air 
sea bound fast to what no foot had trodden. 

2 Well kuoweth Savitar, 0 Child of Waters, where 

ocean, firmly fixt, o’erflowed its limit, 

Thence sprang the world, from that uprose the region ; 
thence heaven spread out and the wide earth 
expanded. 

3 Then, with a full crowd of immortal beings, this 

other realm came later, high and holy. 


3 These with sweet food,; * these (praises are offered) with sacrificial 
•viands.’—Wilson, 

4 Companions: or, dependents. 

r> i'nthVs call : the invocation of Prithu, the Rishi of tho hymn, 
according to S/tyapu. Prof. Ludwig suggests that Prithu's wife is 
intended. Venya: Prithu, son of Vena, 

'1 lie Rishi is Aroban, son of Hirnijyastfipa, The metre is Triahtup. 

1 To what no foot had trodden: atdrte: ‘to the indestructible 
(etlnr),’—Wilson. 






WMSTQf, 


AIN 150.] 


THE RIG VEDA. 




First, verily, Savitar’s well-feathered eagle was born : 
and he obeys his law for ever. 

4 As warriors to their steeds, kine to their village, 

as fond milk-giving cows approach their youngling, 
As man to wife, let Savitar come downward to us, 
heaven’s bearer, lord of every blessing. 

5 Like the Angirasa Hiranyasthpa, I call thee, Savitai', 

to this achievement: 

So worshipping and lauding thee for favour I watch 
for thee as for the stalk of Soma. 


HYMN CL. AgnL 

Thou, bearer of oblations, though kindled, art kind¬ 
led for the gods. 

With the Adityas, Rudras, Vasus, come to us: to 
show us favour come to us. 

2 Come hither and accept with joy this sacriiiee and 

hymn of ours. 

O kindled god, we mortals are invoking thee, calling 
on thee to show us grace. 

3 I laud thee Jatavedas, thee lord of all blessings, with 

my song. 

Agni, bring hitherward the gods whose laws we love, 
whose law's we love, to show us grace. 


3 Eagle: identified by Savana with Turkshya, brother of Garuda, 
who brought the Soma from the moon at Savitar's command. 

5 Angirasa : a descendant of the Angirasas. Achievement: vdje: 
food, according to S&yana, i. e. oblatiou. Lauding: archan: or, I, 
Arehau, honouring thee to win thy favour. 

The Rishi is Mrilika, son of Vasishtha. The metre is Brihati in 
stair/as l—3; l T parishtajjyotish or Jagati in 4; and Upamhtajjyo- 
tish in 5. 

1 Though kindled: although thou art already burning fresh fire is 
added to thee. To shoiv u$ /avow: mrilikdya: this play upon the 
^tishi’s name is repeated iu each stanza. 




MIN/Sr^ 


THE HYMNS OF 




4 Agni the god was made the great high-priest of gods. 

Bishis have kindled Agni, men of mortal mould. 
Agni I invocate for winning ample wealth, kindly 
disposed for winning wealth. 

5 Afcri and Bharadvftja and Gavishthira, Kanva and 

Trasadasyu, in our fight he helped. 

On Agni calls Vasishtha, even the household priest, 
the household priest to win his grace. 


HYMN CLI. Faith. 

Bf Faith is Agni kindled, through Faith is oblation 
offered up. 

We celebrate with praises Faith upon the height 
of happiness. 

2 Bless thou the man who gives, O Faith; Faith, 

bless the man w T ho fain would give. 

Bless thou the liberal worshippers; bless thou the 
word that I have said. 

3 Even as the deities showed their Faith against the 

potent Asuras, 

Bo make this uttered wish of mine true for the liberal 
worshippers. 

4 Guarded by Vayu, gods and men who sacrifice draw 

near to Faith. 

Man winneth Faith by yearnings of the heart, and 
opulence by Faith. 

5 Faith in the early morning, Faith at noonday will 

we invocate, 

Faith at the setting of the sun. 0 Faith, endow us 
with belief. 


Tiio Riflhi is Sraddhil (Fiiith) of llio family of Kama (Love). Hie 
metro is Anushtup. 

1 Upon the height of happiness: (who is seated) on Bhaga’a 
Lead.’—Wilson. 

4 Guarded by Vdyu ■ the moaning is not clear. 




MiN/sr^ 


THE ZIGVEDA. 



HYMN 153.] 




HYMN CLII. Indra. 

A mighty governor art thou, wondrous, destroyer of 
the foe, 

Whose friend is never done to death, and never, 
never overcome. 

2 Lord of the clan, who brings us bliss, strong, 

warrior, slayer of the fiend, 

May Indra, Soma-drinker, go before us, Bull who 
gives us peace. 

3 Drive Rakshasas and foes away, break thou in pieces 

Vritra’s jaws: 

0 Vritra-slaying Indra, quell the foeman’s wrath 
who threatens us. 

4 0 Indra, beat our foes away, humble the men who 

challenge us: 

Send down to nether darkness him who seeks to do 
us injury. 

5 Baffle the foeman’s plan, ward off his weapon who 

would conquer qs. 

Give shelter from his furious wrath, and keep his 
murdering dart afar. 

HYMN CLIII. Indra. 

Swaying about, the active ones came nigh to Indra 
at his birth, 

And shared his great heroic might. 

2 Based upon strength and victory and power, O Indra 
is thy birth: 

Thou, mighty one, art strong indeed. 

—- - — -- - . . . ■■ i . . 

The Ttishi ia Sasa of tho family of Bharadvaja. The metro is 
Anushtup. 

The rtialiis aro Iudra’s Mother.?, the consorts of the gods. The 
metre is Anush tup, 

1 The active ones: the Wator-goddesses may be meant. The con¬ 
sorts of the gods, according to Sayana. 

2 Thsu, vu<jhty one: or, 0 Bull, thou art a Bull indeed. 



mtStffy 



THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK 



3 Thou art the Vritra-slayer, thou, Indra, hast spread 

the firmament: 

Thou hast with might upheld the heavens. 

4 Thou, Indra, bearest in thine arms the lightning 

that accords with thee, 

Whetting thy thunderbolt with might. 

5 Thou, Indra, art preeminent over all creatures in 

thy might: 

Thou hast pervaded every place. 


HYMN CLIY. 


Bhavavrittam, 


For some is Soma purified, some sit by sacrificial 
oil: 

To those for whom the meath flows forth, even to 
those let him depart. 

2 The invincible through Fervour, thoso whom Fervour 

hath advanced to heaven. 

Who showed great Fervour in their lives,—even to 
those let him depart. 

3 The heroes who contend in war and boldly cast their 

lives away, 

Or who give guerdon thousandfold,—even to thoso 
let him depart. 


4 Lightning: or, praise-song, hymn. Siiyana explains artcam here 
by stutyam: thy laudable or adorable thunderbolt. 

The utate of the dead is the subject. The Rishi is Yam*, sister of 
Yuma. The metre is Anush tup. 

1 To those let him depart : let the spirit of the dead go to the realm 
of the blessed, to the Fathers who receive offerings of Soma-juice and 
clarified butter. Meath: according to Say ana, honey, which is ottered 
to the spirits of their ancestors by students of the Atharvaveda, 
.Soma-juice and ghriU'.m or clarified butter (sacrificial oil) beiug offered, 
respectively, by students of the Samavoda aud Yajurveda. 

2 Fervour: tapat: literally, warmth, heat; religious fervour, 
asceticism, austerity, self-denial aud abstracted meditation. 







UYMN 155.] THE RIGVEDA. 395 


4 Yea, the first followers of Law, Law’s pure and holy 

strengthened, 

The Fathers, Yama! Fervour-moved,—even to those 
let him depart, 

5 Skilled in a thousand ways and means, the sages 

who protect the Sun, 

The Ttishis, Yama! Fervour-moved,—even to those 
lefc him depart, 

HYMN CLV. Various. 

ArAy!, one-eyed limping hag, fly, ever-screeching, 
to the hill. 

We frighten thee away with these, the heroes of 
Sirimbitha. 

2 Scared from this place and that is she, destroyer of 
each germ unborn. 

Go, sharp-horned Brahmapaspati and drive Ar&yi 
far away. 

S Yon log that floats without a man to guide it on the 
river’s edge,— 

Seize it, thou thing with hideous jaws, and go thou 
far away thereon. 


4 Fervour-moved: or, Penance-rich; filled full of religious austerity. 
The hymn has been translated by Dr. J. Muir, 0. S, Texts, V. p, 310, 
and by Prof. Zimojer, Altiiidisches Leben, p. 416. 

Ihe subject or object of the hymn is the averting or removal of 
Misfortune. Brahmanaspati and the Visvedevas are also regarded as its 
deif ies. The Kishi is Sirimbitha, son of Bharadvaja. The metre is 
Amish tup. 

1 Arfiy'i .• ‘the stingy;’ the goddess of Distress and Misfortune. 
Ever-sereerlang: according to Sayana’s explanation of sadunve; accor¬ 
ding to others ‘Allied with Danas, Danavas, or demons.’ 

2 6/unp-horncd .• armed with piercing rays of light. 







4 When, foul with secret stain and spot, ye hastened 

onward to the breast, 

All Indra’s enemies were slain and passed away like 
froth and foam. 

5 Hither these men have brought the cow, have duly 

carried Agni round, 

And raised their glory to the gods. Who will attack 
them with success ? 

HYMN CLVI. Agni. 

Let songs of ours speed Agni forth like a fleet 
courser in the race. 

And we will win each prize through him. 

2 Agni, the dart whereby we gain kine for ourselves 

with help from thee,— 

That send us for the gain of wealth. 

3 O Agni, bring us wealth secure, vast wealth m 

horses and in kine : 

Oil thou the socket, turn the wheel. 

4 0 Agni, thou hast made the Sun, the eternal star, 

to mount the sky, 

Bestowing light on living men. 

5 Thou, Agni, art the people’s light, best, clearest, 

seated in thy shrine: 

Watch for the singer, give him life. 

4 The meaning of this stanza is not clear. Manduradkdniklh and 
ludbiuhtydeavah are difficult words that do not occur again. 

5 These men: the test has only ime, * these.’ According to Sayaua, 
the Visvedevas are meant, who have brought back the stolen cattle. 
But the reference is probably to the sacrifice which the priests arc 
performing. 

The Rishi is Ketu. sou of Agni. The metre is Gayatri. 

2 The dart: * that army.’—Wilson. 

3 Turn the wheel: I adopt the reading of the Samavoda, pari in, 
instead of panim. According to the text, tho rendering would be: 
Balm heaven and drive the Pani hence. 




WiSty 


THE RIG VEDA. 




HYMN CLVII. Visvedovas. 

We will, with Indra and all gods to aid us, bring those 
existing worlds into subjection. 

2 Our sacrifice, our bodies, and our offspring, let Indra 

form together with the Adityas. 

3 W ith the Adityas, with the band of Maruts, may 

Indra be protector of our bodies. 

4 As when the gods came, after they had slaughtered 

the Asuras, keeping safe their godlike nature, 

5 Brought the Sun hitherward with mighty powers, 

and looked about them on their vigorous godhead. 


HYMN CLVIII. 


Surya. 


May Stirya guard us out of heaven, and Vat a from 
the firmament, 

And Agni from terrestrial spots. 

2 Thou Savitar whose flame deserves hundred libations, 

be thou pleased: 

From falling lightning keep us safe. 

3 May Savitar the god, and may Parvata also give us 

sight: 

May the Creator give us sight. 

4 Give sight unto our eye, give thou our bodies sight 

that they may see : 

May we survey, discern this world. 

6 Thus, Surya, may we look on thee, on thee most 
lovely to behold, 

See clearly with the eyes of men. 


The Riahi is Bhuvana, son of Aptya, or S&dhana, son of Bhnvaun. 
The metre is Dvipackl-trishtup or Trishtup in half-stanzas. 

f> Say ana, explains the second half of the stanza differently 
‘ then (men) beheld around them the swift descending rain.’_Wilson 

1 "e h-.lii is Chakshuh (Eye), son of Surya. The metre is Gayitri, 
1 Out oj heaven: ‘from (foes dwelling in) heaven,’—-Wilson. 

The Creator: Dhatar. 





298 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK X. 


HYMN CLIX, Saehi Pautoiui. 

Yon Sun hath mounted up, and this my happy fate 
hath mounted high, 

I, knowing this, as conqueror have won my husband 
for mine own, 

2 I am the banner and the head, a mighty arbitress 

am 1: 

I am* victorious, and my lord shall be submissive to 
my will. 

3 My sons are slayers of the foe, my daughter is a 

ruling queen: 

I am victorious: o’er my lord my song of triumph 
is supreme, 

>4 Oblation, that which Indra gave and thus grew 
glorious and most high,— 

This have I offered, O ye gods, and rid me of each 
rival wife. 

5 Destroyer of the rival wife, sole spouse, victorious, 

conqueror, 

The others’ glory have I seized as ’twere the wealth 
of weaker dames. 

6 I have subdued as conqueror these rivals, these my 

fellow-wives, 

That I may hold imperial sway over this hero and 
the folk. 

HYMN CLX. Indra. 

Taste this strong draught that gives thee vital vigour: 

with all thy chariot here unyoke thy coursers. 

Let not those other sacrifieers stay thee, India: 
these juices shed for thee are ready. 

ShcIii Paulomt, t illed also Indranf, the consort of Indra, is also the 
Jiiuhi of the hymn. The metre is Anns!.tap* ! Literally, this is a 
son' of exaltation by Sac hi over her rival wives; but aacki means 
n.ls<rnu ‘-net," ‘ exploit,” cud this hymn is metaphorically the praise 
ol la'li a s glorious acts.”—Wilson. 

The Itiohi is Purana, son of Visvamitra. The metro is Triahtup. 










TEE RIG VEDA. 




2 Thine is the juice effused, thine are the juices yet 

to be pressed: our resonant songs invite thee. 

O Indra, pleased to-day with this libation, come, 
thou who knowest all and drink the Soma. 

3 Whoso, devoted to the god, effuses Soma for him 

with yearning heart and spirit,— 

Never doth Indra give away his cattle: for him he 
makes the lovely Soma famous. 

4 He looks with loving favour ou the mortal who, like 

a rich man, pours for him the Soma. 

Maghavan in his bended arm supports him : he slays, 
unasked, the men who hate devotion. 

5 We call on thee to come to us, desirous of strenodh- 
. en * n £> food, of cattle, and of horses. 

For thy new love and favour are we present: let us 
invoke thee, Indra, as our welfare. 


HYMN CLXI. Iudrat 

For life I set thee free by this oblation from the 
unknown decline and from consumption ; 

Or, if the. grasping demon have possessed him, free 
him from her, O Indra thou and Agni. 

2 Be his days ended, be he now departed, be he 

brought very near to death already, 

Out of Destruction’s lap again I bring him, save 
11 m tor life to last a hundred autumns. 

3 With hundred-eyed oblation, hundred-auturaned, 
_ b rin gmg a hundred lives, have I restored him, 

•i Hho hate, devotion : ■ brakmuduishah: ‘haters of Br&hmans' 
accord mg to Sayan a. 


According to the Index the subject of the hymn is the cure of the 
disease ended hajayakshnm (Consumption or Atrophy). The liishi is 
•.lashuiauasana (Remover of Consumption), son of Prajaputi! The 
meu-e is Anushtnp in stanza 5, and Trishtup in the rest. 



decline,: some insidious disease, differing from Rajaya- 
ciImps, as Prof. Zimmer, suggests, hypertrophy and atrophy 
3 1 wo diseases intended. See Aitindisches Lebcn, p. 377. The 

'' J emo ^' 9 r dhi: from grok, to seize; a female spirit who 
neu and kills them. r 






misfy 


THE I1YMNS OF 



400 


<SL 

[BOOK X. 


That Indra for a hundred years may lead him safe 
to the farther shore of all misfortune. 

4 Live, waxing in thy strength, a hundred autumns, 

live through a hundred springs, a hundred winters. 
Through hundred-lived oblation Indra, Agni, Brihas- 
pati, Savitar yield him for a hundred! 

5 So have I found and rescued thee: thou hast re¬ 

turned with youth renewed. 

Whole in thy members ! I have found thy sight and 
ail thy life for thee. 


HYMN CLXIV. Duhsvapnaghnam. 

Avaunt, thou master of the mind! Depart, and vanish 
far away. 

Look on Destruction far from hence. The live man’s 
mind is manifold. 

2 A happy boon do men elect, a mighty blessing they 

obtain. 

Bliss with Vaivasvata they sec. The live man’s mind 
seeks many a place. 

3 When by address, by blame, by imprecation we have 

committed sin, awake or sleeping, 

All hateful acts of ours, all evil doings may Agni 
bear away to distant places. 


4 For a hundred: years, understood. 

The subject of the bymu is the dissipation of evil dreams. Tho 
Ijtishi is Prachet&s, a descendant of the Augirasas. Tho metre is 
Trial)f up iu Btanza 3, Pankti iu 5, and Anushtup in the rest. 

1 Master of the mind: the spirit of evil dreams is addressed. 
Destruction: the goddess Nirriti. Manifold: “attentivo to various 
objects, and soou diverted from nuy regard to evil dreams.”—Wilson. 

2 Vaivtmala: Yama, the son of Vivasvau, who presides over evil 
dreams,—jilynya. 






MiNisr^ 


<SL 

THE RIQYEDA. 401 

4 When, Indra, Brahmanaspati, our deeds are wrongful 

and unjust, 

Prachetas the Angirasa prevent our foes from troubl¬ 
ing us. 

5 We have prevailed this day and won: we are made 

free from sin and guilt. 

Ill thoughts, that visit us awake or sleeping, seize the 
man we hate, yea, seize the man who hateth us. 

HYMN CLXV. Visvedevas/ 

Gods, whatsoe’er the Dove came hither seeking, sent 
to us as the envoy of Destruction, 

For that let us sing hymns and make atonement. 
Well be it with our quadrupeds and bipeds. 

2 Auspicious be the Dove that hath been sent us, 

a harmless bird, ye gods, within our dwelling. 

May Agni, sage, be pleased with our oblation, and 
may the missile borne on wings avoid us. 

3 Let not the arrow that hath wings distract us : beside 

the fire-place, on the hearth it settles. 

May it bring welfare to our men and cattle : here let 
the Dove, ye gods, forbear to harm us. 

4 The screeching of the owl is ineffective; and when 

beside the fire the Dove hath settled, 

To him who sent it hither as an envoy, to him be 
reverence paid, to Death, to Yama. 



HYMN 105.] 


4 Prachetds: according to Sayuna, Varuua. the wise god who ia 
especially connected with his worshippers the Angiraaas, may bo 
intended. 

The Rishi is Kapota (Dove or Pigeon), the son of Nirriti (Destruc¬ 
tion). Tho metro is Triahtup. 

1 A dove, regarded as an ill-omened bird and the messenger of 
Death, has down into the house. 

26 



MINlSr^ 


THE HYMNS OF 



<SL 

[BOOK X. 


5 Drive forth the Dove, chase it with holy verses : 

rejoicing, bring ye hither food and cattle, 

Barring the way against all grief and trouble. Lot 
the swift bird fly forth and leave us vigour. 


HYMN CLXVI. Sapatnan&sanam. 

Make me a bull among my peers, make me my rivals’ 
conqueror: 

Make me the slayer of my foes, a sovran ruler, lord 
of kine. 

2 I am my rivals’ slayer, like India unwounded and 

unhurt, 

And all these enemies of mine arc vanquished and 
beneath my feet. 

3 Here, verily, I bind you fast, as the two bow-ends 

with the string. 

Press down these men, 0 Bord of Speech, that they 
may humbly speak to me. 

4 Hither I came as conqueror with mighty all-effecting 

power, 

And I have mastered all your thought, your synod, 
and your holy work. 

5 May I be highest, having gained your strength in 

war, your skill in peace : my feet have trodden on 
your heads. 

Speak to me from beneath my feet, as frogs from out 
the water croak, as frogs from out the water croak. 


5 With holy vo set: S&yana taken richd with stdyamdndh, under* 
stood :—(Praised) by our hymn (0 gods). 

The subject is the Destruction of Rivals. The Rishi is Ri-li ibhn 
(Bull), the son of Viraj or Sukvara. The metre is Mabapaukti in 
stanza f>, and Anush tup in the rest. 








MINlSr^ 


TIIE RIG VEDA. 




HYMN CLXVII. Iadr* 

This pleasant meath, 0 Indra, is effused for thee; 

thou art the ruling lord of beaker and of juice. 
Bestow upon us wealth with many hero sons : thou, 
having glowed with fervour, wonnest heavenly light. 

2 Let us call Sakra to libations here effused, winner of 

light who joyeth in the potent juice. 

Mark well this sacrifice of ours and come to us : we 
pray to Maghavan the vanquisher of hosts. 

3 By royal Soma’s and by Varuna’s decree, under 

Brihaspati’s and Anumati’s guard, 

This day by thine authority, O Maghavan, Maker, 
Disposer thou ! have I enjoyed the jars. 

4 I, too, urged on, have had my portion, in the bowl, and 

as first prince I drew forth this my hymn of praise, 
When with the prize I came unto the flowing juice, 
O Visv&mitra, Jamadagni, to your home. 


HYMN CLXVIIT. \w 

O the Wind’s chariot, 0 its power and glory 1 
Crashing it goes and hath a voice of thunder. 

It makes the regions red and touches heaven, and 
as it moves the dust of earth is scattered. 

2 Along the traces of the Wind they hurry, they come 
to him as dames to an assembly. 


Tlui Rishis are Visv&mitra and Jamadagni. The metre is Jngati, 
Stanzas l—3 are spoken by the Rishis, and 4 by Indra. 

1 Having glowed with fervour; ‘performing arduous peuance.’— 
Wilson. 

3 Anumnfi : Divine Favour personified. 

4 The prize : the wealth won for you. 

Tho Rishi is Anila (Wind), of tho race of Vatu. The metro is 
Trishtup. 

2 They : the Waters. 





m THE IIYMNS OF [BOOK X. 

Borne on bis car with these for his attendants*- the 
god speeds forth, the universe’s monarch. 

3 Travelling on the paths of air’s mid-region, no single 

day doth he take rest or slumber. 

Holy and earliest-born, friend of the Waters, where 
did he spring and from what region came he ? 

4 Germ of the world, the deities’ vital spirit, this god 

moves ever as his will inclines him. 

His voice is heard, his shape is ever viewless. Let 
us adore this Wind with our oblation. 

HYMN CLXIX. Cows. 

May the wind blow upon our Cows with healing: 

may they eat herbage full of vigorous juices. 

May they drink waters rich in life and fatness: to 
food that moves on feet be gracious, Kudra. 

2 Like-coloured, various-hued, or single-coloured, 

whose names through sacrifice are known to Agni, 
Whom the Angirasas produced by fervour, vouch¬ 
safe to these, Parjanya, great protection. 

3 Those who have offered to the gods their bodies, 

whose varied forms are all well known to Soma,— 
Those grant us in our cattle-pen, O Indra, with their 
full streams of milk and plenteous offspring. 

4 Fraj&pati, bestowing these upon me, one-minded with 

all gods and with the Fathers, 

Hath to our cow-pen brought auspicious cattle: so 
may we own the offspring they will bear us. 


The Kisbi i. Sahara of the family of Kakshiv&n. The metre is 

TriHht.ni'). 

4 Prqj&jnt'; . hO.h brought: may Piajapati bring, according to 

SuyfliLi'* 






THE RIO VEDA. 



TUN 



HYMN CLXX. sjtrya. 

May the bright god drink glorious Soma-mingled 
meath, giving the sacrifice’s lord unbroken life; 

He who, wind-urged, in person guards our offspring 
well, hath nourished them with food and shines 
o’er many a land. 

2 Kadiant, as high Truth, cherished, best at winning 

strength, Truth based upon the statute that sup¬ 
ports the heavens, 

He rose, a light, that kills Vritras and enemies, best 
slayer of the Dasyus, Asuras, and foes. 

3 This light, the best of lights, supreme, all-conquer¬ 

ing, winner of riches, is exalted with high laud. 
All-lighting, radiant, mighty as the Sun to see, 
he spreadetb wide unfailing victory and strength. 

4 Beaming forth splendour with thy light, thou hast 

attained heaven’s lustrous realm. 

By thee were brought together all existing things, 
possessor of all godhead, all-effecting god. 


HYMN CLXXI. Indra. 

For Ita’s sake who pressed the juice, thou, Indra, 
didst protect his car, 

And hear the Soma-giver’s call. 

2 Thou from his skin hast borne the head of the swift- 
moving oombacant, 

And sought the Soma-pourer’s home. 


The Rishi is Vibhraj or Vibhrat (Radiant), the sou of Surya, The 
metre is Astarapankti iu stanza 4, and Jagnti in the rest. 

The Rishi is Ita, son of Bbrign. The metre is Gayatri. 

2 Combatant: makhosya: according to the legend cited by Sayann, 
Sacrifice personified, whose head, as he attempted to escape in human 
form from the gods, was eat off by India. Seo Wilson, 



NllMSr^ 


THE HYMNS OF 



<SL 

[BOOK X. 


3 Venya, that mortal man, hast thou, for Astrabudhna 

the devout, 

O Indra, many a time set free. 

4 Bring, Indra, to the east again that Sun who now is 

in the west, 

Even against the will of gods. 


HYMN CLXXII. Dawn. 

With all thy beauty come: the kino approaching 
with full udders follow on thy path. 

2 Come with kind thoughts, most liberal, rousing the 

warrior’s hymn of praise, with bounteous ones. 

3 As nourishers we tic the thread, and, liberal with 

our bounty, offer sacrifice. 

4 Dawn drives away her sister’s gloom, and, through 

her excellence, makes her retrace her path. 

HYMN CLXXIII. The King. 

Be with us; I have chosen thee : stand stedfast and 
immoveable. 

Let all the people wish for thee: let not thy king¬ 
ship fall away. 


3 Venya: said to be Prithu, the son of Vena. See X. 61. 10. 
Attrabvdhna; the son of Astrabudhna. Set free: Cp. X. 81. 15. 

The Risbi is Samvavta, of the family of Angiras. The metre is 

Jjvipada Viraj. . , 

2 Moat liberal: Surya appears to be meant. Rousiny the warrior s 
hymn of praise . j&rayanmakhah: the meaning is uncertain : — ‘bring¬ 
ing the sacrifice to completion,’ according to S&yana. 

3 /j ; nourishers: because sacrifice brings the food that nourishes 

life. The thread: of sacrifice. 

4 Her sister's oloorti: the darkness of Night. 

The subject is the benediction of a newly-elected king. The Rishi 
in Dhruva (Firm), of the family of Angiras. The metre is Anushpip. 






MN 174.] 


TIIE RIGVEDA. 


407 


2 Be even here ; fall not away : be like a mountain 

unremoved. 

Stand stedfast here like "Indra’s self, and hold the 
kingship in thy grasp. 

3 This man hath Indra stablished, made secure by 

strong oblation’s power. 

May Soma speak a benison, and Bralima^aspati, 
on him. 

4 Firm is the sky and firm the earth, and stedfast also 

are these hills. 

Stedfast is all this living world, and stedfast is this 
king of men. 

5 Stedfast, may Varuna the king, stedfast, the god 

Briliaspati, 

Stedfast, may Indra, stedfast, too, may Agni keep 
thy stedfast reign. 

6 On constant Soma let us think with constant sacri¬ 

ficial gift. 

And then may Indra make the clans bring tribute 
unto thee alone. 

HYMN CLXNIV. The King. 

With offering for success in fight whence Indra was 
victorious, 

With this, O Brahmanaspati, let us attain to royal 
sway. 

2 Subduing those who rival us, subduing all malignities, 
Withstand the man who menaces, withstand the man 

who angers us. 

3 Soma and Savitar the god have made thee a victori¬ 

ous king: 

All elements have aided thee, to make thee general 
conqueror. 


Tho Riahi i,s Abhfvarta, of the family of Anglrae. Tho metre is 
Auimhtnp 

i It ah offering for meem : 'By the abhivarta oblation.’—Vilsou. 





40S 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK X. 


4 Oblation, that which Indra gave and thus grow glori¬ 

ous and most high,— 

This have I offered, gods! aDd hence now, verily, 
am rival]css. 

5 Slayer of rivals, rivalless, victorious, with royal sway, 
Over these beings may I rule, may I be sovran 

of the folk. 

• HYMN CLXXY. Press-stones. 

May Savitar the god, O Stones, stir you according 
to the Law: 

Be harnessed to the shafts, and press. 

2 Stones, drive calamity away, drive ye away male¬ 

volence : 

Make ye the cows our medicine. 

3 Of one accord the upper stones, giving the Bull his 

bull-like strength, 

Look down with pride on those below. 

4 May Savitar the god, O Stone3, stir you as Law 

commands for him 
Who sacrifices, pouring juice. 

HYMN CLXXVI. Agui. 

With hymns of praise the sons have told aloud the 
Itibhus’ mighty deeds 

Who ; all-supporting, have enjoyed the earth as ’twere 
a mother cow. 


4 Cp. X. 159. 4. 

The Rishi is Urdbvagrava, son of Arbuda. The metre is G&yatri, 

1 The shafts: or chariot-poles; here meaning the guiding arms. 

2 The nows: or, the rays of morning, at whoso approach robbers 
and (lemons liy. 

3 The Bull: Soma. 

The Ribhua are the deities of stanza 1. The Rishi is Sunu (Son), 
Byll 0 f Ki' hu. Thu metre is Gayaui in stanea 2, and Auushtup in 
the rest. 

1 The sons: of the Ribhus. 



MINfSr^ 


THE RIG VEDA. 



1IYMN 177.] 



2 Bring forth the god with song divine, bring Jfitavcdtls 

hitherward, 

To bear our gifts at once to heaven. 

3 He here, a god-devoted priest, led forward comes to 

sacrifice. 

Like a car covered for the road, he, glowing, knows, 
himself, the way. 

4 This Agni rescues from distress, as ’twere from the 

immortal race, 

A god yet mightier than strength, a god who hath 
been made for life. 


HYMN CLXXVII. MAyftbheda. 

The sapient with their spirit and their mind behold 
the Bird adorned w T itli all an Asura’s magic might. 

Sages observe him in the ocean’s inmost depth : the 
wise disposers seek the station of his rays. 

2 The flying Bird bears Speech within his spirit: erst 
the Gaudharva in the womb pronounced it: 

And at the seat of sacrifice the sages cherish this 
radiant, heavenly-bright invention. 


3 Like a car: perhaps, as Prof. Ludwig suggests, like a chariot 
which, U3 the driver is concealed from sight by the canopy, seems to 
find its way without a guide. 

4 its twere from the immortal race: ‘ as (well as) from peril caused 
by the immortals.’—Wilson. 

The subject is Miyabheda, ‘the discernment of Mdyd, or illusion 
(the cause of material creation).’—Wilson. The Eishi is Patau/; 
(Bird), the son of Prajapati, Tho metro is Jagati in stanza 1, and 
Trial)tap in the rest. 

1 The Bird: the Sun. In the ocean’s inmost depth: in tho solar 
orb, according to Sayana. Witt disposers: *ordainers (of solar wor¬ 
ship).'—Wilson. 

2 $peech or song; the morning song of tho Sun bird. 27/.’ Gan- 
dharva: the breath of life, according to Sayaya. The ray of the Sun 
is probably mount. 






<SL 

TEE HYMNS OF [BOOK X. 

3 I saw the Herdsman, him who never resteth, 
approachiug and departing on his pathways. 

He, clothed in gathered and diffusive splendour, 
within the worlds continually travels. 

HYMN CLXXVIII. T&rkshyn. 

This very mighty one whom gods commission, the 
conqueror of cars, ever triumphant, 

Swift, fleet to battle, with uninjured fellies, even 
Tarkshya for our weal will we call hither. 

2 As though we offered up our gifts to Indra, may we 

ascend him as a ship for safety. 

Like the two wide worlds, broad, deep, far-extended, 
may we be safe both when he comes and leaves you. 

3 He who with might the five lands hath pervaded, 

like Sfirya with his lustre, and the waters,—• 

His strength wins hundreds, thousands: none avert 
it, as the young maid repelleth not her lover. 

HYMN CLXXIX. Indra. 

Now lift ye up yourselves and look on Indra’s 
seasonable share. 

If it be ready, offer it; unready, ye have been remiss. 


3 This stanza Las occurred before. See 1.164. 31. The Herdsman : 
the Sun. Restsih: or, stumbletli; literally, sinks or falls down. 

The Rislii is Arishtanemi (Whose follies are uninjured), the son of 
Tarkshya. Tbo metre is Trishtup. 

1 T&rkthya : a personification of the Sun, usually described as a 

divine horse. Cp. 1. 89. 6. 

3 // er /over: I adopt, with a necessary modification, Professor 
Pi sobers interpretation of the difficult words yuvatim na scry dm. See 
Ytdischt Studien, p. 106. 

The Rishis are Sibi, son of Usiuara, Prutardanft, king of the basis, 
and Vnsu.nnmis, son of Rohidasva. The metre is Anushtup in stanza 
1, and Trishtup in 2 and 3. 









miST/fy 


<SL 

THE RIGVEDA. 411 

2 Oblation is prepared: come to us, Indra; the Sun 

hath travelled over half his journey. 

Friends with their stores are sitting round thee wait¬ 
ing like lords of clans for the tribe’s wandering 
chieftain. 

3 Dressed in the udder and on fire, I fancy; well- 

dressed, I fancy, is this recent present. 

Drink, Indra, of the milk of noou’s libation with 
favour, thunderer, thou whose deeds are mighty. 

HYMN CLXXX. Indra. 

0 much-invoked, thou hast subdued thy foeraen: thy 
might is loftiest; here display thy bounty. 

In thy right hand, O Indra, bring us treasures : thou 
art the lord of rivers filled with riches. 

2 Like a dread wild beast roaming on the mountain 

thou hast approached us from the farthest distance. 
Whetting thy bolt and thy sharp blade, O Indra, 
crush thou the foe and scatter those who hate us. 

3 Thou, mighty Indra, sprangest into being as strength 

for lovely lordship o’er the people. 

Thou drovest off the folk who were unfriendly, and 
to the gods thou gavest room and freedom. 

HYMN CLXXXI. Visvedevas. 

Vasishtha mastered the Rathantara, took it from 
radiant Dh&tar, Savitar, and Vishnu, 

Oblation, portion of fourfold oblation, known by tho 
names of'Saprathas and Prathas. 

3 The milk is twice cooked; first matured in the cow’s udder and 
then heated on the fire. 

Tho Kishi is Jaya (Victory), sou of Indra. The metre is Trishtup. 

The Riahis are Pratha, son of Vasishtha, Saprutha, son of Bhnm 
dvija, and Ghartna, sou of Surya, one stanza being ascribed to each. 

The metre is Trishtup. 

I Rathantara: a name usually applied to certain hymns of the 
Samuveda. The meaning here is uncertain, and tho whole stanza is 






412 


THE HYMNS OF 


[BOOK X, 


2 These sages found what, lay remote and hidden, 

the sacrifice’s loftiest secret essence. 

From radiant Dhatar, Savitar, and Vishnu, from 
Agni, Bharadvdja brought the Brihat. 

3 They found with mental eyes the earliest Yajus, 

a pathway to the gods, that had descended. 

From radiant Dh&tar, Savitar, and Vishnu, from 
SArya did these sages bring the Gharma. 

HYMN CLXXXII. Brihaapati. 

Brihaspati lead us safely over troubles, and turn his 
evil thought against the sinner; 

Repel the curse, and drive away ill-fec-ling, and give 
the sacrificer peace and comfort. 

2 May NarAsansa aid us at Prayaja: blest be our 

Anuyaja at invoking3. 

May he repel the curse, and chase ill-feeling, and give 
the sacrificer peace and comfort. 

3 May he whose head is flaming burn the demons, 

haters of prayer, so that the arrow slay them. 
May he repel the curse and chase ill-feeling, and give- 
the sacrificer peace and comfort. 


obscure. Saarabhas and Pratkas: meaning, apparently, ‘far-extend¬ 
ing’ and ‘extending/ the former referring to the liathantara and the- 
latter to the Brihat, which is also a portion of tlie Sanmvcda. 

3 Yajus: the Yajurveda; a sort of sacrificial prayer-book formed out 
of the Rigvoda. Gharma .- warm libation of milk or other beverage. 

“The Siikta refe s evidently to technical ritual to which no key is 
given by tiro commentary.”—Wilson, 

Tim Itishi is Tapurmurdhuu (Fiery-head), son of Brihaspati. The- 
metro is TriBhtup. 

2 Nardsansa: Agni. Fraydja: part of the introductory ceremony 
nt a Soma saorifieo. Amydja : a secondary or final sacrifice. 

3 Uc whose head is fiaminj: bapurmdrdhan: Brihaspati or Agni. 



• HV 


Y UN 135.J 


THE RIG VEDA. 


413 


PL\ MN CLXXXIII. The Sacrificcr, Etc. 
I saw thee meditating in thy spirit what sprang from 
fervour and hath thence developed. 

Bestowing offspring here, bestowing riches, spread 
in thine offspring, thou who cravest children. 

2 I saw thee pondering in thine heart, and praying 

that in due time thy body might be fruitful. 

Come as a youthful woman, rise to meet me: spread 
in thine offspring, thou who cravest children. 

3 In plants and herbs, in all existent beings I have 

deposited the germ of increase. 

All progeny on earth have I engendered, and sons 
for women who will be hereafter. 

hymn clxxxv. Aditi . 

Grf.at, unassailable must be the heavenly favour of 
three gods, 

Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman. 

2 O’er these, neither at home nor yet abroad on path¬ 

ways that are strange, 

The evil-minded foe hath power : 

3 Nor over him, the man on whom the sons of Aditi 

bestow 

Eternal light that he may live. 


™ e . ? r « the Sacrificer, his Wife, and the Hotar-priest. The 

Flishi is : raja van (Prolific), the son of Prajapati. The metre is Trishtup. 

1 According to S&yana, the wife is the speaker of the first stanza 
' j 10 Jajamana or sacrififfer of the second, and the Hotar-priest of tho. 
third. Professor Ludwig considers Agni to be the speaker of the 
whole hymn. What sprang from fervour: the results of ardent 
devotion or tapas . 


3 The Hotar-priest regards himself as the procreator of all livin>» 
being., through the efficacy of the sacrifices which ho performs”: 
mats&dhyena ydjena sarvasyofyatteraham sarvajanaheturbkavdmi.— 
Say ana. 


The Rishi is Satyadhriti, the son of Varuna. The deities are the 
Adityas rather than their mother Aditi. The metre is Gay am. 





misTfy 


THE IIYMXS OF 



414 , 


<SL 

[BOOK X 


HYMN CXXXVL va yu . 

Filling our hearts with health and joy, may "V &ta 
breathe his balm on us : 

May he prolong our days of life. 

2 Thou art our father, Vflta, yea, thou art a brother 

and a friend : 

So give us strength that we may live. 

3 The store of Amrit laid away yonder, O Vdta, 

in thine home,— 

Give us thereof that we may live. 


HYMN CLXXXVII. Agni. 

To Agni send I forth my song, to him the Bull 
of all the folk : 

go may he bear us past our foes. 

2 Who from the distance far away shines brilliantly 

across the wastes: 

So may he bear us past our foes. 

3 The Bull with brightly-gleaming flame who utterly 

consumes the fiends: 

So may he bear us past our foes. 

4 Who looks on all existing things and comprehends 

them with his view': 

So may he bear us past our foes. 

5 Resplendent Agni, who was born in farthest region 

of the air: 

So may he bear us past our foes. 


The p,i s hi i 3 Dla, of the family of Vftta (Wiad). The metre is 
G&yatrL _ 


The Ttishi in VatBft, son of Agni. The metre is (I&yatri 

1 Bull • chief and lord, as the indispensable household fire. 

2 Across the wastes: as the fire that burns the jungle and prepares 
the around for cultivation. 

6 Jn farthest region of ihe air: or beyond the firmament, as 
Sun. 





tiWlST/fy. 


THE RIG VEDA. 



YMN 190.] 



HYMN CLXXXVIII. Agni. 

Now send ye Jfitavedas forth, send hitherward the 
vigorous steed 

To seat him on our sacred grass. 

2 I raise the lofty eulogy of Jjttavedits, raining boons, 
With sages for his hero band. 

3 With flames of Jatavedas which carry oblation to 

the gods, 

May he promote our sacrifice. 

HYMN CLXXXIX. sfirya. 

This spotted Bull hath come, and sat before the 
mother in the east, 

Advancing to his father heaven. 

2 As expiration from his breath, his radiance penetrates 

within: 

The Bull shines out through all the sky. 

3 Song is bestowed upon the Bird : it rules supreme 

through thirty realms 
Throughout the days at break of morn. 

HYMN CXC. ' Creation. 

From fervour kindled to its height eternal Law and 
Truth were born: 

Thence both the day and night, and thence the ■ 
billowy flood of sea arose. 

The Rishi is Syeua, the son'of Agni. The metre is Gayatvi. 

The deity is alternatively Surparajni, the Serpent-queen, Kadnl, 
who is also the Rishi of the hymn. The metre is Gayatri. 

1 This spotted Bull: the Sun. The mother: the earth, 

3 Tin Bird: the Sun. His morning song, representing prayer, ia 
supreme through all the divisions of tho world, or the thirty days of 
the month. 


The Rishi is Aghamarehana, son of Madhuchchhaudib, 

1 Fr^m. fervour: from the tupas, devotional ardour or asceticism 
of Brahma, according to Saynna. But the meaning here may ho 
‘from warmth.’ See X. 129. 3 and Note. Thence: from that 
forvouiy or warmth. 





miST/fy 


THE RIG7EDA. [BOOK X. 

2 From that same billowy flood of sea the Year was 

afterwards produced, 

Ordainer of the days and nights, lord over all who 
close the eye. 

3 Dhatar, the great Creator, then formed in due order 

Sun and Moon. 

He formed in order heaven and earth, the regions of 
the air, and light. 

HYMN CXCI. Agni. 

Thou, mighty Agni, gatherest up all that is precious 
for thy friend. 

Bring us all treasures as thou art enkindled in 
libation’s place. 

2 Assemble, speak together : let your minds be all of 

one accord, 

As ancient gods unanimous sit down to their 
appointed share. 

3 The place is common, common the assembly, 

common the mind, so be their thought united. 

A common purpose do I lay before you, and worship 
with your general oblation. 

4 One and the same be your resolve, and be your minds 

of one accord. 

United be the thoughts of all that all may happily 
agree. 


The deity or subject of stanzas 2-4 is SanyiUnam, Agreement or 
Unanimity in assembly. The JRiahi is Samvanaua. The metro is 
Trisbtup in stanza 3, and Anushtup in the rest, 

3 Common the assembly: this samiti appears to have been a general 
assembly of the people on some important occasion, such as the 

election of a king. 







WHlST/f), 



APPENDIX. 

Page 218, Hymn LXI. 

subjoin a Latin version of stanzas 5—8, and bor¬ 
row Professor Wilson’s translation of stanza 9. 

5 Membrum suum virile, quod protentum fuerat, mas 

Hie retraxit. Rursus illud quod in juvenem filiam 
sublatum fuerat, non aggressurus, ad se retrabit. 

6 Quum jam in medio congressu, semiperfecto opere, 

amorem in puellam pater impleverat, ambo dis- 
cedentes seminis paulum in terrae superficie in 
sacrorum sede effusum emiserunt. 


t Quum pater suam filiam adiverat, cum e& congressus 
suum semen supra terram effudit. Turn Dii benigtii 
precem (brahma) progenuerunt, et Vastoslipatim, 
legum sacrarum custodem, formaverunt. 


i he whole passage is difficult and obscure, and stanza 9 is uuintel- 
p g f regard to the myth of Prajapati and his daughter, 

Professor Max Muller says .—“When K-umirila is hard pressed by 
his opponents about the immoralities of his gods, he answers with all 
e tieedom of a comparative mytliologist: “It is fabled that 
i rajapati, the Lord of Creation, did violence to his daughter. But 
wln, t does it mean % Praj&pati, the Lord of Creation, is a name of 
the sun, and he is called so, because he protects all creatures. His 
( aughter Ushas is the dawn. And when it is said that he was in love 
wtih her, this only means that, at sunrise, the sun runs after the 
dawn, the dawn being at the same time called the daughter of the 
3»n, because she rises when he approaches "."—History o f Anc. Sans 
Literature, pp. 529, 530. See Muir, 0. S. Texts, IV. pp. 46, 47, where 
stanzas 4—7 are translated. 

lo/l ^ st °' hpaiim: Vastoshpati, the guardian of the house; 'the 

‘ ° . the heart} ‘ (“f sacrifice).’—Wilson. The word may be in 

apposition with brahma, prayer. 






APPENDIX. 




8 Tile tauro similis spumam in certamine jactavit; tunc 

discedeus pusillanimis hue profectus est. Quasi 
dextro pede claudus processit, “ inutiles fuerunt 
ill! inei complexus/’ ita locutus. 

9 “The fire, burning the people, does not approach 

quickly (by day): the naked (Rdkshasas approach) 
not Agni by night; the giver of fuel, and the 
giver of food, he, the upholder (of the rite), 
is born, overcoming enemies by his might. 


Page 332, Hymn CVI. 

I borrow Professor Wilson’s translation of the 
omitted stanzas. 

5 “You are like two pleasantly moving well-fed (hills) 

like Mitra and Varuiya, the two bestowers of feli¬ 
city. veracious, possessors of infinite wealth, happy, 
like two horses plump with fodder, abiding in the 
firmament, like two rams (are you) to be nourished 
with sacrificial food, to be cherished (with oblations). 

6 “ You are like two mad elephants bending their fore¬ 

quarters and smiting the foe, like the two sons of 
Nitosa destroying (foes), and cherishing (friends); 
you are bright as two water-born (jewels), do you, 
who are victorious, (render) my decaying mortal 
body free from decay. 

7 “ Fierce (Aswins), like two powerful (heroes), you 

enable this moving, perishable mortal (frame) to 
cross over to the objects (of its destination) as 


9 The fire: according to Sayaya, K&kshftsas who con8U.no like fire. 
[Sayaya, “like two mighty heroes.”] Editor’s Note. 





MINI ST^ 


APPENDIX. 






over water; extremely strong, like the Riblius, 
y 0U1[i chariot attained its destination swift as the. 
wind, it pervaded (everywhere), it dispensed riches. 

8 “ With your bellies full of the Soma, like two sauce¬ 
pans, preservers of wealth, destroyers of enemies, 
(you are) armed with hatchets, moving like two 
flyiag (birds) with forms like the moon; attaining 
success through the mind, like two laudable beings, 
(you are) approaching (the sacrifice).” 


Page 400, Hymn CLXII. 

Mai Aghi, yielding to our prayer, the Rakshas- 
slayer, drive away 

The malady of evil name that hath beset thy labour¬ 
ing womb. 

2 Agni, concurring in the prayer, drive off the eater 

of thy flesh, 

The malady of evil name that hath attacked thy 
babe and womb. 

3 That which destroys the sinking germ, the settled, 

moving embryo, 

That which will kill the babe at birth,—even this 
will we drive far away. 

4 That which divides thy legs that it may lie between 

the married pair, 

That penetrates and licks thy side,—even this will 
we exterminate. 

5 What rests by thee in borrowed form of brother, 

lover, or of lord, 


The aubjeM ia the Prevention of Abortion. The Riahi ia Rakaholia 
(Slayer of llikaliasas), son of BrahmA. Tho metre is Anuahtap. 

Stanzas 1, 2 are directed against diseases, and 3—C against evil 
spirits which attack women who are about to become mothers . 





IV 


APPENDIX. 


And would destroy thy progeny,—oven this will we 
exterminate. 

6 That which through sleep or darkness hath deceived 
thee and lies down by thee, 

And will destroy thy progeny,—even this will we 
exterminate. 

Page 400, Hymn CLXIII. 

From both thy nostrils, from thine eyes, from both 
thine ears and from thy chin, 

Forth from thy head and brain and tongue I drive 
thy malady away. 

2 From the neck-tendons and the neck, from the 

breast-bones and from the spine, 

From shoulders, upper, lower arms, I drive thy 
malady away. 

3 From viscera and all within, forth from the rectum, 

from the heart, 

From kidneys, liver, and from spleen, I drive thy 
malady away. 

4 From thighs, from knee-caps, and from heels, and 

from the forepart of the feet, 

From hips, from stomach, and from groin, I drive 
thy malady away. 

5 From what is voided from within, and from thy hair, 

and from thy nails, 

From all thyself from top to toe, I drive thy malady 
away. 

6 From every member, every hair, disease that comes 

in every joint, 

From all thyself, from top to toe, I drive thy malady 
away. 

The deity or subject is the cure of Yakshma or phthisis or con- 
Eumption. The Rishi is Vivrilut, son of Kftsyapa. The metre is 
Anush tup. 





appendix. V 


Page 400, Hymn CLXXXIV. 

May Vishnu form and mould the womb, may Twash- 
tar duly shape the forms, 

Praj&pati infuse the stream, and Dhatar lay the 
germ for thee. 

2 O Sinivali, set the germ, set thou the germ, Saras- 

vati: ) k 

May the twain gods bestow the germ, the Asvins 
crowned with lotuses. 

3 That which the Asvins twain rub forth with the 

attrition-sticks of gold,— 

That germ of thine we invocate, that in the tenth 
month thou mayst bear. 


The deities are those mentioned in the hymn. The Rishi is Twash- 
tar, or Vishnu, the son of Prajapati. The metre is Anushtup. 

2 Sinivdli; a lunar goddess, who aids the birth of children. Cp. 
II. 32. 6. 



\\ 




. • misTfy 


i 




INDEX OF HYMNS. 

BOOK IX. (Continued.) 

I Riski. Petty. Metre. 

fa? _ -I, 

GI Amahiyn. Soma Pavamaua. Gayatn. 

62 Jamadagui. . . 

G3 Nidhruvr. .. 

64 Kasyapa. . . 

65 Bhrigu or Jatnad- .. .. 

agni. 

66 The VaikMnasas. Soma PavamSvna. Agni. Gayatri. 18 Anushtup. 

67 Bbaradvflja. Kas- Pavamana Soma. Pa- Gayatrt. 16-18 Dvipada 

vapa. Gotanm. vamana Puahan. Ag- Gayatri. ol. 
Atri. Visvamit- ni.Savitar. All-gods. Anushtup. 30 Puttn- 
ra. Jamadagni. Praise of Students. ushnih- 
Vasisbtha. Pa- 


vitra. 

68 Tatsapri. Soma Puvamana. Jagatl. 10 Trishtup. 

G9 Hiranyastupa. . Jagati. 9, 10 I lishtup. 

70 Renn. . Jagati. 10 Trishtup. 

71 Rishabha. Jagatt. 9 Trishtup.. 

72 Harimanta. Jagatt. 

73 Pavitra. 

74 Kaksbtvatt. Jagati. 8 Trishtup. 

75 Kavi. Jagati. 


76 . . . 

77 .. '. . 

78 . .. . 

79 .. . . 

80 Vasu. . . 

gl . .. Jagati. 5 Trislitupv 

82 . .. . 

83 Pavitm. . Jagati. 

84 Prajapati. . . . 

85 Vena. . . Jagati. 11,12 Trishtup. 











































INDEX OF HYMNS. 


o- 

5 Jitshi. Deity. Metre. 

6 
fcj 

86 The Akrishta Ma- . Jagati. 

ehaa. TheSikata 
Nivavaris. The 
PrisniAjas. At- 
ri. Gritsamada. 

87 Tjfsana. . Triahtup. 

88 ...'. . .. 

89 . . . 

90 Vasishtha. Soma Pavamana. Triahtup. 


91 Kasyapa. . .. 

92 ....'.. . . 

93 Nodhas. . . 

94 Kanva. . .. 

95 Praskanva. .. . 

96 Pratardana. .. . 

97 Vasishtha. Indra- . . 

pramati. Manyu. 

U pa manyu. 

Vy&ghrapa d. 

Sakti. Karna- 
srut. Mrilika, 

Vaaukra. l J ara- • 

Bara. Kutsa. 

98 Ambarisba and . Anushtup. 11 Brihatt. 

Eijisvan, 

99 The Eebbasunus.. Anushtup. 1 Brihati. 

100 . . Anushtup. 

101 Andhlgu. Yayati. Anushtup. 2,5 Gayatri. 

Nahusha. Manu, 

Prajapati, 

102 Trita Aptya. .. Ushnih. 

103 Dvita Aptya. . .. 

104 Parvata and .. . 

Narada, or the 

Sikhandinfs 

(Apsarasas). 

105 Farvata and Na- . .. 

tads. 

106 Agni. C'hakshush. .. 

Manu, 







































INDEX OF HYMNS. 


IX 


S JRishi. Deity. 

1 07 Seven Rishis. . 

108 Gauriviti. Sakti. .. . 

A * 

Uru. Rijiavan. 

A 

Urdhvasadman. 

Kritayasa. Ri- 
nanchaya. 

109 Agnisof Sacrifice. Soma Pavamana. 

110 Tryaruna and 

Trasadasyu. 

111 Ananata. 

112 Sisu. 

113 Kasyapa. 

114 ....’.. 


1 Trita Aptya. 

2 . 

3 . 

4 . 

5 . 

€ . 

7 . 

8 Trisira. 

9 Trisira, or Sindhu- Waters. 

dvipa. 

10 Yama. YamS.^ Yama. Yami. 

11 Havirclhana Angi. Agni. 

12 .;. . 

13 Vivasvan. The Two Carts. 

14 Yama. Yama. The deities men¬ 

tioned. The Fathers. 
The Hounds, sons of 
Sarama. 


BOOK X. 
Agni. 


Agni. Indra. 


Metre. 

Pragatha. 3, lfiDvipada 
Viraj. 8, 10 Brihati. 
1-12 Kakup aud Sato- 
brihati alternately. 
13 Gayatri Yavama- 
dhya. 14, 16 Sato- 
brihati. 15 Kakup. 

Dripada Viraj. 

l-3Anushtup Pipilika- 
madhya.4-9 Urdhva- 
brihati. 10-12 Viraj. 

Atyashti. 

Pankti. 


Trishtup. 


Gayatri. 5 Vardhama 
n.l 7 Pratishthd. 8,9 
Auushtup. 

Trishtup. 

Jagati. 7-9 Trishtup. 

Trishtup. 

Trishtup. 5 Jagati. 

Trishtup. 13, 14, 16 
Auushtup. 15 Bri- 
bati. ' 


































MiNisr^ 


INDEX OF HYMNS. 



£ Jiiski. 

15 Sankha. 

1G Damana. 


Deity. 


The Fathers, 
Agni. 


17 Devasrava. 


18 Sankusuka. 


19 Mathita, Bhrigu, 

or Cbyavana. 

20 Vimada, or Vasu* 

krit. 

21 . 

22 . 


2a . 

21 . 

25 . ... 

2G . 

27 Vasukra. 

28 Vosulrra’s Wife. 

lndra. Vasukra. 

29 Vasukra, 

30 Kavasha. 

31 . 

32 . 

33 . 


3*1 Kavasha, or 
Akslia. 

35 Luaa. 

36 . 

37 Abhitapa. 


Saranyu. PGshan. 
Sarasvati. Waters. 
Soma. 

Mrityu. Dhatar. Twash- 
tar. The Pitrimedha. 
Praj&pati. 

Waters, or Cows. 

Agni and Soma. 
Agni. 


lndra. 


Indra. Asvins. 

Soma. 

Pushan. 

Indra. 

Indra. Vasukra. 
Indra. 

Waters, 1 or Child 
of Waters* • 
Visvedcvas. 

Indra. 

Visvedcvas. Indra. 
Kurnsravana. 
Upamasrava. 
Dice. Agriculture, 

Visvedevas, 


Surya, 


<SL 


Metre . 

Trishtup. 11 Jagati. 
Trishtup. 11-14 Anu¬ 
sh tup. 

Trishtup. 14 Anushtup. 
13 Anushtup or 
Purastadbrihati. 
Trishtup. 11 Prastara- 
pankti. 13 Jagati. 14 
Anushtup. 

Anushtup. 6 GayatrL 

Gayatri. 1 Ekapada 
Viraj. 2 Anushtup. 

9 Viraj. 10 Trishtup. 
Astarapankti. 
Purastadbrihati. 5, 7, 9 
Anushtup. 15 Trish¬ 
tup. 

Jagati. 1, 7 Trishtup. 

5 Abhisarim. 
Astarapankti, 4-G 
Anushtup. 
Astarapankti. 
Anushtup, 1, 4 Ushnih, 
Trishtup. 


1 -5 Jagati. 6-9 Trishtup. 
1 Trishtup. 2 Briliati. 
3 Sato by i hath 4-9 
Gayatri. 

Trishtup. 7 Jagati. 
Jagati 13,14 Trishtup^ 


Jagati. 10 Trishtup 






















MINlSr^ 



INDEX OF HYMNS. 


S ffiski. 

38 Indra Mushkavan. 

39 Ghosha. 

40 .. 

41 Suhastya. 

42 Krishna. 

43 ............ 

44 . 

45 Vatsapri. 

4G . 

47 Saptagu. 

48 Indra Vaikuntha. 

49 . 

50 .. 


51 Agni Sauchika. 

52 . 

53 Agni Sauchika. 

Gods. 

54 Briliadukthu. 

55 . 

56 . 

57 Ban dim Sruta- 

bandhu, Vipra- 
baudhu. 

58 .. 

59 .. 


60 The Ganp&yanas 

& their Mother. 

61 Nabhanedishtha. 

62 . 


Deity. 

Indra. 

Asvitis. • 


India. 


Agni. 


Indra Vaikuntha, 


Agni. Gods. 
Gods. 

Agni. Gods. 
Indra. 


Visvedevas. 


The Spirit. 

Nirriti. Soma. Asuuiti. 
'The deities men¬ 
tioned. Heaven and 
Earth. Indra. 

Asamati. India. Su- 
bandbua Recall to 
Life. The Hands. 

Visvedevas. 

Vi§vedevas, or Augira- 
sa,s. Visvedevas. Sa- 
varni’s Liberality. 



XI 


Metre. 

Jagati. 

Jagati. 14 Trishtup. 
Jagati. 


Trishtup. 

Jagati. 10,11 Trishtup. 
Jagati. 1-3, 10, 11 
Trishtup. 

Trishtup. 


Jagati. 7, 10,11 Trish¬ 
tup. 

Jagati. 2, 11 Trishtup. 
I, 2, G, 7 Jagati. 8, 4 
Abhisarini. 5 Trish¬ 
tup. 

Trishtup. 


Trishtup. 6, 7, 9-11 
Jagati. 

Trishtup. 


Trishtup. 4, 6 Jagati. 
Gayatri. 

Anushtup. 

Trishtup. 8 Pankti. 

9 Mahapunkli. 10 
Paukty uttarfi,. 

Anushtup. 1-5 Gayatri. 
8, 9 Pankti. 

Trishtup. 

1-4 Jagati. 5, 8, b 
Anushtup. 6 llrihati. 
7 Satobrihati. 10 
G&yatri, 11 Trishtup. 




























;ii 


£ 

£ 

j Ttishi. 

£ 


63 

Gaya. 

64 


65 

Vasukarna. 

66 


67 

Ayasya. 

68 


69 

Sumitra, 

70 


71 

Brihaspati. 

72 

Brihaspati, or 


Aditi. 

73 

Gauriviti. 

74 


75 

Siudhuksbit. 

76 

Jaratkarna. 

77 

Syfimarasrai. 

78 


79 

Agni, or Sapti. 

80 

Agni. 

81 

Visvakarmau, 

82 


83 

Manyu. 

84 


85 

Surya. 


86 

Indra. Indram. 


Vrishakapi. 

87 

Payu. 

.88 

Murdhanvaii. 

89 

Renu. 

90 

Narayana. 


INDEX OF HYMNS. 

Deity . 

Visvedevas. Pathya 
Svasti. 

Visvedevas. 


Brihaspati, 


Agni. 

Apris. 

Juanam. 

Gods. 

Indra. 


The Rivers. 

The Press- stones. 
Maruts. 


Agni. 


Vievakannan, 


Manyu. 

Soma. Surya’s Bridal, 
Gods. Soma and Arka, 
The Moon. Benedic¬ 
tions. Surya, 

Indra. Indranl. 

Vrishakapi. 

Agni RakshoM. 

Surya and Vaisvanara 
Indra and Soma. 
Purusha. 


Metre. 

Jagatl. 16, 17 Trishtup. 
15 Trishtup or 
Jagati. 

Jagati. 12,16,17 Trish- 
tup. 

Jagati. 15 Trishtup, 


Trishtup. 


Trishtup. 1,2 Jagati. 
Trishtup. 

Trishtup. 9 Jagati. 
Anushtup. 

Trishtup. 


Jagati. 


Trishtup. 5 Jagati. 
1,3,4,8 Trishtup. 2,5-7 
Jagati. 

Trishtup. 


Trishtup. 1 Jagati. 

1-3 Trishtup. 4-7 Jagati. 

Anushtup. 14, 19-21 
23,24, 26, 36, 37, 
44 Trishtup. 18, 37, 
43 Jagati. 34 Uro- 
bribatl. 

Pankti. 

Trishtup. 22,25 Anush" 
tup. 

Trishtup. 


Auushtup.16 Trishtup. 


























INDEX OF HYMNS. 


* 


xi ri 



1 

Riski . 

Deity 

91 

Aruna. 

Agni. 

92 

SarySta. 

Visvedevas. 

93 

Tanva. 



94 

Arbuda. 

The Press-stones. 

95 

Pururavas. Urvasi. 

Urvasi. Pururavas. 

96 

Baru,or Sarvahari. Indra’s Horses. 

97 

Bhishaj. 

Medicinal Herbs. 

98 

Devapi, 

Gods. 

99 

Vanira. 

Indra. 

100 

Duvasyu, 

Visvedevas. 

101 

Budha. 

Visvedevas, or Priests, 

102 

Mudgala. 

Indra, or the Mace. 

103 

Apratiratha. 

Indra. Brihaspati. Apva. 
Maruts. 

104 

Ash taka. 

Indra. 

105 

Durmitra or 
Sumitra.. 


106 

Bhutansa. 

Asvtns. 

107 

Divya,orDa1<shina. Guerdon. 

108 

Sarama, Panis, 

Sarama. Panis.- 

109 

Juhfi. 

Visvedevas. 

110 

Jamadagni or 
llama. 

Apris. 

111 

Ashtr&dansbtra. 

Indra. 


112 N a b h a h p r a ■ .. . 

bhedana. 

113 Sataprabhedana. . 

1a4 SadhrijOrQbarma. Visvedevas. 

115 Upastuta. Agni. 

116 Agnijruta or Agni- Indra, 

yupa. 

H7 Bhikshu. Liberality. 


Metre. 

Jagati. 15 Trishtup. 
Jagati. 

Praatampankti. 2, 3,13 
Anusbtup. 9 Pankti. 
11 Nyankusarini. 
15 Purastadbrihati. 
Jagati. 5, 7, 14 Trish¬ 
tup. 

Trishtup. 

Jagati. 12,13 Trishtup. 

Anusbtup. 

Trishtup. 


Jagati. 12 Trisbtup. 
Trishtup, 4,6 Cayatri. 

5 Brihati. 9,12 Jagati. 
Trishtup. 1, 3, 12 Bri- 
had 

Trishtup. 13 Anusbtup. 
Trishtup. 

Ushnih. 2,7 Pipilika- 
madhya. 11 Trishtup. 
Trishtup. 

Trishtup. 4 Jagati. 
Trishtup. 

Trishtup. 6,7Anushtup, 
Trishtup. 


Jagati. 10 Trishtup. 
Trishtup. 4 Jagati. 
JiiGrati. 8 Trishtup. 9 
Sakvari. 

Trishtup. 

Trishtup. 1, 2 Jagati. 









WHlSTffy 



£ 


118 

119 

120 
121 
122 

123 

124 


125 

12G 


127 

128- 

129 

130 

131 

132 


133 

134 

135 

136 


137 

138 

139 

140 


INDEX OF HYMNS. 


Rhhi. 

Urukshaytf. 

Lava. 

Byihaddivcu 

Hiranyagarbha. 

Chitramaha. 

Vena. 

Agni. Agni, Vani¬ 
na, and Soma. 

Vak. 

Kulmalabarhisha, 
or Anhomuch. 
Kusika, or Batri. 
Vihavya. 

Trujapati Para- 
mesh^him 
Yajiia. 

Sukitti. 

Sakaputa. 


Siid&s. 

M&ndhfitar, 

Godbft. 

Kumara. 

Seven Munis: Juti. 

Yatajuti. Vipra- 
juti. Vrishana- 
ka, Etasa. Ris- 
yn&ringa. 

The Seven Risbis. 
Anga. 

Visvavnsu. 

Agni Pavaka. 


.Deity . 

Agni Rakslioha. 
Indra as Lava. 

Indra. 

Ka. 

Agni. 

Vena. 

Agni. Indra. 

Vak. 

Vievedevas* 

Night. 

Visvedevasv 

Creation. 

Creation. 

India. AsViu3. 
Heaven and Earth. 
Asviirs. Mifcra and 
Varuna. 

Indra. 

Indra. 

Yama. 

The Kesias. 


Visvedevas. 

Indra 

Sfirya. Vi&vavasu. 
Agni, 


141 Agni T&pasft. Visvedevas, 


<SL 

Metre. 

Gayatri. 


Trishtup. 

Jagati. 1, 5 Trishtup. 

Trishtup. 

Trishtup. 7 Jagat\ 

Trishtup. 2 Jagati. 

Uparishtadbrihati. 8 
Trishtup. 

Gayatri. 

Trishtup. 9 Jagat!. 

Trishtup. 

Trishtup. 1 Jagati. 

Trishtup. 4 Anushtup. 

1 Nyank usarini. 2, t 
Prastarapankti. 3-5 
Viradrupa. 7 Maha- 
satobrihati. 

1-3 Sakvarf. 4-6 Maha- 
pankti. 7 Trishtup. 

Mahapankti. 7 Pankti. 

Anushtup. 


Anushtup. 

Jagati. 

Trishtup. 

1 Viehtftrapankti. 2-4 
Satoiirihati. 5 Upa* 
rishtajjyotis. 6 Triah' 
tup. 

Anushtup. 





MINlSr^ 


INDEX OF HYMNS. 



R 

ft 

pi ski. 

•<3 

142 

Jaritar. Drona. 
Sarisrikva. 
Stambamitra. 

143 

Atri. 

144 

A 

Suparna, Urdhva- 
krisaua. 

145 

Indrani, 

14G 

DevamunL 

147 

Suvedas. 

148 

Prithu Vainyfu 

149 

Archan. 

150 

Mrilika. 

151 

Sraddha. 

152 

Sasa. 

153 

Indra’s Mothers. 

154 

Yami. 

155 

Sirimbitha 

156 

Ketu. 

157 

Bhuvana, or 

Sadbana. 

158 

Chakshus. 

159 

Sacht Paulomi. 

160 

Parana. 

161 

Yakshmana: ...a. 

162 

Raksholia. 

163 

Vivriba, 

164 

Prachetds. 

165 

Kapota. 

166 

Rishabha. 

1G7 

Visvamitra and 
Jamadagni, 

108 

Anil a. 


Deity. 

Agni. 

Asvins. 

Indra. 

Removal of Rival 
A rany a nt. 

Iudra. 


Savitar. 

Agui. 

Sraddha (Faith). 
India. 


State of the Dead. 
Avertingof Misfortune. 
Brahmanaspati. Vis- 
vedevas. 

Agni. 

Yisvedevas. 

Surya. 

Sachi Pauloim. 

Indra. 

Removal of Phthisis. 
Against Miscarriage. 
Removal of Phthisis. 
Dissipation of Bad 
Dreams. 

Visvedevas. 

Removal of Rivals. 

Indra. 

Vayu. 


<SL 

XV 

Metre. 

Trishtup. 1, 2 Jagati. 

7, 8 Anushtup. 

Anushtup, 

1, 3, 4 Gayatri. 2 Bri- 
hati. 5 Satobrihati. 

6 Vishtarapaukti. 
Anushtup. G Pankti, 
Anushtup. 

Jagatl 5 Trishtup. 

Trishtup, 


1-3 Bribatt. 4 Uparish 
tajjyotis or Jagati. 

5 Uparishtajjyotis. 
Anushtup. 

Gayatri. 

Anushtup, 


GAyatrl. 

Dvipada Trishtup. 

Gayatrt. 

Anushtup. 

Trishtup, 

Trishtup. 5 Anushtup. 
Anushtup. 

1, 2, 4 Anushtup. 3 
Trishtup. 6 Pankti. 
Trishtup 

Anushtup. 6 Muha- 
pankti, 

Jagati, , 

Trishtup. 








<SL 


XVI 


INDEX OF HYMNS. 


§ 

ft 

Rishi . 

Deity . 

Metre . 

tel 




169 

Sahara, 

Cows. 


170 

Vibhraj. 

Sfirya. 

Jagat!. 4 Astarapankti. 

171 

it*. 

Indra. 

Gayatri. 

172 

Samvarta. 

Ushas. 

Dvipada Viraj. 

173 

Dhruva. 

The King. 

Anushtup. 

174 

Abhivarta. 



175 

Urdhvagrava. 

The Press-stones. 

Gayatri. 

176 

Sunu. 

Ribhus. Agui. 

Anushtup. 2 Gayatrf. 

177 

Patanga. 

Mayabheda. 

1 Jagat i. 2, 3 Trishtup. 

178 

Arishtanemi. 

Tark shy a. 

Trishtup. 

179 

Sibi. Pratardana. 

Indra. 

1 Anushtup. 2, 3 Trish¬ 


Vttsunaan&s. 


tup. 

180 

Java. 


Trishtup. 

181 

Pratha. Sapratba. 

Visvedevaa. 



Ghannsi. 



182 

Tap urmurd hail. 

Brihaspati. 


183 

Prajavan. 

The Sacrificer. H is 




Wife. The flotar. 


184 

Twashtar or 

Benediction of the 

Anushtup. 


Vishnu. 

Embryo. 


185 

Satyadbriti. 

Aditi. 

Gayatri. 

186 

Ula. 

VAyu. 


187 

Vatsa. 

Agni. 


188 

Syeua. 

Agni Jatavedas. 


189 

Sarpavajni. 

Sarparajhi, or Surya. 


190 

Agharnarahana. 

Creation. 

Anushtup. 

191 

Samvauana, 

Agni. Unanimity. 

Anushtup. 3 Trishtup. 













INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


Abhitapas, 176. 

Abhtvarta, 407. 

Acesines, 251. 

Adhvaryu, 62, 69, 136, 
138, 184, 245, 295. 

Adhmryus, 78,108, 162- 
164, 203. 

Adi-Purusha, 290, 369. 

Aditi, 27, 32, 37, 45, 71, 
81,113,122,126, 155, 
174, 224-231, 233, 

242, 245-247, 255, 

284, 290, 297, 320, 
322, 413. 

Adityas, 2,106,173,174, 
197, 208, 225-227, 

230, 231, 233, 235, 
256, 266, 314, 327, 
362, 364, 367, 383. 

Agastya, 215. 

AghA, 268. 

Agni, passim. 

Agnidh, 108, 184, 294. 

Agnihotra(m), 203, 222. 

Agnis, 98. 

Agnishvdttas, 132. 

Aguisktoma, 344. 

Agrayana, 34. 

Agriculture, 169, 171. 

Ahavantya, 111. 

Ahi, 195, 227, 237, 309, 
340. 

Akirhudhnya, 227, 234, 
297. 

Ahtfuva, 386. 

Ahum, 83. 


Aikskv&ka, 211. Apsarasas, 42, 90, 

Ail,i, 308. 305, 306, 359, 377, 

4/<v262. . v \ 378, 

Aja-Ekapdd, 227, 232, 'Ap$u, 91. 

234, 349. ApHya,- 117', 354. 

Aldyya , 23. Apvd, 326, 327. 

All-gods, 168, 225,362. Aramati, 38, 230, 296. 
Amahiyu, 1, 350. Aranydni, 387. 

Amnt, 29, 37, 38, 97, Araru, 31S. 

100, 124, 126, 163, Ardyl, 395. 

205, 357, 381, 414. Arlruda, 237, 301, 339. 
Andiuxta, 102. Atchan, 391. 

Ancestral Spirits. See Archer, 184. 

Fathers. Arjlka, 104. 

Anghdrya, 267. • Arjikas, 16. 

Angiras, 1, 94,' 128, ArjUtiyd, 251. 

194, 223, 235, 237, ArjunU, 268. 

262, 298. - Arka, 333. 

Angirasas, 5, 18,' 54, Arshtishena, 315. 

102, 128, 155, 156, Aruna, 293. 

210, 218, 219, 222, Arya, Aryas, 178, 186, 
223, 236, 243, 250, 232, 240, 263, 278, 


257, 335, 336, 339, 
379. 

Ansa, 106, 247. 
Anumati, 214, 403. 
Anushlup, 369. 
Anuydjas, 202, 412 
Apdmnapdt, 161. 

Ape, 275. 

Apndna, 345. 
Apratiratha, 326. 
Aprt, 241. 

Aprts, 241, 337. 


323, 380. 

Aryaman, 13, 45, 62, 
98, 106, 164, 174, 
183, 220, 228, 230, 
231, 237, 247, 270, 
272, 273, 287, 296, 
299, 364, 382, 413.’ 

Aryan, 66, 123, 187, 
192, 197, 204, 215, 
319. 

Asamdti, 211, 215, 

Ash taka, 328. 


Apsaras, 122,146, 304, Asikni, 251. 
359. Asmanvatt, 205. 


:ii 


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


Asuntti, 125, 132, 133, 164, 173, 180, 225, 313, 314, 319, 327, 

213 214. 229, 237, 247, 270, 335, 336, 337, 340, 

Asura, 34, 38, 83, 119, 272, 296, 299, 382. 363, 367, 369, 382, 

165, 204, 208, 210, Bhajerotha, 215. 383, 412. 

235, 296, 301, 310, Bharadvdja, 20,65,81, Brihati , 369. 

316, 318, 372, 380. 93,370,392. Bull (Soma), 27, 46, 

Asuras, 31, 48, 204, BhArati, 214, 242, 338. 67, 1 2, 79, 122,425. 

262,361. Bhishaj, 311 . - (Indra), 154 , 158 , 

Asuri, 193. Bhrdja, 267. 197, 297, 315, 328, 

Jsvaghna, 221. Bhrigu, 14, 87, 240. 339, 347. 

Asvaldyanci , 108, 138. Bhrigus, 128, 155, - (Agni), 115, 143, 

Asvattha, 165, 201, 311. 181, 191, 193, 297, 165, f>57, 414. 

Asvins, 45, 61,108, 135, 357. - (Varum), 122. 

147, 150, 160, 166, Bkujyu, 179,182,232. - (the Sun), ±25.^ 

172-174,179-184,203, Bird, the (the Sun), - (rain-cloud), 234. 

214, 217, 218, 227, 111, 208,329, 409. - (thunderbolt),2W1, 

232, 233, 248, 259, Brahma, 117, 353. 325. 

268, 269, 271, 298, Brahmd, 218,336,337, Bulls (Press-stones), 
299,’ 331,* 332, 367, 340, 355. ^ 302. 

3 Y j Brahmach&rin y 337. 

Atharvan, 143,195, 280, Brahman, 70,103,108, Ca»ta, f(Mr 292. 

,„ 7 351 159, 203, 223, 245, Chahhush, 91. 

AaJmm, 128. 255, 272, 294, 333, CKcrndmlMgA, 251. 

Mharmveda, 119, 39*. 336, 337, 340, 348, CW-.,251 

Atithigu, 196. 383. Chef PrseM, 242. 

Atithigva, 196. Brahmans, 244, 267, C/annum, 343 

Atkc> 197, 317. 269, 271. Chyavam, 240. 

Atri 65 180, 259, 262, Brdhman, 285, 291, Chyavdna, 217, 218. 

370 384. 313, 316. Cleanser (Potar), 108. 

a 7 /)„l 3 ifi Brahmano.spati, 47, Cow (the Cosmic), 71. 

7 . V, 318 205, 230, -246. - (Aditi), 220. 

AvlJa 235. Brihaddiva, 354. - (Primi), 204. 

/( 135 198. Brihaddivd, 229. - -(the Earth), 373. 

Axe (Ami) 187. Brihadratka, 198. - (the Sun), 310. 

_/ thunderbolt), 298. Brikaduktha, 206,209, - (Sacrifice), 357. 

210. Cows 140, 404. 

Eandhu, 211, 213, 215. Brihatpati, 44, 46, 50, - (hymns), 2i. 

’ o 67 70, 127, 128, 137, - (months, etc.), 28- 

B T 30 g ‘ 173, 174, 186, 187, Create (Soma), 78. 

Ba ‘‘ ' ' nft on 194,227, 230, 232, - (Visvakarman), 

Bhaga, 2, 81,’ 87,98,1.06, 235-239, 243, 297, 260, 262. 



misr^ 


. 

\ . • % \ 


index of Names, etc. 

-- (iPrdjdpati), 356, Devotion, 296. 

369. . Dhdtar, 45, 106, 138, 

_ — of creators (Jhdra 247, 274, 397, 411. 

or Savitar), 367. Dhiskand, 173. 

Dhishnydh, 98, 

Ddbhtti, 343. Dhuni, 343. 

Dadhikrds, 321. Dhruva, 34. 

Dadhyach, 97, 195,197. Dice, 156, 169-17L 
Daksha, 10G, 113, 122, Dirghatamas, 150. 

228, 246, 290.. • Diti, 322. 

Dakshind, 156, 332. Divoddsa, 1, 69, 196. 
Damana, 132. Dogs of Yama, 127, 

Dames, 229, 233, 298, 129. 



305. 

Damdnds, 293. 

Ddnus, 354, 395. 

Ddsa, 145, 146, 178, 
198, 248, 263, 278, 
317,'323, 353, 380. 

Ddsas, 187, 206, 207, 
224, 240. ' 

Dasdgva, 223. 

Dasyu, 61, 66,145,198, 
248, 264, 330. 

Dasyus, 194, 195, 197, 
208,264,305,317,331. 

Dawn, 48,109,155,172, 
174, 180, 208, 227, 
285, 296, 344, 365. 

Dawns, 64, 102, 116, 
164, 172, 190, 209, 
285, 293, 294; 340. 
344, 379. 


Dragon, 195, 340, 341, 
343, 373. 

- of the' Deep, 234, 

297. 

Drona, 383. 

Drughana, 323. 

Druh, 197. 

Duhsdeu, 168. • 

Du/isima, 301. 

Dwnnitra, 331. 

Duvasyu, 318, 320. 

Dvita Apt//a, 89. 

Dyarn, 109,. 117 , 165, 
174, 176, 189, 190, 
191, 198, 218, 220, 
225, 231, 235, 236, 
255, 296, 371, 380. 

Eagles (Press-stones), 
302. 


Dawn and Night , 242. Earth, 79, 111, 139, 
Day and Night, 121. 174, 193, 214, 225, 

Death, 137, 138, 156,. 226, 250, 296, 298, 
308, 372, 401. 371. 

Deshtrt, 274. Ekadhand, 29, 163. 

• Desire, 368. Eros, 368. . 

Destruction, 121, 139, Elam, 8, 97. 

307, 400. Elams, 176. 



six 

Faith, 104, 392. 

Falcon, 33, 41,'55,123. 
Father, N the ( Visvakar- 
man), 260. 

- ( Yanvna), 360. 

•- (Yama), 375. 

- ( Heaven ), 363, 

380. 

Fathers, 47, 109, 112, 

/ 127-137, 139,-183, 

203, 204, 20.8-211, 
222, 229, 239, 256, 
262, 284, 285, 332, 
368-370, 404. 

Favour, 234. 

Fervour, 394; 

Fire, 336. 

Firmament, 45. 

Five tribes, 66, 87, 204, 
215, 351. 

Floods, 136, 174, 336. 
Fortune, 87. 

Friend, the (Mitrd), 
125. 

Funeral hymns, 127- 
130,. 135-139, 209, 
210 . 

Gambler, 169,171,186. 
Gambling-house, 170. 
Gamester, 170. 
Gandharva, 47, 51, 57, 
259, 273, 359, 364, 

381, 409. 

Gandharvas, 104, 120, 

204, 270, 273, 304, 
359, 377, 378. 

Gandharvt, 122. 

Gangd, 251. 

Ganges, 251. 

G&thd, 267. 



INDEX OX NAMES, ETO. 


<SL 


Ganpdyanas, 211. 
Gouriviti , 96. 
Gavishthira , 392. 

Gaya, 227, 230. 

Gdyatra, 245. 

Gdyatri , 32, 130, 369. 

- yavamadhyd, 96,98. 

Generator , f' Visva- 
karman), 260. 
Gharma , 343, 412. 
GAosM, 179, 181-183. 
Ghritam, 202. 

GWs (priests), 357. 
Gomatl, 251. 

G'ooc? Works, 129, 130. 
Gotama , 65, 66, 370. 
Granthmif 305. 

Guerdon, 32, 332-334. 
Gungd, 38, 

Gungus, 196. 


Herald (Hotar), 108. 
Herbs, 311. 

IK/Zs, 172. 
Hiranyagarbha, 355. 
Hiranyasttipa, 26, 391. 
i/oZy Grass, 242. 

Thoughts , 232, 

233. 

Hotar, 69, 108, 124, 
167, 202, 217, 232, 
235, 242, 245, 260, 
264, 285, 294, 295, 
301, 314, 315, 366. 
Hundred autumns, 138. 

- winters, 38, 400. 

- sp't'ings, 400. 

- - years, 400. 

Hr a dec hak s Jms, 305. 
Hydaspes, 251. 

Ikshvdku, 215. 


Jamadagnis, 5, 7. . 
Jaratkarna, 253. 
Jaritar , 383. 

Jardtha, 259. 
Jdtavedds, 23,111,112, 
114, 132-134, 189, 
201, 202, 219, 264, 
279, 280, 283, 295, 
337, 346, 382, 391. 
Jay a, 411. 

Juhil, 336, 337. 

Ka, 355. 

Kadril, 301. 
Kakshivdn, 36, 38,150, 
220, 384. 

Kalasa, 168. 

Kali,'ISO. 

Kdma, 368, 392. 
Kamadyi 2, 232. 

Kanva , 67, 90, 166, 


Harimanta, 33. 
Havirdhdna Angi, 122. 
Havirdhdnas, 126. 
Hawk (Indra), 317. 
Heaven (goddess), 214, 


lid, 4, 214, 229, 242, 
* 293, 308, 338. 
Ildsha, 161. 
Immortality (after 
death), 105, 106, 
127, 289. 


219. 

Kanvas, 346. 

Kapila , 155. 

Kapota, 40L 
Karanja , 196. 

Kasyapa , 10, 20, 64, 
65, 83, 90, 93, 106, 
370. 

Kavasha , 161. 

Kavi, 38, 40, 41, 43, 
59, 197, 317. 

Kdvya , see Usand. 
Kavyas, 128, 131. 

Kesi, 324. 

Kesins , 377. 

Kimidins, 282. 
jfmdtftfr, 184, 

A'%, zAe (Twwa^, 
125, 407. 

— (Soma), 149. 


226, 250. 

- (Dyaus), 109, 180, ——(world of the gods), 

189, 249, 372. 289, 290, 299. 

- (home of the Blest), Indra, passim. 

105, 106, 127, 129, Indrdni, 274-278. 

133, Indu, 150, 151, 385. 

Heaven and Earth, 26, Indus, 252. 

28, 37, 39, 45, 7;), 81, Irammada, 387. 

82, 89, 99, 107, 110, Ievara, 99. 

112, 116, 123-126, Ita, 405. 

163, 172, 174, 177, 

191, 193, 195, 213, Jagatl, 370. 

214, 229, 231, 233, Jdhmha, 180. 

237, 243, 255, 258, Jamadagni, 4, 14,16/ 

261, 287, 298, 300. 65, 80, 370. 





Kratu, 262. 

Krim, 182. 

Kriq&nu, 41, 228. 
Krishna , 184. 

Krityd, 271. 

Krumu, 251. 

Kshatriya , 138,201,314. 
Kubhd, 251. 

Kuhil, 38. 

Kumdra, 375. 

Kurlra, 268.' 
Kurukshetra, 16, 104. 
Kurusravana, 168. 
Kusika, 365. 

Kuisa, 160, 178, 182, 
197, 317, 331, 379. 

Laupdyanas, 211. 

Law, 10, 11, 25, 36, 55, 
85, 89, 93, 97, 100> 
116, 192, 208, 214, 
222, 223, 226, 230- 
232, 235, 256, 259, 
266, 296, 379. 

Leech (physician), 103. 
Liberality, 348-350. 
Love, 368. 

Lnaa, 172, 178. 

Madhyadha, 214. '■ 

Maghavan, 81,146,158, 
184-189; 206, 207, 
250, 288, 327, 328. 

Maghava,ns, 301,318,833. 
Magic, personified,.211, ’ 
Makha , 87-.' 

Male, thepresuUng, 271. 
Man, 289, 369. 

Manas , 211. 

Mdndhdtar, 374. 

Mams, sec Fathers, 


INDEX OP NAMES, ETC. 

Manu, 66, 71, 82, 91, 
18i, 205, 217, 222- 
225, 232, 240, 242, 
253, 278, 319. 
Manyu, 249, 263-266. 
Martchi, 10,6 4,65,2 62. 
Marriage, 266, 272. 
Mdrt&nda, 247. 
Marudvridhd, 251. 
Maruts, 2, 13, 15, 19, 
29, 37, 45, 62, 72, 
79, 90, 95, 96, 98, 
127, 146, 155, 159, 
167, 173, 174, 177, 
190, 197, 203, 204, 
206, 208, 225, 226, 
229, 230, 233, 235, 
236, 243, 247, 250, 
251, 253-257, 265, 
276, 286, 296, 297, 
299, 314, 316, 318, 
327, 341, 357, 366, 
379. 

Mdtali, 128. 

Mdtali, 128.- 
Mdtarisvan, 23, 193, 
195, ’274, 285, 330, 

336, 343. 

Mdyava, 301. 

Mehatnu, 251. 

Mitra, 2, 13,30,41,45, 

50, 5.2, -62, 64, 79, 
84, 85, 90, 95, 98, 
106, lO&i 116, 120, 

125, 126, 144, 161, 
165, 173-17.6, 201, 
2.20, 221, 225, 228- 
231, 247, 26.9, 287, 
296, 299, 314, 336, 

337, 341, 361, 36?, 
363, 370, 372, 413. 


XXI 

Moksha, 289. 

Moon, 156, 208, 227, 
266, 267, 269, 277, 
298, 299, 359, 380. 
Morning, 123,172,285i 
287, 338, 365. 
Mornings, 131, 172. 

f other (Earth), 225. 
others (Rivers), 2 29. 

- (Plants), 311. 

- (Heaven and 

Earth), 229. 
Mountains , 174, 319. 
Mrigaya, 198. 

Mrilika, 391. 

Mrityu, 137. 

Mudgala, 323, 324. 
Mudgaldni, 323-325, 
Mdjavdn, 169, 
Mundane egg, 290. 
Muni(s), 377. 
Mdradevas, 279. 
Mdrdhanv&n, 282. 
Mushkavdn, 198. 

Ndbhd, 223. 
Ndbhdnedishtha, 217, 
221 , 222 .' 
Nachiketas, 376. 
Nahus, Nahvsh, 61, 
199, 259, 317. 
Nahusha, 224. 
Nahusho.s, 64. 
Nahushyas, 64. 
Nakshatras, 266. 

Kami, 196. 

Namuchi, 248, 371. 
Ndrada, 90, 91. 
Nardsansa, 241, 297, 
Ndrdsansa, 227. 
Ndr&sanst, 267. 



INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 


Ndrdyana , 289. 
Ndrshada, 219. 
Ndsatyas, 61, 148, 179, 
184, 219, 248. 
Navogva , 97, 223. 
Navagvas , 128,218, 335. 
Navavdstva , 198. 
Neshtar , 294. 

Nidhruvi, 8. 

155, 174, 227, 
298, 338, 365. 

Night and Day, 180. 
Nirriti, 121, 139, 174, 
213, 253, 400. 
Nirritis, 344. 

Nishddas, 66, 

Nishtigrl, 322. 

Niiosa, n. 

NodhdSy 66, 67, 
Nrimedhci , 259. 
Nrimedkas, 372. 
Nrishad, 166, 219. 

Oganos, 288. 

Omnific, 260. 

One Beingy they 262. 

One Thing, 367. 
Ordainer, 138. 

(Mfcr, 62, 76, 78, 108, 
112, 113, 116, 126, 
164, 166, 208, 234, 

235, 238, 241, 248, 
259, 266, 280, 336, 
337. 

Padgribhi , 198* 

Pajrd, 46. 

Pakihet, Pakthas , 217. 
Pani, 218, 236, 396. 
Panis, 54, 102, 218, 

236, 334 336. 


Panjdb , 251. 
Panktyuttard, 213. 
Paramdtmd, 363. 
Paramesvara, 260. 
Parasurdma , 337. 
Pardvrij, 150. 

Parents, the (Ueaven 
■' and Earth), 231. 
Parijman, 296, 299. 
Parjanya , 46,104,157, 
207, 231, 233, 234, 
314, 315, 404. 
Parnaya, 196, 

ParsUy 278. 

Pdrthya, 301. 
Pamshni, 251. 
Parvata , 90, 91. 
Pathyd Svasti , 226- 
Pavamdna Soma, 1- 
106. 

- Pdshm, 45. 

—yir/ni, 19. 
PnvamdnaSy 96. 
Pavitra, 34, 47. 

279. 

61, 180. 
Phalgunis, 268. 

Pij)tl ikamadhyd , 100. 
Pipru, 318, 380. 
Pitrimedha, 137. 
Pitriyajiia, 203. 

Plants , 311-314. 

P/ari, 227, 230. 

Plenty, 67, 228. 

Potar, 108, 294. 
Pntchetds, 401. 
Prdgdtha , 93. 
Prajdpati, 17, 48, 109, 
113,155,158, 164, 
190, 208, 218, 228, 
273, 355, 369. 


<SL 


Prajdvdn, 413. 

Pramara, 156. 

Prasdstar , 294. 

Praskanva, 68. 

Pratardana , 69. 

Pratha, 411. 

Pra-uga, 369. 

Praydjas , 202, 412. 

Pi'ayei', 278. 

Press-stones, 253, 301* 
303. 

Prisana, 80. 

Prisani, 247. 

Prisni, 167, 204, 218, 
*247, 250. 

Prithavdna , 301. 

Prithi, 390. 

Prithivt, 155,174, 225, 
231. 

Prithildaka, 316. 

Priyamedhas, 249. 

Pulaha, 262. 

Pulastya, 262. 

Purandki, 228, 232, 
272. 

Pw'ohita , 314, 315. 

Puvohitau, 242. 

Pd™, 110. 

Pwwnitra, 179. 

Purdravds, 146, 304* 
808. 

Pitrus, 196. 

Purusha, 289-291, 369. 

Burusha-sdkta, 292. 

Pdsha?i, 2, 20, 2!, 45, 
61,87,98, 112,135, 
136, 150-152, 168, 
173, 213, 214, 227, 
228, 230, 233, 269, 
271, 272, 298, 314, 
380. 


misrtty. 



e 



INDEX OF NAMES, ETO. 


XX1H 


Pushana = Fuzhou, 299. Rodast, 297. 172. 

i7we?ra, 36, 217, 228- S&sa, 393. 

230, 233, 296, 299, Satakratu, 168, 374. 
317, 364, 404. SaucMka, 201, 202. 
Rudras, 208, 228, 233, SAvarni, 223, 224. 

235, 296, 299, 317, Sdvarnya, 224. 

362, 367, 377. Savitar, 20,23,45,101, 


Quail , 180, 181. 
Quoit, 248. 


Raibht, 267. 

Rainbow , 359. 

Rdjanya, 291. 

Rdkd, 38. 

Rdkshasas, 8, 10, 24, 35, 
49, 59, 68, 86, 95, 
204, 208, 214, 279- 
282, 350, 372. 
Rukshas-slayer (Agni), 
279, 350, iii. 

Rdma, 301. 

Rasd, 251,3 34, 335,355. 
Rathaproshlhas, 215. 
Rathaspatif 229, 299. 
Rdti, 234. 

RAvt, 251. 

Rebha, 180. 

Rebhasdnus, 83, 85. 
Remc, 28, 285. 

Ribhu, 146. 299. 
Ribhukshan, 146, 229, 
’ 250, 300. 

Ribhukshanas, 297, 299. 
Ribhus, 146, 180, 205, 
232, 234, 259, 297, 
299. 

Rich, 344. 

Riehas, 245, 291, 295. 
Rijtkas, 104. 

Rijisvan, 81, 318, 380. 
Rikmnst, 128, 227. 
llishablia, 31. 

Rishis, 291, 370. 
Inshtisheria, 315. 

Rilam , 266. 

Rivers, 250-252. 


Rudriyas, 197. 

Sahara, 404. 

Sabardhuk, 220, 241. 

Sabardughd, 219, 220. 

Sachi, 398. 

Sachtvdn, 250. 

Sacred Grass, 338. 

Sddhyas, 291, 293. 

Sakapdta, 372. 

Sabra, 178, 184, 186, Serpents, 126. 

248, 329, 374. Seven JLdityas, 106. 

Sdma, Sdman, 344, 

369, 376. 


126, 136, 156, 164, 
170, 171, 175, 220, 
227, 228, 233, 268- 
270, 272, 281, 296, 
300, 318, 320, 356, 
369, 380, 390, 391, 
397. 

Savya, 198. 

Sayu, 180. 

Sea, 111, 336. 


Sdma-chanter , 333. 
Sami, 165, 201. 
Santanu, 314-316. 
Saptatha, 316. 

Saptagu, 193, 194. 
Saptavadhri, 180. 
Sdpya, 196. 

Saramd, 129, 218, 221. 
Saranyil, 120, 135. 
Sarasvdn, 233,334-336. 
Sarasvati, 24, 45, 136, 


— altars, 116. 

— priests, 18, 100, 

150, 217. 

— regions, 106. 

— Rishis, 93, 262, 
336, 370. 

— rivers, 17, 29, 
54-56, 88, 127, 186, 
215,251. 

— singers, 244. 

— sisters, 18, 112. 
—tongues of Agni, 
112 . 


163, 214, 230, 232, Sikhandinis, 90. 
239, 242, 251, 338, Sdamdvati, 252. 


371. 

Saray u, 229. 
Sdrisrikva, 383. 
Sdmga, 383. 
Sdrpardjht, 415, 
Sdrydta, 295. 


Sin, 131, 134, 137. 
Snidh-u, 2, 81, 229 
232, 234, 250-252, 
340, 378. 

Sindhudvipa, 117, 316 
Sin'ivdli, 48, v. 


Saryandvdn, 16, 104, Sinjdra , 183. 


MiN/sr^ 


INDEX OP NAMES, ETC. 





Sirimbitha, 395, 

Sisters (fingers), 302. 

Six realms , 130. 

Sky , 155, 174, 230, 233, 
298. 

Smadibha, 198. 

iSowa fzAe < 70 ^, 140, 
148, 149, 175, 211, 
213, 214, 230, 232, 
234, 266-268, 273, 
286, 297, 313, 319, 
327, 336, 337, 361, 
366, 369, 383. 

Soma Pavamdna, 1-106, 
356. 

Soid y 289. 

Speech, see Vdk. 

Spirit. 211, 368. 

Sraddhd, 104, 392. 

Sreni, 305. 

Si'utabandhu, 211 , 213. 

Srutarvan, 198. 

Stambamitra , 383. 

♦Staler, 165. 

Stones, 301-303. 

Streams , 172. See Rivers. 

Subandhu, 211, 213-216. 

Sucha, Suchd , 151. 

ibWds, 373. 

SWrrt, 291, 292. 

Suhastya, 184. 

Sujdrni, 305. 

Suktrti , 370. 

Sumedhas , 372. 

Sumitra , 240. 

Sumitrasy 240, 241, 331. 

Sumne-dpi, 305. 

£tw, 8 , 19, 25, 29, 47, 
51, 55, 56, 65, 105, 
HI, 112, 120, 154, 
155, 157, 165, 186, 


192, 198, 208, 216, 
227, 247, 282, 293, 
297-299, 310, 344, 
355, 359, 380. 

Sdnritd , 382. 

Sdnu, 408. 

Supitrya , 346. 

Supreme Spirit, 243. 

-GW, 262. 

$2ra, 14, 19, 21, 56, 
65, 102. 

122 . 

2, 8 , 9, 11, 19, 
23, 27, 32, 33, 36, 
38,40,47. 48,51,54, 
56, 65, 66 , 70, 77- 
79, 94, 95, 102, 

104, 109, 115, 121, 
156, 160, 161, 165, 
172, 176, 177, 191, 
198, 220, 224, 233, 
247, 255, 266, 280, 
282-284, 286, 310, 
339, 340, 343, 362, 
377, 383, 389, 397. 

Sdryd, 180, 266-270, 
272, 273. 

Susartu, 251. 

Sicshna, 145, 146, 197, 
219, 317, 339. 

Sushomd, 251. 

Sutlej or Satlaj, 251. 

Sutudri , 251. 

128, 132, 176. 

Svdhd, 108, 128, 243. 

Svdna, 267. 

Svasti, 226. 

Svetyd , 251. 

/SW/7& aS'wwJ, 362. 

Sydva, 23 2 . 

Sydmarasmi, 254. 


Tandnapdt, 241, 337. 
Tdnvay 298, 301. 
Tapas, 368, 394, 415. 
Tdpascty 382. 
Tapurmtirdhan, 412. 
Tdrkshya, 385,391,410. 
TViree goddesses, 242. 
Thrice-seven rivers, 228. 
Tishya, 228. 
Trasadasyu, 100 , 168. 
Trikadrukas, 130. 
Trishtdmd, 251. 
Trishtup, 78, 130, 370. 
Trisirds. 117, 253. 
TWta, 54, 69, 88 , 117, 
192, 195, 227, 317, 
346. 

Trita Aptya, 88 , 107, 

192, 354. 

Try arum, 100. 

Tugra, 179, 198. 

Tuji, 198. 

Turva, 224. 

Turvasa, 1, 199, 224. 
Tiirvaydna, 217. 
Twashtar, 45,108, 109, 

117, 120, 135, 138, 

193, 195, 199, 205, 
229, 232, 233, 243, 
253, 297, 338, v. 

Udgdtar, 245. 

Vkiha, 369. 

Ukthya, 34. 
tfte, 316. 

Unborn, the, 2G2. 
Univet'sal gods , 274. 
Upamasravds, 168, 169, 
Upastuia, 346. 
Upastutas, 347. 
Upavaktar , 108. 


MIN/Sr^ 


INDEX OP NAMES, ETC. 



TJrdhvahrihatl. 100. 

Uvdhvogrdvd , 408. 
Urdkvakrisam, 385. 
Urdhvandbhd, 336. 
Urmyd, 365. 

Urndvati, 252. 

Ursa Major, 262. 

Uni, 379. 

Urukshayas, 351. 

Urvast . 146, 304-308. 
Usand, 59-62, 144, 163, 
182, 197, 317. 

Ushas, 109, 155, 180, 
248, 380.- 
Ushnih, 369. 

Usij, 318. 

Ustnara, Ushiaras,2\i, 
U&inarani, 214. 

Vadhrimatt, 232. 
Vadhryasva, 239, 240, 
241. 

Vaikhdnasas, 17. 
Vaikuntha, 193, 195, 
197. 

Vairdpas, 128. 
Vaisvdnara, 112, 191, 
282, 284. 

Vaisya, 291. 

Vaitarana, 220. 
Vaivasvuta, 400*. 

Vdja, 146, 229, 299. 
Vdjins,. 234. 

Vdk, 337, 345, 362, 363. 
Vala, 222, 236,238, 239, 
Vdlokhilyas, 155. 

Vamra, 316, 317. 
Vamrakd , 318. 
Vanaspati, 243, 337, 
338. 




Vandana, 180. 

Varum, 2, 13, 14, 30, 
35, 36, 41, 45, 48, 
50, 62, 64, 79, 81, 
85, 90, 95, 98, 106, 
116, 120, 122, 125, 
126, 161, 165, 173- 
176, 190, 198, 201, 
202, 207, 220-222/ 
225, 228-231, 233, 
243, 247, 251, 264, 
266, 269, 270, 287, 
296, 299,.313, 314, 
318, 327, 336, 341, 
359, 360-362, 364, 
370, 372, 389, 413. 

Vasa, 182. 

Vasativari, 29, 30, 35, 


7 dtaramna , 377. 

7 dyu, 2, 8, 10, 15, 23, 
30,36,45,48,50,54, 
61, 63, 71, 76, 79, 
98, 135, 157, 160, 
192, 201, 228, 230- 
233, 254, 267, 285, 
291, 296, 298, 319, 
333, 343, 377, 383. 

Veda, 210, 245. 

Vedas, 6, 77. 

Vena, 49, 301,358,359. 

Venas, 50. 

Venya, 390, 406. 

Vem, 198. 

Vetasu, Vetasus, 198. 

Vibhidaka, 169. 

Vibhrdj, 405. 


36, 89, 163. Vibhdvas, 192. 

Vashat, 136, 347. Vibhvan, 254. 
VashatMra, 208, 385. Vidhdtar, 45. 
Vasishtha, 63, 65, 73, Vihuntha, 193. 

232, 235, 262, 358, Vimada, 142, 148, 179 
370, 392, 411. 232. 

Vasishthcis , 64. Vimadas, 147. 

Vdstoskpati, I. Vipds, 251. 

Vasu, 44. 45, 116,178, Vipn'abandhu, 211,213, 
219,293, 300, 329, 215. 

35 7. Virdj, 72, 208, 370. 

Vasukarm, 230. Virdpa, 128. 

Vasukra, 158, 230. Vintpas, 223. 
Vasuruch, Vasumchas, Visas, 301. 

101. V/shndpu, 232. 

Vasus, 23, 177, 197, Vishnu, 8, 15, 64, 70, 
208, 233, 235, 249, 85, 107, 131, 153, 

255, 280, 314, 320, 230, 233, 297, 316, 

338, 362, 367, 384. 341. 366, 411, v. 

Vdta, 227, 231, 234, Vitpald, 180. 

377, 397, 414. Visva , 281. 

Vatsapri, 24,189. V/svaka, 232. 


xxvi 


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC. 



Visvnkarman, 260-263. 

Visrdmitra, 65, 155, 

316, 370. 

Visv&initras, 288, 

Yisvardpa, 117. 

Visvdvasu, 270,364,381, 

Yisvdyu, 146. 

Vitvedevas, 142, 164, 
i68, 172, 209, 211, 
217, 222, 227, 230, 
295, 298, 318, 321. 

Yitastd, 251. 

Vivasvdn , 18, 83, 84, 
105, 119, 120, 125, 
127, 128, 135, 143, 
180, 211, 216, 224, 
231, 247, 250, 400. 

Vrishdgir, 81. 

Vrishdkapdyi, 277. 

Yrishdkapi, 274-278. 

Yrishtihuvya, 347. 

Vritra , 3, 145| 159, 

*195, 197, 200, 207, 
208, 230, 234, 237, 


264, 286, 329, 330, 
340, 341, 343, 347, 
361, 379, 388. 
Vritras, 61, 100, 288. 
Yritra-slayer (Jndra), 
*82, 198, 248, 250, 
327, 340, 393, 394. 

- (Soma), 63, 82, 

- (Agni), 241. 

Yytva, 14. 

Warmth, 368. 

Waters, 118, 140, 161- 
164,174, 177, 193, 
222, 250, 274, 285, 
294. 

Wellers’ Child, 161, 
162, 298. 

Widow, 138, 181. 
Wind, 144, 165, 192, 
298, 403. See Vdyu, 
Wish, 234. 

Wright, (Carpenter), 

103, 


Worship, 296, 356. 

Yadv, 1, 199, 224. 
Yajamdna, 254. 

Yajha, 369. 

Yajus, 124, 291, 412. 
Yakshmandsana, 399. 
Yama, 105, 119-121, 
125, 127-131, 134, 
135, 137, 139, 143, 
201,203, 211,213, 
216,227, 297, 313, 
375, 376, 396, 400, 
401. 

Yand, 119-122, 135. 
Yamund, 251. 

Yatis, 246. 

YdtudMna, Ydtvdhd- 

nas, 189, 279, 282, 
353 

Yaydti, 224. 

Yilpa (sacrificial post), 
243. 



MIN/Sr^ 






GENERAL INDEX I. 

hymns according to deities and subjects * 


DEITIES OF DAWN. 

Ushas, Dawn, Morning.—I. 48. 49. 
92. 113. 123. 124. III. 61. IV. 
51. 52. V. 79. 80. VI. 64. 65. 

VII. 75-81. X. 172. 

The Asvius.—I. 34. 46. 47. 112. 
116420.157.158.180-184. II. 

39. III. 58. IV. 43-45. V. 73-77. 
VI. 62. 63. VII. 67-74. VIII. 5. 
8-10. 22. 26. 35. 62. 74. 76. V&- 
lakbilya Hymns, at the end of 

VIII. 9. X. 39-41. 106. 143. 
Dadhikravan, Dadhikr&s.—IV. 38- 

40. VII. 44. 

Agni as a God of Morning. — IV. 
13. 14. 


VARUNA AND SUN-GODS. 
f Vanina,—I. 24. 25. II. 28. V. 85. 
VU 86-89. VIII. 41. 42. 
Mitra.— III. 59. VII. 41. 

Varuna, Mitra, Aryanmn.—I. 41. 
Mitra and Varuna.—I. 136. 137. 
151-153. V. 62-72. VI. 67. VII. 
60-66. VIII. 25. X. 132. 185. 
Adityas.— II. 27. VII. 51. 52. 

VIII. 18. 47. 56. 

S&rya,—I. 50. 115. X. 37. 158. 
Savitar.—1.'35. II. 38. IV. 53. 54. 


V. 81. 82. VI. 71. VII. 38. 45, 
X. 139, 149. 

Puahan.—I. 42. 138. VI. 53-56. 58. 
X. ^6. ^ 

Vishnu.—I. 154-156. VII. 99. 100. 
Visvakarman.—X. 81. 82. 

Vena.—X. 123. 

Vibhraj.—X. 170. 

Tarkshya.—X. 178. 

Sarpavajm, or SOrya.—X. 189. 


COSMIC DEITIES. 
Ribhus.-!. 20. 110. 111. III. 60. 

IV, 33-37. VII. 48. 

Heaven and Earth.—I. 159. 160. 

185. IV. 56. VI. 70. VII. 53. 
Trithivi.—V. 84. 

Sarasvati.—VI. 61. VII. 95 96. 
Waters.—VII. 47.49. X. 9. Waters, 
or Cows.—X. 19. 

Sou of Waters, Ap&mnap&t. II 35. 
Soma.—I. 91. VIII. 48. 68. X. 25. 


COLLECTIVE AND MISCELLANEOUS 
DEITIES. 

Visvedevas, All-gods,—I. 14. 89. 
90. 106. 107. 122. 139. 186. It. 
29. 31. III. 54-57. IV. 55. V. 
41-51. VI. 49-52. VII. 34. 36.37. 


* I follow the classification and anangement adopted by Professor Ludwig iu 
Li; Translation. The names of many of the deitieB are repeated iu other Sectioua 
in accui'danco with the subjects of the hymns addressed to them. Fur instance, the 
gi . at, deeds of Indra are related in liyious placed in the Cosuiogonieai and Mythical 
Section. 







misr^ 


GENERAL 

39. 40. 42. 43. VIII. 27-30. 72. 
X. 31. 35. 30. 63-66. 92. 93. 
100 . 

Asvins, Snvilar, Agni, Heaven and 
Earth, Vishnu.—I. 22. 

Vayu, Indra, Mitra, Varuna, Visve- 
devas, Puskan, Waters, Agni.— 
I. 23. 

Heaven and Earth, Indra, Twask- 
tar, RaM, Siuivali.—II. 32, 
Indra, Vayu, Mitra, Varuna, As¬ 
vins, Visvedevas, Saras v ati, 
Dyaus, Prithivi.—II. 41. 

Indra, Varuna, Brihaspati, Pushau, 
Savitar, Soma, Mitra, Varuna.— 
III. 62. 

Mitra, Varuna, Adityas, Asvins, 
Vayu, Surya, Pavamana, the 
Cow.—VIII. 90. 


AGNI (JATAVEDAS AND 

vaisvAnara.) 

I. 1. 12. 26. 27. 31. 36. 44. 45. 58- 
60. 65-79. 94-99. 127. 128. 140. 

141. 143-150. 189.11.1.2. 4-10. 
III. 1-3. 5-7. 9-11. 13-28. IV. 
1-12. 15. V. 1-4. 6-11. 13-28. 
VI. 1-16. 48. VII. 1. 3. 4-17. 
VIII. 11. 19.23. 39. 43. 44. 49. 
60. 61. 63. 64. 73, 91. 92. X. 1- 
8. 11. 12. 20. 21. 45. 46. 79. 80. 
87. 88. 91. 115. 118.122. 140. 

142. 150. 156. 176. 187. 188. 


INDRA (SATAKRATU, SAKRA, 
MANYU.) 

1.4-11. 16. 30. 54-57. 61-63. 80- 
84.100-104. 121, 129-133. 135. 
169. 173-178. II. 11-22, 30. III. 



INDEX I. 

30-32. 34-52. IV. 16. 17. 19- 
25. 29. 31. 32. 46. V. 29-39. VI. 
17-26. 28-47. VII. 19-32. VIII. 
1-4. 6. 12-17. 21. 24. 32-34. 36. 
37. 45. 46. 50-55. 57-59. 65-67. 
69-71. 77-79. 81. 82. 84-88. 

Valakhilya, 1-6. X. 22-24. 29. 
32. 42-44. 47. 50. 54. 55. 73. 74. 
89. 96. 104. 105. 112. 113. 116. 
120. 131. 133. 134. 138. 144. 
147. 148. 152. 153. 160. 171* 
179. 180. Manyu.—X. 83. 84. 


GODS OF STORM, WIND, 

AND RAIN. 

Maruts.—I. 37-39. 64. 85-88. 166- 
168. 171. II. 34. V. 52-60. 87. 
VI. 66. VII. 56-59. VIII. 7. 20. 
83. X. 77. 78. 

Rudra.—I. 43.114. II. 33. VII. 46. 
Vayu.—I. 2. 134. IV. 47. 48. VII, 
90-92. X. 168. 186. 

Parjanya.—V. 83. VII. 101. 102. 


LORD OF PRAYER. 
Brahmanaspati or Brihaspati.— 
I. 18.*40.190. II. 23-26. IV. 50. 
VI. 73. VII. 97. 98. X. 182. 
Indra and Brahmanaspati.*—IV. 49. 


DUAL DEITIES. 

Indra-Varuna.—1.17.IV.41. VI. 68. 

VII. 82. 84. 85. V&lakhilya, 11. 
Indra-Pushan.—VI. 57. 

India Vishnu,—VI. 69. 

IndraAgni.—1.21.108. 109. III. 
12. V.86. VI. 59. 60. VII. 93. 
94. VIII. 38. 40. 

Agui-Maruts,—I. 19. 








GENERAL INDEX 1 . 


XXIS 




Indra-Soma.—VI. 72. VII. 104. 
Agni-Soma.—-1.93. 

Soma-Kudra.—VI. 74. 
Soma-Pdshan.—II. 40. 


LITURGICAL HYMNS. PRAYERS. 
CHARMS. 

Visvedevas.—X. 114. Sacred Me¬ 
tres.—X. 130. Praise of the An- 
girasas.—X. 62. The Sacrificer 
aud his Wife.—VIII. 31. The 
Sacrificer, Wife, and Hotar.—X. 
183. Faith.—X. 151. Visvede- 
vas.—X. 157. State of the Dead. 
—X. 154. Dafeshinii (Priests’ 
Guerdon).—X. 107. Ritvijas 
(Priests).—Valakhilya, 10. X. 
101. Apris.—I. 13. 142. 188. 

II. 3. III. 4.V. 5. VII. 2. IX. 5. 
X. 70. 110. Production of Sacri¬ 
ficial Fire.—III. 29. Sacrifioial 
Stake—III, 8. Pestle and Mor¬ 
tar.—I. 28„ Press-stones.—X. 76. 
94. 175. Havirdhanas.—X. 13. 
Ritus (Seasons).—II. 36. 37. 
Soma PavamAna.— IX. 1.-4. 6- 

III. Praise of the Horse.—I. 
162. 163. Waters, or Son of 
Waters.—X. 30. Saranyu, Pd- 
shan, Sarasvati, Waters, Soma. 
—X. 17. Surya’s Bridal—X. 
85. Vastoshpati (Guardian of 
the House).—VII. 5 4. 5 5. 
Kshetrapati (Lord of the Field) 
and Sita (Furrow). — IV. 57. 
Praise of Food.—I. 187. Arany- 
aut (Goddess of the Forests).— 
X. 146. Night.—X. 127. Avert¬ 
ing Misfortune.—X. 155. Bene¬ 


diction of the Embryo.—X. 187. 
Against Miscarriage.—X. 162. 
Asvins.—V. 78. Maruts. — 1. 
172. Soma Pavamana.—IX. 114. 
Visvedevas.—X. 137. Cows.—X. 
169. Water, Grass, Surya.—I. 
191. Indra.—VIII. 80. Mitra, 
Varuna, Agni, Visvedevas, Praise 
of Rivera.—VII. 50. Visvedevas. 
—X. 126.,Charm against Phthisis. 
—X. 161. 163. Charm against 
Evil Dreams.—X. 164. India.— 
I. 29. Tho Bird of Good Omen. 
—II. 42. 43. The Bird of Ill 
Omen.—X. 165. Charm against 
a rival Wife.—X. 145. Sachi 
Paulom!.—X. 159. Visvedevas. 
—X. 128. 141. Removal of a 
Rival.—X. 166. Benediction 
of the King.—X. 173. 174. 
Unanimity.—X. 191. Yama, the 
Fathers, the Dogs.—X. 14. The 
Fathers.—X. 15. Agni.—X. 16. 
Mrityu, Dhatar, Twashtar, the 
Pitrimedha, Prajapati.—X. 18. 
Visvedevas.—X. 56. Pavamana 
Soma.—IX. 113. 


HYMNS RELATING TO COSMOGONY, 
MYTHS, HISTORY, AND CIVILI¬ 
ZATION. 

Creation of the World.—X. 129,190. 
Creation by Sacrifice of Purusha. 
—X. 90. Ka.—X. 121. The 
Gods.—X. 52, 72. Visvedevas.— 
I. 105. 164. 181, Mayabhoda^—• 
X. 177. Agni, Surya, Waters, 
the Cow, Ghrita,—-IV. 58. Ri- 
valry of Indra and Varuiia.— 




MiNisr^ 


GENERAL INDEX I, 



IV. 42. X. 124. Indra's Birth.— 
IV. 18. Iudra. Praise of the Fal¬ 
con.—IV. 26. Praise of the Fal¬ 
con. — IV. 27. Indra and Soma. 
—IV. 28. Indra and Uskas.— 
IV. 30. Indra.—L 32. 33. 51- 
53. X. 27. 48. 49. 67. 68 99. 
102. 111.119. 1G7. Indra. Va- 
snkra.—X. 28. Indra. * Maruts. 
Agastya.—X. 165. 170. Maruts. 
—V. 61. Indra. V&k.-VIII. 89. 
Agni. The Gods.—X. 51. Agni 
SauchSka. The Gods.—X. 53. 
Indra. Siirya. Atri.—V. 40. Vri- 
shakapi. Indrani. Indra.—X. 86. 
Urvasi. Pururav&s.—X. 95. Sara- 
mL Panis—X. 108. Visvedevas. 
—X. 57. Recall of the Spirit.— 
X. 58. Nirriti, Soma, Asuniti, 
Earth, Heaven and Earth.—X. 

59. Asaruati, Indra, Subandhu’s 
Recall to Life. The Hands. —X. 

60. Vak Ambhrini.—X. 125. 
Jhanara.—X.71. Yama.—X. 135. 
Praise of the Rivers.—X. 75. 


<SL 

Vasishtha and the Rivers.—III. 

33. Indra and Parvata, Indra, 

Vak Sasarpari. Praise of the 
Chariot. — III. 53. Iudra. Chaya- 
mana’s Munificence.—V. 27. 

Indra. Sudas's Munificence.— 

VII. 18. Vasisktha’s Sons. 
Vasishtha. — VII. 33. Indra and 
Varuna.—VII. 83. Dadhikr*- 
van.—IV. 38. Agni.—V. 12. 
Svanaya’s Munificence.—I. 125. 
Bhavayavya and Romasa.—I. 

126. Lop&mudra and Agastya.— 

I. 179. Asvins. — VIII. 75. 

Agni.—X, 69. The Gods.—X. 

98. Visvedevas. Kurusravana’s 
Munificence.—X. 33. Praskanva’s 
Munificence.—Valakhilya, 7. 8. 

Kesins.—X. 136. Visvedevas.— 
x/l09. The Frogs.—VII. 103. 
Weapons of War.—VI. 75. 

Indra.—X. 38. 103. Soma Pava- 
mana.—IX. 112. Medicinal 
Herbs.—X. 97. The Dice.—X. 

34. Liberality.—X. 117. 


GENERAL SUPPLEMENTARY INDEX TO CHIEF 
NAMES, SUBJECTS, AND NOTES. 


'The Roman Numerals indicate the volume and the Arabic the page. 


% 


Aborigines, see D&sas, Dasyus, Ki- 
katas, Simyus, Nishadas. 
Absolute God. II. 72. 

Acesinea. III. 197. IV. 251. 
Acknowledgment of a son. II. 12. 
Adhvaryu, I. 160, 333, 353, 355. 
Aditi. I. 23, 39, 40, 42, 127, 150, 
266,280, 415. II. Ill, 122, 252. 

III. 50. IV. 27, 71,113, 224,246. 
Aditya. I. 41, 43, 282. 

Adityas. I. 23, 24, 43, 81. II. 78. 

IV. 106. 

Adoption of sons. II. 30.31. III. 8. 
Agastya. I. 294, 297, 304. III. 45, 
152. 

Agnayi. I. 35. II. 250. 

Agni. Birth, I. 53, 55, 107, 189, 
252, 333, 409. II. 326. Double 
birth, I. 249, 262. Three births, 
IV. 189. Three birth-places, I. 
162. Three homes, II. 192, 318, 
323. IV. 219. Three stations, IT. 
16. Three forms, I. 133, 410. II. 
22, 90. IV. 284. Three tongues, 
II. 16. Three powers, II. 16. 
Various forms, I- 20,'325. Identi¬ 
fied with all gods, I. 334, 335. II. 
189. Names, epithets, qualities, 
I. 2, 21, 26, 45, 106. II. 26. 


Divine functions, I. 106, 120, 
121,164, 418. II. 6, 75, 320. III. 
9, 10. IV. 283. Functions as 
priest, messenger, and oblation- 
bearer, I. 1, 2, 19, 24, 46, 66, 
105,160, 231, 343. II. 7,15,199. 

202, 327. IV. 192. Jungle-clear¬ 
ing fire, I. 105, 249, 251, 340, 
341, II. 99, 315, 316. IV. 384. 
Spiritual husband of maidens, 

I. 119. II. 189. IV. 273. Conse- 
crator of marriage, II. 189. IV. 
273. Lord of matrons, i. e. giver 
of children, I. 119, 121, 409. 
Production by attrition, I. 19, 
162, 411. II. 25, 187. IV. 192. 

Aguidh. I. 333. II. 244. 

Aguihotra. I. 396. II. 416. IV. 

203. 

Agnis (in three fire-receptacles). 

II. 195. IV. 98. 

Agnishtoma.-1. 26. 

Agriculture. II. 181. IV. 169. 

Plough, II. 181. III. 200. With 
oxen, I. 38, 312. II. 181. III. 
196. Ploughing, I. 38, 312. Fur¬ 
row personified, II. 181. Plough¬ 
ing and sowing, I. 208. Goad, 
II. 181. Sowing and reaping, 



:xxu 


GENERAL INDEX II. 


HI. 200. Sickle, I. 105. II. 127. 

III. 305. Threshing. IV. 196. 
Winnowing, IV. 244. Garner, 

I. 357. Barley (or grain in gene¬ 
ral), I. 208, 357. 

Ahavaniya (sacrificial fire). I. 54, 
394. II. 321. 

Ahi, dragon of drought. I. 57, 
134, 347. 

Ahirbudhnya, dragon of the deep. 
I. 322, 334. II. 178, 179, 237, 
300. III. 47. IV. 227. 

Ahura. I. 42. IV. 85. 

Aia, the Unborn. I. 284. II. 70. 

IV. 262. 

Aja-Ekapad. I. 384. II. 393. III. 

50. IV. 227. 

Akhaijdala. III. 185. 

Akshara (Speech). Ill- 18, 52. 
Alayya. IV. 23. 

AU-god (Indra). HI. 334. , 

All-gods. II. 398. III. 285. IV. 
142, 225. 

Altar. I. 256, 257, 271, 281, 290, 
320, 336, 339, 342, 416. II. 97, 
328. 

Altars, three. I. 394. 

Amrit. I. 38, 127. II. 182, 269, 
3G3, 372. III. 74. 341. 

Anava. III. 146. 

Anavas. III. 24. 

Anger, personified. IV. 263 266. 
Augiras. I. 1. 39, 65, 60. II. 32, 
98. 

Angirasas. I. 2, 373. II. 102, 202, 
247. III. 62, 67, 220. IV. 54, 
128. 

Animals, tame and wild. Horse, 
bull, cow, passim. Barn, ewe, I. 


78, 90, 94. Sheep, HI 137, 230, 
367, Goat, I. 246, 277, 398. 
III. 25. IV. 151. Ass, III. 357. 
Dog, I. 398. III. 356. IV. 349. 
Lion, T. 116, 411. II. 22, 117. 

III. 25. TV. 158, 237. Elephant, 

I. 116, 249. II. 117. HI. 228. 
Buffalo, II. 218. III. 303. Gaura, 

II. 130, 182, 293. Gavaya, II. 
130. Antelope, I. 116. Deer, I. 
69, 71, 178. III. 147. Spotted 
deer, I 144. Hare, IV. 159. Ape, 

IV. 275. Bear, II. 266. Wild 
boar, I. 109, 148, 198. III. 303. 
IV. 158. Wolf, I. 178, 179, 181, 
203. III. 65, 130, 280. Jackal, 
IV. 133, 158. Hyena, IV. 248. 
307. Fox, IV, 158. Mungoose, I. 
332. Serpent, IV. 133. Scorpion, 
I. 332, Emmet, IV. 133. Eagle, 

I. 209, 403. Vulture, III. 130. 
IV. 70. Falcon, Hawk, I. 59, 
209, 403. II. 104. Owl, III. 
130. IV. 401. Peafowl, I. 331. 

II. 54. III. 135. Swan, I. 119, 
282. II. 5, 64,168. III. *6, 232, 
391. Chakva, I. 398. Pigeon, 
Dove, I. 50. IV. 401. Cuckoo, 

III. 130. Quail, I. 190. 203, 
207. Kapinjala, I. 402. Parrot, 
I. 89. Starling. I. 89. 111. 233. 
Kingfisher, IV. 312. Blue-jay, 

IV. 3i2. 

Anitabha. II. 261. 

Aiijast. II. 380. 

Ansa, I. 334, 376. IV. 106, 247. 
Ansumatl III. 331. 

Autaka. I. 190. 

Auumati. IV. 214, 403. 


GENERAL INDEX II. 


XXXIIt 


Anuy&jn. IV. 202, 412. 

Apamnapat (Child of the Waters). 

I. 34, 390, 392. 

A pay a. II. 19. 

Apris. I. 20, 325, 338, 339, 413- 
415. IT. 193, 194. III. 4, 5, 36G, 
367. IV. 241, 242, 337. 
Apocryphal Hymns (Valakhilya). 

III. 347. 

Apsaras. III. 46. IV. 122, 304, 
358. 

Apsarasas. III. 46. IV. 42, 305, 
306. 

Aptya. IV. 354. See Trita Aptya. 
Aramati. I. 396. II. 242. III. 48, 
52. IV. 230. 296. 

Arbuda. I. 349. Ill, 145, 

Archer. 1.117, 119, 123,124, 226, 
261. 

Arjika. III. 161. IV. 104. 

Arjtkas. IV. 16. 

Arjikiya. III. 277. 

Arjikiya. IV. 251. 

Arka (the Sun) II. 389. 

Armour. I. 56, 251. II. 429, 431. 

IV. 256, 322. 

Arya. I. 92. II. 138, 337, 359. 

III. 10, 344. IV. 178. 

Aryas. II. 41. 

Aryan. I. 13. 132, 269. 

Aryatnan. I. 45, 178. II. 189. III. 
^ 49. IV. 183/ 

Asanga. III. 136, 137. 

Asiknt I. 58. III. 197. IV. 251. 
Ass (figurative). I. 49. 

Ass, asses, of the Asvins. I. 63, 
203, 280. 

Assembly (congregation, synod). I. 
54, 206. II. 190. 


Astronomy. The sun, ‘ the moving 
stone that is in heaven’, II. 
220. ‘The Bird’ (see Bird), 
moves round the earth, I. 291. 
Changes his place of rising, TI. 
29. The moon, borrows its light, 

II. 360. Nakshatras (lunar as- 
terisms), IV. 266. Stars, I. 121, 
298. II. 105,388, 390. IV. 156. 
Constellations, I. 41, 88. II. 72. 
IV. 239, ,266, 380. Tishya, IT. 
264. IV. 228. Planets, I. 287. 
Seven Rishia (Ursa Majoi’), IV. 
2G2. 

Asunfti. IV. 125, 132, 132, 213, 
214. 

Asura. I. 42, 65, 99, 377. II. 235. 
Asuras. I. 95, 109, 263. TI. 200. 
234. 

Asvamedha. I, 280. 

Asvattha. I. 243, IV. 165, 201. 
Asvins. Their character, I. 4. 5, 
33, 62, 63. Physicians, III. 187, 
201, 312, IV. 179. Their mir¬ 
acles, I. 189-194,201-211,317. 

III. 88-90, 92. IV. 179-181. 
Their chariot, I. 62, 63. Ill, 
152, 200, 358. IV. 269. 

Asvini. II. 250. 

Atharvan. I. 136. II. 329, 330. 

III. 166. IV. 143, 280. 297. 
Atharvans. III. 373. 

Atharvaveda. I. Preface, III. 
Atiratra. III. 126. 

Atithigva. I. 92. 

Atiyaja. II. 396. 

Atmospheres, two. II. 319. 

Atri. I. 91, 190,344. II. 256, &)3. 
Aurnav§.bha. III. 302. 


XXXIV 


\ . 


GENERAL INDEX II. 


Autumn forts. I. 309, II. 342. 

Axe, hatchet. I. 278, 279, 409, 
411. II. 5, 67. III. 102. IV. 
23. 

•-(figurative). I. 226. II. 311. 

IV. 70, 187. 

Ayu. 1.98, 164. III. 112. 181. IV. 
135. 

Barbor. III. 148. IV. 384. 

Barhis (sacred grass). II. 193, 369. 
Battle. II. 127, 135,159, 349, 350, 
406. III. 34. IV. 178. 

Beos. II. 38. 

Bhaga. I. 23, 4(fc 112, 149, 243, 
361, 376, III. 58. 

Bharadvaja. I. 191. II. 307. 
Bharata. II. 329. 

Bharatas. II. 39, 64, 333. III. 44. 
Bharata. I. 343. II. 137, 331. 
Bharati. I. 22, 34, 335. II. 78, 86. 

III. 5. IV. 338. 

Bharvara. II. 129, 130. 

Bbrigu. I. 1, 107, 124. III. 144. 
Bbrigus. I. 105. III. 22, 145. 

Bird, the (the Sun). I. 127, 284, 
416. II. 387. IV. 111. 329. 
Bird-catching. I. 381. II. 54, 379, 
387. 

Black skin (aborigines)- III. 399. 
TV. 35. 

Boat. II. 193. III. 83, 109 IV. 30, 
68. See Ship. 

Body, parts of the. IV. Appendix, iv. 
Bowls, two (heaven and earth). I. 
290. II. 77, 318, 391, 424. IV. 
31, 189. 

-three (heaven, firmament, 

earth). If. 283. 


Brahma. II. 320. TV. 117, 353. 
Brahma. IV. 218, 355 
Brahman(s). I. 290,333,353, 403. 

II. 172, 173, 373. III. ls’3, 221. 
IV. 244. 

Br&hman. IV. 291. 

Brahmaua. I. 25. II. 183. 

Brahmans. II. 429. III. 125, 126. 
IV. 244, 245. 

Br&hmhnachchhansi. I. 403. 
Brahmnnaspati. I. 23, 28, 29, 72, 
74, 75, 112, 369. III. 118, 119. 
IV. 47. 

Bribu. II. 376. 

Bridal of Surya. IV. 266-269. 
Bride, gifts to obtain a. I. 185. 

-benediction of a. IV. 273, 

274. 

Bridge. III. 399. 

BrihaddivA II. 240 IV. 229. 
Brihaspati. I. 23, 72, 112, 150, 
328, 369. II. 243, 426. III. 118, 
119. IV. 44. 

Budha. I. 54. 

Building. I. 357. II. 101, 103. 
Burial of remains of the dead IV. 
139. 

Bull. The Sun, I. 52. II. 54, 186, 

III. 70. Agui, I. 67, 252. Heaven, 

I. 273. Indra, II. 57. IV. 
158. Brihaspati, II. 87. Par- 

jauya, III. 52. Soma, Book 
IX. passim. Varuna, IV. 122. 
The Asvius’ chariot, I. 316. 
Vishnu, I. 267. Rudra, I. 
386, 387. India’s thunderbolt, 
1 61,235. 

Bulls. The Murats, I 115. Priests, 

II. 24. Rivers, II. 39. 


WNisr/fy 


GENERAL INDEX II. 


XXXV 




Car, war-chariot. II. 66,383. Armed 
with knives ol - scathes, I. 298. 
-—-hymn or sacrifice, I. 189, 362, 
410. II. 118. III. 83. 

-of gold (hymn, riches), I. 52. 

t* -priests’ guerdon, I. 221. 

Car-pole (sacrificial duties), II. 249. 
Carpenter. I. 181. II. 46, 189, 219, 
376. III. 383. 

--of the gods, I. 32. 

Castes, four. I. 196. II. 66. IY. 292. 
Cattle-raiders. II. 195, 321. IV. 35, 
354. IV. 163. 

Cattle-stealing. I. 118. 

Centre of earth (altar). I. 417. II. 
25. IV. 52. 

Chandrabhagit III- 197. IV. 251. 
Chariot, blessing of the. II. 66, 

383. 

Chariot-pole (sacrificial duties). I. 

142, 235, 336, 418. 

Chariot-race. 1. 383. II. 3 ( >4, 374. 
III. 190, 306, 307. IV. 249, 323, 
324. 

Chenfib. III. 197. IV. 251. 
Child-birth, liturgy of. II. 293. 
——goddesses associated with. I. 

384, 385. 

Children, prayer for. See Prayer. 
— — the gift of Agni, I. 119, 121, 
131, 337. II. 13. Ill 2, 3. IV. 
259. Of Soma, I. 244. 
Chyav&ua. I. 202. II. 288, 290. 
Cities (strongholds of the Pasyus). 
I. 174. 

Consorts of the gods. I* 34, 35,110, 
274, 334, 397, 407, 419.11. 235, 
250. III. 218. 

Cow. II- 417. Ushas (Dawn), I. 


286, 350. IT. 29,81, 102. Cloud, 

I. 289. Prism, I. 143. Cosmic, 

I. 314. 11.73. IV. 71. Of Plenty, 

I. 247. Type of Aditi or Nature, 
III. 341. Earth, I. 271- 273, 281. 
Hymn of Praise, I. 337. Yak, 
Speech, II. 1. 

Cows. II. 353, 354. Not to be 
killed, III. 286, 341. Sacrificial, 

I. 128, 306, III. 294. Morning- 
clouds, I. 124. 154. Rays of light, 

I. 157, 2&2, 264. Heaven and 
Earth, I. 259, 418. 

Creation of the worlds, different 
accounts of the. l\ T . 246, 260-263, 
355, 368, 415. Ascribed to Indi a. 
III. 330. Visvakarman (India), 

111, 334. Visvakarman, IV. 26, 
263. India and Soma, 11. 426. 
Varuna, III. 243, 245. Agni, I. 
120. II. 186, 317. IV. 113. 
Hiranyagarbha, IV. 355. Brah- 
manaspati, IV 246. The Unhorn, 
the Sun, I. 120. III. 245. The 
Asvins, IV. 148. Twashtar, IV. 
338. Gods dancing, I\ r . 246. The 
Sacrifice of Purusha, IV. 290-292. 

Creator. Soma, IV. 78. Visvakar- , 
man, IV. 260, 262. 

Dabhiti, I. 194, 354. II. 343. 
Dadhikras. I. 141. II. 16, 158- 
460. III. 61. IV. 321. 
Dadhikr&van. II. 160. III. 59, 61, 
62. 

Dadhyach. I. 141, 203, 208, II. 
330. IV. 97, 195. 

Daksha. I. 149, 376. II. 391; IV. 

112, 228, 246. 




misr/iy 



Dakshina. I. 30, 219, 350. IL 8l. 

IV. 156, 332 334. 

Dame, the (Yak, or Kodasi). I. 

171. 

Dames (Consorts of gods). I. 110, 
334, 397. IL 243, 250, 254, 393. 
III. 49. IV.. 229. 

Danastuti. See Liberality to Priests. 
D&nava. I. 348. II. 217, 224. 
Daneer(s) I. 155. II. 355 IV. 246. 
Indra, I. 234, 368. II. 226. III. 
206, 284, 819. Asvins, II. 413. 
Maruts, III. 196. 

Darius. I. Appendix. I. I. 
Dark-hued races. III. 9. 

Dass(s) I. 58, 366. II. 359. IV. 
145, 178, 224. 

Dasagvas. I. 390. II. 49, 248. 
Dasras. II. 165. 

Dasyavevrika. III. 350, 355. 
Dasyu(s). I. 60, 61, 92, 107, 349. 

II. 26. IV. 145, 

Dawn. I. 52, 195 197, 220, 222- 
224. III. 9510. 

Dawn and Night. IV. 242. 

Dawns, I. 154, 198, 222-224. II. 
174. 

Day and Night. I. 195, 257. IV, 

121 . 

Death, the god of. IV. 137, 138. 
Deification of mortals. Itibhus, I. 

31, 32, 187. II. 83, 84, 150, 
155. Maruts, I. 126, 147. 
Demons of drought. I. 9. See 
Ahi, Ahisuva, Auarsani, Arbuda, 
Aurnavabba, ABna, P>risaya, 
Chumuri, Dasoni, Dhuui, Dri- 
bliika, llibisa, Karanja, Kunaru, 
Kushava, Kiivi, Kuyava, Mfiga, 


Mrigaya, Namuchi, Parnayn, Pip* 
ru, Itudhikras, Sambara, Sribin- 
da, Sushna, Svarbhanu, Svasna, 
Urana, Vala, Vangrida, Varcbiu, 
Vctasu, Visvacb, Vyansa. 
Departed, home and bliss of the. 
IV. 105, 106, 373. 

-king of the. See Yama. 

Dhatar. IV. 45, 137, 138. 
Dhishana. I. 34, 164. II. 58, 152, 

236, III. 111. IV. 173. 
Diabolus. IV. 177. 

Dice. I. 76. III. 106. IV. 156, 169- 
171. 

Diespiter. I. 99. 

Digvijaya. II. 157, 201. IV. 366. 
Discus, quoit. III. 330. 

Diseases, Jaundice, I. 89. 90. 
Dropsy, III. HO. Sipada, III. 66. 
Simula, III. 66. Phthisis. IV.399. 
Colic or dysentery. IV. 327. 
Leprosy, I. 206, 218. Consump¬ 
tion, IV. 378, iv. 

Disposer, the. IV. 45, 262. 

Diti. IL 276, 277. III. 19. 

Dogs. I. 398. III. 356. Of Yama. 

III. 69. IV. 129. House dog. III. 
69. Boar hound. IV. 275. Hound 
of ludra. See Sarama. Figura¬ 
tive, I. 317. III. 130. 

Doors, divine. I. 21, 325, 338. IV. 
242, 338. 

Dragon, the (Ahi). III. 323, 329. 

IV. 195. 

.. of the Deep. I. 322. II. 

237, III. 47, 48, 50. 

DraviijodiU (Wealth-giver). I. 26, 

394. 

Dream, evil. III. 264. 





GENERAL INDEX 1J, 


XXX.VII 


Drishadvati. I. 6 . II. 19. 

Drub. II. 133. IV. 197, 

Druhyus. I. 13. III. 22; 

Drum. II. 384. 

Dual deities. I. 27, 28. 

Dushyanta. II. 329; 

Dusky brood, skin (aborigines). 

I. 170, 234. II. 382. III. 9. 
Dvita. II, 207". III. 264. 

Dyaus, 1 . 52, 99, 115, 149, 252; 

290, 407. II. 251, 323, 406, 
Dyausbpitar, T. 98; 

Dyu. I. 52. 115. 

Earth. I. 35, 99. 

- - Central point of (Altar), p. 

256. 

Eclipse. II. 117, 120 , 140, 142, 
218. 

Eight. Points of earth, I. 65. Sons 
of Aditi, IV. 247. 

Eight-footed. Gaurl (Vak), I. 291. 

Metre, III. 302. 

EkadhanA (waters). IV. 29; 
Ekadhenus. III. 55. 

Eleven. Gods of heaven, gods of 
waters, gods of earth, I. 249.. 
Enthusiasm. II. 238; 

Eos. I. 52. 

Etosa. I. 216, 364. II. 143, 21T, " 
223, 326. IV. 97. 

Exorcism. See Incantation, 

Exposure of natural children. 1.380.. 
Eye, the. The Sun. I. 243. Eye of 
Varumt and Mitra, the Sun, IL 
394. III. 81. IV. 176. Eyes of 
heaven (Sun and Moon), I. 127. 
The eye of the dead goes to the 
Sun, IV. 133. 


Fair-complexioned (Aryans), i. 170; 

- - -(Rudra). L 386.- 

Faith. ILL 362. IV. 104, 392. 
Falcon (bringer of the Soma plant). 

I. 1'34, 158. II. 53, 138, 139. 
IV. 41. 

Falsehood. I. 264, 265. II. 203. 

III., 65, 78, 104, 129. IV. 118. 
Famine, hunger. IIL 187, 269, 
280; IV. 185. 

Father, the. Agni, II. 319. Heaven, 

II. 394'. I V.,363. Varuna, IV. 360. 
lather and Mother (Heaven and;' 

Earth). I. 321. 

Fathors, the. 1.181, 403.. ID 73 , 95 , 
205, 397, 429/ HJL50, 96. IV. 
47, 129 136, 209-211, 229, 239, 
Fervour. II. 238; I V. 415. 

Festal meeting. III. 72. 

Fiends, prayer for destruction, of; 

III. 127-130. 

——forms assumed by. III. 130. 

*--see ItAkshasas and Yatudhanas. 

Filter, for Soma. I. 242; III. 137 , 
Fire. Sec AgnL 
Fire-altars, threo. II. 201. 

I 1 imminent, two divisions of the 
III. 315. 

--personified. IV. 45 . " 

I'ish. III. 2 .;. I\. 238, Mentioned 
twice .only r . 

Five raees, tribes, peoples. I 13, 
169, 184, 205, 312, 337. II. 46 , 
66 , 83, 160, 225, 322. III. 93 
98 377. IV. 16, 66 . 

Five tribes (gods). IV. 215. 

Five Rivers, laud of the. II. 38. 
Five Seasons, I. 285, II. 76. Ho- 
tar-priests, I. 390. Adhvary 113 , 





MINI ST^ 



-GENERAL INDEX II. 


If. 2, Bulla, I. 179. Courses or 
divisions of sacrifice, IV. 203, 
Floods. II. 249. See Waters, 
Flower. See Lotus. 

Food. I. 323, 324. 

Forts. Demons’ cloud-castles, I. 
173. II. 40, 357. III. 10, 404. 
Of aborigines, If. 9, 40, 342. 
III. 10, 404. Of iron or bronze, 
I. 105, 366. II 139. III. 7, 19. 
Of stone, II. 145. 

Four. Beauteous creatures, IV. 2i 
Seas, III. 393. IV. 194. Rivers, 
I. 112. Quarters of the sky, I. 
292. III. 50, 338. IV. G3, HI. 
Dice? I. 76. Varuna, Mitra, 
Bhaga, Aryainan ? I. 76. 
Four-footed (gam 1, Vak). I. 291. 
Friend, the (Mitra). IV. 125. 
Friendship. IV. 244. 

--with Varuna III. 109. 

Frogs (compared to Bi&hmans). 

III. 125, 126. 

Fruit. II. 55. IV. 388. 

Funeral hymns. IV. 127-130, 135- 
139, 209-213. 

Furrow (personified). II. 181. 

Gaia. II. 335. 

Gambler. I. 351, 381. II. 303. IV. 
185, 186. 

-lament of the. IV. 169-171, 

Gu(n)dara, Gandani, Candhara, 
Gandh&ris I. Appendix I. 1. 
Gandhafva(s). I. 35, 280. II. 47. 
III. 303. IV. 47,51,56, 57,104, 
120, 170, 304, 358, 359, 
G.andharvi. IV. 122, 

Gangs. II. 376, 410. IV. 251. 


Ganges. III. 209. IV. 251. 
Garhapatya. I. 26, 54, 282. II. 
16. 

Garutman (the Sun). I. 292. 
Gaura. I. 27. II. 130. 

Garni I. 291. 

Gavaya. II. 130. 

Gayatra. IV. 245. 

GayatrL I. 110, 288, 403 II. 87. 

--yavamadhya, IV. 98. 

Gharma. II. 179, 221, 262. III. 
126. 

Ghosha. I. 206, 218. IV. 182, 183. 
Gbyita, II. 182-184, 242, 423. 

Gift. See Liberality to Priests. 

Glifts (Cousorts of gods). I. 407. 

III. 218. 

God. See Monotheism, One. 

Gods. Origin, I. 81, 272, 320. IT. 
180, 335. III. 68. IV. 124. 
Number, I. 64. II. 6. III. 220. 

IV. 203. Immortal, I. 39, 127, 
326, 415. II. 103. III. 15. IV. 
126, 232, 241, 246, Dwelling- 
pliuje, II. 69, 78. Abide in India, 
II. 72. Omnipotent, II. 77. III. 
219. Omniscient, I. 285. Reward 
the pious, III. 140, 223. Punish 
those who neglect them, III. 41, 
140. Mother of gods, Ushas, I. 
198. Mother of the Adityas, 
Aditi, I. 377. Father of gods, 
Agni, I. 122. Hrahmanispati, I, 
375. Soma, IV. 52, 59 Gods 
made immortal by Agni, II. 190, 
317. HI. 17. By Savitar, II. 177. 
By Soma, IV. 92. Greater and 
lesser gods, I. 47. (but cp. Ill, 
220). Earlier gods, III. 31. 





V 





GENERA!, INDEX' II. ‘ XXXIX 

■4 . 

Holy Grass. I. 414. TV. 242. See 
Barhis, 


Gold. I. 84, 103, 116, 148, 206, 
281, 392. II. 41, 100, 263, 383, 
389. III. 39, 201, 304. 

Gomati. III. 209. IV. 251. „ 

Good Works. IV. 129. 

Guerdon. I. 221. II. 363. IV. 31. 
See Dakshina, and Liberality to 
Priests. 

Guest. I. 128. II. 216, 309. 

Gumti. III. 209; 

Hair, braided. I. 198. III. 103. 
Hands. Uplifted in prayer, II. 11. 
334, 413. IV. 238. Joined in 
marriage, IV. 138, 272. 

Healing by. 1. 386. IV. 216, 379. 
Hansa (the Sun). II. 161. IV. 362. 
Haridrnva. 1. 8SL 
Haritala. I. 89. 

Harits (horses of tho Sun). 1. 216. 
Hariy&ptya. II. 352. 

Harynsva. I. 6. 

Havirdhanas. I. 402. IV. 126. 

Haw' . See Falcon. 

Heaven (Dwitis). I. 96, 115, 116, 
124, 155,'169, 207. 

. . (homo of the Blest). I..267. 

IV 105. • 

Heaven and Earth. I. 35, 54, 55, 
131, 161, 163, 165, 177, 217, 
223, 272 274, 32Q, 321. Ilv 335. 
Hell, 11.401. 

Herald. I. 1, 345. 

Herdsman (India). II. 4&, 

.. .(the Sun). I. 289 v \ 
Himalaya. 11. 38. 

Hihva. 111. 242. 

Hiranyagarbhn. IV. 355. 
Hiranyastupii. I. 53, 55, 


Holy Thoughts. 111. 50, 232. IV. 
232, 233. 

Homage (adoration of'gods, power 
of. II. 395. 

Homestead, guardian of the. See 
Vastoslipati. 

Honey. L I 94, 270. III. 40, 147, 
1Va181, 332.' ' - ; 

Horse. I 391. Halter; head stall. 

girths, cto., I. 278. 279. 

Horse, Sacrifice of the. I. 277-282. 
Horses of Indra. I. 362, 363. II. 
76, 77, 382, 

-of the Sun. 1. 89, 41&. IL 

112, III. 86. 

-of Vayu. II. 170. ■ \ 

-heads of, as signs of Sub¬ 
mission. III. 25. 

Hotnf. I. 131, 16.0, 3.33, 353. IV. 

m. 

Hotnrs, celestial. IV. 235. 338. 
Hotnt. I. 34, 335. 

Humble offering. III. 313, 344. 
Hundred castles, fortresses. 1. 350, 
II. 139,' 145, 357. III. 404. 
Hundred winters, natural duration 
of human life, I. 118,, 129. II. 
264, 313,. 322, 324, 336,'949, 
385. IV. 38. Autumns, ditto, I. 
150, 377. H. 45, 314. III. 86, 
124. IV. 138- Springs, IV. 400. 
Hunting. Wild beasts, II. 183. 
v Wild bull, IV. 202, Elephant. 
IV'. 181. Wi|d hoar, IV. 275. 
Deer, III. 138. Birds, I. 4«'3. 
Husband an'd wife. Ill,,221, 22$. 
Husbandry. II. 1812 







GENEKAL INDEX IZ. 



XL 

Hydaspes. IV. 251. 

Hyphasis. II. 38. 

Icteric! I. 90. 

Icterus. I. 90. 

Idispati. II. 240. 

IU. 1.22.55.335. II. 192, 238. 

III. 5, 20. IV. 4, 338. 

Has place. I. 229. II. 25. IV. 293. 
Ilibis i. I. 61. 

Immortal, Agni alone originally, 
and other gods by him. II. 190, 
317. 

— .- in one’s children. II. 193. 

Immortality of mm). II. 2G5, 277. 

IV. 127. 

-prayer for. IV. 105. 

Incantation. Against jaundice, I. 
89. Venomous reptiles, etc., I. 
329*332. Miscarriage. IV. ill. 
Disease (Phthisis), IV. IV. A 
rival wife, IV. 386. A bird of 
ill omen, IV. 401. 

Indigenous races. I. 60. Sec Dasas, 
Dasyus. 

ludra, His birth, II. 122. Father, 
II. 57, 119. Wife, I. 35. I! 63. 
250. His greatness, I. 17, 96, 
110. II. 36, 115. IV. 286, 237. 
Battles with demons, I. 18, 
56, 57, 61, 99, 103, 134, 135. 

IV. 195-199. Tutelary god of 
Aryans, I. 3, 12, 168, 169. II. 
46 II! 23. IV. 197. Attributes 
and deeds, I. 12, 350-352. War¬ 
rior-god, II! 103. IV. 327. 
Rivalry with Varuna. I! 163, 
164. His supersession of Varuna, 
IV. 360 361. Chief of gods, ! 


<SL 


235. I! 55. Maker of all tilings, 
II! 334. King of all things, ! 
59. I! 55. His various forms, 
I! 64, 382. Identifiable with 
other gods, l! 382. His relations 
to his worshippers, ! 8, 10, 14, 
15, 18, 59, 101, 169, 365. I! 
348, 38! His flight, ! 59. His 
rapture after drinking Soma, 
IV. 35! 

Iudrani. I. 35, 385. I! 63. IV. 

274-278. 

Iudu. ! 78, 151. Book IX., passing 

-(the Moon), II. 365. 

Indus. I. 46, 58. II. 258. 261. III. 
IV. 252. 

Infinite, the. I. 299, 377. 

Infinity. II. 276. IV. 27, 224. 
Inspiration. II. 40, 101, 110. III. 
119. 226. 

I n vokers, the twocelestial (Hot a i a). 

I. 21, 339. II! 5. 

Iravati. I! 131. 

Iron, or other metal (ayas; Latin 
aes). ! 102, 105, 148, 28! II. 
157, 276, 311, 430. II! 7, 19, 
116, 338, 339, 36! IV. 322. 

Jagati. ! 288. 

Jamadagui. II. 88. III. 117. 

»Jamadagnis. I! G5. 66. 

Jatavedas. ! 79. 

Jaundice. ! 89. 

Jewels. ! 60. II! 304. 

Jhelum. IV. 25! 

Jnanam. (Knowledge). IV. 24*3. 
Jumna. I! 259. III. 25. IV. 25! 
Jupiter. I. 99. 149. 

Jyotsna. ! 62. 1! 360. 


i 




mtsTfy 



<si? 


GEtfEftAL INDEX II. 


XLI 


KuBii grass. I. 5.11. 25. See Holy 

Grass, •. '' 


Ka. IV. 355. 

Kabul. II. 261. III. 193. 

Kadru. III. 255. 

Kakambira. II. 387. 

Kalpa. II. 183. 

Kandahar. I. Appendix, I. 

Kanva. I. 22, 67. 

Kapardiu. I. 198. 

Karulati. II. 145. 

Kasyapa. III. 29. 

Kauraudi. I. 62. III. 360. 

Kavya. See Usaua. 

Kavyas. IV. 128. 

Kikatas II. 65. 

Kimiilin(s). III. 127. IV. 282. 
Kine (rays of light). I. 11, 269, 
369. 

King. Election,IV.406.Benediction, 
IV. 407. Taxer of the rich, 1.119. 
Varuna, I. 41, 43, 44, 379. III. 
47. Indra, I. 59. III. 39. Agni, 
II. 74, 188, 213. Soma, I. 38. 
IV. 336. Mitra, II. 83. 

Kings, the. Varuna, Mitra, Arya- 
inan, I. 75. Mitra and Varuna, 
I. 244, 394, 401. II. 79, 276, 
277, 331. 

Koph&i. I. VI. II. 261. III. 193. 
Krisanu. I. 194, 268. II. 140. IV. 
41, 22*. 

Kshatra(in). III. 234, 237. 
Kshatriya. I. 405. II. 430. III. 

234, 281. IV. 138, 291. 
Kshetrapati. II. 180. 

Kubha. I,. VI. II. 261. IV. 251. 
Kuhu. I. 385. IV. 38. 

KuroSm. IV. 375. 

Kuru-Krivis. III. 24. 

Kuruui., II. 261, 


Knshava. II. 123. 

Kutsa. I. 01, 98. 

Lakshmi II. 117. 

Law (ritam, Order of the Uni¬ 
verse). I. 2, 4, 156, 180, 370. 
II. 134, 161, 275. IV. 97. 

-(sacrifice). I. 118, 140, 269, 

345. II. 134. 

Leprosy. J. 206, 218. 

Liberality. IV. 348-350. 

-towards the gods, III. 

41, 87. IV. 185. 

-to priests, I, 100, 224, 

225. II. 114, 215, 221, 227, 
231, 239, 274, 295, 353, 376, 
383, 414. III. 26, 136, 145, 
146, 148, 149, 153, 158, 193, 
199, 208, 209, 212, 231, 232, 
260, 261, 278, 284, 285, 299, 
356, 357. IV. 224, 301. 

Life, duration of, appointed by the 
gods. I. 150. IV. 169. 

•-—natural duration of. Soe ' 

Hundred Winters, etc. 

Lightning. IV. 294. 

Lotus. II. 330. IV, 384. 

Madhuvidya. II. 289. 

Maghavan. I. 57, 228, 405. 
Ma^havans. I. 339. II. 208, 295. 
Magic (of gods). II. 145. 277, 278, 
293, 302, 386, 413, III. 243, 
IV, 361. 

--—(of fiends). II. 189, 223, • 

234, 337, 341, 346, 409. III. 2, 

120, 130, 181, 244. IV Jl8. 







miST^y 



XLIl 


OENERAti INDEX II. 


-(personified). IV. 271. 

Main. I. 22. II. 194. 

Makha. IV. 87. 

Male, the. I. 101. II. 1. 

Man, personified. IV. 289, 369, 

-the service of. I. 56. 

Ma.ua. III. 46. 

Man a. III. 304. 

Mantra. 1, Preface, III. IV. II. 
183. IV. 200. 

Mann. I. 21, 24, 45, 80, 104, 346, 
387. 

-Laws of. II. 430. III. 46. 

Manus. I. 45. II. 15G, 210. 

M«nyu. IV. 249, 263-266. 

Mare (Uahas compared to a). I 52. 

II. 175. 

Mares. H. 37, 163, 217, 206, 410. 

III. 107. 

- (Waters of the firmament). 

II. 1. IV. 112. 

--(libations). I. 258. 

Marks on cattle. IV. 223. 

Marriage ceremonies. IV. 270-274. 
Martandu. IV. 246. 

Maruts. I. 11, 24, 69, 115-118, 

126 . 

Matali IV. 128. 

M atari Bvau, I. 53, 107, 124, 158, 
164, 328, 417. IV. 23, 193. 
Measure, Measuring line. I. 72, 73/ 
Mediator (Agni). I. 160, 247. II. 
89,90, 97,386.111.114. 

- —,- (Soma). III. 265. 

.-(Hudra). I. 198. 

Medicine. I. 38, 39, 78, 149, 198, 
270.11.261, 427.111.63, 196, 
220, 295. IV. 214, 378. 

Mena. I. 93. II. 04. 


Merit, rewarded in heaven. IV. 
129, 130. 

Metal (ayas). I. 95, 102. See Iron. 
Metres. I. 288. IV. 369, 370. 
-of the Rigveda. I. Appen¬ 
dix, III.—V. 

Mitra. I. 4. 33. III. 51. 
Monogamy, indications of. I. 177, 
223. II. 96. 

Monotheism. I. 292. II. 70. 

Month, intercalary. I. 43, 286. 
Moon. I. 62, 177, 287, 400. II. 
360, 365. III. 371, 375. IV. 
208, 266, 269, 292, 380. 

Moons, twelve (months). I. 43. 
Morning. 1. 52. 2- ; 0. See j>awn. 
Mortar. I. 47. 

Mother (Earth). II. 391. IV. 225. 
Mothers (rivers). III. 329. 

-—(waters). I. 252. 

Mountain = cloud. I. 12. 
Mountains. II. 236, 250, 344. 
Mouthless (barbarians). II. 218. 
Mrityu (Death). IV. 137. 

Muj avail. IV. 169. 

Mundane egg, the. IV. 290, 

Muni. 111. 71. IV. 377. 

Munja-grass (filter). I. 275. 

Music. Gargara, III. 287. Lute, 
I. 404. Drum, II. 384. Flute, 

IV. 376. 

Nahus. IU. II. 

Nihusha. III. 116. 

Nahusha. I. 55. 

Nahushas. II. 285, 346, 351, 378. 

III. 116, 156. 

Nalmshyas. IV. 64. 

Namuchi. II. 220, 341. 











GENERAL INDEX If. 


XLttl 


Nai asansa. I. 21, SO, 182, 254, 
397. II. 193. III. 49. 

Nasatyus. I. 5, II. 166. 

Nature. I. 127, 150, 283, 320. II. 

276, 277. III. 341. 

Navagvas. I. 60. II. 49, 248. 
Neshtar. I. 25, 333. 

Netar. I. 341. 

Night. I. 64. IV. 365. 

Night and Morning or Dawn. I. 
112, 195, 217, 255, 322, 383, 
414. IV. 338. 

Nine footed (gauri, Vak). I. 291. 
Ninety {floods, rivers). I. 135, 216. 

{Forts). I. 234. II. 9. 
Ninety-nine rivers. I. 59, 331. IV. 
329. 

- -forts. I. 100. II. 138, 

218, 379. III. 27, 121, 322. IV.l. 

.- arms. 1. 35‘b 

~ -. — .- Vritras. I. 141. 

■ -V&yu’s horses. II. 170. 

Nirriti. I.'41. II. 97, 238. III. 54. 

IV. 121, 213. 

Nirritis. IV. 344. 

Nish&das. I. 13. 

Nishtigri. IV. 322. 

Nivid. II. 420. 

Noose of Varuna. II. 427. IV. 270. 

.-of Rudra. III. 63. 

--of Indra. III. 129. 

Nooses of Varuna and Mitra. III. 
S3. 

Noseless {Dasyus). II. 218. 
Nriyajna. I. 56. 

Ocean. I. 101, 125, 317. II. 38, 
56, 182, 363, 339. III. 50, 116, 
33.5. 


Old age. I. 205. IV. 177, 213, 272. 
Om. I. 291. III. 123. 

Omen (good). 1.402,403. (bad), IV. 

401. 

Omniscience of the gods. I. 285. 

-of Varuna. I. 43. 

-of Agni. I. 66. II. 192. 

— ■ -of the Asvins, I. 85. 

One. I. 284.IV. 262. 

One All. II. 70. 

One-footed. I. 291, 384. IV. 349. 
One Supreme Being or Spirit. I. 

292. IV. 262. 

One Thing. IV. 367. 

Ordainer, the. IV. 45. 

Ordeals (fire, water,combat). 1.271. 
Order. I. 370. 379. II. 129. III. 

51. See Law. 

Ornaments. I 386, 388. 

Pakthas. Ill 22. 

rani. I. 58, 139. II. 324, 396. IV. 
236. 

Panis. I. 58, 264, 372. II. 376, 
407. IV. 54, 218, 334-336. 
Punjab. II. 258, 261, 410. 
Pantheism. I. 150. III. 358. 
Papadevata. I. 41. 
Paramabraliumjuanaru. IV. 243. 
Paramatma. IJ. 138, 320. 
Paramesvara. II. 382. IV. 260. 
Paramour. I. 122, 240. IV. 170. 
Par&vrij. I. 190, 358. 

Parents, the, (Heaven and Earth)., 
II. 358. III. 68. IV. 25, 231. 
Parjanya. 1. 289. II. 299. 300, 
397. III. 363. 

Parnshni. I. 58. II. 131. 258. HI. 
22, 23. IV. 251. 











wmsT/fy 





^Parvata. I. 217, 238. II. 345. Prastotar. III. 308. 

Parvatas. II. 153, 236. Prayaja. IV. 202. 

Pavaka. I. 20. Prayer. Personified, I. 55. Lord of, 


Pavamana Soma, III. 361-412. 
IV. 1-106. 

-Agni. IV. 19. 

. . .-,-Puslian. IV. 45. 

PavamS.ua hymns. IV. 23, 24. 
Pearl, pearls. I. 65. III. 26. IV. 
239. 

Pedu. I. 202, 206. 

Penury, fear of. II. 230. III. 3. 

—-deprecated for others. I. 

378. III. 256. 


see Brihaspati. Power of, I. 112, 
124. The best armour, II. 431. 
Prayer for aid in battle, I. 14, 
50, 94, 129, 168, 169, 172, 173, 
2 36 238, 382. II. 163, 319, 3-50, 
359, 377, 406. III. 34, 300. IV. 
178, 264, 373. For wisdom, III, 
371, 392, 395. For fame, III. 81, 
289, 371, 382, 392. For safety, 
1.10, 35, 66, 244. Long life, 51. 
17, 39, 42, 43, 64, 149, IQ, 


Physician. I. 386. IV. 103, 311. 

Physician’s fee. IV. 311. 
Physicians (waters), II. 392. 
Pitaras, Pitris. See Fathers. 
Pitrimedha. IV. 137. 

Pitriynjna. IV. 203. 

Plants (medicinal). IV. 311-313. 

__-(poisonous). III. 66. 

Plenty. III. 42, 49. 53. IV. 67. 
Poison, charm against. III. 66. 
Poisonous reptiles, charm against. 

I. 329-332. III. 66. 

Polygamy. I. 113, 124. III. 21, 

35. IV. 186. 

«.. — troubles of. I. 179. IV. 

168, 322. 

Potar. I. 25, 131, 160, 333, III. 

20 . 

Poverty, penury, indigence. I. 97. 

II. 13, 94, 230, 111. 3, 92. See 
Famine. 

Praj&pati. I. 149. II. 391, 406, 

III. 367. IV. 218, 355, 365. 
Prakrit!. I. 283. 

prasastar. I. 160, 333. 


152,165, 205, 244, 270. II. 380. 

III. 81, 188, 252, 205, 266, 360. 

IV. 175, 177. For children, I. 
20, 64, 197, 385, 409. II. 20, 
298, etc. For health, wealth, and 
happiness, passim. For innocence, 
III. 118, IV. 177. For mercy, 
III. 110, 256. For forgiveness, 
of sins, see Sin. For immortali¬ 
ty in heaven, IV. 105, 106. For 
victory in the race, II. 374. III. 
306. For destruction of fiends, 
etc., I. 69, 146, 238, 239. III. 
127-130. 

Primal Being, the. I. 283. 
•Pnshtha. II. 101, 127, 262. 

Prism’. I. 24, 37, 71, 143, 388, 
389. II. 98, 102, 259, 272, 388. 
Prison. II. 111. 322. 

Prithivi I. 161. II. 4, 393. 

. . deity of the firmament, I I. 

301, 302, III. 74. IV. 155. 
Professions and Trades. Carpenter, 
I. 109,181, 233. II. 46, 189. 
219, 376. III. 383. IV. 103. 







MiNisr^ 


GENERAL INDEX II. 


XT.V 



Physician, leech, IV. 103, 311. 
Weaving, II. 319.' IV. 151. 
Boat-building, I. 201, 317. III. 
310, IV. 30, 321. Rope-making, 
I. 279, 354. III. 104. Leather¬ 
working, I. 144, 330. II. 167, 
300, 318. III. 81. Agriculture, 
see Agriculture. Barber, III. 
148. IV. 384. Vintner, I. 330. 
Wreath-maker, III. 264. Jewel¬ 
ler, III. 264. Smith, IV. 103, 
246. Smelting, II. 95, 200, 323. 
IV. 246, 260. 

Prosperity. II. 178. 

Providence. I. 97. 

Purandhi. I. 383. II. 140, 239. III. 
49, 52. IV. 228. 

Purohita. I. 1, 160. II. 321. III. 
215. 

Puru. I. 107. III. 9, 27. 

PuiAravaa. I. 54. III. 181. IV.- 
304 308. 

Purus. I. 13. 236. III.. 158. III. 117. 
Pnrusha, the sacrifice of. IV. 289- 
293, 369. 

Pushau. I. 23, 37, 76, 182. II. 62, 
145, 389, 399, 405. IV. 151. ■ 

Quail. L 190, 203, 207. IV. 181, 249. 
Queen, chief. IL 213. 

Questionings regarding the gods, 
Nature, and mau. I. 4l, 283- 
291,320,381.11.69, 113, IV, 
181, 28.5, 340, 367, 368. 

Race-course. 1.114.. II. 377. III. 114. 
Racers. III. 36, 37. IV. 249. 

Rahu. II. 234. 

Sains, the. III. 125, 126. 


R&janya. IV. 291, 

Raka. I. 384, 385. II. 240. IV. 38. 
Rakshasas. I. 33. II. 99. III. 127. 
Rakshasi. HI. 129. 

Rakshoha (Agui). IV. 279-282, 
350. 

Ram (Indra). I. 16, 90, 94. III. 
142, 334. 

Rasa. I. 191: II. 237, 261. III. 

399. IV. 251, 334, 335, 355. 
Rat, IV. 234. 

Rathantat y a. I. 288. IV. 

Ruthaspati. IV. 229, 299. 

Rati. IV. 234. 

Rati. I. Appendix. I. 

Regions of space. II. 251. 
Resuscitation of Subandhu. IV. 
216. 

Revelation. II. 101. III. 154, 359. 
Ribhu. I. 31, 187. IV. 146. 
Ribhukshan. I. 277, 301. II. 153, 
‘239. IV. 146. 

Ribhnkshans,Ribhuksban;-s. 11.153. 
’ III. 159, ICO. IV. 297, 299. 
Ribhus, I. 31, 407. II. S3, 84, 174, 
240, III. 50, 53. Their miracles, 
I. 31, 32, 187, 188, 275.-11. 84, 
150, 152, 154, 155. 

Rich, richas. II. 247. III. 85. IV. 

’ 245. 

Riding on horseback. I. 279, 380, 
£81. II. 68, 273, 379. 

Rigveda. I. Preface, III. V—VIII, 

■ XIV, XVIi: III. 126, 193. 
Rijisvau. I. 91. II. 342, 

Rtkvans. HI. 15. IV. 128, 227. 
Rishi. I. Preface, V. IV. 244. 

Rishis, the Sevon. Sue Seven 
llishis. 


GENERAL INDEX If. 



Rishis, childlike simplicity of pray- 
' era of, I. 71. III. 42, 179, 191, 
192, 251. 

Rita(m). I. 2, 180, 370. II. 134. 

See Law, Order. 

Ritu. I. 25. 

Ritus, I. 394,395. II. 152,174,398. 
Rivers. II. 250, 254, 397. III. 64. 

IV. 250, 207, 273, 305. 

Rodasi. I. 171, 300. II. 250, 267, 
273, III. 48. IV. 297. 

Rudra. I. 24. 46, 71, 78, 143, 198, 
386, 410. II. 97, 240, 259, 354, 

III. 49, 50. IV. 228, 299. 
Rudras. I. 81, 115. IE. 267. 
. -(Mitra aud Varuna). II. 

283. 

-(Asvins). III. 201, 213. 

Rudriyas. IV. 197. 

Sabardhnk. IV. 220, 241. 
Sabardugha. I. 240. II. 386. HI. 132. 

IV. 218. 

Sachi. II. 84, 116. III. 182. 

Sacred grass. I. 5, 19, 201, 316, 
338. III. 4, 60. IV. 338. 

Sacrifice. I. 1, 2, 13, 21, 25, 30, 
44, 45, 56, 84, 139, 198, 237, 
390. IV. 321. 

• - as an act of creation. IV. 

263, 283, 369. 

• - morning and evening. II. 

94, 111. III. 18, 19. 

— - morning, noon, and even¬ 

ing. II. 111,283,291.111.58, 
135, 218. 

-- —importance of. I. 66. 

”— — makes priests and sacri- 
fleers immortal. I. 54, 224. 


Sacrifice!’. I. 16, 20. II. 191. IV, 
263. 

Sacrificial assembly, I. 54; hall, I. 
2, 414; fire, II. 25; post, I. 22, 
68, 155; offerings—milk, 1. 

158, 266; ghritam (butter), 1. 
4, 240; gharma (warm milk), 
II. 178, 179, 291. III. 316; 
Soma, I. 8, 24, 27, 50, 82, 140, 
183; Soma and milk, I. 9, 36, 
50, 141, 215, 322. III. 30; 
Soma with grain, groats, meal, 
cake, etc., 1. 212. 11.24, 61, 62, 
215, 402, 403. III. 318; man, 
I. 39; horse. I. 277-282. IV, 
295; bulls, IV. 158, 277, 295; 
bullocks, I. 344. IV. 258; barreu 
cows, I. 344. IV. 295; rams, 
IV. 295. Vessels aud imple¬ 
ments, I. 278, 279. 

SSdhyas, I. 293. IV. 291, 293. 
Sakra (Indra). I. 16. IT. 43. 
Sakuntala. II. 64. 

Sakvari. III. 44. 

Salt. Not mentioned. 

S&ma, S&man. I. 288, 403. III. 

308. IV. 245. 

Ssimaveda. I. Preface, III. 

Sumbara. I. 9. II. 357. III. 121. 
Sami. IV. 165, 201. 

Sansa. II. 250. IH. 49. 

Saratna. I. Ill, 112, 127. JI. 32, 
116, 248. III. 69. IV. 129, 334- 
336. 

Sararaeyas. I. 111. 

Saranju. IV. 120, 135. 

Sarasv&n. I. 294.11. 389. III. 116- 
118. IV. 233. 

Sarasvali. I. 6, 7, 58, 385, 402. 










GENERAL INDEX II. 


Nt.VII 


TT. 240, 389, 397. 409. III. .90, 
52, 110, 117. IV. 13G, 163, 251. 
338. 

Sarayn. II. 144, 145, 261. IV. 229. 
Sarju. II. 145, 261. 

Sarysm&v&n I. 142 III. 157. IV. 

16, 104, 172. 

Sitakratn. I. 8. II. 232. 

Savfti-i. III. 253, 302. 

Savitar. I. 34, 67, 65, 270, 395. 

II. 87, 328. 

Savitri II. 87. 

Sea. I. 43, 233, 276. II. 362. III. 
11, 171. 

.-- of air. I. 52, 280, 299, 314. 

II. 184. III. 11, 301. 

--of plenty. II. 178, 179. 

- (the Sun), II. 251; (Jlgnil, 

IV. 111. 

Seasons. I. 38, 394. II. 78. 
Serpents. I. 6. 116, 306, 328. II. 

342, 398. III. 128, IV. 225. 
Seveu, the (the Maruts), III. 219. 
«— rivets, I. 58, 63, 65, 125, 
172, 331, 351, 406. II. 125, 

110, 317. III. 26, 97, 208. IV. 
17; priests, I. 282, 283, 341. 
HI. 293. IV. 294; Hotars, IV. 
217; Sous of Aditi, IV. 106, 
247; Rishis, I. 39. II. 164. IV. 
65, 370; metres, I. 36, 362. 
II. 174, 183; mothers, I. 252, 
IV. 88; sisters, I. 283. III. 359. 
IV. 56 ; castles, 1. 115, 309. II. 
342. Ill 24; communities, III. 
321; pathways, IV. 112; threads, 

I. 283, 284. IV. 360; treasures, 

II. 185, 427; Suu’s rays, I. 179, 
283, 2 j0. II. 183; Sun’s horses, 


I. 89, 416. TT. 112, 249, 372. 

III. 86; tongues or flames of 
Agni, I. 105, 179, 259. II. 1"5; 
singers, I. 112; tones, If. 1; 
regions, TV. 357. 

Seven headed. I. 416. III. 350 
Seven times seven (Maruts). II. 
259. 

Ship, boat. I. 43, 16G, 235, 317* 
II 37, 214, 219, 262, 404. III. 
183, 187, 245, 300, 310. 

-(hyiiiu, sacrifice). I. 83, 251. 

IV. 62, 188, 226, 321, 331. 

Sim,da. III. 66. 

Siroyus. T. 1G9. III. 22. 

Sin, bonds of. I. 42, 44, 379. II. 

Ill, 18S. III. 109. 

-prayer for removal or for¬ 
giveness of, I. 39, 42, 44, 50, 
64, 71, 165, 270, 280, 321, 326, 
378 380,401. II. 3, 111, 177, 
188, 298, 303, 395, 427. III. 
3, 47, 67, 75,106, 108-110,114. 
187, 256, 283. IV. 118, 131, 
225, 331. 

... , - committed by others, prayer 
for freedom from. II. 395. III. 


67, 106. 

- punishment of. I. 2o0, 300, 
370, 371, 376, 379, 381 II. 
Ill, 133, 299, 300, 395, III. 
67 , 77 , 78 , 83, 104, 389. IV. 


131, 287. 

Sindh,,. 1. 46, 80, 161, 218. II. 
958 261. HI. 116. IV. 229, 232, 


1 , 252 . 

a { f. 385, IV. 38. 

6s. I. 220. H. 298. HI. 281. 
ssness. II. 391. 



OKN'ERAL IXDTCX II. 


Sipidn. Iir. 66. 

Sira. II. 181. 

Sisters. Fingers, 1 113, 124. II, 

80, 104. III. 362, 388. IV. 29, 
82; rivers, I. 407. II. 39, 132, 
410. IV. 56; hymns, lit, 343; 
plauts, IV. 143; Heaven and 
Earth, II. 70; Dawns, I. 223. 
111. 396; Day and Night, II. 75; 
Night and Dawn, I. 195, 223, 
313. 

Sitl (Furrow). II. 181. 

Siva. I. 386. 

Six. Seasons, I. 38, 285. II. 2, 76, 
77; regions, I. 284; directions, 

I. 354; expanses, II. 379. IV. 
366; realms, IV. 130; burthens, 

II. 78. 

Sky. IL 277, 296. 

Slaves. I. 155. III. 193, 357. IV. 
224. 

Snow-covered mountains. IV. 355. 
Soma (the plant). I. 3, 16. II. 57, 
241, 302. IV. 50, 69, 302; pre¬ 
paration of, I. 3, 47, 48. III. 395; 
rapture produced by, I. 8, 29, 90, 
91, 145, 311. III. 265; powers 
of, I. 38. III. 265; eloquence 
produced by, I, 147. II. 365. III. 
135, 347. 

- - Pavamftua. III. 361-412. 

IV. 1-106. 

—,-the god. I. 29, 30, 38, 79, 

119, 151-154. 

.- the Moon. I. 62, 287, 330, 

400. II. 365. III. 371. IV. 74. 
Sou of strength. I. 45, 82, 

Sorcerers, sorcery. I. 66, 69, 99. II. 
202, See Y&tudh&nas. 


Sorceresses. I. 238. 

Speech. See V&k. 

Spies. Of Varuna, I. 43. III. 107; 
of Mitra and Varuna, II. 419. 

III. 79; of the gods, IV. 119, 

120 . 

Sraddha (Faith). IV. 104, 392. 
Stinginess. IV. 348. 

S&dra. IV. 291. 

Sun. I. 65, 121, 142, 291, II. 97, 
220, 251, 275. 

Suna. II. 181. 

Suuahsepa. I. 39. II. 188. III. 363. 
Sunrita". I. 74. IV. 382, 

Suparnah. I. 65, 287. 

Supreme. Beiug, II. 161; Spirit, 

IV. 213; Deity, IV. 98; God, 
IV. 262. 

Sfira. III. 62, 133. 

Surgery. III. 133. IV. 133, 197. 
Surie. I. 36, 54, 86. II. 142. 

Surya. I. 272, et passim. See Sun. 
sfirya. I. 63, 204, 207, 209, 211, 
300, 319. II. 165, 389, 405. IV. 
266-273. 

Sushna. I. 19, 61, 92. 

Sutlej. II. 38. IV. 251. 

Sutudri. I. 58. II. 37, 38. IV. 251. 
Svadha. IV. 128, 132. 

Svilha. I. 22, 186, 255, 393. II. 

. 195. III. 76. IV. 128. 

Swans (siugers). IV. 74. 

Svarga, I. 33, 158. 

Svasti. II. 178. IV. 224, 226. 

Swing, golden (the Sun). III. 108. 

-—(boat). III. 109. 

Synod. I. 54, 75, 102, 208, 321. 
See Assembly. 

i , — Inviolability of a). I. 54. 


i. 


M 





GENERAL INDEX II. 


XLIX 


Tanunapat. I. 21, 254. III. 366. 
T&rkshya. I. 150. II. 158. 

Teacher. III. 125. 

Ten, the (the fingers). III. 397. Ten 
sisters (fingers), II. 27. IY. 32"; 
daughters of Twashtar (fingers), 

I. 162; Surya’s horses, I. 285; 
months of gestation, II. 293; 
regions of the world, III. 340; 
months duration of sacrifice; II. 
248. III. 171; indefinitely for¬ 
mally, II. 49, 136; usual number 
of objects presented, I. 225. II. 
383. III. 136, 146; confederate 
kings, III. 44, 103. 

Tenfold. Draught, I. 219 ; dwelliug 
of Agni, IV. 201. 

Thief. I. 175. II. 159, 205, 323, 
396. III. 106, 282, 300. 

Thieves. I. 88, 330 II. 191, 258. 
IV. 111.272. 

Thirty. Regions, I. 221; steps 
(division^ of day and night), II. 
406f 

Thirty-four lights. IV. 207, 208. 
Thirty-three gods. I. 64, 81, 249, 
419. III. 218, 220, 232, 357. 
IV. 66. 

Three (Agni, Sun, Wind) I 292. 
Three steers, (Agni, Surya, 
Vayu), 11/283; sisters, I. 342; 
Mornings, II. 14; Dawns, ltd. 
243; mothers, II. 78; holy words, 
III. 123; altars, I. 394; Dames, 

I. 391. II. 78, .79; sacrificial 
fires, I. 25, 54; great gatherings, 
HI. 85; steps or strides of Vish¬ 
nu, I. 35, 36, 266-268. II. 323. 
III. 122, 220, 352; worlds, I. 


63; earths, I. 173, 178, 285. II. 
176. III. 108; heavens, I. 178, 
285. II. 176, 283, III. 108; 
spheres of light, T. 173, 178. If. 
79, 176,283, 372; firmaments, 

II. 283. 

Threefold light. III. 123. , 
Three-footed (old man). IV. 319. 
Thrice (in connexion with tho 
Asvins). I. 62, 63. 

Thrice-sevtfn. Rivers, IV. 28, 54, 
228, 250; logs of fuel, IV. 292 ; 
sparks, I. 331; peahens, I. 331,. 
Thunderbolt-sacrifice. I. 13, 75.' 
•-India’s friend. I. 235. 

II. 341. IV. 200. 

Tbhya. II. 264. IV. 228. 

Tools. Axe, 1. 278, 279, 409, 411; 
knife, I. 2.33. III. 219; razor, 

III. T48; ueedle, 1. 3S4; awl, 

II. 399, 400. 

Trap. For lions. IV. 159; for wild 
bulls, ibid. 

Trees = clouds. IV. 248. 
Trikadrukas. III. 177, 321. 
Trishtama. IV. 251. 

Trishtup. 1. 288, 403. III. 158. 
Trita! I. 95, 177, 323, 389. II? 
207, 235, 262. III. 244, 396. 

IV. 54, 69, 88. 

Trita Aptya. 1. 179. II. 236. HI. 
263, 264. 

Trita's maidens, dames (the lingers), 

III. 392, 396. 

Tryambaka. IH. 77. 

Turvasa. I. 68, 85. II, 144. Ilf, 
22. IV. 199. 

Turvasas. T. 13. 

Tfirvayaua. 1. 98. II. 53S, II. 217 




GENERAL INDEX II. 


1/ 

Twashtar. I. 22, 32, 95, 109, 1G2, 
397, 407. II. 57, 230, 390. III. 
48. IV. 135, 338. 

Twelve. Days, II, 151; moons 
(months), I. 43; spokes, I. 285; 
forms (months), I. 285. 
Two-footed (gauri. Vak). I. 291. 

. - (man). IV. 849. 

Udgatar. I. 403. HI. 308. IV. 245. 
Uktba. I. 3, 14, 85. 

TJkthya. I. 26. 

Unborn, the. I. 120, 284. III. 245. 
IV. 262. 

UrmyS. (Night). II. 274. 

Urnavati. IV. 252. 

Urvasi. II. 238. III. 46, 181. IV. 
304 308. 

Usana. I 93. II. 228. 

Ushas. I. 52, 286, 358, 396. See 
Dawn. 

— - her chariot destroyed by 

Iudra, I. 358. II. 143. IV. 248, 
380. 

Usurers. III. 280. 

Vagdevi. I. 34. 

Vaisvauara. I. 106, 409. 

Vaisya. III. 234. IV. 291. 
Viiivasvat:.. III. 351. 

V&ja. C. 31. III. 53 IV. 146. 

V.ljas I. 188. III. 64, 234. 

Viljins. 1T1. 55. 

Vilk. I. 34, 291. II. 65, 79, 251, 
252, 286. III. 338. IV. 243,245, 
3C2. 363 
Yalu. 1. 16, 95. 

Valnkhilya. III. 267. 

Vabira. I. 92, 192. 


Vanaspati. I. 22, 48, 151, 339, 
415. II 3, 4, IV. 243. 

Varuna. I. 4, 40-44. II. 238. III. 

51. IV. 251, 361. 

Varun&ui. I. 35, 385. III. 48. 
Varfitri. 1. 34. II. 237. III. 55; 57. 
vVardtris. II. 86. III. 48. 

Vasativari waters. III. 364, 376. ’ 
Vashnt. I. 54, 212. 393. III. 17. 
Vasishtha. I. 405. II. 67. III. 1, 
45,46,129. 

Vastoshpati. II. 236. III. 68, 69. 
Y'asu. I. 53, 161. 

Vasus. I. 53. 81, 161. 

Vata. II. 389. 

Vayu. I. 2, 240-242. II. 168-170, 
236, 363. 

Veda. I. Preface, I., it. II. 182, 183. 

III. 189. IV. 245. 

VedAnti. II. 319. 320. 

Vena. II. 183. IV. 358. 

Venas. IV. 50, 

Vibhus. III. 64. 

Vibhvari I. 31. II. 58, 239. III. 65. 

IV. 254. 

Vidhatar (The Disposer). II. 393. 
IV. 45. 

Village. I. 198. IV. 387. 

Vintner, i. 330. 

Vipas. I. 58. II. 37, 143. IV. 251. 
Vi raj (or Virat). IV. 72. 290. 
Virapatni. II. 380, 389. 

Virgins (fingers). III. 362. IV. 18. 
Visas. III. 234. 

Vishnu. I. 35, 36, 109, 151, 390 
II. 71, 323. 

Vieva ill. 222. 

Viavakarman, the Creator. IV. 260 
263. 




GENERAL INDEX II. 




Visvamitra. I. 405. II. 37, 67. III. 
129. 

Visvavr.su. I. 280. IV. 270. 
Visvedevas. I. 6, 47. 

Vitasta. I. 58. IV. 251. 

Vivasvan. I. 53, 84, 97, 104, 353. 

II. GO. III. 351. 

Voice. See Yak. 

Vrislia. I. 101, 117. II. 371. III. 
179, 228. 

Vrishakapavi. IV. 277. 

Vrishakapi. IV. 274-278. 

Vrishan. I. 312, 313. II. 371. III. 
179. 

Vritra. I. 56, 57, 58, 157, et passim, 
Vritras. I. 9. 

Vyansa.II. 122, 123, 124, 372. 

War,- weapons of. Bow, arrow, 
bowstring, brace, quiver, chariot, 
whip, poisoned arrows, armour, 
coat-ofnmil, II. 428. Spear, 
lance, I. 53, 116, 144, 147, 300, 
303. II. 287, 268; sword, I. 69, 
14f, 148. III. 162; dagger, II. 
267; club, I. 68, 114; sling, 
I. 215; shield, III. 153; helm, 

III. 161. 

Warp and woof (sacrifice or the 
universe). II. 319, 369. 

Watches (yamah) of night. III. 150. 
Waters. I. 38, 39, 407. III. 65. IV. 
161, 163. 

—-healing powers of the. T. 

38, 39.1. 392. IV. 118, 379. 

--their power to remove sin. 

I. 39. IV. 118. 


Weavers, weaving, web. I. 283, 396. 

IV. 331, 369. 

Web = hymn. I. 197. 

Widow. IV. 138, 181. 

Wife. Her position in the house, IV. 
271,272, 274; patient, gentle, 
devoted, IV. 170; careful, active, 

I. 119, 133; benevolent, II. 273; 
adorns herself for her husband, 

II. 96. IV. 244; takes part in 
sacrifices, I. 126, 139, 235. II. 
243. III. 224. 

Wind: I. 149. IV. 378. See Vita, 
Vayu. 

Wine (sura : material unknown). I. 

202, 206. III. 106,139. IV. 334. 
Wine-skin. I. 330. 

Winters, a hundred. See Hundred 
Winters. 

Witches. I. 238, 239. 

Women. Praised, II. 273; censur¬ 
ed, III. 229, IV. 307; prize of 
war, II. 121 III. 261. IV. 21 ; 
captured and enslaved, III. 193, 
attend festivals, l. 223. It. 184. 
IV. 276 ; abduction of, II. 222. 
.Words, play upon. Vrisha, I. 312, 
313, 359, 360. II. 43, 231, 233, 
371. HI. 179, 228. IV. 10, 11, 
233; Hri, II. 53, 54; Diman, 
II. 348. 

World-tree. I. 40, 41, 287. 

Yadavas. III. 158. 

Yadn. I. 68. II. 144. III. 158. IV. 


199. 

Yadus. I. 13. 


-son of the. I. 162,390, 392. Yajauiana. I. 16. 

II. 324, IV. 162. Yajurveda. I. Preface, hi. IV. 291. 





GENERAL INDEX II. 



Yajus. IV. 124, 291. Yayati. IV. 224. 

Yama. I. 49, 53 65, 71, 111, 139. Year. I. 268, 285, 293. 

IV. 105, 119-121, 127 130, 203, Young, youthfullest of gods (Agni). 


211, 216, 375. I. 20, 178, III. 16 

Yarai IV. 119-122. Yupa. See Sacrificial Post. 

Yamuna. II. 258, 259. III. 25, 44, 

331. IV. 251. 

Yatis. III. 144. 

Yatudbauas. I. 66. III. 127, 129. 

IV. 279-282. 


Zeus. I. 99. 149. 


misrfiy 



GENERAL INDEX III. 

AUTHORS AND BOOKS QUOTED OR REFERRED TO. 


Aitareya Brahmana. III. 247. 
Atbarvaveda. II. 90. 

Aufrecht (Th.). IL 127, 302. III. 
274, 318. 


Beufey (Th.). I. xi. xiv. xvi. 11, 
13, 40, 51, 60, 62, 68,109, 116, 
173, 174, 180, 183, 290, 212. 
III. 373, 374, 388, 405. 

Bergaigne (A.). I. xv. xvii. 216, 
220, 221, 221, 318. Appendix, 
ii. II. 26, 57, 152, 393, 402, 
405. HI. 386. IV. 11, 17, 85, 
99, 117, 213, 362. 

Bbagavata Purina. IV. 289. 

Bollensen. II. 128. 

Burnouf. IV. 292, 368. 

Colebrooke. I. v . IV. 118, 289, 
292, 308. 

Cowell (E. B.). I. vi. xiv. III. 119, 
126, 194, 247, 256, 257, 273, 
285, 318, 325, 326, 330, 331, 
330, 338, 341, 344, 347, 349, 
353, 356, 358-360, 370, 373, 
375, 384, 395, 404, 411. 

Deuteronomy. IV. 181. 

Dutt (R. Ch.). II. 431. IV. 139. 


Goldstucker (Th.). I. xiii. IV. 308. 
Grasamann. I. xiv. xvi. et passim. 

Hall (F. E.) I. 176. 

Haug (M.). III. 247. 

Herodotus. II. 431. 

Holtzmann. IV. 308. 

Isaiah. I. 150. 


Jones Sir W.) II. 87. 


Kaegi (A.). I. xv. See Sicbmzig 
Lieder des Rigveda. 

Kuhn. I. 212. IV. 308. 


Langlois. III. 126. 

Lassen. I. vii. 58. Appendix, i. 
Ludwig. I. xiv. xvii. et passim. 

Mahidhara. II. 122, 183, 213, 302. 
III. 55, 324, 336, IV. 190, 
193, 261, 263, 290. 292. 
Manning (Mrs.) I. xvi. II. 431. 
Mann. II. 124. IV. 181. 
Megasthenes. I. vii. 

Muir (J.). I. ix. xiii. xiv. xvi, ct 
passim. 

Muller (F. Max.) I. viii. xi. xiv. 


.. p «s^i 4 Sipttssim, 

Celdner (K.). I. xv. II. 421. III. \ i, V.t, -- 

134,377, 410. IV. 31, 178, 206, Nfeye. II. 152. 

249, 255, 308, 325, See Siebenzig '-- 

Lieder des Rigveda . Oldenberg. I. xv. IV. 303. 








GENERAL INDEX III. 



LIV 


Peterson (P.) I. xv. 266, 267. II. 
177, 400, 403. III. 102, 109, 
110,130. IV. 289, 292, 352, 
356, 363. 

Pischcl (R.) II. 311, 349, 357, 
363, 370, 389. III. 32, 62, 106, 
131, 134, 147, 199, 232, 257, 
286, 345, 372, 387, 410. IV. 16, 
36, 37, 83, 122, 159, 217, 325. 
330, 383. 

Pliny. I. 90. 


RGville. IL 335. 

Roth (R.) I. ix. xiv. et passim. 


Sayana. I. viii. xiv. et passim. 
Schermann (Dr.) IV. 368. 
Siebeuzig Lieder des R i g v e d a . 
(Geldner and Kaegi). I. xvi. II. 
123,124, 319. III. 80, 109,110. 
IV. 121, 130, 139, 171, 245, 
334, 350, 352, 363, 368, 388. 
St, Petersburg Lexicon, passim, 


<SL 


Wallis (H. W.). I. xv. 41, 243, 338. 

III. 70, 95, 319, 393. III. 96, 

121, 315. IV. 47, 56, 112, 113, 

161, 165, 166, 176, 196, 209, 

210, 229, 239, 246, 260, 261, | 

263, 290, 292, 355, 359, 368. 

Watt (Dr. G.). I. 3. 

Weber (A.). I. vi. xiv. II, 65. IV. 

272, 292, 318. 

Webster (W. F.). IV. 121, 138, 

158, 163, 263. 

Whitney (W. W.). I. 29. IV. 368. 
Williams (Monier). I. xiv. II. 158. 

IV, 214. etc. 

Wilson(H.H.). I.vi.ix.xiv.,«<pam‘?n, j 

Y^ska. I. 6, 76, 149, 154, 179, 185, 

293. II. 181. HI. 30, 324, IV. 

188, 204. 


Zimmer (H.)r. 113. Appendix, i. II. 
409, 431. III. 23, 24, 277,304. 
IV. 139, 202, 334, 376, 394, 399. 


* 


3937 


v \ \ 







