===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.47949.The-Hymns-Of-The-Sama-Veda_djvu.txt =====

90  8 19 


St*'* 


THE 


HYMNS  OF  THE  SAMAVEDA 

translated  with  a popular  commentary 


RALPH  T,  H.  ijRIFFITH, 

FORMKHLY  PRINCIPAL  OF  BtfNAJES  COfcLEGB. 


BENARES 

tj 

E.  J.  LAZARUS  And  CO. 

‘ , * 

1893. 


PREFACE. 


The  ^auiaveda,  Gr  Veda  of  Holy  Sotigs,  third  in 
the»usual  order  of  enumeration  of  the  three  Vedas, 
ranks  next  in  sanctity  and  liturgical  importance  to  the 
Rigveda  or  Veda  of  Reeitefl  Praise.  Its  Sanhita,  or 
metrical  portion,  consists  chiefly  of  hymns  to  be  chanted 
by  tlfe  Udgatar  priests  at  the  performance  of  those  im- 
portant sacrifices  in  which  the  juice  of  the  Soma  plant, 
clarified  and  mixed  with  milk  and  other  ingredients,  wag; 
offered  in  libation  to  various  deities.  The  Collection  is 
made  up  of  hymns,  portions  of  hyalins,  an<^  detached 
verses,  taken  mafnly  from  the  Rigveda,  transposed  and 
.rearranged,  without  reference  to  their  original  order, 
toViit  the  religious  ceremoi}ies.in  which  they  were  to  he 
employed.  ]ji  these  compiled  hymns  there  are  frequent 
variations,  of  more  or  less  importance,  from  the  text  of 
the  Rigveda  as  we  now  possess  it,  which  variations, 
although  in  some  cases  they  are  apparently  explanatory, 
‘seem  in  others  to  be  older  and  more  original  than  the 
readings  of  the  Rigveda.  In  singing,  the  verses  are  still 
further  altered  by  prolongation,  repetition  and  insertion 
of  syllable^  &nd  various  modulatiqpsf  rests,  and  other 
modifications  prescribed,  for^t he  guidance  of  the  officiat- 
ing prints,  in  the  Capas  or  Song-books,  Hwo  of  these 
manuals,  the  Gramageyagana,  or  Congregational,  ajQfi* 
the  Ajanyagana  or  Forest  Song-book,  follow  the  order 
of  the  verses  of  Part  I.  of  the  Sanhita,  and  two  others, 


IV 


PREFACE. 


the  UhagStiaand  the  UhyagSna,  of  Part  II.  TlvsPart 
is  less  disjointed  than  Part  I.,  and  is  generally  arranged 
in  triplets  whose  first  verse  is  often  the  repetition  of  a 
verse  that  has  occurred  in  Part  I. 

There  is  no  clue  to  the  date  of  the  compilation  of  the 
Samaveda  Hymns,  ior  has  the  compilers  name  been 
handed  down  to  us.  Such  a manual  was  unnecessary  in 
the  early  times  when  the  Aryans  first  came  into  India, 
but  was  required  for  guidance  and  use  in  the  complicated 
ritual  elaborated  by  the  invaders  after  their  expansion 

and  settlement  in  their  new  homes. 

« 

There  are  three  recensions  of  the  text  of  the  Sdma- 
veck  sanhitd,  the  Kauthuma  St\kh&  or  recension  is  cur- 
rent in  Guzerat,  the  Jairniniya  in  the  Carnatic,  and  the 
lianayanlya  in  the  Mahratta  country.  A translation, 
by  Dr.  Stevenson,  of  the  Raydyaniya  recension— or, 
rather,  a free  version  of  Sayana’s  paraphrase — was  edited 
by  Professor  Wilson  in  1842;  in  1848  Professor  Benfey 
of  Gottingen  brought  out  an  excellent  edition  of  the 
same  text  with  a metrical  translation,  a complete  glos- 
sary, and  explanatory  notes;  and  in  1874 — 1878  Pandit 
Satyavrata  Samasrami  of  Calcutta  published  in  the 
Bibliotheca  Imlica  a most  meritorious  edition  of  the 
Sanhitd.  according  t/’  the  samet-recension,  with  Say  ay  a s 
Conniientarj,  portions  of  Qio  Song-books,  aud  other 
illustrative  matter.  I have  followed*  Benfey’s  text,  and 
¥lave  made  much  use  of  his  glossary  and  notes.  Pandit 
Satyavrata  Samasrami’s  edition  also  has  been  q f the 
greatest  service  to  me.  ^T<>  Mr.  Venis,  Principal  of  tho 


PREFACE. 


V 


Benares  Sanskrit  College,  I am  indebted  for  the  loan  of 
cth<4  College  manuscripts  of  the  text  and  commentary. 

. I repeat  the  expression  of  my  obligations  to  those 
scholars*  whose  works  assisted  me  in  my  translation  of 
the  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda  For  help  in  translating  the 
non-Rigvcdic  hymns  of  the  S&mave>la  I am  additionally 
indebted* to  the  late  Professor  Benfey  and  to  Professor 
Ludwig  whose  version  will  be?  found  in  his  Dev  liigveda, 
vol.  iy,  pp.  19 — 25. 

f For  further  information  regarding  the  S&maveda 
Weber’s  History  of  Indian  Literature,  and  M.’Muller’s^ 
History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature , or  the  article  on 
the  Veda  in  Chambers’s  Encyclopaedia  shouljl  be  con- 
sulted. 

T.  II.  GRIFFITH. 

KOTAGIRI,  NlLGIRI  : 

29  th  May , 1393. 


CONTENTS. 


Page 

Preface  ...  ...  ...  III.— v. 

Hymns,  Translation  and  Commentary  : — 

Part  I. 


Book  I. 

• * 11. 

•«  TTT. 

■ IV. 

. V. 

- VI. 

Part  II.  ' 

Book  1. 

..  II. 

- <11. 

IV.  , 

- V. 

■ VI. 

..  VII.  ...  < 

- VIII. 

IX. 

•Appendices  : — 

I.  Index  of  Hymn!? 

II.  List  of  References  to  the  Rigveda^  • 
III.  List  of  Stanzas  not  found  in  the  Rigveda 
iy.  • Index  of  Names,  fitc. 

Corrigenda  • . 


1 
23 
•39 
59  • 
81 


119 

141 

m 

187 

211 

241 

269 

293 

319 


. i — XII. 

. XIII.— XXV. 

. XXVII. 

. XXIX. — XXXVII. 

. XXXVIII. 

*# 


TH^  ^YMNS  OF  THE  SAMAVEDA. 


PA-RT  THE  FIRST. 


BOOK*  I. 

CHAPTER  I. 

Om.  Glory  to  the  S&maveda  ! To  Lord  Ganesa  glory ! Om. 

DECADE  I*  Agni. 

Come,  Agni,  praised  .with  song,  feast  and  sacrifi- 
cial offering : sit 
As  Hotar  on  the  holy  grass ! 

The  benedtetory  line  is  a modern  addition.  Om  is  a sacred  cxclama- 
tion*yiat  may  be  ^ttered — inaudibly  to  profane  ear« — at  the  beginning 
and  end  of  a reading  of  the  Vedas  or  l^efore  a prayer.  Ganesa , Lord 
of  the  Ganas  or  troops  of  inferior  deities,  is  a post-Vedic  God,  regarded 
as  the  remover  of  obstacles  and  ^ence  propitiated  at  the  beginning  of 
jjnportant  undertakings  and  invoked  at  the  commencement  of  books. 

The  mefrre  of  the  hymn  is  dGayatrf,  each  stanza  consisting  of  three 
octosyllabic  P&das  or  divisions,  two  of  which  form  the  first  line  and 
one  flie  second. 

1 Agni : fire,  and  th$  God  of  fire.  Agni  is,  next  to  Indra,  the  most 
prominent  of  tRe  deities  of  the  Rigveda.  iff  the  messenger  and 
mediator  between  earth  and  heaven^  announcing  to  the  Gods*  the 
hymns,  £nd  conveying  to  th*ni  the  oblations,  of  theij  worshippers. 
Sacrificial  offering : oblation  oighritam,  ghi , or  clarified  butter,  sprinkled 
upon ’the  sacrificial  fire.  Hotar:  or  hotri  or  hold  (from  hu>  tV 
sacrifice),  the  Presenter,  the  ministering  priest  who  offers  $ie  oblation ; 
or  (fronj  hve,  to  call)  tho  priest  who  invites  the  Gods  to  the  sacrifice, 
the  invoker  or  Herald.  Agni  concentrates^n  himself  the  various  sacri- 
ficial duties  of  the  different  classes  of  human  priests,  and  is  more 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  T. 


2 *0  Agni,  thou  hast  been  ordained  Hotar  of  every 

By  Gods0, "among  the  race  of  men.  ^ #f  {his 

3 Agni  we  choose  as  envoy,  P 

holy  rite, 

4 £££  bright,  throngh  love 

of  song  may 'Agni,  bent 
On  riches,  smite  the  Vritras  dead 

5 I laud  your  most  beloved  guest  like  a ear  > 

0 Agni,  him 

Who,  like  a chariot,  wins  us  wealth 

6 Do  thou,  O Agni,  with  great  might  guard  us  fr 

all  malignity, 

Yea,  from  the  hate  of  mortal  man  ! 

especially  tluvHntar^lTv^^  tec  sound  of  his 

flames  and  presenting  to  them  the  oblations  l*  ic  oc  | trimmed 

grass : Kusa  or  Dari, ha  grass  .(Poa  Cynosuro.des),  Cippc  Unmm  d 
and  strewn  on  the  floor  of  the  sacrificial  chamber  a.  a seat  for  he  Gods 
and  for  the  sacVificers.  This  stanza,  seen  by,  or  revealed  to,  the  R« 
or*  inspired  sage  o*  seer  Blwmdvija,  is  the  tenth  vc.se  of  Hymn  X . 
of  Book  VI.  of  the  Rigveda. 

2 Revealed  to  Bharadvaja.  Rigveda  VI.  16.  1. 

3 Revealed  to  Medhitithi.  Rigveda  I.  12.  1.  Po^sor  of  all 
wealth  : all  riches  are  at  Agni’s  disposal,  and  he  is  the  most  bounty 
rewarder,  both  directly  and  indirectly,  of  the  pious  worshippers  whose 
oblations  he  carries  to  the  Gods. 

4 Revealed  to  Bharadvaja.  Rigveda  VI.  16.  34.  Jhe  \r'tras  : the 
enemies,  the  oppresw»rp,or  obstructors,  are  especia  y e e"10" 
drought,  the  hostile  powers  of  the  atmosphere  who  malevolently  w.th- 

hold  the  flow  of  the  seasonable  rain.  , 

5 Revealed  to  Usana  Kavya.  The  reading  of  the  R-gveda,  VIII. 
A3  1,  is  Agnim  the  accusative  case  in  the  place  of  the  vocative  Ague. 

Your:  the  sacrifice^’.  Like  a chariot:  that  enriche.  its  owner  by 
winning  races;  ratham  being  in  the  accusative  case  by  attraction 

after  na. 

6 Revealed  to  Suditi  or  Purumilha.  Rigveda  VIII.  60.  1. 


•3 


1.  u 2.]  THE  SAMAVEDA. 

7 O come ; far  other  songs  of  praise  will  I sing 

forth  to  thee. 

Wax  mighty  with  these  Soma-drops ! 

8 May  Vatsa  draw  thy  mind  away  even  fj*om  thy  loft- 

iest dwelling-place ! 

Agni,  I yearrrfor  thee  with  song. 

9 Agnj,  Atharvan  brought  thee  forih  by  rubbing  from 

the  sky,  the  head  , 

Of  all  who  offer  sacrifice. 

10  O Agni,  bring  us  radiant  light  to  be  our  mighty 
succour,  for 

Thou  art  our  visible  deity  ! 

DECADE  II.  Agni: 

0 Agni,  God,  the  people  sing  reverent  praise  to  thee 
for  strength : 

With  terrors  trouble  thou^the  foe  I 

7 Revealed1  to  Bharadv & ja.  Rigveda  VI.  16.  16.  Other:  different, 
thatfis.  more  excellent. 

i ’> 

8 Revealed  to  Vatsa  of  the  family  of  Kanva.  The  reading  of  the 
Rigveda,  VIII.  11.  7,  i akdmayd  in  the  place  of  kdmaye: — ‘Agni,  with 
song  that  yearns  for  thee/ 

9 Bharadvaja  is  the  Risbi.  pigveda  VI.  16.  13.  Atharvan:  the 
sage  who  wks  the  first  to  obtain  fire,  to  institute  sacrifice,  and  to  offer 
up  prayer  and  libations  of  Soma.  From  the  rjcy  : pufitkardt : literally, 
from  the  blue  lotus,  which  is  apparently  a figurative  expression  for 
heaven.  The  head  of  1 all  who  offer  sacrifice  : according  to  Professor 
Ludwig,  ‘ the  head  of  the  priest  Visva,’  that  is,  the  summit  of  Heaven, 
Visva  (All,  universal)'  being  ^appa/cntly  sometimes  u$ed  as  a name  of 
Dyaus  ttr  Heaven. 

10  Vamadeva  is  the  Rishi,.  This  stanza  is  not  found  in  the  Rigveda* 

t 

The  metre  is  G^yatri. 

1 Rigveda  VIII.  64.  10.  Ascribed  to  Vj^upa  of  the  family  of  Angiras 
by  the  Anukramanika  or  Index  of  the  Rigveda,  and  to  Ahi  or  Virupa 
by  Say  ana’s  Commentary  on  the  Samaveda. 


4 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  L 

2 I seek  with  song  your  messenger,  oblation-bearer, 

lord  of  wealth, 

Immortal,  best  at  sacrifice, 

3 Still  turning  to  their  aim  in  thee  the1' sacrifice's 

sister  hymns 

Have  come  to  thee  before  the  wind, 

4 To  thee,  illumJner  of  night,  0 Agni,  day  by  day 

with  prayer, 

Bringing  thee  reverence,  we  come. 

5 Help,  thou  who  knowest  lauds,  this  work,  a lovely 

hymn  jn  Rudra’s  praise, 

Adorable  in  every  house ! 

6 To  this  fair  sacrifice  to  drink  the  milky  draught  art 

thou  called  forth : 

0 Aghi,  with  <the  Maruts  came  ! 

7 With  homage  will  I reverence  thee,  Agni,  like  a 

long-tailed  steed, 

Imperialjtard  of  holy  rites. 

2 Ascribed  to  Vamadeva.  Rigveda  IV.  8.  1.  Yow  messenger:  Agni, 
who  conveys  to  the  Gods  the  oblations  of  their  woahippers. 

3 Rigveda  VIII.  91.  13.  Ascribed  to  Prayoga  of  the  family  of 
Bhrigu.  Before  the  wind:  or,  in  front  of  the  wind,  which  fans  the 
sacrificial  fire. 

4 Rigveda  I.  1.  7.  Ascribed  to  Madhuchchhandas. 

5 Rigveda  I.  ?7.  10.,  Ascribed  to  Sunahsopa.  Tkon  who  kjiowest 

lauds:  jarfihodha:  the  Rishi  apparently  addresses  himself.  Rudra , 
the  roaring,  or  more  probably  the  bright  red  (Sod,  is  in  this  place  a 
name  of  Agni.  r# 

6 bigveda  I.  J9.  1.  Ascribed  tocMedl|itithi. • MWcy  draught:  milk 
mingled  with  Soma  juice.  Maruts : the  Gods  of  wind  aiuf  storm,  the 

* special  friends  and  allies  of  Indra. 

7 Rigveda  I.  27.  1.  Ascribed  to  Sunahsopa.  IAkb  a long-tailed 
steed:  Agni,  or  Fire,  is  likened  to  a horse  probably  on  account  of  his 
impetuosity ; and  his  long  flames,  driven  by  the  wind,  are  •compared 
to  the  horse’s  flowing  tail.  S&yana  explains  : ‘scattering  our  foes  with 
thy  flames  as  a horse  brushes  away  the  flics  that  trouble  him.* 


i.  i.  3.]  THE  SAMAVEDA.  V 

8 As*Aurva  and  as  Blirigu  called,  as  Apnav&na  called, 

• I call 

* Thb  radiant  Agni  robed  with  sea. 

& When  he  enkindles  Agni,  man  should  with  his  heart 
attend  the  song  : 

I kindfe  Agni'  fill  he  glows. 

10  Then,  verily,  they  see  the  light  refulgent  of  primeval 
seed,  • t 

Kindled  on  yonder  side  of  heaven. 

DECADE  III.  Agni. 

ECither,  for  powerful  kinship,  I call  Agni,  him  who 
prospers  you, 

Most  frequent  at  our  solemn  rites. 

2’  May  Agni  with  his  pointed  blaze  cast  down  each 
fierce  devouring  fiend f 
May  Agni  win  us  wealth  by  war ! 

8 Rigveda  VIII.  91.  4.  Ascribed  to  Prayoga.  Aurva:  grandson 

• of  the  ancieijt  Rishi  or  primeval  patriarch  Bhrigu.  • Apnavdna : an- 

otf^pr  ancient  Rishi  of  the  family  of  Bhrigu,  mentioned  in  Rigveda 
IV.  7.  1 in  connexion  with  the  earliest  worship  of  Agni.  Robed  with 
sea : surrounded,  in  his  form  of  lightning,  by  the  firmament  or  sea 
of  air.  0 

. 9 Rigveda  VIII.  91.  22.  Ascribed  to  Prayoga.  With  his  heart:  a 

devout  spirit  will  compensate  the  want  of  milk-libation  and  properly 

• prepared  fuel  for  sacrifice.  Till  he  glows : vivasvabhih  used  in  an 
adverbial  sense:  ‘with  darkness-dispelling  offerings’: — Stevenson. 
‘‘With  the  priests,’  according  to  Sayapa. 

10  RigvedS,  VIII.  6.  30.  Ascribed  to  Va^sa*  The  light:  the  sun 
which  is  lighted  up  beyond  the  range  of  men’s  sight.  Indra,fwho  is 
idcntifjpi  with  the  Sun*  is  the  deity  of  the  stanza..  • 

The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

1 Rigvedf  VIII.  91.  7.  Ascribed  to  Prayoga.  For  powerful  kin- 
ship : I follow  Professor  Ludwig  in  taking  naptre  to  be  the  locative 
case  of  *napiram  with  a dative  signification.  Stevenson  translates 
differently  : ‘ that  thou  mayest  strengthen  our  children.’ 

2 Rigveda  VI.  1G.  28.  Ascribed  to  Bliarad vaja. 


6 THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  I. 

3 Agni,  be  gracious ; thou  art  great : thou  hast  ap- 

proached the  pious  man, 

Hast  come  to  sit  on  sacred  grass. 

4 Agni,  preserve  us  from  distress : consume  our  ene- 

mies, 0 God, 

Eternal,  with  thy  hottest  flames ! 

5 Harness,  0 Agni,  0 thou  God,  thy  steeds  which  are 

most  excellent ! 

The  fleet  ones  bring  thee  rapidly. 

6 Lord  of  the  tribes,  whom  all  must  seek,  we,  worship- 

ped Agni ! set  thee  down, 

Refulgent,  rich  in  valiant  men. 

'7  Agni  is  head  and  height  of  heaven,  the  master  of  the 
earth  is  he : , 

He  quickeneth  the  waters’  seed. 

8 O Agni,  graciously  announce  this  our  good  fortune 
to  the  Gods, 

And  this  our.newest  hymn  of  praise  1 


3 Rigveda  IV.  9.  1.  Ascribed  to  V^madcva.  There  is  a slight 
variation  in  the  Samaveda  reading. 

4 Rigveda  VII.  15.  13.  Ascribed  to  Vasishtha. 

5 Rigveda  VI.  16.  43.  Ascribed  to  Bharadv&ja.  In  the  third  IJada, 
the  second  line  of  the  translation,  instead  of  daavah , ‘ the  fleet  ones,’ 
the  Rigveda  has  many  me  : * The/  bear  thee  as  thy  spirit  wills. * 

6 Rigveda  VII.  15.  7. f * Ascribed  to  Vasishtha.  The  Rigveda  has 
deva , <Sod ! in  tlje  place  of  vayarr,  1 we/  Rich  in  valiant  men ; 
iuvtram : giver  of  brave  sons  to  thy  worshippers.  * Supereminently 
heroic/ — Stevenson. 

Y Rigveda  VIII.  44.  16.  Ascribed  to  Virfipa.  He  quickeneth  the 
waters'  seed:  Agni  in  the  form  of  lightning  impregnates  the  watery 
clouds  and  so  causes  the  rain  t<?  flow, 

8 Rigveda  I.  27.  4.  Ascribed  to  Sunahsepa.  Good  fortune : effect- 
ual prayer  or  oblation. 


THE  SlMAVEDA. 


71 


i.  i.  3.] 

9  B/ song,  0 Agni,  Angiras!  Gopavana  hath  brought 
• Jhee  forth : 

H'ear  thou  my  call,  refulgent  one  ! 

10  Agni,  th«  Sage,  the  Lord  of  Strength,’'  hath  moved 
. around  the-sacred  gifts, 

Giving  the  offerer  precious  things. 

11  His  heralds  bear  him  up  flloft,  the  God  who  knoweth 

all  that  lives, 

The  Sun,  that  all  may  look  on  him. 

12  Praise  Agni  in  the  sacrifice,  the  Sage  whose  holy 

laws  are  true, 

The  God  who  driveth  grief  away. 

13  Kind  be  the  Goddesses  to  lend  us  help,  and  kind 

that  we  may  drink  : 

May  their  streams  bring  us  health  and  wealth  ! 

j — 

Rigveda  VIII.  63.  II.  Ascribed  to  Gopavaryi.  Angiras:  a name 
of  Agni,  regarded  as  the  best  or  eld^sUof  the  primeval  priestly  family 
of  the  Angirasas.  The  reading  of  the  Rigveda  is  slightly  different, 

yam  tod chanishthad  instead  of  tam  tod. . . ,.janish{kad ; ‘Thou  whom 

Gopavana  made  glad.’ 

10  Rigveda  IV.  15.  3.  Ascribed  to  Vamadeva.  Hath  moved  arovnd : 
carried  as  sacrificial  fire  from  one  altar  or  receptacle  to  another. 

11  Rigveda  I.  50.  1,  Ascribed  to  Praskanva,  or  to  Kanva.  Heralds: 
rays  of  light  that  announce  his  approach.  The  Sun:  Surya  the  Sun- 
god,  with  whom  Agni  is  identified,  is  thc*»deity  of  the  hymn  from 
which  the  stanza  is  taken. 

12  Rigveda  I.  12.  7.  Ascribed  to  Medh&tithi. 

13  Rigveda  X.  9.  4,  Ascribed  by  the  Rigveda  Index  to  Trisir&s^oif 
of  Tvashtarf  or  to  Sindhudvipa,  son  of  Ambarisha,  but  by  the  Sama- 
veda  Commentary  to  Sindhudvipa,  or  to  Trita  Aptya.  * Goddesses : the 
deified  Waters,  the  deities  to  whom  ^ie  original  hymn  is  addressed. 
The  reading  of  the  Rigveda  differs  slightly : 1 The  Wators  be  to  us  for 
drink,  Goddesses  for  our  aid  and  bliss.’ 


THE  limits  OF 


[PAST  I. 


14  Lord  of  the  brave,  whose  sOjigs  dost  thou  in  thine 

abundance  now  inspire, 

Thou  whose  hymns  help  to  win  the  kine ? 

DECADE  IV.  Agni. 

Sing  to  yoar  Agni  with  each  song,  at  every  sacrifice 

for  strength,  s 

Come,  let  us  praise  the  wise  and  everlasting  God 
even  as  a well-belov&h  friend. 

2 Agni,  protect  thou  us  by  one,  protect  us  by  the 

second  song, 

Protect  us  by  three  hymns,  O Lord  of  powef  and 
might,  bright  God,  by  four  hymns  guard  us  well ! 

3 O Agni,  with  thy  lofty  beams,  with  thy  pure  brilli- 

ancy, O God, 

Kindled,  most  youthful  one  ! , by  Bharadvaja’s  hand, 
shine  on  us  richly,  holy  Lord  ! 

14  Rigveda  VIII.  73.  7.  Ascribe!  to  Usana  Kavya.  Lord  of  the 
brave:  satpate:% Tho  Rigveda  has  dampaie , ‘lord  of  the  house:’  it  • 
also.reads  parlnaso  instead  of  .partnasi . Tho  third  Pada,  or  second 
line,  is  translated  differently  by^^evenson : ‘his,  whoso  voice  is  employed 
in  praising  thee  during  this  moon-plant  sacrifice.' 

The  metre  Is  Brihati,  consisting  of  tw<$  Padas  or  divisions  of  eight 
syllables  each  in  tho  first  line,  and  two  of  twelve  and  eight  syllables  • 
respectively  in  the  second  line.  ' 

1 Rigveda  VI.  48.  1.  Ascrilred  in  the  Rigveda  Index  to  Sarny  n,  • 

but  in  Say  ana’s  Cofnmcntetry  on  the  Samavdda  to  Bharadvaja.  Let  us 
praise : it  seems  necessary  to  take  the  singular  xerb  with  tho  plural 
pronoun.  * 

2 Rigveda  VIII.  49.  9.  Ascribed  to  Bharga,  son  of  Pmgatha.  By 
four  hymns : accoAling  to  Say  ana  the  four*  Vedas  are  meant;  .hut  tlio 
text  has  only  chatasribhih , by  four,  and  tho . reference  may  bo  to  tho 

quarters  of  the  heavens. 

3 Rigveda  VI.  48.  7.  Ascribed  to  Samyu  (see  note  on  stanza  1), 
but  in  S&yana’s  Commentary  on  tho  Samaveda  attributed  to  Trinapani. 
The  reading  of  tho  Rigveda  is Erevan  nah  sukra  didihi  dyumat*  pdvaka 
dldihi : ‘Shine  on  us,  0 bright  God,  with  wealth,  shine,  Purifier ! 
splendidly.’ 


i.  i.  4.]  THE  sAmaveda.  ‘a 

4 0 Agni  who  art  worshipped  well,  dear  let  our  princes. 

%be  to  thee, 

• OuV  wealthy  patrons  who  are  governors  of  men,  who 
part,  as  gifts,  the  stall  of  kine  ! 

5 Agni,  praise-singer  ! Lord  of  men,  God ! burning  up 

the  Rakshasas, 

Mighty  art  thou,  the  ever-present,  household-lord! 
home-friend  and  guarcljan  from  the  sky. 

6 Immortal  J&tavedas,  thou  bright-hued  refulgent  gift 

of  Dawn, 

Agni,  this  day  to  him  who  pays  oblations  bring  the 
’ Gods  who  waken  with  the  morn  ! 

7 Wonderful,  with  thy  favouring  help,  send  us  thy 

bounties,  gracious  Lord. 

Thou  art  the  charioteer,  Agni,  of  earthly  wealth : 
find  rest  and'safety  for  our  seed1! 

8 Famed  art  thou,  Agni,  far  and  wide,  preserver, 

righteous,  and  a Sage. 

The  holy  singers,  0 enkindled  radiant  oAe,  ordainers, 
call  on  thee  to  come. 

9 O holy  Agni,  give  us  wealth  famed  among  men  and 

strengthening  life  [ 

4 Rigveda  VII.  16.7.  inscribed  to  Vasishtha.  Princes : stir  ay  ah: 
wealthy  men  who  institute  sacrifices,  defray  the  charges,  and  reward 
the  officiating  priests  with  gifts  of  gold,  robes,,  horsey  and  cattle. 

5 Rigvcda  VIII.  49.  19.  Ascribed  to  Bharga  (see  note  on  2),  but 
in  the  Commentary  An  the  Samavefla  to  Rharadv&ja.  Rdkshasas : 
fiends  or  ogres  who  wander  about,  especially  a?  night,  disturbing  sacri- 
fices and  pious  men,  and  showing  general  hostility  to  the  human  Pace. 

6 Rigvcda  I.  44.  1.  Ascribed  to  Praskanva.  Jdtavedas : the  wise 
or  omniscient ; a frequently-occurring  appellative  of  Agni.  Gift  %of 4 5 6 7 8  9 
Dawn : f reality  kindled  and  given  to  men  at  break  of  day. 

7 Rigveda  VI,  48.  9.  See  note  on  stanza  3.  The  charioteer : the 
forwarded. 

8 Rigveda  VIII.  49.  5.  See  note  on  stanza  2.  Ordainers : arrangers 

of  the  sacrifice. 


10  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  /. 

Bestow  on  us,  0 helper,  that  which  many  crav<5,  more 
glorious  still  through  righteousness ! 

10  To  him,  who  dealeth  out  all  wealth,  the  sweet-toned 
Hotar-priest  of  men, 

To  him  like  the  first  vessels  filled  'with  savoury  juice, 
to  Agni  let  tbo  lauds  go  forth. 

DECADE  V.  Agni 

With  this  mine  homage  I invoke  Agni  for  you,  the 
Son  of  Strength, 

Dear,  widest  envoy,  skilled  in  noble  sacrifice,  immor- 
tal'messenger  of  all. 

* 2 Thou  liest  in  the  logs  that  are  thy  mothers : mortals 
kindle  thee. 

Alert  thou  beaVest  off  the  sacrifice's  gift,  and  then 
thou  shinest  to  the  Gods. 

3 He  hath  appeared,  best'prosperer,  in  whom  men  lay 
• their  holy  jicts  : . „ 

So  may  our  songs  of, praise  come  nigh*  to  Agni  who 
was  born  to  give  the  Ary  a strength  ! 

- s . — 

9 Rigveda  VIII.  49.  11.  Helper:  or,  affable. 

10  Rigveda  VIII.  92.  6.  Ascribed  to  Sobhari  or  Saubhari.  Let  the 
lauds  go  forth : the  Rigveda  has  yanli  instead  of  yantu ; ‘To  Agni’ 
songs  of  praise  go ‘forth.’  v 

The  metre  is  Brihafc?. 

r' 

1 Rigveda  VII.  1G.  1.  Ascribed  to  Vasishtha.  Son  of  Strengths 
the  sacrificial  fisc  being  produced*  by  J,he  violent  agitation  of  tho 
fire-drill,  consisting  of  two  pieces  of  wood  called  arani. 

4 c8  Rigveda  VIII.  49.  15.  Ascribed  to  Bharga.  The  Rigveda  reading 
differs : * Thou  liest  in  tho  logs : from  both  thy  mothers  Mortals  kindle 
thee.’  To  the  foods : or,  among  the  Gods. 

3 Rigveda  VIII.  92.  1.  Ascribed  to  Sobhari  or  Sanbhari.1  In  the 
Rigveda,  in  the  second  line,  the  verb  is  in  the  indicative  mood  instead 
of  the  imperative. 


i.  i.  5.]  THE  SAMA  VEDA . IV 

4 Chief  Priest  is  Agni  at  the  laud,  as  stones  and  grass 

« at  sacrifice. 

Gods  ! Maruts ! Brahmanaspati ! I crave  with  song 
the  help  that  is  most  excellent. 

5 Pray  Agni  of  the  piercing  flame,  with  sacred  songs, 

to  be  our  help  ; 

For  wealth,  famed  Agni,  Purufnllha  and  ye  men  ! 
rfe  is  Sudlti’s  sure  deftnce. 

6 Hear,  Agni  who  hast  ears  to  hear,  with  all  thy  train 

of  escort  Gods  ! 

With  those  who  come  at  dawn  let  Mitra,  Aryaman 
sit  on  the  grass  at  sacrifice.  # 

7 Agni  of  Divod&sa,  God,  comes  forth  like  Indra  in 

his  might. 

Rapidly  hath  he  moved  along  his  mother  dearth  : he 
stands  in  high  heavens  dwelling-place. 

4 Rigveda  VIII.  27.  1.  Ascribed  f*>  Manu  Vaivasvata.  Chief  Priest : 

* purohitah  ; or,  set  in  front.  At  the  laud : in  the  Ultha , a service  in 

which  certain  laudatory  verses  are  recited.  Stores  and  grass : stones 
for  crushing  the  stalks  of  the  Soma  plant  and  expressing  the  juice,  and 
Kusa  grass  trimmed  and  strewn  for  the  Gods  to  sit  upon.  In  tho 
Rigveda,  the  words  Maruts,  « Brahmanaspati,  and  Gods  are  in  the 
accusative  case  : ‘ With  song  I seek  Maruts  and  Brahmanaspati,  Gods, 
for  help  much  to  be  desired.,'  Brahmanaspati:  Lord  of  Prayer,  is  an 
^impersonation  of  the  power  of  devotion.  See  Rigveda,  Vol.  I.,  Index. 

5 Rigveda  VIII.  60.  14.  % Ascribed  to  SiuBti  and  *PurumiIha,  or  to 
Suditi  Purumilha.  He:  Agni.  The  Rigveda  reads  Agnim  instead  of 
Agnih : ‘Agn?,  to  liglit  our  dwelling  well,',  according  to  Professor 
Ludwig's  interpretation. 

6 Rigveda  I.  44.  13,  Ascribed  #to  Praskanva.  With  those  who  come 

at  dawn  : prdtarydvadbhik  the  Rigveda  reads  pr&tarydvdnah,  agreeing 
with  Mitra,  Aryaman,  and  Varuna  understood.  » > * 

7 Rigveda  Vi  II.  92.  2.  See  note  to  stanza  3.  Agni%  of  Divoddsa : 
Agni  whom  the  liberal  prince  Divod&sa  or  Atithigva  especially  worship- 
ped and  Claimed  as  his  tutelary  god.  Instead  of  deva  indro  na}  God, 
like  Indra,  the  Rigveda  reads  devdn  achchha  na , as  it  were  towards  tho 
Gods.  The  stanza  is  obscure. 


12  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  I. 

8 Whether  thou  come  from  earth  or  from  the  lofty 

lucid  realm  of  heaven,  < ' 

Wax  stronger  in  thy  body  through  my  song  of  praise: 
fill  full  *11  creatures,  O most  wise  ! 

9 If,  loving  well  the  forests,  thou  we'ntest  to.  thy 

maternal  floods, 

Not  to  be  scornbd,  Agni,  is  that  return  of  thino 
when,  from  afar,  thou  now  art  here., 

10  0 Agni,  Manu  stablished  thee  a light  for  all  the  race 
of  men: 

With  Kanva  hast  thou  blazed,  Law-born  and  waxen 
strong,  thou  whom  the  people  reverence. 


CHAPTER  II. 

- DECADE  I.  Agni. 

The  God  who  giveth  wealth  accept  your  full  libation 
poured  to  him ! 

.Pour  ye  it  out,  then,  fill  the  vessel  full  again,  for, so 
the  God  regardeth  you. 

8 lligveda  VIII.  1.  18.  Ascribed  to  Mcdliitithi  and  Mcdhy&tithi,  or 
to  the  former  only. 

9 Rigveda  111.  9.  2.  Ascribed  to  Visvamitra.  That  return  of  thine, : 
thy  descent  to  earth  from  the  celestial  waters  or  clouds  of  the  heavens 
in  which  thou  art  i>om  in.the  form  of  lightning. 

IQ  Rigveda  I.  36.  19.  Ascribed  to  Kanva,  or  according  to  Sayana’s 
Commentary  on  the  SAmayeda,  fo  Praskanva.  'Manu:  ,the  Man  par 
excellence , or  the  representative  man  and  father  of  the  human  race, 
regarded  as  the  first  institutor  of  sacrifices  and  religious  ceremonies. 
Law-born  • bom  from,  or  in  accordance  with,  the  eternal  Oft  which 
• ordains  sacrifice.  Kanva : the  Rishi  or  seer  of  the  hymn  from  which 
the  stanza  is  taken,  or  the  ancestor  of  Praskanva  to  vfthom  Sayana 
ascribes  it.  1 

The  metre  is  Brihati. 

1 Rigveda  VII.  16.  11.  Ascribed  to  Vasishtha.  The  Rigveda  haa 
* accepts.’ 


i.  ii.  1.]  THE  SAMAVEDA.  *13 

2 Let  Brahmanaspati  come  forth,  let  Sftnrit&  the  God- 

dess come, 

Asad  Gods  bring  to  our  rite  which  yields  a fivefold 
gift  the  hero,  lover  of  mankind  ! 

3 Stand  up*  erect  to  lend  us  aid,  stand  up  like  Savitar 

the  God, 

Erect  as  strength-bestower  when  we  call  on  thee  with 
p/iests  who  balm  our  offerings  ! 

4 The  man  who  bringeth  gffts  to  thee,  bright  God  who 

fain  wouldst  lead  to  wealth, 

Winneth  himself  a brave  son,  Agni  I skilled  in  lauds, 
- one  prospering  in  a thousand  ways. 

5 With  hymns  and  holy  eulogies  we  supplicate  your 

Agni,  Lord 

Of  many  families  who  duly  serve  the  Gods,  yea, 
him  whom  others  too  inflame.  ' 

6 This  Agni  is  the  Lord  of  great  prosperity  and  hero 

strength, 

Of  wealth  with  noble  offspring  and  with  store  of  kine, 
the  Lord  of  battles  with  the  foe. 

t <2 

, . ^ ^ 

2 Rigveda  I.  40.  3.  Ascribed  to  Kanva.  Brahmanaspati : the  Lord 
of  Prayer.  SUnritd : the  Goddess  of  true  and  pleasant  speech.  Five- 
fold gift : oblations  of  grain,  gruel,  curdled  milk,  rice-cake,  and  curds. 
The  hero : Agni. 

3 Rigveda  I.  36.  13.  Ascribed  to  Kanva.  Stand  up  erect : Agni, 
as  erect,  is  identified  by  Sayana  with  the  ytipa  oy  sacrificial  post  to 
which  the  victims  at  .an  animal  sacrifice  were  tied.  Accordingly  ho 
takes  anjihhih  to  mean  ‘with  unguents’  wherewith  the  post  was 
anointed.  ‘ By  our  oblation-bearing  priests.’-— Stevenson.  Like  Savitar : 
Savitar  is  the  Sun,  sometimes  identified  with,  and  sometimes ‘’distin- 
guished atom,  S&rya. 

4 Rigveda  VIII.  92.  4^  Ascribed  to  Sobhari  or  Saubhari. 
reading  of  the  Rigveda  differs  : ‘ The  man  whom  thou  wouldst  lead  to 
wealth.' 

5 Rigveda  I.  36.  1.  Ascribed  to  Ka?,va.  The  Rigveda  has  %\atey 
‘praise,’ or  ‘worship,*  instead  of  indhate , ‘kindle’  or  ‘inflame.’ 

6 Rigveda  III.  16.  1.  Ascribed  to  Utkila  or  Atkila. 


1*  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  I. 

7 Thou,  Agni,  art  the  homestead’s  Lord,  our  Hotar- 

priest  at  sacrifice. 

Lord  of  all  boons,  thou  art  the  Potar,  passing  'wise. 
Pay  worship,  and  enjoy  the  good ! 

8 We  as  thy  friends  have  chosen  thee,  mortals  a God, 

to  be  our  help,  • 

The  Waters’  Civ  Id,  the  blessed,  the  most  mighty  one, 
swift  conqueror,  and  without  a peer. 

DECADE  II.  " Agni. 

Present  oblations,  make  him  splendid  : set  ye  as 
Hotar  in  his  place  the  Home’s  Lord,  worshipped 

With  gifts  and  homage  where  they  pour  libations! 
Honour  him  meet  for  reverence  in  our  houses. 

2 Verily  wondrous  is  the  tender  youngling’s  growth 
whomever  dravveth  nigh  to  drink  his  mothers’  milk. 

As  soon  as  she  nho  hath  no  udder  bore  him,  he,  faring 
on  his  great  errand,  suddenly  grew  strong. 

7 Rigveda  VJI.  16.  5.  Ascribed  to  Vasishtha.  Potar:  the  Cleanser 
or  Purifier  : one?  of  the  sixteen  officiating  priests,  all  of  whose  functions 
are  concentrated  in  Agni. 

8 Rigveda  III.  9.  1.  Ascribed  to  Visvamitra.  The  Waters'  Child: 
Apamnapat,  Offspring  of  the  Waters,  is  a name  of  Agni  as  bom  in  the 
form  of  lightning  from  the  watery  cloudfc  of  the  aerial  ocean  or  firma- 
ment. Most  mighty : the  Rigveda  has  sudiditim , resplendent. 

The  metre  in  stanzas  2 and  4 is  Jagati — consisting  of  forty-eight 
syllables  arranged  in  four,Padas  of  twelve  .syllables  each,  two  P&das 
forming  a line  or  hemistich — , in  stanza  10  Virij  — a shortened  form 
of  Trishtup — , and  i*»  die  rest  Trisl i tup,  consisting  of  *four  P&das  of 
eleven  syllables  each,  two  Padas  forming  a line. 

1 Idiis  stanza  t is  not  found  in  *the  Jtigveda.  The  Home's  Lord: 
grikapnti , Lord  of  the  House,  Home,  or  Homestead,  is  a common  name 

• of  #Agni.  Where  they  pour  libations  : of  g\ritam  or  clarified  butter  on 
Agni  or  the  sacrificial  fire. 

2 Rigveda  X.  115.  1.  Ascribed  to  Upastuta.  The  tender  youngling 
is  Agni.  His  mothers  are  thj  two  fire-sticks,  the  lower  of  which,  in 
which  the  sparks  are  produced  by  friction,  being  she  who  hath  no  udder . 
His  great  errand : as  messenger  and  mediator  between  men  and  Gods. 


i,  ii.  2.]  the  sAmaveda. 

3 Here  is  one  light  for  thee,  another  yonder : enter 

the  third  and  be  therewith  united. 

Beautiful  be  thy  union  with  the  body,  beloved  in  the 
Gods’  sublimest  birthplace ! 

4 For  Jfttav.edas,  worthy  of  our  praise,  will  we  frame 

with  our  mind  this  eulogy  as  ’twere  a car  ; 

For  good,  in  his* assembly,  is  this  care  of  ours.  Let 
us  not,  in  thy  friendship,  Agni,  buffer  harm  ! 

5 Agnf  Vaisr&nara,  born  id  course  of  Order,  the 

messenger  of  earth,  the  head  of  heaven, 

The  Sage,  the  sovran,  guest  of  men,  our  vessel  fit  for 
their  mouth,  the  Gods  have  generated. 

6 Even  as  the  waters  from  the  mountain  ridges,  so 

sprang  the  Gods,  through  lauds,  from  thee,  0 Agni. 
To  thee  speed  hymns  and  eulogies,  as  horses  haste, 
bearing  him  who  loves  the  song,  to  battl*. 

3 Rigveda  X.  56.  1.  Ascribed  to  Brihadukthif.  The  stanza  in  the 
Rigveda  is  the  beginning  of  a funeral  hymn  in  which  the  Rishi  bids 
the  deceased  man  unite  himself  with  the  beams  of  the  heavenly  light, 
'one  light  being  the  fire  of  the  funeral  pile,  another , in  tfie  firmament, 
and  jhe  third  the  light  in  the  highest  region  aboje  the  firmament 
Here,  as  applied  to  Agni,  the  three  lights  arc  said  by  Sayana  to  be 
those  of  lightning,  the  Sun,  and  earthly  fire,  in  the  original  hymn 
the  body  means  a new  body  after  ^remation  ; but  here  the  Sun  appears 
to  be  intended.  The  reading  of  the  Rigvcda  in  the  second  line  differs 
slightly  from  .that  of  the  Sartyivoda,  samvesanah  instead  of  samvesatie. 

# 4 Rigveda  I.  94.  1.  Ascribed  to  Kutsa.  Jdtavedas : Agni,  the 
wise  or  omniscient  God.  As% ' twere.  a car : an  a carpenter  constructs 
a car  or  wain,  the  hymn  also  being  a chariot  which  travels  to  the  Gods. 

5 Rigveda  VJ.  7.  1.  Ascribed  to  Bharadvaj^  Wii&vdnara : common 
to,  dear  to,  or  dwelling  with,  all  Aryan  men.  In  course  of  Order:  in 
accordance  with  ritam,  the  eternal  iuw  which  Gods  and  men  obey  and 
by  which^the  whole  universe  is  regulated.  Our  vessel  Jit  for  their 
mouth : the  Gods  receive  oblations  through  Agni  who  is  called  their* 
mouth.  The  tGods  have  generated : 1 First  the  Gods  brought  the 
hymnal  into  being;  then  they  engendered  Agni,  then  oblation.’ — 
Rigveda  3i.  88.  8. 

6 Rigveda  VI.  24.  6.  Ascribed  to  Bharadv&ja.  There  are  several 
variations  in  the  verse  of  the  Rigveda,  which  is  addressed  to  Indra. — 


[PART  /. 


}fi  TUB  HYMNS  OF 

7 Win,  to  protect  you,  Rudra,  lord  of  worship,  priest 

of  both  worlds,  effectual  sacrifices 
Agni,  invested  with  his  golden  colours,  before  the 
thunder  strike  and  lay  you  senseless  ! 

8 The  King  whose  face  is  decked  with  oil  is  kindled 

with  homage  offered  by  his  faithful  servant. 

The  men,  the  priests  adore  him  with  oblations.  Agni 
hath  shone  forth  at  the  flush  of  morning. 

9 Agni  advanceth  with  his  lofty  bannei  : through  earth 

and  heaven  the  Bull  hath  loudly  bellowed. 

He  hath  come  nigh  from  the  sky's  farthest  limit:  the 
Steer,  hath  waxen  in  the  waters’  bosom.  1 
10  From  the  two  fire-sticks  have  the  men  engendered 
with  thoughts,  urged  by  the  hand,  the  glorious  Agni, 
Far-seen,  with  pointed  flame,  Lord  of  the  Homestead. 

4 By  song  and  sacrifice  men  brought*  the  waters  from  thee,  as  from  a 
mountain’s  ridge,  0 Indra.  Urging  thy  might,  with  these  fair  lauds 
they  seek  thee,  O theme  of  song,  as  horses  rush  to  battle.’  So  sprang 

the  Gods .from  thee  : * Fathei  of  Gods,  and  yet  their  son  wast  thou.1 

— Rigveda  I.  69.  1.  Bearing  the  lover  of  the  so?ig^:  carrying  Indra. 
According  to  Bcnfjy  * bearing  songs  of  praise/ 

7 Rigveda  IV.  3.  1.  Ascribed  to  Vamadeva,  Rudra:  the  bright 
red  God,  Agni.  Before  the  thunder  strike  : Professor  Ludwig,  in  liis 
Commentary  on  the  verse  in  the  Rigveda,  refers  to  Atharvaveda  XII. 
2,  9,  where  Agni  Kravyad,  or  Agni  in  his  most  terrific  form,  is  spoken 
of  as  the  God  of  Death  who  stupefies  men  with  his  thunderbolt. 

8 Rigveda  VII.  8.  1.  Ascribed  to  Vasishtha.  Offered  by  his  faithful 

servant : I follow  the  treading  of  the  Rigveda  sam  aryo  instead  of 
samaryo.  At  the  flush  of  morning:  the  sacrificial  fire  being  kindled  at 
break  of  day.  « 

9 Rigveda  X.  8.  1.  f Ascribed  to  Trisir&s.  The  Bull:  Agni,  so  called 
on  account  of  his  strength,  impetuosity,  and  the  noise  of  his  flames. 
In  the  water f bosom : in  the  lap  of  the  waters  of  the  firmaq^nt. 

10  Rigveda  VTT.  1.  1.  Ascribed  to  t Vasishtha.  With  thoughts: 
•with  religious  attention  and  devotional  thoughts.  According  to  Sayana 

didhitihhih  signifies  * with  fingers,’  this  meaning  being  attributed  to 
the  word,  wfthout  any  philological  grounds,  from  its  use  in  this  and 
similar  passages.  Urged  b ^ the  hand : hastaehyutam  : the  Rigveda  has 
hastachyuti,  the  noun  of  action  with  the  sense  of  the  instrumental 
case,  ‘with  the  hands’  swift  movement/ 


i.  ii.  3.] 


THE  SlMAVEDA,  ft 

DECADE  III.  Agni. 

A<^ni  is  wakened  by  the  people's  fuel  to  meet  the 
Dawn  who  cometh  like  a inilch-cow. 

Like  yout\g  trees  shooting  up  on  high  their  branches, 
his  flames  are  mounting  to  the  vault  of  heaven. 

2 Set  forth  the  gleaming  one,  the  gong-inspirer,  not 

foolish  with  the  foolish,  f^rt-desfroyer, 

Who  leadetfi  with  his  hymns  to  thought  of  conquest, 
gold-bearded,  richly  splendid  with  his  armour. 

3 Tl\ou  art  like  heaven  : one  form  is  bright,  one  holy, 

like  Day  and  Night  dissimilar  in  colour. 

All  magic  powers  thou  aidest,  self-dependent ! 
Auspicious  be  thy  bounty  here,  0 Pftshan  ! 

4 As  holy  food,  Agni,  to  thine  invoker  give  health  in 

cattle,  lasting,  rich  in  marvels  ! • 

To  us  be  born  a son  and  spreading  offspring.  Agni, 
be  this  thy  gracious  will4;o  us- ward  ! 


Tfco  metre  is  Trishtup. 

1 Rigveda  V.  1.1.  Ascribed  to  Budfia  and  Gavishthira.  The  second 
lino  is  difficult : — ‘ and  then  his  irradiations  proceed  aloft  to  the 
heavens,  like  the  flocks  of  moving  birds.’ — Stevenson.  ‘ Like  birds  (?) 
flying  up  to  a branch,  the  flames  of  Agni  went  up  to  heaven ; (or  liko 
strong  men  reaching  up  to). —Max  Muller. 

2 Qigveda  X.  46.  5.  Ascribed  to  Vatsapri.  There  arc  many  variations 
in  the  Rigveda  stanza : — ‘ The  foolish  [that  is,  human  priests  weak  and 
foolish  in  comparison  with  the  wise  Agni]  brought  £ho  ne’er-bewildered 
forward,  great,  victor,  song-inspircr,  fort-destrdyter.  Leading  the  youth 
gold-bearded,  like  a courser  gleaming  with  wealth,  they  turned  their 
hymn  to  profit.’  See  Prof.  LAd wig’s  interpretation  of  tl*e  Samaveda 
text  in  his  Commentary  on  tho  Rigveda  stanza. 

3 Rigveda  VJ.  58.  1.  Ascribed  to  Bharadvaja.  Holy : yajatam: 
apparently  a euphemism  for  ‘ dark.’  Pushan  in  the  original  hymn  is 
regarded  &s  the  Sun,  present  by  day  and  oven  in  his  absence  regulating 
the  night  also.  Magic  powers : of  the  GotJs. 

4 Rigveda  III.  1.  23.  Ascribed  to  Visvamitra. 

2 


THE  HYMNS  ON 


if 


[/‘•Mr  i 


5 Siablished  to  fill  the  juice  with  vital  vigour,,  giver 

of  wealth,  guard  of  his  servant’s  body, 

The  great  Priest,  born,  who  knows  the  clouds/abider 
with  men,  is  seated  in  the  waters’  edjly. 

6 Let  the  song,  honouring  the  best,  with  Iongino 

honour  the  ^.sura’s  most  famous  sovran, 

The  deeds  of  hhn  the  ^nighty,  deeds  like  Indra’s,  the 
manly  one  in  whom  the  folk  must  triumph  ! 

7 In  the  two  kindling-blocks  lies  Jutavcdas  like  the 

well-cherished  germ  in  pregnant  women, — 

Agni  who  day  by  day  must  be  entreated  by  men  who 
watch  provided  with  oblations. 

8 Agni,  from  days  of  old  thou  slayest  demons  : never 

shall  Iiakshasas  in  fight  o’ercome  thee. 

Burn  up  the  foolish  ones,  raw  flesh  dovourer.s  : let 
none  of  them  escape  thine  heavenly  arrow  ' 


5 Itigrcda  *X.  46.  1.  Ascribed  to  Vatsapri.  Tt  Jill  the  juice:  of 
tlio  Soma  plant.  4Thc  Ri^edit  roads  sn  te  instead  of  sute ‘ to  lend 
thee  vital  vigour.’  Who  knows  the,  clouds  : from  which  he  (Agni)  comes 
in  the  form  of  lightning.  In  the.  waters'  eddy : where  the  waters  of 
the  firmament  separate  and  descend.  ® 

6 Rigveda  VII.  6.  1.  Ascribed  to  Vasishtlia.  The  stanza  in  the 

Rigveda  has  important  variations Praise  of  the  Asura,  high  im- 
perial ruler,  the  yianly  qnc  in  whom  the  folk  must  triumph  -I  laud  his 
deeds  who  is  as  strong  as  Iiidra,  and  lauding  colei  irate  the  fort-destroyer/ 
Iji  the  Rigveda,  the  glsura,  thecgreat  superhuman  and  immortal  being, 
is  Agni,  but  in  this  stanza  of  the  Samaveda  Dyaus  or  Heaven  appears 
to  b<5  intended.  The  song : ylh : this  is  not  in  the  text,  but  must  bo 
understood.  * I follow  the  interpretation  given  in  his  Commentary  on 
the  Rigveda  by  Prof.  Ludwig.  » 

7 Rigveda  III.  29.  2.  Ascribed  to  Visvimitra.  Thk  variations  aro 
unimportant.* 

8 Rigveda  X.  87.  19.  #Ascrihed  to  Payu.  Demons:  ydhidhdndn : 
Rakshasas,  or  somewhat  similar  evil  spirits.  ‘ Yitudhina  giants.’— 
Stevenson. 


1.  II. 


THE  sAmaVEDA . 


19C 


DECADE  IV.  Agm. 

IteiNG  us  most  mighty  splendour  thou,  Agni,  resist- 
less on  thy  way : 

Prepare  for  us  the  path  that  leads  to  glorious  opu- 
lence and  strength ! 

2 May  the  bravehnan,  if  full  of  zeal  he  serve  and  kindle 

Agnis  flame, 

Duly  presenting  sacred  gifts,  enjoy  the  Gods*  protect- 
ing help. 

3 Thy  bright  smoke  lifts  itself  aloft,  and  far-extended 

, shines  in  heaven, 

For,  Purifier ! like  the  Sun  thou  beamest  with  thy 
radiant  glow. 

4 Thou,  Agni,  even  as  Mitra,  hast  a princely  glory  of 

thine  own. 

Bright,  active  God,  thou  makest  f^me  increase  like 
means  of  nourishment. 

5 At  dawn  let  Agni,  much-beloved,  guest  of  the  house, 

be  glorified,  # 

Jn  whom,  the  everlasting  one,  all  mortals  make  their 
offerings  blaze. 

G Most  moving  song  be  Agni’s  : shine  on  high,  0 rich 
in  radiant  light ! 

Like  the  chief  consort  of  a King  riches  and  strength 
proceed  from  th Se. 

The  metre  is  Anush  tup,  consisting  of  four  octosyllabic  Padas  or 
divisions. 

1 Rigveda,  V.  10.  1.  Ascribed  to  Gaya.  Th<*  Rigveda  verse  varies 

slightly  : — ‘ With  overflowing  store  of  wealth  prepare  for  us  a path  to 
strength.’  • * 

2 Thins  stanza  is  not  found  in  the  Rigveda.  The  Risbt  is  V amadeva. 

3 Rigveda  VI.  2.  6.  Ascribed  to  Bharadvaja. 

4 3jligveda*Vl.  2.  1. 

5 Rigveda  V.  18.  1.  Ascribed  to  Dvita.  ‘Immortal  who  delights 
in  all  oblations  brought  by  mortal  men/ 

6 Rigveda  V.  25.  7.  Ascribed  to  the  Vasuyus,  of  the  race  of  Atri. 
Like  the.  chief  consort  of  a King : as  the  chief  queen  proceeds  from  her 
home  in  royal  state. 


20 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  1. 


7 Exerting  all  our  strength  with  thoughts  of  potoer  we 

glorify  in  speech 

Agni  yoyr  dear  familiar  friend,  the  darling  guest  in 
every  house. 

8 His  beam  hath  lofty  power  of  life : sing  praise  to 

Agni,  to  the  Gocl 

Whom  men  have  set  in  foremost  place,  like  Mitra 
for  their  eulogy ! 

9 To  noblest  Agni,  friend  of  man,  chief  Vritra-slayer, 

have  we  come — 

Who  with  Srutarvan,  Riksha’s  son,  in  lofty  presence 
is  jnflamed. 

10  Born  as  the  loftiest  Law  commands,  comrade  of 
those  who  grew  with  him, 

Agni,  «the  sire  of  Kasyapa  by  faith,  the  mother, 
Manu,  Sag(*, 

DECADE  V.  Agni. 

We  in  King  Soma  place  our  trust,  in  Agni, < and  in 
Varurfe, 

# 7 — 

7 Rigveda  VIII.  63.  1.  Ascribed  to  Gopavana.  I follow  Prof.  Ludwig 

in  his  interpretation  of  this  stanza,  the  construction  of  which  is  difficult. 

8 Rigveda  V.  16.  1.  Ascribed  to€Puru.  Mitra:  the  Friend;  an 
Aditya  or  son  of  Aditi,  generally  associated  with  Vanina  and  regarded 
as  a form  of  the  Sun.  For  their  eulogy : ‘with  their  eulogies/ — 
Rigveda. 

9 Rigveda  VIII*  63.  4.  Ascribed  to  gopavana.  Tn  the  Rigveda 

the  second  line  varies : — ‘ Him  in  whose  presence  Riksha’s  son,  mighty 
Srutarvan,  waxes  grefft/  ^ 4 c 

10  This  stanza  is  not  found  in  the  Rigveda.  Those  who  grew  with  him  : 
his  own  flames.  Kasyapa : a celebrated  Rishi  of  ancient  time.  By 
faith:  I follow  Prof.  Ludwig  in  taking  sraddhd  as  an  insfemmcntal 

#cate.  ‘He,  too,  is  the  father  of  Kasyapa* the  all-faithful,  the  mother 
of  the  human  race,  the  supreme  law-giver,  the  all  wise. ’-V  Stevenson. 

The  metre  is  Anuslitup  as  in  Decade  IV.  • 

1 Rigveda  X.  141.  3.  Ascribed  to  Agni  Tapasa  in  the  Rigveda 
Index,  but  to  Vamadeva  by  Siyana  in  his  Commentary.  There  are 
•variations  in  the  Rigveda  verse : — ‘We  call  King  Soma  to  our  aid, 


i.  ii.  5.]  THE  SAMAVEDA.  21 

The  Aditya,  Vishnu,  Sftrya,  and  the  Brahman-priest 
*Brihaspati. 

2 Hence  have  these  men  gone  up  on  high  and  mount- 

ed to  the  heights  of  heaven  : 

On ! ccfhquer  on  the  path  by  which  Angirasas 
travelled  to* the  skies! 

3 That  thou  mayst  send  us  ampfc  wealth,  0 Agni, 

we  will  kindle  thee  : * 

So,  for  the  great  oblation,  Steer,  pray  Heaven  and 
Earth  to  come  to  us  ! 

4 Jle  runs  when  one  calls  after  him,  This  is  the  prayer 

of  him  who  prays. 

He  holds  all  knowledge  in  his  grasp  even  as  the  felly 
rounds  the  wheel. 

5 Shoot  forth,  O Agni,  with  thy  fhyne  : demolish  them 

on  every  side ! 

Break  down  the  Yatudlyina’s  strength,  the  vigour  of 
the  Rakshasa ! 


and  Agni  with  our  songs  and  hymns,  The  Adityas,  etc.’  The  Aditya  : 
or  son  of  Aditi,  is  especially  "Vanina.  Brahman-priest:  Brihasputi  is 

regarded  as  the  type  of  the  sacerdotal  order  and  High  Priest  of  the  Gods. 

• 

2 Stanzas  2 and  3 are  not  found  in  the  Rigveda.  Stanza  2 has  no 
apparent  connexion  either  with  the  preceding  or  the  succeeding  verse. 
Angirasas : the  Angirasas  or  children  of  Angiras  appear  to  have  been 
regarded  aiyi  race  <Jf  higher  beings  between  G^ds  and  men,  the  typical 
first  sacrificers  whose  ritual  is  the  pattern  wffich  later  priests  must  follow. 

3 Steer : strong  and  imyetuods  Agni.  According  to  Say  ana,' f raiuer 
of  blessings.’ 

4 Rigvec^i  II.  5.  3.  Ascribed  to  Somahuti,  or  to  Gritsamada.  *It  is 
difficult  to  make  sense  of  the  first  line  in  either  Veda.  ‘ What  my 
soul  utters,  Agni  lays  to  heart ; he  knows  where  sacrificial  viands  aro 
served  up.’ — Stovcnson. 

5 Rigveda  X.  87.  25.  Ascribed  to  Payu. 


THf  MISSION 

Horn  Wit  OF  cut  TUNE 
IISRARY 


•2  THE  SAMA  VEDA.  [PART  / 

6 Worship  the  Vasus,  Agni ! here,  the  Rudras  and 
Adityas,  all 

Who  know  fair  sacrifices,  sprung  from  Manu,^  scat- 
tering blessings  down  ! 

O O 


6 Rigveda  I.  45.  1.  Ascribed  to  Praskanva.  The  Vasus:  as  a class 
of  Cods,  eight  in  number,  were  at  first  personifications  of  natural 
phenomena.  The  Rudras:  a riuss  of  eleven  Cods,  originally  the 
Maruts  or  Cods  of  wind  and  storm.  The  Adityas  : Cods  of  celestial 
light,  regarded  in  later  times  as  twelve  Sun-gods.  See  Rigveda,  Vol.  1, 
pp.  23,  24.  Sprung  from  Man u : Manu  a])peurs  here  as  Prajaputi, 
the  progenitor  u/  Cods  as  well  as  men.  Scattering  blessings  : litJrally, 
sprinklin gj/hrita,  butter  or  fatness,  a figurative  expression  for  prosperity 
and  good  gifts.  ‘ The  givers  of  rain.’ — Stevenson. 


BOOK  II. 


CHAPTER  I. 

DECADE  I.  Agni. 

Agni,  thy  faithful  servant?  I call  upon  thee  with 
many  a gift, 

As  in  the  keeping  of  the  great  inciting  God. 

2 Te  Agni,  to  the  Hotar-priest  offer  your  best,  your 

•lofty  speech, 

To  him  ordaiuer-like  who  bears  the  light  of  ^bngs. 

3 0 Agni,  thou  who  art  the  lord  of  wealth  in  kine*, 

thou  Son  of  Strength, 

Bestow  on  us,  0 Jatamlas,  high  renown  ! 

4 Most  skilled  in  sacrifice,  bring  the  Gods,  0 Agni, 

to  the  pious  man  : 

A joyful  Priest,  thy  splentlour  drives  our#foes  afar! 

5 Taught  by  seven  mothers  at, his  bir^h  was  he,  for 

glory  of  the  wise. 

He,  firm  and  sure,  hath  set  his  mind  on  glorious 
wealth. 


• The  metre  is  Ushnih,  consisting  of  two  Padas  or  divisions  of  eight 
syllables  each  and  one  l‘ada of  twelve  syllables. 

1 Rigveda  I.  150.  1,  Ascribed  to  DJrghatamas. 

2 Rigveda  HI.  10.  5.  Ascribed  to  Visvamiira.*  Bears  the  light  of 
songs:  brightens  and  inspires  our  hvnnis. 

3 Rigveda  I.  79.  4.  Ascribed  to  Gotama  or  Gautama. 

4 Rigveda  III.  10.  7.  Ascribed  to  Yisvamitra. 

5 Rigveda  >X.  102.  4.  ’Ascribed  to  Trita  Aptya.  Soma  is  thV 
deity  or  deified  object  of  the  verse  in  the  Rigveda,  and  there  are 
variations  in  the  text.  The  seven  mothers : are  said  bv  Sayana  to  mean 
the  seven  metres,  or  seven  offerings,  or  kiiifis  of  sacrifice.  The  seven 
celestial  rivers  are  probably  intended. 


24  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  I. 

6 And  in  the  day  our  prayer  is  this : May  Aditi  come 

nigh  to  help, 

With  loving-kindness  bring  us  weal  and  chase  otir  foes! 

7 Worship  thou  Jdtavedas,  pray  to  him  who  willingly 

accepts, 

Whose  smoke  wanders  at  will,  and  none  may  grasp 
his  flame ! » 

8 No  mortal  man  can  e*er  prevail  by  arts  6f  magic 

over  him  * 

Who  hath  served  Agni  well,  the  oblation-giving  God. 

9 Agni,  drive  thou  the  wicked  foe,  the  evil-htearted 

thief  away, 

Far*  far,  Lord  of  the  brave  ! and  give  us  easy  paths ! 
40  0 hero  Agni,  Lord  of  men,  on  hearing  this  new 
laud  of  mine, 

Burn  clown  the  R&kshasas,  enchanters,  with  thy  flame  ! 

DECADE  II.  Agni. 

Sing  forth  to  him  the  holy,  most  munificent,  sublime 
with  his  refulgent  glow, 

To  Agni,  y*3  Upastutas  ! 

6 Rig veda  VIII.  18.  7.  Ascribed  to  Irimbithi,  or  Irimithi.  Aditi : 
the  Infinite,  or  Infinity,  personifieif  and  regarded  as  the  mother  of 
Gods.  See  M.  Muller,  Vedic  Hymns:  Part  I.  pp.  241  seqep,  for  an 
exhaustive  account  of  Aditi. 

7 Rigveda  VI JI.  23.  J.  Ascribed  to  Visvamanas. 

8 Rigveda  VIII.  23.  15.  The  oblation-bearing  Cod:  havyaddtaye : 
literally,  ‘ the  oblation  ^iver.’  # The  Rigveda  has  the  t easier  reading 
kavyaddtibhih , ‘with  sacrificial  gifts.' 

9 ‘Rigveda  VI.  51.  13.  Ascribe!!  to  Rijisvan. 

10  Rigvela  VIII.  23.  14.  Ascribed  to  Visvamanas,  who  is  the 
• Jgishi  of  stanza  8 also. 

The  metre  ns  Kakup,  consisting  of  three  P&das  (8  + 12  + 8 syllables),, 
in  stanzas  1-7,  and  Ushnih  (8  + 8 + 12)  in  stanza  8.  * 

1 Rigveda  VIII.  92.  8.  Ascribed  to  Sobhari  or  Saubhari.  Uyastuta*: 
singers  so  named  after  the  Rishi  Upastuta. 


ii.  i.  3.]  THE  SJMA  VEDA.  . 

2 Agui,  he  conquers  by  thine  aid  that  brings  him  store 

of  valiant  sons  and  does  great  deeds, 

Whose  bond  of  friendship  is  thy  choice. 

3 Sing  praise  to  him  the  Lord  of  lights  The  Gods 

have  mfide  the  God  to  be  their  messenger, 

To  bear  oblation  to  the  Gods. 

4 Anger  not  him  who  is  our  guest ! *He  is  the  bright 

Gad  Agni,  praised  by  many  a ihan, 

Good  Hotar,  skilled  in  sacrifice. 

5 May  Agni,  worshipped,  bring  us  bliss:  may  the  gift, 

blessed  one  ! and  sacrifice  bring  bliss, 

Y£a,  may  our  eulogies  bring  bliss  ! 

6 Thee  have  we  chosen  skilfullest  in  sacrifice,  immortal 

Priest  among  the  Gods, 

Wise  finisher  of  this  holy  rite. 

7 Bring  us  that  splendour,  Agni,  which  may’  overcome 

each  greedy  fiend  in  our  abode, 

And  the  malicious  wrath  of  men ! 

8 Soon  as  the  eager  Lord*  of  men  is  friendly  unto 

Manu’s  race 

'Agi\i  averteth  from  us  all  tjie  BAkshafeas, 

DECADE  III.  India. 

Sing  this,  beside  the  flawing  juice,  to  him  your  hero, 
much-invoked, 

To  please  him  as  a mighty  Bull  ! 

2 Rigveda  VIII.  19.  30.  # Sobhari  or  Saubtyiri  is  tjie  Rishiof  all  the 
stanzas  with  exception  of  th*e  last, 

3 Rigveda  VIII.  19*  1.  To  bear:  ‘tiiou  bearest — Benfey. 

4 Rigveda  VlII.  92.  12.  ‘Let  not  our  guesfrbe  wroth  with  us.’ 

5 Rigveda  VIII.  19.  19. 

6 Rigveda  VIII.  19.  3. 

7 Rigveda  VIII.  19.  15.  #*Thc  wrath  of  evil-hearted  folk.’ 

8 Rigveda  VIII.  23,  13.  * Ascribed  to  Visvamauas.  Mann’s  race  ; 
all  Aryan  men. 

The  metre  is  G&yatrl. 

1 Rigveda  VI.  45.  22.  Ascribed  to  Samyu  in  the  Rigveda  Index, 
but  in  Sayaim’s  Commentary  to  Bharadvaja.  Beside  the  flowing  juice : 
tute  sachd : when  the  Soma  juice  has  been  expressed  for  libation. 


to  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  L 

2 0 Satakratu  Indra,  now  rejoice  with  that  carouse  of 

thine 

Which  is  most  glorious  of  all ! 

3 Ye  cows,  protect  the  fount : the  two  mighty  ones 

bless  the  sacrifice. 

The  handles  twain  are  wrought  of  gold. 

4 Sing  praises  that  the  Jiorse  may  come  ; sing,  Sruta- 

kaksha,  that  the  cow 

May  come,  that  India’s  might  may  come  ! 

5 We  make  this  Indra  very  strong  to  strike  the  mighty 

Vritra  dead  : 

A vigorous  hero  shall  he  be. 


2 Rigveda  VIII.  81.  16.  Ascribed  to  Srutakaksha  or  Sukaksha. 
Satakratu:  a uanuf  of  Indra  signifying  possessor  of  a hundred  or 
many  powers  or  wise  designs.  According  to  Saynna,  the  word  means 
connected  with  many  acts  or  religious  rites  either  as  their  performer  or 
their  object,  t Carouse : wade. : the  word  thus  rendered,  is  the  rapture, 
transport,  delight^or  wild  joy  produced  by  drinking  the  exhilar/.ting 
juice  of  the  Soma  plant.  Most  glorious:  causing  Indra  to  bestow 
most  splendid  gifts  upon  his  worshippers. 

3 Rigveda  VIII.  61.  12.  Ascribed  to  Uaryata.  The  fount:  said  to 

mean  the  gharma  or  mahdmra . a pitcher  or  caldron  used  for  heating 
milk,  etc.  for  offerings  in  the  Pravargya'  ceremony.  Ye  cows ; whoso 
milk  is  to  be  used  for  sacrificial  purposes.  The  two  mighty  ones': 
Heaven  and  Earlh.  Jifess  the  sacrifice  : the  translation  is  conjectural, 
as  the  meaning  of  rapsudd  i»  unknown.  The*  handles : apparently  of 
the  /nahdvira  or  caldmir.  ' 

4 .Rigveda  VIII.  81.  2o.  Ascribed  to  Srutakaksha.  ‘Now  Sruta- 
kaksha sings  his  song  that  cattle  and ‘the  steed  may  come.’  Indra* 
might : or  Indra’s  self.  , 

5 Rigveda  VIII.  82.  7.  Ascribed  to  Sukaksha,  and  to  Srutakaksha. 
Vritra : for  Iudra’s  battles  with  Vritra  and  his  allies,  the  demons  of 
drought  who  obstruct  the  fall  of  the  seasonable  rain,  see  Rigveda 
1.  32  and  other  Hymns  widressed  to  Indra.  A vigorous  hero : or,  a 
strong  bull. 


ii.  i.  4.]  TIIE  sAmaveda.  2* 

6 Basejl  upon  strength  and  victory  and  power,  0 Indra, 

• is  thy  birth  : 

.Thoh,  mighty  one ! art  strong  indeed. 

7 The  sacrifice  made  Indra  great  when  he  unrolled  the 

earth,  and  made 
Himself  a diadem*  in  heaven. 

8 If  I,  Q Indra,  were,  like  thee,  the  single  ruler  over 

wealth 

My  worshipper  should  be  rich  in  kine. 

9 Prossers,  blend  Soma  juice  for  him,  each  draught 

most  excellent,  for  him 
The  brave,  the  hero,  for  his  joy. 

10  Here  is  the  Soma  juice  expressed:  0 Vasu,  drink 
till  thou  art  full  : 

Undaunted  God,  we  giv'e  it  thee  ! 

DECADE  IV.  India. 

• » 

SOrya,  thou  mountest  up  to  meet  the  hero  famous 

vfor  his  wealth, 

Who  hurls  the  bolt  and  works  for  man. 

T 

G Rigveda  X.  153.  2.  Ascribed  to  Indra’s  Mothers,  the  Consorts  of 
the  Gods. 

#7  Rigveda  VIII.  14.  5.  Ascribed  to  Goshuktin  and  Asvasuktin. 

8 Rigveda  VIII.  14.  1. 

9 Rigveda  VIII.  2.  25*  Ascribed  to  Medhatithi  and  Privamcdhas, 
or  to  tho  former *alonc 

10  liigvcda  VIII.  2.  1.  0 Fasiy  or,  0 bright,  or  good  Lord, 
f Possessor  of  wealth.’ — Stcvcnsdn. 

Tho  metre  is  (J^yatrl, 

1 Rigveda  VIII.  82.  1.  Ascribed  to  Sukaksha.  Sury<\:  the  Sun 
or  its  deity.  The  hero : Indra,  the  God  who  reigns  over  the  inter^ 
mediate  region  or  atmosphere,  the  favourite  national  deity  of  the 
Aryan  Indians  in  the  Vodic  age, 


* 28  THE  IIYMNS  OF  [PART  /. 

2 Whatever,  Vritra-slayer ! thou,  S6rya,  hast  risen 

upon  to-day, 

That,  Indra,  all  is  in  thy  power. 

3 That. India  is  our  youthful  friend,  who  with  liis 

trusty  guidance  led 
Turvasa,  Yadu  from  afar. 

4 0 Indra,  let  not  ill  designs  surround  us  in  the  sun- 

beams* light : e 

This  may  we  gain  with  thee  for  friend  ! 

5 Indra,  bring  wealth  that  gives  delight,  the  victors 

ever-conquering  wealth, 

Most  excellent,  to  be  our  aid  ! 

6 In  mighty  battle  we  invoke  Indra,  Indra  in  lesser  fight. 
The  friend  who  bends  his  bolt  at  fiends. 

7 In  battle  of  a thousand  arms  Indra  drank  KadriVs. 

Soma  juice : 

There  he  displayed  his  manly  might. 

2 Rigveda  VIII.  82.  4.  Vritra-slayer : or  slayer  of  *our  enemies, 
the  Sun-god  being  associated  with  Indra  in  his  victories  over  the  foes 
of  the  Aryans. 

3 Rigveda  VI.  45.  I.** Ascribed  to  Saniya,  but  in  Sayana’s Comment- 
ary on  the  Samaveda,  to  Ittharadvaja.  Youthful:  ever  young  and 
powerful.  Turvasa , Yadu : frequently  mentioned  together  in  the  Rig- 
veda  as  eponymi  of  two  of  the  'five  Aryan  tribes.  Some  expedition 
against  a distant  king  appears  to  be  referred  to. 

4 Rigveda  VIII.  81.  31.  Ascribed  to  Srutaknksha  or  Sukaksha.  In 
the  sunbeams'  light : as  Indra  stands  in  the  closest  relationship  to  the 
Sun. — Ludwig. 

5 Rigveda  I.  8.  1.  Ascribed  to  Madhuehchhandas. 

6 Rigveda  I.  7 5.  Ascribed  to  MadhucKchhaiuLw.  At  fiends : at 

Vritras  the  demons ' of  drought,  or  in  general  at  the  enemies  of  the 
Aryans.  r 

7 Rigfcda  VIII.  45.  20.  The  Rtahi  is  Trisoka.  In  battle  of  a 
thousand  arms:  according  to  Say  ana,,  ‘in  the  sacrifice  conducted  by  a 
thousand  performers.’  ‘ In  the  full  assembly.’— Styjvenson.  KadriVs 
Soma  juic# : the  meaning  is  somewhat  uncertain.  Kadru  was  cele- 
brated in  later  times  as  a daughter  of  Daksha  and  mother  of  the 
Nagas  or  serpent  race.H  S^yana  in  his  Commentary  on  the  Rigveda 
stanza  explains  kadruvah  by,  of  a Rishi  named  Kadru.  The  St. 
Petersburg  Lexicon  takes  it  to  mean,  from  a kadru  or  Soma  vessel. 


THE  SlMAVEDA. 


ii.  i.  5,] 


2<f 


8 Faithful  to  thee,  we  sing  aloud,  heroic  Indra,  songs 

to  thee  : 

Mark,  0 good  Lord,  this  act  of  ours ! 

9 HitherwarcJ ! they  who  light  the  flame  and  straight- 

way trim  the  sacred  grass, 

Whose  friend  is  Ihdra  ever  young. 

10  Drive  all  our  enemies  away,  smjte  down  the  foes 
who  press  around, 

And  bring  the  wealth  for  which  we  long ! 


DECADE  V.  Indra  and  others. 

I hear,  as  though  ’twere  close  at  hand,  the  cracking 
of  the  whips  they  hold : 

They  gather  splendour  on  their  way. 

2 Indra,  these  friends  o£  ours,  supplied  witfi  Soma, 

wait  and  look  to  thee 
As  men  with  fodder  to  the  herd. 

3 Before  his  hot  displeasure’  all  the  peoples,  all  the 

^men  bow  down, 

As  rivers  bow  them  to  the  s*?a.  ~ 

4 We  choose  unto  ourselves  that  high  protection  of 

the  mighty  Gods,  • 

That  it  may  help  and  succour  us. 


8 Rigveda  VII.  31.  4.  Ascribed  to  Yasishtlus, 

9 Rigveda  VIII.  43,  1.  Ascribed  to  Trisoka. 

10  Rigveda  \MIl.  45. *40. 

The  metre  is  Gayatri.  , 

1 Rigveda  I.  37.  3.  Ascribed*  to  Kanva.  The  Maruts  arc*the  deities 
of  tho  stanza.  The.  whips : with  which  the  Storm-gods  lash  the  earth. 

2 Rigveda  Vlfl.  45.  1C.  Ascribed  to  Trisoka.  Indra  is  the  deity’ 
of  this  and  of  tho  following  stanza. 

3 Rigveda  VIII.  6.  4.  Ascribed  to  Vatsa. 

4 Rigveda  VIII.  72.  1.  Ascribed  to  Kusidin.  The  deities  are  tho 
Visvodev&h,  the  All-gods  or  Universal  Gods. 


!>0  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  L 

5 0 Brahmanaspati,  make  thou  Kakshiv&n  Ausija  a 

loud 

Chanter  of  flowing  Soma  juice! 

6 Much  honoured  with  libations  may  the  Vritra-slayer 

watch  for  us  : 

May  Sakra  listen  to  our  prayer'! 

7 Send  us  this,  day,  #God  Savitar,  prosperity  with 

progeny : 

Drive  thou  the  evil  dream  away  ! 

8 Where  is  that  ever-youthful  Steer,  strong-necked 

and  never  yet  bent  down  ? 

What  Brahman  ministers  to  him  ? 

9 There  where  the  mountains  downward  slope,  there 

at  the  meeting  of  the  streams 
The  Sage  was  manifest  by  song.  3O&I3 


5 Rigveda  1.  18.  1.  Ascribed  to  Mcdhatithi.  The  deity  is  Bruh- 
manaspati.  The  Rigveda  reading  is  eonahunn  instead  of  somdn-hn 

M)  Brahmanaspati,  make  thou  the  Soma-presser  loud  of  voice,  Even 
Kakshivan  Ausijk.’  KaMhirQn,  called  Ausija  or  son  of  I'sij,  *Was  a 
renowned  Rishi  of  the  family  of  Pajra,  and  the  Seer  of  several  hymns 
of  the  Rigveda.  The  reading  of  the  text  is  difficult,  and  the  exact 
interpretation  is  uncertain.  — ‘O  (loril  of  food)  Brahmanaspati,  do  thou 
for  me,  the  chanter  of  the  moon-plant  banquet,  as  thou  didst  for 
Kaksbivan,  the  son  of  1’sija.’  Stevenson. 

6 Rigveda  \’II1.  18.  Ascribed  # to  Sukaksba.  The  deity  is 

Indra.  Sakra  : the  mighty;  a common  name  of  Indra. 

7 Rigveda  V.  Hi  4.  Ascribed  to  Syavasva,  or,  accusing  to  Say  ana’s 
Commentary  on  the  tvituaveda,  to  Sukaksha.  The  deity  is  Savitar, 
the* Sun,  the  vivifier  or  gcnerator«of  all  natural  production*. 

8 Rigvefla  VIII.  53.  7.  Ascribed  to  Pragatha.  The  deity  is  Indra. 
Jhahman : praying  priest;  one  of  tin?  four  principal  priests  at  a 
sacrifice. 

9 Rigveda  VIII.  G.  28.  Ascribed  to  Vatsa.  The  deity  is  Indm. 
The  Sage : the  wise  Indn^  ‘Sayami’s  conclusion  of  the  purport  of 
the  verse  is  that  men  ought  to  sacrifice  in  those  places  where  Indra 
is  said  to  be  manifested.’ — Wilson. 


ii.  ii.  1.] 


THE  SAMAVEDA. 


fi 

10  Praise  Indra  whom  our  songs  must  laud,  sole  sovran 
of  mankind,  the  chief 
Most  liberal  who  controlleth  men  ! 

CHAPTER  II. 

DECADE  I.  # Indra  and  others. 

Indra*  whose  jaws  are  strong  hath  drunk  of  worship- 
ping Sudaksha’s  draught, 

The  Soma  juice  with  barley  brew. 

2 0 Lord  of  ample  wealth,  these  songs  of  praise  have 

(Jailed  aloud  to  thee, 

Like  milch-kine  lowing  to  their  calves! 

3 Then  straight  they  recognized  the  mystic  name  of 

the  creative  Steer, 

There  in  the  mansion  of  the  Moon. 

4 When  Indra,  strongest  hero,  brougtit  the  streams, 

the  mighty  waters  down, 

* Pti, shan  was  standing  by  his  side. 


10  Uigveda  VIII.  16.  1.  Ascribed* to  Irimbitln.  The  deity  is 
Indra. 

The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

1 Uigveda  VIII.  SI.  4.  Ascribed  to  Srntakaksha  or  Sukakfdia.  The 
deity  is  Indra.  Whose  jaws  are  strong:  siyn:  ‘ Per  srhonej  ‘The 
beaut Rul. : ’---Benfey. — ‘ Whose  features  have  a #divine# gracefulness.’ — 
Stevenson. 

2 Uigveda  VJ.  4a.  Ascribed  to  Samvu  in  ihe  Uigveda  Index, 
but  to  Medhatithi  in  Say  ana’s  Commentary  on  the  Samaveda.  The 
deity  is  Indra. 

3 Uigveda  I.  84.  15.  Ascribed  to  (lotama  or  Gautama.*  The  deity 
is  Indra.  The  mystic  name,  df  the  creative  Steer  appeal's  to  he  a forceij  , 
expression  for  tlfe  Sun.  The  purport  of  the  verse  may  be  that  when, 
after  the  periodical  rains,  the  bright  moonlight  nights  eame,  men 
recognized  the  fact  that  the  light  was  borrowed  from  the  Sun. 

4 Uigveda  VI.  57.  4.  Ascribed  to  Bhanulvaja.  The  deities  aro 
Indra  and  Pushan. 


[PART  1 


3i  THE  HYMNS  OF 

5 The  Cow,  the  streaming  mother  of  the  liberal  Maruts, 

pours  her  milk, 

Harnessed  to  draw  their  chariots  on. 

6 Come,  Lord  of  rapturous  joys,  to  our^  libation  with 

thy  bay  steeds,  come 
With  bay  steeds  to  the  flowing  juice  ! 

7 Presented  strengthening  gifts  have  sent  Indira  away 

at  sacrifice, 

With  might,  unto  the  cleansing  bath. 

8 I from  my  Father  have  received  deep  knowledge  of 

eterndl  Law  : 

I was  born  like  unto  the  Sun. 

9 With  Indra  splendid  feasts  be  ours,  rich  in  all 

strengthening  things,  wherewith, 

Wealthy  in  food,  we  may 'rejoice  ! 

10  Soma  and  Pushan,  kind  to  him  who  travels  to  the 
Gods,  provide 

Dwelliflgs  all  happy  and  secure. 


5 Rigveda  VIII.  S3.  1.  Ascribe^  to  Vindu  or  J'utaduksha.  The 

deities  are  the  Maruts.  The  Cow.  Prism,  said  hy  Savana  to  mean 
‘the  many-coloured  earth,’  hut  more  probably,  as  Prof.  Roth  explains, 
a ]>ersoniHcatioii  of  the  speckled  clouds.  # 

6 Rigveda  VU I.  82.*31.  Ascribed  to  Sukaksha.  The  deity  isHndra. 
Rapturous  joy  $ : the  exhilaration  produced  by  drinking  Soma  juice. 

7 Rigveda  VIJf.*tf2^23.  The  cleansing  bath:  the  (m>abhrithay  here, 
apparently,  the  bath  or  vessel  in  which  the  stalks  of  the  Soma  plant 
were  rinsed  and  purified. 

8 Rigveda  VIII.  6.  10.  Ascribed  to  Vatsa.  My  Father : Indra, 
• the  protector,  of  the  truth  or  of  the  Rigfit,  according  to  SAyana. 

9 Rigvedqj  I.  30.  13.  Ascribed  to  Sunahsepa. 

10  This  stanza  ascribed  to  Sunahsepa  or  to  Vamadeva,  is  not  found 
in  the  Rigveda,  which  attains  only  one  Hymn  (II.  40.)  addressed 
to  Soma  and  Pushan  conjointly. 


ii.  ii.  2.] 


THE  SlMAVBDA . 


53 


DECADE  II.  Indra. 

Invite  ye  Indra  with  a song  to  drink  your  draught 
of  Soma  juice, 

All-conquering  Satakratu,  most  munificent  of  all  who 
live ! # 

2 Sing  ye  a song,  to  make  him  glad,  to  Indra,  Lord  of 

tawny  steeds,  * 

TJie  Soma-drinker,  0 my  friends ! 

3 This,  even  this,  0 Indra,  we  implore : as  thy  de- 

voted friends, 

Tlje  Kaijvas  praise  thee  with  their  hymns ! 

4 For  Indra,  lover  of  carouse,  loud  be’  our  songs 

about  the  juice : 

Let  poets  sing  the  song  of  praise. 

5 Here,  Indra,  is  thy  Soma  draught,  made  $ure  upon 

the  sacred  grass : 

Run  hither,  come  and  drink  thereofl 

6 As  a good  cow  to  him  who  milks,  we  call  the  doer 

of  good  deeds 

To  our  assistance  day  by  day.. 

7 Hero,  the  Soma  being  sh«d,#I  pouf  the  juice  for 

thee  to  drink : 

Sate  thee  and  finish  thy  carouse ! 

8 The  Soma,  Indra,  which  is  shed  in  saucers  and  in 

cups  for  thee,  • 

* Drink  thou,  for  thou  art  lord  thereof! 

■ . • 5 : — 

The  metre  is  Anushtup,  consisting  of  four  octosyllabic  Padas,  in 
stanza  1,  and  CJayatri  iif  the  rest.  * • 

1 Higveda  VIII.  81.  1.  Ascribed  to  Srutakaksha  or  Sukaksha. 

2 Higveda  VII.  31.  1.  Ascribed  to  Vasishtha. 

3 Higveda  VIII.  2.  16.  Ascribed  to  Medhatithi  of  tlfc  family  of 
Kaiiva.  Kanvas : members  ^)f  the  same  family  as  the  Rishi  of  the 
original  hymn.  $ 

4 Higveda  VIII.  81.  19. 

5 Higveda  VIII.  17.  11.  Ascribed  to  Iriiubithi  or  Irimithi. 

6 Higveda  I.  4.  1.  Ascribed  to  Madhuclfchhandus. 

7 Higveda  VIII.  45.  22.  Ascribed  to  Trisoka. 

8 Higveda  VIII.  71.  7.  Ascribed  to  Kustdin. 

3 


3*  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  1. 

9 In  every  need,  in  every  fray  we  call,  as  friends,  to 
succour  us 

Indra,  the  mightiest  of  all. 

10  0 come  ye  hither,  sit  ye  down:  to  Indra  sing  ye 
forth  your  song,  1 

Companions,  bringing  hymns  of  praise! 

\ DECADE  III.  c Indra. 

So,  Lord  of  affluent  gifts,  this  juice  hath  bedh  ex- 
pressed for  thee  with  strength  : 

Drink  of  it,  thou  who  lovest  song ! 

2 Great  is  our  Indra  from  of  old ; greatness  be  his, 

the  Thunderer ! 

Wide  as  the  heaven  extends  his  might. 

3 Indra,  as  one  with  mighty  arm,  gather  for  us  with 

thy  bright  hand 

Manifold  andf  nutritious  sp'oil ! 

4 Praise,  even  as  he  is  known,  with  song  I^ndra  the 

guardian  of  the  kine, 

The  So vl  of  Truth,  Lord  of  the  brave. 

5 With  whatfhelp  will  he  come  to  us,  wonderful,  over- 

waxing friend?,  # 

With  what  most  mighty  company  ? 

6 Thou  speedest  down  to  succour  us  this  ever-conquer- 

ing  God  of  yours, 

Him  who  is  drawn  to  all  our  songs. 


9 Rigveda  J.  30.  7.  Ascribed  to  Sunahsepa. 

10  Rigveda  I.  5.  1.  Ascribed  to  Madhuchchhandas, 

The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

1 Rigvcd^IlI.  51.  10.  Ascribed  to  V,isvamitra. 

2 Rigveda  I.  8.  5.  Ascribed  to  Madhuchehhandas.  Tho  Rigveda 
4ias  parascha  nu  instead  of  purascha  no : — ‘ Mighty  ^is  Indra,  yea, 
supreme.’  # 

3 Rigveda  VIII.  70.  1.  Ascribed  to  Kusidin. 

4 Rigveda  VIII.  58.  4.  Ascribed  to  Priyamedha. 

5 Rigveda  IV.  31.  1.  Ascribed  to  Vimadeva. 

6 Rigveda  VIII.  81.  7.  Ascribed  to  Srutakaksha  or  Sukaksha, 


iL'ii.  4.]  THE  SlMAVEDA . 35 

7 To  the  assembly's  wondrous  Lord,  the  lovely  friend 

of  Indra,  1 

. Had  prayed  for  wisdom  and  success. 

8 May  all  thy  paths  beneath  the  sky  whereby  thou 

spedde^t  Vyasva  on, 

Yea,  let  all  spaces  hear  our  voice! 

9 Bring  to  us  all  things  excellent,  O Satakratu,  food 

arid  strength, 

For,  Indra,  thou  art  kind  to  us ! 

10  Here  is  the  Soma  ready  pressed  : of  this  the  Maruts, 
#yea,  of  this 

Self-luminous  the  Asvins  drink. 

DECADE  IV.  Indra  and  others. 

Tossing  about,  the  active  ones  came  nigh  to  Indra  at 
his  birth, 

Winning  themselves  heroic  might. 


According  to  Sav ana’s  Commentary  on  the  Rigveda  this  stanza  is 
addressed  by  the  yajamdna  or  institutor  of  the  sacrifice  to  the  stotar 
or  praising- priest,  and  he  gives  an  impenytive  sent^  to  the  indicative, 
‘ Thou  speed est.’ 

7 Rigveda  I.  18.6.  Ascribed  to  Medhatithi.  The  assembly's  ivon- 
drous  Lord : Sadasaspati,  the  rmfcjter  or  protector  of  the  assembly  of 
priests  and  worshippers,  is  a title  of  Agni  who  is  the  deity  of  the 
stanza. 

8 $ot  found  in  the  Rigveda.  Ascribed  to  ^ Vamadeva.  Vyasva:  a 
famous  Rishi. 

9 Rigveda  VIII.  82.®  28.  Ascribed  tb  Sukaksh^. 

10  Rigveda*  VIII.  83.4.  Ascribed  to  Vihdu,  or  Putadaksha,  or 
Sukaksha,  Self-luminous:  ‘ the  royal  beverage.’ — Stevenson.  Aevins : 
two  deities,  tho  earliest  briifgers  of  light  in  the  mornfrig  sky.  See 
Rigveda,  General  Index, 

The  metre  is  G&yatri. 

1 Rigveda  X.  153.  1.  Ascribed  to  Indra’s  Mothers,  the  Consorts  of 
the  Gods.  The  active  ones : the  Water-goddesses,  or  the  Consorts  of 
the  Gods  may  be  meant. 


36  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  I. 

2 Never,  0 Gods,  do  we  offend,  nor  are  we  ever  obsti- 

nate : 

We  walk  as  holy  texts  command. 

3 Evening  is  come  : sing  loudly  thou  Atharvan’s  nobly 

singing  son  : 

Give  praise  to  Savitar  the  God ! > 

4 Now  Morning  with  her  earliest  light  shines  forth, 

dear  daughter  of  the  Sky  : 

High,  Asvins,  I extol  your  praise. 

5 Armed  with  the  bones  of  dead  Hadliyaeh,  Indra  with 

unresisted  might 

The  nine-,and-ninety  Vritras  slew. 

G Come,  Indra,  and  delight  thee  with  the  juice  at  all 
our  Soma  feasts, 

Protector,  mighty  in  thy  strength  ! 

7 O thou  who  slayest  Vritras.  come,  0 Indra,  hither 

to  our  side,'1 

Mighty  one,  with  thy  mighty  aids  ! 

8 That  might  of  his  shone  brightly  forth  when  India 

brought  together,  like 
A skin,  the  Worlds  of  heaven  and  earth. 

9 This  is  thine  own.  Thou  dravvest  near,  as  turns  a 

pigeon  to  his  mate  : 

Thou  earest,  too,  for  this  our  prayer. 

2 Itigveda  X.  134.  7.  Ascribed  to  Godha. 

.3  Not  found  i ip  the  Itigveda.  Ascribed  in  Vainadeva. 

4 Itigveda  T.  46.  1.  Ascribed  to  Pmskanva.  M anting : Ushas  or 

Dawn  personified.  , 

5 Itigveda  I.  84.  13.  Ascribed  to  Gotama.  Dadhyach : a Itishi,  son 
of  Atharvan.  With  his  bones  converted  into  a thunderbolt  Indra  is 
said  to  have  itlain  the  host  of  Vritras  eflr  demons  who  withheld  the 
rain.  See  Itigveda,  General  Index. 

5 Itigveda  1.  9.  1.  Ascribed  to  Madhuohchhandas. 

7 Itigveda  \\\  32.  L Ascribed  to  Vamadeva. 

8 Itigveda  VIII.  6.  5.  Ascribed  to  Vatsa. 

9 Itigveda  I.  30.  4.  Ascribed  to  Sunahsepa.  This  is  tkine  own : 
this  libation  of  Soma  juice  is  for  thee.  Our  prayer : without  which 
the  libation  would  not  be  acceptable. 


ii.  ii.  5.] 


THE  SAMA  VEDA. 


'37. 


10  May  Yiita  breathe  his  balm  an  us,  healthful,  delight- 
ful to  our  heart  : 

May  he  prolong  our  days  of  life  ! 

DECADE  V.  Fndra  and  others. 

Ne’er  is  he  injured  whom  the  Gods  Varuna,.  Mitra, 
Aryaman,  • 

The^excellently  wise,  protect. 

2 According  to  our  wish  for  kine,  for  steeds  and 

chariots,  as  of  old, 

Bp  gracious  to  our  wealthy  chiefs  ! 

3 Itfd'ra,  these  spotted  cows  yield  thee  their  butter  and 

the  milky  draught, 

Aiders,  thereby,  of  sacrifice. 

4 That  thou,  much-lauded  ! many-named  ! nfcyst,  with 

this  thought  that  lotigs  for  milk,  % 

Come  to  each  Soma  sacrifice. 

5 May  bright  Sarasvati,  endowed  with  plenteous  wealth 

and  spoil,  enriched 
With  prayer,  desire  the  sacrifice. 


10  Rigveda  X.  18G.  1.  Ascribed  to  Ula  Yatayana.  Vdt  i : the 
Wind  and  its  deity. 

The  metre  is  G.tvatri.  Vrfhnia,  Mitra,  Aryaman  are  the  deities  of 
‘stanzas  1 and  8,  Sarasvati  is  the  deity  of  5,  mid  lndra  of  the  rest. 

1 Rigveda  I.  41.  1.  Ascribed  to  Kanva. 

2 Rigveda  VI 11.  46.  10.  Ascribed  to  Vasa,,  or  Vatsa.  To  our 
wealthy  chiefs:  makondtn  : tlie  Rigveda  has  j Jlakdmahu: — greatest  of 
the  great ! * 

3 Rigveda  VIU.  6.  19.  Ascribed  to  Vatsa. 

4 Rigveda  VIII.  87.  17.  • Ascribed  to  Sukaksha. 

5 Rigveda  if  3*  10.  Ascribed  to  Madhuehchhandas.  Sarasvati:  a 
sacred  river  and  a deity  identified  in  later  times  with  Vak  the  Goddess 
of  Speech.  See  Rigveda,  Vol.  I.  |>p.  G,  J.  Endowed  with  plenteous 
wealth:  vdjintvati : according  to  Sayana,  1 rich  in  food  or  sacrifices 
according  to  others,  ‘ possessed  of,  or  rich  in,  swift  horses  or  mares/ 


3tf  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  I, 

2 Never,  0 Gods,  do  we  offend,  nor  arc  we  ever,  obsti- 

nate : 

We  walk  as  holy  texts  command. 

3 Evening  4s  come  : sing  loudly  thou  Atharvan’s  nobly 

singing  son : 

Give  praise  to  Savitar  the  God ! o 

4 Now  Morning  with  her  earliest  light  shines  forth, 

dear  daughter  of  the  Sky  : 

High,  Asvins,  I extol  your  praise. 

5 Armed  with  the  bones  of  dead  Dadhyach,  Indra  with 

unresisted  might 

The  nine^and-ninety  Vritras  slew. 

6 Come,  Indra,  and  delight  thee  with  the  juice  at  all 

our  Soma  feasts, 

Protector,  mighty  in  thy  strength  ! 

7 0 thou  who  slayest  Vritras,  come,  0 Indra,  hither 

to  our  side,0 

Mighty  one,  with  thy  mighty  aids ! 

8 That  might  of  his  shone  brightly  forth  when  Indra 

brought  together,  like 
A skin,  the  worlds  *of  Jieavon  and  earth. 

9 This  is  thine  owu  Thou  drawest  near,  as  turns  a 

pigeon  to  his  mate  : 

Thou  carest,  too,  for  this  our  prayer. 

2 Kigvoda  X.  134.  7.  Ascribed  to  God  ha. 

.3  Not  found  in  the  Kigveda.  Ascribed  (to  Vamadeva. 

4 Kigvoda  1.  46.  1.  Ascribed  to  Praskanva.  Morning:  Ushas  or 

Dawn  personified.  «.  * 

5 Kigvoda  1.  84.  1 3.  Ascribed  to  Gotama.  Dadhyach : a Rishi,  son 
of  Atharvr.n.  With  his  bones  converted  into  a thunderbolt  Indra  is 
said  to  have  riain  the  host  of  Vritras  demons  who  withheld  tho 
rain.  See  Kigveda,  General  Index. 

c ‘6  Kigvoda  1.  9.  1.  Ascribed  to  Madhuofichhaudas. 

7 Kigveda  {V.  32.  1.  Ascribed  to  Vamadeva. 

8 Kigveda  VIII.  6.  5.  Ascribed  to  Vatsa. 

9 Kigveda  I.  30.  4.  Aseribed  to  Sunahsepa.  This  is  thine  own : 
this  libation  of  Soma  juice  is  for  thee.  Our  prayer : without  which 
the  libation  would  not  be  acceptable. 


ii.  ii.  5.] 


THE  S AM  A VEDA. 


'37 


10  May  Vata  breathe  his  balm  on  us,  healthful,  delight- 
ful to  our  heart : 

May  he  prolong  our  days  of  life  ! 

DECADE  V.  T'lidra  and  others. 

Ne’er  is  he  injured  whom  the  Gods  Varuna,  Mitra, 
Aryaman,  • 

The^excellently  wise,  protect. 

2 According  to  our  wish  for  kine,  for  steeds  and 

chariots,  as  of  old, 

Bp  gracious  to  our  wealthy  chiefs  ! 

3 Iild’ra,  these  spotted  cows  yield  thee  their  butter  and 

the  milky  draught, 

Aiders,  thereby,  of  sacrifice. 

4 That  thou,  much-lauded  ! many-named  ! ntavst,  with 

this  thought  that  lohgs  for  milk,  (t 
Come  to  each  Soma  sacrifice. 

5 May  bright  Sarasvatl,  endowed  with  plenteous  wealth 

and  spoil,  enriched 
With  prayer,  desire  the  sacrifice. 


10  Rigveda  X.  180.  1.  Ascribed  to  Ula  Vatayana.  VAta : the 
Wind  and  its  deity. 

The  metre  is  G.lyatri.  Vifhina,  Mitra,  Aryaman  are  the  deities  of 
'stanzas  1 and  8,  Sarasvatl  is  the  deity  of  5,  and  Indra  of  the  rest. 

1 Rigveda  I.  41.  1.  Ascribed  to  Kanva. 

2 Rigveda  VI II.  48.  10.  Ascribed  to  Vasa,,  or  Vatsa.  To  our 
wealthy  chiefs : mahoadm : tlie  ltigvcda  has  ihahdniaha : — ‘ greatest  of 
the  great ! ’ 

3 itigveda  VI II.  6.  19.  Ascribed  to  Vatsa. 

4 Rigveda  VIII.  87.  17.  'Ascribed  to  Sukaksha. 

5 Itigveda  1? 3.  10.  Ascribed  to  Madhuchchhandas.  Sarasvatl:  a 
sacred  river  and  a deity  identified  in  later  times  with  Vak  the  Goddess 
of  Speech.  Sec  Rigveda,  Vol.  1.  pp.  G,  J.  Endowed  with  plenteous 
wealth : vdjintvatt : according  to  Savaiia,  1 rich  in  food  or  sacrifices 
according  to  others,  ‘ possessed  of,  or  rich  in,  swift  horses  or  mares.’ 


[PART  L 


36  THE  SAMAVEDA. 

6 Who  'mid  the  Nahusha  tribes  shall  sate  this  Indra 

with  his  Soma  juice  ? 

He  shall  bring  precious  things  to  us. 

7 Come,  We  have  pressed  the  juice  for  thee  ; 0 Indra, 

drink  this  Soma  here  : 

Sit  thou  on  this  my  sacred  grass  •! 

8 Great,  unassailable  must  be  the  heavenly  favour  of 

the  Three, 

Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman. 

9 We,  Indra,  Lord  of  ample  wealth,  our  guide,  depend 

on  one  like  thee, 

Thou  driver  of  the  tawny  steeds  ! 


6 Not  found  in  the  Rigveda.  Ascribed  to  Vamadeva.  Nahusha 
tribes : poopf,»  apparently  distinct  from  the  five  great  Aryan  tribes, 
and  dwellers  on  or  near  the  Indus.  Indra,  says  the  Rishi,  pares  not 
for  the  offerings  of  the  alien  Nahushas,  but  will  reward  his  own  Aryan 
worshippers. 

7 Rigveda  VIII.  17.  1.  Ascribed  to  Irimbithi. 

8 Rigveda  %.  185.  1.  Ascribed  to  Satyadhriti. 

9 Rigveda  VIII.^46.  1.  Ascribed  to  Vasa,  or  Vatsa. 


BOOK  III. 


CHAPTER  I. 

DECADE  I.  Indra. 

Let  Soma  juices  make  thee  glad  f Display  thy 
# bounty,  Thunderer : 

Drive  off  the  enemies  of  prayer ! 

2 Drink  our  libation,  Lord  of  hymns  ! with  streams  of 

meath  thou  art  bedewed  : 

Yea,  Indra,  glory  is  thy  gift. 

3 Indra  hath  ever  thought  of  you  and  tended  you  with 

care.  The  God, 

Heroic  Indra,  is  not  checked. 

4 Let  the  drops  pass  within,  thee  as  thfe  rivers  flow 

into  the  sea  : 

O Indra,  naught  excelleth  thee  f 

5 Indra  the  singers  with  high  praise,  Indra  reciters 

with  their  lauds, 

Indra  the  choirs  have  glorified. 


The  metre  is-  Gayatrn  Pushan  is  associated  with  Indra  as  a deity  of 
stanza  Sh 

1 Rigveda  VIII.  53.  1.  Ascribed  to  Pragatha.  The  Rigveda  has 
stomdh,,  hymns,  instead  of  somdh,  • 

2 Rigveda  III.  40.  6.  Ascribed  to  Visvamitra. 

3 Not  found  the  Rigveda.  Ascribed  to  Vamadeva. 

4 Rigveda  VIII.  81.  22.  Ascribed  to  Srutakaksha  of  Sukaksha. 

5 Rigveda  I.  7.  1.  Ascribed  to  Madhuchchhandas.  Singers:  of 
the  S&maveda,  according  to  Sayana.  Reciters:  of  verses  of  the  Rigveda. 
Choirs:  referring,  perhaps,  both  to  singers  and  reciters. 


40  THE  HYMNS  OF  [rART  I. 

6 May  Indra  give,  to  aid  us,  wealth  handy  that  rules 

the  skilful  ones : 

Yea,  may  the  Strong  give  potent  wealth  ! 

7 Verily  Jndra,  conquering  all,  drives  even  mighty 

fear  away, 

For  firm  is  he  and  swift  to  act. 

8 These  songs  wjth  every  draught  we  pour  come,  lover 

of  the  song,*  to  thee 
As  milch-kine  hasten  to  their  calves. 

9 Indra  and  Pftshan  will  we  call  for  friendship  and 

prosperity, 

And  for, the  winning  of  the  spoil. 

10  0 Indra,  Vritra-slayer,  naught  is  better,  mightier 
than  thou : 

Verily  there  is  none  like  thee  ! 

’ DECADE  II.  . Indra. 

Him  have  I magnified,  our  Lord  in  common,  guardian 
of  your  folk, 

Discloser  of  great  wealth  in  kine. 


G Rigveda  VHP.  82.  34.  • Ascribed  to  Sukaksha.  Handy : ribhum. 
That  rules  the  skilful  ones':  ribhukshanam.  The  Strong : vdjt.  These 
words  are  used  as  plays  upon  the  names  of  two  of  tike  three  deified 
mortals  who  are  collectively  called  JRibhus,  or,  as  Professor  Grassmann 
says,  the  verse  may  originally  have  been  taken  from  a hymn  addressed 
to  the  Ribhus,  the  eldest  of  whom  was  Aibhukshan  and  the  youngest} 
Vaja.  Professor 4Wilsoij,  following  S&yana,  translates  the  verse  i n the 
Rigveda  differently : — * May  Indra  bring  to  us  the  bounteous  Ribhu 
Ribhukshana  to  j>artyike  of  ouP  sacrificial  viands ; may  he,  the  mighty, 
bring  the  migh+y  (VajaJ.’ 

7 Rigveda  II.  41.  10.  Ascribedeto  Gritsamada. 

8 Rigveda  VI.  45.  28.  Ascribed  to  skmyu. 

9 Rigveda  VI.  57.  1.  Ascribed  to  BharadvSja. 

10  Rigveda  IV.  30.  1.  Ascribed  to  Yfimadova.  ‘'None  is  better, 
mightier.* 

The  metre  is  G&yatrt.  t 

1 Rigveda  VIII.  45.  28.  The  Rishi  is  Trisoka  according  to  the 
Rigveda  Index,  but  Yirupa  according  to  S&yana’s  Commentary. 


iii.  i.  2.] 


THE  SlMAVEDA . 


41 


2 Songs  have  outpoured  themselves  to  thee,  Indra, 

the  strong,  the  guardian  Lord, 

And  with  one  will  have  risen  to  thee ! 

3 Good  guidance  hath  the  mortal  man  wfyom  Arya- 

man,  the  Marut  host, 

And  Mitras,  void  of  guile,  protect. 

4 Bring  us  the  wealth  for  which  ye  long,  0 Indra, 

that  which  is  concealed 
In  strong  firm  place  precipitous. 

5 Him  your  best  Vritra-slayer,  him  the  famous  cham- 

pion of  mankind 
I flrge  to  great  munificence. 

6 Inara,  may  we  adorn  thy  fame,  fame  of  ope  like 

thee,  hero!  deck, 

Sakra ! thy  fame  at  highest  feast ! 

7 Indra,  accept  at  break  of  day  our  Soma  Jhixt  with 

roasted  corn,  * * 

With  groats,  with  cake,  with  eulogies ! 

8 With  waters  foam  thou  torest  off,  Indra,  the  head 

of  Namuchi, 

When  thou  oercamest  all  the'fipes. 

2 Rigveda  I.  9.  4.  Ascribed  to  Madhuchohhandas.  With  one  will : 
sajoshd,  The  Rigveda  has  ajoshd*  ‘ unsatisfied.* 

3 Rigveda  VIII.  46.  4.  Ascribed  to  Vasa,  but  to  Vatsa  by  Sayana’s 
Commentary.  Mitras : meaning,  in  the  plural,  Mitra,  Varuna,  and 
Aryainan.  The  Rigveda  has  mitrah  in  the  singular. 

4 Rigveda  VIII.  45.  41.*  Ascribed  to  Trisoka.  • In  strong  firm 
2)1  ace  precipitous : ‘ Whether  in  some  strong  chest  or  in  some  hill  or 
well.* — Stevendbn. 

5 Rigveda  VIII,  82.  16.  Ascribed  to  Sukaksha. 

6 This  stanza  is  not  found  i«  the  *Rigveda.  Ascribed  to  Vamadeva. 
At  highest  feast : the  meaning  of  paremani  is  uncertain.  * In  our 
most  Bolemn  sacrifice. * — Stevenson. 

7 Rigveda  III.  52.  1.  Ascribed  to  Visvamitra.  Mixt*  with  roasted 

com , etc : * Accompanied  with  rice,  curds,  sweet  cakes,  and  praises.’— 
Stevenson.  • 

8 Rigveda  VIII.  14.  13.  Ascribed  to  Goshuktin  and  Asvasuktin. 


12  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  /. 

9 Thine  are  these  Soma  juices,  thine,  Indra,  those  still 
to  be  expressed  : 

Enjoy  them,  Lord  of  princely  wealth  ! 

10  For  thae,  0 Indra,  Lord  of  light,  Somas  are  pressed 
and  grass  is  strewn  : 

Be  gracious  to  thy  worshippers,! 

DECADE  III.  Indra  and  others. 

• 

We,  seeking  strength,  with  Soma  drops  fill  full  your 
Indra  like  a well, 

Most  liberal,  Lord  of  boundless  might. 

2 0 Indra,  even  from  that  place  conic  unto  tjs  with 

food  that  gives 

A hundred,  yea,  a thousand  powers ! 

3 The  new-born  Vritra-slayer  asked  his  mother,  as  he 

seized  his  shaft, 

Who  are  thei  fierce  and  famous  ones  ? 


With  waters’  foam  : with  a thunderbolt  in  the  form  of  foam,  according 
to  a later  legend.  See  Muir,  Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  Vol.  V.  p.  91. 
Namuchi : one  of  the  numerous  demons  of  drought  conquered  by 
Indra.  . 

9 Not  found  in  the  Rigveda.  Ascribed  to  Vamadeva. 

10  Rigveda  VIII.  82.  25.  Ascfibed  by  the  Rigveda  Index  to 
Sukaksha,  but  by  S&yana’s  Commentary  to  Vamadeva.  Tlie  last  Pada 
in  the  Rigveda  differs : — 1 Bring  Indra  to’  his  worshippers/ 

The  metre  is  ( layatri.  Indra  is  the  dqity  of  stanzas  1 — 4.  Vanina, 
Mitra,  and  Aryaman  are  tlie  deities  of  5 ; Vanina  and  Mitra  of  7 ; the 
Maruts  of  8.  Ushas  or  Dawn  is  the  deity  of  6,  and  V jshnu  of  9. 

1 Rigveda  I.  30.  1.  Ascribed  to  Sunahsepa.  Lord  of  boundless, 

might:  mtalcratum:  ‘ performer t of,  or  worshipped  with,  a hundred 
sacrifices,’  tfbeording  to  Sayana.  * 

2 Rigveda  VIII.  81.  10.  Ascribed  to  Srutakaksha  or  Sukaksha. 
Even  from  that  place  : from  heaven  where  thou  dwellSst. 

3 Rigvedd  VIII.  45.  4.  Ascribed  to  Trisoka.  The  new-born  Vritra- 
slayer : as  soon  as  ho  was  bom  Indra  showed  his  warlike  disposition, 
and  asked  his  mother  the  mighty  Aditi  what  worthy  opponents  he 
should  have. 


iii,  i.  3.]  THE  SAMAVEDA . 43 

4 Let.  us  call  him  to  aid  whose  hands  stretch  far,  the 

highly-lauded,  who 
. Fulfils  the  work  to  favour  us  ! 

5 Mitra  who  knoweth  leadeth  us,  and  Varuna  who 

guideth 'straight, 

And  Aryaman  iri  accord  with  Gods. 

6 When,  even  as  she  were  present*  here,  red  Dawn 

hath  shone  from  far  away, 

She  spreadeth  light  on  every  side. 

7 Varuna,  Mitra,  sapient  pair,  pour  fatness  on  our 

pastures,  pour 

Meath  on  the  regions  of  the  air  ! 

8 And,  ai  our  sacrifices,  these,  sons,  singers,  have 

enlarged  their  bounds, 

So  that  the  cows  must  .walk  knee-deep. 


4 Rigveda  VIII.  32. 10.  Ascribed  to  MedlnUithi.  Fulfils  the  work : 
the  Rigveda  luis  sddhu  instead  of  sddhah — ‘ worketh  aright.’ 

5 Rigveda  I.  90. 1.  Ascribed  to  Got^ma%bv  the  Rigveda  Index,  but 
to  Saunaka  by  Say  ana’s  Commentary.  » 

6 Rigveda  VI II.  5.  1.  Ascribed  to  Rrahmatithi. 

7 Rigveda  III.  62.  16.  Ascribed  to  Vi svamitra.  Fatness:  ghritaih: 
clarified  butter ; that  is,  fertilizing  rain.  Meath : madhvd : or  honey  j 
that  is,  sweet  refresliing  dew. 

8 Rigveda  I.  37.  10.  Ascribed  to  Kanva  by  iho  Rigveda  Index,  but 
to  Hiranyastupa  by  Sa^ana’s  Commentary.  Sons,  si  tigers : the  sons  of 
Prism,  the  loud-voiced  Maruts,  the  Storm-gods  ^hahting  their  thunder- 
psalm.  The  Rigveda  has  ajmeshu  instead  of  ynjneshu : — ‘ in  their 
racings  have  enlarged  their  founds.’  The  meaning  in  J)oth  Vedas 
appears  to  be  that  the  Maruts  spread  themselves  over  the  sky  and 
caused  so  muefy  rain  to  falf  that  the  cows  in  the  pastures  were  up  t«  « 
their  knees  in  water.  Sayana  explains  vdsrd  and  abhijnu  jn  the  second 
line  differently,  and  Professor  Ludwig’s  interpretation  is  somewhat 
similar: — ‘so  dass  briillend  sic  [uns]  gans  nahe  kamen ’ ; ‘so  that 
bellowing  they  [the  Maruts]  came  quite  close  [to  us].’ 


44  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  /. 

9 Through  all  this  world  strode  Vishnu : thrice  his 
foot  he  planted,  and  the  whole 
Was  gathered  in  his  footstep's  dust. 

DECADE  IV.  < Indra. 

Pass  by  the  wrathful  offerer ; §peed  the  man  who 
pours  libatipn,  drink 
The  juice  which  he  presents  to  thee ! 

2 What  is  the  word  addressed  to  him,  God  great  and 

excellently  wise  ? 

For  this  is  what  exalteth  him. 

3 His  wealth  who  hath  no  store  of  kine  hath*  ne'er 

found  out  recited  laud, 

Nor  song  of  praises  that  is  sung. 

4 Lord  of  each  thing  that  giveth  strength,  Indra  de- 

ligfiteth  most  in  lauds, 

Borne  by  ba (j  steeds,  libations’  friend. 

9 Kigveda  I.  22.  17.  Ascribed  to  Medhatithi.  Vishnu’s  striding 
over  the  universe  or  the  heavens  in  three  steps  is  explained  as  denoting 
the  threefold  manifestation  of  light  in  the  forms  of  fire,  lightning,  and 
the  sun,  or  as  designating  the 'three  daily  stations  of  tfuc  Sun,  in  his 
rising,  culminating,  and  setting.  The  whole  was  gathered  in  his  foot- 
step's dust : this  is  the  meaning  according  to  Sayana.  Vishnu  was  so- 
mighty  that  the  dust  raised  by  his  footstep  enveloped  the  whole  world,, 
or  the  Earth  was  formed  from  the  dust  di  liis  strides. 

The  metre  is  Clyatrl.  , 

1 Kigveda  VIII.  32.  21.  Ascribed  to  Medhatithi.  Tn  the  Kigveda 
three  words  of  the  stanza  are  different : — ‘ Pass ‘him  whq  pours  libations, 
out  in  angry  mood  or  after  sin ; Here  drink  the  juice  wo  offer  thee.’ 

2 Not  found  in  the  Kigveda.  Ascribed  to  Vamadeva. 

3 Kigveda  VIII.  2.  14.  Ascribed  to' Medhatithi.  The  Kigveda  has. 
pgor  arir  instead  of  ndgo  rayir ‘ Foe  (ff  the  man  who  pours  no  milk 
he  heedeth  not  etc.’  The  meaning  of  both  texts  is  that  Indra  will 
not  accept  worship  without  oblation.  His  wealth  who  hath  no  store  of 
kine  is  a periphrasis  for,  tty}  poor  man  who  is  unable  to  offer  libations, 
of  milk. 

4 Not  found  in  the  Kigveda.  Ascribed  to  Vamadeva. 


iii.  i.  4.] 


THE  SAMAVEDA. 


45 


5 With*  wealth  to  our  libation  conic,  be  not  thou  angry 

with  us,  like 

A great  man  with  a youthful  bride. 

6 When,  Vasu,  wilt  thou  love  the  laud  ? Now  let  the 

channel  bring  the  stream. 

The  juice  is  ready  to  ferment. 

7 AfteiUhe  Seasons,  Indra,  drink  the  Soma  from  the 

Brdh man’s  gift : 

Thy  friendship  is  invincible ! 

8 0 Indra,  lover  of  the  song,  we  are  the  singers  of  thy 

praise  : 

0 Soma-drinker,  quicken  us ! 


5 Bigveda  VII [.  2.  19.  Ascribed  to  Medhatithi.  There  is  a slight 
variation  in  the  Rigveda: — ‘Come  to  us  rapidly  % with  wealth/  A 
great  man : the  exact  meaning  of  mahdii , great,  is  uncertain.  In  his 
Commentary  on  the  Bigveda  Say  ana  explains  it  by  gu  nairadikah, 
eminent  on  account  of  his  good  qualities.  ‘ Be  not  bashful,  like  the 
ardent  husband  of  a new  bride/ — Wilson!  % ‘ Like  a^-ich  man,  newly 
married/ — Grassmann.  * Do  not  get  angr£  with  us,  (but  bear  with  us,) 
as  an  elderly  man  does  with  a young  wife/— Stevenson.  ‘Wie  ein 
erhabener  Briiutigain,’  like  a noble  bridegroom. — Benfey. 

6 Rigveda  X.  105.  1.  Ascribed  to  Suraitra.  Vasu:  or,  good  lord. 
Indra.  Let  the  channel  brinf  the  stream : to  the  Soma  juice  which 
has  stoyd  long  enough  for  fermentation. — Ludwig.  The  phraseology 
is  very  obscure,  and  Sayana  in*his  Commentary  on  the  Rigveda  gives 
a totally  different  explanation  : — ‘ When  will  he,  (like)  a dam,  obstruct 
and  let  loose  the  long-protracted  libation  for  the?  sake  of  wind-driven 
(rain)?’ — Wilson. 

7 Rigveda  I.  15.  5.  Ascribed  to  Medhatithi.  After  tlfe  Seasons : 
or  the  Ritus,  the  deified  seasons  of  the  year.  ‘ Throughout  all  the 
seasons/ — StcvertSon.  From  the  Br&hmaris  gift : tho  Brahman  here  is 
said  to  be  the  Brahmanachchhansi,  one  of  the  sixteen  priesls  employed 
at  sacrifices ; and  perhaps  his  office  may  havo  been  to  hold  some  ladle 
or  vase  in  which  the  offering  was  presented. 

8 Rigveda  VIII.  32.  7.  Ascribed  to  Medhatithi. 


A THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  L 

9 0 Indra,  in  each  fight  and  fray  give  to  oup  bodies 
manly  strength  : 

Strong  Lord,  grant  ever-conquering  might ! 

10  For  so  thou  art  the  brave  man’s  friend  ; a hero,  too, 
art  thou,  and  strong  : 

So  may  thine  heart  be  won  to  us  ! 

DECADE  V.  Indra. 

Like  kine  unmilked  we  call  aloud,  hero,  to  thee,  and 
sing  thy  praise, 

Looker*  on  heavenly  light,  Lord  of  this  moving 
world,  Lord,  Indra,  of  what  moveth  not! 

2 That  we  may  win  us  wealth  and  power  we  poets, 

verily,  call  on  thee  : 

In  war  men  call  on  thee,  Indra,  the  hero's  Lord, 
in  the  stead’s  race-course  call  on  thee. 

3 To  you  will  I sing  Indra’s  praise  who  gives  good 

gifts^as  well  we  know ; 

The  praise  of  Maghavan  who,  rich  in  treasure,  aids 
bis  singers  with  wealth  thousandfold. 

4 As  cows  low  to  their  calves  in  stalls,  so  with  our 

songs  we  glorify 

This  Indra,  even  your  wondrous  God  who  checks 
attack,  who  takes  delight  in  precious  juice. 


9 Not  found  in  the  Kh'vcdg.  Ascribed  to  \Tamadcva. 

10  Rigveda  Vll£  8 k 28.  Ascribed  to  Srutakaksha  Ur  Sukaksha. 

rJ  he  met^p  is  Brihati.  Thu  Maruts  are  the  deities  of  stanza  9. 

1 Rigveda  VII.  32.  22.  Ascribed  to  Vusishtha. 

2 Rigveda  VI.  46.  1.  Ascribed  to  Samyu.  * 

3 Higveda  Valakhilya  I.  1.  Ascribed  to  Praskanva  by  the  Higveda 
Index,  but  to  Vamadeva  by  Siiyana’s  Commentary,  Maykavan : tho 
rich  and  liberal  one ; a common  name  of  Indra. 

4 Rigveda  VIII.  77.  1.  Ascribed  to  Nodhas  or  Naudhas. 


iii.  i.  6.]  THE  SAMAYEDA . if 

5 Loud  singing  at  the  sacred  rite  where  Soma  flows 
• we  priests  invoke 

With  haste,  that  he  may  help,  as  the  bards  che- 
risher,  Indra  who  findetli  wealth  for  you. 

6 With  Plenty  for  his  true  ally  the  active  man  will 

gain  the  spoil.  • 

Your  Indra,  much-invoked,  I bend  with  song,  as 
beTids  a wright  his  wheel  of  solid  wood. 

7 Drink,  Indra,  of  the  savoury  juice,  and  cheer  thee 

with  our  milky  draught ! 

Be%  for  our  weal,  our  friend  and  sharer  of  the  feast, 
and  let  thy  wisdom  guard  us  well ! 

8 For  thou — come  to  the  worshipper! — wilt  find  great 

wealth  to  make  us  rich. 

Fill  thyself  full,  O Maghavan,  for  gain  of  kjne,  full, 
Indra,  for  the  gain  of.  steeds! 

9 Vasishtlia  will  not  overlook  the  lowliest  one  among 

you  all. 

Beside  our  Soma  juice  effused  to-day  let  all  the 
Maruts  drink  with  eager  haste ! 

10  Glorify  naught  besides,  O friends ; so  shall  no  sor- 
row trouble  you ! 

Praise  only  mighty  Indra  when  the  juice  is  shed, 
and  say  your  lauds  repeatedly  ! 


5 Rigveda  VIII.  55.  1.  Ascribed  to  Kali,  or,  liceordhur  to  Sav ana’s 
Commentary,  Kalcya.  ]}re  priests  invoke  • the  construction  is  difficult. 
I follow  Professor  Ludwig  in  taking  huve,  an  iitfnitive,  as  equivalent 
to  the  first  person  plural. 

6 Rigveda  VII,  32.  20.  Ascribed  to  Vasishtha.  Plenty  ± the  deity 
Purandhi. 

7 Rigveda  VIM.  3.  1.  Ascribed  to  Mcdhy&titlii,  or  Medhatitlii. 

8 Rigveda  VIII.  50.  7.  Ascribed  to  Bharga. 

9 Rigveda  VII.  59.  3.  Ascribed  to  Vasishtha.  The  Rigveda  has : — 
‘ 0 Maruts,  drink  all  of  you.’ 

10  Rigveda  VIII.  1.  1.  Ascribed  to  Pragatlia. 


48  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  L 

CHAPTER  II. 

DECADE  I.  Indra. 

No  oner  by  deed  attains  to  him  who  works  and 
strengthens  evermore : c 

No,  not  by  sacrifice,  to  Indra  praised  of  all,  resistless, 
daring,  bold  in  might. 

2 He  without  ligature,  before  making  incision  in  •the  neck, 
Closed  up  the  wound  again,  most  wealthy  Maghavan, 

who  healeth  the  dissevered  parts. 

3 A thousand  and  a hundred  steeds  are  harnessed  to 

thy  golden  car  : 

Yoked  by  devotion,  Indra,  let  the  long-maned  bays 
bring  thee  to  drink  the  Soma  juice  ! 

4 Comejhither,  Indra,  with  bay  steeds,  joyous,  with 

tails  like  peacocks'  plumjes  ! 

Let  no  men  0heck  thy  course  as  fowlers  stay  the 
bird  : pass  o’er  them  as  o’er  desert  lands  ! h 

5 Thou  as  a God,  0 mightiest,  verily  blessest  mortal  man. 
0 Maghavan,  there,  is  no  comforter  but  thou  : Indra, 

I speak  fhy  words  Jo  thee. 


The  metre  is  Brihati. 

1 Rigveda  VIII.  59.  3.  Ascribed  to  Puruhanman. 

2 Rigveda  VIII.  I.  12.  Ascribed  to  Medhatithi  and  Medhyatithi 
by  the  Rigveda^  Inde$,  but  to  Pragatha  by  Sayana’s  Commentary. 
According  to  Stevenson  and  Benfey  the  meaning  of  the  stanza  is  that 
Indra  repaired  his  yajra  or  tlfunderbolt  which*had  been  injured  in  his 
combat  with  the  demons.  But  the  preceding  verse  in  the  Rigveda 
shows  that  the  reference  is  to  the  •healing  of  Indra’s  favourite  Etasa 
who  had  bdbn  wounded — how  and  why  is  uncertain — by  Surya  the 

#Sun-god. 

3 Rigveda  VIII.  1.  24.  Ascribed  to  the  same  Rishfs  as  stanza  2. 

4 Rigveda  III.  45.  1.  Ascribed  to  Visv&mitra.  Indra’s  bay  steeds 
with  tails  like  peacocks'  plumbs  arc  the  tawny  clouds  whoso  skirts  are 
shot  with  purple  and  gold. 

5 Rigveda  I,  84. 19.  Ascribed  to  Gotama  or  Gautama. 


iii.  ii.  1.] 


THE  SJMA  VEDA . 


19  , 

6 0 Indra,  thou  art  far-renowned,  impetuous  Lord  of 

power  and  might. 

Alone,  the  never-conquered  guardian  of  mankind, 
thou  smitest  down  resistless  foes. 

7 Indra  for  Vorship  of  the  Gods,  Indra  while  sacrifice 

proceeds, 

Indra,  as  warriors  in  the  battle-shock,  we  call,  Indra 
that  we  may  win  the  spoil. 

8 May  these  my  songs  of  praise  exalt  thee,  Lord,  who 

hast  abundant  wealth  ! 

Men  skilled  in  holy  hymns,  pure,  with  the  hues  of 
fire,  have  sung  them  with  their  lauds  to  thee. 

9 Those  songs  of  ours  exceeding  sweet,  these  hymns  of 

praise  ascend  to  thee, 

Like  ever-conquering  chariots  that  display  their 
strength,  gain  wealtji  and  give  unfailing  help. 

10  Even  as  the  wild-bull,  when  he  thirsts,  goes  to  the 
deserts  watery  pool, 

Come  to  us  quickly  both  at  morning  and  at  eve,  and 
with  the  Kanvas  drink  thy,  fill ! 

(>  Higveda  VI I J.  70.  5.  Ascribed  *to  Nrimedha  and  Purumedha, 
or,  according  to  Sayana’s  Commentary,  to  the  latter  Kislii  only.  Tho 
BUveda  lias,  besides  other  sliglrt  variations,  ‘with  the  guardian  of 
mankind/  that  is,  with  the  thunderbolt  with  which  he  slays  men’s 
enemies,  the  demons  of  drought. 

7 IJigveda  VI 11.  3.  5.  Ascribed  to  Medhyatithi,  or  Medhatithi. 

S ltigveda  VEIL  3.  3.  1 \*itk  the  hues  of  fire:  or,  radiant  as  Agni. 

9 Kigvcda  Virf.  3.  in. 

10  Rigvcda%VIIl.  4.  3.  Ascribed  to  Dcv&Cfthi.  The  wild-bull:  or 
Gaura  (Bos  Gaurus),  a kind  of  buffalo.  Hath  at  morning  and  at  eve: 

tipitve jmtpilvt : the  moaning  of  these  two  words  in  4his  place  is 

somewhat  uncertain.  I lujve  adopted  Professor  Grassmaim’s  inter- 
pretation, but  T do  not  consider  it  satisfactory.  Professor  Ludwfg* 
translates,  ‘ ob  in  der  niilie,  ob  in  dor  feme/  * be  thou  new  or  far  away.’ 
Besides  the  usual  moaning  bamlhntve , in  friendship,  Sayana  assigns  to 
dpitve  a different  meaning  dp&nalcale,  at  the  time  of  the  banquet.  The 
word  prapitva  is  discussed  by  Professor  Gobbler  in  Vedische  JStudien, 

11.  pp.  155—179. 

4 


90 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  L 

DECADE  II.  Indra  and  others. 

Indra,  with  all  thy  saving  helps  assist  us,  Lord  of 
power  and  might ! 

For  after  thee  we  follow  even  as  glorious  bliss,  thee, 
hero,  finder-out  of  wealth. 

2 0 Indra,  Lofd  of  light,  what  joys  thou  broughtest 

from  the  Asuras, 

Prosper  therewith,  0 Maghavan,  him  who  lauds  that 
deed,  and  those  whose  grass  is  trimmed  for  thee  ! 

3 To  Aryaman  and  Mitra  sing  a reverent  sqjig,  O 

pious  one, 

A pleasant  hymn  to  Varuna  who  shelters  us : sing 
ye  laud  unto  the  Kings! 

4 Men  with  their  lauds  are  urging  thee,  Indra,  to 

drink  the  Soma  first. 

The  Ribhus  in  accord  have  lifted  up  their  voice, 
and  Rudras  sung  thee  as  the  first. 


The  metre  is  Brihati. 

I 

1 Rigveda  VIII.  50.  5.  Ascribed  to  Bharga. 

2 Rigveda  Virr.  86.  1.  Ascribed  to  Rcbha.  Joys:  means  of  enjoy- 
ment ; riches.  Asuras : the  word  is  here  used  in  its  later  sense'; 
superior  demons,*  the  constant  enemies  of*  the  Gods. 

3 Rigveda  Vllf.  90.  5.  Scribed  to  Jaruadagni.  Varuna:  the 
Encom passer,  one  of  th<*  oldest  of  the  Vedic  deities,  comtnonly  associat- 
ed with  Mitra  and  presiding  over  the  night  as  Mitra  over  the  day.  Who 
shelters  us:  {Jig  ltigveda  has  vartithyam  instead  of  vardthye : ‘a  pleasant 
hymn  that  shall  protect.’  The  Kings : %the  three  Adityas,  Vanina, 

• Mitra,  and  Aryaman.  t 

4 Kigvcda*  VIII.  3.  7.  The  Rishi  is  Mcdhyatithi,  or  MedMtithi 
according  to  Sayana’s  Commentary.  The  Ribhus : as  deities  connected 
with  the  seasons  which  are  regulated  by  the  Sun  whom  Indra  has 
caused  to  shine.  The  Rudras  : the  Storm-gods,  sons  of  Kudra. 


iii.  ii.  2.] 


THE  SlMAVEDA. 


51 


5 Sing  to  your  lofty  Indra,  sing,  Maruts,  a holy 

hymn  of  praise ! 

Let  Satakratu,  Vritra-slayer,  slay  the  foe  with 
hundred-knotted  thunderbolt! 

6 To  Indra  sin#  the  lofty  hymn,  Maruts!  that  slays 

the  Vritras  b£st, 

Whereby  the  holy  ones  created  for  the  God  the 
light  divine  that  ever  wakes. 

7 0 Indra,  give  us  wisdom  as  a sire  gives  wisdom  to 

his  sous ! 

Q*uide  us,  0 much-invoked,  in  this  oi\r  way  : may 
'we  still  live  and  look  upon  the  light! 

8 0 Indra,  turn  us  not  away:  be  present  with  us  at 

our  feast! 

For  thou  art  our  protection,  yea,  thou  art  our  kin : 
O Indra,  turn  us  not  away ! % 

9 We  compass  thee  like  waters,  we  whose  grass  is 

trimmed  and  Soma  pressed. 

Here  where  the  filter  pours  its  stream,  thy  worship- 
pers round  thee,  0 Vritra-slayer,  sft. 


5 Rigveda  VIII.  78.  3.  Ascribed  in  the  Rigveda  Index  to  Nrimedha 
and  Purumedha,  but  in*  Sayana’s  Commentary  to  Pnrnmcdhas. 

* Maruts : here  and  in  stanza  6 meaning  the  singers  of  the  hymn  of 
praise.  * 0 etherial  priests.1 — Stevenson. 

6 Rigveda  VIII.  7fk  1.  The  1i<jht  (fjvine  : the  Sun,  which  the  holy 
ones,  the  Vis>e  Dcvah,  Visvedevas,  or  AU-g<gds  ‘generated  or  created 
for  Indra. 

7 lligvoda  VII.  32.  26.  Ascribed  to  Sakti. 

8 Rigveda  VIII.  86.  7.  # Ascribed  to  Rebha. 

9 Rigveda  VllL  33.  1.  Ascribed  to  Medhyatithi,  or  to  Med  ha  ti  tin, 
according  to  Sayana’s  Commentary.  Like  waters ; the* construction  is 
difficult,  and  the  forco  of  the  comparison  is  not  obvious.  ‘ As  the 
waters  do  the  continental  shores.’— Stevenson.  The  filter : or  woollen 
strainer,  through  which  the  Soma  juice  is  run  to  purify  it. 


5?  THE  HYMNS  OF  [HART  I. 

10  All  strength  and  valour  that  is  found,  Indra,  in 

tribes  of  Nahushas, 

And  all  the  splendid  fame  that  the  Five  Tribes 
enjoy*  bring,  yea,  all  manly  powers  at  once! 

DECADE  lit  lu dm. 

Yka,  verily  thou  art  a Bull,  our  guardian,  rushing 
like  a bull : -*• 

Thou,  mighty  one,  art  celebrated  as  a Bull,  famed  as 
a Bull  both  near  and  tar. 

2 Whether,  0 Sakra,  thou  be  far,  or,  Vritra-slayer, 

near  at  hand, 

Thence  by  heaven-reaching  songs  he  who  hath  pressed 
the  juice  invites  thee  with  thy  long-maned  steeds. 

3 In  the  wild  raptures  of  the  juice  sing  to  your  hero 

witli  high  laud,  to  him  the  wise, 

10  Uigveda  VI.  1G.  7.  Ascribed  to  Samyu.  Nahushas:  people, 
apparently  distinct,  from  tin*  five  Aryan  tribes  'par  esreflaur-  -the 
Turvasas,  Wins,  Anavas,  Dmhyus,  and  Purus  -,  and  dwellers  on  or 
near  the  Sindlni*  or  India;.  According  to  Say  ana,  human  beings  in 
general  are  meant,  and*  Professor  Roth  explains  the  word  as  men 
generally,  but  with  the  special  sense  of  strangers,  or  neighbours. 
♦See  Muir,  Original  Sanskrit  'Tests,  Yol.  I.,  pp.  179,  ISO. 

The  metre  is  Urihati,  the  metro  of  stanza  3 being  a longer  variety 
called  Pipilikamijdln JRrihati.  , 1 

1 lti  (veda  VII I.  33.  10.  A scribed  to  Medhy.it  it  hi,  or  according  to 

Siyana’s  Coniment;*rv,#ty  Medhatithi.  A Bull : vrisM:  or,  strong 
and  mighty.  Some  of  the  Vedie  poets  delight  in  the  repetition  of  this 
word  and  its  derivatives.  Ovr  : the  Uigveda  has  ’ vritnh , 

instead  of  'vitd  ; ‘ whom  none  may  stay.’  Ruskhuj  like  a hull : going 

• like  a bull  whithersoever  he  will,  according  to  Sayana ; ‘the  universal 
perambulator.’-  ~ Stevenson. 

2 Uigveda  VI II.  8G.  4.  Ascribed  to  Rebba. 

3 Uigveda  VI 11.  4G.  14.  • Ascribed  to  Vasa,  or,  according  to  Sayana’s 
Commentary,  to  Vatsa.  As  the  hymn  alhmeth  it : in  accordance  with 
the  metro. 


iii.  ii.  3.] 


THE  SJjfA  VEDA. 


t>3 

To  Indra  glorious  in  his  name,  the  mighty  one,  even 
as  the  hymn  alloweth  it ! 

4.  0 Indra,  give  us  for  our  weal  a triple  refuge,  triply 
strong ! 

Bestow  a tlwelling-plaee  on  our  rich  lords  and  me, 
and  keep  thy  dart  afar  from  these ! 

5 Turning,  as  ’twere,  to  meet  the*  Sun  enjoy  from 
Indra  all  good  things  ! 

When  he  who  will  be  born  is  born  with  power  we 
look  to  treasures  as  our  heritage. 

G TJie  godless  mortal  gaineth  not  this  food,  0 thou 
whose  life  is  long ! 

But  one  who  yokes  the  bright-hued  horses,  Etasas  ; 
then  Indra  yokes  his  tawny  steeds. 

7 Draw  near  unto  our  Indra  who  must  be  invoked  in 
every  fight ! 

Come,  thou  most  mighty  Vritra-fclaycr,  meet  for 
praise,  come  to  libations  and  to  hymns  ! 

4 Kigveda  VI.  40.  9.  Ascribed  to  Sarny  u.  Our  r^eh  lords : the 
Manila  vans,  or  wealthy  institutors  of  sacrifices. 

5 Kigveda  VII f.  88.  3.  Ascribed  to#Nriiiiodha  or  Nrimedhas.  The 
stanza  is  difficult  and  obscure.  Mahidhara’s  explanation  is:  ‘ The 
gathering  (rays)  proceeding  to  thfe  sun  distribute  all  Imlra’s  treasures 
(to  living  beings,  sc.  as  rain,  corn,  etc.);  may  x\e  too  by  our  power 
leave  those  treasures  as  an  inheritance  to  him  who  has  been  or  will  be 
horn.’  See  Professor  (Wells  Note  in  Wilson’s  Translation  of  the 
Kigveda,  V.,  201.  As  I can  make  nothing  of  jdto* janimdni  of  the 
text  I borrow  the  jdte»ja?ia?ndne,  \vlum..he  who  will  he  born  is  horn,  of 
the  Kigveda. * Sayana  takes  a somewhat  siitular  liberty.  Professor 
Ludwig  remarks  that  the  reading  o£  the  Samaveda  is  almost  impossible 
to  interpret. 

G Kigveda  VIII.  59.  7.  Ascribed  to  Puruhamuan.  Thou  whose 
life  is  long:  Immortal  Tiufra.  Etasas:  Sayana  explains  the  eta  so 
text  by  etasav , the  two  horses  of  Indra,  which  would  a^ree  with  the 
etasd  of  the  Kigveda.  He  who  yokes  Indra’s  horses,  means,  he  who  by 
prayer  and  sacrifice  causes  Indra  to  come  tp  him. 

7 Kigveda  V I FT.  79.  1.  Ascribed  to  Nrimcdha  and  Punimcdha. 
The  Kigveda  has  havya  Indra  instead  of  havyam  Indram , IduUhatu 


• 5f  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  L 

8 Thine,  Indra,  is  the  lowest  wealth,  thou  clierishest 

the  midmost  wealth, 

Thou  ever  rulest  all  the  highest : in  the  fray  for 
cattlemone  resisteth  thee. 

9 Where  art  thou  ? Whither  art  thou  gone?  For  many 

a place  attracts  thy  mind. 

Haste,  warrior^  fort-destroyer,  Lord  of  battle’s  din  I 
haste,  holy  songs  have  sounded  forth ! 

10  Here,  verily,  yesterday  wo  let  the  thunder-wielder 
drink  his  till. 

Bring  him  the  juice  poured  forth  in  saorifice  to-day. 
Now  range  you  by  the  glorious  one! 

DECADE  IV.  Indra. 

He  who  as  sovran  Lord  of  men  moves  with  his 
chariots  unrestrained, 

The  Vritra-sVyer,  vanquisher  of  fighting  hosts,  pre- 
eminent, is  praised  in  song. 

2 Indra,  give  us  security  from  that  whereof  we  are 
afraid ! 

Help  us,  OtMaghatfan,  let  thy  favour  aid  us  thus  : 
drive  away  foes  ana  enemies  ! 

instead  of  fr/tdshatci,  Vritrahd  instead  of  Vritrahan , and  richUhamah 
instead  of  richishama : — ‘ May  Indra,  who  in  every  fight  must  ho 
invoked,  be  near  to  us.  May  the  most  mighty  Vritra-slaycr,  meet  for 
praise,  come  to  libations  and  to  hymns.’ 

8 Kigveda  VI f.  32.  16.  Ascribed  to  Vasishtha.  Indra  is  lord  of 
all  treasures,  in  heaven,  on  earth,  and  under  the  earth. 

9 Kigveda  VIII.  1.  7.  Ascribed  to  Mcdhatithi  and  Medhyatithi, 
but  by  Sayana’s  Commentary  to  Pragatha. 

10  Kigve&a  VIII.  55.  7.  Ascribed  to  Kali,  the  son  of  Pragatha. 

■ sacrifice : savane:  The  Kigveda  has  saviand: — ( So  in  like  manner/ 

The  metre  is  Brihatt. 

Rigveda  VIII.  59.  1.  Ascribed  to  Puruhanman.  Preeminent: 
Benfey’s  text  has  jt/eshthanfi  which  must  be  taken  as  meaning  the  best 
or  noblest  thing,  The  Kigveda  reading  is  jyeshtho . 

2 Kigveda  VIII.  50.  13.  Ascribed  to  Bharga, 


iii.  ii.  4.]  THE  SAMAVEDA.  lb , 

3 Strong  pillar  thou,  Lord  of  the  home ! armour  of 

Soma-offerers ! 

. The  drop  of  Soma  breaketh  all  the  strongholds  down, 
and  Indra  is  the  TCishis’  friend. 

4 Verily,  SRrya,  thou  art  great ; truly,  Aditya,  thou 

art  great ! 

O most  admired  for  greatness  of  thy  majesty,  God, 
by  thy  greatness  thou  art  great ! 

5 Indra!  thy  friend,  when  fair  of  form  and  rich  in 

chariots,  steeds,  and  kine, 

Hath  ever  vital  power  that  gives  him  strength,  and 
joins  the  company  with  radiant  men. 

6 0 Indra,  if  a hundred  heavens  and  if  a hundred 

earths  were  thine, — 

No,  not  a hundred  suns  could  match  thfce  at  thy 
birth,  not  both  the  (vorlds,  0 Thunderer ! 

7 Though,  Indra,  thou  art  called  by  men  eastward  and 

westward,  north  and  south, 

Thou  chiefly  art  with  Anaya  and  Turvasa,  brave 
champion  ! urged  by  men  te  come.* 


3 Rigveda  VIII.  17.  14.  Ascribed  to  Irimbithi.  The  Riskin'  friend: 
muntndm  sak/id : friend  of  the  Munis,  inspired  sages,  saintly  men  or 
ascetics ; of  ua  Rishis,  according  to  Sayana. 

4 Rigveda  VIII.  90.  11.  Ascribed  to  Jamadagni. 

5 Rigveda  VIII.  4.  9.  Ascribed  to  Dcv&{ithi.  'Thy  friend:  the 
faithful  worshipper  whom  thou  favourest.  Vital  ^ ower  that  gives  him 
strength:  ‘f<5bd  accompanied  with  wealth, ’•  according  to  Say  ana’s 
explanation.  The  company:  the  assembly  of  his  friends.  With  radiant 
men : as  one  of  their  number,  and  radiant  or  bright  and  splendid 
himself. 

6 Rigveda  -VI II.  59.  5.  Ascribed  to  Puruhanman. 

7 Rigveda  VIII.  4.  1.  Ascribed  to  Dcv&tithi.  Indrtf  is  invoked  by 
men  on  all  sides,  but  lie  comes  most  frequently  to  the  prayers  and 
sacrifices  of  the  Anavas  and  Turvasas,  the  descendants  of  the  great 
Aryan  eponymi  Anu  and  Turvasa. 


5b  THE  IIYMKS  OF  [FART  I. 

8 Indra  whose  wealth  is  in  thyself,  what  morvtal  will 

attack  this  man  ? 

The  strong  will  win  the  spoil  on  the  decisive  day 
through  faith  in  thee,  0 Maghavan  1 

9 First,  Indra ! Agni ! hath  this  Maid  ‘come  footless 

unto  those  with  feet. 

Stretching  ho*  head  and  speaking  loudly  with  her 
tongue,  she  hath  gone  downward  thirty  steps. 

10  Come,  Indra,  very  near  to  us  with  aids  of  firmly- 
based  resolve  : 

Come,  most  auspicious,  with  thy  most  auspicious 
help  ••good  kinsman,  with  good  kinsmen  come  ! 

DECADE  V.  1,1dm. 

Call  to  your  aid  the  eternal  one  who  shoots  and 
nonfc  may  shoot  at  him, 

Inciter,  swift^  victorious,  blest  of  charioteers,  uneon- 
quered,  Tugriya’s  strengthener ! 

_ _ 4' 

8 Rigveda  LI.  32.  14.  Ascribed  to  Vasishtha,*  Whose  wealth  is  in 
thyself:  the  Rigveda  reads  tvAvamm  : — ‘ Indra,  what  mortal  will  attack 
the  man  who  hafh  his  wealth  in  thee?’  Through  faith:  srcnhlhd: 
here  an  old  form  of  the  instrumental  case. 

9 Rigveda  VI.  59.  6.  Ascribed  t«n  Bhamdwij a.  The  original  hymn 
is  addressed  to  the  dual  deity  Indragni,  that  is,  Tndra-Agui  or  Indra 
and  Agui.  This  Maul:  the  text  has  only  the  feminine  pronoun  iyam 
(haec) : Ushas  or  Dawn  in  intended.  Footless : moving  unsupported 
in  the  sky.  StrHchinf  her  head:  according  to  one  of  Sayana’s  expla- 
nations, ‘ having  ahindoned  tlve  head,  being  heysclf  headless/  which  is 
hardly  consistent  with  what  follows.  Speaking  loudly : t ith  her  charm 
of  earliest  birds  and  the  voice  of  awakened  Nature.  Thirty  steps: 
the  thirty  divisions  of  the  Indian  day  and  night.  ‘ Passing  over  the 
heavens  in  thirty  stops.’ — Stevenson. 

• 4 10  Rigveda,  Valakhilya  5.  5.  Ascribed  In  tho  Rigveda  Index  to 
Medhya,  but  by  Sayana’s  Commentary  to  Mcdhatithi. 

The  metre  is  Rrihati. 

1 Rigveda  VIIL  88.  7.  Ascribed  to  Nnmedha  or  Nrimedhas. 
Tugriyas  strengthener:  protector  of  Rlmjyu,  the  son  of  Tugra,  or  of 


iii.  ii.  5.] 


THE  SJMAVEDA. 


97 


2 Let,none,  no,  not  thy  worshippers,  delay  thee  far 

away  from  us  ! 

Even  from  far  away  come  thou  unto  our  feast,  or 
listen  if  already  here  ! 

3 For  Indrif  Soma-drinker,  armed  with  thunder,  press 

the  Soma  juice  ! 

Make  ready  your  dressed  meats  : cause  him  to  favour 
uxi  The  giver  blesses  him  who  gives. 

4 We  call  upon  that  India  who,  most  active,  ever  slays 

the  foe : 

With  boundless  spirit,  Lord  of  heroes,  manliest  one, 
^ielp  thou  and  prosper  us  in  fight ! 

5 Ye  rich  in  strength,  through  your  great  power 

vouchsafe  us  blessings  day  and  night ! 

The  offerings  which  we  bring  to  you  shall  never  fail, 
gifts  brought  by  us  shall  never  fail. 

G Whenever  mortal  worshipper  will  ^ing  a bounteous 
givers  praise, 

Let  him  with  song  inspired  laud  Varuna  who  sup- 
ports the  folk  who  follow  varied  rites.  • 

7 Drink  milk  to  Indra  in  th<J  joy  irt  Soma  juice, 
Medhyatithi ! 

To  golden  Indra  ever,  close  to  his  bay  steeds,  the 
thunder-armed,  the  golden  one ! 


the  descendants  of  that  chief  in  general.  The  Kfcvcda  has  tuyryd - 
v rid  ham  instead  of  t wjri ydvridha  m . ‘ The  increaser  of  the  waters,’ 

according  to  Siyana.  • 

2 Rigvcda  VII.  32.  1.  Ascribed  to  Vaxishtfla. 

3 Rigveda  VII.  32.  8.  The  yiier  blesses  him  who  (jives:  Indra 
rewards  the  liberal  worshipper* 

4 Rii'veda  VI.  4G.  3.  Ascribed  to  Samyu. 

r»  Ri^veda  T. # 139.  f>.  Ascribed  to  l’aruehchhepa.  The  stanza  is 
addressed  to  the  Asvins. 

6 Not.  found  in  the  Kigveda.  Ascribed  ^o  Vamadeva. 

7 Rijjjveda  VIII.  33.  4.  Ascribed  to  Medhyatithi  by  the  Ri^veda 
Index,  but  to  Vatsa  by  Siyana’s  Commentary.  The  Rijveda  text  is 


56  THE  SlSfAVEDA.  [PART  /. 

8 Both  boons, — may  Indra,  hitherward  turned  listen 

to  this  prayer  of  ours, 

And  mightiest  Maghavan  with  thought  inclined  to 
us  come  near  to  drink  the  Soma  juice! 

9 Not  for  an  ample  price  dost  thou,  Stone-caster ! give 

thyself  away, 

Not  for  a thousand,  Thunderer!  nor  ten  thousand, 
nor  a hundred,  Lord  of  countless  wealth  T’ 

10  0 Indra,  thou  art  more  to  me  than  sire  or  niggard 
brother  is. 

Thou  and  my  mother,  0 good  Lord,  appear  alike,  to 
give  me  wealth  abundantly. 


different: — ‘ Mcdhyatithi,  to  Indra  sing,  drink  of  the  j nice  to  make 
tlice  glad. 4 Close-knit  to  his  bay  steeds,  bolt-armed,  beside  the  juice  is 
he  : his  chariot  is  o£  gold/  Sayana  lakes  Mcdhyatithi  to  be,  not  the 
name  of  the  Rishi,  but  an  appellative  of  Indra,  * guest  at  sacri  1100' : 
4 0 Indra,  who  art  a guest  at  our  sacrifice,  preserve  the  sacrificial  food 
with  the  pleasant  moon-plant  juice  for  thyself.’ — Stevenson. 

8 Itigveda  VIII.  .50.  1.  Ascribed  to  Bharga.  Both  boons:  Indra  is 
asked  to  hear  the  Rishi’s  pray  I r and  to  drink  the  libation. 

9 Itigveda  VI H.  1.  5.  Ascribed  to  Mcdhatithi  and  Mcdhyatithi  by 

the  Itigveda  Index,  but  to  l’rag'itha* by  Sayana’s  Commentary.  Stone- 
caster  : wicldcr  of  the  thunderbolt.  Give  thyself  away : to  our  enemies. 
The  Rigvcda  has  deydm  ins  to;  id  of  dlt/<m : — 4 0 caster  of  the  stone,  I 
would  not  sell  thee  for  a mighty  price.’  A hundred : meaning  an  in- 
definitely large  sum.  ‘By  such  a gift  A hundred  times  repeated/ — 
Stevenson.  r , 

10  Itigveda  VIII.  1/6.  Ascribed  to  the  same  Rishisas  the  prcced- 


BOOK  IV. 


CHAPTER  I. 

...  % DECADE  I.  India  and  others. 

These  Soma  juices  mixt  with  curd  have  been  ex- 
pressed for  Jndra  here: 

Come  with  thy  bay  steeds,  Thunder-wielder,  to  our 
l\onie,  to  drink  them  till  they  make  thee  glad ! 

2 Indra,  these  Somas  with  their  lauds  have  been  pre- 

pared for  thy  delight. 

Drink  of  the  pleasant  juice  and  listen  to  our  songs; 
lover  of  song,  reward  the  hymn  ! % 

3 I call  on  thee,  Sabardugha,  this  day>  inspirer  of  the 

psalm, 

Indra!  the  richly-yielding  milch-cow  who  provides 
unfailing  food  in  ample  stream. 

4 Indra,  the  strong  and  lofty  hills  art*  powerless  to 

bar  thy  way. 

None  stays  that*act  of  tjhine  when  thou  wouldstfain 
give  wealth  to  oue  like  me  who  sings  thy  praise. 


The  jnetro  is  Brihati. 

1 Hi^veda  VII.  32.  4.  Ascribed  to  Vasishtha. 

2 Nut  found^iu  tho  ttigveda.  Ascribed  to  Vaiyadeva.  With  their 
lauds : ‘ accompanied  with  sacred  hymns.’ — Stevenson. 

3 Rigveda  VIII.  1.  10.  Ascribed* to  Medhatithi  and  Medhyatithi 
by  the  Rigveda  Index,  but  to  Soma  by  Sayana’s  Commentary.  Sabar- 
dugM:  according  to  Sayaru*  ‘yielding  nectar,  amnta , or  ambrosia/ 
the  general  namo  of  cows  which  supply  the  milk  required  for  sacrificial 
purpose.  Hero  Iudra  himself,  the  bounteous  giver  of  all* blessings,  is 
intended.  In  tho  second  line  the  Rigycda#has  indram  the  accusative 
case  instead  of  the  vocative  indra. 

4 lligvockt  VIII.  77.  3.  Ascribed  to  Nodhas. 


db 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PA/rr  /. 


5 Who  knows  what  vital  power  he  wins,  drinking 
beside  the  flowing  juice  ? 

This  is  the  fair-cheeked  God  who,  joying  in  the 
draught,  breaks  down  the  castles  in  his  strength. 

0 What  time  thou  castest  from  his  seat'ancl  punishcst 
the  riteless  man, 

Strengthen  fVr  opulence,  0 Indra  Maghavan,  our 
plant  desired  by  many  a one ! *-• 

7 Let  Tvaslitar,  Brahma naspati,  Parjanya  guard  our 

heavenly  word, 

Aditi  with  her  sons,  the  brothers,  guard  for  us  the 
invincible,  the  saving  word! 

8 Ne’er  art  thou  fruitless,  Indra,  ne’er  dost  thou  desert 

the  worshipper  : 

But  now,  0 Maghavan,  thy  bounty  as  a God  is 
poured  forth  ever  more, and  more. 

9 Best  slayer*of  the  Vritras,  yoke  thy  bay  steeds, 

Indra,  far  away ! 4 

Come  with  the  high  ones  hither,  Maghavan,  to  us, 
mighty,  to  drink,  the  Soma  juice  ! 

5 liij'vcda  VI I f.  33.  7.  Ascribed  to  Medhyatithi  by  the*  Kigveda 
Index,  but  to  Medhatithi  by  Sa\ ana’s  Commentary.  T/i a castles : the 
cloud-east les  of  the  demons  of  drought  who  withhold  the  nun,  or  the 
strongholds  of  the  non-Aryan  inhabitants  of  the  land. 

G Not  found  in  the  Kigveda.  Ascribed  to  Torasravas  or  Taurji- 
B favosa.  Our  ft  hint : tansiun : the  Soma  plant,  meaning  sacrifice  with 
libations  of  Soma  juice. 

7 Not  found  in  the  TSii'ced’a.  Ascribed  to  fI  Vasli  tar.  # Tvashtar : the 
Hcphaistos  or  Vulcan  o ft!  ic  Indian  pantheon,  the  ideal  artist,  the  divine 
artisan,  the  most  skilful  of  workftien,  versed  in  all  wonderful  contri- 
vances. Parjanya  . the  rain-cloud  personified  and  regarded  as  a deity. 

• AAiti:  Infinity;  the  mother  of  the  A (lit  ms.  Word:  meaning  prayer. 

8 Ttigveda  Valakhilya,  3.  7.  Ascribe  1 to  1’ushtigu  by  the  Jiigveda 
Tmlex,  hut  to  Vamadeva  by  Suyana’s  Commentary. 

9 Uigveda  VIII.  3.  17.  *rlhc  llishi  is  Medhyatithi,  or,  according  to- 
Sa}  ana,  Medhatithi.  The  hhjh  ones:  In  Ira’s  companions  the  Man  its. 
are  probably  intended. 


iv.  i.  2. 


THE  S Am  A VEDA. 


61  , 

10  0 Thunderer,  zealous  worshippers  gave  thee  drink 
this  time  yesterday  : 

So,  Indra,  listen  here  to  him  who  offers  lauds : come 
near  unto  our  dwelling-place ! 

DECADE  II.  Indra  ami  others. 

Advancing,* sending  forth  her  rays„  the  daughter  of 
tlu;  Sky  is  seen. 

The  mighty  one  lays  bare  the  darkness  with  her  eye, 
the  friendly  Lady  makes  the  light. 

2 These  morning  sacrifices  call  you,  Asvins,  at  the 

+>reak  of  day. 

For  help,  have  I invoked  you  rich  in  power  and 
might:  for,  house  by  house,  ye  visit  all. 

3 Where  are  ye,  Gods?  What  mortal  man,  0 Asvins, 

glows  with  zeal  for  you,  * 

Urging  you  with  the*  crushing  stqpc  and  with  the 
stalk  of  Soma  thus  or  otherwise? 

4 This  sweetest  Soma  juice  hath  been  expressed  for 

you  at  morning  rites. 

Asvins,  drink  this  prepared  are  yesterday  and  give 
treasures  to  him  who  offers  itl 

10  Rigvoda  VI 11.  88.  1.  Ascribed  to  Nyimcdha.  To  him  who  offers 
lands:  stomavdhasa  : the  Rigvela  reals  stomavdluisdm : ‘to  those  who 
bring  the  laud.’ 

Tho'fliot  re  is  Rrihatl 

1 Rigvoda  VII.  81.  1.  Ascribed  to  Vasishtlia.  The  deity  is  Fslms 

or  Dawn,  daughter  of  Dyaiis  or  Heaven.  Tlu^ Rigvcda  version  differs 
in  the  first,  part  of  the  second  line: — ‘ Uncovering,  that  we  may  see, 
the  mighty  gloom.’  % s 

2 Rigvoda  VII.  71.1.  Ascribed  to  Vasishlha.  The  Asvins  are  the 
deities  of  this  utyl  the  two  billowing  stanzas. 

3 Not  found  in  the  Rigvoda.  Ascribed  to  Asvina.  Tdie  stanza  is 
obscure,  and  some  words  of  the  text  seem  corrupt. 

4 Rigvoda  1.  47.  1.  Ascribed  to  Vraskuitva  by  the  Rigveda  Index, 
hut  to  Kutsa  by  Sayana’s  (Commentary.  Prepared  ere  yesterday:  pressed 
from  the  plant  three  days  ago,  and  then  left  to  stand  and  ferment. 


62  THE  II Y MRS  OF  [FART  I. 

5 Let  me  not,  still  beseeching  thee  with  might  and 

sound  of  Soma  drops, 

Anger  at  sacrifice  a fierce  wild  creature  1 Who  would 
not  beseech  the  almighty  one? 

6 Adhvaryu,  let  the  Soma  flow,  for  lndra  longs  to 

drink  thereof. 

He  even  nowthath  yoked  his  vigorous  bay  steeds:  the 
Vritra-slayer  hath  come  nigh. 

7 Bring  thou  all  this  unto  the  good,  0 lndra,  to  the 

old  and  young ! 

For,  Maghavan,  thou  art  rich  in  treasures  from  of 
old,  to  be  invoked  in  every  fight. 

8 If  I,  0 lndra,  were  the  lord  of  riches  ample  as  thine 

own, 

I would  support  the  singer,  God  who  scatterest 
wealth  ! and  not  abandon  him  to  woe. 

9 Thou  in  th/battles,  India,  art  subduer  of  all  hostile 

bands.  * 

Father  art  thou,  all-conquering,  cancelling  the  curse, 
thou  victor  of  tl,ie  vanquisher  ! 

10  For  in  tlty  might  .thou  stretchest  out  beyond  the 
mansions  of  the  sky. 

The  earthly  region,  lndra,  comprehends  thee  not. 
Thou  hast  waxed  mighty  over  all. 

5 Rigveda  VIII.  1.  20.  Ascribe  l to  Mcdliatithi  and  Meilhyatitjii 
by  the  Rigvcd/i  Index,  but  to  Pmgatha  by  Sfiyana’s  Commentary. 
With  might:  jyA;  probably  an  old  form  of  the  instrumental  case. 

6 RigvcdaVUM.il.  Ascribed  to  Devatitlii.  Adhvaryu : officiating 
priest;  especially  one  of  those  whose  duty  was  to  provide  all  that  was 
necessary  for  the  preparation  and  presentation  of  Soma  juice. 

7 Kigvctia  VII.  32.  24.  Ascribed  to  Vanish  tlm. 

, 8 Rigveda  VII.  32.  18. 

9 Rigveda  VIII.  88.  5.  Ascribed  to  Nriiuedha  or  Nrimedhas. 
Cancelling  the  curse:  averting  the  insults  and  imprecations  of  our  enemies. 

10  Rigveda  VIII.  77.  f>»  Ascribed  to  Nodhas.  The  Rigveda  has 
* boundaries’  instead  of  ‘mansions,’  and  ‘after  thy  godhead'  (anu 
svudhdm ) instead  of  ‘ over  all  ’ ( ati  viwam )* 


iv.  i.  3.] 


THE  SAMAVEDA. 


DECADE  III.  Indra. 

Pressed  is  the  juice  divine  with  milk  commingled  : 

thereto  hath  Indra  ever  been  accustomed. 

We  wake* thee,  Lord  of  bays,  with  sacrifices:  mark 
this  our  laud  in  the  wild  joys  of  Soma ! 

2 A home  is  made  for  thee  to  dwell  in,  Indra : 0 

much-invoked  one,  with  the  men  go  thither ! 

Thou,  that  thou  mayest  guard  us  and  increase  us, 
givest  us  wealth  and  joyest  in  the  Somas. 

3 Tlje  well  thou  clavest,  settest  free  the  fountains,  and 

gavest  rest  to  floods  that  were  obstructed. 

Thou,  Iridra,  laying  the  great  mountain  open,  slay- 
ing the  Danava,  didst  loose  the  torrents. 

4 When  we  have  pressed  the  juice  we  laud  thee,  Indra, 

most  valorous!  eveirabout  to  win ^he  booty. 

Bring  us  prosperity,  and  by  thy  great  wisdom,  under 
thine  own  protection,  may  we  conquer ! 

5 Thy  right  hand  have  we  grasped  in  ours,  0 Indra, 

longing,  thou  very  Lord  of  wealth,  for  treasures. 
Because  we  know  thee,  hero,  Lord  of  cattle  : vouch- 
safe us  mighty  and  resplendent  riches! 


The  metre  is  Trishtup. 

* 1 Rigveda  VII.  21.  1.  Ascribed  to  Vasishtha. 

2 Rigveda  VII.  24.  1.  Ascribed  to  Vasishtha.  With  the  men:  the 

priests  officiating  at  thosacrihcc.  # 

3 Rigveda  V.  32.  1.  Ascribed  to  (Jatu.  Tftt  well:  the  rain-cloud. 
The  fountains : the  sources  of  tha  waters  of  the  firmament.  The 
mountain:  the  massive  cloud.  * The  Ddnava:  Yritra,  the  sfln  of  Danu. 

4 Rigveda  X.  148. 1.  Ascybcd  to  Prithu.  And  by  thy  great  wisdom  ; 
this  is  a conjectural  translation,  suggested  by  Professor  Ludwig,  of 
yasya  kond.  The  Rigveda  has  yasya  chdkan , meaning  apparently  ‘ as 
each  desires  it/ 

5 Rigveda  X.  47.  1.  Ascribed  to  Saptagu,  or  Sahagu  according  to 
&iyana. 


(ft  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  L 

6 Mon  call  on  Indrn  in  the  armed  encounter  /that  he 

may  make  the  hymns  they  sing  decisive. 

Hero  in  combat  and  in  love  of  glory,  give  us  a por- 
tion of  the  stall  of  cattle ! 

7 Like  birds  of  beauteous  wing  the  cPriyamedhas, 

Tiishis,  imploring,  have  come  nigh  to  Indra. 

Dispel  the  darkness  and  fill  full  our  vision  : deliver 
us  as  men  whom  snares  entangle  1 # ' 

8 They  gaze  on  thee  with  longing  in  their  spirit,  as  on 

a strong-winged  bird  that  inounteth  sky-ward ; 

On  thee  with  wings  of  gold,  Varuna’s  envoy,  the 
Bird  that  luxsteneth  to  the  home  of  Yama.  . 

D First  in  the  ancient  time  was  Prayer  engendered  : 
Vena  disclosed  the  bright  ones  from  the  summit, 
Laid  ,bare  this  world’s  lowest  and  highest  regions, 
womb  of  the  existent  and  the  non-existent. 

10  They  have  prepared  and  fashioned  for  this  hero  words 
never  matched,  most  plentiful,  most  auspicious, 

For  him  the  ancient,  great,  strong,  energetic,  tho 
very  mighty  wielder  of  the  thunder. 

«.  ^ 

0 Ui^vuda  VII.  27.  1.  ‘Ascribe!  I to  Vasishtha.  And  in  love  of  glory : 
the  Uij'veda  bus  sarasasv hnhhw,  ‘ vojoicin;'  in  tliv  ! ’ instead  of 

Bravnmw'ha  hlnia,  Give  us  a portion,  etc. ; aid  us  to  capture  the  cattle 
of  the  enemy. 

7 Itinvoda  X.  73.  11.  Ascribed  to  Cauriv it i.  Priyamedhas : meiA- 
hers  of  the  famfty  of  fhe  Kishi  IViyamcdha. 

S Rii'veda  X.  123.  C.  Ascribed  to  Vena.  The  original  hymn  is 
addressed  to  \ en.i,  meaning  a]»))arently  the  Sun  ns  he  rises  in  the  mist 
and  dew  of  morning.  Yama  : the  Cod  of  the  Departed.  His  home 
means  the  dark  region  of  the  west. 

9 Not  found  in  the  ltijrveda.  Ascribed  to  Naknla.  Vena : the  Sun. 
j he  Kriffht  ones:  his  brilliant  rays.  From  the  summit from  the  loftiest 
point  of  the  universe.  Non  existent : what  does  not  yet  actually  oxist, 
but  yet  has  in  itself  the  latent  potentiality  of  existence. 

10  Rit'veda  VI.  .32.  1.  Ascribed  to  Suhotra.  They  have,  prepared 
and  fashioned  for  this  hro:  according  to  the  Rii'veda  I with  my 
lips  have  fashioned  for  this  hero/ 

C 


iv.  i.  4.] 


THE  S AM  A VEDA. 


65 


DECADE  IV.  Tndra. 

The  black  drop  sank  in  Ansumatis  bosom,  advancing 
with  ten  thousand  round  about  it. 

Indra  with  might  longed  for  it  as  it  panted : the 
hero-hearted  King  laid  down  his  weapons. 

2 Flying  in  terror  from  the  snort  of  "Vritra  all  deities 

who  were  thy  friends  forsook  thee. 

So,  Indra,  with  the  Maruts  bo  thy  friendship : in  all 
these  battles  thou  shalt  be  the  victor. 

3 The  old  hath  waked  the  young  Moon  from  his  slumber 

who  runs  his  circling  course  with  many  round  him. 

Behold  the  God’s  high  wisdom  in  its  greatness : he 
who  died  yesterday  to-day  is  living. 

The  metre  is  Trishtup,  except  in  stanza  6 where  Tl  is  Vi  raj  consisting 
of  three  instead  of  four  Padas  of  eleven  syllables  each. 

1 Rigveda.  VIII.  85.  13.  Ascribed  to  Dyutana  or  Tiraschl.  The 
black  drop : the  darkened  Moon.  An  sum  at  t ; a mythical  river  of  the 
air.  Ten  thousand:  probably,  demons  of  darkness;  Phe  numerals  are 
without  a substantive,  its  it  jmnted:  wliilft  striving  against  its  as- 
sailants. Laid  down  his  weapons  when  he  had  conquered  the  demons 
and  liberated  the  darkened  Moon.  The  Rigveda  has  adhatta  instead 
of  adhadrdh , of  which  rdh  appears,  as  Prof.  Ludwig  conjectures,  to 
stand  for  rdt : Sayana  gives  a different  explanation  of  this  stanza  and 
the  twd  that  follow  it  in  the  Rigveda.  He  takes  dfapsah  krishnaht 
black  drop,  to  mean  ‘the  swift-moving  Krishna!*,’  an  Asura  or  demon 
who  with  ten  thousand  of  his  kind  had  occupied  th&  banks  of  the  river 
Ansumati,  which  he  says  is  the  Yamuna  or  Jumna,  and  was  there 
defeated  by  Indra,  Brihaspati,%and  the  Maruts.  See  Prof.  Cowell’s 
Note  in  Wilson’s  Translation,  Vol.  V.,  p.  192. 

2 Rigveda  VI5I.  85.  7.  With  the  Maruts : because  they  alone  stood* 
by  him  and  helped  him  in  the  battle. 

3 Rigveda  X.  55.  5.  Ascribed  to  Brihaduktha.  Sayana  explains 
this  stanza  differently,  making  Indra,  identified  with  Time,  the  subject. 
I follow  Prof.  Ludwig’s  interpretation.  With  many  round  him  ; stars 
of  the  asterisms  or  lunar  mansions  through  which  he  passes. 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


<fc 


[PART  t 


4 Then,  at  thy  birth,  thou  wast  the  foeman,  Indra,  of 

those  the  seven  who  ne'er  had  met  a rival. 

The  hidden  pair,  heaven  and  tin*  earth,  thou  found- 
est.  and  to  the  mighty  worlds  thou  gavest  pleasure* 

5 A friend  we  count  thee,  sharp-edged,  thflnder*wielder, 

Steer  strong  of  body,  ovei  throwing  many. 

Thou,  helping*  causost  pious  tribes  to  conquer : Indra, 
I laud  the  heavenly  Yyitra-slayer.  * 

6 Bring  to  the  wise,  the  great,  who  waxeth  mighty 

your  offerings,  and  make  ready  your  devotion! 

Go  forth  to  many  tribes  as  man's  controller! 

7 Call  we«  on  Maghavan,  auspicious  Indra,  beffthero 

in  this  fight  where  spoil  is  gathered,  - 
Strong,  listening  to  give  us  aid  in  battles,  who  slays 
the  Vritras,  wins  and  gathers  riches! 

8 Prayers  have  been  offered  up  through  love  of  glory: 

Vasishtha/honour  Indra  in  the  battle! 

He  who  with  fame  extends  through  all  existence 
hears  words  which  I,  his  faithful  servant,  utter. 

9 May  the  sweet  Soma  juices  make  him  happy  to  cast 

his  quoit  that  li*,s  jn  depth  of  waters! 

Thou  from  the  udder  which  o'er  earth  is  fastened 
hast  poured  the  milk  iqto  the  kine  and  herbage. 

4 Rig  verb  VIII.  85.  16.  The  seven:  Krishna,  Vfitra,  Sambara, 
Namucln  and  others,  according  to  Sayanh. 

5 Not  found  in  the  Rigveda.  Ascribed  to  Vamadeva.  A friend : 
medim : the  exact  meaning  of  the  word  is  uncertain.  Sharp-edged : 

* who  wearest  the  crown.’ — Stevenson. 

6 Rigvcda  VII.  31.  fO.  Ascribed  to  Vasishtha. 

7 Rigvcda  II I.  30.  22.  Ascritad  to  Visvamitra.  The  stanza  is  the 
concluding  verse  of  many  other  hymns  of  the  Rigveda  ascribed  to  the 
Visvamitras. 

« • • 

8 Rigveda  VII.  23.  1.  Ascribed  to  Vasishtha. 

9 Rigveda  X.  73.  9.  Ascribed  to  Gauriviti.  Quoit : chakram: 
meaning  the  thunderbolt. * Waters : the  watery  clouds.  The  udder: 
the  firmament  with  its  clouds  which  produce  the  sweet  soft  rain  which 
fills  the  cows  with  milk  and  the  herbs  with  sap. 


iv.  i.  5.] 


THE  SA  HAYED  A. 


$7 

DECADE  V.  In <lra  and  others. 

This  vigorous  one  whom  deities  commission,  the 
conqueror  of  cars,  the  strong  and  migljty, 

Swift,  fle^t  to  battle,  with  uninjured  fellies,  even 
Tarkshya  for  our  weal  will  we  call  hither. 

2 Imlra  the  rescuer,  Indra  the  helper,,  hero  who  listens 

attach  invocation, 

Sakra  I call,  Indra  invoked  of  many.  May  Indra 
Maghavan  accept  our  presents! 

3 Indra  whose  right  hand  wields  the  bolt  we  worship, 

•driver  of  bay  steeds  seeking  sundered  courses. 
Shaking  his  beard  with  might  he  hath  arisen,  terrible 
with  his  weapons,  with  his  bounty. 

4 The  ever-slaying,  bold  and  furious  Indra,  the  bright 

bolts  Lord,  the  strong,  the  great,  the  bcfundless, 
Who  slayeth  Vritra  and  acquiretlj  booty,  giver  of 
blessings,  Maghavan  the  bounteous. 

5 The  man  who  lies  in  wait  and  fights  against  us, 

deeming  himself  a giant  or  a hero, — 


The  metre  is  Trishtup. 

1 Rigveda  X.  178.  1.  Ascribed  to  Arishtanemi  or  Tarkshya. 
Tdrkshya : a personification  of  the  Sun,  usually  described  as  a divine 
horse.  Cp.  Rigveda  I.  89.  6i 

• 2 Rigveda  VI.  47.  11.  Ascribed  to  Garga.  Accept  our  presents: 

‘ prosper  and  bless  us/  in  the  Rigveda  version.  • • 

3 Rigveda  X.  23.  1.  Ascribed  to  Vimada.  Seeking  sundered  courses: 
vivratdndm:  •unruly,  swerving,  or  pulling  ^wuy  from  each  other. 
According  to  Sftyana,  ‘ having  many  functions.' 

4 Rigveda  IV.  17.  8.  Ascribed  to  Vamadeva.  Indra : the  accusa- 
tive case  without  a governing  verb.  Sayana  supplies  vayam  stotdraJi 
stumeti , * we  wq^shippers  pflaise/ 

5 Not  found  in  the  Rigveda.  Ascribed  to  Vamadeva.,  Giant : the 
meaning  of  vgand  here  is  uncertain,  and  the  translation  is  conjectural. 
Stevenson,  following  Sayana,  translates  th<J  first  line : — ‘The  man  who 
slays  us  and  bestows  our  goods  on  others,  and  who,  though  a murderous 
wretch,  boasts  of  his  liberality/ 


6% 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  I. 


By  battle  or  with  strength  destroy  him,  Jndra! 
With  thy  help,  manly-soulcd ! may  we  be  victors! 

6 He  whom  men  call  when  striving  with  their  foemen, 

or  speeding  onward  in  array  of  battle 
Whom  bards  incite  where  heroes  win  the  booty, 
or  in  the  way  to  waters,  He  is  Indra. 

7 On  a high  car,  0 Parvata  and  Indra,  bring 'pleasant 

viands,  with  brave  heroes,  hither ! 

Enjoy  our  presents,  Gods,  at  sacrifices:  wax  strong 
by  hymns,  rejoice  in  our  oblation ! 

8 In  ceaseless  flow  hath  he  poured  forth  his  praises, 

as  waters  from  the  oceans  depth,  to  Indra, 

Who  to  his  car  on  both  its  sides  securely  hath  fixed 
the  earth  and  heaven  as  with  an  axle. 

9 May  our  fritfids  turn  thee  hitherward  to  friendship! 

Mayst  thou  approach  us  even  o’er  many  rivers*! 
May  the  Disposer,  radiant  in  this  mansion  with 
special  lijstre,  brjng  the  father’s  offspring! 


« 

G Not  found  in  the  Rigveda.  Ascribed  to  Vainadeva. 

7 Rigveda  III.  53.  1.  Ascribed  to , Visvamitra.  Parvata  : the 
Genius  of  the  Mountains,  frequently  associated  with  Indra. 

8 Rigveda  X.’  89.  i.  Ascribed  to  Renu,  or  Rinu  according  to 

Sayana.  Hath  he  the  worshipper.  In  the  • Rigveda  the  verb  is  in 
the  first  person.  * ' 

9 Rigveda  X.  10.  1.  Ascribed*  to  Vasu  by  Sayana.  The  stanza 
difFers  widely  from  that  in  the  Rigvcha  which  is  the  commencement 

, of  Yami’s  speech  to  her  brother  Yaina  imploring  him  to  make  her  his 
wife.  The  altered  stanza  seems  here  to  be  addressed  to  Agni.  Our 
frienth:  the  ‘ officiating  priests.  Rivers:  waters  of  the  atmosphere. 
According  to  Sayana,  arnqvdn  here  is  an  adjective  in  the  nominative 
case,  ‘possessing  water.’  The  Disposer:  apparently  the  God  is  en- 
treated to  bestow  a son  upon  the  institutor  of  the  sacrifice, 


iv.  ii.  1.] 


THE  SlMA  VEDA. 


39 

10  Who  yokes  to-day  unto  the  pole  of  Order  the  strong 
and  passionate  steers  of  checkless  spirit, 
Health-bringing,  bearing  in  their  mouths  no  fodder? 
Long  shall  he  live  who  richly  pays  their  service. 


CHAPTER  II. 

DECADE  I.  India. 

The  singers  hymn  thee,  they  who  chant  the  psalm  of 
praise  are  lauding  thee. 

The  Brahmans  have  exalted  thee,  0 Satakratu,  like 
•a  pole. 

2 All  sacro.d  songs  have  magnified  Indra  expansive  as 
the  sea, 

Best  of  all  warriors  borne  on  cars,  the  Lord  of  heroes, 
Lord  of  strength.  % 

* > — 

10  Rigveda  I.  84.  16.  Ascribed  to  Ootama  or  Gautama.  The  strong 
and  p<is$ionate  steers : the  zealous  and  indefatigable  priests  who  are 
yoked  to  the  chariot-pole  of  Order  or  employed  in  the  performance  of 
sacrifice  ordained  by  eternal  Law.  Bearing  hi  their  mouths  no  fodder : 
that  is,  prayer  and  praise,  not  food  for  fhem  as  steers  to  cat.  1 adopt 
ail  interpretation  suggested  by  Prof.  Ludwig,  but  the  meaning  of 
apsuvdhah  is  uncertain.  The  reading  of  the  Ttigveda  is  different : — 
‘With  shaft-armed  mouths,  heart-piercing,  health-bestowing,’  the  words 
of  the  priests  being  the  arrows  with  which  their  mouths  are  armed. 

The  metre  is  Anushtup,  consisting  of  four  octosyllabic  Padas. 

1 Rigveda  I.  10.  1.  ^ Ascribed  to  Madhuchchhandas.  like  a pole: 
‘The  concluding  phrase,  “ticd...vd  van  mm  iya  t/emiref  “they  have 
raised  thee,  like  a bamboo/'  is  rather  obscure.  The  Scholiast  says, 
they  have  elevated  Indra,  as  timibldVs  raise  a bamboo — on  the  summit 
of  which  they  balance  themselves;  a feat  not  uncommon  in  India:  or, 
as  vahsa  meanfy  also,  a family,  it  may  be  rendered,  as  ambitious* 
persons  raise  their  family  to  consequence.’ — Wilson. 

2 Rigveda  I.  11.  1.  Ascribed  to  Jetar,  son  of  Madhuchchhandas. 
Expansive  as  the  sea : cf.  Rigveda  I.  8.  7.  • Or  the  expression  may  be, 
as  Wilson  says,  ‘a  vague  mode  of  indicating  the  universal  diffusion 
of  Indra  as  the  firmament/ 


n THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  L 

3 This  poured  libation,  Indra,  drink,  immortal,  gladden- 

ing, excellent : 

Streams  of  the  bright  have  flowed  to  thee  here  at  the 
seat  of  holy  Law. 

4 Stone-darting  Indra,  wondrous  God,  Svhat  wealth 

thou  hast  not  given  me  here, 

That  bounty,  treasure -finder  ! bring,  filling  full  both 
thy  hands,  to  us  ! 

5 0 Indra,  hear  Tirasclii’s  call,  the  call  of  him  who 

serveth  thee  ! 

Satisfy  him  with  wealth  of  kine  and  valiant  offspring ! 
Great  art  thou. 

6 This  Soma  hath  been  pressed  for  thee,  0 Indra: 

bold  one,  mightiest,  come  ! 

May  Indra-vigour  fill  thee  full,  as  Sftrya  fills  mid-air 
with3 4 5 6 7  rays ! 

7 Come  hi thciy.  Indra,  with  thy  bays,  come  thou  to 

Kanva’s  eulogy ! * 

Ye  by  command  of  yonder  Dyaus,  God  bright  by 
day!  have  gone  to  heaven. 


3 Rigveda  I.  84.  4.  Ascribed  to  Gotama.  The  bright:  Soma  juice. 
Sent  of  holy  Law:  the  place  wheiy  sacrifice,  ordained  by  rita  or 
eternal  Law  or  Order,  is  performed. 

4 Rig veda  V.  39.  1.  Ascribed  to  Atri.  , What  wealth  thou  hast  not 
given  me  here:  according  to  the  Rigveda: — ‘What  wealth  is  richly’ 
given  from  thee.’  • 

5 Rigveda  VI II.  84.  4.  Ascribed  to  Tiraschi., 

6 Rigveda  I.  84,  'l.  •Ascribed  to  Gotama  or  Gautafna.  Sdrya : 
the  Sun. 

7 Rigveda  VIII.  31.  1.  Ascribed  to1  Nipatithi  by  the  Rigveda 
Index,  but  to  Medhatithi  by  Sayana’s  Commentary.  The  exact  mean- 
ing of  the  second  line,  which  is  the  refrain  of  the  first ‘fifteen  stanzas 
of  the  original!  hymn,  is  obscure.  Ye  probably  means  Indra’s  horses, 
and  God  bright  by  day!  (dMvaso)  Indra  himself.  The  Scholiast 
offers  t wo  different  explanations,  in  one  case  boldly  altering  two  words 
of  the  text.  See  Note  m Wilson’s  Translation  of  the  Rigveda. 


THE  SAMAVEDA. 


iv.  ii.  2.] 


f 1 


8 Song-lover  ! like  a charioteer  come  songs  to  thee  when 

Soma  flows. 

Together,  they  have  called  to  thee  as  mother-kine 
unto  their  calves.  , 

9 Come  no'#'  and  let  us  glorify  pure  Indra  with  pure 

Sam  a hymn ! 

Let  milk-blent  juice  delight  him  made  stronger  with 
pure,  pure  songs  of  praise  ! 

10  That  which,  most  wealthy,  makes  you  rich,  in  splen- 
dours most  illustrious, 

Soma  is  pressed : thy  gladdening  drink,  Indra! 
#Jibations  Lord!  is  this. 

DECADE  II.  Indra.  Dadhiki&vnn. 
Bring  forth  oblations  to  the  God  who  knoweth  all, 
who  fain  would  drink, 

The  wanderer,  lagging  not  behind  £he  hero,  coming 
nigh  with  speed ! 

2 To  us  the  mighty,  lying  in  all  vital  power,  who 
resteth  in  the  deep,  who  standeth  in  the  cast. 

Drive  thou  the  awful  word  atyay. 

8 Rigvcda  VIII.  84.  1.  Ascribed  to  Tiraachi.  Like  a charioteer: 
straight  and  swift  to  their  object.* 

9 Rigveda  VIII.  84.  7.  With  pure , pure  songs  o f praise : According 
to  the  Rigvcda  version  the  second  line  is : — ‘ Let  the  pure  milky 
draught  delight  him  strengthened  by  pure  songs  of  praise.’ 

10  Rigveda  VI.  44.  1.  Ascribed  to  Samyu/  The*  Rigvcda  version 
of  the  beginning  of  th«  stanza  is  different: — ‘That  which  is  wealthiest, 
wealthy  God  V 

The  metre  of  stanza  2 is  irregular,  with  three  nciosyllabic  Padas  in 
the  first  line  and  one  in  the  second.  In  the  reM  of  tie'  hymn  it  is  the 
regular  Anushtup.  # 

1 Rigvoda  vt.  42.  1.  Ascribed  to  Bharadvilj.i.  The  hero:  in  the 
Rigveda  text  nare  instead  of  mrah  is  in  apposition  tfijagmaye,  the 
wanderer : — ‘ the  hero  ever  in,  the  van.’  f 

2 This  very  obscure  stanza,  ascribed  to  Vamadcva,  is  not  found  in 
the  Rigveda.  To  us : wo  call,  or  something  similar,  must  be  supplied. 


[PART  I. 


7$  THE  HYMNS  OF 

3 Even  as  a car  to  give  us  aid,  we  draw  thee  nigh  to 

favour  us, 

Strong  in  thy  deeds,  quelling  attack,  Indra,  Lord, 
mightiest!  of  the  brave. 

4 With  powers  of  mighty  ones  hath  he,  tfie  friend,  the 

ancient,  been  equipped, 

Through  whom  our  father  Manu  made  prayers 
efficacious  with  the  Gods.  • 

5 What  time  the  swift  and  shining  steeds,  yoked  to  the 

chariots,  draw  them  on, 

Drinking  the  sweet  delightful  juice,  there  men  per- 
form their  glorious  acts. 

6 Him  for  your  sake  I glorify  as  Lord  bf  Strength 

who  wrongeth  none, 

Indra  /,he  hero,  mightiest,  all-conquering  and  omni- 
scient. 

7 I with  my  pi&ise  have  glorified  strong  Dadhikr&iian, 

conquering  steed. 

Sweet  may  he  make  our  mouths  : may  he  prolong  the 
days  we  have  to^'ive ! 


3 Rig  veda  VIII.  57.  1.  Ascribed  to  Priyamcdha. 

4 Rigveda  VIII.  52.  1.  Ascribed  to  Pragatha.  This  difficult  verse 
is  variously  interpreted  both  by  Indian  Commentators  and  European 
scholars.  I follow  partly  Professor  Aufrecht’s  translation  as  given  by 
Dr.  Muir,  and  partly  professor  Ludwig’s  Commentary.  See  Original 
Sanskrit  Texts , I.  pp.  163,  164;  Ludwig’s  Rigveda , V.  pp.  167,  168; 
and  Wilson’s  Translation,  V.  p.  107.  Might#  ones:  the  Cods,  The 
friend , the  ancient : Soma,  and  not  Indra,  seems  to  be  intended. 

5 Not  found  in  the  Rigveda.  Ascribed  to  Vamadeva. 

6 Rigveda  VI.  44.  4.  Ascribed  to  Samyu.  Omniscient : visvave- 
%dasam:  the  Rigveda  text  has  visvacharshav.ini:  knowi^to  all  men,  or 

God  of  all  the  tribes. 

7 Rigveda  IV.  30.  6.  Ascribed  to  V&madeva.  Dadhikrdvan : 
identical  with  Dadhikras  or,  in  the  crude  form,  Dadhikra,  the  name  of 
a mythical  being  often  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda  and  the  actual  Bubject 
of  four  hymns  He  ia  described  as  a kind  of  divine  horse,  and  pro- 


iv.  ii.  3.] 


THE  SAMAVEDA. 


%Z 

8 Render  of  forts,  tlie  young,  the  wise,  of  strength  un- 
measured, was  he  born, 

Sustainer  of  each  sacred  rite,  Indra,  the  Thunderer, 
much-extolled. 

DECADE  III.  India  and  others. 

Offer  the  triple  sacred  draught  to  Indu  hero- 
worshipper!  * 

With  hymn  and  plenty  he  invites  you  to  complete 
the  sacrifice. 

2 Those  whom  they  call  the  attendant  pair  of  Kasyapa 
• who  knows  the  light, 

Lords  of  each  holy  duty  when  the  wise  have  honour- 
ed  sacHfice. 


bably,  like  Tarkshya  was  regarded  as  a personification  of  the  morning 
sun,  being  invoked  together  with  Agni,  Ushas,  and  the  Asvins.  It 
seems  probable  that  Dadhikravan  may  have  be^i  originally  only  a 
most  distinguished  race-horse,  glorified  and  deified  by  the  exaggerated 
praises  of  the  bards  of  a people  who  were  passionately  fond  of  chariot 
racing. 

8 Higveda  I.  11.4.  Ascribed  to  Jet&r.  Render  of  forts : cleaver 
or  destroyer  of  the  cloud-castles  wliicil  withhold  tffe  rain,  the  strong- 
holds of  Vritra  and  other  hostile  powers  of  the  air. 

The  metre  is  Anushtup. 

1 Higveda  VIII.  58.  1.  Ascribed  to  Priyamcdha  or  Priyamedhas. 
Triple  sacred  draught : tri&htubham  isham : Professor  Ludwig  in  his 
Comment-ary  takes  pra  + isham,  -praisham,  as  an  infinitive  used  as  a 
finite  verb  in  the  first  person  singular,  ‘ I send  forth,’  and  takes 
trishlubham  tg  mean  tfie  hymn  which  accompanies  the  Soma  libation. 
Indu  ; Soma.  Hero-worshipper : vandadvirdya  : the  praiser  of  heroes, 
according  to  Benfey ; having  hcroei  who  worship  him,  according  to 
Ludwig.  The  reading  of  the  Higveda  is  mandadvirdya , ‘hero-gladdener.’ 

2 This  obscure  stanza,  ^scribed  to  Kasyapa,  is  not  found  in  the^ 
Higveda.  The  attendant  pair:  probably  meaning  Heaven  and  Earth. 
According  to  Benfey,  who  follows  Say  ana,  the  horses  of  *Indra  are  in- 
tended. ‘ Indra’s  pair  of  courageous  horses  arc  said  to  belong  to  the 
creation  of  the  all-wise  Kasyapa.’ — Stevenson.  Praiso  ye,  or  some- 
thing similar,  must  be  supplied. 


n THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  A 

3 Sing,  sing  ye  forth  your  songs  of  praise,  men,  Priya- 

medlias,  sing  your  songs  : 

Yea,  let  }roung  children  sing  their  lauds:  yea,  glorify 
our  firm  stronghold ! 

4 To  India  must  a laud  be  said,  a jo f to  him  who 

freely  gives, 

That  Sakra  may  be  joyful  in  our  friendship  and  the 
juice  we  pour. 

5 Your  Lord  of  might  that  ne'er  hath  bent,  that  ruleth 

over  all  mankind, 

I call,  that  he,  as  he  is  wont,  may  aid  the  chariots 
and  the  men. 

6 Even  he  who  is  thine  own,  through*  thought  of 

Heaven,  of  mortal  man  who  toils, 

He  with  the  help  of  lofty  Dyaus  comes  safe  through 
straits  of  enmity. 

7 Wide,  IndratfSatakratu,  spreads  the  bounty  of  tjiine 

ample  grace  : 

So,  good  and  liberal  giver,  known  to  all  men,  send  us 
splendid  wealth!. 

8 Bright  Usftas,  when  thy  times  return,  all  quadrupeds 

and  bipeds  stir* 

And  round  about  flock  ‘winged  birds  from  all  the 
boundaries  of  heaven. 


3 Rigveda  VIJf.  5K.#8.  Ascribed  to  Priyamcdha.  Our  firm  strong- 
hold: Indra.  The  Rigveda  has  na , Mike  a strong  castle.’ 

4 Rigveda  I.  10.  Ascribed  to  Madhuchchhandas. 

5 Rigveda  VIII.  57.  I.  Ascribed  to  Priyamcdha. 

6 Rigveda  VI.  2.  4.  Ascribed  *o  Bharadvaja.  The  first  line,  as  it 
stands  in  the  Samaveda,  is  very  difficult*  The  reading  of  the  Rigveda 

^is  different: — ‘Prosper  the  man  (or,  That  plan  succeeds)  who  travails 
sore  in  thought  for  thee  the  bountiful.’  § 

^ Rigveda  V.  38.  1.  Ascribed  to  Atri.  Good  ctnd  liberal  giver: 
sudatra:  the  Rigveda  has  sukshatra , lord  of  a fair  dominion;  powerful. 

8 Rigveda  I.  49.  3.  Ascribed  to  Praskanva.  When  thy  times  return : 
in  accordance  with  the  regular  times  appointed  for  thy  reappearance. 


iv.  li.  4.]  THE  SAMArEDA.  n 

9 Ye  .Gods  who  yonder  have  your  home  amid  the 
luminous  realm  of  heaven, 

What  count  ye  right?  what  endless  life?  What  is 
the  ancient  call  on  you? 

10  We  offer  ®laud  and  psalm  wherewith  men  celebrate 
their  holy  rites. 

They  govern  at  the  sacred  place  arid  bear  the  sacri- 
fice to  Gods. 


DECADE  IV.  Indra. 

Heroes  of  one  accord  brought  forth  and  formed  for 
kingship  Indra  who  wins  the  victory  in  all  en- 
counters, 

For  power,  in  firmness,  in  the  field,  the  great  de- 
stroyer, fierce  and  exceeding  strong,  stalwart  and 
full  of  vigour. 


9 Rigveda  I.  105.  5.  Ascribed  to  Kutsa,  or  Trita,  by  the  Rigveda 

Index,  and  to  Trita  only  by  Sayana’a  Commentary.  The  legend  says 
that  Trita  had  fallen,  or  been  thrown,  inta  a well,  and  this  stanza  is 
part  of  his  prayer  to  the  Cods  for  deJivcJrance.  Amid  the  luminous 
realm : according  to  the  Rigveda,  ‘ in  the  three  luminous- realms the 
world  being  divided  into  earth,  gky,  and  heaven,  and  each  of  these 
again  being  sometimes  spoken  of  as  threefold.  What  endless  life  l : 
instead  of  amritam , endless  life  or  immortality,  the  Rigveda  has  an- 
ritam , the  opposite  of  ritam , untruth  or  falsehood ; i.  e.  Do  \ e,  Gods, 
make  no  distinction  between  truth  and  falsehood,  rjght  and  wrong  ? 
What  is  the  ancient  call  on  you? : the  Rigveda  has  kva,  where?  instead 
of  kdy  what  ? ^VVhat  ha^s  become  of  all  my  former  prayers  to  you,  and 
why  do  you  forsake  your  worshipper  ? * 

10  Not  found  in  the  Rigveda.  No*Rishi?s  name  is  given  by  Sayana. 
Laud:  richam.  Psalm : sdnui. 

The  metre  is  A'tijagati,  consisting  of  four  Padas  of  thirteen  syllables* 
each,  in  stanza  1 ; Mahapankti,  consisting  of  five  octosyllabic  P&das, 
in  stanza  10 ; and  Jagati  in  the  rest  of  the  Jiymn. 

1 Rigveda  VIII.  86.  10.  Ascribed  to  Rebha  the  Rigveda  Index, 
but  to  Triaoka  by  Sayana’s  Commentary.  Heroes : narah : the  Gods. 


w 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  I. 


2 I trust  in  thy  first  wrathful  deed,  0 Indra,  when 

thou  slewest  Vritra  and  didst  work  to  profit  man 
When  the  two  world-halves  fled  for  refuge  unto 
thee, # and  earth  even  trembled  at  thy  strength, 
0 Thunder-armed ! « 

3 Come  all  with  might  together  to  the  Lord  of  heaven, 

the  only  on#  who  is  indeed  the  guest  of  men. 

He  is  the  first:  to  him  who  fain  would  cqme  to  us 
all  pathways  turn  ; he  is  in  truth  the  only  one. 

4 Thine,  Indra,  praised  of  many,  excellently  rich,  are 

we  who  trusting  in  thy  help  draw  near  to  thee. 

For  none  but  thou,  song-lover,  shall  receivb  our 
lauds : as  Earth  loves  all  her  creatures,  welcome 
this  our  hymn ! 

5 High  hymns  have  sounded  forth  the  praise  of  Magha- 

vari1,  supporter  of  mankind,  of  Indra  meet  for 
lauds ; ^ 

Him  who  hath  waxen  mighty,  much-invokted  with 
prayers,  immortal  one  whose  praise  each  day  is 
sung  aloud. 


The  Kigveda  has  naranu: — ‘ Of  one  accord  they  (the  Gods)  made  and 
formed  for  kingship  (or  splendour)  Indra  the  hero.’  In  the  field : of 
battle;  but  it  is  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  find  a satisfactory 
explanation  of  vare  here.  Instead  of  kratve  vare  sthemanydmurini 
the  Kigveda  has  kratvd  varishtham  vara' dmurim,  ‘Most  eminent  by- 
strength,  destroyer  in  the  conflict;’  but  the  meaning  of  vara,  that  is 
vare  is  still  uncertain.  According  to  Professor  Grassmann  the  Kigveda 
text  should  be  translated:  ‘Most  widely  extended  in  |K>\ver  in  ample 
space,  and  the  destroyin’  ‘den  ausgedehntesten  an  Kraft  im  weiten 
Kamn  und  den  Vertilger.’  % 

2 Kigveda  X.  147.  1.  Ascribed  to  Shvedas  by  the  Kigveda  Index, 
^ but  to  Sumedhas  by  S&yana’s  < Commentary. 

‘ 3 Not  found  in  the  Kigveda.  Ascribed  to  Vamadcva. 

4 Kigveda*  I.  57.  4.  Ascribed  to  Savya,  or  Satya  according  to 
Sayana.  As  Earth  loves  all  her  creatures:  tliis  is  Sayana’s  explanation; 
but  the  meaning  of  kshontr  here  is  uncertain. 

5 Kigveda  III.  51.  1.  Ascribed  to  VisvAmitra. 


THE  SlMAVEDA. 


n 


iv.  ii.  4.] 


6 In  perfect  unison  have  all  your  longing  hymns  that 

find  the  light  of  heaven  sounded  forth  Indra’s  praise. 
As  wives  embrace  their  lord,  the  comely  bridegroom, 
so  they  compass  Maghavan  about  that  lie  may  help. 

7 Make  glacl  with  songs  that  Iiarn  whom  many  men 

invoke,  worthy  of  hymns  of  praise,  Indra  the 
sea  of  wealth ; 

Whose  boons  spread  like  the  heavens,  the  lover  of 
mankind  : sing  praise  to  him  the  Sage,  most  liberal 
for  our  good ! 

8 I # glorify  that  Ram  who  finds  the  light  of  heaven, 

* whose  hundred  strong  and  mighty  onfcs  go  forth 
with  him. 

With  prayers  may  I turn  hither  Indra  to  mine 
aid  • — the  car  which  like  a swift  steed  hasteth 
to  the  call ! 

9 Filled  full  of  fatness,  compassing  aft  things  that  be, 

wide,  spacious,  dropping  meath,  beautiful  in  their 
form, 

The  heaven  and  the  earth  by  Varuna’s  decree,  un- 
wasting, rich  in  germs,  stand  parted  each  from 
each. 


G Rigveda  X.  43.  1.  Ascribed  to  Krishna,  or  Krishta  according  to 
S&yana.  • 

' 7 Rigveda  I.  51.  1.  Ascribed  to  Savva,  or  Satya  according  to 
Sayana.  That  Ram  : Indra,  courageous  as  a fighting-tam.  According 
to  Sayana,  the  reference  is  to  a legend  which  relates  that  Indra  came 
in  the  form  of*  a ram  to  Mcdhatithi’s  sacrifice,  and ’drank  up  the  Soma 
juice.  Whose  boons : boous,  is  not  in  the  text,  but  something  of  the 
kind  must  be  supplied  to  make  sense.  The  Rigveda  has  rndnushd, 
‘gracious  deeds  for  men,’  instead  of  mdmishanif  ‘the  lover  of  mankind.1 

8 Rigveda  I.  62.  1.  Ascribed  to  Savva  or  Satya.  Hundred  strong  < 
and  mighty  ones : tho  plentiful  draughts  of  Soma  juico  ^hich  inspirit 
and  assist  him. 

9 Rigveda  VI.  70.  1.  Ascribed  to  Bhftradvaja.  Full  of  fatness: 
containing  ghrita , ghi}  clarified  butter,  fatness  in  general,  especially 
fertilizing  rain. 


*8  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  /. 

10  As,  like  the  Morning,  thou  hast  filledl  0 Indra, 

both  the  earth  and  heaven, 

So  as  the  mighty  one,  great  King  of  all  the  mighty 
race  .of  men,  the  Goddess  mother  brought  thee 
forth,  the  blessed  mother  gave  thee  iife. 

11  Sing,  with  oblation,  praise  to  him  who  maketh  glad, 

who  with  Rijisvan  drove  the  dusky  brood  away! 
Let  us,  desiring  help,  call  him  for  friendship,  him 
the  strong,  the  Marut-girt,  whose  right  hand 
wields  the  bolt! 

DECADE  Y.  In  Am. 

When  Sornas  flow  thou  makest  pure,  Indra,  thy  mind 
that  merits  laud  r 

For  gain  of  strength  that  over  grows  : for  great  is  he. 

2 Sing  4forth  to  him  whom  many  men  invoke,  to  him 

whom  many  laud  : 

Invite  the  jr>tent  Indra  with  your  songs  of  praise  ! 

3 We  sing  this  strong  and  wild  delight  of  thine  which 

conquers  in  the  fray, 

Which,  Caster  of  the  Stone!  gives  room  and  shines 
like  gold, 

10  Rigveda  X.  134.  1.  Ascribed  to  Mandhatar  by  the  Rigveda 
Index,  but  to  Medhatithi  by  Say  ana's  Commentary.  The  Goddess 
mother:  Acliti. 

11  Rigveda  I.  101.  1.  Ascribed  to  Khtsa.  Rijisvan:  a celebrated 
raja  or  prince,  favoured  and  protected  by  Indra.  The  dusky  brood : 
the  dark-skinned  native  tribes  who  opposed  the  settlement  of  the 
Aryan  invaders. 

The  metre  is  Uslmih,  consisting  of  two  Padas  of  eight  syllables  each 
followed  by  one  of  twelve  syllables. 

1 Rigveda  VI II.  13.  1.  Ascribed  to  NArada.  The  reading  of  the 

Rigveda  is  indrali .puntta,  Indra  purifies.  IJe \ such  changes  of 

person  are  of  frequent  occurrence. 

2 Rigveda  VIII.  15.  1.  Ascribed  to  Gosh  iik  tin  and  Asvasfiktin. 

3 Rigveda  VIII.  15.  4.  c Strong  and  wild  defv/ht:  the  rapture  caused 
by  draughts  of  Soma  juice  which  inspire  Jndra.  Room:  free  space, 
undisturbed  by  foes. 


iv.  li.  5.]  THE  SAM AV EDA.  79 

4 Whether  thou  drink  the  Soma  by  Vishnu’s  or  Trita 

Aptya’s  side, 

Or  with  the  Maruts,  Indra. ! quaff  the  flowing  drops. 

5 Come,  priest,  and  of  the  savoury  juice  pwur  forth  a 

yet  mord  gladdening  draught : 

So  is  the  hero  praised  who  ever  prospers  us. 

<5  Pour  out  the  drops  for  Indra;  let  him  drink  the 
me&th  of  Soma  juice! 

He  through  his  majesty  sends  forth  his  bounteous 
gifts. 

7 Come,  sing  we  praise  to  Indra,  friends!  the  hero  who 

deserves  the  laud, 

Him  who  with  none  to  aid  o’ercomes  all  tribes  of 
men. 

8 Sing  ye  a psalm  to  Indra,  sing  a great  song  to  the 

lofty  Sage, 

To  him  who  maketh  prayer,  inspired,  who  loveth 
laud! 

9 He  who  alone  bestoweth  wealth  on  mortal  man  who 

offereth  gifts 

Is  Indra  only,  potent  Lord  whom  no n«  resist. 

10  Companions,  let  us  learn  a prayer  to  Indra,  to  the 
Thunderer,  • 

To  glorify  your  bold  and  most  heroic  friend ! 


4 Rigveda  VIII.  12.  16.  Ascribed  to  Parvata.  Trita  Aptya ; a 
divine  being  who  dwells  in  the  most  distant  region  of  the  heavens. 

5 Rigveda  VIII.  247  16.  Ascribed  to  Visvanvmas.  Driest:  the 
Adlmiryu,  one  of  the  ministering  priests,  is  addressed. 

6 Rigveda  VIII.  24.  13.  The  second  line  in  the  Rigveda  differs 
slightly : — ‘ With  bounty  (and)T with  majesty  will  he  further  (us)7 

7 Rigveda  Vlf  I.  24.  19., 

8 Rigveda  VIII.  87. 1.  Ascribed  to  Nrimedha.  To  him  toko  rnaketH 
prayer:  brahmakrite.  The  Rigveda  has  dharmakrite , ‘To  him  who 
maketh  or  observeth  Law.’ 

9 Rigveda  I.  84.  7.  Ascribed  to  Gotama. 

10  Rigveda  VIII.  24.  1.  Ascribed  to  Visvainanas. 


BOOK  V. 


CHAPTER  I. 

DECADE  I.  Indra.  Adityas. 

Indra,  this  might  of  thine  I praise  most  highly  for 
the  sacrifice 

That  thou,  0 Lord  of  Power,  dost  slay  Vritra  with 
faight. 

2 For  thee  this  Soma  hath  been  pressed,  in  whose  wild 

joy  thou  madest  once 

Sambara  Divodasa’s  prey:  0 Indra,  drink!  . 

3 Come  unto  us,  0 Indra,  dear,  still  conquering, 

unconcealable ! • 

Wide  as  a mountain  spread  on  all  sides.  Lord  of 
heaven  ! 

4 Joy,  mightiest  Indra,  that  perceives,  sprung  from 

deep  Soma  draughts,  whereby 
Thou  smitest  down  the  greedy  fiend, — that  joy  we 
crave ! • 


The  metre  is  Viraj  (11  x 3)  In  stanza  8,  and  Uahnili  in  the  rest  of 
the  hymn. 

1 Rigveda  VI II.  51.  8.  Ascribed  to  Pragatlia.  For  the  sacrifice : 

devatdtaye : or,  for  the  host  of  Gods.  , 

2 Rigveda  Vl.  43.  1.  Ascribed  to  Bharadvaja.  Sambara:  one  of 
the  demons  of  drought.  Divoddea : 'called  also  Atithigva,  a liberal 
prince  protected  by  Indra : ‘ Thou  savedst  Kutsa  when  Sushna  was 
smitten  down ; to  Atithigva  gayest  Sambara  for  a prey.’  Rigveda  I.  51.  6. 

3 Rigveda  VIlL  87.  4.  Ascribed  to  Nyimedha. 

4 Rigveda  VIII.  12.  1.  Ascribed  to  Parvata.  Joy:  madak:  the 
rapturous  exhilaration  producod  in  Indra  b^  drinking  the  Soma  juice, 
which  perceives  the  needs  of  men  and  incites  him  to  action.  Greedy : 
or  tusky. 

6 


82  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  I. 

5 Adityas,  very  mighty  ones,  grant  to  our  children  and 
our  seed 

This  lengthened  term  of  life  that  they  may  live  long 
days  t 

{ > Thou  knowest,  Indra,  Thunder-armed!  how  to  avoid 
destructive  powers, 

As  one  secure  from  pitfalls  each  returning  day. 

7 Drive  ye  disease  and  strife  away,  drive  yc  away 

malignity: 

Adityas,  keep  us  far  removed  from  sore  distress ! 

8 Drink  Soma,  Indra,  Lord  of  bays!  and  let  it'cheer 

thee:  the  stone,  like  a well-guided  courser,  ‘ 
Directed  by  the  pressers  arms  hath  pressed  it. 

DECADE  II.  Indra, 

Still,  Indm,  from  all  ancient  time  rivalless  ever  And 
companionless  art  thou : 

Thou  seckest  friendship  but  in  war. 

2 Him  who  of  old  hath  brought  to  us  this  and  that 
blessing®  him  I magnify  for  you, 

Even  Indra,  O my  friends,  for  help. 


5 Rigveda  VIII.  18.  18.  Ascribed  to  Irimbithi,  or  Irimithi  accord- 
ing to  Sayana. 

6 Rigveda  VIII.  24.  24.  Ascribed  to  Visvamanas.  Destructive 
powers:  the  plural  of  Nirriti,  Death  or  Destruction.  I adopt  Prof. 
Ludwig’s  interpretation  of  the  second  line.  » 

7 Rigveda  VIII.  18.' 10.  Ascribed  to  Irimbithi,  or  frimithi. 

8 Rigveda  VII.  22.  1.  Ascribed  to  Vasishtha. 

The  metre  is  Kakup,  consisting  of  three  Padas  of  eight,  twelve,  and 
eight  syllables  respectively. 

1 Rigveda  VIII.  21.  13.  Ascribed  to  Sobhari,  or  Saubhari  according 
to  Savana.  Thou  seekest  friendship  hut  in  war : befriendest  thy  wor- 
shippers when  they  seek  thy  assistance  in  battle. 

2 Rigveda  VIII.  21.  9. 


the  sAmaveda . 


v.  i.  2.] 


83 


3 Fail  ’toot  when  marching  onward : come  hither,  like- 

• . spirited,  stay  not  far  away 

Ye  who  can  tame  even  what  is  firm ! 

4 Come  hither  to  the  dropping  juice,  0 Lord  of  corn- 

land,  Lord  of  horses,  Lord  of  kine  : 

Drink  thou  the  Soma,  Soma’s  Lord! 

5 Hero,  may  we,  witli  thee  for  friend*  withstand  the 

marf  who  pants  against  us  in  his  wrath, 

In  fight  with  people  rich  in  kine! 

6 Yea,  kin  by  common  ancestry,  the  Maruts,  even  the 

oxen,  close  united  friends! 

Arc  licking  one  another’s  back. 

7 0 India,  'bring  great  strength  to  us,  bring  valour, 

Satakratu,  thou  most  active,  bring 
A hero  conquering  in  war!  » 

8 So,  India,  friend  of  song,  do  we  draw  nigh  to  thee 

with  longing;  we  have  streamed  to  thee 
Coming  like  floods  that  follow  floods. 

3 Rigveda  VIII.  20.  1.  Ascribed  to  Sobhari.  The  stanza  is  ad- 
dressed to  Indra’s  companions  the  Maruts.  • Like-spirited : or,  friends 
of  one  mind.  Ye  who  can  tame:  yamayi&hrytvah : the  Rigveda  has 
naviayishnavah,  ‘ye  who  can  bend/ 

4 Rigveda  VIII.  21.  3.  Ascribed  to  Sobhari  or  Saubhari. 

ft  Rigveda  VIII.  21.  11.  Ascribed  to  Prayoga  by  Sayana’s  Com- 
mentary. • 

^6  Rigveda  VIII.  20.  21.  Ascribed  to  Sobhari  or  Saubhari.  Yea , kin 
by  common  ancestry : or,  common  parentage,  as  the  offspring  of  Prisni 
and  Uudra.  The  oxen:  /he  Maruts.  Are  licking  one  another s back: 
or,  ‘one  another’s  humps,’  (M.  Miiller),  as  friends,  or  as  being  crowded 
together  in  their  course.  • % 

7 Rigveda  VI 11,  87.  10.  Ascribed  to  Nrimedha,  or  Nrimcdhas 
according  to  Sayana. 

8 Rigveda  VI If.  87.  7.  TRo  text  of  the  Rigveda  differs: — ‘Now 
have  wtc,  Indra,  friend  of  song,  sent  our  great  wishes  forth  to  thee.’ 
Coming  like  foods : in  crowds.  But  the  half-line  is  very  obscure. 

‘ As  men  going  by  water  (splash  their  friends)  with  handfuls.’ — Wilson. 
‘With  tho  zeal  the  merchant  embarks  on  the  waters.’ — Stevenson. 
The  Rigveda  has  yanta  instead  of  gmanta. 


'84  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  L 

9 Sitting  like  birds  beside  thy  meath,  mingled  with 
milk,  which  gladdeneth  and  exalteth  thee, 

Indra,  to  thee  we  sing  aloud. 

10  We  call  on  thee,  0 matchless  one!  We,  seeking  help, 
possessing  nothing  firm  ourselves, 

Call  on  thee, « wondrous,  Thunder-armed. 

DECADE  III.  Indra. 

The  juice  of  Soma  thus  diffused,  sweet  to  the  taste 
the  bright  cows  drink,  « 

Who  travelling  in  splendour  close  to  mighty  lndra’s 
side  rejoice,  good  in  their  own  supremacy. 

2 Thus  hath  the  Soma,  gladdening  draught,  produced 
the  prayer  that  giveth  joy  : 

Thou,  miglrtiesfc,  Thunder-armed,  hast  driven  by 
force  the  Dragon  from  the  earth,  lauding  thine 
own  supremacy. 

9 Rigveda  VIII.  21.  5.  Ascribed,  to  Sobliari,  or  Saubhari.  Meath  : 

Soma  juice.  i 

10  Rigveda  VIII.  21.  1.  Possessing:  literally,  bearing;  bhardntah. 
Thunder-armed : vajrini:  the  Rigveda  has  vdje}  in  battle. 

The  metre  isfPankti,  consisting  of  five  octosyllabic  Pfidas. 

1.  Rigveda  I.  84.  10.  Ascribed  to  Gotama.  The  bright  cows: 
gauryah  : the  glossy  milk  which  absorbs  or  drinks  the  Soma  juice  with 
which  it  is  mixed,  and  which  accompanies  or  is  united  with  Indra  when 
offered  to,  and  accepted  by,  him  in  h'bation.  According  to  Sayana, 
gauryah  arc  rays  of  light. 

2 Rigveda  I.  80.  1.  Ascribed  to  Gotama  by  the  Rigveda  Index,  but 
to  Sammada  by  Sayana’s  Commentary.  The  reading  of  the  Rigveda 
is  soma  ( = some ) in  made  brahmd  instead  of  soma  in  mado  brahma  : 
‘Thus  in  the  Soma,  in  wilf  joy  ( = in  the  rapture  caused  by  the  Soma 
juice)  the  Brahman  (the  priest)  hath  exalted  thee.’  The  Dragon: 
Ahi,  the  great  serpent,  Vritra,  or  a kindred  demon  of  drought. 


v.  i.  3.] 


THE  SAMAVEDA. 


85* 


3 By  ftien  hath  Indra  been  advanced,  the  Vritra-slayer, 

to  joy  and  strength. 

Him  only  we  invoke  for  help  in  battles  whether 
great  or  small : be  he  our  aid  in  deeds  of  might ! 

4 Unconque&d  strength  is  only  thine,  Indra,  Stone- 

caster,  Thunder-armed ! 

When  thou  with  thy  surpassing,  power  smotest 
to  death  that  guileful  beast,  lauding  thine  own 
supremacy. 

5 Go  forward,  meet  the  foe,  be  bold ; thy  bolt  of 

thunder  is  not  checked  ! 

Manliness,  Indra,  is  thy  strength.  Slay  Vritra,  make 
the  waters  thine,  lauding  thine  own  supremacy  ! 

6 When  war  and  battles  are  on  foot,  booty  is  offered 

to  the  bold. 

Yoke  thou  thy  wildly-rushing  bays.  Whom  wilt 
thou  slay,  and  whom  enrich?  Dojthou,  O Indra, 
make  us  rich ! 

7 Well  have  they  eaten  and  rejoiced;  the  friends  have 

risen  and  passed  away  : 

The  sages  luminous  in  thomgebes  have  praised  thee 
with  their  latest  hymn.  Now,  Indra,  yoke  thy 
two  bay  steeds ! 


3 Rigveda  I.  81.  1.  Ascribed  to  Gotama,  or  Gautama  according  to 

Sayana.  By  men  : by  the  ministering  priests  who  exalt  and  strengthen 
the  God  with  oblations.  • 

4 Rigvcda  I.  80.  7.  Ascribed  to  Gotama,  or  Gautama.  Stone-caster : 

wiclder  of  the  thunderbolt.  That  guileful  beasti  the  den) on  or  monster 
Vritra.  . % 

5 Rigvcda  T.  80.  3.  The  waters : the  rain  which  Vritra  has  obs- 
tructed. 

6 Rigvcda  I.  81.  3.  Ascribed  to  Gotama,  or  Gautama. 

7 Rigveda  I.  82.  2.  Ascribed  to  Gotama,  or  Gautamg,.  Well  have 
they  eaten : referring  probably  to  the  institutors  of  the  sacrifice ; but, 
according  to  Sayana,  to  the  Manes  or  Ancestral  Spirits.  Have  risen 
and  passed  away : this  is  a conjectural  translation,  suggested  by  Prof. 
Ludwig.  According  to  Benfey,  avddhdshata , means,  have  nodded  or 


f«6  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  I. 

8 Graciously  listen  to  our  songs,  Maghavan*  be  not 

negligent ! 

When  wilt  thou  make  us  glorious?  Make  this,  only 
this,,  thine  end  and  aim.  Now,  India,  yoke  thy 
two  bay  steeds ! * 

9 Within  the  waters  runs  the  Moon,  he  with  the 

beauteous  ydngs  in  heaven. 

Ye  lightnings  with  your  golden  wheels,  men  find  not 
your  abiding-place.  Mark  this  my  woe,  ye  Earth 
and  Sky! 

10  To  meet  your  treasure-bringing  car,  the  mighty 
car  most  dear  to  us, 

Asvins,  the  Rishi  is  prepared,  your  worshipper,  with 
songs  of  praise.  Lovers  of  sweetness,  hear  my  call ! 

DECADE  IV.  Agni  and  others. 

0 A6ni,  God,  we  kindle  thee,  refulgent,  wasting  not 
away, 

That  this  more  glorious  fuel  may  send  forth  for  thee 
its  shine  to  heaven.  Bring  food  to  those  who  sing 
thy  praise! 

shaken  their  heads  in  token  of  satisfaction.  ‘ Schutteten  uns  liebes  zu/ 
poured  blessings  upon  us. — Grassmann.  The  sages  luminous  in  them- 
selves : probably  the  Maruts. 

8 Rigveda  I.  82.  1. 

9 Kigveda  I.  105.  1.  Ascribed  to  Kutsa  or  to  Trita  Aptya  by  the 
Kigveda  Index,  and  by  Sayana’s  Commentary  to  Trita.  Sec  Hook  iv,, 
Chapter  ii.,  Decade  III.,  Stanza  9,  Note.  Within  the  waters:  in  the 
ocean  of  air.  He  with  the  beauteous  wings:  suparnah : the  Sun. 
Mark  this  my  woe or,  Attend  to  this  my  hynin. 

10  Rigveda  V.  75.  !l.  Ascribed  to  Avasyu.  Lovers  of  sweetness: 
drinkers  of  the  sweet  Soma  jttieo.  According  to  Sayana,  masters  of 
the  Madhuvidyft,  or  knowledge  of  swc6tness,  the  knowledge  that  tea- 
ches where  Soma  is  to  be  found. 

The  metre  is  AstArapankti  in  stanzas  2 and  4,  Uparishtadbrihati 
(8  x 3 + 12)  in  stanza  8,  an  l Pankti  in  the  rest  of  the  hymn. 

1 Kigveda  V.  6.  4.  Asgribcd  to  Vasusruta  by  the  Kigveda  Index, 
but  to  Vatsa  by  Sayana’s  Commentary.  For  thee : or,  belonging  to 
thee.  Bring : or,  let  him  (Agni)  bring. 


V.  i.  4.]  THE  SlMAVEDA.  8? 

2 Witfi  offerings  of  our  own  we  choose  thee,  Agni,  as 

our  Hotar  priest, 

Piercing  and  brightly  shining— at  your  glad  carouse 
— served  with  trimmed  grass  at  sacrifice.  Thoa 
waxest  great. 

3 0 heavenly  Dawn,  awaken  us  to  ample  opulence* 

to-day,  • 

Even1  as  thou  didst  waken  us  with  Satyasraras,  Vay- 
ya's  son,  high-born ! delightful  with  thy  steeds ! 

4 Send  us  a mind  that  brings  delight,  send  energy  and 

. mental  power. 

Then — at  your  glad  carouse — let  men*  joy  in  thy 
love,  sweet  juice!  as  kine  in  pasturage.  Tliour 
waxest  great. 

5 Great,  as  his  nature  is,  through  power,  terrible,, 

he  hath  waxed  in  strength. 

Lord  of  bay  steeds,  strong-jawed,  •sublime,  he  in- 
joined  hands  for  glory’s  sake  hath  grasped  his 
iron  thunderbolt. 


• • • 

2 Rigveda  X.  21.  1.  Ascribed  to  Vimada  by  the  Rigvcda  Index, 
but  to  Vatsa  by  Sayana’s  Commentary.  At  your  glad  carouse: 
apparently  a Soma-drinking  ref  'Ain  addressed  to  the  Visvedevas,  All- 
Gods,  or  all  Gods  together.  Thou  waxest  great : a similar  refrain 
addressed  to  Agm.  Both  refrains  recur  in  every  stanza  of  the  original 
hymn. 

3-  Rigvcda  V.  79.  1.  Ascribed  to  Satyasravas  by  the  Rigvedk  Index,, 
but  to  Yatsa  by  SayaiWs  Commentary.  With  Satyasravas  : that  is, 
when  he  sang  to  thee.  Delightful  with  thy  steeds : pleasant,  or  glorious,, 
on  account  of  the  horses  which  then  bestowest.  So,  in  I.  113.  8,  tho 
Dawns  are  called  givers,  of  kinfe  and  horses,  which  represent  wealth 
in  general. 

4 Rigveda  X.  25.  1.  Ascribed  by  the  Rigvcda  Index  to  Vimada  or 1 
Vasukrit,  but  by  Sayana’s  Commentary  to  Yatsa.  The  double  burdeiv 
or  refrain  of  stanza  2 is  again  employed,  with  little  or  no  connexion, 
with  the  rest  of  the  stanza. 

5 Rigveda  I.  81.  4.  Ascribed  to  Gotama. 


$8  THE . HYMNS  OF  ' [PART  I. 

6 Het  Indra,  verily  will  mount  the  powerful  oar  that 

finds  the  kine, 

Who  thinks  upon  the  well-filled  bowl,  the  tawny 
coursers'  harnesses  Now,  Indra,  yoke  thy  two 
bay  steeds  I * 

7 I think  of  Agni  who  is  kind,  whom,  as  their  home, 

the  milch-kine  seek  : 

Whom  fleet-fuot  coursers  seek  as  home,  and  strong 
enduring  steeds  as  home.  Bring  food  to  those 
who  sing  thy  praise! 

8 No  peril,  no  severe  distress,  ye  Gods,  affects  the 

mortal  man 

Whom  Aryaman  and  Mitra  lead,  and  Varuna,  of 
one  accord,  beyond  his  foes. 

, DECADE  V.  Soma  Pavamaiia. 

Flow  forth,  0 Soma,  flow  thou  onward,  sweet  to 
Indra’s,  Mitra’s,  P&shan’s,  Bhaga’s  taste. 

6 Rigveda  I.  82.  4.  Ascribed  to  Gotarna.  The  meaning  is:  the 
man  who  remembers  to  offer  to  Indra  the  libations  of  Soma  juice 
which  bring  the  < God  to  ithe.  sacrifice  will  certainly  obtain  riches 
in  return. 

7 Rigveda  V.  6.  1.  Ascribed  to  Vasusruta.  Strong steeds: 

vdjinah : according  to  Sayana,  the  institutors  of  sacrifices  who  bring 
oblations. 

8 Rigveda  X.  126.  1.  Ascribed  to  Kiilmalabarhisha,  or  to 

Anhomuch. 

- • 

The  metre  in  stanzas  2 and  6 is  Anushtup  Pipilikamadhya  (with  a 
Pada  of  four  syllables~*-the  Vritras;  thou — following  the  first  octo- 
syllabic Pada) ; Padapankti  (consisting  of  three  Padas  of  five  syllables 
each  in  the  first  line  and  a Trishtup  in  the  second)  in  stanza  8 ; Pura- 
iishnih  (12+8  + 8)  in  stanza  9;  and  Dvipada  Viraj  (a  species  of 
^G&yatri  consisting  of  two  P&das  only,  containing  11? +8  or  10  + 10 
syllables)  in  tjie  rest  of  the  hymn. 

1 Rigveda  IX.  109.  1.  Ascribed  to  the  Agnayo  Dhishny&h,  sacri- 
ficial Agnis  or  Fires,  said  to#be  the  sons  of  Is  vara  the  Supreme  Deity 
of  post-Vedic  times.  Bhaga : the  name  of  this  ancient  deity  still 


THE  SAMAVEDA . 


89 


v.  i.  5.] 

2 Ruh  forth  to  battle,  conquering  the  Vritras;  thou 

speedest  to  quell  the  foes  like  one  exacting  debts. 

3 Flow  onward,  Soma,  as  a mighty  sea,  as  Father 

of  the  Qods,  to  every  form. 

4 Flow  onward,  Soma,  flow  for  mighty  strength, 

as  a strong  courser,  bathed,  to  \vin  the  prize. 

5 Fair.Indu  hath  flowed  on  for  rapturous  joy,  sage, 

for  good  fortune,  in  the  waters’  lap. 

G In  thee,  effused,  0 Soma,  we  rejoice  ourselves  for 
great  supremacy  in  fight : 

Tfhou,  Pavam&na,  enterest  into  mighty  deeds. 

7 Who  are' these  radiant  men  in  serried  rank,  Rudra’s 
young  heroes,  too,  with  noble  steeds  ? 


survives  in  the  Slavonic  languages  as  a general  name  for  God.  He 
is  frequently  invoked  together  with  Pushan  and  the  Adityas,  and  is 
regarded  as  the  special  giver  of  wealth  and  prosperity. 

Stanzas  1 — 6 and  10  are  addressed  to  Soma  Pavamana,  the  deified 
juice  of  the  Soma-plant  as  it  undergoes  purification  by  flowing  through 
the  wool  which  is  used  as  a strainer.  ' Set  Muir,  Original  Sanskrit 
Texts,  V.  258  ff. 

2 Rigveda  IX.  110.  1.  Asc^hed  to  the  princes  Tryaruna  and 
Trasadasyu,  who  are  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda. 

3 Rigveda  IX.  109.  4.  To  every  form:  to  all  the  forms  or  essences 
of  the  Gods  into  which  he  enters.  See  Bergaigne,  La  Religion 
Vtdique,  TIL  p.  212. 

4 Rigveda  IX.  109.  10.  For  mighty  strength  : the  Rigveda  has  : — 

‘for  wisdom  and  for  power.*  Bathed:  washpd  And  cleansed  in  the 
waters  used  in  preparing  the  juice  as  a race-horse  is  washed  by  his 
groom.  t 

5 Rigveda  IX.  109.  13.  Tndu:  Soma.  In  the  waters ’ lap:  in  the 
water  wrherein  tlae  stalks  of* the  plant  are  soaked. 

6 Rigveda  IX.  110.  2.  For  great  supremacy  in  fight:  samaryardjye : 
the  locative  being  used  with  a dative  signification. 

7 Rigveda  VII.  56.  1.  Ascribed  to  Vi\sishtha.  The  Maruts  are 
the  deities.  In  serried  rank : literally,  of  the  same  nest,  dwelling 
together,  closely  united. 


do  THE  HYMNS  OF  [FART  I. 

8 Agni,  with  hymns  may  we  now  accomplish  that 

which  thou  lovest, 

Strength,  like  a horse,  auspicious  strength  with 
service. 

9 Tlie  strong  youths  have  come  forth  to  view,  to  show 

their  strength,  God  Savi tar’s  quickening  energy  : 
Ye  warrior  horsemen,  win  the  heavens. 

10  Soma,  flow  splendid  with  thy  copious  stream  in  due 
succession  through  the  ample  fleece. 

CHAPTER  II. 

DECADE  I.  IncTra. 

Giver  from  all  sides,  bring  to  us  from  every  side, 
thou  whom  as  strongest  wc  entreat! 

2 This  Brahitian,  comer  at  due  time,  named  Indra, 
is  renowned  and  praised. 


8 Rigveda  IV.  10.  1.  Ascribed  to  Vamadeva.  That:  tain : yajiiam, 
sacrifice,  appears  to  be  understood.  The  stanza  is  difficult  to  construe, 
and  the  meaning  is  obscure.  With  service:  the  meaning  of  ohaih  is 
uncertain.  Benfey  translates  it  by  ‘ mit  dich  erhebenden  Riddem/ 
‘ with  songs  that  extol  thee ; * Prof.  Orassmann  by  ‘ mit  Andacht/ 
* with  devotion;1  and  Prof.  Ludwig  by  ‘»mit  deinrer  billigung,’  ‘with 
thy  approval.* 

9 The  stanza  *is  not  found  in  the  Rigveda.  The  strong  youths : appa- 

rently the  Maruts.  God  Savitar's  quiche n ing* energy : to  aid  the  pro- 
ductive power  of  the  Sun.  * 

10  Rigveda  IX.  109.  7.  The  ayiple  fleece : the  woollen  strainer  or 
filter  through  which  the  Soma  juice  is  run  to  purify  it. 

The  metre  in  stanzas  3 and  7,  the  otdy  stanzas*  taken  from  the 
Rigveda,  is  Trishtup  and  Dvipada  Vir&j,  respectively.  In  the  rest 
of  the  hymn  the  metres  are  irregular. 

2 This  Brahman : Indra*  regarded  as  a priest  who  possesses  sacred 
knowledge:  ‘The  Brahman  who  accepts  the  prayer.’ — Rjgvoda  VI. 
45,7.  ‘Indra  is  priest  and  Rishi.’ — Rigveda  VIII.  16.  7. 


THE  SIMA  VEDA. 


v.  ii.  2.] 


61 


3 Thfe  Brahmans  with  their  hymns  exalting  Indra  in- 

creased his  strength  that  he  might  slaughter  Ahi. 

4 Anavas  wrought  a chariot  for  thy  courser,  and  Tva- 

shtar,  much-invoked!  the  bolt  that  glitters  : 

5 Rest,  wealth  to  him  who  longs  for  wealth!  the  rite- 

less stirs  not  his  love  nor  wins  his  way  to  riches. 

6 The  cows  are  ever  pure  and  all-sujJporting,  the  Gods 

ar'e  ever  free  from  stain  and  blemish. 

7 With  all  thy  beauty  come!  The  kine  approaching 

with  full  udders  follow  on  thy  path. 

8 May  we,  inhabiting  a meath-rich  dwelling,  increase 

5our  wealth,  and  think  of  thee,  0 Indra ! 

9 The  Maruts  with  fair  hymns  chant  out  their  praise- 

song  : this  Indra,  famed  and  youthful,  shouts 
accordant. 

10  Sing  to  your  Indra,  mightiest  Vritra- slayer,  sing  to 
the  Sage  the  song  that  lie  accepteih ! 

DECADE  II.  Agni.  India. 

Observant  Agni  hath  appeared,  oblation-bearer  with 
his  car. 


3 Rigvcda  V.  31.  4.  Ascribed  to  Avasyu. 

4 Taken  from  the  same  stanza  as  the  preceding.  Anavas;  de- 
scendants of  the  eponymuq  Ann ; the  Bhrigus  are  probably  meant. 
Cf.  Rigvcda  IV.  16.  20. 

5 The  riteless  stirs  not  his  love : the  man  who  neglects  the  worship 
of  the  Gods  does  not  move  Indra  to  show  him  affection. 

6 The  cows : gdvah ::  meaning,  according  to  Sa»yana,  the  sunbeams, 
or  waters,  or  the  three  Vedas.  The  connexion  of  the  line  with 
what  precedes  or  with  what  follows  is  not  apparent. 

7 Kigvcda  X.  172.  1.  Ascribed  to  Samvarta.  The  hymn  in  the 
Rigveda  is  addressed  to  yshas  or  Dawn. 

The  metro  of  1 consists  of  one  line,  or  two  P&djis,  of  Pankti ; 
in  2 and  5 it  is  Dvipada  Viraj ; in  6 and  8 Dvipada  Trishtup ; 
in  3 Quindecasyllabic  Gayatri ; 7 consists  of  two  Padas  of  Gayatri ; 
10  of  one  Pada  of  Gayatri ; 4 and  9 are  irregular. 

1 Rigveda,  Yaiakhilya  8.  5.  Ascribed  to  Prishadra. 


h THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  I. 

2 0 Agni,  be  our  nearest  friend,  yea,  our  protector 

and  our  kind  deliverer! 

3 Like  wondrous  Bhaga,  Agni  deals  treasure  among 

the  mighty.  f 

4 Far  off,  or  present  even  now,  send  forth  thy  shouting 

first  of  all! 

5 Dawn  drives  away  her  sister’s  gloom,  and.  through 

her  excellence  makes  her  retrace  her  path. 

6 May  we,  with  Indra  and  the  Gods  to  aid  us,  bring 

these  existing  worlds  to  full  completion ! 

7 Like  streams  of  water  on  their  way,  let  bounties, 

Indra,  flow  from  thee! 2 3  4 5 6 7 8 9 10 

8 With  this  may  we  obtain  strength  god-appointed, 

hapfpy  with  brave  sons  through  a hundred  winters! 

9 With  strength  let  Mitra,  Varuna  swell  oblations;  do 

thou  prepare  for  us  rich  food,  0 Indra ! 

10  Indra  is  King  of  all  the  world. 


2 Rigvcda,  V.,24. 1.  A&rihed  to  the  Gaupayanas  or  Laupayanas. 

3 Not  found  in  the  Rigveda. 

4 Ditto.  Thy  shouting : the  roar,  of  thy  flames. 

5 lligveda  X.  172.  4.  Her  sister's  gloom : the  darkness  of  Night. 

6 lligveda  X.  157.  1.  Ascribed  to  «d3huvana.  Bring to  full 

completion:  through  the  efficacy  of  the  sacrifice  which  we  are 
performing.  • 

7 Not  found  in  the  lligveda.  Streams  of  water : Sayana,  whom 

Benfey  follows,  takes tsrutayah  here  to  mean  by-ways.  ‘As  many 
by-paths  meet  in  the  highway,  #so  let  all  riches  meet  in  thee.' — 
Stevenson.  • 

8 lligveda  VI.  17.  15.  Ascribed  to  Bharadvaj a.  With  this:  gird, 
song,  being  understood.  Hundred  winters : a hundred  years  being 
regarded  in«Vedio  times  as  the  natural  duration  of  human  life. 
Sec  lligveda,  General  index. 

9 Not  found  in  the  lligveda. 

10  Ditto. 


v.  ii.  3.] 


THE  SlMAVEDA. 


9*3 

DECADE  III.  Indra  and  others. 
At  the  Trikadrukas  the  great  and  strong  enjoyed 
the  barley-brew.  With  Vishnu  did  he  drink  the 
pressed»out  Soma  juice,  even  as  he  would. 

That  hath  so  heightened  him  the  great,  the  wide  to 
do  his  mighty  work.  So  did  thp  God  attend  the 
God,  true  Indu  Indra  who  is  true. 

2 This  God  who  sees  for  thousands  of  mankind,  the 

light,  the  thought  of  poets,  and  the  Law, 

The  brilliant  one,  hath  sent  forth  hither  all  the 
Dawns:  spotless,  one-minded,  zealous  in  their 
home  they  dwell,  with  thought  upon  the  Steer. 

3 Come  to  us,  Indra,  from  afar,  conducting  us,  as,  to 

the  gatherings,  a Lord  of  heroes,  as  an  aroher  King, 
the  heroes’  Lord ! 

We  come  with  gifts  of  pleasant  foo'3,  with  flowing 
juice,  invoking  thee,  as  sons  invite  a sire,  that  we 
may  win  the  spoil,  thee,  bounteousest,  for  gain  of 
spoil. 


The  metro  is  Ashti  (16x4=64  syllables)  in  stanzas  1 and  10; 
Atyashti  (17  x 4 = 68)  in  3,  5,  9 ; Atijagati  (13  x 4)  in  4 and  6 ; 

and  irregular  in  2 and  8. 

1 Rigveda  II.  22.  1.  Ascribed  to  Oritsamada.  Trikadrukas:  the 
first  three  days  of  the  religious  ceremony  called  Abhiplava. 

2 Not  found  in  the  Rigveda.  Who  sees  for  thousands  of  mankind : 
sahasranidnavo  drisah  1-  Say  ana’s  division  of  the  first  word  is  sahasra - 
mdnavo , but  it  seems  impossible  to  construe  this.  Sjjotlessj  one-minded , 
zealous  : apparently  referring  to  the*  sunbeams.  The  Steer : the  Sun. 

3 Rigveda  I.  130.  1.  Ascribed  to  Paruchchhepa.  The  hymns 
attributed  to  this  Rishi  are  generally  very  obscure  and  frequently 
unintelligible.  One  of  their  peculiarities  is  ‘to  reiterate  a leading 
word  which  occurs  the  third  or  fourth  from  the  end  of  ’ the  first  line, 
and  sometimes  also  of  the  third,  and  to  repeat  it  as  the  last  word  of 
the  line.’ — Wilson.  See  stanza  9,  Note.  An  archer:  astd:  the  Rigveda 
has  astam , home. 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  l 


4 Loudly  I call  that  Indra  Maghavan,  the  Eighty, 

resistless,  evermore  possessing  many  glories. 

Holy,  most  liberal,  may  he  lead  us  on  to  riches, 
through  songs,  and,  thunder-armed,  make  all  our 
pathways  pleasant ! 1 

5 Heard  be  our  prayer ! In  thought  I honour  Agni 

first:  now 'straightway  we  elect  this  heavenly 
company,  Indra  and  Viyu  we  elect. 

For  when  our  latest  thought  is  raised  and  on  Vivas- 
van  centred  well,  then  do  our  holy  songs  go  forward 
on  their  way,  our  songs  as  ’twere  unto  the  Gqjds. 

• 6 To  Vishnu,  to  the  mighty  whom  the  Ma^uts  follow, 
let  your  hymns  born  in  song  go  forth,  Evay&rnarut ! 
To  the  strong,  very  holy  band  adorned  with  bracelets, 
tliafr rushes  on  in  joy  and  ever  roars  for  vigour! 

7 With  this  his  golden  splendour  purifying  him,  he 
with  his  own  allies  subdues  all  enemies,  as  Sfira 
with  his  own  allies. 


4 Rigveda  VI IK-  86.  13.  ‘Ascribed  to  ltebha. 

5 Rigveda  I.  139.  1.  A scribed  to  Paruchchhepa.  See  stanza  3, 

Note.  Vdyu : God  of  wind.  . % 

6 Itigveda  V.  87.  1.  Ascribed  to  a supposed  Rishi  named  Evayji- 

marut:  but  this  word,  whatever  its  exact  meaning  may  be,  is  evidently 
a mere  sacrificial  exclamation.  It  recurs,  as  a sort  of  burden,  in  each 
verso  of  the  original  hymn.  See  Itigveda,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  304,  305. 
Bom  in  song : developing  themselves  and  taking  form  in  song:  ‘voice- 
boru/ — Wilson.  • # , 

7 Rigveda  IX.  111.  1.  Ascribed  to  Ananata,  son  of  Paruchchhepa. 
He:  Soma.  All  enemies:  the  fiends  of#  darkness.  As  Sura  with  his 
own  allies : as  Surya  or  the  Sun  with  his  attendant  beams  of  light. 

.Of  juice:  the  Rigveda  has  sutasya  instead  of  prichthasya  which 
Sayana  explains  by  somasya,  of  Soma.  With  the  praisers : riJcvabhih : 
perhaps  the  Angirasas,  members  of  the  priestly  family  so  named,  are 
intended.  Having  seven  mouths : that  is,  one  mouth  each,  the  mouth 
being  mentioned  in  reference  to  their  singing  or  to  their  love  of  Soma 
juice. 


THE  SAMAVEDA. 


v.  ii.  3.] 


9* 


Cleansing  himself  with  stream  of  juice  he  shines  forth 
yellow -hued  and  red,  when  with  the  praisers  he 
encompasses  all  forms,  with  praisers  having  seven 
mouths. 

8 I praise  this  God,  parent  of  heaven  and  earth, 

exceeding  wise,  possessed  of  real  energy,  giver 
of  treasure,  thinker  dear  to  all,  * 

WhoSe  splendour  is  sublime,  whose  light  shone  bril- 
liant in  creation,  who,  wise  and  golden-handed, 
in  his  beauty  made  the  sky. 

9 Agni  I deem  our  Hotar-priest,  munificent  wealth- 

giver,  Son  of  Strength,  who  knoweth  all  that  is, 
even  as*  the  Sage  who  knoweth  all. 

Lord  of  fair  rites,  a God  with  form  erected  turning 
to  the  Gods,  he,  when  the  flame  hath  sprung  forth 
from  the  holy  oil,  the  offered  fatness,  longs  for  it 
as  it  glows  bright. 

10  This,  Iridra!  dancer!  was  thy  hero  deed,  thy  first  and 
ancient  work,  worthy  to  be  told  forth  in  heaven, 
Even  thine  who  furtheredst  life  with  a Gods  own 
power,  freeing  the  floods.  * All  that  is  godless  may 
he  conquer  with  his  might,  and,  Lord  of  Hundred 
Powers,  find  for  us  strength  and  food! 


8 Not  found  in  the  ltigvcda.  Ascribed  to  Nakula.  The  deity  is 
♦Savitar,  the  Sun  as  generator  and  vivificr. 

9 Bigveda  1.  127.  >.  Ascribed  to  Paruclichh^pa.  See  stanza  3, 
Note.  Who  knoweth  all  that  is:  jdtavedasam : Omniscient  Agni.  ‘Thus 
we  have  here  sdnum  sahaso  J Atave^asam,  vipram  na  JAtavkdasam  ; 
this  is  nothing  else  than  a kind  of  verbal  alliterative  jingle,  but  the 
Scholiast  thinks  it  necessary  to  assign  to  the  repeated  word  a distinct 
signification/ — ilson. 

10  Kigveda  II.  22.  4.  Ascribed  to  Gritsamada.  Dancer:  active 
in  battle,  dancer  of  the  war-dance.  Life*:  a$um>  as  in  the  Rigveda, 
appears  to  be  the  right  reading.  Freeing  the  floods : releasing  the 
rain  which  Vritra  had  obstructed. 


THE  HYMNS  OF  , 


[PART  t 


DECADE  IV.  Soma  PAvamina. 
High  is  thy  juice’s  birth : though  set  it  heaven,  on 
earth  it  hath  obtained  dread  sheltering  power  and 
groat 'renown. 

2 In  sweetest  and  most  gladdening  stream  flow  pure, 

0 Soma,  on  thy  way,  pressed  out  for  Indra,  for 
his  drink! 

3 Flow  onward  mighty  with  thy  stream,  inspiriting  the 

Maruts’  Lord,  winning  all  riches  with  thy  power! 

4 Flow  onward  with  that  juice  of  thine  most  excellent, 

that  brings  delight,  slaying  the  wicked,  dear  to  Gods! 

5 Three  several  words  are  uttered : kine.  are  lftwing, 

cows  who  give  the  milk:  the  tawny-hued  goes 
bellowing  on. 

6 For  Iadra  girt  by  Maruts,  flow,  thou  Indu,  very 

rich  in  meath,  to  seat  thee  in  the  place  of  song ! 

7 Strong,  mountain-born,  the  stalk  hath  been  pressed 

in  the  streams  for  rapturous  joy.  Hawk-like  he 
settles  in  his  home. 

The  metre  is  G&yatri. 

1 Rigveda  IX.  61.  10.  "Ascribed  to  Amahiyu. 

2 Rigveda  IX.  1.  1.  Ascribed  to  JGidhuchehhandas. 

3 Rigveda  IX.  65.  10.  Ascribed  to  Bhrigu,  son  of  Varuna,  or  to 
Jamadagni  of  the  family  of  Bhrigu. 

4 Rigveda  IX.  61.  19.  Ascribed  to  Amalnyu. 

5 Rigveda  IX.  .33.  4.  Ascribed  to  Trita  Aptya.  Three  several  words: 
meaning,  according  to  Savana,  trimdhd  stutih , praise  of  three  kinds 
from  the  three  Vedac.  Perhaps,  as  Prof.  Ludwig  suggests,  the  three 
vocal  tones  or  keys  are  intended.  The  milk ; required  for  sacrificial 
purposes.  The  tawny-hued : the  yellow  Soma  juice.  Bellowing : or, 
roaring : an  exaggerated  expression  for  the  sound  made  by  the  juice, 

• as  it  drops  from  the  filter. 

6 Rigveda  IX.  64.  22.  Ascribed  to  Kasyapa.  In  the  place  of  song : 
the  Rigveda  has  f itasya,  ‘of  sacrifice,'  instead  of  arkasya,  ‘of  song/ 
or  ‘of  the  hymn.’ 

7 Rigveda  IX.  62.  4.  Ascribed  to  Jamadagni.  The  stalk ; the 
Soma  plant,  which  is  said  to  have  grown  on  mountains. 


V.  ii.  5.]  THE  sAMAVEDA.  97 

# 8 Golcl-hued ! as  one  who  giveth  strength  flow  on  for 
Gods  to  drink,  a draught  for  Vftyu  and  the  Marut 
host! 

9 Soma,  the»  dweller  on  the  hills,  effused,  liath  flowed 
into  the  sieve.  All-bounteous  art  thou  in  carouse. 
10  The  Sage  of  heaven  whose  heart  is*  wise,  when  laid 
betjveen  both  hands,  with  roars,  gives  us  delightful 
powers  of  life. 

DECADE  V.  Soma  Pavamana. 

The  rapture-shedding  Somas  have  flowed  forth  in 
our  assembly,  pressed  to  glorify  our  liberal  lords. 

2 The  Somas,  skilled  in  song,  the  waves,  have  led  the 

water  forward,  like  buffaloes  speeding  to  the  woods. 

3 Indu,  flow  on,  a mighty  juice  ; glorify  us  among  the 

folk  : drive  all  our  enemies  away ! 

4 For  thou  art  strong  by  splendour : we,  O Pavamana, 

call  on  thee,  the  brilliant  looker  on  the  light. 


8 Rigveda  IX.  25.  1.  Ascribed  to  Drilhafchyuta.  • 

9 Rigveda  IX.  18.  1.  Ascribed  to  Asita,  oi*  to  Dcvala.  The  sieve: 
the  strainer,  made  of  twigs  and  lintfd  with  wool. 

10  Rigveda  IX.  9.  1.  Ascribed  to  Asita,  or  to  Dcvala.  The  Sage  of 
heaven:  the  Soma.  Both  hands:  naptyoh : literally,  two  granddaughters. 
According  to  Sayana,  the  two  boards  used  in  pressing  the  Soma  are 
intended.  With  roars:  svanaih : the  sound  made  by  the  dropping 
juice.  The  Rigveda  has  suvd?iot  effused. 

The  metre  is  Gayatri.  All  the  verses  are  fifom  Book  IX.  of  the 
Rigveda.  • 

1 Hymn  32.  1.  Ascribed  t6  Syivvasva.  Our  liberal  lords:  the 
institutors  of  sacrifices. 

2 Hymn  33.  1.  Ascribed  to  Trita  Aptya.  The  Rigveda  has  na 
yanti  instead  of  nayanta: — ‘Like  waves  of  water,  skilled nn  song  the 
juices  of  the  Soma  go  onward  like  buffaloes  to  woods.’ 

3 Hymn  61.  28.  Ascribed  to  Amahiyu. 

4 Hymn  65.  4.  Ascribed  to  Bhrigu  or  to  Jamadagni.  Pavamdna  : 
Soma  undergoing  purification  for  sacrificial  purposes. 

7 


98 


THE  SAMAVEDA. 


[PART  l 


5 Indu,  enlightener,  dear,  the  thought  of  poe^s,  hath 

flowed  clearly,  like  a charioteer  who  starts  the 
steed. 

6 Through  our  desire  of  heroes,  kine*  and  horses, 

potent  Soma  drops,  brilliant  and  swift,  have  been 
effused. 

4 

7 God,  working  with  mankind,  flow  on;  to  Indra  go 

thy  gladdening  juice:  to  Vayu  mount  as  Law 
commands ! 

8 From  heaven  hath  Pavamdna  made,  as  ’twere,  the 

marvellous  thunder,  and  the  lofty  light  of  all 
mankind. 

9 Pressed  for  the  gladdening  draught  the  drops  flow 

forth  abundantly  with  song,  flow  onward  with  the 
stream  of  meath. 

10  Reposing  o/i  the  river’s  wave,  the  Sage  hath  widely 
flowed  around,  bearing  the  bard  whom  many  love. 


5 Hymn  64.  10.  Ascribed  to  Kasyapa.  The  thought : matih : the 
Rigveda  has  mail,  ‘ by  thd  thoughts  or  hymns.’ 

6 Hymn  64.  4. 

7 Hymn  63.  22.  Ascribed  to  Nyihruvi.  I 

8 Hymn  61.  16.  Ascribed  to  Amahiyu.  ‘The  purified  [Soma]  has 
generated  the  great  light  which  is  common  to  all  mankind,  like  the' 
"wonderful  thundering  of  the  sky.’ — Muir,  Original  Sanskrit  Texts , 
IV.  112.  Ther  great  light  common  to  all  men,  or  visvdnaram,  or  the 
lofty  light  of  all  mankind,  is  Agni  Vaievanara. 

9 Hymn  10.  4.  '*  Ascribed  to  Asita  or  Devala.  r 

10  Hymn  14.  1.  Ascribed  to  Asita  or  Devala.  On  the  river’s  wave: 
in  the  vasativari  waters  which  are  uspd  to  sprinkle  or  soak  the  stalks 
of  the  Soma  plants.  Bearing  the  bard : the  Sage,  that  is  omniscient 
deified  Soma  juice,  is  said  to  bear  the  bard,  that  is,  itself — called  bard 
on  accounts  the  sound  it  makes  in  dropping.  The  Rigveda  has 
kdram  instead  of  kdrum,  ‘ bearing  the  hymn,’  or,  perhaps,  ‘ the  prize/ 
Soma  being  regarded  as  a ‘courser  or  race-horse. 


BOOK  VI. 


CHAPTER  I. 

DECADE  I.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Ttlte  Gods  have  come  to  Indu  well-descended,  beauti- 
fied with  milk,  the  active  crusher  of  the  foe. 

2 Active,,  while  being  purified,  he  hath  assailed  all 

enemies  : they  deck  the  Sage  with  holy  hymns. 

3 Pouring  all  glories  hither,  he,  effused,  hath  passed 

within  the  jar  : Indu  on  Indra  is  bestowed. 

4 From  the  two  press-boards  is  the  juice  sent,  like  a 

car-horse,  to  the  sieve  : the  steed  ^teps  forward  to 
the  goal. 

5 Impetuous,  bright,  have  they  come  forth,  unwearied 

in  their  speed,  like  bulls,  driving  the  black  skin  far 
away. 


^The  metre  is  Gayatrt.  All  th**references  are  to  Book  IX.  of  the 
Rigveda. 

1 Hymn  61.  13.  Ascribed  to  Amahiyu.  Well-descended:  literally, 
well-born,  or  well  produced. 

2 Hymn  40.  1.  Ascribed  to  Brihanmati. 

3 Hymn  62.  19.  ^scribed  to  Jamadagni.  The  jar : the  Jcalam , 
beaker  or  vase  into  which  the  Soma  juice  fV>ws!  Indu  on  Indra  is 
bestowed : instead  of  this,  the  Rigveda  lias,  ‘(he)  stands  like  a hero 
‘mid  the  kine,*  that  is,  among  the  enemy’s  cattle  for  which  he  fights. 

4 Hymn  36.  1.  Ascribed  to  Prabhuvasu.  Press-boards : two  planks, 
between  which  ?he  stalks  hi  the  Soma  plant,  after  they  have  been 
bruised  by  the  pressing-stones,  are  thoroughly  squeezed  sq  that  all  the 
juice  may  be  extracted. 

5 Hymn  41.  1.  Ascribed  to  Medhyatithi!  The  black  skin:  meaning, 
apparently,  both  the  black  pall  or  covering  of  night  and  the  Rakshasas 
or  dark-skinned  Dasyus,  the  non- Aryan  inhabitants  of  the  country. 


loo  tiie  hymns  of  [part  /. 

6 Soma,  thou  floweat  chasing  foes,  finder  of  ‘wisdom 

and  delight : drive  thou  the  godless  folk  afar  1 

7 Flow  onward  with  that  stream  wherewith  thou 

gavest  splendour  to  the  Sun,  speeding  the  waters 
kind  to  man ! 

8 Flow  onward  thou  who  strengthenedst  Indra  to 

slaughter  Vritra  who  compassed  and  stayed  the 
mighty  floods ! 

9 Flow  onward,  Indu,  with  this  food  for  him  who  in  thy 

wild  delights  battered  the  nine-and-ninety  down ! 
10  Flow,  pressed,  into  the  filter,  speed  the  heavenly  one 
who  winneth  wealth,  who  bringeth  booty  through 
our  juice ! 

DECADE  II.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

Thk  tawny  Bull  hath  bellowed,  fair  as  mighty  Mitra 
to  behold,1  he  gleams  and  flashes  with  the  Sun. 

2 We  choose  to-day  that  chariot-steed  of  thine,  the 
strong,  that  brings  us  bliss,  the  guardian,  the 
desire  of  all. 


6 Hymn  63.  24.  Ascribed  to  Nidhruvi. 

7 Hymn  63.  7.  ** 

8 Hymn  61.  22.  Ascribed  to  Amahiyu. 

9 Hymn  61.  1.  The  nine-and-ninety  :'the  countless  cloud-castles  of 
the  demons  of  drought. 

10  Hymn  52. *1.  Ascribed  to  Uchathya.  The  heavenly  one:  dyub 
sham:  this  and  the  following  epithet  are  in  thef  nominative  case  in  the 
Rigveda.  They  refer  tef  the  juice  regarded  as  distinct  from  Soma  who 
is  addressed. 

The  metre  is  Gayatri.  All  the  references  are  to  Book  IX.  of  the 
« Rigveda. 

1 Hymn  2,  6.  Ascribed  to  MedhUtithi.  The  tawny  Bull : the 
strong,  greenish  yellow  Soma  juice.  ‘The  golden-hucd  showerer  of 
blessings.’ — Wilson.  With  the  Sun : in  rivalry  with  Sdrya,  the  Sun-god. 

2 Hymn  65.  28.  Ascribed  to  Bhrigu  or  Jamadagni.  That  chariot- 
steed  of  thine : that  is,  Soma  itself,  which  is  frequently  called  vahnit 


vi.  i.  2.]  THE  SAMAVEDA.  lol 

3 Ad^varyu,  to  the  filter  lead  the  Soma  juice  expressed 

with  stones : make  thou  it  pure  for  Indra’s  drink. 

4 Swift  runs  this  giver  of  delight,  even  the  stream  of 

flowing  juice:  swift  runs  this  giver  of  delight. 

5 Pour  hitherward,  O Soma,  wealth  in  thousands  and 

heroic  strength,  and  keep  renown  secure  for  us! 

6 The  ancient  living  ones  have  come  unto  a newer 

resting-place.  They  made  the  Sun  that  he  might 
shine. 

7 Soma,  flow  on  exceeding  bright  with  loud  roar  to  the 

reservoirs,  resting  in  wooden  vats,  thy  home ! 

8 0 Soma,  thou  art  strong  and  bright,  potent,  0 God, 

with  potent  sway  : thou,  mighty  one,  ordainest  laws. 

9 For  food,  flow  onward  with  thy  stream,  cleansed  and 

made  bright  by  sapient  men:  Indu,  with  sheen 
approach  the  milk! 

10  Soma,  flow  on  with  pleasant  stream,  strong  and  devot- 
ed to  the  Gods,  our  friend,  unto  the  woollen  sieve. 


carrier,  drawer,  or  horse  that  carries  or  draw's.  The  lardian : pdntam: 
according  to  Professor  Pischel  ‘den  schwellenden/  the  swelling  one. 
See  Vedische  Studien,  I.  pp.  191-^1 91. 

3 Hymn  51.  1.  Ascribed  to  Uehathya. 

4 Hymn  58.  1.  Ascribed  to  Avatsara.  Swift:  tarat:  ‘rescuing 
(his  worshippers  from  sin).’ — Wilson. 

5 Hymn  63.  1.  Ascribed  to  Nidhruvi.  * 

6 Hymn  23.  2.  Ascribed  to  Asita  or  Dcvala.  The  ancient  living 
ones  : the  Sonva-dfops.  * Newer  resting-place : a^newly  prepared  place  of 
sacrifice. 

7 Hymn  65.  19.  Ascribed  to  Bhrigu  or  Jamadagni.  In  wooden 
vats:  vaneshu : literally,  in  woods.  According  to  Say  ana,  ‘in  waters/ 
In  the  Rigveda^the  last  P&da  is  different: — ‘Falcon-like  resting  in 
thine  home/ 

8 Hymn  64.  1.  Ascribed  to  Kasyapa.  Strong:  vrisAd : see  Vedic 
Hymns  (Sacred  Books  of  the  East),  Part  L pp.  139,  140. 

9 Hymn  64.  13. 

10  Hymn  6.  1.  Ascribed  to  Asita  or  Devala. 


102 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  l 


11  By  this  solemnity,  Soma,  thou,  though  grea/c,  hast 

been  increased : in  joy  thou  verily  actest  like  • 
a bull ! 

12  Most  active  and  benevolent,  this  Pavamkna  sent 

to  us  for  lofty  friendship  meditates.  1 

13  Indu,  to  us  for  this  great  rite,  bearing  as  'twere  thy 

wave  to  Gods,  unwearied,  thou  art  flowing  on. 

14  Chasing  our  foemen,  driving  off  the  godless,  Soma 

floweth  on,  going  to  Indras  settled  place. 

DECADE  III.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Cleansing  thee,  Soma,  in  thy  stream,  ♦thou  flowest 
in  a watery  robe  : giver  of  wealth,  thou  sittest  in 
the  place  of  Law,  0 God,  a fountain  made  of  gold. 

2 Hencd  sprinkle  forth  the  juice  effused,  Soma,  the 
best  of  sayred  gifts,  who,  friend  of  man,  hath  run 
amid  the  water-streams!  He  hath  pressed  Soma 
out  with  stones. 


11  Hymn  47.  fc  Ascribtd  to  Kavi.  In  the  Rigveda,  ‘Soma*  is  in 
the  nominative  case,  and  the  verbs  are  in  the  third  person.  Actest  like 
a bull : roarest. 

12  Hymn  62.  10.  Ascribed  to  Jamadagni.  Meditates;  ‘is  known 
(by  all).' -Wilson. 

13  Hymn  44.  1.  Ascribed  to  Ayasya.  For  this  great  rite;  ‘to 
give  us  abundant  wealth.’ — Wilson. 

14  Hymn  61.  25.  Ascribed  to  Amahiyu.  The  godless;  ardvnah; 
those  who  present  no  sacrificial  offerings.  Settled  place  : nishkritam ; 
the  vessel  set  apart  for  the  Soma  Juice  that  is  to  be  offered  to  him. 

< 

The  whole  of  the  hymn  is  taken  from  the  Rigveda,  Book  IX.  107, 
which  is  ascribed  to  the  Seven  Rishis  Bharadvaja,  K*asyapa,  Gotama, 
Atri,  Visvanritra,  Jamadagni,  and  Vasishtha.  The  metre  is  Brihati. 

1 Stanza  4.  In  the  place  of  Law ; in  the  placo  of  Law-ordained 
sacrifice. 

2 Stanza  1.  He:  the  priest.  Or  sushdva  may  be  the  first  person. 


THE  SAMAVEDA. 


103 


vi.  i.  &] 

3 Expressed  by  stones,  O Soma,  and  urged  through 

the  long  wool  of  the  sheep,  thou,  entering  the 
press-boards  even  as  men  a fort,  gold-hued  hast 
settled  in  the  vats. 

4 0 Soma, — for  the  feast  of  Gods,  river-like  he  hath 

swelled  with  surge,  sweet  with  the  liquor  of  the 
stalk,  as  one  who  wakes,  into  the  vat  that  drops 
with  meath. 

5 Pressed  out  by  pressers,  Soma  goes  over  the  fleecy 

backs  of  sheep,  goes,  even  as  with  a mare,  in 
tawny-coloured  stream,  goes  in  a sweetly-sounding 
stream. 

6 0 Soma,  Indu,  every  day  thy  friendship  hath  been 

my  delight.  Many  fiends  follow  me  ; heljp  me,  thou 
tawny-hued  : pass  on  beyond  these  barriers  ! 

7 Deft-handed  ! thou  when  purified  lfftest  thy  voice 

amid  the  sea.  Thou,  Pavandna,  makest  riches  flow 
to  us,  yellow,  abundant,  much  desired. 


3 Stanza  10.  Press-boards : chajnd  : between  which  the  crushed 
stalks  of  the  Soma  were  thoroughly  squeezed.  See  Zimmer,  Altin- 
disches  Leben , p.  277.  Others  take  chamu  to  be  two  saucers  or  beakers 
into  which  the  filtered  juice 'dropped:  ‘the  cups/ — Wilson.  ‘Gefiiss/ — • 
Crass  maim..  Benfey  translates  correctly,  ‘ zur  Presse/ 

4 Stanza  12..  0 Soma.*...Jte : a sort  of  periphrasis  for  Soma  in  the 

nominative  case.  ' , 

5 Stanza  8.  As  with  a mare  : as  swift  as*  if  he  were  carried  by  a 

race-horse.  * 

6 Stanza  19.  Many  fiends:  the  text  has  only  'puriini,  many, 
multa,  in  the  neuter  pluraL  Sayan  a supplies  rakshdiisi , Itakshasas  -or 
fiends.  Pass  on  beyond  these  barriers  : ‘•overcome  those  who  surround 
me/ — Wilson.  ‘ Come  within  our  enclosure/ — Stevenson.  The  latter 
appears  to  be  the  correct  interpretation^ 

7 Stanza  21.  Amid  the  sea:  antariksfie  kalase  vd}  ‘in  the  sky  or 
in  the  beaker  or  jar/  says  Sayana. 


104  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  l 

8 The  living  drops  of  Soma  juice  pour,  as  thqy  flow, 

the  gladdening  drink,  intelligent  drops  above  the, 
station  of  the  sea,  exhilarating,  dropping  meath. 

9 Soma,  while  thou  art  cleansed,  most  dear  and  watch- 

ful in  the  sheep’s  long  wool,  most  like  to  Angiras ! 
thou  hast  become  a sage.  Sprinkle  our  sacrifice 
with  mead ! 

10  Soma,  the  gladdening  juice,  flows'pressed  for  Indra 

with  his  Marut  host : he  hastens  o’er  the  fleece 
with  all  bis  thousand  streams : him,  him  the  men 
make  pure  and  bright. 

11  Flow  on,  best  winner  of  the  spoil,  to  precious  gifts 

of  every  sort!  Thou  art  a sea  according ‘to  the 
highest  law,  joy-giver,  Soma  ! to  the'Gods. 

12  Over  the  cleansing  sieve  have  flowed  the  Pavamanas 

in  a stream,  girt  by  the  Maruts,  gladdening,  steeds 
with  Indra’s  strength,  for  wisdom  and  for  dainty 
food.  * 

DECADE  IV.  Soma  Pavamana. 
Run  onward  to  the  reservoir  and  seat  thee : cleansed 
by  the  njen  speed  forward  to  the  battle ! 

8 Stanza  14.  The  sea  : of  air,  or  the  vessel  into  which  the  juice 
flows.  Dropping  meaih  : or,  givingtrapture.  The  Rigvcda  his  svar- 
vidah,  finding  light  or  heaven. 

9 Stanza  6.  Most  like  to  Angiras  { ahgirastmna : most  richly 
endowed  with  the  qualities  of  Angiras,  the  representative  of  the  great 
family  of  priestly  fathers  or  typical  first  sacrifices,  frequently  men- 
tioned in  the  Rigvcda.  Mead : or,  rain. 

10  Stanza  17.  The  Jfreece : the  woollen  strainer. 

11  Stanza  23.  The  Ttigveda  differs : — ‘Flow  on  to  win  the  spoil, 
flow  on  to  lofty  lore  of  every  kind.  TJiou,  Soma,  as  exhilarator  wast 
the  first  to  spread  the  sea  abroad  for  Gods.’ 

12  Stanza  25.  The  Pavamdnas : ‘thy  purified  juices.’ — Wilson. 
Dainty  food : oblations. 

The  metre  is  Trishtup.  All  the  references  are  to  Book  IX.  of  the 
Rigveda.  * 

1 Hymn  87.  1.  Ascribed  to  Usana  Kavya.  Battle:  or,  booty. 


vi.  i.  4.] 


THE  SlMAVEDA. 


m 


Making  thee  glossy  like  an  able  courser,  forth  to  the 
sacred  grass  with  reins  they  lead  thee. 

2 The  God  declares  the  deities’  generations,  like 

Usand,  proclaiming  lofty  wisdom. 

With  briliiant  kin,  far-ruling,  sanctifying,  the  wild 
boar,  singing  with  his  foot,  advances. 

3 Three  are  the  voices  that  the  caissteed  utters : he 

speaks  the  lore  of  prayer,  the  thought  of  Order. 

To  the  cows’  master  come  the  cows  inquiring  : the 
hymns  with  eager  longing  come  to  Soma. 

4 Made  pure  by  this  man’s  urgent  zeal  and  impulse, 

the  God  hath  with  his  juice  the  Gods  pervaded. 

Pressed,  pinging,  to  the  sieve  he  goes,  as  passes  the 
Hofcar  to  enclosures  holding  cattle. 

5 Father  of  holy  hymns  Soma  flows  onward,  the 

father  of  the  earth,  father  of  heaven ; ' 

Father  of  Agni,  SOrya’s  generator,  the  father  who 
begat  Indra  and  Vishnu. 

6 To  him,  praiseworthy,  sacred  tones  have  sounded, 

Steer  of  the  triple  height,  the  life-bestower. 

Dwelling  in  wood,  like  Variina,  a rjver,  lavishing 
treasure,  he  distributes  blessings. 

2 Hymn  97.  7.  Ascribed  to  ,*V rishagana,  son  of  Vasishtha.  The 
wild  boar : Soma.  Singing  with  his  foot : sending  out  a sound  as  his 
drops  flow  down. 

3 Hymn  97.  34.  Ascribed  to  Parasara.  Three  are  the  voices : the 
three  Vedas,  according  to  Sayana.  Three  tones  of  tjie  voice  are  pro- 
bably intended.  The  car- steed : Soma. 

4 Hymn  97fc  1.  This  man's:  the  priest's.  Impulse:  hemand : from 

the  root  hi.  According  to  Sayana,  ‘by  gold/  that  is  by  the  gold-adorned 
hand  of  the  priest.  Singing:  the  sou*id  of  the  flowing  juice  is  compared 
to  the  priest’s  recitation  of  sacred  texts.  Enclosures:  literally,  measur- 
ed seats  or  places : ‘ the  halls  prepared  (for  sacrifice)  containing 
victims.’ — Wilson.  • 

5 Hymn  96.  5.  Ascribed  to  Pratardana. 

6 Hymn  90.  2.  Ascribed  to  Vasishtha.  Of  the  triple  height:  dwell- 
ing in  the  firmament,  on  the  mountain,  fyid  on  the  altar.  In  wood  : 
in  wooden  vats.  Like  Varuna,  a river : the  Kigveda  differs : — ‘ as 
Varuna  (dwells)  in  rivers.’ 


106  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  /. 

7 Guard  of  all  being,  generating  creatures,  loudfroared 

the  sea  as  highest  law  commanded. 

Strong,  in  the  filter,  on  the  fleecy  summit,  pressed 
from  the  stone,  Soma  hath  waxen  mighty. 

8 Loud  neighs  the  tawny  steed  when  started,  settling, 

deep  in  the  wooden  vessel  while  they  cleanse  him. 

Led  by  the  jnen  he  makes  the  milk  his  raiment: 
then  shall  he,  of  himself,  engender  worship. 

9 This  thine  own  Soma,  rich  in  meath,  0 Indra,  the- 

Strong,  hath  flowed  into  the  Strong  One’s  filter. 

Theswift  steed,  bounteous, giving  hundreds,  thousands, 
hath  reached  the  sacred  grass  which  never  fails  him. 
10  Flow  onward,  Soma,  rich  in  meath,  and  holy,' enrob- 
ed in  waters,  on  the  fleecy  summit! 

Settle  in  vessels  that  are  full  of  fatness,  as  cheering 
and  most  gladdening  drink  for  Indra  ! 

• DECADE  V.  Soma  Pavamana, 

In  forefront  of  the  cars  forth  goes  the  hero,  the 
leader,  seeking  spoil  : his  host  rejoices. 

Soma  endues  his  robe  of  lasting  colours,  and  blesses,, 
for  his  ffiends,  their  calls  on  Indra. 

7 Hymn  97.  40.  The  sea  : Soma^  The  fleecy  summit : the  fvoollen* 
strainer.  From  the  stone : the  adrih  of  the  text  is  unintelligible,  and 
I adopt  Prof.  Ludwig’s  suggestion  that  adreh  may  have  been  the 
original  reading.  Benfey  translates  ‘durch  Steine’  as  though  the  word 
were  adrihhih.  r 

8 Hymn  95.  1.  Ascribed  to  Praskanva.  Deep  in  the  wooden  vessel : 

literally,  ‘ in  the  belly  of  the  wood.’  * 

9 Hymn  87.  4.  Ascribed  to  Usana  Kavya.  The  Strong  hath  flowed' 
into  the  Strong  One's  filter : thef  liigveda  has,  ‘ strong  for  the  strong 
(that  is,  for  Indra)  hath  flowed  into  the*  filter.’ 

10  Hymn  96.  I?.  Ascribed  to  Pratardana.  Full  of  fatness:  ghi- 
tavanti : according  to  Sayana,  1 containing  water.’ 

The  metre  is  Trishtup.  All  the  references  are  to  Book  IX.  of  the 
Rigveda. 

1 Hymn  96.  1.  Ascribed  to  Pratardana.  The  hero:  Soma,  as  ft 
warrior  who  goes  forth  to  conquer.  Seeking  spoil:  gavyan : literally, 


THE  S Am  A VEDA. 


10/ 


vi.  i.  5.] 


2 Tl)^  streams  have  been  poured  forth  with  all  their 

sweetness,  when,  cleansed,  thou  passest  through 
the  woollen  filter. 

The  race  of  kine  thou  cleansest,  Pavam&na  1 Thou 
didst  be£et  and  speed  the  Sun  with  splendours. 

3 Let  us  sing  praises  to  the  Gods:  sing  loudly,  send 

ye  the  Soma  forth  for  mighty  riches  ! 

Let  him  flow,  sweetly-flavoured,  through  the  filter  : 
let  the  God  Indu  settle  in  the  beaker  ! 

4 Urged  on,  the  father  of  the  earth  and  heaven  hath 

gone  forth  like  a car  to  gather  booty, 

Going  to  Indra.,  sharpening  his  weapons,  and  in  his 
h*ands  containing  every  treasure. 

5 When,  by  the  law  of  the  Most  High,  in  presence  of 

heaven  and  earth,  the  fond  mind's  utterance 
formed  him, 

Then,  loudly  lowing,  came  the  cow$  to  Indu,  the 
chosen,  well-loved  master  in  the  beaker. 

C Ten  sisters,  pouring  out  the  rain  together,  the  sages 
quickly-moving  thoughts,  adorn  him. 

seeking  cows,  with  allusion,  perhaps,  to  the  milk  which  will  he  mingled 
with  the  juice.  Of  lasting  colours:  rabhasdni:  literally,  robust.  ‘ Hastily 
made.’ — Wilson,  ‘Splendid/ — Befifey.  ‘Brilliant/  —Grassmann. 

2 Hymn  97.  31.  Ascribed  to  Para, Sara,  Thou  didst  beget:  instead 
of  the  active  participle  janaym , begetting,  the  Rigveda  has  jajndnaht 

* being  born/ 

3 Hymn  97.  4.  Let  the  God  Indu ; the  Bigveda  has  devayurnafa 

* our  pious  one,’  instead  of  deva  induh. 

4 Hymn  90.*  1,  Ascribed  to  Vasishtha. 

5 Hymn  97.  22.  In  presence,  of  heaven  and  earth  : dyukshoranthe  : 
the  Rigveda  has  kthoranlJce , meaning,  apparently,  ‘ at  the  head  of/  or 
‘chief  of,  food/ 

6 Hymn  93,  1.  Ascribed  to  Nodhas.  Ten  sisters : the  fingers, 
which  press  out  the  juice  of  the  Soma  plant.  Thought the  means 
by  which  he  shows  his  devotion.  Child  of  S&rya : Sayana  explains 
jdh,  offspring,  by  jdydh>  wives,  i,  e.  the  quarters  of  the  heavens,  called 
Siirya’s  wives  because  they  are  made  manifest  by  his  rays : ‘ the 
green-tinted  one  flows  round  the  wives  of  the  sun/ — Wilson. 


f08 


THE  HYMNS  ON 


[PART  I. 


Hither  hath  run  the  gold-huod  child  of  Sfirj/a,  and 
reached  the  vat  like  a fleet  vigorous  courser. 

7 When  beauties  strive  for  him  as  for  a charger,  then 

strive  the  songs  as  people  for  the  sunlight. 

A mighty  Sage,  he  flows  enrobed  in  waters  and 
hymns  as  ’twere  a stall  that  kine  may  prosper. 

8 Strong  Indu,'  bathed  in  milk,  flows  on  for  Indra, 

Soma  exciting  strength,  for  his  carousal.  • 

He  quells  malignity  and  slays  the  demons,  King  of 
the  homestead,  he  who  gives  us  comfort. 

9 Pour  forth  this  wealth  with  this  purification  : flow 

onward  to  the  yellow  lake,  0 Indu ! 

Here,  too,  the  bright  one,  wind-swift,  fedl  of  wisdom, 
shall  give  a son  to  him  who  cometh  quickly. 

10  Somaf  the  mighty,  when,  the  waters’  offspring,  he 

chose  the  Gods,  performed  that  great  achievement. 
He,  Pavamdna,  granted  strength  to  Indra:  he,  Indu, 
generated  light  in  Svtrya. 

1 1 As  for  a chariot-race,  the  skilful  speaker,  first  hymn, 

inventor,  hath  with  song  been  started. 

The  sisters  ten  upon  the  fleecy  summit  adorn  the 
car-horse  in  the  resting-places. 

7 Hymn  94.  1.  Ascribed  to  Kan^a  (Jhaura.  The  meaning!  appa- 
rently,  is  : when  the  bright  and  beautifying  waters  hasten  cmulously 
to  cleanse  Soma  as  though  he  were  a 'horse,  the  voices  of  singing 
worshippers  vie  with  each  other  like  the  shouts  of  men  who  are  fighting 
for  light  and  lif6.  Soma  flows  on  in  his  wisdom,  blent  with  the  waters 
and  surrounded  with  hymns  into  the  midst  of , which  he  enters  as  into 
a stable  full  of  kine  in  order  to  make  them  increase  anil  multiply. 

8 Hymn  97.  10.  Ascribed  to  ^lanyu  Vasishtha.  Of  the  homestead: 
vrijanasya:  see  Gcldncr,  Vedische  Stutiien , I.  pp.  139,  143,  147 ; and 
Max  Miillcr,  Fee lie  Hymns , Part  I.  pp.  208,  304. 

9 Hymn  97.  52.  Ascribed  to  Kutsa  of*  the  family*of  Angiras. 

10  Hymn.97.  41.  Ascribed  to  Parasara. 

11  Hymn  91. 1.  Ascribed  to  Kasyapa.  The  skilful  speaker : Soma 
who  makes  men  eloquent.  * First  hymn : chief  subject  of  hymns.  The 
Rigveda  has  prathamo  manishi , ‘chief,  sage,’  instead  of  prathamd 
manishd.  The  sisters  ten : the  priest’s  fingers. 


THE  SJMAYEDA. 


109 


vi.  ii.  1.] 

12  Hastening  onward  like  the  waves  of  waters  our  holy 
hymns  are  coming  forth  to  Soma. 

To  him  they  go  with  lowly  adoration,  and,  longing, 
enter  him  who  longs  to  meet  them. 


CHAPTER  ir. 

DECADE  I.  Soma  Pavamana. 

For  first  possession  of  your  juice,  for  the  exhilarat- 
ing drink, 

Drive  ye  away  the  dog,  my  friends,  drive  ye  the 
lgng-tongued  dog  away  ! 

2 As  Pflshtfh,  Fortune,  Bhaga,  comes  this  Soma  while 

they  make  him  pure. 

He,  Lord  of  all  the  multitude,  hath  looked  upon  the 
earth  and  heaven. 

3 The  Sonias,  very  rich  in  sweets,  for  which  the  sieve 

is  destined,  flow 

Effused,  the  source  of  Indras  joy  : may  your  strong 
juices  reach  the  Gods  ! 

4 For  us  the  Soma  juices  flow,  the  dibps  best  fur- 

thered of  weal, 

Effused  as  friends,  without  a spot,  benevolent,  finders 
of  the  light. 

5 Stream  on  us  riches  that  are  craved  by  hundreds, 

best  at  winning  spoil, 


12  Hvmn  95.  3.  Ascribed  to  Praskanva. 

•»  r i • , 

The  metre  is  Anushtup.  All  the  references  are  to  Book  IX.  of  the 
Rigveda. 

1 Hymn  101.  1.  Ascribed  to  Andhigu.  Drive  ye  away : prevent 
dogs,  Rakshasas  or  fiends  who  disturb  and  defile  sacrifices,  from  drinking 
the  Soma  juice. 

2 Hymn  101.  7.  Ascribed  to  Nahusha. 

3 Hymn  101.  4.  Ascribed  to  Yayati. 

4 Hymn  101.  10.  Ascribed  to  Mann  Samvarana. 

5 Hymn  98.  1.  Ascribed  to  Ambarisha  and  Rijifvan. 


110 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  /. 


Riches,  0 Indu,  thousandfold,  most  splendid,  that 
surpass  the  light ! 

6 The  guileless  ones  are  singing  praise  to  Indra’s  well- 

beloVfed  friend,  , 

As,  in  the  morning  of  its  life,  the  mothers  lick  the 
new-born  calf. 

7 They  for  the  bold  and  lovely  one  ply  manly  vigour 

like  a bow  : * 

Bright,  glad,  in  front  of  songs  they  spread  to  form 
a vesture  for  the  Lord. 

8 Him  with  the  fleece  they  purify,  brown,  golden-hued, 

beloved  of  all,  . 

Who  with  exhilarating  juice  goes  forth  to  all  the 
deities. 


9  Let  Ivm,  as  mortal,  crave  this  speech,  for  him  who 
presses,  of  the  juice, 

As  Bhrigu^s  sons  chased  Makha,  so  drive  ye  the 
niggard  hound  away  1 


6 Hymn  100.  1.  Ascribed  to  the  two  Rebhasunus,  sons  of  Rebha. 

The  guileless  one$ ; the  vtyativari  waters,  used  in  the  preparation  of 
the  Sonia  juice.  , 

7 Hymn  99.  1.  Ascribed  to  the  two  Rebhasunus.  They:  the<|ropsof 
flowing  Soma  juice,  regarded  as  distinct  from  the  deity,  are  the  subject. 
In  the  Itigveda,  the  reading  in  the  second  lino  is  sukrdm  vayanty 
asurdya  nirnijam , ‘ they  weave  bright  raiment  for  the  Lord/  instead  of 

sukrd  vi  yanty  asurdya  nirnije.  The  Asurti  or  Lord  is  Soma  the  God. 

« 

8 Hymn  98.  7.  Ascribed  to  Ambarisha  and  Rijisvan. 

9 Hymn  101.  13*  Ascribed  to  Prajftpati.  The  stanza  its  obscure. 
The  Rigveda  has  suniAnasya  instead  of  sunvdndya  and  vrita  instead 
of  vashta  : ‘ Let  no  mortal  hear  th<$  sound  of  the  effused  Soma' — Wilson. 
Professor  Ludwig’s  explanation  of  tfle  Samavcda  text  is : — As  a 
mortal  [let  him  not  be  too  proud]  let  himjionour  [let  him  have  power 
over,  let  him  dispose  of]  this  speech  of  the  juice  for  him  [in  favour  of 
him],  who  presscs-out  thereof ; or,  Prof.  Ludwig  suggests,  vashta  may 
be  referred  to  the  root  vah , veh-o,  to  carry.  Makha : meaning  elsewhere, 
strong,  brisk,  combatant  or  champion,  is  here,  apparently,  the  name  or 
an  epithet  of  a demon  who  obstructed  the  Bhrigus’  sacrifice.  The  nig- 
gard hound:  the  Rakshasa  or  demon  who  offers  no  oblation  to  the  Gods. 


vi.  ii.  5,]  THE  SAM  A VEDA.  Ill 

DECADE  II.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Graciously-minded  he  is  flowing  on  his  way  to  win 
dear  names  o’er  which  the  youthful  one  grows  great. 
The  miglriy  and  far-seeing  one  hath  mounted  now 
the  mighty  S&rya’s  car  which  moves  to  every  side. 

2 Spontaneous  let  our  drops  of  Sonja  juice  flow  on, 

pressed  out  and  tawny-coloured,  mightily,  to  the 
Gods ! 

Still  let  our  enemies,  the  godless,  be  in  want,  though 
filled  with  food;  and  let  our  prayers  obtain  success  ! 

3 Most  beauteous  of  the  beauteous,  Indra’s  thunderbolt, 

this  Sopia,  rich  in  sweets,  hath  clamoured  in  the  vat. 
Dropping  with  oil,  abundant,  streams  of  sacrifice  flow 
unto  him,  and  milch-kine,  lowing,  with  their  milk. 

4 Indu  hath  started  forth  for  Indra’s  settled  place,  and 

slights  not,  as  a friend,  the  promise* of  his  friend. 
Soma  comes  onward  like  a youth  with  youthful  maids, 
and  gains  the  beaker  by  a course  of  hundred  paths. 


The  metre  is  Jagatf.  All  the  references  are  to  'Book  IX.  of  the 
Rigveda. 

1 Hymn  75.  1.  Ascribed  to  Xhvi  of  the  family  of  Bhrigu.  O'er 
which : that  is,  the  fresh  and  strong  Soma  exceeds  in  greatness  even 
the  high  titles  which  he  wins. by  his  gracious  deeds. 

2 Hymn  79.  1.  Ascribed  to  Kavi.  The  second  line  is  conjecturally 
translated,  the  meaning  of  ishayo  being  unknown.  The  corresponding 
line  in  the  Rigveda  lyis  vi  cha  nasan  tui  isko  ardtayo  Wyo  na santa, 
meaning,  perhaps, : — i Perish  among  us  they  who  give  no  gifts  of  food: 
perish  the  godless  ! ’ 

3 Hymn  77.  1.  Ascribed  ,to  Kavi.  As  India's  thunderbolt:  as 
mighty  in  operation  as  the  bolt  in  Indra’s  hands.  And  milch-kine : the 
Rigveda  has  warlike,  instead  of  cha , and. 

4 Hymn  86.  16.  Ascribed  to  the  Rishis  called  Sikfitas.  Settled 
place : the  vessel  set  apart  for  libations  intended  for  Indra.  Promise  : 
Sayana  derives  sahgiram  from  sangri,  to «s wallow  : ‘ the  friend  leaves 
not  the  stomach  of  his  friend.’ — Wilson.  Hundred  paths  : through 
the  interstices  of  the  wood  of  which  the  filter  is  made. 


112 


THE  UYMNS  OF 


[PART  l 


5 On  flows  the  potent  juice,  sustainer  of  the  heavens, 

the  strength  of  Gods,  whom  men  must  hail  with 
shouts  of  joy. 

Thou,  gold-hued,  started  like  a courser  by  brave  men, 
art  lightly  showing  forth  thy  splendour  in  the 
streams. 

6 Far-seeing  Soma  flows,  the  Steer,  the  Lord  of 

hymns,  the  furtherer  of  days,  of  mornings,  and  of 
heaven. 

Breath  of  the  rivers,  he  hath  roared  into  the  jars, 
and  with  the  help  of  sages  entered  Ir^dra’s  heart. 

7 The  three-times  seven  milch-kine  in  the  loftiest 

heaven  have  for  this  Soma  poured  the  genuine 
milky  draught. 

Four  other  beauteous  creatures  hath  he  made  for  his 
adornment  when  he  waxed  in  strength  through 
holy  rites. 

8 Flow  on  to  Indra,  Soma,  carefully  effused:  let  sick- 

ness stay  afar  together  with  the  fiend ! 

Let  not  the  double-tongued  delight  them  with  thy 
juice : here  be  thy  flowing  drops  laden  with 
opulence ! 


5 Hymn  76,  1.‘  Ascribed  to  Kavi.  Lightly : or,  spontaneously. 

6 Hymn  86.  19.  Breath:  or,  life:  the  Rigveda  has  krdnd , mixt, 
instead  of  prdnd. 

7 Hymn  70.  1.  Ascribed  to  Rcjiu.  The  three-times  seven  milch-kine 
are,  according  to  Sayana,  the  twelve  months,  the  five  seasons,  the  three 
worlds,  and  Aditya  or  the  Sun.  Probably,  as  Prof.  Ludwig  says, 
the  seven  celestial  rivers,  multiplied  by  three  to  correspond  with  the 
three  divisions  of  heaven,  are  intended.  These  supply  the  genuine 
draught  in  contrast  with  the  four  other  beauteous  beings , the  Vasativari 
and  the  three  Fkadhana  waters,  which  are  terrestrial  and  factitious, 
made  to  adorn  or  purify  Soma. 

8 Hymn  85.  1.  Ascribed  to  Vena,  of  the  family  of  Bhrigu. 


THE  SlMAVEDA. 


113 


vb  11.  \] 

\ 

9  Even  as  a King  hath  Soma,  red  and  tawny  Bull, 
been  pressed  ; the  wondrous  one  hath  bellowed 
to  the  kine. 

While  purified  thou  passest  through  the  filtering 
fleece  to  seat  thee  hawk-like  on  the  place  that 
drops  with  oil. 

10  The  drops  of  Soma  juice,  like  cow£  who  yield  their 

milk,  have  flowed  forth,  rich  in  meath,  unto  the 
deity, 

And,  seated  on  the  grass,  raising  their  voice,  assum- 
ed the  milk,  the  covering  robe  wherewith  the 
ladders  stream. 

11  They  balm  him,  balm  him  over,  balm  him  thoroughly, 

caress  the  mighty  strength  and  balm  it  with  the 
meath. 

They  seize  the  flying  Steer  at  the  stream’s  breathing- 
place  : cleansing  with  gold  they  grasp  the  animal 
herein. 

12  Spread  is  thy  cleansing  filter,  Brahmanaspati : as 

prince  thou  entercst  its  limbs  from  every  side. 

The  raw,  whose  mass  hath » not  been*  heated,  gains 
not  this:  they  only  which  are* dressed,  which  bear, 
attain  to  it.  • 


9 Hymn  82.  1.  Ascribed*  to  Vasu,  of  the  family  of  liliaradvaja. 
That  drops  with  oil : where  clarified  butter  is  poured  out.  Say  ana 
explains  ghritavantam , here  by  udakavantam , * containing  water.' 

10  Hymn  68.  1.  Ascribed  to  Vatsapri.  The  second  lino  is  obscure. 

According  to  •Sayana  usriydh  here  means  e<vvs  — ‘ the  lowing  kino 
sitting  on  the  barhis  grass  hold  in  their  udders  the  pure  (juice)  welling 
up/ — Wilson.  „ 

1 1 Hymn  86.  43.  They  : the  priests.  Breathing-place  : where  the 
stream  seems  te  stay  for  n moment  to  recover  breath.  With  gold : 
with  gold-ringed  fingers.  The  animal : Soma. 

12  Hymn  83.  1.  Ascribed  to  Pavitra.  What  Brahmanaspati’s  filter 
is,  is  not  clear.  'The  raw  : uncooked  oblatjpn.  Which  bear  ; ‘ bearing 
(the  sacrifice)/ — Wilson.  This : the  filter,  according  to  Sayana.  Prof. 
Ludwig  thinks  that  tat  means  Agni  or  Surya. 

8 


[PART  /. 


114  THE  HYMNS  OF 

) 

DECADE  III.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

To  Indra,  to  the  mighty  one,  let  these  gold-coloured 
juices  go, 

Drops  born  as  Law  prescribes,  that  ficd  the  light  of 
heaven  1 

2 Flow  vigilant  for  Indra,  thou  Soma,  yea,  Indu,  run 

thou  forth : 

Bring  hither  splendid  strength  that  finds  the  light  of 
heaven ! 

3 Sit  down,  0 friends,  and  sing  aloud  to  him  who 

purifies  himself : 

Deck  him  for  glory,  like  a child,  with  holy  rites  1 

4 Friends,  hymn  your  Lord  who  makes  him  pure  for 

rapturous  carouse  : let  them 
Sweeten  him,  as  a child,  with  lauds  and  sacred  gifts! 

5 Breath  of  t]ie  mighty  Dames,  the  Child,  speeding  the 

plan  of  sacrifice, 

Surpasses  all  things  that  are  dear,  yea,  from  of  old ! 

6 In  might,  0 Indu,  with  thy  streams  flow  for  the 

banquet,of  the  ‘.Cods : 

Rich  in  meath,  Soma,  in  our  heaker  take  thy  seat ! 

- ~e — 1 

The  metre  is  Ushnih  (8  + 8 + 12).  The  references  are  to  Book  IX. 
of  the  Rigveda. 

1 Hymn  106.  1.  Ascribed  to  Agni  Chakshusha.  As  Law  prescribes: 
srushte : the  Rigveda  has  srushti , rapidly. 

2 Hymn  106.  4.  Ascribed  to  Chakshus  Manava. 

3 Hymn  104.  1.*  Ascribed  to  Parvata  and  frarada  of  the  family  of 
Kanva,  or  to  the  two  Sikhandinis,  Apsarases,  daughters  of  Kasyapa. 

4 Hymn  105.  1.  Ascribed  to  Parvata  and  N&rada.  The  hymn 
from  which  the  stanza  is  taken  is  a sort  of  rifaccimento  of  hymn  104. 

5 Hymn  102.  1.  Ascribed  to  Trita  K$ tya.  Brecth:  the  Rigveda 
has  kr&nd,  blent  with,  instead  of  prdnd : cf.  preceding  Decade,  stanza 
6.  Mighty  Dames:  mahtndm,  magnarum,  without  a substantive, 
meaning  the  rivers.  Froip  of  old : or  dvitd  may  be  merely  a particle 
of  affirmation  = the  Greek  8»>a,  verily,  especially. 

6 Hymn  106.  7.  Ascribed  to  Manu  Apsava. 


vi.  ii.  \] 


THE  SlMAVEDA. 


115 


7 Soma,  while  filtered,  with  his  wave  flows  through 

the  long  wool  of  the  sheep, 

Roaring,  while  purified,  before  the  voice  of  song. 

8 The  speech  is  uttered  for  the  Sage,  for  Soma  being 

purified  : 

Bring  meed  as  ’twere  to  one  who  makes  thee  glad 
with  hymns  ! 

9 Flow  to  us,  Indu,  very  strong,  effused,  with  wealth 

of  kine  and  steeds, 

And  do  thou  lav  above  the  milk  thy  radiant  hue  ! 

10  Voices  have  sung  aloud  to  thee  as  finder-out  of 

wealth  for  us : 

We  clothe  the  hue  thou  wearest  with  a robe  of  milk. 

1 1 Gold-hued  and  lovely  in  his  course  through  tangles 

of  the  wool  he  flows  : \ 

Stream  forth  heroic  dime  upon  the  worshippers  ! 

12  On  through  the  long  wool  of  the  shee^)  to  the  meath- 

dropping  vat  he  flows  : 

The  Rishis’  sevenfold  quire  hath  sung  aloud  to  him. 

DECADE  iy.  t Soma  Pa  v.  i man  a. 
For  Indra  flow,  thou  Soma,  on,  as  most  inspiring 
drink,  exceeding  ricl\  in  sweets, 

Great,  most  celestial,  gladdening  drink ! 

7 Hymn  10G.  10.  Ascribed  to  Agni  Ch:\kshusha. 

8 Hymn  103.  1.  Ascribed  to  Dvita  ^ptya. 

9 Hymn  105.  4.  Ascribed  to  Parvata  and  Narad  a’.  Do  thou  lay : 
dhdraya  : the  Rigved^has  dldharam , ‘ I have  laid.’ 

10  Hymn  >04.  4.  » 

11  Hymn  106.  13.  Ascribed  to  A^ni  Chakslmsha.  Stream  forth  : tho 
Rigveda  has  the  present  participle  instead  of  the  imperative  abhyarsha. 

12  Ilymn  103.  3.  Sevenfold  quire:  sajtfa  vdnih : literally,  seven 
voices  or  tones, •meaning,  according  to  tho  Scholiast,  the  seven  generic 
metres  of  the  Veda. 

. i 

The  metro  is  Kakup  (8  + 12  + 8),  except  in  stanza  8 where  it  is 
Satobrihati  (12  + 8 + 12  + 8)  with  tho  last  Pa  da  lengthened  and  repeat- 
ed. The  references  are  all  to  hymn  108  of  Book  IX.  of  the  Kigvcdu. 

1 Hymn  108.  1.  Ascribed  to  Gauriviti. 


116 


THE  IIYMNS  OF 


[P/HT  L 


2 Make  high  and  splendid  glory  shine  hitherward, 

Lord  of  food,  God,  on  the  friend  of  Gods : 
Unclose  the  cask  of  middle  air ! 

3 Press  ye  and  pour  him,  like  a steed, o laud -worthy, 

speeding  through  the  region  and  the  flood, 

Who  swims  in  water,  dwells  in  wood ! 

4 Him,  even  this  Steer  who  milks  the  heavens,  him 

with  a thousand  streams,  distilling  rapturous  joy, 
Him  who  brings  all  things  excellent. 

5 Effused  is  he  who  brings  good  things,  who  brings  us 

store  of  wealth  and  sweet  refreshing  food,  u 
Soma  who  brings  us  quiet  homes. 

6 For,  verily,  PavamAna,  thou,  divine  ! endued  with 

brightest  splendour  calling  all 
Creatures  to  immortality. 

7 Effused,  hd  floweth  in  a stream,  best  rapture-giver, 

in  the  long  wool  of  the  sheep, 

Sporting,  as  ’twere  the  waters’  wave. 


2 Stanza  9.  Ascribed' to  Urdhvasadman  Angirasa.  On  the  friend 
of  Gods : the  pious  worshipper.  TVe  Rigvcda  has  devaynh , tljfc  nomi- 
native case,  ‘ as  the  friend  of  Cods,’  instead  of  devayum. 

3 Stanza  7.  Ascribed  to  Rijisvan  Rharadvaja.  Laud-worthy:  sto - 
mam,  laud,  hymn,  here  meaning  subject,  or  worthy  of,  the  hymn. 
Speeding  through  the  region  : rajasturam : crossing  the  air.  In  ivood : 
in  the  tub  or  vat. 

4 Stanza  11.  Ascribed  to  Kyitayasas.  Him who  milks  the 

heavens:  who  obtains  rain  for  us.  ‘We  praise*  must  be  understood. 
Instead  of  divoduham , heaven-mhker,  the  Rigvcda  has  divo  duhuh : — 
‘ they  have  drained  him,  the  steer  of  heaven.’ 

5 Stanza  13.  Ascribed  to  Rinaiichaya  A hgirasa.  a 

6 Stanza  3.  Ascribed  to  Sakti  V&sishtha.  Calling:  ghoshayan: 
the  Rigvcda  has  ghoshayah , 1 cal  lest.’  The  stanza  being  incomplete, 
the  Scholiast  supplies  stdygse,  ‘art  landed.’  The  Rigvcda  has  daivyd 
qualifying  janimdni , generations  of  the  (Jods. 

7 Stanza  5.  Ascribed  to  Urn  Angirasa. 


THE  SAMAVEDA. 


vi.  il^.]  THE  SAMA  VEDA.  1 PT 

8 He  who  from  out  the  rocky  cavern  with  his  might 
took  forth  the  red-refulgent  cows — 

Thou  drewest  to  thyself  the  stall  of  kine  and  steeds: 
burst  it,  brave  Lord,  like  one  in  mail;  yea,  burst 
it,  O Wave  Lord,  like  one  in  mail  1 


8 Stanza  6.  Ascribed  to  Kijisvair  Bharadvaja.  The  red-refulgent 
cotvs:  the  beams  of  light  which  shine  forth  when  the  rocky  cavern , or 
strong  prison  of  cloud,  has  been  thrown  open.  Instead  of  api  yd  the 
Rigvoda  has  apyd,  watery,  dwelling  in  the  mist  and  vapours  of  the 
iiriuarucnt,  as  an  additional  epithet  of  cows. 


PART  II. 


BOOK  I. 


CHAPTER  I. 

Om.  Glory  to  the  S&maveda ! to  Lord  Ganesa  glory  1 Om. 


I.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

Sitfa  for^h  to  Indu,  O ye  men,  to  him  who  now 
is  purified, 

Fain  to  pay  worship  to  the  Gods  1 

2 Together  with  thy  pleasant  juice  the  Atharvans 

have  commingled  milk, 

Divine,  God-loving,  for  the  God. 

3 Bring  health  to  cattle  with  thy  flow,  health  to  the 

people,  health  to  steeds, 

Health,  0 thou  King,  to  growing  plants  f 

II.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

Bright  are  these  Somas  blent  with  milk,  with  light 
that  flashes  brilliantly,, 

And  form  that  shouteth  all  around.. 

2 Roused  by  his  drivers  and  sent  forth*  the  strong 
Steed  hath  come  nigh  for  spoil, 

As  warriors  when  they  stand  arrayed. 

* * 

The  triplet  is  taken  from  Kigvecty  IX.  11.  1. — 3,  ascribed  to  Asita 
or  Dovala.  Tho  metre  is  Gayatri. 

2 The  Atharvans : the  priests  who  perform  the  duties  of  the 

Adhvaryus.  * * 

3 King : the  usual  designation  of  Soma  in  the  Bralm^ana. 

Tho  triplet  is  taken  from  Rigveda  IX.  64.  28 — 30,  ascribed  ta 
Kasyapa.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

2 Form : kripd : stream,  according  to  Sayapa.. 


120 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


\PAfT  II. 

3 Specially,  Soma,  Sage,  by  day,  coming  together 
for  our  weal, 

Like  Stirya,  flow  for  us  to  see ! 

III.  ,Soma  Pavamana. 

The  streams  of  Pavam&na,  thine,  Sage,  mighty  one, 

have  poured  them  forth, 

Like  coursers  eager  for  renown. 

2 They  have  been  poured  upon  the  fleece  towards  the 

meath-distilling  vat : 

The  holy  songs  have  rung  aloud. 

3 Like  milch-kine  coming  home,  the  drops  of  Soma 

juice  have  reached  the  lake,  , 

Have  reached  the  shrine  of  sacrifice. 

IV.  Agni. 
Come,  Agni,  praised  with  song  to  feast  and  sacrificial 

offerings  :>  sit 

As  Hotar  on  the  holy  grass ! 

2 So,  Angiras,  we  make  thee  strong  with  fuel  and 

with  holy  oil.  _ . 

Blaze  high;  thou  youngest  of  the  Gods ! 

3 For  us  thou  winhest,  Agni,  God,  heroic  strength 

exceeding  great,  * 1 

Far-spreading  and  of  high  renown. 

3 Specially : ridhak : said  by  Yaska  to  be  the  Vedic  form  of  prithak, 
and  to  be  used  iv  the  sense  of  prospering.  ‘ Zum  Scgcu.’— Benfey. 
Sage : the  Rigvcda  lias  kavih,  the  nominative  case,  instead  of  have, 
the  vocative.  By  day ,*  divd : the  Rigvcda  has  diveth , frpm  heaven. 

The  triplet  is  taken  from  Rigveija  IX.  66.  10—12,  ascribed  to  the 
hundred  VaikhUnasas,  said  to  have  been  a raco  of  saintly  hermits- 
The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

3 The  lake : samudram  • meaning  the  drbnakahm,  flr  reservoir. 

The  triplet  is  taken  from  Rigvcda  VI.  16.  10 — 12,  ascribed  to 
Vitahavya  or  Bharadvaja.  The  metre  is  Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a 
repetition  of  I.  i.  i.  1.  1. 

2 Anyiras : a name  of  Agni. 


i.  L tffi 


THE  SAMAVEDA. 


121 


V • Mi  tm- Vanina. 

Varuna,  Mitra,  sapient  pair,  pour  fatness  on  our 
pastures,  pour 

Meath  oi\the  regions  of  the  air! 

2 Gladdened  by  homage,  ruling  far,  ye  reign  by 

majesty  of  might, 

Pure  in  your  ways,  for  evermore. 

3 Lauded  by  Jamadagni’s  song,  sit  in  the  shrine  of 

sacrifice  : 

Drink  Soma,  ye  who  strengthen  Law ! 

VI.  Indra. 

Come,  we  have  pressed  the  juice  for  thee ; 0 Indra, 
drink  this  Soma  here  : 

Sit  thou  on  this  my  sacred  grass! 

2 0 Indra,  let  thy  long-maned  bays,  yt>kcd  by  prayer, 

bring  thee  hitherward  : 

Give  ear  and  listen  to  our  prayers! 

3 We  Soma-bearing  Brahmans 'oall  theg  Soma-drinker 

with  thy  friend, 

We,  Indra,  bringing  Sgma  juice. 


The  triplet  is  taken  from  Rigveda  III.  62.  16 — 18,  ascribed  to 
Visvamitra.  The  metre  is  Oayatri. 

3 Jamadayni  may,  according  to  Sayana,  be  in  this  place  an  epithet 
of  Visvamitra,  and  mean  ‘by  whom  the  fire  has  tyeen  kindled;’  or  the 
famous  Rishi  Jamadagni  may  be  intended.  * 

■"> r 

The  triplet  is  taken  from*  Rigveda  VIII.  17.  1 — 3,  ascribed  to 
Irimbithi,  of  the  family  of  Kanva.  The  metre  is  Gayatrf. 

2 Yoked  by  prayer : brahmayujd  : the  worshipper’s  prayer  brings 

Indra  to  the  sacrifice.  * 

3 With  thy  friend : yujd : with  thy  companion,  the  thunderbolt. 
‘With  suitable  praise/ — Wilson.  ‘In  appropriate  hymns  of  praise/ — 
Stevenson.  ‘Allosamt.’  ‘Altogether.’ — Benfcy. 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


f22 


[PAqrfTl. 


VII.  Indra-Agni. 

Indra  and  Agni,  moved  by  songs,  come  to  the  juice, 
the  precious  dew : 

Drink  ye  thereof,  impelled  by  prayer ! 

2 Indra  and  Agni,  with  the  man  who*  lauds  comes 

visible  sacrifice : 

So  drink  ye  both  this  flowing  juice! 

3 With  force  of  sacrifice  I seek  Indra,  Agni  who 

love  the  wise : 

With  Soma  let  them  sate  them  here! 


VIII.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

High  is  thy  juice’s  birth : though  sei  in  heaven, 
on  earth  it  hath  obtained 
Dread,  sheltering  power  and  great  renown. 

2 Finder  of  room  and  freedom,  flow  for  Indra  whom 

we  must  ndore, 

For  Varuna  and  the  Marut  host! 

3 Striving  to  win,  with  him  we  gain  all  riches  from  the 

enemy, 

Yea,  all  tht3  glories  of  mankind. 


The  triplet  is  taken  from  Rigveda  III.  12.  1 — 3,  ascribed  to 
Visvamitra.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

1 Indra  and  Agni:  here  addressed  ‘conjointly,  in  a compound, 
indrdgnt , as  a dual  deity.  Dew : or  cloud. 

3 Who  love  the  wise : kavichhadd ; Prof.  Ludwig  takes  the  word  as 
an  epithet  of  jdty&f  ‘durch  dio  von  den  weiscn'gebilligto  aufforderung 
des  opfcrs.’  ‘ Die  Sangcrfrcunde  wahl’  ich  mir,  Indragni,  in  des  Opfer’s 
Drang.’ — Grassmann. 

The  triplet  is  taken  from  Rigveda  IX.  61.  10,  12,  11,  ascribed  to 
Amahiyu.  The  metre  is  GUyatri. 

1 This  staftza  is  repeated  from  I.  v.  ii.  4.  1. 

2 Whom  we  mmt  adore : yajyave:  the  meaning  of  the  word  is 
uncertain : indraya  yajyave  seems  to  moan  ‘ to  the  chasing  Indra.’ — 
Max  Muller,  V.  H.,  I.  328. 


THE  SAMAVEDA. 


125 


i.  i.  1\] 

IX.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Cleansing  thee,  Soma,  in  thy  stream,  thou  flowest  in 
a watery  robe. 

Giver  of  wealth,  thou  sittest  in  the  place  of  Law, 

O God,*  a fountain  made  of  gold. 

2 He,  milking  for  dear  meath  the  heavenly  udder, 
hath  sat  in  the  ancient  gathering*-place. 

Washed  by  the  men,  far-sighted,  strong,  thou 
streamest  to  the  honourable  reservoir. 

X.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Run  onward  to  the  reservoir  and  seat  thee  : cleansed 

by  the  men  speed  forward  to  the  battle  ! 

Making  fliee  glossy  like  an  able  courser,  forth  to  the 
sacred  grass  with  reins  they  lead  thee. 

2 Indu,  the  well-armed  God  is  flowing  onward,  he  who 
averts  the  curse  and  guards  the  homesteads, 

Father,  begetter  of  the  Gods,  mdst  skilful,  the 
buttress  of  the  heavens  and  earth's  supporter. 

XI.  India. 

Like  kine  unmilked  we  call,  aloud, # hero,  to  thee,  * 

and  sing  thy  praise, 

Looker  on  heavenly  li^ht,  Lord  of  this  moving  world, 
Lord,  Indra!  of  what  moveth  not. 

The  two  stanzas,  the  first  of  which  is  repeated  from  I.  vi.  i.  3.  1,  are 
taken  from  Rigveda  IX.  107,  4,  5,  ascribed  to  the  Seven  Rishis.  The 
metre  is  Pragatha,  that  is,  stanza  1 is  Brihati  and  stanza  2 Satobrihati. 

1 Law : Law-ordained  sacrifice. 

2 Thou  streamest : the  ltigveda  has  arshafi,  he  streams.  To  the 
honourable  reservoir:  or  dhanmam  may  be  an  adjective,  meaning 
nutritious,  annum , food,  beiijg  understood  : — ‘thou  streamest  forth 
commendable  nutritious  food:’ 

Rigveda  IX.  $7.  1,  2.  Ascribed  to  Usana  Kavya.  The  metre  is 
Trislitup.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  i.  4.  1.  » 

ltigveda  VII.  32.  22,  23.  Ascribed  to  Vasishtha.  The  metre  is 
Brihati  in  stanza  1 and  Satobrihati  in  stanza  2.  Stanza  1 is  a repe- 
tition of  I.  iii.  i.  5.  1. 


1*21  TUB  HYMNS  OF  [PAp.T  II. 

( 

2 None  other  like  to  thee,  of  earth  or  of  the  heavens, 
hath  been  or  ever  will  be  born. 

Desiring  horses,  Indra  Maghavan!  and  kino,  as  men 
of  might  we  call  on  thee. 

XII.  India. 
With  what  bplp  will  he  come  to  us,  wonderful,  ever- 

waxing  friend  ? 

With  what  most  mighty  company  ? 

2 What  genuine  and  most  liberal  draught  will  spirit 

thee  with  juice  to  burst 
Open  e'en  strongly-guarded  wealth  ? 

3 Do  thou  who  art  protector  of  us  thy  friends  who 

praise  thee 

With^hundred  aids  approach  us! 

XIII.  Indra. 
As  cows  low  to  their  calves  in  stalls,  so  with  our 

songs  we  glorify 

This  Indra,  even  your  wondrous  God  who  checks 
attack,  who  takes  delight  in  precious  juice. 

2 Celestial,  Bounteous  *giver,  girt  about  with  might, 
rich,  mountain-like,  in  pleasant  things, — 

Him  swift  we  seek  for  foodful  booty  rich  iA  kinc, 
brought  hundredfold  and  thousandfold. 

The  triplet—  stanza  1 being  a repetition  of  I.  ii.  ii.  3.  5 — is  taken 
from  Rigveda  I'V.  31.  1—3,  ascribed  to  VamadeVa.  The  metre  is 
Gayatri,  stanza  3 being  in  the  Padanichrit  variety  with  seven  syllables 
instead  of  eight  in  each  Pada. 

1 He  : Indra. 

2 Genuine  and  most  liberal:  producing  good  results  and  causing 
thee  to  be  most  bountiful.  Strongly -guarded  wealth:  the  treasure- 
houses  of  our  enemies ; or  the  precious  waters  shut  up  in  the  clouds. 

Rigveda  VIII.  77.  1,  2.  Ascribed  to  Nodhas.  The  metre  is  Pragatha. 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  1.  iii.  i.  5.  4. 

As  cows : the  cows  which  are  milked  for  sacrificial  purposes,  whoso 
calves  are  shut  up  during  the  performance  of  the  ceremony. 


1. 


THE  SAM  A VEDA. 


125 


.1.  15.1 


XIV.  Indra. 
Loud-singing  at  the  sacred  rite  where  Soma  flows, 

we  priests  invoke 

With  haste,  that  he  may  help,  as  the  bards  cheri- 
sher,  Indra  who  findeth  wealth  for  you. 

2 Whom,  fair  of  cheek,  in  rapture  .of  the  juice,  the 
firm  resistless  slayers  hinder  not : 

Giver  of  glorious  wealth  to  him  who  sings  his  praise, 
honouring  him  who  toils  and  pours. 

XV.  Soma  Pavamana. 
In  -sweetest  and  most  gladdening  stream  flow  pure, 

O Somh,  on  thy  way, 

Pressed  out  for  Indra,  for  his  drink  ! 

2 Fiend-queller,  friend  of  all  men,  he  hath  i\ached  his 
shrine,  his  dwelling-place 
Within  the  iron-hammered  vat. 


Rigvcda  VHr.  55.  1,  2.  Ascribed  to  Kali,  son  of  Prag&tha.  The 
metro  is  PrAgitha.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iih  i.  5.  5. 

1 We  jwiesta  invoke : the  const  root  mn  is  difficult.  I follow  Pro- 

fessor Ludwig,  and  take  huve , an  infinitive,  as  equivalent  to  the  first 
person  plural.  * 

2 Fair  of  cheek : or,  with  fair  helm.  I follow  the  reading  of  the 
Rigveda,  made  svsipram,  instead  of  madeshu  sfpram,  which  is  unin- 
telligible. Slayers:  muro : the  word  is  difficult,  meaning  ‘mortals:’ 
according  to  Sayana,  ‘ walls  ’ according  to  Bcnfey*  ‘ destroyers  ’ or 
‘enemies’  according  to  Grassmann.  See  Geldner,  Vedische  Studien , 

II.  pp.  16—22. 

The  triplet  is  taken  from,  Rigveda  IX.  1.  1 — 3.  Ascribed  to 
Madliuchchhandas.  The  metre  is  Cayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition 
of  I.  v.  ii.  4.  2+  * 

2 Within  the  iron-hammered  vat : within  the  tub  or, vat  that  has 
been  hammered  or  formed  with  a tool  of  ayas,  iron  or  other  metal. 
The  Rigveda  has  ayohatam)  instead  of  ayohatef  agreeing  with  yo?mn} 
and  drund , with  the  plank  (of  the  Soma  press),  instead  of  drone : ‘lie 
hath  with  the  plank  attained  unto  His  shrine,  his  iron-fashioned  home.’ 


126  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PAST  II. 

3 Be  tliou  best  Vritra-slayer,  beat  granter  of  room, 
most  libera] : 

Promote  our  wealthy  princes’  gifts ! 

XVI.  Fortin  Pavamaua. 

For  Indra  flow,  thou  Soma,  on,  as  most  inspiring 
drink,  most«rich  in  sweets, 

Great,  most  celestial,  gladdening  drink ! 

2 Thou  of  whom  having  drunk  the  Steer  acts  like  a 
steer : having  drunk  this  that  finds  the  light, 

He,  excellently  wise,  hath  come  anear  to  food  and 
booty,  even  as  Etasa. 

XVII.  Indm. 

To  Indra,  to  the  mighty  let  these  golden-coloured 
juices  go, 

Drops  born  as  Law  prescribes,  that  find  the  light  of 
heaven!  * 

2 This  juice  that  gathers  spoil  flows,  pressed,  for  Indra, 

for  his  maintenance. 

Soma  bethinks  him'of  the  conqueror,  as  he  knows. 

3 Yea,  Indra  in  tfie  joys  of  this  obtains  the  grasp 

that  gathers  spoil, 

And,  winning  waters,  wields  the  mighty  thunderbolt. 


3 Vritra-slayer : or,  ‘ slayer  of  the  foe/ 

• 

Rigveda  IX.  108.  1,  2,  ascribed  to  Gauriviti.  The  metre  is  Kakup 
in  stanza  1,  and  Satobrihati  in  2.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition,of  I.  vi.  ii.  4. 1. 

2 The  Steer  acts  like  a steer : vrishabho  vrishdyate : the  manly  hero 
Indra  shows  his  manly  might,  iitasa : one  of  the  horses  of  the  Sun ; 
or  a horse  in  general : — ‘ as  a horse  comes  to  the  battle/ — S&yana. 

Rigveda  IX.  106. 1 — 3.  Ascribed  to  Agni  Chakshusha.  The  metro 
is  Ushnih.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  ii.  3.  1. 

2 For  his  maintenance : bhardya : or,  for  battle.  The  conqueror : 
Indra. 

3 Joys  of  this:  raptures  produced  by  draughts  of  Soma. 


i.  i.  19,.] 


THE  SJMAVEDA. 


127 


2 

3 


XVIII. 


Soma  Pavamana. 


For  first  possession  of  your  juice,  for  the  exhilarat- 
ing drink, 

Drive  ye  *way  the  dog,  my  friends,  drive  ye  the  long- 
tongued  dog  away  ! 


He  who  with  purifying  stream,  effused,  comes  flow- 
ing hitherward, 

Indu,  is  like  an  able  steed. 


With  prayer  all-reaching  let  the  men  tend  unassail- 
able Soma  : be 


The  stones  prepared  for  sacrifice  ! 


A IX.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Graciously-minded  he  is  flowing  on  his  way  to  win  dear 
names  o’er  wrhich  the  youthful  one  grow^  great. 

The  mighty  and  far-seeing  one  hath  mounted  now 
the  mighty  Sftrya’s  car  which  mov^s  to  every  side. 

2 The  speaker,  unassailable  master  of  this  prayer,  the 
tongue  of  sacrifice,  pours  forth  the  pleasant  ineath. 

As  son  he  sets  the  name  of  m.othcr  and  of  sire  in  the 
far  distance,  in  the  third  bright  realm  of  heaven. 


Rigveda  IX.  101.  1 — 3.  Ascribed  to  Andhtgu  and  others.  The 
metre  is  Anush  tup  in  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  ii.  1. 
1,  and  Gayatri  in  2 and  3.  , 

3 The  stones:  with  which  the  Soma  stems  are  crushed.  Instead  of 
yajiidya  santvadrayah  the  Rigveda  has  yajham  hinmnty  adribhih  : — 
* The  men  with  all-pervading  prayer  send  unassailable  Soma  forth,  by 
means  of  stoiles,  to  sacrifice.’ 

Rigveda  IX.  75.  1 — 3.  Ascribed*  to  Kavi.  The  metre  is  Jagati. 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  ii.  2.  1. 

2 Soma  is  called  speaker  % because  lie  makes  priests  eloquent,  and 
tongue  of  sacrifice  on  account  of  the  sound  ina  Ic  by  the  drops  of 
falling  juice.  The  second  line  is  obscure,  meaning  perhaps  that  Soma 
glorifies  and  exalts  to  the  distant  skies  the  names  of  his  parents,  that 
is  the  yajamdna  or  insti tutor  of  the  sacrifice  and  his  wife.  The  reading 
of  the  Rigveda  is  somewhat  different,  necessitating  the  taking  of 


128  THE  HYMNS  OP  f PART  11 

3 Sending  forth  flashes  he  hath  bellowed  to  the  jars, 
led  by  the  men  into  the  golden  reservoir. 

The  milkers  of  the  sacrifice  have  sung  to  him  : Lord 
of  th‘reo  heights,  thou  shinest  brightly  o’er  the 
Dawns. 

XX.  Agui. 

Sing  to  your*  Agni  with  each  song,  at  every  sacrifice 
for  strength  ! 

Come,  let  us  praise  the  wise  and  everlasting  God,  even 
as  a well-beloved  friend : 

2 The  Son  of  Strength ; for  is  he  not  our  gracious 
Lord  ? Let  us  serve  him  who  bears  our  gifts ! 

In  battles  may  he  be  our  help  and  streilgthener,  yea, 
be  the  saviour  of  our  lives  ! 

XXI.  Agni, 

0 Agni,  come ; far  other  songs  of  praise  will  I sing 
forth  to  tnee. 

Wax  mighty  with  these  Soma  drops ! 

tritiyam  with  ndma.  According  to  Sflyana,  the  son  is  the  sacrifice^ 
who  takes  a thirli  priestly  mine,  such  as  Somaydjin , or  Somayaga 
sacrifice^  a name  not  recognized  by  his  parents  as  not  having  been 
given  at  his  birth ; the  first  being  life  own  proper  name  and  th6  second 
that  of  the  constellation  under  which  he  was  born.  The  third  bright 
realm : a threefold  division  of  the  rorhai{as}  skies  or  luminous  realms, 
is  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Bigseda.  See  liigveda,  General  Index, 
Three.  Milkers •:  the  priests  who  press  and  draw  out  the  sacrificial 
juice.  Lord  of  three  heights : dwelling  in  three  high  places,  heaven, 
the  mountain-top,  and  the  altar  or  place  of  sacrifice.  • 

liigveda  VI.  48.  1,  2.  Ascribe*!  to  Samyu.  The  metre  is  Brihatl 
in  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of*  I.  i.  i.  4.  1,  and  Satobrihati  in 
stanza  2.  # % 

2 The  Son  of  Strength : produced  by  violent  agitation  of  the  fire- 
sticks.  Who  bears  our  gifts : who  presents  our  oblations  to  the  Gods. 
Lives : literally,  bodies  or  selves. 

liigveda  VI.  16.  16 — 18.  Ascribed  to  Bharadvaja.  Stanza  1 is  a * 
repetition  of  I.  i.  i.  1.  7. 


I i.  23, J THE  SlMAVEDA.  129 

2 Where’er  thy  mind  applies  itself,  vigour  preeminent 

hast  thou  : 

There  wilt  thou  gain  a dwelling-place. 

3 Not  for  % moment  only  lasts  thy  bounty,  Lord  of 

many  men  : 

Our  service  therefore  shalt  thou  gain. 

XXII.  Indra. 

We  call  on  thee,  0 matchless  one.  We,  seeking  help, 
possessing  nothing  firm  ourselves, 

Call  on  thee,  wondrous,  thunder-armed  : 

2 On, thee  for  aid  in  sacrifice.  This  youth  of  ours,  the 
bold,  the  terrible,  hath  gone  forth. 

We  therefore,  we  thy  friends,  Indra,  have  chosen 
thee,  spoil-winner,  as  our  succourer. 

XXIII.  Indra. 

So,  Indra,  friend  of  song,  do  we  draw  near  to  thee 
with  longing  ; we  have  streamed  to  thee 
Coming  like  Hoods  that  follow  floods. 

2 As  rivers  swell  the  ocean;  s p,  here],  our  prayers 

increase  thy  might, 

Though  of  thyself,  0 Thunderer,  waxing  day  by  day. 

3 With  holy  song  they  bind  to  the  broad  wide-yoked 

car  the  bay  steeds  of  the  quickening  God, 

Bearers  of  Indra,  yoked  by  word. 


3 Not  for  a moment* only  : Sayatia  understands,  this  differently: — 

‘ Let  not  thy  ftill  (blaze)  be  distressing  to  the  aye.’— Wilson. 

Rigveda  VIII.  21.  1,  2.  Ascribed* to  Sobhari.  The  metre  is  Kakup 
in  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  I.  v.  i.  2.  10,  and  Satobrihati  in 
stanza  2.  * , 

2 This  youth  of  ours : apparently  the  noble  institntor  of  the  sacri- 
fice. Gone  forth : to  battle. 

Rigveda  VIII.  87.  7—9.  Ascribed  to  Nrimcdha.  The  metre  is  Kakup 
in  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  I.  v.  i.  2.  8,  Ushnih  in  2,  and 
Pura-ushnih  (12  + 8 + 8)  in  3. 

9 


130 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[ PAiiT  11 


CHAPTER  II. 

I-  India. 

Invite  *ye  Indra  with  a song  to  drink  .your  draught 
of  Soma  juice, 

All-conqueriijg  Satakratu,  most  munificent  of  all 
who  live! 

2 Lauded  by  many,  much-invoked,  leader  of  song, 

renowned  of  old : 

His  name  is  Indra,  tell  it  forth ! 

3 Indra,  the  dancer,  be  to  us  the  giver  of  abundant 

wealth : 

The  mighty  bring  it  us  knee-deep ! 

II.  Indra. 

Sing  ye  a dong,  to  make  him  glad,  to  Indra,  Lord  of 
tawny  steeds, 

The  Soma-drinker,  0 my  friends ! 

2 To  him,  tlyj  bounteous,  say  the  laud,  and  let  us  glorify, 

as  men 

May  do,  the  giver  of  true  gifts  ! 

3 0 Indra,  Lord  of  boundless  might,  for  Us  thou  seek- 

est  spoil  and  kine, 

Thou  seekest  gold  for  us,  good  Lord ! 


Rigvcda  VII T.  81.  1—3.  Ascribed  to  Srutakaksha  or  Sukaksha. 
The  metre  is  Anushtup  in  stanzSt  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  1.  ii,  ii.  2. 
1,  and  Gayatri  in  2 and  3. 

3 The  dancer:  active  in  battle,  dancer cf  the  war-dxncc.  Knee-deep: 
abhijhu : or,t  close  to  us,  into  our  la}). 

liigveda  VII.  31.  1 — 3.  Ascribed  lo  Vasishtha.  The  metre  is 
Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  ii.  ii.  2.  2. 

3 Good  Lord : or,  Vasu. 


i.  ii.  4.] 


THE  SAM  A VEDA. 


131 


HI*  Indra. 

This,  even  this,  0 Indra,  we  implore:  as  thy  devoted 
friends, 

The  Kansas  praise  thee  with  their  hymns1. 

2 Naught  else,  O Thunderer,  have  I praised  in  the 

skilled  singers  eulogy : 

On  thy  laud  only  have  I thought. 

3 The  Gods  seek  him  who  presses  out  the  Soma;  they 

desire  not  sleep : 

They  punish  sloth  unweariedly. 

. IV.  Indra. 

For  Indrd,  lover  of  carouse,  loud  be  our  songs  about 
the  juice  : 

Let  poets  sing  the  song  of  praise ! 

2 We  summon  Indra  to  the  draught,  in  whom  all 

glories  rest,  in  whom  * 

The  seven  communities  rejoice. 

3 At  the  Trikadrukas  the  Gods  span  sacrifice  that  stirs 

the  mind  : * t 

Let  our  songs  aid  and  prosper  it  I 

Higvoda  VIII.  2.  16 — 18.  Ascribed  to  Medhatithi  and  Priyamedhas. 
The  metre  is  Gayatri.  Stanza  I is  a repetition  of  I.  ii.  ii.  2.  3. 

3 They  punish  sloth  unweariedly : or,  as  Sayana  explains,  who  is 

followed  by  Benfcy  and  Grassmann  : — ‘Alert  they  come  to  the  carouse.’ 

, * 

Tligveda  VITI.  81.  19 — -21.  Ascribed  to  Smtaknksha  or  Sukaksha. 
The  metre  is  Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of*  I.  ii.  ii.  2.  4. 

2 Seven  communities  : , or  assemblages  : sapta  sain  so  dak : scj)tem 
eonsessus : probably  meaning  all  the  congregation  of  worshippers. 
According  to  Sayana,  ‘the  seven  associated  priests.’ 

3 Trikadrukas : according  to  Sayana  these  are  the  first  three  days 
of  the  Abhiplava  ceremony.  According  to  some  modern, scholars  they 
are  probably  three  peculiar  Soma- vessels,  or  an  oblation  consisting  of 
three  offerings  of  Soma.  Span  sacrifice : the  due  performance  of 
sacrifice  is  regarded  as  an  unbroken  thread.  Stirs  the  mind : attracts 
the  attention  of  the  Gods. 


132 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  IL 


V.  Indra. 

Here,  Indra,  is  thy  Soma  draught,  made  pure  upon 
the  sacred  grass : 

Run  hither,  come  and  drink  thereof! 

2 Strong-rayed!  adored  with  earnest  hymns!  this  juice 

is  shed  for  thy  delight : 

Thou  art  invoked,  Akhaijdala! 

3 To  Kundap&yya,  grandson's  son,  grandson  of  Srin- 

gavrish ! to  thee, 

To  him  have  I addressed  my  thought. 

VI.  Indra. 

Indra,  as  one  with  mighty  arm,  gather  for  us  with 
thy  right  hand 

Manifold  and  nutritious  spoil ! 

Kigveda  VFTI.  17.  11—13.  Ascribed  to  Irimbithi.  The  metre  is 
Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  ii.  ii.  2.  5. 

2 Strang-rayed : the  words  sdchigo  and  sdc/uptljana  have  not  been 
satisfactorily  expedited  bj»  the  Commentator,  and  their  meaning  is 
still  uncertain.  According  to  Sayana  the  former  may  mean  ‘ thou 
whose  cattle  are  strong/  or  ‘thou  whose  radiance  is  renowned and 
the  latter  ‘ thou  of  renowned  adoration  ’ or  ‘ whose  hymns  are  re- 
nowned.’ Akhandala:  meaning,  perhaps,  destroyer  (of  enemies). 
This  appellation  of  Indra  does  not  occur  kgain  in  the  Kigveda. 

3 Kundapdyya  and  Sringavrtih  appear  here  to  be  names  of  men. 
According  to  Sayana,  kundapduya  is  the  name  of  a certain  Soma-cere- 
mony, and  the  grandson  or  offspring  of  Srmgavrish  is  Indra  himself. 

‘ ( Indra),  who  wast  thi  offspring  of  Sringavrish,  of  whom  the  kunda- 
j)dyya  rite  was.  the  protector,  (flic  sages)  have  fixed  (of  old)  their 
minds  upon  this  ceremony.’  See  ProfesW  Wilson’s  note  who  observes 
that  ‘ the  construction  is  loose,  and  the  ^explanation  not  very  satis- 
factory.’ Professor  Grassmann  places  the  stanza  in  his  Appendix  as 
having  no  connexion  with  the  rest  of  the  original  hymn. 

Rigveda  VIII.  70.  1 — 3.  Ascribed  to  Kusidin.  The  metre  is 
Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  ii.  ii.  3.  3. 


i.  ii.  8.]  THE  SAMAVEDA.  13*3 

2 We  know  thee  mighty  in  thy  deeds,  of  mighty 

bounty,  mighty  wealth, 

Mighty  in  measure,  prompt  to  aid. 

3 Hero,  wljen  thou  wouldst  give  thy  gifts,  'neither  the 

Gods  nor  mortal  men 
Restrain  thee  like  a fearful  bull. 

VII.  Indra. 
Hero,  the  Soma  being  shed,  I pour  the  juice  lor 

thee  to  drink  : 

Sate  thee  and  finish  thy  carouse ! 

2 Let  not  the  fools,  or  those  who  mock,  beguile  thee 

when  they  seek  thine  aid  : 

Love  not  the  enemy  of  prayer ! 

3 Here  let  them  cheer  thee  well  supplied  with  milk 

to  great  munificence  : 

Drink  as  the  wild  bull  drinks  the  lak^i ! 

VIII.  Indra. 
Here  is  the  Soma  juice  expressed  : O Vasu,  drink 

till  thou  art  full : 

Undaunted  God,  we  give  it  thee  ! 

2 Washed  by  the  men,  pressed  out  with  stones,  strain- 
ed through  the  filter  made  of  wool, 

Tis  like  a courser  bathed  in  streams. 


Rigsreda  VIII.  45.  22 — 24.  Ascribed  to  Trisokax  The  metre  is 
Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  f.  ii.  ii.  2.  7. 

2 The  enemy  of  prayer:  brahmadvisham:  h;#n  who  hates  Brahmans, 

according  to  Say  ana.  # 

3 Wild  bull : the  gaura  (Boft  Gaurns),  a kind  of  wild  buffalo. 

Rigveda  VI  [ft  2.  1—3.  ‘Ascribed  to  Medhatithi  and  Priyamedhas. 
The  metre  is  Gayatri..  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  ii.  j.  3.  10. 

2 Strained  through  the  filter  made  of  wool:  more  literally,  ‘well 
cleansed  by  tail-wool  of  the  sheep,’  the  material  of  which  the  sieve, 
strainer,  or  filter  used  for  clearing  and  purifying  the  Soma  juice  was 
made. 


h4  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  11 

3 This  juice  have  we  made  sweet  for  thee  like  barley, 
blending  it  with  milk. 

Indra,  I call  thee  to  our  feast. 

IX.  Indra. 

So,  Lord  of  affluent  gifts,  this  juice  hath  been 
expressed  for  thee  with  strength  : 

Drink  of  it,  thou  who  lovest  song ! 

2 Incline  thy  body  to  the  juice  which  suits  thy  godlike 

nature  well : 

Thee,  Soma-lover!  let  it  cheer! 

3 0 Indra.  let  it  enter  both  thy  flanks,  enter  thy  head 

with  prayer, 

With  bounty,  hero  1 both  thine  arms ! 

X.  Indra. 
0 come  ye  ^hither,  sit  ye  down : to  Indra  sing  ye 

forth  your  song, 

Companions,  bringing  hymns  of  praise! 

2 Laud  Indra,  richest  of  the  rich,  who  ruleth  over 

noblest  wealth,  • , 

Beside  the  flowing  Soma  juice ! 

3 May  he  stand  near  us  in  oKr  need  with  all  abundance 

for  our  wealth : 

With  strength  may  he  come  nigh  to  us! 


3 Like  barley ; »or,  like  the  sacrificial  cake  made  of  barley-meal. 

Rigveda  lit.  51.  IP— 12.  Ascribed  to  Visvamitra.  Tho  metre  is 
Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  ii.  ii.  3.  1. 

2 Soma-lover  l somya  : the  Rigveda  has  the  accusative  somyam . 

3 Thy  flanks : to  feed  thee.  Thy  hbad : to  fill  it  with  gracious 
thoughts.  Thine  arms ; to  strengthen  theo  to  win  wealth  for  us. 

t b 

Rigveda  I.  5.  1 — 3.  Ascribed  to  Madhuchchhandas.  The  metro  is 
Gayatri.  Staiiza  1 is  a repetition  of  1.  ii.  ii.  2.  10. 

1 Companions : the  call  is  addressed  to  tho  ministoring  priests. 

3 With  all  afmndance : the  Rigveda  has  purandhydm}  in  all  abun- 
dance ; that  is,  even  when  tho  God’s  assistance  may  not  seem  to  be 
needed.  With  strength : vdjcbhih : or,  with  riches. 


i.  ii.  12.] 


THE  SlMA  VEDA . 


135 

XI.  Indra. 
In  every  need,  in  every  fray  we  call,  as  friends, 

to  succour  us, 

Indra,  the  mightiest  of  all. 

2 I call  him,  mighty  to  resist,  the  hero  of  our  ancient 

home, 

Thee  whom  my  sire  invoked  of  aid. 

3 If  he  will  hear  us,  let  him  come  with  succour  of 

a thousand  kinds, 

With  strength  and  riches,  to  our  call! 

XII.  Indra. 
When  Somas  flow  thou  makest  pure,  Indra,  thy 

mind  that  merits  laud 

For  gain  of  strength  that  ever  grows,:  for  great  is  he. 

2 In  heavens  first  region,  in  the  seat  of  Gods,  is  he 

who  brings  success, 

Most  glorious,  prompt  to  savp,  who  wins  the  water- 
floods. 

3 Him  I invoke,  to  wintthe  spoil,  even  mighty  Indra 

for  the  fray. 

Be  thou  most  near,  to  us  for  bliss,  a friend  to  aid ! 


Itigveda  I.  30.  7*  9,.  8.  Ascribed  to  Sunahscpa.  The  metro  is 
G&yatri.  SiUnza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  ii.  ii.  »2.  (J. 

2 The  hero  of  our  ancient  home  \ the  tutelary  God  of  our  family. 
According  to  Sayana,  tho  ancient  home  is  heaven.  Thee : tve  = tvdm . 
Or  the  meaning  may  bo,  4 Him  whom  thy  sire  invoked  of  old.*  See 
Ludwig’s  Commentary,  V.*p.  12. 

Rigvcda  VIII.  13.  1—3.  Ascribed  to  N&rada.  The  metre  is  Usbjnilu 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iv.  ii.  5.  1. 

2 In  heaven’s  first  region  : in  the  highest  heaven. 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[FART  II. 


NQ 


XIII.  Agni. 

With  this  mine  homage  I invoke  Agni  for  you,  the 
Son  of  Strength, 

Dear,  wisest  envoy,  skilled  in  noljle  sacrifice, 
immortal,  messenger  of  all. 

2 His  two  red  horses,  all-supporting,  let  him  yoke  : let 
him,  well-wtfrshipped,  urge  them  fast ! 

Then  hath  the  sacrifice  good  prayers  and  happy  end, 
the  heavenly  gift  of  wealth  to  men. 

XIV.  Dawn. 

Advancing,  sending  forth  her  rays,  the  daughter 
of  the  Sky  is  seen. 

The  mighty  one  lays  bare  the  darkness  with  her  eye, 
the  friendly  Lady  makes  the  light. 

2 The  Sun  ascending,  the  refulgent  star,  pours  down 
his  beams*  together  with  the  Dawn. 

0 Dawn,  at  thine  arising,  and  the  Sun’s,  may  we 
attain  the  share  allotted  us! 

•XV . Asvins. 

These  morning  sacrifices  call  you,  Asvins,  /it  the 
break  of  day. 

For  help  have  I invoked  you  rich  in  power  and 
might : for,  house  by  hous'e,  ye  visit  all. 


Rigveda  VII.  16.  1,  2.  Ascribed  to  Vasishtha.  The  metre  is 

Brihati  in  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  I.  i.  i.  5.  1‘  and  Satobri- 
hati  in  2. 

Rigveda  VII.  81.  1,  2.  Ascribed  to  Vasishtha.  The  metre  is 

Brihati  in  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  1.  iv.  i.  2/ 1,  and  Satobri- 
hati  in  2. 

Rigveda  VII.  74.  1,  2.  Ascribed  to  Vasishtha.  The  metre  is 

Brihati  in  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  I.  iv.  i.  2.  2,  and  Satobri- 

hati  in  2. 


i.  ii.  17.] 


THE  SAMAVEDA. 


1.97 

2 Ye,  heroes,  have  bestowed  wonderful  nourishment: 
send  it  to  him  whose  songs  are  sweet ! 

One-minded,  both  of  you,  drive  your  car  down  to  us  : 
drink  ye  the  savoury  Soma  juice  ! 

XVI.  Soma  Pavamana. 

After  his  ancient  splendour,  they,  the  bold,  have 
drawn  the  bright  milk  from 
The  Sage  who  wins  a thousand  spoils. 

2 In  aspect  he  is  like  the  Sun  ; he  runneth  forward  to 

the  lakes : 

Seven  currents  flowing  to  the  sky. 

3 He,  while  they  purify  him,  stands  high  over  all 

things  that  exist — 

Soma,  a God  as  SArya  is. 

XVII.  Soma  Pavamana. 

By  generation  long  ago  this  God,  engendered  for  the 
Gods, 

Flows  tawny  to  the  straining  cloth. 

2 According  to  primeval  plftn;  this  ppet  hath  been 
strengthened  by 

The  sage  as  God  for  al^the  Gods. 

Rigveda  IX.  54.  1 — 3.  Ascribed  to  Avatsara.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

1 They , the  bold : the  Soma-pressers,  who  roughly  bruise  the  plant. 
The  Sage  : or  rishi  ; the  Soma  plant. 

2 The  lakes:  according  to  Sayana,  thirty  ukthapdtras , vessels  or 
libations  ottered  during  the  recitation  of  an  uktha.  Seven  currents : 
corresponding  in  number  to  the  seven  great  rivers  known  to  the  early 
Aryans,  Indus,  the  five  rivers  of  tlic*Panjab  (Vitasta,  Asikni,  Parushni, 
Vipas,  Sutudri),  and  Saras  v at  $ or  Kubha. 

Stanza  1 is  token  from  l^igvcda  IX.  3.  9,  ascribed  to  Sunahsepa,  and 
stanza  2 in  part  and  stanza  3 are  taken  from  hymn  42.  2,  4 of  the 
same  Book,  ascribed  to  Medhatithi.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

2 This  poet : the  wise  Soma.  The  sage : the  priest.  The  reading 
of  the  Rigveda  differs: — ‘this  Soma  with  his  stream,  effused,  Flows 
purely  on,  a God  for  Gods.’ 


ft8  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  It. 

3 Shedding  the  ancient  fluid  thou  art  poured  into  the 
cleansing  sieve  : 

Roaring,  thou  hast  produced  the  Gods. 

XVIII.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Bring  near  us  those  who  stand  aloof:  strike  fear 
into  our  enemy  : 

0 Pavamana,  find  us  wealth  I 

2 To  him  the  active,  nobly  barn. 

3 Sing  ye  your  songs  to  him,  0 men  ! 

XIX.  goma  Pavamana. 

The  Somas  skilled  in  song,  the  waves,  have  led  the 
water  forward,  like 
Buffaloes  speeding  to  the  woods. 

2 With  strearp  of  sacrifice  the  brown  bright  drops  have 

flowed  with  strength  in  store 
Of  kine  into  the  wooden  vats. 

3 To  Indra,  Vayu,  Varuna,  to  Vishnu  and  the  Maruts  let. 
The  Soinayaiccs  fl©w. expressed. 


« 

3 The  Eigveda  has  ‘ he  is  poured/  ‘ he  hath  produced.’ 

Stanza  1 is  taken  from  Eigveda  IX.  *19.  6,  ascribed  to  Asita  or 
Devala.  The  metre  is  Gay&tri.  The  fragments  2 and  3 are  taken  from 
I.  vi.  i.  1.  1 and  tl.  i.  i.  1.  I,  respectively. 

1 Those  who  stand  aloof  i who  refuse  to  take*' part  in,  our  religious 
ceremonies,  or  are  otherwise  unfriendly. 

2 To  him : the  Gods  have  come  to  In^lu. 

Eigveda  IX.  33.  1 — 3.  Ascribed  to  Trita.  The  n&trc  is  G&yatrL 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  v.  ii.  5.  2. 

1 The  Somas the  waves:  that  is,  the  Soma  juices  in  waves. 

3  In  the  Eigveda  the  verb  is  in  the  indicative  mood,  arshanti 
instead  of  arshantu . 


i.  ii.  21.] 


Tim  sAmavkda. 


13!) 


XX.  Soma  Pavamana. 

O Soma,  for  the  feast  of  Gods,  rivcr-like  he  hath 
swelled  with  surge, 

Sweet  with  the  liquor  of  the  stalk,  as  one ’who  wakes, 
into  the  vat  that  drops  with  meath. 

2 Like  a dear  son  who  must  be  decked,  the  bright  and 
shining  one  hath  clad  him  in  his  robe. 

Men  skilful  at  their  work  drive  him  forth,  like  a car, 
into  the  rivers  from  their  hands. 

XXI.  Soma  Pavamana. 

The  rapture -shedding  Somas  have  flowed  forth  in 
our  assembly,  pressed 
To  glorify  our  liberal  lords. 

2 Now  like  a swan  he  maketh  all  the  company  sing 

each  his  hymn  : 

He  like  a steed  is  bathed  in  milk. 

3 And  Trita’s  maidens  onward  urge  the  tawny-colour- 

ed with  the  stones, 

Indu  for  Indra,  for  his  drink. 


Rigveda  IX.  107.  12, 13.  Ascribed  to  the  Seven  ltishis.  The  metre 
is  Pragatha.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  i.  3.  4. 

1 0 Soma he:  a sort  of  periphrasis  for  Soma. 

2 The  bright:  in  the  liigvcda  the  adjective  qualifies  robc}  meaning 
the  .milk  that  covers  the  Soma  juice. 


Kigveda  IX.  32.  1,  3,  2.  Ascribed  to  Syavasva.  The  metre  is 
Clayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  T.  v.  ii.  5.  1. 

2 Like  a swan : as  a sentinel  Kama  or  swan  at  the  approach  of 
danger  sounds  a note  of  alarm  which  is  answered  by  all  the  rest. 
Ludwig. 

3 Trita's  maidens  : as  Trita  is  the  celestial  purifier  of  the  heavenly 
Soma  for  Indra,  tho  fingers  of  the  earthly  purifiers  are  called  his 
dames  or  maidens. 


[PART  II. 


HO  THE  SlMAVEDA. 

XXII.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

Herewith  flow  on,  thou  friend  of  Gods!  Singing, 
thou  runnest  round  the  sieve  on  every  side. 

The  streams  of  meath  have  been  effused. 

2 Lovely,  gold-coloured,  on  he  flows. 

3 For  him  who  presses,  of  the  juice. 


Stanza  1 is  taken  from  Higvcda  IX.  106.  14,  ascribed  to  Agni  Ohak- 
shusha.  The  metre  is  Ushnih  in  the  Kigveda,  hut  here  Padas  2 and  3 
are  transposed.  The  fragments  2 and  3 are  taken  from  I.  vi.  ii.  3.  11, 
and  I vi.  ii.  1.  9,  respectively. 


BOOK  II. 


CHAPTER  I. 

I.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Soma,  as  leader  of  the  song,  flow  onward  with  thy 

wondrous  aids 

For  holy  lore  of  every  sort ! 

2 Do  thou  as  leader  of  the  song,  stirring  the  waters 

of  the  sea, 

Flow  onward,  known  to  all  mankind  ! 

3 0 Soma,  O thou  Sage,  these  worlds  stand  ready  to 

enhance  thy  might : 

The  milch-kine  run  for  thy  behoof. 

II.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Indu,  flow  on,  a mighty  juice;  glorify  us  among 

the  folk  : 

Drive  all  our  enemies  away  ! * » , 

2 And  in  thy  friendship,  Indu*  most  sublime  and 

glorious,  may  we 

Subdue  all  those  who  war  with  us  ! 

3 T1  lose  awful  weapons  which  thou  hast,  sharpened  at 

point  to  strike  men  down — 

Guard  us  therewith  from  every  foe  ! , 


Rigvcda  IX.  62.  25—27.  Ascribed  to  Japiauhgni.  The  metre  is 
Oayatri. 

1 Holy  lore : or,  sage-like  thoughts. 

2 Known  to  all  mankind : viwacharshane : the  Rigvcda  has  visva- 
mejaya,  ‘thou  who  movcst'aH.' 

3 The  milch-kine : which  supply  the  milk  which  is  lnixcd  with  the 
Soma  juice.  The  Rigvcda  has  sindhavah , ‘ the  rivers.' 


Rigveda  IX.  61.  28 — 30.  Ascribed  to  Amahiyu.  The  metre  is 
Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  v.  ii.  5.  3. 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PAETll 


Ui 


III.  Soma  Pavamfcna. 

O SosfA,  thou  art  strong  and  bright,  potent,  0 God, 
with  potent  sway, 

Thou,  mighty  one,  ordainest  laws. 

2 Steer-strong  thy  might  is  like  a steer’s,  steer-strong 

the  wood,  steer-strong  the  juice  : 

A steer  indeed,  0 Steer,  art  thou. 

3 Thou,  Indu,  as  a vigorous  horse,  hast  neighed 

together  steeds  and  kino  : 

Unbar  for  us  the  doors  to  wealth  1 

IV.  Soma  P/ivamAna, 

« 

Fou  thou  art  strong  by  splendour:  we,  0 Pavanulna, 
call  j*u  thee, 

The  brilliant  looker  on  the  light. 

2 When  thoij  art  sprinkled  with  the  streams,  thou 

readiest,  purified  by  men, 

• Thy  dwelling  in  the  wooden  vat. 

3 Do  thou,  rejoicing,  nobly-armed!  pour  upon  us  heroic 

strength*:  , 

0 Indu,  come  theu  hitherward  1 


Rigvcda  IX*  64.  1 —3.  Ascribed  to  Kasyapa.  The  metre  is  Gayatrl. 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  i.  2.  8. 

2 The  original  is : — vrishnas  tc  vrishnyam  sivo  vrishd  vanam  vrishd 
sntuh  | sa  tvam  vrishan  vrished  it  si.  Some  of  the  Vcdic  poets  delight 
in  the  repetition  of  the  word  vrishan , signifying  nn\le,  masculine, 
manly,  ltero,  as  well  as  bull,  stallion,  etc. 

3 Neighed  together : collected,*  through  the  efficacy  of  the  sound 
thou  makest  in  dropping  through  the  tilter,  and  enriched  us  with 
steeds  and  kinc. 

Jtigveda  IX.  65.  4,  6,  5.  Ascribed  to  Bhrigu,  or  to  Jamadagni.  The 
metre  is  Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  L v.  ii.  5.  4. 

2 Purified  hy  men : dyubhih , that  is,  by  the  priests.  The  ltigveda 
has  gahhastyoh,  1 in  both  fists  or  hands.’ 


7-] 


TI1E  SlMA  VEDA. 


143 


ii.  i. 


V.  Soma  Pavatnana. 

We  seek  to  win  thy  friendly  love,  even  Pavam&na’s 
flowing  o’er 

The  limit,  of  the  cleansing  sieve. 

2 With  those  same  waves  which  in  their  stream  o’er- 

flow  the  purifying  sieve, 

Soma,  be  gracious  unto  us ! 

3 O Soma,  being  purified,  bring  us  from  all  sides — for 

thou  canst — 

Riches  and  food  with  hero  sons  1 


• VL  Agni. 

Aoni  we  choose  as  envoy,  skilled  performer  of  this 
holy  rite, 

Hotar,  possessor  of  all  wealth. 

2 With  constant  calls  they  invocate  Agni,  Agni,  Lord 

of  the  house, 

Oblation-bearer,  much-beloved. 

3 Bring  the  Gods  hither,  Agni,  born  for  him  who 

trims  the  sacred  grass  : 

Thou  art  our  Hotar,  meet  for  praise  ! 

VII.  Mitra- Vanina. 

Mitra  and  Varuna  we  call  to  drink  the  draught  of 
Soma  juice, 

Those  born  endowed  with  holy  strength. 

Kigvcda  IX.  61.  4-  G.  Ascribed  to  Amahiyu.  rfhe  metre  is  GAyatri. 

* 

liigvcda  I.  12.  1—3.  Ascribed  to  ^ledhatithi.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  Li.  1.  3. 

2 Agni,  Agni:  Agni  again  and  again.  Lord  of  the  house:  vispatim: 
or,  Lord  of  the  clan  or  community. 

3 For  him  who  trims  the  sacred  grass  : the  priest  who.  prepares  the 
Kusa  grass  which  is  strewn  on  the  altar  and  on  the  floor  of  the  sacri- 
ficial chamber. 


Kigvcda  I.  23.  4 — G.  Ascribed  to  Medhatithi.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 


1*44  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  II. 

2 Those  who  by  Law  uphold  the  Lay,  Lords  pf  the 

shining  light  of  Law, 

Mitra  I call,  and  Varuija. 

3 Let  Varuna  be  our  chief  defence,  let  ‘Mitra  guard 

us  with  all  aids, 

Both  make  usarich  exceedingly ! 

VIII.  Indra. 

Indra  the  singers  with  high  praise,  Indra  reciters 
with  their  lauds, 

Indra  the  choirs  have  glorified. 

2 Indra  is  close  to  his  two  bays,  with  chariot  ready 

at  his  word, 

Indra  the  golden,  thunder-armed. 

3 Help  us  in  battles,  Indra,  in  battles  where  thousand 

spoils  are  gained, 

With  awful  aids,  0 awful  one  ! 

4 Indra  raised  up  the'sun  aloft  in  heaven,  that  he  may 

see  afar : 

He  burst  the  mountain  for  the  kine. 


2 By  Law:  ritena  : ‘The  word  used  to-dcuote  the  conception  of  the 
order  of  the  world  is  rita.  Everything  in  the  universe  which  is 
conceived  as  shoeing  regularity  of  action  may  J>o  said  to  have  the  rita 
for  its  principle.  In  its  most  general  application  the  conception 
expressed  by  the  word  occupied  to  some  extent  the  place ‘of  natural  and 
moral  law,  fate,  or  the  will  of  a supreme  God.’ — Wallis,  The,  Cosmology 
of  the  Riyvetla , p.  92. 


Rigveda  I.  7.  1.  2,  4,  3.  Ascribed  to  Macihuchchhandas.  The  metro 
is  G&yatri.  Stanza  1*  is  a repetition  of  I.  iii.  i.  1.  5. 

2 The  golden : richly  decorated  ( sarvdbharanabh'dshitah )}  according 
to  Sayana. 

4 The  mountain:  the  cloud.  The  kine : the  waters. 


ii  j.  10.]  THE  SJ.UA  VEDA.  145 

IX.  Indra-Agni. 
To  Indra  and  to  Agni  we  bring  reverence  high  and 

holy  bymn, 

And,  craving  help,  soft  words  with  prayer. 

2 For  all  these  holy  singers  thus  implore  these  twain 

to  succour  them, 

And  priests  that  they  may  win  them  strength. 

3 Eager  to  laud  you,  we  with  songs  invoke  you,  bearing 

sacred  food, 

Fain  for  success  in  sacrifice. 

X.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Flow  onward,  mighty  with  thy  stream,  inspiriting 
the  Maruts’  Lord, 

Winning  all  riches  with  thy  power ! 

2 I send  thee  forth  to  battle  from  the  press,  0 Pava- 

m&na,  strong, 

Sustainer,  looker  on  the  light ! “ 

3 Acknowledged  by  this^song  of  niiue,  flow,  tawny- 

coloured,  with  thy  stream  : 

Incite  to  battle  thine  ally  1 


Kigveda  VII,  94.  4 — b,  Ascribed  to  Vasishtha.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

2 Priests:  sabMhah  is  thus  explained  by  the  Commentators.  Tho 
word  appears  to  have  originally  meant  closo  associates  or  companions. 

ftigveda  IX.  65.  10 — 12.  Ascribed  to  Bhfigu  or  to  Jamadagui, 
The  metre  is  G&yatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  v.  ii.  4.  3. 

1 From  the  press:  onyoh:  according  to  Sayapa  dkartdram  onyoh 
Cleans,  the  sustainer  of  heaven  and  earth. 

3 Song ; vipd : according  to  Sayapa,  ‘ finger.’  Thine  ally : India, 

10 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  11. 


146 


XI.  Soma  Pnvatn&ua. 

A red  Bull  bellowing  to  the  kine,  thou  goest,  caus- 
ing the  heavens  and  earth  to  roar  and  thunder. 

A shotit  is  heard  like  Indra’s  in  thev  battle : thou 
flowest  on,  sending  this  voice  before  thee. 

2 Swelling  with  milk,  abounding  in  sweet  juices,  urg- 

ing the  meath-rich  plant  thou  goest  onward. 
Making  loud  clamour,  Soma  Pavam&na,  thou  flowest 
when  thou  art  effused  for  Indra. 

3 So  flow  thou  on  inspiriting,  for  rapture,  turning  the 

weapon  of  the  water’s  holder  ! 

Flow  to  us  wearing  thy  resplendent  colour,  effused 
and  eager  for  the  kine,  0 Soma ! 

XII.  Judra. 

That  we  may  win  us  wealth  and  power  we  poets, 
verily,  caU  on  thee  : 

In  war  men  call  on  thee,  Inrlra,  the  hero’s  Lord, 
in  the  steeds  race-course  call  on  thee. 

2 As  such,  0 wonderful,  whose  hand  holds  thunder, 
praised  as  rnighiy,  Caster  of  the  Stone  ! 

Pour  on  us  boldly,  Indra,  kine  and  chayiot-steeds, 
ever  to  be  the  conqueror’s  strength ! 


Rigveda  IX.  97.  13—15.  Ascribed  to  Vasishtha  and  others.  The 
metre  is  Trishtup. 

1 Thou  goest. *....thou  flowest:  in  the  Rigveda  these  verbs  are  in 

the  third  person  singular.  Sending before  thee:  prachodayan : 

the  Rigveda  has  pracl&tayany  ‘making  intelligible:’  ‘letting  this 
voice  bo  known.’ 

2 Loud  clamour : santanim : a continuous  stream,  according  to  Sayana. 

3 Turning  the  weapon  of  the  water's  holder : that  is,  of  Vritra,  and 
so  causing  the  rain  to  flow.  The  Rigveda  has  vadhusnaih  instead  of 
vadhasnum:  ‘ aiming  death-shafts  at  him  who  holds  the  waters.’ 

Rigveda  VI.  46.  1,  2.  Ascribed  to  Samyu.  The  metre  is  Brihatt 
in  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  I.  iii.  i.  5.  2,  and  Satobrihati  in  2, 

1 In  war  : vritreshu : literally,  among  enemies. 


ii.  i.  15.] 


THE  S AM A VEDA. 


U7 

XIII.  Indra. 
To  you  will  I sing  Indra’s  praise  who  gives  good 

gifts,  as  well  we  know ; 

The  praise  of  Maghavan  who,  rich  in  treasure,  aids 
his  singers  with  wealth  thousandfold. 

2 As  with  a hundred  hosts,  he  rushes  boldly  on, 
and  for  the  offerer  slays  his  foes.* 

As  from  a mountain  flow  the  water-brooks,  thus 
flow  his  gifts  who  feedeth  many  a one. 

XIV.  Indra. 
O Thunderer,  zealous  worshippers  gave  thee  drink 

this  time  yesterday : 

So,  Indra,  listen  here  to  him  who  offers  lauds:  come 
near  unto  our  dwelling-place  ! 

2 Lord  of  bay  steeds,  fair-helmed,  rejoice  thee : thee 
we  seek.  Here  the  disposers  wait  on  thee. 

Thy  glories,  meet  for  praise  ! are  ^highest  by  the 
juice,  O Indra,  lover  of  the  song. 

XV.  . Soma  Pavamatm. 

Flow  onward  with  that  ju’icd  of  thihe  most  excel- 
lent, that  brings  delight, 

Slaying  the  wicked,  de^r  to  Gods  1 


Valakhilya  1.  1,  2.  Ascribed  to  Praskanva.  The  metre  is  Brihati 
in  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  I.  iii.  i.  5.  3,  and  Satobphati  in  2. 
2 .ds  with  a hundred  hosts : satd/ukeva ; * like  it  weapon  with  a 

hundred  edges.5 — Cowell. 

* - - 

Rigveda  VIII.  88.  1,  2.  The  Rishi  is  Nfimedha.  The  metre  is 
Pragatha.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iv.  i.  1.  10. 

1 Thee  we  seek : the  Rigveda  has  tad,  that,  instead  of  tam.  Disposers: 
vedhnsah : the  priests  who  order  and  arrange  religious  ceremonies. 

2 Meet  for  praise  ! : ukthya  : the  Rigveda  has  ukthyd : — ‘ Thy 
loftiest  glories  claim  the  laud.5 


Rigvoda  IX.  61.  19 — 21.  The  Rishi  is  Amahiyu.  The  metre  ia 
C&yatrt.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  v.  ii.  4,  4. 


1'48  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  //. 

2 Killing  the  foeman  and  his  hate,  and  daily  winning 

spoil  and  strength, 

Gainer  art  thou  of  steeds  and  kine. 

3 Red-hued,  be  blended  with  the  mil^  that  seems 

to  yield  its  lovely  breast, 

Falcon-like  resting  in  thine  home  I 

XVI.  Soma  Pavam&ua. 
As  Pftshan,  Fortune,  Bhaga,  comes  this  Soma  while 

they  make  him  pure. 

He,  Lord  of  all  the  multitude,  hath  looked  upon  the 
earth  and  heaven. 

2 The  dear  eows  sang  in  joyful  mood  together  to  the 

gladdening  drink. 

The  drops  as  they  are  purified,  the  Soma  juices, 
make  the  paths. 

3 0 Pavam&na,  bring  the  juice,  the  mightiest,  worthy 

to  be  famf'd, 

Which  the  Five  Tribes  have  over  them,  whereby  we 
may  win  opulence! 

XVII.  Soma  Pavamamt. 
Far-seeing  Soma  flows,  the  Steer,  the  Lord«of  hymns, 

the  furtherer  of  days,  of  mornings,  and  of  heaven. 
Breath  of  the  rivers,  he  hath  roared  into  the  jars, 
and  with  the  help  of  sages  entered  Indra’s  heart. 


2 The  foeman  and  his  hate  : or,  the  unfriendly  Vritra. 

3 Milk : dhenubhih : literally,  milch-cows. 

Rigveda  IX.  101.  7—9.  Ascribed  to  Nahusha  M&nava.  The  metre 
is  Anushtup,  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  oi  I.  vi.  ii.  1.  2. 

2 The  path : ‘the  road  (to  the  object  of  pur  desire) * — Stevenson. 

3 Which  the  Five  Tribes  have  over  them : which  has  power  over  the 
Five  great  Aryan  Tribes. 

Rigveda  IX.  86.  20 — 22.  Ascribed  to  the  Prisnayah.  The  metro 
is  Jagati.  Stanza  1 ia  a repetition  of  I.  vi,  ii.  2.  6. 


ii.  i.  18.] 


THE  SlMAVEDA. 


H9 


2 On,  with  the  sages,  flows  the  poet  on  his  way,  and, 

guided  by  the  men,  hath  streamed  into  the  vats. 
He,  showing  Trita’s  name,  hath  caused  the  meath  to 
flow,  yicreasing  V&yu’s  strength  to1  make  him 
Indra’s  friend. 

3 He,  being  purified,  hath  made  the  mornings  shine, 

and  it  is  he  who  gave  the  rivers  'room  to  flow. 
Making  the  three-times  seven  pour  out  the  milky 
stream,  Soma,  the  cheerer,  yields  whate’er  the 
heart  finds  sweet. 


XVIII.  India. 

For  so  thou  art  the  brave  man’s  friend ; a hero, 
too,  art  thou,  and  strong  r 
So  may  thy  heart  be  won  us ! 

2 So  hath  the  offering,  wealthiest  Lord,  been  paid  by 

all  the  worshippers  : * 

So  dwell  thou,  Indra,  even  with  us  ! 

3 Be  not  thou  like  a slothful  priest,  O Lord  of  spoil 

and  strength  : rejoice 
In  the  pressed  Soma  blent  with*  milk  ! 


2 The  poet : the  wise  singer,  Soma.  Showing  Trita1 s name : liter- 
ally, begetting,  that  is,  making  (janayan)  the  name  of  Trita ; meaning, 
probably,  as  Professor  Ludwig  suggests,  reminding  us  of  Trita,  the 
celestial  preparer  of  the  heavenly  Soma  for  Indra.  • ‘ Generating  the 
water  of  the  threefold  (Indra)/ — Wilson.  Increasing  Vdyu’s  strength  : 
the  reading  ef  the  Rigveda  differs  : — ‘that  lydra*  and  that  Vayu  may 
become  his  friends/ 

3 The  three-times  seven  : the,  seven  celestial  rivers,  corresponding  to 
the  rivers  of  earth,  multiplied  by  three  to  accord  with  the  threefold 
division  of  the  heavens.  According  to  Sayana,  the  cows  that  supply 
the  sacrificial  milk  are  meant. 

Rigveda  VIII.  81.  28 — 30.  The  Rishi  is  Srutakaksha  or  Sukaksha., 
The  metre  is  Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iii.  i.  4.  10. 

3 Priest ; brahmtt ; Brahman,  or  praying  priest. 


150 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  II. 


XIX.  Indra. 

All  sacred  songs  have  magnified  Indra  expansive  as 
the  sea, 

Best  of  all  warriors  borne  on  cars,  the  Lord  of 
heroes,  Lord  of  strength. 

2 Lord  of  migty,  Indra,  may  we  ne’er,  strong  in  thy 

friendship,  be  afraid ! 

We  glorify  with  praises  thee,  the  never  conquered 
conqueror. 

3 The  gifts  of  Indra  from  of  old,  his  saving  succours, 

never  fail, 

When  to  his  worshippers  he  gives  the  hoon  of  booty 
rich  in  kine. 


CHAPTER,  II. 

I.  Soma  Pavamarm. 

These  rapid  Soma-drops  have  been  poured  through 
the  purifying  sieve 
To  bring  us  all  felififties. 

2 Dispelling  manifold  mishap,  giving  the  courser’s 

progeny, 

Yea,  and  the  warrior  steed’s,  success. 

3 Bringing  prosperity  to  kine,  they  pour  perpetual 

strengthening  food 
On  us  for  noble  eulogy. 

— 1 * 

Rigveda  I.  11.  1—3.  4 The  Rishi  is  Jetar.  The  metre 'is  Anush  tup. 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iv.  iic  1.  2. 

Rigveda  IX.  62.  1—3.  The  Rishi  is  Jamadagni.  The  metre  is 
Gayatri. 

2 This  stanza  may  be  alternatively  rendered : — 4 Mighty,  dispelling 
many  woes,  bringing  our  progeny  success,  And  freely  giving  warrior 
steeds.’  The  Rigveda  has  tand  instead  of  tmand  and  arvate  instead 
of  arvatah. 

3 Strengthening  food : i$dm> 


ii.  ii.  3.] 


THE  SAMAVEDA. 


l£l 


II.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Kino  Pavamkna  is  implored  with  holy  songs,  on 
mans  behalf, 

To  travel#  through  the  realm  of  air. 

2 Pressed  for  the  banquet  of  the  Gods,  O Soma,  bring 

us  might,  and  speed, 

Like  beauty  for  a brilliant  show  ! 

3 Bring  us,  0 Indu,  hundredfold  increase  of  kine, 

and  noble  steeds, 

The  gift  of  fortune  for  our  help  l 

III.  Soma  Pavamann. 

With  sacrifice  we  seek  to  thee  fair  cherisher  of 
manly  might 

In  mansions  of  the  lofty  heavens. 

2 Drink  gladdening,  crusher  of  the  bold,  praiseworthy, 

with  most  mighty  sway, 

Destroyer  of  a hundred  forts. 

3 Hence  riches  came  to  thee,  the  King,  0 sapient  one  : 

the  strong- winged  bird, 

Unwearied,  brought  thee  fron?the  sky. 

Rigveda  IX.  65.  16.  18.  17.  ^The  Rishi  is  Bhrigu  or  Jamadagni. 
The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

1 With  holy  songs : medh&hhih : the  productions  of  the  intellect. 
Through  the  realm  of  air : antarihhe  : perhaps  a figurative  expression, 
as  Benfey  suggests,  for  the  space  between  the  Soma  press  and  the 
vessel  which  receives  the  juice. 

Rigveda  IX.  48.  1,  2,  3,  5,.  4.  The  Rishi, is  &avi.  The  metre  is. 
G&yatri.  # 

2 Destroyer  of  a hundred  fyrts : the  cloud-castles  of  the  demons  of 
the  air,  or  the  strongholds  of  the  hostile  aborigines,  being  destroyed 
by  Indra  under*  the  inspiriting  influence  of  Soma. 

3 Hence : from  the  destruction  of  the  forts.  Them  strong-winged 
bird : suparnah : the  falcon  which  l rought  the  Soma  from  Svarga  or 
heaven.  The  reading  of  the  Rigveda  varies : — ‘ Hence,  sapient  one  ! 
the  falcon,  strong  of  wing,  unwearied,  brought  thee  down,  Lord  over 
riches,  from  the  sky.* 


f6o  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART 11 


4 And  now,  sent  forth,  he  hath  attained  to  mighty 

power  aud  majesty, 

Active  and  ready  to  assist. 

5 That  each  may  see  the  light,  the  bird  brought  us  the 

guard  of  Law,  the  friend 
Of  all,  the  speeder  through  the  air. 


• IV.  Soma  Pavnmana. 

For  food,  flow  onward  with  thy  stream,  cleansed  and 
made  bright  by  sapient  men  : 

Indu,  with  sheen  approach  the  milk  ! 

2 While  thou  art  cleansed,  song-lover,  bring  comfort 

and  vigour  to  the  folk,  f 

Poured,  tawny  one  ! on  milk  and  curds ! ^ 

3 Purified  for  the  feast  of  Gods,  go  thou  to  Indra’s 

restihg-place, 

Resplendent,  furthered  by  the  strong ! 

Y.  Agni. 


By  Agni  Agni  is  inflamed,  Lord  of  the  house,  wise, 
young,  who  bears 
Our  gifts  the  ladfe  is  his  mouth. 


4 He : Soma.  This  anil  the  following  stanza  are  transposed  in  the 
Itigveda.  4 

* 5 The  friend  of  all:  sddhdranam:  or,  the  common-possession.  Ue 
speeder  through' the  air:  raja  st  nr  am : which  %ftna  explains  by 

udakasya  prerakam : ‘ the  showerer  of  water.  — W llson.  Cf.  stanza 
of  the  preceding  hymn. 


Ri»vcda  IX.  64.  13 — 15.  The  Rishi  is  Kpsyapa.  The  metre  is 
Gavatri.  Stanza  l'is  prepetition  of  I.  vi.  i.  2.  9.  . . . . 

S Reitina-place : the  vessel  prepared  to  receive  the  libations  intended 
for  the  S The  word  niMelilam  t is,  literally,  a sett  ed  place,  a 
rendezvous.  Bcnfcy  translates  it  by  Palast,  palace,  furthered:  fotal., 
for  which  the  Bigveda  has  yatah,  ' guided.’  The  strong : the  pries  s. 


Ri-vedal.12.6, 8,9.  The  Rishi  is  MedMtithi.  The  metre  is  G&yatrl. 

\ BV  Agni  Agni  it  inflamed : the  fire  into  which  the  oblation  m 
poured  is 'kindled  by  the  application  of  fire  P^uc^  by  attn  im  . 
Young : newly  bom  each  time  the  hre  is  produced.  The  ladle . use 
for  pouring  the  sacrificial  butter  into  the  fire. 


ii.il.  7.]  THE  SAMArEDA.  1S73 

2 God,  Agni,  be  his  sure  defence  who,  lord  of  sacrifi- 

cial gifts, 

Worshippeth  thee  the  messenger. 

3 Be  grackms,  brilliant  God!  to  him  Who,  rich  in 

sacred  gifts,  would  fain 
Call  Agni  to  the  feast  of  Gods. 

VI.  Mitrn -Vanina. 

Mitra  of  holy  strength  I call,  and  foe-destroying 
VaruQa, 

Who  perfect  prayer  with  offered  oil. 

2 By  Law,*0  Mitra,  Varuna,  Law-strengtheners  who 

cleave  to  Law, 

Have  ye  obtained  your  lofty  power. 

3 The  Sages,  Mitra,  Varuna,  of  wide  dominion,  mighty 

ones, 

Bestow  on  us  effectual  strength. 

VII.  M amts. 

So  mayst  thou  verily  be  seen  , coming  with  fearless 
Indra  : both 

Of  equal  splendour,  bringing  bliss! 


Rigveda  I.  2.  7 — 9.  The  Rishi  is  Madhuchchhandaa.  The  metro 
is  Gayatri. 

1 Perfect : m ike  complete  and  effectual.  With  offered  oil : ghritdchim : 
accompanied  with  offerings  of  ghritam , ghi , ^clarified  butter  or  sacri- 
ficial oil. 

2 By  Law : in  accordance  with  ritam,  the  eternal  law  or  everlasting 
order  of  the  universe. 

Rigveda  I.  6.  7,  4,  5.  The  Rishi  is  Madhuchchhandaa.  The  metre 
is  Gayatri. 

1 Thou:  the  host  of  Manits  or  Storm-gods  is  addressed  in  the 
singular  number. 


f54  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  II. 

2 Thereafter  they,  as  is  their  wont,  resumed  the  state 

of  new-born  babes, 

Taking  their  sacrificial  name. 

3 Thou,  Indra,  with  the  rapid  Gods  wha shatter  even 

what  is  firm, 

Even  in  the  cave  didst  find  the  cows. 

VIII.  Indra-  Agni. 

I  call  the  twain  whose  deed  wrought  here  hath  all 
been  famed  in  ancient  time  : 

Indra  and  Agni  harm  us  not  ? 

2 The  strong,  the  scatterers  of  the  foe,  Indra  and  Agni 

we  invoke  : 

May  they  be  kind  to  one  like  me  t 

3 Ye  slay  our  Ary  a foes,  0 Lords  of  heroes,  slay  our 

D&sa  foes : 

Ye  drive  all  enemies  away. 


2 Rmtmed  the  state  of new-born  babes : the  meaning  is  ‘that  the 
storms  burst  forth  from  the  womb  of  the  sky  as  soon  as^ndra  arises 

t * 

to  do  battle  against  the  demon  of  darkness.  As  assisting  Indra  in 
this  battle,  the  Maruts,  whose  name  retained  for  a long  time  its  purely 
appellative  meaning  of  storms,  attained  their  rank  as  deities  by  the 
side  of  Indra,  or  as  the  poet  expresses  it,  they  assumed  their  sacred 
name.’  See  Mai  Muller,  Vedic  Hymns , Part  I.  pp.  36,  37.  The  cave : 
the  thick  dark  cloud.  The  cows : streams  of  wpter  and  beams  of  light 
which  follow  their  effusion : ‘ bright  ones.’— M.  Miiller..  ‘ 

Rigveda  VI.  60.  4 — 6.  The  Rishi'is  BharadvAja.  The  metre  is 
Gayatri. 

1 Whose  deed  wrought  here : according  to  Stevenson,  Benfey,  and 
Grassmann,  the  creation  of  the  universe  is  ascribed  to  Indra  and 
Agni : — ‘ for  by  you  this  whole  world  was  formed,  according  to  the 
hymns  of  the  sages.’— Stevenson. 

3 Ddsafoei:  the  hostile  non- Aryan  aborigines* 


iL  ii.  10.] 


THE  SAMAVEDA. 


15^ 


IX.  Soma  Pavam&ua. 
The  living  drops  of  Soma  juice  pour,  as  they  flow, 

the  gladdening  drink, 

Intelligent  drops  above  the  station  of  tile  sea,  ex- 
hilarating, dropping  meath. 

2 May  Pavam&na,  King  and  God,  speed  with  his  wave 

over  the  sea  the  lotty  rite  ! 

Do  thou  by  Mitra’s  and  by  Varuna’s  decree  flow 
furthering  the  lofty  rite  : 

3 Far-seeing,  lovely,  guided  by  the  men,  the  God 

whose  habitation  is  the  sea  ! 

X.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

Three  are  the  voices  that  the  car-steed  utters:  he 

speaks  the  lore  of  prayer,  the  thought  (*f  Order. 
To  the  cows’  master  come  the  cows  inquiring:  the 
hymns  with  eager  longing  come  to  IjJoma. 

2 To  Soma  come  the  cows,  the  milch-kine  longing, 

to  Soma  sages  with  their  hymns  inquiring. 

Soma,  effused,  is  purified  arid  lauded  : our  hymns 
and  Trishtup  songs  unite.in  *Soma. « 

3 Thus,  Soma,  as  we  pour  thee*  into  vessels,  while 

thou  art  purified,  flow* for  our  welfare! 

Pass  into  Indra  with  great  joy  and  rapture  : make 
the  voice  swell,  and  generate  abundance  ! 

Rigveda  IX.  107.  14 — 10.  Ascribed  to  the  Seven  Eishis.  The 
metre  of  stanzas  1 and  2 is  Pragatha,  and  that  of  3 Dvipada  Vir&j  in 
the  text.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  i.  3.  8.  # 

1 The  sea : meaning,  in  this  stanza  and  in*  the  two  stanzas  that 
follow,  the  water  into  whioh  the  Sorri**  falls. 

t 

Rigveda  IX.  97.  34 — 36.  Ascribe  i to  ParAsara.  The  metre  is  Trishtup. 

1 Car-steed:  'tiahnih : a '•common  appellation  of  Soma.  See  Vedic 
Hymns,  I.  40. 

2 Is  purified  and  lauded : richyate  piiyamdnah : the  Rigveda  has 
pdyate  ajyamdnah,  ‘ is  purified  and  blended.’ 

3 With  great  joy  a?ul  rapture : vfihatd  madena  : the  Rigveda  has 
vrihatd  ravena , ‘ with  a mighty  roaring,’ 


156 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  IL 


XL  Indra. 

0 Indka,  if  a hundred  heavens  and  if  a hundred 
earths  were  thine, — 

No,  nbt  a hundred  suns  could  match  thee  at  thy 
birth,  not  both  the  worlds,  0 Thunderer, 

2 Thou,  hero,  #hast  performed  thy  hero  deeds  with 
might,  yea,  all  with  strength,  0 strongest  one. 
Maghavan,  help  us  to  a stable  full  of  kine,  0 
Thunderer,  with  wondrous  aids  l 

XII,  Indra, 

We  compass  thee  like  waters,  we  whose  'grass  is 
trimmed  and  Soma  pressed. 

Here  where  the  filter  pours  its  stream,  thy  worship- 
pers' round  thee,  0 V ritra-slayer,  sit, 

2 Men,  Vasu ! by  the  Soma  with  lauds  call  thee  to 

the  fore&ost  place. 

When  cometh  he  athirst  unto  the  juice  as  home, 
0 Indra,  like  a bellowing  bull? 

3 0 valiant, hero,  boldly  win  thousandfold  spoil  with 

Kanva’s  sons !. 

0 active  Maghavan,  with  eager  prayer  we  crave  the 
yellow-hued  with  store  of  kine. 


Rigveda  VIII.  59.  5,  6.  The  Rishi  is  Puruhanman.  The  metre  is 
Pr&gatha.  Stahza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iii.  ii.  4.  6. 

Rigveda  VIII.  33.  1*~3.  The  Rishi  is  Medhyatithi. r The  metre  is 
Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iii.  ii.  2.  9. 

1 We  compass  thee : there  is  no  verb  to  vaiyam , we ; the  construction 
is  difficult,  and  the  comparison  is  not  obvious. 

2 He...O  Indra  : a sort  of  periphrasis  for  Indra. 

The  Rigveda  has,  ‘ When  coniest  thou  1 1 As  home : familiar  to  thee 
as  thy  home. 

3 With  Kama's  sons : or,  by  them,  through  them,  for  their  sake. 
The  yellow-hued : there  is  no  substantive,  but  gold  must  be  intended* 


a.  a 15.3 


THE  SAMAVEDA . 


157 


XIII.  Indra. 
With  Plenty  for  his  true  ally  the  active  man  will 

gain  the  spoil. 

Your  Incirq,,  much-invoked,  I bend  with  song,  as 
bends  a wright  his  wheel  of  solid  wood. 

2 They  who  bestow  great  riches  love  not  paltry  praise  : 
wealth  comes  not  to  the  niggard  churl. 

Light  is  the  task  to  give,  O Maghavan,  to  one  like 
me  on  the  decisive  day. 

XIV.  Soma  Payam  ana. 
Three  several  words  are  uttered:  kine  are  lowing, 

cows  who  give  the  milk : 

The  tawny-hucd  goes  bellowing  on. 

2 The  young  and  sacred  mothers  of  the  holy  rite  have 

uttered  praise, 

Embellishing  the  Child  of  Heaven.'  m 

3 From  every  side,  0 Soma,  for  our  profit,  pour  thou 

forth  four  seas 

Filled  full  of  riches  thousandfold  ! 

XV.  Soma  Payamana. 

The  Somas,  very  rich  iy  sweets,  for  which  the  sieve 
is  destined,  flow 

Effused,  the  source  of  Indra’s  joy  : may  your  strong 
juices  reach  the  Gods ! 

Rigveda  VII.  32.  20.  21.  The  Rishi  is  Vasishtha.'  The  metre  is 
Pragatha.  » 

Rigveda  IX.  33.  4 — 6.  The  Rishi, is  Trita  A ptya.  The  metre  is 
Oayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  v.  ii.  4.  5. 

2 Mothers  of  the,  holy  rite : apparently,  the  cows  who  supply  milk 
for  libations.  The  Child  of* Heaven : Soma. 

3 Four  seas : imaginaiy  seas,  to  correspond  with  the  four  quarters 
of  heaven. 

Rigveda  IX.  101.  4 — 6.  The  Rishi  is  Yayati  Nahusha.  The  metre 
is  Anush  tup.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  ii.  1.  3. 


158  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  II. 

2 Indu  flows  on  for  Indra’s  sake, — thus  have  the 

deities  declared. 

The  Lord  of  Speech  exerts  himself,  controller  of  all 
powtfr  and  might. 

3 Inciter  of  the  voice  of  song,  with  thousand  streams 

the  ocean  flows, 

Even  Soma,  'Lord  of  opulence,  the  friend  of  Indra, 
day  by  day. 

XVI.  Soma  PavAmlna. 

Spread  is  thy  cleansing  filter,  Brahrnanaspati : as 
prince  thou  enterest  its  limbs  from  every  side. 

The  raw,  whose  mass  hath  not  been  heated,  gains 
not  this : they  only  which  are  dressed,  which  bear, 
attain  to  it. 

4 

2 High  in  the  seat  of  heaven  is  placed  the  scorchers 

sieve : its  threads  are  standing  separate,  glittering 
with  liglft. 

The  swift  ones  favour  him  who  purifieth  this:  with 
brilliancy  they  mount  up  to  the  height  of  heaven. 

3 The  foremost  spotted  Steer  hath  made  the  Mornings 

shine:  he  bellows,  flun  for  war,  among  created  things. 
By  his  high  wisdom  have  the  mighty  Sages  wrought : 
the  Fathers  who  behold  mankind  laid  down  the  germ. 


2 Exerts  himself:  the  meaning  of  makhasyate  is  uncertain:  ‘is 
inclined  to  sacrifice.’ — Benfey. 

Rigveda  IX.  83.  J — 3.  The  Rishi  is  Pavitra*  The  metre  is  Jagati. 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition <of  I.  vi.  ii.  2.  12.  f 

2 The  scorcher's  sieve : ‘ the  filter  of  the  foe-scorching  (Soma).’ — 
Wilson.  With  brilliancy:  the  Rigveda  has  chetasd , ‘with  consciousness.’ 

3 The  foremost  spotted  Steer:  Soma.  Bellows among  created 

things : mimeti  bhuvaneshu : the  Rigvedu  has  bibharti  bhuvandm , 
‘sustains  all  things  that  be.’  The  mighty  Sages:  mdydvinah:  those 
who  possess  supernatural  wisdom  and  power;  the  Gods.  The  Fathers: 
the  Manes  or  spirits  of  the  departed,  to  whom  is  ascribed  the  fruit- 
fulness of  heaven  and  earth,  which  give  birth  to  Gods  and  men.  See 
Rigveda  X.  64.  14. 


ii.  ii.  18.] 


THE  SJMAVEDA. 


159 


XVII.  Agni. 

Sing  forth  to  him,  the  holy,  most  munificent,  sublime 
with  his  refulgent  glow, 

To  Agni,*ye  Upastutas ! 

2 Worshipped  with  gifts,  enkindled,  splendid,  Magha- 
van  shall  win  himself  heroic  farm?  : 

And  will  not  his  more  plentiful  benevolence  come  to 
us  with  abundant  strength  ? 

XVIII.  Indm. 

We  sing  this  strong  and  wild  delight  of  thine  which 
conquers  in  the  fray, 

Which,  daster  of  the  Stone  ! gives  room  and  shines 
like  gold. 

2 Wherewith  thou  foundest  shining  lights  for  Ayu 

and  for  Manus  sake  : 

Now  joying  in  this  sacred  grass  thou  beamest  forth. 

3 This  day  too  singers  of  the  hymn  praise,  as  of  old, 

this  might  of  thine  : 

Win  thou  the  waters  eve^y/day,  thralls  of  the 
strong ! 


Rigveda  VIII.  92.  8,  9.  The  Rishi  is  Sobhari.  The  metre  is 
Kakup  in  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  I.  ii.  i.  2.  1,  and. Sato- 
brihati  in  2. 

1 Upastutas : singers  so  named  after  the  Rishi  Upastuta. 

2 Maghavan : the  rich  and  liberal  God  : here  a name  of  Agni. 
More  plentiful bhavtyasi : the  Rigveda  has  tiavtyasi,  ‘more  recent/ 

Rigveda  VNI.  15.  4 — 6.  The  Rishis  are  Goshuktin  and  Asvasuktin. 
The  metre  is  Ushnih.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iv.  ii.  5.  5. 

2 For  Ayu  ami  for  M arm's  sake : or  for  all  Aryan  men,  dyu  and 
manu  both  meaning  man.  Regarded  as  proper  names,  Ayu  is  the  son 
of  Pururavas  and  Urvasi  (See  Rigveda  X.  95),  and  Manu  is  the 
representative  Man,  the  father  of  the  human  race. 

3 Thralls  of  the  strong : vrishapatnth ; controlled  and  imprisoned 
ky  Vritra. 


THE  SAMAVEDA. 


[PART  II 


XIX.  Iudra. 

0 Indra,  hear  Tiraschi’s  call,  the  call  of  him  who 
serveth  thee. 

Satisfy  ‘him  with  wealth  of  kine  and«  valiant  off-* 
spring ! Great  art  thou. 

2 For  he,  0 Indra,  hath  produced  for  thee  the  newest 

gladdening  song, 

A hymn  that  springs  from  careful  thought,  ancient 
„ % and  full  of  sacred  truth. 

3 iliat  Indra  will  we  laud  whom  songs  and  hymns  of 

praise  have  magni§ed. 

Striving  to  win,  we  celebrate  his  many  deeds  of  hero 
might. 


ltigveda  VIII.  84.  4 — 6.  The  Risbi  is  Tiraschi.  The  metro  is 
Anush  tup.  Stanz^l  is  a repetition  of  1.  iv.  ii.  I.  5. 

2 Newest ancient : recent  in  fown  and  expression,  hut  ancient 

in  its  subject.  See  Muir,  Original  Sanskrit  Texts , III.  pp.  238,  239. 


BOOK  III. 


CHAPTER  I. 

I*  Soma  PavamUna. 

Fleet  as  swiff  steeds  thy  cows  celestial  h#ve  been 
poured,  0 Pavam&na,  with  the  milk  into  the  vat. 

Sages  who  make  thee  bright,  0 friend  whom  Rishis 
love,  have  shed  continuous  streams  from  out  the 
?ealm  of  air.  * 

2 The  beams  of  Pavamana,  sent  from  earth  and  heaven, 

his  ensigns  who  is  ever  stedfast,  travel  round. 

When  on  the  sieve  the  golden-hued  is  cleaiiscd  he  rests 
within  the  jars  as  one  who  seats  him  in  his  place. 

3 O thou  who  seest  all  things,  sovran  ias  thou  art  and 

passing  strong,  thy  rays  encompass  every  form. 

Pervading  with  thy  natural  powers  thou  flowest  on, 
and  as  the  whole  world’s  Lord,  O Soma,  thou  art 
King. 

II.  Soma  Pavamana. 

From  heaven  hath  Pavamana  made,  as  ’twere,  tile 
marvellous  thunder,  and 

The  lofty  light  of  all  mankind. 

Rigveda  IX.  86.  4,  6,  5.  Ascribed  to  the  Sikata&.  The  metre  is 
Jagati.  , w 

1 Cows:  dhenavah:  the  drops  of  Soma  juice.  The  Rigveda  has 
dhtjuvah , * swift  as  thought.’  0 friend  whom  Rishis  love : rishishdna : 
the  word  does  not  occur  elsewhere,  and  its  precise  meaning  is  uncertain. 
c 0 mAe-enjoyed.’ — Wilson.  ‘ Thou  who  playest  the  part  of  a Rishi/ — 
Ludwig.  From  out  the  realm  of  air : perhaps  a figurative  expression 
for  the  space  between  the  Soma  press  and  the  vessel  which  receives 
the  juice.  Instead  of  antarikshdt  the  Rigveda  has  rishayah^mshis , in 
apposition  with  vedasaht  sages.  ^ 

Rigveda  IX.  61.  16 — 18.  The  Rishi  is  Amahiyu.  The  metre  is 
Gayatrl.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  v.  ii.  5.  8. 

ii  * 


m tiie  arms  of  [fart  //. 

2 The  gladdening  and  auspicious  juice  of  thee,  0 Pava- 

ni&na,  King ! 

Flows  o’er  the  woollen  straining- cloth. 

3 Thy  juice,  0 Pavamuna,  sends  its  rayrf'  abroad  like 

splendid  skill, 

Like  lustre,  all  heaven’s  light,  to  see. 


III.  Sonm  Pavamana. 

Impetuous,  bright,  have  -they  come  forth,  unwearied 
in  their  speed,  like  bulls, 

Driving  the  black  skin  far  away. 

2 May  we  attain  the  bridge  of  bliss,  leaving  the 

bridge  of  woe  behind  : 

The  riteless  Dasa  may  we  quell ! 

3 The  mighty  Pavamana’s  roar  is  heard  as  ’twere  the 

rush  of  rain  : 

The  lightning-flashes  move  in  heaven. 

4 Indu,  pour  out  abundant  food  with  store  of  cattle 

and  of  gold, 

Of  heroes,  Soma!  and  of»steeds! 

5 Flow  onward,  dear  to  all  mankind!  filljull  the 

mighty  heaven  and  earth, 

As  Dawn,  as  Stirya  with  his  beams  I 

6 On  every c side,  0 Soma,  flow  round  us  with  thy 

protecting1  stream, 

As  RasA  flows  around  ,the  world  ! 


Rigveda  IX.  41.  1 — 6 (the  entire  hymn).  , The  Risk’  is  Medhy4tithu 
The  metre  is  Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  i.  1.  5. 

2 My  translation  of  the  first  lino,  in  which  I follow  Prof.  Ludwig, 
is  somewhat  conjectural,  as  the  meaning  of  durdyyxm  is  uncertain. 

6 Rmd : a mythical  river  which  flows  round  the  world ; originally 
the  name  of  a real  river  known  to  the  Zjroastrians  as  Ranha. 


iii.  i.  6.] 


THE  SAMA  VEDA. 


163 


IV.  Soma  Pavamana. 
Flow  on,  0 thou  of  lofty  thought,  flow  swift  in  thy 

beloved  form, 

Saying,  Jjgo  where  dwell  the  Gods. 

2 Preparing  what  is  unprepared,  and  bringing  store  of 

food  to  man, 

Make  thou  the  rain  descend  from  heaven! 

3 Even  here  is  he  who,  swift  of  course,  hath  with  the 

rivers  wave  flowed  down 
From  heaven  upon  the  straining-cloth. 

4 With  might,  producing  glare,  the  juice  enters  the 

purifying  sieve, 

Far-seeing,  sending  forth  its  light. 

5 Inviting  him  from  far  away,  and  even  from  near  at 

hand,  the  juice 

For  Indra  is  poured  forth  as  meath. 

6 In  union  they  have  sung  the  hymn:  with  stones 

they  urge  the  golden-hued, 

Indu  for  Indra,  for  his  drink. 

V.  Soma  Pavamana. 
The  glittering  maids  spnd  Shra  forth,  the  glorious 

sisters,  close-allied, 

Send  Indu  forth,  their  mighty  Lord. 

Rigveda  IX.  39,  The  entire  hymn,  stanzas  3 and  4 being  transposed. 
The  9>islii  is  Brihanmati.  The  metre  is  Gayatri.  • 

2 Preparing  what  is  unprepared : ‘ consecrating  the  tinconsccrated 
worshipper  of  place,’  is  Sayana’s  explanation.*  The  rain : vpshtim , as 
in  the  Rigveda,  must  be  read  instead  of  prishlim. 

5 Him:  Indra. 

6 Indu  for  Indra , for  his  drink : the  Rigveda  has  yondvritasya  sidata , 

* Sit  in  the  shrine  of  sacrifice/ — addressed  to  the  Gods,  according  to 
Sayana. 

Rigveda  IX.  65.  1 — 3.  The  Rishi  is  Blirigu,  or  Jamadagni.  The 
metre  is  Gayatri. 

1 The  glittering  maids : the  fingers,  perhaps  with  reference  to  the 
gold  rings  worn  by  the  priests  when  they  pnss  the  Soma.  Sdra : 


164  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  11 

2 Pervade,  0 Pavamdna,  all  our  treasures  with  repeat- 

ed light, 

Pressed  out,  0 God  thyself,  for  Gods ! 

3 Pour  oh  us,  Pavam&na ! rain,  as  service  and  fair 

praise  for  Gods  : 

Pour  forth  unceasingly  for  food  ! 

VI.  Agui. 

The  watchful  guardian  of  the  people  hath  been  born, 
Agui,  the  very  strong,  for  fresh  prosperity. 

With  oil  upon  his  face,  with  high  heaven-touching 
flame,  he  shineth  splendidly,  pure,  for  the  Bbaratas. 

2 0 Agni,  the  Angirasas  discovered  thee  what  time 
thou  layest  hidden,  fleeing  back  from  wood  to  wood. 

Thou  by  attrition  art  produced  as  conquering  might, 
and  men,  0 Angiras,  call  thee  the  Son  of  Strength. 

1 • 

Surya,  the  Sun-god ; here  said  to  mean  Soma : — ‘ the  invigorating/ — 
Wilson.  Or  the*  meaning  may  be  that  the  fingers  of  the  priests  send 
forth  Indu  or  Soma  in  the  same  manner  as  the  bright  rays  of  morning 
introduce  the  Sun.  , 

4 » 

2 Pressed  out , 0 God  thyself)  for  Gods:  the  Rigveda  has  devo 
devebhyaspari , ‘God,  coining  hither  from  the  Gods/  * 

3 As  service : to  give  us  cause  to  worship. 

Rigveda  V.  11.  1,  6,  2.  The  Rishi  is  Sutambhara.  The  metre  is 
Jagati. 

1 Bharatas:  meaning  ‘warriors/  ‘Priests/  according  to  Sayana 
and  Mahidhara. 

2 Angirasas : members  of  a family  of  priestly  Fathers,  regarded  as 
the  typical  first  sacrificcrs.  Tkoudayest  hidden : alluding  to  the  flight 
and  capture  of  Agni.  See  Rigveda  I.  65.  1,  and  X.  51.  It  is  said 
that  Agni,  fearing  to  share  the  fate  of  his  three  elder  brothers  who 
had  perished  in  the  service  of  the  Gods,  fled  away  and  hid  himself. 
The  Gods  or  the  Angirasas  discovered  him  and  persuaded  him  to 
return  to  his  sacred  duties.  Angiras : Agni  is  called  the  best  or  oldest 
of  the  Angirasas,  as  his  aid  was  necessary  for  the  due  performance  of 
sacrifice.  Son  of  Strength:  produced  by  violent  agitation  of  the 
fire  drill. 


iii.  i.  8.] 


THE  SAMAVEDA. 


16*5 

3 The  men  enkindle  Agni  in  his  threefold  seat,  ensign 
of  sacrifice,  the  earliest  household-priest. 

With  Indra  and  the  Gods  together  on  the  grass  let 
the  wisp  priest  sit  to  complete  the  sacrifice ! 

VII.  Mitra- Vanina. 
This  Soma  hath  been  pressed  for  you,  Law-strength- 

eners,  Mitra,  Varuna  ! 

List,  list  ye  here  to  this  my  call ! 

2 Both  Kings  who  never  injure  aught  have  come  to 

their  sublimest  home, 

Th$  thousand-pillared,  firmly-based. 

3 Worshipped  with  fat  libation,  Lords  of  gifts,  Adityas, 

sovran  Kings, 

They  wait  on  him  whose  life  is  true. 

VIII.  Indra. 
Armed  with  the  bones  of  dead  Da#dhyach,  Indra 

with  unresisted  might 
The  nine-and-ninety  Vritras  slew. 

2 He,  searching  for  the  horse’s  hfcad  thai  in  the  moun- 
tains lay  concealed, 

Found  it  in  Saryanav&n  lake. 


3 In  his  threefold  seat : in  the  three  fire-receptacles  or  altars.  House - 
hold  priest : or,  great  high  priest ; or  purohitam  may  be  a participle 
passive,  ‘ placed  at  the  head  or  in  front  (of  the  worshipper)/ 

Kigveda  II.  41.  4—6.  The  Rishi  is  Gritsaimda.  The  metre  is 
Gayatri. 

2 Home : ‘ the  hall  of  assembly.— -Stevenson. 

Rigveda  I.  84.  13 — 15.  The  Rishi  is  Gotama.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  ii.  ii.  4.  5,  and  stanza  3 of  I.  ii.  ii.  1.  3. 

2 The  horse's  head : which  had  been  given  to  Dadhyach  by  the 
Asvins.  The  mountains : the  clouds.  Saryandvdn : said  to  be  the 
name  of  a lake  and  the  surrounding  district  in  Kurukshetra,  near  the 
modern  Delhi.  The  Vedic  legend,  which  was  modified  and  amplified 


f66  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  II. 

3 Then  straight  they  recognized  the  mystic  name  of 
the  creative  Steer, 

There  in  the  mansion  of  the  Moon. 

I 

IX.  Indra-Agni. 

As  rain  from  out  the  cloud,  for  you,  Indra  and  Agni, 
from  my  thbught 

This  noblest  praise  hath  been  produced. 

2 Indra  and  Agni,  listen  to  the  singer’s  call:  accept 

his  songs. 

Fulfil,  ye  mighty  Lords,  his  prayers ! 

3 Give  us  not  up  to  indigonoe,  ye  heroes,  Indra,  Agni, 

nor 

To  slander  and  reproach  of  men ! 

X Soma  Pavamana. 

Gold-hued  ! as  one  who  giveth  strength  flow  on  for 
Gods  to  drink,  a draught 
For  Vayu  and  the(  Marut  host! 


in  later  times,  appears  to  have  boon  exmncotcd  in  its  origin  with  that 
of  Dadhikras,  often  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda  and  described  as  a kind 
of  divine  horse,  probably  a personification  of  the  Sun.  The  horse's 
head  concealed  in  the  mountains  seems  to  be  the  clouded  sun,  seen 
afterwards  setting  over  the  lake.  The  bones  may  he  the  rays  of 
returning  light  with  which  Indra  disperses  the  fiends  of  darkness, 
See  preceding  notes  con  stanzas  1 and  3, 

Rigveda  VII.  94.  1—3.  TherRishi  is  Vasishtha.  The  metro  is 
G&yatri. 

1 As  rain : the  hymn  of  praise  is  oopious  in  its  flow,  and  is  doubly 
beneficial,  gratifying  the  Gods  and  bringing  blessings  to  the  worshipper. 
From  my  thought:  manmanah : explained  by  the  Commentator  by 
8totuhf  * praiser * or  ‘worshipper.* 

Rigveda  IX.  25.  I,  3,  2.  The  Rishi  is  Dri]hachyuta.  The  metro 
is  G&yatri,  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  v.  ii.  4.  8, 


ili.i.  12.]  THE  SAMAVEDA.  lfi7 

2 The  Steer  shines  brightly  with  the  Gods,  dear  Sage 

in  his  appointed  home, 

Even  Pavam&na  unbeguiled. 

3 0 Pavapiana,  sent  by  prayer,  roaring  • about  thy 

dwelling-place, 

Ascend  to  VAyu  as  Law  bids ! 

XI.  Soma  Pavamana. 

0 Soma,  Imlu,  every  day  thy  friendship  hath  been 
my  delight. 

Many  fiends  follow  me;  help  mo,  thou  tawny -hued  : 
pass  on  beyond  these  barriers ! 

2 Close  to  thy  bosom  am  I,  Soma,  day  and  night, 
draining  the  milk,  0 golden -hued. 

Siirya  himself  refulgent  with  his  glow  have  we, 
as  birds,  o’ertaken  in  his  course. 

XII.  Soma  Favnm.ina. 

Active,  while  being  purified,  he  hath  assailed  all 
enemies: 

They  deck  the  Sago  with  hbJy*  hymns*. 


2 Even  Pavam&na  unbeguiled : or,  invincible.  The  Rigveda  has, 
vritrahd  devavitamah,  1 Foc-s  layer,  dearest  to  the  Gods/ 

3 To  Vdyu : into  the  vessel  appropriated  to  libations  intended  for 
Vayu,  the  God  of  Wind.  * Enter  this  air  generating  vessel.’ — Steven- 
son. The  Rigveda  has  d vim,  * enter  thou,’  instead  of  druhah  used 
imperatively*. 

Rigveda  TX.  107.  19,  20.  Ascribed  to  the  Seven  llishis.  The  metre 
is  Brihati  in  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  i.  3.  6,  and 
Satobrihati  in  Stanza  2*.  * 

2 Draining  the  milk : duhdnah : the  Rigveda  reading  is  sahhydya , 
‘ for  friendship  sake.’ 

Rigveda  TX.  40.  1 — S.  The  Rishi  is  Brihanmati.  The  metre  is 
Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  i.  1.  2; 


1*8  THE  HYMNS  OF  [FART  II. 

2 The  Red  hath  mounted  to  his  shrine ; strong  Indra 

hath  approached  the  juice  : 

In  his  firm  dwelling  let  him  rest ! 

3 0 Indu;  Soma,  send  us  now  great  opulence  from 

every  side : 

Pour  on  us  treasures  thousandfold! 

XIII.  Indra. 
Drink  Soma,  Indra,  Lord  of  bays!  and  let  it  cheer 

thee : the  stone,  like  a well-guided  courser, 
Directed  by  the  presser’s  arms  hath  pressed  it. 

2 So  let  the  draught  of  joy,  thy  dear  companion, 

by  which,  0 Lord  of  bays,  thou  slayest  Vritras, 
Delight  thee,  Indra,  Lord  of  princely  treasures ! 

3 Mark  closely,  Maghavan,  the  word  I utter,  this 

eulogy  recited  by  Vasishtha: 

Accept  the  prayers  I offer  at  thy  banquet ! 

XIV.  Indra. 

Heroes  of  one  accord  brought  forth  and  formed  for 

kingship  'Indra/ who  wins  the  victory  in  all 

encounters, 

/ «' 

For  power,  in  firmness,  in  the  field,  the  great  de- 
stroyer, fierce  and  exceeding  strong,  stalwart  and 
full  of  vigour. 


2 The  Red:  armah:  or,  the  red  horse,  meaning  Soma.  Strong 
Indra  hath  approached  the  juice:  according  to  the  reading  of  the 
Rigveda,  ‘ To  Indra  hath  the  string  juice  come.1  Let  him  rest : the 
Rigveda  has  stdatiy  ‘ he  settles.’ 

Rigveda  VII.  22.  1 — 3.  The  Rishi  is  Vasishtha.  *The  metre  is 
Viraj  (11x3).  Stauza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  v.  i.  1.  8. 

Rigveda  VIII.  86.  10,  12,  11.  The  Rishi  is  Rebha.  The  metre  is 
Atijagati  (13x4)  in  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  I.  iv.  ii.  4.  1, 
and  Uparisht&dbrihati  (properly  12  + 8 + 8 + 8)  in  2 and  3. 


ill  i.  16.]  THE  BAMAVEDA . l (f 9 

2 The  holy  sages  form  a ring,  to  view  and  sing  unto 

the  Ram. 

Inciters,  very  brilliant,  free  from  all  deceit,  are  with 
your  cljanters  nigh  to  hear. 

3 Bards  joined  in  song  to  Indra  so  that  he  might 

drink  the  Soma  juice, 

The  Lord  of  light,  that  he  whose  laws  stand  fast 
might  aid  with  power  and  with  the  help  he  gives. 

XV.  Indra. 

He  who  as  sovran  Lord  of  men  moves  with  his 
chariots  unrestrained, 

The  Vritra-slayer,  conqueror  of  all  fighting  hosts, 
preeminent,  is  praised  in  song. 

2 Honour  that  Indra,  Puruhanman!  for  his  aid,  him 
in  whose  hand  of  old  the  fair 
Sustaining  bolt  of  thunder,  mighty  Mike  the  God, 
like  Stirya,  was  deposited ! 

XVI.  . Soma  Pavamana. 

The  Sage  of  heaven  whose  ‘he&rt  is  w’ise,  when  laid 

between  both  hands,  with  roars, 

% 

Gives  us  delightful  powers  of  life. 


2 The  Ram:  Indra.  Seo  Rigveda  I.  51. 1,  and  VIII.  2.  40.  Inciters: 
apparently,  the  Gods.  The  hymn  is  vory  difficult  and  obscure. 

Rigveda  VIII.  59.  1,  2,  The  metre  is  Pnagatha.  Stanza  1 is  a 
repetition  of  I.  iii.  ii.  4.  1.  # 

2 The  Rishi  addresses  himself.  Of  old : dvitd , meaning  originally 
twice  or  doubly,  appears  to  be  sometimes  equivalent  to  sandt.  Sustain- 
ing: vidhartari\ s a nomirfative.  The  sentence  is  difficult  to  construe, 
and  my  version  is  somewhat  conjectural.  See  Ludwig’s  Commentary 
on  the  Rigveda,  Vol.  V.  p.  174. 


Rigveda  IX.  9.  1,  3,  2.  The  Rishi  is  Asita  or  Devala.  The  metre 
is  G&yatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I,  v.  ii.  4.  10. 


170  TIIE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  II. 

2 He,  the  bright  son,  when  born,  illumed  his  parents 

who  had  sprang  to  life, 

Great  son,  great  strengthencrs  of  Law. 

3 On,  onward  to  a glorious  home,  free  from  all  guile 

and  dear  to  men, 

Flow  with  enjoyment  to  our  praise  ! 

XVII.  Soma  Pavarruna. 

For,  verily,  Pavamana,  thou,  divine!  endued  with 
brightest  splendour,  calling  all 
Creatures  to  immortality. 

2 With  whom  Dadhyach  Navagva  opqned  fastened 
doors,  by  whom  the  sages  gained  their  wish, 

By  whpm  they  won  the  fame  of  lovely  Amrita  in 
the  felicity  of  Gods. 

XVIII.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Soma,  while  filtered,  with  his  wave  flows  through 
the  long  wool  of  the  sheep, 

Roaring,  while  purified,  before  the  voice  of  song. 

« ( c 

2 His  parents : mdtard : literally*  his  two  mothers ; Heaven  and 
Earth. 

3 Free  from  all  guile:  adruhah , qualifying  Soma.  The  Rigveda 
has  adruhe  qualifying  jandya , man  or  men. 

Rigveda  IX.  l()8.  3,  4.  The  metre  is  Kakup  in  stanza  1,  which  is 
a repetition  of  I.  vi.,ii.  4.  6,  and  Satobrihati  in  2.  Stanza  1 is  ascribed 
to  Sakti,  and  2 to  Urn. 

1 Dadhyach  : son  of  Atharvart,  the  priest  who  first  obtained  fire 
and  offered  prayer  and  Soma  to  the  Gods.  Here  he  is  called  a Navagva, 
and  consequently  one  of  the  Angirasas.  Opened : the  cave  or  prison 
of  cloud  in  which  the  stolen  cows  or  rays  of  light  were  confined.  Won 
the  fame  of  lovely  Amrita : ‘ obtained  the  sustenance  of  the  delicious 
(ambrosial)  water.’ — Wilson. 

Rigveda  IX.  106.  10 — 12.  The  Rishi  is  Ghakshus  Manava.  The 
metre  is  Uslinih.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  ii.  3.  7. 


in.  i.  19.]  THE  SlMA  VEDA.  tfl 

2 With  prayers  they  cleanse  the  mighty  steed,  sport- 

ing in  wood,  above  the  fleece : 

Our  hymns,  intoned,  have  praised  him  of  the  triple 
height.  • 

3 He  hath  been  hastened  to  the  jars,  bountiful,  like 

an  eager  horse, 

And,  lifting  up  his  voice,  while  filtered,  glided  on. 

XIX.  Soma  Pavaniana. 

Father  of  holy  hymns,  Soma  flows  onward,  the 
father  of  the  earth,  father  of  heaven. 

Father  of  Agni,  Sfirya’s  generator,  the  father  who 
fcegat  Indra  and  Vishnu. 

2 Brahman  of  Gods,  the  leader  of  the  poets,  Rishi  of 

sages,  chief  of  savage  creatures, 

Falcon  amid  the  vultures,  axe  of  forests,  over  the 
cleansing  sieve  goes  Soma  singing. 

3 He,  Soma  Pavam&na,  like  a river,  hath  stirred  the 

wave  of  voice,  our  songs  and  praises. 

Beholding  these  inferior  powers,  the  hero,  well 
knowing,  takes  his  stand^among  thg  cattle. 

2 They  cleanse:  mrijanti,  the  RigvedaMms  hmvanti , ‘they  send 
forth/  Him  of  the  triple  heujfit : Soma  whose  home  is  in  the  firma- 
ment, on  the  mountain,  and  on  the  altar.  According  to  Sayana, 
abiding  in  three  receptacles,  the  dronakalasi , the  ddhavaniya,  and  the 
pdtabhrit. 

3 Bountiful : mtdhvdn : the  Rigvcda  has  milhe , ‘.to  the  battle/ 

Rigveda  IX.  96.  5 — 7.  The  Rishi  is  Pratardana.  The  metre  is 
Trishtup.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  if  4.  5. 

2 Brahman  of  Gods : Bphaspati*  the  Lord  of  Prayer,  among  the 
Gods,  or  chief  among  the  priests.  Axe:  perhaps,  the  lightning. 
According  to  the  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon,  svadhitih  here  means  a tree 
with  very  hard* wood.  ‘Stfadhitir  van&nam  may  well  mean  ‘the strong 
axe  among  woods,'  the  axe  being  naturally  mado  of  the  hardest 
wood/ — Max  Muller.  Chief:  mahishah : or,  buffalo,  or  bull. 

3 The  second  line  is  obscure.  Professor  Wilson  translates : — ‘ tho 
ehowerer  (of  benefits)  beholding  the  hidden  (treasures)  presides  over 

those  irresistible  powers,  knowing  about  the  cattle/ 


172 


THE  UYMNS  OF 


[PART  II. 


XX.  Agni. 
Hither,  for  powerful  kinship,  I call  Agni,  him  who 

prospers  you, 

Most  frequent  at  our  solemn  rites. 

2 That  through  this  famed  one’s  power  he  may  stand 

by  us,  even  as  Tvashtar  comes 
Unto  the  forms  that  must  be  shaped. 

3 This  Agni  is  the  Lord  supreme  above  all  glories  ’mid 

the  Gods : 

May  he  come  nigh  to  us  with  strength. 

XXI.  Indra. 
This  poured  libation,  Indra,  drink,  immortal,  glad- 
dening, excellent ! 

Streams  of  /.he  bright  have  flowed  to  thee  here  at 
the  seat  of  holy  Law. 

2 When,  Indra,  thou  dost  guide  thy  bays,  there  is  no 

better  charioteer ! 

None  hath  surpassed  thee  in  thy  might,  none  with 
good  steeds  o’ertaken  thee. 

3 Sing  glory  now  to  Indra,  say  to  him  your  solemn 

eulogies ! 

The  drops  poured  forth  have  made  him  glad:  pay 
reverence  to  his  noblest  might! 


Rigveda  VIII.  91.  7—9.  Ascribed  to  Prayoga,  or  to  one  or  more 
of  other  Rishis.  The  metre  is  Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition 
of  I.  i.  i.  3*.  1. 

2 Tvashtar:  the  carpenter  or  artificer  God,  regarded  as  the  pro- 
ducer of  all  objects  in  nature  which  show  signs  of  artistic  skill. 

Rigveda  I.  84.  4 — 6.  The  Rishi  is  Gotama.  The  metre  is  Anush- 
tup.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iv.  ii.  1.  3. 


iii.  i.  22.]  THE  SAmaVEDA.  173 

XXII.  Indra. 

Indra,  be  pleased : drive  forward,  hero,  striker  of 
thy  bsyrs! 

Fair,  like  a sago,  delighting  in  the  meath,  drink  of 
the  juice  for  rapturous  joy. 

2 0 Indra,  fill  thy  belly  anew  with  meath  that  seems 

to  flow  from  heaven. 

The  sweet-voiced  raptures  of  this  juice  have  come, 
as  ’twere  to  heaven,  to  thee. 

3 Indra,  victorious,  Mitra-like,  smote,  like  a Yati, 

Vritra  dead. 

As  Bhrigu  quelled  his  foes,  he  cleft  Vara  in  Soma’s 
rapturous  joy. 


Those  three  stanzas  arc  not  found  in.  the  Rigveda.  No  Rishi’s 
name  is  mentioned.  The  metro  is  irregular.  They  are  obscure,  and 
characterized  chiefly  by  the  repetition  of  »a,  1 like,’  ‘ as/  1 as  it  were/ 
which  recurs  seven  times. 

1 Striker  of  thy  bays : hariha : according  to  the  St.  Petersburg 
Lexicon  the  word  is  corrupt  and  meaningless.  ‘ Possessor  of  the 
horses  Han.’ — Stevenson.  ‘ Castor  of  the  lightning/ — Benfey. 

2 Anew : navyam  na : literally,  like  a new  one ; that  is,  as  if  it 
were  empty  and  fasting.  Sweet-voiced : accompanied  with  sweet  songs. 

3 A Yati:  one  of  a mythical  race  of  ascetics,  connected  with  the 
Bhrigus,  and  said,  according  to  one  legend,  to  have  taken  part  in  the 
creation  of  the  world.  The  force  of  the  comparison  is  not  very  ob- 
vious. Professor  Ludwig.suggests  ‘ wrestler  * as  the  possible  meaning 
of  yatih  here.  Bhrigu : a Rishi  regarded  as  the  ancestor  of  the 
ancient  race  of  Bhrigus  who  are  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda 
in  connexion  with  Agni.  Vala : a demon  of  drought,  who  steals  the 
cows  of  the  Gods,  and  hides  them  in  a cave,  that  is,  keeps  the  rain 
imprisoned  in  dark  thick  clouds. 


174 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  II. 


CHAPTER  It 

I.  Soma  Pavamana. 
Winner*  of  gold  and  gear  and  cattle  flpw  thou  on, 

set  as  impregner,  Indu!  ’mid  the  worlds.of  life! 
Rich  in  brave  men  art  thou,  Soma,  who  winnest  all : 
these  holy  singers  wait  upon  thee  with  the  song. 

2 0 Soma,  thou  beholdest  men  from  every  side  : O 

Pavamltna,  Steer,  thou  wanderest  through  these. 
Pour  out  upon  us  wealth  in  treasure  and  in  gold:  may 
we  have  strength  to  live  among  the  things  that  be  ! 

3 Thou  passest  to  these  worlds  as  sovran  J^ord  thereof, 

0 Indu,  harnessing  thy  tawny  well-winged  mares. 
May  thpy  pour  forth  for  thee  milk  and  oil  rich  in 
sweets  : 0 Soma,  let  the  folk  abide  in  thy  decree ! 

II.  Soma  Pavamana. 
The  streams  of  Pavamana,  thine,  finder  of  all!  have 

been  effused, 

Even  as  Shryas  rays  of  light. 

2 Making  the  light  fhat  shines  from  heaven  thou 
flowest  on  to  every  form  • 

Soma,  thou  swellest  like  a sea. 


Rigveda  IX.  86.  39,  38,  37.  Ascribed  to  the  three  Rishiganas  or 
companies  of  Rishis,  Akrishta  Mashah,  Sikatah,  Prishnayah  and  Ajah. 
The  metre  is  Jagati.^ 

2 Through  these : there  is  no  substantive.  Sayana  supplies  apah, 

waters.  «. 

3 Thou  passest  to : iyase : the  Rigveda  has  viyate,  * thou  passest 
through/  Tawny  well-winged  mares : swiftly-flowing  drops  of  golden- 
coloured  juice. 

Rigveda  IX.  64.  7 — 9.  The  Rishi  is  Kaeyapa.  The  metre  is 
G&yatri. 

2 To  every  form : to  quicken  all  Nature  and  bring  us  blessings  in 
every  shape. 


iii.  ii.  3.] 


THE  SJMAVEDA. 


175 


3 Shown  forth  thou  sendest  out  thy  voice,  0 Pava- 
m&na,  with  a roar, 

JLike  Sftrya,  God,‘  as  Law  commands. 

III.  Soma  Pavamuna. 

Hitherward  have  the  Somas  streamed,  the  drops 
while  they  are  purified  : 

When  blent,  in  waters  they  are  rinsed. 

2 The  milk  hath  run  to  meet  them  like  floods  rushing 

• down  a precipice  : 

They  come  to  lndra,  being  cleansed. 

3 0 Soma  Pavamana,  thou  fluwest  as  Indra’s  glad- 

dener  » 

The  men  have  seized  and  lead  thee  forth. 

4 Thou,  Indu,  when,  expressed  by  stones,  t&ou  runnest 

to  the  filter,  art 
Ready  for  Indra’s  high  decree. 
b Victorious,  to  be  hailed  with  joy,  0 Soma,  flow 
delighting  men, 

As  the  supporter  of  mankind.! 

6 Flow  on,  best  Vritra-slaye? ; flow  meet  to  be  hailed 

with  joyful  lauds, 

Pure,  purifying,  wonderful  1 

7 Pure,  purifying  is  he  called,  Soma  effused  and  full 

■of  sweets, 

Slayer  of  sinners,  dear  to  Gods. 


3 Shown  forth  : jajndnah : produced  or  manifested.  The  Rigveda 
lias  hinvdnah , ‘sent  forth*  or  ‘urged  on.’  With  a roar:  krandan: 
the  Rigveda  has  akrdn , probably  from  hr  am,  ‘ thou  hast  moved.’  As 
Law  commands:  vidharmani:  see  La  ReUyion  Vcdique,  III.  218,  Note. 

Rigveda  IX.  54.  1-— 7.  * The  Rishi  is  Asita  or  Dcvala.  The  metre 
is  Gayatri. 

3 Gladdener:  mddanali:  the  Rigveda  has  pdtave,  ‘for  (lndra)  to 
drink.’ 

5 As  the  supporter  of  mankind:  charshanidhritih : the  Rigveda  has 
charshanlsahe , ‘To  him  who  ruleth  o’er  mankind,’  that  is  lndra. 


176  TllE  HYMNS  OF.  [PA$T  If. 

IV.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

The  Sage  hath  robed  him  in  the  sheep’s  wool  for  the 
banquet  of  the  Gods, 

Subduing  all  our  enemies. 

2 For  he,  as  Pavamana,  sends  thousandfold  riches  in 

the  shape 

Of  cattle  to  the  worshippers. 

3 Thou  graspest  all  things  with  thy  mind,  and  purifiest 

thee  with  thoughts : 

As  such,  0 Soma,  find  us  fame  ! 

4 Pour  on  us  lofty  glory,  send  sure  riches  to  ouk  liberal 

lords : 

Bring  food  to  those  who  sing  thy  praise  ! 

5 As  thoh  art  cleansed,  0 wondrous  steed,  0 Soma, 

thou  hast  entered,  like 
' A pious  king,  into  the  songs. 

6 He,  Soma,  like  a courser  in  the  floods  invincible, 

made  bright 

With  bands,  is  resting  in  the  press. 

7 Disporting,’  like  a*  liberal  chief,  thou  goest,  Soma, 

to  the  sieve, 

Lending  the  laud  heroic  strength. 


lligveda  IX.  20.  1 — 7.  The  llishi  is  Asita  or  Devala.  The  metre 
is  Gayatri.  , 

1 Hath  robed  him  in  the  sheep'*  wool : hath  entered  the  woollen 

filter.  The  Rigvcda  hap  pra arshati , ‘flows  forth  to,’  instead  of 

pra avyata. 

5 Steed:  vahne : Sayana  explains  this  word  here  and  in  the  next 
stanza  (courser)  by  ‘ bearer  of  oblations.’ 

6 In  the  press:  chamflshu : according  to ' Sayana ^pdtreshu,  in  the 
receiving- vessels. 

7 Chief:  Sayana  explains  makhah  by  ddnam}  gift ; ‘ playing  thy 
frolics  like  one  begging  a gift.’ — Stevenson.  The  word  as  an  adjective 
seems  to  mean  brisk,  vigorous,  active,  and  as  a substantive,  in  some 
places,  warrior,  hero,  champion,  or  war-chief. 


iii.  ii.  6.] 


THE  SlMAVEDA. 


177 


V.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Pour  on  us  with  thy  juice  all  kinds  of  corn,  each  sort 
of  nourishment, 

And,  Sotfta,  all  felicities  ! 

2 As  thine,  0 Indu,  is  the  praise,  and  thine  what 

springeth  from  the  juice, 

Seat  thee  on  the  dear  sacred  grass ! 

3 And,  finding  for  us  steeds  and  kine,  0 Soma,  with 

thy  juice  flow  on 

Through  days  that  fly  most  rapidly  ! 

4 As  ‘one  wjio  conquers,  ne’er  subdued,  attacks  and 

slays  the  enemy, 

Thus,  vanquisher  of  thousands  1 flow  ! 

VI.  Soma  Pavamanm 

Thou,  Indu,  with  thy  streams  that  drop  sweet  juices, 
which  were  poured  for  help, 

Hast  settled  in  the  cleansing  sieve. 

2 So  flow  thou  onward  through  ’the  fleece,  for  Indra 

flow  to  be  his  drink,  , 

Seating  thee  in  the  shrine  of  Law  ! 

3 As  giving  room  and  freedom,  as  most  sweet,  pour 

butter  forth  and  milk, 

O Soma,  for  the  Angirasas ! 


Pigveda  IX.  55.  1 — 4.  The  Rishi  is  Avatsara.  The  metre  is  (Jayatri. 

1 Vanquisher  of  thousands ! : or,  ‘thou  >\ho  winnest  thousands,’ 
i.  c.  countless  spoils  or  treasures. 

Rigveda  IX.  62.  7—9.  The  Rishi  is  Jamadagni.  The  metre  is 
Oayatri. 

2 The  shrine  of  Law : ritasya  yomtn  : the  place  of  sacrifice.  1 he 
higveda  has  yond  vaneshu , ‘ Finding  thine  home  in  vats  of  wood. 

12 


TI1E  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  11 


VII.  Agni. 
Thy  glories  are,  like  lightnings  from  the  rainy  cloud, 

visible,  Agni,  like  the  comings  of  the  Dawns, 
When,  loosed  to  wander  over  plants  and*  forest  trees, 
thou  crammest  by  thyself  thy  food  into  thy  mouth. 

2 When,  sped  and  urged  by  wind,  thou  spreadest  thee 

abroad,  soon  piercing  through  thy  food  according 
to  thy  will, 

Thy  hosts,  who  ne’er  decayest,  eager  to  consume, 
like  men  on  chariots,  Agni ! strive  on  every  side. 

3 Agni,  the  Hotar-priest  who  fills  the  assembly  full, 

wakcr  of  wisdom,  chief  controller  of  the  thought — 
Thee,  yea,  none  other  than  thyself,  doth  man  elect 
priest1  of  the  holy  offering,  great  and  small,  alike. 

VIII.  Mitra-Varuna. 
Even  far  and  wide,  0 Varuna  and  Mitra,  doth  your 

help  extend  : 

May  I obtain  your  kind  good-will ! 

2 True  Gods,  may  we  completely  gain  food  and  a 
dwelling-place  from  you  : 

Ye  Mitras,  may  we  be  your  own ! 


Rigveda  X.  91.  5,  7,  8.  The  Rishi  is  Anuta.  The  metre  is  Jagati. 

1 Agni,  like  the  comings  of  the  Dawns:  the  Rigveda  has  chitrilh 

ushasdm  na  ketavahf> 1 brilliant  like  the  heralds  of  the  D^wns.’ 

2 Hosts:  or  ‘powers/ 

3 Great  and  small:  according  io  Sayana,  ‘either  accompanied  with, 
or  without,  libations  of  Soma  juice.’ 

Rigveda  V,  70.  1 — 3.  The  Rishi  is  Urucliakri.  The  metre  is 
Gayatri. 

2 And  a dwelling-place : dhdma  cha : the  Rigveda  has  dhdyasc , 1 for 
our  sustenance.’  Mitras : that  is  Mitra  and  Varuna.  The  Rigveda 
has  rudrd,  ‘ Rudras,’  bright  Gods,  hero  and  in  the  following  stanza. 


10.]  TIIE  SAM  AV ED  A.  17$ 

3 Guard  us,  ye  Mitras,  with  your  guards,  save  us, 
ye  skilled  to  save : may  we 
Subdue  the  Dasyus  by  ourselves ! 

IX.  Indra. 
Arising  in  thy  might,  thy  jaws  thou  shookest,  Indra, 

having  drunk 

The  Soma  which  the  press  had  shed. 

2 Indra,  both  worlds  gave  place  to  thee  as  thou  wast 

fighting,  when  thou  wast 
The  slayer  of  the  Dasyu  hosts. 

3 From  Indra  have  I measured  out  a song  eight-footed 

with  nige  parts, 

Delicate,  strengthening  the  Law. 

X.  Indra-Agni. 
Indra  and  Agni,  these  our  songs  of  praise  have 

sounded  forth  to  you  : 

Ye  who  bring  blessings  ! drink  the  juice  ! 


Rigveda  VIII.  65.  10 — 12.  The  Rishi'is*  Kurusuti.  The  metre  is 

. t?  • j » 

Gayatri.  , 

1 Thy  jaws  thou  shooJcest : as  a, sign  that  the  draught  was  pleasant; 
a stronger  expression  for  1 thou  didst  smack  thy  lips.*  Which  the  2>r<‘ss 
had  shed : chamil  sutam  : pressed  out  in  or  between  the  two  boards  of 
the  press.  Or,  poured  into  the  bowls. 

2 Gave  place:  adadetdm:  the  Rigveda  has  akripetdm,  ‘complained.’ 
Fighting:  spardhamdnam : the  Rigveda  has  krakshamdmm , meaning, 
probably,  ‘ roaring.’ 

3 From  Indra : originating  in  him  as  sub  j opt  and  inspirer.  Eight- 
footed with  nine  parts  : the  original  hymn  consists  of  triplet  s,  each  of 
which  contains  nine  Padas,  parts  or  half-lines  of  eight  feet  or  syllables 
each.  That  is,  the  metre  is  octosyllabic  (8  x 3),  and  the  triplet 
contains  three  • stanzas  hi  that  metre  or  nine  octosyllabic  Padas. 
Strengthening  the  Law : ritdvridham : the  Rigveda  has  ritasprisam , 
‘faithful  to  the  Law,’  or  ‘closely  connected  with  sacriiice.’ 

Rigveda  VI.  60.  7—9.  The  Rishi  is  Bharadvaja.  The  metre  is 
Gayatri. 


iSO  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  II. 

2 Come,  Indra,  Agni,  with  those  teams,  desired  of 

many,  which  ye  have, 

O heroes,  for  the  worshipper  ! 

3 With  those  to  this  libation  poured,  ye  heroes,  Indra, 

Agni,  come : 

Come  ye  to  drink  the  Soma-juice  ! 

XI.  Soma  Pavamaua. 

Soma,  flow  on  exceeding  bright  with  loud  roar  to  the 
reservoirs, 

Resting  in  wooden  vats  thy  home! 

2 Let  water-winning  Somas  flow  to  Indra,  V&yu, 

Varuna, 

To  Vishnu  and  the  Marut  host ! 

3 Soma,  bestowing  food  upon  our  progeny,  from  every 

side 

Pour  on  us  riches  thousandfold. 

XII.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Pressed  out  by  presscrs  Soma  goes  over  the  fleecy 
backs  of  sheep,  ■ 

Goes  even  as  with  a mare  in  tawny-coloured  stream, 
goes  in  a sweetly-sounding  stream.  ; 

2 Down  to  the  water  Soma,  rich  in  kine,  hath  flowed 
with  cows,  with  cows  that  have  been  milked. 

They  have  approached  the  mixing-vessels  as  a sea : 
the  cheerer  streams  for  the  carouse. 

Rigveda  TX.  65.  19—21.  The  Rishi  is  Bhrigu  or  Jamadagni.  The 
metre  is  Gayatri.  , . 

2 Let  water -w inning  Somas  Jlow  : according  to  the  Rigve  la,  ‘ Soma 
who  wins  the  waters  flows.’ 

Rigveda  IX.  107.  8,  9.  Ascribed  to  the  Seven  Rishis.  The  metre 
is  Brihati. 

2 Kine  and  cows  are  the  milk  with  which  the  Soma  juice  is  mixed. 
The  mixing-vessels : samvarandni , from  sanivri , to  cover,  enclose,  sur- 
round, must,  apparently,  mean  the  vessels  that  contain  the  juices  and 
not  the  juices  themselves  as  Sayana  explains : — ‘ his  enjoyable  juices 
go  (to  the  pitcher  as  waters)  to  the  ocean.’— Wilson. 


iii.  ii.  14.] 


THE  SAM  A VE1)A. 


181 


XIII.  Soma  Pavamana. 
0 purifying  Soma,  bring  to  us  the  wondrous  treasure, 

meet 

For  laudft,  that  is  in  earth  and  heaven  ! 

2 Cleansing  the  lives  of  men,  thou,  Steer,  bellowing  on 

the  sacred  grass, 

Gold-hued,  hast  settled  in  thy  home. 

3 For  ye  twain,  Indra,  Soma,  are  Lords  of  heaven’s 

light,  Lords  of  the  kine  : 

Prosper,  as  mighty  ones,  our  prayers! 

XIV.  Indra. 

By  men  hath  Indra  been  advanced,  the  Vritra-slayer, 
to  joy  and  strength.  * 

Him  only  we  invoke  for  help  in  battles  whether 
great  or  small : be  he  our  aid  in  deeds  of  might  \* 

2 For,  hero,  thou  art  like  a host,  art  giver  of  abundant 

spoil. 

Strengthening  e’en  the  feeblt\  thou  aidest  the  sacri- 
fice^ thou  givesfc  great  wfealtb  to  him  who  pours. 

3 When  war  and  battles  are  on  foot,  booty  is  offered 

to  the  bold. 

Yoke  thou  thy  wildly-rushing  bays  ! Whom  wilt 
thou  slay,  and  whom  enrich  ? Do  thou,  O Indra, 
make  us  rich ! 


Rigveda  fX.  19.  1,  3,  2.  The  Rishi  is  Asila  or  Devala.  The  metre 
is  (layatri.  * 

2 Cleansing  the  lives  of  men : the  Rigveda  has  dyushu  instead  of 
dyihishi  :■ — ‘ w\iile  cleansed  among  the  living.’  Hast  settled : the  verb 
in  the  Rigveda  is  in  the  third  person: — ‘the  steer hath  settled.’ 

Rigveda  I.  81.  1 — 3.  Ascribed  to  Gotama.  The  metre  is  Pankti 
(8  x 5).  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  v.  i.  3.  3,  and  stanza  3 of  I.  v.  i.  3.  6. 

2 Pours:  libations  of  Soma  j nice. 


182 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  11 


XV.  Indra. 

The  juice  of  Sonia  thus  diffused,  sweet  to  the  taste, 
the  bright  cows  drink, 

Who  travelling  in  splendour  close  to  mighty  Indra’s 
side  rejoice,  good  in  their  own  supremacy. 

2 Craving  his  touch  the  dappled  kine  mingle  the 

Soma  with  their  milk. 

The  milch-kino  dear  to  Indra  send  forth  his  death- 
dealing thunderbolt,  good  in  their  own  supremacy. 

3 With  veneration,  passing  wise,  they  honour  his  vic- 

torious might. 

They  follow  close  his  many  laws  to  win  them  duo 
preeminence,  good  in  their  own  supremacy. 

XVI.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Strong,  mountain-born,  the  stalk  hath  been  pressed 
in  the  streams  for  rapturous  joy. 

Hawk-like  he  settles  in  his  home. 

2 Fair  is  the  juice  beloved  of  Gods,  washed  in  the 

waters,  pressed  by  men : 

The  milch-kine  sw.eeten  it  with  milk. 

3 Then,  like  a steed,  have  they  adorned  the  inciter  for 

eternal  life, 

The  meath’s  juice  at  the  festival. 


Rigveda  I.  84.  10 — 12.  The  Rishi  is  Gotama.  The  metre  is  Pankti. 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  v.  i.  3.  1. 

2 Send  forth : the  cows,  that  is,  libations  of  their  milk,  exalt  and 
strengthen  Indra,  and  incite  him  to  battle  with  the  demons.  The 
meaning  of  the  refrain  of  this  tria  d is  not  very  clear.  Prof.  Wilson, 
following  Sayana,  translates  it : — ‘ abiding  (in  their  stalls)  expectant 
of  his  sovereignty,’ 

Rigveda  IX.  62.  4 — 6.  The  Rishi  is  Jamadagni.  The  metre  is 
Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  v.  ii.  4.  7. 

3 The  inciter : hetdram  : Soma  who  incites  Indra  to  action.  The 
Rigveda  has  heldraht  ‘as  drivers  (dock)  a horse.’  Eternal  life: 
amritdya:  or,  perhaps,  for  Amrita  or  ambrosia,  to  be  the  food  of  Gods. 


iii,  ii.  18.] 


THE  SAM AV EDA. 


183 


XVIL  Soma  Pavamatia. 

Make  high  and  splendid  glory  shine  hitherward. 
Lord  of  food,  God,  on  the  friend  of  Gods  : 

U nc]ose*the  cask  of  middle  air  ! 

2 Loll  onward  from  the  press,  O mighty  one,  effused, 
as  King,  supporter  of  the  tribes  ! 

Pour  on  us  rain  from  heaven,  send  us  the  water's 
flow,  urging  our  thoughts  to  win  the  spoil*! 

XVIII.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Breath  of  tho  mighty  Dames,  the  Child,  speeding 
the  plan  of  sacrifice, 

Surpasses  all  things  that  arc  dear,  yea,  from  of  old. 

2 The  place  that  is  concealed  hath  gained  a share  of 
Trita's  pressing-stones,  <* 

By  the  seven  laws  of  sacrifice,  even  that  dear  place. 

• — 

Rigveda  IX.  108.  9,  10.  The  Rishi  of  stanza  lf,  which  is  a repe- 
tition of  l.  vi.  ii.  4.  2,  is  Urdhvasadman,  and  of  2 Kritayasas.  Tho 
metros  arc  Kakup  and  Satohrihati  respectively. 

2 Roll  onward  from  the  press  : ‘ Roll  hi  the  two  chamu.’ — Ludwig. 

‘ Come  into  the  cups/- — Wilson.  Swpportkr : vahnih:  t lie  exact  mean- 
ing of  the  word  as  applied  to  Soma  is  somewhat  uncertain.  I adopt 
Sayana’s  explanation.  Urginng  our  thoughts  to  win  the  spoil : the 
Rigveda  has  jinvd  instead  of  jinvan  : — ‘ accomplish  the  rites  for  the 
worshipper  who  seeks  cattle.’ — Wilson. 

Rigveda  IX.  102.  1 — 3.  The  Rishi  is  Trita  .Xptya.  The  metre  is 
Ushnih.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  ii.  3.  5. 

2 This  stanza  is  almost  unintelligible,  The  place  that  is  concealed 
is  apparently  heaven,  where  the  celestial  sacriticer  Trita  prepares  the 
divine  Soma  for  Indra.  Profcsso?  Wilson,  following  Sayana,  trans- 
lates: — * When  the  Soma  has  taken  the  secret  station  of  the  grinding- 
stones  (at  tlm  .sacrifice)  pf  Trita,  then  with  the  seven  supports  of 
the  sacrifice  (the  priests  praise)  the  conciliating  ( Soma ).'  The  ‘ seven 
supports’  are  said  to  be  the  seven  metres.  ‘ In  the  seven  stations.’ — 
M.  Miiller.  Even  that  dear  place:  ad  ha  pm  yam : literally,  ‘also 
dear ; ’ priyam  might  refer  to  Soma,  as  Sayana  takes  it,  but  then  its. 
regimen  is  not  apparent. 


VM  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  II. 

3 He  hath  sent  forth  unto  the  heights  the  three, 
in  stream,  as  Trita’s  wealth : 

He  who  is  passing  wise  measures  his  pathways  out. 

XIX.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Flow  to  the  filter  with  thy  stream,  effused,  to  win 
us  spoil  and  wealth, 

Soma  exceeding  rich  in  mcath  for  Indra,  Vishiiu, 
and  the  Gods ! 

2 The  hymns  that  know  not  guile  caress  thee,  golden- 

coloured,  in  the  sieve, 

As  mothers,  Pavamana,  lick  the  new-borji  calf, 
as  Law  commands.  * 

3 Lord  of  great  sway,  thou  liftest  thee  above  the 

heavens,  above  the  earth. 

Thou,  Pavam&na,  hast  assumed  thy  coat  of  mail 
with  majesty. 


3 He  hath  sent  forth  : instead  of  air  ay  at  the  Rigveda  has  erayd 
‘Support,  (Soma,)  with  thy  .stream  Trita’s  three  (oblations) ; cause 
the  giver  of  riches  (Indra)  tfh  come  to  the  sacred  songs.  The  intelli- 
gent (praiser)  of  this  (India)  measures  out  hymns.’  The  meaning  of 
the  stanza  is  obscure,  both  here  and  In  the  Rigveda;  prishthesu  and 
yojand  being  ambiguous,  the  former  meaning  both  ‘heights’  and 
‘ sacred  songs  ’ and  the  latter  ‘ stages  ’ or  ‘ pathways,’  and  sometimes 
* hymns  ’ which  induce  the  Gods  to  yoke  their  horses  and  come  to  the 
sacrifice. 

Rigveda  IX.  100.  Q,  7,  9.  The  Kishis  are  the  two  Rebhasunus. 
The  metre  is  Anushtup.  * 

1 To  win  us  spoil  and  wealth : Mjasdtaye : the  Rigveda  has  vdja- 
sdtamah , ‘best  winner  of  the  spoil.’ 

2 The  hymns:  dhitayo : ‘the  fingers,’  aceprding  to  <S&yana.  The 
Rigveda  has  mdtaro , ‘ mothers,’  the  maternal  waters.  Mothers : the 
Rigveda  has  dhenavah , * milch-cows.’  As  Law  commands : referring 
to  ‘caress  thee.’  ‘At  the  sacrifice.’ — Wilson.  ‘In  the  realm  of 
heaven.’ — Grassmann. 

3 Thy  coat  of  mail : thy  mantle  of  milk. 


ill.  ii.  21.] 


185 


THE  SAM  A VEDA. 

Soma  Pavam&nn. 

Strong  Indu,  bathed  in  milk,  flows  on  for  India, 
Soma  exciting  strength,  for  his  carousal. 

He  quells  malignity  and  slays  the  demons,  King  of 
the  homestead,  he  who  gives  us  comfort 

2 Then  in  a stream  he  flows,  milked  out  with  press- 

stones,  mingled  with  sweetness,  through  the  fleecy 
filter — 

Indu  rejoicing  in  the  love  of  India,  the  God  who 
gladdens,  for  the  God’s  enjoyment. 

3 He  flows,  as  he  is  cleansed,  to  sacred  duties,  a Gqd 

bedewing  Gods  with  his  own  juices. 

Indu  hath,  clothed  in  powers  that  suit  the  season, 
on  the  raised  fleece  engaged  the  ten  swift  finders. 

XXI.  Agoi. 

O Agni,  God,  we  kindle  thee,  refulgent,  wasting  not 
away, 

That  this  more  glorious  fuel,  may  send  forth  for 
thee  its  shine  to  heaved.  'Bring  food  to  those 
who  sing  thy  praise ! . 

2 To  thee  the  splendid,  Lord  of  light!  bright!  won- 
drous! prince  of  men!  is  brought 
Oblation  with  the  holy  verse,  0 Agni,  bearer  of  our 
gifts  ! Bring  food  to  those  who  sing  thy  praise  i 


Rigveda  TX.  97.  10 — 12.  The  Rishi  is  Manyu.  The  metre  is 
Trishtup.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  i.  5.  8. 

3 Sacred  duties:  vratdni : the  Rigveda  has  priydni, , ‘pleasant, 
things/  that  is?  wealth  and  other  blessings.  Clothed  in  powers  that 
suit  the  season : ‘ clothed  in  pleasant  radiance  according  to  the  sea- 
son.’— Wilson. 


Rigveda  V.  6.  4,  5,  9.  The  Rishi  is  Vasusruta.  The  metre  is 
Fankti.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  v.  i.  4.  1 . 


186  THE  SlMA  VEDA.  [PART  II. 

3 Thou  heatest  both  the  ladles  in  thy  mouth,  0 bril- 
liant prince  of  men ! 

So  fill  us  also  in  our  hymns  abundantly,  thou  Lord  of 
Strength.  Bring  food  to  those  who  siijg  thy  praise! 

XXII.  Indra. 

Sing  ye  a psalm  to  Indra,  sing  a great  song  to  the 
lofty  Sage, 

To  him  who  maketh  prayer,  inspired,  who  loveth  laud. 
2 Thou,  Indra,  art  the  conqueror : thou  gavest  splend- 
our to  the  Sun. 

Maker  of  all  things,  thou  art  mighty  and  All-God. 

*3  Radiant  with  light  thou  wen  test  to  t the  sky,  the 
luminous  realm  of  heaven. 

The  Gods,  0 Indra,  strove  to  win  thy  friendly  love. 

XXIII.  India. 

This  Somai  hath  been  pressed  for  thee,  0 Indra, 
bold  one,  mightiest,  come  ! 

May  Indra-vigour  fill  tliee  full,  as  Surya  fills  mid-air 
with  rays  ! 

2 Slayer  of  Vritra,  Vnount  thy  car!  Thy  bay  steeds 

have  been  yoked  by  prayer. 

May,  with  its  voice,  the*  pressing-stone  draw  thine 
attention  hitherward ! 

3 His  pair  of  tawny  coursers  bring  Indra,  resistless  in 

his  might, 

* Hither  to*  Rishis’  songs  of  praise  and  sacrifice  per- 
formed by  men. 

3 Both  the  ladles  : tithe  darvl : from  which  the  yhritum  or  clarilied 
butter  is  poured  into  the  fire.  'Phe  Jiigveda  has  sarpishoy  ‘ of  oil  ’ or 
‘of  butter,’  instead  of  vispate , ‘prince  of  men.’ 

Rigveda  VIII.  87.  1 — 3.  The  Rishi  is  ,Nrimedha,.  The  metre  is 
Ushuih.  Stauza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iv.  ii.  5.  8. 

2 All-God : visvadevah : * the  lord  of  all  the  gods.’ — Wilson.  * The 
universal  divinity.’— -Stevenson. 

Jiigveda  I.  84.  1,  3,  2.  The  Rishi  is  Gotama.  The  metre  is  Anush- 
tup.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iv.  ii.  1.  G. 


BOOK  IV. 


CHAPTER  I. 

L Soma  Pavamana. 

Light  of  the  sacrifice,  he  pours  delicious  meath, 
most  wealthy,  father  and  begetter  of  the  Gods. 

He, gladdening, best  of eheercrs, juice  that  Indra  loves, 
enriches  with  mysterious  treasure  earth  and  heaven. 

2 The  Lord  of  heaven,  the  vigorous  and  far-seeing  one, 

flows  Shouting  to  the  beaker  with  his  thousand 
streams. 

Coloured  like  gold  he  rests  in  seats  whereMitra  dwells, 
the  Steer  made  beautiful  by  rivers  and  by  sheep. 

3 As  Pavamana  thou  flowest  before  tho  streams : thou 

goest  on  before  the  hymn,  before  the  kino. 

Thou  sharest  mighty  booty  in  the  van  of  war: 
Soma,  well-armed,  thou  art  pressed  out  by  men 
who  press. 

tII.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Tiirotoh  our  desire  of  heroes,  kine,  and  horses, 
vigorous  Soma-drops, 

Brilliant  and  swift,  have  been  effused. 

Rigvcda  IX.  86.  10 — 12.  Stanza  1 is  ascribed  to  the  Sikata  Rishis, 
and  2 and  3 to  the  Prisms  or  Ajas.  The  metre  is  Jagati. 

2 By  rivers  and  by  sheep : by  the  purifying  wallers  and  the  woollen  filter. 

3 As  Pavam&na  thou  flowest : o>*„  ‘Thou  flowest,  being  purified.* 
The  ltigvcda  has  arshati  instead  of  arshasi : — ‘ In  forefront  of  the 
rivers  Pavam&na  flows.’  Thou  goest : the  Rigveda  has  gaehehhati , ‘ho 
goes.’  In  the  *second  line  the  verbs  in  the  Rigvcda  arc  in  the  third 
person,  and  instead  of  Soma  sdyase , ‘ Soma,  thou  art  pressed  out,’  the 
reading  is  pHyate  vrishd , * the  steer  is  purified.* 

Rigveda  IX.  64.  4 — 6.  The  Rishi  is  Kasyapa.  The  metre  is 
Gayatrl.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  v.  ii.  5.  6. 


188  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  II 

2 They,  beautified  by  holy  men  and  purified  in  both 

the  hands, 

Are  flowing  through  the  fleecy  cloth. 

3 These  Soma  juices  shall  pour  forth  all  treasures  for 

the  worshipper, 

From  heaven  and  earth  and  firmament. 

III.  Soma  Puvamana. 

Flow,  Soma,  Indu,  dear  to  Gods,  swift  through  the 
purifying  sieve, 

And  enter  Indra  in  thy  strength ! 

2 As  mighty  food  speed  hitherward,  Indu,  as  *a  most 

splendid  steer : * 

Sit  in  thy  place  as  one  with  power ! 

3 The  well-loved  meath  was  made  to  flow,  the  stream 

of  the  creative  juice  : 

The  Sage  dcew  waters  to  himself. 

4 The  mighty  waters,  yea,  the  floods  accompany  thee 

mighty  one, 

When  thou  wilt  clothe  thee  with  the  milk. 

5 The  lake  is  brightened  in  the  floods^  Soma,  our 

friend,  heaven’s  prop  and  stay, 

Falls  on  the  purifying  cloth. 

6 The  tawny  Bull  hath  bellowed,  fair  as  mighty  Mitra 

to  behold  : 

He  gleams  and  flashes  with  the  Sun. 


Rigveda  IX.  2.  1 — lO^the  last  two  stanzas  being  transposed).  The 
Rishi  is  Medhatithi.  The  metre*is  Gayatri.  Stanza  6 is  a repetition 
of  I.  vi.  i.  2.  1. 

1 In  thy  strength : vrishd : or,  according  to  Sayana’s  usual  expla- 
nation, ‘raining  bliss.’  ‘ Ein  Segnender/ — Benfey. 

3 Creative:  vedhasah:  or,  sapient.  The  Sage:  Soma.  Waters: 
with  which  the  stalks  of  the  plant  are  sprinkled  and  washed. 

5 The  lake : or  sea,  meaning  according  to  Sayana,  Soma  as  the 
container  of  all  liquid. 


iv.  i.  4.] 


THE  SAMAVEDA. 


189 


7 Songs,  Indra,  active  in  their  might,  are  beautified 

for  thee,  wherewith 
Thou  deckest  thee  for  rapturous  joy. 

8 To  thee  *vho  givest  ample  room  we  pray;  to  win  the 

wild  delight, 

That  thou  mayst  have  exalted  praise. 

9 Winner  of  kine,  Indu,  art  thou,  winner  of  heroes, 

steeds,  and  spoil : 

Primeval  soul  of  sacrifice. 

10  Pour  on  us,  Indu!  Indra-strength  with  a full  stream 
of  sweetness,  like 
Parjanya,  sender  of  the  rain ! 

IV.  Soma  Pavamana. 

O Soma  PavamAna,  be  victorious,  win  us  high  renown; 
And  make  us  better  than  we  are  ! 

2 Win  thou  the  light,  win  heavenly  light,  and,  Soma, 

all  felicities ; 

And  make  us  better  than  we  are ! 

3 Win  skilful  strength  and  mental  power!  O Soma, 

drive  away  our  foes  ; 

And  make  us  better  than  we  are ! 

4 Ye  purifiers,  purify  Soma  for  Indra,  for  his  drink  : 
Make  thou  us  better  than  we  are! 

5 Give  us  our  portion  in  the  Sun  through  thine  own 

mental  power  and  aids; 

And  make  us  better  than  we  are ! 


10  Indra-strength : indr  i yam  : great  vigour.  The  liigveda  has  in- 
dratjuh , ‘ as  Tndra’a  friend.’  Like.  Parjanya  : enriching  and  blessing 
us  as  the  rain-cloud  fertilizes  the  ground. 

Rigveda  IX.  4.  1 — 10.  The  llishi  is  lliranyastupa.  The  metre  is 
(hiyatri. 

1 Better ; or,  happier. 

4 Purifiers;  priests  whose  business  is  to  purify  the  Soma  juice. 
Hake  thou  ; 0 Soma. 


190  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PANT  II. 

G Through  thine  own  mental  power  and  aids  long  may 
we  look  upon  the  Sun  : 

Make  thou  us  better  than  we  are ! 

7 Well-wdaponed  Soma,  pour  to  us  a stream  of  riches 

doubly  great ; 

And  make  us  better  than  we  are ! 

8 As  one  victorious,  unsubdued  in  battle,  pour  forth 

wealth  to  us ; 

And  make  us  better  than  we  are ! 

9 With  offerings,  Pa vamdna ! men  have  strengthened 

thee  as  Law  commands  : 

. Make  thou  us  better  than  we  are ! 

10  0 Indu,  bring  us  wealth  in  steeds  'brilliant  and 
quickening  all  life  ; 

And  make  us  better  than  we  arc ! 

r 

V.  >3oma  Pavamana. 

Swift  runs  this  giver  of  delight,  even  the  stream  of 
flowing  juice : 

Swift  runs  this  giver  of  delight. 

2 The  Morning  knorts  all  precious  things,  the  Goddess 

knows  her  grace  to  man  : 

Swift  runs  this  giver  of  delight. 

3 We  have  accepted  thousands  from  Dhvasra’s  and 

Purushanti’s  hands : 

Swift  runs  this  giver  of  delight. 

9 As  Law  commands:  vidharmani ‘ for  their  own  upholding.’— 
Wilson.  According  to  Sayana  * in  the  ceremony  that  confers  manifold 
rewards.’ 

10  Quickening  all  life : viwdyufo : explained  by  Sayana  as  = sarva- 
gdminam : * all-reach ing . ’ — W i Ison. 

Rigveda  IX.  58. 1—4.  The  llishi  is  Avatsara.  The  metre  is  G&yatri. 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  i.  2.  4. 

3 Dhvasra  and  Purushanti  were  ‘ two  kings  who  conferred  great 
wealth  on  Taranta  and  PurumVha,  two  rishis  of  the  family  of  Vukt- 
dasiva.  Sec  p.  XXXIII.  of  Max  Muller’s  Higveda,  Yol.  V.’— Professor 
Cowell’s  Note  in  Wilson’s  Translation. 


iv.  i.  7.] 


THE  SAMAVEDA. 


191 


4 From  whom  we  have  accepted  thus  thousands  and 
three-times  ten  besides : 

Swift  runs  tins  giver  of  delight. 

"VI.  Soma  Pavamann. 

Forth  with  his  stream  who  gladdens  best  these  Soma 
juices  have  been  poured, 

Lauded  with  songs  for  mighty  strength. 

2 Thou  flowest  to  enjoy  the  milk,  and  bringcst  valour, 

being  cleansed  : 

Winning  the  spoil  flow  hitherward! 

3 And,  hymned  by  Jamadagni,  let  all  nourishment 

that  kifle  supply, 

And  general  praises,  flow  to  us ! 

VH.  * Agni. 

For  Jatavedas,  worthy  of  our  praisef  will  we  frnnffe 
with  our  mind  this  eulogy  as  ’twere  a car. 

For  good,  in  his  assembly,  is  this  care  of  ours.  Let 
us  not,  in  thy  friendship,  Agni,  suffer  harm! 

2 We  will  bring  fuel  and  prepare  our  sacred  gifts, 
reminding  thee  at  each  successive  holy  time. 

Fulfil  our  thoughts  that  Vo  may  lengthen  out  our  lives ! 
Let  us  not,  in  thy  friendship,  Agni,  sutler  harm ! 


Rigveda  IX.  G2.  22 — 24.  The  Rishi  is  Jamadagni,  The  metre  is 
Gayatri.  ’ 

1 Strength : savase  : the  Rigveda  has  sravase , / fame.’ 

3 Generat praises : parishtubali  : the  meanftig  of  the  word  here  is 
somewhat  uncertain.  According  to  Sayana  parishlubah  is  an  adjective 
qualifying  iskali , viands,  4 everywhere-praised.*  ‘In  IX.  G2,  24,  the 
feliah  are  called  paris hOlba/i,  which  seems  to  mean  something  like 
parisrut,  i.  e.  standing  round  about.’ — Max  Muller,  Vedic  Hymns , 
Part  I.,  p.  394. 

Rigveda  I.  94.  1,  4,  3.  The  Rishi  is  Kutsa.  The  metre  is  Jagati. 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  i.  ii.  2.  4. 

2 Reminding : or,  exciting. 


192 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  11, 


3 May  we  have  power  to  kindle  thee ! Fulfil  our  prayers ! 
In  thee  the  Gods  eat  the  presented  sacrifice. 

Bring  hither  the  Adityas,  for  we  long  . for  them  ! 
Let  as  not,  in  thy  friendship,  Agni,  svifer  harm ! 

VIII.  Mitra,  Varuna,  Aryaman. 

Soon  as  the  Sun  hath  risen  I sing  to  you,  to  Mitra, 
Varuna, 

And  Aryaman  who  slays  the  foe. 

2 With  wealth  of  gold  may  this  my  song  bring  unmol- 

ested might ; may  this, 

Sages  ! obtain  the  sacrifice ! 

3 May  we  be  thine,  God  Varuna,  and  with  our  princes,. 

Mitra,  thine : 

May  we  ^ain  food  and  heavenly  light ! 

IX.  Indm. 

Drive  all  onv  enemies  away,  smite  down  the  foes  who 
press  around, 

And  bring  the  wealth  for  which  we  long  : 

2 Of  which  the  world  shall  know  forthwith  as  given  by 
thee  abundantly  ? * 

Bring  us  the  wealth  for  which  we  long : 

3 The  Adityas : the  sons  of  Aditi ; seven  deities  of  the  heavenly 
sphere,  of  whom  Varuna  is  the  chief.  All  the  Gods,  according  to 
Sayana. 

Rigvcda  VII.  Gtf.  7 — 9.  The  Rishi  is  Vasishtha.  The  metre  is 
Gayatri. 

2 Sages  ! : viprd  must  either  he  taken,  with  Sayana,  in  q>ite  of  the 
accent,  as  a vocative,  or,  with  Ludwig,  as  a shorter  form  of  viprdndm , 
Obtain  the  sages’ sacrifice.  The  meaning  is  not  clear.  ‘May  it  (bo 
effective),  sages,  for  the  fulfilment  of  (the  objects  of)  the  sacrifice.’ — 
Wilson. 

Rigvcda  VIII.  45.  40,  42,  41.  The  Rishi  is  Trisoka.  The  metro 
is  Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  T.  ii.  i.  4.  10,  and  stanza  3 of 
I.  iii.  i.  2.  4. 

2 The  v)orld forthwith : visvam-dnushak : the  Rigveda  has 

viwam&nushali , ‘ the  whole  community  of  men.’ 


iv.  i.  11.] 


THE  SAMA  VEDA. 


19'3 


3 0 Indra,  that  which  is  concealed  in  strong  firm  place 
precipitous  : 

Bring  us  the  wealth  for  which  wc  long! 

f X.  Indra-Agni. 

Yea,  ye  are  priests  of  sacrifice,  winners  in  war  and 
holy  works  : 

Indra  and  Agni,  mark  this  well ! 

2 Bountiful,  riders  on  the  car,  slayers  of  Vritra, 

unsubdued, 

Indra  and  Agni,  mark  this  well ! 

3 The  men  with  pressing-stones  have  pressed  this 

ineath  qf  yours  which  gives  delight : 

Indra  and  Agni,  mark  this  well ! 

XI.  Soma  Pavamana. 

For  Indra  girt  by  Maruts,  flow,  thou  Indu,  very 
rich  in  ineath,  * 

To  seat  thee  in  the  place  of  song! 

2 Sages  who  know  the  lore  of  speech  deck  thee,  the 

strong  sustain er,  well  : 

Men  make  thee  bright  and  beautiful. 

3 Let  Mitra,  Varuna,  Aryaman  drink  Pavam Vila’s 

juice,  yea,  thine  : 

Sage  ! let  the  Maruts  drink  thereof! 


Rigveda  Vfll.  38.  1 — 3.  The  Rishi  is  SyavaHvm  rrhe  metre  is 
Rayatri. 

1 Mark  tlffis  u,el! : tasya  hadhatam : ‘hear  (4  lie  praise)  of  this  (thy 

worshipper).*  Wilson.  % 

2 Bountiful:  tosdsd:  according  to  Say  ana,  ‘destroyers  (of  foes).’ 

• • 

Rigveda  IX.  G4.  22 — 24.  The  Rishi  is  Kasvapa.  The  metre  is 
O&yatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  v.  ii.  4.  G. 

2 The  strong  sustainer : dharnasim  : the  Rigveda  has  vedhasah: — 
‘Controlling  priests  and  sages  skilled  in  lore  of  speech  adorn  thee  well.’ 

3 Sage:  O wise  Soma. 

13 


lU 


[PART  II. 


the  aryps  of 

XII.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Deft-handed!  thou  when  purified  liftest  thy  voice 
amid  the  sea. 

Thou,  Bavam&na,  makest  riches  flow  to<  us,  yellow, 
abundant,  much-desired. 

2 Made  pure,  .as  Pavamana,  in  the  sheep’s  long  wool, 
the  Steer  hath  bellowed  in  the  vat. 

Thou  flowest,  Soma  Pavam&na ! balmed  with  milk 
unto  the  meeting-place  of  Gods. 

XIII.  Soma  Pavam&uft. 
Him  here,  the  offspring  of  the  sea,  the  ten  swift 

fingers  beautify : 

With  the  Adityas  is  he  seen. 

2 With  Indra  and  with  Vayu  he,  effused,  flows  onward 

' with  the  beams 

« Of  Sffrya  t<j|  the  cleansing  sieve. 

3 Flow  rich  in  sweets  and  lovely  for  our  Bhaga,  V&yu, 

Pflshan,  fair 

For  Mitra  and  for  Yaruna! 

XIV.  India. 
With  Indra  splendid  feast3  be  ours,  rich  in  all 

strengthening  things,  wherewith, 

Wealthy  in  food,  we  may  rejoice! 


Rigveda  IX.  107.  21,  22.  Ascribed  to  the  Seven  ltishis.  The  metre 
is  PragAtha.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  i.  3.  7. 

2 The  meeting-place:  meaning  the  vessels  appropriated  to  the 
libations  which  are  to  be  offered  to,  the  several  deities. 

Rigveda  IX.  61.  7—9.  The  Rishi  is  Amahiyu.  The  metre  is 
Gayatri. 

1 Offspring  of  the  sea  : sindhumdtaram  : whose  mother  is  Sindhu, 
the  river  or  the  sea,  that  is,  in  this  place,  the  waters  or  ocean  of  the 
air.  With  the  Adityas : that  is,  he  is  regarded  as  one  of  the  Adityas. 

Rigveda  I.  30.  13 — 15.  The  Rishi  is  Sunahsepa.  The  metre  is 
GAvatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  ii.  ii.  1.  9, 


THE  SjMAVEDA. 


195 


iv.  i.  15.] 


2 Like  thee,  thyself,  for  singers  yoked,  thou  movest, 

as  it  were,  besought, 

Bold  one,  the  axle  of  the  oar, 

3 That,  Sa’takratu,  thou,  to  serve  and  please  thy  praisers, 

as  it  were, 

Stirrest  the  axle  with  thy  strength. 


XV . Indra. 

As  a good  cow  to  him  who  milks,  we  call  'the  doer 
of  good  deeds 

To  our  assistance  day  by  day. 

2 Come  thou  to  our  libations,  drink  of  Soma,  Soma- 

drinker!  yea, 

The  rich  one’s  rapture  giveth  kine. 

3 So  may  we  be  acquainted  with  thine  innermost  bene- 

volence : 

Neglect  us  not;  come  hitherward! 


2 The  lines  in  this  and  the  following  stanza  referring  to  the  axle 
and  the  chariot  or  wain  are  somewhat  obscure  and  have  been  variously 
interpreted.  I adopt  Professor  Ludwig’s  explanation.  The  expression, 
movest,  or  stirrest,  the  axle,  which  is  the  firmest  and  strongest  part 
of  the  car,  is  intended  to  signify  Indra’s  great  strength  exerted  at  his 
worshippers’  prayer.  Like  thee  : with  all  thy  usual  power.  Thyself; 
by  thine  <jwn  exertion.  Yoked : yuktah : harufessod  to  the  car-pole. 
The  Rigveda  has  dptah  : — * the  singers’  friend.’ 

Rigveda  I.  4.  1 — 3.  The  Rishi  is  Madhuchchhandas.  The  metre 
is  Gayatrl.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  ii.  ii.  2.  6. 

1 The  doer  of  good  deeds  : Indra. 

2 The  rich  one's  rapture  giveth  kine : Indra,  when  exhilarated  by 
draughts  of  Soma  juice  bestows  liberal  gifts  of  cattle  on  his  worship- 
pers. 


196 


THE  I1YMNS  OF 


[PANT  II. 


XVI.  Mr*. 
As,  like  tlie  Morning,  thou  hast  filled,  0 Indra, 

both  the  earth  and  heaven, 

So  as  tffe  mighty  one,  great  King  of  all  *the  mighty 
race  of  men,  the  Goddess  mother  brought  thee  forth, 
the  blessed  mother  gave  thee  life. 

2 Thou  bearest  in  thine  hand  a lance  like  a long  hook, 

great  counsellor. 

As  with  his  foremost  foot  a goat,  draw  down  the 
branch,  OMaghavan.  The  Goddess  mother  brought 
thee  forth,  the  blessed  mother  gave  thee  life. 

3 Kelax  that  mortals  stubborn  strength  whose  heart 

is  bent  on  wickedness. 

Trample  him  down  beneath  thy  feet  who  watches  for 
and  aiftis  at  us.  The  Goddess  mother  brought 
thee  forth,  the  blessed  mother  gave  thee  life. 

XVII.  Soma  Pavamana. 
Soma,  the  dweller  on  the  hills,  effused,  hath  flowed 

into  the  sieve. 

All-bounteous  art  tbogju  carouse. 

2 Thou  art  a holy  bard,  a Sage ; the  meath  is  offspring 

of  thy  sap  : 

All-bounteous  art  thou  in  carouse. 

3 All  deities  of  one  accord  have  come  that  they  may 

drink  of  thee  : 

All-bounteous  art  thou  in  carouse. 

Rigveda  X.  13k  1‘,  5 ,2.  The  Hishi  is  Mandhatar.  The  metre 

is  Mahapankti  (8  x 6). 

1 The,  Goddess  mother : Aditi. 

2 Like  a long  hook : thou  u innest  the  distant  prize  with  thy  spear 
as  a man  seizes  something  near  him  with  a hook.  The,  branch  : that 
is  loaded  with  fruit  for  us. 

Rigveda  IX.  18.  1—3.  The  Rishi  is  Asita  or  Dcvala.  The  metre 
is  Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  1.  v.  ii.  4.  9. 

1 Dweller  on  the  hills  : girishthd : ‘pressed  between  the  stones.’ — ■ 
Wilson. 


iv.  i.  20.J 


THE  SAM  A VEDA. 


197 


XVIII.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Effused  is  he  who  brings  good  things,  who  brings  us 
store  of  wealth,  and  sweet  refreshing  food, 

Soma  who  brings  us  quiet  homes  : 

2 He  whom  our  Indra  and  the  Marut  host  shall  drink, 
Bhaga  shall  drink  with  Aryaman, 

By  whom  we  bring  to  us  Mitra  and  Varuna,  and 
Indra  for  our  great  defence. 

XIX.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Friends,  hymn  your  Lord  who  makes  him  pure  for 
. rapturous  carouse  : let  them 
Sweeten  him,  as  a child,  with  lauds  and  sacred  gifts ! 

2 Like  as  a calf  with  mother  cows,  so  Indu  is  urged 

forth  and  sent,  • 

Glorified  by  our  hymns,  the  god-delighting  juice. 

3 Effectual  help  to  power  is  he,  he*  is  a banquet*  for 

the  troop, 

He  who  hath  been  effused,  more  rich  in  meath,  * 
for  Gods.  . % 

XX.  .•  Soma  Pavamaua. 

For  us  the  Soma  juices  flow,  the  drops  best  fur- 

therers  of  weal, 

Effused  as  friends,  without  a spot,  benevolent,  finders 
of  the  light. 


Rigvcda  IX.  108.  13,  14.  The  Rishi  of  1 is  Rinanchaya,  and  the 
metre  Gayatri  Yavamadhya ; of  2 the  Ri,$hi  Is  Sakti,  and  the  metre 
Satobrihati.  Stanza  l is  a repetition  of  1.  vi.  ii.  4.  f>. 

Rigvcda  IX.  105.  1 — 3.  Ascribed  to  Parvata  and  Narnda.  The 
metre  is  TJshnih.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  ii.  3.  4. 

3 The  troop  : the  host  of  Manila,  the  banded  Storm-Gods.  More 
rich  in  meath:  the  Rigvcda  has  the  superlative  madhumattamah. 

Rigveda  IX.  101.  10,  12,  11.  The  Rishi  is  Manu  Samvarana.  Tha 
metre  is  G&yatrL  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  ii.  1.  4. 


1 98  THE  11 YMNS  OF  [PA  RT  If. 

2 These  Soma  juices,  skilled  in  song,  purified,  blent 

with  milk  and  curd, 

Hastening  on  and  firmly  set  in  oil  resemble  beau- 
teous suns. 

3 Effused  by  means  of  pressing-stones,  upon  the  ox- 

hide visible, 

They,  treasure-finders,  have  announced  food  unto  us 
from  every  side. 

XXI,  Soma  Pavamana. 

Pour  forth  this  wealth  with  this  purification : flow 
onward  to  the  yellow  lake,  O Indu ! 
iHere,  too,  the  bright  one,  wind-swift,  full  of  wisdom, 
shall  give  a son  to  him  who  oometh  quibkly. 

2 Plow  on  for  us  with  this  purification  to  the  famed 

fiprd  of  fhee  whose  due  is  glory  I 
May  the  foe-queller  shake  us  down,  for  triumph, 

* like  a tree’s  ripe  fruit,  sixty  thousand  treasures ! 

3 Eagerly  do  we  pray  for  those  two  exploits.,  at  the 

blue  lake  and  Prisana,  wrought  in  battle. 

He  sent  our  enemies-  to  sleep  and  slew  them,  and 

turned  away  the  foolish  and  unfriendly. 

* » , 

Rigveda  IX.  97.  52 — 54.  The  Rishi  is  Kutsa.  The  metre  is  Trishtup, 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  i.  5.  9. 

2 To  the  famed  ford  : meaning,  according  to  Benfey,  the  fleece  over 
whioh  the  Soma  passes  before  it  drops  into  the  reservoir.  Or,  possibly, 
as  Professor  Ludwig  suggests,  the  aid  of  Soma  is  craved  at  some  ford 
of  a neighbouring  river,  famous  on  account  of  a battle  that  has  been 
fought  there,  and  destined  to  bo  the  scene  of  an  approaching  conflict. 

3 The  first  line  is  conjecturally  translated  after  Professor  Ludwig 
who  takes  vrishandma  (the  Rigvedr*  reading  instead  of  vrisha  ndma) 
as  a verb,  and  Prisana  as  the  name  of  a place.  Sayana’s  elaborate 
explanation  is  different : 1 These  two  great  acts,  the  raining  (of  arrows) 
and  the  humiliation  (of  foes),  are  the  givers  ‘of  happin6ss ; they  are 
deadly  either  in  a fight  on  horseback  or  in  a hand  to  hand  fight.’ — 
Wilson.  Here  S4yana  explains  mdnschatve  (at  the  blue  lake  ?)  by  * in 
battle  with  horses,’  and  prisane  (at  Prisana  ?)  by  ‘ in  close  or  hand  to 
hand  encounter.’  Two  victories  appear  to  be  referred  to,  and  that  ia 
about  all  that  can  be  said, 


iv.  ii.  1.] 


THE  SAHA  VEDA. 


199 


XXII.  Agni. 

0 Aqni,  be  our  nearest  friend,  yea,  our  protector  and 
our  kind  deliverer ! 

2 As  gracious  Agni,  famed  for  treasures,  *come,  and, 

most  resplendent,  give  us  store  of  wealth  ! 

3 To  thee  then,  0 most  bright,  0 radiant  God,  we 

con^e  with  prayer  for  happiness  for  our  friends. 

XXIII.  India. 

May  we,  with  Indra  and  the  Gods  to  aid  us, 
bring  these  existing  worlds  to  full  completion  ! 

2 Our  sacrifice,  our  bodies,  and  our  offspring,  let  Indra 

with  the  Adityas  form  and  finish! 

3 With  the  Adityas,  with  the  band  of  Maruts,  let 

Indra  send  us  medicines  to  heal  usj 

XX I Y.  Indra. 

Sing  to  your  Indra,  mightiest  Vritfa-slayer,  sing* to 
the  Sage  the  song  that  he  aecepteth ! 


CHAPTER*  II. 

I.  Soma  Pnvnmana. 

The  God  declares  the  deities’  generations,  like  Usana, 
proclaiming  lofty  wisdom. 

With  brilliant  kin,  far-ruling,  sanctifying,  the  wild 
boar,  singing  with  his  foot,  advances. 

Rigveda  V.  24.  1,  2,  4.  Ascribed  to  the  CJaupayauas,  or  Laupayanas. 
The  metre  is  Viraj.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  v.  ii.  2.  2. 

Rigveda*X.  157.  1,  2,  3.  The  Rishi  is  Btfuvana,  or  Sadhana.  The 
metre  is  Dvipada-trishtup  or  Trishtup  in  half-stanzas.  Stanza  1 is  a 
repetition  of  I.  v.  ii.  2.  6. 

This  stanza*  from  I.  ii.  i.  10,  is  not  found  in  the  Rigveda.  The 
beginning  only,  pra  vo  ’ rckopa,  is  repeated  in  the  text. 

Stanzas  1—3,  Rigveda  IX.  97.  7- -9.  Ascribed  to  Indrapramati 
Vasishtha.  The  metre  is  Trishtup.  Stanzas  4 — 12,  Rigveda  IX.  10, 
1 — -9.  Ascribed  to  Asita  or  Devala.  The  metre  is  G&yatri.  Stanza 
1 is  a repetition  of  1.  vi.  i.  4.  2. 


200 


THE  IlYMNS  OF 


[FART  II. 


2 The  swans,  the  Yrishaganas  from  anear  us,  restless, 

have  brought  their  clamour  to  our  dwelling — 
Friends,  eouie  to  Pavatnana,  meet  for  praises — and 

souncKn  concert  their  resistless  music.  * 

3 He  takes  the  swiftness  of  the  great  Far-strider  : 

cows  low  as  ’twere  to  him  who  sports  at  pleasure. 
He  with  the  sharpened  horns  brings  fortli  abundance: 

the  silvery  shines  by  night,  by  day  the  golden. 

4 Like  cars  that  thunder  on  their  way,  like  coursers 

eager  for  renown, 

Have  Soma  drops  flowed  forth  for  wealth. 

5 Forth  have  they  rushed  from  holding  hands,  like 

chariots  that  are  urged  to  speed,  4 
Like  joyful  songs  of  singing-men. 

6 The  Sonfas  deck  themselves  with  milk  as  kings  are 

graced  with  eulogies, 

* And,  with  sqven  priests,  the  sacrifice. 

7 Pressed  for  the  gladdening  draught  the  drops  flow 

forth  abundantly  with  song, 

Flow  with  the  stream  of  savoury  juice. 

8 Winning  Vivas  van's  glory  and  speeding  the  light  of 

Dawn,  the  suns  * 

Pass  through  the  openings  of  the  cloth. 

2 The  swans  : the  singers,  descendants  of  the  Rishi  Vrishugana. 

Restless clamour  : the  Rigveda  has  tripaUnn  manyuni  instead  of 

tripald  vagnuni : — ‘ have  brought  their  restless 

3 The  swiftness  * of  the  great  Far-strider ; the  rapid  motion  of  the 
Sun.  C ov.'s  low  as  "(were:  SUana  explains  ydvah,  cows,  by  an  ye 
ganidrah,  ‘other  goers,’  takes  na  as  a negative,  and  derives  miniate 
from  mdt  to  measure,  instead  of  Rom  md,  to  bleat  or  low  : — ‘ other 
goers  cannot  overtake  him  (though  he  is)  moving  easily.’— Wilson. 
The  cows  arc,  probably,  the  cows  that  supply  the  sacrificial  milk,  or 
the  milk  itself.  He  with  the  sharpened  horns  : Soma  as  the  Moon. 
He  is  the  silvery  light  by  night  and  the  golden-coloured  juice  by  day. 

6 Seven  prieMs : priests  of  six  different  orders  or  classes,  together 
with  the  institutor  of  the  ceremony,  officiating  at  the  Soma-sacrificc. 

8 The  suns  : bright  and  powerful  Soma  juices  which  bring  the  light 
of  Ushas  or  Dawn  and  Vivasvan  or  the  radiant  morning  sun. 


iv  ii.  l.J 


THE  SAM  A VEDA . 


201 


9  The  singing-men  of  ancient  time  open  the  doors  of 
sacred  songs — 

The  men  who  bring  the  mighty  one, 

10  In  close*  society  have  come  the  priests,  the  sevenfold 

brotherhood, 

Filling  the  station  of  the  One. 

11  He  makes  us  kin  with  Gods,  he  joins  the  Sun, 

for  seeing,  with  mine  eye  ; 

I milk  the  Sage’s  offspring  forth. 

12  The  Sun  belioldeth  with  his  eye  the  heaven’s  dear 

quarter  which  the  priests 
Have  set  within  the  sacred  cell. 


9 Who  bring  : haramh . The  mighty  one  : Soma.  The  Rigveda  has 
harase,  ‘ for  the  acceptance  of  the  mighty  one.’ 

10  'The  One:  Soma. 

1 1 He  malm  ns  kin  with  Coda  : ndjdit  fidbhim  na  d dadhe : I follow 
Professor  PisehePs  interpretation  of  thi*  difficult  passige.  ‘Soma 

unites  our  navel  with  the  navel  of  the  Cods that  is,  he  brings 

us  into  union  with  the  Cods  in  heaven.’ — Vedisehe  Studien , I.  p.  09. 
‘I  take  into  my  navel  the  navel  of  the  sacrifice  [the  Soma|.’  - Wilson. 
‘He  [Soma]  as  kinsman  has  brought  us  a kinsman  [Sirya].’-- -Ludwig. 
The  Sun,  for  seeing,  with  mine  eye:  or,  ‘so  that  mine  eye  may  see  the  Sun.’ 
The  Rigveda  has  rhakshns  chit  stirye  saehd,  ‘even  with  the  Sun  (unites) 
our  eve.’  The  Sages  offspring : a periphrasis  for  the  Sage  himself, 
that  is,  the  Soma.  * 

12  This  stanza  is  very  obscure.  * I have  adopted  Ren  fey’s  explana- 
tion who  ‘here  follows  an  occasional  interpretation  of  div  or  dyidoka , 
given  by  the  Scholiast*  which  identifies  it  with  the  dronakalam  or 
large  Soma-trough.  lie  takes  it  as  meaning  that  the  Sun  looks 

towards  the  place  where  the  Sonia  lies  while  it  is  pressed Sa}Tana 

seems  to  interpret  this  verse  as  meaning  that  hidra  views  the  Soma 
with  affection  oven  after  it  has  been  drunk  by  the  priests  [fixed  in  the 
heart].’— Prof.  Cowell,  in  Wilson’s  Translation  of  the  Rigveda  Sanhitft. 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  II. 


202 


II.  Soma  Pavamann. 

Forth  on  their  way  the  glorious  drops  have  flowed 
for  maintenance  of  Law, 

Knowing  what  suits  this  worshipper.  1 

2 Down  in  the  mighty  waters  sinks  the  stream  of 

meath,  most  excellent, 

Oblation  best  of  all  in  worth. 

3 About  the  holy  place  the  Steer,  true,  guileless, 

noblest,  hath  sent  forth 
Continuous  voices  in  the  wood. 
i When  the  Sage,  purging  manly  deeds  and  lofty 
wisdom,  flows  around, 

The  Strqng  would  win  the  light  of  heaven. 

5 When  purified,  he  sits  enthroned  as  King  over  the 
► warring  cjans, 

What  time  the  sages  speed  him  on. 

6 Most  dear,  gold-coloured,  in  the  fleece  he  sinks, 

and  settles  in  the  wood  : 

The  singer  is  besieged* with  song. 

7 He  goes  to  Indra,  Vayu,  and  the  Asvins  with  the 

rapturous  joy, 

To  whomsoeer  his  power  delights. 


Stanzas  1 — 9,  ltigveda  IX.  7.  1 — 9.  Ascribed  to  Asita  or  Devala. 
Stanzas  10 — 12,  Rigveda  IX.  65.  28 — 30.  Ascribed' to  Bhrigu,  or 
Jamadagni.  The  metre  fs  Gayatri  throughout  the  hymn.  Stanza  10 
is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  i.  2.  2.  1 

1 Worshipper:  or,  ‘sacrifice/  as  Sayana  explains:  asya  has  no 
Bubstantivc  expressed. 

3 In  the  wood : vane : according  to  Sayana,  ‘ in  the  water/  The 
stanza  is  very  difficult,  and  I am  unable  to  offer  a satisfactory 
translation. 

4 Purging  manly  deeds : according  to  the  Rigveda,  ‘ clothed  in 
manly  strength/  The  Strong:  the  mighty  Indra. —Sayana. 


w.  ii.  3.]  THE  SlMAVEDA.  203 

8 The  waves  of  pleasant  Soma  flow  to  Bhaga,  Mitra, 

Varuna, 

Well  knowing,  through  his  mighty  powers. 

9 Gain  for  us,  0 ye  Heaven  and  Earth,  richer  of  meath 

to  win  us  strength  : 

Gain  for  us  treasures  and  renown. 

10  We  choose  to-day  that  chariot-steed  of  thine,  the 

strong,  that  brings  us  bliss, 

The  guardian,  the  desire  of  all ; 

11  The  excellent,  the  gladdener,  the  Sage  with  heart 

that  understands, 

The  guardian,  the  desire  of  all  ; 

12  Who  for  ourselves,  0 thou  most  wise,  is  wealth  and 

fair  intelligence, 

The  guardian,  the  desire  of  all. 

HI.  Agni. 

Agni  Vaisv&nara,  born  in  course  of  Order,  the 
messenger  of  earth,  the  he$d  of  heaven, 

The  Sage,  the  Sovran,  guest  of  men,  our  vessel  fit 
for  their  mouth,  the  Gods  harve  generated. 

2 To  thee,  immortal!  when  to  life  thou  springest  all 
the  Gods  sing  for  joy  as  to  their  infant. 

They  by  thy  mental  powers  were  made  immortal, 
Vaisv^nara  ! when  thou  slionest  from  thy  parents. 


8 Well  knowing : that  is,  the  waves  or  streams*  which,  through  the 
power  of  Soma,  know  the  way  they  should  go.  ‘ The  worshippers 
knowing  its  (virtues  aro  rewarded)  N^ith  happiness.’ — Wilson. 

10  That  chariot-steed  of  thine  : meaning  the  flowing  Soma  itself. 

Rigveda  VI.  7.  1,  4,  2.  Ascribed  to  Bharadvaja.  The  metre  is 
Trishtnp.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  i.  ii.  2.  5. 

2 Were  made  immortal : Agni  alone,  it  is  said,  was  originally  im- 
mortal, and  the  other  Gods  obtained  immortality  through  him. 
Of.  Rigveda  V,  3.  4. 


204  THE  HYMNS  OE  [PART  II 

3 Him  have  they  praised,  mid-point  of  sacrifices,  great 
cistern  of  libations,  seat  of  riches. 

Vaisvanara,  conveyer  of  oblations,  ensign  of  worship, 
have  the  Gods  engendered. 

IV.  Mitra-Vamna. 
Sino  forth  unto  your  Varuna  and  Mitra  with  a song 

inspired : 

They,  mighty  Lords,  are  lofty  law. 

2 Full  springs  of  fatness,  sovran  Kings,  Mitra  and 

Varuna,  the  twain, 

Gods  glorified  among  the  Gods. 

3 So  help  ye  us  to  riches,  great  celestial  and  terrestrial 

wealth ! 

Vast  is  $Tour  sway  among  the  Gods. 

V.  India. 
0 Indra  marvellously  bright,  come,  these  libations 

long  for  thee, 

Tims  by  fine  fingers  purified ! 

2 Urged  by  the  holjf  singer,  sped  by  song,  come  nigh, 

0 Indra,  to  f 

The  sacrificing  suppliant’s  prayers  ! 

3 Approach,  0 Indra,  hasting  thee,  Lord  of  bay 

horses,  to  our  prayers  : 

In  our  libation  take  delight ! 

3 Mid-point  of  sacrifices : ‘the  bond  of  sacrifices.’ — Wilson.  Agni 
or  fire  is  essential  in' all  sacrifices.  r 

Rigveda  V.  68.  1,  2,  3.  Ascribed  to  Ratahavya.  The  metre  is 
Gayatri. 

1 They,  mighty  Lords , are  lofty  law : 1 (Come)  mighty  deities,  to 
the  great  sacrifice.’ — Wilson. 

2 Full  springs  of  fatness:  originators  of  fertilizing  rain ; or  gkritayonl 
may  mean  dwelling  with  yhrita)  clarified  butter  or  oil  used  in  sacrifice. 

Rigveda  I.  3.  4 — 6.  The  Rishi  is  Madhuchchhandas.  The  metre 
is  Gayatri. 


IV.  ii.  7.] 


THE  SlMAVEDA . 


205 


VI.  lndra-Agni. 
Glorify  him  who  compasses  all  forests  with  his  glow- 
ing flame, 

Ancl  leaves  them  blackened  by  his  tongue.  * 

2 He  who  gains  Indra’s  grace  by  fire  enkindled,  finds 

an  easy  way 

Over  the  floods  to  splendid  wealth. 

3 Give  us,  ye  twain,  swift  steeds  to  bring  Indra  and 

Agni,  and  bestow 
Abundant  food  with  wealth  on  us. 

VII.  Soma  Pavamana. 

• * 

Indu  hath*  started  forth  for  Indra’s  settled  place,  and 
slights  not,  as  a friend,  the  promise  of  his  friend. 
Soma  comes  onward  like  a youth  with  youthful  maids, 
and  gains  the  beaker  by  a course  of  hundred  paths. 
2 Your  hymns  of  pleasant  sound,  praiseworthy,  fond  o*f 
lauds,  have  come  into  the  hall  enclosed  for  sacrifice. 
Singers  have  hymned  the  golden-coloured  as  he 
sports,  and  lnileh-kine  have, come  near  to  meet  him 
with  their  milk. 

Itigveda  VI.  GO.  10-  12.  Tin*  Rishi  is  Rharadvaja.  The  metro  is 
Ci  a vatri. 

1 (thrift/:  or,  Supplicate;  addressed  to  the  Stotar  or  praise- 
singer.  Him : Agni. 

2 By  fire,  enkindled  : at  the  fire  into  which  he  pours  his  oblations, 
Floods:  a metaphorical  expression  for  the  troubles  and  difficulties  that 
bar  his  way.  Kay  ana  explains  the  stanza  differently,  taking  the 
genitive  indrasya  as  = the  dative  i^Irdya  :-  *He  who  throws  into  the 
shining  divinity  propitious  offerings  for  Indra,  will  receive  from  him 
pleasant  preserving  rains  for  the  production  of  glorious  crops  of  corn/ 

- -Stevenson.  % 

3 Indra  and  Ayni : that  is,  you,  the  deities  who  are  addressed. 

Itigveda  IX.  86.  1G — 18.  Ascribed  to  the  Sikatas.  The  metre  is 
Jagati.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  ii.  2.  4. 

2 Jnto  the  hall  enclosed  for  sacrifice  : samvaraneshu : the  Kigveda 
has  samvasaneshu : — ‘into  the  places  where  the  people  meet.’ 


206 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  IL 


3 0 Soma,  Indu,  while  they  cleanse  thee,  with  thy 
wave  pour  on  us  plentiful  accumulated  food, 
Which,  ceaseless,  thrice  a day  shall  yield  us  hero 
power  enriched  with  store  of  nourishment,  and 
strength,  and  meath. 

VIII.  Indra. 

No  one  by  deed  attains  to  him  who  works  and 
strengthens  evermore  : 

No,  not  by  sacrifice,  to  Indra  praised  of  all,  resistless, 
daring,  bold  in  might ; 

2 The  powerful  conqueror,  invincible  in  war,  I)im  at 
whose  birth  the  mighty  ones, 

The  kine  who  spread  afar,  sent  their  loud  voices  out, 
heavens,  earths  sent  their  loud  voices  out. 

IX.  Soma  Pavam&na, 

Sir  down,  0 friends,  and  sing  aloud  to  him  who 
purifies  himself : 

Deck  him  for  glory,  like  a child,  with  holy  rites! 

2 Loose  him  who  hringeth  household  wealth,  even 
as  a calf  with  jnothcr  kine, 

Him  who  hath  double  strength,  strong,  god- 
delighting juice! 

3 Thrice  a day : at  the  three  appointed  sacrifices. 

Rigveda  VIIL  59.  3,  4.  The  Rishi  is  Puruhanman.  The  metre  is 
PrSgUtha.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iii.  ii.  1.  1. 

2 The  kine  who  spread* afar ; a metaphorical  expression'  for  heaven 
and  earth.  •» 

Heavens , earths : a threefold  division  of  heaven  and  earth  is 
frequently  spoken  of  in  the  Rigveda. 

Rigveda  IX.  104.  1 — 3.  The  Rishis  are  I’arvataand  NUrada.  The 
metre  is  Ushnih.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  ii.  3.  3. 

2 ‘ Associate  him  the  support  of  the  mansion  with  the  maternal 
(waters)  as  the  calf  (with  the  mother),’ — Wilson.  Double  strength  : 
celestial  and  terrestrial. 


iv.  ii.  11.]  THE  SAMAVEDA.  2&7 

3 Purify  him  who  gives  us  power,  most  blissful  one, 
that  he  may  be 

A banquet  for  the  troop,  Mitra,  and  Varuija ! 

X.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

The  Strong  hath  flowed  forth  in  a thousand  streams, 
flowed  through  the  filter  and  the  sheep’s  long  wool. 

2 With  ceaseless  genial  flow  the  Strong  hath  run, 

purified  by  the  waters,  blent  with  milk. 

3 Pressed  out  with  stones,  directed  by  the  men, 

go  forth,  0 Soma,  into  lndra’s  throat! 

XI.  Soma  Puvamana. 

The  Soma  juices  which  have  been  expressed  afar  or 
near  at  hand, 

Or  there  on  Saryan&v&n’s  bank, 

2 Those  pressed  among  Arjikas,  pressed  among  the 

active,  in  men’s  homes, 

Or  pressed  among  the  Fivefold  Tribes — 

3 May  these  celestial  drops,  expressed,  pour  forth  upon 

us,  as  they  flow, 

Rain  from  the  heavens  and  hero  strength ! 


3 The  troop : the  host  of  Maruts. 

Rigveda  IX.  109.  16 — 18.  Ascribed  to  the  Aguayo  Dhishnyah, 

sacrificial  Agnis  or  fires.  The  metre  is  Dvipada  ,VinVj. 

3 Throat : kukshd : Latin,  coxjus  ; literally,  two  cavities  of  the 
abdomen.  % 


Rigveda  IX,  65.  22 — 24.  The  Rishi  is  Bhrigu,  or  Jamadagni.  The 
metre  is  Giyatri. 

1 Sctryandudn’s  bank ; in  Kurukshetra. 

2 Arjikas : apparently  a non- Aryan  people  inhabiting  a country 
near  Kurukshetra.  In  men's  homes : madhye  pastydndm : or,  among 
the  Pastyas,  who  may  have  been  a neighbouring  people. 


208 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  II. 


XII.  Agni. 

May  Vatsa  draw  thy  mind  away  even  from  thy 
loftiest  dwelling-place!  • 

Agni,  I yearn  for  thee  with  song. 

2 Thou  art  alike  in  many  a place : through  all  the 

regions  thou  art  Lord. 

In  fray  and  light  wo  call  on  thee. 

3 When  we  are  seeking  spoil  we  call  Agni  to  help  us 

in  the  strife, 

Giver  of  wondrous  gifts  in  war. 

XIII.  In  lira. 

0 Tndrv,  bring  great  strength  to  us,  bring  valour, 

Satakvatu,  thou  most  active,  bring 
A hero  conquering  in  war ! 

2 For,  gracious  Satakratu,  thou  hast  ever  been  a mother 

and  a sire*to  us, 

So  now  for  bliss  we  pray  to  thee. 

3 To  thee,  strong!  much-invoked!  who  showest  forth 

thy  strength,  made  very  mighty ! do  I speak  : 

So  grant  thou  us  heroic  power! 

« 

XIV.  Inrirn. 

Stone-darting  Indra,  wondrous  God,  what  wealth 
thou  hast  not  given  me  here, 

That  bounty,  treasure-finder!  bring,  filling  full  both 
thy  hands,  to  us ! 

Rigveda  VIII.  11.  7— 9t  The  Rishi  is  Vatsa.  The  metreis  Gayatri. 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  i.  i.  1#  8. 

2 Regions : disah : the  Rigveda  has  visali , clans,  or  people. 

Rigveda  VIII.  87.  10 — 12.  The  Rishi  is  Nrimedha.  ' The  metre  is 
Kakup  in  stanzas  1 and  2,  and  Pura-ushnih  in  3.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition 
of  I.  v.  i.  2.  7. 

RUveda  V.  39.  1 — 3.  The  Rishi  is  Atri.  The  metre  is  Anushtup. 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iv.  ii.  1.  4. 


iv.  ii.  14.]  THE  SlMAVEDA.  209* 

2 Bring  what  thou  deemest  worth  the  wish,  0 Indra, 

that  which  is  in  heaven ! 

So  may  we  know  thee  as  thou  art,  a giver  boundless 
in  thy  jjfifts ! 

3 Thy  lofty  spirit  famed  in  all  the  regions  as  appeas- 

able,— 

With  this  thou  rendest  even  things  firm,  Stone-darter! 
so  to  win  thee  strength. 


3 In  all  the  regions:  dikshu : the  Rigveda  has  ditsu , ‘willing  to 
give,’  agreeing  with  manas , spirit.  Thou  rendest : or,  rend  thou. 


14 


BOOK  V. 


CHAPTER  I. 

Soma  Pavamfwa. 

The  Mar u is  with  their  troop  adorn  and  brighten, 
even  at  his  birth,  the  Sage,  the  lovely  infant. 

By  songs  a poet,  and  a Sage  by  wisdom,  Soma  goes 
singing  through  the  cleansing  filter. 

2 Light-winner,  Rishi-minded,  Rishi-maker,  hymned  in 

a thousand  hymns,  leader  of  sages, 

Eager  to  gain  his  third  form,  mighty,  Soma  is, *like 
Viraj,  resplendent  as  a singer. 

3 Hawk  seated  in  the  press,  bird  wide-extended,  the 

banner  seeking  kine  and  ‘wielding  weapons, 

Uniting  with  the  sea,  the  wave  of  waters,  the  mighty 
tells  his  fourth  form  and  declares  it. 


Rigvcda  IX.  96.  17 — 19.  The  Rishi  is  Pratardana.  The  metre  is 
Trishtup. 

1 The  Maruts  : meaning,  perhaps,  the  priosfs. 

2 Rnki-viaker : giver  of  inspiration.  1/ is  third  form : the  form 
(dhdma)  that  he  wears  in  hcaren;  ‘the  third  region  (heaven).’ — 
Wilson.  Virdj : splendid  or  most  illustrious  Indra. — Sayana. 

3 The  banner  : drapsah  : usually  meaning  a drop  or  spark.  See 
Rigveda  IV.  13.  2.  The  sea:  the  ocean  of  air;  the  firmament.  The 
wave  of  waters : the  source  from  which  the  rain  comes.  His  fourth 
Jorm : his  form  as  the  Moon  which  is  also  called  Soma.  According  to 
Sayana,  the  region  of  the  moon  which  is  said  to  be  above  that  of  the 
sun. 


212' 


THE  HYMNS  Of 


[TAUT  II. 


II.  Soma  Pa  v a maim. 

Obeying  Indra’s  dear  desire  these  Soma  juices  have 
flowed  forth 

Increasing  his  heroic  might. 

2 Laid  in  the  press  and  flowing  pure  to  V&yu  and  the 

Asvins,  may 

These  give  us  great  heroic  strength. 

3 Soma,  as  thou  art  purified,  incite  to  bounty  Indra’s 

heart, 

To  seat  him  in  the  shrine  of  Gods ! 

4 The  ten  swift  fingers  deck  thee  forth,  seven  ministers 

impel  thee  on : 

The  sages  have  rejoiced  in  thee. 

5 When  through  the  filter  thou  art  poured  we  clothe 

thee  with  a robe  of  milk 
To  be  a rapturous  feast  for  Gods. 

6 When  purified  within  the  jars,  Soma  bright-red  and 

golden-hued 

Hath  veiled  him  in  a milky  dress. 

7 Flow  onward  to  ou*  wealthy  lords.  Drive  all  our 

enemies  away  : 

O Indu,  pass  into  thy  friend  ! 

8 May  we  obtain  thee,  Indra’s  drink,  who  viewesfc 

men  and  findest  light, 

Gaiu  thee  and  progeny  and  food ! 

9 Send  down  the  rain  from  heaven  and  make  splendour 

upon  the  earth!  Give  us, 

0 Soma,  victory  in  war ! 

Kigveda  IX.  8.  1 — 9.  The  Rishi  is  Asita  or  Dcvala.  The  metre 
is  Gayatri. 

3 Of  Godt : the  Rigvela  has  ritasya , ‘of  Law’  or  ‘sacrifice/  instead 
of  devdndrn. 

7 Thy  friend:  Indra. 

8 This  and  the  following  stanza  are  transposed  in  the  Rigveda. 

9 Make  splendour  upon  the  earth:  cover  the  earth  with  com.’ — 
Stevenson. 


V.  i.  3.] 


THE  SA.U.i  VEDA. 


213 


III.  Somn  Pavam&na. 

Poured  through  the  fleece  in  thousand  streams 
purified  Soma  floweth  to 
IndraM  and  V&yu’s  meeting-place. 

2 Sing  forth,  ye  men  who  long  for  help,  to  Pavam&na, 

to  the  Sage 

Effused  to  entertain  the  Gods! 

3 The  Soma  drops  with  thousand  powers  are  purified 

to  win  us  strength, 

Hymned  to  become  the  feast  of  Gods. 

4 Yea,  as  thou  flowest  bring  great  store  of  food  that 

we  nlay  win  us  strength  : 

Indu,  bring  splendid  manly  might! 

5 Like  coursers  by  their  drivers  urged,  th^y  were 

poured  forth,  to  win  us  strength, 

Swift  through  the  woollen  straining-cloth. 

6 May  they  in  flowing  give  us  wealth  in  thousands, 

and  heroic  power, — 

These  godlike  Soma  drops ’effused  ! 

7 The  roaring  Soma  drops  flow  on,  like  milch-kine 

lowing  to  their  calves  : 

They  have  run  forth  from  both  the  hands. 

8 Beloved  by  Indra,  bringing  joy,  roaring  as  thou  art 

purified, 

Drive  all  our  enemies  away.. 


* 

Rigveda  IX.  13.  1—9.  The  l^ishi  is  Asita  or  Devala.  The  metre 
is  Gayatri. 

1 Meeting  place : nishlcritam  : the  vessel  prepared  to  hold  libations 
intended  fox*  the  Gods«mentioned. 

3 To  win  us  strength  : vdjasdtaye  : i for  the  attainment  of  food/ 

Wilson.  So  Sayana  in  stanzas  3 and  4;  but  in  6 the  word  is  explained 
by  sangrdmdya}  to  battle,’  in  the  first  clause  where  he  inserts  it  after 
hiydndh , ‘urged,’  and  by  anrta/dbhdya , ‘for  the  attainment  of  food,’ 
in  the  second  clause. 


214  THE  IIYMNS  OF  [FART  II 

9 As  Favaiu&nas,  driving  off  the  godless,  looking  on 
the  light, 

Sit  in  the  place  of  sacrifice. 

IV.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

The  Sonia  drops,  exceeding  rich  in  sweets,  to  Indra 
have  been  poured, 

Shed  with  the  stream  of  sacrifice. 

2 Sages  have  called  to  Indra,  like  cows,  milch-kine, 

lowing  to  their  calves, 

Called  him  to  drink  the  Soma  juice. 

3 In  the  streams  wave  wise  Soma  dwells,  distilling 

rapture,  in  his  seat, 

Resting  upon  a wild  cow’s  hide. 

4 Far-sighted  Soma,  Sage  and  bard,  is  worshipped  in 

the  central* point 

Of  heaven,  the  straining-cloth  of  wool. 


9 Pavamdncts:  Soma  juicqs  undergoing  the  process  of  purification. 

Tfcigvcda  IX.  12.  1 — 9.  The  Bishi  is  Asita  or  Devalu.  The  metre 
is  G&yatri. 

1 With  the  stream:  dhdrayd : the  Higveda  has  sddane , ‘in  the  scat.’ 

3 In  the  stream's  irave : in  the  water  with  which  the  stalks  are 
sprinkled.  Upon  a wild  cow’s  hide : this  is  Benfcy’s  interpretation  of 
gaurt  adhi ; and  it  is  corroborated  by  gor  ad  hi  tvachi , on  the  skin  of 
the  ox  or  cow,  of  Bigve*da  {X.  101.  1 1.  The  gauri  is  the  female  of  the 
gaura  (Bos  Gaums),  a kind  of  buftab.  The  skin  was  spread  on  the 
ground  to  catch  superfluous  drops  of  juice.  Sayana’s  interpretation 
is  different : ‘ to  a chant  in  the  middle  tone.’ — Wilson. 

4 In  the  central  point  of  heaven : divo  nalhd : div  or  dyuloka  is 
sometimes  identified  by  the  Scholiast  with  the  dronahalasa,  the  reservoir 
or  large  Soma-trough  (cf.  II.  iv.  ii.  1.  12),  and  the  word  seems  to  have 
this  meaning  here.  Professor  Ludwig  takes  ndbhd  as  a nominative 
‘The  kinsman  of  heaven  Yichakshana  [the  far-seeing  Soma]  is  exalted 
in  t]hve  sheep’s  sieve/ 


215 


v.  i.  4.]  THE  SJMAVEDA. 

5 In  close  embracement  Indu  holds  Soma  when  poured 

within  the  jars 
And  on  the  purifying  sieve. 

6 Indu  sends  forth  a voice  on  high,  up  in  the  region 

of  the  sea, 

Stirring  the  cask  that  drops  with  meath. 

7 The  tree  whose  praises  never  fail  dwells  in  the 

stream  of  holy  milk, 

Urged  onward  by  its  human  friend. 

8 0 Pavamana,  bring  us  wealth  bright  with  a thousand 

splendours  ; yea, 

0 Indu,  give  us  ready  help  I 

9 Sage,  poet,  poured  with  all  his  stream,  Soma  is 

driven,  far  away, 

To  the  dear  places  of  the  sky. 


5 Indu  holds  Soma : the  deity  being  regarded  as  distinct  from  the 
plant.  Professor  Ludwig  suggests  that  Indu  may  be  the  Moon,  upon 
whose  phases  the  time  of  important  liturgical  ceremonies  depends. 

6 Of  the  sea : of  air.  The  cask  that  drops  with  meath ; the  cloud 
that  sends  the  balmy  rain. 

7 The  Rigveda  has  dhindm  ant  ah  sabardughah  instead  of  dhendm 
antah  sabardughdm,  and  yugd  instead  of  yvjd : — ‘The  tree  whose 
praises  never  fail  yields  heavenly  milk  among  our  hymns,  Urging 
men’s  generations  on;’  men’s  generations  meaning,  according  to  Say  ana, 
sacrificial  seasons.  The  tree : Soma. 

8 This  stanza  and  the  following  are  transposed  in  the  Rigveda. 

9 The  Rigveda  differs: — ‘The  wise  one,  with  the  sage’s  stream, 
Soma,  impelled  to  speed,  flows  on.’  Dear  places : the  text  has  priyd, 
dear,  in  the  neuter  plural  without  a substantive,  and  ‘things’  or 
treasures  ’ may  be  understood.  The  Rigveda  has  padd , ‘ places  ’ or 
* stations.’ 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


210 


[PART  II. 


V,  Sotna  Pavamaua. 

Loud  as  a river's  roaring  wave  thy  powers  have 
lifted,  up  themselves : 

Urge  on  thine  arrow's  sharpened  point! 

2 At  thine  effusion  upward  rise  three  voices  fresh  and 

strong,  when  thou 
Flowest  upon  the  fleecy  ridge. 

3 On  to  the  fleece  they  urge  with  stones  the  dear, 

the  golden-coloured  one, 

Even  Pavamdna  dropping  meath. 

4 Flow  with  thy  current  to  the  sieve,  O’ Sage,  best 

giver  of  delight, 

Torseat  thee  in  the  shrine  of  song  ! 
b^Best  giver  of  delight,  flow  on  anointed  with  the  milk 
for  balm, 

And  enter  into  Indra's  throat ! 


, 

Rigveda  IX.  50.  1 — 5.  The  Rishi  is  Uchathya.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

1 Urge  on  thine  arrow's  sharpened  point : vdnasya  chodayd  pavim  : 

apparently  a bold  metaphorical  expression  for,  Make  a noise  like  that 
of  a discharged  arrow.  ‘Emit  thy  sound  like  that  of  a (rushing) 
arrow.’ — Wilson.  Or  vdnasya  may  mean,  of  (thy)  reed,  pipe,  flute, 
or  similar  musical  instrument,  and  Say  ana  explains  pavim  by  sabdam. 
Benfey  accordingly  translates  : — ‘ Erhebe  deiner  Flbte  Schall,’  Lift  up 
the  music  of  thy  flute.  Q 

2 Three  voices  fresh  and  strong : ‘ the  three  voices  of  the  worship- 
per.’— Wilson.  According  to  Sayana,  praises  from  the  three  Vedas. 
Three  different  tones  of  voice  may  be  intended^  The  fleery  ridge  ; the 
elevated  woollen  filter  or  straining-cloth. 

4 Of  song  : arkasya  : archaniycisyendrasya. , ‘of  the  adorable  Indra,’ 
according  to  Sayana.  Arka  in  the  Rigveda  means  (1)  song  of  praise, 
hymn  (2)  singer  (3)  splendour  (4)  the  Sun. 

5 Throat : jatharam : literally,  stomach. 


v.  i.  7.] 


TllE  SAM  AY  EDA. 


217 


VI.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Flow  onward,  Indu,  with  this  food  for  him  who 

in  thy  wild  delights 

Battered  the  nine-and-ninety  down, 

2 Smote  stviftly  forts,  and  Sambara,  then  Yadu  and 

that  Turvasa, 

For  pious  Divod&sa’s  sake! 

3 Finder  of  horses,  pour  on  us  horses  and  wealth 

in  kine  and  gold, 

And,  Indu,  food  in  boundless  store! 

VII.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Chasing  our  foemen,  driving  off  the  godless,  Soma 
floweth  on, 

Going  to  Indra’s  settled  place. 

2 0 Pavamana,  hither  bring  great  riches,  and  destroy 

our  foes  : 

0 Indu,  grant  heroic  fame ! 

3 A hundred  obstacles  have  ne’er  checked  thee  when 

fain  to  give  thy  boons, 

When,  being  cleansed,  thou  coilibatest. 


Rigveda  IX.  61.  1 — 3.  The  Rishi  is  Amahiyu.  The  metre  is  (Uyatri. 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  i.  1 . 9. 

2 Sambara:  one  of  the  demons  who  withhold  the  rain.  Yadu  and 

Turvasa : ancient  heroes,  eponymi  of  two  of  the  Five  Tribes, 

frequently  mentioned  together  in  the  Rigveda.*  iJivoddsa : called  also 
Atithigva,  a pious  and  liberal  prince  ^protected  and  favoured  by  Tndra. 

3 In  boundless  store : sahasrinth : literally,  in  thousands. 

Itigveda  IX.  61.  25 — The  Rishi  is  Amahiyu.  The  metre  is 
G&yatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  i.  2.  14. 

2 0 Indu , grant  heroic  fame  : or,  ‘ Indu,  grant  fame  with  manly 
BOnB.’ 

3 Obstacles : or,  enemies,  according  to  Sayana.  Thou  combatest  : 
makhasyase : according  to  S&yana,  * thou  wishest  to  give  us  wealth/ 


218 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  II. 


V III.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

Flow  onward  with  that  stream  wherewith  thou 
gavest  splendour  to  the  Sun, 

Speeding  the  waters  kind  to  man ! 

2 He,  Pavamana,  high  o'er  man,  yoked  the  Suns 

courser  Etasa 

To  travel  through  the  realm  of  air. 

3 Yea,  those  bay  steeds  he  harnessed  to  the  chariot 

that  the  Sun  might  come  : 

Indu,  he  said,  is  Indra’s  self. 

IX.  t Agni. 

Associate  with  fires,  make  your  God  Agni  envoy  at 
sacrifice,  best  skilled  in  worship, 

Established  firm  among  mankind,  the  holy,  flame- 
crowned  and  fed  with  oil,  the  purifier! 

2 Like  a steed  neighing  eager  for  the  pasture,  when 
he  hath  stepped  forth  from  the  great  enclosure : 
Then  the  wind  following  blows  upon  his  splendour, 
and,  straight,  £he  .path  is  black  which  thou  hast 
travelled. 


Rigveda  TX.  63.  7 — 9.  The  Rishi  is  Nidhruvi.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  i.  1.  7. 

2 Etasa  : the  horse,  or  one  of  the  horses,  of  the  Sun  ; especially,  it 
seems,  the  horse  who,  during  the  night,  draws  back  the  chariot  of  the 
Sun  from  the  west  tp  the  east. 


3 Bay  steeds:  the  Rigveda  has  dasa  : — ‘those  ten  bays/ 

Rigveda  VII.  3.  1 — 3.  The  Rishi  is  Vasishtha.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

1 Associate : addressed  to  the  officiating  priests ; sajoshdh  appears 
to  be  a shortened  form  of  sajoshasah,  the  liominative  "plural.  Sayana 
explains  it  as  an  accusative  standing  for  sajoshasam  and  qualifying 
agnim. 

2 From  the  great  enclosure:  ‘from  the  vast  enclosing  (forest).’— 
Wilson.  Others  understand  it  as  the  enclosure  in  which  the  horse  is 
confined. 


7.1  HO 


THE  SlMA  VEDA. 


219 


3 From  thee,  a bull  but  newly  born,  O Agni,  the  kindl- 
ed everlasting  flames  rise  upward. 

Aloft  to  heaven  as  ruddy  smoke  thou  mountest  : 
Agni,  thou  speedest  to  the  Gods  as  envoy. 

X.  In  dra. 
We  make  this  India  very  strong  to  strike  the 

mighty  Vritra  dead  : 

A vigorous  hero  shall  he  be. 

2 This  Indra,  made  for  giving  gifts,  is  stablished, 

mightiest,  in  strength, 

Bright,  meet  for  Soma,  famed  in  song. 

3 By  song,  as  ’twerc,  the  powerful  bolt  which  none 

may  parry,  was  prepared  : 

Strong  and  invincible  he  grew. 

XI.  ^ Soma  Pavjimaiifw 

Adhvaryu,  to  the  filter  lead  the  Soma  juice  expressed 

with  stones : 

Make  thou  it  pure  for  Indra’s^  drink! 

2 These  Gods  and  all  the  Mar.ut  l>ost,  Indu ! enjoy  this 

juice  of  thine, 

This  Pavam&na’s  flowing  meath. 

3 Pour  out  for  Indra,  Thunder-armed,  the  milk  of 

heaven,  the  Soma’s  juice, 

Most  excellent,  most  rich  in  sweets  ! 

3 As  ruddy  smoke  thou  mountest : the  Rigvcda  has  eti  instead  of 
eshi : — ‘ thy  ruddy  smoke  ascend  e tin* 

Rigveda  VIH.  82.  7 — 9.  The  R\shi  is  Sukaksha,  The  metre  is 
Rayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  ii.  i.  3.  5, 

2 Stablished : or  hit  ah  may  mean  kind,  gracious.  In  strength; 
bale:  ‘in  the  powerful  Soma/  according  to  Sayana.  The  Rigvcda  has 
made,  1 in  the  feast/ 

3 He : Indra. 

Rigveda  IX.  51.  1,  3,  2.  The  Rishi  is  Uchathya.  The  metre  is 
Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  i.  2.  3. 

1 Adhvaryu : 0 ministering  priest. 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  II. 


220 


XII.  Soma  Pftvam&na. 

On  flows  the  potent  juice,  sustainer  of  the  heavens, 
the  strength  of  Gods,  whom  men  must  hail  with 
shouts  of  joy, 

Thou,  gold-hued,  started  like  a courser  by  brave 
men,  art  lightly  showing  forth  thy  splendour  in 
the  streams.  < 

2 He  takes  his  weapons,  like  a hero,  in  his  hands,  fain 

to  win  light,  car-borne,  in  forays  for  the  kine. 

Indu,  while  stimulating  Indra’s  might,  is  urged 
forward  and  balmed  by  sages  skilful  in  their  task. 

3 Soma,  as  thou  art  purified  with  flowing  wave,  exhi- 

biting thy  strength  enter  thou  Indra’s  throat. 

Make  both  worlds  stream  for  us,  as  lightning  doth 
the  clouds : mete  out  exhaustless  powers  for  us 
through  this  our  prayer  ! 

XI  IT.  India. 

Though,  Indra,  thou  art  called  by  men  eastward  and 
westward,  north  and  south, 

Thou  chiefly  art*  with  Anava  and  Turvasa,  brave 
champion  ! urged  by  men  to  come. 

> Or,  Indra,  when  with  Ruma,  Rusama,  Syavaka,  and 
Kripa  thou  rejoicest  thee, 

Still  do  the  Kanvas,  bringing  prayer,  with  hymns  of 
praise,  0 Indra,  draw  thee  hither : come  ! 

Rigveda  IX.  76.  l—$.  The  Rishi  is  Kavi.  The  metre  is  Jagati. 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  h 2.  5. 

3 Make  both  worlds  stream  : make  heaven  and  earth  pour  out  their 
gifts. 

Rigveda  VIII.  4.  1,  2.  The  Rishi  is  Deviitithi.  The  metre  is  Brihati 
in  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  I.  iii.  ii.  4.  7,  and  Satobrihatl  in 
stanza  2. 

2 Ruma , Rusama , Sydvaka,  and  Kripa  appear  to  have  been  princes 
favoured  by  Indra. 


v.  i.  10.] 


THE  SAM  A VEDA. 


00  i* 

XIV.  I mini. 
Both  boons, — may  Indra,  hitherward  turned,  listen 

to  this  prayer  of'  ours, 

And  mightiest  Maghavan  with  thought  inclined  to 
us  come  near  to  drink  the  Soma  juice  ! 

2 For  him,  strong,  independent  ruler,  Heaven  and 
Earth  have  fashioned  forth  with  power  and  might. 
Thou  seatest  thee  as  first  among  thy  peers  in  place, 
for  thy  soul  longs  for  Soma  juice. 

XV.  Soma  Puvamana. 
God,  working  with  mankind  flow  on;  to  Indra  go 

thy  gladdening  juice  : 

To  V&yu  mount  as  Law  commands! 

2 0 Soma  Pavam&na,  thou  pourest  out  wealth  that 

may  be  famed  : 

0 Indu,  pass  into  the  lake  ! 

3 Soma,  thou  flowest  chasing  foes,  finder  of  wisdom 

and  delight : 

Drive  thou  the  godless  folk  afa.r  ! 

XVI.  Soma  Piivam&na. 

Stream  on  us  riches  that  are  craved  by  hundreds, 

best  at  winning  spoil, 

Itiches,  O Indu,  thousandfold,  most  splendid,  that 
surpass  the  light ! 


Rigvoda  VIII.  50.  1,  2.  The  Rishi  is  Bharga.  The  metre  is  Pra- 
gatha.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  1.  iii.  ii.  5.  8t 

2 With  power  and  might : ojasd  ^ the  Rigveda  has  ojase : — * for 
power  and  might.’ 

Rigveda  IX.  6-3.  22--24s  The  Rishi  is  Nidhruvi.  The  metre  is 
Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  v.  ii.  5.  7,  and  stanza  3 of  I.  vi.  i.  1.  6. 

2 The  lake : or,  sea,  that  is,  the  vat  or  reservoir  into  which  the 
Soma  juice  flows. 


Rigveda  IX.  98.  1,  5,  3.  The  Rishis  arc  Am’  arisha  and  Rijisvan. 
The  metre  is  Anushtup. 


222  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  11 

2 May  we,  0 Vasu,  be  most  near  to  this  thy  bounty, 

food,  and  wealth 

Desired  by  many  men,  and  in  thy  favour,  0 resistless 
onq ! 

3 Effused,  this  Indu  hath  flowed  on,  distilling  rapture, 

to  the  fleece. 

He  streams  erect  to  sacrifice,  as’twere  with  splendour, 
seeking  kine. 

XVII.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Flow  onward,  Soma,  as  a mighty  sea,  as  Father  of 
the  Gods,  to  every  form  ! 

2 Flow  on,  0 Soma,  radiant  for  the  Gods,  blissful  to 

heaven  and  earth  and  living  things ! 

3 'f'hou  efrt,  bright  juice,  sustainer  of  the  sky:  flow, 

mighty,  in  accoidance  with  true  law! 

XVIII.  AguL 

I laud  your  most  beloved  guest,  like  a dear  friend, 
0 Agni,  him 

Who,  like  a chariot,  Wwins  us  wealth. 


2 0 Vasu : kind  (Joel.  The  Rigveda  differs: — ‘(rood  Vritra-slayer, 
may  we  be  still  nearest  to  this  wealth  of  thine  Which  many  crave, 
to  food,  and  to  thy  favour,  0 resistless  one.’ 

3 Seeking  kine : desirous  of  the  milk  which  is  to  be  mingled  with 
the  juice. 

Rigveda  IX.  109'  4^-6.  The  Uishis  are  the  Agnayo  Dhishnyali, 
sacrificial  Agnis  or  tires.  The  ij  etre  is  Dvipada  Vi  raj.  Stanza  1 is  a 
repetition  of  I.  v.  i.  5.  3. 

2 Living  things',  prajdbhyah:  the  Rigveda  has  prajdyai>  ‘our 
progeny/ 

3 In  accordance  with  true  Law : ‘ in  this  rightly-performed  sacri- 
fice : ’ — Stevenson. 

Rigveda  VIII.  73.  1 — 3.  The  Rishi  is  TTsana  Kavya.  The  metre 
is  Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  i.  i.  I.  5. 


v.  i.  20.] 


THE  SJMAVEBA. 


223 


2 Whom  as  a Sage  who  merits  praise  the  Gods  have, 

from  the  olden  time, 

Established  among  mortal  men. 

3 Do  thoi^  most  youthful  God,  protect  tho  men  who 

offer,  hear  their  songs, 

And  of  thyself  preserve  their  seed  ! 

‘ XIX.  Indra. 

Comb  unto  us,  0 Indra,  dear,  still  conquering,  un- 
concealable  ! 

Wideas  a mountain  spread  on  all  sides,  Lord  of  heaven. 

2 O truthful  Soma-drinker,  thou  art  mightier  than 

both  the  worlds. 

Thou  strengthenest  him  who  pours  libation,  Lord 
of  heaven. 

3 For  thou  art  he,  0 Indra,  who  upholdeth  all  our 

fortresses, 

The  Dasyu’s  slayer,  man’s  sustainer,  Lord  of  heaven. 

XX.  India. 

Render  of  forts,  the  young,’  the  wise,  of  strength 
unmeasured,  was  he  born,  * 

Sustainer  of  each  sacred  rite,  Indra,  the  Thunderer, 
much-extolled. 


2 Who  merits  praise  : prasa?ist/am  : the  Jiigveda  has  prachetasam  : 
‘foreseeing,’  ‘ wise/  From  the  olden  time:  dvitd:  or  in  twofold  wise; 
in  heaven  and  on  earth. 

3 A nd  of  thy  self  preserve  their  seed  : or,  And  guard  our  offspring 
and  ourselves. 

Kigveda  VIII.  87.  4—  6.  The  Kishi  is  Nrimedha.  The  metre  is 
I'shnih.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  v.  i.  1.  3. 

3 Who  upholdeth  : dhartd  : the  Kigveda  has  dartd  : — ‘ the  breaker  * 
or  ‘stormer’  of  all  strongholds  of  the  foe. 


Kigveda  I.  11.  4,  5,  8.  The  Kishi  is  Jctar.  The  metre  is  Anush  tup. 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iv.  ii.  2.  8. 


22f  TUK  HYMNS  OF  [PAST  It. 

2 Thou,  wielder  of  the  stone,  didst  burst  the  cave  of 

Vala  rich  in  kine. 

The  Gods  came  pressing  to  thy  side,  and  free  from 
terror  aided  thee. 

3 They  glorified  with  hymns  of  praise  Indra  who 

reigneth  by  his  might, 

Whose  bounteous  gifts  in  thousands  come,  yea,  even 
more  abundantly.  ' 


CHAPTER  II. 

!•  Soma  Payamaiia. 

Guard  of  all  being,  generating  creatures,'- loud  roared 
the  sea  as  highest  law  commanded. 

Strong,  i'n  the  filter,  on  the  fleecy  summit,  pressed 
from  the  stone,  Soma  hath  waxen  mighty. 
i Make  Vayu.glad,  for  furtherance  and  bounty  : cheer 
Varuna  and  Mitra,  as  they  cleanse  thee  ! 

Gladden  the  Gods,  gladden  the  host  of  Maruts  : make 
Heaven  and  Earth  rejoice,  0 God,  0 Soma  ! 

3 Soma,  the  mighty,'  when,  the  waters’  offspring,  he 
chose  the  Gods,  performed  that  great  achievement. 

He,  Pavam&na,  granted  strength  to  Indra  : he,  Indu, 
generated  strength  in  Sflrya. 


2 The  cave  of  Vala  : Vala  is  the  brother  of  Vritra,  or  Vritra  him 
self,  who  stole  the  cows  of  the  Gods  and  hid  them  in  a cave,  that  is, 
kept  the  waters  imprisoped  in  dark  clouds.  The  Gods:  meaning, 
apparently,  the  Maruts,  as  they  ^ilone  assisted  Indra  in  his  battle. 
Pressing : or,  stirred  up.  Professor  Ludwig  interprets  the  second  line 
differently  : — ‘ The  Gods,  who  were  beaten  away  from  him  who  felt  no 
fear  [that  is,  from  Vala],  encouraged  him.’ 

Rigveda  IX.  97.  40—  42.  The  Rishi  is  Parasara.  The  metre  is 
Gayatri.  Stanza  I is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  i.  4.  7,  and  stanza  3 of 
I.  vi.  i.  5.  10. 

2 As  they  cleanse  thee : while  thou  art  purified  by  the  priests. 


v.  ii.  2.] 


THE  SAMAVEDA. 


225 


II.  Soma  Pavamfina. 

Here  present  this  immortal  God  flies,  like  a bird 
upon  her  wings, 

To  settle  in  the  vats  of  wood.  • 

2 Praised  by  the  sacred  bards,  this  God  dives  into 

waters,  and  bestows 
Rich  gifts  upon  the  worshipper. 

3 He,  like  a*  warrior  going  forth  with  heroes,  as  he 

flows  along 

Is  fain  to  win  all  precious  boons. 

4 This  God  as  he  is  flowing  on  speeds  like  a car  and 

gives;  his  aid  : 

He  lets  his  voice  be  heard  of  all. 

5 This  God,  while  flowing,  is  adorned,  •gold-coloured, 

for  the  spoil,  by  men 
Devout  and  skilled  in  holy  songs. 

6 This  God,  made  ready  with  the  hymn  runs  swiftly 

through  the  winding  ways, 

Inviolable  as  he  flows. 

7 Away  he  rushes  with  his  stream,  across  the  regions, 

into  heaven, 

And  roars  as  he  is  flowing  on. 

8 While  flowing,  meet  for  sacrifice,  he  hath  gone  up  to 

heaven,  across 

The  regions,  never  overthrown. 


Rigveda  IX.  3.  1,  6,  4,  5,  3,  2,  7 — 10. *.Thc  Rishi  is  Sunahsepa. 
The  metre  is  Gayatri.  Stanza  9 is  a repetition  of  II.  i.  ii.  17.  1. 

1 Vats  of  wood ; drondni : largo  r^oodcn  vessels,  tubs  or  troughs, 
which  receive  the  Soma  juice. 

2 Dives  into  waters : .Vailed  vasattvaryah,  with  which  the  stalks  of 
the  Soma  plant  are  sprinkled. 

4 Gives  his  aid : disasyati : or  the  meaning  may  be,  as  Professor 
Ludwig  suggests,  1 takes  his  direction.’  The  Rigvcda  has  dasasyati, 

6 Winding  ways : hvardnsi : the  tangles  of  the  wool  which  forms 
the  filter.  ‘ Rushes  against  the  enemies/ — Wilson. 

15 


226  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  II. 

0 By  generation  long  ago,  this  God,  engendered  for  the 
Gods, 

Flows  tawny  to  the  straining-cloth. 

10  This  Lord  of  many  holy  laws,  even  at  his  birth 
engendering  strength, 

Effused,  flows  onward  in  a stream. 

III.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

Through  the  fine  fingers,  with  the  song,  this  hero 
comes  with  rapid  cars, 

Going  to  Indra’s  settled  place. 

£ In  holy  thought  he  ponders  much  for  the  great 
service  of  the  Gods, 

Where  the  immortals  have  their  seat. 

3 Men  beautify  him  in  the  vats,  him  worthy  to  be 

beautified, 

Him  who  brings  forth  abundant  food. 

4 He  is  deposited  and  led  along  the  consecrated  path 
When  zealous  men  are  urging  him. 

5 He  moves,  a vigorous  steed,  adorned  with  beauteous 

rays  of  shining  gold, 

•He  who  is  Sovran  of  the  streams. 


Rigveda  IX.  15.  1,  2,  7,  3,  5,  4,  6,  8.  The  llishi  is  Asita  or  Devala. 
The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

1 Settled  place : nishkfitam : the  vessel  prepared  and  set  apart  for 
libations  intended  fo>  hi  trio 

4 Deposited:  hitak:  ‘placed  (in  the  cart).’ — Wilson.  Or,  as  hitak 
means  also  ‘good,’  and  as  bhftrnayah,  ‘zealous/  stands  without  a 
substantive,  the  stanza  may  be  i*endered  : — As  a good  (horse)  ho  is  led 
out,  when,  on  the  consecrated  path,  The  nettled  (steeds)  exert  their 
strength.  The  Rigveda  has  suhkrdvatd , ‘ brightly  shining/  instead  of 
sundhydvatd , ‘holy’  or  ‘consecrated.’ 

5 Rays  of  shining  gold : perhaps  with  reference  to  the  gold  ring 
worn  by  the  priest  who  expresses  the  juice. — Ludwig.  Of  the  streams: 
of  Soma  juice. 


V.  ii.  4.] 


THE  SAMA  VEDA. 


227 


6 He  brandishes  his  horns  on  high,  and  whets  them, 

bull  who  leads  the  herd, 

Doing  with  might  heroic  deeds. 

7 He,  over  places  rough  to  pass,  bringing  ritfh  treasures, 

closely  pressed 
Descends  into  the  reservoirs. 

8 Him,  even  him,  the  golden-hued,  well  armed,  best 

giver  oPdelight, 

Ten  fingers  Urge  to  run  his  course. 

IV.  Soma  Ihivamana. 

This  Bull,  this  chariot  robes  him  in  the  sheeps  long 
wool  as  he  proceeds 
To  war  that  wins  a thousand  spoils. 

2 The  dames  of  Trita  with  the  stones  urge  forth  this 

golden-coloured  one, 

Indu  to  Indra  for  his  drink* 

3 He  like  a falcon  settles  down  amid  the  families  of 

men, 

Like  lover  speeding  to  his  love. 

4 This  young  exhilarating  juice’looks  downward  from 

its  place  in  heaven, 

This  Soma  drop  that  pierced  the  sieve. 


7 Places  rough  to  /wss  .•  the  wool  of  the  strainer.  Sayan  a gives  a 
totally  different  explanation  of  this  stanza : — ‘ He,  arriving  at  the 
proper  juncture,  wholly  discomfits  the  encirejing  (R&kshasas),  and 
comes  down  upon  their  murderous  bands.’ — Stevenson.  Into  the  reser- 
voirs : the  meaning  of  etldeshu  is  uncertain. 

Rigvcda  IX.  38.  1,  2,  4,  5,  6,  3^  The  Rishi  is  Rahugana.  The 
metre  is  Gayatri.  * 

1 The  dames  of  Trita  : as  Trita  is  the  celestial  purifier  of  the  Soma, 
the  fingers  of  the  earthly  purifiers  arc  called  his  dames,  or  his  maidens 
as  in  Rigveda  IX.  32.  2. 

4 From  its  place  in  heaven:  or  divah  may  be  the  genitive  case, 
taken  with  sisuh , * the  child  of  heaven.’ 


228  ’ TIIE  IIYHNS  OF  [PART  II. 

5 Pressed  for  the  draught,  this  tawny  juice  flows  forth 

intelligent,  calling  out, 

Unto  the  well-beloved  place. 

6 Him,  here,  the  gold-decked  skilful  ten  deanse  care- 

fully, who  make  him  bright 
And  beauteous  for  the  gladdening  draught. 

V.  Soma  PavaniJiia. 

Urged  by  the  men,  this  vigorous  steed,  Lord  of  the 
mind,  omniscient, 

Flies  to  the  long  wool  of  the  sheep. 

2 Within  the  filter  hath  he  flowed,  this  Soma  for  the 

Gods  effused, 

Entering  all  their  essences. 

3 He  shines  in  beauty  there,  this  God,  immortal, 

in  his  dwelling-place, 

' Foe-slayer,  dearest  to  the  Gods. 

4 Directed  by  the  sisters  ten,  bellowing  on  his  way, 

this  Steer 

Runs  onward  to  the  wooden  vats. 

5 This  Pavamana,  gladdening  drink  within  the  puri- 

fying sieve, 

Gave  splendour  to  the  Sun  in  heaven. 


5 The  well -beloved  place:  the  dronakalam  or  reservoir  in  which  it  rests. 

6 The  gold-decked  skilful  ten : the  fingers  adorned  with  a ring  of 
gold.  JJaritah , gold-lmed  or  gold-decked,  is  explained  by  Sayana  as 
‘grasping;’  by  Professor,  Urassmann  as  ‘mares;’  and  by  Professor 
Wilson  as  ‘fin'ers.’ 

Stanzas  1-  5 are  taken,  wit£i  some  variations,  from  Ttigveda  IX. 
28.  1—5,  ascribed  to  Priyamedha,  and  stanza  6 partly  from  JLtigveda 
IX.  27.  5,  ascribed  to  Nriniedha. 

1 The  long  wool  of  the  sheep : avyam  vdram : the  woollen  straining- 
cloth  or  filter  made  of,  or  lined  with,  the  wool  of  a sheep’s  tail. 

4 The  sisters  ten : the  priest’s  fingers. 

5 This  stanza  in  the  Rigveda  differs : — ‘ This  Pavamana,  swift  and 
strong,  omniscient,  gave  splendour  to  The  Sun  and  all  his  forms  of  light. 


r.  ii.  6.]  THE  SAMAVEDA.  229 

6 Unconquerable  Lord  of  speech,  dwelling  beside 
Vivasv&n,  he 

Mounts  up  together  with  the  Sun. 

VI.  Soma  Pa varn Ana. 

This  Sage,  exalted  by  our  lauds,  flows  to  the  puri- 
fying sieve, 

Scattering /oes  as  he  is  cleansed. 

2 Giver  of  strength,  winner  of  light,  for  Indra  and  for 

VAyu  he 

Is  poured  upon  the  filtering-cloth. 

3 The  men  conduct  him,  Soma,  Steer,  omniscient, 

the  fiead  of  heaven, 

Effused  into  the  vats  of  wood.  ^ 

4 Longing  for  kine,  longing  for  gold  hath  Indu  Pava- 

m&na  roared, 

Still  conqueror,  never  overcome. 

5 To  Indra  in  the  firmament  this  mighty  tawny  Steer 

hath  flowed, 

This  Indu,  being  purified. 

G This  Soma  being  purified  flow, 3 mighty  and  invincible, 
Slayer  of  sinners,  dear  to  Gods.  , 


6 Vivasvdn:  ‘the  brilliant  one;’  Surya  or  the  Sun.  The  partly- 
corresponding  stanza  of  the  Rigveda  may  be  rendered: — This  Pavainana, 
gladdening  draught,  drops  on  the  filtering  cloth,  and  then  Mounts  up 
with  Surya  to  the  sky. 

Stanzas  1 — 5 arc  taken  from  Rigveda  IX.  27.  1 — 4,  6,  ascribed  to 
Nrimcdha,  and  stanza  6 from  RigvJda  IX.  28.  6,  ascribed  to  Priya- 
niedha.  The  metre  is  (Uyatri. 

3 Omniscient ! or,  all-possessing.  Into  the  vats  of  ivood : vaneshu : 
according  to  Benfey,  into  the  streams  of  water. 

4 Kine : the  cows  who  yield  the  sacrificial  milk ; or  the  milk  itself. 
Gold:  the  ring  worn  on  the  finger  of  the  priest  who  presses  out  the 
juice.  Koared:  made  a noise  in  dropping. 


230 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  II. 


VII.  Soma  Pavamiim. 
This  Soma,  strong,  effused  for  draught,  flows  to  the 

purifying  sieve, 

Slaying  the  fiends,  loving  the  Gods. 

2 Far-sighted,  tawny -coloured,  he  flows  to  the  sieve, 

intelligent, 

Bellowing,  to  his  place  of  rest. 

3 This  vigorous  Pavamiltia  runs  forth  to  the  luminous 

realm  of  heaven, 

Fiend-slayer,  through  the  sheep’s  long  wool. 

4 This  Pavam&na,  up  above  on  Trita’s  ridge,  hath 
' made  the  Sun, 

Together  with  the  Sisters,  shine. 

5 Effused,  this  Soma,  Steer,  who  slays  Vfitra,  room- 

giver,  unbeguiled, 

Hath  gone  as  ’twere  to  win  the  spoil. 

6*  Urged  by  th"e  sage  upon  his  way,  this  God  speeds 
forward  to  the  vats, 

Indu  to  Indra,  giving  boons. 

VIII.  Soma  Pavaro&na. 
The  man  who  reads  the  essence  stored  by  saints, 

the  P&vam&oat  hymns, 


Rigveda  IX.  37. 1—6.  The  Rishi  is  Rahugana.  The  metre  is  G \yatri. 

1 For  draught : pitaye  : 1 for  the  drinking  of  the  gods.’ — Wilson. 

2 Intelligent : dharnasih : or,  ‘ endowed  with  strength.’ 

On  Trita’s  ridge : Recording  to  Sayana,  * on  the  high  place  (of  the 
sacrifice)  of  Trite,’  the*  Rishi.  But  probably  the  heavenly  home  of 
Trite,  the  celestial  preparer  of  the  Soi,na  for  Indra,  is  intended.  The 
Sisters : the  Dawns. 

6 Giving  boons : manhayan : *‘the  Rigveda  has  manhandy  ‘ plentc- 
ouBly,’  or,  ‘in  his  might’. 


Stanzas  1 and  2 are  taken  from  Rigveda  IX.  67.  31,  32,  ascribed  to 
Pavitra  of  the  family  of  Angiras,  or  to  Vasishtha,  or  to  both.  Stanzas 
3—6  are  not  found  in  the  Rigveda.  The  metre  is  Anushtup. 

T By  saints  • by  the  Rishis  or  holy  seers  to  whom  the  hymns  were 
revealed.  The  Pdvamdna  hymns : the  hymns  addressed  to  Soma  Pava- 


V.  ii.  8.]  THE  SlMAVEDA.  Ml 

Tastes  food  completely  purified,  made  sweet  by 
Matarisvan’s  touch. 

2 Whoever  reads  the  essence  stored  by  saints,  the 

P&vato&na  hymns,  • 

For  him  Saras vatl  pours  forth  water  and  butter, 
milk  and  meath. 

3 Yea,  for  tlje  P&vam&nas  flow  richly,  drop  fatness, 

bring  us  weal, — 

Amrit  deposited  among  the  Br&h mans,  essence  stored 
by  saints. 

4 So  may  the  P&vamftna  hymns  bestow  on  us  this 

world  and  that, 

And  gratify  our  hearts'  desires, — the  Goddesses 
combined  with  Gods ! 

5-  The  purifying  flood  wherewith  G<jds  ever  purify 
themselves, — 

With  that,  in  thousand  currents,  may  thePavam&nas 
make  us  cleau ! 

6 The  P&vamfina  hymns  brin<j  \veal : by  these  man 
goes  to  Paradise, 

And,  eating  pure  and  holy  food,  attains  to  immor- 
tality. 


m&na,  contained  in  Book  IX.  of  the  RigvedU.  By  Aldtarisvari s touch : 
‘Sayana  says  M&tamvan  means  Vdyu  [the  Wind]  because  it  breathes 
in  the  atmosphere  antarikske  swasiti : the  food  is  sweetened  and  puri- 
fied by  the  purifying  wind  and  the  n^,n  eats  it.’ — Wilson. 

2 Sarasvati : originally  the  deity  of  the  river  of  that  name,  after- 
wards the  patroness  of  religious  ceremonies  celebrated  on  the  banks 
of  her  holy  waters  and  elsewhere,  and  finally  the  Goddess  of  speech, 
inspiration,  and  learning.  See  Muir,  Original  Sanskrit  Texts , V.  p.  375. 

. 6 Paradise : n&ndanam  : the  place  of  happiness,  Elysium.  The  word, 
does  uot  occur  in  the  Rigveda. 


232 


TIIE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  II. 


IX.  Agni. 
We  with  great  reverence  have  approached  the 

Youngest,  who  hath  shone  forth  well  kindled  in 
his  dwelling, 

Wondrously  bright  between  wide  earth  and  heaven, 
well  worshipped,  looking  forth  in  all  directions. 

2 Through  his  great  might  o’ercoming  all  misfortunes, 

praised  in  the  house  is  Agni  J&tavedas. 

May  he  preserve  us  from  disgrace  and  trouble,  both 
us  who  laud  him  and  our  wealthy'princes ! 

3 0 Agni,  thou  art  Varuna  and  Mitra : Vasishthas 
' with  their  holy  hymns  exalt  thee.  , 

With  thee  be  most  abundant  gain  of  treasure ! 
Do  ye  preserve  us  evermore  with  blessings! 

X.  Indra. 
'Indba,  great  in  his  power  and  might,  and  like 

Parjanya  rich  in  rain, 

Hath  been  increased  by  Vatsa’s  lauds. 

2 Since  Kanvas  hav^  with  lauds  made  him  completer 
of  the  sacrifice,' 

1 K 

Words  are  their  .own  appropriate  arms, 


Rigveda  VII.  12.  1—3.  The  Xtishi  is  Vasishtha.  The  metre  is 
Trishtup. 

1 The  Youngest : Agni,  most  youthful  of  the  Gods,  aB  being  conti- 
nually reproduced.  . , 

2 Jdtavedas:  the  wise,  or  omniscient  God. 

3 Vasishtha a:  men  of  the  family  of  Vasishtha,  the  Rishi  of  the 
hymn.  Do  ye : 0 Gods.  This  is  £he  favourite  conclusion  of  the  hymns 
of  the  Vasishthas. 

Rigveda  VIII.  6. 1,  3,  2.  The  Rishi  is  Vatsa.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

1 Parjanya : the  God  of  the  rain-cloud. 

2 The  second  line  is  obscure ; 4 they  declare  all  weapons  needless.’ — • 
Wilson, 


v.  ii.  12.] 


THE  S AM AY EDA. 


233 

3 When  priests  who  magnify  the  Son  of  holy  law 
present  their  gifts, 

Sages  with  Order’s  hymn  of  praise. 

XI.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Op  gold-hued  Pavamana,  great  destroyer,  radiant 
streams  have  flowed, 

Swift  streams  of  him  whose  gleams  are  swift. 

2 Best  rider  of  the  chariot,  praised  with  fairest  praise 

’mid  beauteous  ones, 

Gold-gleaming  with  the  Marut  host, 

3 Penetrate,  Pavamana,  best  at  winning  booty,  with 

thy  rays, 

Giving  the  singer  hero  strength ! 

XII.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Hence  sprinkle  forth  the  juice  effuspd,  Soma,  th$ 
best  of  sacred  gifts, 

Who,  friend  of  man,  hath  run  among  the  water- 
streams  ! He  hath  pressed  Soma  out  with  stones. 

2 Now,  being  purified,  flow  hither  through  the  fleece, 

invincible  and  more  odorous  !, 

We  joy  in  thee  in  waters  when,  thou  art  effused, 
blending  thee  still  with  juice  and  milk. 

3 Pressed  out  for  all  to  see,  delighting  Gods,  Indu, 

far-seeing  one,  is  mental  power. 


3 The  Son  of  holy  law:  praj&ni  ritasya : Iydra.*  Order's : belonging 
to  sacrifice.  * 


Kigvcda  IX.  66.  25 — 27.  The  Rising  are  the  hundred  Vaikhanasas, 
a race  of  saintly  hermits.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

1 Great  destroyer : of  darkness,  according  to  Say  ana. 

3 Pemtrate : the  whole  world. — Sayana.  In  the  Itigveda  the  verb 
is  in  the  third  person. 


Bigveda  IX.  107.  1 — 3.  Ascribed  to  the  Seven  Rishis.  The  metre 
in  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  i.  3.  2,  and  2 is  Pr&g£tha, 
and  in  3 Dvipada  Vi  raj. 


2k 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


‘[PABTJl. 


XIII.  Soma  Pftvamaim. 

Even  as  a King  hath  Soma,  red  jiud  tawny  Bull, 
been  pressed : the  wondrous  one  hath  bellowed  to 
the  -kine.  v 

While  purified  thou  passest  through  the  filtering 
fleece  to  seat  thee  hawk-like  in  the  place  that 
drops  with  oil. 

2 Parjanya  is  the  sire  of  the  leaf-bearing  Bull : on 
mountains,  in  earth’s  centre  hath  he  made  his  home. 

The  waters  have  flowed  forth,  the  Sisters,  to  the  kine : 
he  meets  the  pressing-stones  at  the  beloved  rite. 

•3  To  glory  goest  thou,  a Sage  with  ordering  skill,  like 
a groomed  steed  thou  rushest  forward  to  the  prize. 

Be  gracious  to  us,  Soma,  driving  oft  distress ! Thou 
goest,  clothed  in  butter,  to  a robe  of  state. 

XI\ . Indra. 

*■  I 

Turning  as  ’twere  to  meet  the  Sun,  enjoy  from  India 
all  good  things ! 

When  he  who  will  be  born  is  born  with  power  wo 
look  to  treasures  as  our  heritage. 

2 Praise  him  who  sends  us  wealth,  prompt  with,  his 
liberal  boons-!  Good  are  the  gifts  that  Indra  gives. 

He  is  not  wroth  with  one  who  satisfies  his  wish: 
he  instigates  his  mind  to  give. 


Rigveda  IX.  82.  1,  3,  2.  The  Rishi  is  Vasu.  The  metre  is  Jagati. 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  1.  vi.  ii.  2.  9. 

2 Parjanya : the  God 'of  the  rain-cloud,  who  makes  the  leaf-hearing 

Bull , or  the  powerful  Sonm-plant,  grow.  In  earth'*  centre:  in  oblations 
offered  in  the  place  of  sacrifice.  The  kine : the  milk  which  is  mixed 
with  the  juice.  * 

3 To  the  prize : or,  to  the  fight.  To  a robe  of  state : ‘to  the  cleans- 

ing  (vessel).’ — Wilson.  1 

Rigveda  VIII.  88.  3,  4.  The  Rishi  is  Nrimcdha.  The  metre  is 
Prigatha.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iii.  ii.  3.  5. 

2 Prompt  with  hi 8 liberal  boom : alarshirdtim : or,  * impatient  to 
bestow,’  The  Rigveda  has  anarmdtim , ‘whose  bounties  injure  none, 


V,  * 17.] 


TIIE  S Am  A VEDA. 


235 


XV.  Indra. 

Indra,  give  U£  security  from  that  whereof  we  are 
afraid ! 

Help  us,#0  Maghavan,  let  thy  favour  aid  ms  thus  : 
drive  away  foes  and  enemies ! 

2 For  thou,  O liberal  Lord  of  ample  bounty,  art  the 
ruler  of  our  house  and  home. 

So,  Indra,  *Maghavan,  thou  lover  of  the  song, 
we  with  pressed  Soma  call  on  thee, 

XVI.  Soma  Pavamana. 
Thou,  Soma,  hast  a running  stream,  sweet-toned! 

most  strong  at  sacrifice  : 

Flow  bounteously  bestowing  wealth  ! 

2 Thou  most  delightful,  when  effused,  running,  the 

best  of  gladdeners,  art 
Indu,  still  conquering,  ne’er  subdued. 

3 Do  thou,  poured  forth  by  pressing-stones,  flow  hither 

uttering  a roar, 

And  bring  us  brightly-glorious  strength ! 

XVII.  Soma  Pavam&na. 
In  might,  0 Indu,  with  thy  strpams  flow  for  the 

banquet  of  the  Gods  : 

Rich  in  meath,  Soma,  in  our  beaker  take  thy  seat ! 


Rigveda  VIU.  50.  13,  14.  The  ^ishi  is  Bharga.  The  metro  is 
Prag&tha.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iii.  ii.  4.  2. 

2 The  ruler:  vidhartd:  or,  supporter.  The  *Rigveda  has  vidhatafi: — 
‘thou  belongest  to  the  dwelling  of  him  who  worships  thee.’ 

Rigveda  IX.  67.  1 — 3.  The  llishi  is  Bhamdvaja.  The  metre  is  GAyatri. 

2 Indu , still  conquering , ne'er  subdued:  the  Rigveda  has  indrdya 
turir  andhasd , ‘A' prince  to  Indra  with  thy  juice.’ 

3 And  bring  us : instead  of  d bhara  the  Rigveda  has  uttamam : — 
‘send  us  in  thy  stream  most  excellent  and,  brilliant  might.’ 

Rigveda  IX.  106.  7 — 9.  The  Rishi  is  Manu  Apsava.  The  metre  is 
Vshnih.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  ii.  3.  6. 


*36  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  IT , 

2 Thy  drops  that  swim  in  water  have  exalted  Indra  to 

delight : 

The  Gods  have  drunk  thee  up  for  immortality. 

3 Stream  opulence  to  us,  ye  drops  of  Soma,  pressed 

and  purified, 

Pouring  down  rain  from  heaven  in  floods,  and  finding 
light ! 

XVIII.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Him  with  the  fleece  they  purify,  brown,  golden-hued, 
beloved  of  all, 

Who  with  exhilarating  juice  goes  forth  to  all  the 
deities : ' 

2 Whom,  Jbright  with  native  splendour,  crushed  be- 

tween the  pressing-stones,  a friend 
Whom  Indra  dearly  love'o,  the  waves  and  ten  com- 
panions clip  and  bathe. 

3 For  Vritra-slaying  Indra,  thou,  Soma,  art  poured 

that  he  may  drink, 

And  for  the  guerdon-giving  man,  the  hero  sitting  in 
his  seat 


2 For  immortality : to  preserve  the  immortality  with  which  Agni 
endowed  them. 

Rigvcda  IX.  98.  7,  6,  10.  The  Kish  is  are  Ambarisha  and  Rijisvan. 

The  metre  is  Anushtup. , 

* 

1 Him : Soma. 

2 The  waves : the  Scholiast  takes  firmayah,  the  nominative  plural, 
as  -tirmim,  the  accusative  si/igular,  and  puts  it  in  apposition  with 
whom.  The  Rigvcda  has  the  adjective  drn\inam  : — ‘ The  wavy  friend 
whom  Indra  loves.'  Ten  companions : the  fingers  of  the  priest.  The 
Rigveda  has  svasdrah,  sisters,  with  the  same  meaning. 

3 For  the  guerdon-giving  man : for  the  benefit  of  the  institutor  of 
the  sacrifice  who  rewards  the  officiating  priests.  The  hero : virdya : 
the  Rigveda  has  devdya , 1 for  the  God.’ 


v.  ii.  21.] 


TIIE  SAM AV EDA. 


237 


XIX.  Soma  Pavamana. 
Flow  onward,  Soma,  flow  for  mighty  strength,  as  a 

strong  coarser,  bathed,  to  win  the  prize. 

2 The  preSsers  clarify  this  juice  of  thine,  the  Soma, 

for  delight  and  lofty  fame. 

3 They  deck  the  gold-hued  infant,  newly-born,  even 

Soma,  Indu,  in  the  sieve,  for  Gods. 

% 

XX.  Soma  Pavamana. 
The  Gods  have  come  to  Indu  well-descended,  beauti- 
fied with  milk, 

The  actiye  crusher  of  the  foe. 

2 Even  as  mother  cows  their  calf,  so  let  our  praise-songs 

strengthen  him, 

Yea,  him  who  winneth  Indra’s  heart ! 

3 Soma,  pour  blessings  on  our  kine,  pour  forth  the 

food  that  streams  with  milk : 

Increase  the  sea,  praiseworthy  one  ! 

XXI.  # Tndra. 

Hitherward  ! they  who  light  the  flame  and  straight- 
way trim  the  sacred  grass, 

Whose  friend  is  Indra  ever  young. 


Itigveda  IX.  109.  10—12.  Ascribed  to  the  Agnayo  Dhishnyah, 
sacrificial  Agnis  or  fires.  The  metre  is  Dvipada  Viraj. 

3 They  deck : or,  cleanse. 

Rigveda  IX.  61.  13 — 15.  The  Risjii  is  Amahiyu.  The  metre  is 
Oayatrl.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  1.  vi.  i.  1.  1. 

3 The  sea : samudram : according  to  Sayana,  water  generally. 
Praiseworthy  one  *!  the  Rigveda  has  ukthyam,  4 that  merits  laud/  in- 
stead of  ukthya. 

Rigveda  VIII.  .45.  1—3.  The  Rishi  is  Trisoka.  The  metre  is 
Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  1.  ii.  i.  4.  9. 


238  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  II. 

2 Large  is  their  fuel,  much  their  laud,  wide  is  their 

splinter  from  the  stake, 

Whose  friend  is  Indra  ever  young* 

3 Unquhlled  in  fight  the  hero  leads  his  afmy  with  the 

warrior  chiefs, 

Whose  friend  is  Indra  ever  young* 

XXII.  tndni. 

He  who  alone  bestoweth  wealth  on  mortal  man  who 
offereth  gifts 

Is  Indra  only,  potent  Lord  whom  none  resist. 

2 Whoever  with  the  Soma  pressed  draw^  thee  away 

from  many  men, — 

Verily  Ihdra  gains  thereby  tremendous  power. 

3 When  will  he  trample,  l;ke  a weed,  the  man  who 

hath  no^ift  for  him  ? 

When,  verily,  will  Indra  hear  our  songs  of  praise  ? 


2 Laud:  sastram : the  .recitation  of  hymns  or  verses  by  the  Hotar- 
pricst  during  the  presentation  of  offerings  of  Soma  juice.  Splinter : 
the  first  shaving,  or  strip  of  wood,  cut  from  the  yitpa  or  sacrificial  post 
and  used  in  the  sacrifice.  ‘Club  (for  warding  off  intruders).’ — Steven- 
son. The  meaning  is : those  who  are  favoured  by  the  friendship  of 
Indra  arc  abundantly  supplied  with  all  that  is  required  for  the  due 
performance  of  sacrifice. 

Bigveda  I.  84.  7j>  9,  8,  The  Ttishi  is  ffotama.  The  metre  is  Ushnih. 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iv.  ii.  5.  9. 

1 Is  Indra  only:  indro  anga : ‘Indra  alone,’  or,  ‘verily  Indra,’ 
forms  the  burden  of  each  stanza  of  this  hymn.  In  a close  translation 
into  English  the  words  cannot  retain  this  position. 

2 From  many  mm:  from  many  other  worshippers.  The  second 
line  is  difficult.  Bcnfey  gives  patyate  (potitur,  gains)  the  meaning  of 
‘ grants : ’ — 4 to  him  verily  Indra  grants  this  high  power.’  4 To  him 
Indra  quickly  sends  might.’ — Stevenson.  But  the  word  never  has 
this  sense  in  the  Bigvcda. 


v.  ii.  23.]  THE  SAMAVEDA.  239 

XXIII.  India. 

The  singers  hymn  thee,  they  who  chant  the  psalm  of 
praise  are  lauding  thee. 

The  Brrfhmans  have  exalted  thee,  0 Satakratu, 
like  a pole. 

2 When  thou  wast  climbing  ridge  from  ridge,  he  looked 

upon  the  toilsome  task : 

Indra  takes  notice  of  that  wish,  and  the  Ram  hastens 
with  his  troop. 

3 Harness  thy  pair  of  strong  bay  steeds,  long-maned, 

whose  bodies  fill  the  girths, 

And,  In'dra,  Soma-drinker,  come  to  listen  to  our 
songs  of  praise  ! 


Rigveda  I.  10.  1 —3.  The  Rishi  is  Madhucliclih^idas.  The  metre 
is  Anush  tup.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iv.  ii.  1.  1. 

2 When  thou  vast  climbing : said  to  the  Yajam&na,  the  i ns ti tutor  of 
the  sacrifice,  who  ascends  a mountain  to  gather  the  Soma-plant  for  the 
ceremony.  The  Rigveda  has  the  verb  in^thc  third  person  singular 
dmhat.  He : Indra.  The  Ham : the  vigorous  and  battle-loving  Indra. 
11  is  troop : or  flock ; the  Maruts  who  attend  him.  Hastens  : to  the 
sacrifice. 


BOOK  VI. 


CHAPTER  I. 

I*  Agni. 

Agni,  well-kindled  bring  the  Gods  tor  him  who  offers 
holy  gifts  ; 

And  worship  them,  pure  Hotar-priest ! 

2 O Sage,  Tanfinap&t,  present  our  sacrifice  to  Gods 

to-day, 

Sweet  to  the  taste,  that  they  may  help,! 

3 Dear  Nar^saiisa,  sweet  of  tongue,  presenter  of 

oblations,  I 

Invoke  to  this  our  sacrifice. 

4 Agni,  on  thy  most  easy  car,  entreated,  hither  bring 

the  Gods  ! 

Manus-appointed  Priest  art  thou. 


Rigveda  1. 13.  1 — 4.  The  Rishi  is  Medhatithi.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 
The  four  stanzas  are  taken  from  one  of  the  Apri  or  propitiatory  hymns 
consisting  of  a scries  of  deified  objects,  all  of  those  addressed  in  this 
hymn  being  said  by  Sayana  to  be  forms  of  Agni. 

2 TanUnapdt : Son  of  Thyself ; a frequently  occurring  name  of 
Agni,  so  called  because  fire  is  sometimes  self*genehited,  as  in  the  light- 
ning, or  produced  by  attrition,  and  not  necessarily  derived  from  other 
fire.  Other  fanciful  explanations  of  ^he  word  are  given.  That  they, 
may  help : 4taye : the  Rigveda  has  viUtye , ‘ to  be  their  feast.’ 

3 Nardsahsa : Desire,,  or  Praise,  of  Men ; one  of  Agni’s  mystical 
names. 

4 Manus-appointed:  manurhitah : Manus  or  Mann  is  the  Man  par 
excellence , or  the  representative  man  and  father  of  the  human  race, 
regarded  as  the  ffrst  institutor  of  sacrifices  and  religious  ceremonies. 

16 


242 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  II. 


II,  Adityns. 

So  when  the  Sun  hath  risen  to-day  may  sinless  Mitra, 
Aryaman, 

Bhaga*  and  Savitar  send  us  forth ! < 

2 May  this  our  home  bo  guarded  well : forward, 

ye  bounteous,  on  the  way. 

Who  bear  us  safely  o’er  distress ! 

3 Yea,  Aditi,  and  those  great  Kings  whose  statute  is 

inviolate, 

Are  sovrans  of  a vast  domain. 

III.  India. 

Let  Soma  juices  make  thee  glad  ! Display  thy  bounty, 
Thunderer  : 

Drive  off  ‘the  enemies  of  prayer  ! 

2 Crush  with  thy  foot  the  niggard  churls  who  bring 
no  gifts  ! jnighty  art  thou  : 

There  is  not  one  to  equal  thee. 

"3  Thou  art  the  Lord  of  Somas  pressed,  Somas  un- 
pressed are  also  thine  : 

Thou  art  the  Sovran  of  the  folk. 


Rigveda  VII.  6G.  4—0.  The  llislii  is  Vasishtha.  The  metre  is  Uayatri. 

1 Sinless:  or  andgd  (h)  may  stand  for  andt/usoh,  the  accusative 
plural : — ‘ may  Savitar,  Mitra,  Aryaman,  And  Bhaga  send  us  sinless 
forth.’  Savitar:  the  Sun  as  the  great  vivifier  or  generator.  Send  us 
forth : snvdti:  the  root  is  su,  from  which  Savitar  also  is  formed. 

Aditi , and  those  (jreat  Kings:  ‘ye,  as  lords  of  all,  with  your 
mother  Aditi.’— Stevenson.  Cha,  and,  is  understood.  ‘ A very  fre- 
quent expression  is  that  of  adityah  aditih  without  any  copula,  to 
signify  the  Adityas  and  Aditi.’-*M.  Muller,  Vedic  Hymns, , I.  p.  244. 

ltigvcda  VI I r.  53.  1—3.  The  Rishi  is  frag&tha.  The  metre  is 
Oavatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iii.  i.  1.  1. 

3 Unpressed:  in  the  natural  state  of  the  juices  in  the  stalks  of  the 
plant.  Or,  as  Professor  Ludwig  suggests,  the  Soma  juices  which  Indra 
drinks  in  l.eaven  may  possibly  be  meant. 


vi.  i.  5.] 


THE  SAMAVEDA , 


213 


IV.  Soma  Pavamana. 
True  object  of  our  hymns,  Sage,  watchful  Soma 

hath  settled  in  the  press  as  they  refine  him. 

Him  th£  Adhvaryus,  paired  and  eager,  follow,  leaders 
of  sacrifice  and  skilful-handed. 

2 He,  purified  and  bringing  gifts  to  Stira,  hath  filled 

full  hcave/i  and  earth,  and  hath  disclosed  them. 

He  by  whose  dear  help  heroes  gain  their  wishes  will 
yield  the  precious  meed  as  to  a victor. 

3 He,  being  cleansed,  the  strengthener  and  increaser, 

bountiful  Soma  helped  us  with  his  lustre, 

Wherein  our  sires  of  old  who  knew  the  footsteps 
found  light  and  sought  the  kine  within  the  mountain. 

V.  India. 

Q • 

Glorify  naught  besides,  0 friends  ; so  shall  no  sor- 
row trouble  you  ! 

Praise  only  mighty  Indra  when  the  juice  is  shed, 
and  say  your  lauds  repeatedly.! 


Rigvcda  IX.  97.  37 — 39.  The  Kislii  is  Par&sara.  The  metre  is 
(layatri. 

1 True  object  of  our  hymns  : ritam  matindm  : the  Rigveda  has  ritd, 
which  is  said  by  Sayan  a to  stand  for  ritdndm  ‘ Sage  of  our  truthful 
hymns.’  Leaders  of  san'ifee : this  is  Sayana’s  explanation  of  ruthir- 
dsah , possessing,  or  travelling  in,  a chariot  j tlfat  is,  preparing  the 
Soma  juice  and  urging  it  on  like  a chariot. 

3 Footsteps:  or,  traces,  of  the  cows^that  had  been  carried  off  and 
imprisoned  by  the  Panis,  the  rays  of  light  which  the  fiends  of  darkness 
had  stolen  and  hidden  in  ihe  mountain  or  massy  cloud.  Cf.  Rigveda 
I.  62.  2-  5. 

Rigveda  VI II.  1.  1,  2.  The  llishi  is  Pragatha.  The  metre  is  Brihati 
in  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  I.  iii.  i.  5.  10,  and  Satobrihati  in 
stanza  2. 


244  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  1L 

2 Even  him,  the  swift  one,  like  a bull  who  rushes  down 
men’s  conqueror,  bounteous  like  a cow  ; 

Him  who  is  cause  of  both,  of  enmity  and  peace, 
to  both  sides  most  munificent. 

VI.  Indra, 
These  songs  of  ours  exceeding  sweet,  these  hymns 

of  praise  ascend  to  thee. 

Like  ever-conquering  chariots  that  display  their 
strength,  gain  wealth  and  give  unfailing  help. 

2 The  Bhrigus  are  like  suns,  like  Kanvas,  and  have 
gained  each  tiling  whereon  their  thought  was  bent. 
The  living  men  of  Priyamedha’s  race  t>have  sung 
exalting  Indra  with  their  lauds. 

VII.  Soma  Pavamana. 
Run  forth  to  battle  conquering  the  Vritras!  thou 
Speedest  t<4  quell  the  foe  like  one  exacting  debts. 

2 Thou,  Pavsimfma,  didst  beget  the  Sun  with  might, 
and  rain  in  the  supporting  sky, 

Hasting  to  us  with  plenty  vivified  with  milk. 


2 The  swift  one : juvam  < the  Rigvcda  has  ojuram , ‘ undecaying, ’ 
1 eternal.’  Bounteous  like  a cow  : the  adjective  is  not  in  the  text,  but 
is  required  in  order  to  make  the  comparison  intelligible.  Sec  Vedische 
Studien  I.  103.  To  both  sides:  to  the  singers  or  priests  and  to  the 
insti tutors  of  sacrifice. 

Rigveda  VIII.  3.  15,  16.  The  Kishi  is  Medhyatithi  of  the  family 
of  Kanva.  Stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  I.  iii.  ii.  1.  9,  is  in  Brihati 
metre,  and  stanza  2 in  Satobrihati. 

2 Here  the  three  most  distinguished  families  of  singers  appear  to 
represent  all  priestly  singers.  ( All  singers  have  praised  Indra,  and 
their  prayers  have  been  fulfilled. 

Rigveda  IX.  110.  1,  3,  2.  The  Rishis  arc'the  princes  Tryaruna  and 
Trasadasyu.  The  metre  is  Pipilikamadhya  Anushtup.  Stanza  1 is  a 
repetition  of  1.  v.  i.  5.  2,  and  stanza  3 of  1.  v.  i.  5.  6. 

2 In  the  supporting  sky : vidhdre.  With  plenty  vivified  with  milk : 
‘ with  a profusion  of  cows,  and  enlarged  intellccts.’-'-Stcvenson. 


vi.  i.  0.] 


THE  SJMAVEDA. 


3 For,  Soma,  we  rejoice  ourselves  in  thee  effused  for 
great  supremacy  in  fight  : 

Thou,  PavamAna,  enterest  into  mighty  deeds. 

"VIII*  Soirfa  Pavamlna. 

Flow  forth,  0 Soma,  flow  thou  onward,  sweet  to 
Indra’s,  Mitra’s,  PAshan’s,  Bhaga’s  taste! 

2 So  flow  thou  on  as  bright  celestial  juice,  flow  to  the 

vast  immortal  dwelling-place! 

3 Let  Indra  drink,  O Soma,  of  thy  juice  for  wisdom, 

and  all  deities  for  strength  ! 


IX.  Soma  Pavamann. 

Even  as  the  beams  of  Surya,  urging  men  to  speed, 
they  issue  forth  together,  gladdening*as  they  flow, 
These  swift  outpourings  in  long  course  of  holy  rites  : 
no  form  save  only  Indra  shows  itself  so  pure. 


Rigveda  IX.  109.  1,  3,  2.  The  Risliis  are  the  Aguayo  Dhisnyah, 
sacrificial  Agnis  or  fires.  The  metre  is  Dvipada  Viraj.  Stanza  1 is  a 
repetition  of  I.  v.  i.  5.  1.  • , 

2 To  the  vast  immortal  dwelling-place  ; guiding  us  to  heaven.  ‘ Flow 
for  immortality  and  spacious  abode.’ —Wilson.* 


Rigveda  IX.  69.  6,  2,  4.  The  Rishi  is  Hiranyastupa.  The  metre  is 
Jagati. 

1 As  they  flow : prasutah  : the  Rigveda  has  prasupah , ‘ sending  to 

sleep’: — ‘the  beams  of  Surya that  cheer  and  send  to  sleep.’ 

2 In  long  course  of  holy  rites:  literally,  around  the  extended  thread, 
which  is  a frequently  occurring  expression  for  an  unbroken  series  of 
sacrifices.  Benfey,  Stevenson,  and  Gnassmann,  following  Sayana,  take 
the  words  literally  as  meaning  the  threads  or  net  of  the  filter.  The 
tongue  with  joyous  sound  is  stirring  in  the  mouth : the  exact  meaning 
is  uncertain.  ‘I'he  Soma  stream,  emitting  pleasant  juice  is  driven 
into  (Indra’s)  mouth.’ — Wilson.  Of  those  who  press : or  pour  (the 
Soma  juice).  The  Rigveda  has  praghnatd/n,  ‘of  combatants,’  instead 
of  sunvatdm. 


246 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  II. 


2 The  thought  is  deeply  fixed,  the  savoury  juice  is 

shed  ; the  tongue  with  joyous  sound  is  stirring  in 
the  mouth : 

And  l^avamana,  like  the  shout  of  those,  who  press, 
the  drop  rich  in  sweet  juice,  is  flowing  through,  the 
fleece. 

3 The  Bull  is  bellowing ; the  cows  are  coining  nigh : 

the  Goddesses  approach  the  God^s  own  resting- 
place. 

Onward  hath  Soma  pressed  through  the  sheep's  fair 
bright  fleece,  and  hath,  as  ’twere,  endued  a gar- 
ment newly  washed. 

X.  Agni. 

From  the1  two  fire-sticks  have  the  men  engendered, 
with  thought,  urged  by  the  hand,  the  glorious 
Agni,  , 

Far-seen,  with  pointed  flame,  Lord  of  the  Homestead. 

2 The  Vasus  set  that  Agni  in  the  dwelling,  fair  to 

behold,  for  help,  from  every  quarter  : 

Who,  in  the  house  Tor  ever,  must  be  honoured. 

3 Shine  thou  before  us,  Agni,  well-enkindled,  with 

flame,  most  youthful  God,  that  never  fadeth ! 

To  thee  come  goods  and  treasures  all  together. 


3 The  Bull : Soma.  The  cows : the  streams  of  sacrificial  milk.  The 
Goddesses:  according  to^Sayana,  the  propitiatory  hymns  of  praise. 
Resting-place : the  reservoir.  A garment  newly  washed : the  milk 
with  which  the  Soma  juice  is  mixed. 

Rigveda  VII.  1.  1 — 3.  The  Kishi  is  Vasishtha.  The  metre  is  Viraj. 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  i.  ii.  2.  10. 

2 The  Vasus : meaning  the  Gods  generally. 

3 To  thee  come  goods  and  treasures  all  together : Sayana  interprets 
vdjd  differently  : — ‘ To  thee  come  all  the  sacrificial  viMids.’ 


vi.  ii.  1.] 


THE  SA  MATED  A. 


2*7 


XI.  Surya. 

This  spotted  Bull  hath  come  and  sat  before  the 
mother  in  the  east, 

Advancing  to  his  father  heaven. 

2 As  expiration  from  his  breath,  his  radiance  pene- 

trates within  : 

The  Bull  shines  out  through  all  the  sky. 

3 Song  is  bestowed  upon  the  Bird  : it  reigns  supreme 

through  thirty  realms 
Throughout  the  days  at  break  of  morn. 


CHAPTER  II. 

I*  Agn  i. 

Chant  we  a hymn  to  Agni  while  we  go  to  sacrifice, 
to  him 

Who  hears  us  even  from  afar  ! 

2 Who  from  of  old,  in  carnage,  when  the  folk  were 

gathered,  hath  preserved 

His  household  for  the  worshipper. 

3 May  that  most  blissful  Agn't  guard  our  wealth  and 

all  our  family, 

And  keep  us  safe  from  pain  and  grief! 

Rigveda  X.  189.  1 — 3.  The  deity  is  Sarparajiii,  the  Serpent-queen 
who  is  also  said  to  he  tin)  Rishi.  The  metre  is  G&yatri. 

1 This  spotted  Bull : Surya  or  the  Sun.  The  mother : the  earth.. 

2 This  difficult  stanza  is  variously  interpreted.  ‘ Its  rays  move 

within  man,  mid  from  the  higher  vital  air  extract  and  carry  down  the 
lower  vital  air,  and  the  same  mighty  god  enlightens  the  firmament/ — 
Stevenson.  % 

3 The  Bird:  the  Sun.  II is  morning  song,  representing  prayer, 
is  supreme  through  all  .the  divisions  of  the  world,  or  the  thirty  days 
of  the  month.  * 

Stanzas  1,  2,  4 arc  taken  from  Rigveda  T.  74.  1 — 3,  ascribed  to, 
Gotama,  and  stanza  3 from  Rigveda  VII.  1 5.  3,  ascribed  to  Vasishtha. 
The  metre  is  Oayatri. 


248  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  II, 

4 Yea,  let  men  say,  Agni  is  born,  even  he  who  slayeth 
Vritra,  he 

Who  winneth  wealth  in  every  fight! 

II*  Agni. 

Harness,  0 -Agni,  0 thou  God,  thy  steeds  which  are 
most  excellent ! 

The  fleet  ones  bring  thee  rapidly. 

2 Come  hither,  bring  the  Gods  to  us  to  taste  the 
sacrificial  feast, 

To  drink  the  draught  of  Soma  juice ! 

? 0 Agni  of  the  Bbaratas,  flame  splendid  with  un- 
fading  might : 

Shine  forth  and  gleam,  eternal  one  ! 

% 

hi.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

, Let  him,  as  mortal,  crave  this  speech  for  him  who 
presses,  of  the  juice! 

As  Bhrigu’s  sons  chased  Makha,  so  drive  ye  the 
niggard  hound  away. 

2 The  kinsman  hath  endued  his  robe  even  as  a son  is 
clasped  in  arms.  . 

He  went,  as  lover  to  a dame,  to  take  his  station 
suitor-like. 


Rigveda  VJ.  16.  43 — 45.  The  Rishi  is  Vitahavya,  or  Bharadvaja. 
The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

3 Of  the  Bharatas:  bhdrata ; the  especial  protector  of  the  Bharatas 
or  warriors.  According  to  Sayana  the  word  means  either  * descended 
from  the  priests  called  Bharatas,’  or  ‘the  bearer  of  oblations.’  ‘0 
Agni,  who  layest  hold  on  the  sacrifice.’ — Stevenson.  ‘ Bharatide ! — 
Benfey. 

Rigveda  IX.  101.  13 — 15.  The  Rishi  is  Praj&pati.  The  metre  is 
Anushtup,  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  ii.  1.  9. 

2 The  kinsman ; the  kinsman  of  the  Gods ; Soma.  His  robe : the 
milk  which  is  mixed  with  the  Soma  juice. 


vi.  ii.  .5  j 


THE  SlMAVEDA . 


2i9 


8 That  hero  who  produces  strength,  he  who  hath 
propped  both  worlds  apart, 

Gold-hued,  hath  wrapped  him  in  the  sieve  to  settle, 
priesfr-like,  in  his  place. 

IV . Indra. 

Still,  Indra,  from  all  ancient  time  rivalless  ever  and 
companiotiless  art  thou  : 

Thou  seekest  friendship  but  in  war. 

2 Thou  findest  not  the  wealthy  man  to  be  thy  friend  : 
those  scorn  thee  who  are  flown  with  wine. 

What  time  thou  thunderest  and  gatherest,  then 
thou,  even  as  a father,  art  invoked. 

V.  Indra. 

A thousand  and  a hundred  steeds,  are  harnessed 
to  thy  golden  car  : 

Yoked  by  devotion,  Indra,  let  the  long-maned  bays 
bring  thee  to  drink  the  Soma  juice  ! 

2 Yoked  to  thy  chariot  wrought  of  gold,  may  thy  two 
bays  with  peacock  tails. 

Convey  thee  hither,  steeds  with  their  white  backs, 
to  quaff  sweet  juice  that  makes  us  eloquent  ! 


Rigveda  VIII.  21.  13,  14.  The  Rishi  is  Sobhari.  The  metre  of 
stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  from  I.  v.  i!*2.  1,  is  Kakup,  and  of 
stanza  2 Satobrihati. 

2 Gatherest:  the  clouds  together.'  M.  Muller.  ‘When  thou  but 
utterest  the  inarticulate  sound  of  approbation,  then  thou  bringest  (thy 
wealth)  along  with  thee',  and  we  welcome  thee  with  invitations  as  we 
would  (the  manes  of)  a father.’ — Stevenson. 

Rigveda  VIII.  1.  24 — 26.  The  Rishis  are  MedhAtithi  and  MedhAy- 
tithi.  The  metro  is  Brihati.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iii.  ii.  1.  3. 


2i>0  THE  I1YMNS  OF  [PART  IT. 

3 So  drink,  thou  lover  of  the  song,  as  the  first  drinker, 
of  this  juice. 

This  the  outpouring  of  the  savoury  sap  prepared  is 
good  and  meet  to  gladden  thee. 

VI.  Soma  Pavatft&na. 
Press  ye  and  pour  him,  like  a steed,  laud-worthy, 

speeding  through  the  region  and  the  flood. 

Who  swims  iu  water,  dwells  in  wood  f, 

2 The  Steer  with  thousand  streams  who  poureth  out 

the  rain,  dear  to  the  race  of  deities  ; 

Who,  born  in  Law,  hath  waxen  mighty  by  the  Law, 
King,  God,  and  lofty  ordinance. 

VII.  ' Agni. 
Served  w*;th  oblation,  kindled,  bright,  through  love 

of  song,  may  Agni,  bent 
On  riches,  smite  the  Vritras  dead  : 

His  father’4  father,  shining  in  his  mother’s  ever- 
lasting side, 

Set  on  the  seat  of  sacrifice  ! 

3 0 active  Jata vedas,  bring  devotion  that  wins  progeny, 
Agni,  that  it  may  khine  to  heaven ! 

3 As  the  first  drinker r:  ‘According  to  the  scholiast,  pilrvapdh  means 
Vdyu,  who,  having  arrived  first  in  the  race,  drank  the  Soma  before 
the  other  gods.  The  allusion  is  to  the  principal  graha  libation,  called 
Aindravdyava , which  Indr  a and  Vdyu  share  together/ — Wilson. 

Rigveda  IX.  108.  7,  8.  The  Rishi  of  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition 
of  I.  vi.  ii.  4.  3,  is  Rijisvan,  and  the  metre  Kakup;  of  2,  the  Rishi  is 
Urdhvasadman,  and  the  metre  is  Satobrihati. 

2 Who  poureth  out  the  rain : payoduham : the  Rigveda  has  payo - 
vridham , ‘ increaser  of  the  rain.V 

Rigveda  VI.  1G.  34 — 36.  The  Rishi  is  Vitahavya,  or  Bharadv&ja. 
The  metre  is  Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  i.  i.  1.4. 

2 His  fathers  father : ‘Here the  mother  of  Agni  is  the  earth, 

the  father  is  heaven.  Agni  is  said  to  be  the  father  or  fosterer  of  his. 
parent  heaven  by  transmitting  to  it  the  flame  and  smoke  of  burnt- 
offerings/ — Wilson. 


vi.  ii.  9.] 


THE  SAM  A VEDA. 


2*51 

Soma  Parniiiana. 

Made  pure  by  tliis  man’s  urgent  zeal  and  impulse, 
the  God  hath  with  his  juice  the  Gods  pervaded. 
Pressed,  singing,  to  the  sieve  he  goes,  as  passes  the 
Hotar  to  enclosures  holding  cattle. 

2 Robed  in  fair  raiment  meet  to  wear  in  combat, 

a mightjr  Sage  pronouncing  invocations, 

Roll  onward  to  the  press-boards  as  they  cleanse  thee, 
far-seeing  at  the  feast  of  Gods  and  watchful  ! 

3 Dear,  he  is  brightened  on  the  fleecy  summit,  a 

prince  among  us,  nobler  than  the  noble. 

Roar  out  as  thou  art  purified,  run  forward ! Do  ye 
preserve  us  evermore  with  blessings !, 

I-X-  India. 

Come  now  and  let  us  glorify  pure  Jndra  with  pure 
S&ma  hymn  ! 

Let  milk-blent  juice  delight  him  made  stronger  with 
pure,  pure  songs  of  praise  ! 

2 O Indra,  come  thou  pure  to  us,  'with  pure  assistance, 

pure  thyself! 

Pure,  send  thou  riches  down  to  us,  and,  meet  for 
Soma!  pure,  rejoice! 

3 0 Indra,  pure,  vouchsafe  us  wealth,  and,  pure, 

enrich  the  worshipper  ! 

Pure,  thou  dost  strike  the  Vritfas  dead,  and  strivest, 
pure,  to  win  the  spoil. 

Rigveda  IX.  97.  1 — 3.  The  Kixhi  is  Vasishtha.  The  metre  is 
Gayatrl.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  i.  4.  4. 

3 Do  ye : GodSj.  The  frequently  occurring  conclusion  of  the  hymns 
of  the  Vasishthas. 

Rigveda  VIII.  84.  7 — 9.  The  Rishi  is  Tiraschi.  The  metre  is 
Anushtup.  StanXa  1 is  a repetition  of  T.  iv.  ii.  1.  9. 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PANT  ll 


m 


X.  Agm. 

Eager  for  wealth  we  meditate  Agni’s  effectual  laud 
to-day, 

Laud  pf  the  God  who  touches  heaven. 

2 May  Agni  who  is  Hotar-priest  among  mankind 

accept  our  songs, 

And  worship  the  celestial  folk! 

3 Thou,  Agni,  art  spread  widely  forth,  Priest  dear  and 

excellent : through  thee 
Men  make  the  sacrifice  complete. 

XI.  Soma  Pavamana. 

To  him,  praiseworthy,  sacred  tones  have  sounded, 
Steer  of  the  triple  height,  the  life-bestower. 
Dwelling*, in  wood,  like  Varuna,  a river,  lavishing 
treasure,  he  distributes  blessings. 

2 Great  conqueror,  warrior -girt,  Lord  of  all  heroes, 

4 flow  on  thy  way  as  he  who  winneth  riches  ; 

With  sharpened  arms,  with  swift  bow,  never  van- 
quished in  battle,  vanquishing  in  fight  the  foemen  ! 

3 Giving  security,  Lord  of  wide  dominion,  send  us 

both  heaven  and  earth  with  all  their  fulness! 
Striving  to  win  the  Dawns,  the  light,  the  waters, 
and  cattle,  call  to  us  abundant  booty  ! 

XII.  India. 

O Indra,  thou  art  far-renowned,  impetuous  Lord  of* 
power  and  might. 

Alone,  the  never-conquered  guardian  of  mankind, 
thou  smitest  down  resistless  foes. 


Rigveda  V.  13.  2 — 4.  The  Rislu  is  Sutambhara.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

Rigveda  IX.  90.  2—4.  The  Riahi  is  Vaaishtha.  The  motre  ia 
Trishtup.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  i 4.  6.  ^ 

2 Call  to  us : send  us  with  thy  shout  or  roar. 

Rigveda  VIII.  79.  5,  6.  The  Rishis  are  Nrimedha  and  Purumcdha. 
The  metre  is  Pragatha.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  J.  iii.  ii.  1.  6- 


vi.  ii.  14.] 


THE  SAMAVEDA . 


253 


2 As  such  we  seek  thee  now,  0 Asura,  thee  most  wise, 
craving  thy  bounty  as  our  share. 

Thy  sheltering  defence  is  like  an  ample  cloak.  So 
may  thy  favours  reach  to  us. 

XIII.  Agni. 
Thee  have  we  chosen,  skilfullest  in  sacrifice,  immortal, 

Priest,  among  the  Gods, 

Best  finisher  of  this  holy  rite  : 

2 The  Waters’  Child,  the  blessed,  brightly-shining  one, 
Agni  whose  light  is  excellent. 

May  he  by  sacrifice  win  us  in  heaven  the  grace  of 
Mitn,  Varuna,  and  the  Floods  ! 

XIV.  Agni. 
Lord  of  all  food  is  he,  the  man  whom  thou  protectest 

in  the  fight, 

Agni,  and  urgest  to  the  fray. 

2 Him,  whosoever  he  may  be,  no  one  may  vanquish, 

mighty  one  ! 

Nay,  very  glorious  wealth  is  his. 

3 May  he  who  dwells  with  all  mankind  conquer  in  fight 

with  steeds  of  war, 

With  sages  may  he  win  the  spoil. 


2 Amra:  or,  Lord  divine.  % 

Kigveda  VIII.  19.  3,  4.  The  Rishi  is  Sobhari.  The  metre  is  Kakup 
in  stanza  1 which  is  a repetition  of  I.  ii.  «.  2.  ^6,  and  Satobrihati  in 
stanza  2. 

2 The  Waters'  Child : born  as  lightping  from  the  clouds,  or  waters 
between  heaven  and  earth.  The  Floods : the  waters  of  heaven, 
regarded  as  divinities. 

Kigveda  I.  27.  7 — 9.  The  Rishi  is  Sunahsepa.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

3 He  who  dwells  with  all  mankind:  visvacharslianih ; Agni,  who  is 
found  with,  or  is  known  to,  all  A ryan  men.  With  sages : or  singers, 
the  priests  who  s/hg  hymns  of  praise  at  sacrifice. 


254 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  II. 


XV.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Ten  sisters,  pouring1  out  the  rain  together,  the  sages 
quickly-moving  thoughts,  adorn  him. 

Hither  hath  run  the  gold-hued  Child  of  Sflrya,  and 
readied  the  vat  like  a fleet  vigorous  courser. 

2 Even  as  a youngling  shouting  with  his  mothers,  the 

bounteous  Steer  hath  flowed  along  with  waters. 

As  youth  to  damsel,  so  with  milk  he  hastens  on  to 
the  settled  meeting-place,  the  beaker. 

3 Yea,  swollen  is  the  udder  of  the  milch-cow  : thither 

' in  streams  comes  very  sapient  Indu. 

The  kine  make  ready,  as  with  new-washed  treasures, 
the  head  and  chief  with  milk  within  the  vessels. 

XVI.  Indra. 

< c 

Drink,  Indra,  of  the  savoury  juice,  and  cheer  thee, 
with  our  milky  draught! 

Be,  for  our  weal,  our  friend  and  sharer  of  the  feast, 
and  let  thy  wisdom  guard  us  well! 

2 In  thy  kind  grace  and  favour  may  we  still  be  strong  : 
cast  us  not  down  before  the  foe! 

With  manifold  assistance  guard  and  succour  us,  and 
stablish  us  in  thy  good-will ! 


Rigveda  IX.  93.  1 —3.  The  Itishi  is  Nod  has.  The  metre  is  Trishtup. 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  i.  5.  6. 

3 The  head  and  chief : murdhd^nm : ‘the  supreme  divinity/ — Steven- 
son. ‘ The  elevated  Soma' — Wilson.  Within  the  vessel*:  chamUshu : 
the  usual  meaning,  press-boards,  is  not  applicable  here,  as  the  juice  was 
not  mixed  with  milk  until  it  had  left  the  press. 

Rigveda  VIII.  3.  1,  2.  The  Rishi  is  Mcdhyatithi.  The  metre  of 
stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  I.  iii.  i.  5.  7,  is  Brilyiti,  and  of  stanza 
2 Satobrihati. 


vi.  ii>  18.] 


THE  SlMA  VEDA. 


255 

XVII.  Soma  Pnvamaiift. 

The  three-times  seven  rnilch-kine  in  the  loftiest 
heaven  have  for  this  Soma  poured  the  genuine 
milky'draught. 

Four  other  beauteous  creatures  hath  he  made  for  his 
adornment  when  he  waxed  in  strength  through 
holy  rites. 

2 Enjoying  lovely  Amrit  by  his  wisdom  he  divided, 

each  apart  from  other,  earth  and  heaven. 

He  gladly  wrapped  himself  in  the  most  lucid  floods, 
when  through  their  glory  they  found  the  God  Is 
resting-place. 

3 May  those  his  brilliant  rays  be  ever  freq  from  death, 

inviolate  for  both  classes  of  created  things — 

Rays  wherewith  powers  of  men  and  Gods  are  puri- 
fied ! Yea,  even  for  this  have  sages  welcomed 
him  as  King. 

XVIII.  Soma  I’avamawi. 

Lauded  with  song,  to  feast*  him,  flow  to  Vayu, 
flow'  purified  to  Varuna  and  Mitra! 

Flow  to  the  song-inspiring  car-borne  hero,  to  mighty 
Indra,  him  who  wields  the  thunder ! 

2 Pour  on  us  garments  that  shall  clothe  us  meetly, 
send,  purified,  milch-kine,  abundant  yielders! 

God  Soma,  send  us  chariot-drawing  Jiorses  that  they 
• may  bring  us  treasures  bright  and  golden! 

Rigveda  IX.  70.  1 — 3.  The  Rishi  is  Renu.  The  metre  is  Jagati. 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  ii.  2.  7. 

2 Enjoying:  bhahhamdnah:  the  Rigveda  has  bh ikshamdnah,  ‘craving/ 

‘ begging  for.’  Both  classes  : animate  and  inanimate ; or,  (Jods  and  men. 


Rigveda  IX.  97/49—51.  The  Rishi  is  Kutsa.  The  metre  is  Jagati. 


256  THE  HYMNS  OF  [FART  II. 

3 Send  to  us  in  a stream  celestial  riches,  send  us,  when 
thou  art  cleansed,  what  earth  containeth, 

So  that  thereby  we  may  acquire  possessions  and 
Risliihood  in  Jarnadagni’s  manner! 

XIX.  Indra. 

When  thou,  unequalled  Maghavan,  wastbornto  smite 
the  Vritras  dead, 

Thou  spreadest  out  the  spacious  earth  and  didst 
support  and  prop  the  heavens. 

2 Then  was  the  sacrifice  produced  for  thee,  the  laud, 

and  song  of  joy. 

In  might  thou  art  above  this  All,  all  that  now  is  and 
yet  shdll  be. 

3 Raw  kine  thou  filledst  with  ripe  milk.  Th)QW^m4dest 
* Sftrya  rise  to  heaven. 

Heat  him  as  milk  is  heated  with  pure  Sama  hymns, 
great  joy  to  him  who  loves  the  song  ! 


3 Rishihood  in  Jamadagni’s  manner : ‘make  our  sacred  prayer 
(sweet)  as  Jamadagni. ’^.-Wilson. 

Rigveda  VIII.  78.  5 — 7.  The  Rishis  are  Nrimedha  and  Purumedha. 
The  metre  is  Anushtup  in  stanzas  1 and  2,  and  Brihati  in  3. 

3 Raw  kirn : the  cows  are  called  raw,  as  contrasted  with  the  warm 
milk  matured  in  their  udders.  This  marvel  is  mentioned  several  times 
in  the  Rigveda.  Cf.  I.-  '62.  9.  Thou  madest  Svtrya  rise  to  heaven : 
Sayana  relates  a legend  that  when  the  Panis  had  carried  off  the  cows 
of  the  Angirasas,  and  placed  thr3m  in  a mountain  enveloped  in  dark- 
ness, Indra,  at  the  prayer  of  the  Rishis,  set  the  sun  in  heaven  in  order 
that  ho  might  sec  and  recover  their  cattle.  « 

Heat  himas  milk  is  heated : this  line  is  difficult.  ‘ (Priests)  excite 
(Indra)  with  your  praises  as  men  heat  tho  Gharma  with  Sdman- 
hymns.’ — Wilson.  Gharma  means  either  the  hot  milk  or  other  beverage 
offered  in  the  Pravargya  ceremony,  or  the  vessel  in  rvhicli  it  is  heated. 


vL  iii.  1.] 


the;  sAmaveda. 


257 


XX.  Indra. 

Rejoice  : thy  glory  hath  been  quaffed,  Lord  of  bay 
steeds ! as  ’twere  the  bowl’s  enlivening  mead. 
Thine,  Steer,  is  Indu,  Steer,  the  Strong,  best  winner 
• of  a thousand  spoils. 

2 Let  our  strong  drink,  most  excellent,  exhilarating, 

•come  to  thee, 

Victorious,  Indra ! bringing  gain,  immortal,  conquer- 
ing in  fight ! 

3 Thou,  hero,  winner  of  the  spoil,  urgest  to  speed  the 

car  of  man. 

Burn,  like  a vessel  with  the  flame,  the  riteless  Dasyit, 
conqueror ! 


CHAPTER  III. 

!•  Soma  Pavam&na. 

Pour  down  the  rain  upon  us,  pour  a wave  of  waters 
from  the  sky, 

And  plenteous  store  of  wholespme  food ! 

2 Flow  onward  with  that  stream.of  thine,  whereby  the 

cows  have  eome  to  us, 

The  kine  of  strangers  to  our  home. 

3 Dearest  to  Gods  in  sacred  rites,  pour  on  us  fatness 

with  thy  stream, 

Pour  down  on  us  a flood  of  rain  ! 


Rigveda  I.  175.  1 — 3.  The  Rislii  is  Agastya.  The  metro  is 
Skandhogrivi  (8  + 12  + 8 + 8)  in  stanzas  1,  and  Anushtup  in  2 and  3. 

1 Thy  glory  hath  been  quaffed : thou  hast  drunk  what  incites  thee 
to  glorious  deeds,  the  Sonia  juiee  contained  in  the  bowl. 

Rigveda  IX.  49.  1 — 5.  The  Rislii  is  Kavi.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

1 Wholesome : ayakshmd ; literally,  without  yakshma,  or  pulmonary 
consumption.  ' 

17 


258  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  II. 

4 To  give  us  vigour,  with  thy  stream  run  through  the 

fleecy  straining-cloth ! 

For  verily  the  Gods  will  hear. 

5 Onward  hath  Pavam&na  flowed  and  beaten  off  the 

R&kshasas,  0 

Flashing  out  splendour  as  of  old. 

IL  ' Indra. 

Bring  forth  oblations  to  the  God  who  knoweth  all, 
who  fain  would  drink, 

The  wanderer,  lagging  not  behind  the  hero,  coming 
nigh  with  speed ! 

2 With  Somas  go  ye  nigh  to  him  chief  drinker  of  the 

Soma’s'juice : 

With  beakers  to  the  impetuous  God,  to  Indra  with 
the  flowing  drops! 

3 What  time  with  Somas,  with  the  drops  effused, 

ye  come  before  the  God, 

Full  wise,  he  knows  the  hope  of  each,  and,  bold  one, 
strikes  this  foe  and  that. 

4 To  him,  Adhvaryu ! yea,  to  him  give  offerings  of  the 

juice  expressed  ! 

Will  he  not  keep  us  safely  from  the  spiteful  curse  of 
each  presumptuous  high-bolm  foe  ? 


4 Will  hear  : the,  sound  that  thou  makest  in  flowing. — Sayana. 

5 Flashing  out  splendour  as  of  old : or,  Making  lights  shine  as  erst 
they  shone. 

Rigveda  VI.  42.  1 — 4.  The  Rishi  is  Bharadv&ja.  The  metre  is 
Brihati  in  stanza  4,  and  Anush  tup  in  1 — 3. 

3 Strikes  this  foe  and  that : 1 foe  ’ is  not  in  the  text.  Sayana  makes 
tam  tam  refer  to  kdmam , hope  or  wish : — ‘ And  the  suppresser  (of 
enemies)  assuredly  grants  it,  whatever  it  may  be.’ — Wilson. 

4 Keep  us  safely : the  Rigveda  has  avasparat  for  avasvarat . 


vi.  Hi.  4.] 


THE  SlM AV EDA. 


259 


III.  Soma  Pavamana. 
Sing  ye  a song  to  Soma  brown  of  hue,  of  independ- 
ent might, 

The  R,e(^  who  reaches  up  to  heaven  ! 

2 Purify  Soma  when  effused  with  stones  which  hands 

move  rapidly, 

And  pour  the  sweet  milk  in  the  meath  ! 

3 With  humble  homage  draw  ye  nigh;  blend  the  liba- 

tion with  the  curds : 

To  Indra  offer  Indu  up ! 

4 Soma,  foe-queller,  strong  and  swift,  doing  the  will  of 

Gods,  pour  forth 
Prosperity  upon  our  kine ! 

5 Heart-knower,  Sovran  of  the  heart,  thou  art  effused, 

O Soma,  that 

Indra  may  drink  thee  and  rejoice. 

6 0 Soma  Pavamana,  give  us  riches  and  fieroic  strength, 
Indu,  with  Indra  our  ally! 

IV.  Indra. 
StfRYA,  thou  mountest  up  to  meet  the  hero  famous 

for  his  wealth, 

Who  hurls  the  bolt  and  works  for  men  ; 

2 Him  who  with  might  of  both  his  arms  broke  nino- 
and-ninety  castles  down, 

Slew  Vritra  and  smote  Ahi  dead. 


Rigveda  IX.  11.  4 — 9.  The  Rishi  is  Asita  or  Devala.  The  metre 
is  Uayatri. 

1 The  Red:  kaddchidarunavarndyS, , sometimes  red-coloured,  is 
Sayana’s  explanation  of  arundya  here. 

Rigveda  VIII.  82.  1 — 3.  The  Rishi  is  Sukaksha.  The  metre  is 
Giiyatrf. 

2 Nine-and-ninety  castles : cloud-castles  of  Sambara  or  other  demon 
of  drought. 


260  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  II. 

3 This  Indra  is  our  gracious  friend.  He  sends,  like  a 
full-streaming  cow, 

Riches  in  horses,  kine,  and  corn. 

V«  Surya. 

May  the  bright  God  drink  glorious  Soma-mingled 
meath,  giving  the  sacrifices  lord  unbroken  life  ; 

He  who,  wind-urged,  in  person  guards  our  offspring 
well,  nourishes  them  with  food  ’ and  shines  o’er 
many  a land. 

2 Radiant,  as  high  Truth,  cherished,  best  at  winning 

strength,  Truth  based  upon  the  statute  that  sup- 
ports the  heavens, 

He  rose,  a light  that  kills  Vritras  and  enemies,  best 
slayer  of  the  Dasyus,  Asuras,  and  foes. 

3 This  light,  the  best  of  lights,  supreme,  all-conquer- 

ing, winner  of  riches,  is  exalted  with  high  laud. 
All-lighting,  radiant,  mighty  as  the  Sun  to  see, 
he  spreadeth  wide  unshaken  victory  and  strength. 

VI.  Indra. 

0 Indra,  give  us  wisdom  as  a sire  gives  wisdom  to 
his  sons. 

Guide  us,  0 much-invoked,  in  this  our  way  : may  we 
still  live  and  look  upon  the  light ! 


3 Like  a full-streaming  cow  : 1 cow  ’ is  not  in  the  text : urudhdrd  may, 
perhaps,  be  taken  as  an  instrumental  case,  * as  in  a full  broad  stream.’ 

Rigvcda  X.  170.  i— 3.‘  The  Kishi  is  Vibhraj  or  Vibhrat  (Radiant), 
the  son  of  Surya.  The  metre  is  Jagati. 

1 The  bright  God : Vibhraj,  * Surya,  or  the  Sun-god.  Wind-urged: 
Vayu  or  Wind  is  said  to  set  in  motion  and  drive  onward  the  rays  of 
the  Sun.  ‘ Moved  round  by  the  aerial  vortex.’ — Stevenson.  Nourishes ; 
piparti : the  Rigvcda  has  puposha , ‘ has  nourished.’ 

2 Asuras:  here,  in  the  later  signification  of  tho  word,  demons. 

RigvedaVlI.  32.  26,  27.  TheRishiisVasishtha.  Tfyc  metre  is  Brihatiin 
stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  I.  iii.  ii.  2,  7,  and  Satobrihati  in  stanza  2. 


vi.  iii.  9.] 


THE  SAM  AV ED  A. 


261 


2 Grant  that  no  mighty  foes,  unknown,  malevolent, 
unhallowed,  tread  us  to  the  ground  ! 

With  thine  assistance,  hero,  may  we  pass  through 
all  tho  waters  that  are  rushing  down ! 

* 

VII.  Indra. 

Protect  ub,  Indra,  oaoh  to-day,  each  morrow,  and 
each  following  day  ! 

Through  all  the  days  slialt  thou,  Lord  of  the  brave, 
preserve  our  singers  both  by  day  and  night ! 

2 A crushing  warrior,  passing  rich,  is  Maghavan, 
endowed  with  all  heroic  strength. 

Thine  arms,  O Satakratu,  are  exceeding  strong,  those 
arms  which  grasp  the  thunderbolt 

VIII.  Saras  van. 

We  call  upon  Sarasv&n  as  unmarried , men  who  long 
for  wives, 

As  bounteous  men  who  yearn  for  sons. 

IX.  Saras  vat  i. 

Yea,  she  most  dear  amid  dear  sire'ams,  seven-sistered, 
loved  with  fondest  love, 

Sarasvati,  hath  earned  our  praise. 


Rigveda  VIII.  50.  17,  18.  The  Rishi  is  Bharga.  The  metro  is  Pra- 
gatha. 

2 Grasp  the  thunderbolt : or,  hurl  the  thunder  down. 

Rigveda  VII.  96.  4.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

1 Sarasvdn ; or  Sarasvat,  is  the  namt^of  a River-god  usually  assigned 
as  a consort  to  Sarasvati. 

Rigveda  VI.  61. 10.  Tho  Rishi  is  Bharadvaja.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

1 Seven-sistered:  meaning,  ono  of  the  seven  sister  rivers,  namely 
Indus,  Vitasta,  Asikni,  Parushni,  Vipas,  Sutudri,  Sarasvati;  or  Kubha 
may  be  counted  in '♦the  place  of  the  last-named.  Sarasvati : see  Rig- 
veda, Vol.  I.  p.  6,  or  Muir,  Original  Sanskrit  Texts , V.  p.  375. 


262 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  II. 


X.  Savitar.  Brahmanaspati.  Agm. 

May  we  attain  that  excellent  glory  of  Savitar  the  God: 
So  may  he  stimulate  our  prayers  ! 

2 O Brahmanaspati,  make  thou  Kakshiv&n  ^Lusija  a loud 
Chanter  of  flowing  Soma  juice  ! 

3 Agni,  thou  pourest  life  * sand  down  upon  ns  food 

and  vigorous  strength  : 

Drive  thou  misfortune  far  away  ! 

XL  Mitra-Varuna. 

So  help  ye  us  to  riches,  great  celestial  and  terrestrial 
wealth  ; 

Vast  is  your  sway  among  the  Gods  ! 

2 Carefully«tending  Law  with  Law  they  have  attained 
their  vigorous  might  : 

Both  Gods,  devoid  of  guile,  wax  strong. 

& With  rainy  kkies  and  streaming  floods,  Lords  of  the 
food  that  falls  in  dew, 

A lofty  seat  have  they  attained. 


Stanza  1 is  taken  from'Rigveda  III.  62,  10,  ascribed  to  Visvamitra ; 
stanza  2 is  a repetition  of  I.  ii.  i.  5.  5 ; and  stanza  3 is  from  Rigveda 
TX.  66.  19.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

1 This  stanza  is  the  S&vitri,  the  Gayatri  par  excellence , * the  cele- 
brated verse  of  the  Vedas  which  forms  part  of  the  daily  devotions  of 
the  Brahmans,  and  was  first  made  known  to  English  readers  by  SirW. 
Jones’s  translation  of  a periphrastic  interpretation ; he  renders  it,  Let 
us  adore  the  supremacy  of  that  divine  sun,  the  godhead,  who  illumi- 
nates all,  who  recreates  all,  from  whom  all  proceed,  to  whom  all  must 
return,  whom  we  invoke  to  direct  our  understandings  aright  in  our 
progress  towards  his  holy  scut.’ — Wilson,  Rig-veda  Sanhitdt  Vol. 
III.  p.  111. 

Rigveda  V.  68.  3 — 5.  Ascribed  to  Ratahavya.  The  metre  is  G&yatri. 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  II.  iv.  ii.  4.  3. 

3 Lords  of  the  food  that  falls  in  dew : ‘ lords  of  sustenance,  suited 
to  the  liberal  donors  (of  oblations).’ — Wilson,  The  yeaning  of  ddnu- 
matyd  is  uncerta'n. 


vi.  iii.  13.] 


THE  SAMAVEDA. 


263 


XII.  Tndra. 
They  who  stand  round  him  as  he  moves  harness  the 

bright,  the  ruddy  steed  : 

,The  lights  are  shining  in  the  sky. 

2 On  both  sides  to  the  car  they  yoke  the  two  bay 

coursers  dear  to  him, 

Brown,  bold,  who  bear  the  hero  on. 

3 Thou,  making  light  where  no  light  was,  and  form, 

O men  ! where  form  was  not, 

Wast  born  together  with  the  Dawns. 

XIII.  Soma  Pavamana. 
For  thee  this  Soma  is  effused,  0 Indra : drink  of 

this  juice  ; for  thee  the  stream  is  flowing — 

Soma,  which  thou  thyself  hast  made  and  chosen,  even 
Indu  for  thy  special  drink  to  cheer  thee  ! 


Rigveda  I.  6.  1 — 3.  The  Rishi  is  Kanva.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

1 They  who  stand  round  him : paritasthushah  : lokatrayavartinali 
prdninah, , ‘ the  living  beings  of  the  three  worlds,’  is  S&yana’s  explana- 
tion. Probably  tho  Maruts,  Indra’s  constant  companions,  are  intended. 
The  bright , the  ruddy  steed : the  rising  Sun. 

2 On  both  sides : vipakshasd : harnessed  on  different  sides.  The 
hero  : the  Sun.  As  M.  Bergaigne  remarks  : — ‘ The  Sun  is  sometimes  a 
wheel,  sometimes  a chariot,  sometimes  a horse  drawing  the  chariot, 
sometimes  a hero  mounted  on  the  chariot  and  directing  the  horses.’— 
La  Religion  Vedique^  III.  p.  324. 

3 Thou : 0 Sun.  0 men  / is  perhaps  merely  an  exclamation  of 
admiration.  If  marydh , men,  be  taken  to  mean  the  Maruts,  the  words, 
thou , making , wast  born , although  in ‘the  singular  number,  may  apply 
to  these  Gods  regarded  as  one  host  or  company  and  bom  at  one  birth. 

For  an  exhaustive  explanation  of  the  whole  hymn  from  which  these 
three  stanzas  are  taken  see  Max  Muller,  Vedic  Hymns , Part  I.  pp.  14 — 52 


Rigveda  IX.  88.  1,  2,  7.  The  Rishi  is  Usana  Kavya.  The  metre 
is  Trishtup. 


2G*  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  II 

2 Like  a capacious  car  hath  it  been  harnessed,  the 

mighty,  to  acquire  abundant  treasures. 

Then  in  tire  sacrifice  they  shouted  lauding  all 
triumphs  won  by  Nahua  in  the  battle.c 

3 Flow  onward  like  the  potent  band  of  Maruts,  ‘like 

that  celestial  host  which  n-one  revileth ! 

Quickly  be  gracious  unto  us  like  waters,  like  sacrifice 
victorious,  thousand-fashioned  ! 

XIV.  Aglii; 

0 Agni,  thou  hast  been  ordained  Hotar  of  every 
sacrifice, 

By  Gods,  among  the  race  of  men. 

2 So  with  sweet-sounding  tongues  for  us  sacrifice 
nobly  in  this  rite  : 

Bring  thou  the  Gods  and  worship  them  I 

« 

2 I can  make  nothing  out  of  the  second  line  of  this  stanza.  The 
version  which  I give  as  a temporary  makeshift  is  founded  on  Professor 
Ludwig’s  remarks  in  his  Commentary  on  the  passage,  Vol.  V.  p.  308  of 
his  Rigveda.  Professor  Wilson,  following  S&yana,  translates  : — ‘ After 
this  may  all  the  races  of  men  expecting  our  (attack)  go  to  the  desirable 
battle.’  According  to  Professor  Grassmann,  who  reads  vand  instead 
of  vana , the  line  might  bo  rendered : — ‘ Erect  like  trees  now  may  all 
human  races,  that  they  may  win  felicity,  approach  him,’  Won  by 
Nahus : nahushydni : either  belonging  to  a man  called  Nahus,  or,  be- 
longing to  men  generally,  human. 

3 Like  sacrifice : according  to  Sayana,  yajncdh , sacrifico,  means  here 
worthy  of  sacrifice  : — ‘(thou  art)  of  a thousand  shapes,  adorable  like 
(Indra)  the  victor  in  battle.’ — Wilson.  The  meaning  of  sahasrdpsdlb 
is  somew'hat  uncertain ; Profes&r  Ludwig  translates  it  by  ‘ tausend 
wiiszer  ersiegend,’  ‘winning  a thousand  waters.’  The  St.  Petersburg 
Lexicon  gives  the  word  without  an  interpretation. 

Rigveda  VL  16.  I — 3.  The  Rishi  is  Vitahavya,  or  Bharadvaja. 
The  metre  is  Gayatri,  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetitipn  of  I.  i.  i.  L % 
being  in  a slightly  modified  form  called  Vardhamana, 


Vi.  iii.  16.]  THE  SJMAVEDA.  265 

3 For,  as  disposer,  Agni,  God,  most  wise  in  sacrifices, 
thou 

Knowest  straightway  the  roads  and  paths. 

t XV.  Agni. 

Immortal,  Hotar-priest,  and  God,  with  wondrous 
power  he  leads  the  way, 

Urging  the#  congregations  on. 

2 Strong,  he  is  set  on  deeds  of  strength.  He  is  led 

forth  in  holy  rites, 

Sage  who  completes  the  sacrifice. 

3 Excellent,  he  was  made  by  thought.  The  germ  Qf 

beings  have  I gained, 

Yea,  and  the  Sire  of  active  power. 

XVI.  Agni. 

Pour  on  the  juice  the  heated  milk  which  hastenetji 
to  heaven  and  earth  : 

Bestow  the  liquid  on  the  Bull ! 

2 These  know  their  own  abiding-place  : like  calves 
beside  the  mother  cows 
They  come  together  with  their  kin. 


3 The  roads  and  paths:  the  ways  of  performing  religious  ceremonies. 

Tfcigvcda  III.  27.  7 — 9.  The  Rishi  is  Visvamitra.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

1 Congregations : vidathdni : sacrificial  assemblies,  or,  sacrifices. 

2 He  is  led  forth : Agni,  in  the  form  of  sacrificial  fire,  is  conveyed 
to  the  receptacle  or  altar. 

3 By  thought:  by  holy  thought,  devotion,  prayer.  The  germ  of  beings : 
Agni,  the  embryo  of  all  life;  ‘ the  source  of  all  beings.’ — M.  Muller. 

Rigvoda  VIII.  61. 13 — 15.  The  Rishi  is  Haryata.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

1 The  Bull : Agni. 

2 These : the  priests.  Their  own  abiding-place : or,  the  Soma  to 
which  they  are  accustomed.  They  come : the  cows  come  to  the  place 
where  they  arc  to  be  milked  for  sacrificial  purposes. 


2C6  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  II. 

3 Devouring  in  their  greedy  jaws,  they  make  sustain- 
ing food  in  heaven, 

For  Indra,  Agni,  homage,  light. 

XVII.  lndr. 

In  all  the  worlds  That  was  the  best  and  highest 
whence  sprang  the  mighty  one,  of  splendid  valour. 
As  soon  as  he  is  born  he  smites  his  foemen,  he  in 
whom  all  who  lend  him  aid  are  joyful. 

2 Grown  mighty  in  his  strength,  of  ample  vigour, 

he  as  a foe  strikes  fear  into  the  D&sa, 

Eager  to  win  the  breathing  and  the  breathless.  All 
sang  thy  praise  at  banquet  and  oblation. 

3 All  concentrate  on  thee  their  mental  vigour,  what 

time  these,  once  or  twice,  are  thine  assistants. 
Blend  what  is  sweeter  than  the  sweet  with  sweetness : 
win  quickly  with  our  meath  that  meath  in  battle. 


3 Devouring : perhaps,  the  flames.  Or,  more  in  accordance  with 
Sayana’s  interpretation  who  takes  bapsatah  as  the  genitive  case  : — They 
(the  priests)  make  the  strengthening  food,  in  heaven,  of  him  who  eats 
with  greedy  jaws  (Agni).  T*he  language  of  the  hymn  from  which  these 
stanzas  are  taken  is  intentionally  obscure. 

Rigveda  X.  120.  1 — 3.  The  Rishi  is  Brihaddiva,  son  of  Atharvan. 
The  metre  is  Trishtup. 

1 That : meaning,  according  to  Sayana,  Brahma,  the  original  cause 
of  the  universe.  ‘ That  (primeval  essence  alone).’ — Stevenson. 

2 The  Ddsa : the  hostile  aborigines;  ‘his  slavish  (foes).’ — Stevenson. 
Eager  to  win:  Professor  Ludwig  makes  sasni  an  infinitive.  The 
correct  reading  may  be  sasnih.  The  breathing  and  the  breathless : the 
animate  and  the  inanimate  world. 

3 Mental  vigour:  kratum:  ‘ adoration.’— Wilson.  These:  Soma- 
juices.  Twice  or  thrice : with  reference,  perhaps,  to  the  three  daily 
libations.  What  is  sweeter  than  the  sweet : thine  own  celestial  Soma. 
Sayana  interprets  the  stanza  differently  : — * To  thee  all  (worshippers) 
offer  adoration,  whether  those  propitiators  be  two  or  three.  Combine 
that  which  is  sweeter  than  the  sweet  with  sweetness,  unite  that  honey 


vi.  iii.  18.] 


THE  SlMAVEDA, 


2G7 


XVIII.  Indra. 

At  the  Trikadrukas  the  great  and  strong  enjoyed  the 
barlev-brew.  With  Vishnu  did  he  drink  the  pressed- 
t out  Sonia  juice,  even  as  he  would. 

That  hath  so  heightened  him  the  great,  the  wide, 
to  do  his  mighty  work.  So  may  the  God  attend 
the  God,  true  Indu  Indra  who  is  true ! 

2 Brought  forth  together  with  wisdom  and  potent 

strength  thou  grewest  great : with  hero  deeds 
subduing  the  malevolent,  most  swift  in  act ; 
Giving  prosperity  and  lovely  wealth  to  him  wfyo 
praiseth  thee.  So  may  the  God  attend  the  God, 
true  Indu  Indra  who  is  true  ! 

3 So  he  resplendent  in  the  battle  overca'me  Krivi  by 

might.  He  with  his  majesty  hath  filled  the  earth 
and  heaven,  and  waxen  strong. 

One  share  of  the  libation  hath  he  swallowed  down  : 
one  share  he  left.  Enlighten  us  ! So  may  the 
God  attend  the  God,  true  Indu  Indra  who  is  true  ! 


with  honey.’ — Wilson.  The  ‘ two  or  thred,’  according  to  Sayana,  are 
the  sacrificcr,  and  his  wife  and  child,  and  the  second  half  of  the  stanza 
contains  a reference  to  the  propagation  of  children.  That  meath ; or  the 
meath  yonder.  Indra  is  asked  to  obtain  for  his  worshippers,  through, 
or  in  return  for  the  meath  which  they  offer,  the  genuine  meath  which 
comes  from  heaven. 

• 

lligveda  II.  22.  1,  3,  2.  The  Ttishi  is  'Gritsamada.  The  metre 
in  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  1.  V.  ii.  3.  1,  is  Ashti,  and  in  2 
and  3 Atisakvari.  * 

3 Krivi : originally  ‘ a leather  bag  ’ and  metaphorically  a ‘ cloud,’ 
said  by  S&yana  to  have ‘been  an  Asura  or  demon.  One  share  he  left : 
to  be  divided  among  all  the  other  Gods.  Enlighten  us : prachetaya : 
the  word  is  wanting  in  the  text  of  the  Kigveda. 


BOOK  VII. 


CHAPTER  I. 

L Indra. 

Praise,  even  as  he  is  known,  with  song  Indra  the 
guardian  of  the  kine, 

The  Son  of  Truth,  Lord  of  the  brave ! 

2 Hither  have  his  bay  steeds  been  sent,  red  steeds  are 

on  the  sacred  grass 
Where*  we  in  concert  sing  our  songs. 

3 For  Indra,  thunder-armed,  the  kine  have  yielded 

mingled  milk  and  meath, 

What  time  he  found  them  in  the  vault. 

II.  Indra. 

Draw  near  unto  our  Indra  who  must  be  invoked 
in  every  fight! 

Come,  thou  most  mighty  Vritra-slayer,  meet  for 
praise,  come  to  libations  and  to  hymns. 

2 Thou  art  the  best  of  all  in  sending  bounteous  gifts, 
true  art  thou,  lordly  in  thine  act. 

We  claim  alliance  with  the  very  glorious  one,  yea, 
with  the  mighty  Son  of  Strength. 


Rigveda  VIII.  58.  4 — 6.  The  Rishi  is  Priyamcdha.  The  metre  is 
(jrayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  ii.  ii.  3.  4. 

3 In  the  vault : upahvare : meaning,  according  to  Sayana,  1 near 
at  hand ; 5 according  to  Professor  Roth,  ‘ in  the  cavity  of  the  Soma- 
vessel  ; ’ according  to  Professor  Ludwig,  ‘ on  the  horizon.’  ‘ In  dcr  Neigc,’ 
i.  e.  dropping  downwards. — Bcnfcy. 

Rigveda  VIII.  79.  1,  2.  The  Rishis  are  Nrimcdha  and  Purumodha. 
The  metre  is  Pragatha. 

2 Lordly  in  tfnnc  act ; or,  giving  lordly  powers. 


270 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  II. 


III.  Soma  Pavam&na. 
They  have  drained  forth  from  out  the  great  depth  of 

the  sky  the  old  divine  primeval  milk  that  claims 
the  Jaud : , 

They  lifted  up  their  voice  to  Indra  at  his  birth.  . 

2 Then,  beautifully  radiant,  certain  heavenly  ones  pro- 

claimed their  kinship  with  him  as  they  looked 
thereon : t 

Savitar  opens,  as  it  were,  the  fold  of  heaven. 

3 And  now  that  thou,  0 Pavam&na,  art  above  this 

earth  and  heaven  and  all  existence  in  thy  might, 
Thou  shinest  like  a bull  supreme  among  the  herd. 

IV.  # Agni. 
0 Agni,  graciously  announce  this  our  good  fortune 

to  the  Gods, 

And  this  our  newest  hymn  of  praise! 
i Thou  dealest  gifts,  resplendent  one ! nigh,  as  with 
wave  of  Sindhu,  thou 
Swift  streamest  to  the  worshipper. 

3 Give  us  a share  of  wealth  most  high,  a share  of 
wealth  most  near1  to  us, 

A share  of  wealth  that  is  between. 

Rigveda  IX.  110.  8,  6,  9.  The  Rishis  are  the  princes  Tryaruna  and 
Trasadasyu.  The  metre  is  Urdhvabrihati,  a variety  of  Brihati. 

1 They : tho  men  of  old,  primeval  patriarchs  and  priests. 

2 Beautifully  radiant : vasurvehah : according  to  Sayana,  a proper 
name,  the  Vasuruchar.  With  him : with  Soma.  Opens,  as  it  were , 
the  fold:  ‘drives  away  the  obstructing  (darkness).’ — Wilson.  The 
Rigveda  has  devah , ‘ the  God  ’ (Savitar),  instead  of  divah , ‘ of  heaven.’ 

3 Shinest : vi  rdjasi  : the  Rigveda  has  vi  tishthase , 1 standest.’ 

Rigveda  I.  27.  4, 6, 5.  The  Rishi  is  Sunahse'pa.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

2 Sindhu : the  Indus ; or  the  word  may  stand  for  any  river,  and  the 
expression  mean,  ‘ in  great  abundance.’ 

3 Wealth  of  all  kinds  is  prayed  for,  celestial,  terrestrial,  and  that  of 
mid-air  in  the  shape  of  rain. 


vii.  i.  6.] 


THE  SlMAVEDA. 


271 


V.  Indra. 
I from  my  Father  have  obtained  deep  knowledge  of 

eternal  Law  : 

I  was  born  like  unto  the  Sun. 

2 After  the  ancient  manner  I,  like  Kanva,  beautify  my 

songs, 

And  Indra’s  self  gains  power  thereby. 

3 Whatever  IJishis  have  not  praised  thee,  Indra,  or 

have  praised  thee,  wax 
Mighty  indeed  when  praised  by  me ! 

VI.  Agni. 
Agni,  produced  by  strength,  do  thou  with  all  thy 

fires  accept  our  prayer  : 

With  those  that  are  with  Gods,  with  those  that  are 
with  men  exalt  our  songs ! 

2 Forth  come  to  us  with  all  his  fires  that  Agni,  whoge 

the  mighty  are, 

Come,  fully  girt  about  with  wealth  for  us  and  for 
our  kith  and  kin  ! 

3 Do  thou,  0 Agni,  with  thy  fires  strengthen  our 

prayer  and  sacrifice  : 

Incite  them  to  bestow  their  wealth  to  aid  our  service 
of  the  Gods ! 


Rigveda  VIII.  6.  10 — 12.  The  Rishi  is  Vatsaof  the  family  of  Kanva. 
The  metre  is  Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  ii.  ii.  1.  8. 

2 Manner:  janmand , the  Rigveda  has  inanmand: — ‘After  the  thought 
(or,  lore)  of  ancient  time,  like  Kanva,  I adorh  my  songs/ 

3 Have  not  praised  thee : have  not  praised  thee  yet,  that  is,  will 

praise  thee  hereafter. — Ludwig.  » 

Stanzas  1 and  2 are  not  taken  from  the  Rigveda.  Stanza  3 is  taken 
from  Rigveda  X.  141.  6,  ascribed  to  Agni  Tapasa.  The  metre  is 
Anush  tup. 

2 Forth  come : the  text  has  pra  (pro  or  prae)  only,  without  a verb. 
The  mighty:  vdjinah : explained  by  Sayana  as  meaning  ‘men  supplied 
with  food  in  the  shape  of  oblations.’ 


272 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[FART  II. 


VII.  Soma  Pavamina. 

Soma,  the  men  of  old  whose  grass  was  trimmed  ad- 
dressed the  hymn  to  thee  for  mighty  strength  and 
for  renown  : t 

So,  hero,  urge  us  onward  to  heroic  power ! * 

2 All  round  about  hast  thou  with  glory  pierced  for  us 

as  ’twere  a never-failing  well  for  men  to  drink, 

Borne  on  thy  way  as  ’twere  in  fragment^  from  both  arms. 

3 Thou  didst  produce  him,  deathless  one!  for  mortal 

man,  for  maintenance  of  Law  and  lovely  Amrita : 

Thou  evermore  hast  moved  making  wealth  flow  to  us. 

VIII.  Indra, 

Pour  out  the  drops  for  Indra;  let  him  drink  the 
meath  pf  Soma  juice ! 

He  through  his  majesty  sends  forth  his  bounteous  gifts. 

2 I spake  to  the  bay  coursers’  Lord,  to  him  who  grants 

the  boon  V)f  wealth  : 

Now  hear  the  son  of  Asva  as  he  praises  thee! 

3 Never  was  any  hero  born  before  thee  mightier  than 

thou  : 

None  certainly  like  thee  in  riches  and  in  praise. 

Iligveda  IX.  110.  7,  4 4.  The  Ilishis  are  Tryaruna  and  Trasadasyu. 
The  metre  is  Uidhvabrihati,  a variety  of  Brihati. 

2 As  ’ twere  a never-failing  well:  meaning  an  exliaustlcss  supply  of 
Soma  juice.  In  fragments : in  pieces  of  the  crushed  stalk  and  shoots 
of  the  Soma  plant.  The  word  sarydbhih  in  this  passage  is  variously 
interpreted,  according  to  Sayana,  4 with  (reed-like)  fingers’ ; according 
to  Benfey,  ‘ with  (the  speed  of)  arrow's  ’ ; according  to  Roth,  * with  the 
reed-woven  filter-frame.’  The  wTord  sara  means  reed,  and  arrow ; sarya, 
made  of  reeds,  saryd,  an  arrow,  but  also  reeds  tied  together  and  used 
at  the  sacrifice  for  Soma-oblations.  See  Max  Muller,  Vedic  Hymns , 
Part  I.  p.  398.  I have  followed?  Professor  Ludwig’s  interpretation,  but 
‘on  reed-mats’  is  an  unobjectionable  rendering. 

3 Him:  the  Sun.  The  preceding  verso  in  the  Rigveda  begins 
thus : — * 0 Pavamana,  thou  didst  generate  the  Sun.’ 

Iligveda  VIII.  24.  13 — 15.  The  ltishi  is  Visvamanas,  son  of  Vyasva 
or  Asva.  The  metre  is  Ushnih.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iv.  ii.  5.  6. 

2 The  boon  of  wealth : rddhah : the  Rigveda  has  daksham , 4 ability.’ 


vii.  i.  11.] 


THE  SAM  A VEDA. 


273 


IX.  lndra. 

Thou  wishcst  for  thy  kine  a bull,  lord  of  thy  cows 
whom  none  may  kill, 

For  those  who  long  for  his  approach,  for  fchose  who 

• turn  away  from  him. 

X.  Agni. 

The  God  wljo  giveth  wealth  accept  the  full  libation 
poured  to  him  ! 

Pour  ye  it  out,  then  fill  the  vessel  full  again,  for  so 
the  God  regardeth  you ! 

2 The  Gods  made  him  the  Hotar-priest  of  sacrifice, 
oblatiftn-bearer,  passing  wise. 

Agni  gives  wealth  and  valour  to  the  worshipper, 
to  man  who  offers  up  his  gifts. 

XI.  Agiy. 

He  hath  appeared,  best  prospercr,  in  whom  men  lay 
their  holy  acts  : 

So  may  our  songs  of  praise  come  nigh  to  Agni  who 
was  born  to  give  the  Arya  strength ! 

Rigveda  VJII.  58.  2.  The  llis hi  is  Priyapicdha.  The  metre  is 
Anusli tup.  I adopt  Professor  Pischel’s  interpretation  of  this  difficult 
stanza,  which  is  hardly  intelligible  without  the  stanza  which  precedes 
mid  that  which  follows  in  the  Rigveda.  The  meaning  of  the  three 
stanzas  appears  to  be : Soma  shall  be  celebrated  by  you  in  your  song 
of  praise  in  order  that  he  may  liberally  reward  you.  What  thou 
wishest  for  thyself  is  a bull  for  the  cows  so,  that*  they  may  be  propa- 
gated and  provide  lndra  with  milk  to  be  mixed  with  the  Soma  juice, 
while  they  serve  the  race  of  Gods  in  the  three  realms  of  heaven. — 
Vedische  Studien,  Vol.  I.  p.  197. 

Rigveda  VII.  1G.  11,  12.  The  Rishi  is  Vasishtha.  The  metre  of 
stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  I.  i.  ii.  1.  1,  is  Brihati,  and  that  of  *2 
Satobrihati. 

Rigveda  VTII.  92.  1,  3,  2.  The  Rishi  is  Sobhari.  The  metre  is 
Bnhati.  Stanzas  1 and  3 are  repetitions  of  1.  i.  i 5.  3 and  7,  respectively. 

18 


274  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  11. 

2 Him  before  whom  the  people  shrink  when  he  per- 

forms his  glorious  deeds, 

Him  who  wins  thousands  at  the  sacrifice,  himself, 
that  Agni,  reverence  with  songs ! 

3 Agni  of  Divodasa,  God,  comes  forth  like  Indra  in  his 

might. 

Rapidly  hath  he  moved  along  his  mother  earth : he 
stands  in  high  heaven's  dwelling-p’ace. 

XII.  Agni. 

Agni,  thou  pourest  life  : send  down  upon  us  food 
and  vigourous  strength  : 

Drive  thou  misfortune  far  away  ! 

2 Agni  is  Pavamana,  Sage,  Chief  Priest  of  all  the 
fivefold  tribes : 

To  him  whose  wealth  is  great  we  pray. 

*3  Skilled  in  ?,hy  task,  0 Agni,  pour  splendour  with 
hero  strength  on  us, 

Granting  me  wealth  that  nourishes ! 

XIII.  Agm. 
0 Agni,  holy  and  divine,  with  splendour  and  thy 

pleasant  tongue 

Bring  thou  the  Gods  and  worship  them  ! 

2 Reverence  : or,  worship  ye.  The  Itigveda  has  mparyata , ‘ serve  ye,’ 
instead  of  namasyata . 

Kigvcda  IX.  66.  19—21.  Ascribed  to  the  hundred  Vaikhanasas. 
The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  II.  vi.  iii.  10.  3. 

2 Chief  Priest : purohitah : literally,  placed  foremost  or  in  front. 

* consecrated  and  put  in  his  sacred  recess.’— Stevenson.  ‘ Vorop- 
ferer.* — Benfcy. 

Kigveda  V.  26.  1—3.  Ascribed  to  the  Vastly  us.  The  metre  is 
Ga  v atri. 


vii.  i.  15.] 


THE  SA  MATED  A. 


275 


2 We  pray  thee  bathed  in  butter,  0 bright-rayed ! 

who  lookest  on  the  Sun, 

Bring  the  Gods  hither  to  the  feast ! 

3 Sage,  wts  have  kindled  thee,  the  bright,  thJe  feaster 
* on  oblation,  thee, 

0 Agni,  great  in  sacrifice! 

XIV.  Agui. 
Adorable  in  all  our  prayers,  favour  us,  Agni,  with 

thine  aid 

What  time  the  psalm  is  chanted  forth  ! 

2 Bring  to  us  ever-conquering  wealth,  wealth,  Agnf, 

worthy  of  our  choice, 

Invincible  in  all  our  frays  ! 

3 Grant  us,  0 Agni,  through  thy  grace  wealth  to  sup- 

port us  evermore, 

Thy  favour  so  that  we  may  live  ! 

XV.  Agni. 
Let  songs  of  ours  speed  Agni  forth  like  a fleet 

courser  in  the  race,  * • 

And  we  will  win  each  prize  through  him  ! 

2 Agni!  the  host  whereby  we  gain  kino  for  ourselves 
with  help  from  thee, — 

That  send  us  for  the  gain  of  wealth  ! 


2 The  Sun : or  heaven’s  light. 

3 rfhe  feaster  on  oblation:  vltihvtram  : or,  who  callest  (Gods)  to  the 
banquet. 

Rigveda  I.  79.  7 — 9.  The  Rishi  is  Gotama.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 
3 To  support  us  evermore : v isvAynpo&hasam : oi,  that  suppoits  all 
living  men.  __ 

Rigveda  X.  156.  1—5.  The  Rishi  is  lvetu.  The  metre  is  G&yatri 
2 The  host : or,  the  dart. 


276  THE  HYMNS  OF  [ PART  IL 

3 O Agni,  bring  us  wealth  secure,  vast  wealth  in 

horses  and  in  kine  : 

Oil  thou  the  socket,  turn  the  wheel ! 

4 O Agni,  thou  hast  made  the  Sun,  the  eternal  star, 

to  mount  the  sky,  1 

Giving  the  boon  of  light  to  men. 

5 Thou,  Agni,  art  the  people's  light,  best,  dearest, 

seated  in  thy  shrine  : 

Watch  for  the  singer,  give  him  life! 

XVI.  Agni. 

Agni  is  head  and  height  of  heaven,  the  master  of 
the  earth  is  he  : 

He  quickenetli  the  waters'  seed. 

2 Yea,  Agni,  thou  as  Lord  of  light  rulest  o’er  choicest 

gifts  : may  I, 

Thy  singer,  find  defence  in  thee ! 

3 Upward,  O Agni,  rise  thy  flames,  pure  and  resplend- 

ent, blazing  high, 

Thy  lustres,  fair  effulgences. 

CHAPTER  II. 

I.  Agni. 

Who,  Agni,  is  thy  kin,  of  men?  who  honours  thee 
with  sacrifice  ? 

On  whom  dependent  ? who  art  thou  ? 

3 The.  socket:  kham:  aa  aperture,  a cavity.  The  word  means  also,  heaven. 
The  wheel : pavim : the  tire  or  felly  of  a wheel,  by  synecdoche  a 
wheel.  According  to  the  Commentators  the  word  means  also,  a thun- 
derbolt. Benfey  translates  : — ^feuchte  die  Luft  und  wirf  den  Blitz/ 
moisten  the  air  and  cast  the  lightning.  The  Rigvcda  has  panim  in- 
stead of  pavim : — ‘ Balm  heaven  and  drive  t}io  Pani  (or  niggard)  hence.’ 

RigvedaVlII.  44. 1 6, 18, 17.  ThoRishi  is  Virupa.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

Rigveda  T.  75.  3 — 5.  The  Rishi  is  Gotama.  The  metro  is  Gayatri. 
2 Honours  thee  with  sacrifice : d&svaclharah : oi\  pays  thee  fruitful 
sacrifice!  ‘For  who  else  can  acceptably  oiler  thee  sacrifice?’ — Stevenson. 


vii.  ii.  3.] 


THE  8 AM  AY  EDA. 


27.7. 

2 The  kinsman,  Agni!  of  mankind,  their  well-belovbd 

friend  art  thou, 

A friend  whom  friends  may  supplicate. 

3 Bring  Mitra,  Yaruna,  bring  the  Gods  hither  to  our 
• great  sacrifice  : 

Bring  them,  O Agni,  to  thine  home  ! 

Agni. 

Meet  to  be  worshipped  and  implored,  showing  in 
beauty  through  the  gloom, 

Agni,  the  strong,  is  kindled  well. 

2 Strong  Agni  is  enkindled  well,  even  as  the  horse 

that  brings  the  Gods:  ’ 

Men  with  oblations  pray  to  him. 

3 We  will  enkindle  thee,  the  strong,  we*,  hero  ! who 

are  strong  ourselves, 

Thee,  Agni,  shining  mightily. 

!!!•  Agni. 

Thy  mighty  flames,  O Agni,  when  thou  art  en- 
kindled, rise  on  high, 

Thy  bright  flames,  thou  refulgent  one ! 

2 Beloved!  let  my  ladles  full  of ’sacred  oil  come  ni^h 

to  thee  : * a 

Agni,  accept  our  offerings  ! 

3 I pray  to  Agni — may  he  hear!— the  Hotar  with 

sweet  tones,  the  Priest 
Wondrously  splendid,  rich  in  light. 


Eigveda  III.  27.  13 — 15.  The  Kishi  is  Visvamitra.  The  metre  is 
Gayatri. 

2 The  strong : vrishd : the  word  originally  meant  the  male,  whether 
applied  to  men  or  other  animals ; then,  specially,  a bull  or  a stallion 
&e.,  and  afterwards,  generally,  manly,  strong,  heroic.  Professors  Lud- 
wig and  Grassmann  translate  the  word  in  all  three  stanzas  by  Stier, 
hull.  ‘Agni,  the  bull,  is  kindled  well.  We  will  enkindle  thee,  the 
hull,  we  who  are  bulls  ourselves,  0 bull/ 

Kigveda  VIII.  44.  4-6.  The  Kishi  is  Virupa.  The  metre  is  Gayatri 


278 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  IP 


IV.  Agnj. 

Agni,  protect  thou  us  with  one,  protect  us  by  the 
second  song, 

Protect  us  by  three  hymns,  O Lord  o£  power  and 
might,  bright  God,  by  four  hymns  guard  us  w6ll ! 

2 Preserve  us  from  each  demon  who  bestows  no  gift, 
in  battles  succour  us  and  save  ! 

For  we  obtain  in  thee  the  nearest  friend  of  all,  for 
the  Gods’  service  and  our  weal. 

V.  Agni. 

r O King,  the  potent  and  terrific  envoy,  kindled  for 

strength,  is  manifest  in  beauty. 

He  shines,  observant,  with  his  lofty  splendour  ; 
chasing  black  night  he  comes  with  wliite-rayed 
morning. 

£ Having  o’ei«pome  the  glimmering  Black  with  beauty, 
and  bringing  forth  the  Dame,  the  great  Sire’s 
daughter, 

Holding  aloft  the  radiant  lights  of  Sfirya,  as  mes- 
senger of  heaven,  he  shines  with  treasures. 

3 Attendant  on  the  ‘blessed  Dame  the  blessed  hath 
come : the  lover  followeth  his  sister. 

Agni,  far-spreading  with  conspicuous  lustre,  hath 
covered  night  with  whitely-sliining  garments. 

Higveda  VIII,  49.  9,  10.  The  Iiishi  is  Bharga.  Thu  metre  is  Pm 
gatha.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  i.  i.  4.  2. 

Rigveda  X.  3.  1 — 3.  The  Rishi  is  Trita  Aptya.  The  metre  is  Trish tup. 

1 0 King : addressed  to  Agni,  who  is  also  the  subject  of  what 
follows.  Professor  Ludwig  takes  rdjan  here  as  the  nominative  ease. 
With  white-rayed  morning:  I follow  Professor  Ludwig  in  taking  rvsathn 
as  an  instrumental  case  for  rusatydm. 

2 The  glimmering  Black  : dark  night,  faintly  lighted  by  stars.  The 
great  Sire's  daughter : Ushas  or  Dawn,  daughter  of  Dyaus  or  Heaven. 

3 The  blessed  Dame  : Dawn.  The  blessed  : Agni.  t 'The  lover : Agni, 
who  appears  immediately  after  Dawn, 


vii.  ii.  8.] 


THE  SAMA  VEDA . 


279 


VI.  Agni. 

What  is  the4" praise  wherewith,  O God,  Angiras, 
Agni,  Son  of  Strength, 

We,  after  thine  own  wish  and  thought, 

2 !May  serve  thee,  0 thou  Child  of  Power,  and  with 

what  sacrifice’s  plan  ? 

What  reverent  word  shall  I speak  here  ? 

3 So  then  do  Ihou  prepare  for  us  all  happy  habitations 

and 

Reward  our  songs  with  spoil  and  wealth  ! 

VII.  Agfii. 
Aotti,  come  hither  with  thy  fires  ; we  choose  thee  as 

our  Hotar ; let 

The  proffered  ladle  filled  with  offerings  balm  thee, 
best  of  priests,  to  sit  on  sacred  grass ! 

2 For  unto  thee,  O Angiras,  O Son  of  Strength,  move 
ladles  in  the  sacrifice. 

We  pray  to  Agni,  Child  of  Force,  whose  locks  drop 
oil,  foremost  in  sacrificial  rites. 

VIII.  # § Agni. 

Let  our  songs  come  anear  to  him  beauteous  and 
bright  with  piercing  flame, 

Our  sacrifices  with  our  homage  unto  him  much-laud- 
ed, very  rich,  for  help  : 


Rigveda  Vfll.  73.  4 — 6.  The  Rishi  is  l* Sana  KAvya.  The  metre 
is  Gayatri.  ^ 

Rigveda  VIII.  49.  1,  2.  The  Rishi  is  Bharga.  The  metre  is  Pragatha. 

1 Best  of  priests : yajlshtham  : worshipping  most ; best  of  sacrificers. 

2 Whose  locks  drop  oil:  nhritakesam  : 1 butter-haired/ — Wilson. 


Rigveda  VIIT.  60.  10,  11.  Ascribed  to  Suditi  and  Purumilha,  or  to 
cither  of  the  two*  T.he  metre  is  Pragatha. 


2SU  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  If 

2 To  Agm  Jatavedas,  to  the  Son  of  Strength,  that  he 
may  givQ  us  precious  gifts, 

Immortal,  from  of  old  Priest  among  mortal  men, 
\vho$e  tones  are  sweetest  in  the  house  ! 

IX.  Agni. 
Invincible  is  Agni,  he  who  goes  before  the  tribes 

of  men, 

A chariot  swift  and  ever  new. 

2 By  bringing  offerings  unto  him  the  mortal  worship- 
per  obtains 

A home  from  him  whose  light  is  pure. 

S Inviolable  power  of  Gods,  subduing  all  his  enemies, 
Agni  is  mightiest  in  fame. 

X.  Agni. 
May  Agni,  worshipped,  bung  us  bliss:  may  the  gift, 

* blessed  oife!  and  sacrifice  bring  bliss. 

Yea,  may  our  eulogies  bring  bliss! 

2 Show  forth  the  mind  that  brings  success  in  war  with 
fiends,  wherewith  thou  conquerest  in  fight! 

Bring  down  the  mafny  firm  hopes  of  our  enemies,  and 
for  thy  victory  I6t  us  win! 


2 Jdtaveda* : the  wise,  or  omniscient. 

3 From  of  old : dvitti : or,  in  two  wavs;  ‘who  appears  in  a double 
chara  cter,  ’ — Stevenson. 

Rigveda  III.  II.  5,  7,  6.  The  Rislii  is  Visvamitra.  The  metre  is  Clayatri 

Rigveda  VIII.  19.  19,  20.  The  Rishi  is  Sobhari.  The  metre  is  Kakup 
in  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  I.  ii.  i.  2.  5,  and  Satobrihati  in 
stanza  2. 

1 The  gift : r tilth  : the  sacrificial  offering.  . 

2 In  war  with  fiends : vrilraturye  : or,  in  Vritra-fight.  Firm  hopes  : 
sthird  : the  adjective  stands  without  a substantive,  and  hopes,  resolves, 
or  perhaps  bands,  must  be  supplied.  For  thy  victory  : te  abhishtaye  : 
meaning  that  the  glory  of  his  worshippers*  success  wjll  be  ascribed  to 
Agni.  The  Rigveda  has  te  abhishtibhih , ‘ by  thy  victories/  or  ‘ succour/ 


vit.  ii.  12.J 


THE  SAM  A VEDA. 


281 


XI.  Agni. 

O Agni  thou  who  art  the  Lord  of  wealth  in  kine, 
thou  Son  of  Strength, 

Bestovf  on  us,  O Jatavedas,  high  renown  !f 

2 He,  Agni,  kindled,  good  and  wise,  must  be  entreated 

with  a song : 

Shine,  thoij  of  many  forms,  shine  thou  with  wealth 
on  us! 

3 And,  Agni,  shining  of  thyself  by  night  and  when  the 

morning  breaks, 

Burn,  thou  whose  teeth  are  sharp,  against  the 
Bakshasas ! 


XII.  Agni. 

Exerting  all  our  strength  with  thoughts  of  power  we 
glorify  in  speech  1 

Agni,  your  dear  familiar  friend,  the  darling  guest  of 
every  house  : 

2 Whom,  served  with  sacrificirJ  .oil,  like  Mitra,  men 

presenting  gifts 

Glorify  with  their  songs  of  praisd  ; 

3 Much-lauded  Jiitavedas,  him  who  sends  oblations  up 

to  heaven, 

Prepared  in  service  of  the  Gods. 


Rigveda  I.  79.  4 — 6.  The  Rishi  is  Gotama.  The  metre  is  Gslinih. 

2 Thou  of  many  forms : purvanU'%  : variously  manifested,  in  the 
forms  of  the  Sun,  lightning,  and  terrestrial  tire.  According  to  Sayana, 
‘ endowed  with  many  fljynes  instead  of  faces.’ 

Rigveda  VIII.  63.  1 — 3.  The  Rishi  is  Gopavana.  The  metre  is 
Anushtup  in  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  I.  i.  ii.  1.  7,  and  GAyatri 
in  stanzas  2 and  3. 

2 Like  Mitra:  or,  as  a friend,  or,  like  the  Sun.— Sayana. 


282 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  II. 


XIII.  Agni. 
Agni,  inflamed  with  fuel,  in  iny  song  I sing,  pure, 

bright,  and  stedfast,  set  in  front  at  sacrifice. 

Wise  J&tavedas  we  implore  with  prayers*  for  grace, 
the  Sage,  the  Hotar-priest,  bounteous,  and  toid 
of  guile. 

2 Men,  Agni,  in  each  age,  have  made  thee,  deathless  one, 

their  envoy,  offering-bearer,  guard  adorable. 

With  reverence  Gods  and  mortals  have  established 
thee  as  ever-watchful  and  almighty  household  Lord. 

3 Thou,  Agni,  ordering  the  works  and  ways  of  both, 

as  envoy  of  the  Gods  traversest  both  the  realms. 
When  we  lay  claim  to  thy  regard  and  gracious  care, 
be  thou  to  us  a tlirice-protecting  friendly  guard  ! 

XIV.  Agni. 

• Still  turnifcg  to  their  aim  in  thee  the  sacrifice's 
sister  hymns 

Have  come  to  thee  before  the  wind. 

2 Even  the  waters  find  their  place  in  him  whose  three- 
fold sacred  grass 
Is  spread  unbound,  unlimited. 


Rigveda  VI.  15.  7 — 9.  The  Rishi  is  Vitahavya  or  Bharadvaja.  The 
metre  is  Jagati. 

1 For  grace:  sumnaih:  the  instrumental  case  indicating  the  motive  of 
the  impulse. — Ludwig. 

3 Of  both : of  Gods  and  men.  Both  the  realms : rajasi : the  two 
aerial  spaces  or  regions  of  air,  the  upper  and  the  lower,  between  heaven 
and  earth. 

Rigveda  VIII.  91.  13 — 15.  The  Rishi  is’Prayoga.  The  metre  is 
Gayatrl.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  i.  i.  2.  3. 

1 Before  the  whul : in  front  of  the  wind  with  which  the  flame  of  the 
sacrificial  fire  is  fanned. 

2 In  him  : in  Agni  in  his  form  of  lightning  in  the  firmament. 


vii.  iii.  2.] 


THE  SAM  A VEDA. 


283 


3 The  station  of  the  bounteous  God,  by  his  unconquer- 
able aid, 

Hath  a fair  aspect  like  the  Sun. 


CHAPTER  III. 

I.  Indra. 
Men  with  tlieir  lauds  are  urging  thee,  Indra,  to  drink 

the  Soma  first. 

The  Ribhus  in  accord  have  lifted  up  their  voice,  and 
Rudras  sung  thee  as  the  first. 

2 Indra, »at  sacrifice,  increased  his  manly  strength,  in 
the  wild  rapture  of  this  juice  : 

And  living  men  to-day,  even  as  of  c/ld,  sing  forth 
their  praises  to  his  majesty. 

II.  Indra- Agni. 

Indra  and  Agni!  singers  skilled  in  melody,  with 
lauds,  hymn  you  : 

I choose  you  both  to  bring  me  food. 


3 Or,  a comma  being  substituted  for  the  fifll  stop  at  the  end  of  the 
preceding  stanza,  and  padam  (station)  being  taken  as  in  apposition  to 
pa  dam  (place)  in  stanza  2 : — The  station  of  the  bounteous : he  hath, 
with  unconquerable  aids,  A pleasant  aspect  like  the  Sun. 

Rigvcda  VIII.  3.  7,  8.  The  Rishi  is  Medhyatithi.  The  metre  is 
Brihati  in  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  l.  iii.  ii.  2.  4,  and  Satobri- 
hat-i  in  stanza  2. 

2 At  sacrifice  : vislinavi : or,  in  tli?  Soma  draught.  Benfey,  follow- 
ing Say  ana,  takes  vislinavi  as  an  adjective,  ‘ penetrating/  and  applies 
it  to  made  : — ‘In  dieses 'Safts  durchdr ingen dem  Rausch.’ 

Rigveda  III.  12.  5 — 8.  The  Rishi  is  Visvamitra.  The  metre  is  Gayatr?. 

1 Indra  and  Agni : or,  0 Indra-Agni.  The  two  Gods  are  addressed 
conjointly  in  a dual  compound,  ImlrAgni,  as  a double  deity. 


284  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  If . 

2 Indra  and  Agni ! yc  shook  down,  together,  with  one 

mighty  dped, 

The  ninety  forts  which  D&sas  held. 

3 To  Inc^ra  and  to  Agni  prayers  go  forwarct  from  the 

holy  task 

Along  the  path  of  sacred  Law. 

4 Indra  and  Agni,  powers  are  yours,  yours  are  obla- 

tions and  abodes  : 

Good  is  your  zealous  energy. 

III.  Indra. 
Indra,  with  all  thy  saving  helps  assist  us,  Lord  of 

power  and  might ! , 

For  after  thee  we  follow  even  as  glorious  bliss1,  thee, 
hero,  finder-out  of  wealth  ! 

2 Increaser  of  our  steeds  and  multiplying  kine,  a 
golden  well,  O God,  art  thou, 

# For  no  ond  may  impair  the  gift  laid  up  in  thee. 
Bring  me  whatever  thing  I ask! 

IV.  India. 
For  thou — come  to* the  worshipper  ! — wilt  find  great 

wealth  to  make  us  rich. 

Fill  thyself  full;  O Maghavan,  for  gain  of  kine,  full, 
Indra,  for  the  gain  of  steeds ! 

2 Thou  as  thy  gift  bestowest  many  hundred  herds, 
yea,  many  thousands  dost  thou  give. 

With  singers’  hymns  have  we  brought  the  fort- 
render  near*.  singing  to  Indra  for  his  grace. 


2 Ninety  forts  : the  countless  tstrongholds  of  the  barbarians  or  non- 
Aryan  inhabitants  of  the  country. 

3 The  holy  task : sacrifice. 

Rigveda  VIII.  50.  5,  6.  The  Ilishi  is  Bharga.  The  metre  is  Pra- 
gatha.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iii.  ii.  2.  1. 

Rigveda  VIII.  50.  7,  8.  The  Rishi  is  Bharga.  ^lic  metre  is  Pra- 
gatha.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iii.  i.  5.  8. 


vii.  iii.  7.] 


TIIE  SJMAVEDA. 


285 


V.  Agni. 

To  him  who  dealeth  out  all  wealth,  the  sweet-toned 
Hotar-priest  of  men, 

•To  him,  like  the  first  vessels  filled  with  savoury  juice, 
to  Agni  let  the  lauds  go  forth  ! 

2 Votaries,  bounteous  givers,  deck  him  with  their 
songs,  ewen  as  the  steed  who  draws  the  car. 

To  both,  strong  Lord  of  men ! to  kith  and  kin 
convey  the  bounties  of  our  wealthy  lords  ! 

, VI.  Varuna. 

Hear  this  my  call,  0 Varuna,  and  show  thy  gracious 
love  to-day  : 

Desiring  help  I long  for  thee  ! 

VII.  Indra. 

O hero,  with  what  aid  dost  thou  delight  us,  with 
what  succour  bring 

Riches  to  those  whe  worship  jfcllce  ? 


Rigveda  VJ II.  92.  6,  7.  The  Rishi  is  Sobhari.  The  metre  is  Byihati 
in  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  I.  i.  i.  4.  10,  and  Satobrihati  in 
stanza  2. 

2 Of  our  wealthy  lords : maghondm : or,  of  the  mighty  Gods.  The 
line  is  obscure.  ‘ Graceful  lord  of  men,  grayt  wealth  to  us  rich  in 
children  and  grandchildren.’ — Wilson. 


Rigveda  I.  25.  19.  The  Rishi  is  Sunahscpa.  The  metre  is  C&yatrf. 

Rigveda  VIII.  82.  19.  The  Rishi  is  Sukaksha.  The  metre  is 
Gayatri. 

1 Bring:  d bhara , the  imperative  form,  is  explained  by  Sayana 
as  = dbibarshi , tfee  indicative.  The  translation  might  be  : with  what 
succour  ? — Bring,  etc, 


28fi 


THE  HYMNS  Of 


[PART  If. 


VIII.  Indra. 

Indra,  for  service  of  the  Gods,  Indra  while  sacrifice 
proceeds,  # 

Indra,  as  worshippers,  in  battle-shock  we  call,  Indra 
that  we  may  win  the  spoil. 

2 With  might  hath  Indra  spread  out  heaven  and  earth, 
with  power  hath  Indra  lighted  up  the  Sun. 

In  Indra  are  all  creatures  closely  held  ; in  him  meet 
the  distilling  Soma-drops. 

IX.  •Visvakarman. 

Bring,  Visvakarman  ! strengthened  by  oblation,  thy- 
self, thy  body — ’tis  thine  own — for  worship  ! * 

Let  other  men  around  us  live  in  folly  : here  let  us 
have  a ricii  and  liberal  patron  ! 


Rigveda  VITT.  3.  5,  6.  The  Rishi  is  Medhyatithi.  The  metre  is 
Brihati  in  stanza  1,  and  Satobrihati  in  2. 

2 With  power:  sava  ( mvah ) for  savasah  appears  to  be  used  with 
the  meaning  of  the  instrumental  case.  Or  it  may  he  taken  with 
mahnd , with  mightiness  of  power. 


Rigveda  X.  81.  6.  The  Rishi  is  Visvakarman  Bhauvana  or  son  of 
Bhuvana.  The  metro  is  Trishtup. 

1 Visvakarman  : the  Omnifio,  the  universal  Father  and  Generator, 
the  creator  of  all  living  things  imd  the  architect  of  the  worlds.  He 

is  also  a primeval  divine  sacrificer.  Bring thy  body .for 

worship:  yajasva  tanvdm : or,  sacrifice,  or  sacrifice  to,  thy  body.  In- 
stead of  tanvdm  svd  hi  te , ‘ thy  body — ’tis  thine  own’ — , the  Rigveda 
lias prifhivtm  uta  dydm , 'Earth  and  Heaven.’  See  the  original  hymn, 
Rigveda,  Vol.  IV.  pp.  260,  261  ; or  Muir,  Original  Sanskrit  Texts, 

TV.  pp.  6,  7 ; or  Wallis,  Cosmology  of  the  Rigveda , pp.  81 83  ) or 

Max  Muller,  Hibbert  Lectures , pp.  293  f. 


vii.  iii.  10.] 


THE  SAM  A VEDA. 


287 


a.  Sonia  Pavamaiia. 

With  this  his  golden  splendour  purifying  him,  ho 

with  his  own  allies  subdues  all  enemies,  as  Silra 

with#his  own  allies.  • 

•Cleansing  himself  with  stream  of  juice  he  shines 
forth  yellow-hued  and  red,  when  with  his  praisers 
he  encompasses  all  forms,  with  praisers  having 
seven  months. 

2 He  moves  intelligent  directed  to  the  east.  The  very 

beauteous  car  rivals  the  beams  of  light,  the  beauti- 
ful celestial  car. 

Hymns,  lauding  manly  valour,  came  inciting  IncUa 
to  success,  that  ye  may  be  un conquered,  both  thy 
bolt  and  thou,  both  bo  unconquered  in  the  war. 

3 That  treasure  of  the  Panis  thou  disco  vercdst.  Thou 

with  the  Mothers  deckcst  thee  in  thine  abode, 
writh  songs  of  worship  in  thine  hon;c.  » 

As  ’twTere  from  far  away  is  heard  the  psalm  where 
hymns  resound  in  joy.  He,  with  the  triple  Dames 
red-hued,  hath  won  life-pow7er,  he,  gleaming,  hath 
won  vital  strength. 

Rigvcda  IX.  111.  I,  3,  2.  The  Rishi  is  Ananata,  son  of  Paruch- 
ehhcpa.  The  metre  is  Atyashti,  consisting  of  four  Pad  as  of  seventeen 
syllables  each,  or  sixty-eight  in  the  stanza.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of 
I.  v.  ii.  3.  7. 

2 The  very  beauteous  car : Soma,  compared  to  a chariot. 

3 That  treasure  of  the  Panis : the  rays  of  light,  carried  off  and 
concealed  by  fiends  of  darkness.  The  Mothers:  apparently,  the 
Dawns.  According  to  Sayana,  the  Vasativari*  waters.  He:  Soma. 
With  the  triple  Dames  : there  is  no  substantive  in  the  text,  and  it  is 
uncertain  what  tridhdtubhih  refers  to%  If  Dames  be  understood,  they 
are  probably  the  Mothers  of  the  preceding  line.  Sayana  refers  tridhdtu- 
bhih to  the  Vasativari  waters,  and  explains  it  by  ‘ the  supporters  of 
the  three  worlds.*  Professor  Grassmann  thinks  that  the  beverages, 
consisting  of  three  ingredients,  mixed  with  the  Soma  juice,  are  in- 
truded. Perhaps,  the  red  coursers  of  the  Sun  may  be  intended  by 
arushtbhih,  red-hued  ; but  the  passage  is  very  difficult  and  translation 
must  be  conjeetufal. 


288 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[FART  II. 


XL  Pushan. 

Yea,  cause*our  hymn  to  gain  for  us  cattle  and  steeds 
and  store  of  wealth, 

That  it  may  help  us  manfully  ! 

XII.  Mani  ts. 

Heroes  of  real  strength,  yo  mark  either  the  sweat  of 

him  who  toils, 

Or  his  desire  who  supplicates. 

XIII.  Visvedcvas. 
The  Sons  of  immortality  shall  listen  to  our  songs  of 

praise, 

And  be  exceeding  kind  to  us. 

XIV.  Heaven  and  Earth. 
To  both  of  you,  O Heaven  and  Earth,  we  bring  our 

lofty  song  of  praise, 

Pure  pair  ! to  glorify  you  both. 

2 Ye  sanctify  each  other’s  form,  by  your  own  proper 

strength  ye  rule  : 

Further  the  sacrifice  evermore 

3 Promoting  and  fulfilling,  ye,  mighty  ones,  perfect 

Mitra’s  law  :* 

Ye  sit  around  our  sacrifice. 

Rigveda  VI.  53.  10.  The  Rishi  is  Bharadvaja.  The  metre  is 
G&yatri. 

1 That  it  may  help  us  : Utaye  : the  Rigveda  has  vitaye , * for  (our) 
enjoyment.’  * 

Rigveda  I.  86.  8.  The  Rishi  js  Gotama.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

1 Who  toils ; in  the  performance  of  sacrifice  : ‘ who  praises  you.’ — • 
M.  Muller. 

Rigveda  VI.  52.  9.  The  Rishi  is  Rijisvan.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

1 Sons  of  immortality : according  to  the  Scholiast,  ‘sons  of  the 
immortal’  (Prajapati,  regarded  as  the  creator  of  Gods  and  men). 

Rigveda  IV.  56.  5,  7.  The  Rishi  is  Vamadcva,  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 


vii.  iii.  16.] 


THE  SAM  A VEDA. 


289 


XV.  India. 

This  is  thine  own.  Thou  drawest  near,  as  turns  a 
pigeon  to  his  mate  : 

Thou  carest,  too,  for  this  our  prayer. 

2 O hero,  Lord  of  bounties,  praised  in  hymns,  may 

glorious  fame  and  might 
Be  his  who  sings  the  laud  to  thee ! 

3 Lord  of  a Hundred  Powers,  rise  up  to  be  our  succour 

in  this  fight: 

In  other  fights  let  us  agree  ! 

Citations'. 

Yk  'cows,  protect  the  fount  : the  two  mighty  ones 
bless  the  sacrifice. 

The  handles  twain  are  wrought  of  gold. 

o O 

2 The  pressing-stones  are  set  at  work#:  the  meath  fs 

poured  into  the  tank 
At  tlife  out-shedding  of  the  fount. 

3 With  reverence  they  drain  the  fount  that  circles  with 

its  wheel  above, 

♦ 

Exhaustless,  with  the  mouth  below. 


Rigvoda  I.  30.  4 — 6.  The  Rishi  is  Sunahsepa.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 
1 This:  libation  of  Soma  juice. 

3 In  this  fight:  the  original  hymn  is  a prayer  for  aid  in  a coming 
battle. 


Rigvcda  VIII.  61. 12, 11,  10.  The  Ftyshi  is  H.aryata,  son  of  Pragatha. 
The  metre  is  Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  1.  ii.  i.  3.  3. 

3 Its  wheel:  apparently  the  circular  rim  on  which  it  usually  stands, 
which  is  now  inverted  that  all  the  liquid  may  flow  out. 

The  divine  subject  of  the  original  hymn  is  Agni,  or  Praise  of  the 
Sacrificial  Offerings.  No  deity  is  mentioned  by  the  Scholiast  in  con- 
nexion with  this  extract. 

19 


290  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  IL 

XVII.  India. 

'Let  us  not  tire  or  be  afraid  with  thee,  the  mighty, 
for  our  friend  ! 

May  Ve  see  Turvasa  and  Yadu!  thy ‘great  deed, 
O hero,  must  be  glorified. 

2 On  his  left  hip  the  hero  hath  reclined  himself:  the 
proffered  feast  offends  him  not. 

The  milk  is  blended  with  the  honey  of  the  bee  : 
quickly  come  hither,  haste,  and  drink ! 

XVIII.  Indra. 

May  these  my  songs  of  praise  exalt  thee,  Lord,  who 
hast  abundant  wealth  ! 

Men  skilled  in  holy  hymn.*,  pure,  with  the  hues  of  fire, 
have  sung  them  with  their  lauds  to  thee. 

2 He,  when  a thousand  Rishis  have  enhanced  his  might, 
hath  like  an  ocean  spread  himself. 

His  majesty  is  praised  as  true  at  solemn  rites,  his 
power  where  holy  singers  rule. 


Rigvcda  VIII.  4.  7.  8.  Tho  Rishi  is  Dcvatithi.  The  metre  is  Bii- 
hati  in  stanza  1,  and  Satobriliati  in  2. 

1 May  tve  see  Tunvasa  and  Yadu : enjoying  happiness  through  thy 

favour. Sayana.  Turvasa  and  Yadu  stand  for  the  two  tribes  which 

bear  their  names. 

2 On  his  left  hip  : a mode  of  sitting  seems  to  be  meant.  The  prof- 
fered feast  : ddnah : or,  the  offerer  of  the  oblation. 


Figveda  VIII.  3.  3,  4.  The  Rishi  is  Medhyatithi.  The  metres  are 
(1)  B;ihati,  (2)  Satobrihati.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iii.  ii.  1.  8. 


\ii.  iii.  21.] 


THE  SAMAVEDA. 


291 


XIX.  Indra. 

Good  Lord  of  wealth  is  he  to  whom  all  Aryas,  D&sas 
here  belong. 

Directjy  unto  thee,  the  pious  Rusama  Pavjru,  is  that 
* wealth  brought  nigh. 

2 In  zealous  haste  the  singers  have  sung  forth  a song 
distilling  fatness,  rich  in  sweets. 

Riches  have  spread  among  us  and  heroic  strength, 
with  us  are  flowing  Soma-drops. 

XX.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Flow  to  us,  Indu,  very  strong,  effused,  with  wealth 
of  kjne  and  steeds,  • 

And  do  thou  lay  above  the  milk  thy  radiant  hue ! 

2 Lord  of  the  tawny,  Indu,  thou  who  ,art  the  Gods’ 

most  special  food, 

As  friend  to  friend,  for  splendour  bo  thou  good  to  men  ! 

3 Drive  utterly,  far  away  from  us  eafch  godless,  each 

voracious  foe  : 

O Indu,  overcome  and  drive  the  false  afar ! 

XXI.  . . Soma  Pavamana. 

They  balm  him,  balm  him  over,  balm  him  thoroughly, 
caress  the  mighty  strength  and  balm  it  with  the 
meath. 


Valakhilya  III.  9,  10.  The  Rishi  is  Pushtigu.  The  metres  are  (1) 
Brihati,  (2)  Satobrihati.  > 

1 Rusama  Pavlru : the  llusamas  are  mentioned  in  Rigveda  V.  30. 

13 15.  The  name  of  Pavlru,  who  was  probably  a prince  of  that  tribe, 

does  not  occur  again.  * 

Rigveda  IX.  105.  4 — 6.  The  Rishis  are  Parvata  and  Narada.  The 
metre  is  Ushnih.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  ii.  3.  9. 

2 Of  the  tawny  : harindm : Sayana  supplies  pastlndm,  cattle. 

Rigveda  IX.  86.  43 — 45.  The  Rishi  is  Atri  Bhauma.  The  metre 
is  Jagati.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I,  vi.  ii.  2.  11. 


292 


TEE  SAM AV ED A. 


[PART  1L 


They  seize  the  flying  Steer  at  the  stream’s  breathing- 
* place  ; cleansing  with  gold  they  grasp  the  animal 
herein. 

2 Sing  fprth  to  Pavam&na  skilled  in  holyfsong!  the 

juice  is  flowing  onward  like  a mighty  stream.  . 
He  glideth  like  a serpent  from  his  ancient  skin,  and 
like  a playful  horse  the  tawny  Steer  hath  run. 

3 Dweller  in  floods,  King,  foremost,  he  displays  his 

might,  set  among  living  things  as  measurer  of  days. 
Distilling  oil  he  flows,  fair,  billowy,  golden-hued, 
borne  on  a car  of  light,  sharing  one  home  with 
wealth. 


3 As  measurer  of  days : Soma  being  identified  with  the  Moon,  two 
of  whose  names  are  Soma  (whence  sombdr , Monday),  and  Indu.  Dis- 
tilling oil : pouring*out  fatness  (rain). 


BOOK  VIII. 


CHAPTER  I. 


A.  Agni, 

With  all  thy  fires,  O Agni,  find  pleasure  in  this  our 
sacrifice, 

And  this  our  speech,  O Son  of  Strength  ! , 

2 WJiate'er,  in  this  perpetual  course,  we  sacrifice  to  God 

and  God, 

That  gift  is  offered  but  in  thee. 

3 May  he  be  our  belovtkl  King  and  excellent  sweet- toned 

Hotar : may 

We  with  bright  fires  be  dear  to  him! 


II.  India, 

For  you  from  every  side  we  call  Indra  away  from 
other  men : 

Ours,  and  none  others’,  may  he  be ! 

2 Unclose,  our  manly  hero!  thou  for  ever  bounteous, 
yonder  cloud' 

For  us,  thou  irresistible  ! , 

3.  As  the  strong  bull  leads  on  the  herds,  he  stirs  the 
people  with  his  might,. 

The  ruler  irresistible. 


Rigveda  I.  26. 10,  6,  7.  The  Ttishi  is  Sunahsepa.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 


Rigvoda  I.  7.  10,  6,  8.  The  Rishi  is  Madhuchohhandas.  The  metre 
is  Gayatri. 


294 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  II. 


III.  Agni. 

Wonderful,  with  thy  saving  help,  send  us  thy  boun- 
ties,. gracious  Lord ! 

Thou  art  the  charioteer,  Agni,  of  earthly  wealth  : 
find  rest  and  safety  for  our  seed ! 

2 Prosper  our  kith  and  kin  with  thy  protecting  powers 
inviolate,  never  negligent ! 

Keep  far  from  us,  O Agni,  all  celestial  wrath,  and 
wickedness  of  godless  men ! 

IV*.  Vishnu. 

What,  Vishnu,  is  the  name  that  thou  proclaimest 
when  tl>ou  declaredst,  I am  Sipivishta  ? 

Hide  not  this  form  from  us,  nor  keep  it  secret,  since 
thou  didst  wear  another  shape  in  battle. 

2 This  offering  to-day,  O Sipivishta,  I,  skilled  in  rules, 
extol,  to  thee  the  noble. 

Yea,  I,  the  poor  and  weak,  praise  thee,  the  mighty, 
who  dwellest  in  tjie  realm  beyond  this  region. 


Rigveda  VI.  48.  9,  10.  The  Rishi  is  Samyu.  The  metres  are  (1) 
Brihati,  (2)  Satobrihati.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  i.  i.  4.  7. 


Rigveda  VII.  100.  6,  5,  7.  The  Rishi  is  Vasishtha.  The  metre  is 
Trishtup. 

1 Proclaimest : parvehakshi : or,  perhaps,  despiscst.  The  Rigveda, 
instead  of  parichakshi  ndma , has  parichaJcskt/am  bhut : — ‘What  was 
there  to  be  blamed  in  thee,  O Vishnu  V The  stanza  is  unintelligible. 
The  Commentator  says : ‘ VishnV  formerly  abandoned  his  own  form, 
and  assuming  another  artificial  shape,  succoured  Vasishtha  in  battle. 
Recognizing  the  Cod,  the  Rishi  addresses  him  with  the  verse.*  Sipi- 
vishta is  said  to  be  a word  of  equivocal  meaning,  ‘ clothed  with  rays 
of  light,’  and  ‘denuded.’  See  note  in  Wilson’s  Translation  of  the 
Rigveda,  and  Muir,  0 . S.  Texts , IV.  p.  86.  Form:  varpas:  or, 
perhaps,  plan.  • 

2 This  offering : the  Rigveda  has  1 this  name.*  This  region : of  air. 


viii.  i.  6.] 


THE  SAMA  VEDA. 


295 


3 O Vishnu,  unto  thee  my  lips  cry  Vashat ! Let, this 
mine  offering,  Sipivishta,  please  th£e ! 

May  these  my  songs  of  eulogy  exalt  thee  ! Do  ye 
preserve  us  evermore  with  blessings ! 

* 

V.  Vayu.  Indra  and  Vayu# 

Vayu,  the  bright  is  offered  thee,  best  of  the  meath, 
at  morning  rites. 

Come  thou  to  drink  the  Soma  juice,  God,  longed-for 
on  thy  team-drawn  car  ! 

2 0 V&yu,  thou  and  Indra  are  meet  drinkers  of  these 

Soma  draughts, 

For  unto  you  the  drops  proceed  like  waters  gather- 
ing to  the  vale. 

3 Vayu  and  Indra,  mighty  twain,  borne  oh  one  chariot, 

Lords  of  strength, 

Come  to  our  succour  with  your  steeds,  that  ye  nwy 
drink  the  Soma  juice  ! 

VI.  Sonia  Pavamana. 

Then  thou,  made  beautiful  by  night,  enterest  into 
mighty  deeds, 

When  prayers  impel  the  golden-ljued  to  hasten  from 
Vivasvan’s  place. 


3 Vashat : an  exclamation-  meaning,  probably,  may  lie  (Agni) 
bear  it  (to  the  Gods)!— used  at  the  moment  of  pouring  the  sacrificial 
oil  or  clarified  butter  on  the  fire.  Ye : Gods.  The  concluding  Mda 
or  half-line  is  common  to  many  of  the  hymns  ascribed  to  \ asishtha 
and  his  family. 

Rigveda  IV.  47. 1—3.  The  Rishi  is  Y/»madeva.  Themetre  isAnushtup. 

1 The  bright : juice,  understood.  - 

Rigveda  IX.  99.  2—4  The  Rishis  are  the  two  Rcbhasunus,  of  the 
family  of  Kasyapa.  The  metre  is  Anushtup. 

1 By  night : kshapd : Professor  Ludwig  translates  the  word  by  * der 
fiirst,*  ‘ the  prince,*  meaning  Soma.  Enterest  into  mighty  deeds:  or, 
more  in  accordance  with  Sayana,  plungest  into  the  sacred  food : 
‘tauchst  in  die  Opferspcisen.’ — Benfcy.  Vivasv&n's  p>lace : the  chapel 
or  sacrificial  chamber.  Sec  Vedische  i$tudieny  I.  p p.  241,  242. 


29G 


T1IE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  II. 


2 Wo  cleanse  this  gladdening  drink  of  his,  the  juice 

,\vhich  Iftdra  chiefly  drinks, 

That  which  kine  took  into  their  mouths,  of  old,  and 
. • • 
princes  take  it  now.  , 

3 They  with  the  ancient  psalm  have  sung  to  him  as  he 

is  purified, 

And  sacred  songs  which  bear  the  rnames  of  Gods 
have  supplicated  him. 

VII.  Agni. 

With  homage  will  I reverence  thee,  Agni,  like  a 
long-tailed  steed, 

Imperial  Lord  of  holjr  rites. 

2 May  the  far-striding  Son  of  Strength,  our  friend  who 

brings  felicity, 

Who  pours  his  gifts  like  rain,  be  ours  ! 

3 From  near  and  far  away  do  thou,  the ' everlasting, 

evermore 

Protect  us  from  the  sinful  man  ! 

VIII.  Indni. 

Thou  in  thy  battles,  Indra,  art  subduer  of  all  hostile 
bands. 

Father  art  thou,  all-conquering,  cancelling  the  curse, 
thou  victor  of  the  vanquisher ! 


2 Kine  took  into  their  mouths : in  the  shape  of  the  grass  from  which 
the  milky  portion  of  the  libKtion  is  produced.  Princes : the  rich 
institutors  of  the  sacrifice. 

Kigveda  I.  27.  1 — 3.  The  ltishi  is  Sunahsepa.  The  metre  is 
Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  i.  i.  2.  7. 

Rigveda  VIII.  88.  5,  6.  The  Rishi  is  Nrimcdha.  #Tlic  metre  is  Pra- 
gatha.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iv.  i.  2,  9. 


viii.  i.  10.] 


THE  SAJI  A VEDA. 


297 


2 The  earth  and  heaven  cling  close  to  thy  victorious 
might,  as  sire  and  mother  to  their  ohild. 

When  thou  attackest  Vritra  all  the  hostile  bands 
shrihk  and  faint,  Indra,  at  thy  wrath.  • 

IX.  Indra. 

The  sacrifice  made  Indra  great  when  he  unrolled  the 
earth,  an*d  made 
Himself  a diadem  in  heaven. 

2 In  Soma’s  ecstasy  Indra  spread  the  firmament  and 

realms  of  light, 

When  *1)0  cleft  Vala  limb  from  limb. 

3 Showing  the  hidden,  he  drave  forth  the  cows  for  the 

Angirasas, 

And  Vala  he  cast  headlong  down. 

X.  Indra. 

Thou  specdest  down  to  succour  us  this  ever-conquer- 
ing God  of  yours, 

Him  who  is  drawn  to  all  our  stfngs  ; 

2 The  warrior  whom  none  may  # wound,  the  Soma- 

drinker  ne’er  o’erthrown, 

The  chieftain  of  resistless  might. 

3 O Indra,  send  us  riches,  thou  omniscient,  worthy  of 

our  hymns  : 

Help  us  in  the  decisive  fray ! 


Iligveda  VIII.  14.  5,  7,  8.  The  'Tiishis  are  Goslmktin  and  Asva- 
suktin.  The  metre  is  Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  ii.  i.  3.  7. 
. 2 Vala : the  demon  fcho  stole  the  cows  of  the  Gods  and  hid  them 
in  a cave. 

Tfcigveda  VIII.  81.  7,  9.  The  Tiishi  is  Srutakaksha  or  Sukakslui.  The 
metre  is  Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  ii.  ii.  3.  6. 


298  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  //. 

XI.  Tndra. 

That  lofty  power  and  might  of  thine,  thy  strength 
and  thine  intelligence, 

And  thy  surpassing  thunderbolt,  the  wish  makes 
keen. 

2 0 Indra,  heaven  and  earth  augment  thy  manly  force 

and  thy  renown  : 

The  waters  and  the  mountains  stir  and  urge  thee  on. 

3 Vishnu  the  lofty  ruling  power,  Varuna,  Mitra  sing 

thy  praise  : 

In  thee  the  Maruts  company  have  great  cfeligbt. 

XII.  Agni. 

O Agni,  God,  the  people  sing  reverent  praise  to  thee 
for  strength  : 

With  terrors  trouble  thou  the  foe ! 

2 Wilt  thou  not,  Agni,  lend  us  aid  to  win  the  cattle, 

win  the  wealth  \ . 

Maker  of  room,  make  room  for  ust 

3 In  the  great  fight  cast  us  not  oft1,  Agni,  as  one  who 

bears  a load  : 

Snatch  up  the  wealth  and  win  it  all  l 


Itigveda  VIII.  15.  7*— 9.  The  Uishis  are  Goshuktin  and  Asvasfiktin. 
The  metre  is  Ushnih. 

1 The  wish  : our  hopes  and  wishes  expressed  in  prayer,  praise,  and 
sacrifice,  which  augment  and  stimulate  all  the  powers  of  the  God  to 
whom  they  are  addressed. 


Rigveda  VIII.  6t.  10 — 1*2.  The  Ttishi  is  Virupa.  The  metre  is 

Gayatrl.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  i.  i.  2.  1. 

2 To  win  the  cattle  : the  original  hymn  is  a pray oi;  for  aid  in  an  ex- 
pedition for  the  recovery  of  stolen  cattle. 


Vlii.  i.  14.] 


THE  SAM AV ED A. 


299 


XIII.  Jndra. 

Before  his  hot  displeasure  all  the  peoples,  all  the 
men#bow  down, 

* As  rivers  bow  them  to  the  sea. 

2 Even  fiercely-moving  Vritra’s  head  he  severed  with 

his  thunderbolt, 

His  mighty  hundred-knotted  bolt. 

3 That  might  of  his  shone  brightly  forth  when  Indra 

brought  together,  like 
A skin,  the  worlds  of  heaven  and  earth. 

XIV.  Indra. 

Kind-thoughted  is  the  noble,  gladdening,  friendly  one. 

• • 

2 Approach,  O beauteous  hero,  this  auspicious  pair  that 

draws  the  car ! 

These  two  are  coming  near  to  us. 

3 Bend  lowly  down,  as  ’twere,  your  heads  : he  stands 

amid  the  water-flood, 

Pointing  with  his  ten  horns  the  way. 


Rigveda  VIII.  6.  4,  6,  5.  The  Rishi  is  Vatsa.  #The  metre  is  Gayatri. 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  ii.  i.  5.  3,  and  stanza  3 of  1.  ii.  ii.  4.  8. 


This  hymn  is  not  taken  from  the  Ijftgvcda.  The  first  line  appears  to 
he  a fragment.  The  metre  of  stanzas  2 and  3 is  Gayatri. 

1 Friendly  one  : sunari : Dawn  appears  to  be  intended.  According 
to  Benfey,  stutih , song  of  praise,  is  understood. 

3 Bend  lowly  down : to  receive  Indra’s  blessing.  Ten  horns : fingers, 
According  to  S&yiym.  The  Scholiast  does  not  name  the  deity  of  the 
hymn. 


300 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  II 


CHAPTER  II. 

I*  Indra. 

Pressers,  blend  Soma  juice  for  him,  each  draught 
most  excellent,  for  him 
The  brave,  the  hero,  for  his  joy ! 

2 The  two  strong  bay  steeds,  yoked  by#praycr,  hither 

shall  bring  to  us  our  friend, 

Indra,  song-lover,  through  our  songs. 

3 The  Vritra-slayer  drinks  the  juice.  May  he  who  gives 

a hundred  aids 

Approach,  nor  stay  afar  from  us ! 

II.  Indra. 

Let  the  drocps  pass  within  thee  as  the  rivers  Aoav 
into  the  sea ! 

O Indra,  naught  excelleth  tliee. 

2 Thou,  wakeful  hero.,  by  thy  might  hast  taken  food  of 

Soma  juice, 

Which,  Indra,  i's  within  thee  now. 

3 O Indra,  Vritra-slayer,  let  Soma  be  ready  for  thy  maw. 
The  drops  be  ready  for  thy  forms ! 


Rigvcda  VIII.  2.  25,  27,  26.  The  Rishis  arc  Medh&tithi  and  Priya- 
medhas.  The  metre  is  Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  ii.  i.  3.  9. 

2 Indra  : instead  of  indram  tfae  Rigveda  has  srutam , ‘renowned,’ 

Rigveda  VIII.  81.  22 — 24.  The  Rishi  is*  Srutaksha  or  Sukaksha. 
The  metre  is  G&yatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iii.  i.  1.  4. 

3 Thy  forms : thy  various  bodies  or  splendours,  that  is,  the  Gods 
who  abide  in  thee,  according  to  Say  ana’s  explanation.  Or  the  meaning 
may  be,  thy  troops  or  bands,  especially  the  Maruts. 


viii.  ii.  4.] 


THE  S Am  A VEDA. 


301 


HI*  Inclra. 

Help,  thou  who  knowest  lauds,  this«work,  a loVely 
hymn  in  Rudra’s  praise, 

Adorable  in  every  house ! 

2 *May  this  our  God,  great,  limitless,  smoke-bannered, 
excellently  bright, 

Urge  us  to  holy  thought  and  wealth  ! 

S Like  some  ?ich  lord  of  men,  may  he,  Agni,  the  ban- 
ner of  the  Gods, 

Refulgent,  hear  us  through  our  lauds ! 

IV  • Indra. 

Sing  this,  beside  the  flowing  juice,  to  him,  your  hero, 

^ much  invoked, 

To  please  him  as  a mighty  Rull ! 

2 He,  excellent,  withholdeth  not  his  bounteous  gift  of 

wealth  in  kine 

When  he  hath  listened  to  our  songs. 

3 May  he  with  might  unclose  for  us  the  cows’  stall, 

whosesoe’er  it  be, 

To  which  the  Dasyu-slayer  go#es ! 

Rigvctla  1.27.10 — 12.  The  Rishi  is  Sunahsejja.  The  metro  is  Guy  at  ri. 
►Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  i.  i.  2.  5. 

3 The  banner  of  the  Gods  : who,  like  a banner,  brings  the  Clods 
together;  or,  the  herald  of  the  Gods,  he  who  notifies  to  them,  as  Sayan  a 
explains. 

Ttigveda  VI.  45,  22 — 24.  The  Rishi  is  Samyu.  .The  metre  is  Gayatri. 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  L ii.  i.  3.  1. 

3 IVhosesoe’er  it  be:  the  meaning  of  kuvitsasya  here  is  somewhat 
uncertain.  Sayana  explains  it  as,  of  Kuvitsa,  a certain  person  who  does 
much  harm.  The  meaning  appears  to  be,  May  Indra  open  for  us  the 
cow-stall  and  give  us  the*  wealth  of  any  Dasyu  or  barbarian  whom  he, 
that  is,  we  under  his  guidance,  may  attack,  Renfey  translates : — 
‘Dann  zu  Kuvitsa’s  Stalle  geht,  dem  stiorrcichen,  der  Itiiuberfeind, 
und  offnet  ihn  mit  seiner  Kraft/  Then  goes  the  robbers’  foeman  to 
Kuvitsa’s  stable  rich  in  steers,  And  throws  it  open  with  his  power. 


302 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  IL 


V.  Vishnu. 

Through  all  this  world  strode  Vishnu  : thrice  his  foot 
he  planted,  and  the  whole 
Was  gathered  in  his  footstep's  dust. 

2 Vishnu,  the  guardian,  he  whom  none  deceiveth,  Made 

three  steps,  thenceforth 
Establishing  his  high  decrees. 

3 Look  ye  on  Vishnu's  works  whereby  the  friend  of 

Indra,  close-allied, 

Hath  let  his  holy  ways  be  seen  ! 

4 The  princes  evermore  behold  that  loftiest  place  of 

Vishnu,  like 

An  eye  extended  through  the  heavens. 

5 This,  Vishnu's  station  most  sublime,  the  sages,  ever- 

vigilant, 

Lovers  of  holy  song,  light  up. 

G May  the  (rods  help  and  favour  us  out  of  the  place 
whence  Vishnu  strode 
Over  the  back  and  ridge  of  earth. 

* r VI.  India. 

Let  none,  no,  jiot'  thy  worshippers,  delay  thee  far 
away  from  us  ! 

Even  from  far  away  come  thou  unto  our  feast,  or 
listen  if  already  here  ! 

lligveda  L.  22.  17 — 21,  1G.  The  Rishi  is  Medhatithi.  The  metre 
is  Gayatrt.  Stanza  t is  a repetition  of  I.  iii.  i.  3.  9. 

4 The  princes : the  Suris,  lords,  the  wealthy  institutors  of  sacrifice. 

5 Light  up : glorify  with  th^ir  praises. 

6 Over  the  hack  and  ridge  of  earth  : prithivyd  adhi  sdnavi : the  Ttig- 
veda  has  prithivyd  sapta  dhdmahhih , 4 O’er  the  seven  regions  of  the 
earth,’  that  is,  over  the  whole  earth. 

Rigvcda  VII.  32.  1,  2.  The  Ttishi  is  Vasislitha.  The  metre  is  Brihati 
in  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  I.  iii.  ii.  5.  2,«  and  Satobrihati  in 
stanza  2. 


viii.  ii.  8.] 


THE  SAMA  VEDA. 


303 


2 For  here,  like  flies  on  honey,  those  who  pray  to  thee 
sit  by  the  juice  that  they  have  poured. 
Wealth-craving  singers  have  on  Indra  set  their  hope, 
as  men  set  foot  upon  a car, 

VII.  Indra. 

Sung  is  the  song  of  ancient  time  : to  Indra  have  ye 
said  the  prayer. 

They  have,  sung  many  a Brihati  of  sacrifice,  poured 
forth  the  worshippers  many  thoughts. 

2 Indra  hath  tossed  together  mighty  stores  of  wealth, 
and  both  the  worlds,  yea,  and  the  sun. 

Pure,  brightly-shining,  mingled  with  the  milk,  Hie 
draughts  of  Soma  have  made  Indra  glad, 

VIII.  • Soma  Puvnmana. 

For  Vritra-slaying  Indra,  thou,  Soma,  art  poured 
that  he  may  drink,  m 

And  for  the  guerdon-giving  man,  the  hero  sitting  in 
his  seat. 

2 Friends,  may  the  princes,  ye  and  we,  obtain  this 

most  resplendent  one, 

Gain  him  who  hath,  the  smell'of  strength,  win  him 
whose  home  is  very  strength  ! # 

3 Him  with  the  fleece  they  purify,  brown,  golden-hued, 

beloved  of  all, 

Whowith  exhilarating  juice  flows  forth  toall  the  deities. 

V&lakhilya  TV.  9,  10.  The  Rishi  is  Ayu.  The  metre  is  Brihati  in 
stanza  1,  and  Satobrihati  in  stanza  2.  • 

1 Brihati : verse  in  the  Brihati  metre. 

Rigveda  IX.  98.  10,  12,  7.  The  RiShis  are  Ambarisha  and  Rijisvan. 
The  metre  is  Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  II.  v.  ii.  18.  3,  and 
stanza  3 of  I.  vi.  ii.  1.  8. 

2 Who  hath  the  smell  of  strength : vdjagandhyam : ‘ fragrant  and 
invigorating.’ — Wilson ; ‘ forming  or  having  a wagon-load  of  goods  or 
spoil.’ — S.  P.  Lexicon.  Whose  home  is  very  strength : vdjapastyam  : 

‘ food  and  dwellings.’ — Wilson ; * him  who  has  a house  full  of  goods’ — 
S.  P.  Lexicon. 


301 


THE  1IYMNS  OF 


[PART  II. 


I X.  Indrn. 

I^jdra  whogc  wealth  is  in  thyself,  what  mortal  will 

attack  this  man  ? 

The  strong  will  win  the  spoil  on  the  decisive  day 
through  faith  in  thee,  O Maghavan  ! * 

2 In  battles  with  the  foe  urge  on  our  mighty  ones  who 
give  the  treasures  dear  to  thee  ; 

And  may  we  with  our  princes,  Lord  of  tawny  steeds! 
pass  through  all  peril,  led  by  thee  ! * 

X.  Indra. 

Come,  priest,  and  of  the  savoury  juice  pour  forth  a 

' yet  more  gladdening  draught! 

So  is  the  hero  praised  who  ever  prospers  us.  . 

2 Indra,  w!\om  tawny  coursers  bear,  praise  such  as 
thine,  preeminent, 

None  by  his  power  or  by  his  goodness  hath  attained. 
$ We,  seeking  glory,  have  invoked  this  God  of  yours, 
the  Lord  of  wealth, 

Who  must  be  magnified  by  constant  sacrifice. 

XI.  Afifni. 

4 # ^ 

Sin g praise  to  him.,  the  Lord  of  light.  The  Gods 

have  made  the  God  to  be  their  messenger, 

To  bear  oblation  to  the  Gods. 

2 Agni,  the  bounteous  giver,  bright  with  varied  flames, 
laud  thou,  O singer  Sobhari, 

Him  who  controls  this  sacred  food  with  Soma  blent, 
who  hath  fifst  claim  to  sacrifice  ! 

Rigveda  VII.  32.  14,  15.  The  Rislii  is  Vasishtha.  The  metre  is 
Satobrihati  in  stanza  1,  whiejj.  is  a repetition  of  I.  iii.  ii.  4.  8,  and 
Rrihuti  in  stanza  2. 


Rigveda  VIII.  24.  16 — 18.  The  Itislii  is  Virvamanas.  The  metre  is 
Ushnih.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  ii.  ii.  3.  6. 

Rigveda  VI IT.  19.  1,  2.  The  Rishi  is  Sobhari.  The  metre  is  Kakup 
in  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  1.  ii.  i.  2.  3,  and  Satobrihati  iu 
stanza  2. 


viii.  ii.  14.] 


THE  sAmaveda. 


305 


XII.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Expressed  by  stones,  0 Soma,  and  ur^ed  through 
the  long  wool  of  the  sheep, 

Thou,  entering  the  press-boards,  even  as  me’n  a fort, 
1 gold-hued,  hast  settled  in  the  vats. 

2 He  beautifies  himself  through  the  sheep’s  long  fine 
wool,  the  bounteous,  like  a racing  steed, 

Even  Soma  Pavam&na  who  shall  be  the  joy  of  sages 
and  of  holy  bards. 

XIII.  Indra. 
Here,  verily,  yesterday  we  let  the  Thunder-wielden 

drink  his  fill. 

Bring  him  the  juice  poured  forth  in  sacrifice  to-day ! 
Now  range  you  by  the  glorious  one!  ’ 

2 Even  the  wolf,  the  savage  beast  that  rends  the  sheep, 
follows  the  path  of  his  decrees.  # o 

So  graciously  accepting,  Indra,  this  our  praise,  with 
wondrous  thought  come  forth  to  us ! 

XIV.  Indra-Agni. 
Indra  and  Agni,  in  your  deeds  of  might  ye  deck 

heaven’s  lucid  realms  : 

Famed  is  that  hero  strength  of  yours. 

Rigveda  IX.  107.  10,  11.  Ascribed  to  the  Seven  Risliis.  The  metre 
is  Brihati  in  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  I.  vi.  i.  3.  3,  and 
►Satobrihati  in  stanza  2. 

2 The  bounteous : uudkvdn  : the  Rigveda  has  mVkc,  ‘ in  battle.’ 

» 

Rigveda  VIII.  55.  7,  8.  The  Rishi  is  Kali.  The  metre  is  Brihati  in 
stanza  I,  which  is  a repetition  of  T.  iii.  ii.  3.  10,  and  Satohrihati  in 
stanza  2.  9 

2 The  wolf:  according  to  Sayana,  ‘the  robber.’  The  reason  of 
mentioning  either  is  not  obvious.  The  savage  beast : vdranah : 1 the 
elephant.’ — Beftfey. 

Rigveda  III.  12.  9,  7,  8.  The  Rishi  is  Visv&milra.  The  metre  is 
tUyatri.  Stanzas  2 and  3 are  repetitions  of  II.  Vii.  iii.  2.  3 and  4-. 

1 In  your  deeds  of  inight : in  your  battles  with  the  fiends  of  dark- 
ness ye  restore  the  brightness  of  the  heavens. 

20 


306  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PANT  //. 

2 To  Indra  and  to  Agni  prayers  go  forward  from  the 
• holy  task 

Along  the  path  of  sacred  Law. 

3 Indr&  and  Agni,  powers  are  yours,  yours  are  obla- 

tions and  abodes ; 

Good  is  your  zealous  energy. 

XV.  India. 

Who  knows  what  vital  power  he  wins,  drinking  be- 
side the  flowing  juice  ? 

This  is  the  fair-cheeked  God  who,  joying  in  the 
draught,  breaks  down  the  castles  in  his  strength. 

2 As  a wild  elephant  rushes  on,  this  way  and  that  way 

mad  with  heat, 

None  may  restrain  thee,  yet  come  hither  to  the 
draught ! Thou  movest  mighty  in  thy  power. 

3 When  he^  the  terrible,  ne’er  o’erthrown,  stedfast, 

made  ready  for  the  fight — 

When  Indra  Maghavan  lists  to  his  praisers  call, 
he  will  not  stand  aloof,  but  come. 

. • XVI.  Soma  Pavfimana. 

The  Pavamanas  ‘have  been  poured,  the  brilliant 
drops  of  Soma  juice, 

For  holy  lore  of  every  kind. 

2 From  heaven,  from  out  the  firmament  hath  Pava- 
mana  been  effused 
Upon  the  b^ck  and  ridge  of  earth. 


ltigveda  VIII.  33.  7 — 9.  The  Rishi  is  Medhy&tithi.  The  metre  is 
Brihati.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iv.  i.  1.  5. 

2 Mad  loith  heat : that  is,  mast , or,  Anglo-Indie^,  must : ddnd  in  the 
text  being  probably  the  instrumental  case  of  ddnam , a fragrant  fluid 
which  is  said  to  flow  from  the  temples  of  a male  elephant  when  he  is  in  rut. 

RigvedaIX.63.25,27,26.  The  Rishi  is  Nidhruvi.  ThemetreisGayatri. 

1 Holy  lore : kdvyd : that  is,  wisdom  or  wise  tfiyughts. 

2 Upon  the  back  and  ridge  of  earth : upon  the  raised  altar. 


viii.  ii.  18.]  THE  SAMAVEDA.  307 


3 The  Pavam&nas  have  been  shed,  the  beautified  swift 
Soma-drops, 

Driving  all  enemies  afar. 

XVII.  * India-Agni. 

Indra  and  Agni  I invoke,  joint-vietors,  bounteous, 
unsubdued, 

Foe-slayers,  *best  to  win  the  spoil. 

2 Indra  and  Agni,  singers  skilled  in  melody  hymn  you 

bringing  lauds  : 

I  choose  you  both  to  bring  me  food. 

3 Together,  with  one  mighty  deed,  Indra  and  Agni, 

ye  shook  down 

The  ninety  forts  which  Dasas  held. 


XVIII. 


A * 

Agni. 


O Child  of  Strength,  to  thee  whose  look  is  lovely, 
with  oblations  we, 

O Agni,  have  poured  forth  oui;  songs. 

2 To  thee  for  shelter  are  we  come,  as  to  the  shade 

from  fervent  heat, 

Agni,  who  glittcrest  like  gold  ! 

3 Mighty  as  one  who  slays  with  shafts,  or  like  a bull 

with  sharpened  horn, 

Agni,  thou  brakest  down  the  forts.  » 


Rigveda  III.  12.  4 — G.  The  Rishi  ^is  Visvamitra.  The  metre  is 
Gayatri.  Stanzas  2 and  3 are  repetitions  of  II.  vii.  iii.  2.  1 and  2. 


Rigveda  VI.  16.  37 — 30.  The  Rishi  is  Vitahavya  or  Bharadvaja. 

The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

1 Child  of  Strength : sahaskrita : literally,  made  or  produced  by 
strength,  that  is,  by  violent  agitation  of  the  fire-drill, 


308 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  11 


XIX.  Agni. 

*To  give  eternal  glow,  we  pray  Vaisvdnara  the  holy  one, 
Lord  of  the  light  of  sacrifice. 

2 Who,  furthering  the.  light  of  Law,  hath  spread  hiqiself 

to  meet  this  work  : 

He  sends  the  seasons,  mighty  one. 

3 Love  of  what  is  and  what  shall  be,  Agni,  in  his  be- 

loved forms, 

Shines  forth  alone  as  sovran  Lord. 


CHAPTER  III. 

I.  Agni. 

Wise  Agni,  in  the  ancient  way,  making  his  body 
beautiful, 

Hath  been  exalted  by  the  sage. 

2 I invocate  the  Child  of  Strength,  Agni  whose  glow 

is  bright  and  pijre, 

In  this  well-ordered  sacrifice. 

3 So,  Agni,  rich'in  many  friends,  with  fiery  splendour 

seat  thyself 

With  Gods  upon  our  sacred  grass ! 


The  hymn  is  not  £ak en  from  the  Rigveda.  The  metre  is  G&yatri. 

3 Love:  kdmah:  desire  and  hope.  In  his  beloved  forms : according 
to  Say  ana,  dhdmasu  here  — sthd^xeshu^  in  places  or  abodes,  that  is,  in  the 
three  worlds. 

Rigveda  VIII.  44. 12 — 14.  The  Rishi  is  Virftpa.  The  metre  is  Gayatrt. 

1 Way:  janmand : the  Rigveda  has  manmand , ‘with  the  ancient 
hymn.* 

3 Rich  in  many  fiends:  mitramahas : ‘ thou  who  hast  Mitras 
splendour.’— Ludwig. 


viii.  iii.  3.] 


THE  SAMAVEDA. 


309 


II.  Soma  Pavamaim. 
O thou  with  stones  for  arms,  thy  power's,  rending  the 

fiends,  have  raised  themselves  : 

Drive  off  the  foes  who  compass  us ! 

2 Hence  conquering  with  might  when  car  meets  car, 

and  when  the  prize  is  staked, 

With  fearless  heart  will  I sing  praise. 

3 None,  evil-minded,  may  assail  this  Pavamstna’s  Iioly 

laws : 

Crush  him  who  fain  would  fight  with  thee  ! 

4 For  Indra,  to  the  streams  they  urge  the  tawny  rap- 

ture-dropping steed, 

Indu,  the  bringer  of  delight. 

III.  Indra. 
Come  hither,  Indra,  with  bay  steeds,  joyous,  with 

tails  like  peacocks'  plumes  t 
Let  no  men  check  thy  course  as  fowlers  stay  the 
bird  : pass  o'er  them  as  o'er  desert  lands  ! 

2 Vritra’s  devourer,  he  who  bujrst  the  cloud,  brake 
forts,  and  dravo  the  floods, 

Indra,  who  mounts  his  chariot  at  his  bay  steeds'  cry, 
shatters  e'en  things  that  stand  most  firm. 


Rigveda  IX.  53.  1 — 4.  The  Rishi  is  Avats&ra.  metre  is  Gayatri, 

1 With  stones  for  arms : adrivah : generally  an  "appellative  of  Indra, 
slinger  or  wicldcr  of  the  stone  or  thunderbolt ; here,  according  to  Sayan  a, 
meaning  grdvavan  soma>  ‘0  Soma,  posifesscdof/  that  is,  ‘expressed  by, 
the  stones.* 

2 When  car  meets  car:,  in  battle.  When  the  prize  is  staked:  in  tlio 
chariot-race,  or  in  battle. 

4 To  the  streams : into  the  Vasativari  waters. 

Rigveda  III.  45,  '1—3.  The  Rishi  is  Visvamitra.  The  metre  is 
Brihati.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iii.  ii.  I.  4. 


310 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  //. 


3 Like  pools  of  water  deep  and  full,  like  kine  thou 
cherishest  thy  might  ; 

Like  the  milch-cows  that  go  well-guarded  to  the 
mead,  like  water-brooks  that  reach  the  lake. 

IV.  Indra. 
Even  as  the  wild-bull,  when  he  thirsts,  goes  to  the 

desert’s  watery  pool, 

Come  hither  quickly  both  at  morning  and  at  eve,  and 
with  the  Kanvas  drink  thy  fill ! 

2 May  the  drops  gladden  thee,  Lord  Indra,  and  obtain 
bounty  for  him  who  pours  the  juice  ! 

Soma,  shed  in  the  press,  thou  stolest  and 'didst  drink, 
and  hence  hast  won  surpassing  might. 

V.  Indra. 
Thou  as  a God,  O migntiest,  verily  blessest  mortal 

man. 

O Maghavan,  there  is  no  comforter  but  thou  : Indra. 
I speak  my  words  to  thee. 

3 Like  pools  of  water : the  meaning  appears  to  be,  as  Professor 
Ludwig  suggests  : thy  mental  power  is  as  inexhaustible  as  the  water 
in  deep  springs,  as  safe..from  harm  as  carefully  guarded  cows  that  go 
without  straying  to  their  pasture,  and  ever  full  like  streams  that  pour 
water  into  a lake.  Professor  Wilson,  in  his  Translation  of  the  Rigveda 
Sanhita,  following  Sayana’,  paraphrases  thus:  ‘Thou  cherishest  the 
celebrator  of  the  pious  rite,  as  (thou  fillest)  the  deep  seas  (with  water); 
or  as  a careful  herdsman  (cherishes)  the  cows : (thou  imbibest  the 
Soma)  as  cows  (obtain)  fodder,  (and  the  juices  flow  into  thee)  as 
rivulets  flow  into  a lake.’ 

Rigveda  VIII.  4.  3,  4.  The  ftishi  is  Devatithi.  The  metre  is  Brihatj 
ill  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  I.  iii.  ii.  1.  10,  and  Satobrihati 

in  stanza  2.  . , 

2 Thou  stolest  and  didst  drink ; ‘thou  didst  covertly  drink.— 

Stevenson.  

Rigveda  I.  84.  19,  20.  The  Rishi  is  Gotama.  The  metre  of  stanza 
1,  which  is  a repetition  of  I.  iii.  ii.  1.  5,  is  BrihaVi,  and  of  stanza  2 
Satobrihati. 


viii.  iii.  7.} 


THE  SlMAVEDA. 


311 


2 Let  not  thy  bounteous  gifts,  let  not  thy  saving  help 
fail  us,  good  Lord,  at  any  time ! 

And  measure  out  to  us,  thou  lover  of  mankind, 
all  riches  hitherward  from  men ! 

VI.  Dawn. 

This  Lady,  excellent  and  kind,  after  her  sister  shin- 
ing forth, 

Daughter  of  Heaven,  hath  shown  herself. 

2 Red,  like  a mare,  and  beautiful,  holy,  the  mother  of 

the  kine, 

The  Dawn  became  the  Alvins’  friend. 

3 Yea,  and  thou  art  the  Asvins’  friend,  the  mother  of 

the  cows  art  thou  : 

O Dawn,  thou  rulest  over  wealth. 

VII.  Asvins. 

Now  Morning  with  her  earliest  light  shines  forth, 
dear  daughter  of  the  Sky  : 

High,  Asvins,  1 extol  your  praise  : 

2 Children  of  Ocean,  mighty,  ones,  discoverers  of 
riches,  Gods, 

Finders  of  treasure  through  our 'prayer! 


2 From  men : away  from  other  men. 

Rigveda  TV.  52. 1—3.  The  Rislii  is  V&madcva.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

1 After  her  sister:  when  Night  has  departed." 

2 Holy  : ritdmri : or,  constant ; true  to  ritam,  the  law  and  order 
of  the  universe.  The  kine  : the  earty  rays  of  light,  or  the  days.  The 
Asvins ’ friend : as  being  worshipped  at  the  same  time  as  the  Asvins 
who  herald*  her  approach. 

Rigveda  I.  46.  1—3.  The  Rishi  is  Praskanva.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  ii.  ii.  4.  4. 

2 Children  of  Qcean  : sindhumdtard : sons  of  the  river  or  sea  of  air 
and  cloud,  the  aerial  occaii.  Through  our  prayer:  oi,  with  thoii 
thought. 


312  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  11. 

3 Your  lofty  coursers  hasten  on  over  the  everlasting 
# realm, 

When  jour  car  flies  with  winged  steeds. 

VIII.  Dawn. 

O Dawn  who  hast  a store  of  wealth,  bring  unto  us 
that  splendid  gift 

Wherewith  we  may  support  children  and  children’s 
sons ! 

2 Thou  radiant  Lady  of  sweet  strains,  with  wealth  of 
, horses  and  of  kine 

Shine  thou  on  us  this  day,  O Dawn,  auspiciously  ! 

3 O Dawn  who  hast  a store  of  wealth,  yoke  red 

steeds  to  thy  car  to-day. 

Then  bring  us  all  delight  aid  all  felicities! 


3 Lofty  coursers : kakulidsah : the  word  as  an  adjective  means, 
exalted,  eminent,  and  the  substantive,  asvdh,  horses,  may  be  under- 
stood. According  to  Professor  Roth  kakulidsah , is  a substantive, 
meaning  the  seats,  or  other  parts,  of  chariots.  According  to  Sayana, 
who  is  followed  by  Ben  fey,  kakuhdsah  means  hymns  of  praise.  Ever- 
lasting: jurndydm:  the  meaning  of  the  word  here  is  somewhat 
uncertain.  Derived  from  the  root  jur , it  signifies  grown  old,  decayed, 
decrepit  (uralt  - ewig  : — Bcnfey).  Sayana  derives  it  from  another 
root : ‘much-extolled.’ — Stevenson. 


Rigveda  I.  92.  13—15.  The  Rishi  is  Gotama.  The  metre  is  Ushnih. 

1 Who  hast  a store  of  wealth  : vdjinlvati : according  to  the  commen- 
tators, ‘ partaker  of  sacrificial  fo6d,’  ‘ enriched  with  holy  rites;  ’ accord- 
ing to  Profossor  Roth,  ‘possessed  of,  and  travelling  with,  swift  horses;’ 
according  to  Professor  Ludwig,  * rich  in  horses/  according  to  Professor 
Pischel,  ‘rich  in  mares.’  See  Max  Muller,  Vedic  Hymns , Part  I.  p.  442. 

2 Lady  of  sweet  strains : sdnritdvati : wakener  of  the  ‘ charm  of 
earliest  birds 9 and  all  pleasant  sounds  of  morning.'*  ‘Famed  for  thy 
gracious,  faithful  words.’ — Stevenson.  ‘0  excellent  cftic.’ — Ludwig. 


via.  iii.  10.] 


THE  SAMAVEDA. 


313 


IX,  Asvins. 

0 Asvins,  wonderful  in  act,  do  ye  unanimous  direct 
Your  chariot  to  our  home  wealthy  in  kine  and  gold  ! 

2^Hithe#  may  they  who  wake  at  dawn  bring’  to  drink 
Soma,  both  the  Gods, 

Health-givers,  wonder-workers,  borne  on  paths  of  gold ! 
3 Ye  who  brought  down  the  hymn  from  heaven, 
a light  ihat  giveth  light  to  men, 

Do  ye,  O Asvins,  bring  strength  hither  unto  us! 

X.  Agni. 

1 think  of  Agni  who  is  kind,  whom,  as  their  home, 
the  ftiilch-kine  seek : 

Whom  fleet-foot  coursers  seek  as  home,  and  strong 
enduring  steeds  as  home. 

Bring  food  to  those  who  sing  thy  praise! 

2 For  Agni,  God  of  all  mankind,  giyes  the  strong 

courser  to  the  man. 

Agni  gives  ready  gear  for  wealth,  he  gives  the  best 
when  he  is  pleased. 

Bring  food  to  those  who  sing^thy  praise  ! 

3 That  Agni  who  is  praised  as  kind,  to  whom  the 

milch-kine  come  in  herds, 

To  whom  the  racers,  swift  of  foot,  to  whom  our  well- 
born princes  come.  Bring  food  to  those  who  sing 
thy  praise  ! 


Rigveda  I.  92. 16,  18,  17.  The  Rishi  is  Gotama*  The  metre  is  Ushnih. 

1 Wealthy  in  kine  and  gold : a prolepsis;  so  tliat  it  may  be  wealthy. 

2 They  who  wake  at  dawn : according  to  Sly  ana,  the  horses  of  the 
Asvins.  The  expression  may  apply  wfcli  equal  propriety  to  the  priests 
who  rise  at  day-break  to  perform  the  morning  sacrifices. 


Rigveda  V.  6.  1,  3,  2.*  The  Rishi  is  Vasusruta.  The  metre  is  Pankti. 

1 Strong  enduring  steeds : nitydso  vdjinah : or,  ‘ constant  worshippers,’ 
according  to  Sayana. 

2 Ready  gear  fyr  wealth:  rdye  svdhhuvam  is  difficult  to  construe. 
Professor  Roth  suggests  that  rayim  is  the  correct  reading,  ‘wealth  at 
hand,’  or  ‘prepared,  for  use.’ 


314 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  II. 


# XI.  Dawn. 

O HEAVENLf  Dawn,  awaken  us  to  ample  opulence  to-# 
day. 

Even  as  thou  didst  waken  us  with  Satyasravas, 
Vayya’s  son,  high-born  ! delightful  with  thy  steeds ! 

2 Daughter  of  Heaven,  thou  dawnedst  on  Sunitha, 

Suchadratha’s  son  ; 

So  dawn  thou  on  one  mightier  still,  6n  Satyasravas, 
Vayya’s  son,  high-born  ! delightful  with  thy  steeds ! 

3 So,  bringing  treasure,  shine  to-day  on  us,  thou 

daughter  of  the  Sky, 

As  on  one  mightier  thou  hast  dawned,  on  Satyasravas, 
Vayya’s  son,  high-born ! delightful  with  thy  speeds  ! 

XII.  Asvins. 

To  meet  your  treasure-bringing  car,  the  car  that  is 
* most  dear  to  us, 

Asvins,  the  Rishi  is  prepared,  your  worshipper,  with 
songs  of  praise.  Lovers  of  sweetness,  hear  my  call ! 

2 Pass,  Asvins,  over  all  away.  May  I obtain  you  for 
myself,  * * 

Wonderful,  with  ybur  golden  paths,  most  gracious, 
bringers  of  the  flood ! Lovers  of  sweetness,  hear 
my  call! 


Rigveda  V.  79.  1 — 3.  The  Rishi  is  Satyasravas.  The  metre  is 
Fankti.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  v.  i.  4.  3. 

2 On  one  mightier  $till : sahiyasi : or,  ‘ on  the  very  strong ; ' atis- 
ayenabalavati. — Sayana.  Nothing  is  known  regarding  the  persons 
mentioned,  who  appear  to  have  been  members  of  one  family.  Satya- 
Bravas,  the  Rishi  who  invokes  file  blessing  on  himself,  may  have  been 
the  son  of  Sunitha  who  was  the  son  of  Vaya,  who  was  the  son  of 
Suchadratha.  Sec  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda , 156. 

Rigveda  V.  75.  1 — 3.  The  Rishi  is  Avasyu.  The  metre  is  Pankti. 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  v.  i.  3.  10. 

2 Over  all : prajdh,  or  vi$ah>  people,  or  tribes,  ‘being  implied  iu 
vievdh. 


viii.  iii.  14.] 


TUE  SJMAVEBA. 


315 


3 Come  to  us,  O ye  Asvins  twain,  bringing  your  pre- 
cious treasures,  come  * 

Ye  Rudras,  on  your  paths  of  gold,  rejoicing,  with 
yotfr  store  of  wealth!  Lovers  of  sweetness,  hear 
my  call ! 

XIII.  Agni. 

Acini  is  wakened  by  the  people’s  fuel  to  meet  the 
Dawn  wlio  cometh  like  a milch-cow. 

Like  young  trees  shooting  up  on  high  their  branches, 
his  flames  are  mounting  to  the  vault  of  heaven. 

2 For  the  Gods’  worship  hath  the  priest  been  wakened: 

kind  Agni  hath  arisen  erect  at  morning. 

Kindled,  his  radiant  might  is  made  apparent,  and 
the  great  God  hath  been  set  free  from  darkness. 

3 When  he  hath  roused  the  line  of  his  attendants,  with 

the  bright  milk  bright  Agni  is  anointed.  , 

Then  is  prepared  the  effectual  oblation,  which  spread 
ill  front,  with  tongues,  erect,  he  drinketh. 

XIV.  ' Dawn. 

This  light  is  come,  amid  all  lights  the  fairest : born 

is  the  brilliant,  far-extendiffg  brightness. 

Night,  sent  away  for  Savitar’s  uprising,  hath  yielded 
up  a birth-place  for  the  morning. 


3 Rudras : bright  Gods.  See  Pischel,  Vedische  Studien , I.  pp.  57,  58. 
With  your  store  of  wealth : vdjintvasd : see  note  on  vdjinivati,  which 
>vord  has  much  the  same  meaning,  stanza  1 of.  Hymn  VIII.  of  this 
Chapter. 

it 

Rigveda  V.  1.  1 — 3.  The  Rishi  is  Gavishthira.  The  metre  is 
Trishtup.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  1.  i.  ii.  3.  1. 

3 The  line  of  his  attendants : ganasya  rasandm : tlio  row  of  mini- 
stering priests.  But  the  exact  meaning  is  uncertain  : 1 when  he  looses 
the  (dark)  fetters  of  the  (world’s)  tribes.’ — Stevenson. 

» 

Rigveda  I.  113.  1 — 3.  The  Rishi  is  Kutsa.  The  metre  is  Trishtup. 

1 Savitar  is  the  morning  sun. 


316 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  II. 


2 The  fair,  the  bright  is  come  with  her  white  offspring: 

r to  her  the  Dark  one  hath  resigned  her  dwelling. 
Akin,  immortal,  following  each  other,  changing  their 
colours  both  the  heavens  move  onward.  • 

3 Common,  unending  is  the  sisters'  pathway:  taught 

by  the  Gods  alternately  they  travel. 

Fair-formed,  of  different  hues  and  yet  one-minded, 
Night  and  Dawn  clash  not,  neither«do  they  tarry. 

XV.  Asvins. 

Agni,  the  bright  face  of  the  Dawns,  is  shining:  the 
singers'  pious  voices  have  ascended. 

Borne  on  your  chariot,  Asvins,  turn  y(>u  hither, 
and  come  unto  our  brimming  warm  libation ! 

2 Most  frequent  guests,  they  scorn  not  what  is  ready  : 

even  now  the  lauded  Alvins  are  beside  us. 

With  promptest  aid  they  come  at  morn  and  evening, 
the  worshipper's  most  healthful  guards  from  trouble. 

3 Yea,  come  at  milking-time,  at  early  morning,  at 

noon  of  day,  and  When  the  Sun  is  setting, 

By  day,  at  night,  wjth  most  auspicious  favour!  Not 
only  now  the  draught  hath  drawn  the  Asvins. 


2 Her  white  offspring : the  light  clouds.  Or  * bright  offspring,’  the 
sun  whom  she  precedes.  Both  the  heavens:  dydvd : or,  Day  and  Night. 


Itigvcda  V.  76.  1 — 3.  The  Rishi  is  Bhaumya.  The  metre  is 
Trishfcup.  v 

1 Face  of  the  Batons : ushasdm  anilcam : similarly  in  Rigvcda  I. 
113.  19,  Ushas  or  Dawn  is  called  aditer  antkam,  1 the  face  of  Aditi.* 
Warm  libation : gharmam : offering  of  hot  milk  or  other  hoated 
v beverage. 

3 As  heralds  of  light  the  Asvins  naturally  appear  before  the  dawn, 
and  are  most  appropriately  worshipped  at  day-break.  “ It  need  not, 
however,  supprise  us  that  they  should  bo  invited  to  attend  the 
different  ceremonies  of  the  worshippers,  and  therefore  conceived  to 
appear  at  hours  distiuct  from  the  supposed  natural  periods  of  their 
manifestation.” — J.  Muir,  Original  Sanskrit  Texts , V.  p.  239. 


viii.  iii.  17.] 


THE  SAMAVEDA. 


317 


XVI.  Dawn. 
These  Dawns  have  raised  their  banner : in  the  eastern 

half  of  middle  air  they  spread  abroad  their 
shifting  light.  * 

' Like  heroes  who  prepare  their  weapons  for  the  fray, 
the  cows  are  coming  on,  the  mothers,  red  of  hue. 

2 Rapidly  have  the  ruddy  beams  of  light  shot  up  : the 

red  cowa  have  they  harnessed,  easy  to  be  yoked. 
The  Dawns  have  made  their  pathways  as  in  former 
times : red-hued,  they  have  attained  refulgent 
brilliancy. 

3 They  $ing  their  song  like  women  active  in  their  tasks, 

* along  their  common  path  hither  from  far  away, 
Bringing  refreshment  to  the  liberal  .devotee,  yea, 
all  things  to  the  worshipper  who  pours  the  juice. 

XVII.  As\<ns. 
Aoni  is  wakened : Sftrya  riseth  from  the  earth. 

Bright  Dawn  hath  opened  out  the  mighty  twain 
with  light. 

The  Asvins  have  equipped  their  chariot  for  the  course. 
GodSavitar  hath  roused  the  world  in  sundry  ways. 
2 When,  O ye  Asvins,  ye  equip  y6ur  mighty  car,  with 
fatness  and  with  honey  balm,  ye  twain,  our  power! 
To  our  devotion  give  victorious  strength  in  war : 
may  we  win  riches  in  the  heroes1  strife  for  spoil! 

Rigvoda  I.  92.  1. — 3.  The  Rishi  is  Gotoma.*  The  metro  is  Jagati. 

1 These  Dawns : ‘ Wc  have  the  term  Ushasah , in  the  plural,  intend- 
ing according  to  the  Commentator,  the  divinities  that  preside  over  the 
morning  : but,  according  to  Yaska,  tl'te  plural  is  used  honorifically  only, 
for  the  singular  personification.’ — Wilson.  The  cows : the  Dawns.^ 
Mothers : of  the  day. 

2 The  red  cows : the  red  clouds  of  Morning. 

3 Who  pours  the  juice:  *vho  presses  out  and  offers  libations  of  Soma  juice. 

Rigveda  1. 157j  1 — 3.  The  Rishi  is  Dfrghatamas.  The  metre  is  Jagati. 
1 The  mighty' twain : heaven  and  earth.  Savitar  ; the  Sun  as  the 
great  cause  of  life  and  motion. 


318 


THE  SlMAVEDA . 


[PART  II. 


13  Nigh  to  us  come  the  Asvins’  lauded  three-wheeled 
* car,  the  car  ladeu  with  meath  and  drawn  by  fleet-  * 
foot  steeds, 

Three-seated,  opulent,  bestowing  all  delight : may  it 
bring  weal  to  us,  to  cattle  and  to  men ! 

XVIII.  Soma  Pavamana. 

Thy  streams  that  never  fail  or  waste  flow  forth  like 
showers  of  rain  from  heaven, 

To  bring  a thousand  stores  of  wealth. 

2 He  flows  beholding  on  his  way  all  well-beloved  sacred 

lore, 

Green-tinted,  brandishing  his  arms. 

3 He,  when  .the  people  deck  him  like  a docile  king  of 

elephants, 

« Sits  as  a falcon  in  the  wood. 

4 So  bring  thou  hitherward  to  us,  Indu,  while  thou  art 

purified, 

All  treasures  both  of  heaven  and  earth ! 


3 Three-wheeled  ear : see  °lvigveda  I.  34.  2,  5,  9.  To  cattle  and  to 
men  : dvipade  chatuslqxide : literally,  “ to  biped  (and)  to  quadruped.’ 


Jfcigveda  IX.  77.  1 — 4.  The  Rislii  is  Avatsara.  The  metre  is  Gayatrz. 

2 Well-beloved  sacred  lore : or,  wise  and  well-beloved  thoughts. 

3 King  of  elephants f:  ibhah  and  rdjd  being  taken  together  in  the 
sense  of  elephant-kin^,  or  stately  and  noble  elephant.  See  Vedische 
Stud  ten,  I.  p.  XV.  The  ivood : meaning,  as  referring  to  Sonia,  the 
wooden  trough  or  vat.  4 Sits  oiuthe  waters  like  a hawk.’ — Wilson. 


BOOK  IX. 


CHAPTER  I. 

I*  Soma  Pavamana. 

Forward  have  flowed  the  streams  of  power,  of  this 
the  mighty  one  effused, 

Of  him  who  waits  upon  the  Gods. 

2 The  singers  praise  him  with  their  song,  and  learned 

priests  adorn  the  steed 
Born  as  the  light  that  merits  laud. 

3 These  things  thou  winnest  quickly,  while  men  cleanse 

thee,  Soma,  nobly  rich  ! 

O meet  for  praise,  fill  full  the  sea! 

II.  India. 

This  Brahman,  comer  at  due  time,  named  Indra, 
is  renowned  and  praised. 

2 To  thee  alone,  O Lord  of  Strength,  go,  as  it  were, 

all  songs  of  praise. 

3 Like  streams  of  water  on  their  way,  let  bounties, 

Indra,  flow  from  thee! 


Rigvcda  IX.  29.  1 — 3.  The  llishi  is  Nrimedha.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

1 Of  power : the  Itigveda  lias,  ‘ with  povier.*  Waits  upon  the 
Gods:  or,  decorates. 

2 The  steed  : the  swiftly -flowing  Soma. 

3 These  things : the  blessings  for  which  the  Rishi  prays  in  the 
following  verses  of  the  original  hymn.  0 meet  for  jiraise : the  Rigvedn 
has  ukthyam  agreeing  with  samudram,  the  sea,  that  is  the  Soma  vat 
or  reservoir,  ‘ that  claims  our  praise.* 


Those  lines  are  not  taken  from  the  Itigveda.  Each  consists  of 
two  Padas,  or  oqe  line,  of  Gayatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  v.  ii. 
1.  2,  and  stanza  3 of  1.  v.  ii.  2.  7, 


320 


THE  I1YMNS  OF 


[PART  II. 


HI-  Indra. 

3?ven  as  a car  to  give  us  aid,  we  draw  thee  nigh  to 
favour  us, 

Strong*  in  thy  deeds,  quelling  attack,  Indfra,  Lord, 
mightiest!  of  the  brave.  * 

2 Great  in  thy  power  and  wisdom,  strong,  with 

thought  that  comprehendeth  all! 

Wide  hast  thou  spread  in  majesty. 

3 Thou  very  mighty  one,  whose  hands  by  virtue  of 

thy  greatness  wield 
The  golden  bolt  that  breaks  its  way  ! 

IV.  ^ Agni. 

He  who  hath  lighted  up  the  joyous  castle,  wise 
courser  Kke  the  steed  of  cloudy  heaven, 

Bright  like  the  Sun  with  hundredfold  existence : 

2«  He,  doubly  bprn,  hath  spread  in  his  effulgence  through 
the  three  luminous  realms,  through  all  the  regions, 
Best  sacrificing  Priest  where  waters  gather. 

3 Priest  doubly  born, ‘lie  through  his  love  of  glory 
hath  in  his  keepir\g  all  things  worth  the  choosing. 
The  man  who  brings  him  gifts  hath  noble  offspring. 

Rigveda  VIII.  57.  1 — 3.  The  Ttishi  is  Priyamedha.  The  metre  is 
Anush  tup  in  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  I.  iv.  ii.  2.  3,  and  (Jayatri 
in  stanzas  2 and  3. 

2 Wide  hast  thou  spread : or,  Thou  hast  filled  full  (the  universe). 

Rigveda  I.  149.  3— *5.  The  Hishi  is  Dirghatamas.  The  metre  is 
Viraj,  each  stanza  containing  three  Padas  of  a Trishtup  stanza. 

1 The  joyous  castle:  puram  ndr  minim : or,  the  castle  Narminl.  Ac- 
cording to  S&yana,  the  northern  altar,  or  the  ground  where  the  sacrificial 
'assembly  is  held,  is  intended;  but  this  is  only  a conjectural  explanation. 

2 Doubly  born:  from  the  fire-drill  and  again* at  consecration.  Three 
luminous  realms : tri  rochandni : the  bright  sky,  which  is  spoken  of  as 
threefold.  Where  waters  gather  : according  to  Salyana,  in  the  place  of 
sacrifice  where  water  is  collected  for  ceremonial  purposes.  But  the 
reference  is  probably  to  Agni’s  appearance,  in  the  form  of  lightning, 
in  the  watery  clouds  of  heaven. 


ix.  i.  7.] 


THE  SAM  A VEDA. 


321 


V.  Agni. 
Agni,  with  hymns  may  we  now  accomplish  that 

which  thou  lovest, 

Strength,  like  a horse,  auspicious,  with  service ! 

2 For,  Agni,  thou  art  now  the  promoter  of  strength 

auspicious, 

Lofty  sacrifice,  power  effective. 

3 Through  those  our  praises,  come  thou  to  meet  us> 

bright  as  the  sunlight, 

Agni,  kindly  with  all  thy  faces! 

VI.  Agifi. 
Immortal  Jata  vedas,  thou  bright-hued  refulgent  gift 

of  Dawn, 

Agni,  this  day  to  him  who  pays  oblatioils  bring  the 
Gods  who  waken  with  the  morn  ! 

2 For  thou  art  offering-bearer,  well-loved  messenger, 
and  charioteer  of  holy  rites. 

Accordant  with  the  Asvins  and  with  Dawn  grant 
us  heroic  strength  and  lofty1  fame  ! 

VII.  ^ Indra. 

The  old  hath  waked  the  young  Moon  from  his  slumber 
who  runs  his  circling  course  with  many  rouiid  him. 
Behold  the  God’s  high  wisdom  in  its  greatness : he 
who  died  yesterday  to-day  is  living. 


Rigveda  IV.  10.  1 — 3.  The  Rishi  is  Vamadeva.  The  metre  is  Pada- 
pankti  (5  x 5).  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  v.  i.  5.  8. 

2 The  promoter : literally,  the  charioteer. 

Rigveda  I.  44.  1,  2.  The  Rishi  is  Praskanva.  The  metre  is  Brihati 
in  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  1.  i.  i.  4.  6,  and  Satobrihati  in  stanza  2. 
2 Charioteer:  promoter. 

Rigveda  X.  55.  5—7.  The  Rishi  is  Brihaduktha.  The  metre  is 
Trishtup.  Stanza  1 is  si  repetition  of  I.  iv.  i.  4.  3. 

21 


322 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[FART  II 


2 Strong  is  the  red  Bird  in  his  strength,  great  hero, 
• who  froyi  of  old  hath  had  no  nest  to  dwell  in.  • 
That  which  he  knows  is  truth  and  never  idle : he 

wir\p  and  gives  the  wealth  desired  of  many. 

3 Through  these  the  Thunderer  gained  strong  maaily 

vigour,  through  whom  he  waxed  in  strength  to 
slaughter  Vritra; 

These  who  through  might  of  actual  operation  sprang 
forth  as  Gods  in  course  of  Law  and  Order. 

VIII.  Maruts. 

Here  is  the  Soma  ready  pressed : of  this  the  Maruts, 
yea,  of  this 

Self-luminous,  the  Asvins,  drink. 

2 Of  this,  .moreover,  purified,  set  in  three  places, 
procrean  t, 

Drink  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman. 

#3  Yea,  India*  like  the  Hotar-priest,  will  in  the  early 
morning  drink, 

At  pleasure,  of  the  milky  juice. 

IX.  Surya. 

Verily,  Surya,  tlipu  art  great;  truly,  Aditya,  thou 
art  great. 

O most  admired  for  greatness  of  thy  majesty,  God, 
by  thy  greatness  thou  art  great. 

2 The  red  Bird:  the  Sun,  with  whom  Indra  is  identified. 

3 Through  these : probably  the  stars  are  intended.  ‘ (Accompanied) 
by  these  Maruts.’ — 'JVilson. 

Rigveda  VIII.  83.  4 — 6.  The  Rishi  is  Vindu  or  Putadaksha.  The 
metre  is  GAyatri.  The  original  hymn  is  addressed  to  the  Maruts,  who 
are  specially  invoked  in  stanzas  8 — 12. 

2 Set  in  three  places : in  a trough,  a straining-cloth,  and  a vessel 
called  PHtabhrit.  Procreant : granting  children  to  the  worshipper. 

3 The  Hotar-priest : Agni. 

Rigveda  VIII.  90.  11,  12.  The  Rishi  is  Jama<]agni.  The  metre  is 
Brihat*  in  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  I.  iii.  «.  4.  4,  and  Satobri- 
hati  in  stanza  2. 


lx.  i.  ilk 


THE  SAM  A VEDA. 


323 


2 Yea,  SArya,  thou  art  great  in  fame : thou  evermore, 
O God,  art  great.  > 

Thou  by  thy  greatness  art  the  Gods*  High-Priest, 
■Jivijie,  far-spread  unconquerable  light* 

X.  India. 

Come,  Lord  of  rapturous  joys,  to  our  libations  with 
thy  bay  steeds,  come 
With  bay  steeds  to  our  flowing  juice  ! 

2 Known  as  best  Yritra-slayer  erst,  as  Indra  Satakratu, 

come 

With  bay  steeds  to  our  flowing  juice  ! 

3 Pot,  Vritra-slayer,  thou  art  he  who  drinks  these  drops 

of  Soma  : come 

With  bay  steeds  to  our  flowing  juice  1 

XI.  Indra. 

Bring  to  the  wise,  the  great,  who  waxeth  mighty 
your  offerings  and  make  ready  your  devotion* 

Go  forth  to  many  tribes  as  man’s  controller  ! 

2 For  Indra  the  sublime,  tfie  far-pervading,  have 

singers  generated  prayer  and.  praises: 

The  sages  never  violate  his  statutes. 

3 The  choirs  have  atablished  Indra  King  for  ever, 

for  victory  him  whose  anger  is  resistless  : 

And  for  the  bays’  Lord  strengthened  those  he  loveth. 


^tigveda  VII T.  82.  31 — 33.  The  Rishi  is  Sukaksha.  The  metre  is 
Gayatrt.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  1.  ii.  ii.  1.  6. 


Rigveda  VII.  31.  10—12.  The  Rishi  is  Vasishtha.  The  metre  is 
Viraj.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iv.  i.  4.  6. 

3 Strengthened : ‘ harhayi  for  abarhayan,  as  is  clear  from  what  pre- 
cedes.’— Ludwig. ^ Sayana  takes  barhayd  as  the  imperative:  ‘urge 
thy  kinsmen,  (worshipper,  to  glorify)  the  lord  of  bay  steeds.’ — Wilson. 


824 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


{PART  II. 


XII.  Indra. 

If  I,  0 Indra,  were  the  lord  of  riches  ample  as  thintf 
own, 

I  would  support  the  singer,  God  who  *scatterest 
wealth!  and  not  abandon  him  to  woe.  ° 

2  Each  day  would  I enrich  the  man  who  sang  my 
praise,  in  whatsoever  place  he  were. 

No  kinship  is  there  better,  Maghavan,  than  thine : 
a father  even  is  no  more. 

XIII.  Indra. 
Hear  thou  the  call  of  the  juice-drinking  press-stone  : 

mark  thou  the  sage’s  hymn  who  sings  and  lauds  thee  ! 
Take  to  thine  inmost  self  these  adorations ! 

2 I know  and  ne’er  forget  the  hymns  and  praises  of 

thee,  the  conqueror,  of  thy  power  immortal. 
t Thy  name  I ever  utter,  self-refulgent ! 

3 Among  mankind  many  are  thy  libations,  and  many  a 

time  the  pious  sage  invokes  thee. 

O Maghavan,  be  not  long  distant  from  us ! 

XIV.  Indra. 
Sing  strength  to  Indra  that  shall  set  his  chariot  in 

the  foremost  place  ! 

Giver  of  room  in  closest  fight,  slayer  of  foes  in  shock  of 
war,  be  thou  our  great  encourager!  Let  the  weak 
bowstrings  break  upon  the  bovvsof  our  weak  enemies! 

Rigveda  VII.  32.  v8,  19.  The  Rishi  is  Vasishtha.  The  metre  is 
Brihati  in  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  I.  iv.  i.  2.  8,  and  Satobri- 
hati  in  stanza  2. 


Rigveda  VII.  22.  4 — 6.  The  Rishi  is  Vasishtha.  The  metre  is  Viraj. 
1 Juice-drinking  : that  presses  out  the  juice  of  the  Soma  plant,  and 
bo  may  be  said  to  drink  it.  The  Scholiast  inserts  mama , of  me : ‘ Hear 
the  invocation  of  the  (grinding)  stone  (of  mo)  repeatedly  drinking  (the 
Soma).’ — Wilson. 

Rigveda  X.  133.  1 — 3.  The  Rishi  is  Sudis.  The  metre  is  Sakvari. 


ix.  i.  16.J 


THE  SJlfA  VEDA. 


325 


2 Thou  didst  destroy  the  Dragon : thou  sentest  the 

rivers  down  to  Earth. 

Foeless,  O Indra,  wast  thou  born.  Thou  tendest 
well*  each  choicest  thing.  Therefore  wo  draw  us 
close  to  thee.  Let  the  weak  bowstrings  break 
upon  the  bows  of  our  weak  enemies  ! 

3 Destroyed  be  all  malignities  and  all  our  enemy’s  designs! 
Thy  bolt  tfyou  castest  at  the  foe,  O Indra,  who  would 

smite  us  dead  : thy  liberal  bounty  gives  us  wealth. 
Let  the  weak  bowstrings  break  upon  the  bows  of 
our  weak  enemies  ! 


XV.  Indra. 

Rich  be  the  praiser  of  one  rich  and  liberal,  Lord  of 
, bays ! like  thee  : 

High  rank  be  his  who  lauds  the  juice  ! 

2 His  wealth  who  hath  no  store  of  kine  hath  ne’er 

found  out  recited  laud, 

Nor  song  of  praises  that  is  sung. 

3 Give  us  not,  Indra,  as  a prey  unto  the  scornful  or 

the  proud  : 

Help,  mighty  one,  with  powel*  land  might! 

XVI.  Indra. 

Come  hither,  Indra,  with  thy  bays,  come  thou  to 
Kanva’s  eulogy  ! 

Ye  by  command  of  yonder  Dyaus,  God  bright  by 
day  ! have  gone  to  heaven. 

— 

2 The  Dragon  : Ahi,  the  demon  of  drought. 


Rigvcda  VIII.  2.  13 — 15.  The  Pishis  are  Medhatithi  and  Priya- 
medha.  The  metre  is  G&yatri.  Stanza  2 is  a repetition  of  I.  iii.  i.  4*  3. 

1 Who  lauds  the  juice:  stotd , the  praiser,  being  repeated  from  line  1. 
Instead  of  sutasya  the  Rigveda  has  srutasya  : — * Rich  be  the  praiser  of 
one  rich,  munificent,  and  famed  like  thee  : High  rank  be  his,  O Lord 
of  bays ! , 


Jtigy^da  VIII.  1,  3,  2.  The  Rishi  is  Nipatithi.  The  metre  i a 
G&yatri.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  1.  iv.  ii.  1.  7. 


826  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  1L 

2 The  stones*  rim  shakes  the  Soma  here  like  a wolf 
* worrying*  a sheep.  ' 

Ye  by  command  of  yonder  Dyaus,  God  bright  by 
dayl  have  gone  to  heaven, 

8 May  the  stone  bring  thee  as  it  speaks,  the  Soma- 
stone  with  ringing  voice ! 

Ye  by  command  of  yonder  Dyaus,  God  bright  by 
day!  have  gone  to  heaven, 

XVII.  Soma  Pavamana, 

For  Indra  flow  most  rich  in  sweets,  O Soma,  bring- 
ing him  delight ! 

2 Bright,  meditating  sacred  song,  these  juices  have 

sent  V&yu  forth. 

3 They  were  sent  forth  to  feast  the  Gods,  like  chariots 

speeding  in  the  raoe. 

XVIII.  Agni. 

Agni  I deem  our  Hotar-priest,  munificent  wealth- 
giver,  Son  of  Strength,  who  knoweth  all  that  is, 
even  as  the  Sage^who  knoweth  all. 

Lord  of  fair  rites,  a God  with  form  erected  turning 
to  the  Gods,  he  when  the  flame  hath  sprung  forth 
from  the  holy  oil,  the  offered  fatness,  longs  for  it 
as  it  grows  bright. 


3 Bring  thee:  instead  of  vakshatu  the  Rigveda  lists  yachhatu,  ‘guide.’ 


Rigveda^IX.  67.  16,  18,  17,  ,JFhe  Rishi  is  Jamadagni,  The  metre 
is  Dvipadfi.  G&yatri. 

2 Meditating  sacred  song : vipaschitah : the  Rigveda  ha&  madintamdh 
‘best  givers  of  delight.’  Have  sent  Vdyu  forth:  have  drawn  him  down 
from  heaven.  ‘Are  let  forth  for  Yky u.’ — Wilson. 

Rigveda  I.  127.  1 — 3..  The  Rishi  is  Paruchchhepa.  The  metre  is 
Atyashti.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  v.  li.  3.  9, 


ix.  ii.  1.] 


THE  SJMA  VEDA. 


327 


2 We,  sacrificing,  call  on  the  best  worshipper,  thee 

eldest  of  Angi rasas,  singer  ! with,  hymns,  thee, 
brilliant  one!  with  singers*  hymns; 

Thee,*  wandering  round,  as  ’twere,  the  asky,  thee 
who  art  Hotar-priest  of  men,  whom,  Bull  with 
hair  of  flame,  the  people  must  observe,  the  people 
that  he  speed  them  on. 

3 He  with  fyis  blazing  power  refulgent  far  and  wide, 

he  verily  it  is  who  conquers  demon  foes,  conquers 
the  demons  like  an  axe  : 

At  whose  close  touch  things  solid  part,  and  what  is 
stable  yields  like  trees.  Subduing  all  he  keeps  Jjis 
^groand  and  flinches  not,  from  the  skilled  archer 
flinches  not. 


CHAPTER  II. 

I.  Agni. 

O Agni,  strength  and  fame  are  thine  : thy  fires  blaze 
forth  on  high,  O thou  refiilgent  God  ! 

Sage,  passing  bright,  thou  givest  to  the  worshipper, 
with  power,  the  wealth  that  merits  laud. 

2 With  brilliant,  purifying  sheen,’  with  perfect  sheen 
thou  liftest  up  thyself  in  light. 

Thou,  visiting  both  thy  mothers,  aidest  them  as  son: 
thou  joinest  close  the  earth  and  heaven. 


2 Angirasas:  a semi-divine  priestly  family,’ the  typical  first  sacri- 
ficers,  whose  ritual  is  the  pattern  which  later  priests  must  follow. 

3 Demon  foes:  Dmhs,  or  evil  am!  hostile  spirits.  From  the  skilled 
archer  flinches  not : not  even  a strong  man  armed  with  his  conquering 
bow  can  turn  him  from  his  course. 

Rigveda  X.  140.  1 — 6.  The  Rishi  is  Agni  P&vaka.  The  metre  is 
Visht&rapankti  (8  + 12  + 12  + 8)  in  stanza  1;  Satobrihati  in  2 — 4; 
Uparishtajjyotifjll  in  5;  and  Trishtup  in  6. 

2 Doth  thy  mothers:  heaven  and  earth.  Joinest  close : or,  * satisfiest  J 


328  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  IL 

3 O J&ta  vedas,  Son  of  Strength,  rejoice  thyself,  gra- 

cious, in  aur  fair  hymns  and  songs! 

In  thee  have  they  heaped  viands  various,  many- 
formed  ; wealth-born,  of  wondrous  help  are  they. 

4 Agni,  spread  forth,  as  ruler,  over  living  things : give 

wealth  to  us,  immortal  God ! 

Thou  shinest  out  from  beauty  fair  to  look  upon  : 
thou  leadest  us  to  beauteous  power.  r 

5 I laud  the  Sage,  who  orders  sacrifice,  who  hath  great 

riches  under  his  control. 

Thou  givest  blest  award  of  good,  and  plenteous  food, 
thou  givest  wealth  that  wins  success. 

6 The  men  have  set  before  them,  for  his  favour,  Agni, 

strong,  visible  to  all,  the  holy. 

Thee,  Lord  divine,  with  ears  to  hear,  most  famous, 
mens'  generations  magnify  with  praise-songs. 

II.  Agni. 

Agni,  he  conquers  by  thine  aid  that  brings  him 
store  of  valiant  sons  and  does  great  deeds, 

Whose  bond  of  friendship  is  thy  choice. 

2 Thy  spark  is  black. and  crackling;  kindled  in  due 
time,  O bounteous,  it  is  taken  up. 

Thou  art  the  dear  friend  of  the  mighty  Mornings : 
thou  shinest  in  glimmerings  of  the  night. 


5 I laud:  or,  We  praise:  not  in  the  text,  but  apparently  necessary  to 
complete  the  sentence.  * Such  ellipses  are  occasionally  found  in  the  Veda. 

Rigveda  VIII.  19.  30.  31.  The  Rishi  is  Sobhari.  The  metre  is 
Kakup  in  stanza  1,  which  is  a repetition  of  I.  ii.  i.  2.  2,  and  Satobyi- 
hati  in  stanza  2. 

2 Thy  spark  is  black : the  meanings  of  drapsah  and  nilavdn  here 
are  uncertain,  and  the  translation  of  the  line,  which  follows  Professor 
Ludwig’s  explanation,  is  somewhat  conjectural.  Sfcyana’s  interpreta- 
tion is  different: — *0  recipient  of  divine  service,  the  watery,  cart- 
conveved,  spring-produced,  shining  god  is  offered  up  to  thee.’ — Stevenson. 


ix.  ii.  6.] 


THE  SAMAVEDA. 


329 


III.  Agni. 

Him,  duly  coming,  as  their  germ  have  plants  received  : 

this  Agni  have  maternal  Waters  brought  to  life. 
So,  in*  like  manner,  do  the  forest  trees  and  plants 
bear  him  within  them  and  produce  him  evermore. 

IV.  Agni. 
Agni  growg  bright  for  Indra  : he  shines  far  resplen- 
dent in  the  sky  : 

He  sends  forth  offspring  like  a queen. 

V.  Ag*u. 
The  safcred  hymns  love  him  who  wakes  and  watches : 

to  him  who  watches  come  the  holy  verses. 

This  Soma  saith  to  him  who  wakes  ’and  watches, 
I rest  and  have  my  dwelling  in  thy  friendship. 

VI.  Agni. 

Agni  is  watchful,  and  the  Richas  love  him : Agni  is 
watchful,  Sama  hymns  approach  him. 

Agni  is  watchful,  to  him  saith  this  Soma.  I rest  and 
have  my  dwelling  in  thy  friendship. 


Rigveda  X.  91.  6.  The  Kishi  is  Aruna.  The  metre  is  Jagati. 

1 Agni  is  produced  in  the  form  of  lightning  by  the  waters  of  the 
firmament,  or  the  clouds,  and  descends  with  the  rain  into  plants  and  trees, 
from  the  wood  of  which  he  is  brought  forth  as  sacrificial  fire  by  attrition. 

The  stanza  is  not  taken  from  the  Rigveda.  The  metre  is  Gayatri. 

1 According  to  Say  ana  the  meaning  of  the  second  line  is,  He  pro- 
duces various  sorts  of  food  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  Gods,  like  a 
buffalo-cow : mahishi,  great  or  powerful  female,  meaning  both  queen- 
consort  and  buffalo-cow. 


Rigveda  V.  44.  14.  The  Kishi  is  Avatsara.  The  metre  is  Trishtup. 
1 Holy  vetoes : sdmdni  : Samas,  hymns,  or  songs  of  praise. 

Rigveda  V.  44.  /5.  Tho  Kishi  is  Avatsara.  The  metre  is  Trishtup. 
1 Richas : plural  of  rich , a verse  of  praise. 


S30 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  II. 


VII.  Gods. 

Praise  to  the  friends  who  sit  in  front ! to  those  seated* 
together,  praise : 

I  use  the  hundred-footed  speech. 

2 I use  the  hundred-footed  speech,  I sing  what  bath  a 

thousand  paths, 

G&yatra,  Trishtup,  Jagat  hymn. 

3 Gstyatra,  Trishtup,  Jagat  hymn,  the  farms  united  and 

complete, 

Have  the  Gods  made  familiar  friends. 

VIII.  # Agni. 

Agni,  is  light,  light  is  Agni,  India  is  light,  fight  is 
Indra,  , 

Sflrya  is  light,  light  is  Surya. 

£ O Agni,  turn  again  with  strength,  turn  thou  again 
with  food* and  life  : 

Save  us  again  from  grief  and  woe  ! 

3 0 Agni,  turn  again  with  wealth : sprinkle  thou  us 
from  every  side 

With  thine  own  dll-supporting  stream ! 


The  hymn  is  not  taken  from  the  Rigveda.  The  metre  is  Gayatri, 
somewhat  irregular  in  stanza  1 , 

1 The  friends  who  sit  in  front : the  friendly  Gods  who  sit  in  the  fore- 
most place  at  sacrifice,  or  who,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  have  taken 
their  seats  before  the  beginning  of  the  sacrifice.  Hundred-footed : 
having  countless  feet#or  measures ; meaning,  according  to  the  Scholiast, 
much  the  same  as  ‘ what  hath  a thousand  paths,’  i.  e.  producing  good 
results  for  us  by  an  infinite  number  of  ways. 

3 Made  familiar  friends : literally,  made  their  homes  or  places  of 
* delight ; i.  e.  the  Gods  have  become  accustomed  to,  and  take  delight  in, 
hymns  in  the  Gayatri,  Trishtup,  and  Jagati  metres. 


TheJiymn  is  not  taken  from  the  Rigveda.  The  metre  is  G&yatri. 
Stanzas  2 and  3 occur  in  the  Yajurveda.  ^ 

1 Agni  is  thus  identified  with  Indra  who  is  identified  with  Sfirya 
the  Sun-god. 


ix.  ii.  11.] 


THE  SlMAVEDA. 


331 


IX.  Indra. 

If  I,  O Indra,  were,  like  thee,  the  siftgle  ruler  ’over 
wealth 

My  w&rshipper  should  be  rich  in  kine. 

2 I should  be  fain,  O Lord  of  power,  to  strengthen  and 

enrich  the  sage, 

Were  I the  lord  of  herds  of  kine. 

3 Thy  goodness,  Indra,  is  a cow  yielding  in  plenty  kine 

and  steeds 

To  worshippers  who  press  the  juice. 

X.  The  Wat  era. 

* 

YpA,  Waters,  ye  bring  health  and  bliss : so  help  ye 
us  to  energy 

That  we  may  look  on  great  delight! 

2 Give  us  a portion  of  the  dew,  the  most  auspicious 
that  ye  have, 

Like  mothers  in  their  longing  love! 

8 For  you  wo  gladly  go  to  him  to  whose  abode  ye 
speed  us  on, 

And,  Waters,  give  us  procreant  strength ! 

XI,  Vata. 

May  V&ta  breathe  his  balm  on  us,  healthful,  delight- 
ful to  our  heart ; 

May  he  prolong  our  days  of  life ! 

Rigveda  VIII.  14,  1 — 3,  The  Rishis  are  Gosliuktin  and  Asvasuktin. 
The  metro  is  Gayatri. 

Rigveda  X.  9.  1—3.  The  Rishi  is  Sindhudvipa,  or  Trisiras,  son  of 
Tvashtar.  The  metro  is  Gayatri, 

1 Great  delight : meaning,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  perfect  know- 
ledge of  Brahma. 

2 Of  the  dew  : rasasya : or,  of  the  juice  or  moisture,  meaning  the  rain. 

3 The  meaning  of  the  first  line  is  obscure.  1 The  purport  is  possibly 
a recommendation  to  be  regular  in  practising  ablution.’ — Wilson. 

Rigveda  X.  18p.  1 — 3.  The  Rishi  is  Ula.  The  metre  is  Gayatri, 
Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  ii.  ii.  4.  10, 

I Vdta ; the  God  of  Wind. 


332  THE  HYMNS  OF  [PART  IL 

2 Thou  art  our  father,  V&ta,  yea,  thou  art  our  brother 
• and  our  friend  : 

So  give  us  strength  that  we  may  live  f 

3 The  store  of  Amrit  laid  away  yonder,  OV&ta,  in 

thine  home — 

Give  us  thereof  that  we  may  live  I 

XII.  Agni. 

The  fleet  steed  wearing  divers  forms,  the  eagle  bear- 
ing his  golden  raiment  to  his  birthplace, 

Clothed  in  due  season  with  the  light  of  S&rya,  red, 
hath  begot  the  sacrifice  in  person. 

2?  Multiform  seed  he  laid  in  waters,  lustre  which 
gathered  on  the  earth  and  there  developed.  * 

In  the  mid-air  establishing  his  greatness,  he  cries 
aloud,  seed  of  the  vigorous  courser. 

3 He  hath,  enduing  thousand  robes  that  suit  him,  as 

• sacrifice  upheld  the  light  of  Surya, 

Giver  of  ample  gifts  in  hundreds,  thousands,  sup- 
porter of  the  heavens,  earth’s  Lord  and  ruler. 

* XIII.  Vena. 

They  gaze  on  thee*  \Vith  longing  in  their  spirit,  as  on 
a strong-winged  bird  that  mounteth  sky-ward ; 

On  thee  with  wings  of  gold,  Yaruna’s  envoy,  the 
Bird  that  hasteneth  to  the  home  of  Yama. 

3 The  store  of  Amrit : of  the  drink  of  immortality.  Instead  of 
amritam  nihitam  guhd  the  Rigveda  has  amritasya  nidkir  kitah , ‘ the 
treasure  of  the  immortal  which  is  placed,  etc.’ — Max  Muller. 

• 

This  hymn  is  not  taken  from  the  Rigveda.  The  metre  is  Trishtup. 

1 The  fleet  steed : or,  the  strong  one.  The  eagle  : or,  fair-pinioned ; 
both  words  vdji  and  suparnnh  lfieaning  Agni.  His  birthplace:  the 
% heavens.  The  sacrifice  : medhani , meaning  especially  animal  sacrifice. 

3 Rohes  that  suit  him : his  own  appropriate  flames.  There  is  no 
substantive  in  the  text. 


Rigveda  X.  123.  6 —8.  The  Rishi  is  said  to  be  Vena,  son  of  Bhrigu. 
The  metre  is  Trishtup.  Stanza  1 is  a repetition  of  I.  iv.  i.  3.  8.  Vena, 
the  deity  of  the  original  hymn,  is,  apparently,  the  Surras  he  rises  in  the 
mist  and  dew  of  the  morning.  The  name  does  not  occur  in  this  extract. 


ix.  iii.  1>]  THE  tiJlIA  VEDA.  333 

2 Erect,  to  heaven  hath  the  Gandharva  mounted, 
pointing  at  us  his  many-coloured  weapons : 

Clad  in  sweet  raiment  beautiful  to  look  on,  for  he, 
as  light,  produceth  forms  that  please  us., 

S'  When  as  a spark  he  cometh  near  the  ocean,  looking 
with  vulture’s  eye  as  Law  commandeth, 

His  lustre,  joying  iti  its  own  bright  splendour, 
makoth  $ear  glories  in  the  loftiest  region. 

CHAPTER  III. 

I*  Ind*-a. 

Swift, ‘Vapidly  striking,  like  a bull  who  sharpens  his 
horns,  terrific,  stirring  up  the  people, 

With  eyes  that  close  not,  bellowing,  sole  hero,  Indra 
subdued  at  once  a hundred  armies. 

2 With  him  loud-roaring,  ever  watchful,  victor,  boM, 

hard  to  overthrow,  rouser  of  battle, 

Indra  the  strong,  whose  hand  bears  arrows,  conquer, 
ye  heroes,  now,  now  vanquish  in  the  combat! 

3 He  rules  with  those  who  ca^ry  shafts  and  quivers, 

Indra  who  with  his  band  brings  hosts  together, 
Foe-conquering,  strong  of  arm,'  the  Soma-drinker, 
with  mighty  bow,  shooting  with  well-laid  arrows. 


2 The  Gandharva  : Vena,  the  rising  Sun. 

3 The  ocean : the  sea  of  air. 

The  original  hymn  is  one  of  the  obscurest  m the  whole  Rigveda. 
The  Oommentcr  Mahidhara  interprets  Vena  by  chandra,  the  Moon. 
Professor  Wilson  says  : ‘ The  general  purport  of  the  Siikta  [hymn] 
makes  it  [Vena]  equivalent  to  the  thunder-cloud.’  Professor  Roth, 
whom  Professor  Grassmann  follows,  identifies  Vena  Gandharva  with 
the  Rainbow.  According  to  Professor  Ludwig,  Vena  is  the  Moon  and 
the  Gandharva  is  the  Sun.  Mr.  Wallis  has  translated  and  explained 
the  original  hymn  in  his  Cosmology  of  the  Rigveda , pp.  34  ff. 

Rigveda  X.  10$.  1 — 3.  The  Rishi  is  Apratiratha,  son  of  Indra. 
The  metre  is  Tr^htup.  The  original  hymn  is  a prayer  for  aid  and 
victory  in  a coming  battle. 


334 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  1L 


II.  Bvihaspati.  In  dm. 

Bijihaspati®  fly  with  thy  chariot  hrther,  slayer  of* 
demons,  driving  off  ouiv  foe  men  ! 

Be  thou  protector  of  our  cars,  destroyer, « victor  in 
battle,  breaker-up  of  armies  ! 

2 Conspicuous  by  thy  strength,  firm,  foremost  fighter, 

niightyand  fierce,  victorious,  all-subduing, 

The  Son  of  Conquest,  passing  men  aiyd  heroes,  kine- 
winner,  mount  thy  conquering  car,  O Indra! 

3 Cleaver  of  stalls,  kine-winner,  armed  with  thunder, 

who  quells  an  army  and  with  might  destroys  it — 
Follow  him,  brothers!  quit  yourselves  like  heroes, 
and  like  this  Indra  show  your  zeal  and  courage  ! 

III.  Indra.  Brifcaspati. 

Pi  rrcino  with  conquering  strength  the  cow-stalls, 
Indra,  pitiless  hero  with  unbounded  anger, 

Victor  in  fight,  unshaken  and  resistless — may  he 
protect  our  armies  in  our  battles  ! 

2 India  guide  these : 'Brihaspati,  and  Soma,  the  guer- 

don, and  the  sacrifice  precede  them  ; 

And  let  the  banded  Maruts  march  in  forefront  of 
heavenly  hosts  that  conquer  and  demolish! 

3 Ours  be  the  potent  host  of  mighty  Indra,  King 

Varuna,  the  Maruts,  and  Adityas! 

Uplifted  is  the  shout  of  Gods  who  conquer,  high- 
minded  Gods  who  cause  the  worlds  to  tremble. 


Uigveda  X.  103.  4 — 6.  A continuation  of  I.  The  liishi  and  metre 
are  the  same.  # 

1 Brihaspati  : the  Lord  of  Prayer,  frequently  addressed  together 
with  Indra,  appears  here  as  a militant  deity.  - 

lligveda  X.  103.  7 — 9.  A continuation  of  II.  The  Rishi  and  metro 
are  the  same. 

*2  Guide  these : he  the  lead  t of  our  men.  The  guerdon : dakshind : 
the  honorarium  bestowed  upon  the  priests  who  pferform  the  sacrifice 
before  battle 


\x.  iii.  5i] 


THE  SJMAVEDA. 


335 


IV.  India.  Maruts. 

Bristle  thou  up,  O Maghavan,  our  weapons : e&cite 
the  spirits  of  my  warring  heroes  ! 

Urge*on  the  strong  steed's  might,  O Vrkra-slayer, 
and  let  the  din  of  conquering  cars  go  upward  ! 

2 May  Indra  aid  us  when  our  flags  are  gathered  : 

victorious  be  the  arrows  of  our  army1! 

May  our  b*ave  men  of  war  prevail  in  battle.  Ye 
Gods,  protect  us  in  the  shout  of  onset ! 

3 That  army  of  the  foemen,  O ye  Maruts,  which, 

striving  in  its  mighty  strength,  approaches. 

Hide  ye  and  bury  it  in  pathless  darkness  that  not*  a 
'man  of  them  may  know  the  other  ! 

V.  Agha. 

Bewildering  the  senses  of  our  foemen,  seize  thou 
their  bodies  and  depart,  O Agh&  !% 

Attack  them,  set  their  hearts  on  fire  with  sorrows  : 
so  let  our  foes  abide  in  utter  darkness  ! 

2 Advance,  O heroes,  win  the  day.  May  Indra  be 
your  sure  defence  ! • * 

Mighty  and  awful  be  your’ arms,  that  none  may 
wound  or  injure  you  ! 


Rigveda  X.  103.  10,  11.  Stanza  3 is  not  taken  from  the  Rigveda. 
The  Rishi  and  metre  are  the  same. 

2 When  our  fiage  are  gathered:  ‘apparently  comparable  with  the 
signis  collatis  of  the  Romans.’ — Ludwig. 


Stanzas  1 and  2 are  taken  from  Rigveda  X.  103.  12,  13,  concluding 
the  whole  original  hymn  comprised  in  I. — V.  2.  The  Rishi  is  the 
same.  The  metre  is  Trishtup  in  stanza  1 and  Anushtup  in  2.  Stanza 
3 is  taken  from  Rigveda  VT.  75.  16,  ascribed  to  the  Rishi  Payu.  The 
metre  is  Trishtup.  In  the  Rigveda  the  deity  of  stanza  1 is  Apva, 
said  by  Sayana  to  be  a deity  presiding  over  sin,  and  by  Mahidhara  to 
mean  sickness,  oj  fear. 

1 A ghd : Sin,  personified.  The  Rigveda  has  apve,  0 Apva. 


336 


THE  HYMNS  OF 


[PART  II. 


3 Loosed  from  the  bowstring  fly  away,  thou  arrow, 
r sharpened  by  our  prayer  ! * 

Go  to  the  foemen,  strike  them  home,  and  let  not  one 
be  le/t  alive  ! 

VI.  Indra  and  others. 

Let  ravens  and  strong-pinioned  birds  pursue  them  : 
yea,  let  that  army  be  the  food  of  vultures  ! 

Indra,  let  none  escape,  no  sin-remover  : behind  them 
all  let  following  birds  be  gathered  ! w 

2 This  host  of  foemen,  Maghavan  ! that  cometli  on  in 

warlike  show — , 

* Meet  it,  O Vritra-slayer,  thou,  Indra,  and  Agni, 
with  your  flames  ! , 

3 There  where  the  flights  of  arrows  fall  like  boys  whose 

locks  are  yet  unshorn, 

Even  there  may  Brahmanaspati,  rnay  Aditi  protect 
us  well,  protect  us  well  through  all  our  days  ! 

VII.  Indra. 

Drive  Rakshasas  and  foes  away,  break  thou  in 
pieces  Vritra’s  jaws  : 

O Vritra-slaying  Indra,  quell  the  foeman’s  wrath 
who  threatens  us  J 

Stanza  3 is  taken  from'Rigveda  VI.  75.  17,  ascribed  to  Payu. 

Stanzas  1 and  2 are  not  taken  from  the  Rigveda.  The  metre  is 
Trishtup  in  stanza  1 \ Anushtup  in  2,  anil  Pankti  in  3. 

1 Rave?is : kankdh : usually,  herons ; hut  carrion-eaters  seem  to  be 
intended.  Sin-remover : aghahdrah  : meaning,  perhaps,  priest ; pious 
man,  according  to  Sayan  a. 

3 Like  boy 8 whose  Idcks  are  yet  unshorn:  ‘The  point  of  the  com- 
parison is  not  very  obvious,  but  it  may  mean  that  the  arrows  fall 
where  they  list,  as  boys  before  tljey  are  left  with  the  lock  of  hair, 
before  the  religious  tonsure,  play  about  wherever  they  like.’ — Wilson. 
Professor  Roth  separates  visikhd  from  kvmdrd,  and  translated : 4 Where 
the  arrows  fly,  young  and  old;'  that  is,  feathered  and  unfeathered. 

Stanzas  1 and  2 are  taken  from  Rigveda  X.  152.  3,  4,  ascribed  to 
Indra's  Mothers,  the  Consorts  of  the  Gods.  The  metre  is  Anushtup. 
The  metre  of  stanza  3,  which  is  not  in  the  Rigveda,  is  Viradjagati 
(11  + 11  + 12+12).  ' •* 

1 Rdka/utsas : demons  hostile  to  man. 


ix.  iii.  8.] 


THE  SAMA  VEDA . 


337 


2 0 Indra,  beat  our  foes  away,  humble  the  men  who 

challenge  us  : 

Send  down  to  nether  darkness  him  who  seeks  to  do 
us  ihjury  ! 

3 Strong,  ever-youthful  are  the  arms  of  Indra,  fair 

unassailable,  never  to  be  vanquished  : 

These  first  let  him  employ  when  need  bath  come  on 
us,  wherbwith  the  Asuras’  great  might  was  over- 
thrown. 

VIII.  Soma.  Varuna. 

Thy  vital  parts  I cover  with  thine  armour  : wiih 
immortality  King  Soma  clothe  thee  ! 

Varuna  give  thee  what  is  more  than  qmple,  and  in 
'thy  victory  may  Gods  be  joyful ! 

2 Blind,  O my  foemen,  shall  ye  be,  even  as  headless 

serpents  are  : 

May  Indra  slay  each  best  of  you  when  Agnis  flame 
hath  struck  you  down  ! 

3 Whoso  would  kill  us,  whether  he  be  a strange  foe  or 

one  of  us, 

May  all  the  Gods  discomfit  him  ! My  nearest,  closest 
mail  is  prayer,  my  closest  armour  and  defence. 


3 The  Asuras'  great  might : the  As uras  here  are  demons  who  live  in 
perpetual  hostility  with  the  Gods,  a comparatively  late  sense  of  the 
word. 


Stanzas  1 and  3 are  taken  from  Rigveda  VI.  75.  18,  19,  ascribed  to 
Payu.  Stanza  2 is  not  from  the  Rigveda.  The  metre  is  Trishtup  in 
stanza  1 and  Pankti  in  3. 

1 Armour : the  varman , coat  of  mail,  or  defensive  armour,  protected 
the  shoulders,  back,  chest,  and  lower  parts  of  the  body. 

2 Agni't  flame : t)ie  lightning. 

3 In  the  Rigveda  this  .stanza  is  in  the  Anushtup  metre,  and  ends 
with  the  word  ‘prayer.’ 


338 


THE  S AMAVEDA. 


[PART  II. 


IX.  Tndrn.  All-Gods. 

Like  a dretd  wild  beast  roaming  on  the  mountain* 
thou  hast  approached  us  from  the  farthest  distance. 
Whetting  thy  bolt  and  thy  sharp  blade,  *0  Indra, 
crush  thou  the  foe  and  scatter  those  who  hate  Us  ! 

2 Gods,  may  our  ears  hear  that  which  is  auspicious, 

may  our  eyes  see  that  which  is  good,  ye  holy  ! 
Extolling  you  with  still  strong  limbs  and  bodies, 
may  we  attain  the  age  by  Gods  appointed  ! 

3 Illustrious  far  and  wide,  may  Indra  bless  us,  may 

PUshan  bless  us,  master  of  all  riches  ! 

May  T&rkshya  with  uninjured  fellies  ble^s  us  ! Bri- 
haspati  bestow  on  us  his  favour!  Brihaspati  bestow 

on  us  his  favour  ! 

« 


w Stanza  1 is  taken  from  Rigveda  X.  180.  2,  ascribed  to  Jaya.  The 
metre  is  Trislitup.  Stanzas  2 and  3 are  taken  from  Rigveda  I.  89. 
8,  6.  The  Rishi  is  Gotama.  The  metre  is  Trishtup  in  2,  and  Virat- 
sthana,  a variety  of  Trishtup  shortened  by  two  syllables,  in  3.  The 
stanza,  which  1 have  treaty  as  ordinary  Trishtup  with  an  additional 
’Pada,  ends,  in  the  Rigveda,  with  the  first  ‘ favour.’ 

2 The  age  by  Gods  anointed : according  to  the  Commentator,  one 
hundred  an<J  sixteen,  or  one  hundred  and  twenty  years.  Prayers  for 
life  extending  to  a hundred  winters,  or  autumns,  frequently  occur  in 
the  Rigveda.  The  stanza  which  follows  in  the  original  hymn  is  more 
explicit : ‘ A hundred  autumns  stand  before  us,  O yc  Gods,  within 
whose  space  ye  briny  our  bodies  to  decay  ; Within  whose  space  our 
sons  become  fathers  in  turn ; break  ye  not  in  the  midst  our  course 
of  fleeting  life  ! 1 

3 Tdrkshya : usually  described  as  a divine  horse,  and  probably  a 
personification  of  the  Sun.  Whose  fellies  are  uninjured  : arishtanemih  : 
taken  by  Benfey  as  a Proper  Name,  Tarkshya  Arishtanemi : * the  ring 
of  whose  chariot-wheel  could  not  be  cut.’ — Stevenson. 


APPENDICES. 


T.  Index  ok  Hymns. 

II.  List  of  References  to  the  Rjgveda. 

III.  List  of  Stanzas  not  found  in  the  Rigveda. 

IV.  Index  of  Nam.-s,  Etc. 


I.  INDEX  OF  HYMNS' 


FART  I. 

T.  i.  1,  Agni 

» » 2,  ■ 

» » 3,  » » 

» * 4,  » 

« * 5,  n 

» ii.  1 , n 

■ ■ 2,  » 

n » , 3#u  a 

v ii  4f  » 

" ■ 5,  " 


Page 

1 

3 

5 

8 

10 

12 

!4 

17 

19 

20 


II.  i. 

n a 

H • 

if  it 

n it 


" ii. 


If  n 

II  II 

If  If 

K * 


1*  " 

2, 

3,  Indra 
4> 

5,  I mini,  the  Maiuts,  the  All-Gods,  Brahmanaspati, 
Savitar 

1,  Indra,  the  Maiuts,  Soma,  and  Puslian  ... 

2,  Indra. 

3,  » ... 

4,  Indra,  Dawn,  Vfita 

5,  Indra,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman,  Sarasvati 


23 

hi 

25 

27 

29 

31 

33 

34 


35 

37 


III.  i.  1,  Indra.  ...  ...  ...  39 

" " 2,  ...  ...  40 

* *»  3,  Indra,  Vanina,  Mitra,  Aryaman,  the  Maruts,  Dawn, 

Vishnu  ...  ...  42 

» w 4,  Indra  ...  ...  ...  44 

' '5,  •»  ...  ...  ...  <6  , 

* >>•  h * ...  ...  ...  48 

* • 2,  Indra,  Vamna,  Mitra,  Aryaman,  the  Maruts  ...  50 

* " 1 3,  Indra  ...  ...  ...  52 

" ' 4»  " - ...  ...  54 

" * * , ...  ...  ...  56 


IV.  i.  1^  Indra,  Tvashtar,  Brahmanaspati,  Parjanya,  Aditi,  the 
Adityas  ....  ...  ... 


59 


u 

INDEX  OP  HYMNS. 

Page 

IV  d. 

2, 

Indix,  Dawn,  the  Asvins  ... 

61  " 

II  0 

3, 

Indra,  Vena 

63 

H 0 

4, 

e Indra 

65 

9 0 

3} 

Indra,  Tarktshya,  Parvata  ... 

•37 

* iii. 

l, 

Indra 

69 

* 0 

2, 

Indra.  Dadhikravan 

71 

■ ■ 

3, 

Indra.  Soma.  Dawn.  The  Gods 

73 

N « 

4, 

Indra 

e 

75 

It  II 

•r>. 

n 

78 

V.  i. 

1, 

Indra.  Adityas 

81 

* " 

2, 

« 

82 

II  II 

3, 

0 

84 

n ii 

4, 

Agni.  Dawn.  Indra 

86 

0 p 

5. 

Soma  Pavamana 

88 

» ii. 

1, 

Indra 

90 

* 

2, 

Agni.  Indra 

91 

<4 

9 n 

3, 

Indra.*  Agni.  Vayu.  Vishnu.  The  Maruts.  Savitar... 

93 

0 N 

4. 

Soma  Pavamana 

96 

II  0 

5, 

■ ... 

97 

VI.  1. 

1. 

0 

99 

0 0 

2, 

II 

100 

0 II 

3, 

0 

102 

9 n 

4, 

0 

101 

H P 

5, 

0 

106 

»»  ii. 

1. 

U 

109 

• w 

o 

M . , „ 

111 

It  H 

3, 

■ 

114 

* » 

4, 

H 

115 

PiRT  II. 

I.  I. 

1, 

Soma  Pavamana 

...  . , . 

119 

n •» 

2, 

■ ... 

119 

H H 

3, 

II 

...  ... 

120 

H II 

4, 

Agni 

120 

n i 

5, 

6, 

Varuna  and  Mitra 

121 

H If 

Indra 

121 

w » 

7, 

Indra  and  Agni 

122 

0 H 

.8, 

Soma  Pavamana 

... 

122 

INDEX  OF  HYMN 

in 

Page 

I. 

i. 

9, 

Soma  Pavamana 

* . . 

123 

¥ 

w 

10, 

M 

...  123 

¥ 

K 

IV 

Indra 

...  123- 

II 

12, 

» 

..  124: 

'* 

N 

13, 

n 

. . 124 

n 

II 

U, 

y 

...  125 

H 

« 

15, 

Soma  Pavamana 

r 

...  125 

¥ 

II 

16, 

* ii 

..  126. 

H 

II 

17, 

Indra  . . 

..  126 

n 

» 

18, 

Soma  Pavamana 

..  127 

N 

II 

19, 

• 

..  127 

H 

n 

20, 

Agni 

...  #128 

II 

tn 

21,’ 

* 

..  128 

II 

ii 

23 

India 

...  129 

a 

, » 

23, 

a 

*.  . 

...  129 

H 

ii. 

1, 

y 

...  130 

¥ 

» 

•> 

l» 

...  130 

II 

» 

3, 

9 

...*131 

H 

n 

4, 

...  131 

M 

» 

5, 

II 

...  132 

« 

« 

0, 

It 

...  132% 

H 

« 

7, 

II 

...  133. 

M 

n 

8, 

" ’ * 

...  133 

H 

« 

9, 

'* 

..  134 

» 

n 

10, 

II 

...  134 

a 

n 

11, 

II 

...  135 

H 

ii 

12, 

« 

...  135- 

It 

« 

13, 

Agni  . . 

...  136 

¥ 

ii 

14, 

Dawn 

...  136 

H 

•i 

15, 

The  Asvins  . . 

...  136 

1' 

i. 

16, 

Soma  Pavamana 

. . 137 

I. 

y 

17, 

a ... 

...  137 

n 

n 

18, 

r*  W 

...  138 

ii 

y 

19, 

fi  . . 

...  138 

it 

n 

20, 

l* 

. 139 

V 

\ 

21, 

■ ... 

...  139 

n 

y 

22, 

H 

...  140 

ir/ 

i. 

1, 

Sojna  Pavamana 

. , . 

...  141 

... 

... 

...  m 

IY 


INDEX  OF  HYMNS. 


II. 

i.  3, 

Soma  Pavam ana 

Page 

...  142 

n 

* 4, 

...  142 

II 

" 5, 

. . . 

...  143 

II 

’ ®* 

•Agni 

...  143 

n 

* 

Mitra  and  Vanina 

...  143 

0 

- 8, 

Indra 

. . . 

...  144 

0 

- 9, 

Indus,  and  Agni 

...  145 

0 

» 10, 

Soma  Pavamana 

. • r 

...  145 

¥ 

• 11, 

H 

. . . 

...  146 

II 

» 12, 

Indra 

...  146 

¥ 

» 13, 

...  147 

* V 

t 

» 14, 

n 

...  147 

It 

15, 

Soma  Pavamana 

.r.  147 

¥ 

16, 

n 

... 

...  148 

m 

17, 

4 

...,  148 

*» 

18, 

Indra 

. • i 

...  149 

0 

19, 

* 

...  150 

■ i 

1, 

Soma  Pavamana 

...  150 

n 

2, 

...  151 

m 

3, 

0 

... 

. . . 

...  151 

0 

4, 

» • 

...  152 

0 

6, 

Agni 

...  152 

0 

6, 

Mitra  and  Variina 

...  153 

»» 

7, 

The  Maruls 

. • • 

...  153 

0 

8, 

Indra  and  Agni 

...  154 

0 

9, 

Soma  Pavamana 

...  155 

0 

10, 

» 

...  155 

0 

11, 

Indra 

...  156 

0 

12, 

n 

...  156 

• 

13, 

» • 

...  157 

0 

14, 

Soma  Pavamana 

...  157 

0 

15, 

H 

...  157 

0 

16, 

0 

...  158 

17, 

Agni 

. . . 

...  159 

0 

18, 

Indra 

. . . 

...  159 

n 

19, 

0 

... 

i6o 

in.  i 

1, 

Soma  Pavamana 

...  161 

n i 

O 

•“  J 

» 

c 

••  • i 

...  161 

0 1 

3, 

0 

...  162 

TNDKX  OF  ITYMXS. 


Pack 

• III. 

i. 

4,  Soma  Pa  vain  ana 

. ». 

...» 163 

n 

„ 

5,  M 

. . . 

...  163 

H 

n 

G',.  Agni 

... 

...  164 

W* 

0 

7,  Mitra  and  Varuna 

...  165 

b 

0 

8,  Indra 

... 

...  165 

0 

0 

9,  Indra  and  Agni 

... 

...  166 

b 

0 

10.  Soma  Pavamana 

, . 

/ 

...  166 

b 

0 

11, 

. . . 

...  167 

n 

0 

12, 

. . . 

... 

...  167 

b 

h 

1 3,  Indra 

...  168 

0 

a 

14, 

...  168 

0 

0 

15,  " 

. . . 

...  169 

0 

0f 

16.  • Soma  Pavamana 

. . . 

...  169 

0 

0 

17, 

... 

...  170 

0 

M 

18, 

» 

...  170 

0 

V 

19, 

...  171 

II 

0 

20,  Agni 

... 

... 

...  1*2 

0 

0 

21,  Indra 

...  172 

0 

H 

22  " 

...  173 

H 

ii. 

1,  Soma  Pavamana 

...  174 

H 

n 

2, 

» 

...  174 

0 

0 

3, 

• • •* 

. . . 

...  175 

0 

„ 

4,  • 

• . j 

...  176 

0 

0 

5, 

...  177 

0 

0 

6, 

...  177 

It 

0 

7,  Agni 

...  178 

0 

n 

8,  Mitra  and  Varuna 

...  178 

If 

n 

9,  Indra 

...  179 

0 

n 

10,  Indra  and  Agni 

•« . 

...  179 

0 

H 

11,  Soma  Pavamana 

. . . 

...  180 

0 

II 

12, 

...  180 

■ 

II 

13, 

«... 

...  181 

II 

• 

14,  IiMra 

. . . 

...  181 

0 

0 

15, 

... 

... 

...  182 

0 

0 

16,  Soma  Pavamana 

...  182 

0 

0 

17, 

... 

... 

...  183 

0 

0 

18, 

...  183 

» 

0 

19, 

...  184 

II 

0 

20, 

. . . 

...  185 

M 

0 

21,  Agni 

... 

...  185 

VI 


INMSX  OK  HYMNS. 


nr. 

•ii.  2*2, 

1 11(1 

Pam? 

186« 

• 

- 23, 

ll 

186 

IV. 

i.  1, 

* Sonia  Pavauiamt 

187 

0 

" 2, 

• 

... 

187 

n 

- 3, 

8 

188 

ii 

■ 4, 

R 

189 

ii 

« 5, 

% 

II 

... 

190 

H 

- 6, 

II 

f.  # 

m 

ii 

» 7, 

Agni 

191 

If 

» 8, 

Mitra,  Varuna,  Aryaman 

. . 

192 

M 

- 9, 

India 

192 

% 

H 

• 10, 

Indra  and  Agni 

193 

II 

■ 11, 

Soma  Pavamana 

«... 

19:5 

R 

* 12, 

» 

194 

0 

* is, 

J.  . 

191 

0 

- U, 

Indra 

194 

c 

■ 15, 

- 

195 

II 

■ 16, 

- 

196 

II 

- 17, 

Sonia  Pavamana 

196 

II 

. 18, 

i. 

. . . 

197 

II 

. 19, 

» 

197 

R 

» 20, 

" . . 

. . . 

197 

R 

- 21, 

M • 

198 

II 

- 22, 

Agni 

199 

II 

- 23, 

Indra 

199 

R 

» 24, 

it 

... 

... 

199 

H 

ii.  1, 

Soma  Pavamana 

. . . 

199 

R 

• 2, 

0 

202 

R 

- 3, 

Agni 

M. 

203 

R 

» 4, 

Mitra  and  Varuna 

204 

R 

■ 5, 

Indra 

... 

204 

II 

• 6, 

Indra  and  Agni  * 

... 

... 

205 

H 

■ 7, 

Soma  Pavamana 

... 

206 

It 

* 8, 

Indra 

... 

... 

206 

R 

. 9, 

Soma  Pavamana 

206 

R 

« 10, 

Sonia  Pavamana- 

• . • 

... 

207 

R 

- 11, 

R 

... 

207 

n 

- 12, 

Agni 

... 

*.  . . 

•v 

208 

R 

• 13, 

Indra 

• 

... 

208 

If 

*.14, 

n 

... 

208 

INDEX  OF  IIVMNS. 


VII 


Page 


i. 

1, 

Soma  Pavamana 

... 

A. 

...*211 

H 

» 

...  212 

H 

V 

ii 

...  213 

0 

4, 

a 

... 

...  214 

II 

5, 

n 

... 

...  216 

n 

6, 

0 

...  217 

n 

7, 

0 

■> 

..  217 

ii 

8, 

%l 

...  218 

ii 

9, 

Agni 

...  218 

■ 

10, 

Indra 

... 

...  219 

it 

11, 

Soma  Pavamana 

...  219 

0 

12, 

0 

...  220 

V* 

13,  ' 

Indra 

...  220 

n 

14, 

ii 

...  221 

0 

15, 

Soma  Pavamana 

• 

...  221 

H 

16, 

n 

• . . 

...  221 

it 

17, 

0 

• at 

...  2*>2 

■ 

18, 

Apii 

. . . 

...  222 

■ 

19, 

I ndra 

...  223 

■ 

20, 

M 

...  223 

ii. 

1, 

Soma  Pavamana 

• 

. . . 

221 

» 

2, 

p 

• * 

...  225 

a 

3, 

0 

.A 

...  226 

n 

4, 

0 

...  227 

n 

5, 

» 

...  228 

n 

6, 

» 

... 

...  229 

0 

7, 

• 

...  230 

0 

8, 

* 

...  230 

n 

9, 

Agni 

• . » 

...  232 

it 

10, 

Indra 

...  232 

0 

11, 

Soma  Pavamana 

...  233 

n 

12, 

0 

...  233 

■ 

13, 

0 

... 

...  23 1 0 

ii 

14, 

Indra 

...  234 

ii 

15, 

Indra 

_ 235 

• 

n 

16, 

Soma  Pavamana 

..  . 

• t » 

...  235 

ii 

17, 

- 

...  235 

• " 

18, 

an 

...  236 

19, 

*•  ii 

...  237 

n 

20. 

0 

• . . 

... 

...  237 

VIII 


INDEX  OF  HYMNS. 


V.  «i.  21, 

Indr* 

Page 
...  237 

- * 22, 

n 

... 

...  238 

* - 23, 

» 

« 

... 

...  239 

VI.  i.  1, 

Agni 

... 

...  241 

n h 2, 

The  Adilyas 

. . . 

...  242 

* * 3j 

IndVa 

. . . 

. . • 

...  242 

0 i»  4, 

Soma  Pavamana 

...  243# 

r ii  5, 

Indra 

... 

...  243 

* • 6, 

ii 

... 

. . . 

...  244 

• " 7, 

Soma  Pavamana 

... 

. . . 

...  244 

^ * 8, 

n 

... 

...  245 

M » 9, 

it 

... 

,..  245 

" »*  10, 

Agni 

... 

...  246 

» *11, 

Surya 

... 

247 

<*  ii.  1, 

Agni 

... 

... 

...  247 

..  ..  2, 

Ii 

... 

... 

...  248 

■*  « 3, 

Soma  Pavamana 

...  248 

« « 4, 

Indra 

... 

. . . 

...  249 

« '•  5, 

n 

... 

... 

...  249 

* * 6, 

Soma  Pavamana* 

... 

... 

...  250 

» ■ 7, 

Agni 

... 

...  250 

* * 8, 

Soma  Pavamana, 

... 

...  251 

n *9, 

Indra 

... 

... 

...  251 

» » 10, 

Agni 

... 

• • . 

...  252 

* • 11, 

Soma  Pavamana 

... 

...  252 

. * 12, 

Indra 

...  252 

0 * 13, 

Agni 

... 

... 

...  253 

»*  » 14, 

0 

... 

...  253 

- * 15, 

Soma  PaVam&na 

... 

...  254 

p w 16, 

Indra 

... 

...  254 

•*  «•  17, 

Soma  Pavamana  « 

. . . 

...  255 

« « 18, 

• 

. . . 

...  255 

• « 19, 

Indra 

... 

.. . 

...  256 

• ii.  20, 

Indra 

... 

...  257 

« iii.  1, 

Soma  Pavamana 

... 

257 

» ■ 2, 

Indra 

... 

...  258 

M 'I  3, 

Soma  Pavamana 

... 

• r 

...,  259 

w » 4, 

Indra 

••• 

...» 

...  259 

* » 5, 

Siirya 

... 

... 

...  260 

INDEX  OF  HYMMS. 

IX 

Pa  ok 

VI. 

iii.  f>, 

\ ndra 

a. 

260 

ft 

- 7, 

Indra 

...  261 

M 

" 

Sarasva.ii 

...  261 

If 

■ 9, 

Sarosvati 

...  261 

n 

•»  10, 

Savitar.  Brahmarmspati.  Agui 

... 

...  262 

if 

« 11, 

Mitra  and  Vanina 

...  262 

ii 

- 12, 

India 

...  263 

n 

• 13, 

Somy,  Pavamana 

...  263 

* „ 

• u, 

Agni 

...  264 

ii 

» 15, 

n 

...  265 

ii 

• 16, 

« 

...  262 

ii 

• 17, 

India 

...  2t>6 

n 

«r  18,  * 

■ 

...  267 

VII 

i.  1, 

Indra 

. 

...  269 

0 

» 2, 

i. 

...  269 

II 

■ 3, 

Sonia  Pavamana 

...  270 

ft 

■ 4, 

Agni 

...  2?0 

If 

" 5, 

Indra 

...  271 

II 

■ 6, 

Agni 

...  271 

If 

• 7, 

Soma  Pavamana  . .% 

. , . 

...  272 

fl 

" 8, 

Indra 

272 

« 

■ 9, 

• 

,i 

...  273 

11 

- 10, 

Agni 

...  273 

0 

■ Hi 

...  273 

If 

* 12, 

ii 

...  274 

fl 

- 13, 

n 

...  274 

II 

- 14, 

w 

. . • 

...  275 

If 

» 15, 

* 

. . . 

...  275 

H 

■ 16, 

» ... 

...  276 

* 

ii.  1, 

if 

...  276 

If 

' 2, 

1 1 

1) 

...  277 

If 

* 3, 

V 

V 

...  277 

• 

- 4, 

Agni 

...  278 

If 

■ 5, 

» 

...  278 

n 

■ © 6, 

» ,,, 

...  279 

■ 

- 7, 

• 

If 

... 

...  279 

ii 

■ 8, 

11 

. . * 

...  279 

w 

* 9, 

* 0 

* . ■ 

...  280 

ii 

* 10, 

» 

... 

...  28° 

TXDEX  OF  IIYMXS. 


Paoe 

viu 

ii. 

11, 

Agni 

. . . 

...  281* 

0 

■ 

12, 

H 

...  281 

0 

N 

l-\ 

II 

... 

282 

N 

.. 

14, 

« 

...  282 

0 

iii. 

1, 

Indra 

...  283 

n 

n 

2, 

Indra  and  Agni 

. . . 

...  283 

n 

• ,, 

3, 

liTHra 

...  284 

n 

n 

4, 

• 

,,, 

«... 

..  284 

N 

0 

5, 

Agni 

. . . 

...  285 

II 

0 

11, 

Varuna 

...  285 

0 

ii 

7, 

Indra 

... 

...  285 

n 

8, 

n 

...  280 

It 

i. 

9, 

Visvakarman 

....  28G 

» 

.. 

10, 

Soma  Pavamana 

...  287 

It 

0 

11, 

Pushaii 

... 

...  288 

II 

0 

12, 

The  Maruts 

...  288- 

» 

n 

13, 

Visvedevas 

...  288 

• 

0 

,i 

14, 

Heaven  and  Earth 

...  288 

0 

0 

15, 

Indra 

. • . 

...  289 

0 

0 

16, 

Oblations 

...  289 

0 

0 

17, 

Indra 

...  290 

0 

n 

18, 

M 

...  290 

0 

0 

19, 

II 

...  291 

0 

n 

2(>, 

Soma  Pavamana 

...  291 

0 

ii 

21, 

" 

...  291 

VIII. 

i. 

1, 

Agni 

...  293 

• 

.. 

2, 

Tndra 

...  293 

■ 

If 

3, 

Agni 

...  294 

II 

?f 

4, 

Vishnu 

... 

...  294 

If 

It 

r>. 

Vayu.  Indra  and  Vayu 

...  295 

II 

fl 

6, 

Soma  Pavamana  , 

...  295 

H 

If 

V, 

Agni 

...  296 

N 

n 

*, 

Indra 

...  296 

I, 

.. 

■ 

...  297 

0 

it 

10, 

0 

. . • 

*...  297 

n 

.1 

H, 

■ 

. • . 

. . . 

...  298 

0 

13, 

Agni 

... 

...  298 

• 

It 

.. 

13, 

Indra 

...  298 

0 

14, 

H 

... 

...  299 

INDEX  OF  TlYMN'S. 


XI 


ii.  1,  Indra 

• f,  ■ 

" 3j>  Aglli 

" 4,  Tnrlra 

" 5,  Vishnu 

« 6,  Imlra 

" 7, 

■ 8,  Soma  Pavamana 

" 9 , Indra 

* 10, 

" 11,  Agni 
» 12,  Soma  Pavamana 
»i  13/  Indra 


H, 

Indra  and  Agni 

, I* 

15, 

Indra 

n 

16, 

Soma  Pavamana 

n 

IV, 

Jndra  and  Agni 

* 

18, 

Agni 

If 

10, 

N 

iii 

- 1, 

0 

rt 

o 

-» 

Soma  Pavamana 

.. 

3, 

Indra 

« 

4, 

n 

m 

•r», 

n 

n 

6, 

Dawn 

n 

V, 

The  Asvins 

n 

8, 

Dawn 

n 

9, 

The  As v ins 

w 

10, 

Agni 

11, 

Dawn 

0 

12, 

The  Asvins 

n 

13, 

Agni 

• 

14, 

Dawn 

n 

15, 

The  Asvins 

ii 

16, 

Dawn 

h 

IV, 

The  Asvins 

» 

18, 

Soma  Pavamana 

i. 

1, 

• 

N 

n 

*2 

Indra 

Pahk 
..v  300 
...  300 
...  301 
...  301 
...  302 
...  302 
303 
...  303 
...  304 
...  304 
..  304 
...  305 
...  305 
...  305 
306 
...  306 
...  307 
...  307 
...  308 
...  308 
...  309 
...  309 
...  310 
...  310 
...  311 
...  311 
...  312 
...  313 
...  313 
...  314 
...  314 
...  315 
...  3 1 5 „ 
...  316 
...  317 
...  317 
...  318 

...  319 
...  319 


XII 


INDEX  OF  HYMNS. 


IX. 

3, 

India 

Pag® 
•..  320 

II 

it 

4, 

Agni 

...  320 

II 

f 

5, 

0 

...  321 

It 

0 

6,' 

„ 

...  32 1 

0 

0 

7, 

Indra 

...  321 

■ 

0 

8, 

The  Maruts 

... 

...  322 

n 

0 

9, 

Sufya 

...  322 

r> 

0 

10, 

Indra 

...  32$ 

0 

0 

11, 

0 

...  323 

0 

0 

12, 

ii 

...  324 

„ 

„ 

13, 

0 

...  324 

ir 

0 

H, 

u 

...  324 

„ 

* 

15, 

0 

... 

...  325 

m 

0 

16, 

ii 

...  325 

it 

0 

17, 

Sonia  Pavamana 

326 

if 

II 

18, 

Agni 

...  327 

a 

ii. 

1, 

...  327 

( 

n 

„ 

2. 

3, 

0 

...  328 

n 

0 

0 

...  329 

ii 

0 

4, 

0 

...  329 

■ 

0 

5, 

» 

. . . 

...  329 

* 

0 

6, 

0 

. . . 

...  329 

« 

0 

7, 

Gods 

••• 

...  330 

0 

0 

8, 

Agni 

...  330 

If 

n 

9, 

Indra 

... 

...  331 

V 

ii 

10, 

The  Waters 

...  331 

it 

0 

11, 

Vata 

...  331 

* 

0 

12, 

Agni 

... 

...  332 

n 

ii 

13, 

Vena 

...  332 

if 

iii. 

1, 

Indra 

...  333 

if 

0 

2, 

Brihaspati.  Indra 

...  334 

If 

• 

3* 

Indra.  Brihaspati  « 

...  334 

if 

0 

4, 

Indra.  The  Maruts 

...  335 

0 

ii 

5, 

Agha 

...  335 

it 

0 

6, 

Indra  and  others 

...  336 

ft 

0 

7, 

Indra 

...  336 

if 

n 

8, 

Soma.  Vanina 

...  337 

if 

ii 

9, 

Indra.  All-Gods 

r 

...•  338 

II.  LIST  OF  REFERENCES  TO  THE  RTGVEDA. 

•1 


Page 

Pages 

1.  7 

4 

I.  19.  1 

...  4 

2.  7,  8,  9 

...  153 

22.16—21 

302 

3.  4,  5,  6 

...  204 

22.  17 

...  44 

3.  10 

...  37 

23.  4 — 6 

...  143 

4.  1 

...  33 

25.  19 

...  285 

4.  1,  2,  3 

...  195 

26.  10,  6,  7 

...  293 

5.  1 

1 

...  34 

27.  1 

...  J4 

5.1,  2,  3 

...  134 

27.  1—3 

...  296 

6.  1,  2,  3 

...  263 

27.  4 

...  6 

G*:  4,  5,  7 

...  153 

27.  4,  6,  3 ’ 

...  270 

7.  1 

...  39 

27.  7,  9 

...  253 

7.  1 — 4 

...  144 

27.  10 

...  4 

7.  5 

...  2S 

27.  10—12 

...  301 

7.  10,  G,  8 

...  293 

30.  1 

...  42 

8.  1 

...  28 

30.  4 

...  36 

8.  5 

...  34 

30.  4—6 

...  289 

9.  1 

...  36 

30/7 

...  34 

9.  1 

...  41 

30.  7r9 

135 

10.  1 

...  68 

, 30.  1 3 

...  32 

10.  1—3 

...  239 

30.  13—15 

...  191 

10.  5 

...  74 

34.  2,  5,  9 

.,.  318 

11.  1 

...  68 

36.  1 

...  13 

11.  1—3 

...  150 

36.  13 

...  13 

11.  4 

...  73 

36.  19  * 

...  13 

11.  4,  5,  8 

...  223 

37.'  3 

...  29 

12.  1 

2 

, 37.  10 

...  43 

12.  1—3  • 

...  1 13 

40.  3 

...  13 

12.  6,  8,  9 

...  152 

41.  1 

...  9 

12.  7 

...  7 

44.  1 

...  37 

13?  1,  4 

...  241 

£4,  1,  2 

...  321 

15.  5 

...  45 

14.  13 

...  11 

18.  1 

...  30 

45.  1 

...  22 

18.  6 

...  35 

46.  1 

...  36 

XIV 


I.TST  OK  REFERRXOES  TO  TTTE  RTGVKDA. 


4G.  1-8 

Page 
...  311 

47.  1 

... 

61 

49.  3 , 

74 

r>o.  1 

... 

7 

51.  1 

77 

52.  1 

... 

77 

67.  4 

... 

76 

G9.  1 

16 

74.  1—3 

... 

247 

75.  3-5 

276 

79.  4 

... 

23 

79.  4— 6 

281 

79.  7—9 

... 

275 

80.  1 

84 

80.  3 

85 

80.  7 

... 

85 

81.  1 

85 

81.  1 -3 

181 

81.  3 

85 

81.  4 

87 

82.  1 

86 

82.  2 

. . . 

85 

82.  4 

... 

88 

84.  1 

... 

70 

84.  1,  3,  2 

... 

186 

84.  4 

70 

84.  4—6 

172 

84.  7 

79 

84.  7—9 

238 

84.  10 

... 

84 

84.  10  12 

... 

182 

84.  13 

36 

84.  13—15 

... 

165 

84.  15 

31 

84.  16 

... 

69 

84.  19 

... 

48 

84.  19j  20 

310 

86.  8 

... 

288 

. 89.  8,  5 

Page 

338 

90  1 

...  43 

92.  1—3  ' 

...  317 

92.  13—15 

...  3 5*2 

92.  16,  18,  17 

...  313 

94.  1 

...  15 

94.  1,  4,  3 

...  191 

101.1 

...  78* 

105.  1 

...  86 

105.  5 

...  75 

113.  1-3 

...  315 

127.  1 

...  95 

127.  1—3 

...  326 

130.  1 

...  93 

139.  1 

...  94 

139.  5 

...  57 

149.  3-5 

...  320 

150.  1 

...  23 

157.  1—3 

...  317 

175.  1—3 

...  257 

. 5.  3. 

...  21 

22.  1 

...  93 

22.  1,  3,  2 

...  267 

22.  4 

...  95 

41.  4—6 

...  165 

41.  10 

...  40 

. 1.  23 

...  17 

9.  1 

...  14 

9.  2 

...  12 

10.  5 

...  23 

10.  7 

...  23 

11.  5,  7,  6 

...  280 

12.  1—3 

...  122 

12.  4—6 

30 1 

12.  5—8 

...  283 

12.  9,  7,  8 

i«*  305 

16.  1 

13 

27.  7—9 

...  265 

LT3T 

OF  REFERENCES  TO  THE  R TO VERA. 

XV 

Page 

Page 

ITT.  27.  13 — 15 

..  277 

V.  16.  1 

• f 20 

29.  2 

...  18 

18.  1 

...  19 

30.  h 

...  66 

24.  1 

...  92 

40.  6 

...  39 

24.  1,  2,  4 

...  199 

4.3.  1 

...  48 

25.  7 

...  19 

45  1—3 

...  309 

26.  1—3 

...  274 

51.  1 

...  76 

31.  4. 

.:.  91 

51.  10 

...  34 

32.  1 

...  63 

51  10  12 

...  34 

38.  1 

...  74 

52.  1 

...  41 

39.  1 

...  70 

53-  1 

...  68 

39.  1—3 

...  208 

02.  10v 

...  262 

44.  14 

...  329 

62.  16 

...  43 

44.  15 

...  329 

62.  10 — 18 

...  121 

68.  1—3 

...  204 

IV.  3.  1 

...  16 

68.  3—5 

...  262 

8.  1 

...  4 

70.  1—3 

...  178 

9.  1 

...  6 

75.  1 

...  86 

10.  1 

...  90 

75.  1—3 

...  314 

10.  1 — 3 

...  321 

76.  1—3 

...  316 

15.  3. 

...  7 

>79.  1 

...  87 

17.  8 

...  67 

79.  1 - 3 

...  314 

30.  1 

...  10 

4 

...  30 

31.  1 

...  31 

87.  1 

..  94 

31.  1-3 

...  124 

VI.  2.  1 

...  19 

32.  1 

...  36 

2.  4 

...  74 

39.  6 

...  72 

2.  G 

...  19 

47.  1—3 

...  295 

7.  1 

...  15 

52.  1—3 

...  311 

7.  1,  4,  2 

...  203 

56.  5,  7 

...  288 

15.  7—9 

...  282 

V.  1.  1 

...  17 

16.  1 

2 

1.  1—3 

...  315 

16.  1 — 3 

...  264 

6. 1. 

...  88 

16.  10 

2 

6.  1,  3,  2 

...  313 

16.  10—12 

...  120 

6.  >4 

...  86 

16.  13 

3 

6.  4,  5,  9 . 

...  185 

'16.  16 

...  3 

10.  1 

...  19 

16.  16—18 

...  128 

U.  1,  6,2 

...  164 

16.  28 

5 

13.  2—4 

...  252 

1 G.  34 

2 

XVI 


LIST  OF  REFERENCES  TO  l”fiE  RlGVEDA. 


Page 

Page 

r 16.  34—36  » 

...  250 

VI.  61.  10 

...  261 

16.  37-39 

...  307 

70.  1 

...  77 

16.  43t 

...  6 

75.  16 

...  335 

16.  43-45 

...  218 

75.  17 

...  336 

17.  15 

...  92 

75.  18,  19 

...  337 

24.  6 

...  15 

VII.  1.  1 

...  16 

52.  1 

...  64 

1.  1-3 

...  216 

42.  1 

...  71 

3.  1—3 

...  213i 

42.  1 

...  258 

6.  1 

...  18 

43.  1 

...  81 

8.  1 

...  16 

44.  1 

...  71 

12.  1 3 

...  232 

44.  4 

...  72 

15.  3 

...  247 

45.  1 

...  28 

15.  7 

...  6 

45.  7 

...  90 

15.  13 

...  6 

45.  2 2 

...  25 

16.  1 

...  10 

45.  22—21 

...  301 

16.  1,  2 

...  136 

45.  ‘25 

...  31 

16.  5 

...  14 

45.  28 

...  40 

16.  7 

...  9 

46.  1 

...  46 

16.  11 

...  12 

46.  1—3 

...  J 16 

16.  11.  12 

...  273 

46.  3 

...  57 

21.  1 

...  63 

46.  7 

52 

22.  1 

...  82 

46.  9 

...  53 

22.  1 3 

...  168 

47.  11 

...  67 

22.  4—6 

...  324 

48.  1 

8 

23.  1 

...  66 

48.  I,  2 

...  128 

21.  1 

...  63 

48.  7 

8 

27.  1 

...  64 

48.  9.  10 

...  291 

31.1 

...  33 

51.  13 

...  21 

31.  1-3 

...  130 

52.  9 

288 

31.  1 

...  29 

53.  10 

...  283 

31.  10 

...  66 

57.  1 

...  40 

31.  10—12  1 

...  323 

57.  4 

...  31 

32.  1 

...  57 

58.  t 

...  17 

32,  1,  2 

302 

59.  6 

...  . 56 

32.  4 

...  59 

60.  4-6 

...  151 

32.  8 

...  57 

60.  7—9 

...  179 

32.  11 

56 

60.  10-12 

...  205 

32.  14,  15 

...  304 

LIST  OF 

REFERENCES  TO  THE  RIG  VEDA 

Pace 

xvu 

Page 

VII.  32.  16 

...  54 

VIII.  2.  16-18 

...  131 

32.#  18 

...  62 

2.  19 

45 

32.*  48,  19 

...  324 

2.  25 

...  27 

32.  20 

...  47 

2.  25,  27,  26 

...  300 

32.  20,  21 

...  157 

3.  1 

...  47 

32.  22 

...  46 

3.  1,  2 

...  254 

32.  22,  23 

...  123 

3.  3 

'...  49 

32.  24 

...  62 

3 3,  4 

...  290 

32.  26 

...  5t 

3.  5 

...  49 

32.  26,  27 

...  260’ 

3.  5,  6 

...  286 

56.  1 

...  89 

3.  7 

...  50 

59.  ?/ 

...  47 

3.  7,  8 

...‘283 

C6.  4—6 

242. 

3.  15 

...  49 

66.  7—9 

...  192 

3.  15,  16  t 

...  244 

’ 74.  1 

...  61 

3.  17 

...  60 

74.  1,  2 

...  136 

4.  1 

...  55 

81.  1 

...  61 

4.  1,  2 

...'220 

81.  1,  2 

...  136 

4.  3 

...  49 

94.  1—3 

...  160 

4.  3,  4 

...  310 

94.  4—6 

...  145 

- 4.  7,  8 

...  290, 

96.  4 

...  201 

4.  9 

...  55 

100.  6,  5,  7 

...  294 

/ *4.  11 

...  62 

VIII.  1.  1 

...  47 

5..1 

...  43 

1.  1,2 

...  213 

G.  1,  3,  2 

...  232 

1.  5 

...  58 

6.  4 

...  29 

1.  6 

...  58 

6.  4,  6,  5 

...  299 

1.  7 

...  54 

6.  5 

...  36 

1.  10 

..  59 

6.  10 

...  32 

1.  12 

...  48 

6.  10—12 

...  271 

1.  is 

...  12 

6.  19 

...  37 

1.  20 

62 

* 6.  28 

...  30 

1.  24  ° 

...  48 

6 30 

...  T> 

1.  24—26 

..  219 

11.  7-9 

...  208 

,2.  1 

...  27 

12.  1 

...  81 

2.  1—3 

...  133 

> 12.  16 

...  79 

2.  13—15 

...  325 

13.  1 

...  78 

2.  14 

...  44 

13.  1-  3 

...  135 

2.  16 

...  33 

14.  1 

...  27 

XVIII 


LIST  OJf  REFERENCES  TO  THE  KlttYBDA. 


Page 

Page 

. 14.  1—3 

...  331 

Vill.  23.  14 

...  24 

*14.  5 

...  27 

23.  15 

..  24 

V-4 

*<I 

00 

...  297 

24.  1 

...  79 

14.  13 

...  41 

24.  13 

...  19 

15.  1 

...  78 

24.  13—15 

...  272 

15.  4 

..  78 

24.  16 

...  79 

P5.  4 — 6 

...  159 

21.  16—18 

...  304 

15.  7—9 

...  298 

24.  19 

...  79, 

16.  1 

..  31 

24.  24 

...  82 

17.  1 

...  38 

27.  1 

...  11 

17.  1—3 

...  121 

32.  7 

...  45 

17.  11 

...  33 

32.  10 

...  43 

17.  11  — 13 

...  132 

32.  2 L 

..\  41 

17.  14 

...  55 

33.  1 

...  51 

18/  7. 

...  24 

33.  4 

...*  57 

18.  10 

...  82 

33.  7 

...  60 

18.  18 

...  82 

33  7—9 

...  306 

19.  1, 

...  25 

33  10 

...  52 

19.  1,  2 

...  304 

34.  1 

...  70 

19.  3 

...  .25 

34.  1.  3,  2 

...  325 

19.  3,  4 

...  253 

38.  1—3 

...  193 

19.  15 

* 25 

44.  4 — 6 

...  277 

19.  19 

,...  # 25 

44.  12—14 

...  308 

19.  19,  20 

...  280 

44.  16 

...  6 

19.  30 

...  25 

41.  16,  18,  17 

...  276 

19.  30,  31 

...  32S 

45.  1 

...  29 

20.  1 

...  83 

45.  1—3 

...  237 

20.  21 

...  83 

45.  4 

...  42 

21.  1 

...  84 

45.  16 

...  29 

21.  1,  2 

../  129 

45.  22 

...  33 

21.  3 

...  83 

45.  22  — 24 

...  133 

21.  5 

...  84 

45.  26 

...  28 

21.  9 

...  82 

45.  28 

...  40 

21.  11 

...  83 

45.  40 

29 

21.  13 

...  *2 

45.  40,  42,  41 

...  192 

21.  13,  14 

...  249 

45.  41 

...  41 

23.  1 

...  24 

46.  1 

...«  3S 

23/13 

...  25 

16.  1 

...  41 

LIST  OF 

REFERENCES  TO  THE  Rl^VKIxA, 

Page 

#1  z 

Page 

[,  46.  10 

...  37 

VIII.  59  3,  4 

• . . 

206 

46.  14 

...  52 

59.  5 

% 

55 

49.  2 

...  279 

59.  5,  6 

156 

49.  5 

...  9 

59.  7 

53 

49.  9 

...  8 

60.  1 

2 

49.  9,  10 

...  278 

60.  10,  11 

... 

279 

49.  11 

...  10 

60.  14 

t 

11 

49.  15  ^ 

...  10 

61.  12 

•• . 

26 

49.  19 

...  9 

61.  12,  11,  10 

289 

50.  1 

...  58 

61.  13-15 

265 

50.  1,  2 

...  221 

63.  1 

20 

50.  5 

...  50 

63.  1—3 

281 

*50.  5?  6 

...  284 

63.  4 

20 

50.  7 

...  47 

63.  11 

7 

’ 50.  7,  8 

2^4 

64.  10 

» • . 

3 

50.  13 

...  54 

64.  10—12 

298 

50.  13,  1 { 

...  235 

65.  10 — 12 

,,, 

479 

50.  17,  18 

...  261 

70.  1 

< .. 

31 

51.  8 

...  81 

70.  1—3 

... 

132 

52.  1 

...  72 

. 71.  7 

.. 

33 

53.  1 

...  39 

72.  1 

. . . 

29 

53.  1—3 

...  *>42 

’ 73.  1—3 

222 

53.  7 

...  30 

‘ 73,4-6 

279 

55  1 

...  47 

73.  7 

... 

8 

55.  1,  2 

...  125 

77.  1 

46 

55.  7 

...  54 

77.  1,  2 

. . . 

124 

55  7,  8 

...  305 

77.  1 

... 

46 

57.  1 

..  72 

77.  3 

... 

59 

57.  1-3 

...  320 

77.  f/ 

... 

62 

57.  4 

...  74 

78.  1 

51 

58.  1 

...  73 

• 78.  3 

... 

51 

58.  2 

...  273 

78.  5-7 

256 

58.  4 

...  34 

79.  1 

53 

,58.  4—6 

...  269 

79.  1,  2 

269 

58.  8 

...  74 

* 79.  5 

... 

49 

59.  1 

...  51 

79.  5.  6 

. . . 

252 

59.  1,  2 

...  169 

81.  1 

33 

59.  3 

...  IS 

81.  1—3 

130 

LTST  OF  REFERENCES  TO  THE  RIGVEDA. 


Page 

Page 

81.  4 

...  31 

VIII.  85.  16 

...  56 

*81.  7 

...  34 

86.  1 

...  50 

81.  7,  9 

...  297 

86.  4 

...  52 

81.  10* 

...  42 

86.  7 

...  51 

81.  16 

...  26 

86.  10 

...  75 

81.  19 

...  33 

86.  10-12 

...  168 

81.  19 — 21%* 

...  131 

86.  13 

...  94 

81.  22 

...  39 

87.  1 

...  7a 

81.  22 — 24 

...  300 

87.  1—3 

..  186 

81.  25 

...  26 

87.  4 

...  81 

81.  28 

...  46 

87.  4—6 

...  223 

81.  28—30 

...  149 

87.  7 

...  83 

81.  31 

...  28 

87.  7—9 

129 

82.  1 

...  27 

87.  10 

...  83 

82.  1—3  * 

...  259 

87.  10—12 

...'  208 

82.  4 

...  28 

87.  17 

...  37 

82.  7 

...  26 

88.  1 

...  61 

82.  7—9 

...  219 

8*.  1,  2 

...  147 

82.  7 

...  26 

88.  3 

...  53 

82.  1G 

...  .41 

88.  3,  4 

...  234 

82.  18 

...  30 

88.  5 

...  62 

82.  19 

.!.  *285 

88.  5,  6 

...  296 

82.  23 

....  * 32 

88.  7 

...  56 

82.  25 

...  42 

90.  5 

...  50 

82.  28 

...  35 

90.  11 

...  55 

82.  31 

...  32 

90.  11,  12 

...  322 

82.  31-33 

...  323 

91.  4 

...  5 

82.  34 

...  40 

91.  7 

5 

83.  1 

* ...  32 

91.  7-9 

...  172 

83.  4 

...'  35 

91.  13 

...  4 

83.  4-6 

...  32* 

91.  13—15 

...  282 

84.  1 

...  71 

91.  22 

5 

84.  4 

...  70 

92.  1 

...  10 

84.  4—6 

...  160 

92.  1,  3,  2 

*.  273 

84.  7 

...  sn 

92.  2 

...  11 

84.  7—9 

...  251 

92.  4 

...  13 

85.  7 

...  65 

92.  6 

...•  10 

85.  13 

...  65 

92.  6,  7 

...  285 

IJST  OF 

REFERENCES 

TO  THE  MOVED  A. 

XXf 

Page 

Page 

VIII.  92.  8 

...  24 

IX.  25.  1—3  • 

166 

92.  8,  9 

...  159 

27.  1—4,  6 

. . 229 

92. 

...  25 

27.  5 

...  228 

V*ALAKHILYA.  1.  1 

"...  4G 

28.  1—5 

228 

1.  1,  2 

...  147 

28  G. 

...  229 

3.  7 

...  60 

29.  1 — 3 

...  319 

3.  9,  10 

...  291 

32.  1 

97 

4.  9>  10 

...  303 

32. 1—3 

...  139 

5.  5 

...  56 

33.  1 

...  97 

8.  5 

...  91 

33.  1—3 

...  138 

TX.  1.  1 

...  96 

33.  1—3 

...  156 

1.  1-/3 

...  125 

33.  4 

...  96 

fc.  1—10 

...  188 

33  4—6 

...  157 

2.  G 

...  100 

36.  1 

...  99 

*3.  1 — 10 

...  225 

37.  1—6 

...  230 

3.  9 

...  137 

38.  6 

...  227 

4.  1—10 

...  189 

39.  1—6 

...  163 

6.  1 

...  101 

40.  1 

...  99 

7.  1—9 

...  202 

40  1-3 

..  167 

S.  1 — 9 

...  212 

• 41.  1 

...  99 

9.  1 

...  97 

41.  1—6 

...  162 

9.  1,  3,  2 

...  169 

,'42.  2—4 

...  137 

10.  1—9 

...  199 

44. *1 

...  102 

10.  4 

...  98 

47.  1 

...  102 

11.  1 — 3 

...  119 

48.  1—5 

...  151 

11.  4—9 

...  259 

49.  1—5 

...  257 

12.  1-9 

...  204 

50.  1—5 

...  216 

13.  1—9 

...  213 

51.  1 

...  101 

14.  1 

...  98 

51.  1,\3,  2 

...  219 

15.8  • 

226,  227 

52.  1 

...  100 

18.  1 

...  97 

53.  1—4 

...  309 

18.  1 — :( 

...  196 

54.  1—3 

...  13V 

19.  1,  3,  2 

...  181 

55.  1—4 

...  177 

hi).  6 

...  138 

58.  1 

...  101 

20.  1—7 

...  176 

58.  1—4 

...  190 

23.  2 

...  101 

61.  1 

...  100 

* 24.  1—7  / 

...  175 

61.  1—3 

...  217 

25.  1 

...  97 

61.  4—0 

...  143 

XXII 


LIS'li  OF  REFERENCES  TO  THE  RlUVBDA. 


61.  7—9  c f 

Page 
...  194 

61.  10 

...  96 

61.  10—12 

...  122 

61.  1 3 

...  99 

99.  13-15 

...  237 

61.  16 

...  98 

«S1.  16 — lfe' 

...  161 

61.  19 

...  96 

61.  19—21 

...  117 

61.  22 

..  100 

61.  25 

...  102 

61.  25-27 

...  217 

61.  28 

...  97 

61.  28—30 

...  141 

62.  1—3  ' 

...  150 

62.  4—6 

...  182 

62.  7 — 9 

...  177 

62.  10 

...  102 

62.  19 

...  99 

62.  22—24 

191 

62.  25—27 

J 111 

63.  1 

101 

63.  7 

...‘  100 

63.  7—9 

...  218 

63.  22 

...  98 

63.  22—24 

...  221 

63.  24 

...  100 

63.  25,  27,  26 

...  306 

64.  1 

...  101 

64.  1-3 

142 

64.  4 

...  i‘8 

64.  4—6 

...  187 

64.  7—9 

...  174 

64.  10 

..  93 

64.  13 

...•101 

64.  13—15 

...  152 

64.  22 

...  96 

64.  22-24 

...  193 

64.  28—30 

Page 
...  119  • 

65.  1—3 

...  163 

65.  4 

...  97 

65.  4-6 

...  1©42 

65.  10 

...  96 

65.  10-12 

...  145 

65.  16— IS 

...  151 

65.  19  * 

...  10J 

65.  19-21 

...  180 

65.  22—24 

...  207 

65.  28 

...  100 

66.  10—12 

...  120 

66.  19 

•...  262 

66.  19—21 

...  274 

6G.  25—27 

:..  233 

67.  1—3 

...  235* 

67.  16,  IS,  17 

...  326 

67.  31,  32 

...  230 

68.  1 

...  113 

69.  6,  2,  4 

...  245 

70.  1 

...  112 

70.  1 — 3 

...  255 

75.  1 

...  HI 

75.  1 -3 

..  127 

76.  1 

...  112 

76.  1—3 

...  220 

77.  1—4 

...  318 

79-  1 

...  Ill 

82.  1 

...  113 

82.  1 — 3 

...  234 

83.  1 

...  113 

83.  1—3 

...  158 

85.  1 

...  112 

86.  4—6 

....  16 1 

86.  10—12 

...  187 

86.  16 

...  Ill 

86.  16- IS 

205 

86.  19 

...  112 

LIST  OF 

REFERENCES 

TO  THE  RIUVKDA. 

XXIII 

Page 

Page 

t.  86.  20—22 

...  148 

IX.  97.  49-51. 

255 

86.  39,  38,  37 

...  174 

97.  52 

...  108 

86.  4& 

...  113 

97.  52-54 

...  198 

86.  43—45 

...  291 

98.  1 

...  109 

87.  1 

..  104 

98.  1,  5,  3 

...  221 

87.  1,  2 

...  123 

98.  7 

...  110 

87.  4 

...  106 

98.  7,  6,  10* 

236 

88.  1,  2,  7 * 

...  263 

98.  7,  10,  12 

...  303 

90.  1 

...  107 

99.  1 

...  110 

90.  1 

...  105 

100., 1 

...  110 

90.  2—4 

...  252 

100.  6,  7,  9 

...  184 

91.  2 , 

...  108 

101.  1 

...  109 

95.  1 

...  107 

101.  1,  2,  3 

...  127 

93.  1—3 

...  254 

1)1.  4 

...  109 

54.  1 

...  108 

101.4—6 

...  157 

95.  1 

...  106 

101.  7 

...  109 

95.  3 

...  109 

101.  7—9 

...  1?8 

96.  1 

...  106 

101. 10 

...  109 

96.  5 

...  105 

101.  10,  12,  11 

...  197 

96.  5 -7 

...  171 

101.  13 

...  110 

96.  13 

...  106 

101.  13—15 

..  248 

96.  17  — 19 

...  211 

l*o3.  1 

...  IU 

97.  1 

...  105 

102.  *1-3 

...  183 

97.  1—3 

...  251 

• 102.  4 

...  23 

97.  4 

..  107 

103.  1 

...  1 ! 5 

97.  7 

...  105 

103  3 

...  115 

97.  7—9 

...  199 

104.  1 

...  114 

97.  10 

...  108 

104.  4 

...  115 

97.  10—12 

..  1S5 

104.  1—3 

...  206 

97.  13—15 

..  146 

105.  1 

...  114 

97.  12 

...  107 

• 105.  1—3 

...  197 

97.21  • 

...  107 

105.  4 

...  115 

97.  34—36 

...  155 

105.  4—6 

...  291 

97*  34 

...  105 

106.  1 

...  114 

97.  37—39 

...  243 

*106.  1-  3 

...  126 

97.  30 

...  106 

106.  4 

...  114 

97.  40—12  / 

...  22 4 

106.  7 

...  114 

97.  41 

...  108 

106.  7—9 

...  235 

XXIV 


UST.OF  REFERENCES  TO  TIIE  RIGVEPA. 


10G.  10-*  12 

Page 
...  170 

106.  10 

...  115 

106.  13 

,..  115 

106. 11 

...  140 

107.  1 

...  102 

107.  1 — 3^ 

...  233 

%107.  4 *c 

...  102 

107.  4,  5 

...  123 

107.  6 

...  104 

lo7.  8 

...  103 

107.  8,  9 

...  1«0 

107.  10 

...  103 

107.  10,  11 

...  305 

107.  12 

...  103 

107.  12,  13 

...  139 

107.  14 

...  104 

107.  14—16 

...  155 

107.  17 

...  104 

107.  19 

...  103 

107.  19,  20 

...  167 

107.  21 

...  103 

107.  21,  22 

.!.  194 

ft 

107.  23 

...  104 

107.  25 

...  404 

108.  1 

...  115 

108.  1,  2 

...  126 

10«.  3 

...  116 

109.  3,  4 

..  170 

108.  5 

...  116 

108.  6 

117 

108.  7 

...  116 

108.  7,  8 

...  250 

109.  9 

...  116 

108.  9,  10 

...  183 

108.  11 

...•116 

108.  13 

...  11C 

108.  13,  14 

..  197 

109.  1 

...  88 

Page 

. 109.  1,  3,  2 

...  245< 

109.  4 

...  89 

109.  4—6 

...  222 

109.  7 

...  *90 

109.  10 

...  89 

109,  10—12 

...  237 

109.  13 

...  89 

109.  16— >3 

...  247 

110.  1 

...  89 

110.  1,  3,  2 

...  244 

110.  2 

...  89 

110.  7,  5,  4 

...  272 

110.  8,6,  9 

‘...  270 

111.  1 

. ...  94 

111.  1,  3,  2 

:..  287. 

3.  1—3 

...  278 

8.  1 

...  16 

9.  1—3 

...  331 

9.  4 

...  7 

10.  1 

...  63 

21.  1 

...  87 

23.  1 

...  67 

25.  1 

...  87 

43.  1 

...  77 

46.  1 

...  18 

46.  5 

...  17 

47.  1 

...  63 

55.  5 

...  65 

55.  5—7 

...  321 

56.  1 

...  15 

73.  9 

...  66 

73.  11 

...  64 

81.  6 

...  286 

87.  19 

,...  18 

87.  25 

...  21 

89.  4 

...  68 

91.  5,  7, 

.3.  178 

91.  6 

...  329 

LIST 

OF  REFERENCES 

Fage 

X.  101.  13 — 35 

...  218 

103.  1—3 

...  333 

103.  k-6 

...  334 

103.  7—9 

...  334 

103.  10-11 

...  335 

103.  12,  13 

...  335 

105.  1 

...  45 

115.  1 

...  11 

CO 

1 

1 

0 

01 

...  266 

123.  6 

...  64 

123.  6—8 

...  332 

126.  1 , 

...  88 

133.  1—3 

...  324 

134.  1 

...  78 

*31.  1,  5,  2 

...  196 

134.7 

...  36 

140.  1—6 

327,  328 

111.  3 

...  20 

TO  THE  RIG  VEDA. 

XXV 

Page 

X,  141.  6 

...#27l 

147.  1 

...  76 

148.  1 

...  63 

152.  3,  4 

...  336 

153.  1 

...  35 

153.  2 

...  27 

156.  1-5 

275 

157.  1 

...  92 

157.  1—3 

...  199 

170.  1—3 

...  260 

172.  1 

...  91 

172.  1 

..  02 

178.  1 

...  67 

180.  2 

...  338 

IS  5.  1 

...  38 

186.  1 

...  37 

186.  1—3 

...  35*1 

189.  1 — 3 

...  247 

III. ■„ LIST  OF  STANZAS  NOT  FOUND 
IN  THE  RIG  VEDA. 


I.  i.  i.  1.  10 

Page 
...  3 

1.  iv.  ii.  3.  2 

"Page 
...  73 

i.  ii.  2.  1 

...  11 

iv.  ii.  3.  10 

...  75 

i.  ii.  4.  2 

...  19 

iv.  ii.  4.  3 

...  76 

i.  ii.  4.  10 

...  20 

v.  i.  5.  9 

...  90 

i.  ii.  5.  2yi 

. . 21 

v.  ii.  1,  2,  4—6.  8—10 

90,  91 

ii.  if.  1.  10 

...  32 

v.  ii.  2.  3 

...  92 

ii.  ii,  2.  8 

...  35 

v.  ii.  2.  4 

...  92 

ii.  ‘ii.  4.  3 

...  30 

v.  ii.  2.  7 

...  92 

ii.  ii.  5.  6 

...  38 

v.  ii.  2.  9 

...  92 

iii.  i.  1.  3 

...  39 

v.  ii.  2.  10 

...  i‘2 

iii.  i 2.  G 

...  11 

v.  ii.  3.  2 

...  93 

iii.  i.  2.  9 

...  42 

v.  ii.  3.  8 

...  95 

iii.  i.  4.  2 

...  44 

11.  iii,  1.  22.  1-3 

...  173 

iii.  i.  4.  4 

...  41 

v.  ii.  8.  3 — 6 

...  230 

iii.  i.  4.  9 

...  40 

vii.“  il'  6.  1 , 2 

...  271 

iii.  ii.  5.  f> 

...  57 

viii.  i.  J4.  1—3 

...  299 

iv.  i.  1.  2 

...  59 

viii.  ii.  19.  1 — 3 

...  308 

iv.  i.  1.  6 

...  00 

ix.  i.  2.  1—3 

...  319 

iv.  i.  1.  7 

...  60 

ix.  ii.  4.  1 

...  329 

iv.  i.  2.  3 

...  61 

ix.  ii.  7.  1 — 3 

...  330 

iv.  i.  3.  9 

...  64 

ix.  ii.  8.  1—3 

..  330 

iv.  i.  4.  5 

...  66 

ix.  ii.  12.»l — 3 

...  332 

iv.  i.  5.  5 

...  67 

ix.  iii.  4.  3 

...  335 

iv.  i.  5.  6 

...  68 

»ix.  iii.  6.  1,  2 

...  336 

iv.  ii.  2.  2 1 

...  71 

ix.  iii.  7.  3 

...  336* 

iv.  ii.  2.  5 

...  72 

ix.  iii.  8.  2 

...  337 

IV.  INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC. 


Abhiplava*§3,  181. 

A d/tva ry u(s),  62,  79, 

101,  119,  219,  243, 
258. 

Aditi,  20,  21,  24.  42, 
60,  78,  192, 196,  242, 
336. 

Aditya , 20,  2 1 , 55, 1 1 2, 
322. 

Adityqs,  21, 22,  £>0,  60, 
81,82,89,  165,  192, 
194,  199,  242,  334. 
Agastya , 257. 

335. 

Agnayo  Dhishvydh , 88, 
207,  222,  237,  245. 
4«$rnz,  1 — 25,  35,  49,  56, 
68,  73,  86  88,  90—92, 
94,95,  98,  105,  113, 
120,  TJ2,  128,  136, 
1 13,  145,  152—151, 
159,  161—166,  171, 
172,  178-180,  185, 
191 — 193,  199,  203, 
205,  208,  218,  219, 
222,  232,  211,  246— 
248,  250,  252,  253, 
262,  264—266,  270, 
271,  273—285,  289, 
293,  294,  296,  298, 
304—308,  313,  315, 
316,  320,  321,  322, 
326,  327—330,  332, 
336,  337. 

Agni  Chdkshusha , 114, 
115,  126,  140.  * 


Agni  Pdvaka , 327. 
Agni  Tdpasa , 120,  271. 
A hi,  3,  84,  91,  259, 
325. 

Aindravdyava , 250. 
Ajdh , Ajas,  174,  H7. 
Akhandala,  132. 
Akrnhtd  Mds/tdh,  174. 
All-God,  186. 

All-God *,  29,  51,  87. 
Amahiyu,  96  — 100, 

102,  122,  141,  1 17, 
161,  191,  217,  237. 
AmlarUha,  7,  109,  110, 
221,  23G,  303. 
Amrita,  Amrit , 59,  170 
182,  231,  255,  272, 
332. 

Andnata,  94,  287. 
Anavas,  52,  91. 

Anava,  55,  220.  ' 

Anavas,  55.  1 

Ancestral  Spirits , 85. 
Angiras,  3,  7,  21,  104, 
108,  120,  164,  279. 
Angirasas,  Angirases, 
7,21,94,  164,  170, 
177,  256,  297,  327. 
Angirasa,  116.7 
Anhomuch,  88. 
Ansumatly  65. 

AnUy  55,  91. 

Anushtup,  19,  33?. 
Anushtup  Piptlikama- 

dhydy  88. 

Apdmnapdt,  14. 


Apnavdncty  ’5. 
Apratiratha , 333. 

Aprt,  241. 

Apsa^ases,  114.  , 
Aptya . See  Trita  Aptya. 
Apvdy  335, 

Arishlanemiy  67. 
Arjikas,  207. 

Arnna,  178,  329. 

Arya,  10, 154,273, 291, 
Aryan,  15,  25,  27,  28, 
38,  52,  55,  78,  137, 
159,  253. 

Aryaman , 11,  37,  38, 
41—43,  50,  S.«.  192, 
193,  197,  242,  322. 
Ashti,  93. 

Asikni,  137,  2G1. 

Asita,  97,  98,  101,  119, 
139,  169,  175,  176, 
181,  196,  199,  202, 
212-214,  226,  259. 
Astdrapankti,  86. 
Asura,  18,  65,  110, 
253,  267. 

A suras,  50,  260,  337. 
Asva , 272. 

Asvasdktin,  27,  41,  78, 
159,  297,  298,  331. 
Asvina , 61. 

Asvins,  35,  36,  57,  61, 
73,86,  136,  165,  202, 
212,  311,  313—318, 
321. 

Athavvan,  3,  36,  170, 
266. 


XXX 


TNPEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC. 


Atharvans,  119.  173,  180,  202,  207,  250,  252,  254,  292. 

Atharvaveda 16.  248.  Bulls  (priests),  277. 

Atijagati,  75,  93,  168.  Bhrigus,  91,  110,  173, 

Atisakvart,  627.  244.  Chakshus  MAnava,  14, 

Atithigva,  11,  81,  217.  Bhujyu , 56.  170. 

Athila , 13.  Bhuvana , 92,  199,  286.  Consorts  of  Gods,  27,  35, 

Atri,  19,70,74,  102.  Bird,  the  (the  Sun),  336. 

Atri  Buauma,  29li  247,  322.  Coiv,  the  ( Prieni),  32. 

Atyashli , 93,  287.  Black  skin , 99,  162.  Cows , 26,  124,  154, 

Aurva,  5.  Brahma , 266,  331.  173,  1^2,  229,  246, 

Ausija , 30,  262.  Brahman,  21,  30,  84,  256,  264,  317. 

Avahhritha , 32.  90,  149,  171,  319. 

Avasyu,  86,  91,  314.  Brahmans,  69,  91,  121,  Dadhikrd,  72. 

Avatsdra,  101,  137,  239.  Dadhikrds,  72,  166. 

177,  190,  309,  318,  Brdhman(s),  45,  133,  Dadhikrdvan,  72,  73. 
329.  231.  Dadhyach,  36,  165,  170, 

Aydsya,  102.  Brdhmandchchhdn 45.  Dakshind,  834. 

Ay  i,  159,  303.  Brahmanaspati,  11,  13,  Dames,  the,  183,  287. 

30,  60,  113,  158,  262,  Ddnava,  63. 

Bhaga , 88,  92,  109,  336.  Dancer  (Indra),  95, 

148,  194,  197,  203,  Brahmdtithi,  43.  130. 

242,  279.  Brihaddiva,  266.  Danu,  63. 

Bharadvdja,  2,  3,  5,  8,  Bxihjiduktha,\5,§!>,Z2\.Ddsa(s),\f)4c,\§2,'lG&, 
9,  13,  17,  19,  25,  28,  B\'ihamnati,  99,  163,  281,  291,  307. 

31,  40,  56,  71,  74,  167.  Dasyu(s),  99,179,223, 

77,  81,  92,  102,  113,  Brihaspati , 21,  65,  171,  257,  260,  301. 

120,  128,  154,  179,  334,  338.  Dawn,  9,  17,  36,  42, 

203,  205,  235,  248,  Brihati , 8,  303.  43,  56.  61,  87,  91, 

250,  258,  261,  264,  Pipilikamadhyd,  136,  162,  2o0,  278, 

282,288,307.  ,52.  299,  311,  312,  314, 

Bharatas,  164,  248.  Budha,  17.  315,  317,  321. 

Bhdrata,  248.  Bull  (Ag\i),  16,  21,  Dawns,  87,  93,  128, 

Bharga,  8-10,  47,  264,277,327.  178,  25C,  263,  287, 

50,  54,  58,  221,  256,  (Indra),  25,  30.  316,  317. 

235,  261,  278,  284.  52,  300.  Day  and  Night , 17. 

Bhaumya,  316.  (the  Sun),  247.  Death,  Destruction,  82. 

Bhauvana,  286.  (Soma),  100,  113,  Death , God  of,  16. 

Brigu,  4,  5,  96,  97,  116,  J26,  141,  146,  Demors,  26,28. 

100,  101,  110—112,  187,  188,  194,  202,  Devoid,  97,  98,  101, 

142,  145,  150,  163,  227—229,  234,  246,  119,  139,  169,  175, 


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC. 


XXXI 


176,  181,  196,  199, 
202,  212-214,  216, 
259. 

Devdtithi , <49,  55,  62, 
620,  290,  310. 

Dhva&ra , 190. 

Dirghatamas , 23,  317, 
320. 

fiieposer,  the,  68. 

Divoddsa,  11,  81,  217, 
274. 

Dragon , 84,  85, 

325.  ? 

Drilhdchyuta , 97,  166. 

Druhs,  327. 

DruKyus , 52. 

Dual  deities,  122. 

Dusky  brood  ( abori- 
gines), 78. 

Dvipadd  Trishtvp  199. 

Dvipadd  Virdj,  88. 

Dvita,  19. 

Dvita  Aptya,  1 1 5. 

Dyaus , 3,  18,  61,  70, 
74,  278,  325,  326. 

Dyutdna,  65. 

Earth,  76,  86. 

Earth  and  Heaven,  286. 

Ekadhand,  112. 

Elysium,  231. 

Etasa,  48,  53,  126,218. 

Etasas,  53.  u 

Evaydmarut , 94. 

Falcon , (bringer  of  the 
Soma  plant ),  1 5 1 , 152. 

Far-strider,  the , 200. 

Fathers , 158*,  164. 

Fire-sticks,  14,  16,  24 5, 


307,  320. 

FVve  Tribes , tfAe,  52, 
148,  207,  217,  274. 
Fortune,  109,  148. 
.Four  beauteous  crea- 
tures, 112,  255. 

Fowr  157. 

Friend,  the  (Mitra), 

20. 

Funeral  hymn,  verse 
from,  15. 

Gandharva,  333, 
Ganesa,  1,  119. 

Gavga,  67. 

Gdtu,  63. 

Gaupdyanas , 92,  199. 
Gaura , 49,  133,  214. 
Gauri,  214. 

Gav.rivi.ti , 60,  66,  114, 
126. 

Gautama,  23,  31,  48, 
09,  70,  85.  ' 1 

Gavishthira,  17,  315, 
Gaya,  19. 

Gdyatra,  330. 

Gdyatri , 1,  262,  330. 
Gdyatri  Yavamadhyd , 
197. 

Gharma,  26,  256. 
Ghritam , 1,  14,  153, 
186. 

Goddesses , 7,  231. 
GWM,  36. 

GWs,  passim. 
Gopavana , 7,  20,  281. 
Goshdktin,  27,  41,  78, 
159,  297,  298,  331. 
Gotama , 23,  31,  36,  43, 
48,  69,  70,  79,  84,  85, 


87,  88,102,165,172, 
18 1 ^ 1*82,  186,  238, 
247,  275,  276,  481, 
288,  310,  312,  313, 
317,  338.’ 

Gritsamada , 21,  40,  93, 

95,  1$5. 

» 

Haryata , 26,  264,  289. 
Heaven,  3,  18,  61,  74, 
278,311,314. 

Heaven  and  Earth,  26, 
73,  107,  170,  20$, 
221,  224,  288. 
HUphaistos,  60. 
Hiranyastdpa , 1 89, 

245. 

Holy  Grass,  2,  29,  143, 
181,  282. 

Ilotar,  1,  2,  10,  14,  23, 
25,  87,  95,  105,  120, 
143,  178,  238,  241, 
251,  252,  264,  273, 
277,  279,  282,  285, 
293,  322,  327. 
Hundred,  winters  (na- 
tural duration  of  lift ), 
92,  338. 

Indra,  1,11,15,  16,18, 
25-42,  44—86,  88, 
90—94,  98,  99—102, 
104—112,114,  121—. 
126,  129—135,  13 8, 
139,  144-150,  154, 
155—160,  163,  165, 
168,  169,  171—173, 
175,  177,  181,  182, 
184—186,  188,  189, 
193—197,  199,  201, 


XXXII 


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC. 


302,204—209,212— 
214,  216 — 221',  223, 
224,"  226,  227,  229, 
230,  233,  235,  237— 
239,  243—245,  249, 
251,  252,  254,  256— 
261,  266,  267, ^ 269, 
271— '274,  283—286, 
289—291,  295—307, 
309,  310,  319,  320— 
326,  330,  331,  333— 
338. 

InSrdgni,  56,122,  166, 
193,  283. 

In  dr  a' s Mothers , 27, 

35,  336. 

Indrapramati , 199. 

Inf u,  73,  89,  93,  96— 
108,  110,  111,  114, 
115,  119.  139,  141, 
142,  151,  163,  164, 
167,  168,  174,  175, 
177,  185,  188—190, 
193,  197,  198,  205, 
206,  212,  215,  217 — 
222,  224,  227,  229, 
230,  233,  235,  237, 
254,  257,  259,  267, 
291,  292,  318. 

Indus,  38,  52. 

Infinite , the , 24. 

Infinity , 24,  60. 

Irimbithi , 24,  31,  33, 
38,  55,  82,  121. 

Irimithi , 24,  33,  82. 

isvara , 88. 

Jagat , 330. 

Jagati,  14. 

Jamadagni , 50,  55,  96, 


97,  100—102,  121, 

141,  142,  145,  150, 
163,  177,  180,  182, 
191,  202,  207,  256, 
322, 

Jdtavedas , 9,  15,  18, 
23,  24,  95,  191,  232, 
250,  280,  281,  282, 
321,  328. 

Jetar , 69,  73,  150,  223. 
Jumna , 65. 

Kadru,  28. 

Kadrd , 28. 

Kaksktvdn,  30,  262. 
Kakup,  24,  82,  115. 
Kali,  47,  54,  125,  305. 
Kdleya , 47. 

Kanva,  3,  7,  12,  13,  29, 
33,  37,  43,  70,  108, 
114,  121,  156,  244, 
263,  271,  325. 
Kamm*i  33,  49,  131, 
220,  234,  244,  310. 
Kasyapa,t  20,  73,  96, 

98,  101,  102,  108, 

114,  119,  142,  152, 
174,  187,  193. 

Kavi , 192,  111,  112, 
,127,  150,  220,  257. 
Kdvya,  104. 

Ketu,  274. 

King  ( Soma ),  250,  255, 
292. 

Kings , the  ( Varuna 
and  Mitra),  50,  165, 
242. 

Kfipa,  220. 

Krishna,  65,  66,  77. 
Krishta,  77. 


Krityayasas , 116. 

Krivi,  267. 

Kubhd , 137,  261. 
KulmalabarKisha , 88. 
Kun<jlapdyya , 132. 
Kurukshetra,  165,  20*. 
Kurusuti , 179. 

Kusa , 2,  11,  143. 
Kusldvn , 29,  33,  34,  » 
132. 

Kutsa , 15,  61,  75,  78, 
81,  86,  108,191,  198, 

255,  315.  > 

Kuvitsa,  301. 

Lavpdyanas , 92,  199. 

12,  20,  32,  69, 
70,93,  102,  121,  123, 
126,  144,  152,  153, 
170,  179,  184,  190, 
202,  212,  221,  250, 
262,  272,  284,  306, 
398,  322. 

Law-born,  12,  250. 

Lord  of  Prayer,  334. 

Madhuchchhandas,  4, 
28,  33,  34,  36,  37,  39, 
41,  69,  74,  96,  134, 
144,  153,  195,  204, 
239,  293. 

Madhuvidyd,  86. 
Maghavanj,  46 — 48,  50, 
54,  56, 58,  60,  62,  66, 
67,76,77, 86,94,  124, 
147,  150,  157,  ‘159, 
168,  196,  221,  235, 

256,  361,  284,  3Q4, 
306,  3C0,  324,  335, 
336, 


INDEX  OP  NAMES,  ETC. 


XXX1I1 


Maghavans,  53. 
Mahdpankti , 75. 

- lahdvtra , 26. 

Makha , 1 108,  248. 
i/ten,  159. 

Mdndhdtar , 78, 196, 
Manes,  35,  15*, 
Mdnschatva , 198. 

11,  12,  20-22, 
25,  72,  159,  241. 
Manu  Apsava , 114, 

235. 

Manu  Sdmvavana , 109, 
197.  * 
j|/antt8,*24l. 

J/arwfs,  4,  11,  22,  29, 
35,  41,  42,43,  46,  47, 

51,  60,67,79,83,  86, 
89,  90,91,94,  96,  97, 
104,  122,  139,  145, 
153,  154,  166,  180, 
193,  197,  199,  207, 
211,  219,  224,  233, 
239,  263,  289,  298, 
322,  334,  335. 

Mdtarisvan,  231. 
Medhdtithi , 2,  4,  7,  11, 
27,  30,  31,  33,  35, 
43 — 45,  47—52,  54,- 
56,  58—60,  62,  70, 
78,  100,  131,  133, 
137,  143,  152,  189, 
241,  249,  8a0,  302, 
325. 

Medhya , 56. 
MedhyStithi , 12,  47 — 

52,  54,  57—60,  62, 

77,  156,  162,^44, 

249,  254,  283,  #286, 
290,  306, 


Mitra , 11,  19,  20,  37, 
38,  41—43,  50,  88, 
92,  100,  121,  139, 
143,  144,  153,  155, 
165,  173,  178,  187, 
188,  192—194,  197, 
203,  204,  207,  224, 
232,  242,  245,  253, 
262,  277,  281,  288, 
298,  308,  322. 

Mitras,  41,  178,  179. 
Moon,  the , 31,  65,  86, 
160,  200,  211,  215, 
292,  321. 

Morning , 36,  78,  190, 
196,  311,  328. 
Mothers , the , 287. 
Munis , 55. 

Ndgas , 28. 

Nahus,  264.  # 

Nahushn , 38,  109,  148. 
Nahushas,  38,  52.  » • 
Nakula , 64,  95.  # 

Namuchi , 44,  4^  66. 
Nandanam , 231. 

78,  114,  115, 
135,  197,  206,  291. 
Nardsahsa , 241. 
Ndrmint , 320, 

Naudhas , 46. 

Navagva , 170.# 
Nulhruvi , 98,  100,  101, 
218,  221,  306. 

JVtyA/,  92,  311,  316. 
Nine-and-ninety , 9 36, 
100,  165,  217. 
Nipdlithi , 70,  325. 

Nirriti , 82, 

46,59,  62,  107, 


124,  254! 

Nrimitdka,  49,  51,  53, 
56,  61,  62,  79,  81^83, 
129,  147,  ,186,  208, 
223,  228,  229,  234, 
252,  256,  269,  296, 
319.  , 

Nrimtdhas , 53,  5ff,  62, 
83. 

Om,  1,  119. 

Omnijic , fAe,  286. 

Order,  15,  69,  70,  lOlf, 
155,  203,  233,  322. 

Pddanichrit , 124. 
Padapankti , 88. 

Pajra,  30. 

Panis,  243,  256,  287 
Pankti , 84. 

Paradise,  231. 

Pardsara , 105,  107, 

108,  224,  243. 
Parjanya,  60,  189,  332, 
231. 

Parwhchhepa , 57,  93 — 
95,  287. 

Parushnt , 137,  261. 
Parvata,  68. 

Rarvata  (a  Rishi)  79, 
81,  114,  115,  197, 

206,  291. 

Pastyas , 207. 

Pavamdna , 88,  89,  97, 
98,  102,  103,  107, 108, 
116,  121,  145.  See 
Soma  Pavamdna. 
Pavamdnas,  214. 
Pdvamdna  hymns , 230, 
231, 


XXXIV 


, INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC. 


Paviru,  291.  9 
Pavitra , 113,  158,«230. 
Pdyd,  18,  21,335,  337. 
Pipilikamadhyd  Anush- 
tup , 244.  * 

Plenty,  47,  157. 

Potar,  14. 

Prabhdvasu , 99.  * 
Pragdtha,  8,  30,  39,  47, 
48,  54,  58,  62,  72,  81, 
242,  243. 

Prdgdtha , 123. 
Pfajdpatu  22,  110, 

248,  288. 

Praslcanva , 7,  9, 11, 12, 
22,  36,  46,  61,'  74, 
106,  109,  147,  311, 
321. 

Pratardana , 105,  106, 
171,  211. 

f Pravargya,  26,  256. 
Prayer , 64. 

Prayer , Zorc?  o/,  11, 

171. 

Prayoga , 4,  5,  83,  172, 
282. 

Prisana,  198. 
Prishadhra , 91. 
Prisnayah , Prisnis,  1 48, 
i7*4,  187. 

Prisni , 32,  43,  83. 
Prithu , 63. 

< Priyamedha , 34,  64, 
72 — 74,  228,  229, 

244,  269,  273,  320, 
325. 

Priyamedhas  (plural), 

27,  64,  74. 

Priyamedhas  (singular), 

73,  131,  133,  300. 

f 


Purandhi,  47. 
Pura-ushnih,  88,  129. 
Purohita,  11,  274. 

20. 

Pdrus , 52. 

Puruhanman,  48,  53 — 
55,  156,  169,  206. 
Purumedha , 49,  51,  53, 

, 252,  256. 

Purumedhas , 51. 
Purumllha , 2,  11,  190, 
279. 

Purdravas,  159. 
Purushanti , 190. 

17,  31,  32,  39, 
40,  88,  89,  109,  148, 
194,  245,  288,  338. 
Pushtigu,  60,  29 i. 
Pdtabhrit,  322. 
Pdtadak&ha,  32,  35, 

322.  f 

RaMfrana,  227,  230. 
RQkshasas,  9,  18,  21, 
24,  25,  99,  103, 

109,  227,  258,  281, 
336. 

/fa»i  ( Indra)  77,  169, 
239. 

,Ranhd,  162. 

162. 

Rltahavy* , 204,  262. 
/fcMa,  50—52,  75,  94, 

110,  168. 

Rebhasdnus,  110,  184, 
295.  c 

Renu , 68,  112,  255. 
Ribhukshan,  40. 
tfiMws,  40,  50,  283. 
jtaA,  329. 


Richas , 329. 

Rijisvan,  24,  78,  109, 
110,  116,  117,  221, 
236,  288,  30*3. 

Riksha,  20.  • 

Rinanchaya , 116,  197. 

liinu}  68. 

Rita(m),  15,  144,153, 
311f' 

/taws,  45. 

Rudra,  50,  83,  89. 
Rudra  (Agni),  4,  16, 
301. 

« 

Rudras  (Maruts)t  22, 
50,  178,  283.  , 

Rudras  ( Asoins),  Si 5. 
Ruma , 220. 

Rusama,  220,  291. 

Sabardughd,  59. 
Sadasasjmti , 35. 
Sddhana , 199.° 
tiahagu , Sahangu , 63. 
Sakra , 30,  41,  52,  6T, 
74. 

Satot,  51,  116,  170, 

’ 197. 

71,  251,  256, 

329. 

Sdrnaveda,  1,  119. 
Sambara , 66,  81,  217, 
25'>. 

Sammads:,  84. 

Samvarta  91. 

Samyu , 8,  25,  28,  31, 
40,  46,  52,  53,  57, 
71,72,  128,  146,  294, 
30lr  f 

Saptafyu,  63. 

tiara  svat,  261. 


Surasvati,  37,  137, 

231,  261. 

Sarpardjht,  247. 

$ aryandvdv\  165,  207. 
^atakratu,  26,  33,  35, 
51,  69,  74,  83,  130, 
195,  208,  239,  261, 
323. 

Satobrihati,  115.  v 
Satya , 76,  77. 
Satyadhriti,  38. 
Satyasravas,  87,  314. 
Saubhari,  10,  13,  24, 
25,  8$-84. 

Saunaka , 43. 

Savithr,  13,  30,  36,  90, 
95,  242,  262,  270, 
315,  317. 

Sdvitri , 262. 

Savya,  76,  77. 

Seasons , 45. 

Seven , Celestial  rivers , 
112. 

communities , 131. 

metres  ( voices ) 

115,  1*3. 

mothers,  23. 

■ priests,  131,  212. 

/taAta,  102,  123, 

139,  155,  167,  180, 
194,  233,  305. 

stations , 183. 

supports (i  183. 

Si/cntas,  111,  161,  174, 
187,  205. 

Sikhandints,  114. 
Sindhu,  52,  194,  270. 
Sintffrudvtpa,  7,  331. 
Sipivishta,  294,  295. 
(Dawns),  230. 


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC. 

(fingers),  108, 

163,  254. 

( Seven  Rivers ), 

261. 

Skandhogrivi , 257. 
Sky,  36,  61,  136,  311, 
314. 

Sobhari,  10,  13,  24,  25, 
82-85,  129,  159, 

249,  253,  273,  280, 
285,  304,  328. 

Soma , 20,  23,  32,  59, 
73,  329,  337. 

(Moon),  200. 

Pavamdna , 88, 

89,  96,  97—120, 

137 — 143,  145 — 148, 
150—152,  155,  157, 
158,  161,  164,  166  — 
171,  174— 177, ISO- 
184,  187—190,  193, 
194,  196—199|  206, 
207,  211 — 222, 22§ — 
231,  233 — 237, 543— 
245,  248,  25<J— 252, 
254,  255,  257—259, 
263,  270,  272,  287, 

292,  295,  303,  305, 
306,  309,  318,  319, 
325. 

Somdhuti . 21 . 
Somaydga,  128 
Somaydjin , 1 28. 

Son  of  Strength , 128, 

164,  269,  279—281, 

293,  296,  32*., 
Sringdvrish,  132. 
Srutarvan , 20. 

Stotar , 35,  205. 
Suchadratha , 314, 


XXXV 

Sudakshcfy  31. 

Sudd§,  224. 

Sudtti,  2,  11,  279.* 
Suhotra , 64. 

Sukaksha , 2t>  — 28, 30— 
35,  37—42,  46,  130, 
131,  149,  219,  259, 
285>  297,  300,  323, 
Sumedhas,  76. 

Sumitra , 45. 

Sun,  the,  7,  13,  15,  17, 
19,  20,  27,  28,  30— 
32,  48,  51, 53,  64,  &ti, 
90,  93-95,  100,  112, 

136,  164,  201,  218, 
229, ‘ 242,  247,  260, 
262,  263,  271,  275, 
276,  281,  283,  28", 
330,  332. 

Sunaksepa,  4,  6,  32,  34, 
36,42,  135,  137,  194, 
225,  253,  270,  285, 
289.  293,  296,  301. 
Sunttha , 314. 

■Silnritd.  13. 

Sara,  94,  163,  287. 
Stirii,  SArayah,  9,  302. 
Stirya,  7,  13,  21,  27, 
28,  48,  55,  70,  94, 
100,  105,  107,  108, 
110,  113,  121,  127, 

137,  162,  164,  167, 
169,  171,  174,  175. 
186,  194,  201,  224, 
229,  245,  247,  254, 
256,  260,  278,  317, 
322,  323,  330,  332. 

Suthr.a,  81. 

Sutambhara,  164,  252. 
Sut-udri,  137,  261. 


XXXVI 


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  feTC. 


Suvedas,  76.  Trikadrukas,  92,  131,  Urvast , 159. 

Sydvaka,  220.  < 267.  Usand  Kdvya,  2,  3, 

Sydildsva,  30,  97,  139,  Trinapdni , 8.  104  -106,  123,  199, 


193. 


.Tawbnapdt,  241. 

Taranta , 190. 

Tdrkshya , 67,  73,  C38. 

Sf'atm^rciivasa,  60. 

Tew,  iAe  (fingers),  228. 

sisters , 107,  108. 

— — companions  (fing- 
er**), 236-  183,278. 

Thirty  divisions  of  day  Trita' s maidens , 139. 

night , 56.  dames , 227. 

realms , 247.  Tryaruna , 89,  244, 

7’Aree  AttpAfs.  105,  1 28,  270,  272. 

II 1 . 152.  Tugra,  56. 

heavens.  112,  128.  Tugriya , 56. 

luminous  realms , Turvasa,  28,  55,  217, 

128.  320.  220,  290. 

heavens  and  earths,  Turvaws,  52,  55. 

206  Tvashtar , 7,  60,  91, 

Soma  receptacles,  172,  33*1. 

171. 

steps  of  Vishnu , Uchathya , 100,  101, 

302.  216,  219. 

celestial  rivers  149 ,Uktha,  11,  137. 

times  seven  milch-  Ukthapdtras,  137. 

cow*,  112,  255.  UlaVdtdyana,  37,  331. 

FWaa,  91,  96,  l/niversal  Gods.  29. 

105  216.  • Uparishtddbrihatt , 86, 

. words,  96.  1 68.  * 

worlds,  112,  632.  Uparishtdjj yetis,  327. 

Time,  65.  Upastuta,  14,  24,  159. 

Tiraschi , 65,  70,  71,  Urdhvabrihatl , 270. 

161,  251.  Urdhvasodman,  116, 

Torasravas,  60.  ^250. 

Trasndasyu , 89,  244.  Uru,  116,  170. 

270,  272.  Uruchakri , 178. 


Trishtup  14,  330.  222,  263, 

Trisirds , 7,  16,  331.  Ushas,  36,  42,  56,  61; 
Trisoka,  28,  29,  33,  40  73,  74,  91,  278,  316. 
— 42,  75,  133,  192,  See  Dawn . 

237.  Ushnih,  23,  78. 

Trita,  75,  86, 139, 149,  Usij,  ?0> 

183,  184,  227,  230.  UtHla, , 13. 

Trita  Aptya,  7,  23,  79, 

86,  96,  97,  114,  157,  Vaikhdnasas,  120,  233, 


274.  t 

Vaisvdnara,  i5,  98,  203, 
204,  308. 

Vaivasvata,  11. 

Vdja , 40. 

Vdk,  37. 

Vala,  173,  224,  297. 
Vdlakhilya,  56. 
Vdmadeva,  3,  4,  6,  7, 
16,19,  20,  32^4—36, 
38—42,  44, 46,  59,60, 
66-68,71,72,  76,90, 
124,  288,  295,  311, 

321. 

Vardhamd  id , 261. 
Varuna , 11,  20,  21  37, 
38,  41—43,  50,  57, 
64,77, 88,92,  96,105, 
121,  122,  139,  143, 
144,  153,  155,  165, 
178,  180,  192—194, 
197,  203  201,  207, 
224,  232,  252,  255, 
262,  277,  285,  298, 

322,  332,  334,  337. 
Vasa,  37,  38,  41,  52. 
Vasatbvart,  98,  1 10, 

112,  2G7,  309. 


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC. 


XXXVII 


Vashat , 295. 

Vasishtha , 6,  10,  12, 
14,  16,  18,29,  33,  46, 
47,54,56  57,59,61  — 
64,  66,  82,  89,  102, 
105,  107,  123,  130, 
136,  145,  146,  157, 
168,  192,  218,  230, 
242,  246,  247,  251, 
25 2,  260,  273,  294, 
295,  302,  304,  324. 
Vasishthns,  232,  251. 
Vasu , 27,  '5,  68,  113, 
130,  133,  156,  222. 
Fast*  ( a Bishi ),  234. 
Vasu lent,  87. 
Vasuruchas,  270. 

Vasus,  22,  246. 

Va  susruta,  86,  88,  185, 
313 

Vas&yus,  19,  274. 

Viita,  37,  331,  332. 
Vatsa,  3,  5,  29,  30,  32, 
36 — 38,  41,  52,  57, 
f 6,  87,  208,  232,  271, 
299. 

Vatsnpri,  17,  18,  113. 
Vaya,  314. 

Vdyu,  91,  97,  98,  139, 
149,  166,  167,  194, 
202,  212,  213,  221, 
224,  229,  231,  250, 
255,  260,  295. 
Vayya,  314. 

Vedas,  8,  105. 

Vena,  64,112,  332,  333. 
Vibhrdj , 260. 
Vichakihana,  21-?. 
Vidadaeiva,  19(f. 


Vimada , 67,  87. 

Vindu,  32,  35,  322. 
Viple , 137,  261. 

Virdj , 211. 

Virdj(  metre ),  14, 65,81 . 
Virddjagati , 336. 
Virdtsthdnd,  338. 
Virdpa,  3,  6,  40,  276, 
277,  298,  308 
Vishtdr  tpankti , 327. 
FiVmw,  21,  42,  44,  79, 
93,  94,  105,  139,  171, 
180,  184,  267.  294, 
295,  298,  302. 

Visva,  3. 

Visvakarman , 286. 
Visvakarman  Bhauvana, 
286. 

Visvamanas , 24,  25,  79, 
82,  272,  304. 
FfsvdmJ/a,  1 2,  #1 4,  1 7, 
23,  31,  41,  43, *48,  66, 
68,  76,  102,  12^,  ^22, 
134,  262,  277*  2$0, 
283,  3<»5,  307,  309. 
Visvedevdh,  Visvedevas , 
29,  51,  86,  288. 
Vttahavya , 120.  248, 
250,  264,  282,  307. 
Fttastfd,  137,  261.  • 

Viuasvdn,  94,  200:229, 
295.  • 

Vrishagana  (s)y  105, 
200 

Vrishan,  vrishd,  101, 
142,  277.  * 

Vritra,  26,  63,  65 — 67, 
73,  76,  81,  84,  85,  95, 
100,  146,  193,  219, 


224,  #0,  248,  259, 
280,  297,  299,  322, 
336. 

Vritras,  28,  36,  Di,  ou, 
66,  89,  1€5,  168,  244, 
250,  251,  256,  260. 
Vritra-slayer  ( Indra  ), 

3 Of  40,  41,42,^1—54, 
62,  66,  85,  91,  156, 
169,  181,  186,  199, 
236,  269,  300,  3o3. 
309,  323,  335,  336 

( Agni ),  20.  248. 

( S Ary  ft ),  28. 

• ( Soma ),  1 *25,  175, 

Vulcan,  60. 

Wyasva,  35,  272. 

> 

Waters,  the,  7,  253. 
329,  331 

Waters1  Child,  the , 14. 
253 

Water-Goddesses.  35. 
Wild-boar  ( Soma )%  1 05. 

Yadu,  28,  217,  290. 
Yadus,  52. 

Yajamdna , 35,  239. 
Yajurveda , 33 0. 

Yama , 64,  68,  332. 
Yaml,  68. 

Yamund , 65. 

Yati,  173. 

Ydtudhdtia( s),  1 8,  21. 
Yaydti , 109,  157. 

Ydpa  (sacrificial  post), 
13. 

Youngest,  the  ( Agni ), 
232. 


CORRIGENDA. 

Page  37,  line  *10  of  note,  read  82  for  87 

* 91,  last  line  of  note,  read  Prishadhra  for  Prishadra 

■ 196,  line  1 of  note,  read  1,  6,  2 for  1,  5,  2 

* 301,  head  line  of  III.,  read  Agni  for  Indra 

* , 304,  line  5 of  note,  read  iv.  ii.  5.  5 for  ii.  ii.  3.  6 

* 310,  line  15,  ,« read  Indra,  for  Indra. 

* 327,  line  8 of  note,  read  Uparishtajjy otis/or  U parish  tAjjyotia 


g-fRT  - 


Wnmmmm 

H/H,  B.  P.B4.  Gal. 


