===== Internet Archive OCR: thesamkhyaphilos00sinhuoft_djvu.txt =====

THE 

SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  HINDUS 


Translated  by  various  Sanskrit  Scholars 


EDITED   BY 

MAJOR  B.  D.  BASU,  I.M.S.  (Retired) 


VOL.  XL 

r-gJAMKHYA  PHILOSOPHY 


' 
i 


PUBLISHED  BY 
THE  PAJVINI  OFFICE,   BHUVANE-SWARI  ASRAMA,  BAHADURGANJ 

Bllababai) 

PRINTED  BY  APURVA  KRISHNA  BOSE,  AT  THE  INDIAN  PRESS 

1915 


THE 

SAMKHYA  PHILOSOPHY 


CONTAINING 

(i)  SAMKHYA-PRAVACHANA  SI)TRAM,  WITH  THE  VRITTI  OP  ANIRUDDHA, 
AND  THE  BHASYA  OF  VIJNANA  BHIKSU  AND  EXTRACTS 
FROM  THE  VRITTI-SARA  OF  MAHADEVA  VEDANTIN  ; 
(2)  TATVA  SAM  ASA/ (3)  SAMKHYA 
(4)  PANCHASIKHA 


TRANSLATED  BY 

NANDALAL  SINHA,  M.A,  B.L.,  P.C.S. 

DEPUTY  MAGISTRATE,  DALTONGANJ. 


PUBLISHED  BY 

SUDHINDRA  NATH  VASU, 
THE  PANINI  OFFICE,  BHUVANESWARl  ASRAMA,  BAHADURGANJ, 

Bllababat) 

PRINTED  BY  APURVA  KRISHNA  BOSE,  AT  THE  INDIAN  PRESS 

1915 


135. 


i  •<? 


Kris  Una    bha-. 
Calcutta. 

PREFACE. 


The  present  volume  of  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  Hindus  which  bears 
The  Contents  of  the  the  modest  title  of  the  Sdrnkhya-Praoacliana-Sutra,m, 
is,  in  reality,  a  collection  of  all  the  available  original 

documents  of  the  School  of  the  Samkhyas,  with  the  single  exception  of  the 
commentary  composed  by  Vyasa  on  theSdmhhya-Pravaehana-Yoga-Sutram 
of  Patanjali.  For  it  contains  in  its  pages  not  only  the  Sdmkhya-Prava- 
efiana-Sutram  of  Kapila  together  with  the  Vritti  of  Aniruddha,  the  Bhdsya 
of  Vijnana  Bhiksu,  and  extracts  of  the  original  portions  from  the  Vrit- 
tisdra  of  Vedantin  Mahadeva,  but  also  the  Tattoa-Samasa  together  with 
the  commentary  of  Narendra,  the  Samkhya- Kdrikd  of  t^varakrisna  with 
profuse  annotations  based  on  the  Blidsya  of  Gaudapada  and  the  Tattva- 
Kaumudi  of  Vaehaspati  MisVa,  and  a  few  of  the  Aphorisms  of  Pancha- 
rfikha  with  explanatory  notes  according  to  the  Yoga-Bhdsya  which  has 
quoted  them.  An  attempt,  moreover,  has  been  made  to  make  the  volume 
useful  in  many  other  respects  by  the  addition,  for  instance,  of  elaborate 
analytical  tables  of  contents  to  the  Sdmkhya-Prauachana-Sutram  and  the 
Sdmhhya-Kdrikd,  and  of  a  number  of  important  appendices. 

In  the  preparation  of  this  volume,  I  have  derived  very  material  help 
from  the  excellent  editions  of  the  Vritti  of  Aniruddha  and  the  Bhdsya  of 
Vijnana  Bhiksu  on  the  Sdmkhya-Pravachana-Sutram  by  Dr.  Richard  Garbe, 
to  whom  my  thanks  are  due.  And,  in  general,  I  take  this  opportunity  of 
acknowledging  my  indebtedness  to  all  previous  writers  on  the  Samkhya, 
living  and  dead,  from  whose  writings  I  l^ve  obtained  light  and  leading 
in  many  important  matters  connected  with  the  subject. 

An  introduction  only  now  remains  to  be  written.  It  is  proposed, 
lowever,  to  write  a  separate  monogram  on  the  Samkhya  Dar^ana,  which 
would  be  historical,  critical  and  comparative,  in  its  scope  and  character.  In 
this  preface,  therefore,  only  a  very  brief  account  is  given  of  some  of  the 
cardinal  doctrines  of  the  Samkhya  School. 

The  first  and  foremost  among  these  is  the  Sat-Kdrya-Siddhdvita  or  the 

Established  Tenet  of  Existent  Effect.     It  is  the  Law 
The      La\v       of      the 

[Identity  of  Cause  and     of  the  Identity  of  Cause  and  Effect :  what_  is   called 
the  cause  is  the  umnanifested  state  of  what  is  called 
the  effect,  and  what  is  called  the  effect  is  only  the  manifested  state  of   what 


PREFACE. 


is  called  the  cause  ;  their  substance  is  one  and  the  same  ;  differences  of 
manifestation  and  non-manifestation  give  rise  to  the  distinctions  of 
Cause  and  Effect.  The  effect,  therefore,  is  never  non-existent  ;  whether 
before  its  production,  or  whether  after  its  destruction,  it  is  always 
existent  in  the  cause.  For,  nothing  can  come  out  of  nothing,  and  nothing 
can  altogether  vanish  out  of  existence. 

This   doctrine  would   be   better    understood    by   a  comparison  with 
Definition  of  Cause  and     the  contrary  views  held   by  other   thinkers   on   the 
Effect.  relation  of   cause  and  effect.     But  before  we  proceed 

to  state  these  views,  we  should  define  the  terms  "  cause  "  and  "  effect." 
One  thing  is  said  to  be  the  cause  of  another  thing,  when  the  latter 
cannot  be  without  the  former.  In  its  widest  sense,  the  term,  Cause, 
therefore,  denotes  an  agent,  an  act,  an  instrument,  a  purpose,  some* 
material,  time,  and  space.  In  fact,  whatever  makes  the  accomplishment 
of  the  effect  possible,  is  one  of  its  causes.  And  the  immediate  result  of 
the  operation  of  these  causes,  is  their  effect.  Time  and  Space,  however, 
are  universal  causes,  inasmuch  as  they  are  presupposed  in  each  and  every 
act  of  causation.  The  remaining  causes  fall  under  the  descriptions  of 
Aristotelian  Division  "Material/5  "Efficient,"  "Formal,"  and  "Final." 
^Th^Smkhya  Divi-  The  Samkhyas  further  reduce  them  to  two  des- 
slon-  criptions  only,  viz.,  Updddna,  i.e.,  the  material, 

which  the  Naiyayikas  call  Samavdyi  or  Combinative  or  Constitutive, 
and  Nimitta,  i.  e.,  the  efficient,  formal,  and  final,  which  may  be  vari 
ously,  though  somewhat  imperfectly,  translated  as  the  instrumental, 
efficient,  occasional,  or  conditional,  because  it  includes  the  instruments 
with  which,  the  agent  by  which,  the  occasion  on  which,  and  the  conditions 
under  which,  the  act  is  performed.  Obviously, 
there  is  a  real  distinction  between  the  Updddna  and 


the  Nimiwa  :    the  Updddna   enters   into  the  consti 
tution    of    the  effect,  and   the   power   of  taking   the   form   of,  in    other 
words,  the  potentiality  of  being  re-produced  as,  the  effect,  resides  in  it  ; 
while   the   Nimitta,  by  the   exercise   of  an  extraneous  influence  only,  co 
operates  with  the  power  inherent  in   the  material,   in  its  re-production   in 
the  form  of  the  effect,  and  its  causality  ceases  with  such  re-production. 
To  take  the  case  of   a  coin,  for  example  :   the  material  causality  was  in  a 
lump  of  gold  ;  it  made  possible  the  modification  of  the  gold  into  the  form 
of  the  coin,  it  will  remain  operative  as  long  as  the  coin  will  last  as  a  coin, 
and  after  its  destruction,  it  will  pass  into  the  potential  state  again  ;   but 
the  operation  of   the  Nimittas  came  to   an  end   as  soon  as  the  coin  was 
minted. 


PREFACE. 


Similarly,  the  Samkhyas  distinguish  the  Effect  under  the  twofold 
aspect  of  simple  manifestation  and  of  re-production.  Thus,  the  coin  is  an 
instance  of  causation  by  re-production,  while  the  production  of  cream 
from  milk  is  an  instance  of  causation  by  simple  manifestation. 

Now,  as  to  the  origin  of  the  world,  there  is  a  divergence  of  opinion 
among  thinkers  of  different  Schools  :  Some  uphold 
the  Theory  of  Creation,  others  maintain  the  Theory 
of  Evolution.  Among  the  Creationists  are  counted 

the  Nastikas  or  Nihilists,  the  Buddhists,  and  the  Naiyayikas ;  and 
among  the  Evolutionists,  the  Vedantins  and  the  Samkhyas.  The  Nas 
tikas-  hold  that  the  world  is  non-existent,  that  is,  unreal,  and  that  it 
came  out  of  what  was  not ;  the  Buddhists  hold  that  the  world  is  existent, 
that  is,  real,  and  that  it  came  out  of  what  was  not ;  the  Naiyayikas  hold 
that  the  world  is  non-existent,  that  is,  non-eternal,  perishable,  and 
that  it  came  out  of  the  existent,  that  is,  what  is  eternal,  imperishable; 
the  Vedantins  hold  that  the  world  is  non-existent,  that  is,  unreal,  and  that  it 
came  out  of  what  was  existent,  that  is,  real,  namely,  Brahman  ;  and  the 
Samkhyas  hold  that  the  world  is  existent,  that  is,  real,  and  that  it  came  out 
of  what  was  existent,  that  is,  real,  namely,  the  Pradhdna.  Thus,  there  are 
the  A-Sat-Kdrya-Vdda  of  the  Nastikas  that  a  non-existent  world  has  been 
produced  from  a  non-existent  cause,  and  of  the  Buddhists  that  an  existent 
world  has  been  produced  from  a  non-existent  cause,  the  Abhdva-Utpatti-Vdda 
of  the  Naiyayikas  that  a  non-eternal  world  has  been  produced  from  an 
eternal  cause,  the  Vivarta-Vada  of  the  Vedantins  that  the  world  is  a  re 
volution,  an  illusory  appearance,  of  the  one  eternal  reality,  viz.,  Brahman, 
and  the  Sat-Kdrya-Vada  of  the  Samkhyas  that  an  existent  world  has  been 
produced  from  an  existent  cause. 

Against  the  theories  of   A-Sat-Kdrw,    Abhdva-Utpatti,   and  Vivarta, 

esfawirhThe^la^hya      *?d    in    8UPP0rt    °f    their    theory    °f    ^-^ya,  the 
Theory.  Samkhyas  advance  the  following  arguments  : 

I.     There  can  be  no  production   of  what  is  absolutely    non-existent  • 

e.g.,  a  man's  born. 

TI.  There  must  be  some  determinate  material  cause  for  every  pro 
duct.  Cream,  for  instance,  can  form  on  milk  only,  and  never 
on  water.  Were  it  as  absolutely  non-existent  in  milk  as  it  is  in 
water,  there  would  be  no  reason  why  it  should  form  on  milk, 
and  not  equally  on  water. 

III.  The  relation  of  cause  and  effect  is  that  of  the  producer  and  the 
produced,  and  the  simplest  conception  of  the  cause  as  the  pro- 
ducer_is  that  it  possesses  the  potentiality 'of  becoming  the  effect, 


iv  PREFACE. 


and  this  potentiality  is  nothing  but  the  unrealised  state  of  the 
effect. 
IV.     The  effect   is  seen  to    possess    the  nature  of  the  cause,  e.g.,  a  coin 

still  possesses  the  properties  of  the  gold  of  which  it  is  made. 
V.     Matter   is    indestructible  ;    u  destruction  "   means  disappearance 

into  the  cause. 

It  follows,   therefore,   that   cause   and  effect   are  neither  absolutely 
The  World  possesses       dissimilar  nor  absolutely  similar  to  each  other.     They 
phenomenal  reality.  possess    essential   similarities  and  formal  dissimilari 

ties.  Such  being  the  relation  between  cause  and  effect,  the  world  cannot 
possibly  have  come  out  of  something  in  which  it  had  been  absolutely  non 
existent,  and  which  accordingly  was,  in  relation  to  it,  as  good  as  non-existent. 
For  the  world  is  neither  absolutely  unreal  nor  absolutely  real.  The  test  of 
objective  reality  is  its  opposition  to  consciousness.  It  is  distinguished  as 
Prcitibhdsilta  or  apparent,  Vyavalidrika  or  practical  or  phenomenal,  and 
Pdramarthika  or  transcendental.  Of  these,  the  world  possesses  phenomenal 
reality,  and  must,  therefore,  have  a  transcendental  reality  as  its 
substratum.  Thus  is  the  Doctrine  of  Sat-Kdrya  established. 

A  natural  corollary  from  the    above  doctrine  is  the  other  doctrine  of 
The   Doctrine   of     Parindma  or  transformation.     ]t  is  the  doctrine  that, 
Transformation.  ag  aj]    effects  are    contained    in   their   causes  in  an 

unmanifested  form,  the  "production''  of  an  effect  is  nothing  but  its 
manifestation,  and  that,  as  cause  and  effect  are  essentially  identical,  an 
effect  is  merely  a  transformation  of  the  cause. 

Now,  the  question  arises,  whether  the  cause  of   the  world  be  a  single 
The  Cause    of  the     one,    or   whether  it  be  manifold.     Some  think  that, 
World,  one  or  manifold?     according  to  the  Naiyayikas,  who  declare    the  exist 
ence    of  Parama-Anus   or  the   ordinary    Atoms    of  Matter,    the   world  has 
sprung  from    a  plurality    of   causes.     This  is,   however,    to    take   a  very 
superficial   view    of  the  Nyaya-Vai^'esika  Dar^ana.     The  Naiyayikas  were 
The  Position  of   the     certainly  not  timid  explorers  of  metaphysical  truths  ; 
Naiyayikas  explained.          there    ig    absolute]y    no    reason    for    Sllpposing    that 

they  either  would  not  or  could  not  penetrate  behind  and  beyond  the 
ordinary  Atoms  of  Matter.  As  I  have  elsewhere  pointed  out,  it  would 
be  a  mistake  to  treat  the  six  Dar&mas  as  each  being  a  complete  and 
self-contained  system  of  thought ;  in  respect  of  their  scope  and  purpose, 
they  bear  no  analogy  to  the  philosophies  of  the  West.  They  are  singly 
neither  universal  nor  final ;  but  they  mutually  supplement  one  another. 
Their  Risis  address  themselves  to  particular  sets  of  people  possessing 
different  degrees  of  mental  and  spiritual  advancement.  They  reveal 


PREFACE 


and  explain  the  truths  embodied  in  the  Vedas  to  them  from  their 
point  of  view  and  according  to  their  competence,  and  thus  help 
them  in  realising  the  truths  for  themselves  and  thereby  in  progressing 
towards  Self-realisation.  If  the  Naiyayikas,  therefore,  do  not  carry  their 
analysis  of  the  world  further  than  the  ordinary  Atoms  of  Matter,  it 
must  not  be  assumed  that  they  teach  a  sort  of  atomic  pluralism  as  the 
ultimate  theory  of  the  origin  of  the  world,  and  are  in  this  opposed  to  the 
authors  of  the  other  ^astras  which  teacli  a  different  origin.  The  right 
explanation  is  that  they  make  but  a  partial  declaration  of  the  Vedic  truths 
and  cut  short  the  process  of  resolution  at  the  ordinary  Atoms  of  Matter, 
because  they  address  themselves  to  a  class  of  students  who  do  not  possess 
the  mental  capacity  to  grasp  subtler  truths. 

For  the  sense  of    unity  which  has  found    expression  in    the    Law   of 

Unity  of  the  Cause  of     Parsimony,    points  to  a  single  original  of   the  world 

or  material  manifestation,    as  revealed  in   the  Vedas. 

And  the  Samkhya  makes  its  students  acquainted  with  this.  It,  is  called 
the  Root,  and  is  described  as  the  Pradhdna,  that  in  which  all  things  are 
contained,  and  as  Praltriti,  the  mother  of  things. 

It  is  a  long  way  from  the  ordinary  Atoms  of  Matter  to  the  Pradhana 
The  Scope  of  the  or  Primordial  Matter.  The  Samkhya  undertakes  to 
Samkhya.  declare  and  expound  the  successive  transformations 

of  the  Pradhana  down  to  the  Gross  Matter,  with  the  object  of  accomplish 
ing  the  complete  isolation  of  the  Self  from  even  the  most  shadowy  con 
junction  with  the  Pradhana. 

The  d efinition  of  Prakriti  is  that  it  is  the  sjbate  of  ^guilibrium 
of  Sattva,  Rajas,  and  Tamas,  called  the  Gunas. 

Definition  of  Prakriti.      -—- . . 

It  is  the  genus  of  which  the  Chinas  are  the  species. 

Their  state  of  equilibrium  is  their  latent,  jpotent'ml,  or  inactive  state,  the 
state  of  noTbeing  developed  into  effects.  The  Gunas  are  extremely  fine 
substances,  and  are  respectively  the  principles  of  illumination,  evolution, 
and  involution,  and  the  causes  of  pleasure,  pain,  and  dullness.  For, 
Sattva  is  light  and  illuminating,  Rajas  is  active  and  urgent,  and  Tamas  is 
heavy  and  enveloping.  They  are  in  eternal  and  indissoluble  conjunction 
with  one  another,  aud,  by  nature,  mutually  overpower,  support,  produce, 
and  intimately  mix  with,  one  another. 

This  doctrine   of  the  Three   Gunas    is   the   very    foundation    of  the 

Samkhya    Tantra.     It    is  explained  in  the  following 

The  Doctrine  of  the  / 1  -    TT<  i  •          •         i 

Three  Gunas.  manner:    (I)  Everything  in  the  world,    external    as 

well  as  internal,  is    in   constant   change  ;  and   there 

can   be  no   change,    whether   it    be   movement    in  space,    or    whether   it 


vi  PREFACE. 


be  movement  in  time,  without  rest.  Side  by  side,  therefore,  with  the 
principle  of  mutation,  there  must  be  a  principle  of  conservation.  And,  as 
Berkeley  tells  us,  existence  is  perception, --whatever  is  not  manifested  to 
Consciousness,  individual  or  universal,  does  not  exist.  Another  principle 
is,  therefore,  required  which  would  make  the  manifestation  of  the  other 
two  principles  and  of  their  products,  (as  also  of  itself  and  of  its  own),  to 
Consciousness  possible.  Thus,  at  the  origin  of  the  world,  there  must  be 
a  principle  of  conservation,  a  principle  of  mutation,  and  a  principle  of 
manifestation.  (2)  Similarly,  an  examination  of  the  intra-organic  energies 
would  disclose  the  existence  of  three  distinct  principles  behind  them. 
These  energies  are  the  eleven  Indriyas  or  Powers  of  Cognition  and  Action, 
and  Prana  or  Vital  Force.  Among  them,  the  Powers  of  Cognition,  e.g., 
Seeing,  Hearing,  etc.,  cause  manifestation  of  objects,  the  Powers  of  Action, 
e.g.,  seizing  by  the  hand,  etc.,  produce  change,  and  Prana  conserves  and 
preserves  life.  (3)  In  the  mind,  again,  modifications  of  three  distinct 
characters  take  place  ;  viz.,  cognition,  conation,  and  retention  ;  and  these 
could  not  be  possible  without  there  being  a  principle  of  manifestation, 
a  principle  of  mutation,  and  a  principle  of  conservation  respectively. 
(4)  Likewise,  a  psycho-£esthetic  analysis  of  our  worldly  experience  yields 
the  result  that  everything  in  the  universe  possesses  a  threefold  aspect, 
that  is,  it  may  manifest  as  agreeable,  or  as  disagreeable,  or  as  neutral,  i.e., 
neither  agreeable  nor  disagreeable.  It  must  then  have  derived  these 
characteristics  from  its  cause  ;  for  nothing  can  be  in  the  effect  which 
was  not  in  the  cause.  The  principles  of  manifestation,  mutation,  and 
conservation,  therefore,  which  are  operative  in  the  change  of  the  states  of 
agreeable,  disagreeable,  and  neutral,  must  also  possess  the  nature  of  being 
pleasant  (t&nta),  unpleasant  (ghora),  and  dull  (mud ha). 

It  is  these  principles  of  manifestation,  mutation,  and  conservation, 
possessing  the  nature  of  pleasure,  pain,  and  dullness,  that  are  respectively 
the  Gunas,  Sattva,  Rajas,  and  Tamas,  of  the  Samkhyas.  They  are  the 
constitutive  elements  of  Prakriti.  They  are  Gunas  in  their  manifested 
forms;  they  are  Prakriti  in  their  unmanifested  form. 

The  transformations  of  Prakriti  are  either  prakriti-vikriti,  original  or 

evolvent  as  well  as  modification  or  evolute,  or  vikriti, 
The  Transformations 
of  Prakriti  .enumerated     modification   or   evolute    merely.      Ihe    former    are 

and  distinguished.  themselves    transformations    of    their    antecedents, 

and,  in  their  turn,  give  rise  to  subsequent  transformations.  They  are 
Mahat,  Ahamkara,  and  the  five  Tan-matras.  The  latter  are  the  eleven 
Indriyas  and  the  five  gross  Elements.  The  transformation  of  Praki-iti 
ceases  with  them.  Of  course,  the  gross  Elements  combine  and  evolve  the 


PREFACE.  vii 


material  world  ;  but  the  world  is  not  a  different  Tattva  or  principle  from 
the  Elements,  because  it  does  not  develop  a  single  attribute  which  is  not 
already  possessed  by  them.  For  the  test  of  a  Tattva  or  original  or  ultimate 
principle  is  that  it  possesses  a  characteristic  property  which  is  not  pos 
sessed  by  any  other  Tattva. 

The    objective    world    thus    contains    twenty-four    Tattvas,    namely, 

Prakriti,  Mahat,  Aham-kara,  Manas,  the  five  Indriyas 
The  Objective  World  '.  .  ' 

consists     of     Twenty-     or  Cognition,    the   rive    In  any  as  or  Action,   the   five 

four  Tattvas.  m          \,  j   -i       r  THI 

lan-matras,  and  the  live  gross  Elements. 
At    the  beginning  of  creation,  there  arises  in  Prakriti  Spandana   or 

cosmic  vibration  which  disturbs  its  state  of  equili- 
The    Transformation 
of  Prakriti  is  Mahat  or     briutn,    and    releases    the    Gunas  from    quiescence. 

Buddhi.  T^    .  0    , 

Kajas  at  once  acts  upon  battva  and  manifests  it  as 

Mahat.  Mahat  denotes  Buddhi,  the  material  counterpart  and  basis  of 
what  we  term  Understanding  or  Reason.  Buddhi  is  called  Ma.ha.tj  gr^p.^ 

because  it  is  the  principal  among  the  Instruments  of  Cognition  and  Action. 
Mahat  also  means  "  light  "  ;  it  is  derived  from  the  Vedic  word  Malias  or 
Maghas,  meaning  light.  And  Buddln  is  called  Mahat,.  because  jtLJgJhe 
initial  transformation  of  Sattva  which  is  the  principle  of  manifestation. 
Or,  Buddhi  which  is  the  first  manifestation  of  the  Gunas  and  which  is  the 
material  cause  of  the  world,  is  called  Mahat,  in  order 

Universal  and  Indivi-  .  .  ... 

dual     Buddhis    distin-     to  distinguish  it   from  individual  or  finite  Buddhis 

which  are  its  parts.     For  "  what  is    the  Buddhi  of 

the  first-born  golden- egged  (Brahma),  the  same  is  the  primary  basis  of  all 
Buddhis;  it  is  here  called  the  '  great  self.' ' 

The  function    of  Buddhi   is  Adhyavasftya   or   certainty   leading   to 

Definition  of  Buddhi.     2£^-  It  manifests  in  eight  forms  ;  m.,  as   virtue, 

knowledge,  dispassion  and  power,    while  _Sattva_ is. 

predominant  in  it,  and  as  vice,  ignorance,  passion,  and  weakness,  while 
Tamas  is  predominant  in  it.  And  these,  again,  are  modified  into  in 
numerable  forms,  which,  are  classified  as  Error,  Incapacity,  Complacency, 
and  Perfection.  Such  is  Pratyaya-sarga  or  the  creation  of  Buddhi  or 
intellectual  creation  as  contra- distinguished  from  elemental  creation. 

From  Buddhi  springs  Aham-kara  :    from    "  cogito"   1  think,  "  sum" 

The  Transformation  of     I  am,. Aham-kara  is  literally  the  I-maker.     It  is  the 

Buddhi  is  Aham-kara.  material  counterpart  and  basis  of  what  we  term  ego 
ism,  and  causes  modifications  of  Buddhi  in  the  forms  of  "I  am,"  "I  do," 
etc.,  etc.  It  is  the  principle  of  personal  identity  and  of  individuation.  Its 
function  is  Abhimana,  conceit,  thinking  with  reference  to  itself,  assump- 
.iQ__itself.  But  it  is  not  a  mere  function  ;  it  is  a  substanoe 


viii  PREFACE. 


in  which  reside  Vdsands  or  the  resultant  teiidencies  of  accumulated  ^ex 
perience,  and  which  is  capable  of  modification  into  other  and  grosser 
forms. 

This  Aham-kara,  which  is  the  first   transformation  of   Buddhi,  is  the 

Universal  and  Indivi-  cosmic  Aham-kara,  the  Upadhi  or  adjunct  of  the 
dual  Aham-karas  dis-  golden-egged  Brahma,  the  Creator.  It  is  the 

tinguished.  ,     .  . 

infinite  source  or  the  finite  Aham-karas  of  indivi 
dual  Jivas. 

The    modification    of    Aham-kara    is    twofold,  according    as   it  is  in- 

The   Transformations     ^nced  by  Sattva  or  by  Tamas.     The  Sattvic  modi- 

of  Aham-kara  are :  The     fications  are  the    eleven    Indriyas,   that   is,   the    five 

Indriays  of  Cognition,  vis.,  the  powers  located  in  the 

Eye,  Ear,  Nose,  Tongue,  and  Skin,  the  five  Indriyas  of  Action,  viz.,  the 
powers  located  in  the  voice,  hand,  feet,  and  the  organs  of  generation  and  of 
excretion,  and  Manas.  Manas  is  both  a  power  of  cognition  and  a  power 
of  action.  Assimilation  and  differentiation  are  its  distinctive  functions. 

The  Tamasic  modifications  of    Aham-kara  are    the    five  Tan-matras, 

viz.,  of  Sound,  Touch,  Form,  Flavour  and  Smell. 
And  the  Tan-ma  bras.  ,  ,  •  i  i  ^i 

They  are  pure,  subtle  or  simple  elements,  the  meta 
physical  parts  of  the  ordinary  Atoms  of  Matter.  They  are  "fine  substan 
ces,"  to  quote  from  Vijnana  Bhiksu,  "  the  undifrerentiated  (a-visfesa)  origi 
nals  of  the  Gross  Elements,  which  form  the  substratum  of  Sound,  Touch, 
Form,  Flavour  and  Smell,  belonging  to  that  class  (that  is,  in  that  stage  of 
their  evolution)  in  which  the  distinctions  of  fifinta  ''pleasant1,  etc.,  do  not 
exist."  The  process  of  their  manifestation  is  as  follows:  The  Tan- 
ma  tra  of  Sound,  possessing  the  attribute  of  Sound,  is  produced  from 
Aham-kara  ;  then,  from  the  Tan-matras  of  Sound,  accompanied  by  Aham- 
kara,  is  produced  the  Tan- ma  tra  of  Touch,  possessing  the  attributes  of 
Sound  and  Touch.  In  a  similar  mariner,  the  other  Tan-matras  are  produced, 
in  the  order  of  their  mention,  by  the  addition  of  one  more  attribute  at 
each  successive  step. 

The   transformations   of   the   Tan-matras   are  the  Gross  Elements  of 

,         .          Ether,  Air,  Fire,  Water,   and    Earth, — the  ordinary 
The   Transformations  ' 

of  the  Tan-matras  are  Atoms  of  Matter,  in  which  appear  for  the  first  time  the 
the  Gross  Elements.  .  .  ,  .  , 

distinctions  of  being  pleasant,   painful,  and  neutral. 

All  Bodies,  from  that  of  Brahma  down  to  a  stock,  are  formed  of  them. 

Now,    all     this     objective     world     is    non-intelligent,    because    its 

How  the  Existence  of     material  cause,  Prakriti,  is  non-intelligent.     It    does 

a  Subjective  Principle,     not,    therefore,    exist    or   energise   for  its  own  sake. 

There  must  be  some  one  else   of  a   different  nature, 


PREFACE. 


IX 


some  intelligent  being,  for  whose  benefit,  i.e.,  experience  and  freedom, 
all  this  activity  of  Prakriti  is.  Thus  do  the  Sdmkhyas  explain  the 
existence  of  Purusa. 

The  Twentyfive  To   classify   the   Tattvas  logically,  they  may  be 

Tatfcvas'  exhibited  thus  : 


Jna. 
Knower, 
Intelligent, 
Subject  : 
25  Purusa. 

A-Jna. 
Non-knower, 
Non-intelligent, 
Object  : 

Ma. 

ifest. 

ahat. 
m-kara. 

1 
A-vyakta.                                                                     Vya 
Unmanifesfc  :                                                                   Man 
24  Prakriti,  the  state 
of  equilibrium  of                                                         23  M 
Sattva,  Rajas  and 
Tamas.                                                                  22  Aha 

x  Sattva. 
1 

XTan 

as. 

Indriyas       ^ 
of              k   21  Manas. 
Cognition  :    } 
Powers  located  in— 
20  The  Eye. 
19  The  Ear. 
18  The  Nose. 
17  The  Tongue. 
16  The  Skin. 

1 
(     Indriyas 
of 
{     Action  : 
Powers  located  in  — 
15  Hands. 
14  Feet. 
13  Speech. 
12  Excretory  Organ. 
11  Organ  of  generation. 

1                               1 
10  Sound.               8  Touch. 
1                               1 
9  Ether.                7    Air. 

1                             1                             ! 
6  Form.               4  Flavour.                2  Smell. 

[                               1                              1 
5  Fire.                 3  Water.                   1  Earth. 

Of  these,  Purusa  is  the  principle  of   Being,  Prakriti  is  the  principle 
Purusa  and  Prakriti     of   Becoming  :   Purusa   eternally  is,  never   becomes, 
contrasted.  while  Prakriti  is  essentially  Movement ;  even  during 

Pralaya  or  Cosmic  Dissolution,  its  activity  does  not  altogether  cease ; 
it  then  undergoes  homogeneous  transformation  :  Sattva  modifying  as 
Sattva,  Rajas  modifying  as  Rajas,*  and  Tamas  modifying  as  Tamas. 
Purusa,  on  the  other  hand,  is  eternal  consciousness  undisturbed.  Noth 
ing  can  come  into  him,  nothing  can  go  out  of  him ;  he  is  Kuta-stha, 
dwelling  in  the  cave.  And  these  two  eternal  co-ordinate  principles 
The  Spontaneity  of  are  in  eternal  conjunction  with  each  other.  But 
conjunction  as  such  does  not  set  Prakriti  in  move 
ment.  Creation  is  caused  by  E&ga  or  Passion.  Rdga  is  a  change  of 
state  which  spontaneously  takes  place  in  the  Rajas  of  Buddhi,  through 
the  influence  of  Dharma  and  A-dharma.  These  are  the  natural 
consequences  of  the  previous  changes  in  the  transformations  of  Prakriti, 


PREFACE. 


and  they  reside  in  Aham-kara  in  the  form  of  Vdsand  or  tendency, 
and  render  impure  the  Sattva  of  Buddhi.  The  activity  of  Prakriti,  in 
the  form  of  the  disturbance  of  its  Rajas  element,  is  spontaneously  evoked 
for  the  purpose  of  working  out  and  exhausting  the  stored  up  Vasana  ;  its 
successive  transformation  is  really  a  process  of  purification  of  the  Sattva  of 
Buddhi.  This  spontaneous  tendency  towards  purification  is  due  to  the 
vicinity  of  Purusa. 

The  Samkhyas  constantly  hammer  on  the  theme  that  no  pain,  no 
The  Nature  of  Purusa.      suffering,     no     bondage  ever   belongs     to    Purusa. 
Purusa  is  eternally  free,  never  bound,  never  released.     And  because  they 
The  Meaning  of  the     thus   thoroughly  reveal  the  nature  of   Purusa,  their 
word,  Samkhya.  doctrine   is   described  as   the    Samkhya,   thorough- 

re  vealer. 

The  "  experience  "    of   Purusa   consists  in   his  being  the  indifferent 

The    "  Bondage  "    of     spectator  of  the  changes  that  take  place  in  Buddhi ; 

his_l!_boridage^  is   nothing   but   the   reflection^  on 

him  of  the  bondage,  that  is,  the  impurities,  of  Buddhi  ;  his  "  release^js 
merely  the  removal  of  this  reflection  which,  again,  depends  upon^the 
recovery  by  Buddhi  of  its  state  of  pristine  purity,  which  means  its  dissolur 
tion  into  Prakriti.  To  say  that  the  activity  of  Prakriti  is  for  the  benefit 
of  Purusa  is,  therefore,  a  mere  figure  of  speech.  It  is  really  for  the  purifica 
tion  of  the  Sattva  of  Buddhi. 

To  think,  as  people  generally   do,  that  pleasure   and   pain,   release 
Is  due  to  A-vivaka.         ancl  bondage  really  belong   to  Purusa,  is  a   mistake 
pure  ancl  simple.     It  is  A-vidyd.     A-viveka  is  the  cause  of  A-vidya.      And 
A-viveka,  non-discrimination,  is  the  failure  to  discriminate  Purusa  from 
Prakriti   and   her   products.     Many   are   ignorant   of   the   very  existence 
of   Purusa.     Many  are  ignorant  of   his   exact  nature  :   some  identify  him 
with    Prakriti,   some    with    Mal^at,  some   with   Aham-kara,    and   so  on. 
Many,  again,  know  the  Tattvas  in  some    form   or  other,    but  they  know 
them    not  :    knowledge,  in   the   sen^e  of    mere   information,    they   have, 
but  no  realisation,   and  it  is   realisation  which   matters.     The   Samkhya, 
for  this  reason,  enters  into  a  detailed  examination  of  the  Tattvas,  their  num 
ber,  nature,  function,  effect,  inter-relation,  resemblance,  difference,  etc.,  and 
The  Aim  of  the  Sam-     insists  on  Tattva-abhyasa  or  the  habitual  contempla 
tion  of  the   Tattvas,    so   that   they   may   be  Sak$dt- 

krita  or  immediately  known  or  realised.  The  way  is  also  shown  asL_to 
how,  and  the  means,  too,  whereby,  to  discriminate,  on  the  one  hand, 
the  gross  Elements  from  the  Tan-matras,  the  Tan-matras  from  the 
Indriyas,  and  both  from  Aham-kara,  Aham-kara  from  Buddhi,  and  Buddhi 


PREFACE.  xi 


from  Purusa,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  to  discriminate  Purusa  from_  the 
gross  and  subtle  Bodies  and  to  prevent  their  further  identification. 

The  Yoga  which  is  the  practice  of  the  Samkhya,  which  is  the  theory, 
The  Relation  of  the     takes  up,  and    starts   from,   these   central  teachings 
tiT  TePractceyato     pf  its  predecessor,  mz.    (1)  All  activity-all  change- 
Theory.  is  jn  an(j  of  Prakriti.     (2)  No  activity — no  change — 

is  in  Purusa.  (3)  The  modifications  of  the  mind  are  reflected  in  Purusa, 
and  make  him  look  like  modified.  (4)  When  the  mind  is  calm  and  puri-. 
fied,  Purusa  shines  as  he  really  is.  (5)  Save  and  except  these,  reflection 
and  its  removal,  bondage  and  release  do  not  belong  to  Purusa.  (6)  Bond 
age  and  release  are  really  of  Prakriti,  or,  more  strictly  speaking,  of  the 
individualised  form  of  its  first  transformation,  viz.,  Buddhi.  From  the 
point  of  view  of  the  philosophy  of  the  history  of  the  Dar&inas,  these  are 
the  last  words  of  the  Samkhya. 

The  Samkhya  also  has   brought   the    doctrine  of   Suksma  or  Lifiga 
Sarira,    the   Subtle    Body,  prominently    to    the  fore. 

SubtfeBody!1116  °f  the     For,  the  purification  of   the  Sattva   of   Buddhi   may 
not  be,  and,  as  a  general  rule,  is  not,  possible  in  one 

life,  nor  in  one  region  of  the  Universe.  But  death  seems  to  put  an  untimely 
end  to  the  process  of  purification,  by  destroying  the  gross  Body,  flow 
then  can  the  process  of  purification  be  continued  in  other  lives  and  in  other 
regions  ?  The  SA  mkhya  replies  that  it  can  be  and  is  so  continued  by  means  of 
the  Subtile  Body.  It  is  composed  of  the  seventeen  Tattvas,  beginning  with 
Buddhi  and  ending  with  the  Tan-matras.  It  is  produced,  at  the  beginning 
of  Creation,  one  for  each  Purusa,  and  lasts  till  the  time  of  Maha-Pralaya 
or  the  Great  Dissolution.  It  is  altogether  unconfined,  such  that  it  may 
ascend  to  the  sun  dancing  on  its  beams,  and  can  penetrate  through  a 
mountain.  And  it  transmigrates  from  one  gross  Body  to  another,  from 
one  region  of  the  Universe  to  another,  1)eing  perfumed  with,  and  carrying 
the  influence  of,  the  BhAvas  or  dispositions  of  Buddhi  characterised  as 
virtue,  knowledge,  dispassion,  and  power,  and  their  opposites. 

The  Samkhyas,  again,  teach  a  plurality  of  Purusas.     This  topic  has 
been  very  fully  discussed  in  the  Sdmkhya-Pravacha- 

The     Plurality     of     na_Stitram,    I.    149-159,     and      the     commentaries. 
Purusas.  \t  . 

Therein  "Vijfiana  Bhiksu  has  mercilessly  criticised 

the  doctrine  of  Non-duality  maintained  by  some  of  the  Vedantins,  and  has 
sought  to  establish  the  plurality  of  Purusas.  And  Garbe,  in  his  character 
istic  style,  contents  himself  with  a  flippant  criticism  of  Vijnana  Bhiksu's 
explanations.  But  Vijnana  Bhiksu's  criticisms  are  not  aimed  principally 
against  the  unity  of  Purusas,  but  at  those  interpretations  of  it,  according 


xii  PREFACE. 


to  which  the  empirical  Purusas,  that  is,  mundane  Purusas,  the  plurality 
of  whom  is  established  by  irrefutable  arguments,  as  in  the  Samkhya 
Sastra,  are  reduced  to  mere  shadows  without  substance.  He  does  not  so 
much  attack  the  unadulterated  ArDvaitd  of  the  Vedas  and  the  Upanisats 
as  its  later  developments.  He  was  fully  aware  of  the  fact  that  none  of 
the  six  Dantanas,  for  example,  was,  as  we  have  hinted  more  than  once, 
a  complete  system  of  philosophy  in  the  Western  sense,  but  merely  a  cate 
chism  explaining,  and  giving  a  reasoned  account  of,  some  of  the  truths 
revealed  in  the  Vedas  and  Upanisats,  to  a  particular  class  of  students, 
confining  the  scope  of  its  enquiry  within  the  province  of  Creation,  without 
attempting  to  solve  to  them  the  transcendental  riddles  of  the  Universe, 
which,  in  their  particular  stage  of  mental  and  spiritual  development,  it 
would  have  been  impossible  for  them  to  grasp.  Similarly,  Garbe  is  wrong 
in  thinking  that  Vijnana  Bhiksu  "  explains  away  the  doctrine  of  absolute 
monism."  It  is  only  a  matter  of  interpretation  and  of  stand-point  ; 
compare  Ramanuja,  Madhva,  etc.  For  Vijnana  does  not  hesitate  to  do 
away  even  with  the  duality  of  Prakrit!  and  Purusa  when  he  observes 
that  all  the  other  Tattvas  enter  into  absorption  in  Purusa  and  rest  there 
in  a  subtle  form,  as  does  energy  in  that  which  possesses  it.  (Vide  his 
Commentary  on  S-P-S.,  I.  61).  For  an  explanation,  therefore,  of  the 
apparent  contradictions  in  the  Darsanas,  one  must  turn  to  the  Vedas  and 
Upani&ats  and  writings  of  a  similar  scope  and  character.  The  Bhagavat- 
GitA,  for  instance,  declares  :— 


I    vS 

In  the  world  there  are  theseetwo  Purusas  only,  the  mutable  and  the 
immutable.  The  mutable  is  all  created  things  ;  the  intelligent  experiencer 
is  said  to  be  the  immutable.  —  XV.  16. 

While  the  highest  Purusa  is  a  different  one,  who  (in  the  Upanisats) 
is  called  the  Pararna-Atma,  the  Supreme  Self,  and  who,  presiding  over 
the  three  worlds,  preserves  them,  as  the  undecaying,  omniscient,  omni 
potent  Isvara.  —  XV.  17. 

Along  such  lines  the  so-called  contradictions  of  the  Darsanas  find  their 
reconciliation  and  true  explanation  in  the  higher  teachings  of  the  Upanisats. 

It  will  probably  be  contended  that,    in    the    case    in    question,    such 

The  Samkhya   does     reconciliation  is  impossible   in  view  of   "  one   of  the 
not  deny  the  Existence 
of  God.  fundamental  doctrines  of  the  genuine  Samkhya,  which 


PREFACE.  xiii 


is   the   denial  of   God "   (Garbe).      No   graver     blunder    has   ever    been 
committed   by   any   student  of  the   JSamkhya !      The    genuine   Samkhya 
no  more   denies     the    existence   of    God    than     does  Garbe's     illustrious 
countryman,  Emmanuel    Kant,  in  his  Critique  of  Pure  Reason.     To  make 
this   position    clear,  let  us   paraphrase    the  Sdmkhya-Pravachana-Sutram 
on     the     subject.        Thus,    Isvara     is    not    a    subject   of  proof   (I.    92). 
For,    we    must   conceive  irfvara  as   being   either  Mukta,  free,  or  Baddha, 
bound.       He  can   be   neither   free   nor   bound  ;    because,  in   the   former 
case,    being    perfect,     He     would    have     nothing    to    fulfil    by  creation, 
and,  in    the  latter  case,   He  would    not  possess   absolute   power  (T. 93-94). 
No   doubt,   in   the  Srutis,    we   find   such  declarations  as    "  He  is    verily 
the    all-knower,    the   creator   of  all,"     and     the    like ;     these,  however, 
do  not  allude  to  an  eternal,   uncaused   Isvara  (God),  but  are  only  eulogies 
of   such  Jivas  or  Incarnate   Selves  as  are  going  to  be  freed,  or  of    the 
Yogins,  human  as  well  as  super-human,  who  have  attained  perfection  by 
the  practice  of  Yoga  (I.  95).     Some  say  that  attainment  of  the  highest  end 
results  through  absorption  into  the  Cause  fill.  54).     But  this   is   not   so, 
because,   as   people   rise     up   again    after   immersion  into    water,  so   do 
Purusas,  merged  into  Prakriti  at  the  time  of  Pralaya,  appear,  again,  at  the 
next    Creation,  as   T^varas   (III.    54-55).     The    Vedic    declarations,   e.  g., 
"He    is   verily   the   all-knower,   the  creator  of  all,"  refer  to  such  Highest 
Selves  (III.  56).  Neither   is   the   existence   of   God    as  Jhe   moral 

governor  of  the  world,  proved  ;  for,  if_  God  Himself  produce  the 
consequences  of  acts,  He  would  do  so  even  without  the  aid  of  Karma; 
on  the  other  hand,  if  Mis  agency  in  this  respect  be  subsidiary  to  that 
of  Karma,  then  let  Karma  itself  be  the  cause  of  its  consequences; 
what  is  the  use  of  a  God  ?  Moreover,  it  is  impossible  that  God  should  be 
the  dispenser  of  the  consequences  of  acts.  For,  His  motive  will  be 
either  egoistic  or  altruistic.  But  it  cannot  be  the  latter,  as  it  is  simply 
inconceivable  that  one  acting  for  the, good  of  others,  should  create  a  world 
so  full  of  pain.  Nor  can  it  be  the  former;  because  (1)  in  that  case,  He 
would  possess  unfulfilled  desires,  and,  consequently,  suffer  pain  and  the 
like.  Thus  your  worldly  God  would  be  no  -better  than  onr  ffifftfipt.  SftTvpa 
(2)  Agency  cannot  be  established  in  the  absence  of  desire,  for,  behind 
every  act,  there  lies  an  intense  desire.  Arid  to  attribute  intense  desire  to 
God  would  be  to  take  away  from  his  eternal  freedom.  (3;  Further,  desire  is 
a  particular  product  of  Prakriti.  It  cannot,  therefore,  naturally  grow 
within  the  Self,  whether  it  be  God  or  the  Jiva ;  it  must  come  from  the 
outside.  Now,  it  cannot  be  said  that  desire,  which  is  an  evoluteof  Prakriti, 
directly  has  connection  with  the  Self,  as  it  would  contradict  hundreds  of 


xiv  PREFACE. 


Vedic  declarations  to  the  effect  that  the  Self  is  Asanga,  absolutely  free 
from  attachment  or  association.  Neither  can  it  be  maintained  that  Prakriti 
establishes  connection  of  desire  with  the  Self  by  induction,  as  it  were, 
through  its  mere  proximity  to  it ;  as  this  would  apply  equally  to  all  the 
Selves  at  the  same  time  (V.  2-9).  Furthermore,  the  above  arguments 
might  have  lost  their  force  or  relevancy,  were  there  positive  proof  of  the 
existence  of  God  ;  but  there  is  no  such  proof.  For,  proof  is  of  three  kinds, 
viz.,  Perception,  Inference  and  Testimony.  Now,  God  certainly  is  not 
an  object  of  perception.  Neither  can  He  be  known  by  Inference  ;  because 
there  is  no  general  proposition  (VyApti)  whereby  to  infer  the  existence  of 
God,  inasmuch  as,  Prakriti  alone  being  the  cause  of  the  world,  the  law  of 
causation  is  of  no  avail  here.  And  the  testimony  of  the  Veda  speaks  of 
Prakriti  as  being  the  origin  of  the  world,  and  hence  does  not  prove  the 
existence  of  God  (V.  10-12). 

Thus  the  Sarnkhyas  maintain  that  it  cannot  be  proved  by  evidence 
that  an  eternal,  self-caused  God  exists ;  that  the  ordinary  meansof 
proof,  Perception,  Inference  and  Testimony,  fail  to  reach  Him  ;  and 
that  there  is  no  other  means  of  correct  knowledge  on  our  plane  of 
the  Universe.  And  when,  therefore,  Kapila  thus  declares  that  the 
various  objective  arguments  for  the  establishment  of  theism,  viz.,  the 
ontological,  the  cosmological,  the  teleological,  and  the  moral,  cannot  stand, 
and  pronounces  the  verdict  of  '  non-proven  '  in  regard  to  the  existence  of 
God,  he  takes  up  the  right  philosophical  attitude,  and  there  is  absolutely  no 
justification  for  branding  his  doctrine  as  atheistical  merely  on  this  score. 
"  The  notion  that  the  existence  of  God  is  susceptible  of  dialectic  demons 
tration  has  been  surrendered,  in  later  times,"  ns  Air.  Fitz-Edward  Hall 
remarks,  "by  most  Christian  theologians  of  any  credit:  it  now  being,  more 
ordinarily,  maintained  that  our  conviction  of  deity,  on  grounds  apart 
from  revelation,  reposes  solely  on  original  consciousness,  antecedent  to 
all  proof." 

Thus  the  Samkhya  is  Nir-lscara,  but  not  Ndstika.  It  is  not  Ndstika, 

atheistical,  because  it  does  not  deny    the  existence  of 
Nir-Isvara  and  Nas-  f 

tika  are  not  convertible      God.   It  is  ISir-Iscara,  lit.  god-less,  ars  it  explains    all 

and  every  fact  of   experience    without    referencejo, 

and  without  invoking  the  intervention  of,  a  divine  agency.  Those  who 
imagine  that,  in  the  Samkhya,  there  is  a  denial  of  God,  obviously  fail  to 
recognize  the  distinction  between  the  two  words,  Ndstika  and  Nir-Isvara. 
They,  further,  fail  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  Sanskrit  1'svara  arid  the  English 
God  are  not  synonymous  terms.  For,  the  opposite  of  Ndstika  is  Astika 
(believer),  one  who  believes  in  the  existence  of  God,  the  authority  of  the 


PREFACE.  xv 


Veda,  immortality,  and  so  forth.  Accordingly,  the  Hindu  Dar^anas  have 
been  classified  as  being  either  "Astiha  "  or  "  Ndstika,"  and  the  "Nir-tsvara" 
Samkhya  has  been  always  regarded  as  falling  under  the  former  category. 

DALTONGANJ  : 
The  15th  February,  1915.  N.  SINHA. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


INTRODUCTORY. 

PAGES. 

The  Samkhya  Sastra  presupposes  Vairagya  or  Dispassion         ...  1 

The  origin  and  development  of  Vairagya  ...  ...  1 

Moksa  or  Release   is  achieved  through  Para  Vairagya  or  Higher 

Dispassion     ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  1 

The  Samkhya  is  a  Moksa  Sastra  and  teaches  Para  Vairagya     ...  1 

The  term  "  A-Dvaita  "  or  Non-Dualism  explained  ...  ...  2 

Kapila,  the  father  of  the  Samkhya,  is  an  Avatara  of  Visnu       ...  2 

Loss  of  the  original  Samkhya  Sutras    ...  •     ...  ...  3 

The  Samkhya  is  the  only  true  A-Dvaita  Sastra       ...  ...  3 

It  is  not  in  conflict  with  the  Veda         ...  ...  ...  3 

The  Samkhya  versus  the  Nyaya  and  the  Vaisfesika  : 

The  latter  deals  with   Vyavaharika  or  practical  reality,  while 

the  former  deals  with  Paramarthika  or  ultimate  reality  ;  hence 
»    neither  is  there  opposition  between  them,  nor  is  the  Samkhya 

superfluous   ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  4-5 

The  Samkhya  versus  the  Vedanta  and  the  Yoga  : 

The  exclusion  of  l^vara  from  the  Samkhya, — possible  reasons 
for  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  5-10 

The   Samkhya   is  concerned   primarily   with    Purusa-Prakriti- 

Viveka  or  Discrimination  between  Purusa  and  Prakriti,  while 

the  Vedanta  is  concerned  primarily  with  Wvara  ...  ...  7 

The  Samkhya  Plurality  of  Self  versus  the*  Vedanta  Unity  of  Self  : 

does  not  necessarily  imply  a  conflict...  ...  ...  10 

The  Samkhya-Pravachana  is  an  elaboration  of  the  Tattva-Samasa  11 

The  name  "  Samkhya "  explained         ...  ...  ...          11-12 

The  Divisions  of  the  Samkhya  $&stra   ...  ...  ...  12 

BOOK  I :  OF  TOPICS. 

Th  e  Supreme  Good  defined  ...                 ...                 ...  ...  12 

and  explained                  ...                ...                 ...  ...  13-14 

"  Threefold  pain "  explained                 .„                ...  ...  13-14 

Proof  of  "  Duhkham  anagatam,"  pain  not-yet-come  ...  15 

Jivan-Mukti-Dasla  and  Videha-Kaivalya  compared  ...  ...  16 

How  " cessation  of  pain  "  is  an  object  of  desire  to  Purusa         ...  16-18 


ii  TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 

PAGES. 

Purusa  is  associated  with  pain  in  the  form  of  a  reflection          ...  17 
This  view  is  supported  by  the  Vedanta :  the  Vedanta  Theory  of 

Adhyasa  is  the  same  as  the  Samkhya  Theory  of  Reflection    ...  18 
Cessation  of  pain   is  not   in  itself  the  end,  but   cessation  of  the 

experience  of  pain  is 

Ordinary  means  are  inadequate   to  accomplish  the  Supreme  Good  19 

They  have  no  doubt  their  own  uses         ...                  ...                  ...  20 

But  these  must  be  rejected  by  reasonable  men        ....                  ...  21 

Also  because  Moksa  or  Eelease  is  the  Good  par  excellence            ...  22 

Scriptural  means  are  equally  inadequate                   ..."            ...  23 

Sacrifice  is^  stained  with  the  sin  of  killing                ...                 ...  24 

Immortality   obtained  by  the  drinking  of  the  Soma  juice  is  not 

eternal  '       ...                 ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  25-26 

Bondage  is  not  natural  to  Purusa           ...                 ...                 ...  26 

Viveka  or  Discrimination  is  the  means  of  Release  : 

A-Viveka  or  Non-Discrimination,  the  cause  of  Bondage,   i.e., 

the  experience  of  pain     ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  26-27 

Because   were   Bondage   natural,    it  would   be  unchangeable  and 

consequently  there  can  be  no  Release                      ...                  ...  28 

The  scriptures  do  not  lay  down  precepts  for  the   accomplishment 

of  the  impossible               ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  28 

The  analogy  of  the  "  white  cloth  "  and  the  "  seed  "...                  ...  29 

is  inadmissible                   ...                  ...                  ...                  ...  30 

Defect  of  the  theory  that  mere  disappearance  of  the  power  of  pain 

is  Eelease,  pointed  out      ...                  ...                   ..                  ...  30-31 

Theories  of  Naimittika  or  conditional  Bondage  considered  : 

Bondage  is  not  conditioned  by  Time   ...                  ...                  ...  31 

N either  by  Space              ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  32 

Nor  by  organisation         ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  33 

Because  organisation  is  of  the  Body  and  not  of  Purusa          ...  33 

Purusa  is  free  from  Sanga  or  intimate  association  with  anything  34 

Bondage  is  not  conditioned  by  Karma     ...                 ...                 ...  34-36 

How  Purusa  becomes  aware  of  the  modifications  of  the  Chitta  ...  36 
Scripture  on  Bondage  and  Release  appertaining  to  the  Chitta 

and  not  Purusa,  explained                  ...                 ...                 ...  36 

Nor  is  Prakriti  the  cause  of  Bondage  to  Purusa         ...                 ...  37 

No  Bondage  without  conjunction  of  Prakriti              ...                  ...  37-43 

Bondage  is   not  the  effect  of,  but  the  very  same  as,  the   conjunc 
tion  of  Prakriti                  ,,.                 ...                 ...                 ,,.  38 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.  ill 

PAGES. 

Bondage  is  Aupadhika  or  adventitious,  and  not  real  ...  39 

The  Vais$e§ika  theory  criticised  and  the  real  character  of  Purusa 

explained      ...  ...  ...  ...  ...         39-40 

The  Samkhya  Theory  of   Bondage  supported  by   Yoga-Sutram, 

Gita,  and   Katha-Upanisat  ...  ...  ...  41 

By  "  conjunction  of  Prakriti"  is  meant  the  conjunction  of  indivi 
dual  Buddhis  to  individual  Purusas  ...  ...  41 

"  Conjunction"   distinguished  from  Non-Discrimination,  Trans 
formation,  and  Intimate  Association  ...  ...  42 

How  conjunction  of  Prakriti  with  Purusa  takes  place  ...  43 

Another   interpretation    of    "  Conjunction"    criticised   and  the 

Sutrakara's  meaning  established      ...  ...  ...  43 

Nastika  Theories   of   Bondage   criticised  : 

Bondage    is   not  caused   by   A-Vidya,    as  is   asserted   by   the 
Bauddhas      ...  ...  ...  ...  ...         44-45 

Bondage  is  not  unreal         ...  ...  ...  ...  44 

A-Vidya  cannot  be  an  entity  ...  ...  ...          45-46 

Genuine,  distinguished  from  spurious,  Vedanta  :  the  Maya-Vad- 

ins  are  really  a  branch  of  the  Vijriana-Vadins     ...  ...  46 

The  Samkhya  view  of  A-Vidya  ...  ...  ...  47 

A-Viyda  cannot  be  both  real  and  unreal  ...  ...          47-48 

Experience  of   Prarabdha   Karma  offers  one  more  objection  to 

A-Vidya  being  the  direct  cause  of   Bondage       ...  ...  '48 

Principles  governing  the  enumeration  of  Predicables  stated     ...          48-50 
Real  character  of  Prakriti  incidentally  described  ...  ...  50 

Bondage  is  not  caused  by  Vasana  ...  ...  ...          51-56 

Bondage  is  not  momentary :  Theory  of  Transiency  of   Things 
controverted,  and  the  Theory  of  Permanency  of  Things  estab 
lished  by  the  fact  of  Recognition,  l^y   Scripture,  etc.,  and  by 
means  of  the  Relation  of  Cause  and  Effect         ...  ...          56-62 

The  cause   of   Bondage  is   real  and  not  ideal:    Vijnana  Vada  or 

Bauddha  Idealism  criticised  ...  ;     ...  ...          62-64 

Vijnana- Vada  logically  leads  to  Sftnya-Vada,  or  the  Theory  that 

the  World  is  a  Void         ...  ...  ...  ...          64-66 

Scriptural  texts  about  non-existence  of  external  things-- meaning 

of  "  non-existence"— explained         ...  ...  ...          65-66 

Origin  of  Vijnana-Vadin  Nastikas,  or  Idealist  Heretics  ...  66 

Theory  of  the  Void  criticised  ...  ...  ...          66-71 

Doubtful  texts  of  the  Sruti  and  Smriti  explained    ...  ...         69-70 


IV 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


Bondage  is  not  the  result  of  movement    ... 

Doubtful  Srutis  explained  ... 

Bondage  is  not  caused  by  Adristam 

Conjunction  of  Prakriti  with  Purusa  takes  place  through  A-Viveka- 

or  Non-Discrimination    ... 
It  is  all  the  doing  of  Prakriti 
Objections  answered 
Nature  of  A-Viveka  explained  and   its  identity   with  A-Vidya 

shown 
A-Vive.ka  is  not  a   form  of  Non-Existence :  Nature  of  A-Viveka 

further    discussed  :    Agreement  between   the  Yoga  and  the 

Samkhya  shown 

How  A-Viveka  brings  about  Conjunction  :  Doctrines  of  the  Yo 
ga,  the  Nyaya  and  the  I^vara-Gita  compared 
A-Viveka  is  eradicable  by  Viveka  alone 
Theory  of  Darkness  discussed 
Doctrines  of  the  Yoga  and  the  Vedanta  compared  ... 
Discrimination   between  Purusa  and  Prakriti  includes  all  discri 
mination 

"  Abhimana"  in  Purusa  of  birth,  etc.,  explained     ... 
The  Bondage  of  Purusa  is  merely  verbal  ...  ... 

Immutability   of  Purusa  and  Reflectional  Theories  of  Bondage 

and  Release  defended     ... 
Bondage  is  not  removeable  by  mere  Learning  or  Reasoning,  but 

by  Spiritual  Intuition  of  the  truth    about  Purusa  and  Prakriti 
Existence  of  Prakriti,  etc.,  defended  : 

Inference  also  is  an  instrument  of  right  knowledge 
Karika  on  Sources  of  Human  Knowledge  quoted  ... 
The  Twenty  five  Tattvas  or  Principles  enumerated :  The  order 

of  their  evolution  and  their  inter-relation  as  cause  and  effect 

shown:  Prakriti  defined... 
Sattva,  etc.,  are  substances  :     Why  they  are  called  Gunas. 

in  the  Vaisesika  sense  of  the  word    ... 
Nature  of  Prakriti  and  her  relation  to  the  Gunas  explained 
Two  meanings  of  the  word   '  Prakriti '    :  one  technical  and 

other  general,  explained 

The  enumeration  of  the  Tattvas  is  definite  and  exhaustive 
Enumeration  of  Predicables  in  different  Systems  of  Thought 

justified  on  the  principle  laid  down  in  the  Bhagavatam 


Not 


the 


PAGES. 
71-74 
73-74 

75-76 

77-82 
78 
79 

79 


80 

80*82 
82-86 
82-83 
84-85 

86-88 

88 

88-91 

89-90 
91-92 

92-93 
93 


93-98 

94-95 
94 

94 
96 

96-97 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


The  Samkhya  enumeration   has   the   support  of   the  Upanisats 

Garbha,  Pra&ia,  and  Maitreya 

Scriptural   declaration  of  one   reality,    without   a     second,  ex 
plained 
Difference  between  Theistic  and  Non-Theistic   Theories  pointed 

out 

Proof  of  the  existence  of  the   Tan-matras 
Nature   of   Tan-matras    explained  :    Visnu-Puranam     cited     in 

support 

Process  of  inference  of  Tan-matras  exhibited 
Visnu-Punlnam  on  the  nature  of  Prakriti  quoted    ... 
How   the    Tan-matras   are   evolved :  a   doubtful   Sloka   of   the 

Visnu-Puranam  on  this  point  explained 
Proof  of  Ahamkara 
Nature  of  Ahamkara  explained 
Process  of  inference  of  Ahamkara  exhibited 
Chhandogya  Upanisat  VI.  ii.  3  quoted  in  support  ... 
Objections  answered  :  Yoga-Sutram  II.  22  quoted  ... 
Proof  of  the  Antah-karana  Buddhi 
The  process  of  inference  of  Buddhi  exhibited 
A  corroborative  argument  stated 

Brihat-Aranyaka  and  Chhandogya  Upanisats  quoted    in  support 
Threefold   uses  of   the   Antah-karana    explained   and  justified 

by  reference  to  the  Linga-Puranam,  the  Vedanta-Sutram   and 

the  Yoga- Vasistha-Ra  may  anam 
Proof  of  Prakriti 

The  process  of  inference  of  Prakfiti  exhibited 
A  favourable  argument  stated 
Authority  of  the  Veda  and  Smriti  referred  to 
An  ob  j  ection  answered 
Pleasure  cognised  by  Buddhi  and  Pleasure  inherent   in  Buddhi, 

distinguished 
The  order  of  evolution  defended  against  that   of  the  Logicians  : 

The   futility  of  mere  reasoning,   unsupported   by  Scripture, 

shown 

Proof  of  Purusa 

The  process  of  inference  of  Purusa  exhibited 
Yoga-Sutram  IV.  24  explained  and  distinguished  ... 
Favourable  arguments  stated 


PAGES. 

97-98 

98 

98 
99-101 

99 
100 
100 

101 

102-103 
102 
102 
102 
103 

103-105 
104 
104 
101 


104-105 

106-108 

106 

106 

106 

106-107 

107 


107-108 

108-111 

109 

109 

110 


VI 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


PAGES. 

Visnu-Puranam  I.  iv.  51  and  I.  ii.  33  compared      ...                 ...  110 

Prakriti,  the  Boot  Cause,  is  root-less       ...                  ,..                  ...  Ill 

The  point   argued  :  Prakriti  is  merely  the  name   given   to  the 

original  starting  point  of  evolution     ...                  ...                  ...  111-112 

The  Nyaya,  the  Sarnkhya,  and  the  Vedanta  doctrines  compared...  112-115 
Scriptural  texts   about  "  production "  of  Prakriti   and    Purusa 

explained  :"  production  "  is  in   a  derivative  sense              ...  112-114 
Prakriti   and   A-Vidya   distinguished :   doubtful   scriptures  ex 
plained          ...                 ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  114-115 

Only  the     most     competent    can    realise       the   truth     taught : 

three  classes  of  Adhikarins  described                      ...                  ...  115-116 

From  Prakriti,  the  first  evolute  is  Mahat,  also  called  Buddhi  and 

Manas            ...                 ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  116-117 

The  next  is  Ahamkara         ...                  ...                  ....                  ...  117 

The  rest  spring  from  Ahamkara             ...                  ...                  ...  117 

But  by  the   chain  of   causation   the  primary  causality  of  Prakriti 

remains  unimpaired         ...                  ...                  ...                  ...  118 

Why  Prakriti,  and  not  Purusa,  is  the  material  cause                 ...  118-120 
Argument  in  favour  of  Purusa's   never   undergoing  transfor 
mation,  succinctly  stated                    ...                 ...                 ...  119 

Prakriti  is  all  pervading      ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  1 20-1 2 1 

"  All  pervading  "-ness  explained           ...                 ...                 ...  121 

The  Veda   supports  the   theory  that   Prakriti  is  the  cause  of  all 

things  and  is  all-pervading                  ...                  r..                  ...  121-122 

Ex  nihilo  nihil  fit                ...                  ...                  ...                  ...  122 

The  world  is   not   unreal  ...                  ...                  ...                  ...  122-124 

Doubtful  Chhandogya  text  VI.  i.  4  explained          ...                 ...  123 

Unreality  of   the  World   refuted  by  the   Vedanta-Sutram  11.  ii. 

28-29             ...                 ...              ,   ...                 ...                 ...  124 

Brihat-Aranyaka-UpamBat  II.  iii.  6  does  not  negate  the  reality  of 

the  World  :  Of.  the  Vedanta-Sutram  III.  ii.  22    ...                 ...  124 

Why  nothing  can  come  out  of  nothing    ...                  ...                  ...  124-125 

Karma,  A-Vidya,  etc.,  cannot  be  the  material  cause  of  the  world...  125-126 

Ritual  observances  cannot  become  the  cause  of  Release                 ...  126-127 

Samkhya-Pravachana-Sutram  I.  2  and  6  further  explained        ...  126-127 
The  result  of  Karma  is  not  permanent :   Chhandogya-Upanisat 

VII.  i.  6  quoted  in  support                 ...                 ...                 ...  127 

Doubtful  $ruti,  Kalagni-Rudra-Upanisat  2,  e.g.,   explained      ...  128 

Freedom  from  Samsara  is  not  the  result  of  Karma  ...                 ...  128-129 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


vn 


PAGES. 

The  result  of  Niskama  Karma  also  is  equally  transitory             ...  129-131 

Kaivalya-Upanisat  I.  2  quoted  in  support                ...                 ...  130 

Release  producible  by  knowledge  is  not  perishable     ...                  ...  131-132 

Prama  or  Right  Cognition  and  Pramana  or   Instrument  of  Right 

Cognition,  defined :  Pramana  is  threefold              ...                  ...  132-136 

Right  Knowledge  resides  in  Purusa     ...                 ...                  ...  133 

The  process  of  knowing  rightty  described               ...                 ...  134 

Object  of  Cognition  discussed               ...                 ..,                 ...  135-136 

Three  kinds  of  Pramana  sufficient          ...                  ...                   ..  137-138 

Perception  defined                ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  138-139 

Perception  by  Yogins           ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  140-142 

Contact  of  Buddhi  with  Objects  is  the  cause  of  perception        ...  141 

Perception  is  not  necessarily  dependent  upon  external  Senses  ...  142 

IjJvara  is  not  an  object  of  perception       ...                 ...                 ...  142-143 

In  what  sense  there  can  be  perpetual  cognition  of  fcvara           ...  143 

Why  the  existence  of  IsJvara  is  above  proof                ...                  ...  143-141 

Texts  which  declare  l^vara,  explained    ...                 ...                  ...  144-145 

The  influence  of  Purusa  upon  Prakriti  is  through  proximity      ...  145-146 

Chhandogya-Upanisat  VI.  ii.  3  explained                ...                 ...  145 

Kfirma-Puranam  on  Unconscious  Creation  quoted  ...                 ...  145 

The  influence  of  Jivas  also  is  through  proximity      ...                 ...  147 

Jiva  defined      ...                 ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  147 

Vedic  declarations  vindicated                  ...                  ...                  ...  147-148 

Actual  agency  belongs  to  the  Antah-karana                ...                 ...  148-152 

How  Purusa  illuminates  the  Antah-karana              ...                 ...  149 

How  Buddhi  and  Self  are  mutually  reflected  in  each  other       ...  149 
Reflection  of  Consciousness  in  Buddhi  makes  Self-Consciousness 

possible         ...                 ...                 ...                ...                ...  150 

Reflection  of   Buddhi    in   Consciousness    makes  cognition   of 

objects  possible               ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  150 

Theory  of  Mutual  Reflection  of  Buddhi  and  Consciousness  estab 
lished  by  Vyasa  in  the  Yoga-Bhasy am                 ...                  ...  150 

Opposite  theories  criticised                    ...                 ...                 ...  151-152 

Definition  of  Inference       ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  152-153 

Division  of  Inference          ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  152 

Word  or  Verbal  Testimony  defined        ...                 ...                 ...  153 

Necessity  of  Pramana  in  the  Samkhya  Sastra           ...                 ...  153-154 

Proof  of  Prakriti  and  Purusa  is  by  means  of  Samanyato  Drista 

Inference      ...                 ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  154-156 


Vlll 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


PAGES, 
"Purva-vat,"    "Sesa-vat"   and  "  Samanyato   Drista  "  Inference 

described      ...                 ...                 ..,                 ...                 ...  155 

Process  of  inference  of  Prakriti  and  Purusa  exhibited               ..;  155-156 

The  end  of  Bhoga  is  in  Consciousness    ...                 ...                 ...  156-157 

Two  meanings  of  the  word  "  Bhoga  "  distinguished                 ...  157 

He  who  does  not  act,  may  still  enjoy  the  fruit           ...                  ...  157-158 

The  notion  that  Purusa  is  the  Experiencer  is  due  to  A-Viveka    ...  158-159 

The  fruit  of  Knowledge  is  absence  of  Pleasure  and  Pain             ...  .160 

Mere  non-perception  does  not  prove  non-existence      ...                  ...  160-162 

Karika  VII,  on  causes  of  non- perception,  quoted    ...                  ...  161 

Non-apprehension  of  Prakriti  and  Purusa  by  the  Senses  is  due  to 

their  extreme  fineness      ...                  ...                  ...                  ...  162 

Proof  of  the  subtlety  of  Prakriti,  etc.     ...                 ...                 ...  163 

An  objection  answered          ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  163-165 

Proofs  of  the  Theory  of  Existent  Effects                    ...                 ...  165-17 1 

A  Vaitfesika  theory  refuted ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  168 

Cause   and   Effect  are   identical  :  The  Gita  and  the  Upanisats 
Brihat-Aranyaka,  Chhandogya,  and  Maitri  quoted  in  support : 

Karika  IX  referred  to      ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  170-171 

A  doubt  raised  as  to  how  the  existent  can  be  said  to  be  produced  ...  171-172 

The  doubt  removed  :  "  Production  "  is  only  manifestation           ...  172-173 

"Manifestation"  described...                 ...                 ...                 ...  172-173 

" Destruction"  is  only  dissolution  into  the  cause       ...                  ...  173-175 

Re-manifestation  of  the  same  thing  after  dissolution,  refuted    ...  174 
Existence  of  things  past  and  gone  and  of  things  not-yet-come- 
to-pass,  proved  by  perception  of  the  Yogin          ...                 ...  174 

Theory  of  Manifestation  defended         ...                 ...                 ...  174-175 

"  Existence "  and  "  Non-Existence  "  explained       ...                 ...  175 

The  Theory  of  Manifestation  does  not  entail  non-finality            ...  175-176 

When  non-finality  is  no  fault                 ...                 ...                 ...  176 

Creation  by  Will                  ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  175 

The  theory  of  the  Manifestation  of  the  existent,  further   defended  177-178 

The  rival  Theory  of  the  Production  of  the  Non-Existent  criticised  177 

The  two  reconciled              ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  173 

Effect  defined  :  Properties  common  to  all  effects      ...                 ...  178-180 

Different  meanings  of  the  word  "  Linga  "  mentioned                 ...  179 

Proof  of  the  existence  of  the  effect  as  separate  from  the  cause    ...  180-182 

Properties  common  to  Prakriti  and' her  products       ...                 ...  182-183 

The  Stitra  supplemented  by  Karika  XI  182 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


IX 


PAGES. 
Karika  X  on  difference  of  properties  between  Prakrit!  and  her 

products  quoted               ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  183 

Unity  and  infinity  of  Prakrit!  explained  and  supported  by 

Visnu-Puranam  II.  vii.  25-26             ...                 ...                 ...  183 

Points  of  dissimilarity  among  the  Gunas                    ...                  ...  183-185 

The  text  supplemented  by  a  quotation  from  Pafichasikha         ....  184 

The  Gunas  are  substances  ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  184 

They  are  infinite                  ...                  ...                  ...                  ...  185 

Similarity  and  dissimilarity  among  the  Gunas          ...                  ...  185-187 

Karika  XIII  compared        ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  186 

Samkhya  and  Vaisfesika  doctrines  compared            ...                 ...  187 

Proof  that  Mahat,  etc ,  are  effects           ...                  ...                  ...  187-191 

Buddhi,  etc.,  are  nourished  with  food  :  Chhandogya-Upanisat 

VI.  vii.  6  and  Yoga-Sutram  IV.  2  quoted  in  support              ...  189 

Karika  XV.  compared         ...                 ...                  ...                  ...  190 

Ground  of  in ference  of  cause  from  effect  stated       ...                  ...  191-192 

The  process  of  inference  exhibited         ...                 ...                 ...  192 

The  manifested  is  the  mark  of  inference  of  the  unmanifested    ...  192-193 

The  existence  of  Prakrit!  cannot  be  ignored               ...                  ...  193 

The  existence  of  Purusa  requires  no  proof                ...                  ...  193-195 

Intention  of  Sutra  I.  66  explained         ...                 ...                  ...  195 

Purusa  is  something  different  from  Prakrit!  and  her  products    „.,.  195 

Reasons  for  the  above           ...                  ...                  ...                  ...  195-199 

Nature  of  Purusa  is  Light  or  1  Humiliation               ...                  ...  200-201 

This  view  is  supported  by  the  Veda  and  Smriti       ...                  ...  200 

The  opposite  Vaise&ka  theory  discredited                ...                  ...  200 

Consciousness  is  not  an  attribute,  but  the  essence,  of  Purusa        ...  201-203 

That  the  Self  is  devoid  of  attributes,  proved           ...                  ...  202 

Description  of  the  Sva-rupa  of  the  Self,  quoted  from  the  Yoga- 

Vajftstha-Ramayanam       ...                  ...                  ...                  ...  203 

The  Sruti  is  higher  evidence  than  Perception             ...                  ...  203-205 

Purusa's  freedom  from  attributes  proved  by  the  Upanisats 

Brihat-Aranyaka  IV.  iii.  15  and  Svetasvatara   VI.  11    and    by 

the  Vedanta-Sara             ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  203-204 

Contradictory  Srutis :  their  value :  Rule  of  interpretation  of 

Vedic  texts    ...                 ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  204 

Purusa  is  merely  the  Witness                  ...                  ...                  ...  205-207 

Svapna  or  Dream  and  Susupti  or  Deep  Sleep  described  ...  206 

Proof  of  Plurality  of  Purusas  ...  ...  ...  207-208 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


The  Vedanta  doctrine  of  Unity  criticised 

The  Vedanta  interpretation  of  certain  Vedic  texts  discarded    ... 
The  doctrine  of  Aropa  of  the  pseudo-Vedantins  discredited 
The  Vedanta-Sutram  has   nowhere   declared   the   unity   of   the 

Self 

The  Vedanta-Sutram  I.  i.  21-22   and  II.  iii.  41    establish  differ 
ence 

The  Vedanta  doctrines  of   Avachchheda  and    Pratibimba   must 

be   rejected,    and  the     Samkhya     doctrine     of     Multiplicity 

accepted  :    Rule  as  to  solution  of  doubts  in  philosophical  and 

other  matters  stated 

The   Samkhya   Theory   is   not   in   conflict   with   the   oruti   and 

Smriti 
Upanisats   Chhandogya   VI.   ii.    1,    Katha   IV.  x.  11,  Brahma- 

Bindu  11  and  12,  Aitareya  I.  i.  1,  explained 
The  Samkhya  Theory  supported  by  the   Vedanta-Sutram  III.  ii, 
33,   Katha   Upanisat   IV.   15  and  Mundaka-Upanisat  III.  i.  3 
and  also  by  Smriti 

Denotation  of  "  That "  in  "  Thou  art  That  " 
Unity  is  the  popular  conception   which   the   druti,    Smriti,  etc., 
have  taken  the  trouble  to  chasten  by  declarations  of  Plurality 
What   is   condemned    by    the   Taittiriya-Upanisat    II.    7  is  not 
plurality  of  individual  Selves  essentially  alike  one  another  ... 
The   Vedic    declarations   of   Avachchheda  or  separation  and  of 
Pratibimba  or  reflection,  explained  with    the   help  of   Xatha- 
UpanisatV.  10 

Plurality  of  Purusas  further  established 
Those  who  have  eyes  to  see,  can  see  the  oneness  of  form  among  the 

Selves 

Non-Duality  is  disproved  by  recorded  cases  of  Release 
The  Neo-Vedantins  are  verily  a  sect  of  the  Bauddhas 
Release  of  Vamadeva  is  absolute 
As  it  has  been,  so  will  it  be  ... 
^urusas  are  ever  uniform    ... 

Character  of  being  witness  is  compatible  with  uniformity 
Purusa  is  witness  (Saksi)  of  Buddhi  alone,  and  the  seer  (Drasfta) 

of  all  the  rest 

Purusa   is  for  ever  released 
Purusa  is  indifferent 


PAGES. 

208-216 

212 

215 

215 
215 


216 

216-221 
216-217 

219 
219 

220 
220 


220-221 
221-222 

222-223 

223-224 

224 

224-225 
225-226 
226-227 
227-228 

228 

228-229 
229 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


XI 


PAGES. 

Seeming  agency  o/ Purusa   is  due  to  influence  of  Buddhi  ...  229-230 

Karika  XXII  on  the  same  subject,  compared           ...  ...  230 

The  title  "  Samkhya-Pravachana-Sutram  "  explained  ...  230 

BOOK  II :  OF  THE  EVOLUTIONS  OF  PRAKRITI. 

The  Purpose  of  Creation     ...                 ...                 ...  ...  231-234 

Kinds  of  Vairtigya  or  Dispassion  stated  and  explained  ...  232 

Pain  not-yet-come  is  of  twentyone  varieties              ...  ...  232 

A-Vidya  is  destructible  by  means  of  Vidya,             ...  ...  233 

The  Higher  and  the  Lower  Self  :    their  proof         ...  ...  233-234 

The  Cause  of  Successive  Creation           ...                  ...  ...  234-235 

Who  are  Adhikarins  or  fit  for  Release ...                 ..,  ...  234 

Vairagya  cannot  grow  in  a  single  Creation                ...  ...  235-236 

The  Rule  of  Individuals      ...                  ...                 ...  ...  236 

Proof  of  the   Theory   of   Adhyasa   or  fictitious  attribution  (e.g., 

of  Bondage,  Release,  etc,.)  in  regard  to  Purusa       ...  ...  237-238 

Doubtful  Sruti,  Taittiriya-Upanisat  II.  1.  explained  ...  237 

Reality  of  the  creative  agency  of  Prakriti  proved     ...  ...  238-239 

Knowledge  and  Ignorance  are  the  sole  determinants   of   Release 

and  Bondage  ...                ...                 ...                 ...  ..*  239-240 

How  the  activity  of  Prakriti  ceases  automatically  in  the  case  of 

a  Purusa  possessing  discriminative  knowledge   ...  ...  240 

The  Theory  of  Adhyasa  further  argued                     ...  ...  240-241 

The  instrumental  cause  of  Creation  is  Raga  or  Passion  ...  241-242 

The  order  of  Creation          ...                  ...                 ...  ...  242-244 

Taittiriya-Upanisat  II.  1,  which   mentions  a  different   order  of 

evolution,  considered  in  the  light  of  Mundaka-Upanisat  II.  i.  3, 

Pradna-Upanisat  VI.  4,  and   the  Vedanta-Sutram   II.  iii.  14  243-244 

The  origination  of  Mahat,  etc.,  is  not  for»their  own  sake  ...  244-245 

Theory  of  Space  and  Time  :  they  are  forms  of  AkajJa  ...  245-246 

Space  and  Time,  unlimited  and  limited                    ...  ...  246 

Definition  of  Buddhi           ...                 ...                 ...  ...  246-247 

Different  uses  of  the  word  "  Mahat  "  explained       ...  ...  247 

elation  of  individual  Buddhis  to  the  Mahat  Tattva  ...  247 

Products  of  Mahat               ...                 ...                 ...  ...  247-248 

How  contrary  products  arise  from  the  same  Tattva  Mahat  ...  248-249 

Every  Purusa  is  an  Ii^vara  ...                 ...                 ...  ...  248 

Definition  of  Ahamkara     ...                 ...                 ...  ...  249-250 

Products  rf  Ahamkara        ...                 ...                 ...  ...  250-25] 


XI 1 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


PAGES. 
How  the  Senses  and  Objects  were  produced  in  the  primary 

creation         ...                  ...                  ...                  ...                 ...  250 

Origin  of  Manas                  ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  251-252 

Production  of  the  external  Indriyas  and  the  Tan-Matras            ...  251 

The  Devas  of  the  Indriyas ...                  ...                  ...                  ...  252 

The  Indriyas  are  eleven  in  number        ...                  ...                  ...  252-253 

The  Indriyas  are  not  formed  out  of  the  Bhutas  or  Elements       ...  253-254 

Doubtful  Srutis  explained  ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  254-255 

The  Indriyas  are  n ot  eternal                   ...                  ...                  ...  255-256 

The  Indriyas  are  not  the  same  as  their  physiological  counterparts  256 

There  is  not  one,  but  many  Indriyas       ...                  ...                  ...  256-257 

Conception  must  not  be  allowed  to  stand  against  Positive  Evidence  257 

Definition  of  Manas             ...                  ...                  ...                  ...  257-258 

Diverse  functions  of  Manas  explained   ...                  ...                  ,».  258-259 

The  Objects  of  the  Indriyas ...                  ...                  ...                  ...  259 

Purusa  is  different  from  the  Indriya      ...                  ...                  ...  259-261 

The  In ternal  Indriyas  distinguished       ...                  ...                  ...  261-262 

Their  resemblance                ...                  ...                  ...                  ...  262-263 

Prana  or  Life-Breath  is  not  Air  :  why  it  is  called  Air  ...  263 
The  modifications  of  the  Indriyas  are  simultaneous  as  well  as 

successive      ...                 ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  264-265 

Cognition  called  Alochana  described     ...                  ...                  ...  265 

Aniruddha's  interpretation  of  Sutram  II.  32  criticised               ...  265 

Number  and  character  of  the  Modifications                ...                  ...  266-267 

The  Sva-rupa  of  Purusa  indicated         ...                  ...                  ...  267-268 

Above  illustrated                   ...                  ...                  ...                  ...  268 

What  mo ves  the  Indriyas  to  operate        ...                  ...                  ...  268-269 

Above  illustrated                  ...                  ...                  ...                  ...  269 

The  number  of  the  Instruments        >-      ...                  ...                  ...  270 

Why  the  Indriyas  are  called  Instruments                   ...                  ...  270-271 

Pre-eminence  of  Buddhi  illustrated       ...                  ...                  ...  271-272 

Why  Buddhi  is  the  principal                 ...                 ...                 ...  272-273 

Recollection  is  not  spontaneous  to  Purusa                  ...                  ...  273-274 

Relativity  of  the  condition  of  being  principal  and  secondary  ...  274 
Why  one  particular  Buddhi  and  not  another  acts 

for  the  benefit  of  one  particular  Purusa,  and  not  of  another   ...  274-276 

In  what  sense  Karma  is  said  to  belong  to  Purusa    ...                  ...  275 

Aniruddha's  dictum  that  Karma  is  of  Purusa  reflected  in  Buddhi, 

criticised  275-276 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


Xlll 


PAGES. 

The  Topic  of  the  pre-eminence  of  Buddhi  concluded                     ...  276-277 

Nimiber  of  the  components  of  the  Linga-Deha        ...                 ...  277 

BOOK  III :  OF  DISPASSION. 

Origin  of  the  Gross  Elements                   ...                  ...                  ...  278 

Origin  of  the  Body               ...                  ...                  ...                  ...  279 

Origin  of  Samsara                ...                  ...                  ...                  ...  279-280 

Limit  of  Samsara                  ...                  ...                  ...                  . . ,  280-281 

Purusa  is  ever  free  from  Experience     ...                  ...                  ...  281-282 

The  Gross  and  the  Subtle  Body  distinguished             ...                   ...  282-283 

Experience  may  take  place  during  transmigration  also               ...  283 

The  Subtle,  and  not  the  Gross,  Body  causes  experience  to  Purusa...  283-284 

Constitution  of  the  Subtle  Body               ...                  ...                  ...  284-286 

The  Subtle  Body  distinguished  as  being  the  container  arid  the 

contained        ...                  ...                 ...                  ...                 ...  284 

The  constituents  of  the  Subtle  Body  are  seventeen,  and  not 

eighteen  in  number           ...                  ...                  ...                  ...  285 

Aniruddha's  interpretation  of  the  Sutram  III.  9  criticised           ...  285 

How  from  one  single  Subtle  Body  manifold  individuals  arise       ...  286-287 

Why  the  Gross  Organism  is  called  a  Body                  ...                 ...  287-288 

"  Body "  means  the  House  of  Experience                   ...                 ...  287 

Body  is  threefold  :  Linga-Deha,  Adhisthana-Deha,  and  Sthula- 

Deha              ...                 ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  288 

Proof  of  Adhisthana  or  Vehicular  Body                    ...                  ...  288-290 

An  objection  answered          ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  290-291 

The  size  of  the  Linga-Sarira  is  atomic    ...                 ...                 ...  291-292 

Another  proof  of  the  finiteness  of  the  Linga-Sarira  ...                 ...  293 

Cause  of  migration  of  the  Linga  Sarira  ...                 .„.                -...  293-294 

Origin  of  the  Gross  Body      ...                  ...                  ...                  ...  294 

Contrary  opinions  stated  and  explained  ...                  ...                  ...  294-295 

Consciousness  is  not  a  natural  product  of  the  organisation  of  the 

Body              ...                 ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  295-296 

An  objection  answered          ...                 ...                  ...                  ...  297-298 

Why  the  Linga-Sarira  takes  a  Gross  Body  :  the  cause  of  Release  ...  298-299 

Cause  of  Bondage                  ...                  ...                  ...                  ...  299 

Knowledge  is  the  sole  and  independent  cause  of  Release                 ...  299-300 

Sveta^vatara-Upanisat  III.  8,  quoted  in  support       ...                  ...  300 

Doubtful  Sruti,  lf!a-Upanisat  XL  explained               ...                 ...  300 

Futility  of [the  co-operatioji  of  knowledge  and  Action  illustrated  ...  301-302 


XIV 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


PAGES. 

Our  conception  of  the  Object  of  Worship  is  faulty  ...  ...  302 

Wherein  it  is  faulty             ...                 ...                 ...  ...  303-304 

Fruit  of  Worship                 ...                 ...                 ...  304 

Sources  of  Knowledge : 

Dliy ana  is  cessation  of  Raga                    ...                  ...  ...  304-305 

Dhyana  includes  Dharana  and  Samadhi  also            ...  ...  305 

How  consummation  of  Dhyana  is  reached                   ...  ...  305-306 

"  Samprajnata  "  and  "  A-Samprajnata  "  Yoga  explained  ...  305-306 

Practices  conducive  to  Dhyana                ...                  ...  ...  306-307 

Dharana  described                 ...                  ...                  ...  ...  307-308 

"  Dharana "  here  means  Pranayama      ...                  ...  ...  307 

Asana  described                    ...                  ...  ...  308 

Sva-Karma  described            ...                   ..                  ...  ...  309 

Other  means  of  Dhyana       ...                  ...»                ...  ...  309-310 

Nuture  of  Viparyaya  or  Mistake  described                  ...  ...  310-312 

A-Sakti  or  Incapacity  which  is  the  cause  of  Mistake,  is  of  twenty- 
eight  sorts       ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  ...  311-312 

Tusfci  or  Complacency  is  ninefold            ...                  ...  ...  312 

Siddhi  or  Perfection  is  eightfold              ...                  ...  ...  312 

Minor  sub-divisions  of  Mistake  :  sixty-two  in  number  ...  312-314 

Minor  sub-divisions  of  Incapacity           ...                  ...  ...  314-315 

Divisions  of  Complacency  explained       ...                  ...  ...  315-319 

Divisions  of  Perfection  explained           ...                  ...  ...  319-321 

The  other  so-called  Perfections  are  not  real                ...  ...  322-323 

Vyasti  or  Specific  Creation  described      ...                 ...  ...  323-324 

Bhautika  Sarga  or  Elemental   Creation   also  is  for   the  sake  of 

Purusa          ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  ...  324-325 

The  Higher,  the  Lower,  and  the  Middle  World  described  ...  325-326 

Cause  of  the  above  differences  in  Creation                 ...  ...  326 

The  Higher  Worlds  cannot  be  the  Supreme  Good       ..,  ...  326-327 

There  is  pain  in  the  Higher  Worlds  also                   ...  ...  327 

Dissolution  into  Prakriti  is  not  the  Supreme  Good    ...  ...  327-329 

Re-birth  after  absorption  into  Prakriti  accounted  for  ...  329-330 

Prakriti's  independence  how  maintained                  ...  ...  329 

Proof  of  re-appearance,  after  absorption  into  Prakriti  ...  330-331 

The  Samkhya  conception  of  Adi  Purusa  and  l^vara  ...  330 

In  what  sense  the  Samkhya  denies  Isvara                 ...  ...  331-332 

Creation  by  Prakriti  is  for  the  release  of  Purusa    ...  ...  333-334 

Prakriti's  interest  is  bound  up  with  that  of  Purusa  ...  334 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


PAGES. 

Prakrit!  acts  spontaneously  for  the  benefit  of  Purusa  . . .  334-335 

Spontaneous  activity  further  illustrated                    ...  ...  335 

A  ctivity  of  Prakrit!  is  natural                ...                 ...  ...  336 

Spontaneity  of  Prakrit!  is  necessary       ...                 ...  ...  336-337 

Cessation  of  her  activity  is  also  spontaneous             ...  ...  337 

Atyantika  Pralaya,  or  Final  Dissolution  described  ...  ...  337 

Release  of  one  does  not  involve  release  of  all             ...  ...  338-339 

Doubtful  Sruti,  ^veta^vatara-Upanisat  I.  10,  explained  ...  338 

Release  consists  in  what       ...                 ...                 ...  ...  339 

How  Prakriti  affects  one  Purusa  and  does  not  affect  another     ...  339-341 

The  "  Error  of  snake  in  respect  to  a  rope  "  explained  ...  341 

The  above  dual  character  of  Prakriti  supported        ...  ...  341-342 

Prakriti's  selection,  how  determined       ...                  ...  ...  342-343 

Hoiv  Prakriti  ceases  to  act :  the  analogy  of  the  fair  dancer  ...  343-344 

Relation  of  Bondage  and  Release  to  Purusa               ...  ...  345 

Bondage  and  Release  really  are  of  Prakriti               ...  ...  345-346 

How  Prakriti  binds  and  releases  herself                     ...  , . .  346-347 

A-Viveka  or  N on— Discrimination  itself  is  not  Bondage  ...  347-348 

How  development  of  Viveka  or  Discrimination  is  possible  ...  348-352 

An  exception  to  the  rule  laid  down         ...                  ...  ...  352 

Pure  Viveka  alone  is  the  cause  of  Release                ...  ...  352-354 

A-Samprajnata  Yoga  is  the    means   of   perfect   development  of 

Viveka          ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  ...  353 

The  case  of  Jivan-Mukta  considered       ...                  ...  ...  354 

Proofs  of  Release-in-life                         ...                  ...  ...  354-356 

Definition  of  Jivan-Mukta  quoted  from  the  Naradiya  Smriti    ...  356 

The  Jivan-Muktas  only  can  be  spiritual  guides        ...  ...  355 

Worldly  existence  after  Release  explained                 ...  ...  356-357 

How  retention  of  Body  even  after  Release  is  rendered  unvoidable. . .  357-359 

Viveka  is  the  only  means  of  Release      ...                 ...  ...  359-360 

BOOK  IV  :  OF  FABLES. 

Instruction  is  necessary  :  Story  of  the  abandoned  Prince  ...  361-362 

Instruction,  to  be  effective,  need  not  be  directly  imparted  :  Story 

of  the  Pidticha                 ...                 ...                 ...  ...  362-363 

Inculcation  also  is  necessary  :    Story  of  Svetaketu  ...  ...  363 

The  instructor  need  not  necessarily  be  a  spiritual  guide  -  Story 

of  the  Father  and  the  Son                   ...                 ...  ...  363-364 

All  worldly  pleasure  is  alloyed  with  pain  :  Story  of  the  Hawk  . , .  364-365 


XVI 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


PAGES. 
Things   avoidable  must  be  avoided  :     Story  of  the  Snalte  and  the 

Slough           ...                 ...                ...                 ...                 ...  365 

Penance  necessary  for  prohibited  acts  done  :    Story  of  the  Ampu 
tated  Hand   ...                 ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  365-366 

Thoughts    uncongenial    to    Release,  to    be    avoided :     Story   of 

Bharata         ...                 ...                 ...                 ...                ~«  366-367 

Company  is  to  be  avoided  :     Story  of  the  Girl  and  her  Bracelets  367 

Hope  is  to  be  abandoned  :    Story  of  Pingala             ...                  ...  368-369 

The  innate  pleasure  of  the  Chitta        ...                 ...                 ...  368-369 

Exertion  is  needless :     Example  of   the  Snake         ...                  ...  369 

In  study,  discrimination  is  necessary  :     Example  of  the  Bee     . . .  369-370 

Concentration  of  mind  necessary  :     Story  of  the  Arrow-maker  ...  370-371 

Rules  are  not  to  be  transgressed  :     Experience  in  life                  ...  371-373 

Brahmacharin  defined         ...                  ...                  ...                   ..  372 

Who  are  the  Pasandas        ...                  ...                  ...                  ...  372 

For getf ulness   of   Rules   is   also  harmful  :     Story   of  the   She- 
Frog              ...                 ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  373-374 

Instruction  is  to  be  supplemented  by  Reflection  :     Story   of   Indra 

and  Virochana                ...                 ...                 .<.                 ...  374-375 

Time  also  is  a  factor  in  the  attainment  of  Release  ...                  ...  375-376 

There  is  no  rule  as  to  the  limit  of  Time  required  : 

Story  of  Vamadeva          ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  376-377 

Inferior  means  also  are  useful  in  their  own  way  :     Example   of 

the  performers  of  sacrifices                 ...                  ...                  ...  377-378 

Although  they  fail  to  secure  permanent  release     ...                  ...  378-380 

Vairagya   is  the  only   means  of  Knowledge  :     Story   of  the  Swan 

and  Milk       ...                 ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  380 

Benefit  of  excellent  company:     Story  of   Alarka  and  Dattatreya  380-381 
Association  with  worldly-minded  people  is  to  be  shunned  :     Story 

of  the  Parrot                     ...                  ...                  ...                  ...  381 

Bondage  results  from  connection   with  the   Guna  :     Story  of  the 

Parrot           ...                 ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  382 

Passion  is  not  appeased   by  enjoyment:     Story  of  Saubhari       ...  382-383 

But  through  seeing  the  faults  of  Prakriti               ...                  ...  383-384 

Faults  disqualify  even  for  instruction  :     Story  of  Aja                ...  384 

Example  of  the  dirty  mirror                  ...                  ...                  ...  384-385 

Knowledge   necessarily   is   not   perfect  Knowledge  :     Example  of 

the  lotus        ...                ...                ...                ...                ..,  385-386 

Release  is  above  Lordliness  ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  386-387 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


XVll 


BOOK  V  :     OF  THE  DEMOLITION  OF  COUNTER-THEORIES. 

PAGES. 

Performance  of  Mangala  is  necessary    ...                  ...                   ..  388 

Itfoara  as  the  Creator  of  the  World  is  not  proved      ...                  ...  389-390 

The  facts  are  satisfactorily  explained  by  Karma     ...                  ...  389 

I^vara  as  the  Moral  Governor  of  the  World  is  not  proved            ...  390-394 

There  is  no  proof  of  an  eternal  Isvara  ...                  ...                  ...  394-395 

Inference  of  Irfvara  is  impossible            ...                 ...                  ...  395-396 

There  is  no  Sabda  in  regard  to  Irfvara  as  Creator      ...                  ...  396-397 

Doubtful  Chhdiidogya-Upanisat  VI.  ii.  3  explained                     ...  397 

A-Vidya  does  not  belong  to  Purusa         ...                  ...                  ...  398-400 

Samsara  is  not  without  beginning            ...                  ...                  ...  399 

The  nature  of  A- Vidy a  discussed             ...                  ...                  ...  400-402 

In  any  case,  A-Vidya  cannot  be  without  beginning  ...                  ...  403 

The  causality  of  Dharina  in  Creation     ...                  ...                  ...  404 

Proofs  of  DLarma                ...                 ...                  ...                 ...  404-405 

Perception  is  not  the  sole  proof  of  existence               ...                  ...  405 

Proof  of  A-Dharma             ...                 ...                  ...                  ...  405-406 

Arthapatti  is  not  the  proof  of  Dharma  ...                  ...                  ...  406-407 

Dliarma,  etc.,  are  attributes  of  the  Antab-Karaua     ...                  ...  407 

The  existence   of  the   Gunas,    etc.,    has    nowhere  been  absolutely 

denied'.  Doubtful  scriptures  explained                   ...                  ...  407-409 

Reality  of  Objective  Existence  is  established  by  proof                   ...  409-411 
Vydpti   or   Logical   Pervasion   cannot  be  grasped   from  a  single 

instance         ...                  ...                  ...                  ...                 ...  411-412 

Vyapti  defined                      ...                  ...                  ...                  ...  412-413 

Vyapti  is  not  a  separate  Tattva              ...                                      ...  413-414 

The  View  of  the  Acharyas  on  Vyapti     ...                                      ...  414-415 

The  View  of  Panchaettkha  ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  415 

Vyapti  is  not  a  power  inherent  in  the  essence  of  the  thing           ...  415-419 

Relation  of  Word  and  Object                  .*..                 ...                 ...  419-420 

Proofs  of  the  Relation  of  Word  and  Object               ...                 ...  420-421 

W ord  does  not  refer  to  acts  only             ...                 ...                 ...  421-422 

Probative  force  of  Vidhis,  Artluivfidas  and  Mantras  considered...  421 
Words  Kfirya-para  and  A-Karya-para,  Sadhya-para   and  Siddlia- 

para               ...                 ...                                      ...                 ...  422 

Words  convey  the  same  in  scriptural  as   in  secular  literature      ...  423 

An  objection  stated                ...                                       ...                  ...  423-424 

Answer  :     The  Vedic  objects  are  not  absolutely  supra-sensuous  ...  425-426 

How  there  can  be  intuition  of  supra-sensuous  objects                  ...  426 


XV111 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


PAGES. 

Power  to  denote  objects  is  inherent  in  Vedic  words  ...  ...  426-427 

Proof  of  the  power  of  Vedic  words  to  denote  objects  ...  427 

The  Veda  is  not  eternal       ...                  ...                  ...  ...  428 

The  Veda  is  not  the  work  of  a  person    ...                  ...  ...  428-429 

But  still  it  is  not  eternal      ...                  ...                  ...  ...  430-431 

Meaning  of  the  term  "Pauruseya"       ...                 ...  ....  431-432 

The  Veda  itself  is  proof  of  its  own  authority            ...  ...  432-433 

Reality  of  Objective  W orld  further  established         ...  ...  434 

Object  of  cognition   in   cases  of   illusion   not   absolutely    non 
existent          ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  ...  434 

Neither  is  the  Objective  World  absolutely  real           ...  ...  434-435 

The  World  cannot  be  something  else  than  real  and  unreal  ...  435-437 

Nor  is  the  World  a  reflection  of  ivhat  it  is  not         ...  ...  437-438 

The  World  is  both  existent  and  non-existent              ...  ...  439-440 

The  Theory  of  Sphota  refuted                ...                  ...  ...  441-442 

Varnas  or  Letters  are  not  eternal           ...                  ...  ...  442 

An  objection  answered         ...                  ...                  ...  ...  442-443 

'Non-Duality  of  the  Self  refuted             ...                  ...  ...  444-445 

Unity  of  the  Self  and  the  Non-Self  contradicted  by  Perception  ...  445-446 

Qi'utis  on  Non-Duality  explained            ...                  ...  ...  446-447 

On  the  Theory  of  Non-Duality  there  can  be  no  material  cause  of 

theioorld       ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  ...  447-449 

The  Samkhya  and  the  Vedanta  compared                ...  ...  448-449 

Pseudo-Vedantins  condemned                ...                 ...  ...  449 

The  Self  is  nob  Ananda  or  Bliss              ...                 ...  ...  449-452 

Conflicting  Srutis  compared  :  Rule   of  Interpretation  :  Place  of 

Reasoning     ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  ...  452 

The  Sruti  on  Ananda  is  metaphorical    ...                 ...  ...  452-453 

The  purpose  of  such  metaphorical  ferutis                   ...  ...  453-454 

The  Theory  that  Manas  is  all-pervading,  refuted       ...  ...  454 

Argument  in  support  of  the  above          ...  ...  455 

Manas  is  not  partless            ...                 ...                 ...  ...  455-456 

Objects  eternal  and  non-eternal,  distinguished            ...  ...  456 

Eternality  of  Prakrit!  and  Purusa  defended             ...  ...  456-457 

Doubtful  Sruti,  SvetaJ^vatara-Upanisat  IV.  10,  explained  ...  457 

Eel  ease  is  not  manifestation  of  Ananda...                  ...  ...  457-458 

Eelease  is  not  the  elimination  of  particular  attributes  ...  458-459 

Neither  is  it  the  attainment  of  particular  Worlds    ...  ...  459-460 

It  is  not  the  cessation  of  connection  with  objects       ...  ...  460 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


xix 


PAGFS. 

Total  extinction  of  the  Self  is  not  Release                 ...  ...  460-461 

The  Void  is  not  Release       ...                  ...  ...  461 

It  is  not  the  possession  of  excellent  enjoyables            ...  ...  462 

It  is  not  the  absorption  of  the  Jiva  into  Brahman     ...  ...  462-463 

It  is  not  the  acquisition  of  supernatural  powers        ...  ...  463 

It  is  not  the  attainment  of  supreme  power                ...  ...  463-464 

The  Indriyas  are  not  the  products  of  the  Elements    ...  ...  464 

Release  is  not  attained  through  the  knowledge  of  the  Six  Predic- 

ables  of  the  Vaisesikas     ...                 ...                 ...  ...  465-466 

Neither  through  the  knowledge  of  the  Sixteen  PredicaUes  of  the 

Naiyayikas    ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  ...  466-468 

The  Ultimate  Atoms  of  the  Vaisesikas  cannot  be  eternal  ...  469-470 

The  Sruti is  against  them    ...                 ...                  ...  ...  469 

Manu-Samhita  I.  27,  quoted  and  explained              ...  ...  469 

The  Atoms  are  not  partless   ...                 ...                  ...  ...  470 

The  Tan-matras  are  the  parts  of  the  Atoms              ...  ...  479 

The  VaiSesika  Theory  of  Visual  Perception  criticised  ...  471 

Magnitude  is  not  fourfold,  as  maintained  by  the  VaiSesikas         ...  471-472 

.The  Va\£Qfiik&Theory  of  Eternal  Genus  criticised     ...  ...  472-473 

Genus  exists      ...                 ...                 ...  ...  473-474 

Genus  is  not  a  negative  conception                               ...  ...  474-475 

Similarity  is  not  a  separate  Tattva  . . .  475 

Neither  is  it  an  inherent  power  of  the  thing               ...  ...  476 

Tt  is  not  the  relation  of  Names  and  Things                ...  ...  476-477 

Because  their  relation  is  non-eternal        ...                  ...  ...  477 

It  cannot  be  from  eternity  ...                  ...                  ...  ...  477-478 

The  Samavfiya  or  Combination  of  the  Vaisesikas  does  not  exist  ...  478-479 

Because  there  is  no  proof  of  it                ...  ...  479-480 

Aniruddha's  interpretation  criticised  t...                 ...  ...  480 

Motion  is  perceptible  also      ...  ...  481-482 

The  Body  is  not  composed  of  five  Elements                ...  ...  482-483 

The  Body  is  composed  of  one  Element  only  ...  483 

Body  is  not  necessarily  gross  ...  483-485 

Meaning  of  Ativahika  Body                     ...                  ...  ...  484 

Meaning  of  Body                  ...                  ...  ...  484 

Proof  of  Ativahika  Body     ...                  ...                 ...  ...  484 

How  the  Senses  illuminate  objects            ...                 ...  ...  485-487 

In  what  sense  the  Senses  are  the  revealers  of  objects  ...  487 

The  Eye  is  not  formed  of  Light               ...                  ...  ...  487-488 

Proof  of  the  Vritti  ormodification  of  the  Senses  ...  ...  488 


XX 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


PAGES. 

Nature  of  the  modification  of  the  Senses  described   ...                  ...  488-489 

The  modification  may  be  a  quality  as  well  as  a  substance             ...  490-491 

Ahamkara  is  everywhere  the  uniform  cause  of  the  Senses            ...  491 

A  doubtful  $ruti  explained  ...                                      ...                  ...  491-492 

Varieties  of  the  Gross  Body. . .                 ...                 ...                 ...  492-493 

'Earth  is  the  only  material  of  the  Gross  Body            ...                  ...  493  494 

Prana  is  not  the  originant  of  the  Body    ...                  ...                  ...  494-41)5 

Prana  is  a  modification  of  the  Indriyas...                  ...                  ...  495 

The  Building  of  the  Body  is  due  to  the  Self                ...                  ...  495-496 

The  superintendence  of  the  Self  is  relative  and  not  absolute        ...  496-497 

Purusas  are  ever  free                     ...                  ...              ...            ...  497-499 

Uses  of  the  word  Brahman  in  the  Samkhya  and  the  Vedanta    ...  498 

Release  distinguished  from  Deep  Sleep  and  Trance                      ...  499-500 

The  reality  of  Release  demonstrated                  ...              ...           ...  500-501 

Vasana  is  powerless  during  Deep  Sleep             ...             ...           ...  501-503 

Release  in  life  defended                 ...                  ...              ....         ...  503-504 

Theory  of  Samskara  ...                 ...                 ...             ...           ...  504 

The  Vegetable  Kingdom  also  is  a  Field  of  Experience                 ...  504  506 

The  evidence  of  the  $ruti,  Ohhandogya-Upanisat  VI.  xi.  I     ...  505 

The  evidence  of  the  Smriti             ...                  ...              ...           ...  506 

The  vegetables  are  not  moral  agents                   ...              ...           ...  506-507 

Three  principal   kinds  of  Body  :  Karma-Deha,    Upabhoga-Deha, 

and  Ubhaya-Deha  ...                  ...                 ...             507-508 

A  fourth  kind  of  Body                 ...                  ...              ...           ...  508 

Eternality  of  individual  Buddhi  refuted         ...              ...           ...  509-510 

Yogic  Perfections  defended            ...                  ...              ...           ...  510 

Consciousness  cannot  be  a  product  of  the  Elements           ...           ...  511-512 

BOOK  VI  :  OF  THE  RECAPITULATION  OF  TEACHINGS. 

The  Self  exists               ...                ...                  ...             513 

It  is  different  from  the  Body  and  the  rest        ...             ...           ...  514-517 

How  Pur usa's  aim  is  fulfilled        ...                  ...              ...          ...  1)1 7 

Pain  is  more  intense  than  Pleasure                    ...              ...          ...  517-518 

Pleasure  is  rare           ...                  ...                  ...              ...         ...  518-519 

All  pleasure  is  alloyed  with  pain  ...                  ...              ...          ...  519 

All  is  pain  :  Yoga-Sutram  II.  15  quoted         ...              ...          ...  519 

The  aim  of  Purusa  is  twofold  :  pleasure  and  absence  of  pain     ...  520 

A  doubt  raised  and  solved               ...                  ...              ...         ...  520-522 

A-Viveka  is  from  eternity              ...                 ...              ...         ..  522-523 

But  it  is  not  eternal      ...                ...                 ...               ...         ...  523 

Ths  cause  of  the  annihilation  of  A-Viveka     ...               523-524 


TABLE  OP  CONTENTS. 


xxi 


PAGES. 

Proof  that  Viveka  is  the  only  destroyer  of  A-Viveka  ...          ...  524-525 

A-Viveka  ?s  the  sole  cause  of  Bondage               ...  ..".          ...             525 

Bondage  does  not  over  again  befall  the  released  one  ...          ...  525-520 

Defects  in  the  opposite  mew,  pointed  out          ...  ...         ...  526-527 

Nature,  of  Release  ... 527-528 

Conflict  with  the  Veda  avoided  528-529 

Adhikarins  are  of  three  classes                . .  ...          ...             529 

Utility  of  other  means  of  Knowledge  than  Hearing  ...          ...             530 

Misconception  about  Yogic  Posture  removed     ...  ...          ...             530 

Dhyana  defined                 ...                  ...             ...  ...          ...            531 

Defence  of  Yoga  ...  ...  ... 531-532 

A-Viveka  is  the  cause  of  Upardga  in  Purusa  ...  ...          ...            532 

The  UparAga  is  not  real,  but  is  a  mere  conceit  ...          ...  532-533 

Means  of  the  suppression  of  Upardga                 ...  ...          ...  533-535 

Teaching  of  the  Ancients  on  the  point               ...  ...          ...  535-536 

For  practice  of  Yoga,  there  is   no  need  of  any  particular  locality  536 

Prakriti  is  the  material  of  the  World                 ...  ...          ...  536-537 

Purusa  cannot  be  the  material  of  the  World  ...          ...             537 

The  Sruti  is  against  the  opposite  view                ...  ...          ...  537-539 

The  Vaisesikas  condemned                 ...             ...  ...         ...             538 

Doubtful  Mundaka  Upanisat  IT.  i.  5  explained  538-539 

A  misconception  removed                      ...              ..  ...          ...             539 

Proof  that  Prakriti   is  all-pervading  ...             ...  ...          ...  539-540 

Motion  of  Prakriti  is  not  in    conflict    with   her  being  the    Primal 

Cause             ...                 ...              ...            ...  ...         ,..  540-541 

Prakriti  is  sui  generis         ...              ...             ...  ...          ...             511 

The  Gtmas  are  not  the  attributes,  but  the  very  form  of  Prakriti...  542-543 

Purpose  of  Prakriti's  creation            .  ..             ...  ...          ...             543 

Reason  for  diversity  of  creation          ..,             ...  ...          ...             544 

How  the  self -same  Prakriti  creates  as  well  as  destroys  ...          ...  544-545 

A ctivity  of  Prakriti  is  no  bar  to  Release            ...  ...          ...             545 

Creation  for  one  Purusa  does  not  affect  another  ...          ...  545-546 

Multiplicity  of  Purusas  is  proved  by  the  Veda  ...          ...  546-547 

Upadhi  cannot  explain  the  situation               ...  ...          ...  547-548 

Even  A-Vidya  is  a  contradiction  to  the  Vedantin's  Non-Duality  ...  548 

Other  faults  in  the  Theory  of  Non-Duality  ...  ...          ...  548-549 

The  Self  cannot  prove  itself             ...             ...  ...          ...  549-550 

Light  is  not  a  property  of  the  Self  ...             ...  ...          ..."'550-553 

Doubtful  Srutis  explained  ...                  ..                ...  ...            553 

Reality  of  the  World  established  ...  ...  554-556 


xxii  TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 

PAGES. 

Causes  of  unreality              ...  554 

The  Universe  described      ...                 ...                 ...  554-555 

Doubtful   Srutis,     Chhandogya-Upanisat    VI.  i.  4   and   Brahma 

Bindu  Upanisat  10,  explained            ...                  ...                  ...  556 

The  Universe  is  ever  existent,  never  created              ...                  ...  556-557 

Agency  belongs  to  Ahamkara                   ...                                      ...  557 

When  Experience  ceases      ..                   ...                  ...                  ...  557-558 

How  re-birth  takes  place  after  attainment  of  Higher  Worlds      ...  558-559 

Higher  instruction  in  the  Higher  Worlds  availeth  not                  ...  559 

A  doubtful Sruti  explained                    ...                 ...                 ...  559-560 

How  going  is  possible  for  the  Self  ivhich  is  omnipresent              ...  560-562 

When  and  why  the  Self  is  called  the  Jiva-Atma     ...                  ...  561 

Why  Ananda  is  attributed  to  the  Self  ...                 ...                 ...  562 

Existence   of  the  Body  is  dependent  upon  the  Self    ...                  ...  562-563 

Formation  of  the  Body  is  not  possible  through  Adristain             ...  563-565 

Jiva  distinguished  from  Purusa,  i.e.,  Paraina-Atina...                 ...  565-567 

Ahamkara,  and  n ot  I^vara,  is  the  cause                     ...                  ...  567-568 

Brahma,  Visnu,  and  Rudra  are  I^varas  in  a  practical  sense  only  568 

There  is  no  intelligent  cause  of  Ahamkara                ...                  ...  568-569 

Other  functions  of  the  supposed  frfvara  accounted  for                  ...  569-570 

The  Mahat  Tattva  is  the  Upadhi  of  Visnu               ...                  .,.  570 

Causal  Brahman  in  the  Samkhya  Sastra                   ...                  ...  570 

In  any  case,  the  relation  of  Prakrit!  and  Purusa  is  from  eternity  570-571 

The  view  of  Paiichadikha    ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  -  571-572 

The  view  of  Sanandana       ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  572-573 

Whatever   may   be   its   form,   the  dissolution  of   the  tie  between 

Prakriti  and  Purusa  is  the  Supreme  Good             ...                  ...  573-575 

The  contention   of   the  Vedantin  that    the  founder   of  the  Sfim- 

khya   is   not   Kapila,  the    Avatara    of   Visnu,  but  Kapila  the 

Avatara  of  Agni,  refuted...                 ...                 ...                 ...  574 

One  Kapila  is  mentioned  in  all  the  Sastras              ...                  ...  574 

Conflicting  text  of  the  Mahabharatam  explained     ...  4-575 

Appendix  I. — (Index  of  Aphorisms). 

Appendix  II. — (Index  of  words). 

Appendix  III. — (Index  of  authorities  quoted). 

Appendix  IV. — (A   catalogue  of   some   of   the   important    works   on    the 

Samkhyha). 

Appendix  V. — (Tattva — Samasa  or  Kapila  Sutram). 
Appendix  VI.— (Samkhya-Karika  of  Isvar  Krisna). 
Appendix  VII. — (Pancha&kha  Sutram). 


APPENDIX  I. 
INDEX  OF  APHORISMS. 


INDEX  OF  APHORISMS.  xv 


PAGE. 


...V,  9  ...       ...       ...       ...  394 


.  .  T,  c  i  93 

...VI,  39  ...  ...  ...  542 

...V,  56  ...  ...  ...  439 

...  ...  ...  ...  284 

,  131          ...  ...  ...  ...  188 

.  .  .  v,  lie  ...  ...  ...  497 

:...!,  69       ...  ...  ...  ..  112 


35  srraRi  ro^gta^...!!,  17  ...  ...  276 

...ui,  53     ...  ...  ...  327 

..in,  6  ...       ...  ...  ...  281 

-  .  .  V,  2  ...  ...  ...  395 


..Il,  44        ...       ...  ...  ...  273 

.  .  .VI,  36  ...       ...  ...  ...  539 

..  1,  116       ...  ...  ...  169 

...i,  4  ...  ...  21 

.  .  .  v,  1  1  2  .  .  .  ...  493 

..nT,  56   ...     ...  ...  ...  330 

...I5  161        ...  ...  ...  227 

...n,  18  ...  ...  251 


...if,  31...       ...       ...  262 

'...I,  103       ...       ...       ...  154 

...1,  138  193 


.  .  .  vi,  42      ...  ...  ...  548 

n  ..F,  198      ...  ...  ...  147 

,  40        ...     •  ...  ...  ...  312 

.  .  .  v  r  ,  o  ...  ...  520 


...r,  us   ...  ...  ...  ...  205 

:...I,  109     ...  ...  ...  ...  162 

...I,  34  ...  ...  ...  56 

•••  •••  —  •••  308 

:  .  .  .  vr,  24  ...  .  .  ...  530 

•••  —  "•  —  99 

...  506 


xv 


INDEX  OF  APHORISMS, 


...II,  43 


.  .  in,  35 


.  .  .  V,  3 


.  .  .  i,  8 

...111,61 


...!,  124 


PAGE. 

...  273 

.  .  .  309 

.  .ill,  26  .  .  .  301 

...  28 

...  336 

...  390 

...  1.7  8 


APPENDIX  K. 
INDEX  OF  WORDS. 


Word  Index— Samkhya  Pravachana  Sutram. 


.      _ 
*  1.  15 

ii.  32 
i.  85 
iii.  55 

:  ii.  33 
r*;:  v.  48... 


PAGE. 

...  156 

...  264 

...  129 

...  329 

...  266 

..,  430 

i.  122,  v.  15,  vi. 
67     ...    175,399,570 

fKTf^v.  48      ...  430 

i.61...       ...  563 

*ftiv.  22  ...       ...  378 

i.  GO     ...  92 

i.  126       ...  182 

iii.  59      ...  334 

[:  v.  98  ...       ...  477 

iv.  29       ...  384 

ii.  8       ...  240 

v.  Ill       ...  492 

v.  82        ...  463 

i:  v.  82  463 


iii.  14,  v.  87  291,  469 

L  74,  vi.  35,  vi. 

37  118,  539,  540 

SmT  v.  87  ...  469 

5r  vi.  39  ...  542 

_    .  p,  — 

i.  ^  ...        '«^ 


i.  155     ...  221 
I  1,  i.  4,  i.  59,  vi. 
5      ...  12,17,21,225 
i.  1    ...   12 


PAGE. 

v.  26  ...  407 

i.  4  ...  21 

vi.  15  ...  ...  524 

':  i.  108  160 


i.  91,  iv.  24  140,  380 

»  i.  16  ...       34 

ii.  23  ...     256 

.  41  ...     423 

WI  i.  1       ...  ...         2 

i.  79,  vi.  52  122,  554 


79,  vi.  52  ...     122,554 

:  i.  123  ...     177 

i.  158,  vi.  37  ...     224,  540 
vi.  37  ...     540 


*.  30,  ii.  36,  vi.  61, 

vi.  65    ...    54,  269,  563,  568 

STCf  vi.  61  ...     563 

^5TT^i.  30  ...       53 

i.  156  ...     222 

s:  iii.  20,  v.  129,  295,511 

.  50  ...     431 

ii.  36  ...     269 

vi.  65  ...     568 

i.  154  ...     216 

f  i.  157,  v.  61  223,  444 
ftftfcre:     i.  154     216 

iv.  21  ...     377 

^qtqT'GT^  iv.  21     377 

ii.  13  ...     246 

ii.  5  ...     237 


xvili     WORD  1NDEX-SAMKHYA  PRAVAGHANA  SUTRAM. 


PAGE. 

i.  152  ...  212 

:  ii.  5  ...  237 

ii.  42  ...  272 

vi.  22  ...529 

iii.  76  ...  352 

vi.  22       ...  115,  529 
stfT^iii.  76  ..   352 
iii.  11       ...  287 
iii.  3       ...  390 
i.  142,  v.  114 

197,  495 

ii.  23       ...  256 
i.  96,  i.  99  145,  148 
:  v.  115     ...  496 
v.  2        ...  389 
•i.  64       ...  567 
i.  8     ...   28 
iii.  61   ...  336 
v.  34       ...  416 
.119       501 


i.  27,  ii.  3  51,  235 

:  vi.  12,  vi.  67  521,  570 

iii.  62  ...  336 
rcWW  ii.  3  ...  235 

lWiri.158  ...  224 

iv.  12  ...  369 

i.  83,  vi.  17  128,  525 

ST^:  i.  83  ...  128 

J  vi.  17  ...  525 

ri.  124,  v.  72  178,456 

.  97  ...  477 

.  91  ...  472 

iii.  25  ...  299 
iii.  25 ...  299 

i.  26  49 


PAGE. 

v.  54    ...  435 

iv.  8      ...  366 

vi.  13      ...  523 

.  2       ...  19 

i.  11     ...  30 

i.  <J        ...  28 

Jv.  35       ...  417 

vi.4()      ...  543 

i.  22        ...  20 
i.  100,  i.  135,  v. 
11,  v.  100,152,  19  i,  395,479 
ii.  43      . 
i.  60       . 


273 

1)2 


*v.  101 
-vi.  35 

iii.  77 
i.  156 

i.  82 


:  v.  125 
i.  8 


...  481 

...  539 

...  352 

...  222 

...  126 

...  508 

...  28 

...  309 

i,8     ...  28 

i.  124       ..  178 

ii.  28         ...  259 

.  25     ...  407 
i.  64,  i.  99 

103,  148 

r^  v.  25  ...  407 
v.  22,  vi.  16,  vi.  53 

405,  525,  556 

:  ii.  19,  v.  94,  v.  107 

252,  475,  488 

vi.  20       ...  527 

vi.  20   ...  527 
i.  156,  iii.  81    222,  356 

i.  156     ...  222 


WORD  INDEX—  SAMKHYA  PRAVACHANA  SUTRAM. 


xx 


PAGE. 

iii.  81     ...  356 

iii.  15      ...  203 

i.  105     ...  157 
i.  17,  i.  57,  i.  153,  iii. 
66,  iv.  2,  v.  64,  v.  93, 

v.  109,  vi.  44   35,  86,  213, 
330,  367,  446,  474,  401,  545 

i.  127        ...  183 


i.  127 


...  183 


.  72,  vi.  06    456,  560 
i.  93        ...  143 
^m:  i.75     ...  118 
WTT^i.  03   ...  143 
i.  120,     ...  187 
i.  134,  v.  16   100,  400 
v,  117       ...  400 
i.  26,  v.  55,  v.  100, 
v.  114,  vi.  12,  vi.  13, 
vi.  18  .40,  437,  470, 

405,  521,  523,  526 

wnfir  v.  55   ...  437 

:  v.  100  ...  470 

i.  17,  i.  153  35,  213 

i  .  16  ...   34 

f  v.  03  ...  474 

.  64  ...  446 

ii.  8  ...  240 


iii.  66  ...  330 


iv.  2  ...  362 

i.  57  ...  86 

i.  32  ...  536 

v.  14  ...  308 

v.  14  ...  308 

.  100  ...  401 

vi.  44  ...  545 

vi.  15,  vi.  63  524565 


i.  15, 


i.  63, 

i.  122 
iii.  65 
iii.  10 
.  101 


PAGE. 

524,  565 
...  175 
...  330 
...  205 
...  481 
:  v.  101  ...  481 

v.  128   ...  510 

i.  112,  i.  137,  i. 
147,  v.  20.  164,  103,  203,  404 
i.  45  ...  67 
vi.  34  ...  537 
v.  105  ...  487 
i.  50  ...  9 
i.  30  ... 
i.  2,  i.  4,  i.  5,  i.  0,  i. 
13,  i.  18,  i.  20,  i.  26,  i, 
27,  i.  28,  i.  40,  i.  46, 
i.  52,  i.  55,  i.  59,  i.  68, 
i.  74,  i.  82,  i.  85,  i.  87, 
i.  04,  i.  07,  i.  105,  i. 
108,  i.  112,  i.  150,  i. 
153,  i.  158,  ii.  8,  ii.  24, 
ii.  36,  iii.  27,  iii.  28, 
iii.  51,  iii.  55,  iii.  58, 
iii.  50,  iii.  66,  iii.  68, 
iii.  69,  iii.  70,  iii.  77, 
iv.  2,  iv.  10,  iv.  12,  iv. 
13,  iv.  16,  iv.  17,  iv.  22, 
iv.  30,  iv.  31,  iv.  32, 
v.  7,  v.  12,  v.  18,  v.  23, 
v.  49,  v.  50,  v.  62,  v.  70, 
v.  80,  v.  82,  v  83,  v.  86, 
v.  91,  v.  06,  v.  100, 
v.  103,  v.  100,  v.  118, 
v.  110,  v.  121,  v.  125, 
v.  126,  v.  128,  v.  129, 


xx       WORD  INDEX—SAMKBYA  PRAVAGHANA  SUTRAM. 


PAGE. 

vi.  3,  vi.  7,  vi.  8,  vi. 
11,  vi.  15,  vi.  17,  vi. 
21,  vi.  26,  vi.  27,  vi.  33, 
vi.  35,  vi.  37,  vi.  40, 
vi.  44,  vi.  47,  vi.  48,  vi. 
56,  vi.  59,  vi.  67. ..19,  21,22, 
28,  32,  37,  43,  49,  51,  51,  60, 
70,75,  77,91,  111,118,  126, 
129,  132,144,  147,  157,  160, 
164,  208,  213,  224,  240,  256, 
269,  302,  303,  326,  329,  333, 
334.  339,  342,  343,  344,  352, 
362,  367,  369,  369,  373, 
374,  378,  384,  385,  386,  392, 
396,  402,  405,  430,  431,  445, 
4.61,462,  463,  463,  466,  472, 
476,  479,  483,  491,  500,  501, 
504,  508,  509,  510,  511,  515, 
518,519,  521,  525,  525,  528, 
531,  532,  537,  539,540,  543, 
545,  548,  548,  550,  560,  570 
"  vi.  9       ...  520 

i.  47,  i.  82, 
vi.  18    ...    70,  126,  526 
v.  78   ...  460 
r.  41,  v.  48 

423,  430' 

v.  104        ...  485  ' 
b  i.  24,  v.  58    48,  442 
v.  104  ...  485 

;     ...  28 

t:v.  104       ...  485 
Hi  127       ...  183 
.  35,  i.  79,  v.  56 

57, 122,  439 
.  17  ...  401 
ri.45  67 


PAGE. 

i.  63     ...  102 
v.  73       ...  456 
'l  iii.  21       ...  296 

i.  43,  i.  67,  i.  80, 
i.  93,  i.  138,  i.  158,  v. 
10,  v.  11,  v.  46,  v.  54, 
v.  99,  vi.  9,  vi.  33,  vi. 
44,  vi.  48,  vi.  52,  vi. 
64     ...       ...   64, 

111,  124,  143,  193,  224,394, 
395,  428,  435,  478,  520,  537, 
545,  548,  554,  567 
i.  43,  i.  80     64,  124 
>       ...  274 
:ii.l6,  vi.28,  249,532 
i.  120      ...  172 
;:  v.  59,  v.  74,  v. 
95      ...  442,457,475 
^T  i.  120   172 
:  v.  51     ...  432 
':  vi.  6       ...  517 
i.  84      ...  128 
v.  47      ...  429 
:  i.  125       ...  180 
iii.  58    ...  333 
i.  28     ...   51 
vi.  29       ...  533 
iii.  36,  iii.  75 

309,  348 
i  i.  67...       ...  HI 

i.  15,  i.  46       33,  70 

^  i.  20,  i.  31,  i.  39, 
i.  81,  i.  145. ..43,  54,  60,125, 

200 

-  v.  47     ...  429 
v.  44          427 


WORD  I^DEX—SAMKHYA  PRAVACHANA  StiTRAM.      xxi 


PAGE. 

ii.  8      ...  246 

i.  20     ...  49 

ii.  40     ...  274 

1   ...       ...  12 

.  2,  v.  100,  v.  107 

302,  488,  488 

i.  3  ...       ...  20 

v.  37        ...  4J9 

v.  24        ...  400 

v.  92        ...  473 

v.  22     ...  405 

:  i.  100       ...  158 

v.  27        ...  409 

v.  82  403 


16 


106 


403 
150 
557 
122 
43 
122 
33 
258 
312 
312 
270 
140 
140 
;:  iii.  08,  vi.  12,  vi. 

342,  512,  525 
vi.  08  ...  571 
°q  i.  57,  iii.  74 

80,  347 

re  vi.  08   ...  571 
v.  64     ...  440 
i.  55,  i.  57,  i. 
iii.  71,  vi.  11,  vi. 


:  i.  104 

r  vi.  55 

i.  78 

i.  20 

i.  79 

i.  14 

ii.  27 

iii.  41 

iii.  41 
%  ii.  38 
i.  90 

i.  90 


PAGE. 

27  ...  77,80,  158,345,521, 

532 

v.  J3,  v.  05  ...398,  447 
n  i.  20       ...   43 
:  v.  13  ...  398 
:  vi.  21     ...  528 
vi.  48     ...  548 
i.  0        ...   93 
vi.  19,  vi.  26.  ..526,  531 
i.  85,  iii.  1...129,  218 
iii.  4     ...  286 
:  vi  19   ...  526 
i-  ^08      ...  160 
i.  82        ...  12G 
.82    ...  120 
i.  136  192 

ii.  41   ...  079 

i.  120  179 

.  124  ...  17g 

i.  9  ...  28 

:  iii.  38  ...  3n 

i.  11  ...   30 

&:  i.  9  ...  28 

ii.  42...          272 

^RTHIKcgrT^ii.42  272 
iii.  40  QIO 

•  •  •    <_/  J.  £j 

i.  13,  iii.  38 

14,  311 

iv,  3        ...  363 
i.  114,  v.  56    107,  439 

v.  52      ...  434 

i.  94  ...  144 
i.  114  ...  107 
i.  87  ...  132 


87 


132 


xxii     WORD  INDEX— SAMKHYA  PRAVACHANA  SfJTRAM. 


PAGE. 

:  i.  15...       ...  33 

vi.  10        ...  520 

srjh  vi.  io  ...  520 

i.  49,  i.  11(3,  vi. 

16,  vi.  53,  vi.  61,  vi.  62,  72, 

169,  525,  556,  563,  564 

:  vi.  28      ...  532 

vi.  61     ...  563 

.  109      ...  491 
i.  13 

v.  100    ...  491 


i.  33,  v.99,  vi.  1...   55, 
478,  513 

vi.  1        ...  513 
i.  27,  vi.  14      51,523 
v.  112   ...  493 

iv.  8     ...  366 

^  iv.  8  ...  366 
:i.  88,  i.  Ill  ...137,  163 
f:i.34,i.92,  v.  127   56, 
142,  509 
i.  2...        ...  514 

«rc  i.  61,i.72,  ii.  16, 
vi.  54,  vi.  62,  vi.  64  ...   93, 
117,  249,  557,  564,  567 
i.  61,  ii.  18.  ..93,  251 
vi.  64  ...  567 
i.  63      ...  102 
v.  84      ...  464 
v.  84   ...  464 


irc  tflft  vi.  62         ...     564 

iv.  6  ...  365 


i.  89,  v.  77  138,  460 

r^&f^n  v.  77...    460 

i.  51  ...       73 

i.  15  208 


ii  12 

i.  107 
v.  i 

v  L 

.  3L 
vi.  30 
i.  125,  iii.  72 


PAGE. 

245 

160 
388 
388 
414 


180, 
345 

v.  57        ...  441 
ii.  26        ...  257 
:  i.  95,  ii.  29,  v.  61, 
vi.  10,  vi.  33  ...  144, 

256,  444,  520,  537 


.  62 
:  vi.  34 


...  445 

...  537 

...  523 

447,  513 

...  346 

...  244 

...  244 

...  302 


v.  65,  vi.  1 
iii.  73       ... 
ii.  II       ... 
ii.  11   ... 
iii.  27     ... 

v.  L03   ...  483 
i.  26,  i.  54,  i.  126,  i. 
128,  i.  139,  i.  141,  i. 
149,  ii.  10,  ii.  28,  iii. 
21,  iii.  43,  iii.  46,  v. 
49,  v.  77,  v.  78,  v.  80, 
v.  82,  v.  83,  v.  126,  vi. 
2,  vi.  10,  vi.56     ...   49, 
75,  182,  185,  195,  196,  207, 
242,  259,  296,  315,  323,  430, 
460,  460,  462,  463,  463,  509, 
514,  520,  558 
i.157        ...  223 
.  77,  v.78  ...  460, 
460 


WORD  INDEX— SAMKRYA  PRAVACRANA  S&TRAM.   xxiii 


Fi.  33 

iii.  53 

:  i.  60,  vi.  29 


i  v.  82 

i.  25,  v.  109, 
61     ...    48, 
v.  86 


v.  25,  v.  121 


:i.  129 
i.  71 
i.  118,  vi.  32 


i.  127 


vi.  32 

i.  88 
vi.  38 
v.  32,  v.  30 


r:  v.  32 

Mir  v.  3 1 

iii  43 

^  iii. 
v.  74 
v.66 

:  v.  74 
iv.  15 
:  vi.  19 
:  i.  113 
i.  101 
:  ii.  45 
:  i.  101 
*  cf  iii.  47 


iv.  so 


PAGE. 

...  55 
...  327 
...  92, 

533 

...  463 
vi. 

491,  563 
...  466 
...  407, 

504 

....  187 
...  116 
...  205, 

536 

"...  118 
...  183 
...  536 
...  157 
...  541 
...  415, 

417 

...  415 
..  417 
...  315 
43  315 
...  457 
...  449 
...  457 
...  371 
...  526 
...  165 
...  153 
...  274 
...  153 
...  324 

384 


.  114 

.121 
TrJ^  vi.  55 

i.  153 


PAGE. 

...  495 
...  504 

...  557 
213 


ii.  11,  iii.  1  ...  244,  278 
p.  21,  v.  113...  254, 
494 

ii.  21        ...  254 
ETr^iii.  4,  iii.  47  ...  280, 
324 

l  iii.  52,  iv.  3,  iv. 
22,  vi.  56        ...  326, 
363,378,558 


iii  35 

v.  126,  v.  127 
"  v.  14 

v.128 


v.  i£ 
iii.  11 
i.  124 
ii.  32 
iii.  34,  vi.  24 


64 


..  309 

..  509, 

..  398 

..  500 

..  509 

..  287 

..  178 

..  300 

..  308, 
530 

..  253 
:  ii.  20,  iii. 

253,  338 


iii.  04,  v.  82   ...  338,463 
ii.  7...       ...  282 

iii.  81       ...  356 
.  82     ...  463 
iii.  64       ...  338 
iv.  22      ...  378 
iii.  5,  iii.  8,  iii.  27 

280,  283,  302 


xxiv     WORD  INDEX— SAMKHFA  PRAVAGHAKA  SUTRAM. 


PAGE. 

:  iii.  42      ...  314 
iii.  45,  iii.  84.  ..322,  359 
i.  15,  i.  54,  i.  61,  i. 
68,  i.lll,i.  132,  i.  142, 
i.  163,  iii.  18,  iii.  11), 
iii.  75,  v.  1,  v.  31,  v. 
32,  v.  80,  v.  103,  v. 
107,  v.  Ill,  vi.  7,  vi. 
8,  vi.  9,  vi.  24,  vi.  30, 
vi.  69.  ..33,  75,  93,  111,  163, 
189,  197,  229,  294,  295,  348, 
388,  414,  4H,  462,  483,  488, 
492,  518,  518,  520,  530,  535, 

572 

i.  159        ... 
.  83   ...       ... 

^^m!  v.  83  ... 
ii.19,  ii.  32,  v.  113 

252,  264,  494 
i.  61,  ii.  23     93,  256 
.  69      ...  454 
ii.  32     ...  264 
v.  113   ...  494 


225 
463 
463 


'i.  108,  iv.  18. ..160,  375 
ii.  39       ...  270 
'!  ii.  19        ...  252 

ii.  29,  v.  84,  v. 
104        259,  464,  485  ' 
r  i.  28,  i.  60,  i.  150,  i. 
159,  iii.  26,  iv.  21,  v. 
59,  v.  118,  vi.  28... 51,  92, 
208,  225,  301,  377,  442,>500, 

532 
iv.  14        370 


iii.  57... 


331 


PAGE. 

i.  92,  iii.  57,  v.  2, 
vi.  64  .,.  142,  331,  389,  569 
vi.  64   ...  567 
J  iii.  57    ...  331 
I      ...  389 
:  i.  92        142 


iii.  68  ...  342 
i.  162  ...  228 
«  i.  56,  v.  75,  v. 

77,  v.  78,  vi.  70  ...  82,  458, 
460,  460,  573 


J  v.  82 
:  i.%  159 


...  463 
...  225 
...  148 
22 
22 

...  60 
...  548 
...  60 
i.  73,  vi.  73...  117,  530 
^H  iii  52 


i.  o  ... 

i.  5 
i.  39  ... 

vi.  48... 

i.  39 


iii.  54 


i.  77,  ii.  22 
:  vi.  53 
i.  123 


:  iii.  8 
:  i.  114 
i.  11  ... 
v.  31  ... 
:  ii.  36,  iii.  22 
v.  Ill 

i.  65 
i.  97 
i;  26 


..  326 
...  327 
121,  155 
...  556 
...  177 
...  283 
...  167 
...  30 
...  414 
269,  297 
...  492 
...  568 
...  147 
49 


I 


WORD  INDEX-SAMKEYA  PRAVAGHANA  SIJTRAM.    xxv 


i.  31 


PAGE. 
...   54 

i.  31        ...   54 
:f>¥TT5n  i.  31    54 

iii.  29      ...  304 
v.  50       ...  431 
i.  108     ...  160 
•i.  9        ...   28 
i.  7,  i.  9.       26,  28 
:i.  98,  i.  101,  i.  102, 
iv.  2,  iv.17,  iv.  29  ...  147, 
153,  153,  362,  374,  384 
iv.  17    ...  374 
iii.  99       ...  354 
7.  l,iv.  3,  vi.57  361, 
363,  559 
:  iv.'  29  ...  384 
iii.  79        354 


i.  105,  v.  124.  ..157,  507 

iii.  5       ...  280 
iii.  77,  vi.  44.  ..352,  545 
i.  28         ...   51 

i.  28   ...  DI 

!  i.  28  ...   51 
i.  27         ...   51 
ii-  34,  vi  26,  vi. 
27,  vi.  28...  267,  531,  532,532 
i-  29,  i.  164,  ii. 


15     ...    53,229,248 
iii.  66        ...  339 
^KtsrT^  vi.  26  ...  531 
v.  77       ...  460 
i.  109      ...  162 
»  i.  110,  v.  94,  v.  95 

163,  475,  475 
ii.  34       ...  267 
*  ii.  34      267 


PAGE. 

iii.  70      ...  344 
iv.  19     ...  375 
vi.  44       ...  545 
iii.  30       ...  304 
iv.  25        ...  381 

i.  115,  v.  65,  v. 
102     ...  168,  447,  482 

*  i.  76,  iv.  23, 
v.  112    ...  120,  380,493 
i.  81      ...  125 
i.  81   ...  125 
v.  102     482 


v.  109,  vi.  32 

491,  536 
i.  115  ...  168 
':  iv.  23  ...  380 
i.  57  ...  73 
:i.  151,  vi.  46. ..210,  547 
i.  150  ...  208 
[^  i.  51,  vi.  59 

73,  560 

fiv.  21  ...  377 
iv.  21  ...  377 
iv.  13  ...  369 
i.  95  ...  144 
iv.32  ...  386 
iv.  32  386 


i.  40,  i.  46,  i.  102, 
i.  103,  i.  129,  i.  160, 
ii.  26,  v.  91,  v.  124  ...60,70, 
153, 154,  187,  226,  257,  477, 

507 
I  i.  61,  i.  107,  v.  65 

93,  160,  447 
W  i.  47,  i.  94,  v.  39, 
vi.  26  ...  70,  144,  421,  531 


xxvi     WORD  IWDEX—SAMKRYA  PRAVAGHANA  BUTE  AM. 


PAGE. 

v.  23,  v.  100...  405,  479 

cSn^  i. 

46     ...       ...  70 

:  i.  160      ...  226 
i.  102,  i.  103 

153,  154 

ii.  26      ...  257 

v.  97   ...  477 

i.  129   ...  187 

5  i.  6,  ii.  28,  iii.  36, 
iv.4,iv.  28,  v.  24,  v.  29, 

vi.  19   ...       ...  23, 

259,  301,  363,  383,  406,  412, 

526 

WT*ri  v.  63       ..  446 

TOT*  iii.  66        ...  339 

^ii.  36      ...  269 

i.  89        ...  138 

TOW  v.  Ill        ...  492 


Ill    ... 

vi.  40  ... 


vi.  40 


iii.  48 
5  iii.  44 


...  492 
...  543 
58, 
333,  543 


...  325 
319 


i.  19,  i.  59,  iii.  71,  iv. 
17,  v.  6. ..37,  91,  345,374,391 


v.  120 
iii.  9 


PAGE. 

...  503 

...  284 

J.  31   ...  51 

Ti.  112       ...  164 

i.  68         ...  Ill 

ii.2J         ...  256 

i.  112    ...  164 
i.  75,  iii.  65,  v. 
29     ...    118,  339,  412 

'!  i.  112    ...  164 

i.  153      ...  213 

i.  152       ...  212 

i.  29        ...  53 

553^q?Tm^  i.  29  53 

SMMJ  iii.  19     ...  295 

~  HI  iii.  73      ...  346 
i.  150,  iii.  8,  v.  66 

208,  283,  449 

i  87  132 


i.  33 
*  iii.  71 
.  115 


i.  31 


54 


...  345 
...  496 

ii.  17       ..,  250 
ii.  18,  ii.  19   251,252 
C3r%iii.  18  ...       ...  294 

qfrvi.  62  ...       ...  564 

iii.  66,  iv.  10,  v.  63, 
v.  101,  vi.  16      ...  339, 
367,  446,  481,  525 
*  i.  152,  i.  158,  iii.  28, 
iii.  42,  v.  18,  v.  23,  v. 
79,  v.  86,  vi.  26...  212,  224, 
303,  3] 4,  402,403,  461,  466, 

531 
ii.  11  244 


WORD  INDEX— SAMKHYA  PRAVACHAKA  SUTEAM.     xxvii 


f*  i.  163,iii.65. 

v.  128 

121 


PAGE. 

229, 
339 
510 

504 


. 


vi.  7 

ii.  31,  ii.  36 
ii.  38  ... 
v.  69 


i.  117 


...  239 
...  239 
...  518 
259,  269 
...  270 
...  454 
...  169 
...  269 
...  259 
330,  557 
158,  428 
549,  567 
...  229 

ii.  19,  ii.  46,  ii.  47, 
iii.  10,  iii.  35,  iii.  51, 
iii.  67,  v.  124,  vi.  41, 
vi.  49,  vi.  55,  vi.  67...  259, 
274,  276,  286,  309,  326,  341, 
507,  544,  549,  557,  570 
5  vi.  49      549 


11.  »:D 

ii.  29 
iii.  56,  vi.  54 
:  i.  106.  v.  46 


vi.  49,  vi.  64 
i  164 


v,  124,  ...       ...  507 

:  vi.  67     ...  570 
iii.  67  .   341 


iii.  10    ...  286 
iii.  51,  vi.  41 

320,  544 

:  i.  81        ...  185 

i.  16,  i.  52,  v.  2  ...   34, 

73,  389 


PAGE. 

i.  32,  iii.  60    55,  335 
iii.  62      ..,  336 
v.  1  23   ...  506 
5[tfc  ii.  19   252 


ii.  25,  v.  30   257,  413 

ii.  25   ...  257 

iv.  25    ...  381 
i.  85  ...       ...  129 

i.  19,  i.  38,  i.  78,  i. 
121,  i.  135,  vi.  14,  vi. 
52    ...  59,  72,  110,  173, 
191,  523,  554 
v.  65        ...  447 
vi.  37       ...  540 
iii.  25,  v.  6  ...  299, 
391 

i.  118   ...  170 

:  i.  121  ...  173 

iii.  54  ...  327 

i.  155  ...  221 

i.  56  ...  82 

i.  135  ...  191 


i.  34,  i.  38,  i.  71,  i. 
110,  ii.  14,  ii.  17,v.  20, 
vi.  36,  vi.  64  ...  56,  59,  116, 
163,  247,  250,  404, 

539,  567 
^ 

i.  38   ...   59 


*  i.  73,  i.  129,  iii.  8, 
v.  45,  v.  87,  vi.  32  ...  117, 
187,  283,  428,  469,  536 
:  v.  45,  vi.  32...  428, 
536 

v.  12      ...  396 
:  i.  137,  ii.  6   193,  238 
v.  58          442 
v.  88      ...  470 


xxviii     WORD  IKDEX—SAMKHYA  PRAVACHANA  SC7TRAM. 


PAGE. 

:  v.  58    ...  442 
i.  110,  vi.  36. ..163, 
539 
vi.  42         544 


;:  vi.  64  ...  567 

i.  135  ...  191 

v.  39  ...  ...  421 

-i.  97...  ...  147 

5FT53i.  12,  i.  31,  iv  20,  vi. 
59  ...  31,  54,  376,  560 

i:  iv.  20  ...  376 

r:  i.  12  ..  31 

':  iii.  60  ...  335 

ii.  12  ...  245 

r.  125  ...  508 

vi.  28...  ...  532 

v.  120  ...  503 

fiCTTH&fo:  v.  120  ...  503 

F:  v.  101  ...  481 

ii.  45  ...  274 

ii.  39  ...  270 

r;  i.  80  ...  124 

vi.  7  ...  518 

SFfcvi.  34..  537 


i.  34  ...  537 

i.  80  ...  124 

fm€fiv.  9...  ...  367 

€teNraq;iv.9  ...  367 

iii.  70  ...  ...  344 

iii.  70  ...  344 

ii.  35  ...  268 

I:  i.  4  ...  ...  21 

iv.  15,  v.  50,  vi.  5 

371,431,  517 

:  v.  50  ...  431 

vi.  5  517 


PAGE. 


iii.  54,  iii.  84, 
iv.  17,  iv.  32,  vi.  5 

327,  359,374,386,  517 

iv.  15  ...  371 

iv.  J9        ...  375 

iii.  14...       ...  291 

:  iii.  14       ..  291 

I*  i.  14      ...  199 

^  iii.  73    ...  291 

ii.  32        ...  264 

ii.  10        ...  242 

ii.  33        ...  266 

:  ii.  33    ...  266 

pfSH  vi.  6         ...  517 


i.  34 

v.  77 


i.  46 


56 

460 

380 

20 

70 


v.  55,  v.  66...  437,  439 
v.  52  434 


»T*m  i.  61  93 

i.  48,  i.  51,  v.  70,  v. 
76,  vi.  37,  vi.  59  ...  71, 

73,  455,  459,  540,  560 

vi.  37       ...  540 

WM»    *      i  O  ^71 

*  Tq^  i .  4o      ...  /l 

nfaSTfa:  i  51  73 


v. 


70,  vi.  59^|. 

455,  560 


WORD  INDEX— SAMKRYA  PEAVACHANA  SIJTRAM.    xxix 


iii.  51 


iii.  51 


PAGE. 

...  326 
...  326 
...  55 


i.  33       ... 
i.  125,  ii.27,  ii.  39,  ii. 
45,  iv.  26,  v.  75...  180, 

258,  270,  274,  382,  458 
ii.  27  ...  258 

ii.  45  ...  274 

iv.  26     ...  382 


:  I  125   ...  180 

i.  127,  i.  128.  ..183,  185 

v.  26  ...  407 

v.  107  ...  488 

iv.  13  ...  ...  369 

v.  121...  ...  504 

S  v.  67  ...  ...  452 

v.  28  ...  411 


5T 

v.  71  ...  455 

v.  59  ...  442 

:  i.  150  ...  208 

i.  50,  i.  129. ..72,  187 


i.  6,  i.  16,  i.  22,  i.  36, 
i.  37,  i.  54,  i.  63,  i. 

77,  i.  79,  i.  107,  i.  113, 
i.  118,  i.  128,  i.  132,  i. 
142,  i.  144,  i.  163,  ii.  5, 

••    c\ci    '  *    o  <n   *  *   Or"   *  * 

11.  22,  11.  32,  11.  oo,  11 
43,  iii.  4,  iii.  12,  iii.  15, 
iii.  21,  iii.  36,  iii.  67,  iii. 

78,  iii.  80,  v.  1,  v.  26, 
v.  35,  v.  80,  v.  85,  v. 
lll,v.  122,  v.  127,  v. 


PAGE. 

129,  vi.  48,  vi.  59  ...  23,  34, 
45,58,58,  75,  102,121, 
122,  160,  165,  170,185, 
189,  197,199,229,237, 
255,  264,  268,  273,  280, 
288,293,296,309,341, 
354,355,388,407,417, 
462,465,492,506,509, 
511,  548,  560 

iii.  82   ...  356 

vi.  56  ...       ...  558 

vi.  56    ...  558 

i.  72  ...       ...  117 

v.  105        ...  487 

i.  156      ...  222 

iii.-69    ...  343 

iii.  18     ...  294 

v.  90     ...  471 

i.  104,  vi.  50,  vi.  55...  156, 
550,  557 

i.  58,  vi.  31     ...  88, 
536 

vi.  31   ...  536 

i.  164  ...  229 

i.  58  ...  88 

i.  104  .'..  156 

vi.  55  ...  557 

:  vi.  50  ...  550 

i  146     ...  201 

iii.  12       ...  288 


i.  10,  i.  18,  i.  23,  i. 
30,  i.  Ill,  i.  119,  iii. 
22,  v.  8,  v.  9,  v.  24,  v. 
60,  vi.  9,  vi.  26,  vi.  46, 
vi.  61   ...  29,  37,  45,  54, 
163,  171,  297,  392,  394,  406, 
443,  520,  531,  547,  563. 


xxx     WORD  1NDEX-SAMKHYA  PRAVACBANA  SUTRAM. 


PAGE. 

PAGE. 

^      ^     v 

.  .     239 

5KTJJ1T  v.  1  1  1 

492 

^^T^5IT^  11.  7 

%cf%  iv.  29 

...     384 

3T55  i.  84,  vi.  61 

128, 

%^[^T^  i.  3 

...      20 

563 

P"  /"»  O 

%gf  iii.  51 

...     326 

""STcSi  l^^l  ri   vi.  ul                ... 

563  . 

^ifyd  iii.  59,  iii.  61 

...    334, 

R.     •      01 

128 

TM^^T^  i.  84 

336 

STFKTWrf  iii.  26 

301 

tflPT*  iii.  20,  v.  129 

...    295, 

r"i  1 

5T1^7  i    S5 

128 

1-\  r\ 

511 

3rr§rrarHr^«  i.  o4 

28 
o  i  f* 

9 

STTin^^c^T^  i.  154 
5!T^nTT^^T5  i.  38 

216 

59 

W.JX,                   »    ••      OQ 

...     307 

^Tracer  vi.  63 

565 

e3S|i?  if^rViii  ^  411  i  ^£jT    ill,  t  )  r_) 

SPTT«T^  iii.  12 

...     288 

*ft^gTf>s  iii.  78 

354 

...     365 

^t^T»rt  i.  97 

147 

IC^^Ifi  ^?^  ^1  fl     IV     / 

*f*  i.  100  ... 

152 

^rir^Ti   22  ... 

20 

* 

3T*T^  v.  65,  vi.  52 

...    447, 

cT 

554 

^TST^W   iv,  31 

385 

giro:  v.  18... 

...     402 

rfcP  i.  65 

106 

-  *            n 

...     554 

cf^  i.   2,   i.  3,  i.  4,  i.  19, 

*JfMCv!f{?4CS|     VI.    fJ<^ 

_        *          cr 

...     447 

i.  40,  i.  43,   i.  49,  i.  55, 

3I*T  <*M  |  <^  f  "t  1»l  *v<!J    V.  DO 

5T?  i.  145 

...     200 

i.  56,  i.  57,  i.  62,  i.  71, 

3f^  vi.  50 

...     550 

...     200 

i.  73,  i.  74,  i.  77,  i.  80, 

i.  82,  i.  87,  i.  88,  i.  89, 

*         r*  f\ 

...     550 

i.  93,  i.  96,  i.  99,  i.  102, 
i.  106,  i.  109,  i.  110,  i. 

3Tvg<aiT^Tn  vi.  50 

5T?*T  i.  149,  iv.  22 

...    207, 

Ill,   i.    125,   i.  133,  i. 

378, 

135,    i.    137,   i.  147,  i. 

5C?*3rJt:   iv.  22 

...     378 

OAT 

153,  ii.  2,  ii.  3,  ii.  6,  ii. 

si'Wn^^l^^lcf'  i.  149 

207 

8,  ii.    14,  ii.  17,  ii.  22, 

__                               .                    —  r    ,                                      »^-^V 

...    122, 

ii.  34,  ii.  46,  iii.  3,  iii.  8, 

^^(cc|T^  i.  79,  vi.  52 

554 

iii.   11,  iii.   14,  iii.  22, 

-•'     427                 iii.   31,  iii.   55,  iii.  64, 

...    s 

5TT  vi.  28    ... 

...     532 

f  O  C) 

iii.   79,  iii.  83,   iv.  16, 

•          6\  -%                 c\              r*                rj 

Sf^T^^jfe^F^T*  vi.  28 

5o^ 

iv.  31,   v.  2,  v.  6,    v.  7, 

5W  iii.  53 

-...     327 

v.  10,  v.  14  v.  19,  v.  21, 

...     327 

v.  44,  v.  46,  v.  49,  v,  50, 

^r^t^'STt^SI  111.  53 

WORD  INDEX— SAMKUYA  PRAVAGEANA  SfJTRAM.    xxxi 


PAGE. 

v.  54,  v.61,  v.  71,  v.  85, 
v.  87,  v.  90,  v.  92,  v. 
95,    v.    105,  v.   108,  v. 
110,   v.  112,  v.  113,   v. 
117,  vi.8,vi.  11,  vi.  29, 
yi.  39,  vi.  46,    vi.    49, 
vi.    51,  vi.  55,  vi.    58, 
vi.  61,  vi.  62,  vi.  70...      19, 
20,  21,37,6-),  64,  72,  77,  &2, 
86,  99,  116,  117,   118,  121, 
124,  126,  132,  137,  138,  143, 
145,  148,  153,  158,  162,  163, 
163,  180,  190,  191,  197,  203, 
213,  234,  235,  238,  240,  247, 
250,  255,  267,  274,  279,  283, 
287,  291,  297,  305,  329,  338, 
354,  357,  373,  385,  389,  391, 
392,  394,  398,  403,  404,  427, 
428,  430,  431,435,  444,455, 
465,469,  471,  473,  475,  487, 
490,  491,  493,  494,  499,  519, 
521,  533,  542,  547,  549,  553, 
557,  558,  563,  564,  573 
:  v.  146  ...     428 

fsf  cf^f^  ii.  46,  vi. 
55  ...  ...    274, 


ii.  14,  ii.  17   ...  247, 
250 

:  i.  137      ...  193 
i.  73,  iii.  8   ...  117, 
283 

^r:v.  87    ...  489 
iii.l?        ...  324 
I  i.  33,  i.  83,  iii.  51,  v. 
64,  vi.  21        ...   55, 
128,  326,  446,  528 
J  \.  44,  i.  107,  iii,  75, 


PAGE. 

iv.  t,  v.  94,  v.  107  ...   66, 
160,  348,  361,  475,  488 
iii.  66       ...  339 

i.  107    ...  160 

v.  30,  v.  94,  v.  107, 

...  413,  475,488 

iii.  75  ...  348 

iv.  1  ...  361 

0  ...  431 

i.  147  ...  203 

i.  3  ...  20 

i.  87  ...  132 

i.  96  ...  145 

i.4...  ...  21 

i.  135   ...  191 


:  i.  2,  i.  80,  i.  82, 

1.  93,  i.  125,  i.  153,  ii.  3, 
ii.  8,  iii.  31,  iii.  32,  iii. 
79,  iii.  83,  v.  6,  v.  10, 
v.21,v.44,  vi.  11,  vi  29.  ..19, 
124,  126,  143,  180,  213,  235, 
240,  305,  306,  354,  357,  391, 

394,  404,  427,  521,  533 
J  i.  106,  i.  137,  ii. 

2,  ii.  6,  v.  2,  v.  105,  v. 

113,  vi.  51       ...  .158, 
193,  234,  238,  389,  487,  494, 

553 

i.  88,  v.  14,vi.46, 
vi.  49,  vi.  58      ...  137, 
398,  547,  549,  558 
i.  112,  ii.  42,  iii.  7, 
iv.  10,  vi.  6       ...  164, 
272,  282,  367,  517 
:  v.  117       ...  499 
57,  i.  133    ...   86, 
190 


xxxii    WORD  INDEX— SAMKHYA  PRAVACHANA  S&TRAM. 


iii.  U 
v.  85 
i.  43,  v.  54 


i.  40,  i.  43 
v.  01 
i.  19,  i.  55 

i.  40 


PAGE. 

...  287 

...  405 

...   64, 

435 

...40,04 
...  444 
...37,77 

...  oo 


...  455,  471,  490 
i.  19      ...   37 
v.  7,  v.  14,  v.  40...  392, 
398,  430 

i.  80        ...  124 
ii.  40         ...  274 
v.  41       ...  423 
iv.  31       ...  385 
vi.  39         542 
v.  19        ...  403 
:  v.  92        ...  473 


iv.  19,  iv.  24,  v.  75, 
v.  83   ...       ...  375, 

380,  458,  403 
iii.  H        ...  287 
iii.  11      ...  287 
n:  v  HO,  v.  112, 

...  491,493' 
i.  74        ...  118 
i.  151        ...  210 
iv.  16     ...  373 
iii.  3       _  279 

iii.  12         ...  288 

i.  49,  vi.  61, 
i-  62   ...       ...  72, 

563,  564 
:  i.  Ill         163 


PAGE. 

i.  89  ...  138 

:ii.  22  ...  255 

r»t  i.  77  ...  121 

U.  56  ...  82 

ScT^n^  i.  99  ...  149 

:  i.  102  153 


ft  i.  109    ...  .162 

:  i.  110,  v.  95  163, 
475 

ii.  62      ...  99 

i.  61      ...  93 

ii.  34       ...  267 

:  iii.  49         ...  325 

i.  61...       ...  93 

iii.  49  325 


:  i.  134,  iv.  18  ...  190,  375 
iii.  13      ...  290 
i.  43  ...       ...   64 

i.  14,  i.  18    ...   33, 
37 

iii.  2,  v.  62...  279,  473 
i.  24        ...   48 
^HfaSft:  i.  24  ...   48 
i.58,  i.  126,  i.  151, 
iii.  38,  v.  118,  v.  120... 
88,  182,  210,  311,  500,  503 
i.  134      ...  190 
iii.  39,  iii.  43  ...  312,  313 
v.  121  ...       ...  504 

v.  105. ...       ...  487 

rnj;  v.  105  ...  487 

i,  64,  v.  63      ...  103, 

446 
v.  49  ...       ...  430 

i.  63   ...       ...  102 

v.  105          487 


WORD  INDEX-SAMKHYA  PRAVAGHANA  SUTBAM.     xxxiii 


i.l 


1  3  ... 


iii.  75 


12 

165 
529 
348 


i.  110,  ii.  22,  iv. 
28,  v.  1,  v.  39,  v.  53,  vi. 
36...  163,  255,383,388,421, 
434,  539 

iv.  30  ...  384 
n.  23  ...  530 
iii.  51  ...  326 

ii.  12  ...       ...  245 

A 

ii.  12 

i.59 


5 * 


...  245 

...  91 

v.  59"        ...  42 
i.  1,  i.  84,  iii.  53,  iii. 

84,  v.  67,  vi.  5,  vi.  8...  12, 
128,327,359,452,517,519 

v.  67    ...  452 

/i.  8        ...  519 

vi.  8  519 


PAGE. 

v.  118       ...  500 
ii.  30,  v.  124   ...  261, 
507 

ii.  38     ...  270 
i.  126,  i.  141   182,  196 
cT  i  136      ...  192 
i.  126  ...  182 
^i.  141   196 
v.  124        ...  507 
5  v.  38,  v.  41  ...  420,423 
i.  1,  i.  113  ...  12,165 
i.  87  132 


PAGE. 

i.  84,  vi.  6  ...  128,517 
iv.  5         ...  364 
iii.  74,  iv.  18,  v.  49...  347, 
375,  430 
iv.  4,  v.  118...  363,  500 

.  49  ...  430 

...  257 

iii.  74  ...  347 

i.  2,  i.  103  ....  19,154 

i.  37  ...   58 

:  i.  37  ...   58 

:  iii.  60  ...  335 

i.  112,  i.  155  ...  164,  221 

ii.  21  ...  254 

rawfin  ii.  21   ...  254 

i.  13,  i.  28,  v.  80,  v. 

109,  vi.  59  ...  32, 

51,  462,  491,  560 

v.  109  ...  491 

cf:  i.  13  ...  32 

i.  28  ...  51 

v.  80  ...  462 


i.  14,  iii.  17,  v.  113, 

v.  124,  vi2  ...  33, 

2U4,  494,  507  ,514 

i.  14  ...  33 

:  v.  123  ...  506 

-'  v.  124  ...  507 

*  vi.  2  ...  514 

.  113  ...  494 

ii.H  ...  287 
iii.  46 

iii.  46  ...  323 


i.  DO,  i.  91,  iv.  28, 
v.  119,  vi.  12     ...  140, 
140,  383,  501,  521 


xxxiv     WORb  INDEX-SAMKttYA  I'RAVAGHANA  SUTRAM. 


iv.  28 


PAGE. 

...  383 
vi.  12   ...  521 

ii.-70       ...  344 

.  119       ...  501 
iii-  64,  v.  78,  v. 
77       ...  338,460,400 
3[«rv.  108         ...  490 
:  v.  108     ...  490 
ii.  29      ...  259 
i.  12          ...  521 
:  i.  29,  i.  31,  i.  69,  i. 
75,  i.  87,  i.  126,  ii.  40, 
iii  65,  v.  66,  v.  117,  v. 
118    ...       ...   53, 

54,  112,  118,  132,  182,  271, 
339,  449,  449,  500 
T  iii.  6,  iv.  10,  v.  90, 
vi.  47,  vi.  48      ...  281, 
367,  471,  548,  548 
i.  74,  v.  115,  vi.  61... 

118,  496,  563 
vi.  40  ...       ...  547 

i.  9       ...  520 
§ri  v.  118  ...      ...  500 


i.  152,  v.  20,  v.  25, 
v.  29   ...       ...  212, 

404,  407,  41  2 
f  v.  25,  v.  42  ...407,425 

14>i-  44  •••    33>  60 

i.  17,  i.  153  ...  35,  213 

i.  138  ...  193 

i.  62  ...  564 

ii.  14  ...  247 

:  i.  152  ...  212 


PAGE. 

:  v.  20     ...  404 
v.  98,  vi.  4. ..477,  516 

^  v.  98  ...  477 
**  i.  128  .  185 


ii.  32,  vi.  29  ....  306,  533 
jfi*nT  i  i  .  32  .  .  .     ?><  )G 

.  00      ...  ...       92 

:  i.  60      ...   92 
...  209 
iii.  82          ...  350 
iii.  82      ...  350 
iii.  30,  vi.  25,  vi. 
29     ...       ...  304, 

531,  533 


vi.  29     ... 
:  vi.  20 

i.  50,  vi.  14.. 
i.  80 


V..  533 

...  527 

82,523 

131 


i.  2,  i.  7,  i.  9,  i.  11, 
i.  12,  i.  13,  i.  14,  i.  16, 
i.  18,  i.  19,  i.  20,  i.  24, 
i.  25,  i.  20,  i.  28,  i.  29, 
i.  31,  i.  33,  i.  35,  i.  38, 
i.  40,  5.  41,  i.  42,  i.  48, 
i.  52,  i.  55,  i.  58,  i.  59, 
i.  70,  i.  70,  i.  78,  .i.  79, 
i.  81,  i.  82,  i.  84,  i.  80, 
i.  88,  i.  90,  i.  93,  i.  107, 
i.  112,  i.  114,  i.  119,  i. 
120,  i.  137,  i.  138,1.140, 
i.  147,  i.  151,  i.  152,  i. 
153,i.l54,L156,i.  157, 
i.  159,  ii.  3,  ii.  8,ii.  11, 


WORD  IKDEX-  ^AMKUYA  PRAVACHANA  SUTRAM. 


PAGE. 

ii.  20,  ii.  21,  ii.  24,ii.25, 

11.  44,  iii.  7,  iii.  8,  iii. 

12,  Hi.  13,  iii.  20,  iii.  25, 
iii.  26,  iii.  27,  iii.  45, 
iii.  54,  iii  66,  iii.  70,  iii. 
71,  iii.  74,  iii.  75,  iii. 
76,  iii.  84,  iv.  14,  iv. 
17,  iv.  20,  iv.  25,  iv. 
29,  iv.  30,  iv.  31,  iv.  32, 
v.  2,  v.  6,  v.  7,  v.  10, 
v.  11,  v.  13,  v.  15,  v.  22, 
v.  26,  v.  28,  v.  30,  v.  33, 
v.  39,  v.  41,  v.  42,  v.  45, 
v.  46,  v.  48,  v.  52,  v. 
53,  v.  54,  v.  55,  v.  57,  v. 
58,  v.  61,  v.  63,  v.  65,  v. 
69,  v.  73,  v.  74,  v.  75,  v. 
76,  v.  77,  v.  78,  v.  80,  v. 
81,  v.  82,  v.  83,  v.  84,  v. 
87,  v.  88,  v.  89,  v.  90,  v. 
92,  v.  93,  v.  94,  v.  96,  v. 
97,  v.  98,  v.  99,  v.  100, 
v.  101,  v.  102,  v.  103, 
v-  104,  v.  105,  v.  108, 
v.  109,  v.  Ill,  v.  113, 
v.  115,  v.  118,  v.  119, 
v.  120,  v.  121,  v.  123, 
v.  125,  v.  126,  v.  128, 
v.  129,  vi.  1,  vi.  4,vi.  6, 
vi.  9,  vi.  13,  vi.  16,  vi. 
20,  vi.  24,  vi.  26,  vi.  28, 
vi.  31,  vi,  33,  vi.  34, 
vi.  37;  vi.  38,  vi.  43, 
vi.  44,  vi.  48,  vi.  50,  vi. 

54,  vi.  57,  vi.  64  ...  19, 
26,  28,  30,  31,  32,  33,  34, 
37,37,43,48,48,49,51,53, 
54,55,  57,  59,  60,61,  62,71, 
115,  120,  122, 


PAGE. 

122,  125,  126,  128,  131,  137, 
140,  143,  160,  164,  167,  171, 
172,  193,  193,  201,  203,  210, 
212,  213,  216,  222,  223,  225, 
235,  240,  244,  253,  254,  256, 
257,  273,  282,  283,  288,  290, 
295,  299,  301,  303,  322,  327, 
339,  344,  345,  347,  348,  352, 
359,  370,  374,  376,  381,  384, 
384,  385,  386,  389,  391,  392, 
394,  395,  398,  399,  405,  407, 
411,  413,  415,  421,  423,  425, 
426,  428,  430,  434,  434,  435, 
437,  441,  442,  444,  446,  447, 
454,  456,  457,  458,  462,  462, 
463,  463,  464,  459,  460,  460, 
469,  470,  471,  471,  473,  474, 
475,  476,  477,  477,  478,  479, 
481,  482;  483,  485,  487,  490, 
491,  492,  494,  496,  500,  501, 
503,  504,  506,  508,  509,  510, 
511,  513,  516,  517,  520,  522, 
525,  527,  530,  531,  532,  536, 
537,  537,  540,  541,  545,  545, 
548,  553,  557,  559,  567 
*  i.  9  ...  ...  11 


i.  14,  iii.  39  ...  14  ,312 


i.  77    ..       ...  51 

...  208 

...  258 

,..  445 

...  173 

...  523 
vi. 

1      ...       ...  513 

FI3T  i.  86,  v.  31,  v.  36,  v. 


r  i.  150 
ii.  27 
v.  62  ... 
i.  120 
vi.  14 


xxxvi     WORD  INDEX— SAMKHYA  PRAVACHANA  SuTRASt. 


PAGE. 

43,  v.  95...       ...  131, 

414,  417,426,  475 
v.  36    ...  417 
v.  43       .-  426 
:  v.  51  ...  432 
:  v.  05  ...  475 


i.  86      ...   131 
i.  19,  i.162     ...   37, 

228 

:  vi.  13        ...  523 

f  v.  45,  v.  48,  v.  58, 
v.  126  ...       ...  428, 

430,  442,  509 
vi.  33       ,..  537 
v.  87,  v.  91    ...  469, 
477 

7       ...  392 
i.162       228 


i.  19 


i  12 

i-  18,  v.  89  ...   37, 
471 

i.  120      ...  172 
v.  73       ...  456 
v.  71       ...  455 
iii.  67,  v.  110,  vi. 
44,  vi  56        ...  341, 
49],  545,558 

s  vi.  67,  vi.  68   ...  570, 
571 

'  iii.  68       ...  342 
i  27,  vi.  60  ...   51, 

572 

riii.  74      ...  347 

vi  .  44   ...  545 

.  119    .«  501 


PAGE. 

v.  110  ...  491 

vi.  56  ...  558 
i.  56,  v.  29     ...   82, 
412 

*roirr^  i.  56      ...     82 
srfarftai  v.  29  ...    412 

s  i-  41,  i.  70,  ii.  7,  iii. 
76,  iv.  15,  iv.  20,  v.  22, 
v.  33,  v.  39,  v.  85,  v.  89, 
v.  103,  v.  108,  v.  109, 
v.   Ill,  v.  131,  vi.  22, 
vi.  24,  vi.  31,  vi.  38  ...      61, 
115,  239,  352,  371,  376,  405, 
415,  421,  465,  471,  483,  490, 
491,  492,  504,  529,  530,  536, 

541 

i.  115  ...     168 

iii.  52  ..     326 

i.  54  ...       75 

.  10  ...     520 

i.  146,  vi.  62...  201, 
564 

filRftw:  i.  54  75 

.  74      -  457 

.88      -.  470 

v.  73  456 

v  114       ...  495 

:  v.  120      ...  503 


f  vi.  25       ... 

iv.  11     ...  368 

iii.  33       ...  307 
ii.  31,  vi.  26  ...  305, 
531 

:i.  l,iii.  63,  iii.  69, 
v.93   ...       .-   12 
337,  343,  474 

i.  5        ...  517 


WORD  INDEX—SAM  KEY  A  PRAVAQHAtVA  SClTRAM.    xxxvii 


PAGE. 

..   19 

:..  452 
...  267, 
359 

...  510 
..  350 
,..  359 
i.  49,  v.  76...  72.  459 


.   ... 

v.  67 

ii.  34,  iii.  80 

vi.  8 
iii.  84 


:  v.  2 
.  13 
v.  65 

27 
114,  v 


stfrfiii 


.  75 
v.  101 
iii-  68 

.  17 

36 
v.  36 


iv.  31  ... 

i.  46   ...  ... 

vi.  8  ...  ... 

i.  61,  ii.  31,  ii.  62, 
iii.  37,  iv.  22,  v.  27... 

93,  262,  00,  310,  378, 

ii.  17  ... 


ii.  33       ... 
Rfi  i.  61      ... 

i  v.  32,  vi.  68... 


iv.  22 

v.  27 


.  10 

v.  83 


380 
308 
447 
532 
167, 
434 
348 
481 
342 

401 

58 
417 

385 

70 

510 


400 

250 

266 

03 

415, 

571 

378 

409 

20 

463 


PAGE. 

iv.  13      ...  360 

i.  24,  i.  25,  v.  85  ...   48, 
48,  465 
...  360 

...  131 

...  527 
...  446 

...  521 

...  356 
...  374 


iv.  12 

i  86  ..." 

J  vi.  20  ... 

v.  64 

vi.  11 


iv.  17 


iii.  58 


333 


i.  66,  i.  140.  108,  195 


i.  76 

:i.  87 

ii.  27 
i.  130 

iii.  22 

i.  68 

iii.  14,  v.  90 


qft 


«r  v.  90 

:  iii.  0 

i.  152 


120 

132 

258 
188 

297 
Ill 
291, 
471 

471 

281 
212 
91 
91 

41  7 

345 
337 

294 
482 

35^1  i.  28   ...  51 

i.  18      ...   37 
:  i.  122     ...   75 
68,i.  75,vi.35...  ill, 
118,  539 
iv.  21,  vi.  58,  377,  550 


i.  59 
i.  59 

v.  35 

iii.  72 
qr%iii.  63... 

:  iii.  17 
.  102 


xxxviii     WORD  INDEX— SAMKRYA  PRAVAOHANA  8&TRAM. 


PAGE. 

iii.  55  ...  329 

:  v.  5  ...  39L 

iv.  11  ...  368 

iv.  11  ...  363 

v.  2  ...  362 

i.  32  55 


55 


i.  32 


i.  4  ...  516 

v.  33,  vi.  17,  vi  46... 

415,525,  547 

?spfr*T  vi.  17  ...  525 

ST^rR  *  v.  33  ...  4  lo 

vi.  40  ...  543 

1.  139  ...  195 


:  i.  1,  i.  3,  i.15,  i.  61, 
i.  133,  i.  149,  vi.  45, 
vi.  54  ...  12v  29,  33, 

03,  100,  207,  546,  557 
i.  140,  vi.  45... 

207,  546 

v.  72        ...  456 
i.  66,  ii.  5,  iii.  26, 
iii.  71,  v.  46,  vi.  6  ...  108, 
237,301,  345,  428,  51.7 
ii.  36,  iii.  16...  269,  293 
vi.  70       ...  573 


20 
.  114  ...       ...  495 

'TT  v.  114  ...  495 


i.  39,  i.  41,  iii.  8,  v. 
59,  vi.  48   ...  60,  61,  283, 
442,  548 

iii.  41,  v.  112,  v. 
1.21,  vi.  57  ...  312,  493,  504, 

559 
*Ht  i.  41     ...   61 


PAGE. 

v.  59  ...  442 

i.  39  ...  60 

':  iii.  8  ...  283 

.  112  ...  493 

.  112  ...  493 

v.  50  ...  431 

v.  46  428 


vi.  16,  vi.  53  ...  525,  556 

.  vi.   16, 
vi.  53  ....      525,  550 
i.  145,  v.  106...  200,  488 
vi.  49      ...  549 
v.  104      ...  485 
vi.  50      ...  550 
v.  84      -  ...  464 
i.  18,  i.  61,  i.  133, 
ii.  5,  iii.  68,  v.  20,  v. 
72     ...  37,  93,  190,  237, 
342,  404,  456 
v.20...  404 
i.  18     ...   37 
:  v.  72    ...  456 
iii.  29      ...  304 
ii.  5     ...  237 
^  iii.  68        342 


•  i.  61,  i.  65,  i.  69,  iii. 
72,  vi.  32,  vi.  67  ...  93,  L06, 
112,  345,  536,  570 
v.  120      ...  503 
iv.  19  375 


iv. 
19     ...       ...  375 

v.  6,  vi.  14...  391,  523 


i.  14 


...  523 

v.  6..   391 


WORD  INDEX— SAM  KEY  A  PR  AV  AC  HAN  A  StJTRAM.     xxxix 


srfcf 


vi.  15 

i-  100 

i.  JOG 


PAGE. 

...  524 

...  152 

...  152 

...  20 

...  20 

423,  427 

...  441 

...  441 


STcftft  v.  40,  v  14 

v.  57 

v.  57 

a£rfo*ri  v.  57  ...  441 

i.  42,  v.  61,  v.  1)3, 
v.  101   ...  62,444,  474,481 

i.  89,  i.  147,  v.  62, 

v.  89,  v.  04,  v.  100  ...  138, 
203,  445,  471,475,  471) 

i.  90    ...  140 

ra*w  v.  89   ...  471 

.  62    ...  445 

:  v.  94    ...  475 

i.  35      ...  57 

v.  91    ...  471 

iii.  20,  iii  22,  v.  121) 

295,  297,  511 

ii.  4  ...       ..  236 

Tftflf  iii.  22   ...  297 

S:  v.  129     ...  511 


i.  57,  i.  125,  ii.  40, 
ii.  45,  iii.  51,  iii.  58,  iii. 
73,  v.  8,  v.  12,  v.  119, 
vi.  35   ...  86,180,271,274, 
326,  333,  346,  392,  396,  501, 

539 

v.  12   ...  396 
...  326 
i.  125  ...  180 
.  8  ...  392 


ii.  1,  iii.  59,  iii. 


PAGE. 

63,  iii.  70,  vi.  38,  vi. 
40,  vi.  43  ...  231,334,344, 
337,  541,  543,  545 
iii.  58     ...  333 
!  vi.  35    ...  539 

i.  57   ...  86 

iii.  21  ...  296 
:  iii.  21  296 
iii.  66  ...  339 
iii.  66  ...  339 
iii.  46  ...  323 
iii.  76  ...  352 
SHIT  i.  87  ...  132 
SIWU  i.  4,  ii.  25,  v.  10,  v. 
22,  v.  99,  vi.  47,  vi.  64.  21,  257, 
394,^05,478,548,567 

iff    ...  21 

ii.  25     ...  257 

vi.  47   ...  548 

i.  102     ...  153 

v.  222,  405 


v.  10,  v.  99, 

vi.  64      394,  478,  567 

.  87,      ...  132 

:  iv.  29       ...  384 
ii.  18        ...  251 
iii.  4         ...  280 
iii.  69     ...  343 
:  i.  144        ...  199 
i.  95,  v.  68    144,  453 
:  v.  49       ...  470 
:  v.  33,  v.  34,  v.  120, 
i<  12    ...       ...  415, 

416,  503,  521 

;  v.  16          ...  400 
v.  114      ...  495 


xl       WORD  INDEX— SAMKHYA  FHAVACHANA  SLJTRAM. 


vi.  31 
vi.  38 
foWvi.  38 

v.  113 

?  ii.  31 

i.  3 


PAGE. 

...  336 

...  541 

...  541 

...  494 

...  262 

...  20 

20 

ii.  47  ...     276 

STIR  i.  83,  v.  106  128,  488 

i.  83          ...     128 
^TT^v.l06...4S8 
t:  v.  104  ...     485 

v.  51  ...     432 

iii.  7  ...     282 

sftfa  i.  127...  ...     183 

" :  i.  127      183 


i.  105,  i.  106,  v.  1, 

v.  2    ...  ...  157, 

158,  388,  389 

v.  1  ...  388 

i:  v.  2  ...  389 

i.  106  ...  158 

illtt*  i.  105  ...  157 


iii.  70       ...  344 

•:  iv.  26        ...  382 

Ti.  93        ...  143 

i.  7         ...  26 
•:  i.  20,  i.  155,  iii.  24, 

iii.  71,  vi.  16,  vi.  17  ...  43, 

221,  299,  345,  525,  525 

TOTT5T'  i.  86  131 


PAGE. 

iii.  71      ...  345 
iii.  73          346 


i.  20  ...  43 
...  519 
...  235 

v.  120  ...  503 
[^  iv.  19  ...  375 
i.  149,  vi.  45. ..207,  546 


iv.  13  ...  369 

v.  102  ...  482 

v.  16,  v.  53  ...  400,  434 

\i.  52  ...  554 


.  Ill) 


...   501 


vi.  52 


.  18 


v.  53 


...  402 
...  434 
v.  49,  v.  f>6    430,  439 

i.  147,  v.  62,  v.  98, 
vi.  4    ...       ...  203, 

445,  477,  51(> 
v.  56     ...  439 
i.  59        ...   91 
iii.  77       ...  352 
iii.  77   ...  352 
i.  26  ...       ...   49 

flSTHi.  26...   49 
v.  16       ...  400 
iv.  29,  v.  15,  vi.  67...  384 
399,  570 

i.  10       ...   29 
v.  15,  vi.  67...  399, 
570 

rri3[  v.  126  ...     509 

i.  19  37 


WORD  INDEX— SAM  KEY  A  PR  AV  AC  HAN  A  S&TRAM.       xli 


PAGE. 

t  ii.  13,  ii.  19,  v.  50, 
v.  121,  v.  126     ...  246, 
252,  431,504,500 
ii.  47        ...  276 
:  i.  60  ...       ...   92 

iii.  63,  v.  85,  vi.  43, 

337,  465,  545 
.  16,  v.  116    400,  497 
iv.  19       ...  375 
T:  v.  16    ...  400 
v.  116         497 


.  8  ...  366 

i.  158  ...  224 

v.  73,  v.  107  456,488 

v.  107  ...  488 

v.  73  ...  456 

v.  81  ...  462 

v.  81  ...  462 


i.  31,  i.  38,  i.  44, 
i.  119,  ii.  45,  v.  37,  v. 
93,  v.  114...  54,59,66,  171, 
274,419,474,  495 
iii.  29        ...  304 
iii.  29   ...  304 


:  v.  93      ...  474 

i.  4i     ...  6i 

i.  119       ...   171 
i.  118,  i.  143,  vi.  1   170, 
198,  513 
.  82       ...  463 


i.  40,  i.  80,  i.  119     60, 
124,  171 

i.  151         ...  210 
;  vi.  55         ...  557 


PAGE. 

v.  84,  v.  129  464,  511 

v.  129  ...  511 

v.  84  ...  464 

i.  61  ...  93 

iv.  32  ...  386 

.  115...  ...  496 

v.  115  ...  496 

iii.  61  ...  336 

ii.  40  ...  271 

iii.  16  ...  373 

ii.  24,  v.  61  256,  444 

ii.  24  ...  256 

:  iii.  41,  v.  120  ...  312,  503 

"•  27»  hi-  43>  v- 

66     ...    258,  315,  449 
v.  109  ...       ...  491 

i.  143,  v.  121  ...  198,  504 
:  v.  114       ...  495 
v.  121...  504 


i.  143     ...   198 
i.  104,  v.  114,  v. 
121,  vi.  59        ...   156, 
495,  504,  560 
:  vi.  59  ...  560 
iii.  8,  iv.  27    ...  283, 
382 
v.  114  ...  495 

ii.  20  ...    253 

gnarat  ii.  23  ...    256 


« 

iii.  54 

ii.35  ... 

i.  96 

ii.  22 

i.  77  ., 


327 
268 
145 
297 
352 


xlii     WORD  INDEX— SAMKEYA  PRAVAGEANA  S&TRAM. 


PAGE. 

*  Hi.  77   ...  352 

iii.  50  ...        ...  325 

i.  71,  ii  26,  ii.  40,  vi. 
25      ...        ...  116, 

257,  271,  531 
v.  69...       ...  454 

v.  68        ...  453 
iii.  21,  iii.  53    296,  327 
ii.  28  ... 
iv.  29,  iv.  30 
iv.  29 
iv.  30 
i.  61,  vi.  66 

129»  »•  10» 


ii.  10 


i.  129 
i-  61  ... 
iii.  7 


...  259 

...  384 

...  384 

...  384 

93,  569 

»  "•  15 

187,  242,  248 

...  116 

...  242 

...  187 

...  93 

...,  282 

...  99 

...  93 

...  93 


471,  516 


i.  62 
i.  61 
:  i.  61 
v.  98,  vi.  4 

re»ttarf  iii.  26    301 
i.  19,  i.  93,  i.  95,  i. 
157,  v.  47,  vi.  44...  37,  143, 
144,223,  429,  545 

:  i.  93     ...  143 

i.  86,  vi.  17    131,  525 
i.  95       ...   144 
:  v.  47      ...  429 
:  iii.  23,  iii.  26,  v.  74, 
v.  85,  vi.  20.  ..298,  301,  457, 
465,  527 
vi.  44     .,.  545 


iv.  27 
i.  50 
iii.  13 
JJ<35  i.  67 

iii.  49 

i.  67 
i.  16 


i.  67 
i.  7 


ii.  7 


:  i.  7 


it.  1 

v.  116 

iii.  71... 

v.  1  ... 

v.  1 


:  i.  33 
^  iv.  21 
v.  42 

iv.  21 
.  87,  i,  89,  vi.  70 


PAGE. 

382 

72 
290 
Ill 
325 
Ill 

17 
Ill 

26 
239 

22 

26 

231 
497 
345 
388 
388 


,..  55 

...  377 

...  425 

...  377 
132, 

138,  573 

...  517 

...  431 

...  224 

...  91 

...  59 
...  59 

5  i.  55,  i.  119,  ii.9,  iii. 
55,  v.  13,  v.  32,  v.  36, 
v.  81  v.  86,  v.  128,  vi. 
17  ...  77,  171,  241,329,  398, 
415,  417,  463,  463,  510,  525 


vi.  6  ... 

.  50 
i.  158 
i.  59 

i.  38 

5  i.  38 


WORD  INDEX— SAMKHYA  PR  AV  AC  HAN  A  S&TRA&.      xliii 


PAGE. 

i.  12,  i.  13,  iv.  22 

31,  32,  378 


.  82 

{  v.  128 
v.  44  ... 
vi.  33 

vi.  33 


v.  44 


463 
510 
427 
537 
537 
427 


i.  19,  i.  40,  i.  51,  i. 

82,  ii.  39,  iii.  13,  iii.67, 
iv.  24,  iv.  26,  v.  8,  v. 
27,  v.  71,  v.  90,  v.  102, 
v.  108,  v.  91  ...  37,  60,  73, 
126,  270,  290,  341,  380,  382, 
382,  409,  455,  471,  482,  490, 

492 

i.  90         ...   140 
ii.  47,  iv.  9,  v.  7,  v. 
14,  v.  49,  v.  119,  vi. 
37  ...  276,  367,  392, 

398,  430,  501,  540 
i.  80  .  124 


:  i.  61,  iii.  50 
iii.  66  ... 

iii.  50 


93,  325 

...  339 

...  325 

ii.  28   ...       ...  259 

ii.  9,  iii.  30,  iv.  25,  iv. 

27      241,304,  381,  382 

STTi  i».  9    ...  241 

:  iv.  27      ...  382 

.  6  ...        ..  391 

v.  6         ...  391 

:  iv.  9       ...  367 

.,Yi.  51  553 


PAGE, 

cn  m.  so    .:.  304 

iv.  25  ...  381 

iv.  1  ...  36 1 

iii.  16  ...  ...  293 

i.  98,  i.  160,  ii.  28,  iv. 

21,  v.  16,  vi.  50  ...  147, 

226,  259,  377,  471,  550 

iv.  31,  v.  116  385,  499 

vi.  39  ...  542 

v.  93  ...  474 

v.  19,  v.  66  403,  449 

.  89  ...  471 

ii.  28  ...  259 

iii.  73  346 


i.  8  ...  28 

i  i.  128  ...  185 

i.  128  ...  185 

o5rTT  v.  121  ...  504 

i.  29,  i.  91,  iv.  24  ...  53, 
141,380 

v.  24  ...  380 


i.  121,  vi.  30     173,  535 
:  vi.  30    ...  535 
v.  73,  v.  80,  vi.  9, 
vi.  34,  vi.  59      456,  462, 
520,  537,  560 
.  124,  iii.  9,  vi.  69...  1~78, 
284,  572 

vi.  69    ...  572 

i.  136,  v.  61,  v.  106  192, 
444,  488 

:  v.  21     ...  404 

iii.  16        ...  293 
i.  91  140 


xiiv     WORD  INDEX-SAMKHYA  PRAVAGHANA  S&TRAM. 


PAGE. 


i.  91    ...  ...   HO 

:  iii.  83  ...  537 

ii.40,  ii.46,  ii,  47, 

iv.  15,  v.  3,  vi.  43  ...  271, 
274,  276,  371,  390,545 

vi.  57  ...  559 

v.  40,  vi.  56  423,  558 

.  99  ...  148 

iv.  is  ...  371 


ii.  37  ...     269 

v.  121  ...     504 

v.  126  ...     509 

:  i.  60  ...       92 

i.  25  ...       48 

54 

i.  44,  5.  58,  i.  91,  v. 
30     ...  66,  122,  140,413 
.":  v.  30  ...  413 
45 

.  44     ...   66 
':  v.  120  ...  503 
:  iv.  9...       ...  367 

iv.  13  ..   369 


i.  87,  i.  91,  i.  95,  i.  97, 
i.  106,  i.  123,  i.  125,  i. 
133,  ii.  1,  ii.  4,  ii.  60, 
iii.  62,  iii.  65,  iv.  7,  iv. 
24,  v.  5,  v.  29,  v.  69,  v. 
95,  v.  100,  v.  104,  vi. 
68,  vi.  70...   132,  140,  144, 
147,  158,  177,  180,  190,  231, 
236,  335,  336,  339,  365,  380, 
391,412,  454,  475,  479,  485, 
571,573. 


i.  98 

i.  98 

i.   58 
v  37... 
v.  37 

en^frarar:  v.  37 

v.  33 
i.  25 


PAGE. 
147 

147 

88 
419 
419 

419 

415 
48 


:  i.  Ill   ...  163 

i.  157       ...  223 

iv.  20    ...  376 

i.  157    ...  223 

ii.  31         ...  262 
i.  28,  i.  42,  i.  63,  v. 
121        51,62,102,504 

:  i.  42       ...  62 

v.  121  ...  504 

i.  28      ...  51 

i.  63     ...  102 

v.  119           ...  501 

ii.  3                    ...  235 

iii.  25                   ...  299 

:  vi.  30                 ...  535 

i.  17...  35 

tm  qfcn  i.  22...  45 

i.  89...                  ...  138 

finrramra  i.  42           ...  62 

i.  155                     ...  221 

i.  155...  221 

.  103          ...  483 

v.  18                        ...  402 

v.  18              ...  402 
:i.  7,  1.  9                 ...26,28 

.  44                   ...  66 

ftRIiii.45                       ...  322 

ii.  22                    ...  255 


WORD  INVEX-SAMKHYA  PRAVAGHANA  SUTRAM.      xlv 


.  44 


PAGE. 

ii.22    ...  255 

...   66 
141,  iii.  24 

196,  299 


*  Hi.  37 

.  15 
vi.  36 
ii.  1,  vi.  43 
vi.  43 
ii.  1 
v.  68,  vi.  58 

v.  68 
:  vi.  58 
:  i.  84 

iii.  73 
:  v.  80 
i.  66 
ii.  2,  iv.  23 


:  ii.  9 

i.  152 


i-  23 


...  310 

...  248 
...  539 
231,  545 
...  545 
..  231 
453,  558 
...  453 
...  558 
...  128 
...  346 
...  462 
...  339 
234,  380 

...  241 

...  212 
...   45 


*  i.  54,  i.  113,i.  154, 
ii.  25,  iv.  9  vi.  47,  vi. 
49,  vi.  51         ...   75, 
165,  216,  257,  367,  548,  549, 

553 

.  36,  vi.  34    58,  537 
.  17      ...  374 
i.  138        ...   193 
1  38   ...  193 
...  337 

...  337 

...  348 
...  352 
...  128 
348 


iii.  63 

ii.  63 

iii.  75 
!  iii.  77 
i.  83 
:  iii.  75 


PAGE. 

iii.  84       ...  359 
vi.  8       ...  519 
iii.  47,  iii,  50  325,  325 
vi.  63 


...  565 

i.  97,  iii.  1,  v.  75, 
v.  76,  vi.  26   ...  147,278, 
458,459,531 
i.  97     ...   147 
v.  76      ...  459 
R5%:  v.  75  ...  458 
v.  34        ...  416 
SftpUTO^:  v.  34   416 
i.  48,  iii.  10  ...  71,  286 
iii.  1       ...   278 
v.  120         ...  509 
i.  27,  i.  108      51,  160 
i-  127         ...   183 
iv.  16       ...  375 
iii.  35         ...  309 
i.  122     ...  175 
iii.  3         ...   79 
v.  121        ...  504 
121          ...  504 


v.  121  504 

ii.  33         ...  266 
:  ii.  31,  ii.  32,  iii.  31, 

v.  106,  v.  109    ...  262, 
264,  305,  488,  488 

v.  105       ...  487 

iii.  31     •  305 

:  v.  106     ...  488 

.  41         ...  423 

.  45         ...  428 

.  40         ...  423 

:  v.  40  423 


Ivi     WORD  INDEX— SAMKHYA  PRAVACHAKA. '  S0TRAM. 


2, 


v. 


PAGE. 

ii.  18  ...     251 

iii.  51,  v.  20,  vi. 
vi.  41  ...  326,404,514,544 
vi.  41        .  .   544 

i'  128---  183>  185 

vi.  29  ...  533 

iii.  36  ...  309 

i.  51  ...  553 

v.  123  ...  506 

v.  123   ...  506 

.  42,  v.  95...  425,  475 
.  25        ...   48 
i.  25    ...   48 
vi.  42      ...  544 
iii.  10       ...  286 
ti.  139,  vi.  2...  195,514 
i.  15,  vi.  63  ...  524, 
565 

v.  110,  v.  112  ...  491, 
493 

i-  125,  v.  no, 

3  ...      180,  491,  515 

i.  40  ...       60 

v.  43  ...     420 

i.  28  ...       51 

i.  29,  v.  124    ...   53,  507 

i-  149,  vi.  45.  ..207,  546  ' 
i-  120  ...      172 

araSI^T  i.  120   ...      172 

.  55     ...  437 

v.  69  ...  454 

%vi.  59  ...  560 

5  i.  12  ...  31 

v.  29  ...  412 

*  i.  160  ...  226 

vi.  so     ...  535 


v.  43 
v.  40 
vi.  59 


PAGE. 

426 
423 
560 


7         ...  169 

i.  117       ...  169 

i.  117    ...  169 

.  1  1  30 


i.  11,  v.  8,  v.  13,  v. 
31,  v.  32,  v.  33,  v.  36, 
v.  43,  v.  51,  v.  95   ...   30, 
392,  398,  414,  415,  415,  417, 
426,  432,  474 
i.  132,  v.  113  ...  189, 
494 

ii.  24       ...  256 
iv.  10        ...  367 
:  i.  101,  v.  37,  v.  57, 
v.  58   ...       ...  153, 

419,  441,  442 
v.  58      ...  442 
:  v.  37      ...  419 


i.  139,  iii.  82,  v.  102, 

vi.  69   ...       ...  195, 

356,  482,  572 

iii.  2        ...  279 

ftTR:  i.  139  ...  195 

iv,  27      ...  382 

vi.  4  ...       ...  516 


vi.  4 


v.  1 


v.  1 
.  10  ... 
i.  10 


...  516 

...  388 

...  388 

...  29 

...  29 


WORD  INDEX— SAMKHYA  PR  AV  AC  HAN  A  S&TRAM.     xlvii 


iv.  25,  iv.  26 


i.  19 

iii.  29 
i.  43,  i.  44,  v.  79 


iv.  5 


ii.  3 


iv.  17 
i.  28 


i.  147 

.  36,  i.  51,  i.  54,  i. 
83,  i.  154,  ii.  21,  iii.  86, 
v.  12,  v.  21,  vi.  34,  vi. 
51,  vi.  58 


PAGE. 

...  381, 

382 

37 

...  304 

...   64, 

66,  461 

...  364 

...  235 

...  374 

51 

28   51 
203 


58, 


i 


73,  75,  128,  216,  254,  355, 
396,  404,  537,  553,  558 
v.  1  388 

ffi^  i-  36  ...   58 
v.  2 1   ...  404 
*  vi.  51     ...  553 
:  i.  5,  i.  17,  ii.  20,  ii. 
22,  iii.  14,  iii.  15,  iv.  22, 
v.  15,  v.  45,  v.  70,  v.  73, 
v.  84,  v.  87,  v.  123,  vi. 
10,  vi.  17,  vi.  32,  vi. 
59     ...       ...   22, 

121,  253,  255,  291,  293,  378, 

399,  428,  455,  456,  464,  469, 

506,  520,  525,  536,  560 


i.  25,  iv.  13,  v,  85  ...  48, 

369,  465 

iv.  13      ...  369 

v.  85   ...  465 


TO 


vi.  3 


vi.  3 


v.  86... 
fl  v.  86 


iii.  28 
v.  70 


i.  124 
v.  28 


v  28 


:  v.  8 

:  i.  26 
iii.  13 


iii.  13 


v.  96  ... 

i.  es 


PAGE. 

i.  25   48 
...  515 

...  513 

...  466 
...  466 


330 
303 
455 
178 
411 
4H 

392 

49 
290 

290 

479 


v.  96 


.  96  ... 
v.  53  ... 
i.  89,  v.  56,  vi.  53 


v.  60 


:  v.  60 


.  9 


t  i.  6i 


iii.  48 
v.  59 
tvi.  39 

:  v.  56 
i.  56 


...  476 

...  476 

...  434 

...  138, 
439,  556 

...  443 

...  443 

...  394 

...  554 

...  93 

..  93 

...  325 

...  442 

...  542 

...  439 

...  558 

...  556 


xlviii     WORD  INDEX— SAM  KEY  A  PR  AV  AGE  AN  A  S&TRAM. 


:  vi.  69 


i.  96 


PAGE. 

572 
145 
284 
346 
,  4S9 
281 


iii.  9 

j  iii.  73 

v.  117 

iii.  6 

v.  11,  v.  28,  v.  37, 
v.  38,  v.  96,  v.  97,  v. 
98,  v.  107...  395,  411,  419, 
420,  476,  477,  477,  488 
i.  12,  i.  91    ...   31, 
140 

v.  97     ...  477 
v.  28,v.38  ...  411, 
420 

.  1  1     ...  395 
v.  107      ...  488 
i.  4         ...   21 
i.  4  ...   21 

ii.  44        ...  273 
i.  26          ...   49 
i.  131      ...  188 
v.  99       ...  478 
i-  89  ...        ...   138 

i.  161       •••  227 

.  14,  v.  lie  ...  370, 

497' 

^S  v.  116,  497 
iv.  14     ...  370 


i.  46,  i.  50,  i.  69, 
ii.  42,  iii.  53,  v.  24,  v. 
36  ...  70,  72,  112,276,  327, 
406,  417 
ii.  47    ...  276 


i.  55,  i.  86,  vi. 
65          77,131,568 


:  iii.  25 


i.  50 
.  36 

iii.  25 


PAGE. 
72 
417 
299 
299 
462 
488 
369 


t  v.  80 
v.  107 
.  12 

i.  4,  i.  5,  i.  12,  i.  16, 
i.  88,  i.  116,  iii.  56,  v. 
9,  v.  78,  v.  104   ...  21,22, 
31,  120,  137,  169,  330,  394. 
460,  485 

'~  iii.  29,  v.  72     ...  304, 

456 

iii.  56       ...  330 
i.  116,  i.  159,  vi. 
36          169,225,539 


169 
485 
31 
137 
21, 
169 
330 
493 
394 
460 
22 
120 

:  v.  27        ...  409 
iii.  72      ...  345 
ii.  42,  iii.  33,  v. 
120     ...       ...  272, 

357,  503 

v.  120     ...  503 
iii.  83       357 


116 

v.  104 
i.  12 

:  i.  88 

i.  4,i.  116 


ii.  56 
112 
.  9 

v.  78 
i.  5 

i.  76 


WOED  INDEX- SAMKRYA  PRAVACHANA  BtJTEAM.    xlix 


i.  33 

v.  is 

v.  1  1  1 
*  iii.  3,  iii.  16 


i.  66,  i.  140 


i.  66 


140 


v.  Ill 


i.  161 

i.  148,  i.  161 


ii.  is 

v.  15  ... 
v.  19 

v.  15 

v.  94 

i.  87,  vi.  48 


ii.  39 


vi.  48 
i.  7.  i.  138,  v. 
26, 
vi.  1 
i.  85 

i.  85 


i.  82 
i.  128 

ii.  31 
i.  103 


:  ii.  31 


v.  91 
i.  125 
i.  138 


PAGE. 

55 

...  399 

...  492 

...  279, 

293 

...  108, 
195 
i. 

108,  195 
...  492 
...  227 
...  205, 
227 

...  251 
...  399 
...  403 
...  399 
...  475 
...  132, 
548 

...  270 
39  270 
...  548 
60 

193,  443 
...  513 
...  129 
...  129 
...  126 
...  185 
...  262 
...  154 
...  262 
...  471 
...  180 
193 


vi.  42 
i.  61 


vi.  42 
iv.  13 

iii.  20 
,  iii.  22,  v.  129 

v.  29 

i.  135 
i.  98,  v.  59,  v.  60 


v.  128 


i  .  98  .  . 


v.  eo 

i.  95  i.  147 


iii.  57 

i.  21,v.  60 

i  i.  21     ... 
2,  i.  78,  i.  80, 
i.  82,  i.  93,  i.  102,  i. 
103,  i.  125,  i.  153,  ii.  3, 
ii.  5,  ii.  8,  iii.  31,  ii.  32, 
iii.  40,  iii.  44,  iii.  57,  iii. 
75,  iii.  79,  iii.  83,  iv.  19, 
v.  6,  v.  10,  v.  21,  v.  24, 
v.  28,  v.  38,  v.  44,  v. 
106,  vi.  11,  vi.  29,  vi. 
57,  vi.  64.  ..19,  122,124, 
126,  143,  153,154,  180, 
213,  235,237,  240,305, 
306,  312,  319,  331,348, 
354,  357,  375,391,  394, 
404,406,  411,420,  427, 
488,521,533,559,  ... 

iv.  32,  v.  128  ... 


PAGE. 

...  544 
...  93 
...  544 
...  369 
...  295 
...  297, 

511 

...  412 
...  191 
...  147, 
442,  443 
...  510 

147 
...  443 
..  144, 

203 

...  331 
45,  443 

45 


567 

386, 

510 


1    WORD  INDEX— SAMKHYA  PR  AV  AC  HAN  A  S0TRAM. 


PAGE. 

i.  37,  i.  88,  i  106, 
i.  112,  i.  137,  ii.  2,  ii.  6, 
v.  2,  v.  100,  v.  105,  v. 
113,  vi.  51        ...   58, 
137,  158,  164,  193,  234, 
238,  389,  479,  487,  494, 
553 

i.  88,  ii.  24,  v.  14, 
v.  36,  vi.  46,  vi.  49,  vi. 
58     ...        ...  137, 

256,  398,  417,  547,  549, 
558 

iii.  34,  iv.  5,  v.  27, 
vi.  9,  vi.  24       ...  308, 
364,  409,  520,  530 
iv.  5       ...  364 
vi.  9   ...  520 
!  v.  27     ...  409 
i.  6...       ...  517 

iv.  11,  iv.  12,  vi.  7 

368,369,  518 
.  148,  v.  116   ...  205, 
497 

H  lm  148,  205 
iii.  63       ...  337 


1^  iii.  16    ...  293 
:  ii.  9,  iii.  47,  iii.  58, 
iii.  63,  iii.  66,  vi.  40, 
vi.  41,  vi.  43   ...  241,324, 
333,  337,  339,  543,  544,  545 
^f^T:  Hi.  36     ...  337 
i.  41    ...  544 
:  ii.  11  ...        ...  244 

i.  109       ...  162 
i.  31         ...  536 
tvi.  31      ...  536 
folfrti.58...       .-   88 


PAGE. 

:  i.  33,  i.  34,  iii.  34, 
vi.  24  ...   55,  56,  308,  530 
:  i.  34    ...   56 


.  91  ...  492 

.  91  ...  492 

i.  24  ...  530 

iii.  34  ...  308 


i.  61,  iii.  7,  v.  103, 

93,  282,  483 

i.  61  ...  93 

i.  62  ...  99 

v.  57...  ...  441 

ira:  v.  57  ...  441 

ii-  43  ...  273 

v.  122  ...  506 

vi.  13  ...  523 

iii.  35,  vi.  67  309,  570 

iii.  35  ...  309 

UTiii.  32  ...  306 

ii.  44,  iii.  58,  v.  51 

273,  333,  432 

iii.  26  ...  301 

iii.  26  ...  301 

!  i.  7  26 
i.  8,  i.  19  ...  28,37 

iii.  61  ...  336 

v.  33  ...  415 

tv.  42  ...  425 

v.  33  ...  415 

v.  55  ...  437 

v.  55  ...  437 

:  ii.  34  ...  267 

t  vi.  67  ...  570 

vi.  67  ...  570 

.  115  ...  496 

Ffcn  v.  us  ...  496 


WOED  INDEX— SAMKEYA  PR  AV  ACE  AN  A  S&TRAM.         Ii 


iii.  12 


ii.  1 


ii.  30 


35 


r.  3 


i.  108  ... 
i.  57 


in. 


PAGE. 

288 
231 
261 

309 
390 


160 
86 


PAGE. 

i.  21,  iii.  74,  iv.  14, 
vi.  37   ...  45,  347,  370,  540 
i.  57,  i.  75,  i.  133  ...   86, 
118,  190 
i.  108      160 


f|  i.  33,  iii.  56,  vi.  62  ...   55, 
330,  564 

i.  124  ...  178 

F:  i.  4,  iii.  52  21,  326 

iv.  23  ...  380 

iv.  23  ...  380 

iv.  23  380 


Index  of  Words  in  Kapila  Sutram  (Tatva  Samasa). 


3T  7 


:  8 
:  12 
:  13 
15 


22 


2 

;  9 
11 
22 


22 


is 


21  ... 

r:  19,  20 

22 

g  3 

afc  u  ... 


PAGE. 

2 

2 

9 

9 

9 

17 

20 

10 

13 

14 

15 

14 

3 

20 

3 

11 

12 

20 

9 

17 

20 

2 

19 

18, 19 

,   20 

4 

14 


q^T  8,  9,  10,  11,  12 


:*5f  22 


14  ... 
12 


22 
:  4 


21 
:  19   ... 

18 
:  10  ... 
20   ... 
:  16 
:  3 
:3 

6   ... 
22 
:  1 
:  17 
22 


PAGE. 

...10,11, 
12,13 

7 

...   16 

...   20 

...   20 

...   14 

...   13 

...   13 

...   20 

5 

3 

8 

...   19 

...   18 

17 

...   12 

...   19 

...   16 

4 

4 

8 

...   20 

2 

17 

20 


APPENDIX  III. 
INDEX  OF  AUTHORITIES  QUOTED. 


INDEX  OF  AUTHORITIES  QUOTED. 

N.B. — The  numbers  refer  to  the  pages. 

PAGES. 

Atharva-oiras-Upanisat  ...  ...                 ...                   24 

Amara-Korfa                ...  ...  ...                 ...  44,  224,  262 

It4a-Upanisat               ...  ...  ...                 ...           84,300 

Rig- Veda                     ...  ...  ...                 ...                 555 

Aitareya-Upanisat      ...  ...  ...                 ...                 217 

Katha-Upanisat    17,  41,  73,  160,  216,  219,  221,  306,  332,  408,  458,  484 

Kalagni-Rudra-Upanisat  ...  ...                  ...                  128 

Kalika-Purapam         ...  ...  ...                  ...                  200 

Kavyadar&i                 ...  ...  ...                  ...                 551 

Kumara-Sambhava     ...  ...  ...                  ...                 518 

Kurma-Puraria            ...  7,  27,  69,  81,  113,  237,  238,  268,  283,  521 

Kena-Upanisat            ...  ...  ...                 ...                 447 

Kaivalya-Upanisat      ...  ...  ...                 ...           25,  130 

Garuda-Purana           ...  ...  ...                  ...         310,362 

Garbha-Upanisat        ...  ...  ...                  ...                   97 

Gaudapada's  Mandukya-Karika    ...  ...  ...             69,89 

Ohhandogya-Upanisat  ...2,  17,  23,  58,  102,  104,  122,  123,  127, 

146,  171,  189,  192,  216,  217,  233,  238,  253,  293,' 

304,  374,  379,  397,  400,  409,  445,  447,  449,  492, 

493,  505,  556,  568 

Jabala-Upanisat          ...  ...  ...                  ...                      1 

Taittiriya-Aranyaka   ...  ...  ...                 ...                 378 

Taittiriya-Upanisat    ...  ...  220,  237,  243,  292,  452,  453 

Dkatu-Patha               ...  ...  ...                  ...         490,566 

Naradiya-Purana        ...  ...  '  ...                 ...                 344 

Naradiya-Sinriti         ...  ...  ...                  ...                 356 

Nrisimha-Tapani-Upanisat  ...  ...                 ...              39,64 

Nyaya-Bindu              ...  ..  ...                 ...                 139 

Nyaya-Sutram            ...  ...  81,  82,  286,  358,  433,  466,  467,  468 

Pailcha&kha-Su  tram ...  ...  ...                 ...                 154 

Padma-Purana            ...  ...  ...                 ...                9}46 

Parariara-Upa-Purana  ...  ...                  ...                     7 

Panini-Sutram            ...  ...  ...                 ...                 228 

Prabodha-Chandra-Udaya  ...  ...                                    540 


ii  INDEX  OF  AUTHORITIES  QUOTED. 


PAGES. 
Pradna-Upanisat        ...  ...  ...  ...  97,243 

Brilmt-Aranyaka-Upanisat  ...     3,  5,  20,  34,  76,  90,  104,  110,  114, 

124,  133,  171,  178,  200,  203,204,  229,  233,  234, 
238,  242,  247,  254,  255,  259,  261,  292,  299,330, 
348,  349,  350,  354,  355,  376,  393,  397,  400,  402, 
405,  432,  435,  449,  451,  453,  530,  547,  551,  552, 
555 

Brahraa-Bindu-Upanisat  ...     69,  74,  89,  216,  218,  409,  556,  562 

Brahma-Sutram         ...     8,  10,  46,  84,  85,  104,  107,  124,  206,  215,  243, 

263,  280,  434,  536 
Bhagavat-Gita  ...     4,  6,  11,  41,  74,  79,  80,  88, 137,  145,  170,  376, 

555,  558,  567,  575 
Bhagvata-Puranam    ...  ...  129,  251, 365,  533,  570,  574 

Matsya-Puranam         ...  ...  ...  ..  250 

Manu-Samhita  ...  108,  138,  279,  287,  317,  351,  365,  469,  484 

Maha-Narayana-Upanisat  ...  ...  ...         300,378 

Maha-Bharatam         ...  6,  7,  11,  74,  81,  114,  231,  250,285,368,369,372, 

483,  484,  574 

Mandukya-Karika      ...  Vide  Gaudapada's  MancJukya-Karika. 

Markandeya-Pnrana  ...  ...  ...  25,  107,  252,  370 

Mundaka-Upanisat    ...          219,  243,  255,  263,  322,  342,  445,  464,  538 
Maitri-Upanisat          ...  ...  ...        58,  97,  171,  192,  254 

Yoga-Bhftrfyam  ...     17,  18,  36,  120,  134,  150,  176,  305 

Yoga-Vadistham         ...  ...         18,  105,  134,  173,  203,  268,  290 

Yoga-Sutram  ...     1,  14,  17,  22,  41,  42,  80,  81,  84,  103,  109,  120, 

134, 189,  236,  266,  267,  308,  320,  329,  338, 
352,  358,  519,  527,  534,  535 
Ramayanam  ...  ...  ...  ...  365 

Linga-Purana  ...  ..,  ...  ...  64,  104 

Vnyu-Purana  ...  ...  ...  ...  250 

Visnu-Pnrana  ...5,  8,  26,  66,  99,  100,  101,  110,  113,  157,  176,  183, 

187,  214,  367,  372,  382,   383,  384,  440,  466, 
516,  519,  524 
Vedanta-Sara  ...  ...  ...  ...  204 

Vedanta-Sutram— Vide  Brahma-Sutram. 

Vairfesika-Sfttrain       ...  ...  ...  ...  465 

Sa^vata     ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  508 

Sij$upalavadha  ...  ...  ...  ...  157 

Sulika-Upanisat          ...  50 


INDEX  OF  AUTHORITIES  QUOTED. 


PAGES. 
panifcat     11,  25,  73,  74,  76,  114,  204,  208,  300,  337,  376, 

396,  397,  399,  457,  514,  547,  566 
Safva-Dar&na-Samgraha  ...  ...  ...  44 

Samldiya-Karik'i         ...   24,  40,  78,  93,  98,  129,  161,  171,  179,  182,  183, 

186,  190,  197,  199,  230,  251,  262,  264,  270, 
282,  283,  289,  299,  311,  314,  318,  321,  323, 
324,  326,  328,  335,  344,  345,  346,  351 
Samkhya-Tattva-Kaumudi  ...  ...  ...  23,  265 

Samkhya-Sutram       ...    13,  14,  18,  79,  98,  126,  127,  134,  198,  211,  389, 

498 
Saura-Piir.iim  ...  ...  ...  39,  5() 

Quotations  not  traced  ...      3,  12,  19,  24,  26,  39,  50,  58,  69,  71,  81,  83,  84, 

87,  90,  95,  98,108,  112,  113,  115,  117,  130, 
139,  142,  144,  146,152,  159,  170,  200,  201, 
205,  207,  219,  221,  223,  226,  227,  233,  246, 
247,  260,  287,  288,  293,  328,  332,  355,  357, 
364,  368,  370,  371,  377,  405,  407,  408,  428, 
436,  438,  440,  444,  449,  452,  453,  457,  459, 
462,  474,  489,  494,  499,  505,  506,  521,  526, 
538,  543,  546,  552,  567. 


APPENDIX  IV. 

A  CATALOGUE  OF  SOME  OF  THE  IMPORTANT 
WORKS  ON  THE  SAMKHYA. 


A  CATALOGUE  OF  SOME  OF  THE  IMPORTANT  WORKS 
ON  THE  SAMKHYA. 

A  List  of  Recognised  Text-Books  of  the  Sdnikhya  School 
>  (Taken  from  Fitz-Edivard  Hall's  Collection). 

\.     Samkhya-Pravachana-Sutram  attributed  to  Risi  Kapila.   ^ 
^2.     Sfimkbya-Pravachana-Sutra-Vritti  by  Aniruddha.    ^* 
v^3.     Samkbya-Pravacliana-Sutra-Vritti-Sarali  by  Mahadeva  Sarasvati, 
more  commonly  known  as  Vedantin  Mahadeva.  ^ 

^4.     Samldiya-Pravachana-Bhasyam  by  Vijuana  Bhiksu.^ 

5.     Laghu-Samkhya-Sutra-Vritti  by  Nagoji  Bhatta  or  Nagesfa  Bhatta, 
snrnamed  as  Upadhyaya.    ^ 

v€.     Tattva-Samasah,  attributed  to  Risi  Kapila. 

'  7.     Samkhya-Tarangah,  a  Commentary  on  No.  1,  by   VisJverivaradatta 
Mi^ra,  ascetically  called  Deva  Tirtha.         . 

8.  Sarvopakarini,  a  Commentary  on  No.  6.     Author  is  not  known. 

9.  Samkhya-Sutra-Vivaranam,  ditto.     x  ditto. 

10.  Samkliya-Krama-Dipika,    also    called    Samkhyalankarah    and 
Samkbya-Sutra-Praksepika,  ditto.  ^  ditto. 

11.  Tattva-Yathartbya-Dipanam,  ditto,  by   Bbava  Ganesa    Diksita. 

12.  Tattva-Sarnasa-Vyakhya,  by  Ksemananda. x 

X13.     Samkbya-Karika,  also  called  Saptatih,  by  tdvara  Krisna. 
^14.     Sarnkbya-Karika-Bhasyam,  by  Gaudapada. 

15.     Sarnkhya-Tatt.va-Kau niudi,  sbortly   called  Tattva-Kaumudi,  by 
Vacliaspati  Mirfra. 

\/16.     An  exposition  of  No.  14,  by  Yati  Bharati. 

>/\l.     Tattvarnavah,   otherwise   called    Tattvamrita-Praksini,  a   Com 
mentary  on  No.  14,  by  Raghavananda  Sarasvati. 

^18.     Tattva-Chandrah,  ditto,  by  Narayana  Tirtha  Yati. 
Kaumudi-Prabha,,  ditto,  by  Svapne^vara. 

Samkhya-Tattva-Vilasah,  alsc\  called  Samkliya-Vritti-Praka^ah 
and  Samkhyartha-Samkhyayika,  by  Raghunatha  Tarka  Vagina  BhaUa- 
charya.  ^, 

21.     Sctmkhya-Chandrika,  a  Commentary  on   No.   12,  by    Nfirayana 
Tirtha. 

Sarnkhya-Sara-Vivekah,  by  Vijnana  Bhiksu. 
Samkhya-Tattva-Pradipah,  by  Kaviraja  Yati  or  Kaviraja  Bhiksn. 

24.  Samkhyartha-Tattva-Pradipiku,  by  Bhatta  Ke^ava. 

25.  Samkhya-Tattva-Vibhakarah,  perhaps  by  Vansidhara. 

26.  Samkhya-Kaumudi,  by  Ramkrisna  Bhat^acharya. 

27.  Raja-Vfirtikam,  attributed  to  Ranaranga  Malla,  king  of  Dhara. 


APPENDIX  V. 
TATTVA-SAMASA  OR  KAPILA-SUTRAM. 


APPENDIX  VI. 
SAMKHYA-KAR1KA  OF  ISVARAKUISNA 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 

PAGES. 
Kdrikd  I. 

The  problem  of  Evil  or  Suffering            ...                 ...  ...  1 

Pain  is  threefold...                 ...                 ...                 ...  ...  1 

Deliverance  from  Pain  is  Release            ...                 ...  ...  1 

Pain  includes  possible  pain  also               ...                  ...  ...  2 

The  Samkhya  is  the  only  means  of  deliverance         ...  ...  2 

Its  effect  is  certain  and  permanent          ...                 ...  ...  2 

Ordinary  remedies  produce  temporary  results  only  ...  ...  2 

Kdrikd  II. 

Scriptural  means  also  are  defective         ...                 ...  ...  2 

The  Samkhya  consists  in  discriminative  knowledge  of  the  Subject, 

Purusa,  and  the  Object,  the  Manifest  and  the  Unmanifest  ...  3 
Kdrikd  III. 

The  Subject  is  Purusa          ...                ...                ...  ...  3 

He  is  neither  an  evolvent  nor  an  evolute                    ...  ...  4 

The  Unmanifest  is  the  Root  Evolvent,  Prakriti         ...  ...  4 

She  is  not  an  evolute             ...                 ...                 ...  ...  4 

The  Manifest  comprises  Mahat,  Ahamkara,  and  the  five  Tan- 
matras  which  are  evolutes  as  well  as  evolvents,  and  the  eleven 
Indriyas  and  the  five  Gross  P]lements  which  are  evolutes  only 

and  not  evolvents              ...                 ...                 ...  ...  4 

Kdrikd  IV. 

The  above  twenty-five  Tattvas  have  to  be  known     ...  ...  4 

Sources  of  knowledge  are  Perception,  Inference,  and  Testimony...  4 

All  other  means  of  knowledge  are  included  in  the  above  ...  4 

Kdrikd  V. 

Perception  defined                 ...                 ...                 ...  ...  5 

Inference  is  threefold            ...                 ...                 ...  ...  5 

Inference  defined                   ...                 ...                 ...  ...  5 

Testimony  defined                 ...                 ...                 ...  ...  5 

Process  of  perceptual  cognition  described                 ...  ...  5 

Threefold  inference  described                 .,.                 ...  5 


ii  TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 

Pages. 
Kdrikd  VI. 

Objects  are  either  sensible  or  super-sensible.            ...  ...  6 

Super-sensible  objects  are  proved  from  Inference  and  from  Testi 
mony               ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  ...  6 

Kdrikd  VII. 

Prakriti  and  Purusa  are  not  objects  of  Perception    ...  ...  7 

Perception  is  not  the  sole  test  of  reality  ...                 ...  ...  7 

Admittedly  existent  things  are  not  perceived            ...  ...  7 

Causes  which  obstruct  perception           ...                 ...  ...  7 

Kdrika  VIII. 

Prakriti,  being  subtile,  is  non-perceptible                 ...  ...  7 

Prakriti  is  proved  from  her  products      ...                  ...  •  •  •  7" 

Mahat,  etc.  are  the  products  of  Prakriti...                 ...  ...  7 

They  both  resemble  and  differ  from  Prakriti             ...  ...  7 

Kdrikd  IX. 

Effect  infers  some  cause,  and  not  a  particular  one    ...  ...  8 

But  the  existence  of  the  Pradhana  has  to  be  proved  ...  9 

The  theories  of  effect  examined               ...                 ...  ...  9 

The  existent  is  not  produced  from  the  non-existent...  ...  9 

Effects  are  not  the  Vivarta  or  revolutions  of  a  single  existence  ...  9 

The  non-existent  is  not  produced  from  the  existent ...  ...  9 

The  existent  is  produced  from  the  existent                ...  ...  9 

The  effect  is  identical  with  the  cause      ...                  ...  ...  9 

Reasons  for  the  doctrine       ...                 ...                 ...  ...  9 

Karikd  X. 

The  differences  between  the  Manifest  and  the  Unmanifest          ...  9 

Kdrikd  XT. 

The  resemblances  between  them             ...                  ...  ...  10 

The  differences  between  them  and  Purusa                 ...  ...  10 

Their  resemblances                ...                 ...                 ,..  ...  10 

A  doubt  as  to  the  multiplicity  of  Purusa  removed    ...  ...  11 

Kdrikd  XII. 

The  Gunas  are  Sattva,  Rajas,  and  Tamas                   ...  ...  12 

Their  Svarupa  or  essential  form  described                 ...  12 

What  objects  they  fulfil         ...                 ...                 ...  ...  12 

What  functions  they  mutually  perform  ...                  ...  ...  12 

How  the  Gunas  subserve  one  another     ...                 ...  ...  12 

How  they  co-exist  throughout  the  Universe               ...  .«-  13 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.  Hi 

Pages. 
Kdrikd  XIII. 

The  respective  properties  of  the  Gunas  stated           ...  ...  13 

These  are  contrary  to  one  another           ...                  ...  ...  13 

How  contraries  can  co-operate  towards  a  common  end  ...  13 

The  example  of  the  lamp      ...                 ...                 ...  ...  13 

Kdrikd  XIV. 

Proof  of  the  properties  of  the  Unmanifest                  ...  ......  14 

Proof  of  the  Uninanifest       ...                 ...                 ...  ...  15 

Kdrikds  XV-XVI. 

Proof  of  the  Un manifest  continued         ...                 ...  ...  15 

The  first  transformation  of  the  Unmanifest  are  the  Gunas  ...  16 
How  a  single  cause  accounts  for  the  diversity  in  Creation  ...  16 
The  transformations  of  the  Gunas  are  homogeneous  and  heteroge 
neous               ...                 ...                  ...                 ...  ...  16 

The  example  of  the  rain-water                ...                 ...  ...  17 

Kdrikd  XVII. 

Proof  of  Purusa  ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  ...  17 

Purusa  is  not  an  aggregate  ...                 ...                 ...  ...  17 

Kdrikd  XVIII. 

Proof  of  the  multiplicity  of  Purusa         ...                  ...  ....  18 

Kdrikd  XIX. 

Proof  of  the  Samkhya  conception  of  the  nature  of  Purusa  ...  18 

Kdrikd  XX. 

The  seeming  agency  of  Purusa  is  a  reflection  of  the   real  agency 

of  the  Manifest                   ...                 ...                 ...  ...  19 

The  seeming  intelligency  of  the   Manifest  is  a  reflection  of  the 

real  intelligence  of  Purusa                    ...                 ...  ...  19 

Their  mutual  reflection  takes  place  through  conjunction  ...;.  19 
Idrikd  XXI. 

The  object  of  their   conjunction    is   the  exhibition  of  the  Pra- 

dhana  to  Purusa,  and  the  isolation  of  Purusa        ...  ...  20 

The  example  of  the  halt  and  the  blind  ...                 ...  ...  20 

Creation  is  through  conjunction              ...                 ,,.  ....  20 

rikd  XXII. 

The  evolutes  of  Prakriti        ...                 ...                 ...  ...  21 

Their  inter-relation               ...                 ...                 ...  21 

The  order  of  their  evolution...                 ...             v.v...  ;v>  21 


iv  T  ABLE  OF 


Pages. 
KdriM  XXIII. 

Buddhi  defined  ...                 ...  ...  ...  ...  22 

Its  products  are  Sattvic  and  Tamasic  ...  ...  ...  22 

The     Sattvic    ones     are    virtue,    knowledge,    dispassion,     and 

power              ...                 ...  ...  ...  ...  22 

The  Tamasic  ones  are  the  opposite  ...  ...  ...  22 

Stages  of  dispassion  explained  ...  ...  ...  22 

"  Power  "  explained              ...  ...  ...  ...  23 

'  '  Sattvic  '  '  and  '  '  Tamasic  '  '  explained  ...  ...  ...  23 

KdriM  XXIV. 

Ahamkara  defined                  ...  ...                 ...                 ...       23 

The   creation   of   Ahamkara  is  twofold  :  the  eleven  Indriyas  and 

the  five  Tan-matras            ...  ...                  ...                  ...       23 

Abhimana  explained              ...  ...                 ...                 ...       23 

KdriM  XXV. 

From  Ahamkara,  dominated  by  Sattva,  are  the  Indriyas  ...  24 

From  Ahamkara,  dominated  by  Tamas,  are  the  Tan-matras  ...  24 
The   part   Rajas  plays  in  the  evolution  of  the  products  of  Aham 

kara  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  24 

Terms  "  Vaikrita,"  "  Bhutadi,"  and  "  Taijasa  "  explained  ...  24 

KdrikdXXVL 

The  Indriyas  are  those  of  Cognition  and  of  Action   ...  ...  24 

Names  of  the  two  classes  of  Indriyas  given  ...  ...  24 

Kdrihd  XXVII. 

Manas  is  the  Indriya  both  of  Cognition  and  of  Action  ...       25 

The    uncommon    function    of    Manas    is  Samkalpa  or  Imagina 
tion  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...       25 

Cause  of  the  variety  of  the  Indriyas  and  of  external  objects        ...       26 
Process  of  sensuous  cognition  referred  to  ...  ...       26 

Kdrika  XXVIIL 

What  functions  the  Indriyas  severally  perform         ...  ...       26 

Kdrikd  XXIX. 

The   common   and   uncommon   functions   of   the  three  Internal 
Indriyas          ...  ...  ...  ...  ...       27 

The  Internal  Indriyas  are  Buddhi,  Ahamkara,  and  Manas  ...       27 

The  vital  airs  are  produced  from  them,  and  not  from  the  element 
al  Air  ...  ...  ,.  27 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


Pages. 
Kdrikd  XXX. 

In    perception,    there    is  the  joint  operation  of  the  three  Internal 

Indriyas  and  one  of  the  external  ones...                 ...  27 

Their  functions  may  be  successive  as  well  as  simultaneous         ...  28 
In  inference,  revelation,  and  recollection,  there  is  the  joint  opera 
tion  of  the  three  Internal  Indriyas  only                  ...                  ...  28 

'  Their  functions  may  be  successive  as  well  as  simultaneous         ...  28 

Inference,  revelation,  and  recollection  must  follow  perception    ...  28 

Kdrikd  XXXI. 

How  the  Indriyas  come  to  act  jointly  and  in  harmony  ...  28 

Theory  of  some  sort  of  sensuous  resonance  ...  ...  28 

The  Indriyas  act  spontaneously  ...  ...  ...  28 

The  purpose  of  Purusa  is  the  final  cause  of  their  activity  ...  28 

Kdrikd  XXXII. 

The  Indriyas  are  thirteen  in  number      ...  ...  ...       29 

Their  general  functions  and  the  effect  thereof  ...  ...       29 

Kdrikd  XXXIII. 

There  are  three  Internal  Indriyas  and  ten  external  ones  ...  30 

The  latter  are  object  to  the  former          ...                  ...  ...  30 

In  what  sense  they  are  object                   ...                 ...  ...  30 

The  external  Indriyas  operate  at  time  present           ...  ...  30 

The  Internal  ones  at  times  past,  present  and  future  ...  ...  30 

Kdrikd  XXXIV. 

The   objects   of   the    Indriyas  of  cognition  are  both  gross  sound, 

etc.,  and  subtile  sound,  etc.,  in  the  form  of  the  Tan-matras     ...       30 
Sound  is  the  only  object  of  Speech          ...  ...  ...       39 

The  other  Indriyas  of  action  have  sound  and  all  the  rest  as  their 

object  ...  ...          •      ...  ...  ...       30 

Kdrikd  XXXV. 

The  Internal  Indriyas  reach  to  all   objects,  through   the  external 
ones  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...       31 

The   former  are  compared  to  a  house  of  which  the  latter  may  be 
said  to  be  the  gates  ...  ...  ...  ...       31 

Kdrikd  XXXVI. 

The  example  of  the  lamp  repeated  .  ...  ...  31 

The  external  Indriyas  present  all  objects  to  Buddhi...  ...  31 

Purusa  can  experience  objects  through  all,  in  Buddhi  only  ...  31 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


Pages. 

Kdrikd  XXXVII. 

Buddhi  discrirniuates  the  subtile  difference  between  Prakriti  and 

Purusa             ...                 ...                 ...  ...                 ...  32 

Buddhi  is  supreme  among  the  Indriyas     .  ...                 ...  32 

Kdrikd  XXXVIII. 

The  Tan-matras  are  indiscernibles          ...  ...                 ...  32 

The  Gross  Elements  are  their  products  ...  ...  32 

They  are  discernibles            ...                 ...  ...                 ...  32 

Nature  of  the  Tan-matras  explained        ...  ...                 ...  32 

Kdrikd  XXXIX. 

The  discernibles  enumerated                    ...  ...                 ...  33 

Gross  and  Subtile  Bodies  distinguished  ...  ...                 ...  33 

Kdrikd  XL. 

Character  of  the  Subtile  Body  described  ...                 ...  34 

The  cause  of  its  migration  stated  ...                 ...  34 

Kdrikd  XLI. 

The  Subtile  Body  ever  seeks  a  Gross  one  ...                 ...  35 

The  doctrine  of  an  intermediate  Body  called  Vehicular  ...  35 

Kdrikd  XL1L 

The  migration  of  the  Subtile  Body  :  the  example  of  the  dramatic 

performer        ...                 •••                 •••  •  ••                 ...  35 

Its  causes  :  the  Bhavas          ...  ...                 ...  36 

Kdrikd  XLIII. 

Bhavas  are  instinctive,  essential,  and  acquired  ...                 ...  36 

These  explained...                 ...                 ...  •••                 •••  37 

Kdrikd  XLIV. 

Result  of  virtue  ...  ...  37 

Result  of  vice     ...  ...  37 

Result  of  knowledge  •••  37 

Result  of  ignorance  or  error  ...                 ...  ...  37 

Bondage  is  threefold  :  Prakritika,  Vaikritika,  and  Daksinaka      ...  37 

Bondage  described                ...                 ...  ...                 ...  37 

Kdrikd  XLV. 

Result  of  dispassion               ...                 ...  ...                 ...  38 

Result  of  passion 

Result  of  power  ...                 ...                ...  •••                •••  38 

Result  of  weakness                ...                 ...  •••                •••  38 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.  vii 

Pages. 
Kdrikd  XL77. 

Pratyay a-Sarga  explai  ned    ...  ...  ...  ...  38 

Its   divisions  are   Error,   Incapacity,  Complacency,  and  Perfec 
tion                ...                ...  ...  ...  ...  39 

Their   sub-divisions  are  fifty  ...  ...  ...  39 

The  cause  of  this  diversity  explained  ...  ...  ...  39 

Kdrikd  XLVII. 

There  are  five  kinds  of   Error  ...  ...  ...  39 

Twenty-eight  kinds  of  Incapacity  ...  ...  ...  39 

Nine   kinds  of   Complacency  ...  ...  ...  39 

Eight  kinds  of  Perfection     ...  ...  ...  ...  39 

Kdrikd  XLVIII. 

The  sub-divisions  of  Error   ...  ...  ...  ...  39 

A-Vidya  has  eight  varieties  ...  ...  ...  ...  40 

Asmita  has  eight                   ...  ...  ...  ...  40 

Raga  has  ten      ...                 ...  ...  ...  ...  40 

Dvesa  has  eighteen                ...  ...  ...  ttt  40 

A bhinive^a  has  eighteen       ...  ...  ...  ...  40 

Kdrikd  XLIX. 

The  sub-divisions  of  Incapacity :  ...  ...  ...  40 

Eleven  injuries  of  the  eleven  Indriyas  ...  ...  ...  40 

Seventeen  injuries  of  Buddhi  ...  ...  ...  40 

The  injuries  of  Buddhi  denote  the  contrary  states  of  Complacen 
cies  and  Perfections          ...  ...  ...  ...  40 

Kdrikd  L. 

The  sub-divisions  of  Complacency  :  ...  ...  ...  40 

Internal  five        ...                  ...  ...  ...  ...  40 

External  five      .                    ...  ...  ...  ...  40 

Kdrikd  LI. 

The  sub- divisions  of  Perfection  ...  ...  ...  41 

Error,   Incapacity,   and   Complacency  are  obstacles   to    Perfec 
tion                  ...                 ...  ...  ...  ,..41 

Kdrikd  LII. 

Creation  is  twofold  ;  from  Buddhi  and  from  the  Tan-matras      ...  42 

Why  a  two-fold  creation  is  necessary  ...  ...  ...  42 


viii  TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 

Pages. 

Karikd  LIU. 

The  sub-divisions  of  Elemental  Creation  ...                 ...       42 

Celestial  beings  are  of  eight  kinds         ...  ...                 ...       42 

The  grovelling  are  of  five  kinds              ...  ...                 ...       42 

The  human  is  of  one  kind   ...                 ...  ...                 ...       43 

Karikd  LIV. 

Worlds  higher,  lower,  and  intermediate  characterised  ...       43 

Kdrikd  LV. 

There  is  suffering  in  the  higher  worlds  also  ...                 ...       43 

Pain  is   universal                 ...                 ...  ....                 ...       43 

So  long  as  the  Subtile   Body   remains,   there  can  be  no  escape 

from  pain        ...                 ...                 ...-  ...                 ...       43 

Kdrikd  LV1. 

Prakriti's  creation  is  individualistic       ...  ...                 ...       44 

For  the  release  of  each  respective  Purusa  ...                 ...       44 

And  utterly  unselfish            ...                 ...  ...                 ...       44 

Kdrikd  LVII. 

Prakriti's  activity  is  spontaneous            ...  ...                 ...       44 

Purposive  activity  is  seen  in  unintelligent  things  ...                  ...       45 

The  example  of  the  secretion  of  milk  for  the  calf  ...                 ...       45 

Interposition  of   an    l^vara  is   impossible  ...                  ...       45 

Kdrikd  LVTII. 

Spontaneity  of  Prakriti  further  illustrated  ...                  ...       45 

To  act  for  the   release  of  Purusa   is   an    inner   necessity   of   the 

nature  of  Prakriti                                  ...  ...       46 

Kdrikd  LIX. 

How  Prakriti's  activity  ceases  spontaneously  ...                 ...       46 

The  example  of   a  fair  dancer  <  ...       46 

Kdrikd  LX. 

The  unselfishness  of  Prakriti  demonstrated  ...                 ...       46 

Kdrikd  LX1. 

How  Prakriti  does  not  energise  over  again,  in  regard  to   the  re 
leased  Purusa...  ...       47 

The  example  of  a  lady  of  high  birth  ...                 ...       47 

Kdrikd  LXII. 

Bondage,  transmigration,  and  release   are  really  of  Prakriti  and 

not  of  Purusa .,.                 .,.                 .,.  rt*                 ..,47 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.  ix 

Pages. 

Kdrikd  LX1I1. 

How  Prakrit!  herself  binds  and  releases  herself        ...  ...       47 

Virtue,  dispassion,  and  power,  without  knowledge,  avail  not  ...       47 

Kdrikd  LXIV. 

How  discriminative  knowledge  can  be  fully  developed  ...       48 

What  is  perfect  development  of  knowledge               ...  ...       48 

Kdrikd  LXV. 

Relation  of  Prakriti  and  Purusa  after  release            ...  ...       48 

Kdrikd  LXVI. 

After   release,    there   remains    still   conjunction   of  Prakriti  and 

Purusa            ...                  ...                  ...                 ...  ...       49 

Their  conjunction,  as  such,  is  not  the  cause  of  creation  ...       49 

The  purpose  of  creation  is  to  free  Purusa  from  bondage  ...       49 

Kdrikd  LXVII. 

Jivan-mukti,  or  release  in  life,  stated  and  explained  ...       49 

Perfect  knowledge  kills  the  germ  of  re-birth             ...  ...       49 

The  Body  is  sustained  by   Prarabdha   Karma   which  originated 

it...                 ...                 ...                 ...                 ...  ...       50 

Prarabdha  and  other  kinds  of  Karma  explained       ...  ...       50 

Kdrikd  LXVIII. 

When  a  Jivan-mukta  is  finally  released                     ...  ...       50 

Kdrikd  LXIX. 

The  origin  of  the  Samkhya  Sastra  is  from  Kapila    ...  ...       51 

r.drikd  LXX. 

The  tradition  of  the  Samkhya  $astra :    . . .                 ...  ...       51 

Kapila  taught  it  to  Asuri,  and  Asuri  to  Pancha&kha  ...       51 

Pancha&kha  elaborated  it  in  various *ways                 ...  ...       51 

:drikd  LXXI. 

How  LJvarakrisna  got  it        ...                 ...                 ...  ...       52 

The  Samkhya-Karika  is  a  compendium  of  the  original  oastras  ...       52 
Kdrifcd  LXXII. 

The   Samkhya-Karika  is   also   called   the  Saptati  or  Of  Seventy 

verses              ...                ...                 ...                 ...  ...       53 

The  Samkhya- Pravachana-Sutram  is  also  called  the  Sa§ti-Tantra 

or  Of  sixty  Topics                                ...                 ...  ...       53 

The  Saptati  compared  with  the  Sasti-Tantra             ...  ...       53 

The  sixty  topics  enumerated                   ...                 ...  53 


THE  SAMKHTA-KAKLKA, 


The  Sdmkhya  is  the  only  means  of  the  Supreme  Good. 


ii  '<  ii 

fl  Duhkha-traya-abhighatat,  from  the  disagreeable  occurrence, 
affection  or  action  (abhighata)  of  the  threefold  pain  or  causes  of  suffering.  f%ww 
Jijiiasa,  the  desire  to  know,  enquiry,  fl^iwifi  Tat-avaghatake,  preventive  or 
counter-active  thereof,  i.e.,  of  the  threefold  pain.  t%  Hetau,  into  the  means,  3g* 
Driste,  there  existing  visible  or  ordinary  means.  *r  Sa,  it,  i.e.,  the  enquiry. 
w*i?  Apa-artha,  purpose-less,  superfluous.  %a  Ohet,  if  it  is  said,  i  Na,  no. 
WTTTr3nT^5?irara  Ek4nta-atyanta-tah-abhav£it,  because  of  the  absence  of  certainty 
and  permanency. 

I.  From  the  disagreeable  occurrence  of  the  threefold 
pain,  (proceeds)  the  enquiry  into  the  means  which  can 
prevent  it ;  nor  is  the  enquiry  superfluous  because  ordinary 
(means)  exist,  for  they  fail  to  accomplish  certain  and  perma 
nent  prevention  of  pain. 

ANNOTATION. 

1.  Wise  men  want  to  demonstrate  that  which,  by  being  known,  would 
accomplish  the  Supreme  Good.     Knowledge  about  the   subject   matter  of 
the  proposed  Sastra  is   the   means   of  accomplishing  the  Supreme  Good. 
The  present  K&'rika,  therefore,  introduces  an  enquiry  into  that   subject. — 
Vachaspati  Mi^ra's  Tattva-Kaumudi.      * 

2.  The  subject-matter  of  the  Slmkhya  System  comprises    the  well- 
known    Twenty-five   Tattvas  or   Principles,  from  the  knowledge  of   which 
results   the   destruction  of  the   three   kinds   of    pain.      Of.    Gaudpada's 


* 

3.  The  Supreme  Good  is  Moksa  or  Release  which  consists  in  the 
permanent  impossibility  of  the  incidence  of  pain  in  any  form  whatever, 
that  is,  in  recovering  that  state  of  the  pristine  purity  of  the  Self  in  which 
the  occurrence  of  pain  is  impossible,  in  other  words,  in  the  realisation  of 
the  Self  as  Self  pure  and  simple. 


SAMKHYA-KARTKA. 


4.  Pains,  according  to  the  place  of  their  origin,  are  divided 
primarily  into  two  classes  :  internal  and  external.  Internal  pains,  again, 
are  either  bodily  or  mental.  These  are  called  Adbyatmika  or  intra-organic. 
External  pains  are  either  Adbibhautika  or  caused  by  created  beings, 
namely,  man,  beast,  bird,  reptile,  and  the  immobile,  or  Adhidaivika  or 
caused  by  supernatural  agencies,  such  as  Yaksa,  Raksasa,  Vinayaka,  etc. 
Now,  pain,  such  as  it  is,  cannot  be  ignored,  because  it  is  experienced  by 
every  individual  being. 

5  Pain  is  not  a  condition  of  the  pure  Self.  It  resides  in  the 
Internal  Instrument  of  Action  and  Cognition,  that  is,  the  inner  sense,  or 
Buddhi,  and  is  a  particular  modification  of  that  component  element  of  it 
which  is  called  Rajas.  "Abbighata"  is  the  contact  of  the  power  of 
Sentiency  with  pain  as  an  object  of  disagreeable  sensation. 

6.  It  may  be  objected  that  when  such  obvious  remedies  as  medi 
cines,  desirable  objects,  skill  in  political  arts  and  sciences,  employment  of 
gems  and  charms,  etc.,  for  the  alleviation  and  removal  of  pain,  do  exist, 
whilst  the  knowledge  of  the  Tattvas  is  difficult  of  attainment  and  to  be 
acquired  only  by  long  study  and  traditional  tuition  through  many 
generations,  the  investigation  proposed  is  needless.  To  this,  the  answer 
is  that  the  obvious  means  are  neither  Ekanta  or  absolute,  nor  Atyanta  or 
final  ;  that  is,  there  is  in  them  no  certainty  of  the  cessation  of  pain  nor  of 
the  non-recurrence  of  pain  that  has  ceased.  Therefore,  the  good  accom 
plished  by  them  is  not  the  Supreme  Good.  The  means  of  accomplishing 
the  Supreme  Good  must  possess  these  two  properties.  Such  a  means  is 
the  knowledge  of  the  Tattvas.  The  enquiry,  therefore,  is  certainly  not 
needless. 

7.  But  our  opponent  may  contend  that,  though  the  obvious  means 
may  fail,  still  there  are  means  declared  in  the  Vedas,  which  bring  about 
absolute  and  final  cessation  of  pain,  and  that,  consequently,  the  proposed 
enquiry  is  quite  superfluous  Accordingly,  the  next  Karika  declares  : 

Scriptural,  like  ordinary,  means  are  defective. 


II  ^  II 

Drista-vat,   like   the  ordinary     (means).     wjufwi:    Anusravikali,     the 
revealed,   Vedic,   scriptural.     S:    Sah,    it,    i.e.,   the   Vedic  means.      f%  Hi,    for. 
A-visuddhi-ksaya-atisaya-yuktah,  attended  with  impurity,  waste, 


and  excess.    ftf$*fifti  Tat-viparitah,  the  opposite  thereof,  i.e.,  of  ordinary  and  scrip 
tural  means.  $m  Sreyan,  preferable.   «ITWOIMI*|*JMM  Vyakta-a-vyakta-jna-vijnan&t, 


SAMKHYA-KARIKA. 


as  it  consists  in  discriminative  knowledge  of  the  Manifest,  the  Unmanifest,  and  the 
Knower. 

II.  Like  the  ordinary,  is  the  scriptural  (means 
ineffectual),  for  it  is  attended  with  impurity,  waste,  and 
excess.  (The  means  which  is)  the  opposite  of  both  is 
preferable,  as  it  consists  in  a  discriminative  knowledge  of 
the  Manifest,  the  Unmanifest,  and  the  Knower. 

ANNOTATION. 

8.  "  Scriptural  "  here  refers  to  the  rituals  laid  down   in   the  Vedas, 
and  not  to  their  Jnana-Kanda  portion,   for  Discriminative  Knowledge  also 
is  enjoined  in  them. 

The  scriptural  m6ans  are,  e.g.,  the  drinking  of  the  Soma  juice, 
performance  of  sacrifices  such  as  the  Jyotistorna,  the  A^vamedha, 
etc.  They  are  "  impure  "  from  sacrifice  of  animals,  etc.  The  result 
produced  by  them  is  liable  to  "  waste,"  for  even  heaven  and  the  gods 
pass  away  in  course  o£  time.  They  are  also  inequal  in  the  distribution 
of  their  rewards. 

9.  The  "  opposite   of   both  "    that  is,  that  which   is  absolute  and 
final  in  its   result,  and   is  free   from  impurity,    deficiency,  and  inequality. 
Such  a  means  is  the  discriminative  knowledge  of  Prakriti  and  Purusa. 

10.  "Vijnana"    means  knowledge  of   discrimination.     Knowledge 
of  the  Manifest  leads  to   the    knowledge  of   its   cause,   the   Unmanifest. 
And  knowledge  of  both   as  existing    for   the  sake  of  another,  leads  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  Self.     The   Manifest    begins    with   Mahat  and    includes 
Ahamkara,    the  five   Tan-mi  tras,   the  eleven  Tndriyas,  and    the  five  Great 
Elements.     The  Unmanifest  is   the  Pradhana,  i.e.,  Prakpti.     The  Knower 
is  Purusa.     These  are  the  Twenty-five  Tattvas. 

11.  The  mutual   differences   of   the  Manifest,  the  Unraanifest,    and 
the  Knower  are  declared  in  the  next  Ka*ika. 

The  Manifest,  the  Unmanifest,  and  the  Knower  distinguished. 


II  \  II 

Mula-prakritih  the  root-evolvent,  sifesf^:  A-vikritifr,  non-evolute. 
Mahat-adyalj,  Mahat,  etc.  rr$fcferra:  Prakriti-vikritayalj,  evolvent-e  volutes. 
SB  Sapta,  seven.  ^resRi:  Sodasakafr,  sixteen.  3  Tu,  merely,  forc:  Vikarah, 
evolute.  f  Na.  not.  n«ft:  Prakriti^,  evolvent,  i  Na,  not.  %^  :  Vikritib,  evolute. 
5W  Purusafr,  Purusa. 


SAMKHYA-KARTKA. 


III.  The  Root  Evolvent  is  no  evolute  ;  Mahat,  etc.,  are 
the  seven  evolvent-evolutes  ;  the  sixteen  are  mere  evolutes  ; 
(that  which  is)  neither  evolvent  nor  evolute,  is  Purusa. 

12.  By  "  Prakrit!  "  is  meant  that  which  procreates  or  evolves  —  the 
Pradhana,  that  is,    that   in    which  all    things   are   contained,   and   in  its 
general  significance,  it  denotes   that  which  becomes   the  material  cause  of 
another  Tattva. 

13.  The  Root  Evolvent  is   the   state  of   equipoise  of   Sattva,  Rajas, 
and  Tamas.     It  has  no  root  of  its  own  and  is  the  root  of  all  things.     Hence 
it  is   not   a  product.     To  imagine   a  root  for   the   Root   Evolvent  would 
entail  infinite  regression. 

14.  Evolvent-Evolutes  :    Mahat  springs   from    the   Pradhana.  and, 
in   its   turn,    gives   rise   to   Aharnkara  ;   Aharnkara,  in   its   turn,   to   the 
Tan-matras  of  Sound,  Touch,  Smell,  Form,  and  Taste  ;   and  these,  in  their 
turn,  respectively  to   the  gross  elements   of   Ether,   Air,  Earth,  Fire,  and 
Water. 

15.  It  is  next  to  be  considered  how   the  existence  of  the  Tattvas 
described  above  can  be  rationally  established.     The  causes   of  cognition 
and  non-cognition  are,  therefore,  expounded  in  the  following  four  Karikas. 

Sources  of  knowledge  enumerated. 


II  »   II 

5,3*^  Dristam,  the  seen,  sensuous,  perception,     w^n^  Anuinanam,   inference. 
Apta-vachanam,  statement  of  trustworthy  persons.    ^  Cha,  and.    wn 


Sarva-pramana-siddha-tvat,  because  all  proofs  are  established,  ifcRw  Tri-vidham, 
threefold,  xrowj^  Pramanam,  proof.  *B  Istam,  desired.  uSfofisfg:  Prameya-siddhih, 
establishment  of  the  existence  of  the  things  to  be  proven,  viz.,  the  Twenty-five 
Tattvas.  mniq  Pramaijat,  from  proof,  f^  Hi,  verily. 

IV.  Perception,  Inference,  and  Testimony  (are  the 
Proofs  ;  by  these)  all  proofs  being  established,  Proof  is 
intended  to  be  threefold.  From  Proof  verily  is  the  estab 
lishment  of  the  Provables. 

Perception,  Inference,  and  Testimony  defined. 


II  V  II 

Prati-visaya-adhyavasayah,   ascertainment  of    each   respective 


object  by  the  senses.  ^?'  Dristam,  perception,     raf^  Trividhajii,  threefold. 


SAMKHYA-KAR1KA. 


Anumanam,  inference.  gnw?^  Akhyatam,  declared.  ?ra  Tat,  it.  Bgf^fff^^.  Liftga 
lingi-purvakam,  preceded  by  the  mark  and  by  that  of  which  it  is  the  mark 
9iF*fa:  Apta-srutih,  trustworthy  person  and  the  Veda.  WFF&  Apta-vachanam, 
trustworthy  statement,  testimony.  3  Tu,  while. 

V.  Perception  is  the  ascertainment  of  each  respective 
object  (by  the  Senses).  Inference  has  been  declared  to  be 
threefold.  It  is  preceded  by  the  mark  and  it  is  preceded  by 
the  thing  of  which  it  is  the  mark.  While  Testimony  is  the 
statement  of  trustworthy  persons  and  the  Veda. 

ANNOTATION. 

16.  Vachaspati   Mi^ra  interprets   "  Prati-visaya-adhyavasayah "   as 
follows  :  Adhyavasaya,    that  is,  the   operation  of  Buddhi,  in  other  words, 
cognition,  based  on  or   depending  upon   Prati-visaya,  that   is,  that   which 
functions  in  regard  to,  that  is,  comes  into  contact  with,  the  several  objects, 
in  other  words,  the  Senses. 

17.  The    same    authority     describes   the    process   of    perceptual 
cognition  thus  :  On  the  modification  of   the  Senses  apprehending  objects, 
when   there   takes   place   the   subdual  of   the  Tamas  of  Buddhi,  there  is 
predominance  of  the  Sattva,  which  is  variously  called  Adhyavasaya,  Vritti, 
and  J  fiana.     And  the  favour  that  is  hereby   done  to   the  power  of  intelli 
gence,  that  is  the  fruit ;  it  is  the  consciousness  of   Prama  or  Right  Cogni 
tion.     For  the  Buddhi   Tattva,   being  derived  from   Prakriti,  is  unintelli 
gent  ;    hence    its    Adhyavasaya   also   is    unintelligent,    like    a  jar,    etc. 
Similarly,  the  other  modifications  of  the  Buddhi  Tattva,  such  as  pleasure,  etc., 
also  are  unintelligent.     While   Purusa,   unassociated    with  pleasure,    etc., 
is  intelligent.     Yet  he,  by  the  falling  of  the  shadow  of  cognition,  pleasure, 
etc.,  reflected  by  those  residing  in  the  Buddhi  Tattva,  becomes,  as  though 
possessed  of  cognition,  pleasure,  etc.     This  is  how    the   intelligent   one  is 
favoured.     And  by  the  falling  of   the  shadow  of  intelligence,  Buddhi   and 
also  its  Adhyavasaya,  though  unintelligent,  appear,  as  though  intelligent. 

18.  Anumana  is  inference,    by  means  of  the   mark,    of  the  thing  of 
which  it  is  the  mark,  and  vice  versa.     The  Methods  of  Inference  are  either 
of   Agreement,  called  Vita,  or  of   Difference,  called   A- Vita.      A- Vita  in 
ference  is  called  ^esa-vat,  because  it  has  the  Sesa   or  the  remainder  or  the 
residue  as  its  subject  matter.     E.g.,  Earth  is  not  not-Earth,  because  it  pos 
sesses  smell.     Gaudapada   explains  Sesa-vat  to  be    inference   in   respect 
of  the  Sesa  or  remainder  of  the  class  ;   e.g.,  having   found  a  drop  of  water 
taken  from  the  sea  to  be  salt,  the  saltness  of  the  rest  also  is  inferred; 


6  SAMKHYA-KABIKA. 


Vita  inference  is  two-fold  :  Purva-vat  and  Samanyato  Drista. 
Purva-vat  is  the  inference  of  an  individual  of  a  genus  particular  instances 
of  which  have  previously  been  seen  ;  e.g.,  the  inference  of  fire  from  smoke, 
in  a  mountain,  fire  having  previously  been  seen  in  the  kitchen.  Sama 
nyato  Drista  is  inference  of  a  thing  particular  instances  of  which  same 
kind  have  not  previously  been  seen,  but  particular  instances  of  a  kind 
similar  to  which  have  previously  been  seen  in  analogous  cases  ;  that  is, 
in  this  case,  the  particular  is  not  seen  but  the  genus  is  seen.  E.g., 
Karana-tva  or  instrumentality,  that  is,  the  capability  of  effecting  an  act 
is,  as  a  genus,  a  known  thing,  because  it  has  been  seen  in  the  axe  which 
is  an  instrument  of  cutting.  But  an  Indriya  or  Power  of  Cognition  and 
Action  (commonly  rendered  as  Sense  Organ)  does  not  belong  to  the  same 
class  as  the  axe,  and  is  also  not  an  object  of  perception.  Now,  cognition 
and  action  are  acts,  and  as  the  act  of  cutting  cannot  be  effected  without 
an  instrument,  so  the  acts  of  cognition  and  action  cannot  be  effected 
without  some  instrument.  Thus  is  inferred  the  existence  of  the  Indriyas 
as  the  Instruments  of  Cognition  and  Action. 

Apta  means  Acharyas,  such  as  Brahma  and  the  rest. 
Super-Sensible  objects  how  proved. 


II  I  II 

:  Samanyatafc,  of  the  generic.  5  Tu,  but.  <^  Dristat,  from  the 
seeing,  9RW*3*iwri  Ati-indriyanarp,  of  things  transcending  ihe  senses.  Hffifa: 
Pratitib,  approach,  intuition,  cognition.  wnim  Anumanat,  from  inference. 
f^ira  Tasmat,  from  that,  sifi  Api,  even.  i  Cha,  and  also,  from  Seea-vat  inference 
(Vachaspati).  wfig'  A-siddham,  not-established,  qwt  Paroksam,  super-  sensuous. 
siTFTwa  Apta-agamat,  from  Testimony  and  Revelation.  R§^  Siddham,  proved. 

VI.  (Intuition  of  sensible  things  is  from  perception). 
But  the  intuition  of  supersensible  things  is  from  Sama 
nyato  Drista  and  Sesa-vat  Inference.  And  super-sensible 
things  not  established  from  that  even,  are  established  from 
Testimony  and  Revelation. 

19.  Prakriti  and  Purusa  are  not  objects  of  perception  and  there 
fore  they  are  unreal,  argue  our  opponents  ;  for  a  hare's  horn  or  a  castle 
in  the  air  is  not  perceived,  because  it  is  unreal.  It  is,  accordingly,  next 
pointed  out  that  perception  cannot  be  the  sole^  test  of  reality,  because 
there  are  well-known  causes  from  which  even  admittedly  existent  things 
are  not  perceived.  These  causes  are  declared  in  the  next  Karika, 


SAMKBYA-KARIKA. 


Causes  of  failure  of  external  perception  enumerated. 


u  vs  \\ 

Ati-durat,  from  extreme  distance.  N.  B.  —  The  word  Ati  qualifies 
distance  as  well  as  all  the  rest.  *r*?tera  Samipyat,  from  nearness.  *f*spwwM  Indriya- 
ghatat,  from  impairment  of  the  senses.  ^s^reiHra  Manah-anavasthanat,  from 
non-presence  of  mind.  gte^ira  Sauksmyat,  from  fineness,  sq^^ra  Vyavadhanat, 
from  intervention.  sjn^ira  Abhibhavat,  from  suppression  by  others.  wirfiifrcw 
Samana-abhiharat,  from  intermixture  with  likes.  ^  Cha,  and  others. 

VII.  (Apprehension  of  ev^en  existing  things  may  not 
take  place)  through  extreme  remoteness,  nearness,  impair 
ment  of  the  senses,  non-presence  of  the  mind,  extreme  fine 
ness,  intervention,  suppression  by  other  matters,  intermix 
ture  with  likes,  and  other  causes. 

Why  Prakriti  is  not  an  object  of  perception. 


I)  q  U 


Sauksmyat,  from  extreme  fineness.  ci^w^f:  Tat-anupalabdhifc, 
non-apprehension  thereof,  i.e.,  of  Prakriti.  ^  Na,  not.  SR^m  Abhavat,  from 
non-existence.  «m$i:  K4rya-tab,  from  effects.  ?T|W^:  Tat-upalabdheh,  because 
of  the  apprehension  thereof.  *t^  Mahat-adi,  Mahat  and  the  rest.  ?m  Tat,  that. 
*  Cha,  and.  ^  Karyam,  effect.  i*&fimi  Prakriti-  sarftpam,  similar  to  Prakriti. 
^?*  Virupam,  dissimilar,  'w  Cha,  and. 

VIII.  From  extreme  fineness  is  the  non-apprehension 
of  Prakriti,  and  not  from  her  non-existence,  because  there  is 
apprehension  of  her  from  the,  effect.  And  that  effect  is 
Mahat,  etc.,  similar  and  dissimilar  to  Prakriti. 

20.  "  Similar  and  dissimilar  to   Prakriti  "  :    for  these  resemblances 
and  differences,  see  Karikas  X  and  XI. 

21.  But  from  the   effects,  a  mere   cause  or   cause  in  the  abstract  is 
deduced,  and  not  its  nature,  and,  on  this  point,  different  conclusions  have 
been   arrived   at   by    different   thinkers.       Thus,     some    Buddhists,    say 
that  the  existent   is   produced  from  the   non-existent  ;    e.g.,  from  the  non- 
existence,  by  destruction,  of  the   seed   is  produced   the  sprout.     2.  Some, 
the  Vedantins,  say  that  the  effects   are   the   Vivarta   or  revolution  of    one 


8  KAMKHYA-KARIKA* 

— . , : — i '       •     ••   • " 

single  existent  thing,  and  are  not  themselves  ultimately  real.  3.  Some, 
the  Vai«fe§ikas,  Naiyayikas,  etc.,  say  that  from  the  existent,  i.e.,  the  Ulti 
mate  Atoms,  is  produced  the  non-existent.  4.  The  elders,  the  Samkhyas, 
say  that  from  the  existent  is  produced  the  existent.  Of  these,  on  the  first 
three  alternatives,  the  Pradhana  is  not  established.  For  the  character 
istic  of  being  the  Pradhana,  i.e.,  that  in  which  all  things  are  contained, 
and  of  being  of  the  nature  of  Sattva,  Rajas  and  Tamas,  belonging  to  the 
Cause  of  the  World,  consists  in  being  of  the  nature  of  Sound  and  all 
other  Par  in  a  ma  or  transformations,  the  essences  of  which  possess  the 
distinctions  of  pleasure,  pain,  and  bewilderment.  Now,  if  the  existent 
is  to  be  produced  from  the  non-existent,  how  can  a  non-existent,  name 
less,  form-less  cause  possess  the  nature  of  Sound,  etc.,  in  the  form  of 
pleasure,  etc.  ?  for  there  is  no  proof  of  the  identity  of  nature  between  the 
existent  and  the  non-existent.  If,  again,  the  diversity  of  Sound,  etc., 
is  the  Vivarta  of  a  single  existent  thing,  still  it  would  not  follow  that  the 
existent  is  produced  from  the  existent.  For  a  one  without  a  second 
cannot  have  identity  of  nature  with  the  diversity ;  on  the  contrary,  the 
apprehension  of  the  non-diversity  under  the  characteristic  of  the  diversity 
is  an  error  pure  and  simple-  With  those  also,  again,  namely  Kanada, 
Gotama,  and  others,  who  say  that  it  is  from  the  existent  that  the  non 
existent  is  produced,  the  cause  cannot  be  of  the  nature  of  the  effect, 
because  there  is  no  proof  of  the  unity  of  the  existent  and  the  non-existent. 
Hence  there  can  be  no  proof  of  the  Pradhana  on  these  theories.  In  order, 
therefore,  to  establish  the  existence  of  the  Pradhana,  the  next  Karika 
determines  that  the  effect  must  be  existent  from  before  its  "  productfon." 

Effects  pre-exist  in  their  causes. 


II  *.  II 

A-sat-a-karagat,    from   the  non-effectuation  of  the  non-existent. 
Upadana-grahagat,^from   the   selection   of    material    for  the   effect. 
Sarva-sambhava-abhavat,   from    the  absence   of    the   production  of 


every  thing  by  every  means.  SRffsr  Saktasya,  of  the  competent,  spmrcsmi  Sakya- 
karagat,  from  the  effectuation  of  the  producible,  ^r^mr^m  Karapa-bhavat,  from 
the  nature  of  the  cause,  wi  Sat,  existent,  w^  Karyam,  effect. 

IX.  The  effect  is  ever  existent,  because  that  which  is 
non-existent,  can  by  no  means  be  brought  into  existence  ; 
because  effects  take  adequate  material  causes  ;  because  all 


SAMKHYA-KARIKA. 


things  are  not  produced  from  all  causes  ;  because  a  compe 
tent  cause  can  effect  that  only  for  which  it  is  competent;  and 
also  because  the  effect  possesses  the  nature  of  the  cause. 

ANNOTATION. 

22.     That  which  is  non-existent,  etc. :  e.g.  a  hare's  horn. 

Effects  take,  etc. :  Oil,  for  instance,  can  be  produced  from  mustard 
seeds,  but  not  a  piece  of  cloth. 

All  things  are  not  produced,  etc.  :  Did  effects  not  pre-exist  in  their 
causes,  then,  in  mustard  seeds,  for  example,  there  would  be  non-existence 
of  a  piece  of  cloth,  a  jar,  in  fact,  of  every  other  thing  as  w6ll  as  of  oil, 
and  it  would  be  quite  as  easy  to  produce  a  piece  of  cloth,  a  jar,  and  all 
the  rest  from  them  as  it  is  to  produce  oil.  But  such  is  not  the  case. 

A  competent  cause  can  effect,  etc. :  Competency  means  potentiality, 
the  unmanifested  state  of  the  effect.  A  lump  of  clay,  for  instance,  is 
potentially  a  jar;  in  it  the  jar  lies  hidden,  unmanifested  ;  it  is  manifested 
in  the  form  of  the  jar  by  the  operation  of  the  potter. 

The  effect  possesses  the  nature,  etc.  :  The  colour,  weight,  touch,  etc. 
of -a  piece  of  cloth  for  instance,  are  the  colour,  weight,  touch,  etc.,  of  the 
threads  from  which  it  is  made.  This  could, not  have  been  so,  were  not 
cause  and  effect  identical  in  essence. 

The  Manifest  and  the  Unmanifest  contrasted. 


^<wj  Hetu-mat,  possessing  or  depending  on  a  cause.  ^RrJi^  A-nityam,  non- 
eternal,  perishable,  ««*iiR  A-vyapi,  unpervading,  finite.  sf?fi*n?.  Sakriyam,  mobile, 
mutable-  ^**t  Anekam,  multitudinous,  manifold.  wfsra  Asritam,  supported,  depend 
ent.  B»f!  Lingam,  mergent,  mark,  grerog  Savayavam,  made  up  of  parts.  mzv?m' 
Para -tan  tram,  subordinate,  sq^s*  Vyaktam,  jthe  manifested.  raMfld^  Viparitam, 
the  reverse.  ^-n^  A- Vyaktam,  the  unmanifested. 

X.  The  Manifest  is  producible^  non-enternal,  non-per 
vading,  mobile,  multiform,  dependent,  (serving  as)  the  mark 
(of  inference),  a  combination  of  parts,  subordinate.  The  Un 
manifest  is  the  reverse  (of  this). 

ANNOTATION. 

23.    Sakriya,  migratory  :  Buddhi  and  the  rest  leave,  one  after  another, 
bodies  which  they,  had  taken  up  and  enter   into  other  bodies :  this  is  their 

movement.     The  movement  of  the. Body,  Earth,  etc.,  is  indeed  well-known. 
2 


10  SAMkHYA-KAtilkA. 

Aneka,  multitudinous  :  There  are  as  many  of  them  as  there  are  Puru- 
§as  ;  Earth  and  the  rest  also  are  multiplied  according  to  the  differences  of 
Bodies,  jars,  etc. 

Asrita,  supported  :    They  are  supported  by  their  respective  causes. 

Linga,  mergent,  mark  :  Buddhi  and  the  rest  are  marks  of  the  Pra 
dhana.  Gaudapada  explains  the  word  to  mean  "  subject  to  dissolution."  At 
the  time  of  the  Dissolution  the  five  Great  Elements  merge  into  the  Tan- 
matras,  and  these  together  with  the  eleven  Indrivas,  into  Ahamkara,  and 
this,  into  Buddhi  ;  and  that  merges  into  the  Pradhana. 

Paratantra,  subordinate:  Buddhi,  for  instance,  when  it  has  to  produce 
its  own  effect,  namely,  Ahamkara,  has  to  draw  upon  Prakriti  ;  otherwise, 
being  weak  or  exhausted,  it  will  not  be  able  to  produce  Ahamkara.  Simi 
larly,  by  Ahamkara  and  the  rest  also  is  awaited  the  inflow  of  Prakriti 
in  the  production  of  their  own  effects. 

24.  Viparita,  reverse  :  The  Unmanifest  is  causeless,  eternal,  all 
pervading,  motion-less,  single,  self-  sustained,  the  subject  of  the  mark  or 
non-mergent,  part-less,  and  supreme. 

The  Manifest,  the  Unwanifest  and  the  Knower  contrasted  and  compared. 

faro 


SI^fR  rlH^TT  ^  3*TT^  II  ^  II 

Tri-gunam,  having  or  constituted  by  the  three  Qunas,  viz.,  Sattva, 
Rajas,  and  Tamas.  «ft^  A-viveki,  non-discriminative,  fow:  Visayah,  objective. 
*i*nwpj  Samanyam,  common,  sfari  A-chetanam,  non-intelligent.  Ji^^R  Prasava- 
dharmi,  prolific,  aws*  Vyaktam,  the  Manifest.  ?WT  Tatha,  so.  JTOR  Pradhanam, 
the  Pradhana,  Prakriti.  n^fm:  Tat-viparitalj,  the  reverse  of  this.  TOT  Tath^,,  so. 
<r  Cha,  yet.  3^  Puman,  Purusa. 

XI.  The  Manifest  is  constituted  by  the  three 
Gunas,  is  non-discriminative,  objective,  common,  non-  intel 
ligent,  prolific.  So  is  also  the  Pradhana.  Purusa  is  the 
reverse  of  them  both  (in  these  respects),  and  yet  is  similar 
(to  the  Pradhana  and  also  to  the  Manifest  in  those  other 
respects  mentioned  in  the  preceding  Karika.) 

ANNOTATION. 

25.  A-vivehi  :  Just  as  the  Pradhana  is  not  discriminated  from  itself, 
even  so  are  not  Mahat  and  the  rest  also  discriminated  from  the  Pradhana, 
because  of  their  essential  identity.  Or,  A-viveka  is  to  create  by  uniting 

II 


SAMKBYA-KARIKJL.  11 


together,  for  none  of  them  singly  are  capable  of  producing  their  own  effects, 
but,  on  the  contrary,  only  by  uniting  together. 

Vi$aya  '  because  it  is  the  Object  as  distinguished  from  the  Subject, 
to  be  apprehended  and  made  use  of  by  all  Purusas  alike. 

26.  Tatha  cha,  and  yet  is  similar  :  that  is,  as  the  Pradhana  is,  in 
the  preceding  Karika,  declared  to  be  without  cause,  etc.,  such  is  Purusa. 
Thus,  "  *  *  *  The  Manifest  is  multitudinous  ;  the  Unmanifest  is  single  ; 
so  is  Purusa  also  single.0  *  *  "  (Gaudapada)."  "  But  when  similarity  to 
the  Pradhana  belongs  to  Purusa  in  respect  of  non-causability,  eternality, 
etc.,  and  likewise  multiplicity  is  his  similarity  to  the  Manifest,  how  is  it 
said  that  "  the  reverse  of  them  both  is  Purusa  ?  To  this,  it  is  replied  :  Tatha 
cha  :  Cha  has  the  sense  of  Api,  even,  yet  ;  although  there  is  similarity  in 
respect  of  non-causability,  etc.,  yet  he  possesses  dissimilarity  in  respect 
of  not  being  constituted  by  the  three  Gunas,  etc.  Such  is  the  meaning  " 
(Vachaspati  MitJra).  "  The  S.  Chandrika  confirms  the  interpretation  : 
1  The  phrase  tathd  cha  implies  that  (soul)  is  analogous  to  the  undiscrete 
principle  in  non-causability  and  the  rest,  and  analogous  to  discrete  prin 
ciples  in  manifold  enumeration.'  This  is,  in  fact,  the  Samkhya  doctrine, 
as  subsequently  laid  down  by  the  text,  ver.  18,  and  is  conformable  to  the 
Sutra  of  Kapila  ;  '  Multitude  of  souls  is  proved  by  variety  of  condition  '  : 
that  is,  '  the  virtuous  are  born  again  in  heaven,  the  wicked  are  regenerated 
in  hell  ;  the  fool  wanders  in  error,  the  wise  man  is  set  free.'  Either,  there 
fore,  Gaudapada  has  made  a  mistake,  or  by  his  eka  is  to  be  understood, 
not  that  soul  in  general  is  one  only,  but  that  it  is  single,  or  several,  in 
its  different  migrations  ;  or,  as  Mr.  Colebrooke  renders  it  (R.A.S.  Trans. 
vol.  I.  p.  31)  *  individual.'  So  in  the  Sutras  it  is  said  '  that  there  may  be 
various  unions  of  one  soul,  according  to  difference  of  receptacle,  as  the 
etherial  element  may  be  confined  in  a  variety  of  vessels.'  This  singleness 
of  soul  applies  therefore  to  that  particular  soul  which  is  subjected  to  its 
own  varied  course  of  birth,  death,  bondage,  and  liberation  ;  for,  as  the 
commentator  observes,  *  one  soul  is  torn,  not  another  (in  a  regenerated 
body)  '  The  singleness  of  soul,  therefore,  as  asserted  by  Gaudapada,  is  no 
doubt  to  be  understood  in  this  sense."  (Wilson). 

Characteristics  of  the  Gunas  described. 

iTf  iH«i+i  i  ^  i  :  i 

H   R  n 


w  :    Priti-apriti-visada-atmakah,  of  the  nature   of  pleasure,  pain 


and  dulness.    n*iamqffiRwi>qf  :  Prakasa-pravritti-niyama-arthafy   adapted   to  serving 


12  SAMKHYA-KARIKA. 


. 

~~ 


the  purpose  of,   or    capable  of  causing,   illumination,  activity,  and,   restraint. 

Anya-anya-abhibhava-asraya-janana-mithuna-vrittayah, 


Laving  mutual  domination,  dependence,  production,  consociation,  and  co-existence. 
Vachaspati  does  not  consider  the  term  Vritti  as  a  distinct  condition  :  he  in 
terprets  it  as  Kriya,  act,  operation  or  function,  and  compounds  it  with  each  of 
the  foregoing  terms.  ^  Cha,  and.  JTOT :  Gunah,  the  Gunas. 

XII.  The  Gunas  possess  the  nature  of  pleasure,  pain 
and  dulness ;  serve  the  purpose  of  illumination,  activity, 
and  restraint ;  and  perform  the  function  of  mutual  domina 
tion,  dependence,  production,  and  consociation. 

ANNOTATION. 

27.  Possess   the  nature,  etc  :     Hereby   the  intrinsic  forms  of   the 
Gunas  Sattva,  Rajas,  and  Tamas   are   declared.     The  force   of   the  word 
Atma,  nature,  is  that  it  is  a   reply    to   those   who  think   that   pleasure   is 
nothing    but   absence    of   pain,    and    that  pain   is  nothing  but  absence  of 
pleasure.     For  Atma  denotes  being5  something  positive,  and  is  a  negation 
of  non-being. 

28.  Serve  the  purpose,  etc :     Hereby   the  purposes   served  by   the 
Gunas   respectively  are  declared.     Artha   means  prayojana   or  purpose. 
Gaudapada    interprets  the    term   in     the  sense   of  competency,    fitness, 
capability. 

29.  Perform  the  functions,  etc  :     Hereby  the  various   operations  of 
the  Gunas  are  declared. 

Dependence  :  Although  dependence,  that  ie,  co-existence  by  the 
relation  of  the  container  and  the  contained  is  not  possible,  still  that  is 
the  support  of  that,  the  operation  of  which  depends  upon  it.  Thus, 
Sattva,  by  resting  on  activity  and  restraint,  subserves  Rajas  and  Tamas 
with  illumination  ;  Rajas,  by  resting  on  illumination  and  restraint,  sub 
serves  Sattva  and  Tamas  with  activity  ;  Tamas,  by  resting  on  illumination 
and  activity,  subserves  Sattva  and  Rajas  with  restraint. 

Production:  Production  is  transformation,  and  it  is  of  the  same 
form  as  the  Gunas  ;  hence  causability  is  not  entailed,  owing  to  the  absence 
of  a  cause  which  is  a  different  Tattva.  Neither  is  non-eternality  entailed, 
owing  to  the  absence  of  dissolution  into  a  different  Tattva. 

Consociation:  That  is,  the  Gunas  are  constant  companions  of  one 
another. 

Co-existence  is  explained  by  Guadapada  thus  :  As  a  beautiful  and 
amiable  woman,  who  is  a  source  of  delight  to  every  one  else,  is  the  cause 


SAMKHYA-KARIKA.  13 

of  misery  to  the  other  wives  of  her  husband,  and  of  bewilderment  to  the 
dissolute ;  so  does  Sattva  produce  the  functions  of  Rajas  and  Tamas. 
Asa  king,  assiduous  in  protecting  his  people,  and  curbing  the  profligate, 
is  the  cause  of  happiness  to  the  good,  of  misery  and  mortification  to  the 
wicked  ;  so  does  Rajas  produce  the  functions  of  Sattva  and  Tamas. 
Similarly,  Tamas  produces  the  functions  of  Sattva  and  Rajas,  as  clouds, 
overshadowing  the  heavens,  cause  delight  upon  earth,  animate  by  their 
rain  the  active  labours  of  the  husbandman,  and  overwhelm  absent 
lovers  with  despair.  In  this  manner,  the  Gnnas  perform  the  functions  of 
one  another. 

The  Co-operation  of  the  Gun  as  explained. 


:ll  U  » 

«*  Sattvam,  sattva.  ^  Laghu,  alleviating,  light.  H«*IWJ;  Prakasakam, 
enlightening,  illuminating.  ??1  Istam,  desired,  considered.  3^^  Upastam- 
bhakam,  urgent,  exciting.  TO  Chalam,  versatile,  restless.  *  Cha,  and.  ^ :  Rajal}, 
rajas.  5^  Guru,  heavy.  3^3^  Varanakam  enveloping,  covering,  obscuring. 
*3  Eva,  to  he  sure.  ?ro:  Tamali,  tamas.  U$TO  Pradipa-vat,  like  a  lamp.  ^  Oha, 
and.  swci :  ArtLa-tah,  for  a  purpose.  ?fa:  Vrittih,  function,  operation. 

XIII.  Sattva  is  considered  to  be  light  and  illu 
minating,  and  Eajas,  to  be  exciting  and  restless,  and  Tamas, 
to  be  indeed  heavy  and  enveloping.  Like  a  lamp  (consisting 
of  oil,  wick,  and  fire),  they  co-operate  for  a  (common)  purpose 
(by  union  of  contraries). 

ANNOTATION. 

30.  Contraries   need    not    necessarily  oppose  and   counteract   one 
another.     As  co-operation  of  contraries' for  a  common  purpose   is   seen   in 
the  case  of  a  lamp,  even  so  is  it  the  case  with  the  Gunas  which   co-operate 
with    one   another   to  serve   a  common    purpose,    viz.,  the  experience  and 
release  of  Purusa. 

31.  Granted,   one  may  say,    that   non-discriminativeness,  etc.,  are 
proved  by   perception  in    the  case  of  Earth,    etc.,  which   are   objects   of 
perception  ;  but  how  can  Sattva,  etc.,  which  are  not  objects  of  perception, 
be   said   to  be    non-discriminative,    objective,   common,    non-intelligent, 
and   prolific  (Karika   XI)  ?      To   this,  the   reply   is   given   in   the   next 


14  SAMKHYA-KARIKA. 


Proof  of  the  properties  of  the  Unmanifest. 


A-viveki-adeh,  of  non-discriminativeness,  etc.  f^%  :  Siddhih, 
proof.  ??V*jra  Traigunyat,  from  their  being  constituted  by  the  three  Gunas  or 
from  their  manifesting  the  three  qualities  of  pleasure,  pain,  and  dulness. 
ri  Tat-viparyaya-abhavat,  from  the  absence  of  non-discriminativeness,  etc., 


in  the  reverse  thereof*  i.e.,  of  the  Manifest  and  the  Unmanifest,  i.e.,  Purusa  ; 
from  the  absence  of  the  reverse  of  Traigunya  in  the  Unmanifest  ;  from  the 
absence  of  the  divergence  or  non  concomitance  or  disagreement  between  the 
properties  in  question  and  the  Manifest  and  the  Unmanifest  or  the  Unmanifest 
only.  thiw<JjicH<hrcmi  Kara$a-guna-atmaka-tvat,  from  the  effect's  containing  the  attri 
butes  of  the  cause,  *firfcr  Karyasya,  of  the  effect.  ^^^  A-Vyaktam,  the  Unmanifest. 
9irc  Api,  also.  fss*i  Siddham,  proved,  established. 

XIV.  The  proof  of  non-discriminativeness,  and  the 
rest  (in  the  Manifest  and  the  Unmanifest)  is  from  their  be 
ing  constituted  by  the  three  Gunas  and  from  absence  of  their 
non-concomitance.  From  the  effect  possessing  the  attributes 
of  the  cause  is  proved  the  Unmanifest  also. 

ANNOTATION. 

32.  According  to  Vachaspati,  the  proof  of  non-discriminativeness 
and  tbe  rest  is  by  tbe  method  of  agreement,  thus  ;  — 

Whatever  possesses  pleasure,  pain,  and  dulness,  is  non-discrimina 
tive,  etc., 

As,  for  instance,  are  the  objects  of  the  senses  ; 

Prakriti,  Mabat,  etc.,  possess  pleasure,  pain,  and  dulness  ; 

Tbey  are,  therefore,  non-discriminative,  etc  : 
and  also  by  tbe  method  of  difference,  thus  :  — 

Whatever  is  not  non-discriminative,  etc.,  does  not  possess  pleasure, 
pain  and  dulness, 

As,  for  instance,  is  tbe  case  with  Purusa. 

But  Prakriti,  Mabat,  etc.,  possess  pleasure,  pain,  and  dulness  ; 

They  are,  therefore,  not-non-discriminative,  etc. 

But  tbe  proof  of  these  attributes  must  be  subject  to  tbe  proof  of  their 
alleged  substratum.  How  then  is  this,  namely,  tbe  Pradhana  proved  ? 
Thus  :  Tbe  effect  characterised  as  Mahat,  etc.,  possessing  the  form  of 
pleasure,  pain,  and  dulness,  must  have  tbe  nature  or  essence  of  pleasure, 


SAMKRYA-KAR1KA.  15 

pain,  and  dulness  inhereing  in  its  own  cause  ;  so  that  its  cause,  possessing 
the  nature  of  pleasure,  pain,  and  dulness,  that  is,  the  Pradhana  Unmani- 
fest,  is  established. 

33.  Gaudapada's  interpretation  is  different  from  the  above.  Ac 
cording  to  him,  the  properties  of  non-discriminativeness,  etc.,  are  proved  in 
the  Manifest  from  their  being  constituted  by  the  three  Gunas,  through  the 
absence  of  divergence,  that  is,  because  the  properties  of  non-discriminative- 
ness,  etc.,  have  never  been  found  except  in  conjunction  with  the  property 
of  being  constituted  by  the  three  Gunas.  And  their  existence  in  the 
Un  manifest  is  proved  from  the  absence  of  divergence,  that  is,  from  the 
invariable  atid  universal  concomitance  of  the  Manifest  and  the  Unmani- 
fest  :  just  as,  wherever  there  is  the  cloth,  there  are  the  yarns  ;  similarly 
whoever  sees  the  Manifest,  sees  the  Unmanifest  as  well  ;  and  also  from  the 
effect  possessing  the  nature  of  the  cause  :  thus,  from  the  effect,  viz.,  Mahat 
and  the  rest  which  are  non-discriminative,  objective,  common,  non-in 
telligent,  and  prolific,  is  proved  that  their  cause,  namely,  the  Unmanifest, 
possesses  the  same  properties. 

Proof  of  the  Unmanifest. 


II 


rfrf 


rr 


r  Bhedanam,  of  differentiated  particulars,  specific  objects,  of  the  evolutes, 
Mahat  and  the  rest.  tfxircra  Parimanat,  from  finiteness,  measurableness.  gfFerara 
Samanvayat,  from  homogeneity,  agreement,  sfci:  Sakti-tafr,  from  power.  *?$: 
Pravrittefr,  from  activity,  from  production.  ^  Cha,  and.  ^n?imn^raHT^m  Karana-karya- 
bibhagat,  from  differentiation  of  cause  and^  effect.  sif^Fmi  A-vibhagat,  from  non- 
differentiation,  from  reunion,  tsa**^  Vaisvarupasya,  of  the  formal  Universe.  *K<U^ 
Karanam,  cause.  «f%»  A.sti,  exists.  3i*Kfi'  A-Vyaktam,  Unrnanifest.  V3r$  Pravartate, 
energises,  operates,  f^rcm:  Tri-guna-tah,  through  or  of  the  three  Gunas,  Sattva, 
Rajas,  and  Tamas.  ^^  Sam-udayat,  through  combination,  co-operation.  ^  Cha, 
and.  qfaifmH:  Parinama-ta^,  through  transformation,  ^^n  Salila-vat,  like  water* 
nfitafii^wrnflifcSfrRi  Prati-prati-gana-asraya-visesat,  through  differences  according  to 
the  differences  of  the  several  receptacles  of  the  Gunas,  or  differences  created  by 
the  Gunas  severally  based  on  the  principal  Guna. 

XV-XVI.  Of  the  particulars  (e.g.,  Mahat  and  all  the 
rest  down  to  the  earth),  there  exists  an  Unmanifest  cause  : 


16  SAttKBYA-RARlKA. 


because  the  particulars  are  finite ;  because  they  are  homo 
geneous  ;  because  production  is  through  power ;  because 
there  is  differentiation  of  effect  from  cause  or  difference  of 
cause  and  effect ;  and  because  there  is  reunion  of  the  multi 
form  effect  with  the  cause. 

It  operates,  in  the  form  of  the  three  Gunas  and  by 
combination,  undergoing  transformation,  (diversified)  accord 
ing  to  the  differences  severally  of  the  other  Gunas  depend 
ing  on  the  principal  Guna. 

ANNOTATION. 

34.  Because     they   are    homogeneous :    Homogeneousness   is   the 
possession  of    a  common  form  among  a  number  of  distinct  individuals. 
The  presence  of  a  common  form  infers  a  common  origin. 

Because  production  is  through  power :  Power  inhering  in  the  cause 
is  nothing  but  the  unmanifested  state  of  the  effect. 

Differentiation  and  reunion :  Discrete  products  of  every  sort  of 
form  from  Mahat  down  to  a  jar,  for  instance,  successively  rise  from  their 
causes  at  the  time  of  creation  and  disappear  into  them  at  the  time  of 
destruction  and  universal  dissolution.  The  ultimate  points  in  the  process 
of  evolution  and  involution  are  one  and  the  same.  It  is  the  absolute 
unmanifested  state  of  a  single  entity.  It  is  called  the  Unmanifest,  the 
Pradhana  and  Prakriti, 

35.  It  operates  etc.  :    The  Gunas  of  which  the  nature  is  to  undergo 
transformation,    never   rest,    even   for   a   moment,    without   transforming 
themselves.     Their  transformation  may  be  homogeneous  or  heterogeneous. 
Homogeneous  transformation  takes  place  during  Pralaya  or   the  period  of 
latency  intervening  Creation  and  Dissolution,  when  Sattva  transforms  as 
Saliva,  Rajas  as  Rajas,  and  Tarn  as  as  Tamas.     Such  is  the  meaning  of  the 
phrase  Tri-guna-tah,  in    the  form  of   the  three   Gunas  severally.     Hetero 
geneous  transformation  takes  place  during  Creation  and  Dissolution.     For 
this,  combination  of   the  Gunas  with  one  another  in  different  proportions 
is  necessary.     Such  combination  is  rendered  possible  by  the  diversified 
activity  of  the  Gunas  in  the  evolution  of  Mahat  and  all  the  rest,  of  which 
each  successive  one  is  more  and  more  specified  than,  and  differentiated 
from,  its  predecessor.     And  this  differentiation  is  brought  about  by  the 
difference   in    the   ratio   in    which  ^the   subsidiaryffGunas   combine   and 
co-operate  with  the  principal  Guna.     Thus,  as  regards  the  eleven  Indriyas 


SAMKHYA-KARIKA.  17 


and  the  five  Tan-matras,  while  Rajas  is  equally  operative  in  the  evolution 
of  both,  the  former  arise  from  Ahamkara  in  which  Sattva  is  predominant 
and  Tamas  is  dormant  ;  whereas  the  latter  arise  from  Ahamkara  in  which 
Tamas  is  predominant  and  Sattva  is  dormant. 

Salila-vat  :  As  simple  water  shed  by  the  clouds,  coming  into  contact 
with  various  situations,  is  modified  as  sweet,  sour,  bitter,  pungent,  or  as 
tringent,  in  the  character  of  the  juice  of  the  cocoa-nut,  palm,  bel,  karanja, 
amalaka,  wood-apple,  etc. 

Proof  of  Purusa. 


\\ 

*iviirmi4r«<M  Samghata-para  artha-tvat,  since  an  aggregate  or  structure  of 
manifold  parts  into  one  whole  is  for  the  sake  of  another  of  a  different  character 
fawf^<raqra  Tri-Guna-adi-viparyayat,  since  there  must  exist  an  entity  in  which 
there  is  the  reverse  of  the  properties  of  being  constituted  by  three  Gunas,  and 
the  rest  mentioned  in  Karika  XL  w%"rm  Adhisthanat,  since  there  must  be 
superintendence  over  Buddhi  and  other  products  of  the  Gunas.  j^ra:  Purusah 
Purusa.  ufa  Asti,  exists,  ^ripff^ra  Bhoktri-bhavat,  since  there  must  be  an 
experiencer  of  pleasure  and  pain.  ^^^'  Kaivalya-artham,  for  the  sake  of  iso 
lation.  H^:  Pravritteh,  since  activity  is.  ^  Oha,  and. 

XVII.  Purusa  exists  :  since  the  aggregate  must  be  for 
the  sake  of  the  non-aggregate  ;  since  there  must  exist  an 
entity  in  which  the  properties  of  being  constituted  by  the 
three  Gunas  and  the  rest  do  not  appear  ;  since  there  must  be 
a  superintendent  ;  since  there  must  be  an  experiencer  ;  and 
since  activity  is  for  the  sake  of  abstraction. 

ANNOTATION. 

36.  Since  there  must  exist  an  entity,  etc.  :  Hereby  is  prevented  the 
inference  of  an  aggregate  by  the  aggregate.  For  all  aggregates  possess 
the  three  Gunas,  whereas  Purusa  is  free  from  them,  as  declared  in  Karika 
XI.  Therefore,  the  entity  for  which  the  aggregate  is,  must  be  a  non- 
aggregate.  And  Purusa  is  a  non-aggregate. 

Proof  of  Multiplicity  of  Purusa. 


I)  ^q  i) 

ri  Janana-marana-karananam,  of  birth,  death,  and  the  instrument 
of  cognition   and   action,    afafawnj     Prati-niyamat,  individual   allotment, 


18  SAMKRYA-KAEIKA. 


A-yugapat, non-simultaneous.  *^'.  Pravritteh,  from  activity  or  occupation.  ^  Cha, 
and.  gwrfr^r  Purusa-bahu-tvam,  multiplicity  of  Purusas.  reg'  Siddham,  estab 
lished.  cfV^^rawnfl  Traigunya-viparyayat,  from  absence  of  the  condition  of  the  three 
Gujjas,  from  diverse  modification  of  the  three  Gunas.  ^  Cha,  and.  ^  Eva, 
verily. 

XVIII.  From  the  individual  allotment  of  birth,  death 
and  the  Instruments,  from  non-simultaneous  activity  (towards 
the  same  end),  and  from  the  diverse  modification  of  the 
three  Gunas,  multitude  of  Purusas  is  verily  established. 

ANNOTATION. 

37.  Birth  consists  in  conjunction  with  body,  Indriya,  Manas, 
AJiairikara,  l^uddhi,  and  experience,  and  death  consists  in  their  aban 
donment.  So  that  they  do  not  entail  the  transformation  of  Purusa.  The 
distribution  of  body  and  the  rest,  which  is  different  in  each  individual 
case,  must  imply  a  plurality  of  Purusas,  as,  otherwise,  on  the  birth  of 
one,  all  would  be  born  and  on  the  death  of  one,  all  would  die. 

Non-simultaneous  activity  towards  the  same  end  :  as,  e.g.,  some  are 
busy  with  virtuous,  others  with  vicious,  actions;  some  cultivate  dispassion, 
others  knowledge. 

Diverse  modification  of  the  three  Gunas :  thus,  though  birth  is 
common  to  all,  one  possessing  Sattva  is  happy,  another  possessing  Rajas, 
is  wretched,  and  a  third  possessing  Tamas,  is  dull. 

Proof  of  the  Nature  of  Purum. 


u  ^  n 

Tasmat,  from  that.  ^  Cha,  and.  forafara  Viparyasat,  from  contrast,  diver 
gence.  %  Siddham,  proved.  ^rri%rg  Saksi-tvam,  to  he  the  witness,  sro  Asya,  of 
this.  WJ^r  Purusa- sya,  of  Purusa. t  ^9  KaiA^alyam,  aloneness,  solitariness. 
iT«R*2r  Madhyasthyam,  indifference,  to  he  the  hystander.  ^5^1  Drastri-tvatn,  to 
he  the  spectator.  ^R^ra:  A-kartvi-bhavah,  non-agent-ship  ^  Cha,  and. 

XIX.     And  from  that  contrast  it   is    proved    that    this 
Purusa  is  witness,  solitary,    indifferent,    spectator,    and  non-, 
agent. 

ANNOTATION. 

38.  That  contrast :  that  is,  Purusa  is  not  constituted  by  the  three 
Gunas,  is  discriminative,  is  not  objective  but  subjective,  is  not  common, 
is  intelligent,  and  is  not  prolific  (see  Karikd  XIV). 


SAMKHYA-KARTKA:  19 


Because  he  is  intelligent  and  subjective,  he  is  spectator  and  wit 
ness.  A  witness  is  one  to  whom  objects  are  shown.  Prakriti  exhibits 
herself  to  Purusa. 

From  his  not  being  constituted  by  the  three  Gunas  follow  his 
solitariness  and  indifference.  For  solitariness  consists  in  the  absolute 
non-existence  of  the  three  sorts  of  pain,  and  indifference  denotes  absence 
of  love  for  pleasure  and  hate  for  pain.  Bat  pleasure  and  pain  are 
properties  of  the  three  Gunas.  And  because  Purusa  is  not  constituted 
by  the  three  Gunas,  he  is  absolutely  free  from  pleasure,  pain  and 
bewilderment. 

And  since  he  is  discriminative  and  non-prolific,  he  is  not  the  agent. 

But  if  .Purusa  is  a  non-agent,  how  does  he  make  determination  ?  as 
I  will  perform  acts  of  merit,  I  will  not  perform  acts  of  demerit  :  hence 
Purusa  must  be  the  agent  ;  neither  is  Purusa  the  agent  ;  —  thus  there  is, 
may  say  our  opponent,  defect  in  both  the  theories.  Accordingly,  the 
seeming  agency  of  Purusa  is  explained  in  the  next  Karika. 

The  agency  of   Purusa  is  not  real,  l)iit  fictitious. 


n  **  n 

<j  Tasmat,  therefore.  wro^Him  Tat-sarnyogat,  from  conjunction  therewith, 
i.e.,  with  the  intelligent  Purusa.  3i%?R  A-chetanara,  the  non-intelligent.  3rHiem 
Chetana-vat,  possessing  intelligence.  ^  Iva,  like,  as  if.  rag.^  Lingam,  the  effect, 
Mahat  and  the  rest,  wra'c^  Guna-kartri-tve,  in  the  case  of  the  agency  of  the 
Gunas.  ^  Cha,  and.  ?WT  Tatha,  likewise.  ^  Karta,  agent.  ^  Iva,  like,  as  if. 
Bhavati,  becomes,  g^refa:  Udasiaafc,  indifferent,  i.e.,  Purusa. 


XX.  Therefore  (the  inference  that  intelligence  and 
agency  belong  to  one  and  the  same  subject  is  a  mistake.) 
Through  conjunction  with  Purusa,  the  non-intelligent  Effect 
appears  as  if  it  were  intelligent,  and  although  agency  is  of 
the  Gunas,  the  indifferent  (Purusa)  appears,  in  the  same 
way,  as  if  he  were  the  agent. 

39.  Lingam  here  denotes  Mahat,    Ahamkaia,    Manas   and   the   five 
Tan-matras.     See  Kar,ika  XL. 

40.  The   confusion    then   is   due  to  the  con  junction  -of  Prakriti  and 
Purusa.     And   conjunction   means   mutual    approach     and   co-operation, 


20  SAMKHVA-KARIKA. 


which  necessarily  pre-supposes  some  object  or  purpose  to  be  achieved. 
That  purpose  can  be  nothing  but  mutual  benefit,  as  declared  in  the 
following  Karika. 

Object  of  the  conjunction  of  Purusa  and  Prakriti. 


:  \\H\\\ 

Purusa-sya,  of  Purusa.  ^SRI*!'  Darsana-artham,  for  the  sake  of  seeing 
or  exhibition,  ffa^irzr'  Kaivalya-artham,  for  the  sake  of  separation,  rrar  Tatha, 
likewise.  iwro  Pradhana-sya,  of  the  Pradhana.  tre*^^  Pangu-andha-vat,  like 
that  of  the  halt  and  the  blind.  3^1:  Ubhayoh,  of  both.  «fi  Api,  also,  iftm: 
Samyogah,  conjunction.  cffififi:  Tat-kritah,  originated  by  that,  i.e.,  conjunction. 
m:  Sargajj,  creation,  evolution. 

XXI.  The  conjunction  of  Purusa  and  the  Pradhana 
is,  like  that  of  the  halt  and  the  blind,  for  mutual  benefit, 
that  is,  for  the  exhibition  of  the  Pradhana  to  Purusa  and 
for  the  isolation  of  Purusa.  From  this  conjunction  proceeds 
Creation. 

ANNOTATION. 

41.  The  halt  and-the  blind  :  "  As  a  lame  man  and  a  blind  man, 
deserted  by  their  fellow-travellers,  who,  in  making  their  way  with  difficulty 
through  a  forest,  had  been  dispersed  by  robbers,  happening  to  encounter 
each  other,  and  entering  into  conversation  so  as  to  inspire  mutual 
confidence,  agreed  -to  divide  between  them  the  duties  of  walking  and  of 
seeing  ;  accordingly  the  lame  man  was  mounted  on  the  blind  man's 
shoulders,  and  was  thus  carried  on  his  journey,  whilst  the  blind  man  was 
enabled  to  pursue  his  route  by  'the  directions  of  his  companion.  In  the 
same  manner,  the  faculty  of  seeing  is  in  soul,  not  that  of  moving  ;  it  is 
like  the  lame  man  :  the  faculty  of  moving,  but  not  of  seeing,  is  in  nature  ; 
which  resembles,  therefore,  the  blind  man.  Further,  as  a  separation  takes 
place  between  the  lame  man  and  the  blind  man,  when  their  mutual  object 
is  accomplished,  and  they  have  reached  their  journey's  end,  so  nature, 
having  effected  the  liberation  of  soul,  ceases  to  act  ;  and  soul,  having 
contemplated  nature,  obtains  abstractedness  ;  and,  consequently,  their 
respective  purposes  being  effected,  the  connexion  between  them  is 
dissolved."  —  Gaudapada's  Bhasya,  translated  by  Wilson. 


SAMRBYA-KimKA.  21 


The  Evolutions  of  Prakriti  and  the  order  of  their  evolution  stated. 


u^rn:  Prakriteh,  from  Prakriti.  i*r«|  Malmn,  Mahat.  fifj;  Tatah,  thence,  from 
Maliat.  gjfsfin::  Ahamharat,  Abamkara.  crc^ffij  Tasmat,  therefrom,  from  Ahamkara. 
iw:  Ganah,  set,  group,  series.  ^  Cha,  and.  wzm:  So^asakafc,  sixteenfold.  fl^ra 
Tasmat,  from  that,  wq  Api,  again.  ^ifWfl  Sodasakat,  from  sixteenfold.  vspn: 
Paficha-bhyafr,  from  the  five,  ^  H^rR  Pancha  bhfttani,  the  five  gross  elements. 

XXII.  From  Prakriti  (evolves)  Maliat  ;  thence,  Aham- 
kara  ;  and  from  this,  the  sixteenfold  set  ;  from  five,  again, 
among  the  sixteenfold,  the  five  Elements. 

ANNOTATION. 

42.  The   sixteenfold  set  :    that    is,  the  eleven  Indriyas  and  the  five 
Tan-matras.     From  five,  etc  :  that  is,  from  the  lower  five  among  the  sixteen, 
that  is,  the  five  Tan-matras. 

Five  Elements  :  viz.,  Ether,  Air,  Fire,  Water  and  Earth. 

43.  The  synonyms  of  Prakriti  are  Pradhana,  that  in  which  all  things 
are  contained,   Brahma,  that  which   expands,    A-vyakta,  the   unmanifest, 
Bahu-dhanaka,   that  in   which   manifold  things  are  contained,  Maya,  that 
which  measures  or  limits. 

The  synonyms  of  Mahat  are  Buddhi,  that  which  makes  things  known, 
Asuri,  probably  Chheda-bheda-adi-atrnika  as  in  the  medical  science,  that  is, 
that  which  causes  separation,  differentiation,  etc.,  Mati,  that  by  which 
things  are  understood,  Khyati,  that  by  which  things  are  manifested, 
Jnana,  that  by  which  knowledge  is  acquired,  Prajna,  that  by  which  per 
fect  knowledge  is  obtained. 

The  synonyms  of  Ahamkara  are  Bhuta-adi,  the  origin  of  the  Bhutas 
or  elements,  Vaikrita,  the  modified,  Taijasa,  partaking  of  Tejas,  i.e.f 
Rajas,  Abhimana,  self-consciousness. 

By  Tattva  is  meant  the  Tva,  i.e.,  condition  or  existence  of  Tat, 
or  that  by  which  all  the  three  worlds  are  pervaded.  Prakriti,  Mahat, 
Ahamkara,  Manas,  the  Indriyas,  the  Tan-matras  and  the  Elements  are  then 
the  physical  and  metaphysical  existences,  realities,  or  principles  pervading 
all  the  three  worlds. 


SAMKHYA-KARIKA. 


Buddhi  and  its  modifications  described. 


I)  ^  U 

:  Adhyavasayah,  ascertainment.  ^fg:  Buddhih,  Mahat,  Buddhi. 
Dbarmah,  virtue,  merit.  irr^Jn  an  am,  knowledge.  facro:  Viragah,  dispassion. 
Aisvaryam,  lordliness,  power.  *rf?^  Sattvikam,  partaking  of  Sattva.  ^|^  Etata- 
rupam,  its  forms.  flTW*  Tamasam,  partaking  of  Tamas.  ^^m  Asm&t,  from  this. 
fsrow?^  "Viparyastam,  the  reverse. 

XXIIII.  Ascertainment  is  Buddhi.  Virtue,  know 
ledge,  dispassion  and  power  are  its  forms  or  manifestations 
or  modifications,  partaking  of  Sattva.  Those  partaking  of 
Tamas,  are  the  reverse  of  these. 

ANNOTATION. 

44.  Ascertainment  is  Buddhi  :  this  statement  in  apposition  is 
intended  to  teach  that  there  is  no  difference  between  the  function  and  the 
fuctionary. 

Ascertainment  is  to  arrive  at  the  certainty  that  this  is  a  jar,  this  I 
will  do,  etc.,  which  is  above  the  stage  of  doubt,  differentiation,  assimila 
tion,  and  deliberation. 

Virtue  is  that  which  is  the  cause  of  happiness  and  release, 
and  includes  the  fruits  of  sacrifices  and  of  the  practice  of  Yoga  as 
taught  by  Patanjali. 

Knowledge  is  the  manfestation  of  the  discrimination  between  Pra- 
kriti  and  Purusa. 

Dispassion  is  absence  of  Raga  or  passion.  It  has  four  names  :  the  name 
of  Yatamana,  Vyatireka,  Ekendriya.  and  Vasikara.  Passion  and  the  like, 
which  act  like  dyes  of  different  hues,  reside  in  the  Chitta  or  the  Retentive 
Faculty.  By  them  the  Indriyas,  the  Powers  of  Cognition  and  Action,  are 
employed  on  their  respective  objects.  Now,  the  endevour,  i.e.,  the  putting 
forth  of  energy  for  the  purpose  of  boiling  down  and  dissolving  them,  with 
the  desire  that  the  Indriyas  may  not  go  out  to  the  objects,  is  designated 
as  Yatamana.  And  when  the  boiling  is  once  begun,  some  passions  will 
become  boiled,  while  others  will  be  in  the  course  of  being  boiled.  In  that 
stage,  the  relation  of  before  and  after  thus  coming  into  existence,  the 
ascertainment  of  the  boiled  by  means  of  their  discrimination  from  those 
that  are  in  the  course  of  being  boiled,  is  designated  as  Vyatireka.  They 
being  thus  disabled  to  excite  the  Indriyas  to  activity,  the  persistence 


SAMKHYA-KARIKA.  23 


of  the  boiled  passions  in  the  mind  in  the  form  of  mere  longing,  is 
designated  as  Ekendriya  The  surcease  of  even  the  mere  longing  in  regard 
to  sensible  and  scriptural  objects  of  enjoyment,  even  though  they  be  near  at 
hand,  which,  in  its  appearance,  is  subsequent  to  the  first  three  stages,  is 
designated  as  Va&kara.  —  Vfichaspati. 

Power  is  will-power  or  thought-power,  whereby  a  Yogin  becomes  at 
will  light  as  a  leaf  or  heavy  as  a  hill,  whereby  he  can  ascend  to  the  sun 
on  a  sunbeam  or  can  touch  the  moon  with  the  tip  of  his  finger,  etc. 

Partaking  of  Sattva  :  that  is,  when  Sattva  becomes  predominant  in 
Buddhi,  by  subduing  Rajas  and  Tamas. 

Partaking  of  Tamas  :  that  is,  when  Tamas  becomes  predominant  in 
Buddhi,  by  subduing  Sattva  and  Rajas. 

The  reverse  are  vice,  ignorance,   passion  and  weakness. 

Aliamhdra  and  its  Modifications  described. 


r:  Abhimanah,  consciousness,  self-assertion.  ^*K:  Ahamkarah,  Aham- 
kara.  flWfl  Tasniat,  from  it.  f|fw:  Dvi-vidhah,  twofold.  V^K  Pravartate,  pro 
ceeds  w:  Sargah,  creation,  evolution.  w^:  Ekadasakak,  elevenfold.  ^  Cha, 
and.  m:  Ganah,  set,  series.  cF+iwM^h  Tan-m&tra-panchakam,  the  pentad  of  the 
Tan-matras.  ^  Cha,  and.  ^  Eva,  nothing  else. 

XXIV,  Self-assertion  is  Ahamkara.  Fiom  it  proceeds 
a  twofold  evolution  only  :  the  elevenfold  set  and  also  the 
fivefold  Tan-matra. 

ANNOTATION. 

45.  The  elevenfold  set  comprises  the  eleven  Indriyas,  i.e.,  the  five 
Tndriyas  of  cognition  and  the  five  Indriyas  of  action  and  Manas. 

The  fivefold  Tan-matra  comprises  the  subtile  particles  or  essences 
which  are  Sound,  Touch,  Form,  Taste,  and  Smell.  Whatever  word  conveys 
the  sense  of  subtil  ty  or  fineness  is  a  synonym  of  Tan-nmtra. 

Self-assertion  :  All  that  is  considered  (alochita)  and  reasoned  (mata) 
refers  to  me,  in  this  1  am  competent,  all  these  objects  of  sense  are  for  my 
sake  only,  this  does  not  concern  any  one  else  but  me,  hence  I  am,  —  such 
abhimana,  self-assertion  or  consciousness  by  reference  to  oneself,  from  its 
having  an  uncommon  or  unique  operation  of  its  own,  is  called  Ahamkara, 
by  working  upon  which  Buddhi  determines  that  this  is  to  be  done  by  me. 


24  S&MKHYA-KAHIKA. 


Transformations  of  Ahamkara  distinguished. 


u  **  n 


:  Sattvikah,  partaking  of  Sattva,  in  which  Sattva  is  dominant,  pure. 
:  Ekadasakah,  elevenfold,  n^^  Pravartate,  proceeds.  tfirira  vaikritat,  modi 
fied  by  the  predominance  of  Sattva  ;  an  older  term  conveying  the  same  sense 
as  Sattvika.  *M*Kid  Ahamkarat,  from  Ahamkara.  ^mi^:  Bhuta-adeh»  from  the 
original  of  the  elements  in  which  Tamas  is  dominant  ;  an  older  term  conveying 
the  same  sense  as  Tamasa.  cFwt:  Tan-matrah,  the  Tan-matras.  *:  Sah,  it.  <trw: 
Tamasah,  Tamasa,  having  Tamas  dominant  in  it.  tsrwra  Taijasat,  from  Taijasa, 
which  is  an  older  term  having  the  sense  of  Rajasa,  that  in  which  Rajas  is  domin 
ant.  ^w^Ubhayam,  both,  i.e.,  the  Indriyas  and  the  Tan-matras. 

XXV.  The  Sattvika  elevenfold  set  proceeds  from  the 
Vaikrita  Ahamkara  ;  from  the  Bhutadi  Ahamkara,  the  Tan- 
matras  ;  they  are  Tamasa  ;  from  Taijasa  Ahamkara,  proceed 
both. 

ANNOTATION. 

46.  From  the  Taijasa,  both  :  Of  the  three  Gunas,  Rajas  alone  is 
exciting  and  restless  (see  Karika  XIII).  Rajas  alone,  therefore,  is  active 
while  Sattva  and  Tamas  are  inert.  These  must  then  depend  upon  the 
activity  of  Rajas  for  the  evolution  of  their  products.  It  is  in  this  sense 
that  from  the  Taijasa  proceed  both,  and  not  that  a  duplicate  set  of  the 
Indriyas  and  the  Tan-matras  simultaneously  issue  from  the  Rajasa  Aham 
kara. 

Indriyas  enumerated. 


TO  BQddhi-indriyani,   the   Indriyas   or    Powers   of  cognition.     ^:*ta- 
Ohaksuh-srotra-ghraaa-rasana-tvak-akhyani,    called   the   eyes,    ears, 


nose,  tongue,  and  skin.  ^raqrlw^ra^iT^  Vak-pani-pada-payu-upasthan,  speech, 
hands,  feet,  excretory  organ  and  organ  of  generation.  ^f^HTO  Karma-indriyani, 
the  Indriyas  or  Powers  of  action.  3iT|:  Ahull,  they  say. 

XXVI.  Those  called  the  eyes,  the  ears,  the  nose,  the 
tongue  and  the  skin  are  said  to  be  the  Indriyas  of  cognition, 
and  the  speech,  hands,  feet,  the  excretory  organ  and  the 
organ  of  generation,  to  be  the  Indriyas  of  action, 


SAMKHYA-RARlKA.  25 


Manns  described. 


U  ^  U 

Ubhaya-atmakam,  possessing  the  nature  of  both,  i.e.  Indriyas  of 
cognition  and  of  action.  v&  Atra,  herein,  in  the  set  of  Indriyas.  11:  Manal?. 
Manas.  ^M*^  Sarnkalpakam,  that  which  forms  a  complete  idea  at  last,  by  means 
of  assimilation  and  differenitation  ;  reflective  ;  deliberative  ;  combinative.  *%** 
Indriyam,  indriya.  ^  Cha,  as  well,  sre^fa  Sadharmyat,  from  homogeneousness. 
wrfw^raSfara  Guna-parinama-visesat,  from  differences  in  the  transformation  of 


the   Gunas.      fpn?*   Nana-tvam,    manifoldness  ;    variety    ;    diverseness. 
Bahya-bhedat,  external  diversities,     i  Oha,  and. 

XXVII.  Among  the  Indriyas,  Manas  possesses  the 
nature  of  both.  It  is  deliberative,  and  is  as  well  an  Indriya, 
as  it  is  homogeneous  with  the  rest.  The  variety  of  the  In 
driyas  is  due  to  the  differences  in  the  transformation  of  the 
Gunas,  and  so  are  the  external  diversities  (of  objects  of  the 
senses). 

ANNOTATION. 

47,  Nature  of  both  :    The  presence   of   Manas  is  necessary  both  in 
respect  to  cognition  and  in  respect   to   action  ;  for,  to  quote  from  Locke, 
"  a  man  whose  mind  is  intently   employed    in    the   contemplation  of  some 
objects,  takes  no  notice  of  impressions  made  by  sounding  bodies  Upon  the 
organ  of  hearing  :  therefore   it   is   evident   that   perception   is  only  when 
the  mind  receives  the  impression."     Similarly,    there  can  be  no  movement 
of  the  hands,  etc.,  without  the  co-operation  of  Manas. 

48.  Sainkalpa  or  deliberation  is  the  uncommon  or  distinctive   func 
tion  of  Manas.     By  the  form  of  deliberation,  Manas  is  marked  out,  because, 
when  a  thing  is  first  simply  observed  by  the  sense  as  It  is  something,  and 
doubt  arises  as  to  whether  it  be  this  or  whether  it  be  that,  Manas  perfectly 
images  it  as  It  is  this  and  not  that,  that  is  to  say,  discriminates  the  thing 
as  a  particular  substance  possessing  specific  attributes.     In  other  words, 
from  the  materials  of  the  senses,  Manas  creates  percepts.     These  are  then 
transferred  to  Ahamkara,  which  regards  them  either  as  concerning  itself  or 
not  concerning  itself.     Thus  coloured  with  the  personal  equation,  they  are 
next  taken  up  by  Buddhi,  which  makes  certain  their  true  nature  and  deter 
mines   conduct  accordingly.     Such,  in  brief,  is   the  process  of  sensuous 
.cognition  propounded  in  the  Samkhya  Dar^ana. 


26  SAMRHYA-KARIKA. 


49.  But  Mauas  thus  possesses  a  unique  definition  of  its  own,  yet  it 
does  not  lie  altogether  out  of  the  category  of  the  Indriyas,  like  Buddhi  and 
Ahamkara  ;  for,  unlike  them,  it  is,  along  with  the  other  Indriyas,  produced 
from    the  same  material  cause,  viz.,  Ahamkara  modified  by  the  predomi 
nance  of  Sattva.     Hence,  Manas  also  is  an  Indriya. 

50.  But  how,  from  the  same  material,  are  diverse  effects,  viz.,  eleven 
Indriyas  of  eleven  sorts,  produced  ?  Further,  the  eleven  Indriyas  necessarily 
imply,  and  must  depend  for  their   existence   upon,  eleven  different  sorts 
of  objects.     How  is  this  diversity  created  ?  when  the   Pradhana,    Buddhi, 
and  Ahamkara  are   non-intelligent,  and    Purusa   is   a   non-agent.     Is   it 
created  by  IsSvara  or  by  Svabhava  or  Spontaneity  ?     The  answer  is,  that  a 
certain  Spontaneity  is  the  cause  of  the  variety  of  the  Indriyas  and  their 
objects.     Just   as   through   Spontaneity,  secretion  of  milk  takes  place  for 
the   growth    of   the   calf,  so    the  Gunas  become  spontaneously  modified 
by  the  forms  of  the  eleven  Indriyas  for  the  benefit  of  Purusa.     Similarly, 
through  particular  transformation  of  the  Gunas  spontaneously,  external 
objects  of  various  kinds  are  produced  ;  for   whatever   is   the   modification 
of   the   Gunas,  is  their  object  ;  hence,  external  objects  must  be  understood 
to  be  the  products  of  the  Gunas. 

"  Vachaspati  understands  the  allusion  to  external  objects  to  be 
merely  illustrative  ;  that  is,  the  internal  organs  are  diversified  by  the 
modification  of  the  qualities,  in  the  same  manner  that  external  objects  are 
varied  by  the  same  modification".  —  Wilson's  free  translation. 

Vijnana  Bhiksu  reads  the  passage  as  Bahya-bhedat  cha,  and  from 
the  variety  of  external  objects,  instead  of  Bahya-bhedah  cha,  and  so  are 
the  external  diversities. 

The  Functions^/  the  Indriyas  described. 


II  ^S  II 


Sabda-adi-su,  in  respect  to  sound  and  the  rest,  i.e.,  form,  touch,  taste, 
and  smell.  V3pn  Panchanam,  of  the  five,  i.e.,  senses  of  cognition.  gir^nrrcrai 
Alochana-matram,  observation  simply,  the  mere  observation  of  things,  the  identity 
of  which  is  not  free  from  doubt.  **m  Isyate,  is  considered.  ?f?r:  Vrittili,  modi 
fication,.  function.  ^ir^rnra^mt^I  «i<rqi  :  Vachana-adana-vikarana-utsarga-anand&h, 
speech,  manipulation,  locomotion,  excretion  and  generation.  ^  Cha,  and.  ^RPJ. 
Pnchanam,  of  the  five,  Indriyas  of  action. 

XXVIII.     The  function  of  the  five,  in  respect  to  sound 
and  the  rest,  is  considered  to  be  observation  simply.     Speech, 


SAMKHYA-KARIKA.  27 

manipulation,  locomotion,  excretion  and  generation  are  con 
sidered  to  be  the  functions  of  the  other  five. 

The  common  and  uncommon  functions  of  the  Antah-Karanas  distinguished  . 


II  Ri  II 

«j  Svalaksanyam,  the  condition  of  having  specific  or  distinctive  or 
uncommon  or  characteristic  definitions  of  their  own.  sirt:  Vrittib,  function, 
operation.  WTO  Traya-sya,  of  the  three,  viz.,  Buddhi,  Ahamkara,  and  Manas. 
m  S&,  the  same,  **rr  Esa,  this,  'wfw  Bhavati,  is.  WIWIHT  A-samany&,  uncommon, 
peculiar  to  each.  qwHHbwRi:  Samanaya-karana-vrittih  the  common  function  or 
modification  of  the  Instruments,  imp^i  :  Prana-adyah,  Prana  and  the  rest,  viz., 
Apana,  Samana,  Udana,  and  Vyana,  the  five  vital  airs,  life-breaths.  sr*ra:  Vayavab, 
airs.  ^  Pancha,  five. 

XXIX.  Of  the  three  (internal  Instruments),  their  own 
definitions  are  their  respective  functions.  These,  the  same, 
(functions)  are  peculiar  to  each.  The  common  modification 
of  the  Instruments  is  the  five  airs  beginning  with  Prana. 

ANNOTATION. 

51.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  five  vital  airs  are  taught  to  be  the 
modifications  jointly  of  Buddhi,  Ahamkara,  and  Manas,  and  not  of  the 
elements,  as  otherwise  might  be  imagined. 

The  functions  of  the  It.driyos  are  successive  as  well  as  simultaneous. 


RT$ 


\\ 


Yugapat,  simultaneous,  consentaneous.  ^«w  Chatustayasya,  of  the 
quartet,  viz.,  Buddhi,  Ahamkara,  Manas,  and  one  of  the  external  senses.  3  Tu, 
but.  sfn:  Vrittib,  function,  sroi:  Krama-sab,  successively,  gradually.  ^  Cha, 
and.  rRzr  Tasya,  its,  of  the  quartet.  f*i%T  Nirdista,  found.  &&  Dpste,  in  the  case 
of  the  seen,  in  regard  to  sensible  objects,  in  the  case  of  perceptual  cognition. 
rrarfq  Tath4  api,  so  too.  ^^  A-drisste,  m  regard  to  supra-sensible  objects,  in  the 
case  of  the  unseen,  in  the  case  of  cognition  by  inference,  testimony,  revelation, 
and  recollection.  <wm  Traya-sya,  of  the  triad,  viz.,  Buddhi,  Ahamk&ra,  and  Manas. 
TOjfifw  Tat-purvika,  preceded  by  that,  the  seen.  3fa:  Vriltlh,  function. 

XXX.     Of  all  the  four,  the  functions  are  instantaneous  ; 
their  functions  are  found  to  be    successive   also.     This  is  in 


28  SMA  KHYA-KARIKA. 


regard  to  sensible  objects.     In  regard  to  unseen  objects,  so 
too  are  the  functions  of  the  three,  but  preceded  by  that. 

ANNOTATION. 

52.  Instantaneous  :  as  when  one  suddenly  comes  across  a  tiger  in 
a  dark  night,  one's  eyes  at  once  observe,  Manas  considers,  Ahamkara 
identifies,  and  Buddhi  determines,  and  the  man  immediately  runs  away 
for  his  life. 

Successive  :  as  when  a  man  sees  in  dim  light  something  moving  in 
front  of  him  and  doubt  arises  as  to  what  it  might  be  ;  his  Manas  con 
siders  that  it  is  nothing  but  a  robber  ;  his  Ahamkara  makes  him  self- 
conscious  that  he  is  approaching  towards  him  ;  and  his  Buddhi  deter 
mines,  I  must  move  away. 

So  too  :  that  is,  in  the  case  of  non-perceptual  cognition,  the  functions 
of  Buddhi,  Ahamkara,  and  Manas  may  be  simultaneous  as  well  as  succes 
sive. 

But  preceded  by  that  :  Hereby  the  condition  of  cognition  by  in 
ference,  revelation,  and  recollection  is  laid  down,  which  may  be  stated 
in  the  phraseology  of  Locke  as  that  nothing  can  be  in  the  intellect 
which  was  not  previously  in  the  senses.  For  there  can  be  no  inference 
or  revelation  or  recollection  of  what  has  never  before  been  perceived. 

How  the  Indriyas  act  in  harmony  with  one  another. 


\\ 

i  Svam  svam,  own,    own.     slcw^n    Pratipadyante,  reach,   enter   into. 

Paraspara-akuta-hetukam,  of  which  the  cause  is  proneness  to  acti 
vity  arising  from  mutual  sympathy,  sfrf^  Vrittim,  function,  modification.  jw$: 
Purusa-arthah,  the  purpose  of  Purusa.  ^  Eva,  alone.  ^3:  Hetuh,  cause,  motive. 
*  Na,  not.  tfaftfl  Kena  chit,  by  any  one  whatever.  «firi?i  Karyate,  wrought,  made 
to  act.  qm*?;  Karanam,  instrument. 


XXXI.  The  Instruments  enter  into  their  respective 
modifications  to  which  they  are  incited  by  mutual  desire. 
The  purpose  of  Purusa  is  the  only  (cause  of  the  activity  of 
the  Instruments).  By  none  whatever  is  an  Instrument  made 
to  act. 


SAMKHYA-KARTKA.  29 


The  number,  functions  and  effects  of  the  Tndriyas  described. 


II         II 


src^  Karanam,  instrument.  ft^sifN  Trayodasa-vidham,  thirteenfold.  <ra 
Tat,  it.  «H|«qKW*row  Aharana-dharana-prakasa-karam,  'performer  of  apprehen 
sion,  sustentation  and  manifestation.  ^ra'  Karyam,  effect.  *»  Cha,  and.  ?ra 
Tasya,  its.  ^w  Dasa-dha%  tenfold,  smfrci'  Aharyam,  apprehensible.  ^M'  Dh&ryarp, 
sustainable.  J^rtra  Prakasyam,  manifestable.  ^  Cha,  and. 

XXXII.  The  Instrument  is  of  thirteen  sorts.  It  per 
forms  apprehension,  sustentation,  and  manifestation.  And 
its  effect  or  act,  viz.,  the  apprehensible,  the  sustainable,  and 
the  manifestable,  is  (each)  tenfold. 

ANNOTATION. 

53.  Apprehension  is  of  the  five  instruments  of  action.  Their 
effects  are  speech,  manipulation,  locomotion,  excretion  and  generation, 
which  being  distinguished  as  earthly  and  non-earthly,  become  tenfold. 

Sustentation  is  of  the  five  vital  airs,  which  support  the  Body. 
The  thing  to  be  sustained,  i.e.,  Body,  is  fivefold  according  as  it  is  made  of 
Earth,  Water,  Fire,  Air,  and  Ether,  and  these,  again,  being  distinguished 
as  celestial  (divya)  and  non-celestial,  become  tenfold. 

Manifestation  is  of  the  five  instruments  of  cognition.  The  things 
to  be  manifested  are  sound,  touch,  form,  taste,  and  smell,  and  these  being 
distinguished  as  celestial  and  non-celestial,  become  tenfold. 

Gaudapada  explains  the  Karika  differently.  According  to  him,  the 
instruments  of  action  apprehend  and  sustain,  those  of  cognition  mani 
fest.  The  action  or  effect  of  these  instruments  is  tenfold,  viz.,  sound,  etc., 
and  speech,  etc.  Thus,  what  is  manifested  by  the  instruments  of  cogni 
tion,  is  acquired  and  maintained  by  those  of  action. 

The  Thirteen  Indriyas  described  and  distinguished. 


i    pi 

; 


U 

SFfTiwj  Antah-Karanam,  the   internal  instrument,     faf^  Tri-vidham,  three- 
d.     ^w    Dasa-dha,     tenfold,     ^q'    Bahyam,   external.     a»R*r   Trayasya,   of  the 
ree.     f^rans^  Visaya-akhyam,   called  object,     ^rrum^  Samprata-kalam,   at   time 
present,     ^r^'  Bahyam,  external.     fa*M<»t  Tri-kalam,  at  three  times,  i.e.,  time  past, 
resent  and  future,     simr^  Abhyantaram,  internal.     *RWJ,  Karanam,  instrumen, 


30  8AMKSYA-KAEIKA. 


XXXIII.  The  internal  Instrument  is  threefold  ;  the 
external,  tenfold,  called  the  object  of  the  three.  The  ex 
ternal  instrument  operates  at  time  present  ;  the  internal  at 
all  the  three  times. 

ANNOTATION. 

54.     Called  the  object  of  the  three:  because  the  external  instruments 
of  cognition  and  action  are  the  channels  through  which  the  three  internal 
instruments  of   Buddhi,    Ahamkara,  and    Manas  come  into  contact  with, 
and  exercise  their  functions  in  regard  to,  the  external  objects. 
Objects  of  the  Indriyas  described. 


Buddhi-indriyani,  the  Indriyas  of  cognition,  w  Tesam,  of  these. 
v*^  Pancha,  five.  ft^T^faiwirw  Visesa-avisesa-visayani,  having  as  their  objects 
gross  sound,  etc.,  causing  pleasure,  pain,  and  dulness,  and  subtile  sound,  etc., 
in  the  form,  of  tire  Tan-matras.  313?  Vak,  speech,  'wfn  Bhavati,  is.  SKNW 
Sabda-visaya,  having  sound  as  object.  Sfarfo  Sesani,  the  rest,  i  e.,  hands,  feet, 
the  excretory  organ  and  the  organ  of  generation.  5  Tu,  but.  ^rawfa  Pancha- 
visayani,  having  all  the  five,  sound,  etc.,  as  objects. 

XXXIV.  Among  these  (ten  Indriyas)  the  five  Indriyas 
of  cognition  have  for  their  objects  things  gross  and  subtile. 
Speech  has  sound  (alone)  for  its  object.  But  the  rest  have 
(all)  the  five  as  their  objects. 

ANNOTATION. 

55.     But  the  rest   have  the   five  etc.:    for,  a  jar,  e.g.,    which  may  be 
taken  hold  of  by  the  hand,  possesses  sound,  touch,  form,  taste,  and  smell  ; 

the    foot    treads   upon    the  earth   of   which   sound    and  the    rest  are    the 

• 

characteristics  ;  the  excretory  organ  separates  that  in  which  these  five 
abide  ;  and  the  organ  of  generation  produces  the  secretion  in  which  all 
these  five  are  present. 

Why  Buddhi  is  principal  among  the  Indriyas. 


Sa-antah-karana,  together  with  the  internal  instruments  of  Aham 
and   Manas,     5%  Wuddhih,    Buddhi,     q§*    Sarvam,   all.      m^.   Visayam, 


SAMKtlYA-KAtitKA.  31 


object,     WIT^?!  Avagahate,  adverts  to,  comprehends,     i^^ffij  Yasmat,    since. 
Tasmat,  therefore,     rafoj  Tri-vidharn,  threefold,     w^  Karanam,    instrument,     ^rfr 
Dvari,  warders,  gatemen,  room.     j?TW5  Dvarani,  gates.     3Ftfm  Sesani,  rest. 

XXXV.  Since  Buddhi,  together  with  Ahamkara  and 
Manas,  comprehends  all  objects  (at  all  times),  therefore,  the 
three  Instruments  are  like  a  house  of  which  the  rest  are 
gates. 

Above  continued. 


n 

Ete,  these,  the  ten  external  Indriyas,  Manas,  and  Ahamkara. 
radipa-kalpali,  comparable  to  a  lamp.  tn^w^raw:  Paraspara-vilaksanati, 
characteristically  different  from  one  another.  ^ifoSlNi:  Guna-visesah,  particular 
modifications  of  the  Gun  as.  f^^f  Kritsnam,  whole.  3^n?r  Purusa-sya,  of,  i.e.,  to 
Purusa.  ?&  Artham,  object,  was  Prakasya,  manifesting.  ^  Buddhau,  to 
Buddhi.  Jnr^f^  Prayachchhanti,  present,  make  over. 

XXXVI.  These  particular  modifications  of  the  Gunas, 
which  are  characteristically  different  from  one  another,  and 
which  are,  therefore,  in  this  matter,  comparable  to  a  lamp, 
present  all  their  respective  objects  to  Buddhi,  so  that  these 
may  be  exhibited  to  Purusa. 

ANNOTATION. 

56.     Comparable  to  a  lamp  :  see  Karika  XIII. 
Present  ......  to  Buddhi  :  for  Puruya  can    experience  objects,  pleasure, 

etc.,  only  such  as   are  lodged  in  Buddhi.     The  process  by  which  ideas  are 
conveyed  to  Purusa  is  here  described. 

Above  continued. 


; 

i 
1 


9$'  Sarvarn,  all.  sm  Prati,  in  regard  to.  &wm  Upa-Bhogam,  experience 
through  conjunction,  iwa  Yasmat,  since.  5^R?T  Purusa-sya,  of  Purusa.  ^wfa 
Sadhayati,  effects,  accomplishes,  ^fg:  Buddhih,  Buddhi.  *r  Sa,  it.  ^  Eva,  the 
same.  ^  Cha,  and.  raftmfg  Visinasti,  differentiates,  discriminates,  gr:  Punah, 
again,  ir^n^r^t  Pradhana-purusa-antaram,  difference  between  the  Pradhana 
and  Purusa.  ^1  Suksam  subtile,  difficult  to  discern,  not  to  be  apprehended 
by  those  who  have  not  practised  religious  austerities. 


32 


XXXVII.  (The  other  Indriyas  present  all  objects  to 
Buddhi,  so  that  they  may  be  exhibited  to  Purusa),  since  it  is 
Buddhi  which  accomplishes  the  experience  of  Purusa  in 
regard  to  all  (objects  at  all  times).  And  it  is  that,  again, 
which  discriminates  the  subtile  difference  between  the  Pra- 
dhana  and  Purusa. 

ANNOTATION. 

57.  In  these  three  Karikas  it  is  established  that  Buddhi  is  supreme 
among  the  Indriyas.  It  is  the  principal  means  of  accomplishing  the 
apparently  contradictory  purposes  of  Purusa,  viz.,  experience  and  release. 
For  Buddhi,  through  the  adjacence  of  Purusa,  by  means  of  the  falling  of 
his  shadow,  becoming  verily  of  his  form,  accomplishes  Purusa's  experience 
of  all  objects  ;  for  experience  consists  in  the  apprehension  of  pleasure 
and  pain,  and  this  exists  in  Buddhi,  and  Buddhi  is  verily  of  the  form 
of  Purusa  ;  hence  it  causes  experience  to  Purusa.  And  while,  on 
the  one  hand,  it  is  the  cause  of  experience,  it  is,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
cause  of  release  as  well,  since  it  is  Buddhi  which  causes  discrimination 
between  Prakriti  and  Puru§a. 

The  Tan-mdtras  and  their  products  described. 


II 

Tan-matrani,  Tan-matras,  subtile  elements,  the  originals  of  atoms. 
:  A-visesalj,  indistinguishables,  indiscernibles,  un  differentiated  as  pleasant, 
painful  or  dull.  ?Ni:  Tebhyafe,  from  these.  $wfi  Bhutani,  the  gross  or  great 
elements.  ^  Paficha,  five,  i^:  Pafichabhyah,  from  the  five.  ^  Ete,  these. 
^?n:  Smritah,  remembered.  raSftr  :  Visesafr,  the  distinguishables,  discernibles, 
differentiated  as  pleasant,  painful  and  dull.  an*m:  S&ntaJi,  pacific,  causing 
pleasure,  tranquil.  $w:  Ghorah,  terrific,  causing  pain,  disagreeable.  *  Cha, 
since,  ^r:  Mu^hah,  stupefic,  dull.  ^  Cha,  and. 

XXXVIII.  The  Tan-matras  are  the  indiscernibles. 
From  these  five,  proceed  the  five  gross  Elements  which  are 
remembered  to  be  the  discernibles  ;  for  they  are  pacific, 
terrific,  and  stupefic. 

ANNOTATION. 

58.     Tan-matra  :  lit.  That-merely  or  its  measure.     The   Tan-matras 
are   subtle  forms  of  Sound,   Touch,   Form,  Taste,  and  Smell   which  have 


33 


not  yet  come  down  to  that  degree  of  materialisation  in  which  they  cause 
pleasure,  pain,  and  dulness,  and  thereby  become  capable  of  experience. 
Such  is  the  force  of  the  word  merely,  according  to  Vachaspati's  inter 
pretation.  They  are,  however,  not  properties  or  qualities  but  substances. 
Vijnana  Bhiksu  describes  them  as  "  fine  substances,  the  undifferentiated 
originals  of  the  Gross  Elements,  which  form  the  substrata  of  Sound, 
Touch,  Form,  Flavour,  and  Smell,  belonging  to  that  class  (that  is,  in 
that  state  of  their  evolution)  in  which  the  distinctions  of  S&nta,  etc.,  do 
not  exist."  So  we  find  from  the  Visnu-Puranam  and  other  sources,  e.g., 
that  '  in  them  severally  reside  their  parts  (matra)  wherefore  the  Smriti 
describes  them  as  Tan  (their)-matra  (part).  They  are  neither  Santa, 
pacific,  nor  Ghora,  terrific,  nor,  again,  Mudha,  stupefying,  but  are 
indistinguishables.' 

59.     Pacific,  etc.  :  —  Every  one  of  the  five  Gross   Elements   possesses 
the  threefold  characteristic  of  causing  pleasure,  pain,  and  dulness. 

Subtile  and  Gross  Bodies  described  and  distinguished. 

f^RT: 


R3KIT  ffT^TlSIT  R^f^rT  I)     S.  II 


Suksmah  subtile  Bodies,  ircnton:  Mata-pitri-jdh,  Bodies  produced 
from  mother  and  father.  **  Saha,  together,  *w§:  Pra-bhutaifr,  with  the  Great 
Elements.  ftwr  Tri-dha,  threefold.  ra5i<N:  Visesafr,  distinguishables,  specific 
objects.  ^r:  Syufr,  will  be.  ^r:  Suksmah,  subtile  Bodies.  ?rai  Tesam,  among 
them.  forar:  Niyatah  constant,  continuant,  *n?iTfapn:  Mata-pitri-ja.fr,  Bodies 
produced  from  mother  and  father,  fotffcri  Nivartante,  cease,  perish. 

XXXIX.  The  Subtile  Bodies,  Bodies  produced  from 
father  and  mother,  together  with  the  Great  Elements,  will 
be  the  Visesas.  Amongst  them,  the  Subtile  Bodies  are 
continuant  ;  Bodies  produced  from  father  and  mother  cease 
(to  entangle  after  death.) 

ANNOTATION. 

60.  Wilson's  learned  disquisition  on  the  meaning  of  the  present 
Karika  is  misguided  and  misleading.  The  Samkhya  describes  or  displays 
the  gradual  materialisation  of  the  Pradhana  from  the  highest  degree  of 
subtelity  to  the  lowest  form  of  grossness.  In  the  series  of  evolutes,  the 
Tan-matras  and  the  Gross  Elements  may  be  said,  loosely  speaking,  to 
occupy  the  same  plane,  that  is,  the  plane  of  materiality  in  the  current 
sense  of  the  term,  and  to  stand  to  each  other  as  do  atoms  to  earth,  air, 
5 


S4  SAMKtlYA-KARIKA. 


etc.  Bat  though  they  are  on  the  same  plane,  there  is  a  marked  difference 
between  them  ;  for  the  Tan-matras  are  indiscernible,  while  the  Elements 
are  discernible.  A  Visesa  is  what  contains  a  VijJesana  or  qualification, 
something  extra  by  means  of  which  it  is  distinguished  from  others. 
In  the  present  case  the  Vis^esana  is  the  property  of  causing  pleasure, 
pain  and  dulness.  This  is  absent  from  the  Tan-matras  and  is  present 
in  the  Elements.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  the  transition  from  the 
Tan-matras  to  the  next  succeeding  form  of  evolution  is  marked  by  the 
development  of  the  property  of  causing  pleasure,  pain  and  dulness. 
Similarly,  the  Subtile  Body  which  is  a  combination  of  the  Tan-matras 
and  the  Tattvas  upward,  and  Indriyas  which  are  pacific,  terrific,  and 
stupefic,  contains  the  aroma  of  past  experiences.  So  is  it  as  well  as  the 
Elements  and  the  Bodies  formed  of  them  classed  among  the  Visfesas,  as 
distinguished  from  the  Tan-matras  which  are  A-Vi^esas. 

How  the  Subtile  Body  migrates. 


Purva-utpannam,  primseval,  produced  at  the  beginning  of  creation 
by  the  Pradhana,  one  for  each  Purusa.  *Wr«e  A-saktam,  unconnected,  unconfined 
to  any  particular  gross  Body,  and  therefore  unobstructed  in  its  passage  even, 
through  a  mountain,  fwr  Niyatam,  continuant,  constant,  as  it  lasts  from  the 
beginning  of  creation  to  the  time  of  the  Great  Dissolution.  ^iR^w-tw  Mahat- 
Mi-suksma-paryantam,  being  the  combination  .of  the  Tattvas  beginning  with 
Mahat  and  ending  with  the  Subtile,  i.e.,  the  Tan-matras.  wffl  Samsarati,  moves 
from  Body  to  Body,  transmigrates,  fwnto  Nir-upabhogam,  free  from,  or  without, 
experience,  vfe:  Bhavaih,  dispositions,  conditions,  such  as  virtue,  vice,  etc. 
«rvro%r  Adhivasitam,  perfumed,  affected,  tinged.  f%-^  Lingam,  mergent,  that  which 
suffers  resolution,  being  a  product,  a  combination  of  things. 

XL.  The  Liiga  or  jnergent  Body,  the  one  primor- 
dially  produced,  unconfined,  continuant,  composed  of  the 
Tattvas  beginning  with  Mahat  and  ending  with  the  Tan- 
matras,  transmigrates,  free  from  Experience,  tinged  with 
tlie  Bhavas. 

ANNOTATION. 

6.1.  Tinged  with  the  Bhiivas  :  The  Bhavas  reside  in  Buddhi  which 
accompanies  or  is  associated  with  the  Subtile  Body,  and  through  sueli 
association,  the  Subtile  Body  is  affected  by  the  Bhavas  in  the  same  manner, 
for  instance,  as  a  piece  of  cloth  is  perfumed  with  the  sweet  smell  of  a 


SAMKHYA-KARIKA.  35 

Champaka  flower  from  contact  with  it.     And   it  is   this  affection   by   the 
Bhavas  which  is  the  cause  of  the  transmigration  of  the  Subtile  Body. 

Necessity  for  Gross  Creation  shown. 


Rn*  Chi.tram,  a  painting  or  picture,  w  Yath&,  as.  smw^;  Asrayam,  ground, 
support,  m  Rite,  without,  wr^rf^i  :  Sthanu-adi-bhyalj,  a  stake,  etc.  fan  Vina 
without,  w  Yatha,  as.  «rer  Chhaya,  shadow.  <I$H  Tat-vat,  similarly  to  that.  fMr 
Vina,  without,  fcifl  :  Vieesaih,  Visesas,  Subtile  Bodies  {Vachaspati),  the  Tan-matras 
(Goutfapada),  Ativahika  or  Vehicular  Bodies  (Vijnana  Bhiksu).  *  Na,  not.  fosfa 
Tisthati,  stands,  subsists,  f^wi  Nir-asrayam,  supportless.  ^g-i;  Lingam,  that 
which  makes  known,  iyiz.t  Buddhi,  Ahamkara,  Manas  and  the  other  Indriyas 
(Vachaspati,  Gau<Japada),  the  Subtile  Body  called  Lihga.  (Vijn&na). 

XLI.  As  a  painting  stands  not  without  a  support, 
nor  is  there  a  shadow  without  a  stake  or  the  like,  so  neither 
does  the  Linga  subsist  supportless,  without  the  Visesas. 

ANNOTATION. 

62,  Visesas  :  The  difference  of  the  interpretation  of  this  word  points 
to  a  difference  of  doctrine.  Thus,  according  to  Gaudapada  and  Vachaspati, 
there  are  only  two  kinds  ol  Body,  as  described  above.  But,  according  to 
Vijn/na  Bhiksu,  there  is  also  a  third  kind  of  Body,  the  Adhisthana  Sarjra, 
which  is  formed  of  a  finer  form  of  the  gross  elements  and  which  serves 
as  the  receptacle  of  the  Linga  Sarira. 

The  activity  of  the  Subtile  Body  further  explained. 


I)  $^  I) 

Purusa-artha-hetu-kam,   which  has  the  object  of  Purusa  as  motive. 


*»  Idam,  this.  ftfafl3Rftiw<£ta  Nimitta-naimittika-parasarigena,  by  association 
with  instrumental  causes  such  as  virtue,  vice,  etc.,  and  with  their  consequences 
such  as  the  body  of  a  god  or  a  man  or  a  beast,  n^  :  Prakriteh,  of  Prakriti.  ranr<$roRi 
Vibhu-tva-yogat,  from  conjunction  or  the  universal  supremacy  of  Prakriti.  *re?m 
Nata-vat,  like  a  dramatic  actor.  5^*371  Vyavatisthate,  appears  in  different  roles. 
f^g*l  Lingam,  the  subtile  body. 

XLII.  Impelled  by  the  purpose  of  Purusa,  this  Sub 
tile  Body  appears  in  different  roles,  like  a  dramatic  perform 
er,  by  means  of  association  with  instrumental  causes  aud 


36  SAMKHYA-KARIKA. 


their  consequences,    through   the   universal   supremacy    of 
Prakriti. 

ANNOTATION. 

63.  Like  a  dramatic  performer :  Just  as,  on  the  stage,  one  and  the 
same  person  plays  the  parts  of  Para^urama,  Ajatadatru  and  Vatsaraja,  so 
the  same  Subtile  Body  may  appear  in  the  body  of  a  god  or  an  elephant  or 
a  man.  The  final  and  material  causes  of  this  transmigration  of  the  Sub 
tile  Body  in  general  are  respectively  the  purpose  of  Purusa  and  Prakriti, 
and  the  formal  and  efficient  causes  which  determine  particular  migrations, 
are  respectively  the  consequences  of  the  Nimittas  and  the  Nimittas,  namely, 
virtue,  vice,  and  the  like. 

Bhavas  divided  and  described. 


S&msiddhikalj,  produced  from  means  already  in  existence,  viz.,  pre 
vious  Karma ;  innate,  instinctive.  ^  Cha,  and.  ^M:  Bhavafy,  dispositions,  condi 
tions,  circumstances.  *n$rasfir:  Prakritikah,  essential,  natural,  springing  from 
Pr&kriti  direct.  ^sfom:  Vaikritikah,  acquired,  due  or  relating  to  vikriti  or 
transformations.  *  Cha,  and.  ^ftfspr:  Dharma-ady&h,  virtue  and  the  rest,  ggr: 
Dristal?,  seen.  qwunRw:  Karana-asrayinah,  residing  in  the  Karana,  i.e  ,  Buddhi. 
«rahn%:  Karya-asrayiuah,  residing  in  the  effect,  i.e  ,  body.  *  Oha,  and.  **MI$JI: 
Kalala-ady^h,  the,  uterine  germ  and  the  rest. 

XLIII.  The  Bhavas  or  dispositions  are  instinctive, 
essential,  and  also  acquired.  Dharma  and  the  rest  are 
considered  as  residing  in  Buddhi,  and  the  uterine  germ,  and 
the  rest  as  residing  in  the  Body. 

ANNOTATION. 

64.  Sdmsiddhika  :  as,  at  the  beginning  of  creation,  when  the  Lord 
Kapila  was  to  appear,  the  four  Bhavas,  viz.,  virtue,  knowledge,  dispassion, 
and  power,  were  produced  along  with  him.  They  are  then  the  effects  of 
causes  appertaining  to  a  former  creation. 

Prakritika :  These  are  equally  innate  or  instinctive,  but  are  the 
effects  of  causes  appertaining  to  the  present  creation.  Thus,  from  the 
very  same  causes,  i.e.,  highly  purified  form  of  Prakritic  matter,  from  which 
the  perpetually  youthful  Bodies  of  the  four  sons  of  Brahma,  namely, 
Sanaka,  Sanandana,  Sanatana,  and  Sanatkumara,  were  produced,  were 


SAMKHYA-KARIKA.  37 


also  at  the  same   time   produced   the   Bhavas  of   virtue  and   the   rest   in 
them. 

Vaikritika  :  These  are  those  acquired  from  a  Vikriti  or  evolute, 
namely,  a  teacher  whose  Body  is  an  evolute  ;  thus  the  effect  of  tuition  is 
knowledge,  knowledge  leads  to  dispassion,  dispassion  to  virtue,  and  virtue 
to  power.  This  is  how  ordinary  human  beings  acquire  the  Bhavas. 

The  Bhavas,  virtue,  knowledge,  dispassion,  and  power,  grow  when 
Sattva  is  dominant.  Hence  they  are  characterised  as  Sattvic.  Those 
that  grow  during  the  predominance  of  Tamas,  are  vice,  ignorance,  passion, 
and  weakness.  These  are  characterised  as  Tamasic. 

These  eight  Bhavas  are  the  Nimittas  or  efficient  causes  of  particular 
migrations  of  the  Linga  Sarira.     They   operate   through   bringing   about 
connection    with    their  effects,  the  Naiinittikas,  from  the  first  commingled 
blood  and  semen  in  the  uterus  up  to  the  fully  developed  Body. 
Effects  of  the  Bhdvas  described. 


n  $«  n 

wr  Dharmena,  by  means  of  virtue.  «nr^  Gamanam,  going,  a^i'  Urd- 
dhvam,  upward.  ITW  Gamanam,  going.  siwra  Adhastat,  downward,  wfn 
Bhavati,  is.  srenfa  A-dharmena,  by  means  of  vice,  wr^r  Jnanena,  by  means  of 
knowledge.  *  Oha,  and.  WOT:  Apavargah,  release,  ra<rfara  Viparyayat,  from  the 
reverse,  i.e.,  of  knowledge,  that  is,  ignorance.  ¥*ft  Isyate,  considered.  *^: 
Bandha^,  bondage. 

XLIV.  By  virtue,  is  going  upward  ;  going  downward 
is  by  vice  ;  and  by  knowledge,  is  Release  ;  from  the  reverse, 
Bondage  is  considered  (to  be.) 

ANNOTATION. 

65.  Upwards  :  that  is,  to  the  worlds  of  Brahma,  Prajapati,  Soma, 
Indra,  the  Gandharvas,  the  Yaksas,  the  Raksasas,  and  the  Pisiachas. 

Downward  :  that  is,  into  the  Bodies  of  beasts,  birds,  reptiles,  trees, 
etc. 

Knowledge  :  that  is,  knowledge  of  the  discrimination  between  Purusa 
and  Prakriti. 

Release  :  when  the  Subtile  Body  ceases  and  Purusa  becomes  Parama- 
atma. 

Bondage  :  it  is  either  Prakritika,  or  Vaikritika,  or  Daksinaka.  The 
first  is  of  those  who,  mistaking  either  of  the  eight  Prakritis,  viz.,  the 
Pra.dh.ana,  Mahat,  Ahamkara,  and  the  five  Tan-ma  tras,  to  be  Purusa, 


38  SAMKHYA-EARIKA. 

contemplate  upon  that,  and  not  upon  Purusa.  After  death,  they  are 
absorbed  in  the  Prakritis,  and  are  called  Prakriti-layas.  The  second  is  of 
those  who  contemplate  upon  the  transformations,  viz.,  the  elements,  the 
[ndriyas,  individual  Aharnkara  and  individual  Buddhi,  mistaking  them 
for  Purusa,  and  after  death  reach  unto  the  archetypes  of  those  transforma 
tions.  The  third  is  of  those  who,  not  knowing  the  Tattva,  i.e.,  Purusa, 
seek  mundane  and  heavenly  happiness  through  performance  of  acts  of 
charity  and  public  utility. 

Above  continued. 


*  H 

Vairagyat,  from  dispassion,  that  is,  from  dispassion  divorced  from 
knowledge  of  the  Tattvas.  u$f^:  Prakriti-layah,  absorption  into  the  eight 
Prakritis,  which  state  of  absorption  lasts  for  full  one  hundred  thousand  Manvan- 
taras.  TOTC:  Samsarah,  transmigration,  revolution  of  births  and  deaths,  ^f^ 
Bhavati,  is-  <I^M  Rajasat,  produced  from,  or  appertaining  to,  Rajas,  'crora  Ragat, 
from  passion.  3a.*itd  Aisvaryat,  from  power.  3ifoira:  A-vighatah,  non-impediment 
i.e.  of  desire,  foratra  Viparyayat,  from  the  reverse,  i.e.,  from  weakness.  cifgH«<t<j: 
Tat-viparyasali,  the  contrary  thereof,  i  e.  impediment. 

XLV.  From  dispassion  is  absorption  into  the  Pra 
kritis,  transmigration  is  from  the  passion  of  Rajas,  from 
power  is  unimpediment,  from  the  reverse  is  the  contrary. 

ANNOTATION. 

66.     In  these  two  Knrikas,  the  eight   efficient  causes  and  their  eight 
effects  have  been  declared.     They  are  : 

CAUSE.  EFFECT. 

o     i.  Virtue.  2.  Elevation  to  the  higher  worlds. 

3.  Knowledge.  4.  Release. 

^     5.  Dispassion.  6.  Dissolution  into  the  Prakritis. 

co     7*.  Power.  «        8.  Unimpediment  to  fulfilment  of  desire. 

2     9.  Vice.  10.  Degradation  to  the  lower  worlds. 

*|   11.  Ignorance.  12.  Bondage. 

S    13;  Passion.  14.  Migration. 

5   15.  "Weakness.  16.  Impediment  to  fulfilment  of  desire. 

The  creations  of   Buddhi  classified  and  explained. 


*q:  Esab,  this.  MHIWI:  Pratyaya-sargalj,  the  creation  of  that  by  which  in 
tuition  of  things  is  made,  that  is,  Buddhi.  raqwai^R3fg%Tr^:  viparyaya-asakti- 
tusti-siddhi-akhyah,  called  ignorance,  incapacity,  complacency,  and  perfection, 


SAMKBYA-KAtUKA.  39 


3*j$q**fo*^fti  Guna-vaisamya-vimardat,  from  the  conflict  of  the  Gunas  in  unequal  de 
grees  of  strength,  from  the  combination  of  the  Gunas  in  different  proportions,  and 
consequent  predominance  of  one  over  others.  ?ro  Tasya,  its,  of  the  creation  of 
Buddhi.  *r  Cha  and.  ^r:  Bhedali,  sorts,  divisions.  3  Tu,  again,  *qpm  Pan- 
chasat,  fifty. 

XL  VI.  This  is  the  creation  of  Buddhi,  termed  ignor 
ance,  incapacity,  complacency,  'and  perfection.  And  from 
the  conflict  of  the  Gunas  in  unequal  degree  of  strength,  its 
sorts,  again,  are  fifty. 

ANNOTATION. 

67.  This  :  that  is,  the  sixteenfold  cause  and  effect  mentioned  in 
the  preceding  Karika.  They  are  all  modifications  or  products  of  Buddhi. 
Their  minor  divisions  are  legions.  To  attempt  some  classification,  they 
are  primarily  of  four  sorts,  and  secondarily  of  fifty  sorts. 

The  creations  of  Buddhi  subdivided. 


II  $V9  I) 

ig  Pancha,  five,  viz.,  A-vidya,  Asmita,  Raga,  Dvesa,  and  Abhinivesa. 
Viparyaya-bhedafr,  divisions  of  mistake  or  ignorance.  ^mr  Bhavanti,  are. 
mm:  A-saktih,  incapacity.  ^  Cha,  and.  sfi^^Rr^  Karana-vaikalyat,  according 
to  the  impairment  of  the  Instruments  or  Indriyas.  ^nr^qf^^T  Astavimsati-bheda, 
having  twenty-eight  divisions.  515:  Tustih,  complacency.  *FWI  Nava-dha^  ninefold. 
*3*n  Asta-dha,  eightfold,  fife:  Siddhih,  perfection. 

XL  VII.  Five  are  the  divisions  of  ignorance  ;  and 
according  to  the  impairment  of  the  instruments,  incapacity 
has  twenty-eight  varieties  ;  while  complacency  is  ninefold  ; 
perfection,  eightfold,  o 

Divisions  af  Error  subdivided. 


ii 

^rr  Bhedab,  distinctions,  divisions.  ?m:  Tamasab,  of  Tamas,  which  is  a  tech 
nical  term  for  A-Vidya  or  false  knowledge.  *gfo:  Asta-vldha^,  eightfold.  ^T^I 
Mohasya,  of  Moha,  which  is  technical  for  Asmita  or  Am-ness  or  egotism.  ^  Cha- 
and.  ^aif^:  Dasa-vidhati  tenfold.  I^T^:  Maha-mobab»  Mahamoha,  which  is  tech 
nical  for  Raga  or  passion,  flifts:  Tamisrab,  Tamisra,  which  is  technical  for  Dvesa 


40  SAMKHYA-KARIKA. 


or  aversion,  ^gr^awr  Astadasa-dha,  eighteenfold.  <TOT  Tatha",  so.  H*rf?f  Bhavati,  is. 
*jH=jfiRi*:  Andha-tamisrah,  Andhatamisra,  which  is  technical  for  Abhinivesa  or 
blind  attachment  to  life. 

XLVIIL  The  distinctions  of  A-Vidya  are  eightfold, 
as  also  of  Asmita  ;  tenfold  is  Raga  ;  Dvesa  is  eighteenfold  ; 
so  also  is  Abhinivesa. 

Incapacity  subdivided. 


H  :  • 

:  Ekadasa-indriya-badhab,  injuries  of  the  eleven  Indriyas 
Saha,  together.  5%^-  Buddhi-badhai^,  with  injuries  of  Buddhi.  mm:  A-s 
incapacity.  ^f|?T  Uddista,  pronounced.  ^»^I^T:  Saptadasa-badha^,  seventeen  in 
juries.  3$f  :  Buddheb,  of  Buddhi.  HWJM  Viparyayat,  from  inversion,  fjfjl^^i 
Tusti-siddhinam,  of  complacencies  and  perfections. 

XLIX.  Injuries  of  the  eleven  Indriyas,  together  with 
injuries  of  Buddhi,  are  pronounced  to  be  Incapacity.  The 
injuries  of  Buddhi  are  seventeen,  through  inversion  of  com 
placencies  and  perfections. 

Complacency  subdivided. 


:  (I  V^  II 

:  Adhyatmikah,  self  (souJ)-regarding,  it  is  that  form  of  complacency 
in  which  there  is  belief  in  the  existence  of  a  Self,  as  distinct  from  Prakriti,  but  in 
which  the  Self  is  identified  with  the  Not^Self.  ^ro:  Chatasra,  four. 


Prakriti-upadana-kala-bh^gya-akhyab,  called  after  Prakriti  or  Root,  Upddana 
or  Material,  Kala  or  Time,  and  Bhagya  or  Luck.  *tt&t:  Bahyab,  external,  Not-  Self  - 
regarding.  NM^m^m  Visaya-uparamat,  through  abstinence  from  objects.  ^ 
Pancha,  five.  TWT  Nava-dha,  ninefold.  <Jg*i:  Tustayalj,  complacencies,  ^f^f^r: 
Abhihit&h,  propounded. 

L.  The  nine  Complacencies  are  propounded  :  the 
four  Self-regarding  ones  called  after  Prakriti,  Material, 
Time,  and  Luck  ;  the  external  five,  through  abstinence  from 
objects. 


SAMKHYA-KAR1KA.  41 


Perfection  subdivided. 


u 

$5:  Uhah,  reasoning,  argumentation,  ai^:  Sabdab,  word,  verbal  instruction. 
^apH  Adhyayanam,  study.  §:«foufli:  Dubhha-vighatl^i,  preventions  of  pain,  m: 
Trayab,  three,  ggdmfp;  Suhrit-praptib,  acquisition  of  friend,  intercourse  with 
friend,  ^nf  Danam,  charity,  purity.  ^  Cha,  and.  fig*:  Siddhayah,  perfections. 
*$  Astau,  eight,  fiajf:  Siddheh,  of  perfection.  35:  Purvah,  preceding,  first. 
^51:  Ankusah,  goad,  curb,  restrainer.  fftfo*:  Tri-Vidhah,  threefold. 

LI.  Argumentation,  Word,  Study,  the  three  Pre 
ventions  of  Pain,  Acquisition  of  friends,  Charity  or  Purity 
are  the  eight  Perfections.  Those  mentioned  before  Perfec 
tion  are  the  threefold  goad  to  (Ignorance  and  suffering). 

ANNOTATION. 

68.  Those  mentioned  before   Perfection  are   Ignorance,  Incapacity, 
and  Complacency. 

Afihusa  : — This  word  may  also  be  rendered  by  curb,  meaning  that 
Ignorance  and  the  rest  curb,  i.e.,  impede  or  obstruct  the  means  to  Per 
fection. 

69.  Vijnana   Bhiksu   has  interpreted    this   Karika*  in   a   different 
manner  and  has  criticised   unfavourably  the   exposition  of  Gaudapada  and 
VachaspatL     See  our  Samkhya-Pravachana-Sutratn,   Sacred   Books  of  the 
Hindus,  Vol.  XI,  page  321. 

70.  The  above  details   of   the  creations  of   Buddhi   have  been  fully 
explained  in  the  commentaries  on  the  Tattva-SaiMsah   and  the   Samkhya 
Pravachana-Sutram.     The  reader  is  accordingly  referred   to   Vol.    XI   of 
the  Sacred  Books  of  the  Hindus. 

71.  Now,  if  it  be   questioned    that  when   any  one  of   the   two,  viz., 
creations  of   Buddhi  and  creations  of  the   Tan-matras,  is  enough  for  the 
accomplishment  of   the  purpose  of   Purusa,  what  need   is  there  for  a  two 
fold  creation  ?  so  it  is  declared  in  the  succeeding  Karika. 

Twofold  creation,  of  Buddhi  and  of  Tanmatra,  upheld. 
f\.—.   .  ,,J2k£JL  *       ,   £X-r,r 

^  T^TT  VfRT^fW  »T  T^TT 


II  H*  II 

i  Na,  not.     for  Vina,   without.     *nt:    Bh&vaih,    dispositions,   the   creations 
of  Buddhi   mentioned  above.    %'  Lingam,   the  creation   of  the   Tan-matras,    *r 


43  SAMKHYA-KARIKA. 


Na,  not.  £RT  Vina,  without.  f%f^  Lingena,  the  creation  of  the  Tan-matras. 
'HNfa^fft:  Bhava-nirvrittih,  cessation  or  pause  of  the  dispositions.  f^gng*:  Linga- 
akhyah,  termed  Linga.  wsr^:  Bhava-akhyafy,  termed  Bhava.  ?rewi  Tasmat,  hence. 
f|foi:  Dvi-vidhafy,  twofold.  mm?i  Pravartate,  proceeds,  m:  Sargah,  creation. 

LII.  Without  the  Bhavas,  there  would  be  no  Linga, 
'^without  the  Linga,  there  would  be  no  surcease  of  the  Bhavas  ; 
therefrom  a  twofold  creation  proceeds  :  the  one  called  after 

the  Linga,  the  other  called  after  the  Bhavas. 

/  .  -       .  .  •' 

ANNOTATION. 

72.  Vachaspati  explains  the  necessity  for  a  twofold  creation  and 
their  interdependence  thus  :  Experience  which  is  the  object  of  Purusa, 
cannot  be  possible  in  the  absence  of  the  objects  of  experience,  such  as 
sound  and  the  rest,  as  well  as  of  the  twofold  Body  which  is  the  Ayatana  or 
house  of  experience  :  wherefore  the  creations  of  the  Tan-matras  are  neces 
sary.  In  the  same  manner,  the  very  same  Experience  is  not  possible 
witihont  the  Indriyas  and  the  Antah-karana  which  are  the  instruments  of 
Experience  ;  these,  again,  cannot  be  possible  without  the  Bhavas,  virtue  and 
the  rest!  Neither  is  the  manifestation  of  Discrimination,  Which  is  the 
cause  of  Release,  possible  i'i  the  absence  of  the  twofold  creation.  Hence 
the  twofold  creation  is  established. 

The  succession  of  the  two  kinds  of  creation  as  mutually  cause  and 
effect  is  na  fault,  as  it  is  from  eternity,  like  that  of  the  seed  and  the  sprout- 
Even  in  the  beginning  of  a  Kalpa  the  production  of  the  Bhavas  and  the 
Linga  under  the  influence  of  the  Samskara  or  impression  of  the  Bhavas 
and  the  Linga  produced  in  a  previous  Kalpa,  is  not  unproved. 

Gross  Creation  subdivided. 


II  V,^  II 


i:  A  sta-vikalpab,  having  eight  specific  kinds,  viz.,  Brahma,  Prajapatya, 
etc.  %*'•  Daivab,  divine,  celestial,  supernatural,  super-human.  ^%^:  Tairyak- 
yonah,  the  grovelling-born.  ^  Cha,  and.  if^r  Pancha-dha,  fivefold.  *ref?i  Bha- 
vati,  is.  IIJMI:  Manusyah,  human.  ^  Cha,  and,  while,  izfo*.  Eka-vidha^, 
uniform,  of  one  kind.  s*nra?i:  Samasa-tah,  briefly.  ^  Ayam,  this,  ^f^:  Bhau- 
tikah,  of  the  Bhutas  or  beings,  ^n:  Sargab,  creation. 

LIII.     The   superhuman   is  of   eight  kinds  ;    and    the 
grovelling  species  is  of   five   kinds  ;    and  the  human  is  of  a 


SAMKRYA-KARIKA.  43 

single  kind  ;    this,  briefly,  is  the  Bhautika  Sarga  or  Creation 
of  Beings. 

Higher,  Lower,  and  Intermediate  Worlds  characterised. 


r'  Urddhvam,  above,  in  the  higher  worlds  of  JSrahma  and  the  rest. 

,  abundant  in  Sattva,  in  which  Sattva  is  dominant  and  Rajas  and 
Tamas  are  dormant.  d*)iNajH:  Tamah.-visalah,  abundant  in  Tamas,  in  which  Tamas 
is  dominant  and  Sattva  and  Rajas  are  dormant.  ^  Cha,  and.  ^:  Mula-tah, 
at  the  bottom,  below. 

w:  Sargab,  creation.  *r<3  Madhye,  in  the  middle,  in  the  world  of  man. 
i^iRwiw:  Rajah-visalah,  abundant  in  Rajas,  in  which  Rajas  is  dominant  and  Sattva 
and  Tamas  are  dormant.  a^nf^'wN:  Brahma-adi-stamba-paryantah,  beginning 
with  Brahma  and  ending  with  a  stock. 

LIV.  "Above,  the  creation  is  abundant  in  Sattva  ;  be 
low,  it  is  abundant  in  Tamas  ;  in  the  middle,  it  is  abundant 
in  Rajas;  such  is  the  creation  from  Brahma  down  to  a 
stock, 

(Jniversality  of  pain  demonstrated. 


\\ 

Ti3  Tatra,  therein,  in  the  three  worlds,  in  the  bodies  of  the  superhuman, 
human  and  grovelling  species,  grcrrosifi  Jara-marana-kptam,  caused  by  decay 
and  death.  5:^  Dubkham,  pain.  Jrotfrif  Prapnoti,  experiences.  %n:  Chetanab, 
intelligent.  The  force  of  this  word  is  to  exclude  experience  of  pain  from  Prakyiti 
and  her  products  which  are  all  non-intelligent.  3^:  Purusah,  that  which  lies 
(Sete)  in  the  Pitri  or  the  Linga  ^arira  or  Subtile  Body,  Pumsa.  %^i  Linga-sya, 
of  the  Linga  Sarira.  ^jraf^^n:  A-vinivrJtteb>  owing  to  the  non-cessation,  or  1  11 
the  cessation  of  the  Linga  Sarira  which  is  continuant  (see  Karika  XL),  and  does 
not  cease  till  the  development  of  discriminative  knowledge.  cre*tni  Tasmat,  there 
fore.  f  :«  Duhkham,  pain.  ^i%f  Sva-bhavena,  by  nature. 

LV.  Therein  does  intelligent  Purusa  experience  pain 
caused  by  decay  and  death,  on  acount  of  the  non-cessation 
of,  or  till  the  cessation  of,  the  Subtile  Body  :  wherefore  pain 
is  the  natural  order  of  things. 


44 


Object  of  Prakriti  s  creation  explained. 


Iti,  thus  then. 


Prakriti. 


II  V^  \\ 

:  Esah,    this.      u*iri*ri:   Prakriti-kritah,  originated   by 
Mahat-adi-yisesa-bhftta-paryantah,      beginning     with 


Mahat  and  ending  with  the  particular,  i.e.,  gross  elemental  creations.  Jff^ywftfoujri 
Pratipurusa-artham,  for  the  release  of  each  individual  Purusa.  ^  Sva-arthe,  in  her 
own  interest,  m  Iva,  as.  w$  Para-arthe,  in  the  interest  of  another,  i.e.,  of  Purusa. 
sirc*H:  Arambhah,  creation. 

LVI.  Thus  then  is  this  creation  beginning  with  Mahat 
and  ending  with  specific  entities,  originated  by  Prakriti  in 
the  interest  of  another  as  in  her  own  interest,  for  the  release 
of  each  individual  Purusa. 

ANNOTATION. 

73.  Originated  by  Prakriti  :  Creation  by  Prakriti  is  not  guided, 
directed,  and  controlled  by  I^vara  or  Adi  Purusa,  for  this  is  impossible, 
inasmuch  as  no  activity  can  belong  to  him.  Neither  can  Brahman  be  the 
material  of  creation,  for,  being  the  power  or  energy  of  Consciousness, 
it  can  undergo  no  transformation  or  modification. 

For  the  release  of  each  individual  Purusa  :  This  explains  why,  on 
the  release  of  one  Purusa,  the  release  of  others  does  not  result,  and  how 
the  activity  of  Prakriti  whose  nature  is  to  energise,  can  cease  in  regard 
to  a  particular  Purusa,  and  how  creation  does  not  ever  continue  ,  making 
release  of  any  one  impossible.  Vachaspati  explains  the  passage  thus  :  As 
a  man  who  desires  food,  being  engaged  in  the  cooking  of  food,  rests 
after  the  food  has  been  cooked,  so  does  Prakriti,  who  is  engaged  in  activity 
with  a  view  to  release  every  individual  Purusa,  cease  from  energising 
again  in  regard  to  that  Purusa  whom  she  releases. 

Spontaniety  of  Prakriti  explained  and  illustrated. 


srn%: 


n 


n 


^H^RsJ^Miw  Vatsa-vivriddhi-nimittam,  for  the  sake  of,  or  due  to  the  nourish 
ment  of,  the  calf,  ^wi  Ksira-sya,  of  milk.  *w  Yatha,  as.  **%:  Pravrittih,  acti 
vity,  i.e.,  secretion,  srare?  A-jna-sya,  of  the  unintelligent.  ^^N^i^RHiti  Purusa- 


virnoUsa-nimittam,   due   to  the  release  of  Purusa.    crar  Tatha,  so.     v^fa:  Pravrittih, 
activity,  i.e.,  creation,     irap^i  Pradhana-sya,  of  the  Pradhana. 


SAMKHYA-KARIKA.  45 

LVII.  Just  as  is  the  secretion  of  milk,  which  is  un 
intelligent,  for  the  sake  of  nourishment  of  the  calf,  so  is  the 
creation  of  the  Pradhana  for  the  sake  of  the  release  of 
Purusa. 

ANNOTATION. 

74.  This  Kflrika  gives  an  answer  to  those  who  entertain  doubts  as 
to  how  an  unintelligent  substance  such  as  Prakriti  is  represented  here  to 
be,  can  engage  in  activity  for  an  altruistic  end.  It  cannot  be  maintained 
that  the  secretion  of  milk  takes  place  under  the  superintendence  of  IsVara. 
For  all  intelligent  activity  such  as,  for  instance,  as  is  here  attributed  to 
T^vara,  proceeds  either  from  selfish  motives  or  from  compassion.  Now, 
in  the  case  of  Isvara,  who  is  exhypotliesi  all-full,  having  all  desires  ful 
filled,  wanting  in  nothing  whatever,  can  possibly  have  no  selfish  ends  to 
accomplish.  Compassion  also  is  impossible  ;  for  compassion  implies  the 
desire  to  alleviate,  remove  or  prevent  suffering,  but  prior  to  creation  there 
is  no  existence  of  the  Jivas,  Indriyas,  Bodies,  and  Objects,  and  conse 
quently  no  pain,  no  suffering.  Compassion,  therefore,  cannot  be  the  motive 
for  creation.  Further,  were  creation  an  act  of  compassion  on  the  part  of 
l^vara,  one  would  expect  to  find  in  it  only  happy  beings,  but  such  is  not 
the  case,  but  just  the  opposite.  The  anomaly  cannot  be  explained  by 
reference  to  diversity  of  Karma,  as  in  that  case  the  alleged  superintendence 
.of  Karma  by  an  omniscient  and  omnipotent  Being  falls  to  the  ground. 
Prakriti,  on  the  other  hand,  being  unintelligent,  has  no  selfish  motive  nor 
any  motive  of  compassion  to  impel  her  to  activity.  Her  activity  is  directed 
simply  by  the  end  of  the  other  ;  she  exists  for  his  sake.  Her  action  is  of 
the  nature  of  a  sympathetic  response,  of  harmonical  variation  or  corres 
pondence,  like  the  secretion  of  the  mother's  milk,  in  response  to  the  re 
quirement  of  the  baby. 

Above  continued. 


II 

Autsukya-nivritti-artham,  for  the  sake  of  relieving  or  gratifying 
desire  or  curiosity,  w  Yatha,  as.  f^iro  Kriyasu,  in  acts.  fl^fi  Pravartate, 
engages.  %T«R:  Lokah,  man.  J^f^r  Purusa-sya,  of  Purusa.  f^%r^'  Vimoksa- 
artham,  for  the  sake  of  release.  3*tift  Pravartate,  energises,  ff^a  Tat-vat, 
similarly  to  this.  K&m^  A-Vyaktam,  the  Unmanifest,  Prakriti. 

LV1IL     Just     as   people   engage   in   acts   to   relieve 


46  SAMKHYA-KARIKA. 


anxiety  or   desires,  so  does   the  Unmanifest  energise  for  the 
purpose  of  the  release  of  Purusa. 

Row  Praltritis  creation  ceases  spontaneously. 


Ranga-sya,  to  the  stage,  i.e.,  the  spectators.  ^f^r^T  Darsayitva,  having 
exhibited,  faffi  Nivartate,  ceases,  desists.  ^fl^r  Nartaki,  fair  dancer.  w  Yatha, 
as.  ^^  Nrityat,  from  dance.  3*^  Purusa  sya,  to  Purusa.  rrar  Tatha,  similarly. 
^nr^ni  Atmanam,  herself,  n^ra^  Prakasya,  having  exhibited,  f^^  Nivartate,  ceases. 
m>f?i:  Prakritib,  Prakriti. 

L1X.  Just  as  a  fair  dancer,  having  exhibited  herself 
to  the  spectators,  desists  from  the  dance,  so  does  Prakriti 
desist,  having  exhibited  herself  to  Purusa. 

Unselfishness  of  Prakriti  demonstrated. 


II  ^  II 


:  Nana-vidhaih,  manifold.  ^^:  Upayaih,  by  means.  3qwf^ft  Upa- 
kari^ji,  generous,  beneficent.  ^w%:  An-upakarinah,  non-beneficent,  ungrateful. 
^g:  Pumsa^,  of  Purusa.  yjrgtfi  Guna-vati,  possessing  the  Gunas,  possessing  qualities, 
virtuous,  mffitfl  A-gur;a-sya,  devoid  of  the  Gunas,  devoid  of  qualities,  worthless. 
Sfl:  Satah,  as  he  is.  TTC*  Tasya,  his.  ^'  Artham,  object.  w&«  Ap-artha-kam, 
objectless,  i^ffl  Charati,  pursues. 

LX.  By  manifold  means  does  benevolent  Prakriti, 
possessed  of  the  Gunas,  pursue,  in  a  manner  in  which  she 
has  no  interest  of  her  own,  the  object  of  Purusa  who  makes 
no  return,  being  devoid  as  he  is  of  the  Gunas. 

How  activity  of  Prahriti  ceases  for  ever,  in  regard  to  the  released  Purusa. 


foT%^Erftfrr  f 


U 

:  Prakriteb,  than  Prakpti.  §5*n^t  Sukumara-taram,  more  gentle  or 
delicate.  *  Na,  not.  i^f^  Kim  chit,  anything.  si%  Asti,  exists.  ?B  Iti,  such. 
^  Me,  my.  ^:  Matih,  opinion,  ^ft  Bhavati,  is.  IT  Ya,  who.  5gr  Drista,  seen. 


SAMKBYA-KAB1KA.  47 


Asmi,  I  am.  $fa  Iti,  so.    3^:  Punah,  again.  T  Na,  not.    ^sp^Darganam,  seeing, 
gaze,  sight,     ^f^  Upaiti,  approaches.     5^*1  Purusa-sya,  of  Purusa. 

LXI.  My  opinion  is  that  nothing  exists  which  is  more 
delicate  than  Prakrit!  who,  knowing  that,  "  I  have  seen," 
comes  no  more  within  the  sight  of  Purusa. 

ANNOTATION. 

75.     This  Karika    explains   and  illustrates  how   Prakriti  does   not 
energise,  over  again,  in  regard  to  the  released  Purnsa. 

Bondage,  Transmigration  and  Release  are  all  of   Prakriti,  and  not  of 

Purusa. 


STftfrf:  I)  ^R  II 


?rc*ira  Tasmat,  therefore,  f  Na,  not.  «ro?i  Badhyate,  is  bound,  3131  Addha,  any, 
whatever,  i  Na,  not.  g^P»  Much}  ate,  is  released.  i  Na,  not.  ^  Api,  also, 
sgrffl  Sarnsarati,  transmigrates.  5^:  Pnrusah,  Purusa.  *mrffl  Samsarati,  transmi 
grates,  ^zm  Badhyate,.  is  bound.  g^mMuchyate,  is  released.  ^  Cha,  and.  »IHHKII 
(Nana-asraya,  the  support  of  manifold  creations  or  beings.  v%fa:  Prakritib, 
Prakriti. 

LXII.  Wherefore,  verily,  no  Purusa  is  ever  bound, 
nor  is  released,  nor  transmigrates.  Prakriti,  being  the  sup 
port  of  manifold  creations,  is  bound,  is  released,  and  trans 
migrates. 

How  Prakriti  binds  and  releases  herself. 


11  ^  II 

^  :  Rupaih,  by  forms,  modes,  conditions,  dispositions,  gpft :  Saptabhili, 
seven,  viz.  virtue,  vice,  dispassion,  passion,  power,  weakness,  and  ignorance.  ^ 
Eva,  verily.  TOrfn  Badhnati,  binds.  WIH^  Atmanam,  herself,  WRT  Atmana, 
by  herself,  ^fa:  Prakritib,  Prakriti.  ^r  Sa,  she.  **  Eva,  it  is.  ^  Oha,  and. 
j^n^'  Purusa-artham,  object  of  Purusa.  ^  Prati,  in  regard  to.  N^N^fri  vimocha- 
yati,  releases.  ^>^y  Eka-rupena,  by  one  form,  i.  e.,  of  Knowledge. 

LXEir.  By  seven  forms  does  Prakriti  bind  herself  by 
herself  ;  and  it  is  she  who,  by  one  form,  releases  herself  for 
the  sake  of  Purusa, 


48  SAMKSYA-KARIKA. 


How  discriminative  knoidedge  is  fully  developed. 


^  Evam,  so,  in  the  manner,  taught  above.  r^grorora  Tattva-abhyas&t, 
through  cultivation  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Tattvas  or  twenty-five  Principles,  i 
Na,  not.  vfa  Asti,  is.  *i  Na,  not.  ^  Me,  mine.  T  Na,  not.  ^f^  Aham,  I.  *fa  Iti, 
thus.  3rofi3fo^  Aparisesam,  beyond  which  there  remains  nothing  to  know,  final. 
sifeq^ra  A-viparyayat,  from  the  absence  of  error  and  doubt.  fop*  Visuddham, 
purified,  free,  ifa^i.  Kevalam,  single,  unsullied.  sw^ft  Utpadyate,  is  produced. 
^r^  Jnanam,  knowledge. 

LXIV.  So,  through  cultivation  of  the  knowledge  of 
the  Tattvas,  is  produced  the  final,  pure,  because  free  from 
error  and  doubt,  and  one  single  knowledge  that  neither  does 
agency  belong  to  me,  nor  is  attachment  mine,  nor  am  I 
identical  with  the  Body,  etc. 

Relation  of  Prakriti  and  Purusa  after  Release. 


11  ^  u 

^T  Tena,  thereby,  by  means  of  knowledge  of  the  Tattvas,  as  described  in  the 
preceding  Karika-  f^rww^  Nivritta-prasavam,  whose  prolificness  has  come  to 
cease  through  creation  of  all  that  was  to  be  created  for  the  sake  of  Purusa. 
sr&reira  Artha-vasat,  through  the  influence  of  the  object,  wz.,  knowledge  of  the 
Tattvas.  ^r^MNRsitii^Sapta-riipa-vinivrUtam,  desisting  from  the  seven  forms,  virtue 
and  the  rest,  by  which  she  binds  herself  and  which  are  no  longer  required  for  the 
sake  of  Purusa,  both  of  whose  objects,  experience  and  release,  are  accomplished. 
*5f?f  Prakritim,  Prakrlti.  <T93m  Pasyati,  looks  at.  j^r:  Purusal?,  Purusa.  fos^ra 
Preksaka-vat,  like  a  spectator  in  a  theatre,  srafari:  Avasthitah,  seated,  stand 
ing  by.  ^^:  Sva-sthah,  self-reposed,  undisturbed,  freed  from  the  reflection 
of  Buddhi  rendered  impure  by  means  of  the  modifications  of  Rajas  and 
Tamas. 

LXV.  Thereby  having  her  prolific  energy  stopped, 
and  desisting  from  the  seven  forms  under  the  influence  of 
knowledge,  Prakriti  is  looked  at  by  Purusa  ju$t  like  a  spec 
tator,  standing  by,  self-reposedf 


SAMKHYA-KAR1KA.  49 

Conjunction  of  Prakriti  and  Purusa  is  not,  as  such,  the  cause  of  creation. 

*\        *\ 


II          II 

5gi  Drist4,  seen.  w  Maya,  by  me.  sft  Iti,  so.  3^«:  Upeksakah,  regardless, 
indifferent,  unaffected.  w>:  Ekah,  the  one,  ^Purusa.  ^gr  Drista,  seen.  wn.Ahnm, 
I.  *ft  Iti,  so.  ^t^f^  Uparamati,  desists,  ww  Anya,  the  other,  Prakriti.  *rfff  Sati, 
existing,  continuing,  ^nt  Samyoge,  conjunction,  existence  side  by  side,  vfa  Api, 
even.  ?%:  Tayoh  of  the  two.  H%*H  Prayojanam,  purpose,  motive,  i  Na,  not. 
irf%i,  Exists,  ^i^r  Sarga-sya,  of  creation. 

LXVI.  u  She  has  been  seen  by  me,"  —so  the  one 
stands  indifferent  ;  "  I  have  been  seen,",  —  so  the  other  desists. 
Though  their  conjunction  still  remains,  there  does  not  exist 
any  motive  for  creation. 

Jivan-Mukti  explained. 


II  LVS  II 

Samyak,  perfect,  smfwrra  Jnana-adhigamat,  from  attainment  of  know 
ledge.  ^^f^^Dharma-adinam,  of  virtue  and  the  rest.  ^«hK<iiMi^  A-karana-prdptau, 
on  reaching  or  being  reduced  to  the  state  in  which  they  lose  their  power  of 
causing  effects,  f^^  Tisthati,  remains,  ^rasjm  Samskara-vagat,  from  the  influ 
ence  of  Samskara  or  impression  or  the  effect  of  the  impulse  previously  given  to  it. 
srai**^  Ohakra-bhrama-vat,  like  the  whirling  of  the  potter's  wheel,  ^rf^nc:  Dhrita- 
sariral?,  invested  with  a  Body. 

LXVII.  Through  attainment  of  perfect  knowledge, 
virtue  and  the  rest  coming  to  be  deprived  of  their  power  as 
causes,  Purusa  yet  continues  invested  with  body  under  the 
influence  of  previous  Dharma  and  A-Dharma,  as  the  potter's 
wheel  continues  whirling  (from  momentum). 

ANNOTATION. 

76.  This  Karika  explains  the  fact  of  Jivan-Mukti  or  release  in  life, 
as  in  the  case  of  Kapila,  ^7amadeva5  and  others.  Jivan-Mukti  consists  in 
the  release  of  an  incarnate  Purusa  from  the  entanglement  of  Prakriti  prior 
to  his  separation  from  the  Body.  These  two  things,  viz.,  release  from 
bondage  and  continuance  of  the  Body,  are  compatible  with  each  other,  as 
they  are  dependent  upon  independent  causes,  For,  universally,  release 
7 


50  SAMKHYA-KARIKA. 


takes  place  on  the  manifestation  of  discriminative  knowledge  between 
Prakriti  and  Purusa,  in  other  words,  it  does  not  imply  the  acquisition  of  a 
new  state  or  condition,  but  consists  merely  in  the  removal  of  a  veil  or  a 
shadow,  as  it  were  ;  whereas  the  Body  is  the  positive  result  of  positive 
causes  and  depends  for  its  existence  or  non-existence  upon  those  very 
causes.  These  causes  are  Dharma  and  A-Dharma,  or  merit  and  demerit, 
collectively  termed  Karma.  Now,  l  Karma  is  distinguished  as  Prarabdha 
or  operative,  Sanchita  or  stored  or  potential,  and  Agamika,  or  to  come,  or 
future.  On  the  attainment  of  discriminative  knowledge,  Sanchita  Karma 
or  Karma  in  seed-form  is  burnt  up  and  rendered  infructuous,  and 
Agamika  Karma  also  is  necessarily  precluded.  Only  the  Prarabdha 
then  remains,  It  is  Karma  acquired  by  acts  performed  in  a  previous 
life  and  which  has  become  operative  in  the  present  life,  that  is  to 
say,  it  is  the  cause  of  conjunction  with  the  present  Body  and  of  all 
the  experiences  of  the  present  incarnate  existence.  It  is  not  affected  by 
discriminative  knowledge,  and  it  goes  on  sustaining  the  Body  till  it  is 
exhausted  or  works  itself  out,  in  its  natural  course,  when  the  Body 
which  was  supported  by  it,  automatically  drops  down.  It  is  hence,  there 
fore,  that  when  discriminative  knowledge  is  perfectly  developed  before 
the  Prarabdha  has  worked  itself  out,  the  incarnate  Purusa  in  qiiestion,  is 
released,  but  remains  awhile  burdened  with  the  Body.  This  is  what  is 
called  Jivan-Mukti  or  the  state  of  release  during  life. 


When  a  Jivan-Mukto  is  finally  released. 


STTH 


II  3  m  II 

unT  Prapte,  come  to  pass,  that  is,  on  the  exhaustion  of  Prarabdha  Karma 
by  experience,  aifrc^  Sarira-hhede,  on  separation  from  the  body.  ^fw^m 
Charita-artha-tvat,  for  the  reason  that  phe  has  fulfilled  her  purpose,  viz.,  Crea 
tion  for  the  experience  and  release  of  Purusa.  J^TT^ST^  Pradhana-vinivrittau, 
on  the  cessation  of  the  activity  of  the  Pradhftna.  <toir-n«Mt  Aikantikam,  certain, 
absolute.  wi^f-rw^  Atyantikam,  final,  imperishable.  3*ro  Ubhayam,  both,  tta^i 
Kaivalyam,  singleness,  pureness,  freedom  from  the  reflection  of  the  threefold 
pain.  tuiHlid  Apnoti,  attains. 

LXVI1I.  When  (in  due  course)  separation  from  the 
Body  takes  place,  and  there  is  cessation  of  the  activity  of 
the  Pradhana  from  her  purpose  having  been  fulfilled 
Purusa  attains  both  absolute  and  final  Kaivalya. 


SAMKHYA-KAR1KA.  5l 


Origin  of  the  Samkhya  declared 

31T  'TOTWOT 


Purusa-artha-jnanam,  knowledge  for  the  accomplishment  of  the 
end  of  Purusa,  i.e.,  release.  s?  Idam,  this.  5^'  Guhyam,  secret,  abstruse, 
unintelligible  to  the  dull,  wfw  Parama-risina,  by  the  great  Ilisi  or  Seer, 
namely  Kapila.  s^n^ra^  Sam-akhyatam,  thoroughly  expounded,  expounded  in 
all  details.  Rmr^dMfriti^T;  Sthiti-utpatti-pralayalj,  duration,  production,  and 
dissolution.  R«-HW!  Ohintyante,  are  considered,  discussed,  *ra  Yatra,  wherein. 
^n^  Bhutanam,  of  created  things,  beings. 

LXIX.  This  abstruse  knowledge,  adapted  to  the 
end  of  Purusa,  wherein  the  production,  duration,  and 
dissolution  of  beings  are  considered,  has  been  thoroughly 
expounded  by  the  great  Risi. 

ANNOTATION. 

77.  Vachaspati  construes  the  second  line  of  the  Karika  in  a 
different  manner.  It  is  thus  •  Yatra,  wherein,  that  is,  in  which  knowledge, 
that  is  to  say,  for  which  knowledge,  the  origin,  duration  and  destruction 
of  living  beings  are  considered  by  the  Srutis.  Hereby  he  wants  to  bring 
out  the  sense  that  the  Samkhya  is  connected  with,  and  is  supported  by, 
the  Veda. 

Traditional  succession  of  the  Sdmkhya  stated. 


rR  ^       ^T^rT  rF        il  ^ 


*?m  Etat  ,  this,  ^f^l  Pavitram,  purifying,  i.e.,  from  the  sin  causing  the 
threefold  pain.  ^'  Agryam,  first  in  order,  principal  among  all  purifying 
things,  foremost.  5^:  Munih,  Muni,  sage  Kapila.  ^m$  Asuraye,  to  Asuri. 
Anukampaya,  through  compassion.  J^f  Pradadau,  taught,  imparted. 
:  Asurih,  Asuri.  nfo  Api,  again.  H^fW<i  Pailchasikhaya,  to  Panchasikha. 
?N  Tena,  by  him.  ^  Cha,  and.  is*n$ri  Bahu-dha-kritam,  extensively  propaga 
ted,  elaborated  in  manifold  ways.  <vwi.  Tantram,  the  system. 

LXX.  This  foremost  purifying  knowledge  the  Muni, 
through  compassion,  imparted  to  Asuri  ;  Asuri,  again,  to 
Panchasikha,  by  whom  the  System  was  elaborated  in 
manifold  ways. 


52 


ANNOTATION. 

78.  Tn  this   and  the  succeeding    Karika  the   traditional   succession 
of  the  Samkbya  doctrine  is  recorded  with  a  view  to  establish  its  authentic 
character  and  thereby  to  inspire  reverence  towards  it. 

79.  According   to  Gaudapada,   the  Samkhya-KariM   ends  with  this 
Karika.     "  For  the  Samkhya   which  is  the  cause  of  release   from  transmi 
gration,  was  declared  by  the  Muni  Kapila,  wherein  or  in  regard  to  which," 
as  he  says,  "  there  are   these   seventy   verses  in    the   Aryri    rhetre."     This 
is   supported    by   the   other   traditional    name   for  the   Sanpkhya-Karikn, 
which    is  Samkhya-  Saptati   or   the     Seventy   (Verses)    on    the   Samkbya. 
Vachaspati,    on    the  other   hand,  has   not    questioned  the   genuineness,  or 
the    claim  to   authority,  of   the   additional    two   Karikas  and   has   added 
his  comment  to  them. 

Above  continued. 


fSjisqwiw  &sya-paramparaya.,  by  tradition  of  disciples,  siro?^  Agatam, 
descended,  received,  f^fsw^  tsvarakrisnena,  by  Isvarakrisna,  the  author  of  the 
Samkhya-K&rika.  *  :  Sah,  this.  ^  Cha,  and.  ^m,  this,  ^itm  :  Aryabhih,  by 
Arya  verses.  «%"l  Samksiptam,  abridged,  summarised,  compendiously  written. 


. 

Arya-matina,    whose   intelligence   reached   to   the  Tattvas  ;    holy-minded. 
Samyak,   thoroughly.      $mm     Vijnaya,     understanding,    realising.    %^r 
Siddhantam,  demonstrated  truth,  established  tenet,  doctrine. 

LXXI.  And  this  doctrine,  descended  by  tradition 
of  disciples,  to  the  holy-minded  Isvarakrisna,  having  been 
thoroughly  understood  by  him,  has  been  summarised  by 
means  of  these  Aryas. 

Relation  of  the  Sdmkhya-Kdrikd  to  the  Sdmkya-Pravachana-Sutram. 


Saptatya,  by  the  seventy-versed  treatise.  ^  Kila,  truly.  ^  Ye,  what. 
*Rft:  Arthab,  subjects,  topics.  ^  Te,  those,  wif:  Arthab,  subjects,  fim^r 
Kritsna-sya,  entire,  whole.  Nfgd*-<^  §asti-tantra-sya,  of  the  system  of  sixty 
topics.  ^qiRiwfc<f^r!T  :  Akhyayika-virahital?,  disjoined  from  the  illustrative 
stories.  M<=n<jfc3i^m  :  Para-v4da-vivarjitab,  omitting  demolition  of  opposite  doct 
rines.  *  Cha,  and.  w  Api,  also. 


SAMKBYA-KARIKA.  53 

LXXII.  The  subjects  which  are  treated  by  the  Saptati, 
are  the  subjects  of  the  entire  Sasti-Tantra,  exclusive  of  the 
illustrative  stories,  and  omitting  demolition  of  opposite 
doctrines. 

ANNOTATION. 

80.  The  term  Sasti-Tantra  alludes  to  the  Samkhya-Pravachana- 
Siitram  divided  into  the  six  Books,  namely,  of  Topics,  of  the  Evolutions*  of 
the  Pradhana,  of  Dispassion,  of  Fables,  of  the  Demolition  of  Counter- 
Theories,  and  of  Recapitulation  of  Teachings.  It  is  thus  constructive, 
illustrative  and  destructive  in  its  method.  In  its  constructive  portions, 
it  establishes  the  sixty  topics  of  the  Samkhya  System.  The  same  is  done 
by  the  Saptati  as  well.  Inasmuch,  however,  as  the  latter  omits  the 
stories  and  controversies,  and  also  does  not  deal  with  the  topics  in  so 
much  detail,  it  has,  in  the  preceding  Karika,  been  described  as  a 
summary  of  the  former. 

The  sixty  topics  alluded  to  above  are  :  1.  the  existence,  that  is, 
conjunction  with,  and  disjunction  from,  Purusa,  of  the  Pradhana,  2.  her 
unity  or  singleness,  3.  her  objectiveness,  4.  her  subservience,  5.  the 
distinctness  of  Purusa,  6.  his  manifoldness,  7.  his  inactivity,  8.  his 
conjunction,  9.  his  disjunction,  and  10.  the  duration  of  the  rest, — these 
are  the  ten  radical  topics. 

According  to  another  enumeration,  the  ten  radical  categories  are 
1.  Purusa,  2.  Prakriti,  3.  Mahat,  4.  Ahamkara,  5-7.  Sattva,  Rajas,  and 
Tamas,  8.  the  Tan-Matras,  9.  the  Indriyas,  and  10.  the  Elements. 

A  third  enumeration  specifies  them  as,  1.  the  eternality  of  Purusa 
and  Prakriti,  2.  the  reality  of  experience  and  discriminative  knowledge 
in  Prakriti,  3.  the  unity  of  Prakriti  and  of  Purusa,  throughout  transmigra 
tion,  4.  the  subservience  of  Prakriti,  5.  the  difference  between  Purusa  and 
Prakriti,  6.  the  inactivity  of  Parusa,  7.  the  multiplicity  of  Purusa,  8.  the 
conjunction  of  Puriiba  and  Prakriti  at  the  time  of  creation,  9.  the  disjunc 
tion  of  Purusa  and  Prakriti  at  the  time  of  release,  and  10.  the  pre-existence 
of  Mahat  and  the  other  Tattvas  in  their  respective  causes. 

Add  to  them,  the  five  kinds  of  error,  nine  of  complacency,  twenty- 
eight  of  incapacity,  and  eight  of  perfection.  Thus  the  number  sixty  is 
obtained. 


Alphabetical   Index  of  Karikas. 


v 

xxiii 
xxx         ... 


xxv 
xiv 


:,  Ivi 


xx  v 

liv 

?  ^ 

xlix 

ixx 


,  xxxvi 
,  Ixiv 

,  xlvi 

,  Iviii 
xxxii 


XVI 

,  xli 


IX 


XV111  ... 

,lv 

~\ 

:,  xlviii 
,  xix 


PAGE. 

7 

22 
29 
23 
14 
42 

8 

40 
44 
25 
43 
41 
40 
51 
31 
48 
38 
45 
29 
15 
35 

17 

43 
39 
18 


)  ixv 


[§fo  few,  xi 


11 


iv 
,  Ixvi     ... 

,  Hi 
xlvii 


,  xlii 
xl 


5  Ixviii 


,  xlviii 


PAGE. 

19 

47 

48 

10 

1 

2 

4 

49 
37 
41 
46 
39 
20 
51 
35 
34 
21 
46 
4 
50 
11 
30 
24 
39 
15 
3 


g, 


:.  xxx 


,  Ivii 
«,  xlv 


xxv 


5  Lxxii 

,  ixvii' 
xxxvii 


(     56     ) 

PAGE. 
27 
46 
47 
44 
38 
26 
52 
13 
52 
49 
31 


XXX.V 
,     XXV 

,  vi 

xxxix 
viii 
xvn 
fr,  xxxi 


:  xxix 
fa,  x 


PAGE. 
36 
30 
24 
6 
83 

I 
17 

28 

27 

9 


' 


Words  Index   of  the    Karikas. 


*  xx 

Ixvii 
:  li 

lx 

Ixx 
xi,  xx 

Ivii 
ii 

vi 


xxv 
xxx 

xliv 

xliv 
Ixvii 
f  xl 
xvii 

ixii 


v 

Ixx 
m  lx 


v 


x 
xxxvii 

xxxiii 
xlviii 

*  xlviii 


PAGE. 

...  J8 
49 
41 
46 
51 

...11,  19 

44 

2 


27 
37 
37 
49 
34 
17 
47 
41 
4,  22 

7 

9 

51 
46 

6 
4,  4 

9 

31 
29 
39 
39 


Ixvi 
xii 
:  xliv 

lxiv 


vi,  xiv,  xxi,  xxii,  xxx, 
Ixii,  Ixvi,  Ixx,  Ixxii 


PAGE. 
20 
49 
11 
37 
48 
46 

6, 


14,20,21,27,47,  49,  51,  52 
xii  11 


v,    x,  xv 


x 
vii 

1 

xxiv 


xxx 


liii 


Ixi  x 
xiii 


xxxvi,  lx 
xii,  Ixxii, 
xxxv 


Ixv 


1 

7,  8,  14 
1 

11 

7 

...   40 

7 

...  29 
...  48 
...  42 
...  J7 
...  51 
...  13 
...  48 
...31,  46 
...11,  52 
...  30 

1 
...  48 

3 


(    58     ) 


xlv 

vii 
'  Iv 
Ixiv 


x 


n 


XXXVlll 

x,  xiv,  Iviii 

ii 

xlii 
x 

xlvi 

:  xlvii,  xlix 
xlvii 


xlviii 
xlviii 
*  xlvii 


*  xl 


x 
xxix 


v 


xvii,    Ixi,  Ixiv, 


xx 


Ixiv  Ixvi 
:  xxii,  xxiv 

xxv 
xxxi 
xlvi   1 


PAGE. 

38 
7 

43 
48 
15 

14 
2 
2 
32 
9, 

14,  45 
2 

35 
9 

...       38 

...39,  40 

39 

...       42 
39 

...       39 

..,       39 

...       41 

34 

8 

...       27 
6 

Ixvi       17, 

46,  48,  49 

...       22 

...15,  18 

...48,  49 

...21,  23 

24 

...       28 
...38,  40 


LV  ... 

xxvi 

Ixxii 
xiv 


xxvn 

:  xii .., 

Ixiii 

[  lix,  Ixiii 
Ixviii 

xxviii 
viii,    xvii,     xl, 

':  xli  ... 
iii 

:  1 
:  xxviii 


v  ... 

vi 
Ixviii 


••  Ivi     ,.. 
»  Ixxi 
Ixxi 


XXV  111 

xii,  xvi 
Ixii  ... 
J  xliii 
*xli    ... 
x 

«  XX    ... 

Ixx ... 
J  Ixx  ... 

xxxii 
xxvi 


PAGE. 
4 

24 

...       52 
14 

...  25 
...  11 
...  47 
...46,47 
...  50 
26 

Ivi         7, 

17,  34,  44 

35 

3 

40 

...  26 
2 

...  4,4 
4 
6 

...  50 
...  24 
...  44 
...  52 
...  52 
...  26 
...11,  15 
...  47 
...  36 
35 
9 

19 
51 
51 

...   29 
24 


59    ) 


Ivi,    Ixi,     Ixiv, 

xiii,  Ixix 

vii 

xx  vii 
xlix 

xx'vi,  xxxiv 
xx,  Ivi    ... 
iv,  xiii  ... 
xxviii  ... 


Ixix    .  .  . 


*  xl 
xxviii 


Ixvi 
viii 
xiii 
ix,  1 


x 


t  Ixvi 
Ixi 

xx  vii   ... 
xxv,  Ixviii 

xxi     .:. 
xliv,  liv 


xli 
Ixvi 
Ixiii 


PAGE. 

PAGE 

Ixvi       44, 

Hfjf^fsn  liii  ... 

...       42 

46,  48,  49 

^fHcfST  xlix 

...       40 

...35,  51 

^ftf^STfiJ  xxiv,  xxv 

...23,24 

7 

<CTRT  i 

1 

25 

<**JRT  r^T^f  ^TSm^T^  i 

i      ...         1 

40 

c^cfi^xxiii,  Ixx,  Ixxi 

...      22, 

...24,30 

51,  52 

...19,  44 

c^  xxxvi,  xxxviii 

...31,32 

...  4,  13 

^  xiii,   xviii,    xxiv, 

xxxi, 

...       26 

xxxvii,  Ixiii 

...       13, 

51 

17,  23 

,  28,  31,  47 

...       51 

C£cT  Ixiv 

...       48 

...       51 

c^q:  xlvi,  Ivi 

...38,44 

...       48 

C£qr  xxix: 

...       27 

34 

^          r-         »        i            ... 

...  .     50 

^^Jtn^r  ixvm 

...       26 

Q 

^W^  xxiii 

...       22 

...       40 

^«rq^  xiv 

...       38 

46 

*hcH^T  Iviii 

...       45 

...       49 

shr^f^ftjrSn^*  Iviii 

....       45 

7 

3FR?0    xxix,    xliii, 

xlvii       27, 

...        13 

36,  39 

...   8,40 

5|»?;*!?'   xxxi,   xxxii, 

xxxv      28, 

....       40 

29,  30 

8 

j^                             i      •  • 

...       39 

fj<*03rfiic£rr^  xivn 

46 

^J^^rr^t  xviii 

...       17 

...       49 

^ROTrsrftunJ  xliii 

36 

...       46 

,      ^J^  xx 

...       19 

25 

^Jac%  xx 

...       19 

...24,50 

^  xxvi 

...       24 

...       20 

aF^m?ir:  xliii 

...       36 

...37,43 

^R^  ix,  xiv,  xv 

...        8, 

41 

14,  15 

51 

<*5K?n  xvi 

...       15 

35 

iv     ...        14 

^JR^S'ST^flrfJ^'f^  x 

49 

^jT^^flfT^rr^  ix 

8 

47 

^JT^I  xv,  xliii 

...15,36 

(     60    ) 


v 
xxxi 


xv 


Ixxii 
:  xxi 

Ixxii 
xxxvi 
Ixxi 


Ixiv 

j  xix,  Ixviii 
xvii,  xxi 

... 

Ivii   ... 


PAGE. 
...  7, 

8,  29 
...  7 
...  28 
...  14 
...  40 
...  46 
...  52 
...  20 
...  52 
...  31 
...  52 
...  28 
...  48 
...18,  50 
...17,  20 


44 

27 

45 

58 


xxii,  xxiv  ...21, 

xliv 

xiv,  xx,    xxvii,    xxxvi, 
xlvi  14,19,25,31, 

•  xii 
*:^  xx 
Ix 


*  Ixix   ... 


xxx  v*  ... 

iv,  vi,  vii,  viii,  ix,  xi, 
xii,  xiii,  xv,  xvi,  xvii, 
xviii,  xix,  xx,  xxii,  xxiv, 
xxvii,  xxviii,  xxx,  xxxii, 


37 

38 
11 
19 
46 
27 
13 
51 

8 

32 


PAGE. 

xxxvii,  xxxviii,  xliii,  xliv, 
xlvi,  xlvii,  xlviii,  Ii,  liii, 
liv,  Ixiii,  Ixx,  Ixxi,  Ixxii       4,  6, 
7,7,8,11,  11,  13,  15,  15,  17, 
17,  18,19,  21,  23,  25,  26,  27, 
29,  31,  32,36,  37,38,  39,  39, 
41,  42,  43,  47,*  51,  52,  52 
Ixvii  ...        49 

:  xxvi     ...  ....        24 

:  1       ...  ...       40 

xxx  ...       27 

Ix       ...  ...       46 

Ixviii  ...        50 

13 


x 
f  xii 


lxi 


Iv 


x     xv 


51 
1 

43 
19 

...        35 
...11,  17 
xviii     ...        17 
43 
43 
1 

5f  xxiii,  Ixiv,    Ixvii,    lxix      22, 
48,  49,  51 
...        37 

,   n,    v,  vni,    xi,    xiv, 
xx,  xxi,  xxxii,  xiv     ...         1, 
2,4,  7,  11,  14,  19,  20,  29,  38 
••  xxii      ....  21 

Ixiv       ...  ...        48 

:  xxi    ...  ...       55 

27 
43 


xxx 


(     61    ) 


xli,  Iviii 

xlv 


xxv 
:  xxv 

xxxviii 
cm:  xiii,  liv 
r:  xlviii 
:  Ixvi      ,,. 


PAGE. 

Ixx     ...  ...       51 

Ixxii  ...  ...       52 

xi,  xx,  xxi,  xxx,  xlviii 
Ivii,  lix  ...       11, 

19,  20,  27,  39,  44,  46 
viii  ...         7 

1 

...35,  45 
...       38 
...       23 
...       24 
...       32 
...  13,43 
...        39 
...       49 

xxx,  xxxii  xlvi,  Ix...       27, 
29,  38,  46 
vi,  xix,    xx,  xxii, 
xxiv,  xxxv,  Iii,  Iv,  Ixii     6, 18, 
19,  21,  23,  30,  41,  43,  47 
xxiii  ...  ...        22 

:  xxv  ...  ...        24 

•:  xlviii  ...       39 

xli,lxvii  ...35,49 

iii,  v,   vi,  xxx,      xxxiv, 
xlvi,  Ixiii  ...   3,  4, 

6,  27,  30,  38,  47 
•:1         ..,  ...       40 

xlvi,  xlvii,  xlix        ...       38, 

39,  40 
...       40 
52 

...  48,51 
...       32 
xiv,  xxxix  ....  30,  33 

•:  liii  42 


xlix 


Ixxii 
Ixv,  Ixx 
xxxviii 


5T3TC*T  xxix,  xxx,  xxxiii 


PAGE. 

xxv  ...       24 

1 

...       41 
29 

•      27, 
27,  29 

xxxiii  ...        29 

tvii    ...  ...        17 

15 

.        11 
,        17 
33 

iv,  v,  xxxiii,  xxxv         4,  4 
29,  30 
li     ...  ...        41 

17 

xiv  ...        14 

q&JTrlxviii        ...         17 
Ixi       ...  ...        46 

xxi  ...         20 

lix  ...        46 

xxxii,  xxxiii  ...  29,  29 

:  xlviii  ...        39 

41 
li,  Iv  ...  ...  1,  41, 

43 
1 

46 

...     4,4 
2 

49 
':  xliii     ...  ...       36 

vi      ..,  ...         6 

i,  xxx   ...  ...   15  27 

r:  liii        ..,  ...       42 

xix  18 


(    62    ) 


xxxv    ... 

:  xxiv,  Iii 
xxiii 


xliv 

xxxii 

xxxii 


«T  i,   iii,  viii,  xxxi,  xli,  xlii, 
Ixi,  Ixii,  Ixiv,  Ixvi        ...    1, 
7,  28,  35,  35,  46,  47,  48, 
xlii    . . . 
lix 


xlvii  .. 
Ixii 
xxvii 


lii     .. 


xlii . . 


xxxx 
xl 
xii 

*  xli  ... 

xxx  ... 


lix      .. 
xxxix 


z*'  Iviii 
:  In    ... 


PAGE. 

PAGE. 

.       30 

^ftrrT^:  xlii                     ..,       35 

.        30 

qw    Ixix    ,..                  ...       51 

23,  41 

q^?3f  x    ...                   ...          9 

22 

ItWflmcf  Ixxi               ...        52 

36 

lOT^l        ...                             40 

49* 

q^snfq  *ur  Ixix             ...      51 

37 

q^T^"  Ixxii...           »        ...        52 

29 

q^qc  xxxi,  xxxvi             28,  31 

29 

qcHi1  Ivi                      ...      44 

49 

TO^ft^r^xvii                   ,..        17 

qft^TTR  xxvii                    ...        25 

1,  3, 

48,  49 
35 

qfenfJT^  xvi                     ...        15 

R*..                                                                                                                          1     K 

WTOT^XV                ....      15 

^f^TT^  vi                           ..6 

46 

qijrcf  Ivi      ...                  ...        44 

40 

qsjrefj^xl     ...                  ...        34 

39 

qfesf  Ixx     ...                ...       51 

47 

qs^fo  Ixv                       ...       48 

25 

qiftl  xxvi    ...                  ...       24 

46 

qr^q  xxvi                   ...      24 

35 

fq^srn  xxix                 ...      33 

44 
35 
33 

3^:  xxxvii,  Ixi                    31,46 
JJTR;  xi     ...               ,..      11 

j^q    xviii,     xxxvii,    Ivii, 

o4 

Ixix               ...  17,  31,  44,  51 

11 

JJW  iii,  xvii,  Iv,  Ixii,  Ixv          3, 

35 

17,  43,  47,  48 

27    * 

3^q^    xix,     xxi,      xxxvi, 

34 

xxxvii,  Iviii,  lix,  Ixi    ...        18, 

46 

20,  31,  31,  45,  46,  46 

33 

g^q^TJc^f  xviii                  ...         17 

48 

JJ^qf^ftT^T  Ivii                  ...         44 

48 

3^qHfr  xxxi,  xlii,  Ixiii    ...         28, 

45 

41 
46 

37,  47 

_,_____.^__,_  «        T         •                                                                                               r  ft 

g^rmfTl»T  Ixix                    ....        50 

5^qHf|fj4>  xlii             ...      35 

63    ) 


*sn  lx 

xl,  li 

sr*  xl  ... 

xxi, 


xx      xxxv 


xxv 


xn 


PAGE. 

...        46 
...34,41 
34 

...       20 
IT^T  xxii,       xxix,     xxxiv, 

xxxviii,  xlvii,  1  ...        21 

'  27,  30,  32,  39,  40 
xxiv  ...  ...        23 

liii      ...  ...        42 

.  21,32 
51 

,  26 
,.  38 
11 
13 
19 
11 

..36,59 
.       29 
.       40 
48 

3,46, 
47,  47 
,.       44 
8 
3 
7 

21,35, 
4j6 
17 

.       28 
44 
15 
7 
4 
4 


xn 
xiii  . 
xii 
ST 
xxxn 

1    ... 

Ixv 
f  Ivi 
iii,  lix,  Ixii,  Ixiii 


[*  xlv 


Vlll 

xviii 
:  xxii,  xlii,  Ixi 


XXXI 

Ivi 


xv 


J  xlvi 
xxxvii 


xxxvi 
xiii 

xxxvii,  Ixviii 
Ivii 
Ixviii 
xi 
xxix 


PAGE. 

6 

38 
31 
51 

...       31 
...        13 
31,  32 
20,  44 
...       50 
11 
33 
4 
4 
4 

iv         ...  4 

«  iv  4 

xxxvi  ...        31 

^Ixvi...  ...       49 

xvi,   xxiv,    xxv,    Iii, 
Iviii  15,  23,  24,  41,  45, 

xii     ...  ...        11 

[5  Ivii  ...  >>e       44 

srsra:  xv,  xvii,  xviii      15,  17,  17 


iv 
51  WO*  iv 


Ixi 


Ixv 

xlii    .. 
ET  xliii 
STUn  xxvi 


STTHT 


ji 

*  Ixviii 
xvii 
Iv 


xn 


51 
11 
48 
35 
36 
24 
27 
41 
50 
49 
43 
11 
11 


(    64    ) 


xxvm  ... 
Ixii 
rxlix 

xliv 
:  Ixiii     ... 
xviii  ... 
I  xliv 


PAGE. 

...       48 
...       26 
47 

...       40 
...       37^ 

17 
51 

xxvi,  xxxiv,  xlix      24,  30, 

40 

xxiii,  xxxv,  xxxvii        22, 
30,31 
f :  xlix    ...  ...       40 

xxxvi  ...  ...        31 

:  liv  ...       43 

xx,  xxix,  xxxiv, 
xliv,  xlv,  xlviii,  liii, 
Ixi  19,27,  30,  37,38,  39, 

42.  46 


xlvii 


liii 

:  xliii 


XXV  ... 

Ixix ... 
xxii,  xxxviii 
;  xlviii 


xlvi     ... 

I  XV 

Ixviii 


,       39 

,       40 

41 

41 

36 

,        41 
8 

34,41 

,        44 

,       24 

51 

21,  32 

.       39 

39 

38 

,       15 
50 


tliii  ... 

Ixi 


Vll,     XXV11 

Ixvi 

xviii  ... 
flv  ... 
iii,  viii,  xl,  Ivi 


v      ... 


:   xlviii 
xxxix    ... 

;  xxxix 
xix 


x 


;  Ixx 

:  xxxviii 
iii 

»  liv 

-*1i  iii 


Ixi,  Ixiv    ... 
xlviii 


xli,  Ivii,  Iviii,  lix 
,  xxxvii 


^  Ixxii 


PAGE. 

...   17 

...   42 

46 

...   43 

...  7,25 

...   49 

17 

...   43 

3,7, 

34,  44 

7 

3 

21 

...   36 
33 

...   33 

...   18 

...   42 

11 

...   47 
51 

...   32 
3 

43 
3 

...46,  48 

...   39 

...   42 

51 

35,44, 

45,  46 

...30,  31 

...   46 

2 

...   27 
52 


(     65    ) 


5T5f:  xiii,  liv 


xxv 


':  Ixiii 
xxiii 


PAGE. 

40 

...13,43 
...  43 
...  24 
...  38 

38 
...  48 

47 


x,  xx,  xl,  xli,  xiii,  Hi  9,  19, 
34,  35,35,  41 
4 

...  43 
...  51 
....  51 

45 

...  44 
...  40 
...  13 
...  49 
...24,  30 
...  27 
...  25 
...  40 

29 


;:  Hi 
.  Hi 
t  Iviii 

xlix 
xiii 


xxvi,  xxxiv 


xxvii 


xxxin 

::  iii 

:  iii    ... 

Ixxi   ... 
ii   ... 

'••  li    ... 
xli,  Hi... 
Ixviii 
x 
ii,  xi 


...       52 
2 

...       41 

...35,41 

50 

9 

2,11 


xiv,  xlvi,  xlvii 


»    xli 


xx 


xlvii 
xvii,   xviii, 


:  xiv 
^  xix 
xxiii 
xv  ... 

^  xiii 
xlvi 
Ivii  ... 


8J  Iviii 
IV  Ixxii 
xxiii ... 
viii  . . . 
xxxvi 
:  Ixxii 
Ivii  ... 
:  liv  ... 

xxxvii 
*  Ixiv  ... 
xxxiv,  Ivi 
xxxiv 

:  xxxvi,  xxxix 
,  xxvii 


1 

1  xxxiv 
xxxiii 
xxxiv 


xxxv 
xi 


PAGE. 

...14,38, 
39 

...       39 
xiv, 

...17,17, 

38,  40 

...        37 

...       38 

...       18 

...       22 

...       15 

35 

...  38 
44 
44 
45 

...       52 

...       22 

7 

31 
52 

...  44 
...  43 
...  31 
...  48 
...30,44 
...  30 
...31,33 
...15,25 
...  35 
...  40 
...  30 
...  29 
...  30 
30 
11 


Xll       .. 

xxviii 


xxv... 
:  xliii 


xv 


PAGE. 

11 

26 
39 
24 
36 

38 
15 

38 


x,  x,  xv 


xlvi    ... 

xiii;  xxviii,  xxix,  xxx  13,26, 

27,  27 

xxxi     ...  ...       28 

:   xii     ...  ...        11 

ii         ...  ...         2 

ii        ...         2 
...9,11, 
15 
7 
8 

15 
8 

30 
41 
30 

...       26 
...       50 
49 

...       50' 
...       32 
...       52 
...30,30 
2 

24 

...       52 
3 

..  ;24,52 
2 


xxxiv  ... 
Ii 

xxxiv 
xxviii 
Ixviii 
:  Ixvii  . . . 
Ixviii 
xxxviii 
Ixxi 


xxvi 
Ixxii 


:  in  . 

^T  xxv,  Ixxi 
*?n  ii 


Ix 

Ixvi 

liv        ... 
xiii 

x     •.  • 
iii,  Ixv  ... 
Ixxii  ... 
xlix  ... 
:  Ixiii  ... 
xv 
Ixix 
vii 


J  liii 


v 


Ixvii,  Ixxi 

xx  ... 
:  Ixvi,  xxi 
f:  xxi,  xxiv,  Hi,  liii,  liv.. 
41, 

*  1 

Ixvi  ... 
iv,  ix 

xxxv,  xxxvii 
MWDreR^cefT^  iv 

[  xvi 
xxxix,  xlix 
xxix.  xxxvii.  Ixiii 


xxv  . . . 
xxiii 
xxvii 
xxxvii 
xxxv 


PAGE. 

8 

46 
49 
43 
13 
9 

3,  48 

52 

40 

47 

15 

51 

7 

7 

42 
15 

49,52 
19 

.49,20 

.20,23, 

42,  43 

49 

.     4,8 

30,31, 

4 

.        15 

.33,40 

.27,31, 

47 

.  18 
24 
22 

.       25 

.       31 

.       30 

1 


(    67    ) 


xxx 


XXIX 


Vll 

xxxiii 


x     ... 

iv 


vi,  xiv 

Ixxi 

xlvi    . . . 
xviii,  xix 
iv,  xiv,  xlvii 


xlix 


H 


r  Ixi 


xl 

^ 


XXXV11 

xxxix 
vii,  viii 
xxvii 
Ixxi.. 


PAGE. 

...       27 

...       10 

...       27 

6 

7 

...       29 
9 

...   6,  14 
41 

...  52 
...  38 
...17,18 
...4,14, 
39 

...       40 

...        41 

...       46 

41 

34 

34 

31 

"...       33 

...     7,7 

25 

49 


Ixxi ... 
xvii  . 


xv 


ix 

xl,  Ixii 
;  xlv  ... 
^5ft*  xliii 

STrcP    liv 


xli      ... 
Ixix  . . . 
xxxviii 
xxxix  . 


!    Ixv     ... 
Ivi       ... 
)  xxix 
xxxi 
xxii 
^  xxii 
xxxii   . . . 
11,  iv 

5  xxxi    ... 
4»  xlii     ... 
xxxi . 


PAGE. 

52 

17 

17 

8 

.34,  47 

.       38 

.       36 

43 

.  35 
.  51 
.  32 
.  33 
43 

.       48 
44 

.       27 

.       28 

,       21 

21 

.       29 

.     2,4 

,.       28 

,.       35 

..       28 

9 

1 


APPENDIX  VIL 

PANCHA&KHA  SUTRAM 


OR 


A  FEW  OF  THE  APHORISMS  OF  PANCHA&'IKHA 


PANCHASIKHA-SUTRAM. 


INTRODUCTORY. 

1.  Parichasikha  is  one  of  the  few  earliest  writers  on  the  Samkhya. 
He  is  an  authority  on  the  subject,  and  is  mentioned  as  an  A  chary  a  or  Pro 
fessor  of  the  School,  According  to  L4varakfi&na,  the  author  of  Samkhya- 
Karika,  the  original  Samkhya  which  descended  from  its  founder  Kapila 
to  Panchasikha  (through  Asuri,  see  Samkhya-Karika,  No.  LXX),  was 
elaborated  by  him  in  manifold  ways.  But  not  a  single  one  of  his  works 
is  amongst  the  current  coins  of  the  Samkhya  literature.  "  He  is  known, 
by  scanty  fragments,  as  the  author  of  a  collection  of  philosophical  apho- 
One  other  performance,  if  not  two,  is  likewise  imputed  to  him  ; 


nsms. 


and  he,  perhaps,  descanted  on  the  theistic  (sic)  Samkhya  as  well  as  on 
the  atheistic  (sic.)  "  (F.  E.  Hall).  It  would  appear,  from  Vijnana  Bhiksu's 
Commentary  on  the  Vedanta-Sutram,  that  Panchasikha  wrote  a  comment 
ary  on  the  Tattva-Samasa. 

2.  The  only  source,  as  yet  discovered,  so  far  as  we  know,  from 
which  a  few  of  the  aphorisms  of  Panchasikha  can  be  recovered,  is  Vyasa's 
Commentary  on  the  Yoga-Sutram  of  Patanjali.  In  the  Preface  to  his  edition 
of  the  Samkhya-Pravachana-Bhasyam  of  Vijnana  Bhiksu,  Mr.  Fitz- 
Edward  Hall  has  collected  eleven  aphorisms  of  Panchasikha  quoted  by 
Vyasa  in  his  said  Commentary.  Another  collection  of  extracts  from  the 
same  source  has  been  published,  under  the  title  of  PanchaSikha-acharya- 
pranita  Samkhya-Sutra,  by  Pandita  Raja  Ram,  Professor  of  Sanskrit, 
D.  A.  V.  College,  Lahore,  in  Nos.  4  and  5,  Vol.  VIII,  1912,  of  the  series 
entitled  Arsa-Granthavali,  Lahore.  rPhis  collection  contains  twenty-one 
aphorisms  including  one  of  Varsaganya.  Quite  recently,  again,  we  had 
a  peculiar  opportunity  of  examining  the  MS.  of  another  collection  of  apho 
risms  attributed  to  PanchaSikha,  prepared  by  Svami  Hariharananda 
Aranya  of  the  Kapila  A^rama  in  the  District  of  Hooghli.  This  was 
obviously  not  an  original  compilation,  but  a  reproduction  of  the  Lahore 
publication,  with  a  few  additions,  one  of  which  was  taken  from  the  Veda 
without  acknowledgment !  As  regards  the  collection  of  Mr.  Fitz-Edward 
Hall  and  the  collection  of  Pandita  Raja  Ram,  we  have  found  that  the  one 
is,  in  certain  respects,  more  complete  and  correct  than  the  other,  while 
the  paternity  of  some  of  the  aphorisms  attributed  in  it  to  PanchaSikha 


PANCHASIKHA  SfJTEAM. 


is   not  free   from   suspicion.     These  will  be  noticed  more  in  detail  in  the 
subsequent  pages. 

3.  "  Little  can  safely  be  conjectured, "  as  rightly  observes  Mr. 
Fitz-Edward  Hall,  "  with  regard  to  the  character  of  the  work  or  works 
from  which  these  sentences  were  collected  by  Vyasa.  They  may  be 
text ;  and  they  may  be  commentary.  Probably  they  are  Samkhya  ;  but, 
possibly,  the}7  pertain  to  the  Yoga.  That  Pancharfikha  treated  of  other 
subjects  than  the  Samkhya,  may  be  inferred  from  a  remark  of  Vijnana 
Bhiksu's : 

Svaprayujana-ab'have'pi  vidusflm  pravrittau  Panchasililia-acharya- 
vakyam  samkhya-stham  pramdnayati. — Yoga-Vdrtika,  I.  25." 


PANCHASIKHA-S&TRAM. 


4.  ^iRfcgii     di-Vidvan,  the  primeval  Seer.     "  Primeval  "  means  pro 
duced  at  the  beginning  of  Creation.     "  Seer  "  means   Darstana-kara  or  one 
who  has  had   direct   vision   of  Purusa  ,^,s  distinct   from    Prakriti.     In  its 
primary  significance,  the  term  "  Adi-Vidvan  "  is  applicable  to  Visnu  alone. 
Here  it   refers  to   Kapila,    the   reputed  founder  of  the    Samkhya   Tantra, 
because  "  it  is  the  self-existent  Visuu  who  appeared  as  the  first  Wise  Man, 
Kapila,    at   the   beginning   of   the   current  cycle   of  Cosmic    Evolution, 
endowed  with  virtue,  knowledge,  dispassion,  and  infallible  will  "  (Vachas- 
pati  Mijfra). 

5.  fa^kiNT^Rrani  Nirmana-chittam  adhisthaya,  presiding  over,  ensoul 
ing,  or  through  the  medium  of,  a  self-made  mental   vehicle.     These  words 
explain  how  Visnu   became  incarnated  as  Kapila.     He,  by  an  act  of  will, 
reproduced  Himself  as  the   mighty  sage  Kapila,     Kapila  was  not  a  deve 
loped  man,  but  an  enveloped  Divinity.     This  artificial  creation  of  bodies, 
ensouled  by  artificial  emanations   of  the   mind,   which  is   one  of  the  most 
wonderful  discoveries   of  the  Hindu   Spiritual   Science,  is  not  expected  to 
make  any  deep  impression   on  the    minds  of  the  majority  of   Western 
Scholars  in  the  present  age,  nor  to  engage  them  in  the  investigation   or  in 
an  examination  of  the  truth  in  this  matter,  in  a  true  scientific  spirit.  Neither 
do  we  here   propose  to  enter   into  a  discussion  with  them  on  this  subject. 
We  shall  simply  mention,  for  the  information  of  readers  at  large,  that  this 
subject  of  the  creation  of  artificial   bodies  and  minds  is  dealt  with  in  the 
Yoga-Sutram  of  Patanjali,  IV.  4,  5,  and  6  (See  the    Sacred  Books  of    the 
Hindus,  Vol  IV.,   272-273).     And  to   make  the  words   of  our   text  a  little 
more  illuminating   to   them,  we   may  take  the  following  extract  from  the 
Introduction  to  the  above  volume  : — 

"  A  Yogi,  having  attained  the  power  of  Samadhi,  sets  about  destroy 
ing  his  past  Karmas.  All  Karmas  may  be  divided  into  three  classes  : — (1) 
The  acts  done  in  the  past,  the  consequences  of  which  the  man  must  suffer  in 
the  present  life ;  the  Karmas  to  expiate  which  he  has  taken  the  present  birth 
or  incarnation.  They  are  the  ripe  Karmas  (Prarabdha).  (2)  The  Karmas 
done  in  the  past,  but  which  are  not  ripe,  and  will  have  to  be  expiated  in  some 
future  life.  They  are  the  stored  Karmas,  or  unripe  (Sauchita).  (3)  The 
Karmas  which  a  man  creates  in  his  present  life,  and  which  have  to  be 
expiated  in  a  future  or  the  present  life.  This  last  kind  of  act, — the  fresh 
Karmas,  can  be  stopped.  By  devotion  to  the  Lord  and  doing  .everything 


PANCHASIKHA-S&TRAM. 


in  a  spirit  of   service,  no  fresh  Karmas  are  generated.     The  incurring  of 
debt  is  stopped.     The  man,  however,  has  to   pay  off  past  debts — the  ripe 
and  unripe  Karmas.     The  ripe  Karrnas  will  produce  their  effects  in  the 
present  life.     The  Yogi  does  not   trouble   himself  about  this.     But  the 
unripe  or  stored  Karmas  require  a  future  birth.     It  is  here  that  the  Yoga 
is  of  the  greatest  practical  importance.     The  Yogi  is  not  bound  to  wait  for 
future  lives  in  order  to  get  an  opportunity  to  pay  off  the  debt  of   Sanchita 
Karmas.     He  simultaneously  creates  ALL  the  bodies  that  thpse  Sanchita 
Karmas  require, — through  those  bodies  expiates  all  his  Karmas  simulta 
neously.     Every  one  of  such  bodies  has  a  Chitta  or  mentality  of  his  own. 
This  is  the  Nirmana-chitta  or  the  Artificial  mind — like  the  Pseudo-Person 
alities  of   hypnoptic  trance.     These  artificial  minds  arise  simultaneously 
like  so   many  sparks   from  the    Ahamkaric  matter  of  the  Yogi's  Self,  and 
they  ensoul  the  artificial  bodies  created  for  them.     These  artificial  bodies, 
with  artificial  minds  in  them,  walk  through  the  earth  in  hundreds, — they 
are  distinguished  from  ordinary  men  by  the  fact  that  they  are  perfectly 
methodical  in  all  their  acts,  and  automatic  in  their  lives-     All  these  arti 
ficials  are  controlled  by  the  consciousness  of  the  Yogi, — one  consciousness 
controlling   hundred  automatons.     Every    one  of  these  automatons  has  a 
particular  destiny,  a  particular  portion  of  the  Sanchita  Karma  to  exhaust. 
As  soon  as  that  destiny  is  fulfilled,  the  Yogi  withdraws  his  ray  from  it, 
and  the  "  man  "  dies  a  sudden  death, — a  heart-failure  generally. 

"  Now,  what  is  the  difference  between  the  ordinary  mind  and  the 
Yoga-created  mind,— the  natural  Chitta  and  the  artificial  Chitta?  The 
natural  mind  by  experience  gains  a  habit,  the  impressions  are  stored  in  it, 
and  they,  as  V^sanas,  become  the  seeds  of  desires  and  activities.  The 
artificial  mind  is  incapable  of  storing  up  impressions  in  it.  It  has  no 
Vasana*s  and  consequently  it  disintegrates  as  soon  as  the  body  falls  down." 

6.  «hi*u«fl  Karunyat,  through  compassion.  This  word,  according  to 
Vyasa,  tells  us  what  the  teaching  of  the  text  is.  It  is  this  that  l^vara,  cut 
of  the  abundance  of  His  compassion  towards  all  Purusas,  incarnates  Himself, 
from  time  to  time,  in  order  to  teach  them  knowledge  and  virtue,  whereby 
they  may  be  delivered  from  bondage.  The  passage  of  the  text  is  quoted 
by  Vyasa  in  his  Commentary  on  the  Yoga-Sutram,  I.  25,  and  Vachaspati 
explains  the  purpose  of  the  quotation  thus  :  "  This  theory  that  the  com 
passionate  Lord  teaches  knowledge  and  virtue  is  also  common  to  the 
teaching  of  Kapila : — So  has  it  been  said  by  Panchasikha."  Rdma 
Prasada's  translation. 

7.     w&i  Bhagavan,  divine.     This  term  connotes  the  possession  of 


PANGHASIKHA-StJTRAM. 


virtue,   knowledge,   dispassion,  and  infallible   will.     And  we  know  that 
these  were  cognate  with  Kapila. 

8.  mff:  Parama-risih,  the  mighty  sage.    Visnu  appeared  on  earth  as 
Kapila,  in   the  highly  purified  and  richly  developed  body  of  a  saint  who 
held  communion  with  the  gods.     The  necessity  for  such  bodies  for  divine 
manifestations  has  been  admirably  explained  and  illustrated  by  the  late 
Babu  Sisir  Kumar  Ghosh  in  his  Lord  Gaurdnga. 

9.  wf<3  Asuraye,  to  Asuri,  a  disciple  of  Kapila  and  the  first  recipient 
of  the  Samkhya. 

10.  fSwtniim  Jijnasamanaya,  who  wished  to  know  Asuri  approached 
the  divine  man  Kapila  and  desired  to  know  from  him  the   means  for  the 
accomplishment  of  the  Supreme  Good,  namely,  the  permanent  prevention 
of  pain. 

11.  wa'  Tantram,  the  systematic  teaching,  the  Samkhya  doctrine. 

12.  *tarc  Pra-uvacha,  declared  fully,  revealed.     Such,   then,  is  the 
origin  of  the  Samkhya. 

I.  The  primeval  Seer,  (incarnated),  through  the  me 
dium  of  an  artificial  mind,  (as)  the  mighty  divine  sage 
(Kapila),  out  of  compassion  (towards  all  entangled  Purusas), 
revealed  the  (Samkhya)  doctrine,  in  a  systematic  way,  to 
Asuri,  who  desired  to  know  them. 

13.  Now,    what   is   this   Samkhya    Dar^ana?    "  Dars'ana  "   etymo- 
logically   means  the  act  or  the  result  of  seeing,  from  the  root  </Dri!$,  to  see. 
Here  it  stands  for  Saksatkara   or   immeditae    vision,  that   is,  intuition   of 
the   Self.     And    "  Samkhya  "  means  that  by  which  something  is  perfectly 
revealed,  from  the  root  /Khya,    to   manifest.      The  "  Samkhya  DanJana," 
therefore,  is  that  form   of   Spiritual   Intuition   of   the   Self,    whereby   the 
nature  of  the  Self  is  perfectly  revealed.'    So  declares  Pancha&kha  :  _ 

II 


wi  Ekam,  one,  single.  ^  Eva,  only,  there  is  no  second,  ^r  Darsanam, 
intuition,  knowledge,  wft  :  Khyatifr,  coming  to  light,  shining,  manifestation, 
illumination.  ^  Eva,  alone.  ^\  Darsanam,  intuition,  knowledge. 

II.  There  is  but  one  Spiritual  Intuition  of  the  Self  • 
it  is  nothing  but  manifestation  which  is  the  Spiritual  In 
tuition  of  the  Self. 


PANCHASIKBA-StJTRAM. 


14.  The  word  '  Khyati  '  is  suggestive  in  more  respects   than   one. 
Now,  manifestation  is  declared  to  be  the  means  of  accomplishing  Moksa  or 
Release.  (1)  What,  then,  must  be  its  nature?  It  cannot  obviously  be  of  the 
nature  of  the  attainment  of  some  advanced  state  or  development  from  a  state 
less  advanced  or  less  developed  ;    for   Manifestation    itself   cannot   accom 
plish   this.     It  will  also  be  repugnant  to  the  Samkhya  conception  of  the 
Self ;  for  the  Self  is  kutastha,    unchangeable  ;    it  ever   is,   never   becomes. 
It   follows,    therefore,    that   Moksa   consists   merely   in   the   removal  of  a 
shadow,  as  it  were,  that  is,    of   something   which    casts   its   reflection  on 
the  Self  and  thereby  overshadows  it  and  causes  obstruction  to  its   shining 
out   in    the   fullness  of   its  own  light.     (2)  This  shadow,  this  obstruction, 
is  not  of,  or  from,  the  Self,  but  is  a  creation   of   the   Not-Self.     And   what 
is  the  cause  of  its   origin,    the   same   is   also   the   cause  of   its  removal. 
It  fades  or  deepens,  it  contracts  or   expands,  it  exists  or   ceases   to   exist, 
and  for  this  depends  entirely  on  the  activity  or  non-activity  of  the  Not-Self. 
(3)    The  Self  is  altogether  passive  and  inert.     Shadow  or  no  shadow,  it  is 
ever   there,   all-full,   ever  shining,    unaffected,    unsullied.     In  ignorance, 
men  speak  of  the  Bondage  of  the  Self  which  is  never  bound,  ever  released. 
Bondage,   in    reality,   is   this   supreme  ignorance,    this   veil   of  the  Not- 
Self, — the   non-discrimination    of     the   principle  of    Becoming    and  the 
principle    of  Being, — to   which   alone   is   due    all   the   suffering   in  the 
world, — not   exactly  suffering,   for  actual   suffering   there  can  be,  and  is, 
nothing  in   the   Self,  but  the     Abhimana   or   assumption   or   attribution 
of   it  to   the   Self.     Replace   non-discrimination    by    Discrimination,    the 
veil  is  gone,  and  gone  with   it   is  the   Shadow — the   obstruction — and  see 
the  ever  pure,  ever  constant,  ever  shining  Self. 

15.  This  Aphorism   of   Pancha&kha   has   been  quoted   by   Vyasa 
in  his  Commentary  on  the  Aphorism  I.    4   of   Patanjali's  Yoga-Sutram   in 
the     following   context :    Yoga  is    the    inihibition     of   the    modifications 
of  the  mind  (chitta)  (Yoga-Sutram  I;  2).     Then  the   Seer  (Purusa)   stands 
in  his   own   nature   (Ibid  I.  3),    that  is,  is  established  in  his  own  intrinsic 
form,  as  in  the  state   of  kaivalya  or   absolute  abstractedness.     Elsewhere 
(there   takes   place   in   him)  similarity  of    form   with  the   modifications 
(Ibid  I.  4j.     How  does  it  take  place  ?     Because   objects  are   presented   to 
him.     Whatever,  therefore,  be  the  modifications   of   the   mind,  with  the 
same  is  Purusa  invested,    so  long  as  the   mind  remains   up  and  doing. 
That   is  to  say,    Purusa,    with  the    light   of  his  intelligence,  illuminates 
the  manifold  modifications  of  the   active  mind,   which,    consequently,  are 
mistaken  as  being  the  manifestations  of  Purusa.     It  is  thus  this  mistake, 
the   failure   to  distinguish   between     the   unintelligent   modifications   of 


PANCHAS1  KHA-StfTRAM. 


the  unintelligent  mind  and  the  intelligence  of  the  inert,  immutable 
Purusa,  which  is  the  cause  of  all  the  mental  phenomena  so  universally 
attributed  to  Purusa.  In  reality,  however,  the  manifestation  of  Purusa  is 
one  and  one  only,  the  same  at  all  times  and  in  all  circumstances.  And  so 
there  is  the  Aphorism  :  "  There  is  but  one  Spiritual  Intuition  of  the  Self  ;  it 
is  nothing  but  Manifestation,  which  is  the  Spiritual  Intuition  of  the  Self." 

16-  The  Self  is  most  difficult  to  know.  It  is  inscrutable.  Only  a 
steady,  pure*  and  peaceful  mind  can  reflect  it  as  it  is  in  itself.  Steadiness 
of  the  mind  implies  a  long  and  arduous  process  of  Yogic  practice.  The 
stepping-stone  to  it  is  what  is  called  Jyotismati  or  the  state  of  lucidity, 
or  the  activity  which  causes  illumination.  This  activity  of  the  mind  is 
twofold,  according  as  it  is  painless  objective  (vijfoka-visayavati)  or  is 
purely  egoistic  (asmita-nmtra).  It  is  described  by  Vyasa  in  his  Com 
mentary  on  Yoga-Sutram,  I.  36,  in  the  following  manner  :  "  It  is  the 
consciousness  of  thought-forms  (Buddhi),  on  the  part  of  one  who  practises 
concentration  upon  the  Lotus  of  the  Heart.  For,  the  substance  of 
Buddhi  is  refulgent  and^is  like  Akada,  i.e.,  all-pervading.  Through  success 
in  concentration  upon  that,  the  activity  of  the  mind  modifies  by  the 
forms  having  the  colour  of  the  light  of  the  sun,  the  moon,  the  planets 
and  precious  stones.  Likewise,  the  mind  concentrated  upon  Asmita, 
I-am-ness  or  egoism,  becomes  pure  egoism,  calm  and  infinite,  like  a 
waveless  ocean."  And  he  supports  his  exposition  by  quoting  the 
following  Aphorism  of  Pancharfikha  : 

» 
II 


cpj  Tarn,  that.     IH^W^  Anu-matram,  of   the  size   of   an  atom,    small  as  an 
atom,    difficult   to   understand,   inscrutable,     ^nr^r^  Atmanam,   Self.     SRri^i  Anu- 
vidya,  knowing  at  last,     ufa  Asmi,  am.     sffl  Iti,   that.     ^  Evam,   in   this   form. 
?n^  Tavat,  for  certain,     ^ffm  Sam-pra-janite,  fully  and  accurately  knows- 

III.     Knowing,  at  last,    that  inscrutable  Self,  his  cons 
ciousness  manifests  as  "  I  am  '*  only. 

17.  It  has  been  mentioned  above  that  the  identification  of  the 
Principle  of  Being  with  the  Principle  of  Becoming,  of  the  Self  with  the 
Not-Self,  is  the  cause  of  all  the  suffering  in  the  Universe.  This  identifica 
tion  is  called  A-vidya.  Its  nature  is  declared  by  Pancha^ikha  in  the 
following  two  Aphorisms  : 


t<4 


8  PANCHASIKHA-SfJTRAM. 


Vyaktam,  unfolded,  sentient  substances  or  existences,  such  as  wife, 
son,  animals,  etc.  ?&m'  A-vyaktam,  not  unfolded,  insentient  objects,  such  as  riches, 
house,  couch,  etc.  3T  Va,  or.  ^r^  Sattvam,  existence,  substance,  object. 
Atma-tvena,  under  the  characteristic  of  the  Self,  as  being  the  Self,  ^n 
Abhi-pratitya,  approaching  towards  in  mind,  thinking,  believing,  taking  up.  rRS 
Tasya,  its,  of  the  object.  *R^  Sampadam,  prosperity,  well-being.  SH^T^  Aiiu- 
nandati,  rejoices  at  or  according  to.1  3iTrwr^  Atma-Sampadam,  well-being  of  the 
Self.  *fF3T^:  Manvanah,  imagining,  rrer  Tasya,  its,  of  the  object.  *IIH<^  Vyapa- 
dam,  adversity.  ^r^tof?!  Anu-Sochati,  grieves  according  to.  wi^qr^  Atma-vyapa- 
darn,  adversity  of  the  Self.  «I«*M:  Manvanah,  imagining.  s:  Sal?,  he.  sf  :  Sarvah, 
all.  ^Jn^g:  A-prati-buddhafy,  unawakened  in  regard  to  the  truth. 

IV.  They  are  all  unawakened  who,  believing  the 
objective  entities,  whether  they  be  sentient  or  insentient, 
to  be  the  Self,  rejoice  at  their  prosperity,  imagining  it  to  be 
the  prosperity  of  the  Self,  and  grieve  at  their  adversity, 
imagining  it  to  be  the  adversity  of  the  Self. 

18.  This  Aphorism  has  been  quoted  by  Vyasa  in  his  Commentary 
on  Yoga-Sutram  II.  5  which  describes  A-vidya  as  being  "  the  manifestation 
of  the  non-eternal,  the  impure,  the  painful,  and  the  Not-Self  to  be  the 
eternal,  the  pure,  the  pleasant,  and  the  Self." 


Buddhi-tah,  from  Buddhi.  vi.  Param,  different,  wnj  Purusam, 
Purusa.  wwrsfftara^Tf^i:  Akara-Sila-vidya-adibhih,  by  nature,  character,  know 
ledge,  etc.  The  nature  of  Purusa  is  constant  purity.  Indifference  is  his  character. 
By  knowledge  is  denoted  his  being  intelligent.  Whereas  Buddhi  is  impure,  not 
indifferent,  and  non-intelligent,  siwr^  A-pasyan,  not  seeing.  *jrcf<j  Kuryat,  is  led 
to  form,  ria  Tatra,  therein,  in  respect  of  Buddhi.  ^irH^Qf  Atma-buddhim,  the 
notion  of  the  Self.  %%  Mohena,  by  reason  of  the  dullness  (of  Tamas). 

V.  Not  knowing  Purusa  to  be  different  from  Buddhi 
in  nature,  character,  knowledge,  etc.,  a  man  is  led,  by  reason 
of  the  dullness  born  of  Tamas,  to  form  the  notion  of  the 
Self  in  respect  of  Buddhi. 

19.  The  above  has  been  quoted  by  Vyasa  in  his  Commentary  on  the 
Yoga-Sutram  II.  6  which  describes  Asmita  or  Egoism  as  being  "  the 
apparent  identity  of  the  subjective  power  of  seeing  (i.e.,  Purusa)  and  the 
instrumental  power  of  seeing  (i.  e.,  Buddhi)." 


PANGHASIKHA-BtJTRAM.  9 

20.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  there  is  Bondage  as  long  as  this 
notion  of  the  Self  in  respect  of  the  Not-Self  remains,  and  that  there  is 
Release  when  this  notion  is  destroyed  by  the  knowledge  of  the  Self  as 
being  distinct  and  different  from  the  Not-Self  in  all  essential  particulars. 


^ira  SyAt,  can  be.  *^:  Svalpah,  little.  *farc:  Samlrarah,  mixture. 
Sa-pariharah  attended  with,  i.e.,  capable  of  ,  avoidance  or  removal.  wmsr:  Sa-prati- 
avamarsah,  attended  with,  i.e.,  capable  of,  being  borne  easily.  s»w^i  Kusalasya, 
of  the  good.  T  Na,  not.  <*HW«<  Apakarsaya,  for  damage  or  impairment  or  lessen 
ing  the  effect,  w^  Alam,  sufficient,  strong  or  powerful  enough, 

VI.  A  little  mixture  (of  evil  entailed,  for  instance,  by 
the  killing  of  animals)  which  is  capable  of  removal  (by  ex 
piation)  or  is  easy  to  bear,  cannot  prevail  for  the  diminution 
of  the  (greater)  good  (produced  by  the  performance  of  sacrifices 
such  as  the  Asvamedha  and  the  like). 

21.  The  above  bears  reference  to  the  vexed  question  as  to  the  conse 
quences  of  the  acts  of  sin  necessarily  committed  in  the  course  of  the  per 
formance  of  sacrifices  which  are  calculated  to  produce  merits  of  far-reach 
ing  consequences.     For  instance,  an  Asvamedha   sacrifice  cannot  be   per 
formed  without  the  killing  of   a  horse,  and  killing  is  a  sinful  act.     So  that, 
while    the    performance  of   the  Asvamedha   produces  its  desirable  conse 
quences,  the  killing  of  the  horse  cannot,  at  the  same  time,  fail  to  produce  its 
undesirable  consequences.     The  question,  therefore,  arises  whether  what  is 
acquired  througb  the    sacrifice,  be  not    lost  through  the  sin.     This  is  an 
important  issue  arising  in  the  discussion  of  the  Law  of  Karma  as  a  whole. 

22.  Now,  "  the  killing  of  animals,  etc.,  has,"  as  Vachaspati  explains, 
'*  two  effects.    The  first  is  that,  being  ordained  as  part  of  the  principal  action, 
it  helps    in  its  fulfilment.     The  second  is  that,  the  causing  of  pain  to  all 
living  beings  being  forbidden,  it  results  in  undesirable  consequences-     Of 
these,  when   it  is  performed   only  as  subsidiary   to   the  principal   action, 
then,  for  that  very  reason,    it  does  not  manifest  its  result  all  at  once, 
independently  of    the  principal  action.       On   the  contrary,    it  keeps  its 
position  of   an  accessory  only,  and  manifests  only  when  the  fruition  of  the 
principal  ruling  action  begins.     It  is  said  to  be   tacked  on   to  the  ruling 
action,  when,  while  helping  the  ruling   action,  it  exists  as  the  seed  of   its 
own  proper  effect.  Panchadikha  has  said  the  following  on  the  subject  : 
A,  little  mixture.' 


10  PANCHA&KHA-SdTRAM. 

"When  the  ruling  factor  of  the  present  karma,  born  from  the  sacrifice 
of  Jyotistoma,  etc  ,  is  mixed  up  with  the  present  cause  of  evil,  it  may  be 
easily  removed.  Tt  is  possible  of  removal  by  a  small  expiatory  sacrifice. 
Even  if  an  expiatory  sacrifice  be  not  performed  by  carelessness,  the 
subsidiary  action  would  ripen  at  the  time  of  the  ripening  of  the 
principal  only,  and,  in  that  case,  the  evil  generated  thereby  would 
be  easy  to  bear.  The  wise  who  are  taking  their  baths  in  the  great 
lake  of  the  nectar  of  pleasure  brought  about  by  a  collection  of  good 
actions,  put  up  easily  with  a  small  piece  of:  the  fire  of  pain  produced  by 
a  small  evil.  It  is  not,  therefore,  capable  of  diminishing,  i.e.,  appreciably 
lessening  the  effect  of  the  good,  i.e.,  of  his  large  virtues."  —  Rama  Prasada's 
translation. 

23.  This  Aphorism  of    Panchaj^ikha   has  been  quoted  by   Vyasa  in 
his  Commentary  on  the   Yoga-Sutram    II.    13.     "So   long  as  the  cause 
remains,  the  fruition  of    Merit  and  Demerit  is  in  the  kind  of  birth,  length 
of  life  and  experience." 

24.  Pandit  Raja  Ram  is  wrong  in  reading  the  next  sentence  in    the 
Commentary  as  part  of  the  present  Aphorism.     For  both  Svapnesvara  and 
Vsichaspati  are  against  this  reading. 

25.  But   the   fact  remains   that  even  a   highly   meritorious   act   is 
tainted  with  sin,  and  with  consequent  pain.   It  is  even  as  Patanjali  declares 
that  "  to  the  discriminative,  all  is  pain"   (Yoga-Sutram  II.  15).     And  pain 
is  the  thing   which  every    mortal  seeks  to  get  rid  of  :    not  merely  present 
pain,  but  pain  not-yet-corae  is  the  thing  to  be  avoided  v  Yoga-Sutram  II.  16). 
Accordingly,  both  in  the  Samkhya  and  in  the  Yoga   Sastra,  enquiries  have 
been  instituted  into  the  cause  of    its  origin  as  well  as  into  the  means  of 
its  removal.      In   the  Yoga-Sutram   II.    17,    Patanjali    declares   that  the 
conjunction  of    Buddhi   and    Purusa   is   the  cause  of  pain.     And  on  this 
subject,  also  says  Panchasikha  : 


d<wli'i^r|fceisJHid  Tat-Samyoga-hetu-vivarjanat,  through  abandonment  of  the 
cause,  namely,  Non-discrimination,  of  the  conjunction  thereof,  i-e.,  of  Buddhi.  Wr| 
Syat,  will  be.  ^re^  Ayam,  this,  i.e.,  the  desired  prevention  of  pain  not-yet-come. 
gm^rfli:  Atyantikab*  final,  permanent.  ^:^Mdi*i<:  Duljkha-prati  karat,  prevention  or 
remedy  of  pain. 

VII.  Through  the  abandonment  of  the  cause  thereof, 
there  can  be  the  permanent  prevention  of  pain,  which  is 
desired. 


PAKCHASIKHA-SUTRAM.  11 

26.  The  above  has  been  quoted  by  Vyasa  in  his  Commentary  on  the 
Yoga-Sutram  II.  17. 

27.  Pain  is  due  to  conjunction.    Rajas  gives  rise  to  pain  in  Sattva, 
which  reflects  it  on    Purusa,  through  conjunction.     In  this  reflection   con 
sists  the  experience  (Bhoga)  of  Purusa  from  which  emancipation  (Apavarga 
is  sought.     To  describe  them  more   correctly,  Bhoga  is  the   ascertainment 
of  the  essential  nature  of  the  Gunas,  asvdesirable  and   undesirable,  in  their 
undifferenthited  form  ;  and  Apavarga  is  the  ascertainment  of   the  essential 
nature  of   the  Experience!*,  through  the  withdrawal   of   the   influence   of 
Prakriti  upon  him.    To  accomplish  both  these  objects,  namely,    Bhoga  and 
Apavarga,  is  the   creation  of   the   world.     Creation  is   the   exhibition   of 
Prakriti   to    Purusa.     Purusa   regards   or  looks   at   Prakriti   from    these 
points  of  view  only  ;  and  there  is  no  third  point  of  view.     So  declares  Pan- 
cha&kha  also  : 


TT^TW^ 


3R  Ayam,  this  Purusa.  3  Tu,  but.  ^  Khalu,  surely,  im  Trisu,  in  the  three. 
3^J  Gunesu,  in  the  Gugas,  Sattva,  Rajas,  and  Tamas.  mv  Kartrisu,  which  are 
the  actors,  agents.  ^«MK  A  Kartari,  who  is  not  the  actor.  ^  Cha,  and.  3^ 
Puruse,  in  Purusa.  g^ig^idft  Tulya-a-tulya-j&tiye,  who  is  of  a  like  and  unlike 
kind.  ^  Chaturthe,  the  fourth,  ddfwwifafti  Tat-kriya-saksi^i,  who  is  the 
witness  of  the  action  thereof,  i.e..  of  the  Gugas.  ^iwn^  Upaniyamanan,  that  are 
being  presented,  swr^  Sarva-bhavan,  all  objects.  STOT^  Upapannan,  established, 
known.  3^**^  Anupasyan,  knowing.  T  Na,  not.  ^PT  Darsanam,  view,  wm 
Anyat,  other.  i*&  Sankate,  suspects. 

VIII.  This  one,  however,  seeing  all  things  explained 
as  these  are  being  presented  to  the  three  Gunas  as  the  actors 
and  to  the  fourth,  viz.,  Purusa,  of  a  like  and  unlike  kind,  as 
the  non-actor  and  as  the  witness  of  their  action,  does  not 
suspect  (the  existence  of)  any  other  point  of  view,  or  object 
of  knowledge. 

28.  "  Of  a  like  and  unlike  kind":  —  For  instance,  the  Gunas  are  eter 
nal,  so  is  Purusa  ;  Purusa  is  intelligent,  but  the  Gunas  are  non-intelligent. 

29.  "  The   above  has   been  quoted  by  Vyasa  in  his  Commentary  on 
Yoga-Sfitram  II   18  :    The  object  (Dritfya)   which   possesses  the  nature  of 
illumination  (Sattva),   activity  (Rajas),  and   inertia  (Tamas)  and  consists 


PANGHASlKHA-StiTRAM. 


of  the  elements  and  of   the  powers  of   cognition  and  action,  exists   for  the 
purpose  of  experience  and  of  emancipation. 

30.  "  But  these  two,  experience  and  emancipation,  which  are  effected 
by  Buddhi,  reside   in    Buddhi   alone  ;  ho\v  are  they,  then,"    asks   Vy;>sa, 
"  predicated  of  Purusa  ?  "  He  next  gives  the  answer  :     "  Just  as  victory  or 
defeat,  which  lies  in  the  army,  is  predicated  of  the  owner  of  the  army,  as 
he  is  the  experiencer  of  its  consequences,  so  too  are  Bondage  and  Release, 
residing  in  Buddhi  alone,  are  predicated  of  Puru&a,  as  he  is  the  experiencer 
of  their  consequences.     Of  Buddhi  alone  are  Bondage  in  the  shape  of  the 
non-accomplislunent  of  the  object  of  Purusa,  and  Release  in  the  shape  of  the 
fulfilment  thereof.     Similarly,  are  perception,   memory,  reasoning,  doubt, 
knowledge  of  the  truth,  and  blind  attachment   to  life,   which  reside  in 
Buddhi,  are  attributed  as  existing  in  Purusa,  as  he  is  the  experiencer  of 
their  consequences,   by  having  their  reflections   thrown  upon  him  from 
Buddhi,  through  proximity." 

31.  Puruba,   then,   is   neither   quite   similar  to   Buddhi  nor  quite 
dissimilar  to  it.     He  is  not  quite  subject  to  Bondage  and   Release,  nor  is 
quite  free  from  them.     On  this  subject,  Paficha&kha  further  declares: 


f 


A-parinamini,  not  subject  to  transformation,  unchangeable,  ff 
Hi,  for.  ^RR*if?R:  Bhoktri-Saktih,  the  power  of  the  experiencer,  intelligence,  cons 
ciousness.  swfirasnif  A-prati-Sankrarna,  not  moving  towards  objects,  inert,  actionless, 
inactive.  *  Oha,  and.  iRwPni  Parinamini,  subject  to  transformation,  change 
ful.  9$  Arthe,  into  the  object,  i.e.,  Buddhi.  nmsa^rn  Pratisamkranta,  transferred, 
moved  to.  ¥*  Iva,  as  if.  H^Ph^  TaWrittim,  the  modifications  thereof,  ie.,of 
Buddlii.  ^HMdld  Anu-patati,  imitates,  modifies  according  to.  rrar:  Tasyafe,  its,  i.e  , 
of  Buddhi.  *  Cba,  and.  mp^?T^N^^niT:  Prapta-chaitanya-upagraha-rdpdyah,  trans 
formed  by  receiving  the  reflection  of  intelligence,  ^fgfn:  Buddbi-vritteh,  of  the 
modification  of  Buddhi.  3RWW?*?roT  Anu-kara-matra-taya,  by  reason  of  mere  imita 
tion.  •jfi^n  Buddhi-vrittya,  by  the  modification  oi  Buddhi  ^mnigr  A-visista, 
unqualified,  f^  Hi,  verily,  ^rrfffr:  Jnana-vritti^,  modification  of  consciousness. 
?ra  Iti,  thus.  *i¥n*m  Akhyayate,  called,  described. 

IX.     For  the  power  of  the  Experiencer   which  is  un 
changeable  as  well  as  inert,  as  if  running  into  the  changeful 


PANCHASIKHA-SUTRAM.  13 

object  (i.e.,  Buddhi),  imitates  its  modifications.  And  by 
reason  of  the  mere  imitation  of  the  modifications  of  Buddhi, 
while  that  is  transformed  by  receiving  the  reflection  of  intel 
ligence,  it  (the  imitation)  is  described  as  the  modification  of 
intelligence  unqualified  by  the  modification  of  Buddhi. 

32.  The  above  has  been  quoted  by  Vyasa  in  his  Commentary 
on  Yoga-Sutram  II.  20  :  "  The  seer  is  the  power  of  seeing  merely  :  though 
pure,  he  sees  ideas  by  imitation,"  and  he  thereby  supports  the  proposition 
that  "  though  pure,  he  sees  ideas  by  imitation  ;  because  he  sees,  by  imita 
tion,  ideas  belonging  to  Buddhi,  and,  though  he  is  not  of  the  same  nature 
as  Buddhi,  as  he  sees  by  imitation,  because  he  looks  as  if  he  were  of  the 
nature  of  Buddhi."  This  is  further  explained  by  Vacbaspati  in  the  follow 
ing  manner  : 

"  Although  the  moon  is  not,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  transferred  into 
pure  water,  yet,  inasmuch  as  its  reflection  passes  into  water,  it  is,  as  it 
were,  transferred  into  it.  So  also,  the  power  of  consciousness,  although 
not  actually  transferred  into  the  Buddhi,  yet  is,  as  it  were,  transferred 
into  it,  because  it  is  reflected  into  it.  By  that  fact,  consciousness  becomes, 
as  it  were,  of  the  very  nature  of  the  will-to-be  (Buddhi).  It  accordingly 
follows  the  modifications  of  the  will-  to-be.  This  explains  the  words  "by 
imitation."  It  is  said,  it  cognises  by  imitation,  as  it  cognises  by  following 
the  modifications  of  the  will-to-be."  —  Ram  Prascidas  translation. 

33.  Conjunction  has  been  stated  to  be  the  cause  of  Bhoga.  The 
objective  world  owes  its  existence  to  it.  But  when,  in  the  case  of  a 
Purusa  whose  objects  have  been  fulfilled,  the  objective  world  no  longer 
exists  for  him,  it  does  not  at  the  same  time  altogether  vanish  out  of 
existence,  because  there  are  other  Purusas  whose  Bhoga  and  Apavarga 
still  remain  to  be  accomplished.  (Vide  the  Yoga-Sutram  II.  22).  Thus 
is  the  continuity  of  creation  established.  Hereby  is  also  established 
that,  whereas  the  Subject  and  the  Object  exist  from  eternity,  their  conjunc 
tion  must,  in  the  form  of  a  stream  of  successive  conjunctions,  be  without 
beginning.  On  this  subject  there  has  been  quoted  by  Vyasa,  in  his 
Commentary  on  the  above  Yoga-Sutram,  the  following  Aphorism  of 
Panchat^ikha  : 


Dharmioam,  of  the  containers,  that  is,  the  Guijas,  Sattva,  Rajas,  and 
Tamas.  miRwImid  An-adi-samyogat,  because  conjunction  with  Purusa  is  without 
beginning.  >ri*naw!T^  Dharma-matranarn,  of  all  the  contained,  that  is,  the  products 


14  PANCHASIKHA-StJTRAM. 


Mahat  and  the  rest.     ^R    Api,   also,     9Hrf^:    An-ddih,  without   beginning. 
Sarnyogafy,  conjunction. 

X.  Because  the  conjunction  of  the  Gunas  (with 
Purusa)  is  without  beginning,  the  conjunction  also  of  the 
products  thereof,  taken  as  a  class,  is  without  beginning. 

34.  "  It   is   for   this   reason  ».that,    although  the  conjunction  of  one 
Purusa  with  one  manifestation   of   the    principle  of    Mahat  has   ceased  to 
exist,  the  conjunction   of   another  Purusa    with  another   manifestation  of 
the  Mahat  has  not  become  a  thing  of  the  past."  —  Ram  Prasada's  translation 
of  Vachaspati. 

35.  In  the   Yoga-Sutram   III.    13,  Patanjali  declares:    "  By  this  are 
described  the   changes   of   characteristic   vdharma),    of   secondary    quality 
(laksanaj,    and   of   condition  (avastha)  in   the   objective  and    instrumental 
phenomena."  —  Ram  Prasada's  translation. 

36.  In  the  course  of  his  Commentary  on  the  above,  Vyasa  observes  : 
"  The  change  of   secondary   quality   is   the   moving   of   the  characteristic 
along   the  paths  of  being  (past,  present,  and  future).     The  past  character 
istic  joined  to  the  past   secondary   quality,    is   not  devoid    of   the   future 
and  the   present  secondary  quality.     Similarly,  the  present  (characteristic) 
joined    to   the   present   secondary   quality,  is    not  devoid  of   the    past  and 
the  future  secondary  quality.     Similarly,   the  future  (characteristic)  joined 
to   the    future   secondary    quality,  is    not   devoid  of   the   present  and  past 
secondary  qualities.     For  example,  a  man  who  is  attached  to   one   woman, 
does  not  hate  all  the  others. 

"  Others  find  a  fault  in  this  change  of  secondary  qualities  They 
say  that  all  the  qualities  being  in  simultaneous  existence,  their  paths  of 
being  must  be  confused,  (and  thus  overlapping  one  another,  cannot  be 
considered  as  distinct  and  different). 

"  This  is  thus  met  :  That  the  characteristics  do  exist  as  such,  requires 
no  proof.  When  there  is  such  a  thing  as  a  characteristic,  the  differences 
of  the  secondary  qualities  also  must  be  posited.  It  is  not  only  in  the 
present  time  that  the  characteristic  characterizes.  If  it  were  so,  the  mind 
would  not  possess  the  characteristic  of  attachment,  seeing  that  attachment 
is  not  in  manifestation  at  the  time  of  anger.  -  Further,  the  three  (peaceful, 
fearful,  and  dull)  secondary  qualities  are  not  possible  of  existence  in  one 
individual  simultaneously.  They  may,  however,  appear  in  succession, 
by  virtue  of  the  operation  of  their  several  (exciting  causes.  Therefore, 
there  is  no  confusion.  For  example,  attachment  being  in  the  height  of 
manifestation  with  reference  to  some  object,  it  does  not,  for  that  reason, 


PANCHASIKHA-S&TRAM.  15 

cease  to  exist  with  reference  to  all  other  objects.  On  the  contrary,  it  is 
then  ordinarily  in  existence  with  reference  to  them."  —  Earn  Prasadas 
translation. 

And   in  support   of   the   above   view,    Vyasa  quotes  the    following 
Aphorism  of  Panchadikha  : 


Rupa-atisayafr,   intensities    of  nature   or  characteristic. 
Vritti-atisayah,  intensities   of   function   or   manifestation.     *    cha,     and. 
Virudhyante,  are  opposed.    OTfr^ffR  Sam&nyani,  ordinary  ones.     5  Tu,  but. 
Atisayaili,   with   the   intense   ones,     q*    Saha,  with.     JwM  Pravartante,   co-exist, 
co-operate. 

XL  Intensities  of  characteristic  and  intensities  of 
manifestation  are  opposed  to  each  other,  but  the  ordinary 
ones  co-exist  with  the  intense  ones. 

37.  This   simple   Aphorism  of  Panchasikha  embodies  the  discovery 
of  the  important  doctrine  of  the  sub-conscious  mind. 

38.  As   to  the   relation  between    AkasJa  and  the  Power  of  Hearing, 
there  is  the  following  Aphorism  of  Panchasikha  : 

II 


^  Tulya-desa-sravanan&m,  of  those  having  their  powers  of  hear 
ing  similarly  located,  that  is,  equally  in  Ak3,sa  or  soniferous  ether.  *$^wf?H  Eka- 
desa-sruti-tvam,  to  have  the  power  of  hearing  in  the  same  situation,  ^fai  Sarve- 
sa"m,  of  all.  w^  Bhavati,  is. 

XII.  In  the  case  of  all,  having  their  powers  of  hear 
ing  equally  located  in  Akasa,  hearing  takes  place  in  the 
same  situation. 

39.  The   above  has   been    quoted  by  Vyasa  in  his  Commentary  on 
the   Yoga-Sutrarn  III.    40  :     "  By    Samyama    over    the   relation   between 
Aka^a  and  the  power-of-hearing,  comes  the  higher  power  hearing." 

40.  And    Vachaspati   explains  its  sense   and    significance   in    the 
following  manner  :    "  This  sense  of  hearing,  then,  having  its  origin  in  the 
principle  of  egoism,  acts  like   iron,   drawn   as   it  is   by  sound  originating 
and  located  in  the  mouth  of  the  speaker,  acting  as  loadstone,  transforms 
them  into  its  own  modifications  in  sequence  of  the  sounds  of  the  speaker, 
and  thus  senses  them.     And  it  is  for  this  reason  that   for   every  living 


16  PANOHASIKHA-S&TRAM. 

creature,  the  perception  of  sound  in  external  space  is,  in  the  absence  of 
defects,  never  void  of  authority.  So  says  the  quotation  from  PanchasJikha  : 
"  To  all  those  whose  organs  of  hearing  are  similarly  situated,  the  situation  of 
hearing  is  the  same."  "  All  those  "  are  Chaitras  and  others  whose  powers 
of  hearing  are  similarly  situated  in  space.  The  meaning  is,  that  the  powers 
of  hearing  of  all  are  located  in  2ka&.  Further,  the  Akaafo,  in  which  the 
power  of  hearing  is  located,  is  Lorn  out  of  the  Soniferous  Tamnatra, 
and  has  therefore  the  quality  of  sound  inherent  in  itself.  It  is  by  this 
sound  acting  in  unison,  that  it  takes  the  sound  of  external  solids,  etc. 
Hence  the  hearing,  i.e.,  the  sound,  of  all  is  of  the  same  class. 

"  This,  then,  establishes  that  Akarfa  is  the  substratum  of  the  power 
of  hearing,  and  also  possesses  the  quality  of  sound.  And  this  sameness 
of  the  situation  of  sound  is  an  indication  of  the  existence  of  Aka^a.  That 
which  is  the  substratum  of  the  auditory  power  (Sruti)  which  manifests  as 
sound  of  the  same  class,  is  Ak&rfa."  —  Earn  PrasadcCs  translation. 

41.  In  his  Pancha&kha  —  Acharya-pranita  Samkbya-Sutra,  Pandita 
Raja  Ram  includes  the  following  quotations  by  Vyasa  : 

cHUT 


:  II 


XIII.  The  Pradhana,  the  material  cause  of  all  mani 
festation,  would  become  what  it  is  not,  if  it  tended  only  to 
rest,  because  in  that  case  there  would  not  be  any  manifesta 
tion  into  phenomena  ;  nor  would  it  be  what  it  is,  if  it  were 
to  remain  in  constant  motion,  because  in  that  case,  the  phe 
nomena  would  become  eternal  and  never  disappear.  It  is 
only  when  it  tends  to  both  these  states,  that  it  can  be  called 
the  Pradhana  (the  cause  of  manifestation),  not  otherwise. 
The  same  considerations  apply  to  any  other  causes  that 
might  be  imagined.  —  Vide  Vyasa's  Commentary  on  Yoga- 
Sutram  II.  23. 


XIV.  On  account  of  the  absence  of  the  difference  of 
form,  intervening  space  and  time,  and  genus,  there  is  no 
separation  in  the  Root  (i.e.,  the  Pradhana.)  —  Vide  Vyasa's 
Commentary  on  Yoga-Sutram  III.  52. 


PANCHA&IKBA-S0TRAM.  17 


XV.  All  the  diverse  forms  of  juice,  etc.,  caused  by  the 
transformation  of  earth  and  water,  is  seen  in  immobile 
objects  ;  similarly  of  the  immobile,  in  the  mobile,  and  of  the 
mobile,  in  the  immobile. — Vide  Vyasa's  Commentary  on 
Yoga-Sutram  III.  14. 


XVI.  Of  these  which  possess  the  same  genus,  the 
differences  are  in  (specific)  properties  only.  —  Vide  Vyasa's 
Commentary  on  Yoga-Sutram  III.  43. 

u 


XVII.     By  the   magic  panorama  of  Mahamoha  (desire 
and  ignorance),  overshadowing   the  Sattva  which    is  lumi 
nous  by  nature,  the  very  same  is  employed  in  acts  of  vice.— 
Vide  Vyasa's  Commentary  on  Yoga-Sutram  II.  52, 


XVIII.  There  is  no  penance  greater  than  Pranayama  : 
whence   are  the  purification  from  dirts  and  the  brightness  of 
knowledge.  —  Vide   Vyasa's    Commentary    on   Yoga-Sutram 

II.  52. 

^roref  JTfrgrr  $*t  <jJ<^  ^vr^%  *re£rsr  ^r*^  *r^Rr  u 

XIX.  (In  the   case  of   those    who    do  not  possess  the 

i  curiosity  to  know  the  nature  of  the  Self),  giving  up,  through 
faults  (i.e.,  demerits),  the  nature,  there  arises  a  liking  for 
primd  facie  contrary  views,  and  dislike  for  the  ascertainment 
of  the  truth.  —  Vide  Vyasa's  Commentary  on  Yoga-Sutram, 
IV  25. 


n 

XX.  As  a  Brahmana  undertakes  many  a  vow,  one 
after  another,  he  turns  away  successively  from  acts  of  injury 
due  to  inadvertence,  and  thereby  makes  the  virtue  of  non-in 
jury  (ahimsa)  gradually  purer  and  purer.  —  Vide  Vyasa's 
Commentary  on  Yoga-Sutram  II.  30. 


18  PANG  HA  SI  KHA-S&TRAM. 


XXI.     And  what  are  these  activities  of   the  Dhyayins, 
namely,  friendliness  (maitri),    etc.,    being,   by  nature,   inde 
pendent  of  external  means,  accomplish  the  highest  virtue.  - 
Vide  Vyasa's  Commentary  dh  Yoga-Sutram  IV.    10. 
42.     And  to  them,  the  Kapila  Asirama  reproduction  add£  : 

11 


XXII.  The  activity  of  the  Pradhana  is  for  the  sake  of 
the  exhibition  of  herself.  —  Vide  Vyasa's  Commentary  on 
Yoga-Sutram  II.  23. 

43.  But  Vachaspati  tells   us   that  No.  XIII  is   a   doctrine   of   an 
opposite  school,  and  Nos.  XVII  —  XX  are  the  teachings  of  the  Agamins(Saiva 
Dar^ana)  ;     while  Vyasa  himself   tells  us  that   No.   XIV  is  an  aphorism  of 
Varsaganya  and  No.  XXII  is  a  text  of  the  Veda.     Both  of  them,  again,  are 
silent  as  to  the  paternity  of  Nos.  XV  and  XVf.    The  remaining  one,  No.  XI, 
is  referred  by  Vachaspati  to  the  Ach&ryas  or  older  teachers  of  the  Samkhya 
School.     In  these  circumstances,  we  do  not  feel  we  should  be   justified  in 
affiliating  these  aphorisms  to  Panchaj^ikha. 

44.  Pandita   Raja   Ram   has,  we  observe,  arranged   his  aphorisms 
of    Panchasikha   in   a   particular   order,    and   has   explained  them   in   a 
connected  form.     This   may    mislead    the   unwary  in    thinking   that    this 
collection  of  aphorisms  is  a  complete    treatise   composed    by   Panchasikha 
which,  however,  it  is  not,  and  can,  by  no  means,  pretend  to  be.     To  avoid 
any  such.   misconception,  we  have,  with   the  single   exception  of   the  first  j 
one,  —  and  this,  for   obvious   reasons  —  presented    the  aphorisms  just  in  the  * 
order  of  their  quotation  by  Vyasa  ;    for  there  is  no  more   reason  known  to 
us  for  placing  them  in  one  particular  order  than  in  any  other. 

45  It  may  also  be  just  mentioned  here  that  some  other  views,  not 
aphorisms  or  sayings,  of  Panchasikha  have  been  referred  to  in  the  Samkhya- 
Pavrachana-Sutram  also.  See  Ibidem  V.  32  and  VI.  68,  and  Vijnana 
Biksu's  Commentary  on  I.  127. 


B 

132 
S3S5 
1915 


Sinha,  Nandlal 

The  samkhya  philosophy 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 


UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


