===== Internet Archive OCR: satakasofbhartri00bharuoft_djvu.txt =====

:CO 


TRUBNER'S 

ORIENTAL   SERIES 


THE 


SATAKAS  OF  BHARTRIHARL 


into  (35ngltsfj  from  tfte  ©riginal 


REV.    B.    HALE   WORTHAM,    B.A. 

M.RA.S. 

RECTOR  OF  EGGESFORD,  NORTH  DEVON. 


LONDON: 
TRUBNEK    &    CO.,    LUDGATE    HILL. 

1886. 

[All  rights  reserved.] 


p* 


BALLANTYNE,    HANSON    AND  CO. 

EDINBURGH   AND   LONDON 


TO 
EDWARD  BYLES  COWELL,  ESQ.,  M.A.,  LL.D., 

PROFESSOR  OF  SANSKRIT  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CAMBRIDGE. 


PREFACE. 


OF  the  three  Satakas  or  centuries  of  couplets  ascribed  to 
Bhartrihari,  the  Mti  and  Vairagya  Satakas  alone  are 
included  in  the  following  pages.  The  Sringara  Sataka 
contains  so  many  stanzas  requiring  modification,  so  many 
more  wholly  untranslatable  into  English,  that  on  due 
consideration  I  have  decided  to  omit  this  collection  of 
stanzas  from  the  volume  now  published.  It  only  remains 
for  me  to  convey  my  thanks  to  the  friends  who,  in  various 
ways,  have  so  kindly  and  willingly  contributed  their  aid 
in  helping  me  to  carry  out  this  work. 

B.  H.  W. 


INTRODUCTION 

TO 

THE  SATAKAS  OF  BHARTRIHARI. 


WHO  was  Bhartrihari  ?  what  was  his  date  ?  where  did  he 
live  ?  did  he,  in  fact,  ever  really  exist  at  all  ?  These  are 
questions  to  which  no  satisfactory  answer  has  as  yet  been 
given.  It  has  been  alleged  that  he  was  of  regal  descent, 
and  the  brother  of  Vikramaditya ;  that  not  only  did  he 
belong  to  a  reigning  family,  but  that  he  was  next  in  suc- 
cession to  the  crown,  and  that,  disgusted  with  the  world, 
he  resigned  in  favour  of  his  brother  Vikrama. 

He  is  the  reputed  author  of  three  Satakas  or  centuries 
of  couplets : — 

1.  Sringara  Sataka,  a  purely  amatory  poem ; 

2.  Niti  Sataka,  on  polity  and  ethics ; 

3.  Vairagya  Sataka,  on  religious  austerity. 

Besides  these,  tradition  assigns  to  him  a  grammar  called 
Vakyapadiya,  and  a  poem  called  Bhattikavya. 

But  beyond  tradition  there  is  no  evidence  whatever  as 
to  the  authorship  of  these  Satakas.  The  theory  already 
referred  to,  that  Bhartrihari  was  a  prince  who  quitted  the 
world  in  disgust,  is  founded  upon  the  somewhat  vague 
allusions  in  the  second  Sloka  of  the  Niti  Sataka.  This 
has  been  supposed  to  refer  to  the  discovery  of  a  domestic 
intrigue  in  his  own  household,  which  so  shook  Bhartrihari's 
faith  in  worldly  matters,  that  he  decided  to  abdicate  his 
royal  position,  and  to  retire  into  the  forest  as  an  ascetic. 


x  INTRODUCTION  TO 

These  conclusions  seem,  however,  too  much  to  deduce 
from  a  remark  in  itself  somewhat  obscure.  But  whoever 
the  author  may  have  been,  there  seems  a  continuity  and  a 
uniformity  in  each  of  these  separate  Satakas,  as  well  as  a 
similarity  in  character  between  them,  which  forbid  us  to 
accept  the  theory  that  they  are  merely  a  compilation  of 
well-known  sayings.  The  unbroken  tradition,  moreover, 
that  they  are  the  authorship  of  one  man  (whatever  his 
name  may  be)  should  not  go  for  nothing. 

The  question  of  date  is  almost  as  difficult  to  decide 
as  that  of  authorship,  and  this  can  only  be  arrived  at 
approximately  on  internal  evidence.  The  doctrines  enun- 
ciated in  the  Vairagya  Sataka  are  relied  on  as  supplying 
us  with  some  of  the  proofs  that  are  required.  Many  of 
the  Slokas  in  this  Sataka  speak  in  the  language  of  the 
Vedantic  philosophy.  The  rooting  out  of  Karma  or 
action,  absorption  into  the  Supreme  Spirit,  the  driving 
out  of  Moha  or  illusion  by  Jnana,  or  the  true  knowledge—- 
these ideas  occurring  very  frequently  in  the  Vairagya 
Sataka,  all  point  to  Vedantic  influence.  The  eighth  or 
ninth  century  A.D.  has,  on  these  grounds,  been  assigned 
as  the  date  of  these  Satakas.  Not  that  this  date  can 
be  held  as  conclusive;  for  though  Sankaracharya,  the 
great  exponent  and  formulator  of  the  Vedantic  philo- 
sophy flourished  and  taught  at  that  date,  it  is  not,  there- 
fore, proved  that  the  Vedantic  doctrines  did  not  exist 
before  his  time ;  and  it  necessarily  follows,  therefore,  that 
neither  similarity  of  idea  nor  of  phraseology  can  warrant 
us  in  making  Bhartrihari's  Satakas  cotemporary  with 
Sankaracharya. 

The  argument  as  to  their  date  from  the  mention  of  the 
Puranas  in  the  Vairagya  Sataka  seems  to  be  equally 
unconvincing.  Some  of  the  Puranas  may  be  even  com- 
paratively modern  productions,  as  late  as  the  fourteenth 
or  fifteenth  century;  but  some  are  much  earlier,  dating 
back  to  the  fifth  or  sixth  century  A.D.  Further,  the 
contents  of  these  Puranas  may  be  carried  back  to  an  even 


THE  SATAKAS  OF  BHARTRIHARI.  xi 

earlier  date,  and  are  spoken  of  under  the  title  of  Puranas 
by  Amara  Sinha  in  the  first  century  B.C.  Therefore,  to 
derive  any  satisfactory  conclusion  as  to  dates  from  the 
mention  of  the  Puranas  in  the  Vairagya  Sataka,  we 
should  require  to  know  what  Puranas  are  referred  to  in 
the  particular  passages — whether  the  works  known  to  us 
as  Puranas  or  those  known  under  that  name  to  Amara 
Sinha.1 

Telang,  in  the  preface  to  his  editions  of  the  Niti  and  Vai- 
ragya Satakas,  is  in  favour  of  assigning  the  close  of  the  first 
or  beginning  of  the  second  century  to  the  author  of  these 
philosophical  poems,  in  opposition  to  some  authorities,  who 
would  place  his  date  at  56  A.D.  He  grounds  his  view  on 
the  following  considerations.  Tradition  informs  us  that  the 
author  of  the  Satakas  was  Bhartrihari,  the  brother  of  King 
Vikrama,  and  that  he  also  composed  a  grammatical  work 
called  the  Vakyapadiya.  This  work  shows  us  that  its 
author  lived  at  least  one  generation  after  Patanjali's  com- 
mentary on  Panini's  Grammar,  called  Mahabhashya,  had 
come  into  general  use.  The  date  of  Patanjali  varies 
according  to  different  authorities  from  200  B.C.  to  25  A.D. 
Bhartrihari,  in  the  Vakyapadiya,  notices  the  fact  that  the 
Mahabhashya  had  gone  through  changes  and  rearrange- 
ments of  text ;  possibly  interpolations  and  additions. 
The  period  between  144  B.C.  (which  Telang  considers  the 
probable  date  of  Patanjali)  and  56  B.C.  would  have  been 
hardly  long  enough  to  account  for  alterations  and  inter- 
polations in  the  text  of  the  Mahabhashya,  and  therefore 
56  B.C.,  as  the  date  of  Bhartrihari,  must  be  abandoned. 
We  have,  however,  seen  that  Vikramaditya  was  said  to  be 
the  brother  of  Bhartrihari.  Now  there  appears  to  be  a 
general  consensus  of  opinion  that  this  Vikramaditya  \A'as 
the  founder  of  the  Saka  era,  and  that  he  lived  about  78  A.D. 

This  date  allows  an  interval  of  more  than  two  centuries 
between  Patanjali  and  Bhartrihari,  a  period  of  sufficient 

1  Some,  however,  have  placed  Amara  Sinha  in  the  middle  of  the  third 
century  A.D.,  or  even  later. 


xii  INTRODUCTION. 

length  to  account  for  the  alterations  and  interpolations 
which  existed  in  the  text  of  the  Mahabhashya  referred 
to  in  the  Vakyapadiya.  On  these  grounds,  then,  such  as 
they  are,  the  authorship  of  these  Satakas  has  been  assigned 
to  the  end  of  the  first  or  to  the  beginning  of  the  second 
century  A.D. 

Some  attempt  has  been  made  to  fix  Bhartrihari's  date 
by  comparison  with  that  of  Kalidasa.  But  the  date  of 
Kalidasa  himself  is  not  sufficiently  well  ascertained  to 
arrive  at  any  certain  conclusion  by  that  method. 

Much,  therefore,  as  to  the  date  and  authorship  of  these 
poems  must  be  left  to  probability  and  conjecture. 

Note. — The  text  from  which  the  following  translation  has  been 
made  is  that  edited  by  K^shinath  Trimbak  Telang,  Bombay,  1874. 


THE  SATAKAS  OF  BHARTRIHARI. 


NITI   SATAKA. 


Concerning  Morality. 

1.  SALUTATION  to  the  deity  who  is  not  definable  in  time 
or  space:  infinite — pure  intelligence  in  incarnate  form: 
who  is  peace  and  glory :  whose  sole  essence  is  self-know- 
ledge. 

2.  That  woman  is  attracted  by  another  man  whom  I 
supposed  to  be  always  devoted  to  me :  to  her  another  man 
is  attached :  while  a  certain  other  woman  takes  pleasure 
in  my  doings.     Fie  on  her  and  on  him,  on  the  god  of  love, 
on  that  woman,  and  on  myself. 

3.  The  man  who  is  entirely  ignorant  is  easily  guided : 
the  wise  man  is  still  more  easily  led:  but  even  the  Supreme 
Being  himself  cannot  influence  the  smatterer. 

{  4/)A  man  may  forcibly  get  back  a  jewel  from  the  teeth 
of  a  crocodile :  he  may  cross  over  the  raging  waves  of  the 
sea:  hejnay_wear  an  an  gry:  serpent^  on  his  head  as  if  it 
were  a  garland  of  flowers:  but  he  cannot  win  over  the 
niind  of  one  who  is  foolish  and  obstinate. 

5.  A  man  may  get  oil  from  sand  by  violent  pressure  : 
he  may  drink  water  from  a  mirage  when  oppressed  by 
thirst :  he  may  get  possession  of  the  horn  of  ajbarej  but 
he  cannot  win  over  the  mind  of  one  who  is  foolish  and 
obstinate. 


NfTI  SATAKA. 

'He  who  would  lead  evil  men  into  the  path  of  virtue 
by  a  few  soft  words,  is  as  one  who  binds  an  elephant  with 
a  young  lotus-fibre :  as  one  who  tries  to  cut  the  diamond 
with  a  filament  of  £irisha ;  or  as  one  who  desires  to  make 
the  salt  sea  sweet  with  a  drop  of  honey. 

7.  The  Creator  has  given  man,  as  it  were,  a  cloak  to 
conceal  his  ignorance :  with  that  he  can  cover  himself  at 
all  times,  for  it  is  always  at  hand.     That  gift  is  silence, 
the  special  ornament  of  the  ignorant  in  the  assembly  of 
the  wise. 

8.  When  I  knew  but  a  little,  I  was  blinded  by  pride,  as 
an  elephant  is  blinded  by  passion :  my  mind  was  exalted, 
and  in  my  arrogance  I  thought  I  knew  all  things.     Then 
I  came  into  the  presence  of  the  wise  who  know  many 
kinds  of  wisdom,  and  my  pride  left  me  even  like  a  fever. 

9.  A  dog  eats  with  delight  putrid  abominable  bones, 
and  though  the  king  of  the  gods  may  stand  before  him, 
takes  no  heed:  even   so  a  mean  man  considers  not  the 
worthlessness  of  that  which  belongs  to  him. 

10.  The  Ganges  falls  from  heaven  upon  the  head  of  Siva ; 
from  the  head  of  Siva  on  to  the  mountain ;  from  the  top  of 
the  mountain  to  the  earth,  always  falling  lower  and  lower : 
even  in  so  many  ways  is  the  fall  of  one  whose  judgment 
has  departed  from  him. 

(  llj  Fire  can  be  quenched  by  water,  the  heat  of  the  sun 
canr-be  kept  off  by  a  parasol,  a  wild  elephant  can  be 
guided  by  a  sharp  hook,  an  ox  or  an  ass  by  a  stick :  sick- 
ness can  be  subdued  by  the  help  of  physicians,  poison 
by  the  assistance  of  various  charms.  A  cure  has  been 
ordained  by  the  Sastras  for  everything,  but  there  is  no 
medicine  for  the  cure  of  a  fool. 

1 2.  The  man  who  has  no  sense  of  literature  and  music 
is  like  a  beast,  though  he  has  not  horns  and  a  tail :  he  may 
not  eat  grass,  but  yet  he  lives  a  life  exactly  like  that  of 
the  cattle. 

13.  Those  in  whom  is  neither  wisdom,  nor  penance, 
nor  liberality,  nor  knowledge,  nor  good   disposition,  nor 


Nfrl  SAT  A  K  A.  3 

virtue,  nor  righteousness,  may  live  in  the  world  of  mortals 
in  the  form  of  men,  but  they  pass  through  the  world  like 
beasts  encumbering  the  earth. 

14.  It  is  better  to  wander  in  a  mountain-pass  with  the 
wild  beasts  than  to  live  in  the  palace  of  the  gods  with  a 
fool. 

The  Praise  of  Wisdom. 

15.  When   wise   men   dwell   in   poverty — men  whose 
words  are  adorned  with  polished  sayings  from  the  Sastras, 
and  who  impart  sacred  learning  to  their  disciples — then 
that  prince  in  whose  kingdom  they  dwell  is  chargeable 
with  folly,  and  the  wise  men,  though  poor,  are  the  rulers 
of  the  land.     Should  not  those  bad  examiners  be  worthy 
of  condemnation  who  (through)  carelessness  cause  jewels 
to  fall  from  their  true  value  ? 

1 6.  0  kings!  cast  off  your  pride  before  those  who  have 
the  inward  treasure  of  wisdom :  they  are  not  despoiled  by 
robbers,  but  their  treasure,  always  increasing,  grows  greater 
when  it  is  shared  with  the  needy :  not  even  at  the  end  of 
the  world  does  it  perish.     Who  indeed  may  compare  with 
them? 

17.  Despise  not  wise  men  who  have  attained  to  know- 
ledge of  the  truth.     They  are  not  held  bound  by  riches, 
for  they  count  wealth  even  as  grass.     The  stalk  of  a  water- 
lily  will  not  bind  an  elephant  who  is  infuriated  by  passion. 

1 8.  The  Creator  in  his  anger  may  hinder  the  swan  from 
sporting  in  the  lotus-bed,  his  dwelling ;  but  he  cannot  take 
away  his  faculty  of  separating  milk  from  water. 

19.  Bracelets  are  no  ornament  to  a  man,  nor  strings  of 
pearls  clear  as  the  moon ;  nor  yet  bathing,  nor  perfumes, 
nor  flowers,  nor  decorated  hair.     Perfect  eloquence  alone 
adorns  a  man.     Adornments  may  perish,  but   the  orna- 
ment of  eloquence  abides  for  ever. 

20.  Wisdom,  indeed,  is  the  highest  ornament  that  a 
man  possesses.     It  is  a  valuable  to  be  carefully  guarded, 
for  wisdom  gains  food,  glory,  and  blessing.     It  is  the  lord 


4  NITI  SATAKA. 

of  lords.  Wisdom  is  as  a  friend  to  a  man  travelling  in  a 
distant  land.  Wisdom  is  honoured  among  kings  even  more 
than  wealth.  The  man  devoid  of  wisdom  is  but  an  animal. 

21.  If  a  man  has  patience,  what  need  has  he  of  armour? 
If  he  has  anger  in  his  heart,  what  further  enemy  need  he 
fear  ?     If  he  has  knowledge,  what  need  of  fire  to  consume 
evil  ?     If  a  friend,  what  need  has  he  of  divine  medicines  ? 
If  there  are  malicious  people  about  him,  why  should  he  be 
afraid  of  serpents  ?     If  he  has  perfect  wisdom,  what  need 
of  riches  ?     If  he  is  modest,  what  need  has  he  of  orna- 
ment ?     If  he  give  his  mind  to  poetry,  what  need  has  he 
of  power  ? 

22.  Be  well  disposed  towards  relatives ;  liberal  to  infe- 
riors :  always  hate  the  evil ;  love  the  good ;  be  obedient  to 
princes ;  honour  the  wise.     Be  firm  towards  enemies ;  be 
respectful  to  venerable  men ;  deal  shrewdly  with  women. 
The  man  who  frames  his  life  after  these  precepts  prospers 
in  the  world. 

23.  Intercourse  with  wise  men  takes  away  dulness  of 
mind,   elevates  the  intellect,   inspires   the   speech  with 
truthfulness.     What  will  it  not  do  for  men  ? 

24.  May  there  be  glory  to  wise  men  who  are  learned 
and  accomplished  poets!     There   is  no  fear   that  their 
renown  shall  wither  or  perish. 

25.  A  virtuous  son,  an  affectionate  wife,  a  liberal  master, 
a  loving  friend,  a  guileless  kinsman,  a  mind  not  harassed 
by  care,  a  handsome  form,  abiding  riches,  a  mouth  abound- 
ing in  wisdom — these  are  the  gifts  which  Hari,  the  giver 
of  desires,  the  delight  of  the  earth,  bestows  upon  the  man 
with  whom  he  is  pleased. 

26.  Abstinence    from    destroying    life,    keeping   one's 
hands  off  another's  wealth,  speaking  the  truth,  reasonable 
liberality  according  to  one's  power,  not  conversing  with 
the  wives  of  other  men,  checking  the  stream  of  covetous- 
ness,  reverence  towards  spiritual  fathers,  compassion  to- 
wards all  creatures — this  is  the  path  of  happiness,  violating 
no  ordinances,  taught  in  all  the  Sastras. 


NlTI  SATAKA.  5 

27.  The  low-minded  man  does  not  make  even  the  least 
effort  in  the  pursuit  of  wisdom  through  fear  of  difficulties  : 
if  he  has  made  any  attempt,  he  stops  when  obstacles  meet 
him.     The  noble-minded  man  may  meet  with  repeated 
hindrances,  but  when  he  has  once  begun  the  pursuit  of 
wisdom  he  does  not  give  it  up. 

28.  Eighteousness  must  be  loved ;  evil  must  be  avoided, 
even  at  the  risk  of  death ;  wicked  men  must  not  be  spoken 
to ;  a  poor  man,  even  though  he  be  a  friend,  must  not  be 
asked  for  alms  :  even  in  adversity  the  foot  must  be  con- 
stant, and  the  vow  taught  by  good  and  great  men  must  be 
conformed  to,  even  if  it  be  as  difficult  as  to  stand  on  the 
edge  of  a  sword  ! 

The  Praise  of  Firmness. 

29.  The  lion,  though  overwhelmed  by  hunger  and  weak- 
ened by  old  age,  though  at  the  point  of  death  and  in  a 
state  of  misery,  and  though  his  majesty  may  have  left 
him  and  his  life  be  vanishing  away,  yet  his  whole  desire 
is  to  swallow  at  one  mouthful  the  forehead  of  the  kingly 
elephant  which  he  has  crushed  in  pieces.    How  should  he, 
the  mightiest  of  living  things,  feed  upon  withered  grass ! 

30.  A  dog  rejoices  over  a  small  filthy  bone  of  an  ox 
which  he  has  found  stripped  of  flesh,  though  it  satisfies 
not  his  hunger ;  but  the  lion  passes  by  the  jackal  stand- 
ing near  him  and  attacks  the  elephant.     So  the  man  of 
firm  mind,  even  though  he  may  be  in  distress,  desires  that 
which  is  in  accordance  with  his  natural  disposition. 

31.  The  dog  falls  down  low  before  the  feet  of  one  who 
gives  him  food,  wagging  his  tail  and  opening  his  mouth 
wide ;  but  the  elephant,  on  the  other  hand,  remains  un- 
moved, and  only  eats  after  he  is  entreated  with  flattering 
words. 

32.  What  man  is  not  born  again  while  he  passes  from 
one  birth  to  another  ?     But  that  man  only  is  truly  born 
by  whose  birth  his  family  attains  to  dignity. 


6  NfTI  SATAKA. 

33.  There  are  two  uses  both  for  a  garland  of  flowers 
and  also  for  a  wise  man — they  may  be  exalted  on  the 
head  or  wither  in  the  forest. 

34.  Although  the  five  or  six  planets,  of  which  Vrihas- 
pati  is  the  head,  are  held  in  high  esteem,  yet  Eahu,  whose 
power  and  might  are  great,  does  not  attack  them.     The 
lord  of  the  demons,  though  he  has  nothing  left  him  but 
his  head,  devours  in  his  course  only  the  lord  of  the  day 
and  the  ruler  of  the  night. 

35.  Sesha  bears  all  the  worlds  placed  on  his  serpent- 
like  head :  he  himself  is  always  borne  on  the  back  of  the 
king  of  the  tortoises,  who  dwells,  held  without  difficulty, 
in  the  bounds  of  ocean.     Ah !   with  what  ease  do  the 
mighty  perform  great  marvels  ! 

36.  The  son  of  Himalaya  would  have  behaved  far  more 
nobly  if  he  had  allowed  enraged  Indra  to  cut  off  his  wings 
with  the  thunderbolt  breathing  forth  huge  masses  of  flame, 
and  had  not,  when  his  father  was  helplessly  subject  to  cala- 
mity, sought  a  refuge  by  throwing  himself  into  the  ocean. 

37.  The  sun-stone,  though  insensate,  is  kindled  into 
light  when  touched  by  the  rays  of  the  sun  :  how  then 
should  a  mighty  man  bear  an  injury  inflicted  by  another. 

38.  The  lion,  though  young,  attacks  the  elephant  infu- 
riated with  passion.     The  energy  of  the  noble-minded  man 
proceeds  from  his  natural  disposition,  not  from  his  youth. 

Praise  of  Riches. 

39.  Our  noble  birth  may  go  to  the  lower  regions;  our 
virtues  may  perish ;  our  moral  character  may  fall  as  if 
from  a  lofty  mountain ;  our  family  may  be  consumed  by 
fire ;  a  thunderbolt  may  strike  our  might  as  it  were  an 
enemy :  let  us  keep  our  money,  for  without  this  all  the 
collected  virtues  are  but  a  heap  of  grass. 

40.  These  are  all  the  same  senses — exactly  the  same 
action — the  same  intellect  undiminished :  the  same  voice. 
But  though  a  man  may  remain  exactly  what  he  was,  yet, 


NITI  SATAKA.  7 

when  deprived  of  the  warmth  which  wealth  gives  him,  he 
becomes  some  one  altogether  different.  This  is  indeed 
wonderful ! 

41.  If  a  man  be  wealthy,  he  is  of  good  family,  he  is  wise, 
he  is  learned  in  the  Scriptures,  he  is  virtuous,  eloquent, 
beautiful.     All  the  virtues  attach  themselves  to  gold. 

42.  A   king   is   ruined   through   evil   counsellors :    an 
ascetic  through  society :  a  child  by  spoiling :  a  priest  by 
not  studying  the  Sacred  Scriptures :  a  family  by  the  evil 
behaviour   of  children :    good   manners   by  evil   habits : 
modesty  by  wine :  agriculture  by  want  of  care :  affection 
by  absence  from   home :    friendship   by  want   of  love : 
possessions   by  mismanagement :    money  by  waste  and 
prodigality. 

43.  Giving,  consuming,  and  loss,  are  the  three  ways 
by  which  wealth  is  diminished.     The  man  who  neither 
gives  nor  spends  has  yet  the  third  way  open  to  him. 

44.  A  jewel  is  cut  by  the  polishing  stone ;  a  conqueror 
in  war  is  killed  by  weapons ;  the  elephant  is  weakened 
by  passion;   the  islands  in  a  river  become  dry  in  the 
autumn  ;  the  moon  wanes  ;  young  women  become  languid 
through  pleasure,  yet  is  their  beauty  nothing   lessened : 
so  noble  men  who  have  diminished  their  wealth  by  giving 
to  the  needy  are  still  illustrious. 

45.  A  man  who  is  famishing  longs  for  a  handful  of 
grain ;  but  when  he  has  revived,  he  looks  on  the  whole 
earth  as  a  mere  handful  of  grass.     So  objects  seem  great 
or  small  according  to  the   condition   of   the   men   who 
possess  them :  it  is  the  change  in  men's  fortune  which 
makes  things  seem  greater  or  smaller. 

46.  If,  0  king !  if  you  would  enjoy  this  earth,  which  is 
as  fruitful  as  a  cow,  nourish  it  as  carefully  as  you  would 
a  calf.     The  earth  brings  forth  fruits  without  end  like 
the  creeper  of  plenty  if  it  is  perpetually  and  carefully 
cultivated. 

47.  The  behaviour  of  kings  is  as  uncertain  as  the  way 
of   a  courtesan.     Now  it  is  false,  now  true — now  with 


8  NtTI  SATAKA. 

harsh,  now  with  agreeable  words — now  cruel,  now  mer- 
ciful— at  one  time  liberal,  at  another  covetous — either 
always  squandering  money  or  heaping  it  together. 

48.  Authority,  fame,  the  guarding  of  Brahmans,  libe- 
rality, feasting,  protection  of  friends  :  what  profit  is  there 
to  those  who  serve  kings  if  they  have  not  gained  these 
six  blessings  ? 

49.  Whatever  fate  has  written  on  the  forehead  of  each, 
that  shall   he  obtain,  whether  it  be  poverty  or  riches. 
His  abode  may  be  the  desert,  but  he  shall  gain  no  more  if 
he  live  even  on  Mount  Meru.    Let  your  mind  be  constant. 
Do  not  be  miserable   through  envy  of  the   rich.      The 
pitcher  takes  up  the  same  quantity  of  water  whether  it  be 
from  the  well  or  the  ocean. 

50.  "Who  does  not  know  that  thou,  0  cloud,  art  the 
one  support  of  the  Chataka?     Why,  0  most  beneficent 
cloud  !  dost  thou  wait  for  our  cry  of  misery  ? " 

51.  "Ah!  beloved  Chataka,  hear  and  listen  attentively 
to  what  I  tell  thee.     The  heavens  have  many  clouds,  but 
they  are  not  all  alike ;  some  water  the  earth,  others  thun- 
der and  pour  forth  no  rain."     Do  not  degrade  yourself  by 
asking  alms  of  any  one  whom  you  may  chance  to  meet. 

Concerning  Evil  Men. 

52.  Cruelty,  causeless  quarrels,  the  desire  for  another's 
wife  or  money,  envy  of  the  good,  or  of  one's  own  rela- 
tives.   These  are  the  natural  characteristics  of  wicked  men. 

53.  An   evil  man   should   be   avoided   though  he  be 
adorned  with  learning.     Is  a  snake  less  feared  because  it 
is  ornamented  with  jewels  ? 

54.  The  moderate  man's  virtue  is  called  dulness ;  the 
man  who  lives  by  rigid  vows  is  considered  arrogant ;  the 
pure-minded  is  deceitful ;  the  hero  is  called  unmerciful ; 
the  sage  is  contemptuous ;  the  polite  man  is  branded  as 
servile,  the  noble  man  as  proud;   the  eloquent  man  is 
called  a  chatterer;  freedom  from  passion  is  said  to  be 


NtTI  SATAKA.  9 

feebleness.     Thus  do  evil-minded  persons  miscall  the  vir- 
tues of  the  good. 

55.  If  a  man  be  greedy,  what  further  vice  can  he  have  ? 
What  sin  can  be  worse  than  backbiting  ?     What  need  has 
the  truthful  man  of  penances  ?    What  need  has  the  pure- 
minded  man  of  a  sacred  bathing-place  ?     What  virtue  is 
beyond  generosity  ?     If  there  be  greatness  of  mind,  what 
adornment  is  required  ?    If  a  man  be  learned,  what  neces- 
sity is  there  of  the  society  of  others  ?     If  disgrace  over- 
take a  man,  why  need  he  fear  death  ? 

56.  The  moon  obscured  by  the  daylight,  a  woman  no 
longer  young,  a  pond  destitute  of  water-lilies,  a  handsome 
man  who   talks   nonsense,  a   prince  entirely  devoted  to 
money,  a  good  man   always   in  calamity,  an   evil  man 
dwelling   in  a  king's  court — these  are  seven  thorns  in 
my  mind. 

57.  A  king  full  of  wrath  hath  no  friend.     The  sacred 
fire  burns  even  the  priest  who  offers  the  sacrifice  if  he 
touches  it. 

58.  The  man  who  preserves  a  respectful  silence  is  con- 
sidered dumb ;  the  man  who  talks  agreeably  is  considered 
forward  ;  the  man  who  stands  close  by  is  thought  trouble- 
some; he  who  stands  far  off,  cold-hearted;   the  patient 
man  is  counted  as  faint-hearted;  the  impetuous  man  is 
called  ill-bred.    So  difficult,  indeed,  are  the  laws  by  which 
behaviour  is  regulated,  impossible  to  be  learnt  even  by  an 
ascetic. 

59.  Is  it  possible  to  take  pleasure  in  the  society  of  a 
low  man,  dissolute,  whose  evil  is  all  evident,  whose  wicked 
acts  are  the  result  of  former  births,  who  hates  virtue,  and 
who  lives  by  chance  ? 

60.  The  friendships  formed  between  good  and  evil  men 
differ.     The  friendship  of  the  good,  at  first  faint  like  the 
morning  light,  continually  increases ;  the  friendship  of  the 
evil  at  the  very  beginning  is  great,  like  the  light  of  mid- 
day, and  dies  away  like  the  light  of  evening. 

6 1.  Deer,  fish,  and  virtuous  men,  who  only  require  grass, 


io  NiTI  SATAKA. 

water,  and  peace  in  the  world,  are  wantonly  pursued  by 
huntsmen,  fishermen,  and  envious  people. 


The  Character  of  the  Good. 

62.  Desire  for  the  companionship  of  the  good,  love  for 
the  virtues  of  others,  reverence  for  spiritual  teachers,  dili- 
gence in  acquiring  wisdom,  love  for  their  own  wives,  fear 
of  the  world's  blame,  reverence  for  Siva,  self-restraint, 
freedom  from  the  acquaintance  with  evil  men — wherever 
men  dwell   endowed  with  virtues   like   these,   they  are 
always  reverenced. 

63.  Firmness  in  adversity,  restraint  in  prosperity,  elo- 
quence in  the  assembly,  boldness  in  war,  the  desire  of 
glory,  study  in  the  Scriptures — these  are  the  natural  char- 
acteristics of  the  virtuous. 

64.  Secret  generosity,  cheerful  hospitality  to  strangers, 
not  speaking  in  public  about  one's  own  good  deeds,  pro- 
claiming the  benefits  received  from  others,  freedom  from 
pride  in  prosperity,  due  respect  in  speaking  of  others — 
this  is  the  vow  of  exceeding  difficulty,  taught  by  the  good. 

65.  Liberality  is  the  fitting  virtue  for  the  hand,  rever- 
ence towards  spiritual  teachers  for  the  head,  true  speech 
for  the  mouth,  surpassing  power  for  the  arms  of  a  mighty 
man,  content  for  the  heart,  the  holy  Veda  rightly  under- 
stood for  the  ears ;   the  man  of  noble  mind  who  is  the 
possessor  of  these  adornments  has  no  need  of  outward 
pomp. 

66.  The  heart  of  the  wise  is  soft  as  a  lotus  flower  in 
prosperity,  but  in  adversity  it  is  as  firm  as  a  mountain 
rock. 

67.  Water  will  not  remain  on  hot  iron,  but  standing 
on  a  lotus  leaf  it  shines  with  the  beauty  of  a  pearl ;  and 
if  a  drop  of  water  fall  under  a  favourable  star  into  the 
middle  of  an  oyster  in  the  sea,  it  straightway  becomes  a 
pearl.    So  is  the  disposition  of  men,  good,  tolerable,  or  bad, 
according  to  the  society  in  which  they  live. 


NfTI  SATAKA.  ii 

68.  The  son  who  delights  his  father  by  his  good  actions, 
the  wife  who  seeks  only  her  husband's  good,  the  friend 
who  is  the  same  in  prosperity  and  in  adversity — these 
three  things  are  the  reward  of  virtue. 

69.  Those  who  are  ennobled  by  humility:  those  who 
display  their  own  virtues  by  relating  the  virtues  of  other 
men :  those  who  in  their  own  business  always  consider 
the  interests  of  others :  those  who  hate  the  evil  speaker, 
and  the  mouth  that  continually  utters  harsh  and  impa- 
tient words : — good  men  whose  admirable  behaviour  is 
shown  in  virtues  like  these  are  always  held  in  reverence. 
Who  would  not  respect  them  ? 

The  Way  of  Liberality. 

70.  Trees  loaded  with  fruit  are  bent  down ;  the  clouds 
when  charged  with  fresh  rain  hang  down  near  the  earth : 
even  so  good  men  are  not  uplifted  through  prosperity. 
Such  is  the  natural  character  of  the  liberal. 

71.  The  ears  of  such  men  as  these  are  adorned  with 
hearing  revelation,  not  with  earrings ;  their  hands  with 
liberality,  not  with  bracelets ;  their  bodies  shine  through 
doing  kind  deeds  to  others,  not  with  ointment  of  sandal- 
wood. 

72.  The  good  man  shuns  evil  and  follows  good:    he 
keeps  secret  that  which  ought  to  be  hidden :  he  makes 
his  virtues  manifest  to  all:  he  does  not  forsake  one  in 
adversity:   he  gives  in  season.      Such  (according  to  the 
wise)  are  the  marks  of  a  worthy  friend. 

73.  The  sun  opens  the  lotuses;  the  moon  illuminates 
the  beds  of  water-lilies ;  the  cloud  pours  forth  its  water 
unasked :    even  so  the  liberal  of  their  own  accord  are 
occupied  in  benefiting  others. 

74.  Those  men  are  good  men  who  study  the  good  of 
others   without   regarding   themselves.     Those    men   are 
ordinary   men   who,  while  they   benefit   others,  do   not 
neglect  their  own  interests.     Those  men  are  demons  who 


12  NtTI  SATAKA. 

destroy  another's  good  for  their  own  profit.  What  shall 
we  call  those  who  aimlessly  destroy  that  which  is  an- 
•other's  ? 

75.  The  milk  that  has  been  joined  to  the  water  has 
long  since  given  over  to  it  its  own  innate  qualities.     The 
water  has  seen  the  milk  growing  hot,  and  has  imme- 
diately made  an  offering  of  itself  in  the  fire.     The  milk 
was   eager   to   rush  into   the   fire,  but   having  seen   its 
friend's  distress,  remains  still,  being  joined  to  the  water. 
Even  so  is  the  friendship  of  the  good. 

76.  The  ocean  endures  the  sleep  of  Ke*sava,  and  is  a 
refuge  for  the  mountains  in  their  flight  from  the  demons ; 
moreover,  it  is  filled  with  devouring  flames  within.    Surely 
the  ocean  can  endure  anything ! 

77.  Restrain  desire,  cultivate  patience,  conquer  illusion, 
do  not  lust  after  evil,  speak  the  truth,  follow  that  which 
is  good,  seek  the  company  of  the  virtuous,  honour  the 
wise,  be  reconciled  even  with  enemies,  conceal  your  own 
virtues,  guard  your  good  name,  show  pity  for  the  unfortu- 
nate— these  are  the  acts  of  the  good. 

78.  How  many  noble  men  are  there  whose  thoughts, 
words,  and  deeds  are,  as  it  were,  filled  with  nectar — by 
whom  the  three  worlds  are  loaded  with  blessings — who 
exalt  even  the  very  smallest  virtues  of  another  to  the  size 
of  a  mountain — whose  hearts  are  constantly  expanding  ? 

79.  What  profit  is  there  in  Meru,  the  mountain  of  gold, 
or  of  the  hill  of  silver,  where  the  trees  that  grow  remain 
.the  same  trees  without  any  change  ?    We  honour  the  hills 
of  Malaya,  for  by  contact  with  them  common  trees  like 
the  Trophis  Aspera,  the  bitter  Nimba,  and   the  Karaya 
become  themselves  even  as  sandal  trees. 

The  Praise  of  Constancy. 

So.  The  gods  rested  not  until  they  had  gained  posses- 
sion of  the  nectar :  they  were  not  turned  aside  from  the 
search  by  pearls  of  great  price,  nor  by  fear  of  terrible 


AT177  SATAKA.  13 

poison.     Even  so  men  of  constant  mind  do  not  rest  until 
they  have  completely  accomplished  their  object. 

8 1.  At  one  time  a  man  may  lie  on  the  ground,  at  an- 
other he  may  sleep  on  a  couch ;  at  one  time  he  may  live 
on  herbs,  at  another  on  boiled  rice ;  at  one  time  he  may 
wear  rags,  at  another  a  magnificent  robe.     The  man  of 
constant  rnind,  bent  on  his  purpose,  counts  neither  state 
as  pleasure  nor  pain. 

82.  Courtesy  is  the  ornament  of  a  noble  man,  gentle- 
ness of  speech  that  of  a  hero ;  calmness  the  ornament  of 
knowledge,  reverence  that  of  sacred  learning;  liberality 
towards  worthy  objects  is  the  ornament  of  wealth,  free- 
dom  from  wrath  that  of  the  ascetic;    clemency  is  the 
ornament  of  princes,  freedom  from  corruption  that  of  jus- 
tice.    The  natural  disposition,  which  is  the  parent  of  the 
virtues  in  each,  is  their  highest  ornament. 

83.  The  constant  man  may  be  blamed  or  praised  by 
those  skilled  in  discerning  character ;  fortune  may  come 
to  him  or  may  leave  him ;  he  may  die  to-day  or  in  ten 
thousand  years'  time ;  but  for  all  that  he  does  not  turn 
aside  from  the  path  of  righteousness. 

The  Power  of  Fate. 

84.  A  rat  fell  by  night  into  the  jaws  of  a  serpent  whose 
body  had  been  squeezed  into  a  basket,  and  who  was  half- 
dead  with   hunger.      The  serpent,   revived  by  his  meal, 
went  forth,  and  immediately  meeting  with  the  same  fate 
as  the  rat,  perished.     Be  content,  0  my  friends,  with  your 
lot !     The  success  or  failure  of  men  is  in  the  hands  of  fate. 

85.  A  ball,  though  it  fall  to  the  ground,  flies  up  again 
by  the  strokes  of  the  hand.     Even  so  the  misfortunes  of 
good  men  are  not  often  lasting. 

86.  Idleness  is  a  great  enemy  to  mankind :  there  is  no 
friend  like  energy  ;  for  if  you  cultivate  that  it  will  never 
fail. 

87.  The  tree  that  is  cut  down  grows  again ;  the  moon 


14  NITI  SATAKA. 

that  wanes  waxes  again  after  a  time.     Thus  do  wise  men 
reflect,  and,  though  distressed,  are  not  overwhelmed. 

88.  Indra,  though  guided  by  Vrihaspati,  and  armed  with 
the  thunderbolt ;  though  the  deities  were  his  soldiers,  and 
Vishnu  his  ally ;  though  Svarga  was  his  citadel,  and  the 
elephant  Airasvata  his  steed,  was  defeated.     How  resist- 
less is  the  power  of  fate !     How  vain  are  human  efforts  ! 

89.  Discernment  is  the  fruit  of  men's  actions,  and  is  the 
result  produced  by  deeds  performed  in  another  state :  this 
must  be  carefully  considered  by  the  wise  man  who  gives 
heed  to  all  things. 

90.  A  bald-headed  man  was  scorched  by  the  rays  of  the 
sun  on  his  head,  and  seeking  a  shady  place,  went,  under 
the  guidance  of  fate,  to  the  foot  of  a  palm  tree.     While 
resting  there,  the  fruit  of  the  tree  fell  with  a  loud  noise  on 
his  head  and  broke  it.     Even  so,  wherever  the  unfortunate 
man  goes,  he  generally  meets  with  disaster. 

91.  When  I  see  the  sun  and  moon  exposed  in  the  eclipse 
to  the  assaults  of  the  demon ;  when  I  behold  the  bonds 
which  hold  a  serpent  or  an  elephant ;  when  I  behold  the 
wise  man  in  poverty,  then  the  thought  strikes  me,  "  How 
mighty  is  the  power  of  fate ! " 

92.  Fate  brings  forth  an  excellent  man — a  very  mine  of 
virtue — and  in  a  moment  works  his  ruin.     Alas  !  how  un- 
reasoning is  the  action  of  fate ! 

93.  It  is  not  the  fault  of  the  spring  that  the  leafless  tree 
does  not  produce  leaves ;  it  is  not  the  fault  of  the  sun  that 
the  owl  cannot  see  by  day ;  it  is  not  the  fault  of  the  rain- 
cloud  that  the  drops  do  not  fall  into  the  cuckoo's  mouth. 
Who  shall  reverse  that  which  fate  has  written  on  the  fore- 
head of  each  ? 

The  Praise  of  Action. 

94.  We  worship  the  gods,  but  are  they  not  in  the  power 
of  fate  ?     Destiny  must  be  worshipped,  for  that  is  the  sole 
giver  of  rewards  to  man  proportioned  to  the  acts  of  their 
former  state.     But  the  fruit  of  those  acts  depends  upon  the 


NtTI  SATAKA.  15 

acts  themselves ;  why,  then,  should  we  worship  either  the 
god  or  destiny?  Let  us  pay  adoration  to  those  works 
over  which  fate  has  no  power. 

95.  By  means  of  destiny  Brahma  was  constrained  to 
work  like  an  artificer  in  the  interior  of  his  egg ;  by  means 
of  destiny  Vishnu  was  compelled  to  pass  through  ten  in- 
carnations of  great  difficulty ;  by  means  of  destiny  Siva 
was  forced  to  live  as  a  mendicant,  bearing  the  skull  in  his 
hands  for  a  pot ;  by  means  of  destiny  the  sun  is  compelled 
to  travel  his  daily  course  in  the  heaven.    Adoration,  there- 
fore, be  to  works. 

96.  Neither  beauty,  nor  greatness  of  family,  nor  force  of 
character,  nor  learning,  nor  service,  though  performed  with 
care,  but  merit  alone,  gained  from  penances  in  a  former 
state,  will  bring  forth  fruit  to  a  man  as  a  tree  in  its 
season. 

97.  A  man  may  be  in  a  forest,  or  in  war,  or  in  the  midst 
of  fire,  or  among  a  host  of  enemies,  or  in  the  ocean,  or 
upon  a  high  mountain ;  he  may  be  asleep  or  mad ;  or  he 
may  be  surrounded  by  difficulties ;  yet  the  good  actions 
performed  in  a  former  state  will  profit  him. 

98.  0  wise  man !  cultivate   constantly   divine  virtue ; 
for  that  makes  evil  men  good,  the  foolish  wise,  enemies 
well  disposed,  invisible  things  visible ;  in  a  moment  that 
turns  poison  into  nectar ;  that  will  give  you  the  desired 
fruit  of  your  acts.     0  virtuous  man  !  do  not  vainly  spend 
labour  on  acquiring  mighty  gifts  with  great  pain  ! 

99.  The  wise  man,  at  the  beginning  of  his  actions,  looks 
carefully  to  the  end  of  them,  that  by  their  means  he  may 
be  freed  from  births  in  another  state.     Actions  performed 
with  excessive  haste  are  even  as  an  arrow  piercing  the 
heart. 

100.  The  man  who,  placed  in  the  world  of  action,  does 
not  walk  piously,  regarding  his  state  hereafter,  is  as  one 
who  cooks  the  lees  of  sesame  over  a  sandal-wood  fire  in 
a  caldron  of  lapis-lazuli,  or  as  one  who  ploughs  with  a 
golden  share  to  cultivate  swallow-wort,  or  as  one  who 


16  NITI  SATAKA. 

cuts  down  a  grove  of  camphor  to  fence  in  a  field  of 
kodrava. 

101.  A  man  may  dive  into  the  sea,  he  may  ascend  to 
the  top  of  Mount  Meru,  he  may  be  victorious  over  his 
enemies,  he  may  devote  himself  to  merchandise,  he  may 
plough  the  earth,  he  may  study  all  learning  and  all  art,  he 
may  travel  on  the  wings  of  a  bird  from  one  end  of  heaven 
to  the  other,  but  yet  he  shall  suffer  that  which  is  fated 
him  on  earth,  neither  shall  that  fail  which  is  destined  for 
him. 

1 02.  A  terrible  wood  becomes  a  splendid  city,  and  the 
whole  world  is  filled  with  jewels,  to  that  man  who  has 
performed  righteous  acts  in  his  former  existence ;   all  men 
reverence  his  virtues. 

Supplementary  &lokas. 

103.  What  is  most  profitable  ?     Fellowship  with  the 
•'  good.    What  is  the  worst  thing  in  the  world  ?    The  society 

of  evil  men.  What  is  the  greatest  loss  ?  Failure  in  one's 
duty.  Where  the  greatest  peace  ?  In  truth  and  righteous- 
ness. Who  is  the  hero  ?  The  man  who  subdues  his  senses. 
Who  is  best  beloved  ?  The  faithful  wife.  What  is  wealth  ? 
Knowledge.  What  is  the  most  perfect  happiness  ?  Stay- 
ing at  home.  What  is  royalty  ?  Command. 

104.  The   man  who    possesses   intelligence,   like   the 
jasmin  flower,  has  two  courses  open  to  him:   he  may 
flourish  in  the  sight  of  the  world,  or  he  may  wither  away 
in  the  desert. 

105.  The  earth  is  variously  adorned  in  various  places ; 
by  poor  men  whose  words  are  of  no  account — by  rich  men 
whose  words  are  admired — by  those  contented  with  their 
own  wives — by  men  who  refrain  from  passing  censure  upon 
others. 

1 06.  The  constant  man  loses  not  his  virtue  in  misfor- 
tune.    A  torch  may  point  towards  the  ground,  but  its 
flame  will  still  point  upwards. 


SATAKA.  17 

107.  The  mind  of  the  constant  man  is  not  pierced  by 
the  arrows  shot  from  the  glances  of  love ;  he  is  not  con- 
sumed by  the  fire  of  anger :  worldly  objects  do  not  en- 
snare him  in  the  net  of  covetousness ;  he  is  the  lord  of  the 
three  worlds. 

1 08.  The  mighty  earth,  trodden  by  the  feet  of  one  hero, 
is  lightened  up  with  his  exceeding  great  glory  as  though 
by  the  shining  of  the  sun. 

109.  Through   the   power    of   constancy   fire   becomes 
even  as  water,  the  ocean  becomes  but  a  rivulet,  Mount 
Meru   becomes   only  a   small  stone,   a  lion  becomes  as 
harmless  as  an  antelope,  a  savage  beast  becomes  a  garland 
of  flowers,  poison  is  turned  into  nectar.      The  constant 
man,  by  his  constancy,  turns  the  savage  things  in  nature 
into  the  most  gentle. 

no.  Honourable  men  may  cast  aside  life  and  happiness, 
but  inasmuch  as  they  are  intent  upon  truth,  they  do  not 
cast  off  their  truthfulness,  the  cause  of  modesty  and  of  all 
the  virtues,  following  them  wherever  they  may  go,  pure  in 
heart,  even  as  dear  to  them  as  their  own  mother. 

Miscellaneous  Satakas. 

1.  A  morose  heart,  a  face  exalted  with  inward  pride, 
a  nature  difficult  as  an  exceedingly  narrow  mountain- 
pass — this  is  known  as  the   character  of  women :  their 
mind  is  said  by  the  wise  to  be  as  changeable  as  the  drop 
of  dew  which  rests  upon  the  lotus  leaf.     Faults  indeed 
develop  in  a  woman   together  with  her   growth,  as  the 
poisonous  shoots  sprout  in  the  creeper. 

2.  Whether  a  brave  man  who  is  killed  in  the  foremost 
of  the  fight  obtain  heaven  or  victory,  he  will  gain  great 
glory  from  both  armies ;  and  this  is  the  aim  of  one  who 
desires  fame. 

3.  Of   all  the  exceeding  marvels  which  I  behold,  the 
Boar  and  Rahu  bear  away  the  palm.     The  one  bore  the 
drowned  earth  on  his  tusks,  which  dripped  with  water ; 

B 


1 8  Nfrl  SATAKA. 

the  other,  who  has  only  a  head,  swallows  his  foe  and  then 
lets  him  go  again. 

4.  The  earth  is  bounded  by  the  ocean,  the  ocean  ex- 
tends but  a  thousand  yojanas,  the  sun  always  measures 
his  course  through  the  sky ;  these  objects  then  are  bounded 
by  certain  definite  limits.     There  is  nothing  exceeding 
them  in  greatness  but  the  intelligence  of  wise  men,  which 
has  no  limits. 

5.  There  is  one  divinity,  Kesava  or  Siva;  one  friend, 
a  king  or  an  ascetic ;  one  dwelling,  in  a  town  or  in  the 
forest ;  one  wife,  handsome  or  ugly.    [It  matters  not  which 
a  man  may  choose.] 

6.  The  world,  though  it  be  supported  on  the  king  of  the 
serpents,  on  the  elephants  that  bear  it  up,  on  the  great 
mountains,  and  on  the  tortoise,  shakes;  but  that  which 
has  been  promised  by  men  of  pure  minds  never  fails,  even 
though  ages  have  passed  away. 

7.  The  tortoise  is  pained  through  the  weight  of  the 
earth ;  why  then  does  he  not  cast  it  off  ?     The  sun  feels 
fatigue  in  his  course ;  why  then  does  he  not  stand  still  ? 
Looking  on  these  examples,  a  noble  man  is  ashamed  to 
fail  in  his  promises  ;  he  faithfully  keeps  his  word.     Thus 
are  vows  kept  in  the  family  of  a  good  man. 

8.  When  a  man  is  satisfied  with  food,  he  enters  into 
subjection  to  the  world ;  even  so  a  drum  sends  forth  an 
agreeable  sound  when  its  surface  is  covered  with  flour. 

O 

9.  Low-minded  men  are  occupied  solely  with  their  own 
affairs,  but  noble-minded  men  take  special  interest  in  the 
affairs  of  others.     The  submarine  fire  drinks  up  the  ocean 
to  fill  its  own  insatiable  interior;  the  rain-cloud,  that  it 
may  relieve  the  drought  of  the  earth,  burnt  up  by  the 
hot  season. 

10.  The  counsellor   truly,  like  the  poet,  is  never  free 

from  a  load  of  trouble ;  he  collects  new  -I  r  eanin°s  I  f rom 

{   revenue  j 

,         . ,       ,,    ( vulgar  expressions )      .       , 
afar,  and  avoids  all  \      £         ^  }  ;  he  devotes 


NfTI  SATAKA.  19 

himself  to  pleasing  the  assemblies  of  the  good  ;  with  toil 

f  quarter  of  a  verse  )  , 

and  labour  he  makes  ax  ,  >  by  conlorm- 

place  j 

ing  to  the  thoughts  of  the  world. 

1 1.  Whatever  has  been  appointed  by  fate  in  this  life  fo: 
each  man,  that  shall  be  his  lot,  be  it  great  or  small.     The 
cloud  rains  day  by  day,  filling  all  things,  but  only  a  few  J 
little  drops  fall  into  the  ch&taka's  mouth. 

12.  The  wise  must  be  respected,  even  when  the  advice 
they  give  us  is  not  suitable.     The  ordinary  converse  of 
such  men  is  like  Holy  Writ. 

13.  A  good  man  may  fall,  but  he  falls  as  a  ball;  an 
ignoble  man  falls  like  a  lump  of  clay. 

14.  If,  by  the  decree  of  fate,  the  world  were  ever  to 
become  deprived  of  lotuses,  would  the  swan  scratch  in  the 
dust-heap  like  the  cock  ? 

15.  Elephants,  filled  with  passion,  heavy  with  sleep, 
may  stand  at  the  gate ;  horses,  adorned  with  golden  orna- 
ments, may  gallop  about  filled  with  spirit ;  their  owner 
may  be  wakened  from  his  sleep  by  the  sound  of  drums, 
conchs,  cymbals,  fifes,  and  lutes :  all  this,  a  state  like  that 
of  the  lord  of  the  deities,  is  the  reward,  outwardly  dis- 
played, of  religious  merit  (gained  in  former  births). 

1 6.  The  joy  of  those  whose  minds   are  alive  to  the 
happiness  of  content  is  perfect,  but  the  desire  of  those 
who  are  disturbed  by  the  lust  after  riches  never  ceases. 
For  whose  sake  was  Meru  created  by  fate  full  of  wealth 
as  it  is  ?     Meru  pleases  me  not,  though  it  is  filled  with  an 
abundance  of  gold  and  silver,  since  it  is  satisfied   with 
itself  alone. 

17.  The  red  colour  of  the  lotus,  the  care  for  others  dis- 
played by  the  good,  the  want  of  respect  shown  by  the 
bad;  this   is  the   triad   of   qualities   brought   to   perfec- 
tion in  each  class  by  means  of  its  own  innate  disposi- 
tion. 

1 8.  Faithfulness    in   promises   is   the   noblest   quality 

leanness  is  the  best  quality  for  a  female 


20  NITI  SATAKA. 

elephant ;  wisdom  and  patience  best  become  a  Brahman. 
Each  creature  is  best  adorned  by  its  own  special  ornament. 

19.  It  is  better  to  fall  from  the  highest  point  of  a  lofty 
mountain  and  be  dashed  to  pieces  among  the  rocks — it  is   • 
better  that  one's  hand  should  be  bitten  by  the  poisonous  ;i 
fangs  of  a  dreadful  serpent — it  is  better  to  fall  into  the  I 
fire,  than  that  one's  piety  should  fail.  |» 

20.  If  thou  thinkest  to  behold  noble-minded  men  fall 
from  their  firmness  in  misfortune,  cease  from  evil  efforts 
involving  idle  speculations.     0  fool !  even  at  the  end  of 
ages  the  mighty  mountains  do  not  become  small,  nor  does 
the  ocean  lose  the  powers  that  belong  to  it. 

21.  Glory,  conquering  all  things,  tears  the  bosom  of 
men,  as  an  impudent  and  forward  woman,  with  her  nails 
long  and  sharp  like  swords. 

22.  Even  the  moon,  the  storehouse  of  ambrosia,  the 
guide  of  the  plants  which  grow  year  by  year,  compacted  of 
nectar  and  filled  with  beauty,  becomes  shorn  of  its  beams 
directly  it  reaches  the  region  of  the  sun.     Who  does  not 
fall  into  contempt  directly  he  enters  the  house  of  another  ? 

23.  Girls  with  glances  of  admiration,  a  house  filled  with 
magnificence,  prosperity  attended  with  outward  signs  of 
royalty — these  are  a  man's  portion  as   long  as  fortune 
attends  him  ;  but  if  that  fails,  all  these  things  disappear, 
like  the  pearls  on  a  necklace  whose  string  has  been  broken 
in  play. 


NOTES  TO  THE  NlTI  SATAKA. 

1.  The  second  collection  of  S'atakas  ascribed  to  Bhartrihari 
relates  to  Niti  or  Morality.     The  word  Niti  may  be  taken  to 
mean  "  moral  philosophy,  ethics,  precepts  inculcating  prudent 
or  moral  behaviour."    These  precepts  are  thrown  into  the  pro- 
verbial form.    The  first  sloka  is  occupied  by  the  invocation  or! 
salutation  to  Brahma,  who  is  addressed  as  the  deity,  whose 
essence  is  self-knowledge,  and  by  whom  self-knowledge  can 
alone  be  attained.     This  seems  to  refer  to  the  doctrine  which 
teaches  the  unity  of  the  Supreme  and  the  Individual  Soul, 
since  what  we  know  when  we  know  ourselves  truly  is  the 
Brahma  (Telang). 

2.  By  means  of  this  sloka  an  attempt  has  been  made  to  fix 
the  authorship  of  the  Niti  &ataka  on  Bhartrihari.     It  is  sup- 
posed that  he  was  disgusted  at  some  discovery  of  infidelity  on 
the  part  of  his  wife,  and  in  consequence  resigned  his  royal 
position  to  his  brother  Vikrama.     There  is,  however,  little  or 
no  authority  for  the  statement,  and  the  sloka  itself  is  too 
vague  to  found  any  theory  of  authorship  upon  it.     The  com- 
mentator says  that   King  Vikrama   gained   possession   of  a 
certain  fruit  which  conferred  immortality  on  any  one  who  ate 
it.      Vikrama  gave  it  to  a  Brahman,  who  gave  it  to  King 
Bhartrihari.     Bhartrihari  gave  it  to  his  wife  \  she  gave  it  to 
her  paramour ;  the  latter  gave  it  to  a  lover  of  his  own,  in 
whose   possession   Bhartrihari   saw  the   fruit.     Such   is   the 
occurrence  supposed  to  be  recorded  in  this  sloka. 

3.  We  may  compare  the  ideas  in  this  stanza  with  the  words 
of  St.  Paul,  "  If  any  man  think  that  he  knoweth  anything,  he 
knoweth  nothing  yet  as  he  ought  to  know  "  (i  Cor.  viii.  2),  or 
the  line,  "  A  little  learning  is  a  dangerous  thing,"  of  Pope. 
Jndna-lava-dur-vidagdham,  "(The  man)  puffed  up  through  small- 
ness  of  knowledge."     Durvidagdlia  is  explained  by  the  com- 
mentator as  garvishta,  arrogant. 

4.  Referring  to   the  fable    according   to  which   crocodiles 
were  supposed  to  have  pearls  between  their  teeth. 


22  NtTI  SATAKA. 

5.  Satavishdna,  "  the  horn  of  a  hare ; "  proverbial  for  that 
which  does  not  exist.     Of.  the  following,  given  by  Telang  in 
his  note  on  this  passage — 

"Esha  bandhyasuto  yati  khapushpakritasekharah 
mriga  trishnambhasi  snatah  sasasringadhanurdharah." 

"  The  son  of  a  barren  woman  goes  along,  wearing  a  crown 
made  from  flowers  that  grew  in  the  sky,  bathing  in  a  mirage, 
carrying  a  bow  made  of  hare's  horn."  Bringing  together  all 
the  most  impossible  things.  With  this  sloka  may  be  com- 
pared Prov.  xxvii.  22,  and  Ecclus.  xxi.  and  xxii. 

6.  Vydla  may  be  translated  either  "  elephant"  or  "  serpent." 

7.  This  stanza  is  the  one  in  which  the  author  shows  the 
highest  knowledge  of  the  world.     It  is  merely  an  elaborated 
form  of  the  English  proverb,   "Speech  is  silver,  silence  is 
gold."     The  same  idea  runs  through  a  good  many  verses  of 
the  Proverbs  of  Solomon,  e.g.,  x.   19,  "In  the  multitude  of 
words  there  wanteth  not  sin."     So  also  xiii.  3,  xvii.  27.     Of. 
Ecclus.  xx.  1 8,  19,  20.     Orientals  always  seem  to  have  re- 
garded talkativeness  as  an  evil  and  a  sign  of  folly.     "The 
empty  pitcher  makes  the  most  sound." 

8.  Kinchid-jna,  "  knowing  somewhat,"  is  explained  by  Telang 
to  refer  not  to  the  speaker's  estimate  of  himself  at  the  time  of 
his  "  blindness,"  but  to  the  view  he  takes  of  himself  after  his 
"  intoxication  "  has  left  him.    "  When  I  knew  (that  which  now 
I  know  was  but)  a  little,"  is  the  idea  to  be  conveyed. 

9.  As  a  dog  prefers  the  carrion  which  he  has  before  him  to 
any  sight  however  magnificent,  so  the  fool  keeps  his  eyes  fixed 
on  himself  and  his  small  acquirement,  and 

10.  Continually  falls  lower  and  lower  in  the  scale  of  in- 
tellect. 

12-13.  Cf.  PS-  xlviii.  20  (Vulg.)  :  "Homo,  cum  in  honore 
esset,  non  intellexit ;  comparatus  est  jumentis  insipientibus, 
et  similis  factus  est  illis."  For  bhuvi  bhdrabhdtdh,  cf.  Iliad, 
xviii.  104  :  aXX'  ?],aa/  cra^a  VTJIKT/  «Vcuff/ov  a%8o$  aeoucqz. 

14.  Cf.  Prov.  xvii.  12. 

15.  With  this  sloka  begins  the  section  or  chapter  relating 
to  wisdom.     Cf.  Hitopadesa,  Mitrabhedah,  66,  71,  72,  for  ideas 
similar  to  those  contained  in  the  last  line  of  this  s"loka. 


NITI  SATAKA.  23 

1 6.  Kalpa-anta,   the  end  of  a   kalpa,   the   destruction   of 
the  world.     A  kalpa  is  supposed  to  be  a  day  and  night  of 
Brahma,  and  to  equal  4,320,000,000  years  of  men.     After  the 
creation  of  the  world,  it  is  supposed  to  remain  unaltered  for 
one  of  Brahma's  days,  a  period  of  2,160,000,000  years  of  men. 
The  world,  and  all  that  it  contains,  is  then  destroyed  by  fire, 
only  the  gods,  sages,  and  elements  surviving.     On  Brahma's 
awaking  after  his  night,  which  lasts  an  equal  number  of  years 
with  the  day,  he  repeats  the  process  of  creation.     This  goes 
on   continually   until   his   existence    of  a   hundred   years  is 
brought  to  an  end,  when  he,  the  gods,  the  sages,  and  the 
whole  universe  are  resolved  into  their  constituent  elements. 

17.  Abhi- nava - mada - lekhd - sydma-gandha-sthahdndm  vdrand- 
ndm,  "Elephants,  the  surface  of  their  cheeks  dark  through  the 
lines  of  mada  (flowing  freshly)."      Abhinava,  &c.,  Bahuvrilii 
comp.  qualifying  vdrandndm. 

1 8.  The  Scholiast  says  on  this  sloka,  "  Yo  yasya  svabhavi- 
kah  sadgunah  tad  gunam  na  ko  'pi  hartum  saknoti,"  "  No  one 
can  take  away  the  virtue  of  him  who  is  virtuous  in  his  natural 
disposition."     Bohlen  says,  "Dens  ipse  sapienti  adimere  non 
potest  doctrinam ;  .  .  .  Brahma  ipse  nil  valet  adversus  fatum 
(vidhi)  et  unum  ipsi  negatum  est,  ut  infecta  reddat  quse  </>u<r/xw; 
menti  quasi  fuerint  inusta."     The  latter  part   of  this  sloka 
refers  to  a  supposed  faculty  of  the  swan  for  separating  milk 
from  water  which  has  been  previously  mixed  in  the  act  of 
drinking  it,  which  has  passed  into  a  proverb.     Regnaud  re- 
marks,  "  Prejuge"  sur  1'erreur  duquel  il  est  inutile  d'iusister." 
Of.  Sak.t  "  Hanso  hi  kshtram  adatte  tanmisra  varjayatyapah," 
"  For  the  flamingo  extracts  (takes)  the  milk  (and)  leaves  behind 
the  water  that  is  mixed  with  it."     The  Hindus  imagine  that 
the  hansa  or  flamingo  has  the  power  of  separating  milk  from 
water  (Sak.,  Mon.  Williams,  p.  266  note).     Prof.  M.  Williams 
quotes  this  sloka  of  Bhartrihari  in  his  note  in  £ak.,  and  con- 
tinues, "  This  reference  is  probably  to  the  milky  juice  of  the 
water-lily,  which  would  be  its  (the  hansa's)  natural  food,  and 
to  which  allusion  is  often  made  by  the  Hindu  poets." 

19-20.  Cicero  (pro.  Arch.,  c.  7)  has  a  sentiment  somewhat 
similar  to  that  contained  in  these  slokas :  "  Heec  studia  adoles- 
centiam  alunt,  senectutem  oblectant,  secundas  res  ornant, 


24  NIT  I  SATAKA. 

adversis  perfugium  ac  solatium  praebent ;  delectant  domi,  non 
impediunt  foris,  pernoctant  nobiscum,  peregrinantur,  rustican- 
tur."  Of.  Prov.  xii.  i. 

21.  Some  editors  have  vackanena,   "what   is   the   use   of 
words  1 "    If  the  reading  kavachena  be  taken,  it  means,  "  what 
is  the  use  of  armour  1 "  trans,  by  Eegnaud,  "  la  patience  est  une 
cuirasse."    The  man  who  has  enemies  within,  i.e.,  the  passions, 
can  have  no  worse  enemies  to  fear.     The  passions  or  faults  of 
the  mind  are  six  in  number — desire,  wrath,  covetousness,  be- 
wilderment, pride,  and  envy.    Shad-varga,  the  aggregate  of  six 
things,  is  the  appellation  given  to  them  (Mon.  Williams'  Lex., 
under  Shad-mrga).     The  end  of  the  last  line,  sukavitd  yadasti 
rdjyena  kirn?  "If  theje  is  good  poetry,  what  need  of  a  kingdom?" 
seems  to  mean  that  the  man  who  is  learned  and  intelligent 
has  no  need  of  external  things  to  produce  or  add  to  his  hap- 
piness. 

22.  Enumerates  the  virtues  which  a  man  must  practise  if 
he  would  live  happily.     Kald,  in  1.  4,  signifies  here  "qualities," 
referring  to  the  virtues  enumerated  in  the  preceding  lines. 

23.  Sinchate  vdche  satyam,  "pours  truth  into  the  speech,"  or 
"  impregnates  the  speech  with  truthfulness." 

24.  Kavisvardh,   "learned  poets;"  lit    "kings  of  poets." 
Cf.  sloka  12.      Rasa-siddhah  =  vfQ\\  versed   in  or   conversant 
with  the  poetical  rasas  or  affections,  accomplished  in  poetry 
(Mon.   Williams'  Lex.,  Rasas).     The  poetical  rasas  are  ten  : 
sringdra,  love ;  vira,  heroism  ;  bibhatsa,  disgust  ;  raudra,  anger ; 
hdsya,  mirth ;  bhaydnaka,  terror ;  karuna,  pity ;  adbhuta,  won- 
der; sdnta,  tranquillity;  vdtsalya,  paternal  fondness. 

27.  This  stanza  is  quoted  in  Mudrdrdkshasa,  act  ii.  (p.  79, 
Majumdar's  series),  trans,  by  Wilson  : — 

..."  Obstacles  foreseen 
Deter  the  poor  of  spirit  from  an  enterprise ; 
Some,  more  adventurous,  but  not  all  resolved, 
Commence,  and  stop  midway ;  but  noble  minds 
Like  thine,  by  difficulties  warned,  defy 
Repeated  checks,  and  in  the  end  prevail." 

28.  Even  in  adversity  the  foot  must  be  constant;  vipady- 


SATAKA.  25 

uchchaih   stheyam  =  one    must    retain    dignity   in   misfortune 
(Telang)  ;  uchchaih-steya  =  firmness  of  character. 

30.  This  sloka  occurs  at  Hitop.,  Sulridbheda,  39. 

31.  Fadana-udara-darsanam-kurute,  "makes  the  showing  of 
the  interior  of  his  mouth."     Of.  Hitop.,  Subridbheda,  40. 

32.  Parivartini  samsdre,  "while  he  passes  from  one  birth  to 
another,"  or  while  transmigrations  go  on ;  parivartini  means 
"  revolving,  constantly  recurring."    This  sloka  occurs  in  Hitop., 
Introd.,   14,  the  order  of  the  lines  being  reversed.     On  this 
Bohlen  remarks  in  his  notes  to  the  Niti  &ataka,  that  in  the 
Arabic  translation  of  the  Indian  fables  known  as  Kalilah  and 
Dimnah,  there  verses  have  been  altered  to  avoid  suggesting 
the  doctrine  of  metempsychosis.     Cf.  Hitppadesa,  Mitraldbha, 
114. 

33.  Also  Uttarardmacharita — 

"  Naisargiki  surabhinah  kusumasya  siddha 

murdhni  sthitir  na  charanair  avatadanani." 
"  The    fitting  place  for  the  sweet-smelling  flower  is  on  the 
head,  not  to  be  trodden  under  foot." — Uttararamacharila,  act  i. 
(p.  10  of  Majumdara's  series,  Calcutta,  1874). 

34.  The  fable  to  which  this  sloka  refers  is  as  follows  : — After 
the  deities  had  produced  the  amrita  by  churning  the  ocean, 
Rahu  by  a  stratagem  introduced  himself  among  them,  and 
drank  some  of  it.     The  deities  of  the  sun  and  moon  discovered 
the  theft,  and  told  Vishnu,  who  cut  off  his  head.     The  ami-it 
had,  however,  made  him  immortal,  and  he  was  therefore  placed 
among  the  stars,  where  he  periodically  shows  his  displeasure 
at  the  way  in  which  the  sun  and  moon  behaved  by  swallow- 
ing them.     This  is  supposed  to  take  place  whenever  an  eclipse 
occurs  of  either  the  sun  or  moon. 

35.  Phand-phalaka-sthitam,  "placed  on  the  flat  surface  of  his 
hood." 

36.  The  explanation  for  this  stanza  may  be  supplied  from 
the  fable  which  represents  Indra  as  cutting  off  the  wings  of 
the  mountains.     Mainaka,  the  son  of  Himalaya,  took  refuge  in 
the  ocean  and  so  escaped.     In  the  Puimdyana  he  is  supposed 
himself  to  relate  the  circumstance  to  Hanuman  : — 

"Formerly  the  mountains  were  winged,  and  flew  through 
the  heaven  as  swiftly  as  the  wind.     And  as  they  flew  hither 


26  NtTI  SATAKA. 

and  thither,  gods  and  men  were  filled  with  fear  lest  they  might 
fall.  Then  Indra,  filled  with  wrath,  cut  off  the  wings  of  the 
mountains  with  his  thunderbolt.  And  as  he  approached  me, 
brandishing  his  weapon,  I  was  cast  down  into  the  ocean  by 
the  mighty  Pavana.  And  my  wings  being  concealed,  I  was 
helped  by  your  father  and  took  refuge  in  the  ocean." — Ramd- 
yana,  v.  8. 

In  the  Bhattikavya,  viii.  8,  the  line  occurs — "  Pitra  samrak- 
shitam  sakrat  sa  mainakadrim  aikshata,"  "  He  (Hanuman) 
saw  the  mountain  Mainaka  which  had  been  saved  from  Indra 
by  his  own  father." 

Cf.  also  Raghuv. — 

"  Pakshachchhida  gotrabhidattagandhah 
saranyam  enam  sataso  mahidhrah 
nripa  ivopaplavinah  parebhyah 
dharmottaram  madhyamamasrayante." 

"  The  mountains  by  hundreds  fled  to  him  for  refuge  when 
their  pride  had  been  taken  from  them  by  Indra,  when  he  cut 
off  their  wings;  as  kings  assailed  by  enemies  fly  to  that 
king  among  them  who  is  distinguished  for  his  honour." — 
Raghuv.,  xiii.  7. 

Cf.  also — "  Pakshachchhedodyatam  sakram  silavarshiva  par- 
vatah,"  "  As  a  mountain  sending  forth  a  shower  of  stones 
(attacks)  Indra  who  is  approaching  to  cut  off  its  wings."— 
Raghuv.,  iv.  40. 

Cf.  &\soKumara  Sambhava — "Asutasanagavadhupabhogyam 
mainakamambho  nidhibaddha  sakhyam  kruddhe'  pi  paksha- 
chchhidi  vritrasakravavedanajnam  kulisakshatanam,"  "She 
brought  forth  Mainaka,  the  delight  of  the  daughter  of  the 
serpents,  who  made  an  alliance  with  Ocean,  and  so,  though 
the  enemy  of  Vritra  was  angry,  knew  not  the  stroke  of  the 
thunderbolt  when  the  wings  of  the  mountains  were  cut  off." — 
Kum.  Sam.,  i.  20. 

Bhartrihari  in  this  stanza  appears  to  bring  forward  Mainaka 
as  an  example  of  want  of  firmness.  It  would  have  been  better 
for  him  to  meet  his  fate  with  resignation  and  firmness  than  to 
have  fled,  since  his  father  Himalaya  had  been  overpowered. 

37.  Savitur-ina-lcdntah.  Ina,  from  root  in,  means  "power- 
ful," "mighty,"  "glorious:"  so  a  name  of  the  sun.  Some 


SATAKA.  27 

readings,  however,  savitur-ati-kantdk,  "  exceedingly  beloved  by 
the  sun."  Cf.  &ak.,  41  : 

"  Sparsanukula  iva  suryakantas 

tadanyatejo  'bhibhavadvamanti." 

"That  (energy),  like  sun  crystals  (which  are)  cool  to  the 
touch,  they  put  forth  from  (being  acted  upon)  by  the  opposing 
influence  of  other  forces." — M.  Williams,  &ak,  p.  74. 

39.  With  this  sloka  begins  the  section  relating  to  riches. 
Abhijana  means,  in  this  passage,  "  caste,"  or,  according  to 
Telang,  "nobility  of  birth,"  as  in  Sabuntald:  "Abhijana- 
vato  bhartuh  slaghye  sthita  grihinipade,"  ';  Stationed  in  the 
honourable  post  of  wife  to  a  nobly-born  husband." — $ak., 
Mon.  Williams,  p.  175,  note. 

For  the  idea  contained  in  this  sloka,  cf.  Prov.  x.  15.  The 
silam  sailatatdt,  "  one's  virtue  may  fall  from  a  mountain  slope," 
is  contained  a  play  upon  the  \vords  sild,  a  "stone,"  saila, 
"  stony,"  and  silam,  "  disposition." 

42.  Sanga,  translated  "society,"  with  the  idea  of  "attach- 
ment to  objects  of  sense,"  the  detachment  from  all  worldly 
desires  being  the  devotee's  chief  aim. 

44.  Mada-kshino-ndgah,  "  the  elephant  is  weakened  by  the 
flow  of  mada."     All  the  things  mentioned  do  not  lose  their 
beauty  or  glory  through  the  diminution  of  their  powers  or 
their  resources ;  a  noble  man  who  has  given  away  his  riches 
is  not  less  noble  because  he  is  poor  in  consequence  of  his 
liberality. 

45.  Sprihayati,  "longs   for,"   followed   by   dative   prasrite, 
which   the    commentator   explains    by    tusha,   which    means 
"  grain,"  but  the  ordinary  meaning  of  prasrite  is  a  "  handful." 
The  meaning  of  this  sloka,  as  explained  by  Telang,  is  as  fol- 
lows : — "  Since  in  different  states  of  life  the  same  things  are 
regarded  as  great  or  small,  therefore  it  must  be  concluded 
that  it  is  the  state  of  life  which  causes  the  things  to  appear 
so."    The  word  kalayate  (kal)  means  in  this  place  "  to  consider 
or  reckon." 

46.  The  comparison  between  the  earth  and  a  cow  is  a  com- 
mon one  among  the  Hindus ;  in  fact,  the  word  go  means  both 
the  earth  and  a  cow  (cf.   7^).      Among  other  passages  the 
following  may  be  referred  to  : — ".  .  .  Yathaiva  mama  Kama- 


28  NtTI  SATAKA. 

dhuk,"  "Just  as  Kamadhuk  is  mine." — Nala,  ii.  18,  where 
Kamadhuk,  the  cow  of  plenty,  is  a  figurative  way  of  speaking 
of  the  earth  which  supplies  all  desires.  And  "Dudoha  gam 
sa  yajnaya  sasyaya  maghava  divam,"  "  He  milked  (exhausted) 
the  earth  for  the  sake  of  sacrifices,  Indra  the  heaven  to  give 
the  people  food." — Eaghuv.,  i.  26.  Tena  is  used  as  correlative 
to  yadi  by  an  unusual  construction  (Telang). 

47.  This  sloka  occurs  in  Hitopadesa,  Mitrabheda,  182.  Bohlen 
in  his  note  on  this  passage  refers  to  the  character  of  Vasanta- 
sena  in  the  Mrichchhakatikd  as  a  well-known  typical  character 
among  the  Hindus,  equally  famous  with  Phryne,  Lais,  &c.,  of 
the  Western  world. 

49.  Man's  life  is  predestined  by  fate,  and  the  amount  of 
enjoyment  that  he  has  is  in  proportion  to  his  own  capacity 
for  enjoyment.  Mount  Meru  is  the  Hindi!  equivalent  for 
Olympus.  It  is  generally  used  as  a  synonym  for  a  wealthy 
place.  "  Vittavatsu  kripanam  vrittim  vritha  ma  krithah,"  "  Do 
not  vainly  act  an  envious  part  towards  the  rich."  Cf.  "  Kuru 
priyasakhivrittim  sapatnijane,"  "  Act  the  part  of  a  dear  friend 
towards  thy  fellow- wives." — SaL,  M.  Williams,  p.  173  and 
note. 

50-51.  A  dialogue  supposed  to  take  place  between  the 
chataka,  a  bird  fabled  to  live  solely  on  the  drops  of  rain,  and 
the  rain-cloud.  The  moral  of  the  fable  is  contained  in  the 
last  line  of  sloka  51.  It  is  no  use  to  ask  favours  of  mean 
persons. 

52.  The  section  with   which   this  sloka  begins   sets  forth 
the  characteristic  marks  of  the  wicked  man. 

53.  Cf.  Hitopadesa,  Mitraldbha,  90,  for  this  sloka. 

54.  "Branded,"   ankitah.      The   virtues    of  the   good   are 
branded  as  vices  by  evil-disposed  persons.      Cf.   the  Greek 
proverb,  "  <I>a<r/V  xaxisrovs  e/7  croi/TjPo/  rov;  xaXovs." 

55.  Cf.  sloka  1 8.     The  general  drift  of  these  two  slokas 
appears  to  be  the  same.      For  the   sentiment   in   line   4 — 
"  Apayaso  yad  asti  kim  mrityuna?"  "If  there  be  disgrace, 
what  need  of  death?"  i.e.,  one  should  prefer  death  to  dis- 
grace, cf.  Hor.,  Car.  iii.  5  (the  speech  of  Regulus). 

56.  "These   are  the  seven  thorns  in   my  mind."      Salya 
meaning  a  "dart,"  "arrow,"  "thorn,"  and  secondarily  "em- 


NtTI  SATAKA.  29 

barrassment "  or  ''distress,"  is  not  uncommonly  used  to  express 
this  idea.  Cf.  English  proverb,  "  A  thorn  in  one's  side ;  " 
also  2  Cor.  xii.  7.  Mukham-anaJcsharam  svdkriteh,  lit.  "  the 
inarticulate  mouth  of  (one  having)  a  handsome  form." 

58.  This  sloka  occurs  in  Hitopadesa,  Mitrabheda,  25. 

60.  With  this  sloka  may  be  compared  Prov.  iv.  1 8. 

62.  With  this  sloka  the  section  begins  in  which  the  charac- 
teristics of  virtue  are  described. 

63.  This  sloka  is  given  in  Hitopadesa,  Mitralabha,  32.     Vdk- 
patuld  -  "  skill   or   ability   in   speech,"    "  eloquence."      "  The 
desire  of  glory."     The  readings  differ  between   abhirdte  and 
abhiruchi.      Bohlen  makes  a  distinction   between  these    two 
words,  but  they  both  contain  the  same  idea  of  pleasure  in  a 
thing — desire   after  it.      The   Scripture,  £ruti,  "that   which 
has   been   heard    or   revealed,"   as    the    Veda ;    the    Smriti, 
"  that  which  has  been  handed  down  by  tradition ; "  such  as 
the  laws  of  Manu. 

64.  "Cheerful  hospitality  to  strangers"  (sambhramavidhih) , 
lit.  "  preparations  conducted  in  a  hurried  manner,  with  the 
view  of  honouring  a  guest."    Upakritih,  "  assistance,"  "favour," 
meaning  here  the  favours  which  others  have  granted,  in  op- 
position to  kritva  priyam,  "the  kindness  one  has  done  one- 
self."    Asidhdrd  vratam,  "the  vow  to  stand  on  the  edge  of  a 
sword,"  used  as  a  proverb  to  express  a  task  which  is  impos- 
sible. 

65.  Prakrit i-mahat,  "great  in   nature"  (tat  purusha   comp). 
Cf.  Srutimahat  (Sak.,  199),  "great  in  the  knowledge  of  the 
Veda." 

66.  For  the  sentiment   contained   in   this  sloka  cf.  Prov. 
x.   25,   "The  righteous   is  an  everlasting  foundation;"  also 
Hor.,  Car.  iii.  3 — 

"  Justum  ac  tenacem  propositi  virum 
ISron  civium  ardor  prava  jubentium, 
Non  voltus  instantis  tyranni 

Mente  quatit  solida,  neque  Auster. 

Dux  inquieti  turbidus  Hadrise, 
Nee  fulminantis  magna  manus  Jovis, 
Si  fractus  illabatur  orbis,    . 
Impavidum  ferient  ruinse." 


30  NfTI  SATAKA. 

Mahd-sailctr&ld-sanghdta-kakartam  =  hard  as  the  collected  stones 
of  a  large  mountain. 

67.  Svdte  =  Arcturus,  also  any  conspicuous  constellation.    The 
disposition  of  men  is  ranged  in  three  degrees  of  an  ascending 
scale,  developing  or  the  reverse  according  to  their  surround- 
ings and  the  atmosphere  in  which  they  live  :  first,  the  dis- 
position which  produces  no  results  is  like  the  drop  of  water 
on  hot  iron,  which  leaps  off  the  instant  it  touches  the  metal; 
next,  the  moderately  good  disposition  is  compared  to  the  drop 
of  water  on  the  lotus-leaf,  a  beautiful  object  to  look  at ;  and 
lastly,  the  very  good  disposition  to  the  pearl  which  is  not 
only  beautiful,  but  valuable.     The  ideas  in  this  sloka  rather 
suggest  the  parable  of  the  talents  (St.  Matt.  xxv.  15). 

68.  Of.  Prov.  x.  i. 

69.  Khydpayantah,  translated  "  display,"  means  "  to  declare," 
"  make  known."    The  second  half  of  the  line  appears  to  mean 
"  those  who  make  the  fact  of  their  own  virtues  evident  by  the 
manner  in  which  they  estimate  the  virtue  of  others." 

70.  This  sloka  commences  the  section  treating  of  liberality 
and  benevolence. 

This  sloka  occurs  in  Qakuntald,  M.  Williams,  p.  195, 
where,  instead  of  udgamaih,  the  word  dgamaih  is  used  :  there 
is  perhaps  no  difference  in  their  meanings. 

71.  Cf.  sloka  55.     The  ideas  contained  in  these  slokas  may 
suggest  i  Pet.  iii.  3,  4,  also  Prov.  i.  9. 

73.  The  idea  and  simile  expressed  in  the  first  line  of  this 
sloka  is  to  be  found  in  £ak,  M.  Williams,  p.  213  :  "Kurnu- 
danyeva  sasankah  savita  bodhayate  pankajanyeva,"  "  The 
moon  awakes  (expands)  the  night-lotuses  only ;  the  sun,  the 
day-lotuses  only."  The  "  kumuda"  of  this  passage  in  feakun- 
tald  corresponds  with  the  kaisava  (a  lotus  blossoming  by  moon- 
light) of  Bhartrihari ;  pankaja  with  padma,  the  word  used  by 
Bhartrihari.  The  lotus  called  pankaja  or  padma  is  red,  while 
the  kumuda  or  kaisava  is  white.  Bohlen  on  this  passage  refers 
to  Hit.,  Mitraldbha,  63:  "Na  hi  samharate  jyotsnam  chan- 
draschandalavesmani,"  "The  moon  does  not  withhold  light 
even  from  the  house  of  a  Chandala ; "  cf.  also  St.  Matt.  v.  45. 

75.  The  bond  of  friendship  is  represented  in  this  sloka 
under  the  figure  of  milk  and  water.  The  water,  by  itself 


NlTI  SATAKA.  31 

tasteless,  receives  sweetness  of  flavour  from  the  milk,  and  there- 
fore, as  if  in  return  for  this  benefit  which  it  has  received,  is 
the  first  to  boil  over  and  rush  into  the  hostile  flames.  The 
milk  then  follows  the  water,  and,  combined  together,  they 
extinguish  the  fire,  their  enemy.  So  friends  acting  together 
may  overcome  an  enemy,  even  at  the  loss  of  their  own  lives. 
In  Hit.,  Mitraldbha,  89,  occurs  the  line  :  "  Sutaptamapi  pani- 
yam  samayatyeva  pavakam,"  "  Water  though  well  warmed 
extinguishes  the  fire,"  i.e.,  the  water,  though  it  has  received 
heat  from  the  fire,  returns  the  kindness  by  extinguishing  the 
flame,  that  is,  by  evil  conduct. 

76.  The  sleep  of  Kesava  or  Vishnu  is  referred  to  in  MaMt- 
mya  Devi,  Bk.  i.  sloka  49  :  "  Once  the  adorable  lord  Vishnu, 
at  the  end  of  a  kalpa,  had  spread  out  S'esha  for  his  couch 
on  the  world,  which  was  covered  with  water,  and  was  wrapped 
in  the  sleep  of  meditation."  For  the  ocean  as  the  refuge  for 
the  mountains,  v.  Niti  £ataka,  sloka  29.  The  firmness  of  the 
ocean  in  retaining  the  submarine  fire  is  mentioned  in  Chaura- 
panch.,  50:  " Ambhonidhirvahate  duhsahabadavagnim,"  "The 
ocean  keeps  the  submarine  fire  difficult  to  bear." 

Cf.  £ak.,  56 —  "...  harakopavahnis 

tvayi  jvalatyaurva  ivamburasau." 

"  The  fire  of  the  wrath  of  S'iva  burns  in  thee  like  the  sub- 
marine fire  in  the  ocean." 
Also  Raghuv.,  ix.  82 — 

"  Antarnivishtapadam  atmavinasahetum 
sapam  adadhajjvalanam  aurvam  ivamburasih." 

'•  He  bore  the  curse,  having  a  place  in  his  mind,  the  cause  of 
his  death,  even  as  the  ocean  (bears)  the  submarine  fire  flaming 
(in  its  interior)." 

The  legend  relating  to  the  submarine  fire,  as  given  in  the 
Harivansa,  is  as  follows : — A  sage  called  Aurva  produced  by 
means  of  magic  power  a  devouring  fire  from  his  thigh.  In 
consequence  the  earth  was  in  flames,  when  Brahma,  to  save 
creation,  allotted  the  ocean  to  the  son  of  Aurva  (the  fire)  as  a 
suitable  dwelling.  The  ocean  was  also  the  abode  of  Brahma, 
and  from  it,  he  and  the  submarine  fire  come  forth  at  the  end 


32  NtTI  SATAKA. 

of  each  age  to  consume  the  world,  and  at  the  final  consum- 
mation of  all  things  to  consume  also  the  gods  and  demons. 
Vide  Niti  Sataka,  sloka  13. 

78.  "How  many  noble  men  there  are  in  the  world,  pure 
in  thought,  word,  and  deed ! "  Expecting  the  answer, 
"  But  few."  Of.  Bhagavad.,  vii.  3  :  "  Manushyanam  sahas- 
reshu  kaschid  yatati  siddhaye,"  "Among  thousands  of  men, 
who  strive  after  perfection ?"  (Answer,  "But  few.")  Of. 
also  BhagavadgUa,  xvii.  24  et  seq. 

So.  With  this  sloka  begins  the  section  on  the  praise  of 
firmness  or  constancy. 

8 1.  Cf.  Bhagavad.,  ii.  15 — 

"  Yam  hi  na  vyathayanty  ete  purusham,  purusharshabha, 
samaduhkhasukham  dhiram  so'mritatvaya  kalpate." 

"  The  man  whom  these  things  (external  things)  do  not  affect, 
(0  noblest  of  men),  being  the  same  in  pain  and  pleasure,  and 
firm,  he  is  fit  for  immortality." 

84.  This  sloka,  beginning  the  section  on  the  power  of  fate 
or   destiny,   is   pure   fatalism.     Everything,  both   in   divine 
affairs  as  well  as  human,  is  represented  as  moving  according 
to  an  irresistible  law,  the  law  of  fate. 

The  "  basket "  (karanda)  is  explained  by  Telang  as  the  place 
in  which  the  snake-charmer  keeps  his  snakes.  "  Meeting  with 
the  same  fate,"  "  tena  eva  yatah  patha,"  went  by  the  same 
route  as  the  rat,  i.e.,  died. 

85.  "  The  misfortunes  of  good  men,"  sddhuvrittdndm  vipat- 
tayah.     Telang  points  out  on  this  passage  that  there  is  a 
play  on  the  word  sddhuvritta.     It  means  "well  rounded,"  as 
applied  to  the  ball,  and  "  of  good  conduct,"  as  applied  to 
men.     Cf.  Ntti  Sataka,  Mis.  S'at.,  13. 

87.  Cf.  Job  xiv.  7,  "There  is  hope  of  a  tree,  if  it  be  cut 
down,  that  it  will  sprout  again,  and  that  the  tender  branch 
thereof  will  not  cease;"  also  Hor.,  Car.  iv.  7;  though  both 
the  writer  of  the  Book  of  Job  and  Horace  seem  to  draw  a 
different  conclusion  from  the  writer  of  this  S'ataka.  The 
tree  will  sprout  again,  but  "man  dieth  and  wasteth  away; 
yea,  man  giveth  up  the  ghost,  and  where  is  he?"  Horace 
says — 


NtTI  SATAKA.  33 

"  Nos  ubi  decidimus  .  .  . 
Quo  pater  ^Eneas,  quo  dives  Tullus  et  Ancus 
Pulvis  et  umbra  sumus." 

91.  For  this  sloka,  cf.  Hitopadesa,   Mitrddbliali,  52.     For 
Rahu,  cf.  Niti  Sataka,  sloka  27. 

92.  Tdvat  =  prathamam,  according  to  commentator,  "Fate 
first  creates,  &c.,  and  then  destroys." 

"An  excellent  man"  (purusharatna,  lit.  "a  jewel  of  a 
man"),  ratna,  used  commonly  with  nouns  to  express  their 
extreme  excellence. 

93.  As  to  the  power  of  fate,  cf.  Hitopadesa,  Mitraldbhah, 
152  —  "  Chakravat  parivartante  duhkhani  cha  sukhani   cha." 
"Like  a  wheel,  pains  and  pleasures  revolve."      Also  in  the 
MeghadHUa,  sloka  109,  translated  by  Wilson  — 

"  Life,  like  a  wheel's  revolving  orb,  turns  round, 
Now  whirled  in  air,  now  dragged  along  the  ground." 

The  expression  may  find  a  parallel  in  Anacreon,  xxxiii.  7  — 

yao  oiot, 


The  power  of  destiny  is  recognised  under  a  slightly  different 
figure  in  the  lines  of  Horace,  Car.  i.  34,  14  — 

"...  hinc  apicem  rapax 
Fortuna  cum  stridore  acuto 
Sustulit,  hinc  posuisse  gaudet." 

Or  in  Car.  iii.  10,  10,  where  in 

"  Ne  currente  retro  funis  eat  rota," 

an   allusion  has    been    thought    to    exist    to    the  wheel   of 
fortune. 

94.  The  section  relating  to  religious  works  begins  with  this 
sloka.  The  meaning  of  the  stanza  is  as  follows  :  —  Man  should 
give  himself  up  to  the  works  of  religion,  to  study  of  the  Scrip- 
ture, to  the  exercise  of  liberality,  to  the  instruction  and  the 
benefiting  others  ;  he  should  offer  sacrifice  to  the  deities  and 

C 


34  Nfrl  SATAKA. 

the  manes ;  for  these  works  will  produce  happiness  for  him  in 
a  future  state,  and  are  not  in  the  power  of  destiny  or  fate,  as 
all  other  things  are,  including  even  the  deities  themselves. 
On  the  idea  that  the  gods  are  in  the  power  of  destiny,  cf. 
Eurip.,  Alcestis,  965  : 

ov&lv 


xa/  yuo  Zwc  o  ri 
ouv  aol  rovro 


95.  Continuation  of  the  ideas  in  preceding  sloka.  For 
Brahma  working  in  the  egg,  cf.  Manu,  i.  9,  12,  13.  The  Ava- 
tars or  incarnations  of  Vishnu  have  been  extended  from  ten  to 
twenty-two.  Those  usually  recognised  are  —  i.  Matsya,  as  the 
fish  ;  2.  Kurma,  the  tortoise  ;  3.  Varaha,  the  boar  ;  4.  Nara- 
sinha,  the  man-lion;  5.  Vamana,  the  dwarf;  6.  Parasu 
Rama,  Rama  with  the  axe  ;  7.  Rama  or  Rama  Chandra,  son 
ofDasaratha;  8.  Krishna;  9.  Buddha;  10.  Kalki,  the  white 
horse.  The  first  three  of  these  incarnations  are  apparently 
connected  with  some  Hindu  traditions  of  the  Deluge  ;  that 
of  Varaha,  or  the  boar,  is  referred  to  Ntti  Sataka,  Mis.  Sat.,  3. 
S'iva  (according  to  the  fable)  was  supposed  to  have  killed  the 
sons  of  a  Brahman,  and  was  compelled  to  wander  for  twelve 
years  as  a  mendicant  bearing  the  skull  of  one  of  his  victims  in 
his  hand.  This  is  referred  to  in  the  Sringdra  £at.,  64,  where 
it  is  said  that  persons  who  insult  the  god  of  love  by  want  of 
susceptibility  or  reluctance  are  punished  by  being  turned  into 
ascetics,  and  pass  their  lives  as  Kapalikas,  i.e.,  worshippers  of 
S'iva,  who  carry  skulls  which  they  use  as  the  mendicant's  jar 
in  which  to  collect  their  food. 

99.  Cf.  Prov.  xxv.  1  8  ;  Eccles.  vii.  8.    Salt/a  tulyah,  "  equal 
to  or  like  an  arrow." 

100.  "  A  field  of  kodrava."     Kodrava  is  a  common  kind  of 
grain  eaten  by  the  poor,  Paspalum  scrobiculatum. 

1  01.  There  is  no  escape  from  fate  or  destiny.  This  senti- 
ment is  repeated  usque  ad  nauseam  throughout  the  whole  of 
the  Hitopadesa.  Cf.  however,  Suhridbheda,  15,  for  a  remark- 
able passage  — 


NtTI  SATAKA.  35 

"  Nakale  mriyate  janturviddhah  saranasatairapi 
kusagrenaiva  samprishta  praptakalo  na  jivati." 

"  A  creature,  though  pierced  by  a  hundred  arrows,  does  not 
die  if  his  time  be  not  come ;  but  if  the  time  of  his  death  be 
near,  he  dies  if  pricked  even  by  a  blade  of  grass." 

1 06.  The  idea  contained  in  the  sloka  occurs  in  Hit.,  Suhrid- 
bhedah,  67,  in  the  following  form — 

"  Kadarthitasyapi  cha  dhairyavritter 
buddher  vinaso  na  hi  sankaniyah 
adhah  kritasyape  tanurapato 
nadhah  sikha  yate  kadachideva." 

"  Loss  of  understanding  is  not  to  be  apprehended  in  a  man 
of  firm  conduct  though  he  be  troubled ;  the  flame  of  a  fire 
which  may  have  been  overturned  does  not  go  downwards." 


MISCELLANEOUS  S'ATAKAS. 

i.  For  the  comparison  of  a  woman  to  a  plant,  cf.  Mrich.,  act 
i.  26  :  "Ganika  tvam  margajata  lataiva!"  "Thou,  a  harlot, 
art  like  a  creeper  growing  by  the  roadside."  Also  Catullus, 
Ixi.  34— 

"  Ut  tenax  hedera  hue  et  hue 
Arborem  implicat  errans." 

3.  The  creator  Prajapati  took  the  form  of  a  boar  for  the 
sake  of  raising  the  earth  out  of  the  waters.  The  Taittiriya 
Sanhitd  says — "  This  universe  was  formerly  waters,  fluid.  On 
it  Prajapati,  becoming  wind,  moved.  He  saw  this  earth.  Be- 
coming a  boar,  he  took  it  up."  The  Eamdyana  also  says  that 
Brahma  became  a  boar  and  took  up  the  earth." 

For  Kahu,  vide  sloka  34. 

8.  "  The  drum  sends  forth  an  agreeable  sound,"  &c.  The 
following  may  explain  the  allusion  : — The  Mridanga  is  made  of 
wood,  and  has  two  mouths.  The  right  mouth  is  prepared 
with]  black  kharali  (a  mixture  of  ashes,  red  chalk,  the  tar  of 
the  Diospyros  glutinosa,  and  parched  rice) ;  the  left  mouth  is 
simply  covered  with  leather.  The  players,  before  beginning 


36  NtTI  SATAKA. 

to  perform  on  it,  anoint  this  end  with  an  ointment  made  of 
flour.  The  meaning  of  the  stanza  seems  to  be,  that  as  the 
drum  sounds  when  struck  by  the  man  who  has  spread  the 
flour  ointment  over  it,  so  a  man  sends  forth  the  praises  of  the 
patron  who  supplies  him  with  benefits. 

TO.  This  stanza  contains  throughout  a  play  upon  words 
used  in  a  double  meaning ;  the  force  of  the  expression  is, 
however,  untranslatable,  except  in  the  manner  in  which  I 
have  rendered  them.  Artham  means  "  revenue  "  as  applied 
to  the  minister  of  state,  "  meaning  "  as  referring  to  the  man 
of  letters  ;  apasabdham  "  common  rumours  "  as  well  as  "  vulgar 
expressions;  a.nd.padam,  "a  place"  (i.e.,  of  fame)  as  well  as 
"  a  quarter  of  a  verse." 

13.  Cf.  Prov.  xxiv.  1 6.     The  just  man  falleth  seven  times, 
and  riseth  up  again ;  but  the  wicked  shall  fall  into  mischief. 
Cf.  Ntti  SataTca,  85. 

14.  The  answer  to  the  question  proposed  in  this  sloka  is, 
"  No !  for  the  swan  is  too  noble  a  bird  to  indulge  in  such  low 
practices." 


(     37     ) 


VAIRAGYA  gATAKA. 

Concerning  Renunciation. 

1.  SALUTATION  to  the  deity  who  is  not  definable  in  time 
or  space,  infinite,  pure  intelligence  in   incarnate   form; 
who  is  peace  and  glory ;  whose  sole  essence  is  self-know- 
ledge. 

The  Evil  Qualities  of  Desire. 

2.  Learned  men  are  eaten  up  with  jealousy;  mighty 
men  are  spoiled  through  pride ;  the  minds  of  some  men 
are  obscured  through  ignorance :   therefore  the   eloquent 
teachings  of  science  are  neglected. 

3.  When  I  look  through  the  world,  I  see  no  profit  in 
any  action.     The  result  of  good  actions  makes  me  afraid 
when  I  reflect  on  them ;  for  the  great  enjoyments  gained 
after  long  continuance  in  the   practice  of  great  virtues 
hinder   men  from  perfect  liberation,  since   they  are   at- 
tracted to  objects  of  sense. 

4.  I  have  dug  up  the  earth  to  find  treasure;   I  have 
smelted  minerals;    I  have  crossed  the  sea;   I  have  con- 
ciliated kings  with  great  effort ;  I  have  spent  my  nights 
in  a  cemetery;    I   have    laboured    to    acquire    religious 
knowledge ;  but  my  efforts  are  all  in  vain.     Desire  !  wilt 
thou  not  leave  me  ? 

5.  I  have  wandered  over  lands  crossed  with  difficulty, 
but  I  have  gained  no  fruit ;  I  have  put  away  from  me  my 
pride  of   family ;    I   have  performed  services  that  have 
profited  me  nothing ;  I  have  cast  off  my  self-respect,  and 


38  VAIRAGYA  SATAKA. 

have  eaten  like  a  crow  in  a  stranger's  house.  But  yet, 
desire!  thou  dost  still  increase,  ever  given  to  evil,  and 
art  never  satisfied. 

6.  I  have  suffered  the  abuse  of   evil  men  in  hope  of 
gain ;    I  have   repressed  my  tears   and  forced  laughter, 
though  my  heart  was  void;  I  have  restrained  my  feel- 
ings ;  I  have  bowed  myself  before  fools.     0  desire,  foolish 
desire  !  wilt  thou  lead  me  yet  further  ? 

7.  Day  by  day  our  life  slips  away  from  us,  while  the 
sun  rises  and  sets :  our  business  is  so  great  and  weighty 
that  the  flight  of  time  escapes  us.     We  behold  birth,  pain, 
old  age,  ending  in  death,  and  yet  we  are  not  afraid.     We 
are,  as  it  were,  intoxicated :  we  have  drunk  of  the  wine 
of  infatuation. 

8.  If  one  were  to  see  his  wife  overcome  by  hunger,  her 
garments  old  and  torn,  her  children  hanging  round  her, 
crying  with  pinched,  unhappy  faces ;  though  he  might  fear 
refusal  and  stammer  in  his  speech,  yet  would  he  ask  alms ; 
but  he  would  not  beg  to  satisfy  his  own  wants. 

9.  Our  desire  for  pleasure  fails;  respect  is  no  longer 
paid  us  by  the  world ;  our  equals  in  age  have  gone  to 
Svarga;  our  friends  whom  we  love  even  as  ourselves  will 
soon  follow;  we  walk  slowly,  supported  by  a  stick;  our 
eyes  are  dim.     Alas !  our  body  is  subdued ;  it  trembles  at 
the  approach  of  death. 

10.  It  has   been    ordained   by   the   Creator  that  the 
serpents  shall  gain  their  livelihood  on  air,  without  effort 
and   without    injury   to    others;    the   cattle   have   been 
created  eating  shoots  of  grass  and  lying  on  the  ground. 
The  same  mode  of  living  has  been  appointed   for  men 
who   pass  over  the  ocean   of   this  world  with  subdued 
senses:   men  who  seek  to   live  in  such  a  way  as  this 
continually  go  on  to  perfection. 

11.  We   have  not   meditated  on  the  Supreme  Being 
bringing  future  births  to  an  end :  we  have  not,  through 
the  energy  of  our  righteousness,  been  able  to  open  for 
ourselves  the  door  of  Svarga :  we  have  not  embraced  a 


VAIRAGYA  SATAKA.  39 

woman  even  in  imagination.  We  have  only  (if  our  life 
has  been  spent  thus)  destroyed  the  tree  of  youth  which 
our  mother  gave  us,  as  though  we  had  cut  it  down  with 
an  axe. 

1 2.  We  have  gained  no  pleasure,  but  pleasure  has  taken 
us  captive ;  we  have  not  practised  penance,  but  we  have 
suffered  pain  in  the  pursuit  of  earthly  joys.     Time  never 
grows  old,  but  our  life  passes  away. 

13.  We  have  pardoned  injuries,  but  not  for  the  sake  of 
showing  forgiveness ;  we  have  abandoned  the  pleasures  of 
home,  but  not  because  we  were  willing  to  cast  them  aside  ; 
we  have  suffered  pain  from  cold  winds,  but  we  have  shrunk 
from  penance  because  of  its  painfulness  ;  we  have  thought 
night  and  day  on  the  acquisition  of  wealth,  but  we  have 
given  no  thought  to  the  Supreme  Being;  we  have  per- 
formed all  the  acts  which  the  sages  have  prescribed  for 
us,  but  we  have  gained  no  fruits. 

14.  My  face  is  covered  with  wrinkles,  my  head  is  grey, 
my  limbs  are  feeble,  but  desire  alone  is  ever  strong  in  me. 

15.  The  same  piece  of  sky  which  encircles  the  moon  by 
night,  that  encircles  the  sun  by  day.    Ah  !  how  great  is  the 
labour  of  both ! 

1 6.  Objects  of  sense,  however  long  they  may  be  with 
us,  must  one  day  depart ;  but  there  is  this  difference  be- 
tween separating  oneself  from  them  and  not  giving  them 
up.     If  they  forsake  us,  we  shall  suffer  unequalled  pain 
and  grief ;  but  if  we  forsake  them  of  our  own  accord,  we 
shall  gain  unending  peace  and  happiness. 

The  Miglity  Power  of  Desire. 

17.  Desire  ceases  in  a  man  when  self-restraint,  developed 
by  means  of  true  discrimination,  shines  forth  in  him ;  but 
the  end  of  desire  increases  yet  more  and  more  in  the  lofty 
contact  (with  royal  objects) :  by  this  means  even  Indra 
himself,  the  king  of  the  winds,  is  the  prey  of  desire,  inas- 
much as  he  is  wretched  because  of  the  appetite  which  he 
feels  for  his  royal  position — a  position  decrepit  through  age. 


40  VAIRAGYA  SATAKA. 

The  Great  Distress  caused  ~by  Love. 

1 8.  A  dog,  wretched,  worn  out,  lame,  deaf,  without  a 
tail,  and  covered  with  sores,  overcome  with  hunger,  and 
with  a  piece  of  broken  pot  tied  round  his  neck,  still  runs 
after  his  mate.     Love  destroys  even  that  which  is  already 
dead. 

The  Mighty  Power  of  Objects  of  Sense. 

19.  A  man  may  live  by  begging;  his  food  may  be  taste- 
less, only  enough  for  one  meal ;  his  bed  may  be  the  bare 
earth ;  he  may  have  no  attendant  but  himself ;  his  clothes 
may  be  in  a  thousand  pieces  through  age,  hardly  able  to 
hold  together.    Alas !  even  then  objects  of  sense  do  not 
quit  their  hold  over  him  ! 

Dispraise  of  Beauty. 

20.  The  beauties  of  a  woman  are  praised  by  the  elegant 
poets ;  her  breast  is  compared  to  two  pots  of  gold,  her  face 
to  the  moon,  her  hips  to  the  forehead  of  an  elephant ;  but 
yet  the  beauty  of  a  woman  does  not  merit  praise. 

21.  A  moth  may  fall  into  the  flame  of  a  candle  through 
ignorance ;  a  fish  may  take  a  piece  of  meat  fastened  to  a 
hook,  not  knowing  what  it  is ;  but  we  who  know  perfectly 
the  many  entanglements  of  fortune  yet  do  not  give  up  our 
desire.     Ah !  in  what  a  thicket  of  error  do  we  wander ! 

The  Setting  Forth  of  Evil  Men. 

22.  Lotus  fibre  is  enough  for  our  food  ;  water  suffices  for 
us  to  drink ;  we  may  lie  on  the  bare  earth ;  we  may  be 
clothed  in  bark  raiment.    I  approve  not  the  evil  behaviour 
of  bad  men,  whose  senses  are  led  astray  through  the  thirst 
for  gold. 

Setting  Forth  the  States  of  Honour. 

23.  This  created  world  was  ruled  in  former  times  by 
great  sages ;  by  others  afterwards  it  was  cast  away  like 


VAIRAGYA  SATAKA.  41 

straw,  after  they  had  conquered  it :  even  now  heroes  rule 
fourteen  divisions  of  the  world.  Whence  then  is  the 
feverish  desire  that  men  have  for  a  few  cities  ? 

24.  Thou  art  a  king :  I  am  of  the  number  of  the  spiritual 
teachers,  honoured  for  my  wisdom  by  the  world.     Thy 
riches  are  celebrated :   my  fame  is  celebrated  by  poets. 
Thus,  0  giver  of  blessings !  there  is  not  a  great  interval 
between  us.     Thou  hast  thy  face  averted  from  me,  but 
yet  I  have  no  desire  for  thy  favour. 

The  Setting  Forth  of  Freedom  from  Desire. 

25.  Hundreds  of  princes  always  have  been,  and  always 
are,  incessantly  disputing  for  the  possession  of  earthly 
enjoyments,  and  still  kings  do  not  abandon  pride  in  their 
possessions.      Owners  of  the  earth  in  their  folly  display 
delight   in   the  acquirement  of   even  the  very  smallest 
particle,  while,  on  the  contrary,  they  ought  to  manifest 
sorrow. 

26.  This  earth  is  but  an  atom  of  clay  surrounded  by 
the  line  of  ocean.     Kings  have  subdued  it  in  hundreds 
of  battles,  and  have  divided  it  among  themselves.     These 
wicked,  contemptible  men  might  give  or  they  might  not : 
there  is  no  wonder  in  that !     But  shame  on  those  low- 
minded  persons  who  beg  alms  from  them. 

The  Description  of  Evil  Servitude. 

27.  I  am  not  an  actor ;  I  am  not  a  courtesan ;  I  am  not 
a  singer ;  I  am  not  a  buffoon ;  I  am  not  a  beautiful  woman  : 
what  have  I  to  do  with  king's  palaces  ? 

28.  Once   wisdom  was  employed   to   gain  relief  from 
pain ;  afterwards  it  began  to  be  used  for  the  attainment 
of  pleasure.     Now,  alas!    men  who  dwell  on  the  earth 
plainly  care  nothing  for  the  sacred  wisdom,  therefore  day 
by  day  it  goes  farther  from  them. 


42  VAIRAGYA  SATAKA. 

The  Setting  Forth  of  Egotism  or  Pride. 

29.  That  man  is  truly  born  great  whose   white  skull 
is  worn  by  Siva  (the  enemy  of  Kama)  as  an  ornament 
lifted  up  on  high.     What  means,  then,  this  unequalled 
burden  of  pride  which  kings  now  display,  who  are  wor- 
shipped by  other  men,  intent  solely  on  saving  their  royal 
lives  ? 

30.  Thou  art  the  lord  of  wealth ;  I  of  speech  :  thou  art 
a  hero  in  war ;  my  skill  is  shown  in  subduing  the  proud 
by  the  power  of  my  eloquence:   men  bow  down  before 
thee,  but  they  listen  to   me  that   their   minds  may   be 
purified.     If,  0  king!  thou  hast  no  desire  for  me,  still 
less  is  my  desire  for  thee. 

3 1 .  When  I  was  possessed  of  a  small  amount  of  know- 
ledge, my  mind  was  filled  with  pride,  even  as  an  elephant 
is  blinded  by  passion,  and  I  thought  within  myself  that  I 
knew  everything.     When  I  had  learnt  many  things  from 
wise  men,  I  discovered  my  foolishness,  and  my  mad  ex- 
citement left  me. 

Condition  of  Indifference. 

32.  Time  has  gone  by,  passed  without  difficulty  through 
the  pleasing  society  of  beautiful  women.     We  are  wearied 
through  our  long  wanderings  in  the  path  of  transmigra- 
tions.   We  lie  on  the  banks  of  Siva's  own  river,  and  we  in- 
voke him  with  piercing  cries,  calling  "  Siva !  Siva !  Siva ! " 

33.  When  honour  has  fled,  when  wealth  is  lost,  when 
one's  desire  has   departed  and  one  has  gained  nothing; 
when  one's  relations  are  dead,  one's  friends  have  vanished, 
one's  youth  has  faded  by  degrees :  then  there  is  only  one 
thing  left  for  a  wise  man — a  dwelling  in  a  mountain  cave, 
whose  rocks  are  purified  by  the  stream  of  the  Ganges. 

34.  Why,  0  my  heart,  dost  thou  attempt  day  by  day  to 
conciliate  the  favour  of  others,  bringing  forth  no  fruit  of 
thy  toil  ?     Surely,  if  a  purified  will  were  in  thee,  all  thy 
desires  would  be  fulfilled,  and  there  would  be  no  need  to 


VAIRAGYA  SATAKA.  43 

pay  court  to  other  men,  for  thou  wouldst  be  at  rest  in- 
wardly. 

The  Path  of  Enjoyment. 

35.  In  health  there  is  the  fear  of  disease;  in  pride  of 
family  the  fear  of  a  fall ;  in  wealth  the  fear  of  the  king ; 
in  honour  the  fear  of  abasement ;  in  power  the  fear  of 
enemies ;   in  beauty  the  fear   of   old  age ;   in  the   scrip- 
tures the  fear  of  controversy ;  in  virtue  the  fear  of  evil ; 
in  the  body  the  fear  of  death.     Everything  on  earth  is 
beset  by  fear ;  the  only  freedom  from  fear  is  in  the  renun- 
ciation of  desire. 

36.  What  have  we  not  attempted  for  the  sake  of  those 
lives  of  ours  which  are  as  unstable  as  the  drop  of  water 
on  the  lotus-leaf  ?     Even  we  commit  sin  by  boasting  of 
our  own  virtues  shamelessly  before  those  rich  men  whose 
minds  are   senseless  through  the  intoxicating  power   of 
wealth. 

37.  Homage  be  to  time !     The  delights  of  the  city,  the 
great  king  with  his  crowds  of  courtiers,  the  counsellors 
which  stand  before  him,  the  women  with  faces  beautiful 
as  the  moon,  the  assembly  of  haughty  princes,  the  bards, 
the  reciters — these  are  all  borne  away  by  time,  and  be- 
come but  a  memory. 

Setting  Forth  of  Kdla. 

38.  Those  from  whom  we  were  born  have  long  since 
departed ;  they  also  with  whom  we  grew  up  exist  only 
in   memory:    we   too,   through   the   approach   of    death, 
become,  as  it  were,  trees  growing  on  the  sandy  bank  of 
a  river. 

39.  In  the  house  where  there  were   many,  now  there  is 
but  one ;  where  there  was  but  one,  there  were  many,  and 
then   again  but  one.      So  Kala   and  Kali  toss  day  and 
night  backward  and  forward  as  though  they  were  dice, 
and  play  with  men  on  the  chessboard  of  this  world  as  if 
they  were  chessmen. 


44  VAIRAGYA  SATAKA. 

40.  Shall  we  dwell  beside  the  divine  river  in  a  life  of 
penance?    or    shall  we   desire    the    society  of    virtuous 
women?   or  shall  we  study  the   multitude  of  the  scrip- 
tures, whose  poetry  is  even  as  nectar  ?     We  know  not 
what  we  shall  do,  seeing  the  life  of  man  endures  but  the 
twinkling  of  an  eye. 

41.  Surely  the  retreats  amid  the  Himalayas,  where  the 
Vidy  ad  haras  dwell  among  the  rocks  cooled  by  the  spray 
of  the  Ganges,  must  have  ceased  to  exist,  since  men  enjoy 
that  sustenance  which  they  have  gained  from  others  to 
their  own  disgrace. 

42.  When  may  we  sit  at  peace  on  the  banks  of  the 
heavenly  river,  whose  banks  of  sand  are  dazzling  white  in 
the  moonlight  ?  and  when  shall  we,  when  the  nights  are 
perfectly  still,   wearied  with   the   satiety   of   the  world, 
utter  cries  of  "  Siva  !  Siva !  Siva ! "  while  the  tears  flow 
from  our  eyes  ? 

43.  Mahadeva  is  the  god  we  worship,  and  this  river  is 
the  heavenly  river ;  these  caves  are  the  dwelling,  the  abode 
of  Hari.    Kala,  moreover,  is  our  friend,  and  the  rule  of  life 
which  we  observe  has  freedom  from  humiliation.     What 
more  need  I  say  on  this  matter  ? 

44.  The  Ganges  falls  from  heaven  on  the  head  of  Siva ; 
from  the  head  of  Siva  on  to  the  mountain ;  from  the  top  of 
the  mountain  to  the  earth,  always  falling  lower  and  lower : 
even  in  so  many  ways  is  the  fall  of  one  whose  judgment 
has  departed  from  him. 

45.  Desire  is  like  a  river.     Its  waters  are  men's  wishes, 
agitated  by  the  waves  of  desire ;  love  takes  the  place  of 
crocodiles ;  the  birds  that  fly  about  it  are  the  doubts  which 
haunt  the  mind.     The  tree  of  firmness  growing  on  the 
bank  is   washed   away  by  the  flood;  the  whirlpools  of 
error  are  very  difficult  to  cross :  the  lofty  banks  are  the 
cares  of  life.     The  ascetics  who,  pure  in  heart,  have  suc- 
ceeded in  crossing  it  successfully,  are  filled  with  joy. 

46.  As  we  look  at  the  ever-changing  three  worlds,  the 
desire  hidden  with  us,  violently  attracted  towards  objects 


VAIRAGYA  SATAKA.  45 

of  sense,  ceases  to  cross  the  path  of  our  eyes  or  to  enter 
into  the  way  of  our  ears ;  for  we  have  subdued  the 
objects  of  sense  which  produce  desire  in  us,  and  hold 
them  bound  by  devotion,  as  an  elephant  attracted  by  his 
mate  is  kept  from  her  by  being  tied  to  a  post. 

47.  My  days  once  seemed  long  when  I  used  to  suffer 
pain  through  asking  favours   from  rich  men,  and  they 
seemed  too  short  for  me  to  carry  out  all  my  aims,  filled  as 
they  were  with  the  desire  for  earthly  objects.     Now  I  sit 
on  a  stone  in  a  mountain  cave,  and  in  the  intervals  of  my 
meditation  I  am  filled  with  laughter  at  the  recollection  of 
my  former  life. 

48.  Wisdom  has  not  been  gained  free  from  spot ;  wealth 
has  not  been  acquired ;  reverence  towards  our  elders  has 
not  been  practised  by  us ;  we  have  not  even  dreamt  of  love. 
If  this  has  been  our  existence,  then  have  we  lived  a  life 
even  like  the  life  of  a  crow,  which  hungers  for  the  food  of 
others. 

49.  When  all  our  wealth  is  gone,  then  with  hearts  full 
of  tenderness,  recollecting  how  the  path  of  action  in  the 
world  leads  to  evil,  we  in  a  sacred  grove,  with  the  rays  of 
the  autumn  moon  shining   on  us,  will  pass  our  nights 
occupied  alone  in  meditation,  at  the  feet  of  Siva. 

50.  I  am  satisfied  with  bark  clothing ;  thou  takest  plea- 
sure in  thy  magnificence :  there  is  no  difference  between 
the  contentment  of  both  of  us.     The  man  whose  desires 
are  unlimited  is  poor  indeed ;  who  that  is  satisfied  with 
what  he  has  can  be  either  rich  or  poor  ? 

51.  Eelaxation  from  toil  at  one's  own  will,  food  gained 
without  degradation,  friendship  with  noble-minded  men, 
a  mind  not  agitated  by  contact  with  external  things — 
this  is  the  result  of  the  highest  vow  of  tranquillity.     I 
know  not,  though  I  have  carefully  thought  thereupon,  by 
what  strict  penance  this  perfect  state  may  be  gained. 

52.  The  hand  serves  for  a  cup;  food  is  gained  by  beg- 
ging ;  the  sky  with  its  pure  expanse  serves  for  a  garment ; 
the  earth  is  a  couch.     Those  whose  freedom  from  attrac- 


46  VAIRAGYA  SATAKA. 

tion  to  objects  of  sense  has  been  brought  to  such  perfec- 
tion as  this  are  fortunate,  contented  in  their  own  minds, 
and  they  uproot  action,  casting  away  all  the  many  forms  of 
pain  which  attend  upon  it. 

53.  Masters  are  difficult  to  please;  kings  change  from 
one  thing  to  another  in  their  minds  with  the  swiftness  of 
horses ;  our  desires  are  great,  and  our  minds  aim  at  high 
things.     Old  age  consumes  our  bodies ;  death  puts  an  end 
to  our  lives.    0  my  friends  !  there  is  no  glory  in  this  world 
for  a  wise  man  but  that  which  he  gains  by  penance. 

54.  Pleasure  is  like  the  lightning  that  flashes  in  the 
canopy  of  cloud ;  life  is  like  the  fleeting  clouds  that  are 
torn  asunder  by  the  storm ;  the  ardent  desires  of  the  young 
are  transitory.     0  wise  men !  you  who  know  the  uncer- 
tainty of  human  affairs,  gain  wisdom  by  meditation  on  the 
Supreme  Spirit ;  for  perfection  is  easily  gained  by  means 
of  constant  contemplation. 

55.  A  man  who  is  wise  and  understanding,  being  pained 
by  hunger,  will  go  from  door  to  door  throughout  the  huts 
of  a  sacred  village,  and  will  beg  alms  where  he  sees  the 
door-post  blackened  by  the  smoke  of  the  sacrifices  offered 
by  the  learned  priests  who  dwell  within ;  and  he  will  bear 
before  him  his  pot  covered  with  a  white  cloth :  he  will 
not  live  in  misery  from  day  to  day  among  families  as 
wretched  as  himself. 

56.  "Are  you  a  Chandala?  are  you  a  Brahman?  are  you 
a  Sudra,  or  an  ascetic,  or  a  lord  of  devotion  whose  mind  is 
skilled  in  meditating  on  the  truth  ? "     Ascetics,  when  men 
ask  them  such  questions  as  these  with  loud  voices,  feel 
neither  pleasure  nor  anger,  but  pursue  their  course  in 
quietness. 

57.  0  my  friend !  fortunate  are  those  who  have  cast  off 
the  many  bonds  of  this  world,  and  from  within  whose  minds 
desire  for  earthly  objects,  like  the   poison  of  a  serpent, 
has  departed.     They  spend  the  night,  bright  with  the  clear 
shining  of  the  autumn  moon,  in  the  border  of  the  forest, 
thinking  on  nothing  but  the  greatness  of  their  good  fortune. 


VAIRAGYA  SATAKA.  47 

58.  Cease  to  wander  wearily  in  the  thicket  of  sense. 
Seek  that  better  way  which,  in  a  moment,  brings  freedom 
from  trouble.     Unite  thyself  to  the  Supreme  Spirit,  and 
abandon  thy  own  state  as  unsteady  as  the  waves.     Take 
no  more  pleasure  in  things  perishable.     Be  calm,  0  my 
heart ! 

59.  0  my  friend  !  live  on  fruits  and  nuts,  lie  on  the  bare 
ground ;  let  us  rise  up  and  go  into  the  forest  clothed  in 
new  soft  bark  garments.    In  that  retreat  we  shall  not  hear 
the  voices  of  those  rich  men  whose  minds  are  blind  through 
ignorance,  and  whose  voices  are  troubled  through  the  con- 
fusion of  their  minds. 

60.  0  my  mind !  let  the  delusion  which  envelops  thee 
be  cleared  away,  pay  devotion  to  the  god  of  the  moon- 
crest,  who  takes  delusion  away  from   man.      Fix  your 
thought  on  the  stream  of  the  heavenly  river.     For  what 
certainty  is  there  [in  earthly  things],  in  waves  and  bubbles, 
or  in  flashes  of  lightning,  or  in  women,  or  in  the  tongues 
of  flame,  or  in  serpents,  or  in  the  rushing  of  a  stream  ? 

6 1.  If  there  are  songs  before  thee,  if  there  are  elegant 
poets  from  the  southern  regions  on  one  side  of  thee,  if  be- 
hind damsels  bearing  the  fans  with  tinkling  anklets,  taste, 
my  friend,  the  pleasures  of  sense  which  thou  mayest  gain 
from  these  things.     If  thou  hast  them  not,  then  plunge,  0 
my  mind !  into  devout  contemplation,  freeing  thee  from  all 
thought. 

62.  Wise  men !  have  nothing  to  do  with  women  who 
are  only  pleasing  from  their  beauty,  in  whose  society  is  a 
transitory  delight.     Eather  follow  after  women  who  are 
compassionate,   amiable,    and   intelligent :   the    beautiful 
forms  of  women   adorned  with  tinkling  jewels  will  not 
avail  thee  in  Naraka. 

63.  Abstinence  from  destroying  life,  keeping  one's  hands 
off  another's  wealth,  speaking  the  truth,  seasonable  liber- 
ality according  to  one's  power,  not  conversing  with  the 
wives  of  other  men,  checking  the  stream  of  covetousness, 
reverence  towards  spiritual  fathers,  compassion  towards 


48  VAIRAGYA  SATAKA. 

all  creatures — this  is  the  path  of  happiness,  violating  no 
ordinances,  taught  in  all  the  Sastras. 

64.  0  mother  Lakshmi!   grant  me  yet  further  that  I 
may  not  be  filled  with  desire.     May  I  not  be  filled  with 
the    longing    after    pleasure !      Now,   purifying    myself 
with  a  vessel  of  leaves  joined  together,  may  I  gain  my 
livelihood  by  means   of  the   barley  grain  which  I  have 
begged. 

65.  You  were  to  me  even  as  myself;  I  was  as  yourself 
to  you.     Such  were  our  feelings  to  one  another.     How  has 
it  come  about  that  we  have  been  changed,  and  that  we 
no  more  feel  the  same  sympathy  one  for  another  ? 

66.  0  woman !  why  dost  thou  shoot  forth  at  me  those 
beautiful   glances  from   thy  half-opened  eyes  ?      Cease ! 
cease  !     Thy  toil  is  in  vain  !     I  am  as  it  were  changed  ! 
My  youth  has  departed  from  me ;  my  dwelling  is  in  a 
forest ;  my  infatuation  has  left  me.     I  look  on  the  favours 
of  this  world  only  as  so  much  grass. 

67.  This  woman,  with  eyes  that  have  stolen  the  beauty 
of  the  lotus,  unceasingly  casts  her  glances  towards  me. 
What  does  she  wish  ?     My  infatuation  has  departed ;  the 
arrows  of  cruel  love,  producing  immoderate  heat  and  fever, 
have  left  me. 

68.  Is  not  a  palace  delightful   to   dwell  in?   are  not 
songs  charming  to  hear  ?  is  not  the  society  of  friends,  whom 
we  love  as  our  own  lives,  alluring  ?     Yet  wise  men  retire 
away  from  all  these  things  into  the  forest,  considering 
them  like  the  light  of  a  lamp  which  burns  unsteadily 
through  the  wind  of  the  wings  of  a  wandering  moth. 

69.  Are  there  no  more  roots  growing  in  the  caves  ;  have 
the  mountain  torrents/  ceased  to  flow ;  do  the  trees  no 
longer  bear  fruit ;  has  the  bark  with  which  you  may  gain 
your   clothing  withered   on  the  trees,  that  you  cast  off 
your  self-respect  and  fall  down  before  haughty  men,  who 
have  gained  a  little  wealth  with  difficulty,  and  who  regard 
you  with  supercilious  contempt  ? 

70.  Surely  the  retreats  of  the  Himalayas,  the  abode  of 


VAIRAGYA  SATAKA.  49 

the  Vidyadharas,  where  the  rocks  are  cooled  by  the  spray 
of  the  Ganges,  surely  these  places  must  have  ceased  to 
exist,  since  men  enjoy  food  which  they  gain  from  others  to 
their  own  disgrace. 

71.  WhenMeru  the  magnificent  mountain  falls  from  its 
place,  destroyed  at  the  end  of  the  age ;  when  the  ocean,  the 
abode  of  multitudes  of  great  monsters,  is  dried  up ;  when 
the  earth  resting  on  her  mountains  comes  to  an  end,  how 
can  there  be  any  abiding-place  for  the  body,  which  is  as 
unstable  as  the  ear  of  a  young  elephant  ? 

72.  When  shall  I,  0  Siva !  whose  drinking-cup  is  my 
hand,  who  have  no  garment  but  the  sky,  who  live  solitary, 
peaceful,  free  from  desire,  able  to  uproot  action — when 
shall  I  attain  to  union  with  the  Supreme  Soul  ? 

73.  Thou  mayest  have  gained  glory  and  the  accomplish- 
ment of  all  thy  desires :  what  further  ?     Thy  foot  may 
have  been  placed  on  the  neck  of  thine  enemies :   what 
further  ?     Thou  mayest  have  bestowed  thy  riches  on  thy 
friends :  what  further  ?     Thou  mayest  live  thousands  of 
years  :  what  further  ? 

74.  One  may  have  been  clothed  in  rags :  what  then  ? 
One  may  have  worn  a  magnificent  silk  garment:  what 
then  ?     One  may  have  had  only  one  wife :  what  then  ? 
Or  a  retinue  of  horses  and  elephants  and  attendants  :  what 
then  ?     One  may  have  enjoyed  good  fare :  what  then  ? 
Or  eaten  poor  food  at  the  end  of  the  day:  what  then? 
What  matters  either  state  if  you  know  not  the  glory  of 
the  Supreme  One  who  destroys  all  evils  ? 

75.  Thou  hast  paid  worship  to  Siva;  thou  hast  lived  in 
fear  of  death  and  birth  in  a  future  state ;  thou  hast  detached 
thyself  from  love  for  thy  own  family ;  thou  hast  not  been 
blinded  by  love ;  thou  hast  dwelt  in  a  forest  apart  from 
men ;  thou  hast  been  freed  from  the  evil  contact  of  the 
world.    [If  thou  hast  passed  thy  life  thus],  then  thou  hast 
vairagya — freedom  from  attachment  to  outward  things. 

76.  Meditate  on  the  Supreme  Being,  who  is  eternal, 
who  grows  not  old,  above  all  things,  expanding  by  his 

D 


50  VAIRAGYA  SATAKA. 

own  will.  What  profit  is  there  in  the  delusions  of  the 
world  ?  If  a  man  be  truly  seeking  unity  with  the  Supreme 
Being,  all  earthly  pleasures  and  powers  seem  worthy  only 
of  the  notice  of  low-minded  men. 

77.  0  mind!  thou  canst  enter  Patala,thou  canst  skim  over 
the  heaven  and  cross  the  breadth  of  this  world  in  a  moment 
of  thought.    How  is  it  that  thou  dost  not  even  by  accident 
meditate  on  the  Supreme  Being,  who  is  spotless,  dwelling 
within  himself  ?     So  thou  mightest  gain  tranquillity. 

78.  We,  as  men  devoid  of  intelligence,  think  within 
ourselves  that  day  and  night  repeat  themselves  indefinitely ; 
and  so  we  run  each  to  our  tasks  unswervingly,  and  we 
take  up  each  separate  work  where  we  laid  it  down.    Alas  ! 
how  is  it  that  we  are  not  ashamed  of  our  folly  ?    We  endure 
the  torments  of  this  world  while  we  are  wholly  occupied 
in  enjoying  the  same  objects  of  sense  over  and  over  again. 

79.  The  earth  is  his  delightful  couch,  the  arms  of  the 
creepers  are  his  pillow,  the  heaven  is  his  canopy,  the  winds 
his  fan,  the  moon  is  his  twinkling  lamp.     The  sage,  rejoic- 
ing because  he  has  been  freed  from  desire,  lives  in  peace 
and  happiness,  as  though  he  were  the  lord  of  the  universe. 

80.  The  man  who  has  gained  great  power  finds  even 
the  sovereignty  of  the  universe  tasteless.     Do  not  seek 
pleasure   in  the   enjoyment  which  comes  from  flattery, 
dress,  or  feasting ;  for  the  only  delight  which  is  supreme 
is  everlasting,  and  continually  grows.     Seize  upon  it,  for, 
compared  to  the  sweetness  of  that,  all  the  three  worlds  are 
devoid  of  pleasure. 

8 1.  What  profit  is  there  in  the  Vedas,  or  in  the  Smriti, 
or  in  the  reading  of  Puranas  and  the  tedious  Sastras,  or 
in  the  bewildering  multitude  of  ceremonial  acts  which 
lead  to  an  abode  in  the  tabernacles  of  heaven  ?    All  else 
is  as  the  mere  haggling  of  merchants,  in  comparison  with 
the  final  fire  which  will  consume  the  creations  of  this 
wearisome  burden  of  sorrow  called  existence, — that  fire 
which  will  make  us  enter  into  the  sphere  of  joy  and  unite 
us  with  the  Supreme  Soul. 


VAIRAGYA  SATAKA.  51 

82.  Life  is  as  uncertain  as  the  waves  of  the  sea;  the 
glory  of  youth  remains  but  a  short  time ;  wealth  passes 
away  like  a  thought ;  all  the  pleasure  in  the  world  endures 
but  a  lightning-flash  through  the  heavens ;  the  embraces 
of  your  beloved  whom  you  clasp  to  your  breast  will  not 
be  for  long.     Direct  your  thoughts  to  the  Supreme  Being ; 
for  you  must  cross  the  sea  of  life  with  all  its  fears  and 
alarms. 

83.  How  should  a  wise  man  be  anxious  after  a  small 
portion  of  this  world  ?     Is  the  mighty  ocean  ever  stirred 
up  by  the  gambols  of  a  little  fish  ? 

84.  When  the  darkness  of  love  had  filled  me  with  igno- 
rance, women  seemed  the  only  objects  for  which  to  live. 
Now,  since  I  have  anointed  my  eyes  with  the  ointment 
of   discrimination,  the   sight   of    all   things   has   become 
clear  to  me,  and  I  behold  the  three  worlds  as  the  Creator. 

85.  Delightful  are  the  rays  of  the  moon;  delightful  the 
grassy  places  of  the  forest ;  delightful  the  society  of  beloved 
friends ;  delightful  the  tales  of  the  poets ;  delightful  the 
face  of  one's  beloved  sparkling  with  the  tear-drops  of  rage. 
But  who  cares  any  more  for  these  delights  when  his  mind 
reflects  on  their  uncertainty  ? 

86.  An  ascetic  lives  on  alms,  remote  from  men,  self-con- 
trolled, walking  in  the  path  of  indifference,  giving  or  not 
giving,  it  matters  not  which.     He  is  clothed  in  a  torn 
cloak  made  from  rags  cast  into  the  street ;  he  has  no  pride, 
no  self-consciousness;    he  is  free  from  desire;    his  sole 
pleasure  is  rest  and  quietness. 

87.  0  earth,  my  mother !   0  wind,  my  father !  0  fire, 
my  friend !    0  water,  my   consort !   0  sky,  my   brother  1 
I  salute  you  with  my  hands  joined.     I  am  full  of  glory 
through  the  merit  which  I  have  gained  through  my  union 
with  you.     0  may  I  enter  into  the  Supreme  Being ! 

88.  As  long  as  the  tabernacle  of  the  body  is  well  and 
strong;  as  long  as  old  age  is  far  off;  as  long  as  the  senses 
are  unimpaired  ;  as  long  as  there  is  no  diminution  of  life ; 
so  long  will  the  wise  man  make  great  efforts  to  gain 


52  VAIRAGYA  SATAKA. 

eternal  glory  for  himself.  What  is  the  use  of  digging  a 
well  when  the  house  is  on  fire  ? 

89.  We  have  not  studied  knowledge  while  upon  the 
earth — knowledge  which  tames  the  hosts  of  disputants 
and  is  suitable  for  a  well-trained  man  :  our  fame  has  not 
been  exalted  to  the  skies  by  the  sword-point  which  splits 
the  hard  forehead  of  the  elephant ;  we  have  not  tasted  the 
juice  of  the  lower  lip  of  the  soft  mouth  of  the  beloved  one 
at  the  time  of  moon-rising.  Alas !  youth  has  passed 
fruitlessly,  like  a  lamp  in  an  empty  house. 

96.  In  good  men  knowledge  is  the  destruction  of  pride  ; 
in  others  it  is  the  cause  of  haughtiness :  a  solitary  dwell- 
ing frees  ascetics  from  attraction  to  objects  of  sense ;  it 
is  the  cause  of  extreme  attraction  towards  desire  in  those 
who  are  wounded  by  it. 

91.  The  desires  in  our  own  minds  have  faded:  youth 
has  passed  into  old  age :  even  the  very  virtues  in  our  own 
bodies  have  become  barren  since  they  are  no  longer  recog- 
nised as  virtues.     What  can  we  do  ?     All-powerful  time 
is  hastening  on,  and  death  is  coming  on  us  to  end  our 
lives.     What  can  we  do  but  resort  to  the  feet  of  Siva  ? 
There  is  no  other  means  of  salvation  for  us. 

92.  When  the  mouth  is  dry,  a  man  drinks  water  which 
is  sweet  to  him ;  when  pained  with  hunger,  he  eats  rice 
and  other  vegetables.     But  he  is  mistaken  if  he  imagines 
that  the  removal  of  the  pain  caused  by  hunger  and  thirst 
is  a  pleasure. 

93.  I   will   bathe  in   the   waters   of    Ganges :   I   will 
honour  thee,  0  lord !  with  pure  fruits  and  flowers.     I  will 
meditate  upon  thee ;  I  will  sit  on  a  couch  of  stone  in  a 
mountain  cave ;  I  will  feed  on  fruits  with  peaceful  mind ; 
I  will  reverence  the  voice  of  my  spiritual  father.     When 
shall  I,  lying  at  thy  feet,  0  enemy  of  love !  by  thy  favour 
be  freed  from  the  pain  of  desire,  seeking  alone  the  path  of 
meditation  ? 

94.  Thou  whose  bed  is  a  slab  of  rock ;  thou  whose  dwell- 
ing is  a  cave,  whose  clothes  are  the  bark  of  trees,  whose 


VAIRAGYA  SATAKA.  53 

companions  are  the  antelopes,  whose  food  is  the  tender 
fruits,  whose  drink  is  water  from  the  cascades,  whose 
wife  is  the  sciences  :  such  as  these  are  indeed  the  supreme 
lords ;  they  pay  homage  to  no  man. 

95.  While  there  is  the  Ganges  near  us,  whose  rays  kiss 
the  head  of  Siva,  and  furnishes  us  abundant  livelihood, 
with  bark  garments   made  from  the  banyan  trees  that 
grow  on  its  banks,  what  sage  would  even  look  at  the 
face  of  women  as  they  sit  filled  with  extreme  misery,  and 
with  pain  produced  by  the  fever  of  calamity,  unless  he  felt 
compassion  for  his  distressed  family  ? 

96.  If  wise  men  forsake  Benares,  alas !  to  what  other 
place  should  they  resort  ?     For  in  the  gardens  of  Benares 
are  manifold  pleasures,  and  penances  practised  of  exceed- 
ing difficulty;  a  small  ragged  piece  of  cloth  is  looked 
upon  as  a  splendid  garment,  and  food  without  end  may  be 
gained  by  begging.    Death  in  that  place  is  even  as  a  festival. 

97.  "  Our  lord  sleeps ;  now  is  the  time  for  his  rest :  you 
may  not  enter,  for  if  he  wake  up  and  see  you,  he  will  be 
angry."     So  say  the  guardians  at  the  palace  gate.     Pass 
them  by  and  enter  the  temple  of  that  lord  who  is  the  ruler 
of  the  universe — that  shrine  which  gives  boundless  bliss,  full 
of  love,  where  the  speech  of  rough  doorkeepers  is  not  heard. 

98.  Dear  friend !  unyielding  destiny,  like  an  almighty 
potter,  places  the  mind  of  man  upon  the  wheel  of  care  like 
a  lump  of  clay  and  makes  him  revolve, — that  wheel  which 
is  ever  moving  through  all  the  manifold  evils  of  life,  visit- 
ing men  as  though  with  the  rod  of  affliction. 

99.  There  is  no  difference  for  me  between  Siva,  the  lord 
of  the  world,  the  slayer  of  Janu,  and  Vishnu,  the  soul  of 
the  universe ;  therefore  I  worship  the  deity  who  bears  the 
moon-crest. 

100.  I  am  satisfied  with  the  divine  voice  which  sheds 
forth  words  over  my  mind  sweeter   than   honey,  richer 
than  butter.    Alms  content  me ;  bark  clothing  satisfies  me ; 
I  care  nothing  for  wealth  gained  in  a  state  of  slavery  to 
objects  of  sense. 


54  VAIRAGYA  SATAKA. 

101.  The  ascetic  may  be  clothed  in  rags;  he  may  beg 
his  livelihood ;  his  bed  may  be  in  the  grove  of  a  cemetery  ; 
he  may  cease  to  care  for  friend  or  foe ;  his  habitation  may 
be  desolate ;  but  he  dwells  in  peace,  rejoicing  because  the 
intoxication  of  pride  has  disappeared. 

1 02.  The  many  pleasures  of  which  this  world  is  made 
up  are  all  transitory ;  why  then,  0  men !  do  you   roam 
about  ?  why  take  such  pains  to  pursue  them  ?     Free  your 
soul  from  the  numberless  bonds  of  desire,  and  let  it  enter 
into  the  abode  of  peace  which  is  destined  for  it,  if  you  be- 
lieve my  words. 

103.  Blessed  are  those  who  dwell  in  the  mountain  caves 
meditating  on  the  glory  of  the  Supreme.    In  their  laps  the 
birds  perch  fearlessly,  and  drink  the  tears  of  joy  flowing 
from  their  eyes.     As  for  us,  our  life  passes  away  while  we 
enjoy  ourselves  in  the  groves  or  on  the  river-banks,  build- 
ing castles  in  the  air. 

104.  Every  living  thing  is  subject   to   death.      Youth 
passes  into  old  age  ;  contentment  is  destroyed  by  covetous- 
ness  after  riches ;  peace  of  mind  by  the  glances  of  beauti- 
ful women ;  the  just  are  slandered  by  envious  men ;  forests 
are  infested  by  serpents ;  kings  are  ruined  by  evil  coun- 
sellors.    Even  the  divine  virtues  themselves  are  unstable ; 
so  everything  in  the  world  suffers  loss  and  damage. 

105.  The  health  of  men  is  undermined  by  sicknesses  of 
various  kinds  :  when  fortune  has  departed,  then  disasters 
come  in  as  if  by  the  open  door.     Death  truly  brings  all 
things  under  his  sway.     Destiny  has  made  nothing  abide 
firmly. 

1 06.  Men  have  dwelt  in   the   narrow  womb  of  their 
mother,  suffering  pain ;  youth,  with  its  separations  from 
one  we  love,  is  full  of  sorrow ;  old  age,  exposing  men  to  the 
contempt  of  women, is  an  evil  thing.  Alas!  when  one  reckons 
it  up,  what  pleasure  is  there  to  be  found  in  the  world  ? 

107.  The  life  of  man  endures  a  hundred  years;  half  is 
spent  in  night ;  of  the  remainder,  half  is  spent  in  childhood 
and  in  old  age.     Servitude,  pain,  separation,  sickness,  fill 


VAIRAGYA  SATAKA.  55 

up  that  which  is  left.  What  pleasure  then  can  there  be 
in  the  life  of  man,  which  is  as  uncertain  as  the  bubbles 
on  the  stream  ? 

1 08.  Pure-minded  men,  possessed  of  right  judgment, 
through  their  union  with  the  Supreme   Spirit    perform 
things  hard  of  performance;    for  they  entirely  cast  off 
worldly  ^iches,  which  are  the  source  of  all  pleasure.     As 
for  us,  neither  what  we  had  formerly  nor  that  which  we 
have  now  is  really  in  our  own  power.     That  which  we 
have  only  in  wish  we  cannot  abandon. 

109.  Old  age  menaces  the  body  like  a  tiger;  diseases 
carry  it  off  like  enemies ;  life  slips  away  like  water  out  of 
a  broken  jar ;  and  yet  man  lives  an  evil  life  in  the  world. 
Truly  this  is  marvellous.    \ 

no.  The  Creator  makes  a  jewel  of  a  man,  a  mine  of 
virtues,  an  ornament  to  the  earth  —  and  then  in  one 
moment  destroys  him.  Alas !  what  want  of  knowledge 
does  the  Creator  display  ! 

in.  The  body  is  bent  with  age,  the  steps  fail,  the  teeth 
are  broken,  the  sight  becomes  dim,  deafness  grows  on  one, 
the  mouth  dribbles,  servants  cease  to  obey  one's  orders, 
one's  wife  is  not  submissive,  one's  son  is  even  one's 
enemy — such  are  the  evils  of  old  age. 

112.  For  a  moment  one  is  a  child ;  for  a  moment  a 
youth  full  of  love  :  in  one  minute  wealth  is  abundant ;  in 
the  next  it  has  all  vanished.     A  man  comes  to  the  end  of 
life,  and  then,  with  his  limbs  worn  by  age  and  covered 
with  wrinkles,  as  an  actor  disappears  behind  the  curtain, 
so  he  enters  the  abode  of  death. 

113.  Whether  a  man  wear  a  serpent  or  a  string  of  pearls, 
whether  he  be  surrounded  by  powerful  enemies  or  friends, 
whether  he  be  the  owner  of  jewels  or  possesses  merely  a 
lump  of  mud,  whether  his  bed  be  flowers  or  a  stone, 
whether  he  be  encircled  by  grass  or  by  a  multitude  of 
women,  it  is  all  the  same  to  him  while,  dwelling  in  a 
sacred  grove,  he  invokes  Siva. 


56  VAIRAGYA  SATAKA. 


MISCELLANEOUS  SLOKAS. 

1.  The  whole  world  is  filled  with  delight  to  the  poor 
man,  to  the  man  whose  passions  are  subdued,  to  the  man 
who  is  calm,  and  whose  mind  is  ever  equal,  who  is  filled 
with  contentment. 

2.  Final  emancipation — death — is  approaching,  but  yet 
no  thought  is  bestowed  upon  these  things.     The  various 
states  of  life  have  been  passed  through :  calamity — happi- 
ness— falls — dangers — these  have  been  endured.      What 
more  shall  we  say  ?      Alas !   what  injury  have  you  not 
inflicted  on  yourself  over  and  over  again ! 

3.  The  belly  is  a  pot  difficult  to  fill :  it  scorches  up 
a  man's  virtue,  even  as  the  moon  scorches  up  the  beds 
of  lotuses :  it  is  like  a  thief  that  steals  one's  purse :  it  is 
even  as  a  flashing  axe  cutting  down  the  tree  of  virtue. 

4.  Let  us  eat  the  food  we  have  gained  by  begging :  let 
the  sky  be  our  only  garment :  let  the  earth  be  our  couch : 
why  should  we  be  a  slave  to  harsh  masters  ? 

5.  "0  my  friend!   rise  up,  endure  the  heavy  weight 
of  poverty :   let  me,  overcome  with  weariness,  enjoy  at 
length  the  rest  which  thou  hast  gained  in  death."     Thus 
was  the  corpse  on  the  way  to  the  burying-ground  ad- 
dressed by  the  man  who  had  lost  his  wealth.     The  corpse 
remained  in  silence,  knowing  that  death  is  better  than 
poverty. 

6.  Vide  Niti  feataka,  Miscellaneous,  sloka  4. 

7.  Vide  Niti  SataJca,  Miscellaneous,  sloka  6. 

8.  Hara,  who  rejoices  because  his  beloved  spouse  is  half 
of  his  own  being,  shines  resplendent  in  those  who  are  given 
over  to  passion:   the  same  deity,  who  has  no  superiors, 
manifested  in  his  absence  of  union  with  his  wife,  rules  in 
those  who  are  freed  from  passion.     He  who  is  filled  with 
confusion  through  the  various  snake-poisoned  arrows  of 
love,  hard  to  be  endured,  cheated  by  Kama,  can  neither 
abandon  nor  enjoy  objects  of  sense. 


VAIRAGYA  SATAKA.  57 

9.  At  one  time  women  laugh,  at  another  they  weep  ;  so 
they  make  men  trust  in  them,  though  they  themselves  are 
full  of  falsehood.    The  understanding  man  therefore  avoids 
women  as  he  would  a  vessel  used  in  a  burying-place. 

10.  When  we  pass  our  life  at  Benares,  on  the  banks  of 
the  divine  river,  clothed  in  a  single  garment,  and  with  our 
hands  uplifted  to  our  head,  in  supplication  exclaim,  "  0 
Spouse  of  Gauri,  Tripurahara,  Sambhu,  Trinayana,  be  pro- 
pitious to  us  ! "  in  the  midst  of  our  supplications  the  days 
pass  by  as  if  in  a  moment. 

11.  A  firm  swelling  bosom,  twinkling   eyes,  a   small 
mouth,  curling  hair,  slowness  of  speech,  and  rounded  hips 
are  praised  in  a  woman;  timidity,  too,  is  always  com- 
mended in  the  heart  of  a  woman  one  loves,  and  the  cunning 
devices  which  she  practises  towards  her  lover :  those  fawn- 
eyed  damsels  who  have  all  these  collected  faults  should 
be  dear  only  to  the  beasts. 

12.  Sometimes   there   is   music   and    song,   sometimes\ 
lamentations ;  sometimes  we  may  listen  to  the  conversa- 
tion of  the  wise,  sometimes  only  the  disputes  of  drunken    | "") 
men ;  sometimes  we  may  enjoy  all  pleasures,  sometimes 
our  bodies  may  be  running  over  with  disease :  so  the  life 

of  man  is  made  up  partly  of  ambrosia,  partly  of  poison. 

13.  You,  as  you  pay  flattery  to  your  rich  patrons  with 
your  voice  and  limbs  disguised,  are,  as  it  were,  the  actors 
in  a  comedy.     What  kind  of  a  part  will  you  play  in  time 

when  your  hair  is  grey  with  age  ? 

j,    ######## 

1 5.  Fortune  is  fleeting,  breath  is  fleeting,  youth  is  fleeting; 
the  only  thing  immovable  in  the  world  is  righteousness. 

1 6.  May  Hara,  whose  forehead  is  ornamented  by  the 
crescent  moon  like  a  tongue  of  flame,  who  consumed  the 
god  of  love  flitting  around  him  like  a  moth,  manifesting 
himself  in  the  height  of  the  state  of  happiness,  who  re- 
moves the  mighty  weight  of  darkness  which  overwhelms 
the  earth,  the  torch  of  light  in  the  innermost  mind  of  the 
ascetic, — may  he,  Hara,  be  victorious ! 


58  VAIRAGYA  SATAKA. 

17.  0  my  mind !  do  not  in  thy  solicitude  think  upon 
the  goddess  of  fortune ;  for  she  is  as  uncertain  as  a  cour- 
tesan, delighting  to  sport  in  the  frown  or  smile  of  princes. 
Eather  clothe  thyself  with  rags,  and  entering  Benares,  beg 
from  door  to  door  the  food  which  men  will  place  in  the 
vessels  which  you  offer. 

1 8.  The  tortoise,  whose  back  is  wearied  with  the  burden 
of  the  mighty  world  which  he  bears,  has  been  indeed  born 
to  good  purpose;  the  birth  of  the  Pole  Star  is  glorious 
too,  for  the  splendid  orb  of  the  universe  is  fixed  upon 
him ;  all  other  beings  that  have  come  into  being  are  as 
though  dead,  for  their  wings  are  useless  in  doing  good  to 
others ;  they  are  neither  above  nor  below,  but  are  even  as 
gnats,  buzzing  about  in  the  fig-tree  of  this  world. 

19.  "  My  house  is  magnificent,  my  sons  are  respected  by 
the  good,  my  wealth  is  infinite,  my  wife  is  beautiful,  my 
life  is  in  its  prime."    Thus  speaks  the  man  whose  mind  is 
obscured  through  ignorance.     The  wise  man,  on  the  con- 
trary, knowing  that  everything  in  the  prison-house  of  this 
world  is  transitory,  casts  aside  all  earthly  possessions. 

20.  Those  who  are  full  of  curses  may  curse;  we  are 
righteous,  and,  because  we  are  devoid  of  evil,  we  cannot 
pour  forth  abusive  words.     That  only  can  be  given  which 
is  in  the  world ;  it  would  not  be  possible  to  give  a  hare's 
horn  to  any  one. 

21.  Vide  Niti  tiataJca,  Miscellaneous,  sloka  10. 

22.  Subsistence  can  be  easily  gained  in  this  world  in 
the  path  of  delights.     The  earth  is  full  of  fruit ;  elephant 
or  deer-skin  will  provide  clothing ;  the  same  consequences 
result  from  happiness  or  unhappiness.     Who  then,  casting 
off  the  three-eyed  deity,  would  reverence  one  blinded  by 
the  love  of  a  little  money  ? 

23.  We  have  slain  elephants  by  the  sword,  we  have 
tortured  our  enemies,  we  have  playfully  sported  on  the 
couch  of  our  beloved,  we  have  lived  within  the  roaring 
sound  of  the  falls  on  the  Himalayas,  but  yet  we  have 
had  no  pleasure.     Like  the  crows,  we  have  passed  our 


VAIRAGYA  SATAKA.  59 

lives  in  eager  desire  after  morsels  of  food  given  to  us  by 
others. 

24.  Where,  0  my  mind !  dost  thou  wander  ?    Eest  for  a 
time  !     Since  that  which  has  been  ordained  cannot  come 
to  pass  in  any  other  way,  think  not  of  the  past,  care 
nothing  for  the  future ;  enjoy  only  those  pleasures  which 
come  and  go  without  being  looked  for. 

25.  Use  thy  hand  as  a  drinking  vessel;  eat  in  peace  the 
food  thou  hast  gained  by  begging  with  pure  mind ;  take 
up  thy  seat  in  any  place  thou  canst,  looking  on  the  whole 
world  but  as  grass.     It  is  only  a  few,  before  they  have 
cast  off  their  earthly  forms,  who  have  attained   to  the 
knowledge  of  the  unbroken  and  exceeding  happiness  which 
the  ascetic  feels,  a  bliss  easily  gained  through  the  favour 
of  Siva. 

26.  Bali  has  not  been  released  by  you  from  Patala : 
you  have  not  brought  destruction  to  death :  the  dark  spot 
has  not  been  cleared  from  the  moon,  nor  has  sickness  been 
removed  from  men.     You  have  not  borne  up  the  world 
for  a  moment,  and  so  relieved  the  weariness  of  Sesha.     0 
my  mind !  art  thou  not  ashamed  wrongfully  to  bear  the 
honour  belonging  only  to  noble  heroes. 

27.  My  mind  desires  to  attain  to  union  with  Siva,  for 
through  union  with  him  all  that  restlessness  arising  from 
the  discussion  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  different  Sastras  is 
allayed  ;  the  emotions,  stirred  up  by  poetry  with  its  various 
sentiments,  are  made  to  cease ;  the  multitude  of  doubts  is 
entirely  swept  away. 

28.  You  may  take  the  fruits  of  the  earth  at  your  will ; 
in  every  wood  there  is  no  lack  of  trees ;  in  every  place 
there  is  water,  sweet  and  cool,  of  the  sacred  streams  ;  there 
is  a  soft  couch  strewn  for  you,  made  up  of  the  shoots  of 
the  delicate  creepers.     Why  then  do  wretched  men  suffer 
such  miseries,  waiting  at  the  doors  of  the  rich  ? 

29.  You  may  have  enjoyed  a  meal  of  good  food  :  what 
then  ?  or  you  may  have  eaten  coarse  food  at  the  close  of 
the  day :  what  then  ?     Your  raiment  may  be  ragged  and 


60  VAIRAGYA  SATAKA. 

torn,  or  ample  and  magnificent :  what  then  ?  You  may 
have  but  one  servant,  or  an  endless  number :  what  then  ? 
You  may  have  but  one  elephant,  or  you  may  be  encircled 
by  thousands  of  horses  and  elephants  :  what  then  ? 

30.  I  can  gain   food  by  begging ;  the  cow  of  plenty 
supplies  me  with  milk;  my  rags  keep  off  the  cold;    I 
worship  Siva  unceasingly.     What  care  I  for  possessions  ? 

31.  The  great  ascetics  declare  that  a  life  passed  as  a 
mendicant  is  not  miserable ;  for  the  mendicant  has  no  fear 
of  loss;  he  has  no  envy,  pride,  or  arrogance;  he  is  free 
from  the  mass  of  evils  which  beset  mankind ;  he  gains  his 
food  day  by  day  without  difficulty.     The  mendicant  life 
is  a  means  of  purification  beloved  by  the  gods ;  it  lays  up 
treasure  that  will  last  for  ever ;  it  increases  devotion  to 
Siva. 

32.  The  mendicant  who  has  the  earth  for  his  couch,  the 
sky  as  his  canopy,  the  moon  as  his  lamp,  rejoicing  in  the 
union  which  he  has  attained  with  peace,  fanned  by  the 
winds  of  heaven  which  blow  from  all  quarters,  is  even  as 
a  prince,  although  he  has  cast  off  all  desire  for  earthly  pos- 
sessions. 

33.  Pleasures  are  as  fleeting  as  the  changing  ripples 
of  the  mighty  river :  life  flees  away  in  a  moment ;  our  days 
are  few ;  the  joys  of  youth  pass  away ;  the  love  of  one's 
friends  fails.      Let  the  wise  man,  therefore,  who  knows 
that  all  this  world  is  vain,  and  whose  mind  truly  perceives 
the  evil  of  worldly  attractions,  direct  his  efforts  towards 
indifference. 

34.  Thou  dost  not  regard  the  face  of  the  rich;   thou 
dost  not  speak  flattering  words ;  thou  dost  not  listen  to  the 
utterances  of  pride ;  thou  dost  not  go  here  and  there  for  the 
hope  of  profit ;  but  thou  eatest  in  their  season  the  fresh 
shoots  of  grass,  and  sleepest  peacefully  at  the  time  of 
sleep.     Tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  0  deer,  what  penance  hast 
thou  practised  ? 

35.  Vide  NUi  £ataka,  Miscellaneous,  sloka  15. 

36.  Vide  Mti  £ataka,  gloka  2. 


VAIRAGYA  SATAKA.  61 

37.  Vide  Niti  £ataka,  Miscellaneous,  sloka  16. 

38.  Women  who  are  young  avoid  the  man  whose  head 
is  grey  with  age  and  the  man  who  is  enfeebled  by  years. 
They  flee  far  from  him,  avoiding  him  like  the  well  fre- 
quented by  Chandalas,  which  has  a  piece  of  bone  hanging 
over  it. 

39.  How  often  are  thy  enterprises  destroyed  !  how  often, 
0  senseless  man  !  hast  thou  not  desired,  filled  as  thou  art 
with  folly,  to  drink  water  from  the  vain  mirage  of  this 
world  !     Since  thy   confidence  is   not  abated,  and  since 
thy  mind,  though  torn,  is  not  subdued,  surely  thy  heart 
must  be  made  of  adamantine  rock. 

40.  The  eyes  of  a  woman  will   softly  enter  a  man's 
heart  and  fill  it  with  infatuation,  with  intoxication,  with 
deception,  with  menaces,  with  delights.     What  will  not 
the  eyes  of  a  woman  accomplish  ? 

41.  The  mighty  lion,  which  eats  the  flesh  of  boars  and 
elephants,  enjoys  love  but  once  in  a  year ;  the  dove,  pick- 
ing up  only  pieces  of  hard  rock,  is  a  lover  every  day.     Tell 
me  what  is  the  reason  for  this  ? 

42.  A  dwelling  in  a  sacred  forest,  with  the  deer  alone 
as  companions  ;  a  life  nourished  on  the  fruits  of  the  earth 
on  the  banks  of  every  stream,  the  flat  rock  surface  for  a 
couch :  such  is  the  life  of  peaceful  calm  that  the  ascetic 
lives  who  desires  contact  with  Hara;  his  mind  is  fixed 
upon  one  object ;  the  forest  or  the  dwelling  are  the  same 
to  him. 

43.  The  goddess  pours  forth  words  of  sweet  sound,  more 
pleasing  than  honey  or  butter :  at  the  utterances  of  her 
ambrosial  body  we  are  filled  with  delight.     As  long  as  we 
can  gain  barley  grain  by  begging,  so  long  we  will  not 
desire  to  amass  wealth  gained  in  a  state  of  slavery. 


NOTES   TO   VAIEAGYA   S'ATAKA. 

The  third  collection  of  S'atakas  ascribed  to  Bhartrihari,  called 
the  Vairdgya  £ataka,  treats  of  the  renunciation  of  all  worldly 
objects  and  desires.  Fairdgya,  meaning  absence  from  pas- 
sion, is  an  abstract  substantive  formed  from  vi-rdga;  rdga 
meaning  mental  feelings  or  affections,  passion  in  general; 
vi,  the  particle  which,  affixed  to  words,  gives  them  the 
opposite  sense  which  they  originally  possessed.  Vairagya^ 
however,  means  more  than  a  mere  negative  state :  not  only 
must  there  be  absence  from  passion,  freedom  from  the 
desire  for  all  worldly  objects,  but  there  must  also  be  devo- 
tion shown  by  a  solitary  and  ascetic  life,  a  life  of  worship 
and  penance. 

2.  Three   classes   of  men   exist :    learned   men,    who   are 
envious  of  the  knowledge  that  others  possess  ;  mighty  men, 
who  care  nothing  for  learning,  through   pride  in  their  own 
greatness;   and  men  who  are  too  ignorant  to  take  any  in- 
terest in  learning.     Therefore,  between  these  three,  learning 
and  science  gains  no  hearing  in  the  world. 

3.  Fipdkah punydndm  jayanti  bhayam  me  mmrisatah.     "The 
consequence  (or  result)  of  good  deeds  produces  fear  in  me 
when  I  reflect."     The  performance  of  good  actions  will  gain 
Svarga;  but  Svarga,  according  to  the  Yedantic  system,  is 
not  the  highest  state.     Moksha,  the  final  release  of  the  soul, 
its   exemption   from   all   further   separate   existence,   is   the 
great  end  to  be  attained  and  the  pleasures  of  Svarga  operate 
as  a  hindrance,  and  defer  the  liberation  of  the  soul.     There- 
fore good  deeds  and  the  results  they  produce  are  to  be  viewed 
with  apprehension.    The  object  of  the  devotee  must  be  eman- 
cipation from  all  earthly  objects  and  desires,  and  absorption 
into  the  Supreme  Being. 

"  The  saint  who  has  attained  to  full  perfection 
Of  contemplation  sees  the  universe 
Existing  in  himself,  and  with  the  eye 
Of  knowledge  sees  the  All  as  the  One  Soul. 


VAIRAGYA  SATAKA.  63 

When  bodily  disguises  are  dissolved, 
The  perfect  saint  becomes  completely  blended 
With  the  One  Soul,  as  water  blends  with  water, 
As  air  unites  with  air,  fire  with  fire." 

— Atma-bodha,  Mon.  Williams'  Trans.,  quoted  in 
"Indian  Wisdom"  p.  122. 

5.  "I  have  eaten  like  a  crow,"  &c.     Cf.  Panchatantra,  i.  30. 

Kakopi  jivate  chiram  clia  balim  chabhurikte.  "  A  crow  lives 
long  and  enjoys  food."  The  force  of  the  phrase  is  intended 
to  convey  the  idea  of  living  meanly. 

ii.  The  distinction  must  be  observed  between  Samsdra 
vichhitti,  "  the  destruction  of  future  births,"  and  Svarga,  which 
is  the  paradise  of  the  enjoyment  of  objects  of  sense. 

13.  Neither  in  the  pardoning  of  injuries  nor  in  the  abandon- 
ment of  home  was  there  any  idea  of  self-abnegation  ;  the  first 
proceeding  from  want  of  power  to  revenge  the  injuries,  the 
second,  because  the  pleasures  of  home  were  unattainable. 

We  have  suffered  as  much  pain  in  the  pursuit  of  earthly 
things  as  if  we  had  practised  the  acts  of  self-denial  inculcated 
by  the  wise,  and  the  result  is  that  we  have  gained  no  fruits 
of  righteousness. 

For  3d  line  cf.  Fikramorvasi,  Introductory  sloka — "Antar 
mumukshubhir  niyamitapranadibhir  mrigyate,"  "  (Siva),  who 
is  sought  inwardly  with  suspended  breath  and  other  penances 
by  those  who  desire  liberation  (from  objects  of  sense)."  Also 
Raghuv.,  viii.  19 — 

"  Aparah  pranidhana  yogyaya 
marutah  pancha  sariragochar&n." 

"The  other  (subdued)  by  the  exercise  of  meditation  the  five 
breaths  whose  abode  were  in  his  own  body." 

14,  "Objects  of  desire  are  ever  fresh."      Cf.    Hor.,  Car. 
iv.  i — 

"Intermissa  Venus  diu 

Rursus  bella  moves  ?     Parce,  precor,  precor, 
Non  sum  qualis  eram  bonae 

Sub  regno  Cinarse." 
Also  Car.  iv.  10. 
23.  This  sloka  is  directed  against  the  pride  of  petty  kings. 


64  VAIRAGYA  SATAKA. 

Their  position  is  contrasted  with  that  of  the  great  heroes 
and  sages  of  fable,  who  were  supposed  to  have  ruled  the 
whole  world,  and  with  the  position  of  the  great  sovereigns  of 
modern  times. 

Chaturdasabhuvandni,  the  fourteen  divisions  of  the  world,  is 
explained  by  the  scholiast  to  mean  "the  whole  earth,"  a 
figurative  way  of  expressing  the  greatness  of  the  possessions 
of  the  sovereigns  referred  to. 

24.  This   sloka,  and  also   27  and    30,  may  be   termed  a 
colloquy  between  a  prince  and  an  ascetic,  or  rather  a  mono- 
logue in  which  the  ascetic  only  speaks.     The  ascetic's  chief 
object  apparently  is  to  prove  that  he  is  on  a  level  with  princes, 
if  not  above  them. 

25.  Eeferring  still  to  the  petty  princes  (sloka  23),  patayah, 
11  owners  of  land,"   who    feel   delight   at   their  possessions, 
though  they  ought  to  feel  sorrow  and  humility  when  they 
compare  themselves  with  the  great  sovereigns,  and  perceive 
how  small  their  own  dominions  are. 

27.  Cf.  Juv.  iii.  41 — "  Quid  Romse  faciam?  mentiri  nescio." 

28.  The  idea  (as  explained  by  Telang)  is,  that  in  the  first 
instance  learning  was  a  means  to  the  destruction  of  worldly 
troubles,  afterwards  to  the  achievement  of  worldly  pleasures, 
but  now,  receiving  no  appreciation  at  all,  it  is  departing  from 
the  earth. 

29.  Why  should  princes  be  filled  with  pride  in  their  attend- 
ants and  their  possessions,  since  the  only  true  honour  is  that 
which  S'iva  confers  upon  his  followers  ]     The  honour  referred 
to  in  this  sloka  is  said  to  be  reserved  for  the  liberal,  the  tem- 
perate, those  who  keep  their  promises,  and  those  slain  in  battle. 

39.  Kala  and  Kali  are  taken  by  Telang  to  be  the  male  and 
female  personifications  of  the  destructive  principle.  Kola  is  a 
name  of  destiny  or  fate.  It  is  also  taken  to  mean  "  time  that 
destroys  all  things."  Kali  is  one  of  the  names  given  to 
Parvati,  as  the  great  destroying  goddess.  These  two  personi- 
fied principles  are  represented  as  playing  with  men  as  though 
they  were  chessmen.  The  word  sdra  or  sdra  means  a  piece 
at  chess  or  backgammon.  Cf.  Hor.,  Car.  iii.  29,  50.  Cf.  also 
Plautus,  Captiv.,  Prologue,  22 — "Nimirum  Di  nos  quasi  pilas 
homines  habent." 


VAIRAGYA  SATAKA.  65 

40.  Dwelling  beside  the  divine  river,  i.e.,  the  Ganges,  is 
equivalent  to  abandoning  the  world. 

45.  Bdga-grdha-vtint,  "Love  takes  the  place  of  crocodiles." 
Benfey  in  Lex.  (sub  Grdhavant)  translates  "  Containing  love  in- 
stead of  sharks."     The  first  half  of  the  word  relates  to  men's 
desires,  the  second  to  the  river  to  which  they  are  compared.    A 
man  is  drowned  by  the  passions  which  meet  him  in  the  river 
of  desire,  as  a  swimmer  across  the  Ganges  would  be  eaten  by 
the  crocodiles. 

46.  Aldna,  "  The  post  to  which  an  elephant  is  tied."     Of. 
Mrich.,  act  i.  39— 

"  Alane  grihyate  hasti  vaji  valgasu  grihyate 
hridaye  grihyate  naii,  yadidam  nasti  gamyatam." 

"An  elephant  is  held  by  a  post,  a  horse  is  restrained  by 
bridles,  a  woman  by  her  heart.  If  these  are  not  secured — 
depart." 

47.  The  idea  to  be  gained  from  this  stanza  is,  that  the 
suppliant  of  the  rich  thinks  the  days   too  long  because  he 
has  to  suffer  the  trouble  of  unsuccessful  entreaties ;  the  per- 
son engaged  in  worldly  objects  thinks  the  time  too  short 
to  accomplish   his   numerous    ends.       On   the    other    hand, 
the  philosopher  laughs  at  both  sets  of  persons  for  their  delu- 
sions. 

53.  Turaga-chala-cliittdh.  Chala-chitta  means  fickle,  incon- 
stant. Turaga  means  simply  the  swift  goer  \  hence  a  horse ; 
also  the  mind,  from  its  swiftness  of  thought  (Of.  Fair.  $.,  si. 
77).  Turaga-chala-chitta  might  mean,  therefore,  simply  "fickle 
in  mind."  Telang  remarks  on  the  words  as  expressing  an 
"unusual  simile,"  suggesting  that  the  mind  is  compared  to 
a  horse  for  swiftness.  Probably  a  play  on  the  words  is 
meant. 

55.  The  status  of  the  man  who  thus  obtains  his  livelihood 
by  begging  is  laid  down  in  Manu,  vi.  87,  where  he  is  placed 
as  occupying  the  third  order  in  the  Brahman  caste.  The 
Yana-prastha  (the  title  by  which  he  is  designated)  is  the  last 
stage  but  one  in  the  Brahman's  life.  He  is  directed,  among 
other  duties  (Manu,  ii.  187),  on  the  morning  and  evening  of 
each  day  to  go  round  the  villages  in  his  neighbourhood,  and 

E 


66  VAIRAGYA  SATAKA. 

to  beg  food  for  himself  and  his  spiritual  teacher.  The  "  door- 
posts blackened  by  the  smoke  of  the  offerings  "  is  referred  to, 
Raghuv.,  i.  53 — 

"  Abhyutthit&gnipisunaih  atithinasramonmukhan 
punanam  pavanoddhatairdhumairahutigandhibhih. " 

"  (The  hermitage)  purifying  the  guests  whose  faces  were 
turned  towards  the  hermitage,  through  the  smoke  of  the  obla- 
tions, which  was  scented,  borne  upon  the  wind,  showing  where 
the  fires  were  rising." 

63.  This  sloka  is  identical  with  Niti  tfatalca,  sloka  26. 

65.  This  sloka  is  literally,  "  You  (are)  we,  we  (are)  you,  thus 
was  the  mind  of  us  two :  how  has  it  become  now  that  you  as 
you,  we  (are)  we  ? " 

66.  Cf.  Plato  defiep.j'Book  i.  cap.  3 — Il&g,  'ifa,  w  2o</>oxX£/s, 

rd(f)oodiffiat,  j    sri   oJoc   r    sj  yvvoux.}    ffwyy/ysffdai  •   xal  0£, 
£?j,  aff.agva/rara  [AWTOI  avrb  aKe^wyov,  UGKID  l.vrruvra.  nva, 
xat  ayyov  dsffKorqv  anoffrwyuiv. 

69.  "Supercilious  contempt,"  " Vasa-pavana-anartita-bhru- 
latani,"  lit.  "  Creeper-like  eyebrows  gently  moved  up  and  down 
with  the  wind  of  (their  own)  p^ower  (or  conceit)." 

73.  "Thy  foot  may  have  been  placed  on  the  neck  of  thy 
enemies,"  "Nyastam  padam  sirasi  vidvishatam  tatah  kim." 
For  a  parallel  idea  among  other  passages,  cf.  Ps.  viii.  8  (Vulg.), 
"  Omnia  subjecisti  sub  pedibus  ejus ; "  also  Ps.  xlvi.  4.     For 
a  collateral  notion,  cf.  Ps.   cix.    i,   "Donee  ponam  inimicos 
tuos,    scabellum  pedum  tuorum."      This   and   the  following 
sloka  teaches   that   man   may   have   gained    everything   to 
be  desired,  but  yet  not  have  attained  to  emancipation  from 
worldly  things  and  union  with  the  Supreme  Being.     This  is 
only  to  be  gained  by  the  methods  inculcated  in  the  following 
stanza. 

74.  Cf.  Miscellaneous  Satakas,  Vairagya  £ataJca,  sloka  29. 

75.  Vairdgya  (the  subject  of  this  S'ataka)  is  the  sole  means 
of  gaining  union  with  the  Supreme  Soul ;  and  what  Vairdgya, 
IS  this  sloka  explains. 

Contrast  with  this  sloka,  Bhagavad.,  vi.  i — "  He  who  pays 
no  heed  to  the  fruit  of  his  acts,  and  who  performs  his  duty, 
he  is  both  the  devotee  and  the  ascetic." 


VAIRAGYA  SATAKA.  67 

77.  Cf.  "...  nee  quicquam  tibi  prodest 

Aerias  tentasse  domos,  animoque  rotundum 
Percurrisse  polum  morituro." 

— HOT.  Car.  i.  25,  4. 

81.  Cf.  Bhagavad.,  ii.  46 — "Not  disposed  to  meditation  and 
perseverance  is  the  intention  of  those  who  are  devoted  to 
enjoyments  and  dominion,  and  whose  minds  are  seduced  from 
the  right  path  by  that  flowery  sentence  which  is  proclaimed 
by  the  universe,  who  delight  in  texts  from  the  Vedas,  and 
say,  *  There  is  nothing  else  than  that/  being  covetous-minded 
and  considering  heaven  as  the  chief  goal,  and  which  offers 
regeneration  as  the  reward  of  actions,  and  enjoins  many 
different  ceremonies  for  the  sake  of  obtaining  pleasures  and 
dominion.  .  .  .  Let  the  motive  for  action  be  in  the  action 
itself,  never  in  its  reward ;  .  .  .  perform  thy  actions,  being  the 
same  in  success  or  failure.  The  performance  of  works  is  far 
inferior  to  mental  devotion."  Everything  but  the  performance 
of  actions  without  regard  to  future  results,  all  virtuous  acts, 
except  those  performed  solely  for  the  sake  of  virtue,  are,  as  it 
were,  the  mere  haggling  of  merchants,  with  the  intention  of 
making  the  highest  profit." 

Cf.  also  Bhagavad.,  xviii.  66 — 

"  Sarvadharman  parityajya  man  ekam  saranam  vraja 
aham  tvam  sarvapapebhyo  mochayishyami." 

"  Abandon  all  religious  duties,  come  to  me  as  the  only  refuge, 
so  will  I  deliver  thee  from  all  sin." 

83.  6aphartj  a  little  fish,  supposed  to  be  a  carp. 

84.  "  Women  seemed  the  only  objects,"  &c.     The  text  lite- 
rally translated  is — "  Drishtam  narimayam  idam  asesham  jaga- 
dapi,"  "  This  world  seemed  altogether  made  up  of  women." 

86.  Cf.  Bhagavad.,  ii.  15— 

"  Yamhi  na  vyathayanty  ete  purusham  purusharshabha 
samaduhkasukham  dhiram  so  mritatvaya  kalpate." 

"The  man  whom  these  outward  things  do  not  affect,  and 
who  is  the  same  both  in  pain  and  pleasure,  that  man  is  fitted 
for  immortality." 


68  VAIRAGYA  SATAKA. 

92.  The  removal  of  hunger  and  thirst  are  not  really  plea- 
sure, only  a  temporary  removal  of  a  pain.  Cf.  Plato,  Rep., 
584  —  H5>$  ouv  og6Z>$  \<sri  rb  ftr)  d\yeTv  qdu  qysTff&at,  v\  TO  /ATI 
X<ic/ff/v  dvicceov  ;  ovda/Atog.  oux  sffriv  ago,  ro\jro,  dXXcb 
6'  syu  vagd  rb  dXytivbv  ^5i),  xa/  Dragee  rb  qdb  dXytivbv  TOTS  Y\ 
xa/  Qufisv  vyitc,  rovruv  ruv  <j)Kvra,Gfj,a,ruv  VPOS  yjdovr^  dXqdciav 
yo?jr£/a  rig.  *n$  yoDi/  6  Xoyoj  g^»j,  ff^/j,a.ivsi.  'Ids  ro/vuv,  971^ 
rfiwac,  di  oux  sx  XWTTUV  g/Viv,  7ca  /a^  5roXXax/g  oiqfys  sv  rw 

rovru    Kstfruxsvai    vjftowjv    fj,ev    craDXav    X6c7?jj    s/i/a/,    XLITTTJI/ 


96.  Benares  is  chosen  as  a  city  of  special  holiness  and  the 
resort  of  mendicants.    There  are  seven  cities  of  so  great  sanctity 
in  the  popular  belief,  that  to  die  in  them  leads  to  final  union 
with  the  Supreme  Being.     The  following  verse  gives  them  — 

"  Ayodhya  Mathura  Maya  Kast  K4nchi  Avantika 
pura  Dvaravati  chaiva  saptaita  mokshadayikah." 

—  "Meghaddfa"  Wilson,  p.  31,  note. 

97.  Cf.  Juvenal,  x.  160  — 

"...  In  exsilium  prseceps  fugit,  atque  ibi  magnus 
Mirandus  que  cliens  sedet  ad  prsetoria  regis." 

Expressed  by  Dryden  as  follows  :  — 

"  Eepulsed  by  surly  grooms,  who  wait  before 
The  sleeping  tyrant's  interdicted  door." 

1  01.  This  sloka  gives  the  rule  by  which  an  ascetic  should 
live.  Avadhtita-charya  means  wandering  about  as  a  mendi- 
cant, separated  from  worldly  feelings  and  obligations.  This 
is  the  life  of  one  who  has  attained  to  the  fourth  order  in  the 
Brahman  caste,  and  is  called  a  Sannydsin,  or  a  Tail.  "Let 
him  remain  without  fire,  without  habitation  •  let  him  resort 
once  a  day  to  the  town  for  food,  regardless  of  hardships, 
resolute,  keeping  a  vow  of  silence,  fixing  his  mind  on  medi- 
tation." —  Manu,  vi.  43. 

"  With  hair,  nails,  and  beard  well  clipped,  carrying  a  bowl, 
a  staff,  and  a  pitcher,  let  him  wander  about  continually,  intent 
on  meditation,  and  avoiding  injury  to  any  being."  —  Manu, 
vi.  52. 

"  In  this  manner,  having  little  by  little  abandoned  all  worldly 


VAIRAGYA  SATAKA. 


69 


attachments,  and  freed  himself  from  all  concern  about  pairs  of 
opposites,  he  obtains  absorption  into  the  universal  spirit.  "- 
Manu,  vi.  81. 

With  the  life  of  the  Hindu  ascetic  we  may  compare  the 
instances  given  of  Elijah  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  of  St. 
John  the  Baptist  in  St.  Mark  i.  6. 

103.  Cf.  &ik.,  175 — "Amsavyapi  sakuntanida  nichitam 
bibhrajjatamandalam,"  "  Wearing  a  circular  mass  of  matted 
hair  enveloping  his  shoulders,  filled  with  birds'  nests."  This 
is  a  portion  of  the  description  of  the  sage  Kasyapa. 

1 08.  Telang  explains  brahmajndnavivekinah  by  "those  who 
possess  the  discrimination  (i.e.,  between  things  real  and  unreal) 
resulting  from  knowledge  of  the  Brahma."  This  stanza  says 
that  it  is  more  difficult  to  abandon  the  riches  which  we 
actually  possess  than  to  get  rid  of  the  desire  for  earthly 
possessions ;  but  what  we  actually  have  is  so  uncertain,  and 
of  such  doubtful  duration,  that  it  can  hardly  be  said  to  be 
ours  to  give  up ;  how  much  less  those  things  which  we  only 
desire  and  wish  for.  The  writer  attempts  to  prove  that  the 
giving  up  of  actual  riches  in  possession  may  be  a  difficult 
matter,  but  the  giving'  up  of  the  desire  for  riches  is,  or 
ought  not  to  be  at  all  difficult. 

112.  Cf.  Shakespeare,  "As  You  Like  It,"  act  ii.  sc.  7. 


MISCELLANEOUS   S'LOKAS. 
5.  Cf.  Chaucer,  "Man  of  Lawes  Tale,"  15— 

"  Herkneth  what  is  the  sentens  of  the  wyse, 
Bet  is  to  dye  than  haven  indigence." 

8.  Telang  in  his  notes  to  the  Vairdgya  jjata&a  explains  this 
stanza  as  alluding  to  the  idea  that  S'iva  and  Parvati  form  a 
single  body,  half  of  which  is  male,  half  female.     S'iva,  though 
he  is  so  far  under  the  dominion  of  love  as  to  have  his  wife  half 
of  himself,  is  also  the  first  as  to  withstanding  love. 

9.  This  sloka,  slightly  altered,  occurs,  Mrich.,  act  iv.  124,  in 


70  VAIRAGYA  SATAKA. 

S'arvilaka's  speech,  which  is  entirely  made  up  of  aspersions  on 
the  character  of  women  generally.     Of.  Euripides — 

A5jXov  wg  yuvq  xaxov  {Aiya,. — Hippol.  627.  j 

Also  .  .   .  %$v  yao  aX\o6sv  vodev 

xvovcQcti)  dqXv  5'oux  e/va/ 
ac  oux  %v  ov&v  oudowiroiz  xaxo'v. — Med.  573- 

Tevog  yao  ovre  CTOITOJ  ovre  yij  rgefai 
Tofovds. — Hec.  1181. 

ii.  This  stanza  is  one  containing  a  play  upon  words  through- 
out. The  epithets  which  are  used  in  a  complimentary  sense 
referring  to  a  woman's  external  form  may  also,  together  with 
the  substantives  which  they  qualify,  be  used  in  a  bad  sense 
as  applied  to  mental  characteristics.  From  this  point  of  view 
the  stanza  might  mean — "  Hardness  of  heart,  eyes  not  looking 
straightforward,  a  deceitful  face,  a  stupid  look,  sluggishness, 
cowardice,  crafty  behaviour; — such  qualities  may  be  subjects  of 
boasting,  but  are  really  evil,  and  wise  men  avoid  women  of  this 
kind."  The  wise  man  does  not  judge  women  merely  by  their 
external  appearance ;  such  want  of  discrimination  is  only  worthy 
of  the  beasts ;  he  looks  within. 

Cf.  Fairdgya  SataJca,  sloka  62. 

13.  Prahasana,  translated  "comedy,"  is  one  of  the  ten 
Rdpakas  or  forms  of  dramatic  representation. 

"  Hair  grey  with  age."  Palita-kamaka-bhajam,  lit.  "  having 
grey  ears,"  i.e.,  grey  hairs  round  your  ears. 

Of.  fiaghuv.,  xii.  2 — 

"  Tarn  karnamulamagatya 

.    '.    .     .     .     .     palitachchhadinana  jara." 

"  Old  age  under  the  guise  of  grey  hairs 
Creeping  to  the  bottom  of  his  ear." 

18.  Jdtah,  "born  indeed"  i.e.,  born  to  some  good  purpose. 
Cf.  Vairdgya  SataJca,  sloka  29.  Dhruva,  "  the  pole-star,"  that 
which  is  fixed  or  permanent.  The  tortoise  below  the  earth  and 
the  pole-star  above  it  are  probably  chosen  as  examples  of  two 
things  at  the  extreme  limits  of  the  universe.  "  Neither  above 
nor  below  "  may  be  explained  as  referring  to  men  who  are  no 


VAIRAGYA  SATAKA.  71 

profit  to  others,  either  from  a  high  position,  as  the  pole-star, 
or  from  a  low  one,  as  the  tortoise  :  they  have  no  share  in  any 
useful  work.  They  are  like  gnats,  aimlessly  buzzing  about. 
For  the  fig-tree  as  symbolising  the  world  of  sense  and  passion, 
cf.  Bhagavad.,  xv. 

23.  Men  find  no  pleasure  in  hunting,  in  war,  or  in  love, 
because  their  minds  are  always  set  on  some  extraneous 
object.  Cf.  Pairdgya  Sataka,  slokas  5  and  48. 

26.  Bali  was  a  virtuous  Daitya  king,  who  by  means  of  devo- 
tion and  penance  gained  the  mastery  over  the  three  worlds. 
Vishnu,  on  being  appealed  to  by  the  deities,  became  manifest 
in  his  Avatara  of  the  Dwarf  for  the  purpose  of  overthrowing 
Bali's  power.  In  this  form  he  begged  from  Bali  as  much 
ground  as  he  could  cover  in  three  steps,  and  his  boon  being 
granted,  stepped  over  heaven  and  earth  in  two  strides.  Out 
of  respect,  however,  for  Bali's  virtues,  he  left  him  the  lower 
region  or  Patala. 

29.  Cf.  Vairdgya,  £ataJca,  sloka  74,  and  also  Bhaghavad., 
vi.  8— 

"  Jnana  vijnana  triptatma  kutastho  vijitendriyah. 
yukta  ity  uchyate  yogi  samaloshtasmakanchanah." 

"The  man  whose  soul  is  satiated  with  spiritual  knowledge 
and  discernment,  who  is  unchangeable,  who  looks  upon  a 
stone,  a  clod  of  earth,  or  gold  as  having  exactly  the  same 
value — he  indeed  is  called  a  devotee. " 

34.  What  penance,  it  is  asked,  has  the  deer  practised  that 
he  is  able  to  pass  his  life  in  peace  and  contentment. 

38.  The  well  used  by  Chandalas,  a  tribe  of  outcasts,  is  dis- 
tinguished by  a  piece  of  bone  suspended  over  it. 


PRINTED  BY  BALLANTYNE,  HANSON  AND  CO. 
EDINBURGH  AND  LONDON. 


TRUBNER'S   ORIENTAL   SERIES. 


"  A  knowledge  of  the  commonplace,  at  least,  of  Oriental  literature,  philo- 
sophy, and  religion  is  as  necessary  to  the  general  reader  of  the  present  day 
as  an  acquaintance  with  the  Latin  and  Greek  classics  was  a  generation  or  so 
ago.  Immense  strides  have  been  made  within  the  present  century  in  these 
branches  of  learning ;  Sanskrit  has  been  brought  within  the  range  of  accurate 
philology,  and  its  invaluable  ancient  literature  thoroughly  investigated ;  the 
language  and  sacred  books  of  the  Zoroastrians  have  been  laid  bare ;  Egyptian, 
Assyrian,  and  other  records  of  the  remote  past  have  been  deciphered,  and  a 
group  of  scholars  speak  of  still  more  recondite  Accadian  and  Hittite  monu- 
ments ;  but  the  results  of  all  the  scholarship  that  has  been  devoted  to  these 
subjects  have  been  almost  inaccessible  to  the  public  because  they  were  con- 
tained for  the  most  part  in  learned  or  expensive  works,  or  scattered  through- 
out the  numbers  of  scientific  periodicals.  Messrs.  TRUBNER  &  Co.,  in  a  spirit 
of  enterprise  which  does  them  infinite  credit,  have  determined  to  supply  the 
constantly-increasing  want,  and  to  give  in  a  popular,  or,  at  least,  a  compre- 
hensive form,  all  this  mass  of  knowledge  to  the  world." — Times. 


New  Edition  in  preparation, 
Post  8vo,  with  Map, 

THE  INDIAN  EMPIRE  :   ITS  HISTOEY,  PEOPLE, 
AND  PRODUCTS. 

Being  a  revised  form  of  the  article  "India,"  in  the  "Imperial  Gazetteer," 

remodelled  into  chapters,  brought  up  to  date,  and  incorporating 

the  general  results  of  the  Census  of  1881. 

By  the  HON.  W.  W.  HUNTER,  C.S.I.,  C.I.E.,  LL.D., 

Member  of  the  Viceroy's  Legislative  Council, 
Director-General  of  Statistics  to  the  Government  of  India. 

"The  article  'India,'  in  Volume  IV.,  is  the  touchstone  of  the  work,  and  proves 
clearly  enough  the  sterling  metal  of  which  it  is  wrought.  It  represents  the  essence 
of  the  ioo  volumes  which  contain  the  results  of  the  statistical  survey  conducted  by 
Dr.  Hunter  throughout  each  of  the  240  districts  of  India.  It  is,  moreover,  the  only 
attempt  that  has  ever  been  made  to  show  how  the  Indian  people  have  been  built  up, 
and  the  evidence  from  the  original  materials  has  been  for  the  first  time  sifted  and 
examined  by  the  light  of  the  local  research  in  which  the  author  was  for  so  long 
engaged. " —  Times. 


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  432,  cloth,  price  i6s. 

A  CLASSICAL  DICTIONARY  OF  HINDU  MYTHOLOGY 

AND  RELIGION,  GEOGRAPHY,  HISTORY,  AND 

LITERATURE. 

EY  JOHN  DOWSON,  M.R.A.S., 
Late  Professor  of  Hindustani,  Staff  College. 

"This  not  only  forms  an  indispensable  book  of  reference  to  students  of  Indian 
literature,  but  is  also  of  great  general  interest,  as  it  gives  in  a  concise  and  easily 
accessible  form  all  that  need  be  known  about  the  personages  of  Hindu  mythology 
whose  names  are  so  familiar,  but  of  whom  so  little  is  known  outside  the  limited 
circle  of  tavanta." — Times. 

"  It  is  no  slight  gain  when  such  subjects  are  treated  fairly  and  fully  in  a  moderate 
space  ;  and  we  need  only  add  that  the  few  wants  which  we  may  hope  to  see  supplied 
in  new  editions  detract  but  little  from  the  general  excellence  of  Mr.  Dowson's  work." 
— Saturday  lleview. 

Post  8vo,  with  View  of  Mecca,  pp.  cxii. — 172,  cloth,  price  gs. 

SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  KORAN. 

BY  EDWARD  WILLIAM  LANE, 

Translator  of  "  The  Thousand  and  One  Nights ; "  &c.,  &c. 
A  New  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged,  with  an  Introduction  by 

STANLEY  LANE  POOLE. 

"...  Has  been  Ion?  esteemed  in  this  country  as  the  compilation  of  one  of  the 
greatest  Arabic  scholars  of  the  time,  the  late  Mr.  Lane,  the  well-known  translator  of 
the  'Arabian  Nights.'  .  .  .  The  present  editor  has  enhanced  the  value  of  his 
relative's  work  by  divesting  the  text  of  a  great  deal  of  extraneous  matter  introduced 
by  way  of  comment,  and  prefixing  an  introduction."—  Times. 

"  Mr.  Poole  is  both  a  generous  and  a  learned  biographer.  .  .  .  Mr.  Poole  tells  us 
the  facts  ...  so  far  as  it  is  possible  for  industry  and  criticism  to  ascertain  them, 
and  for  literary  skill  to  present  them  in  a  condensed  and  readable  form."— English- 
man, Calcutta. 

Post  8vo,  pp.  vi. — 368,  cloth,  price  143. 

MODERN  INDIA  AND  THE  INDIANS, 
BEING  A  SERIES  OF  IMPRESSIONS,  NOTES,  AND  ESSAYS. 

BY  MONIER  WILLIAMS,  D.C.L., 
Hon.  LL.D.  of  the  University  of  Calcutta,  Hon.  Member  of  the  Bombay  Asiatic 

Society,  Boden  Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  the  University  of  Oxford. 
Third  Edition,  revised  and  augmented  by  considerable  Additions, 

with  Illustrations  and  a  Map. 

"  In  this  volume  we  have  the  thoughtful  impressions  of  a  thoughtful  man  on  some 
of  the  most  important  questions  connected  witli  our  Indian  Empire.  ...  An  en- 
lightened observant  man,  travelling  among  an  enlightened  observant  people,  Professor 
Monier  Williams  has  brought  before  the  public  in  a  pleasant  form  more  of  the  manners 
and  customs  of  the  Queen's  Indian  subjects  than  we  ever  remember  to  have  seen  in 
any  one  work.  He  not  only  deserves  the  thanks  of  every  Englishman  for  this  able 
contribution  to  the  study  of  Modern  India — a  subject  with  which  we  should  be 
specially  familiar— but  he  deserves  the  thanks  of  every  Indian,  Parsee  or  Hindu, 
Buddhist  and  Moslem,  for  his  clear  exposition  of  their  manners,  their  creeds,  and 
their  necessities." — Times. 

Post  8vo,  pp.  xliv. — 376.  cloth,  price  143. 

METRICAL  TRANSLATIONS  FROM  SANSKRIT 
WRITERS. 

With  an  Introduction,  many  Prose  Versions,  and  Parallel  Passages  from 

Classical  Authors. 

BY  J.  MUIR,  C.I.E.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  Ph.D. 
"...  An  agreeable  introduction  to  Hindu  poetry."—  Times. 
"...  A  volume  which  maybe  taken  as  a  fair  illustration  alike  of  the  religious 

and  moral  sentiments  and  of  the  legendary  lore  of  the  best  Sanskrit  writers." 

E  linburyh  Daily  Review. 


TRUBXER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


Second  Edition,  post  8vo,  pp.  xxvi. — 244,  cloth,  price  IDS.  6d. 

THE     GULISTAN; 

OR,  ROSE  GARDEN  OF  SHEKH  MUSHLIU'D-DIN  SADI  OF  SHIRAZ. 

Translated  for  the  First  Time  into  Prose  and  Verse,  with  an  Introductory 
Preface,  and  a  Life  of  the  Author,  from  the  Atish  Kadah, 

BY  EDWARD  B.  EASTWICK,  C.B.,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  M.R.A.S. 

"  It  is  a  very  fair  rendering  of  the  original." — Times. 

"  The  new  edition  has  long  been  desired,  and  will  be  welcomed  by  all  who  take 
any  interest  in  Oriental  poetry.  The  Gulistan  is  a  typical  Persian  verse-book  of  thu 
highest  order.  Mr.  Eastwick's  rhymed  translation  .  .  .  has  long  established  itself  in 
a  secure  position  as  the  best  version  of  Sadi's  finest  work." — Academy. 

"  It  is  both  faithfully  and  gracefully  executed." — Tablet. 


In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo,  pp.  viii. — 408  and  viii. — 348,  cloth,  price  283. 

MISCELLANEOUS    ESSAYS    RELATING     TO    INDIAN 
SUBJECTS. 

BY  BRIAN  HOUGHTON  HODGSON,  ESQ.,  F.R.S., 

Late  of  the  Bengal  Civil  Service  ;  Corresponding  Member  of  the  Institute  ;  Chevalier 
of  the  Legion  of  Honour ;  late  British  Minister  at  the  Court  of  Nepal,  <fcc.,  <fcc. 

CONTENTS  Ol<    VOL.  I. 

SECTION  1.— On  the  Kocch,  Bodo,  and  Dhimal  Tribes.— Part  I.  Vocabulary  — 
Part  II.  Grammar. — Part  III.  Their  Origin,  Location,  Numbers,  Creed,  Customs, 
Character,  and  Condition,  with  a  General  Description  of  the  Climate  they  uvveLl  m. 
— Appendix. 

SECTION  II.— On  Himalayan  Ethnology. — I.  Comparative  Vocabulary  of  the  Lan- 
guages of  the  Broken  Tribes  of  Ne"pal.— II.  Vocabulary  of  the  Dialects  of  the  Kirant 
Language.— III.  Grammatical  Analysis  of  the  Vayu  Language.  The  Vayu  Grammar. 
—IV.  Analysis  of  the  Bailing  Dialect  of  the  Kirunti  Language.  The  Bahing  Gram- 
mar.— V.  On  the  Vayu  or  Hayu  Tribe  of  the  Central  Himalaya. — VI.  On  tue  Kiranti 
Tribe  of  the  Central  Himalaya. 

CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II. 

SECTION  III.— On  the  Aborigines  of  North-Eastern  India.  Comparative  Vocabulary 
of  the  Tibetan,  Bodo,  and  Garo  Tongues. 

SECTION  IV. — Aborigines  of  the  North-Eastern  Frontier. 

SECTION  V.— Aborigines  of  the  Eastern  Frontier. 

SECTION  VI. — The  Indo-Chinese  Borderers,  and  their  connection  with  the  Hima- 
layans  and  Tibetans.  Comparative  Vocabulary  of  Indo-Chinese  Borderers  in  Arakan. 
Comparative  Vocabulary  ot  Indo-Chine.-se  Borderers  in  Tenasserim. 

SECTION  VII. — The  Mongolian  Affinities  of  the  Caucasians. — Comparison  and  Ana- 
lysis of  Caucasian  and  Mongolian  Words. 

SECTION  VIII.— Physical  Type  of  Tibetans. 

SECTION  IX. — The  Aborigines  of  Central  India. — Comparative  Vocabulary  of  the 
Aboriginal  Languages  of  Central  India. — Aborigines  of  the  Eastern  Ghats.— Vocabu- 
lary of  some  of  the  Dialects  of  the  Hill  and  Wandering  Tribes  in  the  Northern  Sircars. 
— Aborigines  of  the  Nilgiris,  with  Remarks  on  their  Affinities. — Supplement  to  the 
Nilgiriaii  Vocabularies.— The  Aborigines  of  Southern  India  and  Ceylon. 

SECTION  X. — Route  of  Nepalese  Mission  to  Pekin,  with  Remarks  on  the  Water- 
Shed  and  Plateau  of  Tibet. 

SECTION  XL— Route  from  Kathmandu,  the  Capital  of  Nepal,  to  Darjeeling  iu 
Sikim. — Memorandum  relative  to  the  Seven  Cosis  of  Nepal. 

SECTION  XII.— Some  Accounts  of  the  Systems  of  Law  and  Police  as  recognised  in 
the  State  of  Nepal. 

SECTION  XIII.—  The  Native  Method  of  making  the  Paper  denominated  Hindustan 
Nepalese. 

SECTION  XIV. — Pre-eminence  of  the  Vernaculars;  or,  the  Anglicists  Answered  ; 
Being  Letters  on  the  Education  of  the  People  of  India. 

"  For  the  study  of  the  less-known  races  of  India  Mr.  Brian  Hodgson's  '  Miscellane- 
ous Essays'  will  be  found  very  valuable  both  to  the  philologist  and  the  ethnologist." 
—Times. 


TRUBNERS  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


Third  Edition,  Two  Vols.,  post  8vo,  pp.  viii.— 268  and  viii.— 326,  cloth, 
price  2 is. 

THE  LIFE  OR  LEGEND  OF  GAUDAMA, 

THE  BUDDHA  OF  THE  BURMESE.     With  Annotations. 
The  "Ways  to  Neibban,  and  Notice  on  the  Phongyies  or  Burmese  Monks. 

BY  THE  RIGHT  REV.  P.  BIGANDET, 
Bishop  of  Ramatha,  Vicar- Apostolic  of  Ava  and  Pegu. 

"The  work  is  furnished  with  copious  notes,  which  not  only  illustrate  the  subject- 
matter,  but  form  a  perfect  encyclopaedia  of  Buddhist  lore." — Times. 

' '  A  work  which  will  furnish  European  students  of  Buddhism  with  a  most  valuable 
help  in  the  prosecution  of  their  investigations." — Edinburgh  Daily  Review. 

"Bishop  Bigandet's  invaluable  work." — Indian  Antiquary. 

"  Viewed  in  this  light,  its  importance  is  sufficient  to  place  students  of  the  subject 
under  a  deep  obligation  to  its  author." — Calcutta  Review. 

"  This  work  is  one  of  the  greatest  authorities  upon  Buddhism." — Dublin  Review. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  xxiv. — 420,  cloth,  price  i8s. 

CHINESE    BUDDHISM. 

A  VOLUME  OF  SKETCHES,  HISTORICAL  AND  CRITICAL. 
BY  J.  EDKINS,  D.D. 

Author  of  "  China's  Place  in  Philology,"  "Religion  in  China,"  &c.,  &c. 

"It  contains  a  vast  deal  of  important  information  on  the  subject,  such  as  is  only 
to  be  gained  by  long-continued  study  on  the  spot." — Athenaeum. 

"  Upon  the  whole,  we  know  of  no  work  comparable  to  it  for  the  extent  of  its 
original  research,  and  the  simplicity  with  which  this  complicated  system  of  philo- 
sophy, religion,  literature,  and  ritual  is  set  forth." — British  Quarterly  Review. 

"  The  whole  volume  is  replete  with  learning.  ...  It  deserves  most  careful  study 
from  all  interested  in  the  history  of  the  religions  of  the  world,  and  expressly  of  those 
who  are  concerned  in  the  propagation  of  Christianity.  Dr.  Edkins  notices  in  terms 
of  just  condemnation  the  exaggerated  praise  bestowed  upon  Buddhism  by  recent 
English  writers." — Record. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  496,  cloth,  price  i8s. 

LINGUISTIC   AND   ORIENTAL   ESSAYS. 

WRITTEN  FROM  THE  YEAR  1846  TO  1878. 
BY  ROBERT  NEED  HAM  CUST, 

Late  Member  of  Her  Majesty's  Indian  Civil  Service ;  Hon.  Secretary  to 

the  Royal  Asiatic  Society; 
and  Author  of  "  The  Modern  Languages  of  the  East  Indies." 

"  We  know  none  who  lias  described  Indian  life,  especially  the  life  of  the  natives, 
with  so  much  learning,  sympathy,  and  literary  talent." — Academy. 

"  They  seem  to  us  to  be  full  of  suggestive  and  original  remarks."—  St.  James's  Gazette. 

"  His  book  contains  a  vast  amount  of  information.  The  result  of  thirty-five  years 
of  inquiry,  reflection,  and  speculation,  and  that  on  subjects  as  full  of  fascination  as 
of  food  for  thought."— Tablet. 

"  Exhibit  such  a  thorough  acquaintance  with  the  history  and  antiquities  of  India 
as  to  entitle  him  to  speak  as  one  having  authority.'* — Edinburgh  Daily  Review. 

"  The  author  speaks  with  the  authority  of  personal  experience It  is  this 

constant  association  with  the  country  and  the  people  which  gives  such  a  vividness 
to  many  of  the  pages."—  Athen&um. 


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  civ. — 348,  cloth,  price  i8s. 

BUDDHIST  BIRTH  STORIES;   or,  Jataka  Tales. 

The  Oldest  Collection  of  Folk-lore  Extant : 

BEING    THE    JATAKATTHAVANNANA, 

For  the  first  time  Edited  in  the  original  Pali. 

BY  V.  FAUSBOLL  ; 

And  Translated  by  T.  W.  RHYS  DAVIDS. 

Translation.     Volume  I. 

"  These  are  tales  supposed  to  have  been  told  by  the  Buddha  of  what  he  had  seen 
and  heard  in  his  previous  births.  They  are  probably  the  nearest  representatives 
of  the  original  Aryan  stories  from  which  sprang  the  folk-lore  of  Europe  as  well  as 
India.  Tne  introduction  contains  a  most  interesting  disquisition  on  the  migrations 
of  these  fables,  tracing  their  reappearance  in  the  various  groups  of  folk-lore  legends. 
Among  other  old  friends,  we  meet  with  a  version  of  the  J udgmeiit  of  Solomon. " —  limes. 

"  It  is  now  some  years  since  Mr.  Rhys  Davids  asserted  his  right  to  be  heard  on 
this  subject  by  his  able  article  on  Buddhism  in  the  new  edition  of  the  '  Encyclopaedia 
Britannica. ' " — Leeds  Mercury. 

"All  who  are  interested  in  Buddhist  literature  ought  to  feel  deeply  indebted  to 
Mr.  Rhys  Davids.  His  well-established  reputation  as  a  Pali  scholar  is  a  sufficient 
guarantee  for  the  fidelity  of  his  version,  and  the  style  of  his  translations  is  deserving 
of  high  praise." — Academy. 

"  No  more  competent  expositor  of  Buddhism  could  be  found  than  Mr.  Rhys  Davids. 
In  the  Jataka  book  we  have,  then,  a  priceless  record  of  the  earliest  imaginative 
literature  of  our  race ;  and  ...  it  presents  to  us  a  nearly  complete  picture  of  the 
social  life  and  customs  and  popular  beliefs  of  the  common  people  of  Aryan  tribes, 
closely  related  to  ourselves,  just  as  they  were  passing  through  the  first  stages  of 
civilisation." — St.  James's  Gazette. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  xxviii. — 362,  cloth,  price  143. 

A    TALMUDIC    MISCELLANY; 
OR,  A  THOUSAND  AND  ONE  EXTRACTS  FROM  THE  TALMUD, 

THE  MIDRASHIM,  AND  THE  KABBALAH. 

Compiled  and  Translated  by  PAUL  ISAAC  HERSHON, 

Author  of  "  Genesis  According  to  the  Talmud,"  &c. 

With  Notes  and  Copious  Indexes. 

"  To  obtain  in  so  concise  and  handy  a  form  as  this  volume  a  general  idea  of  the 
Talmud  is  a  boon  to  Christians  at  least." — Times. 

"  Its  peculiar  and  popular  character  will  make  it  attractive  to  general  readers. 
Mr.  Hershon  is  a  very  competent  scholar.  .  .  .  Contains  samples  of  the  good,  bad, 
and  indifferent,  and  especially  extracts  that  throw  light  upon  the  Scriptures."— 
British  Quarterly  Review. 

"  Will  convey  to  English  readers  a  more  complete  and  truthful  notion  of  the 
Talmud  than  any  other  work  that  has  yet  appeared." — Daily  News. 

"  Without  overlooking  in  the  slightest  the  several  attractions  of  the  previous 
volumes  of  the  '  Oriental  Series.'  we  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  this  surpasses 
them  all  in  interest." — Edinburgh  Daily  Review. 

"  Mr.  Ilershon  has  .  .  .  thus  given  English  readers  what  is,  we  believe,  a  fair  set 
of  specimens  which  they  can  test  for  themselves." — The  Record. 

"  This  book  is  by  far  the  best  fitted  in  the  present  state  of  knowledge  to  enable  the 
general  reader  to  gain  a  fair  and  unbiassed  conception  of  the  multifarious  contents 
of  the  wonderful  miscellany  which  can  only  be  truly  understood — so  Jewish  pride 
asserts — by  the  life-long  devotion  of  scholars  of  the  Chosen  People." — Inquirer. 

"  The  value  and  importance  of  this  volume  consist  in  the  fact  that  scarcely  a  single 
extract  is  given  in  its  pages  but  throws  some  light,  direct  or  refracted,  upon  those 
Scriptures  which  are  the  common  heritage  of  Jew  and  Christian  alike." — John  Bull. 

"  It  is  a'capital  specimen  of  Hebrew  scholarship  ;  a  monument  of  learned,  loving, 
li;ht-giving  labour." — Jewish  Herald. 


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  xii. — 228,  cloth,  price  ys.  6d. 

THE  CLASSICAL  POETRY  OF  THE  JAPANESE. 

BY    BASIL    HALL    CHAMBERLAIN, 
Author  of  "  Yeigo  Henkaku  Shiran." 

"  A  very  curious  volume.  The  author  has  manifestly  devoted  much  labour  to  the 
task  of  studying  the  poetical  literature  of  the  Japanese,  and  rendering  characteristic 
specimens  into  English  verse." — Daily  News. 

"  Mr.  Chamberlain's  volume  is,  so  far  as  we  are  aware,  the  first  attempt  which  has 
been  made  to  interpret  the  literature  of  the  Japanese  to  the  Western  world.  It  is  to 
the  classical  poetry  of  Old  Japan  that  we  must  turn  for  indigenous  Japanese  thought, 
and  in  the  volume  before  us  we  have  a  selection  from  that  poetry  rendered  into 
graceful  English  verse." — Tablet. 

"It  is  undoubtedly  one  of  the  best  translations  of  lyric  literature  which  has 
appeared  during  the  close  of  the  last  year." — Celestial  Empire. 

""Mr.  Chamberlain  set  himself  a  difficult  task  when  he  undertook  to  reproduce 
Japanese  poetry  in  an  English  form.  But  he  has  evidently  laboured  con  amore,  and 
his  efforts  are  successful  to  a  degree."— London  and  China  Express. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  xii. — 164,  cloth,  price  IDS.  6d. 

THE  HISTORY  OF  ESARHADDON  (Son  of  Sennacherib), 
KING  OF  ASSYEIA,  B.C.  681-668. 

Translated  from  the  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  upon  Cylinders  and  Tablets  in 
the  British  Museum  Collection ;  together  with  a  Grammatical  Analysis 
of  each  Word,  Explanations  of  the  Ideographs  by  Extracts  from  the 
Bi-Lingual  Syllabaries,  and  List  of  Eponyms,  &c. 

BY  ERNEST  A.  BUDGE,  B.A.,  M.R.A.S., 

Assyrian  Exhibitioner,  Christ's  College,  Cambridge. 

"Students  of  scriptural  archaeology  will  also  appreciate  the  'History  of  Esar- 
haddon.' " — Times. 

"  There  is  much  to  attract  the  scholar  in  this  volume.  It  does  not  pretend  to 
popularise  studies  which  are  yet  in  their  infancy.  Its  primary  object  is  to  translate, 
but  it  does  not  assume  to  be  more  than  tentative,  and  it  offers  both  to  the  professed 
Assyriologist  and  to  the  ordinary  nou-Assyriological  Semitic  scholar  the  means  of 
controlling  its  results." — Academy. 

"Mr.  Budge's  book  is,  of  course,  mainly  addressed  to  Assyrian  scholars  and 
students.  They  are  not,  it  is  to  be  feared,  a  very  numerous  class.  But  the  more 
thanks  are  due  to  him  on  that  account  for  the  way  in  which  he  has  acquitted  himself 
in  his  laborious  task."— Tablet, 

Post  8vo,  pp.  448,  cloth,  price  2is. 

THE    MESNEVI 

(Usually  known  as  THE  MESNEVIYI  SHEEIF,  or  HOLY  MESNEVI) 

OF 
MEYLANA  (OUR  LORD)  JELALU  'D-DIN  MUHAMMED  ER-RUMI. 

Book  the  First. 
Together  with  some  Account  of  the  Life  and  Acts  of  the  Author, 

of  his  Ancestors,  and  of  his  Descendants. 
Illustrated  by  a  Selection  of  Characteristic  Anecdotes,  as  Collected 

by  their  Historian, 
MEVLANA  SHEMSU-'D-DIN  AHMED,  EL  EFLAKI,  EL  'AuiFi. 

Translated,  and  the  Poetry  Versified,  in  English, 
BY   JAMES   W.    REDHOUSE,    M.R.A.S.,   &c. 

"  A  complete  treasury  of  occult  Oriental  lore." — Saturday  Review. 

"This  book  will  be  a  very  valuable  help  to  the  reader  ignorant  of  Persia,  who  is 
desirous  of  obtaining  an  insight  into  a  very  important  department  of  the  literature 
extant  in  that  language." — Tablet. 


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  xvi. —  280,  cloth,  price  6s. 

EASTEEN   PROVERBS  AND  EMBLEMS 

ILLUSTRATING  OLD  TRUTHS. 

BY  REV.  J.  LONG, 
Member  of  the  Bengal  Asiatic  Society,  F.E.G.S. 

"  We  regard  the  book  as  valuable,  and  wish  for  it  a  wide  circulation  and  attentive 
reading-." — Record. 

"  Altogether,  it  is  quite  a  feast  of  good  things."— Globe. 
"  It  is  full  of  interesting  matter."— Antiquary. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  viii. — 270,  cloth,  price  73.  6d. 
INDIAN     POETRY; 

Containing  a  New  Edition  of  the  "Indian  Song  of  Songs,"  from  the  Sanscrit 
of  the  "Gita  Govinda"  of  Jayadeva ;  Two  Books  from  "The  Iliad  of 
India"  (Mahabharata),  " Proverbial  Wisdom  "  from  the  Shlokas  of  the 
Hitopadesa,  and  other  Oriental  Poems. 
BY  EDWIN  AKNOLD,  C.S.L,  Author  of  "The  Light  of  Asia." 

"  In  this  new  volume  of  Messrs.  Trubner's  Oriental  Series,  Mr.  Edwin  Arnold  does 
good  service  by  illustrating,  through  the  medium  of  his  musical  English  melodies, 
the  power  of  Indian  poetry  to  stir  European  emotions.  The  '  Indian  Song  of  Songs  ' 
is  not  unknown  to  scholars.  Mr.  Arnold  will  have  introduced  it  among  popular 
English  poems.  Nothing  could  be  more  graceful  and  delicate  than  the  shades  by 
which  Krishna  is  portrayed  in  the  gradual  process  of  being  weaned  by  the  love  of 

'  Beautiful  Radha,  jasmine-bosomed  Eadha,' 

from  the  allurements  of  the  forest  nymphs,  in  whom  the  five  senses  are  typified." — 
Times. 

"  No  other  English  poet  has  ever  thrown  his  genius  and  his  art  so  thoroughly  into 
the  work  of  translating  Eastern  ideas  as  Mr.  Arnold  has  done  in  his  splendid  para- 
phrases of  language  contained  in  these  mighty  epics."—  Daily  Telegraph. 

"  The  poem  abounds  with  imagery  of  Eastern  luxuriousness  and  sensuousness ;  the 
air  seems  laden  with  the  spicy  odours  of  the  tropics,  and  the  verse  has  a  richness  and 
a  melody  sufficient  to  captivate  the  senses  of  the  dullest." — Standard. 

"  The  translator,  while  producing  a  very  enjoyable  poem,  has  adhered  with  toler- 
able fidelity  to  the  original  text."—  Overland  Mail. 

"We  certainly  wish  Mr.  Arnold  success  in  his  attempt  'to  popularise  Indian 
classics,'  that  being,  as  his  preface  tells  us,  the  goal  towards  which  he  bends  his 
efforts." — Allen's  Indian  Mail. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  xvi. — 296,  cloth,  price  IDS.  6d. 

THE  MIND  OF  MENCIUS ; 

OR,  POLITICAL  ECONOMY  FOUNDED  UPON  MORAL 
PHILOSOPHY. 

A  SYSTEMATIC  DIGEST  OF  THE  DOCTRINES  OF  THE  CHINESE  PHILOSOPHER 
MENCIUS. 

Translated  from  the  Original  Text  and  Classified,  with 
Comments  and  Explanations, 

By  the  REV.  ERNST  FABER,  Rhenish  Mission  Society. 

Translated  from  the  German,  with  Additional  Notes, 
By  the  REV.  A.  B.  HUTCHINSON,  C.M.S.,  Church  Mission,  Hong  Kong. 

"  Mr.  Faber  is  already  well  known  in  the  field  of  Chinese  studies  by  his  digest  of 
the  doctrines  of  Confucius.  The  value  of  this  work  will  be  perceived  when  it  is 
remembered  that  at  no  time  since  relations  commenced  between  China  and  the 
West  has  the  former  been  so  powerful — we  had  almost  said  aggressive — as  now. 
For  those  who  will  give  it  careful  study,  Mr.  Faber's  work  is  one  of  the  inos>t 
valuable  of  the  excellent  scries  to  which  it  belongs." — Nature. 


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  336,  cloth,  price  i6s. 

THE    RELIGIONS  OF    INDIA. 

BY  A.  EARTH. 

Translated  from  the  French  with  the  authority  and  assistance  of  the  Author. 

The  author  has,  at  the  request  of  the  publishers,  considerably  enlarged 
the  work  for  the  translator,  and  has  added  the  literature  of  the  subject  to 
date  ;  the  translation  may,  therefore,  be  looked  upon  as  an  equivalent  of  a 
new  and  improved  edition  of  the  original. 

"  Is  not  only  a  valuable  manual  of  the  religions  of  India,  which  marks  a  distinct 
step  in  the  treatment  of  the  subject,  but  also  a  useful  work  of  reference." — Academy. 

"  This  volume  is  a  reproduction,  with  corrections  and  additions,  of  an  article 
contributed  by  the  learned  author  two  years  ago  to  the  '  Encyclopedic  des  Sciences 
Eeligieuses.'  It  attracted  much  notice  when  it  first  appeared,  and  is  generally 
admitted  to  present  the  best  summary  extant  of  the  vast  subject  with  which  it 
deals."—  Tablet. 

"  This  is  not  only  on  the  whole  the  best  but  the  only  manual  of  the  religions  of 
India,  apart  from  Buddhism,  which  we  have  in  English.  The  present  work  .  .  . 
shows  not  only  great  knowledge  of  the  facts  and  power  of  clear  exposition,  but  also 
great  insight  into  the  inner  history  and  the  deeper  meaning  of  the  great  religion, 
for  it  is  in  reality  only  one,  which  it  proposes  to  describe." — Modern  Review. 

"  The  merit  of  the  work  has  been  emphatically  recognised  by  the  most  authoritative 
Orientalists,  both  in  this  country  and  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  But  probably 
there  are  few  Indianists  (if  we  may  use  the  word)  who  would  not  derive  a  good  deal 
of  information  from  it,  and  especially  from  the  extensive  bibliography  provided  in 
the  notes." — Dublin  Review. 

"  Such  a  sketch  M.  Barth  has  drawn  with  a  master-hand."— Critic  (New  York). 


Post  8vo,  pp.  viii.  — 152,  cloth,  price  6s. 

HINDU   PHILOSOPHY. 
THE  SANKHYA  KARIKA  OF  IS'WARA  KRISHNA. 

AD  Exposition  of  the  System  of  Kapila,  with  an  Appendix  on  the 
Nyaya  and  Vais'eshika  Systems. 

BY  JOHN  DAYIES,  M.A.  (Cantab.),  M.R.A.S. 

The  system  of  Kapila  contains  nearly  all  that  India  has  produced  in  the 
department  of  pure  philosophy. 

"The  lion- Orientalist  .  .  .  finds  in  Mr.  Davies  a. patient  and  learned  guide  who 
leads  him  into  the  intricacies  of  the  philosophy  of  India,  and  supplies  him  with  a  clue, 
that  he  may  not  be  lost  in  them.  In  the  preface  he  states  that  the  system  of 
Kapila  is  the  'earliest  attempt  on  record  to  give  an  answer,  from  reason  alone, 
to  the  mysterious  questions  which  arise  in  every  thoughtful  mind  about  the  origin  of 
the  world,  the  nature  and  relations  of  man  and  his  future  destiny,'  and  in  his  learned 
and  able  notes  he  exhibits  '  the  connection  of  the  Sankhya  system  with  the  philo- 
sophy of  Spinoza,'  and  '  the  connection  of  the  system  of  Kapila  with  that  of  Schopen- 
hauer and  Von  Hartmann.'  " — Foreign  Church  Chronicle. 

"  Mr.  Davies's  volume  on  Hindu  Philosophy  is  an  undoubted  gain  to  all  students 
of  the  development  of  thought.  The  system  of  Kapila,  which  is  here  given  in  a  trans- 
lation from  the  Sankhya  Kfirika,  is  the  only  contribution  of  India  to  pure  philosophy. 
.  .  .  Presents  many  points  of  deep  interest  to  the  student  of  comparative  philo- 
sophy, and  without  Mr.  Davies's  lucid  interpretation  it  would  be  difficult  to  appre- 
ciate these  points  in  any  adequate  manner." — Saturday  Revieio. 

"  We  welcome  Mr.  Davies's  book  as  a  valuable  addition  to  our  philosophical 
library.'1 — Notes  and  Queries. 


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  x. — 130,  cloth,  price  6s. 

A  MANUAL  OF  HINDU  PANTHEISM.    VEDANTASARA. 

Translated,  with  copious  Annotations,  by  MAJOR  G.  A.  JACOB, 
Bombay  Staff  Corps  ;  Inspector  of  Army  Schools. 

The  design  of  this  little  work  is  to  provide  for  missionaries,  and  for 
others  who,  like  them,  have  little  leisure  for  original  research,  an  accurate 
summary  of  the  doctrines  of  the  Vedanta. 

"There  can  be  no  question  that  the  religious  doctrines  most  widely  held  by  the 
people  of  India  are  mainly  Pantheistic.  And  of  Hindu  Pantheism,  at  all  events  in 
its  most  modern  phases,  its  Vedantasara  presents  the  best  summary.  But  then  this 
work  is  a  mere  summary :  a  skeleton,  the  dry  bones  of  which  require  to  be  clothed 
with  skin  and  bones,  and  to  be  animated  by  vital  breath  before  the  ordinary  reader 
will  discern  in  it  a  living  reality.  Major  Jacob,  therefore,  has  wisely  added  to  his 
translation  of  the  Vedaiitasai-a  copious  notes  from  the  writings  of  well-known  Oriental 
scholars,  in  which  he  has,  we  think,  elucidated  all  that  required  elucidation.  So 
that  the  work,  as  here  presented  to  us,  presents  110  difficulties  which  a  very  moderate 
amount  of  application  will  not  overcome."—  Tablet. 

"  The  modest  title  of  Major  Jacob's  work  conveys  but  an  inadequate  idea  of  the 
vast  amount  of  research  embodied  in  his  notes  to  the  text  of  the  Vedantasara.  So 
copious,  indeed,  are  these,  and  so  much  collateral  matter  do  they  bring  to  bear  on 
the  subject,  that  the  diligent  student  will  rise  from  their  perusal  with  a  fairly 
adequate  view  of  Hindu  philosophy  generally.  His  work  ...  is  one  of  the  best  of 
its  kind  that  we  have  seen." — Calcutta  Review. 


Post  8vo,  pp.   xii. — 154,   cloth,  price  73.  6d. 

TSUNI— I  I  GO  AM  : 

THE  SUPREME  BEING  OF  THE  KHOI-KHOI. 

BY  THEOPHILUS  HAHN,  Ph.D., 

Custodian  of  the  Grey  Collection,  Cape  Town  ;  Corresponding  Member 

of  the  Geegr.  Society,  Dresden  ;  Corresponding  Member  of  the 

Anthropological  Society,  Vienna,  &c. ,  &c. 

"The  first  instalment  of  Dr.  Hahn's  labours  will  be  of  interest,  not  at  the  Cape 
only,  but  in  every  University  of  Europe.  It  is,  in  fact,  a  most  valuable  contribution 
to  the  comparative  study  of  religion  and  mythology.  Accounts  of  their  religion  and 
mythology  were  scattered  about  in  various  books  ;  these  have  been  carefully  col- 
lected by  Dr.  Hahn  and  printed  in  his  second  chapter,  enriched  and  improved  by 
what  he  has  been  able  to  collect  himself .  "—Prof.  Max  Miiller  in  the  Nineteenth 
Century. 

"  Dr.  Hahn's  book  is  that  of  a  man  who  is  both  a  philologist  and  believer  in 
philological  methods,  and  a  close  student  of  savage  manners  and  customs." — Satur- 
ddit  Review. 

"  It  is  full  of  good  things." — St.  James's  Gazette. 


In  Four  Volumes.    Post  8vo,  Vol.  I.,  pp.  xii. — 392,  cloth,  price  123.  6d., 

Vol.  II.,  pp.  vi. — 408,  cloth,  price  123.  6d.,  Vol.  III.,  pp.  viii. — 414, 

cloth,  price  123.  6d. 

A  COMPREHENSIVE  COMMENTARY  TO  THE   QURAN. 

TO  WHICH  IS  PREFIXED  SALE'S  PRELIMINARY  DISCOURSE,  WITH 
ADDITIONAL  NOTES  AND  EMENDATIONS. 

Together  with  a  Complete  Index  to  the  Text,  Preliminary 
Discourse,  and  Notes. 

By  Rev.  E.  M.  WHERRY,  M.A.,  Lodiana. 

"  As  Mr.  Wherry's  book  is  intended  for  missionaries  in  India,  it  is  no  doubt  well 
that  they  should  be  prepared  to  meet,  if  they  can,  the  ordinary  arguments  and  inter- 
pretations, and  for  this  purpose  Mr.  Wherry's  additions  will  prove  useful." — Saturday 


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  vi.— 208,  cloth,  price  8s.  6<1. 

THE  BHAGAVAD-GITA. 

Translated,   with  Introduction  and  Notes 

BY  JOHN  DAVIES,  M.A.  (Cantab.) 

"  Let  us  add  that  his  translation  of  the  Bhagavad  Gita  is,  as  we  judge,  the  hest 
that  has  as  yet  appeared  in  English,  and  that  his  Philological  Notes  are  of  quite 
peculiar  value." — Dublin  Review. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  96,  cloth,  price  53. 
THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM. 

Translated  by  E.  H.  WHINFIELD,  M.A., 
Barrister-at-Law,  late  H.M.  Bengal  Civil  Service. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  xxxii. — 336,  cloth,  price  IDS.  6d. 

THE   QUATRAINS    OF    OMAR    KHAYYAM. 

The  Persian  Text,  with  an  English  Yerse  Translation. 
By  E.  H.  WHINFIELD,  late  of  the  Bengal  Civil  Service. 

"  Mr.  Whinfield  has  executed  a  difficult  task  with  considerable  success,  and  his 
version  contains  much  that  will  be  new  to  those  who  only  know  Mr.  Fitzgerald's 
delightful  selection. " — Academy. 

"There  are  several  editions  of  the  Quatrains,  varying  greatly  in  their  readings. 
Mr.  Whinfield  has  used  three  of  these  for  his  excellent  translation.  The  most  pro- 
minent features  in  the  Quatrains  are  their  profound  agnosticism,  combined  with  a 
fatalism  based  more  on  philosophic  than  religious  grounds,  their  Epicureanism  and 
the  spirit  of  universal  tolerance  arid  charity  which  animates  them." — Calcutta  Review. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  xxiv. — 268,  cloth,  price  gs. 

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UPANISHADS  AND 
ANCIENT  INDIAN  METAPHYSICS. 

As  exhibited  in  a  series  of  Articles  contributed  to  the  Calcutta  Review. 

By  ARCHIBALD  EDWARD  GOUGH,  M.A.,  Lincoln  College,  Oxford  ; 
Principal  of  the  Calcutta  Madrasa. 

"  For  practical  purposes  this  is  perhaps  the  most  important  of  the  works  that  have 
thus  far  appeared  in  '  Triibner's  Oriental  Series.'  .  .  .  We  cannot  doubt  that  for  sill 
who  may  take  it  up  the  work  must  be  one  of  profound  interest.'' — Saturday  Meviete. 


In  Two  Volumes.    Vol.  I.,  post  8vo,  pp.  xxiv. — 230,  cloth,  price  ys.  6d. 

A  COMPARATIVE  HISTORY  OF  THE  EGYPTIAN  AND 
MESOPOTAMIAN  RELIGIONS. 

By  DR.  C.  P.   TIELE. 

Vol.  I. — HlSTOKY  OF  THE  EGYPTIAN  RELIGION. 

Translated  from  the  Dutch  with  the  Assistance  of  the  Author. 
By  JAMES  BALLINGAL. 

"  It  places  in  the  hands  of  the  English  readers  a  history  of  Egyptian  Religion 
which  is  very  complete,  which  is  based  on  the  best  materials,  and  which  has  been 
illustrated  by  the  latest  results  of  research.  In  this  volume  there  is  a  great  deal  of 
information,  as  well  as  independent  investigation,  for  the  trustworthiness  of  which 
Dr.  Tiele's  name  is  in  itself  a  guarantee ;  and  the  description  of  the  successive 
religions  under  the  Old  Kingdom,  the  Middle  Kingdom,  and  the  New  Kingdom,  is 
given  in  a  manner  which  is  scholarly  and  minute." — Scotsnum. 


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  xii. — 302,  cloth,  price  8s.  6d. 

YUSUF  AND  ZULAIKHA. 
A  POEM  BY  JAMI. 

Translated  from  the  Persian  into  English  Verse. 
BY  RALPH  T.  H.  GRIFFITH. 

"  Mr.  Griffith,  who  has  done  already  good  service  as  translator  into  verse  from  the 
Sanskrit,  has  done  farther  good  work  in  this  translation  from  the  Persian,  and  he 
has  evidently  shown  not  a  little  skill  in  his  rendering  the  quaint  and  very  oriental 
style  of  his  author  into  our  more  prosaic,  less  figurative,  language.  .  .  .  The  work, 
besides  its  intrinsic  merits,  is  of  importance  as  being  one  of  the  most  popular  and 
famous  poems  of  Persia,  and  that  which  is  read  in  all  the  independent  native  schools 
of  India  where  Persian  is  taught." — Scotsman. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  viii. — 266,  cloth,  price  93. 

LINGUISTIC  ESSAYS. 
BY  CARL  ABEL. 

"All  these  essays  of  Dr.  Abel's  are  so  thoughtful,  so  full  of  happy  illustrations, 
and  so  admirably  put  together,  that  we  hardly  know  to  which  we  should  specially 
turn  to  select  for  our  readers  a  sample  of  his  workmanship." — Tablet. 

"  An  entirely  novel  method  of  dealing  with  philosophical  questions  and  impart  a 
real  human  interest  to  the  otherwise  dry  technicalities  of  the  science." — Standard. 

"  Dr.  Abel  is  an  opponent  from  whom  it  is  pleasant  to  differ,  for  he  writes  with 
enthusiasm  and  temper,  and  his  mastery  over  the  English  language  fits  him  to  be  a 
champion  of  unpopular  doctrines." — Athenceutn. 

"Dr.  Abel  writes  very  good  English,  and  much  of  his  book  will  prove  entertaining 
to  the  general  reader.  It  may  give  some  useful  hints,  and  suggest  some  subjects  for 
profitable  investigation,  even  to  philologists." — Nation  (New  York). 


Post  8vo,  pp.  ix. — 281,  cloth,  price  IDS.  6d. 
THE    SARV  A  -  DARSAN  A  -  SAMGRAHA  ; 

OR,  REVIEW  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  SYSTEMS  OF  HINDU 

PHILOSOPHY. 
BY  MADHAVA  ACHARYA. 

Translated  by  E.  B.  COWELL,  M.  A.,  Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  the  University 
of  Cambridge,  and  A.  E.  GOUGH,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Philosophy 

in  the  Presidency  College,  Calcutta. 

This  work  is  an  interesting  specimen  of  Hindu  critical  ability.  The 
author  successively  passes  in  review  the  sixteen  philosophical  systems 
current  in  the  f  ourteentli  century  in  the  South  of  India  ;  and  he  gives  what 
appears  to  him  to  be  their  most  important  tenets. 

"  The  translation  is  trustworthy  throughout.  A  protracted  sojourn  in  India, 
where  there  is  a  living  tradition,  has  familiarised  tlie  translators  with  Indian 
thought." — Athenceum. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  Ixv. — 368,  cloth,  price  143. 

TIBETAN  TALES  DERIVED  FROM  INDIAN  SOURCES. 

Translated  from  the  Tibetan  of  the  KAH-GYUR. 

BY  F.  ANTON  VON  SCHIEFNER. 
Done  into  English  from  the  German,  with  an  Introduction, 

BY  W.  R.  S.  RALSTON,  M.A. 

"Mr.  Ralston,  whose  name  is  so  familiar  to  all  lovers  of  Russian  folk-lore,  has 
supplied  some  interesting  Western  analogies  and  parallels,  drawn,  for  the  most  part, 
from  Slavonic  sources,  to  the  Eastern  folk-tales,  culled  from  the  Kahgyur,  one  of  the 
divisions  of  the  Tibetan  sacred  books."— Academy. 

"The  translation  .  .  .  could  scarcely  have  fallen  into  better  hands.  An  Introduc- 
tion .  .  .  gives  the  leading  facts  in  the  lives  of  those  scholars  who  have  given  their 
attention  to  gaining  a  knowledge  of  the  Tibetan  literature  and  language." — Calcutta 
Review. 

"  Ought  to  interest  all  who  care  for  the  East,  for  amusing  stories,  or  for  comparative 
folk-lore."— Pall  Mall  Gazette. 


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  xvi. — 224,  cloth,  price  93. 

UDANAVARGA. 

A  COLLECTION  OF  VERSES  FROM  THE  BUDDHIST  CANON. 

Compiled  by  DHARMATRATA. 
BEING  THE  NORTHERN  BUDDHIST  VERSION  OF  DHAMMAPADA. 

Translated  from  the  Tibetan  of  Bkah-hgyur,  with  Notes,  and 
Extracts  from  the  Commentary  of  Pradjnavarman, 

By  W.  WOODVILLE  ROCKHILL. 

"  Mr.  Rockhill's  present  work  is  the  first  from  which  assistance  will  be  gained 
for  a  more  accurate  understanding  of  the  Pali  text ;  it  is,  in  fact,  as  yet  the  only 
term  of  comparison  available  to  us.  The  '  Udanavarga,'  the  Thibetan  version,  was 
originally  discovered  by  the  late  M.  Schiefuer,  who  published  the  Tibetan  text,  and 
had  intended  adding  a  translation,  an  intention  frustrated  by  his  death,  but  which 
has  been  carried  out  by  Mr.  Rockhill.  ...  Mr.  Bockhill  may  be  congratulated  for 
having  well  accomplished  a  difficult  task."— Saturday  Review. 


In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo,  pp.  xxiv. — 566,  cloth,  accompanied  by  a 
Language  Map,  price  253. 

A  SKETCH  OF  THE  MODERN  LANGUAGES  OF  AFRICA. 

BY  ROBERT  NEEDHAM  CUST, 
Barrister-at-Law,  and  late  of  Her  Majesty's  Indian  Civil  Service. 

"  Any  one  at  all  interested  in  African  languages  cannot  do  better  than  get  Mr. 
Cust's  book.  It  is  encyclopaedic  in  its  scope,  and  the  reader  gets  a  start  clear  away 
in  any  particular  language,  and  is  left  free  to  add  to  the  initial  sum  of  knowledge 
there  collected."— Natal  Mercury. 

"  Mr.  Cust  has  contrived  to  produce  a  work  of  value  to  linguistic  students." — 
Nature. 

Post  8vo,  pp.  xii. — 312,  with  Maps  and  Plan,  cloth,  price  143. 

A  HISTORY  OF  BURMA. 

Including  Burma  Proper,   Pegu,  Taungu,  Tenasserim,  and  Arakan.     From 

the  Earliest  Time  to  the  End  of  the  First  War  with  British  India. 

BY  LIEUT.-GEN.  SIR  ARTHUR  P.  PHAYRE,  G.C.M.G.,  K.C.S.L,  and  C.B., 

Membre  Correspondant  de  la  Societe  Academique  Indo-Chinoise 

de  France. 

"Sir  Arthur  Phayre's  contribution  to  Triibner's  Oriental  Series  supplies  a  recog- 
nised want,  and  its  appearance  has  been  looked  forward  to  for  many  years 

General  Phayre  deserves  great  credit  for  the  patience  and  industry  which  has  resulted 
in  this  History  of  Burma." — Saturday  Review. 


Third  Edition.     Post  8vo,  pp.  276,  cloth,  price  ys.  6d. 

RELIGION      IN     CHINA. 

By  JOSEPH  EDKINS,  D.D.,  PEKING. 

Containing  a  Brief  Account  of  the  Three  Religions  of  the  Chinese,  with 
Observations  on  the  Prospects  of  Christian  Conversion  amongst  that 
People. 

"  Dr.  Edkins  has  been  most  careful  in  noting  the  varied  and  often  complex  phases 

of  opinion,  so  as  to  give  an  account  of  considerable  value  of  the  subject." — Scotsman. 

"  As  a  missionary,  it  has  been  part  of  Dr.  Edkins'  duty  to  study  the  existing 

religions  in  China,  and  his  long  residence  in  the  country  has  enabled  him  to  acquire 

an  intimate  knowledge  of  them  as  they  at  present  exist." — Saturday  Review. 

"  Dr.  Edkins'  valuable  work,  of  which  this  is  a  second  and  revised  edition,  has, 
from  the  time  that  it  was  published,  been  the  standard  authority  upon  the  subject 
of  which  it  treats."—  Nonconformist. 

"  Dr.  Edkins  .  .  .  may  now  be  fairly  regarded  as  among  the  first  authorities  on 
Chinese  religion  and  language." — British  Quarterly  Review. 


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


Third  Edition.     Post  8vo,  pp.  xv.-25o,  cloth,  price  ys.  6d. 

OUTLINES  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  RELIGION  TO  THE 
SPREAD  OF  THE  UNIVERSAL  RELIGIONS. 

BY  C.  P.  TIELE, 
Doctor  of  Theology,  Professor  of  the  History  of  Religions  in  the 

University  of  Leyden. 
Translated  from  the  Dutch  by  J.  ESTLIN  CARPENTER,  M.A. 

"  Few  books  of  its  size  contain  the  result  of  so  much  wide  thinking,  able  and  labo- 
rious study,  or  enable  the  reader  to  gain  a  better  bird's-eye  view  of  the  latest  results 
of  investigations  into  the  religious  history  of  nations.  As  Professor  Tiele  modestly 
says,  '  In  this  little  book  are  outlines — pencil  sketches,  I  might  say — nothing  more.' 
But  there  are  some  men  whose  sketches  from  a  thumb-nail  are  of  far  more  worth 
than  an  enormous  canvas  covered  with  the  crude  painting  of  others,  and  it  is  easy  to 
see  that  these  pages,  full  of  information,  these  sentences,  cut  and  perhaps  also  dry, 
short  and  clear,  condense  the  fruits  of  lung  and  thorough  research." — Scotsman. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  X.-274,  cloth,  price  93. 

THE  LIFE  OF  THE  BUDDHA  AND  THE  EARLY 
HISTORY  OF  HIS  ORDER. 

Derived  from  Tibetan  Works  in  the  Bkah-hgyur  and  Bstan-hgyur. 

Followed  by  notices  on  the  Early  History  of  Tibet  and  Khoten. 
Translated  by  W.  W.  ROCKHILL,  Second  Secretary  U. S.  Legation  in  China. 

"The  volume  bears  testimony  to  the  diligence  and  fulness  with  which  the  author 
has  consulted  and  tested  the  ancient  documents  bearing  upon  his  remarkable  sub- 
ject."—  Times. 

"  Will  be  appreciated  by  those  who  devote  themselves  to  those  Buddhist  studies 
which  have  of  late  years  taken  in  these  Western  regions  so  remarkable  a  develop- 
ment. Its  matter  possesses  a  special  interest  as  being  derived  from  ancient  Tibetan 
works,  some  portions  of  which,  here  analysed  and  translated,  have  not  yet  attracted 
the  attention  of  scholars.  The  volume  is  rich  in  ancient  stories  bearing  upon  the 
world's  renovation  and  the  origin  of  castes,  as  recorded  in  these  venerable  autho- 
rities."— Daily  News. 

Third  Edition.     Post  8vo,  pp.  viii.-464,  cloth,  price  163. 

THE    SANKHYA   APHORISMS    OF    KAPILA, 

With  Illustrative  Extracts  from  the  Commentaries. 
Translated  by  J.  R.  BALLANTYNE,  LL.D.,  late  Principal  of  the  Benares 

College. 
Edited  by  FITZEDWARD  HALL. 

"The  work  displays  a  vast  expenditure  of  labour  and  scholarship,  for  which 
students  of  Hindoo  philosophy  have  every  reason  to  be  grateful  to  Dr.  Hall  and  the 
publishers." — Calcutta  lievieic. 


In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo,  pp.  cviii.-242,  and  viii.-syo,  cloth,  price  243. 
Dedicated  by  permission  to  H.R.H.  the  Prince  of  Wales. 

BUDDHIST  RECORDS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD, 

Translated  from  the  Chinese  of  Hiuen  Tsiang  (A.D.  629). 

BY  SAMUEL  BEAL,  B.A., 
(Trin,  Coll.,  Camb.) ;  R.N.  (Retired  Chaplain  and  N.I.)  ;  Professor  of  Chinese, 

University  College,  London  ;  Rector  of  Wark,  Northumberland,  &c. 
An   eminent  Indian  authority  writes  respecting  this  work  : — "  Nothing 
more  can  be  done  in  elucidating  the  History  of  India  until  Mr.  Beal's  trans- 
lation of  the  '  Si-yu-ki '  appears." 

"  It  is  a  strange  freak  of  historical  preservation  that  the  best  account  of  the  con- 
dition of  India  at  that  ancient  period  has  come  down  to  us  in  the  books  of  travel 
written  by  the  Chinese  pilgrims,  of  whom  Hwen  Thsang  is  the  best  known." — Times. 
"  We  are  compelled  at  this  stage  to  close  our  brief  and  inadequate  notice  of  a  book 
for  easy  access  to  which  Orientalists  will  be  deeply  grateful  to  the  able  translator." — 
Lit<  /•('/•//  World. 


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  xlviii.-398,  cloth,  price  i2s. 

THE    ORDINANCES    OF    MANU. 

Translated  from  the  Sanskrit,  with  an  Introduction. 
By  the  late  A.  C.  BURNELL,  Ph.D.,  C.I.E. 

Completed  and  Edited  by  E.  W.  HOPKINS,  Ph.D., 
of  Columbia  College,  N.Y. 

"  This  work  is  full  of  interest ;  while  for  the  student  of  sociology  and  the  science 
of  religion  it  is  full  of  importance.  It  is  a  great  boon  to  get  so  notable  a  work  in  so 
accessible  a  form,  admirably  edited,  and  competently  translated." — Scotsman. 

tl  Few  men  were  more  competent  than  Burn  ell  to  give  us  a  really  good  translation 
of  this  well-known  law  book,  first  rendered  into  English  by  Sir  William  Jones. 
Burnell  was  not  only  an  independent  Sanskrit  scholar,  but  an  experienced  lawyer, 
and  he  joined  to  these  two  important  qualifications  the  rare  faculty  of  being  able  to 
express  his  thoughts  in  clear  and  trenchant  English.  .  .  .  We  ought  to  feel  very 
grateful  to  Dr.  Hopkins  for  having  given  us  all  that  could  be  published  of  the  trans- 
lation left  by  Burnell."— F.  MAX  MULLER  in  the  Academy. 


Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.-234,  cloth,  price  gs. 

THE  LIFE  AND  WORKS  OF  ALEXANDER 
CSOMA  DE  KOROS, 

Between  1819  and  1842.  With  a  Short  Notice  of  all  his  Published  and  Un- 
published Works  and  Essays.  From  Original  and  for  most  part  Un- 
published Documents. 

By  THEODORE  DUKA,  M.D.,  F.R.C.S.  (Eng.),  Surgeon-Major 
H.M.'s  Bengal  Medical  Service,  Retired,  &c. 

"Not  too  soon  have  Messrs.  Triibner  added  to  their  valuable  Oriental  Series  a 
history  of  the  life  and  works  of  one  of  the  most  gifted  and  devoted  of  Oriental 
students,  Alexander  Csoma  de  Koros.  It  is  forty-three  years  since  his  death,  and 
though  an  account  of  his  career  was  demanded  soon  after  his  decease,  it  has  only 
now  appeared  in  the  important  memoir  of  his  compatriot,  Dr.  Duka. "— Bookseller. 


In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo,  pp.  and  ,  cloth,  price 

MISCELLANEOUS    ESSAYS 

ON  SUBJECTS  CONNECTED   WITH  THE 

MALAY  PENINSULA  AND  THE  INDIAN  ARCHIPELAGO. 

Reprinted  from  "Dalrymple's  Oriental  Repertory,"  "Asiatick  Researches," 
and  the  "Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal." 


Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.-72,  cloth,  price  53. 

THE    SATAKAS    OF    BHARTRIHARI. 

Translated  from  the  Sanskrit 
By  the  REV.  B.  HALE  WORTHAM,  M.R.A.S., 

Rector  of  Eggesford,  North  Devon. 

Bhartrihari  is  believed  to  have  lived  in  the  first  or  second  century  A.D. 
He  was  a  celebrated  poet  and  grammarian,  and  is  best  known  by  his  three 
"Satakas,  or  Centuries  of  Verses:"  i.  "The  Sringara  Sataka."  2.  "The 
NitiSataka."  3.  "  Vairagy a  Sataka." 


LONDON  :  TRUBNER  &  CO.,  57  AND  59  LUDGATE  HILL. 

tooo — 2/1/86 — M. 


The  following  Catalogue  is  only  inserted  in  order  to 
make  the  volume  of  sufficient  thickness,  so  that  it  can 
be  lettered  on  the  back  uniformly  with  the  other  volumes 
of  the  "  Oriental  Series." 


A 

CATALOGUE  OF  IMPOETANT  WORKS, 

PUBLISHED   BY 

TZRtJBISriElR,     <&5     OO- 

57  AND  59  LUDGATE  HILL. 


ABEL.— LINGUISTIC  ESSAYS.  By  Carl  Abel.  CONTENTS  :  Language  as  the  Expres- 
sion of  National  Modes  of  Thought — The  Conception  of  Love  in  some  Ancient  and 
Modern  Languages— The  English  Verbs  of  Command — The  Discrimination  of 
Synonyms— Philological  Methods — The  Connection  between  Dictionary  and  Gram- 
mar—The Possibility  of  a  Common  Literary  Language  for  the  Slav  Nations — 
Coptic  Intensification — The  Origin  of  Language — The  Order  and  Position  of  Words 
in  the  Latin  Sentence.  Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  282,  cloth.  1882.  9s. 

ABEL. — SLAVIC  AND  LATIN.  Ilchester  Lectures  on  Comparative  Lexicography. 
Delivered  at  the  Taylor  Institution,  Oxford.  By  Carl  Abel,  Ph.D.  Post  8vo, 
pp.  vi.-124,  cloth.  1883.  5s. 

ABRAHAMS. — A  MANUAL  OF  SCRIPTURE  HISTORY  FOR  USE  IN  JEWISH  SCHOOLS  AND 
FAMILIES.  By  L.  B.  Abrahams,  B.A.,  Principal  Assistant  Master,  Jews'  Free 
School.  "With  Map  and  Appendices.  Third  Edition.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and 
152,  cloth.  1883.  Is.  6d. 

AGASSIZ.—  AN  ESSAY  ON  CLASSIFICATION.  By  Louis  Agassiz.  8vo,  pp.  vii.  and 
381,  cloth.  1859.  12s. 

AHLWARDT.— THE  DIVANS  OF  THE  Six  ANCIENT  ARABIC  POETS,  ENNABIGA,  'ANTARA, 
THARAFA,  ZUHAIR,  'ALQUAMA,  and  IMRUULQUAIS  ;  chiefly  according  to  the  MSS. 
of  Paris,  Gotha,  and  Leyden,  and  the  Collection  of  their  Fragments,  with  a 
List  of  the  various  Readings  of  the  Text.  Edited  by  W.  Ahlwardt,  Professor 
of  Oriental  Languages  at  the  University  of  Greifswald.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  xxx.  and 
340,  sewed.  1870.  12s. 

AHN.  —PRACTICAL  GRAMMAR  OF  THE  GERMAN  LANGUAGE.  By  Dr.  F.  Ahn.  A  New 
Edition.  By  Dr.  Dawson  Turner,  and  Prof.  F.  L.  Weiumann.  Crown  8vo,  pp. 
cxii.  and  430,  cloth.  1878.  3s.  6d. 

AHN. — NEW,  PRACTICAL,  AND  EASY  METHOD  OF  LEARNING  THE  GERMAN  LAHGUAGE.  By 
Dr.  F.  Ahn.  First  and  Second  Course.  Bound  in  1  vol.  12mo,  pp.  86  and  120, 
cloth.  1866.  3s. 

AHN.— KEY  to  Ditto.   12mo,  pp.  40,  sewed.     8d. 

AHN. — MANUAL  OF  GERMAN  AND  ENGLISH  CONVERSATIONS,  or  Vade  Mecum  for  Eng- 
lish Travellers.  12mo,  pp.  x.  and  137,  cloth.  1875.  Is.  6d. 


2  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

AHN.— NEW,  PRACTICAL,  AND  EASY  METHOD  OP  LEARNING  THE  FRENCH  LANGUAGE, 
By  Dr.  F.  Aim.  First  Course  and  Second  Course.  12mo,  cloth.  Each  Is.  6d.  The 
Two  Courses  in  1  vol.  12mo,  pp.  114  and  170,  cloth.  1865.  3s. 

AHN.— NEW,  PRACTICAL,  AND  EAST  METHOD  OP  LEARNING  THE  FRENCH  LANGUAGE. 
Third  Course,  containing  a  French  Header,  with  Notes  and  Vocabulary.  By  H. 
W.  Ehrlich.  12mo,  pp.  viii.  and  125,  cloth.  1866.  Is.  6d. 

AHN.— MANUAL  OP  FRENCH  AND  ENGLISH  CONVERSATIONS,  FOR  THE  USE  OP  SCHOOLS 
AND  TRAVELLERS.  By  Dr.  F.  Ahn.  12mo,  pp.  viii.  and  200,  cloth.  1862.  2s.  6d. 

AHN.— NEW,  PRACTICAL,  AND  EASY  METHOD  OP  LEARNING  THE  ITALIAN  LANGUAGE, 
By  Dr.  F.  Ahn.  First  and  Second  Course.  12mo,  pp.  198,  cloth.  1872.  3s.  6d. 

AHN. — NEW,  PRACTICAL,  AND  EASY  METHOD  OP  LEARNING  THE  DUTCH  LANGUAGE, 
being  a  complete  Grammar,  with  Selections.  By  Dr.  F.  Ahn.  12mo,  pp.  viii. 
and  166,  cloth.  1862.  3s.  6d. 

AHN.— AHN'S  COURSE.  Latin  Grammar  for  Beginners.  By  W.  Ihne,  Ph.D.  12mo, 
pp.  vi.  and  184,  cloth.  1864.  3s. 

ALABASTER.— THE  WHEEL  OP  THE  LAW  :  Buddhism  illustrated  from  Siamese 
Sources  by  the  Modern  Buddhist,  a  Life  of  Buddha,  and  an  Account  of  the  Phra 
Bat.  By  Henry  Alabaster,  Esq.,  Interpreter  of  Her  Majesty's  Consulate-General 
in  Siam.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  Iviii.  and  324,  cloth.  1871.  14s. 

ALL— THE  PROPOSED  POLITICAL,  LEGAL,  AND  SOCIAL  REFORMS  IN  THE  OTTOMAN 
EMPIRE  AND  OTHER  MOHAMMEDAN  STATES.  By  Moulavi  Cheragh  Ali,  H.H.  the 
Nizam's  Civil  Service.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  liv.  and  184,  cloth.  1883.  8s. 

ALLAN-FRASER.— CHRISTIANITY  AND  CHURCHISM.  By  Patrick  Allan-Fraser. 
Second  (revised  and  enlarged)  Edition.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  52,  cloth.  1884.  Is. 

ALLEN. — THE  COLOUR  SENSE.  See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical  Library, 
Vol.  X. 

ALLIBONE.— A  CRITICAL  DICTIONARY  OF  ENGLISH  LITERATURE  AND  BRITISH  AND 
AMERICAN  AUTHORS  (LIVING  AND  DECEASED).  From  the  Earliest  Accounts  to  the 
latter  half  of  the  19th  century.  Containing  over  46,000  Articles  (Authors),  with 
40  Indexes  of  subjects.  By  S.  A.  Allibone.  In  3  vols.  royal  8vo,  cloth.  £5,  8s. 

ALTHAUS.— THE  SPAS  OP  EUROPE.  By  Julius  Althaus,  M.D.  8vo,  pp.  516,  cloth. 
1862.  7s.  6d. 

AMATEUR  MECHANIC'S  WORKSHOP  (THE).  A  Treatise  containing  Plain  and  Concise 
Directions  for  the  Manipulation  of  Wood  and  Metals  ;  including  Casting,  Forg- 
ing, Brazing,  Soldering,  and  Carpentry.  By  the  Author  of  "The  Lathe  and  its 
Uses."  Sixth  Edition.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  vi.  and  148,  with  Two  Full-Page  Illus- 
trations, on  toned  paper  and  numerous  Woodcuts,  cloth.  1880.  6s. 

AMATEUR  MECHANICAL  SOCIETY.— JOURNAL  OF  THE  AMATEUR  MECHANICAL 
SOCIETY.  8vo.  Vol.  i.  pp.  344  cloth.  1871-72.  12s.  Vol.  ii.  pp.  vi.  and  290, 
cloth.  1873-77.  12s.  Vol.  iii.  pp.  iv.  and  246,  cloth.  1878-79.  12s.  6d. 

AMERICAN  ALMANAC  AND  TREASURY  OF  FACTS,  STATISTICAL,  FINANCIAL,  AND 
POLITICAL.  Edited  by  Ainsworth  K.  Spofford,  Librarian  of  Congress.  Crown 
8vo,  cloth.  Published  yearly.  1878-1884.  7s.  6d.  each. 

AMERY.—  NOTES  ON  FORESTRY.  By  C.  F.  Amery,  Deputy  Conservator  N.,W.  Pro- 
vinces, India.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  120,  cloth.  1875.  5s, 

AMBERLEY.— AN  ANALYSIS  OF  RELIGIOUS  BELIEF.  By  Viscount  Amberley.  2  vols. 
demy  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  496  and  512,  cloth.  1876.  30s. 

AMONGST  MACHINES.  A  Description  of  Various  Mechanical  Appliances  used  in 
the  Manufacture  of  Wood,  Metal,  and  other  Substances.  A  Book  for  Boys, 
copiously  Illustrated.  By  the  Author  of  "The  Young  Mechanic."  Second 
Edition.  Imperial  16mo,  pp.  viii.  and  336,  cloth.  1878.  7s.  6d. 


Published  ly  Trubner  &  Co.  3 

ANDERSON.— PRACTICAL  MERCANTILE  CORRESPONDENCE.  A  Collection  of  Modern 
Letters  of  Business,  with  Notes,  Critical  and  Explanatory,  and  an  Appendix, 
containing  a  Dictionary  of  Commercial  Technicalities,  pro  forma  Invoices,  Ac- 
count Sales,  Bills  of  Lading,  and  Bills  of  Exchange  ;  also  an  Explanation  of  the 
German  Chain  Rule.  24th  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged.  By  "William  Anderson. 
12mo,  pp.  288,  cloth.  5s. 

ANDERSON  and  TUGMAN. — MERCANTILE  CORRESPONDENCE,  containing  a  Collection 
of  Commercial  Letters  in  Portuguese  and  English,  with  their  translation  on  opposite 
pages,  for  the  use  of  Business  Men  and  of  Students  in  either  of  the  Languages,  treat- 
ing in  modern  style  of  the  system  of  Business  in  the  principal  Commercial  Cities 
of  the  World.  Accompanied  by  pro  forma  Accounts,  Sales,  Invoices,  Bills  of 
Lading,  Drafts,  &c.  With  an  Introduction  and  copious  Notes.  By  William 
Anderson  and  James  E.  Tugman.  12mo,  pp.  xi.  and  193,  cloth.  1867.  6s. 

APEL. — PROSE  SPECIMENS  FOR  TRANSLATION  INTO  Q-ERMAN,  with  copious  Vocabularies 
and  Explanations.  By  H.  Apel.  12mo,  pp.  viii.  and  246,  cloth.  1862.  4s.  6d. 

APPLETON  (Dr.)— LIFE  AND  LITERARY  RELICS.  See  English  and  Foreign  Philoso- 
phical Library,  Vol.  XIII. 

ARAGO. — LES  AEISTOCRATIES.  A  Comedy  in  Verse.  By  Etienne  Arago.  Edited, 
with  English  Notes  and  Notice  on  Etienne  Arago,  by  the  Rev.  E.  P.  H.  Brette,  B.  D. , 
Head  Master  of  the  French  School,  Christ's  Hospital,  Examiner  in  the  University 
of  London.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  244,  cloth.  1868.  4s. 

ARMITAGE. — LECTURES  ON  PAINTING  :  Delivered  to  the  Students  of  the  Royal 
Academy.  By  Edward  Armitage,  R.A.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  256,  with  29  Illustra- 
tions, cloth.  1883.  7s.  6d. 

ARNOLD.— INDIAN  IDYLLS.  From  the  Sanskrit  of  the  Mahabharata.  By  Edwin 
Arnold,  C.S.I.,  &c.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  282,  cloth.  1883.  7s.  6d. 

ARNOLD. — PEARLS  OF  THE  FAITH  ;  or,  Islam's  Rosary  :  being  the  Ninety-nine  beau- 
tiful names  of  Allah.  With  Comments  in  Verse  from  various  Oriental  sources 
as  made  by  an  Indian  Mussulman.  By  Edwin  Arnold,  C.S.I.,  &c.  Third 
Edition.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  320,  cloth.  1884.  7s.  6d. 

ARNOLD. — THE  LIGHT  OF  ASIA  ;  or,  THE  GREAT  RENUNCIATION  (Mahabhinish- 
kramana).  Being  the  Life  and  Teaching  of  Gautama,  Prince  of  India,  and  Founder 
of  Buddhism  (as  told  in  verse  by  an  Indian  Buddhist).  By  Edwin  Arnold, 
M.A.,  &c.  Twenty-fifth  Edition.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  240,  limp  parchment. 
1885.  3s.  6d.  Library  Edition.  1883.  7s.  6d.  Illustrated  Edition.  Small  4to, 
pp.  xx.-196,  cloth.  1884.  21s. 

ARNOLD. — THE  SECRET  OF  DEATH  :  Being  a  Version,  in  a  popular  and  novel  form, 
of  the  Katha  Upanishad,  from  the  Sanskrit.  With  some  Collected  Poems.  By 
Edwin  Arnold,  M.A.,  &c.  Third  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  pp.  viii.-406,  cloth. 
1885.  7s.  6d. 

ARNOLD. — THE  SONG  CELESTIAL  ;  or,  BHAGAV AD-GIT!  (from  the  Mahabharata). 
Being  a  Discourse  between  Arjuna,  Prince  of  India,  and  the  Supreme  Being  under 
the  form  of  Krishna.  Translated  from  the  Sanskrit  Text.  By  Edwin  Arnold, 
M.A.  Second  Edition,  crown  8vo,  pp.  192,  cloth.  1885.  5s. 

ARNOLD. — THE  ILIAD  AND  ODYSSEY  OP  INDIA.  By  Edwin  Arnold,  M.A.,  F.R.G.S., 
&c. ,  &c.  Fcap,  8vo,  pp.  24,  sewed.  Is. 

ARNOLD. — A  SIMPLE  TRANSLITERAL  GRAMMAR  OF  THE  TURKISH  LANGUAGE. 
Compiled  from  Various  Sources.  With  Dialogues  and  Vocabulary.  By  Edwin 
Arnold,  M.A.,  C.S.I.,  F.R.G.S.  Post  8vo,  pp.  80,  cloth.  1877.  2s.  6d. 

ARNOLD.— INDIAN  POETRY.    See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 

ARTHUR. — THE  COPARCENERS  :  Being  the  Adventures  of  two  Heiresses.  By  F. 
Arthur.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  iv.-312,  cloth.  1885.  10s.  6d. 

ARTOM.— SERMONS.  By  the  Rev.  B.  Artom,  Chief  Rabbi  of  the  Spanish  and  Por- 
tugiiese  Congregations  of  England.  First  Series.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo, 
pp.  viii.  and  314,  cloth.  1876.  6s. 


4  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

ASIATIC  SOCIETY  OF  BENGAL.     List  of  Publications  on  application. 

ASIATIC  SOCIETY. — JOURNAL  OP  THE  ROYAL  ASIATIC  SOCIETY  OF  GREAT  BRITAIN 

AND  IRELAND,  from  the  Commencement  to  1863.    First  Series,  complete  in  20  Yols. 

8vo,  -with  many  Plates.     £10,  or  in  parts  from  4s.  to  6s.  each. 
ASIATIC  SOCIETY.— JOURNAL  or  THE  ROYAL  ASIATIC  SOCIETY  OP  GREAT  BRITAIN 

AND  IRELAND.     New  Series.     8vo.     Stitched  in  wrapper.    1864-84. 

Vol.  I.,  2  Parts,  pp.  iv.  and  490,  16s.— Vol.  II.,  2  Parts,  pp.  522,  16s.— Vol.  III.,  2  Parts, 
pp.  516,  with  Photograph,  22s.— Vol.  IV.,  2  Parti  pp.  521,  16s.— Vol.  V.,  2  Parts,  pp.  463,  with 
10  full-page  and  folding  Plates,  18s.  6d.— Vol.  VI.,  Part  1,  pp.  212,  with  2  Plates  and  a  Map,  8s. 
—Vol.  VI.  Part  2,  pp.  272,  with  Plate  and  Map,  8s.— Vol.  VII.,  Part  1,  pp.  194,  with  a  Plate, 
8s.— Vol.  VII.,  Part  2,  pp.  204,  with  7  Plates  and  a  Map,  8s.— Vol.  VIII.,  Part  1,  pp.  156,  with 
3  Plates  and  a  Plan,  8s.— Vol.  VIII.,  Part  2,  pp.  152,  8s.— Vol.  IX.,  Part  1,  pp.  154,  with  a 
Plate,  8s.— Vol.  IX.,  Part  2,  pp.  292,  with  3  Plates,  10s.  6d.— Vol.  X.,  Part  1,  pp.  156,  with  2 

"  '    ~    ~     '  "    jp.  204,  8s.— Vol.  XI., 
A.  XI.,  Part  3,  pp.  250, 
:t  2,  pp.  182,  with  2  Plates  and  Map,  6s.— 
Vol.  XII.,  Part  3,  pp.  100,  4s.— Vol.  XII.,  Part  4,  pp.  x.,  152.,  cxx.,  16,  8s.— Vol.  XIII.,  Part  1, 


Plate,  8s.— Vol.  IX.,  Part  2,  pp.  292,  with  3  Plates,  10s.  6d.— Vol.  A.,  Jf 
Plates  and  a  Map,  8s.— Vol.  X.,  Part  2,  pp.  146,  6s.— Vol.  X.,  Part  3,  pi 
Part  1,  pp.  128,  5s.— Vol.  XL,  Part  2,  pp.  158,  with  2  Plates,  7s.  6d.— Vol. 
8s.— Tol.  XII.,  Part  1,  pp.  152,  5s.— Vol.  XII.,  Part  2,  pp.  182,  with  2  P 

Vol.  XII  ,  Part  3,  pp.  100,  4s.— Vol.  XII.,  Part  4,  pp.  x.,  152.,  cxx.,  16,  8s.—  ,„*.  ^^., -, 

pp.  120,  5s.— Vol.  XIII.,  Part  2,  pp.  170,  with  a  Map,  8s.— Vol.  XIII.,  Part  3,  pp.  178,  with  a 
Table,  7s.  6d.— Vol.  XIII.,  Part  4,  pp.  282,  with  a  Plate  and  Table,  10s.  6d.— Vol.  XIV.,  Part  1, 
pp.  124,  with  a  Table  and  2  Plates,  5s.— Vol.  XIV.,  Part  2,  pp.  164,  with  1  Table,  7s.  6d.— Vol. 
XIV.,  Part  3,  pp.  206,  with  6  Plates,  8s.— Vol.  XIV.,  Part  4,  pp.  492,  with  1  Plate,  14s.— Vol. 
XV.,  Part  1,  pp.  136,  6s. ;  Part  2,  pp.  158,  with  3  Tables,  5s.  :  Part  3,  pp.  192,  6s.  ;  Part  4,  pp. 
140,  5s.— Vol.  XVI.,  Part  1,  pp.  138,  with  2  Plates,  7s.  Part  2,  pp.  184,  with  1  Plate,  9s. 
Part  3,  July  1884,  pp.  74-clx.,  10s.  6d.  Part  4,  pp.  132,  8s.— Vol.  XVII.,  Part  1,  pp.  144,  with 
6  Plates,  10s.  6d.  Part  2,  pp.  194,  with  a  Map,  9s. 
ASPLET.— THE  COMPLETE  FRENCH  COURSE.  Part  II.  Containing  all  the  Rule's  of 

French  Syntax,  &c.,  &c.     By  Georges  C.  Asplet,  French  Master,  Frome.     Fcap. 

STO,  pp.  xx.  and  276,  cloth.     1880.     2s.  6d. 
ASTON.— A  Short  Grammar  of  the  Japanese  Spoken  Language.     By  W.  G.  Aston, 

M.A.     Third  Edition.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  96,  cloth.     1873.     12s. 
ASTON.— A  GRAMMAR  OF  THE  JAPANESE  WRITTEN  LANGUAGE.    By  W.  G.  Aston, 

M.A.,  Assistant  Japanese  Secretary  H.B.M.'s  Legation,  Yedo,  Japan.     Second 

Edition.    8vo,  pp.  306,  cloth.     1877.     28s. 
ASTONISHED  AT  AMERICA.    BEING  CURSORY  DEDUCTIONS,  &c.,  &c.    By  Zigzag. 

Fcap.  Svo,  pp.  xvi.-108,  boards.     1880.     Is. 
AUCTORES  SANSCRITI. 

Vol.  I.  THE  jAiMiNiYA-NYAYA-MiLi-ViSTARA.  Edited  for  the  Sanskrit  Text 
Society,  under  the  supervision  of  Theodor  Goldstiicker.  Large  4to,  pp.  582, 
cloth.  £3,  13s.  6d. 

Vol.  II.  THE  INSTITUTES  OF  GAUTAMA.  Edited,  with  an  Index  of  "Words,  by  A. 
F.  Stenzler,  Ph.D.,  Prof,  of  Oriental  Languages  in  the  University  of  Breslau. 
Svo,  pp.  iv.  and  78,  cloth.  1876.  4s.  6d.  Stitched,  3s.  6d. 

Vol.  III.  VAITANA  SUTRA  :  THE  RITUAL  OF  THE  ATHARVA  VEDA.  Edited,  with 
Critical  Notes  and  Indices,  by  Dr.  R.  Garbe.  Svo,  pp.  viii.  and  120,  sewed. 
1878.  5s. 

Vols.  IV.  and  V.— VARDH  AM  ANA'S  GANARATNAMAHODADHI,  with  the  Author's 

Commentary.     Edited,  with  Critical  Notes  and  Indices,  by  Julius  Eggeling, 

Ph.D.      Svo.     Part  I.,  pp.  xii.  and  240,  wrapper.    1879.    6s.    Part  II.,  pp.  240, 

wrapper.    1881.    6s. 

AUGIER.— DIANE.     A  Drama  in  Verse.     By  Emile  Augier.     Edited  with  English 

Notes  and  Notice  on  Augier.   By  T.  Karcher,  LL.  B. ,  of  the  Royal  Military  Academy 

and  the  University  of  London.     12mo,  pp.  xiii.  and  146,  cloth.     1867.  2s.  6d. 
AUSTIN.— A  PRACTICAL  TREATISE  on  the  Preparation,  Combination,  and  Applica- 
tion of  Calcareous  and  Hydraulic  Limes  and  Cements.     To  which  is  added  many 

useful  Recipes  for  vatious  Scientific,  Mercantile,  and  Domestic  Purposes.     By 

James  G.  Austin,  Architect.     12mo,  pp.  192,  cloth.    1862.     5s. 
AUSTRALIA.— The  publications  of  the  various  Australian  Government  Lists  on 

application. 
AUSTRALIA.— THE  YEAR  BOOK  OF  AUSTRALIA  for  1885.    Published  under  the 

auspices  of  the  Governments  of  the  Australian  Colonies.     Demy  Svo,  pp.  774 ; 

witla  6  Large  Maps ;  boards.    5s. 


Published  by  Trubner  &  Co.  5 

AXON. — THE  MECHANIC'S  FRIEND.  A  Collection  of  Receipts  and  Practical  Sug- 
gestions relating  to  Aquaria,  Bronzing,  Cements,  Drawing,  Dyes,  Electricity, 
Gilding,  Glass- working,  &c.  Numerous  Woodcuts.  Edited  by  W.  E.  A.  Axon, 
M.R.S.L.,  F.S.S.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  339.  cloth.  1875.  4s.  6d. 

BABA. — An  Elementary  Grammar  of  the  Japanese  Language,  with  Easy  Progressive 
Exercises.  By  Tatui  Baba.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xiv.  and  92,  cloth.  1873.  5s. 

BACON. — THE  LIFE  AND  TIMES  OF  FRANCIS  BACON.  Extracted  from  the  Edition  of 
his  Occasional  Writings  by  James  Spedding.  2  vols.  post  8vo,  pp.  xx. ,  710,  and 
xiv.,  708,  cloth.  1878.  21s. 

BADEN-POWELL. — PROTECTION  AND  BAD  TIMES,  with  Special  Reference  to  the 
Political  Economy  of  English  Colonisation.  By  George  Baden-Powell,  M.A., 
F.R.  A.S.,  F.S.S.,  Author  of  "New  Homes  for  the  Old  Country,"  &c.,  &c.  8vo, 
pp.  xii. -376,  cloth.  1879.  6s.  6d. 

BADER. — THE  NATURAL  AND  MORBID  CHANGES  OP  THE  HUMAN  EYE,  AND  THEIR 
TREATMENT.  By  C.  Bader.  Medium  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  506,  cloth.  1868.  16s. 

BADER. — PLATES  ILLUSTRATING  THE  NATURAL  AND  MORBID  CHANGES  OF  THE  HUMAN 
EYE.  By  C.  Bader.  Six  chromo-lithographic  Plates,  each  containing  the  figures 
of  six  Eyes,  and  four  lithographed  Plates,  with  figures  of  Instruments.  With  an 
Explanatory  Text  of  32  pages.  Medium  8vo,  in  a  portfolio.  21s.  Price  for  Text 
and  Atlas  taken  together,  £1,  12s. 

BADLEY. — INDIAN  MISSIONARY  RECORD  AND  MEMORIAL  VOLUME.  By  the  Rev.  B. 
H.  Badley,  of  the  American  Methodist  Mission.  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  280,  cloth. 
1876.  10s.  6d. 

BALFOUR.— WAIFS  AND  STRAYS  FROM  THE  FAR  EAST;  being  a  Series  of  Disconnected 
Essays  on  Matters  relating  to  China.  By  Frederick  Henry  Balfour.  Demy  8vo, 
pp.  224,  cloth.  1876.  10s.  6d. 

BALFOUR. — THE  DIVINE  CLASSIC  OF  NAN-HUA  ;  being  the  Works  of  Chuang  Tsze, 
Taoist  Philosopher.  With  an  Excursus,  and  Copious  Annotations  in  English  and 
Chinese.  By  F.  H.  Balfour.  8vo,  pp.  xlviii.  and  426,  cloth.  1881.  14s. 

BALFOUR.— TAOIST  TEXTS,  Ethical,  Political,  and  Speculative.  By  F.  H.  BALFOUR, 
Editor  of  the  North-China  Herald.  Imp.  8vo,  pp.  vi.-118,  cloth.  10s.  6d. 

BALL.— THE  DIAMONDS,  COAL,  AND  GOLD  OF  INDIA;  their  Mode  of  Occurrence  and 
Distribution.  By  V.  Ball,  M.A.,  F.G.S.,  of  the  Geological  Survey  of  India. 
Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  136,  cloth.  1881.  5s. 

BALL. — A  MANUAL  OF  THE  GEOLOGY  OF  INDIA.  Part  III.  Economic  Geology.  By 
V.  Ball,  M.A.,  F.G.S.  Royal  8vo,  pp.  xx.  and  640,  with  6  Maps  and  10  Plates, 
cloth.  1881.  10s. 

BALLAD  SOCIETY — Subscriptions,  small  paper,  one  guinea;  large  paper,  two  guineas 
per  annum.  List  of  publications  on  application. 

BALLANTYNE. — ELEMENTS  OF  HINDI  AND  BRAJ  BHAKHA  GRAMMAR.  Compiled* for 
the  use  of  the  East  India  College  at  Haileybury.  By  James  R.  Ballantyne.  Second 
Edition.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  38,  cloth.  1868.  5s. 

BALLANTYNE.— FIRST  LESSONS  IN  SANSKRIT  GRAMMAR;  together  with  an  Introduc- 
tion to  the  Hitopadesa.  Fourth  Edition.  By  James  R.  Ballantyne,  LL.D.,  Libra- 
rian of  the  India  Office.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  110,  cloth.  1884.  3s.  6d. 

BALLANTYNE.— THE  SANKHYA  APHORISMS  OF  KAPILA.  See  Trubner 's  Oriental 
Series. 

BARANOWSKI.— VADE  MECUM  DE  LA  LANGUE  FRANQAISE,  redige  d'apres  les  Dic- 
tionnaires  classiques  avec  les  Exemples  de  Bonnes  Locutions  que  donne  I'Academie 
Franchise,  on  qu'on  trouve  dans  les  ouvrages  des  plus  celebres  auteurs.  Par  J.  J. 
Baranowski,  avec  1'approbation  de  M.  E.  Littre",  Senateur,  &c.  Second  Edition. 
32mo,  pp.  224.  1883.  Cloth,  2s.  6d. 

BARANOWSKI.— ANGLO-POLISH  LEXICON.  By  J.  J.  Baranowski,  formerly  Under- 
secretary to  the  Bank  of  Poland,  in  Warsaw.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  492,  cloth. 
1883.  6s. 


6  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

BARANOWSKL— SLOWNIK  POLSKO-ANGIELSKI.  (Polish-English  Lexicon.)  By  »Tt 
J.  Baranowski.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  iv.-402,  cloth.  1884.  6s.  6d. 

BARENTS'  RELICS.—  Eecovered  in  the  summer  of  1876  by  Charles  L.  W.  Gardiner, 
Esq.,  and  presented  to  the  Dutch  Government.  Described  and  explained  by  J. 
K.  J.  de  Jonge,  Deputy  Royal  Architect  at  the  Hague.  Published  by  command 
of  His  Excellency,  W.  F.  Van  F.R.P.  Taelman  Kip,  Minister  of  Marine.  Trans- 
lated, with  a  Preface,  by  S.  R.  Van  Campen.  With  a  Map,  Illustrations,  and  a 
fac-simile  of  the  Scroll.  8vo,  pp.  70,  cloth.  1877.  5s. 

BARRIERE  and  CAPENDU.— LES  FAUX  BONSHOMMES,  a  Comedy.  By  Theodore 
Barriere  and  Ernest  Capendu.  Edited,  with  English  Notes  and  Notice  on  Bar- 
riere, by  Professor  Ch.  Cassal,  LL.D.,  of  University  College.  London.  12mo,  pp. 
xvi.  and  304,  cloth.  1868.  4s. 

EARTH.— THE  RELIGIONS  OF  INDIA.    See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 

BARTLETT.— DICTIONARY  OP  AMERICANISMS.  A  Glossary  of  Words  and  Phrases 
colloquially  used  in  the  United  States.  By  John  Russell  Bartlett.  Fourth 
Edition,  considerably  enlarged  and  improved.  8vo,  pp.  xlvi.  and  814,  cloth. 
1877.  20s. 

BATTYE.— WHAT  is  VITAL  FORCE  ?  or,  a  Short  and  Comprehensive  Sketch,  includ- 
ing Vital  Physics,  Animal  Morphology,  and  Epidemics ;  to  which  is  added  an 
Appendix  upon  Geology,  Is  THE  DENTRITAL  THEORY  OF  GEOLOGY  TENABLE  ?  By 
Richard  Fawcett  Battye.  8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  336,  cloth.  1877.  7s.  6d. 

BAZLEY.— NOTES  ON  THE  EPICYCLODIAL  CUTTING  FRAME  of  Messrs.  Holtzapffel  & 
Co.  With  special  reference  to  its  Compensation  Adjustment,  and  with  numerous 
Illustrations  of  its  Capabilities.  By  Thomas  Sebastian  Bazley,  M.A.  8vo,  pp. 
xvi.  and  192,  cloth.  Illustrated.  1872.  10s.  6d. 

BAZLEY.— THE  STARS  IN  THEIR  COURSES:  A  Twofold  Series  of  Maps,  with  a 
Catalogue,  showing  how  to  identify,  at  any  time  of  the  year,  all  stars  down  to  the 
5.6  magnitude,  inclusive  of  Heis,  which  are  clearly  visible  in  English  latitudes. 
By  T.  S.  Bazley,  M.A.,  Author  of  "Notes  on  the  Epicycloidal  Cutting  Frame." 
Atlas  folio,  pp.  46  and  24,  Folding  Plates,  cloth.  1878.  15s. 

BEAL. — A  CATENA  OF  BUDDHIST  SCRIPTURES  PROM  THE  CHINESE.  By  S.  Beal,  B.A., 
Trinity  College,  Cambridge ;  a  Chaplain  in  Her  Majesty's  Fleet,  &c.  8vo,  pp. 
xiv.  and  436,  cloth.  1871.  15s. 

BEAL.— THE  ROMANTIC  LEGEND  OF  SAKYA  BUDDHA.  From  the  Chinese-Sanskrit. 
By  the  Rev.  Samuel  Beal.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  408,  cloth.  1875.  12s. 

BEAL.— DHAMMAPADA.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 

BEAL.— BUDDHIST  LITERATURE  IN  CHINA  :  Abstract  of  Four  Lectures,  Delivered  by 
Samuel  Beal,  B.A.,  Professor  of  Chinese  at  University  College,  London.  Demy 
8vo,  pp.  xx.  and  186,  cloth.  1882.  10s.  6d. 

BEAL.— Si-Yu-Ki.  Buddhist  Records  of  the  Western  World.  See  Trubner's 
Oriental  Series. 

BE  AMES.— OUTLINES  OF  INDIAN  PHILOLOGY.  With  a  Map  showing  the  Distribution 
of  Indian  Languages.  By  John  Beames,  M.R.A.S.,  B.C.S.,  &c.  Second  enlarged 
and  revised  Edition.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  96,  cloth.  1868.  5s. 

BEAMES. — A  COMPARATIVE  GRAMMAR  OF  THE  MODERN  ARYAN  LANGUAGES  OP  INDIA, 
to  wit,  Hindi,  Panjabi,  Sindhi,  Gujarati.  Marathi,  Oriya,  and  Bengali.  By  John 
Beames,  B.C.S.,  M.R.A.S.,  &c.,  &c.  Demy  8vo.  Vol.  I.  On  Sounds.  Pp.  xvi. 
and  360,  cloth.  1872.  16s.— Vol.  II.  The  Noun  and  the  Pronoun.  Pp.  xii.  and 
348,  cloth.  1875.  16s.— Vol.  III.  The  Verb.  Pp.  xii.  and  316,  cloth.  1879.  16s. 

BELLEW. — FROM  THE  INDUS  TO  THE  TIGRIS.  A  Narrative  of  a  Journey  through 
Balochistan,  Afghanistan,  Khorassan.  and  Iran  in  1872  ;  together  with  a  Synoptical 
Grammar  and  Vocabulary  of  the  Brahoe  Language,  and  a  Record  of  the  Meteorolo- 
gical Observations  on  the  March  from  the  Indus  to  the  Tigris.  By  Henry  Walter 
Bellew,  C.S.I.,  Surgeon,  B,S.C.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  496,  cloth.  1874.  14s. 


Published  ly  Trubner  &  Co.  7 

BELLEW.— KASHMIR  AND  KASHGHAR  ;  a  Narrative  of  the  Journey  of  the  Embassy 
to  Kashghar  in  1873-74.  By  H.  W.  Bellew,  C.S.I.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  xxxii.  and 
420,  cloth.  1875.  16s. 

BELLEW. — THE  RACES  OF  AFGHANISTAN.  Being  a  Brief  Account  of  the  Principal 
Nations  Inhabiting  that  Country.  By  Surgeon-Major  H.  W.  Bellew,  C.S.I.,  late 
on  Special  Political  Duty  at  Kabul.  8vo,  pp.  124,  cloth.  1880.  7s.  6d. 

BELLOWS.— ENGLISH  OUTLINE  VOCABULARY  for  the  use  of  Students  of  the  Chinese, 
Japanese,  and  other  Languages.  Arranged  by  John  Bellows.  "With  Notes  on  the 
"Writing  of  Chinese  with  Roman  Letters,  by  Professor  Summers,  King's  College, 
London.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  vi.  and  368,  cloth.  1867.  6s. 

BELLOWS.— OUTLINE  DICTIONARY  FOR  THE  USE  OF  MISSIONARIES,  EXPLORERS,  AND 
STUDENTS  OF  LANGUAGE.  By  Max  Miiller,  M.A.,  Taylorian  Professor  in  the  Uni- 
versity of  Oxford.  With  an  Introduction  on  the  proper  use  of  the  ordinary 
English  Alphabet  in  transcribing  Foreign  Languages.  The  Vocabulary  compiled 
by  John  Bellows.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xxxi.  and  368,  limp  morocco.  1867.  7s.  6d. 

BELLOWS.— Tous  LES  VERBES.  Conjugations  of  all  the  Verbs  in  the  French  and 
English  Languages.  By  John  Bellows.  Revised  by  Professor  Beljame,  B.A., 
LL.B.,  of  the  University  of  Paris,  and  Official  Interpreter  to  the  Imperial  Court, 
and  George  B.  Strickland,  late  Assistant  French  Master,  Royal  Naval  School, 
London.  Also  a  New  Table  of  Equivalent  Values  of  French  and  English  Money, 
"Weights,  and  Measures.  32mo,  76  Tables,  sewed.  1867.  Is. 

BELLOWS.— FRENCH  AND  ENGLISH  DICTIONARY  FOR  THE  POCKET.  By  John  Bellows . 
Containing  the  French-English  and  English-French  divisions  on  the  same  page  ; 
conjugating  all  the  verbs  ;  distinguishing  the  genders  by  different  types ;  giving 
numerous  aids  to  pronunciation  ;  indicating  the  liaison  or  non-liaison  of  terminal 
consonants ;  and  translating  units  of  weight,  measure,  and  value,  by  a  series  of 
tables  differing  entirely  from  any  hitherto  published.  The  new  edition,  which  is 
but  six  ounces  in  weight,  has  been  remodelled,  and  contains  many  thousands  of 
additional  words  and  renderings.  Miniature  maps  of  France,  the  British  Isles. 
Paris,  and  London,  are  added  to  the  Geographical  Section.  Second  Edition.  32mo, 
pp.  608,  roan  tuck,  orpersian  without  tuck.  1877.  10s.  6d.  ;  morocco  tuck,  12s.  6d. 

BENEDIX.— DER  VETTER.  Comedy  in  Three  Acts.  By  Roderich  Benedix.  "With 
Grammatical  and  Explanatory  Notes  by  F.  Weinmann,  German  Master  at  the 
Royal  Institution  School,  Liverpool,  and  G.  Zimmermann,  Teacher  of  Modern 
Languages.  12mo,  pp.  128,  cloth.  1863.  2s.  6d. 

BENFEY. — A  PRACTICAL  GRAMMAR  OF  THE  SANSKRIT  LANGUAGE,  for  the  use  of  Early 
Students.  By  Theodor  Benfey,  Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  the  University  of  Gottin- 

fen.    Second,  revised,  and  enlarged  Edition.     Royal  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  296,  cloth. 
868.     10s.  6d. 
BENTHAM.— THEORY  OF  LEGISLATION.    By  Jeremy  Bentham.     Translated  from  the 

French  of  Etienne  Dumont  by  R.  Hildreth.     Fourth  Edition.     Post  8vo,  pp.  xv. 

and  472,  cloth.     1882.     7s.  6d. 
BETTS. — See  VALDES. 
BEVERIDGE.— THE  DISTRICT  OF  BAKARGANJ.     Its  History  and  Statistics.    By  H. 

Beveridge,  B.C.S.,  Magistrate  and  Collector  of  Bakarganj.      8vo,  pp.  xx.  and 

460,  cloth.    1876.    21s. 
BHANDARKAR.— EARLY  HISTORY  OF  THE  DEKKAN  DOWN  TO  THE  MAHOMEDAN 

CONQUEST.     By  Rainkrishna  Gopal  Bhandarkar,  M.A.,  Hon.  M.R.A.S.,  Professor 

of  Oriental  Languages,  Dekkan  College.    "Written  for  the  Bombay  Gazette.    Royal 

8vo,  pp.  128,  wrapper.     1884.     5s. 
BICKNELL.— See  HAFIZ. 
BIERBAUM. — HISTORY  OF  THE  ENGLISH  LANGUAGE  AND  LITERATURE. — By  F.  J. 

Bierbaum,  Ph.D.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  270,  cloth.    1883.    3s. 
BIGANDET. — THE  LIFE  OF  GAUDAMA.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 


8  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

BILLINGS.— THE  PRINCIPLES  OP  VENTILATION  AND  HEATING,  and  their  Practical 
Application.  By  John  S.  Billings,  M.D.,  LL.D.  (Edinb.),  Surgeon  U.S.  Army. 
Demy  8vo,  pp.  x.  and  216,  cloth.  1884.  15s. 

BIRCH.— FASTI  MONASTIC!  AEVI  SAXONICI  ;  or,  An  Alphabetical  List  of  the  Heads  of 
Religious  Houses  in  England  previous  to  the  Norman  Conquest,  to  which  is  pre- 
fixed a  Chronological  Catalogue  of  Contemporary  Foundations.  By  Walter  de 
Gray  Birch.  8vo,  pp.  vii.  and  114,  cloth.  1873.  5s. 

BIRD. — PHYSIOLOGICAL  ESSAYS.  Drink  Craving,  Differences  in  Men,  Idiosyncrasy,  and 
the  Origin  of  Disease.  By  Eobert  Bird,  M.D.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  246,  cloth.  1870.  7s.  6d. 

BIZYENOS.— AT0IAEE  AYPAI.  Poems.  By  George  M.  Bizyenos.  With  Frontis- 
piece Etched  by  Prof.  A.  Legros.  Royal  8vo,  pp.  viii.-312,  printed  on  hand-made 
paper,  and  richly  bound.  1883.  £1,  11s.  6d. 

BLACK.— YOUNG  JAPAN,  YOKOHAMA  AND  YEDO.  A  Narrative  of  the  Settlement 
and  the  City,  from  the  Signing  of  the  Treaties  in  1858  to  the  Close  of  1879 ;  with 
a  Glance  at  the  Progress  of  Japan  during  a  Period  of  Twenty-one  Years.  By  J. 
R.  Black,  formerly  Editor  of  the  "  Japan  Herald,"  &c.  2  vols.  demy  8vo,  pp. 
xviii.  and  418  ;  xiv.  and  522,  cloth.  1881.  £2,  2s. 

BLACKET.— RESEAECHES  INTO  THE  LOST  HISTORIES  OF  AMERICA;  or,  The  Zodiac 
shown  to  be  an  Old  Terrestrial  Map,  in  which  the  Atlantic  Isle  is  delineated ;  so 
that  Light  can  be  thrown  upon  the  Obscure  Histories  of  the  Earthworks  and 
Ruined  Cities  of  America.  By  W.  S.  Blacket.  Illustrated  by  numerous  En- 
gravings. 8vo,  pp.  336,  cloth.  1883.  10s.  6d. 

BLADES.  — SHAKSPERE  AND  TYPOGRAPHY.  Being  an  Attempt  to  show  Shakspere's 
Personal  Connection  with,  and  Technical  Knowledge  of,  the  Art  of  Printing;  also 
Remarks  upon  some  common  Typographical  Errors,  with  especial  reference  to  the 
Text  of  Shakspere.  By  William  Blades.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  78,  with  an  Illustra- 
tion, cloth.  1872.  3s. 

BLADES. — THE  BIOGRAPHY  AND  TYPOGRAPHY  OF  WILLIAM  CAXTON,  England's  First 
Printer.  By  W.  Blades.  Founded  upon  the  Author's  "Life  and  Typography  of 
William  Caxton."  Brought  up  to  the  Present  Date.  Elegantly  and  appropriately 
printed  in  demy  8vo,  on  hand-made  paper,  imitation  old  bevelled  binding.  1877. 
£1,  Is.  Cheap  Edition.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  1881.  5s. 

BLADES.— THE  ENEMIES  OF  BOOKS.  By  William  Blades,  Typograph.  Crown  8vo, 
pp.  xvi.  and  112,  parchment  wrapper.  1880. 

BLADES.— AN  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  GERMAN  MORALITY  PLAY  ENTITLED  DEPOSITIO 
CORNUTI  TYPOGRAPHICI,  as  Performed  in  the  Seventeenth  and  Eighteenth  Cen- 
turies. With  a  Rhythmical  Translation  of  the  German  Version  of  1648.  By 
William  Blades  (Typographer).  To  which  is  added  a  Literal  Reprint  of  the 
unique  Original  Version,  written  in  Plaat  Deutsch  by  Paul  de  Wise,  and  printed 
in  1621.  Small  4to,  pp.  xii.-144,  with  facsimile  Illustrations,  in  an  appropriate 
binding.  1885.  7s.  6d. 

BLAKEY. — MEMOIRS  OF  DR.  ROBERT  BLAKEY,  Professor  of  Logic  and  Metaphysics, 
Queen's  College,  Belfast.  Edited  by  the  Rev.  Henry  Miller.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii. 
and  252,  cloth.  1879.  5s. 

BLEEK.— REYNARD  THE  Fox  IN  SOUTH  AFRICA;  or,  Hottentot  Fables  and  Tales, 
chiefly  Translated  from  Original  Manuscripts  in  the  Library  of  His  Excellency  Sir 
George  Grey,  K.C.B.  By  W.  H.  I.  Bleek,  Ph.D.  Post  8vo,  pp.  xxvi.  and  94, 
cloth.  1864.  3s.  6d. 

BLEEK.— A  BRIEF  ACCOUNT  OF  BUSHMAN  FOLK  LORE,  and  other  Texts.  By  W.  H. 
I.  Bleek.  Ph.D.  Folio,  pp.  21,  paper.  2s.  6d. 

BLUMHARDT.— See  CHARITABALI. 

BOEHMER.— See  VALDES,  and  SPANISH  REFORMERS. 

BOJESEN.—  A  GUIDE  TO  THE  DANISH  LANGUAGE.  Designed  for  English  Students. 
By  Mrs.  Maria  Bojesen.  12mo,  pp.  250,  cloth.  1863.  5s. 


Published  ly  Trubner  &  Co. 

BOLIA.— THE  GERMAN  CALIGRAPHIST  :  Copies  for  German  Handwriting.  By  C. 
Bolia.  Oblong  4to,  sewed.  Is. 

BOOLE.— MESSAGE  or  PSYCHIC  SCIENCE  TO  MOTHERS  AND  NURSES.  By  Mary 
Boole.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xiv.  and  266,  cloth.  1883.  5s. 

BOTTRELL.— STORIES  AND  FOLK-LORE  OF  WEST  CORNWALL.  By  "William  Bottrell. 
With  Illustrations  by  Joseph  Blight.  Third  Series.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  200, 
cloth.  1884.  6s. 

BOY  ENGINEERS.— See  under  LUKIN. 

BOYD.— NlGlNANDA  ;  or,  the  Joy  of  the  Snake  World.  A  Buddhist  Drama  in  Five 
Acts.  Translated  into  English  Prose,  with  Explanatory  Notes,  from  the  Sanskrit 
of  Sa-Harsha-Deva.  By  Palmer  Boyd,  B.A.,  Cambridge.  With  an  Introduction 
by  Professor  Cowell.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  100,  cloth.  1872.  4s.  6d. 

BRADSHAW.— DICTIONARY  OF  BATHING  PLACES  AND  CLIMATIC  HEALTH  RESORTS. 
Much  Revised  and  Considerably  Enlarged.  With  a  Map  in  Eleven  Colours. 
Third  Edition.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  Ixxviii.  and  364,  cloth.  1884.  2s.  6d. 

BRENTANO. — ON  THE  HISTORY  AND  DEVELOPMENT  OF  GILDS,  AND  THE  ORIGIN  OF 

TRADE-UNIONS.      By  Lujo  Brentano,  of  Aschaffenburg,   Bavaria,   Doctor  Juris 

Utriusque  et  Philosophise.     1.  The   Origin   of   Gilds.     2.  Religious  (or  Social) 

Gilds.      3.  Town-Gilds  or  Gild-Merchants.      4.  Craft-Gilds.     5.  Trade -Unions. 

8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  136,  cloth.     1870.     3s.  6d. 
BRETSCHNEIDER.— EARLY  EUROPEAN  RESEARCHES  INTO  THE  FLORA  OF  CHINA. 

By  E.  Bretschneider,  M.D.,  Physician  of  the  Russian  Legation  at  Peking.    Demy 

8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  194,  sewed.     1881.     7s.  6d. 
BRETSCHNEIDER. — BOTANICON  SINICUM.     Notes  on  Chinese  Botany,  from  Native 

and  Western  Sources.    By  E.  Bretschneider,  M.D.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  228,  wrapper. 

1882.    10s.  6d. 
BRETTE.— FRENCH  EXAMINATION  PAPERS  SET  AT  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  LONDON  FROM 

1839  TO  1871.     Arranged  and  edited  by  the  Rev.   P.   H.   Ernest  Brette,  B,D. 

Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  278,  cloth.     3s.  6d. ;  interleaved,  4s.  6d. 

BRITISH   MUSEUM. — LIST   OF   PUBLICATIONS   OF    THE    TRUSTEES  OF  THE    BRITISH 

MUSEUM,  on  application. 

BROWN.— THE  DERVISHES  ;  OR,  ORIENTAL  SPIRITUALISM.  By  John  P.  Brown, 
Secretary  and  Dragoman  of  the  Legation  of  the  United  States  of  America  at  Con- 
stantinople. Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  416,  cloth,  with  24  Illustrations.  1868.  14s. 

BROWN.— SANSKRIT  PROSODY  AND  NUMERICAL  SYMBOLS  EXPLAINED.  By  Charles 
Philip  Brown,  M.R.A.S.,  Author  of  a  Telugu  Dictionary,  Grammar,  &c.,  Professor 
of  Telugu  in  the  University  of  London.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  56,  cloth.  1869.  3s.  6d. 

BROWNE.— How  TO  USE  THE  OPHTHALMOSCOPE;  being  Elementary  Instruction  in 
Ophthalmoscopy.  Arranged  for  the  use  of  Students.  By  Edgar  A.  Browne,  Sur- 
geon to  the  Liverpool  Eye  and  Ear  Infirmary,  &c.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo, 
pp.  xi.  and  108,  with  35  Figures,  cloth.  1883.  3s.  6d. 

BROWNE.— A  BENGALI  PRIMER,  in  Roman  Character.  By  J.  F.  Browne,  B.C.S. 
Crown  8vo,  pp.  32,  cloth.  1881.  2s. 

BROWNE.— A  HINDI  PRIMER  IN  ROMAN  CHARACTER.  By  J.  F.  Browne,  B.C.S. 
Crown  8vo,  pp.  36,  cloth.  1882.  2s.  6d. 

BROWNE.— AN  URIYA  PRIMER  IN  ROMAN  CHARACTER.  By  J.  F.  Browne,  B.C.S. 
Crown  8vo,  pp.  32,  cloth.  1882.  2s.  6d. 

BROWNING  SOCIETY'S  PAPERS.— Demy  8vo,  wrappers.  1881-84.  Part  I.,  pp. 
116.  10s.  Bibliography  of  Robert  Browning  from  1833-81.  Part  II.,  pp.  142. 
10s.  Part  III.,  pp.  168.  10s.  Part  IV.,  pp.  148.  10s.  Part  V.,  pp.  .  10s. 

BROWNING'S  POEMS,  ILLUSTRATIONS  TO.    4to,  boards.    Parts  I.  and  II.    10s.  each. 


10  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

BRUNNOW.— -See  SCHEFFEL. 

BRUNTON. — MAP  OF  JAPAN.     See  under  JAPAN. 

BUDGE.— ARCHAIC  CLASSICS.  Assyrian  Texts ;  being  Extracts  from  the  Annals  of 
Shalmaneser  II.,  Sennacherib,  and  Assur-Bani-Pal.  With  Philological  Notes.  By 
Ernest  A.  Budge,  B.A.,  M.R.A.S.,  Assyrian  Exhibitioner,  Christ's  College, 
Cambridge.  Small  4to,  pp.  viii.  and  44,  cloth.  1880.  7s.  6d. 

BUDGE.— HISTORY  OF  ESARHADDON.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 

BUNYAN.— SCENES  FROM  THE  PILGRIM'S  PROGRESS.  By.  R.  B.  Rutter.  4to,  pp. 
142,  boards,  leather  back.  1882.  5s. 

BURGESS :- - 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL  SURVEY  OF  WESTERN  INDIA  : — 

REPORT  OF  THE  FIRST  SEASON'S  OPERATIONS  IN  THE  BELG!M  AND  KALADI 
DISTRICTS.  January  to  May  1874.  By  James  Burgess,  F.R.G.S.  With  56 
Photographs  and  Lithographic  Plates.  Royal  4to,  pp.  viii.  and  45 ;  half 
bound.  1875.  £2, 2s. 

REPORT  ON  THE  ANTIQUITIES  OF  K!THIAWAD  AND  KACHH,  being  the  result  of 
the  Second  Season's  Operations  of  the  Archaeological  Survey  of  Western 
India,  1874-75.  By  James  Burgess,  F.R.G.S.  Royal  4to,  pp.  x.  and  242, 
with  74  Plates;  half  bound.  1876.  £3,  3s. 

REPORT  ON  THE  ANTIQUITIES  IN  THE  BIDAR  AND  AURANGABAD  DISTRICTS,  in 
the  Territories  of  His  Highness  the  Nizam  of  Haiderabad,  being  the  result 
of  the  Third  Season's  Operations  of  the  Archaeological  Survey  of  Western 
India,  1875-76.  By  James  Burgess,  F.R.G.S.,  M.R.A.S.,  Archaeological  Sur- 
veyor and  Reporter  to  Government,  Western  India.  Royal  4to,  pp.  viii.  and 
138,  with  63  Photographic  Plates  ;  half  bound.  1878.  £2,  2s. 

REPORT  ON  THE  BUDDHIST  CAVE  TEMPLES  AND  THEIR  \ 
INSCRIPTIONS  ;  containing  Views,  Plans,  Sections,  and 
Elevation  of  Facades  of  Cave  Temples  ;  Di-awings  of 
Architectural  and  Mythological  Sculptures ;  Facsimiles 
of  Inscriptions,  &c. ;  with  Descriptive  and  Explanatory 
Text,  and  Translations  of  Inscriptions,  &c.,  &c.     By     OT7  ,      1000 
James  Burgess,  LL.D.,  F.R.G.S.,  &c.    Royal  4to,  pp.     2Vols<    188d'   £6'  6s' 
x.  and  140,  with  86  Plates  and  Woodcuts ;  half -bound. 

REPORT  ON  ELURA  CAVE  TEMPLES,  AND  THE  BRAHMANI- 
CAL  AND  JAINA  CAVES  IN  WESTERN  INDIA.  By  James 
Burgess,  LL.D.,  F.R.G.S.,  &c.  Royal  4to,  pp.  viii. 
and  90,  with  66  Plates  and  Woodcuts  ;  half -bound.  / 

BURMA.— THE  BRITISH  BURMA  GAZETTEER.  Compiled  by  Major  H.  R.  Spearman, 
under  the  direction  of  the  Government  of  India.  2  vols.  8vo,  pp.  764  and  878, 
with  11  Photographs,  cloth.  1880.  £2,  10s. 

BURMA.— HISTORY  OF.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series,  page  70. 

BURNE.— SHROPSHIRE  FOLK-LORE.  A  Sheaf  of  Gleanings.  Edited  by  Charlotte  S. 
Burne,  from  the  Collections  of  Georgina  F.  Jackson.  Demy  8vo.  Part  I.,  pp. 
xvi.-176,  wrapper.  1883.  7s.  6d.  Part  II.,  pp.  192,  wrapper.  1885.  7s.  6d. 

BURNELL.— ELEMENTS  OF  SOUTH  INDIAN  PALEOGRAPHY,  from  the  Fourth  to  the 
Seventeenth  Century  A.D.,  being  an  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  South  Indian 
Inscriptions  and  MSS.  By  A.  C.  Burnell.  Second  enlarged  and  improved 
Edition.  4to,  pp.  xiv.  and  148,  Map  and  35  Plates,  cloth.  1878.  £2, 12s.  6d. 

BURNELL.— A  CLASSIFIED  INDEX  TO  THE  SANSKRIT  MSS.  IN  THE  PALACE  AT 
TANJORE.  Prepared  for  the  Madras  Government.  By  A.  C.  Burnell,  Ph.D.,  &c., 
&c.  4to,  stiff  wrapper.  Part  I.,  pp.  iv.-80,  Vedic  and  Technical  Literature. 
Part  II.,  pp.  iv.-80,  Philosophy  and  Law.  Part  III.,  Drama,  Epics,  Puranas,  and 
Zantras ;  Indices.  1879.  10s.  each. 


Published  ly  Trubner  &  Co.  11 

BURTON.— HANDBOOK  FOR  OVERLAND  EXPEDITIONS  ;  being  an  English  Edition  of  the 
"Prairie  Traveller,"  a  Handbook  for  Overland  Expeditions.  With  Illustrations 
and  Itineraries  of  the  Principal  Routes  between  the  Mississippi  and  the  Pacific, 
and  a  Map.  By  Captain  R.  B.  Marcy  (now  General  and  Chief  of  the  Staff,  Army 
of  the  Potomac).  Edited,  with  Notes,  by  Captain  Richard  F.  Burton.  Crown 
8vo,  pp.  270,  numerous  Woodcuts,  Itineraries,  and  Map,  cloth.  1863.  6s.  6d. 

BUTLER.— EREWHON  ;  or,  Over  the  Range.  By  Samuel  Butler.  Seventh  Edition. 
Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii,  and  244,  cloth.  1884.  5s. 

BUTLER.— THE  FAIR  HAVEN.  A  Work  in  Defence  of  the  Miraculous  Element  in 
Our  Lord's  Ministry  upon  Earth,  both  as  against  Rationalistic  Impugners  and 
certain  Orthodox  Defenders.  By  the  late  John  Pickard  Owen.  With  a  Memoir 
of  the  Author  by  William  Bickersteth  Owen.  By  Samuel  Butler.  Second  Edi- 
tion. Demy  8vo,  pp.  x.  and  248,  cloth.  1873.  7s.  6d. 

BUTLER.— LIFE  AND  HABIT.     By  Samuel  Butler.     Second  Edition.    Crown  8vo, 
.    pp.  x.  and  308,  cloth.     1878.     7s.  6d. 

BUTLER. — GAVOTTES,  MINUETS,  FUGUES,  AND  OTHER  SHORT  PIECES  FOR  THE  PIANO. 
By  Samuel  Butler,  Author  of  "Erewhon,"  "Life  and  Habit,"  &c.  (Op.  I.  mus.), 
and  Henry  Testing  Jones  (Op.  I.) 

BUTLER. — EVOLUTION,  OLD  AND  NEW  ;  or,  The  Theories  of  Buff  on,  Dr.  Erasmus 
Darwin,  and  Lamarck,  as  compared  with  that  of  Mr.  Charles  Darwin.  By  Samuel 
Butler.  Second  Edition,  with  an  Appendix  and  Index.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and 
430,  cloth.  1882.  10s.  6d. 

BUTLER.— UNCONSCIOUS  MEMORY  :  A  Comparison  between  the  Theory  of  Dr.  Ewald 
fc  Hering,  Professor  of  Physiology  at  the  University  of  Prague,  and  the  "  Philosophy 
of  the  Unconscious  "  of  Dr.  Edward  von  Hartmann.  With  Translations  from  these 
Authors,  and  Preliminary  Chapters  bearing  on  "Life  and  Habit,"  "Evolution, 
New  and  Old,"  and  Mr.  Charles  Darwin's  edition  of  Dr.  Krause's  "Erasmus 
Darwin."  By  Samuel  Butler.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  288,  cloth.  1880.  7s.  6d. 

BUTLER.— ALPS  AND  SANCTUARIES  OF  PIEDMONT  AND  THE  CANTON  TICINO.  Pro- 
fusely Illustrated  by  Charles  Gogin,  H.  F.  Jones,  and  the  Author.  By  Samuel 
Butler.  Foolscap  4to,  pp.  viii.  and  376,  cloth.  1882.  21s. 

BUTLER. — SELECTIONS  FROM  HIS  PREVIOUS  WORKS,  with  Remarks  on  Mr.  G.  J. 
Romanes'  recent  work,  "Mental  Evolution  in  Animals,"  and  "A  Psalm  of 
Montreal."  By  Samuel  Butler.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  326,  cloth.  1884.  7s.  6d. 

BUTLER.— THE  SPANISH  TEACHER  AND  COLLOQUIAL  PHRASE-BOOK.  An  Easy  and 
Agreeable  Method  of  acquiring  a  Speaking  Knowledge  of  the  Spanish  Language. 
By  Francis  Butler.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  xviii.  and  240,  half -roan.  2s.  6d. 

BUTLER.— HUNGARIAN  POEMS  AND  FABLES  FOR  ENGLISH  READERS.  Selected  and 
Translated  by  E.  D.  Butler,  of  the  British  Museum  ;  with  Illustrations  by  A.  G. 
Butler.  Foolscap,  pp.  vi.  and  88,  limp  cloth.  1877.  2s. 

BUTLER. — THE  LEGEND  OF  THE  WONDROUS  HUNT.  By  John  Arany.  With  a  few 
Miscellaneous  Pieces  and  Folk-Songs.  Translated  from  the  Magyar  by  E.  D. 
Butler,  F.R.G.S.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  70.  Limp  cloth.  2s.  6d. 

CAITHNESS.— LECTURES  ON  POPULAR  AND  SCIENTIFIC  SUBJECTS.  By  the  Earl  of 
Caithness,  F.R.S.  Delivered  at  various  times  and  places.  Second  enlarged 
Edition.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  174,  cloth.  1879.  2s.  6d. 

CALCUTTA  REVIEW.— SELECTIONS  FROM  Nos.  I.-XXXVII.     5s.  each. 

CALDER.— THE  COMING  ERA.  By  A.  Calder,  Officer  of  the  Legion  of  Honour,  and 
Author  of  "  The  Man  of  the  Future."  8vo,  pp.  422,  cloth.  1879.  10s.  6d. 

CALDWELL. — A  COMPARATIVE  GRAMMAR  OF  THE  DRAVIDIAN  OR  SOUTH  INDIAN 
FAMILY  OF  LANGUAGES.  By  the  Rev.  R.  Caldwell,  LL.D.  A  second,  corrected, 
and  enlarged  Edition.  Demy  8vo.  pp.  804,  cloth.  1875.  28s. 

CALENDARS  OF  STATE  PAPERS.  '  List  on  application. 


12  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

CALL.— REVERBERATIONS.  Kevised.  With  a  chapter  from  My  Autobiography. 
By  W.  M.  W.  Call,  M.A.,  Cambridge,  Author  of  "Lyra  Hellenica"  and 
"  Golden  Histories."  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  200,  cloth.  1875.  4s.  6d. 

CALLAWAY.— NURSERY  TALES,  TRADITIONS,  AND  HISTORIES  OF  THE  ZULUS.    In 

their  own  words,  with  a  Translation  into  English,  and  Notes.    By  the  Rev.  Canon 

Callaway,  M.D.     Vol.  I.,  8vo,  pp.  xiv.  and  378,  cloth.     1868.     16s. 
CALLAWAY.— THE  RELIGIOUS  SYSTEM  OP  THE  AMAZULU. 

Part  I. — Unkulunkulu  ;  or,  The  Tradition  of  Creation  as  existing  among  the 
Amazulu  and  other  Tribes  of  South  Africa,  in  their  own  words,  with  a  Transla- 
tion into  English,  and  Notes.  By  the  Rev.  Canon  Callaway,  M.D.  8vo,  pp. 
128,  sewed.  1868.  4s. 

Part  II.— Amatongo;  or,  Ancestor- Worship  as  existing  among  the  Amazulu,  in 
their  own  words,  with  a  Translation  into  English,  and  Notes.  By  the  Rev. 
Canon  Callaway,  M.D.  8vo,  pp.  127,  sewed.  1869.  4s. 

Part  III. — Izinyanga  Zokubula  ;  or,  Divination,  as  existing  among  the  Amazulu, 
in  their  own  words,  with  a  Translation  into  English,  and  Notes.  By  the  Rev. 
Canon  Callaway,  M.D.  8vo,  pp.  150,  sewed.  1870.  4s. 

Part  IV.— On  Medical  Magic  and  Witchcraft.     8vo,  pp.  40,  sewed,  Is.  6d. 
CAMBRIDGE  PHILOLOGICAL  SOCIETY  (TRANSACTIONS).    Vol.  L,  from  1872^1880. 

8vo,  pp.  xvi.-420,  wrapper.     1881.     15s.    Vol.  II.,  for  1881  and  1882.    8vo,  pp. 

viii -286,  wrapper.     1883.     12s. 
CAMERINI. — L'Eco  ITALIANO  ;  a  Practical  Guide  to  Italian  Conversation.     By  E. 

Camerini.     With  a  Vocabulary.     12mo,  pp.  98,  cloth.     1860.     4s.  6d. 

CAMPBELL. — THE  GOSPEL  OF  THE  WORLD'S  DIVINE  ORDER.  By  Douglas  Camp- 
bell. *New  Edition.  Revised.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  364,  cloth.  1877.  4s.  6d. 

CANADA. — A  GUIDE  BOOK  TO  THE  DOMINION  OF  CANADA.  Containing  Information 
for  intending  Settlers,  with  many  Illustrations  and  Map.  Published  under  the 
Direction  of  the  Government  of  Canada.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  xiv. -138,  thick  paper, 
sewed.  1885.  6d. 

CANDID  EXAMINATION  OF  THEISM.  By  Physicus.  Post  8vo,  pp.  xviii.  and  198, 
cloth.  1878.  7s.  6d. 

CANTICUM  CANTICORUM,  reproduced  in  facsimile,  from  the  Scriverius  copy  in  the 
British  Museum.  With  an  Historical  and  Bibliographical  Introduction  by  I.  Ph. 
Berjeau.  Folio,  pp.  36,  with  16  Tables  of  Illustrations,  vellum.  1860.  £2,  2s. 

CAREY.— THE  PAST,  THE  PRESENT,  AND  THE  FUTURE.  By  H.  C.  Carey.  Second 
Edition.  8vo,  pp.  474,  cloth.  1856.  10s.  6d. 

CARLETTI.— HISTORY  OF  THE  CONQUEST  OF  TUNIS.    Translated  by  J.  T.  Carletti. 

Crown  8vo,  pp.  40,  cloth.     1883.     2s.  6d. 
CARNEGY.— NOTES  ON  THE  LAND  TENURES  AND  REVENUE  ASSESSMENTS  OF  UPPER 

INDIA.    By  P.  Carnegy.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  136,  and  forms,  cloth.     1874.    6s. 

CATHERINE  II.,  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  EMPRESS.  Written  by  herself.  With  a  Preface 
by  A.  Herzen.  Trans,  from  the  French.  12mo,  pp.  xvi.  and  352,  bds.  1859. 
7s.  6d. 

CATLIN. — O-KEE-PA.  A  Religious  Ceremony ;  and  other  Customs  of  the  Mandans. 
By  George  Catlin.  With  13  coloured  Illustrations.  Small  4to,  pp.  vi.  and  52, 
cloth.  1867.  14s. 

CATLIN.— THE  LIFTED  AND  SUBSIDED  ROCKS  OF  AMERICA,  with  their  Influence  on 
the  Oceanic,  Atmospheric,  and  Land  Currents,  and  the  Distribution  of  Races. 
By  George  Catlin.  With  2  Maps.  Cr.  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  238,  cloth.  1870.  6s.  6d. 

CATLIN. — SHUT  YOUR  MOUTH  AND  SAVE  YOUR  LIFE.  By  George  Catlin,  Author  of 
"  Notes  of  Travels  amongst  the  North  American  Indians,"  &c. ,  &c.  With  29  Illus- 
trations from  Drawings  by  the  Author.  Eighth  Edition,  considerably  enlarged. 
Crown  8vo,  pp.  106,  cloth.  1882.  2s.  6d. 


Published  by  Trubner  &,  Co.  13 

CAXTON.—  THE  BIOGRAPHY  AND  TYPOGRAPHY  OP.    See  BLADES. 

CAXTON  CELEBRATION,  1877.— CATALOGUE  OF  THE  LOAN  COLLECTION  OF  ANTI- 
QUITIES, CURIOSITIES,  AND  APPLIANCES  CONNECTED  WITH  THE  ART  OF  PRINTING. 
Edited  by  G.  Bullen,  F.S.A.  Post  8vo,  pp.  xx.  and  472,  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

GAZELLES. — OUTLINE  OF  THE  EVOLUTION-PHILOSOPHY.  By  Dr.  W.  E.  Cazelles. 
Translated  from  the  French  by  the  Rev.  O.  B.  Frothingham.  Crown  8vo,  pp. 
156,  cloth.  1875.  3s.  6d. 

CESNOLA. — SALAMINIA  (Cyprus).  The  History,  Treasures,  and  Antiquities  of  Sa- 
lamis  in  the  Island  of  Cyprus.  By  A.  Palma  di  Cesnola,  F.S.A.,  &c.  "With  an 
Introduction  by  S.  Birch,  Esq.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  Keeper  of  the  Egyptian  and  Ori- 
ental Antiquities  in  the  British  Museum.  Royal  8vo,  pp.  xlviii.  and  325,  with 
upwards  of  700  Illustrations  and  Map  of  Ancient  Cyprus,  cloth.  1882.  31s.  6d. 

CHALMERS. — STRUCTURE  OF  CHINESE  CHARACTERS,  under  300  Primary  Forms 
after  the  Shwoh-wan,  100  A.D.,  and  the  Phonetic  Shwoh-wan,  1833.  By  J. 
Chalmers,  M.A.,  LL.D.,  A.B.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  x.  and  200,  with  two  plates,  limp 
cloth.  1882.  12s.  6d. 

CHAMBERLAIN.— THE  CLASSICAL  POETRY  OF  THE  JAPANESE.  By  Basil  Hall 
Chamberlain,  Author  of  "  Yeigo  Henkaku,  Ichiran."  Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  228, 
cloth.  1880.  7s.  6d. 

CHAPMAN. — CHLOROFORM  AND  OTHER  ANESTHETICS  :  Their  History  and  Use  dur- 
ing Childbirth.  By  John  Chapman,  M.D.  8vo,  pp.  51,  sewed.  1859.  Is. 

CHAPMAN. — DIARRHOEA  AND  CHOLERA  :  Their  Nature,  Origin,  and  Treatment 
through  the  Agency  of  the  Nervous  System.  By  John  Chapman,  M.D., 
M.R.C.P.,  M.R.C.S.  8vo,  pp.  xix.  and  248,  cloth.  7s.  6d. 

CHAPMAN.— MEDICAL  CHARITY  :  its  Abuses,  and  how  to  Remedy  them.  By  John 
Chapman,  M.D.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  108,  cloth.  1874.  2s.  6d. 

CHAPMAN.— SEA-SICKNESS,  AND  HOW  TO  PREVENT  IT.    An  Explanation  of   its 

Nature  and  Successful  Treatment,  through  the  Agency  of  the  Nervous  System, 

by  means  of  the  Spinal  Ice  Bag ;  with  an  Introduction  on  the  General  Principles 

of  Neuro-Therapeutics.     By  John  Chapman,  M.  D. ,  M. R. G.  P. ,  M.  R.  C.  S.     Second 

Edition.     8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  112,  cloth.     1868.    3s. 
CHAPTERS  ON  CHRISTIAN  CATHOLICITY.    By  a  Clergyman.    8vo,  pp.  282,  cloth. 

1878.    5s. 
CHARITABALI  (THE),    or,   Instructive   Biography.      By  Isvarachandra  Vidyasa- 

gara.     With  a  Vocabulary  of  all  the  Words  occurring  in  the  Text.     By  J.  F. 

Blumhardt,  Bengal  Lecturer  at  the  University  College,  London ;  and  Teacher  of 

Bengali  for  the  Cambridge  University.    12mo,  pp.  174,  cloth.     1884.     5s.     The 

Vocabulary  only,  2s.  6d. 
CHARNOCK.  —A  GLOSSARY  OF  THE  ESSEX  DIALECT.    By  Richard  Stephen  Charnock, 

Ph.D.,  F.S.A.     Fcap.,  pp.  xii.  and  64,  cloth.     1880.     3s.  6d. 
CHARNOCK. — PRO3NOMINA;  or,  The  Etymology  of  the  Principal  Christian  Names 

of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland.     By  R.  S.  Charnock,  Ph.D.,  F.S.A.     Crown  8vo, 

pp.  xvi.  and  128,  cloth.     1882.     6s. 
CHATTERJEE.     See  PHILLIPS. 
CHATTOPADHYAYA.— THE  YATR!S;  or,  The  Popular  Dramas  of  Bengal.     By  N. 

Chattopadhyaya.     Post  8vo,  pp.  50,  wrapper.     1882.     2s. 
CHAUCER  SOCIETY.— Subscription,  two  guineas  per  annum.    List  of  Publications 

on  application. 
CHILDERS. — A  PALI-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY,  with  Sanskrit  Equivalents,  and  with 

numerous  Quotations,   Extracts,  and  References.      Compiled  by  Robert  Caesar 

Childers,  late  of  the  Ceylon  Civil  Service.     Imperial  8vo,  double  columns,  pp. 

648,  cloth.     1875.     £3,  3s. 
CHILDERS.— THE  MAHAPARINIBBANASUTTA  OF  THE  SUTTA  PITAKA.    The  Pali  Text. 

Edited  by  the  late  Professor  R.  C.  Childers.     8vo,  pp.  72,  limp  cloth.     1878.     5s. 


14  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

CHINTAMON.— A  COMMENTARY  ON  THE  TEXT  OF  THE  BHAGAVAD-GITA"  ;  or,  The 
Discourse  between  Khrishna  and  Arjuna  of  Divine  Matters  A  Sanskrit  Philoso- 
phical Poem.  With  a  few  Introductory  Papers.  By  Hurrychund  Chintamon, 
Political  Agent  to  H.  H.  the  Guicowar  Mulhar  Kao  Maharajah  of  Baroda.  Post 
8vo,  pp.  118,  cloth.  1874.  6s. 

CHRONICLES  AND  MEMORIALS  OF  GREAT  BRITAIN  AND  IRELAND  DURING  THE 
MIDDLE  AGES.  List  on  application. 

CLARK. — MEGHADUTA,  THE  CLOUD  MESSENGER.  Poem  of  Kalidasa.  Translated 
by  the  late  Rev.  T.  Clark,  M.A.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  64,  wrapper.  1882.  Is. 

CLARK. — A  FORECAST  OF  THE  KELIGION  OF  THE  FUTURE.  Being  Short  Essays  on 
some  important  Questions  in  Religious  Philosophy.  By  W.  W.  Clark.  Post 
8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  238,  cloth.  1879.  3s.  6d. 

CLARKE.— TEN  GREAT  RELIGIONS  :  An  Essay  in  Comparative  Theology.  By  James; 
Freeman  Clarke.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  x.  and  528,  cloth.  1871.  15s. 

CLARKE.— TEN  GREAT  RELIGIONS.  Part  II.,  A  Comparison  of  all  Religions.  By 
J.  F.  Clarke.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  xxviii.-  414,  cloth.  1883.  10s.  6d. 

CLARKE. — THE  EARLY  HISTORY  OF  THE  MEDITERRANEAN  POPULATIONS,  &c.,  in 
their  Migrations  and  Settlements.  Illustrated  "from  Autonomous  Coins,  Gems, 
Inscriptions,  &c.  By  Hyde  Clarke.  8vo,  pp.  80,  cloth.  1882.  5s. 

CLAUSEWITZ.— ON  WAR.  By  General  Carl  von  Clause witz.  Translated  by  Colonel 
J.  J.  Graham,  from  the  third  German  Edition.  Three  volumes  complete  in  one. 
Fcap  4to,  double  columns,  pp.  xx.  ajid  564,  with  Portrait  of  the  author,  cloth. 
1873.  10s.  6d. 

CLEMENT  AND  HUTTON.— ARTISTS  OF  THE  NINETEENTH  CENTURY  AND  THEIR 
WORKS.  A  Handbook  containing  Two  Thousand  and  Fifty  Biographical  Sketches. 
By  Clara  Erskine  Clement  and  Lawrence  Hutton.  Third,  Revised  Edition.  2 
vols.  crown  8vo.  pp.  844,  cloth.  1885.  21s. 

COKE.— CREEDS  OF  THE  DAY  :  or,  Collated  Opinions  of  Reputable  Thinkers.  By 
Henry  Coke.  In  Three  Series  of  Letters.  2  vols.  Demy  Svo,  pp.  302-324, 
cloth.  1883.  21s. 

COLEBROOKE.— THE  LIFE  AND  MISCELLANEOUS  ESSAYS  OF  HENRY  THOMAS  COLE- 
BROOKE.  The  Biography  by  his  Son,  Sir  T.  E.  Colebrooke,  Bart.,  M.P.  3  vols. 
Vol.  I.  The  Life.  Demy  Svo,  pp.  xii.  and  492,  with  Portrait  and  Map,  cloth. 
1873.  14s.  Vols.  II.  and  III.  The  Essays.  A  new  Edition,  with  Notes  by  E. 
B.  Cowell,  Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  the  University  of  Cambridge.  Demy  8vo, 
pp.  xvi.  and  544,  and  x.  and  520,  cloth.  1873.  28s. 

COLENSO.— NATAL  SERMONS.  A  Series  of  Discourses  Preached  in  the  Cathedral 
Church  of  St  Peter's,  Maritzburg.  By  the  Right  Rev.  John  William  Colenso, 
D.D.,  Bishop  of  Natal.  Svo,  pp.  viii.  and  373,  cloth.  1866.  7s.  6d.  The  Second 
Series.  Crown  Svo,  cloth.  1868.  5s. 

COLLINS.— A  GRAMMAR  AND  LEXICON  OF  THE  HEBREW  LANGUAGE,  Entitled  Sefer 
Hassoham.  By  Rabbi  Moseh  Ben  Yitshak,  of  England.  Edited  from  a  MS.  in 
the  Bodleian  Library  of  Oxford,  and  collated  with  a  MS.  in  the  Imperial  Library 
of  St.  Petersburg,  with  Additions  and  Corrections,  by  G.  W.  Collins,  M.A.  Demy 
4to,  pp.  112,  wrapper.  1882.  7s.  6d. 

COLYMBIA.— Crown  8vo,  pp.  260,  cloth.     1873.     5s. 

"  The  book  is  amusing  as  well  as  clever."— A  thenaum.        "  Many  exceedingly  humorous  pas- 
sages."— Public  Opinion.         "Deserves  to  be  read." — Scotsman.        " Neatly  done." — Graphic. 

"  Very  amusing." — Examiner. 

COMTE.— THE  CATECHISM  OF  POSITIVE  RELIGION  :  Translated  from  the  French  of 

Auguste  Comte.    By  Richard  Congreve.    Second  Edition.   Revised  and  Corrected. 

and  conformed  to  the  Second  French  Edition  of  1874.    Crown  Svo,  pp.  316,  cloth, 

1883.    2s.  6d. 
COMTE.— THE  EIGHT  CIRCULARS  OF  AUGUSTE  COMTE.   Translated  from  the  French, 

under  the  auspices  of  R.  Congreve.   Fcap.  Svo,  pp.  iv.  and  90,  cloth.  1882.   Is.  6d. 


Published  by  Trubner  &  Co.  15 

COMTE.— PRELIMINARY  DISCOURSE  ON  THE  POSITIVE  SPIRIT.     Prefixed  to  the 

"  Traite    Philosophique    d'Astronomie    Populaire."      By    M.   Auguste    Comte. 

Translated  by  W.  M.  W.  Call,  M.A.,  Camb.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  154,  cloth.     1883. 

2s.  6d. 
COMTE. — THE  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  AUGUSTE  COMTE.   Translated  and  condensed 

by  Harriet  Martineau.     2  vols.     Second  Edition.     8vo,  cloth.     Vol.  I.,  pp.  xxiv. 

and  400;  Vol.  II.,  pp.  xiv.  and  468.    1875.    25s. 
CONGREVE.  —THE  KOMAN  EMPIRE  OF  THE  WEST.    Four  Lectures  delivered  at  the 

Philosophical  Institution,  Edinburgh,  February  1855,  by  Richard  Congreve,  M.A. 

8vo,  pp.  176,  cloth.    1855.     4s. 

CONGREVE. — ELIZABETH  OF  ENGLAND.  Two  Lectures  delivered  at  the  Philosophi- 
cal Institution,  Edinburgh,  January  1862.  By  Richard  Congreve.  18mo,  pp.  114, 

sewed.     1862.     2s.  6d. 
CONTOPOULOS.— A  LEXICON  OF  MODERN  GREEK-ENGLISH  AND  ENGLISH  MODERN 

GREEK.     By  N.  Contopoulos.    Part  I.  Modern  Greek-English.     Part  II.  English 

Modern  Greek.     8vo,  pp.  460  and  582,  cloth.    1877.     27s. 
CONWAY.— THE  SACRED  ANTHOLOGY  :  A  Book  of  Ethnical  Scriptures.     Collected 

and  Edited  by  Moncure  D.  Conway.    Fifth  Edition.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  480, 

cloth.     1876.    12s. 

CONWAY.— IDOLS  AND  IDEALS.  With  an  Essay  on  Christianity.  By  Moncure  D. 
Conway,  M.A.,  Author  of  "The  Eastern  Pilgrimage,"  &c.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  352, 
cloth.  1877.  4s. 

CONWAY.— EMERSON  AT  HOME  AND  ABROAD.  See  English  and  Foreign  Philoso- 
phical Library. 

CONWAY.— TRAVELS  IN  SOUTH  KENSINGTON.  By  M.  D.  Conway.  Illustrated. 
8vo,  pp.  234,  cloth.  1882.  12s. 

CONTENTS. — The  South  Kensington  Museum — Decorative  Art  and  Architecture  in  England 
—Bedford  Park. 

COOMARA  SWAMY.— THE  DATHAVANSA  ;  or,  The  History  of  the  Tooth  Relic  of 
Gotama  Buddha,  in  Pali  verse.  Edited,  with  an  English  Translation,  by  Mutu 
Coomara  Swamy,  F.R.A.S.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  174,  cloth.  1874.  10s.  6d.  English 
Translation.  With  Notes,  pp.  100.  6s. 

COOMARA  SWAMY.— SUTTA  NIPATA  ;  or,  Dialogues  and  Discourses  of  Gotama 
Buddha  (2500  years  old).  Translated  from  the  original  Pali.  With  Notes  and 
Introduction.  By  Mutu  Coomara  Swamy,  F.R.A.S.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xxxvi.  and 
160,  cloth.  1874.  6s. 

COPARCENERS  (THE)  :  Being  the  Adventures  of  Two  Heiresses.     See  "Arthur." 

CORNELIA.    A  Novel.    Post  8vo,  pp.  250,  boards.     1863.     Is.  6d. 

COTTA.— GEOLOGY  AND  HISTORY.  A  Popular  Exposition  of  all  that  is  known  of  the 
Earth  and  its  Inhabitants  in  Pre -historic  Times.  By  Bernhard  Von  Cotta,  Pro- 
fessor of  Geology  at  the  Academy  of  Mining,  Freiberg,  in  Saxony.  12mo,  pp. 
iv.  and  84,  cloth.  1865.  2s. 

COUSIN. — THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  KANT.  Lectures  by  Victor  Cousin.  Translated  from 
the  French.  To  which  is  added  a  Biographical  and  Critical  Sketch  of  Kant's 
Life  and  Writings.  By  A.  G.  Henderson.  Large  post  8vo,  pp.  xciv.  and  194, 
cloth.  1864.  6s. 

COUSIN.  —ELEMENTS  OF  PSYCHOLOGY  :  included  in  a  Critical  Examination  of  Locke's 
Essay  on  the  Human  Understanding,  and  in  additional  pieces.  Translated  from 
the  French  of  Victor  Cousin,  with  an  Introduction  and  Notes.  By  Caleb  S. 
Henry,  D.D.  Fourth  improved  Edition,  revised  according  to  the  Author's  last 
corrections.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  568,  cloth.  1871.  8s. 

CO  WELL. — A  SHORT  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  ORDINARY  PRAKRIT  OP  THE  SANSKRIT 
DRAMAS.  With  a  List  of  Common  Irregular  Prakrit  Words.  By  E.  B.  Cowell, 
Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  the  University  of  Cambridge,  and  Hon.  LL.D.  of  the 
University  of  Edinburgh.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  40,  limp  cloth.  1875.  3s.  6d. 


16  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

COWELL.— PRAKRITA-PRAKASA;  or,  The  Prakrit  Grammar  of  Yararuchi,  with  the 
Commentary  (Manorama)  of  Bhamaha ;  the  first  complete  Edition  of  the  Original 
Text,  with  various  Readings  from  a  collection  of  Six  MSS.  in  the  Bodleian  Library 
at  Oxford,  and  the  Libraries  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  and  the  East  India 
House  ;  with  Copious  Notes,  an  English  Translation,  and  Index  of  Prakrit  Words, 
to  which  is  prefixed  an  Easy  Introduction  to  Prakrit  Grammar.  By  Edward 
Byles  Cowell,  of  Magdalen  Hall,  Oxford,  Professor  of  Sanskrit  at  Cambridge. 
New  Edition,  with  New  Preface,  Additions,  and  Corrections.  Second  Issue. 
8vo,  pp.  xxxi.  and  204,  cloth.  1868.  14s. 

COWELL.— THE  SARVADARSANA  SAMGRAHA.    See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 

CO WLEY.— POEMS.  By  Percy  Tunnicliff  Cowley.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  104,  cloth. 
1881.  5s. 

CRAIG.— THE  IRISH  LAND  LABOUR  QUESTION,  Illustrated  in  the  History  of  Rala- 
hine  and  Co-operative  Farming.  By  E.  T.  Craig.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  202, 
cloth.  1882.  2s.  6d.  Wrappers,  2s. 

CRANBROOK— CREDIBILIA  ;  or,  Discourses  on  Questions  of  Christian  Faith.  By 
the  Rev.  James  Cranbrook,  Edinburgh.  Reissue.  Post  8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  190, 
cloth.  1868.  3s.  6d. 

CRANBROOK.— THE  FOUNDERS  OF  CHRISTIANITY;  or,  Discourses  upon  the  Origin 
of  the  Christian  Religion.  By  the  Rev.  James  Cranbrook,  Edinburgh.  Post  8vo, 
pp.  xii.  and  324.  1868.  6s. 

CRAVEN.— THE  POPULAR  DICTIONARY  IN  ENGLISH  AND  HINDUSTANI,  AND  HINDU- 
STANI AND  ENGLISH.  With  a  Number  of  Useful  Tables.  Compiled  by  the 
Rev.  T.  Craven,  M.A.  18mo,  pp.  430,  cloth.  1881.  3s.  6d. 

CRAWFORD.— RECOLLECTIONS  OF  TRAVEL  IN  NEW  ZEALAND  AND  AUSTRALIA.  By 
James  Coutts  Crawford,  F.G.S.,  Resident  Magistrate,  Wellington,  &c.,  &c.  With 
Maps  and  Illustrations.  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  468,  cloth.  1880.  18s. 

CROSLAND.— APPARITIONS  ;  An  Essay  explanatory  of  Old  Facts  and  a  New  Theory. 
To  which  are  added  Sketches  and  Adventures.  By  Newton  Crosland.  Crown  8vo, 
pp.  viii.  and  166,  cloth.  1873.  2s.  6d. 

CROSLAND.— PITH  :  ESSAYS  AND  SKETCHES  GRAVE  AND  GAY,  with  some  Verses 
and  Illustrations.  By  Newton  Crosland.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  310,  cloth.  1881.  5s. 

CROSLAND. — THE  NEW  PRINCIPLE;  or,  The  Astronomy  of  the  Future.  An  Essay 
Explanatory  of  a  Rational  System  of  the  Universe.  By  N.  Crosland,  Author  of 
"  Pith,"  &c.  Foolscap  8vo,  pp.  88,  cloth  limp  elegant,  gilt  edges.  1884.  2s.  6d. 

CROSS. — HESPERIDES.  The  Occupations,  Relaxations,  and  Aspirations  of  a  Life. 
By  Launcelot  Cross,  Author  of  "  Characteristics  of  Leigh  Hunt,"  "  Brandon 
Tower,"  "  Business,"  &c.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  iv.-486,  cloth.  1883.  10s.  6d. 

CSOMA  DE  SOROS.—  LIFE  OF.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 

CUMMINS.— A  GRAMMAR  OF  THE  OLD  FRIESIC  LANGUAGE.  By  A.  H.  Cummins, 
A.M.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  x.  and  76,  cloth.  1881.  3s.  6d. 

CUNNINGHAM.— THE  ANCIENT  GEOGRAPHY  OF  INDIA.  I.  The  Buddhist  Period, 
including  the  Campaigns  of  Alexander  and  the  Travels  of  Hwen-Thsang.  By 
Alexander  Cunningham,  Major- General,  Royal  Engineers  (Bengal  Retired).  With 
13  Maps.  8vo,  pp.  xx.  and  590,  cloth.  1870.  £1,  8s. 

CUNNINGHAM.— THE  STUPA  OF  BHARHUT  :  A  Buddhist  Monument  ornamented  with 
numerous  Sculptures  illustrative  of  Buddhist  Legend  and  History  in  the  Third 
Century  B.C.  By  Alexander  Cunningham,  C.S.I.,  C.I.E.,  Maj.-Gen.,  R.E.  (B.R.), 
Dir.-Gen.  Archaaol.  Survey  of  India.  Royal  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  144,  with  57  Plates, 
cloth.  1879.  £3,  3s. 

CUNNINGHAM.— ARCHAEOLOGICAL  SURVEY  OF  INDIA,  Reports  from  1862-80.  By 
A.  Cunningham,  C.S.I.,  C.I.E.,  Major-General,  R.E.  (Bengal  Retired),  Director- 
General,  Archaeological  Survey  of  India.  With  numerous  Plates,  cloth,  Vols.  I.- 
XI.  10s.  each.  (Except  Vols.  VII.,  VIII.,  and  IX.,  and  also  Vols.  XII.  to 
XVIII.,  which  are  12s.  each.)  , 


Published  by  Trubner  &  Co.  17 

CUSHMAN.— CHABLOTTE  CUSHMAN:  Her  Letters' and  Memories  of  her  Life. 
Edited  by  her  friend,  Emma  Stebbins.  Square  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  308,  cloth. 
With  Portrait  and  Illustrations.  1879.  12s.  6d. 

OUST. — LANGUAGES  or  THE  EAST  INDIES.    See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 

CUST. — LINGUISTIC  AND  ORIENTAL  ESSAYS.    See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 

GUST. — LANGUAGES  OF  AFRICA.    See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 

GUST.— PICTURES  OF  INDIAN  LIFE,  Sketched  with  the  Pen  from  1852  to  1881.  By 
K.  N.  Gust,  late  I.C.S.,  Hon.  Sec.  Royal  Asiatic  Society.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  x.  and 
346,  cloth.  With  Maps.  1881.  7s.  6d. 

GUST.— THE  SHRINES  OF  LOURDES,  ZARAGOSSA,  THE  HOLY  STAIRS  AT  EOME, 
THE  HOLY  HOUSE  OF  LORETTO  AND  NAZARETH,  AND  ST.  ANN  AT  JERUSALEM.  By 
R.  N.  Gust,  Member  of  Committees  of  the  Church  Missionary  Society,  and  British 
and  Foreign  Bible  Society.  With  Four  Autotypes  from  Photographs  obtained  on 
the  spot.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  63,  stiff  wrappers.  1885.  2s. 

DANA.— A  TEXT-BOOK  OF  GEOLOGY,  designed  for  Schools  and  Academies.  By  James 
D,  Dana,  LL.D.,  Professor  of  Geology,  &c.,  at  Yale  College.  Illustrated.  Crown 
8vo,  pp.  vi.  and  354,  cloth.  1876.  10s. 

DANA.— MANUAL  OF  GEOLOGY,  treating  of  the  Principles  of  the  Science,  with  special 
Reference  to  American  Geological  History ;  for  the  use  of  Colleges,  Academies, 
and  Schools  of  Science.  By  James  D.  Dana,  LL.D.  Illustrated  by  a  Chart  of  the 
World,  and  over  One  Thousand  Figures.  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  800,  and  Chart,  cl.  21s. 

DANA.— THE  GEOLOGICAL  STORY  BRIEFLY  TOLD.  An  Introduction  to  Geology  for 
the  General  Reader  and  for  Beginners  in  the  Science.  By  J.  D.  Dana,  LL.D. 
Illustrated.  12mo,  pp.  xii.  and  264,  cloth.  7s.  6d. 

DANA.— A  SYSTEM  OF  MINERALOGY.  Descriptive  Mineralogy,  comprising  the  most 
Recent  Discoveries.  By  J.  D.  Dana,  aided  by  G.  J.  Brush.  Fifth  Edition,  re- 
written and  enlarged,  and  illustrated  with  upwards  of  600  Woodcuts,  with  three 
Appendixes  and  Corrections.  Royal  8vo,  pp.  xlviii.  and  892,  cloth.  £2,  2s. 

DANA. — A  TEXT  BOOK  OF  MINERALOGY.  With  an  Extended  Treatise  on  Crystallo- 
graphy and  Physical  Mineralogy.  By  E.  S.  Dana,  on  the  Plan  and  with  the 
Co-operation  of  Professor  J.  D.  Dana.  Third  Edition,  revised.  Over  800  Wood- 
cuts and  1  Coloured  Plate.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  486,  cloth.  1879.  18s. 

DANA. — MANUAL  OF  MINERALOGY  AND  LITHOLOGY  ;  Containing  the  Elements  of 
the  Science  of  Minerals  and  Rocks,  for  the  Use  of  the  Practical  Mineralogist  and 
Geologist,  and  for  Instruction  in  Schools  and  Colleges.  By  J.  D.  Dana.  Fourth 
Edition,  rearranged  and  rewritten.  Illustrated  by  numerous  Woodcuts.  Crown 
8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  474,  cloth.  1882.  7s.  6d. 

DARWIN.— CHARLES  DARWIN:  A  Paper  contributed  to  the  Transactions  of  the 
Shropshire  Archaeological  Society.  By  Edward  Woodall.  With  Portrait  and 
Illustrations.  Post  8vo,  pp.  iv.-64,  cloth.  1884.  3s.  6d. 

DATES  AND  DATA  RELATING  TO  RELIGIOUS  ANTHROPOLOGY  AND  BIBLICAI  ARCHAE- 
OLOGY. (Primaeval  Period.)  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  106,  cloth.  1876.  5s. 

DAVIDS.— BUDDHIST  BIRTH  STORIES.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 

DA  VIES. —HINDU  PHILOSOPHY.     2  vols.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 

DAVIS. — NARRATIVE  OF  THE  NORTH  POLAR  EXPEDITION,  U.S.  SHIP  Polaris,  Cap- 
tain Charles  Francis  Hall  Commanding.  Edited  under  the  direction  of  the  Hon. 
G.  M.  Robeson,  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  by  Rear- Admiral  C.  H.  Davis,  U.S.N. 
Third  Edition.  With  numerous  Steel  and  Wood  Engravings,  Photolithographs, 
and  Maps.  4to,  pp.  696,  cloth.  1881.  £1,  8s. 

DAY.— THE  PREHISTORIC  USE  OF  IRON  AND  STEEL;  with  Observations  on  certain 
matter  ancillary  thereto.  By  St.  John  V.  Day,  C.E.,  F.R.S.E.,  &c.  8vo,  pp. 
xxiv.  and  278,  cloth.  1877.  12s. 

DE  FLANDRE.— MONOGRAMS  OF  THREE  OR  MORE  LETTERS,  DESIGNED  AND  DRAWN 
ON  STONE.  By  C.  De  Flandre,  F.S.A.  Scot.,  Edinburgh.  With  Indices,  showing 
the  place  and  style  or  period  of  every  Monogram,  and  of  each  individual  Letter. 
4to,  42  Plates,  cloth.  1880.  Large  paper,  £7,  7s.  ;  small  paper,  £3,  3s. 

B 


18  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

DELBRUCK.— INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY  OP  LANGUAGE  :  A  Critical  Survey  of  the 
History  and  Methods  of  Comparative  Philology  of  the  Indo-European  Languages. 
By  B.  Delbruck.  Authorised  Translation,  with  a  Preface  by  the  Author.  8vo, 
pp.  156,  cloth.  1882.  5s.  Sewed,  4s. 

DELEPIERRE. — HisioiEE  LiTTERAiRE  DBS  Fous.  Par  Octave  Delepierre.  Crown 
8vo,  pp.  184,  cloth.  1860.  5s. 

DELEPIERRE.— MAC  ARONE  AN  A  ANDRA  ;  overum  Nouveaux  Melanges  de  Litterature 
Macaronique.  Par  Octave  Delepierre.  Small  4to,  pp.  180,  printed  by  Whitting- 
ham,  and  handsomely  bound  in  the  Roxburghe  style.  1862.  10s.  6d. 

DELEPIERRE.— ANALYSE  DES  TRAVAUX  DE  LA  SOCIETE  DES  PHILOBIBLON  DE  LON- 
DRES.  Par  Octave  Delepierre.  Small  4to,  pp.  viii.  and  134,  bound  in  the  Rox- 
burghe style.  1862.  10s.  6d. 

DELEPIERRE.— REVUE  ANALYTIQUE  DES  OUVRAGES  ECRITS  EN  CENTONS,  depuis  les 
Temps  Anciens,  jusqu'au  xixidme  Siecle.  Par  un  Bibliophile  Beige.  Small  4to, 
pp.  508,  stiff  covers.  1868.  £1,  10s. 

DELEPIERRE. — TABLEAU  DE  LA  LITTERATURE  DU  CENTON,  CHEZ  LES  ANCIENS  ET  CHEZ 
LES  MODERNES.  Par  Octave  Delepierre.  2  vols,  small  4to,  pp.  '324  and  318. 
Paper  cover.  1875.  £1,  Is. 

DELEPIERRE. — L'ENFER  :  Essai  Philosophique  et  Historique  sur  les  Legendes  de 
la  Yie  Future.  Par  Octave  Delepierre.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  160,  paper  wrapper. 
1876.  6s.  Only  250  copies  printed. 

DENNYS. — A  HANDBOOK  OF  THE  CANTON  VERNACULAR  OF  THE  CHINESE  LANGUAGE. 
Being  a  Series  of  Introductory  Lessons  for  Domestic  and  Business  Purposes.  By 
N.  B.  Dennys,  M.R.A.S.,  &c.  Royal  8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  228,  cloth.  1874.  30s. 

DENNYS. — A  HANDBOOK  OF  MALAY  COLLOQUIAL,  as  spoken  in  Singapore,  being  a 
Series  of  Introductory  Lessons  for  Domestic  and  Business  Purposes.  By  N.  B. 
Dennys,  Ph.  D. ,  F.  R.  G.  S. ,  M.  R.  A.  S.  Impl.  8vo,  pp.  vi.  and  204,  cloth.  1878.  21s. 

DENNYS.— THE  FOLK-LORE  OF  CHINA,  AND  ITS  AFFINITIES  WITH  THAT  OF  THE 
ARYAN  AND  SEMITIC  RACES.  By  N.  B.  Dennys,  Ph.D.,  F.R.G.S.,  M.R.A.S. 
8vo,  pp.  166,  cloth.  1876.  10s.  6d. 

DE  VALDES.-See  VALDES. 

DE  VINNE. — THE  INVENTION  OF  PRINTING:  A  Collection  of  Texts  and  Opinions. 
Description  of  Early  Prints  and  Playing  Cards,  the  Block-Books  of  the  Fifteenth 
Century,  the  Legend  of  Lourens  Janszoon  Coster  of  Haarlem,  and  the  "Works  of 
John  Gutenberg  and  his  Associates.  Illustrated  with  Fac-similes  of  Early  Types 
and  Woodcuts.  By  Theo.  L.  De  Vinne.  Second  Edition.  In  royal  8vo,  elegantly 
printed,  and  bound  in  cloth,  with  embossed  portraits,  and  a  multitude  of  Fac- 
similes and  Illustrations.  1877.  £1  Is. 

DICKSON.— WHO  WAS  SCOTLAND'S  FIRST  PRINTER?  Ane  Compendious  and  breue 
Tractate,  in  Commendation  of  Andrew  Myllar.  Compylit  be  Robert  Dickson, 
F.S.A.  Scot.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  24,  parchment  wrapper.  1881.  Is. 

DOBSON. — MONOGRAPH  OF  THE  ASIATIC  CHIROPTERA,  and  Catalogue  of  the  Species 
of  Bats  in  the  Collection  of  the  Indian  Museum,  Calcutta.  By  G.  E.  Dobson, 
M.A.,  M.B.,  F.L.S.,  &c.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  228,  cloth.  1876.  12s. 

D'ORSEY.— A  PRACTICAL  GRAMMAR  OF  PORTUGUESE  AND  ENGLISH,  exhibiting  in  a 
Series  of  Exercises,  in  Double  Translation,  the  Idiomatic  Structure  of  both  Lan- 
guages, as  now  written  and  spoken.  Adapted  to  Ollendorff's  System  by  the  Rev. 
Alexander  J.  D.  D'Orsey,  of  Corpus  Christi  College,  Cambridge,  and  Lecturer  on 
Public  Reading  and  Speaking  at  King's  College,  London.  Third  Edition.  12mo, 
pp.  viii.  and  298,  cloth.  1868.  7s. 

DOUGLAS.— CHINESE-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY  OF  THE  VERNACULAR  OR  SPOKEN  LAN- 
GUAGE OF  AMOY,  with  the  principal  variations  of  the  Chang-Chew  and  Chin- 
Chew  Dialects.  By  the  Rev.  Carstairs  Douglas,  M.A.,  LL.D.,  Glasg.,  Missionary 
of  the  Presbyterian  Church  in  England.  High  quarto,  double  columns,  pp.  632, 
cloth.  1873.  £3,  3s. 

DOUGLAS. — CHINESE  LANGUAGE  AND  LITERATURE.  Two  Lectures  delivered  at  the 
Royal  Institution,  by  R.  K.  Douglas,  of  the  British  Museum,  and  Professor  of 
Chinese  at  King's  College.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  118,  cloth.  1875.  5s. 


Published  by  Triibner  &  Co.  19 

DOUGLAS. — THE  LIFE  OP  JENGHIZ  KHAN.  Translated  from  the  Chinese.  With  an 
Introduction.  By  Robert  K.  Douglas,  of  the  British  Museum,  and  Professor  of 
Chinese  at  King's  College.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xxxvi.  and  106,  cloth.  1877.  5s. 

DOUGLAS. — POEMS:  Lyrical  and  Dramatic.  By  Evelyn  Douglas.  Foolscap  8  vo, 
pp.  256,  cloth.  1885.  5s. 

DOUGLAS.— THE  QUEEN  OF  THE  HID  ISLE:  An  Allegory  of  Life  and  Art.  And 
LOVE'S  PERVERSITY  ;  or,  Eros  and  Anteros.  A  Drama.  By  Evelyn  Douglas. 
Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  viiL-258,  cloth.  1885.  5s. 

DOWSON.— DICTIONARY  OF  HINDU  MYTHOLOGY,  &c.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 

DOWSON.— A  GRAMMAR  OF  THE  URDU  OR  HINDUSTANI  LANGUAGE.  By  John  Dow- 
son,  M.K.A.S.,  Professor  of  Hindustani,  Staff  College,  Sandhurst.  Crown  8vo, 
pp.  xvi.  and  264,  with  8  Plates,  cloth.  1872.  10s.  6d. 

DOWSON. — A  HINDUSTANI  EXERCISE  BOOK  ;  containing  a  Series  of  Passages  and 
Extracts  adapted  for  Translation  into  Hindustani.  By  John  Dowson,  M.R.A.S., 
Professor  of  Hindustani,  Staff  College,  Sandhurst.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  100,  limp 
cloth.  1872.  2s.  6d. 

DUKA.— THE  LIFE  AND  TRAVELS  OF  ALEXANDER  CSOMA  DE  KO"RO~S:  A  Biography, 
compiled  chiefly  from  hitherto  Unpublished  Data ;  With  a  Brief  Notice  of  each 
of  his  Published  Works  and  Essays,  as  well  as  of  his  still  Extant  Manuscripts.  By 
Theodore  Duka,  Doctor  of  Medicine  ;  Fellow  of  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons  of 
England  ;  Surgeon-Major,  Her  Majesty's  Bengal  Medical  Service,  Retired  ;  Knight 
of  the  Order  of  the  Iron  Crown;  Corresponding  Member  of  the  Academy  of 
Sciences  of  Hungary.  Post  8vo,  with  Portrait,  pp.  xii.-234,  cloth.  1885.  9s. 

DUSAR. — A  GRAMMAR  OF  THE  GERMAN  LANGUAGE  ;  with  Exercises.  By  P.  Friedrich 
Dusar,  First  German  Master  in  the  Military  Department  of  Cheltenham  College. 
Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  208,  cloth.  1879.  4s.  6d. 

DUSAR. — A  GRAMMATICAL  COURSE  OF  THE  GERMAN  LANGUAGE.  By  P.  Friedrich 
Dusar.  Third  Edition.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  x.  and  134,  cloth.  1883.  3s.  6d. 

DYMOCK.— THE  VEGETABLE  MATERIA  MEDICA  OF  WESTERN  INDIA.  By  W. 
Dymock,  Surgeon-Major  Bombay  Army,  &c.  &c.  To  be  completed  in  four  parts. 
8vo,  Part  I,  pp.  160 ;  Part  II.,  pp.  168;  wrappers,  4s.  each. 

EARLY  ENGLISH  TEXT  SOCIETY.— Subscription,  one  guinea  per  annum.  Extra 
Series.  Subscriptions — Small  paper,  one  guinea;  large  paper,  two  guineas,  per 
annum.  List  of  publications  on  application. 

EASTWICK.—  KHIRAD  AFROZ  (the  Illuminator  of  the  Understanding).  By  Maulavi 
Hafizu'd-din.  A  New  Edition  of  the  Hindustani  Text,  carefully  revised,  with 
Notes,  Critical  and  Explanatory.  By  Edward  B.  Eastwick,  F.R.S.,  M.R.  A.S.,  &c. 
Imperial  8vo,  pp.  xiv.  and  319,  cloth.  Reissue,  1867.  18s. 

EASTWICK.— THE  GULISTAN.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 

EBERS. — THE  EMPEROR.  A  Romance.  By  Georg  Ebers.  Translated  from  the 
German  by  Clara  Bell.  In  two  volumes,  16mo,  pp.  iv.  319  and  322,  cloth.  1881. 
7s.  6d.  Paper,  5s. 

EBERS.— A  QUESTION  :  The  Idyl  of  a  Picture  by  his  friend,  Alma  Tadema.  Related 
by  Georg  Ebers.  From  the  German,  by  Mary  J.  SAFFORD.  16mo,  pp.  125,  with 
Frontispiece,  cloth.  1881.  4s.  Paper,  2s.  6d. 

EBERS. — SERAPIS.  A  Romance.  By  Georg  Ebers.  From  the  German  by  Clara 
Bell.  16mo,  pp.  iv.-388,  cloth.  1885.  4s.  Paper,  2s.  6d. 

ECHO  (DEUTSCHES).  THE  GERMAN  ECHO.  A  Faithful  Mirror  of  German  Conver- 
sation. By  Ludwig  Wolfram.  With  a  Vocabulary.  By  Henry  P.  Skelton. 
Post  8vo,  pp.  130  and  70,  cloth.  1863.  3s. 

ECHO  FRANCAIS.  A  PRACTICAL  GUIDE  TO  CONVERSATION.  By  Fr.  de  la  Fniston. 
With  a  complete  Vocabulary.  By  Anthony  Maw  Border.  Post  8vo,  pp.  120  and 
72,  cloth.  1860.  3s. 

ECO  ITALIANO  (L').  A  PRACTICAL  GUIDE  TO  ITALIAN  CONVERSATION.  By  Eugene 
Camerini.  With  a  complete  Vocabulary.  By  Henry  P.  Skelton.  Post  8vo,  pp. 
vi.,  128,  and  98,  cloth.  1860.  4s.  6d. 

ECO  DE  MADRID.  THE  ECHO  OF  MADRID.  A  Practical  Guide  to  Spanish  Con- 
versation. By  J.  E.  Hartzenbusch  and  Henry  Lemming.  With  a  complete 
Vocabulary,  containing  copious  Explanatory  Remarks.  By  Hjnry  Lemming. 
Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.,  144,  and  83,  cloth.  1860.  5s. 


20  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

ECKSTEIN. — PRUSIAS  :  A  Romance  of  Ancient  Rome  under  the  Republic.  By 
Ernst  Eckstein.  From  the  German  by  Clara  Bell.  Two  vols.  16mo,  pp.  356 
and  336.  cloth.  1884.  7s.  6d. ;  paper,  5s. 

ECKSTEIN.  —  QUINTUS  CLAUDIUS.  A  Romance  of  Imperial  Rome.  By  Ernst 
Eckstein.  From  the  German  by  Clara  Bell,  Two  vols.  16mo,  pp.  314  and 
304,  cloth.  1884.  7s.  6d. ;  paper,  5s. 

EDDA  S^EMUNDAB  HINNS  FRODA.  The  Edda  of  Ssemund  the  Learned.  Translated 
from  the  Old  Norse,  by  Benjamin  Thorpe.  Complete  in  1  vol.  fcap.  8vo,  pp.  viii. 
and  152,  and  pp.  viii.  and  170,  cloth.  1866.  7s.  6d. 

EDGREN.— SANSKRIT  GRAMMAR.    See  Triibner's  Collection. 

EDKINS.— CHINA'S  PLACE  IN  PHILOLOGY.  An  attempt  to  show  that  the  Languages 
of  Europe  and  Asia  have  a  common  origin.  By  the  Rev.  Joseph  Edkins.  Crown 
8vo,  pp.  xxiii.  and  403,  cloth.  1871.  10s.  6d. 

EDKINS.— INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  THE  CHINESE  CHARACTERS.  By  J.  Edkins, 
D.D.,  Peking,  China.  Royal  8vo,  pp.  340,  paper  boards.  1876.  18s. 

EDKINS.— RELIGION  IN  CHINA.  See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical  Library, 
Vol.  VIII.,  or  Trubner's  Oriental  Series. 

EDKINS.— CHINESE  BUDDHISM.    See  Trubner's  Oriental  Series. 

EDMONDS. — GREEK  LAYS,  IDYLLS,  LEGENDS,  &c.  A  Selection  from  Recent  and 
Contemporary  Poets.  Translated  by  E.  M.  Edmonds.  With  Introduction  and 
Notes.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xiv.  and  264,  cloth.  1885.  6s.  6d. 

EDMUNDSON.— MILTON  AND  VONDEL  :  a  Curiosity  of  Literature.  By  George 
Edmundson,  M.A.,  Late  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  Brasenose  College,  Oxford,  Vicar  of 
Northolt,  Middlesex.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  ,  cloth. 

EDWARDS. — MEMOIRS  OF  LIBRARIES,  together  with  a  Practical  Handbook  of  Library 
Economy.    By  Edward  Edwards.   Numerous  Illustrations.   2  vols.  royal  8vo,  cloth. 
Vol.  i.  pp.  xxviii.  and  841 ;  Vol.  ii.  pp.  xxxvi.  and  1104.     1859.    £2,  8s. 
DITTO,  large  paper,  imperial  8vo,  cloth.     £4,  4s. 

EDWARDS. — CHAPTERS  OF  THE  BIOGRAPHICAL  HISTORY  OF  THE  FRENCH  ACADEMY. 
1629-1863.     With  an  Appendix  relating  to  the  Unpublished  Chronicle  "  Liber  de 
Hyda."    By  Edward  Edwards.     8vo,  pp.  180,  cloth.     1864.     6s. 
DITTO,  large  paper,  royal  8vo.     10s.  6d. 

EDWARDS. — LIBRARIES  AND  FOUNDERS  OF  LIBRARIES.  By  Edward  Edwards.  8vo, 
pp.  xix.  and  506,  cloth.  1865.  18s. 

DITTO,  large  paper,  imperial  8vo,  cloth.     £1,  10s. 

EDWARDS.— FREE  TOWN  LIBRARIES,  their  Formation,  Management,  and  History  in 
Britain,  France,  Germany,  and  America.  Together  with  Brief  Notices  of  Book 
Collectors,  and  of  the  respective  Places  of  Deposit  of  their  Surviving  Collections. 
By  Edward  Edwards.  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  634,  cloth.  1869.  21s. 

EDWARDS.— LIVES  OF  THE  FOUNDERS  OF  THE  BRITISH  MUSEUM,  with  Notices  of  its 
Chief  Augmentors  and  other  Benefactors.  1570-1870.  By  Edward  Edwards. 
With  Illustrations  and  Plans.  2  vols.  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  780,  cloth.  1870.  30s. 

EDWARDES.— See  ENGLISH  AND  FOREIGN  PHILOSOPHICAL  LIBRARY,  Vol.  XVII. 

E6ER. — TECHNOLOGICAL  DICTIONARY  IN  THE  ENGLISH  AND  GERMAN  LANGUAGES. 
Edited  by  Gustav  Eger,  Professor  of  the  Polytechnic  School  of  Darmstadt,  and 
Sworn  Translator  of  the  Grand  Ducal  Ministerial  Departments.  Technically 
Revised  and  Enlarged  by  Otto  Brandes,  Chemist.  Two  vols.,  royal  8vo,  pp,  viii. 
and  712,  and  pp.  viii.  and  970,  cloth.  1884.  £1,  7s. 

EGER  AND  GRIME.— An  Early  English  Romance.  Edited  from  Bishop  Percy's 
Folio  Manuscripts,  about  1650  A.D.  By  J.  W.  Hales,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Christ's 
College,  Cambridge,  and  F.  J.  Furnivall,  M.A.,  of  Trinity  Hall,  Cambridge.  4to, 
large  paper,  half  bound,  Roxburghe  style,  pp.  64.  1867.  10s.  6d. 
EGERTON. — SUSSEX  FOLK  AND  SUSSEX  WAYS.  Stray  Studies  in  the  Wealden  For- 
mation of  Human  Nature.  By  the  Rev.  J.  Coker  Egerton,  M.A.,  Rector  of  Bur- 
wash.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  140,  cloth.  1884.  2s. 


Published  by  Trubner  &  Go.  21 


EGGELING.— See  AucTOKES  SANSKRITI,  Vols.  IV.  and  V. 
EGYPT  EXPLOEATION  FUND  :— 

THE  STORE-CITY  OF  PITHOM,  and  the  Route  of  the  Exodus.    By  Edouard  Naville. 
4to,  pp.  viii.  and  32,  with  Thirteen  Plates  and  Two  Maps,  boards.     1885.     25s. 
EGYPTIAN  GENERAL  STAFF  PUBLICATIONS  :— 

GENERAL  REPORT  ON  THE  PROVINCE  OF  KORDOFAN.  Submitted  to  General  C.  P. 
Stone,  Chief  of  the  General  Staff  Egyptian  Army.  By  Major  H.  G.  Prout, 
Commanding  Expedition  of  Reconnaissance.  Made  at  El-Obeiyad  (Kordofan), 
March  12th,  1876.  Royal  8vo,  pp.  232,  stitched,  with  6  Maps.  1877.  10s.  6d. 
PROVINCES  OF  THE  EQUATOR  :  Summary  of  Letters  and  Reports  of  the  Governor- 
General.  Part  1.  1874.  Royal  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  90,  stitched,  with  Map. 
1877.  5s. 

REPORT  ON  THE  SEIZURE  BY  THE  ABYSSINIANS  of  the  Geological  and  Mineralo- 
gical  Reconnaissance  Expedition  attached  to  the  General  Staff  of  the  Egyptian 
Army.  By  L.  H.  Mitchell,  Chief  of  the  Expedition.  Containing  an  Account 
of  the  subsequent  Treatment  of  the  Prisoners  and  Final  Release  of  the  Com- 
mander. Royal  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  126,  stitched,  with  a  Map.  1878.  7s.  6d. 
EGYPTIAN  CALENDAR  for  the  year  1295  A.H.  (1878  A.D.) :  Corresponding  with  the 

years  1594,  1595  of  the  Koptic  Era.     8vo,  pp.  98,  sewed.     1878.     2s.  6d. 
EHRLICH.— FRENCH  READER  :   With  Notes  and  Vocabulary.    By  H.  W.  Ehrlich. 

12mo,  pp.  viii.  and  125,  limp  cloth.     1877.    Is.  6d. 

EITEL.— BUDDHISM  :  Its  Historical,  Theoretical,  and  Popular  Aspects.  In  Three 
Lectures.  By  E.  J.  Eitel,  M.A.,  Ph.D.  Third  Revised  Edition.  Demy  8vo, 
pp.  x.-146.  1884.  5s. 

EITEL.— FENG-SHUI  ;  or,  The  Rudiments  of  Natural  Science  in  China.  By  E.  J. 
Eitel,  M.A.,  Ph.D.  Royal  8vo,  pp.  vi.  and  84,  sewed.  1873.  6s. 

EITEL. — HANDBOOK  FOR  THE  STUDENT  OF  CHINESE  BUDDHISM.  By  the  Rev.  E.  J. 
Eitel,  of  the  London  Missionary  Society.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  224,  cloth. 
1870.  18s. 

ELLIOT.— MEMOIRS  ON  THE  HISTORY,  FOLK-LORE,  AND  DISTRIBUTION  OF  THE  RACES 
OF  THE  NORTH-WESTERN  PROVINCES  OF  INDIA.  By  the  late  Sir  Henry  M.  Elliot, 
K.C.B.  Edited,  revised,  and  rearranged  by  John  Beames,  M.R.A.S.,  &c.,  &c.  In 
2  vols.  demy  8vo,  pp.  xx.,  370,  and  396,  with  3  large  coloured  folding  Maps,  cloth. 
1869.  £1  16s. 

ELLIOT.— THE  HISTORY  OF  INDIA,  as  told  by  its  own  Historians.  The  Muhammadan 
Period.  Edited  from  the  Posthumous  Papers  of  the  late  Sir  H.  M.  Elliot,  K.C.B., 
East  India  Company's  Bengal  Civil  Service.  Revised  and  continued  by  Professor 
John  Dowson,  M.R.A.S.,  Staff  College,  Sandhurst.  8vo.  Vol.  I. —Vol.  II., 
pp.  x.  and  580,  cloth.  Vol.  III.,  pp.  xii.  and  627,  cloth.  24s.— Vol.  IV., 
pp.  xii.  and  564,  cloth.  1872.  21s.— Vol.  V.,  pp.  x.  and  576,  cloth.  1873. 
21s.— Vol.  VI.,  pp.  viii.  574,  cloth.  21s.— Vol.  VII.,  pp.  viii.-574.  1877.  21s. 
Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  xxxii.-444.  With  Biographical,  Geographical,  and  General 
Index.  1877.  24s.  Complete  sets,  £8,  8s.  Vols.  I.  and  II.  not  sold  separately. 

ELLIS.— ETRUSCAN  NUMERALS.  By  Robert  Ellis,  B.D.,  late  Fellow  of  St.  John's 
College,  Cambridge.  8vo,  pp.  52,  sewed.  1876.  2s.  6d. 

ELY.— FRENCH  AND  GERMAN  SOCIALISM  IN  MODERN  TIMES.  By  R.  T.  Ely,  Ph.D., 
Associate  Professor  of  Political  Economy  in  the  Johns  Hopkins  University,  Balti- 
more ;  and  Lecturer  on  Political  Economy  in  Cornell  University,  Ithaca,  N.  Y. 
Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii. -274,  cloth.  1884.  3s.  6d. 

EMERSON  AT  HOME  AND  ABROAD.  See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical  Library, 
Vol.  XIX. 

EMERSON.— INDIAN  MYTHS;  or,  Legends,  Traditions,  and  Symbols  of  the  Abori- 
gines of  America,  compared  with  those  of  other  Countries,  including  Hindostan, 
Egypt,  Persia,  Assyria,  and  China.  By  Ellen  Russell  Emerson.  Illustrated. 
Post  8vo,  pp.  viii. -678,  cloth.  1884.  £1,  Is. 


22  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

ENGLISH  DIALECT  SOCIETY.— Subscription,  10s.  6d.  per  annum.    List  of  publica- 
tions on  application. 
ENGLISH  AND  FOREIGN  PHILOSOPHICAL  LIBRARY  (THE). 

Post  8vo,  cloth,  uniformly  bound. 

I.  to  III.— A  HISTOKY  OF  MATERIALISM,  and  Criticism  of  its  present  Importance. 
By  Professor  F.  A.  Lange.  Authorised  Translation  from  the  German 
by  Ernest  C.  Thomas.  In  three  volumes.  Vol.  I.  Second  Edition, 
pp.  350.  1878.  10s.  6d.— Vol.  II.,  pp.  viii.  and  398.  1880.  10s.  6d. 
—Vol.  IIL,  pp.  viii.  and  376.  1881.  10s.  6d. 
IV.— NATURAL  LAW  :  an  Essay  in  Ethics.  By  Edith  Simcox.  Second 

Edition.    Pp.  366.    1878.    10s.  6d. 

V  and  VI.— THE  CREED  OP  CHRISTENDOM  ;  its  Foundations  contrasted  with  Super- 
structure.  By  "W.  R.  Greg.   Eighth  Edition,  with  a  New  Introduction. 
In  two  volumes,  pp.  cxiv.-154  and  vi.  -282     1883.     ]5s. 
VII.— OUTLINES  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  RELIGION  TO  THE  SPREAD  OF  THE 
UNIVERSAL  RELIGIONS.     By  Prof.  C.  P.   Tiele.     Translated  from 
the  Dutch  by  J.  Estlin  Carpenter,  M.A.,  with  the  author's  assist- 
ance.    Third  Edition.     Pp.  xx.  and  250.     1884.     7s.  6d. 
VIII.— RELIGION  IN  CHINA;  containing  a  brief  Account  of  the  Three  Religions 
of  the  Chinese;  with  Observations  on  the  Prospects  of  Christian 
Conversion  amongst  that  People.     By  Joseph  Edkins,  D.D.,  Peking. 
Third  Edition.    Pp.  xvi.  and  260.     1884.    7s.  6d. 
IX.— A  CANDID  EXAMINATION   OF   THEISM,     By  Physicus.     Pp.    216. 

1878.    7s.  6d. 

X.— THE  COLOUR-SENSE  ;  its  Origin  and  Development ;  an  Essay  in  Com- 
parative Psychology.  By  Grant  Allen,  B.A.,  author  of  "  Phy- 
siological ^Esthetics."  Pp.  xii.  and  282.  1879.  10s.  6d. 
XI. — THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  Music  ;  being  the  substance  of  a  Course  of 
Lectures  delivered  at  the  Royal  Institution  of  Great  Britain  in 
February  and  March  1877.  By  William  Pole,  F.R.S.,  F.R.S.E., 
Mus.  Doc.,Oxon.  Pp.336.  1879.  10s.  6d. 

XII.— CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  HUMAN 
RACE:   Lectures  and  Dissertations,  by  Lazarus  Geiger.     Translated 
from  the  German  by  D.  Asher,  Ph.D.     Pp.  x.  and  156.     1880.    6s. 
XIII.— DR.  APPLETON  :  his  Life  and  Literary  Relics.     By  J.  H.  Appleton, 

M.A.,  and  A.  H.  Sayce,  M.A.    Pp.  350.     1881.     10s.  6d. 
XIV.— EDGAR  QUINET:  His  Early  Life  and  Writings.     By  Richard  Heath. 
With  Portraits,  Illustrations,  and  an  Autograph  Letter.    Pp.  xxiii. 
and  370.    1881.    12s.  6d. 

XV. — THE  ESSENCE  OF  CHRISTIANITY.    By  Ludwig  Feuerbach.    Translated 
from  the  German  bv  Marian  Evans,  translator  of  Strauss's  "  Life 
of  Jesus."    Second  Edition.     Pp.  xx.  and  340.     1881.    7s.  6d. 
XVI. — AUGUSTE  COMTE  AND  POSITIVISM.     By  the  late  John  Stuart  Mill, 

M.P.     Third  Edition.     Pp.  200.     1882.    3s.  6d. 

XVII.— ESSAYS  AND  DIALOGUES  OF  GIACOMO  LEOPARDI.  Translated  by 
Charles  Edwardes.  With  Biographical  Sketch.  Pp.  xliv.  and  216. 
1882.  7s.  6d. 

XVIII.— RELIGION  AND  PHILOSOPHY  IN  GERMANY  :  A  Fragment.    By  Hein- 
rich  Heine.     Translated  by  J.  Snodgrass.     Pp.  xii.  and  178,  cloth. 
1882.     6s. 
XIX. — EMERSON  AT  HOME  AND  ABROAD.    By  M.  D.  Con  way.    Pp.  viii.  and 

310.    With  Portrait.     1883.    10s.  6d. 

XX.— ENIGMAS  OF  LIFE.  By  W.  R.  Greg.  Fifteenth  Edition,  with  a 
Postscript.  CONTENTS  :  Realisable  Ideals — Malthus  Notwithstand- 
ing— Non-Survival  of  the  Fittest — Limits  and  Directions  of  Human. 
Development— The  Significance  of  Life — De  Profundis — Elsewhere — 
Appendix.  Pp.  xx.  and  314,  cloth.  1883.  10s.  6d. 


Published  by  Trubner  &  Co.  23 

ENGLISH  AND  FOREIGN  PHILOSOPHICAL  LIBRARY— continued. 

XXI. — ETHIC  DEMONSTRATED  IN  GEOMETRICAL  ORDER  AND  DIVIDED  INTO 
FIVE  PARTS,  which  treat  (1)  Of  God,  (2)  Of  the  Nature  and  Origin  of 
the  Mind,  (3)  Of  the  Origin  and  Nature  of  the  Affects,  (4)  Of  Human 
Bondage,  or  of  the  Strength  of  the  Affects,  (5)  Of  the  Power  of  the 
Intellect,  or  of  Human  Liberty.  By  Benedict  de  Spinoza.  Trans- 
lated from  the  Latin  by  William  Hale  White.  Pp.  328.  1883.  10s.  6d. 
XXII. — THE  WORLD  AS  WILL  AND  IDEA.  By  Arthur  Schopenhauer.  Trans- 
lated from  the  German  by  R.  B.  Haldane,  M.A.,  and  John  Kemp, 
M.A.  3  rols.  Vol.  I.,  pp.  xxxii.-532.  1883.  18s. 

XXV-  to  XXVII.— THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS.  By  Eduard  Von 
Hartmann.  Speculative  Results,  according  to  the  Inductive  Method 
of  Physical  Science.  Authorised  Translation,  by  William  C.  Coup- 
land,  M.A.  3vols.  pp.xxxii.-372;  vi.-368;  viii.-360.  1884.  31s.  6d. 

XXVIII.  to  XXX.— THE  GUIDE  OF  THE  PERPLEXED  OF  MAIMONIDES.  Translated 
from  the  Original  Text  and  Annotated  by  M.  Friedlander,  Ph.D. 
3  vols.,  pp. 

Extra  Series. 

I.  and  II.— LESSING  :  His  Life  and  Writings.  By  James  Sime,  M.A.  Second 
Edition.  2  vols.,  pp.  xxii.  and  328,  and  xvi.  and  358,  with  por- 
traits. 1879.  21s. 

III.  and  VI.— AN  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  POLYNESIAN  RACE:  its  Origin  and  Migrations, 
and  the  Ancient  History  of  the  Hawaiian  People  to  the  Times  of 
Kamehameha  I.  By  Abraham  Fornander,  Circuit  Judge  of  the 
Island  of  Maui,  H.I.  Vol.  I.,  pp.  xvi.  and  248.  1877.  7s.  6d.  Vol. 
II.,  pp.  viii.  and  400,  cloth.  1880.  10s.  6d. 

IV.  and  V.— ORIENTAL  RELIGIONS,  and  their  Relation  to  Universal  Religion — 
India.  By  Samuel  Johnson.  In  2  vols.,  pp.  viii.  and  408;  viii. 
and  402.  1879.  21s. 

VI.— AN  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  POLYNESIAN  RACE.    By  A.  Fornander.     Vol. 
II.,  pp.  viii.  and  400,  cloth.    1880.     10s.  6d. 

ER  SIE  ES.— FACSIMILE  OF  A  MANUSCRIPT  supposed  to  have  been  found  in  an  Egyp- 
tian Tomb  by  the  English  soldiers  last  year.  Royal  8vo,  in  ragged  canvas  covers, 
with  string  binding,  with  dilapidated  edges  (?  just  as  discovered).  1884.  6s.  6d. 

EYTON.— DOMESDAY  STUDIES  :  AN  ANALYSIS  AND  DIGEST  OF  THE  STAFFORDSHIRE 
SURVEY.  Treating  of  the  Method  of  Domesday  in  its  Relation  to  Staffordshire, 
&c.  By  the  Rev.  R.  W.  Eyton.  4to,  pp.  vii.  and  135,  cloth.  1881.  £1,  Is. 

FABER.— THE  MIND  OF  MENCIUS.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 

FALKE.— ART  IN  THE  HOUSE.  Historical,  Critical,  and  ^sthetical  Studies  on  the 
Decoration  and  Furnishing  of  the  Dwelling.  By  J.  von  Falke,  Vice-Director  of 
the  Austrian  Museum  of  Art  and  Industry  at  Vienna.  Translated  from  the  German. 
Edited,  with  Notes,  by  C.  C.  Perkins,  M.A.  Royal  8vo,  pp.  xxx.  356,  cloth. 
With  Coloured  Frontispiece,  60  Plates,  and  over  150  Illustrations.  1878.  £3. 

FARLEY.— EGYPT,  CYPRUS,  AND  ASIATIC  TURKEY.  By  J.  L.  Farley,  author  of  "The 
Resources  of  Turkey,"  &c.  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  270,  cloth  gilt.  1878.  10s.  6d. 

FAUSBOLL.— See  JATAKA. 

FEATHERMAN.— THE  SOCIAL  HISTORY  or  THE  RACES  OF  MANKIND.  By  A.  Feather- 
man.  Demy  8vo,  cloth.  Vol.  I.  THE  NIGRITIANS.  Pp.  xxvi.  and  800.  1885. 
£1,  11s.  6d,  Vol.  V.  THE  ARAMAEANS.  Pp.  xvii.  and  664.  1881.  £1,  Is. 

FENTON.— EARLY  HEBREW  LIFE:  a  Study  in  Sociology.  By  John  Fenton.  8vo, 
pp.  xxiv.  and  102,  cloth.  1880.  5s. 

FERGUSSON.— ARCHAEOLOGY  IN  INDIA.  With  especial  reference  to  the  works  of 
Babu  Rajendralala  Mitra.  By  James  Fergusson,  C.I.E.,  F.R.S.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D., 
V.-P.R.A.S.,  &c.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  116,  with  Illustrations,  sewed.  1884.  5s. 


24  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

FERGUSSON.— THE  TEMPLE  OF  DIANA  AT  EPHESUS.  "With  Especial  Reference  to 
Mr.  Wood's  Discoveries  of  its  Remains.  By  James  Fergusson,  C.I.E.,  D.C.L., 
LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  &c.  From  the  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Institute  of  British 
Architects.  Demy  4to,  pp.  24,  with  Plan,  cloth.  1883.  5s. 

FERGUSSON  AND  BURGESS.— THE  CAVE  TEMPLES  OF  INDIA.  By  James  Fergusson, 
D.C.L.,  F.R.S.,  and  James  Burgess,  F.R.G.S.  Impl.  8vo,  pp.  xx.  and  536,  with 
98  Plates,  half  bound.  1880.  £2,  2s. 

FERGUSSON.— CHINESE  RESEARCHES.  First  Part.  Chinese  Chronology  and 
Cycles.  By  Thomas  Fergusson,  Member  of  the  North  China  Branch  of  the 
Royal  Asiatic  Society.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  274,  sewed.  1881.  10s.  6d. 

FEUERBACH.— THE  ESSENCE  OF  CHRISTIANITY.  See  English  and  Foreign  Philo- 
sophical Library,  vol.  XV. 

FICHTE.— J.  G.  FICHTE'S  POPULAR  WORKS  :  The  Nature  of  the  Scholar— The  Voca- 
tion of  Man— The  Doctrine  of  Religion.  With  a  Memoir  by  William  Smith,  LL.D. 
Demy  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  564,  cloth.  1873.  15s. 

FICHTE. — CHARACTERISTICS  OF  THE  PRESENT  AGE.  By  J.  G.  Fichte.  Translated 
from  the  German  by  W.  Smith.  Post  8vo,  pp.  xi.  and  271,  cloth.  1847.  6s. 

FICHTE.— MEMOIR  OF  JOHANN  GOTTLIEB  FICHTE.  By  William  Smith.  Second 
Edition.  Post  8vo,  pp.  168,  cloth.  1848.  4s. 

FICHTE.— ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THE  SCHOLAR,  AND  ITS  MANIFESTATIONS.  By  Johann 
Gottlieb  Fichte.  Translated  from  the  German  by  William  Smith.  Second  Edi- 
tion. Post  8vo,  pp.  vii.  and  131,  cloth.  1848.  3s. 

FICHTE. — NEW  EXPOSITION  OF  THE  SCIENCE  OF  KNOWLEDGE.  By  J.  G.  Fichte. 
Translated  from  the  German  by  A.  E.  Kroeger.  8vo,  pp.  vi.  and  182,  cloth.  1869.  6s. 

FIELD.— OUTLINES  OF  AN  INTERNATIONAL  CODE.  By  David  Dudley  Field.  Second 
Edition.  Royal  8vo,  pp.  iii.  and  712,  sheep.  1876.  £2,  2s. 

FIGANIERE.— ELVA  :  A  STORY  OF  THE  DARK  AGES.  By  Viscount  de  Figaniere,  G.C. 
St.  Anne,  &c.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  194,  cloth.  1878.  5s. 

FINN.— PERSIAN  FOR  TRAVELLERS.  By  Alexander  Finn,  F.R.G.S.,  &c.,  H.B.M. 
Consul  at  Resht.  Oblong  32mo,  pp.  xxii.-232,  cloth.  1884.  5s. 

FISKE.— THE  UNSEEN  WORLD,  and  other  Essays.  By  John  Fiske,  M.A.,  LL.B. 
Crown  8vo,  pp.  350.  1876.  10s. 

FISKE.— MYTHS  AND  MYTH-MAKERS  ;  Old  Tales  and  Superstitions,  interpreted  by 
Comparative  Mythology.  By  John  Fiske,  M.A.,  LL.B.,  Assistant  Librarian,  and 
late  Lecturer  on  Philosophy  at  Harvard  University.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  260,  cloth. 
1873.  10s. 

FITZGERALD.— AUSTRALIAN  ORCHIDS.  By  R.  D.  Fitzgerald,  F.L.S.  Folio.— Part  I. 
7  Plates.— Part  II.  10  Plates.— Part  III.  10  Plates.— Part  IV.  10  Plates.— 
Part  V.  10  Plates.— Part  VI.  10  Plates.  Each  Part,  Coloured  21s.;  Plain,  10s.  6d. 
—Part  VII.  10  Plates.  Vol.  II.,  Part  I.  10  Plates.  Each,  Coloured,  25s. 

FITZGERALD. — AN  ESSAY  ON  THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS.  Com- 
prising an  Analysis  of  Reason  and  the  Rationale  of  Love.  By  P.  F.  Fitzgerald. 
Demy  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  196,  cloth.  1882.  5s. 

FORJETT.— EXTERNAL  EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY.  ByE.  H.  Forjett.  8vo,  pp. 
114,  cloth.  1874.  2s.  6d. 

FORNANDER.— THE  POLYNESIAN  RACE.  See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical 
Library,  Extra  Series,  Vols.  III.  and  VI. 

FORSTER. — POLITICAL  PRESENTMENTS. — By  William  Forster,  Agent-General  for 
New  South  Wales.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  122,  cloth.  1878.  4s.  6d. 

FOULEES. — THE  DAYA  BHAGA,  the  Law  of  Inheritance  of  the  Sarasvati  Vilasa. 
The  Original  Sanskrit  Text,  with  Translation  by  the  Rev.  Thos.  Foulkes,  F.L.S., 
M.R.A.S.,  F.R.G.S.,  Fellow  of  the  University  of  Madras,  &c.  Demy  8vo,  pp. 
xxvi.  and  194-162,  cloth.  1881.  10s.  6d. 

FOX.— MEMORIAL  EDITION  OF  COLLECTED  WORKS,  by  W.  J.  Fox.  12  vols.  8vo, 
cloth.  £3.  i 


Published  ly  Trubner  &  Co.  25 

FRANKLYN.  —  OUTLINES  OF  MILITARY  LAW,  AND  THE  LAWS  OF  EVIDENCE.    By  H.  B. 

Franklyn,  LL.B.     Crown  16mo,  pp.  viii.  and  152,  cloth.     1874.     3s.  6d. 
FREEMAN.— LECTURES  TO  AMERICAN  AUDIENCES.     By  E.  A.  Freeman,  D.C.L., 

LL.D.,  Honorary  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Oxford.     I.  The  English  People  in 

its  Three  Homes.      II.  The  Practical  Bearings  of   General  European  History. 

Post  8vo.  pp.  viii. -454,  cloth.     1883.     8s.  6d. 
FRIEDRICH.— PROGRESSIVE  GERMAN  READER,  with  Copious  Notes  to  the  First  Part. 

By  P.  Friedrich.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  166,  cloth.    1868.    4s.  6d. 
FRIEDRICH.— A  GRAMMATICAL  COURSE  OP  THE  GERMAN  LANGUAGE.    See  under 

DUSAR. 

FRIEDRICH.— A  GRAMMAR  OP  THE  GERMAN  LANGUAGE,  WITH  EXERCISES.  See 
under  DUSAR. 

FRIED ERICI. — BIBLIOTHECA  ORIENTALIS,  or  a  Complete  List  of  Books,  Papers, 
Serials,  and  Essays,  published  in  England  and  the  Colonies,  Germany  and 
France,  on  the  History,  Geography,  Religions.  Antiquities,  Literature,  and 
Languages  of  the  East.  Compiled  by  Charles  Friederici.  8vo,  boards.  1876,  2s.  6d. 
1877,  3s.  1878,  3s.  6d.  1879,  3s.  1880,  3s.  1881,  3s.  1882,  3s.  1883,  3s.  6d. 

FRCEMBLING.— GRADUATED  GERMAN  HEADER.  Consisting  of  a  Selection  from  the 
most  Popular  Writers,  arranged  progressively  ;  with  a  complete  Vocabulary  for 
the  first  part.  By  Friedrich  Otto  Preambling.  Eighth  Edition.  12mo,  pp.  viii.  and 
306,  cloth.  1883.  3s.  6d. 

FRCEMBLING.— GRADUATED  EXERCISES  FOR  TRANSLATION  INTO  GERMAN.  Consist- 
ing of  Extracts  from  the  best  English  Authors,  arranged  progressively  ;  with  an 
Appendix,  containing  Idiomatic  Notes.  By  Friedrich  Otto  Froembling,  Ph.D., 
Principal  German  Master  at  the  City  of  London  School.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xiv.  and 
322,  cloth.  With  Notes,  pp.  66.  1867.  4s.  6d.  Without  Notes,  4s. 

FROUDE.— THE  BOOK  OF  JOB.  By  J.  A.  Froude,  M;  A.,  late  Fellow  of  Exeter  Col- 
lege, Oxford.  Reprinted  from  the  Westminster  Review.  8vo,  pp.  38,  cloth.  Is. 

FRUSTON.— ECHO  FRANC AIS.  A  Practical  Guide  to  French  Conversation.  By  F. 
de  la  Fruston.  With  a  Vocabulary.  12mo,  pp.  vi.  and  192,  cloth.  3s. 

FRYER.  —THE  KHYENG  PEOPLE  OF  THE  SANDOWAY  DISTRICT,  ARAKAN.  By  G.  E. 
Fryer,  Major,  M.S. C.,  Deputy  Commissioner,  Sandoway.  With  2  Plates.  8vo, 
pp.  44,  cloth.  1875.  3s.  6d. 

FRYER.—  PALI  STUDIES.  No.  I.  Analysis,  and  Pali  Text  of  the  Subodhalankara,  or 
Easy  Rhetoric,  by  Sangharakkhita  Thera.  8vo,  pp.  35,  cloth.  1875.  3s.  6d. 

FURNIVALL.— EDUCATION  IN  EARLY  ENGLAND.  Some  Notes  used  as  forewords  to 
a  Collection  of  Treatises  on  "Manners  and  Meals  in  Olden  Times,"  for  the  Early 
English  Text  Society.  By  Frederick  J.  Furnivall,  M.A.  8vo,  pp.  4  and  Ixxiv., 
sewed.  1867.  Is. 

GALDOS.— TRAFALGAR  :  A  Tale.  By  B.  Perez  Galdos.  From  the  Spanish  by  Clara 
Bell.  16mo,  pp.  256,  cloth.  1884.  4s.  Paper,  2s.  6d. 

GALDOS. — MARIANELA.  By  B.  Perez  Galdos.  From  the  Spanish,  by  Clara  Bell. 
16mo,  pp.  264,  cloth.  1883.  4s.  Paper,  2s.  6d. 

GALDOS. — GLORIA:  A  Novel.  By  B.  Perez  Galdos.  From  the  Spanish,  by  Clara 
Bell.  Two  volumes,  16mo,  pp.  vi.  and  318,  iv.  and  362,  cloth.  1883.  7s.  6d. 
Paper,  5s. 

GALLOWAY.— A  TREATISE  ON  FUEL.  Scientific  and  Practical.  By  Robert  Gallo- 
way, M.R.I. A.,  F.C.S.,  &c.  With  Illustrations.  Post  8vo,  pp.  x.  and  136, 
cloth.  1880.  6s. 

GALLOWAY. — EDUCATION:  SCIENTIFIC  AND  TECHNICAL;  or,  How  the  Inductive 
Sciences  are  Taught,  and  How  they  Ought  to  be  Taught.  By  Robert  Galloway, 
M.R.I. A.,  F.C.S.  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  462,  cloth.  1881.  10s.  6d. 

GAMBLE.— A  MANUAL  OF  INDIAN  TIMBERS  :  An  Account  of  the  Structure,  Growth, 
Distribution,  and  Qualities  of  Indian  Woods.  By  J.  C.  Gamble,  M.A.,  F.L.S. 
8vo,  pp.  xxx.  and  522,  with  a  Map,  cloth.  1881.  10s. 


26  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

GARBE.— See  AUCTORES  SANSKRITI,  Yol.  III. 

GARFIELD.— THE  LIFE  AND  PDBLIO  SERVICE  OF  JAMES  A.  GARFIELD,  Twentieth 
President  of  the  United  States.  A  Biographical  Sketch.  By  Captain  F.  H.  Mason, 
late  of  the  42d  Kegiment,  U.S.A.  With  a  Preface  by  Bret  Harte.  Crown  8vo, 
pp.  vi.  and  134,  cloth.  With  Portrait.  1881.  2s.  6d. 

GARRETT.— A  CLASSICAL  DICTIONARY  OF  INDIA  :  Illustrative  of  the  Mythology, 
Philosophy,  Literature,  Antiquities,  Arts,  Manners,  Customs,  &c.,  of  the  Hindus. 
By  John  Garrett,  Director  of  Public  Instruction  in  Mysore.  8vo,  pp.  x.  and  794, 
cloth.  With  Supplement,  pp.  160.  1871  and  1873.  £1,  16s. 

GAUTAMA.— THE  INSTITUTES  OF.    See  AUCTORES  SANSKRITI,  Vol.  II. 

GAZETTEER  OF  THE  CENTRAL  PROVINCES  OF  INDIA.  Edited  by  Charles  Grant, 
Secretary  to  the  Chief  Commissioner  of  the  Central  Provinces.  Second  Edition. 
With  a  very  large  folding  Map  of  the  Central  Provinces  of  India.  Demy  8vo,  pp. 
clvii.  and  582,  cloth.  1870.  £1,  4s. 

GEIGER. — A  PEEP  AT  MEXICO;  Narrative  of  a  Journey  across  the  Republic  from 
the  Pacific  to  the  Gulf,  in  December  1873  and  January  1874.  By  J.  L.  Geiger, 
F.R.G.S.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  368,  with  Maps  and  45  Original  Photographs.  Cloth, 
24s. 

GEIGER.— CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  HUMAN 
RACE  :  Lectures  and  Dissertations,  by  Lazarus  Geiger.  Translated  from  the 
Second  German  Edition,  by  David  Asher,  Ph.D.  Post  8vo,  pp.  X.-156,  cloth. 
1880.  6s. 

GELBART.— FAITH  AND  FREEDOM.  Fourteen  Sermons.  By  E.  M.  Geldart,  M.A. 
Crown  8vo,  pp.  vi.  and  168,  cloth.  1881.  4s.  6d. 

GELDART.— A  GUIDE  TO  MODERN  GREEK.  By  E.  M.  Geldart,  M.A.  Post  8vo, 
pp.  xii.  and  274,  cloth.  1883.  7s.  6d.  Key,  pp.  28,  cloth.  1883.  2s.  6d. 

GELDART.— GREEK  GRAMMAR.    See  Trubner's  Collection. 

GEOLOGICAL  MAGAZINE  (THE)  :  OR,  MONTHLY  JOURNAL  OF  GEOLOGY.  With 
which  is  incorporated  "The  Geologist."  Edited  by  Henry  Woodward,  LL.D., 
F.R.S.,  F.G.S.,  &c.,  of  the  British  Museum.  Assisted  by  Professor  John  Morris, 
M.A.,F.G.S.,  &c.,  and  Robert  Etheridge,  F.R.S.,  L.  &  E.,  F.G.S.,  &c.,  of  the 
Museum  of  Practical  Geology.  8vo,  cloth.  1866  to  1884.  20s.  each. 

GHOSE.— THE  MODERN  HISTORY  OF  THE  INDIAN  CHIEFS,  RAJAS,  ZAMINDARS,  &c. 

By  Loke  Nath  Ghose.    2  vols.  post  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  218,  and  xviii.  and  612,  cloth. 

1883.    21s. 
GILES.— CHINESE  SKETCHES.— By  Herbert  A.  Giles,  of  H.B.M.'s  China  Consular 

Service.    8vo,  pp.  204,  cloth.    1875.    10s.  6d. 

GILES. — A  DICTIONARY  OF  COLLOQUIAL  IDIOMS  IN  THE  MANDARIN  DIALECT.  By 
Herbert  A.  Giles.  4to,  pp.  65,  half  bound.  1873.  28s. 

GILES.— SYNOPTICAL  STUDIES  IN  CHINESE  CHARACTER.  By  Herbert  A.  Giles.  8vo, 
pp.  118,  half  bound.  1874.  15s. 

GILES.— CHINESE  WITHOUT  A  TEACHER.  Being  a  Collection  of  Easy  and  Useful 
Sentences  in  the  Mandarin  Dialect.  With  a  Vocabulary.  By  Herbert  A.  Giles. 
12mo,  pp.  60,  half  bound.  1872.  5s. 

GILES.— THE  SAN  Tzu  CHING  ;  or,  Three  Character  Classic  ;  and  the  Ch'Jen  Tsu 
Wen ;  or,  Thousand  Character  Essay.  Metrically  Translated  by  Herbert  A.  Giles. 
12mo,  pp.  28,  half  bound.  1873.  2s.  6d. 

GLASS.— ADVANCE  THOUGHT.  By  Charles  E.  Glass.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  xxxvi.  and  188, 

cloth.    1876.    6s. 

GOETHE'S  FAUST.— See  SCOONES  and  WYSARD. 
GOETHE'S  MINOR  POEMS.— See  SELSS. 


Published  ty  Trubner  &  Co.  27 

GOLDSTUCKER. — A  DICTIONARY,  SANSKRIT  AND  ENGLISH,  extended  and  improved 
from  the  Second  Edition  of  the  Dictionary  of  Professor  H.  H.  "Wilson,  with  his 
sanction  and  concurrence.  Together  with  a  Supplement,  Grammatical  Appen- 
dices, and  an  Index,  serving  as  a  Sanskrit-English  Vocabulary.  By  Theodore  Gold- 
stucker.  Parts  I.  to  VI.  4to,  pp.  400.  1856-63.  6s.  each. 

GOLDSTUCKER.— See  AUCTORES  SANSKRITI,  Vol.  I. 

GOOROO  SIMPLE.  Strange  Surprising  Adventures  of  the  Venerable  G.  S.  and  his 
Five  Disciples,  Noodle,  Doodle,  Wiseacre,  Zany,  and  Foozle  ;  adorned  with  Fifty 
Illustrations,  drawn  on  wood,  by  Alfred  Crowquill.  A  companion  Volume  to 
"  Miinchhausen  "  and  "  Owlglass,"  based  upon  the  famous  Tamul  tale  of  the  Gooroo 
Paramartan,  and  exhibiting,  in  the  form  of  a  skilfully-constructed  consecutive 
narrative,  some  of  the  finest  specimens  of  Eastern  wit  and  humour.  Elegantly 
printed  on  tinted  paper,  in  crown  8vo,  pp.  223,  richly  gilt  ornamental  cover,  gilt 
edges.  1861.  10s.  6d. 

GORKOM. — HANDBOOK  OF  CINCHONA  CULTURE.  By  K.  W.  Van  Gorkom,  formerly 
Director  of  the  Government  Cinchona  Plantations  in  Java.  Translated  by  B.  D. 
Jackson,  Secretary  of  the  Linnsean  Society  of  London.  With  a  Coloured  Illus- 
tration. Imperial  Svo,  pp.  xii.  and  292,  cloth.  1882.  £2. 

GOUOH.— The  SARVA-DARSANA-SAMGRAHA.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 
GOUGH.—  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UPANISHADS.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 

GOVER.—  THE  FOLK-SONGS  OP  SOUTHERN  INDIA.  By  C.  E.  Gover,  Madras.  Con- 
tents :  Canarese  Songs  ;  Badaga  Songs  ;  Coorg  Songs  ;  Tamil  Songs ;  The  Cural ; 
Malayalam  Songs ;  Telugu  Songs.  Svo,  pp.  xxviii.  and  300,  cloth.  1872. 
10s.  6d. 

GRAY.— DARWINIAN  A :  Essays  and  Reviews  pertaining  [to  Darwinism.  By  Asa 
Gray.  Crown  Svo,  pp.  xii.  and  396,  cloth.  1877.  10s. 

GRAY. — NATURAL  SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION:  Two  Lectures  Delivered  to  the  Theo- 
logical School  of  Yale  College.  By  Asa  Gray.  Crown  Svo,  pp.  112,  cloth.  1880.  5s. 

GREEN.— SHAKESPEARE  AND  THE  EMBLEM- WRITERS  :  An  Exposition  of  their  Simi- 
larities of  Thought  and  Expression.  Preceded  by  a  View  of  the  Emblem-Book 
Literature  down  to  A.D.  1616.  By  Henry  Green,  M.A.  In  one  volume,  pp.  xvi. 
572,  profusely  illustrated  with  Woodcuts  and  Photolith.  Plates,  elegantly  bound 
in  cloth  gilt.  1870.  Large  medium  Svo,  £1,  lls.  6d. ;  large  imperial  Svo.  £2, 12s.  6d. 

GREEN. — ANDREA  ALCIATI,  and  his  Books  of  Emblems  :  A  Biographical  and  Biblio- 
graphical Study.  By  Henry  Green,  M.A.  With  Ornamental  Title,  Portraits, 
and  other  Illustrations.  Dedicated  to  Sir  William  Stirling-Maxwell,  Bart.,  Rector 
of  the  University  of  Edinburgh.  Only  250  copies  printed.  Demy  Svo,  pp.  360, 
handsomely  bound.  1872.  £1,  Is. 

GREENE.— A  NEW  METHOD  OF  LEARNING  TO  READ,  WRITE,  AND  SPEAK  THE 
FRENCH  LANGUAGE  ;  or,  First  Lessons  in  French  (Introductory  to  OllendorfF s 
Larger  Grammar).  By  G.  W.  Greene,  Instructor  in  Modern  Languages  in  Brown 
University.  Third  Edition,  enlarged  and  rewritten.  Fcap.  Svo,  pp.  248,  cloth. 
1869.  3s.  6d. 

GREENE.— THE  HEBREW  MIGRATION  FROM  EGYPT.  By  J.  Baker  Greene,  LL.B., 
M.B.,  Trin.  Coll.,  Dub.  Second  Edition.  Demy  Svo,  pp.  xii.  and  440,  cloth. 
1882.  10s.  6d. 

GREG.— TRUTH  VERSUS  EDIFICATION.    By  W.  R.  Greg.    Fcap.  Svo,  pp.  32,  cloth. 

1869.    Is. 
GREG.— WHY  ARE  WOMEN  REDUNDANT?    By  W.  R.  Greg.  Fcap.  Svo,  pp.  40,  cloth. 

1869.    Is. 

GREG.— LITERARY  AND  SOCIAL  JUDGMENTS.  By  W.  R.  Greg.  Fourth  Edition, 
considerably  enlarged.  2  vols.  crown  Svo,  pp.  310  and  288,  cloth.  1877,  15s. 


28  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works. 

GREG.— MISTAKEN  AIMS  AND  ATTAINABLE  IDEALS  OP  THE  ARTISAN  CLASS.  By  W. 
R.  Greg.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  vi.  and  332,  cloth.  1876.  10s.  6d. 

GKEG.— ENIGMAS  OF  LIFE.  By  W.  R.  Greg.  Fifteenth  Edition,  with  a  postscript. 
Contents :  Realisable  Ideals.  Malthus  Notwithstanding.  Non-Survival  of  the 
Fittest.  Limits  and  Directions  of  Human  Development.  The  Significance  of  Life. 
De  Profundis.  Elsewhere.  Appendix.  Post  8vo,  pp.  xxii.  and  314,  cloth. 
1883.  10s.  6d. 

GREG.— POLITICAL  PROBLEMS  FOR  OUR  AGE  AND  COUNTRY.  By  W.  R.  Greg.  Con- 
tents :  I.  Constitutional  and  Autocratic  Statesmanship.  II.  England's  Future 
Attitude  and  Mission.  III.  Disposal  of  the  Criminal  Classes.  IV.  Recent 
Change  in  the  Character  of  English  Crime.  V.  The  Intrinsic  Vice  of  Trade- 
Unions.  VI.  Industrial  and  Co-operative  Partnerships.  VII.  The  Economic 
Problem.  VIII.  Political  Consistency.  IX.  The  Parliamentary  Career.  X.  The 
Price  we  pay  for  Self-government.  XI.  Vestryism.  XII.  Direct  v.  Indirect 
Taxation.  XIII.  The  New  Regime,  and  how  to  meet  it.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  342, 
cloth.  1870.  10s.  6d. 

GREG.— THE  GREAT  DUEL  :  Its  True  Meaning  and  Issues.  By  W.  R.  Greg.  Crown 
8vo,  pp.  96,  cloth.  1871.  2s.  6d. 

GREG.— THE  CREED  OF  CHRISTENDOM.     See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical 

Library,  Vols.  V.  and  VI. 

GREG.— ROCKS  AHEAD  ;  or,  The  Warnings  of  Cassandra.  By  W.  R.  Greg.  Second 
Edition,  with  a  Reply  to  Objectors.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xliv.  and  236,  cloth.  1874. 
9s. 

GREG.— MISCELLANEOUS  ESSAYS.  By  W.  R.  Greg.  First  Series.  Crown  8vo, 
pp.  iv.-268,  cloth.  1881.  7s.  6d. 

CONTENTS  :— Rocks  Ahead  and  Harbours  of  Refuge.  Foreign  Policy  of  Great 
Britain.  The  Echo  of  the  Antipodes.  A  Grave  Perplexity  before  us.  Obli- 
gations of  the  Soil.  The  Right  Use  of  a  Surplus.  The  Great  Twin 
Brothers :  Louis  Napoleon  and  Benjamin  Disraeli.  Is  the  Popular  Judgment 
in  Politics  more  Just  than  that  of  the  Higher  Orders?  Harriet  Martineau. 
Verify  your  Compass.  The  Prophetic  Element  in  the  Gospels.  Mr.  Frederick 
Harrison  on  the  Future  Life.  Can  Truths  be  Apprehended  which  could 
not  have  been  Discovered  ? 

GREG.— MISCELLANEOUS  ESSAYS.  By  W.  R.  Greg.  Second  Series.  Pp.  294.  1884. 
7s.  6d. 

CONTENTS  :— France  since  1848.  France  in  January  1852.  England  as  it  is. 
Sir  R.  Peel's  Character  and  Policy.  Employment  .of  our  Asiatic  Forces  in 
European  Wars. 

GRIFFIN.— THE  RAJAS  OF  THE  PUNJAB.  Being  the  History  of  the  Principal  States 
in  the  Punjab,  and  their  Political  Relations  with  the  British  Government.  By 
Lepel  H.  Griffin,  Bengal  Civil  Service,  Acting  Secretary  to  the  Government  of  the 
Punjab,  Author  of  "The  Punjab  Chiefs,"  &c.  Second  Edition.  Royal  8vo, 
pp.  xvi.  and  630,  cloth.  1873.  £1,  Is. 

GRIFFIN.— THE  WORLD  UNDER  GLASS.    By  Frederick  Griffin,  Author  of  "The 
Destiny  of  Man,"  "The  Storm  King,"  and  other  Poems.     Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  204; 
cloth  gilt.    1879.    3s.  6d. 
GRIFFIN.— THE  DESTINY  OF  MAN,  THE  STORM  KING,  and  other  Poems.    By  F. 

Griffin.     Second  Edition.     Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  vii.-104,  cloth.     1883.     2s.  6d. 
GRIFFIS. — THE  MIKADO'S  EMPIRE.    Book  I.  History  of  Japan,  from  660  B.C.  to 
1872  A.D. — Book  II.  Personal  Experiences,  Observations,  and  Studies  in  Japan, 
1870-1874.    By  W.  E.  Griffis,  A.M.     Second  Edition.    8vo,  pp.  626,  cloth.    Illus- 
trated.    1883.     20s. 
GRIFFIS. — JAPANESE  FAIRY  WORLD.    Stories  from  the  Wonder- Lore  of  Japan.    By 

W.  E.  Griffis.     Square  16mo,  pp.  viii.  and  304,  with  12  Plates.     1880.    7s.  6d. 
GRIFFITH.— THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR  GOD.    See  Trubner's  Oriental  Series. 


Published  by  Trubner  &  Co.  29 

GRIFFITH. — YUSUF  AND  ZULAIKHA.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 

GRIFFITH. — SCENES  FEOM  THE  RAMAYANA,  MEGHADUTA,  &c.  Translated  by  Ralph 
T.  H.  Griffith,  M.A.,  Principal  of  the  Benares  College.  Second  Edition.  Crown 
8vo,  pp.  xviii.  and  244,  cloth.  1870.  6s. 

CONTENTS Preface— Ayodhya— Ravan  Doomed— The  Birth  of  Kama— The  Heir-Apparent— 

Manthara's  Guile — Dasaratha's  Oath — The  Step-mother — Mother  and  Son — The  Triumph  of 
Love — Farewell  ? — The  Hermit's  Son — The  Trial  of  Truth — The  Forest — The  Rape  of  Sita — 
Rama's  Despair — The  Messenger  Cloud — Ehumbakarna — The  Suppliant  Dove — True  Glory — 
Feed  the  Poor— The  Wise  Scholar. 

GRIFFITH.— THE  RIMA"YAN  OF  VlLMfkl.  Translated  into  English  Terse.  By  Ealph 
T.  H.  Griffith,  M.A.,  Principal  of  the  Benares  College.  Vol.  I.,  containing  Books 
I.  and  II.,  demy  8vo,  pp.  xxxii.  and  440,  cloth.  1870.  — Vol.  II.,  containing 


Book  II.,  with  additional  Notes  and  Index  of  Names.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  504,  cloth. 
1871.  -Vol.  III.,  demy  8vo,  pp.  390,  cloth.  1872.  —Vol.  IV.,  demy 
8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  432,  cloth.  1873.  —Vol.  V.,  demy  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  360, 


1871.      -Vol.    III.,    demy    8vo,    pp.   390,   cloth.      1872.      —Vol.   IV.,   demy 
8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  432,  cloth.     1873.     —Vol.  V. 
cloth.     1875.    The  complete  work,  5  vols.  £7,  7s. 

GROTE.— REVIEW  of  the  Work  of  Mr.  John  Stuart  Mill  entitled  "Examination  of 
Sir  William  Hamilton's  Philosophy. "  By  George  Grote,  Author  of  the  ' '  History 
of  Ancient  Greece,"  "  Plato,  and  the  other  Companions  of  Socrates,"  &c.  12mo, 
pp.  112,  cloth.  1868.  3s.  6d. 

GROUT.— ZULU-LAND  ;  or,  Life  among  the  Zulu-Kafirs  of  Natal  and  Zulu-Land, 
South  Africa.  By  the  Rev.  Lewis  Grout.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  352,  cloth.  With 
Map  and  Illustrations.  7s.  6d. 

GROWSE.— MATHURA  :  A  District  Memoir.  By  F.  S.  Growse,  B.C.S.,  M.A.,  Oxon, 
C.I.E.,  Fellow  of  the  Calcutta  University.  Second  edition,  illustrated,  revised, 
and  enlarged,  4to,  pp.  xxiv.  and  520,  boards.  1880.  42s. 

GUBERNATIS.— ZOOLOGICAL  MYTHOLOGY  ;  or,  The  Legends  of  Animals.  By  Angelo 
de  Gubernatis,  Professor  of  Sanskrit  and  Comparative  Literature  in  the  Institute 
di  Studii  Superorii  e  di  Perfezionamento  at  Florence,  &c.  2  vols.  8vo,  pp.  xxvi. 
and  432,  and  vii.  and  442,  cloth.  1872.  £],  8s. 

This  work  is  an  important  contribution  to  the  study  of  the  comparative  mythology  of  the  Indo- 
Germanic  nations.  The  author  introduces  the  denizens  of  the  air,  earth,  and  water  in  the  vari- 
ous characters  assigned  to  them  in  the  myths  and  legends  of  all  civilised  nations,  and  traces  the 
migration  of  the  mythological  ideas  from  the  times  of  the  early  Aryans  to  those  of  the  Greeks, 
Romans,  and  Teutons. 

GULSHAN  I.  RAZ  :  THE  MYSTIC  ROSE  GARDEN  OF  SA'D  UD  DIN  MAHMUD  SHABIS- 
TARI.  The  Persian  Text,  with  an  English  Translation  and  Notes,  chiefly  from  the 
Commentary  of  Muhammed  Bin  Yahya  Lahiji.  By  E.  H.  Whinfield,  M.A.,  Bar- 
rister-at-Law,  late  of  H.M.B.C.S.  4to,  pp.  xvi.,  94,  60,  cloth.  1880.  10s.  6d. 

GUMPACH.— TREATY  RIGHTS  OF  THE  FOREIGN  MERCHANT,  and  the  Transit  System 
in  China.  By  Johannes  von  Gumpach.  8vo,  pp.  xviii.  and  421,  sewed.  10s.  6d. 

HAAS.— CATALOGUE  OF  SANSKRIT  AND  PALI  BOOKS  IN  THE  BRITISH  MUSEUM.  By 
Dr.  Ernst  Haas.  Printed  by  permission  of  the  Trustees  of  the  British  Museum. 
4to,  pp.  viii.  and  188,  paper  boards.  1876.  21s. 

HAFIZ  OF  SHIRAZ.— SELECTIONS  FROM  HIS  POEMS.  Translated  from  the  Persian 
by  Hermann  Bicknell.  With  Preface  by  A.  S.  Bicknell.  Demy  4to,  pp.  xx.  and 
384,  printed  on  fine  stout  plate-paper,  with  appropriate  Oriental  Bordering  in  gold 
and  colour,  and  Illustrations  by  J.  R.  Herbert,  R.A.  1875.  £2,  2s. 

HAFIZ.— See  Trubner's  Oriental  Series. 

HAGEN.— NORICA  ;  or,  Tales  from  the  Olden  Time.  Translated  from  the  German  of 
August  Hagen.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  xiv.  and  374.  1850.  5s. 

HAGGARD.— CETYWAYO  AND  HIS  WHITE  NEIGHBOURS  ;  or,  Remarks  on  Recent 
Events  in  Zululand,  Natal,  and  the  Transvaal.  By  H.  R.  Haggard.  Crown  8vo, 
pp.  xvi.  and  294,  cloth.  1882.  7s.  6d. 


30  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

HAGGARD.— See  "The  Vazir  of  Lankuran." 

HAHN.—  TSUNI-IIGOAM,  the  Supreme  Being  of  the  Khoi-Khoi.  By  Theophilus 
Hahn,  Ph.D.,  Custodian  of  the  Grey  Collection,  Cape  Town,  &c.,  &c.  Post  8vo, 
pp.  xiv.  and  154.  1882.  7s.  6d. 

HALDANE.  — See  SCHOPENHAUER,  or  ENGLISH  AND  FOREIGN  PHILOSOPHICAL 
LIBRARY,  vol.  xxii. 

HALDEM AN. —PENNSYLVANIA  DUTCH  :  A  Dialect  of  South  Germany  with  an  Infusion 
of  English.  By  S.  S.  Haldeman,  A.M.,  Professor  of  Comparative  Philology  in  the 
University  of  Pennsylvania,  Philadelphia.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  70,  cloth.  1872.  3s. 
6d. 

HALL.— ON  ENGLISH  ADJECTIVES  IN -ABLE,  WITH  SPECIAL  EEPERENCE  TO  RELIABLE. 
By  FitzEdward  Hall,  C.E.,  M.A.,  Hon.  D.C.L.  Oxon;  formerly  Professor  of 
Sanskrit  Language  and  Literature,  and  of  Indian  Jurisprudence  in  King's  College, 
London.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  238,  cloth.  1877.  7s.  6d. 

HALL.— MODERN  ENGLISH.  By  FitzEdward  Hall,  M.  A.,  Hon.  D.C.L.  Oxon.  Crown 
8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  394,  cloth.  1873.  10s.  6d. 

HALL.— SUN  AND  EARTH  AS  GREAT  FORCES  IN  CHEMISTRY.  By  T.  W.  Hall,  M.D., 
L.R.C.S.E.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  220,  cloth.  1874.  3s. 

HALL.— THE  PEDIGREE  OF  THE  DEVIL.  By  F.  T.  Hall,  F.R.A.S.  "With  Seven 
Autotype  Illustrations  from  Designs  by  the  Author.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and 
256,  cloth.  1883.  7s.  6d. 

HALL.— ARCTIC  EXPEDITION.    See  NOURSE. 

HALLOCK. — THE  SPORTSMAN'S  GAZETTEER  AND  GENERAL  GUIDE.  The  Game 
Animals,  Birds,  and  Fishes  of  North  America  :  their  Habits  and  various  methods 
of  Capture,  &c.,  &c.  With  a  Directory  to  the  principal  Game  Resorts  of  the 
Country.  By  Charles  Hallock.  New  Edition.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  Maps  and 
Portrait.  1883.  15s. 

HAM. — THE  MAID  OF  CORINTH.  A  Drama  in  Four  Acts.  By  J.  Panton  Ham, 
Crown  8vo,  pp.  65,  sewed.  2s.  6d. 

HARLEY. — THE  SIMPLIFICATION  OF  ENGLISH  SPELLING,  specially  adapted  to  the  Ris- 
ing Generation.  An  Easy  Way  of  Saving  Time  in  Writing,  Printing,  and  Reading. 
By  Dr.  George  Harley,  F.R.S.,  F.C.S.  8vo.  pp.  128,  cloth.  1877.  2s.  6d. 

HARRISON.— WOMAN'S  HANDIWORK  IN  MODERN  HOMES.  By  Constance  Gary 
Harrison.  With  numerous  Illustrations  and  Five  Coloured  Plates,  from  designs 
by  Samuel  Colman,  Rosina  Emmet,  George  Gibson,  and  others.  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and 
242,  cloth.  1881.  10s. 

HARTMANN.-See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical  Library,  vol.  XXV. 

HARTZENBUSCH  and  LEMMING.— Eco  DE  MADRID.  A  Practical  Guide  to  Spanish 
Conversation.  By  J.  E.  Hartzenbusch  and  H.  Lemming.  Second  Edition.  Post 
8yo,  pp.  250,  cloth.  1870.  5s. 

HASE.— MIRACLE  PLAYS  AND  SACRED  DRAMAS  :  An  Historical  Survey.  By  Dr. 
Karl  Hase.  Translated  from  the  German  by  A.  W.  Jackson,  and  Edited  by  the 
Rev.  W.  W.  Jackson,  Fellow  of  Exeter  College,  Oxford.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  288. 
1880.  9s. 

HAUG.— GLOSSARY  AND  INDEX  of  the  Pahlavi  Texts  of  the  Book  of  Arda  Viraf, 
the  Tale  of  Gosht — J.  Fryano,  the  Hadokht  Nask,  and  to  some  extracts  from  the 
Dinkard  and  Nirangistan ;  prepared  from  Destur  Hoshangji  Jamaspji  Asa's 
Glossary  to  the  Arda  Viraf  Namak,  and  from  the  Original  Texts,  with  Notes  on 
Pahlavi  Grammar  by  E.  W.  West,  Ph.D.  Revised  by  M.  Haug,  Ph.D.,  &c. 
Published  by  order  of  the  Bombay  Government.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  352,  sewed. 
1874.  25s. 


Published  by  Trubner  &  Co.  31 

HAUG.-  THE  SACRED  LANGUAGE,  &c. ,  OP  THE  PAKSIS.   See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 

HAUPT. — THE  LONDON  ARBITRAGEUR;  or,  The  English.  Money  Market,  in  con- 
nection with  Foreign  Bourses.  A  Collection  of  Notes  and  Formulae  for  the  Arbi- 
tration of  Bills,  Stocks,  Shares,  Bullion,  and  Coins,  with  all  the  Important 
Foreign  Countries.  By  Ottomar  Haupt.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  196,  cloth. 
1870.  7s.  6d. 

HAWKEN. — TJPA-SASTRA :  Comments,  Linguistic,  Doctrinal,  on  Sacred  and  Mythic 
Literature.  By  J.  D.  Hawken.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  288,  cloth.  1877.  7s.  6d. 

HAZEN.— THE  SCHOOL  AND  THE  ARMY  IN  GERMANY  AND  FRANCE,  with  a  Diary  of  Siege 
Life  at  Versailles.  By  Brevet  Major- General  W.  B.  Hazen,  U.S.A.,  Col.  6th  In- 
fantry. 8vo,  pp.  408,  cloth.  1872.  10s.  6d. 

HEATH.— EDGAR  QUINET.  See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical  Library,  Vol. 
XIV. 

HEATON— AUSTRALIAN  DICTIONARY  OF  DATES  AND  MEN  OF  THE  TIME.  Containing 
the  History  of  Australasia  from  1542  to  May  1879.  By  I.  H.  Heaton.  Royal  8vo, 
pp.  iv.  and  554,  cloth.  15s. 

HEBREW  LITERATURE  SOCIETY. 

HECELER.— THE  JERUSALEM  BISHOPRIC  DOCUMENTS.  With  Translations,  chiefly 
derived  from  "Das  Evangelische  Bisthum  in  Jerusalem,"  Geschichtliche  Dar- 
legung  mit  Urtunden.  Berlin,  1842.  Published  by  Command  of  His  Majesty 
Frederick  William  IV.,  King  of  Prussia:  Arranged  and  Supplemented  by  the 
Rev.  Prof.  William  H.  Hechler,  British  Chaplain  at  Stockholm.  8vo,  pp.  212, 
with  Maps,  Portrait,  and  Illustrations,  cloth.  1883.  10s.  6d. 

HECKER. — THE  EPIDEMICS  OF  THE  MIDDLE  AGES.    Translated  by  G.  B.  Babington, 
M.D.,  F.K.S.     Third  Edition,  completed  by  the  Author's  Treatise  on  Child-Pil- 
grimages.   By  J.  F.  C.  Hecker.     8vo,  pp.  384,  cloth.     1859.     9s.  6d. 
CONTENTS.— The   Black   Death— The  Dancing  Mania— The  Sweating  Sickness— Child  Pil- 
grimages. 

HEDLEY. — MASTERPIECES  OF  GERMAN  POETRY.  Translated  in  the  Measure  of  the 
Originals,  by  F.  H.  Hedley.  With  Illustrations  by  Louis  Wanke.  Crown  8vo, 
pp.  viii.  and  120,  cloth.  1876.  6s. 

HEINE.—  RELIGION  AND  PHILOSOPHY  IN  GERMANY.  See  English  and  Foreign 
Philosophical  Library,  Vol.  XVIII. 

HEINE.— WIT,  WISDOM,  AND  PATHOS  from  the  Prose  of  Heinrich  Heine.  With  a 
few  pieces  from  the  "  Book  of  Songs."  Selected  and  Translated  by  J.  Snodgrass. 
With  Portrait.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xx.  and  340,  cloth.  1879.  7s.  6d. 

HEINE. — PICTURES  OF  TRAVEL.  Translated  from  the  German  of  Henry  Heine,  by 
Charles  G.  Leland.  7th  Revised  Edition.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  472,  with  Portrait, 
cloth.  1873.  7s.  6d. 

HEINE. — HEINE'S  BOOK  OF  SONGS.  Translated  by  Charles  G.  Leland.  Fcap.  8vo, 
pp.  xiv.  and  240,  cloth,  gilt  edges.  1874.  7s.  6d. 

HEITZMANN.— MICROSCOPICAL  MORPHOLOGY  OF  THE  ANIMAL  BODY  IN  HEALTH 
AND  DISEASE.  By  C.  HEITZMANN,  M.D.  Royal  8vo,  pp.  xx.-850,  cloth.  1884. 
31s.  6d. 

HENDRIK. — MEMOIRS  OF  HANS  HENDRIK,  THE  ARCTIC  TRAVELLER  ;  serving  under 
Kane,  Hayes,  Hall,  and  Nares,  1853-76.  Written  by  Himself.  Translated  from 
the  Eskimo  Language,  by  Dr.  Henry  Rink.  Edited  by  Prof.  Dr.  G.  Stephens, 
F.S.A.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  100,  Map,  cloth.  1878.  3s.  6d. 

HENNELL.— PRESENT  RELIGION:  As  a  Faith  owning  Fellowship  with  Thought. 
Vol.  I.  Part  I.  By  Sara  S.  Hennell.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  570,  cloth.  1865.  7s.  6d. 

HENNELL. — COMPARATIVISM ;  An  Introduction  to  the  Second  Part  of  "Present 
Religion,"  explaining  the  Principle  by  which  Religion  appears  still  to  be  set  in 
Necessary  Antagonism  to  Positivism.  By  Sara  S.  Hennell.  8vo,  pp.  160,  cloth. 
1869.  3s. 

HENNELL. — COMPARATIVE  ETHICS — I.  Section  I.  Moral  Standpoint.  Present 
Religion,  Vol.  III.  By  Sara  S.  Hennell.  8vo,  pp.  66,  wrapper.  1882.  2s. 


32  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

HENNELL.— COMPARATIVE  ETHICS— I.  Sections  II.  and  III.  Moral  Principle  in 
Kegard  to  Sexhood.  Present  Keligion,  Vol.  III.  By  S.  Hennell.  Crown  8vo, 
pp.  92,  wrapper.  1884.  2s. 

HENNELL.— PRESENT  RELIGION  :  As  a  Faith  owning  Fellowship  with  Thought. 
Part  II.  First  Division.  Intellectual  Effect :  shown  as  a  Principle  of  Metaphy- 
sical Comparativism.  By  Sara  S.  Hennell.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  618,  cloth.  1873. 
7s.  6d. 

HENNELL.— PRESENT  RELIGION,  Vol.  III.  Part  II.  Second  Division.  The  Effect 
of  Present  Religion  on  its  Practical  Side.  By  S.  S.  Hennell.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  68y 
paper  covers.  1882.  2s. 

HENNELL.— COMPARATIVISM  shown  as  Furnishing  a  Religious  Basis  to  Morality. 
(Present  Religion.  Vol.  III.  Part  II.  Second  Division:  Practical  Effect. )  By 
Sara  S.  Hennell.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  220,  stitched  in  wrapper.  1878.  3s.  6d. 

HENNELL.— COMPARATIVE  ETHICS.  II.  Sections  I.  and  II.  Moral  Principle  in 
regard  to  Brotherhood.  (Present  Religion,  Vol.  III.)  By  Sara  S.  Hennell. 
Crown  8vo,  pp.  52,  wrapper.  1884.  2s. 

HENNELL.— THOUGHTS  IN  AID  OF  FAITH.  Gathered  chiefly  from  recent  Works  in 
Theology  and  Philosophy.  By  Sara  S.  Hennell.  Post  8vo,  pp.  428,  cloth.  1860.  6s. 

HENWOOD.— THE  METALLIFEROUS  DEPOSITS  OF  CORNWALL  AND  DEVON  ;  with  Ap- 
pendices on  Subterranean  Temperature  ;  the  Electricity  of  Rocks  and  Veins ;  the 
Quantities  of  Water  in  the  Cornish  Mines  ;  and  Mining  Statistics.  (Vol.  V.  of 
the  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Geographical  Society  of  Cornwall.)  By  William 
Jory  Kenwood,  F.R.S.,  F.G.S.  8vo,  pp.  x.  and  515;  with  113  Tables,  and  12 
Plates,  half  bound.  £2,  2s. 

HENWOOD.— OBSERVATIONS  ON  METALLIFEROUS  DEPOSITS,  AND  ON  SUBTERRANEAN 
TEMPERATURE.  (Vol.  VIII.  of  the  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Geological  Society 
of  Cornwall.)  By  William  Jory  Henwood,  F.R.S.,  F.G.S.,  President  of  the 
Royal  Institution  of  Cornwall.  In  2  Parts.  8vo,  pp.  xxx.,  vii.  and  916;  with 
38  Tables,  31  Engravings  on  Wood,  and  6  Plates.  £1,  16s. 

HEPBURN.  — A  JAPANESE  AND  ENGLISH  DICTIONARY.  With  an  English  and  Japanese 
Index.  By  J.  C.  Hepburn,  M.D.,  LL.D.  Second  Edition.  Imperial  8vo,  pp. 
xxxii.,  632,  and  201,  cloth.  £8,  8s. 

HEPBURN.— JAPANESE-ENGLISH  AND  ENGLISH-JAPANESE  DICTIONARY.  By  J.  C. 
Hepburn,  M.D.,  LL.D.  Abridged  by  the  Author.  Square  fcap.,  pp.  vi.  and  536, 
cloth.  1873.  18s. 

HERNISZ. — A  GUIDE  TO  CONVERSATION  IN  THE  ENGLISH  AND  CHINESE  LANGUAGES, 
for  the  Use  of  Americans  and  Chinese  in  California  and  elsewhere.  By  Stanislas 
Hernisz.  Square  8vo,  pp.  274,  sewed.  1855.  10s.  6d. 

HERSHON.— TALMUDIC  MISCELLANY.    See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 

HERZEN. — Du  DEVELOPPEMENT  DBS  IDEES  REVOLUTIONNAIRES  EN  RUSSIE.  Par 
Alexander  Herzen.  12mo,  pp.  xxiii.  and  144,  sewed.  1853.  2s.  6d. 

HERZEN. — A  separate  list  of  A.  Herzen's  works  in  Russian  may  be  had  on 
application. 

HILL. — THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  REFORM  MOVEMENT  in  the  Dental  Profession  in  Great 
Britain  during  the  last  twenty  years.  By  Alfred  Hill,  Licentiate  in  Dental  Sur- 
gery, &c.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  400,  cloth.  1877.  10s.  6d. 

HILLEBRAND.— FRANCE  AND  THE  FRENCH  IN  THE  SECOND  HALF  OF  THE  NINE- 
TEENTH CENTURY.  By  Karl  Hillebrand.  Translated  from  the  Third  German 
Edition.  Post  8vo,  pp.  xx.  and  262,  cloth.  1881.  10s.  6d. 

HINDOO  MYTHOLOGY  POPULARLY  TREATED.  Being  an  Epitomised  Description  of 
the  various  Heathen  Deities  illustrated  on  the  Silver  Swami  Tea  Service  pre- 
sented, as  a  memento  of  his  visit  to  India,  to  H.R.H.  the  Prince  of  Wales,  K.G., 
G.C.S,!.,  by  His  Highness  the  Gaekwar  of  Baroda.  Small  4to,  pp.  42,  limp  cloth. 
1875.  3s.  6d. 


Published  ly  Trubner  &  Co.  33 

HITTELL. — THE  COMMERCE  AND  INDUSTRIES  OF  THE  PACIFIC  COAST  OF  NORTH 

AMERICA.    By  J.   S.  Hittell,  Author  of  "The  Resources  of  California."    4to, 

pp.  820.     1882.     £1,  10s. 
HODGSON. — ACADEMY  LECTURES.    By  J.  E.  Hodgson,  R.A.,  Librarian  and  Professor 

of  Painting  to  the  Royal  Academy.    Cr.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  312,  cloth.    1884.    7s.  6d. 
HODGSON. — ESSAYS  ON  THE  LANGUAGES,  LITERATURE,  AND  RELIGION  OF  NEPAL 

AND  TIBET.     Together  with  further  Papers  on  the  Geography,  Ethnology,  and 

Commerce  of  those  Countries.     By  B.  H.  Hodgson,  late  British  Minister  at  the 

Court  of  Nepal.    Royal  8vo,  cloth,  pp.  xii.  and  276.     1874.     14s. 
HODGSON.—  ESSAYS  ON  INDIAN  SUBJECTS.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 
HODGSON.— THE  EDUCATION  OF  GIRLS;  AND  THE  EMPLOYMENT  OF  WOMEN  OF 

THE  UPPER  CLASSES  EDUCATIONALLY  CONSIDERED.     Two  Lectures.    By  W.  B. 

Hodgson,  LL.D.    Second  Edition.    Cr.  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  114,  cloth.    1869.    3s.  6d. 
HODGSON.— TURGOT  :  His  Life,  Times,  and  Opinions.     Two  Lectures.     By  W.  B. 

Hodgson,  LL.D.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  vi.  and  83,  sewed.     1870.     2s. 
HOERNLE.— A  COMPARATIVE  GRAMMAR  OF  THE  GAUDIAN  LANGUAGES,  with  Special 

Reference  to  the  Eastern  Hindi.     Accompanied  by  a  Language  Map,  and  a  Table 

of  Alphabets.    By  A.  F.  Rudolf  Hoernle.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  474,  cloth.    1880.    18s. 
HOLBEIN  SOCIETY. — Subscription,  one  guinea  per  annum.      List  of  publications 

on  application. 
HOLMES-FORBES.— THE  SCIENCE  OF  BEAUTY.      An  Analytical  Inquiry  into  the 

Laws  of  ^Esthetics.     By  Avary  W.  Holmes-Forbes,  of  Lincoln's  Inn,  Barrister-at- 

Law.     Post  8vo,  cloth,  pp.  vi.  and  200.     1881.     6s. 
HOLST.— THE  CONSTITUTIONAL  AND  POLITICAL  HISTORY  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

By  Dr.  H.  von  Hoist.    Translated  by  J.  J.  Lalor  and  A.  B.  Mason.     Royal  8vo. 

Vol.  I.  1750-1833.    State  Sovereignty  and  Slavery.    Pp.  xvi.  and  506.    1876.    18s. 

—Vol.11.     1828-1846.     Jackson's  Administration— Annexation  of  Texas.     Pp. 

720.     1879.     £1,  2s.— Vol.  III.     1846-1850.     Annexation  of  Texas— Compromise 

of  1850.    Pp.  x.  and  598.     1881.     18s. 
HOLYOAEE. — TRAVELS  IN  SEARCH  OF  A  SETTLER'S  GUIDE-BOOK  OF  AMERICA  AND 

CANADA.     By  George  Jacob  Holyoake,  Author  of  "The  History  of  Co-operation 

in  England."    Post  8vo,  pp.  148,  wrapper.     1884.     2s.  6d. 
HOLYOAKE.— THE  HISTORY  OF  CO-OPERATION  IN  ENGLAND  :  its  Literature  and  its 

Advocates.     By  G.  J.  Holyoake.     Vol.  I.  The  Pioneer  Period,  1812-44.     Crown 

8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  420,  cloth.    1875.     4s.— Vol.  II.  The  Constructive  Period,  1845- 

78.   Crown  8vo,  pp.  x.  and  504,  cloth.    1878.    8s. 
HOLYOAKE. — THE  TRIAL  OF  THEISM  ACCUSED  OF  OBSTRUCTING  SECULAR  LIFE.    By 

G.  J.  Holyoake.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  256,  cloth.     1877.     2s.  6d. 
HOLYOAKE.— REASONING  FROM  FACTS  :  A  Method  of  Everyday  Logic.     By  G.  J. 

Holyoake.     Fcap.,  pp.  xii.  and  94,  wrapper.     1877.     Is.  6d. 
HOLYOAKE.— SELF-HELP  BY  THE  PEOPLE.     Thirty-three  Years  of  Co-operation  in 

Rochdale.     In  Two  Parts.     Part  I.,  1844-1857;  Part  II.,  1857-1877.     By  G.  J. 

Holyoake.     Ninth  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  174,  cloth.     1883.     2s.  6d. 
HOPKINS. — ELEMENTARY  GRAMMAR  OF  THE  TURKISH  LANGUAGE.    "With  a  few  Easy 

Exercises.     By  F.  L.  Hopkins,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  Trinity  Hall,  Cam- 
bridge.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  48,  cloth.     1877.     3s.  6d. 
BORDER.— A  SELECTION  FROM  "  THE  BOOK  OF  PRAISE  FOR  CHILDREN,"  as  Edited 

by  "W.  Garrett  Horder.     For  the  Use  of  Jewish  Children.     Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  80, 

cloth.     1883.     Is.  6d. 
HOSMER.— THE  PEOPLE  AND   POLITICS;    or,   The  Structure  of  States  and  the 

Significance  and  Relation  of  Political  Forms.     By  G.  W.  Hosmer,  M.D.     Demy 

8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  340,  cloth.    1883.    15s. 
HOWELLS. — A  LITTLE  GIRL  AMONG  THE  OLD  MASTERS.     With  Introduction  and 

Comment.     By  W.  D.  Howells.     Oblong  crown  8vo,  cloth,  pp.  66,  with  54  plates. 

1884.     10s. 

C 


34  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

HOWELLS.— DR.  BREEN'S  PRACTICE  :  A  Novel.  By  W.  D.  How  ells.  English 
Copyright  Edition.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  272,  cloth.  1882.  6s. 

HOWSE.—  A  GRAMMAR  OF  THE  CREE  LANGUAGE.  With  which  is  combined  an 
Analysis  of  the  Chippeway  Dialect.  By  Joseph  Howse,  F.R.G.S.  8vo,  pp.  xx. 
and  324,  cloth.  1865.  7s.  6d. 

HULME. — MATHEMATICAL  DRAWING  INSTRUMENTS,  AND  How  TO  USE  THEM.  By 
F.  Edward  Hulme,  F.L.S.,  F.S.A.,  Art-Master  of.  Marlborough  College,  Author  of 
"Principles  of  Ornamental  Art,"  &c.  With  Illustrations.  Second  Edition. 
Imperial  16mo,  pp.  xvi.  and  152,  cloth.  1881.  3s.  6d. 

HUMBERT.— ON  "TENANT  RIGHT."  By  C.  F.  Humbert.  8vo,  pp.  20,  sewed. 
1875.  Is. 

HUMBOLDT.— THE  SPHERE  AND  DUTIES  OF  GOVERNMENT.  Translated  from  the 
German  of  Baron  Wilhelm  Von  Humboldt  by  Joseph  Coulthard,  jun.  Post  8vo, 
pp.  xv.  and  203,  cloth.  1854.  5s. 

HUMBOLDT.— LETTERS  OF  WILLIAM  YON  HUMBOLDT  TO  A  FEMALE  FRIEND.  A  com- 
plete Edition.  Translated  from  the  Second  German  Edition  by  Catherine  M.  A. 
Couper,  with  a  Biographical  Notice  of  the  Writer.  2  vols.  crown  8vo,  pp.  xxviii. 
and  592,  cloth.  1867.  10s. 

HUNT.— THE  RELIGION  OF  THE  HEART.  A  Manual  of  Faith  and  Duty.  By  Leigh 
Hunt.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  xxiv.  and  259,  cloth.  2s.  6d. 

HUNT. — CHEMICAL  AND  GEOLOGICAL  ESSAYS.  By  Professor  T.  Sterry  Hunt. 
Second  Edition.  8vo,  pp.  xxii.  and  448,  cloth.  1879.  12s. 

HUNTER.— A  COMPARATIVE  DICTIONARY  OF  THE  NON- ARYAN  LANGUAGES  OF  INDIA 
AND  HIGH  ASIA.  With  a  Dissertation,  Political  and  Linguistic,  on  the  Aboriginal 
Races.  By  W.  W.  Hunter,  B. A.,  M.R.A.S.,  Hon.  Fel.  Ethnol.  Soc.,  Author  of 
the  "  Annals  of  Rural  Bengal,"  of  H.M.'s  Civil  Service.  Being  a  Lexicon  of  144 
Languages,  illustrating  Turanian  Speech.  Compiled  from  the  Hodgson  Lists, 
Government  Archives,  and  Original  MSS.,  arranged  with  Prefaces  and  Indices  in 
English,  French,  German,  Russian,  and  Latin.  Large  4to,  toned  paper,  pp.  230. 
cloth.  1869.  42s. 

HUNTER.— THE  INDIAN  MUSALMANS.  By  W.  W.  Hunter,  B.A.,  LL.D.,  Director- 
General  of  Statistics  to  the  Government  of  India,  &c.,  Author  of  the  "Annals  of 
Rural  Bengal,"  &c.  Third  Edition.  8vo,  pp.  219,  cloth.  1876.  10s.  6d. 

HUNTER.— FAMINE  ASPECTS  OF  BENGAL  DISTRICTS.  A  System  of  Famine  Warnings. 
By  W.  W.  Hunter,  B.A.,  LL.D.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  216,  cloth.  1874.  7s.  6d. 

HUNTER.— A  STATISTICAL  ACCOUNT  OF  BENGAL.  By  W.  W.  Hunter,  B.A.,  LL.D., 
Director- General  of  Statistics  to  the  Government  of  India,  &c.  In  20  vols.  8vo, 
half  morocco.  1877.  £5. 

HUNTER.— CATALOGUE  OF  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS  (BUDDHIST).  Collected  in  Nepal 
by  B.  H.  Hodgson,  late  Resident  at  the  Court  of  Nepal.  Compiled  from  Lists  in 
Calcutta,  France,  and  England,  by  W.  W.  Hunter,  C.I.E.,  LL.D.  8vo,  pp.  28, 
paper.  1880.  2s. 

HUNTER.  —THE  IMPERIAL  GAZETTEER  OF  INDIA.  By  W.  W.  Hunter,  C.  I.  E. ,  LL. D. , 
Director-General  of  Statistics  to  the  Government  of  India.  In  Nine  Volumes. 
8vo,  pp.  xxxiii.  and  544,  539,  567,  xix.  and  716,  509,  513,  555,  537,  and  xii.  and 
478,  half  morocco.  With  Maps.  1881. 

HUNTER.— THE  INDIAN  EMPIRE  :  Its  History,  People,  and  Products.  By  W.  W. 
Hunter,  C.I.E.,  LL.D.  Post  8vo,  pp.  568,  with  Map,  cloth.  1882.  16s. 

HUNTER.— AN  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  BRITISH  SETTLEMENT  OF  ADEN,  IN  ARABIA.  Com- 
piled by  Capt.  F.  M.  Hunter,  Assistant  Political  Resident,  Aden.  8vo,  pp.  xii. 
and  232,  half  bound.  1877.  7s.  6d. 

HUNTER.— A  STATISTICAL  ACCOUNT  OF  ASSAM.  By  W.  W.  Hunter,  B.A.,  LL.D., 
C.I.E.,  Director-General  of  Statistics  to  the  Government  of  India,  &c.  2  vols. 
8vo,  pp.  420  and  490,  with  2  Maps,  half  morocco.  1879.  10s. 


Published  by  Trubner  &  Co.  35 

HUNTER.— A  BRIEF  HISTORY  OF  THE  INDIAN  PEOPLE.    By  W.  W.  Hunter,  C.I.E., 

LL.D.     Fourth  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  222,  cloth.    With  Map.    1884.     3s.  6d. 
HURST. — HISTORY  OF  RATIONALISM  :  embracing  a  Survey  of  the  Present  State  of 

Protestant  Theology.     By  the  Kev.  John  F.  Hurst,  A.M.      With  Appendix  of 

Literature.    Revised  and  enlarged  from  the  Third  American  Edition.    Crown  8vo, 

pp.  xvii.  and  525,  cloth.     1867.     10s.  6d. 
HYETT.—  PROMPT  REMEDIES  FOR  ACCIDENTS  AND  POISONS  :  Adapted  to  the  use  of 

the  Inexperienced  till  Medical  aid  arrives.     By  W.  H.  Hyett,  F.R.S.     A  Broad- 
sheet, to  hang  up  in  Country  Schools  or  Vestries,  Workshops,  Offices  of  Factories, 

Mines  and  Docks,   on    board    Yachts,  in  Railway  Stations,   remote  Shooting 

Quarters,  Highland  Manses,  and  Private  Houses,  wherever  the  Doctor  lives  at  a 

distance.     Sold  for  the  benefit  of  the  Gloucester  Eye  Institution.     In  sheets,  21£ 

by  17^  inches,  2s.  6d.  ;  mounted,  3s.  6d. 
HYMANS.— PUPIL  Versus  TEACHER.     Letters  from  a  Teacher  to  a  Teacher.    Fcap. 

8vo,  pp.  92,  cloth.     1875.     2s. 
IHNE.— A  LATIN  GRAMMAR  FOR  BEGINNERS.    By  W.  H.  Ihne,  late  Principal  of 

Carlton  Terrace  School,  Liverpool.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  vi.  and  184,  cloth.     1864.    3s. 
IKHWA'NU-S  SAFA';  or,  Brothers  of  Purity.     Translated  from  the  Hindustani  by 

Professor  John  Dowson,   M.R.A.S.,  Staff  College,  Sandhurst.     Crown  8vo,  pp. 

viii.  and  156,  cloth.     1869.    7s. 

INDIA.— ARCHAEOLOGICAL  SURVEY  OF  WESTERN  INDIA.    See  Burgess. 
INDIA. — PUBLICATIONS  OF  THE  ARCHAEOLOGICAL  SURVEY  OF  INDIA.    A  separate  list 

on  application. 
INDIA.— PUBLICATIONS  OF  THE  GEOGRAPHICAL  DEPARTMENT  OF  THE  INDIA  OFFICE, 

LONDON.    A  separate  list,  also  list  of  all  the  Government  Maps,  on  application. 
INDIA.— PUBLICATIONS  OF  THE  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY  OF  INDIA.    A  separate  list  on 

application. 
INDIA  OFFICE  PUBLICATIONS  :— 

Aden,  Statistical  Account  of.     5s. 

Assam,      do.  do.  Vols.  I.  and  II.     5s.  each. 

Baden  Powell,  Land  Revenues,  &c. ,  in  India.     12s. 

Do.          Jurisprudence  for  Forest  Officers.     12s. 

Beal's  Buddhist  Tripitaka.     4s. 

Bengal,  Statistical  Account  of.  Vols.  I.  to  XX.     100s.  per  set. 
Do.        do.  do.  Vols.  VI.  to  XX.     5s.  each. 

Bombay  Code.    21s. 

Bombay  Gazetteer.    Vol.  II.,  14s.    Vol.  VIII.,  9s.     Vol.  XIII.  (2  parts),  16s. 

Vol.  XV.  (2  parts),  16s. 

Do.  do.  Vols.  III.  to  VII.,  and  X.,  XL,  XII.,  XIV.,  XVI.  8s.  each. 

Do.  do.  Vols.  XXI.,  XXII.,  and  XXIII.     9s.  each. 

Burgess'  Archaeological  Survey  of  Western  India.     Vols.  I.  and  III.     42s.  each. 
Do.  do.  do.  Vol.  II.    63s. 

Do.  do.  do.  Vols.  IV.  and  V.     126s. 

Burma  (British)  Gazetteer.    2  vols.    50s. 

Catalogue  of  Manuscripts  and  Maps  of  Surveys.     12s. 

Chambers'  Meteorology  (Bombay)  and  Atlas.     30s. 

Cole's  Agra  and  Muttra.    70s. 

Cook's  Gums  and  Resins.     5s. 

Corpus  Inscriptionem  Indicarum.     Vol.  I.     32s. 

Cunningham's  Archaeological  Survey.     Vols.  I.  to  XVIII.    10s.  and  12s.  each. 
Do.          Stupa  of  Bharut.    63s. 

Egerton's  Catalogue  of  Indian  Arms.     2s.  6d. 

Ferguson  and  Burgess,  Cave  Temples  of  India.     42s. 

Do.  Tree  and  Serpent  Worship.     105s. 

Finance  and  Revenue  Accounts  of  the  Government  of  India  for  1883-4.     2s.  6d. 

Gamble,  Manual  of  Indian  Timbers.     10s. 

Hunter's  Imperial  Gazetteer.    9  vols. 


36  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

INDIA  OFFICE  PUBLICATIONS— continued. 

Indian  Education  Commission,  Report  of  the.    12s.      Appendices.     10  vols.     10s. 

Jaschke's  Tibetan-English  Dictionary.     30s. 

King.     Chinchona-Planting.     Is. 

Kurz.     Forest  Flora  of  British  Burma.     Vols.  I.  and  II.     15s.  each. 

Liotard's  Materials  for  Paper.     2s.  6d. 

Liotard's  Silk  in  India.     Part  I.     2s. 

Loth.     Catalogue  of  Arabic  MSS.    10s.  6d. 

Markham's  Tibet.     21s. 

Do.         Memoir  of  Indian  Surveys.     10s.  6d. 
Do.        Abstract  of  Reports  of  Surveys.     Is.  6d. 

Mitra  (Rajendralala),  Buddha  Gaya.     60s. 

Moir,  Torrent  Regions  of  the  Alps.     Is. 

Mueller.     Select  Plants  for  Extra-Tropical  Countries.     8s. 

Mysore  and  Coorg  Gazetteer.     Vols.  I.  and  II.     10s.  each. 
Do.  do.  Vol.  III.    5s. 

N.  W.  P.  Gazetteer.    Vols.  I.  and  II.     10s.  each. 

Do.  do.  Vols.  III.  to  XI.,  XIII. ,  and  XIV.  12s.  each. 

Oudh  do.  Vols.  I.  to  III.     10s.  each. 

People  of  India,  The.    Vols.  I.  to  VIII.     45s.  each. 

Raverty's  Notes  on  Afghanistan  and  Baluchistan.     Sections  I.  and  II.     2s.    Sec- 
tion III.  5s.     Section  IV.  3s. 

Rajputana  Gazetteer.     3  vols.     15s, 

Saunders'  Mountains  and  River  Basins  of  India.     3s. 

SewelFs  Amaravati  Tope.     3s. 

Smyth's  (Brough)  Gold  Mining  in  "VVynaad.     Is. 

Taylor.     Indian  Marine  Surveys.     2s.  6d. 

Trigonometrical  Survey,  Synopsis  of  Great.     Vols.  I.  to  VI.     10s.  6d.  each. 

Trumpp's  Adi  Granth.     52s.  6d. 

Waring.     Pharmacopoeia  of  India,  The.     6s. 

Watson's  Cotton  Gins.    Boards,  10s.  6d.     Paper,  10s. 
Do.       Rhea  Fibre.    2s.  6d. 
Do.       Tobacco.     5s. 

Wilson.     Madras  Army.     Vols.  I.  and  II.     21s. 

INDIAN  GAZETTEERS.— See  GAZETTEER,  and  INDIA  OFFICE  PUBLICATIONS. 

INGLEBY.— See  SHAKESPEARE. 

INMAN.— NAUTICAL  TABLES.    Designed  for  the  use  of  British  Seamen.   By  the  Rev. 

James  Inman,  D.D.,  late  Professor  at  the  Royal  Naval  College,  Portsmouth. 

Demy  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  410,  cloth.     1877.     15s. 
INMAN. — HISTORY  OF  THE  ENGLISH  ALPHABET  :  A  Paper  read  before  the  Liverpool 

Literary  and  Philosophieal  Society.     By  T.  Inman,  M.D.     8vo,  pp.  36,  sewed. 

1872.     Is. 
IN  SEARCH  OF  TRUTH.     Conversations  on  the  Bible  and  Popular  Theology,  for 

Young  People.     By  A.  M.  Y.      Crown  8vo,  pp.  x.  and  138,  cloth.     1875.     2s.  6d. 

INTERNATIONAL  NUMISMATA  ORIENTALIA  (THE). — Royal  4to,  in  paper  wrapper. 
Part  I.  Ancient  Indian  Weights.  By  E.  Thomas,  F.R.S.  Pp.  84,  with  a  Plate  and 
Map  of  the  India  of  Manu,  9s.  6d.— Part  II.  Coins  of  the  IJrtuki  Turkumans. 
By  Stanley  Lane  Poole,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford.  Pp.  44,  with  6  Plates. 
9s.— Part  III.  The  Coinage  of  Lydia  and  Persia,  from  the  Earliest  Times  to  the 
Fall  of  the  Dynasty  of  vthe  Achsemenidse.  By  Barclay  V.  Head,  Assistant-Keeper 
of  Coins,  British  Museum.  Pp.  viii.-56,  with  3  Autotype  Plates.  10s.  6d, — 
Part  IV.  The  Coins  of  the  Tuluni  Dynasty.  By  Edward  Thomas  Rogers.  Pp. 
iv.-22,  and  1  Plate.  5s.— Part  V.  The  Parthian  Coinage.  By  Percy  Gardner, 
M.A.  Pp.  iv.-66,  and  8  Autotype  Plates.  18s.— Part  VI.  The  Ancient  Coins 
and  Measures  of  Ceylon.  By  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids.  Pp.  iv.  and  60,  and  3  Plate. 
10s. — Vol.  I.,  containing  the  first  six  parts,  as  specified  above.  Royal  4to,  half 
bound.  £3,  13s.  6d. 


Published  by  Trilbner  &  Co.  37 

INTERNATIONAL  NUMISMATA— continued. 

Vol.  II.  COINS  OF  THE  JEWS.     Being  a  History  of  the  Jewish  Coinage  and  Money 

in  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.     By  Frederick  W.  Madden,  M.R.A.S.,  Member 

of  the  Numismatic  Society  of  London,  Secretary  of  the  Brighton  College,  &c., 

&c.     With  279  woodcuts  and  a  plate  of  alphabets.     Royal  4to,  pp.  xii.  and  330, 

sewed.    1881.    £2. 

Vol.  III.    Part  I.    THE  COINS  OF  ABAKAN,  OF  PEGU,  AND  OF  BURMA.    By  Lieut.  - 

General  Sir  Arthur  Phayre,  C.B.,  K.  C.S.I.,  G.C.M.G.,  late  Commissioner  of 

British  Burma.     Also  contains  the  Indian  Balhara,  and  the  Arabian  Intercourse 

with  India  in  the  Ninth  and  following  Centuries.     By  Edward  Thomas,  F.R.S. 

Royal  4to,  pp.  viii.  and  48,  with  Five  Autotype  Illustrations,  wrapper.     1882. 

8s.  6d. 

Part  II.  THE  COINS  OF  SOUTHERN  INDIA.    By  Sir  W.  Elliot.    Royal  4to. 
JACKSON.— ETHNOLOGY  AND  PHRENOLOGY  AS  AN  AID  TO  THE  HISTORIAN.    By  the 

late  J.  W.   Jackson.     Second  Edition.     "With  a  Memoir  of  the  Author,  by  his 

Wife.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  xx.  and  324,  cloth.     1875.     4s.  6d. 
JACKSON.— THE  SHROPSHIRE  WORD-BOOK.     A  Glossary  of  Archaic  and  Provincial 

Words,  &c. ,  used  in  the  County.     By  Georgina  F.  Jackson.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  civ. 

and  524,  cloth.     1881.     31s.  6d. 

JACOB. — HINDU  PANTHEISM.    See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 
JAGIELSKI. — ON  MARIENBAD  SPA,  and  the  Diseases  Curable  by  its  Waters  and 

Baths.     By  A.  V.  Jagielski,  M.D.,  Berlin.    Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii. 

and  186.   With  Map.     Cloth.     1874.     5s. 
JAMISON.— THE  LIFE  AND  TIMES  OF  BERTRAND  Du  GUESCLIN.    A  History  of  the 

Fourteenth  Century.     By  D.  F.  Jamison,  of  South  Carolina.      Portrait.     2  vols. 

8vo,  pp.  xvi.,  287,  and  viii.,  314,  cloth.    1864.     £1,  Is. 

JAPAN.— MAP  OF  NIPPON  (Japan) :  Compiled  from  Native  Maps,  and  the  Notes  of 
most  recent  Travellers.  By  R.  Henry  Brunton,  M.I.C.E.,  F.R.G.S.,  1880.  Size, 
5  feet  by  4  feet,  20  miles  to  the  inch.  In  4  Sheets,  £1,  Is.;  Roller,  varnished. 
£1,  11s.  6d.;  Folded,  in  Case,  £1,  5s.  6d. 

JASCHKE. — A  TIBETAN-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY.  With  special  reference  to  the  Pre- 
vailing Dialects.  To  which  is  added  an  English-Tibetan  Vocabulary.  By  H.  A. 
Jaschke,  late  Moravian  Missionary  at  Kyelang,  British  Lahoul.  Imperial  8vo,  pp. 
xxiv.-672,  cloth.  1881.  £1,  10s. 

JASCHKE.— TIBETAN  GRAMMAR.    By  H.  A.  Jaschke.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii. -104, 

cloth.    1883.    5s. 
JATAKA   (THE),  together  with  its  COMMENTARY  :  being  tales  of  the  Anterior  Birth 

of  Gotama  Buddha.     Now  first  published  in  Pali,  by  V.  Fausboll.    Text.    8vo. 

Vol.  I.,  pp.  viii.  and  512,  cloth.     1877.     28s.— Vol.  II.,  pp.  452,  cloth.     1879, 

28s.— Vol.    III.,    pp.    viii.   and  544,   cloth.     1883.      28s.      (For  Translation  see 

Triibner's  Oriental  Series,  "Buddhist  Birth  Stories.") 

JENKINS.— A  PALADIN  OF  FINANCE  :  Contemporary  Manners.  By  E.  Jenkins, 
Author  of  "Ginx's  Baby."  Crown  8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  392,  cloth.  1882.  7s.  6d. 

JENKINS.— VEST-POCKET  LEXICON.  An  English  Dictionary  of  all  except  familiar 
Words,  including  the  principal  Scientific  and  Technical  Terms,  and  Foreign 
Moneys,  Weights  and  Measures ;  omitting  what  everybody  knows,  and  contain- 
ing what  everybody  wants  to  know  and  cannot  readily  find.  By  Jabez  Jenkins. 
64mo,  pp.  564,  cloth.  1879.  Is.  6d. 

JOHNSON.— ORIENTAL  RELIGIONS.  India.  See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical 
Library,  Extra  Series,  Vols.  IV.  and  V. 

JOHNSON.— ORIENTAL  RELIGIONS  AND  THEIR  RELATION  TO  UNIVERSAL  RELIGION. 
Persia.  By  Samuel  Johnson.  With  an  Introduction  by  O.  B.  Frothingham. 
Demy  8vo,  pp.  xliv.  and  784,  cloth.  1885.  18s. 

JOLLY.— S«e  NARADIYA, 


38  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

JOMINI.—  THE  AKT  OF  WAR.  By  Baron  de  Jomini,  General  and  Aide-de-Catnp  to 
the  Emperor  of  Eussia.  A  New  Edition,  with  Appendices  and  Maps.  Translated 
from  the  French.  By  Captain  G.  H.  Mendell,  and  Captain  W.  O.  Craighill. 
Crown  8vo,  pp.  410,  cloth.  1879.  9s. 

JOSEPH.— RELIGION,  NATURAL  AND  REVEALED.  A  Series  of  Progressive  Lessons 
for  Jewish  Youth.  By  N.  S.  Joseph.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.-296,  cloth.  1879. 
3a. 

JUVENALIS  SATIRE.  With  a  Literal  English  Prose  Translation  and  Notes.  By 
J.  D.  Lewis,  M.A.,  Trin.  Coll.  Camb.  Second  Edition.  Two  vols.  8vo,  pp.  xii. 
and  230  and  400,  cloth.  1882.  12s. 

KARCHER.— QUESTIONNAIRE  FRANC  AIS.  Questions  on  French  Grammar,  Idiomatic 
Difficulties,  and  Military  Expressions.'  By  Theodore  Karcher,  LL.B.  Fourth 
Edition,  greatly  enlarged.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  224,  cloth.  1879.  4s.  6d.  Interleaved 
with  writing  paper,  5s.  6d. 

KARDEC.— THE  SPIRIT'S  BOOK.  Containing  the  Principles  of  Spiritist  Doctrine  on 
the  Immortality  of  the  Soul,  &c.,  &c.,  according  to  the  Teachings  of  Spirits  of 
High  Degree,  transmitted  through  various  mediums,  collected  and  set  in  order  by 
Allen  Kardec.  Translated  from  the  120th  thousand  by  Anna  Blackwell.  Crown 
8vo,  pp.  512,  cloth.  1875.  7s.  6d. 

KARDEC.— THE  MEDIUM'S  BOOK  ;  or,  Guide  for  Mediums  and  for  Evocations. 
Containing  the  Theoretic  Teachings  of  Spirits  concerning  all  kinds  of  Manifesta- 
tions, the  Means  of  Communication  with  the  Invisible  World,  the  Development 
of  Medianimity,  &c.,  &c.  By  Allen  Kardec.  Translated  by  Anna  Blackwell. 
Crown  8vo,  pp.  456,  cloth.  1876.  7s.  6d. 

KARDEC. — HEAVEN  AND  HELL  ;  or,  the  Divine  Justice  Vindicated  in  the  Plurality 
of  Existences.  By  Allen  Kardec.  Translated  by  Anna  Blackwell.  Crown  8vo, 
pp.  viii.  and  448,  cloth.  1878.  7s.  6d. 

KEMP.    See  SCHOPENHAUER. 

KENDRICK. — GREEK  OLLENDORFF.    A  Progressive  Exhibition  of  the  Principles  of 

the  Greek  Grammar.    By  Asahel  C.  Kendrick.    8vo,  pp.  371,  cloth.     1870.     9s. 
KERMODE. — NATAL  :  Its  Early  History,  Rise,  Progress,  and  Future  Prospects  as  a 

Field  for  Emigration.    By  W.  Kermode,  of  Natal.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  228, 

with  Map,  cloth.     1883.     3s.  6d. 
KEYS  OF  THE  CREEDS  (THE).     Third  Revised  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  210, 

cloth.    1876.     5s. 
KINAHAN.— VALLEYS  AND  THEIR  RELATION  TO  FISSURES,  FRACTURES,  AND  FAULTS. 

By  G.  H.  Kinahan,  M.R.I.A.,  F.R.G.S.I.,  &c.     Dedicated  by  permission  to  his 

Grace  the  Duke  of  Argyll.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  256,  cloth,  illustrated.     7s.  6d. 

KING'S  STRATAGEM  (The) ;  OR,  THE  PEARL  OF  POLAND  ;  A  Tragedy  in  Five  Acts. 
By  Stella.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  94,  cloth.  1874.  2s.  6d. 

KINGSTON.— THE  UNITY  OF  CREATION.    A  Contribution  to  the  Solution  of  the 

Religious  Question.    By  F.  H.  Kingston.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  152,  cloth. 

1874.     5s. 
KISTNER.— BUDDHA  AND  HIS  DOCTRINES.     A  Bibliographical  Essay.     By  Otto 

Kistner.  4to,  pp.  iv.  and  32,  sewed.  1869.  2s.  6d. 
KNOX. — ON  A  MEXICAN  MUSTANG.  See  under  SWEET. 
KLEMM. — MUSCLE  BEATING;  or,  Active  and  Passive  Home  Gymnastics,  for  Heal  thy 

and  Unhealthy  People.      By  C.    Klemm.     With  Illustrations.     8vo,   pp.  60, 

wrapper.    1878.    Is. 
KOHL.— TRAVELS  IN  CANADA  AND  THROUGH  THE  STATES  OF  NEW  YORK  AND 

PENNSYLVANIA.    By  J.  G.  Kohl.    Translated  by  Mrs.  Percy  Sinnett.    Revised  by 

the  Author.     Two  vols.  post  8vo,  pp.  xiv.  and  794,  cloth.     1861.     £1,  Is. 


Published  by  Trubner  &  Co.  39 

KRAPF.— DICTIONARY  OF  THE  SUAHILI  LANGUAGE.  Compiled  by  the  Rev.  Dr.  L. 
Krapf,  missionary  of  the  Church  Missionary  Society  in  East  Africa.  With  an 
Appendix,  containing  an  outline  of  a  Suahili  Grammar.  Medium  Svo,  pp.  xl. 
and  434,  cloth.  1882.  30s. 

KRAUS.— CARLSBAD  AND  ITS  NATURAL  HEALING  AGENTS,  from  the  Physiological 
and  Therapeutical  Point  of  View.  By  J.  Kraus,  M.D.  "With  Notes  Introductory 
by  the  Rev.  J.  T.  Walters,  M.A.  Second  Edition.  Revised  and  enlarged.  Crown 
8vo,  pp.  104,  cloth.  1880.  5s. 

KROEGER.— THE  MINNESINGER  OF  GERMANY.  By  A.  E.  Kroeger.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp. 
290,  cloth.  1873.  7s. 

KURZ.— FOREST  FLORA  OF  BRITISH  BURMA.  By  S.  Kurz,  Curator  of  the  Her- 
barium, Royal  Botanical  Gardens,  Calcutta.  2  vols.  crown  8vo,  pp.  xxx.,  550, 
and  614,  cloth.  1877.  30s. 

LACERDA'S  JOURNEY  TO  CAZEMBE  in  1798.  Translated  and  Annotated  by  Captain 
R.  F.  Burton,  F.R.G.S.  Also  Journey  of  the  Pombeiros,  &c.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  viii. 
and  272.  With  Map,  cloth.  1873.  7s.  6d. 

L  AN  ARI.— COLLECTION  OF  ITALIAN  AND  ENGLISH  DIALOGUES.  By  A.  Lanari. 
Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  200,  cloth.  1874.  3s.  6d. 

LAND.— THE  PRINCIPLES  OP  HEBREW  GRAMMAR.  By  J.  P.  N.  Land,  Professor  of 
Logic  and  Metaphysics  in  the  University  of  Leyden.  Translated  from  the  Dutch, 
by  Reginald  Lane  Poole,  Balliol  College,  Oxford.  Part  I.  Sounds.  Part  II. 
Words.  With  Large  Additions  by  the  Author,  and  a  new  Preface.  Crown  8vo, 
pp.  xx.  and  220,  cloth.  1876.  7s.  6d. 

LANE.— THE  KORAN.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 

LANGE. — A  HISTORY  OF  MATERIALISM.  See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical 
Library,  Vols.  I.  to  III. 

LANGE. — GERMANIA.  A  German  Reading-book  Arranged  Progressively.  By  F.  K. 
W.  Lange,  Ph.D.  Part  I.  Anthology  of  German  Prose  and  Poetry,  with 
Vocabulary  and  Biographical  Notes.  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  216,  cloth,  1881,  3s.  6d. 
Part  II.  Essays  on  German  History  and  Institutions,  with  Notes.  Svo,  pp.  124, 
cloth.  1881.  3s.  6d.  Parts  I.  and  II.  together.  5s.  6d. 

LANGE. — GERMAN  PROSE  WRITING.  Comprising  English  Passages  for  Translation 
into  German.  Selected  from  Examination  Papers  of  the  University  of  London, 
the  College  of  Preceptors,  London,  and  the  Royal  Military  Academy,  Woolwich, 
arranged  progressively,  with  Notes  and  Theoretical  as  well  as  Practical  Treatises 
on  themes  for  the  writing  of  Essays.  By  F.  K.  W.  Lange,  Ph.D.,  Assistant  Ger- 
man Master,  Royal  Academy,  Woolwich  ;  Examiner,  Royal  College  of  Preceptors 
London.  Crown  Svo,  pp.  viii.  and  176,  cloth.  1881.  4s. 

LANGE.— GERMAN  GRAMMAR  PRACTICE.  By  F.  K.  W.  Lange,  Ph.D.  Crown  8vo, 
pp.  viii.  and  64,  cloth.  1882.  Is.  6d. 

LANGE.— COLLOQUIAL  GERMAN  GRAMMAR.  With  Special  Reference  to  the  Anglo- 
Saxon  Element  in  the  English  Language.  By  F.  K.  W.  Lange,  Ph.D.,  &c. 
Crown  Svo,  pp.  xxxii.  and  380,  cloth.  1882.  4s.  6d. 

LANMAN.— A  SANSKRIT  READER.  With  Vocabulary  and  Notes.  By  Charles 
Rockwell  Lanman,  Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  Harvard  College.  Part  I.  Imperial 
Svo,  pp.  xx.  and  294,  cloth.  1884.  10s.  6d. 

LARSEN.— DANISH-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY.  By  A.  Larsen.  Crown  Svo,  pp.  viii. 
and  646,  cloth.  1884.  7s.  6d. 


40  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

LASCARIDES.— A  COMPREHENSIVE  PHRASEOLOGICAL  ENGLISH- ANCIENT  AND  MODERN 
GREEK  LEXICON.  Founded  upon  a  manuscript  of  G.  P.  Lascarides,  and  Compiled 
by  L.  Myriantheus,  Ph.D.  2  vols.  18m o,  pp.  xi.  and  1338,  cloth.  1882.  £1,  10s. 

LATHE  (THE)  AND  ITS  USES  ;  or,  Instruction  in  the  Art  of  Turning  Wood  and  Metal, 
including  a  description  of  the  most  modern  appliances  for  the  Ornamentation  af 
Plain  and  Curved  Surfaces,  &c.  Sixth  Edition.  With  additional  Chapters  and 
Index.  lUustrated.  8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  316,  cloth.  1883.  10s.  6d. 

LE-BRUN.— MATERIALS  FOR  TRANSLATING  FROM  ENGLISH  INTO  FRENCH  ;  being  a 
short  Essay  on  Translation,  followed  by  a  Graduated  Selection  in  Prose  and  Verse. 
By  L.  Le-Brun.  Seventh  Edition.  Revised  and  corrected  by  Henri  Van  Laun. 
Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  204,  cloth.  1882.  4s.  6d. 

LEE. — ILLUSTRATIONS  OF  THE  PHYSIOLOGY  OF  RELIGION.  In  Sections  adapted  for 
the  use  of  Schools.  Part  L  By  Henry  Lee,  F.R.C.S.,  formerly  Professor  of 
Surgery,  Royal  College  of  Surgeons,  &c.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  108,  cloth. 

LEES.— A  PRACTICAL  GUIDE  TO  HEALTH,  AND  TO  THE  HOME  TREATMENT  OF  THE 
COMMON  AILMENTS  OF  LIFE  :  With  a  Section  on  Cases  of  Emergency,  and  Hints 
to  Mothers  on  Nursing,  &c.  By  F.  Arnold  Lees,  F.L.S.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  334, 
stiff  covers.  1874.  3s. 

LEGGE.— THE  CHINESE  CLASSICS.  With  a  Translation,  Critical  and  Exegetical, 
Notes,  Prolegomena,  and  copious  Indexes.  By  James  Legge,  D.D.,  of  the  Lon- 
don Missionary  Society.  In  7  vols.  Royal  8vo.  Vols.  I.-V.  in  Eight  Parts, 
published,  cloth.  £2,  2s.  each  Part. 

LEGGE.— THE  CHINESE  CLASSICS,  translated  into  English.  With  Preliminary  Essays 
and  Explanatory  Notes.  Popular  Edition.  Reproduced  for  General  Readers  from 
the  Author's  work,  containing  the  Original  Text.  By  James  Legge,  D.D.  Crown 
8vo.  Vol.  I.  The  Life  and  Teachings  of  Confucius.  Third  Edition.  Pp.  vi. 
and  338,  cloth.  1872.  10s.  6d.— Vol.  II.  The  Works  of  Mencius.  Pp.  x.  and  402, 
cloth,  12s.— Vol.  III.  The  She-King ;  or,  The  Book  of  Poetry.  Pp.  vi.  and  432, 
cloth.  1876.  12s. 

LEGGE.— CONFUCIANISM  IN  RELATION  TO  CHRISTIANITY.  A  Paper  read  be/ore  the 
Missionary  Conference  in  Shanghai,  on  May  llth,  1877.  By  Rev.  James  Legge, 
D.D.,  LL.D.,  &c.  8vo,  pp.  12,  sewed.  1877.  Is.  6d. 

LEGGE.— A  LETTER  TO  PROFESSOR  MAX  MULLER,  chiefly  on  the  Translation  into 
English  of  the  Chinese  Terms  Ti  and  Shang  Tl.  By  James  Legge,  Professor  of 
the  Chinese  Language  and  Literature  in  the  University  of  Oxford.  Crown  8vor 
pp.  30,  sewed.  1880.  Is. 

LEIGH.— THE  RELIGION  OF  THE  WORLD.  By  H.  Stone  Leigh.  12mo,  pp.  xii.  and 
66,  cloth.  1869.  2s.  6d. 

LEIGH. — THE  STORY  OF  PHILOSOPHY.  By  Aston  Leigh.  Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and 
210,  cloth.  1881.  6s. 

LEILA-HANOUM.— A  TRAGEDY  IN  THE  IMPERIAL  HAREM  AT  CONSTANTINOPLE. 
By  Leila-Hanoum.  Translated  from  the  French,  with  Notes  by  General  R.  E. 
Colston.  16mo,  pp.  viii.  and  300,  cloth.  1883.  4s.  Paper,  2s.  6d. 

LELAND. — THE  BREITMANN  BALLADS.  The  only  authorised  Edition.  Complete  in  1 
vol.,  including  Nineteen  Ballads,  illustrating  his  Travels  in  Europe  (never  before 
printed),  with  Comments  by  Fritz  Schwackenhammer.  By  Charles  G.  Leland. 
Crown  Svo,  pp.  xxviii.  and  292,  cloth.  1872.  6s. 

LELAND.— THE  Music  LESSON  OF  CONFUCIUS,  and  other  Poems.  By  Charles  G. 
Leland.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  168,  cloth.  1871.  3s.  6d. 

LELAND. — GAUDEAMUS.  Humorous  Pcems  translated  from  the  German  of  Joseph 
Victor  Scheffel  and  others.  By  Charles  G.  Leland.  16mo,  pp.  176,  cloth.  1872. 
3s.  6d. 


Published  by  Triibner  &  Co.  41 

LELAND.— THE  EGYPTIAN  SKETCH-BOOK.     By  C.  G.  Leland.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii. 

and  316,  cloth.     1873.     7s.  6d. 
LELAND. — THE  ENGLISH  GIPSIES  AND  THEIR  LANGUAGE.    By  Charles  G.  Leland. 

Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  260,  cloth.     1874.     7s.  6d. 
LELAND.— FU-SANG  ;  OR,  THE  DISCOVERT  OP  AMERICA  by  Chinese  Buddhist  Priests 

in  the  Fifth  Century.     By  Charles  G.  Leland.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  232,  cloth.     1875. 

7s.  6d. 
LELAND. — PIDGIN-ENGLISH  SING-SONG  ;  or,  Songs  and  Stories  in  the  China-English 

Dialect.     With  a  Vocabulary.    By  Charles  G.  Leland.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and 

140,  cloth.    1876.    5s. 
LELAND.  -THE  GYPSIES.     By  C.  G.  Leland.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  372,  cloth.    1882. 

10s.  6d. 
LEOPARDI.—  See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical  Library,  Vol.  XVII. 

LEO. — FOUR  CHAPTERS  OF  NORTH'S  PLUTARCH,  Containing  the  Lives  of  Caius  Mar- 
cius,  Coriolanus,  Julius  Csesar,  Marcus  Antonius,  and  Marcus  Brutus,  as  Sources 
,to  Shakespeare's  Tragedies  ;  Coriolanus,  Julius  Csesar,  arfd  Antony  and  Cleo- 
patra ;  and  partly  to  Hamlet  and  Timon  of  Athens.  Photolithographed  in  the 
size  of  the  Edition  of  1595.  With  Preface,  Notes  comparing  the  Text  of  the 
Editions  of  1579,  1595,  1603,  and  1612  ;  and  Reference  Notes  to  the  Text  of  the 
Tragedies  of  Shakespeare.  Edited  by  Professor  F.  A.  Leo,  Ph.D.,  Vice-Presi- 
dent  of  the  New  Shakespeare  Society  ;  Member  of  the  Directory  of  the  German 
Shakespeare  Society  ;  and  Lecturer  at  the  Academy  of  Modern  Philology  at  Berlin. 
Folio,  pp.  22,  130  of  facsimiles,  half-morocco.  Library  Edition  (limited  to  250 
copies),  £1,  lls.  6d.  ;  Amateur  Edition  (50  copies  on  a  superior  large  hand-made 
paper),  £3,  3s. 

LEO.— SHAKESPEARE-NOTES.  By  F.  A.  Leo.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  120,  cloth. 
1885.  6s. 

LEONOWENS. — LIFE  AND  TRAVEL  IN  INDIA  :  Being  Recollections  of  a  Journey  before 
the  Days  of  Railroads.  By  Anna  Harriette  Leonowens,  Author  of  "  The  English 
Governess  at  the  Siamese  Court,"  and  "The  Romance  of  the  Harem."  8vo,  pp. 
326,  cloth,  Illustrated.  1885.  10s.  6d. 

LERMONTOFF.— THE  DEMON.  By  Michael  Lerinontoff.  Translated  from  the 
Russian  by  A.  Condie  Stephen.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  88,  cloth.  1881.  2s.  6d. 

LESLEY.— MAN:S  ORIGIN  AND  DESTINY.  Sketched  from  the  Platform  of  the  Physical 
Sciences.  By.  J.  P.  Lesley,  Member  of  the  National  Academy  of  the  United 
States,  Professor  of  Geology,  University  of  Pennsylvania.  Second  (Revised  and 
considerably  Enlarged)  Edition,  crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  142,  cloth.  1881.  7s.  6d. 

LESSING.— LETTERS  ON  BIBLIOLATRY.  By  Gotthold  Ephraim  Lessing.  Translated 
from  the  German  by  the  late  H.  H.  Bernard,  Ph.D.  8vo,  pp.  184,  cloth.  1862.  5s. 

LESSING.— See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical  Library,  Extra  Series,  Vols.  I. 

and  II. 
LETTERS  ON  THE  WAR  BETWEEN  GERMANY  AND  FRANCE.    By  Mommsen,  Strauss, 

Max  Muller,  and  Carlyle.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  120,  cloth.  1871.  2s.  6d. 
LEWES.— PROBLEMS  OF  LIFE  AND  MIND.     By  George  Henry  Lewes.     First  Series  : 

The  Foundations  of  a  Creed.     Vol.  I.,  demy  8vo.    Fourth  edition,  pp.  488,  cloth. 

1884.     12s.— Vol.  II.,  demy  8vo,  pp.  552,  cloth.     1875.     16s. 
LEWES. — PROBLEMS  OF  LIFE  AND  MIND.     By  George  Henry  Lewes.    Second  Series. 

THE  PHYSICAL  BASIS  OP  MIND.     8vo,  with  Illustrations,  pp.  508,  cloth.     1877. 

16s.     Contents.— The  Nature  of  Life ;  The  Nervous  Mechanism  ;  Animal  Auto- 
matism ;  The  Reflex  Theory. 
LEWES.— PROBLEMS  OF  LIFE  AND  MIND.    By  George  Henry  Lewes.    Third  Series. 

Problem  the  First— The  Study  of  Psychology  :  Its  Object,  Scope,  and  Method. 

Demy  8vo,  pp.  200,  cloth.     1879.     7s.  6d. 


42  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

LEWES. — PROBLEMS  OF  LIFE  AND  MIND.  By  George  Henry  Lewes.  Third  Series. 
Problem  the  Second — Mind  as  a  Function  of  the  Organism.  Problem  the  Third — 
The  Sphere  of  Sense  and  Logic  of  Feeling.  Problem  the  Fourth — The  Sphere  of 
Intellect  and  Logic  of  Signs.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  x.  and  500,  cloth.  1879.  15s. 

LEWIS.— See  JUVENAL  and  PLINY. 

LIBRARIANS,   TBANSACTIONS   AND  PROCEEDINGS   OF   THE    CONFERENCE  OF,  held  in 

London,  October  1877.     Edited  by  Edward  B.  Nicholson  and  Henry  R.  Tedder. 
Imperial  8vo,  pp.  276,  cloth.     1878.     £1,  8s. 

LIBRARY  ASSOCIATION  OF  THE  UNITED  KINGDOM,  Transactions  and  Proceed- 
ings  of  the  Annual  Meetings  of  the.  Imperial  8vo,  cloth.  FIRST,  held  at 
Oxford,  October  1,  2,  3,  1878.  Edited  by  the  Secretaries,  Henry  R.  Tedder, 
Librarian  of  the  Athenaeum  Club,  and  Ernest  C.  Thomas,  late  Librarian  of  the 
Oxford  Union  Society.  Pp.  viii.  and  192.  1879.  £1,  8s.— SECOND,  held  at  Man- 
chester, September  23,  24,  and  25,  1879.  Edited  by  H.  R.  Tedder  and  E.  C. 
Thomas.  Pp.  x.  and  184.  1880.  £1,  Is.— THIRD,  held  at  Edinburgh,  October 
5,  6,  and  7,  1880.  Edited  by  E.  C.  Thomas  and  C.  Welsh.  Pp.  x.  and  202. 
1881.  £1,  Is.— FOURTH  and  FIFTH,  held  in  London,  September  1881,  and  at 
Cambridge,  September  1882.  Edited  by  E.  C.  Thomas.  Pp.  x.-258.  1885.  28s. 

LIEBER. — THE  LIFE  AND  LETTERS  OF  FRANCIS  LIBBER.  Edited  by  T.  S.  Perry. 
8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  440,  cloth,  with  Portrait.  1882.  14s. 

LITTLE  FRENCH  READER  (THE).  Extracted  from  "  The  Modern  French  Reader." 
Third  Edition.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  112,  cloth.  1884.  2s. 

LLOYD  AND  NEWTON. — PRUSSIA'S  REPRESENTATIVE  MAN.  By  F.  Lloyd  of  the 
Universities  of  Halle  and  Athens,  and  W.  Newton,  F.R.G.S.  Crown  8vo,  pp. 
648,  cloth.  1875.  10s.  6d. 

LOBSCHEID.— CHINESE  AND  ENGLISH  DICTIONARY,  arranged  according  to  the  Radi- 
cals. By  W.  Lobscheid.  1  vol.  imperial  8vo,  pp.  600,  cloth.  £2,  8s. 

LOBSCHEID. — ENGLISH  AND  CHINESE  DICTIONARY,  with  the  Punti  and  Mandarin 
Pronunciation.  By  "W.  Lobscheid.  Four  Parts.  Folio,  pp.  viii.  and  2016,  boards. 
£8,  8s. 

LONG.— EASTERN  PROVERBS.    See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 

LOVETT.  —THE  LIFE  AND  STRUGGLES  OF  WILLIAM  LOVETT  in  his  pursuit  of  Bread, 
Knowledge,  and  Freedom  ;  with  some  short  account  of  the  different  Associations 
he  belonged  to,  and  of  the  Opinions  he  entertained.  8vo,  pp.  vL  and  474,  cloth. 
1876.  5s. 

LOVELY.  — WHERE  TO  GO  FOR  HELP  :  Being  a  Companion  for  Quick  and  Easy 
Reference  of  Police  Stations,  Fire-Engine  Stations,  Fire-Escape  Stations,  &c., 
&c.,  of  London  and  the  Suburbs.  Compiled  by  W.  Lovely,  R.N.  Third  Edi- 
tion. 18mo,  pp.  16,  sewed.  1882.  3d. 

LOWELL.— THE  BIGLOW  PAPERS.  By  James  Russell  Lowell.  Edited  by  Thomas 
Hughes,  Q.C.  A  Reprint  of  the  Authorised  Edition  of  1859,  together  with  the 
Second  Series  of  1862.  First  and  Second  Series  in  1  vol.  Fcap.,  pp.  lxviii.-140 
and  lxiv.-190,  cloth.  1880.  2s.  6d. 

LUCAS. — THE  CHILDREN'S  PENTATEUCH  :  With  the  Haphtarahs  or  Portions  from 
the  Prophets.  Arranged  for  Jewish  Children.  By  Mrs.  Henry  Lucas.  Crown 
8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  570,  cloth.  1878.  5s. 

LUDEWIG.— THE  LITERATURE  OF  AMERICAN  ABORIGINAL  LANGUAGES.  By  Hermann 
E.  Ludewig.  With  Additions  and  Corrections  by  Professor  Wm.  W.  Turner. 
Edited  by  Nicolas  Triibner.  8vo,  pp.  xxiv.  and  258,  cloth.  1858.  10s.  6d. 

LUKIN.— THE  BOY  ENGINEERS  :  What  they  did,  and  how  they  did  it.  By  the  Rev. 
L.  J.  Lukin,  Author  of  "  The  Young  Mechanic,"  &c.  A  Book  for  Boys  ;  30  En- 
gravings. Imperial  16mo,  pp.  viii.  and  344,  cloth.  1877.  7s.  6d. 

LUX  E  TENEBRIS;  OR,  THE  TESTIMONY  OF  CONSCIOUSNESS.  A  Theoretic  Essay. 
Crown  8vo,  pp.  376,  with  Diagram,  cloth.  1874.  10s.  6d. 


Published  by  Trubner  &  Co.  43 

MACCORMAC.— THE  CONVERSATION  OF  A  SOUL  WITH  GOD  :  A  Theodicy.  By  Henry 
MacCormac,  M.D.  16mo,  pp.  xvi.  and  144,  cloth.  1877.  3s.  6d. 

MACHIAVELLI. — THE  HISTORICAL,  POLITICAL,  AND  DIPLOMATIC  WRITINGS  OF 
NICCOLO  MACHIAVELLI.  Translated  from  the  Italian  by  C.  E.  Detmold.  With 
Portraits.  4  vols.  8vo,  cloth,  pp.  xli.,  420,  464,  488,  and  472.  1882.  £3,  3s. 

MACKENZIE.— HISTORY  OF  THE  RELATIONS  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT  WITH  THE  HILL 
TRIBES  OF  THE  NORTH-EAST  FRONTIER  OF  BENGAL.  By  Alexander  Mackenzie,  of 
the  Bengal  Civil  Service ;  Secretary  to  the  Government  of  India  in  the  Home 
Department,  and  formerly  Secretary  to  the  Government  of  Bengal.  Royal  8vo, 
pp.  xviii.  and  586,  cloth,  with  Map.  1884.  16s. 

MADDEN. — COINS  OF  THE  JEWS.  Being  a  History  of  the  Jewish  Coinage  and  Money 
in  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.  By  Frederick  W.  Madden,  M.R.A.S.  Member 
of  the  Numismatic  Society  of  London,  Secretary  of  the  Brighton  College,  &c.,  &c. 
With  279  Woodcuts  and  a  Plate  of  Alphabets.  Royal  4to,  pp.  xii.  and  330,  cloth. 
1881.  £2,  2s. 

MADELUNG.— THE  CAUSES  AND  OPERATIVE  TREATMENT  OF  DUPUYTREN'S  FINGER 
CONTRACTION.  By  Dr.  Otto  W.  Madelung,  Lecturer  of  Surgery  at  the  Univer- 
sity, and  Assistant  Surgeon  at  the  University  Hospital,  Bonn.  8vo,  pp.  24,  sewed. 
1876.  Is. 

MAHAPARTNIBBANASUTTA.  —See  CHILDERS. 

MAHA-VIRA-CHARITA ;  or,  The  Adventures  of  the  Great  Hero  Rama.  An  Indian 
Drama  m  Seven  Acts.  Translated  into  English  Prose  from  the  Sanskrit  of 
Bhavabhiiti.  By  John  Pickford,  M.A.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  5s. 

MAIMONIDES.— THE  GUIDE  OF  THE  PERPLEXED  OF  MAIMONIDES.  See  English  and 
Foreign  Philosophical  Library. 

MALLESON. — ESSAYS  AND  LECTURES  ON  INDIAN  HISTORICAL  SUBJECTS.  By  Colonel 
G.  B.  Malleson,  C.S.I.  Second  Issue.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  348,  cloth.  1876.  5s. 

MAN.— ON  THE  ABORIGINAL  INHABITANTS  OF  THE  ANDAMAN  ISLANDS.  By  Edward 
Horace  Man,  Assistant  Superintendent,  Andaman  and  Nicobar  Islands,  F.R.G.S., 
M.R.A.S.,  M.A.I.  With  Report  of  Researches  into  the  Language  of  the  South 
Andaman  Islands.  By  A.  J.  Ellis,  F.R.S.,  F.S.  A.  Reprinted  from  "  The  Journal 
of  the  Anthropological  Institute  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland."  Demy  8vo,  pp. 
xxviii.-298,  with  Map  and  8  Plates,  cloth.  1885.  10s.  6d. 

MANDLEY.— WOMAN  OUTSIDE  CHRISTENDOM.  An  Exposition  of  the  Influence 
exerted  by  Christianity  on  the  Social  Position  and  Happiness  of  Women.  By 
J.  G.  Mandley.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  160,  cloth.  1880.  5s.  . 

MANIPULUS  VOCABULORUM.  A  Rhyming  Dictionary  of  the  English  Language.  By 
Peter  Levins  (1570).  Edited,  with  an  Alphabetical  Index,  by  Henry  B.  Wheatley. 
8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  370,  cloth.  1867.  14s. 

MAN(EUVRES.— A  RETROSPECT  OF  THE  AUTUMN  MANOEUVRES,  1871.  With  5  Plans. 
By  a  Recluse.  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  133,  cloth.  1872.  5s. 

MARIETTE-BEY.— THE  MONUMENTS  OF  UPPER  EGYPT:  a  translation  of  the 
"  Itineraire  de  la  Haute  Egypte"  of  Auguste  Mariette-Bey.  Translated  by 
Alphonse  Mariette.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  262,  cloth.  1877.  7s.  6d. 

MARKHAM.— QUICHUA  GRAMMAR  AND  DICTIONARY.  Contributions  towards  a 
Grammar  and  Dictionary  of  Quichua,  the  Language  of  the  Yncas  of  Peru.  Col- 
lected by  Clements  R.  Markham,  F.S.  A.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  223,  cloth.  £1,  11s.  6d. 

MARKHAM. — OLLANTA  :  A  Drama  in  the  Quichua  Language.  Text,  Translation, 
and  Introduction.  By  Clements  R.  Markham,  C.B.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  128,  cloth. 
1871.  7s.  6d. 

MARKHAM.— A  MEMOIR  OF  THE  LADY  ANA  DE  OSORIO,  Countess  of  Chincon,  and 
Vice-Queen  of  Peru,  A.D.  1629-39.  With  a  Plea  for  the  correct  spelling  of  the 
Chinchona  Genus.  By  Clements  R.  Markham,  C.B.,  Member  of  the  Imperial  Aca- 
demy Naturae  Curiosorum,  with  the  Cognomen  of  Chinchon.  Small  4to,  pp.  xii.  and 
100.  With  2  Coloured  Plates,  Map,  and  Illustrations.  Handsomely  bound. 
1874.  28s. 


44  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

MARKHAM.— A  MEMOIR  ON  THE  INDIAN  SURVEYS.  By  Clements  R.  Markham, 
C.B.,  F.R.S.,  &c.,  &c.  Published  by  Order  of  H.  M.  Secretary  of  State  for  India 
in  Council.  Illustrated  with  Maps.  Second  Edition.  Imperial  8vo,  pp.  xxx. 
and  481,  boards.  1878.  10s.  6d. 

MARKHAM.— NARRATIVES  OF  THE  MISSION  OF  GEORGE  BOGLE  TO  TIBET,  and  of  the 
Journey  of  Thomas  Manning  to  Lhasa.  Edited  with  Notes,  an  Introduction,  and 
Lives  of  Mr.  Bogle  and  Mr.  Manning.  By  Clements  R.  Markham,  C.B.,  F.R.S. 
Second  Edition.  8vo,  pp.  clxv.  and  362,  cloth.  "With  Maps  and  Illustrations. 
1879.  21s. 

MARES. — SERMONS.  Preached  on  various  occasions  at  the  West  London  Synagogue 
of  British  Jews.  By  the  Rev.  Professor  Marks,  Minister  of  the  Congregation. 
Published  at  the  request  of  the  Council.  Second  Series,  demy  8vo,  pp.  viii.-310, 
cloth.  1885.  7s.  6d.  Third  Series,  demy  8vo,  pp.  iv.-284,  cloth.  1885.  7s.  6d. 

MARMONTEL.— BELISAIRE.  Par  Marmontel.  Nouvelle  Edition.  12mo,  pp.  xii. 
and  123,  cloth.  1867.  2s.  6d. 

MARSDEN.— NUMISMATA  ORIENTALIA  ILLUSTRATA.  THE  PLATES  OF  THE  ORIENTAL 
COINS,  ANCIENT  AND  MODERN,  of  the  Collection  of  the  late  William  Marsden, 
F.R.S.,  &c.  &c.  Engraved  from  Drawings  made  under  his  Directions.  4to,  57 
Plates,  cloth.  31s.  6d. 

MARTIN  AND  TRUBNER.— THE  CURRENT  GOLD  AND  SILVER  COINS  OF  ALL  COUNTRIES, 
their  Weight  and  Fineness,  and  their  Intrinsic  Value  in  English  Money,  with 
Facsimiles  of  the  Coins.  By  Leopold  C.  Martin,  of  Her  Majesty's  Stationery 
Office,  and  Charles  Triibner.  In  1  vol.  medium  8vo,  141  Plates,  printed  in  Gold 
and  Silver,  and  representing  about  1000  Coins,  with  160  pages  of  Text,  hand- 
somely bound  in  embossed  cloth,  richly  gilt,  with  Emblematical  Designs  on  the 
Cover,  and  gilt  edges.  1863.  £2,  2s. 

MARTIN. — THE  CHINESE  :  THEIR  EDUCATION,  PHILOSOPHY,  AND  LETTERS.  By  W. 
A.  P.  Martin,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  President  of  the  Tungwen  College,  Pekin.  8vo,  pp. 
320,  cloth.  1881.  7s.  6d. 

MARTINEAU.— ESSAYS,  PHILOSOPHICAL  AND  THEOLOGICAL.  By  James  Martineau. 
2  vols.  crown  8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  414— x.  and  430,  cloth.  1875.  £1,  4s. 

MARTINEAU.— LETTERS  FROM  IRELAND.  By  Harriet  Martineau.  Reprinted  from 
the  Daily  News.  Post  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  220,  cloth.  1852.  6s.  6d. 

MASON.— BURMA:  ITS  PEOPLE  AND  PRODUCTIONS  ;  or,  Notes  on  the  Fauna,  Flora, 
and  Minerals  of  Tenasserim,  Pegu  and  Burma.  By  the  Rev.  F;  Mason,  D.D., 
M.R.  A.S.,  Corresponding  Member  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  of  the  Boston 
Society  of  Natural  History,  and  of  the  Lyceum  of  Natural  History,  New  York. 
Vol.  I.  GEOLOGY,  MINERALOGY  AND  ZOOLOGY.  Vol.  II.  BOTANY.  Rewritten  and 
Enlarged  by  W.  Theobald,  late  Deputy-Superintendent  Geological  Survey  of 
India.  Two  Vols.,  royal  8vo,  pp.  xxvi.  and  560;  xvi.  and  788  and  xxxvi.,  cloth. 
1884.  £3. 

MATHEWS.— ABRAHAM  IBN  EZRA'S  COMMENTARY  ON  THE  CANTICLES  AFTER  THE 
FIRST  RECENSION.  Edited  from  the  MSS.,  with  a  translation,  by  H.  J.  Mathews, 
B.A.,  Exeter  College,  Oxford.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  x.,  34,  and  24,  limp  cloth.  1874. 
2s.  6d. 

MATERIA  MEDICA,  PHYSIOLOGICAL  AND  APPLIED.  Vol.  I.  Contents  :— Aconitum, 
by  R.  E.  Dudgeon,  M.D.;  Crotalus,  by  J.  W.  Hay  ward,  M.D.;  Digitalis,  by  F. 
Black,  M.D. ;  Kali  Bichromicum,  by  J.  J.  Drysdale,  M.D. ;  Nux  Vomica,  by  F. 
Black,  M.D.;  Plumbum,  by  F.  Black,  M.D.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  xxiv.-726,  cloth. 
1884.  15s. 

MAXWELL. — A  MANUAL  OF  THE  MALAY  LANGUAGE.  By  W.  E.  MAXWELL,  of  the 
Inner  Temple,  Barrister-at-Law ;  Assistant  Resident,  Perak,  Malay  Peninsula. 
With  an  Introductory  Sketch  of  the  Sanskrit  Element  in  Malay.  Crown  8vo, 
pp.  viii.  and  182,  cloth.  1882.  7s.  6d. 

MAY. — A  BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF  ELECTRICITY  AND  MAGNETISM.  1860  to  1883.  With 
Special  Reference  to  Electro-Technics.  Compiled  by  G.  May.  With  an  Index 
by  O.  Salle,  Ph.D.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.-204,  cloth.  1884.  5s. 


Published  by  Trubner  &  Co.  45 

MAYER. — ON  THE  ART  OP  POTTERY:  with  a  History  of  its  Kise  and  Progress  in 
Liverpool.  By  Joseph  Mayer,  F.S.A.,  F.R.S.N.A.,  &c.  8vo,  pp.  100,  boards. 
1873.  5s. 

MAYERS. — TREATIES  BETWEEN  THE  EMPIRE  OF  CHINA  AND  FOREIGN  POWERS, 
together  with  Regulations  for  the  conduct  of  Foreign  Trade,  &c.  Edited  by  "W. 
F.  Mayers,  Chinese  Secretary  to  H.B.M.'s  Legation  at  Peking.  8vo,  pp.  246, 
cloth.  1877.  25s. 

MAYERS.— THE  CHINESE  GOVERNMENT  :  a  Manual  of  Chinese  Titles,  categorically 
arranged  and  explained,  with  an  Appendix.  By  Wm.  Fred.  Mayers,  Chinese 
Secretary  to  H.B.M.'s  Legation  at  Peking,  &C..&G.  Royal  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  160, 
cloth.  1878.  30s. 

M'CRINDLE. — ANCIENT  INDIA,  AS  DESCRIBED  BY  MEGASTHENES  AND  ARRIAN; 
being  a  translation  of  the  fragments  of  the  Indika  of  Megasthenes  collected  by 
Dr.  Schwanbeck,  and  of  the  first  part  of  the  Indika  of  Arrian.  By  J.  W. 
M'Crindle,  M.A.,  Principal  of  the  Government  College,  Patna,  &c.  "With 
Introduction,  Notes,  and  Map  of  Ancient  India.  Post  8vo,  pp.  xi.  and  224, 
cloth.  1877.  7s.  6d. 

M'CRINDLE. — THE  COMMERCE  AND  NAVIGATION  OF  THE  ERYTHRAEAN  SEA.  Being 
a  Translation  of  the  Periplus  Maris  Erythrsei,  by  an  Anonymous  "Writer,  and  of 
Arrian's  Account  of  the  Voyage  of  Nearkhos,  from  the  Mouth  of  the  Indus  to  the 
Head  of  the  Persian  Gulf.  "With  Introduction,  Commentary,  Notes,  and  Index. 
By  J.  W.  M'Crindle,  M.A.,  Edinburgh,  &c.  Post  8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  238,  cloth. 
1879.  7s.  6d. 

M'CRINDLE. — Ancient  India  as  Described  by  Ktesias  the  Knidian;  being  a  Transla- 
tion of  the  Abridgment  of  his  "Indika  "  by  Photios,  and  of  the  Fragments  of  that 
Work  preserved  in  other  Writers.  With  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Index.  By 
J.  W.  M'Crindle,  M.A.,  M.R.S.A.  Svo,  pp.  viii.  and  104,  cloth.  1882.  6s. 

MECHANIC  (THE  YOUNG).  A  Book  for  Boys,  containing  Directions  for  the  use  of 
all  kinds  of  Tools,  and  for  the  construction  of  Steam  Engines  and  Mechanical 
Models,  including  the  Art  of  Turning  in  Wood  and  Metal.  Fifth  Edition. 
Imperial  16mo,  pp.  iv.  and  346,  and  70  Engravings,  cloth.  1878.  6s. 

MECHANIC'S  WORKSHOP  (AMATEUR).  A  Treatise  containing  Plain  and  Concise 
Directions  for  the  Manipulation  of  Wood  and  Metals,  including  Casting,  Forging, 
Brazing,  Soldering,  and  Carpentry.  By  the  Author  of  "The  Lathe  and  its  Uses." 
Sixth  Edition.  Demy  Svo,  pp.  iv.  and  148.  Illustrated,  cloth.  1880.  6s. 

MEDITATIONS  ON  DEATH  AND  ETERNITY.  Translated  from  the  German  by  Frederica 
Rowan.  Published  by  Her  Majesty's  gracious  permission.  Svo,  pp.  386,  cloth. 
1862.  10s.  6d. 

DITTO.     Smaller  Edition,  crown  Svo,  printed  on  toned  paper,  pp.  352,  cloth. 
1884.     6s. 

MEDITATIONS  ON  LIFE  AND  ITS  RELIGIOUS  DUTIES.  Translated  from  the  German 
by  Frederica  Rowan.  Dedicated  to  H.R.H.  Princess  Louis  of  Hesse.  Published 
by  Her  Majesty's  gracious  permission.  Being  the  Companion  Volume  to  "Medi- 
tations on  Death  and  Eternity."  Svo,  pp.  vi.  and  370,  cloth.  1863.  10s.  6d. 

DITTO.     Smaller  Edition,  crown  Svo,  printed  on  toned  paper,  pp.  338.    1863. 
6s. 

MEDLICOTT.— A  MANUAL  OF  THE  GEOLOGY  OF  INDIA,  chiefly  compiled  from  the 
observations  of  the  Geological  Survey.  By  H.  B.  Medlicott,  M.  A.,  Superintendent, 
Geological  Survey  of  India,  and  W.  T.  Blanford,  A.R.S.M.,  F.R.S.,  Deputy  Super- 
intendent. Published  by  order  of  the  Government  of  India.  2  vols.  Svo,  pp. 
xviii.-lxxx.-S18,  with  21  Plates  and  large  coloured  Map  mounted  in  case,  uniform 
cloth.  1879.  16s.  (For  Part  III.  see  BALL.) 


46  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

MEGHA-DUTA  (THE).  (Cloud-Messenger.)  By  Kalidasa.  Translated  from  the 
Sanskrit  into  English  Verse  by  the  late  H.  H.  Wilson,  M.  A.,  F.R.S.  The  Vocabu- 
lary by  Francis  Johnson.  New  Edition.  4to,  pp.  xi.  and  180,  cloth.  10s.  6d. 

MEREDYTH. — AKCA,  A  REPERTOIRE  OF  ORIGINAL  POEMS,  Sacred  and  Secular.  By 
F.  Meredyth,  M.A.,  Canon  of  Limerick  Cathedral.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  124,  cloth. 
1875.  5s. 

METCALFE.— THE  ENGLISHMAN  AND  THE  SCANDINAVIAN.  By  Frederick  Met- 
calfe,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Lincoln  College,  Oxford;  Translator  of  "Gallus"  and 
"Charicles;"  and  Author  of  "The  Oxonian  in  Iceland."  Post  8vo,  pp.  512, 
cloth.  1880.  18s. 

MICHEL. — LES  ECOSSAIS  EN  FRANCE,  LES  FRANC_AIS  EN  ECOSSE.  Par  Francisque 
Michel,  Correspondant  de  1'Institut  de  France,  &c.  In  2  vols.  8vo,  pp.  vii.,  547, 
and  551,  rich  blue  cloth,  with  emblematical  designs.  With  upwards  of  100  Coats 
of  Arms,  and  other  Illustrations.  Price,  £1,  12s. — Also  a  Lai-ge-Paper  Edition 
(limited  to  100  Copies),  printed  on  Thick  Paper.  2  vols.  4to,  half  morocco,  with  3 
additional  Steel  Engravings.  1862.  £3,  3s. 

MICKIEWICZ.  — KONRAD  WALLENROD.  An  Historical  Poem.  By  A.  Mickiejvicz. 
Translated  from  the  Polish  into  English  Verse  by  Miss  M.  Biggs.  18mo,  pp* 
xvi.  and  100,  cloth.  1882.  2s.  6d. 

MILL.— AUGUSTE  COMTE  AND  POSITIVISM.  By  the  late  John  Stuart  Mill,  M.P, 
Third  Edition.  8vo,  pp.  200,  cloth.  1882.  3s.  6d. 

MILLHOUSE. — MANUAL  OF  ITALIAN  CONVERSATION.  For  the  Use  of  Schools.  By 
John  Millhouse.  18mo,  pp.  126,  cloth.  1866.  2s. 

MILLHOUSE. — NEW  ENGLISH  AND  ITALIAN  PRONOUNCING  AND  EXPLANATORY  DIC- 
TIONARY. By  John  Millhouse.  Vol.  I.  English-Italian.  Vol.  II.  Italian-English. 
Fourth  Edition.  2  vols.  square  8vo,  pp.  654  and  740,  cloth.  1867.  12s. 

MILNE.— NOTES  ON  CRYSTALLOGRAPHY  AND  CRYSTALLO-PHYSICS.  Being  the  Sub- 
stance of  Lectures  delivered  at  Yedo  during  the  years  1876-1877.  By  John 
Milne,  F.G-.S.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  70,  cloth.  1879.  3s. 

MILTON  AND  VONDEL.— See  EDMUNDSON. 

MINOCHCHERJI.— PAHLAVI,  GUJ!RATI,  AND  ENGLISH  DICTIONARY.  By  Jamashji 
Dastur  Minochcherji.  Vol.  I.,  with  Photograph  of  Author.  8vo,  pp.  clxxii.  and 
168,  cloth.  1877.  14s. 

MITRA.— BUDDHA  GAYA  :  The  Hermitage  of  Sakya  Muni.  By  Kajendralala  Mitra, 
LL.D.,  C.I.E.,  &c.  4to,  pp.  xvi.  and  258,  with  51  Plates,  cloth.  1879.  £3. 

MOCATTA.— MORAL  BIBLICAL  GLEANINGS  AND  PRACTICAL  TEACHINGS,  Illustrated 
by  Biographical  Sketches  Drawn  from  the  Sacred  Volume.  By  J.  L.  Mocatta. 
8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  446,  cloth.  1872.  7s. 

MODERN  FRENCH  READER  (THE).    Prose.   Junior  Course.   Tenth  Edition.    Edited 
by  Ch.  Cassal,  LL.D.,  and  Theodore  Karcher,  LL.B.   Crown  8vo,  pp.  xiv.  and  224, 
cloth.    1884.    2s.  6d. 
SENIOR  COURSE.    Third  Edition.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  xiv.  and  418,  cloth.    1880.    4s. 

MODERN  FRENCH  READER.— A  GLOSSARY  of  Idioms,  Gallicisms,  and  other  Diffi- 
culties contained  in  the  Senior  Course  of  the  Modern  French  Reader ;  with  Short 
Notices  of  the  most  important  French  Writers  and  Historical  or  Literary  Charac- 
ters, and  hints  as  to  the  works  to  be  read  or  studied.  By  Charles  Cassal,  LL.D., 
&c.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  104,  cloth.  1881.  2s.  6d. 

MODERN  FRENCH  READER.  —SENIOR  COURSE  AND  GLOSSARY  combined.    6s. 

MORELET.— TRAVELS  IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA,  including  Accounts  of  some  Regions 
unexplored  since  the  Conquest.  From  the  French  of  A.  Morelet,  by  Mrs.  M.  F 
Squier.  Edited  by  E.  G.  Squier.  8vo,  pp.  430,  cloth.  1871.  8s.  6d. 

MORFILL.— SIMPLIFIED  POLISH  GRAMMAR.    See  Triibner's  Collection. 


Published  ~by  Triibner  &  Co.  47 

MORFIT.— A  PBACTICAL  TKEATISE  ON  THE  MANUFACTURE  OF  SOAPS.  By  Campbell 
Morfit,  M.D.,  F.C.S. ,  formerly  Professor  of  Applied  Chemistry  in  the  University 
of  Maryland.  "With  Illustrations.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  270,  cloth.  1871. 
£2,  12s.  6d. 

MORFIT.— A  PRACTICAL  TREATISE  ON  PURE  FERTILIZERS,  and  the  Chemical  Con- 
version of  Rock  Guanos,  Marlstones,  Coprolites,  and  the  Crude  Phosphates  of 
Lime  and  Alumina  generally  into  various  valuable  Products.  By  Campbell  Morfit, 
M.D.,  F.C.S.,  formerly  Professor  of  Applied  Chemistry  in  the  University  of  Mary- 
land. With  28  Plates.  Svo,  pp.  xvi.  and  547,  cloth.  1873.  £4,  4s. 

MORRIS. — A  DESCRIPTIVE  AND  HISTORICAL  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  GODAVERY  DISTRICT, 
IN  THE  PRESIDENCY  OF  MADRAS.  By  Henry  Morris,  formerly  of  the  Madras  Civil 
Service,  author  of  "  A  History  of  India,  for  use  in  Schools,"  and  other  works. 
With  a  Map.  Svo,  pp.  xii.  and  390,  cloth.  1878.  12s. 

MOSENTHAL.— OSTRICHES  AND  OSTRICH  FARMING.  By  J.  de  Mosenthal,  late 
Member  of  the  Legistive  Council  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  &c.,  and  James  E. 
Harting,  F.L.S.,  F.Z.S.,  Member  of  the  British  Ornithologist's  Union,  &c.  Second 
Edition.  With  8  full-page  illustrations  and  20  woodcuts.  Royal  Svo,  pp.  xxiv. 
and  246,  cloth.  1879.  10s.  6d. 

MOTLEY.— JOHN  LOTHROP  MOTLEY  :  a  Memoir.  By  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes. 
English  Copyright  Edition.  Crown  Svo,  pp.  xii.  and  275,  cloth.  1878.  6s. 

MUELLER. — THE  ORGANIC  CONSTITUENTS  OF  PLANTS  AND  VEGETABLE  SUBSTANCES, 
and  their  Chemical  Analysis.  By  Dr.  G.  C.  Wittstein.  Authorised  Translation 
from  the  German  Original,  enlarged  with  numerous  Additions,  by  Baron  Ferd. 
ron  Mueller,  K.C.M.G.,  M.  &  Ph.  D.,  F.R.S.  Crown  Svo,  pp.  xviii.  and  332, 
wrapper.  1880.  14s. 

MUELLER. — SELECT  EXTRA-TROPICAL  PLANTS  READILY  ELIGIBLE  FOR  INDUSTRIAL 
CULTURE  OR  NATURALISATION.  With  Indications  of  their  Native  Countries  and 
some  of  their  Uses.  By  F.  Von  Mueller,  K.C.M.G.,  M.D.,  Ph.D.,  F.R.S.  Svo, 
pp.  x.,  394,  cloth.  1880.  8s. 

MUHAMMED.— THE  LIFE  OF  MUHAMMED.  Based  on  Muhammed  Ibn  Ishak.  By 
Abd  El  Malik  Ibn  Hisham.  Edited  by  Dr.  Ferdinand  Wiistenfeld.  One  volume 
containing  the  Arabic  Text.  Svo,  pp.  1026,  sewed.  £1,  Is.  Another  volume,  con- 
taining Introduction,  Notes,  and  Index  in  German.  Svo,  pp.  Ixxii.  and  266,  sewed. 
7s.  6d.  Each  part  sold  separately. 

MUIR. — EXTRACTS  FROM  THE  CORAN.  In  the  Original,  with  English  rendering. 
Compiled  by  Sir  William  Muir,  K. C.S.I.,  LL.D.,  Author  of  "The  Life  of 
Mahomet."  Second  Edition.  Crown  Svo,  pp.  viii.  and  64,  cloth.  1885.  2s.  6d. 

MUIR.— ORIGINAL  SANSKRIT  TEXTS,  on  the  Origin  and  History  of  the  People  of 
India,  their  Religion  and  Institutions.  Collected,  Translated,  and  Illustrated  by 
John  Muir,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  Ph.D.,  &c.  &c. 

Vol.  I.  Mythical  and  Legendary  Accounts  of  the  Origin  of  Caste,  with  an  Inquiry 
into  its  existence  in  the  Vedic  Age.  Second  Edition,  rewritten  and 
greatly  enlarged.  8vo,  pp.  xx.  and  532,  cloth.  1868.  £1,  Is. 

Vol.  II.  The  Trans-Himalayan  Origin  of  the  Hindus,  and  their  Affinity  with  the 
Western  Branches  of  the  Aryan  Race.  Second  Edition,  revised,  with 
Additions.  Svo,  pp.  xxxii.  and  512,  cloth.  1871.  £1,  Is. 

Vol.  III.  The  Vedas  :  Opinions  of  their  Authors,  and  of  later  Indian  Writers,  on 
their  Origin,  Inspiration,  and  Authority.  Second  Edition,  revised  and 
enlarged.  Svo,  pp.  xxxii.  and  312,  cloth.  1868.  16s. 

Vol.  IV.  Comparison  of  the  Vedic  with  the  later  representation  of  the  principal 
Indian  Deities.  Second  Edition,  revised.  Svo,  pp.  xvi.  and  524,  cloth. 
1873.  £1,  Is. 


48  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

MUIR.— ORIGINAL  SANSKRIT  TEXTS— contin ued. 

Vol.  V.  Contributions  to  a  Knowledge  of  the  Cosmogony,  Mythology,  Religious 
Ideas,  Life  and  Manners  of  the  Indians  in  the  Vedic  Age.  Third 
Edition.  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  492,  cloth.  1884.  £1,  Is. 

MUIR.— TRANSLATIONS  FROM  THE  SANSKRIT.    See  Trubner's  Oriental  Series. 
MULHALL.— HANDBOOK  OF  THE  RIVER  PLATE,  Comprising  the  Argentine  Republic, 
Uruguay,  and  Paraguay.     With  Six  Maps.     By  M.  G.  and  E.  T.  Mulhall,  Pro- 
prietors and  Editors  of  the   Buenos  Ayres   Standard.      Fifth  Edition   (Ninth 
Thousand),  crown  8vo,  pp.  x.  and  732,  cloth.    1885.     7s.  6d. 

MULLER.— OUTLINE  DICTIONARY,  for  the  Use  of  Missionaries,  Explorers,  and 
Students  of  Language.  With  an  Introduction  on  the  proper  Use  of  the  Ordinary 
English,  Alphabet  in  transcribing  Foreign  Languages.  ByF.  MaxMuller,  M.A.  The 

'*  Vocabulary  compiled  by  John  Bellows.     12mo,  pp.  368,  morocco.    1867.    7s.  6d. 

MULLER.— LECTURE  ON  BUDDHIST  NIHILISM.  By  F.  Max  Miiller,  M.A.  Fcap. 
8vo,  sewed.  1869.  Is. 

MULLER. — THE  SACRED  HYMNS  OF  THE  BRAHMINS,  as  preserved  to  us  in  the  oldest 
collection  of  religious  poetry,  the  Rig-Veda-Sanhita.  Translated  and  explained,  by 
F.  MaxMuller,  M.  A.,  Fellow  of  All  Souls'  College,  Professor  of  Comparative  Philo- 
logy at  Oxford,  Foreign  Member  of  the  Institute  of  France,  &c.^  &c.  Vol.  I.  Hymns 
to  the  Maruts  or  the  Storm-Gods.  8vo,  pp.  clii.  and  264,  cloth.  1869.  12s.  6d. 

MULLER.  —THE  HYMNS  OF  THE  RIG-VEDA,  in  the  Samhita  and  Pada  Texts.  Reprinted 
from  the  Editio  Princeps.  By  F.  Max  Muller,  M.A.,  &c.  Second  Edition,  with 
the  two  Texts  on  Parallel  Pages.  In  two  vols.  8vo,  pp.  1704,  sewed.  £1,  12s. 

MULLER.  — A  SHORT  HISTORY  OF  THE  BOURBONS.  From  the  Earliest  Period  down 
to  the  Present  Time.  By  R.  M.  Muller,  Ph.D.,  Modern  Master  at  Forest  School, 
Walthamstow,  and  Author  of  "  Parallele  entre  '  Jules  Cesar,'  par  Shakespeare,  et 
'Le  Mort  de  Cesar,'  par  Voltaire,"  &c.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  30,  wrapper.  1882.  Is. 

MULLER.— ANCIENT  INSCRIPTIONS  IN  CEYLON.  By  Dr.  Edward  Muller.  2  Vols. 
Text,  crown  8vo,  pp.  220,  cloth,  and  Plates,  oblong  folio,  cloth.  1883.  21s. 

MULLER.— PALI  GRAMMAR.     See  Trubner's  Collection. 

MULLEY.— GERMAN  GEMS  IN  AN  ENGLISH  SETTING.  Translated  by  Jane  Mulley. 
Fcap.,  pp.  xii.  and  180,  cloth.  1877.  3s.  6d. 

N^GANANDA ;  OR,  THE  JOY  OF  THE  SNAKE  WORLD.  A  Buddhist  Drama  in  Five 
Acts.  Translated  into  English  Prose,  with  Explanatory  Notes,  from  the  Sanskrit 
of  Sri-Harsha-Deva,  by  Palmer  Boyd,  B.A.  With  an  Introduction  by  Professor 
Cowell.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  100,  cloth.  1872.  4s.  6d. 

NAPIER.— FOLK  LORE  ;  or,  Superstitious  Beliefs  in  the  West  of  Scotland  within 
this  Century.  With  an  Appendix,  showing  the  probable  relation  of  the  modern 
Festivals  of  Christmas,  May  Day,  St.  John's  Day,  and  Hallowe'en,  to  ancient  Sun 
and  Fire  Worship.  By  James  Napier,  F.R.S.E.,  &c.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  vii.  and 
190,  cloth.  1878.  4s. 

NARADfYA  DHARMA-S  ASTRA ;  OR,  THE  INSTITUTES  OF  NARADA.  Translated,  for 
the  first  time,  from  the  unpublished  Sanskrit  original.  By  Dr.  Julius  Jolly, 
University,  Wurzburg.  With  a  Preface,  Notes,  chiefly  critical,  an  Index  of 

8 notations  from  Narada  in  the  principal  Indian  Digests,  and  a  general  Index, 
rown  Svo,  pp.  xxxv.  and  144,  cloth.  1876.  10s.  6d. 

NAVILLE.— PITHOM.     See  Egypt  Exploration  Fund. 

NEVILL. — HAND  LIST  OF  MOLLUSCA  IN  THE  INDIAN  MUSEUM,  CALCUTTA.  By 
Geoffrey  Nevill,  C.M.Z.S.,  &c.,  First  Assistant  to  the  Superintendent  of  the 
Indian  Museum.  Part  I.  Gastropoda,  Pulmonata,  and  Prosobranchia-Neuro- 
branchia.  Svo,  pp.  xvi.  and  338,  cloth.  1878.  15s. 

NEWMAN.— THE  ODES  OF  HORACE.  Translated  into  Unrhymed  Metres,  with  Intro- 
duction and  Notes.  By  F.  W.  Newman.  Second  Edition.  Post  Svo,  pp.  xxi. 
and  247,  cloth.  1876.  4s. 


Published  by  Triibner  &  Co.  49 

NEWMAN. — THEISM,  DOCTRINAL  AND  PRACTICAL  ;  or,  Didactic  Religious  Utterances. 

By  F.  W.  Newman.     4to,  pp.  184,  cloth.     1858.     4s.  6d. 
NEWMAN. — HOMERIC  TRANSLATION  IN  THEORY  AND  PRACTICE.  A  Reply  to  Matthew 

Arnold.     By  F.  W.  Newman.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  104,  stiff  covers.     1861.     2s.  6d. 

NEWMAN.— HIAWATHA  :   Rendered  into  Latin.     With  Abridgment.     By  F.   W. 

Newman.     12mo,  pp.  vii.  and  110,  sewed.     1862.     2s.  6d. 
NEWMAN.— A  HISTORY  OF  THE  HEBREW  MONARCHY  from  the  Administration  of 

Samuel  to  the  Babylonish  Captivity.   By  F.  W.  Newman.   Third  Edition.    Crown 

8vo,  pp.  x.  and  354,  cloth.     1865.     8s.  6d. 
NEWMAN.— PHASES  OF  FAITH  ;  or,  Passages  from  the  History  of  my  Creed.     By 

F.  W.  Newman.     New  Edition ;  with  Reply  to  Professor  Henry  Rogers,  Author 

of  the  "Eclipse  of  Faith."    Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  212,  cloth.     1881.     3s.  6d. 
NEWMAN.— A  HANDBOOK  OF  MODERN  ARABIC,  consisting  of  a  Practical  Grammar, 

with  numerous   Examples,   Dialogues,    and  Newspaper  Extracts,   in  European 

Type.     By  F.  W.  Newman.     Post  8vo,  pp.  xx.  and  192,  cloth.     1866.     6s. 

NEWMAN.— TRANSLATIONS  OF  ENGLISH  POETRY  INTO  LATIN  VERSE.    Designed  as 

Part  of  a  New  Method  of  Instructing  in  Latin.    By  F.  W.  Newman.    Crown  8vo, 

pp.  xiv.  and  202,  cloth.     1868.     6s. 
NEWMAN.— THE  SOUL  :  Her  Sorrows  and  her  Aspirations.     An  Essay  towards  the 

Natural  History  of  the  Soul,  as  the  True  Basis  of  Theology.     By  F.  W.  Newman. 

Tenth  Edition.     Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  162,  cloth.     1882.     3s.  6d. 
NEWMAN.— THE  TEXT  OF  THE  IGUVINE  INSCRIPTIONS.      With  Interlinear  Latin 

Translation  and  Notes.     By  F.  W.  Newman.     8vo,  pp.  56,  sewed.     1868.     2s. 

NEWMAN. — MISCELLANIES  ;  chiefly  Addresses,  Academical  and  Historical.     By  F. 

W.  Newman.     8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  356,  cloth.     1869.     7s.  6d. 
NEWMAN. — THE  ILIAD  OF  HOMER,  faithfully  translated  into  Unrhymed  English 

Metre,  by  F.  W.  Newman.     Royal  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  384,  cloth.     1871.     10s.  6d. 

NEWMAN.— A  DICTIONARY  OF  MODERN  ARABIC.     1.  Anglo- Arabic  Dictionary.     2. 

Anglo-Arabic  Vocabulary.     3.  Arabo-English  Dictionary.     By  F.  W.  Newman. 

In  2  vols.  crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  376-464,  cloth.     1871.     £1,  Is. 
NEWMAN.— HEBREW  THEISM.    By  F.  W.  Newman.     Royal  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  172 

Stiff  wrappers.     1874.     4s.  6d. 
NEWMAN. — THE  MORAL  INFLUENCE  OF  LAW.    A  Lecture  by  F.  W.  Newman,  May 

20,  1860.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  16,  sewed.  .  3d. 
NEWMAN. — RELIGION  NOT  HISTORY.    By  F.  W.  Newman.    Foolscap,  pp.  58,  paper 

wrapper.     1877.     Is. 
NEWMAN.— MORNING  PRAYERS  IN  THE  HOUSEHOLD  OF  A  BELIEVER  IN  GOD.    By  F. 

W.  Newman.     Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  80,  limp  cloth.     1882.     Is.  6d. 

NEWMAN.  —REORGANIZATION  OF  ENGLISH  INSTITUTIONS.    A  Lecture  by  Emeritus 

Professor  F.  W.  Newman.     Delivered  in  the  Manchester  Athenaeum,  October  15, 

1875.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  28,  sewed.     1880.     6d. 
NEWMAN.— WHAT  is  CHRISTIANITY  WITHOUT  CHRIST?       By  F.    W.   Newman, 

Emeritus  Professor  of  University  College,   London.     8vo,  pp.    28,   stitched  in 

wrapper.     1881.     Is. 
NEWMAN.— LIBYAN  VOCABULARY.     An  Essay  towards  Reproducing  the  Ancient 

Numidian  Language  out  of  Four  Modern  Languages.     By  F.  VV.  Newman.     Crown 

8vo,  pp.  vi.  and  204,  cloth.     1882.     10s.  6d. 
NEWMAN. — A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH.    By  F.  W.  Newman.     Crown  8vo,  pp. 

60,  cloth.    1883.    Is. 
NEWMAN.— CHRISTIANITY  IN  ITS  CRADLE.    By  F.  W.  Newman,  once  Fellow  of 

Balliol  College,  Oxford,  now  Emeritus  Professor  of  University  College,  London. 

Crown  8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  132,  cloth.     1884.     2s. 

D 


50  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

NEWMAN. — COMMENTS  ON  THE  TEXT  OF  J^SCHYLUS.  By  F.  "W.  Newman,  Honorary 
Fellow  of  Worcester  College,  Oxford,  and  formerly  Fellow  of  Balliol  College. 
Demy  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  144,  cloth.  1884.  5s. 

NEWMAN.— KEBILIUS  CRUSO  :  Robinson  Crusoe  in  Latin.  A  Book  to  Lighten 
Tedium  to  a  Learner.  By  F.  W.  Newman,  Emeritus  Professor  of  Latin  in  Univer- 
sity College,  London ;  Honorary  Fellow  of  Worcester  College,  Oxford.  Post 
8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  110,  cloth.  1884.  5s. 

NEW  SOUTH  WALES,  PUBLICATIONS  OF  THE  GOVEKNMENT  OF.     List  on  application. 

NEW  SOUTH  WALES.— JOURNAL  AND  PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  EOYAL  SOCIETY  OF 
Published  annually.  Price  10s.  6d.  List  of  Contents  on  application. 

NEWTON. — PATENT  LAW  AND  PRACTICE:  showing  the  mode  of  obtaining  and 
opposing  Grants,  Disclaimers,  Confirmations,  and  Extensions  of  Patents.  With  a 
Chapter  on  Patent  Agents.  By  A.  V.  Newton.  Enlarged  Edition.  Crown  8vo, 
pp.  xii.  and  104,  cloth.  1879.  2s.  6d. 

NEWTON. — AN  ANALYSIS  OF  THE  PATENT  AND  COPYRIGHT  LAWS:  Including  the 
various  Acts  relating  to  the  Protection  of  Inventions,  Designs,  Trade  Marks; 
Literary  and  Musical  Compositions,  Dramatic  Performances  ;  Engravings,  Sculp- 
ture, Paintings,  Drawings,  and  Photographs.  By  A.  Newton,  author  of  "  Patent 
Law  and  Practice."  Demy  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  70,  cloth.  1884,  3s.  6d. 

NEW  ZEALAND  INSTITUTE  PUBLICATIONS :- 
I.  TRANSACTIONS  AND  PROCEEDINGS  of  the  New  Zealand  Institute.    Demy  8vo, 

stitched.    Vols.  I.  to  XVI.,  1868  to  1883.     £1,  Is.  each. 

II.  AN  INDEX  TO  THE  TRANSACTIONS  AND  PROCEEDINGS  of  the  New  Zealand  In- 
stitute. Vols.  I.  to  VIII.  Edited  and  Published  under  the  Authority  of  the 
Board  of  Governors  of  the  Institute.  By  James  Hector,  C.M.G.,  BI.D.,  F.R.S. 
Demy,  8vo,  44  pp.,  stitched.  1877.  2s.  6d. 

NEW  ZEALAND.  —GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY.     List  of  Publications  on  application. 

NOIRIT.— A  FRENCH  COURSE  IN  TEN  LESSONS.  ,By  Jules  Noirit,  B.A.  Lessons 
I. -IV.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xiv.  and  80,  sewed.  1870.  Is.  6d. 

NOIRIT.— FRENCH  GRAMMATICAL  QUESTIONS  for  the  use  of  Gentlemen  preparing 
for  the  Army,  Civil  Service,  Oxford  Examinations,  &c.,  &c.  By  Jules  Noirit. 
Crown  8vo,  pp.  62,  cloth.  1870.  Is.  Interleaved,  Is.  6d. 

NOURSE.— NARRATIVE  OF  THE  SECOND  ARCTIC  EXPEDITION  MADE  BY  CHARLES  F. 
HALL.  His  Voyage  to  Repulse  Bay ;  Sledge  Journeys  to  the  Straits  of  Fury  and 
Hecla,  and  to  King  William's  Land,  and  Residence  among  the  Eskimos  during 
the  years  1864-69.  Edited  under  the  orders  of  the  Hon.  Secretary  of  the  Navy, 
by  Prof.  J.  E.  Nourse,  U.S.N.  4to,  pp.  1.  and  644,  cloth.  With  maps,  heliotypes, 
steel  and  wood  engravings.  1880.  £1,  8s. 

NUGENT' S  IMPROVED  FRENCH  AND  ENGLISH  AND  ENGLISH  AND  FRENCH  POCKET 
DICTIONARY.  Par  Smith.  24mo,  pp.  489  and  320,  cloth.  1873.  3s. 

NUTT.— Two  TREATISES  ON  VERBS  CONTAINING  FEEBLE  AND  DOUBLE  LETTERS.  By 
R.  Jehuda  Hayug  of  Fez.  Translated  into  Hebrew  from  the  original  Arabic  by 
R.  Moses  Gikatilia  of  Cordova,  with  the  Treatise  on  Punctuation  by  the  same 
author,  translated  by  Aben  Ezra.  Edited  from  Bodleian  MSS.,  with  an  English 
translation,  by  J.  W.  Nutt,  M.A.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  312,  sewed.  1870.  5s. 

NUMISMATA  ORIENTALIA  ILLUSTRATA.     See  MARSDEN,  and  INTERNATIONAL. 

NUTT.— A  SKETCH  OF  SAMARITAN  HISTORY,  DOGMA,  AND  LITERATURE.  An  Intro- 
troduction  to  "Fragments  of  a  Samaritan  Targum."  By  J.  W.  Nutt,  M.A.,  &c., 
&c.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  180,  cloth.  1874.  5s. 

OEHLENSCHLAGER.— AXEL  AND  VALBORG  :  a  Tragedy,  in  Five  Acts,  and  other 
Poems.  Translated  from  the  Danish  of  Adam  Oehlenschlager  by  Pierce  Butler, 
M.A.,  late  Rector  of  Ulcombe,  Kent.  Edited  by  Professor  Palmer,  M.A.,  of  St. 
John's  Coll.,  Camb.  With  a  Memoir  of  the  Translator.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and 
164,  cloth.  1874.  5s. 


Published  by  Triibner  &  Co.  51 

OERA  LINDA  BOOK  (THE). — From  a  Manuscript  of  the  13th  Century,  with  the  per- 
mission of  the  proprietor,  C.  Over  de  Linden  of  the  Helder.  The  Original  Frisian 
Text  as  verified  by  Dr.  J.  O.  Ottema,  accompanied  by  an  English  Version  of  Dr. 
Ottema's  Dutch  Translation.  By  W.  E.  Sandbach.  Svo,  pp.  xxv.  and  254,  cloth. 
1876.  5s. 

OGAREFF. — ESSAI  SUR  LA  SITUATION  RUSSE.  Lettres  a  un  Anglais.  Par  N.  Ogareff. 
12mo,  pp.  150,  sewed.  1862.  3s. 

OLCOTT. — A  BUDDHIST  CATECHISM,  according  to  the  Canon  of  the  Southern  Church. 
By  Colonel  H.  S.  Olcott,  President  of  the  Theosophical  Society.  24mo,  pp.  32.  Is. 

OLCOTT. — THE  YOGA  PHILOSOPHY  :  Being  the  Text  of  Patanjali,  with  Bhojarajah's 
Commentary.  A  Reprint  of  the  English  Translation  of  the  above,  by  the  late  Dr. 
Ballantyne  and  Govind  Shastri  Deva  ;  to  which  are  added  Extracts  from  Various 
Authors.  With  an  Introduction  by  Colonel  H.  S.  Olcott,  President  of  the  Theo- 
sophical Society.  The  whole  Edited  by  Tukaram  Tatia,  F.T.S.  Crown  Svo,  pp. 
xvi.-294,  wrapper.  1882.  7s.  6d. 

OLLENDORFF. — METODO  PARA  APRENDER  A  LEER,  escribir  y  hablar  el  Ingles  segun 
el  sistema  de  Ollendorff .     Por  Ramon  Palenzuela  y  Juan  de  la  Carreno.     8vo,  pp. 
xlvi.  and  460,  cloth.     1873.     7s.  6d. 
KEY  to  Ditto.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  112,  cloth.     1873.    4s. 

OLLENDORFF.— METODO  PARA  APRENDER  A  LEER,  escribir  y  hablar  el  Frances, 
segun  el  verdadero  sistema  de  Ollendorff ;  ordenado  en  lecciones  progresivas,  con- 
sistiendo  de  ejercicios  orales  y  escritos  ;  enriquecido  de  la  pronunciacion  figurada 
como  se  estila  en  la  conversacion  ;  y  de  un  Apendice  abrazando  las  reglas  de  la 
sintaxis,  la  formacion  de  los  verbos  regulares,  y  la  conjugacion  de  los  irregulares. 
Por  Teodoro  Simonne,  Professor  de  Lenguas.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  342,  cloth.  1873.  6s. 
KEY  to  Ditto.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  80,  cloth.  1873.  3s.  6d. 

OPPERT.— ON  THE  CLASSIFICATION  OP  LANGUAGES  :  A  Contribution  to  Comparative 
Philology.  By  Dr.  Gustav  Oppert,  Ph.D.,  Professor  of  Sanskrit,  Presidency 
College,  Madras.  Svo,  paper,  pp.  viii.  and  146.  1883.  7s.  6d. 

OPPERT.— LISTS  OF  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS  in  Private  Libraries  of  Southern 
India,  Compiled,  Arranged,  and  Indexed  by  Gustav  Oppert,  Ph.D.,  Professor  of 
Sanskrit,  Presidency  College,  Madras.  Vol.  I.  Svo,  pp.  vii.  and  620,  cloth.  1883. 

OPPERT. — ON  THE  WEAPONS,  ARMY  ORGANISATION,  AND  POLITICAL  MAXIMS  OF 
THE  ANCIENT  HINDUS  ;  with  special  reference  to  Gunpowder  and  Firearms.  By 
Dr.  Gustav  Oppert,  Ph.D.,  Professor  of  Sanskrit,  Presidency  College,  Madras. 
Svo,  paper,  pp.  vi.  and  162.  1883.  7s.  6d. 

ORIENTAL  SERIES.— See  TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES. 

ORIENTAL  TEXT  SOCIETY'S  PUBLICATIONS.    A  list  may  be  had  on  application. 

ORIENTAL  CONGRESS.— REPORT  OF  THE  PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  SECOND  INTERNA- 
TIONAL CONGRESS  OF  ORIENTALISTS  HELD  IN  LONDON,  1874.  Royal  Svo,  pp. 
viii.  and  68,  sewed.  1874.  5s. 

ORIENTALISTS. —TRANSACTIONS  OF  THE  SECOND  SESSION  OF  THE  INTERNATIONAL 
CONGRESS  OF  ORIENTALISTS.  Held  in  London  in  September  1874.  Edited  by 
Robert  K.  Douglas,  Hon.  Sec.  Svo,  pp.  viii.  and  456,  cloth.  1876.  21s. 

OTTE. — How  TO  LEARN  DANISH  (Dano-Norwegian)  :  a  Manual  for  Students    of 
Danish  based  on  the  Ollendorffian  system  of  teaching  languages,  and  adapted  for 
self-instruction.     By  E.-  C.  Otte.     Second  Edition.     Crown  Svo,  pp.  xx.  and  338, 
cloth.     1884.    7s.  6d. 
Key  to  above.     Crown  Svo,  pp.  84,  cloth.    3s. 

OTTE. — SIMPLIFIED  DANISH  AND  SWEDISH  GRAMMARS.    See  TRUBNER'S  COLLECTION. 

OVERBECK.— CATHOLIC  ORTHODOXY  AND  ANGLO-CATHOLICISM.  A  Word  about  the 
Intercommunion  between  the  English  and  Orthodox  Churches.  By  J.  J.  Overbeck, 
D.D.  Svo,  pp.  viii.  and  200,  cloth.  1866.  5s. 

OVERBECK.— BONN  CONFERENCE.  By  J.  J.  Overbeck,  D.D.  Cw)wn  Svo,  pp.  48, 
sewed.  1876.  Is. 


52  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

OVERBECK. — A  PLAIN  VIEW  OF  THE  CLAIMS  or  THE  ORTHODOX  CATHOLIC  CHURCH 
AS  OPPOSED  TO  ALL  OTHER  CHRISTIAN  DENOMINATIONS.  By  J.  J.  Overbeck, 
D.D.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  138,  wrapper.  1881.  2s.  6d. 

OWEN.— FOOTFALLS  ON  THE  BOUNDARY  OF  ANOTHER  WORLD.  With  Narrative 
Illustrations.  By  R.  D.  Owen.  An  enlarged  English  Copyright  Edition.  Post 
8vo,  pp.  xx.  and  392,  cloth.  1875.  7s.  6d. 

OWEN.— THE  DEBATABLE  LAND  BETWEEN  THIS  WORLD  AND  THE  NEXT.  With 
Illustrative  Narrations.  By  Robert  Dale  Owen.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo, 
pp.  456,  cloth.  1874.  7s.  6d. 

OWEN.— THREADING  MY  WAY:  Twenty-Seven  Years  of  Autobiography.  By  R.  D. 
Owen.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  344,  cloth.  1874.  7s.  6d. 

OXLEY. — EGYPT  :  And  the  Wonders  of  the  Land  of  the  Pharaohs.  By  William 
Oxley,  author  of  "The  Philosophy  of  Spirit."  Illustrated  by  a  New  Version  of 
the  Bhagavat-Gita,  an  Episode  of  the  Mahabharat,  one  of  the  Epic  Poems  of 
Ancient  India.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.-328,  cloth.  1884.  7s.  6d. 

OYSTER  (THE)  :  WHERE,  How,  AND  WHEN  TO  FIND,  BREED,  COOK,  AND  EAT  IT. 
Second  Edition,  with  a  New  Chapter,  "The  Oyster-Seeker  in  London."  12mo, 
pp.  viii.  and  106,  boards.  1863.  Is. 

PALESTINE.— MEMOIRS  OF  TEE  SURVEY  OF  WESTERN  PALESTINE.  Edited  by  W. 
Besant,  M.A.,  and  E.  H.  Palmer,  M.A.,  under  the  Direction  of  the  Committee 
of  the  Palestine  Exploration  Fund.  Complete  in  seven  volumes.  Demy  4to, 
cloth,  with  a  Portfolio  of  Plans,  and  large  scale  Map.  Second  Issue.  Price 
Twenty  Guineas. 

PALMER.— A  CONCISE  ENGLISH-PERSIAN  DICTIONARY  ;  together  with  a  simplified 
Grammar  of  the  Persian  Language.  By  the  late  E.  H.  Palmer,  M.A.,  Lord 
Almoner's  Reader,  and  Professor  of  Arabic,  Cambridge,  &c.  Completed  and 
Edited,  from  the  MS.  left  imperfect  at  his  death,  by  G.  Le  Strange.  Royal 
16mo,  pp.  606,  cloth.  1883.  10s.  6d. 

PALMER.— A  CONCISE  PERSIAN-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY.  By  E.  H.  Palmer,  M.A.,  of 
the  Middle  Temple,  Barrister-at-Law,  Lord  Almoner's  Reader,  and  Professor  of 
Arabic,  and  Fellow  of  St.  John's  College  in  the  University  of  Cambridge.  Second 
Edition.  Royal  16mo,  pp.  726,  cloth.  1884.  10s.  6d. 

PALMER.— THE  SONG  OF  THE  REED,  AND  OTHER  PIECES.  By  E.  H.  Palmer,  M.A., 
Cambridge.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  208,  cloth.  1876.  5s. 

PALMER.— HINDUSTANI,  ARABIC,  AND  PERSIAN  GRAMMAR.  See  Triibner's  Col- 
lection. 

PALMER.— THE  PATRIARCH  AND  THE  TSAR.  Translated  from  the  Russ  by  William 
Palmer,  M.A.  Demy  8vo,  cloth.  Vol.  I.  THE  REPLIES  OF  THE  HUMBLE  NICON. 
Pp.  xl.  and  674.  1871.  12s. — Vol.  II.  TESTIMONIES  CONCERNING  THE  PATRIARCH 
NICON,  THE  TSAR,  AND  THE  BOYARS.  Pp.  Ixxviii.  and  554.  1873.  12s. — Vol.  III. 
HISTORY  OF  THE  CONDEMNATION  OF  THE  PATRIARCH  NICON.  Pp.  Ixvi.  and  558. 
1873.  12s.— Vols.  IV.,  V.,  and  VI.  SERVICES  OF  THE  PATRIARCH  NICON  TO  THE 
CHURCH  AND  STATE  OF  HIS  COUNTRY,  &c.  Pp.  Ixxviii.  and  1  to  660 ;  xiv.  -661- 
1028,  and  1  to  254 ;  xxvi. -1029-1656,  and  1-72.  1876.  36s. 

PARKER. — THEODORE  PARKER'S  CELEBRATED  DISCOURSE  ON  MATTERS  PERTAINING  TO 
RELIGION.  People's  Edition.  Cr.  8vo,  pp.  351.  1872.  Stitched,  Is.  6d.;  cl.,  2s. 

PARKER.— THEODORE  PARKER.  A  Biography.  By  O.  B.  Frothingham.  Crown 
8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  588,  cloth,  with  Portrait.  1876.  12s. 

PARKER.— THE  COLLECTED  WORKS  OF  THEODORE  PARKER,  Minister  of  the  Twenty- 
eighth  Congregational  Society  at  Boston,  U.S.  Containing  his  Theological, 
Polemical,  and  Critical  Writings ;  Sermons,  Speeches,  and  Addresses  ;  and 
Literary  Miscellanies.  In  14  vols.  8vo,  cloth.  6s.  each. 

Vol.  I.  Discourse  on  Matters  Pertaining  to  Religion.    Preface  by  the  Editor, 

and  Portrait  of  Parker  from  a  medallion  by  Saulini.    Pp.  380. 
Vol.  II.  Ten  Sermons  and  Prayers.    Pp.  360. 
Vol.  III.  Discourses  oi  Theology.     Pp.  318. 
Vol.  IV.  Discourses  on  Politics.     Pp.  312. 


Published  by  Trubner  &  Co.  53 


PARKER.  — COLLECTED  WORKS — continued. 

Vol.  V.  Discourses  of  Slavery.     I.     Pp.  336. 
Vol.  VI.  Discourses  of  Slavery.     II.     Pp.  323. 
Vol.  VII.  Discourses  of  Social  Science.     Pp.  296. 
Vol.  VIII.  Miscellaneous  Discourses.     Pp.  230. 
Vol.  IX.  Critical  Writings.     I.     Pp.  292. 
Vol.  X.  Critical  Writings.     II.     Pp.  308. 

Vol.  XI.  Sermons  of  Theism,  Atheism,  and  Popular  Theology.     Pp.  257. 
Vol.  XII.  Autobiographical  and  Miscellaneous  Pieces.     Pp.  356. 
VoL  XIII.  Historic  Americans.     Pp.  236. 

Vol.  XIV.  Lessons  from  the  World  of  Matter  and  the  World  of  Man.      Pp. 
352. 

PARKER.— MALAGASY  GRAMMAR.    See  Triibner's  Collection. 

PARRY. — A  SHORT  CHAPTER  ON  LETTER-CHANGE,  with  Examples.  Being  chiefly 
an  attempt  to  reduce  in  a  simple  manner  the  principal  classical  and  cognate  words 
to  their  primitive  meanings.  By  J.  Parry,  B.A.,  formerly  Scholar  of  Corpus 
Christi  College,  Cambridge.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  16,  wrapper.  1884.  Is. 

PATERSON.— NOTES  ON  MILITARY  SURVEYING  AND  RECONNAISSANCE.  By  Lieut.  - 
Colonel  William  Paterson.  Sixth  Edition.  With  16  Plates.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  xii. 
and  146,  cloth.  1882.  7s.  6d. 

PATERSON.— TOPOGRAPHICAL  EXAMINATION  PAPERS.  By  Lieut.-Col.  W.  Paterson. 
8vo,  pp.  32,  with  4  Plates.  Boards.  1882.  2s. 

PATERSON.— TREATISE  ON  MILITARY  DRAWING.  With  a  Course  of  Progressive 
Plates.  By  Captain  W.  Paterson,  Professor  of  Military  Drawing  at  the  Royal 
Military  College,  Sandhurst.  Oblong  4to,  pp.  xii.  and  31,  cloth.  1862.  £1,  Is. 

PATERSON.— THE  OROMETER  FOR  HILL  MEASURING,  combining  Scales  of  Distances, 
Protractor,  Clinometer,  Scale  of  Horizontal  Equivalents,  Scale  of  Shade,  and 
Table  of  Gradients.  By  Captain  William  Paterson.  On  cardboard.  Is. 

PATERSON.— CENTRAL  AMERICA.  By  W.  Paterson,  the  Merchant  Statesman. 
From  a  MS.  in  the  British  Museum,  1701.  With  a  Map.  Edited  by  S.  Bannis- 
ter, M.A.  8vo,  pp.  70,  sewed.  1857.  2s.  6d. 

PATON.— A  HISTORY  OF  THE  EGYPTIAN  REVOLUTION,  from  the  Period  of  the  Mame- 
lukes to  the  Death  of  Mohammed  Ali ;  from  Arab  and  European  Memoirs,  Oral 
Tradition,  and  Local  Research.  By  A.  A.  Paton.  Second  Edition.  2  vols.  demy 
8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  395,  viii.  and  446,  cloth.  1870.  7s.  6d. 

PATON.— HENRY  BEYLE  (otherwise  DE  STENDAHL).  A  Critical  and  Biographical 
Study,  aided  by  Original  Documents  and  Unpublished  Letters  from  the  Private 
Papers  of  the  Family  of  Beyle.  By  A.  A.  Paton.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  340,  cloth. 
1874.  7s.  6d. 

PATTON.— THE  DEATH  OF  DEATH  ;  or,  A  Study  of  God's  Holiness  in  Connection 
with  the  Existence  of  Evil,  in  so  far  as  Intelligent  and  Responsible  Beings  are 
Concerned.  By  an  Orthodox  Layman  (John  M.  Patton).  Revised  Edition,  crown 
8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  252,  cloth.  1881.  6s. 

PAULI. — SIMON  DE  MONTFORT,  EARL  OF  LEICESTER,  the  Creator  of  the  House  of 
Commons.  By  Reinhold  Pauli.  Translated  by  Una  M.  Goodwin.  With  Intro- 
duction by  Harriet  Martineau.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  340,  cloth.  1876.  6s. 

PETTENKOFER.— THE  RELATION  OF  THE  AIR  TO  THE  CLOTHES  WE  WEAR,  THE  HOUSE 
WE  LIVE  IN,  AND  THE  SOIL  WE  DWELL  ON.  Three  Popular  Lectures  delivered  before 
the  Albert  Society  at  Dresden.  By  Dr.  Max  Von  Pettenkof er,  Professor  of  Hygiene 
at  the  University  of  Munich,  &c.  Abridged  and  Translated  by  Augustus  Hess. 
M.D.,  M.R.C. P.,  London,  &c.  Cr.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  96,  limp  cl.  1873.  2s.  6d. 

PETRUCCELLI. — PRELIMIN AIRES  DE  LA  QUESTION  ROMAINE  DE  M.  ED.  ABOUT.  Par 
F.  Petruccelli  de  la  Gattina.  8vo,  pp.  xv.  and  364,  cloth.  1860.  7s.  6d. 

PEZZI. — ARYAN  PHILOLOGY,  according  to  the  most  recent  researches  (Glottologia 
Aria  Recentissima).  Remarks  Historical  and  Critical.  By  Domenico  Pezzi. 
Translated  by  E.  S.  Roberts,  M.  A.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  200,  cloth.  1879.  6s. 


54  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

PHAYRE.— A  HISTORY  OP  BURMA.    See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 

PHAYRE. — THE  COINS  OF  ARAKAN,  OF  PEGU,  AND  OF  BURMA.  By  Sir  Arthur 
Phayre,  C.B.,  K. C.S.I.,  G.C.M.G.,  late  Commissioner  of  British  Burma.  Royal 
4to,  pp.  viii.-48,  with  Autotype  Illustrative  Plates.  Wrapper.  1882.  8s.  6d. 

PHILLIPS. —THE  DOCTRINE  OF  ADDAI,  THE  APOSTLE,  now  first  edited  in  a  com- 
plete form  in  the  Original  Syriac,  with  English  Translation  and  Notes.  By 
George  Phillips,  D.D.,  President  of  Queen's  College,  Cambridge.  8vo.  pp.  xv. 
and  52  and  53,  cloth.  1876.  7s.  6d. 

PHILLIPS.—  KOPAL-KUNDALA  :  A  Tale  of  Bengali  Life.  Translated  from  the  Ben- 
gali of  Bunkim  Chandra  Chatterjee.  By  H.  A.  D.  Phillips,  Bengal  Civil  Service. 
Crown  8vo,  pp.  xxx.-208,  cloth.  1885.  6s. 

PHILOLOGICAL  SOCIETY,  TRANSACTIONS  OF,  published  irregularly.  List  of  publi- 
cations on  application. 

PHILOSOPHY  (THE)  OF  INSPIRATION  AND  REVELATION.  By  a  Layman.  With  a 
preliminary  notice  of  an  Essay  by  the  present  Lord  Bishop  of  Winchester,  con- 
tained in  a  volume  entitled  "Aids  to  Faith."  8vo,  pp.  20,  sewed.  1875.  6d. 

PICCIOTTO.— SKETCHES  OF  ANGLO- JEWISH  HISTORY.  By  James  Picciotto.  Demy 
8vo,  pp.  xi.  and  420,  cloth.  1875.  12s. 

PIESSE.  —CHEMISTRY  IN  THE  BREWING-ROOM  :  being  the  substance  of  a  Course  of 
Lessons  to  Practical  Brewers.  With  Tables  of  Alcohol,  Extract,  and  Original 
Gravity.  By  Charles  H.  Piesse,  F.C.S.,  Public  Analyst.  Fcap.,  pp.  viii.  and  62, 
cloth.  1877.  5s. 

PIRY.— LE  SAINT  EDIT,  ETUDE  DE  LITTERATURE  CHINOISE.  Prepared  par  A. 
Th^ophile  Piry,  du  Service  des  Douanes  Maritimes  de  Chine.  4to,  pp.  xx.  and 
320,  cloth.  1879.  21s. 

PLAYFAIR. — THE  CITIES  AND  TOWNS  OF  CHINA.  A  Geographical  Dictionary. 
By  G.  M.  H.  Playfair,  of  Her  Majesty's  Consular  Service  in  China.  8vo,  pp. 
506,  cloth.  1879.  £1,  5s. 

PLINY.— THE  LETTERS  OF  PLINY  THE  YOUNGER.  Translated  by  J.  D.  Lewis,  M.A., 
Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  Post  8vo,  pp.  vii.  and  390,  cloth.  1879.  5s. 

PLUMPTRE. — KING'S  COLLEGE  LECTURES  ON  ELOCUTION  ;  on  the  Physiology  and 
Culture  of  Voice  and  Speech  and  the  Expression  of  the  Emotions  by  Language, 
Countenance,  and  Gesture.  To  which  is  added  a  Special  Lecture  on  the  Causes 
and  Cure  of  the  Impediments  of  Speech.  Being  the  substance  of  the  Introduc- 
tory Course  of  Lectures  annually  delivered  by  Charles  John  Plumptre,  Lecturer 
on  Public  Reading  and  Speaking  at  King's  College,  London,  in  the  Evening 
Classes  Department.  Dedicated  by  permission  to  H.R.H.  the  Prince  of  Wales. 
Fourth,  greatly  Enlarged  Illustrated,  Edition.  Post  8vo,  pp.  xviii.  and  494,  cloth. 
1883.  15s. 

PLUMPTRE. — GENERAL  SKETCH  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  PANTHEISM.  By  C.  E. 
Plumptre.  Vol.  I.,  from  the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Age  of  Spinoza;  Vol.  II., 
from  the  Age  of  Spinoza  to  the  Commencement  of  the  19th  Century.  2  vols. 
demy  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  395 ;  iv.  and  348,  cloth.  1881.  18s. 

POLE. — THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  Music.  See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical  Library. 
Vol.  XI. 

PONSARD.— CHARLOTTE  CORD  AY.  A  Tragedy.  By  F.  Ponsard.  Edited,  with  Eng- 
lish Notes  and  Notice  on  Ponsard,  by  Professor  C.  Cassal,  LL.D.  12mo,  pp.  xi. 
and  133,  cloth.  1867.  2s.  6d. 

PONSARD. — L'HoNNEUR  ET  L'ARGENT.  A  Comedy.  By  Francois  Ponsard.  Edited, 
with  English  Notes  and  Memoir  of  Ponsard,  by  Professor  C.  Cassal,  LL.D.  Fcap. 
8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  172,  cloth.  1869.  3s.  6d. 

POOLE.— AN  INDEX  TO  PERIODICAL  LITERATURE.  By  W.  F.  Poole,  LL.D.,  Librarian 
of  the  Chicago  Public  Library.  Third  Edition,  brought  down  to  January 
1882.  Royal  8vo,  pp.  xxviii.  and  1442,  cloth.  1883.  £3,  13s.  6d.  Wrappers, 
£3, 10s. 


Published  by  Trubner  &  Co.  55 

PRACTICAL  GUIDES  :— 

FRANCE,  BELGIUM,  HOLLAND,  AND  THE  RHINE.  Is.— ITALIAN  LAKES.  Is.— WIN- 
TERING PLACES  OF  THE  SOUTH.  2s.— SWITZERLAND,  SAVOY,  AND  NORTH  ITALY. 
2s.  6d.— GENERAL  CONTINENTAL  GUIDE.  5s.— GENEVA.  Is.— PARIS.  Is.— BER- 
NESE OBERLAND.  Is. — ITALY.  4s. 

PRATT.— A  GRAMMAR  AND  DICTIONARY  OF  THE  SAMOAN  LANGUAGE.  By  Rev. 
George  Pratt,  Forty  Years  a  Missionary  of  the  London  Missionary  Society  in 
Samoa.  Second  Edition.  Edited  by  Rev.  S.  J.  Whitmee,  F.R.G.S.  Crown 
8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  380,  cloth.  1878.  18s. 

PRINSEP. — RECORD  OF  SERVICES  OF  THE  HONOURABLE  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY'S 
CIVIL  SERVANTS  IN  THE  MADRAS  PRESIDENCY,  from  1741  to  1858.  Compiled  and 
Edited  from  Records  in  the  possession  of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  India.  By 
C.  C.  Prinsep,  late  Superintendent  of  Records,  India  Office.  Post  8vo,  pp.  xxxvi.- 
164,  cloth.  1885.  10s.  6d. 

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH,  PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  SOCIETY  FOR.  Published  irregularly. 
Post  Svo,  cloth.  Vol.  I.,  pp.  338.  1884.  10s.  Vol.  II.,  pp.  356.  1884.  10s. 

PURITZ.— CODE-BOOK  OF  GYMNASTIC  EXERCISES.  By  Ludwig  Puritz.  Translated 
by  O.  Knofe  and  J.  W.  Macqueen.  Illustrated.  32mo,  pp.  xxiv.-292,  boards. 
1883.  Is.  6d. 

QUINET.— EDGAR  QUINET.  See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical  Library,  Vol.  XIV. 

RAM  RAZ.— ESSAY  ON  THE  ARCHITECTURE  OF  THE  HINDUS.  By  Ram  Raz,  Native 
Judge  and  Magistrate  of  Bangalore,  Corr.  Mem.  R.A.S.  With  48  Plates.  4to, 
pp.  xiv.  and  64,  sewed.  1834.  £2,  2s. 

RAMSAY.— TABULAR  LIST  OF  ALL  THE  AUSTRALIAN  BIRDS  AT  PRESENT  KNOWN  TO 
THE  AUTHOR,  showing  the  distribution  of  the  species.  By  E.  P.  Ramsay,  F.L.S., 
&c.,  Curator  of  the  Australian  Museum,  Sydney.  Svo,  pp.  36,  and  Map  ;  boards 
1878.  5s. 

RASK. — GRAMMAR  OF  THE  ANGLO-SAXON  TONGUE,  from  the  Danish  of  Erasmus 
Rask.  By  Benjamin  Thorpe.  Third  Edition,  corrected  and  improved,  with 
Plate.  Post  Svo,  pp.  vi.  and  192,  cloth.  1879.  5s.  6d. 

RASK.— A  SHORT  TRACTATE  on  the  Longevity  ascribed  to  the  Patriarchs  in  the 
Book  of  Genesis,  and  its  relation  to  the  Hebrew  Chronology;  the  Flood,  the 
Exodus  of  the  Israelites,  the  Site  of  Eden,  &c.  From  the  Danish  of  the  late 
Professor  Rask,  with  his  manuscript  corrections,  and  large  additions  from  his 
autograph,  now  for  the  first  time  printed.  With  a  Map  of  Paradise  and  the 
circumjacent  Lands.  Crown  Svo,  pp.  134,  cloth.  1863.  2s.  6d. 

RAVENSTEIN.  —THE  RUSSIANS  ON  THE  AMUR  ;  its  Discovery,  Conquest,  and  Colo- 
nization,  with  a  Description  of  the  Country,  its  Inhabitants,  Productions,  and 
Commercial  Capabilities,  and  Personal  Accounts  of  Russian  Travellers.  By  E.  G. 
Ravenstein,  F.R.G.S.  With  4  tinted  Lithographs  and  3  Maps.  Svo,  pp.  500, 
cloth.  1861.  15s. 

RAVENSTEIN  AND  HULLEY.— THE  GYMNASIUM  AND  ITS  FITTINGS.  By  E.  G. 
Ravenstein  and  John  Hulley.  With  14  Plates  of  Illustrations.  Svo,  pp.  32, 
sewed.  1867.  2s.  6d. 

RAVERTY.— NOTES  ON  AFGHANISTAN  AND  PART  OF  BALUCHISTAN,  Geographical, 
Ethnographical,  and  Historical,  extracted  from  the  Writings  of  little  known 
Afghan,  and  Tajyik  Historians,  &c.,  &c.,  and  from  Personal  Observation.  By 
Major  H.  G.  Raverty,  Bombay  Native  Infantry  (Retired).  Foolscap  folio.  Sec- 
tions I.  and  II.,  pp.  98,  wrapper.  1880.  2s.  Section  III.,  pp.  vi.  and  218. 
1881.  5s.  Section  IV.  3884.  3s. 

READE. — THE  MARTYRDOM  OF  MAN.  By  Win  wood  Reade.  Eighth  Edition. 
Crown  Svo,  pp.  viii.  and  544,  cloth.  1884.  7s.  6d. 

RECORD  OFFICE.— A  SEPARATE  CATALOGUE  OF  THE  OFFICIAL  PUBLICATION^  OF 
THE  PUBLIC  RECORD  OFFICE,  on  sale  by  Trubner  &  Co.,  may  be  had  on  application. 


56  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

RECORDS  OF  THE  HEART.  By  Stella,  Author  of  "Sappho,"  "The  King's 
Stratagem,"  &c.  Second  English  Edition.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  188,  with 
six  steel-plate  engravings,  cloth.  1881.  3s.  6d. 

REDHOUSE.— THE  MESNEVI.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 

REDHOUSE.  —SIMPLIFIED  OTTOMAN-TUKKISH  GEAMMAR.    See  Trubner's  Collection. 

REDHOUSE.— THE  TURKISH  VADE-MECUM  OF  OTTOMAN  COLLOQUIAL  LANGUAGE: 
Containing  a  Concise  Ottoman  Grammar ;  a  Carefully  Selected  Vocabulary 
Alphabetically  Arranged,  in  two  Parts,  English  and  Turkish,  and  Turkish  and 
English  ;  Also  a  few  Familiar  Dialogues  and  Naval  and  Military  Terms.  The 
whole  in  English  Characters,  the  Pronunciation  being  fully  indicated.  By  J. 
W.  Redhouse,  M.R.A.S.  Third  Edition.  32mo,  pp.  viii.  and  372,  cloth. 
1882.  6s. 

REDHOUSE.— ON  THE  HISTORY,  SYSTEM,  AND  VARIETIES  OF  TURKISH  POETRY. 
Illustrated  by  Selections  in  the  Original  and  in  English  Paraphrase,  with  a  Notice 
of  the  Islamic  Doctrine  of  the  Immortality  of  Woman's  Soul  in  the  Future  State. 
By  J.  W.  Redhouse,  Esq.,  M.R.A.S.  8vo,  pp.  62,  cloth,  2s.  6d.;  wrapper,  Is.  6d. 
1879. 

REEMELIN. — A  CRITICAL  REVIEW  OF  AMERICAN  POLITICS.  By  C.  Reemelin,  of 
Cincinnati,  Ohio.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  xxiv.  and  630,  cloth.  1881.  14s. 

RELIGION  IN  EUROPE  HISTORICALLY  CONSIDERED  :  An  Essay  in  Verse.  By  the 
Author  of  "The  Thames."  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  152,  cloth.  1883.  2s.  6d. 

REN  AN. —PHILOSOPHICAL  DIALOGUES  AND  FRAGMENTS.  From  the  French  of 
Ernest  Renan.  Translated,  with  the  sanction  of  the  Author,  by  Ras  Bihari 
Mukharji.  Post  8vo,  pp.  xxxii.  and  182,  cloth.  1883.  7s.  6d. 

RENAN.— AN  ESSAY  ON  THE  AGE  AND  ANTIQUITY  OF  THE  BOOK  OF  NABATH.EAN 
AGRICULTURE.  To  which  is  added  an  Inaugural  Lecture  on  the  Position  of  the 
Shemitic  Nations  in  the  History  of  Civilisation.  By  Ernest  Reuan.  Crown  8vo, 
pp.  xvi.  and  148,  cloth.  1862.  3s.  6d. 

RENAN. — THE  LIFE  OF  JESUS.  By  Ernest  Renan.  Authorised  English  Translation. 
Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  312,  cloth.  2s.  6d. ;  sewed,  Is.  6d. 

REPORT  OF  A  GENERAL  CONFERENCE  OF  LIBERAL  THINKERS,  for  the  discussion 
of  matters  pertaining  to  the  religious  needs  of  our  time,  and  the  methods  of 
meeting  them.  Held  June  13th  and  14th,  1878,  at  South  Place  Chapel,  Finsbury 
London.  8vo,  pp.  77,  sewed.  1878.  Is. 

RHODES. — UNIVERSAL  CURVE  TABLES  FOR  FACILITATING  THE  LAYING  OUT  OF 
CIRCULAR  ARCS  ON  THE  GROUND  FOR  RAILWAYS,  CANALS,  &c.  Together  with 
Table  of  Tangential  Angles  and  Multiples.  By  Alexander  Rhodes,  C.E.  Oblong 
18mo,  band.  pp.  ix.  and  104,  roan.  1881.  5s. 

RHYS. — LECTURES  ON  WELSH  PHILOLOGY.  By  John  Rhys,  M.A.,  Professor  of 
Celtic  at  Oxford,  Honorary  Fellow  of  Jesus  College,  &c. ,  &c.  Second  Edition, 
Revised  and  Enlarged.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xiv.  and  467,  cloth.  1879.  15s. 

RICE.— MYSORE  AND  COORG.  A  Gazetteer  compiled  for  the  Government  of  India. 
By  Lewis  Rice,  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Mysore  and  Coorg.  Vol.  I. 
Mysore  in  General.  With  2  Coloured  Maps.  Vol.  II.  Mysore,  by  Districts. 
With  10  Coloured  Maps.  Vol.  III.  Coorg.  With  a  Map.  3  vols.  royal  8vo, 
pp.  xii.  670  and  xvi. ;  544  and  xxii.  ;  and  427  and  xxvii.,  cloth.  1878.  25s. 

RICE. — MYSORE  INSCRIPTIONS.  Translated  for  the  Government  by  Lewis  Rice. 
8vo,  pp.  xcii.  and  336-xxx.,  with  a  Frontispiece  and  Map,  boards.  1879.  30s. 

RIDLEY.— KXMILAROI,  AND  OTHER  AUSTRALIAN  LANGUAGES.      By  the  Rev.  William 

Ridley,  B.A.  Second  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged  by  the  author;  with  com- 
parative Tables  of  Words  from  twenty  Australian  Languages,  and  Songs,  Tradi- 
tions, Laws,  and  Customs  of  the  Australian  Race.  Small  4to,  pp.  vi.  and  172,  cloth. 
1877.  10s.  6d. 


Published  ly  Trubner  d  Co.  57 

KIG-VEDA-SANHITA.  A  Collection  of  Ancient  Hindu  Hymns.  Constituting  the  1st 
to  the  8th  Ashtakas,  or  Books  of  the  Rig-Veda  ;  the  oldest  authority  for  the  Reli- 
gious and  Social  Institutions  of  the  Hindus.  Translated  from  the  Original  San- 
skrit. By  the  late  H.  H.  Wilson,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  &c.,  &c. 

Vol.  I.     8vo,  pp.  lii.  and  348,  cloth.     21s. 
Vol.  II.     8vo,  pp.  xxx.  and  346,  cloth.     1854.     21s. 
Vol.  III.     8vo,  pp.  xxiv.  and  525,  cloth.     1857.     21s. 

Vol.  IV.     Edited  by  E.  B.  Co  well,  M.A.     8vo,  pp.  214,  cloth.     1866.     14s. 
Vols.  V.  and  VI.  in  the  Press. 

KILEY. — MEDLEVAL  CHKONICLES  OF  THE  CITY  OF  LONDON.  Chronicles  of  the  Mayors 
and  Sheriffs  of  London,  and  the  Events  which  happened  in  their  Days,  from  the 
Year  A.D.  1188  to  A.D.  1274.  Translated  from  the  original  Latin  of  the  "Liher 
de  Antiquis  Legihus  "  (published  by  the  Camden  Society),  in  the  possession  of  the 
Corporation  of  the  City  of  London  ;  attributed  to  Arnold  Fitz-Thedmar,  Alder- 
man of  London  in  the  Reign  of  Henry  III.— Chronicles  of  London,  and  of  the 
Marvels  therein,  between  the  Years  44  Henry  III.,  A.D.  1260,  and  17  Edward  III., 
A.D.  1343.  Translated  from  the  original  Anglo-Norman  of  the  "  Croniques  de 
London,"  preserved  in  the  Cottonian  Collection  (Cleopatra  A.  iv.)  in  the  British 
Museum.  Translated,  with  copious  Notes  and  Appendices,  by  Henry  Thomas 
Riley,  M.A.,  Clare  Hall,  Cambridge,  Barrister-at-Law.  4to,  pp.  xii.  and  319,  cloth. 
1863.  12s. 

RIOLA.— How  TO  LEAKN  RUSSIAN  :  a  Manual  for  Students  of  Russian,  based  upon 
the  Ollendorffian  System  of  Teaching  Languages,  and  adapted  for  Self-Instruc- 
tion.    By  Henry  Riola,  Teacher  of  the  Russian  Language.     "With  a  Preface  by 
W.R.S.  Ralston,  M.  A.    Second  Edition.    Crown  8 vo,  pp.  576,  cloth.     1883.     12s. 
KEY  to  the  above.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  126,  cloth.     1878.     5s. 

RIOLA. — A  GRADUATED  RUSSIAN  READER,  with  a  Vocabulary  of  all  the  Russian 
Words  contained  in  it.  By  Henry  Riola,  Author  of  "  How  to  Learn  Russian." 
Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  314,  cloth.  1879.  10s.  6d. 

RIPLEY. — SACRED  RHETORIC  ;  or,  Composition  and  Delivery  of  Sermons.  By 
Henry  I.  Ripley.  12mo,  pp.  234,  cloth.  1858.  2s.  6d. 

ROCHE. — A  FRENCH  GRAMMAR,  for  the  use  of  English  Students,  adopted  for  the 
Public  Schools  by  the  Imperial  Council  of  Public  Instruction.  By  A.  Roche. 
Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  176,  cloth.  1869.  3s. 

ROCHE.— PROSE  AND  POETRY.  Select  Pieces  from  the  best  English  Authors,  for 
Reading,  Composition,  and  Translation.  By  A.  Roche.  Second  Edition.  Fcap. 
8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  226,  cloth.  1872.  2s.  6d. 

ROCKHILL.— UDANAVARGA.     See  Trubner's  Oriental  Series.    . 

ROCKHILL.— THE  LIFE  OF  THE  BUDDHA.     See  Trubner's  Oriental  Series. 

RODD.— THE  BIRDS  OF  CORNWALL  AND  THE  SCILLY  ISLANDS.  By  the  late  Edward 
Hearle  Rodd.  Edited,  with  an  Introduction,  Appendix,  and  Memoir,  by  J.  E. 
Harting.  8vo,  pp.  Ivi.  and  320,  with  Portrait  and  Map,  c^oth.  1880.  14s. 

ROGERS. — THE  WAVERLEY  DICTIONARY  :  An  Alphabetical  Arrangement  of  all  the 
Characters  in  Sir  Walter  Scott's  Waverley  Novels,  with  a  Descriptive  Analysis 
of  each  Character,  and  Illustrative  Selections  from  the  Text.  By  May  Rogers. 
12mo,  pp.  358,  cloth.  1879.  10s. 

ROSING.— ENGLISH-DANISH  DICTIONARY.  By  S.  Rosing.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  x.  and 
722,  cloth.  8s.  6d. 

ROSS.— ALPHABETICAL  MANUAL  OF  BLOWPIPE  ANALYSTS  ;  showing  all  known 
Methods,  Old  and  New.  By  Lieut. -Colonel  W.  A.  Ross,  late  R.A.,  Member  of 
the  German  Chemical  Society  (Author  of  "Pyrology,  or  Fire  Chemistry"). 
Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  148,  cloth.  1880.  5s. 

ROSS. — PYROLOGY,  OR  FIRE  CHEMISTRY  ;  a  Science  interesting  to  the  General  Philo- 
sopher, and  an  Art  of  infinite  importance  to  the  Chemist,  Metallurgist,  Engineer, 
&c.,  &c.  By  W.  A.  Ross,  lately  a  Major  in  the  Royal  Artillery.  Small  4to,  pp. 
xxviii.  and  346,  cloth.  1875.  36s. 

ROSS.— CELEBRITIES  OF  THE  YORKSHIRE  WOLDS.  By  Frederick  Ross,  Fellow  of  the 
Royal  Historical  Society.  12mo,  pp.  202,  cloth.  1878.  4s. 


58  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

ROSS.  —THE  EARLY  HISTORY  OF  LAND  HOLDING  AMONG  THE  GERMANS.  By  Denman 
W.  Ross,  Ph.D.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  274,  cloth.  1883.  12s. 

BOSS.— COREAN  PRIMER  :  being  Lessons  in  Corean  on  all  Ordinary  Subjects.  Trans- 
literated on  the  principles  of  the  "  Mandarin  Primer,"  by  the  same  author.  By 
Rev.  John  Ross,  Newchwang.  8vo,  pp.  90,  wrapper.  1877.  10s. 

ROSS.— HONOUR  OR  SHAME?  By  R.  S.  Ross.  8 vo,  pp.  183.  1878.  Cloth.  3s.  6d. ; 
paper,  2s.  6d. 

ROSS. --REMOVAL  OF  THE  INDIAN  TROOPS  TO  MALTA.  By  R.  S.  Ross.  8vo,  pp.  77, 
paper.  1878.  Is.  6d. 

ROSS. — THE  MONK  OF  ST.  GALL.  A  Dramatic  Adaptation  of  Scheffel's  "  Ekke- 
hard."  By  R.  S.  Ross.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  218.  1879.  5s. 

ROSS.— ARIADNE  IN  NAXOS.   By  R.  S.  Ross.   Square  16mo,  pp.  200,  cloth.   1882.  5s. 

ROTH. — THE  ANIMAL  PARASITES  OF  THE  SUGAR  CANE.  By  H.  Ling  Roth,  late  Hon. 
Sec.  to  the  Mackay  Planters'  Association.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  16,  wrapper.  1885.  Is. 

ROTH.— NOTES  ON  CONTINENTAL  IRRIGATION.  By  H.  L.  Roth.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  40, 
with  8  Plates,  cloth.  1882.  5s. 

ROUGH  NOTES  OF  JOURNEYS  made  in  the  years  1868-1873  in  Syria,  down  the  Tigris, 
India,  Kashmir,  Ceylon,  Japan,  Mongolia,  Siberia,  the  United  States,  the  Sand- 
wich Islands,  and  Australasia.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  624,  cloth.  1875.  14s. 

ROUSTAING.— THE  FOUR  GOSPELS  EXPLAINED  BY  THEIR  WRITERS.  With  an 
Appendix  on  the  Ten  Commandments.  Edited  by  J.  B.  Roustaing.  Translated 
by  W.  E.  Kirby.  3  vols.  crown  8vo,  pp.  440-456-304,  cloth.  1881.  15s. 

ROUTLEDGE.— ENGLISH  RULE  AND  NATIVE  OPINION  IN  INDIA.  From  Notes  taken 
in  1870-74.  By  James  Routledge.  8vo,  pp.  x.  and  338,  cloth.  1878.  10s.  6d. 

ROWE.— AN  ENGLISHMAN'S  VIEWS  ON  QUESTIONS  OF  THE  DAY  IN  VICTORIA.  By 
C.  J.  Rowe,  M.A.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  122,  cloth.  1882.  4s. 

ROWLEY.— ORNITHOLOGICAL  MISCELLANY.  By  George  Dawson  Rowley,M.A.,  F.Z.S. 
Vol.  I.  Part  I,  15s.— Part  2,  20s.— Part  3,  15s.— Part  4,  20s. 
Vol.  II.  Part  5,  20s.— Part  6,  20s.-Part  7,  10s.  6d.— Part  8,  10s.  6d.— Part  9, 

10s.  6d.— Part  10,  10s.  6d. 
Vol.  III.  Part  11,  10s.  6d.— Part  12,  10s.  6d.— Part  13,  10s.  6d.-Part  14,  20s. 

ROYAL  SOCIETY  OF  LONDON  (THE).— CATALOGUE  OF  SCIENTIFIC  PAPERS  (1800- 
1863),  Compiled  and  Published  by  the  Royal  Society  of  London.  Demy  4to, 


cloth,  per  vol.  £1 ;  in  half-morocco,  £1,  8s.  Vol.  I.  (1867),  A  to  Cluzel.  pp. 
Ixxix.  and  960 ;  Vol.  II.  (1868),  Coaklay— Graydon.  pp.  iv.  and  1012  ;  Vol. 
III.  (1869),  Greatheed— Leze.  pp.  v.  and  1002 ;  Vol.  IV.  (1870),  L'Heritier  de 


Brutille— Pozzetti.  pp.  iv.  and  1006 ;  Vol.  V.  (1871),  Praag— Tizzani.  pp.  iv. 
and  1000 ;  Vol.  VI.  (1872),  Tkalec— Zylius,  Anonymous  and  Additions,  pp.  xi. 
and  763.  Continuation  of  above  (1864-1873) ;  Vol.  VII.  (1877),  A  to  Hyrtl.  pp. 


xxxi.  and  1047 ;  Vol%  VIII.   (1879),  Ibafiez— Zwicky.     pp.  1310.     A  List  of  the 

Publications  of  the   Royal   Society  (Separate   Papers   from    the    Philosophical 

Transactions),  on  application. 
RUNDALL.— A  SHORT  AND  EASY  WAY  TO  WRITE  ENGLISH  AS  SPOKEN.    Methode 

Rapide  et  Facile  d'Ecrire  le  Fran§ais  comme  on  le  Parle.      Kurze  und  Leichte 

Weise  Deutsch  zu  Schreiben  wie  man  es  Spricht.     By  J.  B.  Rundall,  Certificated 

Member  of  the  London  Shorthand  Writers'  Association.     6d.  each. 
RUSSELL.— THE  WAVE  OF  TRANSLATION  IN  THE  OCEANS  OF  WATER,  AIR,  AND 

ETHER.     By  John  Scott  Russell,  M.  A.,  F.R.S.S.  L.  and  E.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  318, 

with  10  Diagrams,  cloth.     1885.     12s.  6d. 
RUTHERFORD.— THE  AUTOBIOGRAPHY  OF  MARK  RUTHERFORD,  Dissenting  Minister. 

Edited  by  his  friend,  Reuben  Shapcott.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  180,  boards. 

1881.    5s. 
RUTHERFORD.— MARK  RUTHERFORD'S  DELIVERANCE  :  Being  the  Second  Part  of  his 

Autobiography.     Edited  by  his  friend,  Reuben  Shapcott.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii. 

and  210,  boards.     1885.     5s. 
RUTTER.— See  BUNYAN. 


Published  by  Trubner  &  Co. 


59 


SAMAVIDHANABRl  HMANA  (THE)  (being  the  Third  Brahmana)  of  the  Sama  Veda. 
Edited,  together  with  the  Commentary  of  Sayana,  an  English  Translation,  Intro- 
duction, and  Index  of  Words,  by  A.  C.  Burnell.  Vol.  I.  Text  and  Commentary, 
with  Introduction.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  xxxviii.  and  104,  cloth.  1873.  12s.  6d. 

SAMUELSON.— HISTORY  OF  DRINK.  A  Keview,  Social,  Scientific,  and  Political.  By 
James  Samuelson,  of  the  Middle  Temple,  Barrister-at-Law.  Second  Edition. 
8vo,  pp.  xxviii.  and  288,  cloth.  1880.  6s. 

SAND.— MOLIERE.  A  Drama  in  Prose.  By  George  Sand.  Edited,  with  Notes,  by 
Th.  Karcher,  LL.B.  12mo,  pp.  xx.  and  170,  cloth.  1868.  3s.  6d. 

SARTORIUS.— MEXICO.  Landscapes  and  Popular  Sketches.  By  C.  Sartorius. 
Edited  by  Dr.  Gaspey.  With  Engravings,  from  Sketches  by  M.  Rugendas.  4to, 
pp.  vi.  and  202,  cloth  gilt.  1859.  18s. 

SATOW. — AN  ENGLISH  JAPANESE  DICTIONARY  OF  THE  SPOKEN  LANGUAGE.  By 
Ernest  Mason  Satow,  Japanese  Secretary  to  H.M.  Legation  at  Yedo,  and  Ishibashi 
Masakata  of  the  Imperial  Japanese  Foreign  Office.  Second  Edition.  Imperial 
32mo,  pp.  xv.  and  416,  cloth.  1879.  12s.  6d. 

SAVAGE. — THE  MORALS  OF  EVOLUTION.  By  M.  J.  Savage,  Author  of  "  The  Reli- 
gion of  Evolution,"  &c.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  192,  cloth.  1880.  5s. 

SAVAGE. — BELIEF  IN  GOD;  an  Examination  of  some  Fundamental  Theistic  Pro- 
blems. By  M.  J.  Savage.  To  which  is  added  an  Address  on  the  Intellectual  Basis 
of  Faith.  By  W.  H.  Savage.  8vo,  pp.  176,  cloth.  1881.  5s. 

SAVAGE.— BELIEFS  ABOUT  MAN.  By  M.  J.  Savage.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  130,  cloth. 
1882.  5s. 

SAYCE.— AN  ASSYRIAN  GRAMMAR  for  Comparative  Purposes.  By  A.  H.  Sayce, 
M.A.,  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  Queen's  College,  Oxford.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and 
188,  cloth.  1885. 

SAYCE.— THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  COMPARATIVE  PHILOLOGY.  By  A.  H.  Sayce,  M.A. 
Third,  Revised,  and  Enlarged  Edition.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xlviii.-422,  cloth.  1885. 
10s.  6d. 

SCHAIBLE. — AN  ESSAY  ON  THE  SYSTEMATIC  TRAINING  OF  THE  BODY.  By  C.  H. 
Schaible,  M.D.,  &c.,  &c.  A  Memorial  Essay,  Published  on  the  occasion  of  the 
first  Centenary  Festival  of  Frederick  L.  Jahn,  with  an  Etching  by  H.  Herkomer. 
Crown  8vo,  pp.  xviii.  and  124,  cloth.  1878.  5s. 

SCHEFFEL.— MOUNTAIN  PSALMS.  By  J.  V.  von  Scheffel.  Translated  by  Mrs.  F. 
Brunnow.  Fcap.,  pp.  62,  with  6  Plates  after  designs  by  A.  Von  Werner.  Parch- 
ment. 1882.  3s.  6d. 

SCHILLER. — THE  BRIDE  OF  MESSINA.  Translated  from  the  German  of  Schiller  in 
English  Verse.  By  Emily  Allfrey.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  110,  cloth.  1876.  2s. 

SCHLAGINTWEIT.— BUDDHISM  IN  TIBET  :  Illustrated  by  Literary  Documents  and 
Objects  of  Religious  Worship.  By  Emil  Schlagintweit,  LL.D.  With  a  folio  Atlas 
of  20  Plates,  and  20  Tables  of  Native  Print  in  the  Text.  Roy.  8vo,  pp.  xxiv.  and 
404.  1863.  £2,  2s. 

SCHLAU,  SCHLAUER,  AM  SCHLAUESTEN.— Facsimile  of  a  Manuscript  supposed 
to  have  been  found  in  an  Egyptian  Tomb  by  the  English  Soldiers.  Royal  8vo,  in 
ragged  canvas  covers,  with  string  binding,  and  dilapidated  edges  (?  just  as  dis- 
covered). 1884.  6s. 

SCHLEICHER.— A  COMPENDIUM  OF  THE  COMPARATIVE  GRAMMAR  OF  THE  INDO- 
EUROPEAN,  SANSKRIT,  GREEK,  AND  LATIN  LANGUAGES.  By  August  Schleicher, 
Translated  from  the  Third  German  Edition,  by  Herbert  Bendall,  B.A.,  Chr. 
Coll.,  Camb.  8vo.  Part  I.,  Phonology.  Pp.184,  cloth.  1874.  7s.  6d.  Part  II., 
Morphology.  Pp.  viii.  and  104,  cloth.  1877.  6s. 

SCHOPENHAUER.— THE  WORLD  AS  WILL  AND  IDEA.  By  Arthur  Schopenhauer. 
Translated  from  the  German  by  R.  B.  HALDANE,  M.A.,  and  J.  KEMP,  M.A. 
Vol.  I.,  containing  Four  Books.  Post  8vo,  pp.  xxxii.  532,  cloth.  1883.  18s. 

SCHULTZ.— UNIVERSAL  DOLLAR  TABLES  (Complete  United  States).  Covering  all 
Exchanges  between  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain,  France,  Belgium, 
Switzerland,  Italy,  Spain,  and  Germany.  By  C.  W.  H.  Schultz.  8vo,  cloth. 
1874.  15s. 


60  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

SCHULTZ. — UNIVEKSAL  INTEREST  AND  GENERAL  PERCENTAGE  TABLES.     On  the 

Decimal  System.     "With  a  Treatise  on  the  Currency  of  the  World,  and  numerous 

examples  for  Self-Instruction.    By  C.  W.  H.  Schultz.    8vo,  cloth.    1874.    10s.  6d. 
SCHULTZ.— ENGLISH  GERMAN  EXCHANGE  TABLES.    By  C.  W.  H.  Schultz.    With  a 

Treatise  on  the  Currency  of  the  World.     8vo,  boards.     1874.     5s. 
SCHWENDLEB.— INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  TESTING  TELEGRAPH  LINES,  and  the  Technical 

Arrangements  in  Offices.     Written  on  behalf  of  the  Government  of  India,  under 

the  Orders  of  the  Director-General  of  Telegraphs  in  India.     By  Louis  Schwen- 

dler.    Vol.  I...  demy  8vo,  pp.  248,  cloth.     1878.     12s.     Vol.  II.,  demy  8vo,  pp.  xi. 

and  268,  cloth.     1880.     9s. 
SCOONES.—  FAUST.    A  Tragedy.     By  Goethe.     Translated  into  English  Verse,  by 

William  Dalton  Scoones.     Fcap.,  pp.  vi.  and  230,  cloth.    1879.    5s. 
SCOTT.— THE  ENGLISH  LIFE  OF  JESUS.    By  Thomas  Scott.    Crown  8vo,  pp.  xxviii. 

and  350,  cloth.     1879.     2s.  6d. 
SCOTUS.— A  NOTE  ON  MR.  GLADSTONE'S  "The  Peace  to  Come."    By  Scotus.    8vo, 

pp.  106.     1878.    Cloth,  2s.  6d. ;  paper  wrapper,  Is.  6d. 
SELL.— THE  FAITH  OF  ISLAM.    By  the  Rev.  E.  Sell,  Fellow  of  the  University  of 

Madras.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  xiv.  and  270,  cloth.     1881.     6s.  6d. 
SELL.— IHN-I-TAJWID  ;  OR,  ART  OF  READING  THE  QURAN.    By  the  Rev.  E.  Sell, 

B.D.     8vo,  pp.  48,  wrappers.     1882.     2s.  6d. 
SELSS. — GOETHE'S  MINOR  POEMS.  Selected,  Annotated,  and  Rearranged.    By  Albert 

M.  Selss,  Ph.D.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  xxxi.  and  152,  cloth.     1875.     3s.  6d. 
SERMONS  NEVER  PREACHED.     By  Philip  Phosphor.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  vi.  and  124, 

cloth.    1878.    2s.  6d. 
SE WELL. —REPORT  ON  THE  AMARAVATI  TOPE,  and  Excavations  on  its  Site  in  1877. 

By  Robert  Sewell,  of  the  Madras  C.S.,  &c.     With  four  plates.     Royal  4to,  pp. 

70,  boards.     1880.     3s. 
SEYPPEL.— SHARP,  SHARPER,  SHARPEST  :  A  Humorous  Tale  of  Old  Egypt.    Penned 

down  and  Depicted  in  the  Year  1315  A.  C.     By  C.  M.  Seyppel,  Court  Painter  and 

Poet  Laureate  of  His  Majesty  King  Rhampsinit  III.,  and  done  into  the  English 

tongue  by  Two  Mummies  of  the  Old  Dynasty.     Memphis,  35,  Mummies  Arcade. 

(Ring  three  times).     Imperial  8vo,  pp.  42,  in  ragged  canvas  cover,  with  dilapidated 

edges,  and  string  binding  (?  just  as  discovered),  price  6s. 
SHADWELL. — POLITICAL  ECONOMY  FOR  THE  PEOPLE.     By  J.  L.  Shadwell,  Author  of 

"A  System  of  Political  Economy."  Fcap.,  pp.  vi.  and  154,  limp  cloth.  1880.  Is.  6d. 
SHAKESPEARE.— A  NEW  STUDY  OF  SHAKESPEARE  :  An  Inquiry  into  the  connection 

of  the  Plays  and  Poems,  with  the  origins  of  the  Classical  Drama,  and  with  the 

Platonic  Philosophy,  through  the  Mysteries.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  372,  with 

Photograph  of  the  Stratford  Bust,  cloth.     1884.     10s.  6d. 
SHAKESPEARE'S  CENTURIE  OF  PRAYSE  ;  being  Materials  for  a  History  of  Opinion 

on  Shakespeare  and  his  Works,  culled  from  Writers  of  the  First  Century  after 

his  Rise.     By  C.  M.  Ingleby.     Medium  8vo,  pp.  xx.  and  384.     Stiff  cover.     1874. 

£1,  Is.     Large  paper,  fcap.  4to,  boards.     £2,  2s. 
SHAKESPEARE.— HERMENEUTICS  ;  OR,  THE  STILL  LION.     Being  an  Essay  towards 

the  Restoration  of  Shakespeare's  Text.     By  C.   M.   Ingleby,   M.A.,  LL.D.,  of 

Trinity  College,  Cambridge.     Small  4to,  pp.  168,  boards.     1875.     6s. 
SHAKESPEARE.— THE  MAN  AND  THE  BOOK.     By  C.  M.  Ingleby,  M.A.,  LL.D. 

Small  4to.     Part  I.,  pp.  172,  boards.     1877.     6s. 
SHAKESPEARE.— OCCASIONAL  PAPERS  ON  SHAKESPEARE  ;  being  the  Second  Part 

of  "Shakespeare:  the  Man  and  the  Book."    By  C.  M.  Ingleby,  M.A.,  LL.D., 

V.P.R.S.L.     Small  4to,  pp.  x.  and  194,  paper  boards.     1881.     6s. 
SHAKESPEARE'S  BONES.— The  Proposal  to  Disinter  them,  considered  in  relation 

to  their  possible  bearing  on  his  Portraiture  :  Illustrated  by  instances  of  Visits  of 

the  Living  to  the  Dead.     By  C.  M.  Ingleby,  LL.D.,  V.P.R.S.L.    Fcap.  4to,  pp. 

viii.  and  48,  boards.     1883.     Is.  6d. 


Published  by  Triibner  &  Go.  61 

SHAKESPEARE.— A  NEW  VARIORUM  EDITION  OF  SHAKESPEARE.  Edited  by  Horace 
Howard  Furness.  Koyal  8vo.  Vol.  I.  Eomeo  and  Juliet.  Pp.  xxiii.  and  480, 
cloth.  1871.  18s.— Yol.  II.  Macbeth.  Pp.  xix.  and  492.  1873.  18s.—  Vols. 
III.  and  IV.  Hamlet.  2  vols.  pp.  xx.  and  474  and  430.  1877.  36s.— Vol.  V. 
King  Lear.  Pp.  vi.  and  504.  1880.  18s. 

SHAKESPEARE.— CONCORDANCE  TO  SHAKESPEARE'S  POEMS.  By  Mrs.  H.  H.  Fur- 
ness.  Royal  8vo,  cloth.  18s. 

SHAKESPEARE-NOTES.    By  F.  A.  Leo.    Demy  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  120,  cloth.  1885.  6s. 

SHAKSPERE  SOCIETY  (THE  NEW).—  Subscription,  One  Guinea  per  annum.  List  of 
Publications  on  application. 

S HERRING. — THE  SACRED  CITY  OF  THE  HINDUS.  An  Account  of  Benares  in 
Ancient  and  Modern  Times.  By  the  Eev.  M.  A.  Sherring,  M.A.,  LL.D.  ;  and 
Prefaced  with  an  Introduction  by  FitzEdward  Hall,  D.C.L.  With  Illustrations. 
8vo,  pp.  xxxvi.  and  388,  cloth.  21s. 

SHERRING. — HINDU  TRIBES  AND  CASTES;  together  with  an  Account  of  the 
Mohamedan  Tribes  of  the  North- West  Frontier  and  of  the  Aboriginal  Tribes  of 
the  Central  Provinces.  By  the  Eev.  M.  A.  Sherring,  M.A.,  LL.B.,  Lond.,  &c. 
4to.  Vol.  II.  Pp.  Ixviii.  and  376,  cloth.  1879.  £2,  8s.— Vol.  III.,  with  Index  of 
3  vols.  Pp.  xii.  and  336,  cloth.  1881.  32s. 

SHERRING.— THE  HINDOO  PILGRIMS.  By  Kev.  M.  A.  Sherrmg,  M.A.,  LL.D. 
Crown  8vo,  pp.  126,  cloth.  1878.  5s. 

SHIELDS.— THE  FINAL  PHILOSOPHY  ;  or,  System  of  Perfectible  Knowledge  issuing 
from  the  Harmony  of  Science  and  Eeligion.  By  Charles  W.  Shields,  D.D.,  Pro- 
fessor in  Princeton  College.  Eoyal  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  610,  cloth.  1878.  18s. 

SIBREE.— THE  GREAT  AFRICAN  ISLAND.  Chapters  on  Madagascar.  A  Popular 
Account  of  Eecent  Eesearches  in  the  Physical  Geography,  Geology,  and  Explora- 
tion of  the  Country,  and  its  Natural  History  and  Botany  ;  and  in  the  Origin  and 
Divisions,  Customs  and  Language,  Superstitions,  Folk-lore,  and  Eeligious  Beliefs 
and  Practices  of  the  Different  Tribes.  Together  with  Illustrations  of  Scripture 
and  Early  Church  History  from  Native  Habits  and  Missionary  Experience.  By 
the  Eev.  James  Sibree,  jun.,  F.E.G.S.,  Author  of  "Madagascar  and  its  People," 
&c.  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  272,  with  Physical  and  Ethnological  Maps  and  Four  Illus- 
trations, cloth.  1879.  12s. 

SIBREE.— POEMS  :  including  "Fancy,"  "A  Eesting  Place,"  &c.  By  John  Sibree, 
M.A.,  London.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  134,  cloth.  1884.  4s. 

SIMCOX.— EPISODES  IN  THE  LIVES  OF  MEN,  WOMEN,  AND  LOVERS.  By  Edith  Sim- 
cox.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  312,  cloth.  1882.  7s.  6d. 

SIMCOX. — NATURAL  LAW.    See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical  Library,  Vol.  IV. 

SIME. — LESSING.  See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical  Library.  Extra  Series, 
Vols.  I.  and  II. 

SIMPSON-BAIKIE.— THE  DRAMATIC  UNITIES  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY.  By  E.  Simpson- 
Baikie.  Third  Edition.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  108,  cloth.  1878.  2s.  6d. 

SIMPSON-BAIKIE.— THE  INTERNATIONAL  DICTIONARY  for  Naturalists  and  Sportsmen 
in  English,  French,  and  German.  By  Edwin  Simpson-Baikie.  8vo,  pp.  iv.  and 
284,  cloth.  1880.  15s. 

SINCLAIR.— THE  MESSENGER  :  A  Poem.  By  Thomas  Sinclair,  M.A.  Foolscap 
8vo,  pp.  174,  cloth.  1875.  5s. 

SINCLAIR.— LOVES'S  TRILOGY  :  A  Poem.  By  Thomas  Sinclair,  M.A.  Crown  8vo, 
pp.  150,  cloth.  1876.  5s. 

SINCLAIR.— THE  MOUNT  :  Speech  from  its  English  Heights.  By  Thomas  Sinclair, 
M.A.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  302,  cloth.  1877.  10s. 

SINCLAIR.— GODDESS  FORTUNE  :  A  Novel.  By  Thomas  Sinclair,  M.A.  Three  vols., 
post  8vo,  pp.  viii. -302,  302,  274,  cloth.  1884.  31s.  6d. 

SINCLAIR. — QUEST:  A  Collection  of  Essays.  By  Thomas  Sinclair,  M.A.  Crown 
8vo,  pp.  184,  cloth.  1885.  2s.  6d. 

SINGER.— HUNGARIAN  GRAMMAR.     See  Triibner's  Collection. 

SINNETT.— THE  OCCULT  WORLD.  By  A.  P.  Sinnett.  Fourth  Edition.  With  an 
Appendix  of  20  pages,  on  the  subject  of  Mr.  Kiddle's  Charge  of  Plagiarism.  8vo, 
pp.  xx.  and  206,  cloth.  1884.  3s.  6d. 


62  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

SMITH.— THE  DIVINE  GOVERNMENT.  By  S.  Smith,  M.D.  Fifth  Edition.  Crown 
8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  276,  cloth.  1866.  6s. 

SMITH.— THE  RECENT  DEPRESSION  or  TRADE.  Its  Nature,  its  Causes,  and  the 
Remedies  which  have  been  suggested  for  it.  By  Walter  E.  Smith,  B.A.,  New 
College.  Being  the  Oxford  Cobden  Prize  Essay  for  1879.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  vi.  and 
108,  cloth.  1880.  3s. 

SMYTH. — THE  ABORIGINES  OF  VICTORIA.  "With  Notes  relating  to  the  Habits  of 
the  Natives  of  other  Parts  of  Australia  and  Tasmania.  Compiled  from  various 
sources  for  the  Government  of  Victoria.  By  R.  Brough  Smyth,  F.L.S.,  F.G.S., 
&c.,  &c.  2  vols.  royal  8vo,  pp.  lxxii.-484  and  vi.-456z  Maps,  Plates,  and  "Wood- 
cuts, cloth.  1878.  £3,  3s. 

SNOW— A  THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL  TREATISE.  By  G.  D.  Snow.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  180, 
cloth.  1874.  4s.  6d. 

SOILING.  — DIUTISKA:  An  Historical  and  Critical  Survey  of  the  Literature  of  Ger- 
many, from  the  Earliest  Period  to  the  Death  of  Goethe.  By  Gustav  Soiling.  8vo, 
pp.  xviii.  and  368.  1863.  10s.  6d. 

SOLLING. — SELECT  PASSAGES  FROM  THE  WORKS  OF  SHAKESPEARE.  Translated  and 
Collected.  German  and  English.  By  G.  Soiling.  12mo,  pp.  155,  cloth.  1866. 
3s.  6d. 

SOLLING.— MACBETH.  Rendered  into  Metrical  German  (with  English  Text  ad- 
joined). By  Gustav  Soiling.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  160,  wrapper.  1878.  3s.  6d. 

SONGS  OF  THE  SEMITIC  IN  ENGLISH  VERSE.  By  G.  E.  W.  Crown  8vo.  pp.  iv.  and 
134,  cloth.  1877.  5s. 

SOUTHALL.—  THE  EPOCH  OF  THE  MAMMOTH  AND  THE  APPARITION  OF  MAN  UPON 
EARTH.  By  James  C.  Southall,  A.M.,  LL.D.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  430,cloth. 
Illustrated.  1878.  10s.  6d. 

SPANISH  REFORMERS  OF  Two  CENTURIES  FROM  1520 ;  Their  Lives  and  Writing, 
according  to  the  late  Benjamin  B.  Wiffen's  Plan,  and  with  the  Use  of  His  Mate- 
rials. Described  by  E.  Boehmer,  D.D.,  Ph.D.  Vol.  I.  With  B.  B.  Wiffen's 
Narrative  of  the  Incidents  attendant  upon  the  Republication  of  Reformistas 
Antiguos  Espaiioles,  and  with  a  Memoir  of  B.  B.  Wiffen.  By  Isaline  Wiffen. 
Royal  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  216,  cloth.  1874.  12s.  6d.  Roxburghe,  15s.— Vol.  II. 
Royal  8vo,  pp.  xii. -374,  cloth.  1883.  18s. 

SPEDDING. — THE  LIFE  AND  TIMES  OF  FRANCIS  BACON.  Extracted  from  the  Edition 
of  his  Occasional  Writings,  by  James  Spedding.  2  vols.  post  8vo,  pp.  xx.-710  and 
xiv.-708,  cloth.  1878.  21s. 

SPIERS.— THE  SCHOOL  SYSTEM  OF  THE  TALMUD.  By  the  Rev.  B.  Spiers.  8vo,  pp. 
•  48,  cloth.  1882.  2s.  6d. 

SPINOZA.— BENEDICT  DE  SPINOZA:  his  Life,  Correspondence,  and  Ethics.  By  R. 
Willis,  M.D.  8vo,  pp.  xliv.  and  648,  cloth.  1870.  21s. 

SPINOZA. — ETHIC  DEMONSTRATED  IN  GEOMETRICAL  ORDER  AND  DIVIDED  INTO  FIVE 
PARTS,  which  treat— I.  Of  God;  II.  Of  the  Nature  and  Origin  of  the  Mind; 
III.  Of  the  Origin  and  Nature  of  the  Affects  ;  IV.  Of  Human  Bondage,  or  of  the 
Strength  of  the  Affects ;  V.  Of  the  Power  of  the  Intellect,  or  of  Human  Liberty. 
By  Benedict  de  Spinoza.  Translated  from  the  Latin  by  W.  Hale  White.  Post 
8vo,  pp.  328,  cloth.  1883.  10s.  6d. 

SPIRITUAL  EVOLUTION,  AN  ESSAY  ON,  considered  in  its  bearing  upon  Modern 
Spiritualism,  Science,  and  Religion.  By  J.  P.  B.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  156,  cloth. 
1879.  3s. 

SPRUNER.— DR.  KARL  VON  SPRUNER'S  HISTORICO-GEOGRAPHICAL  HAND- ATLAS, 
containing  26  Coloured  Maps.  Obi.  cloth.  1861.  15s. 

SQUIER.— HONDURAS;  Descriptive,  Historical,  and  Statistical.  By  E.  G.  Squier, 
M.A.,  F.S.A.  Cr.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  278,  cloth.  1870.  3s.  6d. 

STATIONERY  OFFICE.— PUBLICATIONS  OF  HER  MAJESTY'S  STATIONERY  OFFICE. 
List  on  application. 


Published  ly  Trubner  &  Co.  63 

STEDMAN.— OXFOKD  :  Its  Social  and  Intellectual  Life.     With  Remarks  and  Hints 

on  Expenses,  the  Examinations,  &c.     By  Algernon  M.  M.  Stedman,  B.A.,  Wad- 
ham  College,  Oxford.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  309,  cloth.     1878.     7s.  6d. 
STEELE.— AN  EASTEKN  LOVE  STORY.     Kusa  Jatakaya  :  A  Buddhistic  Legendary 

Poem,  with  other  Stories,    By  Th,  Steele.    Cr.  8vo,  pp.  xii.'  and  260,  cl.    1871.    6s. 
STENT.— THE  JADE  CHAPLET.     In  Twenty-four  Beads.     A  Collection  of  Songs, 

Ballads,  &c.  (from  the  Chinese).    By  G.  C.  Stent,  M.N.C.B.R.A.S.     Post  Svo,  pp. 

viii.  and  168,  cloth.     1874.     5s. 
STENZLER.— See  AucTORES  SANSKRITI,  Vol.  II. 
STOCK.— ATTEMPTS  AT  TRUTH.     By  St.  George  Stock.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  vi.  and 

248,  cloth.     1882.    5s. 
STOKES  — GOIDELICA — Old  and  Early-Middle  Irish    Glosses:     Prose  and  Verse. 

Edited  by  Whitley  Stokes.     2d  Edition.     Med.  8vo,  pp.  192,  cloth.     1872.     18s. 
STOKES. — BEUNANS  MERIASEK.     The  Life  of  Saint  Meriasek,  Bishop  and  Confessor. 

A  Cornish  Drama.     Edited,  with  a  Translation  and  Notes,  by  Whitley  Stokes. 

Med.  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  280,  and  Facsimile,  cloth.     1872.     15s. 

STOKES.— TOG  AIL  TROY,  THE  DESTRUCTION  OF  TROY.    Transcribed  from  the  Fac- 
simile of  the  Book  of  Leinster,  and  Translated,  with  a  Glossarial  Index  of  the 

Karer  Words,  by  Whitley  Stokes.     Crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  188,  paper  boards. 

1882.     18s. 
STOKES.— THREE  MIDDLE-IRISH  HOMILIES  ON  THE  LIVES  OF  SAINTS— PATRICK, 

BRIGIT,  AND  COLUMBA.     Edited  by  Whitley  Stokes.     Crown  Svo,  pp.  xii.  and 

140,  paper  boards.     1882.     10s.  6d. 
STONE.— CHRISTIANITY  BEFORE  CHRIST  ;  or,  Prototypes  of  our  Faith  and  Culture. 

By  Charles  J.  Stone,  F.R.S.L.,  F.R.Hist.S.,  Author  of  "Cradle-Land  of  Arts  and 

Creeds."     Crown  Svo,  pp.      ,  cloth. 
STRANGE. — THE  BIBLE  ;  is  it  "  The  Word  of  God  "  ?    By  Thomas  Lumisden  Strange. 

Demy  Svo,  pp.  xii.  and  384,  cloth.     1871.     7s. 
STRANGE. — THE  SPEAKER'S  COMMENTARY.     Reviewed  bv  T.  L.  Strange.     Cr.  Svo, 

pp.  viii.  and  159,  cloth.      1871.     2s.  6d. 
STRANGE.— THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  CREATION  ON  THE  EARTH.    By  T.  L.  Strange. 

Demy  Svo,  pp.  xii.  and  110,  cloth.     1874.     2s.  6d. 
STRANGE.— THE  LEGENDS  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.    By  T.  L.  Strange.    Demy  Svo, 

pp.  xii.  and  244,  cloth.     1874.     5s. 
STRANGE.— THE  SOURCES   AND    DEVELOPMENT   OF  •  CHRISTIANITY.    By  Thomas 

Lumisden  Strange.     Demy  Svo,  pp.  xx.  and  256,  cloth.     1875.     5s. 
STRANGE  — WHAT  is  CHRISTIANITY?    An  Historical  Sketch.     Illustrated  with  a 

Chart.    By  T.  L.  Strange.     Foolscap  Svo,  pp.  72,  cloth.     1880.     2s.  6d. 
STRANGE.— CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  A  SERIES  OF  CONTROVERSIAL  WRITINGS,  issued  by 

the  late  Mr.  Thomas  Scott,  of  Upper  Norwood.     By  Thomas  Lumisden  Strange. 

Fcap.  Svo,  pp.  viii.  and  312,  cloth.     1881.     2s.  6d. 
STRANGFORD.— ORIGINAL  LETTERS  ANDPAPERS  OF  THE  LATE  VISCOUNT  STRANGPORD 

UPON  PHILOLOGICAL  AND  KINDRED  SUBJECTS.    Edited  by  Viscountess  Strangford. 

Post  Svo,  pp.  xxii.  and  284,  cloth.     1878.     12s.  6d. 
STRATMANN.— THE  TRAGICALL  HISTORIE  OF  HAMLET,  PRINCE  OF  DENMARKE.    By 

William  Shakespeare.   Edited  according  to  the  first  printed  Copies,  with  the  various 

Readings    and  Critical  Notes.      By  F.  H.  Stratmann.      Svo,  pp.    vi.  and  120, 

sewed.     3s.  6d. 
STRATMANN.— A  DICTIONARY  OF  THE  OLD  ENGLISH  LANGUAGE.    Compiled  from 

Writings  of  the  Twelfth,  Thirteenth,  Fourteenth,  and  Fifteenth  Centuries.     By 

F.  H.  Stratmann.  Third  Edition.  4to,  pp.  x.  and  662,  sewed.  1878.  30s. 
STUDIES  OF  MAN.  By  a  Japanese.  Crown  Svo,  pp.  124,  cloth.  1874.  2s.  6d. 
SUMNER.  —WHAT  SOCIAL  CLASSES  OWE  TO  EACH  OTHER.  By  W.  G.  Sumner,  Pro- 

fessor  of  Political  and  Social  Science  in  Yale  College.    ISmo,  pp.  170,  cloth.     1884. 

3s.  6d. 
SUYEMATZ.— GENJI  MONOGATARI.     The  Most  Celebrated  of  the  Classical  Japanese 

Romances.     Translated  by  K.   Suyematz.     Crown  Svo,  pp.  xvi.  and  254,  cloth. 

1882.    7s.  6d. 


64  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

SWEET.— SPELLING  REFORM  AND  ENGLISH  LITERATURE.  By  Henry  Sweet,  M.A. 
8vo,  pp.  8,  wrapper.  1884.  2d. 

SWEET. — HISTORY  OF  ENGLISH  SOUNDS,  from  the  Earliest  Period,  including  an  In- 
vestigation of  the  General  Laws  of  Sound  Change,  and  full  Word  Lists.  By 
Henry  Sweet.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  iv.-164,  cloth.  1874.  4s.  6d. 

SWEET. — ON  A  MEXICAN  MUSTANG  THROUGH  TEXAS  FROM  THE  GULF  TO  THE  Rio 
GRANDE.  By  Alex.  E.  Sweet  and  J.  Armoy  Knox,  Editors  of  "  Texas  Sif tings." 
English  Copyright  Edition.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  672.  Illustrated,  cloth.  1883.  10s. 

SYED  AHMAD. — A  SERIES  OF  ESSAYS  ON  THE  LIFE  OF  MOHAMMED,  and  Subjects 
subsidiary  thereto.  By  Syed  Ahmad  Khan  Bahadur,  C.S.I.  8vo,  pp.  532, 
with  4  Tables,  2  Maps,  and  Plate,  cloth.  1870.  30s. 

TALBOT. — ANALYSIS  OF  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THE  PRUSSIAN  ARMY.  By  Lieuten- 
ant Gerald  F.  Talbot,  2d  Prussian  Dragoon  Guards.  Eoyal  8vo,  pp.  78,  cloth, 

TAYLER.— A  RETROSPECT  OF  THE  RELIGIOUS  LIFE  OF  ENGLAND;  or,  Church, 
Puritanism,  and  Free  Inquiry.  By  J.  J.  Tayler,  B.A.  Second  Edition.  Re- 
issued, with  an  Introductory  Chapter  on  Recent  Development,  by  James  Martineau, 
LL.D.,  D.D.  Post  8vo,  pp.  380,  cloth.  1876.  7s.  6d. 

TAYLOR.— PRINCE  DEUKALION  :  A  Lyrical  Drama,  By  Bayard  Taylor.  Small  4to, 
pp.  172.  Handsomely  bound  in  white  vellum.  1878.  12s. 

TECHNOLOGICAL  DICTIONARY  of  the  Terms  employed  in  the  Arts  and  Sciences  : 
Architecture  ;  Civil  Engineering  ;  Mechanics ;  Machine-Making  ;  Shipbuilding  and 
Navigation ;  Metallurgy ;  Artillery ;  Mathematics ;  Physics  ;  Chemistry ;  Minera- 
logy, &c.     With  a  Preface  by  Dr.  K.  Karmarsch.     Second  Edition.     3  vols. 
Vol.  1.  German-English-French.     8vo,  pp.  646.     12s. 
Vol.  II.  English-German-French.     8vo,  pp.  666.     12s. 
Vol.  III.  French- German-English.     8vo,  pp.  618.     12s. 

TECHNOLOGICAL  DICTIONARY.— A  POCKET  DICTIONARY  OF  TECHNICAL  TERMS 
USED  IN  ARTS  AND  MANUFACTURES.  English-German-French,  Deutsch-Englisch- 
Franzosisch,  Frangais-Allemand-Anglais.  Abridged  from  the  above  Techno- 
logical Dictionary  by  Rumpf,  Mothes,  and  Unverzagt.  With  the  addition  of 
Commercial  Terms.  3  volfl.  sq.  12mo,  cloth,  12s. 

TEMPLE.— THE  LEGENDS  OF  THE  PUNJAB.  By  Captain  R.  C.  Temple,  Bengal  Staff 
Corps,  F.G.S.,  &e.  Vol.  I.,  8vo,  pp.  xviii.-546,  cloth.  1884.  £1,  6s. 

THEATRE  FRANCAIS  MODERNE. — A  Selection  of  Modern  French  Plays.  Edited  by 
the  Rev.  P.  H.  E.  Brette,  B.D.,  C.  Cassal,  LL.D.,  and  Th.  Karcher,  LL.B. 

First  Series,  in  1  vol.  crown  8vo,  cloth,  6s.,  containing — 

CHARLOTTE  CORD  AY.  A  Tragedy.  By  F.  Porisard.  Edited,  with  English  Notes 
and  Notice  on  Ponsard,  by  Professor  C.  Cassal,  LL.  D.  Pp.  xii.  and  134.  Sepa- 
rately, 2s.  6d. 

DIANE.  A  Drama  in  Verse.  By  Emile  Augier.  Edited,  with  English  Notes  and 
Notice  on  Augier,  by  Th.  Karcher,  LL.B.  Pp.  xiv.  and  145.  Separately, 
2s,  6d. 

LE  VOYAGE  A  DIEPPE,  A  Comedy  in  Prose.  By  Wafflard  and  Fulgence.  Edited, 
with  English  Notes,  by  the  Rev.  P.  H.  E.  Brette,  B.D.  Pp.  104.  Separately, 
2s.  6d. 

Second  Series,  crown  8vo,  cloth,  6s.,  containing — 

MOLIERE.  A  Drama  in  Prose.  By  George  Sand.  Edited,  with  English  Notes 
and  Notice  of  George  Sand,  by  Th.  Karcher,  LL.B.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  xx.  and 
170,  cloth.  Separately,  3s.  6d. 

LES  ARISTOCRATIES.  A  Comedy  in  Verse.  By  Etienne  Arago.  Edited,  with  Eng- 
lish Notes  and  Notice  of  Etienne  Arago,  by  the  Rev.  P.  H.  E.  Brette,  B.D.  2d 
Edition.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  xiv.  and  236,  cloth.  Separately,  4s. 


PublisJied  ~by  Trubner  &  Co.  65 

THEATRE  FKANfAis  MODERNE — continued. 

Third  Series,  crown  8vo,  cloth,  6s.,  containing — 

LES  FAUX  BONSHOMMES.  A  Comedy.  By  Theodore  Barriere  and  Ernest  Ca- 
pendu.  Edited,  with  English  Notes  and  Notice  on  Barriere,  by  Professor  C. 
Cassal,  LL.D.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  304.  1868.  Separately,  4s. 
L'HoNNEUR  ET  L' ARGENT.  A  Comedy.  By  Francois  Ponsard.  Edited,  with 
English  Notes  and  Memoir  of  Ponsard,  by  Professor  C.  Cassal,  LL.D.  2d 
Edition.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  171,  cloth.  1869.  Separately,  3s.  6d. 

THEISM. — A  CANDID  EXAMINATION  OF  THEISM.  By  Physicus.  Post  8vo,  pp.  xviii. 
and  198,  cloth.  1878.  7s.  6d. 

THEOBALD. — SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  POETS  ;  or,  Passages  Illustrating  Peculiarities 
of  their  Style,  Pathos,  or  "Wit.  By  W.  Theobald,  M.R.A.S.,  late  Deputy-Superin- 
tendent Geological  Survey  of  India.  With  Notes,  Historical,  Explanatory,  and 
Glossarial,  for  the  Use  of  Young  Headers.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  208,  cloth. 
1885.  5s. 

THEOSOPHY  AND  THE  HIGHER  LIFE;  or.  Spiritual  Dynamics  and  the  Divine  and 
Miraculous  Man.  By  G.  W.,  M.D.,  Edinburgh,  President  of  the  British  Theoso- 
phical  Society.  12mo,  pp.  iv.  and  138,  cloth.  1880.  3s. 

THOM. — ST.  PAUL'S  EPISTLES  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  An  Attempt  to  convey  their 
Spirit  and  Significance.  By  the  Rev.  J.  H.  Thorn.  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  408,  cloth. 
1851.  5s. 

THOMAS. — EARLY  SASSANIAN  INSCRIPTIONS,  SEALS,  AND  COINS,  illustrating  the 
Early  History  of  the  Sassanian  Dynasty,  containing  Proclamations  of  Ardeshir 
Babek,  Sapor  I.,  and  his  Successors.  With  a  Critical  Examination  and  Explana- 
tion of  the  celebrated  Inscription  in  the  Hajiabad  Cave,  demonstrating  that  Sapor, 
the  Conqueror  of  Valerian,  was  a  professing  Christian.  By  Edward  Thomas. 
Illustrated.  8vo,  pp.  148,  cloth.  7s.  6d. 

THOMAS.— THE  CHRONICLES  OF  THE  PATHAN  KINGS  OF  DEHLI.  Illustrated  by 
Coins,  Inscriptions,  and  other  Antiquarian  Remains.  By  E.  Thomas,  F.R.A.S. 
With  Plates  and  Cuts.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  xxiv.  and  467,  cloth.  1871.  28s. 

THOMAS.— THE  REVENUE  RESOURCES  OF  THE  MUGHAL  EMPIRE  IN  INDIA,  from 
A.D.  1593  to  A.D.  1707.  A  Supplement  to  "The  Chronicles  of  the  Pathan  Kings 
of  Delhi."  By  E.  Thomas,  F.R.S.  8vo,  pp.  60,  cloth.  3s.  6d. 

THOMAS. — SASSANIAN  COINS.  Communicated  to  the  Numismatic  Society  of 
London.  By  E.  Thomas,  F.R.S.  Two  Parts,  12mo,  pp.  43,  3  Plates  and  a  Cut, 
sewed.  5s. 

THOMAS. — JAINISM  ;  OR,  THE  EARLY  FAITH  OF  ASOKA.  With  Illustrations  of  the 
Ancient  Religions  of  the  East,  from  the  Pantheon  of  the  Indo-Scythians.  To 
which  is  added  a  Notice  on  Bactrian  Coins  and  Indian  Dates.  By  Edward 
Thomas,  F.R.S.  8vo,  pp.  viii.-24  and  82.  With  two  Autotype  Plates  and 
Woodcuts.  1877.  7s.  6d. 

THOMAS.— THE  THEORY  AND  PRACTICE  OF  CREOLE  GRAMMAR.  By  J.  J.  Thomas. 
8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  135,  boards.  12s. 

THOMAS. — RECORDS  OF  THE  GUPTA  DYNASTY.  Illustrated  by  Inscriptions,  Written 
History,  Local  Tradition,  and  Coins.  To  which  is  added  a  Chapter  on  the  Arabs 
in  Sind.  By  Edward  Thomas,  F.R.S.  Folio,  with  a  Plate,  pp.  iv.  and  64,  cloth. 
14s. 

THOMAS. — THE  INDIAN  BALHARA,  and  the  Arabian  Intercourse  with  India  in  the 
Ninth  and  following  Centuries.  By  Edward  Thomas,  F.R.S.  (Contained  in 
International  Numismata  Orientalia.  Vol.  II  I.,  Part  I.  Coins  of  Arakan 
Royal  4to,  pp.  viii.-48,  wrappers.  1882.  8s.  6d. 

THOMAS.— BOYHOOD  LAYS.  By  William  Henry  Thomas.  18mo,  pp.  iv.  and  74, 
cloth.  1877.  2s.  6d. 

THOMPSON. — DIALOGUES,  RUSSIAN  AND  ENGLISH.  Compiled  by  A.  R.  Thompson, 
sometime  Lecturer  of  the  English  Language  in  the  University  of  St.  Vladimir, 
Kieff.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  iv.  and  132,  cloth.  1882.  5s. 

E 


66  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

THOMSON.— EVOLUTION  AND  INVOLUTION.  By  George  Thomson, Author  of  "  The 
World  of  Being,"  &c.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  206,  cloth.  1880.  5s. 

THORBURN.— BANNU"  ;  OK,  OUR  AFGHAN  FRONTIER.  By  S.  S.  Thorburn,  F.C.S., 
Settlement  Officer  of  the  Bannu  District.  8vo,  pp.  x.  and  480,  cloth.  1876.  18s. 

THORPE.— DIPLOMATARIUM  ANGLicuM  JEvi  SAXONici.  A  Collection  of  English 
Charters,  from  the  reign  of  King  ^Ethelberht  of  Kent,  A.D.  DCV.,  to  that  of  "Wil- 
liam the  Conqueror.  Containing  :  I.  Miscellaneous  Charters.  II.  Wills.  III. 
Guilds.  IV.  Manumissions  and  Acquittances.  With  a  Translation  of  the  Anglo- 
Saxon.  By  the  late  Benjamin  Thorpe,  Member  of  the  Koyal  Academy  of  Sciences 
at  Munich,  and  of  the  Society  of  Netherlandish  Literature  at  Leyden.  8vo,  pp. 
xlii.  and  682,  cloth.  1865.  £1,  Is. 

THOUGHTS  ON  LOGIC;  or,  the  S.N.I.X.  Propositional Theory.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  iv. 
and  76,  cloth.  1877.  2s.  6d. 

THOUGHTS  ON  THEISM,  with  Suggestions  towards  a  Public  Religious  Service  in 
Harmony  with  Modern  Science  and  Philosophy.  Ninth  Thousand.  Kevised  and 
Enlarged.  8vo,  pp.  74,  sewed.  1882.  Is. 

THURSTON. — FRICTION  AND  LUBRICATION.  Determinations  of  the  Laws  and  Co- 
efficients of  Friction  by  new  Methods  and  with  new  Apparatus.  By  Robert  H. 
Thurston,  A.M.,  C.E.,  &c.  Crown  8vo,  pp.xvi.  and  212,  cloth.  1879.  6s.  6d. 

TIELE.— See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical  Library,  Vol.  VII.  and  Trubner's 

Oriental  Series. 
TOLHAUSEN. — A  SYNOPSIS  OF  THE  PATENT  LAWS  OF  VARIOUS  COUNTRIES.     By  A. 

Tolhausen,  Ph.D.     Third  Edition.    12mo,  pp.  62,  sewed.    1870.     Is.  6d. 

TONSBERG.  —NORWAY.  Illustrated  Handbook  for  Travellers.  Edited  by  Charles 
Tb'nsberg.  With  134  Engravings  on  Wood,  17  Maps,  and  Supplement.  Crown 
8vo,  pp.  Ixx.,  482,  and  32,  cloth.  1875.  18s. 

TOPOGRAPHICAL  WORKS.— A  LIST  OF  THE  VARIOUS  WORKS  PREPARED  AT  THE 
TOPOGRAPHICAL  AND  STATISTICAL  DEPARTMENT  OF  THE  WAR  OFFICE  may  be 
had  on  application. 

TORCEANU.— ROUMANIAN  GRAMMAR.    See  Trubner's  Collection. 

TORRENS.— EMPIRE  IN  ASIA  :  How  we  came  by  it.  A  Book  of  Confessions.  By 
W.  M.  Torrens,  M.P.  Med.  8vo,  pp.  426,  cloth.  1872.  14s. 

TOSCANI. — ITALIAN  CONVERSATIONAL  COURSE.  A  New  Method  of  Teaching  the 
Italian  Language,  both  Theoretically  and  Practically.  By  Giovanni  Toscani,  Pro- 
fessor of  the  Italian  Language  and  Literature  in  Queen's  Coll.,  London,  &c. 
Fourth  Edition.  12mo,  pp.  xiv.  and  300,  cloth.  1872.  5s. 

TOSCANI.— ITALIAN  READING  COURSE.  By  G.  Toscani.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and 
160.  With  table.  Cloth.  1875.  4s.  6d. 

TOULON.— ITS  ADVANTAGES  AS  A  WINTER  RESIDENCE  FOR  INVALIDS  AND  OTHERS. 
By  an  English  Resident.  The  proceeds  of  this  pamphlet  to  be  devoted  to  the 
English  Church  at  Toulon.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  8,  sewed.  1873.  6d. 

TRADLEG. — A  SON  OF  BELIAL.  Autobiographical  Sketches.  By  Nitram  Tradleg, 
University  of  Bosphorus.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii. -260,  cloth.  1882.  5s. 

TRIMEN. — SOUTH-AFRICAN  BUTTERFLIES  ;  a  Monograph  of  the  Extra-Tropical 
Species.  By  Roland  Trimen,  F.L.S.,  F.Z.S.,  M.E.S.,  Curator  of  the  South 
African  Museum,  Cape  Town.  Royal  8vo.  [In  preparation. 

TRUBNER'S  AMERICAN,  EUROPEAN,  AND  ORIENTAL  LITERARY  RECORD.  A  Register 
of  the  most  Important  Works  published  in  America,  India,  China,  and  the  British 
Colonies.  With  Occasional  Notes  on  German,  Dutch,  Danish,  French,  Italian, 
Spanish,  Portuguese,  and  Russian  Literature.  The  object  of  the  Publishers  in 
issuing  this  publication  is  t'o  give  a  full  and  particular  account  of  every  publica- 
tion of  importance  issued  in  America  and  the  East.  Small  4to,  6d.  per  number. 
Subscription,  5s.  per  volume. 


Published  fy  Trubner  &  Co.  67 

TRUBNER.— TRUBNER'S  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  GUIDE  TO  AMERICAN  LITERATURE  : 
A  Classed  List  of  Books  published  in  the  United  States  of  America,  from  1817 
to  1857.  With  Bibliographical  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Alphabetical  Index. 
Compiled  and  Edited  by  Nicolas  Trubner.  In  1  vol.  8vo,  half  bound,  pp.  750. 
1859.  18s. 

TRUBNER'S  CATALOGUE  OF  DICTIONARIES  AND  GRAMMARS  OF  THE  PRINCIPAL 
LANGUAGES  AND  DIALECTS  OF  THE  WORLD.  Considerably  Enlarged  and  Revised, 
with  an  Alphabetical  Index.  A  Guide  for  Students  and  Booksellers.  Second 
Edition,  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  170,  cloth.  1882.  5s. 

TRUBNER'S  COLLECTION  OF  SIMPLIFIED  GRAMMARS  OF  THE  PRINCIPAL  ASIATIC 
AND  EUROPEAN  LANGUAGES.  Edited  by  Keinhold  Rost,  LL.D.,  Ph.D.  Crown 
8vo,  cloth,  uniformly  bound. 

I. — HINDUSTANI,    PERSIAN,    AND   ARABIC.      By  E.   H.   Palmer,   M.A. 

Second  Edition.     Pp.  112.     1885.     5s. 

II.— HUNGARIAN.  By  I.  Singer.  Pp.  vi.  and  88.  1882.  4s.  6d. 
III.— BASQUE.  By  W.  Van  Eys.  Pp.  xii.  and  52.  1883.  3s.  6d. 
IV.— MALAGASY.  By  G.  W.  Parker.  Pp.  66,  with  Plate.  1883.  5s. 

V.— MODERN  GREEK.    By  E.  M.  Geldart,  M.A.    Pp.  68.     1883.    2s.  6d. 
VI.— ROUMANIAN.     By  R.  Torceanu.     Pp.  viii.  and  72.     1883.     5s. 
VII.— TIBETAN  GRAMMAR.    By  H.  A.  JASCHKE.    Pp.  viii. -104.    1883.    5s. 
VIII.— DANISH.    By  E.G.  Otte.     Pp.  viii.  and  66.     1884.     2s.  6d. 
IX.— TURKISH.  ByJ.  W.Redhouse,M.R.A.S.  Pp. xii.  and 204.  1884.  I0s.6d. 
X.— SWEDISH.    By  E.  C.  Otte.    Pp.  xii. -70.    1884.     2s.  6d. 
XL— POLISH.     By  W.  R.  Morfill,  M.A.     Pp.  viii. -64.     1884.     3s.  6d. 
XII.— PALI.     By  E.  Miiller.     Pp.  xvi.-144.     1884.     7s.  6d. 
XIII.— SANSKRIT.    By  H.  Edgren.    Pp.  xii.-178.    1885.     10s.  6d. 
TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES  :— 

Post  8vo,  cloth,  uniformly  bound. 

ESSAYS  ON  THE  SACRED  LANGUAGE,  WRITINGS,  AND  RELIGION  OF 
THE  PARSIS.  By  Martin  Haug,  Ph.D.,  late  Professor  of  Sanskrit  and 
Comparative  Philology  at  the  University  of  Munich.  Third  Edition. 
Edited  and  Enlarged  by  E.  W.  West,  Ph.D.  To  which  is  also  added,  A 
Biographical  Memoir  of  the  late  Dr.  Haug.  By  Professor  E.  P.  Evans. 
Pp.  xlviii.  and  428.  1884.  16s. 

TEXTS  FROM  THE  BUDDHIST  CANON,  commonly  known  as  Dhamma- 
pada.  With  Accompanying  Narratives.  Translated  from  the  Chinese 
by  S.  Beal,  B.  A.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  Professor  of  Chinese,  Uni- 
versity College,  London.  Pp.  viii.  and  176.  1878.  7s.  6d. 
THE  HISTORY  OF  INDIAN  LITERATURE.  By  Albrecht  Weber.  Trans- 
lated from  the  German  by  J.  Mann,  M.A.,  and  Dr.  T.  Zachariae,  with 
the  Author's  sanction  and  assistance.  2d  Edition.  Pp.368.  1882.  10s.  6d. 
A  SKETCH  OF  THE  MODERN  LANGUAGES  OF  THE  EAST  INDIES.  Accom- 
panied by  Two  Language  Maps,  Classified  List  of  Languages  and 
Dialects,  and  a  List  of  Authorities  for  each  Language.  By  Robert  Cust, 
late  of  H.M.I.C.S.,  and  Hon.  Librarian  of  R.A.S.  Pp.  xii.  and  198. 
1878.  12s. 

THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD:  A  Poem.  By  Kalidasa.  Translated 
from  the  Sanskrit  into  English  Verse,  by  Ralph  T.  H.  Griffiths,  M.A., 
Principal  of  Benares  College.  Second  Edition.  Pp.  xii.  and  116.  1879.  5s. 
A  CLASSICAL  DICTIONARY  OF  HINDU  MYTHOLOGY  AND  HISTORY,  GBO- 
GRAPHY  AND  LITERATURE.  By  John  Dowson,  M.R.A.S.,  late  Professor 
in  the  Staff  College.  Pp.  432.  1879.  16s. 

METRICAL  TRANSLATIONS  FROM  SANSKRIT  WRITERS  ;  with  an  Introduc- 
tion, many  Prose  Versions,  and  Parallel  Passages  from  Classical 
Authors.  By  J.  Muir,  C.I.E.,  D.C.L.,  &c.  Pp.  xliv.-376.  1879.  14s. 
MODERN  INDIA  AND  THE  INDIANS  :  being  a  Series  of  Impressions,  Notes, 
and  Essays.  By  Monier  Williams,  D.  C.L. ,  Hon.  LL.  D.  of  the  University 
of  Calcutta,  Boden  Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  the  University  of  Oxford. 
Third  Edition,  revised  and  augmented  by  considerable  additions.  With 
Illustrations  and  Map,  pp.  vii.  and  368.  1879.  14s. 


63  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES— continued. 

THE  LIFE  OR  LEGEND  OF  GAUDAMA,  the  Buddha  of  the  Burmese.  "With 
Annotations,  the  Ways  to  Neibban,  and  Notice  on  the  Phongyies,  or 
Burmese  Monks.  By  the  Eight  Rev.  P.  Bigandet,  Bishop  of  Kamatha, 
Vicar  Apostolic  of  Ava  and  Pegu.  Third  Edition.  2  vols.  Pp.  xx.-368 
and  viii.-326.  1880.  21s. 

MISCELLANEOUS  ESSAYS,  relating  to  Indian  Subjects.  By  B.  H.  Hodg- 
son, late  British  Minister  at  Nepal.  2  vols.,  pp.  viii.-408,  and  viii.-348. 
1880.  28s. 

SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  KORAN.  By  Edward  William  Lane,  Author  of  an 
"Arabic-English  Lexicon,"  &c.  A  New  Edition,  Revised,  with  an 
Introduction.  By  Stanley  Lane  Poole.  Pp.  cxii.  and  174.  1879.  9s. 

CHINESE  BUDDHISM.  A  Volume  of  Sketches,  Historical  and  Critical. 
By  J.  Edkins,  D.D.,  Author  of  "  China's  Place  in  Philology,"  "Religion 
in  China,"  &c.,  &c.  Pp.  Ivi.  and  454.  1880.  18s. 

THE  GULISTAN  ;  OR,  ROSE  GARDEN  OF  SHEKH  MUSHLIU'D-DIN  SADI  OP 
SHIRAZ.  Translated  for  the  first  time  into  Prose  and  Verse,  with 
Preface  and  a  Life  of  the  Author,  from  the  Atish  Kadah,  by  E.  B. 
Eastwick,F.R.S.,M.R.A.S.  2d  Edition.  Pp.  xxvi.  and  244.  1880.  10s.  6d, 

A  TALMUDIC  MISCELLANY  ;  or,  One  Thousand  and  One  Extracts  from  the 
Talmud,  the  Midrashim,  and  the  Kabbalah.  Compiled  and  Translated 
by  P.  J.  Hershon.  With  a  Preface  by  Rev.  F.  W.  Farrar,  D.D.,  F.R.S., 
Chaplain  in  Ordinary  to  Her  Majesty,  and  Canon  of  Westminster. 
With  Notes  and  Copious  Indexes.  Pp.  xxviii.  and  362.  1880.  14s. 

THE  HISTORY  OF  ESARHADDON  (Son  of  Sennacherib),  Kir\g  of  Assyria, 
B.C.  681-668.  Translated  from  the  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  upon 
Cylinders  and  Tablets  in  the  British  Museum  Collection.  Together 
with  Original  Texts,  a  Grammatical  Analysis  of  each  word,  Explana- 
tions of  the  Ideographs  by  Extracts  from  the  Bi-Lingual  Syllabaries, 
and  List  of  Eponyms,  &c.  By  E.  A.  Budge,  B.A.,  M.R.A.S.,  Assyrian 
Exhibitioner,  Christ's  College,  Cambridge.  Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and 
164,  cloth.  1880.  10s.  6d. 

BUDDHIST  BIRTH  STORIES;  or,  Jataka  Tales.  The  oldest  Collection  of 
Folk-Lore  extant  :  being  the  Jatakatthavannana,  for  the  first  time 
edited  in  the  original  Pali,  by  V.  Fausboll,  and  translated  by  T.  W. 
Rhys  Davids.  Translation.  Vol.  I.  Pp.  cxvi.  and  348.  1880.  18s. 

THE  CLASSICAL  POETRY  OF  THE  JAPANESE.  By  Basil  Chamberlain,  Author 
of  "  Yeigio  Henkaku,  Ichiran."  Pp.  xii.  and  228.  1880.  7s.  6d. 

LINGUISTIC  AND  ORIENTAL  ESSAYS.  Written  from  the  year  1846-1878. 
By  R.  Cust,  Author  of  "The  Modern  Languages  of  the  East  Indies." 
Pp.  xii.  and  484.  1880.  18s. 

INDIAN  POETRY.  Containing  a  New  Edition  of  "The  Indian  Song  of 
Songs,"  from  the  Sanskrit  of  the  Glta  Govindaof  Jayadeva ;  Two  Books 
from  "  The  Iliad  of  India  "  (Mahabharata) ;  "  Proverbial  Wisdom  "  from 
the  Shlokas  of  the  Hitopadesa,  and  other  Oriental  Poems.  By  Edwin 
Arnold,  C.S.I.,  &c.  Third  Edition.  Pp.  viii.  and  270.  1884.  7s.  6d. 

THE  RELIGIONS  OF  INDIA.  By  A.  Barth.  Authorised  Translation  by 
Rev.  J.  Wood.  Pp.  xx.  and  310.  1881.  16s. 

HINDU  PHILOSOPHY.  The  Sankhya  Karika  of  Iswara  Krishna.  An 
Exposition  of  the  System  of  Kapila.  With  an  Appendix  on  the  Nyaya 
and  Vaiseshika  Systems.  By  John  Davies,  M.A.,  M.R.A.S.  Pp.  vi. 
and  151.  1881.  6s. 


Published  by  Trubner  &  Co.  69 

TRUBNERS  ORIENTAL  SERIES- continued. 

A  MANUAL  OF  HINDU  PANTHEISM.  The  Vedantasara.  Translated  with 
Copious  Annotations.  By  Major  G.  A.  Jacob,  Bombay  Staff  Corps, 
Inspector  of  Army  Schools.  With  a  Preface  by  E.  B.  Co\vell,  M.A., 
Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  the  University  of  Cambridge.  Pp.  x.  and  130 
1881.  6s. 

THK  MESNEVI  (usually  known  as  the  Mesnevlyi  Sherif,  or  Holy  Mesnevl) 
of  Mevlana  (Our  Lord)  Jelalu-'d-Din  Muhammed,  Er-Ruml.  Book  the 
First.  Together  with  some  Account  of  the  Life  and  Acts  of  the  Author, 
of  his  Ancestors,  and  of  his  Descendants.  Illustrated  by  a  selection 
of  Characteristic  Anecdotes  as  collected  by  their  Historian  Mevlana 
Shemsu-'d-Din  Ahmed.  El  Eflakl  El  Arifl.  Translated,  and  the  Poetry 
Versified  by  James  W.  Redhouse,  M.R.A.S.,  &c.  Pp.  xvi.  and  136, 
vi.  and  290.  1881.  £1,  Is. 

EASTERN  PROVERBS  AND  EMBLEMS  ILLUSTRATING  OLD  TBUTHS.  By  the 
Rev.  J.  Long,  Member  of  the  Bengal  Asiatic  Society,  F.R.G.S.  Pp. 
xv.  and  280.  1881.  6s. 

THE  QUATRAINS  OP  OMAR  KHAYYAM.  A  Xew  Translation.  By  E.  H. 
Whinfield,  late  of  H.M.  Bengal  Civil  Service.  Pp.  96.  1881.  5s. 

THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.  The  Persian  Text,  with  an  English 
Verse  Translation.  By  E.  H.  Whinfield.  Pp.  xxxii.-335.  1883.  10s.  6d. 

THE  MIND  OF  MENCIUS  ;  or,  Political  Economy  Founded  upon  Moral  Philo- 
sophy. A  Systematic  Digest  of  the  Doctrines  of  the  Chinese  Philosopher 
Mencius.  The  Original  Text  Classified  and  Translated,  with  Com- 
ments, by  the  Rev.  E.  Faber,  Rhenish  Mission  Society.  Translated 
from  the  German,  with  Additional  Notes,  by  the  Rev.  A.  B.  Hutchin- 
son,  Church  Mission,  Hong  Kong.  Author  in  Chinese  of  "  Primer  Old 
Testament  History,"  &c.,  &c.  Pp.  xvi.  and  294.  1882.  10s.  6d. 

Y6SUF  AND  ZULAIKHA.  A  Poem  by  Jami.  Translated  from  the  Persian 
into  English  Verse.  By  R.  T.  H.  Griffith.  Pp.  xiv.  and  304.  1882.  8s.  6d. 

TSUNI-  II  Go  AM  :  The  Supreme  Being  of  the  Khoi-Khoi.  By  Theophilus 
Hahn,  Ph.D.,  Custodian  of  the  Grey  Collection,  Cape  Town,  Corres- 
ponding Member  of  the  Geographical  Society,  Dresden  ;  Corresponding 
Member  of  the  Anthropological  Society,  Vienna,  &c.,  &c.  Pp.  xii.  and 
154.  1882.  7s.  6d. 

A  COMPREHENSIVE  COMMENTARY  TO  THE  QURAN.  To  which  is  prefixed 
Sale's  Preliminary  Discourse,  with  Additional  Notes  and  Emendations. 
Together  with  a  Complete  Index  to  the  Text,  Preliminary  Discourse, 
and  Notes.  By  Rev.  E.  M.  Wherry,  M.A.,  Lodiana.  Vol.  I.  Pp.  xii. 
and  392.  1882.  12s.  6d.  Vol.  II.  Pp.  xi.  and  408.  1884.  12s.  6d. 

HINDU  PHILOSOPHY.  THE  BHAGAVAD  G'ITA  ;  or,  The  Sacred  Lay.  A 
Sanskrit  Philosophical  Lay.  Translated,  with  Notes,  by  John  Davies, 
M.A.  Pp.  vi.  and  208.  1882.  8 

THE  SARVA-DARSANA-SAMGRAHA  ;  or,  Review  of  the  Different  Systems 
of  Hindu  Philosophy.  By  Madhava  Acharya.  Translated  by  E.  B. 
Cowell,  M.A.,  Cambridge,  and  A.  E.  Gough,  "M.A.,  Calcutta.  Pp.  xii. 
and  282.  1882.  10s.  6d. 

TIBETAN  TALES.  Derived  from  Indian  Sources.  Translated  from  the 
Tibetan  of  the  Kay-Gyur.  By  F.  Anton  vou  Schiefner.  Done  into 
English  from  the  German,  with  an  Introduction.  By  W.  R.  S.  Ralston, 
M.A.  Pp.  Ixvi.  and  368.  1882.  14s. 

LINGUISTIC  ESSAYS.     By  Carl  Abel,  Ph.D.     Pp.  viii.  and  265.     1882.     9s. 

THE  INDIAN  EMPIRE  :  Its  History,  People,  and  Products.  By  W.  W. 
Hunter,  C.I.E.,  LL.D.  Pp.  568.  1882.  16s. 

HISTORY  OF  THE  EGYPTIAN  RELIGION.  By  Dr.  C.  P.  Tiele,  Leiden.  Trans* 
lated  by  J.  Ballingal.  Pp.  xxiv.  and  230.  1882.  7s.  6d. 


70  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES— continued. 

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UPANISHADS.    By  A.  E.  Gough,  M.  A.,  Calcutta. 

Pp.  xxiv.-268.     1882.     9s. 

UDANAVARGA.  A  Collection  of  Verses  from  the  Buddhist  Canon.  Com- 
piled by  Dharmatrata.  Being  the  Northern  Buddhist  Version  of 
Dhammapada.  Translated  from  the  Tibetan  of  Bkah-hgyur,  with 
Notes,  and  Extracts  from  the  Commentary  of  Pradjnavarman,  by  W. 
Woodville  Rockhill.  Pp.240.  1883.  9s. 

A  HISTORY  OF  BURMA,  including  Burma  Proper,  Pegu,  Taungu,  Tenas- 
serim,  and  Arakan.  From  the  Earliest  Time  to  the  End  of  the  First 
War  with  British  India.  By  Lieut. -General  Sir  Arthur  P.  Phayre, 
G.C.M.G.,  K.C.S.I.,  andC.B.  Pp.  xii.-312.  1883.  14s. 
A  SKETCH  OF  THE  MODERN  LANGUAGES  OF  AFRICA.  Accompanied  by  a 
Language-Map.  By  R.  N.  Cust,  Author  of  "  Modern  Languages  of  the 
East  Indies,"  &c.  2  vols.,  pp.  xvi.  and  566,  with  Thirty-one  Autotype 
Portraits.  1883.  25s. 

RSLIGION  IN  CHINA  ;  containing  a  brief  Account  of  the  Three  Religion s  of 
the  Chinese ;  with  Observations  on  the  Prospects  of  Christian  Conver- 
sion amongst  that  People.  By  Joseph  Edkins,  D.D.,  Peking.  Third 
Edition.  Pp.  xvi.  and  260.  1884.  7s.  6d. 

OUTLINES  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  RELIGION  TO  THE  SPREAD  OF  THE  UNIVERSAL 
RELIGIONS.  By  Prof.  C.  P.  TIELE.  Translated  from  the  Dutch  by  J. 
Estlin  Carpenter,  M.  A.,  with  the  Author's  assistance.  Third  Edition. 
Pp.  xx.  and  250.  1884.  7s.  6d. 

Si-Yu-Ki.  BUDDHIST  RECORDS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD.  Translated 
from  the  Chinese  of  Hiuen  Tsaing  (A.D.  629).  By  Samuel  Beal,  Professor 
of  Chinese,  University  College,  London.  2  vols. ,  with  a  specially  pre- 
pared Map.  Pp.  cviii.-242  and  viii.-370.  1884.  24s.  Dedicated  by  per- 
mission to  H.R.H.  the  Prince  of  Wales. 

THE  LIFE  OF  THE  BUDDHA,  AND  THE  EARLY  HISTORY  OF  HIS  ORDER. 
Derived  from  Tibetan  Works  in  the  Bkah-Hgyur  and  the  Bstan-Hgyur, 
followed  by  Notices  on  the  Early  History  of  Tibet  and  Khoten.  By  W. 
W.  Rockhill.  Pp.  xii.  and  274.  1884.  10s.  6d. 

THE  SANKHYA  APHORISMS  OF  KAPILA.  With  Illustrative  Extracts  from 
the  Commentaries.  Translated  and  Edited  by  J.  R.  Ballantyne,  LL.D., 
late  Principal  of  Benares  College.  Third  Edition,  now  entirely  Re- 
Edited  by  Fitzedward  Hall.  Pp.  viii.  and  464.  1885.  16s. 
THE  ORDINANCES  OF  MANU.  Translated  from  the  Sanskrit.  With  an 
Introduction  by  the  late  A.  C.  Burnell,  Ph.D.,  C.I.E.  Completed  and 
Edited  by  Edward  W.  Hopkins,  Ph.D.,  of  Columbia  College,  New 
York.  Pp.  xliv.  and  400.  1884.  12s. 

THE  LIFE  AND  WORKS  OF  ALEXANDER  CSOMA  DE  KOROS  between  1819 
and  1842.     With  a  Short  Notice  of  all  his  Published  and  Unpublished 
Works  and  Essays.     From  Original  and  for  the  most  part  Unpublished 
Documents.    By  T.  Duka,  M.D.,  F.R.C.S.  (Eng.),  Surgeon-Major  H.M.'s 
Bengal  Medical  Service,  Retired,  &c.     Pp.  xii. -234,  cloth.     1885.     9s. 
TURNER. — THE  ENGLISH  LANGUAGE.     A  Concise  History  of  the  English  Language, 
with  a  Glossary  showing  the  Derivation  and  Pronunciation  of  the  English  Words. 
By  Roger  Turner.    In  German  and  English  on  opposite  pages.    18mo,  pp.  viii. -80, 
sewed.     1884.     Is.  6d. 

UNGER.— A  SHORT  CUT  TO  READING  :  The  Child's  First  Book  of  Lessons.    Part  I. 
By  W.  H.  Unger.     Fourth  Edition.     Cr.  8vo,  pp.  32,  cloth.     1873.     5d. 

SEQUEL  to  Part  I.  and  Part  II.    Fourth  Edition.    Cr.  8vo,  pp.  64,  cloth.    1873. 

6d.     Parts  I.  and  II.     Third  Edition.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  76,  cloth.    1873.    Is.  6d. 

In  folio  sheets.    Pp.  44.    Sets  A  to  D,  lOd.  each  ;  set  E,  8d.    1873.    Complete,  4s. 

UNGER. — W.  H.  UNGER'S  CONTINUOUS  SUPPLEMENTARY  WRITING  MODELS,  designed 

to  impart  not  only  a  good  business  hand,  but  correctness  in  transcribing.     Oblong 

8vo,  pp.  40,  stiff  covers.     1874.     6d. 


Published  ~by  Trubner  &  Co.  71 

UNGER.— THE  STUDENT'S  BLUE  BOOK:  Being  Selections  from  Official  Corre- 
spondence, Reports,  &c.  ;  for  Exercises  in  Reading  and  Copying  Manuscripts, 
Writing,  Orthography,  Punctuation,  Dictation,  Precis,  Indexing,  and  Digesting, 
and  Tabulating  Accounts  and  Returns.  Compiled  by  W.  H.  Unger.  Folio,  pp. 
100,  paper.  1875.  2s. 

UNGER.— Two  HUNDRED  TESTS  IN  ENGLISH  ORTHOGRAPHY,  or  Word  Dictations. 
Compiled  by  W.  M.  Unger.  Foolscap,  pp.  viii.  and  200,  cloth.  1877.  Is.  6d.  plain, 
2s.  6d.  interleaved. 

UNGER.— THE  SCRIPT  PRIMER:  By  which  one  of  the  remaining  difficulties  of 
Children  is  entirely  removed  in  the  first  stages,  and,  as  a  consequence,  a  consider- 
able saving  of  time  will  be  effected.  In  Two  Parts.  By  W.  H.  Unger.  Part  I. 
12mo,  pp.  xvi.  and  44,  cloth.  5d.  Part  II.,  pp.  59,  cloth.  5d. 

UNGER.— PRELIMINARY  WORD  DICTATIONS  ON  THE  RULES  FOR  SPELLING.  By  W. 
H.  Unger.  18mo,  pp.  44,  cloth.  4d. 

URICOECHEA. — MAPOTECA  COLOMBIANA  :  Catalogo  de  Todos  los  Mapas,  Pianos, 
Vistas,  &c.,  relatives  a  la  Am^rica-Espanola,  Brasil,  e  Islas  adyacentes.  Arre- 
glada  cronologicamente  i  precedida  de  una  introduccion  sobre  la  historia  cartogra- 
fica  de  America.  Por  el  Doctor  Ezequiel  Uricoechea,  de  Bogota,  Nueva  Granada. 
8vo,  pp.  232,  cloth.  1860.  6s. 

URQUHART. — ELECTRO-MOTORS.  A  Treatise  on  the  Means  and  Apparatus  em- 
ployed in  the  Transmission  of  Electrical  Energy  and  its  Conversion  into  Motive- 
power.  For  the  Use  of  Engineers  and  Others.  By  J.  W.  Urquhart,  Electrician. 
Crown  8vo,  cloth,  pp.  xii.  and  178,  illustrated.  1882.  7s.  6d. 

VAITANA  SUTRA.— See  AUCTORES  SANSKRITI,  Vol.  III. 

VALDES.— LIVES  OF  THE  TWIN  BROTHERS,  JUA"N  AND  ALFONSO  DE  VALDES.  By  E. 
Boehmer,  D.D.  Translated  by  J.  T.  Betts.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  32,  wrappers. 
1882.  Is. 

VALDES. — SEVENTEEN  OPUSCULES.  By  Juan  de  Valdes.  Translated  from  the 
Spanish  and  Italian,  and  edited  by  John  T.  Betts.  Crown  Svo,  pp.  xii.  and 
188,  cloth.  1882.  6s. 

VALDES. — JUAN  DE  VALDES'  COMMENTARY  UPON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  MATTHEW. 
With  Professor  Boehmer's  "Lives  of  Juan  and  Alfonso  de  Valdes."  Now  for 
the  first  time  translated  from  the  Spanish,  and  never  before  published  in  English. 
By  John  T.  Betts.  Post  Svo,  pp.  xii.  and  512-30,  cloth.  1882.  7s.  6d. 

VALDES. — SPIRITUAL  MILK;  or,  Christian  Instruction  for  Children.  By  Juan  de 
Valdes.  Translated  from  the  Italian,  edited  and  published  by  John  T.  Betts. 
With  Lives  of  the  twin  brothers,  Juan  and  Alfonso  de  Valdes.  By  E.  Boehmer, 
D.D.  Fcap.  Svo,  pp.  60,  wrappers.  1882.  2s. 

VALDES. — SPIRITUAL  MILK.  Octaglot.  The  Italian  original,  with  translations 
into  Spanish,  Latin,  Polish,  German,  English,  French,  and  Engadin.  With  a 
Critical  and  Historical  Introduction  by  Edward  Boehmer,  the  Editor  of  ' '  Spanish 
Reformers."  4to,  pp.  88,  wrappers.  1884.  6s. 

VALDES.— THREE  OPUSCULES  :  an  Extract  from  Valdes'  Seventeen  Opuscules.  By 
Juan  de  Valdes.  Translated,  edited,  and  published  by  John  T.  Betts.  Fcap.  8vo, 
pp.  58,  wrappers.  1881.  Is.  6d. 

VALDES. — JU!N  DE  VALDES'  COMMENTARY  UPON  OUR  LORD'S  SERMON  ON  THE 
MOUNT.  Translated  and  edited  by  J.  T.  Betts.  With  Lives  of  Juan  and 
Alfonso  de  Valdes.  By  E.  Boehmer,  D.D.  Crown  Svo,  pp.  112,  boards, 

1882.  2s.  6d. 

VALDES. — JuAN  DE  VALDKS'  COMMENTARY  UPON  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANS. 
Edited  by  J.  T.  Betts.  Crown  Svo,  pp.  xxxii.  and  296,  cloth.  1883.  6s. 

VALDES.— JU/N  DE  VALDES'  COMMENTARY  UPON  ST.  PAUL'S  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO 
THE  CHURCH  AT  CORINTH.  Translated  and  edited  by  J.  T.  Betts.  With  Lives 
of  Juan  and  Alphouso  de  Valdes.  By  E.  Boehmer.  Crown  Svo,  pp.  390,  cloth. 

1883.  6s. 


72  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works, 

VAN  CAMPEN.— THE  DUTCH  IN  THE  ARCTIC  SEAS.  By  Samuel  Eichard  Van 
Campen,  author  of  "Holland's  Silver  Feast."  8vo.  Vol.  I.  A  Dutch  Arctic 
Expedition  and  Route.  Third  Edition.  Pp.  xxxvii.  and  263,  cloth.  1877.  10s.  6d. 
Vol.  II.  in  preparation. 

VAN  DE  WEYER.— CHOIX  p'OpuscuLEs  PHILOSOPHIQUES,  HISTOEIQUES,  POLITIQU;  s 
ET  LITTERAIRES  de  Sylvain  Van  de  Weyer,  Precedes  d'Avant  propos  de  1'Editeu? . 
Roxburghe  style.  Crown  8vo.  PREMIERE  SERIE.  Pp.  374.  1863.  10s.  6d.— 
DEUXIEME  SERIE.  Pp.  502.  1869.  12s.— TROISIEME  SERIE.  Pp.  391.  1875. 
10s.  6d.— QUATRIEME  S^RIE.  Pp.  366.  1876.  10s.  6d. 

VAN  EYS.  — BASQUE  GRAMMAR.     See  Trubner's  Collection. 

VAN  LAUN.— GRAMMAR  OF  THE  FRENCH  LANGUAGE.  By  H.  Van  Laun.  Parts 
I.  and  II.  Accidence  and  Syntax.  13th  Edition.  Cr.  8vo,  pp.  151  and  120,  cloth. 
1874.  4s.  Part  III.  Exercises,  llth  Edition.  Cr.  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and  285,  cloth. 
1873.  3s.  6d. 

VAN  LAUN.— LEyoNS  GRADUEES  DE  TRADUCTION  ET  DE  LECTURE  ;  or,  Graduated 
Lessons  in  Translation  and  Reading,  with  Biographical  Sketches,  Annotations 
on  History,  Geography,  Synonyms  and  Style,  and  a  Dictionary  of  Words  ani 
Idioms.  By  Henii  Van  Laun.  4th  Edition.  12mo,  pp.  viii.  and  400,  cloth. 
1868.  5s. 

VAN  PRAAGH. — LESSONS  FOR  THE  INSTRUCTION  OF  DEAF  AND  DUMB  CHILDREN, 
in  Speaking,  Lip-reading,  Reading,  and  "Writing.  By  W.  Van  Praagh,  Director 
of  the  School  and  Training  College  for  Teachers  of  the  Association  for  the  Oral 
Instruction  of  the  Deaf  and  Dumb,  Officier  d' Academic,  France.  Fcap.  8vo, 
Part  I.,  pp.  52,  cloth.  1884.  2s.  6d.  Part  II.,  pp.  62,  cloth.  Is.  6d. 

VARDHAMANA'S  GANARATNAMAHODADHI.     See  AUCTORES  SANSKRITI,  Vol.  IV. 

VAZIR  OF  LANKURAN :  A  Persian  Play.  A  Text-Book  of  Modern  Colloquial 
Persian.  Edited,  with  Grammatical  Introduction,  Translation,  Notes,  and  Voca- 
bulary, by  "VV.  H.  Haggard,  late  of  H.M.  Legation  in  Teheran,  and  G.  le  Strange. 
Crown  8vo,  pp.  230,  cloth.  1882.  10s.  6d. 

VELASQUEZ  AND  SIMONNE'S  NEW  METHOD  TO  READ,  WRITE,  AND  SPEAK  THE 
SPANISH  LANGUAGE.     Adapted  to  Ollendorff's  System.     Post  8vo,  pp.  558,  cloth. 
1882.    6s. 
KEY.    Post  8vo,  pp.  174,  cloth.    4s. 

VELASQUEZ.— A  DICTIONARY  OF  THE  SPANISH  AND  ENGLISH  LANGUAGES.  For 
the  Use  of  Young  Learners  and  Travellers.  By  M.  Velasquez  de  la  Cadena. 
In  Two  Parts.  I.  Spanish-English.  II.  English-Spanish.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii. 
and  846,  cloth.  1883.  7s.  6d. 

VELASQUEZ.— A  PRONOUNCING  DICTIONARY  OF  THE  SPANISH  AND  ENGLISH  LAN- 
GUAGES. Composed  from  the  Dictionaries  of  the  Spanish  Academy,  Terreos,  and 
Salva,  and  Webster,  Worcester,  and  Walker.  Two  Parts  in  one  thick  volume. 
By  M.  Velasquez  de  la  Cadena.  Roy.  8vo,  pp.  1280,  cloth.  1873.  £1,  4s. 

VELASQUEZ. — NEW  SPANISH  READER  :  Passages  from  the  most  approved  authors, 
in  Prose  and  Verse.  Arranged  in  progressive  order.  With  Vocabulary.  By  M. 
Velasquez  de  la  Cadena.  Post  8vo,  pp.  352,  cloth.  1866.  6s. 

VELASQUEZ. — AN  EASY  INTRODUCTION  TO  SPANISH  CONVERSATION,  containing  all 
that  is  necessary  to  make  a  rapid  progress  in  it.  Particularly  designed  for 
persons  who  have  little  time  to  study,  or  are  their  own  instructors.  By  M. 
Velasquez  de  la  Cadena,  12mo,  pp.  150,  cloth.  1863.  2s.  6d. 

VERSES  AND  VERSELETS.  By  a  Lover  of  Nature.  Foolscap  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and 
88,  cloth.  1876.  2s.  6d. 

VICTORIA  GOVERNMENT. — PUBLICATIONS  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT  OF  VICTORIA. 
List  in  preparation. 

VOGEL.— ON  BEER.  A  Statistical  Sketch.  By  M.  Vogel.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  xii.  and 
76,  cloth  limp.  1874.  2s. 

WAFFLARD  and  FULGENCE.— LE  VOYAGE  1  DDZPPE.  A  Comedy  in  Prose.  By 
Wafflard  and  Fulgeuce.  Edited,  with  Notes,  by  the  Rev.  P.  H.  E.  Brette,  B.D. 
Cr.  8vo,  pp.  104,  cloth.  1867.  2s.  6d. 


Published  ly  Trubner  d  Co.  73 

WAKE. — THE  EVOLUTION  OF  MORALITY.  Being  a  History  of  the  Development  of 
Moral  Culture.  By  C.  Staniland  Wake.  2  vols.  crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.-506  and 
xii.-474,  cloth.  1878.  21s. 

WALLACE.— ON  MIRACLES  AND  MODERN  SPIRITUALISM  ;  Three  Essays.  By  Alfred 
Russel  Wallace,  Author  of  "The  Malay  Archipelago,"  "The  Geographical  Dis- 
tribution of  Animals,"  &c.,  &c.  Second  Edition,  crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  236, 
cloth.  1881.  5s 

WANKLYN  and  CHAPMAN.— WATER  ANALYSIS.  A  Practical  Treatise  on  the 
Examination  of  Potable  Water.  By  J.  A.  Wanklyn,  and  E.  T.  Chapman.  Sixth 
Edition.  Entirely  rewritten.  By  J.  A.  Wanklyn,  M.Pv.C.S.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  192, 
cloth.  1884.  5s. 

WANKLYN.— MILK  ANALYSIS  :  a  Practical  Treatise  on  the  Examination  of  Milk  and 
its  Derivatives,  Cream,  Butter,  and  Cheese.  By  J.  A.  Wanklyn,  M.R.C.S.,  &c. 
Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  72,  cloth.  1874.  5s. 

WANKLYN.— TEA,  COFFEE,  AND  COCOA.  A  Practical  Treatise  on  the  Analysis  of 
Tea,  Coffee,  Cocoa,  Chocolate,  Mate"  (Paraguay  Tea),  &c.  By  J.  A.  Wanklyn, 
M.R.C.S.,  &c.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  60,  cloth.  1874.  5s. 

WAR  OFFICE.— A  LIST  OF  THE  VARIOUS  MILITARY  MANUALS  AND  OTHER  WORKS 

PUBLISHED  UNDER  THE   SUPERINTENDENCE  OF  THE  WAR  OFFICE  may  be  had  On 

application. 

WARD.— ICE  :  A  Lecture  delivered  before  the  Keswick  Literary  Society,  and  pub- 
lished by  request.  To  which  is  appended  a  Geological  Dream  on  Skiddaw.  By 
J.  Clifton  Ward,  F.G.S.  8vo,  pp.  28,  sewed.  1870.  Is. 

WARD.— ELEMENTARY  NATURAL  PHILOSOPHY  ;  being  a  Course  of  Nine  Lectures,  speci- 
ally adapted  for  the  use  of  Schools  and  Junior  Students.  By  J.  Clifton  Ward, 
F.G.S.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  216,  with  154  Illustrations,  cloth.  1871.  3s.  6d. 

WARD. — ELEMENTARY  GEOLOGY  :  A  Course  of  Nine  Lectures,  for  the  use  of  Schools 
and  Junior  Students.  By  J.  Clifton  Ward,  F.G.S.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  292,  with  120 
Illustrations,  cloth.  1872.  4s.  6d. 

WATSON. — INDEX  TO  THE  NATIVE  AND  SCIENTIFIC  NAMES  OF  INDIAN  AND  OTHER 
EASTERN  ECONOMIC  PLANTS  AND  PRODUCTS,  originally  prepared  under  the  autho- 
rity of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  India  in  Council.  By  John  Forbes  Watson, 
M.D.  Imp.  8vo,  pp.  650,  cloth.  1868.  £1,  11s.  6d. 

WATSON.— SPANISH  AND  PORTUGUESE  SOUTH  AMERICA  DURING  THE  COLONIAL 
PERIOD.  By  R.  G.  WATSON.  2  vols.  post  Svo,  pp.  xvi.-308,  viii.-320,  cloth. 
1884.  21s. 

WEBER.— THE  HISTORY  OF  INDIAN  LITERATURE.  By  Albrecht  Weber.  Translated 
from  the  Second  German  Edition,  by  J.  Mann,  M.A.,  and  T.  Zacharaiae,  Ph.D., 
with  the  sanction  of  the  Author.  Second  Edition,  post  Svo,  pp.  xxiv.  and  360, 
cloth.  1882.  10s.  6d. 

WEDGWOOD. — THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  GEOMETRICAL  DEMONSTRATION,  reduced  from  the 
Original  Conception  of  Space  and  Form.  By  H.  Wedgwood,  M.A.  12m o,  pp.  48, 
cloth.  1844.  2s. 

WEDGWOOD.— ON  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  UNDERSTANDING.  By  H.  Wedgwood, 
A.M.  12mo,  pp.  133,  cloth.  1848.  3s. 

WEDGWOOD.— THE  GEOMETRY  OF  THE  THREE  FIRST  BOOKS  OF  EUCLID.  By  Direct 
Proof  from  Definitions  Alone.  By  H.  Wedgwood,  M.A.  12mo,  pp.  104,  cloth. 
1856.  3s. 

WEDGWOOD.— ON  THE  ORIGIN  OF  LANGUAGE.    By  H.  Wedgwood,  M.A.     12mo, 


pp.  165,  cloth.     1866.     3s.  6d. 
WEDGWOOD.—^ 


-A  DICTIONARY  OF  ENGLISH  ETYMOLOGY.  By  H.  Wedgwood. 
Third  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged.  With  Introduction  on  the  Origin  of 
Language.  Svo,  pp.  Ixxii.  and  746,  cloth.  1878.  £1,  Is. 

WEDGWOOD.— CONTESTED  ETYMOLOGIES  IN  THE  DICTIONARY  OF  THE  REV.  W.  W. 
SKEAT.     By  H.  Wedgwood.     Crown  Svo,  pp.  viii.  and  194,  cloth.     1882.     5s. 


74  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works,  » 

WEISBACH. — THEORETICAL  MECHANICS  :  A  Manual  of  the  Mechanics  of  Engineer- 
ing and  of  the  Construction  of  Machines  ;  with  an  Introduction  to  the  Calculus. 
Designed  as  a  Text-book  for  Technical  Schools  and  Colleges,  and  for  the  use  of 
Engineers,  Architects,  &c.  By  Julius  Weisbach,  Ph.D.,  Oberbergrath,  and  Pro- 
fessor at  the  Royal  Mining  Academy  at  Freiberg,  &c.  Translated  from  the  Ger- 
man by  Eckley  B.  Coxe,  A.M.,  Mining  Engineer.  Demy  8vo,  with  902  woodcuts, 
pp.  1112,  cloth.  1877.  31s.  6d. 

WELLER.— AN  IMPROVED  DICTIONARY  ;  English  and  French,  and  French  and  Eng- 
lish. By  E.  Weller.  Royal  8vo,  pp.  384  and  340,  cloth.  1864.  7s.  6d. 

WEST  and  BUHLER.— A  DIGEST  OF  THE  HINDU  LAW  OF  INHERITANCE,  PARTITION, 
AND  ADOPTION  ;  embodying  the  Replies  of  the  Sastris  in  the  Courts  of  the 
Bombay  Presidency,  with  Introductions  and  Notes.  By  Raymond  West  and 
J.  G.  Biihler.  Third  Edition.  Demy  8vo,  pp.  1450,  sewed.  1884.  £1,  16s. 

WETHERELL.— THE  MANUFACTURE  OF  VINEGAR,  its  Theory  and  Practice;  with 
especial  reference  to  the  Quick  Process.  By  C.  M.  Wetherell,  Ph.D.,  M.D.  8vo, 
pp.  30,  cloth.  7s.  6d. 

WHEELDON. — ANGLING  RESORTS  NEAR  LONDON  :  The  Thames  and  the  Lea.  By  J. 
P.  Wheeldon,  Piscatorial  Correspondent  to  "Bell's  Life."  Crown  Svo,  pp.  viii. 
and  218.  1878.  Paper,  Is.  6d. 

WHEELER.— THE  HISTORY  OF  INDIA  FROM  THE  EARLIEST  AGES.  By  J.  Talboys 
Wheeler.  Demy  Svo,  cloth.  Vol.  I.  containing  the  Vedic  Period  and  the  Maha 
Bharata.  With  Map.  Pp.  Ixxv.  and  576,  cl.  1867,  o.  p.  Vol.  II.  The  Ramayana, 
and  the  Brahmanic  Period.  Pp.  Ixxxviii.  and  680,  with  2  Maps,  cl.  21s.  Vol. 

III.  Hindu,  Buddhist,  Brahmanical   Revival.      Pp.  xxiv.-500.     With  2   Maps, 
8vo,  cl.     1874.  *  18s.     This  volume  may  be  had  as  a  complete  work  with  the  fol- 
lowing title,    "  History  of  India  ;    Hindu,  Buddhist,  and  Brahmanical."    Vol 

IV.  Part  I.  Mussulman  Rule.      Pp.  xxxii.-320.     1876.     14s.     Vol.  IV.  Part  II. 
completing  the  History  of  India  down  to  the  time  of  the  Moghul  Empire. 
Pp.  xxviii.  and  280.     1881.     12s. 

WHEELER.— EARLY  RECORDS  OF  BRITISH  INDIA  :  A  History  of  the  English  Settle- 
ments in  India,  as  told  in  the  Government  Records,  the  works  of  old  Travellers, 
and  other  Contemporary  Documents,  from  the  earliest  period  down  to  the  rise  of 
British  Power  in  India.  By  J.  Talboys  Wheeler,  late  Assistant  Secretary  to  the 
Government  of  India  in  the  Foreign  Department.  Royal  Svo,  pp.  xxxii.  and  392, 
cloth.  1878.  15s. 

WHEELER.— THE  FOREIGNER  IN  CHINA.  By  L.  N.  Wheeler,  D.D.  With  Intro- 
duction by  Professor  W.  C.  Sawyer,  Ph.D.  8vo,  pp.  268,  cloth.  1881.  6s.  6d. 

WHERRY.— A  COMPREHENSIVE  COMMENTARY  TO  THE  QURAN..  To  which  is  prefixed 
Sale's  Preliminary  Discourse,  with  additional  Notes  and  Emendations.  Together 
with  a  complete  Index  to  the  Text,  Preliminary  Discourse,  and  Notes.  By  Rev. 
E.  M.  Wherry  M.  A.,  Lodiana.  3  vols.  post  8vo,  cloth.  Vol.  I.  Pp.  xii.  and  392. 
1882.  12s.  6d.  Vol.  II.  Pp.  vi.  and  408.  1884.  12s.  6d. 

WHINFIELD.— QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.     See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 

WHINFIELD.— See  GULSHAN  I.  RAZ. 

WHIST.— SHORT  RULES  FOR  MODERN  WHIST,  Extracted  from  the  "Quarterly 
Review  "  of  January  1871.  Printed  on  a  Card,  folded  to  fit  the  Pocket.  1878.  6d. 

WHITE.— SPINOZA.     See  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical  Library. 

WHITNEY.— LANGUAGE  AND  THE  STUDY  OF  LANGUAGE  :  Twelve  Lectures  on  the 
Principles  of  Linguistic  Science.  By  W.  D.  Whitney.  Fourth  Edition,  aug- 
mented by  an  Analysis.  Crown  Svo,  pp.  xii.  and  504,  cloth.  1884.  10s.  6d. 

WHITNEY.— LANGUAGE  AND  ITS  STUDY,  with  especial  reference  to  the  Indo- 
European  Family  of  Languages.  Seven  Lectures  by  W.  D.  Whitney,  Instructor 
in  Modern  Languages  in  Yale  College.  Edited  with  Introduction,  Notes,  Tables, 
&c.,  and  an  Index,  by  the  Rev.  R.  Morris,  M.A.,  LL.D.  Second  Edition. 
Crown  Svo,  pp.  xxii.  and  318,  cloth.  1880.  5s. 


Published  by  Trubner  &  Co.  75 

WHITNEY.— Oriental  and  Linguistic  Studies.  By  W.  D.  Whitney.  First  Series. 
Crown  8vo,  pp.  x.  and  420,  cloth.  1874.  12s.  Second  Series.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xii. 
and  434.  With  chart,  cloth.  1874.  12s. 

WHITNEY. — A  SANSKRIT  GRAMMAR,  including  both  the  Classical  Language  and  the 
older  Dialects  of  Veda  and  Brahmana.  By  William  Dwight  Whitney,  Professor 
of  Sanskrit  and  Comparative  Philology  in  Yale  College,  Newhaven,  &c.,  &c. 
8vo,  pp.  xxiv.  and  486.  1879.  Stitched  in  wrapper,  10s.  6d ;  cloth,  12s. 

WHITWELL.— IRON  SMELTER'S  POCKET  ANALYSIS  BOOK.  By  Thomas  Whitwell, 
Member  of  the  Institution  of  Mechanical  Engineers,  &c.  Oblong  12mo,  pp.  152, 
roan.  1877.  5s. 

WILKINSON.— THE  SAINT'S  TRAVEL  TO  THE  LAND  OF  CANAAN.  Wherein  are  dis- 
covered Seventeen  False  Rests  short  of  the  Spiritual  Coming  of  Christ  in  the 
Saints,  with  a  Brief  Discovery  of  what  the  Coming  of  Christ  in  the  Spirit  is.  By 
R.  Wilkinson.  Printed  1648 ;  reprinted  1874.  Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  208,  cloth.  Is.  6d. 

WILLIAMS. — A  SYLLABIC  DICTIONARY  OP  THE  CHINESE  LANGUAGE  ;  arranged  ac- 
cording to  the  Wu-Fang  Yuen  Yin,  with  the  pronunciation  of  the  Characters  as 
heard  in  Pekin,  Canton,  Amoy,  and  Shanghai.  By  S.  Wells  Williams,  LL.D. 
4to,  pp.  1336.  1874.  £5,  5s. 

WILLIAMS. — MODERN  INDIA  AND  THE  INDIANS.    See  Triibner's  Oriental  Series. 

WILSON.— WORKS  OF  THE  LATE  HORACE  HAYMAN  WILSON,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  &c. 

Vols.  I.  and  II.  Essays  and  Lectures  chiefly  on  the  Religion  of  the  Hindus,  by 
the  late  H.  H.  Wilson,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  &c.*  Collected  and  Edited  by  Dr.  Rein- 
hold  Rost.  2  vols.  demy  8vo,  pp.  xiii.  and  399,  vi.  and  416,  cloth.  21s. 

Vols.  III.,  IV.,  and  V.  Essays  Analytical,  Critical,  and  Philological,  on  Subjects 
connected  with  Sanskrit  Literature.  Collected  and  Edited  by  Dr.  Reinhold 
Rost.  3  vols.  demy  8vo,  pp.  408,  406,  and  390,  cloth.  36s. 

Vols.  VI.,  VII.,  VIII.,  IX.,  and  X.  (2  parts).  Vishnu  Purana,  a  System  of  Hindu 
Mythology  and  Tradition.  Translated  from  the, original  Sanskrit,  and  Illus- 
trated by  Notes  derived  chiefly  from  other  Puranas.  By  the  late  H.  H.  Wilson. 
Edited  by  FitzEdward  Hall,  M.A.,  D.C.L.,  Oxon.  Vols.  I.  to  V.  (2  parts). 
Demy  8vo,  pp.  cxl.  and  200,  344,  346,  362,  and  268,  cloth.  £3,  4s.  6d. 

Vols.  XL  and  XII.  Select  Specimens  of  the  Theatre  of  the  Hindus.  Translated 
from  the  original  Sanskrit.  By  the  late  H.  H.  Wilson,  M.A.,  F.R.S.  Third 
corrected  Edition.  2  vols.  demy  8vo,  pp.  Ixxi.  and  384,  iv.  and  418,  cloth.  21s. 

WILSON.— THOUGHTS  ON  SCIENCE,  THEOLOGY,  AND  ETHICS.  By  John  Wilson,  M.  A., 
Trinity  College,  Dublin.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  280,  cloth.  1885.  3s.  6d. 

WISE.— COMMENTARY  ON  THE  HINDU  SYSTEM  OF  MEDICINE.  By  T.  A.  Wise, 
M.D.  8vo,  pp.  xx.  and  432,  cloth.  1845.  7s.  6d. 

WISE.— REVIEW  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  MEDICINE.  By  Thomas  A.  Wise.  2  vols. 
demy  8vo,  cloth.  Vol.  I.,  pp.  xcviii.  and  397.  Vol.  II.,  pp.  574.  10s. 

WISE.— HISTORY  OF  PAGANISM  IN  CALEDONIA.  By  T.  A.  Wise,  M.D.,  &c.  Demy 
4to,  pp.  xxviii.-272,  cloth,  with  numerous  Illustrations.  1884.  15s. 

WITHERS.— THE  ENGLISH  LANGUAGE  AS  PRONOUNCED.  By  G.  Withers.  Royal 
8vo,  pp.  84,  sewed.  1874.  Is. 

WOOD.— CHRONOS.  Mother  Earth's  Biography.  A  Romance  of  the  New  School. 
By  Wallace  Wood,  M.D.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  334,  with  Illustration,  cloth. 
1873.  6s. 

WOMEN.— THE  RIGHTS  OF  WOMEN.  A  Comparison  of  the  Relative  Legal  Status  of 
the  Sexes  in  the  Chief  Countries  of  Western  Civilisation.  Crown  8vo,  pp.  104, 
cloth.  1875.  2s.  6d. 


76  A  Catalogue  of  Important  Works. 

WRIGHT.— FEUDAL  MANUALS  OP  ENGLISH  HISTORY,  a  series  of  Popular  Sketches  of 
our  National  History  compiled  at  different  periods,  from  the  Thirteenth  Century 
to  the  Fifteenth,  for  the  use  of  the  Feudal  Gentry  and  Nobility.  Now  first  edited 
from  the  Original  Manuscripts.  By  Thomas  Wright,  M.A., 'F.S.A.,  &c.  Small 
4to,  pp.  xxix.  and  184,  cloth.  1872.  15s. 

WEIGHT.— THE  HOMES  OF  OTHEK  DAYS.  A  History  of  Domestic  Manners  and 
Sentiments  during  the  Middle  Ages.  By  Thomas  Wright,  M. A.,  F.S.A.  With 
Illustrations  from  the  Illuminations  in  Contemporary  Manuscripts  and  other 
Sources.  Drawn  and  Engraved  by  F.  W.  Fairholt,  F.S.A.  Medium  8vo,  350 
Woodcuts,  pp.  xv.  and  512,  cloth.  1871.  21s. 

WRIGHT.— ANGLO-SAXON  AND  OLD  ENGLISH  VOCABULARIES.  By  Thomas  Wright, 
M.A.,  F.S.A.,  Hon.  M.K.S.L.  Second  Edition,  Edited  and  Collated  by  Richard 
Paul  Wulcker.  2  vols.  demy  8vo,  pp.  xx.-408,  and  iv.-486,  cloth.  1884.  28s. 
Illustrating  the  Condition  and  Manners  of  our  Forefathers,  as  well  as  the  History 
of  the  forms  of  Elementary  Education,  and  of  the  Languages  Spoken  in  this  Island 
from  the  Tenth  Century  to  the  Fifteenth. 

WRIGHT.— THE  CELT,  THE  ROMAN,  AND  THE  SAXON;  a  History  of  the  Early 
Inhabitants  of  Britain  down  to  the  Conversion  of  the  Anglo-Saxons  to  Christianity. 
Illustrated  by  the  Ancient  Remains  brought  to  light  by  Recent  Research. 
By  Thomas  Wright,  M.A.,  F.S.A.,  &o.,  &c.  Third  Corrected  and  Enlarged 
Edition.  Cr.  8vo,  pp.  xiv.  and  562.  With  nearly  300  Engravings.  Cloth.  1875.  14s. 

WRIGHT.— THE  BOOK  OF  KALILAH  AND  DIMNAH.    Translated  from  Arabic  into 

Syriac.     Edited  by  W.  Wright,  LL.D.,  Professor  of  Arabic  in  the  University  of 

Cambridge.     Demy  8vo,  pp.  lxxxii.-408,  cloth.     1884.     21s. 
WRIGHT.— MENTAL  TRAVELS  IN  IMAGINED  LANDS.      By  H.  Wright.     Crown  8vo, 

pp.  184,  cloth.     1878.    5s. 
WYLD.— CLAIRVOYANCE;  or,  the  Auto-Noetic  Action  of  the  Mind.    By  George 

Wyld,  M.D.  Edin.     8vo,  pp.  32,  wrapper.     1883.     Is. 

WYSARD.— THE  INTELLECTUAL  AND  MORAL  PROBLEM  OF  GOETHE'S  FAUST.    By  A. 

Wysard.    Parts  I.  and  II.     Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  80,  limp  parchment  wrapper.     1883. 

2s.  6d. 
YOUNG  MECHANIC  (THE). -See  MECHANIC. 

ZELLER.— STRAUSS  AND  RENAN.  An  Essay  by  E.  Zeller.  Translated  from  the 
German.  Post  8vo,  pp.  110,  cloth.  1866.  2s.  6d. 


PERIODICALS 

PUBLISHED  AND  SOLD  BY  TRUBNER  &  CO. 


AMATEUR  MECHANICAL  SOCIETY'S  JOURNAL. —Irregular. 
ANTANANARIVO  ANNUAL  AND  MADAGASCAR  MAGAZINE.— Irregular. 

ANTHROPOLOGICAL  INSTITUTE  OF  GREAT  BRITAIN  AND  IRELAND  (JOUBNAL  OF).— 
Quarterly,  5s. 

ARCHITECT  (AMERICAN)  AND  BUILDING  NEWS. — Contains  General  Architectural 
News,  Articles  on  Interior  Decoration,  Sanitary  Engineering,  Construction, 
Building  Materials,  &c.,  &c.  Four  full-page  Illustrations  accompany  each 
Number.  Weekly.  Annual  Subscription,  £1,  11s.  6d.  Post  free. 

ASIATIC  SOCIETY  (ROYAL)  OF  GREAT  BRITAIN  AND  IRELAND  (JOURNAL  OF).— 
Irregular. 


Periodicals.  77 

BIBLICAL  ARCHAEOLOGICAL  SOCIETY  (TRANSACTIONS  OF).— Irregular. 

BIBLIOTHECA  SACRA.— Quarterly,  3s.  6d.     Annual  Subscription,  14s.     Post  free. 

BRITISH  ARCHAEOLOGICAL  ASSOCIATION  (JOURNAL  OF}.— Quarterly,  8s. 

BRITISH  CHESS  MAGAZINE.— Monthly,  8d. 

BRITISH  HOMEOPATHIC  SOCIETY  (ANNALS  OF).— Half-yearly,  2s.  6d. 

BROWNING  SOCIETY'S  PAPERS. -Irregular. 

CALCUTTA  REVIEW.— Quarterly,  8s.  6d.     Annual  Subscription,  34s.     Post  free. 

CAMBRIDGE  PHILOLOGICAL  SOCIETY  (PROCEEDINGS  OF).— Irregular. 

ENGLISHWOMAN'S  REVIEW.— Social  and  Industrial  Questions.     Monthly,  6d. 

GEOLOGICAL  MAGAZINE,  or  Monthly  Journal  of  Geology,  Is.  6d.  Annual  Sub- 
scription, 18s.  Post  free. 

GLASGOW,  GEOLOGICAL  SOCIETY  OF  (TRANSACTIONS  OF).— Irregular. 

INDEX  MEDICUS.— A  Monthly  Classified  Kecord  of  the  Current  Medical  Literature 
of  the  World.  Annual  Subscription,  50s.  Post  free. 

INDIAN  ANTIQUARY.— A  Journal  of  Oriental  Eesearch  in  Archaeology,  History, 
Literature,  Languages,  Philosophy,  Eeligion,  Folklore,  &c.  Annual  Subscrip- 
tion, £2.  Post  free. 

INDIAN  EVANGELICAL  REVIEW.— Annual  Subscription,  10s. 

LIBRARY  JOURNAL. — Official  Organ  of  the  Library  Associations  of  America  and  of 
the  United  Kingdom.  Monthly,  2s.  Annual  Subscription,  20s.  Post  free. 

MANCHESTER  QUARTERLY.— Is.  6d. 

MATHEMATICS  (AMERICAN  JOURNAL  OF). — Quarterly,  7s.  6d.  Annual  Subscrip- 
tion, 24s.  Post  free. 

ORIENTALIST  (THE).— Monthly.     Annual  Subscription,  12s. 

ORTHODOX  CATHOLIC  REVIEW.— Irregular. 

PHILOLOGICAL  SOCIETY  (TRANSACTIONS  AND  PROCEEDINGS  OF).— Irregular. 

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH  (SOCIETY  OF).— PROCEEDINGS. 

PUBLISHERS'  WEEKLY.— THE  AMERICAN  BOOK-TRADE  JOURNAL.  Annual  Sub- 
scription, 18s.  Post  free. 

PUNJAB  NOTES  AND  QUERIES.— Monthly.     Annual  Subscription,  10s. 

REVUE  COLONIALE  INTERNATIONALE. —Monthly.  Annual  Subscription,  25s. 
Post  free. 

SCIENTIFIC  AMERICAN.— WEEKLY.    Annual  subscription,  18s.    Post  free. 

SUPPLEMENT  to  ditto. —WEEKLY.     Annual  subscription,  24s.     Post  free. 

SCIENCE  AND  ARTS  (AMERICAN  JOURNAL  OF).— Monthly,  2s.  6d.  Annual  Subscrip- 
tion, 30s. 

SPECULATIVE  PHILOSOPHY  (JOURNAL  OF).— Quarterly,  4s.  Annual  Subscription, 
16s.  Post  free,  17s. 

SUNDAY  REVIEW.— Organ  of  the  Sunday  Society  for  Opening  Museums  and  Art 
Galleries  on  Sunday. — Quarterly,  Is.  Annual  Subscription,  4s.  Cd.  Post  free. 

TRUBNER'S  AMERICAN,  EUROPEAN,  AND  ORIENTAL  LITERARY  RECORD. — A  Register 
of  the  most  Important  Works  Published  in  America,  India,  China,  and  the  British 
Colonies.  With  occasional  Notes  on  German,  Dutch,  Danish,  French,  Italian, 
Spanish,  Portuguese,  and  Russian  Literature.  Subscription  for  12  Numbers,  5s. 
Post  free. 

TRUBNER  &  CO.'S  MONTHLY  LIST  of  New  and  Forthcoming  Works,  Official  and 

other  Authorised  Publications,  and  New  American  Books.     Post  free. 
WESTMINSTER  REVIEW.— Quarterly,  6s.     Annual  Subscription,  22s.     Post  free. 
WOMAN'S  SUFFRAGE  JOURNAL.— Monthly,  Id. 


TROBNER  &  CO.1 8  CATALOGUES. 


Any  of  the  following  Catalogues  sent  per  Post  on  receipt  of  Stamps. 


Africa,  Works  Relating  to  the  Modern  Languages  of.     Id. 

Agricultural  Works.     2d. 

Arabic,  Persian,  and  Turkish  Books,  printed  in  the  East.     Is. 

Assyria  and  Assyriology.     Is. 

Bibliotheca  Hispano-Americana.     Is.  6d. 

Brazil,  Ancient  and  Modern  Books  relating  to.     2s.  6d. 

British  Museum,  Publications  of  Trustees  of  the.     Id. 

Dictionaries  and  Grammars  of  Principal  Languages  and  Dialects 
of  the  World.    5s. 

Educational  Works.    Id. 

Egypt  and  Egyptology.     Is. 

Guide  Books.     Id. 

Important  Works,  published  by  Triibner  &  Co.     2d. 

Linguistic  and  Oriental  Publications.    2d. 

Medical,  Surgical,  Chemical,  and  Dental  Publications.    2d. 

Modern  German  Books.    2d. 

Monthly  List  of  New  Publications.     Id. 

Pali,  Prakrit,  and  Buddhist  Literature.    Is. 

Portuguese  Language,  Ancient  and  Modern  Books  in  the.    6d. 

Sanskrit  Books.    2s.  6d. 

Scientific  Works.    2d. 

Semitic,  Iranian,  and  Tatar  Races.  Is. 


TRUBNiER'S 
COLLECTION  OF  SIMPLIFIED  GRAMMARS 


OF  THE 


PRINCIPAL  ASIATIC  AND  EUROPEAN  LANGUAGES, 

EDITED  BY  KEINHOLD  KOST,  LL.D.,  PH.D. 


The  object  of  this  Series  is  to  provide  the  learner  with  a  concise  but 
practical  Introduction  to  the  various  Languages,  and  at  the  same  time  to 
furnish  Students  of  Comparative  Philology  with  a  clear  and  comprehensive 
view  of  their  structure.  The  attempt  to  adapt  the  somewhat  cumbrous 
grammatical  system  of  the  Greek  and  Latin  to  every  other  tongue  has  intro- 
duced a  great  deal  of  unnecessary  difficulty  into  the  study  of  Languages. 
Instead  of  analysing  existing  locutions  and  endeavouring  to  discover  the 
principles  which  regulate  them,  writers  of  grammars  have  for  the  most  part 
constructed  a  framework  of  rules  on  the  old  lines,  and  tried  to  make  the 
language  of  which  they  were  treating  fit  into  it.  Where  this  proves  im- 
possible, the  difficulty  is  met  by  lists  of  exceptions  and  irregular  forms,  thus 
burdening  the  pupil's  mind  with  a  mass  of  details  of  which  he  can  make 
no  practical  use. 

In  these  Grammars  the  subject  is  viewed  from  a  different  standpoint ; 
the  structure  of  each  language  is  carefully  examined,  and  the  principles 
which  underlie  it  are  carefully  explained  ;  while  apparent  discrepancies 
and  so-called  irregularities  are  shown  to  be  only  natural  euphonic  and 
other  changes.  All  technical  terms  are  excluded  unless  their  meaning 
and  application  is  self-evident ;  no  arbitrary  rules  are  admitted  ;  the  old 
classification  into  declensions,  conjugations,  &c.,  and  even  the  usual  para- 
digms and  tables,  are  omitted.  Thus  reduced  to  the  simplest  principles, 
the  Accidence  and  Syntax  can  be  thoroughly  comprehended  by  the  student 
on  one  perusal,  and  a  few  hours'  diligent  study  will  enable  him  to  analyse 
any  sentence  in  the  language. 


Now  READY. 
Crown  8vo,  cloth,  uniformly  bound. 

I. — Hindustani,  Persian,  and  Arabic.    By  the  late  E.  H.  Palmer, 

M.A.     Second  Edition.     Pp.  112.     5s. 
II.— Hungarian.     By  I.   SINGER,    of   Buda-Pesth.      Pp.  vi.    and    88. 

4s.  6d. 

For  continuation  see  next  paye. 


80  Triibners  Simplified  Grammars — continued. 

III.— Basque.     By  W.  VAN  EYS.     Pp.  xii.  and  52.     3s.  6d. 
IV.— Malagasy.     By  G.  W.  PARKER.     Pp.  66.     5s. 
fV.— Modern  Greek.     By  E.  M.  GELBART,  M.A.     Pp.  68.     2s.  6d. 
VI. — Roumanian.     By  M.  TORCEANU.   Pp.  viii.  and  72.     5s. 
VII.— Tibetan.    By  H.  A.  JASCHKE.    Pp.  viii.  and  104.    5s. 
VIII. —Danish.     By  E.  C.  OTTE.    Pp.  viii.  and  66.     2s.  6d. 
IX.— Turkish.    By  J.  W.  REDHOUSE,  M.R.A.S.      Pp.  xii.  and  204. 

10s.  6d. 

X.— Swedish.    By  Miss  E.  C.  OTTE.     Pp.  xii.  and  70.     2s.  6d. 
XI.— Polish.     By  W.  R.  MORFILL,  M.A.    Pp.  viii.  and  64.    3s.  6d. 
XII.— Pali.    By  E.  MULLER,  Ph.D.    Pp.  xvi.-144.    7s.  6d. 
XIII.— Sanskrit.    By  H.  EDGREN.    Pp.  xii. -178.    10s.  6d. 

The  following  are  in  preparation  : — 

SIMPLIFIED   GEAMMAES   OF 

Albanian,  by  WASSA  PASHA,  Prince  of  the  Lebanon. 

Assyrian,  by  Prof.  SAYCE. 

Bengali,  by  J.  F.  BLUMHARDT,  of  the  British  Museum. 

Burmese,  by  Dr.  E.  FORCHAMMER. 

Cymric  and  Gaelic,  by  H.  JENNER,  of  the  British  Museum. 

Egyptian,  by  Dr.  BIRCH. 

Finnic,  by  Prof.  OTTO  DONNER,  of  Helsingfors. 

Hebrew,  by  Dr.  GINSBURG. 

Icelandic,  by  Dr.  WIMMER,  Copenhagen. 

Lettish,  by  Dr.  M.  I.  A.  VOLKEL. 

Lithuanian,  by  Dr.  M.jjl.  A.  VOLKEL. 

Malay,  by  W.  E.  MAXWELL,  of  the  Inner  Temple,  Barrister-at-Law. 

Portuguese,fby  WALTER  DE  GRAY  BIRCH. 

Prakrit,  by  HJALMAR]EDGREN,  Lund,  Sweden. 

Russian,  Bohemian,  Bulgarian  and  Serbian,  by  W.  R.  MORFILL,  of 

Oxford. 
Sinhalese,  by  "Dr.  EDWARD  MULLER. 


Arrangements    ar<f  j  being    made    with    competent    Scholars   for    the    early 
preparation^  of   Grammars   of  German,   Dutch,  Italian,    Chinese 


LONDON  :  TRUBNER  &  CO.,  LUDGATE  HILL. 


PRINTED  BY  BALLANTYNE,  HANSON  AND  CO. 
EDINBURGH  AND  LONDON.    , 

750/21/10/85— H. 


PK 

3791 

B2976S3 


Bhartrhari 

The  Satakas  of  Bhartri- 

hari 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 


UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


