===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.237542.An-English_djvu.txt =====

% 

$ 

« 

$ 

« 

Sj 

« 

£ 

iK>»i!ift.»>«!.vw»«(iSftisefl»-*^>-«"- 

GL  294.5563 

DUR2EDED 


» 

Is 
H 

Is 
H 
H 
H- 

nz::::. i>..^ z'^^-.edi... 


5-fT|T  FTTf’sft  STWI^rff 
Lai  Bahadur  Shastri  Academy 
of  Administration 
TT^fr 

MUSSOORIE 

2?^r5rJT 

LIBRARY 

ar^TTfccT  if’ilfr 

Accession  No.... 


^sT 

C/ass  No. 


101991 

LBSNAA 


An  English  Translation  of 

SATYARTH  PRAK  ASH 


“AUM” 


An  English  Translation 

OF  THE 

Satyarth  Prakash 

Literally  : Expose  of  Right  Sense  (of  Vedic  Religion) 


maharshi 

SWAMI  DAYANAND  SARASWATt 

'^The  Luther  of  India” 

BEING 

A Guide  to  Vedic  Hermeneutics 


BY 

Late  Shri  Durga  Prasad 


JAN  CYAN  PRAKASHAN 

NEW  DELHI-5  (India) 


Published  by 

JAN  CYAN  PRAKASHAN 
1597,  Hardhian  Singh  Road 
New  Delhi-5  (India) 


with  the  subsidy  from 

I  Rai  Sahib  Chaudhari  Pratap  Singh  Trust,  Karnal 

II  Shri  Narendra  Gaji,  Suva  (Fiji) 

III  Members  of  Jan  Cyan  (Monthly)  who  helped  in  publishing 
this  sacred  book 


Editors 

Acharya  Vaidyanath  Shastri 
Acharya  Jagdish  Vidyarthi  M.A. 
and 

Bharaiendra  Nath 


Price  : Rs.  10/- 

Cloth-bound  Rs.  12/- 


First  Edition  Second  Edition 
May,  1908  December,  1970 


Printed  at 

The  Raisina  Printery,  4 Chamelian  Road,  Delhi-6 


PUBLISHER’S  NOTE 


One  desirous  of  finding  the  fundamentals  of  truth,  essence  of  true 
knowledge  and  the  splendid  pattern  of  character  building  blended 
together,  must  turn  to  the  pages  of  Satyarth  Prakash  (The  Light 
of  Truth)  which  is  the  magnum  opus  of  the  great  Indian  sage  who 
appeared  on  the  scene  in  the  19th  century.  This  is  the  monumental 
work  of  one  of  the  greatest  and  the  fore- most  sons  of  India  who  had 
never  bowed  down  before  falsehood  and  never  discriminated  between 
man  and  man  and  who  remained  a seeker  and  propagator  of  truth 
throughout  his  whole  life  and  who  lived  and  died  for  upholding  truth. 
Satyarth  Prakash  which  he  has  left  as  an  imperishable  legacy  to  his 
countrymen  and  to  the  world  at  large  is  an  embodiment  of  the  genius 
of  the  master. 

Swami  Dayanand  Saraswati,  the  author  of  Satyarth  Prakash,  was, 
no  doubt,  a World  Teacher.  He  was  a true  son  of  God  and  wanted 
to  see  every  human  being  like-wise.  He  had  the  credit  for  having 
revolutionised  the  human  thought  and  turned  it  into  healthy  channels, 
especially  through  his  work.  He  wanted  to  see  the  individual  and 
the  society  fully  developed— physically,  morally  and  spiritually,  guided 
by  the  light  of  Truth  as  well  as  the  forces  of  love  and  joy,  peace  and 
prosperity.  Satyarth  Prakash  presents  a picture  of  the  reconstructed 
society  based  on  priceless  traditions  of  the  Vedic  culti^xe  h^flioniously 
adjusted  to  modern  conditions  and  environments.'^ 

It  is  an  irony  of  fate  that  a large  number  of  world  people  did 
not  try  to  assess  the  life  and  teachings  of  Dayanand  in  their  true 
perspective.  The  path  he  has  shown  may  or  may  not  be  gainful,  but 
it  is  sure  that  it  can  never  be  baneful.  A man  treading  on  that  path 
cannot  lie  drifted  from  enjoying  peace  and  love.  He  chalked  out 
such  a grand  scheme  of  life  as  may  enable  a man  to  constantly  go 
ahead  from  birth  to  death  smiling,  and  not  weeping  and  wailing. 

The  world  of  Swami  Dayanand’s  golden  dreams  had  no  scope 
for  barriers  between  man  and  man.  He  wanted  and  tried  to  convert 
the  whole  mankind  into  one  family  by  doing  away  with  the  obstacles 
which  divided  it  on  the  artificial  basis  of  sex,  race,  colour,  creed  and 
loyalties—local,  regional  and  national.  This  work  of  Dayanand  had 
certainly  kindled  a flame.  But  it  was  a flame  of  all  consuming  and 
all  purfying  fire.  Swami  Dayanand,  the  inspired  son  of  God,  kindled 
the  fire  not  merely  for  Aryas  but  for  all  who  look  for  the  redemption 
of  humanity. 

The  Satyarth  Prakash  contains  sum  and  substance  and  the  great 
and  essential  truths  of  the  Veda,  the  oldest  revealed  book  in  the 
library  of  mankind,  on  the  authority  of  which  the  author  of  Satyarth 
Prakash  had  placed  his  unflinching  faith  and  reliance  and  had  based 
all  his  teachings.  It  was  he,  who  had  opened  the  closed  portals  of 
the  Vedas  to  the  whole  mankind. 


The  work  which  we  are  presenting  to  the  public  is  the  touch- 
stone on  which  truth  and  untruth  are  tested  It  is  also  an  indi^tor 
of  light  and  right  path  to  those  who  may  be  groping  in  the  ^ 
can,  by  its  thorough  study,  be  able  to  know  themselves  and  God  and 
may  make  their  lives  shining  and  successful  by  having  communion 
with  Him. 

We  crave  the  indulgence  of  every  man  of  understanding  to  make 
an  impartial  study  of  this  great  treatise.  We  are  sure  they  will  find 
it  most  advantageous,  free  from  any  discrepancy  or  anything  contrary 
to  the  canons  of  truth  and  common  sense. 

To  the  present  day  world  which  stands  torn  asunder  by  mutual 
discord,  animosity,  hatred,  and  to  mankind  which  is  steeped  in  igno- 
rance and  addicted  to  the  satisfaction  of  animal  appetites  and  which 
is  facing  annihilation  like  a ship  in  the  ocean  turning  up  and  down, 
we  offer  Satyarth  Prakash  as  a light-house. 

It  is  wrong  to  think  Rishi  Dayanand  as  a narrow  sectarian  pre- 
aching hatred  towards  other  faiths.  His  criticism  of  some  religious 
beliefs  and  practices  is  a beautiful  instance  of  his  independence  of 
thought  and  judgement.  Freedom  of  thought  is  not  a thing  to  be 
afraid  of.  It  is  this  that  leads  to  true  progress.  If  Rishi  Dayanand 
has  criticised  some  religious  beliefs  in  the  Satyarth  Prakash,  he  has 
done  a right  thing.  The  followers  of  other  religious  faiths  should  not 
be  perturbed  over  it.  It  is  their  duty  to  think  over  those  points 
impartially  and  to  reform  their  views  in  the  light  of  Rishi’s  well  meant 
criticism.  This  will  be  helpful  to  them.  He  was  a cosmopolitan. 
His  love  was  universal.  In  his  generous  heart  there  was  equal  love 
for  all  people  whether  they  were  Aryas,  Muslims,  Jains,  Christians  or 
Sanatanists;  none  was  outside  the  pale  of  his  universal  love. 

Our  hearty  thanks  are  due  to  Dr.  Bhawanilal  Bharatiya,  who 
supplied  this  rare  book,  and  Acharya  Jagdish  Vidyarthi  and  Prof. 
Vedavrata  Vidyalankar  who  have  given  us  their  active  cooperation,  in 
this  undertaking.  Without  their  co-operation  it  was  not  possible  to 
bring  out  this  book. 

With  great  pleasure  and  feeling  of  satisfaction  we  present  this 
publication  to  all  well-meaning  seekers  of  truth,  not  only  of  India  but 
also  of  the  whole  world. 


— Bharatendra  Nath 

Jan-Gyan  Prakashan 
1597,  Hardhian  Singh  Road 
New  Delhi-5  (India) 


AN  APPRECIATION 


Maharshi  Dayananda  Saraswati  (1824-1883),  the  founder  of  the  Arya 
Samaj,  was  a profound  Vedic  scholar  and  a great  orator.  In  the 
nineteenth  century  he  appeared  as  a great  teacher  of  monotheism. 
The  medieval  dogmatic  Brahmin  teachers  had  closed  the  doors  of 
Vedic  wisdom  to  all  except  those  who  were  Brahmins  by  birth.  Swami 
Dayananda  opened  the  doors  of  Vedic  wisdom  to  all  people.  He 
propounded  that  it  was  the  inherent  right  of  all  human  beings  not 
only  of  India  (or  Aryavarta  as  he  called  this  land)  but  of  the  whole 
world  to  read  and  study  the  Vedas.  Swami  Dayananda  believed  in 
the  powers  of  deep  contemplation  and  absorption  and  he  was  also  a 
teacher  of  Yoga.  The  Sa  yarth  Prakash  is  not  only  the  Bible  of 
the  Arya  Samaj  but  it  is  a great  book  which  contains  the  mature  re- 
flections and  generalizations  of  a man  of  great  experience,  knowledge 
and  widom. 

In  this  book  we  find  that  not  only  the  worship  of  the  pristine 
and  eternal  Godhead  is  preached  but  a curriculum  of  study  is  provided 
which  can  initiate  a person  into  the  deep  mysteries  of  Vedic  wisdom. 
Swami  Dayananda  has  in  this  book  praised  the  pursuit  of  moral  and 
spiritual  life  and  has  profusely  quoted  from  the  Hindu  scriptures  to 
corroborate  his  notions. 

Swami  Dayananda  has  been  called  the  Martin  Luther  of  India. 
Just  as  Luther  fought  against  the  Pope,  so  Swami  Dayananda  challenged 
all  the  organised  sects,  denominations  and  churches  which  stood  for 
monopoly  of  religion  and  exploited  the  people.  In  the  second  part  of 
the  book  he  has  denounced  some  of  the  irrational  and  unfounded  notions 
and  teachings  both  of  Indian  religious  sects  as  well  as  foreign  religious 
denominations  in  order  to  clear  the  path  for  the  enshrinement  of  true 
Vedic  monotheism,  moral  purity,  social  equality  and  justice. 

Swami  Dayananda  was  one  of  the  greatest  Vedic  scholars  that 
this  country  has  produced.  He  was  in  the  line  of  Patanjali,  Vyasa, 
Jaimini  and  Yaska.  He  had  unrivalled  command  over  Sanskritic 
learning  and  this  book  contains  ample  testimony  to  this  profound 
learning  in  the  ancient  lore.  The  Satyarth  Prakash  was  translated 
into  English  long  ago  by  Shri  Durga  Prasad.  It  had  become  a rare 
book  and  was  not  available  in  the  market.  Its  reprint  will  be  welcome 
to  everybody,  particularly  to  the  thinkers,  philosophers  and  scholars 
of  the  world,  who  might  derive  great  benefit  from  the  message  of 
Swami  Dayananda  and  propagate  it  for  the  good  of  humanity.  I con- 
gratulate the  publishers  for  having  embarked  upon  this  great  venture. 


Sarvadeshik  Arya  Pratinidhi  Sabba 
Rama  Lila  Ground,  New  Delhi  1 (India) 


— D.  Ram 

(Padma  Bhushan) 
President 


“The  world  is  fettered  by  the  chain  forged  by 
superstition  and  ignorance.  I have  come  to  snap 
asunder  that  chain  and  to  set  slaves  at  liberty.  It  is 
contrary  to  my  mission  to  have  people  deprived  of 
their  freedom.” 


“Though  I was  born  in  Aryavarta  (India)  and  live 
in  it,  yet  just  as  I do  not  defend  the  falsehood  of 
the  faiths  and  religions  of  this  country,  but  expose 
them  fully:  in  like  manner,  I deal  with  the  religions  of 
other  countries.  I treat  the  foreigners  in  the  same 
way  as  my  own  countrymen,  so  far  as  the  elevation 
of  the  human  race  is  concerned.” 


“Therefore,  the  purpose  of  my  life  is  the  extirpa- 
tion of  evils;  introduction  of  truth  in  thought,  speech, 
and  deeds;  the  preservation  of  unity  of  religion;  the 
expulsion  of  mutual  enmity:  the  extension  of  friendly 
intercourse:  and  the  advancement  of  public  happiness 
by  reciprocal  subservience  of  the  human  family.  May 
the  grace  of  the  Almighty  God  and  the  consent  and 
co-operation  of  the  learned  soon  spread  these 
doctrines  all  over  the  world  to  facilitate  every- 
body's endeavour  in  the  advancement  of  virtue, 
wealth,  godly  pleasure,  and  salvation,  so  that  peace, 
prosperity,  and  happiness  may  ever  reign  in  the 
world.  AMEN!” 


- DAYANAND  SARASWATI 


PROLEGOMENA 


it  struck  me  as  a great  surprise,  when  I came  to  learn  that  ‘Ian- 
Gyan’  management  had  decided  to  undertake  the  publication  of 
Durga  Prasad’s  translation  of  "Satyarth  Prakash\  The  task  was 
tremendously  bigger  and  the  resources  at  hand  comparatively  smaller. 
Thiii^enture  on  the  part  of  such  a scanty  publication  was  to  embrace 
al(^l  surrender  on  the  altar  of  martyrdom  in  pregnant  pursuif  of 
celebrating  adventure.' 

This  was  a utopian  plan  of  the  implement  and  strategy  of  that  of 
the  inventive  decision  of  that  fabulous  bird-couple  who,  deprived  of 
their  eggs,  which  were  swept  away  by  the  turbulent  tide-waves  of  the 
sea,  resorted  to  the  force  of  filling  water  of  the  sea  in  their  beaks  and 
throwing  it  out  to  make  the  sea  dry.  But  the  dint  of  preseverance 
augmented  by  the  sentiments  of  “Heart  within  and  God  overhead” 
does  not  prostrate  to  the  fate  of  disappointment  and  frustration.  It 
was  not  anybody’s  own  job,  it  was  the  job  of  the  whole  Aryan  world 
and  was  aimed  at  the  good  of  all  mankind.  It  is  why  the  manage- 
ment succeeded  in  its  venture  and  the  work  undertaken  by  it  came  to 
completion  and  inspite  of  all  difficulties  and  adversities  the  book  is 
going  into  the  hand  of  public. 

*Satyarth  Prakash*  is  the  masterpiece  of  the  great  Swami  Daya- 
nanda’s  works.  Emergence  of  the  book  from  the  great  pen  of  great 
Swami  is  an  epochraaking  event  in  the  history  of  the  science  of  Reli- 
gion. It  revolutionised  the  religious  thinking  of  mankind  and  infused 
a new  missionary  spirit  in  the  vien  of  the  degenerated  Vedic  Religion 
which  had  become  the  target  of  bitter  attacks  of  the  dogmatic  alien 
faiths.  It  did  not  merely  reorient  the  Vedic  Religion  but  gave 
also  a true  perspective  to  the  world  religions  in  the  search  of  the 
path  of  truth.  Rigmaroles  and  superstitious  beliefs  of  the  man-made 
religions,  which  had  taken  the  place  of  fundamentals  of  religion,  were 
doomed  their  ill  fate.  Scarcely  there  is  any  religion  in  the  world  which 
has  not  felt  the  impact  of  ^Satyarth  Prakash*.  All  the  religions  of 
the  world  realised  their  weaknesses  and  sooner  or  later  put  their  houses 
in  order.  Even  those  religions  which  preached  that  there  was  no 
interference  of  reason  in  their  religious  matters  now  have  adopted  the 
method  of  logic  to  prove  them.  Initiation  of  reason  and  argument  in 
the  religious  matter  is  such  a remarkable  impact  the  credit  of  which 
directly  goes  to  the  'Satyarth  Prakash\  The  highest  and  ever  re- 
maining aspect  of  'Satyarth  Prakash"  is  that  it  brought  the  mankind 
back  to  the  Vedas.  Vedic  studies  are  going  on  impetuously  in  all  the 
parts  of  the  world. 

What  is  Truth  ? How  can  one  comprehend  it  ? Besides,  there  is 
also  the  question  of  its  enlightenment  to  a person.  If  truth  is  exactly 
known  it  should  be  made  known  to  others  also.  The  Satyarth 
Prakash  of  Swami  Dayananda  lays  down  those  specific  tests  which 


X 


should  be  applied  in -arriving  at  truth  or  comprehending  the  truth. 
These  tests  are  as  follows  : 

(a)  The  Veda  and  the  nature  of  God.  All  that  stands  in  the 
exact  conformity  to  the  teachings  of  the  Vedas,  nature,  attributes  and 
characteristics  of  God  is  right;  the  reverse  is  wrong. 

(b)  Laws  of  Nature.  All  that  tallies  with  the  laws  of  nature  is 
true  and  the  reverse  untrue. 

(c)  The  practice  and  teaching  of  the  apias,  the  pious,  truthful, 
unprejudiced,  honest  and  learned  men. 

(d)  The  purity  and  conviction  of  one’s  own  self  or  soul.  _ What- 
ever is  good  for  you  is  good  for  others  and  so  on.  • 

(e)  Eight  kinds  of  Pramanas.  These  are— direct  perception,  in- 
ference, analogy,  testimony,  history,  deduction,  possibility  and  negation. 

One  cannot  depend  on  a single  test  in  arriving  at  truth.  Before 
drawing  any  conclusion  one  should  necessarily  weigh  out  oneself  in 
different  ways.  Sometimes  excessive  exercise  of  analytical  tenden- 
cies leads  to  misapprehensions.  Sometimes  a thinker  creates  un- 
toward confusion  by  becoming  too  analytical.  ‘Nothing  exists  as 
nothing  persists’  is  the  argument  of  such  a kind  of  excessively  analy- 
tical tendency.  In  an  attempt  to  know  the  whole  by  the  study  of  its 
parts  one  sometimes  loses  the  synthetic  significance.  There  arises 
out  such  occasions  when  we  do  disbelieve  in  perception  and  inference 
both  because  we  find  ourselves  unable  to  draw  a line  of  demarcation 
between  the  regions  of  the  two.  Our  process  of  apprehending  pheno- 
mena is  complicated  one.  It  begins  from  perception,  ends  into  the 
realization  and  again  it  issues  forth  through  the  processes  of  memory, 
dreams,  recollections,  speculations,  etc.  Thus,  in  the  cases  of  a syn- 
thetic truth  the  analysis  is  sure  to  lead  misapprehension. 

The  desire  of  enlightening  others  the  truth  apprehended  is  an 
urge  of  human  understanding.  But  what  is  this  enlightenment  ? 
Enlightening  other  person  the  established  truth  means  to  free  him 
from  prejudice  and  superstitions.  This  task  is  performed  by  the 
Satyarth  Prakash  and  hence  it  is  known  as  Satyarth  Prakash,  the 
Light  of  Truth. 

The  Supreme  Intelligent  Power  acting  behind  the  worldly  scenes 
or  phenomena  is  God.  He  is  Brahman,  the  Supreme  Being.  He  is 
not  only  the  creator  of  the  universe  but  he  is  also  the  ultimate  pri- 
mal ground  of  knowledge.  He  is  one  and  hence  second  to  none. 
Brahma,  Vishnu,  Rudra,  etc.  are  his  names.  He  is  one  and  only  one 
but  called  by  many  names.  One  supreme  power  is  called  by  various 
names,  it  is  the  main  theme  of  the  first  chapter  of  Satyarth  Prakash. 

Education  is  a potential  means  of  man’s  making.  This  should 
be  free  from  all  sorts  of  pressures.  Belief  in  horoscopes,  astrological 
predictions,  demons,  goblins,  etc.  are  such  superstitions  which  uproot 
the  tendency  of  learning.  These  are  the  pressures  of  great  effectivity. 
They  should  be  eradicated  and  the  mind  of  child  should  be  totally 
freed  from  them.  Father,  mother,  and  teacher  are  the  real  instruc- 
tors of  a child.  Discipline  takes  root  in  child  under  the  guidance  of 


xi 


these  three  preceptors.  . Second  chapter  of  Satyarth  Prakash  deals 
with  these  items. 

In  the  third  chapter  the  most  important  subject  dealt  with  is  the 
system  of  education.  Indigenous  system  of  education  is  the  teacher’s 
Home  System  of  education.  It  is  called  Gurukul  system.  Satyarth 
Prakash  gives  a vast  curriculum  of  study.  How  should  a strict  dis- 
cipline be  maintained,  has  been  elucidated  by  the  author.  Education 
is  not  only  concerned  with  the  training  of  heart,  head  and  hand.  Its 
mere  concern  is  not  only  providing  with  the  means  of  developing 
mind.  Physical  development  and  the  development  of  soul  are  also 
the  aims  of  education.  Besides  strict  observation  of  continence  and 
austerity  education  cannot  be  fruitful.  Relation  between  teachers 
and  taught  should  be  very  cordial. 

Girls  like  boys  should  be  sent  to  Gurukul  for  their  education. 
The  institutions  for  teaching  girls  and  boys  should  be  at  a distant 
place.  There  should  not  be  co-education  of  boys  and  girls.  Boys 
and  girls  should  begin  their  studies  in  their  respective  Gurukulas 
after  bearing  the  sacred  thread  given  by  their  Acharyas.  Their  study 
begins  after  the  pronouncement  of  Gayatri  Verse  with  its  meaning. 
The  subjects  from  the  grammar  of  ashtadhyayi  to  the  Vedas  should  be 
taught  to  the  students.  The  curricula  consist  of  the  four  Vedas  with 
six  limbs,  four  upvedas,  six  systems  of  philosophy,  Ramayana  of 
Valmiki,  Mahabharata  and  Manusmriti  excluding  interpolated 
portions. 

The  author  of  Satyarth  Prakash  gives  equal  rights  to  men  and 
women,  the  three  Varnas  and  the  Shudras  in  the  study  of  the  Veda. 
Women  and  Shudras  can  study  the  Veda  and  in  this  connection 
they  have  the  same  rights  which  the  Brahmana,  Kshatriya  and  Vaishyas 
have  held.  In  discussing  the  education  with  its  various  problems  the 
following  points  have  also  been  discussed  in  this  third  chapter: 

1.  Contemplation  and  5 yajnas, 

2.  Practice  of  yoga  and  deep-breathing. 

3.  Advantage  of  yajna. 

4.  Profit  of  pronouncing  Mantras  in  yajna. 

5.  The  five  tests  of  arriving  at  truth. 

6.  Synthesis  of  six  systems  of  philosophy. 

7.  The  various  stages  of  body  and  strict  observation  of  conti- 
nence. 

8.  The  code  of  good  conduct. 

9.  The  importance  of  Yamas  and  Niyamas  in  the  context  of 
austerity. 

10.  Importance  of  the  study  of  Arsha  literature^  completion  of 
education,  study  of  the  Vedas,  etc. 

After  completion  of  education  and  the  life  of  celibacy  there  comes 
the  stage  of  marriage.  Married  life  is  the  household  life.  This  is  the 
nursery  of  many  virtues.  Society  cannot  survive  without  family. 


Family  in  its  turn  is  dependent  on  married  life.  Therefore,  household 
life  has  very  remarkable  place  in  one’s  life.  In  society  it  plays  a very 
important  role.  Continuity  of  existence  of  a living  being  implies  the 
continuity  of  progeny.  Procreation  is  the  main  factor  of  married  life. 
According  to  the  Vedas  there  are  four  ashramas.  The  whole  life  of  a 
man  is  divided  in  four  parts  and  these  are  known  as  four  ashramas. 
They  are— Brahmacharya,  Grihastha,  Vanaprastha  and  Sanyasa,  In 
the  Vedic  society  there  is  classification  of  four  These  are 

known  as  Brahman,  Kshatriya,  Vaishya  and  Shudra.  This  distinc- 
tion is  dependent  on  worth  and  not  on  the  birth.  In  the  degenarated 
Hindu  caste  system  Varna  is  based  on  birth.  But  Veda  and  Swami 
Dayananda  take  the  Varna  by  merit,  action  and  culture.  Varna  is  a 
selection.  Selection  depends  on  quality,  action  and  cultivated  culture. 
It  cannot  be  decided  on  the  basis  of  birth.  If  birth  be  treated  as 
main  factor  in  this  classification,  there  may  arise  many  problems  which 
could  not  and  would  not  be  solved. 

How  do  these  four  Varnas  play  their  role  in  society  is  also  a 
knotty  problem.  To  solve  this,  their  duties  have  been  prescribed. 
The  following  are  the  duties  of  the  four  Varnas: 

Bramhana. — Teaching  the  Vedas,  study  of  the  Vedas,  performing 
yajnas  and  conducting  yajnas  and  rituals  of  the  others,  practice 
of  munificence  and  acceptance  of  remuneration  from  the  yajmanas 
after  conducting  yajnas,  rituals,  etc. 

Kshatriya. — Administration  and  protection  of  the  subjects,  prac- 
tice of  munificence,  performance  of  yajna  and  the  study  of  the  Vedas, 
non-involvement  in  passion,  etc, 

Vaishya. — Domestication  of  useful  animals  like  cows,  horses 
etc.,  practice  of  munificence,  performance  of  yajna,  agriculture, 
trading,  and  earning  lowest  rate  of  interest  on  money  given  as  loan. 

Shudra. — Labour. 

These  are  the  main  topics  discussed  in  the  fourth  chapter  of 
Satyarth  Prakash  besides  many  other  fugitive  points  with  their 
details. 

The  fifth  chapter  of  the  book  is  exclusively  related  with  the 
discussion  of  Vanaprastha  and  Sanyasa  ashramas.  The  nature,  qualities 
and  duties  of  these  ashramas  have  been  comprehensively  discussed 
and  dealt  with  in  this  chapter.  A Sanyasi  is  expected  to  live  the  life 
of  austerity  and  to  do  the  good  of  all.  He  should  devote  this  part  of 
his  life  in  meditation  of  God  and  attaining  emancipation  from  the 
worldly  bondage  by  practising  the  principles  of  yoga.  He  should 
dedicate  his  life  to  deliver  good  to  mankind.  He  should  not  have  any 
worldly  attachment.  His  acts  should  be  detached  and  conducive  to 
spiritual  uplift  of  his  own  as  well  as  of  others.  He  should  preach 
whatever  is  good  for  all. 

A Vanaprastha  resigns  his  pleasure  and  embraces  voluntary 
austerity.  He,  in  this  stage,  has  to  prepare  himself  for  leading  the  life 
of  resignation.  He  should  sever  all  the  domestic  attachments  and 
devote  his  time  in  attaining  knowledge.  This  attainment  would  make 
him  fit  for  Sanyasa.  He  should  live  in  jungle  and  should  depend  on 
the  fruit,  eatable  roots,  etc.  for  the  purpose  of  his  diet. 


Swami  Dayananda  was  a political  philosopher.  He  was  not  a 
political  leader.  The  sixth  chapter  of  his  Satyarth  Prakash  serves  the 
purpose  of  political  philosophy.  Swamiji  was  the  first  person  who 
gave  democracy  a practical  shape  in  his  Aryasamaj.  But  he  knew 
the  draw-backs  of  democracy.  He  also  knew  that  democracy  in  a 
state  where  people  are  uneducated  at  large,  cannot  bring  good 
result.  Those  who  do  not  know  the  real  value  of  their  votes  cannot 
derive  advantage  from  this  system.  Realizing  this  fact  Swamiji 
declared  in  the  sixth  chapter  of  Satyarth  Prakash  : “The  opinion  or 
vote  of  a learned  has  more  weight  and  value  than  that  of  hundred  lay- 
men and  the  opinion  of  a learned  Sanyasi  has  more  value  than  that  of 
hundred  learned.”  This  is,  in  reality,  a check  on  the  indiscriminate 
practice  of  democracy.  This  gives  us  a very  clear-cut  opinion  about 
the  right  of  enfranchisement.  Right  of  enfranchisement  should  be 
given  to  only  those  people  who  know  and  are  able  to  know  the  real 
value  of  it.  Otherwise  bad  result  would  be  consequential. 

Principles  of  the  Political  Science 

Undermentioned  are  the  principles  of  the  political  science  of 
great  Swami  Dayananda  Saraswati : — 

1.  President.— Whosoever  among  the  members  of  the  assembly 
be  the  most  excellent  as  regards  qualifications,  character  and  tempera- 
ment should  be  made  the  President  of  the  state.  He  should  be  be- 
loved of  all,  impartial  and  just  consumer  of  the  wicked  and  mightiest 
of  the  mighty. 

2.  Presidential  election  —Learned  people  should  elect  that  man 
as  their  president  who  is  impartial,  in  every  event  learned  and  court- 
eous and  friend  of  all  and  let  the  whole  world  be  free  from  enemies. 

3.  Democracy. — The  people  should  see  that  their  country  is 
administered  by  an  assembly  and  not  by  a single  person.  No  single 
individual  should  be  allowed  to  be  vested  with  power  of  government. 

4.  Supremacy  of  people. — ^The  president  and  other  government 
officers  should  never  act  against  the  will  of  the  people.  The  absolute 
monarch,  intoxicated  with  power,  ruins  the  subjects  and  eats  them  up. 
There  should  be  no  absolute  and  unristricted  power  in  a president. 

5.  Sovereignty  of  Parliament.— The  President  should  do  noth- 
ing without  the  approval  of  the  members  of  parliament.  None  should 
override  the  decision  of  a deciumvirate  or  a triumvirate,  the  body  of 
ten  or  three  members  respectively. 

6.  Ideal  democratic  system. — The  parliament  should  be  under 
the  president;  the  president  under  the  parliament,  the  president  and 
the  parliament  both  under  people,  and  the  people  under  the  president 
and  the  parliament.  There  can  be  no  ruler  without  the  ruled  and  no 
ruled  without  the  ruler.  All  should  be  independent  in  their  own 
spheres  but  inter-dependent  in  the  matters  of  common  interest. 

7.  Ministerial  qualifications.— The  ministers  of  council  must  be 
indigenous  national  of  the  country,  fearless,  experts,  of  unerring 
aims,  of  respectable  familes  and  well  tried. 


xiv 


8.  Parliament  Member’s  qualifications.— If  a man  distinctively 
qualified  in  all  the  branches  of  knowledge,  a Sanyasi  of  a very  high  cali- 
bre gives  a ruling  on  a certain  subject,  it  should  be  regarded  as  lawful 
and  binding  and  the  decision  of  millions  of  ignorant  people  should 
never  be  accepted.  A mere  collection  of  thousands  of  irresponsible, 
uneducated  and  ignorant  masses  cannot  be  called  an  assembly.  There- 
fore, the  membership  should  be  open  only  to  learned  and  meritorious 
persons. 

9.  Distribution  of  Portfolios. — Everybody  should  be  entrusted 
with  work  he  is  most  qualified  for. 

10.  Foreign  Policy. — One  should  never  pick  up  quarrel  with  a 
righteous  king.  He  should  always  maintain  friendly  relations  with 
him.  But  if  a vicious  king  gathers  strength,  he  has  to  be  subdued. 
When  victory  has  been  achieved,  he  or  his  survivors  should  be  bound 
by  a treaty  to  behave  well  in  future  to  govern  righteously  and  accord- 
ing to  justice  and  suitable  advisers  be  appointed  lest  there  should  be 
trouble  again. 

11.  Treatment  of  Enemy  Prisoners. — When  the  war  is  over  and 
there  is  no  likelihood  of  it  again,  the  prisoners  should  be  released  and 
sent  home  with  due  respect. 

12.  Punishment.— Punishment  must  always  be  exemplary.  The 
greater  the  person,  severer  the  punishment.  The  king  and  the 
ministers  should  receive  one  thousand  and  eight  hundred  times  (res- 
pectively) the  punishment  inflicted  on  an  ordinary  person. 

13.  League  of  Nations.— There  should  be  an  all  world  assem- 
bly where  heads  of  states  should  sit  together  and  discuss  matters 
concerning  the  whole  world. 

14.  Place  of  God. — We  are  the  subjects  of  God.  God  is  our 
ruler.  We  are  his  humble  servants.  May  he  be  gracious  to  us  and 
bless  us  with  the  power  of  administration  and  let  us  be  instrumental 
in  propagating  his  law. 

The  other  matters  like  administration  of  justice,  allegiance  to  law, 
defence,  taxation,  etc.  are  also  given  in  the  sixth  chapter  of  the  book. 

The  seventh,  eighth  and  ninth  chapers  of  Satyarth  Prakash 
are  concerned  with  the  philosophical  outlook.  The  philosophy  of 
Satyarth  Prakash  is  not  at  all  different  from  the  philosophy  of  the 
Vedas.  The  seventh  chapter  first  deals  with  the  thirtythree  devas 
which  are  the  physical  and  spiritual  substances  playing  their  parts  in 
the  panorama  of  the  universe.  Discussion  on  these  devas  is  by  the 
way.  It  is  in  the  context  of  main  discussion  on  the  existence  and 
nature  of  God.  By  giving  the  description  of  33  devas  it  has  been 
emphasised  that  God  is  only  one  and  second  to  none.  There  are  not 
many  gods  in  the  Vedas.  God  is  one  and  only  one.  Plurality  of  God 
is  completely  unthinkable  in  the  Vedic  philosophy.  God  is  the  creator. 
He  creates  the  world,  sustains  it  and  dissolves  it  at  proper  time.  He 
is  omnipresent  and  hence  there  cannot  be  any  image  or  form  of  him. 
He  is  unbegotten  and  imperishable.  He  does  not  assume  any  form  or 
figure.  The  talk  of  his  incarnation  or  descendency  is  a great  folly 
and  is  totally  ruled  out.  He  is  just  and  merciful. 


XV 


He  is  omniscient  and  omnipotent.  To  describe  Him  omnipotent 
is  meant  to  contradict  making  impossibilities  possibilities  by  Him. 
He  cannot  make  another  God.  Whatever  is  impossible  cannot  be 
made  possible  by  Him.  He  is  imperishable  by  His  nature  and  thus 
being  omnipotent  in  its  extremity  cannot  perish  Him.  His  omnipotence 
implies  that  He  can  create,  subsist,  and  annihilate  the  world  without 
taking  any  help  from  other  and  does  whatever  is  right,  exact,  and 
possible.  Being  omnipotent  He  cannot  assume  body  or  figure  as  He 
is  formless  and  unbegotten  by  His  nature. 

He  is  omniscient.  His  knowledge  has  no  bound.  His  knowledge 
is  not  limited  by  the  circumstances  of  time  and  s{>ace. 

On  the  ground  of  His  omnipresence  an  idol  or  figure  cannot  be 
worshippable.  He  is  not  pervading  only  within  of  the  things  but  also 
without  of  the  things.  His  omnipresence  is  within  and  without.  It 
cannot  be  localized  or  spotted. 

He  is  just.  He  does  not  forgive  the  sinners.  A soul  doing  evil 
act  cannot  escape  His  justice.  He  administers  justice  and  awards 
the  reward  or  punishment,  as  the  case  may  be,  to  jivas  according  to 
their  good  or  bad  acts.  Souls  are  free  in  their  action  but  dependent 
in  the  matter  of  getting  award.  They  reap  the  fruit  of  their  actions 
under  God’s  dispensation  of  justice. 

Thus  jivas  are  free  in  their  action  and  dependent  on  God  in  the 
results. 

God  is  eternal  by  nature  and  soul  is  also  eternal  by  nature.  God 
never  assumes  body,  but  soul  according  to  its  previous  acts,  comes  in 
the  world  and  assumes  various  forms.  Its  union  with  figure  or  body  is 
called  birth  and  disunion  is  described  as  death.  Birth  and  death  occur 
in  body,  not  in  soul.  Soul  is  eternal  and  it  assumes  series  of  birth 
according  to  its  actions.  It  takes  birth  and  dies  and  takes  birth  again 
and  so  on.  Souls  abide  by  the  law  of  metempsychosis  unless  and 
until  they  attain  emancipation.  The  wheel  of  re-incarnation  turns  in 
frequency  unless  the  ignorance  is  totally  uprooted.  Law  of  action  is 
very  unique. 

Souls  are  neither  the  parts  of  God  nor  the  results  of  physical 
amalgamation.  God  is  omniscient  and  being  so  He  does  not  become 
jiva  due  to  ignorance.  Ignorance  can  never  influence  His  omniscience. 
If  it  is  influenced  by  ignorance  He  can  never  be  free  from  it.  In  the 
case  He  affected  with  ignorance  becomes  jiva.  He  would  never  become 
God  again  as  the  ignorance  affecting  Him  cannot  be  uprooted  by  any 
other.  If  God  Himself  is  affected  with  ignorance  who  is  else  to  remove 
affection?  God  can  never  be  jiva  and  no  jiva  can  ever  be  God.  There 
is  a vast  difference  in  the  nature  of  God  and  soul.  This  difference 
cannot  be  obliterated.  Therefore,  God  and  soul  are  separate  eternal 
entities. 

Adoration,  supplication  and  communion  with  God  are  such  kinds 
of  acts  which  every  person  should  perform  for  his  well-being.  By 
these  acts  he  is  not  going  to  please  God  but  he  is  going  to  correct  the 
evils  in  his  own  life.  Adoration  is  not  for  appeasement  of  God.  It 
is  for  our  own  good.  We  know  the  attributes  of  God  and  make  them 


xvi 


the/  ideals  of  our  life.  Standard  of  right  and  wrong,  and  good  and 
evil  can  be  estalished  by  the  attributes  and  acts  of  God.  It  is  why 
adoration  is  necessary  for  a devotee.  Supplication  uproots  egoism 
having  its  root  in  our  mind  and  makes  our  conscience  pure.  Purity  of 
conscience  leads  to  spiritual  progress.  Communion  with  God  brings 
one  nearer  to  his  life’s  goal.  Emancipation  is  that  goal  for  the  attain- 
ment of  which  one  emerged  to  float  in  the  tides  of  the  world.  By 
adoration,  supplication  and  communion  one  can  have  the  contact  of 
his  master,  the  lord  of  the  universe  to  whome  only  all  worships  are 
due.  He  is  the  summum  bonum  of  man’s  life. 

The  Vedas  are  four  and  they  are  the  revelation  of  G^od.  Great 
Swami  treated  them  as  supreme  authority  in  the  matter  of  dharma. 
He  gave  emphasis  on  the  study  of  the  Vedas.  In  his  opinion  they  are 
the  knowledge  of  God  who  revealed  them  for  the  good  of  mankind. 
Revelation  refutes  the  idea  of  evolution  of  thought  and  speech.  It  is 
God  Himself  who  reveals  thought  and  language  in  the  beginning  of 
the  creation.  The  revelation  took  place  in  the  conscience  of  Agni, 
Vayu,  Aditya  and  Angira.  God  is  the  upholder  of  eternal  law.  He 
is  the  controller  of  the  universe.  His  laws  are  neither  contrary  nor 
contradictory.  The  Veda  is  his  knowledge  and  the  code  of  His  eternal 
law.  There  can  be  no  language  without  thought  and  no  thought  with- 
out language.  The  Vedas  are  the  thought  and  language  both.  Vedic 
language  was  never  the  language  of  any  people,  country  and  land.  It 
is  the  mother  of  all  languages  but  not  the  language  of  speaking.  The 
Veda  is  eternal  as  it  is  the  knowledge  of  God.  The  term  Veda  can  be 
applied  to  four  Samhitas — Rig,  Yajuh,  Saman,  Atharva  only.  The 
Shakhas  and  Brahmams  are  their  commentaries  and  interpretations. 

The  eighth  chapter  of  Satyarth  Prakash  gives  a very  detailed 
discussion  on  Vedic  ontology  which  is  the  backbone  of  Swami  Daya- 
nanda’s  philosophy.  God,  soul  and  matter  are  the  three  eternal  subs- 
tances which  are  the  root-cause  of  the  universe.  According  to  the 
great  Swami,  God,  soul  and  matter  are  eternal.  There  are  three 
causes— the  efficient  cause,  the  material  cause  and  the  ordinary  cause. 
God  is  the  efficient  cause  while  matter  is  the  material  cause  of  the 
universe.  Souls  are  ordinary  cause.  Brahman,  the  Supreme  Being,  by 
His  efficiency  creates  the  world  out  of  its  material  cause  Prakriti,  the 
matter. 

The  efficient  cause  is  one  which  remains  unchanged  through- 
out but  brings  out  a change  in  the  material  cause.  It  is  an  intelligent 
being  who  designs  and  ordains.  Brahman  who  is  universally  regarded 
as  the  efficient  cause  is  by  Himself  immaterial  and  unchangeable.  How 
can  an  immaterial  being  be  a material  cause  of  the  material  universe  ? 
In  our  experience  we  never  find  an  efficient  cause  becoming  material 
one,  and  if  we  make  such  an  assumption  in  the  case  of  Brahman,  we 
shall  certainly  be  making  an  exception  contrary  to  our  experiences, 
or  an  assumption  which  ourselves  do  not  believe  in,  nor  can  justify. 

The  world  which  we  see  around  us  is  not  an  illusion.  It  has  a 
material  cause  from  which  it  emerged.  Between  cause  and  effect 
there  is  a permanent  relation.  That  is  known  as  causal  relation. 
The  thing  which  has  a causal  relation  cannot  be  an  illusion. 


xvii 


Some  philosophers  regard  all  phenomena  to  be  unreal  like 
dreams  or  like  rope  taken  to  be  a snake  or  a shell  appearing  like 
silver,  or  a mirage  or  an  enchanted  island.  Whatever  appears  is  a 
delusion  and  unreal.  By  imposing  they  mean  mistaking  something 
for  something  else.  But  tiiere  is  fallacy  in  this  analogy.  They  regard 
the  rope  existing  while  the  snake  non-existing.  Does  snake  not 
exist  ? They  would  say  it  does  not  exist  in  the  rope,  it  exists  some- 
where else,  only  its  impression  is  in  the  mind.  If  it  be  so,  then  snake 
as  such  cannot  be  called  at  least  non-existing. 

Satyarth  Prakash  gives  us  the  idea  of  what  is  real  monotheism. 
The  philosophical  schools  are  divided  between  two  camps  on  this  ground 
of  monism.  One  camp  believes  in  materialistic  monism  and  the  other 
accepts  spiritualistic  monism.  The  former  says  that  there  is  only  one 
cause  behind  this  majestic  scene  of  the  world  and  that  is  the  inert 
matter.  The  latter,  quite  contrary  to  this,  accepts  the  existence  of 
only  one  conscious  entity  and  that  entity  is  God.  Again,  the  former 
treats  world  as  real  and  animated  being  as  phantom  like  airy  breath 
resulted  of  various  material  compounds.  The  latter,  on  the  other 
hand,  preaches  the  view  that  the  world  which  we  cognize,  is  a phantas- 
magoria or  illusion  and  the  animated  and  inanimated  objects  are 
being  reflected  in  only  conscious  entity,  the  Brahman.  The  first 
reiterates  that  the  non-sentient  objects  can  never  come  out  of  a senti- 
ent cause  while  the  second  contrarily  maintains  that  sentient  world 
cannot  be  the  result  of  inert  matter.  Thus  both  the  camps,  led  to  their 
logical  extremities,  contradict  each  other.  This  contradiction  demo- 
lishes the  whole  structure  of  their  theories,  leaving  them  to  embrace  a 
negation  and  absurdity  ad  infinitum.  Neither  the  materialistic 
monism  nor  the  spiritualistic  monism  can  exclusively  solve  theriddles 
of  the  universe.  A collective  functioning  of  God,  soul  and  matter,  /.e., 
a trinity  of  entities  is  the  best  possible  solution.  The  monotheism  of 
Satyarth  Prakash  is  quite  different  from  the  monotheism  of  the 
modern  type.  Its  monotheism  is — God,  neither  created  this  world 
out  of  nothing,  nor  emanated  the  world  out  of  Himself;  neither  He  is 
absolutely  indifferent  of  it,  nor  He  is  man’s  comrade  in  sufferings  of 
world. 

The  same  objects  are  repeated  in  all  creations.  There  is  no 
difference  between  objects  of  this  creation  and  previous  and  forth- 
coming ones.  God  created  the  objects  of  this  world  like  those  of  the 
previous  creations  and  same  pattern  will  be  followed  in  the  future 
creation.  The  cycle  of  creation  and  dissolution  is  also  eternal. 

Purpose  assigned  to  the  creation  is  as  follows — 

{a)  To  provide  with  the  opportunity  to  souls  for  attaining  eman- 
cipation. 

(b)  To  award  the  pleasure  and  punishment  to  souls  according  to 
their  deserts. 

(c)  God’s  nature  of  wisdom  and  power  to  create  the  world  is 
also  the  purpose  of  the  creation. 

In  the  beginning  men  and  women,  animals,  birds,  etc.  emerged 
young.  If  they  were  born  old  they  could  not  continue  their  progeny 


xviti 


by  procreation.  If  they  were  born  in  infancy  they  needed  other 
parents  or  persons  for  their  fostering  and  protection.  So  it  is  logical 
that  men  emerged  able  to  think,  to  walk  and  to  defend.  They  were 
born  as  young. 

The  ninth  Chapter  of  Satyarth  Prakash  is  dedicated  exclu- 
sively for  detailed  discussion  on  the  subject  of  emancipation.  Emanci- 
pation is  the  ultimate  goal  of  human  life.  Unless  and  until  ignorance 
is  uprooted  emancipation  cannot  be  attained.  What  is  this  avidya 
or  ignorance  ? It  is  nescience,  misconception  or  misapprehension. 
It  has  four  phases. 

The  first  phase  of  nescience  is  to  behave  in  the  transcient  world 
as  if  it  is  eternal,  to  have  a feeling  of  immortality  about  the  mortal 
body,  to  hold  such  beliefs  that  the  created  universe  which  we  expe- 
rience every  day  has  been  going  on  since  eternity  and  will  not  perish, 
or,  that  the  devas  keep  the  same  body  at  all  times  by  the  powers  of 
yoga. 

The  second  phase  of  nescience  is  to  regard  as  pure  the  things 
which  are  impure. 

The  third  phase  of  nescience  is  to  regard  as  pleasure-giving 
things,  the  things  which  are  painful. 

The  fourth  phase  is  to  regard  as  spiritual  the  things  which  are 
unspiritual. 

These  four  kinds  of  wrong  notions  go  by  the  name  of  nescience, 
just  the  reverse  of  nescience  is  knowledge,  i.e.,  to  know  noneternal 
things  as  non*eternal,  eternal  as  eternal,  impure  as  impure,  pure  as 
pure,  pain  as  pain,  pleasure  as  pleasure,  non-spiritual  as  non-spiritual, 
and  spiritual  as  spiritual.  Knowledge  consists  in  knowing  a thing 
exactly  as  it  is,  and  nescience  consists  in  knowing  a thing  differently 
from  what  it  is. 

This  nescience  is  the  root-cause  of  the  following  five  kinds  of 
pains.  These  should  be  done  away  by  means  o\'  yoga 

1.  Nescience. 

2.  Confounding  our  intellect  with  our  Self. 

3.  Attachment  to  pleasure  or  pleasant  things. 

4.  Dislike  for  pain  and  painful  things. 

5.  Terror  of  death  and  desire  to  cling  to  the  body  and  never  to 
forsake  it. 

It  is  nescience  which  flows  in  forms  of  these  pains.  It  is  the 
root-cause  of  all  these  miseries.  The  means  of  emancipation  are  : 

1.  It  is  essential  to  know  about  five  sheaths — physical  sheath, 
vital  sheath,  psychic  sheath,  intellectual  sheath  and  blissful  sheath. 

2.  Knowledge  of  three  phases  of  soul — wakeful  phase,  slum- 
bering phase,  and  essential  mode  of  soul. 

3.  Knowledge  of  four  bodies : gross  body,  subtle  body  and 
causal  body  and  ecstatic  body,  the  Samadhi. 

4.  Six-fold  achievement. 


xix 


{a)  Shama — Propulsion  of  the  Self  and  the  internal  organ  to- 
ward virtuous  actions  by  driving  them  away  from  temptations. 

{b)  Dama — Control  over  senses. 

(c)  Uparati — Aversion  for  all  evil-doers. 

{d)  Shraddha — Firm  faith  in  the  Vedas  and  the  learned  virtuous 
teachers. 

{e)  Equilibrium  of  mind. 

if)  Eagerness  for  emancipation. 

5.  Four  correlative  factors  : Preparatory  equipments,  Sam- 
bandhci,  Visayi,  Prayojana. 

6.  Four-fold  steps  of  knowledge  called  shravan  chatushtaya, — 
Hearing,  thinking,  contemplation  and  direct  intuition,  etc. 

Emancipation  is  freedom  from  worldly  bondage  and  all  sorts  of 
pains  and  attainment  of  blessedness  in  God.  It  has  no  fixed  place. 

To  have  free  passage  in  divine  blessedness  everywhere.  Divinity 
is  all-pervading  and  all-bliss.  An  emancipated  soul  can  live  in  God 
everywhere  without  any  physical  obstruction  and  realize  His  blessed- 
ness. To  be  in  some  fixed  locality  is  also  a kind  of  bondage. 

The  emancipation  and  bondage  are  not  everlasting.  An  emanci- 
pated soul  has  to  descend  and  assume  birth  after  the  fixed  period. 
Emancipation  is  not  absolutely  everlasting.  The  period  of  emanci- 
pation is  a Parantakala,  which  is  equal  to  the  years  of  thirtysix  thous- 
and times  period  of  creation  and  dissolution  of  the  world.  The  total 
years  of  the  period  of  emancipation  arc  311040000000000.  An 
emancipated  soul  has  to  enjoy  blessedness  for  so  many  years.  After- 
wards he  has  to  take  birth  again. 

The  10th  chapter  is  concerned  with  toiichability  and  untoucha- 
bility,  permissible  and  forbidden  diet  and  code  of  counduct  of  life. 
Great  Swami  is  the  pleader  of  touchability.  He  gave  a very  severe 
stroke  to  untouchability.  He  is  the  person  who  treated  it  as  a perni- 
cious evil  and  embarked  on  a movement  to  eradicate  it.  Meat  is  not 
eatable  and  he  declared  war  against  it.  Meat-eating  is  totally  dis- 
carded by  him.  His  Satyarih  Prakash  is  preaching  and  would  do 
so  in  future  against  the  meat-eating.  Non-vegetarian  diet  is  not  a 
natural  diet  of  man.  Aryas  do  not  eat  non-vegetarian  diets.  Intoxi- 
cant beverage  is  also  not  permissible.  It  is  injurious  for  understand- 
ing. The  drink  which  is  harmful  for  intellect  is  called  intoxicant. 
Except  in  the  cases  of  contagiousness  and  hygienic  and  cleanliness 
considerations  untouchability  in  society  has  not  been  allowed  by  the 
author  of  Satyarth  Prakash. 

The  dictates  of  the  Veda,  the  injunctions  of  the  sacred  scriptures 
which  stand  in  true  conformity  to  the  Vedas,  the  ideals  of  good  men 
and  the  appeal  to  one’s  own  conscience  are  the  four  criteria  of  the  true 
conduct  of  life.  We  find  these  above-mentioned  points  discussed  in 
the  tenth  chapter  of  Satyarth  Prakash. 

The  chapters  from  eleven  to  fourteen  are  the  chapters  of  criti- 
cism. The  criticism  done  by  the  great  Swami  is  a rational  criticism. 


XX 


It  is  always  allowed  by  the  highly  cultured  societies  and  the  men  of 
scholarly  wisdom.  Criticism  of  Swami  Dayanada  is  to  destroy  untruth 
and  unveil  truth.  If  even  an  iota  of  falsehood  is  tolerated  it  would 
deface  the  countenance  of  religions.  Miracles,  superstitions,  contra- 
dictions, impossibilities  and  contrariety  to  the  laws  of  nature  are  such 
things  which  drop  a veil  on  the  truth.  The  removal  of  these  things 
should  be  attempted  at  all  cost  by  the  seekers  and  propagators  of 
truth.  Efforts  were  made  in  all  times  and  climes  to  differentiate  truth 
from  untruth.  Envelop  from  the  face  of  truth  should  always  be 
removed.  The  writer  of  the  Satyarth  Prakash  was  a great  man;  he 
did  these  criticism  with  very  good  intentions.  Here  we  quote  a por- 
tion of  his  sub-introduction  of  the  eleventh  chapter  of  his  book  in 
which  he  opened  his  innocent  pure  heart  to  remove  misunderstanding, 
if  any,  arising  out  this  matter.  His  utterance  from  the  bottom 
of  his  heart  cannot  be  anyhow  dis-believed  or  taken  otherwise.  He 
says : 

“The  object  of  writing  this  book  is  to  give  facilities  to  the 
followers  of  these  religions,  their  disciples  and  all  other  persons  in 
the  investigation  of  truth.  Whatever  has  been  written  in  this  book 
in  the  advocacy  of  true  beliefs  and  refutation  of  false  beliefs  is  meant 
for  the  enlightenment  of  all.  I have  thought  it  best  to  put  before 
the  public  all  that  I have  understood  after  the  study  of  the  original 
scriptures  of  these  religions  according  to  my  intellect  and  my  know- 
ledge, as  knowledge  once  lost  cannot  be  easily  recovered.  Truth 
and  untruth  will  be  clear  to  those  who  will  read  it  with  an  unpre- 
judiced mind.  Then  it  will  be  easy  for  all  to  accept  the  truth  and 
reject  the  untruth  according  to  their  own  light.  In  the  eleventh 
chapter,  we  have  elucidated  the  merits  and  demerits  of  those  cults 
which  have  branched  off  from  the  Puranas  etc.  in  the  country  of  the 
Aryavarta.  If  you  are  not  inclined  to  appreciate  my  work,  never 
mind.  At  best  do  not  oppose  it.  My  object  is  not  to  injure  anybody 
or  to  oppose  him,  but  only  to  ascertain  truth. 

“It  is  incumbent  upon  all  men  to  look  upon  things  with  an  eye 
of  justice.  The  sole  purpose  of  being  born  as  man  is  to  learn  what 
is  truth  and  what  is  untruth,  and  not  to  uphold  wrangling.  Learned 
men  of  unprejudiced  mind  alone  can  calculate  the  harm,  done  in  the 
past,  being  done  in  the  present,  and  likely  to  be  done  in  the  future 
by  religious  hostilities.  As  long  as  mankind  is  not  freed  from  the 
habit  of  falsely  denouncing  each  other’s  religion,  the  world  cannot 
be  happy.  It  is  not  impossible  for  all  and  especially  for  learned 
persons  to  be  able  to  accept  the  truth  and  reject  the  untruth,  if  they 
give  up  their  pre-suppositions  and  ascertain  truth  with  open  mind. 
It  is  certain  that  the  differences  of  the  learned  people  are  the  cause 
of  the  differences  among  common  people.  If  learned  men  rise  above 
their  selfish  motives  and  work  for  the  welfare  of  all,  they  can  be 
united  today  and  be  of  one  religion.  The  method  of  achieving  this 
end  will  be  given  in  the  end  of  the  book.  May  the  Almighty  God 
create  in  the  mind  of  all  people  a desire  for  religious  unanimity. 
No  need  of  further  exertation  for  the  wise.” 

Criticism  on  the  following  religions  in  the  chapter  mentioned 
against  them  has  been  done : 


xxi 


1.  Puranic  cults  and  various  sections  belonging  to  them — 
Xlth  chapter. 

2.  Jainism  and  Budhism— Xllth  chapter. 

3.  Christianity— Xlllth  chapter. 

4.  Mohammedenism — XlVth  chapter. 

Besides,  articles  of  beliefs  and  disbeliefs  of  Swami  Dayananda 
are  enlisted  at  the  end  of  the  book. 

True  is  God,  the  true  all  the  truths  and  his  revelation,  the 
Veda;  true  is  soul  and  the  law  of  metempsychosis  and  emancipation; 
true  is  the  matter,  the  material  cause  of  the  universe  and  true  is  the 
reality  and  phenomenality  of  the  universe;  true  is  creation  and  dis- 
solution and  true  is  the  law  eternal  governing  and  ordaining  the 
world;  true  is  adoration,  true  is  prayer  and  true  is  the  communion 
with  God;  true  is  life,  true  is  death  and  true  is  the  destined  end  of 
it;  true  are  actions  and  their  fructification  and  true  is  justice  and  its 
end;  true  is  truth  that  prevails  in  the  body  of  society  and  states  and 
true  is  ruler  and  the  ruled;  true  is  the  instinct  of  family  and  true  are 
the  varnashramas;  and  true  is  knowledge  that  bears  the  truth  and 
true  is  truth  itself.  Let  the  highest  truth  that  emits  the  light,  the 
‘Light  of  Truth’  enlighten  mankind  for  ever  like  the  beacon  of  light ! 


— Vaidyanath  Shastri 


Maharshi  Dayanand  Bhawan 
New  Delhi- 1 
December,  1970 


IDEAL 


Among  the  many  blessings  a people  receives  from  its  great  men 
the  most  impotant  one  is  that  they  serve  as  ideals  to  their  coun- 
trymen. And  every  nation  has  one  or  more  ideals  which  guide 
the  people  in  their  perilous  path  though  earthly  life.  That  ideal  is 
of  the  greatest  practical  value,  which  is  reared  in  the  native  soil  of  a 
nation.  A foreign  ideal  is  of  little  use,  as  its  actions  are  impractical 
from  the  change  of  local  environments. 

But  it  is  often  seen  that  a national  ideal  is  apotheosized  or 
exalted  to  the  dignity  of  a demi-god,  a misfortune,  which  defeats  the 
purpose  of  its  utility.  No  human  being  can  imitate  the  Deity  or  a 
superhuman  being,  for  there  is  as  much  difference  between  the  Deity 
and  man  as  between  heaven  and  earth.  This  useless  and  repulsive 
exaltation  is  the  outcome  of  blind  and  slavish  devotion.  It  is  on 
this  account  that  nations  fall,  although  they  have  best  ideals  to  copy 
them  in  their  life. 

Specially  the  Hindus  are  placed  in  this  predicament.  Their 
ideals — Parasarama,  Rama,  Krishna,  Vyasa,  Shankara,  &c. — are  all 
deified  by  the  reverence  of  popular  ignorance.  We  do  not  derive 
any  benefit,  say,  from  Rama,  whose  obedience  of  his  father’s  com- 
mand, love  for  his  brothers,  fidelity  to  his  wife,  acting  upon  truth, 
ruling  his  people  with  justice  for  their  own  happiness,  are  sung  to 
beguile  the  relaxing  hours  of  a sultry  summer  1 He  was  an  incarna- 
tion of  God  and  the  human  mind  intuitively  infers  that  he  cannot  be 
copied  in  human  life. 

Therefore  our  life  is  conducted,  not  according  to  the  standard 
given  us  in  Rama’s  life,  but  according  to  our  whims  and  caprices,  or 
the  vicious  character  of  our  low  comrades.  Hence  to  preclude  the 
recurrence  of  this  old  error  which  is  advantageous  to  an  ambitious 
mind,  as  it  converts  it  into  a God,  Swami  Dayanand  Saraswati 
always  associated  himself  with  the  people  and  repudiated  all  insinua- 
tions to  make  him  superior  in  any  way  to  his  fellow  brethren.  So 
he  is  the  best  ideal  for  the  Hindus  of  modern  time.  As  he  was  a 
man,  and  not  a demi-god  or  a messenger  of  God,  or  a vicegerant 
pope,  he  can  be  copied  by  all  of  us  according  to  our  capacities  For 
instance,  he  studied  Sanscrit  first  of  all.  He  laid  a great  stress  on 
adult  marriage.  He  devoted  his  whole  life  and  all  his  powers — 
learning  and  property — to  the  good  of  his  country.  If  we  try  to 
become  something  of  him,  we  shall  leave  the  world  much  better  than 
what  we  have  found  it,  which  should  be  the  end  of  our  life.  The  life 
and  preaching  of  the  great  Swami  to  which  the  reader  is  here  intro- 
duced, will  effect  a great  change  in  him  for  good,  if  read  with  the 
view  of  picking  up  the  good  and  not  cavilling  at  supposed  faults  or 
otherwise  as  a mischievous  man. 


— DURGA  PRASAD 


INDIAN  IDEAL 

Swami  Dayanand  Saraswati 


^"Sunshine  was  he  in  the  winter  day; 

And  in  the  midsummer  coolness  and  shaded 


READER ! 


“Lives  of  great  men  all  remind  us, 

We  may  make  our  lives  sublime, 

And  departing  leave  behind  us 

Foot-prints  on  the  sands  of  time.” 

With  this  view,  peruse,  O Brother  I 
Saint  Dayanand  Swami’s  life, 

Who  was  Monotheistic  Teacher 
In  this  world  with  idols  rife. 

Swami  was  a truly  great  man 
Of  enlightened  modern  time; 

He  kept  no  distinction  of  clan, 

Creed,  and  caste  of  any  clime. 

Truth  he  taught  and  truth  he  followed, 
Giving  up  the  worldly  ease; 

Seed  of  Monotheism  true  he  sowed, 
Made  men  Nature’s  votaries. 

‘All  the  vice,  prejudices. 

Vanities  and  wicked  rites. 

Whereto  sin  our  mind  entices, 

Leave,’  he  charged  his  proselytes. 

Day  and  night  he  worked  for  our  good, 
Both  with  head  and  hand  in  life, 

Boldly  dread  and  despair  withstood, 
And  o’ercame  in  vulgars’  strife. 

He  combined  with  lore  and  piety, 
Reason,  moral  courage,  zeal. 

Virtue,  strength,  the  sense  of  duty, 

And  the  love  of  general  weal. 

He  was  sure  a good  example 
Of  the  ancient  sages  great, 

And  a model  imitable. 

Let  us,  then,  him  imitate. 


xxiv 

So  that  we  may  be  as  righteous, 

Content,  learned,  just,  and  strong; 

Useful  to  our  brethren  make  us, 

And  save  them  from  wrench  of  wrong. 

Brothers,  we  learn  from  Dayanand 
Sanscrit  was  our  mother  tongue, 

Lord  God  gave  the  truth  of  Vedas 
To  our  fathers  when  they  sprung. 

Vedic  truth  enjoins  contentment, 

Holiness,  love,  humbleness. 

Labour,  knowledge,  self-denial, 

Equal  rights,  and  faithfulness. 

’T  was  the  Aryan  mode  of  training. 

Which  produced  men  learned,  strong, 

Moral,  sober,  abstemious, 

Active,  social,  hating  wrong. 

Scriptures  sanction  intermarriage 
With  the  best  folks  of  the  earth, 

Free  trade,  self-help,  co-operation, 

Venture,  firm  will,  ease  and  mirth. 

Let  us  heartily  act  on  the  advice, 

He  gave  for  our  betterment. 

Wipe  all  quarrels  of  old  folly, 

And  hence  make  new  agreement. 


— DURGA  PRASAD 


Maharshi  Swami  Dayanand  Saraswati 

Author  of  ‘Satvarth  Prakash’  and  Founder  of  Arya  Sama) 


SWAMI  DAYANAND  SARASWATI 

(A  Life  Sketch) 


Swarai  Dayanand  Saraswati,  one  of  the  outstanding  personalities  who 
pioneered  cultural,  religious  and  social  revival  in  India  in  the  19th 
century,  was  born  on  Phalgun  Badi  Dashami,  1881  V.S.  (12th  Feb. 
1825  A.D.)  at  Tankara,  a village  in  the  State  of  Morvi  in  Kathiawar, 
now  the  railway  terminus  of  the  Morvi-Tankara  narrow-gauge  line  on 
the  Western  Railway  in  Rajkot,  Gujrat.  His  father  Karshanji  Lalji 
Tiwari,  known  as  Araba  Shankar,  was  an  Audichya  Brahmin  and  a 
man  of  aflBiuence  and  prestige.  He  was  a rich  Zamindar  and  a Banker 
and  a State  Official.  He  was  a staunch  Shaivite  and  wished  his  son  to 
become  a worthy  son  and  follow  in  his  footsteps. 

Dayanand  bore  two  names  in  his  childhood : Dayalji  (or  Daya 
Shankar)  and  Mool  Shankar,  the  former  being  more  in  use,  for  it  was 
his  nickname.  He  had  two  brothers  and  two  sisters.  Dayalji  pos- 
sessed a sharp  intellect  and  a prodigious  memory.  His  faculties  of 
perception  and  critical  analysis  were  outstanding.  When  five  years 
old,  he  learnt  by  rote  numerous  extracts  and  verses  from  Sanskrit 
literature.  At  the  age  of  eight  he  was  invested  with  the  sacred  thread 
as  also  the  Gayatri  Mantra  and  taught  Sandhya.  In  the  short  span 
of  thirteen  years  he  had  memorized  Sanskrit  grammar  and  Shabdaru- 
pavali,  Rudradhyaya  and  Shukla  Yajurveda  Samhita  as  well  as  some 
portions  of  the  other  Vedas. 

Karshanji  was  a staunch  shaivite  and,  therefore,  the  family 
followed  the  Shaiva  faith.  Dayalji  or  Moolji,  as  he  was  called,  was 
also  taught  to  worship  Lord  Shiva  with  obligations  to  undertake  fasts 
and  perform  several  other  religious  duties.  The  father,  himself  a 
learned  man  and  well  versed  in  the  Vedic  lore,  wanted  his  son  to 
develop  an  all-round  personality  and  to  be  a devotee  of  Lord  Shiva, 
So  he  used  to  take  him  to  religious  discourses  and  assemblies.  He 
wanted  to  make  him  a traditionalist  and  a successful  householder. 
But  Providence  had  ordained  otherwise.  Dayalji’s  very  first  encounter 
with  ritualism  and  superstition  shook  the  roots  of  his  faith  and  set 
him  on  the  path  of  scepticism  and  eternal  search. 

In  1894  V.S.  (1837  A.D.),  during  the  Shivaratri  vigil,  he  felt 
disillusioned  to  find  mice  playing  on  the  idol  of  Lord  Shiva  and  eating 
his  offerings.  He  woke  up  his  father  and  asked  for  an  explanation 
but  could  not  get  a satisfactory  answer.  His  faith  in  the  omnipotence 
of  Lord  Shiva  (the  idol)  was  shaken.  He  realized  that  the  spirit 
of  an  omnipotent  deity  like  Lord  Shiva  could  not  reside  in  an  idol. 
If  the  idol  of  Lord  Shiva  had  the  attributes  usually  alluded  to  him, 
how  could  mice  dare  pollute  his  offerings  ? That  minor  episode  gave 
severe  jolt  to  Dayalji’s  religious  faith.  He  returned  home,  broke  his 
fast  and  fell  asleep.  The  death  of  his  younger  sister  and  the  uncle, 


xxvi 


who  was  also  his  tutor,  caused  him  great  grief  and  he  began  to  con- 
sider how  to  alleviate  human  suffering  and  how  to  find  out  true  Shiva. 
In  the  meantime  his  parents  arranged  bis  marriage  which  he  wanted 
to  avoid.  When  the  parents  did  not  pay  any  heed  to  his  entreaties 
to  wait  for  some  time,  he  slipped  away  from  home  one  evening.  It 
happened  in  the  summer  of  1846  A.D.  (1903  V.S.).  He  was  twenty- 
two  years  old  at  that  time.  His  father’s  attempt  to  bring  him  back 
proved  unsuccessful. 

After  leaving  his  father’s  house  he  visited  several  places  in 
search  of  some  Yogis  who  could  lead  him  on  to  the  path  of  salvation. 
Reaching  Sayla  (Shaila)  railway  terminus  of  the  Joravarnagar  Sayla 
narrow-gauge  line  on  the  Western  Railway,  he  stayed  with  Lala 
Bhakta  and  started  practising  Yoga.  There  he  met  a Brahmachari 
(celibate)  on  whose  advice  he  vowed  to  pass  a life  of  celibacy  and 
assumed  the  name  of  Shuddha  Chaitanya.  After  some  time  he  left 
for  Koth  Gangada,  84  kilometers  to  the  south-west  of  Ahmedabad, 
and  from  there  for  Siddhapur  where  a big  congregation  had  collected. 
From  Siddhapur  he  reached  Chanod  and  stayed  there  for  more  than 
one  year.  There  he  read  Vedant  from  Paramanand  Paramahansa. 
Finding  that  preparing  food  for  himself  was  an  impediment  to 
study,  he  resolved  to  become  a Sannyasi.  He  requested  Swami 
Chidanand  to  ordain  him  as  a Sannyasi  but  the  latter  refused,  because 
in  his  opinion  Shuddha  Chaitanya  was  still  immature  and  a novice. 
Then  he  approached  Poornanand  Saraswati,  a Deccani  Swami,  who, 
after  much  hesitation,  yielded  to  the  young  ascetic’s  entreaty  and 
ordained  him  as  a Sannyasi  and  gave  him  the  name  of  Dayanand 
Saraswati. 

From  Chanod  Dayanand  proceeded  towards  Vyas  Ashram 
where  he  took  his  first  lessons  in  yoga  from  Swami  Yoganand  and 
learnt  practical  aspects  of  yoga  from  Jwalanand  Puri  and  Shivanand 
Giri.  Thereafter  he  went  to  Abu  and  learnt  more  about  yoga  from 
the  yogis  residing  there,  but  his  thirst  for  a full  grasy  of  yoga  remained 
unquenched.  He,  therefore,  decided  to  visit  Uttarakhand  in  search 
of  accomplished  yogis  and  reached  Hardwar  in  1854,  at  time  of 
Kumbha  Fair.  There  he  saw  a large  congregation  of  Sadhus  and 
Sannyasis  and  met  many  mahatmas  and  saints.  He  mixed  freely  with 
Sannyasis,  also  devoting  intervals  of  time  to  yogic  practice  in  the  hills 
of  Chandi.  From  Hardwar  he  proceeded  to  Tehri  via  Rishikesh 
where  he  studied  a few  manuscripts  on  Fantra  also.  The  obscenity 
of  that  literature  created  a sense  of  revulsion  in  his  mind  against  the 
entire  Tantra  literature.  He  then  visited  Kedarghat,  Rudra  Prayag, 
Guptakashi,  Trijuginarayan  and  the  heights  of  Tunganath  and  Okhi- 
math,  where  a little  halt  was  made  for  rest.  Kedarnath  was  next 
climbed  as  also  Joshimath  and  Badrinath.  At  .loshimath  he  learnt 
that  certain  Mahatmas  resided  in  those  parts.  For  obtaining  a glimpse 
of  them  or  an  opportunity  of  meeting  them  and  passing  some  time  in 
their  company  he  traversed  those  terrible  and  dangerous  places  of  the 
Himalayas,  frequented  by  wild  animals,  and  climbed  high  cliffs  and 
descended  without  caring  for  food  or  rest.  Incidentally  he  travelled 
the  path  which  the  Pandavas  had  taken  in  old  days  and  passed  the 
cold  weather  at  Dronasagar. 


xxvii 


These  excursions  of  Swami  Dayanand  in  the  Himalayas  were 
mainly  motivated  by  a strong  desire  to  find  true  yogis  and  saints  who, 
as  he  had  heard,  resided  in  inaccessible  places,  in  the  caverns  of 
dales  and  valleys  of  mountains,  near  rivulets  and  sacred  streams,  and 
on  hilltops,  absorbed  in  their  penances  and  austerities.  Without 
caring  for  his  difficulties  and  the  dangers  of  travelling  in  hill-tracks, 
frequented  by  wild  animals,  and  unmindful  of  hunger  or  fatigue,  he 
traversed  those  places  all  alone.  He  spared  no  pains  to  find  out  true 
yogis  and  saints  who  could  satisfy  his  quest  of  truth  and  wisdom  and 
did  not  consider  any  sacrifice  too  great  to  achieve  his  object.  He 
stayed  in  the  Himalayas  for  about  two  years. 

In  1856  A.D.  (1913  V.S.)  Dayanand  descended  from  the  moun- 
tains and  after  passing  some  time  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganga  near 
Garhmukteshwar,  left  for  Farrukhabad  and  from  there  he  reached 
Kanpur.  After  spending  about  five  months  in  travels  between  places 
situated  between  Kanpur  and  Allahabad,  he  passed  one  month  at 
Vindhyachala  and  then  proceeded  to  Kashi  (Varanasi)  where  he  stayed 
for  about  two  weeks  and  had  discussions  with  many  learned  pandits. 
Then  he  decided  to  visit  the  forest  regions  of  the  Central  Provinces 
and  the  source  of  Narmada  and  with  this  end  in  view  he  proceeded  to 
south  in  the  beginning  of  1857  A D.  (1914  V.S  ).  During  this  journey 
he  had  the  same  experiences  as  he  had  had  on  his  Himalayan  excursions. 
He  encountered  several  wild  beasts  on  his  way  in  the  hilly-tracks.  He 
spent  about  three  years  in  those  regions.  How  he  passed  his  time 
during  this  interregnum  is  still  a mystery.  Most  probably  he  employed 
his  time  in  practising  yoga,  communion  with  Nature  and  meeting 
Sannyasis.  Shri  Jayachandra  Vidyalankar  has  presumed  that  during 
this  period  Swami  Dayanand  Saraswati  came  into  contact  with  the 
revolutionaries  of  Central  India  and  might  have  played  some  part  in 
the  Mutiny  of  1857.  But  this  presumption  has  not  been  accepted  by 
other  biographers  of  Swami  Dayanand’s  life.  Swami  Dayanand 
himself  remained  silent  over  his  parentage,  home  and  later  years  of 
his  life,  though  he  gave  an  outline  of  his  career  describing  his  ex- 
periences in  the  Himalayas. 

After  passing  about  three  years  in  the  Narmada  region  Swami 
Dayanand  proceeded  to  north  and  reached  Mathura  in  1860  A.D.  (1917 
V.S.)  where  he  desired  to  study  the  sacred  books  from  Swami  Viraja- 
nand,  a renowned  scholar  of  the  Vedas.  Virajanand  was  then  eighty 
years  old.  Though  blind,  he  was  intellectual  giant  and  nobody  could 
surpass  him  in  his  enthusiasm  for  Vedic  learning.  Even  at  that  ad- 
vanced age  he  was  anxious  to  do  something  for  the  revival  of  the 
Vedic  dharma  all  over  India.  He  had  a complete  mastery  over  Vedic 
grammar  and  philology.  In  his  pathashala,  which  he  had  established 
at  Mathura,  he  taught  only  those  books  which  were  written  by  ancient 
Rishis.  Finding  in  him  a true  guru  and  guide,  Dayanand  requested  him 
to  admit  him  as  his  pupil  and  teach  him  Vedic  literature.  Virajanand, 
after  some  reluctance,  accepted  him  as  his  disciple  and  asked  him  to 
cast  all  his  books  into  Yamuna  and  forget  all  that  he  had  studied  so 
far.  He  further  directed  him  (Dayanand)  to  make  suitable  arrange- 
ments for  his  board  and  lodging.  Luckily  for  Dayanand,  Amar  Lai 
Joshi,  an  Audichya  Brahmin  from  Gujrat,  was  living  at  Mathura.  He 


xxviii 


accepted  to  bear  the  burden  of  Dayanand’s  board  and  for  full  three 
years  fed  him  in  his  own  house.  Another  person  named  Hardev 
promised  to  give  him  two  rupees  monthly  for  milk.  For  his  residence 
Dayanand  acquired  a small  room  in  the  precincts  of  a temple. 

After  making  suitable  arrangements  for  his  board  and  lodging, 
Dayanand  cast  all  his  books  into  the  river  Yamuna,  as  he  had  been 
directed  by  his  new  guru,  and  started  learning.  At  first  he  was  taught 
Panini’s  Ashtadhyayi  and  the  Mahabhashya.  With  a command  over 
these  two  books  Dayanand  could  get  an  easy  access  to  the  treasure- 
house  of  the  Vedas  and  Vedangas  and  could  understand  the  mysteries 
of  Vedic  literature.  He  also  read  several  other  books  including  the 
Nighantu,  the  Nirukta,  the  Vedant  Sutras  and  Manusmriti.  At  the 
end  of  his  studies,  he,  with  a desire  to  take  leave  of  Swami  Virajanand, 
stood  before  him  with  half  a seer  of  cloves  as  his  guru-dakshina  (the 
fee  paid  by  a pupil  to  his  teacher  on  completion  of  his  study  period). 
But  Swami  Virajanand  did  not  accept  his  cloves.  He  asked  him  to 
dedicate  his  life  for  establishing  the  glory  of  the  ancient  learning  and  for 
installing  the  Vedic  religion  in  Aryavarta.  He  should  remove  sectarian- 
ism and  promulgate  the  message  of  the  Vedas  throughout  the  world. 
He  should  be  prepared  to  die  in  the  mission  of  installing  the  Vedic 
dharma  on  a high  pedestal  as  it  used  to  be  in  ancient  times.  Dayanand 
acquiesced  in  his  guru’s  proposal  without  the  slightest  demur  and  utter- 
ed the  words  : “As  you  please”.  He  then  paid  his  obeisance  to  his 
guru  by  falling  at  his  feet  and  left  Mathura  in  April,  1863  (1920  V.S.). 

Having  promised  to  undertake  a herculean  task  that  demanded 
immense  patience  and  perseverance,  pluck  and  prudence,  Dayanand 
reached  Agra  where  he  taught  the  devotees  the  virtues  of  Sandhya 
and  advised  them  to  chant  Gayatri  mantra.  With  this  object  in  view, 
he  distributed  several  thousand  booklets  of  Sandhyopasana  He  also 
taught  people  the  supreme  importance  of  self-control  and  continence. 
From  Agra  he  went  on  tour  of  Dholpur,  Lashkar,  Gwaliar,  Karauly, 
Jaipur  and  Pushkar.  At  Jaipur  he  had  a disputation  with  the  pandits 
of  Vaishnava  sect  in  which  he  defeated  them.  At  Pushkar  he  made 
vigorous  attacks  on  Vaishnava  and  Shaiva  sects  and  criticisd  idol 
worship.  He  said  that  God  had  no  form  and,  therefore,  worshipping 
idols  was  only  groping  in  the  dark.  Moreover,  idol  worship,  according 
to  him,  had  demoralised  Hindu  society.  The  next  place  to  visit  was 
Ajmer,  where  he  had  discussions  and  disputations  with  Muslim 
Maulvis  and  Christian  missionaries  on  God,  origin  of  life  and  trans- 
migration. It  was  at  Ajmer  that  he  took  up  the  question  of  cow- 
protection  and  impressed  upon  Col.  Brook  the  desirability  of  banning 
cow-slaughter  by  means  of  law. 

After  about  three  years  Swami  Dayanand  returned  to  Mathura 
and  met  his  guru  and  presented  him  with  two  guineas  and  a piece  of 
cloth.  He  also  got  some  of  his  doubts  cleared.  In  1866  A.D.  (1923 
V.S.)  Kumbha  Fair  was  held  at  Hard  war.  Swami  Dayanand  in  the 
company  of  several  Brahmacharis  and  Sannyasis  reached  Hardwar  and 
pitched  his  tent,  with  a banner  on  which  was  inscribed  ‘Pakhand 
Khandani  Pataka  (tot^  qm^).  He  had  a fairly  good  equipment 
of  books  with  him,  and  by  that  time  had  obtained  the  texts  of  the 
Vedas  also  from  Germany.  His  personality  was  so  magnetic  and  his 


xxix 


knowledge  of  the  Vedas  and  other  scriptures  so  deep  that  hundreds  of 
people  started  gathering  near  his  tent,  pitched  at  a distance  of  about 
three  miles  from  the  city,  to  listen  to  his  discourses.  He  started  his 
discourses  with  the  recitation  of  some  mantras  (verses)  from  the  Vedas 
and  dwelt  upon  the  oneness  of  God  and  uselessness  of  idol  worship. 
He  also  criticised  the  Puranas  and  many  customs  and  traditions  of  the 
Hindus.  He  impressed  upon  his  listeners  the  desirability  of  doing 
good  deeds,  because  without  them  nobody  could  get  solace  and  salva- 
tion. He  told  his  audience  frankly  that  it  was  not  possible  to  get  rid 
of  sins  and  misdeeds  by  taking  dips  in  sacred  rivers  simultaneously  with 
non-adherence  to  right  conduct.  The  audience  listened  to  his  argu- 
ments and  assertions  with  rapt  attention.  The  result  was  that  people 
started  flocking  in  large  numbers  to  his  discourses  and  his  fame  spread 
far  and  wide. 

While  at  Hardwar  Dayanand  felt  pained  to  watch  the  pageantry 
and  pomp  of  the  sadhus  and  display  of  wealth  by  the  mahants  and 
priests.  He  felt  so  disgusted  that  he  made  up  his  mind  to  get  rid  of 
even  the  meagre  belongings  he  had,  such  as  a few  garments,  books 
and  small  amount  of  money.  He  distributed  all  his  belongings  then 
and  there,  sent  the  Mahabhashya,  a long  piece  of  cloth  and  Rs.  35  to 
his  guru  and  retained  only  a loin-cloth  for  himself.  Thus  he  renounced 
everything  and  started  on  his  lecture  tour  to  spread  the  message  of 
the  Vedas,  From  Hardwar  he  went  to  Farrukhabad  and  from  there  to 
Anupshahr  where  many  followers  of  Chakrankit  sect — an  offshoot  of 
Vallabha  sect — came  in  his  contact  and  gave  up  their  adherence  to 
their  conviction.  At  Ramghat  a brahmin  was  so  impressed  by  Swami 
Dayanand’s  arguments  against  idol  worship  that  he  stopped  it  for 
good.  At  Karnavasa  he  defeated  Pt.  Araba  Datta  and  Pt.  Hiravalla- 
bha,  one  after  the  other,  in  disputation.  Pt.  Amba  Datta  announced 
publicly  that  idol  worship  was  against  the  precepts  of  the  Vedas.  Pt. 
Hiravallabha  accepted  his  defeat  and  threw  all  his  idols  into  Ganga. 
Pt.  Tika  Ram  severed  his  connection  with  the  temple,  where  he  was  a 
priest,  and  got  some  other  employment.  Pt.  Angad  Shastri  threw 
away  his  idols  into  Ganga  and  promised  not  to  deliver  religious  dis- 
courses on  Shrimad  Bhagvat. 

At  Karnvasa  Swami  Dayanand  had  an  encounter  with  Rao 
Kama  Singh,  a Rajput  reis  of  Baroli,  follower  of  Chakrankit  sect 
and  disciple  of  Rangacharya,  who  had  come  to  bathe  in  Ganga. 
The  behaviour  of  this  Rajput  towards  Swami  Dayanand  was  rude 
and  he  attacked  the  latter  with  a sword  which  the  latter  broke  into 
two.  Later  Rao  Kama  Singh  sent  two  or  three  of  his  followers, 
armed  with  swords,  to  murder  Swami  Dayanand  at  night  at  his 
cottage,  but  they,  too,  did  not  succeed  in  their  mission.  This 
attack  on  Swami  Dayanand’s  life  roused  another  reis  Rao  Krishna 
Singh  to  support  and  protect  the  Swami.  He  challenged  the  wicked 
Rajput  and  said,  “If  you  attack  the  Swami  again  I will  make  you  rue 
for  your  foolishness;  you  will  carry  from  here  only  a broken  skull.” 
The  father-in-law  of  Rao  Kama  Singh  advised  him  to  leave  the 
place,  as  the  Kshatriyas  of  the  locality  were  bent  upon  taking  revenge 
on  him.  The  Rao  felt  alarmed  and  left  the  place.  Swami  Dayanand, 
however,  did  not  feel  frightened.  He  said  to  Rao  Krishna  Singh, 


XXX 


“No  one  can  harm  me.  It  is  not  man  that  guards  me  but  the  Great 
Lord,  who  protects  me  everywhere.  Don’t  be  anxious  on  my  account.” 

From  Karnavasa  Swami  Dayanand  went  to  Farrukhabad  and 
passing  through  Ambagarh,  Shahbazpur  and  Kaimganj  reached  there 
in  1868  (1925  V.S.).  He  stayed  there  for  some  days  and  established 
a Sanskrit  Pathashala  for  teaching  the  Vedic  literature.  He  invested 
many  people  with  the  sacred  thread  and  advised  them  to  take  to 
Sandhya  and  Agnihotra.  He  also  dissuaded  some  youths,  who 
intended  to  become  Christians,  from  joining  the  fold  of  Christianity. 
There,  too,  Swami  Dayanand  had  a disputation  on  idol  worship  with 
two  learned  pandits  who  also  accepted  that  idol  worship  was  against 
the  precepts  of  the  Vedas,  According  to  some  biographers,  it  was 
at  Farrukhabad  that  Swami  Dayanand  received  copies  of  the  four 
Vedas  from  Germany. 

From  Farrukhabad  Swami  Dayanand  went  to  Kanpur  where 
he  had  again  a disputation  with  pandits  named  Haidar  Ojha,  Guru 
Parshad  Shukla  and  Prag  Narain  Tiwari.  The  Assistant  Commis- 
sioner, Mr.  W.  Thaine,  presided  over  the  disputation.  He  gave  his 
decision  in  favour  of  Swami  Dayanand.  This  made  Swami  Dayanand 
very  popular  in  Kanpur  and  many  people,  becoming  followers  of  the 
Swami,  threw  away  idols  in  the  river.  In  1869  (1926  V.S.)  he  visited 
Benares  (Varanasi)  where  he  had  a disputation  with  the  pandits  of 
Kashi  headed  by  Pandit  Bal  Shastri.  The  debate  lasted  for  four 
hours  and  nearly  fifty  thousand  people  assembled  to  listen  to  it. 
Unfortunately  the  debate  was  presided  over  by  Maharaja  Ishwari 
Prasad  Narain  Singh,  the  ruler  of  Kashi,  who  himself  being  an  idola- 
ter, was  a partisan.  He  gave  his  decision  in  favour  of  the  pandits. 
Swami  Dayanand  felt  unhappy  at  the  undesirable  and  barbarous 
behaviour  of  the  pandits  and  unfortunate  decision  of  the  ruler  of 
Kashi.  However,  the  newspapers  supported  him  and  declared  that 
it  was  he  who  was  the  winner.  The  Pioneer,  in  its  notice,  charac- 
terised Swami  Dayanand  as  the  Luther  of  India.  The  truth  became 
known  to  all.  Maharaja  Ishwari  Prasad  Narain  Singh  invited  the 
Swami  to  his  palace  and  apologised  for  his  misbehaviour  towards  the 
latter  at  the  time  of  the  debate.  Pandit  Bal  Shastri  also  admitted 
afterwards  that  it  was  beyond  his  power  to  challenge  Swami  Daya- 
nand in  a debate. 

After  staying  at  Kashi  for  a month  and  exhorting  the  people 
to  worship  One  God,  Swami  Dayanand  left  for  Prayag  where  thou- 
sands of  people  had  gathered  on  the  occasion  of  the  Kumbha  fair. 
By  this  time  he  had  become  very  famous  and  people  were  eager  to  see 
him  and  to  listen  to  his  discourses.  He  impressed  upon  them  the 
desirability  of  worshipping  their  God  who  has  no  shape  and  no  form, 
who  is  omnipresent  and  omnipotent.  He  also  advised  them  to  prac- 
tise yoga  which  was  conducive  to  sound  health  and  led  to  spiritual 
uplift.  He  dissuaded  some  Hindus  from  walking  into  the  fold  of 
Christianity.  Maharshi  Devendra  Nath  Thakur,  who  had  also  come 
to  Prayag  on  the  occasion  of  Kumbha  fair,  met  Swami  Dayanand 
and  invited  him  to  visit  Calcutta,  Swami  Dayanand  gladly  accepted 
his  invitation.  From  Prayag  he  went  to  Mirzapur  and  established 
there  a Vedic  Sanskrit  Pathshala.  Then  he  visited  Kashi  again  and 


xxxi 


after  delivering  many  discourses  and  establishing  a Sanskrit  Pathshala 
then  reached  AnupShahr  again  in  1870  (1927  V.S.)  at  the  time  of 
Vijayadashami  (Dasehra)  celebrations.  He  delivered  several  lectures 
against  the  holding  of  Ramlila  and  asserted  that  ordinary  men  and 
women  should  not  play  the  role  of  Rama  and  Slta  who  were  really 
great.  He  also  criticised  the  performance  of  shraddha-karma.  He  spoke 
against  idol  worship  and  urged  the  people  to  worship  formless  and 
shapeless  God.  A brahman  felt  so  annoyed  by  the  speeches  of  Swami 
Dayanand  that  he  gave  him  poison  in  a betel-leaf.  When  Swami 
Dayanand  came  to  know  that  he  had  been  poisoned,  he  vomited  it  out 
with  the  help  of  yogic  exercises.  The  brahman,  however,  was  arrested 
by  the  Muslim  tehsildar  and  was  brought  before  the  Swami  who  got 
him  released  and  told  the  tehsildar  that  he  was  not  there  to  get  people 
arrested  but  was  to  get  them  released.  The  tehsildar  felt  greatly 
surprised  at  themagnanimity  of  Swami  Dayanand. 

In  some  of  his  lectures  at  Anup  Shahr  Swami  Dayanand  dis- 
cussed politics  also  and  raised  the  question  of  cow-slaughter.  He 
demanded  that  cow-slaughter  should  be  banned  by  law.  He  also 
criticised  the  British  administration  in  India  and  pleaded  for  the 
establishment  of  gram-panchayats  and  nyaya-panchayats,  village 
assemblies  of  justice.  In  1872  (1929  V.S.)  Swami  Dayanand  reached 
Calcutta  via  Munghyr  and  Bhagalpur  and  stayed  there  for  three 
months  and  a half.  During  his  stay  at  Calcutta  he  met  many  learned 
Bengalis  and  gave  several  lectures  which  were  widely  reported  in  the 
local  papers  and  discussed  in  public  and  in  homes.  He  came  in 
special  contact  with  the  leaders  of  Brabmo  Samaj,  such  as  Maharshi 
Devendra  Nath  Thakur,  Babu  Keshav  Chandra  Sen,  Hemchandra 
Chakravarti,  etc.  He  also  met  Pt.  Naranath,  Pandit  Mahesh  Chandra, 
and  Rajnarayan  Basu.  He  had  free  and  frank  discussions  on  meta- 
ph>sical  and  spiritual  topics  with  them  and  they  were  greatly  impressed 
by  his  scholarship  and  knowledge  of  the  Vedas.  Swami  Dayanand’s 
lectures  at  Calcutta  were  well  attended  and  his  mission  to  Calcutta 
was  a great  success  So  far,  his  medium  of  speech  was  Sanskrit. 
Finding,  however,  that  the  interpreters,  while  rendering  his  speeches 
into  Hindi  for  the  benefit  of  the  people,  misinterpreted  him,  he,  at  the 
suggestion  of  Keshav  Chandra  Sen,  agreed  to  speak  in  Hindi  in  his 
future  discourses.  He  also  agreed  to  the  suggestion  of  Keshav  Chandra 
Sen  for  giving  up  the  Kaupeen  and  putting  on  clothes  in  public  and 
private  life.  Accordingly,  after  his  departure  from  Calcutta,  he 
started  putting  on  clothes.  He  wore  a bordered  dhoti,  draped  him- 
self with  a sheet  and  put  on  shoes. 

On  April,  1873  (1930  V.S.)  Swami  Dayanand  left  Calcutta  for 
Kanpur  via  Hooghly,  Burdwan,  Bhagalpur,  Chhapara,  Patna, 
Dumraon  and  Prayag.  At  Hooghly  he  defeated  Pandit  Taracharan 
in  a disputation  on  idol  worship.  He  also  discussed  varnashrama  in 
a lecture  and  said  that  in  olden  days  the  varna  did  not  depend  upon 
birth  but  on  the  avocation  a man  chose.  At  Patna  he  delivered  two 
lectures  in  which  he  criticised  idol  worship,  shraddha  ceremony  and 
pinda-dan.  At  Chhapara  he  was  given  a warm  reception  and  was 
put  up  in  a big  bungalow  by  Shiva  Gulam,  a local  zamindar.  Pandit 
Jagannath,  reputed  for  his  scholarship  and  piety,  was  defeated  in  a 


xxxii 


debate.  From  Kanpur  Swami  Dayanand  went  to  Lucknow  and  from 
their  to  Aligarh  where  Sir  Syed  Ahmed  Khan  came  to  see  him  and 
asked  him  how  a havan  (oblation)  could  purify  the  atmosphere.  He 
satisfied  Sir  Syed  by  giving  the  example  of  the  cooked  pulses  which 
became  fragrant  after  being  cooked.  At  Aligarh  Raja  Jai  Kishan 
Dass  became  a disciple  of  Swami  Dayanand  and  requested  him  to 
publish  his  discourses  in  a book  form. 

In  the  beginning  of  January,  1874  Swami  Dayanand  reached 
Mathura  and  challenged  Rangacharya,  the  leader  of  the  Chakrankit 
sect,  to  prove  that  idolatry  was  accepted  and  practised  by  the  Vedic 
Aryans,  but  the  latter  did  not  accept  the  challenge.  While  the  Swami 
was  at  Mathura,  a plot  was  hatched  to  murder  him  but  that  did  not 
materialise.  He  left  Mathura  and  reached  Benares  (Varanasi)  where 
he  passed  his  summer  and  started  writing  Satyarth  Prakash,  the  first 
edition  of  which  was  printed  at  the  Light  Press  and  published  in  1875 
under  the  auspices  of  Raja  Jai  Kishan  Dass.  On  July  1,  he  reached 
Prayag  and  after  staying  for  some  days  left  for  Bombay  from  where 
he  had  been  regularly  receiving  invitations.  His  first  lecture  at  Bom- 
bay was  fixed  on  25  November,  1874,  but  it  ended  in  disorder, 
because  followers  of  Vallabh  sect  resented  his  observations  and  views 
against  idol  worship.  Gosain  Jiwaji,  the  head  of  the  Vallabh  sect, 
even  tried  to  get  him  poisoned  through  his  servant  Baldcv  but  the 
evil  plan  failed.  In  his  second  speech  in  Bombay  Swami  Dayanand 
discussed  the  ancient  history  of  the  Aryans  and  blamed  the  Aryan 
rulers  for  the  decline  of  Aryavarta.  At  the  end  of  his  speech  he 
humorously  commented  on  the  religious  leaders  also.  This  speech 
was  remarkable  for  its  use  of  sarcasm  and  humour  and  created  a 
stir  in  the  audience.  The  listeners  were  greatly  impressed. 

At  Bombay  Swami  Dayanand  wrote  and  published  some  books 
and  pamphlets  in  which  he  attacked  the  hypocricies  of  the  Vallabh 
sect  and  the  Narayan  Swami  sect.  He  also  started  writing  Samskar 
Vidhi  and  Rig-Ved5di-Bhashya-Bhumika.  Dr.  R.  G.  Bhandarkar, 
the  renowned  S^anskrit  scholar,  also  met  him  to  discuss  monotheism 
in  the  Vedas.  But  the  most  significant  work  of  Swami  Dayanand  at 
Bombay  was  the  establishment  of  Arya  Samaj  which  was  founded  on 
April  10,  1875  (5th  of  Chaitra  Shukla,  1932  V.  S.).  The  aims  and 
objects  of  the  Arya  Samaj  were  thoroughly  discussed  and  finally  twenty- 
eight  principles  to  serve  as  guide-lines  for  its  followers  were  adopted. 
Lateron  Swami  Dayanand  condensed  and  reduced  these  principles 
to  ten.  The  establishment  of  Arya  Samaj  at  Bombay  was  followed 
by  the  establishment  of  hundreds  of  Arya  Samajas  at  different  places 
in  North  India.  This  created  a favourable  atmosphere  for  the  spread 
of  the  Vedic  ideals  throughout  India. 

After  establishing  Arya  Samaj  at  Bombay  Swami  Dayanand 
visited  Poona  where  he  had  been  invited  by  Mahadev  Govind  Ranade 
and  Mahadev  Moreshwar  Kunte.  At  Poona  he  delivered  fifteen 
lectures.  Thirtyfive  more  were  delivered  at  other  places.  Lateron 
all  the  fifty  lectures  were  published  and  made  available  in  book  form 
in  Marathi.  After  passing  the  last  quarter  of  1875  in  Poona,  Satara 
and  Bombay  he  left  for  Baroda  where  the  arrangements  for  his  com- 
fortable stay  and  safety  were  made  by  the  state.  He  lectured  daily 


xxxiii 


in  the  premises  of  a dharmashala  there.  From  Baroda  he  returned 
to  Bombay  in  March,  1876  (1933  V,  S.)  and  delivered  some  lectures 
there.  Now  he  spoke  in  simple  Hindi,  though  it  was  interspersed 
with  Sanskrit  words  and  phrases.  In  April,  he  left  Bombay  and 
after  spending  a few  days  at  Indore  proceeded  to  Farrukhabad 
to  launch  his  Arya  Samaj  movement  in  Uttar  Pradesh.  At  Morada- 
bad  he  had  a disputation  with  an  English  clergyman  which  went 
on  for  a fortnight.  The  next  few  months  were  spent  in  visiting 
Benares,  Jaunpur,  Ayodhya,  Lucknow,  Shahjahanpur,  Bareilly  and 
Karnavas.  In  January,  1877,  Lord  Lytton’s  Delhi  Darbar  was  held 
to  display  the  splendour  and  majesty  of  British  rule.  Swami  Daya- 
nand,  considering  it  a fit  occasion  for  the  propagation  of  the  Vedic 
message,  reached  there.  He  called  a conference  of  the  pioneers  in 
social  reform,  including  Sir  Syed  Ahmad  Khan  and  Keshav  Chandra 
Sen,  and  made  proposal  to  work  unitedly  for  the  progress  of  the 
country,  but  his  proposal  was  not  accepted  by  others  and,  therefore, 
the  conftrence  ended  in  failure. 

From  Delhi  Swami  Dayanand  returned  to  Uttar  Pradesh  and 
passing  through  Meerut  and  Saharanpur  reached  Shahjahanpur  in 
March,  1877  to  participate  in  a religious  conference  which  ended  in 
two  days  without  any  success.  Now  he  decided  to  go  to  the  Punjab 
from  where  he  had  received  several  invitations.  He  reached  Lahore 
and  delivered  his  first  lecture  there  on  April  25,  1877  (1934  V.  S.) 
throwing  light  on  the  Vedas  and  the  Vedic  religion.  He  established 
a branch  of  Arya  Samaj  at  Lahore  in  June  24,  1877  (Jyestha-Shukla 
13,  1934  V.  S.).  Then  he  went  on  a lecture-tour  and  visited  many 
cities  and  towns  of  the  Punjab,  such  as  Amritsar,  Jullundur,  Gurdas- 
pur,  Gujranwala,  Gujrat,  Rawalpindi,  Multan,  etc.  Everywhere 
hundreds  of  people  flocked  to  listen  to  him  and  everywhere  his 
favourite  topics,  as  usual,  were  idolworship,  the  Vedas,  social  cus- 
toms, Vedic  ideals,  etc.  He  regretted  that  the  Hindus  never  read  their 
religious  books  properly  and  did  not  understand  their  own  religion. 
The  number  of  lectures  that  Swami  Dayanand  delivered  during  his 
one-year  sojourn  in  the  Punjab  was  much  more  than  in  any  other 
part  of  the  country. 

After  leaving  the  Punjab  Swami  Dayanand  spent  a few  months 
in  eastern  Rajasthan  and  then  returned  to  Uttar  Pradesh  and  visited 
some  towns  of  Bihar  also.  From  February  20  to  April  14,  1879  (1936 
V.  S.)  he  camped  at  Hardwar,  the  occasion  being  the  Kumbh  fair 
again.  After  returning  from  Hardwar  he  spent  the  last  half  of  the 
year  touring  the  towns  of  eastern  and  western  Uttar  Pradesh  and 
establishing  branches  of  Arya  Samaj.  The  main  towns  in  his  itinerary 
were  Saharanpur,  Meerut,  Aligarh,  Moradabad,  Badayun,  Bareilly, 
Shahjahanpur,  Lucknow,  Farrukhabad,  Agra,  Mirzapur  and  Benares 
in  Utter  Pradesh  and  Danapur  in  Bihar. 

After  extensive  travels  across  the  British  provinces  for  over 
sixteen  years  and  spreading  the  message  of  the  Vedas,  Swami 
Dayanand  decided  to  go  to  Rajasthan  from  where  he  had  received 
many  invitations  from  individuals,  social  organisations  and  rulers  of 
states.  Accordingly  he  reached  Bharatpur  on  March  10,  1881  and 
after  staying  there  for  ten  days  and  delivering  his  message  of  Vedic 


xxxiv 


dharma  to  the  people,  left  for  Ajmer  via  Jaipur.  At  Ajmer  he  deli- 
vered several  lectures  and  then  proceeded  to  Masuda  where  he  had 
discussions  on  religious  matters  with  both  Christians  and  Jains.  There 
he  also  invested  many  householders  with  the  sacred  thread.  From 
there  he  went  to  Chittore.  Maharana  Sajjan  Singh  received  him  with 
great  respect  and  made  arrangements  for  his  stay  on  the  banks  of  the 
Gambhiri  river,  near  Chittore.  The  people  of  the  area  flocked  in 
large  numbers  to  listen  to  the  discourses  of  Swami  Dayanand  and 
felt  very  much  impressed.  Maharana  Sajjan  Singh  and  Maharaja 
Nahar  Singh  of  Shahpura  met  Swami  Dayanand  many  times  and 
discussed  religion  and  politics  with  him. 

From  Chittore  Swami  Dayanand  had  to  go  to  Bombay  to 
participate  in  the  annual  function  of  ihe  Arya  Samaj,  but  before  his 
departure  he  promised  to  return  to  Udaipur.  In  Bombay  he  passed 
most  of  his  time  in  writing  his  commentary  on  the  Rigveda  which  he 
had  started  after  completing  his  commentary  on  the  Yajurveda.  At 
many  meetings  in  Bombay  he  spoke  on  the  desirability  of  cow-pro- 
tection and  finally  decided  to  present  a memorandum  bearing  the 
signatures  of  three  crores  of  people  to  Her  Majesty  the  Queen.  But 
this  plan  did  not  materialise  because  of  his  untimely  demise.  After 
his  stay  in  Bombay  for  a few  months  Swami  Dayanand  returned  to 
Udaipur  via  Khandwa,  Indore,  Ratlam  and  Jaora.  The  Maharana 
of  Udaipur  had  by  now  become  greatly  attached  to  him  and  held  him 
in  great  esteem.  On  his  request  Swami  Dayanand  taught  him  Sans- 
krit in  such  an  easy  way  as  he  was  soon  able  to  understand  the 
Manusmriti  and  recitations  from  the  Mahabharat.  The  Swami 
brought  about  an  astonishing  change  in  his  habits  and  outlook.  He 
abstained  from  sensual  pleasures  and  gave  permission  for  the  daily 
performance  of  the  agnihotra  yajna  in  his  palace. 

Having  stayed  at  Udaipur  for  more  than  six  months  Swami 
Dayanand  left  for  Shahpura  and  stayed  there  from  March  9 to  May 
23;  1883  (1940  V.S.),  Maharaja  Nahar  Singh,  the  ruler  of  Shahpur, 
was  an  ardent  admirer  of  the  Swami  and  as  long  as  he  (Swami  Daya- 
nand) was  in  Shahpura  he  regularly  spent  three  hours  with  him 
reading  the  scriptures  and  having  discussions  on  various  subjects.  He 
wished  Swami  Dayanand  to  spend  a few  months  more  in  his  state, 
but  the  latter  could  not  do  so,  because  he  had  received  invitation 
from  His  Highness  Maharaja  Jaswant  Singh  of  Jodhpur  to  visit  his 
state.  Maharaja  Nahar  Singh  did  not  like  that  Swami  Dayanand 
should  go  to  Jodhpur.  He  had  his  own  reasons.  Maharaja  Jaswant 
Singh  was  given  to  wine  and  women  and  was  intensely  in  love  with  a 
dancing  girl  named  Nanhi  Jan.  Besides,  the  Muslims  of  Jodhpur 
would  not  like  the  Swami’s  anti-Muslim  tirade.  But  he  could  not 
dissuade  Swami  Dayanand  from  going  to  Jodhpur,  because  neither  a 
threat  to  his  life  nor  the  enormity  of  opposition  could  deviate  him 
from  the  path  he  had  chosen. 

Swami  Dayanand  reached  Jodhpur  on  May  31  and  stayed  there 
till  October  16,  1883  (1940  V.S.).  He  addressed  the  congregation 
from  four  to  six  every  evening  and  touched  upon  several  subjects  in 
speeches.  He  laid  great  stress  on  character  building,  specially  in  the 
case  of  Rajputs,  He  criticised  the  Rajput  rulers  for  indulging  in 


XXXV 


debauchery  and  drinking.  But  by  his  outspokenness  and  forthright 
condemnation  of  the  feudal  lords  he  made  many  enemies  at  Jodhpur. 
The  Muslims,  the  followers- of  Chakrankit  sect  and  the  orthodox 
Hindu  idolaters  were  already  against  him.  Nanhi  Jan,  the  beloved 
dancing  girl  of  the  Maharaja,  also  became  his  enemy,  because  she,  at 
his  scathing  remarks  against  her,  grew  apprehensive  of  her  position 
at  the  court.  Besides,  he  wrote  a very  strong  letter  to  Rao  Raja 
Pratap  Singh,  the  brother  of  the  ruler,  admonishing  him  and  the  ruler 
for  spoiling  their  health  and  dissipating  their  energies  in  frivolous 
pursuits.  The  Maharaja,  on  his  part,  ignored  the  advice  and  criti- 
cism of  Swami  Dayanand  and  during  his  four-month  stay  at  Jodhpur 
visited  him  only  thrice.  He  could  not  give  up  wine,  nor  was  he  able 
to  forsake  the  company  of  Nanhi  Jan.  Swami  Dayanand  thought 
that  his  mission  at  Jodhpur  had  failed.  He,  therefore,  planned  to 
leave  Jodhpur  on  October  1,  1883,  for  Masuda  in  Ajmer  and  all 
arrangements  for  his  journey  were  finalised.  But,  as  ill  luck  would 
have  it,  he  was  taken  seriously  ill  on  September  29.  It  is  said  that  he 
was  poisoned  by  his  enemies  through  his  cook.  On  the  suspicion  that 
he  had  been  poisoned,  he  tried  to  throw  out  the  poison  by  means  of 
vomiting,  by  taking  large  quantity  of  water  and  by  yogic  exercises, 
but  could  not  succeed.  Dr.  Surajmal  was  called  in,  but  his  treatment 
did  not  prove  beneficial.  After  a few  days  Swami  Dayanand’s  con- 
dition grew  very  serious  and  the  British  doctor  of  the  state  advised 
that  he  should  be  removed  to  Mount  Abu.  At  the  time  of  Swami 
Dayanand’s  departure  from  Jodhpur  on  October  16,  the  Maharaja 
and  his  brother  Sir  Pratap  Singh  came  to  see  him  and  expressed  great 
concern  at  his  condition.  The  Maharaja  asked  Dr.  Surajmal  to 
accompany  the  Swami  upto  Mount  Abu. 

Swami  Dayanand  reached  Abu  on  the  morning  of  October  21, 
1883  (1940  V.S.),  but  as  no  improvement  took  place,  he  accompanied 
by  his  devotees,  was  moved  to  Ajmer  on  October  27.  His  condition 
deteriorated  and  he  breathed  his  last  at  6 p.m.  on  October  30,  1883 
A.D.  (Amavasya  of  Kartika  1940  V.S.).  At  that  time  people  all  over 
northern  India  were  preparing  to  kindle  the  lamps  of  Dipawali,  but 
the  great  light  that  could  have  illumined  the  world  for  some  time 
more  was  extinguished  by  the  cruel  hand  of  destiny. 

This  brief  sketch  of  Swami  Dayanand’s  life  reveals  what  her- 
culean task  was  performed  by  him  for  the  revival  of  the  Vedic  religion 
and  civilisation.  He  tried  to  recapture  the  spendour  of  India’s  past 
and  instilled  in  the  educated  youths  of  the  country  a confidence  and  a 
craving  for  their  rich  heritage  and  thus  saved  them  from  falling  an 
easy  prey  to  the  seductions  of  Westerm  culture.  His  whole  life  was 
a long  and  relentless  struggle  against  ignorance,  abhorrent  social 
customs  and  repulsive  religious  practices.  He  attempted  to  overhaul 
and  reconstruct  the  religious  and  social  fabric  of  Hindu  religion  which 
had  become  synonymous  with  rituals  and  rites,  irrational  dogmas  and 
doctrines.  He  diagnosed  correctly  the  affiiction  from  which  humanity 
was  suffering  and  boldly  suggested  a correct  and  beneficial  treatment 
for  the  same.  By  his  untiring  efforts  he  loosened  the  fetters  of  the 
timehonoured  usages  which  were  retarding  the  progress  of  society.  He 
aroused  Hindus  from  their  inertia  and  filled  them  with  hope  and 


xxxvi 


courage,  sense  of  pride  and  confidence  in  their  glorious  past.  He  had 
to  face  opposition  and  slanderous  imputations  but  he  always  remained 
cool  and  unruffled.  He  was  endowed  with  the  purity  and  serenity, 
intellect  and  knowledge,  compassion  and  continence  of  ancient  rishis. 
Aurobindo  Ghosh  rightly  called  him  “the  soldier  of  Light,  a warrior 
in  God’s  world,  a sculptor  of  men  and  institutions,  a bold  and  rugged 
victor  of  the  difficulties  that  matter  presents  to  spirit”  and  “a  man 
with  God  in  his  soul,  vision  in  his  eyes  and  power  in  his  hands  to 
hew  out  of  life  an  image  according  to  his  vision”.  Rabindra  Nath 
Tagore  also,  paying  his  tribute  to  Swami  Dayanand,  said  that  Swami 
Dayanand  was  the  great  path-maker  in  Modern  India  who  through 
bewildering  jungles  of  creeds  and  practics — the  dense  undergrowth  of 
the  degenerate  days  of  our  country — cleared  a straight  path  that  was 
meant  to  lead  the  Hindus  to  a simple  and  rational  life  of  devotion  to 
God  and  service  for  man. 

Swami  Dayanand’s  principal  works  are  : — 

Commentaries  on  Rigveda  and  Yajurveda. 

Ashtadhyayibhashya 

Introduction  to  the  Commentary  on  Rigveda. 

Satyarth  Prakash. 

Aryabhivinaya. 

Satyadharmavichar. 

Sanskarvidhi. 

Panchmahayagyavidhi. 

Kashisashtrarth. 

Aryoddeshyaratnamala. 

Vyavaharabhanu. 

Veda-virudh-mata-khandan. 

Bhramochchhedan. 

Gokarunanidhi, 

Bhranti-nivaranam. 

Shastrarth  Ferozabad. 

Anubhramochchhedan. 

Vedantadhwanta-nivaran. 

Swami-narayana-mata-khandan. 

Vedangaprakash,  fourteen  parts  (complete). 

Sanskrit-vakya-prabodh. 


-R.C.Sharma 


INTRODUCTION 


When  a learned  person  comes  to  see  that  all  the  creatures  are 
like  one^s  self,  he  is  convinced  of  the  Oneness  of  life  and  ceases  to 
yearn  and  sorrow, — Yajur  Veda, 

Ignorance  diversifies  and  knowledge  unifies  Nature, 

Monotheism  in  Vedas 

The  primary  doctrine  of  the  Vedas  is  the  unity  of  God,  ''There 
is  in  truth,'^  say  repeated  texts,  "'but  one  Deity,  the  Supreme  Spirit, 
the  Lord  of  the  Universe,  whose  work  is  the  Universe,'' — Elphinstone. 

About  half  a century  ago  the  religious  state  of  the  Hindus 
was  deplorable.  The  people,  tho’  well  off  from  the  worldly 
point  of  view,  were  very  wretched  as  far  as  the  right  knowledge 
of  religion  was  concerned.  They  were  sunk  in  gross  idolatry  and 
content  with  the  performances  of  externalism  as  the  evident  signs  of 
true  religion.  Elaborate  and  cumbrous  ceremonial  at  temples  and 
fatigue  and  expense  of  long  pilgrimages  to  sacred  shrines  and  streams 
were  regarded  as  the  highest  aspiration  of  the  religious  and  pious 
mind.  Both  priests  and  people  were  in  the  dark  as  to  what  the  scrip- 
tures contained.  Their  false  translations  supported  the  prevalent 
practice  of  religion.  How  long  could  such  a state  last  ? 

Christian  missionaries,  whose  learned  works  were  included  in 
the  curriculum  of  mission  and  state  schools,  exposed  the  weaknesses 
of  the  popular  Hindu  faith,  and  set  theirs  own  in  brilliant  colours 
before  the  amazed  and  gaping  Hindu  youths,  whose  ignorance  of 
their  ancestral  faith  gave  them  no  option  but  to  embrace  the  Christian 
religion  either  secretly  or  openly.  Their  sordid  priests  sometimes 
joined  the  Christian  church  from  worldly  considerations  and  then 
betrayed  the  hidden  uglinesses  of  the  scriptures  of  their  own  manu- 
facture. Except  those  whose  object  was  to  make  money  and  live  the 
life  of  the  senses  as  is  manifest  in  the  agricultural  and  commercial 
people,  all  the  thinking  portion  of  the  Hindu  community  was  inclined 
to  the  simple  and  apparently  rational  teachings  of  the  missionaries. 
Had  this  state  continued  longer,  the  catastrophe  of  conversion  to 
Christianity  would  have  been  tremendous  and  appalling.  But  it  was 
not  so  fated. 

From  the  ancient  forest  and  weird  fastness  of  the  venerable  Hima- 
layas was  heard  a clarion  voice  of  a broad-chested  holy  son  of  India, 
calling  on  all  that  had  ear  to  hear,  to  halt  before  proceeding  farther 
on  their  wrong  course  to  think  what  they  were  after.  It  was  no  other 
than  the  thunder  voice  of  Swami  Dayanand  Saraswati,  who  had 
mastered  the  Vedas  independently  of  the  spurious  commentaries,  and 


xxxviii 


who  had  gone  through  three  thousand  ancient  books  to  make  sure 
of  his  sense  of  the  Vedas.  His  chaste  and  ascetic  life  and  profound 
and  logical  knowledge  soon  succeeded  in  showing  the  falsity  of  the 
popular  Hindu  religion  which  had  no  support  in  the  Vedas,  the 
supreme  authority  on  religion,  and  in  demolishing  the  Christian  mis- 
sionaries and  Mahomedan  priests  in  a few  representative  discussions 
held  in  different  parts  of  the  country.  People  advanced  in  education 
were  naturally  attracted  to  him  as  he  spoke  from  authority  and  com- 
manded extensive  acquaintance  with  sacred  and  philosophical  lore  of 
Indian  antiquity.  He  thus  saved  the  Hindu  people  from  religious 
and  national  effacement.  Truly  observes  Dr.  A.  J.  Davis,  Seer  and 
Clairvoyant,  Poughkeepsie,  America,  regarding  his  work  : 

“To  restore  primitive  Aryan  religion  to  its  first  pure  state  was 
the  fire  in  the  furnace  called  “Arya  Samaj”,  which  started  and  burnt 
brightly  in  the  bosom  of  that  inspired  son  of  God  in  India,  Dayananda 
Saraswati.  From  him  the  fire  of  inspiration  was  transferred  to  many 

noble  inflaming  souls  in  the  land  of  Eastern  dreams Hindoos 

and  Moslems  run  together  to  extinguish  the  consuming  fire,  which 
was  flaming  on  all  sides  with  a fierceness  that  was  never  dreamt  of  by 
the  first  kindler  Dayananda.  And  Christians,  too,  whose  altar  fires 
and  sacred  candles  were  originally  lighted  in  the  dreamy  East,  joined 
Moslems  and  Hindoos  in  their  efforts  to  extinguish  the  New  Light  of 
Asia,  But  heavenly  fire  increased  and  propagated  itself.” 

The  perusal  of  his  works,  and  especially  the  one  here  presented 
to  the  public  in  English,  called  the  Satyarth  Prakash,  an  epoch  mak- 
ing book  in  the  religious  world,  revives  the  sinking  heart  of  the  Hindu, 
anciently  called  the  Arya,  inspires  him  with  appreciation  of  chastity 
or  Brahmacharya  and  zeal  for  Sanscrit  learning,  which  contains  the 
seed  of  his  religion  and  progress,  and  girdles  his  loins  for  honest  and 
manly  exertion  in  the  struggle  for  existence  threatened  by  the  inroads 
of  political  faiths. 

Not  only  the  Hindu  is  interested  in  Swami  Dayanand  Saraswati’s 
reformation,  but  the  Mahomedan  and  the  Christian  equally  find  food 
for  cogitation,  as  they,  too,  have  been  not  fortunate  in  maintaining 
the  primal  purity  of  their  faiths.  The  pious  frauds,  the  misinter- 
preted scriptures,  and  the  idolatrous  practices  are  found  in  rank 
abundance  in  their  faiths.  The  educated  Mahomedan  has  been  bene- 
fited by  S.  D.  S.’s  preaching,  tho’  he  does  not  acknowledge  it.  He 
no  longer  believes  in  eternal  hell  and  the  gift  of  72  houries  or  para- 
disial nymphs  in  salvation.  The  European  Christian,  tho’  saved  by 
Martin  Luther,  will  get  much  aid  in  breaking  the  last  letters  of  lurk- 
ing papacy  which  impede  his  progress  to  universal  brotherhood  of  the 
Vedas  so  ably  explained  by  Swami  Dayanand  Saraswati  the  Luther 
of  India.  Therefore,  whether  a person  endorses  the  views  of  S.D.S. 
or  not,  he  will  be  much  benefited  by  reading  this  work  of  his. 

Thus  convinced  of  the  use  of  the  Satyarth  Prakash,  I thought 
to  translate  it  so  early  as  1885,  but  the  question  of  right  came  in  my 
way.  However,  hearing  the  cry  from  all  sides  of  true  Arya  gentlemen, 
sincerely  devoted  to  the  benevolent  cause  of  the  Divine  Mission  of 
the  Vedas,  for  a translation  of  the  Satyarth  Prakash^  which  contains 
an  able  exposition  of  the  principles  of  Vedic  religion  from  the  pen  of 


ixl 


our  Swamiji,  and  whose  perusal  alone  can  bring  the  strayed  people 
back  to  the  path  of  true  virtue,  I could  not  further  suspend  my  ener- 
gies from  the  cause  benefiting  the  community  of  learned  men  all  over 
the  world.  Therefore,  in  1886  or  so  I translated  a page  or  two  with 
the  Preface  and  sent  it  to  Pt.  Shyamaji  Krishna  Varma,  M.A.,  then  at 
Ajmere  or  Odeypore.  He  sent  me  a very  encouraging  letter  and 
advised  me  to  finish  it.  The  Pratinidhi  Sabha  of  the  N.  W.  P.  also 
supplied  me  with  some  ruling  of  the  Govt.,  which  settled  the  question 
of  the  right  of  translation.  But  the  objection  of  the  Arya  Samaj 
leaders  in  the  Punjab  to  the  translation  which  they  thought  might 
reduce  the  sale  of  its  Hindi  edition  and  thus  injure  the  Vedic  Press  at 
Ajmere,  which  had  already  objected  to  mv  translation  of  the  Go- 
Karuna  Nidhi,  dissuaded  me  from  proceeding  further. 

So  I wrote  on  the  lOtJi  September  1891,  when  the  translation 
was  given  up  from  legal  and  other  obstructions  : 

It  is  a great  pity  that,  when  impartial  Europeans  appreciate 
Vedic  religion,  as  is  shown  in  Dr.  Davis’  above  testamony,  taught  in 
modern  times  by  our  Swamiji,  w hose  object  was  that  the  whole  learn- 
ed world  should  benefit  by  it,  we  should  throw  legal  obstacles,  by 
prohibiting  the  translation  of  the  Satyartha  Prakasha,  which  is  the 
master-piece  of  our  Swamiji,  in  the  progress  of  this  Divine  Light,  in 
whose  absence  the  world  was  deluged  with  countless  ugly  form  of  vice. 

It  is  well  known  that  the  Satyartha  Frakasha  being  in  Hindi,  a 
language  of  Behar,  Oude  and  the  N.  W.  Provinces,  cannot  be  read 
and  understood  by  the  remaining  nine  provinces  of  India,  viz,,  Scinde, 
Derajat,  the  Punjab  excluding  the  centres  of  education,  Bengal, 
Orissa,  the  Carnatic,  the  Koncan,  Bombay,  the  Deccan;  when  it  is 
confined  to  a portion  of  India,  it  cannot  certainly  be  understood  in 
the  other  countries  of  Asia,  Europe,  Africa,  America,  Australia,  and 
Oceania.  To  think  that  the  people  of  the  world  will  condescend  to 
learn  Hindi  to  reach  Vedic  religion  given  in  the  book,  is  to  ignore  all 
history  and  human  nature  and  to  impede  the  spread  of  Vedic  truth. 
Also,  the  knowledge  of  Hindi  does  not  assist  in  the  interpretation  of 
the  Vedas,  which  can  only  be  understood  by  the  study  of  Panini  and 
other  Vedic  accessories.  But  an  English  translation  of  the  book  may 
carry  it  not  only  to  the  whole  India  but  to  millions  of  people  who 
speak  English  all  over  the  world.  When  the  English  have  come  to 
know  our  doctrines,  they  can  easily  disseminate  them  in  other  Euro- 
pean countries  and  thus  in  the  rest  of  the  world.  This  hope  of  ours 
is  strengthened  by  the  fact,  that  the  Bible  does  not  satisfy  the  scien- 
tific mind  of  modern  Europe. 

Afterwards  for  the  benefit  of  the  English  knowing  public  I 
brought  out  the  most  important  part  of  the  Satyarth  Prakash  in  two 
small  volumes.  One  of  these  contains  the  1 Ith  chapter  which  refutes 
all  the  prevailing  religions  of  India,  with  Swami  Dayanand  Saras- 
wati’s  life  and  beliefs  as  given  at  the  end  of  the  Satyarth  Prakash,  It 
is  entitled  the  S.  D,  S.  on  Indian  Religions.  The  other  volume  is  call- 
ed his  exposition  of  the  Vedic  Religion,  containing  the  7th,  8th,  9th 
and  10th  chapters,  with  important  Discussions  held  at  Benares, 
Jallandher,  Lucknow,  and  Bareilly.  Thus  these  books  are  complete 
in  themselves  to  give  information  of  S.  D.  Saraswati’s  Reformation. 


xl 


A desire  for  the  translation  of  the  whole  book  as  it  is,  being 
still  felt  in  some  quarters,  an  English  translation  of  the  complete 
Satyarth  Prakash  is  here  presented  to  the  public,  brought  out  under 
must  trying  circumstances.  This  translation  is  almost  literal  to  furnish 
pure  materials  to  some  future  European  translator,  who  alone  can 
express  our  meaning  correctly  in  a European  tongue.  Hence,  my 
awkward  expressions,  inelegant  style,  barbarisms,  solecisms  and 
numerous  typographical  and  other  errors  will  not  deflect  the  reader’s 
thoughts  from  the  pursuit  of  the  subject-matter  of  the  hook. 

Lahore 

29th  May,  1908  — DURGA  PRASAD 


CONTENTS 


PREFACE  1 

CHAPTER  I 9 

Explanation  of  Aum  ...  9 

Context  gives  meanings  ...  10 

100  names  of  God  ...  13 

Primary  meanings  ...  12 

Nirguna  and  Saguna  ...  25 

Summary  ...  28 

CHAPTER  II  29 

Dietary  in  pregnancy  ...  29 

Time  of  conception  ...  29 

Delivery  ...  30 

Management  of  infancy  ...  30 

Trainig  of  children  by  mothers  30 
Education  of  children  ...  31 

Necromancy  ...  31 

Astrology  ...  33 

Small-pox  and  sorcery  ...  34 

Alchemy  ...  34 

Preservation  of  energy  ...  35 

Parental  advice  ...  35 

Discipline  ...  36 

Moral  instruction  ...  36 

Good  manners  ...  36 

Veracity  and  Righteousness  37 
Hygienic  precaution  ...  37 

Parental  duties  ...  38 

Summary  ...  38 

CHAPTER  III  39 

Acquisition  and  Impartation  39 
Learning  and  Philanthropy  39 

Admission  to  school  ...  39 

School  locality  ...  39 

Watch  over  conduct  ...  40 

Compulsory  education  ...  40 

Meaning  of  Gayatri,  creedal 
verse  ...  40 

Prayer  ...  41 

Mode  of  worship  ...  42 

Deep  breathing  ...  42 

Its  process  ...  43 


Its  4 steps  ...  43 

Its  advantages  ..  43 

Meditation  ...  44 

Fire  oblation  ...  44 

Its  outfits  ...  44 

Advantages  of  fire  sacrifice  45 

Brahmacharya  ...  47 

Its  3 grades  ...  47 

4 Stages  of  body  ...  49 

Rules  of  Instruction  ...  49 

Moral  Instruction  ...  53 

Criteria  of  Test  ...  55 

8 Kinds  of  Evidence  ...  55 

6 Categories  ...  58 

9 Substances  ...  58 

Their  Definitions  ...  58 

Qualities  of  Mind  ...  60 

Their  Definitions  ...  60 

Scheme  of  Studies  ...  64 

Read  Veda  with  meanings  67 

Books  recommended  ...  69 

Books  rejected  ...  69 

Advice  ...  71 

Women,  Shudras  to  study 

Veda  ...  72 

Summary  ...  75 

Puranas  and  Upapuranas  ...  76 

CHAPTER  IV  77 

Marriage  ...  77 

Whom  to  marry  ...  79 

Age  for  Marriage  ...  79 

Who  to  arrange  marriage  ...  81 

Dhanvantary  ...  81 

Happy  Home  ...  82 

Vedas  on  marriage  age  ...  82 

Caution  ...  83 

Adult  marriage  ...  83 

Caste  by  merit  ...  83 

Duties  of  Priests  ...  87 

„ ,,  Warriors  ...  88 

„ „ Merchants  ...  88 

„ „ Servants  ...  89 

8 Kinds  of  Marriage  ...  89 


xlii 


Commendable  Marriage  ...  90 
Time  of  Nuptial  Celebration  90 


Conduct  in  pregnancy  ...  91 

Food  „ „ ...  92 

Birth  rites  ...  92 

Mutual  love  ...  93 

Treatment  of  women  ...  93 

Eternal  Rule  of  speaking  Truth  94 
Five  Great  Duties  ...  95 

Duty  to  Parents  ...  96 

Service  of  Seers  ...  97 

„ ,,  Elders  ...  97 

,,  „ Sages  ...  97 

Duty  to  Nature  ...  99 

,,  ,,  Guests  ...  100 

Hypocrites  ...  100 

Early  Rising  ...  101 

Retributive  Justice  ...  101 

Practice  of  Truth  ...  102 

Peace  with  1 3 Persons  ...  102 

3 Evil  Men  ...  102 

Marks  of  Hypocrites  ...  103 

Necessity  of  Virtue  ...  103 

Pleasure  and  Pain  ...  105 

Husband  and  Wife  ...  105 

Duties  of  lay  Brahmins  ...  105 

Qualifications  of  Masters  ...  105 

Marks  of  unfit  persons  ...  105 

Qualities  of  Students  ...  107 

Fitness  for  acquiring  know- 
ledge ...  107 

Duties  of  Kshatriyas,  Vaish- 
yas,  and  Shudras  ...  108 

Husband  and  Wife’s  Faults  108 
Re-marriage  ...  108 

Niyoga  (nuptial  compact)  109 

Veda  on  Niyoga  ...  110 

Veda  and  Niyoga  ...  112 

Devara  or  Niyoga  Husband  112 
Manu  on  Niyoga  ...  113 

Inheritance  ...  115 

Rationale  of  Marriage  ...  116 

Patriotism  and  Loyalty  ...  116 

Horse  and  Cow  Sacrifices  ...  116 

Forgery  of  Books  ...  117 

Importance  of  Householder- 
ship  ...  118 

Summary  ...  119 

Sandhya  or  Prayer  ...  120 

CHAPTER  V 124 

Retirement  ...  124 


Time  of  Retirement  ...  124 

Renunciation  ...  125 

Duties  of  Clergy  or  Sannya- 
sins  ...  127 

10  Essentials  of  Religion  ...  129 

Brahmins  alone  are  to  adopt 

renunciation  ...  130 

Modern  Monks  ...  132 

Distinction  between  God  and 
Soul  ...  132 

Summary  ...  135 

CHAPTER  VI  136 

Duties  of  the  King  ...  136 

3 Councils  ...  136 

President’s  qualifications  ...  138 

True  King  ...  138 

Chief  Officers  ...  140 

Council  ...  140 

Members  of  Councils  ...  141 

Evils  of  anger  ...  141 

Ministers  ...  143 

Subjects  of  deliberation  ...  143 

Decision  by  majority  ...  143 

Experienced  Ministers  ...  143 

Foreign  and  Home  Ministers  1 44 
Officials  and  their  responsibi- 
lities ...  144 

Tribute  or  Revenue  ...  146 

Laws  of  chivalry  ...  147 

Duties  of  Rulers  ...  148 

Policy  ...  149 

Ruin  of  Empire  ...  149 

Management  ...  149 

Peace  Officers  ...  151 

Taxation  ...  151 

King’s  daily  work  ...  152 

6 Kinds  of  tactics  ...  153 

Their  six-fold  nature  ...  153 

War  ...  154 

Invasion  ...  155 

Strategy  ...  156 

Battle  Array  ...  157 

Treaty  ...  158 

Treatment  of  Prisoners  ...  158 

Ally  ...  158 

Neutral  Power  ...  159 

King’s  daily  duties  ...  159 

Schedule  of  imposts  ...  159 

Judicial  procedure  ...  160 

18  Titles  of  Law  ...  160 

Importance  of  Justice  ...  161 


xliii 


Sin  of  Injustice  ...  162 

Witnesses  ...  163 

Evidence  ...  164 

Punishment  ...  164 

Mode  of  punishment  ...  165 

Atrocious  man’s  qualities  ...  166 
Punishment  for  adultery  ...  167 
Tolls  and  Insurance  ...  168 

Politics  in  Sanscrit  ...  168 

Summary  ...  169 

CHAPTER  Vil  172 

God  ...  172 

33  Gods  ...  172 

Unity  of  Godhead  ...  173 

Proofs  of  God’s  Existence  ...  174 
Omnipresence  of  God  ...  174 
God’s  Mercy  and  Justice  ...  175 
God  is  Spirit  ...  176 

God  is  Almight  ...  176 

God  is  Eternal  ...  176 

God’s  purpose  ...  176 

Praise,  Prayer,  and  Medita- 
tion ...  177 

Prayer  ...  177 

Purity  of  Mind  ...  178 

Use  of  Prayer  ...  179 

Meditation  ...  180 

Yamas  and  Niyamas  ...  180 

Use  of  Meditation  ...  180 

Infinitude  of  God  ...  180 

Incarnation  ...  184 

Forgiveness  of  sins  ...  185 

Liberty  of  Soul  ...  185 

Characteristics  of  God  and 

Soul  ...  186 

God’s  Prescience  and  Man’s 
Liberty  ...  187 

Soul’s  place  in  body  ...  187 

Relation  between  God  and 

man  ...  188 

Vedant  Precepts  ...  188 

Non-ignorance  of  God  ...  191 

Vedantic  theory  ...  192 

Disparity  of  God  and  Soul  193 
No  inconsistency  ...  194 

No  passion  of  God  ...  194 

Veda  ...  195 

Method  of  Revelation  ...  196 

Why  Vedas  are  in  Sanscrit  ...  197 


Proof  of  Vedic  Revelation  ...  197 
Necessity  of  Revelation  ...  197 


Origin  of  Brahmana  Books  198 
Distinction  between  Vedas 


and  Brahmanas  ...  198 

Commentaries  of  Vedas  ...  199 

Eternity  of  Vedas  ...  200 

Summary  ...  200 

CHAPTER  VIII  202 

Creation,  Preservation,  and 

Destruction  ...  202 

Three  Eternal  Substances  ...  203 

Nature  or  Prakriti  ...  204 

Causes  of  the  world  ...  205 

Pantheism  ...  206 

Distinction  between  God 

and  Matter  ...  206 

Object  of  creation  ...  206 

Omnipotence  of  God  ...  208 

Nothing  without  a cause  ...  209 

A cause  or  monad  has  no 

cause  ...  209 

Atheistic  objections  answered  210 

Christians  and  Moslems  ...  210 

Materialists  ...  210 

Vedantists  ...  211 

Buddhists  and  Jainis  ...  212 

Fatalists  ...  212 

No  God  but  souls  ...  213 

Uniformity  of  creation  ...  214 

Consistency  of  six  philoso- 
phies ...  214 

The  Elephant  of  the  Blind 

Story  ...  215 

Creation  what  ...  216 

First  creation  ...  218 

Beginning  of  the  world  ...  218 

Diversity  of  life  ...  219 

Place  of  man’s  creation  ...  219 

Advent  of  Aryas  ...  219 

Dasy us  or  Barbarians  ...  220 

Support  of  the  world  ...  222 

The  Earth  goes  round  the  sun  223 

Other  inhabited  worlds  ...  224 

God’s  suzerainty  ...  225 

Summary  ...  225 

CHAPTER  IX  227 


Knowledge,  Ignorance,  Bon- 
dage, Emancipation  ...  227 
Damnation  and  Salvation  ...  228 
God  and  Soul  distinguished...  228 


xliv 


Soul  ...  229 

World  is  supposition  ...  230 

Salvation  and  Incarnation  ...  231 

Means  of  Salvation  ...  231 

Constitution  of  Soul  ...  231 

Qualities  of  Soul  ...  233 

Soul  not  absorbed  ...  233 

Upanishats  on  Salvation  ...  234 

Return  from  Salvation  ...  234 

Duration  of  Salvation  ...  235 

Soul  is  increaie  ...  236 

Means  of  Salvation  ...  236 

Minor  means  ...  239 

Accessories  ...  240 

Practical  hints  ...  240 

Kinds  of  Salvation  ...  241 

Incarnation  ...  242 

Inequality  of  condition  ...  242 

Predestination  ...  243 

Equality  of  all  ...  243 

Human  and  animal  souls  ...  244 

Signs  of  man’s  nature  ...  247 

3 Gunas  or  qualities  ...  247 

Moral  consequences  ...  249 

Summary  ...  251 

CHAPTER  X ...  252 

Conduct  and  Food  ...  252 

Righteous  Works  ...  253 

Hair  and  Beard  ...  254 

Sources  of  Honour  ...  255 

Behaviour  ...  256 

Foreign  Travel  ...  257 

Sea  Voyage  ...  257 

Two  kinds  of  food  ...  259 

Shudra  or  low  caste  cooks  ...  259 

Usefulness  of  the  cow  ...  261 

Religious  food  ...  262 

Eating  together  ...  262 

Inter-dining  ...  263 

Summary  ...  266 

CHAPTER  XI  ...  277 

Preface  ...  278 

Refutation  and  Advocation  of 
Indian  Religions  279 

Indian  Popes  ...  284 

European  Popes  ...  284 

Warn  Marg  ...  286 

Orgies  ...  287 


Worship  of  Warn  Marg  ...  288 


Cow,  Horse  and  Human 

Sacrifices  ...  290 

Not  sanctioned  by  Vedas  ...  291 
Buddhists  ...  291 

Charvaka  or  Materialism  ...  291 
Jainism  ...  292 

Origin  of  Idolatry  ...  292 

Lord  Shankara  ...  292 

Triumph  of  Vcdic 

Religion  ...  293 

Spread  of  Vedic  Religion  ...  294 
Shankara’s  Followers  ...  294 

Vedant  ...  295 

Mystery  or  Upadhi  ...  297 

Chidabhasa  ...  298 

Distinctness  of  soul  ...  300 

New  Vedant  ...  301 

Nishchal  Das  ...  301 

Yoga  Vasisht  ...  301 

Jaimini,  Vyasa  on 

Salvation  ...  302 

Distinction  of  God  and  soul  303 
Vicramadittya  ...  304 

Shaivism  ...  305 

Markande  and  Shiva 

Puran  ...  306 

Mahabharat  ...  306 

Origin  of  Hinduism  ...  306 

,,  „ Vishnuism  ...  307 

,,  ,,  Puranas  ...  307 

Shaktism  ...  307 

Putting  on  ashes  ...  308 

Worshippers  of  Vishnu  ...  299 

Story  of  Two  Bigots  ...  299 

Popish  Ignorance  ...  300 

Chakrankit  Vaishnavism  ...  300 

Its  Teachers  ...  302 

Shankara  and  Ramanuja  ...  302 

Idolatry  ...  302 

Distinction  beween  Jaina  and 
Vaishnava  Idolatry  ...  303 

Pious  Frauds  ...  303 

Plea  for  Idolatry  ...  304 

Muttering  of  God’s  name  ...  304 

Image  of  Incarnation  ...  305 

Omnipresent  God  is  an 

Image  ...  305 

Inefiicacy  of  Faith  ...  306 

Falsity  of  Invocation  ...  306 

Monotheism  in  Veda  ...  307 

Spiritual  worship  in 

Upanishat  ...  307 


xlv 


No  Idolatry  in  Vedas  ...  308 

Two  kinds  of  actions  ...  308 

Arguments  against 

idolatry  ...  310 

Worship  of  5 Gods  ...  311 

Great  men’s  Images  ...  313 

MIRACLES  AND  SACRED 
PLACES 

Benares  ...  313 

Gaya  ...  314 

Calcutta  ...  314 

Jagan  Nath  Puri  ...  315 

Inter-dining  ...  316 

Rameshwara  ...  317 

Deccan  ...  317 

Dwarka  ...  317 

Somanath  ...  318 

Narsi’s  Cheque  ...  319 

Jwala  Mukhi  and  Hinglaj  ...  319 

Amritsar  ...  320 

Hard  war  ...  320 

Vindhya  Goddess  ...  321 

Mathura  ...  322 

Modernity  of  Idolatry  ...  322 

Sanctity  of  Places  ...  323 

Service  of  the  Teacher  or 

Guru  ...  324 

Author  of  Puranas  ...  325 

Falsehood  of  Puranas  ...  327 

Creation  in  Shiva  Purana  ...  327 

,,  ,,  Bhagwat  ...  328 

,,  ,,  Markande 

Puran  ...  330 

Origin  of  Bhagwat  ...  330 

Boar  Incarnation  ...  331 

Lion  ,,  ...  331 

Giantess  Putana  ...  332 

Ajamel  ...  333 

Sumern  ...  333 

Author  of  Bhagwat  ...  333 

Krishna  defended  ...  334 

12  Genitals  of  Light  ...  334 

Puranas  for  Shudras  ...  334 

All  to  study  the  Vedas  ...  334 

Astrology  ...  335 

Origin  of  priests’  power  ...  335 

Garurha  Purana  ...  337 

Shraddha  or  food  to 

manes  ...  338 

Story  of  peasant’s  cow  ...  338 


Undeserving  ...  341 

Deserving  ...  341 

Fast  Days  ...  342 

Harlot  in  heaven  ...  343 

Religious  Sects  ...  344 

Lost  Books  of  Vedas  ...  344 

All  Vedas  in  Vyasa’s  time  ...  345 

Lost  Branches  not  Vedas  ...  345 

Idolatry  disgraces  Rama  ...  345 

Warn  Marg  initiation  ...  347 

,,  ,,  ceremonies  ...  347 

Sects  and  Mysteries  of 

Wain  Marg  ...  348 

Shivism  ...  348 

Its  sects  ...  349 

Vishnuism  ...  349 

Story  of  Robber  Parikal  ...  350 

Its  sects  ...  350 

Story  of  crow’s  excrement  ...  351 

Khaki  ascetics  ...  351 

Pandit  and  Khaki 

dialogue  ..  352 

St.  Kabir’s  religion  ...  354 

St.  Kabir’s  life  ...  355 

St.  Nanak’s  religion  ...  355 

Sects  of  Sikhism  ...  357 

Guru  Govind  Singh  ...  357 

Bibliolatry  in  Sikhism  ...  357 

Daduism  ...  358 

Ram  Sanehiism  ...  358 

Its  origin  ...  358 

Its  dogma  ...  359 

Ram  Charan  ...  359 

KurhaPanth  ...  359 

Gosainism  ...  361 

Its  origin  ...  361 

Ballabhacharya  ...  362 

Sankalpa  or  offering  ...  362 

Ballabha’s  imposture  ...  362 

Path  of  Health  ...  364 

The  Lady  ...  365 

Serving  the  Gosains  ...  366 

Sale  of  milk  forbidden  ...  367 

Swami  Narayanism  ...  367 

Story  of  Nose-cuts  ...  368 

Frauds  of  Swami 

Narayanists  ...  370 

Madhavism  ...  371 

Lingankitism  ...  372 

Brahmo  Samaj  and  Prarthana 
Samaj  ...  372 

Caste  ...  373 


xivi 


Blunders  of  Brahmoism  ...  373 

Infinite  Progress  ...  376 

Advice  to  Brahmoes  ...  377 

Bird's  cyeview  of  all 

religions  ...  378 

Assemblage  of  Religions  ...  380 

Religion  and  Irreligion  ...  380 

Pious  Frauds  ...  381 

Almight  of  money  ...  381 

Unity  of  Religion  ...  383 

10  Orders  of  Friars  ...  384 

Monkish  tricks  ...  385 

Geneology  of  kings  ...  388 

Lunar  line  ...  388 

Solar  line  ...  390 

Summary  ...  391 

CHAPTER  XII  ...  395 

Preface  ...  395 

Historical  Note  ...  396 

Examination  of  Atheism  ...  397 

Charvakism  or 

Materialism  ...  397 

Gross  Blunders  ...  398 

Animal  sacrifices  ...  399 

Flesh-eating  ...  400 

Kinds  of  Charvak  or 

Materialism  ...  401 

Buddhism  ...  403 

4 Kinds  of  Buddhists  ...  403 

Their  refutation  ...  404 

5 Scan.1has  ...  405 

Worship  of  senses  ...  406 

Doctrines  of  Buddhism  ...  407 

4 Sects  of  Buddhists  ...  408 

Buddhism  and  Jainism  ...  409 

7 Propositions  ...  410 

Jainism  ...  412 

Amarkosh  ...  413 

Proofs  of  God  ...  414 

Eternal  God  ...  415 

Dialogue  between  Theist  and 

Atheist  ...  415 

Science  of  Jainism  ...  419 

Chronology  ,,  ,,  ...  420 

Zoology  „ „ ...  421 

Geography  „ ...  422 

Beliefs  of  Jains  ...  423 

Mind  and  Matter  ...  423 

Soul’s  depravity  ...  425 

Intrinsic  activity  of  Soul  ...  426 

Religion  of  Jainis  ...  426 


Praise  of  Jainis  ...  427 

Prohibitive  acts  ...  427 

Jain  Tenderness  ...  428 

Means  of  Salvation  ...  428 

5 Vows  of  Jainis  ...  429 

Blunders  of  Jainism  ...  429 

Exclusiveness  ...  429 

Sinfulness  of  other  faiths  ...  430 
Selfishness  ...  430 

No  good  to  others  ...  431 

Superiority  of  Jainism  ...  431 

Worship  of  Jina  ...  433 

Chief  Doctrines  ...  434 

Self-praise  ...  434 

Prohibition  of  Trade  ...  435 

Prejudice  ...  436 

Salvation  by  faith  ...  436 

Book  of  Belief  ...  437 

Bliss  of  Jainism  ...  437 

Worship  of  Jina’s  image  ...  438 
Idolatry  in  Jainism  ...  438 

Detail  of  Ritual  ...  438 

Jainism,  the  author  of 

idolatry  ...  439 

Creed  of  Jainism  ...  440 

Meaning  of  the  creed  verse  441 
Salvation  of  Jainism  ...  442 

Jain  Absurdities  ...  443 

Sin  of  Cookery  ...  444 

Sin  of  Horticulture  444 

Qualifications  of  Holiness  ...  445 
Dry  Vegetables  ...  446 

Boiled  water  ...  447 

Mouth  covering  ...  447 

24  Jain  Saviours  ...  451 

Miracles  ...  452 

Saint’s  prostitute  ...  452 

Astronomy  of  Jainis  ...  453 

Rock  of  Salvation  ...  454 

Butterflies  of  4 leagues  ...  455 

Seats  of  Jain  Gods  ...  456 

Summary  ...  457 

Priority  of  Jainism  to  Bud- 
dhism ...  459 

CHAPTER  XIII  460 

Preface  ...  460 

OLD  TESTAMENT  461 

Christianity  ...  461 

Creation  of  light  ...  462 

Creation  of  Adam  ...  462 

Forbidden  fruit  ...  463 


xhii 


Cain  and  Abel  ...  465 

Noah  ...  466 

Tower  of  Babel  ...  466 

Abraham  ...  468 

Circumcision  ...  468 

Anthropomorphism  ...  469 

God  eats  flesh  ...  469 

Lot’s  incest  ...  470 

Hagar,  Abraham’s  concubine  470 

Human  sacrifice  ...  470 

Burial  ...  470 

Abraham’s  God  ...  472 

Ismael  ...  472 

Litholatry  ...  472 

Idolatry  ...  473 

Wrestling  match  ...  473 

Moses  ...  473 

Miracles  ...  475 

Parting  of  sea  ...  475 

Jealous  God  ...  475 

Sabbath  ...  476 

Back  of  God  ...  477 

Sin  offering  ...  478 

Priests’  Frauds  ...  478 

God  wants  a house  ...  480 

Book  of  Job  ...  481 

NEW  TESTAMENT  482 

Birth  of  Jesus  Christ  ...  482 

Miracles  ...  483 

Exorcism  ...  484 

Forgiveness  of  Sins  ...  485 

Miracle  of  Loaves  ...  486 

Messiah  ...  487 

Christ  curses  a fig  tree  ...  488 

Betrayal  of  Christ  ...  490 

Humanity  of  Christ  ...  490 

Arrest  of  Christ  ...  490 

Crucifixion  of  Christ  492 

Resurrection  of  Christ  ...  493 

Trinity  ...  493 

Mansions  in  heaven  ...  494 

Lamb  opens  the  seals  ...  496 

Elects  ...  497 

Idolatry  ...  497 

Bottomless  Pit  ...  498 

Horses  in  heaven  ...  498 

Temple  of  God  ...  499 

Woman  in  labour  in  heaven  499 
War  in  heaven  ...  499 

Temple  in  heaven  ...  501 

Christ’s  Marriage  ...  501 

Christ’s  Wife  ...  502 


City  in  heaven  ...  503 

Heaven  ...  503 

Works  ...  504 

Summary  ...  504 

CHAPTER  XIV  506 

Preface  ...  506 

Religion  of  Moslems  ...  507 

Right  way  ...  508 

Alkoran  ...  508 

Fezi’s  Koran  ...  509 

God  teaches  Adam  ...  510 

Worship  of  Adam  ...  510 

Satan  deceives  Adam  ...  511 

God  works  ...  512 

Covenant  ...  512 

Infidels  ...  513 

Forgiveness  ...  514 

Moses’  Miracles  ...  514 

Praying  Side  ..-  514 

Kaaba  : Temple  of  Mecca  ...  515 

Keblah  (Praying  Side)  ...  516 

Women  and  Fast  ...  517 

Crescentade  ...  518 

Loan  to  God  ...  519 

God’s  arbitrary  will  ...  520 

Praise  of  Islam  ...  520 

St.  Mary  ...  521 

God’s  stratagems  ...  522 

Belief  in  Apostles  ...  522 

Belief  in  Mahomed  ...  523 

Kill  Infidels  ...  523 

God’s  Associates  ...  524 

Forbidden  Flesh  ...  525 

Parley  between  God  and 

Satan  ...  526 

Sight  of  God  ...  528 

Allotment  of  Plunder  ...  528 

War  against  Idolatry  ...  529 

Special  Providence  ...  529 

Crescentade  ...  530 

Troops  of  Angels  ...  530 

Police  of  God  ...  530 

Paradise  ...  531 

God’s  partiality  ...  532 

Eternal  Hell  ...  533 

Prophets  of  Nations  ...  534 

Injustice  and  Inconsistency  535 
Books  deeds  ...  535 

Miracle  of  camel  ...  535 

Salvation  ...  535 

Mercilessness  ...  535 


xlviif 


Sun  sets  in  mud  ...  535 

Immaculate  conception  ...  535 

God  tempts  to  sin  ...  536 

Mountains  steady  the  earth  536 
Idolatry  of  Kaaba  ...  539 

Evidence  of  organs  ...  539 

Passing  of  mountains  ...  541 

Murder  forgiven  ...  542 

Noah  lived  950  years  ...  542 

Second  creation  ...  542 

Wonders  of  Koran  ...  543 

Allah  not  omnipresent  ...  543 

Prophet’s  wives  ...  544 

Mahomed  marries  Zeinab  ...  544 

Prophet’s  license  ...  544 

Prophet’s  widows  not  to 

remarry  ...  545 

Resurrection  ...  546 


Wine  and  Women 

...  546 

Injustice 

...  548 

Bate  to  Proselytes 

...  549 

Koran  contradicts  Bible 

...  550 

Massacre 

...  550 

Life  in  Paradise 

...  551 

War 

...  552 

War  against  Infidels 

...  553 

8 Angels  bear  God’s  throne  554 

7 Heavens 

...  555 

Flaying  of  Heaven 

...  556 

Scattering  of  Stars 

...  556 

Original  Koran 

...  557 

Descent  of  Koran 

...  558 

Conclusion 

...  558 

Islam  in  Veda 

...  559 

Summary 

...  561 

AUTHOR’S  BELIEFS 

...  563 

Humble  Salutation  to  the  Lord  God,  who  is  Truth,  Intelligence, 
or  Consciousness,  and  Happiness  ! 


PREFACE 

WHEN  I brought  out  the  first  edition  of  this  book,  called  the 
Satyarth  Prakasha,  I was  not  much  familiar  with  the  Hindi 
idiom;  for  my  mother  tongue  was  Gujrati,  and  the  language  I 
used  to  speak  in  the  time  of  study  was  Sanscrit.  Consequently  many 
mistakes  crept  into  that  edition.  But  as  the  most  frequent  use  of 
Hindi  in  the  course  of  my  preaching  has  now  obtained  me  great  facility 
and  practice  in  speaking  and  writing  it,  I think  it  to  be  proper  to 
publish  the  second  edition  of  the  book,  after  correcting  its  expressions 
according  to  the  rules  of  Bhasha  grammar.  This  revised  and  enlarged 
edition  presents  a slight  difference  in  its  wording,  phraseology,  struc- 
ture of  sentences  and  general  disposition  of  the  subject-matter;  for, 
without  this  necessary  alteration  it  was  hard  to  express  the  Hindi 
idiom.  But  there  is  no  doctrinal  difference  of  any  significance  in  it. 
Moreover,  the  typographical  errors  of  the  first  edition  have  been 
corrected  in  the  present  one. 

This  book  contains  fourteen  chapters  and  is  divided  into  two 
parts.  The  first  ten  chapters  form  the  first  part  and  the  last  four,  the 
second.  The  first  edition  did  not  contain  the  last  two  chapters  and 
the  one  on  my  beliefs  for  certain  reasons  that  need  not  be  mentioned 
here. 

The  first  chapter  treats  of  the  signification  and  explanation  of 
the  names  of  the  Supreme  Being,  as  Om  and  the  like;  the  second,  of 
education  of  children;  the  third,  of  the  student  life  (brahmacharya), 
the  rules  of  instruction,  a list  of  authentic  and  spurious  books  and 
the  curriculum  of  studies;  the  fourth,  of  the  institution  of  marriage 
and  the  duties  of  the  family  life  (grihastha);  the  fifth,  of  the  retired 
life  (vanaprastha)  and  the  missionary  life  (sannyastha);  the  sixth,  of 
the  duties  of  kings;  the  seventh,  of  the  Vedas  and  God;  the  eighth, 


2 


Preface 


of  the  creation,  preservation  and  destruction  of  the  world;  the  ninth, 
of  knowledge,  ignorance,  damnation  and  salvation;  the  tenth,  of 
moral  and  immoral  conduct,  ordained  and  forbidden  food;  the  ele- 
venth, of  the  exposition  and  refutation  of  the  faiths  of  India;  the 
twelfth,  of  materialism,  Buddhism  (rationalism),  atheism  and  Jainism 
or  idolatry;  the  thirteenth,  of  Christianity;  and  the  fourteenth,  of 
Mahometanism.  The  book  concludes  with  a summary  of  the  ancient 
Aryan  religion  as  taught  in  the  Vedas  which  I believe  in  entirety. 

The  chief  object  of  writing  this  book  is  to  bring  the  correct 
interpretation  of  the  Vedic  Scriptures  in  vogue.  It  proves  what  is 
true  and  exposes  what  is  false.  It  is  no  truth  wherein  falsehood  is 
substituted  for  truth  and  truth  for  untruth;  but,  on  the  contrary, 
truth  consists  in  telling,  writing  and  believing  things  as  they  are.  The 
man  who  is  partial,  is  ready  to  prove  his  untruth  to  be  truth,  and  the 
truth  of  other  religions,  opposed  to  his  own,  to  be  falsehood.  He, 
therefore,  cannot  obtain  true  religion.  Hence,  it  is  the  duty  of  virtuous 
and  learned  men  to  acquaint  all  the  people  with  what  is  truth  and 
what  is  falsehood,  by  means  either  of  writing  or  of  preaching  in  the 
public.  They  will  then  judge  for  themselves  what  is  good  and  what 
is  evil,  and  perchance  choose  truth  and  reject  falsehood  to  their  great 
ease  and  felicity.  Though  the  power  of  the  recognition  of  truth  and 
falsehood  is  inherent  in  the  soul  of  man,  yet  the  promptings  of 
motives,  bigotry,  prejudice,  ignorance  and  the  like  passions  keep  him 
away  from  truth  and  incline  him  towards  untruth.  But  this  book  is 
free  from  all  these  defects.  Also,  there  is  not  the  remotest  object  to 
hurt  the  feelings  of  any  person  either  directly  or  indirectly;  but,  on  the 
contrary,  the  book  proposes  that  men  should  distinguish  truth  from 
falsehood.  Thus  alone  can  the  human  race  steadily  advance  on  the 
path  of  happiness;  since  none  but  the  preaching  of  truth  is  the  cause 
of  the  improvement  of  the  human  family. 

Whatever  mistakes  are  made  in  this  book  either  unconsciously 
or  in  correcting  the  proofs  in  printing,  shall  be  immediately  attended 
to  when  pointed  out  in  good  faith;  but  the  voice  of  prejudice  and 
cavilation  with  the  view  of  injuring  the  cause  of  truth  shall  be  passed 
over  unheeded.  However,  if  a person  informs  us  of  something  for 
the  good  of  all  men,  his  opinion  when  found  correct  shall  be  at  once 
accepted.  Since  there  are  many  learned  men  in  all  the  religious 
bodies,  the  common  people  can  obtain  and  enjoy  comfort  and  pleasure, 
provided  that  they  give  up  their  partiality  and  acknowledge  the  truth 
of  universal  maxims,  which  hold  good  in  all  times  and  are  beneficial 
to  all  people,  and  that  they  reject  what  is  prejudicial  to  their  good 
and  live  in  peace  with  one  another;  for,  the  dissension  of  learned  men 
kindle  the  flames  of  the  mutual  antipathy  of  the  vulgar,  which  tend 
to  the  increase  of  various  kinds  of  distress  and  to  the  decrease  of 
ease  and  comfort  This  loss  which  is  liked  by  the  selfish,  has  launched 
all  the  people  upon  the  sea  of  sorrow.  If  any  person  sets  about  a 
beneficial  undertaking  for  the  good  of  all,  he  is  embarrassed  with 
many  troubles  thrown  in  his  way  by  the  vicious  for  his  obstruction. 
But  the  old  saying  is:— 


Preface 


3 


srqfH  «r?TT  i' 

—meaning,  Truth  always  triumphs,  but  not  falsehood;  truth  paves 
the  path  of  the  learned.  From  the  firm  belief  in  this  adage,  the 
learned  and  virtuous  never  waver  from  revealing  the  truth  of  things, 
nor  do  they  even  grow  indifferent  to  benevolence.  It  is  one  of  the 
settled  truth,  viz; 

c N 

which  is  said  in  the  Gita,  It  means  that  all  the  efforts  for  the  acqui- 
sition of  knowledge  and  virtue  are  like  poison  at  first,  but  turn  nectar 
in  the  end.  Similar  considerations  actuated  me  to  write  this  book. 
The  reader  may  act  on  what  he  likes  after  its  careful  and  attentive 
persual  and  the  comprehension  of  its  purport.  The  whole  merit  of 
this  book  is  that  it  accepts  whatever  is  truth  in  all  religions  that  does 
not  conflict  with  others,  and  it  discards  all  sectarian  views  which  are 
false  and  selfish.  Another  merit  of  this  book  is  that  it  has  laid  bare 
the  secret  and  open  wickedness  of  all  religious  sects  for  the  information 
of  both  learned  and  unlearned  men,  so  that  they  may  think  over  them, 
settle  their  differences,  become  friends  to  one  another,  and  follow  one 
true  religion.  Just  as  I,  being  born  in  Aryavarta  and  living  there, 
am  not  partial  to  the  false  views  of  the  various  religions  of  this 
land,  but  advocate  the  truth  only,  so  I am  neither  partial  to,  nor 
prepossessed  against,  but  treat  the  people  of  other  countries  and  their 
religions  with  strict  regard  to  right  and  justice.  I am  as  much  friend 
of  those  who  strive  for  the  improvement  of  this  country,  as  of  those 
who  work  for  other  lands;  and  the  same  should,  I think;  all  virtuous 
people  do.  Had  I leaned  towards  any  religion,  I would  have  become 
like  one  of  those  gentlemen  of  modern  times,  who  are  ready  to  extol, 
support  and  spread  their  own  creeds,  and  slander,  censure,  obstruct, 
and  persecute  those  of  others.  But  these  things  are  below  the  dignity 
of  man.  Because  it  is  the  characteristic  of  the  lower  animals  that  the 
strong  afflict  and  prey  upon  the  weak.  And  if  a person  takes  advan- 
tage of  his  efficient  machinery  of  the  human  body  to  perpetrate  similar 
acts,  verily  he  is  not  endowed  with  the  godly  virtue  of  humanity,  and 
there  is  no  reason  why  he  should  not  be  called  a human  beast.  That 
person  is  a true  man  who  protects  the  weak  in  the  time  of  his  strength. 
But  he  who  injures  the  interests  of  others  out  of  his  selfishness,  is 
closely  akin  to  brutes,  so  to  speak. 

But  to  return.  Now,  the  first  eleven  chapters  of  this  book 
dwell  upon  the  religious  manners  and  customs  of  the  people  of  Arya- 
vatra.  The  religion  they  propound  is  based  upon  and  enjoined  by 
the  Holy  Vedas  and  has  accordingly  ever  commanded  my  belief  in  it  ; 
but  the  teachings  of  the  modern  Puranas  (mythological  and  cosmolo- 
gical books)  and  Tantras  (ritualistic  and  demonological  books)  herein 
exposed  and  refused  should  always  be  rejected  with  righteous  contempt. 

The  religion  of  Charavaka  (materialism)  given  in  the  l2th  chap- 
ter, has  now  almost  disappeared;  it  greatly  resembles  Buddhism  and 
Jainism  in  respect  of  atheism  and  the  like,  only  that  Charavakism  is 
greater  than  both  put  together.  Its  propaganda  should  of  necessity 


4 


Preface 


be  checked;  for,  if  false  ideas  be  suffered  to  pass  without  restraint, 
the  world  will  soon  come  to  grief.  Charavakism  is  one  with  Jainism 
and  Buddhism  and  is  therefore  succinctly  described  in  the  12th  chap- 
ter. The  points  wherein  it  differs  from  the  latter  are  also  touched 
upon.  Jainism  agrees  with  Charavakism  and  Buddhism  in  many,  and 
dilTers  from  them  but  in  a few  things;  hence,  it  is  looked  upon  as  a 
distinct  sect.  The  details  of  its  divergence  from  the  former  will  be 
correctly  learnt  from  the  perusal  of  the  12th  chapter,  which  also  gives 
the  principal  tenets  of  Buddhism  and  Jainism.  The  account  of 
Buddhism  is  taken  from  the  “Dipavansha”  and  other  books,  which 
give  an  abridgement  of  Buddhism.  The  following  authorities  on  Jain- 
ism are  consulted  in  the  preparation  of  this  book  : — 

4 Moot  Sutras  : — (1)  Avashyaka  Sutra,  (2)  Vishesha  Avash- 
yaka  Sutra.  (3)  Dashavaikalika  Sutra,  and  (4)  Pakshika  Sutra. 

11  An^as: — (1)  Acharanga  Sutra,  (2)  Sugadanga  Sutra,  (3) 
Thananga  Sutra,  (4)  Samavayanga  Sutra;  (5)  Bhagawati  Sutra,  (6) 
Jnatadharmakatha  Sutra,  (7)  Upasaka  dasha  Sutra,  (8)  Antagada- 
dasha  Sutra,  (9)  Anuttarovavai  Sutra,  (10)  Vipaka  Sutra,  and  (1 1) 
Prashnavyakarana  Sutra. 

12  Upaugas  :—{\)  Upavai  Sutra,  (2)  Rayapseni  Sutra,  (3) 
Jivabhigama  Sutra.  (4)  Pannavana  Sutra.  (5)  Jambudwipapannati 
Sutra,  (6)  Chandapannati  Sutra,  (7)  Surapannati  Sutra,  (8)  Niriyavali 
Sutra,  (9)  Kepyiya  Sutra,  (10)  Kapabarhisaya  Sutra,  (11)  Puppyyia 
Sutras  and  (12)  Papyachuliya  Sutra. 

5 Kalpa  Sutras  : — (1)  Uttaradhyayana  Sutra,  (2)  Nishitha 
Sutra,  (3)  Kalpa  Sutra,  (4)  Vyavahara  Sutra,  and  (5)  Jitakalpa  Sutra. 

Cltliedas: — (1)  Mahabnishithavrihadvachana  Sutra,  (3)  Maha- 
nishitha  laghuvachana  Sutra,  (3)  Madhyamavachana  Sutra.  (4)  Pinda- 
nirukti  Sutra,  (5)  Ougha  nirukti  Sutra,  and  (6)  Paryushana  Sutra. 

10  Payanna  Sutras  : — (1)  Chatussarna  Sutra,  (2)  Pancha- 
khans  Sutra,  (3)  Tadulavaiyalika  Sutra,  (4)  Bhaktiparijnana  Sutra, 
(5)  Maha  pratyaknyana  Sutra,  (6)  Chandavijaya  Sutra,  (7)  Gani- 
vijaya  Sutra,  (8)  Maranasamadhi  Sutra,  (9)  Devendrastamana  Sutra, 
(10)  Sansar  Sutra  ; and  Nandi  Sutra,  Yogoddhara  Sutra  are  also  con- 
sidered authentic. 

5 Panchangas  \ — (1)  Commentaries  on  all  the  above  men- 
tioned books  (2)  Nirukti,  (3)  Charani,  (4)  Bhashya.  These  are  called 
parts,  and  these  with  the  text  are  called  Panchangas.  Of  these,  the 
Dhnndhiyas  do  not  recognize  the  parts.  Besides  these,  there  are  seve- 
ral books  of  the  Jain  faith  The  12th  chapter  of  this  book  gives 
their  doctrines  and  articles  of  faith.  The  Jain  books  labor  under  the 
fault  of  hundreads  of  thousands  of  repetitions.  It  is  a custom  with 
them  that  they  consider  a book  to  be  spurious  if  it  is  in  the  hands  of 
persons  of  different  religions,  or  if  it  is  a printed  copy.  This  belief  of 
theirs’  is  ridiculous  enough  ; for  a book  cannot  be  without  the  pale  of 
Jainism,  if  a sect  of  theirs  ever  believed  in  it.  Of  course,  that  book 
cannot  be  called  theirs,  which  neither  is  nor  was  ever  believed  in  by 


Preface 


5 


any  of  them.  But  there  is  no  such  book  in  the  above  list  that  has 
not  been  believed  in  by  some  or  other  person  of  Jain  denomination. 
Hence  the  believer  of  a book  alone  is  involved  in  the  refutation  or 
confirmation  of  its  doctrines.  But  there  are  some  among  them  who, 
when  in  a meeting  or  discussion,  change  their  belief  in  a book  which 
they  otherwise  believe  in.  So  they  are  obliged  to  keep  their  books 
secret.  They  do  not  give  them,  read  them  or  teach  them  to  their  oppo- 
nents in  religion.  The  reason  is  that  they  contain  so  many  absurd 
things  as  cannot  be  maintained  by  the  Jainis.  The  abandoning  of  a 
lie  is  its  proper  answer. 

The  1 3th  chater  describes  the  religion  of  the  Christians.  These 
people  hold  the  Bible  to  be  their  religious  book.  All  their  especial 
and  important  doctrines  have  been  treated  of  in  the  said  chapter. 

The  14th  chapter  deals  with  the  religion  of  the  Mahometans. 
These  people  uphold  the  Koran  to  be  the  book  of  their  religion,  the 
chief  doctrines  of  which  have  been  as  well  explained  and  convassed 
as  was  consistent  with  brevity. 

The  book  concludes  with  a synopsis  of  the  important  doctrines 
of  Vedic  religion.  The  perusal  of  the  book  that  does  not  enter  into 
the  spirit  of  the  author  or  his  intention,  will  not  at  all  elicit  the  real 
purport;  for  there  are  four  conditions  for  the  right  understanding  of 
a subject,*  viz,  (1)  akanksha  : expressiveness,  (2)  yogyta  : fitness,  (3) 
asatti  : usage,  and  (4)  tatparya  : the  object.  He  grasps  the  right 
meaning  of  a subject  who  reads  it  in  conformity  with  these  four  essen- 
tials. 1 Expressiveness  (the  power  of  conveying  thoughts)  is  the 
correlation  between  the  speaker  and  the  words  of  the  language  he 
employs  with  reference  to  their  signification.  2 Fitness  (propriety) 
is  the  suitability  of  the  expressions  used,  just  the  same  way  as  water 
is  suitable  for  sprinkling,  3 Usage  (idiom)  is  the  proper  order  of 
words  which  regulates  their  co-location  with  one  another.  4 The 
object  is  the  purpose  for  which  the  writer  has  written  a book  or 
speaker  has  made  a speech.  This  purpose  should  always  be  kept 
uppermost  in  the  mind  in  the  consideration  of  the  subject.  There  are 
many  prejudiced  persons  who  throw  out  conjuctures  quite  contrary  to 
the  intention  of  the  writer  or  speaker.  These  gentlemen  are  generally 
sectarian.  Their  intellect  is  destroyed  by  the  darkness  of  ignorance 
brought  about  by  sectarianism.  But  from  the  very  beginning  I do 
not  view  the  Puranas,  the  Jain  books,  the  Bible,  and  the  Koran  with 
the  eye  of  prejudice,  and  therefore  I accept  what  is  good  and  reject 
what  is  faulty  in  them.  1 try  for  the  advancement  of  the  Hindus  as 
well  as  for  that  of  other  nations.  I think  other  people  should  also 
do  the  same.  A few  flaws  of  these  religions  have  been  here  put  forth. 
Sensible  people  can  themselves  judge  which  is  a true  and  which  is  a 
false  religion  by  comparing  them,  and  accordingly  form  their  opinion 
as  to  the  acceptance  of  truth  and  rejection  of  falsehood.  It  is  quite 
foreign  to  the  sincere  wish  of  the  truly  learned  to  incite  any  people  to 


6 


Preface 


prejudice  them  against  each  other,  to  set  them  together  by  the  ear, 
and  thus  to  work  out  their  ruin.  Though  ignorant  persons  will  think 
otherwise  on  perusing  this  book,  yet  learned  and  wise  men  alone  will 
comprehend  the  true  and  real  object  of  it.  With  this  settled  convic- 
tion and  a sanguine  hope  of  my  labours  being  successful,  I lay  my 
object  before  the  judgement  of  all  good  men.  They  may  favour  it  with 
an  impartial  reading  to  make  my  labours  useful  to  them.  In  like 
manner,  it  is  the  most  important  duty  of  mine  and  of  virtuous  people 
to  reveal  the  truth  and  truth  only.  May  the  infinite  God,  who  is  all 
truth,  all-intelligence,  all-happiness,  and  the  innermost  spirit  of  all, 
out  of  his  grace,  give  success  and  permanence  to  this  object  of  mine  ! 
Verbum  sat  sapkntia — a word  is  enough  for  the  wise. 


Odeyporf, 

Bhadrapad,  Bright  Fortnight, 
1939,  A.V. 


—DAY  AN  AND  SARASWATI 


NOTE  BY  THE  TRANSLATOR 

Transposition  of  Sanscrit  Verses 

In  the  translation  of  the  book  the  Sanscrit  authorities  of  the 
text  are  placed  over  the  translation,  though  they  are  given  in  the 
original  a long  way  before  it,  which  makes  it  somewhat  inconvenient 
for  an  enquirer  to  test  the  correctness  of  the  translation.  In  the 
beginning  the  Sanscrit  verses,  not  being  explained  there,  are  trans- 
posed to  the  place  of  their  translation.  In  like  manner,  the  verses  of 
Manu,  which  are  often  grouped  together,  are  interposed  in  the  trans- 
lation for  the  facility  of  reference. 

Abbreviations  used  in  Translation 


The  book  is  replete  with  Sanscrit  quotations  from  numerous 
Sanscrit  books,  to  repeat  full  names  of  which  is  very  tedious.  Hence 
the  initials  of  their  names  are  often  used.  We  give  most  of  these 


abbreviations  below:  — 
Rig,  for  Rig  Veda 
Yaj.  „ Yajur  Veda 
Ps  ,,  Psalm  Veda 
Ath.  ,,  Atharva  Veda 
M.  ,,  Mandal 
S.  „ Sukta 
Ash  „ Ashtak 


V. 

for  Varg. 

M. 

,,  Mantra 

Ad 

„ Addhyaya 

An. 

„ Anuvak 

Pr. 

,,  Prapathak 

K. 

„ Kand 

Ar. 

,,  Archika 

For  example,  Rig. 
II,  xii,  5 means  the 
Rigveda,  2nd  Man- 
dal, 12th  Sukta,  and 
5th  verse  or  mantra, 
Yaj.  XXI,  3,  means 
the  Yajurveda,  21st 
Chapter  or  Addh- 
yaya  and  3rd  mantra 
or  verse. 


The  Rigveda  is  divided  in  two  manners,  1st,  into  Mandala, 
Sukta  and  Mantra,  2ndly,  into  Ashtak,  Prapathak,  Anuwak,  Varg 
and  Mantra.  Both  are  mixed  up.  The  translation  follows  the  first 
mode.  The  Yajurveda  is  divided  into  Addhyaya  or  chapters  and 
mantras  or  verses.  The  Psalm  Veda  is  divided  into  two  Archikas  and 
many  Kandikas  and  Mantras,  The  Atharva  Veda  is  divided  into 
Kand,  Varg,  Sukta  and  Mantra. 


Br. 

for  Brahdaranyka  Upanishat  i 

Shan 

,,  Shandalya 

Chh 

„ Chhandogya 

do. 

Ait 

„ Aitereya 

Man 

„ Mandukya 

do. 

Yoga 

,,  Yoga  philosophy 

Mun 

,,  Mundaka 

do. 

Ny. 

„ Nyaya  do. 

Kat 

,,  Kath 

do. 

Ved. 

„ Vedant  do. 

Kaiv 

„ Kaivalya 

do. 

Vai. 

,,  Vaisheshak  do. 

Tait 

„ Taitereya 

do. 

San. 

,,  Sankhya  do. 

Ish 

„ Ish 

do. 

Mim. 

,,  Miraansa  do. 

Prash 

„ Prash na 

do. 

S. 

„ Sutra 

Ken 

„ Ken 

do. 

P. 

,,  Pada 

Brail 

„ Brahmana 

Manu. 

„ Manu  smriti 

Shat 

„ Shatpath  Brahmana 

Ch. 

,,  Chanakyaniti 

Go 

„ Gopath 

do. 

Su. 

„ Sushrut 

8 


Preface 


Ch.  „ Charak 

A.  „ Anhik 

Nir.  „ Nirukta 

Nig.  ,,  Nighantu 

Jy.  „ Jyotis 

Gr.  ,,  Gryhya  Sutra 

Ap.  ,,  Apasthamb 

Mall.  ,,  Maha  Bharat 

Par.  ,,  Parva 

V.  „ Valli 

Kh.  ,,  Khand 

Gita  „ Bhagwat  Gita 

Sh.  ,,  Shloka 

V.R.  ,,  Valmiki  Ramayan 

Sarg.  ,,  Sarg 

Bh.  ,,  Bhagwat 

Sk.  ,,  Skandh 

Tan.  ,,  Tantra  Shastra 

R.  ,,  Reviewer 


The  Qoran  is  divided  into 
Manzal,  114  Surat  or  Chap.  30 
Spipara  and  Ayat. 

0.  for  Alqoran  S.  for  Surat 
Sip,  ,,  Sipara  A.  ,,  Ayat 

The  Bible  in  divided  into  Old 
and  New  Testaments.  The  former 
contains  39  books  and  the  latter 
27,  each  book  contains  Chapters 
and  verses. 

O.T.  for  Old  Testament 
Gen.  ,,  Genesis 
Ex.  ,,  Exodus 
Lev.  „ Leviticus 
Num.  ,,  Numbers 
Deut.  „ Deuteronomy 
Jo.  ,,  Joshua 
Jud.  ,,  Judges 
Ruth.  ,,  Ruth 

I Sam.  ,,  I Samual 

II  Sam.  „ II  Samual 
IK.  „ I Kings 

II  K.  „ II  Kings 

I Ch.  ,,  I Chronicles 

II  Ch.  ,,  II  Chronicles 
Ezra  „ Ezra 

Neh.  ,,  Nehemiah 


Es. 

„ Esther 

Job. 

,,  Job 

Prov. 

,,  Proverbs 

Ec. 

,,  Ecclesiastes 

S. 

,,  The  Song  of  Solomon 

Is. 

,,  Isaiah 

Jer. 

,,  Jeremiah 

Lam.  ,,  Lamentation 

Ez.  „ Ezekiel 

Dan.  ,,  Daniel 

Ho.  ,,  Hosea 

Jo.  ,,  Joel 

Am.  ,,  Amos 

Ob.  ,,  Obadiah 

Jonah  ,,  Jonah 

Micah  ,,  Micah 

Nan.  „ Nahum 

Hab.  ,,  Habakkuk 

Zep.  ,,  Zephaniah 

Hag.  „ Haggai 

Zech.  ,,  Zechariah 

Mai.  ,,  Malachi 

N.T.  ,,  New  Testament 

Mat.  „ Matthew 

M.  „ Mark 

L.  „ Luke 

J.  ,,  John 

Acts  ,,  The  Acts 

Ep.  ,,  Epistle  to  the  Romans 

I.  Cor,  ,,  I Corinthians 

II  Cor.  „ II  Corinthians 

Gal.  ,,  Galatians 

Eph.  ,,  Ephesians 

Ph.  „ Philippians 

Col.  ,,  Colossians 

I Th.  ,,  I Thessalonians 

II  Th.  ,,  II  Thessalonians 

IT.  ,,  I Timothy 

II  T.  „ II  Timothy 

Titus.  5,  Titus 

Phil.  „ Philemon 

H.  ,,  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews 

E.J.  „ Epistle  of  James 

IP.  „ I Peter 

II  P.  „ II  Peter 

IJ.  ,,  I John 

II  J.  „ II  John 

III  J.  „ III  John 

Judde  ,,  Jude 

Rev.  „ Revelation 


SATYARTH  PRAKASH 

Light  of  Truth 


Chapter  I 

EXPLANATION  OF  AUM 

The  word  Aumkara*  is  the  best  name  of  God:  for,  the  thiee  letters, 
a,  w,  nty  which  compose  the  word  Awn,  denote  many  of  his  attri- 
butes. For  instance,  a signifies  Virat  : the  Ruler  of  the  universe, 
Agnh  the  Omniscient  Being,  Vishwa  : the  Omnipresent  Being,  and  the 
like  divine  appellatives ; u implies  Hiranya  Garbha;  the  upholder  of 
stars  and  planets,  Vayu  : the  Omnipotent  Being,  Tejah  : the  Self- 
glorious  Being,  and  such  like  God’s  epithets  ; and  m expresses 
Ishwara  : the  Lord  God,  Aditya  : the  Eternal  Being,  Prajna  : the  Uni- 
versal Intellect,  and  similar  names  of  the  Deity.  Thus  the  Divine 
Names  are  clearly  and  distinctly  described  in  the  Vedas  and  other 
philosophical  books,  and  the  context  of  the  passages  of  all  the  books 
these  names  occur  in,  refers  them  to  the  Supreme  Being  alone. 

Question— should  not  Virat  and  the  like  words  be  taken 
to  mean  objects  rather  than  God  ? Do  they  not  mean  the  universe, 
the  earth,  and  the  similar  creations;  Indra  and  the  like  gods;  and 
ginger  and  the  like  drugs  in  medicine  ? 

Answer — Yes;  they  do.  But  they  also  mean  the  infinite  Spirit, 
g.— -Don’t  you  take  them  to  mean  gods  only  ? 

A, — No.  What  is  the  authority  for  your  taking  them  to  mean 
exclusively  so  ? 

Q. — Gods  are  well-known  and  are  also  considered  the  best  of 
all  ; hence  1 take  these  words  to  mean  them. 

A, — Is  not  God  well-known?  Is  there  anybody  better  than  He  ? 
Then,  why  don’t  you  take  them  to  mean  God  also?  How  can  any- 
thing be  better  than  God,  when  he  is  well-known,  and  there  is  none 
equal  to  him  ? Therefore  your  objection  is  untenable;  for,  it  contains 
many  inconsistencies:  as,  for  instance. 


*Kara  is  a termination  added  to  letters  to  make  them  nouns  and  declinable  as 
akara  means  simply  a So  here  aumkara  is  simply  Aum,  which  is  an  indecelin- 
able  particle. 


10 


Satyarth  Prakash 


meaning,  if  a man  having  got  food  ready,  goes  about  asking  for  it,  he 
cannot  be  looked  upon  as  a wise  man;  for,  he  tries  for  things  rather 
few  and  far  between  than  those  near  at  hand.  In  like  manner,  your 
assertion  is  an  unreasonable  as  the  wisdom  of  that  person  is  uncom- 
mendable.  The  reason  is  evident  that  there  is  no  authority  for  your 
taking  the  words,  Virata  &c.,  (which  plainly  and  decidedly  imply  the 
Supreme  Being,  the  universe,  and  the  like  objects  of  nature,)  to  mean 
gods  and  other  imaginary  beings  only. 

Context  Gives  Meaning 

You  would,  perhaps,  say  that  the  occasion  should  determine 
the  meanings  of  words.  For  instance,  a gentleman  says  to  his  servant, 

^ e 

meaning,  O butler,  bring  me  saindhava.  Here  the  man  should  think 
of  the  occasion;  for,  saindlutva  means  two  things,  1.  a horse,  2.  salt. 
If  it  is  his  master’s  time  to  go  out,  he  should  bring  his  horse;  and  if 
he  is  at  dinner,  he  should  bring  him  salt;  but  if,  on  the  contrary,  he 
brings  salt  on  the  occasion  of  going  out  and  the  horse  at  the  time  of 
dinner,  his  master  will  get  angry  and  say,  “Thou  art  a fool.  What  is 
the  use  of  bringing  me  salt  at  the  time  of  going  out  and  that  horse  at 
the  time  of  dinner  ? Thou  dost  not  think  of  occasions,  otherwise  thou 
wouldst  bring  what  was  then  needed.  Thou  didst  not  think  what  the 
occasion  required;  so  thou  art  a blockhead.  Get  thee  gone  from  me.” 

Well,  what  does  this  dialogue  prove  ? It  goes  to  prove  that  that 
signification  alone  should  be  accepted,  which  is  most  appropriate  and 
suitable  to  the  occasion  requiring  it,  and  this  is  what  we  should  all 
do  and  scrupulously  observe  at  all  times. 

Examples 

Let  it,  therefore,  be  borne  in  mind  that  Oin*  and  similar  other 
words  mean  the  Supreme  Being  in  the  Vedas  in  such  passages  as  are 
quoted  below.  The  object  of  these  quotations  is  to  show  (1)  that 
Awn  and  the  like  words  in  them  signify  the  Infinite  Spirit;  (2)  that 
no  name  of  God  is  meaningless,  as  in  the  vulgar  dialect  a pauper  is 
called  dhanpati : a master  of  riches,  and  so  forth.  Moreover,  they 
prove  that  these  words  denote  either  qualities,  actions,  bearings,  or 
natures  of  things  in  dilTerent  places 

Now,  Awn  and  the  other  names  of  God  occurring  in  the  verses 
that  follow  are  significant,  as, 

551— 

meaning,  God  is  called  Aum  from  affording  us  protection,  Kham  from 
pervading  all  things  like  the  sky,  and  Brahma  from  being  greater  than 
all  things. 

* Om  and  Aum  are  optional  spellings.  O am. 


Explanation  of  Aunt 


11 


2.  I 

He  alone  who  is  called  Aum,  and  who  is  immortal,  should  be 
adored,  but  none  else.— Chh.  Up. 

N 

Aum  is  the  specific,  connotativc  and  most  important  name  of 
God  in  the  Vedas  and  other  scriptures,  and  his  other  names  are  of 
secondary  importance. — Mandukya  Upanishat. 

4.  ^ ^ ^ I 

era  {\^  w 

He  is  called  Aum  who  is  sung  in  all  the  Vedas,  invoked  in  all 
the  acts  of  devotion  and  austerity,  and  sought  for  obtainment  in  the 
vows  of  celibacy.— Kath.  II,  12. 

5.  si5TTftTarK  i 

He  should  be  regarded  as  the  Supreme  Being,  who  is  the  tea- 
cher, of  all,  who  is  more  subtle  than  atoms,  who  is  self-glorious,  and 
who  is  known  only  in  the  intellect,  composed  in  trance  or  abstracted 
from  all  influences  of  matter. — Manu,  XII,  112. 

6.  SI3TTq%lT  I 

God  is  called  Agni,  because  he  is  self-glorious  ; Manu,  because 
he  is  incarnate  knowledge  ; Indra,  because  he  is  the  protector  of  all 
and  the  Almighty  Lord  of  all ; Prana  because  he  is  the  fountain  of 
life  of  all ; and  Brahman,  because  he  is  the  all-pervading  principle 
of  the  universe,  ib.  128. 

7.  H H H H ftiq:  H I 

H ??a‘:  H qFraiffq:  ^ II  Kaivalya  Upanishat 

He  is  called  Brahma,  for  he  makes  all  the  world  ; Vishnu,  for 
he,  pervades  all  ; Rudra,  for  he  afflicts  the  wicked  by  punishing 
them  ; Shiva  for  he  is  happy  and  is  the  dispenser  of  good  to  all  ; 
Aksharcr,  for  he  is  everywhere  and  immortal  ; Swarat,  for  he  is  self- 
glorious  ; and  Kalagni,  for  he  destroys  all  during  the  time  of  cata 
clysm  and  is,  as  it  were,  the  destroyer  of  death,  being  the  purifying 
fire  of  enternity. — 

8.  firq  fesq:  H I 

qnrfoqmTf:  II 

Indra  and  the  similar  other  words  are  the  names  of  the  Deity 
who  is  non-dual,  self-existent,  and  the  all-encompassing  substance— 
Rig  I.  164  46. 

m qqrqq  qmffq  qr^^qrfq  qr 

(1)  He  is  called  Indra,  for  he  prevades  the  most  wonderful 
empire  of  nature  and  all  the  objects  therein  ; (2)  Suparna,  for  his 


12 


Satyarth  Prakash 


protection  is  best  and  his  actions  perfect  ; (3)  Gaurtman,  for  his 
glory  is  universal  ; and  (4)  Matrishwa,  for  he  is  infinitely  more 
powerful  than  the  air.  Thus  Divya  Suparna,  Garutman  and  Mat- 
rishwa  are  the  names  of  God.  The  remaining  names  will  be  explain- 
ed hereafter. 

qf«T^  m II  Yaj.  Xlll.  18. 

God  is  called  Bliumilt,  for  all  the  creatures  exist  in  him.  The 
other  names  of  God  in  this  verse  will  be  explained  hereafter. 

10.  »T|fT  ???:  I 

5 faRfT  Hq'tTiOr  ???  ii 

Indra  is  a name  of  God  in  this  verse  ; hence,  it  is  given  here 
as  an  authority. — Psalm  Veda,  Pr.  7,  A.  3,  S.  8. 

1 1 . srmiq  qtjf  i 

qt  qq:  qq^tftqrl  qf?q?HTq  qfqfeqq  II 

CN 

God  controls  the  whole  world  as  the  respiration  does  the  senses 
of  the  body. — Atharva  Veda,  Kand  11,  Adhaya  2,  Sukta  2,  Mantra  1, 

Primary  Meanings  of  Agni,  &c. 

The  right  interpretation  of  the  above  authorities  establishes  the 
fact,  that  the  above  names  belong  to  God  only,  for  Aum,  Agni  and 
the  like  names,  properly  speaking,  denote  God,  as  is  shown  by  the 
Vyakarana  or  grammar,  Nirukta  or  philology,  Brahmanas  or  Vedic 
commentaries,  Sutras  or  aphorisms  and  the  expositions  of  scriptures 
by  sages  and  philosophers.  Hence  these  meanings  should  be  accept- 
ed by  all  ; only  that  Aum  is  exclusively  the  name  of  God,  but  A^iii 
and  others  mean  God,  when  the  subjects  and  the  epithets  indicate 
prayer,  praise,  meditation.  Wherefore,  it  is  established  that  when 
these  names  are  modified  and  accompanied  by  such  words  as  omni- 
scient, omnipresent,  holy,  eternal,  the  maker  of  the  world,  and  the 
like  words,  they  mean  God. 

Secondary  Meanings  of  Agni,  &c. 

But  in  such  passages  as 

qqt  fqrrqsrrqq  fqTT5ftqfq'[?q:i  qroijq ’g^iqfjqTsnqq 

wqqyq  l q5qiqqfqqq>  I Yajur  XXXI 
!nq>15T:  I qT*PT5ITfTg:  I qiq^Tpq:  I \ v:^:  qfq^  qfqsq: 

qfqqq:  I wtqfqvq>s?qq  I ?T?qT?q:  I ^qq:  gw:  q qi  qq  jqqts^rqqq: — 

— Tait.  Brahmanand  V III,  1st  An.  The  words  mat,  purusha,  cieva, 
akasha,  vayu,  agni,jala,  bhumi,  &c.  denote  terrestrial  objects  ; for, 
wherever  creation,  preservation,  destruction,  partial  knowledge,  non- 
sentient,  visible  and  the  like  epithets  are  mentioned,  they  do  not 
signify  God.  The  reason  is  that  God  is  above  creation  and  similar 
other  actions,  which  in  the  above  authorities  are  natural  actions. 


Explanation  of  Aum 


13 


Hence,  not  being  the  names  of  God,  the  virat,  &c.  denote  natural 
objects.  But  when  they  are  used  along  with  such  adjectives  as  omni- 
scient, &c.,  they  signify  the  Great  God  ; and  when  they  are  qualified 
by  such  words  as  imply  desire,  enmity,  exertion,  pleasure,  pain, 
partial  knowledge,  and  the  like,  they  mean  the  human  soul.  This 
holds  good  everywhere,  for  the  birth  and  death  of  God  never  happen 
at  all.  Hence  birth,  &c.  make  virat  and  other  words  mean  material 
and  mental  creations,  but  not  God. 

Now  to  show  how  virat  and  other  words  mean  God  derivatively. 

100  Names  of  God 

Om,  Daivya,  Suparna,  Garutman,  and  Matrishwa  are  the  5 
names  previously  explained,  see  page  1 1-12,  and  95  names  are  here 
enumerated. 

1.  Virat  ift  ^ I 

The  word  virat  (an  illumer)  is  delivered  from  the  root  rap  : to 
illume  or  shine,  with  the  prefix  vi  and  kvipa  termination.  He  who 
illumes  and  manifests  the  world  in  various  forms,  is  called  Virat. 
Hence  it  means  God. 

2.  Agni  I 

The  word  agni  (worshipful)  is  derived  from  the  root  anchu  : to 
move  or  to  worship  or  the  roots  agi  and  ina  which  signify  motion.- 
Agni  is  the  name  of  God  because  he  is  incarnate  knowledge,  omni- 
scient, and  worth  knowing  and  acquiring. 

.h  Vishwa 

>9  ^ <V  ^ ^ 

The  word  vishm  is  derived  from  the  root  visit  : to  enter,  with 
va  as  an  affix,  meaning  an  agent  or  a place.  God  is  called  Vivhwa, 
because  he  is  the  asylum  of  the  heavens  with  all  the  creation,  or  he 
pervades  and  exists  in  them  all.  The  above  names  are  connoted  by 
the  letter  A in  the  word  Aum. 

4.  Hiranya  Garbha  I Aitareya  & 

Shatapatha  W H 

God  is  so  called  Hiranya  Garbha  (the  womb  of  light),  because  the 
sun  and  other  heavenly  bodies  are  produced  by  and  exist  in  him.  The 
following  verse  of  the  Yajur  Veda,  Xlll.  4,  supports  this  meaning  : — 

1.  The  letters  which  are  elided  in  roots,  prefixes  and  affixes,  are  here  drop- 
ped out.  They  are  signs  for  vowel  elongation  and  classes  of  roots— Ed. 

2.  The  word  (j«// which  is  the  meaning  of  the  root  AG;  has  three  mean- 
ings v/z.,  knowledge,  ideas,  movement,  acquisition.  These  are  denoted  by  Agni 
when  it  means  God. 

3.  In  the  opinion  of  some,  the  English  word  God  is  also  derived  from  go, 
others  says  it  is  a contraction  of  Good. 


14 


Satyarth  Prakash 


H qf^  f^r^  ii 

There  are  many  other  verses  which  make  Hiranya  Garbha  a name 
of  God. 

5.  VavLi  \ 

^fir  ^fi=r?TT  ^ qrg:  i 

The  word  vayu  (a  mover)  is  derived  from  the  root  va  : to  move, 
to  kill.  God  is  called  Vayu,  because  he  moves,  quickens,  supports 
and  destroys  all  the  movable  and  immovable  creatures  and  is  the 
most  powerful  of  all. 

6.  Tejah  - 

The  word  tejah  (an  illumer)  is  derived  from  the  root  iij  : to 
shine  or  illume,  and  tajas  from  the  same  root  with  a nominal  suffix. 
God  is  called  Tejah,  because  he  is  self-glorious  and  illumines  the 
sun  and  the  like  refulgent  bodies.  The  above  names  are  indicated 
by  the  letter  U in  the  word  Aum. 

7.  Ishwara  f?T  ^ I 

The  word  ishwara  (a  ruler)  comes  from  the  root  ish  : to  rule 
or  to  be  wealthy,  with  Vijr  as  a suffix,  meaning  an  agent.  God  is 
called  Ishwara,  because  his  nature,  knowledge  and  wealth  are  infinite. 

8.  Aditya  it  q?q 

5Rrq%^q  ^ifqrq:  I 

The  word  aditya  (unscatheable  or  immortal)  is  derived  from 
the  root  do  ; to  cut,  with  a privative  as  a prefix  and  ti  a suffix,  mean- 
ing an  agent,  and  o changes  into  e,  which  makes  aditi,  and  with  a 
nominal  termination  it  becomes  aditya.  Aditya  is  the  name  of  God, 
because  he  never  dies. 

P.  Prajna  5r:  qfc^rTqi  'qTT^T^ 

H q^T:  I trqr  \ 

The  word  prajna  (a  knower)  is  derived  from  the  root  jna  : to 
know,  with  pra,  a prefix,  it  becomes  prajna  with  a nominal  termina- 
tion. Prajna  is  the  name  of  God,  inasmuch  as  he  rightly  knows  the 
actions  of  all  the  movable  and  immovable  creatures  of  the  world 
and  whose  knowledge  is  clear  and  free  from  all  manner  of  doubt. 
These  names  are  expressed  by  the  letter  M in  the  word  Aum. 

Here  only  three  attributes  are  mentioned  that  are  implied  by 
each  letter  of  the  word  Aum.  In  the  same  way.  other  names  are 
inferred  therefrom. 

51  5I^>  I 5I?5T  Sf^^rT:  5rsT> 

u *(ri5i»r  i sfruw  i Jim 

i gfectrifiT  I HfJi  i dgvBi'CH^g  i 

I I uif  5nf^:  5Trf%:  II 


Explanation  of  Aum 


15 


The  names  in  the  above  verse,  such  as  rnitra  and  others,  all 
belong  to  God;  for,  as  has  already  been  said,  invocation,  prayer 
and  worship  are  only  due  to  the  Shreshta  (Best)  or  Supreme  Being, 
who  excels  others  in  attributes,  character,  nature  and  right  ways. 
He  who  is  exceedingly  superior  to  even  the  best,  is  called  the  Lord 
God.  None  was,  is,  or  will  be  equal  to  him.  When  there  is  none 
equal  to  him,  how  can  any  one  be  greater  than  He  ? Truth,  justice, 
mercy,  omnipotence,  omniscience,  and  other  infinite  attributes  can 
not  be  so  well  and  rightly  predicated  of  any  material  object  as  of 
the  Supreme  Ruler  of  the  universe.  The  Being  which  is  true  or 
real,  can  also  have  true  attributes,  character  and  nature.  Hence, 
men  should  invoke,  supplicate  and  worship  none  but  God;  for, 
ancient  learned  sages,  whose  names  were  Brahma,  Vishnu,  Mahadeva, 
nay,  even  the  Titans,  giants,  and  other  low  castes  and  common 
people,  believed  in  God  only,  and  praised,  glorified  and  asked  bless- 
ings of  him  alone,  and  not  any  other  being.  The  same  we  all  should 
do.  This  subject  will  be  particularly  described  at  large  in  the  chapter 
on  salvation  and  devotion. 

Q — If  it  be  urged  that  the  words  rnitra  and  others  should  be 
taken  in  their  popular  sense  of  earthly  friends,  Indra  and  other 
divinities,  as  their  actions  are  well-known.  A. — It  is  replied  that 
those  significations  will  not  do  here;  for,  the  person  who  is  a friend 
to  one,  is  an  enemy  to  another,  and  is  generally  seen  to  be  indiffe- 
rent to  a third  individual.  Hence,  human  companions  and  other 
popular  meanings  cannot  be  their  primary  significations.  But  as 
God  is  the  undoubted  friend  of  all,  and  is  neither  ill  disposed, 
nor  indifferent  to  any  one,  which  a human  being  cannot  be,  those 
names  can  mean  God  only  in  such  passages.  Of  course,  in  their 
secondary  sense  rnitra  and  other  words  mean  earthly  friends  and  so 
forth. 

10.  Mitra  m h f^r^r:  i 

The  word  mitra  (a  friend)  is  derived  from  the  root  nimid  : to 
love  with  ktra  as  a termination.  God  is  called  Mitra,  because  he 
loves  all  and  deserves  to  be  loved  by  all. 

11.  Varuna  ^5{  fqfniTW,  K:  fwi^T 

c o v9  .a 

The  word  varuna  is  derived  from  the  root  vri  to  choose,  with 
a suffix  unan.  God  is  called  Varuna,  because  he  accepts  or  is  accept- 
ed by  a metaphysician,  a clairvoyant,  the  learned,  an  aspirant  of 
salvation,  the  saved,  and  the  righteous. 

12.  Aryama,  qfcTsrTqwrqt:,  “snrm” 

irtsirfjT  nrmm'hrnT  *TT?iTi?r  qrdfir  i 

The  word  aryama  comes  from  arya  and  ma  to  respect,  with  an, 
an  affix,  and  arya  is  derived,  from  ri  to  go,  to  obtain,  and  ya  an  affix. 
God  is  called  aryama,  because  he  honours  them  that  do  what  is  equit- 
able and  just,  and  rightly  judges  the  good  and  evil  actions  of  the 
virtuous  and  vicious. 


16 


Satyarth  Prakash 


] 3 . Indra  ffir  <7745^^  I ^ ?^fk  iR4»?4aiPT  fT  pJ:  I 

The  word  wc/ra  comes  from  the  root  ic/i:  to  have  almighty  power 
and  the  affix  rc/.  God  is  called  Indra,  because  he  has  almighty  power. 

14.  Brihaspati  irt  f5?nm«R5rnfHTt  qffT:  TRfiRn 

The  word  brihaspati  is  derived  from  the  root pa\  to  protect,  with 
\Yiha,  as  a prefix  the  t of  brihat  is  dropped  and  s is  inserted.  Then 
the  affix  ti  is  added.  God  is  called  Brihaspati,  because  he  is  the 
greatest  of  the  great  and  is  the  Lord  of  the  heaven  and  earth  and  the 
vast  universe. 

15.  Vishnu  smcT  H f4e<iT:~ 

% o 

The  word  vishnu  comes  from  the  root  vish\  to  pervade  and  na  an 
affix  meaning  an  agent.  God  is  called  Vishnu,  because  he  pervades 
the  movable  and  immovable  objects  of  the  world. 

16.  Urukrama  — 

On  account  of  infinite  power,  God  is  called  Urukramah. 

The  verse  means:  May  {hhavatu)  the  Infinite  Spirit  (Parmatma) 
who  is  omnipotent  {Urukramah),  who  is  the  friend  of  all  (Mitra)  who 
is  the  dispenser  of  happiness  {Sham)  who  is  the  best  of  all  (l^aruna), 
who  is  the  fountain  of  happiness  {Sham),  who  is  the  common  judge 
of  all  (Aryama),  who  is  all-powerful  Indra,  who  is  the  giver  of  ail 
wealth  {Sham)  who  is  the  support  of  all  {Brihaspati),  the  teacher  of 
knowledge  {Sham)  who  pervades  all  {Vishnu),  bless  {sham)  us  {nah) ! 

P.  Brahma  ^3^  \ 

The  word  brahma  is  derived  from  the  root  brih  or  brihi  to  increase 
with  the  suffix  ma  of  an  agent.  Meaning  of  the  verse, — We  salute 
the  Great  God  Brahma,  who  is  above  all,  who  encompasses  all,  and 
who  is  infinitely  powerful.  Almighty  Lord,  thou  alone  art  the  searcher 
of  the  heart  and  evidently  the  ruler  of  all.  1 own  thee  as  my  Lord, 
and  being  present  everywhere,  thou  art  ever  accessible  to  all.  I shall 
act  on  and  preach  to  others  what  is  thy  commandment  in  the  Vedas. 
I shall  follow  truth  in  thought,  speech,  and  action.  Protect  me,  O 
Lord ! Protect  me,  righteous  and  veracious  as  I am,  so  that  my  mind 
may  hold  fast  to  it;  thy  commandment  is  religion  and  its  opposite  is 
irreligion  ! 

The  repetition  of  the  last  phrase  marks  the  fervour  of  prayer  and 
the  commencement  of  study.  For  instance,  when  a person  says  to 
another,  “Go,  go  to  the  village”,  the  repetition  of  the  verb  “go”  marks 
quickness,  / e.,  Go  to  the  village  quickly.  In  the  same  manner,  in  the 
former  sentence,  it  denotes  emphasis,  i,e  , Protect  me,  O Lord,  protect 
me,  do  thou  so  that  I may  be  firm  and  without  any  doubt  whatever, 
is  religion  and  hate  irreligion.  O Lord,  do  me  this  favour,  I shall 
ever  own  thy  grace  !” 

The  object  of  repeating  the  word  shanti  (peace)  thrice  is  to  show 
that  there  are  three  kinds  of  pain  in  the  world,  mental,  corporal  and 
natural,  1 Adliyatmic,  i e.,  ignorance,  affection,  enmity  and  folly 
belong  to  the  mind;  and  fever  and  the  similar  evils  to  the  body. 


Explanation  of  Aum 


17 


2 Adhibhoutic,  i.e , earthly  evils  come  from  an  enemy,  as  the  tiger,  the 
serpent,  and  the  like.  3 Adhidaivic,  i.e.,  natural  evils  are  produced  by 
the  excess  of  rain,  cold,  heat  and  the  disquietude  of  the  mind  and  the 
senses.  So  it  means:  '‘Keep  us  all,  O Lord,  away  from  these  three 
kinds  of  pain,  and  always  employ  us  in  the  acts  of  benevolence,  for 
thou  art  the  source  of  happiness,  the  benefactor  of  the  whole  world, 
and  the  dispenser  of  bliss  to  the  righteous  and  the  seekers  of  salvation. 
Therefore,  O Lord,  be  manifest  in  the  hearts  of  all  persons  out  of 
thy  sheer  grace,  so  that  they  may  practise  religion  and  abandon 
irreligion,  obtain  everlasting  bliss,  and  be  free  from  all  kinds  of  pain.” 

18.  Surya  I 

The  Supreme  Ruler  is  called  Snrya  in  this  verse  of  the  Yajur 
Veda,  for  he  is  self-glorious,  illumes  all,  and  is  the  innermost  soul  of 
all  that  is  movable, — the  sentient  creatures  and  other  locomotive 
beings,  and  all  that  is  immovable,— non-sentient  trees,  materials,  such 
as  earth  and  the  like. 

19.  Paramatma  <513  I H ?n?«n 

>TT5^r?Tr^rcq'r  ^ h tthtcsti  i 

The  word  atnia  is  derived  from  the  root  at:  to  pervade.  God  is 
caWed  Paramatma,  the  Supreme  Spirit,  because  be  entirely  pervades 
all  the  animals  and  other  creatures,  and  because  he  is  the  best  of  all 
creatures,  and  finer  than  the  atoms  of  matter,  the  soul  and  the  sky, 
and  is  the  life  or  innerself  of  all  souls. 

20.  Parameshwara  tT  ^ I 

o 

The  mighty  is  called  Ishwara  the  Lord.  He  who  is  the  Ruler 
of  rulers  and  who  has  none  equal  to  him,  is  called  Parameshwara  the 
Supreme  Ruler. 

21.  Savita  <131  I I 

'ON  ON 

I 


The  word  savita  is  derived  from  the  root  su:  to  produce,  with  ta 
a siiHix,  before  which  su  becomes  savi.  Being  the  producer  of  all  the 
world,  God  is  called  Savita. 

22*  Deva  fer 


eft  ^'t«irfar  a la:,  a la:,  ^aa^iTafa  a la:,  a^aTrar  aaa 

ataafa,  a:  ^ga^  a la:,  a>  ataafa  a la:,  a>  ararfa  a la:,  ^aiaafa  a 
a:  ^laa^  ai  a la:,  at  ar  a la:  i 


The  word  deva  is  derived  from  the  root  div,  meaning  play,  desire, 
to  conquer,  work,  glory,  praise,  joy,  dream,  beauty,  motion.  God  is 
called  Deva,  because  of  affording  pleasure  to  the  innocent,  of  willing 
the  triumph  of  the  righteous,  of  being  the  dispenser  of  means  and 
measures  of  all  efforts  and  movements,  of  being  self-glorious  and 
giving  light  to  all,  of  deserving  all  praise,  of  being  happiness  himself 
and  giving  it  to  others,  of  being  the  curber  of  the  proud,  of  being  the 


18 


Satyarth  Prakash 


maker  of  night  and  cataclysm  for  the  rest  of  all,  of  being  the  object 
of  the  desire  of  all,  and  of  being  the  fountain  of  knowledge.  In  other 
words,  the  Supreme  Being  is  called  Deva,  because  he  delights  in  the 
happiness  of  himself  and  makes  all  the  worlds  by  virtue  of  his  nature 
and  without  the  help  of  any  other  being,  and  is  the  source  of  the 
pleasure  of  all,  because  he  overcomes  all  and  is  himself  invulnerable 
and  unconquerable,  because  he  knows  and  teaches  right  and  wrong, 
because  he  gives  light  to  all,  because  he  is  entitled  to  the  praise  of  all 
and  the  censure  of  none,  because  he  is  happiness  in  himself,  and  gives 
it  to  others,  and  has  no  trace  of  pain  whatever,  because  he  is  ever 
happy,  is  beyond  pain,  is  joyful  and  keeps  others  away  from  the 
misery  of  pain,  because  he  gives  rest  to  all  the  creatures  in  the  time 
of  cataclysm,  because  his  will  is  based  upon  truth,  and  he  is  sought 
by  all  virtuous  persons,  and  because  he  pervades  all  and  is  worth 
knowing. 

23.  Kiivera  if:  ^ H 5rJR35gR:  I 

The  word  kuvera  (an  encompasser)  is  derived  from  the  root 
kuvi.  to  cover,  to  encompass.  God  is  called  Kimra,  because  he 
encompasses  all  by  virtue  of  his  own  presence  everywhere. 

24.  Prithwi  it:  ST«T%  ^ H qf«T^'t  ( 

> c c 

The  word  prithwi  is  derived  from  the  root  prithu  : to  spread.  In 
as  much  as  God  spreads  or  makes  the  world,  he  is  called  Prithwi. 

25.  Jala  mcrcrfcT 

The  word  Jala  comes  from  the  root  jala  : to  kill.  God  is  called 
Jala,  because  he  punishes  the  wicked  and  composes  and  decomposes 
atoms  or  invisible  molecules. 

26.  Akasha  m H \ 

The  word  akash  (a  shiner)  comes  from  the  root  kash  : to  shine. 
God  is  called  Akasha,  because  he  is  the  light  of  the  world  in  every 
way. 

27.  Anna,  28.  Annada  ^ \ 

29.  Atta  I \ 

The  word  amia  comes  from  aJ : to  eat.  The  last  is  the  aphorism 
of  the  Sharirik  or  Vedant  by  St.  Vyasa.  As  he  contains,  holds  and 
sustains  all  and  is  the  fundamental  support  of  all  that  is  and  all  that 
moves,  God  is  called  Anna,  Annada  and  Atta.  The  treble  repetition  of 
Anna  in  the  Upanishat  is  by  way  of  par  excellence.  All  the  world 
exists  in  God  very  much  like  the  virmin  in  the  fruit  of  "'GulaP'  (fig), 
which  are  born  and  destroyed  therein. 

30.  Vasu,  I 

The  word  vasu  comes  from  the  root  vas  : to  live,  with  the 
suffix  u As  all  the  heavens  and  the  other  creatures  live  in  him,  and 
He  resides  in  them  all,  the  supreme  Ruler  is  called  Vasu. 

31.  Rudra  ^ H I 


Explanation  of  Aum 


19 


The  word  rudra  is  derived  from  the  root  rudir  ; to  shed  tears  and 
the  affix  nich,  which  becomes  a The  Lord  is  called  Rudra,  because 
he  brings  the  wicked  to  grief  and  causes  them  to  weep. 

«^TirfcT  ?TrT 

This  is  a quotation  from  the  Brahmana  of  the  Yajur  Veda.  It 
means  : Man  expresses  in  speech  what  he  thinks  in  mind.  He  puts 
in  execution  what  he  expresses  in  words.  He  bears  the  consequences 
of  what  he  carries  out  in  action.  This  proves  that  man  reaps  what 
he  sows.  When  evil  doers  receive  punishment  for  their  sins  from  the 
equitable  justice  of  God,  they  weep  and  lament.  And  this  is  how  God 
makes  them  weep.  Hence,  the  propriety  of  Rudra  being  his  name. 

32.  Narayana  HRT  i 

fTf  iKfsrWJf  ?»T5T:  -Manu  I.  10. 

c\  c 

Nara  is  the  name  of  Jala  : water  and  jiwa  : soul.  Since  God 
pervades  water  and  other  elements  as  well  as  all  the  souls,  which  are 
his  temples  so  to  speak,  he  is  rightly  Narayana.  Ayana  means 
residence. 

33  Chandra,  ^ H I 

The  word  chandra  (happy)  is  derived  from  the  root  chadi : to 
be  happy.  As  God  is  the  source  of  happiness  and  gives  it  to  all 
others,  he  is  called  Chandra. 

34.  Mangala  ^ ( 

The  word  mangala  is  made  of  the  primitive  word  mang,  imply- 
ing motion  with  al  a suffix.  As  God  is  by  nature  holy  and  happy  and 
also  the  source  of  happiness  of  all  others,  he  is  called  Mangala. 

35.  Buddha  m ^ \ 

■o  VJ 

The  word  buddha  comes  from  the  root  budh  : to  know.  God  is 
so  called  Buddha,  because  he  is  the  absolute  intellect  and  is  the  cause 
of  all  others’  intelligence. 

The  meaning  of  the  word  Brihaspati  has  been  already  explained. 

36.  Shukra  m m H \ 

>9  O 

The  word  sukra  comes  from  the  root  shu  : to  purify  with  kra  a 
suffix.  God  is  called  Shukra,  as  he  is  most  holy  and  by  his  grace  or 
the  knowledge  of  him,  the  soul  is  purified. 

37.  Shanaishchar  | q*;  ^ I 

The  word  shanaishchar  comes  from  the  root  char  : to  move 

and  to  eat  with  shanaish  an  adverbial  prefix.  Since  God  by  virtue  of 
his  nature  pervades  all  and  is  most  forbearing  or  merciful,  he  is  named 
Shanaishchara. 

38.  Rahu  iT>  ««  ^ I 

The  word  rahu  is  derived  from  the  root  rah  : to  abandon.  As 

God  is  one  and  only,  in  whom  no  other  substance  is  intermixed  or  is 
non-dual,  who  forsakes  sinners  and  saves  others,  he  is  called  Rahu. 


20  Satyarth  Prakash 

39.  Ketu  % W.  m ^ 

The  word  ketu  comes  from  kit : to  live  and  to  remove  diseases. 
As  God  is  free  from  all  diseases,  relieves  all  of  all  ills,  in  salvation 
that  pant  after  it  and  is  the  resting  place  of  all,  he  is  called  Ketu. 

40.  Yajna  I 4 | ijt 

m H JW:  I 

The  word  yajna  is  derived  from  the  root  yaj : to  worship, 
accompany  and  give  in  charity.  It  is  a quotation  from  a Brahmana. 
God  is  called  Yajna,  as  he  is  omnipresent,  makes  all  the  things  in  the 
world,  was  adored  by  all  the  ancient  sages  from  Brahma  downwards, 
is  now  worshipped  by  all  the  learned  men  and  will  ever  be  so  in  time 
without  bounds. 

41.  Hota  f I tft  H II 

The  word  hota  comes  from  the  root  hu  : to  give  and  to  take, 
also  to  take  only  in  the  opinion  of  some,  with  the  affix  ta.  God  is 
called  Hota,  as  he  gives  what  is  worth  giving  to  and  takes  away  what 
deserves  taking  from  all  people. 

42.  Bandhu  I 

The  word  bandhu  comes  from  the  root  bandh  : to  bind,  with  an 
affix  u.  God  is  called  Bandhu,  for  He  holds  the  worlds  and  stars  in 
his  power,  well  regulated  by  his  laws,  so  that  they  do  not  trespass 
their  respective  orbits  and  violate  his  immutable  law,  and  is  the  help 
of  all  creatures  like  the  brothers  by  the  same  parents,  giving  ease  and 
support  to  all  the  worlds  and  all  that  exist  in  them 

43  Pita  m TTf^  H I 

The  word  pita  comes  from  the  root  pa  ; to  protect,  with  the 
affix  ta.  God  is  called  Pita,  as  he  is  the  protector  of  all,  and  wishes 
all  souls  success  and  prosperity  out  of  His  grace  and  mercy  like  a kind 
and  generous  father  to  his  sons  and  daughters. 

44.  Pitamaha  m ^ I 

God  is  called  Pitamaha,  because  he  is  the  father  of  fathers. 

45.  Prapitamaha  m ^ \ 

God  is  called  Prapitamaha.  because  he  is  the  father  of  the  fore- 
fathers of  fathers. 

46.  Mata  ^ iTTcTT  I 

God  is  called  Mata,  because  He  has  at  his  heart  the  amelioria- 
tion  of  all,  just  as  a kind  and  benevolent  mother  wishes  her  children 
ease  and  comfort  in  right  good  earnest.  It  is  derived  from  ma  : to 
respect  and  ta  an  affix. 

47.  Acharya  I 


Explanation  of  Aunt 


21 


The  word  acharya  is  derived  from  the  root  char  : to  eat  and  to 
move,  with  a a prefix  and;^^  an  affix.  As  He  is  pleased  with  virtuous 
conduct,  and  being  the  fountain  of  knowledge,  gives  it  to  mankind, 
God  is  called  Acharya. 


48.  Guru  n I ^ m:  W 

c N N c O ^ 


?r  T^isrmf'T 

c\  o 


W — Yoga. 


The  word  guru  is  derived  from  the  root  gri : to  sound.  God  is 
called  Guru,  because  He  teaches  the  Vedas,  prescribing  true  religion 
and  containing  all  knowledge;  because  He  is  the  teacher  even  of  Agni, 
Vayu,  Adittya,  Angira,  Brahma  and  the  like  teachers  of  antiquity  in 
the  beginning  of  the  creation,  and  because  His  death  never  takes 
place. 


49.  Aja  ^ I qfc?  qfir 

qr  1 

The  word  aja  is  derived  from  the  root  aja  : to  move  or  to  throw, 
ja  : to  be  manifest  or  revealed.  The  Lord  God  is  called  Aja,  because 
he  joins  the  atoms  or  the  elements  of  ether  and  the  like,  and  unites 
the  body  and  the  soul  to  bring  them  into  existence,  and  is  himself 
never  born. 


50.  Brahma  I ^ I 

The  word  brahma  is  derived  from  brih,  to  increase,  to  be  great. 

God  is  called  Brahma,  because  He  improves,  develops  the  world  or 
brings  it  to  perfection  after  creating  it. 

It  is  a quotation  from  Taitteriya  Upanishat. Brahman  or  the 
Supreme  Being  is  called  Satya,  Jnan  and  Anant. 

51.  Satya  I 

God  is  called  Satya,  because  He  is  conversant  with  all  objects, 
which  are  called  sat  in  Sanskrit. 

52.  Jnana  I 

God  is  called  Jnana,  because  He  knows  all  (derived  from  jna 
to  know). 

53.  Anant  q W 

God  is  called  Anant,  because  He  has  no  end,  or  bound,  dimen- 
sion, that  is  to  say,  length,  and  breadth  and  depth  or  volume  (a: 
no  ant:  end). 

54.  Anadi  \ qTqrq  qq  qifer  qiftq  q sqrfqfTcq- 

^ >5  N N e\  O 

The  word  anadi  is  derived  from  the  root  do  : to  give,  with  a and 
na  prefixes.  God  is  called  Anant  (unbeginning),  because  there  is 
nothing  prior  to  Him  and  He  is  beyond  all,  that  is.  He  is  not  preceded 
by  any  but  followed  by  all. 


22 


Satyarth  Prakash 


55.  Anand  iT3^ 

>9  N N 

JT:  H II 

The  word  anand  is  derived  from  the  root  nad  : to  increase  or  to 
thrive,  with  a a prefixed.  God  is  called  Anand  because  He  is  happiness 
itself,  and  all  the  elects  enjoy  beatitude  in  Him,  and  He  blesses  all 
that  are  righteous  with  happiness. 

56.  Sat  I ^ to  n 

>3  O O N ^ 

The  word  sat  is  derived  from  as  : to  be.  God  is  called  Sat 
(Being),  because  He  exists  forever  and  is  not  hampered  by  the  three- 
fold divisions  of  time,  v/z.,  past,  present,  and  future. 

57.  Chit  f^fcT  H5TT%  I a5%cTfiT 

The  word  chit  is  derived  from  the  root  chit  : to  know  well. 
God  is  called  Chit,  because  He  is  Absolute  Intellect,  gives  intelligence 
to  all  the  souls,  and  enables  them  to  discriminate  truth  from  falsehood. 

58.  Satchidanand  II 

God  is  called  Satchidanand,  because  these  three  words  sat,  chit, 
anand, — being,  knowledge,  delighting,  are  expressive  of  three  great 
divine  attributes. 

59.  Nitya  ^ ^ II 

God  is  called  ‘Nitya’,  as  he  is  eternal,  unchangeable  and 
immortal. 

60.  Suhddha  I m ^ H ^ I 

The  word  shuddha  comes  from  shudh  : to  purify.  God  is 
called  Shuddha,  because  He  is  himself  holy  and  free  from  all  taint  of 
impurities,  and  he  is  the  purifier  of  all. 

6 1 . Buddha  I H I 

The  word  buddha  is  derived  from  the  root  budh  : to  know  with 
ta  a suffix.  God  is  called  Buddha  because  He  ever  knows  all. 

62.  Mukta  I H I 

'O  O CS  N .3 

The  word  mukta  is  derived  from  the  root  much  : to  release,  with 
ta  affixed.  God  is  called  Mukta,  because  he  is  free  from  all  impu- 
rities and  releases  all  the  aspirants  of  salvation  from  the  bonds  of 
pain. 

^PTcT  tr^  I 

Hence,  God  is  called  Nitya,  Shuddha,  Buddha,  Mukta-— the 
eternal  the  holy,  the  wise;  and  the  absolute, 

63.  Nirakar  f?TT  I I 

The  word  nirakar  is  derived  from  the  root  kri : to  do,  with  nir 
and  a a prefixed.  God  is  called  nirakar  because  He  has  no  form, 
nor  does  he  ever  take  on  flesh. 


Explanation  of  Aum 


23 


64.  Niranjan  I 

The  word  nirainjan  is  derived  from  the  root  anj\  to  be  manifest, 
to  indicate,  to  desire,  to  move,  and  the  prefix  nir  of  prevation  and  an 
affixed.  God  is  called  Niranjan,  inasmuch  as  He  is  beyond  the  sphere 
ot  the  objects  of  the  senses,  and  free  from  corporeality,  evil  actions, 
and  desires. 

65.  Ganesh,  66.  Ganapati  m \ ^ 

qfir:  qtcrqft  i 

The  words  ganesh  and  ganpati  come  from  the  root  gan  • to 
count,  which  with  esli  and  pad  affixed  gives  Ganesh  and  Ganpati, 
the  lord  or  master  of  hosts.  God  is  called  Ganesh  or  Ganpati, 
because  He  is  the  lord  and  protector  of  all  things,  both  material,  and 
unmaterial  or  that  go  to  make  up  the  empire  of  nature. 

67.  Vihsweshwar  qt  ^ | 

God  is  called  Vishwesliwar,  because  He  is  the  Supreme  Ruler  of 
the  universe.  (Vishwa  : the  universe,  isli  to  rule,  var  an  affix). 

68.  Kutastha  q:  ^ 

( 

God  is  called  Kutastha,  because  He  never  changes  his  mind, 
although  pervading  all  actions  or  changes,  and  being  the  cause  of  all 
those  actions.  {Kuta  : elementary  substance,  and  stha  : to  stay,= 
dwelling  in  matter). 

69.  Devi  \ 

The  word  devi  has  as  many  meanings  as  the  word  deva  men- 
tioned above.  The  names  of  God  arc  of  three  genders.  The  word 
de\a  is  used  when  it  qualifies  Ishwara  : Ruler  (masculine)  and  devi 
when  it  qualifies  Chiti  Consciousness,  (feminine).  Hence  Devi  is  a 
name  of  God.^ 

70.  Shakti  51^^  \ m W,  5Tfq^:  \ 

c ^ o 

The  word  shakti  comes  from  the  root  'shak'  ; to  be  able.  God 
is  called  ‘Shakti’,  because  He  is  able  to  make  the  whole  world. 

71.  Shri  fsRir^  I q: 

I 

The  word  ‘shri'  is  derived  from  ‘shri'  : to  serve.  God  is  called 
‘Shri’  He  is  ineffable  beauty,  because  He  is  served  by  the  whole 
world,  the  learned  and  the  ascetics  included. 

72.  Lakshmi  I oft  qWciT^  ^iTT 

3rq?«Tarr  ®r>  i 

1.  In  Sanscrit  God  pervades  all  Grammar,  as  He  does  all  sciences.  Hence 
He  is  present  to  three  genders.  In  Arabic  and  English  God’s  names  are  mascu- 
line only.  God’s  motherhood,  his  most  endearing  relation  to  humanity,  is  absent 
from  Christianity  and  Islam. 


24 


Satyarth  Prakash 


The  word  'lakshmV  is  derived  from  the  root  ‘laksh'  ; to  see  and 
to  mark.  God  is  called  ‘Lakshmi’  (the  wealth  of  all),  because  He 
sees  all  the  movable  and  immovable  world,  gives  it  a shape  and  form, 
conferring  upon  it  the  distinguishing  marks,  such  as  the  eyes,  the 
nose  in  the  human  body  ; the  leaves,  flowers,  fruits,  and  roots  in  the 
trees  ; the  black,  red,  white  colours  : clay,  stone  in  land  water  ; the 
sun,  moon  and  the  like  features  of  the  material  world  ; and  He  is  the 
Ever  Wakeful  Eye  of  the  universe  ; He  is  the  beauty  of  beauties  ; the 
cynosure  of  the  Vedas  and  similar  scriptures,  the  religious  and  the 
learned. 

73.  Saraswati  H \ 5TT7T  I 

c 

The  word  saraswati  comes  from  the  root  sri  : to  go,  which 
becomes  ‘saras’,  ‘wat’  and  ‘i’  sulflxes.  God  is  called  ‘Saraswati’  (the 
mother  of  speech),  because  he  possesses  immense  knowledge  and  has 
correct  notions  of  words  and  their  significations,  relations,  and 
applications. 

74.  Sarvashaktiman  I 

God  is  called  \mrvashoktiman'  (the  Almighty),  because  in  His 

works  He  stands  in  no  need  of  another  and  because  He  completes 
all  His  immeasurable  works  by  His  own  power. 

75.  Nyayakari  I I 

SI 

The  word  UiyayakarT  is  derived  from  the  root  'ni"  : to  obtain, 
and  ‘cn’  do,  with  ‘m’  affixed.  The  above  is  a quotation  from  Vats- 
yasna  commentary  at  the  aphorism  of  Logic.  Justice  is  what  is  proved 
to  be  right  by  the  evidence  of  the  senses,  or  it  is  virtuous  conduct 
free  from  partiality.  God  is  called  ‘Nyayakari’  because  it  is  His 
nature  to  do  justice. 

76.  Dayalu  I 

The  word  "dayalu'  is  derived  from  the  root  'daya':  to  give,  to 
move,  to  protect,  to  kill,  to  receive,  and  ‘/w’  affixed.  God  is  called 
‘Dayalu,  because  He  is  the  conferror  of  fearlessness,  the  knower  of 
right  and  wrong  and  all  kinds  of  sciences,  the  protector  of  all  good 
people,  and  the  just  punisher  of  the  wicked. 

77.  Adwaita  g’D'mfiTrT  HT  fg^T  m ^ 

God  is  called  Adwaita  (non-dual),  because  He  is  the  only  one 
Great  God  free  from  duality,  or  co-partnership  in  his  divine  being, 
having  no  like,  as  man  has  another  man  for  his  likeness,  having  no 
opposite  or  antagonist,  as  man  has  trees,  stones,  and  other  material 
objects  for  his  opposites  of  his  thinking  nature,  and  having  no  susce- 
ptibility of  division,  in  Himself,  or  corporeal  distinction  of  lineament 
in  His  spiritual  nature,  as  the  eye,  the  ear,  and  the  other  limbs  in  the 
body  of  man. 


Explanation  of  Aum 


25 


?r«if5T  ?f5i  i 

Hence,  the  Supreme  Being  is  distinguished  for  Divine  Unity, 
non-duality,  or  having  no  second  hostile  divinity  or  variety  of  goods 
in  His  divine  godhead. 

78.  Nirguna  ^ ^ Jpiri  ^ n'in:,  JTWVTTt 

God  is  called  Nirguna,  because  He  is  free  from  the  properties  of 
matter,  such  as  satyva  (visible  existence),  raja  (action),  tama  (inertia), 
light,  taste,  touch,  smell,  and  the  like;  and  from  the  qualities  of  the 
human  mind,  such  as  ignorance,  impcrfact  knowledge,  affection,  en- 
mity and  the  similar  passions  and  sutferings. 

The  authorities  of  the  Upanishats  support  this  view,  as  for  ins- 
tance— 

K at  h . 

meaning  to  say,  God  is  far  from  having  the  properties  of  matter  as 
sound,  touch,  form,  &c.  {Nir  : not,  guna  : qualities  of  matter.) 

79.  Saguna  ^ H \ 

God  is  called  Saguna,  because  His  attributes  arc  omniscience, 
all  holiness  and  the  similar  qualities  of  infinite  character. 

Attributiveness  or  Unattributiveness  of  God. 

Just  as  the  earth  is  said  to  be  both  saguna,  /.  e,  possessed  of  the 
properties  of  matter,  as  smell,  &c.,  and  nirguna,  i.  e.,  devoid  of  men- 
tal qualities,  as  desire,  &c.,  so  is  God  called  both  Nirguna,  inasmuch 
as  He  is  not  reached  by  the  qualities  of  mind  and  matter  and  Saguna, 
because  He  possesses  the  qualities  of  omniscience  and  the  like  infinite 
powers.  In  other  words,  there  is  nothing  that  is  altogether  devoid 
of  the  possession  or  non-possession  of  qualities.  Just  as  the  matter 
is  nirguna,  i.e.,  without  qualities,  from  the  absence  of  the  qualities  of 
the  mind,  and  is  saguna,  i e,,  with  qualities,  from  the  possession  of  its 
own  qualities  ; so  is  the  soul  nirguna,  from  the  absence  of  the  qualities 
of  the  matter  ; and  Saguna,  from  the  presence  in  it  of  the  qualities 
of  desire  and  the  like  mental  powers.  The  same  is  the  case  with  God. 

80.  Antaryami  I 

God  is  called  Antaryami  (Inner  Controller),  because  He  has 
under  His  control  all  the  worlds,  both  animate  and  inanimate,  from 
His  presence  in  them  all. 

81.  Dharmaraja  W H I 

God  is  called  Dharmaraja  (the  king  of  justice),  because  He 
glories  in  justice  and  upholds  perfect  equity  without  the  least  alloy  of 
partiality  or  injustices. 

82.  Yama  I ^ 5rTf^>  H I 

O N 

The  word  yama  is  derived  from  the  root  yam  : to  control.  God 
is  called  Yama,  because  He  is  the  Judge  of  the  law  of  the  rewards  of 
the  actions  of  all  creatures  and  is  not  influenced  by  injustice. 


26  Satyarth  Prakash 

83.  Bhagwan  ^ I ^ ^ 

I 

N 

The  word  Bhagwan  is  derived  from  bhag,  which  is  again  derived 
from  the  root  bbaj  : to  serve,  and  the  termination  wan.  God  is  call- 
ed Bhagwan^  because  He  is  the  Lord  of  the  universal  wealth  and  is 
the  object  of  adoration. 

84.  Manu  I H I 

o 

The  word  maim  comes  from  the  root  man:  to  think.  God  is 
called  Manu,  because  His  knowledge  is  His  glory,  and  He  is  the  only 
being  to  whom  worship  is  due. 

85.  Purusha  1 Tf^TSTq’C’iIJTt:  I *1:  q’>TlfiT 

c c\  ^ c 

The  word  purusha  comes  from  the  root  pri : to  protect  and  to 
fill,  or  pur  the  body  or  the  world  and  shi  to  abide,  meaning  Indweller 
of  the  world.  God  is  called  Purusha,  as  He  fills  all  the  world. 

86.  Vishawambhar  \ ift  f^^cT, 

.a  c N ' 

3WTmfrT  ^ H I 

The  word  vishwambhar  comes  from  the  root  bhri : to  hold  and 
to  nourish,  with  the  word  vishwa  : the  world,  prefixed  to  it.  God  is 
called  Vishwambhar,  for  He  holds  and  supports  the  world. 

87.  Kaia  I H^arfcT  i 

The  word  kala  comes  from  kal:  to  count,  and  a affixed.  God 

is  called  Kala  because  He  counts  all  the  souls  and  objects  of  the 

world. 

88.  Shesha  I ^ \ 

c 

God  is  called  Shesha  (Omega),  because  He  remains  after  the 
creation  and  destruction  of  the  worlds.  Shis  : to  specify,  to  remain. 

89.  Apta  \ 

The  word  apta  comes  from  the  root  ap  : to  pervade,  and  the 
affix  ta.  God  is  called  Apta,  because  He  is  the  true  preacher,  possesed 
of  all  knowledge,  is  obtained  by  and  accessible  to  all  religious  per- 
sons, and  is  free  from  all  dissimulation,  fraud,  and  other  evils 

90.  Shankar  i m 5T  ^ i 

The  word  shankar  comes  from  the  root  kri  : to  do  with  sham  : 

good  as  a perfix  and  a affixed.  God  is  called  Shankar,  because  He 
does  good  and  dispenses  joy  and  ease  to  all 

91.  Mahadeva  \ ^ I 

The  word  mahadeva  is  formed  from  deva  with  mahat  prefixed 
to  it.  God’s  name  is  Mahadeva,  because  He  is  the  Great  God  of 
gods,  /.  e.,  the  most  learned  of  the  learned,  gives  light  even  to  the  sun 
and  other  luminous  objects. 


Explanation  of  Atm 


27 


92.  Priya  rTq^  ^ \ m q^ifir  ^ ^ fqq:  I 

The  word  'priya'  comes  from  the  root  'pri'  : to  please,  to  be 
beautified.  God’s  name  is  ‘Priya,  as  He  pleases  all  the  saints,  aspi- 
rants of  salvation,  and  the  good,  and  He  is  the  object  of  desire  of  all. 

93.  Swayambhu  I m ^ \ 

The  word  'Swayanihliu'  comes  from  the  root  'bhii'  : to  be  with 

the  prefix  swayam:  self.  God’s  name  is  Swayambhu,  as  He  exists  by 
Himself,  and  He  is  not  born  of  another. 

94.  Kavi  f I H I 

The  word  'kavV  comes  from  'kii'  to  sound  or  to  teach.  Kavi 
is  a name  of  God,  as  he  is  the  teacher  of  all  branches  of  knowledge 
by  means  of  the  Vedas  and  knows  them  all. 

95.  Shiva  \ \ 

The  word  'shiva'  comes  from  'shiv"  : to  be  haypy.  Also,  shi  : to 
repose,  and  va  affixed,  i.e.,  one  in  whom  the  universe  reposes.  God’s 
name  is  Shiva,  who  is  the  embodiment  of  happiness  and  dispenses 
happiness  to  all  the  people. 

Thus  are  the  hundred  names  of  God  described.  But  there  are 
still  innumerable  names  of  God  besides  them.  For  as  God’s  attri- 
butes, actions  and  nature  are  infinite,  so  are  His  names  indicating 
them,  infinite  in  number.  Of  them,  each  denotes  an  attribute,  action 
or  a phase  of  his  nature.  Therefore  the  names  of  God  above  men- 
tioned by  me  are  like  a drop  compared  with  an  ocean  ; for  the 
Vedas  and  other  scriptures  give  innumerable  attributes,  actions  and 
modes  of  his  nature.  Their  study  or  teaching  enlightens  the  mind. 
They  alone  can  get  the  correct  knowledge  of  other  objects,  who  study 
the  Vedas  and  other  scriptures. 

Prayful  Exordium 

Question. — Like  other  authors,  why  have  you  not  written  a 
mangalacharan  : auspicious  exordium,  cither  in  the  beginning,  middle 
or  at  the  end  of  the  book  ? 

Answer. — It  is  not  fit  for  us  ; for  he  who  v/iites  what  is  auspi- 
cious in  the  beginning,  middle  or  end,  will  have  his  writing  inauspici- 
ous between  the  beginning  middle  and  end.  Therefore,  it  is  an 
aphorism  of  the  Sankhya  philosophy:  — 

I 

It  purports  to  mean  that  the  mangalacharan  (lit  : right  conduct) 
is  the  constant  practice  of  justice  without  partiality,  truth,  and  obe- 
dience to  God’s  commandments  in  entirety  everywhere  and  at  all  time. 
Writing  what  is  right  and  true  from  the  beginning  ro  the  end  of  a 
book,  is  called  the  mangalacharan.  But  it  is  not  good  to  write  what 
is  good  in  some  places  and  what  is  evil  at  other.  So  the  writings  of 
great  seers  and  thinkers  : — 


28 


Satyarth  Prakash 


it  is  a quotation  from  the  Taiteriya  Upanishat,  Prapathak  7, 
Anuvak  11. — Meaning  : O dear  children  ! You  should  do  what  is 
irreproachable  and  unblameable  or  righteous  works,  but  not  unrighte- 
ous ones.  Hence  such  expressions  as  ^found  in  modern  books,  are 
considered  by  the  wise  to  be  false  from  their  being  opposed  to  the 
Vedas  and  scriptures  for  no  such  initial  writing  is  found  in  the  Vedas 
and  the  writings  of  sages.  But  the  books  by  the  Rishis  (Vedic  seers) 
contain  the  words  Om  and  Atha— O God  ! and  “OT”.  See— 

I 5^^^— Mahabhashya. 

ON  O •' 

WfHt  Mim.  «nf  sinWT- 

'IfJTtTWof  sqRitrRm: — Vai. 

iT>TR5IIHJT«r,  Yoga. 

San.  ?RrH>  W?rf3T5imi  -Vcd.  - Chh. 

rT?H>nRTWR»T  - Man 

N 

These  are  the  commencing  words  of  these  scriptures.  In  the 
same  way,  the  other  sages,  and  writers’  works  begin  with  Om  and 
Atha.  The  beginning  of  all  the  four  Vedas  have  the  words,  Agni,  It, 
&c.,  but  nowhere  are  found  the  expressions  like: — 

J!T>r^5TT^T  I W:  I TT^fiSUTTPTt  I 

nm  I \ W:  I ?T1T:  I ?TR:  { 

\ \ 

Those  men  who  read  the  Vedas  by  pronouncing  or  writing  Hari 
Om  have  learnt  them  from  the  false  belief  of  the  mythologists  or 
followers  of  the  Puranas  and  ritualistic  scriptures.  The  word  Hari 
never  occurs  in  other  scriptures.  Hence  the  word  Om  or  Atha  should 
be  written  at  the  commencement  of  a book.  So  much  in  brief  with 
regard  to  the  subject,  entitled  God.  We  take  up  primary  education 
in  the  next  chapter. 


Summary 

I . The  mono.syllable  Om  is  the  most  sacred  name  of  God.  2. 1 he  words  Agm 
Indra,  &c  mean  God  on  the  occasions  of  prayer  and  other  religious  purposes  ; 
but  they  signify  common  objects  in  natural  sciences  and  the  ordinary  affairs  of 
life.  The  context  determines  their  right  sense.  For  instance,  (saindhava)  means 
a horse  and  salt.  At  the  time  of  journey  it  means  a horse,  and  that  of  dinner 
salt  only  3.  Therefore  100  examples  are  given  of  the  right  meanings  of  the 
words,  which  signify  God  in  religion.  In  case  of  others  the  occasion  will  give 
the  right  sense.  4.  Books  should  begin  with  Om  and  Athas  as  of  old,  and  not 
with  a prayerful  invocation,  as  Salutation  to  the  Lord  of  hosts  ! 


Chapter  II 

EDUCATION  OF  CHILDREN 


This  is  a quotation  from  the  Shatapath  Brahmana.  It  is  a fact  that 
a person  becomes  learned  and  wise,  when  blessed  with  three  good 
instructors,  viz,  (1)  the  mother.  (2)  the  father,  (3)  the  teacher. 
Blessed  is  the  family,  fortunate  is  the  child,  whose  mother  and  father 
are  righteous  and  learned  ! Children  do  not  receive  so  much  good  and 
benefit  of  education  from  any  other  person  as  they  do  from  the 
mother.  None  loves  to  do  good  to  children  so  much  as  the  mother. 
Hence  the  scriptures  declare: 

JfTtnTH  ^ »TTrP?R  I 

C ^ N 6 N 

that  is,  he  is  blessed  whose  mother  is  praise  worthy  and  pious. 
Blessed  is  that  mother  who  teaches  her  child  what  constitutes  good 
character  fnmi  its  birth  till  the  completion  of  its  education. 


Dietary  in  Pregnancy 

Before  conception,  during  pregnancy,  and  after  delivery,  the 
mother  and  the  father  should  abstain  from  intoxicant  drugs,  wine, 
decomposed  and  sour  substances  injurious  to  the  brain;  and  use  such 
nutritious  food  stuffs,  as  clarified  butter,  milk,  sugar,  grain,  water  and 
the  like,  pure  food  and  drink;  which  conduce  to  health,  strength,  sed- 
ateness, the  clear  brain,  courage,  moral  conduct,  and  decent  habits. 
Such  a pure  dietary  will  purge  the  ova  and  sperms  of  all  defects  and 
endue  them  with  germs  of  excellent  constitution  of  the  embryo. 


Time  of  Conception 

The  time  of  cohabitation  lasts  from  the  5th  day  to  the  16th  day 
from  the  appearance  of  the  menses.  The  first  4 days  should  be 
avoided.  Of  the  remaining  2 days,  the  1 1th  and  the  13th  night  of 
the  lunar  month  should  also  be  omitted.  The  remaining  10  nights 
are  best  for  sexual  congress  with  the  view  of  bringing  about  conception. 
After  the  16th  day  from  menstruation  there  should  be  no  conception. 
Again  there  should  be  no  cohabitation  till  the  next  monthly  course 
takes  place,  or  a year  passes  away  after  conception.  When  man  and 
wife  are  healthy  in  body  and  jubilant  in  mind,  nay,  when  there  is  no 
shadow  of  sorrow  to  depress  their  spirits,  they  should  meet  to  beget 
children.  They  should  live  with  regard  to  food,  drink  and  raiment 
as  prescribed  by  the  medical  treatises  of  Charak  and  Sushrut,  and  see 
each  other  on  the  occasions  enjoined  by  the  Code  of  Manu,  which 
lays  down  the  rules  of  mutual  fitness  and  enjoyment.  The  women 


30 


Satyarth  Prakash 


should  be  very  careful  after  conception  with  regard  to  food,  drink  and 
dress.  She  should  not  go  to  her  husband  until  a year  after  delivery, 
and  take  such  food  till  confinement  as  promotes  the  understanding, 
strength,  beauty,  health,  courage,  calmness,  and  other  noble  qualities. 

Delivery 

After  parturition,  the  child  should  be  bathed  in  scented  water 
and  its  umblical  cord  cut  off  carefully.  Fragrant  drugs  and  clarified 
butter  should  be  burnt  on  the  altar.  Proper  arrangements  should  be 
made  for  the  bath  and  food  of  the  mother,  so  that  both  the  mother 
and  the  child  should  progress  gradually  in  the  recovery  of  their  health. 
The  mother  or  the  nurses  should  take  such  edibles  as  enrich  the 
quality  of  milk. 

Management  of  Infancy 

The  mother  should  suckle  her  babe  six  days,  after  which  it  may 
be  nurtured  by  a nurse.  But  the  parents  of  the  child  should  give 
nutritious  food  and  drink  to  the  nurse.  Those  who  are  too  poor  to 
afford  to  keep  a nurse,  should  soak  such  medicines  as  benefit  the 
intellect,  courage,  and  health  in  pure  water,  boil,  and  strain  them, 
and  mixing  them  with  water  like  milk,  should  give  mixture  to  the  child 
to  drink.  After  delivery  the  mother  and  the  child  should  be  sent  to  the 
place  whose  climate  is  healthy  Their  residence  should  contain 
fragrant  and  beautiful  objects.  They  should  be  taken  out  to  walk 
where  the  air  is  pure.  But  persons  may  do  as  they  like  with  regard 
to  these  things  where  a nurse  or  the  milk  of  the  cow  cannot  be 
obtained.  As  the  tissues  of  the  mother’s  body  make  those  of  the 
child,  a woman  becomes  weak  after  delivery,  and  therefore  she  should 
not  suckle  her  babe.  To  check  the  secretion  of  milk  in  the  mother’s 
breast  that  medicine  should  be  applied  to  it  which  prevents  its  secre- 
tion. The  treatment  of  the  mother  restores  her  to  youthful  health  in  a 
month.  During  this  period,  a man  should  not  waste  his  manhood 
but  should  keep  himself  chaste.  Those  men  and  women  who  will 
follow  these  rules,  will  be  blessed  with  excellent  children — long-lived, 
strong,  courageous,  and  energetic.  They  will  in  their  turn  beget 
similar  children  of  righteous  character,  and  thus  the  families  will  be 
ever  progressive.  The  women  should  try  to  heal  the  vagina  and  the 
man  to  guard  his  energy  from  wasting.  This  course  will  give  them  as 
many  healthy  children  as  will  be  born  to  them. 

Training  of  Children  by  Mothers 

The  mother  should  always  give  her  children  the  best  instruction 
possible  so  that  they  may  grow  up  good  and  virtuous  and  never  abuse 
any  organ  of  their  body.  When  a child  begins  to  speak,  its  mother 
should  try  to  mould  its  tongue  or  pronunciation  to  clear  and  dintinct 
articulation.  Every  letter  should  be  pronounced  with  its  proper 


Education  of  Children 


31 


organ  and  stress  of  voice.  For  instance,  the  organ  of  pronouncing 
pa  is  the  lips  and  its  stress  of  voice  is  open.  It  should  be  pronounced 
by  bringing  both  lips  together  and  blowing  them  open.  Short,  long, 
acute  vowels  and  other  sounds  should  be  properly  pronounced,  so  that 
gentle,  grave,  harmonious  vowel  sounds,  accents,  words,  coalitions 
and  stops  should  all  be  distinctly  heard. 

When  children  are  able  to  speak  and  understand  a little,  they 
should  be  taught  sweet  speech,  how  to  converse  with  superiors,  nobles, 
inferiors,  the  father,  mother,  king,  scholar  and  others,  and  how  to 
behave  themselves  towards  them  and  to  keep  their  company,  that 
their  conduct  may  never  be  improper  anywhere,  and  they  may  be 
honoured  everywhere.  Spare  no  pains  to  make  children  master  of 
their  senses,  lovers  of  knowledge,  and  fond  of  a good  company.  They 
should  not  unnecessarily  be  allowed  to  indulge  in  playing,  weeping, 
joking,  qaurrelling,  laughing,  bemoaning,  fondling  with  an  object, 
envy,  enmity  and  other  evil  habits.  They  should  not  touch  and 
irritate  the  generative  organ  as  it  produces  the  loss  of  semen  and  the 
disease  of  impotency  besides  making  the  hand  stink.  The  children 
should  be  trained  to  acquire  the  habit  of  veracity,  bravery,  patience, 
amiability  and  similar  virtues. 


Education  of  Children 

When  boys  and  girls  are  five  years  old,  they  should  be  taught 
the  Devanagari  characters  and  also  those  of  foreign  languages.  Then 
they  should  be  made  to  learn  by  heart  with  meanings  the  Veda 
Mantras,  such  verses  or  shlokas,  aphorisms,  prose  passages  and  poems 
as  contain  nice  and  salutary  instruction,  advice,  and  morals,  and 
teach  how  to  behave  towards  the  Diety,  mother,  father,  teacher, 
scholar,  guest,  king,  subject,  family,  relative,  sister,  servant,  and 
others,  so  that  they  may  not  be  misled  and  duped  by  cheats. 

Necromancy 

They  should  also  be  informed  of  the  wicked  actions  which  are 
at  variance  with  wisdom,  religion,  and  lead  to  temptation ; so  that 
they  may  not  believe  in  ghosts,  and  other  humbugs. 

I 

Manu.  V.  65 — Meaning  : — When  a teacher  is  dead,  the  corpse 
is  called  ‘preta’  : ghost.  The  pupil  who  cremates  it  and  helps  in 
carrying  it  to  a crematory,  is  purified  in  10  days  along  with  other 
carriers  of  the  coffin.  When  the  corpse  is  cremated,  it  is  called 
‘bhuta’.  meaning  gone,  /.e.,  he  was  so  and  so.  Those  who  are  born 
and  no  longer  exist,  are  classed  with  the  past  : ‘bhuta’  which  really 
means  ‘past’.  Such  is  the  opinion  of  all  the  learned  persons  from 
Brahma  down  to  a modern  scholar.  But  he  who  doubts,  keeps  a 
bad  company,  and  has  evil  tendencies,  is  subject  to  fear  and  doubt, 


32 


Satyarth  Prakash 


iransformed  into  so  many  devils,  goblins,  fays,  fairies,  and  other 
tormenting  illusions,  got  up  by  his  own  imagination.  When  a man 
dies,  his  soul  takes  on  another  body  to  reap  the  fruits  of  pleasure  and 
pain  produced  from  his  good  and  evil  deeds  in  the  government  of 
the  Supreme  Being.  Can  any  body  violate  this  eternal  law  of  the 
Supreme  Being  ? Ignorant  persons  who  have  never  studied,  heard, 
or  thought  of  medical  books  or  physical  science,  give  delerium,  fever 
and  other  physical  diseases,  and  mania  and  similar  mental  diseases 
the  names  of  evil  spirits,  ghosts  and  so  forth.  Without  getting  them 
cured  by  means  of  proper  medication,  medically  prescribed  regimen 
and  other  modes  of  medical  treatment,  they  put  faith  on  cheats, 
hypocrites,  ignoramuses,  evil-doers,  selfish  fellows,  sweepers,  shoe- 
makers, low  castes,  barbarians  and  other  dregs  of  the  society.  They 
practise  many  kinds  of  superstition,  tricks,  frauds,  eat  refuse  of  food, 
put  on  charmed  threads,  amulets,  phylacteries — shells  and  false 
incantation,  and  induce  other  people  to  use  these  false  things.  They 
waste  their  money,  ruin  their  children,  promote  diseases,  and  increase 
misery.  When  these  simpletons,  who  are  blind  of  the  mental  eye 

nts  I:  ^ 

and  swollen  with  gold,  go  to  the  evilminded,  sinful  and  selfish  per- 
sons, and  address,  them  : O great  king,  it  is  not  known  what  the 
matter  is  with  this  boy,  girl,  woman,  or  man.  They  reply  : A 
great  devil,  spook,  hobgoblin,  small  pox  genius,  or  a similar  evil 
spirit  has  entered  his  or  her  body.  He  or  she  will  never  be  free  from 
the  influence  until  you  have  recourse  to  some  proper  remedy,  or  else 
the  case  may  prove  fatal.  If  you  give  us  so  much  sugared  loaf  or 
present,  we  shall  exercise  the  devil  by  the  force  of  our  charms,  mutter- 
ings  of  spell,  passes  and  other  necromantic  performances.  Then  the 
persons  and  their  relatives  and  companions  mentally  blind  cry  out : 
O great  king,  we  are  ready  to  sacrifice  all  our  property,  only  you 
may  cure  him  or  her.  Then  those  impostors  find  themselves  in 
their  element.  So  they  say  : Well  then,  bring,  so  much  food,  so 
much  gift  to  be  presented  to  the  goddess,  and  give  charity  to  avert 
the  evil  influence  of  stars.  They  then  sing  and  play  upon  the  cym- 
bals, tabor,  drums,  sounding  plate  before  the  patient  or  haunted 
person.  One  of  these  hypocrites  begins  to  dance  and  frolic  out  of 
madness  and  exclaims  : I shall  kill  him  or  her.  Thereupon  the  fools 
fall  down  at  the  feet  of  that  sweeper  or  shoe-maker  or  some  low 
caste  and  cry  out  ; You  may  take  what  you  like,  only  spare  the  life 
of  this  patient.  The  cheat  replies  ; I am  Hanuman  (Monkey  General 
of  Rama).  Let  me  have  butter,  fried  pastcry  oil,  vermillion,  a loaf 
of  one  maund  and  a quarter  (lOOths),  and  a pair  of  red  breaches.” 
Or,  I am  the  goddess  or  Indian  Bacchus.  Give  me  five  bottles  of 
wine,  twenty  hens,  five  goats,  sweatmeat  and  clothes.  Then  they 
reply  : You  may  take  what  you  please  Whereupon  the  impostor 
begins  to  dance,  frisk  and  jump  very  much.  But  if  a wise  man  beats 
him  five  times  with  shoes,  blows  of  a cudgel,  slaps  or  kicks  him  the 
supposed  Hanuman,  goddess,  or  Bacchus,  will  soon  get  satisfied  and 


Education  of  Children 


33 


leave  him  or  her  for  good  and  all ; for,  it  was  a sheer  humbug  to 
cheat  money  and  other  valuable  things  of  simple  folks. 

Astrology 

When  they  go  to  a pretender  of  astrology,  who  is  shadowed 
with  an  evil  star,  and  who  is  an  incarnate  evil  star,  and  ask  him  : 
O great  king,  what  is  the  matter  with  this  ? He  replies  ; He  is  under 
the  influence  of  the  sun  and  other  cruel  planets.  If  you  hold  the 
reading  of  the  Veda  mantras,  beginning  with  the  word  shanti : peace, 
arrange  for  worship,  and  give  charity  ; he  will  recover,  otherwise  it 
is  no  wonder  if  he  succumbs  to  death  after  severe  ailing. 

Layman — Tell  me,  dear  astrologer,  if  the  sun  and  other  worlds 
are  inanimate  like  this  earth.  They  can  do  nothing  beyond  giving 
heat,  light,  &c>  Are  they  living  beings  so  that  they  afflict  us  when 
enraged  and  comfort  us  when  propitiated  ? 

Astrologer  — Is  it  not  the  effect  of  the  stars  that  kings  and 
subjects  enjoy  ease  and  suffer  trouble  in  the  world  ? 

L. — No,  it  is  the  consequence  of  good  and  evil  deeds. 

A. — Then,  is  the  science  of  astronomy  false  ? 

L. — No,  whatever  is  said  there  of  the  science  of  figures,  quanti- 
tie,  and  lines,  is  all  true  ; but  what  is  said  of  the  influence  of  stars 
is  all  false. 

A. — Is  (he  horoscope  useless  ? 

L — Yes  ; it  is.  It  should  not  be  called  the  horoscope,  but 
“sorrow-scope”  ; for  when  a child  is  born,  all  persons  of  its  house 
are  delighted.  But  their  joy  lasts  till  they  hear  the  effects  of  stars 
after  the  horoscope  is  prepared  When  a priest  asks  permission  to 
prepare  the  horoscope,  the  parents  of  the  child  request  him  : O 
great  king,  make  a very  good  horoscope.  If  the  father  of  the  child 
is  a rich  man,  he  draws  many  beautiful  and  curious  lines  of  red, 
yellow  and  the  like  colours  ; but  if  poor,  he  makes  an  ordinary 
horoscope  and  goes  to  the  child’s  house  to  read  it  to  its  parents,  who 
sit  down  before  him  and  ask  : — Is  the  horoscope  good  ? The  astro- 
loger replies  : I am  going  to  read  it  to  you  as  it  is.  The  stars  of  the 
boy’s  nativity  as  well  as  those  that  are  friendly  areal!  very  auspicious. 
Their  influence  is  to  make  him  honourable  Whatever  assembly  he 
attends,  all  its  members  will  be  awed  by  his  presence.  He  will  be 
healthy  of  body  and  much  respected  in  the  town.  On  hearing  these 
flattering  things,  the  parents  and  other  relatives  of  the  child  exclaim  ; 
O learned  astrologer,  you  are  an  excellent  min.  But  he  well  knows 
that  such  empty  coaxes  do  not  profit  him  at  all.  So  he  says  : These 
mansions  of  the  stars  are  certainly  very  good  ; but  there  are  evil 
stars,  that  is  to  say,  the  conjunction  of  such  and  such  planets  will 
bring  on  his  death  in  the  8th  year  of  his  age  Whereupon  the  parents 
lose  their  previous  joy  felt  at  the  birth  of  their  child,  sink  into  the 
sea  of  sorrow,  and  ask  the  astrologer : O great  king,  what  shall  we 
do  now  ? Then  he  replies  : Make  a gift.  The  child’s  father  asks  : 


34 


Saiyarth  Prakash 


What  steps  should  wc  take  ? The  astrologer  then  explains  details 
to  him,  viz  , so  much  charity  should  be  given.  Set  up  the  muttering 
of  the  text  referring  to  the  evil  star.  Feed  the  Brahmanas  daily. 
This  plan  will  probably  avert  the  evil  of  the  nine  mansions.  The 
word  probably  is  employed  to  keep  a loophole  to  escape  by,  so  that 
if  the  child  dies,  he  can  say  there  is  no  help  for  it.  “None  is  over 
the  Supreme  Ruler.  I have  done  my  best,  and  so  you  did  ; but  it 
was  the  fate  of  the  child,  or  it  was  the  consequence  of  its  works  of 
previous  life,”  If  the  child  survives,  he  triumphantly  exclaims  : 
“Look  at  the  power  of  our  incantation,  goddess  and  Brahmanas  ! 
They  have  saved  your  child.”  In  this  matter  it  is  desirable 
that  if  their  muttering  the  mystic  text  recitation  fail  to  produce 
any  effect  such  fellows  should  be  made  to  pay  twice  or  thrice 
the  amount  spent  by  their  orders.  It  should  be  extracted  from 
them  even  when  a child  is  saved  ; for,  as  astrologers  say,  “None 
has  power  to  destroy  the  child’s  actions  of  a previous  life,  or  to 
violate  the  laws  of  God”,  so  should  lay  men  say,  “This  child  is  saved 
from  death  by  means  of  the  good  consequences  of  its  works  in  its 
anterior  life  and  by  the  laws  of  God  hut  not  on  account  of  their 
effort”.  Also  tho'^c  tc  ichers  and  others  who  induce  people  to  give 
charities  and  donations  which  they  pocket  themselves,  should  be 
treated  as  astrologers. 

Small  Pox  and  Sorcery 

As  regards  small  box  goddess,  incantations,  charms,  mystic 
symbols  and  other  magical  devices,  suffice  it  to  say  that  they  are  all 
superstitions.  Some  of  the  magicians  say  that  if  they  give  a man  a 
talismanic  device  or  charmed  thread  after  pronouncing  incantation  on 
it,  their  goddess  and  master  spirit  will  avert  all  evil  from  him  on 
account  of  the  influence  of  their  magical  devices.  These  magicians 
and  sorcerers  should  be  asked  : “Can  you  save  persons  from  death, 
the  operation  of  God’s  law,  and  the  consequences  of  deeds  ? Many 
children  die  notwithstanding  all  these  devices  of  yours.  You  your- 
selves lose  dear  ones  in  your  family.  Shall  you  escape  from  death  ?“ 
Such  queries  silence  these  men,  and  they  are  convinced  that  their 
tricks  are  not  to  succeed  with  you.  So  all  these  mendacious  actions 
should  be  abandoned.  Virtuous,  philanthropic  and  unselfish  instruc- 
tors and  wise  persons  should  be  helped  and  served  as  they  do  much 
good  to  the  world.  The  patronage  of  learning  should  on  no  account 
be  neglected. 

Alchemy 

Those  who  pretend  to  prepare  elixir,  to  bring  on  death  by  magic, 
to  produce  madness,  to  enslave  persons  and  to  work  other  diabolical 
miracles,  should  be  set  down  as  so  many  densely  ignorant  persons. 
Children  should  be  early  impresseed  with  the  monstrocity  of  these 
superstitious  and  infernal  tricks,  so  that  they  may  not  suffer  trouble 
by  falling  into  the  snares  of  impostors. 


Education  of  Children  35 

Perservation  of  Energy 

They  should  also  be  well  informed  that  the  preservation  of 
energy  produces  joy  and  the  waste  of  it  brings  on  the  ruin  of  the  body 
and  consequent  misery.  For  instance,  look  at  a person,  how  glad  and 
cheerful  he  feels  from  the  promotion  of  health,  the  brilliancy  of  the 
intellect,  the  feeling  of  strength  and  valour,  which  are  the  effects  of  the 
preservation  of  semen  virile  in  the  body.  The  best  way  to  preserve  it 
is  that  students  should  avoid  reading  or  listening  to  love  tales  or 
stories  of  sensuousness,  the  company  of  sensualists,  thinking  of  the 
objects  of  luxury,  looking  at  women,  closeting  with  them,  talking  with 
them,  embracing  them  and  other  excitement  of  passions.  They  should 
devote  themselves  to  the  acquisition  of  the  excellent  truths  of  morality 
and  perfection  of  their  knowledge.  He  who  wastes  his  manhood, 
becomes  impotent  and  highly  mischievous  and  vicious.  He  who  gets 
a venereal  disease,  becomes  emaciated,  pale,  dull,  devoid  of  courage, 
boldness,  endurance,  prowess,  valour,  and  manly  qualities,  and  is 
finally  ruined. 

Parental  Advice 

O children  ! if  you  lose  this  splendid  opportunity  of  acquiring 
moral  training  and  perfect  education,  and  developing  physique 
by  following  the  vow  of  chastity,  you  will  never  get  this  precious 
time  again  in  your  lifetime.  As  long  as  we,  your  elders,  are 
able  to  do  our  domestic  duties  and  are  alive  by  the  grace  of  God,  so 
long  you  should  be  engaged  in  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  and  the 
development  of  constitution  and  increase  of  bodily  strength  ” Such 
and  other  kinds  of  instructions  should  be  given  to  the  children  by  the 
parents.  Hence  it  is  that  the  words  matriman  : honour  the  mother  and 
pitriman  : honour  the  father—are  used  in  the  texts  above  quoted.  In 
other  words,  the  mother  should  educate  the  child  from  its  birth  to  its 
5th  year  of  age  and  the  father  from  its  6th  to  8th  year  of  age,  and  at 
the  commencement  of  the  9th  year,  regenerates  (Brahmans,  Khashatri- 
yas,  and  Vaishyas),  having  invested  their  children  with  the  sacred 
thread,  should  send  them,  both  sons  and  daughtrs,  to  the  Acharya 
Kula  (professor’s  house),  that  is,  where  very  great  learned  men  and 
women  teach  and  keep  a school  to  instruct  youths.  The  Shudras 
(low  castes)  and  other  servile  tribes,  without  performing  the  sacred 
thread  ceremony,  should  send  their  children  to  the  Guru  Kula  (a 
teacher’s  house)  for  education.^ 

1.  The  “Acharya  Kula”  and  “Guru  Kula”  appear  to  be  two  kinds  of 
schools.  The  former  is  reserved  for  the  high  castes  and  the  latter  for  the  low. 
Also  the  first  inculcated  all  kinds  of  knowledge  both  sacred  and  secular.  The 
secrets  of  religion,  the  esoteric  meaning  of  the  Vedas  and  professional  knowledge 
were  taught,  in  the  first,  while  the  second  was  a sort  of  grammar  schools  which 
taught  elementary  knowledge  to  servile  classes.  If  any  of  these  by  good  luck 
developed  abilities  to  acquire  a first  class  learning,  he  or  she  was  permitted  to  do 
so,  as  several  texts  and  specially  Manu  distinctly  say  that  the  low  caste  can  rise 
to  high  castes  by  means  of  their  qualification  in  knowledge. 


36 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Discipline 

The  children  of  those  who  do  not  fondle  them,  but,  who,  on  the 
contrary  are  very  strict  to  them  while  under  training,  become  learned, 
well  behaved,  and  civilised.  It  is  well  said  in  the  Sanscrit  Grammar, 
called  the  Mahabhashya,  VIII,  i,  8,  in  connection  with  this  matter : 

c o 

H^iTT:  it  !to  t;  I ? I q H 

Those  fathers,  and  mothers,  and  teachers  who  are  severe  in 
educating  their  children  and  pupils,  are  as  it  were,  giving  them  nectar 
to  drink  with  their  own  hands  ; but  those  who  fondly  love  them, 
give  them  poison  to  eat,  so  to  speak,  and  thus  spoil  and  ruin  them. 
For,  fondling  begets  evil  characters  and  severity,  good  qualities  in 
them.  Children  and  pupils  arc  always  happy  from  severe  and  un- 
happy from  affectionate  treatment  However  the  mother,  father,  and 
teacher  should  not  punish  their  children  and  pupils  out  of  jealousy 
and  hatred.  They  should  outwardly  use  threats  and  inwardly  bear 
love  and  kindness  towards  them. 


Moral  Instruction 

Like  intellectual  education,  they  should  also  be  taught  to  sail 
clear  of  robbery,  adultery,  indolence,  negligence,  intoxication,  false- 
hood, slaughter,  cruelty,  jealousy,  avarice,  and  similar  evils,  and  to 
practise  good  behaviour,  for  a man  who  but  once  commits  theft, 
adultery,  tells  a lie,  or  does  any  kind  of  evil  before  another,  loses  his 
respect  in  the  eyes  of  people  forever  in  his  life.  Nobody  suffers  so 
much  loss  of  respect  of  credit  as  the  person  who  breaks  his  promise 
or  tells  a lie.  So,  whatever  righteous  promise  is  made  to  a person,  it 
should  be  fuHillled  to  a letter.  Thus,  for  instance,  a man  said  to 
another:  I shall  see  you  at  such  and  such  time  and  place,  or  give  you 
such  and  such  thing  at  a particular  time,  he  should  keep  his  word 
exactly,  or  else  none  would  believe  him.  Therefore  all  should  always 
speak  the  truth  and  abide  by  their  promises.  None  should  be  proud. 
Deception,  fraudulence,  and  ingratitude  sting  the  heart  of  the  person 
who  practises  them,  not  to  mention  the  pain  of  others  against  whom 
they  are  aimed.  Deception  and  fraudulence  are  those  evil  deeds  where 
a person  who  puts  on  a different  appearance  from  what  he  is  at  heart, 
entices  another  into  his  snare,  does  not  care  a fig  for  the  loss  of 
others,  but  encompassses  his  own  obiect  at  any  rate.  Ingratitude  is 
that  vice  which  does  not  acknowledge  the  good  done  by  others. 


Good  Manners  and  Obedience  to  Parents 

Anger,  harsh  language  and  other  similar  vicious  habits  should 
be  given  up,  and  calm  and  sweet  expressions  should  be  used  in  con- 
versation. Vain  talk  should  be  avoided.  They  should  speak  neither 
more  nor  less  than  what  is  required  of  them.  They  should  respect 


Education  of  Children 


37 


the  elders.  On  the  coming  of  their  superiors,  they  should  get  up  and 
conduct  them  to  a higher  seat.  After  saluting  or  bidding  them 
namaste  (salutation  to  thee),  they  should  not  sit  on  a higher  seat 
before  them.  They  should  take  a seat  in  an  assembly  which  befits 
them  and  from  which  nobody  may  turn  them  out.  They  should  not 
quarrel  with  any  one.  They  should  be  cheerful,  accept  virtue  and 
reject  vice.  They  should  keep  company  of  good  men  and  avoid  the 
contact  of  the  wicked.  They  should  serve  their  mother,  father, 
teacher  with  their  life,  heart,  means,  best  things  and  love. 


Veracity  and  Righteousness 

cTtf^  I 

It  is  a quotation  from  the  7'aitteriya  Upanishat,  vii  1 1.  Its 
purport  is  that  the  mother,  father,  and  teacher  should  always  teach 
truth  to  their  children  and  pupils.  They  should  also  tell  them  to 
adopt  and  follow  those  actions  of  theirs  which  are  righteous  and  reject 
those  actions  which  are  vicious.  Whatever  truth  they  know,  they 
should  preach  and  publish.  They  should  not  believe  a hypocrite  and 
a vicious  man.  They  should  faithfully  do  that  righteous  work  which 
their  father,  mother  and  teacher  order  them  to  do.  The  teacher 
should  again  instruct  the  meanings  to  pupils  of  those  passages  which 
the  parents  have  made  them  learnt  by  heart  from  the  Nighantu, 
Nirukta  and  Ashtadhyayi  or  other  aphorisms  or  Veda  Mantras.  They 
should  adore  God  in  spirit  according  to  the  description  of  God  in  the 
first  chapter  of  this  book. 


Hygienic  Precaution 

They  should  eat,  drink,  and  dress  and  do  any  other  work  in  a 
manner  which  contributes  to  their  health,  knowledge  and  strength.  In 
plain  words,  they  should  eat  a little  less  than  appetite  demands,  and 
abstain  from  the  use  of  flesh,  wine  and  other  intoxicants.  They  should 
not  enter  the  water  of  unknown  depth,  for  they  will  suffer  trouble 
from  some  aquatic  animal  or  other  objects,  or  if  they  do  not  know 
how  to  swim,  they  may  be  drowned.  Says  Manu — Don’t  enter 
unknown  waters  to  bathe  in.  i 

I 

n t ^ I u 

Manu,  VI,  46 — In  walking  one  should  keep  his  eyes  on  the  road, 
and  proceed  after  seeing  the  elevations  and  depressions  of  the  path. 
The  water  should  be  drunk  after  straining  it  through  a piece  of  cloth. 
What  is  sanctioned  by  truth,  should  be  spoken.  Work  should  be  done 
after  a thorough  consideration. 


38 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Parental  Duties 

nrHi  5iar;  fq^rr  ^ h qrfs^r:  i 

This  is  said  by  a poet  in  the  Chanakya  Niti.  Those  fathers  and 
mothers  are  great  enemies  of  their  own  children,  who  have  not  taught 
them  any  kind  of  knowledge.  Those  children  when  grown  up  are 
treated  with  contempt  or  look  so  awkward  in  (he  assembly  of  the 
learned  as  the  jackdaw  among  swans  It  is  the  imperative  duty,  the 
highest  virtue,  the  cause  of  fame  of  the  parents  to  make  their  children 
learned,  virtuous,  civilised  and  well  educated  at  the  expense  of  their 
own  comfort,  thought  and  wealth.  These  brief  points  relative  to  the 
education  of  boys  and  girls  are  sufTicicnlly  significant  to  the  wise  for 
amplification. 


Summary 

The  person  becomes  good  whose  mother,  father,  and  teacher  are  virtuous 
and  learned.  During  pregnancy  a woman  should  take  vegetarian  diet  and  pure 
water,  but  never  flesh  food  and  alcoholic  beverages.  Her  husband  should  not 
waste  his  manhood.  They  should  not  meet  sexually  for  a year  after  successful 
conception.  The  best  days  for  conjugal  embrace  are  10  after  the  lapse  of  4 days 
from  the  menses  the  11th  and  13th  night  being  avoided.  After  delivery  the  mother 
and  child  should  live  in  a place  of  good  sanitary  condition.  The  mother  or  a 
nurse  may  suckle  the  child.  But  they  should  take  nutritious  food.  The  mother 
and  father  should  teach  the  child  proper  pronunciation  and  instruct  it  in  element- 
ary knowledge,  such  as  Vedic  verses  and  other  moral  sayings  with  meanings.  The 
child  should  be  warned  against  vulgar  superstition,  sorcery,  astrology  and  alchemy. 
Chastity  and  physical  culture  should  be  enforced.  Moral  training  should  also  go 
hand  in  hand  with  intellectual  training.  Good  behaviour  and  etiquette  should  not 
be  lost  sight  of.  In  short,  it  is  the  first  duty  of  parents  to  educate  their  children 
well  at  all  cosis. 


Chapter  III 

ACADEIVIICAL  EDUCATION 
(Acquisition  and  Impartation  of  Knowledge) 


NOW  in  this  third  chapter  we  describe  the  system  of  education — 
acquisition  and  impartation  of  knowledge.  The  chief  duty  of  the 
father,  preceptor,  and  kinsmen  is  to  adorn  the  offspring  with  the 
ornaments  of  the  best  education,  the  sense  of  duties  and  the  attain- 
ment of  good  qualities,  morality  and  nature.  The  soul  of  man  can 
never  be  adorned  with  the  ornaments  made  of  gold,  silver,  rubies, 
pearls,  corals,  and  other  gems.  For,  the  decoration  of  person  with 
ornaments  begets  the  vanity  of  the  body  and  fondness  for  sensuous 
pleasures,  and  is  attended  with  the  fear  of  thieves  and  other  pests, 
nay,  with  the  possibility  of  death.  It  is  seen  in  the  world  that  the 
wicked  murder  children  and  others  for  the  sake  of  ornaments. 

Learning  and  Philanthropy 

Urr5ft?Tf5I«TT:  I 

Blessed  are  the  men  and  women  whose  mind  is  engaged  in 
tnc  pursuit  of  knowledge,  who  are  of  amiable  disposition  and  polite 
manners,  who  observe  the  rules  of  veracity  and  other  virtues,  who  are 
free  from  pride  and  impurity,  who  destroy  others’  vices,  who  are 
adorned  with  the  jewels  of  the  advocacy  of  truth,  who  alleviate  the 
sufferings  of  humanity  in  the  world  by  the  inculcation  of  knowledge 
and  who  do  good  to  others  by  means  of  works  ordained  by  the  Vedas. 


Admission  to  School 

So,  when  boys  and  girls  are  of  8 years  af  age,  they  should  be 
sent  to  their  respective  (boys  to  male  and  girls  to  female)  schools. 
The  masters  and  mistresses  of  bad  conduct  should  not  be  allowed  to 
teach  children.  They  alone  are  fit  for  teaching  and  training  who  are 
thoroughly  learned  and  righteous.  Investing  the  sons  with  the  sacred 
thread  and  ministering  an  appropriate  sacrament  to  the  daughters  at 
home,  the  regenerate  or  twice-born  classes  should  send  them  to  their 
respective  seminaries,  conducted  by  the  teachers  of  the  aforesaid  quali- 
fications. 


School  Locality 

An  unfrequented  tract  of  country  should  be  selected  for  the 
place  of  education.  The  male  and  female  schools  should  be  situated 


40 


Satyarth  Prakash 


two  miles  or  leagues  apart  from  each  other.  The  teaching  staff, 
servants  and  followers  should  be  all  male  in  male  schools  and  female 
in  female  schools.  Neither  a boy,  even  of  5 years  old,  should  be 
allowed  to  enter  into  the  female  school,  nor  a girl  of  the  same  age 
into  the  school  of  boys.  In  plain  words,  so  long  as  the  pupils  are 
bachelors  and  maids,  observing  the  vow  of  chastity  in  their  academi- 
cal career,  they  should  not  indulge  in  eyeing  men  or  women,  embrac- 
ing, living  in  privacy,  talking,  listening  to  love  stories,  sporting  with 
one  another,  and  thinking  of  sensual  pleasures  and  their  enjoyment, 
which  are  the  eight  kinds  of  the  vice  of  carnality. 


Watch  over  Conduct  and  Equal  Treatment 

The  teachers  should  keep  the  pupils  aloof  from  these  injurious 
habits  so  that  they  may  acquire  the  very  best  knowledge,  morality,  be- 
haviour, habitude  and  the  highest  development  of  mind  and  body, 
and  be  able  to  promote  their  joy  ever  in  life.  Schools  should  be  a 
league  or  four  miles  away  from  the  vicinity  of  a town  or  a city. 
Whether  the  sons  and  daughters  of  kings  or  the  children  of  poor 
people,  all  the  students  should  be  treated  alike  with  regard  to  the 
supply  of  food,  drink,  shelter  and  seats  to  them  They  should  all  be 
the  devotees  of  knowledge.  Neither  the  pupils  nor  their  parents  should 
be  permitted  to  see  each  other  or  keep  any  kind  of  epistolary  com- 
munication between  them,  h)  that  being  rid  of  all  the  cares  of  the 
world,  they  may  have  the  idea  of  acquiring  knowledge  alone  foremost 
in  the  mind.  When  out  on  walk,  they  should  be  accompanied  bv 
their  teachers,  so  that  they  may  not  commit  an  act  of  any  kind  of 
misconduct  and  fall  into  the  habit  of  indolence  negligence. 


Compulsory  Education 

^ ^ T^^H  — Manu.  VII,  152. 

Its  purport  is  that  there  should  be  a government  order  and 
national  custom  that  persons  must  not  keep  their  sons  and  daughters 
at  home  after  they  are  8 years  of  age.  They  must  send  them  to 
schools  at  the  pain  of  penalty  At  first  the  investiture  of  boys  with 
the  sacred  thread  should  take  place  at  home  and  afterwards  at  the 
residence  of  professors  in  the  schools. 

Meaning  of  the  Gayatri  or  Creedal  Verse 

Parents  and  teachers  should  initiate  children  and  pupils  into 
tiecd  of  the  Gayatri  verse  of  the  Veda  with  its  meaning.  It  is  as 
follows : — 

I i nt  h:  ii 

— Alim,  Bhur,  Bliuvah,  Swah,  (at  Savitur  varenyam  bhargo  devasya 
dliimahi,  dliiyo  yo  nah  prachodayat.  The  meaning  of  AUM  in  the 
beginning  of  the  above  verse  has  been  given  in  the  first  chapter,  which 


Academical  Education 


41 


may  be  consulted  for  it.  Yaj.  XXXVI,  3.  We  now  briefly  give  the 
meanings  of  the  three  greai  mystic  syllables,  called  the  Vyalmties. 

i Sim:  I srmtrfiT  H:  I 

N e\  c\ 

— Bhuh  is  a name  of  God,  signifying  that  life  which  is  the 
support  or  the  existence  of  all  the  worlds,  which  is  self-existent  and 
which  is  dearer  than  individual  life. 

I W |:^PPTPTiTfcT  Hlsqm:  I 

— Bhuvah  is  a name  of  God,  because  the  word  means  the  one 
who  is  free  from  all  suffering,  and  whose  company  emancipates  others 
from  it. 

I trl  SETRitfrT  sziTRlfrT  ^ stTR:  I 

— Swali  is  a name  of  God,  because  the  word  means  the  one  who 
pervades  all  the  diversity  of  the  world,  and  who  supports  all  the  beings 
therein. 

These  three  syallables  are  taken  from  the  Tatteriya  Arannyak. 


Prayer 

smar  h ?tfgcTT  i hw  iff 

gt  tft  I i as 

^PF’RI  f«RT:  I 

> 'O  > N 

— May  we  ever  remember  that  amiable  and  sublime  glory,  the  all 
wise  Supreme  Being,  who  is  holy  and  of  sanctifying  nature,  who  is  the 
producer  of  the  whole  world  and  the  dispenser  of  all  blessings,  who 
is  the  giver  of  all  comfort,  and  whose  obtainment  is  desired  by  all  the 
peopel,  so  that  he  who  is  the  father  and  the  innerself  and  guide  of 
our  intellects,  may  keep  us  off  from  evil  actions  and  lead  us  on  to 
good  works  ! 

I ! I ^ | ?T3t 

0tT55R  ! I HwfRirffiTH  ! ^ ! 5tn?q%  ! ! 

^ ! I iR 

^ I SttlfstHT- 

t^afiRTTip  ^qtHHttt  ^^5  iqitftsTit  n^cffsTw  ^ 

t 

— O people,  let  us  adore  the  spiritual  glory  of  the  Supreme  Being, 
who  is  the  Lord  of  lords,  the  Mightiest  among  the  mighty,  whose 
nature  is  Truth  Consciousness  and  Happiness,  who  is  ever  Holy,  ever 
Wakeful,  and  ever  Free  by  his  nature,  who  is  the  Ocean  of  Mercy, 
the  most  impartial  Judge  free  from  all  suffering  of  birth  and  death, 
who  is  formless  or  immaterial  knowing  the  thoughts  of  all  hearts,  the 
Supporter  of  all,  the  Common  Father,  Begetter,  and  Provider  of  food 


42 


Satyarth  Prakash 


and  other  means  to  all  the  world  ! He  is  the  Possessor  of  all  wealth, 
Maker  of  the  world,  all-holy,  and  dearest  to  be  sought  after  for  the 
great  purpose,  that  he,  being  the  Supreme  Lord,  dwelling  in  our  heart 
and  illuming  our  intellects,  may  take  us  away  from  evil  conduct  and 
unrighteous  course  and  lead  us  to  the  most  virtuous  conduct  and 
right  path.  May  we  never  turn  away  from  him  and  adore  any  thing 
else;  for  there  is  none  equal  to  Him.  much  less  higher  than  He  ! He 
alone  is  our  Father,  Ruler,  Judge,  and  Dispenser  of  all  blessings. 

Mode  of  Worship 

Thus  inculcating  the  article  of  creed,  the  Gayatri  verse  of  the 
Veda,  the  parents  and  teachers  of  pupils  should  teach  them  the  modus 
operamli  of  praying  and  meditation,  which  consists  of  bathing,  sip- 
ping a little  water  to  clear  the  throat  and  set  the  circulation  a going 
on,  deep  breathing  and  the  like  minutiae  of  the  method. 

The  object  of  bathing  is  to  elTect  the  cleanliness  and  so  to  keep 
the  health  of  the  external  organs  of  the  body.  In  proof  of  this  state- 
ment,  we  quote  the  109th  verse  from  the  fifth  chapter  of  the  Code  of 
Manu 

R5T:  5TtTrfrT  I 

<N 

—Water  cleans  the  external  organs  of  the  body,  right  conduct 
purifies  the  will  ; knowledge  and  austerity,  that  is,  the  practice  of 
virtue  in  the  midst  of  all  kinds  of  trouble,  purify  the  mind  ; wisdom, 
or  the  discriminate  knowledge  of  all  beings  from  the  eaith  upto  the 
Deity,  brightens  the  understanding,  making  it  firm  in  faith.  So  bath 
must  be  taken  before  dinner. 


Deep  Breathing 

The  spiritual  worship  requires  the  regulations  of  breath,  which 
is  supported  by  the  following  authority: — 

\ Yoga,  ll,  28  * 

This  is  an  aphorism  from  the  Yoga  Philosophy.  When  a man 
begins  to  practise  the  controlment  of  breath,  his  impurities  or  bad 
desires  are  gradually  being  destroyed  in  course  of  time,  and  his  light 
of  knowledge  burns  brighter  and  brighter  in  him,  so  that  the  know- 
ledge of  his  soul  is  ever  on  the  steady  increase  till  his  salvation  is 
effected. 

wTTqmHHi  Httt:  i 

^T:  Manu.  VI,  71. 

This  couplet  is  from  Manu’s  law — The  controlment  of  breath 

^Thcre  are  4 padas  or  parts  of  Yoga  Philosophy;  namely,  1 Samadhi  (trance), 
2.  Sadhan  (means),  3.  Vibhuti  (powers),  Kaivalya  (Absoluteness). 


Academical  Education 


43 


purges  the  conative  faculty  and  other  senses  of  their  defects  and 
restores  their  rectitude,  as  the  purity  of  gold  and  the  like  metals  is 
effected  by  burning  them  in  fire,  which  destroys  their  impurity. 


Its  Process 


m Yoga.  1,  34. 

— It  is  a Yoga  aphorism.  As  a violent  vomition  throws 
out  the  intestinal  food  and  liquids,  so  the  breath  should  be  violently 
ejected  in  an  action  of  expiration  and  be  not  allowed  to  come  in  back 
to  the  best  of  one’s  power.  To  expire  the  breath,  the  nether  organ 
(anus)  should  be  contracted  upwards.  The  breath  is  held  out  till  the 
contraction  lasts.  In  this  way  the  breath  can  be  held  out  till  uneasi- 
ness is  felt,  when  uneasiness  is  felt  it  should  be  gradually  drawn  in  and 
held  there  as  long  as  possible.  This  process  should  be  repeated  as  often 
as  one  has  power  and  will  to  do.  The  word  Om  should  be  repteated  at 
the  same  time  in  the  mind.  This  work  effects  the  purity  and  tranquility 
of  the  soul  and  the  will. 


Its  4 Steps 

In  other  words,  the  process  has  4 stages,^  V7j.,  I.  To  held  out 
the  breath  outside  for  a long  time.  2.  To  restrain  the  breath  inside 
as  long  as  possible.  3.  To  stop  the  course  of  breathing  at  once  as 
long  as  can  be.  4.  To  restrain  the  internal  breath  when  it  is  to  go 
out,  by  breathing  in,  in  opposition  to  it,  and  to  restrain  the  external 
breath,  when  it  seeks  to  get  in,  by  breathing  out  to  propel  and  stop 
it.  By  thus  breathing  oppositely  the  action  of  both  expiration  and 
inspiration  is  checked,  and  the  respiration  being  controlled,  the  will 
and  the  senses  are  brought  under  subjection  to  the  mind  or  soul. 


Its  Advantages 

One’s  courage  being  increased,  the  understanding  becomes 
refined  and  sharp  so  as  to  comprehend  very  difficult  and  abstruse 
subjects  quickly.  It  develops  energy  in  the  body,  which  adds  to 
solid  strength,  valour,  control  over  the  senses,  so  that  a person  masters 
all  the  systems  of  philosophy  in  a very  short  interval  of  time.  Women 
should  also  practise  the  Yoga  or  abstraction  of  mind  in  the  same  way. 


Instruction  of  Etiquette 

Studedts  should  be  taught  the  proper  way  of  dining,  dressing, 
going,  sitting,  departing,  conversing,  and  behaving  towards  inferiors 
and  superiors. 

1.  ’RTVVWfrT,  I 


44 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Brahma  Yajna  or  Meditation 

1.  The  children  should  be  taught  the  Sanclltyopasana  : the  Mass 
— Matins  and  vespers,  which  are  called  the  worship  of  the  Supreme 
Being.  (K/V/e  The  Five  Great  Duties  of  the  Aryans). 

On  sitting  to  pray,  only  that  much  of  water  should  be  used  in 
sipping,  called  the  Achaman,  which  can  be  held  in  the  palm  of  the 
hand  and  which  can  just  reach  down  the  throat,  but  neither  more  nor 
less  than  that.  It  is  sucked  in  by  placing  the  lips  in  its  centre.  This 
removes  the  throat  phlegm  and  bile  a little. 

Then  a covenant  with  the  senses,  called  the  Marjan,  should  be 
made.  Water  should  be  sprinkled  over  the  eyes  and  other  senses 
with  the  foreparts  of  the  middle  and  ring  fingers  to  drive  off  drowsi- 
ness. If  there  be  no  drowsiness  and  no  water  at  hand,  it  should  be 
dispensed  with. 

They  should  be  taught  the  Pranayam  : controlment  of  breath 
with  Vedic  verses,  the  mental  circumambulation  or  comprehensive 
view  of  the  creation,  called  the  Manas  Prakriaman,  mental  presenta- 
tion to  the  Lord,  called  the  Upasthan,  the  chanting  of  the  praises  of 
the  Lord,  prayer  and  the  contemplation  of  Him,  called  the  Upasana. 
Then  let  them  learn  the  Aghamarshan,  i.e.,  the  desire  to  do  evil  should 
never  be  entertained  This  morning  and  evening  mass  should  be 
performed  in  a retired  place  with  rapt  and  undivided  attention. 

!nf  f5T!Tfrt  1 

— So  says  Manu,  II,  104.  Persons  should  go  to  the  jungle  or  a 
Place  of  Solitude,  compose  themselves,  stand  by  the  side  of  the  water, 
perform  the  ordinary  rituals  and  repeat  the  gayairi  or  creed  with  its 
meaning  (in  the  mind).  They  should  regulate  their  conduct  accord- 
ing to  it.  But  this  practice  should  be  commenced  as  early  as  possible. 

Deva  Yajna  or  Fire  Oblation 

The  second  service  is  Fire-offering,  which  is  burning  drugs  in 
fire,  the  company  of  the  learned  and  their  service.  The  mass  and 
fire-offering  should  be  performed  both  in  the  morning  and  at  evening 
only  ; for  there  are  only  two  junctions  of  night  and  day  and  no  other. 
Meditation  should  be  performed  at  least  one  hour  before  and  after 
the  manner  of  the  ascetics  or  Yogis,  who  contemplate  on  the  divine 
glory  of  God  in  the  posture  of  trance. 

Outfits  of  Fire  Oblation 

The  time  of  fire-offering  is  just  after  the  sunrise  and  before  the 
sunest.  For  this  purpose,  (1)  an  alter  like  a tub  of  either  of  metal  or 
clay  may  be  made,  which  should  be  of  12  or  16  fingers  in  three 
dimensions,  but  the  bottom  may  be  3 or  4 fingers  square,  that  is  to 
say,  its  mouth  should  be  four  times  of  its  bottom  in  area.(2)  Pieces 


Academical  Education 


45 


of  sandal,  palash  (butea  frondosa)  or  mango  wood,  which  are  the 
best  kind  of  wood,  should  be  made  larger  or  smaller  in  proportion 
to  the  size  of  the  altar  and  placed  in  it.  In  the  centre  fire  should  be 
put  and  the  above  mentioned  fuel  arranged  around  it.  (3)  A ladle, 
(4)  a pot,  (5)  a dish  for  clarified  butter,  and  (6)  a spoon  should  be 
made  of  gold,  silver,  or  wood.  Water  should  be  put  in  the  pot  and 
the  ladle,  and  the  clarified  butter  in  the  ladle  or  cup  made  for  it.  It 
should  be  melt  at  the  fire.  These  vessels,  the  ladle  and  the  pot,  are 
convenient  to  take  out  water  to  wash  hands.  The  clarified  butter 
should  be  well  examined  and  then  the  offering  into  the  fire  should 
be  made  with  the  following  verses  : — 

1.  ?rli  srmro  > 2.  i 3. 

fulif  SJTPTTH  I 4.  It* 

Each  oblation  should  be  made  by  reciting  a verse.  But  if  more  offer- 
ings are  to  be  made,  the  following  Vedic  verse  and  the  aforesaid 
creedal  verse  should  be  repeated  with  every  succeeding  offering  : — 

Om,  Bhu,  Pran,  and  others  are  the  names  of  the  Great  God.  Their 
meanings  have  been  told.  The  word  Swaha  (Amen  ! or  Selah  !) 
means  that  what  is  in  the  heart,  should  be  spoken,  and  not  otherwise. 
As  the  Lord  Almighty  has  created  the  objects  of  this  world  for  the 
ease  and  comforts  of  all  the  animals,  so  should  men  also  do  good  to 
all  beings  to  the  best  of  their  power. 


Advantages  of  Havan  or  Fire  Sacrifice 

What  is  the  good  of  Havan  or  Fire  Sacrifice  ? 

Answer — All  men  know  that  the  foul  air  and  bad  water  pro- 
duce disease,  which  in  turn  begets  suffering  among  mankind.  But,  on 
the  contrary,  pure  air  and  water  bring  on  health,  and  the  absence  of 
disease  produces  comfort  among  them. 

Q, — Is  it  not  useful  to  rub  and  paste  the  sandalwood  on  the 
person  of  somebody,  or  to  give  the  clarified  butter  to  some  one  to 
eat,  instead  of  throwing  them  into  fire  and  thus  to  waste  them?  Does 
it  indicate  any  sense  in  the  man  who  does  so  ? 

/t. — If  you  knew  the  physical  science,  you  would  never  talk  so, 
for  nothing  is  destroyed  or  wasted.  See  the  persons  who  stand  at 
a distance  from  the  place  of  the  havan  or  fire  offering,  smell  sweet 
affluvia  wafted  to  them.  In  the  same  manner,  they  also  feel  foul 
stench.  It  should  show  you  well  that  a substance  thrown  into  the 
fire  gets  purified  and  goes  with  the  wind  to  distant  places  where  it 
replaces  stench. 

1.  Offering  to  Om,  the  adorable  God,  the  lite.  2.  Offering  to  Om,  the  almighty 
God,  the  holy.  3.  Offering  to  Om,  the  enternal  God,  the  happy.  4.  Offering  to 
Om,  God,  the  life,  holy,  happy,  adorable,  almighty,  and  eternal. 

2.  O God,  the  Father,  remove  ail  evils  and  give  us  that  which  is  good. 


46 


Satyarth  Prakaslt 


Q.—lf  it  is  so,  why  don’t  you  in  your  house  place  salTron,  musk, 
fragrant  flowers,  perfumed  oils  and  the  like  odoriferous  substances 
so  as  to  odorify  the  current  of  air  in  the  room  and  to  give  pleasure 
to  all  ? 

A,  The  odour  has  no  power  to  drive  off  the  impure  air  of  the 
house  and  to  introduce  pure  air  from  outside;  for,  it  has  no  power 
to  decompose  putrid  or  noxiuos  air  of  the  room  and  turn  it  out  to 
usher  in  fresh  air  from  outside  It  is  the  power  of  fire  to  decompose 
nasty  things;  and  rarefying  them  it  drives  them  out  of  the  house  and 
brings  in  fresh  air  from  outside. 

Q. — Then  what  is  the  use  of  reciting  the  verses  or  mantras  on 
the  occasion  of  the  oblation  to  fire  ? 

A.  The  verses  or  mantras  describe  the  advantages  of  the  fire- 
offering and  their  recitation  impresses  them  on  the  memory,  and 
thus  it  tends  to  preserve  the  loss  of  Vedic  Learning. 

0.— Is  the  non-performance  of  the  fire-obtation  sinful  ? 

A, — Yes;  persons  commit  as  much  sin  as  they  occasion  pain  and 
misery  to  the  creation  by  contributing  to  the  production  of  diseases, 
which  spring  from  their  spoiling  the  air  and  water  by  discharging 
into  them  all  the  stench  and  impurities  generated  in  their  body. 
Hence,  to  make  amends  for  the  sins  thus  committed,  odour,  equiva- 
lent to  or  more  than  that  to  produce  pleasure,  should  be  diffused  in 
the  air  and  water.  The  donation  of  food  and  drink  gives  pleasure 
and  comfort  to  the  recipient  only.  The  odoriferous  and  the  clarified 
butter  which  a person  eats,  do  good  to  hundreds  of  thousands  of  people 
by  being  offered  into  the  fire. 

If  people  do  not  get  the  clarified  butter  or  nutritious  viands,  the 
strength  of  their  body  and  mind  will  not  improve.  Therefore  nutritious 
edibles  should  also  be  given  always  to  the  people  for  food  and  drink. 
But  the  havan  should  always  be  done  by  persons.  Hence  the  necessity 
of  the  ceremony  of  oblation. 

Q —How  many  offerings  should  be  made,  and  what  must  be 
the  quantity  of  each  offering  ? 

A. — Each  person  should  offer  16  limes,  and  the  clarified  butter 
and  other  perfumes  or  disinfectants  in  each  time  should  weigh  at  least 
6 masas  or  one-half  of  a rupee.  If  more  than  this  is  offered,  so 
much  the  better.  Therefore  the  jewels  and  pride  of  the  Aryas,  great 
men,  scientific  men,  professors  and  divine  sages,  kings,  and  emperors 
in  old  times  performed  the  havan  in  abundance,  and  advised  the  same 
to  do  to  others.  As  long  as  the  practice  and  custom  of  the  havan 
was  in  vogue.  India  then  Aryavarta,  was  free  from  diseases  and  filled 
with  comfort.  Even  now  if  the  custom  be  revived,  the  same  ease  and 
comfort  will  again  accrue. 

These  are  the  two  services  required  of  a student,  viz.,  (1)  Brahma 
Yajna  which  is  the  study  and  impartation  of  knowledge,  the  recitation 
of  God’s  attributes,  prayer,  and  meditation;  (2)  Deva  Yajna,  which 
consists  of  the  fire  offering,  ashwa  medha  and  other  rituals,  the  service 
of  the  learned  and  their  company.  So  the  prayer  and  fire  sacrifice 


Academical  Education 


47 


alone  should  be  performed  by  the  student  in  his  school  life  devoted 
to  acquiring  knowledge. 

This  quotation  is  from  the  second  chapter  of  the  Sushrut.  It 
means  that  the  Brahman  can  invest  the  three  classes,  viz,.  Brahman, 
Kshatriya  and  Vaishya,  with  the  sacred  thread  and  teach  them;  the 
Kshatriya,  the  two  orders,  viz.,  the  Kshatirya  and  Vaishya;  and  the 
Vaishya,  only  one,  viz  , Vaishya.  If  there  be  a Shudra  (person  of  the 
servant  class)  of  good  family  and  of  good  character,  he  should  be 
instructed  in  all  the  scriptures  eind  the  text  of  the  Vedas.  The  Shudra 
may  read;  but  he  should  not  be  invested  with  the  sacred  thread.  This 
is  the  opinion  of  many  Acharyas  or  professors  of  theology. 

Brahmacharya  : Unmarried  School  Life 

When  boys  and  girls,  after  their  fifth  year,  arc  sent  to  their 
respective  schools,  they  should  regularly  begin  the  following  course 
of  instruction. 

— The  vow  of  celibacy  should  be  kept  by  students  from  the  8th  to 
36th  year  of  ape,  i.e  , 12  years  should  be  spent  in  the  study  of  each  of 
the  three  Vedas  with  their  accessories  and  commentaries,  which  make 
36  years  with  8 years  of  pre-school  life  being  added  they  amount  to 
44  years.  Or,  the  vow  may  be  kept  for  18  years,  which  with  8 years 
as  before  make  26  years.  Or,  it  may  be  kept  for  9 years,  or  till  the 
acquisition  of  knowledge  is  completed. —Manu,  III,  1. 

Its  three  Grades 

The  following  six  quotations  are  from  the  Chhandogya  Upani- 
shat.  There  are  three  grades  in  the  vow  of  the  student’s  celibacy. 

mu'sft  nm  stth;  mi,  srT«in  m 

^TmfiT  II  ? II 

1.  The  lowest  grade  is  when  a man,  whose  body  is  made  of 
food  and  other  nutritious  substances,  and  is  pervaded  by  the  soul, 
and  whose  duty  is  to  live  in  good  company  and  to  perform  good 
actions,  should  study  the  Vedas  and  other  scriptures  and  learn  the 
practice  of  morality  during  24  years  of  the  vow  of  the  student’s  celibacy 
and  keep  his  senses  under  control.  He  should  not  indulge  in  vices 
even  after  marriage.  Then  his  body  becomes  very  vigorous  in  life 
time  and  good  qualities  reside  in  him. 

ar!T%  SrTa:?RR 

ii  ^ ii 


48 


Satyarth  Prakash 


The  first  part  of  life  should  be  devoted  to  the  study  of  knowledge. 
The  teacher  should  also  always  advise  his  pupils  to  the  same  effect. 
The  pupil  should  always  believe  that  if  he  keeps  the  vow  of  chastity 
perfectly  in  the  first  part  of  life,  his  body  and  soul  will  be  healthy, 
and  vigorous,  and  his  life  endowed  with  good  qualities.  O man, 
increase  your  happiness  and  pleasure  in  this  way.  Say  to  yourself,  if 
I do  not  break  the  vow  of  celibacy,  and  if  I marry  after  the  24th  year 
of  age,  it  is  evident  I shall  be  healthy  and  my  life  will  last  70  or  80 
years. 

>9  N >3  • 

II  ? II 

2.  The  middle  grade  of  chastity  is  when  a man  keeps  the  vow 
of  the  student’s  celibacy  for  44  years  and  applies  himself  to  acquiring 
knowledge  all  the  while,  his  breath,  sense,  intellect,  and  soul  become 
healthy  and  vigorous.  He  stamps  out  vice  and  protects  virtue. 

H ?rin?STTW|T  ^ 5? 

iTfUTt?!  5 u II 

He  should  say  to  his  teacher,  if  I spend  the  first  part  of  my  life 
in  the  Brahmacharya:  vow  of  chastity  and  austerity,  my  life  will 
become  happy  and  I shall  accomplish  the  middle  grade  of  chastity. 
“Do  O student”,  the  teacher  should  say  to  his  pupils,  “as  I have  done 
and  become  an  incarnate  sacrifice  by  adhering  to  the  vow  of  chastity. 
I have  come  from  the  same  family  of  teachers  as  those  of  old,  and 
being  free  from  disease  I am  always  healthy.  Act  as  a good  student 
acts  in  his  life”, 

qqlqqqq  qi^r  qrqifqrqr 

II  ^ II 

3.  The  third  grade  of  chastity  is  the  best  of  all.  It  lasts  till  48 
years  of  age.  He  becomes  a master  of  self  and  knowledge  in  all  its 
departments,  who  strictly  keeps  the  vow  of  bachelorship  during  the 
course  of  study. 

q qqfq  qqm  qm  qifqcqr  ?q  ^ wfftqqqq- 

qmRTqffqrqTqt  qsft  HcT  ^cqq^ 

^ qqfir  II  ^ II 

— The  teacher,  the  father  and  the  mother  should  make  and  train 
the  children  as  ascetics  for  the  acquirement  of  knowledge  and  good 
habits  and  always  preach  them  the  advantages  of  such  a course  in  the 
first  part  of  their  life.  The  children  themselves  should  stick  to  the 
unbroken  vow  of  bachelorship  and  thus  accomplish  the  third  grade  of 
chastity  when  they  become  learned  and  live  for  full  400  years.  They 
should  act  upon  such  preachings  of  their  teachers.  For,  those  pupils 


Academical  Education 


49 


who  keep  this  vow  of  bachelorship  and  never  break  it,  are  always  free 
from  disease  and  blessed  with  virtue,  wealth,  success  and  salvation. 

Four  Stages  of  Body 

I I qrqcqifelH:  \ qq:  fqfq- 

n 

gq  |qR  qt^  g I— Sutrasthan. 

qqfqiqqqW  ^rrqtqTr^qqt  fqq^  u Chapter,  35. 

This  quotation  is  from  the  Sushrut.  This  body  has  4 stages. 
The  1st  stage  is  that  of  growth,  which  lasts  from  the  16th  to  25th  year 
of  age,  and  in  which  all  the  tissues  of  the  body  are  growing.  The  2nd 
stage  is  that  of  youth,  which  commences  from  the  25th  year  of  age. 
The  3rd  stage  is  that  of  manhood  or  perfection,  which  lasts  till  the 
40th  year  of  age,  when  all  the  tissues  of  the  body  attain  maturity.  The 
4th  stage  is  that  of  fullness,  when  all  the  limbs  and  organs  of  the  body 
obtain  perfection  in  development.  After  this  period  the  increase  of 
semen  runs  off  in  sleep,  the  excess  of  perspiration  and  the  like  occa- 
sion of  depletion,  as  it  cannot  be  retained  in  the  body.  This  40th 
year  is,  therefore,  the  best  time  for  marriage.  But  the  very  best  time 
for  marriage  is  the  48th  year  of  age. 

Q, — Is  this  rule  of  the  vow  of  chastity  alike  for  both  man  and 
woman  ? 

A. — No.  If  a man  keeps  it  for  25  years,  a woman  should  do  it 
for  16  years  of  age.  If  a man  is  celibate  for  30  years,  a woman  should 
be  so  till  17.  If  a man  is  unmarried  till  36,  a woman  should  be  so 
till  the  18th  year  of  age.  If  a man  keeps  it  till  40,  a woman  should 
do  it  till  20.  If  a man  observes  it  till  44,  a woman  should  do  it  till  22. 
If  a man  keeps  it  till  48,  a woman  should  do  it  till  24.  That  is  to  say, 
a man  should  not  keep  it  beyond  48,  and  a woman  beyond  24.  But 
this  rule  is  for  persons  who  marry.  But  those  who  do  not  wish  to 
marry  at  all,  may  be  celibate  till  death,  they  are  at  liberty.  However, 
this  can  only  be  done  by  perfectly  learned  man  or  woman,  who  is  the 
master  of  one’s  senses,  and  who  is  not  hampered  with  a single  fault, 
rather  who  is  an  ascetic  or  Yogi.  Itis  the  most  difficult  work  to  check 
the  force  of  passion  and  keep  the  senses  under  subjection  to  the 
dictates  of  the  will. 

Rules  of  Instruction 

1.  '^ci  q q I 2.  q?q  q rqnqmqq^  q I 3.  q'T5q 

rqitqTqsiqq^  q I 4.  qq^q  rqrtqrqsrqq^  q I 5.  SHRq  rqT«qTqsiqq%  q 
6.  qtqq^q  rqicqmqq^  q I 7.  Wpq^tqsq  rqtcqTqsqq^  q I 
8.  qfqqqsq  rqicqiqjjqq^  q \ 9.  qm  q rqqqtqqqq^  q I 10.  qqr 
q ^qtcqtqsrqq^  q I 11.  qqq5q  rqsqiqqqq^  q I 12.  srsiTfq5q 
^qTwnqqqq^  q \ 


50 


Satyarth  Prakash 


— This  quotation  is  from  the  Tait.  It  lays  down  rules  for  the 
teacher  and  the  taught.  They  are — 1.  Studying  and  teaching  require 
the  maintenance  of  right  conduct.  2.  Persons  should  study  and  teach 
what  is  truth  in  knowledge.  3.  They  should  be  ascetics  or  practise 
virtue  in  studying  and  teaching  the  Vedas  and  other  scriptures. 
4.  They  should  prevent  the  senses  from  indulging  in  vices  during 
studying  and  teaching  5.  They  should  in  every  way  check  the 
tendency  of  the  mind  to  connive  at  all  kinds  of  its  defects  during  study 
and  instruction.  6.  The  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  sacrificial  fire  and 
electricity  should  occupy  their  attention  in  teaching  and  studying. 
7.  The  performance  of  the  fire- offering  should  be  observed  in  studying 
and  teaching.  8.  They  should  entertain  and  serve  guests  or  itinerant 
sages  during  the  course  of  teaching  and  studying  9.  The  attention 
of  the  teacher  and  the  taught  is  invited  to  the  proper  knowledge  of  the 
human  affairs.  10,  They  should  study  and  teach  the  laws  of  the 
protection  of  children  and  government.  1 1 . They  should  protect  and 
improve  their  energy  while  instruction  lasts.  12  They  should  learn 
how  to  protect  and  nourish  sons  and  pupils  when  under  training. 

N N N O 

n Manu,  IV,  204. 

— A wise  man  should  mind  the  Yamas  (moral  duties)  and  not  the 
Niyamas  (religious  ceremonies)  only.  Without  practising  the  Yamas, 
a man  falls  from  rectitude,  though  he  observes  the  Niyamas,  The 
Yamas  are  of  5 kinds.  They  are  given  in  this  aphorism  of  the  Yoga 
philosophy  : 

\ Yoga,  II,  30. 

— 1.  The  regard  of  truth  in  thought,  speech  and  action;  2.  the 
giving  up  of  theft  in  mind,  word,  and  deed;  3.  the  curbing  of 
amativeness;  4.  the  absence  of  pride;  5.  the  giving  up  of  selfish- 
ness and  fickleness  in  the  extreme.  These  five  Yamas  or  acts  of  virtue, 
purificatory  of  character,  should  always  be  observed,  and  not  the 
Niyamas  only. 

5fN?rTfft<srrI'T:?^T6iIIi|:^TsrfiT5nHlf?r  l Yoga,  ll  32. 

— This  aphorism  enumerates  the  5 Niyamas.  1.  Purification  by 
bath  and  the  like  means.  2.  Contentment,  (not  apathetic  idleness) 
but  the  exertion  of  all  possible  energy  without  exultation  in  profit  and 
dejection  in  loss.  3.  The  practice  of  virtuous  deeds  inspite  of  physical 
pain.  4.  Studying  and  teaching.  5.  The  sacrifice  of  life  and  devo- 
tion to  the  service  of  God.  These  are  the  five  Niyamas.  They  alone 
should  not  be  practised  to  the  exclusion  of  the  moral  duties.  But  they 
both  should  be  observed.  He  does  not  improve  who  practices  the 
Niyamas  without  the  Yamas,  rather  he  falls  lower  and  lower,  i.e  , he 
becomes  wordly. 

— The  excess  of  desire  and  indifference  are  not  good  for  any- 
body ; for  if  there  is  no  desire  the  knowledge  of  the  Vedas  and  the  per- 
formance of  the  works  required  by  them  and  other  virtuous  work  will 
not  be  accomplished. — Manu,  II,  28. 


Academical  Education 


51 


g^:  \ 

H^m^S^sar  cH:  n 

— The  body  is  made  Brahman  (body),  fit  for  the  worship  of  God 
and  study  of  the  Vedas,  by  the  study  and  instruction  of  all  kinds  of 
knowledfjc,  by  the  observance  of  the  vows  of  chastity  and  veracity, 
and  by  performing  offrings  into  fire,  the  adoption  of  truth  and  rejec- 
tion of  untruth,  by  the  gift  of  various  kinds  of  true  knowledge,  by 
meditation  and  other  works  enjoined  by  the  Vedas,  by  performing 
fortnightly  and  other  sacrifices,  by  producing  children,  by  performing 
the  great  duties  of  (1)  adoration,  (2)  fire  offering,  (3)  service  of  parents 
(4)  feeding  the  disabled  and  lower  animals,  (5)  hospitality  of  learned 
strangers  or  guests;  by  performing  sacrifices  and  learning  handicrafts 
or  manufacture,  and  other  sciences  and  arts.  Without  these  means,  a 
person  is  not  Brahmanized. 

— Just  as  a skilful  driver  keeps  the  horses  of  his  car  on  the 
right  path,  so  should  a person  try  by  all  means  the  senses  from  falling 
into  the  temptation  of  sensuous  pleasures,  which  lead  the  will  and 
the  mind  to  sinful  acts. — Manu,  11,  88. 

c ^ 

g \ Manu,  II,  93, 

— The  soul  being  enslaved  by  the  senses  becomes  liable  to  many 
great  vices  and  weaknesses;  but  when  it  subjects  the  senses  to  its 
control,  it  becomes  successful.  For, 

— He  who  is  of  wicked  conduct  and  not  master  of  his  senses,  is 
never  successful  in  the  Veda,  resignation.  Yoga,  sacrifice,  the  Niyamas, 
purity,  asceticism,  or  any  other  good  work. — Manu,  II,  97. 

— There  is  no  break  or  holiday  in  the  study  of  instructions  of 
the  Veda,  the  performance  of  the  five  great  duties  and  fire  oblation. — 
Manu,  II,  105. 

— For,  there  is  no  cessation  in  the  daily  religious  work,  which 
should  be  performed,  every  day  the  work  of  respiration  is  always 
going  on  and  is  never  stopped.  On  no  occasion  it  should  be  stopped, 
for,  the  performonce  of  the  fire  oblation  even  in  holidays  is  con- 
verted into  meritorious  act.  As  there  is  always  sin  in  lying,  and  merit 
in  speaking  the  truth,  so  there  is  always  prohibition  in  doing  vicious 
and  sanction  in  doing  virtuous  acts.  — Manu,  II,  106. 

qr??nfT:  ewr  ii 


52 


Satyarth  Prakash 


— His  four  qualities,  viz.,  age,  knowledge,  fame,  and  strength,  are 
always  on  the  increase,  who  is  ever  humble  and  polite,  who  is  learned 
and  serves  the  seniors  and  the  old;  but  those  who  do  not  act  so,  are 
deprived  of  the  development  of  these  four  qualities  in  them. — Manu, 
11,  121. 

— The  learned  and  the  students  should  give  up  all  enmity 
against  one  another  and  should  preach  the  path  of  good  to  all  mankind. 
Preachers  should  always  speak  in  sweet  and  polite  language.  They 
who  wish  success  in  religion,  should  always  act  on  truth,  and  always 
preach  truth. — Manu,  II,  159. 

S o 

— That  person  gets  all  the  merit  of  the  study  of  the  Vedant  or 
the  cream  of  the  Vedic  truth  whose  language  and  thoughts  are  pure 
and  under  proper  control.  Manu,  II,  160. 

?mT5TT?  i 

c 

— That  Brahman  knows  God  and  the  whole  of  the  Vedas  who 
always  shuns  praise  as  if  it  were  a poison,  and  courts  dispraise  like 
nectar,  Manu,  II,  162. 

— In  this  manner,  the  regenerate  students,  both  male  and  female, 
engaged  in  the  study  of  the  Vedas,  being  regenerated  by  the  sacra- 
ment of  the  investiture  of  the  thread,  should  gradually  improve  their 
knowledge  of  the  Vedas.  Manu,  II,  164. 

-O 

— He  who  does  not  study  the  Vedas  and  tries  his  best  in  some 
other  subjects,  soon  becomes  a Shudra  or  low  caste  together  with 
his  sons  and  grandsons. — Manu,  II,  168. 

| 

5lTSlfsT  JnPr  srf'rjJTi  ^ ll — Manu,  II,  177. 

— Male  and  female  students  engaged  in  the  study  of  the  Vedas 
should  abstain  from  the  use  of  wine,  flesh,  perfumes,  garlands,  beve- 
rages, gazing  at  and  embracing  a man  or  a woman,  pickles,  and 
slaughter  of  animals. 

— Let  them  give  up  the  anointment  of  the  body,  the  touch  of 
the  generative  organs,  putting  antimony  in  the  eyes,  shoes,  umbrellas, 
sensual  desire,  anger,  avarice,  sordidness,  fear,  sorrow,  envy,  enmity, 
dancing,  singing,  playing  upon  musical  insltuments.  Manu,  ll,  n&. 


Academical  Education 


53 


'ar  anmR  ^ «TfTarT3  ?r«TisH5m  i ar  $«r»rraT>R<mTW  TTfir  ^ ii 

C\  C N v> 

— They  should  leave  off  gambling,  talk  of  persons,  detraction, 
falsehood,  wantonly  glancing  at  women,  injury  to  others,  and  the  like 
vices.  Manu,  II,  179. 

5TifhT  ?T  I 

vmtfe  acTOTWH:  II  Manu,  II,  180. 

— They  should  always  sleep  alone,  never  waste  their  energy,  if 
one  wastes  his  semen  out  of  lust  he  destroys  his  vow  of  chastity,so  to 
speak. 

Moral  Instruction 

1.  i 2.  ufii  sra  i 3.  sm  air  i 

4.  snr?:  i 5.  fir??  srsnfTJH  ht  s^raps^nt:  i 

6.  urmar  smferaqn  i 7.  sinfenaqu  i 8.  f alarm  sinftrraaw  i 
H sinferann  i 9.  mrmmsrar^TmT  n srnfemrn  i lo.  ^t^rafairmimT 

N SC 

5T  sr^rfermn  i 1 1.  i f«T^t  ^ i i 

^4  112.  armr^rargrT^  mfH  ^faaaqfrfn  ^rrrrfoT  1 13.  irimmiajl? 
narferrfH  min  farTiW  i 14.  ^ ^T^ran- 

sTaarfararmn  i 15.  ar^m  i grar^m  i famr  i 
%!TT  I fwT  ^*r  I i 16,  gr«mfk  ^ m gfar- 

firf^^frmi  mrar  ^ am  ^arr:  nmF5H>  g^arr  grgafar  grararT  awaruTT: 

^ ar^  ar'ai  aai  i 17.  arilaT  qi?  grq%5T  qar 

%3>T0maT  I rTm35j5iTnar^  i qar^fnarain  i i»aw  ^arfmarn  i 

— Tait.  Pr.  7,  An  11. 

— 1.  The  teacher  should  thus  give  moral  lessons  to  his  female 
and  male  pupils  : — 2.  Always  speak  the  truth  3.  Practise  virtue. 
4.  Give  up  carelessness  in  either  learning  or  teaching.  Keep  the  vow 
of  chastity  unbroken  in  acquiring  all  kinds  of  knowledge.  5.  Give 
the  teacher  valuable  articles  of  wealth.  Marry  and  beget  children. 
6.  Do  not  give  up  truth  out  of  inadvertence.  7.  Do  not  abadon 
religion  out  of  negligence.  8.  Do  not  ruin  health,  dexterity  and 
prosperity  out  of  neglect.  9.  Do  not  discontinue  study  and  instruc- 
tion out  of  carelessness.  10.  Do  not  be  careless  in  serving  God, 
learned  persons,  the  father,  mother  and  other  elders.  11.  Always 
serve  the  father,  the  mother,  the  teacher  and  the  guest  in  the  same 
manner  as  the  learned.  12.  Perform  unblamable  and  virtuous  works, 
such  as  the  speaking  of  truth  and  the  like.  Never  do  what  is  con- 
trary, to  them,  as  the  speaking  of  falsehood  and  the  like.  13.  Imitate 
our  good  actions,  which  are  enjoined  by  religion,  but  never  our  wick- 
ed actions.  14.  Keep  company  of  those  religious  learned  Brahmins 
among  us,  who  are  best,  and  put  faith  in  them.  15.  Give  charity 
from  faith,  give  it  without  faith,  give  it  for  fame,  give  it  with  modesty, 
give  it  with  fear,  give  it  to  redeem  promise.  16.  Whenever  you  get 
a doubt  of  any  kind,  you  should  act  like  those  persons  who  are  pru- 
dent, free  from  partiality,  Yogis  or  clairvoyants,  gentle-hearted,  des- 


54 


Satyarth  Prakash 


irous  to  do  good  and  pious.  17.  This  is  the  commandment,  this  is 
the  teaching,  this  is  the  Upanishat  (essence)  of  the  Vedas,  this  is  the 
advice.  Act  on  this  and  this  alone,  and  mould  your  character  accord- 
ing to  it. 

U— Manu  II,  4. 

— People  should  know  that  even  the  twinkling  of  the  eye  does 
not  take  place  in  a man  having  no  object.  Hence  it  is  proved  that 
whatever  a man  does  he  does  not  do  without  some  kind  of  object 
in  view 

^ fg^ST:  H -Mann  1,  108. 

— Man  should  always  practise  virtue  ; for  it  is  the  end  of 
talking,  hearing,  preaching  and  instructing  that  persons  should  fulfill 
the  duties  enjoined  by  the  Vedas  and  the  laws  in  accord  with  them. 

g ii 

— For,  that  person  cannot  obtain  the  blessed  fruit  of  virtue 
enjoined  for  practice  by  the  Vedas,  whose  conduct  is  not  righteous  ; 
but  he  alone  gets  perfect  joy  who  lives  a righteous  life  after  complet- 
ing his  education. — Manu  1,  109. 

H II — Manu  11,11. 

— The  person  who  oppugnes  the  Vedas  and  the  works  written  by 
great  sages  in  consonance  with  the  Vedas,  should  be  driven  away  as 
an  atheist  and  scorner  of  the  Veda  from  the  company  of  the  virtuous 

— tribe,  society,  and  country. 

SfTg:  ii— Manu  II  12. 

— The  four  signs  of  virtue  which  distinguish  it  from  vice,  are 

— 1.  the  Veda;  2.  the  codes  of  law,  written  by  sages  agreably  to  the 
Vedas,  such  as  the  ordinances  of  Manu;  3.  the  conduct  of  the  virtu- 
ous or  permanent  duties  enjoined  by  God  through  the  Veda;  4.  the 
satisfaction  of  the  conscience,  or  what  is  liked  by  the  soul,  as  the 
speaking  of  truth. 

Religion  is  the  conduct  which  consists  of  the  practice  of  the 
justice  free  from  partiality,  the  adoption  of  truth  and  the  total  rejec- 
tion of  falsehood.  The  conduct  contrary  to  this,  full  of  partiality, 
the  doing  of  injustice,  the  rejection  of  truth,  and  the  adoption  of  un- 
truth, constitutes  irreligion. 

— They  acquire  the  knowledge  of  religion  who  are  not  enslaved 
by  the  allurements  of  gold  and  gems,  the  company  of  women  and 
the  like  form  of  luxury.  They  who  are  desirous  of  the  knowledge  oi 
religion,  should  ascertain  it  through  the  Vedas  ; for  religion  and 


Academical  Education 


55 


irreligion  cannot  be  exactly  distinguished  without  a reference  to  the 
Vedas — Manu,  II.  13. 

Thus  the  teacher  should  admonish  his  pupils.  Also  the  king 
and  other  members  of  the  warrior  class,  the  mercantile  class  and  the 
worthy  persons  of  the  servile  class  must  need  be  especially  educated; 
for  if  only  the  Brahmans  are  educated,  but  dot  others,  their  can  be 
no  improvement  in  knowledge,  religion,  government,  wealth  and  the 
like  institutions.  The  Brahmans  depend  upon  the  military  and  other 
orders  for  sustenance  and  are  their  guides.  There  is  no  superintendent 
over  them.  Also  there  is  no  punisher  of  crimes.  Hence,  all  the 
orders  have  fallen  victims  to  hypocrisy.  But  when  the  warrior  and 
the  other  classes  are  educated,  the  Brahmans  study  much  and  adhere 
to  the  path  of  religion.  They  cannot  practise  hypocrisy  and  false- 
hood before  other  educated  classes.  But  when  the  military  order, 
traders,  and  the  servant  class  are  not  educated,  the  Brahmans  do 
whatever  they  like  and  teach  others  to  do  the  same.  Therefore,  if  the 
Brahmans  themselves  love  their  own  good,  they  should  very  studiously 
and  attentively  instruct  the  warrior  and  other  classes  in  the  Vedas 
and  other  true  scriptures  for  they  alone  are  the  promoters  of  know- 
ledge, religion,  government  and  wealth.  They  do  not  beg  for  liveli- 
hood, so  they  cannot  be  partial  in  the  worldly  matters  and  knowledge. 
When  all  the  classes  are  well  educated  and  morally  well  behaved,  no 
one  can  impose  upon  other  or  practise  frauds  and  other  vices.  Hence 
the  inference  from  the  above  is  that  the  Brahmans  and  ascetics  guide 
the  warriors  and  others  in  the  path  of  religion  and  they  themselves 
are  kept  righteous  by  the  latter.  Wherefore  education  must  neces- 
sarily be  cnnforced  among  the  men  and  women  of  all  classes. 

Criteria  of  Test 

Whatever  is  studied  or  taught,  should  be  tested  in  a thorough 
manner.  The  criteria  of  test  are  of  five  kinds:— (I ) what  is  in  accor- 
dance with  the  attributes,  actions  and  nature  of  God,  and  with  the 
tenor  of  the  Vedas,  is  true  ; and  what  is  contrary  to  it,  is  untrue.  (2) 
Whatever  is  in  unison  with  the  laws  of  nature,  is  true  ; and  whatever 
is  contrary  to  them,  is  untrue  ; as,  for  instance,  the  statement  that  a 
child  is  born  without  the  existence  of  its  father  and  mother  is  untrue, 
being  against  the  laws  of  nature.  (3)  Whatever  is  consistent  with 
the  teachings  of  the  virtuous,  learned,  veracious  and  upright,  is  accept- 
able ; but  what  is  against  them,  is  rejectable.  (4)  The  rightness  of  the 
self  in  conformity  to  the  dictates  of  knowledge,  i.e  , just  as  we  like 
pleasure  and  dislike  pain,  so  we  should  always  bear  in  mind  that,  if 
we  give  pleasure  or  pain  to  any  body,  he  or  she  will  be  affected 
accordingly.  (5)  The  eight  kinds  of  evidence,  viz.,  (i)  Perception, 
(ii)  Inference,  (iii)  Anology,  (iv)  the  Teaching  of  the  Learned  or 
holy  Writ,  (v)  History,  (vi)  the  Converse,  (vii)  Possibility,  (viii)  Non- 
existence. 

Eight  Kinds  of  Evidence 

The  aphorisms  given  below  as  definitions  of  the  above  kinds  of 
evidence  are  from  the  II  Chapter  of  Logic. 


56 


Satyarth  Prakash 


i 

1.  The  knowledge  produced  from  the  immediate  contact  of  the 
mind  and  the  will,  of  the  will  and  the  senses — the  ear,  the  skin,  the 
eye,  the  tongue,  the  nose,  and  of  the  senses  and  their  object — sound, 
touch,  form,  taste,  smell,  is  called  the  Pratyaksha  : Perception,  (a)  But 
what  is  derived  from  vyapadesha,  i.e.,  the  relation  of  a word  and 
its  object,  is  not  perception  in  its  true  sense.  As,  for  example,  a man 
says  to  another,  “Bring  me  water.”  He  brings  and  puts  it  before  him 
and  says,  “This  is  water.”  But  the  word  water  neither  of  the  persons 
can  see.  The  thing  which  is  called  water,  can  only  be  preceived.  The 
knowledge  which  is  produced  from  sound,  falls  under  the  head  of  the 
Personal  or  Scriptural  evidence,  (b)  Suppose  a person  seeing  a pillar 
at  night  believes  it  to  be  a man,  but  when  he  sees  it  in  the  day  his 
knowledge  of  the  man  of  the  night  is  destroyed  and  he  knows  it  to  be 
a pillar.  Such  a delusive  knowledge  is  called  Vyabhichari  delusion, 
(c)  Suppose  a man  seeing  the  sands  of  a river  from  a distance  fancies 
that  “clothes  are  drying,  there  is  water  or  there  is  something  else.” 
“Is  there  Deva  Datta  standing  or  Yajna  Datta?”  As  long  as  there 
is  no  certainty,  it  cannot  be  called  perception.  So  perception  is  that 
knowledge  which  is  neither  delusive,  changeable,  nor  uncertain. 

ii  Ny.  i.i  5. 

n.  If  a part  of  a thing  or  the  whole  of  it  has  been  perceived  at 
some  time  or  place,  the  knowledge  of  the  thing,  though  unseen,  which 
is  obtained  from  the  prcception  of  one  of  its  component  parts  at 
other  time  or  place,  is  called  Inference.  As,  for  example,  wc  infer 
the  existence  of  a father  by  seeing  his  son,  the  knowledge  of  fire  from 
the  perception  of  smoke  on  the  mountain,  and  the  prior  existence  of 
life  from  the  perception  of  pleasure  and  pain  in  the  world.  Inference 
is  of  three  kinds. — 1.  Purvavat:  as  we  get  the  idea  of  rain  from  the 
appcarence  of  clouds,  of  the  pi  eduction  of  children  from  the  percep- 
tion of  the  ceremony  of  marriage,  and  of  the  proficiency  of  knowledge 
from  the  perception  of  the  labour  and  attention  of  students.  In  short, 
it  is  the  knowledge  of  the  effect  from  the  perception  of  the  cause. 
2.  Sheshavaf.  which  is  the  knowledge  of  the  cause  from  the  perception 
of  the  effect;  as,  for  example,  we  infer  the  heavy  fall  of  rain  in  the  up- 
country  from  the  perception  of  the  inundation  of  a liver,  the  existence 
of  a father  from  the  perception  of  his  son,  of  the  unbeginning  first 
cause  and  of  God  the  creator  from  that  of  the  creation,  and  of  his 
pleasure  and  pain  from  the  observation  of  good  and  evil  in  the  conduct 
of  a person.  3.  Sawauyatodrshta,  which  is  that  inference  in  which 
circumstances  have  no  connection  as  cause  and  effect,  but  possess 
some  characteristics  in  common.  As,  for  example,  since  none  can  go 
from  one  place  to  another  without  movement,  a particular  individual 
can’t  go  to  another  place  without  movement.  The  word  anuman 
means  that  knowledge — 

Which  is  obtained  after  perception  has  taken  place.  Thus,  none 
can  come  to  the  knowledge  of  an  invisible  fire  without  the  actual 
perception  by  the  senses  of  the  phenomenon  of  its  smoke. 

W— Nyaya,  1,  i,  6. 


Academical  Education 


57 


III.  The  evidence  of  Similitude  is  that  kind  of  proof  which  is 
based  upon  the  agreement  of  important  characteristics  cognizable  by 
the  senses. 

As,  for  instance,  a man  tells  his  servant  to  bring  to  him  Vishnu 
Mitra  who  is  like  Deva  Datt.  The  servant  says  he  has  hever  seen  him. 
The  master  replies,  Vishnu  Datta  is  like  Deva  Datta  here.  Or,  take 
another  example;  the  nil  gao  (antelope)  in  the  forest  is  like  this  cow. 
When  the  servant  goes  to  the  place,  he  finds  Vishnu  Mitra  resemble 
Deva  Datta,  and  so  he  gets  assured  that  he  is  the  required  person. 
Accordingly,  he  brings  him  to  his  master.  Or,  in  the  other  case, 
going  to  the  forest  and  finding  an  animal  like  the  cow,  he  gets  assured 
that  it  is  the  nil  gao,  and  so  he  brings  it  home.  It  is  also  called 
Comparison  and  Analogy. 

515?:  U— Nyaya  I,  i,  7. 

IV.  The  Authority  is  that  evidence  which  is  the  opinion  of  an 
adept  or  a person  throughly  learned,  righteous,  benevolent,  veracious, 
energetic,  self-possessed,  advocating  the  good  of  all  people,  and 
impelled  by  his  sincere  desire  to  tell  others  the  ways  he  has  obtained 
happiness  by  and  what  is  good  in  his  mind,  that  is  of  a person,  who 
is  versed  in  the  knowledge  of  all  beings  from  the  earth  upto  the 
Supreme  Ruler.  The  opinion  of  such  a savant  and  the  command- 
ment of  God,  which  constitute  the  Vedas  are  to  be  considered  as  the 
authority  or  evidence  of  a sage  or  the  Holy  Writ.  It  may  be  called  the 
Personal  or  Scriptural  evidence. 

n — Nyaya  II,  ii,  7. 

V.  The  Histoiical  proof  shows  the  exact  occurrence  of  event 
or  actions  of  persons,  that  is,  it  is  the  life  or  biography  of  a person. 

VI.  The  proof  of  the  Converse:  as,  for  instance,  when  it  is 
affirmed  that  the  existence  of  clouds  produces  rain,  or  every  effect  has 
its  cause,  it  is  proved  without  any  explicit  saying  that  there  is  no  rain 
without  clouds,  and  no  effect  without  a cause. 

VII.  Possibility.  For  example,  such  assertions  of  people  as — 
So  and  so  was  born  without  parents,  a certain  person  raised  the  dead, 
he  lifted  mountains,  he  floated  stone  on  the  waters  of  the  sea,  he  split 
the  moon,  God  took  in  flesh;  a certain  man  has  horns,  the  son  and 
daughter  of  a barren  woman  were  married,  and  similar  others,  are  all 
impossible  of  occurrence;  for,  they  are  against  the  laws  of  nature. 
What  is  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  nature,  is  considered  possible. 

VIII. — -Non-existence.  As,  for  instance,  a man  desired  his 
servant  to  bring  him  an  elephant  from  a certain  place.  But  on  going 
there,  he  found  no  elephant.  However,  he  brought  it  from  the  place 
where  it  was  found. 


58 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Such  are  the  8 kinds  of  proof  or  evidence.  If  history  be  includ- 
ed in  authority,  and  the  converse,  possibility  and  non-existence  in 
inference,  there  are  left  4 kinds  of  proof  only.  A man  can  test  the 
truth  or  otherwise  of  a matter  by  means  of  these  five  canons  of 
examinations,  viz.,  the  Laws  of  Spirit,  Laws  of  Nature,  Wisdom  of 
Sages,  Voice  of  Conscience,  Eight-fold  Evidence  ; but  not  in  any 
other  way. 

Salvation  by  Knowledge— 6 Categories  of  Existence 

Hmvjjgvvirfvjit  ll  Vaisheshik,  Ch.  1,  i,  4*. 

— A man  obtains  salvation  or  absolute  beatitude,  when  he,  be- 
ing purified  by  the  practising  of  virtue  to  his  best,  masters  the  philo- 
bophical  knowledge  of  the  six  categories  of  existence,  namely,  Sadhar- 
miya  identity  /.c.,  the  commonness  of  properties,  as  inertia  in  earth 
and  water,  Vaidharmiya  : disparity,  as  hardness  of  earth  and  softness 
of  water,  similarly,  1 dravya  : substance,  3 guna  qualities,  3 karma  : 
action  or  influence  4 samanya  : agreement,  5 vishesha  dilTerence,  and 
6 samavaya  necessary  relation  or  causal  connection. 

9 Substances 

1.  gTgTTq!T5T  ffir  ii  l,  i,  5. 

— Earth,  water,  fire,  air,  ether,  time,  space,  soul,  and  will  or 
mind  are  the  nine  substances,  called  dravyas  in  Sanscrit. 

ffsrtHSWin  U l,  i,  15. 

va  s ' ^ 

ttfvnvaa  i 

« ^ >a  > 

— A substance  is  that  which  has  energy,  properties,  or  even 
properties  alone.  Of  the  substances,  earth,  water,  fire,  air,  will  and 
soul  are  the  six  substances  that  have  both  qualities  and  action.  Either 
time  and  space  are  the  three  substances  that  have  properties,  but  not 
action  or  force. 

> > 

— An  object  or  substance  {dravya)  is  a cause  existing  before  its 
natural  effect,  produced  by  contact  and  sharing  in  its  nature.  That 
by  which  an  object  is  known,  is  called  the  sense  ; as,  light  or  form 
is  discerned  by  means  of  the  eye. 

Their  Definitions 

1.  Prithvi  ||  1 1,  i,  1, 

— Earth  has  the  properties  of  form  or  corporeity,  tastibility, 
odour  and  tangibility.  It  has  these  properties  from  its  union  with 
fire,  water  and  air. 

All  the  aphorisms  given  here  from  page  59  to  64  are  quoted  from  the 
Vaisheshik  Philosophy.  So  its  name  will  not  be  repeated  ; but  its 
Addhyaya  (Chapter)  Khand  (Section)  and  Sutra  (aphorism)  only  will  be 
mentioned.— T. 


Academical  Education 


59 


5?T3rft«rcr:  m n,  ii,  2. 

— Oduor  is  the  essential  property  of  earth  ; in  the  same  way, 
taste  is  that  of  water  ; form  or  light  is  that  of  fire  ; tangibility  is 
that  of  air  ; and  sound  is  that  of  ether. 

2.  Apa  II  II,  i,  2. 

— Water  has  the  properties  of  form,  taste,  tangibility,  fluidity 
and  softness.  But  of  these,  taste  is  its  essential  quality.  Form  and 
tangibility  are  due  to  its  union  with  fire  and  air. 

II  II,  ii,  5. 

— Coldness  is  also  an  essential  property  of  water. 

3.  Teja  II  II,  i,  3. 

— Fight  or  colour  and  tangibility  are  the  essential  properties  of 
fire.  But  form  (colour)  is  its  natural  quality  and  tangibility  is 
acquired  by  its  union  with  air. 

4.  Vayu  II  II,  i,  4. 

— Air  has  the  property  of  tangibility.  But  it  imbibes  heat  and 
cold  from  its  union  with  fire  and  water. 

5.  'Akasha'  cT  H II  II,  i,  5. 

—Ether  does  not  possess  form,  taste,  odour,  and  touch  ; but 
sound  alone  is  its  property. 

II  II,  I j,  20. 

— The  quality  of  ether  is  its  admissibility  of  entry  and  exit. 

5T5?:  ll  II,  i,  25. 

— Sound  alone  is  the  property  of  ether,  as  it  is  not  found  in 
earth  and  other  objects  or  their  products. 

6.  ‘Kala'  II  II,  ii,  6. 

— Time  is  that  to  which  the  application  of  the  ideas  expressing 
now,  beyond,  simultaniety,  quickness,  slowness  and  the  like  charac- 
teristics is  proper  and  congruous. 

II  II,  ii,  9. 

•o 

— ^Time  is  not  found  in  the  nature  of  noumena,  but  only  in 
that  of  phenomena.  The  idea  of  time  comes  up  in  the  consideration 
of  causation. 

7.  ‘Disha’  far  U II,  ii,  10. 

— Space  is  that  of  which  east,  south,  west,  and  north,  up  and 
down  witli  reference  to  a certain  place,  can  be  spoken. 

iJTTfefiRnttni?  i ii,  ii,  14. 

—East  is  that  direction  wheie  the  sun  rises  or  will  rise,  and 
the  side  where  it  sets,  is  called  the  west.  South  is  on  the  right  side 
of  a man  facing  towards  the  east,  and  north  is  on  his  left  side. 

ii  ii,  ii,  16. 

—The  direction  between  East  and  South  is  called  agneyi : E.  S. 
the  point  between  S.  and  W.,  nairiti : S.  W.,  that  between  W.  and  N. 
Vayavi  W.  N , and  that  between  N.  and  E.,  aishani : N.  E. 


60 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Qualities  of  Soul 

8.  'Atma’  II  Ny.  1,  10. 

— That  which  manifests  the  qualities  of  desire,  hatred,  energy, 
pleasure,  pain,  cognition,  is  called  the  soul.  The  Vaishcshik  philoso- 
phy has  the  following  in  addition  to  the  above  : 

f^Tf?T  II  111,  ii,  4. 

— Inbreath,  outbreath,  dropping  the  eyelids,  casting  them  up, 
having  life  thinking  or  consciousness,  voluntary  movement,  employing 
the  senses  in  their  objects  and  perceiving  those  objects  through  them, 
hunger,  thirst,  fever,  sickness  and  the  like  changes,  besides  the  above, 
namely,  pleasure,  pain,  desire,  hatred,  and  energy, — all  these  are  the 
powers  and  qualities  of  the  soul. 

6.  'Manas’  U Ny,  1,  i,  16. 

— That  which  cannot  attend  to  two  objects  at  the  one  and  the 
same  time,  is  called  the  mana  : will,  attention  or  desire.  So  much  for 
the  nature  and  characters  of  substances.  Now  to  mention  their 
qualities. 

24  Qualities 

11.  ‘Guilil’  RfTRmTfH 

a N 

mj:  II  1,  i,  6. 

— Light  (form),  taste,  smell,  touch,  sound,  number,  measure, 
separability,  cohesion,  divisibility,  distance,  nearness,  understanding, 
pleasure,  pain,  desire,  hatred,  exertion,  gravity,  fluidity,  greasiness, 
influence,  inherence,  and  incongruity  are  the  24  qualities  of  substances. 

ii  l,  ii,  16. 

— Quality  is  that  which  depends  for  its  existence  on  a substance 
and  docs  not  assume  another  character.  It  is  never  the  cause  of  union 
or  separation. 

Their  Definitions 

?n^T5ll5T:  5T5?:  II 

— Mahabhashya. 

— Shabda  : Sound  is  what  is  felt  in  the  ear,  perceived  by 
the  understanding,  and  mani^'ested  by  utterance,  and  whose  home  or 
element  is  ether  Rupa  : Colour  or  form  is  what  is  preceived  through 
the  eye.  Rasa  : Taste  is  what  affects  the  tongue,  as  sweet  etc. 
Gandha  : Smell  is  what  is  perceived  with  the  nose.  Spar  ska  : Touch 
is  what  is  perceived  through  the  skin.  Sankhya  : Number  is  that  by 
which  one,  two  and  the  like  are  counted.  Parimana  : Measure  is  what 
shows  weight  as  light,  heavy.  Prithaktwa  : Separation  is  exclusion 
from  one  another.  Sanyoga  : Union  is  contact  with  one  another. 
Vibhaga : Division  is  breaking  what  is  united  into  many  parts. 
Paratwa  : Remoteness  is  distance  from  a point.  Aparatwa  : Nearness 
is  proximity  with  reference  to  a point.  Budhi  : Intellect  is  the  faculty 


Academical  Education 


61 


which  discerns  right  and  wrong.  Sukha  : Pleasure  is  joy.  Dukha  : 
Pain  is  distress.  Ichha  : Desire  is  attachment.  Dwesha  : Hatred  is 
dislike.  Prayatna  : Exertion  is  the  putting  forth  of  strength  and 
energy  in  many  ways.  Giirutwa  : Gravity  is  heaviness.  Dravatwa  : 
Fluidity  is  the  quality  of  being  melted.  Sneha  : Oleagiousness  is 
oiliness  and  love.  Sanscara  : Influence  is  the  effect  produced  in  con- 
sequence of  the  presence  of  something  else.  Dharma  : Inherence  is 
just  conduct  or  solidity  and  the  like  qualities.  Adharma  . Incoherence 
is  unjust  conduct,  or  softness  and  other  qualities,  opposites  of  solidity 
and  the  like.  Such  are  the  24  qualities. 

III.  “Karma"’  M 

— Ascension,  descension,  contraction,  expansion,  movement  and 
the  like  change  of  position  are  called  actions.  Now  to  desetibe  the 
characters  of  action. 

n 1.  i,  17. 

s 

— Action  is  that  which  depends  on  an  object,  has  no  qualities, 
and  is  an  independent  cause  in  union  and  division. 

IV.  “Samanyam”  II  I.  i.  18. 

— A common  substance  is  that  which  is  a cause  of  products, 
qualities  and  actions. 

ii 

A product  of  substances  is  common  or  similar  to  all  such 
products  in  virtue  of  its  being  an  effect. 

V,  “Vishesha”  II 

— Objectivity  in  objects,  characteristicalness  in  characteristics, 
activity  in  action  are  agreement  and  difference  or  commonness  and 
distinctiveness.  For,  objectivity  in  objects  is  common  and  is  distinct 
from  qualitativeness  or  characteristicalness  and  activity.  The  same 
may  be  said  of  all  else  at  all  places. 

Hmpq  II 

— Agreement  and  difference  are  proved  by  reference  to  the 
intellect  ; as,  for  example,  humanity  in  the  individuals  of  mankind  is  a 
point  of  agreement  ; but  it  is  a point  of  difference  with  reference  to 
animals  and  other  creatures.  The  quality  of  the  Brahmin  or  piety, 
the  quality  of  the  Kshatriya  or  bravery,  the  quality  of  the  Vaishya  or 
business  aptitude,  the  quality  of  the  Shudra  or  servility  are  also  the 
differentiating  qualities  among  human  beings,  besides  femininity  and 
masculinity  of  their  sex.  Piety  or  the  quality  of  the  Brahmin  is  a 
character  in  which  ail  the  Brahmin  individuals  agree  : but  it  differen- 
tiates the  Kshatriyas  or  warrior  from  them.  This  law  holds  good 
everywhere,  namely,  the  essential  qualities  of  one  kind  are  not  found 
in  another. 

VI.  “Samavaya'’  H II  VII,  ii,  26. 

— The  constant  relation  between  the  parts  and  the  whole  ; an 


62 


Satyarth  Prakash 


act ; action  and  the  actor  ; qualities  and  the  substance,  a class  and  the 
individuals,  a cause  and  the  effect,  is  called  inherence.  The  relation 
between  any  two  substances  is  called  union,  i.e.,  an  accidence  or 
temporary  relation. 

\ I,  i,  9. 

— The  homogeneous  and  cognate  change  in  the  effect  from  a 
cause  is  called  homogeneity — Sadharmya.  Thus,  for  instance,  earth 
possesses  materiality,  which  is  also  shared  by  its  products,  as  pitchers 
and  other  earthenwares.  In  the  same  way,  materiality  is  alike  found 
in  water  and  its  products,  as  ice  and  other  forms  ; thus  earth  and 
water  agree  in  the  possession  of  the  common  property  of  materiality. 

— It  shows  that  the  opposite  character  of  qualities  and  a sub- 
stance in  the  product  is  called  heterogeneity — Vaidhannya.  Thus  the 
properties  of  hardness,  dryness,  and  odorousness  of  earth  are  opposites 
of  the  properties  of  fluidity,  softness,  and  liquidity  of  water. 

II  IV,  i,  3. 

— An  effect  takes  place  when  there  is  a cause, 
g II  1,  ii,  2. 

— The  non-existence  of  an  effect  does  not  prove  the  non-existence 
of  the  cause. 

M 1,  ii,  1. 

— No  effect  has  the  same  qualities  as  its  cause. 

II  II,  i,  24. 

— An  effect  has  the  same  qualities  as  its  cause. 

II  VII,  i,  11. 

— Size  is  of  two  kinds.  Small,  large,  as  a particle  (of  three  atoms) 
is  smaller  than  a nit  or  an  atom,  and  larger  than  two  atoms,  and 
mountains  are  smaller  than  the  earth  and  larger  than  trees. 

II  I,  ii,  7. 

— The  word  sat  : being  is  implied  in  substances,  qualities,  and 
actions  ; i.e.,  the  word  sat  denoting  present  time  (copula)  is  joined  to 
all. 

n l,  i,  l. 

— Existence  which  is  found  in  all  things,  is  called  the  great  agree- 
ment of  bcing—'Mahasamanya.  Such  is  the  law  of  the  existence  of 
substances. 

5 Kinds  of  Non-existence 

1.  fwn'i!5!Tq|^W5rT?5rr>T?r^  ii  Ix,  i, 

^^n-existciicc  is  of  5 kinds.  The  existence  of  a thing,  qua/ity 

or  action  betore  Its  pnrticuhir  cause,  is  called  the  Prag-abhava  ; as  a 

pot,  a piece  of  doth,  or  any  other  object  does  not  exist  before  its 
production. 


Academical  Education 


63 


2.  n IX,  i,  2. 

— The  non-existence  of  the  object,  having  been  in  existence,  is 
called  the  Pradhwans-abhava  as,  a pot  being  made  is  destroyed. 

3.  II  IX,  i,  4. 

— Existence  in  one  and  non-existence  in  another  object  is  called 
the  Anyony-abliava  mutual  exclusion  ; as,  a horse  is  not  a cow,  and  a 
cow  is  not  a horse,  that  is,  there  is  non-existence  of  the  horse  in  the 
cow,  and  vice-versa.  The  existence  of  the  cow  is  found  in  the  cow 
only,  and  similarly  that  of  the  horse,  in  the  horse  only. 

— That  which  is  different  from  the  above  three  kinds,  is  called 
the  Atyantahhava  absolute  non-existence  ; as,  the  horns  of  man,  the 
flowers  of  the  sky,  the  son  of  a barren  woman,  and  so  forth. 

5.  Heft  II  IX,  i,  10. 

— The  pot  is  not  in  the  house  /.c.,  it  is  elsewhere.  The  pot  has 
no  connection  with  the  house.  Such  are  the  5 kinds  of  non-existence. 

II  TX,  ii,  10. 

— The  defects  of  the  senses,  and  disposition  {sanscar)  produce 
ignorance. 

rf?  II  IX,  ii,  II. 

— False  knowledge  or  wrong  information  is  ignorance  or 
nescience. 

f^T  II  IX,  ii,  12. 

Defectless  or  right  information  is  called  knowledge  or  science. 

II  VII,  i,  2. 

— The  phenomena  existence  of  earth  and  other  objects  is  unreal 
and  their  properties  viz,,  colour,  tastes,  odour,  touch,  are  also  unreal 
from  the  unreality  of  phenomenal  objects. 

II  VII,  i,  3. 

— But  the  qualities  of  odour  and  others,  existing  in  the  noumenal 
existence  of  earth  and  other  elements,  arc  real. 

II  IV,  i,  1. 

— That  which  exists  and  has  no  cause  is  constant  or  real.  The 
qualities  of  a cause  appearing  in  the  effect  are  unreal. 

II  IX,  ii,  1. 

— Four  kinds  of  knowledge  is  obtained  when  it  is  said  that  this 
is  a cause  or  effect  of  that,  i.e,,  from  the  relation  of  a substance  to  its 
qualities,  viz.,  samavayi  the  knowledge  of  inherence  or  intimate  rela- 
tion, as  ether  is  measurable  ; Sanyogi  the  knowledge  of  necessary 
concomitance  as  the  body  and  skin  ; Such  and  the  like  relations  are 
constant.  Ekarthasamavayi  : the  knowledge  of  two  objects  by 
expressing  one  as  touch  implies  the  object  of  touch  and  the  sensation 
of  touch  ; Virodhi  the  knowledge  of  the  opposite,  as  the  rain  which  is 
fallen,  is  the  opposite  of  the  rain  to  come. 

II  Sankhya,  I,  29 


64 


Satyarth  Prakash 


— The  invariable  concomitance  of  the  characteristics  of  the 
object  to  be  proved  and  the  means  by  which  it  is  proved,  or  even  of 
one  of  them,  viz.,  some  determinate  circumstances  in  the  means  is 
called  the  vyapti.  Thus,  there  is  invariable  concomitancy  between 
smoke  and  fire. 

II  Ibid,  31. 

— Smoke  is  an  object,  pervaded  by  fire,  and,  produced  by  its 
own  power,  goes  to  a distance  where  it  exists  without  its  union  with 
fire.  This  circumstance  is  called  the  vyapti.  In  other  words,  smoke 
is  produced  by  the  disintegrating  and  thermic  property  of  fire  operating 
on  water  and  other  objects. 

U lb,  32. 

— The  relation  between  the  power  of  pervasion  of  the  material 
substance  in  the  great  elements,  called  the  mahattatwa,  and  the  capa- 
city of  being  pervaded  of  the  intellect  and  others,  is  called  the  vyapti 
or  in  variable  concomitancy  as  is  the  relation  between  power  and  the 
possessor  of  it,  or  the  contained  and  the  container. 

In  this  way  study  and  instruction  should  be  conducted  and  ex- 
amined according  to  the  proofs  given  in  books  on  philosophy.  Other- 
wise pupils  cannot  acquire  right  knowledge.  Whatever  books  are 
taught,  should  be  examined  by  the  light  of  evidence  described  above, 
and  those  books  only  should  be  taught  which  stand  the  test.  But 
those  books  should  be  neither  studied  nor  taught,  which  are  against 
the  decision  of  the  above  examination.  For,  the  definition  of  objects 
(as  Gandhavati  Prit/ivi, — whatever  is  earth,  possesses  odour)  and  the 
proofs  (such  as  preception  and  others)  determine  truth  and  falsehood 
and  the  existence  of  objects. — II  Without  this 
course  nothing  can  be  ascetained. 

Method  of  Learning  and  Teaching — Scheme  of  Studies. 

Now  we  describe  the  method  of  studying  and  teaching  and  give 
a curriculum  of  studies. 

1.  Shiksha.  Orthoeny  by  Panini,  which  is  written  in  aphorisms. 
It  should  be  taught  thus.  Pupils  should  be  taught  the  organs,  the 
eifort,  and  the  vehicle  of  the  pronunciation  of  letters;  as  the  organ  of 
pronunciation  of  pa  is  the  lips,  the  eifort  in  pronouncing  it  is  open, 
and  the  breath  and  motion  of  the  tongue  constitute  its  vehicle  or 
utterance.  In  like  manner,  the  father,  mother,  and  teacher  should 
teach  the  pronunciation  of  all  other  letters  according  to  the  rules  of 
orthoeny. 

2.  Vyakaran  : Grammar.  The  Ashtadhyayi  or  Panini’s  Eight 
Lectures  should  be  read  thus  : (/)  aphorisms,  as  Vriddhiradaich  / 
(//)  the  separation  of  their  words,  as  vriddhi — at,  aich  in  the  above  ex- 
amples (Hi)  their  collocation,  as  ach  cha  aich  cha—adaich,  and  its 
meaning,  as  ai  and  ow  are  called  vriddhi;  compound  vowels.  The 
letter  before  ta  and  the  letter  after  ta  are  called  the  tapara,  le.,  a be- 
fore ta  and  aich  after  ta  are  both  tapara.  The  object  of  the  rule  of 
this  tapara  is  that  the  short  and  long  vowels  are  not  called  vriddhi. 


Academical  Education 


65 


Examples — 1.  Bhaaga  is  from  the  root  bhaj^  to  which  ghanj  a termi- 
nation is  affixed,  of  which  gh  and  ny  are  to  be  elided  After  elision  it 
stands  as  hhaj  a.  Here  the  a of  bha  before  / is  made  long  and  becomes 
a (long).  It  then  becomes  bhaaj  Here  y changes  into  g,  which  with 
the  subsequent  a becomes  ga,  making  the  word  bhaaga.  Such  is  its 
formation.  2 Adhyaaya  is  from  the  root  eng  with  adhy  a prefix. 
The  short  e is  replaced  by  ai,  its  vriddhi,  before  the  termination  ghanj 
The  ai  is  changed  into  aay,  which  with  a of  ghanj  becomes  adhya- 
aya. 3.  Naayaka  is  from  the  root  neenj.  For  its  long  e is  substituted  by 
ai,  its  vriddhi,  before  the  affix  nvul  (elided),  and  with  the  ai  being 
changed  into  aay,  and  joining  with  a following  it  becomes  naayaka 
4 Staavaka  comes  from  the  root  stu  with  the  nvul  affix.  Its  short  u 
is  made  long  into  ow,  which  changes  into  aav,  and  with  the  sub- 
sequent a it  becomes  staavaka.  5 Kaaraka  is  formed  from  the  root 
krinj  with  the  nvul  suffix,  of  which  n and  / are  to  be  elided.  After 
elision  vu  is  replaced  by  aka,  and  aar  is  substituted  for  n,  being  its 
vriddhi  or  long  sound.  It  then  becomes  kaaraka. 

The  teacher  should  explain  the  rules  or  aphorisms  applied  in 
these  instances.  The  process  of  formation  should  be  shown  on  a 
slate  or  board.  The  crude  forms  should  be  written  and  then 
their  changes  should  be  shown  step  by  step  ; thus  bhaj  ghanj-su. 
After  dropping  gh  and  nj  one  after  the  other,  it  should  be  written 
bhaj-a-su  as  left  after  elisions.  Then  fl-being  made  long  and  / chang- 
ed into  g,  it  stands  as  bhaag-a-su.  Then  coalescing  with  a,  it  becomes 
bhaaga-su  Here  u is  elidable  and  s changes  into  ru,  of  which  u is 
again  elided.  After  elision  the  word  becomes  bhaagar.  Now,  : visarga 
(h)he\\\g  substituted  for  r,  it  becomes  bhaagah.  Thus  bhaagah  is 
made  from  bhaj.  The  rules  or  aphorisms  which  are  applied  and  the 
change,  they  effect,  should  be  well  read  and  taught  and  written  to  ena- 
ble the  pupil  to  understand  the  process  of  formation.  Reading  and 
teaching  in  this  way  very  soon  results  in  a great  deal  of  substantial 
progress  in  knowledge.  Having  taught  the  Ashtadhyayi  in  the  afore- 
said manner,  the  master  should  then  teach  the  following: — 

3.  Dhatupath  : Verbs,  with  meanings  and  the  paradigms  of  the 
ten  Lakaras  or  moods  and  Tenses.  Then  the  utsarga  sutra  ; general 
rules  should  be  taught  in  their  order  with  explanation.  Thus, 
Karmany-an  : when  the  word  karma  is  used  as  upapad  before  a root, 
an  should  be  affixed  to  it;  as,  kumbhakaarah.  Then  apvad  sutra  : 
particular  rules  or  aphorisms  relating  to  exceptions  should  be  taught ; 
as,  Ato-niipasarge  kali — the  suffix  ‘aka’  is  to  be  added  to  a root  en- 
ding in  ‘a’  when  preceded  by  ‘karm’  by  implication  without  a pre- 
position; as,  ‘vayu’  ‘vyapak’.  If  the  ‘karma’  : object  is  implied,  all 
roots  take  ‘an’.  Other  minor  rules  are  included  in  the  aforesaid  rules 
regarding  the  roots  ending  in ‘a’ and  taking  the  suffix ‘ka’.  Parti- 
cular rules  or  aphorisms  of  exceptions  are  applicable  to  the  cases 
embraced  by  general  rules;  but  general  rules  are  not  applicable  to  the 
instances  of  particular  rules.  For  instance,  the  rulers  of  kingdoms 
and  chiefs  of  principalities  can  be  included  in  the  empire  of  the  uni- 
versal king,  but  the  latter  cannot  be  included  in  the  former.  Thus 
Panini  has  put  the  whole  knowledge  of  words  and  their  grammatical 


66 


Satyarth  Prakash 


relations  in  a 1,000  couplets  or  verses.*  After  teaching  the  roots, 
the  master  should  well  teach  all  the  declensions  in  going  through  the 
part  of  grammer  unadi  giving  rules  of  the  words  commencing  with 
w/1.  Then  the  Ashtadhyayi  should  be  taught  second  time,  explaining 
all  the  objections  to  rules,  their  vartik:  annotations,  their  karika: 
amplifications,  parihhasha:  echnology,  with  examples. 

4.  Mahabhashya  should  then  be  taught.  If  intelligent,  en- 
ergetic, sincere  lovers  of  knowledge  daily  study  or  teach  grammar, 
they  will  finish  the  Ashtadhyayi  and  Mahabhashya  each  in  \\  year, 
i.e.  complete  their  grammatical  course  in  three  years,  and  become 
perfect  scholars  of  grammar.  They  will  be  able  to  understand  the 
Vedic  and  popular  Sanscrit  terminologies  by  the  help  of  their  pro- 
ficiency in  grammar,  and  then  to  study  and  teach  other  Sanscrit  books 
quickly  and  easily.  The  study  of  other  books  does  not  require  so 
much  application  and  labour  as  grammar  does.  So  much  knowledge 
is  acquired  by  studying  these  books,  the  Ashtadhyayi  and  Mahabha- 
shya, in  three  years,  as  cannot  be  done  by  studying  bad  books,  for  50 
years,  such  as  the  Saraswat,  Chandrika,  Manorama  and  others.  How 
can  the  spurious  books  of  the  narrow-minded  persons  of  superficial 
knowledge  contain  the  vast  learning  and  erudition  which  the  great 
men,  seers  and  savants  have  easily  and  naturally  displayed  in  their 
works?  The  methods  of  savants  lead  to  the  comprehension  of  a sub- 
ject with  facility  and  in  a short  time  as  far  as  possible.  The  object 
of  the  men  of  superficial  learning  and  little  thought  is  to  write  as 
difficult  language  as  possible  so  as  to  cost  the  reader  much  pain  with 
little  gain.  It  is  like  digging  a mountain  to  find  a shell.  But  the  study 
of  savant’s  works  is  like  bringing  out  handfuls  of  very  precious  pearls 
in  one  diving  after  finishing  grammar. 

5.  Yaska’s  Nighantu  and  Nirukiita  should  be  taught  in  six  or  eight 
months  with  their  meanings.  Persons  should  not  waste  many  years  in 
studying  the  Amar  Kosh  and  the  like  books  written  by  atheists. 

6.  Pingala,  a treatise  on  poetry  by  Prof.  Pingala,  should  then 
be  gone  through,  as  it  gives  the  knowledge  of  the  Vedic  and  popular 
Sanscrit  metre  as  well  as  new  methods  of  metrification  and  versifica- 
tion in  the  best  manner  possible.  This  book  and  the  methods  of 
modern  versification  as  well  as  their  later  development  can  be  mastered 
in  4 months.  Many  years  should  not  be  wasted  in  the  study  of  the 
Vritta  Ratnakar  and  other  books  on  metres  written  by  persons  of  little 
learning. 

7.  The  Code  of  Manu,  the  Ramayana  of  Valmika,  Vidur’s  Niti, 
Morals  in  the  Udyoga  Parva  of  the  Mahabharata  and  other  select 
passages  of  Scriptures,  which  purge  the  mind  of  evil  desires  to  let 
in  excellence  and  urbanity,  should  then  be  taken  up.  These  should  be 
studied  after  the  manner  of  poetical  study,  that  is,  the  separation  of 
words,  telling  out  the  meanings  of  words,  the  prose  order,  the  relation 
of  adjecVwes  and  snbsVanVwies  and  their  purport  in  brief  should  be 
explained  by  the  teacher  and  learnt  attentively  by  the  pupil  This 
course  should  occupy  them  less  than  a year. 


*Now  there  are  4047 
verses  or  Shlokas  can  be 


aphorisms  in  Panini.  It  is  not  known  where  these  J,000 
found,  which  would  be  very  useful  in  learning  Panini-T. 


Academical  Education 


67 


8.  Purva  Mimansa,  Vaisheshik,  Nyaya,  Yoga,  Sankhya,  and 
Vedanta  are  then  to  be  taken  up.  These  six  schools  of  philosophy 
should  be  studied  as  far  as  possible  with  the  help  of  their  commen- 
taries by  sages  and  philosophers  or  the  simple  annotations  of  eminent 
scholars.  But  before  reading  the  Vedanta  aphorisms,  the  ten  Upani- 
shats  namely  : — 

9.  Tsha,  Kena,  Katha,  Prashna,  Mundaka,  Mandukya,  Aita- 
reya,  Taittiriya,  Chhandogya  and  Vrihadaranyaka,  should  be  gone 
through,  and  then  the  six  philosophies  course  should  be  finished  within 
two  years 

10.  Rig,  Yajur,  Sama,  and  Atharva — the  4 Vedas — should  then 
be  studied  with  their  annotation,  meanings  of  words,  syntactical 
connection,  and  manual  gesticulation,  as  well  as  the  4 Brahmanas. 

1 1 . Aitareya  Shatapatha,  Sama,  and  Gopatha,  within  6 years. 

Read  Veda  with  Meanings 

This  verse  from  the  Nirukta  is  an  authority  for  this:— 

o ^ c\  > 

--  He  who  reads  the  Vedas  with  proper  accents  only  and  does  not 
know  their  meanings,  is  like  a tree  which  bears  the  burden  of  branches, 
without  leaves,  and  fruit,  or  like  a beast  which  carries  the  burden  of 
grain  and  other  stuff.  But  he  who  reads  the  Vedas  and  knows  their 
meanings  propeily,  obtains  perfect  joy  in  life,  and  having  abandoned 
sin  by  and  of  knowledge  and  by  the  influence  of  righteous  conducts 
is  rewarded  with  beatitude  after  death. 

o c c > 

ll  Rig,  x,  Lxxi,  4. 

— Those  who  are  ignorant,  have  ears,  but  they  hear  not.  They 
have  eyes,  but  they  see  not.  They  have  the  tongue  in  the  mouth,  but 
they  speak  not.  In  plain  words,  the  ignorant  cannot  know  the 
secret  of  this  speech  of  knowledge.  Knowledge  reveals  her  glory,  not 
to  this  ignorant,  but  to  the  learned  man  who  knows  the  meaning  and 
the  bearing  of  the  import  of  the  text,  as  a beautiful  woman  decked 
with  jewels  and  fine  dress  shows  her  person  out  of  love  to  her  husband. 

cifbrg  i Rig.  Y 

qjfTCiTfcT  ^ ll  Clxiv,  39- 

— What  pleasure  can  he  derive  from  the  study  of  the  Rig  and 
other  Vedas,  who  does  not  know  the  Supreme  Being,  the  all-pervading, 
immortal  and  most  excellent  Over-Lord,  the  knowledge  of  whom  is 
the  sole  end  of  the  Vedas,  and  in  whom  all  the  learned  people  with 
earth,  sun  and  other  worlds  move  and  have  their  being  ? Nothing 
whatever,  they  alone  get  the  supreme  bliss  of  salvation,  who  having 
an  abiding  faith  in  God,  study  the  Vedas,  become,  righteous  adepts 
in  introspection  or  yogis,  and  realise  the  Infinite  Sprit  of  God.  Hence, 
all  that  is  to  be  studied  or  taught  should  be  mastered  with  the  know- 
ledge of  its  meaning  and  purport 


68 


Satyarth  Prakash 


The  study  of  the  Vedas  being  thus  finished,  the  Ayurveda, 
science  of  (life)  medicine,  should  then  be  taken  up  for  study,  which 
is  given  in  the  : — 

12.  “Charak,  Sushrut”  and  other  medical  treatises  by  sages 
and  savants  of  medicine.  It  should  be  finished  in  nearly  4 years. 
Then  the 

13.  ‘Dhanurveda’  should  be  studied,  which  is  concerned  with 
the  affairs  of  government.  It  is  divided  into  two  parts;  namely,  the 
one  concerning  the  royalty  and  the  other  concerning  the  people.  All 
the  officers  of  the  army  in  a government  should  be  trained  in  the  use 
of  all  arms,  weapons  and  missiles,  and  in  the  practice  of  various  kinds 
of  military  squad  formations,  now  called  drill,  and  used  in  held  service 
on  the  occasion  of  lighting  with  enemies.  These  should  be  thoroughly 
learnt.  The  part  of  the  science  of  government  which  refers  to  the 
protection  of  the  people  and  the  promotion  of  their  interest,  should 
be  studied  to  govern  the  people  with  justice  and  equity  so  as  to  secure 
them  happiness  and  contentment.  Students  should  also  thoroughly 
learn  the  rules  of  criminal  justice  to  punish  crime  and  to  guard  the 
best  and  law-abiding  people.  This  study  of  the  two  parts  of  the 
science  of  government  should  be  llnishcd  in  tv\o  years  each. 

14.  The  ‘Gandharvaveda’,  which  is  called  the  science  of 
music,  should  then  be  taken  up.  Its  notes,  modes,  modification,  time, 
measure,  scale,  tunc,  air,  instruments,  dancing,  singing,  and  the  like 
subjects  should  be  properly  learnt.  But  the  singing  of  the  Sam 
Veda  and  the  playing  of  its  tunes  on  musical  instruments  should  be 
particularly  learnt.  The  muscial  treaties  written  by  St.  Narada  and 
other  holy  minstrels  should  be  studied.  But  they  should  never  indulge 
in  the  useless  screeching  of  buffoons,  prostitutes,  and  monkish  vaga- 
bonds, braying  like  asses  to  excite  sensuality. 

15.  The  ‘Arthaveda’,  which  is  called  the  art  of  manufacture, 
should  then  be  properly  learnt  in  two  years  with  its  models,  knowledge 
of  the  qualities  of  things,  manipulations,  skill,  making  of  various 
sorts  of  articles  and  the  processes  of  industries  which  arc  used  on  land 
and  in  the  aerial  regions.  It  is  an  art  of  acquiring  fortune  Then 
astronomy  as  given  in  the 

16.  “Suryasidhanta  and  other  books  on  heavenly  bodies,  which 
include  algebra,  arithmetic,  geography  and  geology,  should  be  syste- 
matically learnt. 

17.  Handicrafts,  mechanics,  engineering  and  other  mechanical 
arts  should  then  be  learnt.  But  all  the  books  of  astrology,  describing 
the  influence  of  stars,  planets,  the  casting  of  horoscope,  mansions, 
zodiac  constellations,  auspecious  times  and  others  of  the  sort,  should 
not  be  attempted,  being  considered  false  and  untruthful. 

The  teacher  and  the  taught  should  so  try  as  to  complete  the 
course  of  all  uptodate  knowledge  and  the  best  training  in  20  or  21 
years.  Having  thus  done  what  they  had  to  do,  the  people  will  live 
happily  on  earth.  This  system  of  education  will  give  them  as  much 
knowledge  in  20  or  21  years  as  can  not  be  acquired  by  any  other 
method  in  a hundred  years. 


Academical  Education 


69 


The  reason  why  the  books  written  by  seers  and  savants  alone 
sliould  be  studied,  is  that  they  were  very  great  scholars  versed  in  all 
the  authentic  books  and  were  righteous  at  the  same  time.  But  the 
books  written  by  the  men  of  superficial  learning,  whose  mind  was 
imbued  with  partiality,  share  the  spirit  of  their  authors. 


Books  by  Savants  Recommended  for  Study 


1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 


Jaimini’s  Purva  Mimansa  with  Vyasa’s  Commeniary. 


Kanada’s  Vaislieshika 
Gotama’s  Naya 
Patanjali’s  Yoga 
Kapila’s  Sankhya 
Vyasa’s  Vedanta 


Gotama’s 
Vatsyayana’s 
Vyasa’s 
Bhaguri’s 
Vals^ayna’s 
or  Boudhayana's 
with  annotations. 


These  aphorismic  books  are  also  classed  with  the  “kalpa:” 
monitory  studies  of  the  Vedas.  As  the  Rig,  Yajur,  Psalm,  and 
Atharva  are  the  4 Vedas  made  by  God  or  Revelations  ; so  are  the 
Aitareya,  Shatapath,  Psalm  and  Gopath,  the  4 Brahmanas  ; the 
Shiksha,  Kalpa,  Vyakarana,  Nighantu,  Nirukta,  Chhanda  and  Jyotis, 
the  6 Angus  : accessories  or  auxiliary  studies  of  the  Vedas  ; Mimansa 
and  others  the  6 Upangas  : Complementary  studies  of  the  Vedas  : 
and  the  Ayur,  Dhanur,  Gandharva,  and  Artha  Vedas,  the  “Upa- 
vedas:”  Secondary  Vedas  all  written  by  sages  and  philosophers.  Of 
these  again,  those  which  appear  to  be  contradictory  to  the  Vedas, 
should  be  rejected  ; for  the  Vedas,  being  made  by  God,  are  infalible 
and  self-sufficiently  authoritative,  that  is  to  say,  the  Vedas  are  their 
own  authority.  The  Brahmans  and  all  other  books  of  the  kind  are 
of  dependent  authority,  that  is,  their  proof  depends  upon  the  truth  of 
the  Vedas. 

Further  details  of  information  regarding  the  Vedas  may  be 
learnt  from  our  introductian  to  the  Commentary  of  the  Rig  and 
other  Vedas  “Rigvedaadi  Bhashya  Bhumika.”  We  shall  also  give 
it  further  on  in  this  book. 


Books  rejected  from  study 

The  books,  which  should  be  rejected  in  reading,  are  briefly 
enumerated  here,  that  is  the  following  books  should  be  considered  as 
spurious  : — 

In  Grammars  ; Katantra,  Saraswat,  Chandrika,  Mugdhabodh, 
Koumudi,  Shekhar  : Manoraina,  and  others.  In  Dictionaries  : Ainar 
kosh,  &c.  In  Prosody  : Virttaratnakara  and  others.  In  Primers  : 
Atha  Shiksha,  &c.  In  Astronomy  : Shigrabodh,  Muhurat  Chinta- 
niani  and  others.  In  poetry  : Nayakabheda,  the  distinction  of  female 
characters  Kuvalayanand,  Raghuvansa,  Magha,  Kiratarjuniya  and 
others.  In  Mimansa  : Dharma  Sindhu,  Viratarka,  &c.  In  Vaishe- 
shak,  Tark  Sangrah  and  others.  In  Nyaya  : Jagdishi  and  others. 
In  Yoga  : Hat  pradipika  and  others.  In  Sankhya  ; Sunkhytatwa 
Koumudi,  &c.  In  Vedant  : Yogavashishta,  Panchdashi  and 


70 


Satyarth  Prakash 


others.  In  Medicine  : Sarangdhar  and  others.  In  Law  : all  Codes 
except  selected  couplets  of  Manu.  All  Tantras  (books),  on  demono- 
glogy,  all  Puranas  (cosmology)  Uppuranas,  Tulsi  Das’  Ramayan, 
Rukmani  Mangal  and  others,  and  all  Bhasha  or  Vernacular  books 
should  be  rejected,  as  they  are  all  imaginary  and  false  books. 

Q. — Is  there  no  truth  whatever  in  them  ? 

A.— There  is  a little  truth  in  them  indeed,  but  with  it  there  is  a 
great  deal  of  falsehood.  Therefore  they  should  be  rejected  as  is 
the  delicious  food  cast  away,  being  contaminated  with  poison. 

C N 

Q. — Don’t  you  believe  in  the  Puranas  and  historical  books  ? 

A. — O yes  ; we  do  believe  in  them.  But  we  believe  truth  only* 
and  not  falsehood. 


Q. — What  are  true  books  and  what  false  ? 

This  is  a quotation  from  the  Grahiya  Sutra.  The  Aitareya, 
Shatapath  and  other  Brahmanas,  which  we  have  mentioned  before, 
are  also  called  by  the  5 names  of  history,  purana  (cosmology),  kalpa 
(monitory),  gatha  (tradition)  and  narashansi  (biography).  Srimat- 
Bhagwat  and  other  books  are  not  Puranas, 

Q. — Why  don’t  you  accept  the  truth  found  in  spurious  books  ? 

A. — Whatever  truth  is  found  in  them,  belongs  to  the  Vedas 
and  other  tiuthful  and  genuine  books  ; but  whatever  is  false,  is  their 
own  manufacture.  The  acceptance  ol  the  Vedas  and  other  truthful 
books  includes  the  recognition  of  all  truths  If  any  one  wishes  to 
accept  the  truth  of  these  mythical  books,  he  will  be  caught  in  the 
trap  of  their  falsehood.  Hence,  the  truth  of  a book  mixed  with 
untruth  should  be  thrown  of  like  a food  mixed  with  poison. 

Q.— What  is  your  belief? 

A. — We  believe  in  the  Veda,  that  is,  whatever  acts  of  com- 
mission and  omission  arc  ordained  by  the  Vedas.  As  we  believe  in 
the  Veda  our  religion  is  Veda.  1 his  belief  should  be  accepted  by 
all  people  and  particularly  by  the  Aiyas  so  as  to  have  one  faith 
among  them  while  they  live  on  earth. 


Q. — Authentic  scriptures  also  dilYer  in  view  with  regard  to  right 
and  wrong  from  one  another  like  spurious  books  ; as,  for  instance, 
the  six  schools  of  philosophy  hold  opposite  views  about  the  creation. 
To  take  concrete  examples.  The  origin  of  the  creation  is  assigned 
‘\w  vVve.  lo  a.eUon,  \w  the  Vtusheshak  \\n\e,  \w  W\e 

to  atoms,  in  the  Yoga  to  energy,  in  the  Sankhya  to  nature,  and  in 
the  Vedant  to  Brahma  or  the  Supreme  Being  Is  not  this  antithetical  ? 


, . the  origin  of  the  creation  is  not  explicitly  describ- 

i c schools  of  philosophy,  the  Sankhya  and  Vedant  alone 

t contradiction  in  them  ; for  you 

don  t know  the  distinction  between  concord  and  conflict,  I ask  you 


Academical  Education 


71 


to  tell  me  where  opposition  is  ? It  is  found  in  one  subject  per  se  or 
in  ditferent  subjects  ? 

Q. — The  conflict  of  many  persons’  views  on  one  subject  is  call- 
ed contradiction.  In  the  case  of  the  six  schools  of  philosophy,  the 
subject  is  one  namely,  the  origin  of  the  creation. 

A.  — Is  knowledge  one  or  two  ? (Is  there  unity  in  knowledge?) 

Q. — It  is  one. 

A. — If  one,  how  is  it  that  the  subjects  of  grammer;  medicine, 
astronomy  and  other  books  are  ditferent  from  one  another  ? As  in 
one  science  the  various  branches  of  many  other  sciences  are  different- 
ly described,  so  the  six  divisions  of  the  knowledge  of  the  creation  are 
differently  described.  Hence,  there  is  no  contradiction  whatever  in 
the  six  schools  of  philosophy.  For  example,  the  causes  concerned 
in  the  making  of  an  earthen  pot  are  action,  time,  clay,  design  or  the 
thought  of  the  fitting  and  vSeparating  of  parts  and  other  information, 
energy,  the  properties  of  things,  and  the  potter.  In  the  same  manner, 
the  part  played  in  the  causation  of  the  genesis  of  the  world  by  action 
or  motion  is  described  in  the  Mimansa,  by  time  in  the  Vaisheshak, 
by  the  matter  in  the  Nyaya,  by  energy  in  the  Yoga,  by  atoms  in  the 
Sankhya,  which  gives  a serial  order  of  elements,  and  by  the  Supreme 
Being,  who  is  the  efficient  cause,  in  the  Vedant  philosophy.  Thus 
there  is  no  opposition  in  them.  Though,  for  instance,  diagnosis, 
treatment,  medicine,  regimen  and  fast  are  different  subjects  given  in 
books  on  medicine,  yet  their  main  object  is  tlie  cure  of  disease.  So 
likewise  there  are  6 causes  of  the  creation  of  the  world.  Each  of 
these  causes  is  explained  by  each  author  of  the  six  schools  or  divisons 
of  philosophy.  Therefore,  there  is  no  contradiction  in  those  philoso- 
phies. We  shall  give  the  detailed  explanation  of  this  subject  in  the 
chapter  of  this  book  ‘on  the  creation.’ 

Advice 

The  teacher  and  the  taught  should  avoid  the  impediments  in  the 
pursuit  and  impartation  of  knowledge.  They  are— bad  company,  as 
the  use  of  wine  and  other  intoxicants,  whoring  and  other  forms  of 
adultery  ; early  marriage,  that  is  marrying  before  the  25th  year  of  age 
of  man,  and  before  16  of  woman  ; incompletion  of  the  vow  of  chas- 
tity ; want  of  love  for  the  spread  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Vedas  and 
other  authentic  books  in  the  breast  of  the  king,  mother,  father,  and 
the  learned  ; gluttony,  vigil,  or  over  waking  ; slackness  in  the  study- 
ing, teaching,  and  holding  examinations,  cheating,  ignorance  of  the 
supreme  importance  of  knowledge  ; disbelief  in  the  improvement  of 
strength,  intelligence,  valour,  healh,  commonwealth  by  the  observance 
of  the  vow  of  chastity  ; useless  waste  of  time  in  visiting  shrines  and 
worshiping  the  graven  images  made  of  stone  and  other  material  in 
place  of  the  adoration  and  contemplation  of  God  ; neither  doing 
service  to  nor  waiting  upon  the  mother,  father,  guest,  preceptor  and 
learned  persons,  who  are;  as  it  were,  the  living  images  of  God  ; paint- 
ing the  forehead  with  erect  and  cross  lines  of  sandal  paste  and  other 
marks  and  badges  in  place  of  doing  the  duties  of  the  four  orders  of 
the  society  ; wearing  strings  of  beads,  rosary;  fasting  on  the  llth^ 


72 


Satyarth  Prakash 


13th  of  both  fortnights  of  every  month,  and  other  fasts  ; pilgrimages 
to  Kashi  and  other  places  ; belief  of  getting  rid  of  sin  by  the  mutter- 
ing of  the  names  of  Rama,  Krishna,  Narayana,  Shiva,  Bhagwati, 
Ganesh  and  other  gods  ; no  desire  tor  the  acquisition  of  knowledge 
from  the  advice  of  hypocrites  ; belief  regarding  salvation  as  accruing 
not  from  the  attainment  of  knowledge,  merit  of  righteousness,  illu- 
mination of  Yoga,  and  worship  of  God,  but  from  listening  to  the 
stories  and  anecdotes  of  the  Bhagwat  and  other  books,  falsely  called 
the  Puranas  or  paleontology  ; no  love  for  knowledge  from  engross- 
ment in  the  collection  of  wealh  out  of  covetousness  ; useless  rambl- 
ing about  without  any  objection  in  view  ; and  similar  other  false  and 
wicked  acts,  indulgence  in  which  deprives  persons  of  the  blessedness 
of  chastity  and  knowledge  and  consigns  them  to  the  misery  of  dis- 
ease and  ignorance.  Modern  sectarians  and  selfish  priests.  Brahmins 
and  others  of  the  sort,  taking  others  off  from  the  pursuit  of  know- 
ledge and  keeping  good  company,  and  catching  them  in  their  snares, 
luin  their  health,  wealth  and  happiness.  They  think  that  if  the  warrior 
class  and  other  people  be  enlightened  by  acquiring  knowledge,  they 
will  get  out  of  their  snares  of  deception,  and  coming  to  know  their 
frauds,  disrespect  and  dishonour  them.  Such  are  the  obstacles  in  the 
path  of  the  education  of  youths.  The  king  and  people  should  remove 
them  and  try  their  best  to  make  their  sons  and  daughters  learned  and 
well  educated  without  sparing  any  amount  of  effoit,  thought  and 
money. 


Women  and  helots  to  study  Veda 

Q. — May  women  and  serfs  (Shudras)  study  the  Veda  ? If  they 
read  what  shall  we  do  ? There  is  no  authority  sanctioning  their 
education. 

•—Here  is  prohibition  of  it.  It  is  a precept  of  the  Veda  that 
woman  and  the  servant  should  not  be  allowed  to  learn. 

A. — Damn  your  eyes  ! All  human  beings,  whether  men  or 
women  have  a right  to  study.  This  verse  is  your  fabrication.  It  is 
to  be  found  nowhere  in  any  authentic  scripture.  On  the  contrary, 
the  2nd  verse  of  the  26th  chapter  of  the  Yajur  Veda  is  an  explicit 
authority  in  support  of  the  title  of  all  persons  to  read  and  to  listen  to 
the  expounding  of  the  Veda  and  other  scriptures, — 

The  Lord  saith  : I declare  this  speech  of  the  4 Vedas.  Rig  and 
others,  for  all  the  people  so  as  to  do  them  good  both  in  this  world  and 
after.  Here  it  may  be  urged  that  the  word  ‘jana’  signifies  regenerates 
only  ; for,  the  codes  of  Law  give  the  priests,  warriors  and  merchants 
the  right  of  studying  the  Vedas,  but  not  to  women,  serfs  and  the  like 
pJebians. 

A —See,  the  Lord  himself  saith  : We  have  revealed  the  Vedas, 
or,  Inc  Brahnianas,  Kshatriyas,  Vajsfayas,  Shudras  and  our  servants, 
women,  ana  very  low  castes,  that  is,  for  all  the  people,  who  should 


Academical  Education 


73 


read  and  teach  the  Vedas,  listen  to  and  read  them  to  others,  so  as  to 
improve  their  knowlege,  to  adopt  the  virtuous  course  of  conduct,  to 
eschew  vicious  habits,  to  get  rid  of  distress  and  to  obtain  happiness. 

Now,  tell  me  if  I obey  you  or  the  Lord  God  over  us.  The  Lord’s 
commandment  must  needs  be  obeyed.  This  being  the  case,  if  a man 
however  does  not  accept  the  authority  of  the  Vedas,  is  called’an  atheist. 
Does,  not  God  wish  to  do  good  to  the  servant  class  ? Is  God  so  un- 
just that  He  has  forbidden  their  study  or  hearing  to  the  serfs  and  per- 
mitted it  to  the  twice  born  classes  ? If  it  was  not  the  will  of  God 
that  the  serfs  and  plebians  should  read  or  teach,  why  did  He  furnish 
their  body  with  the  organ  of  voice,  and  the  sense  of  hearing?  As  God 
has  made  the  earth,  water,  fire,  air,  sun,  moon,  edibles  and  other 
things  for  all  beings;  so  has  He  revealed,  the  Vedas  for  all  of  them. 

Wherever  their  study  is  forbidden,  it  means  that  he  who  learns 
nothing,  by  reading  with  a teacher  is  called  a dullard  ignoramus  from 
the  fact  of  his  being  dull  and  ignorant.  His  reading  or  teaching  him 
is  of  no  use.  It  is  a proof  of  your  ignorance,  selfishness  and  stupidity 
that  you  prohibit  women  from  studying.  See  the  authority  of  the 
Vedas  in  support  of  girl’s  education.  Atharva  Veda,  K.  11.  Pt.  24, 
Ad,  3,  Verse  18. — 

I 

— Like  boys  who  acquire  perfect  Knowledge,  and  good  train- 
ing by  observing  the  vow  of  chastity  and,  when  of  age,  marry  maidens, 
youthful,  educated,  lovely,  suitable,  equal  to  them  ; let  girls  also 
acquire  perfect  knowledge  and  the  best  training  by  studying  the  Vedas 
and  other  scriptures  during  their  vow  of  chastity  and,  attaining  pub- 
erty and  full  majority,  marry  bachelors,  youthful,  handsome,  educa- 
ted and  equal  to  them.  Hence,  women  must  also  observe  the  vow 
of  chastity  and  acquire  knowledge. 

Q. — Should  women  study  the  Vedas  ? 

A. — Certainly,  they  should.  Vide  the  Shi  out  precepts  and  others. 

^ I 

It  means  that  the  wife  should  recite  this  verse  of  the  Vedas  at  a 
sacrifice.  If  she  has  not  studied  the  Vedas  and  other  scriptures,  how 
can  she  read  the  Vedic  verses  with  fluent  pronunciation  and  proper 
annotation  and  converse  in  Sanscrit  on  the  occasion  of  worship  ? Gargi 
and  other  ladies,  the  jewels  of  the  women  of  ancient  India,  became 
eminently  learned  by  the  study  of  the  Vedas  and  other  scriptures. 
This  is  explicitly  written  in  the  Shatpath.  Well,  if  the  master  of  a 
house  be  educated  and  his  wife  uneducated  or  vice  versa,  there  will 
every  day  be  a war  between  gods  and  devils  in  the  house. ^ How  can 


1.  Devasur  Sangram. — In  mythology  it  is  said  that  in  very  old  times  gods 
and  devils  fought.  Vishnu  the  Great  God,  brought  about  their  peace  on  the 
conditions  that  they  should  churn  the  ocean  and  divide  the  finds  between  them. 
Then  the  Sumeru  Mountain  was  made  a churning  rod,  and  a rope  was  made  of  the 
Hydra  of  serapis  whose  head  was  held  by  the  devils  and  tail  by  the  gods  in  the  act 
of  churning.  The  venom  emitted  by  the  Hydra  destroyed  the  devils.  The  gods 
obtained  the  14  priceless  products  of  the  sea  at  the  hands  of  Vishnu,  who  was  the 
umpire.  The  occidental  mythology  relates  a similar  tale  of  a war  between  the 
Titans  and  Gaints,  when  Saturn  was  the  Great  God.  The  Christian  mythology 
also  mentions  a war  in  heaven  between  God  and  Satan. — T. 


74 


Satyarth  Prakash 


there  be  joy  in  it  ? If  women  don’t  read  how  can  they  be  teachers  in 
girls’  schools  ? Without  knowledge  a woman  cannot  discharge  the 
domestic  duties  properly,  such  as  the  management  of  the  household, 
just  treatment  of  all,  duties  of  married  life,  mutual  satisfaction  of 
husband  and  wife,  domestic  work  under  the  control  of  the  mistress  of 
a house,  and  similar  other  duties. 

See,  the  wives  of  kings  and  nobles  of  Aryavarta  (ancient  India) 
knew  the  military  art  and  laws  of  chivalry  very  well.  If  they  did  not 
know  it,  how  could  Queen  Kekayee  and  others  accompany  King 
Dashrath  and  others  to  the  battle  held  and  take  part  in  fighting  ? So 
the  Brahmin  and  warrior  class  women  should  learn  all  branches  of 
knowledge,  the  merchant  class  women  should  acquire  commercial 
knowledge,  and  the  servile  class  women  should  know  the  culinary  art 
and  the  duties  of  service.  Like  men  who  must  at  least  learn  some- 
thing of  grammar,  religion,  and  ethics,  women  should  also  learn 
grammar,  religion,  medicine,  arithmetic,  hardicraft,  as  a matter,  of 
course.  For  without  the  knowledge  of  these  arts  they  cannot  distin- 
guish right  from  wrong,  behave  themselves  agreeably  towards  the 
husbands  and  other  relatives,  beget  children  properly,  nurture,  bring 
up  and  well  train  them,  do  or  sec  the  domestic  duties  done  as  they 
ought  to  be  dor/C,  cook  or  superintend  the  cooking  of  food,  and 
prepare  drink  like  medicine  according  to  the  method  prescribed  by  the 
medical  art,  so  that  disease  may  not  attack  the  household,  and  all  the 
inmates  live  happily.  Without  the  knowledge  of  handicraft,  they 
cannot  supervise  the  building  of  a house,  make  or  inspect  the  making 
of  suits,  jewelry,  and  other  requisites  ; without  the  knowledge  of 
arthmctic,  they  cannot  keep  or  render  accounts  of  all  concerned  ; 
and  without  the  knowledge  of  the  Vedas  and  other  sacred  scriptures, 
which  give  them  a right  idea  of  God  and  religion,  they  cannot  guard 
themselves  against  i ‘religion  or  vice.  Hence,  blessed  are  they  and 
deserve  to  be  congraiulated,  who  train  their  children  by  the  rules  of 
chastity  to  acquire  the  best  morals,  knowledge,  and  develop  their 
physical  strength  and  mental  calibre  to  perfection,  so  that  those 
children  when  of  age  behave  themselves  properly,  nobly  and  right- 
tcously  towards  their  mother,  father,  husband,  mother-in  law,  father- 
in-law,  king,  fellow  subjects,  neighbours,  favourites,  friends,  children, 
relatives  and  other  kinsmen  Knowledge  is  an  inexhaustibie  treasure. 
The  more  it  is  spent  the  more  it  is  increased.  All  other  treasures  are 
exhausted  by  expenditure.  Inheritors  take  their  own  share  in  a legacy. 
But  there  is  no  inheritor  or  thief  of  a person’s  wealdi  of  knowledge. 
The  king  and  the  people,  too  are  in  particular  the  guardians  and  pro- 
moters of  this  priceless  treasure. 

^ ^ n Manu,  VI J,  152. 

The  king  should  order  the  enforcement  of  the  vow  of  chastity 
among  all  the  girls  and  bo>s  of  his  dominions  for  a definite  period  of 
their  age,  and  have  them  acquire  knowledge  to  be  civilised.  If  it  be 
not  obeyed  by  any  young  person,  its  mother  and  father  should  be 
punished.  In  plain  words,  it  should  be  a standing  order  of  the  king 
that  none  should  keep  their  sons  or  daughters  at  home  after  their  eight 
years  of  age.  They  should  live  in  the  school,  called  the  Acharyakul. 


Academical  Education 


75 


Their  marriage  should  not  be  allowed  to  take  place  until  the  time  they 
return  from  their  academy  on  the  termination  of  their  educational 
training. 

I 

II  Maiuj,  IV,  233. 

—Of  all  the  gifts  in  the  world,  that  is  of  food,  drink,  kine,  land, 
clothes,  sesame,  gold,  and  clarified  butter,  the  impartation  of  the  Vedic 
lore  is  the  best.  Therefore  the  people  should  try  as  far  as  possible 
with  all  their  power,  thoughtfulness  and  means  to  promote  the  cause 
of  knowledge.  That  country  is  blessed  with  prosperity  in  which  the 
chastity  of  students,  progress  of  knowledge,  and  light  of  Vedic  religion 
are  kept  up  all  the  time.  So  much  in  brief  for  the  education  and 
training  of  the  student  community.  In  the  4th  chapter  the  return  of 
students  from  school  and  the  household  life  will  be  described. 

Summary 

The  academical  education  consists  of  1.  Spiritual.  2 Moral,  3.  Intellectual, 
and  4.  Physical  Training. 

Boys  and  girls  should  after  their  eighth  year  be  sent  to  their  respective 
schools,  situated  four  miles  apart  and  conducted  by  the  teachers  of  good  moral 
character.  1.  They  should  be  taught  the  mass  with  meanings  and  the  performance 
of  fire*oblation.  Daily  bath  and  deep-breathing  should  precede  prayer.  They 
should  solemnly  take  the  vow  of  chastity,  which  has  three  grades  : the  first  lasting 
till  the  24th  year  of  age,  the  second  till  the  4-1th  and  the  third  till  the  48th.  Girls 
may  keep  the  vow  upto  16  or  24.  2.  The  supreme  importance  of  truth,  honesty, 
plain  living,  selfdenial,  and  contenment  should  be  impressed  on  their  mind.  They 
should  bear  in  mind  that  a person  falls  low  by  observing  religious  ceremonies  only 
without  discharging  moral  duties  (Manu,  IV.  204).  Politeness  and  proper  etiquette 
should  never  be  lost  sight  of.  Those  who  do  not  study  the  Veda  are  degraded  to 
the  lower  class  of  people. 

They  should  abstain  from  flesh  food,  strong  drink,  using  chaplets  of  flowers, 
perfumes,  exciting  beverages,  pickles,  condiments,  unguents,  putting  antimony  in 
the  eyes,  carrying  the  umbrella,  cruelty  to  animals,  sensual  desire,  covetousness, 
singing,  dancing,  gambling,  slandering,  and  company  of  women. 

They  should  sleep  singly  and  keep  their  semen  and  hymen  guarded,  wan- 
tonness in  which  breaks  their  vow  of  chastity. 

On  no  account  should  they  be  negligent  in  speaking  truth,  practising 
righteousness;  studying  the  Veda,  honouring  ihe  teacher,  father,  mother,  and  guest. 
They  should  practise  chastity  from  any  consideration,  and  adopt  the  virtuous,  and 
not  vicious  actions  of  their  elders.  In  case  of  doubt  m any  matter,  to  follow  the 
example  of  the  learned  and  virtuous  persons,  is  the  safest  course  for  them. 

3.  In  intellectual  education,  their  study  should  satisfy  the  five  great 
canons,  namely,  the  laws  of  spirit,  the  laws  of  nature,  the  wisdom  of  sages,  the 
eight-fold  evidence  of  logic,  and  the  voice  of  conscience.  The  eight-fold  evidence 
of  logic  consists  of  perception,  inference,  analogy.  Holy  Writ,  history,  the  converse, 
possibility,  and  non-existence  In  other  words,  their  study  should  include  both 
physics  and  metaphysics,  as  relating  to  the  six  categories  of  existence,  namely, 
substance,  quality,  action,  agreement,  difference,  and  causation.  To  raise  the 
educational  standand  to  the  ancient  greatness  of  Aryavarta.the  Scheme  of  Studies 
should  consist  of  the  Ashtadhyayi,  Nighantu,  Nirukta,  selections  from  Manu, 
Ramayan,  Mahabharat,  six  schools  philosophy, — Mimansa,  Yoga,  Nyaya,  Vai- 
shesik,  Sankhya,  and  Vedant, — ten  Upanishats, — Isha,  Kena,  Katha,  Prashna, 
Mundak,  Mandukya,  Aitareya,  Taitireya,  Chhandogya,  and  Brahdaranyak— four 
Vedas, — Rig,  Yajur,  Sama,  and  Atharva, — four  Brahmanas,— Aitareya,  Sama, 
Gopath,  and  Shatpath,— Medicine— Charak  and  Sushrut,— Astronomy,— Suryasi- 
ddhanta,— Music,— Narad  Samhita,  Arthaveda  or  politics  and  4,  Military  Art.  To 


76 


Satyarth  Prakash 


save  the  student  from  the  degenerating  effect  of  spurious  books,  all  the  Purans* 
(mythology)  and  Taniras  (demonology)  as  well  as  vernacular  religious  books,  such 
as  Tulsi  Ramayan,  should  be  excluded  from  the  curriculum  of  studies.  After 
completing  this  course  in  about  20  years,  the  student  should  return  home,  marry 
and  enter  the  world. 


The  names  of  the  18  Puranas  with  the  number  of  their  verses  and  the  names 
of  the  18  Upa-Puranas  or  Supplementary  Puranas  are  as  follow: — 

Puranas 

1.  Brahma  10,000,  2.  Padma  55,000,  3.  Vishnu  23,000,  4.  Shiva  24,000, 
5.  Vayu  24,000  6,  Bhagwat  18,000,  7.  Narada  25,000,  8.  Markanday  9,000, 
9.  Agni  15,400,  10.  Bhavishya  14,500,  II.  Brahmavaivarta  1,8000,  12.  Linga 

11.000,  13.  Varah  24,000,  14  Scandha  81,100,  15.  Vamana  10,000,  16.  Kurma 

17.000,  17.  Matsya  14,000,  18.  Garurha  19,000,  19.  Brahmanada  12,000. 

Upa-Puranas 

1.  Adi,  2.  Nrisinha,  3.  Vayu,  4.  Shiva  Dharm,  5.  Durvasa,  6.  Kapila, 
7.  Narad,  8.  Nandikeshwar,  9.  Shukar,  10.  Varuna,  11.  Samba,  12.  Kalki, 
13.  Maheshwar,  14.  Padma,  15.  Devas,  16.  Parashar,  17.  Marich,  18.  Bhaskar. 


Chapter  IV 

OF  THE  STUDENT’S  RETURN  HOME  FROM 
STUDY,  MARRIAGE  AND  FAMILY  LIFE 

wiPt  I !irw'^?r5rg[«Tf  n5?«n>srR>TTfw!^r{  ii 

That  bachelor  or  maid  should  enter  the  world,  whose  rules  of 
chastity  have  not  been  violated,  who  has  properly  finished  the  term 
of  studentship  in  accordance  with  the  teacher’s  wishes,  and  who 
has  studied  the  four,  three,  or  two  Vedas,  nay  even  one  Veda,  Angas: 
accessories  and  supplements  of  the  Vedas  (Vicfe  page  69). 

— ‘Manu  III,  3. 

^ fqg:  I 

—lb.  3,  Being  credited  with  the  merit  of  having  duly  performed 
his  duty  as  a pupil  towards  his  prcccpter;  having  received  the  gift  of 
the  knowledge  of  Vedas  from  the  guardian,  father,  or  teacher;  and 
being  decked  with  laurels  and  seated  on  a chair,  he  should  be  before 
nuptials  presented  with  a cow  by  his  father,  which  should  also  be 
done  by  the  father  of  the  bride  on  the  occasion  of  marriage. 

II 

—Having  obtained  the  consent  of  his  spiritual  guide,  having 
performed  ablution  according  to  the  directions  of  the  law,  he  should 
espouse  a maiden  of  the  same  class  as  himself,  endued  with  marks  of 
excellence. — lb.  4. 

HT  II 

— lb.  5.  The  maid  who  is  not  within  the  sixth  degree  of  descent 
from  his  mother,  and  who  does  not  belong  to  the  primitive  family 
stock  of  his  father,  is  eligible  for  marriage.  The  object  of  this  distant 
matrimony  is — 

i I— Shatapath. 

that  it  is  an  ascertained  fact  that  the  immaterial  have  more  attraction 
than  the  material  things.  Thus  a man’s  mind  is  drawn  to  the  sugar- 
candy  whose  properties  he  has  heard,  but  which  he  has  not  tasted. 
As  a man  ardently  wishes  to  see  an  invisible  object  on  hearing  its 
commendable  quantities,  so  that  girl  should  be  selected  for  marriage, 
who  has  no  near  connection  with  the  paternal  or  maternal  family. 
The  following  are  the  advantages  of  marriage  between  parties  living 
a far  or  near: — 

Marriage  in  Distant  Places 

1.  Their  marriage  does  not  favour  the  growth  of  love  for  each 
other,  who  from  infancy  live,  sport,  quarrel,  love  each  other,  know 


78 


Satyarth  Prakash 


each  other’s  temper,  virtues  and  vices  of  early  life,  and  unlawful 
conduct,  and  who  have  seen  each  other  in  nude  state. 

2.  No  improvement  is  made  in  constitution  from  the  infusion  of 
mutual  tissues  by  marriage  between  parties  belonging  to  the  same 
parental  family  of  the  primitive  stock,  as  the  mixture  of  two  waters 
docs  not  produce  a substance  of  peculiar  quality. 

3.  Marriage  between  men  and  women  of  different  parental 
ftimilies  and  stock  is  best  and  most  desirable,  as  the  mixture  of  milk, 
sugar,  ginger  and  the  like  drugs  is  productive  of  agreeableness. 

4.  The  marriage  of  parties  living  in  distant  countries  is  attend- 
ed  with  happiness,  as  health  is  secured  by  the  change  of  climate  and 
dietary  in  removal  from  a country  where  one  is  sick  to  another  at  a 
distance. 

5.  There  is  a possibility  of  being  affected  with  joy  and  sorrow 
or  involved  in  the  quarrel  of  each  other’s  family  in  the  contingency 
of  matrimony  at  a place  close  by.  This  is  not  the  case  with  the 
matrimonial  alliances  of  distant  countries.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
string  of  love  is  enlarged  by  marriage  between  parties  of  remote 
places,  but  not  so  in  them  who  live  near  each  other. 

6.  The  marriage  of  parties  living  at  a distance  can  facilitate 
the  acquisition  of  objects  of  distant  countries  and  assistance  of  their 
peoples,  which  can't  be  the  case  with  the  marriage  of  parties  living 
in  each  other’s  vicinity. 

ff^cTT  { Nirukta  III,  4. 

— A girl  is  called  Dufiita,  because  her  marriage  in  a distant 
country  proves  beneficial,  but  not  so  when  it  takes  place  in  adjoining 
countries. 

7.  The  parents  of  a girl  may  be  threatened  with  poverty,  as 
they  must  have  to  give  her  something  or  other  every  time  she  comes 
to  see  them. 

8.  The  married  parties  get  proud  from  the  assurance  of  receiv- 
ing help  from  each  other’s  parental  family.  On  a slight  misunder- 
standing arising  between  them,  the  woman  will  immediatly  repair  to 
her  father’s  house.  The  marriage  of  persons  of  adjoining  places  may 
beget  ill  fame  or  hatred  ; for,  the  temper  of  women  is  sensitive  and 
mild.  Such  and  similar  arc  the  reasons  against  the  property  of  con- 
tracting the  marriage  of  persons  belonging  to  the  same  paternal  stock 
and  coming  within  six  descents  from  he  maternal  side. 

— Manu,  III-o.  The  following  ten  families  should  be  rejected 
for  matrimonial  purpose,  howsoever  blessed  they  may  be  wdth  the 
possession  of  wealth,  plenty,  cows,  goats,  elephants,  horses,  do- 
minions, riches,  and  other  property. 

i 

— lb.  7.  A birde  or  bridegroom  should  not  be  selected  for 
m riage  from  those  families,  which  perform  no  righteous  acts. 


Marriage  and  Family  Life 


79 


which  have  no  righteous  persons,  which  have  neglected  the  study  of 
the  Vedas,  whose  members  have  long  or  thick  hair  on  the  body, 
which  are  subject  to  hemorrhodis,  phthisis,  asthma,  cough,  epilepsy, 
leprosy,  elephantiasis,  and  dyspepsia ; for,  marriage  transmits  these 
diseases  and  defects  to  the  families  of  marrying  parties.  Hence, 
the  youthful  boys  and  girls  of  the  best  families  should  be  united  in 
marriage. 

Whom  to  Marry 

frmffw  h ii  Manu,  m,  8. 

— A youth  should  not  marary  a girl  of  yellow  colour,  of  larger 
size,  i.e.,  taller,  broader,  and  stronger  than  himself,  troubled  with 
disease,  with  hair  either  too  little  or  too  much,  garrueous,  or  with 
brown  or  inflamed  eyes  ; 

— lb.  9.  Nor  one  with  the  name  of  a constellation,  as  Ashwani 
(Castor  and  Pollux),  Bharni,  Rohini,  Devi,  Revati  Bye,  Chittri,  and  the 
like  heavenly  bodies  ; of  a tree,  as  Tulsia,  Genda,  Gulabi,  Champa, 
Chameli  and  the  like  plants  ; of  a river,  as  Ganga,  Yamna,  and  the 
like  streams  ; Cliandali  and  the  like  lowcaste  names  ; of  a mountain, 
as  Vindhya,  Himalaya,  Parvati,  and  the  like  hills  ; of  a bird,  as 
Kokila,  Mena,  and  the  like  birds  ; of  a snake,  as  Nagi,  Bhujanga, 
and  the  like  serpents  ; of  a slave  as  Madho  Dasi,  Mira  Dasi,  and  the 
like  menials  ; of  a terrific  object,  as  Bhim  Kunvari,  Chandika,  Kali, 
and  the  like  furies  ; for  these  names  are  of  disagreeable  and  repul- 
sive objects. 

— He  should  marry  a girl  with  sleek  proportionate  limbs,  with 
agreeable  name,  i.e.,  attractive,  as  Yashoda,  Sukhada,  and  the  like, 
with  the  gait  of  a swan  or  she  elephant,  witli  fine  hair  and  teeth, 
and  whose  body  has  exquisite  softness. — Manu  III.  10. 

Age  for  Marriage 

Q. — What  time  and  kind  of  marriage  are  the  best  ? 

A. — The  best  time  for  a girl’s  marriage  is  when  she  is  from  16 
to  24  years  of  age,  and  for  a youth  when  he  is  25  to  48  years  of  age. 
The  marriage  of  a girl  of  16  and  youth  of  25  years  is  of  the  lowest 
order  ; of  a girl  of  18  or  20  years  and  a youth  of  30,  35,  or  40  years 
is  of  the  middle  order  ; of  a maid  of  24  and  a bachelor  of  48  years 
is  of  the  best  kind.  That  country,  is  happy  in  which  this  best  custom 
of  marriage,  the  observance  of  chastity,  and  the  vigorous  pursuit  of 
knowledge  exist  to  a great  extent  ; but  that  country  sinks  into 
misery  in  which  there  is  no  enforcement  of  chastity,  no  light  of 
knowledge,  and  which  has  the  custom  of  the  marriage  of  infants 
or  in  early  age,  or  of  unworthy  and  discordant  couples.  For  the 
amelioration  of  society  depends  on  the  perfection  of  chastity  and 
acquisition  of  knowledge,  and  the  deterioration  of  it,  on  their  disuse 
and  decline. 


80  Satyarth  Prakash 

0.  — These  verses  are  given  in  the  Parashari  and  Shighrabodh: — 

1.  ^ I 

ffrT  3;6-^  TsreafHT:  II 

2.  HIrTT  PTcTT  cTf^TT  5^C5t  ’STmt  ^ I 

T3(?*»fTI*T  II 

C N N 

They  mean  : 1.  A girl  is  called  Gowric  in  her  8th,  Rohni  in 
her  9th,  and  Kannya  (maid)  in  her  10th  year,  and  Rajaswala  (men- 
striiant)  after  that  age.  2.  If  she  is  not  given  away  in  marriage  in  her 
10th  year  of  age,  her  mother,  father  and  elder  brother  go  to  hell  on 
seeing  her  in  menses. 

A. — This  is  an  authority  of  the  Extempore  Brahma  Parana 
(God’s  book)  : 

BT  ftfT  TSRWvtT  II 

irmr  fq^Tc  am  ^lanrig^Tt  afrpft  fmn  i 
aa  ^ arfm  aesar  1 1 

C > N 

It  means  : Brahmovach  : The  Lord  Saith  : The  kshana  is  that 
portion  of  time  which  an  atom  takes  to  turn.  Well,  when  a girl  is 
born,  she  is  called  Gowrie  in  the  first  kshana  (infinitesimal  interval), 
Rohni  in  the  second,  Kannaya  in  the  third,  and  Rajaswala  in  the 
fourth.  The  sight  of  that  girl  in  menses  sends  her  mother,  brother, 
and  sister,  all  to  Hell. 

Q. — These  verses  have  no  authority. 

A — Why  have  they  no  authority  ? If  the  verses  of  Brahma 
(the  creative  principle  of  Hindu  trinity)  carry  no  authority,  yours  also 
are  of  no  weight. 

Q.— Hollo  Don’t  you  accept  the  authority  of  Parashara  and 
Kashinath  ? 

A — Bravo  ! Don’t  you  accept  the  authority  of  Brahma  ? Is 
not  Brahma  greater  than  Parashara  and  Kashinath  ? If  you  don’t 
accept  the  authority  of  Brahma’s  verses,  we  don’t  admit  that  of 
Parashara  and  Kashinath’s, 

Q. — The  impossibility  of  your  verses  destroys  their  authority  ; 
for,  a thousand  infinitesimal  intervals  elapse  in  the  occurance  of  a 
child’s  birth  ; then  how  can  its  marriage  take  place  ? Also,  there  is 
no  use  apparent  of  the  performance  of  marriage  at  that  time. 

A. — If  our  verses  are  impossible,  yours  also  share  the  same 
fate  ; for,  a girl’s  marriage  at  the  age  of  8 or  10  years  is  of  no 
use.  The  best  children  are  the  fruits  of  the  marriage  of  women  16 
to  24  years  old,  when  their  uterus  is  perfectly  developed  and  body  is 
grown  strong,  and  of  men  at  25  to  48,  when  their  seman  is  matured 
and  body  is  grown  stout  and  strong.  As  parturition  is  impossible  in 
a girl  of  8 years  of  age,  so  it  is  absurd  to  call  her  Gowrie,  Rohni  and 
the  like.  If  a girl  is  not  fair,  which  the  word.  Gowrie  means,  but 
dark,  it  is  absurd  to  name  her  Gowrie  or  fair.  Also  Gowrie  is  the 


Marriage  and  Family  Life 


81 


wife  of  God  Mahadeva.  Rohni  is  the  wife  of  Baladeva.  They  are 
regarded  as  mothers  by  you  people,  the  mythologists  or  believers 
in  the  Puranas.  When  you  revere  a girl  as  Gowrie  and  the  like 
goddesses  how  can  it  be  possible  and  righteous  and  lawful  to  marry 
her  ? Therefore  your  verses  and  ours  are  both  absurd  and  false.  Just 
as  we  have  composed  verses  in  the  name  of  Brahma  by  inserting  “the 
Lord  saith,”  so  the  verses  in  quoted  by  you  have  been  wiitten  and 
fathered  upon  Parashara  and  other  lawgivers.  Therefore,  it  is  best 
to  reject  all  these  so  called  authorities  and  to  act  in  conformity  to  the 
precepts  of  the  Vedas,  which  are  of  supreme  authority  in  all  matters. 
Says  Manu,  IX.  90 — 

g qfeW  It 

— Let  a damsel  seek  a husband  equal  to  herself  in  qualifications 
3 years  after  her  menstruation.  As  menses  occur  every  month, 
there  are  36  menses  in  3 years,  after  which  marriage  is  proper,  but 
not  before. 

^ w 

— Ib.  89.  It  is  better  that  youths  and  damsels  remain  unmarried 
till  death  than  that  unequals  in  qualification  should  be  matched,  that 
is,  the  bride  and  bride-groom  should  not  be  of  mutully  repellent 
qualities,  tendencies,  and  natures.  Thus,  it  is  shown  that  marriage 
is  improper  before  the  time  mentioned  above  or  between  persons  of 
desperate  characters. 

How  to  arrange  Marriage 

Q. — Tell  me  whether  the  arranging  of  marriage  should  be  in  the 
hands  of  parents  or  be  left  to  the  discretion  of  youths  and  maidens. 

A. — It  is  better  that  it  should  be  in  the  power  of  the  marrying 
parties.  If  the  parents  ever  take  it  into  their  head  to  bring  about 
their  sons  and  daughters’  matches,  they  should  not  be  completed 
without  their  consent  ; for,  the  marriage  contracted  with  their  mutual 
consent  is  seldom  attended  with  displeasure  and  variance,  and  it 

Dr.  Dhanwantary,  the  author  of  the  Sushrut,  thus  forbids  men  and  women 
of  under  age  from  attempting  procreation  : 

nn  h it 

The  impregnation  of  a woman  less  than  16  years  of  age  by  a man  less  than 
25  years  of  age  is  subject  to  misfortune. 

If  it  fruits  in  the  birth  of  a child,  the  child  will  not  live  long  ; but  if  it  lives 
long.  It  will  be  weak  in  constitution.  So  the  conception  of  a minor  should  not 
be  encouraged. — Sushrut,  Sharirasihan,  Chap.  10. 

Such  scriptural  authorities  and  the  observation  of  the  laws  of  nature  go  to 
prove  that  women  less  than  16  years  of  age  and  men  less  than  25  years  of  age  are 
not  fit  for  procreation-  They  who  go  against  these  laws,  come  to  grief. 


82 


Satyarth  Prakash 


brings  forth  splendid  children.  Marriage  without  mutual  consent  of 
the  bride  and  bridegroom  is  always  attended  with  trouble.  The 
chief  concern  in  marriage  is  of  the  bride  and  bridegroom,  and  not  of 
their  parents  ; for,  if  they  are  pleased  with  each  other,  they  become 
happy;  but  if  not  pleased,  they  suffer  trouble. 

Happy  Home 

— M.  Ill,  60.  Happiness,  fortune,  and  fame  dwell  in  that  family  in 
which  the  wife  is  ever  contented  with  the  husband,  and  vice  versa:  and 
misery,  poverty,  and  reproach  overtake  that  family  in  which  discord 
and  quarrel  reign.  Therefore,  the  custom  of  a woman’s  choosing  her 
husband  (swayamvara),  which  has  been  in  vogue  in  Aryavarta  from 
time  immemorial,  is  best  calculated  to  meet  the  end  of  matrimony. 
When  a man  and  a woman  wish  to  marry,  they  should  look  to  the 
propriety  of  each  other’s  qualifications  in  respect  of  knowledge, 
modesty,  manners,  beauty,  age,  vigour,  family,  stature,  and  other 
merits.  There  is  no  happiness  found  in  marriage  so  long  as  there  is 
no  harmony  in  the  character  of  the  marrying  parties.  Also,  no  happi- 
ness is  obtained  from  early  marriage.  Says  the  Veda  : — 

Vedas  on  Marriage  Age 

^ \ 

: II  Rig.  Ill,  viit.  4. 

— Verily,  that  youth  becomes  glorious  and  beneficial  to  the  people  at 
large,  who  is  sanctified  in  all  respects  and  invested  with  the  sacred 
thread,  who  has  observed  the  vow  of  chastity  and  acquired  soard 
knowledge  and  moral  training,  who  being  well  dressed  enters  the 
family  life  after  attaining  majority  and  who  has  acquired  a merit  in 
knowledge  and  reputation  as  a scholar,  learned  men  with  through 
experience,  zeal  for  the  promotion  of  knowledge  on  scientific  lines, 
and  preservance,  raise  him  to  respectable  social  rank.  But  those  men 
and  women  who  without  observing  the  rule  of  chastity  and  without 
acquiring  knowledge  and  proficiency  in  the  best  moral  culture,  many 
in  early  age,  are  spoiled  and  ruined;  and  they,  fail  to  secure  in  honour- 
able position  among  learned  persons. 

11  Rig.  HI,  Lv,  16. 

— Like  the  cows  not  milked  by  anybody,  let  those  perfectly  youthful 
women  undertake  the  responsibility  of  maternity,  who  have  passed 
infancy,  who  are  able  to  accomplish  all  human  works  in  the  best 
way  possible,  who  have  passed  girlhood  or  immaturity,  who  have 
attained  perfect  youth  and  acquired  sound  moral  training,  who  drive 
intellectual  pleasure  from  the  teaching  of  the  great  scriptures  of  wis- 
dom written  by  eminent  scholars  noted  for  success  in  their  vow  of 
studentship  and  observance  of  its  rules,  and  who  have  married  youth- 
ful husbands. 


Marriage  and  Family  Life 


83 


Caution 

Women  should  in  their  early  life  never  think  of  going  to  men; 
for,  their  pure  conduct,  namely,  maidenship  in  the  prime  of  life,  is  a 
source  of  joy  both  here  and  hereafter.  But  marriage  before  puberty 
ruins  the  constitution  of  women  more  then  that  of  men. 

Adult  Marriage 

Men  and  women  should  ever  live  like  those  who  are  ready  and 
very  energetic  in  full  prime  of  youth  and  able  to  beget  children  and 
marry  youthful  and  beautiful  women,  as  they  live  100  years  or  ev,n 
more  with  joy  and  are  blessed  with  children  and  grand  children.  Let 
them  each  say  : 

\ Rig.  I. 

^ 11  Clxxix  1. 

'‘I  shall  marry  after  having  attained  full  growth  and  vigour  of 
mind  and  body,  and  acquired  perfect  knowledge  and  moral  training  in 
accordance  with  rules  of  studentship,  so  as  to  obtain  good  old  age 
when  days  and  nights  mar  the  beauty  and  weaken  the  strength  of  the 
body  by  pushing  it  on  :o  decline  of  life  just  as  they  deprive  previous 
autmuns  and  fading  twilights  of  their  charm.”  A contrary  course 
being  opposed  to  the  commandment  of  the  Vedas,  does  not  make 
marriage  happy. 

This  country  of  Aryavarta  ever  enjoyed  prosperity  and  progress 
so  long  as  all  the  sages,  philosophers,  princes,  emperors,  and  people 
acquired  knowledge  during  the  time  of  their  vow  of  bachelorship  and 
observed  the  custom  of  marriage  in  which  a maid  selected  her  husband 
(Swayamvara  : self-choice).  But  when  the  acquisition  of  knowledge 
during  studentship  ceased  to  be  and  the  contraction  of  marriage 
became  the  duty  of  parents,  national  degenracy  and  physical  deterio- 
ration set  in,  and  it  has  been  since  coming  down  gradually  and  steadily 
all  over  the  country.  Hence,  the  evil  customs  of  early  marriage  should 
be  given  up  by  the  sensible  good  people,  who  should  adopt  the  afore- 
said custom  of  marriage,  in  which  a maid  selected  her  husband 
(Swayamvara).  It  should  be  done  in  the  class  to  which  the  marrying 
parties  belong.  The  determination  of  classes  should  be  based  upon 
the  principles  of  similarity  in  qualifications,  habits,  and  tempers. 


Caste  by  Merit 

Q.—As  a Brahmin  is  one  whose  parents  are  Brahmins,  can  the 
children  of  persons  of  other  castes  than  Brahmin  be  Brahmins  ? 

A. — Yes,  there  have  been  many,  there  are  many  now,  and  there 
will  be  many  in  the  future.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  Chhandogya 
Upnishat  represents  St.  Jabal  of  unknown  parentage,  the  Mahabharta 
St.  Vishwamitra  of  the  Kshatriya  caste,  and  St.  Matanga  of  the 
Chandal  or  lo  / caste,  as  becoming  Brahmins.  At  present  he  deserves 
to  be  a Brahmin  who  has  acquired  the  best  knowledge  and  character, 
and  an  ignorant  person  is  fit  to  be  classed  as  a Shudra  or  with  the 
servant  class.  This  natural  classification  will  hold  good  in  future. 


84 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Q. — Well,  how  can  the  body,  produced  from  the  substance  of 
the  ova  and  sperms  of  one  class  of  people,  be  changed  into  another? 

A. — A Brahmin  body  is  not  produced  from  the  union  of  ova 
and  sperms.  But,  on  the  contrary,  a person  becomes  Brahmin  by 
virtue  of  righteousness.  Says  Manu.  11.  28, — 

n 

The  meaning  of  this  verse  has  been  given  before.  But  it  is  again 
given  here.  This  body  is  made  Brahmin  by  studying  and  teaching,  by 
thinking  and  putting  others  in  the  way  of  thinking,  by  making  olTer> 
ings  to  fire,  by  studying  all  the  Vedas  with  their  meaning,  purport, 
application,  context,  pronounciation,  intonation,  by  sacrificing  on  the 
full  moon  and  on  other  occasions  according  to  the  process  described 
above,  by  getting  children  righteously,  by  performing  the  five  great 
duties  above  mentioned— prayer,  oblation  to  fire,  service  of  parents, 
maintenance  of  the  disabled  and  fallen  people  and  lower  animals,  and 
hospitality,  — by  special  offerings  to  fire  and  performing  other  sacri- 
fices, by  keeping  the  company  of  the  learned  and  honouring  them,  by 
speaking  the  truth,  by  doing  good  to  others  and  other  virtous  acts,  by 
acquiring  proficiency  in  all  arts  and  industries,  by  ceasing  to  do  evil, 
and  by  trying  to  do  good. 

2.— Don’t  you  believe  what  this  verse  says  ? 

Yes  ; we  do. 

Q. — Why  do  you  then  belive  that  the  division  of  castes  is 
founded  on  the  people’s  birth  resulting  from  female  ova  fecundated 
by  male  sperms  ? 

A, — It  IS  not  I that  alone  believe  so,  but  many  people  have 
believed  so  from  time  out  of  mind. 

Q. — Do  you  discard  ancient  hereditary  beliefs  ? 

A. — No  ; but  we  don’t  accept  your  wrong  sense,  and  so  we 
repudiate  it. 

Q. — What  is  the  proof  that  our  sense  is  wrong  and  yours  right  ? 

A. — The  proof  is  the  very  statement,  that  you  believe  the 
customs  prevalent  for  five  or  six  generations  to  be  the  usage  of  anti- 
quity, while  we  believe  the  Vedas  and  the  established  rules  from  the 
beginning  of  the  creation  up  to  the  present  to  be  the  authority  of 
antiquity.  See,  it  is  often  observed  that  a father  is  virtuous  while  his 
son  is  wicked  ; a virtuous  son  has  a vicious  father,  sometimes  both  a 
man  and  his  son  are  virtuous  or  vicious.  Hence,  you  are  in  the  wrong 
and  in  delusion.  See  what  Manu  says, 

fqrcrmfr:  i 

^ muTcHcTt  ^ ii 

— IV.  178.  Persons  should  go  by  the  way  their  fathers  and 
forefathers  have  gone  by  ; but  they  must  walk  in  the  path  of  the  good 
fathers  and  forefathers  alone  but  never  in  the  path  of  the  vicious 
fathers  and  forefathers.  For,  there  is  no  sin  or  suffering  by  going  the 
way  gone  by  righteous  persons.  Do  you  or  do  you  not  believe  it  ? 


Marriage  and  Family  Life 


85 


Q. — Yes  ; we  do. 

A, — See,  what  has  been  revealed  by  God  in  the  Vedas  is  eternal ; 
but  what  is  opposed  to  it,  can  not  be  permanent.  Should  not  all  the 
people  believe  so  ? 

2.— Most  certainly. 

A. — Ask  them  who  do  not  so  believe  if  a person,  who  is  rich 
and  whose  father  is  poor,  should  throw  away  his  riches  out  of  his 
pride  in  his  father’s  poverty.  Should  a man  whose  father  is  blind,  put 
out  his  eyes  ? Shall  a person  whose  father  is  vicious,  do  evil  alone  ? 

Q. — No,  never,  never.  But,  on  the  contrary,  persons  must 
necessarily  cease  to  do  evil  and  try  to  do  what  good  is  seen  in  the 
actions  of  people. 

A. — Ask  him  who  holds  that  the  division  of  castes  is  made  from 
the  union  of  male  and  female  energies,  and  not  from  personal  quali- 
ties, and  deeds,  why  he  docs  not  call  that  Brahmin,  a Brahmin  who 
abandoning  his  caste  joins  a low  or  unclean  caste,  or  turns  a Christian 
or  Mohomedan.  Certainly  he  will  say  that  he  is  not  called  a Brahmin, 
as  lie  has  ceased  to  do  the  duties  of  a Brahmin.  It  is  also  proved 
tlicrcform  that  those  Brahmins  and  the  other  classes  who  do  good 
works,  should  be  regarded  as  such  ; and  those  low  caste  people  who 
possess  good  character,  habits,  and  nature,  should  be  considered  as  of 
higher  castes  ; and  if  the  persons  of  higher  castes  commit  sin  and 
do  deeds  of  low  people,  (hey  should  be  classed  with  the  low. 

Q, — Here  is  the  1 1 th  verse  of  the  31st  chapter  of  the  Yajur- 
veda  : — 

It  means : The  Brahmin  is  born  from  the  mouth  of  God,  the 
Kshatriya  from  his  arms,  the  Vaishya  from  his  thighs,  and  the  Shudra 
from  his  feet.  Just  as  the  mouth  can  not  become  the  arms  and 
other  limbs,  or  vice  versa,  so  the  Brahmin  cannot  change  into  the 
Kshtriya  and  other  classes,  nor  do  the  latter  into  the  former. 

A. — The  meaning  of  the  verse  which  you  make  out,  is  not 
correct;  for,  the  phrase  “formless  and  all-pervading  supreme  spirit” 
is  to  be  supplied  from  the  previous  context  in  interpreting  it.  When 
God  is  formless,  he  cannot  have  the  mouth  and  other  parts  of  the 
body.  If  he  has  a mouth  and  other  organs, he  cannot  be  all-per- 
vading. If  he  is  not  omnipresent,  he  cannot  be  omnipotent,  the  crea- 
tor, upholder,  and  destroyer  of  the  world,  the  judge  of  the  good  and 
evil  deeds  of  souls,  omniscient  spirit,  immortal,  or  the  possessor  of 
such  other  attributes.  Hence,  the  verse  means  that  he  who  like  the 
mouth  in  the  body  of  man  is  the  best  and  most  prominent  of  all  in 
the  creation  of  the  all-pervading  God,  is  a Brahmin;  he  who  has  more 
strength  than  others,  is  a Kshatriya;  for,  the  Shatpath  says  the  word 
bahu  means  vigour  and  energy;  he  who  travels  as  if  in  virtue  of  the 
strength  of  his  thighs,  which  form  the  part  of  the  body  below  the 
loins  and  above  the  knees,  in  his  country  or  goes  to  foreign  countries 
and  trades  there  in  all  commodities,  is  a Vaishya;  and  he  who  is  igno- 
rant and  possesses  qualities  allied  to  ignorance  which  is  like  the  feet 


86 


Satyarth  Prakash 


or  low  parts  of  the  body,  is  a Shudra.  At  another  place  the  Shat- 
path  interprets  this  verse  in  the  same  sense.  Thus,  for  instance, 


speaking  of  the  Brahmins,  it  says  that  as  they  are  the  chief  members 
of  society,  they  are  said  to  be  born  of  God’s  mouth.  Such  is  the 
intelligent  interpretation  of  the  Vedic  verse.  In  plain  words,  just  as 
the  mouth  is  the  best  of  all  organs,  so  are  the  Brahmins  considered 
to  be  the  best  in  the  human  kind  in  virtue  of  their  perfect  knowledge 
and  excellent  character,  habits,  and  nature  Since  the  divine  form- 
lessness and  immateriality  can  have  no  material  distinctions  of  the 
mouth  and  other  organs  of  the  human  body,  the  production  of  the 
Brahmins  from  God’s  mouth  is  impossible.  It  is  like  the  marriage 
of  the  son  of  barren  woman.  Also,  if  the  Branmins  and  other  classes 
had  been  born  of  the  mouth  and  other  organs,  their  forms  would 
have  been  like  those  organs,  as  the  qualities  of  a material  cause  arc 
reproduced  in  its  elTect.  Their  bodies  should  have  been  round  and 
hollow  like  the  mouth,  those  of  the  Kshatriyas  like  the  arms,  those 
of  the  Vaishyas  like  the  thighs,  and  those  of  the  Shudras  like  the 
feet.  But  they  are  not  so.  What  will  you  say  if  anybody  tells  you 
that  those  might  be  called  Brahmins  and  other  castes,  who  were  born 
of  the  mouth  and  other  organs;  but  you  cannot  be  called  by  those 
names,  as  you  are  born  of  woman’s  womb  just  like  all  other  people. 
Not  being  born  of  God’s  mouth  your  pride  in  being  called  the 
Brahmins  and  so  forth  is  vain  and  all  shame.  Hence,  the  interpreta- 
tion you  put  upon  the  verse,  is  absurd,  but  ours  is  quite  correct.  It 
is  also  supported  by  what  Manu  says,  X 65, — 


5T?ftm  i 

— If  a person  born  of  a Shudra  or  low  caste  family  possesses 
the  virtues,  habits  and  tendencies  of  the  Brahmins,  Kshatriyas,  and 
Vaishyas,  he  should  be  classed  with  them  according  to  his  merits.  In 
like  manner,  if  a person  born  of  a Brahmin,  Kshatriya  or  Vaishya’s 
family,  possesses  the  merits,  habits  and  nature  like  those  of  a Shudra, 
he  should  sink  to  the  level  of  the  Shudras.  Also,  a person  coming 
from  the  family  of  the  Kshatriyas  and  Vaishyas  and  possessing  the 
qualifications  of  the  Brahmins  and  Shudras,  is  classed  with  them 
respectively  according  to  his  virtues.  In  short,  the  men  and  women 
of  the  four  orders  should  be  classed  with  those  orders  whose  quali- 
fications they  possess. 


CN  t 

2.  ^ srTfirqfftarrft  ii 

CN  C 

— These  are  aphorisms  of  the  Apasthamba.  They  mean  that 
I.  righteous  conduct  exalts  a man  of  the  lower  to  the  higher  order, 
and  he  should  be  regarded  to  be  a member  of  that  order  for  which 
he  is  fit.  In  the  same  manner,  2 unrighteous  conduct  degrades  a 
man  to  a lower  order,  and  he  is  to  be  considered  as  such.  As  men 
sink  to  lower  orders  in  virtue  of  unrighteousness,  so  are  women  class- 
ed according  to  their  merits  or  demerits.  Thus  these  scriptural  authori- 
ties go  to  prove  that  it  is  the  only  course  which  makes  persons  attain 


Marriage  and  Family  Life  87 

the  moral  standard  of  character,  behaviour,  and  nature,  and  preserves 
their  purity  of  race;  that  is  to  say,  there  will  be  no  person  like  a 
Kshatriyas,  Vaishya  or  Shudra  among  the  Brahmins;  also  the  orders 
of  the  Kshatriyas,  Vaishyas  and  Shudras  will  maintain  their  respec- 
tive excellence  of  race.  There  will  be  no  bastards  in  any  class.  This 
course  will  bring  no  censure  or  charge  of  unfitness  to  any  class. 

Q. — Who  will  serve  that  man  and  his  wife  in  old  age,  whose 
only  son  or  daughter  is  put  in  a different  order  ? There  is  a danger 
of  their  family  being  extinct.  What  is  to  be  done  in  such  a case  ? 

No  one  will  lose  the  services  of  his  children  or  have  his 
family  come  to  an  end;  for,  he  will  be  given  other  children  that  are 
of  his  order  in  place  of  his  own  by  the  order  of  the  Educational  and 
Administrative  Councils.  Hence  there  will  be  no  disorder.  This 
classification  of  social  oiders  according  to  the  degree  of  excellence 
and  aptitude  should  be  determined  and  established  at  the  age  of  16 
in  the  case  of  girls  and  at  25  in  that  of  boys  by  a decisive  test  Also, 
their  marriages  should  be  in  their  respective  classes,  i,e  , a Brahmin 
should  marry  a woman  of  the  Brahmin  order,  a Kshtriya,  of  the 
Kshtriya,  a Vaishya,  of  the  Vaishya,  and  a Shudra,  of  the  Shudra.  In 
this  way  the  people  will  be  able  to  do  their  respective  duties  and  live 
in  love  and  peace  as  husband  and  wife  among  themselves  in  society. 

Duties  of  4 Orders 

The  following  are  the  characteristics  and  duties  of  the  four 
orders  : — 

Duties  of  Priests 

— Manu  1,  88.  The  six  duties  of  a Brahmana  are  1.  studying, 
2.  teaching,  3.  sacrificing,  4.  ministering  at  sacrifices,  5.  giving  and  6. 
receiving  alms.  But,  receiving  gifts  is  a low  work  according  to 
Manu.  : STfcT^?:  i 

— Gita.  The  fifteen  characteristics  which  must  be  possessed 
and  the  duties  which  must  be  done  by  persons  belonging  to  the 
Brahminical  order  are — 7.  shama  : contentment,  not  even  to  enter- 
tain in  the  mind  the  thought  of  doing  evil,  and  not  to  allow  desire 
to  run  wild  in  unrighteous  works,  8.  dama  restraing  the  senses  of  hear- 
ing, seeing  and  other  powers  from  indulging  in  unrighteous  actions 
and  employing  them  in  righteous  deeds;  9.  tapa  : penance,  to  be  firm 
in  continence,  to  keep  the  senses  under  control,  to  practise  virtue  at 
all  times;  10.  shoucha  : purity,  says  Manu,  V.  109,—* 

The  exterior  of  the  body  is  cleaned  by  water,  the  will  is  purified 
by  the  practice  of  truth,  the  vital  spirit  by  knowledge  and  devotion, 


88 


Satyarth  Prakash 


and  the  understanding  by  wisdom  and  philosophy  : i.e,,  to  keep  one’s 
self  free  from  the  internal  vices  of  like  and  dislike  and  others  and 
from  the  external  impurities, — in  other  words,  one  is  certainly  purified 
by  the  distinction  of  virtue  and  vice  and  the  consequent  of  truth  and 
rejection  of  falsehood  ; 1 1 . kshanti : forbearance,  to  have  a firm  faith 
in  religion  after  rising  above  praise  and  dispraise,  pleasure  and  pain, 
heat  and  cold,  hunger  and  thirst,  profit  and  loss,  honour  and  shame, 
joy  and  sorrow,  and  other  opposites  ; 12.  arjava  : honesty,  to  cherish 
tenderness,  humility,  simplicity,  good  nature,  and  to  give  up 
crookedness,  and  other  sinister  motives  ; 13.  jnana  ; the  acquisition 
of  knowledge  by  the  study  of  the  Vedas  and  other  scriptures  with 
their  accessories  and  supplements,  the  acquirement  of  power  to  teach 
them,  the  attainment  of  discrimination,  the  determination,  the  deter- 
mination of  truth,  the  right  knowledge  of  things  as  they  are,  that  is, 
to  know  and  believe  an  inanimate  object  to  be  an  inanimate  object, 
and  an  animate  object  to  be  an  animate  object,  14.  vljnaua  : a special 
knowledge  of  all  things  from  the  earth  upward  to  God  and  the  right 
application  of  that  knowledge  ; 15.  Astikta  : faith,  never  to  turn  the 
back  upon  and  talk  ill  of  the  Veda,  God,  salvation,  transmigration, 
religion,  knowledge,  good  company,  the  service  of  the  mother,  father 
and  guest. 

Duties  of  Warriors 

JisuHt  ^ i uuwci:  i 

The  duties  and  characteristics  of  the  Kshatriyas  are  1.  rakshana: 
to  protect  the  people  with  justice,  i c , without  any  kind  of  partiality, 
to  honour  the  good,  to  reprehend  the  wicked,  and  to  support  all  in 
every  way  possible  ; 2.  dana,  to  spend  money  and  other  valuable 
means  in  promoting  the  cause  of  knowledge  and  religion  and  in  the 
service  of  the  deserving  ; 3.  ij'yu  : to  offer  oblations  to  fire  and  to  per- 
form other  sacraments  : 4.  adhyayana  : to  read  the  Vadas  and  other 
authentic  scriptures,  and  to  keep  the  health  of  the  mind  and  body  at 
all  times  by  the  controlment  of  the  senses  and  abstinence  from  the 
allurements  of  sensuousness  ; 5.  shourya  : to  have  no  fear  in  fighting 
single  handed  with  hundreds  and  thousands  ; 6 teja  : to  be  always 
dignified  or  above  meanness,  brave  and  bold  ; 7.  dhriti  : to  be  patient 
and  persevering  ; 8.  dakshya  : to  be  expert  in  all  the  affairs  of  the  king 
and  the  people  and  in  law  and  philosophy  ; 9.  yudhya  : never  to 
skulk  away  or  desert  the  ranks  in  the  time  of  battle,  but  to  be  firm 
and  fearless  in  it,  that  is,  to  fight  in  such  a manner  as  to  make  sure  of 
victory  and  to  save  his  life,  and  if  need  be,  to  retire  apparently  from 
before  the  enemy  or  to  use  some  other  tactics  to  snatch  a victory  from 
him  : 10.  dana  : to  be  charitable ; 1 1.  Ishwara  bliava  : to  behave  towards 
all  with  due  respects  without  any  partiality,  to  make  gifts  after  discri- 
mination, to  redeam  promise,  and  never  to  break  it.  Such  are  the 
eleven  duties  and  essentials  of  the  Kshatriyas. — M.  I,  89  and  Gita. 

Duties  of  Merchants 


Marriage  and  Family  Life 


89 


— Manu,  1,  90.  The  duties  and  qualifications  of  tlie  Vaishya 
are  1 pasJiu  raksha  : to  tend  and  bread  kine  and  other  cattle  ; 2.  dana  : 
to  spend  money  and  other  means  in  promoting  the  cause  of  know- 
ledge and  religion  and  in  helping  others  in  the  same  cause  ; 3.  ijya  : to 
make  oblations  to  fire  and  observe  other  sacraments  ; 4.  adhyayana, 
to  study  the  Vedas  and  other  scriptures  ; 5.  vanik  pallia  : to  follow  all 
kinds  of  trade  ; 6.  kuseed  - to  invest  money  on  interest  (a)  4,  6,  8,  12, 
16,  or  20  annas  per  centum,  but  not  more,  and  never  to  receive 
interest  more  than  the  capital,  that  is,  if  one  rupee  be  invested,  one 
should  not  receive  more  that  1 rupees  for  the  amount  even  in  100 
years  nor  should  he  give  more  than  that  : and  7.  kris/ii  : to  till  the 
ground. 

Duties  of  Servants 

— Manu  1,91  The  only  duty  assigned  to  the  Slnidra  as  well 
as  his  distinctive  character  is  that  he  should  properly  serve  the  Brah- 
manas,  Kshtriyas  and  Vaishyas,  shunning  slander,  envy,  pride  and 
other  bad  habits.  Thus  the  characteristics  and  duties  of  the  social 
orders  have  been  succinctly  described.  All  people  enjoy  prospeiity  by 
the  enforcement  of  the  rule,  that  they  should  be  given  the  rights  and 
privileges  of  those  orders  to  which  they  are  entitled  by  their  respec- 
tive merits  and  qualifications.  For,  the  upper  classes  will  be  afraid 
lest  their  children  becoming  ignorant  and  contracting  other  evils 
should  be  classed  with  the  Shudras,  and  their  descendants  themselves 
will  be  ever  on  their  guard  against  their  sinking  to  the  level  of  the 
Shudras  in  case  of  their  not  acquiring  knowledge  and  the  qualifica- 
tions of  their  orders.  Also,  the  lower  classes  will  be  encouraged  in 
aspiring  for  elevation  to  the  ranks  of  the  upper  classes. 

The  Brahmanas  should  be  invested  with  the  powers  of  spread- 
ing and  maintaining  education  and  religion  ; for  being  proficient  in 
knowledge  and  religion,  they  can  very  well  discharge  that  duty.  The 
delegation  of  the  power  of  government  to  the  Kshatriyas  docs  not 
result  in  harm  to  the  country  or  produce  any  of  kind  disturbance  in 
peace  thereof  The  Vaishyas  arc  the  proper  persons  to  have  the  care 
of  the  live  stock  of  the  country  : for,  they  can  satisfactorily  accomp- 
lish this  work.  The  Shudra  is  assigned  the  duty  of  service,  because 
being  illiterate  and  ignorant  he  cannot  do  any  work  requiring  intelli- 
gence and  educational  qualifications.  But  he  can  do  all  works  of 
physical  and  manual  labour.  Thus  it  is  the  duty  of  the  king  and 
other  civilised  persons  to  enforce  the  rule  of  duty  where  by  individuals 
are  assorted  into  classes  according  to  their  merits. 

Kinds  of  Marriage 

-~M.  Ill,  21.  There  arc  eight  kinds  of  marriage,  viz.,  1.  Brahma, 
2.  Dava,  3.  Arsha,  4.  Prajapataya,  5.  Asur,  6.  Gandharv,  7.  Raksnasa 
and  8.  Paishacha.  Their  definitions  arc  : When  a youth  and  maid, 


90 


Satyarth  Prakash 


having  proparly  observed  the  rules  of  studentship  and  acquired  upto- 
date  knowledge,  are  righteous  and  well  behaved,  and  chose  to  be 
united  in  marriage  by  each  other’s  consent,  their  marriage  is  called  the 
Brahma.  The  Daiva  form  of  marriage  is  one  in  which  the  bride 
decked  in  gay  attire  is  given  to  the  bridegroom  ofiTiciating  as  a priest 
at  a great  sacrifice.  The  form  of  marriage  in  which  something  is 
received  from  the  bridegroom,  is  called  the  Arsha  The  marriage  of 
a couple  done  to  promote  the  interests  of  religion  is  called  the  Praja- 
patya.  When  the  bride  and  bridegroom  marry  in  consideration  of  a 
gift  by  either,  the  marriage  is  named  the  Asura  The  reciprocal 
connection  of  a youth  and  a damsel  by  some  cause  with  mutual 
desire,  and  without  nuptial  rules  and  proper  time  is  called  the  Gan- 
dharva  marriage.  The  seizure  of  a damsel  by  force  in  fight  by 
surprise  or  dcceipt,  is  called  the  Rakhsa.  Forcibly  embracing  a 
maiden  sleeping  flushed  with  strong  liquor  or  other  intoxicants  or 
mad,  is  called  the  Paishach  marriage.  Of  all  these  forms  of  nuptials, 
the  Brahma  marriage  is  the  best,  the  Daiva  middling,  and  the  Arsha, 
Asura  and  Gai.dharva  bad,  and  the  Rakshasa  is  base,  and  the  Paish- 
cha  is  very  sinful. 

Commendable  Form  of  Marriage 

Hence,  to  check  evil,  it  should  be  an  established  rule,  that  the 
bride  and  bridegroom  should  not  be  allowed  to  meet  in  secret 
before  marriage;  for,  the  secret  meeting  of  women  and  man  in  prime 
of  youth  is  fraught  with  the  danger  of  scandal.  But  when  the  time  of 
the  marriage  of  youths  and  damsels  approaches,  that  is  to  say,  when 
it  is  a year  or  six  months  to  the  completion  of  the  terms  of  student- 
ship and  of  the  course  of  educational  training,  the  likenesses  or  photo- 
graphs of  the  bachelors  should  be  sent  to  the  schoolmistresses  of  girls’ 
schools,  and  those  of  the  maids  to  the  schoolmasters  of  boys’  schools. 
The  couples  for  marriage  being  selected,  their  biographies  from  birth 
upto-date  should  be  obtained  for  comparing  their  merits,  habits,  and 
tempers  When  their  characters  harmonies  with  each  other  the 
photographs  and  memoirs  of  the  couples  to  be  matched  should  be 
handed  over  to  the  marrying  parties  with  the  request,  that  they  should 
inform  their  masters  and  mistresses  of  their  intention.  When  the 
marriageable  parties  have  come  to  the  determination  to  be  united  in 
wedlock  they  should  be  simultaneously  sent  home  from  their  respec- 
tive schools.  If  they  want  to  marry  before  their  teachers,  their 
marriage  should  be  celebrated  there  and  then.  If  not,  it  is  better  to 
hold  their  marriage  at  the  house  of  the  girl’s  parents.  When  the  youth 
and  the  maiden  are  brought  together  face  to  face,  the  teachers  the 
girl’s  parents  should  have  themselves  hold  conversation  or  discussion 
on  some  subject  between  them  in  the  presence  of  a number  of  good 
people.  If  they  have  to  ask  each  other  of  some  private  matter,  they 
should  put  it  down  on  paper  before  the  assembly  and  place  it  in  each 
other’s  hand  asking  questions  if  needed. 

Time  of  Nuptial  Celebration 

When  they  earnestly  desire  to  marry,  their  elders  should  make 
the  best  arrangement  for  their  diet,  so  that  their  bodies  which  are 


Marriage  and  Family  Life 


91 


emaciated  by  the  rigor  and  austerity  of  the  prosecution  of  study  and 
the  rules  of  studentship,  should  in  a few  days  grow  strong  and 
vigorous  as  the  digits  of  the  moon  in  a fortnight.  Afterwards  when  the 
maiden  gets  her  monthly  course  and  takes  her  bath  after  the  menses, 
a canopy  over  an  altar  should  be  erected  and  oblations  of  fire  made  of 
many  fragrant  and  medicinal  drugs  and  clarified  butter  and  other 
substances.  Learned  men  and  women  of  their  acquaintance  should 
be  invited  and  treated  with  due  respect.  When  the  day  of  the  con- 
summation of  marriage  is  fixed,  the  nuptial  ceremony  of  the  clasping 
of  hands  should  be  held  at  dead  of  night  or  at  10  p.m.  according  to 
the  directions  of  the  Sanscar  Vidlii  and  on  the  completion  of  the 
marriage  rites  the  happy  couple  should  retire  to  bed  in  their  private 
chamber.  In  sexual  congress  they  should  follow  the  instructions  of 
scxuology,  the  man  to  fecundate  the  oviary  with  the  semen  and  the 
woman  to  attract  and  retain  it.  They  should  not  waste  the  energy 
developed  in  previous  celibacy  as  far  as  they  can;  for,  the  child 
begotten  of  their  semen  and  hymen  or  ova,  possesses  the  best  and 
most  excellent  physique.  At  the  time  of  the  emission  of  semen  virile 
into  the  uterus,  the  man  and  woman  should  both  be  motionless,  their 
bodies  being  straight,  nose  to  nose,  and  eyes  to  eyes,  with  minds  filled 
with  great  joy.  They  should  not  move  : the  man  should  relax  his 
body,  and  the  woman  should  draw  up  outbreath  at  the  time  of  receiv- 
ing the  seed,  contract  the  vagina  to  draw  up  the  semen  to  retain  it  in 
the  womb.  Afterwards  both  should  take  a bath  in  pure  water.  A 
learned  woman  comes  to  know  her  pregnancy  at  the  end  of  cohabi- 
tation; but  the  non-occurrence  of  menses  at  the  end  of  a month 
indicates  it  to  all. 


Conduct  in  Pregnancy 

After  bath  they  both  should  satisfactoiily  drink  milk  in  which 
ginger,  saffron;  myrrh  or  asagucJ/ia,  cardamom,  and  salam  misri  are 
mixed  by  boiling  and  cooled  for  the  occasion,  and  then  go  to  sleep  on 
separate  beds.  This  method  should  be  followed  whenever  conception 
is  desirable.  When  the  non-recurrence  of  the  menses  after  a month 
indicates  the  existence  of  pregnancy,  the  man  and  wife  should  thence- 
forward refrain  from  sexual  indulgence  for  the  period  of  a year;  for, 
it  gives  a better  child,  and  the  next  child  will  also  be  as  good  as  the 
first.  The  neglect  of  this  advice  wastes  energy  and  tends  to  lesson 
the  terms  of  their  life,  giving  rise  to  many  kinds  of  dieases  to  both. 
But  they  should  live  in  perfect  love  in  their  talk  and  affairs,  should 
always  breathe  the  spirit  of  mutual  concord  and  abiding  friendship. 
The  man  should  keep  his  semen  from  running  to  waste,  and  the 
woman  should  protect  the  foetus  from  any  kind  of  injury.  Their  diet 
and  dress  should  be  unstimulating  and  unexciting  so  that  the  man  may 
not  lose  his  manhood  in  nocturnal  omissions  and  the  woman’s  period 
of  gestation  may  be  favourable  to  the  body  of  the  unborn  child, 
attaining  excellent  constitution,  beauty,  health,  vigour  and  valour,  and 
may  result  in  safe  delivery  at  the  end  of  10  months  from  conception. 
Special  care  should  be  taken  of  the  foetus  from  the  4th  month  of 
pregnancy,  and  still  further  care  is  required  from  the  8th  month. 


92 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Food  in  Pregnancy 

A pregnant  woman  should  in  no  case  use  such  things  in  her 
dietary  as  are  purgative,  unoleaginous,  intoxicative,  injurious  to  the 
soundness  of  the  intellect  and  vigour  of  the  body.  On  the  contrary  she 
should  take  food  and  drink  made  of  clarified  butter,  milk,  nice  rice, 
wheat,  fruit,  legume,  pulse,  pease,  and  other  frainaccous  edibles. 
Rational  precautions  should  be  taken  against  disagreeable  local  and 
climatic  circumstances. 

Birth  Rites 

Two  ceremonial  rites  arc  to  be  performed  according  to  llie 
directions  of  the  ritualistic  code,  namely.  (1)  the  sacrament  of  the 
certainty  of  pregnancy  called  the  Punsavana,  in  the  4tli  month,  and 
(2)  that  of  the  development  of  the  foetus  in  tlie  Sth  month.  After 
labour  and  delievery  and  during  confinement  very  great  care  should  be 
taken  of  the  health  of  the  mother  and  the  new  born  babe.  Before 
birth  the  decoction  of  ginger  or  the  great  pre])aration  of  ginger — 
shwithipak  or  souhlugya  shunthipak — should  be  ready.  After  delivery 
and  the  riddance  of  afterbirth  the  mother  and  the  child  should  be 
bathed  in  fragrant  tepid  water  warmed  beforehand.  Then  the  sever- 
ance of  the  iimolical  cord  should  be  made  by  means  of  a soft  thiead 
lied  at  4 fingrers  from  the  root  of  the  navel.  Tt  should  be  so  tied  that 
not  a single  drop  of  the  blood  may  be  lost.  Then  the  loom  of  delivery 
should  be  cleaned  and  the  oblations  of  fragrant  and  medicinal  drugs, 
clarified  butter  and  nutrients  made  to  fire  within  doors  After  the 
offerings  the  father  of  the  child  should  whisper  in  its  ear  : Vedosi  : 
thy  name  is  Veda,  and  writing  the  syllable  Aum  (God’s  name)  with  a 
golden  stylus  and  the  mixture  of  clarified  butter  and  pure  honey  on 
its  tongue,  allow  it  to  lick  with  these  medicines.  Tlien  the  child 
should  be  left  to  the  care  of  the  mother.  If  she  likes,  she  may  suckle 
the  baby.  If  there  be  no  sufficient  secretion  of  milk  in  her  breast,  a 
wet  nurse  may  be  employed  after  a careful  examination  of  her  breast 
The  mother  and  the  child  should  be  removed  to  another  department 
of  the  house  or  a well  ventilated  place  in  pure  air,  where  offerings  of 
odourified  butter  to  fire  should  be  made  morning  and  evening  Foi 
six  days  the  child  should  suck  the  milk  of  its  mother’s  breast,  and  the 
mother  should  take  the  best  food  possible  of  many  kinds  agreeable 
to  the  state  of  her  health,  and  get  the  vagina  healed  and  the  womb 
contracted  to  their  original  state.  On  the  6th  day  after  paitition  the 
woman  should  come  out  of  confinement  and  engage  a wet  nurse  to 
suckle  the  baby.  She  should  be  given  good  food  and  drink  to  take, 
and  she  should  suckle  and  nurse  the  child.  But  the  mother  should 
by  all  her  means  keep  the  eye  upon  the  child.  No  kind  of  impropriety 
and  irregularity  should  be  permitted  in  bringing  up  the  child.  To 
prevent  the  secretion  of  milk,  some  medicinal  application  should  be 
made  on  the  nipples  which  may  effect  its  purpose  without  any  harm. 
She  should  regulate  her  diet  with  regard  to  this  object  in  view.  Hence- 
forward the  sacraments  of  christening  or  nomination  and  other  rites 
should  be  performed  according  to  the  instiuctions  laid  down  in  the 
ritual  code,  called  the  Sanskar  Vidhi,  at  their  proper  time.  When  the 
women  again  gets  monthly  course,  the  same  course  of  sacramental 


Marriage  and  Family  Life 


93 


observances  and  medical  methods  should  be  adopted  in  connection 
with  conception  and  parturition. 

rT^T«lJr  11 

— That  house-holder  is  like  a bachelor  who  approaches  his  wife 
in  the  season  of  women,  and  is  satisfied  with  her  alone,  avoiding 
conjugal  intercourse  on  forbidden  nights  —Manu,  111,50. 

Mutual  Love 

^ I 

^ ^ 11 

— All  blessings  and  fortune  dwell  permanantly  in  that  family 
where  a man  is  well  contented  with  his  wife  and  a woman  with  her 
husband.  Wretchedness  and  indignance  establish  themselves  where 
strife  exists  between  a man  and  his  wife — Manu,  111,60. 

irf?  5T  i 

55tsmt?Ic55T:  >j?T:  RSH  51^^  II 

— When  a woman  does  not  love  her  husband,  nor  does  she 
exhilarate  him,  he  feels  no  desire  for  conjugal  embrace  from  want  of 
hilarity. — lb.  61. 

carT^^JTiqt  q ii 

Since  the  happiness  of  a family  depends  upon  the  satisfaction 
of  the  mistress  of  the  house,  her  dissatisfaction  is  the  source  of  un- 
happiness and  trouble  to  all  concerned. — Manu,  111,62. 


Treatment  of  Women 

fqqfq’jrf?ffwr;qqT:  qrqfqfqT^qqi  i 

e c 

— Women  should  be  honoured  and  adorned  with  apparel  and 
jewels  by  their  fathers,  brothers,  husbands,  and  the  brothers  of  their 
husbands,  if  they  seek  abundant  prosperity. Manu,  111,55. 

— Being  enduied  with  learning,  the  men  of  house  where  women 
are  honoured,  are  called  gods  and  live  in  happiness  at  home.  But  the 
religious  acts  of  the  family  where  women  are  not  honoured,  become 
fruitless. — lb.  56. 

^ g it^arr  ii 

That  family  soon  goes  to  rack  and  ruin  where  women  are  sad 
and  miserable.  That  farnily  enjoys  perpetual  prosperity  where  women 
are  filled  with  joy,  alecrity  and  delight. — Manu,  111,57. 


94 


Satyarth  Prakash 


^rfespi^^ifffrrtT  ?i?irt^chIw  ^ ii 

c\  c\  o 

— lb.  50.  Therefore,  men  desirous  of  wealth  should  ever  honour 
women  and  supply  them  with  jewels,  garments,  viands  and  other 
requisties  on  the  occasions  of  festivals  and  jubilies.  It  should  always 
be  borne  in  mind  that  the  word  pujya  means  honour.  Also  whenever 
they  have  occassion  to  meet  or  to  part  with  whether  in  day  or  at  night, 
they  should  bid  ‘'nameste:  salutation  to  thee”  to  each  other  with 
affection  and  cordiality. 

— M.V.  150.  A woman  should  be  very  cheerful  in  temper,  dexterous 
in  the  management  of  the  house,  take  greater  care  of  all  things  of 
the  household,  be  not  too  liberal  in  expense,  and  keeping  the  house 
clean  and  in  order,  i.e.,  observe  propriety  in  expenditure,  and  cook 
all  articles  of  food  so  pure  and  nice  as  to  serve  the  purpose  of  medi- 
cines in  keeping  the  mind  and  body  immune  to  disease.  She  should 
keep  a proper  account.  She  should  exact  sufficient  work  from  domes- 
tics and  menials,  and  suffer  no  work  of  the  house  to  be  spoiled. 

fsrar  HfiT  5fN  I 

^ f5T5Tlf5T  II 

— Good  women,  all  kinds  of  gems,  knowledge,  truth,  purity, 
gentle  speech  ; and  all  sorts  of  arts  and  industries,  should  be  selected 
from  all  countries  and  nations. — Manu,  II,  240. 

Eternal  Rule  of  Speaking  Truth 

1,  fsiiy  9nncr  \ 

c\  N rv  c\  •.  N 

2.  ^ ^ I 

ON  N 

— 1.  It  is  a primeval  rule  always  to  speak  the  pleasing  truth 
beneficial  to  others,  but  never  the  unpleased  truth,  such  as  to  call  a 
monocular  one-eyed.  Never  speak  falsehood  to  please  others. 

2.  Always  speak  well,  that  is,  use  expressions  beneficial  to  all.  Dry 
or  groundless  enmity  and  altercation  with  any  body  should  never  be 
maintained.  What  is  beneficial  for  others,  though  disagreeable  to 
them,  should  be  told  out. — Manu  IV,  138,  139. 

3^r  Hem  I 

Hfairm  5 srhi  h |hh:  ii 

— VidurNiti,  Udyoga  Parva,  Mahabharat. 

O Dhritrashtra,  there  are  many  flatterers  in  the  world  who 
always  speak  the  agreeable  to  please  others  ; but  he  is  rare  who 
speaks  or  hears  what  appears  to  be  disagreeable  to  hear  and  yet 
beneficial  in  effect.  For,  it  is  proper  for  good  people  to  point  others’ 
defects  in  their  face,  to  listen  quietly  to  their  own  defects,  and  always 


Marriage  and  Family  Life 


95 


to  extol  the  virtues  of  others  in  their  absence.  It  is  the  habit  of  the 
wicked  to  talk  of  his  virtues  in  the  face  of  a man  and  to  expose  his 
vices  in  his  back.  A man  can  never  get  rid  of  his  vices  and  acquire 
virtues  so  long  as  he  does  not  tell  his  shcrt-comings  to  others.  One 
should  never  defame  or  talk  ill  of  anybody.  Praise  and  dispraise  are 
thus  defined  : — 

S>  >9  '3  \3  w 

— Dispraise  is  to  represent  the  virtues  of  others  as  vices,  and 
vice-versa.  Praise  is  to  point  out  virtues  as  virtues  and  vices  as  vices. 
In  plain  words,  the  speaking  of  falsehood,  is  called  detraction  or 
dispraise,  and  the  speaking  of  truth  is  called  praise  or  eulogy. 

1.  ^ ^ I 

5n??ri<nT^«3  II 

s 

2.  *I«TI  urn  3^:  5TnF^  I 

cTm  f^STHTfaf  f%5TR  II 

1. — Persons  should  always  read  and  expound  the  Veda  and 
philosphy,  which  soon  improve  the  intellect,  wealth,  and  welfare. 
Both  women  and  men  should  daily  ponder  over  them  and  teach  what 
they  have  studied  during  their  academical  career.  2.  For,  a person’s 
stock  of  knowledge  improves  and  his  fondness  for  it  increases  so  far 
as  he  properly  learns  the  system  of  that  kind  of  literature. — Manu  IV, 
91,  20. 

Five  Great  Duties  or  Sacraments 

1.  ^ I 

f'T<TlRf  ^ H I* 

2.  sqcBrrqq  fT^q^rq  i 

3.  ^tqqqiq  qqifqfq  i 

fqqq  «[T;|5q  qfqqjqqi  ii 

6 ^ C C\ 

Two  sacraments  have  been  mentioned  in  describing  the  first 
order  or  studentship,  namely.  1.  Ris/ii  Yajana--the  reading  and 
teaching  of  the  Veda  and  other  scriptures,  meditation  and  prayer,  and 

*1.  Duty  to  ?ag:s,  to  nature,  to  animals,  to  guests,  and  to  parents,  let  a 
man  constantly  do  to  the  best  of  his  power. — Manu,  IV,  21. 

2.  Teaching  and  studying  the  Veda  is  the  duty  to  the  sages,  supplying  food 
and  water  to  them,  the  duty  to  parents;  oblations  to  fire,  the  duty  to  nature; 
giving  rice  or  other  food  to  living  creatures,  the  duty  to  animals;  receiving  guests 
with  honour,  the  duty  to  guests.— Mann.  II,  70 

3.  Let  him  honour  the  sages  by  studying  the  Veda;  purify  air  and  water  by 
oblations  to  fire  ordained  by  law;  honour  the  parents  by  pious  service;  guests  by 
supplying  them  with  food;  and  animals  by  gifts  to  all  animated  creatures.  — Manu, 
III,  81-T. 


96 


Satyarth  Prakash 


the  practice  of  introspection  of  Yoga  ; 2.  Deva  Yajna — the  company 
of  sages,  their  service,  purity,  acquirement  of  angelic  and  holy  quali- 
ties, charity,  the  pursuit  of  knowledge  These  two  duties  should  be 
done  morning  and  evening. 

qm:  hr  u 

— The  drugs  olTered  to  fire  at  evening  to  purify  the  air,  prove 
beneficial  upto  the  next  morning.  Those  offered  in  the  morning  to 
lire  they  prove  beneficial  by  purifying  the  air  upto  evening.  Atharva, 
K,  19,  An.  7,  M.  3,  4. 

n--Shadvinsh  Brah.  Pr.4,  Kh.  5. 

— Therefore  meditation  on  God  and  oblation  to  fire  must  be 
done  at  the.  union  of  day  and  night,  that  is,  the  time  of  sunrise  and 
sunset. 

H firesfH  g q:  qqf  qtqi^^  q^g  qftqqiq  I 

H 5T^qqqf^<sqnfq:  Hqwq  1 1 

— He  who  does  not  do  these  two  religious  duties  either  in  the 
morning  or  at  evening,  should  be  precluded  by  good  people  from  all 
the  observances  of  the  twice-born  classes;  that  is,  he  should  be  regard- 
ed as  a low  caste  or  Shudra. — Manu,  11,  103. 

Q. — Why  should  meditation  be  not  done  thrice  a day  ? 

A. — There  is  no  chronical  union  at  three  times.  The  union  of 
the  light  and  darkness  take  place  twice  only — at  morning  and  even- 
ing. Why  should  he  who  disregarding  this  fact  believes  in  the  3rd 
union  at  mid-day,  not  do  his  meditation  and  prayer  at  mid-night  ? 
Why  should  he  who  prays  at  mid-night,  not  pray  at  every  prahar, 
ghan\  pala  and  ksliana'^  when  there  is  as  much  union  of  time  as  at 
mid-day  ? If  a man  wishes  to  do  so  it  cannot  be  done.  Also,  there 
is  not  authority  of  any  authentic  scripture  for  praying  at  mid-day. 
Therefore  it  is  proper  to  do  meditation  and  fire  sacrifice  twice  a day 
only,  viz  , at  morning  and  evening  ; but  not  on  the  third  time.  Tiic 
three  divisions  of  time  are  made  with  reference  to  present,  past  and 
future,  but  not  with  reference  to  worship. 

Duties  to  Parents 

3.  The  third  sacrament  is  the  Pitri  Yajna  which  consist  in 
serving  the  learned,  sages,  students,  teachers,  father,  mother,  and 
other  elderly  scholars,  and  eminent  spiritualists  or  clairvoyants.  This 
duty  of  elders’  service  is  of  two  kinds  namely.  1.  Shraddha  and, 
2.  Tarpana, — food  offering  and  water  offering, 

rhe  Shraddha  is  derived  from  shrat,  which  is  another  name  for 

truth. 

jq^Hcq  qqifq  qqi  fqjqqi  HT  ^5'T,  «r^qT  qg  fqjq^  II 

— The  disposition  for  the  acceptance  of  truth  is  called  the 


♦♦’•‘Prahar-^S  hours,  Gharhi^24  minutes.  Pala ^^4  Kshana-  30  kala  or  4” 


Marriage  and  Family  Life 


97 


Shraddha,  the  action  performed  with  this  disposition  is  named  the 
Shraddha. 

The  tarpana  is  derived  in  Sanscrit  as, 

e « N s 

That  is,  whatever  is  done  to  satisfy  the  living  parents  and  other 
superiors  or  doing  whatever  pleases  them,  is  called  the  Tarpana.  But 
these  services  are  done  for  the  living,  and  not  for  the  dead. 

Service  of  Seers 

i ii* 

The  Shatapatha  says,  Vidwanso  hi  devah,  that  those  who  are 
learned  are  called  gods  or  devas  Those  who  know  the  four  Vedas 
with  their  accessory  and  supplementary  studies,  are  called  Brahma. 
They  are  also  called  gods,  who  are  a little  inferior  to  them.  Thus, 
deva  means  the  learned.  Their  learned  wives  equal  to  them  are 
called  Brahmani  and  devis  or  goddesses.  Their  worthy  sons  and 
disciples  as  well  as  their  virtuous  attendants  and  servants  are  also 
classed  with  them.  The  service  of  all  these  persons  is  called  the 
Shraddha  and  Tarpana. 

Service  of  Sages 

c > C C N 

The  Rishi  Tarpana  or  service  of  sages  consists  in  honouring  and 
affording  satisfaction  to  the  teachers  who  are  as  learned  as  Marichi, 
the  great  grandson  of  Brahama,  to  their  wives  who  being  learned  like 
them  impart  knowledge  to  girls,  to  their  sons,  and  pupils  equal  to 
them  in  holiness  of  character,  and  to  their  servants  virtuous  like 
themselves. 

Service  of  Elders 

1.  ^ I 2.  I 3.  af^- 

i 4.  \ 5.  PraT^aca^m  \ 

c^  c'N^'O  a*\ 

6.  I 7.  f'lHVfH'iPrim  I 8.  imtfevTft  sw: 

I 9.  hviiPt  i lo. 

pTcTm^  ?T>fjnf»T  I II.  srfq^rnr^TiT  w:  nPirrm^  cnimpT  i 12. 

»TiHT  cf'rmPr  i 13.  Pimirff  fnr:  Praminr  ^ffsTiPr  i 
14.  srPirrm^'  varm  hvt:  i i5. 

rrqinPT  i 16.  ftw:  ?TV9P«rfrRi<wriPT  i 17. 

?T>T:  HntartfWfuTpT  I 

*Let  the  learned  men,  called  Brahmas,  be  satisfied ! Let  their,  wives  be 
satisfied  ! Let  their  children  be  satisfied  1 Let  their  attendants  be  satisfied  ! 

**For  Brahma  put  Marichi,  and  translate  the  4 sentences  as  the  above. 


98 


Satyarth  Prakash 


The  persons  versed  in  divine  knowledge  and  natural  sciences  are 
called  the  Somasad,  which  word  is  thus  derived  : — 

1.  ^ ^fhrffrT  ^ I 

Those  who  know  the  science  of  heat,  electricity  and  other 
natural  objects,  are  called  the  Agnishwat : — 

2.  ^ I 

Those  who  are  endued  with  the  best  knowledge  and  engaged  in 
prosperous  business;  are  called  the  Barhished. — 

3.  $ ^ I 

Those  who  are  the  protectors  of  wealth,  who  are  free  from  dis- 
ease by  drinking  the  juice  of  great  medicines,  and  who  protect  the 
fortune  of  others  and  cure  others  of  diseases  by  the  administration  of 
medicines,  are  denominated  the  Somapa: — 

Those  whose  food  excludes  intoxicants  and  products  of  slaughter 
or  substances  derived  from  the  destruction  of  life,  are  called  the 
Havirbhuj: — 

5.  ^ ^ \ 

Those  who  are  the  protectors  of  the  things  worth  knowing,  and 
who  use  clarified  butter,  milk,  and  the  like  dairy  products,  are  called 
the  Ajyapa: — 

6.  ^ S5TT^  5Traf  ^ \ 

>9  >9 

Those  whose  best  time  is  made  happy  by  the  practice  of  virtue, 
are  called  the  Sukalin: — 

7.  I 

Those  who  are  judges,  punishing  the  wicked  and  protecting  the 
good  are  called  the  Yamas: — 

8.  ^ ^ RRTtsfhTT:  ( 

He  who  begets  children  and  supplies  them  with  food  and  rai- 
ment, honourably  protecting  them  is  called  the  Pita  : father. 

9.  m Rfir  H fq^T  i 

He  who  is  the  father  of  father,  is  called  the  Pitamaha  : grand- 
father ; and  the  father  of  grandfather  is  called  the  Prapitamaha, 
great  grandfather. 

10-11.  r^g:  fqm  fqR  ii 

She  who  gives  children  food  and  drink  and  honourably  brings 
them  up,  is  called  the  Mata  : mother. 

12.  m HT  I 

She  who  is  the  mother  of  the  father,  is  called  the  Pitamahi  and 
the  mother  of  grand-father  is  called  the  Parpitamahi. — 

13-14.  m mm  ii 

1 5, 1 6, 1 7,  In  fine,  the  shraddha  as  well  as  the  Tarpana  is  the  affectionate 
service  of  the  relatives  of  one’s  wife  and  sister,  of  the  members  of  the 
same  stock  and  all  other  good  and  elderly  people  with  great  zeal  and 
devotion  by  supplying  them  with  the  best  food,  dress,  beautiful  con- 


Marriage  and  Family  Life 


99 


veyances  and  other  requisites  in  the  best  manner  possible  so  as  to 
meet  their  entire  satisfaction  or  by  doing  them  such  kind  acts  as  to 
gratify  their  mind  and  contribute  to  the  health  of  their  body. 

Duty  to  nature 

4.  The  fourth  duty  is  the  Vaishwa  Deva  Yajna.  The  food 
being  ready  a portion  of  viands  made  of  clarified  butter  and  sugar 
should  be  taken  out  leaving  out  such  as  is  sour,  salt,  and  alkaline, 
and  separating  a part  of  the  fire  it  should  be  offered  into  it,  as  is 
ordained  by  Manu,  III,  84,— 

— A person  should  make  an  oblation  to  the  fire  of  the  hearth  of  what- 
ever is  prepared  in  the  kitchen  for  the  purpose  of  food  to  improve 
the  physical  environments  with  the  following  Vedic  verses  as  the  law 
ordains  : — 

I I ^Tfr  I I ST^T^cT^  I 

I II 

An  offering  should  be  made  into  a blazing  fire  with  the  recitation 
of  each  verse,  then  a modicam  of  food  should  be  placed  either  in  a 
dish,  on  the  ground,  or  on  a leaf  in  the  east  and  other  quarters  taken 
in  order  from  the  southern  direction,  repeating  the  following  Vedic 
verses  with  each  lot  : — 

>9  >0  >9 

l I I HW:  I fsi4 

?r*(:  I >T^¥q>  ffiT:  | fHT:  II 

c\  es  c\ 

These  lots  of  food  may  be  used  in  feeding  a guest  if  there  be 
any,  or  they  may  be  offered  to  the  fire  Then  a portion  of  salted  and 
seasoned  food  that  is,  the  soup  of  legume,  boiled  rice,  cooked  vege- 
tables, bread  and  other  victuals,  should  be  divided  into  6 parts  and 
placed  on  the  ground  : Says  Manu,  III,  92, — 

5TJTi  ^ ^ TmlPmw  i 

v» 

Having  thus  placed  the  shares  of  living  creatures  after  pronounc- 
ing ; — 

H»T:,  W:,  53r'nviit  W:  I 

he  should  give  them  away  to  some  miserable,  hungry  persons  or 
dogs,  crows  and  other  animals.  Here  the  word  mmah  means  food, 
that  is  food  should  be  given  to  dogs,  sinners,  low  castes,  consumptives, 
elephantine  patients,  crows,  worms,  ants,  and  other  lower  animals. 
Such  is  the  ordinance  of  Manu’s  Code  with  regard  to  feeding  the 
lower  creatures.  The  object  ot  oblation  to  fire  is  to  pure  the  air  of 


100  Satyarth  Prakash 

the  kitchen  and  to  expiate  the  sin  incured  in  being  an  unconscious 
means  of  the  destruction  of  invisible  animals. 

Duty  to  Guests 

5.  The  fifth  sacrament  is  the  duty  of  hospitality.  A guest  or 
atithi,  as  called  in  Sanscrit  is  one,  the  date  or  tithi  of  whose  arrival  is 
not  known.  Now,  it  is  the  duty  of  a layman  to  entertain  a guest  who 
comes  unaware  to  his  house,  is  righteous,  is  a preacher  of  truth,  goes 
everywhere  to  do  good  to  the  people,  is  perfectly  learned  and  eminen- 
tly clairvoyant,  belongs  to  the  holy  or  fourth  order,  and  has  renounced 
the  world,  first  by  giving  him  three  kinds  of  water,  padya  to  wash  his 
feet,  argha  to  bathe,  and  achamaniya  to  sip,  then  by  giving  him  a seat 
with  all  the  honour  due  to  his  rank,  and  lastly  by  serving  him  with 
food,  drink  and  other  delicious  things  with  sincere  love  and  bene- 
volence. Then  he  should  listen  while  in  his  company  to  his  teachings 
of  spiritual  and  secular  knowledge,  favourable  to  the  attainment  of 
virtue,  wealth,  desire  and  salvation.  He  should  mould  his  character 
and  conduct  according  to  his  teaching  of  truth.  On  similar  occasions 
laymen,  kings,  and  others  are  entitled  to  the  honour  as  shown  to  a 
guest. 

Hypocrites 

IffTH  M — Manu,  IV,  30. 

— But  he  should  not  honour  even  with  his  conversation  such  as 
oppugn  the  Holy  Writ  (Veda)  and  act  contrary  to  the  precept  of  tlie 
Veda;  such  as  do  forbidden  acts  tained  with  falsehood  and  craft  like 
the  cat,  which  crouching,  concealed  and  motionless  to  watch  the 
egress  of  a mouse  and  similar  animals,  springs  on  them  to  kill  and 
devour  them;  such  as  are  stubborn,  bigoted,  conceited,  ignorant,  yet 
not  willing  to  receive  a lesson  from  others;  such  as  are  sophists,  vain 
talkers  like  the  present  day  vedantists  or  monists  who  gabble,  “We 
are  the  Supreme  Being,  and  the  world  is  illusion;  the  Veda  and  other 
scriptures  and  God  are  also  imaginary,”  and  the  like  gabblers  : such 
as  are  repacious  like  the  carmorant  which  stands  on  one  leg,  absorbed, 
as  it  were,  in  meditation,  but  darts  off  a sudden  on  a fish  to  kill  to 
gratify  itself,  — a selfish  conduct  which  is  shared  by  the  modern  frairs 
(vairugis),  ascetics  (khakis)  and  other  bigots,  perverts,  and  opposers  of 
the  Veda.  For,  being  honoured,  they  multiply  and  lead  the  people  to 
unrighteousness.  Themselves  doing  degenerative  works,  they  immerse 
their  companion  disciples  into  the  ocean  of  ignorance. 

Moral 

The  good  of  these  aforesaid  five  great  duties  is  that  the  perfor- 
mance of  the  Brahma  Yajna  or  duty  to  God  promotes  knowledge, 
morality,  righteousness,  civilisation,  and  other  blessings;  the  perform- 
ance of  Agnihotra  : fire  oblation  effects  the  purification  of  the  air, 
rain,  and  water,  and  helps  the  supply  of  rain  to  shower  blessings  on 
the  world.  In  other  words,  breathing  in  pure  air,  pure  living,  pure 


Marriage  and  Family  Life 


101 


food,  and  pure  drink  promote  health,  intellect,  vigour,  valour  which 
lacilitate  the  satisfactory  attainment  of  virtue,  wealth,  desire  and 
salvation.  It  is  called  the  Deva  Yajna  or  duty  to  inanimate  creation, 
in  as  much  as  it  purifies  the  air  and  other  objects. 

Of  the  duty  to  elders,  or  pitri  yajna,  it  is  plain  that  when  a man 
serves  the  mother,  father,  sages,  saints,  geniuses,  he  will  improve  his 
knowledge,  which  will  enable  him  to  distinguish  between  truth  and 
rejectiori  of  untruth.  Another  reason  for  its  performance  is  gratitude, 
that  is,  it  is  proper  to  repay  the  service  the  father  and  mother  do  to 
the  children  in  their  minority  and  the  teacher  to  his  pupil  in  their 
training. 

The  utility  of  the  Balivaishwadeva  Yajna  or  duty  to  theanimatc 
creation  has  been  mentioned  before 

There  can  be  no  progress  in  the  country  so  long  as  there  are  no 
itinerant  missionaries  {atithis).  Their  tours  in  all  the  countries  to 
preach  the  truth  check  the  growth  of  imposture  and  alTord  facility  to 
lay  people  everywhere  to  receive  true  knowledge  at  home.  Also,  their 
mission  maintains  the  stability  of  one  religion  among  all  people  of  the 
world.  Without  the  help  of  these  holy  men  the  doubts  of  people  in 
dirterent  matters  can  not  be  removed,  and  without  the  removal  of 
doubts  there  can  be  no  firm  faith  in  religion.  Where  is  joy  without 
faith  ? 

Early  Risiog 

I 

— A person  should  get  up  in  the  fourth  watch  of  the  night  or 
when  it  is  4 gharis  of  the  night  to  day  break,  answer  the  call  of 
nature,  perform  ablution,  think  of  religious  and  righteous  means  of 
living  as  well  as  the  diagnosis  of  the  diseases  of  the  body,  meditate  on 
the  Supreme  Spirit,  and  never  do  an  unrighteous  act  — Manu,  IV,  92. 

Retributive  Justice 

For  iniquity  committed  never  becomes  fruitless;  but  it  does  not 
produce  fruit  when  it  is  done.  Therefore  the  ignorant  do  not  fear  to 
commit  sin.  But  be  sure  that  unrighteousness  goes  on  cutting  the 
roots  of  your  happiness  little  by  little. — M.  IV,  172.  Its  order  of 
working  runs  as,  M.  IV,  174. 

II 

—An  iniquitous  person,  transgressing  the  bounds  of  righteous- 
ness, at  first  grows  rich  like  a tank,  the  water  of  which  bursting  its 
sides  spreads  all  around  by  robbing  other  people  of  their  property 
through  falsehood,  deception,  imposition,  that  is,  the  refutation  of  the 
Vedas,  protecting  virtue,  treachery  and  other  iniquities;  then  he  gets 


102 


Satyarth  Prakash 


riches,  wealth,  food,  drink,  raiment,  ornaments,  carriages,  position, 
honour,  influence  nay,  he  vanquishes  his  foes  by  injustice;  but  at  last 
he  soon  perishes  in  consequence  of  his  iniquities  like  the  tree  whose 
roots  are  cut  away. 

Practice  of  Truth 

Manu,  IV,  175.  Let  a learned  man,  practising  the  true  religion 
taught  by  the  Vedas,  in  which  one  has  to  be  free  from  an  alloy  of 
partiality  to  accept  truth  and  to  reject  untruth,  and  which  is  justice  in 
substance,  and  living  by  honest  and  lawful  means,  teach  his  pupils 
with  propriety  and  justice. 

Peace  with  13  Persons 

Manu,  IV,  180.  Let  none  dispute,  quarrel  or  wrangle  with  the 
sacrificer  or  minister,  with  the  preceptor  or  teacher  of  the  best 
behaviour,  with  the  instiuctor,  with  the  maternal  uncle,  with  the  guest 
or  one  whose  date  of  arrival  and  departure  are  unknown,  with  the 
dependants,  with  a child,  with  the  aged,  witli  the  sick,  with  the 
physician  or  scholar  of  the  Ayurvedas,  with  the  kinsmen  or  clansmen, 
with  the  father-in-law  and  other  relatives,  with  the  friend,  with  mother, 
with  the  father,  with  the  sister,  with  the  brother,  with  the  wife,  with 
the  daughter  and  with  the  servants. 

3 Evil  men 

— Manu,  IV,  190.  The  3 kinds  of  persons  sink  into  the  sea  of  sorrow 
through  their  wicked  deeds  like  a boat  of  stone  put  to  sea,  viz.,  (1) 
those  who  are  devoid  of  chastity,  veracity  and  other  acts  of  devotion, 
(2)  those  who  are  not  educated,  (3)  those  who  are  the  great  receivers 
of  gifts  from  others  in  the  name  of  religion.  Not  only  they  sink  into 
the  sea  of  sorrow  but  they  plunge  the  donors  along  with  themselves. 

?rT  fe  flrf^HTtirrsjfr  i 

o''.  N 

— The  donation  of  wealth  honestly  acquired  to  the  aforesaid  three 
kinds  of  persons  ruins  the  donor  in  his  lifetime  and  the  receiver  in  the 
next  world.— Manu,  IV  193.  If  there  are  such  people,  what  are  they 
like  ? 


Marriage  and  Family  Life 


103 


— Manu,  IV  194.  As  he,  who  wishes  to  pass  over  deep  water  in  a 
boat  of  stone,  sinks  to  the  bottom,  so  those  two  ignorant  men,  the 
giver  and  the  receiver,  both  go  down  to  the  region  of  torment. 

Marks  of  hypocrites 

— Manu,  IV,  195.  That  person  should  be  regarded  as  a rogue  and 
base  fellow  like  a cat,  who  does  no  righteous  act,  but  cheats  people 
in  the  name  of  religion,  who  is  ever  covetous,  who  is  a cheat,  who 
boasts  of  his  greatness  before  the  lay  people,  who  is  a murderer  of 
animals  and  misanthrope,  who  keeps  both  good  and  evil  company. 

fgr^T:  |( 

— M.  IV  196.  That  person  should  be  thought  as  low  like  a bittern, 
who  looks  demure  to  get  fame;  who  is  ready  to  revenge  in  death  on 
him  who  has  caused  him  a loss  of  farthing  ; who  is  shrewd  enough  to 
serve  his  own  purpose  whether  by  fraud,  iniquity,  or  by  treachery; 
who  never  gives  up  his  bigotry  though  on  the  wrong  side;  and  who 
alfects  civility,  contentment,  and  piety  in  outward  conduct.  Such 
persons  as  show  the  above  mentioned  marks,  are  declared  as  hypo- 
crities.  They  should  never  be  trusted  or  treated  with  kindness. 

Necessity  of  Acquiring  Virtue 

w gfrt^T:  i 

Men  and  women  should  gradually  develop  their  righteousness 
for  the  happiness  of  the  next  world  or  post  existence  by  giving  pain  to 
no  creature,  as  a white  ant  by  degrees  builds  its  nest. — Manu,  IV,  238. 

f'TfTT  UTcTT  ^ firCSft:  • 

sr  ^ II 

— For,  in  his  passage  to  the  next  world  neither  the  mother,  father, 
son,  wife,  nor  kinsmen  can  help  him;  but  righteousness  alone  is  his 
companion,  friend  and  help-mate  therein — M.  IV,  239. 

^ ^ ii 

See,  the  soul  is  born  single  and  single  suffers  the  pain  of  death.  Single 
she  eats  the  fruit  of  virtue  which  is  joy  and  of  vice  which  is  affliction 
M.  IV,  240. 

qroPr  »T^3t?T;  I 

—It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  one  member  of  a family  brings  in 
a thing  by  committing  a sin,  and  the  whole  family  consumes  it.  The 
perpetrator  of  the  crime  alone  suffers  the  evil  consequences,  but  not 
the  consumers. — Mahabharat,  Prajagar,  Ch.  33.42 


104 


Satyarth  Prakash 


^ IPTIS5?T>«5!T*T  ftTcft  I 

fjRmr  »TT«r?rT  ii 

>•  ^ 

— When  a man  dies,  his  relatives  leave  his  corpse  on  the  ground  like 
a lump  of  earth  and  turn  the  back  upon  him  to  go  home.  No  one 
goes  with  him  but  virtue  alone  accompanies  him  to  the  next  world. 
Manu,  IV,  241. 

fHcSf  I 

^ asr^cTTfcI  l^rTTIT  (I 

— M.  242.  Therefore  a man  should  slowly  and  steadily  lay  his  treasure 
of  righteousness  day  by  day  to  help  him  in  present  life  and  to  secure 
felicity  in  after-life  in  the  next  world;  for,  it  is  by  the  help  of  right- 
eousnCvSs  that  a man  can  cross  the  main  of  misery,  otherwise  very  hard 
to  pass  over. 

rTTOT  I 

— M.  243.  Also  a man  with  whom  religion  is  of  chief  importance, 
and  who  is  saved  from  doing  sin  in  future  by  the  practice  of  virtue, 
soon  by  virtue  of  his  righteousness  obtains  God  whose  form  is  light 
and  whose  body  is  the  sky,  so  to  speak, 

— So  the  person  who  is  ever  persevering,  tender-hearted,  of  subdued 
senses,  shunning  the  society  of  murderous,  cruel,  and  iniquitous  fellow, 
and  who  is  righteous,  obtains  ease  by  conquering  the  self  and  by 
making  a gift  of  knowledge  and  other  blessings  to  others. — M.246. 

f^T^rari:  ^ ^ ( 

N C\  C 

cTT^g  m H II 

—But  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  he  commits  theft  and  all  other 
sins,  who  tells  lies  or  suppresses  the  speech  of  truth,  which  ascertains 
and  decides  all  matters,  which  is  their  common  root,  and  which 
carries  on  and  accomplishes  all  business. — M.  256. 

— ib.  156.  Therefore  one  should  give  up  falsehood  and  other  vices, 
try  to  attain  full  age  by  observing  the  vow  of  chastity  and  by  subduing 
the  senses,  and  practise  virtue,  which  gives  him  the  best  children  and 
undecaying  treasure.  A person  should  behave  like  the  man  who 
practices  virtue  and  eschews  evil  practices  in  his  life. 

ITT’anrfI  g^^>  i 

— For  a wicked  man  sinks  to  contempt  among  good  people  in  the 
world,  gets  a large  portion  of  misery,  is  continually  afflicted  with 
disease,  and  is  short-lived. — ib.  257.  Hence,  a man  should  so  try  as 
to  ioWo^  the  ruVe*. 


105 


Marriage  and  Family  Life 

Pleasure  and  Pain 

^ I g crCH^:  (i 

— ib  159.  Whatever  act  depends  on  another  man,  that  act  let  him 
carefully  shun,  but  whatever  depends  on  himself,  to  that  let  him 
studiously  attend. 

II 

— ib.  160.  For,  all  that  depends  on  another,  gives  pain;  and  all  that 
depends  on  himself,  pleasure;  let  him  know  this  in  a few  words  to  be 
the  definition  of  pleasure  and  pain. 

Husband  and  Wife 

But  whatever  depends  on  another,  should  be  done  in  the  state 
of  dependence;  as  for  example,  the  work  of  man  and  wife  in  a house- 
hold depends  on  each  other.  They  should  act  to  mutual  satisfaction 
in  perfect  harmony,  the  man  pleasing  his  wife,  and  vice  versa.  They 
should  neither  quarrel,  nor  break  the  marriage  vow.  The  woman 
should  do  the  domestic  duties  in  obedience  to  her  husband.  The 
work  outside  should  belong  to  the  province  of  the  man’s  duties.  They 
should  prevent  each  other  from  falling  into  bad  habits.  This  should 
be  the  rule  with  man  and  wife.  When  the  marriage  is  performed, 
man  and  wife  are,  as  it  were,  sold  to  each  other;  that  is  whatever  is 
in  their  body  from  head  to  foot,  whether  gestures,  blandishments  or 
energy  and  the  like  physical  portions,  belongs  to  them  in  common. 
They  should  never  do  any  act  without  each  other’s  approval.  The 
most  heart-rending  acts  of  all  are  adultery,  whoring,  prostitution  and 
similar  sins.  Not  even  the  remotest  thought  of  these  sins  should 
ever  be  entertained  in  the  mind.  A man  should  always  be  content 
with  his  wife,  and  a woman  with  her  husband. 

Duties  of  Brahmins  in  Temporal  life 

If  they  are  Brahmin,  the  man  should  teach  boys,  and  his  ed- 
ucated wife,  girls.  They  should  make  their  pupils  learned  and  well-in- 
formed by  their  advice  and  lectures.  A woman  should  be  respected 
like  an  angel  by  her  husband,  and  a man  should  be  treated  similarly 
by  his  wife.  As  long  as  they  are  under  training  in  a Gurukul  or 
school,  they  should  regard  their  teacher  as  their  father  and  mother. 
The  teachers  should  also  treat  their  pupils  as  their  own  children. 

Qualifications  of  Masters  and  Mistresses 

1.  i 

A Pundit  or  wise  man  is  one  who  has  a knowledge  of  self;  who 
is  engaged  in  a right  undertaking,  that  is,  who  is  never  useless  and 
indolent;  who  is  indifferent  to  pleasure  and  pain,  profit  and  loss, 
praise  and  dispraise,  respect  and  disrespect;  who  is  ever  firm  in  the 
practice  of  virtue;  and  whose  mind  is  not  attempted  by  good-looking 
things  attractive  to  the  senses. 


106 


Satyarth  Prakash 


2.  St5t?rTTfH  ^ I 

WffTfeTV:  I3[a?rPlW5T«iT'>I*T  II 

—It  is  the  imperative  duty  of  a wise  man  to  do  all  righteous  works, 
to  cease  to  do  evil,  not  to  detract  from  God,  Veda,  the  practice  of 
truth,  and  to  have  a firm  faith  in  God  and  religion. 

3.  fWT  {^StHTffT  pETT  5T'n>fET,  PriTTlT  H spT*IIrT  I 

c "S 

rTcSRiH  si«tr  ii 

— The  first  sign  of  a wise  man’s  great  knowledge  is  that  he  is  able  to 
understand  a difficult  subject  quickly;  that  he  has  studied,  heard  the 
explanation  of,  and  thought  of  the  scriptures  for  a long  time;  that  he 
devotes  what  he  knows  to  the  benefit  of  others;  that  he  does  not  do 
any  work  for  his  own  interest  alone;  and  that  he  does  not  give  his 
advice  in  others’  affairs  without  request  and  without  the  knowledge 
of  proper  time.  A wise  and  learned  man  is  one  who  never  wishes 
to  have  an  unlawful  gain,  who  is  not  sorry  for  the  loss  of  a thing, 
and  who  is  not  distressed  or  dejected  in  the  time  of  trouble. 

4.  5T>f^§*T  I 

WTTcg  ^ ET  ^flfErr  eTTT:  II 

— A wise  man  is  one  who  is  very  expert  in  all  system  of  knowledge 
and  in  interrogation,  who  is  able  to  expound  the  subjects  of  the 
scriptures  wonderfully,  and  who  is  able  to  explain  the  true  meanings 
of  logic  and  law  codes  without  hesitation. 

5.  I 

55nq  ^ ir:  h w 

— That  man  should  be  called  a pandit  or  wise  man,  whose  under- 
standing is  in  perfect  accord  with  the  right  senses  of  the  scriptures, 
whose  experience  is  in  harmony  with  the  dictates  of  reason,  and  who 
never  sophisticates  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  best  righteous 
persons,  called  the  Aryas  (noble)  in  Sanscrit. 

6.  sr^TT  ^ i 

>9  V>  >9  «9 

— Wherever  there  are  such  people,  both  men  and  women,  to  teach 
the  advancement  of  knowledge,  religion  and  morality  knows  no 
bound;  and  it  contributes  to  the  perpetual  enjoyment  of  life  through- 
out the  country. 

All  these  6 verses  are  quoted  from  the  Vidur  Piajagar  of  the 
Udyoga  Parva  of  the  Mahabharat,  chapter  33d. 

Marks  of  unfit  and  foolish  persons 

1.  i 

9^;  11 

2.  I 

?TTT«rpr:  11 

These  verses  are  also  taken  from  the  Vidur  Prajagar  (the  vigil) 
of  St.  Vidur,  Udyoga  Parva,  Mahabharat,  chap.  33d).  They  mean: 


Marriage  and  Family  Life 


107 


I.  Wise  men  call  him  a fool,  who  has  neither  read  nor  heard  the  ex- 
pounding of  any  book  or  scripture,  who  is  very  proud,  who,  though 
poor,  makes  high  resolves,  and  who  without  putting  his  hand  to  any 
work,  wishes  to  come  by  the  treasures  of  wealth.  2.  He  is  a fool  and 
is  regarded  as  a vulgar  among  people,  who  enters  an  assembly  or  a 
house  of  persons  without  permission  or  invitation,  wishes  to  take  a 
high  seat,  talks  much  in  a assembly  without  anybody’s  request,  and 
believes  in  an  incredible  object  or  person. 

The  country  where  there  are  such  persons  working  as  teachers 
and  preachers,  preceptors  and  nobles,  is  soon  enveloped  in  the  dark- 
ness of  ignorance,  and  is  afflicted  with  the  horrors  of  unrighteousness, 
barbarism,  strife,  enmity,  split  and  farction,  whose  increase  accentuate 
the  torment  of  misery. 

q>n:  f^RnfsTSTt  ^rart:  ii 

These  verses  are  also  taken  from  the  Vidurprajagar.  ch.  40. 
They  mean:  The  7 defects  of  students  are  indolence,  intoxication, 
worldliness  or  attachment  to  the  wordly  objects,  fickleness  or  talkative 
ness,  telling  and  listening  to  idle  tales,  restivencss  or  laxity  in  study, 
pride,  and  selfishness.  Such  students  are  never  successful  in  their 
acquisition  of  knowledge. 

f fart  \ 

— How  can  a person,  desirous  of  enjoying  pleasures,  get  the  blessing 
of  knowledge  ? Where  is  ease  for  the  person  devoted  to  the  acqui- 
sition of  knowledge  ? Therefore  a lover  of  pleasures  should  give  up 
the  idea  of  acquiring  knowledge,  and  the  student  should  banish  from 
his  mind  the  thought  of  the  pleasures  of  the  senses.  There  is  no  other 
way  to  acquire  knowledge. 

Fitness  for  acquiring  knowledge 

e\  N 

— They  alone  are  true  bachelors  and  become  learned,  who  ever  main- 
tain their  righteous  conduct,  exercise  control  over  the  senses,  and  have 
never  lost  their  manhood  or  semen.  Therefore  masters  and  mistresses 
should  have  eminent  qualities.  Masters  should  take  such  measures 
as  to  make  their  pupils  habituated  to  veracity,  modesty,  self-respect, 
the  practice  of  truth,  civility,  control  over  the  senses,  humility  and 
other  good  qualities;  and  to  help  them  to  develop  their  physical  and 
spiritual  powers  to  their  best  and  become  proficient  scholars  in  all  the 
Vedas  and  other  scriptures.  They  should  ever  exert  themselves  in 
preventing  their  pupils  from  drifting  to  bad  habits  and  in  instructing 
them  with  zeal  and  conscientiousness. 

Students  should  be  ever  self-subdued,  composed,  well  disposed 
towards  their  teachers  and  fellow-students,  thoughtful,  studious,  and 
so  work  with  ardour  as  to  acq  uirc  proficiency  in  knowledge,  to  attain 


108  Satyarth  Prakash 

full  age  and  to  get  the  full  share  of  courage  and  righteousness.  Such 
are  the  duties  of  the  Brahminas. 

Duties  of  Kshatriyas 

The  duties  of  the  military  class  will  be  described  in  the  chapter 
on  the  duties  of  royalty. 

Duties  of  Vaishyas 

The  duties  of  the  mercantile  class  are  to  learn  the  languages  of 
different  countries,  the  various  methods  of  business,  tariff,  rates,  risks, 
supply  and  demand;  to  go  to  foreign  lands;  to  start  undertakings  for 
profit;  to  tend  cattle;  to  promote  husbandry;  industries  and  arts;  to 
increase  the  stock  of  wealth  ot  the  country;  to  spend  money  to  further 
the  cause  of  knowledge  and  religion;  to  be  truthful,  honest,  fair  in  all 
dealings;  and  to  guard  all  things  of  use  in  a manner  so  as  not  to  waste 
them. 

Duties  of  Shudras 

The  duties  of  the  servant  or  auxilary  class  arc  to  be  at  home 
with  all  kinds  of  service,  to  be  well  up  in  the  culinary  art,  to  serve 
and  help  the  twice-born  classes,  and  to  get  their  living  at  their  hands. 
The  regenerate  class  arc  to  provide  the  auxiliary  class  with  food, 
drink,  raiment,  shelter,  and  all  that  is  required  in  the  celebration  of 
their  marriage  or  to  make  provisions  for  their  monthly  payment.  The 
four  orders  should  live  in  perfect  amity,  mutual  sympathy,  on  good 
terms,  and  be  at  one  in  one  another’s  pleasure  and  pain,  profit  and 
loss.  They  should  aho  devote  their  might,  mind  and  means  to  the 
welfare  of  the  government  and  people. 

Husband  and  Wife’s  Faults 

Man  and  wife  should  never  be  separated  from  each  other;  for, 

'TRt  "sr  { 

— Drinking  spirituous  liquors,  associating  with  evil  persons,  absence 
from  her  husband,  rambling  abroad  uselessly  with  the  pretext  of  pay- 
ing respects  to  hypocrite  monks,  sleeping  and  dwelling  in  the  house 
of  another  person  are  the  six  faults  that  bring  infamy  on  a married 
woman.  These  are  also  the  faults  of  men— Manu,  IX,  13. 

The  separation  of  man  and  wife  is  of  two  kinds,  namely;  1.  going 
on  business  to  another  country.  2.  death.  The  remedy  of  the  first 
kind  of  separation  is  that  a man  should  keep  his  wife  with  him  when 
going  to  another  country,  on  business.  The  object  in  view  here  is 
that  their  separation  should  not  be  of  a long  duration. 

Re-marriage 

Q. — Should  or  should  not  men  and  women  marry  many  times? 
A, — Not  at  one  and  the  same  time,  /.  e,,  in  the  life-time  of  a 
consort. 


Marriage  and  Family  Life 


109 


Q, — Should  there  be  many  marriages  at  different  times? 

A. — Yes;  as,  for  instance,  Manu,  IX,  178, — 

m 5?T:  II 

— Men  and  women  whose  marriage  ceremony  only  is  done,  but  who 
have  not  seen  their  consort,  i.e,,  women  being  virgins  and  men  inno- 
cent of  sex  work,  should  marry  again.  The  men  and  women  of  the 
sacerdotal,  military  and  mercantile  class,  who  have  had  conjugal  inter- 
course should  not  marry  again  after  the  death  of  their  consort. 

<2- — What  harm  is  there  in  re-marriage  ? 

A. — 1.  There  will  be  a little  love  between  man  and  wife;  for, 
they  will  leave  their  consort  whenever  they  like  and  form  connection 
with  another.  2.  When  they  marry  after  the  death  of  their  spouse, 
they  will  carry  off  the  property  of  their  predecessors,  whose  family 
members  will  fall  foul  together.  3.  Many  noble  families  will  disappear 
and  be  altogether  effaced,  and  their  property  will  be  gone  to  the  winds. 
4.  The  virtue  of  the  chastity  of  men  and  women  will  be  destroyed. 
Such  and  similar  are  the  evils  which  attend  a rc-marriage  or  the 
plurality  of  marriages.  Hence,  it  should  never  be  adopted  by  the 
regenerates  of  the  upper  classes. 

Q. — The  cessation  of  line  will  also  destroy  a family.  Men  and 
women  will  fall  into  adultery  and  other  vices,  and  commit  abortion 
and  other  heinous  sins.  Hence  it  is  better  that  they  should  marry 
again. 

/f.— -No;  never.  If  men  and  women  wish  to  live  a chaste  life 
there  will  be  no  evil.  To  continue  their  line  of  descent  on  the  failure 
of  issue,  they  can  adopt  a son  of  their  own  caste,  if  they  like.  It  will 
prevent  the  occurance  of  adultery.  If  they  can  not  keep  up  their 
chastity,  they  can  beget  children  by  the  niyoga  form  of  marriage 
(temporary  nuptial  compact). 

Niyoga 

Q.~  What  is  the  difference  between  re-marriage  and  niyoga  ? 

A. — 1.  As  in  marriage  the  bride  leaves  the  parental  roof  and 
dwells  in  the  house  of  the  bridegroom,  having  no  particular  concern 
with  her  father,  so  in  niyoga  a widow  lives  in  the  house  of  her  de- 
ceased master.  2.  The  widow’s  sons  inherit  her  deceased  husband’s 
property.  They  arc  not  regarded  as  the  sons  of  their  begetter,  nor 
do  they  take  his  patronymic  or  belong  to  his  family  stock.  He  too 
has  no  right  whatever  to  them.  But  they  are  recognised  as  sons  of 
their  mother’s  deceased  husband,  whose  family  stock  they  belong  to, 
whose  property  they  inherit,  and  whose  house  they  dwell  in.  3. 
Married  men  and  women  are  bound  to  serve  and  support  each  other; 
but  men  and  women  united  by  niyoga  have  no  such  obligation.  4. 
The  connection  of  married  men  and  women  lasts  till  death;  but  that 
of  the  men  and  women  who  enter  into  the  compact  of  niyoga,  ceases 
with  the  accomplishment  of  their  purpose  of  raising  up  issues.  5. 
Married  men  and  women  do  their  domestic  duties  together  for  their 


1 10  Satyarth  PrakasJi 

common  household;  but  men  and  women  united  by  niyoga  do  the 
work  of  their  respective  houses. 

Q. — Arc  the  rules  of  marriage  and  niyoga  similar,  or  are  they 
different  ? 

A. — There  is  some  difference.  Some  points  of  difference  have 
been  already  mentioned  above.  Others  are  : that  men  and  women 
united  by  marriage  can  beget  10  children  ; but  those  united  by 
niyoga  can  beget  4 only,  and  not  more.  Just  as  the  marriage  of 
bachelors  and  maids  is  solemnised,  so  is  also  the  niyoga  of  widowers 
and  widows  performed.  A bachelor  and  a maid  cannot  be  united 
by  niyoga.  Unlike  a married  couple  who  always  live  together,  a man 
and  woman  bound  by  niyoga  do  not  live  together.  They  do  not 
meet  except  in  the  season  of  women.  If  a woman  contracts  niyoga 
for  her  interest,  she  should  separate  from  her  man  on  her  second 
pregnancy.  If  a man  enters  into  the  compact  of  niyoga  for  his  own 
sake,  his  relation  with  his  woman  should  cease  on  the  second  preg- 
nancy. But  the  same  woman  should  nurture  the  children  for  two  or 
three  years  and  then  make  them  over  to  the  man.  Thus,  a widow 
can  raise  up  two  children  for  herself  and  two  children  to  each  of 
men  united  to  her  in  niyoga.  Also,  a widower  can  raise  up  two 
children  for  himself  and  two  to  each  of  4 widows.  Thus,  10  children 
may  be  begotten  by  each  pair  of  human  beings,  as  the  Veda  directs. 
Vide  Rig.  X.  85.  45,— 

I 

53rTSTt^r5  ffPsT  II 

It  means  : O man,  blessed  with  fortune  and  able  to  beget 
children,  make  this  married  woman  or  this  widow  happy  and  have 
the  best  children.  Beget  10  children  upon  this  married  woman  and 
regard  her  as  the  11th  member  of  the  household.  O woman,  thou, 
too,  shouldst  bear  10  children  to  the  married  man  or  niyoga  associate 
and  regard  the  husband  as  the  11th  member  of  the  household. 
According  to  this  Vcdic  verse,  man  and  women  of  the  sacerdotal, 
military  and  mercantile  classes  should  not  beget  more  than  10 
children;  for,  the  plurality  of  children  is  marked  by  their  weakness 
of  body,  dimness  of  understanding,  shortness  of  life;  and  the  father 
and  mother  of  those  children,  too,  become  weak,  short-lived,  and 
subject  to  disease,  and  suffer  a great  many  troubles  in  old  age. 

2.— This  doctrine  of  niyoga  looks  like  adultery. 

A. — As  illegal  connection  between  unmarried  men  and  women 
is  called  adultery,  so  it  is  illegal  when  men  and  women  not  united  by 
niyoga  form  a connection.  Thus,  it  is  plain  that  as  it  is  no  adultery 
when  marriage  is  legally  performed,  so  there  can  be  no  adultery 
also  when  niyoga  is  contracted  according  to  proper  rules  and  cere- 
monies. As  there  is  neither  adultery,  sin,  nor  shame  in  the  connec- 
tion of  men  and  women  when  they  are  married  according  to  the 
ordinance  of  the  scriptures,  so  there  should  be  thought  neither  adul- 
tery, sin,  nor  shame  in  the  union  of  niyoga  performed  according  to 
the  precepts  of  the  Veda  and  other  scriptures. 

Q. — It  is  true.  But  it  looks  like  the  affair  of  a prostitute. 

A. — No;  for  an  intercourse  with  a prostitute  has  no  sanction  of 


Marriage  and  Family  Life 


in 


law  or  lawful  appointment  of  a man.  But  the  ceremony  of  niyoga 
has  the  support  of  law  like  marriage.  There  should  be  no  shame 
in  sexual  intercourse  between  men  and  women  united  according  to 
the  compact  of  niyoga  as  is  the  case  with  marriage  duly  solemnised. 
Can  adulterous  men  and  women  be  aloof  from  wicked  acts  ? 

Q. — We  see  sin  in  the  doctrine  of  niyoga. 

A. — Why  don’t  you  see  sin  in  marriage,  if  you  see  it  in  the  custom 
of  niyoga  ? It  is  rather  sinful  to  prevent  the  celebration  of  niyoga. 
For,  according  to  the  laws  of  nature  in  God’s  creation,  natural 
attraction,  between  men  and  women  cannot  be  checked  except  in  the 
case  of  those  persons  who  have  renounced  the  world,  who  are 
eminently  learned,  and  who  are  clairvoyants  or  yogis.  Do  you  not 
regard  abortion,  the  destruction  of  foetus  and  the  great  misery  of 
widows  and  widowers  to  be  great  sins  ? For,  as  long  as  they  are 
young,  they  naturally  wish  to  beget  children  and  to  enjoy  the  life  of 
the  senses;  but  due  to  hindrance  in  meeting  with  government  or 
caste  obstructions,  they  have  recourse  to  evil  practices  and  sinful 
acts  in  secret.  The  only  best  way  to  prevent  this  adultery  and  wicked- 
ness is  to  exercise  control  over  the  senses,  nay,  to  avoid  contracting 
re-marriage  or  niyoga.  If  it  be  possible,  it  is  well  and  good.  But  if 
there  be  no  such  persons  of  moral  courage,  they  should  be  remarried 
and  allowed  to  enter  into  the  niyoga  compact  in  time  of  dire  necessity. 
Therefore  it  is  possible  to  diminish  adultery  and  to  secure  the  increase 
of  mankind  by  proper  course  of  love  and  procreation  of  the  best 
children.  It  will  completely  put  an  end  to  the  sin  of  abortion. 
Adultery  exists  between  low  caste  men  and  high  caste  women,  and 
prostitution  of  harlots  and  fallen  women  spoiling  good  men,  the 
scandal  of  noble  families,  the  discontinuance  of  decent,  the  grievances 
of  men  and  women,  abortion  and  similar  other  sins  are  removed  by 
the  prevalence  of  marriage  and  niyoga.  Therefore  the  institution  of 
niyoga  should  be  encouraged. 

Q. — What  ceremonies  should  be  observed  in  the  celebration  of 
niyoga. 

A. — A niyoga  should  be  celebrated  like  a marriage.  Like 
marriage  the  tie  of  niyoga  should  have  the  approval  of  good  men  and 
the  mutual  consent  of  the  marrying  parties.  In  fine,  when  a man  and 
a woman  wish  to  be  united  by  niyoga,  they  should  make  a solemn 
declaration  before  the  members  of  their  families  that  they  make  a 
mutual  covenant  of  niyoga,  for  the  purpose  of  raising  up  issues,  and 
that  they  will  separate  on  the  accomplishment  of  the  object.  If  they 
continue  their  connection  after  it  they  should  be  considered  as  sin- 
ner and  liable  to  punishment  by  the  classmen  and  government.  They 
should  see  each  other  once  a month  for  fecundation.  After  concep- 
tion they  will  live  their  years  apart  from  each  other. 

Q. — Should  the  niyoga  of  persons  be  done  in  their  own  class 
or  between  persons  of  different  castes  ? 

A. — A women  should  enter  into  the  niyoga  compact  with  a man 
of  her  own  class,  or  of  orders  superior  to  hers;  as  for,  example,  a 
woman  of  the  mercantile  class  should  take  for  niyoga  a man  of  the 
marcantile,  military  or  sacred  class;  a woman  of  the  military  class. 


112 


Satyarth  Prakash 


a man  of  the  same  class  as  herself  or  of  priestly  class;  a woman  of 
the  Brahmana  class,  a man  of  the  Brahmana  class.  The  object  is  that 
the  fecundation  should  be  with  the  women  of  the  like  or  a better 
class,  but  not  of  the  class  below  hers.  The  purpose  of  the  creation 
of  men  and  women  is  to  propagate  the  human  species  after  being 
united  in  wedlock  or  niyoga  in  accordance  with  the  dictates  of  religion 
or  the  injunctions  of  the  Vedas. 

Q. — What  is  the  need  of  niyoga  for  a man,  for  he  can  re-marry  ? 

A. — We  have  already  mentioned  that  men  and  women  of  the 
twice-born  classes  are  permitted  by  the  Vedas  and  other  scriptures  to 
marry  but  once,  and  not  twice  The  marriage  of  bachelors  and 
maids  is  founded  on  justice;  but  there  is  injustice  or  unrighteousness 
in  a marriage  between  a widow  and  a bachelor,  or  between  a maid 
and  a widower.  As  a man  does  not  wish  to  marry  a widow,  so  does 
a maid  not  like  to  marry  a married  man  or  one  who  has  seen  a 
woman  When  a maid  does  not  take  a married  man  for  her  hus- 
band, nor  does  a bachelor  like  to  accept  the  hand  of  a widow,  men 
and  women  will  be  under  the  necessity  of  making  the  compact  of 
niyoga.  It  is  right  that  like  should  be  united  with  like  in  matri- 
monial relations. 

Q. — Is  there  any  authority  of  the  Vedas  and  other  scriptures  for 
niyoga  as  for  marriage? 

Veda  and  Niyoga 

/4.— There  are  many  authorities  for  Niyoga.  Look  here  and 
listen  to  them.  Says  the  Rig  Veda,  Mandala  X,  Sukta  40  & Mantra 
2.- 

^ zi)mj  n 

Ashwina:  O man  and  woman,  vidhaveva:  as  a widow  akrinute: 
bears  children  at  best  cievaram:  to  her  second  husband  and  yosha:  a 
married  woman  maryam:  to  her  husband  sadhasthe:  by  lying  with  him 
in  the  same  bed  and  in  the  same  place,  so  should  you  do.  Where 
did  you  get  your  things — bhipitwan  karatah,  and  at  what  time — kuJia 
osliatu?  Where  do  you  dwell?  Where  is  your  place  to  sleep  in — ko  vam 
shayntral  Who  are  you  and  what  is  your  country? 

Q — If  a man  had  no  younger  brother  with  whom  shall  his 
widow  form  the  relation  of  niyogal 

A. — With  her  second  husband,  called  the  devara.  But  the  word 
devara  does  not  mean  what  you  believe  to  be.  See,  what  the  Nirukta 
says  on  this  point. 

Devara 

—Devara  is  one  who  is  the  second  husband  of  a widow,  whether  he 
may  be  her  husband’s  younger  or  elder  brother,  or  he  may  be  of  the 
same  class  as  she,  or  of  a upper  class.  In  short,  devara  is  one  with 
whom  she  forms  the  connection  of  niyoga. 


Marriage  and  Family  Life 


113 


q?g^f5T^f>T  H W Rig.  X.  xviii,  8. 

— Nari:  O widowed  woman,  give  up  all  hope  of  etam  this 
gatasum:  deceased  husband  of  thine  and  upaihi:  get  another  husband 
from  amongst  the  abhi  jivalokam:  living  men  and  udirshwa  bear  in 
mind  and  abide  by  the  rule,  that  if  the  compact  of  niyoga  is  made  in 
the  interest  of  the  hasla  grabliasya  didhishoh  remarrying  man,  idam\ 
the  janitwanr  child  born  of  the  union  of  niyoga  will  belong  to  patyuh: 
him,  and  if  the  niyoga  connection  is  formed  for  your  sake,  the  child 
will  be  (ava:  yours.  Have  faith  abhi  sambabhutha:  in  this  rule,  and 
let  the  man  accepting  niyoga  abide  by  it. 

f^T  I 

— O woman,  apatiglviva:  who  gives  no  trouble  to  the  husband 
and  devriglifiya:  the  second  husband,  saparya:  offer  oblations  imam 
to  this  garhapatyam:  domestic  agninv.  fire,  and  edlii:  be  s/iiva:  kind 
to  the  domestic  pashubhyah:  cha-  animals,  siiyamah:  obedient  to  the 
rules  of  religion,  smarcha:  endued  with  beauty  and  knowledge, 
prajavati:  blessed  with  the  best  sons,  grandsons  and  other  relatives, 
virsiili:  the  mother  of  brave  and  bold  sons,  devrikama:  agreeable  to 
the  second  husband,  and  syona:  ministrant  of  ease  to  the  husband  or 
second  husband. 

Manu  on  Niyoga. 

n 

— Sa>s  he,  IX.  69,  If  a woman  without  knowing  her  husband  be- 
comes a widow,  the  younger  brother  of  her  deceased  husband  can 
marry  her. 

Q. — How  many  times  can  a man  or  woman  form  the  alliance  of 
fiiyogal  Also,  what  are  the  names  of  a woman’s  husbands  got  by 
niyogal 

A I 

HgcqsTT:  ll— Rig.  X,  85,  40. 

— O woman,  the  name  of  te:  thy  prathama  first  pati:  husband,  vivide: 
who  married  thee,  is  soma  from  his  gentility  and  other  similar  quali- 
ties,  that  of  the  second  husband  got  by  niyoga  is  gandharva  from  his 
having  known  but  one  wife,  that  of  the  3rd  husband  uttara:  after  the 
two  preceding  is  agni  in  virtue  of  his  great  heat  of  passion,  and  the 
remaining  husbands  te\  of  thine  from  the  turiya  fourth  to  the  ele- 
venth got  by  niyoga  go  by  the  name  of  mauushyaja  men.  For  in- 
stance, according  to  the  verse.  Rig  X,  85,  45,  a woman  can  take 
husbands  one  after  another  up  to  the  1 1th  number.  In  likemanner, 
a man  also  can  marry  women  eleven  in  number  one  after  another  by 
means  of  niyoga. 

Q, — Why  should  we  not  take  the  word  ekadasha  to  mean  10 
sons  and  the  l 1th  person,  the  husband  of  a woman? 


1 14  Satyarth  Prakash 

A. — If  you  interpret  the  Vedic  verse  in  that  way,  there  will  be 
contradiction  in  the  meanings  of 

\ 

Also,  a woman  cannot  get  a second  husband  according  to  your  ren- 
dering. 

HPra^TST  i 

5T*v^frHmf?^TT7rT«qT  \\ 

il 

— Says  Mann,  IX,  59,  58,  159,  A widow  can  take  in  the  alliance  of 
niyoga  a }oimger  or  elder  brother  of  her  deceased  husband  within  6 
degrees  of  descent,  a man  of  her  tribe,  or  one  of  a superior  class. 
But  the  connection  of  niyoga  is  permitted  when  a widower  and  a 
widow  have  a desire  for  raising  up  issue  in  the  event  of  the  utter 
failure  of  progeny.  In  (Uher  woids,  on  the  failure  of  issue,  the 
alliance  of  niyoga  may  he  formed  between  a woman  and  her  hus- 
band’s younger  or  elder  brother  for  the  purpose  of  procreating  off- 
spring, But  if  these  allied  parties  have  intercourse  frona  carnal  desire 
after  the  birth  of  children,  they  should  be  degraded.  The  time  of  the 
alliance  of  niyoga  expires  with  the  sign  of  the  second  conception. 
They  should  not  amorously  meet  afterwards  If  (he  niyoga  compact 
is  formed  for  the  interests  of  both  parties,  it  should  cease  with  the 
fourth  pregnancy.  In  fine,  10  children  can  be  begotten  by  the  above 
mentioned  compact  Afterw'ards  the  conjugal  intercourse  between 
men  and  women  is  regarded  as  sensuality,  and  they  are  looked  upon 
as  fallen  people.  Also  if  married  men  and  women  cohabit  after  the 
lOth  conception,  they  are  thought  to  be  lecherous  and  censurable. 
To  tell  the  truth,  marriage  and  niyoga  arc  for  the  purpose  of  pro- 
creating children  but  not  f(^r  carnal  sports  like  those  of  beasts. 

Q. — Does  the  niyoga  of  a woman  take  place  after  the  death  of 
her  lord  or  also  in  his  life-time  ? 

/I. —Also  in  his  life-time;  as— \ 

— When  a man  finds  himself  unable  to  beget  children,  he  should  suffer 
his  wife  to  go  to  another,  saying:  O fortunate  lady,  desirous  of  pros- 
perity, now  do  thou  icchaswa  seek  anyam  another  mat:  than  me,  for 
thou  have  no  hope  of  offspring  from  me.  But  she  should  serve  her 
married  husband  as  usual.  In  like  manner,  a woman  afflicted  with 
disease  and  other  defects,  and  finding  herself  incapable  of  bearing 
children,  should  allow  her  husband  to  raise  issue  upon  another,  say- 
ing: O my  master,  now  give  up  all  hope  of  begetting  children,  upon  me, 
and  entering  into  the  compact  to  niyoga  with  another  widowed  woman 
raise  up  issue  of  yourself.  The  niyoga  was  done  by  King  Pandu’s 
wives,  Kunti  and  Madri,  and  other  women  of  old.  Also,  Vyasa 
formed  the  connection  of  niyoga  with  the  wives  of  his  brothers, 
Vichitravirya  and  Chitrangada,  on  their  death  and  begot  Dritrashtra 
upon  Ambika,  Pandu  upon  Ambalika,  and  Vidur  upon  a maid  servant. 


Marriage  and  Family  Life 


115 


Such  and  (he  like  instances  are  the  historical  proofs  of  the  doctrine 
of  niyoga. 

— Manu,  Says  IX,  76.  A married  woman  may  wait  for  her  husband 
for  8 years  if  he  is  gone  for  the  purpose  of  knowledge,  for  6 years  if 
for  fame,  for  3 years  if  for  wealt.i  and  other  purposes.  After  the 
expiry  of  those  years,  she  should  beget  children  by  the  niyoga  form 
of  marriage.  On  the  return  of  her  married  husband,  the  connection 
ol  niyoga  should  break  olT. 

g garsr^T  \ 

II 

— ib.  8 1 . similar  rules  hold  good  for  men.  Thus  a man  may  bear 
with  his  wife  for  8 years  if  she  is  barren,  i.e.,  she  is  not  conceived  for 
8 years  since  marriage;  for  10  years  if  children  die  away;  for  1 1 years 
if  only  a daughter  is  born  at  every  delivery;  and  for  no  time  if  she 
speaks  unkindly;  and  then  after  these  years  he  should  beget  children 
upon  another  woman  by  the  niyoga  form  of  marriage.  If  a woman 
finds  her  husband  very  oppressive,  she  should  leave  him  and  forming 
niyoga  with  another  man  beget  children  to  inherit  her  married 
husband’s  property.  Such  are  the  authorities  and  reasons  for  swayatn- 
vara  and  niyoga  marriages,  which  the  people  should  adopt  to  improve 
their  families. 

Inheritance 

Like  the  children  of  married  men  and  women,  called  iho  aurasa, 
those  of  the  niyoga  compact  inherit  the  property  of  their  fathers. 

Now,  men  and  women  should  always  keep  it  in  view  that  semi- 
nal and  mensrual  fluids  are  invaluable  substances.  Whoever  wastes 
this  basis  of  life  by  going  to  a prostitute  or  strange  woman  or  in  the 
company  of  wicked  men,  is  a great  fool.  Even  ignorant  peasants  or 
gardeners  do  not  grow  their  seeds  elsewhere  than  their  own  fields 
or  gardens.  When  so  much  attention  is  paid  to  insignificant  vegetable 
seeds,  and  when  ignorant  peasants  show  such  care,  is  he  not  a greater 
fool,  who  being  wiser  than  all  others  throws  away  the  seed  of  the 
tree  of  human  body  into  a bad  field;  for,  he  gets  no  fruit  therefrom  ? 
Also,  Afma  vai  Jayate  putraJi  is  a saying  of  the  Brahmana  Scriptures. 
It  means.  Soul  is  born  into  a son. 

^ 5^5TnTTf?r  ^ 5TT7:  5TfT*r  ii 

This  is  a quotation  of  the  Psalm  Veda  in  the  Nirukta,  III.  4 — 
Thou  are  born  of  the  seed  secreted  from  every  organ  and  of  the  heart. 
Therefore  thou  art  my  soul.  Mayst  thou  never  die  before  me  ! Rather 
do  thou  live  100  years.  It  is  a great  sin  to  sow  in  harlots  and  other 
sinful  fields  a seed  out  of  which  are  born  the  bodies  of  great  sages 
and  saints,  or  to  suffer  good  fields  to  be  disseminated  with  evil  seed. 


116 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Rationale  of  Marriage 

Q. — Why  should  we  marry  ? For,  marriage  puts  restraint  upon 
men  and  women  who  are  compelled  to  restrict  themselves  and  to  suffer 
pain.  Therefore,  they  should  live  together  as  long  as  there  is  love 
between  them;  but  when  it  ceases  to  be,  they  should  separate. 

A. — It  is  the  custom  with  animals  and  birds,  and  not  with  human 
beings.  If  the  institution  of  marriage  be  abolished  in  the  society  of 
people,  1.  the  best  duties  of  family  life  will  go  to  rack  and  ruin.  No 
body  will  serve  another.  2.  Adultery  will  be  enormously  increased,  and 
all  persons  will  get  diseased,  become  weak  and  short  lived  and  soon 
die  away.  3.  None  will  fear  anybody  or  feel  shame  for  wrong  doing. 
4.  No  body  will  look  after  the  old  folks.  5.  The  increase  of  sensuality, 
disease,  and  weakness,  and  the  diminution  of  the  period  of  human 
existence  will  decimate  many  a family.  6.  There  will  be  no  owners  and 
none  to  inherit  anybody’s  property.  7.  None  will  have  a right  to  any- 
thing for  a long  time.  To  check  such  and  many  other  evils  for  ever, 
the  institution  of  marriage  is  the  only  proper  course  to  follow. 

Q. — When  there  is  but  one  marriage,  one  man  will  have  pregnant 
only  one  wife,  and  one  woman  one  husband.  The  woman  being  afflicted 
with  a chronic  disease,  or  the  man  conlinuously  ailing,  while  both  are 
in  the  prime  of  youth,  and  so  they  cannot  avoid  indulging  in  sensuality; 
what  should  they  do  ? 

A. — This  question  has  been  answered  in  discussing  the  custom 
of  niyoya.  If  a man  can  not  restrain  himself  from  sexual  indulgence 
for  a year,  while  his  wife  is  pregnant,  he  should  go  into  niyoya  with 
a woman  and  beget  children  for  her.  But  on  no  account  must  men 
commit  adultery  or  whoredom. 

Patriotism  and  Loyalty 

Living  thus,  they  should  as  far  as  possible  aspire  to  have  what 
is  not  possessed,  protect  what  is  got,  increase  what  is  preserved,  spend 
what  is  increased  in  the  good  of  the  country.  They  should  always  do 
the  duties  of  their  own  orders  by  all  means  in  their  power  and  with 
love  and  zeal  in  the  manner  above  mentioned,  bringing  their  might, 
mind  and  means  to  work  before  them  always  for  the  welfare  of  others. 
They  should  spare  no  pains  in  serving  their  mother,  father,  mother- 
in-law,  father-in-law;  love  their  friend,  neighbour,  king,  scholar, 
physician,  and  virtuous  people;  and  treat  the  wicked  with  indifference 
/.£^,  setting  aside  enmity  against  them  they  should  ever  exert  them- 
selves for  their  betterment  As  far  as  it  is  in  their  power,  they  should 
spend  their  money  and  means  on  the  education  and  training  of  their 
children  so  as  to  make  them  accomplished  scholars  and  moral  citizens. 
By  honest  dealing  they  should  also  try  to  obtain  salvation,  which 
secures  them  supreme  bliss. 

Horse  and  cow  sacrifice 

They  should  not  believe  in  these  and  similar  verses  : — 

1.  qfnnlsfq  fg-st:  i 


Marriage  and  Family  Life 


117 


2.  HTqrm  i 

3.  ^Tfsj  ^ ^ qfir^  ^cft  i 

q3:^f^ncg  <TfcTT^>  n 

1.  A fallen  Brahmin  is  better  than  a selfless  Shudra;  for,  a dry 
cow  is  sacred,  but  not  a milch  jenny  ass. 

2.  The  horse  sacrifice,  cow  sacrifice,  offering  of  flesh  to  manes, 
begetting  of  children  by  a brother  of  the  husband,  are  the  five  customs 
forbidden  in  the  Kaliyuga  (present  age). 

3.  A second  husband  is  allowed  to  women  in  five  kinds  of 
misfortune,  viz  , their  husband’s  disappearance,  death,  impotency, 
renunciation  and  excommunication. 

These  are  spurious  verses  of  Parasar’s  Code.  1.  What  can  be 
greater  partiality, injustice  and  unrighteousness,  when  a wicked  twice- 
born  person  is  considered  as  best  and  virtuous  and  a Shudra  or  low 
caste  person  as  low.  Does  not  a jenny  ass  deserve  as  much  care  of 
potters  and  others  as  a milcli  or  dry  cow  of  cowheards  ? Also,  this 
example  is  not  proper;  for,  a Brahmin  and  a Shudra  are  human  beings, 
and  a cow  and  a donkey  are  different  species.  If  a portion,  however, 
of  the  example  tallies  with  that  of  the  assertion,  the  verses  can  not 
deserve  credence  from  the  impropriety  of  their  import. 

2.  When  the  ashwalamhita  sacrifice  of  the  horse  and  gavaJam- 
hh(}\  of  the  cow  i.e.,  killing  them  to  offer  into  fire,  is  not  ordained  in  the 
Veda,  why  is  not  its  prohibition  in  the  kaliyuga  (age  of  strife)  against 
the  Veda?  If  the  prohibition  of  this  wicked  act  is  proper  to  observe, 
its  sanction  will  be  believed  by  implication  in  the  Treta  age  and  other 
cycles*  Now  it  is  altogether  impossible  to  believe  that  this  sinful  act 
was  perpetrated  in  that  virtuous  age.  Also  there  is  sanction  for 
renunciation  in  the  Vedas  and  other  genuine  scriptures.  Therefore,  its 
piohibition  is  groundless.  If  flesh  eating  is  forbidden,  its  prohibition 
is  constant.  When  the  Vedas  permit  the  procreation  of  children  by 
the  (levara  or  second  husband  of  a woman,  why  does  the  writer  of 
this  verse  bark  in  vain  ? If  a woman  forms  a niyoga  alliance  at  home 
when  her  husband  is  gone  to  some  other  country,  whose  wife  will  she 
be  thought  on  the  return  home  of  her  husband  at  the  time?  If  it  be 
said  that  she  will  be  the  wife  of  her  previous  husband,  we  believe  it 
to  be  so;  but  no  such  ruling  is  found  in  the  Code  of  Parasar. 

3.  Are  there  only  five  occasions  of  hard  time  for  a woman  ? 
Her  times  of  distress  are  more  than  five;  as,  for  instance,  her  husband’s 
long  confinement  to  bed  by  sickness,  misunderstanding  between  herself 
and  her  husband,  and  so  forth.  Hence,  such  verses  should  never  be 
obeyed. 

Forgery  of  Books 

Q. — Hollo,  don’t  you  believe  what  Sage  Parasar  has  said  ? 

A. — The  saying  may  be  of  anybody,  however,  great.  Being  against 

♦Like  week  days,  the  four  cycles  divide  time  viz.,  satayuga--1728,000,Treta- 
yuga  = 1296,000  Dwaparayuga= 864,000  and  Kaliyuga  ^432,000  years, 


118 


Satyarth  Prakash 


the  spirit  of  the  Vadas,  it  can  not  be  accepted.  Also,  it  is  not  a saying 
of  Parasar.  For,  it  is  like  the  expressions:  xm 

f^Tsr  I Supreme  Being  said,  &c. 

The  object  of  writing  books  in  the  name  of  universally  respected 
persons  is  that  those  books  may  be  accepted  by  all  under  the  umbrage 
of  their  great  names  and  bring  their  authors  plenty  of  subsistence. 
Therefore,  these  books  are  full  of  nonsensical  talk.  Except  a few 
interpolated  verses,  the  Code  of  Manu  alone  is  consistent  with  the 
teachings  of  the  Vedas,  but  not  the  other  codes.  The  same  rule  may 
be  regarded  as  true  lor  all  suprious  books. 

Importance  of  householdership 

Q, — Is  the  family  life  the  least  in  importance  of  all  the  stages 
of  life,  or  is  it  greater  than  others? 

A, — All  the  stages  of  life  are  great  in  consideration  of  their 
duties. 

— But  says  Manu,  VI.  90,  All  oiders  derive  their  stability  from  the 
support  of  the  temporal  order,  as  all  the  small  and  large  rivers  wander 
about  till  they  reach  the  sea.  No  work  of  any  other  order  is  success- 
fully carried  on  without  the  existence  of  this  useful  order. 

'O 

am  aa  ww:  n 

— As  all  creatures  subsist  by  receiving  support  from  the  air,  so  all 
orders  of  men  exist  by  receiving  support  from  house  keepers. — Manu, 
III,  77. 

-As  the  temporal  order  of  householders  daily  maintains  the 
three  orders  educational,  hermitical,  and  spiritual,  by  making  them 
gifts  and  doles  of  food  and  other  necessaries;  it  is  regarded  as  the 
fundamental  order  and  as  the  main  source  of  all. — ib.  78. 

— Therefore,  he  who  longs  for  salvation  and  worldly  enjoyment, 
should,  carefully  observe  its  rules.  Intirm  and  timid  men  are  unable  to 
fulfill  the  duties  of  this  order.—  ib  79. 

So  a person  should  duly  observe  its  rules  and  accept  its  respon- 
sibility. The  family  life  has  half  the  duties  that  are  found  in  the  world. 
Had  there  been  no  temporal  order,  where  could  the  educational, 
hermitical  and  spiritual  orders  have  existed  in  the  absence  of  the 
production  of  children  ? He  is  censurable  who  reprehends  the  temporal 
order.  He  who  extols  it,  deserves  all  praise.  But  the  family  life  is 
blissful  only  when  the  master  and  mistress  of  a household  are  content 
with  each  other,  educated,  energetic  and  well-up  in  all  works  of  teh 


Marriage  and  Family  Life 


119 


house  in  every  way.  Therefore,  the  chief  source  of  the  married  life 
is  the  successful  completion  of  the  educational  career  and  the  above 
mentioned  institution  of  self-choicc  (swayamvara)  marriage.  So  much 
in  brief  for  the  description  of  the  student’s  return  home  after  the 
academical  career,  marriage,  and  worldly  life.  Now,  retirement  and 
renunciation  will  be  described  in  the  next  chapter. 


Summary 

On  completion  of  education,  a student  should  return  home,  when  his 
father  or  teacher  will  honour  him  with  the  gift  of  a cow,  and  he  will  receive  another 
from  his  father-in  law  on  the  occasion  of  marriage. 

He  should  then  espouse  a maid  of  his  own  clan,  who  is  not  within  six 
degrees  of  descent  from  his  mother's  family  and  who  docs  not  belong  to  the 
family  of  his  father.  She  should  not  be  chosen  from  the  family  of  unrighteous 
persons,  having  such  transmissible  diseases  as  pthisis,  epilepsy,  leprosy,  elephan- 
tiasis. &c  , She  should  have  charming  features  and  an  aiiactive  name,  and  be  equal 
in  qualifications  to  him  (Manii.  Ill,  4,  8,  9 ) Marriage  in  distant  countries  obvia- 
tes contempt  from  familirtity,  mixes  bloods,  improves  the  race,  recuperates  health 
from  change  of  climate,  keeps  olT  each  othci's  family  quarrels,  and  brings  new 
things  and  persons  in  contact. 

According  to  Dhanwantary,  the  father  of  Indian  medicine,  man  should  be 
at  least  25  and  woman  16  years  of  age  at  marriage.  Manu  orders  a girl  to  be 
married  to  a qualified  man  three  years  after  her  menstruation.  (IX,  90)  The  early 
marriage  at  her  8 years  of  age  mentioned  in  Pararar’s  Code  is  not  desirable,  as 
the  text  containing  it  is  spurious.  The  Veda  which  is  the  supreme  authority  in 
religion  and  ceremonies,  commands  the  perfoimancc  of  marriage  at  mature  age 
when  a maid  is  educated  and  is  able  to  bear  children.  (Rig  III,  viii,  4,  iv.  16.) 
Marrying  parties  should  have  their  own  choice  in  contracting  marriage.  When 
they  have  made  their  choice,  they  may  be  married  at  school  or  at  the  bride’s  house. 

Their  qualification  should  determine  their  caste  for  class  in  society.  Caste 
by  birth  has  no  support  of  authentic  scriptures.  Manu  says,  X 65  that  low  class 
people  rise  to  higher  classes  in  virtue  of  their  merit,  and  likewise  the  higher  classes 
sink  down  from  degeneracy.  The  classes  are  made  on  the  principle  of  duty.  The 
duties  of  priests  arc  studying,  teaching,  ofiiciatmg  at  ceiemonies,  giving  and  re. 
ceiving  alms;  also  the  practice  ot  contentment,  self  denial,  penance,  purity,  for- 
bearance, honesty,  science,  and  faith  in  God.  The  duties  of  warriors  are  learning, 
chastity,  the  performance  of  sacraments,  practice  of  military  art,  and  fear  of  God. 
The  duties  of  merchants  are  learning,  tilling,  trading,  breeding,  and  investing 
money  at  interest  to  be  realised  not  more  than  the  capital.  The  duties  of  servants 
are  to  cook  and  to  help  the  above  classes  in  various  ways.  These  are  the  4 castes 
of  society.  The  non-performance  of  their  duties  brings  on  degradation.  To  oppose 
this  view,  i.e.,  caste  by  merit;  the  1 1th  verse  of  the  31st  chapter  of  the  Yajurveda 
IS  produced,  which  is  rendered  to  say  that  the  Brahmanas  aie  born  of  God’s 
mouth,  and  so  forth.  But  this  rendering  is  wrong,  since  the  Veda  describes  God 
as  having  no  mouth  and  other  human  organs.  I he  true  meaning  is  that  as  the 
mouth  of  the  body  is  the  best  of  all  parts  of  the  body  physical,  so  are  the  Brah- 
manas the  best  of  the  body  politic  of  all  men  in  virtue  of  their  learning,  and  so 
forth.  There  society  is  meant,  and  not  God. 

After  marriage,  man  and  wife  should  cohabit  only  at  the  end  of  the 
monthly  course.  Manu,  III,  50.  If  pregnancy  is  indicated  the  next  month,  they 
should  desist  from  sex  work  till  the  child  is  weined.  The  food  during  pregnancy 
should  be  nutritive  unstimulative  It  should  be  made  of  farina,  butter  and  fruit. 
Great  care  should  be  taken  of  the  woman  and  great  love  should  exist  between  hus- 
band and  wife.  Women  should  always  be  honoured  by  all  men  desirous  of  prosperity 
M.  HI.  55,  56. 

In  the  affairs  of  life  they  should  speak  what  is  true,  but  never  what  is 
false.  Manu,  IV.  38.  They  should  not  give  up  the  pursuit  of  knowledge  and  the 
use  of  the  Veda,  they  should  do  what  is  ordained  by  them.  They  should  always 


120 


Satyarth  Prakash 


do  the  five  great  duties,  viz.,  worship  of  God,  oblations  to  fire,  service  of  elders, 
compassion  on  animals  and  hospitality  to  guests.  Manu,  IV,  21.  Prayer  should 
be  said  at  morn  and  eve  only,  and  not  thrice  a day.  Manu,  II.  103.  They  should 
not  honour  hypocrites,  the  revilers  of  the  Vedas,  bigots,  sophists  neo-vedantists 
(who  call  themselves  the  Supreme  Being).  They  should  rise  early,  never  do  evil 
which  destroys  families,  Manu  iV,  174.  There  should  be  no  quaricl  with  the 
minister,  preceptor,  instructor,  maternal  uncle,  guest,  dependant,  child,  aged,  sick, 
doctor,  relative,  father-in-law,  friend,  mother,  father,  sister,  brother,  wife, 
daughter  and  servant.  Manu,  IV.  179,  180.  They  should  avoid  the  company  of 
the  adulterers,  liars,  sinners  traders  in  religion,  rogues,  cheats,  boasters,  butchers, 
misanthropes,  hypocrites,  and  traitors,  ib.  195. 

The  acquirement  and  practice  of  virtue  is  very  necessary,  seeing  that  all  is 
left  behind  but  it  alone  goes  with  the  soul  to  the  next  world. — Manu,  240  He  is 
saved  and  he  shall  see  God  who  is  virtuous— ib.  243.  Good  conduct  procures 
full  age,  good  children  and  undecaying  treasure,  and  removes  defect.  — ib  156.  The 
four  orders  sliould  live  in  amity,  priests  arc  to  teach,  warriors  to  protect,  mer- 
chants to  trade  and  servants  to  help  the  people.  Man  and  wife  should  live  in 
perfect  harmony,  and  be  faithful  to  each  other.  They  should  live  together  both  at 
home  and  in  foreign  countries  as  far  as  possible.  On  separation  by  death,  the  upper 
three  clas.ses  are  not  to  remarry,  but  in  the  absence  of  heirs  raise  up  issue  by  en- 
tering into  niyof'a  in  their  own  or  a superior  class.  Among  them  widows  or 
widower’s  marriage  is  not  desirable  from  the  diminution  of  love,  dispute  regard- 
ing the  property  of  the  dead  between  the  families  of  remarrying  parties,  efface- 
ment  of  good  families,  and  the  loss  of  woman’s  chastity.  The  peculiarity  of 
niyoga  is  that  parties  live  in  their  own  domiciles,  the  children  begotten  belong  to 
whomsoever  they  are  raised  up,  the  parties  do  not  support  each  other,  their  con- 
nection breaks  on  the  birth  of  children  and  two  or  four  children  only  should  be 
begotten  Niyoga  is  allowed  by  the  Veda.  Rig,  X,  LV,  45.  It  looks  like  adultery 
from  disuse.  But  like  marriage,  it  is  done  with  the  consent  of  relatives  and 
solemnised  with  the  rites  of  religion.  It  is  not  for  bachelors  and  maids.  If  a maid 
loses  hei  husband  before  she  knows  him,  she  should  be  remarried,— M^nu  JX, 
178.  It  is  spouseless  persons  that  adopt  for  begetting  heirs  to  their  pro- 

perty. After  the  birth  of  children,  if  the  parties  still  keep  up  their  connection, 
they  are  regarded  as  fallen.  In  the  case  of  a man’s  impotency  or  a woman’s 
sterility  the  line  may  be  perpetuated  by  the  temporary  compact  of  myoga — See 
Rig,  X,  X,  10  and  the  instance  of  Paiidu’s  wives.  Man  and  woman  should  beget 
ten  children  only  either  by  marriage  or  by  niyoga;  foi,  the  plurality  of  children 
weakens  the  race.  As  bachelors  do  not  want  to  marry  widows,  nor  do  maids  wish 
to  take  widowers  for  their  husband,  niyoga  will  be  forced  upon  the  people,  if  they 
arc  allowed  to  have  their  choice. 

All  the  four  ordeis  should  live  in  amicable  brotherhood;  woiking  for  the 
the  welfare  of  the  common  wealth,  and  serving  their  parents,  neighbours,  king, 
scholars,  doctors,  and  other  superiors.  On  no  account  the  light  of  knowledge 
should  be  put  out.  Thev  should  be  honest  in  all  dealings  and  try  for  salvation. 
The  consideration  of  high  and  low  castes  should  be  set  aside.  The  discharge  of 
duties  confers  honour  on  all.  The  sacrifice  of  the  horse  and  the  cow  and  flesh-eat- 
ing,  fatheied  upon  St.  Parasar,  is  a barefaced  forgery  of  later  priestcraft.  Such 
mischievous  opinions  are  in-admissible  by  the  importance  of  the  second  order  of 
householdsliip,  which  supports  all  other  orders  of  society.  — Manu,  VI,  90. 

Sandhya 

As  all  the  live  sacraments  are  briefly  given  in  this  book,  the 
worship  of  God,  (he  most  important  of  all,  is  given  here  in  full  to  be 
useful  to  those  who  have  no  Five  Great  Duties  with  them  : 

I H: » 

—May  the  All-pervading  Divine  Mother  be  gracious  enough  to 

gratify  our  irrner  craviirg,  and  send  dowrv  blessings  a\\  around  us\ 

I «r>'  srm:  am:  i ^ t wf  i wf  sTTfir.-  i 

wit  I wf  I wf  I wf  I It 


Marriage  and  Family  Life 


121 


— O God  ! Most  sincerely  and  solemnly,  I make  a covenant  with  Thee 
that  knowingly  I shall  never  sin  with  my  organs  of  5 cognitive  and  5 
senses;  viz.,  the  tongue— taste,  the  nose— smell,  the  eye— sight,  the  ear 
—hearing  the  palm  and  its  back  touch,  the  genitals— passions,  the  heart 
—desire,  the  throat--speech,  the  head— thought,  the  hand— deeds. 

^ ^ ^ ‘ ^ 3^13  1 ^ 

g^T:  ftTTftr  1 55ff  ^ ^51  g?TTg  n 

— But  O Lord  ! 1 am  w'eak  and  so  depend  upon  Thee.  Purify  and 

so  strengthen  my  senses  Thyself.  May  the  Living  God  puiify  the  head  ! 
May  the  Holy  God  purify  the  eyes  1 May  the  Happy  God  purify  the 
throat  ! May  the  Great  God  purify  the  heart  ! May  the  Common 
Father  purify  the  genitals  or  animal  propensities  ! May  the  All-wise 
God  purify  the  feet  ! May  the  Eternal  God  again  purify  the  brain  ! 
May  the  All-pervading  God  purify  all  places  ! 

Wf  ^T^:,  ^ 3f^:,  wf  cT«T:,  wf  I 

— O God  of  life  ! O God  of  Holiness  ! ! O Great  God  ! O God 

the  Father  ! O God  of  wisdom  ! O God  of  truth  ! 

?raT3P^^m<mtscjT5ifirfT  i TT5tT«nircT  ftci:  wor:  ii 

— Principles  and  atoms  were  produced  from  the  pregnant  Nature, 
then  came  out  chaos,  then  energy  or  motion,  then  ocean. 

— After  the  energy  and  the  ocean  came  out  the  planetary  motion.  The 
Ruler  of  the  universe  makes  days  and  nights  without  ejlbrt. 

1 qf?T^T[3:^T7?rfTOTPT>  Fsr:  n 

— The  Maker  formed,  as  before,  the  sun  and  moon,  the  luminous  and 
opaque  bodies,  the  firmament  and  the  happy  region. 

^ 5TT^  feqfHTf?TqrfarTfH^>  Tfwrifem  i 

— O All-wise  and  Glorious  Being  ! Thou  art  before  us,  the  Absolute, 
our  King  and  Protector.  Thou  hast  made  the  sun,  whose  beams 
shower  life  on  earth.  We  bow  down  to  Thee  in  gratitude  for  Thy 
benign  rule,  kind  protection,  and  blessed  gift  of  life.  For  all  these 
blessings,  O God  ! we  humbly  thank  Thee,  and  place  him,  who  hates 
us,  or  whomever  we  hate,  at  Thy  disposal. 

TfOTcTT  pTcTT  I ^^0  \\ 

— O Almighty  Lord,  Thou  art  to  our  right,  our  Sovereign  and  pro- 
tector from  a host  of  the  invertebrata.  Thou  sendest  wise  men  to  teach 
us  We  bow  & c.  The  rest  both  in  Sanscrit  and  English  is  as  1. 

— O Adorable  Being  ! Thou  art  behind  us,  our  King  and  protector 
from  the  vertebrata.  Thou  Greatest  food,  which  gives  us  life  on  earth. 
(As  1.) 

Tfwn  5Tf?TfT«Sf^:  I || 

— O Father  ! Thou  art  to  our  left,  our  King,  Self-existent,  and  our 


122  Satyarth  Prakasit 

Protector.  Thy  electricity  moves  our  blood  to  keep  us  our  life  and 
produces  various  motions  in  the  world.  (As  1 ) 

sTsri  ftsra:  i u 

— O All-pervading  God  ! Thou  art  below,  our  King,  and  the 
Nourisher  of  our  life  with  arborcaus  trees  and  tuberous  creepers, 
bearing  a variety  of  fruits.  (As  1.) 

— O Great  God  ! Thou  art  above,  our  King,  Developer,  and  Pro- 
tector. Thou  sendcst  down  rain  to  water  our  fields,  which  preserve 
our  life.  (As  1.) 

— May  we,  perceiving  God  with  all  His  glory,  be>ond  the  darkness 
of  ignorance,  all-happy,  supreme  over  all,  obtain  Him,  the  sun  of  our 
life  and  our  spiritual  light  ! 

^|?pf  I W 

— All  the  objects  of  the  world  serve  the  purpose  of  flags  to  show  Him, 
the  Glorious  Being,  the  Maker  of  the  worlds  and  the  Sun  of  life,  to 
all  the  creatures. 

fcTJj  W SIT  ?IigT^f^^r 

wmi  ii 

— Although  all  the  objects  indicate  Thee,  yet,  O God  ! Thou  art 
wonderous,  the  Ever  wakeful  Eye,  and  the  Suppoit  of  all  the  heavenly 
bodies,  even  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  fire.  Thou  holdcst  the  heaven 
and  earth,  and  the  firmament.  Thou  art  the  Maker  and  the  Soul  of 
all  the  movable  and  immovable  objects.  May  we  think,  speak,  and 
act  rightly  ! 

e >9 

51^5:  5T?f  srff^W  5TT5:  5ia«R>Tl: 

5IT?:  5T?f  5TT5:  5imcl  II 

CN  X 

— That  Ever  wakeful  Eye  exists  pure  from  all  eternity  for  the  good  of 
the  learned.  May  we  see  a hundred  autumns  ! May  we  live  a 
hundred  autumns  ! May  we  hear  a hundred  autumns  ! May  we  speak 
a hundred  autumns  ! May  we  be  free  a hundred  autumns  ! And  again 
so  for  a hundred  autumns  ! (Autumn  poetically,  a year) 

?l1f  Hijar:  I wff  I II>  sr:  sraft^iri  II 

— O All-Life  ! All-Holiness  ! All-Joy  ! the  Lord  of  the  uppep 
lower  and  happy  regions,  our  maker,  the  Supreme  Being,  we  meditate 
upon  Thy  adorable  form  of  spiritual  light,  which  dispeles  the  darkness 
of  sin  from  the  mind.  May  Ye  illume  our  intellects  ! 

fticrm  ^ ^ ii 

—We  bow  to  Thee,  who  art  All-joy,  All-happiness,  the  Dispenser  of 
ease  and  Fulfiller  of  our  righteous  desires,  All  calm  and  All-peace. 


Marriage  and  Family  Life 


123 


On  page  99  under  Duty  to  Nature  two  sets  of  Vedic  verses  are  given.  Their 
translation  is  as  follows.— 

(a)  O God,  offering  to  Thee,  the  Lord  of  hosts  ! O God,  offering  to  Thee 
who  is  attended  by  heavens  and  earth  ! O God,  offe  ing  to  Thee,  the  benevolent  ! 
O God,  offering  to  Thee,  the  glorious  ! O God,  offering  to  Thee,  the  creator  ! 
O God  offering  to  Thee,  the  life  and  death  1 O God,  offering  to  all  the  learned 
people  ! O God,  offering  to  Thee,  the  curer  of  diseases.  O God,  offering  to  Thee, 
the  conscious  self  ' O God,  offering  to  Thee,  the  learned  intellect. 

(b)  Salutation  to  God  Almighty,  to  the  Judge  of  all,  to  the  Best,  to  the 
Creator,  to  the  Upholder  to  the  All-prevading  God,  to  the  Lord  of  the  vegetable 
world,  to  the  Adorable,  to  the  Benevolent,  to  the  Lore  of  all,  to  the  Asylum  of 
all,  to  all  the  learned  people.  Give  food  to  the  creatures  of  the  day.  Give  food 
to  the  creatures  of  night.  Salutation  to  God,  the  life  of  all. 


Chai'TKr  V 

RETIREMENT  AND  RENUNCIATION 
Of  Retirement 

The  systematic  gradation  of  human  life  according  to  the  Shatapatha, 
Chapter  XIV,  is  that  having  finished  studentship,  man  should 
take  up  the  duties  of  the  house-holder,  and  having  finished 
house-holdership,  retire  from  temporal  affairs,  and  having  prepared  in 
retirement  for  spiritual  works,  take  to  the  holy  order  of  renunciation. 
Also,  Manu  says;  VI.  5, — 

Time  of  Retirement 

1.  trg  f«rf«rarf^IcT!pt  fg-5T:  | 

2.  'R^g'vftqfiTfTqTr’TH:  I 

3.  HcortJtt  tfi^qnx^TT  qft^srarn  i 

g^ij  ii 

4.  ?r»TT?tlT  ^irrjfqft'5?5?n  I 

5.  *T?Err#f^f^qq64;  ^ I 

>3  «N 

— 1.  The  regenerate  house-holder,  either  Bralimana,  Kshalriya  or 
Vaishya,  who  had  before  completed  his  studentship,  and  who  faith- 
fully discharged  the  duties  of  family  life,  being  stauncli  in  taith  and  a 
master  of  his  senses,  should  retire  and  live  in  a foiest  or  away  from 
the  haunts  of  men.  2.  Also,  when  the  house-holder  sees  Ins  hair  turn 
grey,  his  skin  get  loose  and  wrinkled,  and  his  son  beget  a son;  he 
should  take  to  retirement.  3.  Abandoning  the  use  of  all  delicious  foods, 
showy  clothes,  and  the  most  pleasant  liixinies  of  town  life,  and  com- 
mitting the  care  of  his  wife  to  his  sons  or  taking  her  with  himself,  he 
should  live  in  a lonely  place  in  the  country  4 Taking  a complete  set 
of  the  outfits  of  sacrifice,  he  should  leave  the  town  and  live  in  the 
country  or  forest  with  firm  control  over  the  senses  5.  He  should 
perform  the  five  great  sacraments  or  religious  duties  and  live  upon  the 
various  kinds  of  cereals,  good  vegetables,  roots,  fruits,  and  under- 
ground edibles,  as  sweet  potatoes  (yams),  entertaining  his  guests 
therewith.  Fuither,  Manu  says  in  his  Code,  VT.  8,  26. — 


Retirement  and  Renunciation 


125 


2.  I 

^nftcnTTT^^  ^^r^f?T%cT^:  11 

— 1.  He  should  lead  a life  of  study,  benevolence  and  charity,  that  is, 
be  ever  engaged  in  studying  and  teaching  the  Veda,  be  self-possessed, 
philanthropic,  a master  of  the  senses,  a teacher,  kind  to  all,  a giver 
but  not  a receiver  of  anything.  2.  Never  very  solicitous  for  the  care 
of  the  body,  ever  chaste,  that  is,  not  going  to  his  wife  if  in  company, 
sleeping  on  the  ground,  without  eflfection  for  the  desendants  or  han- 
kering after  his  own  things  he  should  live  at  the  root  of  trees.  Also, 
the  Mundakopanishat  says.  T,  II,  11: 

rPT:<si3  ^ 5n?rrT  I 

^ f^T5TT:  simfjcT  3^  11 

— Quiet  and  learned  men,  faithfully  practising  truth,  righteousness 
and  asceticism  in  the  solitude  of  the  forest,  and  supporting  themselves 
with  begging  alms  obtain  heaven  and  being  purified  of  sins,  enjoy 
the  happiness  of  the  presence  of  God,  who  is  immortal,  perfect,  all- 
pervading,  free  from  growth  and  decay,  and  the  supreme  self.  Also, 
the  Yajurveda  says  XX,  24. 

isr^t  f^T  II 

— The  hermit  or  forest  dweller  should  aspire  to  be  purified  by  per- 
forming the  fire  sacriiice  and  acquire  right  conduct  and  faith  in  the 
Supreme  Bing  He  should  acquiie  this  merit  by  means  of  various 
austerities,  good  company,  practice  of  yoga  or  introspection,  right 
thinking,  which  will  give  him  spiritual  knowledge  and  holiness.  After- 
wards when  desirous  of  taking  the  holy  order  or  renunciation,  he 
should  send  his  wife  to  his  sons  and  then  renounce  the  world,  that  is, 
live  like  a monk  to  preach  righteousness.  So  much  for  retirement  or 
the  hermit’s  life  for  brevity’s  sake. 

Of  Renunciation 

1.  ^ ^T»mTg^:  I 

— Manu  says.  VI.  33, — Having  thus  lived  in  retirement  during  the 
third  portion  of  his  life,  that  is,  from  the  50th  to  75th  year,  he  should 
renounce  all  attachment  to  the  wordly  objects  in  the  fourth  portion, 
and  become  a monk,  clergyman  or  Saimyasi. 

Q. — Docs  he  or  docs  he  not  incur  sin,  who  passes  over  house- 
holdership  and  the  hermit’s  life  and  takes  to  renunciation? 

A. — He  may  or  he  may  not. 

0. — Why  do  you  return  an  answer  of  two  kinds? 

A.—  \i  is  not  of  two  kinds;  for  he  who  renounces  in  early  years 
and  indulges  in  sensuousiiess  afterwards,  becomes  a great  sinner;  but 
not  if  a virtuous  and  truthful  man.  Says  a Brahmina  scripture: 

2.  n^Tg-T  51^^  n 

— Renunciation  should  be  adopted  from  house-holdership  or  retire- 
ment on  the  day  when  its  ardent  desire  rises  in  the  mind.  The  first 


126 


Satyarth  Prakash 


text  gives  the  regular  way  to  renunciation;  this  one  ordains  renunciation 
from  house-holdership;  and  the  third  way  is  that,  if  a man  is  perfectly 
learned,  of  subdued  senses,  free  from  desire  of  sensuousness,  and 
anxious  to  do  good  to  others,  he  can  take  renunciation  directly  from 
studentship.  The  Veda  also  ordains  renunciation  in  such  phrases  as 
yatayah,  Brahnianasah.  vijanatah, — Learned  men  become  ascetics.  But 
says  the  Kath  upanishat,  11,  23. 

— He  does  not  realise  God  even  in  renunciation  by  virtue  of  his  great 
knowledge,  who  is  not  free  from  evil  deeds,  who  is  not  calm,  whose 
mind  is  not  concentrated,  and  whose  mind  is  not  contented.  Again, 
ib.  Ill,  13. 

— A wise  man  of  renunciation  should  restrain  his  thoughts  and  speech 
from  unrighteousness,  and  direct  them  to  knowldge  and  to  the  self  or 
ego,  and  that  self  pregnant  with  knowledge  to  the  Supreme  Being, 
and  then  impress  the  calm  mind  with  the  knowledge  of  God  thus 
obtained.  Says,  Mundak,  II,  12, — 

— Seeing  the  worldly  pleasures  acquired  with  the  sweat  of  the  brows,  a 
holy  man  should  adopt  renunciation;  for,  God,  who  is  spirit,  that  is 
not  worked  out,  is  not  accessible  to  the  performance  of  works  of 
religious  acts.  Hence  he  should  take  a present  in  hands  and  go  to  a 
teacher,  versed  in  the  Vedas  and  who  knows  God,  for  the  purpose  of 
acquiring  spiritual  knowledge.  He  would  remove  all  his  doubts  But 

1.  ar^RRT:  I 

51?  WTifJTRr:  ^ II 

2.  !if^?rT5rt  srmr:  i 

he  should  not  go  to  men,  who,  being  sunk  in  ignorance,  consider  them- 
selves to  be  wise  and  learned.  Foolish  and  of  low  thoughts,  they 
are  the  blind  leaders  of  the  blind  and  fall  into  the  ditch  of  misery. 
Wallowing  in  dense  ignorance,  but  imagining  themselves  to  be  happy 
and  satisfied,  being  pretentious,  conceited,  mere  children  in  know- 
ledge, and  intoxicated  with  the  pride  of  works,  they  do  not  know  what 
God  is,  nor  can  they  lead  other  to  the  knowledge  of  him.  Being  fickle, 
they  suffer  the  pain  of  birth  and  death  — Mundak,  H,  8,  9. 

— Mundak  Upanishat,  III,  see.  2,  verse  6.  Hence,  those  who  are 
sannyasi  or  resigned  to  the  will  of  God,  who  are  themselves  con- 
vinced of  Truth  by  the  intelligent  study  of  Vedant  or  the  knowledge 
of  the  Vedic  verses  and  by  the  practice  of  virtue,  and  whose  mind  is 


Retirement  and  Renunciation 


127 


purified  by  renunciation  and  introspection,  obtain  the  happiness  of 
salvation  in  God,  and  on  the  termination  of  the  salvation  period, 
return  to  ihe  world.  Without  salvation  the  suffering  of  pain  to  which 
all  flesh  is  heir  to,  is  never  destro>ed,  as  we  read — 

in  the  Chhandogya  LJpanishat,  part  8,  section  ! 2, — All  embodied 
beings  cannot  be  free  from  the  suffering  of  pain.  When  the  incorporal 
soul  lives  with  God  on  being  purified,  she  gets  no  pleasure  or  pain  of 
the  world. 

n 

— Shatapatha  K,  14,  Pr.  5,  Br.  2,  K.  1.  Rising  above  the  worldly 
desires,  v/z.,  fame,  wealth,  pleasures,  honour  and  love  for  children,  the 
resigned  persons  live  by  begging  alms  and  devote  their  days  and  nights 
to  the  adoption  of  the  means  of  salvation. 

5rT^rq:rgrt  ii  Yaj.  Br. 

ni^TrT  M 

— Having  arranged  for  a sacrifice  to  realise  God,  throwing  into  it  the 
sacred  thread,  the  lock  on  the  crown,  and  other  signs,  and  substituting 
the  fiery  vital  aiTS—prcina:  outbreath,  apana:  inbreath,  vyana:  cerebral 
energy,  udana  : digestive  power,  and  samana:  locomotive  force,  for  the 
five  sacrificial  fires,  a Brahamana  versed  in  the  lore  of  the  Vedas, 
should  leave  the  house  and  lead  the  ascetic  life  of  the  Sannyasi  one 
who  has  renounced  the  world. — Manu,  VI,  38. 

n 

— After  giving  exemption  from  fear  to  all  animated  creatures,  the  holy 
man  who  renounces  domestic  affairs  to  talk  holy  orders,  and  who 
teaches  righteousness  and  divine  knowledge  of  the  Vedas  revealed  by 
God,  gets  to  the  happy  legions  of  salvation  full  of  light,  (knowledge)— 
ib.  39. 

Q. — What  is  the  religion  of  a Sannyasi  or  monk  ? 

A — The  religion  of  all  mankind  is  only  one,  viz,  the  practice  of 
impartial  justice,  adoption  of  truth,  rejection  of  falsehood,  obedience 
to  the  commandments  of  God  sung  in  the  Vedas,  beneficence,  veracity 
and  the  like  virtues.  But  the  special  duties  of  the  Sannyasi  or  clergy- 
man are  : — 

Duties  of  Clergy 

fwaf  { 

C CN  f\  ^ 

n 

— Manu,  VI,  46. — When  a monk  goes  on  the  way  he  should  not  look 
here  and  there  but  keep  his  eyes  on  the  road  and  move  on.  He  should 
always  drink  the  water  strained  through  a piece  of  cloth,  and  always 
speak  the  truth.  He  should  always  ponder  well,  and  adopt  truth  and 
reject  falsehood. 


128 


Satyarth  Prakash 


^ H ^T^gr^RcTT  M 

— ib.  48.  Whenever  anybody  is  angry  with  him  in  preaching  or 
conversation  or  talks  spitefully  of  him,  or  slangers  him,  he  should 
not  be  angry  with  him;  but  on  the  contrary,  he  should  always  speak 
what  is  good  for  him.  On  no  account  whatever  he  should  ever  by 
speaking  falsehood  vitiate  his  speech,  diffused  in  seven  portals,  as  it 
were,  mouth,  two  nostrils,  two  eyes,  and  two  ears. 

fHTTfW:  \ 

5qTc^  ii 

—Being  firm  in  faith  in  his  self  and  the  Supreme  Being,  living  indepen- 
dently, and  abstaining  from  the  use  of  flesh  foods  and  strong  drink, 
a monk  should  always  go  about  preaching  to  promote  the  cause  of 
religion  and  knowledge  in  the  world,  reposing  on  the  power  of  the 
soul  for  his  own  happiness. — Manu,  VI,  49. 

C\  N 

— Clipping  the  hair,  mustaches,  and  beard,  and  paring  the  nails,  he 
should  take  a good  vessel  and  staff,  and  put  on  clothes  coloured  with 
mahogny  or  kusum.  Having  no  doubt  whatever  as  to  the  existence 
of  the  Self  and  the  mind  fixed  on  God,  he  should  go  wherever  he 
likes,  injuring  no  sentiment  being. — ibid,  52. 

^ II 

— He  should  restrain  the  senses  from  falling  into  vice,  renounce 
animalism  or  fondness  and  hatred,  and  having  no  enmity  with  any 
sentientbeing,  develop  his  powers  to  attain  salvation. — ib.  60. 

TfT:  i 

^ f^n  II 

SJ  C\  >9  N 

— He  should  ever  try  to  practise  virtue  and  persuade  other  to  do  the 
same.  Tho’  reviled  or  praised  by  anybody  in  the  world,  he  should  be 
impartial  to  all  beings  in  what  order  soever  he  has  been  placed  in  life. 
He  should  bear  in  mind  that  the  staff,  bowl,  coloured  scarf  and  the 
like  signs  are  not  the  essentials  of  religion.  The  chief  duty  of  a holy 
man  or  Sannyasi  is  to  do  good  to  the  people  and  other  sentient  being 
by  teaching  them  truth  and  promoting  their  knowledge.— ib. 66. 

6 >9  > 

sr  rT?JT  STH^fiT  II 

— For,  tho’ the  mixing  of  the  powder  of  the  fruit  of  the  strychnos 
potatorum  or  nirmali  tree  with  turbid  water  clears  it;  yet  without 
adopting  this  process, — pounding  it  and  throwing  it  into  the  jar,  and 
by  mere  repeating  its  name  or  hearing  it,  one’s  water  is  not  purified — 
ib.  67. 

simmiiTT  ’niftsftr  i 


Retirement  and  Renunciation 


129 


— The  Brahman  or  a God  fearing  member  of  the  holy  order,  should 
practise  deep-breathing  as  much  as  he  can,  repeating  the  monosyllabic 
Om  and  the  seven  names  of  God,  called  the  vyahritis  see  page  40,  as 
the  law  ordains  But  he  should  never  take  less  than  three  deep 
breaths.  The  deep-breathing  is  one  of  his  primary  duties. — ib.  70. 

F^r^r^m  ii— Manu,  vi,  71. 

— For,  the  regulation  of  breathing  destroys  the  defects  of  the  senses  and 
will,  just  as  heating  and  smelting  remove  the  dross  of  metalic  ores. 

11  — ib.  72. 

— So  the  holy  man  or  sannyasi  should  destroy  the  defects  of  the 
mind,  the  internal  sense  and  the  senses  by  the  daily  practice  of  deep- 
breathing ; sins  by  dliarna:  meditating  on  the  name  of  God  ; the  evils 
of  attachment  to  the  worldly  objects  by  humility  and  the  subjugation 
of  the  senses  ; and  the  atheistic  tendencies  or  the  defects  of  the  soul 
with  regard  to  joy  and  sorrow,  ignorance  and  other  imperfections  by 
incessant  contemplation  on  the  Divine  attributes. 

N 

— By  contemplation  and  introspection  he  should  peep  into  the  way*^  of 
God,  dwelling  in  the  heart,  into  the  working  of  the  soul,  and  realise  the 
presence  of  the  Supreme  Being  in  all  things,  small  and  great,  which 
knowledge  is  hard  to  obtain  by  the  uninitiate  and  ignorant. — ib.  73. 

— -None  but  the  sannyasins  or  selfless  holy  men  can  attain  the  plane 
of  beatitude  or  salvation  and  help  others  in  its  obtainment  in  the 
world,  by  hating  no  being,  by  giving  up  the  pleasures  of  the  senses, 
by  doing  the  works  ordained  by  the  Vedas,  and  by  practising  severe 
austerities. — ib.  75. 

H^FrT  F^TPJ^:  I 

^ II 

— When  a monk  becomes  free  from  desires  for  the  worldly  objects  oi 
any  kind  of  hankering  of  the  flesh,  and  purified  in  covert  working  of 
the  passions  and  the  covert  actions  of  the  body,  he  obtains  unintermi- 
ttant  joy  in  present  life  and  after  death. — ib  80. 

ii 

— ib.  91,  Hence,  the  student,  the  house-holder,  the  hermit  and  the 
divine  should  practise  the  following  ten-fold  virtue  : — 

Ten  Essentials  of  Religion 

OTTT  I 


130 


Satyarth  Prakash 


ib.  92. — 1.  Dhriti  or  patience — always  to  have  patience.  2.  Kshama 
or  forgiveness — to  forbear  slander  and  praise,  respect  and  disrespect, 
profit  and  loss  and  the  like  vicissitudes,  and  to  maintain  equal  temper 
therein.  3.  Dama  or  piety — always  to  engage  one’s  self  in  the  practice 
of  righteousness,  and  to  refrain  from  doing  inequities,  so  much  so  as 
never  to  think  of  doing  evil.  4.  Asteya  or  honesty — giving  up 
stealing,  that  is,  not  to  take  others’  things  without  permission,  by 
fraud,  cheat,  or  treachery,  contrary  to  the  injuction  of  the  Vedas  or 
the  rules  of  business,  which  constitutes  honesty.  5.  Shouch  or 
sanctity — to  keep  internal  purity  by  shunning  fondness,  hatred, 
partiality,  and  external  purity  by  the  use  of  water,  earth-bedaubing 
and  the  like  processes.  6.  Indriya-nigrah  or  the  controlment  of  the 
senses — always  to  check  the  senses  from  committing  an  act  of 
unrighteousness  and  to  employ  them  in  the  practice  of  virtue.  7. 
Dhi  or  reason — to  develop  reason  by  abstaining  from  the  use  of 
intoxicants,  destructive  of  reason  ; by  avoiding  the  company  of  the 
wicked  ; by  giving  up  idleness,  pride  and  the  like  evils  ; by  the  use  of 
good  things, — keeping  the  company  of  good  people  ; and  by  the 
practice  of  yoga  or  contemplation.  8.  Vidya  or  knowledge — a 
right  knowledge  of  all  substances  from  the  earth  to  the  Dity,  to 
utilise  it  for  the  benefit  of  life,  and  to  abide  by  truth.  Truth  is  to 
represent  in  action  what  is  expressed  in  speech,  to  express  in  speech 
what  is  in  the  notion  of  the  will,  and  to  form  the  notion  of  the  will 
of  what  is  in  the  mind.  This  constitutes  what  is  called  knowledge 
here ; the  opposite  of  it  is  ignorance.  9.  Satya  or  truth— -to  know  a 
thing  as  it  is,  to  talk  of  it  and  to  use  it  accordingly.  10.  Akrodh  or 
tranquility— to  give  up  anger  and  the  like  passions  and  adopt  tran- 
quility and  the  like  peaceful  virtues. 

The  practice  of  these  ten  essentials  of  religion  is  binding  on  all 
persons  in  the  four  orders  or  stages  of  life.  It  is  the  special  duty  of 
monks  or  divines  to  practice  it  themselves  and  to  persuade  others  to 
follow  it  in  life. 

5T#:  5H:  I 

ib.  81. — Thus  a monk  gets  repose  in  the  Supreme  Being  by 
gradually  giving  up  the  evils  born  from  attachment  to  the  worldly 
objects,  and  rising  above  the  joy  and  sorrow  and  other  pairs  of 
opposites  found  in  the  world.  It  is  the  chief  duty  of  monks  to  show 
the  conviction  to  all  the  lay  persons  and  others  the  truth  of  all  things 
and  actions,  to  dissuade  them  from  doing  all  kinds  of  evils,  to  remove 
all  their  doubts,  and  to  engage  them  in  actions  based  upon  righteous- 
ness. 

Q. — Is  it  the  duty  of  the  Brahmana  alone  to  adopt  renunciation, 
or  of  the  warrior  class  and  others  as  well  ? 

A.  It  is  the  right  of  the  Brahmana  alone  to  adopt  renunciation, 
for,  that  person  is  called  a Brahmana,  who  is  most  learned  of  all 
classes  of  people,  virtuous,  and  benevolent  to  all.  No  good  can 
result  to  the  world  from  the  renunciation  of  persons  without  perfect 
knowledge,  righteousness,  faith  in  God,  and  the  detachment  of  the 
mind  from  the  pleasure  of  the  world.  Hence  the  proverb,  that  the 


Retirement  and  Renunciation 


131 


Brahmana  alone,  and  not  others,  has  the  right  to  adopt  renunciation 
or  Sannyas.  Here  is  the  authority  of  Manu. 

— The  great  law-giver  says,  VI.  97,  O seers,  it  is  the  duty  of  the  Brah- 
mana to  go  through  the  duties  of  the  four  stages  of  life, — studentship, 
family  life,  hermit’s  life  and  resigned  life.  The  virtue  of  renunciation 
gives  godly  pleasure  here  below  and  unfading  hippiness  of  salvation 
after  death.  After  this,  listen  to  the  duties  of  kings  from  me. 

Hence,  it  is  plain  that  the  Brahmana  alone  has  a right  to  adopt 
the  life  of  renunciation  The  warrior  and  other  classes  are  entitled 
to  the  blessing  of  studentship  or  Brahmacharya. 

Q, — What  is  the  necessity  of  adopting  Sannyas  or  resigned  life  ? 

A — Renunciation  or  religious  teachership  is  as  necessary  to  the 
orders  of  society  as  the  head  to  the  body;  for  knowledge  and  religion 
cannot  be  promoted  without  it.  Also,  the  other  orders  have  little 
time  to  lead  the  people  to  the  right  path  from  their  pursuits  of  know- 
ledge of  the  details  of  house-hold  duties  and  practice  of  penances  It 
is  hard  of  them  to  act  justly  and  impartially.  They  cannot  do  as  much 
good  to  the  world  at  large  as  the  divine,  being  freed  from  all  temporal 
obligations.  For,  he  has  ample  time  which  others  cannot  have  for 
the  promotion  of  the  knowledge  of  things  in  virtue  of  his  possession 
of  right  knowledge.  But  the  person  who  has  taken  holy  orders  from 
the  life  of  the  student,  can  do  more  good  to  the  people  in  generel  by 
teaching  them  truth  than  one  who  has  gone  through  the  regular 
succession  of  house-holdership  and  the  hermit’s  life. 

Q. — The  adoption  of  renunciation  is  against  the  will  of  God; 
for  it  is  God’s  will  to  propagate  the  human  species.  When  a man 
docs  not  enter  into  married  life,  he  will  get  no  children.  If  renuncia- 
tion is  the  chief  object  of  life,  and  all  the  people  adopt  it,  the  human 
race  will  become  extinct. 

A. — Many  people  don’t  get  children  even  in  married  life,  or  if 
the  children  are  born,  they  soon  die.  Then  those  people  go  against 
the  will  of  God.  If  you  say  as  some  poet  has  said — 

^ II 

— What  is  the  fault  there,  if  a thing  is  not  done  even  on  taking  pains 
and  means  for  it  ? There  is  none.  We  ask  you  how  great  the  harm 
is  if  many  children  are  begotten  during  house-holdership,  who  quarrel 
and  fight  with  one  another  from  committing  antagonistic  deeds.  There 
is  much  dispute  from  the  opposition  of  opinions.  When  the  man  who 
has  renounced  the  world  creates  mutual  love  among  the  people  by 
preaching  the  religion  taught  by  the  Vedas,  he  will  save  hundreds  of 
thousands  of  them.  He  will  further  be  the  cause  of  their  welfare  as  do 
thousands  of  house-holders  All  the  people  can  not  adopt  renuncia- 
tion, for  they  all  can  not  be  freed  from  fondness  for  wordly  pleasures. 
Those  who  will  turn  virtuous  people  from  the  effect  of  the  preaching 
of  holy  men,  will  be,  as  it  were,  the  children  of  those  sages. 


132 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Modern  Monks 

Q. — The  resigned  say;  We  have  nothing  to  do  in  the  world.  What 
is  the  use  of  bothering  the  head  with  the  illusion  of  the  world  ? Why 
not  live  in  happiness  after  receiving  food  and  clothes  ? We  should 
live  contented  by  believing  one’s  self  to  be  Brahman  (God),  and 
preach  the  same  doctrine  to  an  inquirer,  that  is  to  say — (Thou  art  the 
Supreme  Being;  Brahman),  invulnerable  to  the  taint  of  vice  or  merit 
of  virtue;  for,  heat  and  cold  are  the  properties  of  the  body,  hunger 
and  thirst  of  the  respiration,  pleasure  and  pain  of  the  will,  the  world 
is  an  illusion,  the  affairs  of  the  world  are  imaginary  or  unreal.  So, 
it  is  becoming  of  a wise  man  not  to  be  bound  down  to  them.  All  the 
good  deeds  and  vices  a man  does,  are  the  effects  of  the  operations  of 
the  body  and  the  senses,  but  not  of  the  soul;  such  is  our  teaching. 
But  what  you  say  of  Sannyas  or  renunciation,  is  somewhat  strange 
and  different  from  the  received  opinion.  Now,  which  is  true  and 
which  is  false  ? 

A. — Do  they  not  like  to  do  good  deeds  ? See,  Manu  ordains, 
Vaidikaish  chaiva  kannahhih,  that  is  necessary  for  the  Sannyasins  or 
monks  to  do  the  works  enjoined  by  the  Vedas,  which  constitute  truth 
accompanied  by  righteousness.  Can  they  relinquish  the  work  of  eat- 
ing and  dressing  ? If  they  can  not  leave  off  these  works  will  they  be 
not  fallen  and  sinful  by  leaving  off  good  works  ? Will  they  not  be- 
come great  sinners,  if  they  receive  food,  clothes  and  other  necessaries 
from  house-holders  and  make  no  return  to  them  in  any  shape  what- 
ever ? As  the  eyes  are  to  see  with,  the  ears  are  to  hear  with  they 
will  be  of  no  use  if  they  don’t  perform  these  functions.  In  like  maner, 
if  the  monks  do  not  preach  the  truth,  nor  do  they  study  or  spread  the 
use  of  the  Vedas  and  other  authentic  scriptures,  they  are  a useless 
burden  on  the  earth.  As  regards  their  assertion,  that  it  is  no  use  to 
bother  their  head  with  the  talk  of  the  illusive  world  and  the  like 
things,  it  is  the  preachers  of  these  doctrines  that  are  incarnate  false- 
hood and  sinners,  adding  to  the  doing  of  sins.  Whatever  action  is 
done  with  the  body  is  attributed  to  the  soul  that  bears  its  fruit. 

Distinction  between  God  and  Soul 

Those  who  think  that  the  human  soul  is  the  Supreme  Being, 
sleep  on  the  rosy  bed  of  ignorance;  for  the  soul  is  finite,  limited  in 
knowledge  and  the  Supreme  Being  is  infinite,  all  pervading  and  om- 
niscient. The  Supreme  Being  is  eternal,  holy,  ever  wakeful,  absolute  by 
nature  but  the  soul  is  sometimes  free  and  at  other  times  subject  to  the 
influence  of  her  actions.  The  Supreme  Being  is  ever  above  ignorance 
or  confusion,  being  omnipresent  and  omniscient;  but  the  soul  is  some- 
times illumed  with  knowledge  and  at  other  times  falls  into  ignorance. 
God  never  suffers  the  pains  of  birth  and  death,  which  the  soul  endures. 
Hence  the  falsity  of  their  teaching. 

Q. — Is  it  true  that  monks  are  free  from  the  obligation  of  all 
works,  not  using  fire  for  cooking  their  food  or  touching  metal  as  coin? 

A. — No.  That  person  is  called  a Sannyasi  or  monk,  who  knows 


Retirement  and  Renunciation 


133 


God  and  who  has  ceased  to  do  evil  deeds  and  is  of  good  nature. 
Thus  a monk  is  a doer  of  virtuous  and  undoer  of  evil  deeds. 

Q. — Teaching  and  preaching  arc  done  by  lay  persons.  The 
clergy  or  monks  have  nothing  to  do  with  these  works. 

A. — The  laity  may  preach  truth  and  listen  to  a discourse  on  it; 
but  they  have  not  so  much  impartiality  or  time  at  their  disposal  as 
the  clergy  have.  Verily,  it  is  the  duty  of  the  persons,  called  the 
Brahmanas,  (ministering  priests).  So  men  should  teach  and  preach 
truth  among  men  and  women  among  women.  But  the  Brahmanas 
cannot  get  as  much  time  to  make  preaching  tours  as  the  clergy.  When 
the  Brahamanas  act  contrary  to  the  injuctions  of  the  Vedas,  the  clergy 
alone  can  check  and  control  them.  Hence,  the  necessity  of  renuncia- 
tion and  the  clerical  order. 

Q. — Is  it  right  that  clergy  man  should  stay  one  night  only  at  a 
village  but  not  longer,  as  is  said:  Eka  ratrhn  vased  grame,  &c. 

A. — It  is  true  to  a certain  extent,  for  a man  can  not  do  much 
good  to  the  people  at  large  by  his  long  residence  at  a place.  Attach- 
ment to  that  place  gets  strong.  Love  and  hatred  are  increased  for 
things  there.  If  to  do  much  good  be  the  end  in  view  by  living  long 
at  one  place,  then  it  should  be  such  as  at  the  place  of  King  Janak, 
where  the  frairs  of  the  order  of  the  Panch  Sikha  and  other  clergymen 
stayed  for  many  years.  But  not  to  live  at  one  place,  is  fabricated  by 
the  modern  hypocriticed  sectarians;  for  if  a clergyman  stays  long, 
their  frauds  will  be  exposed  and  come  to  an  end. 

Q.—ls  it  true  that  the  donor  who  gives  gold  in  alms  to  the 
clergy,  will  be  thrown  into  hell,  as  is  the  import  of  the  text  : — 

A. — It  is  also  got  up  by  the  opponents  of  the  social  orders, 
sectarians  and  selfish  mythologists;  for  if  the  clergy  get  money,  they 
will  refute  a great  deal  of  their  falsehood,  which  will  cause  them  loss. 
Also,  the  clergymen’s  affluence  will  make  them  independent  of  the 
sectarians.  But  when  their  begging  and  other  necessaries  are  in  their 
hand  they  will  be  afraid  of  the  mythologists.  When  it  is  thought  good 
and  meritorious  to  give  charity  to  the  ignorant  and  selfish,  there  can 
be  no  harm  or  sin  in  giving  it  to  the  learned  and  beneficent  clergymen. 
Says  Manu, 

^ I —XI,  6. 

—A  person  should  give  various  kinds  of  gems,  gold  and  the  like 
valuable  to  the  clergy.  Hence,  the  prohibitive  couplet  advanced  in 
argument  is  absurd;  for,  if  a donor  goes  to  hell  by  giving  gold  to  the 
clergy,  he  will  go  to  heaven  by  giving  silver,  pearls,  diamonds,  and 
other  precious  metals  and  stones. 

Q. — The  Pandit  or  lay  Brahmin  made  a mistake  in  quoting  the 
text,  which  should  be  Yati  haste  dhanam  dadyat : he  goes  to  hell  who 
crosses  the  hand  of  the  clergy  with  money. 

/4.— This  text  is  also  written  by  an  ignorant  from  imagination 
for,  if  man  who  gives  money  to  a clergyman  by  putting  it  on  his  hand. 


134 


Satyarth  Prakash 


goes  to  hell,  he  will  go  to  heaven  by  placing  it  at  his  feet  and  by 
giving  it  tied  in  a knot  of  a piece  of  cloth.  So  such  guesses  are  not 
worth  acceptance,  Verily,  it  is  true  that  if  a clergyman  keeps  more 
money  than  is  required  to  meet  his  own  wants  or  personal  expenses, 
he  will  be  oppressed  with,  the  fear  of  thieves  and  become  attached  to 
the  worldly  affairs.  But  he  who  is  learned,  will  never  do  any  selfish 
act  unbecoming  of  the  holy  order,  nor  will  he  be  tied  down  to  the 
world,  for  he  has  previously  seen  and  enjoyed  all  pleasures  in  the 
house-holder’s  life,  or  studentship.  And  he  who  has  taken  holy  order 
from  studentship,  never  falls  into  worldliness  from  his  entire  selfl- 
essness. 

Q, — The  people  say  that  if  a clerg>man  comes  to  a feast  held  in 
memory  of  the  manes  or  shradha,  as  it  is  called  in  Sanscrit,  or  invited 
to  dine  therein  the  manes  flee  away  and  fall  into  hell. 

>4.— Firstly,  it  is  impossible  and  false  that  the  dead  come  to  the 
feast,  or  that  the  shradha  food  goes  to  the  dead  forefathers;  for,  it  is 
against  the  teaching  of  the  Vedas  and  the  reason.  When  they  don’t 
come  at  all,  who  is  it  that  runs  away  ? How  can  the  souls  come, 
when  they  are  incarnased  after  death  according  to  the  consequences  of 
their  good  or  evil  deeds  in  the  reign  of  the  just  law  of  God  ? Hence, 
this  belief  is  got  up  by  gourmand  mythologists  and  beggers  in  colored 
garb,  and  is  altogether  false.  Verily,  it  is  right  that  wherever  clergy- 
men go,  the  mane’s  feasts  held  against  the  orders  of  the  Vedas  and 
authentic  scriptures,  will  be  put  an  end  to,  the  fraud  being  exposed. 

Q. — It  will  go  hard  upon  him  to  lead  a chaste  life  who  joins  the 
clerical  order  from  studentship,  sexual  desires  being  very  hard  to 
restrain.  Therefore,  it  is  proper  for  a man  to  become  a clergyman 
after  living  a married  life  and  a hermit’s  sylvan  life  when  he 
becomes  old. 

A. — He  who  can  not  live  chaste  and  can  not  restrain  his  senses, 
should  not  join  the  holy  orders  from  the  life  of  the  student.  But  why 
should  he  not  do  it,  who  can  ? He  never  becomes  a slave  to  the  senses, 
who  knows  the  evils  of  sensuousness  and  the  benefits  of  chastity.  His 
energy  is  consumed  as  fuel,  so  to  speak,  in  the  furnace  of  intellection. 
The  hale  have  no  such  need  of  the  doctor  and  physic,  as  the  sick.  In 
the  same  manner,  the  man  or  the  woman  may  not  marry,  whose  object 
of  life  is  only  the  promotion  of  the  cause  of  knowledge  and  religion, 
and  the  good  of  the  people  of  all  the  world,  as  for  example,  the  Ranch 
Shikha  order  men  and  Gargi  and  other  women  of  old.  Therefore,  the 
duly  qualified  persons  should  join  the  clerical  order.  If  an  unqualified 
man  becomes  a clergyman,  he  will  fall  off  himself  and  lead  others 
astray.  The  entirely  selfless  clergyman  or  parivrat  sannyasi  is  like  the 
paramount  lord  in  the  world,  only  that  a king  respected  in  his  domi- 
nions or  by  his  subjects  and  relatives,  but  a clergyman  is  respected 
everywhere. 

One  of  the  morals  of  Chanakya  says  that  a king  and  a learned  man 
cannot  be  equal;  for,  a king  is  respected  and  honoured  in  his  own 
country,  but  a learned  man  is  honoured  and  revered  everywhere. 


Retirement  and  Renunciation 


135 


Therefore,  the  student’s  life  is  for  the  acquisition  of  knowledge,  train- 
ing in  morality,  developing  physical  power  and  the  like  acquirements; 
the  married  life  is  for  the  practical  use  of  all  the  best  works;  the 
retired  life  for  maturing  thought,  contemplation,  increasing  knowledge, 
and  performing  penances;  and  the  sacerdotal  is  for  spreading  the  light 
of  the  Vedas  and  other  truthful  scriptures,  practising  piety  and  pure 
righteousness,  renouncing  all  evil  actions,  preaching  the  truth  and 
dispelling  the  doubts  of  the  people  in  truth.  But  those  who  do  not 
properly  do  the  duty  of  the  holy  order  of  preaching  the  truth  and 
showing  the  right  way,  fall  from  virtue  and  deserve  to  go  to  hell, 
Therefore,  the  clergy  should  do  good  to  the  world  by  preaching  the 
truth,  dispelling  the  doubts  of  skeptics,  teaching  the  Vedas  and  other 
authentic  scriptures,  and  promoting  the  cause  of  the  Vedic  religion. 

0.— Are  those  people  counted  among  the  clergy  who  are  called 
the  Sadhus,  Vairagis  Gosains,  Khakis,  &c?  (These  are  dilferent  classes 
of  Indian  friars  or  mendicants.) 

/4.— No.  For,  none  of  the  qualifications  of  the  spiritual  order  is 
found  in  them.  They  go  counter  to  the  teaching  of  the  Vedas,  and 
honour  the  teaching  of  their  abbots  or  the  founders  of  their  sects  more 
than  the  commendments  of  the  Vedas.  They  extol  their  own  faith  to 
the  sky.  Being  wedded  to  false  system  of  sectarianism,  they  cajole 
others  into  their  sect  for  selfish  purposes.  Instead  of  doing  good  to 
the  world,  they  mislead  the  people  to  the  downward  path  of  retro- 
gression and  satisfy  their  own  selfish  ends.  Therefore,  they  can  not 
be  reckoned  in  the  spiritual  order.  There  is  not  the  least  doubt  at  all 
in  it.  They  alone  are  righteous,  self-abnegating  and  high  souled,  who 
act  themselves  on  the  dictates  of  virtue  and  induce  others  to  follow 
it;  who  themselves  enjoy  the  blessing  of  the  present  life  and  make  the 
rest  of  the  world  equally  share  in  them,  going  themselves  on  the  path 
of  God  and  showing  it  to  others  to  go  by.  So  much  in  brief  for  the 
description  of  the  spiritual  order  of  society.  The  next  chapter  will  be 
devoted  to  the  duties  of  royalty. 

Summary 

The  first  portion  of  life  being  devoted  to  education,  and  the  second  to  secu- 
larity,  the  third,  from  the  50th  year,  should  be  spent  in  retirement  or  eremit ism, 
which  requires  the  performance  of  the  five  sacraments,  of  the  senses,  vegetarian 
diet,  study  and  instruction  of  knowledge,  kindness  to  all,  non-receipt  of  charity, 
and  research  into  the  spiritual  phenomenon.  An  anchorite  may  keep  his  wife  with 
him  or  leave  her  in  the  care  of  his  son. 

{Continued  on  next  page) 


Chapter  VI 

THE  DUTIES  OF  ROYALITY 

1.  TigimrfjJ  qmsrat  i 

N C C 

fHfe5=9  qT»TT  II 

2.  STfi  SIT'^  I 

q«nj^rm  'rfTT^T'nir  ii 

MANU,  the  great  law-giver  of  antiquity,  says  to  the  saints  who 
approached  him  to  ask  the  import  of  the  law,  that,  having 
described  the  duties  of  the  four  classes  of  people  and  four 
institutions  of  society,  1.  he  will  proceed  to  explain  those  of  the  king, 
that  is  to  say,  what  the  qualifications  of  a king  are,  what  his  possibili- 
ties are,  and  what  his  means  are  to  achieve  success, — Vlf,  1.  The 
following  is  the  way  2.  how  a warrior  being  educated  and  trained 
like  a very  learned  Brahmin,  should  constitutionally  govern  the 
country  with  justice:  ib.  2— The  Lord  saith.  Rig.  Ill,  38,6, — 

The  king  and  people  should  join  to  form  three  Councils  relating  to 
the  affairs  of  Education,  Religion,  and  Administration,  for  their 
welfare,  for  the  advancement  of  knowledge  and  for  the  protection  of 
the  interests  of  the  government  and  the  country,  which  adorn  the 
civilization  of  the  people  with  science,  independence,  religion,  morality 
and  wealth. 

rf  ^ ^ II  - Ath.  K.  15,  Ann.  2,  Varg.  9,  M.  2. 

HHTO?:  II  Ath.  K.19,  An  7,  Varg  5%  M.  6 

The  three  Councils’  constitution,  including  the  government  policy 
relating  to  war  and  peace,  and  the  army  should  watch  over  prosperity 
of  the  government  of  the  country.  Regarding  the  king  and  the 
courtiers,  the  king  should  require  the  chief  leader  to  act  in  obedience 
to  the  just  laws  of  the  constitution  of  the  court,  and  the  other 
courtiers  to  abide  by  the  laws  of  the  government.  In  other  words, 
one  individual  should  not  have  the  absolute  power  of  government ; 
the  Council  of  which  the  King  is  the  President,  should  be  subordinate 

The  fourth  portion  of  life  should  be  spent  in  renunciation  and  employed  in 
teaching  religion  and  the  realisation  of  God  by  introspection,  being  free  from  the 
three  desires,  viz,  for  children,  wealth  and  fame.  The  resigned  person  should  go 
from  place  to  place  to  teach  truth,  justice,  benevolence,  and  other  commandments 
of  God.  He  or  she  should  live  on  pure  food  and  drink,  give  injury  to  no  creature, 
be  angry  with  none,  bless  in  return  of  curse,  clip  hair,  put  on  purple  dress,  and 
keep  a staff.  The  religion  or  virtue  to  be  practised  and  taught  is  marked  with  ten 
charactersitics  viz.,  patience,  forgiveness,  self-denial,  honesty,  purity,  mastery  over 
the  senses,  sensibleness,  knowledge,  veracity,  cheerfulness. 

Secular  priests  prohibit  pecuniary  gifts  to  the  resigned,  which  is  not  proper, 
as  these  selfless  persons  know  a better  use  of  money.  The  Brahmins  or  learned 
persons  alone  should  join  the  holy  order  but  not  others,  as  they  can  do  more 
good  to  the  world. 


The  Duties  of  Royality 


137 


to  him ; the  king  and  the  Council  should  both  be  subject  to  the 
People,  and  the  people  should  be  subordinate  to  the  Council.  If  this 
course  be  not  adopted,  as  the  Shatpath  says, 

^frdfrT  rT^TjfTts^  ftr^TFrf^r  ?T  TT?qfr  ffir  II 

— Kand  13,  Prapathak  3,  Brah  3,  Kandika,  7,  8,  the  ruling  body 
being  independent  of  the  people  and  absolute  in  power,  and  being  in 
possession  of  the  country,  will  ruin  the  people.  Thus  a sole  and 
independent  monarch  becomes  neglectful  of  his  duties  and  ruinous  to 
the  people.  He  greatly  oppresses  the  people  and,  as  it  were,  eats 
them  away.  So,  none  should  be  made  absolute  in  a government. 
An  absolute  king  ruins  the  people  as  the  lion  and  the  other  carnivora 
destroy  healthy  and  vigorous  animals  to  eat  them.  He  dos  not 
allow  anyone  to  rise  above  him.  He  would  rob  the  wealthy,  despoil 
them,  and  unjustly  punish  them  to  serve  his  own  purposes. 

SUTTfrT  ^ 'RT  STUT^n  TT3ig  I 

— Atharvaveda,  K.  6,  Anu.  10,  V.  98,  M.  I — The  king  should  appoint 
him  President,  who  is  the  greatest  promoter  of  welfare  in  all  the 
people,  who  can  vanquish  the  adversary,  who  cannot  be  overcome  by 
the  enemies,  who  surpasses  kings  in  excellence,  who  is  most  influential, 
who  is  the  fittest  person  to  preside,  who  is  endued  with  commendable 
qualities,  who  does  good  deeds,  and  who  has  a good  temper,  com- 
manding respect,  and  inspiring  confidence,  who  is  able  to  afford 
asylum,  and  who  is  most  popular. 

n ~Yaj.  IX,  40. 

— O learned  ruler  and  people,  make  all  the  world  free  from  the 
enemies,  do  justice  by  unanimously  appointing  the  president  king  over- 
lord,  being  the  friend  of  all,  endued  with  perfect  knowledge  and 
justice,  ever  free  from  partiality,  to  protect  the  people’s  wealth  and 
the  prosperous  government  of  the  universal  empire,  containing  many 
learned  people,  so  as  to  further  the  cause  of  progress. 

RT  RlftTR:  II— Rig.  1,  xxxix,  2. 

— The  Lord  says  : O ruler,  let  your  weapons,  fire-arms,  missiles,  guns, 
muskets,  bows,  swords,  and  other  arms  be  powerful  and  effective  in 
vanquishing  the  enemies  and  resisting  their  onslaught ; and  let  your 
army  be  admirable  and  efficient  so  as  to  be  always  victorious.  But  let 
the  afore-said  arms  and  accountrements  be  not  so  useful  to  one  who 
does  reprehensible  and  unjust  deeds.  To  be  explicit,  a rule  prospers 
and  progresses  as  long  as  the  people  are  righteous.  But  when  they 
commit  iniquities,  it  goes  to  rack  and  ruin.  The  appointment  of  very 
learned  men  as  educational  officers,  of  pious  and  learned  men  as  the 
dignitaries  of  the  spiritual  council,  and  of  noted  virtuous  and  learned 
men  in  the  administrative  council  and  of  the  most  remarkable  person 
of  them  with  regard  to  qualities,  action,  and  disposition,  as  the  presi- 
dent of  the  executive  council  produces  all  kinds  of  prosperity  and 


138 


Satyarth  Prakash 


progress.  All  the  people  should  obey  and  abide  by  the  rules  and 
regulations  of  the  government  policy  framed  by  the  unanimous  consent 
of  the  three  councils.  They  should  agree  in  all  the  works  that  are  for 
the  benefit  of  the  people.  They  are  bound  to  do  what  is  beneficial  to 
the  whole  society  and  to  all  the  affairs,  pertaining  to  religion.  They 
are  at  liberty  to  act  in  their  private  concerns. 

President 

=5r  I 

—The  qualifications  of  a President  are  : — He  should  be  the  promoter 
of  wealth,  as  quickly  as  lightning,  as  dear  to  all  as  the  air  and  life. 
He  should  understand  what  one  means,  acting  impartially  like  an 
impartial  judge;  be  a promoter  of  justice,  religion,  and  knowledge  like 
the  sun;  an  enemy  of  the  darkness  of  ignorance,  injustice;  a destroyer 
of  the  wicked  like  fire:  a restrainer  of  the  wicked  by  various  means 
like  Varuna  or  the  controller;  a dispenser  of  ease  to  the  best  people 
like  the  moon;  and  a replenisher  of  wealth  like  the  lord  of  wealth.  A 
person  who  possesses  these  qualities,  should  be  elected  President. 

c\ 

— That  person  is  fit  to  be  the  President  of  a society  or  council,  who 
is  awful  like  the  sun,  who  strikes  fear  in  the  heart  of  all  by  his  power 
and  controls  them,  and  at  whom  none  on  earth  can  look  with  an 
angry  and  contemptuous  eye. 

H ^ II 

— That  person  is  worthy  to  be  made  President  who  is  able  to  suppress 
the  wicked,  and  is  of  great  resources  in  himself  like  the  fire,  air,  sun, 
moon,  religion,  and  who  is  encourager  and  promoter  of  wealth. 

King 

Who  is  a true  king  ? Says  Maim,  VII,  17-i9,  24-28,  30,  31,— 

H TT5n  3^t  H 5nfHr!T  ^ W.  I 

'^'>T?*TT«T»TT'»rt  ^ srfrTH:  II 

O CN  c 

— That  which  is  punishment,  is  the  very  person,  as  it  were,  that  is 

the  king.  The  same  (law  of  punishment)  is  the  dispenser  of  justice  and 
the  governor  of  all;  it  is  the  representative  and  surety  of  the  duties  of 
the  four  classes  of  people  and  their  four  institutions. — Manu,  VII,  17. 

5ITfel  srSTT  I 

«T*T  II 

— It  rules  all  the  people,  and  is  the  protector  of  all  subjects.  It  (the 
law  of  restributive  justice)  wakes  when  the  people  sleep.  Hence,  wise 
men  regard  the  law  or  punishment  as  virtue  or  religion,  ib.  18. 

H «rH:  st3IT:  I 

c ^ 

wmlw  S|i»fhT?§  II 


The  Duties  of  Royalty 


139 


— When  law  is  enforced  with  proper  consideration  it  delights  all 
the  people;  but  when  it  is  executed  without  consideration,  it  ruins  the 
king  from  all  sides  — ib.  19. 

— The  absence  of  justice  spoils  all  the  classes  of  people  and  break  up 
all  institutions.  The  abortion  of  justice  provokes  the  resentment  of 
the  people. 

qrrq^  i 

^cTT  11 

— They  become  unmindful  of  their  duties  and  enjoy  peace  and  happi- 
ness where  the  genius  of  justice  like  a terrible  person  of  black  color 
and  red  eyes  stalks  among  the  people  to  destroy  crimes,  and  where  the 
administrator  of  justice  or  inflictor  of  punishment  is  impartial  and 
learned. 

rTfUif:  «sr«ifnT  i 

srm  ii 

— Learned  men  consider  him  to  be  a judge,  or  proper  person  to  inflict 
punishment,  who  is  veracious,  who  acts  after  consideration,  who  is 
wise,  and  who  is  a learned  king-president  in  securing  success  in  virtue, 
wealth  and  pleasure.— ib.  26. 

^ TTsiT  i 

9PT»TTr»TT  II 

— The  king  who  well  administers  justice,  promotes  the  cause  of 

religions,  wealth,  and  the  enjoyment  of  life.  But  the  king  who  sits 
on  the  judgement  seat,  and  who  is  voluptuous,  malicious,  mean,  and 
low  minded,  is  ruined  by  retributive  justice  itself. — ib.  27. 

— As  justice  is  very  awful  and  majestic,  it  can  not  be  upheld  by  the 
ignorant,  and  unrighteous.  It  ruins  the  unjust  and  unrighteous  king — 
lb  28. 

!T  ^ II 

— For,  he  who  is  unassisted  with  the  advice  of  sages,  who  is  unlearned, 
untrained,  sensuous,  a block-head,  is  never  able  to  inflict  punishment 
or  enforce  law  with  justice — ib.  30. 

5Tf^T  lT^5TT^HmfT^TT  I 

>o  « 

— But  he  alone  who  is  pure  in  mind,  right  in  conduct,  keeping  the 
company  of  the  good,  acting  in  perfect  accordance  with  the  laws  of 
morality,  and  helped  by  the  advice  of  the  best  persons,  and  who  is 
wise  is  able  to  strictly  enforce  Jaw  and  do  justice.— ib.  31. 


140 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Chief  Officers 

^ TrilT  T(  ^ I 

c 

’St  II 

— For,  Manu,  says,  XII.  100,  110-115 — Persons  thoroughly  versed  in 
the  Vedas  and  other  scriptures,  perfectly  learned  in  their  subjects,  vir- 
tuous, masters  of  the  senses  and  polite  in  manners,  should  be  appoint- 
ed in  the  four  offices  of  (i)  the  command  of  armies  and  authority  over 
all  commandants  of  corps,  (2)  the  head  of  the  criminal  and  judicial 
affairs,  (3)  supreme  power  over  all,  and  (4)  royal  authority;  that  is  to 
say  the  commander-in-chief,  chief  administrator,  chief  justice,  and 
king  should  be  most  learned  in  all  departments  of  knowledge. 

Council 

qifq  ^ w rf  n 

— The  decision  or  judgement  of  the  council  of  at  least  ten  learned 
persons,  or  in  their  absence,  of  three  learned  persons,  should  not  be 
transgressed  or  controverted  by  any  one. — ib.llO. 

— The  members  of  this  council  should  be  learned  in  the  four  Vedas, 
logic,  Nirukta  or  Vedic  companion,  law  and  other  scriptures.  But  if 
they  should  be  students,  family  men,  and  anchorites,  then  it  will  be 
properly  constituted  council  when  it  contains  no  fewer  than  ten 
learned  persons. — ib.  III. 

•o 

5^grTT  'TfT^^JTT  II 

— The  decision  of  the  assembly  constituted  of  three  persons  versed  in 
the  Rig,  Yajur,  and  Sama  Vedas,  should  not  be  transgressed  by  anyone. 

?r  'rd  wt  siisTWT’jfeitsg#:  ii 

— Also,  even  the  decision  of  a point  in  law  by  one  clergyman  or 
Sannyasi  who  knows  all  the  Vedas  and  is  the  foremost  of  all  the 
regenerates,  should  be  considered  to  be  the  best  law;  for  the  opinion 
formed  by  an  assembly  of  millions  and  trillions  of  ignorant  men 
should  not  be  accepted. 

eJrrTTqf  qftqcq  ?T  II 

— A council  can  not  be  constituted  of  those  men  who  meet  by  thous- 
ands, who  are  destitute  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Vedas,  the  training  of 
the  student,  veracity  and  other  virtues  of  urbanity,  and  right  thinking, 
and  who  are  Brahmin  by  birth  but  live  like  the  Sudras. — ib.  114. 

cTcqrq  ii 

— The  law  taught  by  the  illiterate  fools,  ignorant  of  the  principles  of 


The  Duties  of  Royality 


141 


the  Vedas,  should  not  be  accepted.  For,  hundreds  kinds  of  sin 
overtake  them,  who  follow  the  teaching  of  fools. — Manu,  XII,  1 15. 

Therefore,  ignorant  people  should  not  be  taken  into  the  above 
three  Councils,  educational,  spiritual,  and  judicial  or  administrative; 
but  on  the  contrary,  they  should  ever  be  constituted  of  learned  and 
righteous  persons. 

Members  of  Councils  « 

n Mann,  vii,  43. 

— For,  the  people  can  then  and  then  only  become  kings,  presidents 
and  members  of  the  sovereign  council,  when  they  have  studied  the 
three  branches  of  knowledge  of  the  four  Vedas,  namely,  duties, 
worship  and  philosophy,  with  the  masters  of  them  ; eternal  laws  of 
equity  and  justice,  logic,  metaphysics,  viz.,  the  right  knowledge  of 
the  attributes,  actions,  and  nature  of  God,  in  other  words,  divine 
science,  traditions  and  customs  of  the  people,  and  made  of  assertions 
and  interrogations. 

stUT;  II— ib.  44. 

— All  the  councillors  and  the  president  should  subdue  the  senses  and 
keep  them  under  control,  ever  follow  virtue,  and  avoid  vice,  and  keep 
others  away  from  it.  To  strengthen  themselves,  they  should  practise 
yoga  or  meditation  ; for,  one  who  can  not  subjugate  his  own  senses, 
that  is,  desires,  respiration,  and  the  animal  body,  which  are,  as  it 
were,  his  subjects  in  himself,  can  never  conquer  the  subjects  out  of 
himself  and  bring  them  under  his  control. 

— With  a firm  resolution,  he  should  carefully  shun  the  ten  evils  aris- 
ing from  the  love  of  pleasure  and  eight  vices  springing  from  anger, 
from  whose  snares  it  is  hard  for  a man  to  get  out.  He  should  also 
help  others  out  of  them. — ib.  45. 

Evils  of  Anger 

g n lb.  46. 

For,  the  king  who  indulges  in  the  ten  evils  born  of  the  love  of  pleasure 
loses  virtue  and  wealth,  that  is,  rule,  riches  and  other  resources.  He 
who  indulges  in  the  eight  evils  arising  from  hot  temper,  loses  even 
his  body. 

*T?:  I 

^ 95t^  n'n:  ii— ib  47. 

c ^ 

— The  ten  evils  arising  from  the  love  of  pleasure  are  (1)  hunting  or 
sport;  (2)  gambling,  chowpar  (drafts)  and  the  like  plays  ; (3)  sleeping 
by  day  ; (4)  listening  to  love  tales,  scandals  or  talking  ill  of  others  ; 


142 


Satyarth  Prakash 


(5)  excess  with  women ; (6)  the  use  of  intoxicants, — wine,  opium, 
bhang  or  hemp  leaf,  drink  ganja  or  hemp  leaf  smoking,  opium  smok- 
ing, and  the  like  stimulants;  (7)  singing;  (8)  playing  on  musical 
instruments ; (9)  dancing  or  witnessing  dance,  attending  balls ; and 
(10)  useless  strolling  to  and  fro. 

— Tite  eight  evils  produced  from  wrath  or  hot  temper  are  1.  back- 
biting, 2.  adultery  or  rape,  i.e.^  outraging  anybody’s  wife  with  force, 
3.  malice  or  hatred,  4.  jealousy,  that  is,  not  to  bear  to  see  others 
prosper,  5.  fault-finding — to  show  good  qualities  as  faults  and  faultas 
as  good  qualities.  6.  squandering,  that  is,  to  waste  money  and  other 
valuables  in  unrighteous  work,  7.  to  speak  harshly,  and  8.  to  punish 
people  without  faults  severely  or  call  them  names— ib.  48. 

if  fatf:  i 

— He  should  carefully  relinquish  avarice,  which  is  in  the  opinion  of 
the  learned  the  root  of  evils  that  befall  a man  and  that  are  produced 
from  the  love  of  pleasure  and  outburst  of  hot  temper, — ib.  49. 

c s 

— The  great  evils  among  the  vices  produced  from  the  love  of  pleasure 
are — 1.  alcoholism  or  the  use  of  intoxicants,  2.  gambling  or  playing 
with  dice,  3.  keeping  too  much  company  of  women,  4.  hunting.  These 
four  are  the  most  wicked  evil  habits  — ib.  50. 

— Of  the  evils  arising  from  the  love  of  pleasure  and  hot  temper,  three 
are  great  evils  causing  great  pain,  namely,  I,  to  punish  people  without 
faults,  2,  to  use  harsh  language,  and  3,  to  spend  money  illegally. — ib.  51. 

3^  il  ib»  52. 

^ ^ > N 

— Of  the  seven  evils  resulting  from  indulgence  in  sensuous  pleasures 
and  the  uncoiitrolment  of  hot  temper,  their  heinousness  increases 
according  to  their  order  of  precedence,  viz  , the  useless  waste  of 
money  is  less  heinous  than  harsh  language,  harsh  language  than 
injustice,  injustice  th.in  hunting,  hunting  than  excess  with  women, 
debauchery  than  gambling,  gambling  thin  drinking,  which  is  the 
greatest  of  all  evils. 

C ^ 

The  rule  in  this  case  is  that  it  is  better  to  die  than  to  indulge  in 
vicious  habits.  For,  if  a vicious  person  lives  long,  he  will  commit 
more  sins  and  going  to  deeper  depths  of  misery,  suffer  more  pain. 
But  if  a person  not  addicted  to  any  evil  habit  dies,  he  will  have 
enjoyed  pleasure.— ib.  53. 


The  Duties  of  Royalty 


143 


Therefore,  the  king  in  special  and  the  people  in  general  should 
not  be  addicted  to  hunting,  drinking,  and  other  vicious  habits  ; but, 
on  the  contrary,  leaving  vicious  and  sensuous  pleasures  and  attaining 
righteous  merits,  disposition,  and  methods  of  work,  they  should  do 
good  works. 

Ministers 

What  kind  of  persons  the  members  of  the  royal  court  and 
ministers  should  be,  is  thus  declared  by  Manii,  VII.  54—57,  60 — 64 — 

n— M.  VIT,  54. 

— The  king  should  appoint  seven  or  eight  ministers,  born  in  his 
territory  and  country,  versed  in  the  Vedas  and  other  scriptures,  brave 
and  courageous,  of  purpose  never  to  be  frustrated,  of  good  family, 
well-educated,  eminent,  virtuous,  and  skillful. 

— For,  without  special  assistance  even  an  easy  act  is  hard  to  be  per- 
formed by  a single  man.  Such  being  the  case,  how  can  the  great 
work  of  government  be  done  by  an  individual  person  ? Therefore,  it 
is  a very  bad  plan  to  make  one  person  king  and  to  entrust  the  affairs 
of  government  to  the  discretion  of  a single  individual. — ib — 55. 

Subjects  of  Deliberation 

»lf«cT  5IStTSI5r»RTfH  =9  II  lb.  56. 

>3  >3 

— The  president  should  daily  consult  expert  learned  ministers  on 
government  affairs,  such  as  1.  peace  to  be  made  with  some  one,  2.  war, 
3.  the  establishment  of  order — to  utilise  the  peaceful  time  for  the 
defence  of  the  country,  4.  prosperity — to  attack  an  evil  enemy  in 
one’s  favourable  and  prosperous  time,  5.  the  protection  of  revenue, 
organisation  of  army,  6.  to  establish  order  in  acquired  provinces  and 
make  them  free  from  disturbcnce  and  danger,  such  duties  should  ever 
engage  his  serious  thoughts. 

Decision  by  Majority 

— He  should  carefully  take  the  opinion  and  grounds  there  of  con- 
cilors  on  state  affairs  first  separately  and  then  collectively  and  decided 
on  a measure  according  to  the  votes  of  majority  for  the  benefit  of 
himself  and  others,— ib.  57. 

Experienced  Ministers 

sr!5n5i3rfr«t5TT5T  i 

II  ib.  60. 


144 


Satyarth  Prakash 


— He  should  appoint  other  ministers,  upright,  prudent,  of  decisive 
character,  of  great  resources,  very  able  to  secure  the  required  objects, 
and  well  tried  by  experience. 

5Tf>T:  I 

n ib.  61. 

— He  should  engage  in  service  as  many  ofTicers  and  men,  active, 
powerful,  very  ingenious  and  choicest,  as  are  required  for  the  efficient 
performance  of  state  functions. 

Foreign  and  Home  Ministers 

II  ib.  62. 

— He  should  appoint  brave,  bold,  strong,  virtuous  men,  of  good 
family,  at  the  posts  of  important  work  ; and  shy,  timid  persons  for 
internal  affairs  of  the  home  department. 

Ambassador 

fP^^T^TT%*S2r5T  II  lb.  63. 

— He  should  appoint  that  person  as  his  ambassador  who  comes  from 
a distinguished  family,  is  of  righteous  intents  and  purposes,  and  of 
good  conduct,  virtuous  at  heart,  able  to  foreshadow  the  course  of 
great  events  to  come,  thoioughly  familiar  with  all  scriptures  and 
expert  in  his  work  of  diplomacy. 

I 

T75T:  5T5T^^^  II 

— The  ambassador  should  be  very  zealous  in  the  discharge  of  govern- 
ment work,  love  his  work,  be  sincere,  pure  at  heart,  dexterous  in 
work,  of  retentive  memory,  not  forgetting  thing  of  long  past,  acting 
in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  the  countries  and  times,  hand- 
some, intrepid  and  eloquent — ib.  46  The  man  of  these  qualifications 
is  worthy  to  be  an  ambassador  of  the  king. 

Of  Officials  and  their  Responsibilities 

Manu,  VII.  65,  6,  68,  70,  74, — 78  thus  describes  the  kind  of 
persons  and  the  work  to  be  entrusted  to  them : — 

— The  prime  minister  should  see  that  justice  is  upheld  in  the  infliction 
of  punishment,  and  that  to  unjust  punishment  is  inflicted.  The 
treasury  and  executive  work  of  the  government  should  be  in  the  hand 
of  the  king  The  state  council  should  regulate  all  work.  The  power 
of  making  peace  or  alliance  with  any  country  or  declaring  war  should 
be  vested  in  the  ambassador  or  foreign  minister. — 65. 

IrnFaa  f#  «irR  ?rT  h ^ ii 


The  Duties  of  Royalty 


145 


— It  is  the  ambassador  who  creates  union  in  disunion  and  divides  and 
disunites  the  wicked  in  alliance.  He  should  so  act  as  to  produce 
disunion  among  enemies. — 66. 

?r«Tr  H II 

— The  president,  all  ministers  or  councillors,  the  ambassador  and  other 
minister  should  ascertain  the  designs  of  a hostile  king  and  his  people, 
and  take  such  measures  carefully  as  to  run  into  no  risk  or  bring  no 
trouble  upon  their  country. — 68. 

— He  should  fix  his  residence  in  the  country,  picturesque  and  enriched 
with  forest,  wealth  and  grain;  in  the  middle  of  which  he  should  make 
a series  of  fortification  manned  with  archers,  built  of  earth,  surrounded 
with  a ditch  of  water  and  forest  on  all  sides,  garrisoned  with  the 
army  all  round,  and  protected  by  mountains  around.  In  their  centre, 
he  should  make  his  town,  which  should  be  surrounded  with  a 
rampart. — ib.  70 

5T?r  I 

5T5T  II 

— For,  one  armed  bow  man  seated  therein  can  oppose  a hundred 
invaders,  and  one  hundred  entrenched  garrison  soldiers  can  resist  the 
attack  of  ten  thousand  enemies.  Therefore,  it  is  necessary  to  build  a 
fort.  ib.  74. 

^ (I 

—It  should  be  plentifully  supplied  with  weapons  and  missiles,  money 
and  provisions,  conveyances  and  learned  Brahmins  fit  to  teach  and 
preach  mechanics,  machines  and  various  kinds  of  appliances,  grass, 
provender,  water  and  other  requisites. — 75. 

'O  ^ ^ C N 

— In  the  centre  of  the  fort,  he  should  make  a house  for  his  residence 
supplied  with  water,  beautified  with  trees,  with  flowers  and  things  pro- 
tected in  all  respects,  comfortable  to  live  in  all  seasons,  whitewashed, 
and  which  should  accommodate  all  the  Government  Offices. — 76. 

—After  finishing  his  study  in  the  student’s  life,  he  should  marry  only 
one  woman,  beautiful,  accomplished,  attractive,  born  in  a very  noble 
family  of  his  warrior  class,  amiable  in  character,  suited  to  him  in 
knowledge,  disposition,  activity,  temper.  Regarding  all  other  women 
as  outside  his  amour,  he  should  not  even  look  at  them. — 77. 

I 

f ^ 11—78. 


146 


Satyarth  Prakash 


— He  should  keep  a chaplain  and  a priest,  for  they  will  perform 
fire* sacrifice,  fortnightly  worship,  and  other  religious  rites  of  the  house; 
while  he  himself  should  always  be  busy  with  the  government  affairs, 
the  right  performance  of  which  constitutes,  as  it  were,  his  prayer, 
meditation  and  other  acts  of  worship,  to  which  he  should  devote  his 
days  and  nights  so  as  not  to  suffer  any  work  to  go  wrong. 

Of  Tribute  or  Revenue 

C CO 

— He  should  receive  his  annual  tribute  through  virtuous  collector  of 
revenue  ; and  the  president-king  and  the  other  chief  officers,  and  the 
whole  council  should  all  act  in  conformity  with  the  precept  of  the 
Vedas  and  behave  themselves  towards  the  subjects  loco  parentis. — 
Manu,  Vir,  80. 

— The  state  council  should  appoint  various  inspecting  officers  of  the 
government  work.  It  will  be  their  duty  to  see  that  all  the  employees 
of  the  government  service  in  different  offices  work  and  discharge  their 
duties  in  accordance  with  the  rules  and  regulations  of  the  states. 
They  should  honour  them  if  they  work  properly  and  conscientiously 
and  punish  them  justly  if  they  act  in  opposition  to  orders. — ib.  81. 

— To  spread  the  light  of  the  Vedas  at  all  times,  which  is  the  inexhau- 
stible treasure  of  kings,  the  king  and  council  should  properly  honour 
him  who  comes  from  the  university  (Gurukul)  after  having  finished 
his  study  of  the  Vedas  and  other  scriptures  during  his  studentship. 
They  should  also  honour  them  who  turn  out  learned  scholars — ib.  82. 

TT^T  c^TgrT:  I 

N « N 

— This  course  will  promote  the  cause  of  knowledge  in  the  kingdom 
and  contribute  to  the  great  progress  of  the  people.  Whenever  a king 
devoted  to  the  protection  of  the  people  is  challenged  to  fight  by  another 
person,  equal,  inferior  or  superior  to  him ; he  calling  to  his  mind  the 
duties  of  the  warrior  class,  should  never  desist  from  joining  in  battle 
with  him  and  should  fight  with  great  skill  so  as  to  obtain  a victory. — 
ib.  8. 

— The  kings  who  fight  in  battle  with  all  their  might,  without  fear  and 
turning  their  back,  with  the  view  to  kill  the  enemy,  obtain  happiness. 
They  should  not  recede  from  combat.  However,  to  vanquish  the 
enemy,  it  is  right  to  conceal  one’s  self  from  him;  for,  one  should  make 
such  manoeuvers  and  adopt  such  means  as  to  defeat  him.  They  should 


The  Duties  of  Royalty 


147 


not  soon  disable  or  destroy  themselves  out  of  folly  like  the  lion  burnt 
by  coming  into  the  range  of  the  firing  of  arms. — ib.  86. 

Laws  of  Chivalry 

S3  -s 

2.  H gccf  H ^ H pRTg^iT  I 

sTigcimm  ^ <11^  n 

3.  q'(g«TS!T?Hsn'?f  HTtT  !TTr5mV%cHT  I 

5T  ^ >TTraTT  11 

C ■ON 

— 1.  Warriors,  keeping  before  their  mind  the  laws  of  chivalry  or  the 
rules  of  virtuous  men,  should  not  strike  in  battle  such  a person  as 
stands  here  or  there,  as  is  cowardly,  as  joins  the  palms  in  submission, 
as  has  the  hair  loosened,  as  sits,  as  says  ‘I  am  the  refugee;  2.  as  sleeps, 
as  is  swooned,  as  is  naked,  as  is  without  arms,  as  is  a spectator  of 
hght,  as  \s  a companion  of  the  enemy;  3.  as  \s  smarting  under  the  pain 
of  wounds;  as  is  miserable,  as  is  extremely  wounded,  as  is  timid  or  terri- 
fied, as  runs  away. — ib,  91,  92,  93. 

But  such  persons  should  be  taken  prisoners,  and  those  that  are 
well  among  them,  should  be  put  in  a Jail.  They  should  be 
properly  supplied  with  food  and  clothes.  The  wounded  should  not 
be  teased  and  subjected  to  pain.  They  should  be  given  such  work  to 
do  as  they  are  fit  for.  It  should  be  particularly  borne  in  mind  not  to 
hurt  or  strike  women,  children,  the  old,  the  sick,  or  otherwise  afflicted. 
Their  children  should  be  maintained  like  one’s  own.  Their  women 
should  also  be  maintained  and  regarded  as  one’s  sisters  and  daughters, 
whom  never  to  look  at  with  the  eye  of  lust.  When  the  order  is  well 
established,  those  persons  who  are  not  suspected  to  take  up  arms  again, 
should  be  honourably  set  at  liberty  and  sent  to  their  respective  homes 
or  countries.  But  those  who  are  thought  to  cause  disturbance  of 
peace,  should  be  always  kept  in  confinement. 

5lfiT<Rr^  II 

— The  soldier  who  deserts  his  ranks  out  of  fear  in  battle,  should  be 
punished  when  caught  for  the  crime  of  treason  against  the  govern- 
ment ; he  takes  upon  himself  all  the  consequences  of  the  evil  acts  of 
his  commander, — ib.  94. 

—His  master  takes  his  merit  which  was  to  give  him  happiness  both 
here  and  hereafter.  If  the  deserter  is  killed,  he  gets  no  felicity,  he  loses 
the  fruit  of  all  his  good  deeds.  He  does  not  obtain  that  merit  which 
is  acquired  by  him  who  fights  honourably  accordingly  to  the  code  of 
war. — lb.  95. 

m ^ m'Sf  i 


148 


Satyarth  Prakash 


— The  rule  should  never  be  infiringed  that  a commandant  or  a soldier, 
who  has  captured  cars,  horses,  elephants,  umbrellas,  money,  grain, 
cow  and  other  cattle,  women,  and  all  other  kinds  of  substances,  and 
the  flasks  of  clarified  butter,  oil  and  other  liquids  in  an  engagement, 
should  receive  them  as  his  lawful  prizes  of  war.— ib.  96. 

TT5rr  ^ (I 

— But  the  men  of  the  army  should  make  over  the  sixteenth  part  of 
their  prizes  to  the  king.  The  king  should  also  give  commandants 
and  soldiers  one-sixteenth  part  of  the  booty  captured  conjointly  by 
the  army. — ib.  97. 

The  share  of  the  slain  in  battle  should  be  given  to  their  surviving 
wives  and  children.  Their  widowed  wives  and  destitute  children  should 
be  maintained  at  the  expense  of  the  state.  When  the  children  attain 
maturity,  they  should  be  provided  with  employment  according  to  their 
fitness.  He  who  loves  the  prosperity,  honour,  success,  felicity  and 
progress  of  his  kingdom,  should  never  break  the  above  rules  of  war. 

Duties  of  Rulers 

— The  king  and  the  state  council  should  aspire  1.  to  get  what  is  not 
possessed,  2.  to  preserve  with  care  what  is  acquired,  3.  to  augment  the 
acquisition,  4.  to  apply  the  increase  of  wealth  to  the  promotion  of 
knowledge  and  religion,  to  give  it  to  students  and  preachers  of  the 
Vedic  path,  and  to  support  the  helpless  orphans  and  destitutes  there- 
with — Manu,  VII,  99. 

He  should  always  try  without  indolence  to  fiilflill  the  object  of 
the  aforesaid  four  fold  aspiration  of  the  military  class. 

TfOTrf  II 

— He  should  strive  to  gain  by  punishment  what  is  not  obtained,  to 
preserve  what  is  obtained  by  constant  inspection,  to  augment  what  is 
preserved  by  interest  and  other  legal  modes  of  increase,  and  to  spend 
the  increase  of  wealth  always  in  the  way  described  above. — ib.  101. 

— He  should  never  treat  anybody  with  guile,  but  should  act  with 
sincerity  in  his  dealings  with  all,  and  being  ever  on  his  guard,  detect 
the  fraud  of  others  to  avert  his  danger  therefrom. — ib.  104. 

!TT?iT  fey  Tft  fesrifWy  5 t 

— No  enemy  should  be  able  to  know  his  weakness  or  vulnerable 
points  *.  but  he  should  ever  know  his  foe’s  weak  points.  He  should 
conceal  his  parts  attackable  by  the  foe  as  the  tortoise  hides  its  limbs 
from  danger.— ib.  105. 


The  Duties  of  Royalty 


149 


qrr^JrcT  I 

?|!|7^’5^crg^  fgrf^TCq^  II 

— As  a heron  attentively  watches  the  opportunity  to  catch  a fish,  so  let 
him  muse  on  collecting  wealth;  having  improved  his  finances,  let  him 
put  forth  his  strength  like  a lion  to  vanquish  the  enemy;  let  him  fall 
upon  the  foe  like  a leopard  from  an  ambush;  let  him  double  like  a 
hare  on  the  approach  of  a powerful  enemy,  and  then  take  him  by  sur- 
prise.— ib.  106. 

Policy 

II 

—Thus,  let  the  president  desirous  of  success  reduce  to  subjection  all 
the  felons,  robbers,  thieves  in  the  country  by  1.  amnesty,  2.  presents, 
3.  division;  and  if  these  means  fail  to  secure  their  submission,  let  them 
be  brought  under  subjection  by  4.  force  of  arms. — ib.  107. 

TPsj  q'fTqf^^T^r:  ii 

— As  a husbandman  removing  chaff  preserves  his  corn  and  does  not 
suffer  it  to  break,  so  should  a king  destroy  robbers  and  thieves  and 
protect  the  kingdom. — ib.  110. 

— The  king  who  thoughtlessly  weakens  his  people  from  fondness  for 
pleasure,  is  soon  ruined  before  his  death  with  his  relatives  and  deprived 
of  his  kingdom. — ib.  111. 

Ruin  of  Empire 

5TTfnT?rt  i 

arm  stmv.  ii 

— As  the  emaciation  of  the  body  cuts  of  the  life  of  sentient  beings,  so  is 
the  life  of  kings,  that  is,  their  power  and  substance,  together  with  their 
kith  and  kin,  destroyed  by  the  emasculation  of  the  people. — ib.  112. 

f^c^r  \ 

qrf^csr:  ii 

— Therefore,  the  king  and  the  sovereign  assembly  should  so  try  for  the 
success  of  government,  that  state  affairs  may  be  conducted  with  effi- 
ciency. The  joy  of  that  king  ever  increases,  who  is  devoted  by  all 
means  to  the  protection  of  his  dominions. — ib.  113. 

Management 

^ f ii 

— For  this  purpose,  he  should  make  a government  office  in  the  midst 


150 


Satyarth  Prakash 


of  two,  three,  five,  and  a hundred  villages,  to  place  in  it  oflScers  requir- 
ed, properly  qualified  to  carry  on  the  goveinment  affairs. — ib.  114. 

— ib.  1 15.  Let  a chief  man  be  appointed  over  one  village,  another  over 
ten  such  villages,  a third  over  20  such  villages,  a fourth  over  such  100 
townships,  a fifth  over  such  1,000  townships  : that  is  to  say,  just  as  at 
present  there  is  one  Patvari  or  notary  in  one  village,  or  a thana  : police 
station  in  10  such  villages,  and  a big  thana  over  two  such  police 
stations,  and  over  five  such  thanas  one  tehsil  or  revenue  office  and 
over  10  tehsils  one  district  office.  All  this  system  of  government  has 
been  taken  from  the  code  of  our  Manu  and  other  law-givers. 

.a  ^ N 

!if%?  ii 

N N 

He  should  arrange  to  govern  in  the  manner  described  above  and 
order  that  the  lord  of  one  village  should  daily  confidentially  report  to 
the  lord  of  10  villages  whatever  crimes  and  occurrences  happen  in  his 
jurisdiction. 

In  the  same  way,  the  officer  of  10  villages  should  report  to  that 
of  20  villages  what  occurs  in  10  villages  under  him.— ib.  116. 

— The  officer  incharge  of  20  villages  should  report  daily  the  occurre- 
nces of  20  villages  to  the  officer  incharge  of  100  villages.  The  gover- 
nor of  100  townships  should  submit  his  report  daily  on  what  happens 
in  his  jurisdiction  to  the  governor  of  1,0C0  township. — 117. 

Five  officers  each  in  charge  of  20  townships  should  report  to  the 
officer  of  100  villages;  and  ten  lords  of  1000  villages  each  should  report 
all  occurrences  daily  to  the  ruler  of  10,000  villages  and  to  the  State 
Council  of  100,000  villages.  All  those  state  councils  should  report  the 
events  of  the  whole  world  to  the  universal  sovereign  assembly. 

TT5flS7qr:  (( 

(The  affairs  of  those  townships,  cither  jointly  or  separately 
transacted,  let  another  minister  of  the  king  inspect  ; who  should  be 
well  affected,  and  by  no  means  remiss. — ib.  120.) 

Two  presidents  of  each  10,000  villages  should  be  so  appointed  that 
one  of  them  should  be  superintend  of  the  home  department,  consisting 
of  the  judiciary  and  other  executive  branches,  and  the  other  should 
vigilantly  make  tours  to  inspect  the  work  of  government  servants. 

Hnt  ^«l!  I 

sTsrrmifiTsr  ii 

—Large  towns  should  have  a beautiful,  high  and  spacious  building, 
brWViant  as  the  moon  for  the  deliberative  body,  where  learned 
persons,  who  have  had  all  kinds  of  experience  in  knowledge, 
should  sit  to  consider  those  measures  which  promote  the  interests  of 


The  Duties  of  Royalty 


151 


the  ruler  and  the  ruled,  and  to  investigate  the  laws  and  principles  of 
knowledge. — ib.  121. 

>a  > 

— Emissaries  and  detectives  should  be  placed  under  the  chief 
inspecting  officer.  The  king  should  secretly  learn  the  merits  and 
demerits,  of  all  the  subjects  in  the  kingdom  by  means  of  the  detective 
police,  constituted  of  different  castes.  Delinquents  should  be  punished 
and  persons  of  merits  honoured. — ib.  122. 

Peace  Officers 

TT5ft  5T5T:  I 

5rT^  51^:  n 

— The  persons  appointed  by  the  king  for  the  protection  of  the 
people  should  be  virtuous,  well  trained,  learned,  and  of  good  family  ; 
rogues,  felons,  thieves,  robbers  and  other  peace  breakers  may  be 
served  from  their  nefarious  work  by  engaging  them  in  the  government 
service  and  placing  them  under  the  above  officers,  thus  turning  those 
evil  men  into  guardian  of  peace  to  protect  the  people.— ib.  123. 

ir  i 

^ Ttsrr  II 

-~lf  a government  servant  takes  bribe  from  plaintiffs  and  defen- 
dants to  do  injustice  and  partiality  and  defeats  the  end  of  law, 
the  king  should  confiscate  all  his  property,  give  him  condign  punish- 
ment, and  expel  him  to  such  a country  as  never  to  come  back  from. 
If  he  is  not  punished,  his  evil  example  will  induce  others  to  take  to 
corruption.  But  the  dread  of  punishment  will  save  them  from  evil 
practice. — ib.  124. 

The  government  servants  should  receive  so  much  land  or  money 
from  the  government  monthly,  annually,  from  time  to  time,  or  once 
for  all,  as  to  maintain  them  respectably,  nay,  to  enable  them  to 
acquire  affluence.  They,  who  are  old,  should  also  receive  the  money 
of  their  previous  allowance.  It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  their 
sustenance  allowance  lasts  as  long  as  they  live,  but  not  after  their 
death.  Their  children  should  receive  due  consideration  and  be  pro- 
vided according  to  their  worth.  Their  minors  and  widows  should 
also  receive  allowance  for  maintenance  from  the  government  accord- 
ing to  the  merit  and  in  proportion  to  the  length  of  their  service.  But 
they  should  forfeit  it,  if  they  turn  wicked.  This  policy  should  be 
strictly  maintained. 

Taxation 

— In  imposing  taxes  upon  the  people  in  the  kingdom,  the  king 
or  state  council  should  take  it  into  consideration  that  the  officers  and 


J52  Satyarth  Prakash 

others  government  servants,  as  well  as  subjects  enjoy  the  blessings  of 
ease  and  comfort.— Manu,  VIT,  128. 

cT«TTS?qTS?q>  M ib.  129. 

— The  king  should  annually  receive  taxes  in  small  amounts  from 
his  people  just  as  the  leech,  the  calf  or  the  bumble-bee  draws  its  food 
little  by  little. 

q^t  'mrargOTTm  i 
cTT5^  q^^^Tcf  II 

— He  should  not  cut  his  own  or  others’  root  of  ease  from  exces- 
sive covetousness  ; for,  he  who  cuts  the  root  of  work  and  ease,  brings 
distress  upon  himself  and  others — ib.  139. 

— The  monarch  who  is  strict  and  lenient  in  the  discharge  of  his 
duties,  is  held  in  great  esteem  from  his  severity  towards  the  wicked 
and  indulgence  towards  the  good. — ib.  140. 

qcT  ^cf  I 

qfTT^f^TTT:  II 

—Thus  should  he  govern  his  people.  He  should  ever  protect  his  people 
being  always  devoted  to  his  work  and  free  from  negligence. — ib.  142. 

H ?T  g 11  — 143. 

e c w 

— That  king  with  his  ministers  and  servants  is  dead  and  not 
living,  in  whose  presence  the  life  and  property  of  persons  in  his 
dominions  crying  for  help  are  taken  away  by  robbers.  Such  a king  is 
destined  to  suffer  great  pain. 

«Tf?riT?ir  'Rt  w:  sisrRT^  TT^rfrir  i 

TT5TI  tl 

— The  highest  duty  of  kings  is  the  protection  of  the  people.  The 
king  who  receives  tributes  as  laid  down  in  the  7th  chapter  of  Manu’s 
Code  or  as  fixed  by  the  governing  assembly,  acquires  merit  and  enjoys 
happiness  but  suffers  pain  by  acting  in  contravention  to  the  above 
rules. — ib.  144. 

King’s  Daily  Work 

—Rising  in  the  latter  part  of  night,  answering  to  the  call  of 
nature  and  taking  a bath,  he  should  attentively  pray  to  God,  offer 
oblations  to  fire,  honour  learned  and  virtuous  men,  take  food,  and 
enter  the  hall  of  audience — Manu,  VII,  145. 

I 

’it  ^ \l 


The  Duties  of  Royalty 


153 


— Standing  there,  he  should  show  condescension  to  the  subjects 
present  and  dismissing  them  with  love,  consult  with  his  prime  minister 
on  the  affairs  of  government.— ib.  146. 

0T:5nTl%  ^ II 

— Then  he  should  go  on  a walk  with  him.  On  the  knoll  of  a 
mountain  in  a secret  chamber,  in  the  solitude  of  a forest  where  there 
is  no  bit  of  grass  to  disturb,  or  in  a lonely  place,  he  should  consult 
with  the  prime  minister  in  a calm  mood  of  mind,  unruffled  with  angry 
passions. — ib.  147. 

^ I 

H qfqqlr  qrfqq:  II 

— That  king  is  able  to  govern  the  whole  world  though  wealthless, 
whose  great  secrets  and  plans  of  action  for  the  good  of  the  people  are 
always  deep  and  hidden  from  the  knowledge  of  others.  Hence,  he 
should  not  do  a single  work  until  it  is  approved  by  all  councillors. 

Six  Kinds  of  Tactics 

^ ^ II 

— The  king,  ministers  and  other  government  servants  should  bear  in 
mind  that  their  work  is  of  six  kinds  which  should  be  properly  done 
after  a thorough  consideration;  viz:  plans  regarding  entrenchment — in- 
vulnerableness, attack,  peace,  waging  war  with  wicked  enemies,  making 
two  divisions  of  the  array  to  gain  victory,  making  alliance  with  a 
powerful  king  from  one’s  own  inability. — Manu,  VII.  161. 

Their  Two-Fold  Nature 

^ II 

— The  king  should  clearly  understand  the  two-fold  nature  of  peace, 
war,  attack,  defence,  two-fold  division  of  corps,  and  alliance — ib.  162. 

HqiqrmqqRf  ^ ^ i 

— The  two  kinds  of  peace  are  a treaty  with  the  enemy  or  an  alliance 
with  another  for  his  opposition  : but  he  should  regularly  continue  the 
present  and  future  plan  of  work.— ib.  163. 

fcR^:  II 

— War  is  of  two  kinds,  namely,  one  declared  in  season  or  out  of  season 
for  one’s  own  sake;  and  another  waged  against  the  offending  enemy 
of  the  friend  or  an  ally. — ib.  163. 

^ It 


154 


Satyarth  Prakash 


— The  two  kinds  of  attack  are  expeditions  against  the  enemy  under 
unforeseen  circumstances  with  or  without  allies.— ib.  165. 

STT  I 

^ c s 

— The  two  kinds  of  inaction  are  decline  or  weakness  in  course  of  time 
or  from  some  cause  or  to  remain  inactive  at  one’s  place  at  the  remons- 
tration  of  a friend.— ib.  166. 

— The  division  of  the  army  with  its  commanders  into  two  corps  for 
the  purpose  of  success  is  called  the  two  kinds  of  division. — ib.  167. 

o 

mqq  fjfqq:  ?i>srq:  II 

« o c 

—The  two  kinds  of  alliance  are  those  in  which  a king  seeks  the  refuge 
of  a more  powerful  king  or  a great  man  against  the  dread  of  the 
enemy  or  to  accomplish  a certain  plan  of  action. — ib.  168. 

War 

q?Tqq^?Tq?qT«TTf«tqa  Jjqqicqq:  I 

T'tsi  CRT  ?rf?«T  TTqT«tiTcT  II 

♦ N 

— When  he  comes  to  know  that  war  at  certain  time  will  bring  on  a 
little  distress  to  him.  but  at  other  time  tend  to  his  advantage  and 
certain  victory,  he  should  make  truce  and  have  patience  till  favourable 
time. — ib,  169. 

cRT  M 

—When  all  the  people  or  army  is  exceedingly  happy  and  in  prosperous 
condition,  and  he  also  thinks  them  to  be  in  the  best  circumstances 
and  himself  in  the  same  state,  it  is  time  for  him  to  commence  hostili- 
ties or  wage  war  against  the  enemy.— ib.  170. 

ir?T  3*5?  i 

fqqrtrf  ^ mqifeq  qfar  n 

— ib.  171.  When  he  finds  his  forces  jubilant,  strong  and  ready  for 
action,  and  the  army  of  the  enemy  weak  and  unready,  he  should 
proceed  to  engage  with  him. 

5 fqTrqfT^>*q>  ^ I 

II 

— When  the  army  is  reduced  in  strength  and  transport,  he  should 
carefully  and  gradually  pacify  enemy  and  stay  at  home. — ib.  172. 

TOT  fRT  u 

— Wlien  the  king  consiciers  the  enem^  \o\>eNW'3 

double  his  forces  or  divide  them  into  two  corps  to  achieve  his  end. 
ib.  173. 


The  Duties  of  Royalty 


155 


ir?T  g iunfhTcmt  i 

g fwsr  snfTT^  qf?R  hw  ii 

•3  N c N 

— When  he  knows  that  the  enemies  will  soon  attack  him,  he  should  at 
once  seek  alliance  with  some  virtuous  and  powerful  monarch. — 
ib.  174. 

?t  Otw  q«n  ii 

— ib.  175.  He  should  by  all  means  ever  serve  like  elders  those  people 
and  his  army  that  resist  the  power  of  the  enemy. 

uf?  ?T?nf'T  i 

a^Tsfqr  ii 

— ib.  176.  If  he  detects  faults  in  the  actions  of  his  ally  or  liege,  he 
should  unhesitatingly  and  bravely  engage  in  fighting  with  him. 

He  should  not  be  hostile  to  a virtuous  king;  but,  on  the  contrary, 
he  should  be  ever  on  good  terms  with  him.  The  afore-said  plans  are 
to  be  adopted  to  vanquish  a wicked  powerful  king. 

f nhKtf'cTiT:  qf«raVqfcT:  i 

JT«rTfqTWTfq^t  q II 

— Let  a politic  king  so  arrange  all  his  affairs  and  take  such  steps  that 
no  ally,  neutral  power,  or  enemy  may  obtain  any  advantage  over  him. 
— 177. 

wfftenqt  ^ ^qf  ^ afqq:  ii 

>9 

— Let  him  properly  consider  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  all 
his  present  plans  actually  undertaken  or  to  be  carried  out  in  future. 
Then  he  should  try  to  eliminate  the  disadvantages  and  secure  the 
advantages.  — 178, 

?Trqfqt  f«qfH5^q;  | 

o o 

— That  king  is  never  overcome  by  his  enemies  who  weighs  the  advan- 
tages and  disadvantages  of  his  future  measures,  who  speedily  takes 
resolution  on  the  presentation  of  an  occasion,  and  who  knows  what 
is  to  be  done  in  the  completion  of  actions  already  taken.— ib.  179. 

— The  ruler,  specially  the  sovereign  president,  should  so  try  as  to  keep 
the  ally,  netural  power  and  enemy  under  power,  and  should  not  allow 
them  out  of  his  negligence,  to  act  contrary  to  his  interest.  This  is 
what  is  called  in  a few  words  the  political  wisdom  or  government 
policy.— ib.  180. 

Invasion 

fq«nq  g qifqqt  q qqrfqfq  i 
qqq^?qq  qrng  HvqPqqm  w ii 


158  Satyarth  Prakash 

besiege  him,  and  harassing  the  country,  spoil,  or  destroy  his  provender, 
food,  water  and  fuel. — ib,  195. 

— His  tanks,  walls  round  the  city  and  moat  should  be  breached  and  de- 
molished. At  night  the  enemy  should  be  threatened  with  attack. 
Measures  should  be  taken  to  subdue  him. — ib.  196. 

Treaty 

— ib.  203.  On  his  submission  a treaty  should  be  made  and  signed. 
And  if  thought  proper,  some  relation  of  his  loyal  and  virtuous,  should 
be  installed  king,  and  he  should  be  made  to  sign  a protocol,  purport- 
ing that  he  should  have  to  obey  orders,  that  is,  to  act  on  the  lines  of 
righteous  policy,  and  to  govern  the  people  with  justice.  This  should  be 
impressed  on  his  mind  and  such  persons  should  be  given  him  to  help 
in  affairs  as  to  preclude  the  possibility  of  disturbance  again  in  future. 
The  defeated  enemy  should  be  honoured  in  the  assembly  of  chief 
officers  with  the  present  of  jewels  and  other  valuable  things.  But 
nothing  should  be  done  to  take  away  his  maintenance.  If  kept  in 
confinement,  he  should  be  treated  with  due  respect,  so  that  his  grief 
from  his  defeat  may  leave  him  to  live  in  joy. 

Treatment  of  Prisoners 

— ib.  204.  For,  the  cause  of  enmity,  is  the  seizure  of  other’s  property 
and  of  friendship  the  restoration  of  it,  and  specially  proper  treatment 
on  opportune  time.  It  is  best  to  give  him  what  he  likes.  Never  should 
he  be  teased,  joked  at  or  scoffed,  nor  such  expression  as  “Thou  art 
defeated”,  should  be  ever  used  in  conversing  with  him.  But,  on  the 
contrary,  such  expressions  as  “You  are  our  brother”  &c.,  should 
be  used  of  him,  and  he  should  be  always  honoured  and  respected. 

Ally 

^«rr  n 

— The  advantage  of  the  help  of  an  ally  is  that  a king  does  not  get  so 
strength  from  the  acquisition  of  wealth  and  territory  as  from  having 
an  ally  whose  love  is  constant  and  who  is  able  to  weigh  future  plans 
and  to  accomplish  purpose  in  view,  or  even  from  having  a weak  ally. 
— M.  VII,  208. 

— A king  is  praised  for  having  an  ally  who  is  familiar  with  religion 


The  Duties  af  Royalty 


159 


and  is  ever  greatful  for  good  done  to  him  ; who  is  cheerful  and  gay, 
affectionate  and  persevering,  or  even,  small  and  insignificant. — ib.  209. 

ycT5f  gm:  U 

— He  should  bear  in  mind  not  to  make  an  enemy  of  a wise,  noble, 
braver,  heroic,  clever,  benevolent,  grateful,  and  patient  man  ; for  he 
who  makes,  an  enemy  of  such  a man,  will  come  to  grief. — ib.  210. 

Netural  Power 

■o  o 

Of  the  netural  power,  he  is  called  netural  who  possesses  praise* 
worthy  qualities,  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  men,  heroic  temper, 
brave  mind  and  benignity  of  heart,  and  incessantly  talks  of  super- 
ficial matters.— ib.  21 1. 

King’s  daily  duties 

TT5TT  »TfN5T:  I 

5qTrrKTT«^?JT  UeitTff'  II 

— As  described  above,  the  king  should  rise  early  in  the  morning, 
answer  the  call  of  nature,  make  his  toilet,  say  his  prayer  and  meditate 
on  God  ; offer  oblations  to  fire  or  order  others  to  do  it  for  him, 
consult  with  all  his  ministers,  go  to  the  court,  see  all  servants  and 
commanders,  greet  them,  practise  himself  and  make  others  go  thro’ 
various  kinds  of  squad  drill  and  other  military  exercises  daily  inspect 
all  horses,  elephants,  cows  and  other  animals  places,  arsenals, 
hospitals,  and  treasuary  with  his  own  eyes,  remove  whatever  defects 
he  finds  in  them,  go  to  the  place  of  exercise,  take  exercise  there,  take 
bath,  and  go  into  the  private  apartments,  the  residence  of  his  family, 
and  its  attendants  and  take  food  at  noon.  He  should  take  the  food 
which  is  well  inspected,  promotive  of  the  intellect,  strength,  and 
valour,  destructive  of  disease,  which  consist  of  various  kinds  of  viands 
and  dishes,  drinks  and  other  edibles,  perfumed,  sweetmeat  and  many 
other  delicious  foods,  nutritive  and  wholesome,  so  that  he  ever  enjoys 
ease  and  comfort.  Thus  should  he  discharge  his  state  duties  and 
improve  his  affairs. 

Schedule  of  Imposts 

grr^^T  II 

— For  taxes,  he  should  take  50th  part  of  the  profit  on  gold  and  silver 
from  their  dealers  and  workers  ; 6th,  8th,  or  1 2th  part  from  rice  and 
other  corn. — Manu  VII,  130. 

If  he  takes  coin  in  taxation,  he  should  take  it  in  such  a way, 
that  peasants  and  other  people  do  not  suffer  trouble  from  want  of 
food,  drink  and  money.  For,  the  king’s  prosperity  is  much  increased 
by  the  opulence,  health,  and  plenty  of  food  and  drink.  The  king 


160 


Satyarth  Prakash 


should  provide  the  subjects  with  means  of  comfort  like  his  own 
children  and  the  subject  should  regard  the  king  and  government 
servants  like  their  father.  This  is  a fact  the  kings  of  kings  are  culti- 
vators and  other  people  who  toil  for  bread  and  the  king  is  their 
protector.  Whose  king  shall  he  be,  if  there  be  no  subjects  ? And 
whose  subjects  shall  the  people  be,  if  there  is  no  king  ? Both  are  at 
liberty  in  their  own  affairs  but  not  so  in  the  works  of  the  whole  com- 
munity, which  require  love  and  sacrifice.  No  king  or  government 
servants  should  be  appointed  against  the  common  consent  of  the 
people.  The  government  servants  and  the  subjects  should  not  go 
counter  to  the  order  of  the  king.  Thus  is  described  briefly  the  science 
of  politics  which  is  the  king’s  own  subject  of  government.  He  who 
wants  to  know  its  details  should  see  for  his  satisfaction  the  four 
Vedas,  the  Code  of  Manu,  the  polity  of  Shukra,  the  Mahabharat  and 
other  scriptures. 

Judicial  Procedure 

Justice  should  be  administered  as  prescribed  in  the  8th  and  9th 
chapters  of  the  Code  of  Manu.  However,  we  give  its  summary 
below  : 

18  Titles  of  Law 

— The  Council,  King,  and  Magistrates  should  all  daily  decide  the 
causes  of  contention  falling  under  the  following  18  titles  of  law 
according  to  arguments  drawn  from  local  usages  and  the  rules  of 
codes  ; and  when  they  find  the  rules  not  mentioned  in  the  codes  and 
see  their  necessity,  they  should  make  the  best  rules  possible  that  pro- 
mote the  interests  of  both  the  king  and  the  subjects.  The  18  titles 
under  which  all  disputes  are  arranged  are,  Manu,  VIII,  4-7  : — 

C 

^ ^ ii 

C\  '9 

^ ^ ^ II 

^ ^ 1 
ii 

— 1 . Contraction  of  debt — dispute  relating  to  lending  and  borrowing, 
2.  deposit — a person’s  refusal  on  demand  of  things  or  money  placed 
in  his  custody,  3.  sale  of  property  without  ownership,  4.  illegal 
concerns  among  partners,  5.  resumption  of  gift,  6.  deduction  or 
less  payment  of  wages  or  salary,  7.  non-performance  of  (acting 
country  to)  agreement,  8.  disputes  of  transactions,  9.  dispute  bet- 
ween the  owner  and  the  tender  of  cattle,  10.  contest  on  boundaries, 
11.  assault  or  severe  beating,  12.  harsh  language  or  slander, 


The  Duties  of  Royalty 


161 


13.  theft,  larceny  robbery,  14.  tresspass  or  acts  of  violence,  15. 
adultery,  16.  alteration  regarding  the  failure  of  duties  as  man  and 
wife,  17.  disputes  of  inheritance,  gambling  or  laying  things  or 
conscious  beings  at  stake  in  play.  These  are  the  18  points  of  mutual 
contention. 

i 

* o >a  «N  s 

— In  the  decision  of  these  cases  the  king  should  act  justly  after 
considering  the  contentions  of  several  persons  with  reference  to  the 
ancient  law,  that  is,  he  should  never  be  partial  to  anybody. — ib.  8. 

Importance  of  Justice 

^ II 

— All  the  members  of  the  court  are  considered  as  wounded,  where 
justice,  is  found  wounded  with  iniquity,  and  judges  do  not  extract 
the  dart  of  iniquity  from  justice  or  remove  its  blot  and  destroy  ini- 
quity, in  other  words  where  the  innocent  are  not  respected  and  the 
criminal  is  not  punished. — 12. 

s 

— ib.  13.  A virtuous  and  just  person  should  never  enter  a 
court  and  when  he  does  so,  he  should  speak  the  truth, ; he  who  holds 
his  tongue  on  seeing  injustice  done,  or  speaks  contrary  to  truth  and 
justice,  is  the  greatest  sinner. 

— All  the  persons  in  that  court  are  dead,  as  it  were,  and  none  of 
them  is  alive,  where  justice  is  killed  by  iniquity  and  truth  by  falsehood 
in  the  presence  of  its  courtiers. — ib.  14. 

TftTcT:  I 

^ m ^ II 

— Justice  destroyed,  destroys  its  destroyer ; and  justice  preserved  pre- 
serves its  preserver.  Hence,  never  destroy  justice,  lest  being  destroyed, 
it  should  destroy  thee. — ib.  15. 

— The  learned  regard  him  to  be  base  or  low  caste  who  violates  justice 
which  gives  all  wealth  and  showers  all  blessings.  Therefore,  no  man 
should  ever  destroy  justice. — ib,  16. 

II 

— In  this  world  justice  or  righteousness  alone  is  man’s  friend  that 
goes  with  him  after  death.  All  other  things  or  companions  part  on 


162  Satyarth  Prakash 

the  destruction  of  the  body  and  he  is  detached  from  all  company. 
But  the  company  of  justice  is  never  cut  off. — ib.  17. 


Sin  in  Injustice 

ft?:  i 

N e 

— When  injustice  is  done  in  the  government  court  out  of  partiality,  it 
is  divided  into  four  parts  of  which  one  is  shared  by  the  criminal  or 
doer  of  injustice,  the  second  by  the  witness,  the  third  by  the  judges, 
and  the  fourth  by  the  president  king  of  an  unjust  court. — ib.  18. 

tTTft  II 

— The  king  and  all  the  judges  of  the  court  are  freed  from  sin  and 
become  holy  where  the  party  deserving  censure  is  censured,  deserving 
praise  is  praised,  deserving  punishment  is  punished,  deserving  respect 
is  respected  ; and  the  doer  of  iniquity  alone  incurs  sin. — ib.  19. 

Now  we  describe  the  qualifications  of  witnesses. 

i 

>0  0 >s 

— Just,  learned,  sincere  man  of  all  the  classes,  conversant  with  the 
law  in  all  respects,  free  from  avarice,  and  truthful,  should  be  taken  as 
witnesses  on  trials,  but  not  the  men  of  opposite  character.  — Manu, 
VIII,  63. 

fjSTT:  1 

5t3T5^  ?T?cr:  II 

C\  <N 

— Women  should  appear  as  witnesses  for  women,  the  twice-born  for 
the  twice-born,  the  servile  class  for  the  servile  class,  the  low  caste  for 
the  low  caste. — 64. 

— In  all  cases  of  voilence,  theft,  adultery,  defamation,  insult,  assault, 
the  judge  may  not  examine  the  competence  of  witnesses.  This  pro- 
cedure is  very  necessary  as  these  acts  are  done  in  secrecy. — 65. 

5 fe5r>rmT5T  ii 

— Let  him  decide  the  cases  according  to  the  majority  of  witnesses  on 
both  sides,  by  the  evidence  of  witnesses  of  the  best  character  on  the 
equality  of  their  number,  and  by  the  testimony  of  the  best  Brahmins, 
that  is,  seers,  great  seers,  and  anchorts  or  yatis. — ib.  66. 

^ II 

— Witnesses  are  of  two  kinds,  those  who  have  seen  the  occurrence 
and  those  who  have  heard  it  from  others.  When  being  asked  to 
deliver  their  evidence  in  the  court,  the  witnesses  who  speak  the  truth. 


The  Duties  of  Royalty 


163 


should  not  be  regarded  as  faithless  and  punished ; but  those  witnesses 
who  speak  falsehood,  should  be  punished  accordingly. — 67. 

C O 

— The  witness  who  speaks  contrary  to  what  he  saw  or  heard  in  the 
royal  court  or  an  assembly  of  good  men,  should  suffer  hell-like  pain 
from  the  cutting  of  his  tongue  in  life  time,  and  he  will  be  deprived  of 
happiness  after  death. — 68. 

tnft’  i 

SETrft  II 

— That  statement  of  a witness  should  be  accepted  by  the  judge,  which 
he  naturally  makes  relevent  to  the  case  on  trial ; but,  on  the  contrary, 
he  should  reject  what  he  speaks  from  tutoring. — 72. 

— The  witnesses  being  assembled  in  the  court  room,  the  judge, 
barristers  and  pleaders  should  calmly  thus  address  them  in  the  pre- 
sence of  the  plaintilf  and  the  defendant  73 

5T3  gcTttsR  fnftfm  ii 

— O witnesses ! declare  with  truth  what  you  know  to  have  happened  in 
the  matter  in  question  between  the  parties  ; for  your  evidence  is 
required  in  the  cause. — 74. 

ii 

— The  witness  who  speaks  the  truth;  attains  happiness  in  the  next  life, 
is  born  in  other  exalted  regions  to  enjoy  bliss,  and  gets  good  fame  in 
the  life  here  and  hereafter;  for,  the  Vedas  declare  this  very  speech  to 
be  the  cause  of  honour  and  shame.  He  who  speaks  the  truth,  is 
honoured;  but  a false  witness  is  condemned. — 75. 

— By  truth  is  a witness  cleared  from  sin;  by  truth  is  justice  advanced; 
truth  must,  therefore,  be  spoken  by  witnesses  of  all  classes.— 78. 

»Tf?RTcl?T  I 

« >a  N 

— The  soul  is  its  own  witness;  and  the  soul  is  its  own  refuge;  with 
this  knowledge,  O gentleman,  don't  dishonour  your  soul,  the  best 
witness  of  all  men.  In  other  words,  truth  is  in  your  mind,  will,  and 
speech;  and  what  is  opposed  to  it  is  falsehood. — 79. 

firf:  M 

—The  learned  do  not  consider  any  man  better  than  him,  who  has  no 


164  Satyarth  Prakash 

doubt  in  the  mind  which  knows  all  the  internal  thoughts,  in  delivering 
his  testimony. — 

— O man  desirous  of  good  1 it  is  not  right  that  you  should  speak  un- 
truth imagining  in  the  mind,  “I  am  alone”,  none  sees  me;  but  fear 
all-knowing  God,  who  dwells  in  your  heart  in  the  form  of  the  internal 
spirit,  and  who  sees  good  and  evil  deeds,  you  should  alway  speak  the 
truth.— 81. 

Evidence 

M -“Manu,  VIII,  18. 

—Evidence  given  from  covetousness,  distraction  of  mind,  terror, 
friendship,  love,  resentment,  ignorance,  and  childishness,  should  all  be 
held  invalid. 

tr:  I 

—The  king  should  punish  in  various  ways,  to  be  just  described,  a 
witness  speaking  falsehood  in  a cause  from  any  of  the  above  motives. 
— ib.  119. 


Punishment 


<PTm^5PTwr  'Tg  ttw  i 


— ib.  120,  121.  If  he  gives  false  evidence  through  avarice,  he  should 
be  find  lOOOpana^  or  Rs.  15-0-0;*  if  from  distraction  of  mind,  250  p. 
or  Rs.  3-2-0;  from  terror.  Rs.  6-0-0;  if  from  friendship,  Rs.  12-0-0;  if 
from  love,  Rs.  25;  if  from  wrath,  Rs.  46-14-0;  if  from  ignorance, 
Rs.  6;  if  from  childishness,  Rs.  1-9-0. 


’ar  i 

^ ^ ^ ar  M 

— There  are  10  places  of  punishments,  namely  the  generative  organ, 
belly,  tongue,  hands,  legs,  eyes,  nose,  ears,  property  and  body,  on 
which  punishment  is  inflicted. — 125. 

The  penalty  prescribed  above  and  to  be  mentioned  hereafter 
should  alone  be  given;  thus  for  instance,  false  evidence  from  cove- 
tousness should  be  ameerced  with  Rs.  15-10-0. 

'Tfrsira  ^ erf^;  i 

'afT5T><W  «n5t^  II 


*Manu  gives  pana  which  is  here  taken  in  a pice,  and  these  calculations  are 
made  thereon.  It  may  be  penny. 


The  Duties  of  Royalty 


165 


—But  a very  poor  culprits  should  be  fined  a small  amount,  a rich  one 
double,  treble  and  quadruple  of  it  that  is  to  say,  the  judge  should 
inflict  punishment  according  to  the  circumstances,  of  the  place,  the 
time,  the  criminal  and  the  nature  of  his  crime. — 126. 

S 

— For,  unjust  punishment  destroys  reputation  of  past,  present,  and 
future  time  during  life  on  earth  and  becomes  a cause  of  torment  in 
the  next  life.  It  becomes  a cause  of  suffering  even  in  the  next  life. 
Hence,  unjust  punishment  should  not  be  inflicted  on  any  one. — 127. 

!!PT5ft  ^ II 

— The  king  who  inflicts  no  punishment  on  such  as  deserve  it,  and 
inflicts  it  on  such  as  deserve  it  not,  /.e..  lets  off  culprits,  and  punishes 
those  who  should  not  be  punished,  brings  great  infamy  on  himself 
while  he  lives,  and  suffers  great  torment  after  death.  Therefore,  he 
should  always  punish  him  who  commits  offence,  and  never  the  inno- 
cent.— ib.  128. 

Mode  of  Punishment 

— Penalty  for  the  first  offense  is  vocal  punishment,  the  offender 
should  be  censured;  for  the  second,  reproof,  he  should  be  re- 
proved.— ‘Fie  to  thee  ! why  hast  thou  done  such  a foul  deed  ? — for 
the  third,  confiscation  of  property;  for  the  fourth,  corporal  punish- 
ment, i.e.,  whipping  or  canning  him,  or  decapitation. — ib.  129. 

^ ^ H I 

—With  whatever  limb  a thief  commits  an  offence  by  any  means 
against  men,  even  that  limb  shall  the  king  take  off,  i.e.,  amputate  for 
the  prevention  of  crime  among  all  the  people. — Manu,  VIII,  334, 

5f^TcTT  3^:  I 

—Whether  an  offender  be  the  father,  the  preceptor,  a friend,  the  wife, 
a son,  or  the  domestic  priest,  he  can  not  be  left  unpunished  by  the 
king  if  they  do  not  adhere  to  their  duty,  i.e.,  when  the  king  sits  on 
the  judgment  seat  to  administer  justice,  he  should  not  show  partiality 
to  any,  but  inflict  proper  punishment  on  all  — ib.  335. 

«RTqf<m  SfTfrat  5PT:  I 

ctq  TTSTT  II— Ib.  336. 

—In  the  case  of  that  offence,  for  which  an  ordinary  person  is  fined  one 
pice,  the  king  is  punished  with  a fine  of  a thousand  pice,  /.e.,  a king 
should  be  punished  a thousand  times  of  a common  man;  the  minister, 
that  is,  the  king’s  chancellor  of  the  exchequer,  800  times;  the  person 
below  him  700  times;  one  below  this  person  600  times;  so  like  wise  in 


166 


Satyarth  Prakash 


the  downward  series  of  ranks,  the  last  inferior  servant,  i.e.,  a peon 
should  not  receive  less  punishment  than  8 time;  for,  if  the  persons  in 
the  govt,  service  be  not  given  greater  punishment  than  the  common 
people,  they  will  ruin  the  latter.  As  the  lion  is  not  under  control  by 
means  of  great  beating  and  the  goat  by  a little,  so  should  the  govern- 
ment servants  from  the  king  down  to  inferior  servants  should  be  more 
severely  punished  than  the  ordinary  subjects  for  committing  offences. 

I 

cftTOT  g ^ w 

sttPt  ^ i 

— In  like  manner,  if  a Shudra  being  a little  sensible  commits  a crime 
he  should  be  punished  eight  times  than  an  ordinary  man;  if  a Vaishya, 
16  times,  if  a Kshatriya,  20  times;  if  a Brahman,  64  times,  or  100  times 
or  128  times. 

— ib.  337-338.  In  other  words,  persons  should  receive  greater  and 
greater  punishment  for  their  offences  as  their  knowledge  is  found  more 
and  more  and  as  their  status  rises  higher  and  higher  in  society. 

— The  government  officers  and  the  king  desirous  of  doing  justice  and 
obtaining  glory  should  not  delay  inflicting  punishment  for  a moment 
on  robbers,  perpetrating  atrocious  violence.— ib.  344. 

Of  atrocious  man^s  qualities 

5TT:  qr^f  fq#q:  qjq^^:  H 

— He  is  very  heinous  offender  who  commits  greater  violence  than  a 
defamer,  a thief,  an  unprovoked  assaulter. — ib.  335. 

346.  The  king  who  does  not  punish  a person  committing  atrocious 
violence  and  endures  him,  is  soon  ruined,  and  disaffection  springs  up 
in  the  country. 

Neither  on  account  of  friendship,  nor  for  the  sake  of  great  wealth, 
should  the  king  dismiss  a perpetrator  of  violence,  causing  a suffering 
of  all  the  people,  without  confinement  and  amputation.— ib.  347. 

qr  i 

350.  Let  him  kill  without  thinking,  i.e..  think  after  killing  those 
persons  who  whether  the  preceptor,  or  sons  and  other  young  people, 
or  the  father  and  other  elders,  or  the  Brahmins  or  such  as  are  versed 


The  Duties  of  Royalty 


167 


in  many  scriptures  forsaking  their  duty,  commit  iniquities  and  kill 
others  without  any  offence. 

JWRT  ?fTS5l^  ^TT  || 

—A  man  commits  no  crime  in  slaying  evil  men  and  assassins,  either 
in  public  or  in  private;  for,  killing  anger  with  anger  is,  as  it  were,  fury 
recoiling  upon  fury. — ib.  351. 

?T  H TT3TT  II 

— That  king  is  by  far  the  best  in  whose  realm  lives  no  thief,  no  ad- 
ulterer, no  defamer,  no  daring  robber,  no  law-breaker  or  disobeyer 
of  the  king’s  orders. — Ib.  386. 

Punishment  for  Adultery 

— Should  a woman,  neglecting  her  husband  from  the  pride  of  the 
excellence  of  family,  commits  adultery;  let  the  king  condemn  her  to 
be  devoured  alive  by  dogs  in  the  presence  of  many  men  and  women. 
M.  VIII,  371. 

gmtfi  ct^rt  i 

Tnssifsr  rt^  ii 

— In  like  manner,  the  man  who  out  of  wickedness  neglects  his  wife, 
commits  adultery  upon  another's  wife,  or  goes  to  a whore,  should  be 
laid  upon  an  iron  bed  stead  made  red  hot  in  fire  and  burnt  alive  to 
ashes  in  the  presence  of  many  men. — ib.  372. 

Q. — Who  should  punish  the  king  or  queen,  the  judge  or  his 
wife,  if  they  commit  adultery  and  other  iniquities  ? 

A. — The  State  Council.  They  should  be  punished  more  severely 
than  the  common  people. 

Q. — Why  will  the  king  and  the  others  above  mentioned  submit 
to  their  punishment  ? 

A. — The  king,  too,  is  pure-hearted  lucky  man.  If  he  is  not 
punished  for  offence,  and  if  he  does  not  submit  to  punishment,  why 
will  the  other  people  obey  the  law  and  bear  punishment.  When  all 
the  people,  the  principal  officers  of  the  government,  and  the  state 
assembly  wish  to  inflict  punishment  with  justice,  what  can  the  single 
king  do  ? If  there  be  no  such  rule,  the  king,  the  prime  minister,  and 
all  other  persons  in  power,  plunging!  nto  injustice,  drowning  justice 
and  right,  ruining  all  the  people,  will  themselves  be  ruined.  Why, 
remember  the  meaning  of  the  couplet  which  says  that  punishment 
inflicted  according  to  law  is  called  king  and  justice.  Who  is  baser 
than  he  who  destroys  it  ? 

Q. — This  severe  punishment  is  not  proper,  for,  man  can  not 
make  or  revive  any  limb.  So  such  a punishment  should  not  be  inflicted. 

A, — Those  who  regard  it  severe,  do  not  understand  the  intent  of 
politics;  for,  the  severe,  punishment  of  one  man  will  keep  all  others 


168 


Satyarth  Prakash 


aloof  from  the  commission  of  evil  deeds.  They  will  give  up  committing 
crimes  and  be  established  on  the  path  of  duty.  To  tell  the  truth,  not 
an  iota  of  this  severe,  punishment  will  fall  to  the  lot  of  any.  If  light 
punishment  be  inflicted,  crime  will  increase  much.  What  you  call 
light  punishment  becomes  tens  of  millions  of  times  heavier  trom  its 
frequency  in  consequence  of  the  increase  of  crime.  For,  when  many  per- 
sons commit  crimes,  punishment  however  slight  will  have  to  be  given. 
For  example,  suppose  a man’s  punishment  amounts  to  one  maund  or 
80lbs  and  another’s  4 chhittacks,  or  |lb.  they  total  1 md.  4 ch.  Then 
on  average  each  man  receives  20  srs,  and  2 ch.  of  punishment.  What 
do  the  olfenders  understand  by  his  gentle  punishment  ? Also,  suppose 
one  man’s  punishment  amounts  to  one  maund,  and  one  thousand 
people  get  4 ch.  of  it.  Their  total  punishment  comes  to  6 md.  and  a 
quarter.  Being  meted  to  all  the  people,  it  is  heavier  and  so  severe; 
and  that  one  maund  of  punishment  is  small  and  mild. 

Tolls  and  Insurance 

ctt)  H%cf  i 

v*  N 

— The  king  should  fix  the  proportion  of  toll  on  passages  according 
to  the  length  of  the  way,  the  number  of  bays  of  the  sea,  and  the  ex- 
tent of  the  country  watered  by  rivers  and  streams.  It  cannot  be 
ascertained  and  fixed  for  oceans.  But  he  may  make  a favourable 
tariff  so  as  to  profit  both  himself  and  the  owners  of  large  ships  on 
the  sea. — ib.  406. 

It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  they  are  liar’s  who  say  that 
there  were  no  ships  in  ancient  time.  Sea  men  voyaging  to  foreign 
lands  and  oceanic  islands  should  look  after  the  liberties  of  their 
fellow-subjects  in  all  countries  and  see  that  they  do  not  suffer  from 
any  kind  of  disabilities. 

^ ii 

— The  king  should  daily  inspect  the  performance  of  duties  in  offices; 
elephants,  horses;  and  other  means  of  conveyance;  constant  revenue 
and  necessary  expenses,  his  mines  of  metals  and  gems;  and  his 
treasury,  ib.  419. 

— This  accomplishing  and  superintending  all  affairs  with  propriety, 
he  frees  his  country  from  all  crimes  and  reaches  the  supreme  goal  of 
beatitude.  420. 

Politics  in  Sanscrit 

Q, — Does  Sanscrit  contain  perfect  or  imperfect  politics? 

A. — Perfect.  For,  whatever  politics  prevails  or  will  prevail  in  the 
world,  has  been  taken  from  Sanscrit.  As  regards  that  of  which  there  is 

II— Manu,  VII  3. 


The  Duties  of  Royalty 


169 


no  written  or  evident  proof,  the  state  assembly  constituted  of  thorou- 
ghly learned  men  should  make  such  rules  as  promote  the  prosperity 
of  the  king  and  subjects  agreeably  to  righteousness.  They  should 
always  keep  it  in  view  that  they  do  not  allow  infant  marriages  to  take 
place.  Even  in  youth  they  should  not  agree  to  or  arrange  or  allow 
marriages  without  mutual  consent.  Chastity  should  be  properly 
preserved.  Adultery  and  ploygamy  should  be  stopped  so  that  the 
mind  and  body  ever  maintain  their  full  strength.  For,  if  the  strength 
of  mind  promoted  to  the  neglect  of  the  strength  of  the  body  a single 
powerful  man  will  vanquish  hundreds  of  learned  men.  But  if  the 
strength  of  the  body  be  improved,  and  not  that  of  the  soul,  the 
efficiency  of  government  can  not  be  kept  without  knowledge.  With- 
out a proper  rule,  all  are  split  up  among  themselves;  hatred,  quarrel 
and  contention  engage  them,  and  work  their  ruin.  Therefore,  always 
try  to  improve  the  strength  of  both  the  mind  and  body.  There  is  no 
force  more  destructive  of  strength  and  intellect,  than  adultery, 
and  sensuousness.  Particularly  the  warrior  class  should  be  of  strong 
body  and  muscular  limbs,  for  if  they  are  slaves  of  the  senses,  the  govt, 
of  the  country  is  destroyed.  It  should  also  be  kept  in  view  that  the 
subject  go  after  their  king — yatha  raja  thatha  praja.  Therefore,  the 
king  and  government  officers  should  never  commit  crime  or  evil,  but 
on  the  contrary  set  an  example  by  always  adhering  to  justice  and 
virtue. 

So  much  for  the  duty  of  royalty  in  brief.  For  particulars,  the 
Vedas,  the  Code  of  Manu,  chapter,  VII.  VIII,  IX,  Morals  of  Shukra, 
Vidur  Pajagar,  Shanti  Parva  of  the  Mahabharat  relating  to  duties  of 
kings  and  duties  in  misfortune,  and  other  books  may  be  consulted. 
Having  mastered  the  science  of  politics,  the  people  may  successfully 
carry  on  a provincial  or  the  universal  government.  They  should  re- 
gard themselves  to  be  the  subjects  of  God. 

— It  is  a teaching  of  the  Yajur  Veda.  God  is  our  king.  We  are  his 
servants  and  menials.  May  He  out  of  His  grace  qualify  us  for 
government  in  the  world,  and  make  us  His  tools  for  spreading  truth 
and  justice  ? In  the  next  chapter  we  shall  write  about  God  and  the 
Vedas. 


Summary 

The  Rig.  HI,  xxxvii,  6 and  the  Shat.  XIII,  ii,  7 enjoin  that  the  king  and  the 
people  should  form  three  Councils,  Educational,  Religious,  and  Administrative. 
One  individual  should  not  have  the  absolute  power  of  government,  the  King  being 
the  general  President  of  the  councils.  The  qualifications  of  the  president  and  the 
presidents  of  separate  councils  are  their  interest  in  the  welfare  of  the  country,  their 
excellence  of  learning  and  character,  and  their  influence  over  the  people.  A 
country  prospers  as  long  as  the  people  are  righteous.  Also  their  welfare  requires 
the  appointment  of  learned  educational  officers,  appointments  of  learned  men 
as  the  dignitaries  of  the  spiritual  council,  and  of  virtuous  learned  men  as  adminis- 
trators. Obedience  to  law  is  required  of  all. 

According  to  Manu,  VII,  17-31,  the  law  of  retributive  justice  or  just  punish- 
ment is  the  true  governor  of  the  people;  for  the  absence  of  justice  spoils  all  people. 
The  king  who  administers  justice  promotes  the  welfare  of  the  people.  Therefoee 


170 


Satyarth  Prakash 


persons,  thoroughly  versed  in  the  Vedas  and  Codes,  virtuous,  unselfish,  and  polite 
should  be  appointed  to  command  the  army,  to  preside  over  executive  and  judicial 
affairs,  and  to  exercise  royal  authority.  The  members  of  councils  should  also  be 
learned  in  all  scriptures.  No  fewer  than  ten  learned  persons  should  form  a council, 
whose  quorum  is  fixed  at  three.  Ignorant  men  should  not  be  taken  into  councils, 
for  the  judgment  of  a thousand  ignorant  persons  is  worthless,  while  that  of  a single 
virtuous  learned  man  is  considered  as  the  best  rule. 

The  king  should  shun  (1)  ten  evils  arising  from  love  of  pleasure,  and  (2)  eight 
vices,  springing  from  anger.  They  are  (1)  hunting,  gambling,  drafts,  day  sleeping, 
love  tales,  scandal,  luxuriousness,  drinking,  opium,  hemp-leaf  smoking,  singing, 
fiddling,  and  sauntering;  (2)  back  biting,  adultery,  malice,  jelaousy,  caviling, 
squandering,  harsh  language,  and  unjust  punishing. 

The  Cabinet  should  contain  seven  or  eight  ministers  of  noble  family,  great 
learning  and  good  character.  Nothing  should  be  done  without  their  counsel 
(Manu,  vii.  54  64).  The  king  is  to  have  charge  of  treasury  and  executive  work; 
the  premier,  of  the  administration  of  justise;  the  ambassador,  of  making  war  or 
peace.  All  matters  are  to  be  decided  by  the  majority  of  votes. 

The  capital  should  be  made  in  a central  place,  protected  by  nature  and  art. 
The  government-house  should  accommodate  all  head  offices,  and  the  fort  be  well 
supplied  with  arms  and  provisions. 

To  conduct  the  state  affairs  efficiently,  a government  office  should  be  made 
in  two,  three,  five  or  hundred  villages.  The  officer  in  charge  of  one  village  is  to 
report  to  the  officer  of  ten  villages,  the  latter  to  that  of  twenty  villages,  and  so 
forth.  The  officer  of  ten  thousand  villages  is  to  report  on  his  province  to  State 
Council,  who  are  responsible  to  the  Universal  Sovereign  Assembly. 

The  imposition  of  tax  laid  down  in  Manu,  VII,  130,  is  fixed  at  50th  part  of 
the  profit  of  manufacture,  6th  part  of  the  produce  of  agriculture  If  com  be  taken 
for  tax,  care  should  be  taken  that  the  people  do  not  suffer  from  want  of  food.  In 
short,  the  amount  of  taxes  should  be  as  small  as  possible,  such  as  the  milk  sucked 
by  the  calf  of  a cow  or  the  blood  by  a leech,  'faxes  are  also  levied  on  roads  and 
voyages. 

The  government  servants,  civil  and  military,  are  to  receive  monthly  salaries 
or  land  grant'^.  They  should  get  pensions  on  retirement,  and  ihcir  family,  and 
children  should  be  supported  by  the  government  on  their  demise.  Bribery  should 
be  severely  punished  by  confiscation  of  property  or  banishment  from  country. 

Military  tactics  are  divided  into  peace,  war,  attack  defence,  manoeuvres,  and 
alliance.  Each  is  siib-divided  into  two  kinds.  For  intsance,  peace  with  the 
enemy  or  with  another  for  his  resistance,  the  division  of  army  into  two 
wings  or  corps,  &c.  (Manu,  VJI,  161-176).  In  war  the  laws  of  chivalry  should  be 
enforced,  such  as  not  to  strike  by-standers  in  a fight,  wounded  soldiers,  sleepers, 
refugees,  &c.  The  vanquished  enemy  should  be  honoured  in  the  court  and  if  ad- 
visable, reinstated  in  his  dominions,  which  in  case  of  his  death  should  be  made 
over  to  his  relative,  assisted  by  loyal  advisers.  The  prisoners  of  war  should  be 
well  treated  with  regard  to  food  and  medicine  and  dismissed  on  the  conclusion  of 
peace. 

Thejudical  procedure,  (Manu,  viii,  3-19),  consists  in  deciding  18  kinds  of 
disputes,  v/z.,  debt,  deposit,  sale,  partnerships,  wages,  gifts,  agreements,  transgres- 
sion, ownerships,  boundaries,  assault,  defamation,  theft,  transgression,  adultery, 
altercation,  inheritance,  and  gambling.  That  court  is  dead  where  justice  is  killed 
by  iniquity.  Cases  should  be  argued  by  pleaders  and  barristers  before  judges  on 
theevidenceofwitnesses(Manu,  VIII.  68-91),  who  should  be  of  unimpeachable 
character.  Evidence  given  from  covetousness,  madness,  terror,  friendship,  lust, 
ignorance,  resentment  and  childishness,  is  invalid.  Fine  is  imposed  according  to  the 
circumstances  of  the  criminal,  that  a king  is  fined  a thousand  times  than  an  ordinary 
man.  Punishment  should  be  inflicted  on  the  genitals,  belly,  tongue,  hands,  legs, 
eye?,  nose,  ears,  body,  and  property.  It  should  not  be  spared  from  the  respect  of 
persons,  such  as  Brahmins,  relations,  the  father,  preceptor,  &c.,  when  found  guilty. 
Adultery  is  punished  with  death,  a woman  to  be  torn  in  pieces  by  dogs  and  man 
to  be  burnt  to  ashes  on  a hot  iron  bed.  The  extreme  severity  of  punishment 
prevents  the  commission  of  crimes. 


ThelDuties  of  Royalty 


171 


The  king  should  daily  inspect  offices,  army,  and  treasury,  so  that  all  goes  on 
well  to  promote  the  happiness  of  the  people. 

This  semblance  of  the  prevalent  with  the  ancient  Aryan  system  of  government 
IS  in  consequence  of  the  former  being  taken  from  Manu,  the  great  law-giver  of 
Indian  antiquity. 


Chapter  VII 

GOD  AND  THE  VEDA 


Of  God 


IsfT  wf«T  f^5%  f?m|:  I Rig,  I. 

^ f^fefKT  f^r  II  cixiv,  39. 

WE  have  given  the  meaning  of  this  verse  when  describing  the 
education  of  students.  However,  it  means  : Those  men  arc 
atheistic,  dull,  and  ever  sunk  in  the  sea  of  sorrow,  who 
neither  know,  try  to  seek,  nor  even  think  of  God,  whose  attributes, 
character,  nature  and  knowledge  are  all  glorious  and  wonderful,  in 
whom  the  earth,  sun,  and  other  worlds  exist;  who  pervades  all  like  the 
sky;  and  who  is  the  Supreme  Lord,  the  God  of  gods.  The  knowledge 
of  Him  alone  brings  eternal  happiness  to  humankind. 

33  Gods 

Q, — Do  you  believe  that  the  Veda  talks  of  many  gods? 

A. — No;  there  is  no  whisper  of  it  in  all  the  four  Vedas  so  as  to 
justify  the  existence  of  many  gods.  But,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  clearly 
written  there  that  there  is  but  one  God. 

Q. — What  is  the  object  of  many  devatas  (gods)  mentioned  in 
the  Vedas  ? 

A. — The  objects  which  have  wonderful  and  extraordinary  pro- 
perties, are  called  devatas;  thus  for  the  instance,  the  earth.  But  it  is 
nowhere  described  as  adorable  like  God.  Look  here,  this  very  Vedic 
verse  says  that  God  alone  ought  to  be  sought  after  and  worshiped  in 
whom  all  the  gods  have  their  being.  It  is  the  mistake  of  the  people 
to  take  the  word  devata  to  mean  God,  who  being  the  greatest  of  all 
gods,  is  called  the  Mahadeva  or  Great  God;  for.  He  alone  is  the 
Maker,  Preserver,  and  Destroyer  of  the  world;  He  is  the  Supreme 
Judge  and  Ruler.  The  phrase,  33  gods,  occurring  in  the  Vedas,  is 
explained  in  the  Shatapatha.  They  are  8 Vasus  or  the  abodes  of 
creatures  (derived  from  vas  : to  live,)  i.e.,  the  earth,  waters,  fire  or 
light,  air,  sky,  sun,  moon  and  planets;  11  Rudras  or  vital  processes 
derived  from  ru  : to  weep,  as  on  the  disappearance  of  these  vital  forces 
from  the  body,  it  ceases  to  live,  when  the  relatives  of  the  deceased 
weep),  i.e,^  inbreath  (apana),  outbreath  (prana),  energy  (vyana)  or 
motive  power,  swallowing  power  (udana),  bracing  or  recuperative 
power,  circulation  (samana),  belching  (naga),  twinking  (kurma), 
hunger  or  craving  (kirkala),  yawning  (devadatta),  decomposing  power 
(dhananjaya),  and  the  ego  (jivatma);  12  Adittyas  or  the  signs  of  the 


God  and  the  Veda 


173 


zodiac,*  (derived  from  ada  ; to  take)  i.e.,  the  sun’s  (adittya’s)  course 
through  these  constellations  takes  away  or  reduces  the  life  of  creatures; 
Indra  or  eletricity,  derivatively  meaning  a great  cause  of  power  and 
prosperity;  Prajapati  or  the  lord  of  creatures  or  Yajna  (work)  sacrifice 
as  it  is  a cause  of  purifying  the  air,  water,  rain,  and  plants.  It  also 
gives  an  opportunity  to  respect  the  learned,  and  it  is  the  mother  of 
inventions  and  various  kinds  of  manufacture.  These  are  the  33  gods, 
denominated  from  their  having  wonderful  properties  mentioned  above. 
The  14th  chapter  of  the  Shata.  (patha)  distinctly  says  that  the  Supreme 
Being  is  the  Lord  of  all  these  objects  and  the  greatest  of  all.  He  is, 
as  it  were,  the  34th  divine  state,  and  is  alone  adorable.  Other  scrip- 
tures bear  testimony  to  it  and  have  similar  expressions.  Had  persons 
seen  these  scriptures,  they  would  not  have  gone  astray  from  the  right 
path  and  so  fallen  into  the  ditch  of  delusion,  that  there  is  a plurality 
of  gods  in  the  Vedas. 

Unity  of  Godhead 

^ Jj«r:  Il  — Yaj.  XL,  I. 

— O man,  fear  God,  who  pervades  all  the  objects  in  the  universe,  and 
controls  them;  He  is  the  true  Lord.  Do  not  covet  the  wealth  of 
others.  Give  up  injustice.  Enjoy  life  by  observing  the  religion  of 
doing  right. 

(a)  H I Rig.  X. 

fTrTT  H n ”48,  L 

(b)  ^ ^ \ 

^ ^ ^ W -ib.  5. 

— a.  Lord  God  speaketh  unto  all,  saying  : O men  I am  the  Lord,  I 
existed  before  all,  I am  the  Lord  of  all  the  world.  I am  the  eternal 
cause  of  the  world,  I am  the  conqueror  of  all  and  master  and  donor 
of  all  wealth.  All  the  people  should  call  Me  Father  as  children  to 
their  begetters.  To  support  all,  I provide  for  the  various  kinds  of 
food  to  them  all  over  the  world  which  is  their  source  of  pleasures. 
Being  Almighty,  I am  the  illuminator  of  all  the  world  like  the  sun. 
I am  never  frustrated.  I never  die.  I am  the  maker  of  wealth  in  the 
shape  of  the  worlds.  Know  Me  to  be  the  maker  of  all  the  worlds.  O 
souls,  ask  Me  for  the  wealth  of  knowledge  and  other  virtues  by  taking 
right  steps  to  acquire  power  and  prosperity.  Never  sever  your  friend- 
ship with  Me. 

^ iramRfiT  ii  ib.  49.1] 

O my  people,  I give  the  eternal  wealth  of  knowledge  and  other 
virtues  to  the  person  who  glorifies  Me  by  the  practice  of  veracity.  I 
am  Brahman,  that  is,  the  revealer  of  the  Vedas,  which  rightly  pro- 
claim Me,  and  by  which  I promote  the  knowledge  of  all.  I am  the 
Guide  of  the  righteous,  the  Blesser  of  the  doer  of  good  works  {yajna) 

♦Aries,  Taurus,  Gemini,  Cancer,  Leo,  Virgo,  Libra,  Scorpion,  Sagittarius, 
Capricornus,  Aquarus,  and  Pisces. 


174 


Satyarth  Prakash 


and  the  Creator  and  Upholder  of  the  phenomena  of  all  the  visible 
world.  So  do  not  turn  away  from  Me,  nor  worship,  believe  or  recog- 
nise the  power  of  any  thing  instead  of  Me. 

^ n — Yaj.  xiii,  4. 

— This  is  a verse  of  the  Yajur  Veda.  It  means  : O men,  with  all  love 
and  devotion  adore  the  Supreme  and  most  happy  Spirit;  who  existed 
before  the  creation,  who  is  the  Maker,  Preserver  and  Upholder  of  all 
the  suns  and  other  luminous  bodies,  and  who  is  the  eternal  sole  Lord 
of  all  that  has  been,  is  in  existence,  and  will  come  into  being.  He 
has  made  and  He  sustains  all  the  creatures  of  the  worlds  from  the 
earth  to  the  sun. 

Proofs  of  God’s  Existence 

Q. — You  talk  glibly  of  God.  But  how  do  you  prove  His 
existence  ? 

A. — By  means  of  all  kinds  of  proofs,  called  the  testimony  of  the 
senses — perception,  and  the  like  logical  tests. 

Q. — These  proofs  cannot  be  applied  to  the  case  of  God. 

A. — Ny.  1,4  It  is  an  aphorism  of  Maharishi  Gotama’s  Logic  or  Nyaya 
philosophy.  It  means  : Perception  or  perceptual  evidence  is  the  know- 
ledge produced  in  the  mind  from  the  contact  of  the  will,  ear,  skin> 
eye,  tongue,  and  nose  with  sound,  touch,  form,  taste,  smell,  pleasure, 
pain,  real,  unreal  and  other  objects.  But  the  perception  should  be 
free  from  doubt  or  error.  Bear  in  mind  that  the  senses  and  the  will 
perceive  the  properties  of  objects,  but  not  their  substance  in  which 
these  qualities  inhere.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  four  organs,  viz,,  the 
skin,  and  others  perceive  touch,  form,  taste,  and  smell  ; and  the  will 
joined  to  the  mind  perceives  the  substance  which  is  the  earth.  In  like 
manner,  the  perception  of  God  results  from  the  perception  of  wonde- 
rous  design  in  the  visible  world  and  of  the  phenomena  of  knowledge 
and  virtue.  When  the  mind  or  soul  impels  the  will  or  conative  power, 
and  the  will  incites  the  senses  towards  any  object,  whether  it  be  theft 
or  other  vices  or  beneficence  and  other  virtues,  and  when  it  begins  to 
do  the  thing,  its  desires  and  judgement  are  bent  upon  that  desired 
object.  At  such  a time  fear,  doubt,  and  shame  rise  in  the  self  con- 
sciousness for  evil  works;  and  boldness,  conviction,  joy,  and  encourage- 
ment for  good  works  This  internal  voice  or  impulse  is  not  from  the 
ego,  but  from  the  Infinite  Spirit  When  the  mind  is  engaged  in  con- 
templating God  in  all  its  purity  of  intent,  it  perceives  both  of  them 
(God  and  soul).  When  God  is  evident  from  perceptual  evidence,  what 
doubt  can  there  be  in  the  evidence  of  inference  and  other  logical  tests 
of  the  knowledge  of  God  ? For,  the  knowledge  of  the  effect  leads  to 
that  of  the  cause. 

Omnipresence  of  God 

Q. — Is  God  omnipresent,  or  does  He  reside  in  some  particular 
place  ? 


God  and  the  Veda 


175 


A. — He  is  omnipresent.  For,  had  He  been  limited  to  one  locality 
He  could  not  have  been  the  inner  soul  of  all,  omniscient,  all  controll- 
ing, all-creating,  all-sustaining,  and  all-destroying.  For,  the  action 
of  a doer  is  impossible  of  happening  at  a place  lying  beyond  his  in- 
fluence 

God,  Mercy  and  Justice 

Q. — Ts  God  merciful  and  just  ? 

i4.— Yes,  He  is. 

Q. — These  attributes,  viz  , mercy  and  justice,  are  contrary  to 
each  other.  The  doing  of  justice  admits  of  no  mercy,  and  vice  versa. 
For.  justice  is  the  giving  of  rewards  and  punishment  according  to  deeds, 
neither  more  nor  less;  and  mercy  consists  in  letting  off  a criminal 
without  punishment. 

A. — The  difference  between  justice  and  mercy  is  merely  nominal; 
for  they  both  serve  the  one  and  the  same  purpose.  The  object  of 
punishment  is  to  deter  people  from  doing  evil  and  suffering  pain. 
Mercy  is  to  relieve  a person  of  pain.  Your  definition  of  justice  and 
mercy  is  not  true.  For,  justice  consists  in  giving  condign  punish- 
ment to  a person  who  has  committed  any  wrong  according  to  its 
nature  and  magnitude  If  a criminal  is  not  punished  mercy  will  be 
destroyed;  for,  to  forgive  a wrong  doer  is  to  bring  suffering  to 
thousand  of  virtuous  people.  How  can  it  be  mercy  which  causes  pain 
and  suffering  to  thousands  of  people  ? Properly  speaking,  mercy  is 
shown  in  putting  the  felon  in  jail  and  there  by  restraining  him  from 
wrong  doing  It  is  mercy  to  him  also.  Nay  his  capital  punishment 
will  be  an  act  of  mercy  to  thousands  of  people. 

Q. — Then  why  are  mercy  and  justice  two  distinct  words  ? If 
they  mean  the  same  thing,  their  being  separate  words  is  useless.  It 
would  have  been  better,  had  there  been  but  one  word.  It  is  thus 
manifest  that  the  object  of  justice  and  mercy  is  not  the  same. 

A. — Are  there  no  words  of  the  one  and  the  same  meaning,  and 
is  there  no  word  having  various  meanings  ? 

Q. — Yes,  there  are  such  words. 

A, — Then  why  do  you  doubt  it  ? 

Q. — For,  we  heard  the  people  say  so. 

A. — We  heard  both  truth  and  falsehood  in  the  world;  but  it  is 
our  duty  to  ascertain  them  after  a thorough  consideration.  Look  here, 
it  is  the  great  mercy  of  God  that  He  had  bestowed  upon  all  creatures 
entire  number  of  objects  after  creating  them  in  the  world  for  their 
use.  What  can  be  greater  mercy  than  that  ? Now,  the  advantage  of 
justice  is  sole  evident  in  as  much  as  the  existence  of  pleasure  and  pain, 
to  a greater  or  less  extent,  among  the  people  point  out  the  conse- 
quences of  their  deeds.  The  difference  between  them  is  that  mercy 
is  the  desire  and  consequent  action  to  give  ease  and  to  remove  the 
suffering  of  others,  and  justice  is  the  external  action  or  measures  such 
as  the  use  of  the  fetters,  mutilation,  and  other  just  punishments.  The 
main  and  sole  object  of  both  mercy  and  justice  is  to  prevant  people 
from  committing  wrong  and  relieve  all  of  suffering. 


176 


Satyarth  Prakash 


God  is  Spirit 

Q. — Is  God  corporeal  or  incorporeal  ? 

A. — Incorporeal;  for,  had  He  been  corporeal.  He  could  not  have 
been  all-pervading,  and  absence  of  omnipresence  in  Him  would  have 
made  the  ascription  of  omniscience  and  other  attributes  inconsistent. 
For  a limited  object  has  limited  qualities,  natures  and  actions.  Also, 
such  a limited  being  can  not  be  free  from  heat  and  cold,  hunger  and 
thirst,  disease,  evil,  mortification,  separation,  and  other  kinds  of 
suffering.  These  considerations  lead  us  to  the  only  conclusion  that 
God  is  immaterial  or  formless.  Had  He  been  material  and  so  had  a 
definite  form,  there  would  have  been  another  higher  being  than  Him- 
self to  make  His  nose,  ears,  eyes,  and  other  organs  to  give  Him  a 
shape  and  form.  It  is  an  indisputable  maxim  that  a composite  object 
produced  from  combination  must  necessarily  presuppose  its  immaterial 
and  intelligent  combiner  Or,  if  it  be  urged  that  God  made  His  own 
body  Himself  out  of  His  will  and  desire,  it  is  replied  that  it  only 
proves  the  thesis,  that  He  was  immaterial  before  the  formation  of  His 
body.  Hence,  God  never  takes  on  flesh;  but  being  immaterial  He 
makes  and  gives  shapes  to  all  the  material  world  out  of  invisible  cause. 

God’s  Almight 

Q. — Is  God  Almighty? 

A. — Yes,  He  is.  But  He  is  not  what  you  mean  by  the  word 
almighty.  It  means  that  God  stands  in  need  of  nobody’s  least  help  in 
doing  His  work  of  creation,  preservation,  and  destruction,  and  in 
doing  equitable  justice  to  souls  according  to  their  merits  and  demerits. 
In  other  words,  He  accomplishes  all  His  works  out  of  His  own  infinite 
power. 

0.  — We  believe  God  does  what  He  likes,  for  there  is  none  over 

Him. 

A. — What  does  He  like?  If  you  say  that  He  likes  all  and  can 
do  all  we  ask  you  if  He  can  kill  Himself,  create  many  Gods,  make 
himself  ignore,  and  commit  theft,  adultery,  and  other  evils,  and  suffer 
pain  ? Since  these  things  are  against  His  nature,  incompetible  with 
His  attributes  and  actions,  your  assertion  that  He  can  do  all,  falls  to 
the  ground,  being  inapplicable  in  the  case  of  God.  Hence,  the  meaning 
of  the  word  almighty  which  we  have  given,  is  the  only  true  one. 

God  is  Eternal 

Q. — Is  God  unbeginning? 

A. — Yes,  He  is.  Unbeginning  is  one  which  has  no  first  cause 
or  time  of  commencement.  All  these  meanings  are  given  at  length  in 
the  first  chapter,  which  may  be  referred  to. 

God’s  Purpose 

Q. — What  does  God  want  ? 

y4.— He  wishes  good  to  all  and  wants  that  all  should  acquire 
ease  and  comfort,  but  with  liberty.  He  makes  none  dependent  upon 
others  without  committing  sin. 


God  and  the  Veda 


177 


Praise,  Prayer  and  Meditation 

2.— Is  it  proper  to  sing  the  glory  of,  pray  to,  and  meditate  on 

God? 

A. — Yes,  it  is. 

Q. — Will  God  remove  or  pardon  the  sins  of  the  person  who 
sings  His  glory,  prays  to  Him,  and  thinks  of  Him,  by  setting  aside 
His  laws  ? 

No. 

Q. — Then  what  is  the  use  of  singing  His  glory,  praying  to  and 
thinking  of  Him. 

A. — The  consequence  of  performing  these  duties  is  quite  different. 

Q, — What  is  it  ? 

A, — The  fruit  of  singing  the  glory  of  the  Lord  is  the  love  of  God 
and  improvement  of  a devotee’s  nature,  qualities  and  deeds  from  the 
influence  of  those  of  the  Divinity.  The  fiuit  of  prayer  is  humility, 
zeal,  and  the  obtainment  of  help.  The  advantage  of  meditation  is 
communion  with  the  Supreme  Being  and  the  realization  of  Him.  (Each 
of  them, — praise,  prayer  and  meditation, — is  of  two  kinds,  viz.,  posi- 
tive : sagima  and  negative  uir^una.) 

Sfuti  or  Singing  the  Glory  of  God 

Q. — Explain  them  clearly. 

A -^T  I Yaj.  XL.  8. 

CN  C*  ^ 

A. — 1.  Thus,  for  instance,  God  is  the  all  prevading  Supreme 
Spirit,  swifter  than  the  swiftest,  infinitely  powerful,  holy,  all  knowing, 
the  innerself  of  all-governing,  enternal,  self-existent,  the  Supreme  Lord. 
He  the  impartor  reveals  the  right  knowledge  of  things  through  the 
Vedas,  the  eternal  source  of  knowledge,  to  His  eternal  children  from 
all  eternity.  This  is  a positive  description  of  God  or  Saguna  Stuti, 
that  is  to  say,  the  predicating  of  proper  atributes  of  God.  2.  He  is 
bodiless,  that  is  to  say,  He  never  assumes  the  body  or  incarnates  or 
is  born  of  women.  He  is  indivisible,  free  from  the  nervous  and 
arterial  systems,  and  never  does  evil.  Pain,  suffering  and  ignorance 
never  exist  in  him.  This  kind  of  God’s  description,  which  denies  the 
attribution  of  attachment,  hatred,  and  other  qualities  to  God,  is 
called  the  negative  description  of  God  or  Nirguna  Stuti. 

These  virtues  should  be  imitated  in  one’s  own  character  and 
actions;  in  other  words,  a man  should  be  just  as  God.  His  talk  of 
God  is  useless,  who  repeats  His  attributes  like  a buffoon  or  a parrot 
without  remodelling  and  improving  his  own  character. 

Prayer 

irt  Jrm  i 

— Yaj.  XXXII.  14.  O God  ! the  most  glorious  Supreme  Being,  make 
us  wise  in  this  very  life  time,  bless  us  with  that  wisdom  out  of  Thy 
grace  of  which  the  learned  and  clairvoyants  pray  to  Thee. 


178 


Satyarth  Prakash 


^ 

53rH^fH  3r?T  iirftr  ^rftr 

TTfir  ^rfir  ii 

— Yaj,  XIX,  9.  Thou  art  Light,  put  Thy  light  in  me  also  out  of  Thy 
grace  ! Thou  hast  infinite  valour,  endow  me  also  with  full  valour  out 
of  Thy  kind  condescension  ! Thou  hast  infinite  power,  give  me  power 
also.  Thou  hast  infinite  capability,  give  me  complete  capability  too  ! 
Thou  showest  Thy  anger  at  wicked  deeds  and  towards  the  iniquitous, 
mould  my  character  after  Thee  ! Thou  bearest  calumny,  praise  by  the 
people  and  also  bearest  with  sinners  against  Thee,  make  me  forbear- 
ing like  Thee  ! 

Purity  of  Mind 

i 

il  Yaj.  XXXIV. 

— O Ocean  of  mercy  ! may  my  will  be  devoted  to  good  out  of  Thy 
grace,  i c.,  intent  on  promoting  the  interests  of  my  fellow  creatures 
and  myself,  and  never  be  engaged  in  doing  harm  to  others. 

c'TRfg  II — b.  2. 

O Inner  Self  of  all  ! let  my  will  be  disposed  to  do  good  and  ever  re- 
frain from  vice,  and  take  that  resolve  whereby  preserving  learned 
people  do  their  duties  and  play  their  part  in  battles  and  other  actions, 
be  that  which  is  extraordinary,  full  of  power,  and  awful,  and  dwells  in 
all  creatures. 

HH:  II  ib.  3. 

— Let  my  will  (manas)  which  is  best  knowledge,  arouser  of  others, 
and  the  state  of  consiousness,  which  is  the  internal  light  of  creatures 
and  deathless,  and  without  which  none  can  do  the  least  work  of  any 
kind,  be  aloof  from  evil  qualities  and  full  of  purity  and  other  virtues. 

^^>crT  ii  ib.  4. 

O Lord  of  the  universe  ! let  my  will  be  the  same  as  enlightens  all  the 
clairvoyantis  with  the  knowledge  of  all  occurrences  of  past,  present 
and  future;  as  makes  the  immortal  mind  omniscient  by  putting  her  in 
communion  with  the  Supreme  Self;  as  is  endowed  with  knowledge 
and  action  as  is  accompanied  by  the  five  cognitive  senses,  intellect 
and  human  soul;  and  as  develops  concentration  of  attention;  and  be 
gifted  with  communion  and  spiritual  knowledge,  being  freed  from  all 
obstructions  and  difficulties. 

5tfcTfc<!?cTT  \ 

II— ib.  5. 

— O supremely  learned  Lord  of  all  I may  my  will  be  endowed  with 
the  knowledge  of  the  Rig,  Yajur,  Sama,  and  Atharva  Vedas  as  the 


God  and  the  Veda 


179 


spokes  of  a cart  wheel  are  attached  to  its  navel;  and  be  such  as  to  re- 
veal the  conscious  ego,  the  omniscient,  all  pervading,  witness  of 
creatures  and  dispelling  the  darkness  of  ignorance,  be  ever  devoted 
to  knowledge  ! 

fcsrfcTts  ^ \\  ib*  6. 

— O All-ruling  Lord  ! may  my  will,  which  is  like  the  will  of  all,  that 
carries  men  very  much  this  way  and  that  way  as  the  bridle  rein  does 
the  horses  of  a team,  or  a charioteer  does  his  horses,  and  that  dwells 
in  the  heart  full  of  motion,  and  very  much  swift,  restrain  all  my  senses 
from  vicious  conduct  and  ever  lead  them  on  in  the  righteous  path. 
Give  me  this  blessing,  O Lord  ! 

^ ^ ^ M -Yaj.  XL.  16. 
— O Supreme  Self!  the  dispenser  of  happiness,  self-elTulgent,  all-know- 
ing ! bless  us  with  complete  systems  of  knowledge  from  the  best  sour- 
ces, and  keep  us  away  from  crooked  and  vicious  acts  and  tenden- 
cies in  us.  With  all  humility,  we  sing  They  glory  a great  deal,  O Lord 
Make  us  holy  ! 

X nD  on 

— Yaj.  XVI.  15. 

— O Vanquisher  ! (Rudra)  the  Lord  Almighty,  who  terribly  visits  the 
wicked  with  suffering  as  a consequence  of  their  wickedness,  do  not 
suffer  our  youths,  ciders,  children,  fathers,  mothers,  dear  ones,  and 
relatives,  to  be  destroyed.  Lead  us  to  the  path  wherein  we  shall  not 
sin  and  so  be  punishable  by  Thee  ! 

— O Great  Teacher,  Supreme  Being  I lead  us  from  the  path  of 
falsehood  to  that  of  truth,  take  us  from  the  darkness  of  ignorance  to 
the  light  of  knowledge,  and  save  us  from  the  disease  of  death  and  give 
us  the  happiness  of  salvation  and  immortality.  In  other  words,  the 
(saguna)  positive  or  (nirguna)  negative  prayer  is  that  in  which  God 
is  addressed  on  supposing  Him  and  one’s  self  to  be  endued  with  or 
separate  from  merits  or  demerits,  according  as  assertion  or  nagation 
of  attributes  finds  predominence  implicitly  or  explicitly. — Shat,  XIV, 
3.  1,  30* 

Use  of  Prayer 

A man  should  act  on  what  he  prays  for.  For  instance,  a man 
praying  for  right  understanding,  should  do  his  best  to  live  to  it.  In 
plain  words,  one  should  have  recourse  to  prayer  after  giving  out  his 
own  exertion.  None  should  say  such  a prayer  which  God  never 
accepts,  as— O God,  destroy  my  enemies,  make  me  the  greatest  of  all, 

I alone  may  be  honoured,  all  others  should  be  subject  to  and  depen- 
dent on  me  and  so  forth.  For,  if  both  combatants  pray  for  the  des- 
truction of  each  other,  will  God  destroy  them  both  ? If  it  be  said  that 
his  prayer  will  be  accepted  or  successful  whose  love  is  greater,  it  may 


180 


Satyarth  Prakash 


be  replied  that  proportionally  less  ruin  will  befall  on  his  enemy  whose 
love  is  less.  Such  prayers  may  induce  persons  from  their  folly  to  pray: 
O God,  give  us  ready  made  bread,  sweep  my  house  clean,  wash  my 
clothes,  and  cultivate  lands  for  me.  The  persons  who  rely  on  God’s 
help  in  the  above  manner  and  waste  their  time  in  idleness,  are  great 
fools.  For,  he  who  breaks  God’s  commandment  of  exertion,  will 
never  be  happy.  It  is— 

I— -Yaj.  XL.  2. 

— God  orders  that  man  should  desire  to  live  100  years,  i.e.,  his  whole 
life,  and  work  all  the  while.  He  should  never  be  idle.  See  all  the 
animals  and  inanimate  beings  in  the  creation  are  at  their  respective 
work  and  ever  exert  their  best.  Man  should  take  a lesson  from  the 
earth  and  other  heavenly  bodies  which  always  move  and  revolve  and 
from  trees  which  always  grow.  God  helps  the  man  who  works  in  the 
holy  cause  just  as  one  man  helps  another  who  works.  God  grants  a 
prayer  for  beneficence,  but  never  helps  persons  in  harmful  actions, 
Just  as  persons  employ  him  who  works  but  not  him  who  is  a lazy 
lounger,  nay,  they  don’t  want  to  see  his  face  even;  persons  show  a 
way  to  a man  with  eyes  but  not  to  a blind  man.  If  a man  says  that 
sugar  is  sweet,  but  never  exerts  himself  to  obtain  it,  he  gets  no  sugar, 
nor  realises  its  taste.  Hut  the  man  who  exerts  himself,  comes  by 
sugar  in  more  or  less  time. 

Upasana  : Meditation,  lit : Proximity  to  God. 

?r  flTTt  (I 

— It  is  a verse  from  an  Upanishat.  It  means — experienced  in  com- 
munion with  God  by  a person,  whose  thoughts  arc  absorbed  in  think- 
ing of  God,  who  is  at  one  with  Deity,  and  whose  taints  of  ignorance 
and  other  vices  are  removed  from  the  influence  of  trance  or  com- 
munion, cannot  be  expressed  in  speech  for  it  is  felt  by  the  ego  in  its 
innermost  consciousness.  The  word  Upasana  (meditation)  means 
proximity  to  or  relisation  of  God.  All  the  details  of  the  eight  fold 
yoga  or  process  of  the  concentration  of  attention  on  God,  should  be 
thoroughly  gone  through  to  realise  or  approach  God  the  inmost  soul 
of  all,  who  pervades  all, 

Yamas  and  Niyamas 

nm:  n — Yoga.  i.  30. 

— The  aphorism  is  from  Patanjali’s  Yoga  philosophy.  Its  purport  is 
that  he  who  wants  to  learn  meditation,  should  take  such  preliminary 
steps  as  not  to  hate  anybody,  always  to  love  all,  to  speak  the  truth, 
never  to  tell  a lie,  never  to  steal,  to  be  honest  in  dealings,  to  be  chaste 
or  keep  the  senses  under  control,  never  to  be  a cheat,  to  be  humble, 
never  to  be  proud.  These  five  merits  (yamas)  form  together  what  is 
called  the  first  part  of  the  Yoga  or  meditation. 

OiiwT:  ii — Yoga.  i.  32. 

— One  should  keep  up  the  internal  purity  by  means  of  the  renuncia- 
tion of  hankering  and  hatred,  and  the  external  by  means  of  water 


God  and  the  Veda 


181 


bath  and  the  like  purification.  A person  should  exert  himself  con- 
bcientiously  and  righteously.  He  should  not  be  overjoyed  or  puffed 
up  with  profit  or  luck,  nor  dejected  at  loss.  He  should  be  cheerful, 
give  up  idleness,  be  always  active,  endure  pleasure  and  pain.  He 
should  act  up  the  precept  of  religion,  but  never  entertain  the  thoughts 
of  irreligion.  He  should  ever  study  and  teach  true  scriptures  and 
other  books  and  keep  a good  company  He  should  contemplate  on 
tlie  meaning  and  import  of  Om,  God’s  holy  name,  which  he  should 
daily  repeat  or  mutter.  He  should  devote  his  life  to  carry  out  the 
commandmentb  of  God.  I'hese  five  merits  (niyams)  form  together 
what  is  called  the  second  stage  of  Upasana  or  meditation.  The  other 
six  stages  or  steps  of  meditation  are  given  in  the  'Introduction  to  the 
Commentary  on  the  Rig  and  other  Vedas.’* 

When  a person  wants  to  meditate,  he  should  repair  to  a secluded, 
clean  place,  take  a comfortable  seat,  practise  deep  breathing,  check 
the  tendency  of  the  senses  towards  the  external  objects,  fix  his  atten- 
tion on  the  umblical  region,  the  heart,  throat,  eye,  crown,  lock,  or 
anywhere  in  the  spine.  He  should  think  of  his  own  self  and  the 
Supernal  Soul  and  being  absorbed  in  contemplating  on  the  Supreme 
Being,  acquire  the  power  of  Sanyama**  or  adeptness. 

Use  of  Meditation 

When  a man  does  these  things,  his  mind  and  internal  senses  are 
purified  and  filled  with  truth.  He  daily  advances  in  secular  and  spir- 
tual  knowledge  till  he  obtains  salvation.  He  who  practises  meditation 
in  the  aforesaid  manner,  makes  progress  forever.  Now  positive 
meditation  is  to  think  of  God  as  having  the  attributes  of  omniscience 
and  the  like;  and  the  negative  meditation  is,  to  be  absorbed  in  con- 
templating on  the  Supreme  Being  as  pervading  the  interior  and  exterior 
of  the  subtle  soul,  and  as  free  from  the  material  qualities  of  repulsion, 
form  taste,  odour,  touch  and  the  like.  The  use  of  meditation  is  some- 
thing similar  to  one  experienced  by  a person  shivering  with  cold  and 
obtaining  comfort  on  approaching  a fire  which  removes  his  cold.  In 
like  manner,  approach  to  God  dispels  all  vice  and  suffering  and  puri- 
fies the  nature  and  character,  action  of  the  soul  and  fills  her  with  virtues 
similar  to  those  of  God.  Therefore,  it  is  very  necessary  to  repeat  the 
attributes  of  God,  to  pray  to  Him,  and  to  meditate  on  Him.  But 
there  is  another  advantage  to  be  got  therefrom,  namely,  the  soul  will 
be  so  strong  as  to  retain  her  pressence  of  mind  even  in  the  midst  of 
mountains  of  misery.  She  will  be  able  to  bear  all  up.  Is  it  a small 
benefit  ? He  who  never  performs  the  repetition  of  God’s  attributes, 
prayer  to  Him,  and  meditation  on  Him,  is  ungrateful  and  greatly 
foolish  too.  For,  it  is  ungreatfulness  and  sheer  folly  to  forget  the 

*The  8 Stages  are  Yama,  Niyama,  Asana,  Pranayama,  Pratyahara,  Dharna, 
Dhyana  and  Samadhi — moral  duties,  religious  rites,  position,  deep-breathing, 
mortification,  concentration,  contemplation  and  trance. 

♦♦Dharma,  Dhyana  and  Samadhi  are  called  Sanyama  and  the  person  who 
can  practise  them  is  called  Sanyami.  They  are  the  degrees  of  concentration  of  the 
mind.  Dhyana  is  the  unit  of  concentration,  say,  30  seconds,  say  12  times  that 
again  is  Dhyana  and  12  times  that  again  is  Samadhi  or  trance,  in  which  an  adept 
realises  the  absolute  nature  of  a thing.  In  case  of  the  Diety,  he  sees  Him  face  to 
face,  as  it  were.  It  is  the  beatifie  vision.  The  result  is  emniscience. 


182 


Satyarth  Prakash 


blessings,  nay,  to  disbelieve  in  God,  who  has  given  all  the  things  of 
the  world  for  the  comfort  of  souls. 

Q. — How  can  God  perform  the  work  of  the  senses,  when  He 
has  no  eyes,  ears,  and  &c.  ? 

^ 5T  ^ cT^Tfef  cTm|Tq^‘  gm^  n 

— This  verse  is  the  19th  of  the  3rd  chapter  of  the  Shwetashwatra  Upani- 
shat.  It  means, — God  has  no  hands,  but  He  makes  and  upholds  all 
the  world  with  the  hand  of  His  power.  He  has  no  feet,  but  being  all 
pervading.  He  is  the  swiftest  of  all  in  motion.  He  has  no  organ  of 
sight,  but  He  sees  all  creatures  in  their  true  light.  He  has  no  ears, 
but  He  hears  the  voice  of  all.  He  has  no  internal  sense,  but  He  knows 
all.  There  is  none  in  the  world  who  comprehends  Him.  Being  eternal, 
the  best  of  all,  and  omnipresent,  He  is  called  the  Purusha  oi  Omni- 
present Being.  He  performs  the  work  of  the  senses  and  the  internal 
sense  with  His  almight. 

Q. — Many  people  imagine  Him  to  be  without  any  action  and 
attribute. 

^ ^ \ 

qrr^q  ^fq^fqfqqq  «cq^  ^ U 

It  is  the  8th  verse  of  the  6th  chapter  of  the  Shwetashwatra 
Upanishat.  It  means — There  is  no  off-shoot  or  produce  of  God, 
identical  with  His  nature.  He  has  no  need  of  another  for  a vehicle 
or  means  to  work  upon.  There  is  none  equal  to  Him  or  greater  than 
He,  His  power  is  infinite,  that  is  to  say,  He  has  infinite  knowledge, 
infinite  power,  and  infinite  energy.  All  these  are  part  and  parcel  of 
His  nature.  Had  God  been  without  any  action  or  energy.  He  could 
not  have  made,  supported,  and  destroyed  the  world.  Hence,  He  is 
omnipresent,  and  being  intelligent  He  has  energy  or  power  to  act. 

Q. — When  He  performs  any  action,  is  it  finite  or  infinite? 

A. — Being  all-wise  and  omniscient,  He  limits  His  activity  to 
the  place  and  time  which  He  considers  to  be  proper.  He  does  things 
neither  more  nor  less. 

Infinitude  of  God 

<2.~~Does  God  know  His  own  limit? 

A.— God  is  omniscient,  and  has  perfect  knowledge  which  consists 
in  knowing  things  in  their  true  light  or  as  they  are  in  their  nature. 
God  is  infinite,  so  His  knowledge  of  Himself  as  infinite  is  characteristic 
of  His  true  and  perfect  knowledge.  The  opposite  of  it  would  be 
ignorance  It  is  problematical  knowledge  to  think  an  infinite  being 
as  finite  and  vice  versa.  Yathartha  darshanam  jnanam — True  know- 
ledge consists  in  forming  the  concept  of  a thing  according  to  its 
properties,  nature  and  energy,  and  its  proper  use.  The  reverse  of  this 
knowledge  is  ignorance. 

Existence  of  God 


God  and  the  Veda 


183 


—God  is  the  absolute  self,  which  is  free  from  the  taint  of  ignorance 
and  other  vices;  from  evil  desire,  dislike,  and  the  hope  of  the  enjoy- 
ment of  fruits  of  mixed  action. — Yoga  1,  24. 

I — Sankhya  1,  12. 

i— ib.  V.  10. 

I— ib.  V.  11. 

—There  is  no  proof  of  the  existence  of  God,  which  can  be  referred  to 
the  testimony  of  the  senses  {pratyakslia).  When  there  is  no  evidence  of 
the  senses,  the  other  tests  or  canons,  such  as  inference  and  the  like 
laws  of  logic  can  not  be  applied.  Also,  there  can  be  no  syllogistic 
inference  from  want  of  certainty  as  the  inherence  of  attributes  in  the 
Divine  substance.  Then  again  the  absence  of  the  evidence  of  the 
senses  and  of  inference  does  away  with  the  authority  of  scriptures  or 
assertion  of  learned  men.  Hence  the  existence  of  God  can  not  be 
proved. 

A.—lhcrQ  is  no  evidence  of  the  senses  for  the  existence  of  God, 
alluded  to  in  the  above  aphorisms,  nor  is  God  the  material  cause  of 
Ibc  universe.  The  Supreme  Being  is  caWed  the  Purusha  UteraWy, 
Pervader  of  the  universe  from  His  being  different  from  man  that  is  to 
say,  from  His  pervading  all  things.  Man  (ego)  is  also  called  2i purusha 
from  his  pervading  the  whole  body.  For,  it  is  said  in  connection  with 
this  subject. — 

II — Sankhya  V.  8.  9,  12. 

—If  there  be  no  union  of  the  Purusha  (God)  and  Pradhana  (nature), 
the  union  of  parts  in  God  will  be  inevitable,  or  compositeness  will 
be  attributed  to  God.  Thus,  compositeness  is  found  in  the  world, 
which  is  the  product  of  the  union  of  nature  (matter)  and  force 
(invisible).  In  like  manner,  God  would  have  become  composite. 
1 herefore,  God  is  not  the  material  cause  of  the  universe,  but  He  is 
the  instrumental  or  essential  cause  of  it.*  It  the  world  had  been 
produced  from  intelligence,  it  would  have  been  omnipotent  like  the 
Deity,  that  is  the  fountain  of  all  forces  and  wealth.  But  as  it  is  not 
the  material  cause  of  the  world;  but  as  is  said  above,  He  is  the 
essential  or  intelligent  cause.  Also,  the  Shwetashwatra  Upanishat 
makes  nature  (matter)  the  material  cause  ol  the  world.  Thus  : 

51  ^T:  II 

—It  is  the  5th  verse  froin  its  3rd  chapter.  Nature  (Prakriti)  which  is 
increate,  and  is  made  of  satwa  (intelligence),  raja  (force,)  tama  (inertia 
or  matter),  is  diversified  into  creatures  in  its  form  and  bulk.  In  other 
words,  Nature  assumes  different  states  frona  its  being  changeable,  and 
God  being  unchangeable,  never  changes  His  states  and  appears  in 
another  form.  He  is  always  consistant  and  immutable.  Hence  also, 
he  who  regards  Kapilcharya  to  be  an  atheistic,  is  himself  so.  The 

*Cause  (Karana)  are  of  three  kinds,  viz,  material  (Upadana),  which  gives 
portion  of  its  substance  to  the  effect,  as  cotton  is  the  material  cause  of  cloth; 
instrumental  (Sadharan),  as  the  loom  is  the  instiumental  cause  of  cloth;  eflicient 
or  intelligent,  as  the  weaver  is  the  intelligent  cause  of  cloth. 


184 


Satyarth  Prakash 


saint  was  not  an  atheist  also,  the  Mimansa  is  not  atheistic  inasmuch 
as  it  treats  of  dharma  (qualities)  and  dharmi  (substance).  The  Vai- 
sheshika  explicitly  talks  of  Ishwara  (God).  The  Nyaya  calls  the 
Supreme  Being  Atma,  For,  that  Being  is  called  Ishwara  (God)  who 
is  possessed  of  omniscience  and  other  attributes. 

who  prevades  all,  and  has  infinitude  of  knowledge  and  other  virtues, 
and  who  is  the  inner  self  of  all  the  souls.  Such  is  God  according 
to  the  Mimansa,  Vaisheshika  and  Nyaya. 

Incarnation 

Q.— Does  God  take  on  flesh,  or  does  the  incarnation  of  God 
ever  take  place  ? 

A. — No;  God  never  incarnates.  Says  the  Yajur  Veda  : 

I H II 

— The  unitary  God  is  unborn.  He  is  holy  and  immaterial,  and  so 
fourth.  These  authorties  prove  that  God  is  never  born. 

Q — HTTcT  I 

Q. — Lord  Krishna  says  (Gita,  iv.  7)  that  he  is  born  whenever 
religion  or  virtue  is  trampled  down. 

A. — Being  against  the  Vedas,  this  assertion  cannot  be  admitted 
as  true  But  it  is  possible  that  Lord  Krishna  wished  to  protect  religion 
and  saints  and  so  said  that  he  would  incarnate  in  all  ages  to  protect 
the  virtuous  and  destroy  the  vicious,  which,  therefore,  is  not  objec- 
tionable; for  : — 

C\ 

The  body,  soul,  and  wealth  of  the  good  are  all  for  the  welfare  of  people. 
However,  it  can  not  prove  the  divinity  of  Lord  Krishna. 

Q. — If  it  is  so,  why  do  the  people  talk  of  and  believe  in  the  24 
incarnations  of  God  in  the  world  ? 

A — They  do  so,  because  they  do  not  know  the  meaning  of  the 
Vedas  They  are  led  astray  by  sectarians,  themselves  are  ignorant, 
and  are  so  fallen  into  the  labyrinth  of  doubt  and  delusion.  Therefore, 
they  talk  of  and  believe  in  such  absurd  things. 

Q, — If  God  never  incarnates  on  earth,  how  can  Kansa,  Ravana, 
and  other  monsters  be  killed  ? 

^.—Firstly;  he  who  is  born  of  woman,  must  inevitably  taste  the 
bitter  cup  of  death.  Kansa,  Ravana,  and  other  devils  are  nothing 
before  God,  who  makes,  preserves,  and  destroys  the  world  without 
incarnating  or  assuming  a human  form.  Being  omnipresent,  He  fills 
the  bodies  of  Kansa,  Ravana  and  other  devils.  He  can  kill  them  any- 
time He  likes  by  destroying  their  vitals.  Can  he  go  by  any  other 
name  but  a fool  who  says  that  God  of  infinite  attributes,  deeds,  and 
nature,  is  born  and  dies  in  order  to  kill  an  insignificant  being?  Secon- 
dly; it  is  wrong  to  say  that  He  is  born  to  save  the  pious  and  devotees; 


God  and  the  Veda 


185 


for  to  save  the  saints  who  act  upon  His  commandments,  God  has 
full  power.  Are  the  acts  of  killing  Kansa,  Ravana  and  other  devils, 
and  lifting  the  Goberdhana  and  other  mountains,  greater  than  those 
of  God’s  making  the  earth,  sun,  moon,  and  other  worlds,  preserving 
and  destroying  them  ? If  a man  thinks  of  God’s  work  in  the  creation, 
he  will  come  to  the  conclusion,  bliuto  na  bhavishyati,  that  there  is 
none,  nor  there  will  ever  be  any  being  like  God.  Thirdly;  the  reason 
does  not  prove  the  incarnation  of  God.  It  is  like  saying  that  the 
infinite  spacie  is  brought  into  a womb  or  held  in  the  fist  of  a hand, 
which  is  prima  facie  absurd,  and  can  never  be  true.  For,  space  is  in- 
finite and  extends  everywhere,  and  so  it  cannot  be  put  in  the  inside 
of  a thing  or  spread  outside  of  it.  In  like  manner,  God  being  infinite 
and  all-pervading,  cannot  be  said  to  come  or  go  to  any  place.  A 
man’s  coming  and  going  to  a place  can  only  happen  when  he  is  not 
present  there.  Was  not  God  present  in  the  womb  so  that  He  came 
into  it  ? Was  He  not  present  outside  of  it  so  that  He  came  out  from 
inside  ? Who  but  the  ignorant  can  say  it  of  God  and  believe  in  it  ? 
Therefore,  God’s  advent  and  exit,  birth  and  death  can  never  be  proved. 

Also,  bear  in  mind  that  Jesus  and  the  like  persons  were  not  the 
incarnations  of  God  Being  subject  to  desire,  hatred,  hunger,  thirst, 
fear,  sorrow,  pleasure,  pain,  birth,  death,  and  other  human  qualities, 
they  were  men. 

Forgiveness  of  Sins 

Q, — Does  God  forgive  the  sins  of  His  saints  and  devotees  ? 

A, — No.  For,  if  He  forgives  their  sins.  His  Justice  will  be  done  away 
with  and  all  the  people  will  turn  sinners.  Learning  that  sins  are  re- 
mitted, they  will  be  emboldened  and  encouraged  to  commit  them. 
Thus  if  a king  pardon  crimes,  his  subjects  will  be  fearless  to  commit 
them  more,  and  those  more  and  more  heinous  than  before.  For,  they 
come  to  believe  that  the  king  will  give  them  pardon  and  so  are  sure 
to  get  his  forgiveness  by  supplication  and  crouching  before  him.  Then 
these  who  do  not  commit  crimes,  will  begin  to  commit  them  being 
without  any  fear  of  consequences.  Hence,  it  is  the  duty  of  God  to 
deal  out  rewards  and  punishments  for  all  deeds  according  to  their 
merits  and  demerits,  and  not  to  forgive  them. 

Liberty  of  Soul 

Q. — Is  the  soul  independent  or  free  to  act,  or  is  she  dependent 
for  her  actions  on  God  ? 

A. — She  is  free  to  do  her  duties,  but  subject  to  the  laws  of  God, 
Swatantrah  karta — This  aphorism  of  Panini  means  that  the  doer  is 
one  who  is  free  or  independent, 

Q. — What  do  you  mean  by  free  or  independent? 

A. — That  person  is  free  to  whom  the  body,  vital  powers,  senses, 
internal  senses  and  other  organs  are  subject.  If  he  be  not  free  to  act, 
he  cannot  be  amenable  to  the  consequences  of  virtue  and  vice 
of  his  actions.  For  instance,  the  soldiers  of  an  army  kill  many 
persons  in  war  by  the  order  or  at  the  instigation  of  their  master  and 


186 


Satyarth  Prakash 


commander,  and  yet  they  are  not  charged  with  murder.  In  the  same 
manner,  if  the  people  do  any  thing  by  the  commandment  of  or  im- 
pulse given  by  God,  merit  and  demerit  cannot  occure  to  them.  God 
will  enjoy  the  fruit  of  their  actions  Heaven  or  hell  i e.,  pleasure  or 
pain,  will  come  to  the  lot  of  God.  A man  who  kills  another  with 
some  weapon,  is  alone  punished,  but  not  his  weapon.  In  like 
manner,  a dependent  soul  can  not  be  responisble  for  the  good  or  evil 
of  her  deeds.  Hence,  the  souls  arc  free  to  do  according  to  their 
power.  But  when  they  have  committed  a sin,  they  sulTer  its  con- 
sequences on  account  of  their  being  subject  to  the  laws  of  God’s 
justice.  Therefore,  the  soul  is  at  liberty  in  acting,  but  is  dependent 
on  God  to  reap  the  fruits  of  her  good  or  evil  actions. 

Q, — Had  God  not  made  the  soul  and  given  her  power,  she  could 
do  nothing.  Therefore,  the  soul  acts  from  necessity  or  an  impulse 
from  God. 

A, — The  soul  is  never  made  or  created.  She  is  unbeginning  as 
God,  and  the  metrial  cause  of  the  world  is  merely  an  attendant 
circumstance.  The  tenement  of  the  soul,  the  body  and  the  sockets  of 
the  senses  arc  made  by  God.  But  they  are  all  subject  to  the  soul. 
He  who  sins  either  by  thought,  speech,  or  action,  alone  suffers  the 
consequences  of  his  doings,  but  not  God.  For  instance,  a certain 
person  dug  out  iron  from  a mountain,  and  sold  it  to  a merchant, 
from  whom  an  ironsmith  purchased  it  and  made  a sword  of  it.  A 
soldier  purchased  the  sword  and  killed  a man  with  it.  Here  in  this 
example  no  king  punishes  the  digger  of  the  iron,  the  purchaser  of  it, 
the  maker  of  the  sword,  and  the  sword  itself.  But  the  man  alone 
who  committed  the  murder  with  the  sword,  is  punished.  In  like 
manner,  God  the  maker  of  the  body  and  the  organs,  does  not  suffer 
the  consequences  of  its  actions,  but  makes  the  soul  suffer  them.  If 
God  was  the  cause  or  inciter  of  actions,  nobody  would  be  sinful;  for, 
God  being  holy  and  righteous,  would  not  induce  anybody  to  commit 
an  evil.  Therefore,  the  soul  is  free  to  act.  In  the  same  manner,  God 
is  also  free  to  act. 


Characteristics  of  God  and  Soul 


Q, — What  kind  of  form,  qualities,  character,  and  nature  have 
the  soul  and  God  ? 


A. — They  are  both  intelligences,  and  their  nature  is  holy,  im- 
mortal and  righteous.  But  God’s  actions  arc  the  making  of  the  world, 
its  preservation,  and  its  destruction,  keeping  all  things  in  their  res- 
pective spheres  and  subjecting  them  to  laws,  the  awarding  of  rewards 
and  punishments  to  virtue  and  vice,  and  the  like  virtuous  duties.  The 
functions  of  the  soul  are  the  propagation  of  the  species  the  preserva- 
tion of  the  offspring,  manufactures  and  other  professions,  doing 
good  or  evil.  The  attributes  of  God  are  eternal  knowledge,  happi- 
ness, omnipotence,  and  other  infinite  powers.  The  qualities  of  the 
soul  are — 


-Ny  1 1 10. 


n— Vai.  Ill,  ii.  4. 


God  and  the  Veda 


187 


— Ichha  : the  desire  to  obtain  things;  dwesha  : hatred  of  pain  and 
other  evils:  prayatna  : courage  and  strength;  sukha  : pleasure  dukha  : 
bewailing  and  sadness;  jnana  : discernment,  knowledge,  remembrance, 
are  the  qualities  of  the  soul  common  to  the  Nyaya  and  Vaisheshika; 
but  the  latter  also  has  prana;  outbreath;  apana  : inbreath;  nimesha  : 
closing  the  eyes;  iinmesha  : opening  them;  rnano  : faith,  memory,  con- 
sciousness; : motion;  indrya,  regulation  of  the  senses;  antarvikara 
hunger,  thirst,  joy,  sorrow  and  other  alfections;  which  qualities  of  the 
soul  are  distinct  from  those  of  God.  These  are  the  characteristics  to 
determine  the  existence  of  the  soul  for,  she  is  no  corporeal.  These 
qualities  are  manifested  as  long  as  the  soul  dwells  in  the  body.  When 
she  departs  it  they  also  disappear  from  the  body.  For,  the  qualities 
which  exist  in  the  presence  of  an  object  and'ceases  to  exist  in  its  absence, 
are  its  essential  qualities.  Thus,  light  is  not  found  in  the  absence  of 
the  sun  and  lamp,  but  is  always  present  when  they  are  present.  In 
like  manner,  the  knowledge  of  God  and  the  soul  is  possible  through 
their  characteristics  only. 

God’s  Prescience  and  Man’s  Liberty 

Q. — God  secs  the  past,  present  and  future.  He,  therefore, 
knows  what  will  happen  in  the  future.  Whatever  He  determines,  the 
soul  will  act  upon.  So  the  soul  is  not  free,  and  God  cannot  with 
justice  punish  her;  for,  she  does  what  God  has  resolved  in  virtue  of‘ 
His  fore-knowledge. 

/4. — To  say  that  God  is  the  seer  of  three  divisions  of  time,  is  an 
act  of  folly.  For  the  past  is  what  was  and  is  not  now,  and  the  future 
is  what  will  happen,  having  not  been  in  existence  as  yet.  Does  God 
forgets  what  He  knew  in  the  past  ? Will  He  know  what  He  does  not 
know  at  present  ? Hence  God’s  knowledge  is  always  uniform,  with- 
out break,  constant  and  present.  The  past  and  present  are  spoken 
of  man.  But  with  reference  to  the  knowledge  of  human  deeds,  it  can 
be  said  that  God  is  the  seer  of  three  divisions  of  time.  With  regard 
to  God  himself,  they  do  not  exist  in  Him.  What  man  does  out  of  his 
freedom,  God  knows  in  virtue  of  His  conscience.  The  souls  act  as 
God  knows,  that  is,  God  is  free  in  His  kdowledge  of  the  past,  present 
and  future  and  in  doing  justice  to  souls  according  to  their  merits.  The 
souls  are  also  free  to  some  extent  in  the  present  and  quite  free  to  act. 
In  virtue  of  God’s  knowledge  being  unbeginning  His  knowledge  both 
of  soul’s  deeds,  and  of  punishing  the  violation  of  His  laws  is  unbeginn- 
ing. Both  kinds  of  knowledge  are  true.  Can  His  knowledge  of 
human  deeds  be  true  and  that  of  punishment  false  ? Thus  there  is  no 
inconsistency  in  our  position. 

Soul’s  Place  in  Body 

Q. — Does  the  soul  pervade  all  the  body  or  is  limited  to  one  spot  ? 

A, — She  acts  at  one  spot.  Had  he  been  present  in  all  the  body,  the 
phenomena  of  waking,  sleeping,  dreamless  sleep,  death,  birth  union, 
separation,  ingress,  egress  would  never  take  place.  Hence,  the  form 
of  the  soul  is  small  or  finite,  or  better  still;  delicate  or  subtle,  and  God 
is  still  subtler  than  the  subtlest,  infinite,  omniscient,  and  omnipresent. 
It  is  on  this  account  that  the  relation  between  God  and  man  is  the 
relation  of  the  pervader  and  the  pervaded. 


188 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Relation  between  God  and  Man 

Q, — A thing  can  not  exist  where  there  is  already  another.  There- 
fore, the  relation  between  God  and  man  can  not  be  one  of  the  pervader 
and  the  pervaded,  but  one  of  union  or  association. 

A, — This  rule  is  true  of  material  objects  of  the  like  kind,  but 
not  of  the  different  kinds.  Thus,  for  instance,  iron  is  denser  or  more 
bulky  and  hre  is  liner  or  more  delicate.  Therefore,  fire  penetrates 
iron  and  electricity  pervades  the  sky.  In  like  manner,  the  soul  is 
grosser  than  God,  and  God  is  more  delicate  than  the  soul.  Conse- 
quently God  pervades  the  soul.  Besides  the  relation  of  the  pervader 
and  the  pervaded  the  other  relations  between  God  and  man  from 
other  points  of  view  are  the  saved  and  the  server,  the  adored  and  the 
adorer,  the  master  and  the  servant,  the  king  and  the  subject,  the  father 
and  the  son,  and  so  forth. 

Vedant  Precepts 

A. — If  God  is  diilcrcnt  from  man,  what  is  the  meaning  of  these 
“great  precepts”  (maha  vakyas)  of  the  Vedas  ? 

1.  \ 2.  { 3.  \ 4. \ 

A, — These  are  not  the  precepts  of  the  Vedas.  But  they  are 
passages  from  the  books,  called  the  Brahmanas.  They  arc  not  called 
the  Great  Piccepts  anywheic  in  authentic  scriptures.  They  mean — 
altam  I,  brahma  in  the  Brahman  or  Supreme  Being,  asmi  am.  Here 
the  figure  of  syncope  is  used.  Thus,  Manchali  kroshanti — Renches 
call  out.  But  all  know  that  renches  arc  inanimate  and  so  have  no 
power  of  speech.  Therefore,  the  sentence  means  that  the  persons  sitt- 
ing upon  renches  call  out.  In  the  same  way,  the  above  precepts 
should  be  interpreted.  It  may  be  said  that  all  things  live  in  God — 
brahmastha — and  so.  What  peculiarity  is  there  in  using  the  phrase 
brahrnastha  (dwelling  in  the  Brahman)  ? It  is  replied  to  this  objection, 
that  tho’  all  things  dwell  in  God  yet  there  is  no  other  object  so  simi- 
lar in  qualities  and  approximate  to  God  as  the  psycho,  who  has  the 
knowledge  of  the  Supreme  Being  and  dwells  in  the  presence  of  God 
during  salvation.  Therefore,  in  relation  to  God,  the  soul’s  attribute 
is  fellowship,  that  is  to  say,  the  soul  dwells  with  God.  But  it  does 
not  prove  the  identity  of  God  and  the  human  soul.  Thus,  if  a man 
says  that  he  and  a certain  other  man  are  one,  he  means  they  are  not 
opposed  to  each  other.  In  like  manner,  the  soul  being  absorbed  in 
the  Supreme  Being  out  of  her  devotion  to  and  love  for  him  in  her 
ecstatic  state,  can  say  or  she  imagines  that  the  Supreme  Being  and 
she  are  one  i.c.,  not  opposed  to  each  other,  but  united  and  intimate  or 
cO'dwcllers.  That  soul  alone  who  makes  her  character,  temper,  and 
action  in  harmony  with  those  of  God  can  claim  her  fellowship  or 
friendship,  or  atonement  with  God. 

Q. — Well,  how  do  you  interpret  that  : Brahman  or  God,  twarn  : 
thou,  soul,  : (asi)  ait  i.e.,  O soul,  (twain)  thou  (asi)  art  (tat)  God  ? 

/I. —What  do  you  mean  by  the  word  tat  ? If  you  say  Brahma, 
whence  do  you  supply  this  omission  ? Where  is  it  implied  that  it 
should  be  supplied  here  ? 


God  and  the  Veda 


189 


Q. — From  this  authority  stated  before,  viz,, 

You  have  not  even  seen  this  Chhandogya  Upanishat.  If 
you  had  seen  it  you  would  have  found  that  there  was  no  such  word 
as  brahma  there.  You  should  not  have  told  so,  which  is  false.  On 
the  contrary,  the  Chhandogya  Upahishat  has, 

n— Ch.  VI.  ii.  1. 

There  is  no  such  word  as  brahma  in  it 

Q, — Then  what  do  you  mean  by  the  word  tat  ? 

— That  God  is  worth  knowing,  He  himself  is  His  inner  self,  who 
is  most  delicate  and  the  soul  of  all  the  universe  and  the  human  soul, 
ego,  and  is  self  existent, — Ch,  Pr,  6,  Kh,  8,  M,  6,  7. 

O Shweta  Keto  ! My  dear  son, 

II 

— Thou  are  united  with  that  Supreme  Being,  the  innermost  spirit.  This 
interpretation  is  in  unison  with  the  teachings  of  the  Upanishats.  For, 
this  quotation  from  the  Brahadaranyaka  Upanishat— Shat,  14,  6,  7, 

30,  records  that  once  upon  a time  the  great  sage  Yajnavalkya  said  to 
his  wife  Maitreyi : “O  dear  one  the  foolish  soul  does  not  know  that 
the  Supreme  Being  Self,  which  is  ever  present  in  her  and  yet  separates 
from  her,  pervades  her.  God,  whose  temple  or  body  is  the  ego,  per- 
vades the  soul  as  the  latter  dwells  in  the  body.  Being  different  or 
separate  from  the  ego.  He  witnesses  its  good  and  evil  actions,  gives 
rewards  and  punishments  accordingly  and  subjects  them  to  His  laws. 
That  same  immortal  Deity  is  the  inmost  ruling  spirit  in  other  words 
pervades  thee,  Know  Him.”  Who  can  interpret  this  passage  other- 
wise ? Ayamatma  Brahma  I am  the  Supreme  Being,  is  uttered  by 
an  entranced  person  when  he  realises  the  Deity  in  his  clairvoyance — 
samadhi,  that  is  to  say  he  says  that  the  Supreme  which  pervades  him, 
is  present  everywhere.  Therefore,  the  modern  followers  of  Vedanta 
who  prove  the  identity  of  God  and  the  soul,  do  not  know  Vedanta 
philosophy. 

Q sjjTc'I’TT  SiTmmPiT  II — Ch.  Pr.  3. 

Kh.  3,  M.  2.  fPTOCJm  ?I^T5TSrifg5I?r  I — Tail.  An.  6. 

— God  says  : Having  created  the  world  and  the  human  body,  I pervade 
the  world  and  the  body  in  the  form  of  the  ego,  so  that  I may  describe 
the  names  and  appearances  of  things— wama  rupa,  the  phenomenal 
world.  God  himself  pervades  the  world  and  body  after  creating  them. 
Such  are  the  authoritities  from  the  Revelation.  How  can  you  inter- 
pret them  otherwise  ? 

♦It  properly  means:  This  spirit  is  God.  For,  ayam  means  this,  and  not  1. 
This  spirit  is  said  by  a clairvoyant,  because  he  realises  God.  So  he  says  this,  mean- 
ing, one  before  his  mind. 


190 


Satyarth  Prakash 


A. — If  you  knew  words,  their  meanings,  and  the  meanings  of 
sentences,  you  would  not  so  absurdly  translate  them.  For,  it  should 
be  borne  in  mind  that  here  1st  pravesli  (entering)  and  2nd  anupravesh 
(entering  after)  are  mentioned.  God  reveals  the  science  of  the  pheno- 
menal world  and  other  kinds  of  knowledge  by  means  of  the  Veda  as 
if  He  entered  the  body  after  the  soul  had  entered.  He  put  the  souls 
in  the  body  and  himself  entered  their  interior.  If  you  know  the  mean- 
ing of  the  word  anu\  after,  you  would  never  interpret  it  so  contrariwise. 

Q — q ^T5qt  qcj; 

q fqrqlf  ii 

^ e s >»  e 

— I see  the  very  Deva  Datta  at  Mathura  in  the  rainy  season,  whom 
1 saw  at  Kashi  in  the  hot  season.  Here  the  idea  of  the  town  of 
Kashi  and  of  the  hot  season  are  set  aside,  and  the  idea  of  Deva  Datta 
is  given  all  prominence.  It  is  an  application  of  the  figure  of  meto- 
nomy — hhaga  tya^a  lakshana,  or  elision.  In  the  same  manner, 
eliminating  the  hidden  region,  time,  inaya  (power)  and  other  attributes 
of  Go;  and  also  locality,  time,  ignorance,  limited  knowledge  and  other 
properties,  from  the  soul  by  the  rules  of  elision;  and  considering  their 
quality  of  intelligence  alone,  we  perceive  but  one  Brahman  or  Supreme 
Being  underlying  them  both.  This  is  the  figure  of  speech,  called 
b/iaga  tyaga  lakshana,  in  which  something  is  retained  and  other  things 
are  omitted.  Thus  the  omission  of  God’s  attributes  of  omiscience  and 
distinctive  epithets,  and  of  the  soul’s  qualities  of  limitation  of  know- 
ledge and  powers,  and  the  consideration  of  intelligence  only  prove  the 
doctrine  of  non-dualism*  addwaita  What  reply  will  you  give  to  it  ? 

A, — Do  you  believe  God  and  the  soul  to  be  immortal  ? 

Q, — We  believe  them  both  to  be  mortal,  being  conditional, 
suppositional  or  existing  through  the  upadlii — Desire,  senses,  life. 

A — Do  you  believe  the  upadhi  (unessential  attribute)  to  be  cons- 
tant or  everlasting  ? 

Q. — According  to  our  belief 

This  is  the  sum  and  substance  of  the  Shariraka  and  the  lines  are 
these  metrical  commentary  on  it.  We,  the  followers  of  Vedanta, 
believe  six  categories  ti)  be  unbeginning,  namely,  1.  the  soul,  2 God. 
3,  the  Brahman  or  Supreme  Being,  4.  the  special  distinction  between 
God  and  the  ego,  5,  ignorance,  nescience,  6.  the  union  of  ignorance 
and  the  soul.  Of  them,  the  Brahman  only  is  unbeginning  and  endless, 
and  the  remaining  live  entities  are  unbeginiiing  and  endable;  as  prag 
abliava.  These  live  last  as  long  as  there  is  ignorance.  Their  com- 
mencement is  not  known,  so  they  are  unbeginning.  They  are  destroyed 
on  the  acquisition  of  right  knowledge,  so  they  have  an  end,  and  are 
transient. 

/!.— These  two  Sanscrit  verses  of  yours  are  wrong.  For,  God’s 
existence  cannot  be  proved  in  your  belief  without  the  union  of  illusion 


God  and  the  Veda 


191 


{maya)  and  the  (Supreme  Being)  Brahman;  the  soul’s  existence,  without 
the  union  of  ignorance  and  the  Brahman.  Hence,  tachchitor  yogah 
that  which  you  count  to  be  the  sixth  entity,  does  not  exist;  for,  it  is 
included  in  the  five  entities,  viz.  nescience:  avidya,  illusion:  maya,  the 
ego:  Jiva  and  God:  ishwara.  Then  God  is  not  made  without  Brahman, 
illusion  and  knowledge.  Therefore,  to  regard  God  apart  from  nes- 
cience and  Brahman,  is  absurd.  Hence,  only  two  entities  can  be 
proved  in  your  system  of  faith,  viz.,  Brahman  and  illusion  and  not 
six  as  asserted  before. 

Also,  you  can  prove  God  and  the  soul  to  be  beings  qualified 
with  cause  and  effect,  when  you  can  prove  ignorance  to  exist  in  the 
infinite,  eternal,  holy,  intelligent,  free,  omnipresent  Supreme  Being 
(Brahman).  The  entire  Supreme  Being  can  not  be  holy,  if  you  believe 
unbeginning  ignorance  of  itself  lurking  somewhere  in  it.  If  you 
believe  ignorance  to  exist  in  one  part  of  the  Brahman  or  Supreme 
Being,  it  will  be  moveing  about  in  all  parts  of  it  (the  Supreme  Being), 
being  detached  and  extrinsic.  It  will  make  that  part  of  the  Brahman 
ignorant,  where  it  goes,  and  that  part  will  shine  with  knowledge 
whence  it  departs.  Under  such  circumstances  you  can  not  call  any 
part  of  the  Brahman  to  be  unbeginning,  holy,  and  omniscient.  The 
part  of  the  Brahman  which  is  within  the  limits  of  ignorance,  will  sense 
ignorance.  The  exterior  and  interior  Brahman  will  be  divided.  If 
you  say  that  it  is  no  harm  if  the  Brahman  is  divided,  it  is  then  not 
undivided.  If  He  is  undivided,  He  can  not  be  ignorant.  Ignorance 
or  pervert  knowledge  being  an  attribute.  He  will  have  constant  con- 
nection with  some  object.  If  so,  His  connection  or  relation  being 
essential,  it  can  not  be  transient  or  phenomenal.  Just  as  the  whole 
body  feels  pain  from  the  existence  of  a boil  in  any  part  of  it,  so  also 
will  the  whole  Supreme  Being  be  afflicted  with  ignorance,  pleasure, 
pain,  and  other  defects  from  their  existence  in  any  one  of  its  parts. 
If  you  suppose  the  Brahman  to  be  the  ego  from  the  attribute  of  effect 
and  from  Its  union  with  the  internal  sense,  I ask  you  if  the  Brahman 
is  all-pervading,  or  is  It  limited  ? If  you  avert  that  it  is  all-pervading 
and  the  attribute  (upadhi)  is  distinct  or  accidental,  that  is  to  say, 
limited  to  one  region  and  separate,  does  the  internal  sense  move,  or  is 
it  stationary  ? 

No  Ignorance  in  God 

A. — It  moves. 

Q, — Does  the  Brahman  move  with  the  internal  sense,  or  is  it 
fixed  and  immovable  ? 

A, — It  is  immovable. 

Q. — When  the  internal  sense  leaves  a portion  of  the  Brahman, 
it  is  freed  from  ignorance;  and  that  portion  of  the  holy  Brahman 
which  is  in  contact  with  it,  will  turn  ignorant.  Thus  the  Deity  will 
be  now  knowing  and  now  ignorant.  Also,  such  being  the  case,  sal- 
vation and  worldliness  or  damnation  will  also  be  transitory.  There 
can  be  no  memory  of  things  seen  or  heard  yesterday,  just  as  one  can 
not  remember  what  is  seen  by  another;  for,  when  it  was  seen  or  heard, 
it  was  a different  time  and  a different  place;  and  when  it  was  attempted 


192 


Satyarth  Prakash 


to  remember  it,  it  was  another  time  and  another  place.  If  it  be  said 
that  the  Supreme  Being  is  one  and  undivided  then  why  is  it  not  all- 
knowing ? If  you  say  that  the  internal  senses  are  separate  and  so  the 
Brahman  becomes  separate  and  individualised.  It  is  then  inanimate, 
and  so  it  can  have  no  knowledge.  If  you  say  that  neither  the  Brahman 
nor  the  internal  sense  has  consciousness  or  is  capable  of  knowledge 
severally;  but  the  conscious  light  (chidabhasa)  dwelling  in  the  internal 
sense  (antah  karanci)  becomes  conscious  or  percipient;  in  that  case 
too,  the  conscious  being  becomes  percipient  through  the  internal  sense. 
Why  is  it  then  limited  and  dwaiflsh  in  knowledge  by  the  eye  ? So  you 
can  not  make  God  or  establish  the  theory  of  the  Divine  existence,  the 
Brahman  and  ego  by  the  union  of  the  attributes  of  cause  and  effect. 
But  ishwara:  God  is  the  name  of  the  Brahman,  and  the  ego:  jiva  is 
distinct  from  the  Brahman,  unbeginning,  uncreated,  and  immortal. 
If  you  say  that  the  ego  is  the  name  of  conscious  light — chidahasa,  it 
will  be  subject  to  destruction  from  being  transitory.  Who  will  then 
enjoy  the  happiness  of  salvation?  Therefore,  the  Brahman  never 
became  the  ego,  nor  the  ego  ever  became  the  Brahman,  and  also  they 
will  never  be  so. 


Vedantic  Theory 

Clihandogya  Upanishat,  Then  how  will  the  non-dualism  be  proved  ? 
Our  system  of  belief  proves  but  only  one  Supreme  Being  (Brahman) 
from  there  being  none,  besides  the  Brahman,  separate,  like,  unlike 
and  divisible  from  it.  If  the  ego  is  another  being,  how  can  non- 
dualism be  proved  ? 

A. — Why  are  you  afraid,  having  fallen  into  a delusion  ? Think 
of  the  rules  of  the  collocation  of  nouns  and  adjectives.  What  purpose 
do  they  serve  ? If  you  say  that  adjectives  distinguish,  you  should 

\\ — 

bear  in  mind  that — adjectives  qualify  and  illustrate  nouns.  In  the  case 

under  consideration  the  word  addwaita  [non-dual]  qualities  the  noun 
Brahma.  Its  distinguishing  property  is  that  it  separates  Brahma,  who 
is  without  a second,  from  many  souls  and  elements,  and  its  illustrative 
quality  is  that  it  proves  the  unity  of  Godhead — Brahma. 

— Thus,  a man  said  to  another  that  Deva  Datta  was  secondless 
among  rich  men,  and  Vikram  Singh  was  secondless  among  brave  men 
in  that  army.  Does  this  assertion  prove  that  there  is  no  rich  man 
besides  Deva  Datta  in  the  town,  and  no  brave  man  besides  Vikram 
Singh  in  that  army  ? There  are  certainly  men  inferior  to  them. 
There  are  spheres,  planets  and  other  inanimate  things  ; and  cattle  and 
other  animals,  and  plants  and  the  like  things.  Their  existence  can 
not  be  denied  from  their  being  secondless.  In  the  same  manner,  the 
souls  and  nature  are  not  like  the  Brahman,  but  they  are  inferior  to  it. 


God  and  the  Veda 


193 


Therefore,  it  is  proved  that  the  Brahman  is  always  one,  and  the  souls 
and  elements  existing  in  nature  are  many. 

To  distinguish  it  from  all  that  variety  and  to  prove  its  unity,  the 
epithet  addwaita  or  secondless  is  used  of  the  Brahman.  It  by  no 
means  proves  the  non-existence  of  the  ego,  nature,  and  the  pheno- 
menal world,  nor  even  denies  their  existence.  But,  on  the  contrary, 
all  these  exist,  though  they  are  not  equal  to  the  Brahman.  It  does  no 
harm  to  the  doctrine  of  non-dualism  or  dualism.  Do  not  get  confused. 
Think  and  try  to  understand  the  subject. 

Q. — The  attributes  of  existence,  intelligence  and  happiness  of 
the  Brahman,  and  the  qualities  of  life,  manifestation,  and  amiableness 
of  the  ego  prove  their  identity.  Why  do  you  then  refute  it  ? 

A. — Their  identity  can  not  be  proved  from  the  resemblance  of  a 
few  qualities.  Thus,  for  instance,  materiality  and  invisibility  of  earth, 
water,  lire  and  other  elements  can  not  make  them  identical.  They  are 
not  one  and  the  same  as  proved  by  their  distinguishing  and  dissimilar 
qualities,  as,  odour,  roughness,  hardness,  and  other  qualities  of  earth  ; 
and  liquidity,  fluidity,  softness  and  other  properties  of  water  ; light, 
heat,  and  other  qualities  of  fire  do  not  go  to  prove  the  identity  of 
these  substances.  Take  another  example.  Man  and  an  ant  see  with 
the  eyes,  eat  through  the  mouth,  walk  with  the  legs,  yet  they  are  not 
identical.  Man  has  two  legs  and  the  ant  many.  These  differentiating 
qualities  disprove  their  identity.  In  like  manner,  infinite  knowledge, 
happiness,  power,  activity,  freedom  from  delusion,  and  omnipresence 
of  God  distinguish  Him  from  the  ego,  whose  qualities  are  limited 
knowledge,  power,  body,  defusion,  error,  distinctiveness  and  others, 
which  distinguish  it  from  the  Deity.  They  prove  that  they  are  not 
one.  Also  their  personalities  are  different.  God  is  more  delicate  and 
subtle  than  the  soul.  Hence  they  are  different. 

Q. — I W I fSTfftJTTt  W II 

— It  is  a quotation  from  the  Brihadaranyaka  Upanishat.  He  is 
afflicted  with  fear  who  points  out  the  least  difference  between  the 
Brahman  and  the  soul  ; for,  fear  comes  from  another. 

A. — It  does  not  mean  what  you  say.  Its  correct  meaning  is  that 
the  man  is  subject  to  fear  who  denies  the  existence  of  God,  believes 
God  to  be  limited  to  a certain  spot  and  time,  and  separate  from  and 
exterior  to  one’s  self,  acts  contrary  to  His  commandments,  attributes, 
nature  and  character,  or  bears  grudge  to  another  person.  For,  the  man 
falls  into  fear  who  maintains  the  exclusiveness  of  or  severance  of  con- 
nection with  God,  or  quarrels  with  persons,  saying  : ‘T  consider  you 
nothing,  you  can  do  me  no  harm,”  or  does  injury  to  others  and  exer- 
cise oppression  on  others.  Also  when  persons  live  in  harmony  in  all 
respects,  they  are  said  to  be  one.  Thus  the  people  say  that  Deva  Datta, 
Yajna  Datta,  and  Vishnu  Mitra  are  all  one,  i.e.,  they  are  friendly.  The 
non-existence  of  hatred  produces  pleasure,  and  its  existence  pain. 


Disparity  of  God  and  Soul 

2-— Is  the  union  or  separateness  of  God  and  the  soul  constant  ? 
Do  they  or  do  they  not  ever  unite  and  become  one  and  the  same? 


194 


Satyarth  Prakash 


A. — This  question  is  partially  answered  above.  However,  their 
oneness  or  union  is  established  by  their  similar  qualities — sadharmya 
and  necessary  cor\T\<^c\\on—anvayabhava;  as  the  material  bodies  are  at 
one  with  the  sky  from  their  common  materiality  and  from  their  being 
never  separate.  But  they  are  distinguished  from  the  fact,  that  the 
sky  is  all  encompassing,  delicate,  formless,  infinite  and  has  other 
peculiar  qualities;  and  the  material  bodies  are  separate,  visible  and 
have  other  differentiating  properties.  The  earth  and  other  material 
bodies  can  not  subsist  apart  from  the  sky  on  account  of  their  essential 
relation,  i.e..  their  existence  depends  upon  it;  but  they  are  also  distinct 
from  it  on  account  of  their  difference  in  form  and  character.  In  the 
same  manner,  the  souls,  the  earth  and  other  material  bodies  can  not 
exist  apart  from  the  Supreme  Being  from  Its  ubiquity;  but  they  are 
not  alike  in  form  and  character.  To  take  a familiar  example.  The 
clay,  timber,  iron,  and  other  material  of  a building  existed  in  the  sky 
in  different  parts  of  it  before  the  construction  of  the  house.  When 
it  is  built,  they  are  still  in  the  sky;  and  when  it  is  pulled  down,  i.e.^ 
when  all  its  component  material  is  gone  to  its  original  source,  it  is  still 
in  the  sky.  In  other  words,  it  can  never  be  apart  from  the  sky  in  all 
times.  Having  a different  form  and  character  from  the  sky,  it  was 
never  identical  with  it,  nor  is  now,  nor  will  it  ever  be.  In  the  same 
way,  the  souls  and  all  the  rest  of  the  world  with  its  innumerable 
objects,  though  pervaded  by  the  Deity,  are  distinct  in  all  times  from 
the  Supreme  Being;  and  being  different  from  Him  in  form  and  cha- 
racter, they  are  never  identical  with  Him.  Now-a-days  the  mental  sight 
of  the  followers  of  Vedanta  is  perverted  like  that  of  a monocular 
person,  inasmuch  as  they  overlook  the  differentiating  qualities-— 
vyatirekabhava  and  pitch  upon  the  like  ones — anvaya  or  common 
characteristics.  There  is  no  object,  which  does  not  contain  positive 
{saguna)  and  negative  {nirguna)  qualities,  essential  or  inherent  pro- 
perties {anvaya),  dilferentiating  characteristics  {vyatireka),  similar 
{sadharmya)  and  dissimilar  {vaidharmya)  virtues,  and  distinguishing 
peculiarities  {visheshana  hhava.) 

’Tis  No  Inconsistency 

2.— How  can  one  sheath  contain  two  swords  ? How  can  positive 
and  negative  qualities,  qualities  and  no  qualities,  be  in  one  and  the 
same  object  ? 

A. — Look  here,  the  qualities  of  material  objects  are  form,  visi- 
bility and  others:  the  qualities  of  animate  beings  are  knowledge  and 
similar  others,  which  are  not  found  in  material  bodies.  In  the  same 
manner,  the  mind  has  the  qualities  of  desire,  will  and  the  like,  and 
does  not  contain  those  of  the  matter,  namely,  form  and  the  like.  The 
terms  are  thus  defined  : 

NO  ^ SON 

nwrvift  urr  rrffHJjiro  it 

— The  saguna  is  what  has  qualities,  and  the  nirguna  what  is 
devoid  of  qualities.  Containing  their  natural  qualities,  and  being 
devoid  of  the  qualities  of  their  opposites,  all  objects  are  said  to  have 
characterfulness  and  characterlessness.  An  object  may  be  represented 


God  and  the  Veda 


195 


with  characters  only,  but  it  is  always  modified  by  characterfulness 
from  opposite  points  of  view.  In  like  manner,  God  is  said  to  be 
saguna  or  attended  with  attributes  on  account  of  His  having  infinite 
knowledge,  power,  and  similar  other  attributes.  He  is  also  nirguna 
or  without  attributes  on  account  of  His  being  free  the  properties  of 
matter,  such  as  form  and  the  like,  and  from  human  qualities,  such  as 
hatred  and  the  like. 

Q. — The  people  call  the  formless  beings  to  be  characterless,  and 
beings  with  forms  to  be  characterful,  i.e.,  when  God  does  not  take  on 
flesh  He  is  characterless;  but  when  He  is  incarnated.  He  is  said  to 
be  possessed  of  characters. 

A. — It  is  the  supposition  of  ignorant,  illiterate  persons  only. 
Those  who  have  no  kind  of  knowledge,  rave  uncoherently  like  beasts, 
as  the  patient  of  hysteric  fever  talks  madly,  so  what  the  ignorant  say 
is  absurd. 

No  Passion  in  God 

Q. — Has  God  passions  or  is  He  without  them  ? 

A, — He  is  neither.  For,  a man  entertains  a passion  for  a better 
object  outside  of  him.  But  God  has  no  object  out  of  Him,  nor  is 
there  any  thing  better  than  He.  Therefore,  there  can  be  no  passions 
in  Him.  The  virakta  or  resigned  person  is  one  who  gives  up  what  he 
had.  God  being  all-pervading,  can  not  renounce  any  thing.  So  He 
is  not  a recluse. 

Q. — Has  God  desires? 

A. — No,  not  like  man’s.  For,  a man  feels  desire  for  an  un- 
obtained and  better  thing,  as  its  possession  is  to  give  him  special 
pleasure.  Now,  God  has  no  desire  whatever,  for  there  is  no  object 
which  is  not  in  His  possession,  and  which  is  better  than  He.  Also, 
being  perfectly  happy,  He  has  no  craving  for  anything.  Hence,  there 
is  no  possibility  of  desire  in  God.  But  He  has  ikshana  : the  insight  of 
all  kinds  of  knowledge — darshana,  which  is  the  power  of  all  creation. 
So  much  for  the  knowledge  of  God  though  very  brief,  yet  good  people 
may  conceive  its  details  by  themselves. 

Of  the  Veda 

C ^ >3  N 

ft:  (— Ath.  K.  10,  Pr.  23,  An.  4,  M.  20. 

Q. — What  God  is  that  who  has  revealed  the  Rig  Veda,  Yajur 
Veda,  Sama  Veda,  and  Atharva  Veda? 

A. — He,  who  has  made  all,  and  supports  all,  is  that  God,  the 
Supreme  Spirit. 

U— YaJ.  XL.  SO. 

— The  Lord  God  who  is  self-existent,  omnipresent,  holy,  eternal, 
and  incorporeal,  teaches  His  eternal  children,  the  human  souls,  all 


J96  Satyarth  Prakash 

systems  of  knowledge  through  the  Vedas  methodically  in  their  true 
light  for  their  welfare 

Q. — Do  you  believe  God  to  be  corporeal  or  incorporeal  ? 

A, — Incorporeal  or  immaterial. 

Q. — If  he  is  incorporeal,  how  could  He  teach  the  knowledge  of 
the  Vedas,  and  how  was  the  pronunciation  of  letters  possible  without 
the  mouth  ? For,  the  pronunciation  of  letters  must  necessarily  require 
the  palate  and  other  vocal  organs,  and  the  effort  of  the  tongue. 

Method  of  Revelation 

A. — As  the  Great  God  is  all-powerful  and  all  pervading,  He 
stands  in  no  need  of  the  mouth  and  other  vocal  organs  to  impart  the 
Vedic  knowledge;  for,  the  letters  are  pronounced  with  the  mouth  and 
tongue  to  inform  persons  different  from  the  speaker,  but  not  to 
inform  one’s  self.  There  is  a great  deal  of  business  done  in  the  mind 
without  the  pronunciation  of  words.  Stop  the  ears  with  fingers  and 
then  hear  how  many  kinds  of  sounds  are  made  there  without  the 
employment  of  the  palate,  tongue  and  mouth.  In  the  same  way,  God 
has  revealed  knowledge  to  the  souls  in  virtue  of  His  being  the  inner- 
most ruling  spirit.  The  necessity  of  pronunciation  is  to  communicate 
thoughts  to  others.  As  God  is  incorporeal,  all-pervading,  He  reveals 
His  whole  Vedic  knowledge  to  the  souls  in  virtue  of  His  being  present 
in  their  interior. 

The  person  thus  illumined  with  revelation,  imparts  his  know- 
ledge to  others  by  means  of  pronunciation  with  the  mouth.  Therefore, 
the  objection  of  the  want  of  the  organs  of  speech  cannot  stand  in 
the  case  of  God. 

Time  and  Recipients  of  Vedic  Revelation 

Q. — To  whose  mind  and  at  what  time  did  God  reveal  the  Vedas? 
/!.— - Shat.  11,  4,  2,  3. 

In  the  beginning  of  the  creation  God  revealed  a Veda  to  the 
soul  of  each  of  the  four  sages,  called  Agni,  Vayu,  Adittya,  and  Angira. 

It  is  a verse  from  the  Shewetashwatar,  Upanishat  VI.  18. 
According  to  it,  God  reveales  the  Vedas  to  the  mind  of  Brahma. 
Then  why  is  it  said  that  they  were  revealed  to  the  souls  of  the  sages, 
Agni,  &c  ? 

A. — God  caused  them  communicated  through  Agni  and  others 
to  the  mind  of  Brahma.  See  what  Manu  says,  I,  23, — 

— In  the  beginning  the  Great  God,  having  made  men,  blessed  Brahma 
with  the  four  Vedas  through  the  four  sages,  called  Agni  and  others. 
Brahma  received  the  Rig,  Yajur,  Sama  and  Atharva  Vedas  from  Agni, 
Vayu,  Aditya  and  Angira. 


God  and  the  Veda 


197 


Q. — As  God  revealed  the  Vedas  to  those  four  sages  only,  and 
not  to  others,  He  is  proved  to  be  partial. 

A. — Those  four  sages  were  holier  than  all  other  souls.  The 
others  were  not  like  them.  Hence,  the  holy  spiritual  knowledge  was 
ignited  in  them. 

Why  Vedas  are  in  Sanscrit 

Q. — Why  did  God  reveal  the  Vedas  in  the  Sanscrit  language, 
and  not  is  some  vernacular  of  the  country  ? 

A, — Had  He  revealed  the  knowledge  in  any  vernacular,  He 
would  have  become  partial;  for,  the  people  of  the  country  in  whose 
language  the  Vedas  were  revealed,  would  lind  facility  in  learning  and 
teaching  them,  but  the  other  people  would  have  found  it  very  hard. 
Hence,  the  revelation  was  given  in  the  Sanscrit  language,  which  is  not 
the  tongue  of  any  country.  The  Vedic  speech  is  the  mother  of  all 
other  languages,  so  the  revelation  was  given  in  it.  The  language  of 
God’s  knowledge  should  be  alike  and  uniform  to  all,  as  the  natural 
objects,  such  as  land  and  others  are  common  to  all  countries  and 
inhabitants  thereof  and  arc  also  the  sources  of  arts  and  manufacture, 
so  that  the  people  of  all  countries  have  equal  labour  to  bestow  upon 
it  in  learning  and  teaching  the  Vedas,  which  proves  that  God  is  not 
partial.  It  is  also  the  origin  of  other  tongues. 

Q. — What  is  the  proof  that  the  Vedas  are  made  by  God,  and 
not  by  others  ? 

Proof  of  Vedic  Revelation 

A. — (1)  That  book  is  made  by  God  and  not  by  others,  of  which 
the  subject  matter  is  in  perfect  accord  with  the  attributes,  character 
and  nature  of  the  Lord,  who  is  holy,  omniscient,  just,  merciful,  and 
of  hallowed  attributes,  character  and  nature. 

(2)  That  book  is  inspired  by  God,  which  does  not  contain 
statements  against  the  laws  of  nature,  the  evidence  of  the  senses,  and 
other  logical  canons,  and  the  way  prescribed  by  saints,  sages  and 
savants. 

(3)  That  book  is  inspired  by  God,  which  expounds  the  system 
of  knowledge  free  from  error  and  delusion  as  is  the  case  with  God’s 
knowledge. 

(4)  That  book  is  written  under  inspiration  by  the  Great  God, 
which  describes  God,  the  world,  cause,  effect,  and  ego,  as  the  Great 
God  truly  is,  and  as  the  order  of  nature  actually  is. 

(5)  The  Vedas  are  such  as  these  tests  require,  being  in  harmony 
with  the  truth  of  the  testimony  of  the  senses  and  other  logical  laws 
and  the  character  of  truly  holy  persons.  Other  religious  books,  such 
as  the  Bible,Koran,  and  the  like,  are  not  from  God.  This  subject  is 
treated  at  length  in  the  13th  and  14th  chapters  of  this  book. 

Necessity  of  Revelation 

Q. — There  is  no  necessity  of  the  Vedas  being  from  God,  for 
persons  can  make  books  by  developing  their  knowledge  gradually. 


198 


Satyarth  Prakash 


A. — No,  they  can  never;  for,  it  is  impossible  that  an  effect  can 
take  place  without  its  cause.  The  savages  have  not  become  savants 
by  observing  nature,  but  they  become  so  when  they  get  some  teacher. 
Even  now  nobody  ever  becomes  a learned  person  without  being  ins- 
tructed by  some  other  person.  In  like  manner,  if  God  had  not  ins- 
tructed the  sages  in  the  beginning  of  the  creation,  and  if  they  had  not 
imparted  their  knowledge  to  others:  all  persons  would  have  remained 
ignorant.  For  instance,  if  a child  be  brought  up  in  a solitary  place 
or  in  the  company  of  ignorant  persons  or  beasts,  he  will  become  like 
them  when  grown  up.  This  fact  is  exemplified  in  the  savage  Bhils 
and  other  barbarians  of  India.  The  people  of  Egypt,  Greece, 
Europe,  and  other  countries  were  ignorant  and  illiterate,  till  the  light 
of  knowledge  went  to  them  from  Aryavarta.  The  inhabitants  of 
America  had  been  ignorant  and  illiterate  for  hundreds,  thousands, 
nay  millions  of  years,  till  Columbus  and  other  people  went  there, 
when  they  became  learned  and  civilised  by  acquiring  knowledge  from 
them.  In  like  manner,  human  beings  were  endued  with  knowledge 
and  civilisation  by  the  Supreme  Spirit  at  the  biginning  of  the  creation, 
and  they  have  kept  up  that  knowledge  by  transmitting  it  to  their 
posterity  generation  after  generation. 

H I — Yoga  II,  26. 

— The  Lord  God  was  the  teacher  of  Agni  and  other  sages  at  the 
commencement  of  the  creation  just  as  we  people  become  learned  and 
enlightened  at  present  when  instructed  by  our  teachers.  God  does 
not  become  unconscious  and  void  of  knowledge  as  human  beings  in 
the  dreamless  state  and  in  the  cataclysm  of  the  world.  His  know- 
ledge is  eternal,  and  so  it  must  be  sent  down  as  an  indubitable  truth 
that  imparted  knowledge  can  not  be  had  without  an  imparter. 

Q. — The  Vedas  were  revealed  in  the  Sanscrit  language,  which 
Agni  and  the  other  sages  did  not  know.  How  then  did  they  know 
the  meanings  of  the  Vedas  ? 

Origin  of  Brahmanas  (books) 

God  made  them  understand  the  meanings  of  the  Vedas. 
Whenever  saints,  clairvoyants,  and  great  sages  meditated  on  the  glory 
of  God  in  a trance  with  the  view  of  knowing  the  meaning  of  any  Vedic 
verse,  the  Lord  God  illumed  its  meaning  in  their  mind.  When  the 
import  of  the  Vedas  was  illumed  in  the  mind  of  many  sages  and 
philosophers,  they  wrote  books  on  it  together  with  the  lives  of  seers. 
Such  books  are  called  the  Brahmanas,  that  is,  commentaries  on  the 
Vedas,  which  (Vedas)  are  also  called  the  Brahma.  Moreover,  the  name 

l — Nirukta,  I,  20. 

of  that  seer  is  always  given  in  his  memory  with  the  Vedic  verse  whose 
meaning  he  realised,  which  was  not  done  before  him  and  so  not 
taught  till  then.  They  do  not  tell  the  truth  who  call  the  seers  the 
authors  of  the  Vedic  verses.  They  simply  expounded  the  meanings  of 
the  Vedic  Verses. 

Distinction  between  Vedas  and  Brahmanas 

g.— What  books  are  called  the  Vedas  ? 


God  and  the  Veda 


199 


A, — The  collection  of  the  Rig,  Yajur,  Sama,  and  Atharva  verses 
or  mantras,  but  not  others. 

Q. — How  will  you  interpret  the  explanatory  aphorisms  of 
Katyayana  and  other  sages  like  this  : — 

— The  name  of  Mantras  (verses)  and  Brahmanas  is  Veda. 

A. — See,  (1)  the  word  Veda  is  always  written  at  the  beginning 
or  the  end  of  a chapter  of  the  Samhita,  which  is  the  coalescene  of 
words  in  Vedic  verses.  But  it  is  not  given  either  at  the  beginning  or 
at  the  end  of  a chapter  of  the  Brahmana  scriptures.  (2)  In  theNirukta, 
chap.  5,  sec.  3,  4,  we  find — 

I f I 

^ "ii 

— It  is  an  aphorism  of  Panini,  IV,  II,  66.  It  shows  plainly  that  the 
Veda  is  the  verse  portion  and  the  Brahmana  the  commentary  portion. 
For  further  information  on  this  head,  my  introduction  to  the  Commen- 
tary of  the  Rig  and  other  Vedas  may  be  consulted.  There  it  is  proved 
that  (3)  it  can  not  be  the  opinion  of  Katyayana,  being  antagonstic  to 
many  authorities.  If  it  is  accepted,  the  Veda  can  never  be  primeval; 
for,  the  Brahmanas  record  the  account  of  many  seers,  sages,  and  kings. 
And  it  is  evident  that  the  account  of  a person  is  always  written  after 
his  birth,  and  the  book  containing  it  is  also  written  after  his  birth. 
(4)  The  Vedas  contain  nobody’s  history,  but  particularly  those  words 
are  employed  which  suggest  and  explain  some  system  of  knowledge. 
They  do  not  contain  anybody’s  name  or  the  description  of  any  special 
story. 

Commentaries  of  Vedas 

Q, — How  many  branches  or  parts  of  the  Vedas  are  there  ? 

A, — They  are  1 127. 

Q — What  do  you  mean  by  “branches”  or  parts  ? 

A. — Commentaries  or  expositions  are  called  “branches” 
(shakhas)  or  parts  ? 

Q. — The  learned  people  of  the  world  consider  the  component 
parts  of  the  Vedas  to  be  branches. 

A. — If  you  think  a little,  you  will  see  the  truth.  For,  (1)  all  the 
“branches”  or  parts  are  known  after  the  names  of  Ashwalayana  and 
other  sages.  But  the  verse  or  mantra  portion  is  known  after  the  name 
of  the  Supreme  Lord. 

(2)  The  four  Vedas  are  believed  to  be  made  by  the  Diety  and 
the  Ashwalayani  and  other  “branches”  are  called  after  the  sages  who 
wrote  them.  All  the  branches  or  parts  commence  their  exposition 
with  a text  of  Vedic  verses  or  mantras;  as,  for  instance,  the  Taitteriya 
branch  commences  its  exposition  with  the  text  Ishe  tworje  twa  and  so 
forth.  But  the  Vedas  proper  (metrical  portion)  commence  with  no 
text  or  heading  line.  Therefore,  the  four  Vedas  are  the  root  of  “the 
tree  of  knowledge”,  planted  by  God,  and  Ashwalayani  and  other 
expositions  are  so  many  branches,  reared  or  made  by  sages  and  phi- 
losophers, but  not  made  by  God.  For  further  information  on  this 


200 


Satyarth  Prakash 


subject  the  ‘Introduction  to  the  Commentary  on  the  Vedas’  may  be 
referred  to.  Just  as  people  have  at  heart  the  welfare  of  their  children 
out  of  their  parental  affection  and  tenderness,  so  has  the  Supreme 
Spirit,  out  of  His  infinite  love  for  all  human  beings,  revealed  the 
Vedas  to  them,  so  that  they  may  get  out  of  the  darkness  of  ignorance 
and  avoid  being  entangled  in  the  cobweb  of  delusion,  nay,  they  may 
reach  the  sun  of  science  and  spiritual  knowledge  and,  living  in  perfect 
joy  and  happiness,  promote  their  knowledge  and  comfort  for  evermore. 

Eternity  of  Vedas 

O. — Are  the  Vedas  eternal  or  transitory  ? 

A. — They  are  eternal.  For,  God  being  eternal,  His  attributes 
of  omniscience  and  others  are  also  eternal.  The  qualities,  influences 
and  natures  of  eternal  things  are  also  eternal,  and  those  of  transitory 
ones  transitory. 

Q. — Is  this  book  (a  volume  of  the  Vedas)  also  eternal  ? 

A. — No  ; for,  it  is  made  of  paper  and  ink.  How  can  that  be 
eternal  or  imperishable  ? But  the  words,  their  significations,  and 
their  relations  are  eternal  or  constant. 

Q, — God  might  have  given  those  primeval  sages  an  idea  preg- 
nant with  knowledge  and  then  they  developed  it  into  the  Vedas. 

—There  is  no  knowledge  without  an  object  to  be  known. 
Except  the  omniscient  God,  nobody  has  power  to  make  the  Gciyatri 
and  other  verses  according  to  the  laws  of  the  Gayatri  and  other  kinds 
of  meters,  shadhaja  and  other  musical  notes  of  the  gamut,  udatta 
(sharp),  amidatta  (flat)  and  swarita  (thrill)  accents;  much  less  to  write 
a book  containing  omniscience.  There  is  no  doubt  that  sages  and 
philosophers  having  studied  the  Vedas,  wrote  Vyakarana  (grammar), 
Nirukta  (philology),  Chhanda  (prosody)  and  other  treatises  to  expound 
the  various  systems  of  knowledge.  If  God  had  not  revealed  the 
Vedas,  nobody  could  have  made  anything  whatever.  Therefore,  the 
Vedas  are  the  speech  of  God.  All  the  people  should  act  upon  their 
precepts.  When  anybody  is  interrogated  as  to  what  religion  he  pro- 
fesses, he  should  reply  that  his  religion  is  Vedic,  that  is  to  say,  he 
believes  in  the  teachings  of  the  Vedas.  So  much  in  brief  for  God 
and  the  Vedas.  Now  we  pass  on  to  describe  the  creation. 

Summary 

The  Vedas  declare  the  unity  of  Godhead  God  existed  before  all  else.  He 
is  the  eternal  cause  of  the  world,  and  provides  food  to  all  creatures.  He  has  re- 
vealed the  Vedas,  guides  the  righteous,  blesses  good  work,  and  is  the  maker, 
preserver,  and  destroyer  of  the  visible  world.  Yaj.  XL.  I,  XIII,  4.  Rig.  xxlviii. 
1,5  He  is  omnipresent,  merciful  and  just.  He  is  Spirit,  incorporeal,  omnipotent, 
eternal,  and  omniscient.  He  wishes  good  to  all. 

The  proofs  of  God’s  existence  are  given  in  the  perception  of  design  in  the 
world,  and  the  phenomena  of  knowledge  and  virtue.  The  fear,  the  mind  feels  in 
doing  a wrong  and  the  joy  it  feels  in  doing  good  to  others,  are  from  God  and 
therefore  the  evident  proofs  of  His  existence. 

He  alone  should  be  worshipped  by  singing  His  praise,  by  praying  to  Him, 
and  by  meditating  on  him.  His  worship  is  sometimes  called  saguna  and  nirguna,-^ 


God  and  the  Veda 


201 


affirmative  and  negative.  It  is  saguna  or  affirmative,  when  the  worshipper  affirms 
or  repeats  the  attributes  of  God;  as,  God  is  holy,  just,  and  merciful.  It  is  nirguna 
or  negative,  when  he  denies  certain  attributes  to  God;  as,  God  is  not  born,  not 
material,  and  mortal  The  object  of  praising  God  is  to  impress  the  mind  with 
those  attributes  for  imitation  in  conduct;  as  God  is  merciful,  wc  should  not  kill  a 
sentient  being,  and  so  forth. 

Prayer  should  be  as  is  given,  say,  in  Yaj,  XIX,  9. — Thou  are  Light,  give  me 
light  out  of  Thy  grace ! Thou  art  merciful,  make  me  bear  with  my  enemies  ! Let  my 
will  be  free  from  evil  and  full  of  purity  and  virtue  Yaj.  XXXIV,  3.  A man 
should  act  on  what  he  prays  for,  and  pray  for  what  is  righteous. 

Meditation  eases  the  mind  and  fills  it  with  indescribable  joy.  It  should  be 
practised  in  accordance  with  the  rules  of  Yoga  or  introspection,  which  has  eight 
steps  leading  to  the  illumination  of  the  mind,  viz.,  the  practice  of  moral  duties, 
the  observance  of  religious  rites,  the  regulation  of  respiration,  the  controlement 
of  the  senses,  the  posture  favourable  to  the  composure  of  the  mind,  the  concentra- 
tion of  attention,  the  contemplation  of  God,  and  the  ecstasy  of  trance. 

They  are  wrong  who  say  that  there  arc  33  gods  in  the  Vedas.  They  are  33 
categories  of  existence,  viz  , 8 vasus~the  sun,  moon,  earth,  water,  light,  air,  and 
sky;  11  rudras— inbreath,  outbreath,  digestion,  mastication,  nictitation,  circulation, 
recuperation,  decomposition,  hunger,  belching,  and  yawning;  12  adittyas— con- 
stellations of  the  Zodiac;  I.  electricity;  1.  sanitary  work. 

It  is  not  right  to  believe  the  incarnation  of  God  to  kill  devils  and  to  protect 
saints;  for,  God  can  do  these  works  without  taking  on  flesh.  It  is  against  the 
Vedas  to  believe  that  Krishna  was  God.  He  was  a virtuous  soul  intent  on  pro- 
tecting virtue. 

It  is  a false  belief  that  God  forgives  sins.  If  He  does  so,  His  justice  will  be 
done  away  with.  The  soul  being  a free  agent,  reaps  the  fruits  of  its  deeds.  The 
distinction  between  God  and  the  soul  is  that  God  is  infinite,  makes  the  world,  en- 
forces justice;  the  soul  is  finite  and  engaged  in  propagating  its  species,  and  does 
good  or  evil  deeds.  It  manifests  desire,  feelings,  discernment,  respiration, 
memory,  hunger,  thirst,  &c.,  which  are  not  found  in  God.  The  relation  of  God 
to  the  soul  IS  that  God  pervades  the  soul,  God  is  the  father  and  the  soul  the  son, 
&c.  Some  say  that  Vedas  believe  in  the  identity  of  God  and  the  soul.  Tattwanasi, 
— Thou  art  God.  This  doctrine  is  not  found  in  authentic  scriptures.  This  text  means, 
Thou  art  in  the  Supreme  Being.  It  is  said  of  Shwetketu.  The  Shatapatha  says 
Ya  atmani  tishthair.  God  dwells  in  the  mind.  Those  who  prove  their  identity, 
take  away  the  differentiating  attributes  and  insist  on  common  qualities.  This  is 
not  a proper  way  of  ascertaining  things.  Thus,  trees  grow  and  animals  grow  so 
trees  are  animals,  which  is  absurd. 

God  who  has  made  the  world,  has  revealed  the  Vedas,  Rig,  Yajur,  Sama  and 
Atharva,  to  impart  knowledge  to  human  beings  for  their  welfare.  The  sages  in 
whose  mind  the  Vedas  were  illumined  are  respectively  called  Agni,  Vayu,  Ravi, 
and  Angira.— Manu,  1.23. 

The  proofs  of  the  Vedas  being  made  by  God  are  that  their  subject  matter 
is  in  perfect  accord  with  His  attributes,  character  and  nature.  It  does  not  con- 
flict with  the  laws  of  nature.  Its  knowledge  is  free  from  terror.  It  describes  God, 
the  world,  ego  as  they  truly  are.  It  is  borne  by  the  testimony  of  sages.  If  it  be  said 
that  there  is  no  necessity  of  revelation,  for  man  can  develop  his  natural  knowledge 
gradually;  it  is  replied  that  had  it  been  the  case,  the  savages  of  several  countries 
would  have  become  civilised;  but  it  was  not  so:  they  were  enlightened  on  the  spread 
of  the  light  of  knowledge  from  India.  So  God  gave  the  Vedic  revelation  in  the 
beginning  of  the  creation.  Says  the  Yoga  philosophy,  God  is  the  teacher  of  the 
ancients  at  creation.— I,  26. 

It  is  not  right  to  call  the  Brahmanas  the  Vedas,  which  consist  of  the  metrical 
portion  only;  for,  the  Brahmanas  are  commentaries,  their  passages  begin  with  the 
text  of  the  Vedas — Panini,  IV.  ii.  66.  The  Vedas  consisting  of  ideas,  and  not 
paper  and  ink,  are  eternal,  living  in  the  mind  of  God.  No  human  being  can 
make  the  metres,  notes,  and  accents  as  given  in  the  Vedas,  containing  omnis- 
cience. 


Chapter  VIII 


CREATION,  PRESERVATION  & DESTRUCTION 

ftf  !n  Iff?  art  ^ ST  I— Rig-  X. 

®r>  TTTmwrST:  TTtI  nfe  ^ it  cxxix,  7. 

Oman.  He  is  the  Supreme  Spirit,  from  whose  hands  this  world 
of  diversified  objects  has  come  out,  who  sustains  and  destroys 
it,  who  is  the  Lord  of  this  universe,  in  whom  this  universe  lives, 
moves  and  dies.  Know  Him  and  do  not  believe  any  other  being  to 
be  the  creator  of  the  world. 

fm  TnTflrmm  s5i%eT  i —Rig.  X. 

lRITflTT«THT5TS*Tf5fIT  II  cxxix,  4. 

— All  this  world  was  enveloped  in  darkness  before  creation,  it 
was  in  chaos,  unknowable,  and  of  ethereal  form.  It  was  insignificant 
before  God’s  greatness,  i.e.,  it  lay  undeveloped  in  the  presence  of 
Infinite  God  at  a place  in  space.  Afterwards  God  brought  it  out 
from  its  state  of  cause  or  rudimental  or  noumenal  form  to  the  form 
of  effect  or  phenomenal  or  visible  form  in  virtue  of  His  omnipotance. 

5H5T:  TITtOcT  I — Rig.  X. 

TT  5HTTT  ?rT»T^i  II  CXxix,  1. 

— O man,  serve  God,  the  Infinite  Spirit,  with  your  love,  who  is 
the  support  of  all  the  suns  and  other  luminous  bodies,  who  is  the 
sole  and  secondless  lord  of  this  world  which  is  and  which  will  be. 
This  Supreme  self  existed  before  the  creation  of  the  world  and  he 
has  made  all  universe  from  the  earth  and  other  planets  to  the  bright 
sun. 

3^^  \ 

U Yaj.  xxxi,  2. 

— O man.  He  is  the  maker  of  all  this  past,  present  and  future 
world,  who  pervades  all,  who  is  the  deathless  cause,  who  is  the  lord 
of  souls,  and  who  is  distinct  from  the  earth  and  other  inanimate 
matter,  and  the  mind. 

^ i— Tait. 

n Briguvlai  An  1. 

— He  is  the  Brahma  or  Supreme  Being  whose  design  has  brought 
forth  all  these  planets  and  other  material  bodies,  in  whom  the  sen- 
tient beings  live  and  die.  Desire  to  know  Him. 

iTci:  I — Shariraka  (Vedant)  I.  i.  3. 

— The  Supreme  Being  is  worth  knowing,  who  is  the  cause  of 
the  creation,  perservation  and  destruction  of  the  world. 


Creation^  Preservation  and  Destruction 


203 


Q. — Is  this  world  born  of  the  Great  God  or  of  some  other 
being  ? 

A. — It  is  produced  from  the  Deity,  the  efficient  or  intelligent 
cause,  but  its  material  cause  is  nature  (prakritij  or  matter. 

Q, — Has  not  God  made  Nature  or  Prakriti  ? 

A. — No,  it  is  unbeginning. 

Three  Eternal  Substances 

Q, — What  do  you  mean  by  unbeginning  ? How  many  objects 
are  unbeginning  there  ? 

A. — God,  soul,  and  the  cause  of  the  world  (matter).  These 
three  are  unbeginning. 

Q. — What  is  the  proof  of  it  ? 

gri  gqnrf  ngsn  'tTt  \ — Rig.  i. 

n cixiv.  20. 

5TT5grcft^:  I -^Yaj  XL.  8. 

— The  Brahm  (Supreme  Being)  and  the  ego  are  both  (dwa)  alike 
in  virtue  of  their  consciousness  and  protective  and  other  qualities 
(suparna).  They  are  related  to  each  other  as  the  pervader  and  the 
pervaded  (sayuja).  Bearing  friendship  to  each  other  (sakhaya)  they 
are  eternal  and  unbeginning.  So  {samanam)  is  also  the  tree  (vriksha), 
which  is  the  fundamental  cause,  whose  branches  are  the  phenomena 
of  the  material  world,  and  which  is  developed  on  till  it  goes  to  rack 
and  ruin  in  concataclysm.  It  is  the  third  unbeginning  substance.  The 
qualities,  characters  and  natures  of  these  three  substances  are  also 
unbeginning.  Of  the  two,  the  Spirit  and  ego,  the  latter  satisfactorily 
tastes  the  fruit  of  virtue  and  vice,  borne  by  the  tree  of  the  world 
{swadwatti);  and  the  former,  the  Supreme  Spirit,  is  not  affected 
{anashnan)  by  the  consequences  of  works,  shining  every  where  in  the 
interior  and  exterior  through  and  through.  God  is  distinct  from  the 
soul,  and  nature  (matter  or  prakriti)  is  distinct  from  both  God  and 
the  soul.  But  all  the  three  are  eternal  and  unbeginning.  In  other 
words,  God  has  instructed  His  unbeginning  and  eternal  spiritual 
children,  the  souls,  and  departments  of  knowledge  through  the  revela- 
tion of  the  Vedas. 

5T5fT:  I 

— It  is  from  the  Shwetashwatara  Upanishat,  IV  5,  which  says 
that  nature  {prakriti),  soul  (Jiva)  and  Supreme  Spirit  (paramatma)  are 
uncreated,  that  is,  they  were  never  born,  nor  do  they  ever  take  on 
flesh.  These  three  are  the  causes  of  the  whole  world,  but  themselves 
without  a cause.  The  unbeginning  ego  is  affected  by  the  consequences 
of  its  enjoying  the  unbeginning  nature  or  empire  of  matter.  But  the 
Supreme  Spirit  is  neither  influenced  by  it,  nor  has  He  any  use  of  it 
for  Himself. 


204 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Of  Nature  or  Prakriti 

The  qualities  of  God  and  the  soul  have  been  given  in  their 
account.  We  now  come  to  the  properties  of  nature  or  matter  (prakriti). 

3^  q‘3:irf%5T- 

M — Sankhya  I,  61. 

—Prakriti  or  nature  is  tripartite  or  the  union  of  three  qualities, 
namely,  pure  (satwa)  middling  (raja)  and  inert  (tama). — subtle,  vola- 
tile, and  bass  states  of  matter.  It  produces  the  brain  substance 
(buddhi)  which  generates  consciousness  (ahankara).  This  in  its  turn 
creates  the  five  quintessences  (panch  tanmatras)  correlated  or  sensitive 
to  five  kinds  of  elements,  ten  senses,  and  the  will  or  conative  power. 
The  five  quintessences  produce  five  elements.  They  all  make  up 
the  number  of  24  essences.  The  25th  is  the  person  or  mind  (purusha), 
human  and  divine.  Of  these  essences,  the  prakriti  or  matter  in  its 
original  state  is  undecaying,  and  the  brain  substance  or  sublime  mat- 
ter, consciousness  or  life,  and  five  quintessences  or  elementals  are  the 
products  of  prakriti  or  modifications  of  matter  and  the  cause  of  the 
senses,  the  will  (mana)  and  gross  elements.  The  person  or  mind  is 
neither  the  nature,  material  cause  or  substance,  nor  the  product  of 
any  other  being.* 

Q. — I Ch.  Pr.  6,  K.  L 2,  !T?T5T  I 

— Tail,  Br.  V.  An.  7.  wmt  1— Brail.  I.  4. 

I -Shat.  11.  1,  II.  1. 

— These  quotations  are  from  the  Upanishats.  They  mean:  O Shweta- 
ketu,  there  were  sat  (real)  asat  (unreal),  self  (atma)  and  Brahm  (God) 
before  the  creation  of  the  world. 

gg:  sr^T^fa  I 5g:  fui  sr5ri^rfT  l — Tait.  II6. 

The  very  God  himself  is  become  the  variety  of  nature. — I.  2. 
wi  JTRTfR  \ 

— These  quotations  are  also  from  the  Upanishats.  Verily,  all  this 
universe  is  the  Brahma.  The  variety  of  objects  different  from  Him 
are  nothing.  They  are  all  the  forms  of  the  Brahman. 

Why  do  you  misinterpret  these  passages  ? For,  the  same 
Upanishats  have  : — 

^3r>TcT- 

^r^f:  s^ri:  h?t- 

innTT:  » — Ch.  Pr.  6.  Kh.  8.  M.  4. 

— It  means  ; O Shweta  ketu,  distinguish  water  as  the  original  cause 
from  the  enjoyable  earth,  its  effect : water  as  effect  from  heat  as  cause; 
and  heat  as  effect  from  sat;  the  real,  as  cause,  which  is  the  eternal  or 

* Literally  : Prakriti  is  the  state  of  equilibrium  of  satwa,  raja  and  tama — 
Moha  comes  from  prakriti,  ahamkara  from  moha,  five  tanmatras  and  both  kinds 
of  the  senses  (indriya)  from  ahamkara,  gross  elements  from  five  tanmatras,  and 
purasha  or  person.  These  are  the  25  csitegorics. —Sankhya  aphorism  I,  16. 


Creation,  Preservation  and  Destruction 


205 


noumenal  prakriti  or  primordial  matter,  the  root  and  main  stay  of 
all  the  world. 

This  whole  visible  world  was  like  something  unreal  before  the 
creation,  and  existed  in  invisible  form  together  with  the  ego  in  the 
Brahman  and  Prakriti.  It  was  not  non-existent  As  regards  the 
phrase  sarvam  khalu — even  all,  it  savours  of  the  nature  of  the  proverb  : 

— A juggler  builds  a house  by  taking  a brick  from  here  and  a pebble 
from  there.  For,  it  is  given  in 

^ I Ch.  Pr.  3,  Kh.  14. 

I Kath.  Ad.  2,  Bal.  4,  M.  11,  1. 

— It  is  quotation  from  the  Katha  Upanishat.  A word  or  phrase  is 
significant  so  long  as  it  is  collocated  in  its  proper  place  in  a sentence 
or  narration;  but  it  becomes  absurd  on  being  detached  from  it  and 
placed  in  juxta-position  with  others;  just  as  the  limbs  of  a body  are 
useful  so  long  as  they  are  part  and  parcel  of  it;  but  they  become 
quite  useless  on  being  separated  from  it.  Listen  to  me.  Its  meaning 
is  ; O soul,  think  of  God,  who  is  the  cause  of  the  creation,  preser- 
vation and  animation  of  the  world;  which  exists  in  virtue  of  His  crea- 
tive and  preservative  power,  and  co-exists  with  Him.  Do  not  adore 
any  other  being  but  Him.  There  is  no  combination  of  various  things 
in  Him,  who  is  constant  and  indivisible  and  absolute  intelligence  and 
consciousness.  But  the  visible  variety  of  nature  exists  in  the  support- 
ing power  of  the  Supreme  Spirit. 

Causes  of  the  World 

Q. — How  many  causes  are  there  of  the  world  ? 

A. — They  are  three,  namely,  1.  Nimitta:  efficient,  2.  Upadana: 
material,  3.  Sadharana  : instrumental. 

1.  The  efficient  cause  is  that  which  makes  some  thing  and 
without  which  nothing  is  made;  itself  is  not  made,  but  it  makes 
another  of  different  form  from  itself.  2.  The  material  cause  is  that 
without  which  nothing  is  made,  which  is  turned  into  a different  form, 
and  which  decays.  3.  The  instrumental  cause  is  that  which  is  a 
help  in  making  a thing  and  is  a common  means.  1.  The  chief 
efficient  cause  is  the  Supreme  Spirit  who  makes  all  the  world  out  of 
the  material  cause,  maintains  it,  and  destroys  it,  nay.  keeps  all  subject 
to  their  respective  laws.  2.  The  soul  is  the  ordinary  efficient  cause, 
who  brings  out  different  kinds  of  results  out  of  natural  objects  in  the 
world.  The  material  cause  is  the  prakriti  : primordial  matter  or 
atoms,  which  is  called  the  material  for  the  construction  of  all  the 
worlds.  Being  inert  and  inanimate,  it  can  neither  transform  itself  into 
anything,  nor  be  decomposed  of  itself.  But  it  stands  in  need  of 
another  being  for  the  transformation  and  decomposition  of  itself. 
Sometimes  one  inanimate  object  changes  and  destroys  another.  For 
instance,  seeds  which  are  made  by  God,  take  root  when  buried  in 
soil  and  sprinkled  with  water,  and  grow  into  big  trees.  But  coming 
in  contact  with  fire  and  other  destructive  agents,  they  are  destroyed. 


206 


Satyarth  Prakash 


However,  their  systematic  growth,  transformation,  and  destruction 
are  in  the  hands  of  God  and  man.  When  a thing  is  made,  its  causes 
are  knowledge,  design,  energy,  hands  and  other  physical  causes  of 
various  kinds;  space  and  time  are  its  common  causes.  For  instance, 
when  a potter  makes  a pot,  he  is  its  efficient  cause;  clay  is  its  material 
cause;  the  wheel,  handle,  and  other  implements  are  its  ordinary  instru- 
mental causes;  space,  time,  ether,  light,  eyes,  hands,  theory,  action, 
and  others  are  its  common  instrumental  and  efficient  causes.  Noth- 
ing can  be  made  or  destroyed  without  these  three  kinds  of  causes  : — 
material,  instrumental,  and  efficient  causes. 


Pantheism 

Q. — The  neo-vedantins  or  modern  followers  of  the  Vedant 
philosophy  regard  the  Supreme  Ruler  as  the  only  cause,  in  which  the 
efficient  and  the  material  causes  are  inseparably  united — abhinna 
nimitta  upadatm  karana — a cause  inseparable  from  efficient  and 
material  causes.  For  instance,  the  Mundaka  Upanishat  says ; I,  i,  7. 

— The  spider  makes  its  own  web  of  the  threads  drawn  out  of  its 
own  body  and  does  not  take  any  material  from  outside.  It  then  lives 
and  sports  in  the  web.  In  like  manner,  the  Brahman  (Supreme  Being) 
has  made  the  worlds  out  of  Himself,  and  changing  Himself  into  the 
form  of  the  worlds  sports  with  Himself.  It  is  the  will  of  God.  With 
the  desire  to  become  many  though  one,  that  is,  the  form  of  the 
universe.  He  has  become  the  universe,  with  the  force  of  His  thought 
alone.  For,  a commentary  on  the  Mandukyopanishat  says  : 

5511^1^  ^ I — Gourhpad,  31. 

— What  is  neither  in  the  beginning  nor  in  the  end,  is  also  nothing 
in  the  middle  or  present  time.  There  was  no  world  in  the  begin- 
ning of  creation;  but  the  Supreme  Being  alone  existed.  There  will  be 
no  world  at  the  end  of  the  concataclysm  or  final  destruction  of  the 
universe.  Why  then,  is  not  the  Supreme  Being  the  whole  world  ? 

Distinction  Between  God  and  Matter 

A. — If  the  Brahman  is  the  material  cause  of  the  world  as  you 
affirm.  He  will  be  changeable  and  subject  to  decay;  for,  the  proper- 
ties, character,  and  nature  of  the  material  cause  pass  on  to  its  effect, 
which  decays. 

I— Vaisheshik,  I,  i,  24. 

— It  is  an  aphorism  of  Vaisheshik  philosophy.  It  means  : an 
effect  contains  qualities  like  those  of  its  material  cause.  Now,  1.  the 
Supreme  Being  is  real,  intelligent,  happy;  but  the  world  being  the 
effect  of  the  material  cause,  is  unreal,  inert  or  inanimate  and  unhappy. 
He  is  unborn,  but  it  is  created.  He  is  invisible,  but  it  is  visible.  He 
is  indivisible,  but  it  is  divisible.  2.  If  the  world  is  produced  from  the 
Supreme  Being,  the  inertness  and  other  qualities  of  matter  found  in 
the  effect  will  also  be  found  in  Him.  In  other  words  He  will  be  as 
much  material  as  the  world.  3.  Also  the  world,  i.c.,  the  earth  and 


Creation,  Preservation  and  Destruction 


207 


heavenly  bodies,  should  be  equally  intelligent  with  Him.  The  example 
of  the  spider  does  not  support  your  thesis,  it  rather  refutes  it.  The 
material  cause  of  the  threads  of  the  cobweb  is  the  material  body  of 
the  spider,  and  the  living  principle  or  soul  in  the  spider  is  the  efficient 
cause  of  the  web.  It  is  an  evident  instance  of  the  wonderful  works 
of  God;  for,  the  soul  can  not  produce  threads  from  any  other  body 
but  that  of  the  spider.  In  the  same  manner,  the  all-pervading  God 
(Brahm)  made  the  physical  world  or  the  prakriti  (primordial  matter) 
and  the  stoms  existing  in  Himself  in  an  invisible  form  and  conferred 
corporeality  and  visibility  on  it.  He  pervades  it,  and  is  happy  to 
exist  as  witness  of  the  world.  As  regards  the  belief  that  the  Lord  saw, 
thought  and  desired  that  He  should  make  the  world  and  be  glorified, 
it  means  that  when  the  world  is  made,  God  is  glorified  inasmuch  as 
the  souls  then  think,  know,  contemplate,  preach,  and  hear,  which 
reveals  the  Supreme  Ruler,  who  is  also  manifested  in  large  physical 
bodies;  but  when  the  world  is  destroyed,  none  knows  Him  except 
God  himself  and  those  who  have  attained  salvation.  As  for  the  com- 
mentary on  the  Upanishat,  it  is  delusive  and  misleading.  For,  the 
world  was  not  visible  and  known  in  the  time  of  cataclysm  and  remains 
invisible  and  unknown  from  the  commencement  of  destruction  to  the 
time  of  re-creation.  For,  it  is  said  in  the  Rig.  Veda — X.  cxxix  3. 

Also,  Manu  says,  I.  5, — 

«N  > 

— It  means  that  all  this  world  was  enveloped  with  and  hidden 
in  darkness  in  the  time  of  destruction  and  before  creation.  It  is  so 
after  the  commencement  of  destruction.  As  that  time  it  was  unknow- 
able, because  none  could  think  anything  of  it  and  it  was  not  cognis- 
able by  means  of  the  senses  through  its  perceptible  characters.  It 
will  never  be  knowable  during  that  state.  It  is  always  known  in  the 
present,  when  its  perceptible  characters  are  cognisable  to  the  senses, 
and  it  is  fit  for  use.  Again,  the  commentator  writes  that  the  world 
is  non-existent  in  the  present,  which  is  altogether  groundless;  for, 
what  is  known  and  realised  by  means  of  experience  and  logical  proofs 
can  never  be  otherwise  than  what  is  true. 

Object  of  Creation 

Q. — What  is  God’s  object  in  creating  the  world  ? 

A, — What  can  His  object  be  in  not  making  it  ? 

Q. — Had  He  not  made  it,  He  would  have  been  happy,  and  the 
souls  would  not  have  experienced  pleasure  and  pain. 

A, — It  is  the  talk  of  idle  and  poor  or  desperate  fellows,  but  not 
of  the  courageous  and  enterprising.  What  pleasure  or  pain  is  felt  by 
souls  in  the  period  of  destruction  ? If  the  pleasure  and  pain  of  the 
time  the  creation  lasts,  be  considered  and  compared,  the  pleasure  for 
exceeds  the  pain  by  many  limes.  1.  Many  pure  and  virtuous  souls 
attain  the  happiness  of  salvation  by  working  out  the  method  of  eman- 


208 


Satyarth  Prakash 


cipation  from  wordly  bondage.  They  lie  idle  in  the  time  of  chaos  as 
they  do  in  dreamless  or  profound  sleep.  2.  How  could  God  before 
destruction  give  souls  rewards  and  punishments  as  the  fruits  of  their 
good  and  evil  deeds  done  during  the  creation  ? 3.  How  could  the 

souls  have  enjoyed  those  fruits?  4.  If  you  be  asked  what  purpose  is 
served  in  the  existence  of  the  eyes,  you  will  no  doubt  reply  that  vision 
is  obtained  from  the  presence  of  the  eyes.  What  is  the  use  of  God 
having  the  knowledge,  power  and  activity  to  make  the  world?  To 
this  question  you  can  give  no  other  answer  than  that  these  attributes 
of  His  exist  to  make  the  world.  Also,  5.  God’s  exercising  justice, 
mercy  and  other  attributes,  can  only  then  bear  fruits  when  He  makes 
the  world.  6.  His  infinite  power  is  turned  to  use  inasmuch  as  He 
makes,  supports,  destroys  and  regulates  the  world.  To  take  an 
example.  The  essential  quality  of  the  eye  is  sight.  In  like  manner, 
God’s  essential  attribute  is  beneficence,  as  He  always  gives  innumer- 
able blessings  to  souls  by  means  of  the  creation  of  the  world. 

Q. — Which  is  first  or  which  does  pre-exist,  the  seed  or  the  tree  ? 

A. — The  seeds;  for,  the  seed,  cause,  first  cause,  efficient  cause, 
common  cause,  and  similar  words  are  synonyms.  The  cause  being 
called  the  seed,  precedes  the  effect. 

Omnipotence  of  God 

Q. — As  God  is  ommipotent.  He  can  produce  the  cause  and  the 
ego.  If  He  can  not.  He  can  not  be  omnipotent. 

A. — The  meaning  of  the  word  omnipotence  has  been  given 
above.  But  is  he  omnipotent  who  can  do  what  is  impossible  ? If 
He  can  do  what  is  impossible,  as  for  instance,  to  produce  an  effect 
without  a cause;  then  can  He  without  a cause  make  another  God, 
Himself  die,  become  material,  suffer  pain  Himself,  do  injustice,  be 
unholy,  turn  vicious  and  so  forth  ? God  can  not  change  the  laws  of 
Nature,  as  fire  is  hot,  water  is  cold,  earth  is  inanimate,  and  the  like. 
God’s  laws  are  true,  unfailing  and  perfect.  So  He  does  not  change 
them.  Therefore,  the  word  omnipotence  can  only  mean  that  God  can 
do  all  His  works  without  any  other  being’s  assistance. 


God’s  Body 

Q. — Has  God  a body?  If  he  has  no  body,  He  can  not  make 
the  world  without  hands,  feet  and  other  means.  But  if  He  has  a 
body,  there  can  be  no  objection. 

A. — God  has  no  material  body.  He  who  has  a material  body, 
is  no  God  For,  having  a material  body.  He  must  necessarily  be 
limited  in  power,  separate  and  circumscribed  by  material  things, 
limited  in  time  and  space.  He  will  be  afflicted  with  hunger,  thirst, 
decay,  mutation,  heat,  cold,  fever,  and  other  diseases.  These  are  the 
qualities  of  man  and  are  inconsistent  with  the  attributes  of  God.  You 
well  know  that  you  and  we  have  material  bodies  and  so  are  unable  to 
control  the  molecules,  united  atoms,  atoms  and  sublimated  matter.  In 
the  same  way,  God  having  a material  body  could  not  have  made  the 
physical  world  of  the  invisible  atoms  and  material  substance.  Though 


Creation,  Preservation  and  Destruction 


209 


God  has  no  material  organs  of  the  senses  such  as  hands,  feet  and 
others;  yet  His  power,  strength,  and  glory  are  infinite.  He  uses  them 
in  ail  His  works,  which  can  not  be  done  by  souls  and  nature.  Since 
He  is  more  delicate  than  nature  or  matter  and  souls,  He  pervades  them, 
and  so  is  able  to  mould  them  in  the  form  of  the  material  world. 

Q. — Don’t  you  know  that  the  people  have  got  bodies,  because 
their  parents  had  bodies  ? Had  they  been  incorporeal,  their  children 
would  have  been  so.  In  the  same  manner,  if  God  is  incorporeal,  the 
world  produced  by  Him  should  also  be  incorporeal. 

A. — This  question  of  yours  is  childish.  For,  I have  just  said 
that  God  is  not  the  material  cause  of  the  world;  but  He  is  theefiicient 
cause.  What  becomes  manifest  and  corporeal  is  nature  and  atoms, 
the  material  cause  of  the  world,  which  are  not  altogether  without  any 
form;  but  they  are  grosser  than  God  and  subtler  than  other  objects. 

Nothing  without  a Cause 

(?. — Cannot  God  make  any  object  without  a cause  ? 

A. — No;  for,  it  is  impossible  to  bring  into  being  what  has  no 
being.  It  is  like  the  talk  of  the  man  who  says  that  he  has  seen  the 
marriages  of  the  son  and  daughter  of  a barren  woman.  They  had  a 
bow  of  human  horns,  and  both  wore  garlands  of  flowers  that  blossom 
in  the  sky.  They  bathed  in  the  Jake  of  mirage,  and  lived  in  the  city 
of  illusion.  There  they  have  rain  without  clouds,  harvests  of  corn 
without  the  cultivation  of  land,  and  other  impossible  things.  Thus 
there  can  be  no  effect  without  a cause.  For  instance,  a man  says, — 

^ n 

— I had  no  parents,  I was  born  of  none.  I have  no  tongue  in 
the  mouth,  but  I speak.  There  was  no  serpent  in  a hole,  but  it  came 
out  of  it.  I was  nowhere,  nor  were  they  anywhere;  but  we  have  come 
here.  Such  talk  befits  drunkards  or  lunatics  only. 

A Cause  or  Monad  has  no  Cause 

Q, — If  there  can  be  nothing  without  a cause,  what  is  the  cause 
of  a cause  ? 

A. — What  are  causes  or  simples  only,  do  not  become  the  effects 
of  others.  If  a thing  is  the  cause  of  another  and  the  effect  of  a 
precedent  thing,  it  is  not  called  a pure  cause  or  simple  or  monad. 
Thus,  for  instance,  earth  is  a cause  of  houses  and  other  things.  It  is 
also  the  effect  or  product  of  water  and  other  elements.  But  nature, 
the  primeval  cause,  is  unbeginning.  Says  the  Sankhya  philosophy, 
I.  67,— 

CN  c\  cv  c\  s 

— There  is  no  root  of  roots,  no  cause  of  causes.  Thus  the  cause  of 
all  things  is  itself  causeless.  For,  there  are  necessarily  three  causes  at 
the  beginning  of  any  effect  or  object.  For  example,  the  making  of 
cloth  presupposes  cotton  yarn,  loom  and  other  implements  of  a wea- 
ver. In  the  same  manner,  the  creation  of  the  world  presuppose  the 


210 


Satyarth  Prakash 


existence  of  the  Supreme  Being,  primordial  matter,  time,  space,  and 
souls,  that  is,  they  are  unbeginning  and  existed  before  creation.  If 
any  of  them  be  wanting  the  world  will  never  come  into  being. 

Atheistic  Objections  answered 

W?:— 

tTfJf  ar^gndcgfrfg^TTSnw  l San  I.  44. 

ssrfsrfnwwt  i 

O N 

f5Trn  q3f^»T'Tf?TcJT?gTrT  I 

C\  N 

c > c s 

W^fercT^aTT^Rftl®:  I Nyaya,  IV.  1. 

Q.  1. — Atheists  say  that  nothing  is  a substance.  It  existed 
before  the  creation.  It  will  be  at  the  end  of  the  world.  For,  the 
existence  which  occupies  the  present,  will  be  reduced  to  non-existence, 
i,e.y  it  will  come  to  nothing. 

A, — The  space,  sky,  invisible,  and  zero  or  cypher,  are  also  called 
nothing.  It  is  an  inanimate  thing.  All  things  in  it  are  invisible,  as 
a line  of  one  point.  The  lines  of  atoms  bent  in  spherical  form  by  the 
design  of  the  Lord,  go  to  make  the  earth,  mountains,  and  other 
physical  phenomena.  The  perceiver  of  nothing  is  not  a non-entity. 

Christians  and  Moslems 

Q.  2.— Non-existence  produces  existence;  as,  the  destruction 
of  the  seed  produces  the  sprout.  If  the  seed  be  cut  up,  no  trace  of 
existence  of  the  sprout  is  seen  therein.  As  there  was  no  sprout  in  the 
seed,  it  is  plain  that  it  is  produced  from  nothing. 

A. — The  force  which  destroys  the  seed,  was  present  in  it.  Had 
it  not  existed,  how  could  it  be  decomposed  ? It  would  never  have 
sprouted, 

Q.  3. — Man  is  not  affected  by  the  consequences  of  his  actions, 
for  many  deeds  are  seen  to  bear  no  fruits.  Hence  it  is  inferred  that 
it  is  in  the  power  of  God  whether  or  not  a man  should  get  the  conse- 
quences of  his  own  actions.  God  makes  that  action  bears  fruit  which 
He  likes,  and  that  which  He  does  not  like,  bears  no  fruit.  Hence,  it 
is  evident  that  fruition  of  actions  is  in  the  hand  of  God. 

A. — If  the  consequences  of  actions  are  in  the  hand  of  God,  why 
does  He  not  reach  them  to  persons  without  their  doing  an  act  ? 
Therefore,  God  sends  the  consequences  of  actions  according  to  their 
worth  He  can  not  reward  or  punish  the  man  who  has  done  no  action. 
But  according  to  God’s  law,  man  reaps  what  he  sows. 

Materialists 

Q,  4. — Things  are  produced  without  an  efficient  cause;  for,  the 
brambles  of  the  acacia  are  sharp  and  pointed,  but  other  trees  have  no 


Creation^  Preservation  and  Destruction  2 1 1 

thorns.  Hence,  it  is  inferred  that  when  creation  takes  place,  bodies 
and  other  material  things  come  into  being  without  any  efficient  cause. 

A. — The  efficient  cause  of  a thing  is  that  from  which  it  is  pro- 
duced. Why  are  the  brambles  not  produced  without  a thorny  tree  ? 

Vedantists 

Q.  5. — All  the  objects  are  subject  to  production  and  destruction, 
so  they  are  all  transitory  and  unstable.  Here  is  a verse  from  some  book — 

Hfsr  ii 

— It  means  according  to  the  new  followers  of  Vedanta  who  are  classed 
with  the  5th  kind  of  atheists, — The  sum  and  substance  of  billions  of 
books  is  that  Brahm  or  the  Supreme  Being  is  the  only  truth  or  has  a 
real  existence;  and  the  rest  of  the  world  is  illusion.  The  ego  is  not 
different  from  Brahm. 

A, — If  the  stability  of  all  is  constant,  all  can  not  be  transitory. 

Q. — The  stability  of  all  is  also  transitory,  as  fire  is  extinguished 
after  consuming  wood. 

A. — It  cannot  be  said  that  what  is  properly  perceivable,  is  illusory, 
and  that  the  supreme  invisible  cause  is  in  permanent.  The  modern 
school  of  Vedant  believes  the  creation  of  the  world  from  the  Supreme 
Being  (Brahman).  Well,  the  Supreme  Being  or  Brahman  being  eternal, 
its  effect  or  product  can  not  be  impermanent  or  illusory.  It  is  unten- 
able to  assert  that  the  world  is  unreal  and  suppositional  like  a dream, 
or  the  idea  of  a serpent  in  the  rope  lying  in  darkness;  for  supposition 
or  illusion  is  a quality.  Now,  a quality  can  not  be  separate  from  its 
substance,  nor  is  a substance  distinct  from  its  quality.  When  the 
entertainer  of  supposition  is  permanent,  his  supposition  should  also 
be  permanent.  If  not,  the  entertainer  should  also  be  regarded  as  un- 
substantial and  unstable  Also,  a dream  cannot  be  had  without  see- 
ing or  hearing  of  things  in  the  wakeful  state.  The  real  objects  of  the 
wakeful  state  make  impressions  on  the  mind  by  means  of  their  being 
in  contact  with  the  senses,  and  thus  producing  their  empirical  know- 
ledge in  the  ego.  These  impressions  become  realised  and  visible  to  the 
mind  and  in  the  state  of  dream.  The  substance  of  matter  exists  in  the 
time  of  cataclysm,  as  the  external  objects  continue  to  exist  in  the  ab- 
sence of  their  knowledge  during  the  profound  sleep.  If  a dream  can 
take  place  without  any  previous  impressions,  a man  blind  by  birth 
should  dream  of  light.  Therefore,  there  are  only  notions  or  impressions 
in  dreams,  and  their  prototypes  or  real  things  exist  in  external  nature. 

Q. — As  the  objects  of  waking  state  are  annihilated  in  a dream, 
those  of  both  states  in  a profound  sleep,  so  the  objects  of  waking 
state  should  be  regarded  as  illusory  or  like  phantoms  of  dream. 

A, — No,  this  can  not  be;  for,  there  is  mere  ignorance  of  the  real 
objects  of  the  physical  world  in  a profound  sleep,  but  not  their  total 
extinction.  It  is  like  the  things  behind  the  back  of  a man.  They  are 
not  obliterated  from  existence.  The  same  is  the  case  with  dream  and 
profound  sleep.  Hence,  what  is  said  above,  that  is,  the  Supreme 


212  Satyarth  Prakash 

Being,  soul,  and  matter  or  the  cause  of  the  world,  are  unbeginning 
and  constant,  is  true. 

Buddhists  and  Jainees 

Q.  6. — As  the  five  elements  are  permanent,  all  the  world  is 
stable  and  constant. 

A — This  assertion  is  not  true,  for  if  all  the  objects  be  perma- 
nent, the  cause  of  whose  production  and  destruction  is  well  known; 
the  whole  physical  world  with  its  bodies,  goods  and  chattels  and  other 
objects,  which  arc  produced  and  destroyed,  should  be  permanent;  but 
they  are  not  so.  Hence,  the  product  or  effect  cannot  be  permanent 
and  stable. 

Q.  7. — All  arc  distinct.  There  is  no  one  substance.  Whatever 
thing  we  observe,  we  find  no  other  thing  exist  in  it. 

A. — The  substance  of  objects,  time,  space,  innermost  self,  genus 
and  species  are  constant  and  invariable.  Tiiere  can  be  nothing  apart 
and  away  from  them.  So  the  objects  are  not  distinct  and  detached. 
They  appear  to  be  so.  There  is  one  invariable  substance  underlying 
them  all. 

Q,  8.— An  object  cannot  exist  in  another,  so  all  do  not  exist; 
as,  the  cow  is  not  the  horse,  and  the  horse  is  not  the  cow*;  so  all 
should  be  regarded  as  non-entities. 

A. — Though  all  objects  do  not  exist  in  one  another,  as  the  cow 
is  not  in  the  horse  or  vice  versa,  yet  the  cow  does  exist  in  the  cow 
and  the  horse  in  the  horsc.f  So  they  can  not  be  non-existent.  If  there 
is  no  existence  of  objects,  how  can  their  non-existence,  in  one  another 
be  asserted  ? 

Fatalists 

Q.  9. — Nature  produces  the  world;  i.e.,  it  comes  out  sponta- 
neously; as  the  mixture  of  water  and  food  decomposes  and  produces 
worms,  the  presence  of  seed,  earth,  and  water  brings  forth  grass, 
plants,  rocks  and  other  things.!  Waves  are  produced  from  the  con- 
tact of  the  wind  and  the  sea.  The  foam  of  the  sea  is  produced  from 
waves.  Ochre,  lime,  lemon  juice  when  mixed  and  ground,  produce 
red  powder  (rori).  In  like  manner  all  the  world  is  produced  from  the 
nature  of  the  properties  of  elements, There  is  no  maker  of  it. 

A. — If  the  world  is  produced  by  nature  or  spontaneously,  it 
should  never  be  destroyed.  If  destruction  be  supposed  to  be  its 
quality,  there  can  be  no  production  of  it.  If  both  production  and 
destruction  be  assumed  to  co-exist  in  objects,  there  can  be  no  distinc- 
tion and  demarcation  of  production  and  destruction.  If  the  efficient 
cause  be  supposed  to  exist  to  produce  and  destroy  the  world,  it  must 
be  thought  to  exist  as  distinct  from  producible  and  destructible  objects. 
If  production  and  destruction  arc  natural,  it  is  impossible  for  them  to 
exist  at  one  and  the  some  time.  If  creation  is  natural  or  spontaneous, 

»i1: 1 M frfe  iftrstswl  ii 


Creation,  Preservation  and  Destruction 


213 


how  is  it  that  no  other  earth,  moon,  sun  and  the  like  planets  and  stars 
spring  into  being  near  the  present  ones  ? Whatever  grass,  plants, 
worms  and  other  forms  of  vegetable  or  animal  life  arc  produced  from 
the  union  of  seeds,  grains,  water  and  similar  natural  things,  they  are 
produced  from  things  created  by  God;  but  not  without  them.  Thus, 
for  instance,  to  form  the  red  powder  {rori),  its  ingredients,  namely, 
ochre,  lime,  lemon  juice,  found  in  distant  parts  of  a country,  never 
come  together  by  themselves;  but  they  arc  brought  together  by  some- 
body. Also,  it  is  made  by  mixing  them  in  certain  determinate  pro- 
portions, and  not  by  taking  either  more  or  less  quantities  of  them. 
In  like  manner,  the  various  kinds  of  things  and  species  of  animals  can 
not  come  into  being  of  their  own  accord  without  God’s  uniting  the 
ditferent  kinds  of  atoms  of  matter  from  His  omniscience  and  trans- 
cendent design.  Therefore,  the  creation  is  not  the  result  of  spontan- 
eity or  the  fortuitous  concourse  of  atoms.  It  is  the  work  of  God’s 
design. 

Q. — There  was,  is,  and  will  be  no  maker  of  this  world.  But  it 
exists  as  it  is  from  time  without  beginning.  It  was  not  produced,  nor 
will  it  be  ever  destroyed. 

A. — No  action  can  take  place,  nor  can  an  object  be  formed  out  of 
an  action  without  an  actor.  The  earth  and  other  objects  which  reveal 
design  in  the  special  union  of  constituents,  can  not  be  unbeginning. 
What  is  produced  from  the  union  of  parts,  docs  not  exist  before  that 
union,  nor  will  it  remain  after  disruption.  If  you  don’t  believe  it, 
you  should  make  an  experiment  to  verify  it  upon  a piece  of  granite, 
diamond,  steel  and  other  hard  substances,  by  breaking  them  in  pieces, 
by  fusing  them  or  reducing  them  to  ashes,  and  see  if  they  are  not 
made  of  parts  and  atoms.  If  they  are  made  of  atoms,  they  must 
separate  into  their  component  parts  in  course  of  time. 

No  God  but  Souls 

Q. — There  is  no  unbeginning  God.  The  soul  that  become  all- 
wise by  acquiring  omniscience  and  other  virtues,  and  that  becomes 
all-powerful  by  attaining  to  miraculous  or  occult  powers  of  invisibility, 
and  others  through  the  influence  of  abstraction  or  yoga,  is  called  the 
Supreme  Ruler. 

A. — Had  there  been  no  unbeginning  God,  the  creator  or  maker 
of  the  world,  how  could  the  world,  which  is  full  of  life,  which  is  the 
support  of  souls,  and  which  is  made  by  the  adjustment  of  means  to 
end,  the  bodies  of  animals,  and  the  organs  of  senses,  be  formed  ? 
Without  them  the  ego  cannot  attain  powers.  Without  powers  how 
could  it  be  all-wise  and  all-powerful  ? However  wise  and  powerful  an 
ego  may  become  by  attaining  occult  powers,  it  can  not  acquire  powers 
equal  to  God’s  power,  which  is  natural  to  Him,  eternal,  and  inconceiv- 
able. and  which  is  infinite  in  scope.  For,  if  the  knowledge  of  the 
ego  develop  upto  its  highest  point,  it  will  still  be  limited,  and  its 
power  be  limited.  It  can  never  obtain  infinite  knowledge  and  power. 
Look  here,  there  has  been  none  till  now,  who  could  change  the  order 
of  nature  set  up  by  God.  There  will  never  be  such  a person.  God 
who  exists  from  time  unbeginning,  has  made  the  law,  that  the  eyes 


214  Satyarth  Prakash 

should  see,  and  the  ears  hear.  Now  no  yogi  or  occult  powers  can 
alter  it.  The  soul  can  never  become  God. 

Uniformity  of  creation 

Q, — Does  God  make  the  world  of  diverse  kinds  in  different 
aeons  and  cycles  or  of  the  same  kind  ? 

The  world  was  the  same  before  as  it  is  now,  and  it  will  be 
the  same  in  future.  He  does  not  make  it  different. 

mm  \ 

^ II  Rig.  X.cxc.  3. 

— God  has  made  the  sun,  moon,  lightning,  earth,  firmament,  and  other 
heavenly  bodies  in  the  present  cycle  as  He  did  in  previous  ones.  He 
will  make  it  in  the  same  manner  in  the  time  to  come.  Therefore,  the 
works  of  God  are  always  uniform  being  without  an  error  or  defect. 
That  man’s  works  are  defective  and  erroneous,  whose  knowledge 
is  liable  to  increase  and  decrease.  It  is  not  so  with  the  works 
of  God. 

Consistency  of  Six  Philosophies 

Q, — Are  the  Vedas  and  other  true  scriptures  consistent  in  the 
account  of  creation,  or  are  they  inconsistent? 

A, — They  are  all  consistent. 

Q. — If  they  are  not  conflicting,  how  can  these  be  all  reconciled? 
Which  account  of  the  six  schools  of  philosophy  is  correct  ? Thus,  for 
instance,  we  find  in  them  : 

N C C ^ 

5W:  I H ll— Tait.  Br.  V.  An.  J. 

— From  God  and  nature  is  produced  the  sky  or  space,  which  seems 
to  be  produced  from  the  condensing  of  the  material  substance  diffused 
every  where  in  the  state  of  the  cause.  In  truth,  space  is  not  produced; 
for  where  can  the  primordial  matter  and  atoms  rest  without  the  exis- 
tence of  space  ? After  space  comes  out  the  air,  then  fire,  then  water, 
and  then  earth,  from  which  spring  plants,  which  bear  eatables,  which 
produce  semen,  form  which  the  person  or  body  is  born.  This  is  the 
order  of  creation  in  this  scripture,  in  which  space  appears  first.  The 
Chhandogya  makes  fire  and  others  precede  the  rest,  the  Aitereya  water 
and  others,  in  describing  creation.  The  Vedas  derive  the  creation 
sometimes  from  the  persons  at  other  from  Hiranya  Garbha  and  so 
forth.  The  Mimansa  ascribes  the  creation  to  action  or  cosmic  energy. 
The  Vaisheshik  assigns  it  to  time,  the  Nyaya  to  atoms,  the  Yoga  to 
enterprise  or  courage,  the  Sankhya  to  Prakrili  or  Nature,  and  the 
Vedant  to  Brahman.  Now,  which  of  the  accounts  is  the  correct  one, 
and  which  is  false  ? 

A. — All  these  accounts  are  true  and  none  of  them  is  false;  but 
false  is  he  who  misunderstands  them.  For,  the  Great  God  is  the 
efficient  cause,  and  Nature  or  Prakriti  the  material  cause  of  the  world. 


Creation,  Preservation  and  Destruction 


215 


Whenever  a cataclysm  takes  place,  the  creation  begins  in  the  above 
order,  viz.,  the  sky  or  ether  and  so  forth.  When  the  sky  and  air  are 
not  destroyed,  but  fire  and  others  are  destroyed,  the  creation  begins 
from  fire  and  others;  when  the  fire  of  electricity  is  not  destroyed,  the 
creation  begins  from  water  and  others  that  follow  it.  In  other  words, 
the  creation  starts  from  the  point  after  every  cataclysm  iipto  which 
destruction  had  taken  place.  Purush,  Hiranyagarbh  and  other  words 
have  been  described  in  the  first  chapter  of  this  book  as  the  names  of 
the  Great  God.  But  conflict  or  inconsistency  is  that  which  tells 
different  tales  of  the  one  and  the  same  event  on  different  occasions  in 
a work.  You  will  find  perfect  harmony  pervading  in  the  six  schools 
of  philosophy  in  this  manner  : — According  to  the  Mimansa,  there  is 
no  work  in  the  world,  in  the  performance  of  which  no  action  or 
energy  is  employed  According  to  the  Vaisheshik,  nothing  can  be 
done  without  time.  The  Nyaya  maintains  that  nothing  can  be  made 
without  the  existence  of  the  atoms  or  material  cause.  The  Yoga 
asserts  that  nothing  can  be  done  without  knowledge,  wisdom,  intelli- 
gence. According  to  the  Sankhya,  nothing  can  be  made  without  the 
union  of  elements.  The  Vedant  emphasises  that  nothing  can  be  pro" 
duced  without  the  instrumentality  of  an  agent.  Hence,  the  creation 
takes  place  from  the  working  of  six  causes,  each  one  of  which  is 
described  at  length  by  each  school  of  philosophy.  So  they  are  not 
antagonistic  to  one  another.  It  is  like  six  persons  joining  to  put  a 
thatch  upon  walls  to  make  a house.  Exactly  like  it  the  six  schools  of 
philosophy  have  given  the  account  of  the  phenomena  of  the  creation 
in  an  exhaustive  manner.  It  is  like  the  story  of  the  elephant  of  the 
blind. 


The  Elephant  of  the  Blind 

Once  upon  a time  somebody  presented  a part  of  an  elephant  to 
each  of  five  blind  persons  and  one  of  dim  sight.  Then  he  asked  them 
what  kind  of  animal  it  was  in  their  opinion.  One  of  them  said  that 
it  was  like  a pillar,  another  like  a winnowing  fan,  the  third  like  a 
postle,  the  fourth  like  a broom,  the  fifth  like  a platform,  the  sixth  said 
it  was  something  black  and  somewhat  like  a buffalo  in  form  resting 
on  pillars. 

In  like  manner,  the  vulgars  and  smatterers  who  have  studied 
only  the  modern  unauthentic  books,  but  who  have  never  perused  the 
books  written  by  sages  and  philosophers,  nay,  who  are  acquainted 
with  such  Sanscrit  and  Vernacular  books  only  as  are  written  by  men 
of  inferior  intellect,  are  madly  busy  in  slandering  one  another  and 
quarrelling  among  themselves  for  nothing.  Their  teachings  do  not 
deserve  the  credence  of  wise  and  sensible  persons;  for,  how  can  the 
blind  escape  from  falling  into  the  ditch  of  misery  by  following  the  lead 
of  the  blind  ? Exactly  the  same  is  the  chicanery  destructive  of  all  good 
and  progress,  of  the  present  religious  people,  having  but  smattering 
knowledge,  imbued  with  selfishness,  and  given  heart  and  soul  to  the 
voluptuousness  of  the  senses. 

Q. — When  no  effect  can  be  produced  without  a cause,  why  is 
there  not  cause  of  a cause  ? 


216 


Satyarth  Prakash 


A, — O my  dear  simple  people,  why  don’t  you  exercise  your  rea- 
son a little  ? Look  here,  there  are  but  two  things  in  the  world,  viz., 
the  cause  and  the  effect.  What  is  a case,  is  not  an  effect,  and  when 
it  is  an  effect,  it  is  not  a cause.  As  long  as  a man  does  not  under- 
stand the  phenomena  of  the  world,  he  does  not  get  the  truth  and 
correct  knowledge  of  things.  Listen  to  philosophy: — 

Creation  What  ? 

c c\ 

—The  creation  is  the  association  of  wonderful  phenomena,  which  arc 
the  material  and  visible  forms  given  by  development  to  invisible  ori- 
ginals, which  have  undergone  a change  in  their  state  from  their  special 
union, — the  commencement  of  the  working  of  elements  very  subtle 
and  distinct  in  themselves,  being  produced  from  Nature,  which  is  the 
ecjuilibrium  of  thice  eternal  properties,  v/z.,  satwa  (luminosity),  raja 
(activits),  and  tama  (solidity).* 

In  other  words,  Nature  or  Prakriti  is  the  equilibrium  of  the  unbe- 
ginning and  eternal  principles  of  satwa,  raja  and  tama.  It  produces  ele- 
ments, distinct  and  highly  delicate.  These  disparted  elements  begin  to 
unite,  and  their  particular  union  and  contact  bring  about  the  changes, 
of  their  states.  Though  delicate  and  invisible  at  lirst,  they  begin  to  be 
dense  and  bulky  masses,  and  develop  into  the  wonderful  phenomena 
of  the  existing  world.  The  existence  of  these  phenomena  is  called  the 
creation.  Well,  the  cause  is  what  is  at  first  an  attendant  circumstance, 
or  arranges  for  other  circumstances  of  the  union  of  things  and  is  a 
residium  after  their  disunion  or  decomposition,  and  what  can  not  be 
divided.  The  effect  is  what  is  produced  after  a union  of  things  or 
elementals,  and  is  not  in  the  same  state  after  their  separation.  To 
talk  of  the  cause  of  a cause,  the  effect  of  an  effect,  the  doer  of  a 
doer,  the  means  of  a means,  the  end  of  an  end,  is  to  call  a seer  blind, 
a hearer  deaf,  and  a knower  ignorant.  Is  there  the  eye  of  an  eye,  the 
lamp  of  a lamp,  the  sun  of  a sun  ? What  produces,  is  a cause,  and 
what  is  produced,  is  an  effect.  He  who  turns  a cause  into  an  effect, 
is  the  doer. 

Also,  attend  to  what  the  Gita  says: — 

— It  is  the  16th  couplet  from  the  II  chapter  of  the  Gita.  It  means 
that  non-existence  never  becomes  an  actual  existence,  nor  is  existence 
reduced  to  non-entity.  These  two  facts  have  been  veil  ascertained 
by  philosophers.  How  can  bigoted,  unjust,  evil-minded,  ignorant 
vulgars  understand  these  truths  easily  ? For,  a man,  though  learned 
and  keeping  a good  company,  yet  not  taking  the  trouble  of  thinking 

♦The  words  satwa,  raja  and  tama  denote  three  properties  of  Prakriti  or 
matter  when  in  its  primary  state.  Some  translate  them  by  good,  passion  and 
darkness  respectively. 


Creation,  Preservation  and  Destruction 


217 


himself  and  going  to  the  bottom  of  things  thoroughly,  is  always  down 
in  the  ditch  of  delusion.  Blessed  are  the  people,  who  know  the  laws 
of  all  the  known  departments  of  knowledge  and  try  to  know  them, 
and  having  mastered  them  themselves,  teach  them  without  guile  to 
others.  Hence,  he  does  not  know  anything  who  believes  the  world 
being  created  out  of  nothing.  When  it  is  time  to  make  the  world, 
the  Supreme  Spirit  unites  the  sublimated  particles  of  matter.  In  the 
first  stage  of  development  what  becomes  a little  grosser  than  the 
highly  subtle  Nature  or  Prakriti  or  material  substance,  is  called  the 
Mahat  tattwa  tit  (the  great  element).  What  is  still  grosser  than  that, 
is  called  the  Ahankara.  Then  there  come  from  the  Ahankara  five 
distinct  and  subtle  elements  {sukshma  bhuta).  Then  again  are  pro- 
duced the  live  organs  of  the  cognitive  senses,  viz.,  the  ears,  skin,  eyes, 
tongue,  nose;  and  live  organs  of  the  active  senses,  viz.,  the  throat 
(voice),  hands,  feet,  generatives,  excretives;  the  eleventh  is  the  will  or 
manas,  which  is  somewhat  grosser.  The  five  subtle  elements  or  tan 
/nairas  produce  five  material  or  gross  elementals  in  order,  many  de- 
grees removed  in  grossness  from  their  originals,  and  so  visible  to  us 
all.  They  produce  many  kinds  of  herbs,  plants,  and  other  things, 
from  them  come  forth  food  substances,  which  generate  the  seed, 
sperm,  or  semen,  ova,  which  produce  the  body.  But  the  creation  at 
first  is  not  sexual:  for,  when  the  Supreme  Being  makes  male  and 
female  bodies  and  vivifies  them  with  souls,  then  the  development  of 
sexual  creation  takes  place.  Look  at  the  plan  of  the  body,  how 
wisely  is  it  constructed  ! Its  observation  fills  the  learned  with  wonder. 
Inside  the  body  are  found  the  system  of  bones,  the  system  of  nerves, 
the  system  of  muscles,  the  covering  of  the  skin,  the  spleen,  liver, 
lungs,  the  valves  of  the  chambers  of  the  heart,  the  mysterious  union 
of  the  soul  and  body.  The  structure  of  the  head  contains  the  brain, 
the  root  of  vitality,  and  hair.  See  the  nails  and  other  growths,  the 
delicate  organ  of  the  eye,  the  arrangement  of  nerves  like  telegraphic 
wires,  glands,  the  sensation  in  the  organs  of  the  senses,  the  provisions 
of  special  regions  for  the  inducement  of  waking,  dreaming  and  sleep- 
ing state  of  the  soul,  the  secretion  and  production  of  all  tissues, 
mechanism,  organism  and  other  schemes  of  tempers,  all  of  which  is 
the  most  wonderful  creation,  and  which  can  not  be  made  by  any 
other  being  but  God.  None  but  God  Almighty  can  make  the  earth, 
stored  with  many  kinds  of  precious  stones  and  materials;  the  micro- 
scopic structures  of  the  various  kinds  of  vegetable  life;  the  phenomena 
of  innumerable  varieties  of  colors,'~green,  white,  yellow,  black  and 
intermediate  shades,  which  are  painted  on  leaves,  flowers,  fruits, 
roots  and  the  like.  Except  God,  nobody  can  make  the  leaves, 
flowers,  fruits,  grain,  tubes  and  roots,  endowed  with  various  kinds 
of  tastes — sweet,  salt,  pungent,  acid,  sour,  bitter;  and  diverse  kinds 
of  order;  innumerable  worlds,  millions  of  suns,  moons  and  stars;  con- 
struction, revolution,  preservation,  their  subjection  to  laws,  and 
other  wondrous  plans  of  nature’s  economy.  When  a man  sees  an 
object,  he  becomes  conscious  of  two  things,  first,  the  perception  of 
the  object  as  it  is;  second,  the  idea  of  its  maker  from  observing  its 
plan.  For  instance,  a man  comes  across  a beautiful  ornament  in  a 
forest.  On  examining  it,  he  finds  it  to  be  made  of  gold  by  some  in- 
telligent artist.  In  like  manner,  the  wondrous  design  of  the  world  of 


2 1 8 Satyarth  Prakash 

many  kinds  of  creatures  proves  the  existence  of  its  author,  the 
Supreme  Ruler  of  all  the  creation. 

First  Creation 

0.— Which  was  created  first,  man  or  the  earth  and  material 
f objects  ? 

A. — The  earth  and  material  objects  were  created  at  first;  for, 
without  them  the  habitation  and  maintenance  of  man  cannot  be 
effected. 

Q, — Was  there  one  or  were  there  many  men  created  in  the 
beginning  of  the  world  ? Was  there  any  other  order  ? 

A. — Many  men  were  created  in  the  beginning;  for,  God  gives 
birth  in  the  beginning  of  the  world  to  these  souls,  the  merits  of  whose 
works  entitle  them  to  be  born  of  the  Divine  agency.  Says  the  Yajur 

Veda.  ^ I cTcft  ! 

« o 

— Then  were  men  created, — which  goes  to  prove  that  many,  /.c., 
hundreds  and  thousands  of  people  were  created  in  the  beginning.  The 
ethnological  researches  prove  that  the  people  are  the  children  of  many 
parents. 

Q, — Were  humans  and  other  animals  created  in  infancy,  youth, 
or  old  age,  or  all  the  three  stages  of  life  in  the  beginning  of  the  world  ? 

A. — In  youth.  For,  had  God  made  children  at  first,  their  sup- 
port would  have  necessitated  other  men.  Had  He  made  then*!  in  old 
age,  there  could  never  have  been  sexual  generation.  So  He  created 
them  in  youth. 

Beginning  of  the  World 

Q. — Is  or  is  not  there  a beginning  of  the  world  ? 

A. — No,  there  is  none.  Just  as  day  is  preceded  by  night,  and 
night  is  preceded  by  day,  or  day  is  followed  by  night  and  night  is 
followed  by  day,  that  is  to  say,  the  succession  of  light  and  darkness  is 
constant  ever  since  time  began;  so  is  creation  preceded  by  destruction, 
destruction  is  preceded  by  creation,  or  creation  is  followed  by 
destruction  and  destruction  is  followed  by  creation,  that  is  to  say,  the 
rhythmic  cycle  of  the  world  proceeds  with  regularity  and  constancy 
from  all  eternity.  There  is  neither  beginning  nor  end  of  it.  The 
beginning  and  end  of  creation  and  destruction  are  like  those  of  day 
and  night.  Just  as  the  Supreme  Spirit,  the  ego,  and  the  case  of  the 
world  [matter]  are  the  three  substances  eternal  by  their  nature;  so 
are  the  creation,  preservation,  and  existence  of  the  world  unbeginning 
in  virtue  of  their  succession.  Just  as  the  current  of  a river  always 
looks  uniform,  now  flowing  and  now  dry,  now  shallow  and  now  in 
flood  in  the  rainy  season,  and  disappearing  altogether  in  the  hot 
season  ; exactly  so  are  the  geneses  of  the  world  as  regards  their  conti- 
nuity. God’s  attributes,  character  and  nature  are  unbeginning  ; His 
creation,  preservation  and  destruction  of  the  world  are  also  unbegin- 
ning ; God’s  own  actions  have  neither  beginning  nor  end,  as  there  is 
neither  beginning  nor  end  of  His  attributes,  character  and  nature. 


Creation,  Preservation  and  Destruction  219 

Diversity  of  Life 

Q. — It  is  God’s  partiality  that  He  has  given  birth  to  some  souls 
in  the  human  species,  to  others  in  the  cruel  species  of  the  lion  and 
the  like  beasts  of  prey,  to  some  in  the  species  of  the  deer,  bovine  and 
other  harmless  animals,  to  others  in  the  vegetable  kingdom,  and  to 
others  again  in  the  species  ot  the  reptiles  and  the  like  lower  animals. 

A. — No,  there  is  no  partiality  of  God  in  it.  For,  their  variety 
of  life  is  due  to  the  influence  of  their  works  done  in  the  previous 
creation.  Had  God  overlooked  their  merits  in  the  distribution  of 
their  births,  He  would  have  been  partial. 

Place  of  Man’s  Creation 

Q, — Where  was  man  first  created  ? 

A. — He  was  created  at  first  in  Tribishtapa,  now  called  Thibet. 

Q. — Was  there  but  one  kind  or  caste  of  people,  or  were  there 
many  castes  in  the  beginning  of  the  world  ? 

A. — There  was  but  one  caste  or  kind,  the  human  species.  After- 
wards, according  to  the  Rig  Veda,— 

— The  noble  and  virtuous  were  called  the  Aryas,  the  learned,  devas  or 
gods  ; and  the  low  and  vicious,  the  Dasyus  or  robbers  and  ignorants. 
Thus  the  people  were  divided  into  two  sections,  Arya  and  Dasyu. 
Further  on  the  Rig  Veda  says, — Uat  shudre  uta  arye, — (It  is  also  given 
in  the  Atharva.)* — According  to  this  precept,  the  Aryas  were  classified 
into  four  orders,  viz,,  the  Brahmanas  (priests),  Kshatriyas  (warriors), 
Vaishyas  (merchants),  and  Shudras  (servants).  The  regenerates  and 
learned  people  were  called  the  Aryas,  the  ignorant  people  were  called 
the  Shudras  and  Un-aryas. 

Advent  of  Aryas 

Q. — How  did  they  come  here  ? 

A. — When  the  quarrel  between  the  Aryas  and  the  Dasyus,  i.e,, 
the  learned,  gods  and  ignorant  devils,  became  frequent  and  bitter  : 
the  Aryas,  considering  this  land  (India)  as  the  best  country  in  the 
world,  came  here  to  settle,  and  so  it  was  named  the  Aryavarta  or  the 
abode  of  the  noble. 

Q. — What  is  the  boundary  of  the  Aryavarta  ? 

WTHWTH  i 'TfSWfT  I 

>3  ^ ^ « O > 

ff  ii 

— Manu,  II,  22,  17.  It  is  bounded  in  the  north  by  the  Himalayas,  in 
the  south  by  the  Vindhyachalas  in  the  east  and  west  by  the  seas.  In 


I — Ath.  K.  19,  V.  62. 


220 


Satyarth  Prakash 


other  words,  that  territory  is  called  Aryavarta,  which  extends  to  the 
Attock  or  Indus  on  the  west,  and  to  the  Irravady,  which  rises  from 
the  northern  ranges  of  Nepal  and  to  the  Brahmaputra,  which  bounds 
Assam  in  the  east  and  falls  into  the  Bay  of  Bengal  on  the  east  ; and 
from  the  central  line  of  the  Himalaya  ranges  to  Rameshwara  on  the 
south,  intersected  by  the  Vindhya  mountains  and  sourroundcd  by  the 
Ghats.  It  is  so  called  Aryavarta,  because  it  was  peopled  by  gods  or 
learned  persons  on  account  of  its  being  the  habitation  of  the  Aryas. 

Q. — What  was  its  original  name,  and  who  dwelt  in  it  before  the 
Aryas  ? 

A. — It  had  no  name  before  their  advent.  Also,  there  were  no 
people  in  it  before  the  Aryan  settlement.  For,  the  Aryas  came  to  this 
land  direct  from  Thibet  a little  after  the  beginning  of  the  world. 

Q. — Some  say  that  they  came  from  Iran  (Persia),  hence  they 
were  called  the  Aryas.  The  land  was  before  them  inhabited  by 
savages,  who  were  called  the  Asuras  and  Rakshasas,  and  the  Aryas 
called  themselves  gods  or  Devatas.  When  they  fought  together,  their 
struggle  was  called  the  war  of  gods  and  demons  in  mythology. 

A, — This  assertion  is  absolutely  false  ; for,  here  is  averse  ot  the 

Rig  Veda  I,  LI.  8 — It  has  already  been  mentioned  above  that  the 
name,  Arya,  was  given  to  the  virtuous,  learned,  divine  ; and  their 
opponents  or  the  people  having  qualities  contrary  to  them,  were 
denominated  Dasyus  or  robbers,  evil  doers,  irreligious,  ignorant 
people.  Also,  the  Brahmanas,  Kshatriyas,  and  Vaishyas  were  termed 
Dwija  or  regenerates  and  Aryas,  and  the  Shudras,  Unaryas  or  idiots. 
When  such  is  the  authority  of  the  Veda,  the  discriminating  learned 
men  can  not  believe  the  whims  and  suppositions  of  foreigners.  In  the 
war  of  gods  and  demons,  which  took  place  in  the  Himalaya  mountains 
between  the  Aryas  and  Dasyus,  barbarians  or  devils  (Assyrians), 
Arjuna  and  Emperor  Dasharatha  joined  from  Aryavarta  to  assist  the 
gods  and  to  encompass  the  defeat  of  the  Asuras  (devils).  From  this 
it  is  evident  that  the  people  inhabiting  the  country  all  around  outside 
Aryavarta  to  the  east  E.  S.,  south,  S.  W.,  west,  W.  N.,  north,  N E. 
of  the  Himalayas,  were  called  the  Asuras  (barbarians).  For,  when- 
ever they  attacked  the  Aryas  living  in  the  Himalayan  regions,  the 
princes  & kings  of  this  land  succoured  them  in  their  combats.  The 
war  fought  in  the  south  by  Ramachandra,  is  not  called  the  war  of  the 
gods  and  demons,  but  it  is  called  the  Rama  and  Ravana  war,  or  the 
wai  between  the  Aryas  and  the  Rakshasas  (barbarians).  No  Sanscrit 
book  or  history  records  that  the  Aryas  came  here  from  Iran,  and 
defeating  the  savages  of  the  country  in  battles,  drove  them  away  and 
proclaimed  themselves  the  rules  of  the  country.  How  can  then  the 
writings  of  foreigners  be  worth  believing  in  the  teeth  of  this  testimony? 

Dasyus  or  Barbarians 

^ \ Manu,  X,  45. 

qr:  I ib.  II,  23. 

Also,  the  countries  other  than  Aryavarta  are  called  the  countries 


Creation,  Preservation  and  Destruction 


221 


of  the  Dasyus  & barbarians.  From  this  text  it  is  plain  that  the  in- 
habitants of  the  countries  lying  in  the  east,  E.  N.,  north,  N W , west 
are  called  the  Dasyus.  Malechas  (barbarians)  and  Asuras  (demons); 
and  the  people  occupying  the  countries  in  the  S E.,  south,  S.W.,  to 
Aryavarta,  are  called  the  Rakshasas.  It  is  evident  now  that  the 
shapes  of  the  Negroes  is  fearful  as  the  devils  are  described.  You  may 
now  see  that  the  fearful  shapes  of  the  negro  race  are  exactly  like  the 
description  of  the  Rakshasas  in  mythological  books.  The  name  of 
the  people  of  the  antipodes  to  Aryavarta  is  Nagas,  and  their  country 
is  called  Fatal,  which  signifies  that  it  is  under  the  feet  {pa:  feet  and  tal 
under).  There  were  kings  of  these  Nagas,  i.e.,  the  dynasties  of  the 
Nagas.  One  of  their  daugliters,  called  Ulopi,  was  married  to  Arjuna. 
In  other  words,  the  rule  of  the  Aryas  lasted  from  Ikshwaku  to  the 
Kowrawas  & Pandawas  over  the  whole  world,  and  there  was  to  some 
extent  professed  the  religion  of  the  Vedas  in  other  countries  than 
Aryavartha  The  proof  for  it  is  that  Brahma’s  son  was  Virat,  Virat’s 
son  was  Manu,  Manu’s  ten  sons  were  called  Marichi  and  the  like, 
whose  seven  descendants;  called  Swayambhava  and  others,  were  all 
kings,  riieir  descendants,  called  Ikshwaku  8c  others,  were  the  first 
kings  who  colonised  Aryavarta.  But  now  on  account  of  their  ill-luck, 
indolence,  negligence,  and  internecine  quarrels  the  Aryas  have  lost 
their  own  undivided,  indepedent,  and  peaceful  rules  of  Aryavarta;  much 
less  to  talk  of  their  rule  over  foreign  countries.  Whatever  rule  they 
have  left  to  them  is  trampled  down  by  foreigners.  A few  kings  are 
independent.  When  evil  days  come,  the  people  have  to  suffer  many 
troubles.  Whatever  good  may  be  done  to  them,  the  Home  Rule  is 
the  best  of  all.  A foreign  rule,  tho’  free  from  religious  bigotry  and 
race  partiality,  tho’  benevolent  to  the  people  like  parents,  and  endow- 
ed with  mercy  and  justice,  is  not  conducive  to  perfect  peace  and  happi- 
ness. But  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  remove  the  evil  of  various  dialects, 
sectarian  teachings,  and  clashing  economic  interests.  Without  the 
removal  of  these  horrid  evils,  it  is  hard  to  revive  and  promote  perfect 
common  weal  and  public  interest.  Hence,  whatever  precepts  and  rules 
for  guidance  and  historic  precedents  are  given  in  the  Vedas  and  other 
scriptures,  deserve  to  be  observed  by  good  people  as  in  duty  bound. 

Time  of  Creation 

Q. — How  much  time  has  elapsed  since  the  creation  of  the  world  ? 

A. — It  is  one  thousand,  nine  hundred  and  sixty  millions  of  years 
in  round  numbers  when  the  world  was  made  and  Veda  was  revealed. 
The  details  of  this  chronology  are  given  in  the  Introduction  of  my 
Commentary  on  the  Vedas,  which  may  be  consulted  in  this  matter. 
Such  is  the  time  of  the  creation  and  evolution  of  the  world.  It  is  well 
known  that  the  piece  of  matter  which  can  not  be  further  divided  is 
termed  an  atom  (paramanu).  The  union  of  60  such  atoms  forms  an 
anu  or  molecule.  The  union  of  two  such  molecules  or  anus  forms 
what  is  called  a dwianuk  or  double  molecule,  which  is  the  substance 
of  the  material  air.  The  union  of  three  such  double  molecules  makes 
what  is  called  fire,  and  four  of  them  form  water,  and  five  of  them 
form  earth.  Also  three  double  molecules  make  a trasarenu  or  parti- 
cle, and  two  such  particles  make  earth  and  other  visible  objects.  In 


222  Satyarth  Prakash 

this  systematic  and  gradual  way  God  has  made  the  world  & other 
stars. 

Support  of  the  World 

0.— Who  holds  and  supports  the  world  ? Some  say  the  Hydra 
(Shesha)  which  has  a thousand  hoods,  holds  the  earth  on  its  head. 
Another  person  says  that  it  rests  on  the  horn  of  a bull.  A third  says 
that  it  is  held  by  none.  A fourth  says  that  the  air  supports  it.  A fifth 
affirms  that  the  solar  attraction  keeps  it  in  its  proper  place  in  the 
heavens.  A sixth  is  of  opinion  that  being  heavy  it  is  always  going 
down  and  down  in  the  vacuum  of  space.  Such  are  the  various  theories 
respecting  the  support  of  the  earth.  Now,  which  of  them  is  true  and 
worth  believing  ? 

^.-“He  who  says  that  the  earth  is  supported  on  the  head  of  a 
serpent,  the  horn  of  a bull,  should  be  asked  on  what  it  rested  at  the 
time  the  parents  of  those  creatures  were  born.  Also,  what  supports 
the  serpent  and  the  bull  ? The  Mahomedans  who  maintain  the  bull 
hypothesis,  will  hold  their  tongue  at  this  interrogation.  But  the  holder 
of  the  serpent  supposition  will  say  that  the  serpent  rests  on  a tortoise, 
which  floats  on  water.  This  water  is  held  by  fire,  which  is  supported 
by  the  air,  and  the  air  lives  in  the  sky.  This  person  should  be  asked  on 
whom  rests  all.  It  is  ten  to  one  that  he  will  own  that  God  holds  all. 
If  asked  whose  childern  the  serpent  and  the  bull  arc,  he  will  say  that 
Kashyapa  was  the  son  of  Kadru  and  the  bull  of  a cow.  Marichi,  the 
father  of  Kashyapa  was  the  son  of  Manu  who  was  the  son  of  Virat. 
Brahma,  the  father  of  Virat,  lived  in  the  morning  of  creation.  There 
were  five  generations  before  the  birth  of  the  serpent.  Who  held  the 
world  then  ? In  plain  words,  on  what  did  the  earth  rest  at  the  time 
of,  say,  Kashyapa’s  birth  ? He  will  then  say : You  are  silenced 
and  I am  silenced.*  Both  the  interrogator  and  the  responder  will 
begin  to  fight.  The  fact  is  that  the  remainder  is  the  shesha  or  residium. 
Hence,  some  poet  has  said,t  that  the  Shesha  holds  the  earth.  Others 
not  understanding  his  sense  properly,  guessed  it  to  be  a serpent.  But 
as  God  remains  after  the  creation  and  destruction  of  the  world.  He 
is  called  the  Shesha,  the  Omega,  and  the  world  is  supported  by  Him. 
Says  the  Atharwa  Veda,  Kanda  14,  varga  I,  verse  I, — Satyenotta- 
hhita  bhumih,\  that  Satya  or  Truth  which  is  ever  green  and  indestruc- 
tible in  the  three  divisions  of  time  and  which  is  God,  holds  the  earth, 
sun,  and  all  other  worlds  — Uksha  dadhar  prithiwini  uta  dyam*  This  is 
a verse  from  the  Rig  Veda.  It  appears  that  somebody  finding  the 
world  uksha  interpreted  it  into  an  ox;  for,  it  also  means  a bull.  But 
he  made  a fool  of  himself  that  he  did  not  think  whence  an  ox  could 
muster  strength  sufficient  to  support  as  big  a thing  as  the  world.  The 
word  uksha  means  the  sun,  which  sends  rain  to  the  world  to  fertilise 
it.  The  sun  holds  the  earth  by  means  of  his  attraction.  But  here  is 
none  but  God  to  support  the  sun  and  other  worlds. 

0.— How  can  God  hold  so  prodigious  spheres  as  the  worlds? 


Creation,  Preservation  and  Destruction 


223 


A, — Before  the  Infinite  God  the  innumerable  worlds  are  not 
equal  to  a single  atom,  as  in  the  immense  sky  the  gigantic  worlds  are 
nothing,  rather  they  are  as  a particle  of  water  to  the  vast  expanse  of 
the  sea.  God  pervades  inside  and  outside,  everywhere.  The  Yajur 
Veda  says  : Vibhu  projasu"^ — The  supernal  soul  pervading  all  creatures, 
supports  all.  Had  He  not  been  all-pervading  as  the  Christians,  Maho- 
medans  and  Puranians  (Indian  mythologists)  assert,  He  could  never 
have  supported  all  the  universe;  for,  none  can  support  a thing  without 
having  it  in  the  hand. 

Q — As  the  worlds  are  held  together  by  the  influence  of  their 
mutual  attraction,  it  is  no  use  to  assume  the  Divine  support  of  them. 

A. — Is  this  universe  unlimited  or  limited  ? If  it  is  unlimited,  it 
is  absurd,  for  a corporeal  thing  can  not  be  unlimited.  If  it  is  limited, 
whose  attraction  supports  its  extreme  beyond  which  there  is  no  other 
world  A thing  may  be  individually  attracted  by  another.  But  all 
the  different  objects  which  constitute  the  world  as  a whole,  are  held 
and  attracted  by  no  other  being  but  the  Lord  Almighty.  Says  the 
Yajur  Veda,  XIII  4,t  God  makes  and  supports  all  the  opaque  bodies 
like  the  earth  and  other  planets  and  satellites  and  the  luminous  regions 
as  the  sun  and  others.  He  who  pervades  all,  is  the  author  and 
holder  of  all  the  universe. 

Q. — Do  the  earth  and  other  worlds  revolve,  or  are  they 
stationary  ? 

A. — They  revolve. 

The  Earth  goes  round  the  Sun 

Q. — Some  say  that  the  sun  revolves  and  the  earth  is  stationary. 
Others  assert  that  the  earth  moves,  and  not  the  sun.  Which  of  these 
assertions  is  true  ? 

A. — Both  of  these  theories  are  half  untruth.  For  the  Veda  says  : 

jr:  \ ^ n— Yaj.  in.  6. 

— This  earth  with  all  its  waters  moves  round  the  sun.  So  the  earth 
moves. 

W Yaj.  XXXIII,  43. 

— The  sun  sends  rain,  is  made  of  light  and  heat,  is  wondrous  in  the 
heavens  above  us.  He  infuses  life  into  animate  and  inanimate  crea- 
tures by  means  of  fructifying  rains  and  vivifying  rays.  He  is  the 
cause  of  vision  of  all  physical  objects.  He  attracts  all  objects,  and 
rotates  on  his  own  axis,  but  he  does  not  move  round  any  planet  of 
his  system.  In  like  manner,  each  system  is  furnished  with  a sun  to 
give  light  and  other  planets  are  lighted  and  attracted  by  it.  Thus  Ath. 
K.  14,  An.  1,  M.  It  says  : The  earth  and  other  planets  receive  light 
from  the  sun  as  the  moon  does.  But  the  succession  of  day  and  night 
is  always  present.  For,  the  portion  of  the  earth  which  is  turned 
towards  the  sun,  is  lighted  and  is  said  to  enjoy  day  ; and  the  portion 

srsrig  i i % « 


224 


Satyarth  Prakash 


which  is  turned  away  from  him,  is  dark  and  night  reigns  thereon.  In 
other  words,  sunrise,  sunset,  twilight,  noon,  midnight,  and  other 
divisions  of  time,  always  exist  in  some  part  of  the  world  or  other  ; 
that  is  to  say,  when  it  is  morning  in  Aryavarta,  it  is  evening  in  the 
antipodes  or  America  ; and  when  it  is  sunset  in  Aryavarta,  it  is  morn- 
ing in  America.  When  it  is  noon  or  midnight  in  Aryavarta,  it  is 
midnight  or  midday  in  America,  The  people  who  say  that  the  sun 
moves  and  the  earth  does  not,  are  all  ignorant  ; for,  had  it  been  so, 
there  would  have  been  day  and  night  of  many  thousands  of  years’ 
duration.  Also,  the  name  of  the  sun  is  bradhnah.  He  is  hundreds  of 
thousands  of  times  larger  than  the  earth  and  tens  of  millions  of  miles 
distant  from  it.  Tf  a mountain  moves  round  a mustard  seed,  it  will 
take  a long  time,  but  it  takes  a little  time  for  a mustard  seed  to  go 
round  a mountain.  In  like  manner,  the  revolution  of  the  earth  pro- 
duces the  phenomena  of  day  and  night  with  great  facility,  but  not  so 
is  the  case  with  the  moving  of  the  sun.  Those  who  believe  the  sun 
to  be  stationary,  also  donot  know  the  science  of  astronomy  ; for,  if  it 
did  not  move,  it  would  not  traverse  from  one  constellation  to  another  ; 
and  also,  a heavy  object  can  not  stand  without  revolving  in  the  sky. 
The  Jainees  who  say  that  the  earth  does  not  revolve  but  descends 
perpetually,  and  that  there  arc  hut  two  suns  and  two  moons  in 
Jamboo  dwipa  (Asia),  are  profoundly  asleep  in  the  intoxication  of 
hemp-leaf  decoction.  If  it  goes  down,  it  will  break  in  pieces  from 
there  being  no  circles  of  air  formed  round  it  and  the  inhabitants  of 
depressed  regions  would  get  no  air  and  those  of  the  lower  would  get 
more  than  enough,  and  the  motion  of  the  air  would  be  uniform.  Had 
there  been  two  suns  and  two  moons,  they  would  have  destroyed  the 
occurrence  of  bright  and  dark  fortnight.  Therefore,  one  earth  has  but 
one  moon,  and  many  earths  have  but  one  sun. 


Other  Inhabited  Worlds 

Q. — What  are  the  sun,  moon,  stars  and  planets  ? Is  there  human 
population  or  is  there  not  ? 

A. — They  are  all  worlds  and  arc  peopled  with  human  species. 
Say  the  Shatapatha,  K.  14,  Pr.  6,  Br.  7,  Kandika  4, — 

— The  earth,  water,  fire,  air,  sky,  moon,  stars,  and  sun  arc  so  called 
Vasus  (abodes),  because  all  things  and  creatures  live  in  them.  They 
are  the  habitate  of  all.  Since  they  are  the  places  of  residence,  they  are 
called  Vasu^.  When  the  sun,  moon  and  stars  are  habitations  like  the 
earth,  there  can  not  be  the  least  shadow  of  doubt  that  they  are  inha- 
bited by  creatures.  As  this  little  world  of  God  is  full  of  people  and 
other  creatures,  are  all  these  shining  worlds  desert  and  uninhabited  ? 
There  is  no  work  of  God  that  is  without  a purpose.  If  all  these  in- 
numerable worlds  have  no  men  and  other  creatures,  can  they  be  of 
any  use  at  all  ? Hence,  the  human  and  other  races  are  in  them  all. 

Q. — Have  the  human  and  other  families  the  same  kinds  of 
features,  organs  and  limbs  as  on  the  earth,  or  have  they  different  ? 


Creation,  Preservation  and  Destruction 


225 


A,—li  is  possible  they  should  differ  a V\U\e»  as  the  Chinese, 
Negroes,  Indians,  Europeans  have  a little  difference  in  their  limbs, 
organs,  color,  complexion,  and  shape.  In  like  manner,  there  exist 
similar  differences  in  their  bodily  formation.  But  a species  begets  its 
like  in  all  these  worlds  as  it  does  on  earth  ; and  the  organs  and  their 
positions  in  the  body  have  the  same  correspondence  there  as  here. 
Says  the  Rig  Veda,  X.  CXC.  3,— 

^ il 

— God,  the  creator,  made  the  sun,  moon,  luminous  regions,  earth, 
interplanetary  space,  and  happiness  of  life  found  there  in  the  previous 
cycle  exactly  in  the  same  way  as  He  has  done  in  this  cycle.  He  has 
done  the  same  thing  in  all  other  worlds,  there  being  no  difference. 

Q. — Are  there  the  same  Vedas  revealed  in  those  worlds  as  on  this 
earth  ? 

A. — The  same  Vedas  are  revealed  there.  As  a king’s  rule  and 
policy  are  uniform  throughout  his  dominions,  so  is  the  Supreme  Ruler; 
the  Lord  of  lords,  law  proclaimed  in  the  Vedas  is  enforced  enquitably 
in  all  the  varied  creations. 


God’s  Suzerainty 

Q. — Since  the  souls  and  the  elements  of  Prakriti  are  unbeginning 
and  are  not  made  by  God,  He  should  have  no  power  over  them;  for, 
they  are  all  independent. 

A. — As  the  king  and  subjects  co-exist,  and  the  subjects  are  under 
the  control  of  the  king,  so  are  the  souls  and  inanimate  creatures 
subject  to  God.  Since  God  is  the  author  of  all  in  the  world,  the  dis- 
penser of  the  fruits  of  their  actions,  the  preserver  of  all,  almighty; 
how  can  not  souls  and  inanimate  creatures  be  subject  to  Him?  Hence, 
the  souls  are  independent  in  acting,  but  dependent  upon  God  in 
reaping  the  fruits  of  their  actions.  Thus  the  Almighty  Lord  creates, 
preserves  and  destroys  all  the  universe. 


Summary 

The  Supreme  Being  existed  before  the  creation  of  the  world,  which  was  in  the 
begining  hidden  in  chaos. — Rig  X.  cxxix  3 exxi  1 . God’s  design  brought  forth  this 
visible  world. — Tait.  If.  1.  There  are  3 eternal  substances,  viz.,  God.  soul,  and 
matter — Rig  I.  clxiv  20  God  makes  the  world  out  of  matter  for  the  enjoyment 
of  souls.  Shwet.  IV.  5.  The  essential  properties  of  matter  are  satwa  (existence), 
rajas  (force),  and  tamas  (inertia);  which  produce  5 elements,— earth,  water,  fire, 
air,  ether, — and  10  senses, — power  of  seeing,  hearing,  smelling,  tasting,  touching. 
Some  say  there  was  God  only  in  the  beginning,  and  He  created  the  world  out  of 
Himself,  as  the  spider  produces  its  web  (Mundak).  It  is  not  right.  God  is  the 
efficient  cause,  and  time  and  space,  design  and  power  are  the  instrumental  causes 
of  the  world  If  God  had  made  the  world  out  of  Himself  it  would  have  been 
intelligent;  for,  the  material  cause  transmits  its  qualities  to  its  effect.— Vaish.l . 24. 
But  God  is  all-wisdom  and  all-knowing. 

The  object  of  the  creation  is  that  God’s  power  may  be  utilised  for  the  good 
of  souls,  who  have  no  other  means  to  enjoy  the  fruits  of  their  deeds  done  in 
various  lives  prenatal  during  their  march  in  eternity. 


226 


Satyarth  Prakash 


It  is  said  that  God  is  all-powerful.  He  can  create  out  of  nothing.  No,  God 
does  not  go  against  His  own  laws.  For  instance,  He  can  not  sin,  die,  or  be  born. 
God  has  no  body.  He  is  immaterial.  It  is  asked  if  nothing  comes  out  without  a 
cause,  what  is  the  cause  of  God  ? God  is  a cause,  and  causes  which  are  simples, 
have  no  causes  of  them.— San.  1.  67.  There  is  no  root  of  roots.  So  there  is  no 
cause  of  causes. 

The  Christians  and  Moslems  say  that  God  creates  the  world  out  of  nothing. 
But  it  is  not  true;  for,  it  is  a God’s  law  that  nothing  produces  nothing.  Some  say 
man  gets  no  consequences  of  his  deeds.  God  gives  him  what  He  likes.  It  is  a'^ked 
why  God  does  not  bestow  His  favour  on  persons  without  their  doing  any  work.  The 
Budhists  and  Jainees  maintain  the  stability  of  elements.  But  the  world  is  unstable 
as  is  known  to  experience. 

Some  say  that  the  six  schools  of  philosophy  assign  the  creation  of  the  world 
to  different  causes,  so  they  are  contradictory.  No;  they  are  all  in  harmony.  There 
being  six  causes,  each  takes  up  one  for  its  subject;  as,  the  Vedant  describes  God 
as  Its  efficient  cause;  the  Nyaya,  the  atoms  as  its  material  cause;  the  Yoga,  energy 
as  its  common  cause;  the  Vaisheshik,  Mimansa,  and  Sankhya,  time,  action,  and 
nature  respectively  as  its  instrumental  causes. 


Chapter  IX 

1.  KNOWLEDGE  AND  IGNORANCE 
2 BONDAGE  AND  EMANCIPATION 

Il — Yaj.  XL,  14. 

— He  who  realises  knowledge  and  ignorance  together,  overcomes  death 
by  performing  works  and  obtains  salvation  by  attaining  true  know- 
ledge. Ignorance  is  thus  defined — 

— It  is  an  aphorism  from  the  Yoga.  II.  5.  To  believe  the  unstable 
world  and  the  decaying  body  to  be  permanent,  i.e.,  to  regard  the 
phenomenal  world  to  be  everlasting  and  eternal,  and  to  make  the 
physical  body  angelic  with  the  view  to  keep  it  on  for  ever  by  means  of 
psychic  energy  or  the  induence  of  Yoga,  and  a similar  groundless 
belief,  is  the  first  phase  of  ignorance.  The  belief  of  purity  in  impure 
objects  such  as  the  body  of  a lecherous  woman  made  of  decaying 
animal  tissues  (and  other  libidinous  sensualities)  and  also  such  prac- 
tices as  lying,  stealing  and  other  vices,  constitute  the  second  form  of 
ignorance.  The  idea  of  pleasure  in  the  real  form  of  pain  which 
excessive  indulgence  in  sensual  pleasures  no  doubt  is,  is  the  third  kind 
of  ignorance.  The  fourth  form  of  ignorance  consists  of  thinking  the 
body  to  be  man  or  mind,  and  the  matter  to  be  spirit.  These  four 
sorts  of  incorrect  knowledge  or  wrong  notions  go  by  the  name  of 
ignorance.  The  opposite  of  this  is  knowledge,  that  is  to  say,  to  regard 
a transient  object  as  transient,  an  ever-lasting  thing  as  ever-lasting,  an 
impure  object  as  impure,  a pure  one  as  pure,  pain  as  pain,  pleasure  as 
pleasure,  the  non-ego  as  the  non-ego,  the  self,  as  the  self,  in  short  to 
know  a thing  as  it  is  in  nature.  In  the  words  of  Sanscrit — 

%f%r  m i or, 

ir«rr  m 

When  it  is  time  to  create,  God  unites  atoms,  produces  the  Malta,  Ahankara, 
5 elements,  5 senses,  5 subtle  Tan  matras,  plants,  food,  sperm,  ova,  and  the  body 
of  creatures.  It  is  the  work  of  the  Almighty  but  not  of  anyone  else.  Man  (male 
and  female)  came  last  in  the  vigor  of  youth  out  of  God’s  hand.  Then  he  multiplied 
by  sexual  reproduction.  The  creation  and  destruction  of  the  world  happen  as  day 
and  night,  one  after  the  other.  At  first,  the  good  were  called  the  Aryas,  and  the 
evil  the  Dasyus.  They  came  from  Thibet  to  India,  which  was  after  them  called 
Aryavarta,  round  which  lived  the  Asuras  and  Rakshasas. 

It  is  now  nearly  1,960,000,000  years  since  creation.  The  world  does  not  rest 
on  any  object,  as  the  Hydra,  the  bull,  &c.  It  spins  round  the  sun  which  attracts  it* 
Ath  XIV.  I.  1.,  Yaj.,  HI.  6 , and  is  supported  by  God,  Yaj.  XIII.  4. 

The  other  planets  and  stars  are  also  peopled  like  the  earth  with  corresponding 
difference,  and  the  same  laws  prevail  there  as  here. 


228 


Satyarth  Prakash 


— Knowledge  is  that  which  gives  us  the  correct  and  true  idea  of  a 
thing.  Ignorance  is  that  which  does  not  give  us  the  right  notion  of 
an  object,  but,  on  the  contrary,  gives  us  quite  a different  idea  of  a 
thing  from  what  it  naturally  is.  Works  and  devotion  are  also  ca/yed 
ignorance,  because  they  are  the  names  of  certain  external  and  inter  nal 
actions  ; but  they  donot  constitute  knowledge  proper.  Hence,  the 
Vedic  verse  declares  that  nobody  can  overcome  the  pain  of  death 
without  the  performance  of  virtuous  deeds  and  the  worship  of  God. 
In  plain  words,  holy  works,  righteous  devotion,  and  sacred  knowledge 
lead  to  salvation  ; and  unrighteous  works,  such  as  lying,  the  worship 
of  stocks  and  stones,  and  false  knowledge  bring  on  the  bondage  of 
sin.  No  man  can  be  without  an  action,  a thought,  and  some  kind  of 
knowledge  even  for  a moment.  Therefore,  the  performance  of  right- 
eous works,  such  as  telling  the  truth  and  other  virtues  ; and  the 
abandonment  of  lying  and  other  wicked  works,  form  the  means  of 
salvation. 

The  Fallen  or  Sinful 

Q. — Wlio  is  fallen  or  bound  in  the  fetters  of  sin  ? 

/t.— The  soul  who  is  given  to  unrighteousness  and  ignorance. 

Damnation  and  Salvation 

Q. — Are  bondage  and  emancipation  or  fall  and  salvation  naturul 
or  accidental,  z.e.,  do  they  arise  from  certain  occasions  or  incidents? 

A. — They  are  accidental  or  extraneous  ; for,  had  they  been 
natural,  here  would  have  been  no  cessation  of  them. 

God  and  Soul  Distinguished 

^ ^ II  — Gourhapada  II,  32. 

— This  verse  is  from  a melrical  commentary  on  (he  Mundaka  Upani- 
shat.  It  means — The  soul  being  God,  she  has  no  obstruction,  (hat  is 
to  say,  she  never  passes  into  obscuration,  incarnation  or  the  bondage 
of  sin.  There  is  none  to  adopt  means  or  desirous  of  effecting  his 
salvation.  The  soul  never  has  any  salvation.  For,  how  can  a being 
get  emancipation,  who  was  never  pinioned  in  bondage  in  spirit  ? 

A. — This  assertion  of  the  new  Vedantins  is  not  true  ; for,  the 
soul,  being  of  limited  powers  is  clouded  with  darkness  ; she  incarnates 
by  appearing  with  the  body  ; she  gets  into  trouble  by  enjoying  the 
fruit  of  sinful  deeds,  takes  measures  to  get  rid  of  it,  desires  to  be  free 
from  pain,  and  having  been  liberated  from  bodily  sufferings  and  got 
the  happiness  of  obtaining  God,  enjoys  the  blessing  of  salvation. 

0 —All  these  qualities  belong  to  the  body  and  the  internal 
sense,  but  not  to  the  soul,  for  she  is  above  the  influence  of  good  and 
evil  and  exists  as  a pure  intelligence  or  as  a mere  seer.  Heat  and  cold 
and  other  opposite  properties  of  matter  appertain  to  the  body.  The 
son\  is  absolute  and  unaffected  by  them. 


Knowledge  & Ignorance ^ Bondage  & Emancipation 


229 


A. — The  body  and  the  internal  sense  are  inanimate  or  material 
They  do  not  feel  hot  and  cold,  nor  do  they  enjoy  anything.  The 
sentient  beings,  such  as  man  and  other  animals,  feel  them,  are  cogni- 
zant of  them,  and  derive  pleasure  or  pain  from  them.  In  like  manner, 
breath  is  also  inanimate  or  material.  It  does  not  feel  hungry  or 
thirsty  ; but  a sentient  being  having  breath  feels  hunger  and  thirst. 
Also,  the  will  or  mams  is  an  inanimate  or  unconscious  entity,  it  can 
not  feel  pleasure  or  pain.  On  the  contrary,  the  soul  feels  pleasure  or 
pain  through  the  will.  Just  as  the  soul  feels  pleasure  or  pain  by  being 
cognizant  of  the  objects,  such  as  agreeable  and  disagreeable  sounds 
and  the  like,  through  the  instrumentality  of  the  external  organs  of  the 
senses,  namely,  the  ears  and  other  organs  ; so  is  she  affected  with 
desire,  dislike,  discrimination,  remembrance  and  the  sense  of  indivi- 
duality, and  is  the  bearer  of  honour  and  shame,  by  means  of  the  several 
organs,  namely,  the  will,  understanding,  memory,  and  self-conscious- 
ness,  which  compose  the  internal  sense.  Just  as  the  user  of  the  sword 
IS  punished  for  a murder,  but  not  the  sword  ; so  is  the  soul  subjected 
to  pleasure  and  pain  inasmuch  as  she  is  the  doer  of  good  and  evil 
deeds  by  means  of  the  body,  senses,  internal  sense,  and  vital  powers. 
The  soul  is  not  a mere  witness  of  good  and  evil  deeds,  but  she  is  the 
doer  of  them  and  suffers  their  consequences.  The  unitary  God  is  the 
sole  witness  of  our  actions.  But  the  soul  who  performs  those  actions, 
suffers  their  consequences.  She  is  not  God,  who  alone  is  the  witness 
of  things. 

Soul  : A Reflection  of  God 

Q, — The  soul  is  the  reflection  of  the  Supreme  Being.  A reflec- 
tion in  a looking  glass  is  not  injured  on  its  breaking.  In  the  same 
manner,  the  soul,  the  reflection  of  the  Supreme  Being  mirrored  in  the 
internal  sense,  endures  as  long  as  the  reflecting  medium,  the  internal 
sense,  exists.  When  it  is  destroyed,  the  soul  is  liberated  or  obtains 
salvation. 

A. — It  is  a child’s  prattle.  For,  a material  thing  is  reflected  in  a 
material  medium  ; as,  a man’s  face  and  a looking  glass  are  both 
material  objects,  which  exist  separately.  If  they  don’t  exist  separately, 
one  will  not  be  reflected  in  the  other.  But  the  Supreme  Being  is 
immaterial  and  formless.  Being  all-pervading.  He  cannot  be  reflected 
from  an  object. 

Q —Don’t  you  see  that  the  all-pervading  and  formless  sky  is 
reflected  in  placid  and  deep  water  ? In  the  same  way,  the  Supreme 
Spirit  is  reflected  in  the  pure  internal  sense.  This  reflection  is  called 
the  chidabhasa — an  image  or  reflection  of  intelligence. 

A. — It  is  an  absurd  twaddle  of  a childish  man.  For,  the,  sky  is 
not  visible,  how  can  it  be  seen  with  eyes  by  any  one  ? 

Q -—Does  not  the  sky  look  like  a vault  dim  and  blue  over  our 
heads  V 

A, — No,  it  isn’t. 

g.— Then,  what  is  it  ? 

A.— It  is  the  atmosphere,  that  is,  the  particles  of  earth,  water, 
and  fire  ^re  seen  floating  separately.  The  tint  of  blueness  is  due  to 


230 


Satyarth  Prakash 


the  excess  of  rain  water  in  the  air,  in  which  floats  the  dust  from  the 
earth,  appearing  dim  and  blue.  It  is  what  is  reflected  in  water  or  a 
mirror.  But  the  real  sky  is  never  seen  or  reflected. 

Q. — Well,  in  the  practice  of  every  day  life  we  have  a space 
enclosed  in  a pitcher,  convent,  or  existing  in  clouds  or  extending 
everywhere.  In  the  same  way,  the  Supreme  Being  is  named  God  and 
the  soul  from  the  distinction  of  the  vehicle  (upadhi),  namely,  the 
universe  and  internal  sense.  When  the  pitcher,  convent,  and  clouds 
are  destroyed,  the  same  enclosed  in  them  is  called  the  great  sky. 

A. — This  talk  is  also  like  that  of  ignorant  people.  For,  the  sky 
never  breaks  into  pieces.  In  practice,  we  say:  Bring  me  a pitcher  and 
so  forth.  Nobody  uses  such  expressions  : Bring  me  the  space  enclosed 
in  a pitcher,  and  so  forth.  Hence,  it  is  not  true. 

A Portion  of  God’s  Light 

Q. — All  the  internal  senses  float  in  the  cliidakasa  of  the  Supreme 
Being  or  light  enclosed  in  the  human  mind,  just  as  lish  and  other 
aquatic  animals  live  in  water,  and  birds  and  similar  animals  fly  in  the 
sky.  They  are  inanimate  or  material  themselves,  but  they  are  ani- 
mated by  the  influence  of  the  all-pervading  Supreme  Spirit,  as  a piece 
of  iron  is  heated  by  fire.  They  have  motion,  but  the  sky  and  the 
Supreme  Being  have  none.  So  there  is  no  mistake  or  impropriety  in 
believing  the  soul  to  be  the  Supreme  Being. 

A. — This  instance  of  yours,  too,  is  not  right;  for,  if  the  all- 
pervading  Deity  becomes  the  souls  in  virtue  of  shinning  in  the  internal 
senses,  has  He  or  has  He  not  omniscience  and  other  infinite  attri- 
butes ? If  you  say  that  He  has  not  from  His  being  (screened  or)  con- 
ditioned or  limited,  then  say  if  the  Supreme  Being  is  limited  and 
divided,  or  if  He  is  indivisible.  If  you  say  that  He  is  indivisible,  then 
no  screen  can  be  placed  in  Him.  If  there  is  no  screen  or  limitation 
in  Him,  how  can  He  not  be  omniscient  ? If  you  say  that  He  forgett- 
ing Himself  appears  to  move  with  the  internal  sense,  as  it  were,  but 
not  so  by  His  own  essence;  then  as  He  Himself  does  not  move,  that 
part  of  Him  which  is  set  free  from  the  internal  sense,  will  be  omni- 
scient, holy,  and  absolute;  and  that  part  which  is  occupied  by  the  in- 
ternal sense,  will  fall  into  illusion,  limitation  and  ignorance.  Thus  the 
whole  of  the  Supreme  Being  will  be  rendered  unhallowed  by  the  inter- 
nal senses.  As  a natural  consequence,  the  union  of  the  spirit  with 
the  body  and  her  emancipation  therefrom  will  be  momentary.  If 
what  you  say  is  right,  no  soul  will  remember  what  is  seen  or  heard  : 
for,  that  Brahman  does  not  exist  which  saw  or  heard.  Hence,  the 
Brahman  and  soul  are  not  identical.  They  are  distinct  beings. 

World  is  Adhyaropa  or  Supposition 

0. — All  this  is  an  instance  of  the  adhyaropa,  i.e.,  taking  one  thing 
for  another.  To  instruct  a catechumen  in  our  knowledge,  the  whole 
world  with  all  its  affairs  is  supposed  to  exist  in  the  Brahman  (Sup- 
reme Being).  Properly  speaking,  all  is  the  Brahman. 

A, — Who  is  the  author  of  the  adhyaropa  or  supposer  ? 


Knowledge  & Ignorance,  Bondage  & Emancipation 


231 


0. — The  soul. 

A, — What  is  the  soul  ? 

Q. — The  soul  is  the  intelligence  limited  by  the  internal  sense. 

A, — Is  the  intelligence  limited  by  the  internal  sense  a different 
entity  from  the  Supreme  Being,  or  is  it  the  very  Supreme  Being  ? 

e.-it  is  the  very  Supreme  Being. 

A. — Is  it  the  Supreme  Being  that  has  supposed  the  existence  of 
tlie  world  in  Himself  by  hallucination  ? 

Q, — Let  it  be  so.  What  harm  is  there  to  the  Supreme  Being 
from  it  ? 

/f.— Is  that  man  not  a liar  why  makes  a false  supposition  ? 

Q. — No;  for,  what  is  supposed  or  expressed  by  the  will  or  speech, 
is  all  false. 

A, — ^Then,  is  not  the  Supreme  Being  imaginary  and  the  author 
of  falsehood  for  His  making  a false  supposition  or  statement  either 
by  the  will  or  in  speech  ? 

Q. — Let  it  be  what  it  may.  It  serves  to  prove  our  point. 

A, — Bravo,  lying  Vedantins  ! You  prove  God,  who  is  absolute 
truth,  true  love,  holy  thought  or  will,  to  be  hypocrite  and  the  author 
of  lies  ! Is  it  not  a cause  of  your  miserable  state  ? What  Upanishat, 
aphorism,  or  Veda  teaches  that  God’s  will  is  false  and  His  command- 
ments are  lies  ? Your  assertion  literally  justifies  the  adage  : 

i.c.,  a thief  punishes  the  Police  Magistrate.  The  ordinary  course  is 
that  a police  officer  punishes  a thief.  But  it  is  against  all  experience 
that  a chief  punishes  a police  commissioner.  In  like  manner,  your 
belief  being  false  and  your  assertions  being  untrue,  you  impute  your 
defects  of  the  understanding  to  the  Supreme  Being  for  nothing  ! If 
the  Supreme  Being’s  knowledge  is  false.  His  speech  is  false.  His 
actions  are  false;  He  will  be  so  infinitely  everywhere:  for,  He  is  every- 
where the  same.  He  is  ever  absolute  truth,  of  right  thought,  of  right 
speech,  and  of  right  action.  The  above  defects  are  yours,  but  not  of 
the  Supreme  Being.  What  you  call  knowledge,  is  but  ignorance. 
Vour  adfiyaropa  or  erroneous  predication  or  taking  one  thing  for  an- 
other, is  also  false.  What  else  is  it,  if  it  is  not  a piece  of  falsehood 
pure  and  simple  to  imagine  one’s  self  to  be  the  Supreme  Being  with- 
out being  so  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  and  to  regard  the  Supreme 
Being  to  be  the  soul  ? God  who  is  all-pervading,  never  becomes 
limited  or  conditioned,  ignorant,  and  restricted  to  the  compages  of  the 
body.  For,  it  is  the  characteristic  of  the  soul  to  be  ignorant,  limited, 
localised,  insignificant,  and  a little  enlightened.  But  not  so  is  the 
Supreme  Being. 

Salvation  and  Incarnation 

Q.— What  is  salvation  ? 

A. — 5PTT  ttrirt  nt  ii 


232 


Satyarth  Prakash 


— It  is  one  in  which  liberty  is  obtained. 

Q. — What  is  freedom  sought  from  ? 

A. — From  what  all  souls  desire  to  be  free  from. 

0. — From  what  do  they  desire  to  be  free  ? 

A — From  what  they  most  avoid. 

Q. — What  do  they  wish  to  avoid  ? 

A. — Pain  or  misery. 

Q. — What  do  they  get  after  their  freedom  from  pain,  and  where 
do  they  live  ? 

A. — They  get  happiness  and  dwell  in  God. 

Q. — What  are  the  means  of  salvation  and  what  brings  about  in- 
carnation ? 

Means  of  Salvation 

A. — They  are:  the  obedience  of  God's  commandments;  free- 
dom from  irreligion  (vice),  ignorance,  bad  company,  evil  thoughts  or 
associations,  and  improper  sensuousness  or  indulgence  in  wicked 
pleasures;  veracity,  beneficence  knowledge,  impartial  justice,  devotion 
to  the  cause  of  virtue  or  religion,  remembering  God,  praying  to  Him, 
meditating  on  Him  or  introspection,  all  in  the  manner  above  indica- 
ted, acquiring  knowledge,  teaching,  honest  profession,  the  advance- 
ment of  knowledge,  the  adoption  of  righteous  means  in  alTairs,  doing 
everything  with  impartiality,  equity  and  righteousness;  such  and  similar 
other  works  which  lead  to  salvation;  and  the  works  of  their  opposite 
nature,  such  as  violation  of  God’s  commandments,  and  similar  others 
subject  souls  to  the  trouble  of  incarnations. 

Q. — Is  the  soul  absorbed  in  God  in  the  state  of  salvation,  or 
does  she  remain  intact  or  keep  her  individual  existence  ? 

A, — She  keeps  her  individual  existence. 

Q. — Where  does  she  live  ? 

A, — She  lives  in  God. 

Q. — Where  is  God  (Brahman)  ? Docs  the  saved  soul  Jive  in 
one  particular  locality,  or  does  she  go  everywhere  at  liberty  ? 

i4.— The  liberated  soul  moves  about  at  liberty  without  any  im- 
pediment in  God,  who  pervades  all,  with  her  knowledge  and  happi- 
ness perfected. 

Constitution  of  Soul 

Q, — Has  the  saved  soul  the  physical  body  ? 

/!.— No. 

Q. — How  then  does  she  feel  pleasure  and  enjoy  happiness  ? 

A. — She  retains  all  her  inherent  qualities  and  powers,  as  right 
thinking  and  the  like;  but  she  is  free  from  all  physical  contact.  Thus, 
for  instance,  the  Shatapatha  says,  Kand  14. 


Knowledge  & Ignorance,  Bondage  & Emancipation 


233 


sfH  ?q5TiT5T  rq»H^fcT,  q5q?T  THHT 

«N  N 'no  n 

f^5T?T  5Rt  ^^f^y  %?rcff5^- 

— The  physical  body  or  the  organs  of  the  senses  do  not  accompany 
the  soul  in  the  state  of  salvation;  but  she  retains  her  pure  essential 
qualities.  In  plain  words,  the  soul  in  salvation  turns,  by  virtue  of  her 
power,  into  the  car*  in  order  to  hear,  the  skin  to  touch,  the  eys  to 
see,  the  tongue  to  taste,  the  nose  to  smell,  the  will  to  desire  or  imagine, 
the  intellect  to  determine,  the  memory  to  remember,  and  the  con- 
sciousness to  know  her  individuality.  Her  body  is  ideal,  depending 
upon  her  will-power.  Just  as  the  soul  does  her  duties  in  the  world  by 
means  of  the  organs  of  the  senses  fixed  in  the  body,  so  does  she  enjoy 
happiness  of  all  kinds  by  means  of  her  powers  in  the  beatific  state. 

Qualities  of  Soul 

Q. — How  many  kinds  of  and  how  much  power  has  she  ? 

A. — Her  power  is  chiefly  of  one  kind.  But  to  analyse  it,  she  is 
endowed  with  24  kinds  of  power,  namely,  1.  strength,  2.  valor,  3. 
attraction,  4.  impulse,  5.  motion,  6.  fear.  7.  discrimination,  8.  action, 
9. enterprise,  10.  recollection,  1 1.  faith,  12.  desire,  13.  love,  lA.  hatred, 
15.  association,  16.  separation,  17.  formation,  18.  destruction,  19. 
hearing,  20.  touching,  21.  seeing,  22.  tasting,  23.  smelling,  and  24. 
knowing.  It  is  on  this  account  that  she  secures  happiness  and  enjoys 
it  in  salvation.  If  she  were  to  be  absorbed  or  annihilated  in  salva 
tion,  who  would  enjoy  its  happiness  ? They  are  very  ignorant  who 
look  upon  her  destruction  as  salvation.  For,  the  salvation  of  the  soul 
is  to  live  happily  in  the  all-pervading,  infinite,  and  most  holy  God 
after  achieving  her  emancipation  from  all  sulTering.  ViJe  the  Sharirika 
aphorisms  of  Vedant,  IV.  iv. 

Soul  not  Absorbed 

1-1. 

— Vadari,  the  father  of  Vyasa,  believes  the  existence  of  the  soul  and 
her  will  in  the  state  of  salvation;  that  is  to  say,  Parasars,  who  is  called 
Vadari,  is  of  opinion  that  the  soul  with  her  will  is  not  absorbed  in 
the  Supreme  Being  or  annihilated  in  salvation. 

W3f  i - 1 1 . 

— Also,  Jaimini  acharya  (professor)  believes  in  the  existence  of  the 
subtle  body  of  a saved  person  like  that  of  the  will,  of  the  senses,  of 
the  respiratory  power  and  other  qualities.  He  does  not  assert  their 
non-existence, 

i— 12. 

—The  Philosopher  Vyasa  is  for  both  existence  and  non-existence  in 
salvation,  that  is  to  say,  the  soul  retains  her  pure,  unconditioned 
power  in  salvation;  her  impure  qualities,  sinful  tendencies,  liability  to 
suffering,  ignorance  and  other  evil  propensities  are  annihilated. 


*The  faculty  of  hearing. 


234 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Upanishats  on  Salvation 

9%?^  !T  Tmi  nfrm  it 

— It  is  a verse  from  the  Katha  Upanishat,  II.  vi.  10.  The  state,  in 
which  the  will  purified  and  attended  by  the  live  cognitive  senses  abides 
with  the  ego,  and  in  which  the  intellect  is  established  in  its  belief,  is 
called  the  highest  ecstatic  state  or  salvation.  The  Chhandogya  says; 

1.  tf  WTr^IT  ftpiTTl  ftnjrgfeft^ttsfctrsrtlrVrM'T'Tm: 

nf!T4:i»r:  H f^f^rSTTfirasiT:  1 

fgari^ifftfcr  n— Pr.  8,  Kh.  7,  M.  i. 

2.  n 'i5it5T  i n 

^aTt%  ti  qel  ?ncaTi?mcnH#  cTvrrmttTt''  ^ art^iT  ?tmT:  ?t€  =ar 
55Tm:  H H^r  5^  5^  4tWR  iRfl*TTfni5m?Tf%?T 

% > N 'Q 

ll  — Pr.  8,  Kh.  12,  M.  5,  6. 

3.  5TftTRm  ^cg^T 

^ HcT:  f5T^TTf5^^^)T^T- 

^fcTT^?^5TThc  ^ M— Pr.  8.  Kh.  12,  M.  1. 

— 1.  Seek  the  Deity  and  desire  to  know  Hira,  who  is  free  from  all 
taint  of  sin,  old  age,  death,  sorrow,  hunger,  thirst;  whose  will  is  true, 
whose  thought  is  true;  dependence  upon  whom  secures  that  saved 
soul  the  possession  of  all  the  world  and  the  fulfillment  of  all  right 
desires,  who  knows  how  to  adopt  the  means  of  salvation  and  to  purify 
one’s  self,  2.  The  saved  soul  enjoys  herself  by  viewing  things  with 
pure  celestial  eyes  and  obtaining  them  with  the  stretch  of  pure  mind. 
The  saved  souls  being  lodged  in  the  effable  Supreme  Being,  experience 
the  happiness  of  salvation.  The  learned,  having  obtained  salvation, 
meditate  on  the  Supreme  Spirit,  the  inner  self  and  light  of  all.  It  is  on 
this  account  that  they  have  access  to  all  the  worlds  and  power  to 
gratify  all  desires;  in  other  words,  whatever  worlds  and  desires  they 
set  their  mind  on,  they  get  to  their  satisfaction.  The  saved  souls, 
shaking  olT  the  mortal  coil,  live  in  perfect  libcity  in  heaven  in  the 
Supreme  Being  in  the  spiritual  body  made  of  will  For,  the  souls 
encased  in  the  material  body  can  not  be  free  from  the  worldly  sulTer- 
ing.  3.  A tradition  runs  that  once  upon  a time  Prajapati  said  to 
Indra:  O rich  and  much  respected  man,  this  gross  body  is  by  nature 
subject  to  death.  It  is,  as  it  were,  in  the  mouth  of  death  as  a goat 
in  the  mouth  of  a lion.  This  body  is  the  dwelling  place  of  the  bodi- 
less and  deathless  soul,  who,  therefore,  is  always  engrossed  in  pleasure 
and  pain;  for,  the  worldy  pleasures  of  the  embodied  soul  are  gratified 
in  that  way;  but  the  worldly  pleasure  and  pain  do  not  alTcct  the  in- 
corporeal saved  soul,  who  lives  in  the  Supreme  Being,  and  who  ever 
enjoys  happiness. 

Return  from  Salvation 

Q.— Do  Ifie  souls  having  once  obtained  salvation  ever  taste  the 

cuij  of  mortal  life  again  oneartlvl  ioT,?.uc,\vaul\vou\,\csa5>, 


Knowledge  d Ignorance,  Bondage  & Emancipation 


235 


^ H ^ ffir  II— Chh.  Pr.  8,  Kh.  15. 

siI5Tra%:  5T53rT?5TTW%:  5T5?T?|[  II — Vedant  IV,  iv,  33. 
nf^T  !T  riim  qT»j  m u — Gita. 

show  that  salvation  is  one  from  which  there  is  no  return  to  the  material 
world. 

/4.— This  assertion  is  not  right,  for  it  is  thus  contradicted  in  the 
Vedas: 

Jft  *IftT  gJT?ffT  ^ ^ II 

ST’iTtT^iTrtTaiTHt  I 

?r  ?T>  "tTfri  fqaiT  h mfTT  ^ ii— Rig.  i.  xxiv. 

II— San.  1,  159. 

— It  is  asked:  Whose  name  shall  we  regard  as  hallowed  ? What  Deity 
is  always  refulgent  among  the  immortal  beings,  gives  us  life  again  in 
this  world  after  our  enjoyment  of  the  happiness  of  salvation,  and 
affords  us  an  opportunity  to  see  the  father  and  mother  ? To  it,  it  is 
replied:  We  should  regard  that  glorious,  eternal,  ever  holy  and  happy 
Deity’s  name  as  hallowed,  who  provides  us  with  the  happiness  of 
heaven,  again  gives  us  life  on  earth  through  the  medium  of  parentage, 
and  lets  us  see  the  face  of  the  father  and  mother.  That  Deity  re- 
gulates salvation  and  is  the  Overlord  of  all  creatures. 

The  terrestrial  and  celestial  souls  always  exist  in  the  same  way 
as  now.  The  earthly  and  the  heavenly  life  are  never  annihilated,  in 
plain  words,  physical  life  and  salvation  are  not  ever-lasting, 
g.  - cT?c?T^ft'^>^sq^5rT:  \ 

n Ny.  i.  2. 

— The  annihilation  of  sulfering  is  called  salvation  which  lasts  for  ever; 
for,  it  occurs  on  liberation  from  existent  life  and  evils  and  riddance 
from  prenatal  sin  and  sulfering,  illusive  knowledge  and  utter  ignor- 
ance, avarice  and  other  weaknesses,  tendencies  to  sensuousness  and 
wicked  pleasures,  earthly  life  and  inevitable  sufferings. 

/I. —It  is  not  necessary  that  the  word  "'atyantef  (extreme) 
should  mean  absolute  annihilation.  Thus,  for  instance, 

— This  man  suffers  from  ‘ extreme”  pain  or  enjoys  “extreme”  pleasure: 
It  shows  that  the  manj  is  getting  much  pleasure  and  pain.  In  the 
same  way,  the  word  atyanta  (extreme)  has  the  same  meaning  in  the 
passage  cited  here  from  the  Nyaya  philosophy. 

Duration  of  Salvation 

g __-tf  the  soul  returns  to  physical  life  from  salvation,  how  long 
does  she  live  in  that  happy  state? 

qrmafm  m 

— Mundak  III,  ii,  6. 


236 


Satyartb  Prakash 


— The  saved  souls,  having  obtained  salvation  and  enjoyed  happiness 
in  the  Supreme  Being  for  a period  of  Mahakalpa,  leave  heaven  for 
the  world.  The  time  of  this  aeon  of  Mahakalpah  thus  calculated: — 
43,20,000  years  make  one  cycle  of  four  ages,  called  the  chatur  yuga 
in  Sanscrit,  viz.  Sat  Yuga  containing  1728,000  years;  Treta  Yuga 
Dwapara  Yuga  Kali  Yuga  000  Then  2,000 

such  quadruple  ages  or  cycles  make  one  day-and-night:  aho-ratra, 
30  such  days  make  one  month,  12  such  months  make  one  year,  100 
such  years  make  one  Maliakalpa  or  Pranta  kala  or  aeon.  Now,  count 
the  number  of  years*  arthmetically.  So  much  is  the  duration  of  the 
enjoyment  of  happiness  in  salvation. 

Q. — All  the  common  people  and  authors  of  scriptures  are 
unanimous  in  maintaining  that  there  is  no  return  to  life  and  death 
from  salvation. 

A. — This  can  never  be;  for,  first,  the  powers  of  the  soul,  such 
as  the  body  and  other  means,  are  limited.  How  can  the  result  of 
their  work  be  unlimited  ? The  souls  have  no  unlimited  power,  can 
perform  no  unlimited  action,  can  adopt  no  unlimited  means  to  en- 
sure the  enjoyment  of  infinite  happiness.  So  they  can  not  enjoy  un- 
bounded pleasure.  Transient  means  can  have  no  limitless  or  per- 
manent end.  If  the  souls  never  return  to  the  world  from  the  state 
of  salvation,  the  phenomenon  of  sentient  life  would  disappear  altoge- 
ther from  the  earth. 

Souis  Increate 

(7.— God  replaces  the  saved  souls  with  the  newly  created  souls 
on  earth.  So  they  never  come  to  an  end. 

A, — It'  it  is  a fact,  it  will  make  the  soul  impermanent  or  transi- 
tory; for,  what  is  created,  is  sure  to  be  destroyed.  Therefore,  the  soul 
will  be  destroyed  after  obtaining  salvation  according  to  your  belief. 
It  makes  salvation  unstable,  and  the  place  of  salvation  will  be  over- 
crowded, for  there  will  be  arrivals  but  no  departures,  so  there  will  be 
no  end  of  crowding  or  increase  of  individuals.  There  will  be  no  ease 
but  the  experience  of  positive  evil.  It  will  be  like  sweet  without 
bitter.  If  there  be  no  bitter,  how  can  we  know  sweet  ? For,  the 
opposition  of  one  taste  to  another  leads  to  the  discrimination  of  both. 
The  man  who  eats  and  drinks  nothing  but  sweet  and  palatable,  does 
not  experience  so  much  joy  and  pleasure  as  the  one  who  tastes  all 
kinds  of  delicious  dishes.  If  God  rewards  limited  actions  with  un- 
limited consequences.  His  justice  and  equity  will  go  to  the  wind.  It 
is  the  mark  of  wisdom  to  put  as  much  burden  on  a beast  as  it  can 
bear.  The  man  is  blamed  who  puts  ten  maunds  of  weight  on  a per- 
son who  can  carry  but  one  maund  (801bs).  In  like  manner,  it  is  not 
right  of  God  to  put  the  burden  of  infinite  pleasure  on  a being  of 
little  knowledge  and  limited  power.  If  God  creates  new  souls,  the 
material  out  of  which  He  creates  them,  will  be  exhausted:  for,  how- 
ever much  a treasure  may  be,  it  will  sooner  or  later  run  out,  if  there 
be  nothing  but  drawings  upon  it  and  no  puttings  in  it.  Hence,  it 
appears  to  be  the  correct  rule  that  souls  attain  to  salvation  and  also 

♦lOOx  12 X 20x2000  X 4,320.000  years- 3 11.040,000,000,000. 


Knowledge  & Ignorance^  Bondage  & Emancipation 


237 


return  therefrom.  Does  anybody  prefer  a whole  life  imprisonment  or 
capital  punishment  to  temporary  confinement  ? If  there  is  no  return 
from  salvation,  it  is  like  a whole  life  imprisonment,  only  that  a person 
has  no  need  to  work  for  bread  there.  As  to  the  absorption  of  the  soul 
into  the  Supreme  Being,  it  is  like  death  by  drowning  in  the  sea. 

Q. — The  soul  will  be  eternally  saved  and  live  in  ease  and  joy, 
a God  is  eternally  saved  & perfectly  happy.  In  this  supposition  there 
is  no  defect. 

A. — God  is  infinite  in  existence  and  power,  and  of  infinite  attri- 
butes, character  and  nature.  So  He  can  not  fall  into  ignorance  and 
the  bondage  of  pain.  But  the  soul,  even  when  saved,  is  imperfectly 
holy  and  wise,  and  of  limited  powers,  character  and  nature.  She  is 
never  like  or  equal  to  God. 

Q. — If  it  is  so,  salvation  is  like  life  and  death.  Hence,  it  is  use- 
less to  try  for  it. 

A. — Salvation  is  not  like  life  and  death;  for,  is  it  a small  thing 
to  have  no  suffering  and  live  in  the  happiness  of  salvation  till  the 
world  undergoes  creation  and  destruction  36,000  times  ? Why  do  you 
strive  to  earn  bread,  seeing  that  you  become  hungry  the  day  after 
you  take  food  ? Why  should  no  effort  be  made  for  salvation,  when  it 
is  considered  necessary  to  try  for  the  alleviation  of  hunger  and  thirst; 
for  the  obtainment  of  a little  wealth,  kingdom  and  honour;  for  bring- 
ing about  marriage  and  begetting  children,  and  similar  other  wordly 
purposes  ? Though  death  is  certain,  }et  'Struggle  is  made  for  existence, 
in  like  manner,  though  the  soul  returns  to  the  world  from  salvation, 
yet  it  is  indispensably  necessary  to  try  for  its  attainment. 

Means  of  Salvation 

Q. — What  are  the  means  of  obtaining  salvation? 

A, — Some  of  the  means  have  been  described  above.  The  chief 
means  are  as  follow  : — 

1.  (a)  He  who  longs  for  salvation,  should  try  to  be  saved  in  life 
time,  that  is  to  say,  give  up  falsehood  and  other  vices,  whose  conse- 
quence is  sorrow  and  misery,  and  adopt  veracity,  righteousness,  and 
other  virtues,  whose  consequence  is  joy  and  comfort.  For,  it  is  a 
maxim  that  one  who  wishes  to  be  away  from  pain  and  to  enjoy  happi- 
ness, must  fly  from  wickedness  and  act  upon  the  dictates  of  virtue  and 
piety.  The  root  of  misery  is  the  life  of  wickedness,  and  the  cause  of 
ease  and  joy  is  the  observance  of  virtuous  life. 

(b)  The  candidate  of  salvation  must  ascertain  the  duties  to  be 
done  and  acts  to  be  omitted,  and  learn  to  discriminate  virtue  and  vice, 
truth  and  falsehood  thoroughly  by  keeping  the  company  of  good 
persons. 

(c)  The  knowledge  of  the  five  planes  of  life,  called  ihQ  pancli  kosJi, 
that  compose  the  human  existence,  should  be  acquired.  The  5 planes 
or  sheaths  are  (I)  Anna  maya  kosli : the  alimentary  organic  system 
(physical  body),  containing  skin,  muscles,  bones,  nerves,  arteries, 
blood,  semen,  all  made  of  the  earth  and  water  elements;  (2)  Prana 
maya  kos/i : the  vital  system  (aerial  frame),  containing  prana  : out- 
breath,  apana  : in-breath,  samama  : digestive  process  which  starts  from 


238 


Satyarth  Prakash 


the  navel  and  distributes  different  essences  of  food  to  different  parts 
of  the  body,  udana  : the  vital  action  which  passes  the  food  and  drink 
down  the  throat  and  contributes  to  strength  and  valor  ; vyana:  the 
energy  which  helps  the  ego  to  set  also  functions  of  the  body  to 
work  and  produce  other  motions;  (3)  /cav/r : the  animal 

system,  containing  the  will,  consciousness  and  five  active  senses,  i.e.^ 
speech  or  voice,  feet,  hands,  excretory  organs,  generative  organs, 
rather  their  powers,  namely,  articulation,  locomotion,  prehension, 
excretion,  generation;  (4)  Vijnana  maya  kosh  : the  intellectual  system, 
containing  the  intellect,  memory,  and  five  cognitive  senses,  f.e.,  the 
ear,  skin,  eyes  tongue,  and  nose,  rather  the  powers  of  hearing,  feeling 
or  touching,  seeing,  tasting,  and  smelling;  which  are  the  means  of  the 
soul  to  acquire  knowledge;  (5)  Ananda  maya  kosh  : the  spiritual  system, 
manifesting  love,  cheerfulness,  greater  or  less  degree  of  joy,  happiness, 
and  the  material  substance  as  the  vehicle.  Through  these  five  systems, 
the  soul  performs  all  her  actions,  devotion,  and  acquisition  of 
knowledge. 

There  are  three  states  : (1)  the  : waking  phase,  (2)  the 

swapiia  dreaming  phase,  (3)  the  sushupti : slumbering  phase  of  the 
mind.  (These  must  be  studied  to  know  the  self  from  the  non-self). 

{d)  There  are  three  kinds  of  bodies  : (1)  the  sthula  : visible,  phy- 
sical body;  (2)  the  sukshama  : invisible,  elemental  body,  made  up  of 
the  combination  of  17  elements,  v/z.,  the  five  prana  : kinds  of  vitality, 
mentioned  above,  the  five  prana  indrya  : cognitive  senses,  the  five  suk^ 
shama  bhuta  : elementals  or  properties  of  elements,  the  mana  : will, 
and  the  budhi : intellect.  This  elemental  or  astral  body  accompanies 
the  soul  in  her  transition  of  birth  and  death.  It  is  of  two  kinds,  viz., 
(0  the  bhoutic : physical  body,  which  is  constructed  with  the  parts  of 
elementals,  (//)  the  swabhavic:  natural  body,  which  is  constituted  of 
the  inherent  qualities  of  the  soul.  This  second  kind  of  body  accom- 
panies the  soul  in  salvation  where  she  enjoys  happiness  by  its  means. 
(3)  The  karana  or  substantial  body,  which  is  found  in  the  slumbering 
phase  of  the  mind — dreamless  sleep.  Being  substance  in  nature,  it  is 
omnipresent  and  is  the  same  for  or  common  to  all  souls.  (4)  The 
turiya  body  or  the  highest  spiritual  state  is  that  in  which  the  soul  is 
absorbed  in  the  enjoyment  of  happiness  on  the  realisation  of  God 
through  trance.  The  power  of  this  pure  spiritual  state  generated  in 
trance  is  the  efiicient  help  to  the  soul  in  salvation. 

Let  it  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  soul  is  distinct  from  all  these 
systems,  states  and  bodies;  for,  it  is  known  to  all  that  the  people  in- 
stinctively say  at  the  time  of  death  of  a person  that  the  soul  has  left 
the  body.  This  soul  is  the  actuater  of  all  the  states  and  bodies,  the 
support  of  all  them,  their  witness,  their  maker,  and  their  enjoyer  or 
user.  It  is  the  ignorant  and  inexperienced  that  say  that  the  soul  is  not 
the  doer  and  enjoyer  of  them;  for,  they  are  all  inanimate  and  dead  with- 
out the  presence  of  the  soul.  They  can  not  feel  pleasure  and  pain,  nor 
can  they  be  responsible  for  the  acts  of  virtue  and  vice.  But  the  soul 
acts  and  feels  pleasure  and  pain  through  their  instrumentality.  When 
the  senses  are  occupied  with  their  objects,  the  will  joins  the  senses, 
(he  mind  falls  in  with  the  will  to  induce  the  exertion  of  the  body  for 
any  kind  of  good  or  evil  act;  the  thoughts  of  the  mind  are  then  bent 


Knowledge  & Ignorance,  Bondage  & Emancipation 


239 


upon  external  objects.  At  this  juncture  are  produced  in  the  mind  joy, 
courage,  fearlessness,  dread  of  evil  acts,  doubt,  and  shame.  It  is  the 
Voice  of  God  dwelling  within  us.  He  who  obeys  this  voice  and  acts 
according  to  its  guidance,  obtains  the  happiness  of  salvation.  But  he 
who  goes  against  it,  suffers  the  misery  consequent  upon  life  on  the 
physical  plane  of  existence. 

II  The  second  means  of  salvation  is  Viveka  : judgment  or  dis- 
tinguishmeni.  It  is  to  know  truth  and  falsehood  after  a careful  dis- 
crimination, and  then  to  choose  the  righteous  acts  and  reject  the  evil 
ones.  It  is  called  the  right  judgment.  It  consists  of  the  right  know- 
ledge of  all  the  beings  from  the  world  upto  God  as  to  their  character, 
nature  and  action  or  energy;  and  then  the  obedience  of  God’s  com- 
mandments, the  engagement  of  the  mind  in  devotion;  absence  of 
conduct  contrary  to  His  commandments,  and  the  right  use  of  the 
world. 

III.  The  third  means  of  salvation  is  shat  sampatti  or  six-fold 
merit.  It  is  to  do  six  kinds  of  acts  : (1)  Shama  : checking  the  mind 
and  the  internal  sense  from  running  riot  into  wickedness  and  always 
applying  them  to  righteousness.  (2)  Dama:  withdrawing  the  senses  and 
the  body  from  lusting  after  wicked  actions  such  as  adultery  and  other 
vices,  and  employing  one's  self  in  the  subjugation  of  the  senses  and 
other  virtuous  works.  (3)  Uparati : indifference,  which  always  keeps 
us  away  from  vices  and  persons  doing  wicked  deeds.  (4)  Titiksha  : 
forbearance,  endurance,  and  constant  application  to  the  attainment  of 
salvation  after  abandoning  joy  and  sorrow  consequent  upon  adulation 
and  slander,  profit  and  loss  to  any  extent.  (5)  Shradha  : staunch  faith 
in  the  teachings  of  great  men  noted  for  veracity,  learning,  and  holiness. 
(6)  Samadhana  : concentration  of  the  mind.  All  these  six  steps  form 
the  means  of  salvation. 

IV.  Mumukshutwa  : intense  desire  for  salvation,  i.e.,  love  for 
no  other  thing  whatever  than  salvation  and  its  means  of  attainment, 
just  as  the  hungry  and  thirsty  think  of  nothing  else  but  food  and  drink. 

These  are  the  four  means  of  salvation,  and  there  are  four  minor 
means  of  it,  called  anubandha.  The  person  who  possesses  these  merits, 
is  the  candidate  for  salvation  or  adhikari. 

Minor  Means 

The  aunuhandhas  or  minor  qualifications  for  salvation  are  four 
in  number,  viz  ; (1)  Adhikari : one  who  possesses  the  merit  of  pro- 
ficiency in  the  aforesaid  four  means  of  salvation.  (2)  Sambandha  : a 
correct  knowledge  of  the  obtainable,  /.e.,  salvation,  which  consists  in 
the  realisation  of  the  Supreme  Being:  and  of  the  means  of  obtainment, 
i.e.,  the  knowledge  of  the  Vedas  and  other  scriptures,  and  acting  upon 
this  knowledge.  In  other  words,  it  is  the  relation  between  the  know- 
able  and  knowledge.  (3)  Vishayi:  the  person  whose  subject  of  study 
is  the  realisation  of  the  Supreme  Being,  which  is  the  berthen  of  all 
genuine  scriptures.  (4)  Prayojana  : an  object  or  purpose,  or  intense 
desire  for  the  attainment  of  the  happiness  of  salvation,  which  is 
summum  bonum,  after  a thorough  emancipation  from  pain  of  all  des- 
cription. These  are  the  secondary  essentials  of  mental  perfection  or 
salvation. 


240 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Accessories 

There  are  other  accessories,  called  the  shravana  chatushtaya  ; 
four  stages  in  the  path  to  salvation,  which  should  be  observed  after 
the  means.  They  are  ; (1)  Shravana  : listening  attentively  and  patiently 
to  the  teaching  of  a learned  person  specially.  Great  attention  is 
required  to  be  paid  to  spiritual  knowledge,  for  it  is  the  most  profound 
of  all  kinds  of  knowledge.  (2)  Manana  : reflection,  thinking  in  retire- 
ment of  what  one  has  heard,  enquiring  into  the  matter  which  is  doubt- 
ful, interrogating  when  the  speaker  and  the  audience  think  the  ques- 
tion proper,  and  acquiring  tranquility.  (3)  Nididhyasana  : experiment, 
examination.  When  attention  and  reflection  remove  doubt  and  confirm 
conviction,  the  matter  in  question  should  be  subjected  to  examination 
in  trance  in  order  to  ascertain  if  it  is  really  what  is  said  or  imagined 
about  it,  i.e.,  to  see  it  by  clairvoyance,  (4)  Sakshatkara  : realisation, 
i.e.,  the  true  knowledge  of  an  object  according  to  its  form,  qualities, 
and  nature. 

Practical  Hints 

Give  up  and  always  avoid  dark  passions  (tamo  gimas),  i.e.,  anger, 
uncleanliness,  indolence,  negligence  and  other  lower  qualities;  fiery 
qualities  (rajo  ^imas),  i e.,  envy,  hatred,  desire,  pride,  irregularity  and 
other  faults. 

Adopt  the  virtues  such  as  truth,  calmness,  holiness,  knowledge, 
and  thoughtfulness.  Also,  cherish  friendship  (maitri)  with  happy 
persons,  take  pity  (kariina)  upon  miserable  people;  show  sympathy 
(mudita)  with  the  generous;  maintain  inditference  (upeksha)  i e.,  neither 
friendship  with  the  wicked,  nor  enmity  towards  them. 

Candidates  for  salvation  must  need  meditate  two  hours  at  least 
every  day;  so  that  the  will  and  other  internal  objects  may  be  com- 
pletely known.  Look  here  ! We  are  conscious  beings,  and  so  capa- 
ble of  knowing,  and  the  seers  of  the  will,  for  we  see  the  will  rightly 
when  it  is  calm,  fickle,  pleased  or  agitated.  In  like  manner,  we  know 
the  senses,  respiration  and  other  vital  processes.  We  remember  the 
past  and  recognise  many  objects  at  one  and  the  same  time.  We 
are  the  upholders  and  traders  of  organs  and  yet  are  distinct  from  all  of 
them.  Had  we  been  not  distinct  from  them,  we  could  not  have  been  the 
responsible  agents,  users,  regulators,  and  impellers  of  all  these  organs. 

#5it:  ii— Yoga,  li,  3. 

— Of  the  five  causes  of  sulTering,  mentioned  in  this  aphorism,  avidya  : 
ignorance  has  been  described  above.  Asmita  is  the  confusion  of  the 
soul  and  the  intellect,  which  is  a distinct  power.  Raga  is  the  love  of 
ease.  Dwesha  is  hatred  to  pain.  Abhinivesha  is  the  fear  of  the  pain 
of  death.  All  sentient  beings  wish  to  live  for  ever  and  never  to  die  or 
to  depart  from  the  body.* 

Persons  should  get  rid  of  these  five  causes  of  suffering  by  means 
of  the  practice  of  introspection  and  philosophy  of  things  and  enjoy 
the  happiness  of  heaven  by  realising  the  Supreme  Being. 

♦Oneness  of  body  and  soul,  love  of  ease,  hatred  of  pain,  dread  of  death  or 
love  of  life. 


Knowledge  & Ignorance,  Bondage  & Emancipation 


241 


Q, — Nobody  believes  in  that  kind  of  salvation  which  you  advo- 
cate. See  the  Jainees  believe  in  the  rock  of  salvation  where  the  saved 
quietly  sit  down.  The  Christians  place  their  salvation  in  the  fourth 
heaven  where  persons  enjoy  happiness  by  marrying,  conquering,  sing- 
ing, playing  on  the  band,  and  putting  on  excellent  dress.  The  Maho- 
medans  locate  it  in  the  seventh  heaven,  the  Wamaraargians  in  Shripur, 
the  Shivites  in  Kailasha,  the  Vaishanavas  in  Vaikuntha,  the  Gosains 
of  Gokala  in  Goloka  where  the  people  live  at  ease  amidst  the  abun- 
dant blessings  of  beautiful  women,  delicious  food,  cordial  drink, 
splendid  dress,  magnificent  mansions  and  other  carnal  pleasures.  The 
followers  of  the  Puranas  believe  in  four  kinds  of  salvation,  viz.,  (1) 
Salokya  : residence  in  the  region  of  God,  (2)  Sanujya  : living  with  God 
like  the  younger  brother,  (3)  Sarupya  : becoming  the  same  in  form  as 
God  adored  (4)  Samipya  : living  with  God  like  servants.  The  believers 
in  the  Vedant  regard  salvation  of  Sayujya  : union  with  God  to  be  the 
absorption  of  the  soul  in  the  Supreme  Being. 

A. — The  salvation  of  the  Mahomedans  and  Christians  will  be 
specially  described  in  the  12th,  13th  and  14th  chapters  of  this  book 
respectively.  As  regards  the  Wamamargians  who  believe  that  they 
will  enjoy  the  company  of  women  like  the  goddess  of  wealth,  indulge 
in  eating  flesh  and  drinking  wine,  and  pass  life  in  singing  and  making 
merry;  their  heavenly  pleasures  are  not  better  than  those  of  the  earth? 
In  like  manner,  the  pleasures  of  the  Shivites  and  Vishnavities  who 
fancy  that  they  will  be  given  forms  like  Mahadeva  and  Vishnu  and 
united  to  women  like  Parvati  and  Lukshmi  to  enjov  high  life,  differ 
from  those  of  rich  kings  in  that  there  will  be  no  disease  in  heaven  and 
youth  will  list  for  ever,  which  is  of  course  absurd;  for,  disease  follows 
luxury,  and  decay  and  old  age  result  from  disease.  The  followers  of 
the  Puranas  may  be  told  that  insects,  worms,  mosquitoes,  beasts  and 
other  ciuimils  naturally  secure  such  salvation  as  is  theirs  of  four 
kinds  mentioned  above;  for,  all  these  worlds  are  of  God  and  all  crea- 
tures live  in  them.  Hence,  the  salvation  by  dwelling  in  God’s  region 
is  obtained  without  any  effort.  The  salvation  by  approximity  to  God 
is  also  afforded  by  nature,  for  God  being  all-pervading  is  at  hand  of 
all  creatures  The  Sanujya  salvation,  in  which  a person  becomes  a 
younger  brother  of  God,  is  already  in  the  hand  of  man  without  exer- 
tion, as  the  soul  who  is  man,  is  inferior  to  God  in  all  respects,  and 
being  conscious  is  related  to  God.  The  Sayujya  salvation  by  union  is 
also  natural;  or  the  souls  being  pervaded  by  God  are  united  to  Him. 
As  regards  the  belief  of  the  ordinary  atheists,  that  the  return  of  ele- 
ments to  elements  after  death,  is  the  supreme  salvation,  suffice  it  to 
say  that  it  is  obtained  by  dogs,  asses  and  other  lower  animals.  These 
plans  are  not  salvations,  rather  they  are  a sort  of  bondage  ; for,  these 
different  sectarians  regard  Shivapur,  the  salvation  rock,  the  fourth 
heaven,  the  seventh  heaven,  Shripur,  Kailasha,  Vaikuntha  Goloke  to 
be  salvation  places  situated  in  particular  localities.  If  they  leave  those 
places,  they  will  lose  salvation.  The  persons  saved  in  such  places  are 
like  those  who  are  confined  within  municipal  bounds.  True  salvation 
consists  in  liberty  to  go  anywhere  the  saved  like,  there  being  no 
obstacle  to  them,  nor  any  kind  of  fear,  doubt,  or  pain.  Birth  is 
production,  and  death  is  destruction.  The  saved  incarnate  at 
times. 


242 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Incarnation 

Q. — Is  there  one  life  (birth)  or  a plurality  of  lives  of  a soul  ? 

A. — There  are  many  lives  or  births  of  a soul  ? 

Q. — If  there  are  many  lives,  why  is  there  no  memory  of  pre- 
existence and  death  ? 

A. — The  soul’s  knowledge  is  limited.  She  is  not  the  seer  of 
three  divisions  of  time,  and  so  does  not  remember  the  occurences  of 
her  past  lives.  The  mind  which  acquires  knowledge,  can  not  be 
conscious  of  two  objects  at  one  and  the  same  time.  Waving  the 
questions  of  the  memory  of  a previous  life,  we  can  not  remember  the 
events  of  this  very  life  which  happened  before  we  were  five  years  old, 
or  what  took  place  when  we  were  in  the  womb,  when  the  body  was 
developing,  or  when  we  were  born.  Why  is  there  no  memory  of  the 
occurrences  of  the  workinglstate  during  the  interval  of  profound  sleep, 
called  sushupti  in  Sanscrit,  although  we  evidently  perform  multiplicity 
of  works  in  waking  and  in  dream  ? What  will  you  say  if  asked  what 
you  did  in  the  first  minute  after  10  o’clock  a.m.  on  the  9th  idem  of 
the  5th  month  of  the  13th  year  of  your  age,  or  in  the  previous  12 
years  ? What  direction  were  your  face,  hands,  ears,  and  eyes  turned 
to  ? What  was  in  your  mind  ? To  all  these  queries  you  return  a 
negative  answer.  When  such  is  the  state  of  memory  of  the  present 
life,  to  raise  doubt  in  the  reality  of  occurrence  of  pre-existences,  is  to 
act  the  prattling  child.  Forgetfulness  is  a blessing,  otherwise  man 
will  die  of  extreme  pain  at  the  remembrance  of  the  suffering  of  all 
past  existences.  If  a man  tries  to  know  the  account  of  the  past  and 
the  future  life,  he  can  not  do  so  ; for,  the  knowledge  and  power  of 
the  soul  are  limited.  It  can  be  known  by  God  only.  It  is  not  the 
business  of  the  soul  at  all. 

Q. — As  the  soul  has  no  knowledge  of  pre-existence  and  God 
punishes  her  for  sins  committed  in  that  past  life,  she  can  not  be 
reformed  or  derive  good  from  chastisement.  For,  if  she  has  know- 
ledge of  her  former  sins  and  so  of  their  consequences,  she  can  desist 
from  doing  evil  again. 

A, — How  many  kinds  of  knowledge  do  you  believe  to  be  ? 

Q. — Eight  kinds  according  to  the  canons,  called  the  pratyaksha 
and  the  like  laws. 


Inequality  of  Condition 

A. — Then  why  don’t  you  infer  the  pre-existence  of  souls  from 
observing  rule,  riches,  understanding,  knowledge,  poverty,  dullness, 
ignorance,  and  like  pleasure  and  pain  at  different  times  and  places  in 
the  world  from  birth  to  death  of  people  ? Suppose  a physician  and 
an  ordinary  man  fall  sick.  The  physician  will  by  diagnosis  ascertain 
the  cause  of  his  illness  ; but  the  other  can  not  know  the  cause  of  his, 
for  he  has  not  studied  medicine.  However,  a common  man  can  at 
least  know  in  an  attack  of  fever  or  other  violent  disease  that  he  must 
have  taken  some  unwholesome  food  which  has  brought  on  his  present 
disorder.  In  like  manner,  why  don’t  you  infer  the  pre-existence  of 


Knowledge  d Ignorance^  Bondage  & Emancipation 


243 


souls  from  your  observation  of  the  amazing  inequality  of  pleasure 
and  pain  in  the  world  ? If  you  don’t  believe  in  the  pre-existence  of 
souls,  you  must  admit  that  God  is  partial  ; for,  how  can  He  consis- 
tently with  his  justice  and  equity  give  people  poverty  and  other  kinds 
of  misery  without  their  committing  sin  in  a previous  life  ; or  rule, 
affluence,  and  dullness  without  their  doing  good  works  in  a pre-exis- 
tence ? But  God’s  justice  is  maintained  to  the  letter  by  awarding 
people  pleasure  and  pain  according  to  their  merits  and  demerits  of 
pre-existence. 

Q. — God  can  be  just  if  there  be  but  one  life  of  the  soul.  For 
whatever  an  over-ruling  icing  does,  is  just.  See,  a gardener  plants  big 
and  small  trees  in  his  garden.  He  cuts  down  some,  uproots  others, 
protects  some  and  develops  others.  A person  can  do  whatever  he 
iikes  with  his  own  things.  There  is  none  over  Him  to  sit  a judge  on 
what  He  does,  or  to  punish  Him  who  fears  none. 

A. — God  does  what  is  just  and  never  does  what  is  unjust.  It  is 
on  this  account  that  He  is  worshipped  and  is  over  all.  He  is  no  God 
who  acts  against  the  principles  of  justice.  For  instance,  a gardener 
is  blamed  for  planting  trees  in  the  way  or  in  an  improper  place  with- 
out a set  plan,  for  felling  down  those  trees  which  were  not  to  be  cut 
down,  for  growing  improper  trees,  and  for  not  developing  the  right 
ones.  In  like  manner,  God  will  incur  blame  for  doing  anything  with- 
out a cause.  It  is  a necessity  with  God  to  do  justice  ; for.  He  is  holy 
and  just  by  nature.  If  He  acts  thoughtlessly,  He  will  be  disgraced 
and  sink  lower  than  the  best  human  judge.  Does  not  the  man  incur 
blame  and  lose  respect  in  this  world,  who  honours  people  without  their 
doing  good  works,  and  punishes  them  without  their  committing  evil? 
As  God  does  no  injustice,  He  fears  none. 

Pre-destination 

G.— God  gives  persons  what  He  intended  to  give,  and  does  what 
He  resolved  to  do. 

A. — His  intention  and  resolution  are  in  unison  with  the  actions 
of  souls,  but  not  otherwise.  If  they  be  carried  without  any  regard  to 
their  actions,  He  will  commit  wrong  and  be  unjust. 

Equality  of  All 

Q. — The  higher  and  lower  classes  of  people  equally  enjoy 
pleasure  and  suffer  pain.  Great  men  have  great  cares,  and  common 
people  have  little  anxiety.  Suppose,  for  instance,  a banker  has  a case 
of  100,000  Rs.  in  the  court.  He  goes  there  on  one  sultry  summer  day 
in  a very  magnificent  sedan  chair  carried  on  men’s  shoulders,  with  a 
beautiful  parasol  to  screen  him.  When  passing  in  state  through  the 
market,  the  ignorant  people  say  : Here  is  an  instance  of  the  consequ- 
ences of  good  and  evil  deeds.  A man  sits  at  ease  in  the  sedan,  while 
others  carry  it  on  their  shoulders  without  shoes,  with  the  burning  sun 
on  their  head  and  heated  road  under  their  feet.  But  the  wise  know 
that  as  the  court  approaches,  the  banker’s  care  and  sorrow  increase, 
while  the  sedan  bearers  become  glad  at  the  prospect  of  relief  of  the 


244 


Satyarth  Prakash 


burden.  When  the  court  is  reached,  the  banker  thinks  of  seeing  this 
and  that  official  or  his  reader  and  of  consulting  barristers.  He  is  in 
suspense  as  to  whether  he  will  win  or  lose  the  case.  He  is  at  a loss 
to  think  of  the  sequence.  But  the  sedan  bearers  comfortably  smoke 
under  the  shade  of  a tree  and  after  some  pleasant  chit  chat  among 
themselves  pass  into  sound  sleep.  If  the  banker  wins  the  case,  he  gets 
some  pleasure.  But  if  he  loses  it,  he  sinks  into  the  sea  of  sadness.  But 
the  bearers  are  exactly  the  same  as  ever.  Take  another  example.  When 
a king  lies  down  to  rest  on  a beautiful  soft  bed,  he  gets  no  sleep  at 
once.  But  a labourer  lying  on  pebbles  and  stones  or  a rough  flat  of 
mud,  immediately  falls  to  sleep.  This  example  holds  good  everywhere. 

A. — It  is  the  argument  of  ignorant  people.  (1)  If  a banker  be 
asked  to  turn  a bearer,  he  will  never  consent  to  do  so.  But  if  a 
labourer  be  asked  to  take  the  place  of  a banker,  he  will  do  so  with 
all  his  heart.  Had  their  suffering  been  equal  or  in  direct  proportion 
to  their  social  status,  they  would  have  never  wished  to  leave  their 
position  to  become  high  or  low.  See,  one  man  is  born  of  the  queen 
of  a learned,  virtuous,  and  properous  king;  and  another  of  a very 
poor  grass-cut’s  wife.  The  former  enjoys  all  kinds  of  pleasure  from 
birth  to  death,  while  the  latter  suffers  all  sorts  of  trouble  during  his 
whole  life.  When  the  former  is  born,  he  is  bathed  in  good  odori- 
ferous water,  his  umblical  cord  is  cut  with  great  skill  by  a learned 
doctor,  and  excellent  arrangement  is  made  for  his  suckling  and 
nourishing.  When  he  wants  to  drink,  milk  sweetened  with  candy  is 
given  to  him  to  his  full  satisfaction.  To  keep  him  pleased,  obedient 
servants,  attendants,  toys,  and  equipage  are  provided  to  take  him  to 
picturesque  places  and  bring  him  up  with  great  affection  and  fondness. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  son  of  a poor  woman  is  born  in  the  forest, 
no  water  is  to  be  had  to  wash  him.  When  he  wants  to  drink  milk, 
he  is  beaten  with  a box  or  given  a slap  on  his  flice.  He  cries  in  bitter 
agony,  but  none  pays  any  heed  to  him.  If  all  these  untold  sufferings 
or  undeserved  blessings  are  given  to  persons  without  their  doing  any 
good  or  evil  work,  God  can  not  escape  the  imputation  of  the  charge 
of  partiality  and  injustice.  (2)  Also,  if  pleasure  and  pain  are  awarded 
to  us  without  doing  any  kind  of  works,  there  should  be  neither  heaven 
nor  hell  after  the  present  life.  For,  since  He  has  given  people  com- 
fort and  misery  without  any  action  on  their  part.  He  may  send  some 
to  heaven  and  others  to  hell,  as  He  likes  after  their  earthly  life. 
Under  such  circumstances  all  people  will  turn  irreligious  and  vicious. 
Why  should  they  do  good  works?  For,  it  is  doubtful  if  a man  gets 
the  reward  of  a virtuous  act.  It  is  in  the  hand  of  God,  who  will  do 
what  He  pleases  to  do.  If  such  be  the  case,  nobody  will  be  afraid  of 
doing  wickedness,  which  will  grow  to  enormity  in  the  world,  while  vir- 
tue will  go  to  rack  and  ruin.  Hence,  it  is  right  to  believe  that  the 
present  life  and  the  existing  circumstances  are  in  perfect  accord  with 
the  consequences  of  the  deeds  done  in  previous  lives;  and  the  future 
life  will  be  regulated  by  the  consequences  of  the  deeds  done  in  the 
present  life. 

Human  and  Animal  Souls 

Q, — Are  souls  in  the  human  and  the  animal  body  of  the  same 
nature,  or  are  they  different  in  kind? 


Knowledge  & Ignorance,  Bondage  & Emancipation 


245 


A. — All  souls  are  alike  by  nature,  but  they  become  holy  or 
impure  according  to  their  virtuous  or  vicious  deeds. 

0. — Does  or  does  not  the  human  soul  pass  into  the  body  of  the 
beast  or  vice  versa  ? Does  or  does  not  the  soul  of  woman  pass  into 
the  body  of  man  or  vice  versa  ? 

A, — Yes,  the  soul  passes  from  one  to  another  body.  For,  when 
vicious  exceed  virtuous  deeds,  the  human  soul  passes  into  the  body 
of  an  animal.  When  virtuous  deeds  are  more  numerous  than  vicious, 
the  soul  goes  into  the  higher  bodies  of  gods  or  learned  persons.  When 
virtuous  and  vicious  deeds  are  equal,  the  soul  is  born  as  an  ordinary 
person.  Again  among  men,  three  kinds  of  persons  are  found  with 
regard  to  their  body  and  other  circumstances,  according  as  their 
deeds  are  either  of  the  best,  mediocre,  or  inferior  order  in  considera- 
tion of  virtue  and  vice.  When  the  consequence  of  the  excess  of 
vicious  deeds  over  virtuous  is  endured  in  the  bodies  of  lower  animals, 
the  soul  ascends  to  the  human  body,  as  her  virtuous  and  vicious  deeds 
of  the  previous  existence  are  equal  in  their  consequences.  In  like  man- 
ner, when  the  consequence  of  the  excess  of  virtuous  over  vicious  deeds 
is  enjoyed,  the  soul  passes  to  the  body  of  an  ordinary  man.  Her 
departure  from  the  body  is  called  death — mrityu.  Her  union  with  the 
body  is  called  birth— ya/z/na.  When  she  leaves  the  body,  she  sojourns 
in  the  ethereal  regions  of  sky — yarnalaya.  For,  the  Vedas  declare 
that  yama  is  a name  of  the  air  or  ether — yamena  vayuna.  It  is  not 
the  imaginary  Yama  (Angel  of  Death)  of  the  Garurha  Purana.  Its 
special  refutation  will  be  given  in  the  llth  chapter  of  this  book. 
After  her  temporary  sojourn  in  the  ethereal  regions,  God  restores  her 
to  life  according  lo  the  merits  of  her  virtuous  or  vicious  deeds.  She 
enters  the  bodies  of  the  animal  species  by  means  of  ether,  air,  food, 
drink,  or  the  pores  of  the  body  by  order  of  God.  After  her  entry 
into  these  bodies,  she  gradually  passes  into  the  semen  and  is  lodged 
in  the  womb,  whence  putting  on  the  body  she  comes  out  and  sees  the 
light.  She  is  manifested  in  the  female  body,  if  the  consequences  of 
her  deeds  can  be  borne  in  it,  and  in  the  male  body  if  they  can  be 
endured  in  it.  She  is  born  eunuch  when  the  male  sperm  and  the 
female  ova  are  equal  at  the  time  of  impregnation.  Thus  the  soul 
passes  through  birth  and  death  into  the  various  kinds  of  bodies,  till 
she  attains  to  salvation  by  performing  good  works  and  devotion  and 
acquiring  spiritual  knowledge;  for,  good  works  procure  her  good 
opportunities  in  the  human  body,  and  the  enjoyment  of  happiness 
and  freedom  from  the  suffering  of  life  and  death  for  the  period  of 
one  aeon — maha  kalpa. 

Q, — Is  the  salvation  obtained  in  one  or  many  lives  ? 

A, — It  is  got  after  many  lives;  for, 

tl*  — Mundak  II.  ii.  8. 

The  soul  dwells  in  God  who  pervades  outside  and  inside 
of  her  when  her  internal  ignorance  is  dispelled  or  the  knot  of  her 

*On  the  spiritual  vision  of  the  Eternal,  the  soul’s  internal  knot  of  ignorance 
is  cut,  all  her  doubts  arc  removed,  and  her  works  destroyed.— Ed. 


246  Satyarth  Prakash 

nescience  is  cut,  and  all  her  doubts  are  removed,  and  her  wicked  deeds 
are  destroyed. 

Q. — Does  the  soul  mix  with  God  or  remain  distinct  from  Him 
in  salvation  ? 

>4.— She  remains  distinct;  for,  if  she  is  mixed  up  with  God,  who 
will  enjoy  the  happiness  of  salvation?  Then  all  the  means  of  salva- 
tion go  to  the  wind.  It  is  no  salvation,  rather  it  is  the  annihilation 
of  the  soul.  That  soul  alone  obtains  salvation  who  obeys  the  com- 
mandments of  God,  does  good  woiks,  keeps  a good  company,  prac- 
tice introspection  or  Yoga  and  the  other  means  of  salvation.  Says  the 
Taitiriya  Upanishat,  III.  I, — 

— The  soul  who  knows  the  God  of  iniinte  truth,  knowledge  and  happi- 
ness to  be  ever  dwelling  in  her  intellect  and  herself,  gets  all  her 
desires  gratified  when  living  in  the  all-pervading  Deity;  in  other  words 
the  soul  gets  that  kind  of  happiness  which  she  longs  for.  It  is  then 
the  real  salvation. 

Q, — How  can  the  soul  enjoy  happiness  in  salvation  without  the 
accompaniment  of  the  body,  as  she  cannot  enjoy  the  wordly  plea- 
sures without  the  instrumentality  of  the  body  ? 

A. — This  question  has  been  answered  above,  only  we  have  to 
add  that  the  soul  will  enjoy  the  happiness  of  salvation  with  the  help 
of  God,  as  she  enjoys  the  pleasure  of  this  world  with  the  instrument- 
ality of  the  body.  The  saved  soul  moves  at  liberty  in  the  infinite 
Supreme  Being.  She  sees  all  the  creation  in  virtue  of  her  pure  in- 
tellect. She  meets  other  saved  souls.  She  becomes  acquainted  with  the 
systematic  knowledge  of  creation,  and  makes  a tour  in  all  these  visible 
and  invisible  spheres.  She  views  all  the  objects  which  are  worth 
knowing.  The  more  she  knows,  the  more  she  becomes  happy.  Being 
pure  and  stainless  in  salvation,  she  comes  to  have  perfect  knowledge 
and  realises  the  nature  of  objects  at  hand.  This  particular  joy  from 
increase  of  knowledge  is  called  swarga  or  heaven,  and  suffering  much 
pain  from  indulgence  in  sensuous  pleasures,  naraka  or  hell.  Swah 
means  ease.  Heaven  is  that  in  which  people  obtain  ease.  Its  reverse 
is  sulfering  or  hell.  The  worldly  pleasures  constitute  an  ordinary 
heaven — Samanaya  i^warga.  The  happiness  accruing  from  the  obtain- 
ment  of  God  is  the  special  or  great  heaven  : Vishesha  Swarga.  All 
sentient  beings  naturally  seek  to  obtain  ease  and  shun  all  sorts  of 
suffering.  But  they  can  not  get  ease  and  rid  of  misery  as  long  as 
they  do  no  good  and  do  not  cease  to  do  evil;  for,  that  can  not  be  des- 
troyed whose  cause  persists,  or  whose  root  strikes  deep. 

^ ^ QfW  I 

— Our  abandonment  of  wickedness  puts  an  end  to  our  suffering  just  as 
a tree  is  destroyed  by  severing  its  root.  Vide  the  Code  of  Manu, 
Chap.  XII,  8,  9,  25 — 33,  35-38  for  the  various  kinds  of  fruits  borne 
by  virtue  and  vice. 

These  purport  to  mean  that  having  ascertained  his  good,  middl- 
ing and  bad  qualities,  a man  should  develop  his  good  and  suppress 
middling  and  bad  qualities. 


Knowledge  & Ignorance,  Bondage  & Emancipation 


247 


Signs  of  Man’s  Nature 

WTO  < 

fffi  ^4  «pr^  ii 

— He  should  also  know  that  the  conative  power,  the  organ  of  speech, 
the  body  in  general,  each  reaps  the  fruits  of  good  or  evil  done  by  it. — 8 

HT:  I 

^Tf^:  qf^’jnctt  mqnT?c5r5nfemTn  ii 

— A man  in  his  next  life  hecomes  a plant  for  sins  committed  by  him 
with  the  body,  such  as  theft,  adultery,  murder  of  the  virtuous,  and 
other  wicked  actions.  He  incarnates  as  a bird,  a brute  and  any  other 
lower  animal  for  the  sins  perpetrated  with  the  organ  of  speech.  He 
is  born  as  a low  caste  for  committing  sins  with  the  conative  power. — 9 

qt  qqqf  qoft  I 

^ o s 

— The  quality  which  predominates  in  the  body  of  these  animals,  forces 
them  to  show  it  in  their  life. — 25 

3 Gunas 

II 

— A soul’s  satwa  : good  quality  is  indicated  by  her  taste  for  know- 
ledge, tama  : dark  quality  by  her  ignorance,  and  raja  : energy  by  love 
and  hate.  These  three  qualities  of  nature  pervade  all  objects  of  the 
world. — 26 

5T5rT?rTflT^  II 

— They  should  be  thus  ascertained.  When  the  mind  is  cheerful,  the 
will  calm,  contended  and  inclined  to  purity,  it  should  be  known  that 
the  good  quality— .ycz/wa  guna — predominates,  and  the  active  and 
dark  qualities — rajo  guna  and  tamo  guna — are  driven  to  the  back- 
ground.— 27 

— When  the  mind  and  the  will  are  afflicted  with  misery,  destitute  of 
joy,  fond  of  sensuous  pleasures,  and  engaged  in  strolling  to  and  fro, 
it  is  certain  that  the  active  quality— rq/«  gima—\s  foremost  and  the 
good  and  dark  qualities — satwa  guna  and  tamo  guna — are  in  the  back- 
ground.— 28 

—When  the  mind  and  the  will  are  engrossed  in  the  acquisition  of  the 
worldly  objects,  devoid  of  discernment,  immersed  in  sensuous  pleasures, 
and  incapable  of  distinguishing  between  valid  and  fallacious  reason- 
ings; it  is  certain  that  the  dark  quality— is  uppermost 
then,  and  the  good  and  the  active  qwdMiy—satwaguna  and  rajoguna^ 
are  gone  down.— 29 


248 


Satyarth  Prakash 


jpiwt  n:  "liHYciq:  I 
H«ift  3tST?q5^  cT  Jierwi«TW:  II 

— Now  we  fully  describe  the  good,  middling  and  bad  consequences  of 
these  qualities. — 30 

STR'  I 

— The  indications  of  the  good  quality — satwa  guna — are  the  practice 
of  the  Vedas,  acting  upon  the  dictates  of  religion,  progress  in  know- 
ledge, desire  for  purity,  controlment  of  the  senses,  righteous  acts,  and 
contemplation  of  the  spirit. — 31 

II 

— When  the  active  quality — rajo  guna — becomes  prominent,  and  the 
good  and  dark  qualities  recede  into  latency;  love  for  work,  the  giving 
up  of  patience,  acceptance  of  false  actions  and  fondness  for  constant 
indulgence  in  sensuous  pleasures,  become  evident  in  man. — 32 

«rf?T:  ^ i 

c c. 

O ON 

— When  the  dark  quality  of  passion  gets  up  and  the  other  two  sub- 
side, excessive  avarice,  which  is  the  root  of  evils,  rises  in  the  breast; 
a great  deal  of  indolence,  sleep,  the  absence  of  patience,  cruelty, 
atheism,  that  is  to  say,  no  faith  in  the  Veda  and  God,  variable  ten- 
dencies of  the  internal  sense,  non-concentration  of  attention,  and  in- 
dulgence in  sensuous  pleasures  come  into  prominence  as  fruits  of 
passions. — 33 

I 

fq|qT  Hq  ii 

— Also,  shame,  doubt,  and  fear  crop  up  in  the  mind  in  doing  deeds 
and  in  wishing  to  do  them,  when  the  tamo  guna  or  dark  passions 
sway  a man. — 35 

— When  the  mind  desires  fame  from  actions,  and  does  not  cease  to 
give  donations  to  geneologists,  bards  and  other  trumpeteers  even  in 
poverty;  it  is  a sign  of  the  active  quality — rajo  guna — being  come  into 
play. — 36 

When  the  mind  wishes  to  know  all,  acquires  virtues,  does  not 
feel  shame  in  doing  good  works,  and  loves  to  do  works  according  to 
the  guidance  of  conscience  and  precepts  of  religion;  it  is  plain  that  the 
good  quality — satwa  guna— is  predominant  in  a man.— 37 

i 

N 

— The  chief  characteristic  of  passion  or  tamo  guna  is  desire  and  lust, 
that  of  activity  ov  rajo  guna  is  the  desire  of  amassing  wealth,  and  that 


Knowledge  & Ignorance,  Bondage  & Emancipation 


249 


of  the  good  quality  or  satwa  guna  is  devotion  to  religion  or  love  of 
virtue.— 38 

But  the  active  quality  is  better  than  the  dark,  and  the  good  is  the 
best  of  all. 

Moral  Consequences 

Now  we  proceed  to  describe  those  states  which  arc  attained  by 
the  soul  in  virtue  of  these  three  qualities  of  nature  Manu  XII.  40, 
42-50,  52. 

cTTHHi  nfir:  n 

— The  person  possessing  the  good  quality  becomes  a god  or  learned 
person;  he  who  is  endued  with  the  active  quality,  becomes  an  ordinary 
person;  and  he  who  has  the  dark  quality,  goes  to  a degraded  state.— 40 

I 

nfir:  it 

— They  who  arc  excessively  imbued  with  the  dark  nature,  pass  into  the 
life  of  plants,  worms,  insects,  fish,  serpents,  turtles,  cattle  and  brutes. 
—42 

f^^T:  nfir:  n 

— They  who  possess  the  mediocre  amount  of  the  dark  nature,  are  born 
in  the  world  as  elephants,  horses,  low  castes,  barbarians,  the  doers  of 
evil  deeds,  such  as  the  lion,  tiger,  boar,  or  hog.— 43 

i 

TWfn  ^ ’Tf^:  H 

c\ 

— They  who  possess  the  best  part  of  the  dark  nature,  come  into  the 
world  as  bards  who  compose  verses  to  panegyrise  people,  beautiful 
birds,  arrogant  persons  who  extol  themselves  to  get  ease,  murderous 
devils,  demons  of  bad  conduct,  i.e,,  drunkards  and  felons.— 44 

—They  who  possess  the  worst  part  of  the  active  nature,  incarnate  as 
swordsmen,  diggers  with  pickaxes,  mariners,  actors,  acrobats,  gym- 
nasts, armed  servants  and  topers. — 45 

TTat  I 

TT«-W  Tl5Rfy  »TffT:  II 

—They  who  possess  the  mediocre  activity  of  nature,  are  born  as  kings, 
priests  of  warrior  kings,  controvertialists,  ambassadors,  barristers, 
pleaders,  and  commanders  of  army. — 46 

’TfRTI  IJWI  ^ I 

?Rf  nfrt:  II 

—They  who  possess  the  best  part  of  the  active  nature,  are  born  as 
singers,  organists,  millionaires  servants  of  learned  persons,  fairies  and 
beauties. — 47 


250 


Satyarth  Prakash 


cTmr  f^srT  ^ ^mr:  \ 

ir  smr  »Tfcr:  n 

— The  possessors  of  the  first  degree  of  the  good  nature  are  born  devo- 
tees’ hermits,  monks,  vedic  scholars,  the  drivers  of  balloons,  astro- 
nomers, hygienists  or  the  preservers  of  the  body. — 48 

fSHhTT  »Tf^:  11 

— The  possessors  of  the  second  degree  of  the  good  nature  are  born 
sacrificers,  the  expounders  of  the  Vedas,  the  masters  of  the  Vedas, 
electricity,  and  chronology;  protectors,  savants,  professors  able  to 
accomplish  great  works. — 49 

^r^TT  ^ I 

nfcTmpWcTJT:  M 

— The  possessors  of  the  third  or  best  degree  of  the  good  nature  are 
born  as  the  seers  of  the  Vedas — Brahma,  the  masters  of  the  order  and 
laws  of  nature  and  architects  of  various  kinds  of  conveyance  and 
balloons,  Vishwasrija,  or  mechanicians,  divines,  geniuses,  occultists, 
and  masters  of  nature. — 50 

— The  ignorant  who  indulge  in  sensuous  pleasures  from  their  slavery 
to  the  senses,  and  who  abandoning  religion  commit  sins,  are  born  as 
vile  persons  and  suffer  horrible  misery. — 52 

Thus  persons  reap  the  various  kinds  of  fruits  according  to  the 
merits  and  demerits  of  the  actions  they  commit  under  the  working  of 
the  forces  of  the  three  natural  qualities  of  purity,  power  and  passion — 
satwa,  raja,  and  tama  gunas.  Those  who  are  to  obtain  salvation,  are 
above  the  influence  of  these  qualities  or  triune  power  of  nature  Being 
unaffected  by  the  influence  of  these  forces,  they  should  be  great  clair- 
voyants to  achieve  their  salvation.  For,  it  is  said  in  the  aphorisms  of 
the  Yoga  of  Patanjali, — 1,  2,  3, — 

Man  should  restrain  his  mind  from  the  works  of  power  and 
passion  raja  and  tama,  also  from  those  of  pure  good  nature — satwa, 
and  be  himself  of  pure  good  nature.  Then  he  should  also  overcome 
it  and  compose  his  mind,  that  is  to  say,  fix  it  on  God  and  employ  it 
in  doing  righteous  works.  This  kind  of  concentration  on  the  front 
part  of  the  head  is  called  the  checking  of  the  mind,  whose  wanderings 
on  all  sides  are  put  an  end  to.  When  the  mind  is  concentrated  and 
its  fickleness  is  checked,  it  is  lodged  in  the  presence  and  glory  of  God, 
the  all-seer.  Such  are  the  means  of  salvation  to  be  adopted  by  the 
student  of  salvation.  Also  the  aphorism  of  the  Sankhya  philosophy 
says.  I.  1, — 

— Salvation  is  the  greatest  effort  of  courage  to  get  rid  of  the  three 
kinds  of  suffering,  viz.,  (1)  adhyatmik  \ diseases  of  thebod^,  adhi- 
bhowtik:  social  evils:  (3)  adhidaivik:  natural  calamities,  i.  e.  excessive 


Knowledge  & Ignorance,  Bondage  & Emancipation  251 

rain,  excessive  heat,  excessive  cold,  the  fickleness  of  the  mind  and  the 
senses. 

We  now  pass  on  to  describe  the  rules  of  behaviour  and  proper 
and  improper  food  of  man. 


Summary 

Ignorance  is  said  to  be  the  cause  of  sutTering  from  death  and  knowledge  pro- 
cures immortality  or  salvation.  Yaj.  IV-  14.  Ignorance  is  to  believe  what  is  not 
true,  as  to  believe  the  world  to  be  stable.  Yoga  II.  5.  Knowledge  is  the  true  idea 
of  a thing,  as  the  soul  is  ever -lasting  Ignorance  begets  lying,  idolatry,  and  other 
sins,  and  so  produces  suffering.  Knowledge  directs  persons  to  righteous  works, 
such  as  telling  truth  and  the  like,  and  so  is  a means  of  salvation. 

Sinfulness  and  salvation  are  not  natural  but  acquired.  It  is  not  right  to 
believe  that  the  soul  is  naturally  sinful  or  depraved,  for  then  salvation  would  be 
impossible.  And  salvation  as  a sequence  of  knowledge  is  evidently  acquired. 

It  is  also  not  right  to  believe  that  the  soul  is  God  or  the  reflection  of  God. 
For,  God  is  infirlite  and  the  soul  is  finite  in  all  respects.  Regarding  the  soul  being 
the  light  of  God  encased  in  the  internal  sense,  suffice  it  to  say  that  it  makes  God 
divisible,  where  as  He  is  all-pervading.  Also,  ignorance  which  is  envinced  by  the 
soul,  would  be  attributed  to  God,  which  is  absurd.  Hence,  the  soul  is  distinct  from 
God,  to  live  in  whose  presence  is  salvation. 

Its  means  are  the  acquirement  of  knowledge,  company  of  good  men,  absten- 
tion from  vices,  and  practice  of  virtuous  deeds.  To  realise  the  nature  of  the  soul, 
it  is  necessary  to  know  what  are  called  the  Panch  Kosfi : 5 sheaths  which  make 
man,  v/z.,  1.  organic  system—the  skin,  muscles,  bones,  nerves,  arteries,  blood, 
semen;  2.  vital  system— inspiration  expiration,  digestion,  assimilation,  circulation; 
or  recuperation;  3.  animal  system — the  will,  consciousness,  articulation  (speech), 
locomotion,  prehension,  depletion,  generation  or  reproduction;  4.  intellectual 
system— the  understanding,  memory,  the  faculties  of  seeing,  hearing,  smelling, 
tasting,  touching  or  feeling;  5 spiritual  system— love,  cheerfulriess,  joy,  happiness. 
The  3 states  are  waking,  dreaming,  and  slumbering.  The  3 bodies  are  the  physical, 
elemental  and  natural.  The  4th  state  is  called  the  turiya  in  which  the  soul  lives  in 
salvation.  It  is  perfect  liberty.  Wishing  to  hear,  she  assumes  the  power  of  hearing, 
and  so  on.  She  is  thus  distinct  from  all  these  states  and  God. 

Other  means  of  salvation  are  right  judgement,  six-fold  merit— contentment, 
self-control,  indifference,  forbearance,  faith,  contemplation.  Sincere  desire  for 
salvation,  right  knowledge  of  the  Deity,  attention  to  spiritual  teaching,  reflecting, 
experimenting  and  realising  what  is  taught,  are  also  necessary. 

The  4 kinds  of  salvation  of  mythology,  namely,  salokya:  residence  in  God’s 
region,  samipya:  living  with  God  as  a younger  brother,  .•  becoming  as 

God,  sayujya : absorption  into  God,  are  not  proper.  They  are  already  found  in  the 
world,  as  God  pervades  all.  Absorption  is  not  salvation  but  annihilation. 

Salvation  may  not  be  effected  in  one  life.  So  the  soul  incarnates,  many  times 
to  acquire  perfection.  It  is  not  right  to  believe  in  one  life  of  the  soul  For,  the 
unequal  distribution  of  happiness  seen  in  the  world  must  be  the  consequence  of 
good  or  bad  deeds  done  by  the  soul  in  her  pre  existences.  If  not.  God  will  be 
unjust  to  make  some  happy  and  others  miserable.  But  God  is  just.  So  the  present 
IS  the  result  of  the  past  life.  Retributive  justice  is  strictly  maintained  in  God’s 
kingdom. 

Therefore,  a person  should  develop  its  good  qualities,  the  other  two  kings  of 
qualities  being  active  and  passive.  These  qualities — satwa,  raja,  lama — are  found 
in  all  creatures  and  their  operation  leads  to  different  fates. 

The  duration  of  salvation  is  one  aeon  or  prantakala  (Mundak  Upanishat  III. 
ii.  6.)  containing  311,040,000,003,000  human  years,  after  which  the  soul  begins  her 
march  in  eternity. 

Those  souls  who  don’t  try  for  this  happiness,  repeatedly  undergo  the  sufferings 
of  birth  and  death  in  flesh. 


Chapter  X 


THE  PROPRIETY  & IMPROPRIETY  OF  CONDUCT 
AND  PROPER  & IMPROPER  FOOD 


Good  behaviour  is  the  doing  of  righteous  works,  decency,  humility, 
the  company  of  good  people  and  love  of  acquiring  right  know- 
ledge; and  its  opposite  is  called  misbehaviour.  Says  Manu, 
Chapter  II,— 

—It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  whatever  is  constantly  believed  in 
and  acted  upon  by  wise  men  free  from  partiality  and  hatred,  and  has 
the  consent  of  their  conscience,  is  the  religion  which  should  be  believed 
in  and  acted  upon.— I 

II 

—Excessive  selfishness  and  absolute  unselfihness  are  not  the  best  things 
in  the  world.  For  the  knowledge  of  the  Vedas  and  the  performance 
of  duties  prescribed  by  the  Vedas  are  accomplished  only  when  one  has 
a will  to.— 2 

t iISIl:  I 

—If  a man  says  that  he  has  no  desire  and  no  motive  or  he  may  be  so, 
he  can  never  be  so,  for  all  works,  viz.,  sacrifice,  veracity,  yama,  niyama* 
and  other  virtues  are  the  outcome  of  desire.— 3 

WWW  fWBTT  ^ I 

jrafi  ii 

—For  the  movements  of  the  hands,  feet,  eyes,  volatility  of  the  will  arc 
effected  by  desire  or  motive.  If  there  be  no  desire,  there  can  be  no 
opening  and  closing  of  the  eyes.— 4 

WR5WW  W II 

— Therefore,  the  prospects  of  all  the  Vedas,  the  ordinances  of  Manu 
the  teachings  of  the  scriptures  written  by  the  Rishis  or  seers,  the  ex- 
amples of  righteous  persons  and  those  works  which  satisfy  the  con- 
science that  is,  carry  no  shame,  fear,  or  doubt,  should  all  be  sincerely 
followed.— 6 

* Mercy,  truth,  honesty,  chastity , and  humility  arc  Yamas,  Niyamas  are  purity, 
contentment,  austerity,  reading  of  scriptures,  and  faith  in  God. 


Proper  and  Improper  Food 


253 


Look  here,  when  a person  wishes  to  tell  a lie,  commit  a theft, 
and  other  vices,  there  surely  arise  in  his  heart  fear,  doubt,  and  shame. 
So  such  works  should  not  be  done. 

—A  person  should  embrace  that  religion  which  is  in  perfect  accord 
with  all  the  scriptures  or  philosophies,  Vedas,  examples  of  the  right- 
eous, the  conscience,  after  a thorough  consideration  of  it  with  the 
light  of  knowledge,  and  testing  it  by  the  commandments  of  the  Reve- 
lation and  the  consent  of  the  conscience. — 8 

— For,  the  man  who  acts  upon  the  religion  taught  by  the  Vedas  and 
by  the  law  uncontradicted  by  the  Vedas,  gets  fame  in  this  world  and 
the  highest  felicity  in  the  next  after  his  death. — 9 

All  the  works  to  be  performed  and  omitted  should  be  ascertain- 
ed with  the  help  of  the  Shruti  (Revelation)  which  is  the  Vedas,  and 
the  Smriti  or  Dharma  shastras  (sacred  law). 

Religious  Works 

^ fgrir:  \ 

— The  man  who  disrespects  the  Vedas  and  other  sacred  scriptures 
founded  upon  them,  should  be  excommunicated  by  the  responsible 
great  men,  for  he  that  slanders  the  Vedas,  is  an  atheist. — 11 

« 

srij:  ?r«'>nT  ii 

— The  four  characteristics  which  indicate  religion,  are  the  obedience 
of  the  precepts  of  the  Vedas,  the  injunctions  of  the  Jaw,  the  example 
of  good  men,  and  benevolent  works  guided  by  the  conscience, — 12 

W fitr^TRTRHHi  StRm  'TTR  M 

— He  who  is  not  given  to  the  avarice  of  worldly  things  and  to  lust  or 
indulgence  in  sensuous  pleasures,  alone  succeeds  in  acquiring  the 
knowledge  of  religion.  The  Vedas  are  the  highest  authority  on  religion 
to  them  who  desire  to  learn  religion. — 13 

—It  is  proper  for  the  people  that  they  should  perform  the  religious 
ceremonies,  such  as  Nisheka  and  others  of  the  children  of  the  Brah- 
manas,  Kshatriyas  and  Vaishyas  according  to  the  sacred  rites  prescrib- 
ed by  the  Vedas,  which  sanctify  them  here  and  hereafter.— 26 


254 


Satyarth  Prakash 


— The  ceremony  of  tonsure,  the  shaving  or  clipping  of  hair,  should 
be  performed  at  the  age  of  16  in  the  case  of  a Brahmana,  at  22  in 
that  of  a Kshatriya,  at  24  in  that  of  a Vaishya.— 65 

Hair  and  Bread 

In  other  words,  they  should  always  shave  the  beard,  mustaches 
and  scalp  excent  the  crown  lock  after  this  ceremony.  They  should 
never  be  kept  afterwards.  But  the  people  in  cold  climates  should 
consult  their  convenience  as  to  keeping  hair.  In  a hot  country,  all 
hair  not  excluding  the  crown  lock,  should  be  shaved  or  cut,  for  the 
hair  on  the  head  produces  much  heat  in  the  body.  It  also  dwarfs  the 
understanding.  Eating  is  not  well  done  from  keeping  the  mustaches 
and  beard,  and  the  refuse  of  food  is  also  retained  in  the  hair  on  the 
lips  and  chin. 

— The  chief  duty  of  man  is  to  try  to  subdue  the  senses  which  lead  the 
mind  to  sensuous  pleasures,  just  as  a charioteer  restrains  his  horses  to 
drive  them  on  a proper  road.  In  like  manner,  he  should  obtain  con- 
trol over  them  to  check  them  from  going  to  a vicious,  and  lead  them 
on  to  a virtuous  course. — Manu  II.  88. 

— For,  a man  surely  incurs  blame  by  allowing  his  senses  to  indulge  in 
luxury  and  irreligion.  When  he  overcomes  them  and  employs  them  in 
righteousness,  he  obtains  success  wished-for. — ib.  93. 

^ ^5  mm  i 

— It  is  certain  that  a fire  burns  the  more,  the  more  fuel,  clarified 
butter,  we  put  into  it.  In  like  manner,  desire  is  never  satisfied  by 
indulgence,  rather  it  is  increased.  Therefore,  a man  should  never  be 
luxurious. —ib.  94. 

— The  man  who  has  not  subdued  his  senses,  is  called  vicious,  vipra- 
dushta.  Such  a man  of  unsubdued  senses  meets  with  no  success  in 
the  knowledge  of  the  Vedas,  in  renunciation,  in  sacrifices,  in  yamas 
or  five  preliminary  virtues,  and  in  the  practice  of  religion.  A man  of 
the  subdued  senses  and  religious  mind  alone  gets  success  in  all  of 
them.— ib.  97. 

^ mm  ^ \ 

> NON 

— So  a man  should  get  his  five  cognitive  senses  and  five  active  senses 
and  the  will,  the  1 lih  sense,  in  his  power;  keep  the  body  in  health  by 
means  of  moderation  in  eating  and  drinking  and  the  practice  of  Yoga 
or  deep-breathing;  and  be  the  master  of  all  the  objects  with  righteous- 
ness.— ib.  100. 


Proper  and  Improper  Food 


255 


^ ^ H^c^TT  ^ ?TT:  I 

^ fc^frr  n 

— That  man  has  subjugated  his  senses,  who  is  not  pleased  on  hearing 
his  own  praise,  who  does  not  feel  sorry  on  hearing  his  slander,  who 
feels  no  ease  on  touching  soft  things,  who  never  feels  pain  on  falling 
into  trouble,  who  neither  feels  pleasure  on  seeing  beautiful  things;  nor 
is  sorry  when  he  sees  ugly  objects,  who  is  neither  joyous  on  tasting 
delicious  food  nor  sad  on  eating  unpalatable  food,  who  takes  neither 
delight  in  smelling  odour  nor  offence  in  scenting  stench. — ib.  98. 

\ 

C N €\  C 

— He  never  answers  a question  without  being  asked  or  when  asked  by 
an  unjust  and  hypocritical  man.  Before  such  people,  a wise  man  should 
hold  his  peace.  But  he  should  discourse  before  sincere  and  desirous 
persons,  though  not  asked. — ib.  110. 

Sources  of  Honour 

tTqjfq  qrVqt  W 

— First,  wealth;  second,  relatives,  family  or  tribe;  third,  age;  fourth, 
good  works;  and  fifth,  the  best  knowledge,  these  five  things  are  the 
source  of  honour;  but  family  is  better  than  wealth,  age  than  family, 
good  works  than  age,  learning  than  good  works;  /.e.,  each  of  the 
things  here  enumerated  is  better  than  the  one  preceding  it. — ib.  136. 

5q5ft  qqfir  q qm:  fqm  \ 

qFTfqcqrf:  g qfqqq  M 

— A man  may  be  a hundred  years  old,  but  without  learning  and  spiri- 
tual knowledge  he  is  but  a child.  But  he  who  imparts  spiritual  know- 
ledge and  secular  information,  though  young,  should  be  revered  as  an 
old  man;  for,  all  scriptures  regard  an  ignorant,  illiterate  and  worldly 
man  as  a child,  and  a learned  and  wise  man  as  a father  — ib.  153. 

q ^jqqq  fq#T  q q^qfq:  \ 

qq  qtsqqiq:  q q>  q^jq  II 

— A man  who  has  seen  many  years,  whose  hair  is  turned  grey,  who 
has  much  money,  or  who  has  a large  family,  does  not  become  a res- 
pectable or  great  man;  but  it  is  a settled  rule  with  sages  and  philoso- 
phers that  he  is  an  elder  who  is  greater  in  secular  and  spiritual  know- 
ledge among  them. — ib.  154. 

fqqiqi  qiqqt  ^fqqiqT  g qWq:  I 

qqqtqf  qpqqqqj  ^T^qqi  II 

— A Brahman  becomes  respectable  from  learning  and  wisdom,  a Ksha- 
triya  from  strength  and  valour,  a Vaishya  from  wealth  or  money,  and 
a Shudra  from  old  age. — ib.  155. 

q ^ qqfq  qf^  ftlT:  I 

jft  q gqpqqtqrq^q  ^qi:  qqfq^  II 


256 


Satyarth  Prakash 


— Grey  hair  does  not  entitle  a man  to  the  respect  of  all,  but  the  learned 
look  upon  him  as  worthy  of  respect  who  is  learned,  though  young. 
— ib.  156. 

’g;n:  i 

— He  who  is  illiterate,  is  like  a wooden  elephant  or  a leathery  deer. 
In  like  manner,  an  ignorant  man  is  a human  being  in  name  only  in 
the  world. — ib.  157. 

^ CN  -S 

— A man  should  become  learned  by  mastering  knowledge,  be  right- 
eous, and  always  teach  truth  for  the  good  of  all  sentient  beings  out  of 
love  and  without  enmity.  Blessed  is  he  who  uses  sweet  and  persua- 
sive language  in  his  teaching  so  that  his  teaching  of  truth  promotes 
virtue  and  drives  vice  away  from  among  the  people. — ib.  159. 

Behaviour 

A person  should  take  bath  daily,  keep  clothes  clean,  take  pure 
food  and  drink,  live  in  a clean  ventilated  place;  for,  the  cleanliness  of 
these  necessaries  lead  to  the  purity  of  thoughts  and  the  health  of  the 
body,  which  in  their  turn  conduce  to  courage.  Cleanliness  should  be 
carried  to  that  point  which  removes  all  dirt,  filth  and  stench. 

^ ll  -Manu  r.  108 

The  practice  of  veracity  and  other  virtues  is  the  behaviour  taught 
by  the  Vedas  and  codes  of  laws. 

m ^ ^ n - Yaj.  XVl.  15. 

I ~Alh.  XI,  xv.  17. 

i i ^ i 

6 C 

II  —Tail.  Pr.  7,  An.  II. 

— The  service  of  the  father,  mother,  teacher  and  guest  is  called  wor- 
ship. The  chief  duty  of  man  is  to  do  what  is  beneficial  to  the  world 
and  to  cease  to  do  what  is  injurious.  The  company  of  atheists,  cheats, 
ungrateful  persons,  liars,  selfish  persons,  fraudulent  persons,  deceiv- 
ers, and  other  wicked  fellows,  should  be  studiously  avoided.  The 
company  of  truth-speakers,  pious  men,  and  the  lovers  of  the  good  of 
the  people  should  be  always  sought.  It  constitutes  good  behaviour. 

Travel  in  Foriegn  Countries  and  Voyages 

Q. — Is  the  character  of  the  inhabitants  of  Aryavarta  spoiled  by 
going  to  foreign  countries  ? 

A. — This  opinion  is  quite  false,  for  character  consists  of  internal 
and  external  purity,  veracity  and  the  practice  of  similar  virtues.  So 
wherever  a man  practises  them,  he  will  be  a good  character,  and  he 
can  never  be  fallen.  But  if  a man  misbehaves  himself  even  in  India, 
he  wiJJ  become  an  apostate  to  religion.  Says  the  Mahabharat,  Shanti 
Parva,  Ch.  327  : — 


257 


Proper  and  Improper  Food 

Foriegn  Travels 

i m ^ \ 

— It  is  a dialogue  between  Vyasa  and  Shuka  on  the  nature  of  salva- 
tion. («)  Once  upon  a time  Vyasa  with  his  son  and  pupil  Shuka  sojo- 
urned in  Patala,  which  is  now  called  America.  Shuka  asked  his  father 
a question,  if  that  much  was  spiritual  knowledge,  or  if  it  is  more  than 
that  Vyasa  returned  no  answer,  as  he  had  already  dwelt  upon  it.  To 
give  him  another  authority,  he  told  his  son  to  go  to  Mithilapuri  and  put 
the  same  question  to  King  Janak  there,  who  would  answer  it  satis- 
factorily. Thereupon  Shuka  started  for  Mithilapuri.  He  passed 
through  Europe,  Meru,*  and  Indiaf  and  came  to  China.  Crossing  the 
Himalayas,  he  arrived  at  Mithilapuri.  (b)  Also,  Shri  Krishna  and 
Arjuna  went  to  Patala  (America)  by  an  Ashwatari,  which  is  a name 
for  a steamer,  and  thence  brought  sage  Uddalaka  to  the  sacrifice 
celebrated  by  Emperor  Yudhishtira.  (c)  Dhritarashtra  was  married  to 
a princess  of  Gandhara,  now  called  Kandahar  in  Afghanistan,  (d) 
Madri,  the  wife  of  Pandu,  was  the  daugher  of  a king  of  Iran  (Persia). 
Arjuna  was  married  to  Ulopi,  the  daughter  of  a king  of  Patala,  which 
is  now  called  America,  (e)  If  the  people  did  not  go  to  foreign  coun- 
tries and  islands,  how  could  such  things  come  to  pass? 


Sea  Voyage 

The  tax  on  a ship  going  to  sea  mentioned  in  the  code  of  Manu 
shows  that  voyages  were  made  to  foreign  lands  from  Aryavarta. 

When  Emperor  Yudhishthira  held  his  royal  feast — rajasuya  yajna, 
Bhima,  Arjuna,  Nakula  and  Sahadev  went  to  the  four  quarters  to 
invite  the  kings  of  the  world  to  it.  Had  they  thought  foreign  travel 
to  be  a sin,  they  would  never  have  gone  on  it. 

Thus  the  people  of  Aryavarta  of  old  made  journey  to  all  the 
foreign  countries  of  the  world  for  the  sake  of  commerce,  government 
affairs,  and  pleasure  trips.  The  present  dread  of  the  destruction  of 
purity  and  religion  from  foreign  travel  is  due  to  ignorant  persons’ 
misleading  and  the  spread  of  ignorance  only.  The  men  who  do  not 
hesitate  to  journey  in  foreign  lands  and  islands,  becin  to  improve  by 
mixing  with  many  kinds  of  foreign  people  and  by  observing  their 
manners  and  customs,  and  to  be  bold  and  brave  by  promoting  their 
commerce  and  government.  They  acquire  great  wealth  by  their 


♦The  country  lying  to  the  N.  N.  W.  of  the  Himalayas  was  called  Hari  varsha 
from  kari  meaning  a monkey.  The  people  of  that  country  now  have  ruddy  face 
like  that  of  a monkey  and  green  eyes.  This  country  is  now  called  Europe,  the 
Harivarsha  of  Sanscrit.  But  I think  Hari  varsha  is  derived  from  Hari : Krishna 
or  Hercules,  and  Varsha  : abode,  i e.  the  abode  of  the  descendants  of  Krishna  or 
Hercules.  (See  Tod.— Ed.) 

tThe  country  of  the  Hunas,  probably  Hungary,  the  house  of  the  Huns. 


258 


Satyarth  Prakash 


readiness  to  give  up  vices  and  to  adopt  useful  customs.  Strange,  the 
people  don’t  consider  themselves  to  be  polluted  and  their  religion 
destroyed  by  going  to  fallen  v^omen  and  prostitutes  born  of  wicked 
people;  but  they  regard  it  a pollution  and  contamination  to  have  inter- 
course with  the  great  men  of  the  world  ! If  it  is  not  a result  of  igno- 
rance what  is  it?  Of  course,  it  is  true  that  the  body,  semen,  and  its 
other  tissues  of  flesh-eaters  and  drunkards  being  putrid  and  offensive, 
it  is  feared  rightly  that  the  Aryas  may  not  be  degraded  from  contact 
with  them.  But  there  is  neither  pollution  nor  sin  to  learn  work  and 
virtues  from  them.  Also,  there  is  no  harm  to  imitate  their  good 
qualities  and  to  discard  their  evils,  such  as  drinking  and  other  vices. 
Since  the  ignorant  believe  it  to  be  a sin  to  touch  or  see  them,  they 
cannot  fight  with  them;  for,  fighting  necessitates  seeing  and  touching. 
With  good  people,  to  relinquish  improper  love,  hatred,  injustice,  lying 
and  other  vice;  and  to  cultivate  absence  of  enmity,  love,  benevolence, 
good  nature  and  gentility,  constitutes  good  behaviour  and  good  char- 
acter. Also,  they  should  bear  in  mind  that  religion  is  concerned  with 
their  soul  and  their  duties.  When  we  do  good  works,  travelling  in 
distant  and  foreign  lands  and  islands  cannot  impute  any  evil  to  us 
Evil  is  produced  from  the  commission  of  sin.  Of  course,  it  is  in- 
dispensably necessary  to  have  faith  in  the  religion  taught  by  the  Vedas 
and  to  learn  the  refutation  of  false  religions,  so  that  we  may  not  be 
misled  by  any  one  to  believe  in  superstition.  Can  there  ever  be  any 
progress  in  the  country  without  ruling  in  and  trading  with  foreign 
countries  and  archipelagoes  ? There  can  be  nothing  but  poverty  and 
misery  when  the  people  do  not  go  for  trade  beyond  the  bounds  of 
their  country  to  places  where  foreigners  rule  and  trade.  The  popish 
priests  think  that  if  they  teach  the  people  and  allow  them  to  travel 
in  foreign  countries,  they  will  become  wise  and  so  will  not  fall  into 
the  trap  of  their  pious  frauds,  which  will  take  off  their  honour  and 
livelihood.  So  they  have  raised  difficulties  in  eating,  drinking  and 
living,  that  they  may  not  venture  to  go  to  foreign  countries.  But  the 
people  should  make  it  a rule  with  them  never  to  take  flesh  and  wine 
on  any  account  whatever.  Has  it  not  been  ascertained  by  all  the  wise 
men  that  the  custom  among  kings  and  warriors  of  taking  food  in  a 
chowka,  or  a place  scrubbed,  with  cow-dung  or  mud,  even  at  war 
times  and  cooking  it  with  their  own  hands,  is  certainly  a cause  of 
their  defeat  ? But  the  good  conduct  of  the  warrior  caste  in  a battle 
is  to  eat  bread  and  drink  water  with  one  hand  and  to  kill  enemies  with 
the  other  while  still  on  a horse,  elephant,  or  in  a chariot  or  on  foot. 
The  right  conduct  of  a warrior  is  to  conquer  and  the  bad  conduct  is 
his  defeat.  It  is  this  tomfoolery  of  these  ignorant  people  that  they 
have  lost  independence,  ease,  wealth,  government,  knowledge,  and 
courage  by  being  over-squeamish  in  eating  and  drinking,  and  are  now 
sitting  idle  with  folded  hands.  They  are  anxious  to  get  some  money 
to  buy  their  food  with  and  to  cook  and  eat  it.  But  their  anxiety  is 
fruitless.  In  sweeping  their  dining  spot,  called  chowka,  they  have, 
as  it  were,  swept  Aryavarta  of  every  good  thing  and  ruined  it.  It  is 
necessary  that  the  place  where  they  take  food,  should  be  washed, 
smoothed  with  cow-dung  or  mud,  swept,  and  cleared  of  all  rubbish 
and  debris.  They  should  not  keep  their  kitchen  dirty  like  the  Maho- 
medans  and  Christians. 


Proper  and  Improper  Food 


259 


Two  Kinds  of  Food  Preparations 

Q, — What  are  sakhari  and  nikhari  menus  ? 

A. — Sakhari  is  that  food  preparation  which  is  cooked  in  water 
alone,  and  nikhari  is  one  which  is  cooked  in  clarified  butter  and  milk. 
Other  names  of  food  preparations  in  water  are  chokhi,  pakki — pure, 
baked.  This  custom  is  also  a humbug  set  up  by  the  popish  cheats. 
Since  it  is  delicious  to  eat  that  food  and  to  drink  that  beverage  in 
which  much  milk  and  clarified  butter  are  used,  and  since  a great  deal 
of  oleaginous  food  stuff  is  easily  thrown  into  the  stomach,  these 
fellows  have  laid  this  kind  of  share.  Setting  this  foolish  distinction 
aside,  pakka  is  that  food  which  is  cooked  over  fire  or  matured  in  time, 
and  kacheha  is  one  which  is  not  so.  It  is  also  always  right  to  say 
that  cooked  or  ripe  food  should  be  taken,  but  not  uncooked  or  un- 
ripe, for  gram  and  other  cereals  and  fruits  are  eaten  uncooked. 

Q. — Should  the  twice  born  or  regenerate  Brahmins,  Kshatriyas 
and  Vaishyas  eat  the  food  cooked  by  themselves,  or  should  they  eat 
it  when  cooked  by  the  Shudras  ? 

A. — They  should  cat  food  cooked  by  the  Shudras,  for,  the 
women  and  men  of  twice  born  castes  should  be  engaged  in  teaching, 
conducting  the  affairs  of  government,  tending  cattle,  cultivating  land, 
and  commercial  enterprises.  They  should  not  eat,  except  in  the  time 
of  misfortune,  out  of  the  vessels  of  a Shudra,  or  take  food  prepared 
at  his  house.  Here  is  an  authority  for  it  : 

— This  is  an  aphorism  of  the  Apastamba.  The  Shudras,  i.e  , igno- 
rant women  and  men  should  serve  in  the  families  of  the  Aryas  to 
cook  food  and  to  do  other  menial  works.  But  they  should  keep 
their  person  and  clothes  scrupulously  clean.  When  cooking  food  at 
the  houses  of  the  Aryas,  they  should  bandage  their  mouth  to  prevent 
the  salival  particles  and  outbreath  from  getting  mixed  up  with  food. 
They  should  shave  and  pare  nails  every  eight  days,  cook  food  after 
bathing,  and  eat  after  the  Aryas  have  taken  their  food. 

Q. — When  the  eating  of  oil-cooked  food  touched  by  the  Shudra 
is  condemned,  how  can  it  be  eaten  when  cooked  by  him  ? 

A. — This  belief  is  purely  imaginary  and  false;  for,  they  have,  as 
it  were,  eaten  food  prepared  by  all  the  world  and  which  is  refuse,  who 
cat  the  molasses,  sugar,  clarified  butter,  milk  preparations,  flour,  vege- 
tables, fruits  and  roots.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  Shudras,  shoe-makers, 
sweapers,  Mahomedans,  Christians,  and  similar  other  peoples,  mow 
sugar-canes  in  the  field,  clean  them,  and  squeeze  them  in  a press  to 
extract  juice.  The  work  in  this  process  with  hands  unwashed  after 
going  to  stool  and  making  water.  They  carry  these  sugar-canes,  and 
put  them  in  a press.  They  often  suck  half  a sugar-cane  and  throw 
the  other  half  into  the  press.  When  heating  the  juice,  they  cook  their 
bread  in  it.  In  making  sugar,  they  rub  it  with  old  shoes,  whose  soles 
are  soiled  with  filth,  urine,  dung  and  dirt.  These  people  adulterate 
milk  with  water  of  their  unclean  pots  also  used  for  clarified  butter  at 
their  houses.  Aft&r  grinding  corn,  they  gather  flour  with  unclean 


260 


Satyarth  Prakash 


hands.  The  drops  of  their  sweat  fall  into  the  flour.  Similar  other 
unclean  things  happen  in  these  preparations.  It  is  also  the  case  with 
fruits,  roots,  and  tubers.  When  such  things  are  eaten,  they  have,  as 
it  were,  eaten  food  at  the  hands  of  all  other  people. 

Q, — There  is  no  objection  to  eat  fruits,  tubers,  juice  and  others 
prepared  out  of  sight. 

A. — Well,  will  you  eat  the  food  prepared  by  sweepers  or  the 
Mahomedans  in  a different  place  from  yours  ? If  you  say,  no,  then 
the  food  prepared  out  of  sight  also  becomes  objectionable  to  be  taken. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  you  Aryas  are  likely  to  be  afterwards  influenced 
with  the  vice  of  kreophagy,  drinking,  and  other  evil  habits  from  your 
eating  at  the  hands  of  the  Mahomedans,  Christians  and  other  flesh- 
eaters  and  drinkers.  But  these  appears  to  be  no  harm  in  sharing  food 
with  one  another  among  all  the  Aryas.  It  is  very  difficult  to  make 
any  progress  without  the  unity  of  religion,  fellowship  in  weal  and 
woe  or  partnership  in  profit  and  loss,  and  mutual  sympathy  in  joy 
and  sorrow.  But  the  partaking  of  food  at  the  same  table  with  ail 
people  can  not  alone  mend  matters.  Unless  the  evil  customs  be  given 
up  and  good  ones  be  adopted  instead,  there  can  be  no  real  progress, 
but  rather  positive  evils  will  result.  The  cause  of  foreign  governments 
in  Aryavarta  is  internal  disunion,  difference  in  religion,  the  disuse  of 
the  institution  of  chastity  or  Brahmacharya,  the  absence  of  the 
acquisition  and  impartation  of  knowledge,  early  marriage  without  the 
parties  approval,  luxury,  lying  and  other  vices,  the  ignorance  of  the 
Vedas  and  other  vicious  practices.  When  brothers  light  with  each 
other,  a foreign  third  party  sets  itself  up  for  an  arbitrator.  Have  you 
forgotten  the  events  of  the  Mahabharata  (great  war)  which  took 
place  5,000  years  ago  ? See,  all  the  men  that  joined  in  that  great 
war,  took  their  food  and  drink  in  chariots  at  the  time  of  battles. 
Disunion  and  mutual  dissensions  entirely  destroyed  the  Kauravas, 
Pandavas  and  Yadavas. 

What  is  done  is  done,  but  pity  it  is  that  the  same  diseases  still 
afflicts  us  to  our  great  misfortune.  It  is  not  known  when  this  dread- 
ful devil  will  leave  us  for  good  and  all.  Will  it  deprive  the  Aryas  of 
all  comforts  and  sink  them  into  the  ocean  of  misery  to  die  like  dogs  ? 
The  Aryas  still  add  to  their  trouble  by  following  the  wicked  path  of 
the  mean,  wicked  Duryodhana,  the  murderer  of  his  own  relatives  and 
miner  of  his  own  country.  Lord  have  mercy  upon  us,  that  this  dire 
disease  be  annihilated  among  us  the  Aryas  ! 

Prescribed  and  forbidden  food  is  of  two  kinds,  namely,  (1)  one 
sanctioned  by  the  law  or  Dharma  Shastra,  (2)  that  which  is  allowed 
by  medical  books.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  law  says  : 

^ l— Manu,  V.  5. 

— The  twice  born  (Brahmins,  Kshatriyas,  and  Vaishyas)  should  not 
eat  the  vegetables,  fruits,  roots  and  other  food  stuffs  produced  from 
the  manure  of  filth,  urine  and  other  dirty  things. 


Proper  and  Improper  Food 


261 


^ I— Manu,  11.  177. 

— Those  things  should  never  be  used  which  mar  the  intellect,  such  as 
many  kinds  of  intoxicants,  hemp  leaves— gt?  Ay  a,  opium  and  other 
drugs. 

They  should  not  eat  decomposed  food,  spoiled,  stinking  or  in 
any  way  loathsome  or  not  well  prepared.  They  should  not  take  food 
at  the  hands  of  barbarians,  eating  flesh  and  drinking  wine,  and  whose 
body  is  stocked  with  the  noxious  particles  of  wine  and  flesh. 

Usefulness  of  the  Cow 

They  should  neither  kill  nor  allow  others  to  kill  useful  animals. 
For  instance,  one  cow  gives  m»lk,  clarified  butter  and  calves,  both 
males  and  females,  to  such  an  extent  as  her  single  generation  sustains 
475,600  persons  with  milk  and  food.  To  explain.  Some  cows  give 
20  sers  or  40  lbs  of  milk  and  others  but  2 sers  or  4 lbs  every  day. 
Then  the  average  supply  of  milk  per  cow  will  be  1 1 sers  per  diem. 
Also,  some  cows  give  milk  for  18  months  and  others  but  6.  Then 
the  average  time  of  milk  supply  per  cow  will  be  12  months.  Now, 
one  cow  gives  so  much  milk  during  her  life-time  as  to  satisfy  24,960 
persons  at  one  time.  She  brings  forth  6 bulls  and  6 heifer.  If  two  of 
them  die,  they  leave  10  behind.  So  the  whole-life  milk  supply  of  5 
heifers  will  satisfy  124,800  persons  at  one  time.  The  remaining  5 
bulls  can  produce  at  least  5,000  maunds  of  grain,  which  will  feed 
25,000  persons  at  one  time,  if  a person  cats  f ser  or  1 4 lb  a day  at 
average.  Now,  both  milk  and  grain  together,  produced  by  a cow  and 
a bull  during  their  life,  will  feed  374,800  persons  at  one  time.  There- 
fore, one  cow  in  one  generation  will  support  475,600  persons  at  one 
time. 


If  these  generations  be  multiplied,  innumerable  people  will  be 
fed  by  this  useful  animal.  Besides  tilling  lands,  bulls  do  a great  deal 
of  service  to  human  beings  by  driving  carts  and  chariots  and  by  carry- 
ing burden.  The  cow  is  very  useful  as  a milch  animal.  Also,  the 
butfalo  is  as  useful  as  the  bullock.  Moreover,  the  milk  of  cows  and 
its  carified  butter  conduce  more  to  the  health  of  the  brain  than  the 
milk  of  the  buffalo.  It  is  on  this  account  that  the  Aryas  consider 
the  cow  to  be  the  most  useful  animal  to  mankind.  Other  learned 
people  will  also  be  of  this  opinion. 

The  milk  of  a goat  during  its  life-time  can  feed  so  many  as 
25,920  persons  at  a time.  In  like  manner,  the  elephant,  the  horse, 
the  camel,  the  sheep,  the  ass  and  the  like  animals  are  very  serviceable 
to  man.  Those  who  kill  these  animals,  may  be  regarded  as  the  mur- 
ders of  all.  See,  when  the  Aryas  ruled  over  the  land,  these  beneficant 
animals  were  not  slaughtered.  Then  the  people  of  Aryavarta  and 
other  countries  of  the  world  lived  very  happily;  for,  the  abundance  of 
milk,  clarified  butter,  bulls  and  other  cattle  produced  plenty  of  corn, 
milk  and  other  food  stuffs  for  the  comfort  of  all.  But  ever  since  the 
carnivorous  and  intemperate  foreigners  who  slaughter  the  cow  and 


262  Satyarth  Prakash 

other  animals  established  their  rule  in  the  country,  the  misery  of  the 
people  has  been  steadily  on  the  increase;  for, 

HC?  55%  5T  5m  n— Chanakya  X.  13. 

— There  can  be  no  flowers  and  fruits  of  a tree  when  its  root  is  cut  olT. 

Q. — If  nobody  kill  animals,  tigers  and  other  beasts  of  prey  will 
be  so  numerous  as  to  destroy  and  devour  all  the  cows  and  other  do- 
mestic animals  and  make  your  benevolent  exertions  fruitless. 

A. — It  is  the  duty  of  rulers  to  punish  injurious  animals  and 
men  nay,  to  kill  them,  if  needed. 

Q. — Then  should  their  flesh  be  thrown  away  when  killed  ? 

A.— It  may  be  either  thrown  away  or  given  to  carnivorous 
animal  to  eat.  It  may  rather  be  burnt.  If  a flesh-eater  eats  it,  it  does 
no  harm  to  the  world  at  large;  but  the  nature  of  that  man  will  become 
cruel,  and  it  is  possible  he  will  turn  a murderer  in  course  of  time. 


Righteous  Food 

It  is  improper  to  eat  or  use  what  is  got  by  harm,  wrong,  theft, 
ungratefulness,  fraud,  deception,  and  other  vices.  But  it  is  proper  to 
cat  and  cnjo>  what  is  obtained  without  doing  harm  to  any  being,  and 
with  righteousness.  Also,  rice,  wheat  and  other  cereals,  fruits,  roots, 
tubers,  nuts,  milk,  butter,  sugar  and  other  wholesome  articles  of  food 
which  promote  health,  remove  disease,  and  improve  the  brain, 
strength,  valor,  and  age,  should  be  taken  in  regulated  quantity  at 
proper  time  after  scientifically  preparing  and  cooking  them  as  the 
case  may  be.  All  the  articles  of  food  which  do  not  agree  with  one’s 
nature  and  are  sickening  in  any  way,  should  be  avoided.  But  those 
foods  which  agree  with  one’s  temper,  should  be  taken;  they  arc  their 
appointed  food. 


Eating  Together 

Q, — Is  there  any  harm  in  eating  together  out  of  the  same  dish  ? 

A. — Yes,  there  is  harm  in  doing  so;  for,  the  nature  and  temper 
of  one  person  do  not  agree  with  those  of  another.  Thus,  a healthy 
man  eating  with  a leper  or  any  person  suflering  from  a contagious 
disease,  becomes  infected,  and  his  blood  is  spoiled.  It  is  harmful  to 
eat  together  with  all  persons,  and  there  is  no  good  in  it.  Hence,  says, 
Manu,  11  56, — 

— The  refuse  of  food  should  not  be  given  to  others,  nor  should  a 
person  eat  with  another  out  of  a common  dish.  Persons  should  not 
eat  too  much,  nor  should  they  go  about  without  washing  and  clean- 
ing their  hands  and  mouth  after  taking  dinner. 


Proper  and  Improper  Food 


263 


Q. — What  is  the  meaning  of  the  precept : 

N#  N 

A, — It  means  that  after  the  teacher  had  taken  his  food,  a person 
should  eat  the  food  which  was  set  aside  and  untouched,  that  is  to  sa>, 
the  teacher  should  be  fed  first  and  then  the  pupil  should  take  his  food. 

Q. — If  no  refuse  of  food  whatever  should  be  eaten,  none  should 
eat  honey  which  is  the  refuse  of  the  food  of  bees,  drink  milk  which  is 
the  refuse  of  the  food  of  a calf,  and  eat  his  own  food  after  the  first 
morsal  as  the  remaining  food  becomes  the  refuse  of  his  food. 

A. — Honey  is  refuse  only  in  name,  it  is  to  be  eaten  as  it  is  the 
extract  of  many  herbs.  The  calf  drinks  the  milk  which  comes  outside 
but  not  what  is  inside.  So  it  is  not  refuse.  But  the  udders  of  a cow 
should  be  washed  clean  with  pure  water  before  she  is  milked  in  a clean 
pail.  The  refuse  of  one’s  own  food  is  not  injurious  to  health.  Look 
here,  it  is  quite  natural  that  one  feels  disgusted  to  eat  the  refuse  of 
another’s  food.  No  person  feels  disgust  in  cleaning  one’s  own  mouth, 
nose,  ear,  eyes,  generative  and  excretory  organs  of  their  dirt,  filth,  and 
urine.  But  he  abhors  to  touch  the  exertions  of  others.  Hence,  it  is 
plain  that  this  behaviour  of  the  people  is  not  opposed  to  the  order  of 
nature,  and  no  people  should  eat  the  refuse  of  the  food  of  others. 

Q, — Well,  should  not  the  husband  and  wife  eat  each  other’s 
refuse  of  food  ? 

A, — No;  for,  the  temperaments  of  their  bodies  are  also  different 
from  each  other. 


Inter-Dining 

Q. — Tell  me  what  harm  there  is  in  eating  the  food  prepared  by 
any  person  whatever.  For,  the  bodies  of  the  Brahmin  down  to  the 
low  caste  are  made  up  of  the  bones,  flesh  and  skin.  The  blood  of  a 
Brahmin’s  body  is  exactly  like  that  of  a low  caste.  Under  these  cir- 
cumstances what  harm  is  there  in  taking  food  at  the  hands  of  all  man- 
kind ? 

A. — There  is  harm  in  it;  for,  the  sperm  and  ova  produced  in  the 
bodies  of  a low  caste  man  and  woman  are  not  so  pure  and  free  from 
impurity,  stench  or  other  kinds  of  taint  as  those  of  a Brahmin  and  his 
wife’s  bodies,  which  are  nourished  with  the  pure  articles  of  food.  For, 
the  body  of  a low  caste  is  full  of  the  atoms  and  stench  and  other 
noxious  matter.  But  it  is  not  so  with  the  Brahmins  and  other  high 
castes.  Therefore,  it  is  proper  to  eat  food  at  the  hands  of  the  Brahmins 
and  other  high  castes,  and  not  to  take  food  at  the  hands  of  low  castes, 
such  as  sweepers,  shoe-makers,  and  bastards  (chandals—offspring  of 
a Brahmin  woman  and  a Shudra  or  serf).  Well,  if  you  be  asked, 
Would  you  behave  yourself  towards  your  mother-in-law,  daughter,  or 
daughter-in-law,  as  if  she  were  your  wife,  seeing  that  her  body  is  made 
of  the  skin  and  other  materials  like  those  of  your  wife  ? You  will  feel 


264 


Satyarth  Prakash 


shame  and  hold  your  tongue.  Since  decomposed,  stinking  things  can 
be  eaten  just  as  delicious  food  with  the  hands  and  mouth,  will  you  eat 
the  excreta  also  ? Can  anybody  be  so  degraded  ? 

Q. — As  you  clean  or  plaster  a spot  to  eat  on  with  cow-dung, 
why  don’t  you  clean  it  with  your  own  excreta  ? Why  does  not  the  eat- 
ing spot  (dinner  room)  become  impure  by  the  introduction  of  cow- 
dung? 

A. — The  cow-dung  does  not  so  stink  as  human  filth.  The  ordure 
of  a cow  does  not  go  olT  soon  from  its  viscidity  ? It  does  not  stain 
cloth  nor  gets  discoloured.  The  dry  cow-dung  does  not  soil  like 
earth.  The  place  which  is  plastered  with  earth  and  cow-dung,  looks 
very  beautiful.  Also,  flies,  ants,  and  many  other  worms  and  insects 
frequent  the  kitchen  from  its  dirtiness,  as  butter,  sugar  and  the  refuse 
of  food  are  thrown  down  at  the  time  of  taking  food,  and  when  food 
is  prepared.  If  the  place  is  not  daily  cleaned  and  swept,  it  will  soon 
look  like  a privy  house.  Therefore,  the  kitchen  and  dining  place 
should  be  daily  scrubbed  with  cow  dung  and  earth  and  swept  quite 
clean.  If  the  place  is  paved  with  stone  or  built  with  lime  composition, 
it  may  be  washed  clean  with  water  only.  This  precaution  will  remove 
all  objections.  It  should  not  be  like  the  kitchen  of  the  Mahomedans, 
wherein  are  scattered  charcoal,  ashes,  fuel,  broken  earthen  pots,  un- 
clean plates,  bones,  limbs,  confusedly  in  all  directions,  and  files  are 
hovering  in  swarms.  The  place  looks  so  bad  and  filthy  that  it  is 
possible  a gentleman  may  vomit  who  goes  there  to  sit.  It  looks  like 
a place  of  filth.  If  you  take  any  objection  to  the  scrubbing  of  a din- 
ing spot  with  cow-dung,  we  ask  you  whether  or  not  the  burning  of 
dung  cakes  in  the  hearth,  lighting  a pipe  with  the  cinders  of  cow- 
dung  cakes,  and  the  plastering  of  house-walls  with  cow-dung,  and 
other  uses  of  it,  are  objectionable  and  make  the  place  of  the  Maho- 
medans impure.  There  is  not  the  least  doubt  at  all  that  it  is  not 
objectionable. 

0,— What  is  better,  either  to  eat  food  on  the  dining  spot  or  out- 
side of  it  ? 

A, — Food  should  be  taken  where  the  place  is  clean,  pleasant  and 
beautiful.  But  on  occasions  of  emergency  and  war,  it  may  be  taken 
on  horseback,  in  carriages,  standing  or  squatting  on  the  ground  as  the 
case  may  be. 

Q. — Should  we  eat  food  prepared  with  cur  own  hands,  and  not 
by  others  ? 

A. — There  is  no  harm  at  all  to  eat  together  with  all  the  Aryas, 
if  food  is  prepared  with  .scrupulous  cleanliness.  For,  if  men  and 
women  of  the  Brahmin,  Ksbatriya  and  Vaishya  tribes  be  engaged  in 
the  botheration  of  cooking,  cleaning  the  dining  spot,  and  scouring 
utensils;  they  will  not  be  able  to  improve  their  knowledge  and  other 
higher  virtues.  Remember  the  kings,  sages  and  philosophers  of  the 
world  who  attended  the  royal  feast  (sacrifice)  of  Emperor  Yudhishtir, 
took  food  from  the  same  kitchen.  But  when  divers  religious  such  as 
those  of  the  Christians  and  Mahomedans  spread  in  the  country,  the 


Proper  and  Improper  Food 


265 


people  were  split  with  disunion.  These  foreigners  took  to  drinking 
wine  and  eating  beef  and  other  kinds  of  flesh,  which  raised  mountain- 
ous difficulties  in  the  custom  of  taking  food  and  drink.  See,  the 
kings  of  the  Aryavarta  contracted  matrimonial  alliances  with  the 
kings  of  Cabul,  Candahar,  Persia,  America,  Europe  and  other  coun- 
tries, and  married  Gandhari,  Madri,  Ulopi,  and  other  princesses  of 
those  countries.  Shakuni  and  other  foreigners  partook  food  with  the 
Kouravas  and  Pandavas.  There  was  no  hostility  among  them.  For, 
in  those  days  there  was  but  one  religion  of  the  Vedas  in  the  whole 
world.  All  the  people  believed  in  it  and  reprded  one  another  like 
their  second  self.  They  had  deep  sympathy  with  one  another  in  their 
joy  and  sorrow,  in  prosperity  and  adversity.  It  is  on  this  account 
that  peace  reigned  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  the  people  enjoyed 
ease  and  comfort.  But  now  there  is  much  misery  and  animosity  on 
account  of  the  increase  of  the  followers  of  conflicting  faiths.  It  is  the 
imperative  duty  of  wise  persons  to  remove  this  misery.  May  the 
Great  God  sow  the  seed  of  true  religion  in  the  heart  of  all  people  so 
that  the  false  faiths  be  soon  annihilated  for  good  and  all ! It  is  a 
serious  matter  worth  careful  consideration.  Setting  aside  inimical 
feelings,  they  should  be  devoted  to  the  promotion  of  peace  and  happi- 
ness of  all. 

So  much  for  behaviour  and  misdemeanor,  for  foods  allowed 
and  forbidden. 

This  10th  chapter  finishes  the  first  half  of  this  book.  The  rea- 
son why  the  chapters  of  this  half  of  the  book  contain  no  particular 
refutation  of  false  religions,  is  that  until  the  present  people  are  im- 
proved in  judging  of  and  distinguishing  between  right  and  wrong,  they 
cannot  understand  the  purport  of  general  and  particular  refutation 
of  false  laiths.  There! ore,  this  first  half  of  the  book  expounds  the 
doctrines  of  true  religion.  The  latter  half,  which  consists  of  four 
chapters,  will  specially  deal  with  the  support  of  true  and  refutation  of 
false  faiths.  The  first  of  these  four  chapters  gives  the  account  and 
refutation  of  Indian  religions,  the  second  of  Jainism,  the  third  of 
Christianity,  and  the  fourth  of  Mahomedanism.  At  the  end,  the  four- 
teenth chapter  will  briefly  describe  our  own  faith.  Those  who  wish  to 
know  a detailed  refutation,  should  read  these  chapters  attentively. 
But  a general  exposition  and  refutation  of  various  religions  are  also 
given  briefly  in  the  preceding  ten  chapters.  He  who  reads  the  fourteen 
chapters  without  partiality  and  with  the  eyes  of  justice  and  equity, 
will  be  inspired  with  truth  and  blessed  with  happiness.  But  he  who 
reads  and  hears  this  book  with  bigotry,  prejudice  and  jealousy,  will 
find  it  hard  to  comprehend  the  object  of  this  book.  Hence,  he  who 
does  not  bestow  his  best  consideration  upon  this  book,  will  miss  the 
mark  aimed  at  by  the  author  and  fall  into  the  ditch  of  error.  It  is  the 
supreme  duty  of  wise  persons  to  distinguish  truth  from  falsehood  and 
then  to  accept  the  truth  and  to  reject  the  falsehood  and  thereby  attain 
the  highest  good.  It  is  they  alone  who  are  in  a position  to  appreciate 
virtue  and  to  become  learned,  and  acquiring  the  truth  of  religion,  the 
case  of  wealth,  the  satisfaction  of  desire  and  the  happiness  of  salvation, 
pass  their  life  in  joy  and  perennial  cheerfulness  of  earth. 


266 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Summary 

Good  behaviour  is  marked  by  righteousness,  decency,  humility,  good  company 
and  right  knowledge,  and  misbehaviour  is  its  opposite.  It  is  accompanied  by  t 
religion  of  impartiality,  love,  conscientiousness  and  practice  of  sages.  The  keeping 
of  hair  on  the  head  and  chin  is  optional.  The  controlment  of  the  senses  is  neces- 
sary. Indulgence  in  them  leads  to  vice.  Moderation  in  eating  and  working,  practice 
of  concentration,  honest  dealing  are  never  to  be  given  up.  Decency,  politeness,  res- 
pect to  age  and  learning  should  always  be  shown.  Wealth,  family,  age,  beneficence, 
and  knowledge  command  respect  increasing  in  the  descending  order  here  stated. 

Foreign  travel  and  sea  voyage  were  in  vogue  in  old  time.  The  Mahabharat, 
Shanti  Parva,  Ch.  327,  relates  of  Shuka  Deva  having  travelled  to  Europe,  Tartary, 
and  China;  of  Lord  Krishna  to  America  (Fatal)  by  a steamer  (Ashwatari).  Kings 
of  Aryavarta  were  married  in  foreign  countries.  Dhriiarashtra’s  queen  Gandhari 
was  a princess  of  Candhar. 

Ail  the  Aryas  should  cat  at  the  same  table.  The  preparation  of  food  is  the 
duty  of  the  Shudras  (Apastamba).  Flesh-eating  and  strong  drinks  should  always  be 
avoided.  Food  should  be  taken  in  a clean  restaurant,  and  the  foolish  rules  of  what 
is  called  the  chowka  should  be  repudiated.  Warriors  can  take  food  on  horseback. 

Flesh-eating  makes  man’s  nature  cruel  and  destroys  useful  animals.  For 
instance,  a cow  giving  22  lbs  of  milk  a day  for  12  months,  will  feed  24,960  persons 
at  one  time.  Its  5 heifers  and  5 bulls  produce  milk  and  corn  sufficient  for  374,800 
men.  Thus  one  cow  in  one  generation  feeds  475,000  persons  at  one  time.  Goats, 
sheep,  and  horses  also  largely  benefit  mankind.  Hence  these  animals  should  not 
be  slaughtered  for  food  at  all. 


End  of  Part  1 


AUM 


LIGHT  OF  TRUTH 


Pai^  II 


An  English  Translation 


of 


SATYARTH  PRAKASH 


— Swami  Dayananda  Saraswati 


SUB-PREFACE  (I) 


IT  is  well  known  to  all  that  there  was  no  other  religion  5,000  years  ago 
all  the  world  over  than  the  Vedic  religion,  for  It  is  consistent  with  the 
dictum  of  knowledge  and  truth  seated  in  man's  heart.  Its  extinction  was  due 
to  the  evil  consequences  of  the  Great  Wart  that  led  to  the  spread  of  ignorance 
over  all  the  world,  which  in  its  turn  obscured  the  human  intellect  with  the 
cobwsbs  of  doubt  and  disbelief  This  mental  obscurity  gave  birth  to  many 
relig'ons  according  to  the  whims  and  caprices  of  their  authors  But  all  these 
religions  can  be  classed  into  four  principal  religions,  which  are  the  bases  of 
all  other  religions,  u/z , Purani,  Jam',  Kirani,  and  Korani^.  They  came  into 
existence  one  after  the  other  in  the  same  chronological  order  as  given  here. 
Thoir  verities  number  aboot  1,000  The  object  of  this  book  is  to  afford  facility 
to  their  advocates,  followers  and  others  in  judging  of  the  truth  It  is  hoped 
that  whatever  is  said  in  favour  of  the  true  religion  or  against  the  false,  will  be 
worth  knowing  by  all  I think  it  to  bo  proper  to  lay  before  the  public  what 
I have  come  to  know  of  them  according  to  my  knowledge  and  capacity 
after  examining  the  authentic  sacred  books  of  these  religions,  so  that  they 
may  judge  It  by  themselves,  for  it  is  not  easy  to  regain  a lost  truth.  The 
impartial  readers  of  this  treatise  will  soon  come  to  know  which  religion  is 
true  and  wh'ch  false.  Then  it  wll  bo  easy  for  them  to  accept  the  true  and 
reject  the  false  religion  according  to  the  capacity  of  their  understanding. 
The  11th  chapter  of  the  Satyarth  Prakash  will  briefly  treat  of  the  beaut-es 
and  defects  of  the  Indian  religions,  based  as  they  are  upon  the  Puranas  and 
their  subsidiary  works  The  reader  should  not  take  it  amiss  or  misunderstand 
me,  if  they  are  not  charitable  enough  to  consider  this  attempt  of  mine  to  be 
a positive  service  done  to  their  fallen  cause,  for  it  is  never  my  object  to  injure 
or  oppose  the  interests  of  anybody ; but,  on  the  contrary,  the  purpose  of 
my  life  is  to  put  them  on  the  path  to  the  discernment  of  truth  In  like  manner. 
It  IS  incumbont  on  all  men  to  act  on  truth  and  justice  The  object  of  the 
human  life  is  only  to  know  and  preach  the  truth,  but  never  to  indulge  in 
wrangling  controversies  All  learned  men  known  how  many  evils  arise  from 
such  disputes  There  will  be  no  good-will  and  peace  brought  to  all  until  the 
quarrels  arising  from  conflicting  and  mutually  inconsistent  religions  are  put 
down  everywheie  in  the  human  community  It  is  not  impracticable  for  the 
people,  and  specially  the  learned,  to  give  up  hatred  and  enmity,  and  to  seek 
after  the  truth,  and  when  found,  to  accept  it  and  reject  the  falsehood.  It  is 
sad  to  observe  that  it  has  become  a truism  that  the  dissensions  of  the  learned 
have  drawn  all  other  people  to  their  bro'Is  If  they  give  up  their  selfishness 
and  take  to  the  good  of  all,  we  shall  soon  see  one  religion  established 
throughout.  The  scheme  to  achive  this  end  is  given  at  the  end  of  this  book. 
May  the  Lord  Almighty,  the  Inner  Self  of  all,  inspire  the  hearts  of  all  the 
people  with  aspiration  for  one  universal  religion  ! A word  is  enough  for  the 
wise. 

— Dayananda  Sarswati 


1.  Fought  for  the  sovereignty  of  Hastinapur  5,000  years  ago. 

2.  Purani  means  Hinduism,  Jami  the  faith  of  Jams,  Kirani  Christianity 
find  Kotanl  Mahomedanism 


Chapter  xi 

Refutation  and  Advocation 
of 

Indian  Religions 


J SHALL  support  or  refute  the  religions  of  the  Aryans,  that  is  to 

say,  the  people  of  India,  the  ancient  Aryavarta,  according  as 
they  teach  truth  or  falsehood.  This  country,  called  Aryavarta. 
in  old  time,  is  so  excellent  that  it  has  no  equal  on  the  earth.  It 
is  therefore  called  the  Golden  Chersonese  in  ancient  histories,  as 
its  land  produces  gold  and  other  precious  things.  It  is  on  account 
of  its  great  fertility  that  the  Aryas  settled  down  in  it  ever  since 
the  world  began.  I have  already  said  in  the  account  of  creation 
that  the  word  Arya  means  noble.  The  non-aryans  are  called 
Dasyus.  All  the  countries  of  the  world  talk  of  this  country  in 
high  terms  of  encomium.  They  think  that  the  stories  of  the  phi- 
losopher’s stone  are  untrue,  yet  the  land  of  the  Aryas  is  the  real 
philosopher’s  stone,  whose  touch  instantly  turns  the  base  metal 
of  foreigners*  poverty  into  gold,  that  is  to  say,  they  become  rich. 

The  Aryas  were  the  lords  paramount  over  the  whole  world  from 
the  dawn  of  civilisation  to  5,000  years  ago,  and  the  rulers  of  other 
lands  acknowledged  their  suzerainty  from  India  for  the  supremacy 
of  India  was  never  disputed  till  the  time  of  the  Kurus  and  Pandus. 

Manu,  whose  code  is  the  oldest  written  law,  says,  IL  20, 

— The  people  of  the  world,— the  Brahmanas,  Kshatriyas,  Vaishyas 
and  Shudras,  Dasyus  and  Malekshas, — learn  their  professions,  man- 
ners, and  customs  and  study  sciences  and  arts  with  the  Brahmins 
or  learned  men  of  this  country.  Thus  the  authority  of  Aryavarta 
was  supreme  over  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  upto  Emperor 
Yudhister’s  celebration  of  universal  rejoicings  (rajsuya  yajna)  and 
the  Mahabharta  (Great  War,  5000  years  ago).  For,  wc  read  in 
the  Mahabharta  that  King  Bhagdatta  of  China,  King  Babruwahana 
of  America,  King  Vidalaksha  with  cat  like  eyes  of  Europe,  the 
King  of  Greece,  King  Shalya  of  Persia  and  the  like  kings  came  to 
join  in  the  Great  War  and  Emperor  Yudhister’s  feast  of  paramount- 
cy.  When  the  house  of  Raghu  was  paramount,  king  Ravan  paid 
homeage  to  it.  When  hostilities  broke  out  between  them,  Emperor 
Rama  Chandra  gave  him  a crushing  defeat  in  a memorable  battle  in 
which  he  fell,  and  placed  his  brotjier  Vibhishan^  on  the  thropc 


280  Satyarth  Prakash 

of  Lanka  (Ceylon).  Thus  the  Aryas  held  the  universal  sovereingty 
from  Manu  down  to  Yudhister. 

Then  they  fell  out  amongst  themselves  to  their  utter  ruin,  for 
the  rule  of  the  proud,  unjust,  ignorant  does  not  last  long  in  this 
world  of  God.  It  appears  to  be  a law  of  nature  that  indolence,  want 
of  courage,  envy,  hatred,  luxury,  and  pride  spring  up  on  the  ex- 
cessive increase  of  wealth,  far  above  the  natural  requirements  of 
the  people.  These  evils  destroy  knowledge,  education,  and  give 
birth  to  debauchery  and  sensuousness  ; in  other  words,  flesh-eating 
drinking,  early  marriage,  selfishness  and  licentiousness  prevail 
largely  among  the  people.  When  a people’s  military  power  and 
standing  army  are  so  increased  that  none  can  withstand  them, 
they  become  proud  and  unjust.  They  then  quarrel  among  them- 
selves, or  some  one  else  rises  up  and  is  enabled  by  circumstances  to 
overturn  them.  As  for  example,  the  Mogal  empire  was  almost 
subverted  by  Shivaji  and  Gobind  Singh.  See,  what  the  Maitry- 
Upanishat  says  I.  IV:— 

— There  were  many  emperors  of  the  whole  world,  as  Sudumna, 
Bhuridumna,  Indradumna,  Kuvalayashwa,  Youvanashwa,  Vadh- 
ryashwa,  Ashwapati,  Shashbindu,  Harishchandra,  Ambrarisha,  Nan- 
aktu,  Saryati,  Yayati,  Anaranya,  Akshasena,  Maruta,  and  Bharata, 
whose  names  are  written  in  our  histories,  and  Manu  and  others 
are  mentioned  in  the  Code  of  Manu  and  Mahabharata.  It  is  only 
the  interested  and  ignorant  persons  who  consider  these  emperors 
to  be  fabulous.  These  universal  sovereigns  were  the  Aryans  from 
the  beginning  of  the  world  to  the  Great  War.  But  now  the  mis- 
fortune of  their  descendants  has  deprived  them  of  all  power  and 
government  and  laid  them  prostrate  at  the  feet  of  foreigners  to  be 
trampled  down  to  dust  and  destruction. 

Question. — Is  it  true  what  is  written  in  Sanskrit  books  about 
the  arts  of  fire-arms  7 Were  there  guns  and  muskets  in  the  an- 
cient time  ? 

Answer.— Yes ; it  is.  There  were  these  fire-arms,  for  they  are 
the  outcome  of  physical  science. 

Q.— Were  they  made  and  used  by  the  influence  of  gods’ incan- 
tation ? 

A.— No  ; it  was  rules  and  methods,  called  the  mantras  in  Sans- 
crit, according  to  which  the  different  missiles  and  weapons  were 
manufactured.  These  mantras  are  a number  of  words,  which  can- 
not produce  any  material  object.  If  a man  asserts  that  a ihantra 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


281 


or  charm  produces  fire,  he  should  be  told  that  it  will  burn  the 
tongue  and  throat  of  the  man  who  pronounces  or  mutters  that 
mantra.  He  goes  to  kill  his  enemy,  so  to  speak,  but  he  is  him- 
self destroyed.  The  truth  is,  that  the  mantra  is  the  secret  as  in 
rajmantri,  which  means  the  person  who  holds  the  secrets  of  a state. 
So  a mantra  is  the  knowledge  of  certain  objects  of  the  world,  the 
application  of  which  afterwards  produces  various  kinds  of  thin ps, 
industries  and  arts.  As,  for  instance,  if  an  iron  arrow  or  ball  be 
charged  with  such  substances  as  are  ignited  with  fire,  with  the 
spread  of  their  smoke,  or  with  the  contact  of  the  solar  rays  or  the 
air,  it  will  be  called  a fiery  weapon  (agneyastra).  If  a person  wants 
to  ward  it  off,  he  should  oppose  it  with  a varunastra,  a weapon  wor- 
ked with  water.  When  the  enemy  wants  to  destroy  an  army  by 
throwing  fiery  weapons  upon  it,  its  commander-in-chief  should 
ward  them  off  by  means  of  the  weapons  of  water,  which  are  made 
of  such  materials  that  there  smoke  is  turned  into  a cloud  with 
the  contact  of  the  air  and  begins  to  rain  down  and  quench  the 
fire. 

The  same  is  the  case  with  the  nagaphans,  which  when  sent 
against  an  enemy,  paralyses  all  his  limbs.  There  was  another, 
called  the  mohanastra,  or  stupefying  weapon,  which  was  charged 
with  intoxicants,  whose  smoke  narcotised  or  hypnotised  the  enemy’s 
array.  In  fine,  all  other  weapons  were  of  a piece.  In  those  days 
the  people  destroyed  the  enemy’s  army  also  by  means  of  electricity, 
produced  from  a wire,  a piece  of  lead,  or  a similar  substance.  Such 
weapons  were  also  called  the  agneyastra  and  pashupatastra.  Tope 
(a  gun)  and  bandook  (a  musket)  are  foreign  words.  They  do  not 
belong  to  Sanskrit  or  any  Indian  tongue.  But  what  the  foreigners 
call  the  gun,  Sanskrit  and  Hindi  call  it  shaiaghni,  and  what  is  called 
the  musket,  is  called  bimhundi  in  Sanskrit  and  the  Indian  vernacu- 
lar. Those  who  are  unacquainted  with  Sanskrit,  write  and  talk  non- 
sense and  what  is  irrelevant  in  their  utter  confusion  of  thought.  The 
learned  cannot  look  upon  their  writings  as  authentic.  It  was  from 
Aryavarta  (India)  that  knowledge,  science  and  art  travelled  to  other 
lands  of  the  world.  They  went  first  to  Egypt,  thence  to  Greece, 
thence  to  Rome,  and  thence  all  over  Europe,  thence  to  America,  and 
so  forth.  Even  upto  this  time  no  country  has  so  much  knowledge 
of  Sanskrit  as  Aryavarta  (India).  And  it  is  a mere  talk  with  no  legs 
to  stand  on  when  it  is  said  that  Sanskrit  largely  prevails  in  Germany 
and  that  nobody  in  the  whole  wide  world  knows  as  much  Sanskrit 
as  Prof.  Max  Muller  ; for,  there  is  a proverb,  in  Sanskrit  that  a 
castor-oil  plant  or  a bush  is  considered  to  be  a great  tree  inthecoun- 
try  where  there  is  no  shrub  to  be  seen.  Accordingly  Sanskrit  being 
not  much  found  among  the  Europeans,  the  little  knowledge  of 
Sanskrit  of  the  Germans  and  Prof.  Max  Muller  is  made  a mountain 

X.  ^ ii 


Satyarth  Prakash 


of  a mole-hill  in  Europe.  Their  knowledge  is  very  little  in  compari- 
son with  Aryavarta.  I learnt  from  a letter  of  the  Principal  of  a 
German  College  that  there  were  but  a very  few  people  to  understand 
a Sanskrit  letter.  1 think  from  what  1 have  seen  Prof.  Max  Muller’s 
S inskrit  literature  manuals  and  his  commentary  on  some  portion  of 
the  Vedas  that  what  he  has  written,  he  has  obtained  from  his  stu- 
dying the  translations  of  Sanskrit  books  written  by  Indians.  For 
instance,  he  translates  the  word  bradimam  by  horse  in  the  Vedic 
verse  : — 


Even  Sayanacharya’s  translation,  which  renders  it  by  sun,  is  for 
better  than  Prof.  Max  Muller’s  rendering.  But  the  word  properly 
means  the  Great  Self,  vide  my  ‘Introduction  to  the  Commentary  on 
the  Vedas’ which  gives  the  complete  meaning  of  the  above  verse. 
But  this  is  enough  to  show  how  much  Sanskrit  knowledge  Germany 
and  Prof.  Max  Muller  really  possess. 

India,  the  cradle  of  civilisation. 

It  is  a fact,  that  all  the  sciences  and  arts  and  religions,  that 
are  now  found  in  the  whole  world,  took  their  original  start  from 
Aryavarta.  Dr.  Jacoliot  a Frenchman,  writes  in  his  “Bible  in 
India”  that  Arvavarta  is  the  fountain-head  of  all  knowledge  and 
morals ; and  all  sciences  and  arts  and  religions  have  spread  out  from 
this  very  land.  He  prays  to  God  ; O Lord,  may  my  country  make 
as  much  progress  as  was  made  by  the  ancient  Aryavarta  ! Also, 
Darashikoh  was  of  the  same  opinion,  namely,  Sanskrit  was  unsur- 
passed in  systematising  and  perfecting  knowledge  by  any  other 
language  on  the  earth.  He  exprosses  his  opinion  in  his  translation 
of  the  Upanishats,  though  he  studied  Arabic  and  many  other  ton- 
gues, yet  he  did  not  get  his  doubts  removed  and  he  got  no  solace; 
but  when  he  studied  Sanskrit  and  got  himself  acquainted  with  San- 
skrit knowing  people,  all  his  doubts  were  removed  and  he  became 
very  happy.  Also,  sec  the  zodiac  representation  in  the  temple  of 
Mann  ’ at  Benares  which  is  not  kept  even  in  proper  repairs  and 
preserved  from  the  ravage  of  time.  Still  how  excellent  it  is,  and 
how  clearly  it  show  the  progress  made  in  ancient  time  by  the 
country  in  astronomy  and  the  method  of  studying  the  stars.  It  will 
be  very  beneficial  to  the  scientific  world,  if  the  Jeypore  State  keeps 
it  in  repairs  and  protects  it  from  injury.  So  this  splendid  country, 
the  jewel  on  the  world,  got  such  a rude  shock  from  the  Great  War, 
that  it  has  not  recovered  from  it  till  now,  exemplifying  to  the  world 


1.  Maharaja  Mann  who  built  the  temple  at  Benares,  was  the  king  of 
JeviJuu;  and  euiiimandur-in-Chiuf  of  Akbar.  Thu  temple  Ihoicluie  beluiins  to 

Jeypoie. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions  i83 

that  ruin  is  undoubtedly  complete  when  brothers  fight  each  other 
and  come  to  blows.  Chanakya  says,  XVI.  17, 

- That  a man  loses  his  sense  on  the  approach  of  his  ruin,  and 
begins  to  do  what  is  unreasonable.  He  totally  misunderstands  a 
right  advice  given  him  and  believes  to  be  right  what  is  really  inju- 
rious to  his  interests. 

When  very  learned  men,  kings,  emperors,  sages  and  philosop- 
hers were  killed  on  the  battle-field  of  Kurukshetra,  or  otherwise 
died  during  the  Great  War,  knowledge  declined  and  decayed  in 
Aryavarta  and  with  it  disappeared  the  religion  of  the  Vedas.  The 
people  were  possessed  with  jealousy,  hatred  and  pride.  The  strong 
seized  upon  different  provinces  of  the  country  and  proclaimed 
themselves  to  be  the  kings.  So  the  country  fell  to  pieces.  There 
was  none  to  look  after  the  government  of  other  countries.  When 
the  Brahmanas  grew  ignorant,  there  could  be  no  talk  of  the 
learning  of  the  Kshatriyas,  Vaishyas  and  Shudras.  The  ancient 
custom  of  studying  and  teaching  the  Vedas  and  other  scriptures  with 
meanings  died  away.  The  Brahmanas  studied  only  so  much  without 
meaning  as  sufficed  them  for  their  livelihood,  and  even  that  they  did 
not  teach  to  the  Kshatriyas  and  others;  for,  when  the  people  became 
ignorant  and  instituted  priestcraft ; fraud,  deception  and  irreligion 
took  their  root  among  them  and  thrived  mightily.  On  the  accession  to 
power  of  the  strong,  the  Brahmins  thought  that  they  should  make  a 
shift  for  their  livelihood,  so  they  all  agreed  to  preach  to  the  Kshatriyas 
and  others  that  they  (Brahmins)  were  their  priests,  without  their  ser- 
vice they  would  get  no  heaven  or  salvation;  but,  on  the  contrary,  they 
would  fall  into  a dreadful  hell  should  they  not  serve  them.  They 
perverted  the  meanings  of  what  was  written  in  the  Vedas  and  the 
books  made  by  sages  and  philosophers,  which  called  the  learned, 
worshipful  and  pious  men  to  be  the  Brahmanas,  and  arrogantly 
applied  the  sense  to  themselves,  although  ignorant,  luxurious, 
fraudulent,  deceitful  and  irreligious.  We  wonder  how  those  ignorant 
people  could  support  the  qualifications  of  the  highly  learned 
men  ! But  the  Kshatriyas,  their  disciples  and  others,  who  had 
become  quite  ignorant  of  Sanskrit,  believed  in  every  thing  they  told 
them,  howsoever  absurd  it  was.  Then  these  nominal  Brahmins 
began  to  feel  their  ground,  and  snared  all  others  in  their  net  of 
implicit  obedience  and  got  them  under  their  complete  control.  They 
then  taught  (see  Pandava  Gita). 

That  whatever  they  said,  was  like  what  fell  from  the  mouth 
of  God  himself.  When  the  Kshatriyas  and  others  who  were  intelle- 
ctually blind  or  destitute  of  knowledge,  but  who  were  enormously 


284 


Satyarth  Prakash 


rich  and  wealthy,  became  their  disciples,  this  lazy  lot  of  nominal 
Brahmins  began  to  sprout  in  the  lap  of  luxury.  They  gave  out  that 
all  the  best  things  whatever  in  the  world  were  intended  for  them. 
In  other  words,  they  based  the  system  of  castes,  which  as  originally 
founded  upon  merit,  character,  and  qualifications,  upon  the  accident 
of  birth.  They  received  alms  given  on  the  death  of  persons.  They 
did  whatever  came  into  their  head.  They  went  so  far  in  their  aggr- 
andizement as  to  assert  that  they  were  'gods  on  earth’  and  none 
could  get  entry  into  heaven  without  paying  them  homage.  They 
should  be  asked  to  what  region  they  would  go  as  their  actions  sho- 
wed them  to  be  fit  for  a horrible  hell,  or  they  might  be  turned  into 
vermin,  moths,  and  the  like  insects.  When  thus  interrogeted,  they 
are  enraged  and  say— We  shall  curse  you  and  you  will  be  destroyed, 
for  it  is  written  in  scriptures  that  he  who  hates  the  Brahmins,  is 
ruined.  No  doubt,  it  is  true  that  the  person  is  ruined  who  hates 
the  men  well-versed  in  the  Vedas  and  the  nature  of  God,  and  who 
arc  virtuous  and  philanthrophic.  But  it  is  not  proper  to  call 
them  Brahmins  or  to  serve  them  who  are  not  really  so. 

Indian  Popes. 

Q.— Who  are  we  then  ? 

A.— You  are  popes. 

Q.  — What  is  a pope  ! 

A.— Pope  means  an  elder  or  father  in  the  language  of  the 
Romans;  but  now  the  word  means  the  person  who  cheats  others  to 
serve  his  own  purpose. 

Q. — We  are  Brahmins  and  holy  men,  for  our  father  and 
mother  were  both  Brahmins  and  we  are  disciples  of  a holy  man. 

A— It  is  true  no  doubt;  but  listen  to  me,  none  can  be  a Brah- 
min on  the  ground  of  his  parents  being  Brahmins  and  of  his  being 
a disciple  of  a holy  man.  A man  is  called  a Brahmin  from  his 
personal  merit,  character,  deeds  and  benevolence.  But  the  nominal 
Brahmins  act  just  like  the  popes  of  Rome,  who  said,  as  it  were,  to 
their  disciples  to  the  following  efiect  : — 

European  Popes. 

If  you  confess  your  sins  before  us,  we  shall  pardon  you.  None 
can  go  to  heaven,  without  serving  and  obeying  us.  If  you  want  to 
go  to  heaven,  you  will  get  property  there  worth  as  much  as  you 
deposit  with  us  in  the  shape  of  money. 

Accordingly  when  some  person,  rich  in  gold  and  blind  of  the 
eye  of  reason,  brought  to  a pope  as  much  money  as  he  desired  out 
of  his  wish  to  go  to  heaven.  His  Holiness  would  stand  before  the 
images  of  Jesus  and  Mary  and  write  a draft  to  the  effect 

0 Lord  Jesus  Christ!  the  bearer  has  placed  Rs.  100,000  to 
Thy  credit  with  us.  When  he  comes  to  heaven,  Thou  shall  be  plea- 
sed to  provide  him  in  Thy  father’s  heavenly  kingdom  with  man- 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


285 


sions,  gardens,  and  appurtenances  worth  Rs.  25,000;  with  carriages, 
horses,  servants  and  butlers  to  the  extent  of  Rs.  25,000;  with  food 
drink,  clothings,  beddings  to  the  value  of  Rs.  25,000  and  give  him 
Rs.  25,000  in  cash  to  entertain  his  brethren,  friends  and  relatives. 

The  pope  then  signed  the  draft  and  made  it  over  to  the  suppli- 
ant of  heaven  with  the  following  words  : — 

When  you  die,  tell  your  family  members  to  place  this  draft 
under  your  pillow  in  the  grave.  The  angels  will  come  to  take  you 
there,  and  help  you  to  get  all  the  things  mentioned  in  the  draft  in 
the  heaven. 

It  shows  that  a pope  has  got  the  license  of  heaven.  Papacy 
lasted  in  Europe  so  long  as  it  was  sunk  in  ignorance.  But  the  rise 
of  science  has  checked  the  trickery  of  popery,  although  it  is  not  yet 
thoroughly  destroyed.  What  has  happended  in  Europe,  exists  also 
in  India.  The  Indian  popes  have  spread  their  snares  in  a hundred 
thousand  forms.  They  do  not  allow  a king  and  his  subjects  to 
acquire  knowledge,  and  good  persons  to  associate  for  improvement. 
Day  and  night  they  are  engaged  in  misleading  persons  and  do  noth- 
ing else.  But  they  must  bear  in  mind  that  those  persons  alone  are 
called  popes  who  commit  frauds  and  other  evil  deeds.  Among 
them  those  men  who  are  pious,  benevolent,  and  learned,  are  true 
Brahmins  and  holy  men.  It  is  only  the  deceitful  and  selfish  per- 
sons cheating  others  to  get  money  or  gain  advantage  that  are  called 
popes;  and  good  men  only  arc  called  Brahmins  and  holy  men.  Had 
there  been  no  such  good  Brahmins  and  holy  men  as  escaped  from 
the  traps  of  the  Jainces,  Mahomedans  and  Christians,  who  would 
teach  the  Vedas  and  other  authentic  books  with  their  proper  accent 
and  meaning;  encourage  the  Aryas  (now  Hindus)  to  love  the  study  of 
the  Vedas  and  philosophies,  and  keep  them  within  the  pale  of  the 
true  Aryan  fraternity  ? It  was  only  the  true  and  pious  Brahmins 
who  have  done  it. 

rqqigcqijfr'  | 

To  avoid  the  snares  of  popery  and  the  fascination  of  Jainism, 
and  other  faiths  is  like  extracting  nectar  out  of  poison. 

When  the  laymen  became  ignorant  and  the  clergy  who  knew  a 
little  ritual  became  proud,  all  the  people  unanimously  told  their 
king  that  the  Brahmins  and  friars  were  unpunishable,  for  it  was 
written  : 

— A Brahmin  should  not  be  killed.  A friar  should  not  be 
killed.  These  precepts  were  originally  intended  for  true  Brahmins 
and  friars,  but  they  were  misapplied  to  the  popes.  They  also  wrote 
false  books  and  represented  sages  and  philosophers  as  speaking 
there,  and  in  their  name  they  practised  frauds.  They  got  themselves 
out  of  the  power  of  the  law  under  the  cloak  of  those  holy  men  and 
learned  divines.  They  then  indulged  freely  in  whatever  they  liked, 


286 


Satyarth  Prakash 


and  framed  such  laws  as,  for  instance,  none  should  sleep,  rise,  sit, 
go,  come,  eat,  drink,  &c.,  without  the  permission  of  popes.  They  so 
convinced  kings  of  their  impunity  that  they  should  never  punish  the 
Brahmins  and  friars  notwithstanding  their  wicked  deeds,  on  the 
mere  ground  that  they  were  Brahmins  and  friars,  so  much  so  that 
they  (kings)  should  not  even  think  of  their  punishment. 

When  the  people  became  very  ignorant,  the  Indian  popes  did 
what  they  liked.  The  causes  of  this  decay  began  about  1,000  years 
before  the  Great  War.  At  that  time  there  were  sages  and  philoso- 
phers, although  the  sprouts  of  indolence,  pride,  jealousy,  hatred 
were  also  visible.  In  the  course  of  time  they  struck  root  and  be- 
came large.  When  preaching  of  the  truth  ceased,  ignorance  covered 
the  land,  and  the  people  fell  out  among  themselves.  For,  the 
Sankhya  philosophy  says.  III,  79,81, — 

— Where  there  are  good  preachers,  the  people  easily  gain 
success  in  acquiaring  religious  merit,  wealth,  satisfaction  and 
salvation.  But  dense  ignornce  asserts  its  reign  in  their  absence. 
However,  when  the  good  people  teach  truth,  ancient  ignorance  is 
dispelled,  and  light  dawns  upon  them. 

So  the  Indian  popes  got  the  people  to  worship  them  and  their 
feet,  which  was  taught  to  be  the  pissporl  for  them  to  happiness. 
When  the  people  were  completely  brought  under  their  control,  they 
fell  into  the  ditch  of  pride  and  luxury.  They  were  like  the  shepherd 
and  the  people,  their  herd.  But  they  were  the  false  spiritual  guides 
of  ignorant  people.  Knowledge,  power,  reason,  valour,  bravery 
and  the  like  good  qualities,  all  gradually  died  out.  When  they  be- 
came luxurious,  they  took  to  flesh-eating  and  drinking  in  the 
dark,  and  then  they  started  a new  religion  called  the 

WAM  MARG* 

They  wrote  the  Tantras,  in  which  they  used  such  expressions, 
as  Shiva  said,  Parvati  said,  Bhairava  said,  and  so  forth.  They 
told  curious  things  in  them,  which  are  shocking  to  humanity. 

"at  ^ 5?rT  1 II 

*The  Hindus  were  of  opinion  that  God  manifested  himself  either  to  the 
virtuous  or  to  the  vicious  people.  As  for  instance,  the  virtuous  Narada  saw 
the  Lord  face  to  face,  and  the  vicious  Havana  saw  Him  on  the  battle  field.  This 
opinion  IS  shared  by  Christianity  also,  Moses  saw  God  face  to  face.  But 
Satan  also  talked  with  Him  as  in  the  book  of  Job.  Hence  they  came  to  the  con- 
clusion that  either  a man  should  adopt  a godly  course  of  actions,  or  he  should 
practise  abominable  inquities.  The  performance  of  virtuous  actions,  was  called 
the  Right  Path.  Dakshin  Marg,  and  that  of  vicious  the  Left  Path,  Warn  Marg. 
The  right  and  left  paths  therefore  were  the  two  courses  of  religion,  whose 
object  was  to  see  God.  A man  who  was  unable  to  practise  virtue  or  to  go 
on  the  Right  Path,  adopted  fhe  vicious  course  (which  is  pleasing  in  youth) 
or ' travelled  on  the  Left  Path.  Hence  all  kinds  of  legal  vices  were  commited 
by  the  follov.eis  of  Warn  Marg. --Ed. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


287 


—Kali  Tantra.  Wine,  flesh,  fish,  mudra  (cakes),  and  copulation 
are  the  5 M’S.  (These  Words  in  Sanskrit  begin  with  M).  They 
procure  salvation  in  every  age. 

Jnfrf  gtnf  f^lcttt:  I SUV  SSV  II 

— Kularnav  Tantra.  All  castes  become  regenerates  when  admit- 
ted to  the  orgies  : but  on  leaving  them,  they  become  all  distinct. 

qtfST  jJT;  ql?si  swqttfer  i gfrosra  s stfsi  h fsv#  ii 

— Mahanirvan  Tantra.  If  a man  goes  on  drinking  till  he  falls 
on  the  ground,  and  rising  up  again  drinks,  he  is  freed  from  re- 
birth (which  is  a penalty  for  sin),  i.e.,  he  gets  salvation. 

sifitirff  snwvis  I mstJimftjTVT  ii 

— Gyansankalni  Tantra.  A man  may  go  to  all  women  except 
his  mother.  The  Vedas,  philosophies,  and  Puranas  are  like  ordi- 
nary postitutes. 

qvs  giT  f I 

—Bacchus’  orgy  is  the  only  merit  (to  obtain  heaven).  It  is  kept 
.secret  like  a house  mistress  in  veil.  (Ancient  India  had  no  veil  for 
women.  Hence,  this  religion  is  not  ancient.— Ed.) 

The  perusal  of  the  books  reveal  the  wonderful  trickery  of 
the  Indian  popes,  with  whom  religion  consisted  of  what  was 
really  its  opposite,  namely,  the  use  of  wine,  flesh,  fish,  mudra — oil- 
cakes, stuffed  cake.s,  curdsoaked  spiced  cakes,  bread,  spitting  or 
washing  pots,~and  copulation.  In  other  words,  believing  all 
men  to  be  Shiva  and  all  women  to  be  Parvati,  they  muttered  the 
words. 

Orgies 

— I am  Shiva  and  you  arc  Parvati,  and  then  cohabited  with  any 
woman  and  thought  it  to  be  no  sin.  They  took  those  for  pure 
women  whose  touch  is  foul.  As  for  instance,  they  looked  upon 
the  women  in  menses  as  very  holy  women,  though  the  scriptures 
forbid  their  contact.  Their  texts  say  that 

gsvT  5 II  Rudrayamala 

wvpct  sfmri:  fuisstvl  rtat  ii  wufeai  sftvn  li  Tantra 

—Cohabitation  with  a worn  in  in  monthly  course  is  as  meritorious 
bathing  in  the  sacred  tank  of  Pushkar  (in  Ajmere),  with  a fallen, 
or  low  caste  woman  as  pilgrimage  to  Benares,  with  a skin-dealer’s 
wife  as  bathing  in  the  Ganges  at  Prayaga  (Allahabad),  with  a laun- 
dress as  pilgrimage  to  Mathura,  (the  birth-place  of  Chrishna  'the 
Christ  of  India’),  and  with  a prostitute  as  pilgrimage  to  Ayudhya 
(Oude,  the  birth-place  of  Rama). 


288 


Satyarth  Prakash 


They  called  wine  a sacred  place,  flesh  purity,  and  fish  the  third 
of  water  gourd,  mudra  (exciting  food)  the  fourth,  and  coition  the 
fifth  (essential  of  the  religion).  They  coined  these  names  so  that 
none  could  understand  their  heinous  doctrines.  They  called  them- 
selves Kowla,  Ardravira.  Shambhava  and  Gana,  and  others  who 
did  not  belong  to  Warn  Marg,  to  be  Kantakak’  Vimukha,  Shush- 
kapashu.  According  to  their  belief,  all  persons  from  the  Brahmin 
to  the  low  caste  who  are  admitted  to  the  Bhairavi  Chakra  (God 
Bhairava  or  Bacchus’  circle),  are  called  the  Dwija  or  regenerates 
and  when  they  leave  it,  they  are  treated  according  to  their  caste. 

Worship  of  Warn  Marg 

The  followers  of  Warn  Marg  worship  a jar  of  wine  placed  up- 
on the  ground  or  a pedastal  painted  with  a triangular,  square, 
or  circular-mark.  They  pronounce  before  it : 

I i 

— O wine,  thou  art  free  from  the  bond  or  curse  of  Brahma  I Both 
men  and  women  assemble  in  a secret  place  where  none  but  the  be- 
lievers of  Warn  Marg  are  allowed  to  come.  There  men  worship 
a stark  naked  woman  and  women,  a similar  man.  Then  in  the 
meeting,  in  which  there  are  women  related  to  men  as  wives,  dau- 
ghters, mothers,  sisters,  daughters-in-law,  is  placed  a goblet  of  wine 
and  a dish  of  flesh  and  cakes.  Their  priest  takes  up  the  cup  in 
his  hand  and  mutters, 

I I 

—I  am  Bacchus,  I am  Shiva,— and  then  quaffs  it  off.  Then  all 
others  drink  from  the  same  unwashed  cup.  Then  somebody’s 
wife  or  a prostitute  or  a man  is  made  naked  and  given  a sword 
in  hand.  Such  a woman  is  called  Devi  and  man,  Mahadeva.  The 
rest  worship  their  generative  organs.  They  are  then  given  a cup 
of  wine  to  drink,  from  which  the  others  take  their  potion  in  several 
courses. 

They  repeat  the  course  till  drunk  and  promiscuosly  cohabit 
without  regard  to  the  sacredness  of  relation  and  under  the  impulse 
of  desire.  It  sometimes  so  happens  that  when  much  intoxicated, 
they  fight  one  another  by  boxing,  kicking,  pulling  by  hair,  and  with 
shoes.  They  sometimes  vomit  there.  Then  whoever  is  an  adept 
and  famous  omnivore  among  them,  eats  up  the  vomit.  Of  their 
greatest  adept,  it  is  recorded  ; 

fifTraS  II 

The  man  who  drinks  away  bottle  after  bottle  at  the  house  of  a 
wineseller,  sleeps  at  the  house  of  prostitutes  for  cohabitation  and 
commits  similar  sins  without  compunction  and  shame,  is  considered 
like  an  emperor  supreme  over  all  by  the  followers  of  Warn  Marg. 

1.  Thorn,  damand,  diy  bruts. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


289 


In  other  words,  the  greatest  sinner  is  the  greatest  man  among  them 
and  whoever  does  good  deeds  and  avoids  evil,  is  looked  upon  as 
an  inferior  man  ; for,  it  is  said  in  a Tantra  (Black  magic)  that 
the  human  soul  is  one  that  is  chained  in  bondage  to  shame,  com- 
mandments, family  consideration  and  the  opinion  of  the  public. 
But  whoever  commits  evil  deeds  without  shame,  is  called  the 
eternal  Shiva. 

qriragl «3T  fnw:  it— Gyansankalni  Tantra,  verse  47 

The  Uddisa  Tantra  describes  a ceremonial,  namely,  bottles 
filled  with  wine  should  be  placed  each  in  a niche  all  round  a room, 
then  a man  should  drink  one  of  them  and  go  to  another  to  drink 
its  contents,  and  similarly  from  the  third  to  the  fourth,  and  from 
the  fourth  to  the  fifth  niche,  and  so  forth,  till  he  falls  down  like 
a log  upon  the  ground.  When  his  intoxication  goes  off  and  he 
rises  upon  his  legs,  he  should  drink  again  in  the  same  manner,  till 
he  falls  down  upon  the  ground.  If  he  repeats  it  several  times,  he 
is  liberated  from  the  necessity  of  rebirth.  The  truth  is  that  such 
people  are  never  again  made  human  beings  on  earth,  but  are  sent 
to  the  species  of  the  lower  animals  for  a very  long  time.  The  books 
of  Warn  Marg  teach  adultery  with  any  woman  except  mother.  Accor- 
ding to  them,  it  is  proper  to  go  to  any  woman,  whether  daughter  or 
sister.  They  have  two  kinds  of  great  knowledge.  One  of  them  is 
Matangi  Vidya,  and  is  professed  by  one  who  does  not  spare  even  his 
mother  from  dishonouring.  They  repeat  charms  at  the  time  of  sexual 
intercourse  with  the  view  to  obtain  some  occult  power.  There  will 
be  few  people  in  the  world  as  foolish  and  ignorant  as  these  followers 
of  Warn  Marg. 

The  man  who  wants  to  give  currency  to  falsehood  disparages 
and  slanders  truth.  This  is  exemplified  in  what  the  followers  of 
Warn  Marg  sav  : the  Vedas,  philosophies,  and  Puranas  are  all  like 
common  prostitutes,  and  the  Shambhavi  Mudra  or  the  ceremonial  of 
Warn  Marg  is  like  a veiled  woman  of  a noble  faniily.  Being  so 
perverted,  they  taught  a religion  against  the  teachings  of  the  Vedas. 
Their  religion  spread  over  a great  part  of  India  in  the  course  of 
time.  They  fraudulently  coined  and  practised  certain  religious 
rites  in  the  name  of  the  Vedas.  As  for  instance, 

grt  Prig  i i 1 1 

Drink  wine  in  the  sacrifice  of  Soutramani.  But  the  true 
meaning  is : Drink  the  juice  of  the  Soma  herb  in  the  sacrifice  of 
Soutramani.  The  ignorant  followers  of  Warn  Marg  also  taught 
such  doctrines  as,  Manu. 

— V,  56.  There  is  no  sin  in  eating  flesh  in  a sacrifice  from  the 
scripture  point  of  view.  If  slaughter  in  a Vedic  sacrifice  be  no  sin 


290 


Satyarth  Prakash 


of  murder,  as  a follower  of  Warn  Marg  says  will  there  be  any  sin 
in  murdering  him  and  all  the  members  of  his  family  and  burning 
them  in  a sacrifice  ? It  is  childish  to  say  that  there  is  no  sin  in 
eating  flesh  and  drinking  wine,  or  cohabiting  with  a neighbour’s 
wife ; for,  flesh  cannot  be  obtained  without  causing  pain  to 
animals,  and  it  is  not  a religious  act  to  give  pain  to  others  without 
fault.  It  is  well  known  that  drinking  is  always  forbidden  by  all 
the  scriptures  except  those  of  Warn  Marg.  And  it  is  sinful  to  hold 
a sexual  intercourse  with  a woman  without  marriage.  Whoever 
calls  it  sinless,  is  himself  sinful. 

Cow,  Horse  and  Human  Scrifices 

They  have  interpolated  many  such  doctrines  in  the  books  of 
sages  and  philosophers  and  have  written  books  in  their  name.  They 
instituted  Gomedh  and  Ashwamedh  sacrifices,  that  is  to  say,  they 
permitted  the  people  to  slaughter  cows  and  horses  and  burn  them 
on  the  alter  to  obtain  heaven  for  themselves  and  the  beasts  slaugh* 
tered.  The  cause  of  this  strange  custom  is  that  they  did  not 
understand  the  right  sense  of  the  words,  Ashwamedh,  Gomedh, 
and  the  like  terms  occuting  in  the  Brahmanas  (Vedic  ritualistic 
scriptures),  or  else  they  would  have  never  committed  sm^h  a 
blunder  and  abominable  sin. 

Q.— What  is  the  true  meaning  of  Ashwamedh,  Gomedh, 
Narmedh  and  the  like  words  ? 

A.— Their  meaning  is— Shat.  XIII.  1,  6,  3;  IV.  3,  1,  25; 
respectively,— 

Tt«5'  Vt  \ *i>:  I WW:  i I —Shat. 

Nowhere  is  there  sanction  found  in  authentic  scriptures  to 
slaughter  men,  horses,  cows  and  other  lower  animals  and  to  burn 
them  upon  the  alter.  Such  horrid  things  are  written  in  the  books 
of  the  believers  of  Warn  Marg  only.  The  sacrifices  of  men  and 
animals  were  instituted  by  the  Warn  Margians  only,  and  if  they 
are  found  anywhere  in  other  peoples’  books,  they  are  interpolated 
there  by  them.  Ashwamedha  properly  means  a king’s  governing 
the  people  with  justice  and  equity  and  according  to  the  precept  of 
righteousness,  a person’s  working  in  the  cause  of  education  and 
other  beneficient  reforms,  and  the  burning  of  clarified  butter  and 
odorous  substances  in  a clear  fire  for  the  purification  of  the  atmos- 
phere. Gomedha  signifies  the  purifying  of  food  substances,  the 
subjugation  of  the  senses,  the  use  of  the  solar  rays,  and  the 
improving  of  the  world  around.  Narmedha  is  the  cremating  of  the 
body  of  a person  when  dead,  in  accordance  with  the  injunctions  of 
the  Vedas. 

Q.— Is  it  true  as  asserted  by  sacrificers  that  the  layman  per- 
foTmiag  a sacrifice  ond  the  animal  slaughtered  therein,  get  heaven 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


291 


as  its  consequence,  and  the  burning  of  the  victim  of  a sacrifice 
upon  the  alter  restored  it  to  life  ? 

A— No  ; it  is  not.  For,  if  people  can  attain  to  heaven  by 
slaughter,  the  teacher  of  such  rights  should  be  sent  to  heaven  by 
killing  and  burning  him  upon  the  alter.  Why  does  he  not  help  his 
own  dear  father,  mother,  wife,  and  children  to  get  to  heaven  by 
murdering  and  sacrificing  them  upon  the  alter,  and  restore  them 
to  life  out  of  the  ashes  of  the  sacred  fire  ? 

Not  Sanctioned  by  Vedas 

Q.— How  is  it  that  people  recite  the  Veda  mantras  at  such 
sacrifices  if  there  is  no  sanction  for  them  in  the  Vedas  ? 

A.— The  Vedic  verses  do  not  prevent  people  from  reading  or 
reciting  them  at  any  time  and  at  any  place  ; for,  they  are  a group 
of  words  But  they  do  not  mean  that  animals  should  be  slaughtered 
and  burnt  in  sacrifices.  For  example,  Agnaye  swaiha  : the  sacrificial 
verses  mean  that  the  burning  of  nutritious  drugs,  clarified  butter, 
and  other  odorous  things  in  a clear  fire  purifies  the  air,  rain,  and 
water,  and  benefits  the  people  who  use  them.  But  the  ignorant 
priests  do  not  understand  these  right  meanings,  for  the  persons 
who  seek  their  own  interests,  do  not  care  for  the  good  of  others. 

Buddhism. 

When  this  vicious  religion  and  pious  frauds  reigned  trium- 
phant, and  the  priests  took  gifts  for  the  welfare  of  the  departed 
souls  and  got  food  to  offer  to  the  manes,  called  the  shraddha  and 
tarpona ; a very  terrible  religion,  denominated  Buddhism  or 
Jainism,  sprang  up,  which  reviled  the  Vedas  and  the  system  of 
philosophy. 

It  is  related  that  there  was  a certain  king  at  Gorakhpur  in 
India.  He  was  advl^ed  to  perform  a sacrifice  at  which  the  Indian 
popes  ministered.  His  dear  queen  died  under  a sacrificial  horse 
in  the  unnatural  sexual  intercourse  with  the  beast,  required  by 
such  a sacrifice.  He  was  consequently  disgusted  with  the  religion 
and  so  renounced  the  world  after  making  over  the  government  of 
his  kingdom  to  his  son  and  heir,  and  commenced  preaching  and 
exposing  the  trickery  of  the  popes. 

Charavaka  : Materialism 

A sect  of  this  religion  is  called  Charavaka  or  Abhanaka.  This 
school  wrote  such  verses  as — 

Refutation  of  Offerings  to  Manes 

wf  wtraeslJr  i firw  it  ii 

—meaning  : If  the  animals  slaughtered  at  sacrifices  and  burnt  upon 
the  altar,  aseeqd  to  heaven,  why  does  not  the  performer  of  the  savn* 


292 


Satyarth  Prgkash 


fices  kill  his  parents  and  relatives  to  help  them  to  bliss  ? If  the 
Shraddha  and  Tarpana  (food  and  water  to  the  departed  souls)  are 
for  the  satisfaction  and  appeasing  of  the  hunger  and  thirst  of  the 
dead,  it  is  useless  to  supply  the  persons  about  to  start  on  journey 
with  provisions  and  expenses  ; for,  the  food  and  drink  prepared  at 
home  and  served  in  dishes  and  pots  in  their  name  will  reach  them 
in  journey  or  a foreign  country,  just  as  these  articles  in  the 
Shraddha  and  Tarpana  are  believed  to  reach  the  dead  people  in 
heaven.  If  the  living  persons  cannot  obtain  things  offered  to 
them,  when  they  are  in  a far-off  country,  or  even  at  a distance  of 
ten  cubits,  how  can  the  dead  persons  get  them  at  all  in  heaven 
which  is  immeasurably  far  ? 

These  ananswerable  arguments  got  an  easy  hold  on  the 
people’s  mind,  and  this  new  religion  began  to  spread  among  them. 
When  many  kings  and  noblemen  became  its  disciples,  the  popes 
were  also  tempted  to  it,  for  they  were  ever  ready  to  go  where  they 
could  get  much  gold. 

Jainism 

So  they  began  to  embrace  Jainism,  whose  various  kinds  of 
popery  will  he  described  in  the  XII  chapter.  Many  persons  accepted 
the  faith  ; but  the  others,  who  lived  in  mountains,  Benares,  Cunouj, 
the  west,  and  the  south,  did  not  embrace  it.  These  believers  of  the 
Jain  faith,  taking  the  popish  commentary  on  the  Vedas  to  be  the 
Vedas  themselves  out  of  their  ignorance,  cried  down  the  Vedas. 
They  prohibited  their  study  and  leaching,  suppressed  the  ceremony 
of  the  sacred  thread,  and  abolished  the  rules  of  studentship  or 
Brahmacharya  They  destroyed  as  many  Vedic  scriptures  as  they 
could  get,  and  persecuted  and  oppressed  the  Aryas  (followers  of 
the  Vedas).  When  they  gained  power  and  had  no  fear  from  any 
quarter,  they  honoured  their  laity  and  clergy.  They  disgraced  the 
believers  in  the  Vedas  and  punished  them  unjustly. 

Origin  of  Idolatry 

Being  puffed  up  with  pride,  they  rolled  in  luxury.  They  made 
large  images  of  their  teachers,  called  the  Tirthankaras,  from 
Rishabh  Deva  to  Mahavira.  It  was  therefore  the  followers  of 
Jainism  that  laid  the  foundation  of  the  worship  of  stone  images. 
Then  belief  in  God  declined.  The  people  took  to  idolatry.  The 
rule  of  the  Jainees  lasted  for  about  300  years  in  Aryavarta.  The 
general  public  grew  ignorant  of  the  right  meanings  of  the  Vedas. 
These  dark  days  passed  over  India  about  2,500  years  ago. 

Lord  Shankara 

About  2,200  years  ago  Shankaracharya,  a Brahmana  of  Dravid 
(Southern  India),  who  studied  grammar,  philosophy,  and  all  the 
Sanskrit  literature,  pondered  over  the  state  of  things  and  was  very 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religion 


sorry  to  find  that  the  true  monotheistic  religion  of  the  Vedas  had 
disappeared  and  Jainism  and  atheism  prevailed  to  the  great  loss  of 
spiritual  interests.  He  determined  to  drive  them  away.  Not  only 
he  knew  the  six  systems  of  Aryan  philosophy  but  also  the  litjerature 
of  the  Jain  faith.  Besides,  his  reasoning  power  was  gigantic  and 
invincible.  He  thought  it  best  to  preach  and  hold  discussions  with 
the  Jainees  to  expose  their  faith.  With  this  purpose  in  view,  he 
travelled  to  Ujjain  in  Central  India,  which  was  then  under  the  rule 
of  King  Sudhanwa,  who  was  conversant  with  the  books  of  the  Jain 
faiih  and  Sanskrit  to  some  extent.  He  then  preached  the  religion 
of  the  Vedas  there,  and  in  the  interview  with  the  king  asked  him 
that  since  he  professed  the  Jain  faith  and  also  know  its  books  as 
well  as  Sanskrit,  he  should  arrange  for  his  discussion  with  the 
scholars  of  the  Jain  faith  and  make  it  a necessary  condition  that 
whoever  is  silenced,  should  embrace  the  faith  of  the  victor,  and 
that  he  should  also  adopt  the  same  religion.  Though  the  king 
was  a follower  of  the  Jain  faith,  yet  being  acquainted  with  Sanskrit 
books,  he  had  some  light  of  knowledge  in  his  mind,  and  therefore 
his  reason  was  not  obscured  with  animality  ; for,  a learned  person 
can  distinguish  between  right  and  wrong,  and  accept  the  truth  and 
reject  the  falsehood.  As  long  as  King  Sudhanwa  did  not  see  a 
learned  preacher,  he  remained  in  doubt  as  to  which  the  true  and 
which  the  false  faith  was.  But  when  he  heard  the  request  of 
Shankaracharya,  he  was  much  pleased  and  said  that  he  would 
surely  arrange  for  a discussion  to  ascertain  the  truth.  So  he  invited 
the  great  Jain  scholars  from  different  parts  of  the  country  and 
convened  a meeting  for  discussion,  in  which  Shankaracharya  was 
to  prove  the  Vedic  religion  to  be  true  and  refute  Jainism,  and  the 
Jain  scholars  to  refute  his  and  argue  for  theirs  in  his  opposition. 

Triumph  of  Vedic  Religioo 

The  discussion  continued  for  several  days.  The  Jainees  main- 
tained that  there  was  no  eternal  God,  the  maker  of  the  world.  The 
soul  and  the  world  themselves  were  eternal.  Both  of  them  werc 
unborn  and  indestructible.  Contradictory  to  this  doctrine, 
Shankaracharya  affirmed  that  the  eternal  Supreme  Being  alone  was 
the  maker  of  the  world.  The  soul  and  the  world  were  illusory. 
For,  the  Great  God  made  the  world  out  of  his  Maya  : illusion,  or 
occult  power.  He  alone  held  and  destroyed  it.  The  soul  and  the 
phenomenal  world  were  like  a dream.  The  Great  God  was  himself 
the  world  and  sported,  as  it  were,  in  time.  The  argumentation  was 
kept  up  by  both  parties  for  a long  time  ; but  the  reasoning  and 
cogent  proofs  advanced  by  Shankaracharya  in  favour  of  his  thesis 
prevailed  at  last  and  demolished  the  doctrines  of  Jainism.  There- 
upon the  champion  of  Jainism  and  the  king  embraced  the  religion 
of  the  Vedas  and  abandoned  that  of  Jainism.  Shankaracharya’s 
success  made  a great  noise  in  the  country.  King  Sudhanwa  wrote 
letters  to  other  kings  and  asked  t|iem  to  arrange  for  discqssion  vitll 


294 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Shankaracharya.  But  the  refutation  of  Jainism  at  one  place  con- 
vinced them  of  its  error  and  induced  them  to  renounce  it  for  good 
and  all. 

Spread  of  Vedic  Religion 

King  Sudhanwa  then  arranged  for  Shankaracharya’s  tour  in 
India  and  furnished  him  with  a body-guard  to  protect  him  and 
servants  to  wait  upon  him.  From  the  influence  of  his  preaching 
the  people  again  put  on  the  sacred  thread  and  commenced  the  study 
of  the  Vedas,  He  travelled  for  ten  years  over  all  India,  thoroughly 
refuted  the  religion  of  the  Jainees,  and  restored  that  of  the  Vedas 
to  its  original  supremacy.  The  broken  images  that  are  now  dug 
out,  were  broken  in  the  time  of  Shankaracharya,  but  those  which 
are  sometimes  found  whole,  were  then  buried  underground  by  the 
Jainees  to  preserve  them  from  iconoclasm. 

Shankaracharya  also  refuted  Shaivism,  which  was  believed  in  by 
some  communities,  as  well  as  Warn  Marg.  At  that  time  the 
country  was  very  opulent  and  the  heart  of  the  people  beat  with 
patriotism,  Shankaracharya  and  King  Sudhanwa  did  not  get  the 
temples  of  the  Jainees  to  be  pulled  down,  for  they  were  intended 
for  the  Vedic  schools.  When  Shankaracharya  had  established  the 
religion  of  the  Vedas  and  was  meditating  the  scheme  of  education, 
he  was  poisoned  by  two  men  who  outwardly  professed  the  Vedic 
religion,  but  were  bigoted  Jajnees  inwardly,  and  who  had  gained 
the  favour  of  Shankaracharya  by  their  hypocrisy.  He  lost  his 
appetite  and  his  body  was  covered  with  blisters.  Six  months  after 
he  breathed  his  last.  This  bad  event  of  his  death  cast  a deep  gloom 
over  the  country,  and  his  disciples  lost  heart.  The  cause  of  educa- 
tion was  checked.  His  followers  tried  to  encourage  the  study  of  his 
Shariraka  Bhashya  (Commentary  on  the  Vedanta  philosophy.) 

Shankara’s  Followers 

In  other  words,  they  taught  that  Brahman  was  the  only  truth, 
and  the  world  was  identical  with  Brahman  or  the  divine  spirit, 
which  Shankaracharya  had  posited  to  refute  Jainism.  They  opened 
convents  at  Sringeri  in  the  south  and  at  Bhugovardhana  in  the  east, 
also  erected  the  Joshimath  convent  in  the  north  and  the  Sarda 
convent  at  Dwarka  in  the  west,  and  became  their  abbots  and  priors. 
They  collected  much  wealth  and  sank  in  ease;  for  after  the  demise 
of  Shankaracharya  they  were  much  honoured  by  the  country. 

Let  us  here  pause  to  consider  the  above  question.  If  the 
doctrine  of  the  identity  of  the  soul  and  Brahman  and  the  illusion 
of  the  world,  was  really  believed  in  by  Shankaracharya,  it  was  not 
good  ; but  if  assumed  only  to  refute  Jainism;  it  was  somewhat 
go'etd.  The  doctrine  of  these  Neo-Vedantins  is  as  follows 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religionx 


295 


Vedanta 

Vcdanti* — The  world  is  unreal  or  false  like  a dream  ; like  an 
illusion  of  a serpent  which  a rope  appears  to  be  in  darkness,  of 
silver  which  a mollusk  looks  like  in  sun,  of  water  in  mirage  ; like  a 
fairy  town  or  a castle  in  the  air ; or  like  a rhagician’s  trick. 
Brahman  or  the  Supreme  Being  alone  is  real  or  the  truth. 

Siddhanti** — What  do  you  mean  by  unreal  or  false  ? 

V.— What  appears  to  be,  but  does  not  exist  in  reality, 

S. — How  can  a thing  appear  to  be,  which  does  not  exist  really? 

V. — It  appears  to  be  from  Adhyaropa  (supposition). 

S. — What  is  Adhyaropa  ? 

— The  incompatibility  of  an  object  with  its  alleged  predication 
is  called  Adhyaropa  or  Adhyasa  ; t or  in  other  words,  predicating 
certain  properties  of  an  object  in  which  they  do  not  inhere.  Elimi- 
nating them  is  called  Apavadaka.  The  phenomenal  world  is 
supposed  to  be  lodged  in  Brahman,  which  is  free  from  both  the 
predication  and  elimination  of  attributes. 

S. — You  have  fallen  into  this  error  from  supposing  the  rope 
to  be  real  and  the  serpent  to  be  unreal.  Is  not  a serpent  a real 
thing  ? If  you  say  that  it  is  not  in  the  rope,  it  is  present  elsewhere, 
and  its  notion  is  latent  in  the  mind.  So  that  the  serpent  is  not 
unreal.  In  the  same  manner,  it  is  also  true  of  the  other  instance, 
viz.,  an  idea  of  a man  on  seeing  a trunk,  of  silver  on  seeing  a shell, 
and  so  forth.  The  things  seen  in  a dream  exist  elsewhere.  Their 
notions  endure  in  the  mind.  Therefore,  a dream  is  not  the  result 
of  an  erroneous  predication  of  an  object. 

V.— How  can  it  be  true  what  is  never  seen  or  heard,  as  for 
example,  a man  sees  his  own  head  cut  off,  and  himself  weeping  ; 
a stream  of  water  flowing  upwards,  which  has  never  happened  nor 
is  ever  heard,  but  which  is  seen  in  a dream  ? 

• Vedanti  means  a follower  of  Vedanta  philosophy  which  assets  that 
there  is  only  one  substance,  called  Brahman,  and  all  else  is  but  illusion 
nothing  exists  but  God.  He  is  all  in  all. 

**  Siddhanti  means  a follower  of  Mimansa  philosophy  which  maintains 
the  reality  of  the  world  and  the  distinction  between  God  and  the  human  soul ; 
that  is  to  say,  there  exist  three  distinct  substances,— God  soul,  and  matter, — 
souls  being  many  and  distinct.— frf. 

t It  is  that  act  of  perception  in  which  a person  ascribes  certain  proper- 
ties to  an  object  which  is  different  from  them  ; as,  seeing  a rope  in  a dark 
place,  we  imagine  it  to  be  a serpent.  But  when  a light  is  brought  to  it,  It  is 
no  longer  g serpent  but  a rope.  The  imaginary  serpent  disappears  before 
light  or  true  knowledge.  In  like  manner,  we  imagine  the  world  in  Brahman 
or  the  Supreme  Being  : but  when  true  knowledge  dawns  upon  us,  ther#  will 
be  no  world,  but  tpe  Brahman  will  be  all  in  all.— 5d, 


296 


Satyarih  Prakash 


S. — This  example,  too,  does  not  prove  your  proposition.  For, 
there  can  never  be  an  impression  of  a thing  on  the  mind  without 
seeing  or  hearing  it,  without  impression  there  is  no  remembrance, 
and  without  remembrance  there  is  no  realization  of  thi  thing. 
When  a man  has  actually  heard  or  seen  somebody’s  head  cut  off 
and  his  father  or  brothers  weeping  in  a battle-field  ; or  when  he 
has  seen  or  heard  a jet  of,  water  gushing  up  ; his  mind  is  impressed 
with  these  ideas.  When  he  dreams,  he  sees  in  his  mind  those  things 
which  he  has  seen  or  heard  before.  When  he  sees  them  within 
himself  in  dream,  he  fancies  his  own  head  as  cut  off  and  himself  as 
weeping,  or  a stream  as  flowing  upward.  So  these  are  not  the 
examples  of  erroneous  predication  ; but  they  are  like  those  cases  in 
which  draftsmen  draw  a sketch  on  paper  out  of  their  imagination 
of  what  has  been  seen,  heard  or  practised  by  them  ; or  a painter 
observing  an  object,  forms  an  idea  of  it  in  the  mind  and  then  makes 
an  exact  picture  of  it.  However,  in  a dream  there  is  consciousness 
of  an  act  of  memory,  as  a man  sees  his  teacher  in  a dream.  Some- 
times a man  fails  to  recollect  what  he  saw  or  heard  at  a very  remote 
time.  He  does  not  know  if  he  sees,  hears  or  acts  upon  what  he 
experienced  before.  He  cannot  remember  so  well  in  a dream  as  in 
waking.  Therefore  your  definition  of  Adhyaropa  or  Adhyasa  is 
false.  It  is  also  wrong  what  is  called  Vivartavada,  or  the  prccep- 
tion  of  a serpent  in  a rope.  Nor  is  it  applicable  to  the  case,  that 
the  world  appears  to  exist  by  illusion  in  the  Brahman. 

V. — There  is  no  perception  of  predicated  qualities  apart  from 
that  of  the  substance  ; as,  there  can  be  no  illusion  of  a serpent 
without  a rope.  There  is  no  serpent  in  a rope,  yet  a man  trembles 
from  fear  on  an  illusory  perception  of  a serpent  in  it,  produced 
accidently  by  darkness  sprinkled  with  a little  light.  But  his  fear 
and  doubt  instantly  leave  him  when  he  sees  it  with  a light  ; so  the 
false  idea  of  a world  in  the  Supreme  Being  disappears  on  the  reali- 
sation of  Brahman  ; as  the  false  idea  of  a serpent  goes  away  and  a 
firm  conviction  of  rope  gains  ground  in  the  mind  in  light. 

S. — Who  experiences  the  illusion  of  a world  in  the  Supreme 
Being  ? 

V. — The  soul  experiences  it. 

S.— Whence  does  the  soul  come  ? 

V.— She  comes  out  of  ignorance. 

S.  - Whence  does  ignorance  come,  and  where  does  it  reside  ? 

V.— Ignorance  is  unbeginning  and  resides  in  the  Brahman. 

S. — Was  there  in  the  Brahman  the  iginorance  of  self  or  of  some- 
thing else,  and  who  had  that  ignorance  ? 

V,— The  Chidabhasa  had  it. 


Refutation  and  Ad'/ocation  af  Indian  Religion 


297 


S.— What  is  the  nature  of  the  Chidabhasa  ? 

V. — The  Brahman  and  its*  ignorance  of  self,  that  is  to  say, 
he  Brahman  forgets  its  own  self. 

S.— What  is  the  cause  of  the  Brahman’s  forgetfulness  ? 

V.— Avidya  (nescience), 

S. — Is  Avidva  an  attribute  of  the  all-pervading  and  all-know- 
.ng  Being,  or  it  is  that  of  the  one  who  is  of  limited  knowledge  ? 

V.— It  is  an  attribute  of  the  Being  of  limited  knowledge. 

S.— Is  there  any  other  thinking  being  in  the  opinion  of  youi 
school  than  the  one  infinite  and  all-knowing  conscious  Being  ? And 
where  does  the  being  of  limited  knowledge  come  from  ? It  is  all 
right,  if  you  believe  a conscious  being  of  limited  knowledge  to  be 
different  from  the  Brahman.  If  the  Brahman  is  ignorant  of  itself 
in  one  part  of  its  whole  existence;  and  just  as  the  pain  of  an  ulcer 
in  one  part  of  the  body  disables  all  its  organs,  so  if  the  Brahman  is 
ignorant  and  afflicted  in  one  part,  it  will  be  ignorant  and  afflicted 
in  all  parts  of  its  existence, 

V.— It  is  a characteristic  of  the  Upadhi,  but  not  of  the 
Brahman. 

S,— Is  the  Upadhi  an  inanimate  or  a conscious  being  ? Is  it 
real  or  otherwise  ? 

Mystry  of  Upadhi : World. 

V.— It  is  “unspeakable"  (anirvachaniya),  i.e,  it  cannot  be  said 
to  be  either  real  or  unreal,  inanimate  or  conscious. 

S. — This  assertion  of  yours  is  like  vadato  vyagliatah  : self  con- 
radiction;  for,  you  say  that  there  is  avidya  which  cannot  be  said  to 
be  either  inanimate,  conscious,  real  or  unreal.  It  is  just  like  the 
case  when  a person  takes  a piece  of  composite  metal,  made  of  gold 
and  brass,  to  a jeweller  for  test,  who  says  that  it  is  neither  gold  nor 
brass,  but  it  is  made  of  both. 

V.— See,  there  is  space  in  a pitcher,  space  in  a convent,  space 
in  clouds,  and  space  in  the  heavens  on  account  of  the  Upadhi,  i e., 
there  appears  to  be  a plurality  of  spaces  on  account  of  pitchers, 
buildings,  and  clouds  ; but  in  reality  there  is  only  one  space  in  the 
heavens,  or  extension.  In  like  manner,  the  Brahman  appears 
diverse  to  ignorants  or  vulgars  on  account  of  the  Upadhis  of  Maya 
(illusion),  Avidya  (nescience),  Samashti  (collectivity),  Vyashti 
(diversity)  and  Antahkarana  (the  internal  sense);  but  in  reality  the 
Brahman  is  one  and  one  only  : for,  it  is  said  in  the  Kathopanishat, 

•The  word  Brahman  is  the  Neuter  Gender  like  the  Supremy  Being. 


Satyarth  Prakash 


M 


srfiiest  ^ I 

WI^T??ITTc«tT  ¥«?  II 

— section  5,  verse  9,  that  as  fire  takes  the  long,  wide,  circular,  great 
or  small  shape  of  an  object  into  which  it  enters,  and  yet  it  is  diffe- 
rent from  them;  so  also  does  the  all-pervading  Supreme  Self  appears 
as  so  many  distinct  and  separate  internal  senses  from  its  pervading 
them;  but  it  is  really  different  from  them. 

S. — This  assertion  of  yours  is  also  wrong.  Since  you  believe  a 
pitcher,  convent,  cloud  and  space  to  be  distinct  entities,  you  may 
believe  the  soul  and  the  world  with  its  phenomena  of  cause  and 
effect  to  be  distinct  from  the  Supreme  Being  or  Brahman,  and  vice 
versa. 

V. — As  fire  appears  to  assume  the  same  form  as  the  object  it 
enters  into,  so  does  the  Brahman  appears  to  have  forms  or  shapes 
to  the  ignorant.  But  the  Brahman,  in  reality,  is  neither  the  mind 
nor  the  matter  (animate  or  inanimate).  If  the  sun  be  seen  in  a 
thousand  trays  of  water,  he  will  present  a thousand  forms  to  the 
eye:  but  in  reality,  the  sun  is  one;  nor  is  he  destroyed,  removed,  or 
evaporated  on  the  destruction  of  the  trays,  the  throwing  away  of  the 
water,  or  its  evaporation.  In  like  manner,  the  Brahman  is  reflected 
in  the  internal  senses,  which  is  the  phenomenon,  called  the  chida~ 
blijsa  : so  the  soul  exists  as  long  as  there  are  the  internal  senses; 
but  when  the  internal  senses  are  annihilated  by  the  divine  knowledge 
(gyana),  the  soul  regains  her  identity  with  the  Brahman.  This  C/t/efa- 
bhasa  (soul  or  reflection  of  God)  is  ignorant  of  the  nature  of  the 
Brahman.  It  supposes  itself  to  be  active,  luxurious,  happy,  mis- 
erable, sinful,  benevolent  and  subject  to  birth  and  death,  and  so  it 
is  not  rcleasetl  from  the  bondage  of  the  world. 

S. — ^This  instance  of  yours  is  also  wrong.  For  the  sun,  water 
and  trays  have  definite  forms;  the  sun  being  distinct  from  the  water 
and  trays  and  vice  versa,  his  reflection  in  the  water  is  possible;  but  if 
he  be  formless,  he  cannot  be  reflected.  Also,  the  Great  God  being 
formless  and  all-pervading  like  space,  no  object  can  be  aloof  from 
the  Brahman,  or  vice  versa.  The  relation,  that  God  is  the  pervader 
and  (he  svorld  is  the  pervaded  object,  does  not  make  the  Brahman 
and  the  universe  one  and  the  same  thing.  In  other  words,  seen  from 
the  point  of  the  law  of  connection  and  distinction  of  circumstances* 
anvaya  vyalireka  hliava,  they  appear  to  be  always  united  and  yet  they 
are  distinct.  If  they  are  one  and  the  same  thing,  there  can  be  no 
relation  between  them  of  the  pervader  and  the  thing  pervaded  as  men- 
tioned plainly  in  the  phrase  ; Antaryami  Brahman  of  the  Brihada- 
ranyaka  Also,  there  can  be  no  reflection  of  the  Brahman  for 
reflection  is  impossible  without  form.  As  for  your  believing  the 

• the  threads  that  go  to  make  up  a piece  of  cloth,  are  the  examples  of  this 
; ihiji  IS  thfv  ai«  distinct  and  yet  v/ithout  thorn  there  can  bo  no  cloth  ; but 
ili^y  tliifiiis^lv^s  di«  nut  cloth. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


1^9 


Brahman  to  become  the  soul  from  the  attendant  circumstances  or 
uphadhi  of  the  internal  sense  is  mutable  and  separate  and  the  Brah- 
man is  immutable  and  entire.  If  you  are  not  inclined  to  believe 
the  Brahman  and  the  soul  to  be  two  distinct  entities,  please  do 
answer  me  the  question  : Do  you  believe  that  part  of  the  Brahman 
to  be  ignorant  where  the  internal  sense  is  present  and  that  to  be  wise 
where  it  is  not  ? As  an  umbrella  cuts  off  the  sunlight  wherever  it  is 
carried  and  sets  it  free  whence  it  is  removed,  so  also  will  the  inter- 
nal senses  cause  the  Brahman  every  moment  to  be  wise  and  igno- 
rant, bound  and  liberated.  The  whole  Brahman  will  be  ignorant 
from  the  effect  of  the  presence  of  the  internal  sense  in  one  part 
which  will  extend  over  the  whole  for  the  Brahman  is  animate  or 
conscious.  Also,  whatever  the  Brahman,  limited  by  an  internal 
sense,  has  seen  at  Mathura,  cannot  be  remembered  by  it  (Brahman) 
at  Kashi ; for,  it  is  a fact  that  a man  does  not  remember  a thing 
which  is  seen  by  another.  The  Chidabhasa  (reflection  of  the  Brah- 
man) which  has  seen  a thing  at  Mathura,  is  no  more  at  Kashi. 
Again,  that  Brahman  which  illumines  the  internal  sense  at  Mathura, 
is  not  the  same  as  at  Kashi.  If  the  very  Brahman  is  the  soul  and 
not  distinct  from  her,  the  soul  should  be  omniscient,  If  the  reflec- 
tion of  the  Brahman  is  distinct,  none  can  have  the  knowledge  of 
what  was  seen  or  heard  before.  If  you  say  that  there  is  remember- 
ance  because  the  Brahman  is  one,  then  pain  or  ignorance  being  in 
one  part,  there  should  be  pain  or  ignorance  over  the  whole.  Brah- 
man. Such  examples  of  yours  prove  the  eternal  holy,  wise,  absolu- 
te Brahman  to  be  unholy,  ignorant  and  limited,  and  represent  the 
indivisible  Brahman  as  divisible. 

V.— The  formless  things  also  cast  reflection,  as  the  sky  is 
reflected  in  a mirror  or  water.  There  it  is  seen  blue,  and  something 
vast  and  deep.  In  the  same  manner,  the  Brahman  is  reflected  in  all 
internal  senses. 

S.— -Since  the  sky  has  no  form,  none  can  see  it.  How  can  a 
thing  be  seen  in  a mirror  or  water,  which  is  not  seen  at  all  ? Only 
the  definite,  or  things  having  forms,  look  wide  and  deep,  but  not 
the  formless  things. 

V.— What  is,  then  that,  which  is  seen  as  blue  above  and  is 
reflected  in  a mirror? 

No  Reflection  of  God. 

S. — It  is  the  particles  of  water,  of  earth,  and  of  fire  evapora- 
ted from  below.  How  can  rain  come  from  the  place  where  there 
is  no  water  ? Therefore,  what  is  seen  extended  far  like  a tent,  is  a 
sphere  of  water.  Water  is  seen  in  the  sky  as  the  hoar  frost  looks  or 
like  a cloud  from  far,  but  hazy  from  neat  or  like  a tent. 

V.— Are  our  examples  of  the  rope  and  the  snake,  the  dream, 
and  the  like  false  ? 


3<)d  ^tyarth  Prakash 

S. — No  ; it  is  your  understanding  that  is  false  or  is  to  blame, 
as  I have  stated  above.  Please,  tell  me,  who  it  was  that  fell  into 
ignorance  at  first? 

V.— The  Brahman  falls  into  it  at  first. 

S.— Is  the  Brahman  of  limited  knowledge,  or  is  it  omniscient? 

V — It  is  neither  omniscient  nor  of  limited  knowledge,  for 
omniscience  and  limited  knowledge  reside  in  a thing  with  the 
upadhis. 

S. — Who  or  what  is  with  the  upadhis? 

V. — The  Brahman. 

S.—Then  the  Brahman  alone  is  omniscient  and  of  limited 
knowledge.  Why  then  did  you  deny  omniscience  and  limited 
knowledge  in  the  Brahman?  If  you  say  that  an  upadhi  is  only 
suppositional  and  false,  who  is  it  that  supposes  it  at  first? 

DistincHoo  of  Sool 

V — Is  the  soul  the  Brahman,  or  is  she  distinct  from  it? 

S— It  is  distinct  from  the  Brahman  ; for,  if  the  soul  is  the 
same  as  the  Brahman,  he  who  makes  a false  supposition,  cannot 
be  the  Brahman.  How  can  he  be  true  whose  suppositions  are 
false  ? 

V— We  believe  both  real  and  unreal  to  be  false  ; and  to 
express  it  in  language  is  also  false. 

S— When  you  speak  falsehood  and  believe  in  what  is  false, 
why  should  you  be  not  false? 

V— It  matters  nothing;  falsehood  and  truth  are  only  our 
suppositions.  We  are  the  vehicles  and  observers  of  both  of  them. 

5— When  you  are  the  medium  or  vehicle  of  truth  and  false- 
■hood,  you  are  like  a banker  or  an  honest  man  and  thief  in  one.  So 
you  cannot  be  an  authority  ; for,  an  authority  is  he  who  always 
believes  in  truth,  acts  on  truth,  who  does  not  believe  in  falsehood, 
speak  falsehood,  and  act  upon  falsehood.  When  you  yourself 
falsify  your  own  statement,  you  become  the  speaker  of  falsehood. 

V — Do  you  believe  in  the  unbeginning  Maya  or  illusion 
which  depends  upon  the  Brahman  and  veils  \i? 

S— -No,  I don’t.  For  you  define  Maya  to  be  the  object  which 
really  docs  not  exist,  but  which  appears  to  be.  Now,  it  can  only 
be  believed  by  one  who  is  intellectually  blind  ; for,  the  appear- 
ance of  a thing  which  docs  not  exist,  is  always  impossible.  There 
can  be  no  photograph  of  a barren  woman’s  son.  Your  assertion 
is  against  the  doettiue  of  the  Chhandogya  Upanishat  such  as 
Sanmulah  somyemah  prajah  * O good  man  ! these  creatures  have 
truth  for  their  foundation. 

V— Do  you  refute  what  has  been  written  by  sages  from 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religion 


301 


Vasishtha  and  Shankaracharya  lo  NishchaJ  Das,  who  were  more 
learned  than  you?  We  look  upon  (hem  as  great  savants. 

S— Are  you  learned  or  are  you  ignorant? 

V— I am  learned  to  some  extent. 

New  Vedaot  Challeoged 

S - Well  then,  prove  the  thesis  of  Vasishtha,  Shankara- 
charya, and  Nishchal  Das  before  me  ; and  I shall  refute  it.  He 
will  be  great  whose  thesis  is  proved  to  be  true.  If  their  proposi- 
tion and  yours  were  irrefutable,  how  is  it  that  you  could  not  refute 
my  doctrine  with  the  help  of  their  arguments?  If  you  do  that, 
your  thesis  will  deserve  acceptance.  It  is  probable  that  Shankara- 
charya and  others  might  have  adopted  the  doctrine  to  refute 
Jainism  only  : for,  many  selfish  learned  men  act  against  their 
conscience  to  prove  their  doctrine  at  different  times  and  places.  If 
they  believed  it  to  be  true  that  God  and  the  soul  were  identical,  the 
world  was  unreal,  and  the  actions  of  the  people  to  be  false  ; they 
were  not  right. 

Refutation  of  Nishchal  Das. 

Nishchal  Das’  learning  is  shown  in  the  inference  given  in 
the  Vrittiprabhakar  as  to  the  identity  of  God  and  the  soul,  Jivo 
Brahmabhinnash  chetanatwat,  * namely,  the  soul  is  not  different 
from  the  Brahman  on  the  ground  of  her  consciousness.  It  is  an 
inference  of  the  people  of  little  sense.  For,  the  agreement  of  qua- 
lities does  not  make  two  things  identical.  Suppose,  for  instance,  a 
man  says  that  earth  is  not  distinct  from  water  both  being  inani- 
mate, Prithwi  jalabhinna  jarhatwatA  As  this  inference  is  fallacious, 
so  is  also  that  of  Nishchal  Das.  Since  the  soul  is  limited,  has 
limited  knowledge  and  is  apt  to  err,  which  qualities  are  opposed 
to  the  nature  of  the  Brahman  and  the  Brahman  is  omnipresent, 
omniscient,  is  not  apt  to  err,  which  distinctive  characteristics  are 
opposed  to  the  nature  of  the  soul  ; so  the  Brahman  and  the  soul 
are  distinct.  Since  odorousness,  solidity,  and  the  like  characteristics 
of  earth  are  different  from  fluidity,  mobility,  and  the  like  qualities 
of  water;  earth  and  water  are  not  identical.  In  like  manner,  the 
distinctive  characteristics  of  the  Brahman  and  the  soul  do  not 
identify  them.  They  were  never  one  and  the  same,  nor  are  they  now 
identical,  and  they  will  never  be  one  and  the  same  in  future.  So 
much  for  Nishchal  Das  and  his  great  erudition  and  philosophy. 

Yoga  Vasishtha. 

The  author  of  the  Yoga  Vasiilitlia  was  probably  some  Neo- 
vedanti  and  it  was  not  written  by  Valmiki,  Vasishtha,  and  Rara- 
chandra.  nor  was  it  read  to  them,  for  they  were  all  the  followers  of 
the  Vedas.  They  could  not  write  against  the  Vedas,  nor  hear  and 
say  anything  against  them. 


302 


Satyarth  Prakash 


g— Is  not  the  identity  of  the  soul  and  the  Brahman  taught  in 
the  Sharirak  Sutras  (metaphysical  aphorisms)  written  by  Prophet 
Vyasa  ? For  they  say  : — 

Jaimini,  Vyasa  on  Salvation. 

(?)  n (^)  II 

(?)  II  (V) 

fencia  ii  (n)  nctqa  arJTfJnfirqrtT: 

— ^Vedanta,  IV,  iv  I,  5-7,  9. 

—(1)  The  soul  becomes  manifest  on  acquiring  her  own  form, 
which  was  originally  that  of  the  Brahman  ; for,  the  word  swa  (own) 
in  the  text  implies  the  nature  of  the  Brahman.  (2)  Many  canons 
as  well  as  the  reasons  given  for  the  obtainment  of  divinity  go  to 
prove  the  existence  of  the  soul  as  the  Brahman,  which  is  the  doc- 
trine of  St.  Jaimini.  (3)  St.  Audolomi  believes  that  the  soul 
exists  in  salvation  in  her  conscious  natuie  only,  as  shown  in  the 
reasons  given  in  the  Brihadaranyaka  in  favour  of  the  identity  of 
the  soul  and  the  Brahman.  (4)  Prophet  Vyasa  believes  it  to  be 
on  incompatibility  in  the  soul  being  of  the  nature  of  the  Brahman 
from  the  above  reasons  given  in  the  canons  of  the  obtainment  of 
divinity.  (5)  A yogi  or  clairvoyant  recognising  his  own  Bramanic  na- 
ture and  free  from  the  thought  of  any  superior  being,  that  is,  know- 
ing his  own  self  only,  exists  in  salvation  in  his  essential  form  of 
the  all-encompassing  Brahman. 

A — These  aphorisms  do  not  mean  that.  Their  true  sense  is 
that  the  soul  does  not  obtain  happiness  or  realise  the  indwelling 
Brahman  in  virtue  of  her  pover  of  clairvoyance,  until  she  becomes 
pure  and  free  from  all  taints  and  obtains  her  inherent  holiness.  In 
like  manner,  a clairvoyant  (yogi)  can  then  enjoy  the  happiness  of 
the  presence  of  the  Brahman  in  salvation  when  he  is  cleansed  of  the 
taint  of  vice  and  becomes  endowed  with  divine  powers.  Such  is 
the  teaching  of  Jaimini.  When  the  soul  is  liberated  from  the  vice 
of  ignorance  and  becomes  pure  intelligence,  then  and  then  only  she 
obtains  union  with  the  Brahman.  When  the  soul  obtains  the 
absolute  knowledge  and  psychical  powers  with  the  Brahman  in  her 
earthly  life,  she  regains  her  original  purity  and  enjoys  happiness. 
When  a clairvoyant  is  of  holy  desires,  he  obtains  God  of  his  own 
accord  and  enjoys  the  felicity  of  salvation.  Then  he  lives  free 
and  independent.  In  salvation  there  is  no  such  thing  as  one  is 
superior  and  another  is  inferior  as  here  ; but  all  the  saved  souls 
are  equal.— Says  the  Vedanta,  I. 

II  — 1 ,i,  16,  17,  ^ 

ii,  22.  tqffqsqfq  ^ I II  5rq3qq|?iT 

wrf?q;—i,l  9,-21.  I ugq^g  q II 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


303 


i,  11,3,  18,20. 

Also,  according  to  the  above  aphorisms  of  the  Vedanta,  no 
other  soul  than  the  Brahman  is  the  creator  of  the  world  ; for,  the 
creation  of  the  world  is  incompatible  with  the  limited  nature, 
limited  knowledge,  and  limited  power  of  the  soul.  So  the  soul  is 
not  the  Brahman.  An  Upanishat  says  ^ 
that  the  soul  and  the  Brahman  are  two  separate  beings,  and  so 
establishes  their  distinction.  Had  it  been  otherwise,  it  could  not 
have  been  said  that  she  becomes  happy  on  obtaining  God, 
whose  nature  is  happiness,  wherein  the  Brahman  is  the  object  to 
be  obtained  and  the  soul  is  the  obtainer  of  it.  So  the  soul  and  the 
Brahman  are  not  identical  Says  the  Mundak  Upanishat ; 

— The  Infinite  Spirit  is  stupendous,  holy,  formless,  all-perva- 
ding, ever  present  outside  and  inside  of  all,  unborn,  free  from 
birth,  death,  and  incarnation,  in-breathing,  out-breathing,  and  all 
connections  with  the  body  and  mind,  glorious  and  so  forth  ; the 
soul  is  immortal,  undecaying,  and  beyond,  or  more  subtle  than 
the  matter  (prakriti) ; the  great  God  is  beyond  her  even,  i.e.,  the 
Brahman  is  the  most  subtle  of  all.  So  the  Brahman  is  distinct  from 
souls  and  matter  for  the  reasons  of  its  having  attributes  distingui- 
shing it  from  the  mind  and  matter.  They  are  distinct  from  the 
fact,  that  the  people  establish  the  union  of  the  soul  with  the  all- 
pervading  Brahman,  or  vice  versa.  For,  union  takes  place  in 
distinct  objects. 

Distinction  of  God  and  Soul. 

The  Brahman  is  described  as  in-dwelling  and  pervades  the  soul, 
which  makes  the  soul  prevaded  and  distinct  from  the  Brahman 
pervading,  for  the  relation  of  the  pervaded  and  the  pervader  is  only 
possible  in  distinct  objects.  God  is  different  from  the  soul  and 
also  from  the  senses,  the  internal  senses,  the  five  elements,  the  space, 
the  sun,  the  joy  of  the  possession  of  heavenly  qualities,  and  the 
learned  or  saved  people,  called  gods* 

Another  Upanishai’s  leaching  regards  the  Brahman  and  the 
soul  to  be  distinct.  Similar  teachings  arc  found  in  many  places 
in  the  Upanishats.  * 

The  soul  endowed  with  the  body  is  not  the  Brahman  ; for, 
the  attributes,  nature  and  deeds  of  the  Brahman  cannot  be  predi- 
cated of  the  soul.  God  is  present  in  all  souls  in  virtue  of  His 
pervading  in  all— (adhidaiva)  the  subtle  thing  such  as  the  mind  and 


304 


Satyarth  Prakash 


seases,  (adhibhuta)  the  elements  such  as  earth  &c.,  and  (adhyatma) 
all  the  souls  ; for,  the  Upanishats  everywhere  describe  the  pervading 
qualities  of  the  same  Infinite  Spirit.  The  soul  accompanied  with 
the  body  is  not  the  Brahman  ; for,  the  distinction  of  the  soul  from 
the  Brahman  is  evident  from  the  very  nature  of  the  Divine  Subs- 
tance. Thus  the  Shariraka  Sutras  prove  the  distinction  between 
the  Brahman  and  the  soul  from  their  natural  and  inherent 
constitution. 

In  like  manner,  the  Upakrama  and  Upasamhara  of  Vedan- 
tins  are  also  untenable.  For  they  believe  the  beginning  (upa- 
krama) and  and  (upasamhara)  of  the  creation  from  the  constitu- 
tion of  the  Brahman.  Since  they  believe  in  nothing  else  but  the 
Brahman,  creation  and  destruction  become  the  qualities  of  the 
Brahman.  But  the  Vedas  and  other  authentic  scriptures  prove 
the  Brahman  to  be  free  from  creation  and  destruction.  God 
will  be  angry  with  the  Neo-Vedantins ; for,  change,  creation,  and 
ignorance  are  impossible  of  being  found  in  the  Brahman,  which 
is  unchanging,  undecaying,  holy,  eternal  and  unerring.  Even  in 
cataclysm,  the  Brahman,  the  material  cause,  and  the  souls,  all  the 
three  remain  distinct.  So  the  doctrine  of  beginning  and  end  of 
the  Neo-Vedantins  is  false.  There  arc  many  other  erroneous  doc- 
trines in  this  school,  which  are  against  the  scriptures  and  the  eight 
kinds  of  evidence. 

Vikramaditya. 

Afterwards  some  doctrines  of  the  Jainees  and  the  followers  of 
Shankaracharya  spread  in  India,  and  they  held  discussions  among, 
them.  Three  hundred  years  after  Shankaracharya,  Maharajah 
Vikramaditya  of  Ujjain  became  famous  to  some  extent  in  India. 
He  suppressed  the  internal  quarrels  of  the  Rajahs  and  restored 
peace.  Then  came  Maharajah  Bhartrihari  who  was  somewhat  versed 
in  poetry  and  other  books  of  literature.  But  he  turned  a recluse 
and  abandoned  government.  Maharajah  Bhoja  came  500  years  after 
Vikramaditya.  He  encouraged  the  study  of  grammar,  rhetoric  and 
poetry  so  much  so  that  Kalidas  who  was  a shepherd  wrote  the  poem 
of  the  Raghuvansha.  Raja  Bhoja  awarded  and  honoured  him  who 
brought  to  him  a couple  of  good  verses  with  much  wealth.  Then 
the  Rajahs  and  nobles  after  them  gave  up  studying.  Though  the 
Wammargians  flourished  before  Shankaracharya  as  well  as  the  sects 
of  Shaivism  and  the  like  faiths,  yet  their  doctrines  did  not  spread  far 
and  wide.  But  the  power  of  the  Shaivites  increased  from  the  time  of 
Vikramaditya.  They  were  divided  into  many  sects  such  as  Pashu- 
pata  like  the  ten  sects  of  the  Mahavidya  of  Warn  Marg.  The  people 
believed  Shankaracharya  to  be  the  incarnation  of  Shiva.  His  dis- 
ciples and  monks  joined  Shaivism  and  also  associated  with  the  Warn. 
Margians,  who  were  the  worshippers  of  Devi,  the  wife  of  Shiva. 
The  Shivites  were  the  worshippers  of  Mahadeva.  Both  put  on  the 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


305 


beads  of  rudraksha  and  ashes  even  now.  But  the  Shaivites  are  not 
so  much  against  the  Vedas  as  the  Warn  Margians. 

1 . f«nt  ii 

2.  wtwnj  f i 

JT:  II 

—1.  The  Shaivites  taught  that  the  person  who  did  not  bedaub 
the  forehead  with  ashes  and  put  on  a chaplet  of  rudraksha  (aberry 
of  eleocarpus)  about  the  neck,  should  be  shunned  as  an  unclean 
outcaste.  They  composed  verses  in  support  of  their  doctrines,  and 
held  that  that  man  was  like  Mahadeva  incarnate  who  wore  32 
berries  about  the  neck,  10  on  the  head,  6 in  each  ear,  12  about  each 
wrist,  16  in  each  arm,  1 in  the  lock  on  the  crown,  and  108  upon 
the  breast.  It  is  also  the  belief  of  the  Shaktas  or  the  worshippers 
of  Shiva’s  wife.  So  these  sects,  viz.,  the  Warn  Margians  and  Shivites 
both  came  to  the  understanding  of  establishing  the  worship  of  the 
male  and  female  generative  organs,  called  the  Linga  and  Jaladhais 
in  Vernacular.  Thus ' hey  were  not  ashamed  to  worship  them,  and 
it  never  flashed  upon  their  mind  that  it  was  an  act  of  barbarians 
and  so  was  not  fit  for  them.  But  they  justified  what  a poet  has 
well  said  that  the  selfish  people  do  not  see  their  faults  and  vices, 

!T  qrofn  i 

rather  they  look  upon  them  as  so  many  virtues.  So  they  began  to 
believe  that  the  success  of  all  religion,  welfare,  desire  and  salvation 
lay  in  the  worship  of  stone  images  and  human  generative  organs. 
When  the  Jainees  enshrined  images  in  their  temples  after  the  reign 
of  Raja  Bhoja,  and  the  laymen  flocked  there  to  worship  them,  the 
disciples  of  the  Indian  popes  also  repaired  to  the  shrines  of  the 
Jainees.  Also,  when  new  religions  were  preached  in  the  west,  and 
the  Greeks  and  Mahomedans  began  to  come  to  India,  the  Indian 
popes  wrote  : 

>TiHTSfnj:  I anrtntHtsfq  h 1 1 

— the  verses  which  mean  that  none  should  utter  a syllable  of  the 
Greek  or  Muslem  tongue,  though  he  might  be  put  to  excruciating 
pain  and  brought  to  the  brink  of  non:  existence.  None  should 
enter  a temple  of  the  Jainees  even  to  save  his  life  from  the  attack 
of  a furious  elephant,  that  is  to  say,  it  was  better  to  be  trampled 
down  to  death  by  an  elephant  than  to  seek  refuge  in  a temple  of 
the  Jainees.  Such  were  the  doctrines  they  taught  to  their  disciples. 
When  anyone  asked  them  of  the  authority  of  some  acknowledged 
scriptures,  they  would  read  out  passages  from  the  Markandeya 
Parana  and  the  like  books,  or  give  such  descriptions  of  the  Goddess 
^s  were  ^iven  in  the  Durp  Patha, 


306 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Markandeya  and  Saiva  Parans 

Some  men  wrote  the  Markandeya  Purana  and  SJiiva  Parana  in 
the  time  of  Raja  Bhoja  under  the  nom  de  plume  of  Vyasa.  When 
the  Raja  came  to  know  of  it,  he  punished  the  forgers  by  lopping 
off  their  hands,  and  he  sent  forth  a proclamation  to  the  effect  that 
whoever  wrote  a poem  or  book,  should  do  so  in  his  own  name  and 
never  in  that  of  sages  and  philosophers  of  old.  This  account  is 
given  in  the  history  written  by  Raja  Bhoia,  called  the  Sanjivani. 
It  is  found  with  the  Tivari  Brahmins  of  Bhinda  in  the  Gwalior 
state.  It  has  been  seen  by  the  Rao  of  Lakhuna  and  his  agent  Chobay 
Ram  Dayal. 

Mahabharat 

It  is  also  plainly  written  in  the  same  book  that  Vyasa  compo- 
sed 4,400  and  his  disciples  5,600  shlokas  (distiches),  i.  e.,  10.000  in 
all,  which  made  up  the  whole  Mahabharata;  but  it  swelled  to  20,000 
in  the  time  of  Vikramaditya.  Raja  Bhoja  said  that  it  contained 
25,000  verses  in  his  father’s  time  and  at  the  time  of  his  manhood  it 
contained  30,000.  If  it  went  on  increasing  in  that  way,  it  would 
soon  be  a camel  load  If  books  or  Puranas  were  written,  in  the 
name  of  sages  and  philosophers,  the  Indian  people  would  be 
deluded,  deprived  of  the  true  Vedic  religion,  and  destroyed  as  a 
nation.  This  proclamation  shows  that  the  Raja  had  some  love  for 
the  Vedas. 

It  appears  from  the  Bhoja  Prabandha  that  there  were  so  very 
clever  mechanics  in  the  time  of  Raja  Bhoja  and  in  his  service  that 
they  made  a horse-like  machine,  which  went  1 1 kos  or  22  miles  in 
about  one  gharhi  or  24  minutes,  27J  kos  or  55  miles  in  an  hour. 
It  moved  both  in  the  air  and  on  land.  Also,  a fan  was  invented, 
which  always  moved  automatically,  i.  e.  without  the  agency  of  man, 
and  agitated  the  air  plentifully — 

jng’  1 1 

Had  these  two  inventions  come  down  to  these  days,  the  Europeans 
would  not  have  been  so  puffed  up  with  pride,  as  they  are  now-a- 
days. 

Origin  of  Hinduism 

Though  the  popes  prohibited  the  people  from  going  to  the 
temples  of  the  Jainees,  yet  they  could  not  be  deterred  from  doing 
so,  nay  they  hastened  there  t • hear  the  expounding  of  the  law  or 
stories  of  the  Jainees.  Then  the  popes  of  the  Jainees  began  to  coax 
the  disciples  of  the  Puranic  popes.  Therefore  these  thought  it  advis- 
able to  adopt  some  measures  to  prevent  them  from  going  over  to 
the  Jainees.  They  came  to  the  conclusion  that  a religious  system 
like  the  Jainees  should  be  created  to  treat  of  incarnations,  temples, 
idols,  and  stories,  So  they  created  24  in9araations  t)fl?r  th* 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


307 


Teerthankaras  of  the  Jainees,  erected  temples  and  idols,  and  wrote 
18  Puranas  like  the  Adi  and  Uttara  Puranas  of  the  Jainees. 

Origin  of  Vishnuism. 

Vaishnavism  came  into  existence  150  years  after  Raja  Bhoja. 
It  was  taught  at  first  by  (1)  Shatakopa  who  was  born  of  a Kanjar 
(low  caste)  family.  It  was  after  him  preached  by  (2)  Munibanan, 
born  of  a sweeper  family,  and  then  by  (3)  Yavanacharya,  born  of  a 
Greek  or  Moslem  family,  then  by  (4)  Ramanuja,  a Brahmin  by 
birth,  who  gave  it  a great  impetus. 

Origin  of  Pnrans. 

The  Shaivites  made  the  Shiva  Puma,  the  Shaktas  the  Devi 
Bhagwata,  the  Vaishnavas  the  Vishnu  Purana.  They  did  not  put 
their  names  to  them  from  the  fear  that  if  their  names  appeared  on 
them,  none  would  accept  them  as  authorities,  so  they  put  the  names 
of  Vyasa  and  the  like  sages  upon  them  to  make  them  popular.  The 
names  of  these  books  should  properly  be  Navina  (new)  and  not 
Purana  (old).  But  there  is  no  wonder,  for  the  poor  people  some- 
times call  their  son  Maharajadhiraj  or  the  great  king  and  name  a 
new  thing  Sanatana  or  old. 

Shaktism. 

Their  quarrels  are  all  faithfully  depicted  in  the  Puranas.  For 
instance,  their  Devi  Bhagwata  mentions  a Goddess  called  Shri,  as 
the  ruler  of  Shripur.  She  created  the  whole  world  as  well  as 
Brahma,  Vishnu  and  Mahadeva,  When  the  Goddess  had  a mind 
to  create,  she  rubbed  her  hand,  and  got  a blister  in  it,  from  which 
came  out  Brahma.  She  asked  him  to  marry  her,  but  he  said  that 
she  was  his  mother,  and  so  he  could  not  marry  her.  She  got  very 
angry  at  it  and  reduced  this  son  to  ashes.  She  then  rubbed  her 
hand  again  and  produced  a second  son,  called  Vishnu.  Making 
him  the  same  request  and  i eceiving  the  same  answer  from  him,  she 
consumed  him  also  to  ashes.  In  the  same  manner,  she  produced  a 
third  son,  called  Mahadeva,  who,  being  aksed  to  marry  her,  said 
that  he  could  not  do  so  unless  she  assumed  another  body,  which 
she  did.  Thereupon  Mahadeva  asked  her  what  it  was  that  lay 
there  like  heaps  of  ashes  at  two  places.  She  replied  that  they  were 
his  brothers  who  were  reduced  to  ashes  for  not  obeying  her.  Maha- 
deva said  that  he  could  do  nothing  alone.  He  asked  her  to  revive 
them  and  produce  two  more  women,  so  that  all  the  three  might 
marry  three  women  separately.  The  Goddess  did  what  was  asked 
of  her  and  the  three  youths  were  married  to  three  women.  Splen- 
did ! They  refused  to  marry  the  mother,  but  they  did  not  hesitate 
to  marry  the  sister  ! Can  it  be  thought  proper  ? She  then  produced 
Indra  and  other  deities,  and  made  Brahma,  Vishnu,  Mahadeva  and 
Indra  serve  as  her  palanquin  bearers.  Such  fanciful  and  tediovis 
tales  are  written  there. 


308 


Satyarth  Prakash 


The  Indian  popes  should  be  asked  who  it  was  that  made  the 
body  of  the  Goddess  and  the  town  of  Shripur,  and  who  the  father 
and  the  mother  of  the  Goddess  were.  If  it  be  replied  that  the 
Goddess  is  unbeginning,  it  may  be  opposed  that  a thing  produced 
from  union  can  not  be  unbeginning.  If  the  mother  feels  compunc- 
tion in  marrying  the  son,  is  the  marriage  of  brothers  and  sisters 
proper  ? As  the  Devi  Bhagawata  describes  the  disgrace  of  Brahma, 
Vishnu,  Mahadeva  and  the  like  deities,  and  extols  the  power  of  the 
Goddess  ; so  also  the  Shiva  Purana  gives  a disgraceful  account  of 
the  Goddess  and  other  deities,  that  is  to  say,  it  makes  them  the 
servants  of  Mah  deva,  who  is  described  as  the  lord  of  all.  If  the 
wearing  of  rudraksha  and  rubbing  the  body  with  ashes  entitled  a 
person  to  salvation,  why  should  not  asses  and  other  bea‘its  which 
roll  in  dust  everyday  and  the  savages,  called  Bhils,  Karjars.  &c., 
who  wear  berries  and  shells,  obtain  salvation  ? 

Putting  on  Ashes. 

g.— Is  the  commandment  of  the  application  of  ashes  to  the 
body,  given  in  the  Kalagni  Rudropanishat,  untrue  ? The  Vedic 
Mantras  such  as  Trayusham  Jatnadagne*  of  the  Yajur  Veda  ordain 
the  application  of  ashes  to  the  body.  The  Puranas  mention  that 
tree  to  be  the  rudraksha  which  was  produced  from  the  tears  of 
Mahadeva.  Therefore  it  was  very  meritorious  to  put  on  the  rudra- 
ksha. The  wearing  of  one  bead  of  the  rudraksha  will  liberate  a 
person  from  all  sins  and  send  him  to  heaven.  He  has  nothing  to 
fear  from  death  and  hell. 

Its  Refutation. 

A. — The  Kalagni  Upanishat  was  written  by  some  person  who 
bedaubed  his  body  with  ashes  ; for,  it  has  unmeaning  passages  in 
it.  For  instance,  Yasya  prathama  rekhu  sa  bhur  lokah  t ‘the  first 
line  drawn  everyday  by  the  hand  on  the  forehead  is  the  earth’.  How 
can  that  be  ? The  Veda  Mantras  referred  to  do  not  enjoin  the 
bedaubing  of  ashes  or  painting  the  forehead  with  three  lines.  The 
verses  trayusham  jamadagne  referred  to  above,  mean  : 0 God, 
may  my  eye-sight  last  three  hundred  years  ! May  I do  these  virtu- 
ous deeds  that  do  not  destory  the  eye-sight  ! t What  a great 
ignorance  is  it  to  suppose  that  a tree  can  be  produced  from  the 
drop  of  a tear  ? Can  anybody  alter  God’s  law  of  nature  ? Every 
kind  of  tree  is  produced  from  its  own  seed,  but  not  otherwise. 
Therefore  all  manners  of  using  rudraksha  berries,  ashes,  basil,  lotus 
seed,  grass,  sandal,  and  the  like  things  about  the  neck  and  other 
parts  of  the  body,  are  the  beastly  acts  of  savages.  Such  Warn 
Margians  and  Shivites  as  use  them,  are  very  hypocritical,  cynical 
and  indolent.  Those  who  are  good  among  them,  do  not  believe 
these  doctrines  and  do  good  to  the  people.  If  the  berry  and  ashes 
can  scare  away  the  messengers  of  Death,  they  should  at  least  terrify 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


299 


the  police  constables  also.  When  dogs,  tigers,  serpents,  scorpions, 
flies,  mosquitoes  and  other  lower  animals  are  not  afraid  of  the 
users  of  the  berry  rosary  and  ash-bedaubing  ; how  can  the  soldiers 
of  the  Great  Judge  fear  them  ? 

Worshippers  of  Vishou. 

Q. — ^If  the  Warn  Margians  and  Shaivites  are  not  good,  are  the 
Viashnavas  good  ! 

A. — Being  against  the  Vedas,  they  are  worse  than  they. 

Q. — Why  do  you  refute  Shaivism,  Vishnavism  and  other 
religions,  since  they  are  given  in  the  Vedic  texts,  such,  for  ins- 
tance, as. 

1 I «t  I *t?!Rt  WT  1 

I wfm  inramwTO,  &c. 

./4.— These  texts  do  not  prove  Shaivism  and  the  like  faiths  to  be 
true  for,  the  word  rudra  means  God,  life,  air,  soul,  fire,  &c.  They 
mean  that  salutation  is  to  God,  whose  wrath  makes  the  wicked 
weep  ; food  should  be  supplied  to  be  consumed  by  the  heat  of 
the  digestive  apparatus ; for,  the  word  nama  means  food.*  Also, 
God  who  is  gracious  to  all  the  world,  should  be  saluted.  Shiva, 
Vishnu,  Ganpati,  Surya,  t &c.  are  the  names  of  God,  and  Bhag- 
wati  is  the  veracious  speech.  The  popes  have  set  up  a quarrel 
among  them  without  understanding  their  true  sense  as  will  be 
illustrated  by  the  following  story 

Two  Bigots. 

A certain  hermit  had  two  disciples,  who  shampooed  their 
teacher’s  legs  everyday.  They  divided  this  service  between  them. 
One  of  them  took  upon  himself  to  serve  the  right  leg,  and  the  other 
the  left.  Once  it  so  happened  that  while  a disciple  had  gone  to  the 
market  and  the  other  had  been  engaged  in  kneading  the  teacher’s  leg 
that  had  fallen  to  his  lot,  the  holy  man  turned  on  his  side,  when 
the  absentee’s  allotted  leg  fell  upon  its  fellow  which  the  other  dis- 
ciple was  shampooing.  Being  offended  that  his  beloved  leg  of  the 
teacher  was  insulted  and  assaulted  by  his  rival’s  part,  he  took  a 
cudgel  and  fetched  a heavy  blow  to  it.  The  teacher  cried  out : O 
wicked  man,  what  hast  thou  done  ? The  disciple  replied  : Why 
did  the  leg  come  upon  that  leg  which  was  his  part  ? In  the  mean- 
time, the  other  disciple  who  had  been  absent,  returned  from  the 
market  and  took  to  rubbing  the  leg  that  was  allotted  to  him. 
When  he  saw  that  it  was  swollen,  he  asked  his  master  as  to  what 
the  matter  was  with  the  leg.  The  hermit  related  to  him  all  that 
had  happened.  He,  too,  was  ignorant.  So  without  uttering  a 

•W  ftWIT  wfSraE  I t fiww  ^f^^WTCTT^i  I I 


300  > SatyoTth  Prakasft 

word,  he  got  hold  of  a thick  club  and  struck  a severe  blow  on  the 
pious  man’s  other  leg.  Thereupon  he  cried  very  loudly,  and  then 
both  the  disciples  began  to  belabour  his  legs  with  strong  sticks. 
A great  bewailing  was  then  heard,  which  brought  many  people  to 
the  scene  of  action.  They  asked  the  holy  man  as  to  what  the 
matter  was.  Some  wise  spectator  rescued  him  from  their  beating. 
He  explained  to  the  ignorant  disciples  that  both  of  the  legs  be- 
longed to  their  master.  The  service  of  both  of  them  would  bring 
happiness,  and  injury  to  any  of  them  would  be  a cause  of  pain 
to  him. 

Popish  Ignorance. 

The  men  who  do  not  understand  the  right  sense  of  the  different 
names  of  the  Almighty  discribed  at  length  in  the  first  chapter  of 
this  book,  that  is  to  say,  Indra,  Vishnu.  &c.  are  the  different  names 
of  the  one  eternal,  holy  and  wise  Being,  talk  ill  of  one  another  and 
make  them  opposed  to  one  another,  as  the  two  foolish  disciples 
did  in  the  above  story,  thinking  that  the  legs  belonged  to  different 
men.  These  popes  do  not  exercise  their  judgment,  that  Vishnu, 
Indra,  Shiva,  and  the  other  names  belong  to  the  same  Unitary 
Spirit,  the  Inmost  Self  of  all,  the  Guardian  and  the  Lord  of  the 
world,  and  represent  His  infinite  power,  attributes  and  manner  of 
existence.  Will  not  God  be  angry  with  them  ? Let  us  turn  to 
the  popery  of  the  Chakrankita  Vaishnavas. 

Chakrankifa  Vaishnavism. 

I — Ramanuja’s  Fatal  Paddhati. 

(1)  The  dies  of  a conch,  discus,  mace,  and  lotus*  are  heated 
over  a fire,  and  the  fore-arms  are  cauterised  therewith.  They 
are  then  quenched  in  a pot  of  milk,  which  some  dt  ink  away.  Now 
it  is  probable  that  it  may  contain  the  taste  of  the  human  flesh. 
The  believers  of  this  faith  hope  to  reach  God  by  these  works  ! 
They  assert  that  the  soul  never  goes  to  God  without  their  bran- 
ding the  body  with  the  above  marks,  for  she  is  imperfect.  They 
arc  of  opinion  that  the  messengers  of  death  are  terrified  at  the 
sight  of  Vishnu’s  conch,  discus  and  other  weapons,  just  as  the  com- 
mon people  arc  intimated  by  supposing  the  person  to  be  a govern- 
ment servant  who  has  on  him  a badge  and  other  marks.  (2)  They 

further  say  that  9RT  ^ [ UR 

•PIR  RU RUTR  it  is  very  important  to  put  a mark  on  the  fore- 
head and  marks  on  arms  and  a garland  about  the  neck,  which  are  the 
divine  heraldic  signs.  They  overawe  the  heavenly  judge  and  a 
terrestrial  king.  They  paint  their  forehead  with  the  mark  of  a 
trident,  assume  such  (3)  names  as  Narayan  Das,  Vishnu  Das, 

•This  sect  worships  Vishnu,  who  is  represented  as  holding  these  things 
in  his  4 hands. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


301 


that  is,  as  end  in  Das  (servant),  and  wear  (4)  a rosary  of  lotus 
seeds.  (5)  Their  article  of  creed  for  the  common  people  is : ♦Om, 
Salutation  to  Narayan  ! For  the  rich  people,  they  have  : 1 1 seek 
refuge  at  the  feet  of  the  Glorious  Lord  Narayan.  Salutation  to 
Lord  Ramanuja  ! It  looks  likd  a trade  affair.  Their  marks  are 
according  to  the  face  or  opulence. 

Its  Refotatioo. 

These  Chakrankitas  regard  these  five  signs  or  sacraments  as 
the  means  of  salvation,  just  as  the  Warn  Margians  believe  in  five 
symbols  whose  names  begin  with  ma  in  Sanscrit,  t The ' Veda 
Mantra  which  they  repeat  at  cauterisation  with  the  marks  of  a 
conch,  discus,  &c.,  means : (,0  Lord,the  Protector  of  the  universe 
and  the  Vedas,  almighty,  all-energy.  Thou  pcrvadest  all  the  objects 
and  parts  of  the  world,  the  men  who  are  devoid  of  the  merif  of 
chastity,  veracity,  contentment,  subjugation  of  the  senses,  meditation, 
self-denial,  austerity  and  good  company,  and  are  undeveloped  in  the 
faculty  of  reason  and  the  internal  sense,  do  not  obtain  Thy  pre- 
sence ! But  they  who  are  purified  by  means  of  the  above  good 
works,  shall  see  Thee  to  their  ' satisfaction.  Those  who  perforpi 
great  penance  in  the  form  of  keeping  virtuous  conduct  in  the  world 
of  the  Great  Glorious  God,  become  qualified  to  realise  Hiih.  It 
is  wonder  how  the  followers  of  Ramanuja  can  prove  the  brandttfg 
of  the  body  from  the  above  Veda  Mantra  ? Were  they  leiirhed 
or  ignorant  ? If  they  were  learned,  how  could  they  render  ’ the 
mantras  so  absurdly  ? For,  these  verses  have  the  word  atapta  tanuh 
but  not  atapta  bhuj  ekadeshah  (2)  The  former  denotes  the  whole 
body  from  head  to  foot.  So  if  the  Chakrankitas  accept  the-  hea- 
ting of  the  body  on  this  authority,  they  should  burn  their  body 
in  a furnace.  Still  they  will  find  their  conduct  against  the  sense 
of  the  mantra  ; for,  tapa  in  the  mantra  means  veracity  and  good 
works.  The  Taittiriya  Upanisbat  says  : pra.  10,  adh.  8,  that 

9pf  IW:  Wii  Wif  fW:  inw  tnl  H 

the  frankness  of  the  heart  ; practice  of  truth  in  thoughts,  words, 
and  deeds.;  withholding  the  mind  from  vice  ; restraining  the  senses 
from  indulging  in  wicked  deeds^ ; in  other  words,  to  do  good  works 
with  body;  soul  and  heart  are  called  tapa  or  penance. . It  can  not 
be  cauterispi  with  heated  pieces  of  metal. 

# iff  Hiwtjnn  II 

♦sftTOmntsruitsf  smT  ii  ii^N^Troigimum; 

tThey  are ; page  286.  Madya  :wine  Mansa  : flesh,  Meena  : fish,  Mudra  : 
mystic  sign,  Maithuna  : copulation. 

(t)  nfira’fffntm  i|niiw^ niffa firww: unwind 
iptm  1 fiwnf  fwfit  Rig.  IX,  Lxxxiii,  13. 

(2)  wntnj;  1 11 


302 


Satyarth  Prdkash 


Its  Teachers. 

The  Chakrankitas  consider  themselves  to  be  great  Vaishnavas, 
but  they  never  pay  attention  to  their  evil  customs  and  evil  deeds. 
The  fir?t  teacher  of  this  faith  was  (1)  Shathakopa,  who,  according 
to  the  books  of  the  Chakrantikas  and  the  Bhakti-mala,  which  was 
written  by  Nabha,  was  of  the  Doom  (low  caste)  tribe.  For,  it  says 
that  the  Yogi  Shathakopa  used  to  make  and  sell  winnowing  fans,  * 
(3)  that  is  to  say,  he  was  born  of  the  tribe  of  Kanjar.  When  he 
bad  wanted  to  read  with  the  Brahmans  or  to  hear  their  scriptures, 
they  must  have  treated  him  with  contempt.  He  then  might  have 
coined  new  things  against  the  Brahmans  and  their  scriptures,  such 
as  the  forehead  mark,  cauterising  the  fore  arms  with  the  discus,  &c. 
His  disciple  was  (2)  Munivahan,  born  of  a Chandal  or  low  caste 
family.  He  had  a disciple,  named  (3)  Yavanacharya,  born  of  a 
Moslem  or  Greek  family.  But  his  name  was  changed  to  Yamuna- 
charya.  He  was  followed  by  (4)  Ramanuja,  who  was  a born  Brah- 
man, and  was  afterwards  initiated  into  the  mysteries  of  the  Chakra- 
pkitas.  Before  his  time,  all  the  books  of  this  religion  were  written 
In  Vernacular.  But  he  acquired  some  Sanscrit  and  wrote  books  in 
Sanscrit  poetry.  He  also  wrote  a commentary  on  the  Vadanta 
aphorisms  and  Upanishats,  contradicting  the  interpretation  of 
Shankaracharya,  whom  he  greatly  traduced  in  his  book. 

Shankar  and  Ramanoj. 

Since  Shankaracharya  believed  in  non-dualism,  or  that  the 
soul  is  identical  with  the  Brahman  or  the  Supreme  Being  and  in  rea- 
lity there  is  nothing  else  in  existence,  and  all  the  universe  is  illusion, 
unreal  and  fleeting;  Ramanuja  believed  to  the  contrary,  namely,  the 
soul,  the  Brahman  and  Maya  (matter)  are  all  eternal.  Shankaracha- 
rya’s  not  believing  the  soul  and  the  material  substratum  to  be  dis- 
tinct from  the  Brahman  is  not  good.  But  Ramanuja  is  also  entirely 
wrong,  when  he  professes  non-dualism  and  believes  in  three  distinct 
substances,  namely,  Vishisht-adwaita  or  the  Conditioned  Supreme 
Being,  the  soul,  and  God  attended  with  Maya  (matter  or  nature). 
In  short,  the  bad  doctrines  of  the  Chakrankitas  are  the  soul  is 
always  dependent  upon  God  for  her  actions,  the  use  of  the  string  of 
beads,  marks  on  the  head,  rosary,  image  worship  and  other  false 
dogmas.  The  di.sciples  of  Shankaracharya  are  not  so  much  against 
the  Vedas  as  the  Chakrankitas  are.  We  now  pass  on  to  idolatry.' 
Idolatry. 

Q.— Whence  has  idolatry  come  ? 

A. —It  has  come  from  the  Jainees. 

Q.— Whence  did  it  come  among  the  Jainees  ? 

A.— It  came  forth  from  their  ignorance. 

Q.  — The  Jainees  assert  that  a man’s  mind  is  religiously  modi- 
fied according  as  he  sees  an  image  looking  tranquil  and  absorbed  in 
meditation  ? 


303 


Rejutgtion,  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 

A.— The  mind  is  intelligent  and  an  image  is  material.  Will  the 
mind  become  material  like  the  image  before  it  7 This  idolatry  is  a 
false  religion,  pure  and  simple.  It  is  invented  by  the  Jainecs.  The- 
refore, the  refutation  of  their  doctrines  will  be  given  in  the  XII 
chapter. 

Q.— The  worshippers  ofDevi  (female  form  of  God)  and  others 
have  not  copied  idolatry  from  the  Jainees,  for  the  idols  of  the 
Vaishnavas.are  not  like  those  of  the  Jainees. 

Dijstiiiction  of  Jaio  and  Vaishnav  Idolatry. 

A. — Just  so;  for,  had  they  made  their  idols  like  those  of  the 
Jainees  they  would  have  been  confounded  with  them.  So  they  made 
theirs  opposite  in  characteristics.  For,  it  was  their  chief  duty  to 
quarrel  with  the  Jainees,  and  the  Jainees  thought  it  to  be  theii  duty 
to  be  hostile  to  them.  Since  the  Jainees  made  their  idols  naked,  absor- 
bed in  meditation  like  the  persons  who  have  renounced  the  world; 
the  Vaishnavas  made  theirs  clothed,  decorated,  and  accompanied 
with  women,  musical  appliances,  standing  or  sitting  postures, 
surrounded  with  the  things  of  enjoyment  and  luxury.  The 
Jainees  do  not  blow  conches,  ring  bells  and  jingles,  play  upon 
other  leathern  musical  instruments  in  their  worship.  But  these  men 
make  much  noise.  It  is  these  tricks  of  the  popes  of  the  Vaishnava 
sects  that  saved  their  followers  from  falling  into  the  traps  of  the 
Jainees  and  secured  them  fast  in  theirs.  They  wrote  many  books  of 
fanciful  and  absurd  tales  in  the  names  of  the  sages,  Vyasa  and 
others.  Calling  such  books  Puranas  (old),  they  related  stories  there- 
from to  the  people. 

Pious  Fraud. 

Then  they  took  to  strange  frauds.  They  would  make  images  of 
stone  and  hide  them  in  mountains  or  forests,  or  bury  them  under  the 
ground  in  solitary  places;  and  then  some  of  them  would  tell  hi$ 
disciples  that  Mahadeva,  Parvati,  Radha,  Krishna,  Sita,  Rama, 
Luxmi,  Narayana,  Bhairava,  or  Hanumana  had  informed  him  in  a 
dream  last  night  that  his  or  her  image  was  at  such  and  such  a place. 
Should  he  take  it  (the  pope)  out  from  that  place  and,  placing  it  in  a 
shrine,  be  its  ministering  priest,  the  god  or  goddess  would  give  what 
was  desired  by  the  people.  When  these  popish  stories  came  to  the 
ears  of  rich  and  foolish  persons,  they  took  them  to  be  true. 
They  would  ask  him  as  to  where  that  image  was.  The  pope  would 
reply  that  it  was  to  be  found  in  such  and  such  a place  or  mountain, 
and  that  he  would  show  it  to  them,  if  they  but  accompanied  him 
there.  The  foolish  people  would  go  with  him  and  finding  an  idol 
there  would  fall  down  at  his  feet  in  wonder  and  say  : “This  god  is 
very  kind  to  you.  You  may  carry  him  hence.  We  shall  have  you  a 
temple  built  for  enshrining  him  and  for  your  performing  his  worship 
there,  so  that  we  may  get  our  desires  fulfilled  by  worshipping  this 
glorious  god.”  When  one  man  thus  succeeded  in  fraud,  all  the 
other  popes  took  to  erecting  statues  with  the  same  kind  of  frauds 
for  the  purpose  of  earning  their  idle  livelihood. 


304 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Plea  for  Idolatry 

, Q.-'-God  is  formless.  He  cannot  be  conceived.  So  there 
shoiild  be  an  image  for  His  worship.  Well,  if  we  do  nothing  else 
biit  to  approach  in  idol  and  think  of  God  after  saluting  it  with 
Pflms  joined,  is  there  still  any  harm  in  it  ? 

Its  Refotation 

A — As  God  is  formless  and  albpervading,  His  image  can  not 
be  formed.  If  a mere  sight  of  an  image  reminds  you  of  God,  will 
you  not  think  of  God  by  observing  the  earth,  water,  fire,  air,  plants 
and  the  like  numerous  objects,  which  arc  made  by  ombipotent  God, 
displaying  His  wounderful  skill  in  them,  which  are  in  fact  gigantic 
images,  all  full  of  the  heavenly  design,  and  out  of  which  men  make 
their  tiny  artificial  images  ? Your  assertion  is  totally  wrong  that  the 
sight  of  images  calls  forth  the  idea  of  God  in  your  mind.  Also, 
when  there  will  be  no  image  before  a man,  he  will  not  think  of  God 
and  will  fall  to  robbery,  adultery  and  other  vices  in  the  absence  of 
the  idol ; for,  he  knows  that  none  sees  him  there,  and  so  he  will 
seldom  fail  in  committing  an  evil.  Such  are  the  various  evils  in 
worshipping  the  images  of  stone  and  other  substances.  If,  on  the 
other  hand,  a man  who  rejects  material  images,  believes  and  knows 
that  God  is  always  omnipresent,  heart-searching,  and  just ; he  always 
holds  the  belief  that  God  sees  all  his  good  and  bad  actions,  and  so  he 
does  not  think  himself  for  a moment  to  be  away  from  God.  He 
never  thinks  of  evil,  much  less  he  does  it.  He  knows  that  if  he  does 
fny  evil  in  thought,  deed,  or  action  ; he  will  never  escape  punishment 
from  the  justice  of  God,  the  inner  Self. 

Muttering  of  God's  Name. 

Mere  repetition  of  God’s  name  docs  him  no  good  whatever, 
just  as  the  mouth  feels  no  sensation  of  sweetness  from  repeating  the 
word  sugar-candy,  nor  the  sensation  of  bitterness  from  muttering 
the  name  of  neem  (melia  azadiracta),  but  we  do  feel  these  sensations 
on  tasting  them. 

Q,— Is  muttering  the  name  of  God  entirely  false  ? The 
Puranas  talk  everywhere  of  the  great  merit  accruing  from  repeating 
the  Name. 

A. — Your  manner  of  repeating  it  is  not  good.  It  is  entirely 

false. 

g.—How  is  our  manner  of  invoking  God’s  name  ? 

It  is  against  the  Vedas. 

Q, — W611,  be  pleased  to  tell  us  the  Vedic  manner  of  repeating 
God’s  name. 

A. — It  should  be  thus : For  instance,  the  Scriptures  say  ; 
God  is  most  just.  It  implies  to  us  that  He  is  not  partial  to  anv, 
but  equitable  to  all.  We  should  hold  fast  to  this  significance  and 
ever  practise  justice  and  never  indulge  in  iniquities.  Thus  prac- 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions  305 

Used,  one  name  of  an  attribute  of  God  will  be  enough  for  a man  to 
save  him  from  evil. 

Images  of  Incaroations. 

Q. — We  know  that  God  is  formless.  But  He  was  incarnated 
in  Shiva,  Vishnu,  Ganesh  (Janus),  Sun,  Devi  (Goddess  Durga)  and 
also  manifested  himself  in  the  incarnations  of  Rama,  Krishna,  &c. 
Therefore  we  make  His  images.  Do  you  think  it  false  too  ? 

A Yes,  it  is.  (1)  For,  the  Vedas  declare  Him  to  be  free  from 

birth,  death,  and  incarnation,  as  is  plain  from  such  expressions  as, 
Aja  ekapat,  akayam  * &c.  (2)  Also,  the  reason  does  not  prove  the 
incarnation  of  God.  For,  being  everywhere  present  like  the  sky, 
infinite,  and  free  from  the  corporeal  qualities  of  pleasure  and  pain, 
visibility,  &c.,  how  can  He  be  enclosed  in  a drop  of  the  semen  or 
in  the  cavity  of  the  womb  ? That  person  can  come  and  go,  who  lives 
in  one  place.  To  talk  of  the  incarnation  of  God,  who  is  immovable, 
invisible,  and  fills  all  atoms,  is  like  seeing  a barren  woman’s,  son 
performing  his  marriage,  and  then  beget  a son  there  by,  that  is,  it  is 
a self-contradiction. 

Omnipresent  God  in  the  Image. 

Q.—As  God  is  present  everywhere,  He  is  present  in  an  image. 
Why  then  is  it  not  good  to  believe  Him  to  be  present  in  any  object 
and  adore  Him  there  ? Says  Chanakya  : 

^ wes  !T  qT«»Tsiil  h i 

~ God  is  not  in  the  things  made  of  wood,  stone,  or  earth. 
But  He  is  obtained  wherever  we  put  our  faith  in. 

A mistake  and  Refntation. 

A. — As  God  is  present  everywhere,  to  believe  Him  to  be  pre- 
sent in  one  object  and  not  in  others,  is  like  considering  an  emperor 
to  be  the  master  of  a small  hut  instead  of  holding  authority  over 
all  the  provinces  of  his  empire.  Is  not  it  a great  disgrace  to  him  ? 
So  it  is  also  derogatory  to  God  to  localise  Him.  If  you  believe 
Him  to  be  omnipresent,  why  do  you  pluck  flowers  from  a garden 
to  offer  them  to  an  idol  ? Why  do  you  paint  it  with  the  paste  of 
sandal  ? Why  do  you  fumigate  it  with  incense  ? Why  do  you  ring 
bells,  jingles,  cymbals,  beat  drums  with  sticks  He  is  present  in 
your  hands,  why  do  you  join  the  palms  in  reverence  to  an  idol  ? 
He  is  present  in  the  head,  why  do  you  bend  it  to  an  idol  ? He  is 
present  in  food  and  drink,  why  do  you  offer  them  to  an  idol  ? He 
is  present  in  water,  why  do  you  bathe  an  idol  with  it  ? As  God  is 
present  in  all  of  them,  do  you  worship  the  pervaderor  the  pervaded 
object  ? If  you  worship  the  Pervader,  why  do  you  offer  flowers, 
sandal,  &c.  to  stocks  and  stones  ? If  you  worship  the  object  perva- 
ded, your  assertion  is  false  that  you  worship  God.  Why  don’t  you 
speak  the  truth,  that  you  are  the  worshippers  of  stocks  and  stones  ? 


Unborn,  Absolute,  Incorporeal. 


306  Satyarth  Prakash 

Please,  tell  me  if  your  faith  is  true  or  false.  If  it  is  true,  God  will 
be  confined  to  a body  from  the  effect  of  your  faith. 

loefficacy  of  mere  Faith 

Why  don’t  you  change  by  means  of  your  faith  the  substance 
of  earth  into  gold,  silver  and  other  metals  ; of  stones  into  dia- 
monds, emeralds,  and  other  gems ; of  sea  f^oam  into  pearls ; of 
water  into  butter,  milk,  curd,  &c.  ; of  sand  into  boiled  flour,  sugar, 
&c.  ? You  never  think  of  pain,  but  why  do  you  get  it  ? You 
think  of  ease  and  comfort,  why  don’t  you  ever  enjoy  it  ? Why 
cannot  a blind  man  see  by  thinking  of  eyes  ? You  never  think  of 
death,  how  is  it  that  you  die  ? Therefore  your  faith  or  mere  thinking 
is  not  true  or  efiicacious.  True  faith  is  to  believe  a thing  as  it  is, 
for  instance,  to  believe  fire  as  fire,  and  water  as  water.  To  believe 
water  to  be  fire  and  fire  to  be  water,  is  the  reverse  of  faith.  To 
know  a thing  as  it  is,  constitutes  true  knowledge.  To  know  it  what 
it  is  not,  is  ignorance.  So  you  call  non-faith  as  faith  and  vice 
versa. 

0.— No  god  comes  into  an  image  until  he  is  invoked  by  means 
of  the  Veda  Mantras  (verses).  He  comes  at  once  upon  invocation 
and  goes  away  upon  the  conclusion  of  a rite. 

Falsity  of  Invocation. 

A. — If  a god  descends  upon  an  image,  why  is  it  not  enlivened  ? 
Why  does  it  not  depart  upon  the  conclusion  of  a ceremony  ? 
Whence  does  he  come  and  where  does  he  go  ? O listen  to  me, 
brother,  the  all-filling  God  neither  comes  from  nor  goes  to  any- 
where. If  you  can  call  God  by  the  force  of  the  Veda  Mantras, 
why  don’t  you  call  the  departed  soul  into  the  corpse,  say,  of  your 
son  ? Why  don’t  you  kill  your  enemy  by  dismissing  his  soul  ? 
Hark  ! O simple  folks  ! These  popes  cheat  you  to  make  money 
for  their  idle  life  by  teaching  you  such  foolish  things.  There  is  no 
whisper  in  the  Vedas  of  the  worship  of  images  and  of  the  invocation 
of  God  by  means  of  the  Vedic  Mantras. 

These  and  others  are  the  Veda  Mantras.  How  do  you  say 
(hat  it  is  not  given  there  ? 

,4.-— Good  friend  ! Use  your  own  sense  a little.  These  lines 
are  not  the  Vedic  words ; but  they  are  fabricated  by  the  Indian 
popes  and  given  in  the  Tantras  (magical  books)  of  the  Warn 
Margians. 

0.— Are  the  Tantras  false  ? 

A.— Yes,  they  are  totally  false.  There  is  not  a single  verse 
in  the  Vedas  relative  to  invocation,  enlivenment,  image-worship, 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religtons 


307 


nor  there  are  such  expressions  as,  / minister  bath  * Not  even  sueh 
a hint  do  we  find  as 

— 

Make  images  of  stones  and  metals,  enshrine  them  in  temples,  and 
worship  them  with  sandal  paste,  grains  of  rice,  and  so  forth. 

g.— If  there  is  no  order  in  the  Vedas  for  image  worship,  there 
is  also  no  prohibition  of  it  in  them  ; and  if  there  is  any  prohibition 
of  it,  it  can  be  refuted  from  the  very  mention  of  it.  x 

.4.— There  is  no  injunction  of  it  ; but,  on  the  contrary,  there 
is  an  explicit  commandment  not  to  adore  any  object  in  place  of  God. 
It  is  always  prohibited  there.  Is  not  the  absence  of  a precedent  an 
injunction  ? Here  it  is — 

Monotheism  inVedas. 

afityrO?!  it  i atft  ii 

—They  fall  into  the  darkness  of  ignorance  and  ocean  of 
misery,  who  worship  the  unmanifested,  eternal  and  material  nature 
in  place  of  the  Supreme  Being.  But  they  who  worship  the  manifes- 
ted nature,  that  is,  the  creatures  like  the  earth,  stone,  trees  and 
other  organised  objects  and  the  bodies  of  men  and  other  animals  in 
place  of  the  Supreme  Being  of  Brahman,  fall  into  still  greater  dark- 
ness of  ignorance  and  suffer  the  protracted  pain  of  hell. — Yaj.  XL.9. 
Vf  rjflf  Sffftm  Ib.  XXXII.  3 

— The  formless  Deity  who  pervades  all  the  universe,  has  no 
image,  measurement  or  the  like. 

Spiritual  worship  iu  Upaaishats. 

— Kr  jw  and  adore  Him  as  the  Brahman,  who  is  not  expressed 
by  speech,  as  persons  say  of  water  : Here  is  water,  take  it.  But 
our  speech  is  stimulated  by  his  presence  and  power.  Whatever  is 
different  from  Him,  is  not  worth  worshipping. — Kena  Upanishat, 
Part  1.  4. 

qjpqm  q *rg^  qqtlHPt  l 11 

— Know  Him  to  be  the  Brahman  and  adore  Him  who  is  not 
limited  bv  mental  cogitation,  but  who  knows  the  mind.  Don’t 
worship  the  soul  and  the  internal  sense  that  are  different  from  the 
Brahman.— lb.  5. 

qr  ff  qq  wTq  qtqufjct  i aN  ^ rd  fafe  ft?  1 1 

—Know  Him  to  be  the  Brahman  and  worship  Him  alone  who 
is  not  seen  with  eyes,  but  who  enables  the  eyes  to  see  all  objects. 
Don’t  worship  the  sun,  lightning,  fire  and  other  dead  objects.— Ib.  6. 

a i ala  ca  fafe  afiragaia^  ii 

—Know  Him  to  be  the  Brahman  and  adore  Him  alone 


o^ara  aaqaiFa  1 1 tar'a'l  a?aT  faaa:  1 1 


308 


Satyarth  Prakash 


whom  the  ears  have  not  heard  but  who  enables  the  ears  to  hear. 
Dont’i  worship  sound  and  others  in  His  place.— Ib.  7. 

— Know  Him  to  be  the  Brahman  and  adore  Him  alone  who 
does  not  live  by  breathing,  but  who  sets  the  breath  a-coursing. 
Don’t  worship  the  wind  which  is  not  the  Brahman.— Ib.  8.  There 
are  many  similar  interdictions. 

No  Idolatry  in  Vedas. 

Both  existing  and  unexisting  objects  are  forbidden  of  the 
Vedas  to  be  worshipped.  Thus  your  turning  out  a person  sitting 
in  a certain  place,  is  an  instance  of  the  prohibition  of  existing 
things.  The  example  of  unexisting  things  is  : O son  ! Thou  shalt 
not  steal.  Thou  shalt  not  fall  down  into  a well.  Thou  shalt  shun 
the  company  of  evil  men.  Be  not  ignorant.  Thus  an  action  not 
done,  can  also  be  prohibited.  Such  things  do  not  exist  in  man’s 
mind,  but  they  exist  in  God’s.  Therefore  the  worship  of  the  images 
of  stone  and  other  materials  is  ever  prohibited. 

Q.—U  there  be  no  merit  in  image-worship,  there  is  no  sin 

in  it. 

/!.— Actions  are  of  two  kinds  only,  viz.,  (1)  the  duties  ordai- 
ned by  the  Vedas,  such  as  speaking  the  truth,  &c  ; (2)  the  actions 
prohibited  by  the  Vedas,  as  speaking  falsehood,  &c.  It  is  meri- 
torious to  do  the  duties  ordained  and  sinful  not  to  do  them.  It  is 
sinful  to  do  the  actions  prohibited,  but  meritorious  not  to  do  them. 
How  can  you  be  free  from  sin  when  you  do  works  prohibited  by  the 
Vedas,  as  image  worship  and  the  like  ? 

Q.— Listen  ! The  Vedas  are  unbeginning.  There  was  no  use 
of  images  in  Vedic  times.  The  gods  were  themselves  present  thi'u. 
Image  worship  came  in  vogue  in  later  times  from  the  use  of  the 
Tantras  and  Puranas.  When  the  knowledge  and  power  of  man 
declined,  he  could  not  conceive  of  God.  He  could  think  of  an 
image.  Thus  image-worship  is  designed  for  the  ignorant.  For,  a man 
goes  to  the  top  of  a staircase  by  ascending  one  steps  after  ano- 
ther. He  can  not  go  up,  if  he  leaves  off  the  first  step.  Therefore 
image  worship  is  the  first  step  towards  God.  When  knowledge 
dawns  upon  the  mind  from  worshipping  an  image,  and  the  internal 
sense  is  purified,  man  will  be  able  to  think  of  God.  For,  an  archer 
or  musketeer  first  practises  to  shoot  his  arrows  or  bullets  at  a visi- 
ble mark  or  the  bull’s  eye,  then  he  can  hit  an  invisible  mark.  In 
like  manner,  a man  obtains  the  subtle  Brahman  after  practising  the 
worship  of  gross  images.  Also,  girls  play  with  toys  as  they  are  not 
developed  to  go  to  their  husbands.  Therefore  image-worship  is  not 
a wicked  deed. 

/!.— If  a religious  merit  consists  in  doing  the  duties  ordained 
by  the  Vedas,  and  sin  in  acting  against  the  commandment  of  the 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


309 


Vedas,  your  own  assertion  proves  image-worship  to  be  sin.  To 
assume  those  books  as  authority  which  are  against  the  Vedas,  is  to 
become  an  atheist.  For  example,  says  Manu,  II,  11 

II 

»n  NflfTT:  OTW  VIW  f | 

fifSWtT:  HOT  ?l»TtfiTOT  ^tlT:  II 

^ oiwralsarf!!  vifst  i 

mwwhvTftrvtnn  OfwsHiwmwfH  w n 

— The  person  is  an  atheist  who  blasphemes,  disgraces,  renoun- 
ces and  acts  against  the  Vedas.  The  books  written  by  evil  men  against 
the  Vedas  leag  the  world  to  the  depth  of  the  ocean  of  misery.  They 
are  all  vain,  false,  and  ignorance  incarnate,  so  to  speak,  and  bring 
misery  to  their  readers  both  here  and  hereafter. — Manu, 
XII.  95,  96. 

The  books  written  against  the  Vedas  in  recent  times  soon  go 
out  of  use.  To  take  them  for  authority  is  useless  and  wrong. 
Therefore  the  sages  from  Brahma  to  Jaimini  teach  us  not  to  believe 
what  is  against  the  Vedas.  But  it  is  the  practice  of  religion  to  live 
the  Vedas ; for,  they  teach  the  truth  only.  Therefore  all  the  Tan- 
tras  and  Puranas  being  against  the  Vedas,  are  false,  and  the  image 
worship  enjoined  by  them  is  also  false  and  irreligious.  Man’s 
knowledge  cannot  be  improved  from  the  worship  of  inanimate 
things,  but,  on  the  contrary,  whatever  knowledge  he  possesses,  is 
thereby  destroyed.  It  is  promoted  by  the  service  of  the  learned 
and  their  company,  but  not  by  bowing  to  stocks  and  stones.  Can 
a men  ever  conceive  of  God  by  worshipping  images  ? No,  never 
Idolatry  is  not  a step  to  Godhood  but  a deep  ditch,  a fall  into 
which  breiks  a man’s  bones.  He  then  can’t  get  out  of  it, 
nay  he  dies  in  u.  But  knowledge  aind  veracity  learnt  from 
the  company  of  even  ordinarily  learned  and  religious  up 
to  superlatively  learned  and  clairvoyants  men,  are  the  steps  to 
reach  God  like  stairs  to  an  upper  storey.  None  has  been  seen  to 
grow  wise  by  worshipping  images ; but,  on  the  contrary,  all  the 
image-worshippers  have  wasted  their  life  for  nothing  and  died 
away,  and  those  who  exist  at  present  or  who  will  come  after,  will 
also  be  deprived  of  the  objects  of  life,  viz.,  virtue,  wealth,  enjoy- 
ment, and  salvation,. and  will  die  in  ignorance.  Image-worhip  does 
not  hold  the  relation  to  the  Brahman  as  gross  to  subtle.  The 
true  relation  is  as  a scholar  to  the  knowledge  of  the  world.  When 
he  perfects  it,  he  obtains  God.  Image-worship  is  not  like  doll- 
playing, but  instructions  in  the  alphabet  and  education  are  like 
doll-playing  in  the  obtainment  of  God.  Hear  me,  when  a person 
acquires  sound  knowledge  and  good  training  he  will  get  God, 
the  true  Lord, 


310 


Satyarth  Prakash 


2,— The  mind  can  be  fixed  upon  a corporeal  thing,  but  it  is 
difficult  to  fix  it  upon  an  incorporeal  object.  Therefore  image 
worship  should  be  allowed. 

Argameots  agaiost  indolatry. 

/l.-(l)  The  mind  can  not  be  fixed  upon  a corporeal  thing  ; 
for,  it  grasps  it  at  once,  and  then  it  runs  from  one  of  its  parts  to 
another.  But  the  mind  may  exert  its  utmost  power  to  grasp  God, 
it  can  not  get  to  the  end  of  Him.  It  does  not  get  restless  from 
God  being  without  organs  ; but  it  is  absorbed  in  contemplating 
His  attributes,  works,  and  nature,  becomes  happy  and  gets  rest. 
If  a corporeal  thing  had  composed  the  mind,  the  mind  of  all  the 
world  would  have  been  composed.  For,  it  is  ever  engaged  in 
gross  material  things  in  the  world  such  as  men,  women,  sons, 
riches,  friends,  that  are  all  croporeal.  But  nobody’s  mind  is  ever 
tranquillised  until  he  directs  it  to  the  incorporeal  God,  for  it  rests 
in  Him  as  He  has  no  organs.  Therefore,  image-worship  is  irreli- 
gious. 

(2)  It  produces  poverty,  as  it  requires  spending  crores  of 
rupees  upon  temples.  It  gives  rise  to  pride  and  neglect  of  duties. 

(3)  The  assemblage  of  men  and  women  in  temples  begets 
adultery,  quarrel,  scuffle,  diseases  and  so  forth, 

(4)  The  people  waste  their  life,  being  rendered  void  of 
courage  from  thinking  it  to  be  the  only  means  of  virtue,  wealth, 
pleasure  and  salvation. 

(5)  The  unity  of  the  priests  is  destroyed,  for  by  their  wor- 
shipping images  of  opposite  characters,  name  and  forms,  they 
adopt  opposite  courses  of  religion,  separate  themselves  from  one 
another,  and  bring  ruin  upon  the  country. 

(6)  Idolaters  believe  that  their  victory  and  the  enemy’s 
defeat  depend  upon  their  faith  in  it  and  so  lead  idle  life.  When 
they  are  defeated,  the  independence  of  the  country  and  the  posses- 
sion of  wealth  pass  into  the  hands  of  their  enemies.  They  then 
suffer  many  troubles  from  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy  like 
a potter’s  ass  or  an  inn-keeper’s  pony. 

(7)  Since  a person  gets  angry,  flies  to  force,  and  calls  ill 
names  when  told  by  some  one  that  an  effigy  is  made  of  him  or  a 
stone  is  used  in  place  of  him  or  his  name,  why  should  not  God 
get  angry  and  destroy  the  men  of  evil  mind,  who  put  stones  in 
His  place  in  the  heart  or  in  the  internal  sense,  which  is  the  temple 
of  God  ? 

(8)  Idolaters  wander  from  temple  to  temple  in  distant  coun- 
tries and  suffer  much  trouble,  neglect  the  duties  of  religion,  the 
world  and  spiritual  life,  being  harassed  by  robbers  and  chea- 
ted by  bad  persons. 

(9)  They  give  money  to  wicked  priests,  who  spend  it  in 
whoring  adultery,  eating  flesh  and  drinking  wine,  and  quarrels  over 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions  311 

petty  things,  a circumstance,  which  destroys  the  pleasure  of  a gift 
and  causes  much  sorrow. 

(10)  They  do  not  honour  their  parents  and  elders ; but 
paying  respects  to  stone  images,  they  turn  ungrateful. 

(11)  If  the  images  be  broken  or  stolen  away,  they  beat  their 
breast  and  weep  bitterly. 

(12)  The  priests  being  oppressed  with  the  company  of  the 
wives  of  others  and  the  priestesses  with  that  of  strange  men,  lose  the 
pleasure  of  the  life  of  connubial  love. 

(13)  They  are  destroyed  and  entirely  ruined  from  mutual 
animosity  on  account  of  there  being  no  proper  obedience  in  the 
servant  to  the  master’s  behests. 

(14)  The  mind  of  the  man  contemplating  on  an  inanimate 
object,  becomes  gross,  and  stunted  in  reason,  or  the  inanimate 
nature  of  the  thing  contemplated  influeneces  the  contemplator’s 
mind  through  the  internal  sense. 

(15)  God  made  the  fragrant  flowers  and  other  odouriferous  subs- 
tances to  cleanse  the  impurities  of  the  air  and  water,  and  to  promote 
health.  The  priests  pluck  them  off.  How  long  would  they  have 
been  spreading  fragrance  in  the  open  air  to  purify  it  ? But  they 
destroy  them  before  they  complete  their  life.  They  are  thrown  into 
gutters  and  mixing  there  with  sloppish  water,  they  produce  stench. 
Has  God  made  fragrant  flowers  to  be  offered  to  stones  ? 

(16)  The  flowers,  sandal-wood  paste,  rice  and  other  objects, 
offered  to  stones,  are  all  thrown  into  the  mud  of  the  gutter  or  cess- 
pool where  they  rot  and  produce  so  much  stench  in  the  air  as  is 
produced  from  the  nuisance  committed  by  people.  Thousands 
of  worms  are  constantly  produced  and  die  in  it. 

These  and  many  other  evils  are  produced  from  idolatry. 
Therefore,  the  good  people  should  give  up  the  worship  of  images 
forever.  They  who  worship  stone  images  or  will  do  it  in  future, 
can  never  be  free  from  the  above  mentioned  evils. 

Worship  of  5 Gods. 

Q. — Is  no  kind  of  idolatry  to  be  performed  ? Why  has  then 
the  pharse,  the  worship  of  five  gods,  been  current  in  our  Arya- 
varta  (India)  from  time  out  of  mind  ? It  is  no  other  than  the 
worship  of  the  images  of  Shiva,  Vishnu,  Ambika  (Goddess  Durga 
or  Minerva)  Ganesha  (Janus)  and  Surya  (Sol).  Is  it  not  the  wor- 
ship of  five  gods  ? 

A, — No  kind  of  image-worship  should  be  performed.  But 
the  following  five  corporeal  being  should  be  worshipped  or  levered. 
It  is  excellent  worship  of  five  gods  and  the  phrase,  the  worship  of 
five  bodies,  has  also  an  excellent  meaning.  But  the  ignorant  peo- 
ple have  rejected  its  good  sense  and  accepted  its  bad.  The  modern 
worship  of  the  five  gods,  such  as  Shiva  and  the  like,  has  already 


312  Satyarth  Prakash 

been  refuted.  But  the  true  worship  of  the  five  bodies  ordained 

in’ the  Vedas  and  the  worship  of  gods  and  images  consistent  with 

the  teachings  of  the  Vedas,  are  as  follow 

m xx  I 

Alb.  K.  II,  v.'s.  verse  17. 

— Ib.  15.  13.  6.  sn#cT  irw— Rig.  RWft 

straw  o^r  afwTfi?  n— Tait.  l.  i.  if  R 

rafirrOTfrWcf  ll— Sbat.  K.  14,  Pr.  6,  Br.  7,  K.  10.  w, 

Pr5rif>  mfTaif>  w,  w ii— Tait  v.  i.  An.  ii. 

ofiffiTf'fTffT  I ^iaT^fatraoTW  : ii 

Manu,  in,  >5.  OTWa:  ftfat  WcTcT*  iffRfir:  II  lb. 

The  first  corporeal  goddess  to  be  worshipped  is  the  mother, 
that  is,  the  children  should  please  the  mother  by  serving  her  with 
their  body,  soul  and  wealth.  They  should  give  her  no  kind  of 
offence,  much  less  cause  her  an  injury.  The  scconjl  corporeal  god 
to  be  reverenced  is  the  father.  He  should  be  served  as  the  mother. 
The  third  god  is  the  teachej,  who  is  the  giver  of  knowledge.  He 
should  be  served  with  the  body,  soul  and  wealth.  The  fourth 
gofl  is  the  guest,  who  is  learned,  righteous,  sincere,  and  benev  olent, 
and  who  is  engaged  in  the  good  of  all  by  truthful  preaching  m his 
constant  tone  throughout  the  world.  The  people  should  serve  him. 
The  fifth  person  to  be  treated  with  respect  is  the  husband  for  the 
wife  and  the  wife  for  the  husband.  These  are  the  five  corporeal 
divinities,  whose  association  produces  the  body  of  human  beings, 
who  give  them  protection  and  education  aqd  from  whom 
knowledge  and  truth  are  obtained.  They  alone  are  the  steps  towards 
the  obtainment  of  God.  Those  who  do  not  serve  them  but  wor- 
ship the  images  of  stone  and  other  materials,  are  very  much  against 
the  Vedas. 

6 — Well,  there  will  be  nothing  wrong,  if  we  worship  the 
images  and  also  serve  the  parents  and  other  elders. 

A. — No,  your  good  consists  in  abandoning  image-worship 
entirely  and  in  serving  the  worshipful  persons  above  described.  It 
is  nonsense  to  give  up  the  respect  of  the  really  worshipful  gods  in 
the  persons  of  fathers,  mothers  and  other  elders,  whose  blessings 
are  evident,  and  to  adopt  the  botheration  of  worshipping  stocks  and 
stones.  The  people  seem  to  have  adopted  image-worship,  because 
if  sweetmeat,  presents,  and  other  offerings  be  placed  before  the 
parents  and  elders,  they  will  consume  them  themselves  or  keep 
th^m  for  themselves  and  the  offerers  will  get  nothing.  But  if  they 
offer  sweetmeat  to  stone  and  material  images,  ring  bells,  blow  trum- 
pet^ and  conches  and  make  all  sorts  of  noise,  they  can  lose  nothing, 
rgther  they  will  turn  a tantalising  finger  to  the  idols,  so  to  speak, 
and  enjoy  the  whole  offering  themselves,  just  as  persons  do  in 
cheating  others  j viz., 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions  313 

WHfss  iT^nTT  iwrt  ^si( 

—pointing  the  finger  at  another,  a person  may  tell  him  in 
taunt  '‘Take  thou  my  thumb,*’  and  then  snatch  away  from  before 
him  all  the  things  offered.  The  popery  of  these  priests  is  very  much 
like  it.  They  are  called  Pujari,  that  is,  ari  or  the  enemy  of  puja  or 
worship  or  righteousness.  Like  cheats,  these  men  are  dressed 
foppishly,  make  charmingly  attractive  and  brilliantly  gaudy  images 
highly  decorated,  rob  the  helpless  and  thoughtless  simpletons  of  all 
their  riches,  and  roll  in  wealth.  Had  there  been  a pious  king,  he 
would  have  employed  these  men  in  working  in  quarries,  sculpturing, 
and  holding  houses  so  as  to  provide  them  with  food  and  drink  and 
help  them  to  lead  an  honest  life. 

Great  men’s  Images. 

0.— Why,  will  not  the  idea  of  resignation  and  contentment 
arise  in  the  mind  at  the  sight  of  an  image  of  the  man  of  self-denial 
and  tranquility  just  as  lust  is  excited  at  the  appearance  of  a woman’s 
stone  image  ? 

y4.— No,  it  will  never.  For,  the  introduction  of  the  inert  quali- 
ties of  the  image  into  the  mind  lessens  its  thinking  and  distinguish- 
ing power.  Without  distinguishment  there  can  be  no  renunciation, 
without  renunciation  no  knowledge  and  without  knowledge  no 
tranquillity.  Whatever  renunciation  or  unselfishness  is  produced 
in  the  mind,  comes  from  the  company  of  sages,  listening  to  their 
preaching  and  reading  their  lives ; for,  there  is  no  love  for  the  image 
of  him  whose  merits  are  unknown  : the  cause  of  love  being  the 
knowledge  of  merits.  It  is  from  such  evil  causes  as  image-worship 
and  the  like  that  millions  of  men  have  become  useless,  priestly, 
beggarly,  idle  and  unenterprising.  It  is  they  who  have  spread  stupi- 
dity in  the  whole  world.  There  is  also  much  falsehood  as  well  as 
humbug  in  idolatry. 

MIRACLES  AND  SACRED  PLACES. 

Benares 

g.— Think  of  Kashi  (Benares)  where  Aurungzebe  was  shown 
a great  many  miracles  by  Lat-bhairava.  When  the  Moslems  made 
an  attack  with  the  view  to  demolish  the  temple,  and  began  to  shell  it, 
a swarm  of  bumble  bees  attacked  the  enemy  who  were  struck  with 
panic  and  so  took  to  their  heels. 

.4.— It  is  no  miracle  produced  by  the  stone  image  ; but  there 
must  be  a hive  of  bumble  bees,  which  are  by  nature  cruel  and  rush 
to  sting  on  the  least  provocation.  The  miracle  of  the  milk  stream 
that  was  seen  there,  was  the  fraud  of  the  priests. 

Q. — Why,  Mahadeva  (Shiva)  hid  himself  in  a well  and  Beni 
Madhava  (Krishna)  in  a Brahmin’s  house  to  avoid  being  seen  by 
barbarians  (Malechha).  Is  it  not  a miracle  ? 

i4.— Since  they  had  Kota-pala,  Kala  bhairva,  Lat-bhairva  and 
other  hosts  of  spirits,  ghosts,  and  garurh  (a  god,  half  bird  and  half 


314 


Satyarth  Prakash 


man,  the  vehicle  of  Vishnu),  why  did  they  not  repwlse  the  Mahome* 
dans  in  a fight?  Why  did  they  not  reduce  the  Moslems  to  ashe, 
as  they  did  Tripurasur  and  other  frightful  demons  according  to  the 
account  of  Mahadeva  and  Vishnu  given  in  the  legends  of  the 
Puranas  ? Hence  it  is  proved  that  the  poor  stone  images  could 
not  fight  with  the  Mahomedans.  When  the  enemy  came  to  Kashi 
in  their  course  of  demolishing  temples  and  breaking  images,  the 
priests  threw  the  stone  phallus  into  a well  and  concealed  Beni 
Madhava  in  a Brahmin’s  house.  Since  the  messengers  of  Death 
durst  not  enter  Kashi  from  the  fear  of  Kala-bhairava,  and  it  is  not 
destroyed  even  in  a cataclysm,  why  did  they  not  scare  away  the 
messengers  of  Moslems  ? Why  did  they  allow  their  royal  palace 
to  be  destroyed  ? The  truth  is,  that  all  this  is  a mere  popish 
fraud. 

Gaya 

Q. — The  performance  of  the  Shradha  (offering  rice  balls  to 
the  manes)  sanctifies  the  departed  ancestors  and  sends  them  to 
heaven  in  virtue  of  its  religious  merit.  The  departed  ancestors  hold 
out  their  hands  to  receive  the  rice  balls.  Is  it  false  too  ? 

/<.— Yes,  it  is  totally  false.  If  the  departed  souls  receive  the 
merit  of  the  rice-ball  ceremony,  in  which  hundreds  of  rupees  are 
spent  to  feed  the  dead,  why  should  they  not  participate  in  the  sins, 
committed  by  the  Gaya  priests  such  as  whoredom  and  the  like  by 
metins  of  the  money  received  in  the  ceremony  ? Also,  the  projec- 
tion of  the  dead  is  not  at  all  observed  now-a-days,  but  the  hands 
of  the  priests  receive  the  offerings.  It  appears  that  some  rogue 
might  have  in  ignorant  days  dug  a pit  in  the  ground  and  hid  a 
person  therein.  Then  strewing  long  grass  (kusha)  over  him,  he 
might  have  offered  him  rice-balls,  which  the  hidden  person  must 
have  taken  by  stretching  forth  his  hand.  Thus  a pope  might  have 
cheated  some  man  devoid  of  sense  but  loaded  with  wealth,  who 
being  struck  with  wonder  in  his  ignorance,  might  in  his  turn  have 
given  currency  to  it.  In  like  manner,  it  is  also  no  wonder  that  the 
belief,  that  Ravana  brought  Baij  Nath  (an  idol  of  Shiva  near  Kangra, 
Punjab)  may  be  altogether  false. 

Calcutta 

Q — Is  it  no  miracle  that  hundreds  of  thousands  of  people 
worship  Goddess  Kail,  Kamaksha  and  the  like  goddesses  at 
Calcutta  ? 

A— No,  not  at  all.  These  men  are  blind  and  follow  one 
another  like  sheep,  which  fall  down  into  a pit,  but  which  do  not 
give  up  the  blind  lead.  In  the  same  manner,  the  igorant  persons  go 
after  another  and  fall  down  into  the  ditch  of  image- worship  and 
suffer  pain  therein, 


315 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 

Jagan  Nath  Puri 

g.— Well,  let  it  go.  Attend  to  Jagan  Nath  Puri,  where  there  is 
an  evident  miracle.  (1)  A log  of  sandal-wood  spontaneously  comes 
floating  upon  the  sea  at  the  time  of  Lord  Jagan  Nath’s  changing  the 
body  or  corporeal  incasement*  of  sandal-wood.  (2)  Seven  cauldrons  of 
rice  are  piled  upon  a hearth;  but  the  rice  is  boiled  from  topmost  down- 
ward. (3)  If  a person  does  not  eat  the  refuse  offering  of  Lord  Jagan 
Nath,  he  becomes  leprous  (4)  The  car  of  Lord  Jagan  Nath  moves 
spontaneously.  (5)  A wicked  person  cannot  see  the  Lord.  (6)  The 
gods  created  the  temple  in  the  reign  of  Indra-damana.  (7)  At  the  time 
of  changing  the  corporeal  incasement,  the  king,  the  priest,  and  the 
carpenter  (who  dress  the  God)  die  away.  You  will  never  be  able  to 
refute  these  miracles. 

A. — Once  a man  who  had  worshipped  Jagan  Nath  (the  Lord  of 
the  world)  for  12  years,  came  to  Mathura.  When  he  met  me,  I asked 
him  of  these  things.  He  said  that  they  were  all  false.  Also,  (1)  our 
reason  tells  us  that  a log  of  sandal-wood  is  perhaps  secretly  sent  in  a 
boat  and  set  afloat  upon  the  sea  at  the  time  of  changing  the  corporeal 
incasement  of  the  Deity.  It  is  brought  ashore  by  the  tide  waves.  The 
carpenters  catch  it  and  make  images  out  of  it.  (2)  When  food  is  cooked 
none  but  the  cooks  are  allowed  to  enter  the  kitchen  and  look  into 
the  pots.  There  are  in  the  ground  six  hearths  in  a circle  with  one  in 
the  centre.  The  cooks  paste  butter,  mud,  and  ashes  on  the  bottom 
of  the  cauldrons  and  boil  rice  upon  the  six  fireplaces.  They  then  scrub 
the  bottoms  clean  and  put  uncooked  rice  into  the  central  cauldron, 
upon  which  the  six  cauldrons  of  cooked  rice  are  piled.  The  mouths  of 
six  hearths  are  closed  with  iron  pans.  Then  those  sight-seers  who 
are  rich,  are  called  in  to  see  them.  They  see  the  cooked  rice  of  the 
top  cauldron,  and  then  they  are  asked  by  the  priests  to  offer  money 
for  those  cauldrons.  The  persons,  mentally  blind  and  immensely  rich, 
offer  silver  and  gold  coins,  and  some  of  them  promise  monthly 
subscriptions.  (3)  The  low  castes  bring  sweetmeat  to  the  temple. 
When  it  is  offered,  it  is  polluted  by  eating  a part  of  it.  Then  the 
kettles  of  rice  are  sent  to  the  houses  of  the  men  who  pay  for  them. 
The  poor  family  men,  monks  and  friars,  low  castes  and  slum  masses 
all  squat  down  in  a row  to  eat  one  another’s  refuse  food.  When  one 
batch  is  satisfied,  others  are  seated  to  eat  from  the  same  dishes  of 
leaves,  which  is  the  most  dirty  way  of  eating.  But  many  persons  do 
not  partake  of  the  refuse  food.  They  cook  their  own  food  till  they 
return  home.  They  catch  no  leprosy  and  other  diseases.  Also,  many 
inhabitants  of  the  town  never  eat  the  offered  food,  and  are  never  affict- 
ed  with  leprosy  and  other  diseases.  But  there  are  many  lepers  too. 
They  don’t  recover  because  of  eating  refuse  food.  There  is  a Bhairavi 
Chakra  (circle  of  God  Bacchus)  made  by  the  Wam-Margians.  Subha- 
dra,  who  is  the  sister  of  Krishna  and  Baldeva,  is  placed  between  her 
both  brothers  as  the  wife  and  mother,  which  could  not  have  been  the 
case  had  there  been  no  Bacchanalian  circle.  (4)  The  wheels  of  the  car 
are  furnished  with  machinery,  which  when  turned  to  the  right  moves 

*Every  twelve  years  a sandal-wood  covering  in  the  form  of  the  human  body 
is  put  on  the  idol  of  Jagan  Nath  at  Puri  in  Orissa. — Ed. 


316 


Satyarth  Prakash 


the  car,  but  which  stops  it  when  it  has  reached  the  centre  of  fair  as 
the  regulator  is  then  turned  to  the  left.  The  ministering  priests  then 
cry  at  the  top  of  their  voice  : Make  donations,  give  alms,  so  that 
Lord  Jagan  Nath  be  pleased  to  move  his  car  on,  and  our  religion  be 
preserved!  They  continue  their  calling  that  sort  of  way  so  long  as 
gifts  pour  in.  When  they  cease,  an  inhabitant  of  Vraja,  near  Mathura, 
with  a nice  suit  of  clothes  and  a shawl  on,  stations  himself  before  the 
car  and  thus  prays  with  the  palms  joined  : “O  Lord  Jagan  Nath,  be 
gracious  enough  to  move  your  car  on  and  preserve  our  religion.” 
Then  he  mounts  the  car  after  prostration  before  it.  The  machine 
being  turned  to  the  right  with  an  acclamation  of  ‘Victory  to  the  Lord! 
Victory  to  the  Lord!’  thousands  of  people  pull  the  ropes  tied  to  the 
car,  and  it  moves  onward  (5)  The  temple  is  very  spacious  but  dark, 
so  that  it  is  lighted  with  lamps  in  day  time.  Curtains  hang  both  sides 
before  the  image  there.  The  priests  stand  inside.  When  one  of  them 
pulls  a curtain,  the  images  are  at  once  hidden.  Then  the  ministers 
and  priests  thus  cry  out  to  the  persons  who  crowd  in  the  vestiblue  to 
catch  a sight  of  the  Diety  : “OlTer  presents,  all  your  sins  will  leave  you 
off!  Then  you  will  see  the  God.  Make  haste.”  The  simple  folks 
are  thus  robbed  of  their  money  by  the  cheats.  Then  the  curtain  is 
at  once  withdrawn  and  the  God  is  seen  by  the  devotees,  who  shout 
‘Victory  to  the  God’  and  are  very  much  rejoiced  and  are  then  driven 
off  contemptuously. 


Inter-Dining 

The  decendants  of  Indradamana  are  still  found  in  Calcutta.  He 
was  a rich  king  and  worshipper  of  Goddess  Devi.  He  spent  hundreds 
of  thousands  of  rupees  on  the  erection  of  the  temple.  His  object  was 
to  solve  the  problem  of  taking  food  at  each  other’s  hands  by  making 
them  partake  of  food  from  common  dishes.  But  how  can  the  fools 
give  up  their  exclusive  habits?  If  you  believe  in  gods,  you  should 
regard  as  gods  those  artisans  who  have  built  the  temple.  The  king, 
the  priest  and  the  carpenter  never  die  at  the  time  of  changing  the 
sandal  wood  covering,  but  they  became  the  heads  of  the  ministrant 
pastors.  It  appears  that  at  some  time  they  might  have  tyrannised 
over  their  subordinates  who  must  have  successfully  plotted  against 
their  life.  Since  the  heart  of  the  idol  is  hollow,  in  which  a Saligram^ 
is  placed  enclosed  within  a golden  casket  and  the  latter  idol  is  daily 
washed  to  make  the  nectar-  of  feet  (charanamrita),  they  might  have 
applied  some  poisonous  acid  on  the  candle  stick  to  show  light  on 
retiring  for  rest  at  night  and  given  the  washed  water  in  the  morning 
to  the  three  superiors  who  were  then  present  and  thus  put  them  to 
death.  While  they  died  thus,  the  priestly  gluttons  gave  out  that  Lord 
Jagan  Nath  carried  away  with  him  his  three  devotees  at  the  time  of 
changing  the  body.  There  are  always  many  such  false  reports  to 
cheat  the  ignorant  people  of  their  money. 

1.  Saligrama  is  an  idol  in  the  form  of  a round  or  oval  stone  like  a marble 
and  found  in  the  Gandki,  a river  in  the  north  of  Bengal.  It  is  worshipped  as  an 
incarnation  of  Vishnu. 

2.  The  water  in  which  an  idol  is  washed  is  called  the  nectar  of  feet.— 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


317 


Rameshwara 

Q.  Is  it  false  too  that  the  phallus^  at  Rameshwara  is  increased 
at  the  time  of  pouring  over  it  the  water  of  the  source  of  the  Ganges? 

A.  It  is  false;  for  the  temple  is  dark  even  in  the  day  and  so  it 
is  lighted  with  lamps  day  and  night.  When  the  water  is  poured  over 
it,  the  light  of  the  lamp  is  reflected  in  the  flow  of  water  like  lightning. 
Nothing  more  happens  there.  Neither  does  the  stone  image  increase 
in  size  nor  does  it  decrease.  It  remains  exactly  the  same  as  ever.  The 
priests  cheat  the  fools  by  means  of  such  tricks. 

Q. — Rameshwara  was  made  by  Lord  Ram  Chandra.  If  image- 
worship  had  been  against  the  Vedas,  how  should  he  have  done  so; 
and  why  should  Valmiki  write  it  in  the  Ramayana  ? 

A. — There  was  neither  the  name  nor  even  any  trace  of  that 
phallus  or  its  shrine  in  the  time  of  Rama  Chandra.  But  it  is  certain 
that  a Deccan  king,  Rama  by  name,  built  the  temple  and  called  the 
phallus  Rameshwara.  When  Rama  Chandra  with  Sita,  Hanuman, 
etc.  started  for  Ayodhya  from  Lanka  (Ceylon)  in  a balloon  by  way 
of  the  sky,  he  said  to  his  queen  Sita  : 

Valmiki  Ramayana,  Lanka  Kanda,  Sarga  125,  verse  20. 

“O  Sita,  when  I was  distressed  from  thy  separation  and  wander- 
ing about,  I passed  the  four  rainy  months  at  this  place.  I thought  of 
and  meditated  on  God,  who  is  all-pervading,  and  is  the  God  of  gods, 
the  Great  God,  the  Supreme  Spirit.  It  was  His  grace  that  I got  all 
required  things  here.  There  is  the  bridge  we  constructed  to  go  to 
Lanka,  where  we  slew  Ravana  and  brought  you  back.” 

Nothing  more  than  this  is  written  here  by  Valmiki. 

Deccan 

I ^ \ f'RXm  \ 

Q. — There  is  an  idol  of  Kalya-kanta.  It  smokes  unto  this  day. 
If  image-worship  be  false,  this  miracle  will  be  false  also. 

A. — It  is  all  false.  It  is  a popish  fraud.  The  mouth  of  the  idol 
may  be  hollow,  from  which  there  will  be  a hole  to  carry  a tube  through 
the  wall  behind  to  another  house.  When  the  priest  gets  a smoking 
pipe  ready,  being  furnished  with  a smoking  tube  and  stuck  to  the 
mouth  of  the  idol,  and  when  the  curtains  are  let  down,  he  comes  out- 
side, and  then  a man  hidden  behind  begins  to  smoke  so  that  the  bubble 
makes  a bubling  noise.  There  must  be  another  hole  through  the  nose 
and  the  mouth,  so  that  when  the  hidden  man  blows  the  smoke,  it 
comes  out  of  them.  Then  it  is  the  opportune  time  for  the  priests  to 
strip  the  foolish  pilgrims  of  all  their  wealth. 

Dwarika 

Q. — Don’t  you  know  that  the  image  of  Dakor  went  with  a 
devotee  from  Dwarika  ? Though  several  maunds  in  weight,  that 

1.  A symbol  of  the  generative  organ  of  Shiva. — Ed. 


318  Satyarth  Prakash 

golden  image  weighed  but  one  ruttee*  and  a half  only.  Is  it  not  a 
miracle  ? 

A, — No,  it  is  not.  That  devotee  must  have  stolen  away  the 
image.  As  for  the  enormous  weight  of  the  image  being  equal  to  one 
ruttee  and  a half,  it  is  a lie  pure  and  simple,  given  out  by  some  intoxi- 
cated with  hemp  decoction  (bhang). 

Soma  Nath 

Q. — See,  Soma  Nath  rested  above  the  ground,  which  was  a great 
miracle.  Is  it  false  also  ? 

A. — Yes,  it  is  false.  Listen  to  me.  There  were  magnets  above 
and  below  so  that  the  image  was  suspended  in  the  air  from  their 
attraction.  When  Mahmud  of  Ghazani  fought  his  way  to  the  temple, 
the  miracle  was  that  he  demolished  it  and  disgraced  the  priests.  The 
Hindu  army  many  hundred  thousands  strong  was  routed  and  put  to 
flight  by  ten  thousand  Moslems.  The  popish  priests  made  offerings, 
called  on  gods,  and  prayed  : ‘'O  Mahadeva,  kill  this  infidel  and  pro- 
tect us  !”  They  advised  their  royal  followers  to  have  patience  as 
Mahadeva  would  send  Bhairava  or  Birabhadra,  *who  would  kill  all 
the  infidels  (mlechhas)  or  blinden  them.  Their  god  was  about  to  be 
propitiated.  Hanumana,  Durga,  and  Bhairava  were  seen  in  a dream 
and  they  said  that  they  would  settle  all.  Those  simple  kings  and  war- 
riors (Kshatriyas)  were  led  to  believe  in  these  statements  of  the  popes. 
Many  popish  astrologers  said  that  it  was  not  astrologically  proper 
time  for  their  advance.  One  pointed  out  the  evil  moon  in  the  8th 
mansion,  and  another  showed  in  ominous  conjunction  (yogini)  before 
them,  and  so  forth.  Thus  the  warriors  were  misled  and  delayed.  The 
army  of  infidels  soon  came  and  surrounded  them.  They  fled  in  dis- 
grace. Several  popish  priests  and  their  disciples  were  captured.  The 
priests  offered  with  joined  hands  to  give  three  crores  of  rupees  pro- 
vided that  they  would  not  pull  down  the  temple  and  break  the  idol. 
The  Moslems  replied  that  they  were  not  idolaters  but  were  iconoclasts. 
They  at  once  fell  to  destroy  the  temple.  When  the  roof  was  destroyed 
the  image  fell  down  from  the  removal  of  the  magnets.  It  is  said  that 
when  the  image  was  broken,  some  18  crores  worth  of  gems  came  out 
of  it.  When  the  popes  and  priests  were  whipped,  they  wept  and  cried 
piteously.  They  were  so  cruelly  beaten  that  they  disgorged  the  secret. 
The  Mahomedans  at  once  pillaged  and  secured  it.  They  made  slaves 
and  porters  of  the  popes  and  their  disciples,  who  were  made  to  grind 
hard,  to  cut  grass,  to  clean  latrines,  and  they  gave  them  gram  to  eat. 
Alas  ! Why  did  they  throw  themselves  into  destruction  by  worship- 
ping stones  ? Why  did  they  not  serve  God  so  that  they  might  knock 
the  teeth  of  infidels  and  gain  a victory  over  them  ? Also  note,  had 
they  worshipped  even  heroes  then  existing  in  place  of  images,  they 
would  have  been  saved.  Though  the  priests  served  these  stones  very 
much,  yet  no  image  flew  to  break  the  heads  of  the  enemy.  But  had 
they  served  any  heroic  man  as  they  did  the  images,  he  would  have  done 
his  best  to  protect  his  followers  and  destroy  the  enemy. 


* One  ruttee  is  equal  to  one-tenth  of  a scruple.  One  maund  is  equal  to 
eighty  pounds. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions  319 

Narsi’s  Cheque 

Q.—ls  it  also  false  that  God  Ran-chhorh*  of  Dwarika  sent  a bill 
of  exchange  to  Narsi  Mehta  and  paid  off  his  debts  ? 

A,— Yes,  it  is  false.  Some  banker  must  have  paid  the  money 
and  then  somebody  gave  out  that  the  draft  was  sent  by  Shri  Krishna. 
When  the  English  bombarded  the  temple  with  its  images  in  1914  A.V., 
where  were  the  images  gone  then  ? However,  the  Bagheras  showed 
great  bravery  in  fighting  and  killing  the  enemy,  but  no  image  could  do 
even  so  much  as  to  break  the  leg  of  a fly.  Had  there  been  somebody 
like  Shri  Krishna  he  would  have  discomfited  them  hip  and  thigh,  so 
that  they  would  have  taken  to  their  heels.  Tell  me  why  should  his 
proteges  be  not  beaten  whose  protector  is  whipped. 


Volcanoes  in  Punjab  and  Hinglaj  in  Sindh 

Q, — The  Jwala-mukhi  (Punjab  volcano)  is  an  evident  Goddess. 
She  eats  all.  If  you  make  an  offering,  she  eats  half  of  it  and  leaves 
the  other  half.  The  Mosleam  kings  brought  a canal  to  be  poured 
into  the  crater  and  tried  to  close  it  with  iron  sheets.  Still  the  fire  was 
not  quenched,  nor  was  it  shut  up.  In  like  manner,  Goddess  Hinglaj 
lides  up  the  mountain  at  mid-night  and  is  seen  there.  She  sends 
thunder  into  the  mountain.  The  Chandra-kup  well  speaks.  If  a man 
passes  through  the  Yoni-yantra  (vagina-like  machine),  he  is  freed  from 
the  necessity  of  rebirth.  One  is  a half  great  man,  who  wears  a charm 
of  thhomerha.  The  man  is  a half  great  man  who  has  not  been  to 
Hinglaj.  Are  all  these  things  not  worth  believing  in  ? 

A. — No,  they  are  not.  The  fire  there  is  emitted  by  a volcano. 
The  tricks  are  the  frauds  of  the  priests.  It  is  like  the  fire  caught  by 
a heated  spoon  of  clarified  butter  for  spicing  a pot  of  soup,  which  is 
put  out  by  removing  the  spoon  from  the  hearth  or  blowing  upon  it 
with  the  mouth,  and  which  licks  away  some  clarified  butter  and  leaves 
the  rest  unburnt.  Wherein  does  it  differ  from  the  hearth  fire,  which 
reduces  all  to  ashes  that  is  thrown  into  it  ? When  it  is  set  to  a house 
or  the  forest,  it  eats  up  all.  Is  there  anything  more  in  it  ? As  to 
Hinglaj  (near  Karachi),  there  is  nothing  but  a popish  fraud  in  it. 
There  is  no  procession  of  the  Goddess  at  Hinglaj.  All  the  tricks  are 
played  by  the  priests.  They  have  got  a pond  of  water  and  another 
of  mud,  from  the  bottom  of  which  the  bubbles  arise.  It  is  considered 
a success  of  a pilgrimage  by  foolls.  The  Yoni-yantra  (vaginal  machine) 
has  been  made  by  them  to  rob  the  people  of  their  wealth.  The 
charms  are  also  a popish  trick  like  the  rest.  If  they  make  a great 
man,  will  an  animal  loaded  with  a freight  of  them  be  a great  man.  A 
great  man  is  made  by  the  possession  of  the  best  qualities  such  as  right- 
eousness or  religion  and  courage. 

* These  arc  the  powerful  spirits  in  the  service  of  the  Great  God,  called 
Mahadeva  in  Sanscrit,  according  to  the  legends  of  the  Puranas.  It  is  a name  of 
Krishna,  given  him  when  he  shunned  giving  battle  to  Jarasiandha,  a king  of 
Magadha  (Behar).  Krishna  emigrated  with  his  people  to  Dwarika,  the  Land's 
End  of  India.  In  the  year  of  Vikramaditya,  which  is  57  years  older  than  the 
Christian  era. 


320 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Amritsar 

Q. — The  pond  at  Amritsar  is  like  nectar;  half  the  fruit  of  murithi 
(soap  nut)  is  sweet;  there  is  a wall  which  shakes  but  does  not  fall 
down;  fields  float  at  Rewalsar;  phalluses  arc  made  at  Amar  Nath 
spontaneously,  there  pigeons  come  from  the  Himalayas  to  be  seen  by 
the  pilgrims  and  then  go  away.  Are  all  these  not  worth  believing  in  ? 

/i.— No,  they  are  not.  The  pond  of  Amritsar  is  merely  called 
the  pool  of  nectar,  but  it  is  not  so  in  reality.  Its  water  might  be  good 
when  there  was  a forest,  and  so  it  was  called  Amritsar  or  the  pool  of 
nectar.  Why  do  the  people  die  there,  for  nectar  gives  life  according 
to  the  Puranas  ? The  construction  of  the  wall  must  be  such  as  to  allow 
it  to  shake  but  to  prevent  it  from  falling.  The  soap-nut  must  be  an 
ingraft  of  the  lotus,  or  it  may  be  a hoax  altogether.  There  must  be 
some  ingenuity  in  floating  a field  at  Rewalsar.  At  Amar  Nath  moun- 
tains are  rnade  of  ice,  so  what  wonder  can  there  be  if  a small  phallus 
(stone  penis)  is  made  that  way  ? The  pairs  of  pigeons  must  be  tame, 
which  are  let  off  from  a secret  place  in  the  mountain  in  order  to  cheat 
the  people  thereby. 

Hardwar 

Q.—Hardwar  is  the  gate  of  heaven.  Bathing  at  the  Har-ki- 
pourchi  (steps  of  god  Hari)  removes  all  sins.  Residence  in  theTapo- 
bana  makes  a man  saint.  A pilgrimage  to  Deva  Prayaga,  the  cow's 
mouth  at  the  Gangotri  (source  of  the  Ganges),  Uttara  Kashi,  Gupta 
Kashi,  Triyiigi  Narayana  and  their  sight  confer  a religious  merit  on  a 
rnan  Kedar  Nath  and  Badri  Narayan  (in  Garhawal)  are  worshipped 
six  months  by  mortals  and  six  months  by  immortals.  Pashupati 
Mahadeva’s  face  is  seen  in  Nepal,  buttocks  at  Kedar  Nath,  thighs  at 
Thunga  Nath,  and  feet  at  Amar  Nath,  Their  sight,  embrace,  and 
bathing  at  pools  there  give  salvation  to  the  people.  If  one  wants  to 
go  to  heaven  from  Kedar  Nath  and  Badri  Nath,  he  can  do  so.  What 
do  you  think  of  all  these  ? 

^•“7 Hardwar  is  an  entrance  to  go  to  the  mountains  in  the  north. 
The  Hari  steps  are  the  steps  to  a pool  for  bathing.  They  arc  in  fact 
the  bone-steps,  for  the  bones  of  all  the  dead  throughout  India  arc 
sunk  there.  Sin  is  never  removed  by  any  place.  It  is  never  effaced 
without  undergoing  its  penalty.  Tapo-bana  might  be  a place  of  saints 
in  the  past.  It  is  now  a place  of  beggars.  No  penance  is  performed  by 
going  to  or  living  in  Tapo-bana.  Penance  is  performed  by  under- 
going it,  for  there  are  many  shopkeepers  who  tell  lies  : Himavatah 
prabhavati  Ganga — the  Ganges  issues  from  the  Himalayas,  the  abode 
of  snow.  Water  gushes  out  from  the  mountain.  The  cow’s  mouth  is 
made  to  cheat  the  people.  That  mountain  is  the  heaven  of  the  popes. 
The  places  there,  called  Uttara  Kashi  and  the  like,  are  good  for  medi- 
tators. But  shopkeepers  carry  on  their  worldly  trade  there  too.  Dava- 
prayaga  is  a place  of  the  Puranic  frauds.  For,  if  they  do  not  speak 
lies,  that  gods  live  where  the  Ganges  and  the  Alakhananda  meet,  who 
will  go  there  and  give  them  money  ? Gupta  Kashi  is  not  hidden  as 
the  name  implies,  but  it  is  as  visible  as  day.  At  Triyugi  Narayana 
there  is  no  fire-place  of  three  ages.  It  may  be  as  old  as  ten  or  twenty 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


321 


generations  of  popes,  just  as  the  fire-place  of  the  order  of  the  Khakies 
(who  bedaub  their  bodies  with  ashes)  and  the  Parsies  is  always  kept 
burning.  The  Tapta  Kundas  (hot  springs)  get  heat  from  the  bowels  of 
the  earth,  and  the  water  is  heated  in  passing  over  the  hot  strata.  The 
cold  springs  near  them  receive  water  from  the  mountains  above  them 
or  from  places  where  there  is  no  heat,  so  their  water  is  cool  The 
country  in  which  Kedar  Nath  is  situated,  is  very  good.  But  the  priests 
or  their  disciples  have  got  a temple  built  around  a stone  fixed  in  the 
ground.  Its  abbots,  priests,  and  pastors  get  money  from  men,  blind 
of  mental  eyes  and  full  of  purse,  to  indulge  in  sensuousness.  In  like 
manner,  there  are  many  swindlers  at  Badri  Narayana.  The  Rawalji  is 
the  pontiff.  He  has  many  wives  instead  of  one.  Kashupati  is  a temple 
with  an  idol  of  five  faces.  As  there  is  none  to  enquire  into  these 
matters,  pious  frauds  have  gathered  strength.  But  the  mountaineers 
are  not  so  deceitful  and  money-grabbing  as  the  priestly  people  of 
sacred  places.  Also,  the  landscape  there  is  very  beautiful  and 
picturesque. 

Vindhya  Goddess  near  Mirzapore 

Q, — The  octomanus  Goddess  Kali,  Vindhyeshwari  of  the 
Vindhyachala  mountains  (in  the  north-west),  is  evidently  a true  god- 
dess. She  changes  her  forms  three  times  a day,  and  there  is  no  fly  to 
be  seen  in  all  her  premises.*  Prayaga  (Allahabad)  is  the  king  of 
sacred  places.  A man  gets  success  in  life  by  shaving  his  whole  head 
there.  All  desires  are  fulfilled  by  bathing  at  the  confluence  of  the 
Ganges  and  the  Jamna.  In  like  manner,  Ayodhya  (Fyzabad)  has 
ascended  to  heaven  several  times  with  all  her  inhabitants.  Mathura  is 
superior  to  all  the  secred  places.  Brinda  Bana  is  the  place  sanctified 
by  the  sports  of  Lord  Krishna.  It  is  a man’s  great  luck  that  he  has 
been  on  a pilgrimage  to  Braja  and  the  Goberdhana  hills.  A fair  of 
hundreds  of  thousands  of  men  assembles  on  the  occasion  of  a solar 
elipse  at  Kuru  Kshetra  (near  Delhi).  Are  all  these  false? 

A. — Our  eyes  only  see  three  images  plainly  that  they  are  made 
of  stone.  As  regards  the  three  transformations,  their  cause  is  the 
dexterity  of  the  priests  in  dressing  and  decorating  the  idol.  There 
are  thousands  and  hundreds  of  thousands  of  flies  there.  I have  seen 
them  with  my  own  eyes.  As  for  shaving  at  Prayaga,  some  barber 
able  to  compose  Sanscrit  verses  or  by  giving  some  money  to  an  Indian 
pope,  might  have  written  or  got  the  holy  book  of  the  religious  merit 
of  shaving  written  for  himself.  If  a person  goes  to  heaven  by  bath- 
ing at  Prayaga,  why  does  he  return  home  after  bath  ? Nobody  has 
ever  observed  the  pilgrims  there  go  to  heaven,  but  all  see  them  return 
home.  As  to  one  who  dies  there  by  sinking,  his  soul  passes  to  the 
sky  and  wandering  there  with  the  ethereal  current  reincarnates  in  the 
world.  It  is  only  the  money-grabbing  priests  that  have  called  Prayaga 
Tirtha-raja  to  cheat  people  of  their  money.  There  can  be  no  relation 
of  the  king  or  subjects  in  a stone  It  is  quite  impossible  that  Ayodhya 
went  thrice  to  heaven  with  its  inhabitants,— dogs,  asses,  sweepers, 

*Many  goats  are  slaughtered  for  offering  to  the  Fury.  So  it  should  attract 
many  flies. 


322 


Satyarth  Prakash 


shoe-makers,  and  dirt  cleaners.  It  never  went  to  heaven,  but  it 
always  stood  where  it  was.  It  is  a shameless  lie  circulated  by  the 
Indian  popes  that  the  town  flew  to  heaven.  This  lie  passes  from  one 
man  to  another  without  inquiry.  In  the  same  way,  they  have  spread 
falsehood  about  Nemisharaoya  and  other  places. 

Mathura 

It  is  also  false  that  Mathura  teen  lake  se  nyari — Mathura  is 
separate  from  the  three  regions.  II  is  not  separate  from  the  world; 
but  there  are  three  great  humbugging  families  in  it,  whose  tyranny  has 
made  it  difficult  for  any  one  to  get  rest  either  on  land,  or  in  water,  or  in 
the  air  First,  there  are  the  Chowbays  who  are  ready  to  demand  their 
tax  from  him  that  goes  to  bathe,  and  who  always  say  : O sacrificer, 
give  us  alms  so  that  we  may  eat  and  drink  bhang  (hemp  leaves), 
pepper  and  sweetmeat  balls,  and  pronounce  victory  to  you  ! Secondly, 
there  are  tortoises  in  the  river,  which  bite,  so  that  it  is  difficult  to 
bathe  at  bathing  places.  Thirdly,  there  arc  red-faced  monkeys  in  the 
trees  or  on  the  tops  of  houses,  which  carry  away  turbans,  caps,  orna- 
ments, and  shoes,  and  which  bite,  attack,  dash,  and  sometimes  kill 
unwary  persons.  All  these  three  are  revered  by  the  popes  and  their 
disciples.  The  tortoises  arc  given  gram  and  other  grains  to  eat;  the 
monkeys,  gram,  molasses  and  other  eatables;  and  the  Chowbays, 
sweetmeat  balls  and  presents  by  the  devotees.  Brindabana  might 
be  a holy  place  in  some  past  time,  but  it  is  not  so  at  all  now;  it  is 
like  a brothel  {lit.  wilderness  of  prostitutes)  full  of  the  wickedness  of 
the  priests  and  their  blind  followers,  libidinous  youths  and  maidens. 
In  like  manner,  the  popes  turn  every  thing  to  account  in  the  fair  of 
‘the  festival  of  lamps’  and  the  Goberdhana  and  the  pilgrimage  of 
Vraja.  Also  the  same  pious  frauds  are  practised  by  the  popes  at 
Kurukshetra  (the  battlefield  of  Mahabharata)  to  live  an  idle  life. 
Among  them  whoever  is  righteous  and  benevolent,  severs  his  connec- 
tion with  them. 

Modernity  of  Idolatry 

Q. — Well,  idolatry  and  pilgrimage  to  sacred  places  have  been 
in  vogue  from  eternity.  How  can  they  be  false  ? 

A. — What  do  you  mean  by  eternity  ? Is  it  what  comes  down 
from  unbeginning  time  ? If  they  had  existed  from  all  eternity,  how 
is  it  that  no  trace  of  their  name  is  found  in  the  Vedas,  Brahmanas 
and  other  scriptures  by  sages  and  philosophers  ? Idolatry  has  been 
started  by  the  Wam-Margians  and  Jainees  nearly  for  the  last  25  or 
30  centuries.  It  was  not  found  at  first  in  Aryavarta  (India).  There 
were  also  no  sacred  places  then.  When  the  Jainees  made  Girnar, 
Palitana,  Shikhara,  Shatrunjaya,  Abu,  and  other  sacred  places,  the 
Brahmins  also  made  theirs  in  imitation  of  them.  Those  who  want  to 
examine  the  matter  to  find  out  their  antiquity,  should  look  into  the 
oldest  registers  and  copper  plates,  etc.  of  the  priests  there.  They 
will  then  be  convinced  of  the  fact  that  all  these  sacred  places  were 
made  nearly  500  or  1,000  years  ago.  Nobody  among  the  priests  has 
a writing  older  than  1,000  years.  Thus  they  are  quite  m odern. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


323 


Sanctity  of  Places 

Q- — Are  such  things  false  as  the  religious  merit  of  sacred  places 
and  the  efficacy  of  muttering  the  Name  ? Thus,  for  instance, 

f rT  qt't  I 

Sins  committed  at  other  holy  places  are  destroyed  at  Kashi  (Benares). 

A. — Yes,  they  are.  For,  if  sins  could  be  destroyed,  the  poor 
would  have  got  riches,  dethroned  monarchs  their  kingdoms,  the  blind 
their  eyes,  and  the  lepers  wholeness.  But  no  such  thing  takes  place 
there.  Therefore,  the  sins  of  nobody  are  ever  removed,  nor  anybody 
obtains  an  addition  of  virtues  there. 

Muttering  of  the  Name 

A.—  »r^>I^rcT  q)  I 

>3 

qt'nfq  i 

5ncf:q>T%  f5rq  fqftr  qr'f  fqqwfrr  II 

c > 

These  Sanscrit  verses  are  from  the  popes’  Parana.  They  mean  : 
(1)  If  a man  utters  the  name  of  the  Ganges  even  at  the  distance  of  a 
hundred  or  a thousand  miles,  his  sins  are  removed  and  he  goes  to  the 
heaven  of  Vishnu.  (2)  The  muttering  of  the  two  syallables  of  the 
name  of  Ha-ri  takes  off  all  sins;  the  same  is  done  by  repeating  Rama, 
Krishna,  Shiva,  Bhagawati,  and  other  sacred  names.  (3)  If  a man  sees 
and  bows  to  the  phallus  (penis)  of  Shiva  or  his  image  in  the  morning, 
all  his  sins  committed  in  the  previous  night  are  removed;  if  at  noon, 
all  his  life-long  sins  are  wiped  off;  if  at  evening,  all  his  sins  of  seven 
lives  are  purged  off.  Such  is  the  efficacy  of  the  sight  of  the  idols. 
Will  it  be  false  too  ? 

A. — What  doubt  is  there  in  its  being  false  ? For,  the  repetition 
of  the  names  of  the  Ganges,  Hari,  Rama,  Krishna,  Shiva,  and  Bhaga- 
wati does  not  remove  sins.  If  sins  are  removed,  none  will  be  miser- 
able and  afraid  of  committing  sins.  As  enormous  sins  are  being 
committed  in  popedom,  the  ignorant  believe  that  if  they  mutter  the 
sacred  names  or  go  on  pilgrimages,  the  sins  will  be  removed  onces 
for  all.  It  is  on  the  strength  of  this  belief  that  they  are  bringing  ruin 
upon  this  as  well  as  the  other  life.  But  the  consequences  of  the  sins 
committed  must  have  to  be  borne. 

Q. — Then,  is  there  any  sacred  place  or  method  of  the  mutter- 
ing of  the  Name,  which  is  true  ? 

A. — Yes,  there  is.  The  reading  and  teaching  of  the  Vedas  and 
other  true  scriptures,  the  company  of  the  righteous  and  learned, 
beneficence,  the  practice  of  virtue  or  religion,  introspection  or  the 
practice  of  Yoga,  absence  of  enmity,  undeceitfulness,  veracity,  the 
observance  of  truth,  acting  upon  truth,  the  maintenance  of  chastity, 
the  service  of  the  teacher,  guest,  mother,  father,  singing  the  glory  of 
God,  prayer,  meditation,  quiescence,  the  subjugation  of  the  senses, 
modesty,  righteous  courage,  wisdom,  knowledge,  and  the  like  virtuous 


324 


Satyarth  Prakash 


qualities  and  works,  being  efficacious  enough  to  emancipate  man  from 
sin  and  sorrow,  are  the  leal  emancipators  or  “tirthas”  as  they  are 
called.  Those  things  which  aie  land  and  water,  can  never  be  tirthas 
or  emancipators;  iov,  jaiiah  yaistaranti  tani  teerthani — tirthas  are  those 
by  whose  means  people  cross  the  sea  of  sorrow  (world).  Land  and 
water  are  not  helpers  in  the  matter,  they  rather  sink  a man  and  kill 
him  (by  temptation).  Boats  and  other  conveyances  can  be  called 
tirthas  for  they  enable  a man  to  cross  a sea  and  land. 

\ Adh.  4,  P.  4,  V.  108.  ^ I— Yaj.  xvi. 

— Those  bachelor  students  who  study  a book  together  with  a common 
preceptor,  are  said  to  belong  to  the  same  emancipator  or  sa-tirthya. 
The  tirtha  (fam,  sacred  place)  is  to  give  food  and  other  necessary 
things  to  one  versed  in  the  Vedas  and  other  scriptures,  and  wedded 
to  veracity  and  righteousness,  and  to  receive  knowledge  from  him, 
and  so  forth. 

The  muttering  of  the  Name:  Yasya  nama  mahad  yashah,  or 
remembering  God  is  the  performance  of  great  works  of  righteousness 
and  religious  glory.  For  instance,  the  Brahman,  Supreme  Ruler,  Lord, 
Judge,  Merciful  Being,  Almighty  Lord,  etc.  are  the  names  of  God,  in- 
dicative of  His  attributes,  exisence  and  character.  In  other  words,  the 
Brahman  is  the  gicatest  being  of  all.  Parameshwara  is  the  Lord  of 
lords  or  King  of  all  kings.  Ishwara  is  the  Almighty  Being.  As  judge, 
God  never  does  injustice.  He  is  merciful  and  kind  to  all.  He  is 
Almighty,  as  by  His  own  power  He  creates,  maintains,  and  destroys 
the  world.  He  docs  not  stand  in  need  of  help  from  anybody.  The 
Brahman  is  the  maker  of  the  various  objects  of  the  world.  Vishnu 
pervades  and  protects  all.  Mahadeva  is  the  God  of  gods.  Rudra  is 
the  destroyer  of  the  world.  Thus,  these  meanings  of  the  above  names 
should  be  impressed  upon  the  mind.  A man  should  try  to  be  great 
by  doing  great  deeds.  He  should  acquire  strength  and  power,  which 
should  be  always  developed.  He  should  on  no  account  commit  an 
evil.  He  should  be  kind  to  all  and  perfect  his  means  to  the  best  of 
his  power.  He  should  make  various  kinds  of  things  of  art  and 
science,  regard  the  pleasure  and  pain  of  others  in  the  world  like  his, 
protect  all,  be  learned  among  the  learned,  try  to  punish  the  evil  deeds 
and  the  iniquitous  and  protect  the  righteous.  In  this  manner,  he 
should  endeavour  to  know  the  import  of  the  Divine  Names  and 
bring  himself  to  imitate  the  Great  God  in  His  attributes,  deeds  and 
character,  for  that  is  the  remembering  of  His  Great  Name. 

Service  of  the  Teacher 

Q. — Are  these  and  other  merits  resulting  from  the  service  of  the 
teacher  right  ? One  should  drink  the  washings  of  the  teacher’s  feet, 
obey  his  orders  whatever  they  may  be,  regard  him  like  Vamana  (the 
dwarfish  incarnation)  if  he  is  avaricious,*  like  Narasinha  (the  leonine 


♦The  10  incarnations  are  Fish  (Dragon),  Tortoise,  Boar,  Lion,  Dwarf, 
Parasrara,  Rama,  Krishna,  Buddha,  and  Nish-Kalunk  (Immaculate  to  come). 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


325 


incarnation)  if  he  is  hot-tempered,  like  Rama  if  he  is  attached  to  the 
world,  and  like  Krishna  if  he  is  lusty.  Howsoever  wicked  the  teacher 
may  be,  a man  should  not  slack  his  faith  in  him.  The  religious  merit 
of  the  horse  sacrifice  accrues  to  a man  at  every  point  in  the  journey  he 
undertakes  to  see  his  teacher.  Is  it  true  ? 

A, — It  is  not  true.  Brahma,  Vishnu,  Mahesha,  and  the  Supreme 
Being  are  the  names  of  God.  A teacher  can  never  be  equal  to  God. 
This  religious  merit  from  the  service  of  the  teacher  and  the  Guru 
Gita  are  both  the  great  frauds  of  the  Indian  popes.  The  proper 
gurus  or  teachers  are  the  mother,  father,  teacher,  and  guest.  It  is  the 
duty  of  the  pupil  to  receive  instruction  from  them  and  to  serve  them, 
whose  duty  it  is  to  teach  him  or  her.  But  if  the  teacher  is  covetous, 
hot-tempered,  seltlsh,  and  lusty  lie  must  always  be  shunned.  Education 
is  necessary.  If  a pupil  is  recalcitrant  in  learning  in  an  ordinary  way, 
he  should  be  punished.  There  is  no  fault  even  when  death  results  to 
him.  There  is  no  gurudom  or  popedom  in  the  possession  of  know- 
ledge and  virtuous  qualities.  They  are  not  teachers  who  are  fraudu- 
lent enough  to  wear  a string  of  beads  round  the  neck,  paint  the  fore- 
head with  sandalwood  paste  and  initiate  the  people  into  mysteries 
against  the  Vedas.  They  are  like  shepherds  They  cheat  their 
followers  of  money  to  serve  their  own  purpose,  just  as  shepherds 
carry  on  their  trade  by  milking  sheep  and  goats. 

— The  avaricious  teacher  and  covetous  disciple  both  practise  frauds. 
They  sink  into  the  sea  of  the  world,  silting  in  a stone  boat,  so  to  say. 

The  popish  teacher  thinks  that  his  male  and  female  devotees 
must  give  him  something.  A disciple  thinks  that  the  popish  teacher 
is  able  to  absolve  aim  from  a false  oath  and  to  emancipate  him  from 
sin.  It  is  from  such  selfish  thoughts  that  both  the  popish  teacher  and 
the  popish  disciple  are  sunk  in  the  sea  of  misery  of  the  world,  just  as 
the  persons  sink  into  sea  and  die  who  sit  in  a stone  boat.  Away  with 
such  popish  teachers  and  disciples  1 None  should  ever  seek  their  com- 
pany. Whoever  associates  with  them,  will  sink  into  the  sea  of  sulfer- 
ing.  These  shepherd  popish  teachers  of  false  faiths  are  practising 
the  same  pious  frauds  as  are  done  by  priests  and  mythologists.  All 
this  is  the  work  of  the  selfish.  The  unselfish,  although  encountering 
difficulties  or  sulfering  pain  themselves,  never  desist  from  doing  good 
to  others.  The  dogma  of  religious  merit  accruing  from  serving  tea- 
chers and  the  Guru  Gita  are  made  by  these  unrighteous  people. 

Anthor  of  Puranas  (Indian  Mythology) 

(2)  I—  Muhabharat  I 

(3)  ^ I — Manu. 

(4)  l — Chh.  pr.  7,  Kh.  1. 

(5) 

(6)  l — Aphorism 


326 


Satyarth  Prakash 


— (1)  Saint  Vyasa  is  the  author  of  the  18  Puranas  His  teach- 
ings must  necessarily  be  accepted  as  authority.  (2)  The  meanings  of 
the  Vedas  should  be  learnt  from  history,  Mahabharata,  and  18 
Puranas;  for,  these  are  in  unison  with  their  meanings.  (3)  The  stories 
of  the  Puranas  and  Haribansa  should  be  listened  to  in  the  ceremonies 
of  the  manes.  (4)  The  history  and  Puranas  are  called  the  fifth  Veda. 
These  are  the  authorities  for  the  truth  of  the  Puranas,  whose  authority 
establishes  the  truth  of  idolatry  and  holy  places;  for,  the  Puranas 
contain  their  dispensation  and  permission.  (5)  On  the  lOth  day,  at  the 
completion  of  a ‘horse  sacrifice’,  a little  of  the  stories  of  the  Puranas 
should  be  read  to.  (6)  The  knowledge  of  the  Puranas  is  the  Veda, 
from  its  helping  in  the  interpretation  of  the  Vedas. 

A. — Had  St.  Vyasa  been  the  author  of  the  18  Puranas,  they 
would  not  have  so  many  falsehoods;  for,  the  perusal  of  the  Vedanta 
aphorisms  and  his  commentary  on  the  Yoga  philosophy  shows  that 
he  was  a very  learned,  veracious  and  righteous  clairvoyant.  He  could 
not  have  written  such  false  tales.  It  also  shows  that  the  sectarians 
of  clashing  creeds  who  wrote  the  Bhagawata  and  the  other  new  pre- 
posterous books,  had  no  particle  of  St.  Vyasa’s  virtue  about  them. 
To  write  falsehood  against  the  Vedas  and  philosophies,  is  not  the 
work  of  the  persons  of  St.  Vyasa’s  learning.  But  it  is  the  work  of 
quarrelsome  and  selfish  ignoramuses.  History  and  Puranas  aie  not  the 
names  of  the  Shiva  Purana,  &c.  But*  the  Aitareya,  Shatapatha,  Sama, 
and  Gopatha  Brahmanas  are  called  by  the  five  names  of  history, 
Purana,  Kalpa,  Gatha  (tradition),  and  Narashansi;  as  the  follow- 
ing aphorism  of  a Brahmana  proves 

The  history  contains  such  matter  as 
the  dialogue  between  Janaka  and  Yajnavalkya,  the  Puranas  the 
account  of  creation,  the  Kalpa  the  description  of  the  import  of  the 
Vedic  meanings  and  phraseology,  the  Gatha  stories  by  way  of  illus- 
tration of  some  moral  principle,  Narashansi  the  account  of  good  and 
evil  actions  of  human  beings.  These  subjects  help  us  in  understand- 
ing the  meanings  of  the  Vedas.  The  service  of  the  manes  consists  in 
listening  to  the  praiseworthy  deeds  of  the  sages,  which  is  enjoined  at 
the  end  of  an  Ashwa  Medha.  The  reading  and  hearing  of  the  books 
written  by  St  Vyasa  can  only  be  after  his  birth,  but  never  before  it. 
When  St.  Vyasa  was  not  born,  the  people  used  to  learn  and  teach, 
recite  and  listen  to  the  interpretation  of  the  Vedas.  Therefore,  these 
conditions  aic  only  fulfilled  by  the  oldest  Brahmana  scriptures,  but 
never  by  the  new  fantastical,  false  and  defective  books,  called  the 
Srimad  Bhagawat,  Shiva  Purana,  &c.  St.  Vyasa  is  called  the  Veda 
Vyasa  because  he  studied  the  Vedas  and  spread  their  study  among 
the  people.  The  word  Vyasa  means  the  diameter  which  goes  through 
the  circle;  for,  he  went  through  the  four  Vedas  from  the  Rig  to  the 
Atharva  Veda.  He  taught  them  to  his  pupils,  Shukadeva,  Jaimini, 
and  others.  Otherwise  his  christened  name  was  Krishna  Dwaipayana. 
It  is  wrong  to  say  that  St.  Vyasa  collected  the  Vedas;  for,  his  father, 
grand-father,  great-grand-father,  namely,  Parasara,  Shakti,  Vashish- 
tha,  Brahma,  and  others  too,  had  studied  the  Vedas  before  him. 
How  can  it  take  place,  if  he  is  the  compiler  of  them  ? 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


327 


Falsehoods  of  Puranas 

Q. — Is  there  any  truth  in  the  Puranas,  or  are  they  all  false  ? 

A. — They  contain  much  falsehood.  There  is  truth  in  them  by 
way  of  gilding  the  falsehood.  Whatever  is  true  in  them,  is  from  the 
Vedas  and  other  true  scriptures,  and  whatever  is  false  in  them,  is  from 
the  imagination  of  the  Indian  popes.  For  instance,  in  tlie  Shiva 
Purana,  the  followers  of  Shiva  (Osiris)  accept  him  to  be  the  Great 
God  and  regard  Vishnu,  Brahma,  Indra,  Ganesha,  Surya,  &c.  to  be 
his  servants.  In  the  Vishnu  Purana,  the  followers  of  Vishnu  suppose 
him  to  be  the  Great  God  and  Shiva  and  others  to  be  his  servants.  In 
the  Devi  Bhagawata,  Goddess  Devi  is  regarded  as  the  Great  Divinity 
and  Shiva,  Vishnu  and  others  as  her  menials.  In  the  Ganesha  Khand, 
Ganesha  is  described  as  the  Great  God  and  the  other  gods  as  his 
serfs.  If  these  things  are  not  the  fabrications  of  these  sectarians, 
whom  should  they  belong  to?  Such  contradictions  are  not  found  in 
one  and  the  same  author.  Much  less  they  can  come  from  a learned 
person.  If  one  account  be  accepted  as  truth,  the  other  is  false;  if  the 
other  is  true,  the  third  one  is  false,  and  so  on  to  the  end  of  them.  The 
author  of  the  Shiva  Purana  writes  that  Shiva  creates  and  destroys  the 
world;  that  of  the  Vishnu  Parana,  Vishnu;  that  of  the  Devi  Purana, 
Devi;  that  of  the  Ganesha  Khand,  Ganesha;  that  of  the  Surya  Purana, 
Surya;  that  of  the  Vayu  Purana,  Vayu.  Each  of  them  describes  his 
creator  as  the  creator  of  others’  creators.  If  it  be  asked  of  these  popes 
how  the  creator,  preserver  and  destroyer  can  be  produced,  and  how 
the  created  can  become  the  first  cause  of  the  creation,  they  hold  their 
tongue  and  say  nothing  in  reply  thereto.  The  creation  of  these  crea- 
tors’ body  must  be  from  the  created  world.  This  being  the  case,  how 
can  they  who  are  the  created  objects  be  distinct  from  the  creation 
and  be  the  author  of  that  creation?  Their  account  of  creation,  which 
is  curious,  is  impossible  of  occurrence.  To  take  an  example  for  illus- 
tration. 

Creation  in  Shiva  Purana 

According  to  the  Shiva  Purana,  Shiva  desired  to  create.  So  he 
created  an  ocean,  called  Narayana,  from  whose  navel  a lotus  was 
produced  and  from  the  lotus  came  out  Brahma,  who  looked  about 
him  and  saw  nothing  but  water  throughout.  He  took  a palmful  of 
water  out  of  the  surrounding  ocean  to  see  and  then  threw  it  back  into 
it.  This  act  produced  a bubble,  from  which  came  out  a man  (Vishnu), 
who  said  to  Brahma  : O my  son,  create  the  world.  Brahma  said  to 
him  : 1 am  not  your  son,  but  you  are  my  son.  So  they  began  to  fight 
each  other  and  the  fight  lasted  on  the  waters  for  1,000  years  of  gods. 
Then  Shiva  thought  to  himself  that  the  persons  whom  he  had  sent  to 
create,  were  fighting  each  other.  So  there  came  out  of  them  both  a 
phallus  of  light,  which  projected  directly  towards  the  sky.  Both  of 
them  were  astonished  to  see  it.  They  determined  to  find  out  its  be- 
ginning and  end,  making  an  understanding  between  them  that  he 
would  be  looked  upon  as  the  father  of  the  other  who  first  came  back 
with  the  discovery  of  its  beginning  and  end,  and  he  who  came  last 
would  be  the  son.  Vishnu,  for  such  was  the  name  of  the  person  who 
came  out  of  the  bubble,  assumed  the  form  of  a tortoise  and  went 


328 


Satyarth  Prakash 


down  to  the  bottom  of  the  ocean.  Brahma  assumed  the  form  of  a 
swan  and  soared  upward.  Both  of  them  proceeded  on  their  journey 
with  the  quickness  of  the  mind.  They  continued  their  journey  for 
1,000  years  of  gods;  but  they  did  not  find  the  extremities  of  the  phallus 
(Shiva’s  emblem). 

Then  Vishnu  thought  from  down  below  and  Brahma  from  up  in 
the  sky  that,  if  the  other  brought  out  the  knowledge  of  the  extremity 
of  the  phallus,  he  would  be  considered  as  his  son.  While  Brahma  was 
thus  absorbed  in  thinking,  a cow  and  a fragrant  plant  (pandanus 
odoratissimus)  descended  from  the  heaven.  Brahma  asked  them 
whence  they  came.  They  replied  that  they  depended  upon  the  phallus 
for  thousands  of  years.  Brahma  enquired  of  them  if  there  was  an  end 
of  the  phallus.  They  replied  that  there  was  no  end  of  it.  Brahma 
asked  them  to  accompany  him  and  give  their  evidence,  that  the  cow 
was  pouring  milk  and  the  plant  flowers  on  the  top  of  the  phallus.  If 
they  consented  to  the  proposal,  he  would  take  them  to  a place  of  rest. 
They  replied  that  they  would  not  give  a false  evidence.  Then  Brahma 
got  angry  and  told  them  that  he  would  consume  them  to  ashes  there 
and  then,  should  they  refuse  to  give  that  sort  of  evidence.  So  being 
terrified,  they  both  agreed  to  give  an  evidence  which  he  desired.  Then 
all  the  three  descended  to  the  starting  place.  But  Vishnu  was  already 
there.  When  Brahma  arrived,  he  asked  Vishnu  if  he  found  out  the  end 
of  the  phallus.  Vishnu  replied  that  he  could  not  find  it  out.  Brahma  said 
that  he  had  found  it  out.  Vishnu  demanded  some  evidence  for  it.  Then 
the  cow  and  the  plant  delivered  their  evidence,  that  they  were  both  on 
the  top  of  the  phallus.  Then  came  out  a voice  from  the  phallus  and 
cursed  the  fragrant  plant  first  that  iis  flower  would  not  be  offered  to  the 
phallus  or  to  any  other  deity  in  the  world  for  its  telling  falsehood.  But 
if  any  one  offered  it,  he  should  die  for  it.  It  then  cursed  the  cow  that 
she  should  eat  excreta  with  her  mouth,  out  of  which  came  out  the 
falsehood.  None  would  worship  her  mouth,  but  her  tail  would  be 
worshipped.  It  also  cursed  Brahma  that  he  would  not  be  worshipped 
in  the  world  for  his  telling  lies.  It  blessed  Vishnu  that  since  he  told 
the  truth,  he  would  be  worshipped  everywhere.  Then  both  Brahma 
and  Vishnu  prayed  to  the  phallus.  Being  propitiated,  an  image 
(Shiva)  with  matted  hair  came  out  of  the  phallus  and  asked  them, 
as  they  were  sent  to  create  the  world,  why  they  were  engaged  in 
quarrelling  with  each  other.  Brahma  and  Vishnu  replied  how  they 
could  create  the  world  without  materials.  Thereupon  Mahadeva  (the 
God  who  came  out  of  the  phallus)  gave  them  a ball  of  ashes  out  of 
his  matted  hair  and  told  them  to  create  ail  the  world  out  of  it.  Now, 
these  authors  of  the  Piiranas  should  be  asked  whence  the  bodies  of 
Brahma,  Vishnu,  Mahadeva,  the  water,  lotus,  phallus,  cow,  fragrant 
plant,  and  ball  of  ashes  came  out  at  the  time  when  there  was  no 
material  cause  of  the  creation  and  the  five  elements.  Did  they  come 
out  of  their  grand-father’s  house  ? 

Creation  in  the  Bhagwat 

In  like  manner,  the  creation  account  of  the  Bhagawat  is  false. 
According  to  it,  a lotus  was  produced  from  the  navel  of  Vishnu,  from 
the  lotus  came  out  Brahma,  whose  right  toe  produced  Swayambhuva 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


329 


and  left  toe  Queen  Satyarupa,  and  whose  forehead  produced  Rudra, 
Marichi  and  the  like  ten  sons.  *From  the  ten  sons  were  born  ten 
Prajapatis  or  lords  of  hosts,  whose  thirteen  daughters  were  married 
to  Kashyapa  Of  them,  Diti  bore  him  Daitya;  Danu,  Danava;  Aditi, 
Aditya;  Vinta,  birds;  Kadru,  serpents;  Sliarma,  dogs,  jackals,  &c\; 
and  other  daughters,  elephants,  horses,  camels,  asses,  buffaloes,  grass, 
straw,  acacia  and  other  thorny  trees.  Bravo  ! Bravo  ! O hobble-de- 
hoy author  of  the  Bhagawat ! Splendid  ! Thou  didst  feel  no  shame 
in  writing  such  falsehood,  but  wast  quite  blind  ! As  a matter  of 
course,  the  union  of  female  ova  and  male  sperms  produces  human 
beings,  but  they  cannot  produce  animals,  birds,  serpents,  trees,  and 
the  like  monstrocities  against  the  law  of  God’s  nature.  How  can  the 
womb  of  woman  be  capacious  enough  to  carry  an  elephant,  camel, 
lion,  dog,  ass,  or  tree  ? Why  did  not  lions  and  others  devour  their 
parents  after  birth  ? How  can  it  be  possible  for  animals,  birds,  trees 
and  others  to  be  born  of  the  body  of  human  being  ? Shame  to  such 
tremendous  frauds  of  these  men,  who  still  mislead  the  world  ! It  is 
very  strange  that  these  blind  popes  and  their  doubly  blind  disciples 
hear  these  utterly  false  doctrines  and  believe  in  them  I Are  they  men 
or  otherwise?  Would  that  these  authors  of  the  Bhagawat  and  other 
Puranas  have  died  on  birth  or  in  the  mother’s  womb  ! Had  there 
been  no  popes,  Aryavarta  would  have  suffered  no  misery. 

Q, — These  accounts  are  not  contradictory,  for  each  marriage 
party  praises  its  own  bridegroom.  When  the  people  pray  to  Vishnu, 
they  regard  him  to  be  the  Supreme  Being  and  other  gods  as  his  ser- 
vants; when  they  pray  to  Shiva,  they  extol  him  as  the  Supreme  Spirit 
and  other  gods  as  his  menials. 

n 

Also,  every  thing  is  possible  with  the  power  of  God.  God  can 
bring  out  creation  from  man.  Behold,  He  has  created  all  the  world  as  it 
stands  before  us  without  a cause  by  His  own  mysterious  power  (maya) ! 
What  is  impossible  with  Him  ? He  can  do  all  what  He  likes  to  do. 

A. — O simple  people!  In  marriage,  though  the  people  sing  the 
praises  of  their  bridegroom,  yet  they  never  make  him  superior 
to  all  others,  or  others  as  his  inferiors,  or  dispraise  others,  or 
regard  him  as  the  father  of  all  others.  O ye  popes  ! tell  us  if  you 
are  not  greater  gossippers  than  buffoons  and  sycophant  bards. 
You  make  him  the  greatest  of  all  whom  you  follow,  and  the  lowest 
of  all  whom  you  hate.  No  doubt,  you  have  nothing  to  do  with  truth 
and  religion.  You  care  for  your  own  purpose  only.  Maya  or  power 
to  delude  resides  in  the  man  who  is  a cheat  and  vhumbug.  Hence  he 
is  called  a deluder  or  mayavi.  There  being  no  deceit,  cheating  and 
other  evils  in  God,  He  cannot  be  called  a deluder.  If  at  beginning 
Kashyapa  and  his  wives  could  bear  animals,  birds,  serpents,  why  do 
human  being  not  bring  forth  the  same  kind  of  progeny  now-a-days? 
The  order  of  creation  and  the  laws  of  nature  described  above  (in  the 
VIII  chapter  are  the  only  true  ones,  and  it  is  probable  that  the  pope 
was  led  to  the  above  raving  from  misunderstanding  them. 

♦Marichi,  Atri,  Angirah,  Pulastya,  Pulaha,  Ritu,  Prachetasa,  Vasishta, 
Brigu,  Narad. — Manu.  I 35. 


330 


Satyarth  Prakash 


?«TT:  Sfsn:  I 

—According  to  the  Shatapatha,  7.  5.  1.  5,  Kashyapa  made  all  this 
world. 

>mfcT  | --Nirukta  ii,  2. 

— Kashyapa  is  the  name  of  the  Supreme  Being,  the  author  of  the 
world,  for  the  word  Pashyaka  in  Sanscrit  means  God  who  undoubtedly 
sees  all  the  movable  and  immovable  objects  of  the  world  and  all  the 
souls,  their  deeds  and  the  systems  of  knowledge  in  their  naked  truth. 

— The  word  is  changed  to  Kashyapa  from  the  transposition  of  the 
first  and  the  last  syllable  according  to  a Mahabhashya  rule : Adyanta^ 
viparyayashcha — the  first  and  the  last  syllables  are  transposed.  Not 
comprehending  the  meaning  of  this  rule  and  being  intoxicated  with 
hemp-leaf  decoction,  the  popes  have  wasted  their  life  in  writing  the 
account  of  the  world’s  origin  against  the  laws  of  nature. 

Creation  in  Markandeya  Purana 

In  like  manner,  according  to  the  Durga  Patha  of  the  Markan- 
deya Purana,  a goddess  was  produced  from  the  glory  emitted  from 
the  bodies  of  gods.  She  killed  Mahishasur.  The  whole  world  is  des- 
cribed as  filled  with  Raktabijas  who  were  born  from  a drop  of  the 
blood  of  Raktabija,  falling  upon  the  ground  from  his  body.  A river 
of  blood  is  said  to  be  flowing.  These  and  other  idle  tales  fill  this 
book.  When  the  whole  world  was  filled  with  Raktabijas,  where  did 
the  goddess,  her  lion,  and  her  army  live?  If  it  be  said  that  Rakta- 
bijas were  far  from  the  Goddess,  then  the  whole  world  was  not  full 
of  them.  Had  it  been  so  filled,  where  were  the  animals,  birds,  human 
beings  and  other  sentient  beings,  and  water,  land,  crocodiles,  &c? 

Origin  of  Bhagawata 

Now  listen  to  the  frauds  of  what  is  called  the  Shrirnad  Bhaga- 
wata.  God  Narayana  taught  Brahma  the  Bhagawat  of  4 couplets  only, 
II.  xc.  30:— 

5TH  qTH  ^ \ 

qfer  ii 

— “O  Brahma,  receive  from  me  the  most  recondite  knowledge  accom- 
panied with  divine  light  and  mystery,  and  being  a means  of  virtue, 
wealth,  pleasure  and  salvation.”  Now,  it  is  superfluous  to  use  the 
adjective  “most  recondite”  of  knowledge  accompanied  with  divine 
light.  It  is  also  a tautology  to  use  the  word  mystery  of  the  recon- 
dite knowledge.  Hence,  if  the  foundation  couplet  is  meaningless, 
why  should  not  the  book  be  regarded  to  be  of  a piece  ? Narayana 
blessed  Brahma,  Bhag.  II.  ix.  36  : 

— that  he  would  not  be  tempted  in  or  go  after  the  world  in  either  the 
cyclic  creation  or  the  chaotic  destruction.  But  it  is  written  in  the  10th 
chapter  that  Brahma  stole  the  calves  of  Krishna  out  of  worldliness. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


331 


Now,  one  of  these  two  assertions,  namely,  Brahma  without  an  alloy 
of  worldliness  and  Brahma  stealing  calves,  which  is  rank  worldliness, 
must  be  false,  and  the  other  true,  which,  in  fact,  stultifies  both  of 
them.  As  there  is  neither  love,  hatred,  anger,  envy,  nor  pain  in 
heaven;  why  were  Sanaka  and  brothers  angry,  though  standing  sentry 
at  the  gate  of  heaven?  As  they  got  anger,  the  place  cannot  be  heaven. 
As  Jaya  and  Vijaya  were  both  God’s  door-keepers,  who  were  duty- 
bound  to  obey  their  master,  how  could  they  be  in  fault  if  they  pre- 
vented Sanaka  and  brothers  from  getting  in?  As  they  were  blameless, 
they  could  not  be  accursed  or  condemned.  But  they  were  condemned 
to  fall  down  upon  the  earth.  Their  fall  proves  that  there  was  no  land, 
but  there  were  only  sky,  air,  fire,  and  water.  Then  how  were  the  gate, 
mansion,  and  water  supported  there  in  the  absence  of  land?  Then 
again  Jaya  and  Vijaya  prayed  to  Sanaka  and  brothers  : O holy  sages, 
when  shall  we  be  allowed  to  come  back  to  heaven?  They  replied  to 
them  : If  you  serve  God  Narayana  with  love,  you  shall  reach  heaven 
in  the  seventh  rebirth;  but  if  you  hate  and  oppose  Him,  you  shall  get 
to  heaven  in  the  third  rebirth.  Now,  think  that  Jaya  and  Vijaya  being 
the  servants  of  Narayana,  it  was  the  bounden  duty  of  the  latter  to 
protect  and  help  the  two  former.  If  a man  oppresses  master’s  ser- 
vants without  a fault,  and  the  master  does  not  punish  him,  the  servants 
will  be  oppressed  by  all  men.  Narayana  should  have  well  treated 
Jaya  and  Vijaya  and  severely  punished  Sanaka  and  brothers  for  their 
violence  in  getting  entrance  and  for  their  fighting  with  his  servants.  He 
should  have  for  justice’  sake  hurled  them  headlong  on  the  earth  for 
their  accursing  the  servants.  When  such  is  the  misrule  and  state  of 
justice  in  the  domicile  of  Narayana,  it  is  nothing  wonderful  if  his  wor- 
shippers, called  the  Vaishnavas,  are  very  much  oppressed  and  maltreated. 
After  the  condemnation  they  were  born  on  earth  as  Hiranyaksha  and 
Hiranya  Kashyapa,  of  whom  the  former  was  killed  by  Varah  (Boar). 

The  Boar  Incarnation 

His  Story  is  thus  related  : He  rolled  the  earth  like  a mat  and 
went  to  sleep,  using  it  for  his  pillow.  Vishnu  incarnated  in  a Divine 
Boar  and  lifted  the  earth  on  his  tusks  from  under  his  head.  He  got  up, 
and  both  were  engaged  in  fight,  in  which  the  Boar  killed  him.  Now, 
these  popes,  who  made  the  story,  should  be  asked  if  the  earth  was 
round  or  flat  like  a mat.  They  would  not  be  able  to  reply  to  it;  for, 
the  followers  of  the  Puranas  are  the  enemies  of  geography.  Well, 
when  the  earth  was  rolled  into  a pillow,  what  did  he  sleep  on?  What 
was  it  on  which  the  Divine  Boar  ran  on  his  legs?  When  the  Boar  lifted 
up  the  earth  on  his  tusks,  on  what  did  they  stand  to  fight  each  other? 
There  was  nothing  to  support  them.  Perhaps  they  fought  by  standing 
on  the  breast  of  the  popish  author  of  the  Bhagawat.  But  then,  what  did 
the  pope  sleep  on  ? This  affair  is  like  a gossipper  coming  to  another 
gossipper  and  telling  him  a gossip.  Since  gossippers  frequent  the 
houses  of  liars,  there  is  nothing  wonderful  in  this  kind  of  idle  prattle. 

The  Lion  Incarnation 

As  for  Hiranya  Kashyapa,  he  had  a son,  called  Prahlada,  who 
was  a devotee.  Being  sent  to  school  by  his  father,  he  asked  his  teacher 


332 


Satyarth  Prakash 


to  write  the  words  Rama  Rama  on  his  slate  or  board.  When  his 
father  came  to  know  of  it  he  asked  him  why  he  muttered  the  name  of 
his  enemy.  The  boy  did  not  desist  from  repeating  it.  Then  binding 
him  hand  and  foot,  he  hurled  him  from  the  top  of  a hill,  and  also 
threw  him  into  a well,  but  the  boy  got  scot-free.  Then  he  heated  an 
iron  pillar  and  told  him  that  if  his  god  to  whom  he  was  so  much 
devoted  was  true,  he  would  not  get  burnt  by  catching  it.  Prahlada 
went  to  catch  it,  but  hesitated  in  the  mind  if  he  would  be  saved  from 
burning.  Narayana  set  up  a row  of  small  ants  moving  on  it.  His  doubt 
was  removed,  and  he  touched  the  pillar  at  once.  It  was  rent  and  a 
Human  Lion  came  out  of  it.  He  caught  hold  of  his  father  and  split 
his  belly,  so  he  died.  He  then  began  to  lick  Prahlada  out  of  love,  and 
asked  him  to  name  his  boon.  He  asked  for  his  father’s  salvation. 
The  Human  Lion  gave  him  the  blessing  asked  for,  saying  that  twenty- 
one  generations  of  his  ancestors  would  be  saved.  Now,  attend  to  its 
absurdity.  It  is  also  a groundless  idle  talk  like  the  other.  If  the 
author  of  the  Bhagawat  was  hurled  from  a mountain  and  nobody  inter- 
cepted his  fall,  he  would  be  dashed  in  pieces  and  die.  The  father  of 
Prahlada  did  nothing  bad  in  sending  him  to  school.  Prahlada  was  so 
foolish  as  to  give  up  his  study  and  turn  a monk.  If  a man  believes 
it  to  be  true  that  ants  crept  on  a heated  pillar  and  Prahlada  did  not 
get  burnt  by  embracing  it,  he  should  be  also  bound  to  a red-hot  iron 
pillar.  If  he  does  not  get  burnt,  then  and  then  only  we  should  believe 
that  Prahlada  might  not  have  been  burnt.  Also,  why  was  the  Human 
Lion  not  burnt?  Again,  Sanaka  and  brothers'  blessing  was  that  he 
would  go  to  heaven  in  his  third  rebirth,  which  Narayana  forgot. 
According  to  the  Bhagawat,  the  line  of  descent  is : Brahma,  Prajapati, 
Kashyapa,  Hiranyaksha,  and  Hiranya  Kashyapa.  So  the  last  is  the 
fourth  in  descent.  Therefore,  there  are  not  twenty-one  generations  of 
Prahlada’s  ancestors,  and  it  is  a bare-faced  lie  to  say  that  his  twenty- 
one  ancestors  went  to  heaven.  Also,  those  very  Hiranyaksha  and 
Hiranya  Kashyapa  incarnated  as  Ravana  and  Kumbhakarna  and  then 
again  as  Shishupala  and  Dantavakra.  So,  where  was  the  Human 
Lion’s  blessing  of  their  salvation?  Such  a reckless  rhapsody  can  only 
be  believed  by  care-ignorant  people,  but  never  by  learned  people. 

Giantess  Putana 

Now  turn  to  the  stories  of  Putana  and  Akrura  : — 

I — Bhag.  X.  xxxix  38. 

5ifar  i--xxxviii  24. 

Akrura,  being  sent  by  Kansa,*  started  by  a car  yoked  with  horses 
swift  as  the  wind  at  day-break  and  reached  Gokal  four  miles  distant 
at  sunset!  Perhaps  the  horses  were  running  races  round  the  author  of 
the  Bhagawata  all  the  while!  Or  else  they  lost  their  way  and  so  the 
drivers  and  Akrura  went  to  the  house  of  the  author  to  go  to  sleep. 
The  body  of  Putana  is  described  to  be  six  cos  (leagues)  wide  and  very 
long.  She  was  killed  by  Shri  Krishna  and  thrown  between  Mathura 

♦A  king  of  Mathura  and  maternal  uncle  and  enemy  of  Krishna.  He  sent 
Akrura  to  bring  Krishna  to  a feast  where  his  murder  was  arranged.  But  Krishna 
succeeded  in  slaying  him  in  a fight. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


333 


and  Gokal.  If  it  was  true,  both  Mathura  and  Gokal,  including  the 
house  of  the  pope  who  wrote  it,  would  have  been  hurried  alive  under 
the  Giantess’  corpse. 

Ajamel 

The  story  of  Ajamel  has  neither  head  nor  tail.  He  named  his 
son  Narayana  by  the  advice  of  Narada.  At  his  death  he  called  his 
son,  but  God  Narayana  cropped  up.  Did  not  Narayana  know  of  the 
intent  of  his  heart,  that  he  called  his  son,  and  not  him?  If  such  is  the 
elficacy  of  muttering  the  name,  why  does  not  Narayana  now  come  to 
the  rescue  of  the  persons  repeating  his  name  and  smarting  under  pain  ? 
If  it  is  true,  why  are  not  the  prisoners  become  free  by  repeating  the 
word  Narayana  ? 

Sumeru 

In  the  same  manner,  the  dimensions  of  the  Sumeru  mountain 
are  described  with  so  much  absurdity  as  is  contradicted  by  astronomy. 
The  seas  are  produced  out  of  the  ruts  of  Raja  Priyavrata’s  car.  The 
dimensions  of  the  earth  are  given  as  49  koti  of  yojanas.*  Such  are 
the  senseless  stories  and  wild  gossips  of  the  Bhagawata,  whose  false- 
hood has  no  bound. 

Author  of  Bhagawata 

This  Bhagawata  was  written  by  Bobadeva,  whose  brother  wrote 
the  Gitagovinda.  You  know  he  has  written  the  following  couplets  in 
his  book,  called  the  Himadri,  to  the  effect  that  he  has  written  the  Shri- 
mad  Bhagawata  Purana.  We  had  that  passage  written  on  three  slips, 
one  of  which  has  been  lost.  The  purport  of  the  couplets  given  in 
that  passage  is  reproduced  in  the  following  two  couplets  by  us.  Who- 
ever wants  to  verify  them,  may  consult  the  Himadri. 

Jif5n?T'»r  ii 

f^i^T  II 

The  lost  paper  had  couplets  like  these.  They  mean  that  Himadri, 
a king’s  minister,  told  Pt.  Bobadeva  that  he  had  no  time  to  listen  to 
the  complete  Bhagawata  written  by  him.  So  he  had  better  write  its 
contents  briefly  in  metre,  so  that  he  might  succintly  know  the  sub- 
stance of  the  story  of  the  Shrimad  Bhagawata  by  looking  at  them. 
Then  Bobadeva  wrote  the  following  contents,  ten  couplets  of  which 
are  wanting  on  account  of  the  paper  being  lost.  These  begin  from 
the  11th  couplet,  all  these  were  written  by  Bobadeva. 

% snf : jh:  i 

q5^T:  ^ II 

fix:  fimxx  i 

?XX?:qFXX?X  sxnhix^  * ^qsffxx  'q  11 


*A  koti  is =10,000,000,  Yojana=9  miles. 


334 


Satyarth  Prakash 


^F^5fTp:af:  grifT^THH:  11 

«ftg:  bjctttcj^  f^rnn:  i 

^Hciicq’Tn^^T  ^ar:  n 

^TOrRT3rr?Tt;T  TT^  5jq:  (I 

?frr  t TT5T>  5r>fm  ii 

— End  of  Scaiidh  Book  L 

Such  are  the  contents  of  the  12  books  of  the  Bhagawata  written 
by  Pt.  Bobadeva  for  the  minister  Himadri.  Whoever  wants  to  see  them 
in  detail,  may  consult  the  Himadri  written  by  him.  The  forgeries  of 
the  other  Puranas  are  of  a piece.  Every  one  of  them  surpasses  the 
other  in  absurdity. 

Krishna  Defended 

You  know  that  the  account  of  Shri  Krishna  is  very  nicely  given 
in  the  Mahabharatam.  His  merits,  deeds,  character  and  life  are  like 
those  of  great  divine  sages.  It  does  not  relate  any  unrighteous  act  or 
misdeed  committed  by  him  from  liis  birth  to  death  It  does  not  men- 
tion what  the  Bhagawata  writes  of  him.  The  author  of  the  Bhagawata 
ascribes  to  him  unheard-of  unworthy  faults.  He  imputes  to  him  the 
stealth  of  milk,  curd,  butter  and  so  forth.  He  is  said  to  have  had 
illegal  connection  with  the  hand-maid  Kubja.  Sporting,  flirting  and 
dancing  with  the  wives  of  others  and  other  sinful  acts  are  attributed  to 
him.  The  men  of  dilferent  religions,  who  read  it  or  hear  its  stories, 
talk  ill  of  Shri  Krishna.  Had  there  been  no  Bhagawata,  how  could  a 
great  man  like  Shri  Krishna  be  slandered  for  nothing  ? 

12  Genitals  of  Light 

The  Shiva  Parana  gives  the  account  of  twelve  luminous  male- 
organ-like  idols;  but  they  had  no  ray  of  light.  These  were  not  seen 
at  night  without  lamps.  All  these  frauds  arc  the  creations  of  the 
Indian  popes’  brain. 

Puranas  for  Shudras 

(7.— When  men  lost  the  power  of  reading  the  Vedas,  the  Smritis 
(laws)  were  made;  when  they  were  unable  to  study  the  Smiritis,  the 
Shastras  (philosophies)  were  written;  and  when  they  were  incapable  of 
understanding  the  Shastras,  the  Puranas  were  composed  for  the  women 
and  the  Shudras  (low  castes)  only;  for,  they  have  no  right  to  study  and 
listen  to  the  reading  of  the  Vedas. 

All  to  study  the  Vedas 

A. — It  is  all  false.  For,  man’s  ability  is  increased  by  study  and 
teaching.  AW  have  right  to  study  and  hear  the  reading  of  the  Vedas. 
For  instance,  Gargi  and  other  women  were  versed  in  the  Vedas,  and 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


335 


Janashruti  Shudra,  according  to  the  Chhandogya,  read  the  Vedas  with 
Raikyamuni.  The  2nd  verse  of  the  26th  chapter  of  the  Yajur  Veda 
plainly  says  that  all  human  beings  have  right  to  read  and  hear  the 
recitation  of  the  Vedas.  Then,  why  should  not  the  persons,  who  have 
written  sueh  false  books  to  turn  away  the  simple  people  from  the 
truthful  books  and  to  entrap  them  in  folly  to  serve  their  own  purposes, 
be  regarded  as  great  sinners  ? 

Astrology 

Look  at  the  snare  of  astrological  mansions  which  has  caught  the 
ignorant  people.  (1)  Akrishnena  rajasa  is  called  the  incantation  of  the 
Sun.  (2)  Iman  deva  asapatnam  vada  dhwan,  of  the  Moon.  (3)  Agnim 
moordh  diwah  kakiit  patih,  of  Mars.  (4)  Udavu  cJhyaswagne,  of  Mercury, 
(i)  Drihaspate  atiyadaryo,  of  Jupiter.  (6)  Shuka  mandhasa,  of  Venus. 
(7)  Saimodeoi  rabhishtaya,  of  Saturn.  (8)  Kayanarh  cliitra  abhava,  of 
the  Rahu  (ascending  node).  (9)  Ketum  krinvama  ketave,  of  the  des- 
cending node  (Ketu  Kandika).  The  1st  verse  teaches  the  attraction 
of  the  sun  and  earth;  the  2nd  describes  the  active  principle  in  nature; 
the  3rd  describes  lire;  the  4th  narrates  the  duties  of  a householder; 
the  5th  mentions  the  qualities  of  a learned  man;  the  6th  describes  the 
semen  and  food;  the  7th  describes  water,  respiration  and  God;  the 
8th  gives  the  qualities  of  a friend;  and  the  9th  describes  the  method  of 
acquiring  knowledge.  These  verses  do  not  relate  to  the  astrological 
mansions  or  planets.  The  people  are  misled  from  their  ignorance  of 
the  right  meanings. 

Q.— Have  the  mansions  or  constellations  of  stars  any  efficacy  or 
inlluence  ? 

A, — Not  as  described  by  the  astrological  popery.  Certainly  the 
planets  are  the  causes  of  the  pleasure  and  pain  of  the  people  in  relation 
to  their  tempers,  of  the  change  of  seasons,  and  of  heat  and  cold  by 
means  of  the  rays  of  the  sun  and  moon.  But  the  believers  in  the  Indian 
popery  say  ; O good  banker  and  sacrificer,  you  have  got  to-day  the 
eighth  sun,  moon,  etc.,  in  the  evil  mansions  of  your  horoscope 
Saturn  (an  evil  planet)  influences  your  feet  for  two  years  and  a half. 
You  will  be  sore  troubled.  It  will  take  you  to  wander  in  foreign  lands 
far  away  from  your  home.  But  you  will  be  saved  from  these  troubles 
if  you  make  gifts  to  us  in  the  name  of  the  mansions  for  muttering  the 
name,  recitation  of  scriptures,  and  v/orship. 

Origin  of  Priests’  Power 

If  these  popes  are  asked  what  connection  they  have  with  the 
mansions  of  anything  else,  they  say  in  reply  : 

See,  what  a plain  authority!  The  gods  have  power  over  all  the 
world,  Vedic  verses  (mantras)  have  power  over  all  the  gods,  and  those 
verses  are  in  the  power  of  the  Brahmins  who  are  therefore  called  gods. 
For,  we  can  call  any  god  in  we  please  by  the  efficacy  of  the  verses, 
propitiate  and  make  him  satisfy  our  desires.  If  we  had  no  such  power 


336  Satyarth  Prakash 

derived  from  the  verses,  your  atheists  would  not  have  by  this  time  let 
us  live  in  the  world  at  all. 

Truth-Speaker. — Your  gods  must  have  power  over  the  persons 
who  are  robbers,  raiders,  and  evil-doers.  It  must  be  the  gods  who 
make  them  do  evil  works.  If  it  is  a fact,  there  can  be  no  differericc 
between  your  gods  and  demons.  As  you  can  make  the  mantras,  which 
are  in  your  power,  do  anything  for  you,  why  do  you  not  influence  the 
gods  by  their  means  to  bring  the  treasures  of  kings  to  your  house  so 
as  to  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  life?  Why  do  you  go  about  from  door 
to  door  to  beg  charities  of  oil  in  which  persons  see  their  reflexion  and 
which  they  dedicate  to  Saturn  and  others  ? Why  don’t  you  get  as 
much  wealth  from  what  you  call  Kuvera  (the  god  of  riches)  by  exert- 
ing your  influence  over  him  ? Why  do  you  fleece  poor  people  of  their 
hard-earned  money  ? If  the  zodiacal  signs  are  pleased  by  our  giving 
you  presents  and  displeased  by  our  withholding  them,  please  show 
us  their  pleasure  or  displeasure  in  an  evident  manner.  Thus,  for 
instance,  make  the  man  who  is  under  the  influnce  of  the  8th  sun  or 
moon,  and  another  who  is  fallen  under  the  3rd,  both  walk  in  the 
burning  sun  of  Jyeshtha  (June)  without  shoes  on  a heated  plain.  If  these 
heavenly  bodies  be  pleased  with  them,  their  bodies  and  feet  will  not 
feel  hot;  but  if  displeased,  they  will  be  scorched.  Also,  they  both  may 
be  made  to  stand  naked  on  a plain  all  the  night  long  on  the  full  moon 
of  Pousha  (December).  If  one  of  them  feels  cold  and  the  other  does 
not,  we  should  know  that  the  planet  are  auspicious  and  inaupicious. 
Are  they  your  relatives?  Have  you  any  postal  or  telegraphic  com- 
munication with  them  ? Do  you  visit  them  or  receive  visits  from 
them  ? If  you  have  any  power  over  mantras  or  incantations,  why  do 
you  not  become  rich  or  kings  yourselves  ? Why  do  you  not  reduce 
your  enemies  to  subjection  ? An  atheist  is  one  who  practices  frauds 
against  the  commandments  of  God  in  the  Vedas.  What  does  it  matter 
if  a man  fallen  under  the  influence  of  an  evil  star,  enjoys  the  donation 
given  in  the  name  of  stars  himself  and  does  not  give  it  to  you  ? If 
you  say  that  the  stars  are  propitiated  by  giving  donations  to  you  alone, 
and  not  to  others,  have  you  monopolised  the  stars  ? If  you  hold  a 
license,  go  and  get  burnt  to  death  by  calling  the  sun  and  other  stars 
to  your  house.  The  fact  is  that  the  sun  and  other  worlds  are  inani- 
mate. They  can  never  take  an  action  or  give  pleasure  to  or  inflict  pain 
upon  anyone.  But  all  of  you  who  live  on  donations  given  in  the  name 
of  stars,  are  images  of  these  stars,  so  to  speak;  for,  the  meaning  of 
the  word  grilia  (stars)  fits  you — ye  grihnanti  te  grahah,  viz.,  those 
persons  are  grihas  who  receive  anything.  Until  you  go  to  a king, 
noble,  banker,  merchant  or  pauper  to  tell  him  of  the  nine  manLdons 
of  astrology,  nobody  ever  thinks  of  them.  But  when  you,  the  incarnate 
Sun,  Saturn  and  the  like  stars,  attack  a man,  you  never  let  him  oif 
without  fleecing  him  to  the  skin.  You  slander  him  by  calling  him  an 
atheist  or  the  like  who  does  not  follow  you  in  your  absurdities. 

Pope. — The  evident  truth  of  astrology  or  astronomy  is  attested 
by  the  occurrence  of  solar  and  lunar  eclipses  in  the  heavens  foretold 
by  us.  The  influence  of  the  stars  on  human  destiny  is  equally  evident 
from  these  phenomena.  You  know  it  is  the  influence  of  stars  that 
makes  people  rich,  poor,  kings,  beggars,  happy,  or  miserable. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


337 


Truth-Speaker. — The  evidence  of  eclipses  belongs  to  astronomy, 
but  not  to  astrology.  Astronomy  is  true,  but  astrology  is  false,  except 
so  far  as  it  concerns  the  natural  effect  of  the  stars  on  the  terrestrial 
existence  of  man.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  solar  or  lunar  eclipse  as  well 
as  occultations  or  the  regular  or  eccentric  motion  of  heavenly  bodies 
is  known  by  calculation  to  take  place  on  certain  days  or  to  be  visible 
at  certain  places. 

l — Grahalaghava  V,  4. 

It  is  a quotation  from  the  Siddhant  Shiromani.  One  similar  to  it 
is  also  found  in  the  Surya  Siddhant.  It  means  that  a solar  eclipse 
happens  when  the  moon  intervenes  between  the  sun  and  the  earth,  and 
a lunar  eclipse  when  the  earth  comes  between  the  sun  and  moon, 
that  is  to  say,  the  shadow  of  the  moon  is  cast  upon  the  earth  in  a 
solar,  and  the  shadow  of  the  earth  upon  the  moon  in  a lunar  eclipse. 
Nothing  casts  its  shadow  upon  the  face  of  the  sun  being  luminous. 
The  case  of  an  eclipse  is  like  one  when  the  shadow  of  a thing  is  cast 
back  if  placed  before  the  sun  or  a lamp.  Persons  become  rich,  poor, 
kings,  and  beggars,  in  consequence  of  their  deed  and  works,  but  not 
from  the  influence  of  stars.  Many  astrologers  perform  the  marriages 
of  their  sons  or  daughters  according  to  the  oracles  of  astrology,  still 
those  marriages  become  unhappy — quarrels  spoil  conjugal  love,  parties 
turn  widows  or  widowers.  Had  the  astrological  conclusions  been 
true,  no  such  thing  would  have  happened.  Therefore,  the  fruits  of 
actions  are  true  and  the  motion  of  heavenly  bodies  is  not  the  cause  of 
human  pleasure  or  pain.  There  is  no  visible  connection  between  the 
stars  in  the  sky  and  the  human  beings  capable  of  doing  works  and 
living  on  the  earth  far  away  from  them.  Human  beings  are  the 
authors  and  the  reapers  of  the  fruits  of  their  actions,  and  God  makes 
them  suffer  the  consequences  of  their  actions.  As  you  believe  in  the 
influence  of  stars,  you  should  answer  the  question  : When  a man  is 
born  on  a certain  time,  whose  horoscope  you  cast  according  to  the 
positions  of  the  polar  star  and  other  conjunctions,  is  there  any  other 
person  born  at  the  same  time  in  the  world  ? If  you  reply  in  the 
negative,  it  is  false.  But  if  you  admit  it,  how  is  it  that  the  one  becomes, 
say,  the  universal  emperor  in  the  world,  and  the  other  does  not  ? 
Well,  if  you  confess  that  all  this  trickery  is  a shift  to  earn  the  bread  of 
idleness,  persons  will  readily  believe  it. 

Garurh  Purana 

Q. — Is  the  Garurh  Purana  false  too  ? 

A, — Yes,  it  is  false. 

Q, — Then  what  becomes  of  the  departed  soul  ? 

A. — She  enjoys  the  consequences  of  her  deeds. 

Q. — How  can  what  is  said  of  her  in  the  Purana  be  false,  viz., 
the  account  of  King  Death  (Yama),  Chitragupta,  his  prime  minister, 
his  awfully  terrible  followers  as  gigantic  in  size  as  the  mountain  of 
lamp-black,  who  catch  and  take  her  to  His  Terrible  Majesty,  and  who 
then  throw  her  into  the  hell  or  heaven  according  to  the  sentence 
passed  on  her  merits  or  demerits,  for  which  alms  and  charities  are 


338 


Satyarth  Prakash 


given,  the  Brahmins  are  feasted  at  the  ceremony  of  the  departed  spirits, 
water  is  offered  to  the  manes,  and  cows  are  given  away  in  gifts  to 
enable  a departed  soul  to  cross  the  Baitarni  (Styx)  ? 

A. — All  these  things  are  the  fabrications  of  papacy.  For,  Yama 
(lit.  the  king  of  righteousness),  Chitragupta,  etc.  decide  the  case  of 
those  souls  that  go  there.  Where  is  another  court  of  Death,  which 
decides  the  cases  of  the  souls  that  sin  in  and  pass  away  from  the 
region  of  Death?  There  must  be  some  such  court.  Further,  if  the 
bodies  of  Death’s  messengers  be  like  mountains,  why  are  they  not 
visible?  Not  one  finger  of  theirs  can  get  into  the  door  of  a dying  man 
to  take  away  whom  they  come.  Why  are  they  not  obstructed  in 
the  streets?  If  you  say  that  they  can  assume  microscopic  bodies, 
where  will  they  put  the  large  skeletons  of  their  gigantic  bodies,  if 
there  be  no  pope’s  house?  When  a forest  is  set  on  fire,  innumerable 
animals,  such  as  ants  and  the  like,  are  burnt  to  death.  If  innumerable 
messengers  of  Death  come  to  the  forest  to  take  away  the  souls  of 
dying  animals,  there  will  be  pitch  darkness  from  their  black  mountain 
bodies.  When  they  run  about  to  catch  those  dying  souls,  they  will 
collide  against  one  another.  As  the  tops  of  big  mountains  fall  down 
upon  a plain,  so  their  stupendous  limbs  will  break  and  fall  down  in 
the  premises  of  the  expounders  of  the  Garurh  Parana,  either  crushing 
the  fellows  to  death  or  obstructing  the  doors  and  passages.  How  will 
they  then  get  out? 

Shraddha  or  Food  to  Manes 

The  food  offered  to  the  manes  and  water  and  rice  balls  given  to 
the  lares,  never  reach  the  departed  spirits,  but  these  substances  go  to 
the  houses  of  the  popes,  the  representatives  of  the  dead,  to  stuft'  their 
belly  or  to  fill  their  hand  with  gold.  The  cow  given  to  cross  the 
Styx  goes  either  to  the  pope’s  house  or  to  the  butcher.  The  cow 
never  goes  to  the  Styx.  Then  whose  tail  will  the  dead  hold  to  cross 
the  ferry  of  the  Styx?  Also,  the  hand  is  here  burnt  or  buried,  how 
will  the  dead  catch  the  tail  of  the  cow?  There  is  a story  illustrative 
of  this  jobbery.  It  runs  as  follows  : — 

Peasant’s  Cow 

Once  upon  a time  there  was  a peasant  who  had  a nice  cow  at 
his  house.  It  gave  4 gallons  of  milk  every  day,  which  was  very  sweet. 
It  was  sometimes  tasted  by  his  pope  or  priest,  who  contemplated 
that  he  should  have  it  given  to  himself  by  the  peasant  when  he  lost 
his  old  father.  Some  time  after  it  so  happened  that  his  old  father 
was  on  the  point  of  death,  his  speech  was  lost,  he  was  laid  on  the 
ground,  and  he  was  about  to  expire.  The  friends  and  relatives  of  the 
peasant  assembled,  when  the  pope  called  out  to  him  : O faithful 
man,  you  should  now  have  a cow  given  away  by  your  father’s  hand. 
The  peasant  put  Rs.  10  on  his  father’s  palm  and  asked  the  pope  to 
pronounce  the  donation  formula.  The  pope  said  : Bravo!  Does  the 
father  die  often?  At  this  critical  moment  you  should  bring  a cow 
which  gives  milk  and  is  not  old,  and  which  should  be  excellent  in  all 
respects.  Such  a cow  should  be  given  away  as  a gift.  The  peasant  said  : 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


339 


I have  but  one  cow,  without  which  I shall  not  be  able  to  support  the 
family  and  children,  so  I shall  not  give  it  away.  Take  Rs.  20  and 
pronounce  the  blessing.  You  can  purchase  another  milch  cow  with 
this  sum.  The  pope  said  : Good  gracious  ! You  consider  the  cow  to 
be  of  greater  value  than  your  father!  Do  you  want  your  father  to  sink 
into  the  Styx  and  suffer  pain?  A very  nice  son  indeed!  Then  all 
the  relatives  took  the  side  of  the  pope,  for  he  had  already  misled 
and  blindened  them.  He  gave  them  a hint  at  the  time,  so  all 
insisted  on  that  very  cow  being  given  away  in  gift  to  him.  It 
was  accordingly  done.  The  peasant  could  not  resist  their  unanimous 
vote.  The  peasant’s  father  died,  and  the  pope  led  the  cow  with  its 
calf  and  the  milking  pail  to  his  house,  where  he  tethered  it  and  put 
the  pail  there.  He  returned  to  the  peasant’s  house  and  went  with  the 
bier  to  the  crematory  and  ministered  at  the  ceremony  of  cremation. 
There  also  he  managed  to  take  something  by  his  trickery.  He  then 
fleeced  him  in  the  performance  of  the  ceremony,  called  the  Dasli-gatra 
sapindi^  worship  of  rice  balls  supposed  to  represent  the  body  of  the 
departed  soul,  who  passes  away  to  heaven  after  this  ceremony.  The 
undertakers  or  Maha-brahmanas  also  got  much  from  him  by  their 
frauds.  The  hungry  priests  also  subsisted  to  their  fill  When  the 
ceremony  was  over,  the  peasant  got  on  by  begging  milk  from  neigh- 
bours. On  the  I4th  day  he  went  early  in  the  morning  to  the  pope’s 
house,  where  he  saw  that  he  had  just  milked  the  cow  in  the  pail  to  its 
brim.  The  pope  on  seeing  the  peasant  said  : Come  in,  my  faithful 
follower,  sit  down. 

The  peasant : Holy  priest,  come  here  please. 

The  pope  : Very  well,  let  me  put  the  milk  in  a safe  place. 

The  peasant : No,  no,  bring  the  milk  pail  here. 

Tiic  pope  went  to  him  and  placed  the  pail  in  front. 

The  peasant : You  are  a great  liar. 

The  pope  : What  falsehood  have  I spoken? 

The  peasant : Tell  me  why  you  have  got  the  cow  from  me? 

The  pope  : To  enable  your  father  to  cross  the  Styx. 

The  peasant : Why  did  you  not  send  the  cow  to  the  banks  of 
the  Styx?  I relied  on  you  and  you  kept  the  cow  at  your  place.  I 
don’t  know  how  many  times  my  father  ducked  in  crossing  the  Styx. 

The  pope  : No,  no.  There  another  cow,  created  out  of  the 
merit  of  this  donation  of  yours,  must  have  helped  your  father  to  get 
over  the  river. 

The  peasant : How  far  is  the  Styx  from  this  place,  and  in  what 
side  is  it? 

The  pope  : I suppose,  it  must  be  some  300,000,000  leagues 
hence;  for  the  earth  is  49,000,000  leagues  and  the  Styx  is  in  the  S.S.W. 

The  peasant : Show  me  the  telegram  or  the  letter  in  reply  to 
yours  sent  so  far,  that  a cow  was  created  out  of  the  influence  of  the 
meritorious  deed  and  the  father  of  so  and  so  was  carried  over  the 
Stygian  ferry. 

The  pope  : Except  the  authority  of  the  Garurh  Purana,  I have 
neither  a postal  nor  an  electric  message. 


340  Satyarth  Prakash 

The  peasant  : How  can  1 believe  the  Garurh  Purana.  to  be  true? 

The  pope  : Just  as  others  do. 

The  peasant  : This  book  was  written  by  your  ancestors  for  your 
livelihood,  for  nothing  is  dearer  to  a father  than  his  son.  When  my 
father  sends  me  a letter  or  a telegram,  I shall  then  send  the  cow  to  the 
banks  of  the  Styx,  and  having  got  him  over  the  ferry  bring  the  cow 
home,  where  I and  my  children  will  drink  the  milk.  Bring  me  the 
pail  full  of  milk.  The  peasant  took  the  cow,  calf  and  pail  to  his  house. 

The  pope  : You  take  back  what  you  have  given  in  gift!  You 
shall  be  ruined. 

The  peasant : Hold  your  tongue,  otherwise  1 shall  wreak  ven- 
geance on  your  head  for  the  trouble  1 have  suffered  for  the  last  thir- 
teen days.  Then  the  pope  kept  quiet,  and  the  peasant  carried  the 
cow  and  calf  home. 

When  the  people  of  the  world  are  like  this  peasant,  there  will 
be  an  end  of  popery.  The  people  believe  that  the  departed  soul  is 
associated  with  the  body  by  performing  the  ceremony  of  Dasha-gatra 
and  making  rice  balls  represent  ten-fold  body.  This  body  is  as  small 
as  the  thumb,  and  with  it  the  disembodied  soul  goes  to  the  land  of 
Death.  If  it  is  true,  the  coming  of  Death’s  messengers  is  useless. 
They  should  come  13  days  after  death.  If  the  soul  is  endowed  with  a 
body,  why  does  it  not  return  home  from  love  for  its  wife,  children, 
and  beloved  friends? 

Question  : Nothing  is  got  in  heaven.  Whatever  is  given  in 
charity,  is  obtained  there.  So  all  things  should  be  given  in  alms 

Answer  : This  world  is  far  better  than  your  heaven,  for  here  inns 
are  erected,  people  give  alms,  they  invite  their  friends  to  dinners,  nice 
suits  of  clothes  are  obtained.  But,  as  you  say,  nothing  is  got  in 
heaven.  What  is  the  use  of  good  people  going  there  ? It  is  belter 
that  the  pope  should  go  there  and  enjoy  its  want. 

Q~U  there  is  neither  Death,  nor  the  land  of  Death,  as  you 
say,  then  where  does  the  soul  go  after  death  ? Who  decides  the  cases 
of  such  departed  souls  ? 

What  your  Garurh  Purana  says  is  false,  but  what  the 
Vedas  say  is  : 

Such  Vedic  texts  show  that  Yama  (Death)  is  the  name  of  the  air. 
The  souls  after  departing  the  bodies  live  in  the  interplanetary  region 
in  the  air,  and  God  who  is  impartial  and  who  acts  upon  what  is  right, 
is  the  Dharm  Raj  or  the  King  of  Righteousness.  It  is  He  who  judges’. 

0.— You  seem  to  prove  that  cow-gifts,  alms,  or  other  charities 
should  not  be  given. 

/4.— What  you  understand  is  quite  wrong;  for,  gold,  silver, 
diamonds,  pearls,  rubies,  food,  water,  shelter,  clothes  must  needs  be 
given  in  alms  to  deserving  people  and  to  benefactors  for  the  purpose 
of  doing  good  to  others.  But  nothing  should  be  ever  given  to  the 
undeserving. 

g.— What  are  the  distinguishing  marks  of  the  deserving  and  the 
undeserving  ? 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


341 


The  Undeserving 

The  distinguishing  qualities  of  the  undeserving  are  trickery, 
fraud,  selfishness,  sordidness,  anger,  avarice,  inordinate  desire,  doing 
injury  to  others,  cheating,  lying,  ignorance,  evil  company,  idleness, 
worrying  a donor  by  constant  begging,  sitting  at  doors  to  force  alms, 
begging  persistently  after  a donor’s  refusal,  want  of  contentment, 
talking  ill  of  those  who  don’t  give  them,  cursing  and  abusing,  become 
an  enemy  of  him  who  has  served  them  many  times  but  once,  deceiv- 
ing people  by  assuming  the  appearance  of  a holy  man,  denying  to 
have  anything  at  all  though  possessed  of  much  wealth,  encompassing 
their  ends  by  humbugging  and  treachery,  being  engaged  day  and 
night  in  begging,  eating  much  food  when  invited  by  the  people  to 
dinner,  by  taking  the  decoction  of  hemp  leaves  and  other  intoxicants, 
then  being  negligent  from  intoxication,  opposing  the  true  path  and 
fabricating  fiilse  religions  to  accomplish  their  ends,  teaching  their 
followers  to  serve  them  alone  but  not  others  though  deserving,  oppo- 
sition to  the  propagation  of  true  knowledge,  trying  to  create  in  the 
minds  of  the  people  disgust  for  the  wife,  husband,  father,  mother, 
children,  kings,  subjects,  relatives  and  friends,  saying  that  all  these  as 
well  as  the  world  are  illusion,  and  such  like  teachings  to  upset  the 
social  constitution. 

The  Deserving 

The  distinguishing  qualities  of  the  deserving  are  chastity,  control 
over  the  senses,  love  to  study  and  teach  the  Vedas  and  other  systems 
of  knowledge,  politeness,  veracity,  love  for  beneficence,  exertion  or 
labor,  generosity,  love  to  promote  knowledge  and  religion  constantly, 
virtue,  calmness,  freedom  from  joy  at  praise  and  sorrow  at  dispraise, 
fearlessness,  courage.  Yoga  or  meditation,  wisdom,  knowledge  of 
physical  laws,  obedience  to  the  precepts  of  the  Vedas,  readiness  to  act 
upon  the  commandments  of  God  with  reference  to  His  existence, 
character  and  attributes,  justice,  impartiality,  preaching  truth,  ability 
to  distinguish  those  who  study  and  teach  true  knowledge  from  mere 
pretenders,  absence  of  flattery,  satisfactorily  answering  questions  of 
importance,  regard  for  the  pleasure,  pain,  profit  and  loss  of  others  like 
their  own,  absence  of  the  stain  of  ignorance,  bigotry,  fanaticism,  pride, 
regarding  their  disrespect  as  good  or  ambrosial,  and  their  respect  as 
poison,  contentment,  satisfaction  with  whatever  is  given  them  by 
others  with  love,  doing  no  discourtesy,  or  feeling  no  pain  at  refusal 
of  alms  or  being  turned  out,  but  departing  at  once  from  the  place  of 
refusal,  talking  no  evil  of  the  refuser,  keeping  company  of  good 
people,  commiseration  upon  sufferers,  rejoicing  with  the  virtuous, 
indifference  to  the  vicious,  i.e.,  freedom  from  love  or  hatred,  respect 
for  truth,  veracity,  righteous  conduct,  honesty,  freedom  from  enmity 
and  prejudice,  seriousness  or  depth  of  character,  true  manliness, 
righteousness,  aloofness  from  vicious  deeds,  sacrifice,  absence  of 
selfishness,  wealth  and  desire  for  the  interest  and  good  of  others,  and 
sacrifice  of  one’s  own  life  for  the  ease  and  happiness  of  others. 

But  in  distress  and  famine  all  beings  are  entitled  to  receive  food, 
drink,  clothes,  medicine,  sanitation,  and  shelter. 

Q, — How  many  kinds  of  donors  are  there  ? 


342 


Satyarth  Prakash 


A. — They  arc  of  three  kinds;  namely,  good,  middling,  and 
inferior.  A good  donor  is  one  who  donates  to  a proper  person  for 
people’s  welfare  in  true  knowledge  and  religion  at  proper  time  and 
place.  A middling  donor  is  one  who  makes  gifts  for  his  own  fame 
or  interest.  An  inferior  donor  is  one  who  cannot  do  any  good  either 
to  himself  or  to  others,  but  gives  his  money  to  prostitutes,  buflfoons, 
sycophants,  etc.  and  shows  contempt  and  disrespect  to  recipients. 
He  does  not  know  the  distinction  between  the  deserving  and  the 
undeserving.  He  is  like  one  who  sells  all  things  at  the  same  rate.  He 
is  engaged  in  disputes,  fights  and  pleasure  to  see  righteous  persons 
suffer  from  trouble.  In  other  words,  he  who  gives  alms  with  discri- 
mination, honours  the  learned  and  the  righteous,  is  a good  donor.  He 
who  gives  his  money  with  or  without  discrimination  for  his  own 
praise  is  a middling  donor.  He  who  donates  blindly  and  indiscrimi- 
nately in  useless  matters  is  the  worst  donor. 

Q. — Where  arc  the  rewards  of  donalian  obtained  ? Is  it  here  or 
hereafter  ? 

A, — Everywhere. 

Q. — Do  the  fruits  of  good  deeds  come  to  a man  of  their  own 
accord,  or  is  there  any  dispenser  of  them  ? 

A. — God  is  the  dispenser  of  rewards.  Just  as  a thief  or  a robber 
does  not  want  to  go  to  jail  himself,  but  a king  sends  him  there,  guards 
the  comforts  of  the  virtuous,  gives  them  ease,  and  protects  them  and 
keeps  them  in  safety  from  robbers  and  wicked  people,  so  also  does 
God  deal  them  proper  doles  in  the  shape  of  pleasure  or  pain  accord- 
ing to  their  merits  or  demerits. 

Q. — Do  the  Garurh  Purana  and  other  scriptures  expound  the 
sense  of  the  Vedas  and  support  them  ? 

A. — No.  They  are  against  and  go  contrary  to  them.  The  Tantra 
scriptures  are  also  of  a piece.  A believer  ot  the  Puranas  and  Tantras 
is  like  one  who  is  friendly  to  one  and  inimical  to  the  rest  of  the  world; 
for,  it  is  these  books  that  foment  quarrels  among  persons.  No  learned 
person  should  believe  in  them.  Respect  to  them  marks  ignorance. 

Fast  Days 

See,  according  to  the  Puranas,  the  fasting  days  are  the  13th  and 
Monday  (Shiva  Purana);  Sunday  (Aditya  Purana),  Tuesday;  Wednes- 
day, Thursday,  Friday,  Saturday  when  these  occur  on  the  conjunction 
of  the  moon  with  lunar  asterides  (Chandra  khanda);  the  days  occur- 
ring on  the  ascending  and  descending  nodes,  the  11th  of  Vishnu,  the 
12th  of  Vaman,  the  14th  of  God  Nrisinha  or  God  Ananta,  the  full 
moon  day,  the  10th  of  the  gods  Dikpalas,  the  9th  of  Goddess  Durga, 
the  8th  of  God  Vasu,  the  7th  of  7 Sages,  the  6th  of  God  Swami 
Kartika  (Castor  and  Pollux),  the  5th  of  the  god  Serpent  (Serapis),  the 
4th  of  god  Ganesha  (Janus),  the  3rd  of  goddess  Gouri  (Isis),  the  2nd 
of  the  twin  gods  Ashwini  Kumar  (Gemini),  the  1st  of  the  goddess 
Adya,  the  15th  of  the  manes.  It  is  recorded  everywhere  that  whoever 
eats  and  drinks  on  these  days  will  go  to  hell.  Now,  the  pope  and  his 
disciples  should  not  take  food  and  drink  on  any  day  or  date,  for  they 
will  otherwise  go  to  hell. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


343 


Now  the  books,  called  the  Nirnaya  Sindhu,  Dharma  Siddu, 
Britarka,  etc.,  which  are  written  by  careless  fellows,  make  mess  of  all 
the  fasting  days  calling  one  another  bad.  For  instance,  the  Shaiva 
(followers  of  God  Shiva)  look  down  upon  the  11th  and  some  keep 
fast  on  the  llth,  which  is  connected  with  the  12th  in  the  calendar. 
It  is  a strange  kind  of  papacy  that  they  quarrel  over  starvation.  There 
is  selfishness  of  the  pope  in  instituting  the  llth  and  there  is  no  mercy 
in  it.  Thus  it  is  said  that 

'nqrfH  i 

— All  the  sins  repair  to  corn  meal  on  the  1 1th.  Now,  ask  this  pope 
as  to  whose  sins  resort  to  meal,  his  or  his  father’s.  If  all  the  sins  of 
people  pass  away  to  corn  on  the  llth,  there  should  be  none  miserable 
on  that  day.  But,  on  the  contrary,  the  tasters  arc  afflicted  with  the 
pain  of  hunger  and  thirst.  The  pain  is  the  result  of  sin.  So  to  be 
hungry  is  sinful.  These  popes  have  written  lengthy  discourses  on  the 
merit  of  fasts,  and  cheat  the  people  by  reading  to  them.  There  is  a 
story  in  these  discourses.  It  is  as  follows  : — 

Harlot  in  Heaven 

There  was  a prostitute  in  Brahmalok  or  heaven.  She  committed 
some  offence  and  was  cursed  to  fall  down  upon  the  earth.  So  she 
prayed  : O God,  how  shall  I be  retaken  to  heaven?  She  was  told  to 
go  there  where  some  one  would  give  her  the  merit  accruing  from  the 
fast  on  the  llth.  She  fell  into  some  city  together  with  the  heavenly 
car  she  was  seated  in.  The  king  of  that  place  asked  her  who  she  was. 
She  related  her  story  to  him  and  remarked  that  if  anybody  gave  her 
the  merit  of  the  fast  of  the  llth,  she  could  again  go  to  heaven.  There- 
upon the  king  enquired  in  the  city  but  found  that  nobody  kept  fast  on 
the  llth.  However,  once  it  so  happened  that  some  low  caste  man 
and  his  wife  quarrelled.  The  woman  did  not  take  any  food  the  whole 
day  and  night,  which  by  chance  fell  on  the  llth.  She  said  that  she 
kept  no  fast  on  the  1 1th  knowingly,  but  was  kept  hungry  by  chance. 
When  the  royal  servants  heard  this,  they  took  her  to  the  king,  who 
ordered  her  to  touch  the  heavenly  car.  She  did  so,  and  lo!  the  car  at 
once  ascended  to  heaven.  Such  is  the  merit  of  a fast  on  the  llth 
when  kept  even  unknowingly.  If  it  be  kept  knowingly,  how  immense 
will  be  the  greatness  of  its  merit? 

How  blind  are  these  people  who  believe  in  such  idle  tales!  If  it 
be  true,  we  want  to  send  a betel  wad  to  heaven  where  it  is  not  found.* 
Let  all  the  fasters  on  the  llth  transfer  their  merit  to  it.  If  one  betel 
goes  there,  we  should  send  millions  upon  millions  of  betels  there,  and 
keep  a fast  on  the  llth.  But  if  it  does  not  take  place,  we  shall  save 
you  from  the  distressing  time  of  starvation.  The  llths  of  a yearf  24 
in  number,  have  received  separate  names.  One  is  called  the  Dhan-da 
(giver  of  wealth),  another  Kama-da  (satiater  of  desires),  a third  is 

♦After  taking  food,  the  people  chew  a betel  fold  containing  within  it  lime 
paste,  catechu,  cuttings  of  areca  nuts  and  cardamon  sometimes  as  well.  It  reddens 
the  lips  and  gives  fragrance  to  breath. 

fA  lunar  month  contains  two  fortnights,  bright  and  dark,  each  begins  with 
one  and  ends  in  15  (Ides). 


344 


Satyarth  Prakash 


called  Putra-da  (giver  of  sons),  a fourth  is  called  Nir-jala  (waterless). 
Many  people,  poor,  ambitious,  childless,  have  turned  old  while  keep- 
ing the  fast  of  the  1 1th  and  died  away,  but  they  never  got  either  wealth, 
satisfaction  of  their  desires,  or  any  issue.  The  fasters  feel  much  trouble 
and  pain  in  a fast  at  the  time  of  the  bright  fortnight  of  the  month  of 
Jyeshtha  (June-July),  whose  parching  heat  makes  a thirsty  man  uneasy 
if  he  does  not  drink  for  a short  time.  This  is  specially  the  case  in 
Bengal  where  the  widows  suffer  terribly  on  the  fast  day  of  the  llth. 
These  merciless  popish  butchers  never  felt  a ray  of  compassion  when 
writing  those  books,  otherwise  they  would  have  called  the  waterless 
1 1th  as  one  to  be  kept  with  drinking  little  water  only.  Had  he  who 
wrote  the  book  of  fasts  called  the  llth  of  the  bright  fortnight  of  the 
month  of  Posh  (November-December)  the  waterless  llth,  there  would 
have  been  no  great  harm.  But  what  has  this  pope  to  do  with  com- 
passion? 

— It  matters  little  whether  anybody  lives  or  dies,  but  the  belly  of  the 
pope  must  be  stuffed  to  its  hll.  Pregnant  women,  newly  married 
women,  boys  and  adults  should  never  keep  fasts.  If  anybody  wants  to 
keep  a fast,  he  should  do  so  on  the  day  when  he  feels  indigestion,  or 
has  no  appetite  in  any  way  at  all.  He  should  then  take  sugared  water 
or  beverage  or  milk  only.  Those  who  do  not  take  food  when  hungry, 
or  who  eat  without  any  appetite  for  food,  fall  into  the  sea  of  diseases 
and  suffer  terribly.  None  should  regard  the  writings  of  these  irres- 
ponsible men  as  an  authority. 

RELIGIOUS  SECTS 

We  now  describe  the  present  state  of  the  initiation  of  disciples  by 
their  religious  teachers  and  various  systems  of  faith. 

Lost  Books  of  Vedas 

Q, — The  idolatrous  people  say  that  the  Vedas  are  innumerable. 
There  were  21  “branches”  or  parts  of  the  Rig  Veda,  101  of  the  Yajur 
Veda,  1,000  of  the  Sama  Veda,  and  9 of  the  Atharva  Veda.  Of  these, 
a few  are  extant  and  the  rest  are  become  extinct.  They  must  contain 
an  authority  for  idol-worship  and  pilgrimage  to  sacred  places.  If  it 
had  not  been  there,  how  could  it  come  into  the  Puranas?  We  infer  a 
cause  from  the  observation  of  its  effect,  then  how  can  we  doubt  in  the 
propriety  of  idol-worship  since  we  find  it  in  the  Puranas? 

A, — The  branches  of  a tree  arc  of  the  same  nature  as  the  tree, 
but  never  the  reverse  of  it.  They  may  be  either  small  or  big,  but  they 
cannot  be  heterogeneous  to  one  another.  In  like  manner,  the  lost 
branches  or  parts  of  the  Vedas  cannot  contain  an  authority  for  the 
worship  of  stone  idols  and  pilgrimage  to  special  towns  and  rivers,  called 
the  sacred  places;  for,  those  that  are  still  extant  do  not  contain  a trace 
of  it.  The  four  Vedas  are  found  complete.  The  lost  branches,  or 
rather  supplements,  cannot  be  antagonistic  to  them.  If  they  be 
against  them,  they  cannot  be  called  their  branches.  Such  being  the 
case,  the  Puranas  cannot  be  the  branches  or  parts  o?  the  Vedas, 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


345 


But,  on  the  contrary,  they  are  the  books  written  by  sectarians,  con- 
flicting against  one  another.  As  you  believe  the  Vedas  to  be  made  by 
the  Deity,  why  don’t  you  believe  the  books  bearing  the  names  of  the 
sages  and  divines  like  Ashwalayana?  Just  as  branches  and  leaves  show 
the  kinds  of  trees,  as  pipal,  fig,  mango,  and  the  like,  so  do  the  com- 
plementary books  of  the  Vedas,  namely,  the  four  Brahmanas,  Angas, 
Upangas,  and  Upa-vedas  and  the  like  scriptures  help  in  the  interpre- 
tation of  the  Vedic  sense,  and  so  they  are  called  the  branches  of  the 
Vedas.  It  cannot  be  an  authority  which  is  against  the  Vedas,  and  in 
the  same  way  that  which  is  in  unison  with  them  cannot  be  rejected. 
If  you  suppose  idol  worship  sanctioned  in  the  lost  branches  of  the 
Vedas,  and  if  anybody  tells  you  that  those  lost  books  reverse  the  four 
orders  of  society,  namely,  thev  call  the  low  castes  and  the  Shudras 
as  Brahmanas,  the  Brahmanas  as  Shudras  and  low  castes,  and  regard 
the  relations  prohibited  from  marrying  as  proper  for  marriage,  for- 
bidden actions  as  worth  doing,  lying  as  virtue,  veracity  as  unrighteous, 
we  say  that  if  anybody  says  so,  you  yourselves  will  return  him  the 
same  answer  as  we  have  given  to  your  objection,  that  is  to  say, 
we  should  believe  as  true  what  is  written  in  the  existing  Vedas  and 
their  accessory  studies,  called  the  Brahmanas  and  the  like  scriptures, 
about  the  Brahmins  and  other  castes,  and  the  same  must  be  in  those 
parts  or  branches  that  are  now  not  found.  If  you  don’t  do  this,  all  the 
laws  regarding  duties  and  other  things  will  be  upset  and  unreliable. 

All  Vedas  in  Vyasa’s  Time 

Were  those  lost  books  extant  in  the  time  of  Jaimini,  Vyasa,  and 
Patanjali?  If  they  were,  then  you  cannot  raise  the  above  objection, 
and  if  not,  what  are  the  grounds  of  such  a belief  of  yours,  that  there 
were  such  books  as  you  believe  to  be  lost  now  ? 

See  that  Jaimini  has  given  all  the  ceremonial  duties  in  the 
Mimansa,  Patanjali  the  whole  process  of  worship  in  the  Yoga,  and 
Vyasa  the  complete  system  of  philosophy  in  the  Vedanta,  according 
to  the  Vedas.  There  is  no  whisper  at  all  about  the  worship  of  stone 
idols  or  pilgrimage  to  the  sacred  places  as  Prayaga.  Well,  how  could 
they  write  otherwise  ? Had  it  been  given  in  the  Vedas,  they  must  have 
written  it  in  their  books.  Therefore,  there  was  no  mention  of  idol- 
worship  in  the  lost  branches  of  the  Vedas. 

Lost  Branches  not  Vedas 

All  these  branches  are  not  the  Vedas,  for  they  expound  the 
Vedas  by  taking  some  Vedic  text,  and  also  give  history  of  the  worldly 
people.  So  they  cannot  be  included  in  the  Vedas,  which  teach  men 
knowledge  only.  They  don’t  contain  anybody’s  name.  Therefore, 
idol-worship  should  always  be  rejected. 

Idolatry  Disgraces  Rama,  etc. 

The  custom  of  idol-worship  disgraces  and  scandalises  Rama 
Chandra,  Krishna,  Narayana,  Shiva  and  others.  Everybody  knows 
that  they  were  great  kings  and  their  wives,  Sita,  Rukamani,  Lakshmi, 
Parvati  and  others,  were  great  queens.  But  when  the  preists  put  their 


346 


Satyarth  Prakash 


images  in  temples  and  similar  buildings  and  ask  alms  in  their  names, 
that  is,  make  them  beggars,  calling  out:  “O  king,  prince,  banker, 
merchant,  come  and  have  the  sight,  sit  down,  taste  their  feet  washings, 
offer  presents  ! It  is  three  days  since  they, — Sita,  Rama,  Radha,  etc., 
took  food  and  drink;  they  have  nothing  to  eat  to-day;  let  the  princess 
or  the  banker’s  wife  get  a nose-ring  made  for  Sita  and  others;  send 
food  and  other  things  that  we  may  offer  them  to  Rama,  Krishna,  and 
others;  their  clothes  are  all  torn  to  pieces;  the  corners  of  their  temples 
are  all  fallen  down;  they  leak  in  the  ceiling;  wicked  robbers  have 
carried  away  whatever  there  was  on  their  person;  other  things  have 
been  gnawed  by  rats.  Once  the  rats  grew  so  harmful  that  they  ex- 
tracted their  eyes  and  made  off.  We  could  not  make  their  eyes  of 
silver,  so  we  have  made  them  of  shells!*’  They  also  hold  what  they  call 
the  Ramalila  (drama  of  Rama)  and  Rasamandala  (Krishna’s  mystic 
dance  in  circle).  There  Sita,  Rama,  Radha,  and  Krishna  dance,  and 
princes  and  abbots  enjoy  the  sight  from  their  seats.  In  temples 
Sita,  Rama  and  others  stand,  while  the  priests,  abbots  sit  on  carpets 
and  mattresses  reclining  against  big  bolsters  1 In  the  hot  season,  these 
priests  shut  them  and  lock  the  doors  of  the  rooms.  They  themselves 
spread  their  couches  in  the  open  air  to  sleep  soundly.  Many  priests 
put  their  gods  in  small  caskets,  wrap  them  in  cloth  and  hang  them 
about  their  necks,  just  as  a female  monkey  puts  her  young  ones  round 
her  neck.  When  anybody  breaks  their  images,  they  cry  out  most 
bitterly  and  beat  their  breasts,  exclaiming:  “Some  wicked  persons 
have  broken  Sita,  Rama,  Radha,  Krishna,  Shiva  and  Parvati.  We 
should  now  get  another  image  which  a sculptor  has  made  of  marble, 
and  worship  it  after  duly  enshrining  it.  Food  cannot  be  offered  to 
Narayana  without  clarified  butter.  If  you  cannot  send  much,  you 
must  send  a small  quantity  of  it.”  Thus  they  talk  of  these  great  per- 
sonages. At  the  conclusion  of  the  drama  of  Rama  and  Krishna’s 
dance,  they  make  Rama  and  Krishna  beg  money  of  the  audience. 
Wherever  there  is  any  fair  or  concourse  of  people,  they  place  a tinsel 
crown  upon  the  head  of  a boy  to  represent  Krishna  and  make  him 
beg  of  the  passengers  on  the  road. 

You  should  think  of  these  things  yourselves  How  sad  are  they! 
Tell  me  if  Sita  and  Rama  were  so  poor  and  beggarly.  If  it  is  not 
disgracing  and  slandering  them,  what  is  it  then  ? It  is  a great  calumny 
of  our  respectful  forefathers.  When  Sita,  Rukmani,  Lakshmi  and 
Parvati  lived,  they  would  never  have  consented  had  these  ignorant 
priests  asked  them  to  stand  by  the  roadside  or  in  some  house  and 
call  out  to  the  passers-by  to  come  and  have  the  sight  of  them  and 
olfer  them  presents.  They  would  never  have  allowed  them  to  do  it. 
Nay,  if  anybody  had  ever  attempted  to  make  such  a fun  of  them, 
they  would  have  never  let  him  off  without  giving  him  condign  punish- 
ment. Since  they  got  no  punishment  from  the  people  at  large,  their 
evil  deeds  brought  upon  them  much  distress  and  disgrace  at  the  hands 
of  iconoclasts.  They  still  now  and  then  sulfer  from  the  enemies  of 
idol  worship.  They  will  continue  to  suffer  from  it  till  they  give  up 
Ibis  wicked  custom.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  India  incurs  a great 
loss  everyday  from  idol-worship,  and  the  defeat  of  idolaters  is  due  to 
these  evil  deeds,  for  pain  is  the  consequence  of  sin.  Much  hatm  \s 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


347 


done  to  the  country  by  the  people’s  belief  in  idol  worship.  They  will 
suffer  still  more  day  by  day,  if  they  don’t  give  it  up. 

Warn  Marg  Initiation 

Of  these  idolatrous  people,  the  followers  of  Warn  Marg  (the 
left-hand  path)  are  the  most  iniquitous.  When  they  convert  a man 
to  their  faith,  they  initiate  him  into  their  mysteries  with  these  formulas 
of  their  creed: 

i I H \ 

tf  ^1f  w 

(Salutation  to  Dam  Durga!  Salutation  to  Bham  Bhairava! 
Salutation  to  Aing,  Hring,  Kling  Chamunda!) 

But  in  Bengal  they  specially  initiate  a person  with  monosyllabic 
articles  of  their'creed,  as  Hreem ! Slireem  I Kleem  ! — Shavar  Tantra  44. 

These  are  the  names  of  the  Goddess.  They  anoint  the  rich  with 
all  their  ceremonies.  Such  formulas  are  given  in  10  Mahavidyas. 
Thus  (Shavar  41) 

II 

— Offering  to  the  Goddess  whose  face  is  like  a heron.  Also  in  some 
places  we  find,  Hrum  phat  swaha. — Kama  Ratna  Tantra,  Bij  Mantra  4. 

Warn  Marg  Ceremonies 

These  priests  of  Warn  Marg  perform  ceremonies  with  the  object 
of  achieving  their  end  psychologically,  such  as  their  enemy’s  death,  be- 
foolment,  the  estrangement  of  the  reason,  hatred  in  mind,  subjection 
and  the  like  events.  Though  their  incantation  fails  to  accomplish  their 
object,  yet  their  physical  actions  bring  it  about.  When  they  perform 
the  ceremony  of  encompassing  a man’s  death,  they  take  money  from 
the  man  whose  enemy  they  undertake  to  kill.  To  do  it,  they  make 
an  effigy  of  their  victim  of  either  earth  or  flour  and  pierce  knives  into 
its  breast,  navel,  and  throat,  and  sink  nails  into  its  eyes,  hands,  and 
feet.  Then  they  make  an  idol  of  Goddess  Durga  or  God  Bhairava 
and  put  it  with  a trident  in  its  hand  upon  the  victim’s  effigy  which 
they  smite.  Some  light  an  altar  and  offer  flesh  into  it.  While  they 
do  these  things  overtly,  they  manage  covertly  to  send  an  assassin  to 
despatch  the  victim  either  by  poisoning  or  stabbing  him.  If  they 
succeed  in  killing  him  in  the  midst  of  their  mortal  ceremonial,  they 
call  themselves  as  the  favourites  or  mediums  of  God  Bhairava  or 
Goddess  Devi.  They  mutter  such  texts  as  “Bhairava  and  Bhuta-nath” 
These  are  names  of  Shiva,  the  terrible  god  and  the  Lord  of  creatures 
or  evil  spirits. 

11— Kama  Ratna 
Tantra  Uchchatan  Section,  5-7. 

They  mutter  or  repeatedly  pronounce  these  talismanic  phrases. 

They  mean ; Kill,  bedevil,  inhumanise,  cut,  pierce,  subdue,  eat, 


348 


Satyarth  Prakash 


swallow,  break,  destroy  and  enslave  my  enemy!  Humph!  Amen!  [The 
verb  is  repeated  twice  in  Sanscrit.]  They  eat  flesh  and  drink  wine  to 
their  satisfaction,  make  a perpendicular  mark  between  the  eye-brows 
with  Vermillion,  and  sometimes  eat  human  flesh  after  sacrificing  a man 
whom  they  catch  to  offer  to  Goddess  Kali.  If  a man  goes  into  the 
Bhairava  chakra  [circle  of  persons  to  worship  God  Bhairava  or 
Bacchus — Bacchanalia]  and  docs  not  taste  flesh  and  wine,  they  kill 
and  sacrifice  him  on  the  altar.  Of  these  men,  one  who  is  an  aghori 
or  cannibal — eater  of  all,  cates  the  flesh  of  a corpse.  They  also  eat 
filth  and  drink  urine. 

Sects  and  Mysteries  of  Warn  Marg 

There  are  two  sects  of  them,  one  is  called  the  “Choli  margi”, 
and  the  other  the  “Bija  margi”.  The  first  sect  makes  a chamber  in  a 
secret  place  or  under  the  ground.  There  they,  their  wives,  children, 
sons,  daughters,  sisters,  mothers,  daughters-in-law  and  others  assemble 
and  eat  flesh  and  drink  wine.  Stripping  a woman  of  her  dress,  they 
all  worship  her  private  parts,  and  call  her  Goddess  Durga.  Also, 
undressing  a man,  all  the  women  worship  his  private  parts.  When 
they  are  intoxicated  from  much  drinking,  they  put  all  the  corsets  or 
breast-dresses  of  their  ladies  into  an  earthen  vessel  and  shuffle  them. 
Then  each  man  puts  his  hand  into  it  to  take  out  a corset.  He  takes 
her  to  wife  whose  stays  he  happens  to  pick  up,  without  regard  to  her 
being  his  mother,  sister,  daughter  or  daughter-in-law.  They  commit 
many  sins  and,  when  much  intoxicated,  fight  one  another  with  shoes 
In  the  early  morning,  when  it  is  still  dark,  they  repair  to  their  houses. 
Then  their  relations  are  restored  as  they  were  before,  namely,  mother, 
daughter,  sister,  and  daughter-in-law. 

The  second  sect  or  Bija-margis  dissolve  their  semen  after  copu- 
lation in  water  and  quaff  it  off.  These  savages  consider  these  heinous 
deeds  as  means  of  salvation.  They  are  destitute  of  knowledge,  thinking, 
gentlemanliness  and  other  good  qualities. 

Shivism 

Q. — Are  the  followers  of  Shivism  good  ? 

How  can  they  be  good?  Just  as  the  Lord  of  ghosts  is,  so 
is  the  Lord  of  goblins.  The  priests  of  Shiva  deprive  the  people  of 
their  money  as  do  the  followers  of  Warn  Marg  by  initiation  into  the 
mysteries  of  incantation  or  mantras.  They  initiate  their  followers  with 
the  quint-syllabic  formula,  viz.,  Om!  Namah  Shivaya — Salutation  to 
God  Shiva!  They  wear  the  rosary  of  eleocarpus,  bedub  their  body 
with  ashes,  and  worship  the  generative  organ  of  Shiva,  called  the  Ling 
and  made  of  earth  or  stone.  They  exclaim  : “Har,  Har,  Bam,  Bam”, 
and  shout  patting  puffed  checks  in  a voice  resembling  a goat.  The 
reason  they  assign  to  it  is  that  Parvati  is  pleased  and  God  Shiva 
displeased  with  clapping  and  calling  out  Bam!  Bam!  For,  when  Maha- 
deva  (God  Shiva)  ran  away  from  before  Bhasmasur,  a demon,  he  was 
hooted  with  Bam!  Bam!  and  the  people  clapped  in  ridicule.  Parvati 
is  displeased  and  Mahadeva  pleased  with  striking  the  bloated  cheeks. 
For,  when  the  head  of  Parvati’s  father,  Daksha  Prajapati,  was  cut  off 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


349 


and  thrown  into  the  burning  fire  of  a sacrifice,  a goat’s  head  was 
placed  in  lieu  of  it.  The  Bam  Bam  of  the  worshippers  is  believed  to 
represent  the  voice  of  the  goat,  produced  by  beating  the  air-stuffed 
cheeks.  They  keep  a fast  on  the  Shivaratri  and  on  the  13th  of  the 
Hindu  calendar,  which  they  consider  as  productive  of  salvation.  So 
the  followers  of  Shiva  are  as  much  mistaken  as  the  Wam-margians. 

Its  Sects 

Of  these,  the  people  with  their  ears  split  are  called  Natha,  others 
Giri  (hill  men),  Puri  (townsmen),  Bana  (dwellers  of  forest),  Aranya 
(people  of  waste)  lands,  and  Parvat  (hill).  Family  men  also  are  the 
followers  of  Shiva.  Some  of  them  ‘ride  two  horses’,  as  it  were,  i e., 
they  are  believers  both  in  Shivism  and  in  Warn  Margism,  which  they 
always  revere.  Some  of  them  arc  also  the  worshippers  of  Vishnu.  The 
gist  of  their  creed  is  expressed  in — 

5TT^crT  ^ I 

It  means  : the  believers  in  the  Warm  Marg  live  in  the  world  as 
the  followers  of  Warn  Margism  inwardly,  and  of  Shiva  outwardly, 
wearing  berries  and  ashes,  and  are  considered  as  the  followers  of 
Vishnu  in  assemblies,  and  they  assume  many  appearances  in  their  life 
on  earth. 


Vishnuism 

Q, — Are  the  worshippers  of  God  Vishnu  better? 

A. — No,  nothing  of  the  kind.  They  are  just  as  good  as  the 
worshippers  of  God  Shiva.  They  regard  themselves  as  the  servants  of 
Vishnu.  Of  them,  those  who  are  the  Shri  Vaishnavas  and  marked 
with  Vishnu’s  discus,  think  themselves  as  superior  to  the  rest.  But  it 
is  all  sham, 

Q. — Why  are  they  nothing?  They  are  the  best  of  all.  See,  they 
paint  their  forehead  with  a likeness  of  God  Narayana’s  lotus-like  feet 
and  put  in  the  centre  of  it  a yellow  perpendicular  line,  called  Shri 
(Goddess  Laxmi  of  wealth).  Hence  we  are  called  the  Shri  Vaishnavas. 
We  worship  none  but  God  Narayana.  We  don’t  even  see  the  image 
of  Mahadeva  (male  organ),  for  Shri  is  in  our  forehead,  she  is  ashamed 
to  see  it.  We  repeat  the  names  of  such  females  as  Aul,  Mandara  and 
the  like,  worship  God  Narayana  with  chanting  Vedic  verses,  and 
do  not  take  flesh  and  wine.  Then  why  are  we  not  good  ? 

A, — It  is  useless  for  you  to  imagine  your  forehead  mark  as  the 
imagine  of  God’s  feet  and  the  yellow  line  as  that  of  Shri;  for,  they  are 
mere  instances  of  your  skill  and  pictures  on  the  forehead,  as  the 
people  paint  the  scalp  of  the  elephant  with  vermillion.  Whence  have 
you  got  the  mark  of  Vishnu’s  feet  ? Have  you  ever  been  to  heaven 
and  got  your  forehead  maiked  wdth  the  feet  ot  Vishnu? 

Thinker: — Is  Shri  (Ceres)  a piece  of  dead  matter  or  a conscious 
being  ? 


350 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Vaishnava: — A conscious  being. 

T. — Then  this  line  on  your  forehead  being  a dead  matter  can- 
not be  Shri  (Ceres).  I ask  if  Shri  is  not  made  with  hands  or  otherwise. 
If  she  is  not  made  with  hands,  then  this  iine  is  not  Shri;  for,  you  draw 
this  line  every  day  on  your  forehead,  and  so  it  cannot  be  Goddess 
Shri.  If  Shri  (Goddess  of  Beauty)  dwells  in  your  people’s  forehead, 
then  why  the  faces  of  so  many  of  your  people  look  so  ugly?  Bravo! 
Goddess  of  wealth  Shri  in  the  forehead,  and  still  you  beg  from  door 
to  door!  Why  do  you  live  upon  charity?  It  savours  of  maniacs  and 
shameless  persons  that  you  have  Shri,  the  Goddess  of  wealth  (Ceres), 
in  the  forehead  and  yet  you  act  like  very  poor  people! 

Robber  Parikal 

There  was  once  a Vaishnava  devotee,  Parikal  by  name,  who 
took  delight  in  giving  wealth  to  the  Vishnuites,  which  he  earned  by 
robbing,  deceiving,  defrauding  and  raiding  upon  others.  Once  he  got 
nothing  to  pilfer  and  so  wandered  about  very  much  disconsolate. 
Whereupon  God  Narayana  thought  that  his  adorer  was  in  trouble,  so 
he  assumed  the  appearance  of  a banker  by  putting  on  rings  and  other 
ornaments,  and  sitting  in  a car  made  his  appearance  before  him.  He 
went  to  the  car  and  called  out  to  the  banker  to  put  olf  all  his  jewels  and 
things  at  the  pain  of  death.  There  was  a little  delay  in  taking  off  the 
ornaments,  so  Parikal  bit  off  Narayana’s  finger  to  take  the  ring  off. 
Upon  this  God  Narayana  was  much  pleased  and  showed  him  his 
quadrumanic  form,  saying:  “You  are  my  very  dear  worshipper,  inas- 
much as  you  serve  the  Vishnuites  by  plundering  and  robbing  money 
for  them.  I am  very  thankful  to  you.”  He  then  took  all  those  orna- 
ments to  the  Vishnuites.  At  another  time  some  merchant  took  Parikal 
into  his  service  and  made  a voyage  with  him  to  a distant  country. 
He  freighted  his  ship  with  areca  nuts.  Parikal  broke  one  nut  into 
two  and  asked  his  master  to  put  his  half  nut  in  the  ship  and  to  ack- 
nowledge in  writing  that  half  the  nut  belongs  to  Parikal.  The  mer- 
chant told  him  that  it  was  no  use  to  write,  he  could  take  one  thousand 
nuts,  if  he  liked.  Parikal  declined  and  said  that  he  was  not  so  dis- 
honest as  to  take  what  was  not  right.  He  would  take  but  half.  The 
merchant  being  a simple  fellow  gave  him  a writing  to  that  effect. 
When  the  ship  reached  the  port  of  their  country  and  preparations 
were  made  to  unload  the  nuts,  Parikal  demanded  half  of  his  nut.  The 
merchant  brought  his  half  nut  to  return  him;  but  Parikal  contended 
that  half  of  the  nut  in  the  vessel  belonged  to  him,  so  he  would  take  half 
of  the  whole  cargo.  The  dispute  was  taken  to  the  court  for  decision. 
Parikal  producted  the  document  signed  by  the  merchant  who  promised 
to  return  half  the  nut.  Though  the  merchant  disputed  much,  yet  he 
succeeded  in  taking  the  moiety  of  the  nut  freight,  which,  as  usual,  he 
offered  to  the  worshippers  of  God  Vishnu.  These  men  were  trans- 
ported with  joy.  Upto  this  time  an  image  of  the  raider  and  robber 
Parikal  is  kept  in  temples.  This  story  is  given  in  the  Bhaktamal. 

Its  Sects 

Now,  the  thinking  people  can  easily  understand  from  it  if  the 
priests  of  Vishnu  and  their  followers  and  Narayana  are  not  all  three  a 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


351 


band  of  robbers.  Although  all  the  religions  contain  some  good  or 
compensating  qualities,  yet  nobody  believing  in  them  can  be  entirely 
virtuous.  Now  many  schisms  have  occurred  among  the  followers  of 
Vishnu,  who  use  forehead  marks  and  necklaces  of  beads  different  from 
one  another.  The  disciples  of  Ramanand  paint  the  mark  on  their 
forehead  of  two  side  lines  of  white  earth  and  the  central  line  of  red 
color.  The  Nimavats  make  two  lines  very  thin  with  a large  black  dot 
between  them.  The  Madhawas  use  black  lines,  the  Gorha  Brahmins 
of  Bengal  mark  their  forehead  with  a sign  similar  to  a dagger.  Their 
teachings  are  also  curious.  The  followers  of  Ramanand  believe  the 
red  line  on  the  breast  to  be  the  mark  of  Lakshmi  (Goddess  of  Wealth). 
But  the  Gosains  believe  that  it  is  Radha  in  the  heart  of  Krishna. 


Crow’s  Excrement 

According  to  a story  given  in  the  Bhakta-mal,  there  was  once  a 
man  who  slept  under  a tree  and  died  while  asleep.  It  so  happened 
that  a crow  dropped  its  excreta  which  formed  a perpendicular  mark 
on  his  forehead.  The  messengers  of  Death  came  to  take  him,  but  the 
messengers  of  Vishnu  also  appeared  on  the  spot.  Both  the  parties 
began  to  quarrel;  one  said  that  the  order  of  its  master  was  to  carry 
him  to  Death’s  court  and  the  other  said  that  it  had  orders  of  its 
master  to  take  him  to  the  heaven  of  Vishnu.  “Behold,  there  is,”  said 
Vishnu’s  messengers,  “a  mark  on  his  forehead  indicative  of  Vishnuism. 
How  can  you  then  take  him  to  the  court  of  Death?  ’ The  messengers 
of  Death  then  kept  quiet  on  this  demonstration  and  went  away. 
Vishnu’s  messengers  took  him  to  their  heaven  at  leisure.  Vishnu  gave 
him  a mansion  to  dwell  in  heaven.  Now,  when  such  is  the  impor- 
tance of  a Vishnuite  mark  made  by  chance  on  the  forehead,  what 
wonder  is  there  that  the  people  go  to  heaven  instead  of  hell  who  put 
the  Vishnuite  mark  on  their  forehead  with  their  own  hand  with  the 
sincerity  of  devotion?  We  ask,  if  a small  forehead  mark  entitles  a 
man  to  heaven,  will  he  go  up  higher  than  heaven  if  he  bedaubs  his 
whole  face  or  blackens  it  or  paints  his  whole  body?  Well,  all  these 
teachings  are  sheer  stuff  and  nonsense. 

Khaki  Ascetics 

There  are  many  Khaki  friars  of  the  same  persuasion.  They 
cover  their  private  parts  with  a strip  of  cloth  and  squat  at  a fire  cons- 
tantly fed  with  fuel.  They  keep  matted  hair  and  assume  the  forrn  of 
pious  men.  They  feign  to  meditate  like  a heron  which  remains  in  a 
fixed  position  to  catch  fish.  They  smoke  ganja  and  opium,  and  drink 
bhang  or  hemp  leaf  decoction.  Their  eyes  are  consequently  red.  They 
ask  for  a handful  or  a pinch  of  flour,  food,  shells  and  copper  coins, 
and  entice  the  sons  of  family-men  to  become  their  disciples.  They 
are  recruited  from  labourers  If  anybody  tries  to  study  they  prevent 
him  from  doing  so;  rather  they  preach  that 

which  means  that  it  is  no  use  for  saints  to  clatter  teeth  as  in  study, 
for  even  they  die  who  acquire  knowledge.  The  saints  should  make 


352 


Satyarth  Prakash 


pilgrimages  to  four*  sacred  places,  to  serve  their  brother  saints,  and 
to  think  of  God  Rama.  If  a man  has  not  seen  the  image  of  incarnate 
ignorance,  he  should  see  a Khaki.  They  call  him  or  her  a lad  or  lass 
who  goes  to  them,  although  he  or  she  may  be  as  old  as  their  parents. 

Like  the  Khakis  are  the  Runkharh,  Sunakarh,  Godarhye, 
Sutresain  living  in  groups,  Akali,  Kanphata,  Yogi,  Ougarh,  and  the 
like  sects  of  monks,  who  are  all  of  a piece. 

Pandit  and  Khaki 

Once  upon  a time  a disciple  of  a Khaki  went  to  a well  to  fetch 
v/ater  repeating  ‘Salutation  to  God  Ganesh’  in  oider  to  learn  it. 
There  was  a Pandit  at  the  well.  Finding  him  repeat  the  tormula 
wrongly,  he  told  the  disciple  to  repeat  it  correctly.!  Taking  his  water 
pot,  the  disciple  at  once  went  to  his  teacher  and  said  that  a certain 
Barnman  (Brahmin)  called  his  pronunciation  to  be  wrong.  Where- 
upon the  Khaki  immediately  repaired  to  the  well  and  asked  the 
Pandit  why  he  misled  his  disciple.  “Thou  tail  of  a scoundrel  !”  ex- 
claimed he,  “what  dost  thou  know  ? See,  thou  knowest  but  one  kind 
of  version,  while  I know  three  readings  of  it,  thus 

Paddit — Rev.  Saint,  a subject  of  knowledge  or  science  is  hard  to 
understand.  It  is  not  known  without  study. 

Khaki— Damned,  get  thee  away  ! I have  silenced  all  the 
learned  men  in  a twinkle  of  the  eye  by  means  of  a draught  of  hemp 
leaf  beverage.  The  saints’  mansion  is  spacious.  What  dost  thou, 
vain  fellow  know  of  it  ? 

p — Well,  if  you  had  acquired  some  knowledge,  you  would  not 
have  used  such  a foul  language;  you  would  have  known  all  manners 
of  decency. 

K. — Dost  thou  want  to  be  my  teacher  ? I don’t  want  to  hear 
thy  preaching. 

P. — How  can  you  appreciate  it  ? You  have  no  sense  To  under- 
stand a good  advice,  requires  some  acquaintance  with  knowledge. 

K. — If  a man  has  studied  the  Veda  and  other  scriptures,  but  he 
does  not  reverse  the  saints,  then  you  should  know  it  for  certain  that 
he  knows  nothing. 

P. — Yes,  just  so.  We  seive  the  saints,  but  not  lazy  lubbers  like 
you  Good,  learned,  religious,  benevolent  people  are  called  saints. 

K.— Behold,  we  don’t  put  on  clothes  day  and  night;  we  sit  at 
a fire;  smoke  ganja,  opium  hundreds  of  times;  we  drink  three  pots  of 
hemp  leaf  beverage  daily;  we  eat  the  sausage  of  ganja,  hemp  leaves 
and  dhatura  leaves;  we  swallow  arsenic  and  opium  at  once;  we  drown 
away  cares  and  sorrows  in  intoxication  day  and  night;  we  do  not  care 

♦They  are  Badri  and  Kedar  in  the  north,  Rameshwar  in  the  south,  Jagannath 
in  the  east,  Dwarka  in  the  west. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


353 


a fig  for  the  world;  we  beg  flour  to  make  bread  with  to  live  on;  we 
cough  away  the  whole  night  so  violently  that  a man  cannot  sleep  by 
us.  All  these  powers  and  saintliness  are  found  in  us.  Why  dost  thou 
calumnise  us  ? Beware,  O thou  manikin  of  a learned  man,  if  thou 
dost  tease  us,  we  shall  reduce  thee  to  ashes  ! 

P. — All  these  characteristics  are  of  the  wicked,  ignorant,  and 
foolish  people,  but  not  of  saints.  Listen  to  me,*  he  is  called  a saint 
who  performs  virtuous  and  religious  acts,  is  always  engaged  in  doing 
good  to  others,  has  no  evil  qualities  in  him.  is  learned,  and  benefits 
others  with  good  advice. 

K — Damn’d  your  eye,  what  dost  thou  know  of  the  acts  of 
saints  ? The  thoughts  of  saints  are  too  liberal  for  you  to  grasp.  Do  not 
measure  sword  with  a saint,  mind  you;  or  else  he  will  fell  you  down 
with  a pair  of  tongs,  and  dash  your  brains  out. 

P. — Well,  Khaki,  go  to  your  seat.  Do  not  be  much  angry  with 
me.  You  know  what  kind  of  government  is  at  present.  If  you  beat 
anyone,  you  will  be  apprehended  and  thrown  into  a dungeon  or 
flogged;  or  you  will  be  beaten  in  return  by  others.  What  will  you  do 
then  ? These  are  not  the  characteristics  of  a saint. 

K. — O my  disciple,  let  us  hie  hence  ! What  a great  devil  you 
have  shown  me  ! 

P, — You  have  never  been  in  the  company  of  great  men,  other- 
wise you  would  never  have  been  so  densely  ignorant. 

K. — I am  a great  man  myself.  I have  no  need  of  another  great 

man. 

P. — They  are  unfortunate  who  have  sense  and  pride  like  you. 

The  Khaki  went  away  to  his  seat  and  the  Pandit  also  went  home. 
When  vespers  and  light-show  were  over,  many  Khakis,  considering 
him  to  be  an  old  man,  came  saluting  him  and  sat  down  by  him  after 
prostration  in  reverence  to  him.  The  Khaki  asked  one  of  them  : 
O Follower  of  Rama  Das,  what  hast  thou  read  ? 

Rama  Das—O  Master  1 I have  read  the  Vesnu  Sahasar  Nama  * 

K. — O Gobind  Das  ! What  hast  thou  read  ? 

G.— I have  read  the  Rama  sata  baraj  with  a certain  Khaki. 

Then  Rama  Das  asked  : O Master,  what  have  you  read  ? 

K. — I have  read  the  Gita. 

R.— With  whom  ? 

K. — Damn’d  you  urchin  1 1 never  make  anybody  my  teacher. 
You  know  I lived  in  Parag-rajt  (Allahabad).  I then  never  knew  an 
(akkher)  letter. 

When  I saw  a Pandit  wearing  a long  loin  cloth,  I asked  him 
what  the  name  was  of  a certain  crested  letter.  In  this  way  I have 
never  made  anybody  my  teacher. 

H — \ 


354 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Well,  if  ignorance  does  not  make  its  home  of  such  enemies  of 
knowledge,  where  else  can  it  find  a better  place  to  dwell  in  ? They 
do  nothing  good  but  get  intoxicated,  careless;  quarrel,  eat,  sleep,  strike 
cymbals,  ring  bells  and  jingles,  blow  conches,  keep  fire  kindling,  bathe, 
clean,  wander  about  uselessly  in  all  quarters  It  is  easier  to  melt  a 
stone,  but  to  arouse  these  monks  to  sense  is  next  to  impossible;  for, 
it  is  the  low  castes,  labourers,  peasants,  water-bearers,  who  giving  up 
their  honest  work,  and  bedaubing  their  body  with  ashes,  turn  Vairagis, 
Khakis,  and  other  ascetics.  They  cannot  know  the  importance  of 
knowledge  or  good  company. 

The  secret  formula  of  the  creed  of  the  Nathas  is  *Salutation  to 
Shiva;  of  the  Khakis  Salutation  to  God  Lion;  of  the  Rama-avataris 
Salutation  to  God  Rama  or  to  Sita  and  Rama;  of  the  worshippers  of 
Krishna  Salutation  to  Radha  and  Krishna  or  to  God  Vasudeva; 
of  the  Bengalis  Salutation  to  Gobind  ! They  make  disciples  by 
whispering  these  formulas  into  the  ears  of  a neophyte.  They  also  tell 
him:  O child,  learn  the  formula  of  the  gourd,  which  is  : — 

Can  such  men  ever  have  qualifications  to  be  saints  or  learned 
men,  or  to  do  good  to  the  world  ? The  Khakis  burn  wood  and  cow- 
dung  lumps  day  and  night.  They  burn  away  wood  worth  many  rupees 
in  a month.  If  they  buy  blankets  or  clothes  with  the  price  of  wood 
consumed  in  a month,  they  can  live  at  ease  with  a hundredth  part  of 
their  expense.  But  how  can  they  have  such  sense  ? They  call  them- 
selves ascetics  by  warming  their  body  at  their  ever-kindling  fires.  If 
men  can  become  ascetic  or  “tapaswi”  in  this  way  alone,  the  sylvan 
people  can  be  still  greater  ascetics  than  they.  If  a man  can  be  an 
ascetic  by  keeping  long  matted  hair,  by  besmearing  the  body  with 
ashes,  or  by  painting  the  forehead  with  a sandalwood  mark,  every- 
body can  become  so.  These  men  have  given  up  the  world  outwardly, 
but  they  are  very  selfish  at  heart. 

St  Kabir’s  Religion 

Q. — Are  the  followers  of  Kabir  good? 

A, — No;  they  are  not. 

0.— Why  are  they  not  good?  They  condemn  the  worship  of 
idols  made  of  stone  and  other  substances.  Lord  Kabir  was  born  of 
flowers,  and  turned  a flower  at  the  end  of  his  life!  He  existed  when 
Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Mahadeva  were  not  born.  He  was  so  great  and 
familiar  with  everything  that  he  knew  what  the  Vedas  and  Puranas 
could  not  know.  He  alone  has  shown  man  the  true  path.  I he  secret 
formula  of  his  creed  is  '\Satya  nam  Kabir— O Kabir,  God’s  name 
alone  is  true  or  real. 

* \ I I 

t Water  is  pure,  land  is  pure,  and  a well  is  pure.  Shiva  says  to  Parvati: 
listen,  the  gourd  is  become  pure. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


355 


A.— It  is  not  less  than  idol  worship  to  worship  the  bedstead,  the 
mattress  and  pillow,  sandals,  or  lamp  or  light  which  is  found  among 
them.  Was  Kabir  an  insect  or  bud  that  he  was  born  of  flowers  and 
turned  a flower  at  the  end?  It  may  be  remarked  here  that  what  is 
heard  of  him,  must  be  true.  It  is  like  this. 

Once  upon  a time  there  lived  a weaver  at  Benares.  He  had 
neither  sons  nor  daughters  of  his  own.  It  so  happened  that  when  he 
was  passing  in  a street  in  the  latter  part  of  a night,  he  saw  a child 
born  that  very  night  and  laid  by  the  roadside  in  a basket  of  flowers. 
He  took  the  child  home  and  gave  it  to  his  wife,  who  nursed  it.  When 
it  grew  up  a youth,  he  (Kabir)  followed  the  profession  of  a weaver. 
He  went  to  some  Pandit  to  study  Sanscrit,  but  he  was  insulted  by 
him,  saying,  we  do  not  teach  a weaver.  So  he  went  to  several  Pandits 
one  after  the  other;  but  none  taught  him  anything.  He  then  cons- 
tructed an  irregular  and  incorrect  language  and  preached  to  weavers 
and  other  low  castes.  He  sang  upon  a psaltery,  composed  psalms,  and 
especially  reviled  the  Pandits,  scriptures  and  Vedas.  Some  ignorant 
fellows  fell  into  his  snare.  The  people  canonised  him  after  his 
death.  Whatever  he  composed  during  his  lifetime,  was  studied  by  his 
followers.  The  sound  heard  on  stopping  the  ears,  is  called  by  them 
"^anahat  shabda  siddhanta:  the  doctrine  of  eternal  voice.  They  call  the 
activity  of  the  mind  or  will  as  Surati.  To  engage  it  in  listening  to  the 
eternal  voice  is  called  by  them  the  meditation  on  God,  and  the  person 
who  does  so  is  called  a saint.  Death  cannot  reach  it.  They  put 
a mark  on  the  forehead  like  a lance  and  tie  a rosary  of  wooden 
beads  to  their  neck.  Now,  think  a little  how  spiritual  progress  of 
knowledge  can  be  made  in  this  faith?  It  is  like  a child’s  play  only. 


St.  Nanak’s  Religion 

Q. — 111  the  country  of  the  Punjab  St.  Nanak  taught  a religion. 
He  condemned  idol-worship  and  saved  the  Hindus  from  conversion 
to  Mahomedanism.  He  did  not  turn  a monk  but  remained  a family 
man.  He  taught  the  following  formula  of  his  creed,  which  shows 
that  his  object  was  good  : — 

^ 

I ^ i — Japji  PoLirhi  1. 

— Om.  He  whose  name  is  true,  is  the  Creator,  all  pervading  being, 
free  from  fear  and  hatred,  of  deathless  form,  who  is  not  bound  by 
time  or  birth,  self-glorious.  Repeat  His  name  by  the  favour  of  the 
Teacher.  He  existed  from  all  beginning  of  eons,  exists  in  the  present, 
and,  O Nanak,  will  exist  in  the  future. 

A. — St.  Nanak’s  motive  was  righteous,  but  he  had  no  scholastic 
knowledge  at  all.  However,  he  certainly  knew  the  language  of  the 
country  which  prevails  in  villages.  He  did  not  at  all  know  the  Vedas 


356 


Satyarth  Prakash 


and  other  scriptures  and  Sanscrit.  Had  he  known  the  Sanscrit  language, 
how  could  he  write  the  word  nirbhaya  as  nirbho?  Another  instance 
of  his  unacquaintance  with  Sanscrit  is  a Sanscrit  prayer  composed  by 
him.  He  wanted  to  make  an  attempt  at  Sanscrit  composition.  But 
can  Sanscrit  be  known  without  study?  However,  he  might  have 
passed  as  a Sanscrit  scholar  by  making  those  Sanscrit  verses  among 
the  villagers  who  had  never  heard  a word  of  Sanscrit  before.  He 
would  never  have  done  it  but  for  his  desire  for  popularity,  honour, 
and  fame.  He  must  have  had  a desire  of  honour,  for  else  he 
should  have  preached  in  the  language  which  he  knew.  He  should 
have  said  that  he  never  studied  Sanscrit.  Since  he  had  some  pride,  he 
wished  to  commit  arrogance  for  the  sake  of  honour  andesteem.  It  is 
on  this  account  that  the  calumniation  and  praise  of  the  Vedas  arc  found 
here  and  there  in  his  book;  for,  had  he  not  done  so,  some  one  would 
have  asked  the  meaning  of  the  Vedas,  and  had  he  not  been  able  to 
tell  it,  he  would  have  lost  his  respect.  So  he  would  sometimes  speak 
from  the  first  against  the  Vedas  before  his  disciples.  In  some  places 
he  spoke  in  favour  of  the  Vedas  in  his  book,  for  if  he  had  not  said  well 
of  them,  the  people  would  have  set  him  down  for  an  atheist.  Thus  : — 

^ *if^T  I:?  n 3n%  n 

— Sukhamani,  Porhi  7,  Chowk  8. 

^nq*  ll  -lb.  8,  6. 

It  means  that  Brahma  died  though  versed  in  the  Vedas,  all  the 
four  Vedas  are  tales.  O Nanak,  the  Veda  does  not  know  the  great- 
ness of  a saint.  The  knower  of  the  Brahman  is  himself  the  Great  God. 

Were  the  scholars  of  the  Vedas  no  more  and  dead?  Did  Nanak  and 
others  consider  themselves  to  be  immortal?  Are  they  not  dead?  The 
Veda  is  the  treasury  of  all  knowledge,  but  all  his  chatterings  who  calls 
the  four  Vedas  tales,  are  myths  themselves.  Since  ignorant  men  are 
called  saints,  they  cannot  know  the  worth  of  the  Vedas.  If  St.  Nanak 
had  revered  the  Vedas  only,  his  sect  would  not  have  come  into  exis- 
tence, nor  would  he  have  become  a teacher;  for,  he  did  not  study 
Sanscrit,  and  how  could  he  then  teach  it  to  others  and  make  them  his 
pupils?  It  is  true  that  when  St.  Nanak  lived  in  the  Punjab,  the  coun- 
try was  destitute  of  the  knowledge  of  Sanscrit  and  was  oppressed  by 
the  Mahomedans.  He  saved  some  people  from  Mahomedanism  at 
the  time.  There  were  not  many  followers  of  Nanak  in  his  time;  for, 
it  is  a rule  with  the  ignorant  that  they  make  their  teacher  saint  after 
his  death,  and  then  magnifying  his  greatness  apotheosise  him.  No 
doubt,  St.  Nanak  was  not  a rich  or  noble  man.  But  his  disciples  des- 
cribe him  to  be  a great  saint  and  a very  opulent  man  in  the  Nanak- 
chandrodaya,  Janam-sakhi  and  other  books.  It  is  also  written  there 
that  St.  Nanak  met  Brahma  and  other  gods,  and  had  a long  talk  with 
them,  who  all  honoured  him.  There  was  no  counting  of  the  number 
of  his  horses,  chariots,  elephants,  and  things  studded  with  gold,  silver, 
pearls,  rubies,  and  other  precious  stones.  Now,  what  are  these  things 
but  pure  fiction?  In  this  matter  it  is  the  disciples  to  blame,  and  not 
St.  Nanak. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


357 


Sects  of  Sikhism 

Then  the  Udasi  sect  sprung  from  his  son,  the  Nirmala  sect  follow- 
ing Ram  Das  and  other  teachers,  and  other  sects  established  them- 
selves as  distinct  churches.  They  composed  verses  and  included  them 
in  the  Granth  (Bible  of  the  Sikhs).  No  insertion  of  anybody’s  verses 
took  place  after  Gurn  Gobind  Singh,  their  tenth  teacher.  But  all  the 
small  books  then  extant  were  collected  and  bound  in  one  volume.  They 
wrote  many  verses  after  St.  Nanak,  and  several  of  them  made  various 
kinds  of  mythical  tales  like  those  of  Puranas.  They  set  themselves  up 
as  in  possession  of  the  knowledge  of  God  and  so  claiming  to  be  God 
gave  up  doing  good  works  and  saying  prayer,  a Vedantic  doctrine,  to 
which  their  followers,  the  common  Sikhs,  were  more  and  more  attrac- 
ted, and  which  brought  on  much  deterioration.  On  the  other  hand, 
had  they  practised  the  teachings  of  St.  Nanak  who  wrote  much  of 
devotion  to  and  adoration  of  God,  they  would  have  fared  well.  Now, 
as  they  are,  the  Udasis^  say  that  they  are  superior  to  all  the  rest,  the 
Nirmalas“  claim  the  same  right,  the  Akalis^  and  Sutrasayis'^  assert 
their  superiority  over  others. 

Guru  Gobind  Singh 

Of  these  successors  of  St.  Nanak,  Guru  Gobind  Singh  was  the 
bravest  and  most  valorous.  He  wanted  to  avenge  the  pain  and  torture 
the  Mahomedans  had  inflicted  on  his  ancestors.  But  he  had  no  means 
to  achieve  his  end,  and  the  Mahomedan  power  was  at  its  height.  He 
held  a religious  ceremony  and  gave  out  that  he  was  given  a boon  and 
a sword  by  the  Goddess  who  ordered  him  to  wage  war  againt  the 
Mahomedans  in  which  he  was  to  gain  victory.  Whereupon  many  men 
followed  him.  He  appointed  five  essentials,  each  beginning  with  K, 
to  be  always  observed  after  the  manner  of  the  Warn  Marg  sect,  which 
keeps  five  things  beginning  with  M,  and  of  the  Chakrankit  sect  which 
observes  five  Sanscars  or  ceremonies.  But  his  five  k’s  were  useful  in 
war.  They  are — 1 . the  kesh  or  hair,  which  afford  some  protection 
against  the  blows  of  the  sword  or  club  in  a battle;  2.  the  kangan  or 
quoit,  which  the  Sikhs  keep  on  the  head  round  the  turbans,  the  karha, 
a bracelet  worn  on  the  wrist,  protecting  both  the  hand  and  the  head; 

3.  the  kciclih  or  a pair  of  breeches,  which  protects  and  covers  the 
buttocks  and  which  is  very  convenient  in  running  and  jumping,  as  in 
the  case  of  athletes  in  wrestling  in  the  arena  and  the  acrobats  in  their 
gymnastic  exercises,  guarding  their  vitals  and  offering  no  impediment; 

4.  the  kanga  or  comb,  which  dresses  the  hair;  5.  the  kachoo  or  knife, 
which  is  used  in  a hand-to-hand  fight  with  the  enemy.  Thus,  this 
custom  was  instituted  by  Guru  Gobind  Singh  out  of  his  great  wisdom 
in  consideration  of  those  times.  Now,  the  keeping  of  them  in  these 
days  is  of  no  use.  But  the  Sikhs  regard  these  things  which,  were  useful 
for  the  purpose  of  war,  as  part  and  parcel  of  their  religion. 

Bibliolatry  in  Sikhism 

Though  they  perform  no  idol-worship,  yet  they  worship  their  j 
Granth  (Holy  Writ)  more  idolatrously.  Is  it  not  idolatry  ? Idolatry  is^ 

1.  Recluses.  2.  The  Pure.  3.  Immortals.  4.  Thread- wearers. 


358 


Satyarth  Prakash 


bowing  to  or  worshipping  any  material  object.  They  have  done 
exactly  the  same  thing  as  the  idolaters,  who  have  made  idolatry  a very 
lucrative  business.  Just  as  the  idolaters,  like  so  many  shop-keepers 
exposing  their  things  on  the  stall,  exhibit  their  idols  to  the  people  at 
large  and  receive  presents  to  their  gods;  so  do  the  followers  of  the 
religion  of  St.  Nanak  worship  the  Granth,  allow  it  to  be  worshipped, 
and  receive  presents  to  it.  These  people,  who  follow  the  Granth,  do 
not  respect  the  Vedas  as  much  as  the  idolaters.  It  is  not  improper  to 
say  that  they  have  neither  heard  the  Vedas,  nor  read  them.  What  else 
can  they  do  ? When  the  wise  men  who  are  not  begots  and  perverts, 
hear  or  read  the  Vedas,  they  adopt  the  Vedic  religion,  in  whatever 
sect  they  may  be.  However,  the  Sikhs  have  cast  off  many  absurdities 
in  the  matter  of  eating.  In  the  same  manner,  as  they  have  done  here, 
if  they  give  up  sensuousness  and  wicked  pride  and  promote  the  Vedic 
religion,  they  will  do  a world  of  good. 

Daduism 

2.— Is  the  religion  of  the  sect  of  Dadoo  good  ? 

The  good  religion  is  the  Vedic  path.  If  you  can  embrace  it, 
do  it  at  once  by  all  means,  or  else  you  will  ever  sink  in  error.  Accord- 
ing to  the  faith  in  question,  St.  Dadoo  was  born  in  Guzerat.  After ' 
wards  he  lived  at  Ajmer  near  Jeypore.  He  followed  the  profession  of 
an  oilman.  It  is  a wonder  in  the  world  that  Dadoo  succeeded  in 
getting  himself  worshipped!  Leaving  all  the  teachings  of  the  Vedas 
and  other  Scriptures,  his  followers  believe  salvation  to  be  found  in 
repeating  “Dadoo  Ram”.  When  there  is  none  to  preach  the  truth, 
such  anomalous  things  must  needs  come  into  existence. 

Ram  Saneheeism 

Very  lately,  a faith  called  the  Rama  Sanchi  was  started  at  Shah- 
pura.  The  followers  have  given  up  the  religion  taught  by  the  Vedas 
and  consider  it  better  to  repeat  the  words  “Rama”,  which  in  their 
faith  gives  them  knowledge,  meditation  and  salvation.  But  when 
hunger  oppresses  them,  they  can’t  get  bread  and  sauce  out  of  ‘ Rama 
nama”  (the  name  of  Rama);  for,  food  and  drink  can  only  be  had  from 
the  houses  of  family  men.  These  men  condemn  idol-worships,  but 
they  themselves  have  become  idols,  live  much  in  the  company  of 
women;  for,  God  Rama  cannot  be  happy  without  Goddess  Ramaki 
(the  wife  of  Rama). 

There  was  once  a friar,  Rama  Charan  by  name,  whose  religion 
spread  specially  at  Shahpura  in  the  Mewar  state.  The  followers  regard 
the  muttering  of  “Rama”  as  the  supreme  article  and  doctrine  of  their 
faith.  Their  holy  book  contains  the  teachings  of  St.  Sant  Das  and 
other  friars.  It  has  this : — 

^ xj%  I 

^ W ^51  5TTf  U 

— The  disease  of  doubt  is  cured  when  the  name  of  the  Bodiless  is  re- 
peated. Then  also  the  warrant  of  Death  is  torn  to  pieces  and  the 
Karma  (sin)  removed.  Now,  wise  men  should  think  whether  doubt 
which  is  ignorance,  or  the  order  of  the  heavenly  judge  (Death)  given 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


359 


according  to  the  commission  of  sins,  can  be  cast  off  or  not.  This  faith 
simply  tends  to  make  men  more  sinful  and  waste  their  life.  Now  listen 
to  the  teachings  of  their  chief  teacher,  called  Rama  Churan. 

staiT  gfft  HI?  I 

^ HI?  II 

fHH  fHH  5«Trrf  Hra  Hf  Hg  HaTHT  qiT  I 

TmHTH  Hf  ^ HH  % STIT  II 

Xm  3T5  Hrimf  II 

C\ 

TTH  \ ii 

TTH  qr|  fiTH  ^ ^ HT^If  I cfWr  qr^lr  ii 

x\^  x^^  H Hiq  I 

X\^  ?Tm  q^  rTTTf  \ ^^JX  ^ II 

3;^  f ^ I rT>  ^TTqnft  II 

^ qi^Tf  I xiH  x\^  q>5  "cm  ii 

f ^ ^xf^  qiq  I ^fT  srq  q>>  qiT  q qj^  II 

TT^T  H?rt  q^T  5q?^  ?t  i hh  qi#  ii 

First,  the  book  of  Rama  Cliaran  and  others  shows  us  that  he 
was  a simple  and  artless  clown,  who  was  altogether  illiterate,  or  else 
he  would  not  have  written  such  stuff  and  nonsense.  It  is  their  delusion 
that  the  repetition  of  “Rama”  will  take  olT  the  evil  consequences  of 
their  dark  deeds.  They  thereby  waste  their  and  other  people*s  life. 
Nothing  is  effected,  although  they  may  repeat  Rama  day  and  night. 
They  cannot  thereby  get  rid  of  the  fear  of  a government  peon,  thief, 
raider,  serpent,  scorpion,  gnat  and  so  forth;  much  less  the  fear  of 
death  which  is  tremendously  great.  No  good  results  from  the  mere 
reiteration  of  Rama,  without  speaking  the  truth  and  doing  other 
righteous  acts,  just  as  one’s  mouth  is  not  sweetened  by  repeating  the 
word  sugar.  If  Rama  does  not  hear  them  when  they  repeat  Rama 
twice,  he  will  never  hear  them  if  they  repeat  his  name  all  their  life. 
If  he  hears  at  all,  it  is  useless  to  repeat  it  second  time.  These  people 
have  got  up  this  sham  to  get  their  livelihood  and  to  waste  the  life  of 
others.  It  is  a very  curious  thing  we  hear  and  see  that  they  call  them- 
selves as  the  lovers  of  Rama,  but  their  actions  prove  them  to  be  the 
lovers  of  widows  or  women.  Wherever  the  eye  is  cast,  it  meets  noth- 
ing but  women  surrounding  these  saints.  Had  there  been  no  such 
humbug,  how  could  India  have  fallen  into  its  present  miserable  state  ? 
These  people  give  their  refuse  of  food  to  their  disciples  to  eat  The 
women  prostrate  themselves  at  their  feet  to  salute  them.  The  women 
and  saints  also  meet  in  secluded  places. 

Kurha  Panth 

Their  another  sect  flourishes  at  a village,  called  Kherhapa,  in  the 
Marwar  State.  Its  history  is  that  there  was  a certain  man,  named 
Ram  Das,  a Dherh  by  caste,  who  was  a very  clever  fellow.  He  had 


360 


Satyarth  Prakash 


two  wives.  At  first  he  played  a maniac  and  ate  with  dogs  for  some 
time.  Then  he  became  a follower  of  Kurhapanth,  a sect  of  Warn 
Marg  (left-handed  path).  Then  he  became  a “Kamrhiya”.  He  used 
to  sing  with  his  two  wives.  In  his  rambles  he  came  to  Scethal,  a large 
village  in  the  Jodhpur  state.  There  he  met  Ram  Das,  the  teacher  of 
the  Dherlias,  who  initiated  him  into  the  faith  of  Ram  Deo  (God 
Rama)  and  made  him  his  disciple.  Ram  Das  established  his  head- 
quarters at  Kherhapa  where  his  religion  began  to  spread  in  the 
neighbourhood,  and  the  religion  of  Ram  Charan  spread  in  Shahpura. 

Ram  Charan 

The  history  of  Ram  Charan  is  that  he  was  originally  a shop- 
keeper (baniya)  of  Jaipur.  He  took  the  order  of  sainthood  from  a 
saint  at  the  village,  called  Dantrha,  and  made  him  his  teacher.  Then 
he  repaired  to  Shahpura  to  fix  his  headquarters.  Frauds  succeed 
soon  with  simple  folks.  This  faith  took  a deep  root  in  the  heart  of 
the  people  of  the  neighbourhood. 

These  people  convert  persons  according  to  the  teachings  of  Ram 
Charan  above  mentioned.  They  make  no  distinction  between  high 
and  low  castes.  They  recruit  their  ranks  from  the  Brahmins  down  to 
the  slum  population.  They  are  still  “Kunda-panthi”,  for  they  eat  in 
an  earthen  pot.  They  eat  the  refuse  of  saints’  food.  They  estrange 
people  from  the  Vedic  religion,  from  serving  parents  and  other  worldly 
affairs,  in  order  to  convert  them  to  their  sect.  They  regard  “Ram 
Nam”  (the  name  of  Rama)  as  the  supreme  article  of  faith  and  as  the 
secret  Veda.  The  repetition  of  Rama  obliterates  the  taint  of  the 
sins  committed  in  innumerable  pre-incarnations.  There  is  no  salvation 
of  anybody  without  it.  They  call  him  as  a true  teacher  who  practises 
the  utterance  of  the  name  of  Rama  along  with  his  inbreath  and  out- 
breath.  They  look  upon  a true  teacher  as  greater  than  God.  They 
contemplate  on  his  image,  and  drink  the  washings  of  saints’  feet. 
When  a disciple  goes  far  off,  he  keeps  by  him  the  nails  and  hairs  of 
his  teacher’s  beard,  the  washings  of  which  he  drinks  daily.  They  pay 
more  respect  to  the  books  containing  the  teachings  of  Ram  Das  and 
Har-ram  Das  than  to  the  Vedas.  They  go  round  those  books  and 
bow  to  them  eight  times.  If  the  teacher  is  hard  by,  they  kneel  and 
bow  to  him.  They  initiate  the  same  formula  of  creed  of  Ram  Rama 
to  men  and  women  and  believe  in  the  efficacy  of  the  muttering  of  the 
Name.  Studying  is  sin  with  them.  Their  sacred  book  says  : — 

gm  'T?'  q?  x^  ii 

— Scholarship  eats  dirt,  sin  spreads  from  east  to  west,  and  man 
becomes  worthless  without  remembering  Rama. 

Such  is  the  nature  of  their  books.  They  teach  that  a woman 
incurs  sin  in  serving  her  husband  but  gets  merit  in  serving  the  teacher 
or  saint.  They  reject  the  social  distinction  of  the  Brahmanas,  Ksha- 
triyas,  Vaishyas  and  Shudras.  If  a Brahmin  does  not  embrace  their 
religion,  they  look  down  upon  him  as  a low  easte  and  bastard 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


361 


(chandal)  ; but  if  he  joins  their  ranks,  they  think  him  to  be  the  best. 
They  now  do  not  believe  in  the  in-carnation  doctrine,  but  accept  the 
teaching  of  Ram  Charan  related  to  it,  which  is  given  before,  viz  , 
God  incarnates  for  the  sake  of  His  devotees  and  saints  : 

These  doctrines  and  other  delusive  deeds  of  theirs  are  all  pre- 
judicial to  thu  true  interests  of  Aryavarta.  A word  is  enough  to  the 
wise. 


Gosainism 

Q. — Is  not  the  faith  of  the  Gosains  of  Gokal  very  good  ? See 
how  they  enjoy  their  enormous  wealth  ! Can  it  be  done  without  the 
Divine  hand  in  it  ? 

A — This  wealth  has  gone  to  them  from  the  pockets  of  house- 
holders. It  is  not  earned  by  the  Gosains 

Q. — Hollo  ! Is  it  not  got  from  the  influence  of  the  Gosains, 
for  why  is  it  not  found  with  others  ? 

A.—U  others  practise  the  same  frauds  and  tricks,  they  will  come 
by  it  without  the  least  shadow  of  doubt.  Also,  if  anybody  plays  a 
greater  devil,  he  can  amass  more  wealth. 

Q — Good  God  ! What  imposition  is  in  their  conduct  ? It  is  all 
the  work  after  heaven  (Goloke). 

A. — It  is  not  the  work  of  heaven,  it  is  the  tricking  of  the 
Gosains.  If  it  is  the  work  of  heaven,  it  must  be  like  it.  This  faith 
is  originated  in  Telangana  in  the  Madras  Presidency.  There  was  once 
a Brahmin  of  Telangana,  named  Luchhman  Bhatta,  who  after  his 
marriage  left  his  parents  and  wife  from  some  cause  or  other  and  went 
to  Benares  where  he  took  the  orders  of  the  monks  or  Sannyasis.  He 
told  lies  that  he  was  not  married.  His  parents  happened  to  learn  that 
he  turned  a hermit  at  Benares,  immediately  went  there  and  asked  the 
man  who  ordinated  him  why  he  initiated  him  into  the  order  of  hermits. 
Here  is  his  young  wife,  who  says  that  if  he  does  not  send  her  husband 
back  with  her,  he  should  also  receive  her  into  the  order  of  friars. 
Then  he  called  the  Brahmin  and  said  that  he  was  a big  liar.  He 
should  leave  olT  the  hermit’s  order  and  return  to  the  family  life,  for  he 
got  into  the  order  by  telling  lies.  He  accordingly  did  it,  that  is,  giving 
up  the  holy  order,  he  accompanied  his  wife  home.  Now,  the  very 
foundation  of  this  religion  was  laid  upon  lie  and  cheat.  When  he 
reached  his  native  country,  his  caste  did  not  receive  him  into  its  pale  so 
he  left  it  and  betook  himself  to  travelling.  When  going  through  the 
forest  called  Chainparanya,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Charnar  garh 
near  Benaras,  he  came  upon  a child  left  in  the  forest  by  somebody  who 
had  burnt  the  wood  to  a great  distance  from  the  spot;  for,  he  evidently 
thought  that  if  he  did  not  set  fire  to  the  surrounding  woods  some 
beast  would  there  and  then  destroy  the  child.  Luchhman  Bhatta  and 
his  wife  took  the  child  and  adopted  him  as  their  son  and  settled  at 
Benares. 


362 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Ballabha  Acharya 

When  he  (Ballabha)  grew  up,  his  parents  died.  He  used  to  study 
from  his  infancy  upto  youth  at  Benares.  He  then  went  away  to  the 
temple  of  a Vishnu  Swami  and  became  his  disciple.  A quarrel  arising 
with  the  authorities,  he  returned  to  Benares  where  he  became  a friar 
(Sanyasi).  Now  there  lived  at  Benares  an  outcaste  Brahmin,  similarly 
circumstanced.  He  had  a young  daughter.  So  he  proposed  to  the 
Brahmin  youth  to  give  up  his  holy  order  and  marry  his  daughter.  He 
did  it  accordingly.  Why  should  not  a boy  do  the  same  thing  as  was 
done  by  his  father?  He  went  with  his  wife  to  the  same  temple  of 
Vishnu  Swami  where  he  was  at  first  ordained  as  a friar.  But  he  was 
turned  away  on  account  of  his  being  married. 

Then  he  practised  imposition  with  all  his  tricks  at  Braja,  which 
is  the  home  of  ignorance,  and  where  he  began  to  spread  false  ideas.  He 
gave  out  that  Lord  Krishna  met  and  ordered  him  to  send  to  Goloke 
(heaven)  those  divine  souls  which  had  come  to  the  world  (the  place 
of  death)  from  heaven,  after  purifying  them  with  the  grace  of  God. 
Thus  telling  pleasing  things  to  the  ignorant,  he  succeeded  in  securing 
84  persons  as  his  disciples.  He  made  the  following  verses  and  wove 
some  secret  in  them.  Gopal’s  1000  names: 

—Lord  Krishna  is  my  asylum.  Offering  to  Klim  Krishna,  the  favou- 
rite of  milk-maids! 

Sankalpa  (Offering) 

These  are  two  common  verses.  But  the  next  verse  belongs  to 
the  ceremony  of  God’s  grace  and  donation  : 

— Lord  Krishna  is  my  asylum.  Being  enveloped  in  immense  darkness 
of  pain  and  suffering  got  up  from  severance  from  Krishna  for  illimi- 
table time  of  thousands  of  years,  I sacrifice  to  Lord  Krishna  my  body, 
senses,  life,  heart  with  its  tendencies,  wife,  son,  honour,  wealth,  and 
relations  with  the  soul.  Krishna,  I am  thy  slave! 

By  means  of  these  verses  the  priests  of  this  faith  make  their 
male  and  female  votaries  olfer  things.  In  the  verse  Klim  Krishnaya 
the  word  Klim  belongs  to  the  Tantra  scriptures.  It  shows  that  this 
faith  of  Ballabha  is  a sect  of  the  faith  of  Warn  Marg,  and  so  the 
Gosains  indulge  much  in  associating  with  women.  Gopi  jam  ballabh 
means  the  favourite  of  the  gopis  or  milk-maids.  Was  Krishna  a 
favourite  of  the  milk  maids  only  and  not  of  others?  The  favourite 
of  women  is  that  man  who  indulges  in  the  enjoyment  of  women’s 
society.  Was  Lord  Krishna  so?  Sahasra  parivatsara  : The  number- 
ing of  tJiousands  of  years  is  useless,  for  Ballabha  and  his  disciples  are 
not  omniscient.  Is  man’s  separation  from  Krishna  only  a thousand 
years  old?  Why  did  not  God  come  to  purify  and  receive  the  heavenly 
souls  till  then,  that  is,  when  there  was  neither  the  religion  nor  the 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


363 


birth  of  Ballabha?  The  words  tapa  and  klesha  are  both  synonymous. 
One  of  them  should  have  been  used,  not  both.  The  word  anant  is 
useless,  for  if  the  word  thousands  is  used  the  word  anant  (endless)  can- 
not be  used  and  vice  versa.  If  man  is  covered  with  sin  for  illimitable 
time,  then  the  existence  of  Ballabha  is  useless,  for  the  illimitable  time 
does  not  end.  Why  do  the  priests  make  the  disciples  give  the  organs 
of  the  body,  life  and  internal  sense,  and  their  wives,  houses,  sons, 
wealth  to  Krishna?  For,  being  content  or  having  all  his  desires  satis- 
fied, Krishna  cannot  wish  to  have  the  bodies  and  other  property  of 
others.  Also,  the  body  and  its  organs  cannot  be  given  away,  for  in 
offering  the  body  which  contains  all  the  tissues  and  organs  from  head 
to  foot,  how  can  you  offer  the  good  and  bad  things  such  as  filth  and 
urine?  Since  all  actions  are  either  meritorious  or  sinful,  the  offering 
of  them  to  Lord  Krishna  will  make  him  reap  their  fruits.  They  merely 
name  Krishna,  but  really  they  cause  offerings  to  be  made  for  them- 
selves. It  is  the  filth  and  urine  in  the  body  which  are  offered  to  the 
Gosains.  Do  they  want  to  eat  what  is  sweet  and  spit  away  what  is 
bitter?  It  is  written  in  their  scriptures  that  offerings  should  be  made 
to  the  Gosains,  and  not  to  the  persons  of  other  faiths.  It  is  a scheme 
of  selfishness,  of  robbery  of  the  wealth  and  property  of  others,  and  of 
the  destruction  of  the  Vedic  religion.  Here  is  Ballabha’s  imposture  : — 

fT?«TT5T  II 

II 

ffjft’TSn;  ?»T5T3n5^  ?T  II 

C 

OrtftfH:  I 

^ *rcf  II 

^rTI'T^TTaR^T  ^ II 

ff  i 

7r^7>T5Tt  !T«II  SifiTWTfiT  II 

frm  Tfm  afr:  i 

n»ITr7»T'»R>7mt  n'>I5>7Tfe«r«T’T»T  II 

S»  -ON 

These  verses  are  given  in  the  books  of  secret  doctrines  of  the 
Gosains.  They  contain  the  gist  of  their  faith.  They  may  be  asked, 
as  it  is  now  nearly  5,000  years  since  the  death  of  Lord  Krishna,  how 
could  he  come  at  dead  of  night  in  the  month  of  Shravana  (July-August) 
to  visit  Ballabha?  All  the  sins  of  the  soul  and  evils  of  the  body  of 
that  disciple  are  done  away  with,  who  makes  an  offering  of  all  his 
property.  This  is  Ballabha's  imposition  to  mislead  ignorant  persons 
and  entice  them  into  his  faith.  If  all  the  mental  and  bodily  evils  of 


364 


Satyarth  Prakash 


the  Gosain’s  male  and  female  disciples  are  removed,  why  do  they  suffer 
from  diseases,  poverty  and  other  evils?  Those  defects  or  evils  are  of 
five  kinds:  1,  natural  defects  such  as  are  produced  from  desire,  anger, 
and  other  passions;  2 many  sins  committed  in  a certain  time  and  place; 
3.  what  the  people  call  the  eating  of  forbidden  food  and  those  shown 
by  the  Vedas  as  falsehood,  and  the  like  acts;  4.  social  evils,  which  are 
produced  from  a bad  company,  such  as  theft,  adultery,  committing 
incest  upon  the  mother,  sister,  daughter,  daughter-in-law,  the  teacher’s 
wife;  5.  those  which  are  produced  from  contact,  that  is,  touching 
those  which  are  forbidden  to  be  touched  These  sins  should  be  dis- 
regarded by  the  followers  of  the  Gosains;  that  is  to  say,  they  are  at 
liberty  to  act  in  these  matters.  There  is  no  other  way  to  get  rid  of 
the  evils  than  the  faith  of  the  Gosains  So  the  disciples  of  the  Gosains 
are  not  to  enjoy  any  thing  whatever  without  offering  it  to  the  Gosain, 
their  religious  teacher.  It  is  on  this  account  that  their  disciples  offer 
to  their  teacher  their  wives,  daughters,  daughters-in-law,  and  also  their 
wealth  and  other  property.  But  the  rule  of  offering  is  that  a man 
should  not  see  his  wife  till  she  is  offered  to  the  service  of  the  Gosain, 
They  can  enjoy  their  things  after  their  offering;  for,  a thing  cannot 
be  offered  when  once  enjoyed.  Therefore,  in  all  undertakings  all  things 
should  be  offered  at  first  to  the  Gosain.  The  wife  and  others  should 
be  accepted  after  offering  them  to  Gosain  In  the  same  way, 
all  things  should  be  used  after  offering  them  to  God.  The  male 
and  famale  followers  of  the  Gosains  are  forbidden  from  hearing  the 
teachings  of  other  faiths  and  from  adopting  them.  This  peculiarity 
is  very  well  known  of  their  disciples.  After  offering  all  things,  one 
should  think  of  them  as  belonging  to  God.  Then,  just  as  all  waters 
falling  into  the  Ganges  become  one  with  it,  so  is  the  case  of  all  good 
qualities  in  their  faith  and  of  all  defects  in  other’s  faith.  So  the  dis- 
ciples should  talk  of  merits  of  the  Gosain’s  faith  Now  see  that  the 
faith  of  the  Gosain  is  more  selfish  than  others’.  Let  the  Gosains  be 
asked : Since  you  do  not  know  even  a single  attiibute  of  the  Supreme 
Being,  how  can  you  obtain  for  your  male  and  female  followers  their 
relation  to  God?  If  you  say  that  you  are  Brahman,  and  the  affinity 
with  you  is  the  affinity  with  God,  then  you  have  not  a bit  of  attribute, 
character  and  nature  of  God.  Have  you  become  Brahman  merely 
for  the  sake  of  pleasure  and  enjoyment?  Well,  you  purify  your  male 
and  female  followers  by  getting  them  offered  to  you.  Are  not  your 
wife,  daughter,  daughter-in-law,  and  other  relations  impure  from  their 
being  unoffered?  You  believe  an  unoffered  thing  as  impure.  Why 
are  you  not  impure  being  born  of  them?  You,  therefore,  should  offer 
your  wife,  daughter,  daughter-in-law  and  other  dear  ones  to  the  people 
of  other  faiths.  If  you  refuse  to  do  so,  you  should  give  up  the  cus- 
tom of  making  your  disciples  offer  their  wives  and  things  to  you. 
Well,  what  is  done  is  done  But  henceforth  you  should  give  up  your 
frauds,  falsehood,  and  other  evils;  and  embracing  the  beautiful  Vedic 
path  appointed  by  God,  enjoy  the  human  life  by  acquiring  virtue, 
wealth,  satisfaction,  and  salvation. 

Also,  the  Gosains  call  their  faith  the  '‘Path  of  Health”  (pushti), 
that  is  to  say,  it  is  a way  to  eating,  drinking,  being  merry  or  healthy, 
and  indulging  to  the  heart’s  content  in  sports  and  sexual  intercourse 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indion  Religions 


365 


with  women.  It  may  be  asked  of  them,  since  they  sometimes  die  of 
very  painful  and  lingering  maladies  such  as  cancer  and  other  diseases, 
the  evil  of  which  they  themselves  know,  why  should  their  faith,  to 
tell  the  truth,  be  not  called  the  way  of  leprosy?  For,  as  a leper  dies 
bewaling,  the  tissues  of  his  body  mortifying  and  falling  off,  so  is  the 
state  of  these  men  to  all  intents  and  purposes.  Therefore,  it  can  be 
properly  called  a way  to  hell;  for,  pain  is  called  hell  and  pleasure 
heaven.  In  like  manner,  they  fraudulently  ensnare  simple  and  artless 
folks.  Assuming  the  appearance  of  Lord  Krishna,  they  set  themselves 
up  for  the  Lord  of  all.  They  say  : “We  have  taken  on  flesh,  as  the 
Divine  Ideal  of  humanity,  for  the  salvation  of  those  heavenly  souls 
that  have  descended  on  the  earth.  Until  they  accept  our  teaching, 
they  cannot  obtain  the  heaven  (Goloke),  where  Lord  Krishna  alone 
is  man  and  all  the  rest  are  women.”  Splendid!  Excellent  is  your 
faith!  AH  the  disciples  of  the  Gosains  will  be  turned  to  milkmaids! 
Now,  ponder  here.  Since  the  man  who  has  two  wives,  suffers  a 
great  deal,  how  immense  will  be  the  misery  of  the  place  where  there  is 
only  one  man  and  millions  of  women  to  hang  upon  him?  Where  can 
be  the  end  of  his  troubles?  If  you  urge  that  Lord  Krishna  has  suffi- 
cient virility  to  satisfy  all  the  women,  then  the  wife  of  the  Gosain, 
who  is  called  ‘ the  Lady”  (Swamini),  must  have  equal  heat,  for  she  is 
his  better  half.  As  the  lewdness  or  sexual  po\^er  of  man  and  woman 
is  here  either  equal,  or  woman  has  more  carnality,  why  should  they 
not  have  it  likewise  in  heaven?  If  it  is  so,  she  must  often  quarrel 
with  other  rival  women,  for  rivalry  is  very  great  among  women.  Also, 
the  Goloke  (paradise)  must  be  a hell  in  comparison  with  heaven.  In 
other  words,  the  condition  of  the  paradise  must  be  like  that  of  a 
debauchee  who  is  afflicted  with  such  painful  diseases  as  cancer  and 
the  like.  Fie!  Away  with  such  a paradise,  than  which  the  earth  or 
mortal  region  is  much  better!  If  the  Gosain  (teacher),  who  considers 
himself  to  be  Lord  Krishna  and  cohabits  with  many  women,  and  so  is 
afflicted  with  cancer,  syphilis  and  other  venereal  diseases  and  suffers 
much  pain;  I say,  if  the  Gosain  or  the  vicegerent  of  Lord  Krishna  is 
not  exempt  from  disease  and  pain,  how  can  Lord  Krishna,  the  Lord 
of  Paradise  (Goloke),  be  not  afflicted  with  disease?  If  not,  why  his 
vicegerent,  the  Gosain,  is  attacked  with  disease? 

Q. — Diseases  affect  him  from  incarnating  on  the  earth  for  guid- 
ing the  people  in  their  affairs;  but  it  is  not  so  in  the  Goloke  or  para- 
dise; for,  there  is  no  disease  and  no  pain  there. 

A, — Blioge  rogabhayam — There  is  a danger  of  disease  in  sen- 
suousness. Do  the  millions  of  Lord  Krishna’s  wives  give  birth  to 
children  there?  If  they  do,  do  they  beget  male  or  female  children  only 
or  both?  If  they  beget  daughters  only,  to  whom  are  they  married? 
For,  there  is  none  but  Lord  Krishna.  If  there  are  other  men  besides 
Krishna,  your  assertion  falls  to  the  ground.  If  you  say  that  sons  only 
are  born  there,  the  same  difficulty  will  then  present  itself,  namely, 
where  and  to  whom  are  they  married?  Do  they  manage  it  among 
themselves?  Or,  are  there  sons  and  daughters  of  other  people  in  the 
Goloke?  In  that  case  your  position  that  there  is  but  one  man,  who  is 
Lord  Krishna,  is  contradicted.  If  you  say  that  there  is  no  child  born 


366 


Satyarth  Prakash 


there,  then  the  defect  of  impotency  will  be  proved  in  Lord  Krishna, 
and  barrenness  in  the  women  Well,  is  it  the  paradise  or  the  camp  of 
the  wives  and  concubines  of  the  Emperor  of  Delhi?  Now,  it  is  not 
right  that  the  Gosains  should  make  their  male  and  female  disciples 
offer  their  person,  will,  and  wealth;  for,  the  body  is  given  away  at  the 
time  of  marriage  to  the  husband  or  wife;  then  the  will  cannot  be 
given  to  others;  the  body  can  be  properly  offered  with  the  will.  If 
the  body  is  offered  without  the  consent  of  will,  it  becomes  adultery. 
As  to  wealth,  it  falls  under  the  same  category;  for,  nothing  can  be 
donated  without  willingness.  The  motive  of  the  Gosains  is  that  their 
disciples  should  earn,  and  they  should  enjoy.  All  the  Gosains  of  the 
sect  of  Ballabha  are  not  as  yet  re-admitted  into  their  original  Tailanga 
Brahmin  caste.  If  anybody  gives  his  daughter  in  marriage  to  them 
out  of  ignorance  or  by  mistake,  he  is  turned  out  of  the  caste  and  so 
becomes  reprobate;  for,  they  are  excommunicated  and  they  spend 
their  whole  life  in  ignorance  and  indolence. 

Also,  mark  their  conduct!  Whenever  any  body  invites  a Gosain 
to  his  house,  he  goes  there  and  sits  down  like  a wooden  doll,  neither 
speaking  nor  moving.  Poor  fellow,  how  can  he  speak,  since  he  is 
ignorant?  MurJdtanam  balam  maumn.  For,  the  strength  of  the 
ignorant  lies  in  silence.  If  he  speaks,  his  stupidity  will  be  discovered 
But  he  gazes  at  women  with  fixed  attention  She  is  considered  lucky 
who  is  marked  by  the  Gosain.  Her  husband,  brother,  relatives, 
mother,  father  become  much  pleased  at  it.  There  all  the  women  touch 
the  feet  of  the  Gosain  in  making  a bow  to  him.  He  presses  with  his 
foot  the  finger  of  the  woman  whom  he  falls  in  love  with  or  fixes  his 
eyes  upon.  The  woman,  her  husband  and  other  relations  thank  their 
stars  for  this  favour  of  his.  Her  husband  and  the  relatives  press  her 
to  go  to  him  to  do  the  ‘service  of  his  feet  (to  he  with  hiai).’  If  it 
happens  that  her  husband  and  relatives  are  not  willing  to  send  her  to 
him,  he  accomplishes  his  end  by  means  of  pimps  and  panders,  who, 
properly  speaking,  are  found  in  abundance  in  the  Gosain’s  temples 
and  with  whom  he  is  ever  surrounded  Now  listen,  how  they  play 
the  devil  to  beg.  They  beg  thus : O votary,  bring  a present  to  the 
Gosain,  the  lady,  the  infante,  the  infanta,  the  major  domo,  the  guard, 
the  singer,  and  the  idol  God.  These  fellows  fatten  themselves  upon 
the  substance  they  take  by  cheating  simpletons  by  means  of  these 
seven  shops,  as  it  were,  to  their  heart’s  content.  When  a disciple  of 
the  Gosain  is  on  the  point  of  death,  the  latter  puts  his  foot  upon  his 
breast,  and  pockets  what  he  gets  thereby.  Does  it  not  look  like  the 
duty  of  undertakers  (Mahabrahmanas),  coffin  bearers,  and  sextons? 
Some  disciples  invite  the  Go'^ain  to  minister  at  the  marriage  of  their 
sons  and  daughters. 

Serving  Gosains 

Some  disciples  serve  a Gosain  at  his  bathing  with  a saffron 
preparation  with  which  women  rub  his  body.  Then  men  and  women, 
specially  females,  put  a sitting  board  in  a large  vessel  and  wash  him. 
When  he  puts  on  a yellow  silk  cloth  on  his  lions  and  comes  out  of 
the  bath  room  on  his  sandals,  he  casts  off  his  nether  garment  or  cloth 


R‘’f  itition  and  Advocition  of  Indian  Religions 


367 


wrapper  in  the  same  vessel,  then  his  disciples  drink  his  washings 
These  followers  then  give  him  to  chew  a betel  fold  or  pellet  in  which 
they  put  nice  spices  and  nuts  A part  of  it  he  swallows  an  1 the 
residue  he  spits  in  a silver  plate  which  an  attendant  holds  to  his 
mouth.  This  spitted  and  chewed  betel  is  distributed  as  a holy  food 
to  be  eaten  by  the  disciples,  (t  is  called  the  special  “favour”  (prasadi). 
Now  think  what  kind  of  people  are  they  ! Stupidity  and  wickedness 
cannot  go  farther.  Many  of  the  Gosains  receive  offerings  (samarpan). 
Others  eat  at  the  hands  of  the  Vaishnavas  or  worshippers  of  Vishnu, 
but  not  of  others  ; while  others  do  not  take  food  touched  by  them. 
They  wash  even  the  fuel  wood  offered  to  them.  But  if  flour,  molasses, 
sugar,  clarified  butter  and  other  foodstuffs  be  washed,  they  become 
unclean.  Poor  fellows,  if  they  wash  them,  the  food  articles  will  be 
destroyed  or  lost  to  them.  They  say  that  they  spend  much  money  in 
their  God’s  decoration,  singing,  enjoyment  ; but,  properly  speaking, 
these  things  they  enjoy  themselves.  To  tell  the  truth,  they  commit 
many  horrible  and  heinous  sins.  For  instance,  on  the  occasion  of 
Carnival  (holi)  or  Saturr)alia,  they  squirt  water  by  a syringe  on  the 
private  parts  of  women.  Though  to  sell  milk  and  curd  is  forbidden 
to  a Brahmin,  yet  they  do  it. 

Q. — The  Gosain  never  sits  at  a shop  openly  in  a market  to  sell 
bread,  soup,  porridge,  vegetables,  peas,  sweetmeat  balls  and  other  kinds 
of  food,  but  he  gives  away  leaf-dishes  of  food  in  lieu  of  pay  to  his 
servants  who  sell  them. 


Sale  of  Milk  Forbidden 

A. — If  he  gave  them  money  in  monthly  pay,  why  would  they 
take  dishes  of  food  ? The  Gosain  gives  soup,  boiled  rice,  and  other 
food  to  his  attendants  in  lieu  of  pay,  and  they  take  the  food  to  the 
maikct  to  sell.  If  the  Gosain  had  sold  the  things  himself,  the  Brah- 
mans, who  are  his  servants,  would  have  escaped  the  blame  of  selling 
milk,  and  he  alone  would  have  been  affected  with  the  sin  of  selling 
milk.  First  he  fell  into  the  sin  and  then  he  has  been  the  occassion  of 
others  falling  into  it.  But  at  some  places,  as  the  Nathdwara  and  other 
temples,  the  Gosains  also  sell  these  forbidden  foods.  It  is  the  duly  of 
the  low  caste  to  sell  milk,  but  not  of  the  high.  Such  persons  have 
brought  on  the  downfall  of  India. 


Swami  Narayanism 

Q. — What  do  you  think  of  Swami  Narayana’s  religion  ? 

—As  is  the  Small-pox  Goddless,  so  is  the  ass,  her  vehicle  (that 
is,  both  are  bad).  Swami  Narayana’s  imposition  is  similar  to  the 
Gosain’s  pious  frauds  in  swindling  other  people  to  take  their  money. 
Listen  to  his  history. 

Once  upon  a time  there  was  a Brahmin,  named  Sahajanand,  at 
a village  near  Ayodhya.  Being  a celebate,  he  took  to  wandering  in 


368 


Satyarth  Prakash 


the  countries  of  Guzerat,  Cattiawar,  Kuch-bhuj.  He  saw  that  that  part 
of  the  country  was  full  of  ignorant,  simple  and  artless  people,  who  can 
be  converted  to  any  religion  of  his  as  he  liked.  There  he  secured  two 
or  three  disciples,  who  unanimously  gave  out  that  Sahajanand  was  an 
incarnation  and  great  sage.  He  showed  his  divine  form  having  four 
hands  to  his  disciples.  Some  time  after  his  disciples  asked  a rich 
landlord  of  the  Cattiawar,  called  Dadakhachar,  the  owner  of  Gurday, 
if  he  wanted  to  see  God  Narayana  quadrumanus,  they  would  pray 
to  Sahajanand  to  favour  him.  He  replied  : What  can  be  beter  than 
that  ? He  was  a simple  man. 

Sahajanand  put  a crown  on  the  head  and  held  up  a conch  and 
a discus  in  his  hands,  while  another  man  behind  him  took  a mace  and 
a lotus  in  his  hands  which  he  put  forth  from  under  the  armpits  of 
Sahajanand,  and  thus  gave  him  the  appearance  of  the  quadrumane 
Deity.  The  disciples  ot  Sahajanand  instructed  him  to  cast  his  eyes 
only  once  at  the  Deity  and  then  quickly  shut  them  and  come  back  by 
a previously  arranged  passage.  If  he  looked  at  him  for  a longer  time, 
the  Deity  would  be  angry.  They  dreaded  in  their  mind  lest  the  land- 
lord should  detect  their  sleight  of  hand.  They  then  took  him  to  a 
dark  room,  where  Sahajanand  stood  dressed  in  a gold-laced  and  shin- 
ing silk  garment.  The  disciples  illumined  the  room  all  of  a sudden 
with  a lantern.  When  Dadakhachar  looked  into  the  room,  he  saw  a 
quadrumanus  figure.  The  light  was  then  withdrawn.  They  all  pros- 
trated themselves  to  bow  to  the  Deity  and  then  withdrew  by  another 
passage,  where  they  took  care  to  enter  into  conversation  with  him, 
congratulating  him  on  his  good  luck,  and  asked  him  to  become  a dis- 
ciple of  the  Lord.  He  consented  to  be  so.  When  he  came  to  a room 
outside,  he  found  Sahajanand  in  a different  dress,  seated  on  a mattress. 
The  disciples  told  him  that  the  Lord  was  present  there  in  another 
appearance.  Thus  Dadakhachar  was  entrapped  in  their  snares.  Then- 
ceforward this  new  faith  took  a deep  root  in  the  soil,  for  he  was  a 
very  rich  landlord.  Having  got  a permanent  footing,  Sahajanand 
took  to  itinerent  preaching.  He  converted  many  persons  to  be  monks 
ot  his  order,  and  sometimes  made  a monk  senseless  by  rubbing  the 
nerves  of  his  throat  and  then  gave  out  that  he  brought  about  his 
trance.  Such  frauds  of  his  caught  the  simple  and  artless  folks  of  the 
Cattiawar  in  his  trap.  After  his  death,  his  disciples  practised  frauds 
and  made  a mountain  of  a mole-hill.  His  case  reminds  us  of  a story. 

Nose-Cuts 

Once  upon  a time  a thief  was  caught  in  the  act,  and  was  punish- 
ed by  the  judge  with  the  cutting  ot  his  nose.  When  his  nose  was  cut 
off,  he  began  to  dance,  sing,  and  laugh.  The  people  asked  him  why 
he  laughed.  He  replied  that  the  cause  is  beyond  his  power  of  expres- 
sion. They  again  asked  what  kind  of  thing  it  was.  He  answered  that 
it  was  the  most  marvellous  thing  indeed  he  had  ever  seen.  They 
requested  him  to  tell  it  out.  He  said  that  the  quadrumanus  Deity 
Narayan  himself  stood  before  him,  whose  sight  enraptured  him  be- 
yond measure,  and  so  he  danced,  sang,  and  thanked  h\s  stars  that  he 
was  witnessing  the  Deity  with  his  own  eyes.  They  asked  him  why 
they  dJd  not  see  the  J:>}ety.  He  replied  that  their  noses  shut  Him  out 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


369 


from  their  view.  If  they  got  their  noses  out  off,  they  would  see  Him, 
but  not  otherwise.  Some  one  of  the  crowd  thought  that  he  should 
see  the  Deity  even  at  the  expense  of  the  nose.  So  he  asked  the  nose- 
less fellow  to  cut  off  his  nose  and  show  him  God  Narayan.  He  cut 
olT  his  nose  and  whispered  into  his  ear  that  he  should  say  the  same  as 
he  had  done,  or  else  the  world  would  laugh  at  both  of  them.  He 
thought  that  it  was  impossible  to  get  the  nose  back,  so  it  was  proper 
to  follow  the  man.  Accordingly  he,  too,  began  to  dance,  hop,  sing, 
play  upon  an  instrument,  laugh  and  cry  out  that  he  also  saw  the  Deity. 
In  like  manner,  one  thousand  men  joined  the  noseless  order,  which 
made  much  noise  in  the  world.  They  called  their  order  the  Seers  of 
God.  Some  ignorant  king  invited  them.  When  the  king  went  to 
them,  they  were  overjoyed  and  began  to  dance,  frisk,  and  laugh.  His 
Majesty  asked  them  what  the  matter  was.  They  replied  that  they  saw 
God  Narayan  himself  ? fhe  king  asked,  why  don’t  I see  Him  V The 
Narayan  or  God  seers  said,  as  long  as  you  have  the  nose,  you  will  not 
see  Him.  When  you  get  the  nose  cut  ofl',  God  Narayan  will  be  seen 
by  you  in  His  full  power. 

The  king  thought  it  to  be  right.  So  he  ordered  an  astrologer 
to  find  out  an  auspicious  time  to  cut  the  nose  off.  The  astrologer 
said  : Very  well,  O Giver  of  food,  I shall  do  it.  The  best  time  to  cut 
oil  the  nose  and  to  see  God  Narayan  is  at  8 A.  M.  on  the  10th  diem. 

Splendid  ! O you  Pope  ! You  have  inserted  the  auspacious  time 
to  cut  off  the  nose  in  your  book  1 When  the  king  showed  his  kindness 
to  them  by  sanctioning  a daily  ration  to  the  thousand  monks,  they 
were  transported  with  Joy,  and  began  to  dance,  hop  and  sing.  But 
this  matter  was  not  very  pleasant  to  the  ministers  who  were  somewhat 
wise.  There  was  a nonagenarian  minister,  who  had  seen  four  gene- 
rations. His  great-grand-son,  who  was  then  the  prime  minister,  told 
this  matter  to  him. 

The  grand  old  man  said  that  they  were  cheats,  and  asked  the 
premier  to  take  him  to  His  Majesty.  He  did  it  accordingly.  The 
king  related  the  doings  of  the  nose-cuts  with  great  pleasure  when  the 
old  minister  sat  down.  The  old  man  said  : O king,  do  not  make  too 
much  haste.  To  do  a thing  without  trying  brings  on  repentance. 

The  king  : Do  these  thousand  men  tell  lies  ? 

The  old  minister  : Without  testing  them  nothing  can  be  said 
whether  they  tell  the  truth  or  otherwise. 

K.— How  can  they  be  tested  ? 

M. — By  means  of  the  dictates  of  knowledge,  the  order  of  nature 
or  laws  of  nature  and  the  canons  of  logic,  etc. 

K.— How  can  a man  hold  a test  if  he  is  not  endowed  with 
knowledge  ? 

M,^By  promoting  his  knowledge  in  the  company  of  the  learned. 

K.— What  to  do,  if  no  learned  man  be  found  ? 

M.— -Nothing  is  inaccessible  to  an  enterprising  man. 

K. — You  may  yourself  tell  me  what  is  to  be  done. 


370 


Satyarth  Prakash 


M.  —I  am  old  and  spend  my  time  at  home.  I shall  live  but  a 
few  short  days.  So  let  me  first  test  them.  Then  you  may  do  what 
you  think  proper. 

K. — Very  well.  O astrologer,  find  out  an  auspicious  time  for 
the  old  minister. 

A.  — I shall,  as  ordered.  It  is  at  10  a.m.  on  5th  instant  this 
bright  fortnight. 

On  the  5th  instant,  the  old  minister  came  to  His  Majesty  at  8 
a.m.  and  told  him  to  go  to  the  nose-cuts  with  a thousand  or  two 
thousand  troops. 

K. — What  is  the  use  of  troops  there  ? 

M. — Your  Majesty  has  no  experience  of  government.  You 
should  do  as  I advise  you. 

K. — Well,  prepare  the  troops. 

At  9 30  a.m  the  king  went  to  them  with  retinue  of  all  followers. 
The  nose-cuts  at  his  sight  beg  in  to  dance  and  sing.  The  king  sat 
down  there,  and  sent  for  their  head  priest  (abbot)  who  formed  this 
sect  and  whose  nose  was  first  cut.  His  Majesty  told  him  : Show  God 
Narayan  today  to  my  minister.  He  replied  : All  right.  When  it  was 
10  o’clock,  a man  held  a plate  under  the  minister’s  nose.  The  priest 
pulled  a sharp  knife  and  cut  olf  the  nose  with  it  and  put  it  on  the 
plate  whereupon  the  minister’s  wound  bled  profusely,  and  he  was 
much  distressed  with  face  cast  down  Then  the  cunning  priest  whis- 
pered his  creed  into  the  minister’s  ear,  saying  : “You  should  smile  and 
tell  the  people  that  you  see  God  Narayan.  Now  your  nose  is  cut  off, 
it  will  never  be  restored.  If  you  don’t  say  so,  the  people  will  laugh 
at  you  a great  deal.”  Having  said  so,  he  left  him.  The  minister  put 
a plug  of  the  napkin  on  his  nose.  When  the  king  asked  him  if  he 
saw  God  Narayan,  the  minister  said  in  his  ear  : “I  see  nothing.  In 
vain  has  this  man  oisligured  many  persons.”  The  king  asked  the 
minister  what  should  be  done  then.  The  old  man  advised  that  they 
should  be  apprehended  and  severely  punished.  They  should  be  thrown 
into  a jail  for  the  whole  life,  and  the  man  who  has  spoiled  all  these 
fellows  should  be  seated  on  an  ass  and  beaten  very  disgracefully. 
When  the  king  and  the  minister  were  consulting  each  other,  they  were 
alarmed  and  attempted  to  bolt;  but  the  troops  had  surrounded  them 
so  they  could  not  run  away.  The  king  ordered  that  they  should  be 
arrested  and  loaded  with  tetters.  I he  face  of  their  Head  should  be 
blackened,  he  should  be  seated  on  an  ass,  a garland  of  old  worn-out 
shoes  should  be  thrown  round  his  neck,  he  should  be  paraded  in  all 
streets,  ashes  should  be  thrown  by  boys  upon  him,  he  should  be  beaten 
in  every  square  with  shoes,  and  given  to  the  dogs  to  be  torn  in  pieces. 
If  this  be  not  done,  others  will  not  be  deterred  from  committing  such 
sins  over  again.  When  these  measures  were  taken,  the  sect  of  the 
nose-cuts  was  brought  to  an  end. 

Frauds  of  Swami  Narayanists 

In  the  same  manner,  all  the  opponents  of  the  Vedas  are  very 
clever  in  stripping  others  of  their  wealth.  Such  is  the  imposition  of 
sects.  The  followers  of  the  Swarai  Narayan  religion  illegally  make 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


371 


money,  practise  frauds  and  tricks.  To  mislead  persons,  they  say  that 
at  the  time  of  death  Sahajanand  (their  teacher)  comes  on  a white 
pelfry  to  carry  the  dead  to  salvation  He  comes  once  a day  to  this 
temple.  When  a fair  is  held,  the  priests  stay  inside  the  temple.  A 
shop  is  held  below.  They  manage  to  keep  a hole  for  communication. 
If  a man  offers  a coconut,  it  is  passed  on  to  the  shop.  So  the  same 
coconut  is  sold  about  a thousand  times  in  a day.  In  like  manner, 
they  sell  other  articles.  They  set  their  disciple  to  that  kind  of  work 
which  belongs  to  his  caste  Thus,  for  instance,  if  a man  is  a barber, 
he  has  to  shave  there,  a potter  works  as  a potter,  an  artisan  works  as 
an  artisan,  a merchant  acts  as  a merchant,  and  a low  caste  does  his 
caste  work.  They  have  imposed  a tax  on  their  disciples.  They  have 
fraudulently  amassed  millions  of  money  and  are  engaged  in  collecting 
more  money.  He  who  is  installed  as  their  leader,  marries  and  be- 
comes a householder.  He  wears  ornaments  and  other  trinklets  Wherever 
there  are  any  religious  ceremonies  of  departure,  they  receive  donations 
like  the  Gosains  of  Gokal  in  the  name  of  the  Prior,  the  Lady  and  others. 
They  call  themselves  a good,  and  the  persons  of  other  religions  a bad, 
company.  They  never  respect  and  serve  a man,  however,  good,  religious, 
and  learned,  that  belongs  to  a different  sect.  They  regard  it  to  be  a sin 
to  do  good  to  the  people  of  different  persuasions.  Apparently  these  men 
affect  not  to  see  women’s  faces,  but  nobody  knows  what  transpires  in 
the  dark.  The  sect  has  everywhere  fallen  into  disrepute.  At  some  places 
the  adultery  and  other  sins  of  these  saints  are  brought  to  light.  When 
their  great  men  die,  they  throw  them  into  a secret  well,  and  give  out 
that  such  saint  has  ascended  to  heaven  with  his  physical  body,  saying  : 
“Saint  Sahajanand  came  down  to  take  him  away.  We  prayed  hard  that 
he  should  not  be  carried  up,  for  his  residence  on  earth  was  beneficial 
to  all.  Sahajanand  answered  in  the  negative  and  said  that  he  was 
much  required  in  heaven  and  so  he  took  him  away.  We  saw  with  our 
own  eyes  the  aero-stat  or  ethereal  car  He  went  heavenward,  raining 
flowers  on  the  earth.”  When  a saint  falls  sick,  and  there  is  no  hope  of 
his  life,  he  sa>s  that  he  will  go  to  heaven  to-morrow  at  night  It  is  heard 
that  if  by  chance  he  does  not  die  that  night,  but  is  only  swooned 
away,  they  throw  him  into  the  well,  for  if  they  did  not  do  so,  they 
would  be  counted  as  liars.  Therefore,  they  commit  such  homicides. 
Very  much  like  them,  act  the  Gokali  Gosains.  When  a saint  of  this 
sect  dies,  the  disciples  say  that  the  master  is  gone  to  sport.  The  article 
of  faith  of  the  Gosains  and  the  Swami  Narayanists  is  the  same,  that 
is,  S/iri  Krishnah  Sharanam  mama.  ‘They  translate  it  as.  Lord  Krishna 
is  my  asylum,  or  I am  in  Him.’  But  it  can  also  mean  that  Lord 
Krishna  is  my  refuge  or  I am  His  asylum.  All  these  faiths  write  absurd 
and  are  opposed  to  the  teachings  of  the  authentic  scriptures.  Being 
ignorant,  they  do  not  know  the  rules  of  knowledge. 

Madhavism 

Q. — Is  the  faith  of  Madhava  good  ? 

A, — This  sect  is  like  others.  Its  followers  are  Chakrankit  (Marked 
with  Vishnu’s  discus  and  other  symbols).  They  differ  from  the  Chak- 
rankits  in  that  the  followers  of  Ramanuja  are  marked  once,  but  these 
every  year.  The  Chakrankits  put  a yellow  mark  in  their  forehead  and 


372  Satyarth  Prakash 

these  black.  Once  upon  a time  a learned  man  discussed  with  a Pandit 
of  this  sect. 

L. — Why  have  you  put  this  black  perpendicular  line  and  the 
other  mark  on  the  forehead  ? 

P. — I shall  go  to  heaven  by  using  it.  Also  the  colour  of  Lord 
Krishna’s  body  was  black,  so  we  use  a black  mark  on  the  forehead. 

L. — If  by  putting  an  erect  line  and  a black  mark  on  the  forehead 
you  go  to  heaven,  where  will  you  go  if  you  paint  your  whole  face 
black  ? Will  you  go  beyond  heaven  ? Also,  you  should  blacken  your 
whole  body  after  Lord  Krishna,  then  there  can  be  any  resemblance 
between  you  and  Lord  Krishna.  Hence  the  sect  is  like  those  described 
above. 


Lingankitism 

Q, — What  kind  of  religion  is  the  faith  of  the  Lingankits? 

A. — It  is  like  that  of  the  Chakrankits.  As  the  Chakrankit  men 
are  marked  with  a discus  (circular  line)  and  do  not  worship  any  other 
deity  than  Narayan,  so  also  are  they  marked  with  a Lingum  (erect 
line)  and  do  not  adore  any  other  god  but  Mahadeva.  The  difference 
between  them  is  that  the  Lingankits  get  a lingum  (a  piece  of  stone) 
studded  in  gold  or  silver  and  wear  it  about  their  neck.  When  they 
drink  water,  they  first  show  it  to  the  idol  about  their  neck.  Their 
formula  of  faith  is  like  that  of  the  Shivites. 

Q, — Are  the  Brahmo  Samaj  and  Prarthana  Samaj  good  ? 

A, — They  have  something  good  but  a great  deal  bad. 

Q. — The  B.S.  and  P.S.  are  the  best  of  all,  for  their  principles  are 
very  good. 

A. — 1.  The  principles  are  not  entirely  good,  for  how  can  the 
supposition  of  persons  destitute  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Vedas  be 
entirely  true?  Their  good  traits  are  that  they  have  saved  a few  persons 
from  being  converted  to  Christianity,  repudiated  idolatry,  and  kept 
some  people  from  being  misled  by  false  scriptures,  and  so  forth.  But 
the  members  have  very  little  devotion  to  the  interest  of  their  country, 
have  adopted  the  Christian  manners  and  customs  to  a great  extent, 
and  have  changed  the  rules  of  eating  and  drinking  and  marriage  and 
ceremonies. 

2.  Thus,  to  their  heart’s  content,  they  cry  down  the  glory  of 
their  country  and  the  greatness  of  its  ancients,  much  less  to  mention 
their  good;  extol  the  English  Christians  etc.  in  their  lectures;  never 
mention  even  the  names  of  Brahma  and  other  sages;  on  the  contrary, 
they  assert  that  there  have  been  no  learned  people  in  the  world  unto 
this  day  except  the  English,  that  the  people  of  India  have  always  been 
ignorant  and  they  never  made  any  progress  before. 

3.  They  do  not  keep  themselves  aloof  from  talking  evil  of  the 
Vedas  and  other  scriptures.  The  books  written  to  mention  the  aims 
and  objects  of  the  B.S.  enumerate  among  saints  Jesus,  Mahomed, 
Nanak,  Chaitanya;  but  they  do  not  do  so  much  as  to  mention  the 
name  of  any  ancient  Indian  sage  or  philosopher.  These  things  prove 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


373 


that  these  gentlemen  follow  the  religion  of  those  whose  names  they 
mention.  How  can  the  work  be  permanent  and  progressive  of  the 
people  who  are  born  in  India,  who  are  maintained  by  India  and  still 
receive  their  support  therefrom,  but  who  have  given  up  their  fore- 
father’s religion  and  are  very  much  inclined  to  the  religion  of  foreigners, 
who  call  themselves  learned  people  although  destitute  of  the  know- 
ledge of  Sanscrit  of  this  country,  and  having  studied  English  boastfully 
call  themselves  Pandits  and  rush  to  start  a new  religion? 

4.  They  do  not  avoid  taking  food  with  the  English,  Mahome- 
dans  and  low  castes.  They  have  perhaps  thought  that  they  and  their 
country  will  be  reformed  by  abolishing  caste  distinction  and  the  custom 
of  eating  and  drinking.  Such  things  do  not  lead  to  improvement,  but, 
on  the  contrary,  to  degradation. 


Caste 

Q. — Is  the  caste  distinction  made  by  God  or  by  man  (natural  or 
artificial)  ? 

A, — It  is  partly  natural  and  partly  artificial. 

Q. — Which  is  natural  and  which  is  artificial  ? 

A, — 5.  Man,  animals,  birds,  worms,  trees,  water,  etc.  are  species 
or  kinds  of  beings  made  by  God.  God  made  the  cow,  horse,  elephant 
and  other  species  among  animals;  the  pipal,  fig,  mango,  and  other 
kinds  among  trees;  the  swans,  crows,  herons  and  others  among  birds; 
the  lish,  crocodiles  and  the  like  among  aquatics.  In  like  manner,  the 
Brahmains  and  others  are  thought  among  men,  not  as  entirely  ordinary 
kinds,  but  as  differentiated  or  modified  kinds  of  persons.  It  is  indis- 
pensably necessary  to  regard  the  caste  distinction  as  founded  on  merit, 
deeds,  and  character,  as  has  been  said  before  in  describing  the  stages 
of  life.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  king  and  the  learned  to  establish  by 
means  of  examination  the  distinctions  of  Brahman,  Kshatriya,  Vaishya, 
and  Shudra  castes,  according  to  merit,  avocation  and  character,  des- 
cribed before  as  created  by  man.  The  difference  of  food  is  also  both 
God-made  and  man-made;  as  the  lion  is  carnivorous,  and  the  wild 
buffalo  eats  grass  and  vegetables,  which  is  established  by  God.  This 
food  distinction  is  man-made  from  the  circumstances  of  clime  and 
surroundings. 

Q. — See,  the  Europeans  wear  boots,  coats,  pantaloons,  and  eat 
in  hotels  with  all  persons;  so  they  are  progressive. 


Blunders  of  Brahmoes 

/4.— It  is  your  mistake.  For,  all  the  Mahomedans  and  slum 
population  eat  food  at  one  another’s  hands.  Why  don’t  they  improve? 
The  Europeans  are  advanced  and  enlightened  from  their  merit  and 
good  deeds.  For  instance,  they  don’t  marry  early.  They  educate 
and  train  their  boys  and  girls  well,  and  marry  after  choosing  a con- 
sort. They  do  not  allow  bad  people  to  preach.  They  being  learned 
do  not  fall  into  anybody’s  trap.  Whatever  they  do,  they  do  after 


374 


Satyarth  Prakash 


general  consultation  and  resolutions  of  their  assemblies.  They  devote 
their  life,  attention,  and  wealth  to  the  welfare  of  their  nation.  They 
give  up  idleness  and  exert  themselves  to  rise.  See,  they  allow  persons 
to  go  into  their  offices  and  shops  with  shoes  on  if  made  in  their 
country,  but  not  if  made  in  this  country  (after  Indian  fashion)  Now 
it  is  enough  to  show  you  how  much  they  respect  even  the  shoes  made 
in  their  country,  but  not  the  men  of  other  countries.  See,  it  is  now 
about  a hundred  years  since  they  came  to  this  country;  but  they  put 
on  rough  and  thick  cloth  as  they  used  to  do  in  their  country.  They 
have  not  given  up  the  manners  and  customs  of  their  country.  But 
many  of  you  (Brahmoes)  have  imitated  them.  It  is  on  that  very 
account  they  are  considered  to  be  wise  and  you  foolish.  Senseless 
imitation  does  not  become  a man  of  understanding  Whoever  among 
them  has  got  the  charge  of  a work,  he  does  it  with  propriety.  They  arc 
always  obedient.  They  help  their  countrymen  in  trade.  Such  are 
the  noble  qualities  and  deeds  which  have  brought  about  their  advance- 
ment. They  are  not  advanced  by  using  coats,  pantalooms,  eating 
in  hotels,  and  other  ordinary  evil  habits.  They,  too,  have  a kind 
of  caste  distinction.  Sec,  when  a European,  however  high  in  rank  or 
office,  marries  the  daughter  of  a person  of  a foreign  country  or  reli- 
gion, or  when  a European  girl  marries  a foreigner,  they  don’t  invite 
him  or  her  to  a dinner,  nor  do  they  eat  with  him  at  the  same  table 
and  do  not  intermarry  with  him.  If  it  is  not  a caste  distinction, 
what  is  it?  They  mislead  you,  simple  and  foolish  as  you  are,  by  say- 
ing that  they  don’t  observe  any  caste  distinction.  You  believe  it  from 
your  ignorance  and  folly.  So  whatever  you  do,  you  should  do  after 
a thorough  consideration,  so  that  you  may  not  have  to  repent.  See, 
a patient  needs  a physician  and  medicine,  but  not  a hale  man.  A 
learned  person  is  a healthy  person,  and  the  ignorant  are  suffering 
from  disease  of  ignorance.  To  cure  them  of  it,  they  want  true  know- 
ledge and  true  preaching  (advice).  It  is  from  ignorance  that  they 
are  sick  and  imagine  that  religion  depends  on  eating  and  drinking. 
When  they  see  anybody  eat  and  drink  improperly,  they  say  and 
believe  that  he  is  fallen  from  religion.  They  would  not  lisen  to  him, 
nor  sit  by  him,  nor  allow  him  to  sit  by  them.  Now  tell  me  if  your 
knowlcge  is  for  selfishness  or  otherwise.  It  would  tend  to  promote 
the  cause  of  benevolence,  when  it  benefits  the  ignorant.  If  you  aver 
that  since  they  don’t  want  to  derive  any  benefit,  you  can  do  nothing, 
it  is  then  your  own  fault  and  not  theirs;  for,  had  you  kept  your  con- 
duct good,  they  would  have  been  benefited  by  loving  you.  But  you 
have  destroyed  the  good  of  thousands  to  do  your  own  good.  It  is  a 
great  sin  you  have  fallen  into.  For,  religion  is  to  do  good  to  others, 
and  irreligion  to  do  them  injury.  Therefore  the  learned  should  do 
what  is  proper  and  be  like  a boat  to  help  the  ignorant  to  cross  the 
sea  of  pain.  They  should  not  act  exactly  like  the  ignorant,  rather 
they  should  do  what  tends  to  promote  their  and  others’  welfare  day 
and  night. 

Q, — We  do  not  believe  any  book  to  be  written  by  God  or  to  be 
entirely  true,  for  the  human  reason  is  not  infallible,  so  the  books 
written  by  men  are  all  fallible.  Hence  we  welcome  truth  from  all 
and  reject  falsehood.  We  accept  truth  whether  it  is  found  in  the  Veda, 
Bible,  Qoran,  or  any  other  book.  We  never  adopt  falsehood  of  any. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


375 


What  you  wish  to  prove  you  to  be  the  lovers  of  truth,  will 
also  prove  you  to  be  false;  for,  as  all  men  cannot  be  infallible  or 
free  from  error,  you  being  men  are  fallible,  or  what  you  say  is 
erroneous.  Also,  since  the  statement  of  an  erroneous  man  cannot 
be  an  authority  in  its  entirety,  yours  too  is  not  reliable.  So  what 
you  say,  should  not  be  believed  in.  Such  being  the  case,  your  state- 
ment should  be  rejected  like  food  mixed  with  or  suspected  of  poison, 
and  the  authority  of  the  books  you  have  written  to  expound  your 
views  should  not  be  accepted  by  anybody.  Your  case  is  like  what 
is  said  in  an  Indian  proverb  : 

^ ^ ixfs  % ^ ^ I 

— A Brahmin  having  4 talents  aspired  to  have  6,  but  lost  2,  and  so  got 
2 only  left  with  him.  Like  other  people  you  too  are  not  omniscient. 
Probably  you  give  up  truth  by  accepting  falsehood  from  error.  So 
we  men  of  little  knowlege  must  need  have  help  from  the  Word  of  the 
All-knowing  God.  You  should  of  necessity  believe  what  is  said 
in  the  description  of  the  Vedas,  otherwise  yato  bhrashtah  tato  bhra- 
shtah  : you  will  stumble  at  every  step.  When  all  truth  can  be  had 
from  the  Vedas,  which  do  not  contain  untruth  at  all,  you  do  harm 
to  yourselves  and  to  others  by  hesitating  to  accept  them.  Hence  it  is 
that  the  people  of  Aryavarta  do  not  look  upon  you  as  their  kith  and 
kin,  and  you  have  not  been  able  to  contribute  to  the  advancement 
of  India;  for,  you  are  regarded  as  beggars  from  door  to  door  or 
eclectics.  You  think  you  can  do  good  to  yourselves  and  to  others  by 
this  mode  of  conduct.  You  will  fail  like  those  parents  of  children 
who  set  upon  maintaining  the  children  of  the  whole  world,  which 
was  impossible,  neglected  theirs  own  and  so  spoiled  them.  Your 
case  will  be  like  theirs.  Can  you  test  the  truth,  or  know  the  falsity 
of  your  views,  or  promote  the  welfare  of  Aryavarta  without  accept- 
ing the  Vedas  and  other  true  scriptures?  You  have  not  got  the  medi- 
cine to  cure  the  country  which  has  fallen  sick.  The  Europeans  have 
no  need  of  you  and  the  people  of  Aryavarta  regard  you  in  the  same 
light  as  the  followers  of  other  religions  than  their  own.  It  is  yet 
time  for  you  to  accept  the  Vedas  and  the  like  scriptures  to  do  good 
to  the  country.  It  will  be  all  right  if  you  do  so.  Why  don’t  you 
believe  the  infallible  Holy  Vedas  revaled  by  God  to  the  mind  of 
sages;  since  you  say  that  all  truth  comes  from  God?  Verily,  the  cause 
is  that  you  have  not  studied  the  Vedas,  nor  do  >ou  want  to  study 
them.  How  then  can  you  know  the  Vedas  ? 

6.  Then  you  believe,  like  the  Christians  and  Mahomedans,  in 
the  creation  of  the  world  without  the  existence  of  its  material  cause, 
and  also  believe  the  soul  to  be  created  The  refutation  of  this  belief 
may  be  consulted  in  the  chapter  on  the  production  of  the  world  and 
the  description  of  God  and  the  soul.  No  effect  can  ever  be  produced 
without  a cause,  and  a thing  produced  in  like  manner  is  impossible  to 
be  destroyed. 

7.  Then  there  is  another  defect  in  your  faith  that  you  believe 
in  removal  of  sins  by  means  of  repentance  and  prayer.  It  is  this 
belief  that  has  increased  the  commission  of  sins  in  the  world;  for,  the 


376 


Satyarth  Prakash 


followers  of  thePuranas  believe  in  the  riddance  of  sins  without  suffering 
their  penalties  simply  by  means  of  pilgrimages  and  other  penances, 
the  Jainees  by  muttering  the  verse  of  novakar  and  pilgrimages  and 
other  rites,  the  Christians  by  faith  in  Christ,  and  the  Mahomedans  by 
repentance.  Therefore,  the  tendency  of  the  people  to  commit  sin  is 
increased  from  the  absence  of  its  fear.  In  this  respect  the  Brahmo 
and  Prarthana  Samajes  are  like  the  followers  of  the  Puranas.  Had 
you  heard  the  exposition  of  the  Vedas,  you  would  have  feared  from 
the  commission  of  sins  on  account  of  virtue  and  vice  being  not  done 
away  with  without  enjoying  their  fruits,  and  so  would  have  been  ever 
engaged  in  practising  virtue.  If  you  believe  in  the  remission  of  sins 
without  suffering  their  consequences,  you  will  make  God  unjust. 

8.  Your  belief  in  the  infinite  progress  of  the  soul  is  also  unte- 
nable, for  the  consequences  of  the  qualities,  actions,  and  natures  of 
finite  souls  must  be  finite. 

Infinite  Progress 

0.— God  is  merciful.  He  will  award  infinite  merit  for  finite 
actions. 

A.  If  God  acts  in  that  way,  His  justice  will  be  done  up.  Nobody 
will  care  to  make  progress  in  good  works,  for  God  will  give  infinite 
reward  for  a few  good  works,  and  sins  can  be  got  rid  of,  however 
numerous,  by  the  efficacy  of  repentance  and  prayer.  Such  doctrines 
lead  to  the  increase  of  iniquities  and  the  destruction  of  virtue. 

Q, — We  believe  instinctive  knowledge  to  be  greater  than  the 
Vedas,  but  we  don't  recognise  the  superiority  of  acquired  knowledge. 
For,  if  there  had  been  no  instinctive  knowledge  given  us  by  God, 
how  could  we  learn  or  teach,  understand  or  explain  the  Vedas?  So 
our  faith  is  very  good. 

A. — What  you  say  is  absurd;  for,  knowledge  imparted  by  others 
(tho’  God)  cannot  be  instinctive.  Instinctive,  knowledge  is  spon- 
taneous. It  cannot  be  either  increased  or  decreased  Nobody  can  make 
any  progress  thereby;  for,  savages  also  have  instinctive  knowledge,  yet 
they  cannot  improve.  So  the  imparted  knowledge  is  a cause  of  pro- 
gress. See,  you  and  we  never  knew  accurately  about  duties  and  pro- 
hibitions, virtue  and  vice  in  our  infancy.  But  when  we  studied  with 
the  learned,  we  came  to  know  of  our  duties  and  prohibitions,  virtue 
and  vice.  So  it  is  not  proper  to  regard  instinctive  knowledge  as  above 
all  or  the  only  thing  needed. 

9.  You  must  have  adopted  from  the  Christians  and  Maho- 
medans your  disbelief  in  re-incarnation.  You  may  consult  my  refu- 
tation of  it  in  the  exposition  of  rebirth.  But  you  should  bear  in  mind 
that  the  soul  is  eternal,  and  so  also  are  her  actions  by  virtue  for  their 
persistence.  The  relation  between  the  actor  and  his  actions  is  cons- 
tant. Was  the  soul  sitting  idle  somewhere  before  birth?  Will  she  be 
ever  so?  Your  belief  proves  God  to  be  without  work.  Disbelief  in 
rebirth  attributes  to  God  the  evils  of  the  destruction  of  our  works, 
reward  for  no  work,  cruelty,  and  inconsistency;  for  without  rebirth 
the  consequences  of  the  practice  of  virtue  or  vice  cannot  be  borne, 
without  re-incarnation  we  cannot  square  the  account  of  pleasure  and 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


377 


pain,  profit  and  loss  in  our  dealings  with  others.  Also,  how  can  you 
account  for  the  pleasure  or  pain  of  our  present  life  without  assuming 
our  doing  good  or  evil  in  a previous  or  prenatal  life?  If  the  present 
distribution  of  happiness  is  not  based  upon  the  consequence  of  the 
good  or  evil  done  in  an  antecedent  existence  of  souls,  God  will  be 
proved  to  be  unjust  and  the  consequences  of  actions  will  be,  as  it  were, 
destroyed  without  being  suffered  So  this  belief  of  yours,  that  there 
is  no  rebirth,  is  not  good  at  all. 

10.  It  is  not  proper  to  believe  no  creatures  of  glorious  qualities 
and  learned  people  can  be  gods  except  God;  for,  the  Almighty  Lord  is 
called  the  Great  God,  which  cannot  be  if  there  be  no  small  gods. 

11.  It  is  also  not  good  not  to  admit  the  sacrifices  of  fire  and 
(he  like  rites  to  be  beneficent  works. 

12.  It  is  not  good  to  follow  Jesus  and  others  after  ignoring  the 
good  done  by  the  Indian  sages  and  divines. 

13.  It  is  altogether  impossible  to  assume  the  rise  of  the  derived 
systems  of  knowledge  without  admitting  the  primary  source  of  know- 
ledge in  the  Vedas. 

14.  It  is  vain  to  cast  off  the  sacred  thread  which  is  a sign  of 
the  mastery  of  a branch  of  knowledge,  and  to  shave  the  crown  lock 
like  the  Christians  and  Mahomedans.  Is  the  weight  of  the  sacred 
thread  greater  than  that  of  the  pantaloon  and  other  cumbrous  dress, 
and  is  it  worse  than  the  medals  you  heartily  long  for? 

15.  Can  it  be  called  anything  else  than  partiality  and  flattery 
to  be  bent  on  praising  the  Europeans  and  not  to  revere  the  memory  of 
the  numerous  learned  men  of  Aryavarta  who  flourished  after  Brahma? 

16.  It  is  a self-contradiction  in  you  to  believe  the  production 
of  the  soul  from  the  combination  of  mind  and  matter  like  a sprout 
from  a seed,  the  non-existence  of  the  soul  before  her  birth,  and  the 
destruction  of  things  produced.  If  there  were  no  mind  and  matter 
before  creation  or  genesis,  whence  has  the  soul  come?  What  things 
were  united  to  bring  her  about?  If  you  believe  them  both  to  be 
eternal,  it  is  right.  Your  belief,  that  there  was  nothing  whatever  but 
God  before  creation,  is  absurd. 

Advice 

So  if  you  want  to  make  any  progress,  you  should  Join  the  “Arya 
Saraaj”  and  accept  and  act  upon  its  aims  and  objects,  or  else  your 
labour  will  be  fruitless.  For,  it  is  very  proper  for  you  and  us  to  unite 
to  contribute  to  the  advancement  of  the  country,  whose  wealth  sup- 
ports us  at  all  times,  with  all  love  and  by  all  means  in  our  power. 
Hence  no  society  can  be  so  proper  a cause  of  the  progress  of  India  as 
the  Arya  Samaj.  It  is  very  good  of  you  if  you  help  it  properly,  for 
it  is  the  duty  of  a body  of  persons,  and  not  for  an  individual,  to  pro- 
mote the  welfare  of  the  Samaj. 

G.— You  refute  all,  but  they  are  all  right  in  their  own  respective 
religions.  You  should  not  refute  any  one.  If  you  do  so,  what  have 
you  to  show  more  than  they?  If  you  show  anything,  was  or  is  there 
none  greater  than  or  equal  to  you?  You  should  not  be  so  proud. 


378  Satyarth  Prakash 

For  there  are  many  in  God’s  creation  greater  than,  equal  to  and  less 
than  one  another;  so  none  should  be  proud. 

Bird’s  Eye- View  of  all  Religions 

A. — Do  all  have  one  and  the  same  religion  or  dilTerent  religions? 
If  different,  are  they  allied  or  opposed  to  one  another?  If  opposed, 
none  but  one  can  be  the  proper  religion.  If  allied,  their  variety  is 
useless.  So  religion  or  atheism  is  one  and  the  same,  but  not  many. 
We  only  observe  that  if  a king  convene  all  religious  sects  to  hear  their 
preaching,  they  cannot  be  fewer  than  1,000,  but  on  a little  considera- 
tion they  devide  themselves  into  four  classes,  viz,,  the  Puranists 
(followers  of  Indian  mythology),  Christians,  Jainees,  and  Mahomedans, 
who  represent  all  denominations,  so  to  speak.  Let  the  king  first  ask 
a Warn  Margi  (follower  of  the  left-hand  path  as  it  means  in  Sanscrit) 
in  the  capacity  of  a tyro  thus : — O holy  man,  I have  had  no  initiator 
nor  adopted  any  religion.  Whose  religion  is  the  best  that  I may 
embrace? 

Warn, — Ours. 

Tyro. — What  kinds  of  religions  are  the  remaining  999  ? 

W. — They  are  all  false.  Their  followers  will  go  to  hell.  For, 
according  to  the  adage,  kowlat  parataram  nasti : no  religion  is  higher 
than  ours. 

T.— What  is  your  religion  ? 

W. — It  is  faith  in  Goddess — the  use  of  flesh,  wine  and  the  rest 
of  five  means  of  our  faith,  acceptance  of  the  64  Tantras  containing 
Rudramal  and  the  like.  If  thou  desirest  salvation,  be  our  disciple. 

T. — Very  well,  but  I wish  to  consult  other  pious  men  on  the 
point,  and  then  to  accept  that  religion  which  commands  my  approba- 
tion and  faith. 

W. — O man,  why  dost  thou  hesitate  ? These  fellows  will  entice 
thee  into  their  snares.  So  don’t  go  to  any  other  chap.  Rest  in  our 
fold,  otherwise  thou  shalt  repent.  See,  our  religion  holds  out  to  man 
both  enjoyment  of  pleasures  and  a promise  of  salvation. 

T. — All  right.  But  let  me  see  them  also. 

So,  going  to  a follower  of  Shivism,  and  putting  the  same  ques- 
tion to  him,  received  the  same  kind  of  answer  with  this  difference  only 
that  there  can  be  no  salvation  without  Shiva,  a berry  rosary,  ash  paste 
and  generative  organ  worship.  Taking  leave  of  him,  he  went  to  a neo- 
vedantist  and  thus  addressed  him  : 

T.— O holy  wan,  let  me  know  your  faith. 

W. — We  don't  believe  either  in  religion  or  in  irreligion.  We  are 
really  the  Brahman.  Where  is  religion  or  irreligion  in  us  ? All  the 
world  is  illusion.  If  thou  wishes  to  be  the  knower  and  absolute 
intellect,  thou  shouldst  regard  thyself  as  the  Brahman  and  give  up  the 
idea  of  thy  being  a soul,  and  thou  shalt  be  eternally  saved. 

T. — If  you  are  the  Brahman,  eternally  absolute,  why  do  you  not 
have  the  attributes,  nature  and  actions  of  the  Brahman,  and  why  are 
you  confined  in  a body  ? 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


379 


V.-— Thou  seest  bodies  and  so  thou  art  in  error.  We  see  noth- 
ing but  the  Brahman. 

T. — Who  are  you  that  see,  and  whom  do  you  see  ? 

Y.— The  seer  is  the  Brahman  and  the  Brahman  sees  himself. 

T. — Are  there  two  Brahmans  ? 

V. — No.  He  sees  himself. 

T.— Can  anybody  mount  upon  his  own  shoulders  ? What  you 
say  is  nothing.  It  savours  of  madness. 

The  tyro  then  went  to  ask  the  same  question  of  the  Jainees  who 
returned  him  a similar  answer  only  adding  that  all  other  religions  are 
defective  except  the  religion  of  Jina— //Vza  Dharma.  There  is  no  God 
without  beginning,  the  maker  of  the  world,  which  exists  in  the  same 
way  from  all  beginning  and  will  continue  to  be  so.  Thou  shouldst 
be  our  disciple,  for  we  are  better  than  others  in  all  respects.  We 
accept  the  best  things.  All  religions  but  the  Jain  religion  are  false. 

He  went  on  and  asked  a Christian  the  same  question.  He 
answered  in  the  same  way  as  the  Warn  Margi,  only  adding  that  all  men 
are  sinful.  They  cannot  get  rid  of  sin  by  their  own  effort  except  by 
their  belief  in  the  Christ.  Purity  cannot  procure  salvation.  The 
Christ  has  shown  mercy  by  sacrificing  his  life  for  the  sins  of  mankind. 
So  thou  shouldst  be  our  disciple. 

He  then  went  on  to  a Moulvi  (Mahomedan  priest)  and  talked 
with  him  on  the  same  subject.  The  Moulvi  said  particularly  that  no 
one  can  be  saved  without  belief  in  one  God  without  a second,  His 
Prophet,  and  the  Holy  Qoran.  He  who  does  not  profess  this  religion, 
will  go  to  hell,  and  he  deserves  to  be  killed. 

Thereupon  the  gentleman  went  to  a follower  of  Vishnu,  with 
whom  he  had  the  same  kind  of  religious  talks,  when  the  latter  specially 
said  that  King  Death  was  terrified  at  the  sight  of  the  sandal  mark  on 
his  co-religionists’  head  and  sandal  imprints  on  their  arms.  The 
enquirer  said  to  himself  that  it  was  impossible  that  King  Death  should 
be  afraid  of  them,  seeing  that  mosquitoes,  flies,  police  constables, 
thieves,  robbers,  and  their  enemies  do  not  fear  them  at  all.  So  he 
proceeded  further,  and  found  that  the  believers  of  all  faiths  averred  that 
theirs  was  the  only  true  faith.  Some  said  that  Kabir,  their  religious 
teacher,  was  the  true  apostle,  some  said  the  same  of  Nanak,  some 
of  Dadu,  some  of  Ballabha,  some  of  Sahajanand,  some  of  Madhava, 
and  others  of  the  like  persons,  whom  they  regarded  as  greater  than 
all  the  rest  and  the  incarnation  of  the  Deity.  The  inquirer  asked  of 
thousands  of  people.  He  observed  their  disputes  and  mutual  jealousy, 
which  convinced  him  that  none  of  them  was  fit  to  be  made  his  initia- 
tor of  religion  ; for  the  falsehood  of  each  of  the  sects  was  borne  wit- 
ness to  by  the  remaining  999.  They  are  no  better  than  shop-keepers, 
prostitutes,  panders,  who  praise  their  commodities  as  something  far 
better  than  those  of  others,  which  they  cry  down  vehemently.  Con- 
sidering them  all  in  this  light,  he  thought  of  the  Mundak  Upanishat, 
which  advises  that 


380 


Satyarth  Prakash 


— A man  should  repair  to  a teacher,  who  knows  God,  has  a 
staunch  faith  in  the  Supreme  Being,  and  knows  the  Vedas,  in  order 
to  ascertain  the  truth,  and  taking  in  his  hand  some  sacrificial  present 
approach  him  with  the  palms  of  hands  joined.  He  should  not  fall 
into  the  snare  of  these  hypocrites.  And  when  such  an  enquirer,  of 
tranquil  mind  and  controlled  senses,  goes  to  a learned  man,  the  latter 
should  initiate  him  into  spiritual  knowledge  which  treats  of  the  attri- 
butes, ways,  and  nature  of  the  Supreme  Spirit,  and  he  should  also  tell 
him  the  proper  means  to  attain  virtue,  wealth,  love,  and  salvation. 
When  our  enquirer  went  to  such  a preacher,  he  said:  Holy  Father,  I 
am  purplexed  with  the  controversies  of  the  sects.  For  it  I become  a 
follower  of  any  of  them,  I must  perforce  be  set  against  999.  A 
man  can  get  no  ease  who  has  999  enemies  and  one  friend.  So  you 
should  show  me  a better  faith  that  I may  accept  it. 

Holy  Sage  : — All  these  faiths  are  the  products  of  ignorance  and 
enemies  of  knowledge.  They  achieve  their  end  by  misleading  and 
entrapping  fools,  ignorants  and  savages,  who  thus  forfeiting  the  object 
of  their  life  waste  it  for  nothing.  See,  what  these  thousand  faiths  agree 
in  is  the  Vedic  faith  worth  your  accepting.  What  is  self-contradictory 
is  imaginary,  false,  irreligion,  and  unworthy  of  being  accepted. 

Enquirer  : — How  could  it  be  tested  ? 

Sage  : — Go  and  ask  of  them  about  the  following  points,  which 
will  command  their  general  consent. 

Assemblage  of  Religions 

He  then  stood  up  in  the  assembly  of  the  thousand  faiths  and 
thus  addressed  them  : Does  religion  consist  in  truth  or  falsehood  ? 

Religion  and  Irreligion 

All  unanimously  cried  out  : It  consists  in  truth  and  irreligion  in 
untruth.  In  like  manner,  all  of  them  with  one  voice  said  that  religion 
requires  the  acquirement  of  knowledge,  the  vow  of  chastity,  the  per- 
formance of  marriage  at  perfect  puberty  and  the  maturity  of  age,  good 
comp  iny,  promptitude,  honest  dealing,  and  so  forth;  whereas  ir* 
religion  is  shown  in  lying,  ignorance,  leading  no  chaste  life,  committing 
adultery,  keeping  evil  company,  fradulent  dealing,  cheating,  treachery, 
killing,  doing  injury  to  others  and  th.;  like  sinful  actions.  Upon  this 
the  tyro  asked  them  why  they  all  did  not  join  with  heart  and  soul  in 
promoting  the  cause  of  the  true  religion  and  in  refuting  false  faiths. 
They  all  replied  : If  we  do  so,  who  will  respect  us  ? Our  disciples 
will  not  obey  us.  Our  livelihood  will  begone.  Then  all  the  comforts 
and  luxuries  we  at  present  enjoy,  will  be  lost.  So,  though  we  know 
the  truth,  yet  we  preach  our  own  particular  faith  and  insist  upon  it. 
For  the  proverb  has  it  : 

i sPrir  ^ n 

— We  should  eat  bread  with  sugar  and  cheat  the  world  with  frauds. 
See,  the  world  gives  nothing  to  an  honest  and  true  man,  nor  do  the 
people  honour  him.  He  who  is  hypocritical  and  cunning,  fares  well 
and  makes  much  money. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions  381 

Tyro--As  you  cheat  other  persons  by  means  of  your  jugglery, 
why  are  you  not  punished  by  the  king  or  government  ? 

Sectarians.— ‘Vie  have  converted  the  king  to  be  our  disciple, 
and  made  sure  of  our  footing,  which  is  not  likely  to  give  way. 

r.— Since  you  cheat  the  followers  of  other  faiths  and  injure 
their  interest,  how  will  you  answer  before  the  tribunal  of  God  ? You 
will  go  to  a horrible  hell.  Why  do  you  not  give  up  committing  so 
heinous  sins  for  the  short  span  of  your  life  ? 

S — It  will  be  seen  when  such  things  come  to  pass.  Let  the  hell 
and  God’s  punishment  come  when  they  may,  we  now  lie  on  the  bed 
of  roses.  The  people  give  us  wealth  out  of  their  own  free  will  and 
pleasure.  We  never  take  it  by  force.  Why  should  then  the  king 
punish  us  ? 

T. — Why  don’t  you  get  punishment  like  the  person  who  robs  a 
child  of  its  valuables  or  ornaments  by  coaxing  it,  and  so  is  punished 
by  a government  ? For,  says  Manu,  chapter  2,  verse  53  : 

^ fqr^T  vr^fcT  n 

—One  who  is  void  of  knowledge  is  a child,  and  one  who  imparts 
knowledge  is  a father  and  elder.  He  who  is  wise  and  learned,  does 
not  fall  into  your  snares;  but  for  cheating  ignorant  people,  who  are 
like  so  many  children,  you  should  certainly  receive  punishment  from 
the  government. 

S,  — Who  can  punish  us,  as  both  the  king  and  the  people  are 
the  followers  of  our  faith  ? When  such  a rule  is  in  force  as  to  award 
us  punishment,  we  would  set  these  customs  aside  and  institute  others 
in  their  place. 

T.  — Why  don’t  you  acquire  knowledge  and  teach  the  boys  and 
girls  of  householders,  which  will  do  you  and  lay  persons  much  good, 
instead  of  uselessly  consuming  wealth  in  idleness  ? 

S.  — What  is  the  use  to  leave  off  all  the  comforts  we  enjoy  from 
infancy  to  death  and  to  be  engaged  in  study  from  early  to  old  age, 
and  then  to  try  to  teach  and  preach  the  whole  life  ? We  get  millions 
of  money  without  effort,  and  live  in  ease.  Why  should  we  throw  all 
this  away  ? 

T.  — The  consequence  of  your  mode  of  living  is  bad.  See,  you 
are  afflicted  with  dire  disease;  you  die  fast;  you  are  disgraced  in  the 
eyes  of  the  wise.  Still  you  don’t  know  it  ! 

Might  of  Money 

S. — O our  dear  friend  : 

^ (I 

— Money  is  religion,  works,  and  salvation.  He  who  has  no 
money,  cries  : O Money  1 O money  ! and  is  sore  troubled. 

Thou  art  a child,  and  hast  no  experience  of  the  world.  Bear  in 
mind  that  no  religion  can  exist  without  money,  no  good  work  can  be 


382 


Satyarth  Prakash 


done  without  money,  no  salvation  can  be  attained  without  money. 
He  who  has  no  money  in  his  house,  sighs  for  it  and  gazes  at  good 
things  with  sore  longing,  saying  to  himself : If  I had  money,  I would 
enjoy  the  pleasure  of  such  and  such  things.  For,  all  persons  hear  of 
invisible  God  being  described  as  possessed  of  sixteen  attributes,  but 
they  do  not  find  Him,  but  the  real  God  is  the  Rupee  (Indian  dollar) 
which  is  possessed  of  qualities  and  parts  in  the  shape  of  sixteen  annas 
(Indian  pennies)  and  pices  (Indian  farthings)  and  shells  (used  as  coins 
in  India).  Therefore,  all  the  people  are  absorbed  in  earning  money, 
which  serves  all  their  purposes. 

r. — All  right.  Your  fraud  has  been  brought  to  light.  All  the 
deceptive  shams  you  have  set  up,  are  so  many  schemes  for  your  ease 
and  interest;  but  they  tend  to  the  ruin  of  the  rest  of  the  world;  for 
preaching  truth  to  the  world  as  much  benefits  it  as  it  is  injured  by  the 
advocacy  of  falsehood.  Why  don’t  you  collect  money  by  means  of 
service  and  commercial  pursuits,  if  wealth  alone  is  your  object  ? 

S.  — It  requires  much  labour  and  often  results  in  a loss;  but  our 
scheme  never  fails;  rather  it  always  brings  profit  surely  and  certainly. 
Look  here,  we  give  a man  a leaf  of  the  sacred  basil  and  a little  wash- 
ing of  our  god’s  feet,  and  put  a necklace  of  wooden  beads  about  his 
neck.  Being  thus  converted  to  our  faith,  he  serves  us  like  a cattle  all 
his  life.  He  goes  as  we  please  to  guide  him.  He  follows  us  like  the 
shadow. 

T,  — Why  do  these  people  give  you  much  wealth  ? 

S.  — For  the  sake  of  religion,  heaven  and  salvation. 

T,  — When  you  are  not  saved,  nor  do  you  know  the  nature  or 
means  of  salvation,  how  will  the  persons  get  it  by  serving  you  ? 

S — Is  the  reward  of  it  given  in  this  world  ? No  Sir,  it  is  after 
death  got  in  heaven.  They  get  back  in  heaven  all  that  they  give  us 
or  the  merit  of  serving  us  here. 

T, — Whether  they  will  get  back  what  they  give  you  here  or  not, 
is  not  the  question;  but  what  will  you  get  who  do  but  receive  money  ? 
Will  you  get  hell  or  something  like  it  ? 

S.  — We  sing  the  name  of  our  god.  We  shall  get  its  merit. 

T,  — Your  devotion  is  for  the  sake  of  money,  which  will  all  be 
left  here  on  death.  The  body  made  of  flesh  and  blood,  which  you 
nourish  so  fondly,  will  also  be  reduced  to  ashes  here.  Had  you  been 
serving  God,  your  heart  would  have  been  pure. 

S.  — Are  we  impure  ? 

T.  — You  are  very  dirty  inside. 

S,  — How  do  you  know  it  ? 

T,  — From  your  conduct  and  deeds. 

S, — The  conduct  of  great  men  (mahatmas)  is  like  the  tusks  of  an 
elephant,  ^ Just  as  the  teeth 

of  an  elephant  used  in  eating  are  different  from  those  which  are 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


383 


shown  to  the  world,  so  are  we  pure  at  heart,  but  play  the  worldly  or 
practice  frauds  outwardly. 

T. — Had  you  been  pure  at  heart,  your  outward  actions  would 
have  been  pure  also.  So  you  are  impure  at  heart  also. 

.S'. — We  may  be  anything,  but  are  not  our  disciples  good  ? 

T. — Your  disciples  must  be  like  you,  who  are  their  spiritual 

guide. 

S. — There  can  never  be  one  faith  for  all  the  people,  for  their 
qualities,  tendencies  to  actions,  and  natures  are  different  from  one 
another. 

Unity  of  Religion 

T.  — If  right  education  be  given  in  early  life,  veracity  and  other 
virtues  be  taught  to  be  practiced,  and  lying  and  other  evils  be  aban- 
doned, there  will  certainly  be  one  religion.  There  are  always  two 
sxts,  v/z,  the  virtuous  and  the  vicious.  It  does  not  matter  much. 
But  the  increase  of  the  virtuous  and  the  decrease  of  the  vicious  con- 
tribute to  promote  the  happiness  of  the  world,  and  when  the  vicious 
are  numerous,  there  is  much  misery  among  the  people.  If  all  the 
learned  people  preach  alike,  there  can  be  no  possible  delay  in  the 
unity  of  religion  among  the  people. 

S, — It  is  now  the  age  of  strife  or  Kali  Yuga.  Don’t  wish  for 
the  things  of  the  age  of  truth  or  Sat  Yuga. 

r. — Kali  Yuga  is  the  name  of  time,  which  being  inanimate  or 
actionless,  is  neither  a help  nor  a hindrance  to  the  practice  of  virtue 
or  vice.  But  you  yourselves  are  the  images  of  Kali  Yuga.  If  the 
people  were  neither  Sat  Yuga  nor  Kali  Yuga  (neither  good  nor  bad), 
no  man  whatever  could  be  virtuous.  They  are  the  eifects  of  good  or 
evil  company,  and  not  natural. 

So  saying,  he  repaired  to  the  holy  sage,  and  thus  addressed  to 

him  : 

Oh  holy  father,  you  have  saved  me,  or  else  I would  have  been 
perverted  and  ruined  by  falling  into  the  snares  of  some  one  of  these 
faiths.  I shall  henceforth  refute  these  hypocrites  and  advocate  the 
true  religion  of  the  Vedas. 

Sage. — It  is  the  duty  of  all  men,  and  specially  ol  the  learned  and 
the  spiritual  men,  to  teach  and  preach  the  cause  of  truth  to  all  other 
people,  and  to  show  them  the  necessity  of  abandoning  falsehood  and 
thus  to  do  good  to  all  by  their  advocacy  of  truth. 

Q. — Are  the  Brahmacharis  (Vedic  students)  and  Sanyasis 
(monks)  good? 

A. — These  orders  are  right  in  principle,  but  they  are  much  cor- 
rupted now-a-days.  Many  persons  assume  the  name  of  Brahmacharis 
and  keeping  long  matted  hair  set  up  themselves  hypocritically  as  holy 
men.  They  are  ever  engaged  in  muttering  their  god’s  name,  and  do- 
ing other  rituals.  They  never  do  so  much  as  to  think  of  acquiring 
knowledge,  which  originally  gave  them  the  name  of  Brahmachari* 


384 


Satyarth  Prakash 


They  never  take  the  least  pains  to  study  the  Vedas  or  Brahma.  These 
Brahmacharis  are  useless  like  the  goiter.  Those  Sanyasis  are  also 
useless  who  are  destitute  of  knowledge,  and  wander  begging  with  a 
staff  and  bowl  in  the  hand,  who  do  not  promote  the  cause  of  Vedic 
religion,  but  who  become  vagrant  from  early  life  by  taking  the  vow 
of  renunciation,  and  give  up  the  acquiring  of  knowledge.  Such 
Brhamacharis  and  Sanyasis  are  roving  about  here  and  there  to  visit 
the  so-called  sacred  rivers  and  places  and  to  take  the  sight  of  idols 
of  stone  and  the  like  substances.  They  don’t  speak  in  public  tho’  vers- 
ed in  knowledge,  and  lie  asleep  after  a hearty  meal  in  a retired  place. 
They  pass  their  days  in  slander  and  evil  deeds  from  jealousy  and 
hatred.  They  think  they  have  done  their  duty  when  they  put  on  a 
coloured  garment  and  got  a staff  in  the  hand.  Thinking  themselves 
to  be  superior  to  all  others,  they  do  no  good  work.  Such  monks  are 
a burden  to  the  earth.  But  those  who  do  good  to  all  the  world,  are 
all  right  and  praiseworthy. 

Q. — Are  the  Giri,  Puri,  Bharati,  Gosain  and  other  orders  good  ? 
For,  they  go  about  in  groups  and  make  hundreds  of  monks  pass 
their  life  in  ease  and  confort.  They  preach  the  doctrine  of  non-dualism 
everywhere.  They  study  and  teach  to  some  extent.  So  they  must 
be  good. 

A, — All  these  ten  names^  were  afterwards  assumed.  They  are 
not  ancient.  Their  groups  are  for  the  sake  of  food  and  drink.  Many 
monks  join  these  bodies  for  subsistence  only.  They  are  also  vain  and 
showy.  For,  making  one  of  them  an  abbot,  who  is  their  head,  they 
seat  him  on  a mattress  or  divan  at  evening,  and  all  the  Brahmins  and 
friars  stand  up  before  him  with  flowers  in  their  hands  and  pronounce-^ 

^ ^ \ 

and  similar  couplets.  Exclaiming  Hara ! Hara  ! they  shower  flowers 
on  him,  and  then  prostrate  before  him  in  salutation.  He  who  does  not 
conform  to  this  custom,  finds  it  hard  to  pull  on  with  them.  This 
trickery  is  for  a mere  show  to  the  world,  that  they  may  be  honoured 
among  the  people  and  get  money  from  them.  Many  of  them  own 
convents  and  lead  a family  life,  still  calling  themselves  to  be  Sanya- 
sis or  hermits  (who  renounce  the  world)  in  name,  but  not  in  deeds. 
The  duties  of  Sanyasis  are  given  in  the  fifth  chapter.  Without  doing 
them,  they  waste  their  time  for  nothing.  They  also  set  their  face 
against  him  who  preaches  the  truth.  They  generally  put  on  ashes  and 
a rosary,  and  some  of  them  are  proud  of  their  being  in  the  sect  that 
worships  Shiva  When  they  hold  their  religious  controversy,  they 
assert  their  belief  as  taught  by  Shankaracharya  and  refute  the  faith 
of  the  Chakrankits  and  others.  They  never  work  for  the  advance- 
ment of  the  Vedic  path  and  for  the  refutation  of  all  the  superstitious 
faiths  that  are  in  vogue.  These  monks  believe  that  they  have  nothing 

1.  10  orders  of  friars  are— Giri,  Puri,  Bharati,  Gosain,  Vana,  Parvat,  Saraswati, 
Dandi,  Sanyasi,  Paramansa. 

2.  We  salute  Narayan,  Brahma,  Vashishta,  Shakti,  Parasar,  Vyasa,  Shuka,  and 
Gourhpad. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


385 


to  do  with  advocation  or  refutation  of  faiths,  they  being  Mahatmas 
or  adepts.  Such  fellows  are  a burden  to  the  earth,  so  to  speak.  As 
these  monks  are  so  perverted,  the  opponents  of  the  Vedic  religion, 
the  followers  of  the  Warn  Marg  and  other  faiths,  such  as  the  Chris- 
tians, Mahomedans,  Jainees,  and  others,  have  become  numerous  and 
are  still  multiplying.  These  monks  are  being  decimated,  but  they 
don’t  awake  from  their  torpor  of  ages.  But  how  can  they  rise?  They 
have  at  heart  no  thought  of  benevolence  and  love  for  virtuous  deeds. 
They  consider  no  honour  done  to  them  greater  than  being  feasted. 
They  are  much  afraid  of  the  popular  cry. 

Now,  a monk  should  sacrific  his  desire  for  fame  among  the 
laymen,^  his  desire  for  wealth  and  enjoyment  of  the  worldly  plea- 
sures,and  his  desire  for  children  or  doting  over  disciples.^  How 
can  one  be  a monk  when  he  has  not  renounced  these  his  three 
desires  ? In  other  words,  it  is  the  primary  duty  of  monks  to  be 
engaged  day  and  night  in  doing  good  to  the  world  by  preaching  the 
religion  of  the  Vedas  without  partiality.  When  they  do  not  perform 
their  bounden  duties,  it  is  useless  to  call  them  monks,  /.e.,  those  who 
have  renounced  the  world.  To  be  true  to  their  name,  they  should 
work  harder  in  benevolence  than  the  lay  people  do  in  the  worldly 
affairs  and  selfish  interests.  In  that  case  alone,  all  orders  can  thrive 
healthily. 

See,  the  false  faiths  are  on  the  increase  before  your  eyes.  The 
people  are  turning  Christians  and  Mussulmans.  Can’t  you  protect 
your  own  house  a little  and  convert  others  to  your  faith  ? It  can  be 
done  when  you  have  a will  to  do.  There  can  be  no  progress  among 
the  people  of  this  land,  Aryavarta,  and  other  climes,  until  the  cham- 
pions of  progress  are  born  in  the  present  and  future  times.  The 
country  makes  progress  when  its  causes  exist,  namely,  the  study  and 
instruction  of  the  Vedas  and  other  true  and  genuine  scriptures,  the 
proper  observance  of  the  duties  relating  to  the  Brahmacharya  (stu- 
dent’s life)  and  other  stages  of  life,  and  the  preaching  of  truth.  Bear 
in  mind,  you  yourselves  see  many  things  to  be  really  superstitious. 
Thus,  for  instance,  a trading  monk  gives  out  his  power  of  blessing 
the  lay  people  with  sons  and  the  like  blessings.  Then  many  women 
go  to  him  and  ask  of  him  with  joined  hands  the  gift  of  a son.  The 
monk  then  gives  his  benediction  for  the  birth  of  a son  to  all.  The 
woman  who  begets  a son,  fancies  his  birth  is  due  to  the  monk’s 
benediction.  If  she  be  asked  by  which  monk’s  blessings  the  cow,  the 
bitch,  the  jenny  ass,  the  hen,  and  other  females  give  birth  to  the  litters 
of  their  young  ones,  she  will  be  unable  to  give  an  answer  If  a monk 
says  that  he  can  preserve  a child  from  death,  why  does  he  himself  die? 

Monkish  Tricks 

Some  of  these  monks  are  so  roguish  and  spread  their  snares  so 
dexterously  that  even  very  wise  men  are  caught  in  them.  They  are  like 
the  highway  robbers  of  Dhansary.  These  men  go  to  distant  provinces 
in  groups  of  5 or  7 fellows.  They  appoint  one  of  them  their  chief  saint 
who  is  fat  and  good-looking.  They  lodge  him  in  a forest  near  the 

1 . Lokaishna.  2.  Vittaishna.  3.  Putraishna. 


386 


Satyarth  Prakash 


town  or  village  in  which  there  are  some  rich  men.  They  then  go 
about  the  town  enquiring  of  inhabitants  if  they  have  seen  such  a saint, 
as  if  they  have  been  wholly  unacquainted  with  him,  though  really  his 
abetters  and  accomplices  in  swindling.  The  people  then  ask  of  them 
about  the  saint  as  to  who  and  what  kind  of  a holy  man  he  is.  A 
swindler  says  he  is  a very  great  saint,  who  can  read  thoughts,  and 
whose  words  of  mouth  turn  out  to  be  true.  He  is  a very  great  clair- 
voyant. We  have  left  our  house  and  home,  say  they,  to  find  him 
out.  1 have  heard  from  some  body,  says  one  of  them,  that  the  holy 
saint  was  seen  coming  toward  this  town.  A lay  man  then  requests 
them  to  show  him  that  he  may  go  to  see  him  and  ask  of  him  the  things 
of  the  mind.  Thus  they  wander  in  the  streets  and  tell  every  one  about 
the  so-called  saint.  They  assemble  at  night  to  take  repast  and  go  to 
bed.  The  next  morning  they  repeat  the  same  thing  and  continue  to 
do  so  for  two  or  three  days  together.  Then  all  the  tour  cheats  go  to 
a rich  rnan  and  tell  him  that  the  saint  has  been  found  out.  If  he  wants 
to  see  him,  he  should  accompany  them.  When  ready,  the  swindlers 
ask  him  what  he  wants  to  inquire  of  the  saint  He  should  tell  it  to 
them.  Then  some  express  their  desire  for  a son,  some  for  wealth, 
some  for  getting  cured  of  a disease,  others  for  overcoming  their  enemy. 
The  swindlers  take  them  to  the  counterfeit  sage.  They  then  use  their 
devices  for  thought-reading  to  cheat  them;  namely,  on  the  right  arc 
seated  those  who  want  wealth,  in  the  front  those  who  want  a son,  on 
the  left  those  who  want  to  be  cured.  Those  who  want  to  vanquish 
their  enemy  are  seated  in  the  midst  of  the  front  men,  after  being  con- 
ducted from  behind.  Whenthey  salute  him,  the  sage  at  once  loudly 
expresses  his  miraculous  power  of  reading  their  mind.  “Are  there 
sons,”  says  he  to  one  of  the  audience,  “with  us,  that  thou  hast  come 
here  with  that  desire?  In  like  manner,  he  addresses  to  one  with  a 
desire  for  wealth,  “Are  there  purses  here  that  thou  hast  come  to  us 
with  a desire  lor  wealth?  How  can  fortune  be  found  with  friars?”  To 
the  diseased  he  says,  “Are  we  a doctor  that  thou  hast  come  here  to 
get  cured?  We  arc  not  a doctor  to  cure  thee.  Go  to  some  doctor.” 
Ihe  sign  to  express  that  the  father  of  a man  is  sick,  is  the  pointing  of 
the  thumb.  It  the  mother  be  sick,  its  sign  is  the  index  finger.  If  the 
brother  is  sick,  it  is  indicated  by  the  midle  finger.  If  the  wife  is  sick, 
its  sign  is  the  ring  finger.  If  the  daughter  is  sick,  its  sign  is  the  little 
finger.  Seeing  these  fingers  raised  by  his  brother  cheats,  he  tells  out 
to  persons  : Thy  father  is  sick,  thy  mother  is  sick,  thy  brother,  thy 
wife  or  thy  daughter  is  sick.  Then  the  four  enquirers  are  charmed 
with  his  answers  The  wire-pullers  then  triumphantly  remind  the 
folks  of  what  they  told  them  of  the  sage:  “Is  he  not  what  we  told 
you  of  him?”  The  lay  men  say,  “O  yes,  he  is  what  you  told  us  of  him. 
You  have  done  us  a great  good  indeed.  It  was  also  our  good  luck 
that  we  saw  such  a sage,  whose  sight  satisfied  our  desires/*  One  of  the 
swindlers  says:  O brother,  listen  to  me,  this  high-souled  sage  goes  away 
when  he  likes.  He  is  not  likely  to  stay  long  here.  Whatever  bene- 
diction you  want  to  take  from  him,  you  should  make  haste  to  take  by 
serving  him  with  the  body,  soul,  and  wealth,  according  to  your  power. 
*For,  service  bears  fruit.  If  he  is  pleased  with  any  one,  it  is  not 


^ firHcn  1 1 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


387 


known  how  great  a gift  of  boon  he  may  give  him.  Santon  ki  gat 
apar  hai}  The  ways  of  saints  are  inscrutable.  The  lay  men  return 
home,  pleased  with  flattery,  praising  the  saint  all  along.  The  wire- 
pullers also  follow  them,  so  that  none  should  expose  their  trickery. 
If  a friend  of  those  rich  lay  men  comes  across  them,  they  praise  the 
sage  before  him.  They  tell  him  the  account  of  all  that  accompanied 
them  to  the  saint.  When  a great  noise  is  made  in  the  town,  that  a 
very  great  saint  has  come  to  a certain  place,  the  people  repair  to  him 
in  multitudes.  When  crowds  go  to  him  and  ask  him  what  in  their 
mind  is,  he  assumes  silence  from  the  plan  of  secret  signs  being  upset. 
He  says,  ‘Don’t  tease  me.’  Then  his  instrumental  monks  also  say  : If 
you  trouble  him  much,  he  will  leave  the  place.  A very  rich  man  of 
them  taking  the  mmistrant  swindler  aside  says,  ‘if  you  get  my  desire 
told  by  the  saint,  I shall  believe  him  to  be  true.’  The  swindler  asks 
him  what  it  is.  The  rich  man  tells  it  to  him.  The  cheat  takes  and 
seats  him  according  to  the  appointed  signs.  Then  the  affected  sage 
tells  out  his  desire  at  once  on  knowing  the  sign.  It  is  heard  by  the 
whole  crowd,  who  exclaim:  O,  he  is  a very  great  saint!  Thereupon 
some  bring  him  a present  of  sweetmeat,  some  of  pices,  some  of  rupees, 
some  of  gold  coins,  some  of  clothes,  some  of  foodstuffs  and  other 
things.  As  long  as  the  people  respect  them  greatly,  the  swindlers  rob 
them  of  wealth.  Sometimes  he  gives  benediction  or  a pinch  of  ashes 
for  the  blessing  of  a son  to  some  of  the  visitors  who  are  foolish  but 
riclV^  and  taking  a thousand  rupees  from  him  says  : “If  thy  devotion 
is  sincere,  thou  shalt  get  a son.” 

Thus  there  are  many  ‘ thugs”  or  cheats  who  can  only  be  known 
by  the  learned,  but  not  others.  Therefore,  it  is  the  knowledge  of  the 
Vedas  and  other  systems  of  knowledge  and  the  keeping  of  a good 
company  that  make  a man  proof  against  the  frauds  of  rogues  and 
able  to  save  others  from  similar  evils;  for,  knowledge  alone  is  the  eye 
of  man.  There  can  be  no  awakening  of  the  merit  without  instruction 
and  knowledge.  They  alone  who  receive  good  education  from  early 
age  become  true  men  and  learned  people.  Those  who  keep  a bad 
company  turn  out  wicked,  sinful  and  densely  ignorant  and  suffer  much 
pain.  Therefore,  knowledge  is  praised  over  all,  for  he  who  knows, 
believes  in  virtue.  Says  Chanakya,  XI,  12  : — 

>9 

ftrvrfcr  ^3^:  n 

— He  who  does  not  know  the  qualities  of  another,  always 
censures  the  latter;  as  a savage  leaving  off  pearls,  wears  a garland  of 
berries. 

In  like  manner,  the  man  who  is  learned,  wise,  virtuous,  fond  of 
a good  company,  clairvoyant,  courageous,  of  subdued  senses,  and 
polite,  obtains  success  in  religion,  his  desire,  wealth,  and  salvation, 
and  lives  in  ease  in  this  life  and  the  life  to  come. 

So  much  in  brief  of  the  faiths  of  the  people  of  the  Aryavarta. 
What  follows  is  a brief  history  of  Arya  kings  which  has  come  to  our 
hand,  and  given  here  for  the  information  of  good  people. 


?.  ^ WUX  I 


R.  nte  % 5^  I 


388 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Geneology  of  the  Kings  of  Aryavarta 

We  now  give  a history  of  the  royal  dynasties  of  Aryavarta  which 
begins  from  Emperor  Yudhishthir  and  ends  with  Emperor  Yashapala. 
The  history  of  kings  from  SwayambhavaManu  to  Emperor  Yudhishthir 
is  given  in  the  Mahabhar  at  and  other  books.  This  account  will  add  to 
the  information  of  good  people.  Although  it  is  given  in  the  Harish- 
chandra  Chandrika  and  Mohan  Chandrika,  guides  of  students,  being  fort- 
nightly papers  from  the  Nathadwara,  Chittorgarh,  Udaipur,  Meywar 
State,  Rajputana,  and  so  known  to  all,  yet  we  translate  it  therefrom  to 
show  that  if  our  good  Arya  people  carefully  search  and  publish  histor 
ical  and  scientific  books,  they  will  greatly  benefit  the  country.  The  editor 
of  the  paper  got  this  account  from  an  ancient  book  which  he  received 
from  his  friend  and  which  was  written  in  1732  of  the  Vikram  era  and 
published  it  in  his  two  issues  of  the  bright  fortnight  of  Margashirsh  of 
1939  (1882  A.D.),  Nos.  19  and  20.  It  is  as  follows  : 

Lunar  Line 

Indraprastha  was  the  seat  of  Government  of  the  Aryas  till  the 
reign  of  Emperor  Yashapala  From  Emperor  Y udhishthir  to  Emperor 
Yashapala  there  were  about  124  kings,  who  reigned  4,157  years,  9 
months,  and  14  days,  whose  detail  is  as  follows  : — 


The  house  of  Yudhishithir  con- 

24.  Karadavi 

44 

10 

8 

tained  30  kings  reigning  fo 

r 1770 

25.  Alamika 

50 

11 

8 

years,  11  months,  and 

10 

days, 

26.  Udayapala 

38 

9 

0 

distributed  as  follows  : 

27.  Durvana  Mai 

40 

10 

26 

No.  Arya  Kings 

Y 

M 

D 

28.  Damata 

32 

0 

0 

1.  Yudhishthir 

36 

8 

25 

29.  Bhimapala 

58 

5 

8 

2.  Parikshit 

60 

0 

0 

30.  Kshemaka 

48 

11 

21 

3.  Janamejaya 

4,  Ashwamcdha 

84 

82 

7 

8 

23 

22 

Kshemaka  was 

killed  1 

by 

his 

5.  Rama  II 

88 

2 

8 

minister  Vihrava 

whose 

house 

().  Khatra  Mai 

81 

11 

27 

contained  14  kings 

reigning 

for 

7.  Chitta  Ratha 

75 

3 

18 

500  years,  3 months,  17  days 

as 

8.  Dashta  Shailya 

75 

10 

24 

loiiows  : — 

9.  Ugra  Sen 

78 

7 

21 

No.  Arya  Kings 

Y 

M 

D 

10.  Shur  Sen 

78 

7 

21 

1.  Vishrava 

17 

3 

29 

11.  Bhuvanpati 

69 

5 

5 

2.  Pura  Seni 

42 

8 

21 

12.  Rana  Jita 

65 

10 

4 

3.  Vira  Sen 

52 

10 

17 

13.  Rikshaka 

64 

7 

4 

4.  Ananga  Shayi 

47 

8 

23 

14.  Sukhadeva 

62 

0 

24 

5.  Hari  Jit 

35 

9 

17 

15.  Naraharideva 

51 

10 

2 

6.  Parama  Seni 

44 

2 

23 

16.  Suchiratha 

42 

11 

2 

7.  Sukhpalala 

30 

2 

21 

17.  Shur  Sen  11 

58 

10 

8 

8.  Kadruta 

42 

9 

24 

18.  Parvata  Sen 

55 

8 

10 

9 Sajja 

32 

2 

14 

19.  Medhavi 

52 

10 

10 

10.  Amara  Churha 

27 

3 

16 

20.  Sonachira 

50 

8 

21 

11.  Amipala 

22 

11 

25 

21.  Bhima  Deva 

47 

9 

20 

12.  Dasharatha 

25 

4 

12 

22.  Nrihari  Deva 

45 

11 

23 

13.  Vira  sala 

31 

8 

11 

23.  Puma  Mai 

44 

8 

7 

14.  Vira  Sala  Sen 

47 

0 

14 

Note— Y.M.D,  are  abbreviations  of  year,  month,  day  respectively. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


389 


Vira  Sala  Sen  was  murdered 
and  succeeded  by  Vira  Maha 
President  whose  house  had  16 
kings,  who  reigned  for  445  years, 
5 months,  and  4 days,  as  follows  : 


No. 

Arya  Kings 

Y 

M D 

1. 

Vira  Maha 

3.5 

10 

8 

2. 

Ajita  Sinha 

27 

7 

29 

3. 

Sarva  Datta 

28 

3 

10 

4. 

Bhuvanapati 

15 

4 

10 

5. 

Vira  Sen 

21 

2 

13 

6. 

Mahipala 

40 

8 

7 

7. 

Shatru  Shala 

26 

4 

3 

8. 

Sangha  Raja 

17 

2 

10 

9. 

Tejapala 

28 

11 

10 

10. 

Manika  Chand 

37 

7 

21 

11. 

Kama  Seni 

42 

5 

10 

12. 

Shatru  Mardan 

8 

11 

13 

13. 

Jivan  Loka 

28 

9 

17 

14. 

Hari  Rao 

26 

10 

29 

15. 

Vira  Sen  II 

35 

2 

20 

16.  Adittya  Ketu 

23 

11 

13 

King  Adittya  Ketu  of  Maga» 
dha  Desha  was  killed  and  succeed- 
ed by  Dhandhar,  King  of  Prayaga, 
whose  dynasty  contained  9 kings 
reigning  for  374  years,  11  months 
and  26  days  as  follows  , — 


No. 

Arya  Kings 

Y 

M D 

1. 

Dhandhar 

42 

7 

24 

2. 

Maharshi 

41 

2 

29 

3. 

Sanarachi 

50 

10 

19 

4. 

Mahagadha 

30 

3 

8 

5. 

Duranatha 

28 

5 

25 

6. 

Jivana  Raj 

45 

2 

5 

7. 

Rudra  Sen 

47 

4 

28 

8. 

Arilaka 

52 

10 

8 

9. 

Rajapala 

36 

0 

0 

Raja  Rajapala  was  killed  and 
succeeded  by  Samant  Mahampal 
who  reigned  for  14  years.  He  was 
attacked,  killed  and  succeeded  by 
Viramadittya  of  Ujjain  or  Avanti 
who  reigned  93  years.  He  was 
killed  and  succeeded  by  Samud- 
rapala  Yogi  of  Partham,  a noble 
of  Shalivan.  His  dynasty  contained 
61  kings,  reigning  for  372  years,  4 
months,  and  27  days  as  follows 


No,  Arya  Kings 

Y 

M D 

1.  Samudrapala 

54 

2 

20 

2.  Chandrapala 

36 

5 

4 

3.  Sahoyapala 

11 

4 

11 

4.  Devapala 

27 

1 

28 

5.  Narsinghapala 

18 

0 20 

6.  Samapala 

27 

1 

17 

7.  Raghupala 

22 

3 

25 

8.  Gobindpala 

27 

1 

17 

9.  Amritapala 

36 

10 

13 

10.  Balipala 

12 

5 

27 

11.  Mahipala 

13 

8 

4 

12.  Haripala 

14 

8 

4 

1 ^ Sisapala 

11 

10 

13 

14.  Mahanpala 

17 

10 

19 

15.  Karampala 

6 

2 

2 

16.  Vikrampala 

24 

11 

13 

Vikrampala  attacked  Malukh 
Chandra  Bohra  King  of  west,  but 
was  slain  in  the  battle,  and  succee- 
ded by  his  vanquisher  whose 
dynasty  contained  10  kings  ruling 
for  191  years,  1 month,  16  days, 
as  follows  : — 


No. 

Arya  Kings 

Y 

M D 

1. 

Malukh  Chandra 

54 

2 

10 

2. 

Vikram  Chandra 

12 

7 

12 

3. 

Ami  Chandra 

10 

0 

5 

4. 

Rama  Chand 

13 

11 

8 

5. 

Hari  Chand 

14 

9 

24 

6. 

Kalyan  Chand 

10 

0 

5 

7. 

Bhim  Chand 

16 

2 

6 

8. 

Lobe  Chand 

26 

3 22 

9. 

Gobind 

31 

7 

10 

10. 

Queen  Padmavati 

2 

0 

0 

She  died  heirless.  Her  nobles 
put  Hari  Prem  Friar  on  the  throne 
and  ruled  themselves.  His  dynasty 
had  4 kings  reigning  for  50  years, 
and  21  days,  as  follows  : — 


No.  Arya  Kings  Y Ml  D 

1.  Hari  Prem  7 5 8 

2.  Gobind  Prem  20  2 1 

3.  Gopal  Prem  15  7 28 

4.  Mahavahu  6 8 29 


He  turned  a recluse,  where- 
upon Adhi  Sen,  King  of  Bengal, 
came  to  Indraprastha.  His  dynasty 


390 


Satyarth  Prakash 


had  12  kings,  reigning  for  115 
years,  1 1 months,  and  2 days  as 
follows  : — 


No. 

Ary  a Kings 

Y 

M 

D 

1. 

Adhi  Sen 

18 

5 

21 

2. 

Vilavala  Sen 

12 

4 

2 

3. 

Keshava  Sen 

15 

7 

12 

4. 

Madh  Sen 

12 

4 

2 

5. 

Mayur  Sen 

20 

11 

27 

6. 

Bhima  Sen 

5 

10 

9 

7. 

Kalyan  Sen 

4 

8 

21 

8. 

Hari  Sen 

12 

0 

25 

9. 

Kshema  Sen 

8 

11 

15 

10. 

Narayan  Sen 

2 

9 

29 

11. 

Lakshmi  Sen 

26 

10 

0 

12. 

Damodar  Sen 

11 

5 

19 

King  Damoder  Sen  was  very 
oppressive  to  his  nobles,  of  whom 
Deep  Singh  won  over  the  army 
and  fought  with  the  King  who 
was  killed  and  succeeded  by  Deep 
Singh  whose  dynasty  had  6 kings, 
reigning  for  107  years,  5 months, 
and  22  days,  as  follows  : — 


No, 

Ary  a Kings 

Y 

M 

D 

1. 

Deep  Singh 

17 

1 

16 

2. 

Raj  Singh 

14 

5 

0 

3. 

Rana  Singh 

9 

8 

1 

4. 

Nara  Singh 

45 

0 

15 

5, 

Hari  Singh 

13 

2 

2 

6. 

Jivan  Singh 

8 

0 

1 

King  Jivan  Singh  sent  all  his 
army  to  the  north  for  some 
reason.  When  it  was  heard  by 
Prithwi  Raj  Chowhan,  King  of 
Virat,  he  attacked  King  Jivan 
Singh  who  fell  in  the  battle  and 
was  succeeded  by  Prithwi  Raj 
whose  dynasty  had  5 kings  reign- 
ing for  86  years  and  20  days  as 
follows  : — 


No.  Ary  a Kings 

Y 

M 

D 

1.  Prithwi  Raj 

12 

2 

19 

2.  Abhaya  Pal 

14 

5 

17 

3.  Durjan  Pal 

11 

4 

14 

4.  UdayaPal 

11 

7 

7 

5.  Yasha  Pal 

36 

4 

27 

King  Yasha  Pal  was  attacked 
by  Sultan  Shahabuddeen  Gori- 
garh,  Gajni,  and  being  captured 
was  confined  in  the  fort  of  Prayaga 
in  1249  Vikram  era.  The  Sultan 
ruled  at  Indraprastha.  His  dynasty 
had  53  kings  reigning  for  754 
years,  1 month,  17  days,  whose 
detail  is  found  in  many  books  and 
so  omitted  here. 


Lunar  Line 

1 Vishnu,  Brahma,  Marichi, 
Kashyapa. 

5 Vaivaswat,  Manu,  Ella 
(daughter)  married  Buddha,  5th  in 
descent  from  Atri,  brother  of 
Marichi,  Purava,  Ayu. 

10  Nohas,  Yayati,  Ora, 
Vahana,  Sovahana. 

15  T r e s a n i,  Kathanduna, 
Miritha,  Yasmatha,  Viroota. 

20  Drooja,  Seth,  Ur,  Kandhar, 
Dharmasena. 

25  Dridsen,  Pritchita,  Kana, 
Goban,  Trisan. 

30  Kurunduma,  Mcru,  Maroo- 
ti,  Dushyanta,  Bharat. 

25  Vitatha,  Manyu,  Vrahate- 
shetra,  Sahotra  Hasti. 

40  Ajmida,  Riksha,  Samvarna, 
Cooru,  Parikshit. 

45  Jahun,  Soratha,  Viduratha, 
Sarvbhooma,  Jaysena. 

50  Radhica,  Avutaya,  Crodh- 
ana,  Devatithi,  Riksha. 

55  Bhimena,  Dulepa,  Pretipa, 
Santanu,  Vichitravirya. 

60  Pandu,  Yudhisthira. 

Soloar  Line 

Brahma,  Marichi,  Kashyapa, 
Vaivaswat,  Manu. 

1 Ikshwaku,  Vicukshi,  Purun- 
jah,  Anprithu. 

5 Visgandhi,  Ardrah,  Yava, 
Sravas,  Vrihadaswa. 

10  Dhundmar,  Dridaswa, 
Hariaswa,  Nikumpa,  Varunaswa. 

15  Senajit,  Yavanaswa,  Man- 
dhata,  Purkutchu,  Aruna. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


391 


20  Trividhunva,  Atraruna, 
Sutvritha,  Trisonkha,  Haris- 
chandra. 

25  Rohita,  Harita,  Champa, 
Vijeya,  Baruka 

30  Vricksha,  Rahuka,  Sagar, 
Kesi,  Asmanjas 

35  Ausuman,  Dilipa,  Bhagi- 
ratha,  Srutsen,  Nabagh. 

40  Ambarisha,  Sindhudwipa, 
Ayutayu,  Rituparna,  Naia. 

45  Niruah,  Sevadasa,  Asm- 
orka,  Maluka,  Satwarith. 

50  Aidvira,  Viswasah,  Khar- 
bhang,  Dirgbahu,  Dilipa. 

55  Raghu,  Aja,  Dasratli,  Ram- 
chandra.  Lava. 

60  Alitha,  Nissida,  Nabha, 
Pundrika,  Meghunna. 

65  Bala,  vSiila,  Bajranaba, 


Sujansa,  Visitaswa. 

70  Vidrita,  Hirnaba,  Puspaka, 
Sudarsan,  Ugganvurna. 

75  Seegra,  Miirroo,  Prisisoota, 
Setsemda-Amarsunda. 

80  Avaswana,  Viswasawa, 
Pri^enjita,  Takhyac,  Virhidbala. 

85  Virhitvira,  Orookria,  Bach- 
vrida,  Prithiveoma,  Bhannu. 

90  Sydeva,  Vrehidiswa,  Vahu- 
man,  Pratikuswa,  Supritika. 

95  Murudeva,  Sonikhetra, 
Pushkara,  Rekha,  Sutha. 

100  Umitrajit,  Vrihitraya, 
Barriketu,  Krejinjaya,  Rininjaya. 

i05  Suiijeha,  Sakya,  Sudipa, 
Sangala,  Asmanjita. 

100  Romika,  Surita,  Suraitra, 
contemporary  with  Vikrama- 
dittya,  57  B.C. — Col.  Tod. 


Summary 

There  was  but  Vedic  Religion  in  the  whole  world  5,000  years  ago,  when  the 
great  war,  called  the  Mahabharat,  was  fought  between  the  Kauravas  and  the  Pan- 
davas  in  which  almost  all  the  great  men  perished  and  which  led  the  Indian  Empire 
to  its  downfall  Prior  to  that  war  the  Indian  civilisation  was  a wonder  to  the  world 
and  attracted  the  people  of  the  world  to  come  to  India  to  learn  science  and  art  (as 
now  they  do  by  going  to  Europe,  the  seat  of  modern  civilisation).  Manu,  II,  20. 
That  India  was  the  queen  of  the  world,  as  borne  out  by  a passage  in  the  Maitri 
Upanishat,  which  enumerates  17  Emperors  that  ruled  overall  the  then  known  world. 
Of  them,  the  last  was  Bharat,  after  whom  India  is  still  called  Bharat-khand  or 
Bharatvarsha  or  the  land  of  Bharat. 

The  ancient  Indians  developed  the  military  art  to  a wonderful  stage,  rivalling 
its  modern  state,  as  there  were  fire-arms  called  shataghni  (cannon),  bhushimdi  (mus- 
ket), &c.  The  progress  in  philosophy,  medicine,  mathematics,  poetry,  and  other 
branches  of  knowledge  is  attested  by  some  of  the  books  now  extant  and  well  known 
to  scholars. 

It  was  from  ancient  India  that  knowledge  travelled  westward.  It  went  first  to 
Egypt,  thence  to  Greece,  thence  to  Rome  and,  spreading  over  all  Europe,  passed 
on  to  America.  Sometimes  European  orientalists  misinterpret  Sanskrit  books  and 
so  come  to  no  right  conclusion.  For  instance,  the  late  Prof.  Max  Muller  translates 
bradhnam  by  horse,  whereas  it  means  the  Great  Self.  Dr.  Goldstucker  rightly 
observes  in  his  Bible  in  India  that  Aryavarta  (India)  is  the  fountain-head  of  all 
knowledge,  morals,  science  and  art;  and  religions  have  spread  out  from  this  very 
land.  He  prays  to  God,  O Lord,  may  my  country  (France)  be  as  great  as  Arya- 
varta! [This  prayer  is  answered,  as  the  whole  Europe  is  called  the  land  of  the 
Franks  (French) — Faringstan  and  is  now  the  seat  of  civilisation  as  India  in  old  time. 
— Ed.]  Dara  Shikoh,  the  most  learned  son  and  heir-apparent  of  Emperor  Shahjehan 
of  Delhi,  says  in  his  translation  of  Upanishafs  that  tho*  he  studied  Arabic  and 
other  languages,  yet  he  got  no  solace  but  in  Sanscrit.  But  all  this  great  progress 
was  dashed  to  pieces  by  the  great  civil  war,  which  ushered  the  age  of  ignorance. 

Since  then  the  Brahmins  have  given  up  their  old  austere  training  and  ceased  to 
teach  the  other  classes  of  society.  The  people  becoming  ignorant,  priest-craft  was 
instituted  in  its  most  horrible  form.  The  ignorant  Brahmins  taught  that  what  they 
said  was  as  true  as  the  commandments  of  God,  and  all  the  best  things  of  the  world 
were  intended  for  them.  When  the  people  who  were  barbarised  most  shamefully, 
believed  all  that  they  preached;  the  Brahmins  virtually  became  the  popes  of  India, 


392 


Satyarth  Prakash 


and  they  acted,  strange  to  say,  on  simitar  lines.  The  European  popes  used  to  write 
drafts  on  heaven  in  the  name  of  Lord  Jesus  Christ  The  Indian  popes  pUyed  the  like 
tricks  in  a thousand  forms.  They  are  still  misleading  the  people.  The  reason  is  on 
the  surface  : when  the  preachers  are  ignorant,  the  congregation  goes  to  the  Devil. 
So  the  Indian  popes  started  a new  religion,  called  (1)  the  Warn  Marg  (Bacchanalia- 
nism),  whose  doctrines  are  {a)  to  take  flesh,  {b)  wine,  (c)  fish,  {d)  stimulant  pie,  and 
{e)  to  indulge  in  indiscriminate  sexual  intercourse  They  worshipped  private  parts 
of  men  and  women  in  their  orgies.  The  man  was  called  Bhairava  (Bacchus)  and  the 
woman  Bhairavi  (his  wife)  That  person  who  died  drinking  was  believed  as  gone 
to  heavens.  Their  religious  books  are  called  the  Tantras.  In  sacrifices  these  priests 
burnt  cows  and  horses  on  the  altar,  called  the  goniedh  and  ashwamedh  respectively. 
But  their  ancient  sense  implies  the  subdual  of  senses  and  just  government  respec- 
tively. For,  the  Vedas  do  not  at  all  sanction  the  slaughter  of  cows  and  horses  in 
any  form. 

When  this  horrid  religion  was  in  its  height.  Lord  Buddha  raised  his  voice 
against  it,  asking,  if  the  animal  sacrificed  went  to  heaven  as  the  Indian  Bacch- 
analians asserted  to  justify  their  sacrifices,  why  did  not  the  sacrificer  burn  his  own 
parents  on  the  altar  to  send  them  to  heaven  ? The  argument  was  unanswerable, 
and  the  supremacy  of  (2)  Buddhism  was  the  consequence.  There  also  rose  kindred 
sects,  called  (3)  Jainism  and  (4)  Charvakism  (materialism).  The  believers  of  Jainism 
condemned  the  Vedas,  imagining  them  to  sanction  sacrifices.  With  the  repudiation 
of  the  Vedas  their  religion  was  about  to  expire,  when  Lord  Shankar  arrested  its 
fall  and  defeating  the  Buddhists,  Jainis,  and  Charvaks  in  controversies,  restored 
the  Vedic  faith  to  its  previous  supremacy.  In  this  noble  cause  he  was  helped  by 
King  Sudhanwa.  Jainism,  Buddhism  and  Charvakism  maintained  that  there  was 
no  eternal  God,  the  maker  of  the  world,  and  that  the  visible  world  was  all  in  all. 
Lord  Shankar  denied  the  reality  of  the  world  and  proved  the  real  existence  of  the 
Supreme  Being.  He  gained  a signal  victory  over  his  opponents,  who  embraced  the 
Vedic  religion.  His  early  death  was  a serious  blow  to  the  Vedic  cause.  His 
followers  taught  the  new  form  of  (5)  Vedant,  that  the  soul  and  God  were  indentical 
and  that  the  world  was  illusion.  As  a rope  in  the  dark  looks  like  a snake,  which 
disappears  in  the  presence  of  light,  so  is  the  visible  world,  which  will  vanish  on  the 
dawn  of  the  Brahman  in  the  mind.  But  this  position  is  wrong;  for,  if  there  is  but 
God  alone  and  no  other  beings,  the  soul  and  matter  being  both  God,  it  is  God 
who  has  got  an  erroneous  idea  of  the  world,  that  is  to  say,  the  soul’s  ignorance 
of  the  world  will  be  laid  at  the  door  of  God;  but  it  is  an  outrage  of  reason  to  believe 
ignorance  in  God.  Hence  the  neo-Vedant  is  false 

It  is  wrong  to  suppose  that  the  identity  of  the  soul  and  God  is  taught  by 
Vyasa  and  Jaimini.  The  Vedant  philosophy  of  Vyasa  distinctly  says,  (1.  i.  17)  the 
soul  is  not  the  Brahman  (God). 

V^hen  Vicramadittya  was  the  emperor  of  India  300  years  after  Lord  Shankar, 
(6)  Shivism  was  very  much  prevalent.  This  sect  teaches  that  the  bedaubing  of  the 
forehead  with  ashes,  the  wearing  of  beads,  the  worship  of  God  Shiva’s  emblem 
(generative  organ),  and  fasting  on  the  13lh  of  a month  give  salvation  to  man.  This 
worship  is  mentioned  in  the  Shiva  Parana,  written  in  the  reign  of  King  Bhoja  who 
came  500  years  after  Vicramadittya. 

Some  140  years  after  Bhoja,  (7)  Vaishnavism  came  to  be  believed  by  the 
people.  It  was  first  taught  by  Shatkopa,  a low  caste  and  then  by  Yavanacharya, 
a Greek  or  Mahomedan.  The  only  learned  teacher  was  Ramanuja,  who  gave  it  a 
great  impetus.  The  doctrines  of  this  sect  are  the  cauterisation  of  the  votary’s 
arms  with  the  dies  of  a conch,  quoit,  mace,  and  lotus  (supposed  to  be  held  by 
God  in  his  four  hands);  the  painting  of  the  forehead  with  sandal  wood  or  white 
mud  daub;  assuming  such  names  as  Narayan  Das;  the  wearing  of  lotus  seeds;  and 
muttering  “Salutation  fo  God  Narayan.!’  They  are  the  means  of  salvation.  Their 
falsity  is  evident. 

All  these  sects  introduced  idolatry  in  imitation  of  the  Jainis,  who  are  its 
original  inventors.  The  difference  in  the  form  of  idols  is  kept  to  show  opposition 
to  Jainism  The  idols  of  Jainism  are  naked,  while  those  of  the  Indian  popery  are 
clothed,  and  so  forth.  The  idolaters  plead  that  God  being  formless  cannot  be  con- 
ceived, so  an  image  is  necessary  for  His  worship.  It  is  replied  that  the  contemplation 
of  God’s  works  as  displayed  in  nature  is  sufficient  to  give  an  idea  of  God  to  a wor- 
shipper. An  image  worshipper  is  liable  to  sin,  as  he  imagines  God  to  be  in  an  image 
only;  while  one  who  believes  in  the  omnipresence  of  God  does  not  commit  sin 
even  in  the  dark. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


393 


The  idolater’s  muttering  the  name  of  God  is  also  useless^  for  one’s  mouth  is 
not  sweetened  by  repeating  the  word  sugar. 

The  belief  that  God  incarnated  in  Rama,  Krishna,  etc.,  is  also  false.  The 
Vedas  declare  that  God  never  takes  on  flesh,  for  being  present  everywhere  He  has 
no  necessity  to  incarnate. 

Some  people  wrongly  imagine  that  God  comes  down  in  an  image  on  invoca- 
tion by  means  of  the  Vedic  verses.  The  falsity  of  this  belief  will  be  apparent  when 
it  is  known  that  the  invocating  texts  are  not  the  Vedic  verses  They  are  forged  by 
popes  to  cheat  the  vulgar  of  money.  The  Yajurveda  plainly  says  (XXXH,  3)  that 
there  is  no  image  of  God.  The  Kena  Upanishat  says:  Know  and  adore  Him  as  the 
Supreme  Being  who  is  not  expressed  by  speech,  which  He  stimulates  by  His  presence. 

Idolatry  has  begotten  many  evils  in  India.  It  makes  the  mind  restless,  as  it 
soon  graps  an  image  and  then  it  runs  wild.  It  costs  millions  of  money,  which 
produce  quarrel,  etc  Idolaters  neglect  their  duties  and  become  engaged  in  frivo- 
lities. The  father,  mother,  teacher,  guest  are  the  living  images  to  whom  service  is  due. 

The  idolaters  have  erected  images  in  many  towns  which  are  called  holy  places. 
There  the  priests  practice  frauds  to  rob  pilgrims.  To  take  a few  examples.  At 
Benares  they  say  God  Mahadeva  hid  himself  in  a well  to  avoid  being  seen  by  a 
Moslem.  The  truth  is  that  some  pope  threw  the  idol  into  the  well  when  the 
Mahomedans  attacked  Benares  in  the  time  of  Aurungzebe,  who  broke  Hindu  idols. 
At  Jagan  Nath  Puri  the  priests  play  many  tricks.  They  pile  several  kettles  of  rice 
on  a hearth  and  show  to  pilgrims  that  the  rice  of  the  top  kettle  is  first  boiled.  The 
fact  is  that  they  place  the  kettle  of  boiled  rice  on  the  top  of  others  and  then  bring 
in  pilgrims  to  show  it. 

In  the  Deccan  an  idol  is  so  made  that  tubes  are  inserted  in  it,  so  that  a man 
smoking  behind  it  and  blowing  through  them  gives  the  idol  an  appearance  of  a 
smoker.  The  image  of  Somnath,  which  Mahmud  broke  and  plundered,  was  held 
in  the  air  by  means  of  magnets. 

All  these  so-called  sacred  places  are  of  recent  date.  When  the  Jainis  made 
their  Girnar,  Abu,  Palitana,  etc.  in  the  12th  century,  the  Brahmin  popes  made 
theirs  in  imitation  of  them.  If  the  records  of  these  popes  be  examined,  they  do 
not  go  more  than  1 ,000  years  back. 

All  these  sects  insist  on  the  worship  of  their  first  teacher  whom  they  regard 
as  equal  to  God.  But  it  is  absurd,  for  no  man  however  great  can  ever  be  equal  to 
God  who  makes  the  heaven  and  earth. 

As  idolatry  is  plainly  given  in  the  18  Puranas  or  books  of  mythology,  their 
believers  ascribe  their  authorship  to  Vyasa,  the  author  of  the  Vedant  aphorisms. 
But  the  perusal  of  the  works  of  Vyasa  does  not  warrant  us  to  suppose  that  he 
could  write  such  falsehoods  and  self-contradictions  as  are  found  in  the  Puranas. 
For  instance,  the  Shiva  Purana  makes  Shiva  the  Gread  God  and  other  gods  his 
servants.  The  Vishnu  Purana  describes  Vishnu  as  the  Creator  and  the  other  gods 
as  his  menials.  These  and  other  subjects  of  the  Puranas  cannot  be  the  work  of 
one  man,  and  specially  of  the  type  of  Vyasa’s  learning  The  creation  stories  of 
the  Puranas  are  very  ridiculous.  For  instance,  according  to  the  Bhagwat,  the  lotus 
sprouted  from  Vishnu's  navel  produced  Brahma,  whose  right  toe  begot  King 
Swayambhava  and  left  toe  his  Queen  Satyarupa.  His  forehead  produced  Rudra 
and  other  9 patriarchs,  trees,  mountains,  men,  devils,  serpents  etc  Now  all  this 
is  the  work  of  maniacs.  Thus  St.  Vyasa  was  not  the  author  of  the  18  Puranas. 

It  is  falsely  said  that  St.  Kashyapa  and  his  wives  produced  all  the  objects  of 
the  world;  for,  human  beings  cannot  beget  mountains,  trees  and  rivers.  The 
word  kashyapa  is  the  transposed  form  of  the  word  pashyaka,  which  means  a seer 
and  is  a name  of  God,  who  has  produced  all  the  objects  of  the  world. 

The  claims  of  the  Indian  popes  that  they  can  propitiate  the  evil  stars  which 
afflict  the  fortune  of  man,  are  also  false.  If  the  stars  are  in  their  power,  why  do 
they  beg  their  bread  of  men?  The  vicissitudes  of  man’s  fortune  are  the  results  of 
his  actions. 

The  Garurh  Purana  teaches  that  a cow  should  be  given  by  a dying  person  to 
a priest  to  enable  the  dead  to  cross  the  river  of  death.  But  the  cow  and  other 
things  are  used  by  the  receiving  priest,  and  nothing  is  sent  with  the  dead  to  help 
him  in  his  journey  heavenward.  When  the  people  think  themselves,  these  frauds 
will  come  home  to  them.  Once  a peasant  was  made  to  give  a cow  to  his  priest  for 
his  dying  father.  But  finding  it  some  days  after  at  the  priest’s  house,  asked  him 


394 


Satyarth  Prakash 


why  he  did  not  send  the  cow  to  his  father  to  enable  him  to  cross  the  Styx.  Thus 
saying,  he  brought  back  his  cow.  Even  this  common  sense  if  exercised  will  put  aa 
end  to  the  imposture  of  popes. 

What  the  popes  say  of  the  merit  of  fasts,  is  also  false.  It  is  said  once  a 
prostitute  fell  from  heaven.  On  her  praying  for  re-admission,  she  was  told  she 
would  regain  heaven  if  somebody  gave  her  the  merit  of  fasting  on  the  1 1 th  of  a 
month.  A woman  of  the  town,  where  she  fell,  did  not  eat  anything  on  the  1 1th 
by  chance  from  some  quarrel  with  her  husband.  The  king  made  her  transfer  the 
merit  of  that  chance  starvation  to  the  fallen  Prostitute,  who  again  ascended  to  the 
heaven.  Now  such  tales  of  (he  Puranas  fools  only  can  believe. 

Idolaters  say  there  were  branches  of  the  Vedas  which  are  now  lost,  but 
which  contained  the  sanction  for  idolatry.  Well,  if  they  had  been  extant  in  the 
time  of  Vyas,  he  must  have  mentioned  it.  But  as  he  does  not  mention  it,  it  is  a 
lie  pure  and  simple. 

Idolaters  disgrace  Rama,  Krishna  and  other  personages;  for,  they  make 
puppets  of  them  and  make  ihem  dance,  begging  in  their  name.  Had  they  done  so 
in  their  time  they  would  have  been  severely  punished  for  it. 

There  are  many  sects  whose  members  are  densely  ignorant  of  true  religion. 
The  Khakis,  Yogis,  Sanyasis,  etc.  are  leading  vagrant  life.  They  are  all  oppo- 
nents of  the  Vedic  religion. 

The  formula  (8)  of  creed  of  the  sect  of  St.  Kabir  is:  O Kabir,  God’s  name 
alone  is  true.  The  sect  (9)  of  St.  Nanak  is  called  the  Sikhs,  whose  bible  is  the 
Granth,  which  at  some  places  praises  the  Vedas  and  at  other  condemns  them. 
They  have  5 signs  of  their  religion,  viz  , long  hair,  a comb,  an  iron  bracelet,  a pair 
of  breaches,  a knife  These  were  instituted  by  the  last  teacher,  called  Guru 
Gobind  Singh,  contemporary  with  Queen  Anne.  They  worship  their  bible  like 
an  idol.  The  sect  ( 10)  of  Ram  Sanehi  mutters  the  name  of  Rama.  It  was  founded 
by  one  Ram  Charan,  who  fixed  his  headquarters  at  Shahpura  in  Rajputana. 
They  revile  the  Vedas  and  Gita,  and  look  down  on  all  persons  who  do  not  belong 
to  (heir  sect. 

The  sect  (11)  of  the  Gosains  was  founded  by  a foundling  adopted  by  an  out- 
caste  Brahmin,  named  Luchhman  Bhatta.  The  child  (Ballabhacharya)  when 
grown  up  and  versed  in  Sanscrit  started  the  sect.  He  wrote  Sanscrit  book  which 
require  its  votaries  to  surrender  their  will,  peison  and  property  to  the  sect  in  the 
name  of  Lord  Krishna.  The  disciples  gladly  place  their  wives  at  the  disposal  of 
the  Gosains,  if  they  choose  them.  Their  chief  temple  of  the  Krishna  at  Mathura 
received  donations  of  millions  of  money  which  these  gallant  Gosains  spend  in 
sensuousness. 

The  sect  (12)  of  Swami  Narayan  was  founded  by  a Brahman,  named  Sahja- 
nand,  who  fraudulently  impersonated  God  Narayan.  It  is  found  in  the  Cathiawar. 
The  sect  (13)  of  Madhavacharya  worships  Krishna,  painting  the  forehead  with 
two  erect  lines  of  white  earth  with  a black  dot  between  them.  It  gives  them  sal- 
vation. 

The  later  sects  are  the  Brahmo  Samaj  (14)  and  Prarlhana  Samaj  (15).  They 
do  not  believe  in  the  infallibility  of  religious  books,  observe  caste  distinctions,  and 
accept  the  doctrine  of  rebirth.  They  imitate  the  Christians  and  extol  European 
manners  and  customs.  But  they  lack  the  virtues  of  the  Europeans,  such  as  patrio- 
tism, unselfishness,  etc.  Their  chief  doctrines  are  the  creation  of  mind  and 
matter,  infinite  progress  of  the  soul,  remission  of  sins  by  grace,  and  efficacy  of 
prayer.  The  creation  of  the  soul  and  m itter  is  inconceivable  and  is  refuted  by 
the  reason.  The  finite  hiimin  soul  cannot  make  infinite  progress.  The  remis- 
sion of  sins  makes  God  unjust. 

All  these  sects  consider  themselves  to  be  on  the  right  and  the  rest  in  the 
wrong.  According  to  the  Vaishnavas,  all  will  go  to  hell  but  themselves.  The 
Christian  heaven  is  closed  to  the  Hindus  The  Mahomedans’  paradise  will  admit 
those  only  who  believe  in  Allah,  Mahomed,  Koran,  and  the  last  day.  But  all 
these  dogmas  are  the  popish  schemes  to  get  money. 

The  true  religion  is  found  in  the  Vedas  anb  Upinishats,  which  enjoin  that 
learned  persons  should  teach  and  preach  truth  to  the  people  and  show  them  the 
necessity  of  abandoning  falsehood  and  of  doing  good  to  all.  The  knowledge  of 
the  Vedas,  good  company,  belief  in  virtue  self-control,  and  pure  character  result 
in  the  obtainment  of  heaven. 


CHAPTER  XII 

SUB-PREFACE  2 


WHEN  the  knowledge  of  the  Vedas,  which  properly  distinguishes 
between  truth  and  untruth,  fell  into  disuse  among  the  people 
of  Aryavarta,  rank  ignorance  spread  all  over,  favouring  the 
rise  of  many  religious  sects  and  denominations.  It  was  also  the  cause 
of  the  prevalence  of  the  faith  of  the  Jainis  and  others  which  is  opposed 
to  the  genius  of  knowledge.  Its  later  origin  is  proved  by  the  fact, 
that  the  Valmiki  Ramayan,  Mahabharat  and  other  books  do  not  con- 
tain even  the  names  of  the  Jainis,  but  (he  books  of  the  Jainis  give  at 
length  the  stories  of  Rama,  Krishna,  and  others.  Thus  is  it  plain  that  the 
faith  of  the  Jainis  came  into  being  after  those  books  had  been  written. 
For  if  their  faith  had  been  as  ancient  as  they  represent  it  to  be,  their 
stories  must  have  found  a way  into  the  Valmiki  Ramayan  and  other 
books  But  as  they  don’t  contain  them,  it  is  proved  that  this  faith 
came  into  vogue  after  the  composition  of  those  books.  If  it  be  said 
that  the  Valmiki  Ramayan  and  other  books  are  made  of  the  stories 
taken  from  the  books  of  the  Jainis,  it  is  asked  how  is  it  that  there  is 
no  mention  of  the  name  of  their  books  nor  even  any  passage  there- 
from in  them  Why  do  their  books  make  mention  of  the  stories  of 
the  Valmiki  Ramayan  and  others  ? Can  a man  see  the  birth  of  his 
father  ? No,  never.  Thus  it  is  evident  that  the  faiths  of  the  Jainis 
and  Buddhas  are  in  origin  later  than  those  of  Shivism,  Shaktism,  and 
the  like  sects. 

Now,  what  is  written  in  this  XII  chapter  with  regard  to  the 
religion  of  the  Jainis,  is  supported  by  reference  to  their  own  books. 
The  Jaini  gentlemen  should  not  take  it  amiss.  For,  whatever  is  here 
given  regarding  their  faith,  is  done  with  the  best  intention  for  ascer- 
taining the  truth  as  distinguished  from  untruth,  but  never  for  the 
purpose  of  creating  hatred  against  them  or  doing  them  any  harm. 
When  the  Jainis,  Buddhist  or  other  religionists  see  what  is  written 
here,  they  will  get  an  occasion  to  think  and  write  on  the  momentous 
subject  of  the  distinguishment  of  truth  and  falsehood,  which  will  add 
to  the  stock  of  their  right  knowledge.  The  ascertainment  of  truth 
cannot  be  satisfactorily  arrived  at  until  a friendly  debate  or  discussion 
in  writing  is  held  on  the  subject  by  persons  ranged  on  the  affirming 
and  denying  sides.  When  there  is  no  certainty  of  truth  as  contra- 
distinguished from  untruth  among  the  learned,  the  ignorant  people 
fall  into  great  darkness  and  suffer  terrible  misery.  Hence,  it  is  the 
chief  duty  of  all  the  human  beings  to  hold  friendly  discussions  either 
orally  or  in  writing  for  the  triumph  of  truth  and  the  distruction  of 
falsehood.  If  this  course  is  not  adopted,  there  will  be  no  progress  of 
people  worth  the  name.  This  review  of  the  religions  of  the  Jainis 
and  Buddhists  will  greatly  benefit  the  believers  of  other  faiths,  and 
give  them  right  information;  for,  these  people  do  not  give  their  books 


396 


Satyarth  Prakash 


to  the  professors  of  other  religions  to  read,  examine  or  write  about. 
With  great  difficulty  and  specially  through  the  influences  of  Seth 
Sawak  Lai  Krishna  Das,  Secretary,  Arya  Samaj,  Bombay,  1 have 
obtained  some  book  for  my  review.  The  Jain  Prabhaker  Press,  Be- 
nares, as  well  as  the  publication  of  the  Prakaran  Ratnakar  in  Bombay 
has  alTorded  great  facility  to  the  learned  for  the  study  of  the  religion 
of  the  Jainis.  Well,  what  kind  of  learned  people  are  they  whose  custom 
is  to  keep  their  religious  books  to  themselves  only,  and  not  to  show 
them  to  other  people  to  read  ? It,  therefore,  shows  that  their  authors 
had  doubt  at  the  outset  that  those  books  contained  things  that  come 
within  the  range  of  impossibility.  They  well  knew  that  if  they  came 
under  the  notice  of  the  people  of  other  faiths,  they  would  refute  them, 
and  that  if  their  own  religionists  read  the  books  of  other  faiths,  they 
would  lose  faith  in  their  own  religion.  Be  it  what  it  may.  There  are, 
however,  many  men  who  do  not  see  their  own  faults,  but  who  are  very 
eager  to  see  those  of  others.  This  is  not  just.  They  should  first  find 
out  their  own  faults  and  errors,  and  remove  them,  and  then  set  out  to 
eradicate  them.  Now  I lay  the  subject  of  the  religion  of  the  Buddhists 
and  the  Jainis  before  all  the  learned  and  good  people  and  leave  it  to 
their  impartial  consideration.  Word  is  enough  to  the  wise. 


Historical  Note 

According  to  Elphinstone,  Buddha  died  in  the  reign  of  Ajat 
Shatru,  550,  and  according  to  Max  Muller,  447,  B.C.  His  religion 
contains  several  sects,  the  most  ancient  of  which  denies  the  existence 
of  God,  and  believes  in  the  eternity  of  matter.  The  highest  rank  in 
the  scale  of  existence  is  held  by  the  Buddhas,  of  whom  the  last  was 
Sakya  Muni  Goutam.  His  religion,  of  which  he  is  the  chief  God,  is 
professed  by  the  greatest  portion  of  mankind — China,  Tibet,  Burma, 
Siam,  and  Ceylon.  Their  object  of  life  is  the  attainment  of  perfect 
apathy,  whereas  true  religion  consists  in  sympathy — love. 

Elphinstone  says  the  Jainis  appear  to  have  originated  in  the  6th 
or  7th  century  of  our  era,  got  to  the  highest  prosperity  in  the  11th 
and  declined  after  the  12th.  Their  principal  seats  are  in  the  west  of 
India — Gujerat  and  Rajputana.  With  the  Buddhas  they  deny  the 
existence  of  God  and  believe  in  the  eternity  of  matter.  They  worship 
deified  saints  and  abhor  killing.  The  doctrines  of  St.  Kapila’s  Sankya 
philosophy  seem  reflected  in  the  atheism  of  the  Buddha,  which  appears 
in  disguise  in  Jainism. — Ed. 


AN  EXAMINATION  OF  ATHEISM  INCLUDING 
MATERIALISM,  BUDDHISM  & JAINISM 

Charvakism  or  Materialism 

Once  upon  a time  there  was  a man,  Brihaspati  by  name,  who 
did  not  believe  in  the  Veda,  God,  and  the  necessity  of  works.  Here 
is  his  belief : — 

fa:  ii 

— No  man  or  any  sentient  being  is  out  of  the  power  of  death,  that  is, 
all  have  to  die;  so  let  a person  be  happy  and  gay  as  long  as  there  is 
soul  in  body.  If  it  is  said  that  the  doing  of  religious  duties  is  painful, 
and  relinquishing  them  is  to  be  followed  with  great  suffering  in  the 
life  to  come;  the  Charvak*  or  Indian  materialist  replies,  saying,  as  it 
were,  to  the  interrogator:  O my  good  fellow,  the  body  which  has 
consumed  food  and  drink  is  reduced  to  ashes  after  death.  It  will  never 
come  to  the  world  again.  Hence,  try  any  how  to  enjoy  life  in  the 
society  as  the  law  directs,  increase  your  wealth,  and  obtain  the  plea- 
siircfs  of  life  by  its  means.  Believe  this  world  to  be  real,  and  the 
so-called  next  world  to  be  nothing.  See  this  body  is  made  of  the 
metamorphosis  of  four  elements,  namely,  earth,  water,  fire,  and  air. 
Their  union  produces  consciousness  in  it,  as  intoxication  is  produced 
by  taking  intoxicating  substances.  In  the  same  way,  the  soul  is  born 
with  the  body  and  dies  with  its  death.  Who  will  then  bear  the  conse- 
quences of  good  and  evil  deeds  ? 

wi?»TT  ii 

— The  union  of  four  elements  produces  the  soul  which  perishes  with 
their  disunion;  for,  there  is  no  evidence  of  the  senses  for  the  existence 
of  the  soul  after  its  death.  We  accept  the  authority  of  the  evidence 
of  the  senses  only;  for,  there  is  no  basis  of  inference  and  other  kinds 
of  evidence  without  the  evidence  of  the  senses.  Therefore,  the 
evidence  of  the  senses,  being  of  primary  importance  and  inference  and 
other  proofs  of  secondary,  the  authority  of  the  latter  cannot  be 
acceptable.  The  fruit  of  exertion  to  achieve  the  end  of  human  life  is 
the  pleasure  derived  from  the  amorous  embraces  of  a beautiful  woman. 

A. — The  elements  of  earth  and  other  material  agents  are  inani- 
mate. They  cannot  produce  consciousness.  As  at  present  the  pro- 
duction of  body  comes  from  the  union  of  father  and  mother,  so  in 
the  beginning  of  creation  the  form  of  human  and  other  bodies  cannot 
be  produced  without  the  agency  of  the  Supreme  Being.  The  production 
and  destruction  of  the  conscious  soul  are  not  like  those  of  intoxication. 

’“Charvak  is  one  who  believes  in  the  existence  of  4 elements  only,  namely, 
earth,  water,  fire,  and  air.  What  is  not  perceptible  by  the  senses  is  not  believed  by 
him. 


398 


Satyarth  Prakash 


The  destruction  of  the  objects  of  nature  is  their  disappearance.  Not 
one  of  them  comes  to  nothing.  In  like  manner,  the  disappearance 
of  the  ego  should  not  be  taken  as  its  non-existence.  The  display  of 
the  ego  happens  only  on  its  embodiment.  When  the  ego  leaves  the 
body,  the  latter  perishes  and  it  can  not  be  endued  with  consciousness 
as  before  the  departure  of  the  soul.  This  is  also  said  in  the  Brahda- 
rannyaka  Upanishat : — 

—St.  Yajna  valkya  says  : O Maiteryi;  [ do  not  speak  from  self  love, 
but  from  full  conviction  that  the  self  is  immortal.  The  motion  of  the 
body  is  due  to  its  union  with  the  self.  On  its  separation  the  body 
ceases  to  reveal  the  least  vestige  of  consciousness.  The  ego  is  distinct 
from  the  body,  which  receives  its  vitality  and  animation  from  its  pre- 
sence and  passes  into  inertness  and  unconsciousness  from  its  absence. 

Like  the  eye  which  cannot  see  itself,  tho’  able  to  see  others, 
the  ego  which  is  the  perceiver  of  objects,  can  have  no  sense-percep- 
tion of  itself.  It  perceives  pots,  clothes,  and  other  external  objects 
through  the  eye.  In  the  same  way  it  perceives  the  eye  thro’  cognition. 
The  perceiver  always  remains  so,  and  never  becomes  the  perceived  or 
perceivable.  It  is  an  indubitable  axiom  that  a thing  supported  can 
not  live  without  its  support,  there  can  be  no  action  without  an  actor. 
In  the  same  way,  how  can  there  be  perception  without  the  perceiver, 
or  an  act  without  the  doer  ? 

Gross  Blunders 

If  the  amorous  embraces  of  beautiful  women  be  regarded  as  the 
aim  of  life  or  the  fruit  of  human  exertion,  its  transient  pleasure  with 
its  consequent  pain  may  also  be  considered  as  the  fruit  of  the  same 
exertion.  This  being  the  case,  in  the  non-existence  of  heaven  where 
alone  the  soul  has  pure  joy,  sorrow  alone  will  be  its  lot.  If  it  be  said 
that  efforts  should  be  made  to  remove  suffering  and  to  promote  ease, 
it  is  replied  that  such  a course  implies  the  non-existence  of  the  happi- 
ness of  salvation.  Therefore,  it  is  not  the  fruit  of  exertion  or  the 
destiny  of  human  life. 

Charvak. — They  are  fools  who  renounce  pleasure  mixed  with 
pain.  The  wise  in  the  world  should  choose  pleasure  and  reject  pain, 
as  the  man  who  wants  grain,  takes  grain  and  rejects  chaff.  For,  it  is 
the  ignorant  who  give  up  the  present  pleasures  of  this  world,  long  for 
the  joy  of  heaven  yet  to  come,  and  to  obtain  heaven  perform  the 
sacrament  of  oblation  to  fire  (agni  hotra)  and  other  religious  duties, 
ordained  by  the  Veda  written  by  the  roguish  priests,  saying  prayers, 
and  striving  for  obtaining  spiritual  knowledge.  As  there  is  no  heaven 
or  the  next  world,  it  is  the  height  of  folly  to  hope  to  get  there.  For, 
Brihaspati,  the  advocate  of  the  religion  of  Charvak  or  materialism, 
says  : — 

—The  ceremony  of  oblation  to  fire,  three  Vedas,  three  Dands  and 
bedaubing  the  body  with  ashes  are  instituted  by  people  devoid  of  sense 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


399 


and  energy  for  their  lazy  livelihood.  But  the  pain  resulting  from 
pricking  the  body  with  thorns  and  other  modes  of  ascetic  mortifi- 
cations is  called  hell,  the  king  of  the  country  famous  in  the  world  is 
God,  and  the  fall  of  the  body  is  salvation.  That  is  all  and  nothing 
more. 

Answer. — It  is  folly  to  believe  only  the  sensuous  pleasures  to  be 
the  aim  of  life  purusliarthas,  only  avoidance  of  physical  pain  to  be 
the  success  of  human  existence  and  beatitude.  The  sacrament  of 
oblations  to  fire  and  other  works  etfect  the  purity  of  air,  rain,  and  v/ater, 
which  conduces  to  public  health,  and  thereby  helps  the  people  in 
achieving  success  in  religion,  wealth,  pleasure  and  salvation.  It  is 
an  act  of  mischief  to  talk  ill  of  the  Veda,  God,  Vedic  religion,  with- 
out knowing  those  blessings.  The  refutation  of  Tridand  (3  cubit- 
sticks)  and  putting  on  ashes  is  right.  It  the  pain  produced  from  the 
pricking  of  thorn  is  called  hell,  why  are  not  the  more  painful  diseases 
and  other  ills  also  called  hell  ? If  a king  be  regarded  as  the  best  of 
all  men  in  virtue  of  his  being  the  lord  of  fortune  and  able  to  protect 
the  people,  it  is  right;  but  if  you  consider  an  unjust,  wicked  king  to 
be  like  God,  nothing  can  be  more  foolish.  If  the  destruction  of  body 
alone  is  salvation,  what  is  the  dilference  between  man  and  beasts  ? 
They  will  dilfer  but  in  form. 

5ftrf  i 

C. — 1.  Charvaks,  Abhanaks,  Buddhists  and  Jainis  believe  the 
genesis  of  the  world  to  be  from  Nature.  All  the  things  are  made  of 
the  substances  having  their  natural  properties.  There  is  no  maker  of 
the  world. 

dg  q;rr?Tfti8pi:  ii 

2.  This  is  the  belief  of  the  Charvak.  But  the  Buddhists  and  Jainis 
believe  in  future  life  and  the  existence  of  soul,  which  the  Charvak 
denies.  Except  in  certain  points,  the  beliefs  of  all  the  three  are  simi- 
lar. There  is  neither  heaven  nor  hell,  and  no  soul  to  enter  into  future 
life.  The  performance  of  the  duties  of  the  four  orders  is  futile 
bringing  no  fruit  to  the  performer. 

»Tf»TiaTfcr  I 

3.  If  the  animal  killed  and  burnt  in  sacrifice  on  the  altar,  goes  to 
heaven,  why  does  not  the  sacrificer  kill  his  own  father  and  other  dear 
ones  in  sacrifice  and  burn  them  on  the  altar  to  send  them  to  heaven  ? 

4.  If  the  offering  of  food  (shraddha)  and  drink  (tarpana)  to  the 
desparted  spirits  is  for  their  gratification,  what  is  the  use  of  carrying 
food,  clothes  and  money  to  be  serviceable  on  journey  ? The  relatives 
of  travellers  should  offer  the  things  of  requirement  at  home  in  their 
name  to  send  them  to  their  relatives  on  journey  in  a distant  country 
as  the  food  offered  in  the  name  of  the  departed  reaches  them  in 


400  Satyarth  Prakash 

heaven.  If  things  offered  don’t  reach  persons  on  journey  on  earth, 
how  can  they  reach  the  dead  in  heaven  ? 

5.  If  food  and  drink  gifts  given  to  priests  on  earth  appease  the 
appetite  of  the  inhabitants  of  heaven,  how  is  it  that  food  offered  in- 
side a house  does  not  satisfy  a person  on  its  roof  ? 

fcT:  II 

6.  Therefore,  let  persons  live  happily  as  long  as  they  live.  If  they 
have  no  money  with  them  at  home,  they  should  take  a loan  and  live 
with  ease.  They  will  not  have  to  pay  the  debt,  for  neither  the  body 
nor  the  soul  which  has  taken  food  and  drink  while  in  that  body,  will 
return  to  the  earth.  Who  will  then  be  the  creditor  and  the  debtor  ? 
Who  will  pay  it  ? 

7.  It  is  false  what  the  people  say  that  a man’s  soul  leaves  the 
body  at  death  and  goes  to  heaven;  for,  had  it  been  true,  why  would  it 
not  return  home,  being  drawn  by  the  force  of  affection  for  the  relatives 
in  the  family  bewailing  and  weeping  for  his  death  ? 

8.  Hence  all  this  fabric  of  superstition  is  a device  of  the 
Brahmin  priests  for  their  own  lazy  livelihood. 

As  for  the  ceremony  of  Das  Gatra  or  lO  unclean  days  after  a 
death,  it  is  also  a fraud  of  priestcraft  to  create  its  living. 

9.  The  writers  of  the  Veda  are  three,  viz,,  buffoons,  rogues, 
and  demons.  It  embodies  the  roguish  sayings  of  Jarfary,  Turfary  and 
other  pandits. 

I 

10.  The  roguery  of  their  composition  is  shown  in  such  mentions 
that  a woman  should  hold  the  penis  of  a horse  in  sacrifice,  that  the 
wife  of  a sacrificer  should  cohabit  with  it,  and  that  jokes  should  be 
cracked  with  a bridge,  and  so  sorth.  Who  can  write  such  obscenity 
but  rogues? 

V\.  As  to  the  mention  of  ftesh-eating,  that  portion  of  the  Veda 
is  written  by  a demon. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions  401 

Its  Refutation 

A. — 1.  Without  the  instrumentality  of  the  intelligent  Supreme  Being 
in  the  creation  of  the  world,  the  material  objects  cannot  spontane- 
ously come  into  being  in  virtue  of  their  nature.  If  they  spring  into 
existence  by  themselves  or  by  their  own  nature,  why  are  a second  sun, 
moon,  earth,  and  universe  of  stars  not  made  by  their  own  nature? 

2.  Heaven  is  the  name  of  joy  and  pleasure  and  hell,  of  sorrow 
and  pain.  If  there  is  no  soul,  who  can  have  pleasure  and  pain?  As 
in  the  present  life,  the  soul  is  the  being  that  feels  pleasure  and  pain  in 
the  next  life.  Will  veracity,  beneficence,  and  other  virtuous  deeds  of 
the  persons  of  the  four  orders  of  society  be  futile  and  without  conse- 
quences? No,  they  can  never  be  so. 

3.  To  sacrifice  by  killing  animals  on  the  altar  is  not  written  in 
the  Veda  and  other  books  of  truth.  To  olTer  food  and  drink  to  the 
manes  or  departed  spirits  is  purely  the  fabrication  of  the  priestly 
imagination.  This  ceremony  is  opposed  to  the  teachings  of  the  Veda 
and  other  books  of  truth.  It  is  a doctrine  of  the  Bhagwat  and  other 
Puranas  or  mythologies.  Therefore,  its  refutation  is  irrefutable. 

4.  What  is  in  existence,  cannot  be  reduced  to  nothing.  The 
existing  ego  cannot  be  turned  into  non-entity.  The  body  is  reduced 
to  ashes,  but  not  the  soul.  It  passes  to  another  body.  Hence  who- 
ever purchases  his  pleasures  in  this  world  at  the  expense  of  others  by 
contracting  debt  or  by  other  means,  and  does  not  pay  it,  is  assuredly 
a sinner  and  falls  into  the  hell  of  suffering  in  the  next  life.  There  is 
not  the  least  doubt  at  all. 

5.  On  quitting  the  body,  the  soul  passes  to  another  in  a different 
place.  It  has  no  knowledge  of  pre-existence  or  its  family  and  other 
relations.  Hence  it  cannot  return  to  its  previous  family. 

6.  Verily,  the  Brahmin  priests  have  made  the  ceremony  of 
obsequies  for  their  own  livelihood.  But  being  not  sanctioned  by  the 
Veda,  it  deserves  refutation. 

7.  Now  it  is  plain  that  if  the  Charvaks  or  the  Indian  material- 
ists and  other  atheists  had  read,  heard  or  studied  the  Veda  and  other 
books  of  truth  or  genuine  scripture,  they  would  not  have  condemned 
them,  and  said  that  the  Vedas  were  written  by  buffoons,  rogues  and 
devilish  persons.  They  would  not  have  used  such  abusive  language. 
Yes,  Mahidher  and  other  commentators  of  the  Vedas  were  like  jestors, 
rascals,  and  fiends.  It  is  their  roguery,  and  not  of  the  Vedas.  But 
it  is  a pity  that  the  Charvaks,  Abhanaks,  Buddhists,  and  Jainis  have 
not  seen  or  heard  the  exposition  of  the  Vedas  or  studied  them  with 
learned  people.  Therefore,  losing  the  balance  of  mind  and  guide  of 
sound  understanding,  they  have  unreasonably  laid  the  blame  on  the 
Vedas.  Reading  the  commentaries  of  the  wicked  Waramargies  or 
Indian  Bacchanalians,  devoid  of  the  support  of  evidence,  absolutely 
imaginary  and  sinfully  atrocious,  they  have  become  the  enemies  of  the 
Vedas  and  fallen  into  the  unfathomable  sea  of  ignorance. 

8.  It  should  be  remembered  that  it  is  the  work  of  no  other 
people  than  the  professors  of  the  Warn  Marg  sect  that  a woman  should 


402 


Satyarth  Prakash 


grasp  the  equine  organ  and  lie  with  it,  and  that  the  daughter  of  a 
sacrificer  should  be  jested  with  obscene  Jokes.  Who  can  be  the 
persons  other  than  the  most  wicked  believers  in  Warn  Marg  (lit,  woman 
path)  that  would  write  wrong  and  obscene  commentaries  on  the  Vedas 
opposed  to  their  right  sense?  It  is  to  be  very  much  regretted  that  the 
Charvaks  and  other  materialists  rushed  to  detract  the  Vedas  without 
thinking.  They  should  have  used  their  understanding  a little.  Poor 
fellows,  how  could  they  have  done  otherwise!  They  had  not  so  much 
knowledge  as  to  be  able  to  discern  the  distinction  between  truth  and 
falsehood  and  to  advocate  truth  and  to  condemn  falsehood. 

9.  As  for  flesh-eating,  it  is  also  the  fraud  of  those  Warn  Margi 
commentators.  Hence  it  is  proper  to  call  them  devils  (rakshasa). 
But  flesh  eating  is  nowhere  written  in  the  Vedas.  Therefore,  the  sin 
of  the  above  falsehood  is  undoubtedly  on  the  head  of  those  very  com- 
mentators who  have  indulged  in  the  banter  of  the  Vedas  to  their 
heart’s  content  without  knowing  them.  The  truth  is  that  those  persons 
who  were,  are  and  will  be  the  enemies  of  the  Vedas,  will  eertainly  fall 
into  the  darkness  of  ignorance  and  instead  of  obtaining  happiness 
suffer  excruciating  pain,  which  however  great  will  be  insignificant 
before  the  moiistrocity  of  their  conduct.  Therefore  all  mankind 
should  follow  the  Vedas  in  their  life. 

10.  — The  followers  of  Warn  Marg  defamed  the  Vedas  in  order 
to  serve  their  purpose  under  the  umbrage  of  the  Vedas  of  encouraging 
the  wicked  actions  of  drinking,  kreophagy,  adultery  and  other  sins. 
The  persual  of  these  false  allegations  led  the  Charvaks,  Buddhists, 
and  Jainis  to  condemn  the  Vedas  and  establish  a distinct  sect  opposed 
to  the  Vedas  and  belief  in  God,  /.c.,  a church  of  atheism.  If  the 
Charvaks  and  other  materialists  had  taken  pains  to  consider  the  mean- 
ing of  the  text  of  the  Vedas  how  could  they  have  washed  their  hands 
clean  of  the  truth  of  the  Vedic  religion  on  reading  the  false  commen- 
taries on  the  Vedas?  Poor  fellows,  what  can  they  do?  When  a 
man’s  time  of  ruin  comes,  his  reason  in  upset  — 

We  now  mention  the  kinds  of  the  Charvaks.  They  agree  in 
many  points.  But  the  proper  Charvaks  believe  that  the  soul  is  pro- 
duced with  the  body  and  it  is  destroyed  with  its  death.  They  do  not 
believe  in  the  rebirth  and  future  state.  Also  they  do  not  believe  the 
evidence  of  inference  and  other  kinds  of  proof,  except  the  evidence  of 
the  senses.  The  word  charvak  means  one  who  is  audacious,  arrogant 
and  specially  disputatious  from  the  mere  love  of  controversy. 

The  Buddhists  and  Jainis  accept  the  authority  of  the  four  kinds 
of  evidence,  (perceptual,  logical  or  inferential,  personal  and  historical), 
and  believe  in  the  eternity  of  the  soul,  the  doctrine  of  reincarnation, 
the  truth,  of  the  future  state,  and  the  state  of  salvation.  This  is  the 
difference  between  the  Charvaks  and  the  Jainis.  But  they  are  at  one 
with  each  other  in  the  belief  of  atheism,  the  detraction  of  God  and 
the  Vedas,  the  hatred  of  others’  religion,  (6  kinds  of  suffering  and  6 
kinds  of  works  to  be  describe  further),  the  denial  of  the  existence  of 
the  maker  of  the  world,  and  similar  other  beliefs.  So  much  in  brief  of 
the  theory  of  Charvak  or  materialism. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions  403 

Buddhism 

Now  we  write  briefly  of  the  religion  of  Buddhism. 

— Karya  karana  bhava  : Causation,  i.e.,  the  knowledge  of  elTect  leads 
to  that  of  cause  and  vice  versa.  Tiiis  evidence  of  the  senses  produces 
inference  in  the  mind  at  the  end.  The  actions  of  all  the  sentient  crea- 
tures can  never  attain  completion  without  it.  The  admission  of  the 
superiority  of  inference  separated  the  sect  of  the  Buddhists  who  are  of 
four  kinds. 

4 Kinds  of  Buddhists 

What  the  reason  establishes,  i.e.,  what  is  comprehended  by  one's 
intellect  should  be  accepted  for  belief,  but  what  is  not  recognised  by 
the  understanding,  should  not  be  admitted.  These  four  kinds,  are — 

1.  (a)  The  Madhyamik  sect  believes  in  the  total  abnegation  of 
existence,  i.e.,  all  the  objects  that  exist,  are  nothing.  It  is  reasoned 
that  they  do  not  exist  at  the  beginning,  they  cease  to  exist  at  the  end. 
In  the  middle  of  beginning  and  end  they  only  seem  to  exist.  But  that 
appearance  of  existence  takes  place  in  time.  After  their  time  they 
become  cypher  or  nothing.  For  instance,  a pitcher  did  not  exist  before 
Its  beginning.  It  does  not  exist  after  its  breakage.  Its  knowledge  as  a 
pitcher  appears  in  a certain  time  only  The  idea  of  the  pitcher  does 
not  exist  on  the  rise  of  the  idea  of  another  object  or  the  mind  being 
directed  to  it.  Hence  non-existence  is  the  only  element  or  substance— 
Nihilism. 

{b)  The  sect  further  believes  all  things  to  be  transient  or  fleeting, 
that  is,  the  change  of  the  intellect  at  every  moment  does  not  give  the 
same  idea  of  a thing  in  the  next  moment  as  in  the  preceding  moment. 
Therefore,  all  things  are  fleeting.  Such  is  its  belief  of  the  world. 

2.  (a)  The  Yogachar  sect  believes  in  the  unreality  of  phenomena 
or  the  non-existence  of  the  external  world,  i.e.,  the  objects  appear 
internally  in  the  mind,  but  they  are  not  outside.  Thus  the  idea  of  a 
pitcher  is  in  the  mind.  So  a man  says  it  is  a pitcher.  If  he  has  no 
idea  in  the  mind,  he  cannot  say  so.  Such  is  the  theory  of  Yoga- 
cherism — Idealism. 

(^)  The  sect  also  believes  that  all  action  is  a form  of  pain;  for, 
none  is  content  with  what  is  got.  The  acquisition  of  one  object  contains 
a desire  for  another.  Such  is  its  nature  of  belief. 

3.  {a)  Soutrantik  school  believes  in  the  existence  of  external 
objects  through  inference.  For,  there  can  be  no  complete  perception 
of  external  objects  in  all  their  parts.  But  on  the  perception  of  one 
aspect  of  them,  the  knowledge  of  the  rest  is  obtained  through  in- 
ference. Such  is  the  theory  of  this  sect — Nominalism. 

{b)  It  also  holds  that  all  objects  are  distinguished  by  their  own 
properties.  As  a cow  is  known  by  the  qualities  of  the  cow,  a horse 
by  those  of  the  horse,  in  fine,  properties  are  inherent  in  objects.  Such 
is  its  theory. 


404 


Satyarth  Prakash 


4.  (a)  The  Vaihhashik  sect  believes  in  the  perception  of  external 
reality,  but  it  does  not  exist  in  the  mind.  As,  ayam  nilo  ghatali  : this 
is  a blue  pitcher.  This  belief  points  to  the  external  existence  of  the 
form  of  a blue  pitcher.  Such  is  their  doctrine  of  perception — Realism. 

(b)  This  sect  believes  non-entity  to  be  the  one  and  only  sub- 
stance. 

The  Madhyamik  sect  believes  all  to  be  non-existent,  which  is  also 
the  belief  of  the  Vaibhashik,  These  and  others  are  the  different  sects 
of  Buddhism  arisen  from  the  view  they  hold  of  the  existence  of  the 
world.  Thus  they  have  the  four  kinds  of  beliefs  regarding  existence. 

Tho’  they  have  Buddha  for  their  common  teacher,  yet  their 
difference  in  thought  divided  them  into  4 sects;  as,  after  sunset  liber- 
tines indulge  in  adultery,  and  the  learned  do  what  is  right,  such  as  the 
speaking  of  truth  and  the  practice  of  other  virtues.  Though  they  have 
the  same  time,  yet  they  do  dilferent  kinds  of  work  according  to  the 
guidance  of  their  several  intellects. 

Their  Refutation 

A. — 1.  As  regards  the  Madhyamik  sect,  if  all  is  non-existent, 
the  perceiver  of  non-existence  cannot  be  non-existent.  If  all  is  non- 
existence, non-existence  cannot  perceive  non-existence.  Hence  two 
objects  are  proved,  namely,  non-existence  and  the  perceiver  of  it. 

2.  As  to  the  Yogachara\s  belief  of  the  non-existence  of  the  ex- 
ternal reality,  a mountain  should  be  supposed  to  be  within  him.  If  it 
is  admitted  that  a mountain  is  within,  the  capacity  of  his  heait  should 
be  like  a mountain,  which  is  absurd.  Hence  a mountain  exists  out- 
side. The  idea  of  a mountain  is  in  the  mind. 

3.  The  Soutrantika  man  does  not  believe  in  the  perception  of 
any  object.  Therefore,  he  and  his  statement  are  the  objects  of  inference 
but  not  of  perception.  If  it  is  not  an  object  of  perception,  the  appli- 
cation of  the  sentence,  ayam,  ghatali,  is  impossible;  but  it  should  be 
ayam  ghataika  deshah  : this  is  a part  of  a pitcher.  Also  a portion  of 
a pitcher,  is  not  called  a pitcher,  but  the  whole  is  called  a pitcher. 
This  is  a pitcher,  is  an  act  of  perception,  and  not  of  inference.  The 
pitcher  is  perceived  and  not  inferred.  For  the  whole  is  one  in  all  parts. 
Its  perception  implies  the  perception  of  all  its  parts,  i.e.,  the  pitcher 
with  all  its  parts  is  the  object  of  perception  ? 

4.  The  Vaibhanoka  sect  believes  in  the  perception  of  the  external 
objects  only,  which  is  not  right.  For,  perception  or  knowledge  is 
possible  only  where  there  is  a perceiver  or  knower  and  perception. 
Tho’  the  object  of  perception  is  external,  yet  its  perception  takes  place 
in  the  mind. 

In  the  same  manner,  if  external  reality  be  fleeting  and  its  per- 
ception be  also  pratya  bhigya  : there  should  be  no  remembrance 

of  an  act,  as  I have  done  it.  But  there  is  remembrance  of  what  was 
seen  or  heard  before.  Hence  the  theory  of  momentary  changeability 
is  not  tenable. 

If  all  is  pain,  and  if  there  be  no  pleasure  whatever,  the  existence 
of  pain  cannot  be  proved  without  the  existence  of  pleasure,  as  night 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


405 


exists  in  relation  to  day,  and  vice  versa.  Therefore,  it  is  not  right  to 
believe  that  all  is  pain. 

If  the  properties  of  objects  alone  be  admitted,  then  the  eye  is 
the  organ  of  light,  and  light  is  the  thing  perceivable;  as,  the  form  of  a 
pitcher  is  distinct  from  the  organ  of  that  form,  i,e.,  the  e>e;  and  smell 
is  different  from  earth.  In  the  same  way,  the  properties  and  their 
objects  should  be  regarded  as  logically  distinct. 

A reply  to  the  doctiine  of  non-existence  has  been  given  above, 
that  is,  the  perceiver  of  non  existence  is  distinct  from  it. 

— All  the  prophets  (Thirthankers)  are  of  the  opinion  that  all  the  world 
is  the  vale  of  tears  or  pain  itself.  The  teachers  or  Tirthankers  of  the 
Buddhists  are  also  regarded  in  the  same  light  by  the  Jainis.  So  they 
both  are  one  and  the  same  sect.  They  believe  in  4 bhavanas  or  senti- 
ments as  the  means  with  which  to  effect  the  riddance  of  all  desires, 
whereupon  is  produced  the  mental  vacuity,  or  Nirvana,  which  is  sal- 
vation. They  advise  their  pupils  to  practise  yoga  or  concentration 
of  the  mind.  The  teaching  of  their  preceptor  is  authority  with  them. 
Having  desires  and  passions  from  eternity,  the  intellect  appears  to  be 
of  various  forms  or  classes,  i.e,  full  of  various  ideas.  These  various 
classes  of  the  knowledge  of  the  intellect  arc — 

5 Skandhas 

1.  Rupa  skandha  or  objective  knowledge  is  the  knowledge 
obtained  by  means  of  the  senses  of  the  external  objects,  as  colour,  and 
other  objects. 

2.  Vijnana  skandha  or  subjective  knowledge  is  the  act  of  know- 
ledge relating  to  the  activity  of  the  organs  of  the  senses  or  sensations. 

3.  Vedana  skandha  or  feelings — the  consciousness  of  pleasure 
and  pain,  produced  from  the  above  objective  and  subjective  knowledge. 

4.  Sanjna  skandha— consciousness  of  relation  between  an 
object  and  its  name,  as  the  animal  cow  and  the  word  cow. 

5.  Sanscara  skandha  or  impressions  the  consciousness  of  feel- 
ings produces  as  desire,  aversion  and  other  sufferings;  hunger,  thirst 
and  other  minor  sufferings;  lust,  neglect,  pride,  virtue,  vice,  and  other 
acts. 

The  Charvaks  go  farther  to  believe  in  emancipation  by  faith 
from  the  world  which  is  full  of  pain,  the  home  of  suffering  and  the 
source  of  misery.  They  also  believe  in  the  authority  of  Inference. 
The  Buddhas  do  not  believe  in  the  existence  of  the  soul. 

l.  Persons  should  believe  the  teachings  of  the  lords  of  the 
world,  the  wise,  resigned,  elect,  awakened  Tirathankars  (saviours),  who 
had  insight  into  the  nature  of  objects,  who  described  them  separately, 
with  all  their  distinctions  and  means  of  obtainment. 


406 


Satyarth  Prakash 


f^T  I^TRTSf^T  n 

2.  To  believe  those  masters’  teachings,  which  are  very  deep  in 
sense,  well-known  and  sometimes  secret,  and  distinct  from  one  an- 
other in  a marked  manner,  which  have  been  described  above  as 
referring  to  the  doctrine  of  total  non-existence. 

Worship  of  Senses 

3.  The  worship,  called  the  secures  salvation.  To 

acomplish  it  a number  of  things  and  much  wealth  should  be  acquired. 
It  consists  in  making  12  kinds  of  places  or  dispositions  of  things  and 
woshipping  them  by  all  means.  What  is  the  use  of  worshipping  any 
other  object  ? 

^fefTfcT  11 

4.  The  Dwadashayatana  worship  is  thus  given  : 5 Cognitive 
senses,— the  ears,  skin,  eyes,  tongue,  and  nose;  5 Active  senses, — the 
voice,  hands,  feet,  anus  and  penis  (rectum  and  uthera)— 10  senses,  and 
the  conative  faculty,  and  the  reason.  These  alone  should  be  served, 
/.c.,  they  should  be  employed  in  pleasures.  Such  and  similar  others 
are  the  beliefs  of  the  Buddhists. 

Answer— U the  world  is  all  pain,  no  sentient  being  would  desire 
to  live  in  it.  But  their  love  for  it  is  evident  to  all  observers.  Hence, 
the  world  cannot  be  full  of  pain  only.  It  contains  both  pleasure  and 
pain.  But  if  they  adhere  to  this  doctrine  alone,  why  do  they  believe 
that  ease  and  comfort  follow  indulgence  in  eating  and  drinking,  regu- 
lation of  regimen  and  use  of  medicines  in  cases  of  sickness  in  the  pre- 
servation of  the  body  ? If  it  be  said  that  tho’  they  like  to  adopt  such 
means,  yet  they  regard  them  as  painful,  it  is  replied  that  the  assertion 
is  self  contradictory,  for  the  soul  chooses  a work  on  the  knowledge 
of  pleasure  accruing  therefrom;  but  it  shows  no  inclination  to  it  if 
it  knows  it  to  be  painful. 

In  the  world,  religious  works,  the  attainment  of  knowledge,  the 
company  of  good  men,  and  other  good  actions  are  all  conducive  to 
happiness.  No  sensible  man,  except  the  Buddhists,  can  regard  them 
as  the  source  of  misery. 

As  for  the  5 skandhas  or  branches  of  knowledge,  they  are  not 
exhaustive  and  complete.  For,  if  such  branches  be  taken  into  account, 
each  of  them  can  be  divided  into  many  classes. 

If  they  believe  their  primitive  pontiffs,  called  the  Triathankers, 
as  the  teachers  of  their  religion  and  the  lords  of  the  worlds,  and  do 
not  believe  in  God,  the  eternal,  the  lord  of  lords  : whom  did  those 
teachers  receive  their  gospel  from  ? If  they  say  that  they  received  it 
from  their  own  mind,  their  assertion  is  not  possible;  for,  there  can  be 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


407 


no  effect  without  a cause.  Also,  taking  it  for  granted  for  arguments 
sake,  how  is  it  that  none  of  them  now  becomes  learned  and  wise  with- 
out being  taught,  without  hearing  the  exposition  of  knowledge,  and 
without  frequenting  the  society  of  learned  and  good  people  ? If  such 
events  are  impossible  of  occurance,  their  belief  and  assertion  of  their 
teachers  self  acquired  gospels  are  entirely  groundless  and  devoid  of 
reason,  nay  are  like  the  ravings  of  the  patient  of  delirium  tremens. 
If  the  doctrine  of  the  Buddhists  is  non  existence  and  monism,  the 
present  existence  can  not  be  reduced  to  non-existence.  It  is  no  doubt 
changed  to  its  invisible  causal  or  atomic  state.  Therefore,  this  doc- 
trine is  also  an  instance  of  hallucination. 

If  they  regard  the  dwadasfiayatna  worship  consisting  in  the 
acquisition  of  wealth  alone  as  the  means  of  salvation,  why  do  they  not 
adore  the  10  vital  airs  or  processes  and  the  ego,  which  is  the  1 1th 
sense.  If  the  state  of  salvation  is  thought  as  consisting  of  the  worship 
of  the  senses  and  the  internal  sense,  what  is  the  difference  between 
the  Buddhists  and  sensualists  ? If  they  can  not  differ  from  them,  how 
can  they  talk  of  salvation  ? 

Where  such  doctrines  are  held,  how  can  the  hope  of  salvation 
be  entertained  there  (What  has  salvation  to  do  with  such  deeds)? 
How  greatly  have  spread  their  ignorance,  so  that  there  is  no  parallel 
to  it  in  the  world  but  themselves  It  is  certain  that  they  have  reaped  the 
harvest  of  their  disbelief  in  God  and  the  Veda.  First  they  fostered 
the  belief  that  the  world  is  incarnate  pain,  then  they  set  up  the  work 
of  dwadasfiayatna  worship.  Is  their  worship  of  the  senses  or  the  dwada- 
shayatna  htyon(\  the  objects  of  the  world,  that  it  can  be  the  dispenser 
of  salvation  ? Can  a man  find  out  a gem  with  his  eyes  closed  ? To  such 
a pass  they  have  come  out  of  their  unbelief  in  the  Veda  and  Supreme 
Being.  However,  if  they  even  now  wish  to  obtain  happiness,  they 
should  seek  refuge  in  the  Veda  and  Supreme  Being  to  make  their  life 
a success. 

A book,  called  the  Vivek  vilas,  thus  describes  the  dogmas  of 
the  religion  of  the  Buddhists  : — 

Doctrines  of  Buddhism 

1.  The  4 elements  of  the  Buddhistic  belief  are  the  godhead  of  the 
adorable  Lord  God  Buddha,  also  called  the  Sugat  Deva  by  the 
Buddhists  (God  the  well-gone);  the  instability  or  constant  changeabi- 
lity of  the  world;  the  nobleness  of  men  and  women;  and  the  know- 
ledge of  elements. 

?rrr:  Hcf:  I 

2.  Progress  is  made  on  considering  the  world  to  be  the  home  of 
siilTering.  Listen  to  the  explanation  of  this  doctrine. 


408 


Satyarth  Prakash 


3.  There  is  but  suffering  in  the  world.  The  acquisition  of  the 
aforesaid  5 skandhas  or  branches  of  knowledge  is  essential. 

4.  The  12  objects  of  regard  are  the  5 senses  of  knowledge,  their  5 
objects — sound  and  other  material  properties,  the  will,  the  internal 
sense,  the  understanding,  and  righteousness. 

H ^Tc?nT??T:  W 

5.  The  group  of  desire,  aversion  and  other  passions  produced  in 
the  heart  of  man,  is  called  the  Samudaya  or  group,  and  the  mind  and 
mental  nature,  the  akhya  or  subject,  which  again  gives  rise  to  the 
Samudaya 

H mn  H ^ II 

6.  All  sanscars  or  desire  and  other  passions  are  momentary.  The 
stay  of  this  belief  (transcience  of  passions)  is  the  path  of  the  Buddhists. 
Their  annihilation  in  the  mind  is  salvation.  (It  is  the  element  of  non- 
existence. The  mind  purged  of  them  is  salvation). 

=5r§:5T?^Tf?T^r  ^mfqr^cr:  ii 

7.  The  Buddhists  admit  only  two  kinds  of  evidence,  namely, 
perceptual  evidence  and  logical  inference. 

8.  They  are  divided  into  4 sects,  v/z,,  Vaibhashika,  Soutrantik; 
Yogachar  and  Madkyamik. 

4 Sects  of  Buddhists 

^THTNcTt  I 

— Of  them,  the  Vaibhashik  sect  believes  in  the  existence  of  what  is  in 
the  mind  or  the  objects  of  which  the  idea  is  in  the  mind  : for,  scientists 
cannot  admit  the  existence  of  the  object,  of  which  there  is  no  idea  in 
the  mind,  or  no  knowledge. 

The  Soutrantik  ^cct  believes  in  the  direct  perception  of  the  ideas 
within  the  mind,  but  not  of  external  things. 

^7^r%  gn:  II 

9.  The  Yogachar  sect  believes  in  the  intellect  together  with 
ideas  and  the  knowledge  of  the  external  reality.  The  Madliyamik  sect 
believes  in  the  consciousness  or  the  ideas  of  things,  but  not  in  the 
existence  of  the  objective  world. 

10.  AW  the  four  sects  of  the  Buddhists  bcVieve  in  the  salvation 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


409 


born  from  the  annihilation  of  impressions  left  in  the  mind  by  the 
association  of  ideas  pertaining  to  love,  hatred  and  other  passions. 

1 1.  The  custom  and  costume  of  the  Buddhistic  monks  are  the 
seats  of  (cloth)  dear  skins,  a bowl  for  begging,  the  shaving  of  the 
head,  the  habiliment  of  bark,  the  taking  of  dinner  in  the  forenoon  or 
before  9 a.m.,  not  to  live  alone,  to  wear  ruddy  clothes. 

A. — 1.  If  the  Sogata  Buddha  was  the  teacher  of  the  religion  of 
the  Buddhists,  who  was  his  teacher?  If  the  universe  changes  every 
moment,  there  should  be  no  remembrance  of  objects,  long  before 
perceived,  that  it  is  the  same  object  as  perceived  before.  If  it  was 
truly  subject  to  momentary  mutability,  it  would  cease  to  exist.  Then 
there  could  be  no  remembrance  of  it. 

2.  If  the  doctrine  of  momental  mutability  is  the  path  of  the 
Buddhists,  their  salvation  will  also  be  transient  and  changing  every 
moment. 

If  the  ideas  of  objects  are  endued  with  knowledge,  the  material 
objects  should  also  exhibit  marks  of  intelligence,  and  upon  what  do 
they  move  and  act? 

Well,  how  can  that  be  illusive  which  is  perceived  in  the  external 
world?  If  the  intellect  is  ol  some  form,  it  should  be  observable.  If 
only  ideas  or  knowledge  be  in  the  mind  and  the  external  objects  be 
only  ideas  or  knowledge,  there  can  be  no  knowledge  without  the 
existence  of  the  objects  to  be  known.  If  the  destruction  of  impressions 
or  vasna  alone  is  salvation,  the  state  of  dreamless  sleep  should  be 
regarded  as  salvation.  This  doctrine  being  opposed  to  the  evidence  of 
knowledge  is  reprehensible.  Such  is  the  cursory  view  of  the  doctrines 
of  Buddhism,  Now  it  is  left  to  the  judgment  of  learned  and  thinking 
people  to  determine,  after  examining  them,  the  extent  of  their  know- 
ledge and  the  truth  of  their  religion.  It  is  also  believed  by  the  Jainis. 

Buddhism  and  Jainism 

The  book,  called  the  Prakarma  Ratna  Kara,  1st  Part,  Naya 
chakrasara,  gives  the  following  subjects  of  Jainism  : —The  Buddhists 
have  at  all  times  out  of  novelty  recognised  4 categories  of  existence, 
viz.,  (1)  sky  (ether)  akaslia  (2)  time  kala,  (3)  ego  jiva,  (4)  matter 
pudagala.  The  Jainis  believe  in  6 such  categories,  v/z.,  l.dharma: 
virtue,  2 adharma  : vice,  3.  akasha  : space,  A,  pudagala  : matter,  5.  jiva  : 
ego — astikaya  : existence,  6 kala  : time.  Of  these,  time  is  not  admitted, 
as  astikaya  : a being  or  substance.  They,  however,  say  that  time  has 
come  to  mean  substance  by  the  use  of  language,  in  reality  it  is  not  a 
being. 

1.  Virtue  is  to  regulate  the  actions  produced  from  the  motion 
of  the  body  and  the  activity  of  the  soul  qualified  with  modifications 
in  consequence  of  the  changeability  of  motion.  It  pervades  innu- 
merable places,  bodies  and  worlds.  (Virtue  is  a check  upon  the 
actions  of  the  body  and  soul.) 


410 


Satyarth  Prakash 


2.  Vice  is  the  source  of  the  persistence  of  the  body  and  soul 
constant!)  modified.  (Vice  is  the  origin  of  the  union  of  the  body  and 
soul  or  re-incarnation). 

3.  Space  is  the  support  or  container  of  all  beings  or  modes  of 
existence  or  substances  in  which  immersion,  egress,  ingress,  and  other 
actions  of  the  sentient  beings,  as  well  as  the  motions  of  the  bodies 
are  possible.  It  is  all  pervading. 

4.  Matter  is  an  invisible  cause,  eternal,  uniform,  having  the 
properties  of  color,  smell,  touch,  changeability,  divisibility  by  its  nature. 

5.  Mind  is  an  agent,  enjoyer,  endued  with  consciousness,  fit  to 
know  and  perceive,  liable  to  modifications  from  changes. 

6.  Time  is  marked  by  remoteness,  proximity,  modernity,  anti- 
quity of  the  aforesaid  five  substances  or  things  of  being,  present  and 
attended  with  changes. 

Refutation 

Reviewer — It  is  false  to  say  that  4 new  substances  are  maintained 
by  the  Buddhists;  for  space,  time,  mind  and  atoms  cannot  be  said  to 
be  old  or  new.  They  arc  unbegmning  and  in  virtue  of  their  nature 
undecayable.  How  can  then  newness  and  ancientness  be  predicated 
to  them  ? The  belief  of  the  Jainis  is  also  not  right;  for,  virtue  and 
vice  are  not  substances  but  qualities.  They  are  both  included  in  the 
definition  of  the  ego.  Therefore,  they  would  have  been  right,  had 
they  maintained  space,  atoms,  mind,  and  time.  Also,  the  9 categories 
maintained  by  the  philosophy  of  Vaisheshik  are  right;  for,  earth  and 
other  elements,  5 in  number,  time,  space,  mind,  and  will  are  the  9 
distinct  beings  in  general  acceptance  It  is  the  partiality  and  untruth- 
fulness  of  the  Jainis  and  Buddhists  to  believe  in  the  existence  of  one 
conscious  being,  the  ego,  and  not  believe  in  God. 

Seven  Propositions 

Now  to  give  a brief  account  sapt a bfianga  : seven  propositions 
and  syacl  bada  : doctrine  of  uncertainty,  which  the  Jainis  and  Buddhists 
maintain.  The  proposition,  san  gliatah : “there  is  a pitcher”  is  called 
the  1st  assertion  Bhang  means  break  or  opposition.  For,  the  existence 
of  a pitcher  is  a break  or  contradiction  of  the  assertion  of  non-exis- 
tence. The  2nd  proposition  is  asan  ghataJi : “there  is  no  pitcher”.  It 
first  asserts  the  existence  of  a pitcher  and  then  denies  it,  or  it  is  an- 
other form  of  contradiction.  The  3rd  proposition  is  sann  asanna 
ghatah  : meaning  it  is  a pitcher  but  not  a piece  of  a cloth.  It  is  different 
from  both  the  above  propositions.  The  4th  pre^position  hghato^  ghatah. 
If  a non-pitcher  be  a piece  of  cloth,  and  if  there  be  no  piece  of  cloth,  a 
pitcher  may  be  called  a non-pitcher.  Thus  it  has  two  names  simulane- 
ously:  viz  a pitcher  and  a non-pitcher.  The  5th  proposition  is,  it  is 
improper  to  call  a pitcher  a piece  of  cloth,  i.e.,  its  quality  of  being  a 
pitcher  is  predicable  of  it,  and  the  quality  of  cloth  is  unpredicable.  The 
6th  proposition  is,  what  is  not  a pitcher,  should  not  be  expressed;  and 
what  is,  does  exist  and  expressible.  The  7th  proposition  is,  it  is  desir- 
able to  express  \t,  but  it  is  not  present;  and  also  it  is  not  fit  to  call  it 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


411 


a pitcher.  Such  are  the  7 bhangas  or  logical  propositions  of  hair- 
splitting puerility. 

>Tn:  11^  n 5fk5^5«ff 

w:  ll'fll  ?T5Tf!«^t  3fhr:  »T^t  >T»t:  1 1 VII I ?in?HTf?cT 

ii^ii  ii\9U 

Meaning. — The  soul  is.  This  proposition  asserts  the  non-exis- 
tence of  inanimate  objects  in  the  soul  to  which  they  are  opposed.  It 
is  called  the  1st  bhanga.  The  2nd  bhanga  is,  there  is  no  soul  in  an 
inanimate  object.  This  is  also  a form  of  proposition,  hence  it  is  called 
the  2nd  bhanga  or  proposition  or  assertion.  The  3rd  assertion  is, 
there  is  a soul,  but  it  is  inexpressible.  The  proposition.  When  the 
soul  takes  on  flesh,  it  becomes  evident;  and  when  it  is  out  of  the  body, 
it  is  unknown,  is  called  the  4th  assertion.  The  5th  assertion  is,  there 
is  a soul,  but  not  expressible.  The  6th  proposition  is,  there  is  no 
perceptual  evidence  of  the  soul,  so  it  is  not  seen  with  the  eye,  such  is 
its  nature.  The  7th  proposition*  is,  the  soul  is  proved  to  exist  at  one 
time  by  inference  and  not  to  be  demonstrated  in  its  invisibility,  not  to 
be  constant,  but  to  be  changing  every  moment.  It  is  neither  existence 
nor  non-existence  and  also  it  is  not  non-existence,  existence  and 
action.  Such  is  the  form  of  the  7th  kind  of  proposition. 

In  like  manner,  constancy  and  inconstancy  are  expressed  in  these 
seven  logical  propositions,  also  agreements,  dilTerentiations,  charac- 
teristics, and  every  circumstance  of  change  are  capable  of  expression 
in  these  seven  ways  of  statement  or  sapta  bhangas.  Moreover,  sub- 
stances, properties,  natures,  and  their  countless  modifications  give 
innumerable  septual  expressions.  Such  are  the  syad  bad  doctrine  of 
ambiguity  and  logic  of  septual  propositions. 

Reviewer. — This  framing  of  propositions  may  be  of  advantage 
in  the  consideration  of  the  agreement,  difference  and  reciprocity  of 
objects.  But  to  leave  the  easy  way  and  to  fabricate  a difficult  maze  of 
words  in  the  determination  of  essential  and  accidental  characteristics 
of  objects,  is  only  to  delude  and  entangle  the  ignorant  in  confusion. 
See,  for  instance,  it  is  plain  that  the  non-existence  of  ego  is  found  in 
non-ego,  and  of  non-ego  in  ego.  There  is  agreement  between  the  ego 
and  non-ego  in  virtue  of  their  being  in  existence.  There  is  difference 
between  them  in  virtue  of  the  one  possessing  consciousness  and  the 
other  inanimateness.  In  other  words,  the  ego  possesses  consciousness  : 
asti,  but  not  nasti : inanimateness.  In  like  manner,  matter  possesses 
materiality,  but  not  consciousness.  This  method  of  treating  the  subject 
of  the  agreement  and  difference  of  the  qualities,  actions,  and  natures 

*It  is  past  common  understanding  why  Jainism  includes  puerile  propositions 
of  logical  text  books  which  are  intended  to  train  the  intellectual  power  of  un- 
developed youths  in  the  books  of  religion.  What  purpose  do  they  serve  in  reform- 
ing the  character  of  man  to  accommodate  himself  to  the  moral  government  of 
the  world  ? It  is  amazing  that  the  followers  of  Jainism  should  establish  a different 
church  from  the  pantheon  of  Hinduism  on  the  ground  of  the  above  possible  forms 
of  logical  statements.  It  is  a sheer  waste  of  time  to  take  them  into  account.  They 
carry  their  own  refutation.  They  are  intellectual  tricks  of  school  boys  and  not  the 
serious  subjects  of  heavenly  religion. — T. 


412 


Satyarth  Prakash 


of  objects  facilitates  the  understanding  of  the  intricacy  of  the  septual 
propositions  and  the  doctrine  of  ambiguity  held  by  the  Jainis  and 
Buddhists.  What  is  then  the  use  of  all  this  fuss  ? As  said  above,  these 
doctrines  are  held  by  both  the  Jainis  and  Buddhists.  There  is  very 
little  difference  between  them  but  in  trivial  respects.  We  proceed  now 
to  consider  Jainism  only. 

Jainism 

^ ^ 5^^:  11 

The  Jainis  believe  in  two  great  substances  only,  chit : mind  and 
achit : matter.  The  consideration  of  them  both  constitutes  discrimi- 
nation or  knowledge.  The  discriminator  or  sage  is  one  who  accepts 
what  is  worth  accepting  and  rejects  what  deserves  rejection. 

— 2.  It  is  best  and  most  commendable  to  reject  the  doctrine  of  the 
creator  of  the  world,  desire  and  other  mental  qualities,  and  that  God 
has  made  the  world,  which  is  maintained  by  the  undiscriminator  or 
vulgar;  and  to  accept  the  doctrine  of  the  mind  being  endued  with  the 
power  of  concentration  or  introspection  or  yoga,  and  being  of  supreme 
light  in  its  nature.  In  other  words,  they  do  not  believe  in  God  as 
another  conscious  being,  except  the  soul.  That  there  is  no  God  existing 
without  beginning,  is  the  belief  of  the  Jainis  and  Buddhists.  With 
reference  to  this  theory.  Raja  Shiva  Prasad  writes  in  his  book,  called 
the  Iti-has-timar-mshak,  that  they  are  divided  into  two  sects,  namely, 
1.  Jainis,  2.  Buddhists.  These  are  synonymous  words.  But  there  are 
the  believers  in  Warn  Marg  or  Bacchanalians,  drinkers  and  kreopha- 
gists  among  the  Buddhists.  The  Jainis  are  opposed  to  them.  But 
Mahabir  and  Goutam  who  were  original  teachers — Ganadhara,  are 
called  Buddhas  by  the  Buddhists  and  Ganadhar  and  Jinwar  by  the 
Jainis.  Of  these,  the  following  of  Jina  is  the  sect  of  the  Jainis.  Raja 
Shiva  Prasad  says  in  the  3rd  part  of  his  book,  called  the  Iti-has-timar- 
nashak,  that  Jina  lived  nearly  1000  years  before  Swami  Shankeracharya. 
Buddhism  or  Jainism  then  prevailed  over  all  India. 

The  Raja’s  note  on  this  is  given  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. — T. 

The  Sanscrit  Thesaurus,  called  the  Amarakosha,  gives  the  same 
view  : — 

m II 

o « o O 

?T  ?T;  I 

5r;  ii 

Now  see  if  the  words  Buddha  and  Jina,  Bouddha  and  Jaina  are 
not  the  names  of  the  same  persons.  Has  Amar  Singh,  the  author  of 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


413 


the  Kosh,  made  a mistake  in  confounding  Buddha  and  Jina?  The 
Jainis  who  arc  ignorant,  know  neither  their  own  nor  other’s  religion, 
but  talk  nonsense  from  bigotry.  But  those  Jainis  who  are  learned, 
know  full  well  that  Bouddha  and  Jaina,  and  Buddha  and  Jina  are 
synonyms,  and  there  is  no  doubt  in  it. 

The  Jainis  assert  that  the  mind  becomes  God.  They  regard 
their  teachers,  called  the  Tirathankers,  as  having  attained  absolute 
salvation  and  as  having  become  Gods,  there  being  no  God  existing  from 
eternity.  The  omniscient,  passionless,  adorable,  absolute,  saviour, 
victor  are  the  6 names  of  the  gods  of  atheists.  Chanda  Suri  thus 
describes  the  character  of  Adi  Deva,  the  first  God,  in  the  book,  called 
the  Apta  Nishcliaya  Alankara — a jewel  of  the  faith  of  the  elects  : — 

1.  God  is  one  who  is  free  from  desire  and  other  passions, 
adorable  in  the  three  worlds,  a truthful  discourser  on  all  objects, 
omniscient,  and  worshipful  divine.  The  same  is  written  by  the 
Toutatitas. 

2.  As  we  don’t  see  God  in  the  present,  there  is  no  deity  un- 
beginning  and  all-knowing,  perceivable.  There  being  no  perceptual 
evidence  in  the  case  of  God’s  existence,  the  argument  of  inference  can- 
not be  applicable;  for,  inference  cannot  be  valid  without  the  percep- 
tion of  a part  of  the  object  to  be  proved. 

3.  When  there  is  neither  evidence  of  perception  nor  of  infer- 
rence,  there  can  be  no  evidence  of  authority  or  scriptures  to  indicate 
the  existence  of  the  eternal,  unbeginning,  omniscient  supreme  spirit. 

In  the  absence  of  three  kinds  of  evidence,  the  argument  of  the 
converse  artha  bada  or  the  account  of  the  praise,  dispraise,  actions  of 
the  person  whose  existence  is  to  be  proved,  cannot  hold  water,  or 
historical  evidence  of  the  past  cannot  be  admitted. 

4.  The  manner  of  proof  by  implication  {anyartha  pradhana)  or 
vahuvrihi  like  an  attributive  compound  word,  which  suggests  its  subs- 
tantive, cannot  hold  good  in  the  case  of  the  invisible  Supreme  Being. 
Also,  there  can  be  no  hearsay  without  hearing  the  preachers  of  God. 

Refutation — If  there  was  no  God  unbeginning,  who  would  make 
the  matrix  of  the  bodies  of  the  parents  of  their  adorable  god  Arhan 
Deval  (1)  Without  the  author  of  union  the  body  cannot  be  made 
perfect  in  adaptations,  with  full  complement  of  all  organs  and  tissues, 
capable  of  performing  all  appropriate  actions,  necessary  for  its  ease. 

( 2)  Also  the  elements  of  the  body,  being  inert  and  unintelligent,  can- 
not by  themselves  form  a body  of  exquisite  design;  for,  they  have  no 


414 


Satyarth  Prakash 


knowledge  of  proper  and  harmonious  construction.  (3)  He  can  never 
afterwards  be  a God,  who  was  once  subject  to  the  influence  of  desire 
and  other  passions,  and  then  he  becomes  free  from  them;  for,  the 
cause  which  liberates  him  from  subjection  to  passions,  ceases  to  be  on 
his  liberation,  and  therefore,  his  liberation  or  salvation  which  was  an 
effect,  becomes  temporary.  (4)  He  whose  power  and  knowledge  are 
limited,  can  never  be  omnipresent  and  omniscient;  for,  the  constitu- 
tion of  the  soul  is  definite,  and  its  faculties,  actions  and  nature  are 
limited.  He  cannot  be  the  true  and  infallible  expounder  of  all  sciences 
in  all  respects.  Hence  the  teachers  of  Jainism  can  never  be  the 
Supreme  Being. 

Proof  of  God 

Do  you  admit  the  objects  of  perception  only,  and  don’t  you 
admit  the  objects  not  perceived  by  the  senses?  As  light  is  not  per- 
ceived by  the  ear  nor  sound  by  the  eye,  so  do  the  physical  senses  not 
perceive  the  Eternal  Supreme  Being.  The  perception  of  God  takes 
place  in  the  pure  heart  or  internal  sense.  It  is  knowledge  and  practice 
of  yoga  or  introspection  that  have  the  perception  of  God,  the  all-holy. 
God  is  not  seen  or  apprehended  without  the  merit  of  concentration 
or  clairvoyance  and  perfection  of  knowledge,  as  no  end  is  served 
without  the  acquirement  of  knowledge.  God  is  perceived  by  the 
observation  of  the  special  marks  of  design  of  God  displayed  in  crea- 
tion, as  the  perception  of  earth  takes  place  by  observing  the  proper- 
ties of  form  and  other  characteristics,  and  on  account  of  the  inherent 
relation  between  earth  and  its  properties.  The  fear,  hesitation,  shame, 
felt  in  the  mind  at  the  time  of  committing  a sin,  come  from  the  indwel- 
ling presence  of  God.  This  conviction  is  as  good  as  an  immediate 
perception  of  God.  What  doubt  can  there  be  in  the  inference  of  God’s 
existence? 

The  scriptual  evidence  proves  the  existence  of  the  eternal,  omni- 
scient God  in  loud  terms.  Thus  there  is  the  applicability  of  the  evi- 
dence of  authority  in  the  matter  of  God’s  existence. 

When  the  mind  has  the  knowledge  of  God  deducible  from  the 
triple  evidence  of  perception,  inference,  and  scriptures;  the  singing  of 
God’s  glory  which  constitutes  the  evidential  argument  of  arthabacia 
or  sacred  history,  is  justifiable;  for,  the  eternal  substances  have 
eternal  qualities,  actions,  nature.  There  is  no  objection  to  the  extol- 
ling of  those  virtues.  As  no  work  among  men  is  done  without  an 
agent,  so  is  the  accomplishment  of  the  stupendous  work  of  creation 
without  its  author  a sheer  impossibility.  This  being  the  case,  even  a 
dullard  can  have  no  manner  of  doubt  in  the  existence  of  God.  When 
the  people  hear  the  preaching  of  God  from  Vedic  evangelists,  they 
will  easily  interpret  the  right  sense  of  the  divine  subject  in  their  mind. 
Thus  the  action  taken  by  the  Jainis  to  refute  the  existence  of  God  on 
the  inapplicability  of  the  argument  of  sensuous  perception  and  other 
kinds  of  evidence,  is  improper. 

> 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


415 


ftTfeT^>S7qT«nm>^>:  \\ 

Q.  1.  An  iinbeginning  book  has  no  meaning;  nor  an  omniscient 
being  can  have  a beginning;  for,  he  can  not  be  proved  by  a false 
fabricated  statement.  2.  If  God  is  proved  by  his  own  words:  an 
unbeginning  God  is  proved  by  an  unbeginning  scripture,  and  an 
unbeginning  scripture  by  an  unbeginning  God;  it  is  a fallacy  of  petitio 
principii  or  an  argument  in  circle.  3.  For,  the  Veda  is  true,  being  the 
utterance  of  the  omniscient,  and  the  omniscient  is  proved  from  the 
very  Veda!  How  can  this  argument  be  valid  ? To  prove  the  truth  of 
the  scripture  and  the  existence  of  God,  a third  authority  is  required. 
If  a third  be  admitted,  then  a fourth,  and  so  ad  infinitum;  that  is,  there 
will  be  the  defect  of  uncertainty — anvyavastlia  dosha. 

Eternal  God 

A. — We  believe  God  and  God’s  attributes,  actions,  and  nature 
to  be  unbeginning.  The  defect  of  the  argument  in  circle  cannot  be 
said  of  unbeginning  and  eternal  substances.  As  the  knowledge  of 
elTect  leads  to  that  of  cause  and  as  the  essential  characteristics  of  a 
cause  are  constant  in  its  effects,  and  vice  versa,  so  God  and  his  end- 
less knowledge  and  other  attributes  being  constant  and  eternal,  the 
Veda  made  by  Him-— /y/?wara  pranita — can  have  no  defect  of  uncer- 
tainty or  indicision. 

That  you  believe  that  Tirthankers  were  gods,  can  never  be  true, 
for  their  bodies  cannot  come  into  being  without  the  agency  of  their 
parents.  How  can  they  get  the  knowledge  of  tapashcharya  : asceti- 
cism and  salvation  ? In  like  manner,  union  must  have  a beginning; 
for,  no  union  can  take  place  without  previous  disunion.  Therefore, 
you  should  believe  God  to  be  the  unbeginning  author  of  creation. 
See  a man,  however  great  an  adept  in  science  he  may  be,  cannot 
perfectly  know  the  construction  of  the  body  and  other  things.  When 
the  soul  of  an  adept  passes  into  the  state  of  unconscious  sleep — 
sushupti,  it  perceives  nothing  or  has  no  knowledge  of  anything  at  all. 
When  a soul  is  afflicted  with  pain,  its  knowlege  is  diminished.  Such 
a person  of  limited  power  and  dwelling  in  one  place  cannot  be 
believed  to  be  God  by  anybody  but  the  Jainis  of  bewildered  sense. 
If  you  aver  that  Tirthankers  were  born  of  their  own  parents,  it  is 
asked  of  whom  their  parents  were  born,  and  who  were  the  progeni- 
tors of  their  grand  parents.  Then  who  were  the  parents  of  the  pro- 
genitors of  their  grand  parents,  and  so  on  ad  infinitum  ? Thus  their 
reasoning  establishes  the  defect  of  uncertainty. 

Dialogue  between  a Theist  and  an  Atheist 

Now  we  proceed  to  give  the  dialogue  between  a theist  and  an 
atheist  found  in  the  2nd  part  of  the  Prakarana  Ratnakara  in  the  form 
of  questions  and  answers  admitted  by  the  leading  Jainis  with  unani- 
mous consent,  and  published  at  Bombay. 


4 1 6 Satyarth  Prakash 

Atheist — Nothing  takes  place  by  the  will  of  God.  Whatever 
happens  is  due  to  deeds. 

Theist — If  all  happens  in  consequence  of  deeds,  whence  do  deeds 
take  place  or  whose  consequences  are  they  ? If  you  say  that  they  are 
done  by  souls  and  others,  by  whom  are  the  ears  and  other  organs  of 
the  senses  made,  whereby  the  soul  acts  ? If  you  say  that  they  are 
made  in  unbeginning  time  and  by  nature,  freedom  from  what  is  eter- 
nal and  natural  will  be  impossible  of  occurance,  and  salvation  in  your 
religion  will  be  a creature  of  imagination.  If  you  say  that  they  are 
unbeginning  but  like  pragbJuina  endable,  then  the  consequences  of 
deeds  of  all  souls  will  be  done  up  and  finished  without  any  effort  on 
their  part.  If  God  is  not  the  giver  of  rewards  and  punishment  for 
good  and  evil  deeds,  no  soul  will  take  up  suffering  at  its  will  in  con- 
sequence of  committing  sins,  as  thieves  and  other  felons  do  not 
willingly  accept  punishment  for  their  crimes,  but  it  is  inflicted  on  them 
by  the  law  of  the  land  or  government.  In  like  manner,  souls  are 
made  by  God  to  take  up  the  consequences  of  their  good  and  evil 
deeds,  otherwise  the  confusion  of  deeds  will  allot  their  fruits  to  wrong 
persons, — one  man  will  suffer  for  another’s  doing. 

A — God  does  nothing.  If  he  did  any  work,  he  would  suffer 
consequence,  so  you  should  like  us  believe  our  saints,  who  have  ob- 
tained the  salvation  of  absolute  existence,  to  be  free  from  all  actions. 

T, — God  is  not  inactive,  but  active.  When  he  is  conscious,  how 
can  he  be  not  active  or  the  maker  ? If  active,  he  cannot  be  aloof 
from  action.  No  learned  man  can  believe  in  such  a God  as  your 
artificial  and  manufactured  deities,  the  Tirthankaras,  who  rise  from 
souls  to  Godhead.  For,  he  who  is  made  God  by  some  cause,  will  be 
impermanent  and  dependent,  as  he  had  been  a soul  before  he  be- 
came God.  He  became  God  from  some  cause.  He  will  turn  soul  again; 
he  cannot  get  rid  of  his  nature  of  soul;  for  being  a soul  from  eternity, 
he  will  be  so  to  eternity.  Therefore,  you  should  believe  in  eternal, 
self-existent  God. 

See  God  never  becomes  like  man  or  soul,  who  does  good  and 
evil  deeds  in  the  present  time,  gets  joy  and  sorrow  in  consequence 
thereof.  If  God  were  not  active,  how  could  he  make  this  world  ? If 
you  regard  actions  unbeginning  but  endable  like  a thing  having  no 
beginning  but  an  end—praghhava,  they  will  Jose  their  most  important 
condition  of  necessary  connection  between  the  doer  of  actions  and 
their  consequences.  What  has  no  sumhayasambandha  : necessary  con- 
nection, becomes  impermanent  in  virtue  of  the  nature  of  union — 
sanyoga.  If  you  don’t  believe  actions  in  salvation,  tell  us  if  the  saved 
possess  knowledge.  If  you  say  they  do,  they  have  action  in  the  in- 
ternal sense,  i.e.,  they  act  internally  by  the  mind.  If  in  salvation 
persons  become  motionless  like  a stone,  lie  at  one  place  only,  and 
make  no  movement  whatever,  what  is  the  liberty  of  salvation  but  the 
darkness  of  ignorance  and  bondage  ? 

A, — God  is  not  all-pervading,  if  he  be  so,  why  all  the  things  are 
not  sentient  ? Why  is  the  distinction  of  the  best,  middling,  and  lowest 
made  of  the  Brahmanas,  Kshatriyas,  Vaishyas,  and  Shudras  ? For, 
if  God  pervades  all  uniformly,  there  should  be  no  distinction  of 
superiority  and  inferiority. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


417 


T, — The  pervader  and  the  pervaded  are  not  one  and  the  same- 
thing.  The  pervaded  is  limited  in  space,  but  the  pervader  is  omnipre- 
sent; as,  the  sky  pervades  all,  but  the  earth  and  other  objects  such  as 
pots,  clothes,  and  the  like,  are  all  pervaded  and  confined  to  one  place. 
As  the  sky  and  the  earth  are  not  one  and  the  same  thing,  so  are  God 
and  the  world  not  identical.  As  space  pervades  all  objects  such  as 
pots,  clothes  and  others,  but  they  are  not  the  same  as  space;  so  is  the 
conscious  God  present  in  all  things,  but  they  do  not  possess  animation 
and  consciousness. 

The  learned  and  the  ignorant,  the  virtuous  and  the  vicious  are 
equal.  The  natural  admissibility  of  degree  in  the  attainments  of 
knowledge,  goodness,  veracity,  suavity  and  other  merits  has  given  rise 
to  the  distinction  of  the  Brahmanas,  Kshatriyas,  Vaishyas,  Shudras, 
and  slumbs,  and  their  respective  high  and  low  social  states.  The 
principles  of  social  classification  have  been  given  at  length  in  the  4th 
chapter,  which  may  be  consulted  with  reference  to  the  classes  of  people. 

A. — If  the  creation  is  God’s  performance,  what  is  the  use  of 
parents? 

T.— God  is  the  maker  of  the  natural  objects  in  the  world,  but 
not  of  the  human  works.  God  never  does  the  duties  or  works  of 
man.  But  it  is  man  who  does  them.  For  instance,  God  has  created 
trees,  fruits,  herbs,  cereals  and  other  edibles.  If  a man  does  not  get 
them,  and  after  pounding,  grinding  and  cooking,  make  bread  and 
other  articles  of  diet,  with  which  to  gratify  his  appetite;  will  God 
ever  do  these  works  for  him  ? If  God  never  does  his  work  of  crea- 
tion, man  cannot  live  in  the  world.  Hence,  in  the  beginning  of  crea- 
tion the  structure  of  the  bodies, — the  moulds  and  matrixes  of  sentient 
beings,  was  made  by  God;  but  afterwards  the  work  of  the  propaga- 
tion of  human  species  was  assigned  to  souls  as  their  obligatory  duty. 

A. — As  God  is  eternal,  unbeginning,  intelligent,  happy,  and 
wise;  why  has  he  created  the  perplexity  of  the  world  and  fallen  into 
trouble  ? Even  a man  of  common  sense  does  no  such  work  as  to  lose 
his  case  and  run  into  trouble.  How  is  it  that  God  has  done  it  ? 

T, — God  never  falls  into  any  perplexity  and  trouble,  nor  does 
he  lose  his  happiness;  for,  it  can  only  be  the  lot  of  a finite  being,  and 
not  of  an  infinite  being  to  fall  into  illusion  and  suffering.  If  God, 
the  first  cause,  spirit,  happiness,  and  intelligence,  does  not  make  the 
world,  who  can  do  it  V The  human  soul  has  no  power  to  make  the 
world.  As  the  matter  possesses  no  power  of  self  creation  or  forma- 
tion, it  is  evident  that  God  alone  makes  the  world  and  ever  lives  in 
happiness.  God  has  established  the  law  of  the  genesis  of  the  human 
species  through  the  parental  instrumentality,  as  it  is  his  law  to  make 
the  world  out  of  atoms. 

v4.— Why  has  God  fallen  into  the  trouble  of  the  creation,  pre- 
servation and  destruction  of  the  world  at  the  expense  of  the  happiness 
of  heaven  ? 

T.— Being  ever  in  the  state  of  absolute  happiness,  the  supreme 
and  eternal  spirit  is  not  like  your  teachers  of  religion  or  Tirathankers, 
who  have  attained  salvation  by  adopting  certain  means,  who  live  in 


418 


Satyarth  Prakash 


one  place,  and  who  have  been  emancipated  from  previous  bondage. 
God  is  infinite  in  his  attributes,  action,  and  existence,  does  not  lose 
his  freedom  by  making,  preserving  and  destroying  this  insignificant 
world;  for,  bondage  and  emancipation  are  relative  terms,  as  bondage 
is  the  absence  of  emancipation,  and  vice  versa.  He  who  was  never 
tied  down  to  a state,  cannot  be  said  to  be  liberated  therefrom.  It 
is  the  finite  souls  only  that  ever  fall  into  the  bondage  of  suffering  and 
are  liberated  from  it.  The  infinite,  omnipresent,  all-seeing  God  never 
gets  into  the  revolution  of  the  wheal  of  suffering  and  accidental  salva- 
tion like  your  saviours,  the  Tirathankaras.  Therefore,  the  Supreme 
Being  is  called  eternally  free. 

A. — Souls  suffer  the  consequences  of  their  actions  as  a drinker 
gets  intoxication  by  nature.  There  is  no  hand  of  God  in  it. 

T. — Robbers,  cheats,  thieves  and  other  wicked  men  do  not 
voluntarily  hang  themselves  or  go  or  wish  to  go  to  jail  in  punishment 
for  their  crimes  without  the  enforcement  of  law  by  the  king  who 
forcibly  apprehends  them  and  punishes  them  according  to  their  vio- 
lence. In  like  manner,  God  enforces  his  equitable  law  and  rewards 
and  punishes  souls  as  the  case  may  be,  according  to  their  respective 
deeds.  For,  no  soul  wishes  to  suffer  the  consequences  of  their  evil 
deeds.  So,  the  Supreme  Being  is  necessarily  tlie  common  judge  of  all. 

A, — There  is  not  one  God  in  the  world;  but  all  the  souls  that 
have  attained  to  the  state  of  salvation,  arc  so  many  Gods. 

T. — This  assertion  is  entirely  futile;  for,  he  who  was  at  first  in 
flesh,  and  then  was  saved  from  the  taint  of  flesh,  must  needs  come 
again  into  flesh;  for,  he  is  not  by  nature  eternally  saved;  as  your  24 
saviours  or  Tirathankers  were  at  first  subject  to  the  suffering  of 
humanity— but  were  afterwards  liberated  from  it.  They  must 
again  relapse  to  the  same  state.  When  theie  are  many  Gods,  they 
will  quarrel  among  themselves  like  souls  from  their  numerousness. 

A, — O you  fool,  there  is  no  maker  of  the  world;  but  it  is  self- 
existent. 

T. — What  a great  mistake  is  it  of  the  Jainis  to  believe  in  no 
agent  ? Well,  is  there  any  instance  in  the  world  of  an  action  happen- 
ing without  its  actor,  and  of  a result  or  work  without  an  action  ? It 
is  like  saying  that  self-made  flour  is  of  its  accord  turned  into  bread 
in  the  field  of  wheat  to  enter  the  stomach  of  the  Jainis.  Cotton  yarn, 
cloth,  coats,  scarfs,  under  lower  garments  (dhoti),  turbans,  and  other 
clothes  are  never  made  of  themselves.  If  such  things  never  happen, 
how  can  this  world  of  great  diversity  of  formations  displaying  special 
design  come  into  being  without  its  maker,  the  Lord  God  Almighty? 
If  you  maintain  the  self  existence  of  the  phenomena  of  the  material 
world,  you  should  show  examples  of  self-made  suits  and  other  articles 
above  mentioned  brought  into  existence  without  the  instrumentality 
of  a manufacturer.  If  you  can  not  do  it,  what  sensible  man  will  be- 
lieve your  theory  without  proof  ? 

A. — Has  or  has  not  God  desires  and  passions  ? If  he  has  none, 
why  has  he  got  into  the  trouble  of  creating  the  world  ? If  he  is  ab- 
solute or  has  no  attachment  to  the  world,  he  will  not  be  able  to 
make  the  world. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


419 


T, — Renunciation  or  dotage  cannot  be  spoken  of  God.  For, 
whom  can  he  who  is  all-pervading,  leave  off,  and  whom  can  he 
accept  ? There  is  nothing  better  than  or  inaccessible  to  God.  So,  he 
has  no  hankering  after  a thing.  Renunciation  and  fondness  are 
predicates  of  the  soul,  but  not  of  God. 

A. — If  you  believe  God  to  be  the  maker  of  the  world,  and  dis- 
penser of  the  consequences  of  souls’  actions,  he  will  become  wordly 
and  so  endure  suffering. 

T. — Well,  when  an  impartial  and  conscientious  learned  judge 
who  does  a great  many  works,  and  dispenses  the  fruits  of  people’s 
deeds,  does  neither  contract  the  taint  of  the  influence  of  actions,  nor 
become  worldly;  how  can  God  of  unbounded  power  be  worldly  and 
subject  to  suffering  ? Verily,  you  regard  the  Great  God  like  yourselves 
and  your  saviours  the  Tiralhankers  out  of  your  ignorance.  It  is  the 
outcome  of  your  own  ignorance.  If  3011  want  to  be  free  from  the 
faults  of  ignorance  and  other  vices,  you  should  seek  refuge  in  the 
truth  of  the  Vedas  and  other  true  scriptures.  Why  do  you  tumble 
down  in  the  darkness  of  ignorance  and  waste  your  precious  life  ? 

Now  we  proceed  to  show  what  kind  of  opinions  the  Jains  hold 
of  the  world  from  the  aphorisms  of  their  scriptures.  The  meaning 
of  the  text  will  be  given  briefly.  Then  its  review  will  be  given  to 
show  what  is  true  and  what  is  otherwise. 

mftr  \ 

few  u 

— Prakaran  Ratnakar,  Part  11,  Shatak  60,  Sutra  2. 

Note — This  is  a dialogue  between  Goutaina  and  Mahabira  given 
in  the  book,  called  the  Ratnsarabhag,  on  the  subject  of  the  Ramyaha 
Prakasha  : illumination. 

Its  concise  appropriate  meaning  is  that  the  world  is  unbeginning 
and  endless.  It  was  never  created  and  it  will  never  be  destroyed.  In 
other  words,  nobody  has  made  the  world.  This  has  been  given  fully 
in  the  dialogue  between  the  theist  and  atheist.  O you  fool,  there  is  no 
creator  of  the  world,  which  was  never  made,  and  which  will  never  be 
destroyed. 

Reviewer. — What  is  come  into  being  from  union,  can  never  be 
unbeginning  and  endless.  Its  production  and  destruction  cannot  take 
place  without  an  action.  All  the  objects  that  are  seen  in  the  world, 
are  attended  with  production  and  destruction.  Then  how  is  it  that 
the  world  is  not  liable  to  production  and  destruction?  Hence  your 
saviours  had  no  right  knowledge.  If  they  possessed  it,  how  could 
they  write  such  impossible  things? 

Science  of  Jainism 

As  your  teachers  are,  so  are  you  their  pupils.  They  who  listen 
to  your  talk,  can  never  gain  the  knowledge  of  truth  or  reality  (object). 
Well,  why  do  you  not  believe  the  production  and  destruction  of  the 
objects  perceived  as  united?  Plainly,  the  Jainis  and  their  teachers 
had  no  knowledge  of  geography  and  astronomy,  also  these  branches 
of  knowledge  are  not  now  found  among  them,  otherwise  how  could 
they  believe  and  assert  the  following  impossible  things?— 


420 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Sec,  in  the  creation  Prithwi  Kaya  : the  earth  is  the  body  of  the 
soul.  They  also  believe  Jala  Kaya  that  water  and  other  elements  are 
the  body  of  the  soul.  This  can  not  be  believed  by  anybody. 

See  further  on  their  false  teachings.  Here  are  a few  specimens 
of  the  false  doctrines  of  the  Jain  saviours  or  Tirathankers  whom  the 
Jains  regard  as  the  possessors  of  right  knowledge  and  great  gods. 

Chronology 

The  Jainis  believe  the  book,  called  Ratnasar  Bhag.  It  was  printed 
at  the  Jain  Prabhakar  Press,  Benares,  and  published  by  Nanak  Chand 
Jaini  on  April  28th,  1879  A.  D.  On  its  page  145,  time  is  thus  des- 
cribed : — 

Reckoning  of  time 

A particular  time  is  called  suksJiam  kala  unit  of  time.  Innumer- 
able such  units  are  called  an  avail;  1,67,70,216  avails  make  I muhurta; 
30  muhurtas  make  1 divasa : day;  15  days  make  a paksha : fortnight; 
2 fortnights  make  a month;  12  months  make  a year;  70  lac  crores,  56 
thousand  crores  of  such  years  make  1 purva  or  cycle;  innumerable 
such  cycles  make  1 palyopama  time.  Asankhyata  : innumerable  means 
that  a well  4 cos  (leagues)  long,  4 cos  broad  and  4 cos  deep  be  filled 
with  the  pieces  of  the  following  hair  of  twin’s  body.  The  hair  of 
twins  is  4096  times  finer  than  that  of  a man  of  the  present  time.  If 
4096  hairs  of  twins  are  united,  they  will  make  one  hair  of  a man  of 
the  present  time.  A part  of  the  hair  of  twins  one  finger’s  breadth 
long  should  be  cut  seven  times  into  8 parts  each  time,  which  makes 
2,097,152  pieces.  The  above  mentioned  well  should  be  filled  with 
such  pieces  of  hair.  Then  one  piece  should  be  taken  out  at  the  interval 
of  100  years.  When  all  the  pieces  are  taken  out  and  the  well  is 
emptied,  it  will  still  be  a time  countable.  Then  those  pieces  of  hair 
should  be  divided  each  into  innumerable  pieces,  with  which  the  well 
should  be  so  filled  and  compressed  as  not  to  yield  when  the  army  of 
a king  of  the  whole  world  passes  on  it.  Then  they  should  be  taken 
out  one  by  one  at  the  interval  of  100  years.  When  it  is  emptied,  it 
will  make  innumerable  purvas  (cycles)  which  will  form  one  palyopama 
time.  This  palyopama  time  is  reckoned  as  in  the  example  of  the  well. 
When  ten  crores  by  a crore  palyopama  times  elapse,  it  makes  one 
sagaropama  time.  When  10  crores  by  a crore  such  sagaropama  time 
elapse,  it  makes  one  utsarpanl  time,  and  when  one  utsarpanl  and  one 
avasarpani  times  elapse,  they  make  owe  kala~chakra  or  chronical  wheel. 
When  such  endless  wheels  of  time  pass  away,  they  make  one  padagola 
para  vrita.  Now  what  is  the  endless  time?  It  is  beyond  what  is 
mentioned  in  the  9 examples  of  the  authorized  books.  To  come  to 
the  point,  the  soul  has  been  wandering  about  in  eternity  of  such  end- 
less eons  of  padagala puravrlta  time.  The  book  goes  on  in  this  strain 
of  argument. 

Refutation 

Hear,  O my  brothers,  versed  in  mathematics,  will  you  or  will  you 
not  be  able  to  calculate  the  time  of  the  Jainis?  Will  you  or  will  you 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


421 


not  take  it  as  true?  See,  such  has  been  the  acquisition  of  mathematical 
knowledge,  of  these  Tirathankaras!  Such  are  the  teachers  and  pupils  in 
their  religion  that  there  is  no  imagining  of  the  boundlessness  of  their 
ignorance.  Listen  furthermore  to  their  talk  of  ignorance. 

Zoology 

On  the  Ratnakar  Bhag  page  133,  we  have  the  substance  of  what 
has  been  taught  by  the  26  saviours,  beginning  from  Rishabh  Deva 
(the  lord  of  the  bull)  up  to  Mahabir  (Goutama)  in  the  sacred  autho- 
rized scriptures  of  the  Jainis.  The  Ratnakar  Bhag,  page  148,  says 
that  souls  and  different  rocks  (clay,  stone,  &c.)  are  the  various  forms 
of  the  body  of  the  earth — prithwikayos.  The  size  of  the  body  of  the 
animals  living  in  them  may  be  thought  to  be  an  infinitesimal  part  of 
a finger’s  breadth;  in  other  words,  they  arc  very  minute.  The  length 
of  their  life  is  22,000  years  at  the  utmost. 

On  page  149  of  the  same  book  we  read  : in  one  tree  (lit  one  body 
of  vegetable  kingdom)  there  arc  innumerable  animalcuhs.  They  are 
called  common  plants  (sadharana  vanaspati)  Tube’s  roots,  and  other 
kinds  and  plants  of  innumerable  forms  (anantakaya)  may  be  called 
the  life  (jiva)  of  common  plants.  The  duration  of  their  life  time  is 
antar  muhurta.  But  their  above  mentioned  muhurta  may  be  taken 
here.  If  a plant  has  one  sense,  namely  the  sense  of  touch,  and  it  has 
but  one  animal  dwelling  in  it  it  is  called  the  pratyeka  or  an  individual 
plant.  Its  size  is  1000  yojana.  The  yojana  of  the  believers  or  writers 
of  the  Puranas  is  4 cos  or  leagues,  but  that  of  tiie  Jainis  is  10,000  cos. 
Its  body  is  4,000  such  cos.  The  duration  of  its  life  is  at  utmost 
10,000  \ears. 

Now,  of  the  animals  of  two  senses,  that  is  the  body  and  the 
mouth  (senses  of  touch  and  taste),  as  the  mollusk,  louse,  and  others. 
Their  body  measures  at  utmost  48  cos  round  or  in  volume.  They  live 
at  utmost  12  years.  The  author  has  erred  here,  for  he  should  have 
given  a longer  duration  to  such  a big  body.  Also  a louse  of  48  miles 
(cos)  may  be  found  on  the  person  of  the  Jainis,  and  they  must  have 
seen  it.  Other  people  are  not  so  fortunate  enough  as  to  see  such  a 
big  louse  ! ! ! 

Also,  see  page  150,  Ratnakar  bhag,  for  their  imaginary  animals. 
The  scorpion,  lizard,  grecko,  fly  have  bodies  one  yojana  in  size.  The 
longest  duration  of  their  life  is  6 months.  O hear  me  ! nobody  else 
has  seen  a scorpion  4 cos  long.  It  is  the  religion  of  the  Jainis  in 
which  a scorpion  and  fly  8 miles  long  in  size  are  to  be  met  with. 
Such  big  scorpions  and  flies  may  be  in  their  houses  only;  and  they 
alone  must  have  seen  them.  No  other  person  may  have  seen  them  in 
the  world.  What  must  he  the  condition  of  the  Jaini  who  is  stung  by 
such  a scorpion ! 

The  body  of  fish  and  other  acquatic  animals  is  given  at  1,000 
yojana,  /.e.  its  body  is  10,000,000  cos,  counting  a yojana  to  be  of 
10,000  cos.  Their  life  lasts  one  crore  of  purva  years.  None  but  the 
Jainis  must  have  seen  such  aquatic  animals. 

This  size  of  the  body  of  the  elephant  and  other  quadrupeds  is 
given  2 cos  to  9 cos;  and  the  term  of  their  life  at  84,000  years.  The 


422 


Satyarth  Prakasfi 


Jainis  must  have  seen  such  big  animals.  They  alone  believe  their 
existence.  But  no  sensible  and  learned  man  can  believe  such  things. 

TheRatnakar  bhag,  page  151.  has  the  size  of  the  body  of  aqua- 
tics, zoophytes  and  garbhaja  entozoas  given  at  1,000  yojana  or  one 
crore  cos.  Their  life  lasts  one  crore  pur\a  years.  It  is  the  teachers 
of  the  Jainis  who  must  have  seen  so  big  and  so  long  lived  animals.  Is 
it  not  a great  lie,  which  has  no  possibility  at  all  ? 

Geography 

Now,  listen  to  the  account  of  the  earth.  Ratnasar  bhag,  page 
152. — This  oblique  world  has  innumerable  islands  and  countless  seas. 
To  know  their  number,  it  is  said  that  they  are  commensurate  in 
number  with  the  time  of  two  sagaropamas  and  a half.  Now,  first  of 
all  among  these  islands  and  continents  in  the  world  is  one,  called 
Jambu  dwipa  (India)  situated  in  their  centre.  Its  area  is  100,000 
yojanas  or  4 lacs  of  cos.  It  is  surrounded  on  all  sides  with  a salt  sea, 
whose  area  is  200,000  yojanas  or  8 lac  cos.  Around  Jambu  dwipa 
(India)  is  an  island,  called  Dhatki  khana.  Its  extent  is  4 lac  yojanas 
or  16  lac  cos.  Behind  it  is  the  sea,  called  Kalodadhi.  Its  size  is  8 lac 
yojanas  or  32  lac  cos.  Then  Fushkar  avarta  continent  is  behind  it.  Its 
area  is  16  cos.  The  border  of  its  interior  is  rugged.  The  half  of  it  is 
peopled  with  men.  Beyond  it  there  are  innumerable  islands  and  seas, 
where  live  insects  and  worms. 

lb.  135  — There  are  6 plains  in  India  (Jambu  dwipa)  viz.  Hima- 
vant,  Airanyavant,  Hari  varsha,  Ranyaka,  Deva  Kuru,  Uttara  Kuru. 

Reviewer — Hear  me,  brothers,  who  know  geography.  Have  the 
Jainis  or  you  made  a mistake  in  the  mathematical  description  of  the 
world  ? 

If  the  Jains  have  made  a mistake,  you  should  explain  it  to  them. 
But  if  >ou  have  erred,  you  should  receive  instructions  from  them.  If 
you  think  a little,  it  will  appear  that  the  teachers  and  scholars  of  the 
Jainis  have  studied  nothing  of  geopraphy,  astronomy,  and  mathematics. 
Had  they  read  them,  how  could  they  have  talked  such  nonsense  and 
impossible  things  ? What  wonder  is  there  if  such  ignorant  men  believe 
the  world  to  be  without  its  maker  and  God  to  be  non-existent?  So 
the  Jainis  do  not  give  their  books  to  the  learned  men  of  other  religion 
to  read;  for,  the  books  which  they  regard  as  genuine,  authorised,  and 
written  by  their  saviours,  the  Tirathankers,  are  replete  with  such  absur- 
dities, and  so  unfit  to  be  placed  in  the  hands  of  learned  men.  If  they 
allow  them  to  read  their  scriptures,  their  hollowness  will  be  exposed 
to  their  shame.  Excepting  the  Jainis,  no  man  with  a particle  of  sense 
about  him  can  ever  believe  them  to  be  true,  full  of  disgusting  gossip 
they  are.  All  this  humbug  has  been  got  up  by  the  Jainis  to  support 
their  dogma  of  the  eternity  of  the  world.  But  it  is  falsehood  pure  and 
simple.  Verily,  the  cause  of  the  world  is  eternal,  for  it  consists  of 
atoms,  the  material  substratum,  without  its  maker.  But  its  atoms  have 
no  power  at  all  of  formation  or  destruction  by  themselves.  For,  the 
atoms  of  the  matter  are  distinct  and  disparate  by  their  nature  and  are 
inert  and  inanimate,  they  can  not  properly  form  themselves  into  any 
plan.  Therefore,  there  is  certainly  the  intelligent  maker  of  their  pheno- 
menal forms,  and  he  is  all-wise.  See  it  is  the  work  of  unbeginning 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


423 


and  endless,  conscious  and  intelligent  Supreme  Being  to  keep  the  sun 
and  all  other  stars  and  world  is  comformity  to  his  laws  of  nature, 
which  display  his  design  and  power  of  union  in  special.  The  pheno- 
menal world  can  never  be  without  a beginning.  If  the  phenomenon 
of  the  world  (an  effect)  be  believed  to  be  eternal,  there  will  be  no  cause 
of  it.  But  it  will  be  both  cause  and  effect  in  itself.  If  this  view  be 
asserted,  it  will  be  hampered  with  the  fallacy  of  mutual  dependence 
for  proof  or  the  argument  in  circle  and  of  dependence  on  self,  as,  for 
instance,  a man’s  climbing  on  his  own  shoulder.  As  no  man  can  be 
his  own  father  and  son,  the  maker  of  the  world  must  necessarily  be 
admitted. 

Q, — If  God  is  the  maker  of  the  world,  who  is  the  maker  of  God  ? 

A. — There  can  be  no  doer  of  a doer  or  cause  of  a cause,  for,  the 
existence  of  a doer  and  a cause  must  precede  that  of  an  effect.  What 
is  at  first  the  cause  of  union  and  disunion  can  in  no  way  have  its  doer 
or  cause.  The  particular  treatment  of  this  subject  being  included  in 
the  description  of  creation  has  been  given  in  the  8th  chapter,  to  which 
the  reader  is  referred.  These  Jainis  have  no  right  knowledge  of 
concrete  subjects,  how  can  they  comprehend  the  highly  abstract  subject 
as  the  knowledge  of  creation  is  ? 

Beliefs  of  Jainis 

The  beliefs  of  the  Jainis  are  that  the  creation  is  unbeginning  and 
endless;  that  the  transformations  of  matter  are  also  the  same;  that 
there  are  changes  in  every  quality  and  every  locality,  and  endless 
changes  in  every  object.  This  is  given  in  the  first  part  of  the  Pra- 
karana  Ratnakara,  These  beliefs  are  also  untenable;  for,  whatever  is 
terminable  and  finite,  has  all  its  relations  also  limited  and  definite.  It 
is  also  improper  to  call  immense  innumerable.  It  is  proper  in  relation 
to  the  soul,  but  not  in  the  case  of  God.  It  is  a matter  of  ignorance 
only  to  believe  that  every  substance  has  its  own  particular  power  of 
causation  and  boundless  power  of  ceaseless  transformations.  When 
an  atom  has  a limit,  how  can  it  have  endless  formations  in  shape  of 
divisions?  Tt  is  childishness  to  say  that  every  substance  has  endless 
qualities,  and  every  quality  has  the  continuity  of  endless  changes.  For, 
if  a measure  has  a limit,  how  can  its  contents  have  no  limit  ? Such 
lengthy  false  discourses  are  found  in  their  scriptures. 

Now  the  following  is  the  belief  of  the  Jainis  with  regard  to  the 
ego  and  non-ego  : — 

Mind  and  Matter 

g^^T  ii 

— It  is  a saying  of  Jindatt  Suri.  It  is  also  given  in  the  first  part  of 
the  Prakarana  Ratnakara  and  Naya  Chakrasara  that  the  characteristic 
of  the  ego  is  consciousness,  and  the  non-ego  is  devoid  of  consciousness, 
that  is,  inert  and  inanimate.  The  class  of  good  works  constitutes 
virtue,  that  of  evil,  vice. 


424 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Reviewer. — The  definitions  of  matter  and  soul  are  right;  but 
inanimate  bodies  can  never  possess  virtue  and  vice;  for,  it  is  the  nature 
of  a conscious  being  to  do  good  or  evil.  See  all  the  inanimate  objects 
ar  e free  from  the  effect  of  good  and  evil  or  sin  and  merit.  It  is  also 
right  to  hold  the  view  of  the  eternity  of  the  soul;  but  it  is  wrong  to 
regard  the  finite  soul  of  limited  knowledge  in  the  state  of  salvation 
as  omniscient;  for,  he  who  is  finite  and  whose  knowledge  is  limited, 
will  always  have  his  power  finite  and  limited.  It  is  also  an  error  in 
the  teachings  of  the  Saviours  of  the  Jainis,  the  Tirathankaras,  to  regard 
the  phenomenal  world,  earthly  life  of  the  soul  and  its  deeds  to  be 
unbeginning;  for,  the  phenomena  of  the  world  with  their  causation 
{karya  karaua)  and  succession  of  the  actions  of  the  soul,  its  appear- 
rances  cannot  be  eternal;  otherwise  why  do  you  believe  emancipation 
from  them  ? For,  what  is  essential  and  eternal,  cannot  be  got  rid  of. 
If  you  believe  the  end  and  destruction  of  what  is  unbegining  and 
permanent,  it  will  hold  truly  good  for  the  extinction  of  all  your  un- 
beginning and  eternal  substances.  When  you  believe  what  is  unbeginn- 
ing to  be  permanent,  the  actions  and  psychophysical  unions  will  be 
prima  facia  permanent  and  eternal.  The  destruction  of  the  continuity 
of  actions  and  the  doctrine  of  the  eternity  of  what  is  unbeginning,  will 
prove  the  permanence  of  the  tendency  of  action  and  psycho-physical 
union.  When  you  believe  salvation  to  be  emancipation  from  all 
actions,  it  will  be  accidental  and  impermanent.  The  accidental  sal- 
vation cannot  last  for  ever.  The  constant  relation  between  the  actor 
and  the  action  will  not  procure  freedom  from  actions  In  the  face  of 
these  views  the  permanence  of  the  salvation  of  the  Tirathankers  and 
yourselves  will  become  evanescent  and  trancient. 

Q. — If  a grain  of  rice  be  peeled  off  or  parched  over  a fire,  it  will 
not  germinate.  In  like  manner,  the  soul  gone  to  salvation  or  heaven, 
never  returns  to  the  world  of  mortality. 

A. — Relation  between  the  soul  and  its  action  is  not  like  that 
between  a seed  grain  and  the  husk.  But,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  like 
that  between  warf  and  woof,  i.e.  essential.  The  relation  between  the 
soul,  its  actions,  and  its  tendency  to  act  exists  from  eternity.  If  the 
absence  of  its  power  to  act  be  alleged,  all  the  souls  will  be  like  dead 
stone.  They  will  have  no  power  to  enjoy  the  happiness  of  salvation. 
As  the  soul  passes  into  salvation  by  being  freed  from  the  unbeginning 
chain  of  actions,  it  will  be  released  from  your  permanent  salvation  and 
join  the  psycho-physical  union.  As  you  believe  salvation  to  be 
emancipation  from  the  necessity  of  adopting  means  of  salvation,  you 
should  for  the  sake  of  consistency  admit  its  liability  to  psycho-physical 
union.  A thing  made  by  adopting  means  can  never  be  constant  and 
stable.  If  you  believe  salvation  to  be  attainable  without  the  adoption 
of  means,  the  psycho-physical  union  or  birth  of  the  soul  will  occur 
without  the  influence  of  actions.  For  instance,  clothes  are  soiled  with 
dirt  which  is  removed  by  washing;  then  they  are  again  covered  with 
it.  In  the  same  way,  the  soul  is  affected  with  the  consequences  of 
deeds  from  their  dependence  upon  desire,  avertions  and  other  passions 
as  well  as  from  falsehood  and  other  vices.  It  is  purified  by  right 
knowledge,  true  philosophy,  and  right  conduct.  If  soiling  is  believed 
to  be  due  to  the  cause  of  dirtiness  itself,  it  will  be  incumbent  to  admit 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


425 


that  the  saved  soul  may  be  worldly  and  vice  versa  i.e.  the  entrance  into 
and  return  from  salvation  of  the  soul.  For,  the  causes  which  remove 
dirtiness,  operate  to  bring  it  about.  (The  activity  of  the  soul  leads  it 
to  sin,  but  it  also  effects  its  freedom  from  it).  So  it  is  proper  to 
believe  the  soul’s  incarnation  and  salvation  to  be  unbeginning  in  virtue 
of  their  succession,  but  not  both  unbeginning  and  endless. 


Soul’s  Depravity 

Q. — The  soul  was  never  pure,  but  it  is  deprave  and  impure. 

A. — If  it  was  never  pure  and  holy,  it  can  never  be  so.  A piece 
of  white  cloth  soiled  afterwards  with  dirt,  can  be  cleaned  of  the  dirt; 
but  its  natural  whiteness  cannot  be  got  rid  of.  Dirt  again  soils  it.  The 
same  will  happen  in  salvation 

Q. — The  soul  assumes  the  body  in  virtue  of  actions  done  before 
nativity.  It  is  useless  to  hypotheticise  the  existence  of  God. 

A. — If  the  influence  of  actions  alone  be  the  cause  of  the  embodi- 
ment of  the  soul,  and  God  be  no  cause  in  it,  the  soul  will  never  enter 
the  body  where  much  pains  is  to  be  endured,  but  will  ever  seek  to 
dwell  in  the  bodies  of  best  conditions.  If  you  say  that  the  influence  of 
actions  is  a barrier  to  it,  still  you  too  should  believe  in  the  existence 
of  God,  who  gives  rewards  and  punishments  according  to  the  actions 
of  the  soul  and  allots  to  it  a suitable  tenement  of  the  body;  as  a king 
passes  a sentence  of  imprisonment  upon  a thief  who  never  voluntarily 
goes  to  jail,  and  of  capital  punishment  upon  a murderer  who  never 
willingly  hangs  himself  from  the  gibbets. 

Q. — The  consequences  of  actions  make  their  appearance  sponta- 
neously as  intoxication  from  the  use  of  drugs.  There  is  no  necessity 
of  another  agent  in  giving  (or  producing)  the  consequences  of  actions. 

A. — If  such  be  the  case,  as  habitual  drunkards  get  a little  in- 
ebriation, and  one  unaccustomed  to  drink  is  very  much  intoxicated; 
the  veteran  performers  of  virtuous  and  vicious  deeds  will  pari  passa 
bear  less  consequences  than  occasional  and  petty  performers.  Small 
actions  will  be  followed  with  great  consequences. 

Q, — Consequences  are  regulated  by  the  nature  of  agents.  (A 
man  gets  consequences  of  his  deeds  according  to  his  nature). 

A. — If  a man  gets  consequences  according  to  his  nature,  suffer- 
ing or  ridding  them  is  out  of  question  or  cannot  take  place  at  all.  A 
clean  cloth  is  bedaubed  with  dirt  from  certain  causes.  It  is  removed 
by  other  means  of  cleaning.  This  is  the  right  view  of  the  matter. 

Q. — No  change  takes  place  in  an  action  without  its  union  with 
another  action  as  curd  is  not  made  without  the  union  of  milk  and 
rennet.  In  the  same  manner,  the  union  of  the  soul  and  action  pro- 
duces a change. 

A. — As  the  mixer  of  milk  and  rennet  is  a third  entity,  so  is 
God  a third  estate  to  accommodate  the  soul  with  the  fruits  of  their 
actions;  for,  inanimate  objects  do  not  follow  their  laws  by  themselves, 
and  the  souls  too  do  not  take  up  the  fruits  of  their  actions  of  their 


426 


Satyarth  Prakash 


own  accord  from  the  limitedness  of  their  knowledge.  Hence  it  is 
proved  that  the  law  of  retribution  cannot  exist  without  the  establish- 
ment of  the  laws  of  nature. 

Intrinsic  Activity  of  soul 

Q, — He  who  is  freed  from  action,  is  called  God. 

A. — When  the  souls  are  associated  with  action  from  eternity, 
they  cannot  be  freed  from  it. 

Q. — The  effect  of  action  has  a beginning? 

A. — If  it  has  a beginning,  the  concommittance  of  action  is  not 
unbeginning.  The  soul  will  be  void  of  action  in  the  beginning  of 
union.  If  one  void  of  action  is  associated  with  action,  the  saved  will 
also  contract  it.  As  relation  between  the  doer  and  action  is  constant 
like  warf  and  woof  in  cloth,  it  does  not  come  to  an  end.  Therefore, 
what  is  written  in  the  9th  chapter  is  proper  to  believe. 

However  great  the  soul’s  knowledge  and  power  may  become  by 
its  exertion,  they  will  be  finite  and  limited.  So  the  soul  cannot  be 
equal  to  God.  Verily  whatever  improvement  is  possible  and  proper, 
it  can  effect  by  means  of  yoga  or  introspection. 

As  the  saints  {ardat)  of  Jainis  maintain  that  the  volume  of  the 
soul  is  equal  to  the  size  of  the  body,  they  should  explain  how  the  soul 
of  the  elephant  can  accommodate  itself  in  the  body  of  a pismire,  and 
\ice  versdl  It  is  also  an  instance  of  ignorance;  for,  the  soul  is  subtle 
entity,  which  can  live  ever  in  an  atom.  But  its  powers  are  displayed 
in  union  with  respiration,  electricity,  nervous  system  and  other  orga- 
nism of  the  body.  They  govern  all  the  movements  of  the  body.  It 
takes  its  tone  with  the  nature  of  company,  good  one  making  it  good 
and  \ice  \ersa. 

Religion  of  Jainis 

Now,  the  following  are  the  views  of  the  religious  duties  of  the 
Jainis  : — 

^ ^ ^ I 

qTH  eft  u— ib.  3. 

It  means  briefly  : — O soul,  only  the  religion  of  Jina  declared  by 
saints  with  passions  destroyed  (vita  raga)  takes  off  the  sufferings  in- 
cident to  birth,  oecay,  death  and  other  evils  of  the  sublunar  world. 
In  like  manner  good  deities  and  good  teachers  should  also  be  regarded 
in  the  same  light.  Excepting  the  Jain  saints  of  subdued  passions 
from  Rishbha  Deva  to  Mahavira  all  other  deities,  such  as  Hari,  Har, 
Brahma  (the  members  of  the  Hindu  trinity)  are  regarded  as  bad 
deities.  All  those  people  who  worship  them  for  their  own  facility, 
are  deceived  and  defrauded.  Its  purport  is  that  there  is  no  good 
believing  other  bad  deites,  teachers  and  religions  than  the  good  one 
of  the  Jainis. 

Reviewer. — Now,  the  learned  should  reflect  how  their  sacred 
scriptures  are  bestrewed  with  derogation  of  other  faiths. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


427 


^ g^f  «nppT  \ 

M— ib.  1. 

The  religion  which  saves  people  from  torment  is  that  which  is 
taught  by  Lord  Jina,  holy,  untained  with  the  impurity  of  sin,  and  the 
foundation  of  righteousness,  justice,  humanity  and  mercy;  the  teacher 
of  scriptures,  adept  in  knowledge  and  its  application,  ari  hunt  Deva 
(God,  the  destroyer  of  the  enemy),  the  God  of  gods,  glorious,  ador- 
able with  all  veneration  by  God  Indra  {devendra),  than  whom  none  is 
better.  The  religion  of  Hari,  Har,  and  other  deities  does  not  save 
people  from  the  sins  of  the  world.  Salutation  to  the  five  arihant 
Supreme  Lords  and  their  spiritual  relatives  ! The  four  virtues  are 
the  best  and  most  commendable  viz.  mercy,  forgiveness,  righteousness, 
knowledge,  right  seeing  and  right  conduct.  They  constitute  the 
religion  of  the  Jainis. 

Reviewer. — It  is  no  mercy  or  forgiveness  which  does  not  em- 
brace allmankind.  There  is  ignorance  in  stead  of  knowledge,  dark- 
ness for  clearness  of  vision,  and  starvation  of  fast  for  good  behaviour 
among  them.  What  kind  of  good  is  it  ? 

Praise  of  Jainism 

-srfar  forfe  'Tsfn  ^ 

I cTT  ffeif  n ^ ii  — ib.  2. 

It  briefly  means  : — O man,  as  thou  canst  neither  practice  asce- 
ticism nor  read  apliorismic  commandments,  nor  think  over  sublime 
subjects,  nor  give  alms  to  deserving,  the  best  course  and  means  of 
salvation  for  thee  is  to  have  faith  in  one  God  Arihant  to  whom  our 
adoration  is  one,  who  is  the  best  teacher,  and  in  the  religion  of  Jainism. 

Reviewer. — Tho’  compassion  and  forbearance  are  good  qualities 
indeed,  yet  associated  with  partiality,  compassion  is  turned  into 
cruelty,  forgiveness  into  relentlessness.  That  its  object  is  not  to  cause 
pain  to  any  sentient  being,  is  not  possible  in  all  circumstances;  for,  to 
punish  the  iniquitous  is  included  in  mercy.  If  one  wicked  man  be 
not  punished,  thousands  of  people  will  get  harm.  Mercy  and  for- 
giveness to  him  will  become  cruelty  and  licentiousness  It  is  right 
that  the  adoption  of  means  and  measures  for  the  alleviation  of  suffer- 
ing and  the  enjoyment  of  happiness  of  all  people,  is  called  mercy. 
But  only  to  drink  filtered  water,  and  to  protect  insignificant  creatures 
is  not  reckoned  as  mercy.  This  kind  of  mercy  is  rather  mere  lip 
profession  of  Jainis;  for,  they  do  not  put  it  into  practice.  Is  it  not 
mercy  to  show  respect  to  people  in  general,  irrespective  of  their  creed 
and  colour  by  kindly  presenting  them  with  food  and  drink,  and  to 
honour  and  serve  the  learned  men  of  other  faith  than  those  of  one’s 
own  ? To  know  if  their  idea  of  mercy  is  correct,  one  should  consult 
what  is  written  on  page  221  of  the  Viveksar. 

Prohibitive  Acts 

1.  Never  admire  the  virtues  of  the  people  of  other  faiths.  2. 
Never  salute  them.  3.  Talk  little  with  them.  4.  Don’t  converse 


428 


Satyarth  Prakash 


frequently  with  them.  5.  Don’t  give  them  articles  of  food  and  drink. 
6.  Don’t  give  perfume,  flowers,  and  other  things  for  the  worship  of 
the  idols  of  other  faiths.  The  Jainis  are  commanded  not  to  commit 
these  6 kinds  of  acts. 

Reviewer. — Now,  the  learned  men  should  see  how  much  un- 
kindness, jealousy,  and  hatred  these  Jainis  show  to  the  people  of 
different  persuasion  ! When  their  unkindness  is  so  great  to  the 
followers  of  other  religions  it  is  possible  to  consider  the  Jainis  as  de- 
void of  mercy.  For,  only  to  serve  one’s  family  members  is  not  called 
religion  proper.  The  people  of  their  faith  are  like  the  inmates  of 
their  household  They  serve  them,  and  not  those  who  profess  a 
different  faith.  What  sensible  man  then  can  call  them  kind  and 
merciful  ? 

Jain  Tenderness 

It  is  recorded  on  page  108  of  the  Viveksar  that  the  Jainis  think- 
ing Mr.  Namuchi,  the  minister  of  a king  of  Mathura,  to  be  their 
enemy,  dispatched  him,  and  purified  themselves  by  repentence  — 
aloyana.  Is  this  act  not  subversive  of  kindness  and  forgiveness  ? When 
they  entertain  inimical  thoughts  of  the  persons  of  different  denomi- 
nations, carried  to  the  extremity  of  depriving  them  of  life,  it  is  proper 
and  significant  to  call  them  cruel  instead  of  kind. 

Means  of  Salvation 

Now,  the  Arhat  Pravaclian  Farm  agman  sar  give  the  definition 
of  right  seeing,  &c.  It  is  right  faith,  right  understanding,  right 
knowledge  and  right  conduct. 

These  are  the  four  means  of  salvation  Yoga  Deva  has  written 
an  exposition  of  them.  Right  faith  or  right  view  is  the  faith  in  or 
love  for  the  religion  of  Jina,  without  the  ignorant  fear  of  death  and 
other  obstacles  in  the  path  of  salvation  opposed,  as  laid  down  in  the 
scriptures  sanctioned  by  Jina,  to  the  constitution  of  the  mind  and 
other  substances. 

N O 

Right  faith  should  be  put  in  the  principles  taught  by  Jina,  i.e., 
not  in  any  other. 

zit  jrrtfTor:  ii 

The  comprehension  of  the  account  in  brief  or  in  detail  of  tiic 
mind  and  other  principles  as  they  exist  in  nature,  is  called  right  know- 
ledge by  w'ise  men. 

>3 

: I 

The  total  abandonment  of  connection  with  other  comprehensive 
faiths  is  called  right  conduct. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


429 


5 Vows 

The  vow  is  of  5 kinds  in  respect  of  harmlessness  and  other 
virtues.  They  are  : — 

I.  Altinsa  : not  to  kill  any  sentient  being.  2.  Swirita  : to  speak 
politely.  3.  Asteya  : not  to  steal.  4.  Bralimacharya  : to  check  ame- 
tiveness.  5.  Aparigriha  : to  renounce  all  things. 

Of  all  these  Jain  teachings,  many  are  good;  as,  for  instance,  it  is 
good  to  give  up  killing,  stealing  and  other  censurable  acts.  But  these 
good  principles  have  become  reproachable  in  their  detraction  and  con- 
demnation of  other  faiths  which  also  contain  them,  as  it  is  ordained 
in  the  first  aphorism  that  the  religions  of  I lari,  Har  and  other  deities 
do  not  save  people  from  the  sins  of  the  world.  Is  it  a little  defama- 
tion of  other  faiths  to  talk  ill  of  them,  the  perusal  of  whose  scriptures 
at  once  discovers  their  perfect  knowledge  and  righteousness?  Is  it  a 
little  fault  to  panegyrise  their  own  saviours,  called  the  Tirathankaras, 
whose  teachings  have  been  shown  before  to  be  absolutely  impossible? 
It  is  the  talks  of  bigotry.  Well,  can  that  Jaini  become  good  by  merely 
saying  that  Jainism  is  true,  although  he  ca.-iuot  live  a virtuous  life, 
nor  can  he  read,  nor  give  alms?  Can  the  persons  of  other  faiths  be 
taught  to  be  vicious,  tho’  virtuous?  What  can  else  be  said  of  the  men 
who  talk  such  things  than  that  they  are  mistaken  and  childish  in  mind? 
It  is  plain  enough  that  their  teachers  were  selfish  and  not  perfectly 
learned;  for,  had  they  not  disparaged  all  other  religions,  nobody  would 
have  been  caught  in  the  trap  of  such  folsehoods,  nor  would  their  own 
object  have  been  attained.  See,  if  other  people  say  that  it  is  proved 
that  the  religion  of  the  Jainis  is  misleading  and  the  religion  of  the  Vedas 
is  the  saviour  of  all,  that  Hari,  Har,  and  other  deities  are  good,  and 
Rishabha  and  their  other  gods  are  bad;  will  they  not  take  it  ill? 

Blunders  of  Jainism 

Also,  see  further  mistakes  of  their  teachers  and  followers  of  their 
faith  ; — 

— A cursory  glance  of  the  Un  marag  Ulsutra  shows  that  the  disobe- 
dience of  the  commandment  of  Lord  Jina  or  selfless  saviours,  Tira- 
thankaras, is  the  cause  of  sin  and  suffering.  It  is  very  difficult  to  embrace 
the  religion  of  righteousness  taught  by  Lord  Jina.  Therefore,  persons 
should  act  in  such  a way  as  not  to  violate  the  injunction  of  Jina. 

Reviewer  — It  is  the  height  of  folly  to  sing  one’s  own  paean,  and 
to  call  one’s  own  religion  the  most  important,  and  to  detract  that  of 
otheras  for  that  praise  is  right  which  is  given  by  other  learned  men.  Can 
thieves  become  praiseworthy  when  they  sing  their  own  glories?  Their 
assertions  are  of  the  same  kind. 

Exclusiveness 


430 


Satyarth  Prakash 


The  Jainis  should  avoid  the  company  of  those  who  are  not  in  the 
pale  of  their  religion,  however  great,  righteous,  and  learned  they  may 
be,  like  the  ruby  of  a poisonous  serpent. 

Reviewer. — Behold!  what  a great  mistake  it  is?  Had  the  Jaini 
teachers  and  their  followers  been  learned,  they  would  love  the  company 
of  the  learned.  When  they,  with  their  saviours,  the  Tirathankaras  are 
unlearned  and  illiterate,  how  can  they  honour  the  literate?  Does  any 
one  reject  the  gold  lying  in  dirt  or  dust?  Therefore,  who  else  will  be 
so  partial,  bigoted,  obstinate  and  destitute  of  knowledge  than  the  Jainis. 

f^crqfT  r 

— The  Jainis  should  not  even  see  the  opponents  of  their  religion? 

Reviewer, — The  learned  will  perceive  how  amazing  this  barba- 
rism is.  The  truth  is  that  he  whose  religion  is  true,  has  no  fear  of 
anybody.  Their  saviours  knew  in  their  heart  that  their  religion  was 
but  hollow,  and  that  if  they  preached  it  to  others,  it  would  be  refuted. 
So  they  thought  it  belter  to  revile  others  and  ensnare  the  ignorant. 

Sinfulness  of  other  faiths 

M — ib.  27* 

— The  religions  opposed  to  Jainism  make  men  sinners.  There- 
fore it  is  best  to  believe  in  Jainism  and  not  in  other  faiths. 

Reviewer. — It  is  hence  evident  that  Jainism  plunges  people  into 
the  sea  of  general  enmity,  hatred,  jealousy  and  other  vices  No  person 
of  other  faiths  will  be  so  great  a reviler  and  unrighteous  fellow  as 
Jainis  are.  It  is  not  the  habit  of  clowns  to  revile  all  on  the  one  hand 
and  to  eulogise  themselves  on  the  other?  Men  of  discernment  recog- 
nise merit  in  men  whatever  faith  they  may  belong  to,  calling  good 
men  good  and  bad  men  bad. 

^ HTWT  n— ib.  35 

— What  comparison  can  there  be  between  the  teachings  of  Jina 
the  omniscient,  the  eminent  Jain  teachers  and  Jainism  on  the  one  hand 
and  bad  teachers  and  preachers  of  the  other  faiths  opposed  to  them 
on  the  other,  / e.,  the  deities,  teachers  and  religion  of  the  Jainis  are 
good  and  those  of  others  arc  bad. 

Selfishness 

Reviewer. — It  is  like  the  talk  of  the  woman  selling  plums,  who 
describes  her  sour  plums  as  sweet,  and  sweet  ones  of  others  as  sour 
and  useless.  The  talk  of  the  Jainis  is  also  of  the  same  kind.  These 
persons  consider  doing  good  to  the  professors  of  other  faiths  than  their 
own  to  be  a great  forbidden  act  or  sin, 

nw— f »T^5  f I?  nw?  i 

n— ib.  37. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


431 


—As  mentioned  before,  even  the  ruby  of  a serpent  should  be  rejected. 
In  the  same  way  the  company  of  the  best  and  most  pious  persons  of 
other  faiths  should  be  shunned.  Not  only  so  far,  but  still  farther  are 
they  gone  in  vilifying  the  followers  of  other  faiths.  All  the  teachers 
of  other  religions  than  Jainism  are  bad,  i.e.,  worse  than  serpents. 
Persons  should  never  visit,  serve,  or  keep  company  of  them;  for  con- 
tact with  an  adder  occasions  death  once  only,  but  the  company  of  evil 
teachers  of  other  faiths  sends  them  to  the  frequency  of  birth  and 
death  in  the  world.  “Hence,  O good  fellow,  do  not  even  stand  near 
the  teachers  of  other  faiths,  for,  if  thou  dost  even  a little  service  to 
other  religious  men,  thou  shalt  suffer  torment.” 

Reviewer. — See,  there  will  be  none  of  other  faiths  so  hard-heart- 
ed, bewildered,  hateful,  slanderous,  and  misled,  as  the  lainis  are.  They 
have  thought  in  their  mind  that  if  they  do  not  reproach  others  and 
extol  themselves,  they  will  receive  no  homage  and  honour  from  the 
people.  But  it  is  their  misfortune;  for  they  will  never  acquire  right 
knowledge  and  lind  a true  religion,  until  they  associate  with  and  serve 
the  best  and  most  learned  people.  Therefore,  the  Jainis  should  give 
up  doctrinal  myths,  antagonistic  to  the  teachings  of  knowledge,  and 
accept  in  the  true  doctrines  taught  by  the  Vedas  to  their  own  great 
felicity. 

No  Good  to  others 

^ gwr  u — ib  40. 

— What  is  the  use  of  conversing  and  having  concern  with  the 
man  who  has  lost  his  hope  of  happiness,  who  is  very  smart  in  doing 
rude  and  wicked  deeds,  and  who  is  vicious  and  sinful  ? For,  he  harms 
him  who  benefits,  him;  as,  for  instance,  if  a man  goes  to  a blind  lion 
to  restore  its  sight,  it  will  devour  him.  In  like  manner,  to  do  good  to 
the  followers  of  other  faiths,  is  to  do  harm  to  one’s  self;  in  other 
words,  it  is  better  to  be  aloof  from  them. 

Reviewer. — If  the  people  of  other  faiths  think  as  the  Jainis  do, 
what  hardships  will  they  be  subjected  to?  If  nobody  does  them  ser- 
vice of  any  kind,  many  of  their  works  will  be  ruined  and  they  will  get 
a lot  of  trouble.  Why  do  the  Jainis  not  think  for  others  as  they  do 
for  themselves  ? 

Superiority  of  Jainism 

^ II— ib.  42. 

— It  is  a great  wonder  that  the  righteousness  of  the  Jain  saints 
of  right  understanding  should  be  as  well  known  in  the  country,  as  the 
power,  honour  and  importance  of  fairs  of  other  faiths,  carrying  a 
stick  of  three  knots  as  their  emblem,  monks.  Brahmin  priests  and 
other  wicked  peoples  such  as  fallen  crites,  deceivers,  desperados, 
roughs  and  other  religious  vagrants. 

Reviewer. — Well,  will  there  be  anybody  greater  in  enmity,  jea- 
lousy and  malevolence  than  the  Jainis  ? No  doubt  there  are  jealousy 


432 


Satyarth  Prakash 


and  enmity  in  other  faiths,  but  not  so  much  as  in  the  Jainis.  Hatred 
is  the  root  of  sin.  Hence,  why  should  their  lives  be  not  sinful  ? 

{ 

i ^fvi  n— ib-  75. 

— It  chiefly  means  that  fools  do  not  fear  the  punishment  of  the 
cutting  of  the  nose  and  other  organs  from  living  in  the  company  of 
thieves.  Similarly  the  people  of  robber  religions  different  from  Jainism 
do  not  fear  their  own  damnation. 

Reviewer. — A man  generally  thinks  others  to  be  of  the  same 
character  as  himself.  Can  it  be  true  that  all  other  faiths  are  robbers 
and  Jainism  alone  is  honest  ? A man  does  not  relinquish  jealousy, 
enmity  and  other  vices  in  his  behaviour  towards  others  so  long  as 
dense  ignorance  occupies  him  and  evil  company  perverts  his  reason. 
No  other  religion  hates  others  so  much  as  Jainism. 


Jains  Alone  Virtuous 

rifq  ^ qrmm  n - ib.  76. 

— As  mentioned  in  the  previous  apliorism,  the  Jain  peoples 
alone  are  virtuous,  and  all  the  others  outside  Jainism  are  sinful. 
Therefore,  whoever  establishes  the  faith  of  sinners,  is  sinful. 

Reviewer. — As  the  9th  day  sacred  to  Goddess  Durga,  Chamuda, 
Kalika,  Jwala  and  other  days  of  fasting  are  regarded  as  evil,  are  not 
your  fast  days,  such  as  pajusan  and  others,  equally  bad,  as  they  cause 
much  pain  to  devotees  ? 

The  refutation  of  the  pious  frauds  of  the  followers  of  the 
Wammarg  sect  or  Indian  Bacchanalianism  as  given  here  is  all  right; 
but  if  the  worship  of  Goddess  Shasan  (personification  of  government) 
and  Goddess  Marut  (personification  of  morality)  had  been  refuted 
it  would  have  been  well.  If  they  say  that  their  goddesses  are  not 
murderous,  they  are  wrong;  for,  Goddess  Shasan  once  couched  the 
eyes  of  man  and  also  a goat.  Then  can  she  not  be  reckoned  as  a 
sister  companion  of  Goddesses  Durga  and  Kalika  ? It  is  sheer  bigo- 
try to  think  their  own  fasts,  such  as  yachcha  khana  and  others,  to  be 
the  most  meritorious,  and  the  9th  and  other  fast  days  to  be  sinful; 
for,  it  is  not  the  custom  of  good  people  to  praise  their  own  fasts  and 
to  cry  down  those  of  others.  Verily,  the  vows  of  veracity  and  other 
virtues  are  best  for  all.  But  the  vows  of  fasting  of  the  Jainis  and 
others  are  not  right. 

— Its  purport  is  that  whores,  bards,  buffoons.  Brahmins,  votaries 
of  ghosts  (yaksha),  God  Ganesh  (Janus),  and  similar  gods,  and  their 
believers  all  drown  the  people  in  the  sea  of  sorrow;  for,  they  believe 
their  deities  as  possessed  of  all  blessings,  and  keep  themselves  aloof 
from  selfless  persons. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


433 


Reviewer. — It  is  the  voice  of  partiality  alone  to  call  the  deities 
of  other  sectarians  false  and  one’s  own  true.  The  Jainis  repudiate 
the  adoration  of  the  Goddess  and  other  divinities  of  the  Warn  marg 
sect  as  being  cruel;  but  they  do  not  regard  Goddess  Shasan  in  the 
same  light,  tho’  she,  as  mentioned  on  the  page  46  of  the  book,  called 
the  Shraddha  Din  Kritya,  slapped  a man  for  taking  food  at  night, 
put  out  his  eyes,  and  taking  out  the  eyes  of  a goat,  placed  them  in  his 
sockets. 

The  book,  called  the  Ratnasar,  Part  I,  p.  67,  which  may  be 
seen  for  verification,  mentions  that  Goddess  Marut  assuming  the 
form  ot  a stone  statue  helped  travellers.  Why  is  she  not  regarded 
as  others  ? 

\ 

— Why  are  they  born  in  the  world  who  follow  false  religions 
opposed  to  Jainism  ? If  born,  why  have  they  multiplied  ? In  other 
words,  it  would  have  been  well,  had  they  died  no  sooner  than  born. 

Reviewer. — Look  at  their  mercy  religion  taught  by  their  selfless 
saints  ! They  do  not  even  wish  that  others  should  be  born  ! Certainly 
their  mercy  religion  is  merely  a lip  profession.  If  their  is  any  practi- 
cal mercy,  it  is  for  minute  forms  of  life  and  other  animals,  but  not 
for  the  people  outside  the  pale  of  Jainism. 

ART  -5Tt  i 

^ a ii 

— Briefly  it  means  that  it  is  no  wonder  if  a man  born  in  a Jain 
family  goes  to  heaven.  But  it  is  a great  wonder  if  a man  born  in  other 
than  Jain  family,  belonging  to  false  religions,  obtains  salvation.  It  prati- 
cally  means  that  the  believers  of  Jainism  alone  go  to  heaven,  but  not 
others.  Those  who  do  not  embrace  Jainism,  are  damned  to  go  to  hell. 

Reviewer. — Is  there  no  wicked  person  fit  for  hell  born  in  the 
sect  of  Jainism  ? Do  they  all  go  to  heaven,  and  no  body  else  ? 
Is  it  not  the  talk  of  a maniac  ? Who  can  believe  such  absurdities 
except  idiots  ? 

Worship  of  Jina 

C\  CN  « 

— Briefly,  the  worship  of  the  idols  of  Jina  in  truth,  and  the 
idolatry  of  other  faiths  than  Jainism  is  untruth  or  sin.  He  is  a philo- 
sopher who  obeys  the  commandments  of  the  religion  of  Jina,  but  not 
he  who  does  not  obey  them. 

Reviewer. — Bravo  ! Splendid  ! Are  not  your  idols  made  of 
stone  and  other  substances  of  dead  matter  like  those  of  the  believers 
in  Vishnu  ? Your  idolatry  is  as  false  as  that  of  the  worshippers  of 
Vishnu.  Since  you  consider  yourselves  to  be  philosophers,  and  others 
to  be  vulgars.  it  appears  that  there  are  no  philosophers  in  your  sect. 


434 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Chief  Doctrines 

?Tm  \ 

?cn^Tq  II 

— Briefly,  as  the  commandments  of  Jina  consisting  of  mercy, 
forgiveness,  and  other  virtues,  constitute  religion;  all  commandments 
of  other  faiths  constitute  irreligion. 

Reviewer. — How  great  is  this  injustice  ? Are  there  no  people 
veracious  and  righteous  except  the  Jainis  ? If  there  be  any  person, 
shall  he  not  be  respected  ? The  followers  of  Jainism  would  have 
been  justified  to  say  so,  if  their  mouth  and  tongue  had  not  been  made 
of  skin,  as  is  the  case  with  others.  They  have  praised  their  religion, 
scriptures,  precepts,  saints  and  others  so  much  that  they  have  beaten 
the  record  in  buffoonery. 

— Its  chief  purport  is  that  the  power  of  Hari,  Har,  and  other 
gods  is  the  cause  of  damnation.  Its  sight  makes  the  hair  of  the 
Jainis  stand  on  its  end.  Why  will  not  a person  suffer  the  pain  of 
birth  and  death  by  breaking  the  commandment  of  Lord  Jina,  seeing 
that  he  bears  trouble  till  death  by  infringing  the  order  of  a temporal 
king  ? 

Reviewer.— Sqq  the  eternal  working  of  the  mind  of  the  Jaini 
teachers  and  the  saints.  Outside  is  proved  to  be  the  cloak  of  decep- 
tion and  dissimulation.  Now,  their  interior  is  exposed  to  view.  They 
cannot  bear  the  sight  of  the  power  and  prosperity  of  Hari,  Har,  and 
the  like  gods  and  of  their  worshippers.  They  feel  horripilation,  for 
they  wonder  how  the  others  prosper.  Probably  they  wish  that  it 
would  be  better  if  they  should  get  all  their  wealth  and  they  should 
turn  poor.  The  reason  why  they  give  the  example  of  a king,  is  that 
they  are  great  flatters  of  governments,  liars  and  cowards.  It  is  por- 
per  to  accept  falsehood  of  a king  ? If  there  be  enviers  and  haters, 
they  will  not  be  greater  than  the  Jainis. 

Self-praise 

-3ft  srnfiiT  I 

— Briefly.  They  are  fools,  who  are  the  opponents  of  Jainism, 
They  are  equal  to  the  Tirthaiikaras  (Saviours),  who  are  the  preachers 
of  the  religion  declared  by  Lord  Jina,  friars,  laymen,  or  authors  of 
books.  None  is  equal  to  them. 

^ ?nT<jr  1 

it— ib.  102. 

Reviewer. — Bravo  ! If  the  Jainis  had  no  childish  sense,  how 
could  they  have  believed  such  absurdities  ? This  self-glorification 
looks  like  the  custom  of  the  harlot  who  never  praises  another  but 
cperself. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


435 


— It  is  not  proper  for  the  Jainis  to  forsake  the  Lord  God  Jina, 
the  doctrines  taught  by  him  and  the  preachers  of  Jainism. 

Reviewer. — What  is  this  stilf-neckedness  of  the  Jainis  if  not  the 
fruit  of  their  partiality  and  ignorance  ? Excepting  a few  beliefs  of 
the  Jainis,  all  else  is  worthless  and  fit  for  rejection.  He  who  has  a 
bit  of  sense  about  him,  will  abandon  the  gods,  authorised  scriptures, 
and  preachers  of  the  Jainis  on  seeing,  hearing  and  reflecting  on  them. 

n— ib  108. 

— It  briefly  means  that  those  who  follow  the  teachings  of  Jina,  are 
honourable,  and  those  who  act  contariwisc,  are  unworthy  of  respect. 
The  Jaini  preceptors  should  be  revered,  but  not  other  sectarians. 

Reviewer. — If  the  Jainis  had  not  conveited  their  ignorant 
people  to  their  faith  and  tied  them  to  it  like  so  many  beasts,  they 
would  have  escaped  from  their  snare  and  turned  their  term  of  life  to 
account  by  taking  proper  steps  to  secure  the  Joy  of  beatitude.  How 
much  will  you  be  olTended,  if  anybody  calls  you  walkers  on  an  evil 
path,  bad  teachers,  and  bad  preachers  ? As  you  are  olfensive  to 
others,  your  religion  is  full  of  vanity. 

Prohibition  of  Trade 

qrm  ii— ib.  109. 

— The  Jainis  should  never  take  to  trade  and  other  business,  even 
though  driven  to  the  brink  of  death  by  suffering;  for,  these  works 
lead  people  to  hell. 

Reviewer. — Now,  let  anybody  ask  the  Jainis  why  they  are 
engaged  in  commerce  and  mercantile  business.  Why  do  they  not 
give  up  these  professions  ? If  you  leave  them  off,  the  maintenance 
and  care  of  your  body  will  be  an  impossibility.  If  all  people  throw 
off  their  work  at  your  instance,  what  will  you  eat  to  keep  the  body 
and  soul  together  ? It  is  altogether  useless  to  preach  such  mischiev- 
ous doctrines.  Poor  fellows,  what  else  can  they  do  ? Being  without 
knowledge  and  good  company,  they  have  uttered  what  came  up  in 
their  mind  ! 

^ ~ cTfin  5^1^  I 

^ ^ n ~ib.  121. 

— Those  who  believe  in  scriptures  that  are  against  the  gospel 
of  the  Jainis,  are  the  vilest  of  the  vile.  Never  open  your  mouth 
against  it,  notwithstanding  some  wordJy  object  may  be  attained  there- 
by. Always  reject  another  religion,  though  some  purpose  may  other- 
wise be  served. 

Reviewer  —All  the  people  that  either  have  been  or  will  be  among 
the  Jainis  from  their  first  progenitor  upto  the  present  have  done  nothing 
but  called  names  to  other  faiths.  And  wherever  they  see  that  their 
purpose  is  served,  they  play  the  blindest  followers  of  other  faiths.  It 


436  Satyarth  Prakash 

is  a great  pity  that  they  are  not  a little  ashamed  of  telling  such  tre- 
mendous lies  ! 

Prejudices 

HmT  n ib*  122. 

It  means  to  the  effect  that  if  man  says  that  there  is  righteousness 
in  the  life  of  the  monks  of  Jainism,  and  it  is  also  found  in  other  faiths 
as  well  as  in  Jainism,  he  goes  to  hell  for  billions  of  years,  after  which 
he  is  born  in  a low  family. 

Reviewer.— Brsi\o\  O ye,  enemies  of  knowledge,  you  may  have 
thought  in  your  mind  that  your  false  assertions  will  nowhere  meet 
with  refutation,  so  you  have  written  this  monstrous  leinark  which  is 
impossible.  How  long  shall  we  remonstrate  with  you  ? You  have 
girt  up  your  loins  to  slander  others  falsely,  and  to  bear  enmity  and 
hostility  toward  other  faiths,  imagining  to  achieve  your  own  end  to  be 
like  eating  sweet  pudding. 

Salvation  by  Faith 

ftfTJT^Pqr  fqf^ir  {{  ib.  127. 

— If  a man  cannot  practice  anything  of  Jainism  and  if  he  has  so 
much  faith  as  to  believe  that  Jainism  is  the  only  true  religion  and  no 
other  faith,  he  will  escape  torments. 

Reviewer. — Will  there  be  any  other  better  way  to  catch  the  igno- 
rant in  the  snare  of  their  religion?  What  religion  can  be  so  ridiculously 
foolish  as  to  hold  out  the  hope  of  heaven  without  the  performance  of 
sacred  duties  ? 

li  - ib.  128. 

—A  person  who  says  to  himself,  “If  I am  a man,  I shall  listen  to 
the  expounding  of  the  Jinagama:  scriptures  of  the  Jainis  and  never  the 
utsutra  : books  of  other  religion”,  will  safely  cross  the  sea  of  suffering 
by  virtue  of  that  desire  only. 

Reviewer.— assertion  is  also  made  to  entrap  simple-minded 
folks  in  the  meshes  of  their  religious  net;  for,  the  above  resolution  of 
a man  can  neither  save  him  from  sinking  into  the  sea  of  suffering  on 
this  subclunar  earth,  nor  let  him  off  scot-free  from  the  evil  conse- 
quences of  the  accumulated  sins  of  his  previous  existence.  Had  they 
not  written  such  falsehoods  or  statements  contrary  to  the  evidence  of 
knowledge,  the  people  reading  and  hearing  the  doctrines  of  the  Vedas 
and  other  books  of  truth,  and  coming  to  distinguish  between  right 
and  wrong,  would  have  ceased  to  believe  in  their  books.  But  they 
have  so  firmly  tied  the  ignorant  in  their  net,  that  if  a sensible  man 
alone  who  has  had  the  company  of  good  people,  may  disentangle 
himself,  it  is  possible;  but  the  release  of  dullards  therefrom  is  exceed- 
ingly difficult. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


437 


TT5  n ib*  138. 


Book  Belief 

— Those  who  believe  in  the  aphorisms  given  in  the  book,  called 
the  Nirukti  Vritti  and  Bhashya  CJiurni,  obtain  happiness,  being  endued 
with  good  character  by  performing  auspicious  and  severe  works  or- 
dained therein;  but  this  benefit  does  not  result  from  a belief  in  the 
books  of  other  faiths. 

Reviewer. — Is  tlie  endurance  of  extreme  starvation  and  other 
penances  called  good  character  or  religious  merit?  If  the  deprivation 
of  food  and  drink  constitutes  religious  merit,  many  men  stricken  with 
famine  and  starving  for  want  of  food  and  drink,  being  sanctified, 
should  obtain  happiness.  But  neither  they  nor  you  are  made  holy; 
but,  on  the  contrary,  you  are  alBicted  with  disease  instead  of  getting 
ease  from  the  rise  of  biliousness  and  other  ailments.  Religion  consists 
of  the  practice  of  justice,  vow  of  chastity,  veracity,  and  similar  virtues; 
irreligion,  of  speaking  falsehood,  doing  wrong,  and  other  iniquities; 
and  good  character,  of  behaviour  of  love  and  benevolence  towards 
all.  Enduring  the  deprivation  of  food  and  drink  and  other  severties 
does  not  constitute  religion.  Belief  in  these  aphorisms  gives  people  a 
little  truth  and  a great  deal  of  untruth,  and  sinks  them  into  the  sea 
of  sorrow  and  sulfering  to  boot. 


Bliss  in  Jainism 

aicfci  fit  ?ft^  muK  ii 

It  briefly  means.  ~~J\\osc  alone  who  are  virtuous  and  fortunate, 
are  attracted  to  the  religion  of  Jina,  and  those  who  do  not  embrace 
Jainism,  are  unfortunate. 

Reviewer. — Is  not  this  assertion  erroneous  and  false?  Is  there 
nobody  good  and  fortunate  in  other  faiths  and  bad  and  unfortunate 
in  Jainism?  As  regard  the  assertion,  that  the  virtuous,  i.e.,  the 
followers  of  Jainism,  should  not  quarrel  among  themselves,  but  behave 
themselves  with  love  towards  one  another,  it  is  evident  that  the  Jainis 
do  not  perhaps  regard  it  wrong  to  quarrel  with  others.  This  assertion 
is  also  groundless;  for,  the  good  treat  the  good  with  love,  and  reform 
the  wicked  with  admonition.  Also,  see  that  the  Jainis  look  upon  all 
others  with  the  spirit  of  enmity  and  calumniate  them;  for,  they  write 
that  the  Brahmins,  frairs  with  their  three-knotted  staff,  monks  of 
resigned  life,  divines,  hermits  and  other  holy  men  are  the  enemies  of 
the  Jainism.  Where  is  now  the  religion  of  mercy  and  forgiveness  of 
the  Jainis;  for,  it  is  the  destruction  of  mercy  and  forgiveness  to  hate 
others?  There  is  no  other  sin  of  killing  like  hate.  There  will  be  few 
persons  like  the  Jainis  who  are  incarnate  hatred,  so  to  speak.  How 
much  will  the  Jainis  be  displeased,  if  the  24  saviours,  the  Tirathankaras, 
from  Rishabh  Dev  down  to  Mahabir,  be  regarded  as  wordly,  misan- 
thropic, hypocritical;  the  Jainis  as  afflicted  with  delirium  febrile;  and 


438 


Satyarth  Prakash 


their  religion  as  hell  and  poison?  Therefore,  the  Jainis  suffer  great 
pain  by  falling  into  the  hell  of  calumniating  and  hating  the  religion  of 
others.  It  will  be  much  better  for  them  to  leave  of  these  vices. 

Worship  of  Jina’s  Image 

^ I 

H n 

— The  religion  of  all  the  Jainis  or  Shravakas  is  one  and  the  same, 
that  is,  the  woiship  of  Jina’s  image  and  protection  of  his  shrines  and 
endowment  constitute  religion. 

Reviewer, — Now,  sec  all  the  contention  or  controversy  relating 
to  idolatry  has  risen  from  Jainism,  which  is  the  root  of  hypocrisy  and 
extcrnalism.  Sec  page  I of  the  book,  called  the  Shradhha  Dina 
Kritya,  for  the  proofs  of  idolatry. 

Idolatry  in  Jainism 

niM  M2n  n3ii  ii4ii 

\\5\\  g u6ii 

1.  The  Shravakas  (hearers),  as  the  Jainis  call  themselves,  should 
mutter  Navakara  in  the  first  entrance  2.  After  the  muttering,  a 
Jaini  should  remember  that  he  is  a Shravaka  or  disciple  of  Jainism. 
3.  To  remember  how  many  vows  and  fasts  he  has  to  observe.  4. 
In  the  4th  gate  to  remember  that  salvation  is  the  foremost  in  the  4 
states — Varga.  Its  cause  is  knowledge  and  other  merits,  which  form 
the  Yoga  whose  strict  practice  with  purity  of  heart  requires  6 essentials, 
which  are  termed  Yoga  by  usage,  to  be  described  afterwards.  5. 
Salutation  to  the  image  worship  by  offering  money.  6.  To  say 
l^Tnyers  — Prataya  /c/zana— according  to  the  Navakarasi  and  other  books. 

Detail  of  Ritual 

This  book  further  describes  the  ritual  in  detail,  such  as  to  wor- 
ship the  image  of  Jina  or  Tirathankaras  at  the  time  of  evening  dinner, 
and  to  worship  the  gate,  which  is  very  tedious.  Rules  to  build 
temples.  Salvation  is  got  by  repairing  and  constructing  old  temples. 
How  to  sit  in  temples.  To  worship  with  love  and  devotion.  With 
i\\Q  Namo  Jinendrebhyah  {Sdilni'diion  to  Lord  Jina  !)  and  other 
verses  to  bathe  and  serve  the  image.  With  water,  sandal  wood, 
flowers,  incense,  light,  &c.  to  offer  perfume.  The  Ratnasar  bhag, 
12th  page,  describes  the  reward  of  idolatry  to  be  that  neither  the  king 
nor  the  people  can  thwart  a priest. 

Reviewer. — These  claims  of  Jainism  are  mere  creatures  of  im- 
agination; for,  kings  and  others  check  the  priests  in  their  conduct.  It  is 
said  on  page3  of  the  same  book  that  idolatry  removes  diseases,  ailments 
and  great  evils.  A certain  person  offered  a flower  with  5 shells,  and 
got  the  kingdom  of  18  countries  in  reward  1 His  name  was  Kumar- 
pal.  Such  and  similar  talk  is  false  and  devised  to  tempt  the  ignorant 
to  their  faith.  For,  many  Jainis  perform  worship,  yet  they  are  sick. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


439 


Idolatry  does  not  give  a man  the  kingdom  of  an  acre  of  land.  If  an 
offering  of  flowers  with  5 shells  secures  a kingdom,  why  do  they  not 
obtain  the  kingdom  of  the  world  by  offering  flowers  with  many  times 
5 shells;  and  why  do  they  bear  punishment  from  a government?  If 
idolatry  ferries  the  Jainis  across  the  sei  of  the  world,  why  are  know- 
ledge, right  vision,  and  virtuous  character  postulated  ? 

The  Ratnasar  bhag  on  page  13  says  that  Goutama  had  nectar 
in  his  thumb,  and  that  remembering  him  gives  a desired  object  to  a 
devotee. 

Reviewer. — If  such  is  the  case,  all  the  Jainis  should  be  immortal. 
But  it  is  not  so.  Hence,  it  is  a mere  boast  to  mislead  the  ignorant. 
There  is  nothing  else  in  it.  The  verse  with  which  they  worship  images 
is  thus  given  on  page  52  of  the  Ratnasar  bhag  : — 

— May  we  worship  Lords  Jinas  or  Tirthankaras  with  offerings  of 
water,  sandal  wood,  rice,  flower,  incense,  light,  sweetmeat,  clothes, 
and  the  best  service  ! 

Thus  we  see  that  idolatry  has  been  introduced  by  the  Jainis. 

Jainism  the  author  of  Idolatry 

We  have  on  page  21  of  the  Viveksar  that  there  is  no  temptation 
in  a shrine  of  Jina,  which  helps  His  votaries  in  crossing  the  sea  of  the 
world. 

The  Viveksar,  page  51  to  52,  says  : Idolatry  gives  salvation 
and  a visit  to  Jina’s  shrine  gives  good  qualities.  Those  who  worship 
the  Tirathankaras  with  offering  of  water,  sandal  and  other  things, 
escape  hell  and  go  to  heaven. 

ibid,  page  55. — The  worship  of  the  images  of  Rishabh  Deva 
and  other  saviours  in  the  temple  of  Jina  confers  on  the  worshipper 
the  blessings  of  religion,  wealth,  pleasure  and  salvation. 

ibid,  page  61. — The  worship  of  the  images  of  Jina  removes  all 
troubles  of  the  world. 

Reviewer. — Now,  see  their  assertions  marked  with  ignorance 
and  impossibility.  If  in  this  manner  sins  and  evil  works  be  cast  off; 
temptations  do  not  seize  a man,  he  cross  the  sea  of  the  worldly  trou- 
bles, get  good  qualities,  escape  hell  and  go  to  heaven,  be  blessed  with 
virtue,  wealth,  pleasure,  and  salvation,  and  get  rid  of  all  suffering; 
why  do  all  the  Jainis  not  become  happy  and  obtain  the  possession  of 
all  wealth  ? 

The  Viveksar,  page  3,  says  : Those  who  have  set  up  the  image 
of  Jina,  have  made  sure  of  their  and  their  family’s  livelihood. 

Ibid,  page  225. — It  is  very  bad  to  worship  the  images  of  Shiva, 
Vishnu, and  others  i.e.,  it  paves  the  way  to  hell. 

Reviewer. — If  the  images  of  Shiva  and  others  are  the  means  of 
damnation,  are  not  the  Jainis’  images  to  be  the  same  ? If  it  be  said 


440 


Satyarth  Prakash 


that  the  Jainis’  idols  have  the  appearance  of  resignation,  calmness 
and  symbols  ot  auspiciousness,  so  they  are  good,  but  the  images  of 
Shiva  and  other  deities  are  not  so;  hence  they  are  bad;  it  is  asked  how 
their  images  can  represent  renunciation,  since  they  are  enshrined  in 
costly  temples  worth  many  lacs,  and  worshipped  with  the  offerings  of 
saffron  and  other  costly  materials  ? But  the  images  of  Shiva  and 
others  lie  without  the  shade  of  a roof.  How  can  they  not  be  consi- 
dered as  representing  renunciation  ? If  calmness  be  pleaded,  all 
inanimate  objects  are  motionless  and  so  calm  and  quiet.  The  truth 
is  that  the  idolatry  of  all  religions  is  useless. 

Q, — Our  images  do  not  put  on  clothes,  ornaments,  and  other 
trinklets.  So  they  arc  preferable. 

A. — It  is  beastly  habit  to  expose  and  place  nude  images  in  the 
public. 

Q. — The  sight  of  a woman’s  picture  or  statue  excites  lust,  so 
the  sight  of  saints  and  clairvoyants’  images  inspires  us  with  virtues. 

If  you  believe  the  sight  of  stone  images  brings  on  an  auspi- 
cious change  over  a person,  its  properties  of  inertness  will  also  be 
infused  into  him.  When  you  turn  lithic  in  understanding,  you  will 
be  completely  ruined.  Your  loss  of  the  company  of  good  and  learned 
men  will  increase  your  dullness.  The  evils  mentioned  in  the  1 Ith 
chapter  befall  all  the  idolaters  in  the  world.  The  Jainis  have  made  a 
great  fuss  for  nothing  about  idolatry.  Their  scriptural  verses  also 
contain  many  absurdities.  Here  is  one  of  the  verses,  Ratnasar  bhag, 
page  1,— 

Creed  of  Jainism 

n 

There  is  a great  merit  recorded  of  this  ver^e.  It  is  the  article  of 
faith  of  all  the  Jainis  Its  merit  of  edicucy  is  so  much  that  it  beats 
the  stories  of  the  Tantra  Piirancis  and  buffoons  into  shade. 

The  ShraddJia  Din  Kritya,  page  3,  thus  expounds  it  * — 

il9M  I 

qRH  \ Ml  On 

I \ nlln 

^ ni2n 

This  Navakara  verse  is  sacred  and  of  the  highest  authority.  In 
the  matter  of  meditation  it  is  of  supreme  importance.  It  is  the  greatest 
of  all  essences.  For  the  lay  people  distressed  with  the  afflictions  of 
the  world,  it  serves  as  a ship  in  crossing  a sea.  This  salutation  verse 
or  Navakara  Mantra  is  like  a ship.  Those  who  give  it  up,  sink  into 
the  sea  of  the  worldly  troubles.  But  those  who  take  hold  of  it,  escape 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


441 


the  suffering  of  the  world.  There  is  nothing  else  than  this  verse  to 
keep  persons  aloof  from  torments,  to  annihilate  their  sins  and  to  give 
them  salvation.  This  is  the  verse  which  carries  them  safe  in  their 
journey  on  the  turbulent  sea  of  painful  life,  afflicted  as  they  are  with 
the  pain  of  the  body  coming  through  many  antecedent  lives.  The 
soul  cannot  pass  safely  thro’  the  world  until  it  gets  this  verse.  This 
meaning  is  given  in  the  aphorism.  None  but  this  salutation  verse 
helps  people  in  the  eight  great  tribulations,  as  fire,  &c.  The  utility 
of  this  formula  of  creed  is  as  great  as  the  obtaining  of  the  most  valuable 
diamond  in  the  search  of  precious  stones,  as  the  possession  of  the 
most  reliable  weapon  in  the  event  of  an  attack  of  the  enemy,  and  as 
the  meeting  of  the  most  learned  saint.  It  is  the  secret  of  all  worship, 
called  the  dwadashavgi,  consisting  of  12  ceremonies. 

Meaning  of  the  Verse 

1 Salutation  to  all  Saviours  the  Tirathankaras!  2.  Salutation  to 
all  saints  of  Jainism!  3 Salutation  to  all  preceptors  of  Jainism! 
4.  Salutation  to  all  instructors  of  Jainism!  5.  Salutation  to  all  friars 
of  Jainism  in  this  world. 

Tho’  the  word  Jainism  is  not  down  in  the  verse,  yet  many 
books  of  Jain  religion  never  enjoin  salutation  to  anyone  of  a different 
faith.  Therefore,  the  above  meaning  is  the  right  one. 

The  Tatwa  Viveka,  page  169,  has  : He  who  worships  wood  or 
stone  with  faith  in  it  as  in  God,  obtains  his  best  reward. 

Reviewer, — If  it  be  so,  why  do  all  of  them  not  become  happy  at 

sight? 

The  Ratnasar  bhag,  page  10,  says  : The  sight  of  the  image  of 
Paras  Nath  destroys  sins.  The  Kalpa  Bashya,  page  51,  records  the 
repairing  of  125,000  pagodas. 

Such  is  their  voluminous  writing  on  idolatry.  Hence  it  is  evident 
that  fundamental  cause  of  idolatry  is  Jainism. 

Monkish  Frauds 

Now,  look  at  the  pious  frauds  of  the  priests  of  Jainism. 

The  Viveksar,  page  228,  says  : — A monk  of  Jainism  lay  with  a 
prostitute,  named  Kosha,  renounced  the  world  and  went  to  heaven. 

ibid,  page  10. — St.  Arnak  failing  in  morality,  passed  several  years 
in  adultery  in  the  family  of  Datt  Seth  and  then  went  to  heaven  (the 
region  of  God).  Syalia  carried  away  St.  Dhan  dhan,  a son  of  Shri 
Krishna,  and  afterwards  became  a deity,  ibid,  page  156. — The  Jainis 
should  revere  the  monks  of  Jainism  only;  when  in  their  dress  whether 
moral  or  immoral,  they  are  all  worshipful,  ibid,  page  168. — A monk 
of  Jainism  with  no  character  is  better  than  that  of  other  faiths,  ibid. 
page  171. — The  Jainis  or  Shravakas  should  serve  the  friars  of  Jainism, 
altho’  they  find  them  immoral  and  fallen.  Ibid,  page  216. — A thief 
stole  5 handfuls  of  corn,  adopted  Jain  virtues — charitra,  underwent 
penance  and  repentence  and,  obtaining  knowledge  only,  became  a saint. 


442 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Reviewer, — Now,  see  the  hypocritical  deeds  of  their  monks  and 
laity.  In  their  religion  a friar  of  wicked  deeds  went  to  heaven. 

ibid,  page  106. — It  is  written  there  that  Shri  Krishna  went  to 
the  third  hell,  ibid  page  145. — Dhanwantry  (the  father  of  Indian 
medicine)  went  to  hell,  ibid  page  48 — We  find  that  Yogi  or  mystic, 
itinerant  priests;  Kazi,  Mullah  (Mahomedan  priests)  go  to  hell  in  spite 
of  their  penances,  however  great,  out  of  their  ignorance  of  (Jainism). 
The  Ratnasar  bhag,  page  171,  records  that  9 Vasu  Devas /.e  , 1. 
Triprishta,  2.  Dwiprishta,  3.  Swayambhu,  4.  Purushottama,  5. 
Siuha  Porusha,  6.  Purusha  Pundarika,  7.  Datta,  8.  Lukshamana, 
9.  Shri  Krishna,  went  to  hell  in  the  time  of  the  1 1th,  12th,  14th, 
15th,  I8th,  20th,  and  22nd  Tirathankaras.  Also  Prati  Vasu  Devas,  i.e., 
1.  Ashwagriva,  2.  Taraka,  3.  Modaka,  4.  Madhu,  5.  Nishumbha, 
6.  Bali,  7.  Prahalada,  8.  Ravana,  9.  Jarasindu  went  to  hell. 

Did  the  writer  see  what  he  wrote?  If  not,  it  is  his  spite  that 
reviles  great  men — Ed. 

The  Kalpabhashya  says  that  all  the  24  Tirathankers,  from  Rishabh 
Deva  to  Mahabir,  went  to  heaven. 

Reviewer. — Let  a wise  man  think  that  the  monks,  laity,  and  saints 
or  Tirathankers,  many  of  whom  were  whore-mongers,  adulterers, 
thieves,  and  other  kinds  of  sinners  of  Jainism,  went  to  heaven  and 
obtained  salvation;  and  Sri  Krishna  and  other  great  religious  men, 
saints  and  savants  all  went  to  hell!  How  monstrous  and  wicked  is 
this  statement?  If  it  be  seriously  thought,  it  will  be  found  that  it  is 
bad  for  a good  man  to  keep  the  company  of  the  Jainis  or  to  see  them. 
For,  their  company  will  infuse  such  falsehoods  into  their  hearts. 
Nothing  will  be  gained  but  evil  habits  from  their  company,  who  are 
very  stubborn  and  begotted.  But  there  is  no  harm  to  keep  the  com- 
pany of  those  who  are  virtuous  among  them. 

The  Viveksar,  paue  55,  writes  that  pilgrimage  to  the  Ganges  and 
other  rivers  and  Kashi  and  other  holy  places  give  no  spiritual  good, 
but  their  sacred  places  such  as  Girnar,  Palitana,  Abu  and  others  give 
salvation  to  visitors  and  pilgrims. 

Reviewer. — One  should  think  that  the  sacred  places  of  the  Jainis 
are  material  things  as  much  as  the  holy  places  of  the  followers  of 
Vishnu,  as  they  arc  all  rivers,  tanks,  plains  and  others  of  the  like  sort. 
It  is  an  act  of  folly  to  praise  one  and  to  dispraise,  the  other. 

Salvation  of  Jainism 

The  Ratnasar,  page  23. — Mahabir  Tirathanker  says  to  Goutam  : 
There  is  a place  in  the  upper  region,  called  the  Siddha  Shila  (rock  of 
the  perfect).  Being  above  Swargpuri  (the  town  of  heaven),  it  is 
45,00,000  yojanas  or  leagues  long  and  as  much  hollow.  It  is  8 yojanas 
or  leagues  thick.  It  is  whiter  than  a garland  of  white  perals  or  the 
cow’s  milk.  It  is  resplendant  like  gold,  and  clearer  than  a diamond. 
That  rock  of  siddhas  or  savants  is  on  the  top  of  the  14th  region. 
Above  it  is  the  place,  called  Shivapur  (the  town  of  Shiva).  It  is  also 
inhabited  by  the  saved  people  who  live  suspended  or  without  touching 
the  floor.  There  is  no  evil  of  birth  or  death  there,  and  they  live  in 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


443 


happiness,  and  never  again  pass  through  birth  and  death,  and  they  are 
not  bound  by  the  obligation  of  duties.  Such  is  the  salvation  of  the  Jaini. 

Reviewer. — It  is  worth  thinking  that  the  Siddha  Shila  and  Shiva- 
pur,  the  salvation  places  of  the  Jainis,  are  like  those  of  other  faiths; 
as,  for  instance,  the  Pouranis  or  bona  fide  Hindu  mythologists,  point 
to  their  Vaikunth,  Kailash,  Goloke,  Shripur  and  others  as  the  places 
of  salvation.  Mahomedanism  mentions  their  paradise  as  situated  in 
the  7th  heaven,  and  the  Christians  locate  their  place  of  salvation  in  the 
4th  region.  For,  what  the  Jainis  believe  to  be  up  above,  is  considered 
down  below  our  antipodes.  Above  and  below  are  not  determinate 
and  fixed  localities,  but  only  relative  positions.  What  the  Jainis  of 
India  (Aryavrata)  regard  as  above,  is  thought  to  be  below  by  the 
Americans,  and  what  is  believed  to  be  below,  is  above  in  the  opinions 
of  the  Americans.  Tho’  that  rock  of  salvation  be  twice  45  or  90  lacs 
of  cos  or  leagues,  yet  the  saved  people  are  in  a veritable  confinement; 
for,  their  going  out  of  it  or  Shivapur  destroys  their  salvation.  They 
must  have  fondness  to  live  in  it  and  aversion  to  leave  it.  How  can 
that  state  be  called  salvation  in  which  there  are  restriction,  love,  and 
aversion?  Salvation  should  be  believed  as  described  in  the  9th  chapter. 
The  salvation  of  the  Jainis  is  a kind  of  imprisonment.  They  are 
misled  in  the  matter  of  salvation.  The  truth  is  that  a correct  know- 
ledge of  the  nature  of  salvation  cannot  be  acquired  without  the  proper 
understanding  of  the  meaning  of  the  Vedas. 

Jain  Absurdities 

Now  listen  further  to  some  of  their  absurdities  and  impossibili- 
ties : 

Viveksar,  page  78. — Mahabir  was  bathed  at  the  time  of  his  birth 
with  water  of  16,000,000  pitchers. 

ibid,  page  136.  — King  Dasharna  went  to  see  Mahabir  and  evinced 
a little  pride,  to  remove  which  16,77,72.16,000  Indras,  and  13,370,572, 
800,000,000  wives  of  Indras  came  there.  There  sight  astonished  the 
King. 

Reviewer. — Now,  think  how  many  worlds  are  required  for  these 
Indras  and  their  wives  even  to  stand  on.  (Was  the  author  present  as 
a shorthand  reporter? — Ed.) 

The  Shraddha  Dina  Kritya  Atma  Nanda  Bhavana  on  page  31 
says  : Wide  wells,  and  tanks  should  not  be  sunk  or  made. 

Reviewer. — If  all  the  people  turn  Jaini,  none  will  construct  these 
works  of  public  utility.  Whence  will  they  get  water  to  drink? 

Q. — The  erection  of  reservoirs  and  other  structures  of  water 
become  the  source  of  the  generation  of  aquatic  animals,  whose  death 
brings  sin  to  their  constructor.  Hence  we  the  Jainis  never  put  our 
hand  to  it. 

A, — You  have  lost  the  sense.  Why  don’t  you  take  account  of 
the  great  religious  merit  accruing  from  giving  water  to  the  thirsty 
people  and  other  living  creatures,  cows  and  other  quadrupeds,  seeing 
that  you  think  the  death  of  microscopic  animals  to  be  a sin? 


444 


Satyarth  Prakash 


The  Tatwa  vivek,  p.  196 — A certain  banker,  Nand  Manikar 
(Jeweller)  by  name,  sank  a large  well  in  his  town.  He  incurred  sin 
thereby  and  became  afflicted  with  16  great  diseases.  On  his  death  he 
turned  a frog  in  that  very  well.  The  auspicious  sight  of  Mahabir 
occasioned  remembrance  of  his  former  life.  Mahabir  says:  “Hearing 
my  arrival  and  remembering  the  religious  works  of  his  previous  life, 
he  set  out  to  come  to  pay  respects  to  me.  In  the  way  he  was  kicked 
to  death  by  the  horse  of  Shrenik  and  became  a Mahardwik  deity  under 
the  name  of  Durdurank  by  virtue  of  his  pure  contemplation.  Know- 
ing my  arrival  by  means  of  his  clairvoyance — avadhi  jnana,  he  came  to 
show  his  good  luck  with  great  humility  and  then  departed.” 

Reviewer. — To  believe  in  Mahabir  as  the  most  exalted  who  says 
such  stories  opposed  to  all  evidence  of  knowledge,  false  and  impossible, 
is  an  instance  of  the  great  pervertion  of  the  understanding. 

The  Shraddha  Dina  Kritya,  p.  36,  writes  that  a friar  may  accept 
the  gift  of  shrouds  or  the  winding  cloth  of  a dead  person. 

Reviewer. — Look  here,  their  friars  are  like  undertakers  or  Maha- 
brahmins.  [f  the  friars  take  the  winding  sheet,  who  will  take  the 
jewels  on  the  person  of  the  dead?  Being  of  great  value,  they  are 
perhaps  retained  by  themselves  at  home. 

Sin  of  Cookery 

The  Ratnasar  bhag,  p.  105,  says:  sin  is  incurred  in  parching, 
pounding,  grinding,  cooking  and  other  culinary  works. 

Reviewer. — Look  at  their  ignorance.  If  these  works  be  not  done, 
how  can  man  live  on  earth?  Also,  the  Jainis  will  themselves  die  away 
from  the  pain  of  starvation 

Sin  of  Horticulture 

Ratnasar  bhag,  p.  104  : A gardener  incurs  100,000  sins  in  plant- 
ing an  orchard. 

Reviewer. — If  a gardener  commits  a hundred  thousand  sins  in 
doing  his  natural  work,  he  is  credited  with  the  religious  merit  of 
billions  of  times  by  affording  many  souls  the  benefit  of  enjoying  the 
freshness  of  foliage,  fruits,  flowers,  and  their  shade.  These  blessings 
are  not  accounted.  What  a great  injustice  it  is? 


Monstrous  Myth 

The  Tatwa  vivek,  p.  202,  has  : Once  upon  a time  a friar,  called 
Lubdhi,  entered  a prostitute’s  house  by  mistake,  and  asked  alms  of 
her  in  the  interest  of  religion.  She  replied  that  religion  had  no  busi- 
ness there.  Money  was  in  demand  there.  Thereupon  the  friar  rained 
down  1,250,000  gold  coins  in  her  house. 

Reviewer. — Who  that  has  not  his  reason  altogether  destroyed, 
can  believe  this  myth? 

The  Ratnasar  bhag,  p.  67,  records  that  if  a man  contemplates  an 
equestrian  image  of  stone  anywhere,  the  image  goes  there  for  his 
protection. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


445 


Reviewer, — O our  Jaini  brother,  you  have  theft,  raid,  attack  and 
other  kinds  of  violence  sometimes  committed  upon  your  house.  Why 
don’t  you  call  that  statue  to  your  mind  and  get  rescue  through  it? 
Why  do  you  go  to  seek  protection  to  the  police  and  other  govern- 
mental arrangements? 

Qualifications  of  Holiness 

Now  attend  to  the  qualifications  of  their  holy  men. 

gF3=5(rir.f'TftTspi5?rn:'rTf«iqt?rTft*i?5nn:  i 
’ll  ?Tgf|r5ft!n  n 

5larP9T:  II 

Jindatt  Suri  describes  the  qualifications  of  monks  in  these  com- 
plets.  They  are — the  keeping  of  a brush — arjoharana  chamri,  living 
upon  alms  off  food,  plucking  of  the  hair  on  the  head,  putting  on 
white  clothes,  maintaining  of  forgiveness,  avoiding  of  others’  company. 
The  Jainis  of  these  qualification  are  called  the  Yatis  (ascetics)  of  the 
Shwetambara  (white  robed)  sect.  There  is  another  sect,  called  the 
Digambara  (sky  robed)  who  don’t  put  on  clothes  but  live  naked.  To 
pluck  off  the  hair  on  the  head,  to  keep  the  broom  made  of  woollen 
threads  to  sweep  under  the  armpit,  called  the  pichchika,  to  eat  the 
alms  of  food  on  the  palms.  Such  are  the  special  qualifications  of 
this  second  sect  of  nudes. 

There  is  a third  kind  of  friars,  called  the  Jin  Rishi,  who  take 
their  food  after  the  lay  almoners  and  donors  have  done. 

The  only  difference  between  these  two  sects,  the  robed  and  the 
unrobed,  is  that  the  Digambaras  don’t  go  to  a woman,  but  the 
Swetambaras  do  Such  are  the  means  of  salvation,  which  divide 
their  friars  into  two  sects. 

Hence  the  plucking  of  the  hair  of  the  Jainis  is  well-known.  It 
is  also  allowed  by  their  sacred  books  to  pluck  5 handfuls  of  hair. 

The  Viveksar  bhag  on  p.  216  writes  that  a certain  man  took 
holy  orders  by  plucking  5 handfuls  of  hair,  technically  called  the 
charitra  or  good  character. 

The  Alpa  Sutra  Bhashya,  p.  108,  ordains:  Pluck  hair  and  keep 
it  like  the  hair  of  the  cow. 

Reviewer —Lei  the  Jainis  tell  where  their  mercy  religion  is.  Is 
it  not  hinsa  or  giving  pain  to  others?  Whether  a man  plucks  his  own 
hair,  or  his  preceptor  does  it,  or  any  other  person  does  it,  he  must 
endure  a great  deal  of  pain  therefrom.  To  cause  pain  to  a living 
being,  is  called  hinsa  or  injury. 

Dhundia  Sect 

The  Viveksar  says:  In  1633  A.V.  a sect,  called  the  Dhundia 
(seekers),  branched  off  from  the  Shwetambaras,  and  they  in  their  own 


446 


Satyarth  Prakash 


were  split  into  13  sub-sects  of  scruplists,  called  the  The 

Dhundias  do  not  worship  the  images  of  stone  and  other  materials. 
They  always  cover  their  mouth  with  a piece  of  cloth  except  at  the  time 
of  eating  and  bathing  The  Yatis  or  ascetics  screen  the  mouth  with  a 
strip  of  cloth  at  the  time  of  reading  a book,  but  not  at  other  times. 

Q. — A strip  of  cloth  must  be  suspended  upon  the  mouth.  For, 
the  animalcules  of  the  air — Vnya  kaya — are  killed  by  the  warmth  of 
breath.  The  sin  of  their  death  befalls  him  who  docs  not  so  cover  his 
mouth.  Hence  we  consider  the  bandage  of  the  mouth  to  be  proper. 

A. — This  opinion  is  untenable  in  the  teeth  of  the  evidence  of 
knowledge  and  perception;  for,  souls  are  undecayable  and  immortal; 
they  can  never  be  killed  by  the  warmth  of  breath.  You  also  believe 
them  to  be  undecayable  and  immortal. 

Q. — Certainly  the  soul  never  dies;  but  the  pain  felt  by  it  from 
the  warmth  of  breath  occasions  sin  which  taints  the  giver  of  pain. 
Hence  it  is  right  to  screen  the  mouth  with  cloth. 

A, — This  view  is  wholly  impossible;  for,  no  animal  can  live  at 
all  on  earth  without  causing  pain  to  others.  When  you  believe 
according  to  your  religion  that  your  breath  causes  pain  to  souls  or 
animals,  it  is  certain  that  your  walking,  rambling,  sitting,  raising 
hands,  winking  and  other  movements  of  the  body  must  cause  pain 
to  them.  Hence  you  can  also  not  be  free  from  giving  pain  to  animals. 

Q, — Animals  should  be  protected  as  far  as  possible.  When  we 
cannot  protect  them,  there  is  no  help  for  it;  for,  the  air  and  other 
elements  are  full  of  animals.  If  we  don’t  cover  the  mouth  with  cloth, 
many  animals  will  die.  But  a few  of  them  die  in  consequence  of  our 
covering  the  mouth  with  cloth. 

A. — This  assertion  of  yours  is  groundless;  for,  bandaging  causes 
more  pain  to  animals.  When  a man  binds  a piece  of  cloth  upon  the 
mouth,  his  breath  accumulates  and  rushes  out  with  force  downwards, 
sideways  and  through  nostrils  in  the  case  of  closing  the  mouth  in 
silence.  Its  greater  warmth  must  cause  more  pain  to  animalcules  in 
accordance  with  your  religion.  See,  if  all  the  doors  of  a room  be 
closed  or  screens  be  hung,  its  temperature  increases,  but  not  on  keep- 
ing the  doors  open.  In  like  manner,  covering  the  mouth  with  cloth 
increases  the  warmth  of  breath,  but  not  in  keeping  it  open.  Thus 
according  to  your  own  religion  you  give  more  pain  to  animals.  When 
your  mouth  is  covered,  the  breath  is  checked,  it  accumulates,  goes 
out  with  force,  gives  a greater  shock  and  so  causes  more  pain  to 
animals.  You  see  some  men  blow  a fire  with  the  mouth,  others  with 
a tube  or  pipe.  The  expansion  of  breath  weakens  its  force;  but  the 
breath  squeezed  in  the  pipe  and  blown  out  strikes  the  fire  with  force. 
In  like  manner,  the  breath  checked  by  cloth  upon  the  mouth  forces 
its  way  through  the  nose,  giving  more  pain  to  animals.  Therefore, 
those  who  do  not  cover  the  mouth  with  cloth  are  more  righteous 
than  those  who  do.  Bandaging  the  mouth  prevents  correct  pro- 
nunciation of  letters  with  proper  organs  and  accents.  You  incur 
blame  by  pronouncing  letters  without  nasal  sounds  as  nasals.  Also, 
mouth-binding  increases  the  foulness  of  breath;  for,  the  interior  of 
the  body  is  filled  with  foetid  matter.  The  air  which  comes  out  of  the 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


447 


body  is  evidently  tainted  with  stench.  If  it  is  prevented  from  escap- 
ing, its  foulness  is  increased  as  a closed  latrine  is  very  stenchy,  but 
an  open  one  is  less  so.  In  the  same  manner,  your  body  exudes  more 
malodor  by  bandaging  the  mouth  and  by  not  performing  the  hygienic 
work  of  cleaning  the  teeth,  rinsing  the  mouth,  bathing  the  body  and 
washing  the  clothes.  It  helps  the  production  of  many  diseases.  You 
thus  cause  more  pain  to  animals  and  incur  much  sin  thereby.  Since 
excessive  stench  in  excreta  produces  cholera  and  other  dirty  diseases 
of  many  kinds  and  becomes  a fruitful  source  of  suffering  to  living 
beings,  and  the  decrease  of  nastiness  lessens  the  growth  of  diseases 
and  diminishes  the  enormity  of  suffering,  you  become  greater  sinners 
by  increasing  the  amount  of  foulness  of  the  air.  Those  who  do  not 
bandage  the  mouth,  but  who  clean  the  teeth,  rinse  the  mouth,  take  a 
bath,  clean  the  clothes  and  house,  are  much  better  than  you.  As 
those  who  keep  themselves  aloof  from  the  contact  of  filthiness  and 
stench  of  the  slums  are  far  better,  and  as  the  intellect  does  not  become 
pure  and  bright,  so  your  and  your  companions’  intellect  does  not 
improve.  Since  the  increase  of  disease  and  decrease  of  sense  present 
an  obstacle  to  the  practice  of  virtue,  your  and  your  community’s  liv- 
ing must  share  the  same  fate. 

Q, — As  the  flames  of  a fire  made  inside  a closed  house  cannot 
go  out  to  cause  pain  to  the  animalcules  peopling  the  air  outside,  so 
we  cause  less  pain  to  animals  by  binding  a flapper  over  the  mouth  and 
by  restraining  the  breath.  Bandaging  the  mouth  does  not  cause  pain 
to  the  atmospheric  germs  of  life.  As  a man  feels  less  heat  by  raising 
the  hands  against  a fire,  so  the  animalcules  receive  less  pain  by  the 
intervention  of  the  mouth-binder,  as  the  microscopic  tenants  of  the 
air  must  feel  pain  from  having  a sensitive  body. 

A. — This  assertion  of  yours  smacks  of  childishness.  Firstly, 
fire  cannot  burn  where  there  is  no  vent  through  which  the  internal 
does  not  meet  the  external  air.  If  you  want  to  see  it  with  your  own 
eyes,  make  an  experiment  by  putting  a lamp  in  a lantern  and  closing 
all  holes.  You  will  find  the  lamp  go  out  presently  after.  Fire  can 
not  burn,  as  men  and  other  terrestrial  animals  cannot  live  without 
the  contact  of  the  air  outside.  When  the  heat  of  a fire  is  obstructed 
on  one  side,  it  escapes  from  the  other  side  with  greater  energy.  The 
intervention  of  hands  lessens  the  feeling  of  heat  on  the  face,  but  it  is 
felt  more  on  the  hands.  Hence,  your  assertion  is  not  right. 

Mouth-covering 

0.-lt  is  known  to  all  that  when  a poor  man  whispers  in  the 
ear  of  or  converses  with  a rich  man  by  bringing  his  mouth  very  near 
to  him,  he  covers  the  mouth  either  with  cloth  or  with  the  hands  so 
that  his  spittle  or  foul  breath  should  not  fall  on  him.  When  he  reads 
a book,  the  particles  of  saliva  certainly  fly  out  and  fall  on  the  book, 
make  it  a sort  of  refuse  and  soil  it.  Hence  it  is  better  to  cover  the 
mouth  with  cloth. 

A, — It  is  therefore  proved  that  the  mouth  binder  is  of  no  use  as 
far  as  the  protection  of  animals  is  concerned.  In  talking  with  a rich 
man,  a poor  man  covers  his  mouth  with  his  hands  or  cloth,  so  that 


448 


Satyarth  Prakash 


others  may  not  hear  the  secret  conversation;  for,  when  a man  talks  of 
some  public  interest,  he  never  covers  his  mouth  with  his  hands  or 
cloth  Hence  it  is  plain  that  the  covering  of  the  mouth  is  for  the 
secrecy  of  speech. 

Your  mouth  and  other  organs  emit  a very  bad  odour  from  your 
not  brushing  the  teeth  and  not  doing  other  sanitary  duties  of  the  body. 
Nothing  but  bad  smell  goes  out  of  your  body  to  him  who  sits  by  you 
or  you  go  to  him.  Such  is  the  reason  why  men  cover  the  mouth  in 
conversation.  There  are  other  reason  as  well,  for  instance,  if  the 
mouth  be  not  covered  in  talking  of  a secret  before  many  men,  the  air 
carries  it  in  its  circulation  to  them.  When  talking  in  a retired  place, 
nobody  covers  the  mouth,  for  there  is  no  third  party  to  overhear  the 
talk.  Is  it  implied  by  the  hint  that  spittle  should  not  fall  on  rich  men, 
and  that  it  may  fall  upon  the  poor  men?  Also,  nobody  can  avoid 
the  touch  of  spittle;  for,  when  the  winds  blow  from  one  man  to  another 
at  a distance  the  molecules  of  saliva  are  carried  by  the  wind  to  his 
body.  To  regard  it  as  a fault  of  anybody,  is  an  instance  of  ignorance. 
If  the  warmth  of  breath  kills  or  pains  animalcules,  the  burning  heat 
of  the  sun  in  the  hot  weather  as  in  the  months  of  Vaisakh  and  Jeth 
or  June  and  July,  will  kill  all  of  them  to  an  individual  and  none  will 
escape  death.  But  these  tiny  tenants  of  the  air  do  not  die  from  it. 
Therefore,  your  dogma  is  false.  Had  your  saviours  or  Tirathankaras 
been  eminent  in  science,  they  would  not  have  said  so.  You  see  that 
pain  is  felt  by  that  animal,  whose  mental  powers  are  associated  with 
all  its  organs.  The  authority  for  it  is— 

— This  is  an  aphorism  of  the  Sankhya  philosophy.  It  means  that 
when  the  five  senses  are  brought  in  contact  with  their  five  objects  or 
percepts,  the  mind  feels  pleasure  or  pain.  For  instance,  a deaf  man 
is  not  affected  by  calling  him  names;  a blind  man  does  not  see  light 
or  the  approach  of  a serpent,  tiger,  and  other  ferocious  beasts;  a para- 
lytic man  shunya  vahiri  is  insensitive  to  touch;  the  paralysis  of  the 
olfactory  nerve  perceives  no  smell;  and  the  paralysis  of  the  tongue 
feels  no  taste.  The  same  is  the  case  with  those  animals.  You  see 
that  a man  does  not  at  all  feel  pleasure  or  pain  in  the  state  of  profound 
sleep — sushupti.  There  is  the  soul  in  the  body,  but  then  it  is  not 
associated  with  the  physical  organs  at  that  time,  and  so  it  feels  no 
sensation  of  pleasure  or  pain.  Also,  you  see  that  modern  surgeons 
insensitise  a patient  by  administering  him  an  anasthetic  or  chloroform 
to  perform  an  operation  on  his  body;  and  so  he  feels  no  pain  at  the 
time.  In  like  manner,  the  animalcules  of  the  air  or  other  animals  of 
motionless  bodies  cannot  feel  pleasure  or  pain.  As  a man  in  the  fit 
of  swoon  cannot  feel  pleasure  or  pain,  so  do  the  animalcules  of  the 
air  being,  as  it  were,  in  the  state  of  great  insensibility,  not  feel  pleasure 
or  pain.  How  then  can  the  opinion  regarding  the  prevention  of 
cruelty  to  them  be  proved;  Where  there  is  no  evidence  of  the  senses 
as  to  their  affection  of  pleasure  and  pain,  how  can  the  admissibility  of 
inference  be  appropriate? 

Q. — As  they  are  living  beings,  how  can  they  have  no  sensation 
of  pleasure  or  pain? 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


449 


A, — Hear  me,  my  fellow-brethren,  why  don’t  you  feel  pleasure 
or  pain  in  the  state  of  profound  sleep?  The  cause  of  the  sensation  of 
pleasure  or  pain  is  the  actual  relation  between  the  ego  and  the  senses. 
We  have  just  answered  this  objection  by  the  fact,  that  doctors  anas- 
thetise  a patient  for  the  purpose  of  surgical  operations.  As  he  does 
not  feel  pain,  so  are  the  animals  in  the  state  of  great  natural  insensibi- 
lity not  susceptible  to  feelings  of  pleasure  and  pain;  for,  they  have  no 
means  to  receive  the  influence  of  affecting  objects. 

Dry  Vegetables 

Q. — You  see,  we  don’t  eat  all  green  vegetables,  leaves,  roots, 
tubers,  radishes,  and  the  like  sort;  for,  vegetables  contain  many  and 
roots  innumerable  animals,  if  we  eat  them,  we  shall  incur  the  sin  of 
killing  or  afflicting  them. 

A. — This  shows  your  great  ignorance.  How  do  you  believe 
that  animals  die  or  suffer  pain  in  your  eating  green  vegetables?  Well, 
it  appears  you  have  no  perception  or  evidence  of  the  senses  of  their 
suffering  pain.  But  if  you  have  it,  show  it  to  us.  You  will  never  be 
able  to  perceive  their  suffering  or  show  it  to  us  When  there  is  no 
actual  evidence  of  the  senses  with  regard  to  their  suffering,  the  admis- 
sibility of  the  evidence  of  inference,  comparison,  and  authority  is  out 
of  question.  The  answer  given  above  will  do  for  this  objection.  For, 
it  seems  to  be  an  error  of  your  saviours,  the  Tirathankaras,  who  have 
taught  you  such  doctrines,  opposed  to  reason  and  knowledge,  to 
assume  the  feeling  of  pleasure  and  pain  in  animals  passing  their  life 
in  exceeding  obscurity,  profound  sleep,  and  great  intoxication.  Well, 
when  a house  is  limited,  how  can  the  number  of  the  animals  living 
therein  be  illimitable?  When  we  see  the  limits  of  bulbs  how  can  the 
number  of  animals  living  in  them  have  no  end?  Hence,  your  belief 
is  founded  on  a great  mistake. 

Boiled  Water 

Q, — See  you  commit  a great  sin,  since  you  drink  raw  and  un- 
boiled water.  Like  us,  you  should  drink  boiled  water. 

This  opinion  of  yours  is  also  based  on  misconception;  for, 
when  you  boil  water,  the  animalcula  of  water  must  die  away.  Also, 
their  bodies  are  boiled  in  water,  making  it  a sort  of  lavender-t/ze 
arrack  of  somp,  so  that  you  drink  the  acid  of  their  bodies.  Thus  you 
are  great  sinners.  But  those  who  drink  cold  water,  are  not  sinners. 
For,  when  gone  into  the  stomach  with  cold  water,  they  will  go  out 
with  breath  on  receiving  a little  warmth.  The  aquatic  animalcules 
cannot  feel  pleasure  or  pain  according  to  the  reasons  given  above. 
So  there  will  be  sin  to  none. 

g. — Why  will  not  the  aquatic  animalcules  fly  away  on  feeling 
heat  of  fire  as  they  do  on  receiving  warmth  from  the  animal  heat  in 
the  stomach  ? 

A, — Yes,  they  would  go  out;  but  you  hold  that  they  are  killed 
by  warmth  of  breath,  so  the  boiling  of  water  according  to  your  reli- 
gion will  destroy  them,  or  they  will  go  out  after  suffering  great  pain. 


450  Satyarth  Prakash 

Also,  their  bodies  will  be  boiled  in  water,  which  will  make  you  greater 
sinners.  Is  it  not  ? 

Q — We  ourselves  never  boil  water,  nor  allow  any  layman  to 
do  it.  So  we  get  no  sin. 

A. — Firstly,  if  you  took  no  boiled  water  nor  drank  it,  why 
would  the  laity  boil  it  ? Therefore,  you  yourselves  are  the  co-opera- 
tors  of  this  sin,  and  so  greater  sinners;  for,  if  you  told  one  layman 
to  boil  water  for  you,  he  alone  would  do  it.  But  as  the  laymen  are 
uncertain  as  to  what  house  you  call  at,  every  one  of  them  boils  it  at 
his  house.  Therefore,  you  arc  the  chief  abettors  of  this  sin. 

Secondly,  much  combustion  of  wood  and  burning  of  fire  for  the 
purpose  of  the  kitchen,  agriculture,  trade  and  other  works  make  you 
greater  sinners  damned  for  hell.  As  you  are  the  chief  cause  of  the 
boiling  of  water,  you  are  the  chief  sinners  by  your  advocacy  of  the 
use  of  boiled  and  disuse  of  cold  water.  Those  who  act  on  your 
advice,  will  also  share  in  the  sin.  Now,  see  if  you  are  not  sunk  in 
great  ignorance.  Is  it  a little  sin  to  show  compassion  to  animalcules 
and  to  slander,  to  do  no  good  to  the  professors  of  other  faiths  ? If 
the  religion  of  your  saviours  (Tirathankaras)  were  true,  why  did  God 
make  arrangements  for  so  much  rain,  for  the  flowing  of  rivers,  and 
for  so  large  a quantity  of  water  in  the  world  ? He  should  not  have 
made  the  sun  as  well.  For,  billions  of  animals  probably  die  in  con- 
sequence of  this  plan.  When  your  saviours  were  in  life  whom  you 
consider  to  be  gods,  why  did  they  not  quench  the  solar  heat  and  stop 
the  clouds  ? Without  the  above  mentioned  plan  the  vermin  and 
aphides  living  in  bulbs,  roots,  and  other  vegetables  cannot  be  saved 
from  the  feeling  of  pleasure  and  pain  incident  to  the  sentient  life  in 
existence. 

Always  to  show  kindness  to  all  animals,  is  also  a cause  of  sulTer- 
ing;  for,  if  all  the  people  act  on  the  teachings  of  your  religion,  thieves 
and  raiders  will  go  unpunished;  and  then  how  great  a sin  will  be  got 
up  ? Therefore,  it  is  mercy  to  give  condign  punishment  to  the  iniquitors 
and  to  protect  the  virtuous  and  innocent;  the  contrary  course  brings 
ruin  upon  the  religion  of  mercy  and  forgiveness. 

Many  Jainis  keep  shops,  tell  lies  in  business,  misappropriate 
others’  money,  deceive  the  poor,  and  do  other  evil  deeds.  Why  don’t 
you  forbid  them  from  perpetrating  these  iniquities  ? Why  do  you 
keep  yourselves  engaged  in  trivial  show  of  religion  as  the  binding  of 
the  mouth  and  other  frivolities  ? When  you  convert  men  and  women, 
why  do  you  become  the  authors  of  suffering  to  them  by  plucking  their 
hair  and  enforcing  many  days’  fast  upon  them  by  giving  pain  to  your- 
selves and  others  ? You  are  virtually  the  cause  of  suffering  to  the 
mind,  and  so  why  should  you  be  not  called  cruel  fellows  or  hinsakas  ? 
Why  do  the  Jainis  not  think  it  to  be  a sin  in  riding  upon  elephants, 
horses,  bullocks,  camels,  and  in  employing  labour  of  men  ? When 
your  disciples  cannot  prove  your  absurdities  to  be  right,  your  savi- 
ours also  cannot  do  so.  When  you  read  your  scriptures,  the  audience 
must  kill  minute  animals  in  the  way  according  to  your  religion.  So 
you  arc  the  chief  causes  of  this  sin.  Let  your  mind  amplify  these 
brief  remarks  on  the  fact  that  pleasure  and  pain  cannot  affect  the  ani- 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


451 


malcules  living  in  water,  land,  air,  having  the  body  of  the  nature  of 
vegetation  and  passing  their  life  in  the  greatest  swoon  or  insensibility. 

24  Saviours  of  Jainis 

Listen  further  to  the  absurdities  of  the  Jains,  wliich  we  now 
proceed  to  write.  It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  a bow  measures 
cubits,  and  the  division  of  time  as  described  above  should  be 
applied  to  what  follows  : — 

The  Ratnasar  bhag.  Part  1,  page  166-167,  says  ; 

1.  Rishabha  Deva  was  500  bows  tall,  and  84,00,000  purva 
years  old. 

2.  Ajit  Nath  was  450  bows  tall,  his  age  was  72,00,000  purva 
years. 

3.  Sambhava  Nath  was  400  bows  tall,  his  age  was  60,00,000 
purva  years. 

4.  Abhinandan  was  350  bows  tall,  his  age  was  50,00,000  purva 
years. 

5.  Sumati  Nath  was  300  bows  tall,  his  age  was  40,00,000  purva 
years 

6.  Padma  Prablia  was  140  bows  tall,  his  age  was  30,00,000  purva 
years. 

7.  Parshwa  Nath  was  200  bows  tall,  his  age  was  20,00,000 
purva  years. 

8.  Chandra  Prabha  was  150  bows  tall,  his  age  was  10,00,000 
purva  years. 

9.  SubiJhi  Nath  was  100  bows  tall,  his  age  was  200,000  purva 
years. 

10.  Shital  Nath  was  90  bows  tall,  his  age  was  100,000  purva  years. 

11.  Shreyansa  Nath  was  80  bows  tall,  his  age  was  84,00,000  years. 

12.  Vasu  Pujya  Swami  was  70  bows  tall,  his  age  was  72,00,000 
years. 

13.  Bimal  Nath  was  60  bows  tall,  his  age  was  60,00,000  years. 

14.  Anant  Nath  was  40  bows  tall,  his  age  was  30,00,000  years. 

15.  Dharma  Nath  was  45  bows  tall,  his  age  was  10,00,000  years. 

16.  Shanti  Nath  was  40  bows  tall  and  100,000  years  old. 

17.  Kunthu  Nath  was  35  bows  tall  and  95,000  years  old. 

18.  Aniar  Nath  was  30  bows  high  and  84,000  years  old. 

19.  Malli  Nath  was  25  bows  tall  and  55,000  years  old. 

20.  Muni  Subrit  was  20  bows  tall,  his  age  was  30,000  years. 

21.  Nami  Nath  was  14  bows  tall  and  10,000  years  old. 

22.  Nemi  Nath  was  10  bows  tall,  and  1,000  years  old. 

23.  Parshwa  Nath  was  9 cubits  high  and  100  years  old. 

24.  Mahabir  Swami  was  7 cubits  high  and  72  years  old. 

These  were  the  24  Tirathankaras  who  taught  Jainism.  They  were 

teachers  and  preceptors  of  the  Jainis,  who  believe  them  to  be  great 
gods.  All  these  attained  salvation. 


452 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Now,  let  the  learned  men  think  if  it  is  possible  with  the  human 
body  to  be  so  high  and  age  so  long.  A very  few  such  men  can  dwell 
in  this  world.  In  imitation  of  the  Jainis,  the  writers  of  the  Puranas 
or  Indian  mythology  have  mentioned  100,000,  10,000  and  1,000  years’ 
ages  of  men,  which  is  also  impossible.  Then  how  can  the  Jainis’ 
account  be  possible  ? Listen  further — 

Miracles 

Kalpa  Bhashya,  p.  4. — Nagketa  lifted  a rock  equal  in  size  to  a 
village  on  his  finger,  ib.  p.  35. — Mahabir  pressed  the  earth  with  his 
great  toe,  whereon  the  hydra  supporting  the  earth  trembled  In.  p. 
46  — A serpent  bit  Mahabir,  but  milk  flowed  from  the  wound  instead 
of  blood.  The  serpent  went  to  the  8th  heaven,  ib  p.  47 — Frumenty 
was  cooked  on  the  feet  of  Mahabir;  but  they  were  not  burnt  or  scor- 
ched. ib.  p 16. — He  put  a camel  in  a small  pot.  Ratnasar  bhag  1. 
p.  14 — The  dirt  of  the  body  should  not  be  rubbed  or  scratched. 

Viveksar  bhag  p.  15  — A Jaini  friar,  called  Damsar,  having  read 
the  Udvega  Janaka  Sutra  set  fire  to  a town.  He  was  a great  favourite 
of  Mahabir.  ib  page  120. — The  king’s  order  must  needs  be  obeyed. 
Ibid,  page  227. — A dancing  girl,  Kosha  by  name,  heaped  a quantity 
of  mustard  in  a dish,  on  which  a needle  was  placed  on  its  end, 
covered  with  flowers,  and  then  danced  upon  it;  but  she  was  not 
pricked  with  the  needle  on  the  feet,  nor  was  the  heap  of  mustard  scat- 
tered. 

Saint’s  Prostitute 

Tatwa  vivek,  p.  228. — A sage,  called  Sthula,  lived  with  this 
prostitute  for  1 1 years,  after  which  he  being  initiated  into  the  Jain 
mysteries  went  to  heaven  and  Kosha  the  prostitute  died  in  Jain  faith 
and  went  to  that  abode  of  bliss.  Viveksar  p.  185.  A saint’s  cloak  gave 
500  sovereigns  daily  to  a prostitute. 

lb.  p.  228. — No  harm  is  done  to  the  practice  of  religion  if  it  is 
slackened  from  hindrance  by  the  order  of  a powerful  man,  a god,  the 
preceptor,  mother,  father,  family,  priest,  relatives,  preacher,  or  from 
the  difficulties  of  living  in  a dense  forest. 

Reviewer, — Now  look,  at  their  falsehoods.  Can  a man  ever  hold 
a rock  equal  to  a village  on  his  finger?  Can  the  earth  be  depressed 
with  a toe?  When  there  is  no  hydra  supporting  the  earth,  who  was 
to  tremble?  Nobody  has  ever  seen  milk  come  out  on  lacerating  a 
part  of  the  body.  It  is  nothing  else  but  the  talk  of  jugglery.  The 
serpent  which  bit  a good  man  went  to  heaven,  and  Shri  Krishna  and 
other  good  men  went  to  hell  No.  3 ! What  a great  falsehood  it  is  ? 
How  is  it  that  the  feet  of  Lord  Mahabir  were  not  burnt  when  frumenty 
was  cooked  on  them  ? Can  a small  pot  contain  a camel  ? They  who 
neither  rub  off  dirt  of  the  body,  nor  scratch  it  away,  must  be  in  a 
great  hell  of  stench.  Where  were  the  mercy  and  forgiveness  of  the 
Jain  saint  who  set  fire  to  a village?  The  Jain  people  will  never  be 
holy  by  faith  in  and  reliance  on  Mahabir  after  his  death,  when  the 
soul  of  the  Jain  saint  was  not  sanctified  from  the  company  of  Mahabir 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


453 


in  his  lifetime.  That  the  king’s  order  should  be  obeyed,  is  probably 
dictated  by  the  timidity  and  pusillanimity  of  the  Jainis,  who  are  mer- 
chants What  is  it,  if  it  is  not  a bare-faced  lie  that  prostitute  Kosha 
danced  on  an  erect  needle  stuck  in  a heap  of  mustard  without  being 
pricked  and  without  scattering  the  grains  of  mustard  ? This  could  not 
be,  however  light  she  might  be  in  body.  Nobody  should  tiangress 
religion  in  any  state,  happen  what  it  may.  A cloak  is  made  of  cloth. 
How  can  it  give  500  sovereigns  daily  to  anybody  ? If  such  absurd 
tales  and  myths  of  theirs  be  mentioned,  it  will  fill  volumes  hollow  like 
those  of  the  Jainis.  So  we  do  not  write  anything  more  of  them.  Let  it 
be  borne  in  mind  that  except  a few  beliefs  of  the  Jainis,  all  the  rest 
are  a labryinth,  of  lies.  See — 

Astronomy  of  Jainis 

I Jr  \ 

I tfn  fes  HfifT  11— Prak  iv.  77. 

This  is  the  first  island  of  Jamboo  dwip  (India)  which  is  one  lac 
yojan  or  4 lacs  of  cos  or  leagues  in  extent.  It  has  two  moons  and  two 
suns.  The  salt  sea  has  twice  as  many  of  these  heavenly  bodies,  viz., 
4 moons  and  4 suns;  and  the  region  of  metals  has  12  moons  and  12 
suns.  Three  times  the  suns  and  moons  of  the  region  of  metals,  i.e., 
36  suns  and  36  moons  with  the  2 suns  and  2 moons  of  Jamboo  dwip 
and  4 moons  of  the  salt  sea,  make  up  the  42  suns  and  42  moons  of 
the  black  sea  (Kalo  dadlii). 

In  like  manner,  the  islands  and  seas  farther  on  have  3 times  42, 
i.e,,  126,  to  which  are  added  12  of  the  metal  region,  4 of  the  salt  sea, 
2 suns  of  India,  i e.,  144;  so  Pushkardwipa  has  144  sun  and  144  moons. 
This  calculation  of  the  suns  and  moons  is  of  half  the  part  of  those 
regions  inhabited  by  mankind;  but  those  portions  where  there  are  no 
people  have  many  suns  and  many  moons.  Also,  the  suns  and  moons 
of  the  uninhabited  half  of  Pushkar  are  stationary.  As  said  above,  3 
times  144,  i.e  , 432  together  with  the  2 suns  and  2 moons  of  Jamboo 
dwip,  4 of  salt  sea,  12  of  metal  region,  42  of  black  sea,  i.e.,  492  suns 
and  492  moons  are  in  the  Pushkar  sea.  All  this  description  is  given  by 
Shri  Jina  Bhadra  Ganiksliama  Shramana  in  the  large  Sanghayani,  Yotis 
Karandak  Payanna,  Chandra  Pannati  and  other  authorised  books. 

Reviewer. — Now  attend,  ye  savants  of  geography  and  astronomy, 
to  this  strange  description.  The  Jainis  believe  there  are  492  in  one 
part  and  innumerable  suns  and  moons  in  the  other  part  of  this  one 
world!  It  is  your  great  good  luck,  ye  who  follow  the  Vedic  religion, 
that  your  study  of  the  Surya  Siddhant  and  other  astronomical  treatises 
has  brought  to  light  the  exact  account  of  geography  and  astronomy. 
Had  you  been  in  the  dense  darkness  of  Jainism,  you  would  have  been 
your  whole  life  in  the  same  darkness  of  ignorance  as  the  Jainis  are  at 
present.  These  ignorant  men  doubted  in  their  mind  that  the  affairs  of 
the  world  could  be  conducted  by  means  of  one  sun  and  one  moon; 
for,  how  can  the  sun  and  moon  come  to  such  a big  world  in  30  ghari, 
the  Jainis  believing  the  world  to  be  larger  than  the  sun  and  other 
stars;  which  is  their  great  error. 


454 


Satyarth  Prakash 


fqrr^T^f^  II — ib.  79. 

It  means  : We  now  give  the  number  of  suns  and  moons  in  the 
world  of  mankind.  There  is  a row  or  line  of  two  suns  and  two  moons 
(shreni).  They  move  at  the  distance  from  one  another  of  one  lac 
yojanas  or  400,000  kos  or  leagues.  Thus  the  line  or  orbit  of  the  sun 
includes  that  of  the  moon,  and  likewise  the  circle  of  the  moon  encloses 
that  of  the  sun.  In  like  manner  there  are  4 lines  or  circles  and  epicircles 
(pankti).  Each  row  or  circle  contains  66  suns  and  66  moons.  These 
4 rows  or  circles  go  round  the  mountain  Meru  in  Jamboo  dwip  or 
(Asia  or  India)  from  right  to  left  and  move  in  the  region  of  mankind; 
that  is  to  say,  when  one  sun  moves  in  the  south  of  the  Meru  of  Jamboo 
dwip,  another  sun  moves  in  the  north.  In  the  same  way,  two  suns 
move  on  each  side  of  the  salt  sea,  6 in  metal  region,  21  in  Black  Sea, 
36  in  Pushkar.  Thus  altogether  66  suns  move  in  the  south  and  66  in 
the  north  in  their  regular  order.  When  all  the  suns  of  both  sides  arc 
added,  they  number  132,  and  likewise  the  rows  of  both  sides  of  the  62 
moons,  they  total  132,  which  move  in  the  human  region.  In  the  same 
way,  there  are  many  rows  of  stars  with  moon. 

Reviewer. — O brothers,  you  see  there  may  be  132  suns  and  132 
moons  shining  in  the  houses  of  the  Jainis.  When  so  many  suns  give 
them  heat,  how  can  they  be  alive?  Also,  the  Jainis  must  be  benumbed 
with  cold  at  night.  Those  who  do  know  geography  and  astronomy, 
believe  such  things,  but  not  others.  When  one  sun  illumines  many 
worlds  as  in  this  world,  what  can  be  said  of  this  little  world?  If  neither 
the  earth  moves  nor  the  sun  moves  round  the  earth,  the  day  and  the 
night  will  be  of  many  years’  duration.  There  is  no  Sumeru  except  the 
Himalayas.  It  is  not  as  big  as  a grain  of  mustard  in  comparison  with 
the  sun.  The  Jainis  cannot  know  these  things  as  long  as  they  arc  in 
their  religion;  rather,  they  will  be  in  the  dark. 

(I  ib.  135. 

— The  pure  {Kevalis)  who  have  acquired  the  merit  of  good 
character,  will  frequent  all  the  14  kingdoms  like  their  own  spiritual 
regions. 

Reviewer. — The  Jainis  believe  that  there  are  14  kingdoms.  On 
the  top  of  the  14th  is  placed  a sedan  chair  (vim  an  a),  called  the  Sarvartli 
siddhi  (attainment  of  all  hopes).  A little  above  the  banner  of  this 
sedan  is  the  rock  of  saints — Siddhu  shila.  Then  there  is  the  divya 
akarha  : wonderful  sky,  called  Shivapur  by  them.  They  go  there  who 
are  pure  (kevalis),  i.e.,  who  have  attained  absolute  knowledge,  omni- 
science, and  perfect  holiness.  They  are  ever  omniscient  by  virtue  of 
their  spirituality — atma  pradesha. — He  is  not  vibliu  : omniscient,  who 
has  a pradesh  : locality.  He  who  is  not  omnipresent,  can  never  be 
omniscient,  and  have  absolute  knowledge.  For,  he  whose  soul  is  tied 
to  one  locality,  goes,  comes,  is  born,  is  saved,  becomes  learned,  igno- 
rant. He  can  never  become  all-pervading,  all-knowing.  As  the 
Tirathankaras  of  the  Jainis  were  human  souls,  limited  in  power  and 
knowledge,  and  confined  to  a locality,  they  can  never  become  all- 
pervading,  all-knowing.  The  Jainis  do  not  believe  in  the  Supreme 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


455 


Being  who  is  unbeginning  and  endless,  all-pervading,  all-knowing,  all- 
holy, knowledge  itself  and  who  has  omniscience  and  other  infinite 
attributes  in  the  proper  sense. 

qPssyH  I n —ib.  241. 

It  means  : People  are  of  two  kinds;  v/z,  uterine  and  non-uterine. 
The  uterine  man  has  at  best  a life  of  3 palyopama  years  and  a body 
of  3 cos. 

Reviewer.  — the  world  will  contain  a few  men  of  the  size  of 
3 kos  (leagues)  and  of  the  age  of  3 palyopama.  If  they  live  3 palyo- 
pama years,  their  children  will  also  have  bodies  of  3 kos  each.  Per- 
haps Bombay  will  accommodate  2 and  Calcutta  3 or  4 such  giants. 
If  it  be  true,  there  being  mentioned  hundreds  of  thousands  of  inhabi- 
tants in  the  cities  of  the  Jainis,  their  towns  must  be  hundreds  of 
thousands  of  kos  or  leagues  in  extent.  In  such  a case  not  even  a 
single  town  will  be  made  in  the  whole  world. 

n -ib.  258. 

— Siddha  Shila  is  12  yojan  above  the  banner  of  the  sedan,  called 
Sarvarth  Siddhi  Its  extent  is  45  lac  yojanas  with  regard  to  its  cavity, 
and  other  dimension.  Its  holy  land  {siddha  bhumi)  is  all  snow  white 
like  Dhavala  arjuna  golden,  pure  as  crystal.  It  is  also  called  Ishat 
and  Fraghhara  by  some.  This  rock  of  the  attaiment  of  all  hopes  is 
invisible  for  12  yojan  from  the  sedan.  It  is  known  to  one  versed  in 
absolute  divine  knowledge.  It  is  8 yojan  thick  in  the  middle,  whence 
it  decreases  in  four  quarters  and  three  points  between  them  to  the 
thinness  of  a fly’s  wing.  The  rock  is  established  in  the  form  of  a 
raised  canopy — Uttan  chatra,  or  an  opened  umbrella.  One  yojan  above 
the  rock  is  a region  called  Lokant,  where  saints,  or  Siddhas,  dwell. 

Reviewer. — On  a little  thinking  it  will  be  seen  that  the  place  of 
salvation  of  the  Jainis  is  45  lac  yojanas  in  extent  situated  above  the 
banner  of  the  sedan,  called  Sarvarth  siddhi  or  attainment  of  all 
hopes.  However  pure  it  may  be,  its  dwellers,  the  saved  people,  are  a 
sort  of  prisoners;  for,  their  going  out  of  it  must  take  olf  their  enjoy- 
ment of  salvation.  They  must  have  no  air  to  cool  them.  All  this  is 
a mere  fabrication  of  imagination  to  cajole  the  ignorant. 

i fqafffg  ii— ib.  267. 

It  means  : Ordinarily,  a being  having  the  body  of  one  sense  and 
of  one  yojan,  should  be  considered  utkrishta  : the  best.  Those  that 
have  two  senses  as  mollusks,  have  a body  of  12  yojan.  The  body  of 
those  that  have  4 senses  as  butterflies,  is  of  4 kos.  Those  who  have 
5 senses,  have  a body  of  1,000  yojanas  or  4,000  kos  or  leagues. 

Reviewer. — If  there  be  men  having  the  body  of  4,000  leagues  or 
kos,  a few  of  them  will  stuff  the  world  to  suffocation.  There  will 
be  no  room  to  move  about.  Then  they  will  ask  the  Jainis  for  a place 
to  live  in  or  a way  to  go  out.  If  it  be  true,  they  may  lodge  them  in 
their  own  houses.  But  then  a man  of  the  body  of  4,000  kos  will 


456 


Satyarth  Prakash 


require  for  his  living  a house  of  32,000  kos  at  least.  To  build  such  a 
house  all  the  wealth  of  the  Jainis  will  not  suffice  Whence  will  they 
get  beams  of  8,000  kos  long  to  roof  the  house.  If  pillars  be  erected 
inside,  the  giant  will  not  be  able  to  enter  it.  Such  a talk  is  all  bosh 
and  sham. 

^ i 

^ I gfJr  tl  - Prak  iv.  4. 

—As  described  before,  the  pieces  of  hair  one  digit  long,  filling  a 
pit  4 square  kos  and  as  many  kos  deep,  number  2,057,152,  and  at 
utmost  330762104,  2465625,  4219960,97536000000000.  If  a palyopam 
eon  contain  as  many  years  as  the  number  of  the  parts  of  hair  equal  to 
the  cube  of  the  above  dimension,  it  will  still  be  a numerable  time. 
Innumerable  divisions  of  a part  of  hair  may  be  imagined;  they  will  be 
innumerable  cilious  atoms  or  romanu. 

Now  look  at  their  method  of  numeration.  How  many 
parts  have  they  made  of  a hair  one  digit  long?  Can  they  be  counted? 
Then  they  divide  the  hair  ad  infinitum  in  the  mind.  Hence  it  is  plain 
that  the  former  division  was  made  with  hand  and  when  the  hand  could 
not  do  it,  they  did  it  in  the  mind.  Can  it  be  ever  possible  that  a hair 
one  digit  long  be  divided  into  innumerable  parts? 

ii  ~ib.  12. 

—The  extent  of  Jambu  dwip  is  a lac  yojanas  and  it  is  hollow. 
There  are  also  7 salt  seas,  7 islands,  twice  as  large  as  Jambu  dwipa. 
In  this  world  there  are  7 countries,  such  as  Jambu  dwipa  and  others 
and  7 seas  as  mentioned  before. 

Reviewer. — The  country  next  to  Jambu  dwip  is  20,000  lac  yojanas, 
the  3rd  4 lac,  4th  8 lac,  5th  16  lac,  6th  32  lac,  and  7th  64  lac,  yojanas. 
The  seas  are  as  large  and  some  of  them  larger  than  these  countries. 
How  can  these  countries  and  seas  be  contained  in  this  world  of  25,000 
miles  in  circumference?  (A  yojana  is  equal  to  3 kos  or  leagues  or 
miles).  Hence,  it  is  all  false. 

\ I 

\ u 

— The  plain  of  Kuru  Chhetra  contain  84,000  rivers. 

Reviewer. — Well.  Kuru  Chhetra  is  a small  tract  of  country. 
Without  seeing  it,  they  have  written  falsehood  about  it,  and  yet  they 
don’t  feel  shame  for  it. 


Seats  of  Jain  Gods 

^ g n — ib.  119. 

It  means  : In  the  south  and  north  of  the  rock  there  is  a chair 
(Sinhasana  : lit.  the  lion’s  seat)  in  each.  The  rock  in  the  south  is 
called  the  Atipandu  kamhala  and  that  in  the  north,  the  Atirakta 
kambala.  (Very  yellow  and  red  blankets)  The  Tirathankaras  are  seated 
in  those  chairs. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


457 


Ri.  viewer, — See,  the  rock  on  which  is  celebrated  the  festivity  of 
the  Tirathankaras’  nativity  is  like  that  of  salvation,  called  the  (Sicldha 
Shihi  : rock  of  saints).  Such  are  their  fraudulent  accounts  of  things 
too  numerous  to  be  mentioned  here.  Their  three  doctrines  are 
good,  namely  to  drink  water  strained  through  cloth,  to  show  com- 
passion in  name  to  animalcules,  not  to  eat  at  night.  All  the  rest  of 
their  doctrines  are  within  the  province  of  impossibility.  These  brief 
hints  will  give  ample  information  to  the  wise.  The  above  account  is 
given  as  a mere  example.  If  all  their  absurdities  be  recorded,  it  will 
fill  as  many  volumes  as  no  man  will  be  able  to  go  through  in  his  life- 
time. The  above  writing  is  like  taking  a grain  of  rice  boiling  in  a pot 
to  know  if  the  whole  rice  is  or  is  not  cooked.  In  the  same  way,  the 
learned  will  understand  all  about  Jainism.  The  learned  do  not  require 
much  exposition;  for,  they  can  know  all  the  purport  from  a single 
instance  Digdarshana  vat  : like  the  sight  of  space  or  four  quarters. 
Furtheron  the  subject  of  Christianity  will  be  treated. 

Note  Vide  Page  412-13.  By  Buddhism  we  mean  that  religion 
which  prevailed  in  India  from  the  time  of  Goutam  Swami,  a disciple  of 
Mahabir  to  that  of  Shankar  Swami.  in  opposition  to  the  Vedic  religion, 
and  which  was  believed  in  by  Emperors  Ashoka  and  Samprati.  The 
Jainis  cannot  in  any  way  escape  from  inclusion  in  the  Buddhists.  The 
word  Jaini  is  derived  from  Jin,  and  Buddhist  from  Buddha,  they  are 
both  synonymous  words.  They  have  the  same  meaning  in  a diction- 
ary. Both  sects  believe  in  Goutam.  The  book,  called  Dip  bansh, 
and  other  ancient  Buddhistic  books  generally  mention  Sakya  Muni 
Goutam  by  the  name  of  Mahabir.  In  his  time  both  sects  must  have 
one  common  faith.  The  reason  why  the  followers  of  Goutam’s 
religion  are  called  the  Buddhists  by  us,  and  not  the  Jainis  is  that  the 
writers  of  other  countries  have  called  them  by  the  name  of  Buddhists. 


Summary 

Atheism  in  India  is  expressed  in  Charvakism,  one  whose  teachers,  Brihaspati 
by  name,  says,  as  all  sentient  beings  are  to  die,  let  a person  be  happy  any  how 
as  long  as  he  or  she  is  alive.  This  world  is  real,  the  next  chimerical.  The  body 
is  made  of  four  elements  whose  union  produces  consciousness,  which  marks  the 
soul.  So  the  soul  dies  with  the  body.  It  is  replied  that  elements  are  inanimate. 
They  cannot  produce  consciousness.  Hence  the  soul  which  is  known  by  conscious- 
ness, is  a distinct  entity.  The  act  of  perception  presupposes  the  perceiver  and 
thing  perceived.  So  the  soul  is  distinct  from  the  matter. 

Charvakism  is  right  in  condemning  the  animal  sacrifices  and  the  offering  to 
the  manes;  for,  if  the  victims  of  sacrifices  go  to  heaven,  sacrificers  should  burn 
their  own  parents  to  send  them  to  heaven;  and  if  food  can  reach  the  departed 
spirits,  it  should  also  reach  persons  in  journey. 

It  is  a calumny  of  the  atheists  to  say  that  the  Vedas  enjoin  animal  sacrifices 
and  so  they  are  written  by  rogues;  for,  there  is  no  sanction  of  animal  sacrifices  in 
the  Vedas.  This  and  other  rites  are  mentioned  in  the  Vedic  commentaries  and 
mythologies  of  the  priests  and  Indian  Bacchanalians,  who  long  ago  ceased  to 
understand  the  Vedic  idiom. 

Buddhism  believes  in  the  existence  of  the  soul.  But  its  theory  of  the  existence 
of  the  world  divides  it  into  four  sects.  1 . The  Madhyamik  sect  believes  in  its 
non-existence.  Its  appearance  is  due  to  time,  in  which  it  also  disappears.  2 The 
Yogachar  sect  believes  that  the  world  is  the  reflection  of  the  mind  It  is  within 
and  not  without  the  mind.  3.  The  Soutrantik  sect  believes  in  the  existence  of  the 
world  through  inference,  there  being  no  immediate  knowledge.  4.  The  Vaibhanik 


458 


Satyarth  Prakash 


sect  believes  in  the  external  existence  of  the  world.  The  great  theory  of  Buddhism 
is  non-existence,  which  is  the  substance  of  the  world  The  refutation  of  this 
theory  of  non-existence  is  that  the  preceiver  of  non-existence  establishes  the  fact 
of  existence. 

The  Tirathankaras  or  pontiffs  of  Buddhism  and  Jainism  are  the  same.  The 
chief  point  of  their  teaching  is  the  riddance  of  all  desires,  which  is  effected  by  the 
practice  of  Yoga.  The  desires  exist  from  eternity  in  the  intellect,  whose  know- 
ledge or  ideas  are  divided  into  5 classes  or  skandhas;  1 . Rupa  or  objective  know- 
ledge through  senses;  2 Vijnana  or  subjective  knowledge  of  sensations;  3.  Vedana 
or  feelings;  4.  Sanjna  or  consciousness  of  the  relation  between  an  object  and  its 
name;  5.  Sanscar  or  impressions  on  the  mind. 

Another  doctrine  is  the  worship  of  the  12  senses,  called  the  Dwadasha 
yatana  : 5 cognitive  senses — seeing,  hearing,  smelling,  tasting,  touching;  5 active 
senses — speaking,  catching,  moving,  generating,  excreting,  will  and  reason.  This 
division  of  the  store  of  intellect  is  not  exhaustive.  The  Buddhists  don’t  believe  in 
God  and  the  Vedas;  but  their  worship  of  the  senses  levels  them  to  sensualists. 

The  Buddhists  believe  in  the  godhead  of  the  Buddha,  the  world  being  the 
home  of  suffering,  and  the  annihilation  of  all  desires  as  salvation.  Well,  it  may 
be  asked  who  was  the  maker  of  the  Buddha  and  his  teacher.  The  world  is  full  of 
both  suffering  and  enjoyment.  The  annihilation  of  desires  takes  place  in  profound 
sleep  Is  it  salvation  ? 

The  Buddhists  believe  the  existence  of  space,  time,  mind  and  matter.  The 
Jainis  believe  in  two  more,  viz,  virtue  and  vice.  But  virtue  and  vice  are  no  sub- 
stances, they  reside  in  mind.  The  Vaisheshik  philosophy  distinctly  enumerates 
nine  categories  which  Buddhism  vainly  tries  to  reduce  to  four.  They  are  five 
elements  and  time,  space,  mind  and  will. 

Jainism  posits  seven  propositions  to  ascertain  existence.  They  are  called 
bhangas  or  breaks,  for  their  theory  being  non-existence,  any  assertion  breaks  their 
original  thesis.  Thus,  it  is  a pitcher,  contradicts  non-existence.  But  all  these  are 
logical  quibbles,  unworthy  of  serious  consideration  regarding  existence. 

Jainism  does  not  believe  in  God  but  asserts  that  the  human  mind  becomes 
God.  Its  24  teachers  have  become  Great  Gods.  It  says  that  God  is  one  who  is 
free  from  desires  and  passions,  which  were  destroyed  by  its  teachers.  There  is  no 
perceptual  evidence  of  God  So  an  inference  of  the  existence  of  God  cannot  be 
admitted.  It  is  asked  who  made  the  Jain  pontiffs  if  there  is  no  God  Those 
teachers  being  human  were  finite  and  limited,  and  so  they  cannot  turn  God,  who  is 
infinite  and  unlimited.  The  proof  of  the  existence  of  God  is  given  in  the  feeling 
of  fear  and  horror  in  the  commission  of  sin,  which  is  as  good  as  immediate  per- 
ception of  God. 

The  Jain  teachers  betray  their  ignorance  in  giving  absurd  account  of  the 
world,  which  disproves  their  godhead.  One  of  the  Jain  books,  called  the  Ratna- 
sarbhag,  which  gives  the  teachings  of  24  Tirathankaras,  says  a louse  is  48  miles 
long,  a fiy  is  8 miles  long,  and  so  forth.  Of  geography,  it  says  that  India  is  400,000 
miles  in  extent  and  is  surrounded  with  a salt  sea  of  800,000  miles.  In  astronomy, 
It  is  of  opinion  that  India  has  two  suns  and  two  moons.  These  assertions  carry 
their  own  refutation  Their  miracles  are  described  in  the  Jain  books  Rice  was 
boiled  on  the  feet  of  Lord  Mahabir  without  scorching  them.  A prostitute  of  Jain 
faith  danced  on  a needle  point  without  being  pricked.  These  and  other 
absurdities  fill  the  sacred  volumes  of  the  Jainis. 

Observation 

The  theoretical  portion  of  Charvakism,  Buddhism  and  Jainism  shows  that  they 
are  sprung  up  in  consequence  of  the  discussions  on  the  Sankhya  philosophy,  which 
therefore  precedes  them.  Charvakism  has  disappeared  with  its  literature.  Buddhism 
and  Jainism  differ  but  in  name.  They  have  the  same  teachers  and  same  beliefs, 
only  that  the  followers  of  Buddhism  eat  flesh  and  worship  the  image  of  the  Buddha, 
while  those  of  Jainism  are  vegetarian  and  worship  the  images  of  Nemi  Nath  and 
Paras  Nath  but  not  of  Goutama  Buddha.  So  Buddhism,  which  is  now  the  state 
religion  of  China  and  Japan,  survives  in  India  in  Jainism  only.  If  they  see  the 
folly  of  bigotry  and  stubbornness  in  discussions  on  philosophical  subjects,  which 
advance  in  philosophy  alone  can  decide,  and  not  the  worship  of  this  man  or  that 
man;  there  is  no  doubt  in  the  union  of  all  under  the  common  designation  of  uni- 
versal religion,  whose  biblepar  excellence  is  the  Veda. 


Refutation  and  Advocation  of  Indian  Religions 


459 


Priority  of  Jainism 

The  well-informed  Jainis  are  also  of  the  opinion  that  they  and  the  Buddhists 
at  first  believed  in  a common  faith  and  were  consequently  one  and  the  same  people. 
Their  separation  was  caused  by  the  dire  necessity  of  preserving  life  during  the 
ravages  of  a fearful  famine.  In  the  horrible  distress  some  people  of  the  Jain  faith 
took  the  flesh  of  dead  animals  to  keep  their  body  and  soul  together.  Thereupon 
the  well-to-do  people  raised  a hue  and  cry  against  their  conduct.  It  is  said  that 
the  general  assembly  convened  in  consequence  excommunicated  the  flesh-eaters. 
So  the  Jain  community  was  split  into  the  Jainis  and  Buddhists  The  probability 
of  this  occurrence  is  evident  from  frequency  of  famine  in  India  and  humanita- 
rianism  of  dietetics  in  Jainism.  Upto  this  date  the  Buddhists  do  not  kill  animals 
themselves,  but  either  purchase  flesh  or  duck  animals  to  death.  Thus  they  still 
respect  the  original  teaching  of  compassion  to  animals.  It  is  said  in  the  Lalii  Vistar 
that  Lord  Buddha  died  of  surfeit  in  pork,  which  shows  he  must  have  been  in  the 
habit  of  eating  flesh.  Thus  the  difference  between  the  Jainis  and  Buddhists  is  not 
of  faith  but  of  food. 

As  Lord  Nemi  Nath,  the  22nd  Tirathanker,  was  a cousin  of  Lord  Krishna, 
in  whose  time,  some  5000  years  age,  there  was  no  Buddhism,  it  is  most  probable 
that  Jainism  is  the  original  religion  and  Buddhism  is  its  offshoot.  The  date  of  the 
advent  of  Lord  Buddha,  given  by  the  Maha-Bodhi  Society,  is  about  2451  year. 
Jainism  was  taught  by  Lord  Rishabha  Deva,  whose  date  is  lost  in  mythology.  His 
name  signifies  the  Lord  of  the  Bull,  which  is  also  the  venical  of  Mahadeva,  viz., 
the  Bull  Nandi.  If  they  are  identical,  they  appear  in  European  mythology  as 
Hercules  and  Dionysus,  whose  date  is  probably  3000  B.C.  Thus  Jainism  precedes 
Buddhism,  which  is  its  flesh-eating  branch. — T. 


Chapter  XIII 

PREFACE 

The  religion  of  the  Bible  refers  not  only  to  the  Christians  but  also 
to  the  Jews  and  other  western  peoples.  The  object  of  reviewing 
Christianity  in  this  13th  Chapter  is  that  the  religion  of  the  Bible 
is  mainly  believed  in  by  the  Christians  and  indirectly  by  the  Jews.  The 
consideration  of  the  main  subject  will  include  that  of  its  side  issues. 
The  religion  of  the  Hebrews  may  also  be  supposed  to  be  included 
in  this  treatment  of  Christianity.  What  is  given  here,  is  taken  from 
the  Bible,  which  is  believed  in  by  the  Christians,  Jews  and  other  wes- 
terners as  the  foundation  of  their  religions.  It  is  translated  into  various 
languages  by  their  great  priests  and  missionaries. 

On  reading  its  Hindi  and  Sanscrit  version,  I got  many  doubts 
about  it,  of  which  some  are  given  here  in  this  1 3th  Chapter  for  the 
consideration  of  the  public.  This  review  is  only  in  the  interest  of  the 
propagation  of  truth  and  the  suppression  of  falsehood  but  not  to 
offend  the  feelings  of  anyone,  or  to  injure  him,  or  to  impute  false 
faults  to  him.  The  object  of  this  review  will  be  at  once  known  from 
the  reading  of  what  follows  as  to  what  kind  of  book  the  Bible  is,  and 
what  kind  of  religion  of  the  Christians  is. 

The  object  of  this  writing  is  to  afford  facility  to  all  in  studying, 
hearing,  writing  on  and  in  treating  of  it,  so  that  they  may  think  its 
pros  and  cons  and  form  their  opinion  about  it.  One  of  its  advantage 
will  be  that  people’s  information  of  religion  will  be  increased,  they  will 
know  truly  to  distinguish  right  from  wrong,  and  the  subject  of  the  com- 
mission and  omission  of  duties,  resulting  in  the  facility  of  their  accepting 
the  truth  and  the  obligatory  duties  and  in  their  rejecting  falsehood  and 
forbidden  acts.  All  men  should  read  the  books  of  others’  religion 
and  express  their  opinion  of  them,  or  they  should  listen  to  others; 
for,  a man  gains  knowledge  by  hearing  others  as  he  becomes  learned 
by  studying.  Though  a listener  may  not  be  able  to  explain  to  others 
what  he  has  heard,  yet  he  understands  it  himself.  They  who  ride  the 
car  of  prejudice,  do  not  see  either  their  own  or  others  faults.  Man 
can  distinguish  right  from  wrong.  He  can  see  well  what  he  has  read 
or  heard.  If  the  people  do  not  know  the  religion  of  others,  they  both 
cannot  converse  with  one  another.  But  the  ignorant  fall  down  into 
a ditch  of  perplexity.  To  prevent  it,  this  book  gives  important  infor- 
mation of  religions  briefly.  The  rest  can  be  made  up  by  the  mind  as 
to  their  truth.  Whatever  truth  acceptable  to  all  is  in  them,  is  equally 
found  in  all.  The  dispute  is  over  what  is  false.  If  one  is  true  and 
another  false,  their  dispute  can  last  for  a short  time.  If  controversia- 
lists dispute  for  the  ascertainment  of  truth  from  untruth,  it  will 
certainly  be  found  out.  Now  I write  briefly  on  Christianity  in  this  13th 
Chapter  for  the  perusal  of  the  public  with  the  view  that  they  should 
know  what  kind  of  religion  it  is.  A word  is  enough  to  the  wise. 


CHRISTIANITY 


WE  now  proceed  to  write  about  the  religion  of  the  Christians  so 
that  it  may  be  known  if  their  religion  is  or  is  not  faultless  and 
their  Bible  is  or  is  not  made  by  God.  Firstly,  to  write  about 
the  Old  Testament. 


Old  Testament 

1. — In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heaven  and  the  earth. 
And  the  earth  was  without  form,  and  void;  and  the  darkness  was 
upon  the  face  of  the  deep.  And  the  Spirit  of  God  moved  upon  the 
face  of  the  waters. — Genesis,  I,  1,2. 

Reviewer-^V^hdii  is  beginning  ? 

Christian— Tht  first  creation  of  the  world. 

R. — Is  this  the  first  creation  ? Was  there  none  before  it  ? 

C. — We  don’t  know  if  there  was  or  was  not  one,  God  knows  it. 

R, — When  you  don’t  know  it,  why  have  you  put  your  faith  in 
this  book  ? As  it  cannot  remove  doubts,  why  do  you  rely  on  it  and 
cajole  others  by  preaching  its  religion  full  of  doubts  to  them  ? Why 
don’t  you  believe  in  the  Vedic  religion,  which  has  no  doubt  whatever 
and  is  able  to  remove  all  doubts  ? How  do  you  know  God  when 
you  don’t  know  anything  of  His  creation.  What  do  you  believe  to 
be  the  sky  ? 

C, — The  vacuum  or  hollowness  and  upper  regions. 

R. — How  was  the  vacuum  produced;  for,  it  is  all  pervading  and 
atomic,  and  it  is  alike  both  up  and  down.  When  the  heaven  was  not 
created,  was  there  a vacuum  or  sky  or  was  there  none  ? If  it  did  not 
exist,  where  was  God,  the  cause  of  the  world,  and  the  human  soul  ? 
Nothing  can  remain  in  existence  without  vacuum.  Hence  the  teach- 
ing of  the  Bible  is  not  reasonable.  Are  God’s  knowledge  and  work 
systematic,  or  have  they  any  method  ? 

C. — God’s  work  is  methodical. 

R. — Then  why  is  it  written  here  that  the  earth  created  by  God 
was  without  form  ? 

Note — Swamiji’s  remarks  show  that  the  Hindi  version  of  the 
Bible  was  not  right.  The  missionaries  in  their  rage  for  the  diffusion 
of  the  Bible,  do  not  see  the  correctness  of  its  translations. — T. 

C. — Without  form  means  that  it  was  rugged,  and  not  level. 

R. — Then  who  made  it  level  ? Is  it  not  now  rugged  ? So  God’s 
work  cannot  be  without  form;  for,  he  is  omniscient.  There  can  never 
be  any  fault  or  mistake  in  his  work.  As  it  is  written  in  the  Bible 
that  the  earth,  God’s  creation,  was  without  form,  it  cannot  be  made 
by  God.  What  is  the  spirit  of  God  ? 


462 


Satyarth  Prakash 


C, — Consciousness. 

R, — Is  it  of  some  form  or  is  it  without  a form  ? It  it  all  per- 
vading infinite,  or  is  it  finite  ? 

C. — It  is  immaterial,  conscious,  and  infinite.  But  it  specially 
dwells  in  Mount  Senai,  the  fourth  heaven,  and  other  regions. 

R. — If  it  is  immaterial  or  formless,  who  has  seen  it  ? An  infinite 
being  cannot  float  upon  the  surface  of  water.  Well,  when  the  spirit 
of  God  was  upon  the  face  of  the  deep,  where  was  God  ? It  is  evident 
that  God’s  body  must  be  somewhere  else,  or  He  must  have  floated  a 
part  of  his  spirit  on  the  surface  of  water.  If  it  is  so,  he  can  never  be 
infinite  and  omniscient.  If  not  infinite,  he  cannot  create,  support, 
preserve  the  world;  he  can  neither  control  and  judge  the  actions  of 
souls,  nor  destroy  the  world.  For,  whatever  is  finite,  has  its  qualities, 
actions  and  nature  also  finite.  Ifitisso,  he  cannot  be  God.  For 
the  Vedas  declare  that  God  is  all-pervading,  infinite  in  his  attributes, 
actions,  and  nature;  truth,  holiness,  intelligence;  eternal,  holy,  wake- 
ful, free  or  absolute,  unbeginning,  endless,  and  so  forth.  If  you  believe 
in  such  a God,  you  will  be  happy;  but  not  otherwise. 

2.  — And  God  said,  Let  there  be  light;  and  there  was  light.  And 
God  saw  the  light,  that  it  was  good. — Gen.  I.  3,4. 

R. — Did  the  material  light  hear  what  God  said  ? If  it  did,  how 
is  it  that  the  light  of  the  sun,  lamp,  and  fire  does  not  hear  what  we 
say  at  present  ? Light  is  material,  it  cannot  hear  what  anybody 
says.  Did  God  know  the  light  to  be  good  when  he  saw  it  ? Did  he 
not  know  it  to  be  so  before  ? If  he  knew  it,  why  did  he  say  it  was 
good  after  seeing  it  ? If  he  did  not  know  it,  he  cannot  be  God  ? 
So  your  Bible  is  not  said  by  God  and  the  God  described  therein  is 
not  omniscient. 

3.  — And  God  said.  Lei  there  be  a firmament  in  the  midst  of  the 
waters,  and  let  it  divide  waters  from  the  waters.  And  God  made 
the  firmament,  and  divided  the  waters  which  were  under  the  firma- 
ment from  the  waters  which  were  above  the  firmament,  and  it  was 
so.  And  God  called  the  firmament  Heaven.  And  the  evening  and 
morning  were  the  second  day. — Gen.  1.  6-8. 

/?.— Did  the  heaven  and  water  hear  the  speech  of  God  ? If 
there  was  no  sky  in  water,  where  would  it  stay  ? In  the  first  verse 
God  created  heaven,  and  then  his  making  it  again  is  senseless.  If 
the  firmament  is  called  heaven,  it  is  all  pervading.  So  the  heaven  is 
everywhere.  Then  it  is  useless  to  say  that  it  is  above.  When  the 
sun  was  not  created,  how  can  day  and  night  happen  ? Such  absurd 
assertions  are  also  found  in  verses  further  on. 

4 — And  God  said,  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image,  after  our 
likeness  : God  created  men  in  his  own  image  in  the  image  of  God 
created  he  him;  male  and  female  created  he  then.  And  God  blessed 
them.— Gen.  I,  26—28. 

R,  — U God  made  man  in  his  own  image,  God  being  holy,  omni- 
scient, happy,  and  having  similar  attributes,  why  was  Adam  not  like 
him  ? As  he  was  not  so,  he  was  not  made  in  God’s  image.  If  God 
made  Adam,  he  made  his  own  image  capable  of  production.  How 
can  it  be  not  impermanent  ? Out  of  what  did  God  make  Adam  ? 


Christianity 


463 


C. — Out  of  earth  God  made  Adam. 

R, — Of  what  was  earth  made  ? 

C. — Out  of  his  own  power. 

Is  God’s  power  unbeginning  or  has  it  a beginning  ? 

C.— It  is  unbeginning. 

R. — If  it  is  unbeginning,  the  cause  of  the  world  will  be  eternal. 
Why  then  do  you  believe  that  existence  came  out  of  non-existence  ? 

C— There  was  nothing  but  God  before  creation. 

R. — If  there  was  nothing,  out  of  what  was  this  world  made  ? 

Is  God’s  power  a substance  or  is  it  a quality  ? If  it  is  a substance, 
there  was  a thing  different  from  God.  If  it  is  a quality,  a thing  or 
substance  cannot  be  made  of  a quality;  as  fire  cannot  be  made  of 
colour  or  form,  or  water  of  taste.  If  the  world  was  made  out  of  God, 
its  qualities,  actions  would  be  like  those  of  God.  But  being  not  like 
God  in  qualities,  action  and  nature,  the  world,  it  is  evident,  is  not 
made  out  of  God;  but  out  of  the  cause  of  the  world,  called  the  atoms 
or  matter.  So  you  should  accept  what  in  written  in  the  Vedas  and 
other  scriptures  with  regard  to  the  origin  of  the  world;  /.e.,  there  is 
matter  out  of  which  God  makes  the  world.  If  the  soul,  the  internal 
form,  and  the  body,  the  external  form,  of  Adam  were  like  those  of 
man,  how  is  it  that  God’s  form  should  not  be  like  man’s?  For,  if 
Adam  was  made  like  God,  God  must  be  like  Adam. 

5. — And  the  Lord  God  formed  man  of  the  dust  of  the  ground 
and  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of  life;  and  man  became  a 
living  soul.  And  the  Lord  God  planted  a garden  eastward  in  Eden; 
and  there  he  put  the  man  whom  he  had  formed.  And  out  of  the 
ground  made  the  Lord  God  to  grow  the  tree  of  life  in  the  midst  of  the 
garden,  and  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil. — Gen.  IL  7 — 9. 

R. — When  God  planted  a garden  in  Eden  and  put  Adam  in  it, 
did  he  not  know  that  he  would  have  to  turn  him  out  of  it?  Also,  if 
God  made  Adam  out  of  dust,  he  could  not  be  after  the  image  of  God. 
But  if  he  was,  God  also  must  have  been  made  out  of  dust  When 
God  breathed  into  his  nostrils,  was  it  the  breath  of  God  or  was  it 
diflferent?  If  different,  Adam  was  not  made  in  the  image  of  God.  If 
the  breath  was  identical  with  God,  Adam  and  God  would  be  alike. 
If  alike,  like  Adam  God  would  be  subject  to  birth,  death,  growth, 
decay,  hunger,  thirst  and  other  ills.  How  then  can  he  be  God?  There- 
fore, this  doctrine  of  the  Old  Testament  does  not  seem  to  be  right,  and 
the  book  itself  is  not  made  by  God. 

6.  — And  the  Lord  God  caused  a deep  sleep  to  fall  upon  Adam, 
and  he  slept;  and  he  took  one  of  his  ribs,  and  closed  up  the  flesh  ins- 
tead thereof;  and  the  rib,  which  the  Lord  God  had  taken  from  man, 
made  he  a woman,  and  brought  her  unto  the  man. — Gen.  IL  21 — 22. 

R. — If  God  made  Adam  out  of  dust,  why  did  he  not  make  his 
wife  out  of  dust  also?  If  he  made  woman  of  a bone,  why  did  he  not 
make  Adam  of  a bone?  Since  she  was  called  woman  because  she  was 
taken  out  of  man,  he  should  also  be  called  man  because  of  his  origin 
from  woman.  They  will  love  each  other,  man  cleaving  unto  woman, 
and  woman  unto  man.  O learned  people,  you  see  how  great  a know- 
ledge of  science  or  philosophy  is  here  depicted  of  God!  If  a rib  was 


464 


Satyarth  Prakash 


taken  out  of  man  to  make  woman,  how  is  it  that  all  men  have  not 
one  rib  less  than  woman!  Also  there  should  be  but  one  bone  in  the 
body  of  woman,  for  she  was  made  of  one  bone  only.  Could  not  the 
body  of  woman  be  made  of  the  material  of  which  the  world  was  made? 
Hence,  this  biblical  doctrine  of  creation  is  against  the  knowledge  of 
creation. 

7. — Now  the  serpent  was  more  subtle  than  any  beast  of  the  field 
which  the  Lord  God  had  made.  And  he  said  unto  the  woman,  yea, 
hath  God  said,  ye  shall  not  eat  of  every  tree  of  the  garden?  And  the 
woman  said  unto  the  serpent  Wc  may  eat  of  the  fruit  of  the  tree  of 
the  garden;  but  of  the  fruit  of  the  tree  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the 
garden,  God  hath  said,  ye  shall  not  eat  of  it  neither  shall  ye  touch  it, 
lest  ye  die.  Then  the  serpent  said  unto  the  woman,  ye  shall  not  surely 
die;  for  God  doth  know  that  in  the  day  ye  eat  thereof,  then  your 
eyes  shall  be  opened  and  ye  shall  be  as  gods,  knowing  good  and  evil. 
And  when  the  woman  saw  that  the  tree  was  good  for  food,  and  that 
was  pleasant  to  the  eyes,  and  a tree  to  be  desired  to  make  one  wise, 
she  took  of  the  fruit  thereof,  and  did  eat,  and  gave  also  unto  her 
husband  with  her;  and  he  did  eat.  And  the  eyes  of  them  both  were 
opened  and  they  knew  that  they  were  naked;  and  they  sewed  fig  leaves 
together,  and  made  themselves  aprons. 

And  the  Lord  God  said  unto  the  serpent  because  thou  hast  done 
this,  thou  art  cursed  above  all  cattle,  and  above  every  beast  of  the 
field;  upon  thy  belly  shalt  thou  go,  and  dust  shalt  thou  eat  all  the 
days  of  thy  life.  And  I will  put  enmity  between  thee  and  the  woman, 
and  between  thy  seed  and  her  seed;  it  shall  bruise  thy  head,  and  thou 
shalt  bruise’his  heel. 

Unto  the  woman  he  said,  I will  greatly  multiply  thy  sorrow  and 
thy  conception;  in  sorrow  thou  shalt  bring  forth  children  and  thy 
desire  shall  be  to  thy  husband,  and  he  shall  rule  over  thee. 

And  unto  Adam  he  said,  because  thou  hast  hearkened  unto  the 
voice  of  thy  wife,  and  hast  eaten  of  the  tree,  of  which  I commanded 
thee,  saying,  thou  shalt  not  eat  of  it;  cursed  is  the  ground  for  thy 
sake;  in  sorrow  shalt  thou  eat  of  it  all  the  days  of  thy  life;  Thorns  also 
and  thistles  shall  it  bring  forth  to  thee;  and  thou  shalt  eat  the  herb  of 
the  field.— Gen.  III.  1—7,  14—18. 

7?. — If  the  God  of  the  Christians  had  been  omniscient,  why 
should  he  have  made  this  roguish  serpent  or  Satan?  If  he  has  made 
him,  God  himself  is  the  author  of  sin.  For,  if  he  had  not  made  him 
evil,  why  would  he  have  done  evil?  As  he  does  not  believe  in  rein- 
carnation why  has  he  made  him  evil  without  any  fault  on  his  part? 
To  speak  the  truth,  he  was  not  a serpent,  but  a man;  for,  if  he  had 
not  been  a man,  how  could  he  have  spoken  the  speech  of  man?  He 
should  be  called  Satan,  who  tells  a lie  and  ensnares  others  into  it.  But 
Satan  is  here  veracious,  and  so  he  did  not  tempt  the  woman;  but  he 
told  the  truth.  God  told  a lie  to  Adam  and  Eve  that  they  would  die 
if  they  ate  the  fruit.  As  the  tree  could  give  knowledge  and  immorta- 
lity; why  was  its  fruit  forbidden  to  be  eaten?  If  be  did  forbid,  God 
is  proved  to  be  false  and  a tempter.  For,  the  fruits  of  the  tree  were 
able  to  give  knowledge  and  case,  but  not  cause  ignorance  and  mortality. 


Christianity 


465 


If  God  forbade  the  eating  of  its  fruit,  why  did  he  make  that 
tree?  If  he  made  it  for  himself,  was  be  ignorant  and  mortal?  If  he 
made  it  for  others,  there  was  no  fault  in  eating  it.  Also,  there  is  no 
tree  at  present  which  confers  knowledge  and  immortality  upon  the 
caters  of  its  fruit.  Has  God  annihilated  its  seed?  Such  a conduct 
makes  a man  a cheat  and  deceitful.  How  is  it  that  God  cannot  be  so 
thereby?  For,  how  can  a man  escape  the  charge  of  fraud  and  decep- 
tion who  cheats  and  deceives  others?  Also,  the  curse  he  pronounced 
against  the  three,  is  without  any  fault  on  their  part.  So  God  is  un- 
just, and  the  curse  should  recoil  upon  him;  for,  he  told  an  untruth 
and  tempted  them.  Look  at  this  philosophy!  Can  there  be  gesta- 
tion and  parturition  without  pain?  Can  anybody  earn  his  bread 
without  the  sweat  of  brows?  Were  there  no  thorns  and  thistles  in  the 
world  before?  If  the  eating  of  herbs  became  proper  by  order  of  God, 
is  not  the  later  flesh  eating  allowed  by  the  Bible  false?  If  the  later 
practice  is  right,  the  previous  one  is  not  right.  When  the  fault  of 
Adam  is  not  established,  why  do  the  Christians  believe  all  mankind 
to  be  sinful  from  being  the  children  of  Adam?  Can  such  a book  and 
a Deity  be  thought  to  be  rational  by  the  learned  and  wise? 

8.  — And  the  Lord  God  said.  Behold,  the  man  is  become  as  one 
of  us,  to  know  good  and  evil;  and  now,  lest  he  put  forth  his  hand, 
and  take  also  of  the  tree  of  life,  and  eat,  and  live  for  ever.  So  he 
drove  out  the  man;  and  he  placed  at  the  east  of  the  garden  of  Eden 
cherubims,  and  a flaming  sword  which  turned  every  way,  to  keep  the 
way  of  the  tree  of  life. — Gen.  III.  22,  24. 

R. — Well,  why  did  God  bear  such  jealousy  and  get  such  a pre- 
posterous notion  that  Adam  was  equal  to  him  in  knowledge  ? Was  it 
a bad  thing  ? Why  did  he  entertain  such  an  idea  at  all  ? For,  none 
can  ever  become  equal  to  God.  But  this  account  proves  at  least  that 
he  was  not  God,  but  some  particular  man.  Wherever  the  Bible  talks 
of  God,  it  describes  him  as  a man.  Now  see  how  great  was  God’s 
regret  at  the  improvement  of  Adam’s  knowledge  ? How  jealous  was 
he  at  his  eating  the  fruit  of  an  immortal  tree  ? Also,  when  he  first 
put  him  in  the  garden  of  Eden,  he  had  no  knowledge  of  the  future, 
that  he  would  have  to  turn  him  out  of  it,  Therefore  the  God  of  the 
Christians  was  not  omniscient.  To  set  a sentry  with  a flaming 
sword,  is  a human  work,  not  divine. 

Cain  and  Abel 

9.  — And  in  process  of  time  it  came  to  pass,  that  Cain  brought 
of  the  fruit  of  the  ground  an  offering  unto  the  Lord.  And  Abel,  he 
also  brought  of  the  firstlings  of  his  flock  and  of  the  fat  thereof.  And 
the  Lord  had  respect  unto  Abel  and  his  offering;  But  unto  Cain  and 
to  his  offering  he  had  not  respect.  And  Cain  was  very  wroth,  and  his 
countenance  fell.  And  the  Lord  said  unto  Cain,  Why  art  thou  wroth 
and  why  is  thy  countenance  fallen  ? — Gen,  IV.  3 — 6, 

R, — If  God  had  not  been  a flesh-eater,  why  should  he  have 
respect  for  Abel  and  his  offering  of  sheep  and  no  respect  for  Cain  and 
his  offering  ? The  cause  of  quarrel  between  Cain  and  Abel  and  that 
of  Abel’s  death  is  God  alone.  The  acts  like  that  of  the  God  of  the 
Christians  are  like  those  of  man.  To  plant  a garden  and  to  frequent  it  is 


466  Satyarth  Prakash 

human.  Hence  it  is  plain  that  the  Bible  is  written  by  men  and  not 
made  by  God. 

10.  — And  the  Lord  God  said  unto  Cain,  Where  is  Abel  thy 
brother  ? And  he  said,  1 know  not;  Am  I my  brother’s  keeper  ? And 
he  said,  what  hast  thou  done  ? The  voice  of  thy  brother’s  blood  crieth 
unto  me  from  the  ground;  And  now  art  thou  cursed  from  the  earth. 
—Gen.  IV.  9—11. 

R, — Did  not  God  know  of  Abel  before  asking  Cain  ? Can  the 
voice  of  blood  call  anybody  from  the  ground  ? All  these  things  savour 
ignorance.  Hence,  this  book  cannot  be  written  either  by  God  or  by 
a learned  man. 

11.  — And  Enoch  walked  with  God  after  he  begat  Methuselah 
300  years.— Gen.  V.  22. 

R. — Well,  if  the  God  of  the  Christians  was  not  a man,  could 
Enoch  walk  with  him  ? Hence,  the  Christians  will  be  happy  if  they 
believe  in  God  immaterial  as  taught  by  the  Vedas. 

12.  — And  daughters  were  born  unto  them  (men).  The  sons  of 
God  saw  the  daughters  of  men  that  they  were  fair;  and  they  took 
them  wives  of  all  which  they  chose.  There  were  giants  in  the  earth 
in  those  days;  and  also  after  that,  when  the  sons  of  God  came  in 
unto  the  daughters  of  men,  and  they  bare  children  to  them,  the  same 
became  mighty  men  which  were  of  old,  men  of  renown.  And  God 
saw  that  the  wickedness  of  man  was  great  in  the  earth,  and  that  every 
imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  was  only  evil  continually. 
And  it  repented  the  Lord  that  he  had  made  man  in  the  earth  and  it 
grieved  him  at  his  heart.  And  the  Lord  said,  I will  destroy  man  whom 
I have  created  from  the  face  of  the  earth,  both  man  and  beast  and  the 
creeping  thing,  and  the  fowls  of  the  air;  for  it  repenteth  that  1 have 
made  them. — Gen.  VI.  1,  2,  4—7. 

R. — Let  it  be  asked  of  the  Christians  who  the  sons  of  God  are, 
and  who  his  wife,  mother-in-law,  father-in-law,  brother-in-law  and 
relatives  are.  For,  marriage  with  the  daughters  of  man  makes  such 
a God  his  relative,  and  the  children  born  of  them  will  be  his  sons  and 
grandsons.  Can  this  account  be  of  God  and  his  book  ? But  it  is 
proved  that  this  book  is  made  by  wild  men.  He  is  not  God,  is  not 
omniscient,  and  who  does  not  know  the  future.  Such  a being  is  man. 
Did  he  not  know  when  he  created  the  world  that  the  people  would  be 
wicked  in  future  ? To  repent,  to  regret,  to  make  a mistake  and  then 
to  be  sorry  for  it,  can  only  be  said  of  the  God  of  the  Christians;  for, 
he  was  not  omniscient  and  clairvoyant  so  that  he  could  be  free  from 
regret  and  repentance  by  the  force  of  tranquility  and  philosophy. 
Strange,  even  beasts  and  birds  turned  wicked  ! Had  he  been  God, 
how  could  he  be  so  sorry  ? Hence,  neither  he  was  God,  nor  can  the 
Bible  be  the  book  of  God  (Ishwarkrita),  If  the  Christians  believed  or 
even  if  they  now  bring  themselves  to  believe  in  the  Deity  sung  by  the 
Vedas  as  absolutely  free  from  all  sin,  sorrow,  pain,  repentance  and 
other  human  ills,  being  Truth,  Intelligence,  and  Happiness  (sat-chid~ 
dnand  sarupa),  they  can  attain  the  object  of  their  human  life  on  earth. 

13.— The  length  of  the  ark  shall  be  300  cubits  and  the  breadth 
of  it  50  cubits,  and  the  height  of  it  30  cubits.  Thou  shalt  come  into 


Christianity 


467 


the  ark,  thou,  and  thy  sons,  and  thy  wife  and  thy  sons’  wives  with 
thee.  And  of  every  living  thing  of  all  flesh,  two  of  every  sort  shalt 
thou  bring  into  the  ark,  to  keep  them  alive  with  thee,  they  shall  be 
male  and  female.  Of  fowls  after  their  kind,  and  of  cattle  after  their 
kind,  of  every  creeping  thing  of  the  earth  after  his  kind,  two  of  every 
sort  shall  come  unto  thee,  to  keep  them  alive.  And  take  then  unto 
thee  of  all  food  that  is  eaten,  and  thou  shalt  gather  it  to  thee;  and  it 
shall  be  for  food  for  thee,  and  for  them.  Thus  did  Noah;  according 
to  all  the  God  commanded  him,  so  did  he. — Gen.  VI.  15,  18 — 22. 

R. — Can  any  learned  person  take  a being,  talking  such  absurdities 
opposed  to  knowledge,  for  God  ? For,  how  can  an  ark  of  the  above 
mentioned  dimensions  contain  a male  and  a female  elephant,  a male 
and  a female  camel  and  other  billions  of  creatures  with  their  food  and 
drink  ? Therefore  the  Bible  is  written  by  men,  and  whoever  has 
written  the  above  cannot  be  learned. 

14. — And  Noah  built  an  altar  unto  the  Lord;  and  took  of  every 
clean  beast,  and  of  every  clean  fowl,  and  olfered  burnt  offerings  on 
the  alter.  And  the  Lord  smelled  a sweet  savour;  and  the  Lord  said 
in  his  heart,  I will  not  again  curse  the  ground  any  more  for  man's 
sake;  for  the  imagination  of  man’s  heart  is  evil  from  his  youth;  neither 
will  I again  smite  any  more  every  thing  living,  as  I have  done.— Gen. 
VIII,  20,21. 

/?.— To  build  an  altar,  and  to  offer  on  it,  proves  that  these 
ceremonies  are  copied  by  the  Bible  from  the  Vedas.  Has  God  a nose 
with  which  he  smelled  the  savour  ? Is  not  the  God  of  the  Christians 
of  limited  knowledge  like  man,  as  now  he  curses  and  now  he  repents  ? 
Sometimes  he  says  he  will  not  curse  which  he  did  before,  and  some- 
times he  says  he  will.  First  he  killed  all  and  now  he  says  he  will  not 
do  so  again.  All  this  looks  childish,  and  not  divine  or  worthy  of  a 
learned  person;  for,  the  assertion  and  vow  of  a learned  person  are 
abiding. 

15.  — God  blessed  Noah  and  his  sons,  and  said  unto  them,  Every 
moving  thing  that  liveth  shall  be  meat  for  you;  even  as  the  green  herb 
have  1 given  you  all  things.  But  flesh  with  the  life  thereof,  which  is 
the  blood  thereof,  shall  ye  not  eat. — Gen.  IX.  1,  3,  4. 

R. — Is  not  the  God  of  the  Christians  devoid  of  mercy  by  killing 
one  to  please  another  ? Are  not  those  parents  great  sinners  who  get 
one  child  murdered  in  order  to  feed  another?  The  above  injunction 
is  like  this  case.  For,  all  creatures  are  like  children  to  God.  Being 
not  so,  the  God  of  the  Christians  acts  like  a butcher.  It  is  he  who 
has  made  all  people  flesh-eaters.  Why  should  he  be  not  sinful  from 
being  cruel  ? 

Babel 

16. — And  the  whole  earth  was  of  one  language,  and  of  one 
speech.  And  they  said.  Go  to,  let  us  build  a city  and  a tower,  whose 
top  may  reach  unto  heaven  ; and  let  us  make  a name,  lest  we  be 
scattered  abroad  upon  the  face  of  the  whole  earth.  And  the  Lord 
came  down  to  see  the  city  and  the  tower,  which  the  children  of  men 
builded.  And  the  Lord  said,  Behold,  the  people  are  one,  and  they 


468 


Satyarth  Prakash 


have  all  one  language;  and  this  they  begin  to  do;  and  now  nothing 
will  be  restrained  from  them,  which  they  have  imagined  to  do.  Go 
to,  let  us  go  down,  and  there  confound  their  language,  that  they 
may  not  understand  one  another’s  speech.  So  the  Lord  scattered 
them  abroad  from  thence  upon  the  face  of  all  the  earth;  and  they 
left  off  to  build  the  city. — Gen.  II  1,  4 — 8. 

R. — When  there  was  one  language  on  the  earth,  the  people 
must  have  been  very  happy  among  themselves.  But  what  can  be 
done  when  the  jealousy  of  the  God  of  the  Christians  confounded  the 
common  language  of  the  people  and  thereby  ruined  them  all?  It  is 
his  great  fault.  Is  it  not  a more  wicked  action  than  any  of  the  Devil’s? 
It  is  also  evident  from  all  this  that  the  God  of  the  Christians  dwelt 
on  Senai  or  other  mounts,  and  he  never  liked  the  progress  of  the 
people.  How  can  this  account  be  of  a learned  j^erson,  much  less  of 
God,  and  the  Bible  be  the  word  of  God  ? 


Abraham 

17.  — Then  he  (Abraham)  said  unto  Serai  his  wife,  Behold  now 
I know  that  thou  art  a fair  woman  to  look  upon.  Therefore  it  shall 
come  to  pass,  when  the  Egyptians  shall  see  thee,  that  they  shall  say, 
This  is  his  wife;  and  they  will  kill  me,  but  they  will  save  thee  alive. 
Say,  thou  art  my  sister;  that  it  may  be  well  with  me  for  thy  sake; 
and  my  soul  shall  live  because  of  thee. — Gen.  XII,  11  — 13. 

Behold,  Abraham  is  regarded  as  a great  prophet  by  the 
Christians  and  Moslems.  His  conduct  is  evil,  inasmuch  as  he  told  a 
lie.  Well,  how  can  they  get  the  path  of  knowledge  and  felicity  who 
believe  in  such  prophets  ? 

Circumcision 

18.  — And  God  said  unto  Abraham,  thou  shalt  keep  my  cove- 
nant, thou  and  thy  seed  after  thee  in  their  generations.  This  is  my 
convenant,  which  ye  shall  keep,  between  me  and  you  and  thy  seed 
after  thee;  Every  man  child  among  you  shall  be  circumcised.  And 
ye  shall  circumcise  the  flesh  of  your  foreskin;  and  it  shall  be  a token 
of  the  covenant  betwixt  me  and  you.  And  he  that  is  eight  days  old 
shall  be  circumcised  among  you,  he  that  is  born  in  the  house,  or 
bought  with  money  of  any  stranger,  which  is  not  thy  seed.  He  that 
is  born  in  thy  house,  and  he  that  is  bought  with  thy  money,  must 
needs  be  circumcised;  and  my  covenant  shall  be  in  your  flesh  for  an 
everlasting  covenant.  And  the  uncircumcised  man  child  whose  flesh 
of  his  foreskin  is  not  circumcised,  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  his 
people,  he  that  hath  broken  my  covenant  —Gen.  XVII,  9 — 14. 

R. — Look  at  this  contradictory  order  of  God.  Had  the  circum- 
cision been  desirable  to  God,  he  would  not  have  made  the  foreskin 
at  all  in  the  beginning  of  creation.  As  it  is,  it  is  protective  like  the 
lid  of  the  eye;  for  the  private  part  is  very  delicate.  If  there  be  no 
foreskin,  the  bite  of  an  ant  or  a slight  hurt  will  cause  much  pain.  It 
prevents  the  drawers  from  being  stained  with  urine  after  making 
water.  For  such  reasons  it  is  bad  to  cut  oflf  the  foreskin.  Why  do 
the  Christians  not  obey  this  ordinance  ? It  is  a standing  order.  Its 


Christianity 


469 


infringement  falsifies  Christ’s  testimony,  that  not  a word  of  the  law 
is  false.  The  Christians  never  think  of  this  ? 

Anthropomorphism 

19.  — When  God  left  off  talking  with  Abraham,  he  went  up.— 
Gen.  XVII.  22. 

R. — This  verse  proves  that  God  was  like  man  or  the  bird  who 
went  up  and  came  down.  He  appears  as  if  he  were  a legerdemain. 

God  eats  flesh 

20.  — And  the  Lord  appeared  unto  him  in  the  plains  of  Mamre; 
and  he  sat  in  the  tent  door  in  the  heat  of  the  day;  And  he  lift  up 
his  eyes  and  looked,  and,  lo,  three  men  stood  by  him;  and  when  he 
saw  them,  he  ran  to  meet  them  from  the  tent  door,  and  bowed  him- 
self toward  the  ground,  and  said,  my  Lord,  if  now  I have  found 
favour  in  thy  sight,  pass  not  away,  1 pray  thee,  from  thy  servant. 
Let  a little  water,  I pray  you,  be  fetched,  and  wash  your  feet  and 
rest  yourselves  under  the  tree;  And  I will  fetch  a morsel  of  bread 
and  comfort  ye  your  hearts;  after  that  ye  shall  pass  on;  for  therefore 
are  ye  come  to  your  servant.  And  they  said,  so  do,  as  thou  hast 
said.  And  Abraham  hastened  into  the  tent  unto  Sarah  and  said, 
make  ready  quickly  three  measures  of  fine  meal,  knead  it  and  make 
cakes  upon  the  hearth.  And  Abraham  ran  unto  the  herd,  and  fetched 
a calf  tender  and  good,  and  gave  it  unto  a young  man;  and  he  hasted 
to  dress  it.  And  he  took  butter  and  milk  and  the  calf  which  he  had 
dressed,  and  set  it  before  them;  and  he  stood  by  them  under  the  tree 
and  they  did  eat.— Gen.  XVIIL  1—8. 

R, — Behold,  ye  good  people  ! How  can  his  votaries  not  eat 
cows,  calves,  and  other  animals,  whose  God  eats  the  flesh  of  a calf? 
Can  he  ever  be  God,  and  not  a cruel  man,  who  has  no  mercy  and  is 
eager  to  eat  flesh?  It  is  not  known  who  the  two  men  were  that 
accompanied  God.  Hence,  it  is  evident  that  there  was  a company 
of  wild  men  whose  chief  is  called  God  by  the  Bible.  For  such  reasons 
enlightened  persons  cannot  accept  the  Bible  to  be  the  word  of  God, 
nor  do  they  legard  as  God  such  a being  as  is  mentioned  in  the  Bible. 

21.  — And  the  Lord  said  unto  Abraham,  Wherefore  did  Sarah 
laugh,  saying  shall  I of  a surety  bear  a child  which  am  old  ? Is  any 
thing  too  hard  for  the  Lord  ? 

R. — Look  at  the  strange  conduct  of  the  God  of  the  Christians 
who  is  peevish  like  children  and  women  and  uses  taunts. 

22.  — Then  the  Lord  rained  upon  Sodom  and  upon  Gomorah 
brimstone  and  fire  from  the  Lord  out  of  heaven.  And  he  overthrew 
those  cities,  and  all  the  plain,  and  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  cities, 
and  that  which  grew  upon  the  ground. — Gen.  XIX.  24,  25. 

/?.— Look  at  the  performance  of  the  God  of  the  Bible,  who 
had  no  pity  even  upon  children.  Were  they  all  sinners  that  he  over- 
threw the  ground  of  all  and  smothered  them  to  death  ? This  deed  is 
against  justice,  mercy,  and  reason.  How  can  these  people  not  do 
iniquities,  whose  God  does  such  horrible  deeds? 


470 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Lot's  incest 

23.  — Come  let  us  make  our  father  drink  wine,  and  we  will  lie 
with  him,  that  we  may  preserve  seed  of  our  father.  And  they  made 
their  father  drink  wine  that  night;  and  the  first  born  went  in,  and  lay 
with  her  father.  Let  us  make  him  drink  wine  this  night  also;  and  go 
thou  in  and  lie  with  him.  Thus  were  both  the  daughters  of  Lot  with 
child  by  their  father. — Gen.  XIX  32—34,  36. 

R. — Lo!  What  a great  enormity  of  the  wickedness  of  the  Chris- 
tians and  others  who  drink  wine  in  the  intoxication  of  which  a man 
and  his  daughters  could  not  refrain  from  cohabitation?  Hence,  good 
men  should  never  think  of  drinking  alcoholic  beverages. 

24.  — And  the  Lord  visited  Sarah  as  he  had  said,  and  the  Lord 
did  unto  Sarah  as  he  had  spoken.  And  Sarah  conceived — Gen. 
XXL  1,  2. 

R. — Now  think  how  Sarah  conceived  after  his  visiting  her!  Is 
there  any  other  cause  of  pregnancy  than  Sarah  and  God  ? It  appears 
that  Sarah  was  conceived  by  the  grace  of  God. 


Hagar,  Abraham’s  Concubine 

25.  — Then  Abraham  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and  took 
bread,  and  a bottle  of  water,  and  gave  it  unto  Hagar,  putting  it  upon 
her  shoulder,  and  the  child,  and  sent  her  away;  she  cast  the  child  under 
one  of  the  shrubs.  And  she  sat  over  against  him  and  wept.  And  God 
heard  the  voice  of  the  lad. — Gen.  XXL  14—17. 

R. — Look  at  the  mischief  of  the  God  of  the  Christians,  for,  lirst 
he  siding  with  Sarah  got  Hagar  turned  out,  then  she  cried  aloud,  but 
he  heaid  the  voice  of  the  child.  How  strange  is  this  affair  1 Perhaps  it 
may  be  that  he  misunderstood  that  the  child  cried.  Can  he  be  God 
and  the  Bible  the  word  of  God  ? It  contains  the  account  of  common 
people.  Except  a little  truth,  it  is  full  of  myth. 

Human  Sacrifice 

26.  — And  it  came  to  pass  after  these  things  that  God  did  tempt 
Abraham  and  said  unto  him,  Abraham,  take  now  thy  son,  thine  only 
son  Issac,  whom  thou  lovest,  and  offer  him  for  a burnt  offering. 
Abraham  bound  Issac  his  son,  and  laid  him  on  the  altar  upon  the 
wood.  And  Abraham  stretched  forth  his  hand,  and  took  the  knife  to 
slay  his  son.  Then  the  angel  of  the  Lord  called  unto  him  out  of 
heaven,  and  said,  Abraham,  lay  not  thine  hand  upon  the  lad,  neither 
do  thou  anything  unto  him;  for  now  I know  that  thou  fearcst  God. — 
Gen.  XXII.  I,  2,  9-12. 

R, — It  is  now  clear  enough  that  the  God  of  the  Bible  is  of  finite 
knowledge  and  not  omniscient.  Abraham  was  also  simple-minded, 
else  he  would  not  have  done  so.  Had  the  God  of  the  Bible  been 
omniscient,  he  would  have  known  the  future  faith  of  Abraham  by 
virtue  of  his  omniscience.  So  it  is  proved  to  demonstration  that  the 
God  of  the  Christians  is  not  omniscient. 


Christianity  471 

Burial 

27. — In  the  choice  of  our  sepulchre  bury  thy  dead,  none  of  us 
shall  withhold  from  thee  his  sepulchre,  but  that  thou  mayest  bury  thy 
dead.—Gen.  XXIII.  6. 

R — The  internment  of  the  dead  is  highly  injurious  to  the  welfare 
of  the  world;  for,  the  decomposition  of  corpses  taint  the  purity  of  the 
air,  filling  it  with  noxious  effluvia,  and  producing  diseases. 

Q. — It  is  not  proper  to  burn  him  whom  we  love.  To  bury  him 
is  like  laying  him  to  sleep.  So  it  is  better  to  bury  the  dead. 

A, — If  you  love  the  dead,  why  don’t  you  keep  the  corpse  in  your 
own  house?  Why  do  you  bury  it  at  all  ? The  soul  which  you  loved, 
is  gone  away.  What  love  can  there  be  for  the  stinking  stuff  that  a 
corpse  is  ? If  you  love  it,  why  do  you  put  it  under  the  ground  ? 

For,  if  you  tell  a man  that  you  wish  to  put  him  under  the  ground, 
he  is  not  pleased  at  all.  Is  it  an  act  of  love  to  throw  dust  and  stones 
upon  the  face,  eyes  and  body  of  your  dear  one;  to  put  a stone  upon 
the  breast  and  to  immure  him  with  brick  and  lime?  To  enclose  a 
corpse  in  a coffin  to  bury  aggravates  decomposition,  which  sends  forth 
noxious  gas,  spoiling  the  air,  and  generating  fearful  diseases. 

2.  A corpse  requires  land  6 cubits  long  and  4 cubits  broad.  This 
calculation  will  show  what  a great  portion  of  the  earth  is  taken  up 
uselessly  by  hundreds,  thousands  and  millions  of  the  dead  in  each 
town.  It  is  not  used  for  the  purpose  of  tillage,  gardening,  or  inhabi- 
tation. Hence,  burying  is  the  worst  of  all  means  of  disposing  the  dead. 
To  drown  a corpse  is  less  evil  than  to  bury  it;  for,  the  aquatic  animals 
fall  at  once  to  cutting,  biting  and  eating  it  away.  But  whatever  of 
bones  and  filth  remains  in  water  will  rot  and  add  to  the  misery  of  the 
world.  To  cast  a corpse  away  in  the  forest  is  less  evil  than  drowning; 
for,  it  is  torn  to  pieces  and  eaten  up  by  carnivorous  animals  and  brids 
of  prey.  Still  whatever  of  the  marrow  of  the  bones  and  excreta  rot 
and  taint  the  air,  will  do  harm  to  the  world  according  to  its  proportion. 
So  cremation  is  the  best  of  all,  for  it  reduces  a corpse  to  atoms  which 
fly  away  in  the  atmosphere. 

Q, — Cremation  also  produces  stench. 

A. — If  a corpse  is  burnt  without  regard  to  proper  method,  it 
produces  a little  stench;  but  it  is  much  less  than  that  produced  by  intern- 
ment, and  other  ways  of  the  disposal  of  the  dead.  But  no  malodour  is 
produced  if  cremation  is  done  according  to  the  infunction  of  the  Vedir 
process  consisting  of  (1)  digging  a grave  3 cubits  deep,  cubits  broad, 
5 cubits  long  sloping  to  J span  in  breadth  at  the  bottom.  (1)  of  taking 
clarified  butter  equal  in  weight  to  the  corpse,  mixed  with  musk  I ratti 
to  1 seer  in  proportion,  1 mausa  of  saffron,  ^ maund  of  sandal  at  the 
least  more  if  liked  to  any  quantity,  agar  tagar,  camphor,  &c.,  wood 
of  palash  <ftc.,  to  be  arranged  in  the  grave  or  altar,  to  place  the  corpse 
upon  the  fuel  arranged  and  there  to  arrange  wood  upon  the  mouth  of 
the  grave  to  one  span  to  the  full.  Then  to  set  fire  to  it  and  offer  oblations 
of  the  prepared  clarified  butter  into  the  fire.  This  ceremony  is  called 
Anteshti  or  final  sacrifice.  It  is  also  called  (he  Narmedha,  purushmedha, 
sacrifices.  If  a man  is  poor  he  should  not  spend  less  than  20  seers  of 
clarified  butter  on  the  pyre.  The  expense  of  cremation  may  be  met 


472 


Satyarth  Prakash 


with  either  by  begging  or  by  a gift  from  the  state.  But  it  must  be 
done  according  to  the  above  method.  If  clarified  butter  and  other 
ingredients  be  not  available,  the  burning  of  corpses  with  wood  only  is 
better  than  their  internment  and  other  ways  of  disposal;  for,  one  rood 
of  land  to  make  a crematorium  will  suffice  for  burning  millions  of  the 
dead.  Also  the  land  is  not  more  spoiled  than  by  burial  and  the  sight 
of  a tomb  inspires  fear.  Thus  burial  is  reprehensible  in  all  respects. 

Abraham’s  God 

28.  — Blessed  be  the  Lord  God  of  my  master  Abraham,  who  hath 
not  left  destitute  my  master  of  his  mercy  and  his  truth.  I being  in  the 
way  the  Lord  led  me  to  the  house  of  my  master’s  brethren. — Gen. 
XXIV.  27. 

R. — Was  he  the  God  of  Abraham  ordy  ? If  God  led  the  way  as 
the  modern  forced  labourers  and  guides  do  by  going  ahead  to  show 
the  way,  why  does  he  not  do  it  at  present  ? Why  does  he  not  talk  with 
men  as  of  old  ? Hence  such  things  cannot  be  said  of  God,  or  of  the 
word  of  God,  but  they  belong  to  wild  men. 

29.  — These  are  the  names  of  the  sons  of  Ishmael.  The  first 
born  of  Ismael,  Neba  Joth,  and  Kedar,  and  Adbcel  and  Mibsam  and 
Mishma  and  Duma  and  Massa;  Hadai  and  Zema,  Jetur  Naphish  and 
Kedemah.-Gen.  XXV.  13—15. 

Ismael 

R, — This  Ishmael  was  born  of  Hagar  the  slave  of  Abraham. 

30.  — I will  make  them  (kids)  savoury  meat  for  thy  father,  such 
as  he  loveth;  and  thou  shalt  bring  it  to  thy  father,  that  he  may  eat, 
and  that  he  may  bless  thee  before  his  death.  And  Rebekah  took 
goodly  raiment  of  her  eldest  son  Esan,  and  put  them  upon  Jacob  her 
younger  son;  and  she  put  the  skins  of  the  kids  of  the  goats  upon  his 
hands  and  upon  the  smooth  of  his  neck;  And  Jacob  said  unto  his 
father,  I am  Esau  thy  first  born;  1 have  done  according  as  thou  hadest 
me,  arise,  I pray  thee,  sit  and  eat  of  my  venison,  that  thy  soul  may 
bless  me.— Gen.  XXVII,  9,10,  15,  16,  19. 

R, — See,  they  cheat  blessings  by  imposture  and  afterwards  set 
up  as  saints  and  prophets  Is  it  not  strange  ? Such  were  the  pro- 
phets of  the  Christians  ! How  can  there  be  a greater  defect  than 
what  is  found  in  their  religion  ? 

Litholatry 

31.  — And  Jacob  rose  up  early  in  the  morning  and  took  the 
stone  that  he  had  put  for  his  pillows,  and  set  it  up  for  a pillar,  and 
poured  oil  upon  the  top  of  it.  And  he  called  the  name  of  that  place 
Bethel.  And  this  stone,  which  I have  set  for  a pillar  shall  be  God’s 
house— Gen.  XXX.  18,  19,  22. 

R, — Look  at  these  acts  of  savages  I They  worshipped  and 
caused  others  to  worship  stones.  The  Mahomedans  call  it  “Bothel 
Mukad  das”  (house  of  God).  Was  that  stone  the  house  of  God,  and 


Christianity 


473 


did  God  live  in  that  stone  alone  ? Bravo,  my  friends  the  Chris- 
tians ! It  is  you  who  are  surely  idolaters. 

32.  — And  God  remembered  Rachel  and  God  hearkened  to  her 
and  opened  her  womb  And  she  conceived  and  bare  a son  and  said 
God  hath  taken  away  my  reproach — Gen.  XXV  22,  23. 

R. — Curious  is  the  God  of  the  Christians  ! What  a great  doctor 
is  he  ? What  were  the  instruments  and  medicines  to  open  the  wombs 
of  women  which  he  employed  ? All  these  things  savour  of  gross 
ignorance. 

Idolatry 

33.  — But  God  came  to  Laban  the  Syrian  in  a dream  by  night, 
and  said  unto  him,  Take  heed  that  thou  speak  not  to  Jacob  either 
good  or  bad.  Because  thou  sore  longest  after  thy  father’s  house,  yet 
wherefore  has  thou  stolen  my  gods  ?— Gen.  XXXI.  24,  30. 

R. — This  passage  of  the  Bible  we  produce  as  a specimen.  God 
came  to  thousands  of  men  in  dreams  and  talked  with  them.  In  wak- 
ing state  he  met,  dined  and  drank  with,  visited  and  took  leave  of  men 
and  did  similar  things  as  recorded  in  the  Bible.  But  it  is  not  known 
if  he  is  or  if  he  is  not  at  present  in  existence.  For,  he  now  never 
meets  anybody  either  in  dream  or  in  waking.  It  is  also  evident  that 
these  savages  believed  in  stone  images  as  gods  and  worshipped  them. 
But  the  God  of  the  Christians,  too,  regards  stone  as  god  ; else  how 
can  the  expression  of  stealing  gods  be  intelligible? 

34.  — And  Jacob  went  on  his  way,  and  the  angels  of  God  met 
him.  And  when  Jacob  saw  them,  he  said,  this  is  God’s  host. — Gen. 
XXXIl.  1,  2. 

R — Now  there  is  not  the  least  doubt  at  all  in  the  God  of  the 
Christians  being  a man;  for.  he  keeps  an  army.  Where  there  is  an 
army,  there  must  be  weapons,  and  he  must  be  engaged  in  war  by 
making  attacks  here  and  there,  also  what  is  the  use  of  maintaining 
an  army  ? 

Wrestling  Match 

35.  And  Jacob  was  left  alone;  and  there  wrestled  a man  with 
him  until  breaking  of  the  day.  And  when  he  saw  that  he  prevailed 
not  against  him,  he  touched  the  hollow  of  his  thigh;  and  the  hollow 
of  Jacob’s  thigh  was  out  of  joint  as  he  wrestled  with  him.  And  he 
said,  let  me  go,  for  the  day  breaketh.  And  he  said,  I will  not  let 
thee  go,  except  thou  bless  me.  And  he  said  unto  him,  What  is  thy 
name  ? And  he  said,  Jacob.  And  he  said,  thy  name  shall  be  called 
no  more  Jacob,  but  Israel,  as  a prince  hast  thou  power  with  God  and 
with  me  and  hast  prevailed.  And  Jacob  asked  him  and  said.  Tell  me, 
I pray  thee,  thy  name.  And  he  said,  wherefore  is  it  that  thou  dost 
ask  after  my  name.  And  he  blessed  him  there.  And  Jacob  called  the 
name  of  the  place  Paniel,  for  I have  seen  God  face  to  face,  and  my 
life  is  preserved.  And  as  he  passed  over  Paniel,  the  sun  rose  upon 
him,  and  he  halted  upon  his  thigh.  Therefore  the  children  of  Israel 
eat  not  of  the  sinew  which  shrank,  which  is  upon  the  hollow  of  the 


474  Satyarth  Prakash 

thigh  unto  this  day,  because  he  touched  the  hollow  of  Jacob’s  thigh 
in  the  sinew  that  shranks. — Gen  XXXII,  24 — 32. 

/?.  — Since  the  God  of  the  Christians  was  a wrestler  of  the  cock- 
pit, he  showed  his  grace  of  giving  sons  to  Sarah  and  Rakhel.  Can  he 
ever  be  God  ? Look  at  the  etiquette,  that  a person  asks  him  his 
name,  and  he  does  not  tell  it  to  him,  God  caused  Jacob’s  sinew  to 
shrink,  but  he  was  defeated.  Had  he  been  a doctor,  he  would  have 
cured  it  also.  As  Jacob  became  lame  from  his  devotion  to  such  a 
God,  other  devotees  of  his  must  also  be  lame.  When  God  was  seen 
face  to  face  and  wrestled  with,  how  can  it  be  possible  without  God 
having  a material  body  ? All  this  account  is  the  child’s  prattle 

36.  And  Er,  Judah’s  first  born,  was  wicked  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord;  and  the  Lord  slew  him.  And  Judah  said  unto  Onan,  go  in 
unto  thy  brother’s  wife,  and  marry  her,  and  raise  up  seed  to  thy  bro- 
ther. And  man  knew  that  the  seed  should  not  be  his;  and  it  came  to 
pass  when  he  went  in  unto  his  brother’s  wife,  that  he  spilled  it  on  the 
ground,  lest  that  he  should  give  seed  to  his  brother.  And  the  thing 
which  he  did  displeased  the  Lord,  wherefore  he  slew  him  also. — Gen. 
XXXVIIL  7—10. 

R, — Now  see  if  these  acts  are  of  man  or  of  God.  When  he 
entered  into  what  is  called  niyoga,  why  was  he  killed  ? Why  did  he 
not  enlighten  his  intellect  ? The  custom  of  niyoga  was  at  first  pre- 
valent every  where.  It  is  now  proved  that  the  doctrine  of  niyoga  was 
believed  in  all  countries. 

Moses 

37.  When  Moses  was  grown,  he  spied  an  Exodus  Hebrew, 
spied  an  Egyptian  sunting  and  one  of  his  brethren  And  he  looked  this 
way,  and  when  he  saw  there  was  no  man,  he  slew  the  Egyptian,  and 
hid  him  in  the  sand.  And  when  he  went  out  the  second  day,  behold, 
two  men  of  the  Hebrews  strove  together  and  he  said  to  him  that  did 
the  wrong,  therefore  smitest  thou  thy  fellow  ? And  he  said,  who 
made  thee  a prince  and  a judge  over  us  ? intendcst  thou  to  kill  me,  as 
thou  killedst  the  Egyptian  ? And  Moses  feared.  It  (Mose’s  rod) 
became  a serpent,  IV,  3, — Ex,  II,  11 — 15. 

R. — Look  at  Moses,  who  is  the  chief  saint,  author,  and  teacher 
of  religion  of  the  Bible,  whose  character  is  marked  with  anger  and 
other  evil  passions,  a murderer,  avoider  of  Government  punishment 
like  a thief.  When  he  concealed  the  fact,  he  must  have  been  a liar. 
Strange  God  met  him  and  he  became  a prophet  and  taught  the 
religion  of  the  Jews,  which  partakes  of  his  character.  Hence  the 
ancients  of  the  Christians  since  Moses  have  been  in  the  state  of 
barbarism  but  not  m that  of  civilisation. 

Hint  to  God 

38.  — And  kill  the  passover.  And  ye  shall  take  a bunch  of 
hyssop,  and  dip  it  in  the  blood  that  is  in  the  bason,  and  strike  the 
lintel  and  the  two  side  posts  with  the  blood  that  is  in  the  bason;  and 
none  of  you  shall  go  out  at  the  door  of  his  house  until  the  morning. 


Christianity 


475 


For  the  Lord  will  pass  through  to  smite  the  Egyptians;  and  when  he 
seeth  the  blood  upon  the  lintel,  and  on  the  two  side  posts,  the  Lord 
will  pass  over  the  door,  and  will  not  suffer  the  destroyer  to  come  in 
unto  your  house  to  smite  you. — Ex.  XII.  21 — 22. 

R. — This  is  like  omens.  Can  he  ever  be  God  omniscient?  He 
knew  the  house  of  an  Israelite  family  when  he  saw  the  marks  of  blood 
upon  doors;  but  he  could  not  know  it  otherwise.  This  act  is  like  that 
of  a man  of  little  sense.  Hence,  it  appears  that  these  things  have 
been  written  by  some  barbarian. 

Miracles 

39.  — And  it  came  to  pass,  that  at  mid-night  the  Lord  smote  all 
the  first  born  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  from  the  first-born  of  the  Pharaoh 
that  sat  on  his  throne  unto  the  first-born  of  the  captive  that  was  in 
the  dungeon;  and  all  the  first  born  of  cattle.  And  Pharaoh  rose  up 
in  the  night,  he,  and  all  his  servants,  and  all  the  Egyptians;  and  there 
was  a great  cry  in  Egypt;  for  there  was  not  a house  where  there  was 
not  one  dead. — Ex.  XIL  29,  30. 

jR.— -Horrible!  The  God  of  the  Christians  was  so  cruel  as  to 
kill  children  and  cattle  at  mid-night  without  any  fault  on  their  part. 
He  showed  no  mercy  to  them.  Was  not  the  hard-heartedness  of  the 
God  of  the  Christians  destroyed  at  the  lamentation  of  the  Egyptians? 
Such  an  act  is  not  even  committed  by  an  ordinary  person,  much  less 
by  God.  But  there  is  no  wonder,  for  it  is  written  in  our  scriptures  : 
Masa  harino  kuto  daya  : (Where  is  mercy  in  the  heart  of  flesh-eaters?) 
As  the  God  of  the  Christians  is  a flesh-eater,  what  business  has  he 
with  mercy? 

Parting  of  Sea 

40. — -The  Lord  shall  fight  for  you.  Speak  unto  the  children  of 
Israel,  that  they  go  forward.  But  lift  thou  up  thy  rod,  and  stretch  out 
thine  hand  over  the  sea,  and  divide  it;  and  the  children  of  Israel  shall 
go  on  dry  ground  through  the  midst  of  the  sea. — Ex.  XIV.  14—16. 

R — Well,  friend,  at  first  God  went  after  the  families  of  Israel 
like  a shepherd  after  his  flock,  but  it  is  not  known  where  he  is  now 
concealed;  else  railways  could  have  been  made  everywhere  in  the  sea, 
which  would  have  done  much  good  to  the  world;  and  there  would 
have  been  no  occasion  for  the  botheration  of  ship-building.  But 
what  can  be  done?  It  is  not  known  where  the  God  of  the  Chris- 
tians is  now  bidden.  There  are  many  acts  of  impossibility  recorded 
in  the  Bible  as  done  by  God  in  league  with  Moses.  But  it  is  evident 
that  the  Christians  arc  as  their  God  and  their  Bible  is  of  the  same 
sort.  Better  such  a God  and  such  a book  be  away  from  us! 

Jealous  God 

41.  — For  I,  the  Lord  thy  God  am  a jealous  God,  visiting  the  ini- 
quity of  the  fathers  upon  the  children  unto  the  third  and  fourth  gene- 
ration of  them  that  hate  me. — Ex.  XX.  5. 


476 


Satyarih  Parkash 


R. — Well,  whose  justice  is  this  act,  which  gives  punishment  to 
four  generations  for  the  fault  of  their  father?  Who  thinks  it  to  be 
right?  Is  it  not  a fact  that  a good  man  has  wicked  children,  and  a 
wicked  man  good  children?  If  it  is  a fact,  how  can  he  punish  upto 
the  fourth  generation?  If  progeny  after  the  fifth  generation  be  wicked, 
how  can  he  withhold  punishment  from  it?  It  is  an  act  of  injustice  to 
punish  anyone  without  a fault. 

Sabbath 

42.  — Remember  the  Sabbath  day,  to  keep  it  holy.  Six  days  shalt 
thou  labor,  but  the  seventh  day  is  the  Sabbath  of  the  Lord  thy  God, 
the  Lord  blessed  the  Sabbath  day. — Ex.  XX.  9 — 11. 

jR.— Is  Sunday  alone  holy  and  the  other  six  days  unholy?  Did 
God  work  very  hard  for  six  days,  so  that  being  tired  he  went  to  sleep 
on  the  seventh  day?  If  he  blessed  Sunday,  what  did  he  do  with  the 
other  six  days?  Perhaps  he  cursed  them!  No  learned  man  can  do  it, 
much  less  God.  What  virtue  is  there  in  Sunday  and  what  vice  in 
Monday  and  other  days,  that  he  made  one  holy  and  others  unholy? 

Narrowness 

43.  — Thou  shalt  not  hear  false  witness  against  thy  neighbour. 
Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour’s  wife,  nor  his  maid  servant,  nor 
his  ox,  nor  his  ass,  nor  anything  that  is  thy  neighbour’s — Ex.  XX.  16,  17. 

R. — Splendid!  It  is  on  this  account  that  the  Christians  fall  upon 
the  property  of  foreigners  as  a thirsty  creature  upon  water,  a hungry 
upon  food.  The  God  of  the  Christians  must  be  like  this  selfish  and 
unjust  teaching.  If  it  be  said  that  all  the  people  of  the  world  are  here 
meant  to  be  neighbours,  who  are  then  those  having  wives  and  maid 
servants  that  are  considered  as  neighbours?  Such  teachings  belong  to 
selfish  men,  and  not  to  God. 

Numbers 

44.  — Now  therefore  kill  every  male  among  the  little  ones,  and 
kill  every  woman  that  hath  known  man  by  lying  with  him.  But  all 
the  women  children,  that  have  not  known  a man  by  lying  with  him, 
keep  alive  for  yourselves. — Num.  XXXI.  17,  18. 

R, — Bravo!  Moses  and  his  God  are  good  fellows  indeed.  They 
did  not  fear  committing  the  murder  of  women,  children,  the  aged, 
and  cattle!  This  passage  clearly  shows  that  Moses  was  voluptous. 
Had  he  been  otherwise,  why  should  he  have  ordered  the  virgin  girls 
to  be  reserved  or  to  be  treated  with  cruelty  and  sensuality? 

45. — He  that  smiteth  a man,  so  that  he  die,  shall  be  surely  put 
to  death.  And  if  a man  lie  not  in  wait,  but  God  deliver  him  into  his 
hand;  then  I will  appoint  thee  a place  whether  he  shall  flee. — Ex.  XXL 
12,  13. 

R, — If  this  justice  of  God  is  right,  why  was  Moses  not  punished 
who  killed  and  buried  a man?  If  it  be  said  that  the  man  was  given 
to  Moses  for  killing,  God  is  proved  unjust  thereby,  for  why  was  Moses 
not  made  to  be  tried  by  the  court  of  the  government? 


Christianity 


All 


46.  And  (Moses’  youngmen)  sacrificed  peace  oflFerings  of  oxen 
unto  the  Lord.  And  Moses  took  half  of  the  blood  and  put  it  in 
basons,  and  half  of  the  blood  he  sprinkled  on  the  altar.  And  Moses 
took  the  blood  and  sprinkled  it  on  the  people,  and  said,  Behold  the 
blood  of  the  covenant,  which  the  Lord  hath  made  with  you  concern- 
ing all  these  words.  And  the  Lord  sath  unto  Moses,  come  up  to  me 
into  the  mount,  and  be  there;  and  I will  give  these  tables  of  stone, 
and  a law,  and  commandments  which  I have  written;  that  thou  mayest 
teach  them. — Ex.  XXIV.  5,  6,  8,  12. 

R. — Now  see,  these  things  belong  to  barbarians.  Are  they  not 
of  them  ? Does  God  take  the  sacrifice  of  oxen  ? Is  not  sprinkling 
blood  upon  the  altar  an  act  of  savages  and  of  uncivilised  men  ? Since 
the  God  of  the  Christians  receives  the  sacrifice  of  oxen,  why  should 
not  his  devotees  stuff  their  belly  with  beef?  Why  should  they  not 
do  harm  to  the  world  ? Since  the  Bible  is  replete  with  such  wicked 
teachings,  the  Christians  want  to  impute  false  allegations  to  the  Vedas; 
but  the  Vedas  are  quite  free  from  such  horried  doctrines.  It  is  also 
plain  that  the  God  of  the  Christians  was  some  mountaineer,  who 
lived  on  a hill.  As  their  God  had  no  ink,  pen,  paper,  nor  did  he  know 
how  to  make  them;  he  wrote  his  orders  on  stone  tablets  and  set  up 
himself  as  God  among  these  barbarians. 

Back  of  God 

47.  — And  he  said,  thou  canst  not  see  my  face;  for  there  shall  no 
man  see  me,  and  live.  And  the  Lord  said.  Behold,  there  is  a place 
by  me  and  thou  shalt  stand  upon  a rock.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass, 
when  my  glory  passeth  by,  that  I will  put  thee  in  a clift  of  the  rock 
and  will  cover  thee  with  my  hand  while  I pass  by  : And  I will  take 
away  mine  hand,  and  thou  shalt  see  ray  back  parts;  but  my  face  shall 
not  be  seen. — Ex.  XXXIIL  20 — 23. 

R. — Now  see,  the  God  of  the  Christians  is  corporeal  like  man, 
and  playing  tricks  with  Moses  set  himself  up  for  God.  Will  not  he 
see  the  form  who  sees  the  back  parts  ? He  must  not  have  covered 
him  with  the  hands;  for,  might  not  he  have  seen  his  form,  when  God 
covered  him  with  the  hands  ? 

Leviticus 

48.  — And  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  and  spoke  unto  him  out 
of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation,  saying.  Speak  unto  the  children 
of  Israel,  and  say  unto  them,  if  any  man  of  you  bring  an  offering 
unto  the  Lord,  ye  shall  bring  your  offering  of  the  cattle,  even  of  the 
herd  of  the  flock.— Lev.  I.  1,2. 

R. — Now  think,  if  the  God  of  the  Christians  who  receives  the 
sacrifice  of  bulls,  cows,  and  other  animals,  and  who  teaches  the 
people  to  make  him  the  sacrifice,  is  he  not  thirsty  of  the  blood  of  cows 
and  other  animals.  It  is  on  this  account  that  he  cannot  be  consi- 
dered as  merciful  and  divine;  rather  he  is  a flesh-eater  and  like  a juggler. 

49.  — And  he  shall  kill  the  bullock  before  the  Lord;  and  the 
priests,  Aaron’s  sons,  shall  bring  the  blood,  and  sprinkle  the  blood 


478 


Satyarth  Prakash 


round  about  the  altar  that  is  by  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  con- 
gregation. And  he  shall  flay  the  brunt  offering  and  cut  it  into  his 
pieces.  And  the  sons  of  Aaron  the  priest  shall  put  fire  upon  the 
altar,  and  lay  the  wood  in  order  upon  the  fire.  And  the  priests, 
Aaron’s  sons,  shall  lay  the  parts,  the  head,  and  the  fat,  in  order  upon 
the  wood  that  is  on  the  fire  which  is  upon  the  altar  : to  be  a burnt 
sacrifice,  an  offering  made  by  fire,  of  a sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord.— 
Lev.  1.  5 — 9. 

R. — Think  a little,  the  votaries  of  God  kill  a bullock  before 
him,  and  he  suffers  them  to  kill  it.  They  sprinkle  the  blood  around 
and  offer  flesh  into  the  fire,  God  smells  it  ! Is  it  less  than  what 
takes  place  in  a butcher's  house  ? Hence  the  Bible  is  not  the  word 
of  God,  nor  can  he  be  God  who  acts  like  a savage. 


Sin  Offering 

50.  — And  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses,  saying  if  the  priest  that 
is  anointed  do  sin  according  to  the  sin  of  the  people;  then  let  him 
bring  for  his  sin  which  he  hath  sinned  a young  bullock  without  blem- 
ish unto  the  Lord  for  a sin  offering;  and  shall  lay  his  hand  upon 
the  bullock’s  head,  and  kill  the  bullock  before  the  Lord. — Lev.  IV 
1,  3,  4. 

R. — Now  see,  to  atone  for  (he  sin  committed,  they  commit  an- 
other sin  again  by  killing  cows,  bullocks,  and  other  animals,  which 
are  best  and  most  useful;  and  that  by  the  order  of  God.  Curious 
and  queer  are  the  Christian  people  who  regard  such  a being  that  does 
and  allows  others  to  do  the  above  horrid  acts  as  God,  and  hope  for 
salvation! 

51.  — When  a ruler  hath  sinned,  he  shall  bring  his  offering,  a 
kid  of  the  goats,  a male  without  blemish,  and  kill  it  before  the  Lord; 
it  is  a sin  offering. — Lev.  IV.  22 — 24. 

R. — Bravo  ! If  it  is  so,  why  should  their  rulers,  judges,  com- 
manders and  others  fear  to  do  sin  ? They  themselves  do  sin  as  they 
like,  and  to  atone  for  it,  they  kills  cows,  kids,  goats,  and  other  inno- 
cent animals.  It  is  the  effect  of  this  teaching  that  the  Christians  do 
not  hesitate  in  killing  any  beast  or  birds.  Listen  ye  Christians,  now 
abandon  this  barbarian  religion  and  accept  the  truly  civilised  religion 
of  the  Vedas,  which  will  give  you  happiness  ! 


Wringing  Pigeon’s  Head 

52. — And  if  he  be  not  able  to  bring  a Jamb,  then  he  shall  bring 
for  his  trespass,  which  he  hath  committed,  two  turtledoves,  or  two 
young  pigeons,  unto  (he  Lord;  and  wring  off  his  head  from  his  neck, 
but  shall  not  divide  it  asunder;  the  priest  shall  make  an  atonement 
for  him  for  sin  which  he  hath  sinned  and  it  shall  be  forgiven  him. 
But  if  he  be  not  able  to  bring  two  turtle-doves,  or  two  young  pigeons, 
then  he  that  has  sinned  shall  bring  for  his  offering  the  tenth  part  of 
an  ephah  of  fineflour  for  sin  offering;  he  shall  put  no  oil  upon  it,  and 
it  shall  be  forgiven  him — Lev.  V.  7,  8,  10,  11,  13. 


Christianity 


479 


Note, — Thanks  to  this  God  ! who  has  made  rules  to  receive 
kids,  lambs,  sheep,  pigeons,  and  flour  He  wrung  the  neck  of  pigeons 
and  took  no  pains  at  all  of  dividing  it  asunder.  From  this  account 
it  appears  that  there  must  be  some  clever  barbarian  who  settled  in  a 
mountain  and  declared  himself  to  be  God.  The  ignorant  savages 
accepted  him  as  such.  He  got  animals,  birds  and  flour  at  his  fortress 
by  cunning  decrees.  His  messengers  called  angles  waited  upon  him. 
Learned  men  should  think  if  the  God  of  the  Bible  who  eats  kids, 
calves,  pigeons  and  fine  flour,  can  be  compared  with  the  God  who 
is  omniscient,  unborn,  immaterial,  omnipotent,  and  having  similar 
other  attributes  as  mentioned  in  the  Vedas. 

R — Hark  ! neither  rich  nor  poor  men  probably  shudder  from 
perpetrating  sins  among  the  Christians,  for  their  God  has  made  atone- 
ment for  sins  easy.  It  is  a strange  doctrine  of  the  Bible  that  a sin 
is  forgiven  without  enduring  pain  by  committing  another  sin;  for, 
they  commit  sin  at  first  and  then  kill  animals  for  its  atonement;  and 
very  gladly  partake  of  the  victim  ! They  eat  the  flesh  of  innocent 
animals  and  are  forgiven  the  sins  committed  ! The  wringing  of  the 
neck  of  a young  pigeon  must  give  him  pain  to  writhe  and  convulse 
for  a long  time.  It  does  not  move  the  heart  of  the  Christians  ? But 
how  can  they  feel  compassion,  for  their  God  enjoins  them  to  commit 
murder.  If  such  is  repentance  for  all  sins,  why  is  the  farce  of  a belief 
in  Christ  made  for  the  forgiveness  of  sins  ? 

Priests’  Frauds 

53.  — The  priest  shall  have  to  himself  eat  the  skin  of  the  burnt 
offering  which  he  hath  offered.  And  all  the  meat  offering  that  is 
baken  in  the  oven  and  all  that  is  dressed  in  the  frying  pan,  and  in  the 
pan,  shall  be  the  priest’s  that  offereth  it. — Lev.  VII.  8,  9. 

R, — We  thought  the  frauds  of  the  priests  and  attendants  of 
Goddess’  shrine  were  wonderfully  cunning;  but  those  of  the  God  of 
the  Christians  and  their  priests  are  a thousand  times  greater;  for, 
they  turned  the  skin  into  money  and  got  sumptuous  food  to  eat. 
They  must  have  had  a gala-day  of  it.  Also  they  must  be  revelling  in 
it  now.  Can  it  be  possible  that  a man  causes  one  of  his  children  to 
be  killed  and  feeds  another  with  the  victim’s  flesh  ? In  the  same  way, 
all  the  people,  and  all  the  beasts  and  birds  are  like  the  children  of 
God.  So  God  cannot  do  such  acts  as  are  ascribed  to  him  by  the 
Bible.  Hence  the  Bible  is  not  the  word  of  God,  nor  are  the  God 
described  therein  and  his  believers  righteous.  Such  absurdities  fill 
the  pages  of  the  Leviticus  and  other  books  of  the  Bible.  They  are 
too  numerous  to  mention  here. 

Numbers 

54.  — The  ass  saw  the  angel  of  the  Lord  standing  in  the  way,  and 
his  sword  drawn  in  his  hand;  and  the  ass  turned  aside  out  of  the  way, 
and  went  into  the  field;  and  Ballaam  smote  the  ass,  to  turn  her  into 
the  way.  And  the  Lord  opened  the  mouth  of  the  ass,  and  she  said 
unto  Ballaam,  what  have  I done  unto  thee,  that  thou  hast  smitten 
me  these  three  times — Num.  XXII  23 — 28. 


480 


Satyarth  Prakash 


R, — Formerly  even  asses  saw  the  angels  of  God;  but  at  present 
neither  bishops,  priests,  missionaries  and  other  religious  men,  nor 
wicked  men,  see  God  or  his  messengers.  Do  God  and  his  angels  ex- 
ist or  do  they  not  exist  now- a- days  ? If  they  do,  are  they  in  very  pro- 
found sleep  ? Have  they  become  sick  or  have  they  gone  to  some 
other  world  ? Are  they  engaged  in  some  other  business?  Are  they 
now  displeased  with  the  Christians  ? It  is  not  known  what  has  be- 
come of  them.  The  inference  is  that  since  they  are  not  now  existent 
and  seen,  they  were  not  existent  and  seen  before;  and  all  this  talk  is 
a mere  fabrication  of  the  imagination. 

The  Second  book  of  Samuel 

55. — And  it  came  to  pass  that  night,  that  the  word  of  the  Lord 
came  unto  Nathan,  saying,  go  and  tell  my  servant  David,  Thus  saith 
the  Lord,  Shalt  thou  build  me  an  house  for  me  to  dwell  in  ? Where- 
as I have  not  dwelt  in  any  house  since  the  time  that  I have  brought 
up  the  children  of  Israel  out  of  Egypt,  even  in  this  day,  but  have 
walked  in  a tent  and  in  a tabernacle. — II  Sam.  VII.  4 — 7. 

God  wants  a house 

R. — There  is  not  the  least  doubt  at  all  now  that  the  God  of  the 
Christians  is  like  man  having  a material  body.  He  complains  that 
he  has  been  wandering  here  and  there  and  wishes  to  dwell  in  a house 
for  rest  if  David  builds  him  one.  How  is  it  that  the  Christians  feel 
no  shame  in  believing  in  such  a God  and  such  a book  as  the  Bible. 
But  poor  fellows;  what  can  they  do,  since  they  are  caught  in  a net 
now,  they  have  to  exert  much  to  get  out  of  it. 

II  Book  of  Kings 

56.  — And  in  the  fifth  month,  on  the  7th  day  which  is  the  19th 
year  of  King  Nebuchadnezzar,  King  of  Babylon,  came  Nebuzar-adan, 
Captain  of  the  guard,  a servant  of  the  king  of  Babylon,  unto  Jerusa- 
lem; and  he  burnt  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  the  king’s  house,  and 
all  the  houses  of  Jerusalem,  and  every  great  man’s  house  he  burnt 
with  fire.  And  the  army  of  the  Chaldees,  that  were  with  the  Captain 
of  the  guard,  brake  down  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  round  about. — II 
K.  XXV.  8—10. 

R. — What  can  be  done  ! The  God  of  the  Christians  got  a house 
made  for  his  rest  by  David;  but  Nebusar-adan  burnt  it  to  ashes.  God 
and  his  army  of  angels  could  do  nothing.  Formerly  their  God  fought 
great  battles  and  came  out  victorious;  but  this  time  he  allowed  his 
own  house  to  be  burnt  and  pulled  down.  It  is  not  known  why  he 
kept  quiet,  and  where  his  host  of  angels  ran  away.  None  came  to 
his  help  in  this  time  of  distress!  It  is  not  known  where  the  valour  of 
God  was  gone  away.  If  this  account  is  right,  all  the  things  of  victory 
mentioned  before  were  useless  and  nonsensical.  Was  he  brave  only 
in  murdering  the  boys  and  girls  of  the  Egyptians  ! Now  he  kept 
quiet  before  brave  warriors.  The  God  of  the  Christians  brought  re- 
proach and  disgrace  upon  him.  Thousands  of  such  idle  tales  are 
found  in  the  Bible. 


Christianity  481 

I Chronicles 

57.  — So  the  Lord  my  God  sent  pestilence  upon  Israel  and  there 
fell  of  Israel  70,000  men.— I Ch.  XXL  14. 

R. — Now  see  the  exploits  of  the  God  of  the  Israelite  Christians. 
He  sent  pestilence  upon  those  families  of  Israel  out  of  anger,  whom 
he  had  given  many  blessings  and  rambled  day  and  night  for  their 
protection  and  preservation.  But  now  he  destroyed  70,000  of  them 
by  plague!  Thus  it  justifies  what  a poet  has  said  : — 

^ l 

— Even  the  favour  of  the  man  is  dangerous,  who  is  now  pleased 
and  now  displeased,  that  is  to  say,  whose  pleasure  and  displeasure 
interchange  every  moment.  The  case  of  the  God  of  the  Christians  is 
something  like  it. 

The  Book  of  Job 

58.  — Again  there  was  a day  when  the  sons  of  God  came  to 
present  themselves  before  the  Lord,  and  Satan  came  also  among 
them  to  present  himself  before  the  Lord.  And  the  Lord  said  unto 
Satan,  From  whence  earnest  thou  ! And  Satan  answered  the  Lord, 
and  said,  from  going  to  and  fro  in  the  eaith,  and  from  walking  up 
and  down  in  it.  And  the  Lord  said  unto  Satan,  Hast  thou  considered 
my  servant  Job,  that  there  is  none  like  him  in  the  earth,  a perfect 
and  an  upright  man,  one  that  feareth  God,  and  escheweth  evil  ! And 
still  he  boldest  fast  his  integrity,  although  thou  movest  me  against 
him,  to  destroy  him  without  cause.  And  Satan  answered  the  Lord, 
and  said,  skin  for  skin,  yea,  all  that  a man  hath,  will  he  give  for  his 
life.  But  put  forth  thine  hand  now,  and  touch  his  bone  and  his 
ilesh,  and  he  will  curse  thee  to  thy  face.  And  the  Lord  said  unto 
Satan,  Behold,  he  is  in  thine  hand;  but  save  his  life.  So  went  Satan 
forth  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  smote  Job  with  sore  boils 
from  the  sole  of  his  foot  unto  his  crown. — Job.  11.  1 — 7. 

R. — Look  at  the  power  of  the  God  of  the  Christians  that  Satan 
alllicts  his  devotee  before  him.  He  neither  punishes  Satan,  nor  pro- 
tects his  followers  from  him.  None  of  the  angels  can  confront  Satan  ! 
Satan  has  individually  struck  fear  in  all.  The  God  of  the  Christians 
is  not  omniscient.  Had  he  been  omniscient,  why  should  he  get  Job 
tried  by  Satan  ? 

Ecclesiastes 

59.  — My  heart  had  great  experience  of  wisdom  and  knowledge. 
And  I gave  my  heart  to  know  wisdom,  and  to  know  madness  and 
folly;  I perceived  that  this  also  is  vexation  of  spirit.  For  in  much 
wisdom  is  much  grief : and  he  that  increaseth  knowledge  increaseth 
sorrow. — Ec.  1.  16 — 18. 

i?.— Now  see,  understanding  and  knowledge  or  wisdom  ari 
synonymous;  but  here  they  are  distinguished  as  separate.  Who  can 
write  but  the  ignorant  that  there  is  sorrow  and  grief  in  the  increase 


482  Satyarth  Prakash 

of  understanding  ? Hence,  the  Bible  is  not  made  by  any  learned  man, 
much  less  God. 

Thus  we  have  given  a few  specimens  of  the  teachings  of  the 
Pentateuch  and  Zabur  (Old  Testament).  We  now  proceed  to  the 
gospels  by  Matthews  and  others  which  are  held  as  great  authorities 
by  the  Christians.  A short  review  of  what  is  called  the  gospel  is 
here  given  in  order  to  know  what  kind  of  book  it  is. 

New  Testament 
St.  Matthew’s  Gospel 

60.  — Now  the  birth  of  Jesus  Christ  was  this  wise.  When  as 
his  mother  was  espoused  to  Joseph,  before  they  came  together,  she 
was  found  with  child  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Behold,  the  angel  of  the 
Lord  appeared  unto  him  in  a dream,  saying,  Joseph,  thou  son  of 
David,  fear  not  to  lake  unto  thee  Mary  thy  wife,  for  that  which  is 
conceived  in  her  is  of  tlie  Holy  Ghost. — Mat.  I.  18,  20. 

R. — No  learned  man  can  believe  these  things;  as  they  are  againt 
the  evidence  of  the  senses,  the  laws  of  nature.  It  is  the  credulity  of 
ignorant  men  and  savages  to  put  faith  in  them,  but  not  the  civilised 
and  learned  people.  Well,  can  anyone  violate  the  order  of  God? 
If  God  trifle  with  his  law,  none  will  obey  it.  But  he  never  does  so, 
as  he  is  omniscient  and  free  from  doubt.  If  the  above  is  a fact, 
whenever  a maiden  is  found  big  with  a child,  the  same  thing  can  be 
said  of  her,  namely,  she  is  pregnant  with  the  grace  of  God;  and  it 
can  be  falsely  given  out  that  an  angel  of  God  declared  it  in  a dream. 
Like  this  impossibility,  the  Puianas  mention  Kunti’s  conception  by 
the  sun.  Such  dogmas  arc  believed  by  those  who  are  mentally  blind 
and  financially  fat  to  be  caught  in  the  priest’s  trap.  It  may  be  that 
when  Mary  was  found  pregnant,  either  she  or  somebody  else  gave 
currency  to  the  impossibility  that  her  pregnancy  was  from  God. 

61.  — Then  was  Jesus  led  up  of  the  spirit  into  the  wilderness  to 
be  tempted  of  the  devil.  And  when  he  had  fasted  40  days  and  40 
nights,  he  was  afterward  an  hungered.  And  when  the  tempter  came 
to  him,  he  said  if  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  command  that  these 
stones  be  made  bread. — Mat.  IV  1-3. 

R. — It  proves  plainly  that  the  God  of  the  Christians  is  not 
omniscient;  for,  if  he  had  been  so,  why  should  he  try  Jesus  by  Satan. 
He  should  know  it  himself.  Well,  if  a Christian  be  kept  hungry  for 
40  days  and  40  nights  at  present,  will  he  live  at  all  ? It  is  also  clear 
that  he  was  not  the  son  of  God,  nor  had  he  power  to  work  any  mira- 
cle, otherwise  why  did  he  not  make  those  stones  bread  before  Satan 
and  why  should  he  be  hungry  ? The  truth  is  that  what  is  made  stone 
by  God,  cannot  be  made  bread  by  anyone.  God,  too,  cannot  reverse 
his  previous  order;  for,  he  is  omniscient  and  all  his  works  are  without 
any  fault  or  flaw. 

Christ  converts  fishermen 

62.  — And  he  saith  unto  them.  Follow  me  and  I will  make  you 
fishers  of  men.  And  they  straightway  left  their  nets,  and  followed 
him.— Mat.  IV.  19,  20. 


Christianity 


483 


R. — It  appears  that  this  summons  was  a sin  against  the  ten 
commandments  of  the  Old  Testament,  namely,  Honour  thy  father  and 
thy  mother  that  thy  days  may  be  long.  Christ  himself  did  not  serve 
his  parents  and  called  away  others  from  the  service  of  their  father 
and  mother.  It  was  from  this  sin  that  his  life  was  prematurely  cut 
off.  It  is  also  evident  that  Christ  preached  a religion  to  entrap  people 
as  fishes  in  a net  to  obtain  the  object.  When  such  was  the  case  with 
Christ,  it  is  no  wonder  that  the  modern  missionaries  should  catch 
people  in  their  net.  For,  as  a fisherman  gains  a great  name  and  plen- 
tiful livehood  by  catching  many  and  large  lishes  in  his  net,  so  does  a 
man  get  much  honour  and  subsistence  by  converting  many  people  to 
his  faith.  It  is  on  this  account  that  these  Christian  missionaries 
ensnare  the  people,  ignorant  of  the  Vedas  and  philosophies,  in  their 
net  and  separate  them  from  their  duty  of  serving  their  parents  and 
family  members  Therefore  it  is  proper  for  all  learned  Aryas  to  be 
on  their  guard  against  their  snares  and  to  be  ever  ready  for  saving 
their  ignorant  brethren  from  falling  thereinto. 

Miracles 

63.  — And  Jesus  went  about  all  Galilee,  teaching  in  their  syna- 
gogues, and  preaching  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom,  and  healing  all 
manner  of  sickness  and  all  manner  of  disease  among  the  people.  They 
(of  Syria)  brought  unto  him  all  sick  people  that  were  taken  with 
divers  diseases  and  torments  and  those  which  were  possessed  with 
devils,  and  those  which  were  lunatics  and  those  that  had  the  palsy; 
and  he  healed  them. — Mat.  IV.  23,  25. 

R. — If  the  pious  frauds  of  charms,  incantation,  benediction, 
paraclete,  exorcising  devils  and  driving  diseases  of  the  present  time 
by  administering  a pinch  of  scrilicial  ashes,  be  true;  the  above  account 
of  the  gospel  will  be  true  also.  Therefore  these  things  are  to  catch 
simple  folks  in  their  snare.  If  the  Christians  believe  these  things  of 
Christ,  why  do  they  not  believe  similar  things  of  the  priests  of  the 
Gods  and  Goddesses  of  India; for,  they  are  all  alike? 

Humility 

64.  — Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit;  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom 
of  heaven.  For  verily  I say  unto  you,  till  heaven  and  earth  pass, 
one  jot  or  one  tittle  shall  in  no  wise  pass  from  the  law  till  all  be  ful- 
filled. Whoever  therefore  shall  break  one  of  these  least  command- 
ments, and  shall  teach  men  so,  he  shall  be  called  the  least  in  the  king- 
dom of  heaven. — Mat.  V.  3,  18,  19. 

R. — If  heaven  is  one,  there  shall  be  one  king.  If  all  the  poor 
go  to  heaven,  who  will  have  the  royal  authority  ? They  will  fall  foul 
among  themselves,  and  upset  the  order  of  goverriment.  It  is  not 
proper  to  understand  paupers  by  the  poor;  also  it  is  not  proper  to 
take  it  to  mean  prideless;  for  the  words  poor  and  prideless  do  not 
mean  the  one  and  the  same  thing.  For,  one  who  is  poor  in  mind, 
has  no  contentment.  Hence,  the  doctrine  is  not  right.  When  the 
heaven  and  earth  pass  away,  the  law  will  also  pass  away.  Such  an 
impermanent  law  is  of  man,  and  not  of  omniscient  God.  It  is  merely 


484  Satyarth  Prakash 

to  tempt  and  threaten  to  say  that  whoever  breaks  the  least  of  the 
commandments  shall  be  called  the  least  in  heaven. 

Inconsistency  of  precept  and  practice 

65.  — Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread.  Lay  not  up  for  your- 
selves treasures  upon  earth. — Mat.  VI.  ll,  19. 

R, — From  this  it  appears  that  when  Christ  was  born,  the  people 
were  barbarian  and  poor.  Christ  was  also  poor  like  others.  So  he 
prays  to  God  for  the  obtainment  of  a day’s  bread  and  teaches  others 
to  pray  likewise.  If  it  is  so,  why  do  the  Christians  amass  wealth? 
They  should  act  on  Christ’s  teaching  and  giving  all  away  in  charity 
should  turn  poor. 

66.  — Not  every  one  that  saith  unto  me,  Lord,  Lord,  shall  enter 
into  the  kingdom  of  heaven; — Mat.  Vil.  21. 

/?. — Now  think,  if  the  great  bishops  and  Christians  believe  this 
saying  of  Christ  to  be  true,  they  should  not  call  him  Lord  or  God. 
But  if  they  don’t  believe  it,  they  will  not  be  able  to  be  free  from  sin. 

67.  — Many  will  say  to  me  that  day  (Lord,  Lord,  have  we  not 
prophesied  in  thy  name).  And  then  I will  profess  unto  them  I never 
knew  you;  depart  from  me,  ye  that  work  iniquity. — Mat.  VIL  22,23. 

R, — ^See  Christ  wished  to  be  the  judge  of  heaven  to  inspire  belief 
into  barbarians.  It  is  merely  a device  to  tempt  simple  folks. 

68.  — Behold  there  came  a leper  and  worshipped  him,  saying,  if 
thou  wilt  thou  canst  make  me  clean  And  Jesus  put  forth  his  hand, 
and  touched  him,  saying,  I will,  be  thou  clean.  And  immediately  his 
leprosy  was  cleansed. — Mat.  VIII  2,3. 

R, — All  these  things  are  for  the  entrapping  of  simpletons.  For, 
if  the  Christians  believe  these  statements  of  the  Bible  to  be  true  though 
against  the  teachings  of  knowledge  and  the  laws  of  nature;  why  don’t 
they  believe  as  truth  what  is  said  in  the  Puranas?  For  example, 
Shukracharya,  Dhanwantry,  Kashyap  and  others  are  mentioned  in  the 
Puranas  and  the  Bharat  as  raising  the  dead  armies  of  many  titans. 
Cach,  the  son  of  Brihaspati,  was  cut  to  pieces  and  given  away  to  beasts 
and  fishes  to  devour;  but  Shukracharya  restored  him  to  life;  afterwards 
Cach  was  killed  and  served  to  Shukracharya  to  eat,  who  then  animated 
him  in  his  stomach  and  brought  him  forth.  He  then  died,  and  Cach 
restored  him  to  life.  Kashyap  resussitated  a tree  with  a man  in  which 
was  reduced  to  ashes  by  Takshak.  Dhanwantry  raised  hundreds  of 
thousands  of  the  dead,  cleansed  as  many  lepers  and  healed  the  sick, 
opened  the  eyes  and  ears  of  the  blind  and  the  deaf  by  millions  Why 
do  you  call  these  tales  to  be  myths?  If  these  tales  arc  myths,  why  are 
not  the  miracles  of  Christ  believed  to  be  myths  also?  If  you  call 
other’s  assertions  to  be  untrue  and  your  myths  true,  why  will  you  not 
be  set  down  as  bigots?  Hence  what  the  Christians  say  savours  of 
bigotry  and  childishness. 

Exorcism 

69. — (When  he  was  come  to  the  country  of  the  Gergesenes), 
there  met  him  two  possessed  with  devils,  coming  out  of  the  tombs, 


Christianity 


485 


exceeding  fierce,  so  that  no  man  might  pass  by  that  way.  And,  behold, 
they  cried  out,  saying,  what  have  we  to  do  with  thee,  Jesus,  thou  son 
of  God?  Art  thou  come  hither  to  torment  us  before  time?  So  the 
devils  besought  him,  saying,  If  thou  cast  us  out,  suffer  us  to  go  away 
into  the  herd  of  swjne.  And  he  said  unto  them,  Go.  And  when 
they  were  come  out,  they  went  into  the  herd  of  swine,  and,  behold, 
the  whole  herd  of  swine  ran  violently  down  a steep  place  into  the  sea 
and  perished  in  the  waters.— Mat.  VIII.  28—33. 

7?.— Well,  a little  thinking  will  show  all  these  things  to  be  untrue; 
for,  dead  cannot  come  out  of  tombs,  they  neither  go  to  nor  talk  with 
anyone.  All  these  things  are  said  of  ignorant  men.  Those  alone  put 
faith  in  such  tales  who  are  quiet  barbarian.  Christ  is  responsible  for 
the  sin  of  causing  death  of  the  swine  and  loss  to  herdsmen.  As  the 
Christians  believe  Christ  to  be  the  forgiver  of  sins  and  sanctifier,  why 
did  he  not  purify  the  devils?  Why  did  he  not  make  good  the  loss  of 
herd  men?  Do  the  educated  and  civilised  Christian  Englishmen  of  the 
present  day  believe  in  these  gossips?  If  the  do;  they  are  sadly  mistaken. 

Forgiveness  of  sins 

70.  — Behold,  they  brought  to  him  a man  sick  of  the  palsy,  lying 
on  a bed;  and  Jesus  seeing  their  faith  said  unto  the  sick  of  the  palsy: 
Son,  be  of  good  cheer,  thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee.  1 am  not  come  to 
call  the  righteous,  but  sinners  to  repentance. — Mat.  IX.  2,  13. 

R. — This  is  as  impossible  as  that  mentioned  above.  As  regards 
the  forgiveness  of  sins,  it  is  merely  to  tempt  the  people  to  their  snare. 
If  a man  drinks  wine  or  decoction  of  hemp  leaves  or  eats  opium, 
another  man  does  not  get  intoxicated.  In  the  same  way,  the  sins 
committed  by  one  man  will  not  fall  to  the  lot  of  another  person.  But 
he  suffers  for  them  who  commits  them.  It  is  the  law  of  God.  If  one 
man  sins  and  another  suffers,  or  a judge  takes  the  consequence  of  sin 
upon  himself,  or  God  does  not  punish  a sinner  as  he  deserves,  he  will 
be  unjust.  Remember,  justice  alone  is  the  dispenser  of  good  to  all, 
but  not  Jesus  or  any  other  person.  Neither  the  good  nor  the  wicked 
have  any  need  of  Christ  and  others,  for  nobody’s  sin  can  be  done  away 
with. 

71.  — Jesus  called  unto  him  his  twelve  disciples,  he  gave  them 
power  against  unclean  spirits,  to  cast  them  out,  and  to  heal  all  manner 
of  sickness  and  all  manner  of  disease.  It  is  not  ye  that  speak,  but 
the  spirit  of  your  father  which  speaketh  in  you.  Think  not  that  I am 
come  to  send  peace  on  earth;  I came  not  to  send  peace,  but  a sword. 
For  I am  come  to  set  a man  at  variance  against  his  father,  and  the 
daughter  against  her  mother,  and  the  daughter-in-law  against  her 
mother-in-law.  And  a man’s  foes  shall  be  they  of  his  own  house- 
hold.—Mat.  X.  1,  20,  34—36. 

i^.— These  were  those  disciples  one  of  whom  betrayed  Christ  for 
30  Rs.  and  the  rest  deserted  his  cause  and  took  to  their  heels.  The 
above  wonders  are  against  knowledge.  The  possession,  obssession  or 
exorcism  of  devils,  the  healing  of  diseases  without  medicines  and 
regulation  of  regimen  are  against  the  laws  of  nature.  Hence  belief  in 
them  is  characteristic  of  ignorance.  If  it  is  not  the  souls  that  speak, 


486 


Satyarth  Prakash 


but  it  is  God  that  speaks,  what  are  the  souls  doing  in  the  body?  The 
consequences  of  speaking  truth  or  falsehood,  i.e.,  happiness  or  misery, 
must  be  borne  by  God  himself.  Hence  it  is  a false  doctrine.  As 
Christ  came  to  create  disunion  and  strife  among  people,  it  is  still 
going  on  among  them.  How  bad  is  it,  seeing  that  disunion  always 
tends  to  the  misery  of  the  people.  The  Christians  have  accepted  it 
as  their  creed.  Since  Christ  regarded  disunion  to  be  good,  why  should 
they  think  it  otherwise?  It  might  be  the  duty  of  Christ  to  make  one’s 
foes  of  his  own  household.  It  is  not  the  duty  of  a good  man. 

Miracle  of  Loaves 

72.  — And  Jesus  sath  unto  them.  How  many  loaves  have  ye  ? 
And  they  said,  seven,  and  a few  little  fishes.  And  he  commanded  the 
multitude  to  sit  down  on  the  ground.  And  he  took  the  seven  loaves 
and  the  fishes,  and  gave  thanks,  and  brake  them,  and  gave  to  his 
disciples,  and  the  disciples  to  the  multitude  And  they  did  all  eat. 
and  were  filled;  and  they  took  up  of  the  broken  meat  that  was  left 
seven  baskets  full.  And  they  that  did  eat  were  four  thousand  men, 
besides  women  and  children. — Mat.  XV.  34 — 39. 

R. — Behold,  is  it  not  like  the  sleight  of  hand  of  modern 
jugglers  and  false  saints.  How  could  other  cakes  come  out  of  those 
cakes  ? If  Christ  had  such  power,  why  did  he  wander  about  in  his 
starvation  to  eat  the  fruit  of  fig  trees  ? Why  did  he  not  make  sweet 
pudding  for  himself  out  of  earth,  water,  stones  and  other  substances. 
All  this  smacks  of  a child’s  play.  These  things  are  like  the  frauds  of 
monks  and  friars,  by  which  they  inveigle  simpletons. 

Inconsistence  of  Justice  and  Forgiveness 

73.  — And  then  he  shall  reward  every  man  according  to  his  work. 
—Mat.  XVI.  27. 

R. — If  the  people  arc  to  be  judged  according  to  their  works,  it 
is  absurd  for  the  Christians  to  preach  forgiveness  of  sins.  If  the  one 
is  true,  the  other  will  be  false.  If  it  be  said  that  those  worthy  of 
forgiveness  are  forgiven,  and  those  who  do  not  deserve  it,  are  not 
given  it;  it  is  also  untenable;  for,  to  judge  all  works  according  to  their 
worth,  is  essential  to  justice  and  perfect  mercy. 

74.  — O faithless  and  perverse  generation,  verily,  I say  unto  you 
if  ye  have  faith  as  a grain  of  mustard  seed,  ye  shall  say  unto  this 
mountain.  Remove  hence  to  yonder  place,  and  it  shall  remove;  and 
nothing  shall  be  impossible  unto  you.— Mat.  XVII.  17,  20. 

R. — Now,  what  the  Christians  preach,  viz..  Come  to  our  faith, 
get  your  sins  forgiven,  obtain  salvation,  and  so  forth,  is  altogether 
false;  for,  if  Christ  had  power  to  forgive  sins,  to  confirm  belief,  to 
sanctify;  why  did  he  not  make  his  disciples  sinless,  faithful,  and  holy  ? 
If  he  could  not  make  those  who  accompanied  him  in  his  wanderings 
holy,  faithful  and  happy;  it  is  not  known  where  he  is  now  after  his 
death  ? He  will  not  be  able  to  make  anybody  holy  at  present.  Since 
the  disciples  of  Christ  had  no  faith  equal  to  a grain  of  mustard  and 
it  is  they  who  have  written  the  gospels;  these  books  can  be  of  no 


Christianity 


487 


authority.  For,  it  is  of  no  avail  to  persons  desirous  of  heaven  to 
believe  in  a book  written  by  unfaithful,  unholy,  and  unrighteous  men. 
It  is  also  clear  from  this  confession  of  Christ  that  if  it  is  right,  no 
Christian  has  faith  equal  to  a grain  of  mustard.  If  he  says  that  he 
has  the  full  complement  or  a modecum  of  faith,  he  is  asked  to  remove 
a mountain  out  of  the  way.  If  it  be  removed,  their  faith  is  not  full, 
but  it  is  equal  to  a grain  of  mustard  If  it  is  not  removed,  it  must 
be  understood  that  the  Christians  have  not  a jot  of  faith  in  them.  If 
it  be  said  that  pride  and  other  passions  are  here  meant  by  the  word 
mountain,  it  is  replied  that  it  is  not  proper;  for  in  that  case  to  raise 
the  dead,  to  give  sight  to  the  blind,  to  cleanse  the  lepers,  and  to  cast 
out  devils  from  those  possessed  with  them,  would  mean  to  awaken 
the  idle,  the  ignorant,  the  sensuous  and  the  bewildered  to  the  sense  of 
their  ultimate  good.  Even  in  this  case,  supposing  it  to  be  right,  it  is 
not  proper,  for,  how  is  it  that  he  could  not  make  such  men  of  his 
own  disciples  ? Hence,  the  above  description  of  impossibilities  reveals 
the  ignorance  of  Christ.  Well,  if  he  had  a little  share  in  knowledge, 
why  should  he  have  uttered  so  entirely  barbarous  a gibber  ? However, 

— The  castor-oil  plant  is  the  tallest  tree  arid  is  considered  as  the 
best  tree  in  the  country  which  has  no  trees.  So,  the  importance  of 
Christ  is  justifiable  in  the  country  of  savages  and  ignorant  people. 
But  what  position  can  be  assigned  to  Christ  in  these  days  of  learning 
and  civilisation  ? 

75.  — Verily,  I say  unto  you,  except  ye  be  converted,  and  become 
as  little  children,  ye  shall  not  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven. — 
Mat.  XVIII.  3. 

R. — If  the  voluntary  conversion  of  the  mind  is  the  passport  of 
heaven,  and  non-conversion  of  hell,  it  stands  to  reason  that  none  can 
take  off  another’s  sin  or  righteousness.  The  advice  of  becoming  as 
little  children  indicates  that  the  teachings  of  Christ  are  opposed  to  the 
facts  of  knowledge  and  the  laws  of  nature.  It  was  also  his  wish  that 
the  people  of  his  time  should  believe  his  teachings  as  children  do,  and 
not  question  their  truth,  but  accept  them  blindly.  Many  Christians 
act  childishly,  else  how  could  they  believe  such  doctrines  contrary  to 
reason  and  experience  ? It  is  also  plain  that,  if  Christ  had  not  been 
innocent  of  knowledge  and  possessed  child- like  understanding,  why 
should  he  have  advised  the  people  to  be  like  little  children  ? For,  it 
is  a fact,  that  a man  wants  to  make  others  like  himself. 

76.  — Verily,  I say  unto  you;  That  a rich  man  shall  hardly  enter 
into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  And  again  I say  unto  you,  It  is  easier 
for  a camel  to  go  through  the  eye  of  a needle,  than  for  a rich  man  to 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God. — Mat.  XIX.  23,  24. 

R. — It  is  plain  that  Christ  was  poor,  and  the  rich  people  of  his 
time  might  not  have  respected  him,  which  called  forth  the  above  ex- 
pression. But  it  is  not  true,  for,  there  are  both  good  and  evil  persons 
among  the  rich.  Whoever  does  good,  gets  reward;  and  whoever  does 
evil,  gets  punishment.  It  is  also  proved  therefrom  that  Christ  believed 
the  kingdom  of  God  to  be  in  some  country,  but  not  everywhere.  If 
it  is  so,  he  is  not  God;  for,  God’s  kingdom  is  everywhere.  It  is  the 


488 


Satyarth  Prakash 


belief  of  the  ignorant  only  to  talk  of  entering  or  not  entering  into  it. 
It  is  also  asked,  if  all  the  Christians  that  are  rich  will  go  to  hell,  and 
all  the  poor  will  go  to  heaven.  Well,  Christ  the  Messiah  should  have 
thought  a little  that  the  poor  do  not  possess  so  much  wealth  as  the 
rich.  So  if  the  rich  use  their  wealth  with  discretion  in  the  cause  of 
righteousness,  they  can  obtain  beatitude,  while  the  poor  will  still 
remain  in  the  ditch  of  wretchedness. 

77. — 'Jesus  said  unto  them.  Verily  I say  unto  you,  that  ye  which 
have  followed  me,  in  the  regeneration  when  the  son  of  man  shall  sit 
in  the  throne  of  his  glory,  ye  also  shall  sit  upon  twelve  thrones,  judg- 
ing the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel.  And  every  one  that  hath  forsaken 
houses,  or  brethren,  or  sisters,  or  father,  or  mother,  or  wife,  or 
children;  or  lands,  for  my  name’s  sake,  shall  receive  an  hundred-fold, 
and  shall  inherit  ever-lasting  life. — Mat.  XIX.  28,  29. 

R. — Now  look  at  the  curious  wish  of  Christ  that  the  people 
caught  in  the  trap  might  not  get  out  of  it  even  after  his  death.  The 
wicked  people  like  him  who  got  his  master  arrested  and  killed  out  of 
his  sordid  avarice  for  30  Rs.  will  sit  in  the  thrones  ! Their  partiality 
will  not  judge  the  families  of  Israel  aright;  but  all  their  evil  deeds  will 
be  forgiven,  and  they  will  judge  other  families.  It  is  therefore  inferred 
from  this  teaching  that  the  Christians  show  a great  deal  of  partiality 
to  their  co-religionists.  If  a white  man  kill  a black  man,  they  generally 
adjudge  him  to  be  not  guilty  out  of  their  partiality  and  acquit  him  of 
all  blame.  The  justice  of  the  heaven  of  Christ  will  probably  be  like 
it.  Also,  there  is  a serious  defect  in  this  doctrine  A man,  for  instance, 
died  in  the  beginning  of  creation  and  another  will  die  in  the  night 
nearly  before  the  day  of  judgment.  The  former  lay  in  suspense 
from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  world  waiting  for  the  day  of 
judgment;  but  the  latter  had  his  trial  at  once  ! How  great  is  this 
injustice  1 Also,  a person  who  goes  to  hell,  will  burn  in  hell  to  the 
end  of  time;  and  one  who  goes  to  heaven,  will  enjoy  happiness  for 
ever.  This  too  is  certainly  a very  great  injustice.  For,  the  fruit  of 
finite  means  and  measures  should  be  finite.  Also,  no  two  souls  have 
equal  merits  and  demerits.  Hence,  the  equitable  rewards  and  punish- 
ments for  various  degrees  of  virtue  and  vice  require  a serial  gradation 
of  many  heavens  and  hells  to  meet  the  end  of  retributive  justice.  But 
the  book  of  the  Christians  nowhere  has  a place  for  retributive  justice. 
Therefore,  the  Bible  cannot  be  the  word  of  God,  nor  can  the  Christ 
be  the  son  of  God.  As  stated  in  the  verse  that  whoever  leaves  his 
father  and  mother  for  his  sake,  will  get  a hundred-fold  of  them,  it  is 
very  absurd;  for,  no  one  can  have  a hundred  fathers  and  a hundred 
mothers,  every  one  has  one  father  and  one  mother.  Again,  it  appears 
that  what  is  written  in  the  book  of  the  Mahomedans,  namely,  a believer 
will  get  72  women  in  the  paradise,  is  taken  from  the  Bible. 

Christ  cures  a fig  tree 

78.  — Now  in  the  morning  as  he  returned  into  the  city,  he  hun- 
gered. And  when  he  saw  a fig  tree  in  the  way,  he  came  to  it,  and 
found  nothing  thereon,  but  leaves  only,  and  said  unto  it.  Let  no  fruit 
grow  on  thee  hence  forward  for  ever.  And  presently  the  fig  tree 
withered  away.— Mat.  XXL  18,  19. 


Christianity 


489 


— All  the  missionaries  and  Christians  say  that  Christ  was  very 
calm  and  tranquil,  and  free  from  anger  and  other  passions;  but  this 
verse  of  the  Bible  shows  Christ  was  of  hot  temper  and  had  no  know- 
ledge ot  the  season  of  trees.  He  behaved  like  a man  of  barbarous  habits. 
For,  what  was  the  fault  of  the  tree  which  was  material  that  he  cursed 
it  and  it  dried  away?  It  must  not  have  been  dried  from  his  execration; 
but  it  is  no  wonder  if  a destructive  medicine  might  have  been  dropped 
on  it  to  effect  its  withering. 

79.  — Immedidateiy  after  the  tribulation  of  those  days  shall  the 
sun  be  darkened,  and  the  moon  shall  not  give  her  light,  and  the  stars 
shall  fall  from  heaven,  and  the  powers  of  the  heaven  shall  be  saken. 
—Mat.  XXIV.  29. 

R — Glory  to  you,  Christ ! what  kind  of  knowledge  was  it  that 
informed  you  of  the  falling  of  stars  ? What  are  the  powers  of  the 
heavens  that  shall  be  shaken  ? Had  Christ  acquired  a little  knowledge, 
he  should  have  certainly  known  that  all  the  stars  are  the  systems  of 
worlds.  How  can  they  fall  ? It  is  plain  that  being  born  in  the  family 
of  a carpenter,  Christ  was  always  engaged  in  hewing,  scraping,  sawing 
and  joining  pieces  of  timber.  When  it  flashed  in  his  mind  that  he 
could  be  a prophet  in  that  barbarous  country,  he  took  to  preaching 
among  the  people.  Several  of  the  doctrines  which  fell  from  his  lips 
were  good,  but  many  were  bad.  The  people  were  barbarous.  They 
took  him  by  his  words.  Had  Europe  been  as  civilised  in  those  days  as 
it  is  now,  his  success  as  the  son  of  God  would  have  been  nil.  It  is  the 
short- coming  of  the  Europeans  that  though  they  are  learned  and 
civilised,  yet  they  do  not  give  up  this  hollow  religion  out  of  their 
bigotry  and  love  for  fashion  and  custom,  and  attend  to  the  eternally 
true  path  shown  by  the  Vedas, 

80.  — Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  my  words  shall  not 
pass  away. — Mat.  XXIV.  35. 

i?.— This  expression  also  smacks  of  ignorance  and  folly.  Well, 
where  can  the  heaven  go  by  passing  away.  When  the  heaven  is  very 
subtle  and  invisible  to  the  eye,  who  can  see  its  passing  away?  It  does 
not  become  a good  man  to  praise  himself. 

Partiality 

81.  — Then  shall  he  say  also  unto  them  on  the  left  hand,  Depart 
from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  ever-lasting  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and 
his  angles.— Mat.  XXV.  41. 

R. — Well,  how  great  is  this  partiality  that  he  gives  heaven  to  his 
own  votaries  and  parts  others  into  ever-lasting  fire?  But  as  it  is 
written  that  heaven  shall  pass  away,  where  will  the  ever-lasting  fire, 
hell  and  paradise  be?  Had  God  not  made  Satan  and  his  angles,  why 
should  he  have  the  trouble  of  making  so  much  preparation  in  the 
creation  of  hell  ? If  Satan  who  is  one  does  not  fear  God,  how  can  he 
be  the  Supreme  Ruler?  For,  being  one  of  his  angels,  Satan  rebelled, 
and  God  could  not  catch  him  at  the  very  beginning  of  his  rebellion 
and  throw  him  into  a jail,  nor  could  he  kill  him.  How  can  he  claim 
Godhead  ? Satan  afflicted  even  Christ  for  forty  days,  and  Christ  could 


490 


Satyarth  Prakash 


do  him  nothing.  It  is  useless  for  Christ  to  be  the  son  of  God.  Hence, 
neither  Christ  is  the  son  of  God,  nor  can  the  God  of  the  Bible  be  the 
true  God. 

Betrayal  of  Christ 

82.  — Then  one  of  the  twelve,  called  Judas  Iscariot,  went  unto 
the  chief  priests,  and  said  unto  them,  What  will  ye  give  me,  and  I will 
deliver  him  unto  you?  And  they  covenanted  with  him  for  thirty 
pieces  of  silver.— Mat.  XXVI.  14,  15. 

R. — Now  see,  all  the  power  of  working  miracles  and  of  Godhead 
of  Christ  is  exposed  here.  For,  even  his  chief  disciple  was  not  re- 
generated and  made  holy  in  his  very  company  while  in  life.  How  can 
he  when  dead  regenerate  and  make  others  holy  ? How  much  deceived 
are  his  followers  in  their  belief  in  him  ? For,  how  can  he  save  anybody 
after  his  death,  since  he  could  not  save  and  sanctify  his  own  disciple 
by  virtue  of  his  actual  company  while  in  life  ? 

83.  — As  they  were  eating,  Jesus  took  bread,  and  blessed  it,  and 
brake  it,  and  gave  it  to  the  disciples,  and  said,  Take,  cat,  this  is  my 
body.  And  he  took  the  cup,  and  gave  thanks  and  gave  it  to  them, 
saying,  Drink  ye  all  of  it,  for  this  is  my  blood  of  the  new  testament. — 
Mat.  XXVI.  26,  27. 

R. — Will  any  civilised  man  say  so?  None  but  an  ignorant  bar- 
barian can  say  to  his  disciples  that  their  eatables  are  his  flesh  and 
drinkables  his  blood.  This  very  doctrine  is  called  by  the  modern 
Christians  the  Lord’s  Supper,  that  is,  they  take  food  and  drink, 
believing  them  as  the  flesh  and  blood  of  Christ.  How  bad  is  this 
belief  ? How  can  they  give  up  taking  other  kind  of  flesh  and  blood, 
who  do  not  abstain  in  belief  from  eating  the  flesh  and  drinking  the 
blood  of  their  teacher? 

Humanity  of  Christ 

84.  — And  he  took  with  him  Peter  and  the  two  sons  of  Zebedee, 
and  began  to  be  sorrowful  and  very  heavy.  Then  said  he  unto  them, 
my  soul  is  exceedingly  sorrowful,  even  unto  death  And  he  went  a 
little  further,  and  fell  on  his  face,  and  prayed,  saying,  O my  Father,  if 
it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  me. — Mat.  XXVI.  37-  39. 

R — See,  had  he  not  been  human,  and  had  he  been  the  son  of 
God,  knowing  what  happens  in  the  three  divisions  of  time,  and  learn- 
ed; he  would  not  have  acted  so  improperly.  Hence,  it  is  plain  that 
all  this  imposture  is  brought  about  either  by  Christ  or  by  his  disciples 
out  of  falsehood;  namely,  he  was  the  son  of  God,  the  knower  of  the 
past  and  future,  and  the  forgiver  of  sins.  It  shows  that  he  was  merely 
an  ordinary,  simple,  honest,  and  ignorant  man,  neither  learned,  clair- 
voyant— yogi,  nor  possessed  of  power. 

Arrest  of  Christ 

85.  — While  he  yet  spoke,  lo,  Judas,  one  of  the  twelve,  came, 
and  with  him  a great  multitude  with  swords  and  staves,  from  the 
chief  priests  and  elders  of  the  people.  Now  he  that  betrayed  him 
gave  them  a sign,  saying.  Whomsoever  I shall  kiss,  that  same  is  he: 


Christianity 


491 


hold  him  fast  And  forthwith  he  came  to  Jesus,  and  said,  Hail, 
Master;  and  kissed  him.  Then  came  they,  and  laid  hands  on  Jesus, 
and  took  him.  Then  all  the  disciples  forsook  him,  and  fled.  At  the 
last  came  two  false  witnesses.  And  said,  this  fellow  said,  I am  able 
to  destroy  the  temple  of  God,  and  build  it  in  three  days.  And  the 
high  priest  arose,  and  said  unto  him.  Answerest  thou  nothing  ? 
What  is  it  which  these  witness  against  thee  ? But  Jesus  held  his 
peace,  and  the  high  priest  answered  and  said  unto  him,  I adjure  thee 
by  the  living  God,  that  thou  tell  us  whether  thou  be  the  Christ,  the 
son  of  God.  Jesus  saith  unto  him.  Thou  hast  said.  Then  the  high 
priest  rent  his  clothes,  saying,  he  hath  spoken  blasphemy;  what  fur- 
ther need  have  we  of  witnesses  ? Behold,  now  ye  have  heard  his  blas- 
phemy. What  think  yet  ? They  answered  and  said.  He  is  guilty  of 
death.  Then  did  they  spit  in  his  face,  and  buffeted  him;  and  others 
smote  him  with  the  palms  of  their  hands.  Saying,  Prophesy  unto  us, 
thou  Christ.  Who  is  he  that  smote  thee  ? Now  Peter  sat  without  in 
the  palace;  and  a damsel  came  unto  him,  saying,  thou  also  wast  with 
Jesus  of  Galilee.  But  he  denied  before  them  all,  saying  I know  not 
what  thou  sayest.  And  when  he  was  gone  out  into  the  porch,  another 
maid  saw  him,  and  said  unto  them  that  were  there,  this  fellow 
was  also  with  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  And  again  he  denied  with  an  oath, 
\ do  not  know  the  man.  Then  on  others  saying,  surely  thou  also  art 
one  of  them,  he  began  to  curse  and  to  swear,  saying,  I know  not  the 
man.— Mat.  XXVI.  47—50,56,61—72,74. 

R. — Now  see  Jesus  had  not  even  so  much  power  and  influence  as 
to  make  his  disciples  firm  in  belief;  and  they  should  not  have  betrayed 
him  even  at  the  risk  of  their  life,  nor  denied  him,  nor  spoken  falsehood, 
nor  sworn  by  false  oaths.  Also,  he  had  no  power  to  work  miracles  as 
mentioned  in  the  Old  Testament,  that  many  people  came  to  beat  the 
guests  of  Lot,  but  two  angels  of  God  made  them  blind.  Though  it  is 
an  impossibility,  yet  Christ  had  not  even  that  much  power  in  him.  But 
how  much  fuss  the  Christians  make  now-a-days  in  extolling  the  name 
of  Christ!  Instead  of  dying  so  disgracefully,  should  he  have  fought  to 
death,  or  absorbed  in  trance,  or  given  up  the  ghost  in  any  other  way; 
it  would  have  been  well.  But  whence  could  he  get  that  sense  without 
the  attainment  of  knowledge  ? Further  on  Christ  says: 

86. — (Thinkest  thou  that)  I cannot  now  pray  to  my  Father,  and 
he  shall  presently  give  me  more  than  twelve  legions  of  angels  ? — 
Mat.  XVI.  53. 

R. — Though  he  threatened  with  his  power  and  praised  his 
Father,  yet  he  could  do  nothing.  See,  how  curious  it  is  that  when 
the  high  priest  asked  him  to  answer  to  the  witnesses  against  him,  he 
held  his  peace  ? It  is  not  well  done  by  Christ.  Had  he  told  there 
what  was  truth,  it  would  have  been  well.  It  was  not  proper  for  him 
to  boast  of  his  power.  It  was  also  not  just  on  their  part  who  accus- 
ed him  of  false  charges  and  smote  him;  for,  his  fault  was  not  of  that 
kind  which  justified  their  treatment  of  him.  But  they  were  barbari- 
ans. How  could  they  know  what  justice  was?  If  Christ  had  not 
set  up  himself  for  the  son  of  God  in  utter  disregard  for  truth,  and  if 
they  had  not  so  maltreated  him  as  they  did,  it  would  have  been  well 
for  both  the  parties.  But  whence  could  they  have  so  much  know- 
ledge, righteousness,  and  justness  in  those  days  of  barbarism  ? 


492 


Satyarth  Prakash 


87.— And  Jesus  stood  before  the  governor,  and  the  governor 
asked  him,  saying.  Art  thou  the  King  of  the  Jews  ? And  Jesus  said 
unto  him.  Thou  sayest.  And  when  he  was  accused  of  the  chief  priests 
and  elders,  he  answered  nothing  Then  said  Pilate  unto  him,  Hearest 
thou  not  how  many  things  they  witness  against  thee  ? And  he  answer- 
ed him  to  never  a word;  in  so  much  that  the  governor  marvelled 
greatly.  Pilate  saith  unto  them.  What  shall  I then  do  with  Jesus 
which  is  called  Christ  ? They  all  say  unto  him,  Let  him  be  crucihed. 
And  when  he  had  scourged  Jesus,  he  delivered  him  to  be  crucified. 
Then  the  soldiers  of  the  governor  took  Jesus  into  the  common  hall, 
and  gathered  unto  him  the  whole  band  of  soldiers.  And  they  stripp- 
ed him,  and  put  on  him  a scarlet  robe.  And  when  they  had  platted 
a crown  of  thorns,  they  put  it  upon  his  head,  and  a reed  on  his  right 
hand  and  they  bowed  the  knee  before  him,  and  mocked  him,  saying, 
Hail,  King  of  the  Jews!  And  they  spit  upon  him,  and  took  the  reed, 
and  smote  him  on  the  head.  And  after  that  they  had  mocked  him, 
they  took  the  robe  off  from  him,  and  put  his  own  raiment  on  him, 
and  led  him  away  to  crucify  him.  And  when  they  were  came  unto 
a place,  called  Golgotha,  that  is  to  say,  a place  of  skull,  they  gave 
him  vinegar  to  drink  mingled  with  gall:  and  when  he  had  tasted 
thereof,  he  would  not  drink.  And  they  crucified  him.  And  they  set 
up  over  his  head  his  accusation  written  Then  were  there  two  thieves 
crucified  with  him,  one  on  the  right  hand,  and  another  on  the  left. 
And  they  that  passed  by  reviled  him,  wagging  their  heads,  and  say- 
ing, Thou  that  destroyest  the  temple,  and  buildest  it  in  three  days, 
save  thyself.  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  come  down  from  cross. 
Likewise  also  the  chief  priests  mocking  him,  with  the  scribes  and 
elders  said.  He  saved  others;  himself  he  cannot  save.  If  he  be  the 
King  of  Israel,  let  him  now  come  down  from  the  cross,  and  we  will 
believe  him.  He  trusted  in  God;  let  him  deliver  him  now,  if  he  will 
have  him:  for  he  said,  I am  the  Son  of  God.  The  thieves  also,  which 
were  crucified  with  him,  cast  the  same  in  his  teeth.  Now  from  the 
noon  (sixth  hour)  there  was  darkness  over  all  the  land  unto  the  after- 
noon (ninth  hour).  And  about  the  ninth  hour  Jesus  cried  with  a 
loud  voice,  saying,  Eli  Eli  lama  sabach  tliani  ? that  is  to  say,  My  God, 
my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?  Some  of  them  that  stood  there, 
when  they  heard  that,  said,  this  man  calleth  for  Elias.  And  straight- 
way one  of  them  ran,  and  took  a sponge,  and  filled  it  with  vinegar, 
and  put  it  on  a reed,  and  gave  him  to  drink.  Jesus,  when  he  had 
cried  again  with  a loud  voice,  yielded  up  the  ghost. — Mat.  XXVII. 
11  — 14,  22-24,  26-34,37-50. 

R. — Certainly  those  wicked  people  did  evil  to  Jesus.  But  he  was 
also  to  blame.  For  no  one  is  the  son  of  God,  nor  is  he  the  father  of 
anyone.  For,  if  he  be  the  father  of  anybody,  he  will  be  the  father- 
in-law,  brother-in-law,  relative  of  somebody.  When  the  governor 
had  asked,  he  should  have  said  in  answer  what  the  truth  was.  It  is 
right,  that  if  the  previous  miracles  were  true,  he  should  have  come 
down  from  the  cross  and  converted  all  the  people  to  be  his  disciples. 
Had  he  been  the  son  of  God,  God  would  have  saved  him.  Had  he 
been  omniscient,  why  should  he  have  tasted  the  vineger  mixed  with 
gall  to  know  it  and  then  to  reject  it  ? He  should  have  known  it 
beforehand.  Had  he  had  the  power  of  working  miracles,  why  should 


Christianity 


493 


he  have  expired,  by  crying  aloud  repeatedly  ? It  should  be  remem- 
bered that  whatever  cleverness  may  be  used,  what  is  truth  and  what 
is  falsehood,  will  come  to  light  in  the  long  run.  It  is  also  proved  that 
Jesus  was  somewhat  better  than  the  barbarians  of  that  time.  But  he 
was  not  a miracle  worker,  nor  the  son  of  God,  nor  a learned  man;  for, 
had  he  been  so,  why  should  he  have  undergone  that  terrible  suffering? 

Resurrection 

88.  — And,  behold,  there  was  a great  earthquake,  for  the  angel 
of  the  Lord  descended  from  heaven,  and  came,  and  rolled  back  the 
stone  from  the  door,  and  sat  upon  it.  He  is  not  here;  for  he  is  risen, 
as  he  said,  (Come,  see  the  place  where  the  Lord  lay).  And  as  they 
went  to  tell  his  disciples,  behold,  Jesus  met  them,  saying,  All  hail. 
And  they  came  and  held  him  by  the  feet,  and  worshipped  him.  Then 
said  Jesus  unto  them,  Be  not  afraid,  go  tell  my  brethren,  that  they  go 
into  Galilee,  and  there  shall  they  see  me.  Then  the  eleven  disciples  went 
away  into  Galilee,  into  a mountain,  where  Jesus  had  appointed  them. 
And  when  they  saw  him,  they  worshipped  him  : but  some  doubted. 
And  Jesus  came  and  spake  unto  them,  saying.  All  power  is  given 
unto  me  in  heaven  and  in  earth.  And  lo,  I am  with  you  always,  even 
unto  the  end  of  the  world. — Mat.  XXVIII.  2,  6,  9,  10,  16 — 18,20. 

R. — What  is  said  above  in  the  verses,  does  not  deserve  credence; 
for  it  is  against  the  teachings  of  knowledge  and  the  laws  of  nature. 
Is  the  tribunal  of  God  made  like  a country  court,  or  collectorate,  that 
God  has  messengers  called  angles,  and  sends  them  here  and  there  on 
errand  and  they  descend  from  above  ? Is  it  true  that  he  went  to 
heaven  and  came  to  life  in  that  body  ? For,  when  the  women  held 
him  by  the  feet  and  worshipped  him,  was  it  the  same  body  ? Why 
was  it  not  rotten  in  three  days  ? It  is  but  arrogance  to  talk  of  one’s 
own  power  over  all.  It  is  impossible  to  meet  disciples  and  talk  with 
them  after  death.  If  these  things  are  true,  why  do  some  people  not 
rise  from  the  dead  ? Why  do  they  not  go  to  heaven  in  the  same 
body  ? So  much  for  the  gospel  of  Matthews.  Now  we  pass  on  to 
the  gospel  by  Mark. 

St.  Mark’s  Gospel 

89.  — Is  not  this  the  carpenter  ? — Mark  VI.  3 

R. — As  a matter  of  fact,  Joseph  was  a carpenter,  so  was  Christ. 
For  many  years  he  worked  as  a carpenter.  Afterwards  trying  to  turn 
a prophet,  he  set  up  as  the  son  of  God,  and  the  barbarians  believed 
him  to  be  so.  Hence,  he  showed  much  cleverness,  hacking,  hewing, 
breaking,  splitting,  being  his  duty. 

No  Trinity 
St.  Luke’s  Gospel 

90.  — And  Jesus  said  unto  him,  Why  callest  thou  me  good  ? 
None  is  good,  save  one,  that  is,  God. — Luke,  XVIII.  19. 

R. — When  Christ  himself  says  there  is  but  one  God,  whence 
have  the  Christians  taken  their  three  Gods,  namely,  the  Father,  Son, 
and  Holy  Ghost  ? 


494 


Satyarth  Prakash 


91.  — He  (Pilate)  sent  him  to  Herod.  And  when  Herod  saw 
Jesus,  he  was  exceeding  glad;  for  he  was  desirous  to  see  him  for  a 
long  season,  because  he  had  heard  many  things  of  him;  and  he  hoped 
to  have  seen  some  miracle  done  by  him.  Then  he  questioned  with  him 
in  many  words;  but  he  answered  him  nothing. — Luke,  XXI1I.7 — 9. 

No  Miracle 

R. — This  account  is  not  found  in  the  gospel  by  Matthews. 
Hence,  these  witnesses  are  unreliable;  for  witnesses  should  say  alike. 
Also,  if  Christ  had  been  clever  and  able  to  perform  miracles,  he  should 
have  answered  to  Herod  and  showed  him  some  miracle.  Therefore 
it  is  plain  enough  that  Christ  had  neither  the  virtue  of  knowledge  nor 
the  power  of  miracles  at  all. 

St.  John’s  Gospel 

92.  — In  the  beginning  was  the  Word,  and  the  Word  was  with 
God,  and  the  Word  was  God.  The  same  was  in  the  beginning  with 
God.  All  things  were  made  by  him;  and  without  him  was  not  any- 
thing made  that  was  made.  In  him  was  life;  and  the  life  was  the  light 
of  man. — John  I.  1 — 4. 

R — \ word  cannot  be  in  the  beginning  without  a speaker.  If 
the  word  was  with  God,  the  above  assertion  was  useless.  Also,  the 
word  can  never  be  God.  For,  when  it  was  with  God  in  the  begin- 
ning, it  is  inconsistent  to  say  that  it  was  in  the  beginning  or  it  was 
God.  The  creation  can  never  be  possible  by  means  of  a word,  un- 
less its  cause  be  present.  Also  the  maker  can  create  the  world  silently 
without  a word.  In  whom  was  life  or  what  was  life  ? The  expression 
in  the  verse  above  will  oblige  you  to  regard  life  as  unbeginning.  If 
it  is  unbeginning,  the  breathing  of  life  into  the  nostrils  of  Adam  is 
contradicted  hereby.  Also,  is  life  the  light  of  people  only  and  not  of 
the  lower  animals  ? 

93  — And  supper  being  ended,  the  devil  having  now  put  into 
the  heart  of  Judas  Iscariot,  Simon’s  son,  to  betray  him. — John  XIII.  2. 

/?.--This  is  not  right;  for,  the  Christians  are  asked,  if  the  devil 
tempts  all  to  evil,  who  tempts  the  devil  to  evil  ? If  it  is  replied  that 
the  devil  is  tempted  to  evil  of  his  own  accord,  then  persons  can  be 
evil  by  themselves.  So  what  is  the  use  of  Satan  ? But  if  the  maker 
and  tempter  of  Satan  is  God,  then  the  God  of  the  Christians  is  the 
very  devil  of  devils.  God  himself  tempts  all  by  means  of  Satan.  Can 
such  be  the  work  of  God  ? The  truth  is  that  they  may  be  devils  if 
there  be  devils,  who  made  this  book  of  the  Christians  and  Christ  the 
son  of  God.  But  neither  it  can  be  the  word  of  God,  nor  can  the  deity 
described  in  it  be  God,  nor  can  Christ  be  the  son  of  God. 

Mansions  in  Heaven 

94. — Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled;  ye  believe  in  God,  believe 
also  in  me.  In  my  Father’s  house  are  many  mansions;  if  it  were  not 
so,  I would  have  told  you.  I go  to  prepare  a place  for  you.  And  if 
I go  and  prepare  a place  for  you,  1 will  come  again,  and  receive  you 


Christianity 


495 


unto  myself;  that  where  I am,  there  ye  may  be  also.  Jesus  saith  unto 
him  (Thomas),  I am  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life;  no  man  cometh 
unto  the  Father,  but  by  me.  If  ye  had  known  me,  ye  should  have 
known  my  Father  also, — John,  XIV.  1 — 4,  6,  7. 

Now,  think  of  these  expressions  of  Christ.  Are  they  less 
in  force  than  pious  frauds  ? Had  he  not  spread  such  a net  of  his 
religion,  who  would  have  been  canght  in  it  ? Had  Christ  got  the 
monopoly  of  his  Father  ? If  he  is  in  the  power  of  Christ,  he  being 
dependent  on  others  is  no  God.  For,  God  does  not  accept  anybody’s 
recommendation.  Did  nobody  obtain  God  before  Christ  ? How  he 
lays  the  bait  of  mansions  ? He  is  simply  arrogant  who  calls  himself  to 
be  the  way,  truth,  and  life.  Therefore,  the  above  dogma  can  never 
be  true. 

95. — Verily,  verily,  I say  unto  you,  he  that  believeth  on  me,  the 
works  that  I do  shall  he  do  also;  and  greater  works  than  these  shall 
he  do;  because  I go  unto  my  Father. — John  XIV.  12. 

R. — Now  think,  why  the  Christians  who  repose  full  faith  in 
Christ,  cannot  do  the  works  of  raising  the  dead,  and  other  miracles. 
If  they  cannot  do  wonders  by  means  of  faith,  the  Christ  also  did  none 
of  them.  This  fact  should  be  borne  in  mind;  for  Christ  himself 
sa>s  that  they  also  will  do  wonders.  Yet  none  of  the  Christians  can 
perform  any  miracle  in  the  present  time.  Well,  who  has  lost  the  sight 
of  the  mind  that  will  believe  Christ  to  be  the  worker  of  miracles  ? 

96.  — They  might  know  thee  the  only  true  God. — John.  XVII.  3. 

R. — When  there  is  but  one  unitary  God,  the  belief  of  the  Christ- 
ians in  three  gods  is  absolutely  untrue. 

Thus  the  gospels  are  full  of  absurdities. 

St.  John’s  Revelation 

Now  listen  to  the  wonderful  visions  of  St.  John. 

97.  — And  they  had  on  their  head  crowns  of  gold.  And  there 
were  seven  lamps  of  fire  burning  before  the  throne  which  are  the 
seven  spirits  of  God.  And  before  the  throne  there  was  a sea  of 
glass,  and  round  about  the  throne,  were  four  beasts  full  of  eyes  before 
and  behind — Rev.  IV.  4 — 6. 

jR.— Now  look  at  the  heaven  of  the  Christians  which  is  like  a 
city.  Also  their  God  is  fire  like  a lamp.  It  is  impossible  to  wear  the 
crowns  of  gold  and  other  ornaments  and  to  be  full  of  eyes  before  and 
behind.  Who  can  believe  these  rhapsodies  ? Also,  it  is  written  there- 
in that  there  are  four  beasts,  such  as  the  lion  and  others. 

98.  — And  I saw  in  the  right  hand  of  him  that  sat  on  the  throne 
a book  written  within  and  on  the  back  side  sealed  with  seven  seals. 
Who  is  worthy  to  open  the  book,  and  to  lose  the  seals  thereof  ? And 
no  man  in  heaven,  nor  in  earth,  neither  under  the  earth,  was  able  to 
open  the  book,  neither  to  look  thereon.  And  I wept  much,  because 
no  man  was  found  worthy  to  open  and  to  read  the  book,  neither  to 
look  thereon. — Rev.  V.  1— *4. 


496 


Satyarth  Prakash 


i?.--Now  look  at  the  heaven  of  the  Christians  thronged  with 
thrones  and  men.  There  is  a book  closed  with  many  seals,  to  open 
and  to  read  which  there  is  none  worthy  either  in  heaven  or  in  earth. 
Thereupon  John  wept.  Then  an  elder  said  to  him  that  Christ  alone 
was  able  to  open  it.  The  truth  is  told  in  the  \>TO\tih.—jiska  vivah 
uska  geet  : His  praises  are  sung  whose  marriage  is  to  be  celebrated. 
See,  all  glory  is  ascribed  to  Christ.  But  all  these  things  are  mere 
expressions  without  reality. 

99.  — And  I beheld,  and,  lo,  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  and  of 
the  four  beasts,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  elders,  stood  a Lamb  as  it 
had  been  slain,  having  seven  horns  and  seven  eyes,  which  are  the 
seven  Spirits  of  God  sent  forth  into  all  the  earth. — Rev.  V.  6. 

R. — Now  look  at  the  work  of  John’s  fancy  in  a dream.  There 
are  all  the  Christians,  four  beasts  and  Christ  in  heaven  and  no  one 
else  ! It  is  very  curious  that  on  earth  Christ  had  two  eyes  and  no 
horns  even  in  name;  but  in  heaven  he  got  seven  eyes  and  seven  horns! 
Also  the  seven  spirits  of  God  turned  eyes  and  horns  of  Christ  1 Why 
have  the  Christians  believed  in  these  things  ? For  heaven’s  sake,  they 
should  have  used  a little  sense  in  it. 

100.  — And  when  he  had  taken  the  book,  the  four  beasts  and 
four  and  twenty  elders  fell  down  before  the  Lamb,  having  every  one 
of  them  harps,  and  golden  vials  full  of  odours,  which  arc  the  prayers 
of  saints. — Rev.  V.  8. 

R. — When  Christ  was  not  in  heaven,  whom  would  they,  poor 
fellows,  worship  with  incense,  odour,  sweet,  light  and  other  objects? 
How  curious  is  it  that  the  Protestant  Christians  refute  idolatry  here  in 
India;  but  their  heaven  is  the  home  of  idolatory  ? 

101.  — And  I saw  when  the  Lamb  opened  one  of  the  seals,  and 
I heard,  as  it  were  the  noise  of  thunder,  one  of  the  four  beasts  saying. 
Come  and  see.  And  I saw,  and  behold  a white  horse;  and  he  that  sat 
on  him  had  a bow;  and  a crown  was  given  unto  him;  and  he  went 
forth  conquering  and  to  conquer.  And  when  he  had  opened  the 
second  seal,  I heard  the  second  beast  say.  Come  and  see.  And  there 
went  out  another  horse  that  was  red;  and  power  was  given  to  him  that 
sat  thereon  to  take  peace  from  the  earth.  And  when  he  had  opened 
the  third  seal,  and  lo,  a black  horse.  And  when  he  had  opened  the 
fourth  seal,  and  behold  a pale  horse:  and  his  name  that  sat  on  him 
was  Death  : and  so  forth. — Rev.  VI.  1 — 5,  7,  8. 

R, — See  if  this  myth  is  not  greater  than  that  of  the  Indian 
Puranas.  How  can  horses  and  horsemen  live  in  books  closed  with 
seals  ? The  ignorance  of  those  who  have  taken  the  ravings  of  dream 
for  truth,  cannot  be  exaggerated. 

102.  — And  they  cried  with  a loud  voice,  saying.  How  long,  O 
Lord,  holy  and  true,  dost  thou  not  judge  and  avenge  our  blood  on 
them  that  dwell  on  the  earth  ? 

And  white  robes  were  given  unto  everyone  of  them;  and  it  was 
said  unto  them,  that  they  should  rest  yet  for  a little  season,  until  their 
fellow  servants  also  and  their  brethren,  that  should  be  killed  as  they 
were,  should  be  fulfilled. — Rev.  VI.  10,  11. 


Christianity 


491 


/?.— They  who  are  Christian,  being  committed  to  session  as  it 
were,  will  wait  weeping  for  such  a justice.  He  who  accepts  the  Vedic 
religion,  will  have  no  delay  in  obtaining  justice.  It  should  be  asked 
of  the  Christians  if  the  Court  of  God  is  now-a-days  closed.  There  is 
no  work  of  adjudicature,  and  the  judges  are  sitting  idle!  They  can 
not  answer  these  questions  properly.  They  also  mislead  their  God, 
who  is  misled;  for  at  their  request  he  immediately  wreaks  vengeance 
on  their  enemies.  They  are  of  vindictive  temper.  They  take  revenge 
after  death.  They  have  no  peace  in  mind.  Where  there  is  no  peace, 
there  can  be  no  end  of  misery. 

103.  — And  the  stars  of  heaven  fell  unto  the  earth,  even  as  a 
tig  tree  castcth  her  untimely  figs,  when  she  is  shaken  of  a mighty 
wind.  And  the  heaven  departed  as  a scroll  when  it  is  rolled  together. 
—Rev.  VI.  13,  14. 

jR. — Now  sec,  as  John  the  prophet  had  not  acquired  knowledge, 
he  mentioned  his  tales  without  a head  or  a tail.  Well,  the  stars  are 
the  systems  of  worlds,  how  can  they  fall  on  one  single  earth  ? How 
can  the  attraction  of  the  sun  and  other  stars  allow  them  to  leave 
their  orbits  ? Does  he  think  the  heaven  to  be  like  a mat  ? The  heaven 
is  not  a body,  which  can  be  folded  or  gathered.  Therefore  John  and 
others  were  all  barbarians,  they  had  no  knowledge  of  these  things. 

Elects 

104.  — I heard  the  number  of  them  which  were  sealed  : and 
there  were  sealed  an  hundred  forty  and  four  thousand  of  all  the 
tribes  of  the  children  of  Israel.  Of  the  tribe  of  Juda  were  sealed 
twelve  thousand.— -Rev.  VII.  4,  5. 

R, — Is  the  God  of  the  Bible  the  God  of  the  tribes  of  Israel  only, 
or  is  he  the  God  of  the  whole  world  ? Had  he  not  been  so,  why 
should  he  have  accompanied  those  barbarians?  He  helped  them  only. 
He  never  talked  of  the  name  or  trace  of  others.  Therefore  he  is  not 
God,  The  sealing  of  the  tribes  of  Israel  shows  his  finiteness  of  know- 
ledge or  it  may  be  merely  the  false  imagination  of  John. 

105.  — Therefore  are  they  before  the  throne  of  God,  and  serve 
him  day  and  night  in  his  temple. — Rev.  VII.  15, 

i?.— Is  it  not  gross  idolatry  ? Is  not  their  God  material,  having 
a body  like  man  and  limited  to  a place?  The  God  of  the  Christians 
does  not  sleep  at  night;  if  he  sleeps,  how  can  they  worship  him  at 
night?  He  must  lose  his  sleep.  If  he  wakes  day  and  night,  he  will 
be  distracted  and  very  sickly. 

Idolatry 

106.  — And  another  angel  came  and  stood  at  the  altar,  having 
a golden  censer;  and  there  was  given  unto  him  much  incense.  And 
the  smoke  of  the  incense,  which  came  with  the  prayers  of  the  saints, 
ascended  up  before  God  out  of  the  angel’s  hand.  And  the  angel 
took  the  censer,  and  filled  it  with  fire  of  the  altar,  and  cast  it  into 
the  earth.  And  there  were  voices,  and  thunderings  and  lightnings, 
and  an  earthquake. — Rev.  VIII.  3 — 5. 


498 


Satyarth  Prakash 


R, — Now  look  here  there  were  the  altar,  smoke,  lamp,  sweet, 
and  the  sound  of  trumpets  in  the  heaven  I Is  the  heaven  of  the 
Christians  inferior  to  the  pagoda  of  mendicants  or  vairagisl  It  has 
rather  more  bustle  and  alarm  in  it. 

107.  — The  first  angel  sounded,  and  there  followed  hail  and  fire 
mingled  with  blood,  and  they  were  cast  upon  the  earth;  and  the  third 
part  was  burnt  up. — Rev.  VlII.  7. 

R. — Bravo,  the  Christian  prophets  ! God,  God’s  angels,  the 
sounding  of  trumpets  and  the  farce  of  the  destruction  of  the  world 
look  like  a child’s  play. 

Bottomless  Pit 

108.  — And  the  fifth  angel  sounded,  and  I saw  a star  fall  from 
heaven  unto  the  earth;  and  to  him  was  given  the  key  of  the  bottom- 
less pit.  And  he  opened  the  bottomless  pit;  and  there  arose  a smoke 
out  of  the  pit,  as  the  smoke  of  a great  furnace.  And  there  came  out 
of  the  smoke  locusts  upon  the  earth,  and  unto  them  was  given  power, 
as  the  scorpions  of  the  earth  have  power.  And  it  was  commanded 
them  that  they  should  not  hurt  the  grass  of  the  earth;  but  only  those 
men  which  have  not  the  seal  of  God  in  their  foreheads.  They  should 
be  tormented  five  months. — Rev.  IX.  1 — 5. 

R, — Will  the  stars  have  fallen  on  hearing  the  sound  of  trum- 
pets upon  those  angels  and  into  that  heaven  ? But  they  never  fell 
here  upon  the  earth.  Well,  did  God  keep  the  locusts  and  the  pit 
for  the  cataclysm  ? They  must  be  able  to  see  and  read  the  seals  so  as 
not  to  bite  the  persons  with  seals  on  their  foreheads.  It  is  a mere 
fraud  to  convert  simple  folks  to  Christianity  by  terrifying  them  with 
the  biting  of  the  locusts  if  they  did  not  turn  Christians.  Such  beliefs 
can  gain  acceptance  in  ignorant  countries,  but  not  in  Aryavart  or 
India.  Is  the  description  of  cataclysm  possible? 

Horsemen  in  Heaven 

109.  — And  the  number  of  the  army  of  the  horsemen  were  two 
hundred  thousand. — Rev.  IX.  16. 

R. — Well,  where  in  heaven  did  so  many  horses  stay,  graze  and 
live?  How  much  dung  will  there  be  of  so  many  hoises?  How  much 
stench  would  be  produced  in  heaven  ? Therefore  we  the  Aryans  have 
all  rejected  such  a heaven,  such  a God,  and  such  a religion  as  is 
presented  in  the  Bible.  It  will  be  better  if  such  a medley  of  incon- 
gruities and  absurdities  be  purged  otY  from  the  head  of  the  Christians 
by  the  grace  of  the  Almighty. 

Angelic  Colossus 

1 10.  — And  I saw  another  mighty  angel  come  down  from  heaven, 
clothed  with  a cloud,  and  a rainbow  was  upon  his  head,  and  his  face 
was  as  it  were  the  sun,  and  his  feet  as  pillars  of  fire;  and  he  set  his 
right  foot  upon  the  sea,  and  his  left  foot  on  the  earth.— Rev.  X.  1 — 3. 

R. — Now  think  of  the  fables  of  these  angels,  which  beat  the 
tales  of  the  Puranas  and  buffoons  into  shade. 


Christianity 


499 


Temple  of  God 

111.  —And  there  was  given  me  a reed  like  unto  a rod;  and  the 
angel  stood,  saying,  Rise  and  measure  the  temple  of  God,  and  the 
altar,  and  them  that  worship  therein. — Rev.  XL  1. 

R. — The  Christians  have  made  temples.  Not  only  on  earth, 
but  in  heaven  also  and  they  are  measured  ! Well,  their  teachings  are 
like  their  heaven.  On  earth  they  eat  in  faith  the  flesh  and  blood  of 
the  body  of  Christ  in  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord’s  supper,  and  make 
forms  of  the  cross  in  the  churches,  which  is  but  idolatry. 

112.  — And  the  temple  of  God  was  opened  in  heaven,  and  there 
was  seen  in  his  temple  the  ark  of  his  testament. — Rev.  XL  19. 

R» — The  temple  which  is  in  heaven,  probably  remains  closed  at 
all  times,  but  it  is  opened  at  some  time.  Can  there  be  a temple  of 
God?  There  can  be  no  temple  of  the  Supreme  Being  mentioned  by 
the  Vedas  as  all-pervading  and  infinite.  Verily,  there  may  be  a tem- 
ple of  God  of  the  Chiistians  who  has  a material  form  either  in  heaven 
or  on  earth;  and  the  Christians  have  the  fun  of  worship,  consisting  of 
the  tinkling  of  bells  and  flourishes  of  trumpets  in  their  heaven,  as  it 
is  found  here  among  the  Hindus  The  Christians  may  sometimes  be 
seeing  the  ark  of  convenant.  It  is  not  known  what  purpose  is  served 
thereby.  The  fact  is  that  all  these  things  are  for  the  enticement  of 
the  people. 

Woman  in  Labour  in  Heaven 

113.  — And  there  appeared  a great  wonder  in  heaven:  a woman 
clothed  with  the  sun,  and  the  moon  under  her  feet,  and  upon  her  head 
a crown  of  twelve  stars.  And  she  being  with  child  cried,  travailing 
in  birth,  and  pained  to  be  delivered.  And  then  appeared  another 
wonder  in  heaven;  and  behold  a great  red  dragon,  having  seven  heads 
and  ten  horns,  and  seven  crowns  upon  his  heads.  And  his  tail  drew 
the  third  part  of  the  stars  of  heaven,  and  did  cast  them  to  the  earth. — 
Rev.  XIL  1—4. 

7?.— Now  think  of  the  acme  of  this  long  idle  talk  ! In  their  very 
heaven  a poor  woman  is  crying  for  help,  and  nobody  cares  for  her 
suffering  nor  can  he  assuage  it!  How  long  was  the  tail  ol  that  dragon 
who  threw  down  a third  part  of  stars  on  the  earth?  Well,  the  earth 
is  a small  planet,  and  the  stars  are  large  worlds,  the  earth  cannot 
contain  even  one  of  them.  But  it  should  be  inferred  therefrom  that 
this  third  part  of  all  the  stars  must  have  fallen  upon  the  house  of  this 
writer,  and  the  dragon  whose  tail  was  so  big  as  to  wind  round  the 
stars  and  to  foss  them  upon  the  earth,  must  be  living  in  his  house. 

War  in  Heaven 

114. -»And  there  was  war  in  heaven;  Michael  and  his  angels 
fought  against  the  dragon;  and  the  dragon  fought  him  and  his  angels 
—Rev.  XIL  7. 

/?.— Whoever  goes  to  the  heaven  of  the  Christians,  must  suffer 
the  horrors  of  war.  Better  give  up  the  desire  of  going  to  such  a 


500 


Satyarth  Prakash 


heaven  and  sit  down,  bowing  to  it  from  a distance.  The  place  where 
there  is  no  peace  and  where  war  is  raging,  is  for  the  Christians  only. 

1 15.  And  the  great  dragon  was  cast  out,  that  old  serpent,  called 
the  Devil,  and  Satan,  which  deceiveth  the  whole  world.— Rev.  XII.  9. 

jR. — Did  not  Satan  deceive  men  when  he  was  in  heaven?  Why 
was  he  not  confined  in  a jail  or  put  to  death!  Why  was  he  cast  upon 
the  earth?  If  Satan  is  the  deceiver  of  the  whole  world,  who  is  the 
deceiver  of  Satan.  If  Satan  is  himself  misled,  then  persons  disposed 
to  go  astray  will  be  misled  without  Satan.  If  God  is  his  tempter,  he 
cannot  be  God.  It  appears  that  the  God  of  the  Christians  may  be 
in  dread  of  Satan.  For,  if  he  is  more  powerful  than  Satan,  why  did 
he  not  punish  Satan  at  the  time  of  committing  sin?  The  government 
of  the  God  of  the  Christians  on  earth  is  not  even  a thousandth  part 
of  that  of  Satan.  Hence  the  God  of  the  Christians  cannot  expel 
him.  Wherefore  it  is  proved  that  the  God  of  the  Christians  is  not 
even  like  the  present  Christian  officers  who  immediately  punish  thieves 
and  robbeis  on  their  apprehension.  Then  who  is  senseless  enough  to 
give  up  the  Vedic  faith  and  to  embrace  the  imaginary  and  fantastic 
religion  of  the  Christians? 

116.  — Woe  to  the  inhabiters  of  the  earth  and  of  the  sea!  for 
the  devil  is  come  down  unto  you. — Rev.  XII.  12. 

R. — Is  God  the  protector  and  master  of  heaven  only?  Is  he  not 
the  protector  and  master  of  the  earth,  mankind,  and  other  sentient 
creatures?  If  he  is  the  king  of  the  world,  how  can  he  not  kill  him? 
Satan  goes  about  deceiving,  while  God  is  looking  on!  Yet  God  does 
not  prohibit  him!  It  seems  that  there  are  two  gods,  one  good  and 
another  powerful  and  evil. 

117.  And  power  was  given  unto  him  to  continue  forty  and  two 
months.  And  he  opened  his  mouth  in  blasphemy  against  God,  to 
blaspheme  his  name,  his  tabernacle,  and  them  that  dwell  in  heaven. 
And  it  was  given  unto  him  to  make  war  with  the  saints,  and  to  over- 
come them;  and  power  was  given  him  over  all  kindreds,  and  tongues, 
and  nations. — Rev.  XIII,  5—7. 

R. — Well,  is  it  or  is  it  not  like  the  work  of  the  leader  of  robbers 
to  send  Satan,  beasts  and  others  to  the  earth  to  deceive  mankind,  to 
make  war  with  saints?  Such  a work  can  never  be  of  God  or  God’s 
worshippers. 

118. — And  I looked,  and,  lo,  a Lamb  stood  on  the  Mount  Sion, 
and  with  him  an  hundred  forty  and  four  thousand,  having  his  Father’s 
name  written  in  their  foreheads. — Rev.  XIV.  1. 

R. — See  the  Father  of  Christ  lived  on  Mount  Sion,  and  there 
lived  also  his  son.  But  how  were  the  people  numbered  to  be  144,000? 
Only  144,000  persons  were  the  inhabitants  of  heaven?  The  remain- 
ing millions  of  the  Christians  were  not  labelled  on  their  foreheads. 
Did  they  all  go  to  hell?  The  Christians  should  go  to  Mount  Sion 
and  see  if  there  is  the  Father  of  Christ  and  his  army.  If  they  are 
found  there,  this  writing  is  true;  but  if  not,  it  is  false.  If  he  came 
there,  when  did  he  come?  If  it  be  said  that  he  and  his  army  came 
down  from  heaven,  are  they  birds  that  such  a large  army  flies  up  and 


Christianity 


501 


down  to  come  and  go  there?  If  he  comes  and  goes,  he  is  like  the 
judge  of  a district.  If  there  be  one,  two  or  three  gods,  they  will  not 
suffice;  for  there  should  be  at  least  one  god  for  every  world.  One, 
two  or  three  gods  cannot  tour  and  judge  in  innumerable  worlds  at 
the  same  time. 

119. — Yea,  saith  the  Spirit,  that  they  may  rest  from  their  labours; 
and  their  works  do  follow  them.— Rev.  XIV.  13. 

R. — Look  here  the  God  of  the  Christians  says  that  their  works 
do  follow  them,  that  is  to  say,  all  will  get  rewards  according  to  their 
works;  but  the  Christians  say  that  Christ  will  take  away  the  sins,  and 
also  they  will  be  forgiven.  Here  let  sensible  persons  think  whether 
the  words  of  God  or  of  the  Christians  are  true.  Both  cannot  be  true 
in  a matter  in  case  of  their  difference.  One  of  them  must  be  false. 
What  is  to  us,  whether  the  God  of  the  Christians  or  the  Christians,  be 
false? 

120.  — And  the  angel  cast  it  into  great  winepress  of  the  wrath  of 
God.  And  the  winepress  was  trodden  without  the  city,  and  blood 
came  out  of  the  winepress,  even  unto  the  horse  bridles,  by  the  space 
of  a thousand  and  six  hundred  furlongs. — Rev.  XIV.  19,  20. 

/?.— Now  see  if  their  myths  are  not  greater  than  those  of  the 
Indian  Puranas.  The  God  of  the  Christians  might  become  much 
distressed  when  in  anger.  As  the  winepresses  are  full  of  his  wrath,  is 
his  wrath  water  or  is  it  any  other  liquid  substance  that  fills  a thing? 
The  flowing  of  blood  for  hundred  miles  is  impossible;  for  blood  is 
soon  congealed  on  its  contact  with  the  air.  How  can  it  then  flow? 
Hence,  these  statements  are  false. 

Temple  in  Heaven 

121.  — Behold,  the  temple  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  testimony  in 
heaven  was  opened. — Rev.  IV.  5. 

R. — Had  the  God  of  the  Christians  been  omniscient,  there  was 
no  use  of  witnesses;  for  then  he  would  know  all.  Hence  it  is  con- 
clusively proved  in  every  respect  that  their  God  is  not  omniscient;  for 
he  is  finite  in  knowledge  like  man.  How  can  he  do  the  work  of 
Godhead  ? No,  no  he  can’t.  The  subject  of  the  Revelation  contains 
many  impossible  statements.  Nobody  can  believe  them  to  be  true. 
How  long  shall  we  produce  them,  it  is  entirely  full  of  like  assertions. 

122. — And  God  hath  remembered  her  iniquities.  Reward  her 
even  as  she  rewarded  you,  and  double  unto  her  double  according  to 
his  works.— Rev.  XVIII.  5,6. 

/?.— See  the  God  of  the  Christians  is  evidently  unjust;  for  justice 
is  done  aright  when  a person  is  dealt  with  according  to  his  works 
both  with  regard  to  their  quality  and  quantity.  To  reward  or  punish 
more  or  less  than  what  is  done,  is  injustice.  Those  who  adore  the 
unjust,  become  unjust  themselves. 

Christ’s  Marriage 

123.  — Let  us  rejoice;  for  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb  is  come  and 
his  wife  hath  made  herself  ready. — Rev.  XIX.  7. 


502 


Satyarth  Prakash 


R, — Now  listen,  marriages  are  celebrated  in  the  heaven  of  the 
Christians  ! For,  the  marriage  of  Christ  was  performed  there  by 
God.  It  may  be  asked  who  his  father-in-law,  mother-in-law,  brother- 
in-law  and  other  relatives  were.  How  many  children  were  born  to 
him  ? The  loss  of  energy  decreases  strength,  understanding,  valor, 
life,  and  other  qualities.  Therefore,  Christ  must  have  left  his  decayed 
body  there  by  this  time.  For  an  object  produced  from  the  union  of 
others  must  undeigo  disunion.  The  Christians  are  deluded  in  their 
belief  in  him  upto  present;  and  it  is  not  known  how  long  they  will 
remain  in  delusion. 

124. — And  he  laid  hold  on  the  dragon,  that  old  serpent,  which  is 
the  Devil,  and  Satan,  and  bound  him  a thousand  >ears.  And  cast 
him  into  the  bottomless  pit,  and  shut  him  up,  and  set  a seal  upon 
him,  that  he  should  deceive  the  nations  no  more,  till  the  thousand 
years  should  be  fulfilled. — Rev.  XX.  2,3. 

R. — See  with  great  difficulty  and  after  a long  delay  they  caught 
hold  of  the  Devil,  and  imprisoned  him  for  a thousand  years,  he  will 
be  loosed  again.  Will  he  not  tempt  again  ? Such  a wicked  being 
should  be  always  kept  in  imprisonment  or  put  to  death,  but  never  set 
at  liberty.  But  the  existence  of  Satan  is  a whim  of  the  Christians. 
In  reality  Satan  is  nothing.  It  is  a device  made  by  the  Christians  to 
terrify  and  cheat  people  into  their  religion.  For  instance,  a shrewd 
fellow  said  to  an  honest  man,  come  with  me,  1 will  show  you  a deity. 
Then  going  to  a solitary  place,  he  made  a man  have  four  hands  and 
stand  in  the  bushes  Then  he  told  the  dupe  to  shut  his  eyes  and 
open  them  when  he  orders;  and  close  them  again  on  his  bidding. 
Whoever  does  not  close  them,  will  become  blind.  Similar  are  the 
teachings  of  these  sectarians.  They  say,  whoever  does  not  accept 
their  religion,  is  deceived  by  Satan.  When  he  came  before,  the  de- 
ceiver said.  See,  then  imniediatly  said  again  : Close  them.  When  he 
was  bidden  in  the  bushes,  he  said.  Open  your  eyes.  Sec  the  Deity. 
All  saw  him.  Such  is  the  imposture  of  these  religionists.  Hence, 
nobody  should  fall  into  their  snare  of  fraud. 

125.  — (I  saw  a great  white  throne,  and  him  that  sat  on  it), 
from  whose  face  the  earth  and  the  heaven  fled  away;  and  there  was 
found  no  place  for  them  And  I saw  the  dead,  small  and  great, 
stand  before  God;  and  the  books  were  opened  : and  another  book 
was  opened,  which  is  the  book  of  life  and  the  dead  were  judged  out  of 
those  things  which  were  written  in  books,  according  to  their  works  — 
Rev.  XX,  II.  12. 

7?.— Now  look  at  their  childishness  ! Well,  how  can  the  earth 
and  the  heaven  flee  away  ! Where  will  they  rest  on  ? Where  was 
he  and  his  throne  from  whose  face  they  fled  ? As  the  dead  were 
made  to  stand  before  God,  he  must  be  either  sitting  or  standing.  Is 
God’s  work  like  the  courts  and  shops  of  the  earth,  since  it  is  done 
according  to  what  is  written  in  books  ! Did  God  or  his  clerk  write 
the  account  of  all  souls  ? Such  beliefs  of  the  Christians  and  other 
sectarians  have  made  him  god  who  is  no  God  and  God  no  god. 

Christ’s  Wife 

126.  — There  came  unto  me  one  of  the  seven  angels,  and  talked 


Christianity 


503 


with  me,  saying,  Come  hither,  I will  show  thee  the  bride,  the  Lamb’s 
wife.— Rev.  XXL  9. 

R, — Hello  ! Christ  got  a nice  wife  in  heaven.  He  must  be 
enjoying  conjugal  pleasures.  Those  Christians  who  go  there,  pro- 
bably get  women  for  wives  and  children  are  born  to  them.  The  in- 
crease of  heavenly  population  must  give  rise  to  disease,  and  they  must 
be  dying.  It  is  better  to  be  away  from  such  a heaven. 

City  in  Heaven 

127.  — And  he  measured  the  city  with  the  reed  12,000  furlongs. 
The  length,  and  the  breadth,  and  the  height  of  it  are  equal.  And  he 
measured  the  wall  thereof,  144  cubits,  according  to  the  measures  of  a 
man,  that  is,  of  the  angel.  And  the  building  of  the  wall  of  it  was  of 
jasper,  and  the  city  was  pure  gold,  like  unto  clear  glass.  And  the 
foundations  of  the  wall  of  the  city  were  garnished  with  all  manner  of 
precious  stones.  The  first  foundation  was  jasper,  the  second,  sap- 
phire; the  third,  a chalcedony;  the  fourth,  an  emerald.  The  fifth, 
sardonyx;  the  sixth,  sardius;  the  seventh,  chryselyte;  the  eighth,  beryl; 
the  ninth,  a topaz;  the  tenth,  a chryso  prasus;  the  eleventh,  a jacinth; 
the  twelfth,  an  amethyst.  And  the  twelve  gates  were  twelve  pearls; 
every  several  gate  was  of  one  pearl;  and  the  street  of  the  city  was  pure 
gold,  as  it  were  transparent  glass. — Rev.  XXL  16 — 21. 

/? —Look  at  the  description  of  the  heaven  of  the  Christians. 
If  they  die  here  and  be  born  there,  how  can  they  be  contained  in  that 
city  ? For,  there  is  only  ingress  of  people,  but  no  egress.  As  regards 
what  is  written  of  the  city  made  of  very  precious  stones  and  of  pure 
gold  and  so  forth;  it  is  a trick  to  wheedle  simple  folks  and  to  secure 
them  into  their  snare.  Well,  the  length  and  breadth  as  written  are 
possible;  but  how  can  its  height  be  12,000  furlongs  (750  cos)  ? It  is 
a pure  fiction  created  by  the  imagination.  Whence  were  obtained  so 
large  pearls  ? They  were  obtained  from  a pitcher  of  the  house  of  the 
writer  of  this  fairy  tale  This  monstrous  hoax  has  quite  out-beaten 
the  Indian  mythology. 

128.  — And  there  shall  in  no  wise  enter  into  it  anything  that  de- 
fileth,  neither  whatsoever  worketh  abomination,  or  maketh  a lie.— 
Rev.  XXL  27. 

R,—U  it  is  the  case  as  said  above,  why  do  the  Christians  say 
that  sinners  can  go  to  heaven  by  turning  Christians?  This  assertion 
of  the  verse  is  not  right,  for  had  it  been  so,  John  who  talks  the  false 
things  of  his  dream,  could  never  have  entered  the  heaven.  Also  Christ 
must  not  have  gone  to  heaven;  for  when  a single  sinner  cannot  obtain 
heaven,  how  can  Christ  laden  with  the  sms  of  many  sinners  be  the 
dweller  of  heaven? 

Heaven 

129.  — And  there  shall  be  no  more  curse,  but  the  throne  of  God 
and  of  the  Lamb  shall  be  in  it,  and  his  servants  shall  serve  him.  And 
they  shall  see  his  face;  and  his  name  shall  be  in  their  foreheads.  And 
there  shall  be  no  night  there,  and  they  need  no  candle,  neither  light 


504  Satyarth  Prakash 

of  the  sun;  for  the  Lord  giveth  them  light;  and  they  shall  reign  for  ever 
and  ever. — Rev.  XXII.  3 — 5. 

R. — Think  of  the  residence  in  heaven!  Will  God  and  Christ 
ever  remain  sitting  on  the  thrones?  Will  their  servants  ever  remain 
before  them  seeing  their  faces?  Now  tell  us  whether  the  face  of  your 
god  be  white  like  that  of  a European,  or  black  like  that  of  an  African, 
or  is  it  like  that  of  the  people  of  other  countries.  This  your  heaven  is  a 
surveillance',  for  there  is  higher  and  lower  social  position,  and  it  is 
necessary  to  live  in  one  city  only.  How  can  there  be  no  sulfering?  He 
who  is  luxurious,  can  never  be  God  omniscient,  and  the  ruler  of  all. 

Works 

130. — Behold,  I come  quickly;  and  my  reward  is  with  me  to  give 
every  man  according  as  his  work  shall  be. — Rev.  XXII.  12. 

R. — When  such  is  the  case  that  rewards  are  obtained  according 
to  works,  there  is  no  forgiveness  of  sins.  If  there  is  forgiveness  of 
sins,  the  teachings  of  the  gospels  are  untrue.  If  it  be  said  that  for- 
giveness of  sins  is  also  written  in  the  gospels,  it  will  produce  contra- 
diction, or  false  evidence,  and  it  will  falsify  the  teachings.  Cease  to 
believe  in  the  Bible.  How  long  shall  we  mention  the  absurdities  and 
contradictions  of  the  Bible.  What  is  given  above  is  merely  a hint 
from  the  Bible  of  the  Christians.  Wise  men  will  know  a great  deal 
from  it.  Except  a few  things,  all  the  rest  of  what  is  written  in  the 
Bible  is  false.  Whatever  is  truth  loses  its  purity  by  mixing  with  false- 
hood. So  the  Bible  cannot  be  worth  believing  in.  But  the  pure  truth 
can  only  be  had  for  acceptance  from  the  Vedas. 

Summary 

For  the  divisions  of  the  Bible  see  page  70.  To  the  teachings  of  the  Bible 
that  (1)  the  earth  of  creation  was  without  form,  (2)  the  Spirit  of  God  moved  upon 
waters,  (3)  God  created  Adam  out  of  dust  in  his  image,  (4)  he  created  Eve  out  of 
his  rib,  (5)  Satan  deceived  them,  and  (6)  God  liked  Abel’s  sacrifice  of  a kid;  it  is 
replied  that  (1)  God’s  work  is  never  without  form  or  imperfect,  (2)  the  Spirit  of 
God  is  a meaningless  phrase  and  its  floating  on  waters  makes  him  limited,  (3) 
God  must  be  like  man  as  Adam  was  like  God,  (4)  the  creation  of  Eve  from  man’s 
rib  is  false  as  he  has  a full  set  of  ribs  in  his  skeleton,  (5)  why  God  created  Satan 
who  deceived  Adam  and  why  he  is  allowed  to  deceive  the  world,  (6)  God’s  accept- 
ing Abel’s  offering  makes  him  a flesh-eater. 

(7)  The  story  of  Noah’s  flood  is  not  true,  as  an  ark  of  150  yards  long  and  25 
yards  broad  cannot  contain  the  pairs  of  all  animals,  such  as  the  elephant,  camel, 
rhinoceros,  lion,  &c.  with  their  food.  (8)  Offering  on  the  altar  is  probably  taken 
from  the  Vedas.  (9)  It  does  not  bespeak  well  of  God  to  confound  the  common 
language  of  all  people  which  ruined  them.  (10)  Why  did  God  make  the  foreskin 
so  as  to  order  its  cutting  afterwards?  The  Christians*  not  obeying  it  disproves  its 
truth.  (11)  God’s  talking  with  Abraham  (Gen.  XVII.  22)  his  partaking  of  food 
at  his  tent  (ib.  XVIll.  1—8)  and  other  similar  acts  prove  the  God  of  the  Christians 
to  be  human.  (12)  Abraham’s  sacrifice  of  his  son  is  an  instance  of  human  sacrifice. 
(13)  Idolatry  is  indicated  by  Gen.  XXXI  24,  30  where  gods  were  stolen  by  Jacob. 

(14)  God’s  being  jealous  and  punishing  children  for  three  generations  for 
the  sins  of  their  ancestor,  destroys  his  justice  and  Godhead.  (15)  The  sacrifices  of 
Moses  (Lev.  I 5—9)  do  not  show  any  mercy  in  God.  It  is  a horrible  doctrine 
that  sins  are  atoned  and  forgiven  by  murdering  bullocks  and  roasting  their  flesh 
on  the  altar  to  eat.  (16)  David’s  making  a house  for  God  who  rested  there,  proves 
the  man-worship  of  the  Christians. 


Christianity 


505 


(17)  The  teachings  of  the  gospels  regarding  the  birth  of  Christ  is  an  instance 
of  impossibility  as  Kunti's  conception  by  the  sun  in  the  Indian  mythology.  (18) 
Also  the  driving  of  devils,  raising  the  dead,  &c.  are  like  the  myths  of  the  Puranas 
which  the  Europeans  don’t  believe.  (19)  Jesus’  eleven  disciples  deserted  him  and 
denied  their  discipleship  and  the  twelfth  disciple,  Judas  Iscariot,  betrayed  him  for 
30  Rs  which  proves  they  were  not  regenerated  by  his  company  and  teachings. 
How  can  the  modern  Christians  be  regenerated  by  Christ  2000  years  after  his 
murder  or  crucifixion  by  the  Jews?  (20)  St-  John’s  Revelation  is  a dream,  wherein 
he  saw  four  horses  coming  out  of  a book  opened  by  the  Lamb  (Christ)  with  seven 
horns  and  going  to  four  quarters  conquering.  He  saw  24  elders  and  beasts  with 
eyes.  As  it  is  a work  of  fancy,  it  does  not  deserve  any  serious  consideration. 

As  there  is  no  systematic  teaching,  the  instances  of  impossibilities  and  absur- 
dities can  be  picked  up  from  the  review  given  above. 

N.B, — The  books  of  free-thought  give  a detailed  and  exhaustive  refutation 
of  the  Bible.  As  it  is  from  the  pen  of  Europeans  who  are  brought  up  in  Christianity, 
it  is  very  interesting  to  read.  They  can  be  had  from  the  Truth-seeker,  New  York, 
U.S  A.  But  few  of  them  excel  Thomas  Paine’s  Age  of  Reason. 


CHAPTER  XIV 

PREFACE 


The  treatment  of  Islam  in  this  14th  chapter  is  based  on  the  Koran, 
but  not  on  any  other  book;  for  the  Mussulmans  have  full  faith 
in  it.  Although  the  existence  of  various  sects  has  created  differ- 
ence of  views  with  regard  to  particular  expressions  and  interpre- 
tation of  the  text,  yet  they  are  unanimous  in  their  belief  in  the  Koran. 
As  the  Koran  is  in  Arabic  and  the  Moulvies  (Moslem  savants)  have 
written  commentaries  in  Urdu,  it  was  transliterated  in  the  Devanagri 
characters  and  afterwards  corrected  by  Arabic  scholars  before  its  use 
in  the  present  discourse.  For  the  object  of  this  treatise  is  to  advance 
the  cause  of  mankind  and  to  ascertain  what  is  truth  or  otherwise. 
Accordingly  a brief  account  of  all  religions  is  here  given  for  public 
information  with  a view  to  afford  them  a chance  for  the  consideration 
among  themselves  of  vital  questions,  resulting  in  the  rejection  of  evil 
habits  and  the  adoption  of  virtues.  It  is  foreign  to  our  purpose  to  cavil 
at  any  religion  or  Islam;  but  it  is  our  object  to  bring  to  light  whatever 
is  good  in  reality  and  what  is  evil  in  the  end  for  all  people.  None  can 
impose  falsehood  on  others  or  oppose  the  progress  of  truth  in  the 
world.  Even  after  the  determination  of  truth  and  untruth  the  people 
are  at  liberty  to  accept  or  reject  what  they  like;  there  is  no  compulsion 
but  perfect  freedom  of  choice  It  is  a rule  with  good  people  to  regard 
their  or  others’  virtues  and  vices  as  such,  and  then  to  digest  virtues 
and  to  abjure  vices  It  is  the  duty  of  the  good  to  give  up  and  drive 
away  prejudice  and  bigotry  from  among  others  at  least  to  lessen  their 
keenness.  For  what  evil  is  there  that  has  not  come  out  of  prejudice, 
and  partiality,  and  what  evil  will  not  come  out  of  them  in  the  future? 
The  truth  is  that  it  is  outside  the  sphere  of  humanity  to  be  engrossed 
in  self  interest  at  the  expense  of  others  in  the  precarious  human 
life  like  a flash  of  lightning  in  the  sky.  Good  readers  will  intimate 
what  they  think  is  improper  in  this  writing,  so  that  it  may  be  corrected 
if  approved;  for  the  object  of  these  lines  is  to  palliate  or  remove 
bigotry,  prejudice,  jealousy,  enmity,  dispute,  contention,  and  anta- 
gonism; and  never  to  fan  their  flames.  It  is  our  primary  duty  to  avoid 
doing  harm  to  any  and  to  promote  mutual  interests.  Now  I proceed 
to  lay  before  all  the  good  people  the  subject  of  Moslem  religion  in  this 
14th  chapter  with  the  request  that  they  should  accept  what  is  desirable 
and  reject  what  is  undesirable.  A word  is  enough  to  the  wise. 


The  Author. 


THE  RELIGION  OF  MOSLEMS 


NOW  to  attend  to  the  subject  of  the  Mussulman  religion. 

1. — In  the  name  of  the  most  merciful  God.  (To  begin  with  the 
name  of  God  forgiving  and  kind) — Manzil  I,  Sipara  I,  Surat  1, 
Ayat  1. 


Reviewer. — The  Mussulmans  say  that  the  Koran  is  the  word  of 
God.  But  the  above  verse  shows  that  its  author  is  somebody  else;  for 
had  it  been  made  by  God,  he  would  not  have  used  the  expression  : In 
the  name  of  God;*  but  he  should  have  said,  To  preach  to  the  people.f 
If  God  teaches  the  people  that  they  should  say  so,  it  is  not  proper; 
for,  being  used  in  the  beginning  of  an  evil  act,  it  will  blot  the  name 
of  God.  If  he  forgives  and  shows  mercy,  why  has  he  in  his  creation 
permitted  flesh  eating  for  the  pleasure  of  men,  by  killing  other  animals, 
or  getting  them  slaughtered  with  excruciating  pain  ? Are  not  those 
animals  innocent  and  made  by  God  ? And  it  should  have  been  stated. 
“To  begin  good  works  in  the  name  of  God,  but  not  evil  ones.”  The 
expression  is  doutful.  Are  the  sins  of  theft,  adultery,  lying  and  other 
vices  to  be  begun  with  the  name  of  God  ? Consequently,  the  Mussul- 
man butchers  pronounce  the  phrase,  “In  the  name  of  God*’ — Bismillah, 
in  splitting  the  throat  of  cows  and  other  animals.  If  that  is  its  meaning 
as  said  above,  the  Mussulmans  commence  the  doing  of  evil  in  the 
name  of  God  Also,  the  God  of  the  Mussulmans  will  cease  to  be 
merciful;  for  his  mercy  is  not  extended  to  those  dumb  creatures.  If 
the  Mussulmans  don’t  know  its  meaning,  its  revelation  is  useless.  If 
the  Mussulmans  interpert  it  otherwise,  what  is  its  plain  meaning  ? 


Merciful  God 

2.  — All  praise  be  to  God,  the  Lord  of  all  creatures,  the  most 
merciful. — M 1,  S 1,  s 1,  A 2. 

R. — If  the  God  of  the  Koran  had  been  the  protector  of  all  crea- 
tures and  the  dispenser  of  forgiveness  and  mercy  to  all,  he  would  not 
have  commanded  the  Mussulmans  to  kill  the  people  of  other  religions 
and  the  lower  animals.  If  he  gives  forgiveness,  will  he  forgive  sinners  ? 
If  he  does,  why  has  he  said,  kill  the  infidels,  /.e.  those  who  do  not 
believe  in  the  Koran  and  the  Prophet,  as  will  be  shown  further  on  ? 
Hence  the  Koran  does  not  appear  to  have  been  made  by  God. 

3.  — The  king  of  the  day  of  judgment.  These  do  we  worship,  and 
of  thee  do  we  beg  assistance.  Direct  us  in  the  right  way. — M 1,  s 1, 
s 1,  v 3,  5. 

R. — Does  not  God  judge  always  ? Does  he  sit  on  judgment  on 
some  particular  day  ? It  then  shows  the  reign  of  injustice.  It  is  right 


♦ % I t ^ I 


508 


Satyarth  Prakash 


to  worship  him  and  to  ask  help  of  him.  Will  they  ask  help  in  evil  ? 
Is  the  right  way  of  the  Mussulmans  only,  or  of  others  too  ? Why  do 
the  Mussulmans  not  accept  the  right  way  ? Does  the  straight  way 
lead  to  evil  that  they  don’t  like  it  ? If  the  good  of  all  is  one,  there  is 
no  peculiarity  in  the  Mussulmans.  If  they  do  not  wish  the  good  of 
others,  they  will  be  unjust. 

Right  Way 

4.  — Direct  us  in  the  way  of  those  to  whom  thou  hast  been 
gracious;  not  of  those  against  whom  thou  art  incensed,  not  of  those 
who  go  astray —Mt.  S 1,  s 1,  v 6,  7. 

R. — As  the  Mussulmans  do  not  believe  prior  existence  and  good 
and  evil  works  done  in  that  life,  God  will  be  unjust  by  giving  bless- 
ings and  showing  mercy  to  some  and  withholding  them  from  others. 
For,  to  give  pleasure  and  pain  without  the  consideration  of  merit  and 
demerit,  is  injustice;  while  to  show  mercy  to  some  and  to  be  angry 
with  others  without  any  cause  whatever,  is  not  in  the  experience  of 
nature.  Equitable  justice  requires  He  cannot  have  mercy  and  wrath 
without  a cause.  In  the  absence  of  good  and  evil  works  being 
accumulated  in  the  previous  life,  mercy  to  some  and  wrath  against 
others  are  not  possible  in  the  face  of  justice.  If  it  is  a fact  what  is 
written  in  the  commentary  on  this  verse,  that  God  made  men  pro- 
nounce it  so  that  they  may  always  repeat  it  in  that  way;  the  alphabet 
of  Arabic  must  also  have  been  taught  by  God.  If  it  be  said  that  this 
chapter  could  not  be  read  without  the  knowledge  of  the  alphabet,  it 
is  asked  if  they  were  made  to  utter  it  out  of  their  throat  and  they 
uttered  it  so.  If  it  is  so,  the  whole  Koran  must  have  been  taught 
with  the  utterance  of  the  throat.  Therefore  the  book  which  contains 
things  of  partiality,  cannot  be  called  as  made  by  God.  As  it  is  given 
by  God  in  Arabic,  the  understanding  of  it  is  easy  to  the  Arabs  but 
difficult  to  others,  a fact  which  charges  God  with  partiality.  This 
defect  or  blame  could  not  have  been  imputed  to  him,  had  he  reveal- 
ed it  in  Sanscrit,  which  is  distinct  from  all  languages  out  of  his  equi- 
table justice  to  the  people  of  all  the  countries  in  the  world. 

Alkoran 

5.  — This  book  in  which  there  is  no  doubt  shows  the  way  to  the 
pious,  who  believe  in  the  future  state,  say  prayers,  and  live  on  what 
we  have  bestowed  on  them.  Those  people  who  believe  in  the  book 
which  is  sent  down  to  thee,  or  in  those  books  which  had  been  sent 
down  to  prophets  before  thee,  who  believe  in  thee  are  directed  by 
their  Lord,  and  it  is  they  who  will  be  saved.  Verily,  the  unbelievers 
will  not  believe,  whether  thou  admonish  or  do  not  admonish  them, 
which  is  all  the  same  to  them;  God  hath  sealed  their  hearts  and  ears, 
and  a veil  covereth  their  eyes;  great  torment  is  in  store  for  them. — 
M.  1,  S 10,  s 2,  v.  1—6. 

R. — Is  it  not  an  instance  of  arrogance  on  the  part  of  God  to 
praise  his  own  book  ? Those  who  are  pious  are  on  the  right  path  by 
themselves;  and  this  Koran  cannot  show  it  to  those  who  are  in  the 
false  way.  Then  what  Is  the  use  of  it  ? Does  God  make  bestowals 


The  Religion  of  Moslems 


509 


for  expenses  out  of  his  own  treasury  without  regard  to  virtue,  vice 
and  exertion.  If  he  does,  why  does  he  not  give  it  to  all  ? Why  do 
the  Mussulmans  work  ? If  it  is  proper  to  believe  in  the  Bible,  gospel, 
and  other  revealed  books;  why  do  the  Mussulmans  not  believe  in 
them  as  they  do  in  the  Koran  ! But  if  they  do,  what  is  the  need  of 
the  Koran  ! If  it  be  said  that  the  Koran  contains  more  things,  God 
must  have  forgotten  to  mention  them  in  previous  books.  But  if  he 
did  not,  the  making  of  the  Koran  was  useless.  We  see  that  with  a 
few  exceptions,  all  the  teachings  of  the  Bible  and  Koran  are  alike. 
Why  did  not  God  make  one  book  like  the  Veda?  Should  the  end  of 
the  world  be  believed  and  not  any  other  doctrine  ? Are  the  Mussul- 
mans and  Christians  only  directed  by  the  Lord,  and  is  there  no  sinner 
among  them?  If  the  pious  Christians  and  Mussulmans  be  saved,  but 
not  other  pious  people,  will  it  be  not  great  injustice  and  lawlessness? 
Is  it  not  like  a decree  ex  parte  to  call  those  people  infidels  who  are  not 
Mussulmans?  If  God  hath  sealed  the  hearts  and  ears  of  the  unbeliev- 
ers whereby  they  commit  sin,  they  are  not  to  blame,  but  it  is  God 
himself  who  is  to  blame.  Then  they  have  nothing  to  do  with  good 
and  evil,  pleasure  and  pain;  why  does  God  give  them  reward  and 
punishment  ? For,  they  were  not  at  liberty  to  do  good  and  evil. 

6.  — There  is  disease  in  their  hearts  and  God  hath  increased  their 
disease  or  infirmity. — M 1,  S 1,  s 2,  A 9. 

R, — Hollo,  God  increased  their  disease  without  their  fault ! He 
never  showed  mercy  to  them  ! They  must  have  felt  much  aggrieved. 
Is  it  not  greater  diabolism  than  that  of  Satan  ? It  cannot  be  the 
work  of  God  to  seal  the  hearts  of  some,  to  increase  the  disease  of 
others;  for,  the  increase  of  disease  is  caused  by  sins. 

7.  — Fear  him,  who  has  spread  the  earth  as  a bed  for  you,  and 
the  heaven  as  a covering  or  ceiling, — M 1,  S 1,  S 2,  A 21. 

R. — Can  the  heaven  be  anybody’s  ceiling  ? It  is  an  instance  of 
ignorance.  It  is  ridiculous  to  regard  the  heaven  as  the  ceiling  If 
they  believe  any  planet  to  be  the  heaven,  it  is  their  own  belief. 

8.  — If  ye  be  in  doubt  concerning  that  revelation  which  we  have 
sent  down  unto  our  servant  (prophet),  produce  a chapter  like  unto  it, 
and  call  upon  your  witnesses,  besides  God,  if  ye  say  truth.  But  if 
ye  do  it  not,  fear  the  fire,  whose  fuel  is  men  and  stones,  prepared  for 
unbelievers.— -M  1,  S 1,  S 2,  q 22,  23. 

i?.— Is  it  difficult  to  produce  a chapter  like  it  ? Did  not  Fezi 
make  a Koran  without  a dot*  in  the  time  of  Akbar  ? What  fire  of 
hell  is  that  ? Shall  this  fire  be  not  dreaded  ? Its  fuel  is  all  that  is 
thrown  into  it.  As  it  is  written  in  the  Koran  that  stones  are  prepar- 
ed for  unbelievers,  so  the  Puranas  also  say  that  a fearful  hell  is  pre- 
pared for  mlechhas  or  nonsanscritarians.  Now,  tell  me  which  of 
them  should  be  believed  ? According  to  their  own  assertion  they  are 
to  go  to  heaven;  but  according  to  the  assertion  of  others,  i.e.,  oppo- 
nents, they  are  to  go  to  hell.  Hence  their  contention  is  all  false;  but 

♦Many  Arabic  letters  have  dots  above  and  beneath  them,  as  bay,  zay,  &c. 
Hence  to  use  such  words  as  have  no  dotted  letter  shows  the  extraordinary  com- 
mand over  the  language  of  Fezi  who  wrote  a Koran  without  a dotted  letter. 
Without  a dot  also  means  without  a flaw. 


510  Satyarth  Prakash 

the  truth  is  that  in  all  religions  the  righteous  will  get  happiness  and 
the  wicked  torment. 

9.  — And  bear  good  tidings  unto  these  who  believe  and  do  good 
works,  that  they  shall  have  gardens  watered  by  rivers;  so  often  as 
they  eat  the  fruit  thereof  for  sustenance,  they  shall  say,  This  is  what 
we  were  formerly  given;  and  there  are  for  them  holy  wives  always 
dwelling  there. — M 1,  S I,  S 2,  A 24. 

/?.— Well,  in  what  respect  is  this  paradise  of  the  Koran  better 
than  the  world?  For,  the  same  objects  that  are  in  the  world,  are  also 
in  the  heaven  of  the  Mussulmans;  only  that  the  dwellers  of  the  para- 
dise do  not  die,  come  and  go  as  the  people  of  the  world,  and  like  the 
women  of  the  world,  who  never  live  here  for  ever,  the  holy  wives  of 
the  paradise  live  for  ever.  Well,  till  the  end  of  the  world  comes, 
how  will  they  pass  their  nights  ? Yes,  it  is  all  right,  if  God  is  kind  to 
them,  and  they  pass  their  time  in  his  service.  For,  this  paradise  of 
the  Mussulmans  looks  like  the  Go-loke  or  heaven  and  temples  of  the 
Gosains  of  Gokul  or  monks  of  Brindaban.  For,  women  are  held  in 
great  honour,  but  not  men.  In  the  same  way,  women  are  held  in  great 
esteem  in  the  house  of  God.  God’s  love  for  them  is  also  great,  but 
not  for  the  men,  for,  God  has  suffered  the  women  to  dwell  there  for 
ever,  but  not  men.  How  can  those  women  live  for  ever  in  paradise 
without  the  consent  of  God  ! If  it  be  so,  God  may  fall  in  love  with 
the  women. 

God  Teaches  Adam 

10.  — He  taught  Adam  the  names  of  all  things,  and  then  propos- 
ing them  to  the  angels,  said,  Declare  unto  me  the  names  of  these 
things  if  ye  say  truth.  (They  not  telling  them)  God  said,  O Adam,  tell 
them  their  names.  And  when  he  had  told  them  their  names,  God 
said.  Did  I not  tell  you  that  I know  the  secrets  of  heaven  and  earth, 
and  know  the  actions  overt  and  covert. — M I,  S 1,  s 2,  A 29,  31. 

R. — Well,  can  it  be  the  work  of  God  to  deceive  the  angels  to 
add  to  his  greatness?  It  is  an  act  of  arrogance,  no  learned  person  will 
admit  its  propriety,  nor  will  anybody  be  so  proud  of  it.  Does  God 
wish  to  establish  his  fame  of  omniscience  on  the  performance  of  such 
an  act?  Verily,  such  vanity  may  succeed  if  practiced  among  savages, 
but  never  among  the  civilised. 

Worship  of  Adam 

11.  — When  we  said  unto  the  angels.  Worship  Adam,  they  all 
worshipped  him,  except  Satan,  who  refused,  and  was  puffed  up  with 
pride;  for,  he,  too,  was  an  unbeliever.  — M 1,  S 1,  s 2,  A 32. 

R. — It  proves  God  is  not  omnicient,  that  is,  he  does  not  know 
completely  of  the  past,  present  and  future.  If  he  knew  it,  why  should 
he  have  created  Satan?  Also,  God  has  no  influence;  for,  Satan  did 
not  obey  his  order,  and  God  could  do  nothing  of  him.  See  Satan 
took  God  to  task  single-handed,  so  how  can  the  Mussulmans  and  their 
God  prevail  where  there  are  millions  of  infidels.  God  at  times  in- 
creases the  disease  of  some  and  misleads  others;  He  may  have  pro- 


The  Religion  of  Moslems 


511 


bably  learnt  these  things  from  Satan,  and  he  from  God;  for,  there  can 
be  no  teacher  of  Satan  except  God. 

Satan  deceives  Adam 

12.  — We  said,  O Adam,  dwell  thou  and  thy  wife  in  the  garden, 
and  eat  of  the  fruit  thereof  plentifully  wherever  ye  will;  but  approach 
not  this  tree,  lest  ye  become  of  the  number  of  transgressors.  But 
Satan  tempted  and  caused  them  to  forfeit  the  happiness  of  paradise. 
Whereupon  we  said,  Get  ye  down,  there  are  enemies  of  one  another 
among  you.  There  shall  be  a dwelling  place  for  you  on  earth,  and  a 
provision  for  a season.  And  Adam  learnt  a few  things  from  his  Lord, 
and  got  down  upon  the  earth. — M 1,  S 1,  s 2,  A 33 — 35. 

R. — Now  look  at  the  short-sightedness  of  God.  At  first  he 
blessed  them  with  an  abode  in  heaven,  and  then  a little  after  told 
them  to  get  down  from  it.  Had  he  known  the  future,  why  should  he 
have  given  them  a benediction?  He  appears  to  be  powerless  in  punish- 
ing the  deceitful  Satan?  For  whom  did  he  create  that  tree?  Was 
it  for  himself  or  for  others?  If  for  others,  why  did  he  forbid  Adam? 
Therefore  such  things  cannot  be  of  God,  nor  of  the  book  made  by 
him.  How  many  things  did  Adam  learn  from  God?  When  Adam 
came  to  the  earth,  how  did  he  come?  Is  that  paradise  on  a mountain 
or  in  heaven?  How  did  he  descend  therefrom?  Did  he  come  down 
flying  like  a bird,  or  like  a stone  falling  upon  the  earth,  from  above? 
It  is  evident  from  it  that  since  Adam,  was  created  out  of  earth,  there 
must  be  earth  in  their  paradise.  Also,  all  the  angels  and  others  that 
are  there  must  be  like  him.  For  the  division  of  the  senses  cannot 
take  place  without  the  physical  body.  Where  there  is  an  earthly  body 
. there  must  needs  be  death.  If  they  die  there,  where  do  they  go  there- 
from? If  there  is  no  death,  there  is  no  birth.  When  there  is  birth, 
there  must  needs  be  death.  If  it  is  so,  what  is  written  in  the  Koran, 
namely,  the  holy  women  always  live  in  the  paradise,  will  prove  to  be 
untrue.  For,  they  must  die.  Under  such  circumstances  the  persons 
going  to  the  paradise  must  also  die. 

13.  — Dread  the  day  wherein  one  soul  shall  not  depend  upon 
another,  neither  shall  any  intercession  be  accepted  of  them,  nor  shall 
any  compensation  be  received,  neither  they  shall  be  helped. — M I,  S 1, 
s 2,  A 46. 

Shall  we  not  dread  the  present  day?  In  doing  evil,  we 
should  dread  all  days.  If  no  intercession  be  accepted,  will  God  give 
an  abode  in  the  paradise  on  the  Prophet’s  evidence  or  recommenda- 
tion? How  can  this  be  true?  Is  God  the  helper  of  the  dwellers  of 
the  paradise,  and  not  of  those  of  the  hell  or  gehena?  If  it  be  so,  God 
is  unjust. 

14.  — We  gave  Moses  the  book  of  the  law;  and  power  to  work 
miracles.  We  said  unto  them  who  transgressed  on  the  sabbath  day, 
be  ye  changed  into  apes  and  we  made  them  an  example  unto  those 
who  were  contemporary  with  them,  and  unto  those  who  came  after 
them,  and  a warning  to  the  pious. — M 1,  S 1,  s 2,  A 50-61. 

R. — If  God  gave  the  book  of  the  law  to  Moses,  the  need  of  the 
Koran  is  done  away  with.  As  stated  in  the  Bible  and  the  Koran  that 


512 


Satyarth  Prakash 


God  gave  Moses  the  power  of  working  miracles,  it  is  not  proper  to 
believe  it;  for  had  it  been  a fact,  it  would  have  been  possible  of  occur- 
rence at  present.  As  it  is  not  in  the  now,  it  was  not  in  the  past.  It 
must  have  been  a fraud  then,  as  the  selfish  now-a-days  set  up  them- 
selves for  learned  people  among  the  ignorant.  For,  God  and  his 
servants  still  exist,  why  does  he  not  give  any  of  them  the  power  of 
working  wonders?  They  cannot  bring  any  sign  now.  What  was  the 
need  of  the  Koran,  when  the  book  of  the  law  was  given  to  Moses?  If 
the  direction  for  the  distinction  between  good  and  evil  be  the  same 
everywhere,  then  making  separate  books  of  the  same  is  open  to  the 
charge  of  tautology  and  repetition.  Did  God  forget  to  write  in  Moses’ 
book  what  he  wrote  in  the  Koran?  If  God  condemned  the  sabbath 
breakers  to  turn  damnable  monkeys  to  strike  fear,  it  was  a falsehood 
or  a trick.  Whoever  does  such  things  cannot  be  God  and  whatever 
contains  such  things  cannot  be  the  book  made  by  God. 

Miracles 

15.  — So  God  raiseth  the  dead  to  life,  and  showeth  you  his  signs, 
that  peradventure  ye  may  understand. — M I,  S 1,  S 2,  v 67 

R. — If  God  raised  the  dead  to  life  then,  why  does  he  not  do  so 
now?  Will  they  lie  in  graves  till  the  night  of  the  end  of  the  world? 
Now-a-days  they  are  committed  to  sessions,  so  to  say.  Are  the  signs 
of  God  so  many  only?  Are  not  the  earth,  sun,  moon,  and  others  the 
miracles  of  God?  Is  the  variety  of  design  visible  in  the  objects  of  the 
world  less  than  a sign  from  God? 

Good  Works 

16.  — They  (who  believe  and  do  good  works)  shall  be  the  com- 
panions of  paradise,  they  shall  continue  therein  forever. — M 1,  S 1,  S 2, 
v 75. 

R. — No  soul  has  power  to  do  infinite  good  or  evil.  There  it 
cannot  always  dwell  in  heaven  or  hell.  If  God  permitted  so,  he 
would  be  unjust  and  ignorant.  If  all  be  judged  in  the  night  of  the 
world’s  end,  their  good  and  evil  works  should  be  equal.  As  actions 
are  not  infinite,  how  can  their  consequence  be  infinite?  As  it  is  said 
that  the  world  has  been  seven  or  eight  thousand  years  old,  was  God 
idle  before  that  time?  He  will  be  idle  after  the  end  of  the  world.  All 
such  assertions  are  like  the  prattling  of  a child.  For  God’s  works 
endure  forever.  He  judges  all  according  to  their  good  or  evil  works. 
Hence  this  teaching  of  the  Koran  is  not  right. 

1 7.  — When  we  accepted  your  covenant,  saying.  Ye  shall  not 
shed  your  brother’s  blood,  nor  dispossess  one  another  of  your  habit- 
ations. Then  ye  confirmed  it,  and  were  witnesses  thereto.  After- 
wards ye  were  they  who  slew  one  another,  and  turned  several  of  your 
brethren  out  of  their  houses. — M 1,  S 1,  s 2,  v 77,  78. 

Covenant 

R. — Well,  is  it  human  or  is  it  divine  to  make  or  accept  cove- 
nants ? If  God  is  omniscient  why  should  he  act  like  a stiff  necked 


The  Religion  of  Moslems 


513 


worldly  man  ? Well,  is  it  a good  conduct  not  to  shed  the  blood  of 
one  another  and  not  to  turn  one’s  own  co-religionists  out  of  their 
houses,  that  is  to  say,  to  shed  the  blood  of  the  persons  of  different 
religions,  and  to  turn  them  out  of  their  houses  ? It  is  the  teaching  of 
falsehood,  ignorance,  and  partiality.  Did  not  God  know  at  first  that 
they  would  break  the  covenant  ? Thus  it  is  plain  that  the  God  of 
the  Mussulmans  has  much  similarity  to  that  of  the  Christians,  and 
the  Koran  cannot  be  an  independent  book;  for  all  its  subject-matter 
with  a few  exceptions  belongs  to  the  Bible. 

18.  — These  are  they  who  have  purchased  this  present  life,  at  the 
price  of  that  which  is  to  come;  wherefore  their  punishment  shall  not 
be  mitigated,  neither  shall  they  be  helped. — M I,  S 1,  S 2,  v 29. 

R — Can  such  enmity  and  hatred  be  expected  from  God  ? Who 
are  they  whose  sins  will  be  mitigated,  and  who  will  be  helped  ? If 
they  are  sinners  and  if  they  be  relieved  without  receiving  punishment, 
it  will  be  an  act  of  injustice.  If  they  be  lightened  after  receiving 
punishment,  they  who  are  mentioned  in  the  above  verse,  will  be  light- 
ened by  getting  punishment.  If  they  be  not  lightened  after  receiving 
punishment,  it  will  also  be  an  act  of  injustice.  If  the  righteous  are 
meant  by  those  whose  punishment  will  be  mitigated,  their  sins  are 
light  of  their  own  accord,  what  will  God  do  with  them  ? So  it  is  not 
written  by  a learned  man.  In  truth  it  is  proper  to  give  happiness  to 
the  righteous  and  torment  to  the  unrighteous  according  to  their  works. 

19.  — Verily,  we  gave  the  book  of  the  law  unto  Moses,  and 
caused  apostles  to  succeed  him,  and  gave  evident  miracles  to  Jesus 
the  son  of  Mary,  and  strengthened  him  with  the  holy  spirit.  Do  ye 
therefore,  whenever  an  apostle  cometh  unto  you  with  that  which  your 
souls  desire  not,  proudly  reject  him;  and  accuse  some  of  imposture, 
and  slay  others  ?— M 1,  S 1,  S 2,  A 80. 

R, — When  there  is  an  evidence  of  the  Koran  that  God  gave  the 
book  of  the  law  to  Moses,  it  is  obligatory  upon  the  Mussulmans  to 
believe  in  it.  Its  defects  are  transmitted  to  the  Moslem  religion.  All 
that  is  said  of  miracles  is  contrary  to  nature.  They  are  fraudulently 
spread  to  ensnare  simple  folks  into  their  religion.  For,  what  is 
against  the  laws  of  nature  and  the  teachings  of  knowledge,  is  rele- 
gated to  falsehood.  If  there  were  miracles  then,  why  do  they  not 
take  place  now  ? If  they  are  not  possible  at  the  present  time,  they 
never  existed  then.  There  is  not  the  least  doubt  at  all. 

Infidels 

20.  — Although  they  had  before  prayed  for  assistance  against 
those  who  believed  not,  yet  when  that  came  unto  them  which  they 
knew  to  be  from  God,  they  would  not  believe  therein  : therefore  the 
curse  of  God  shall  be  on  the  infidels.— M 1,  S 1,  S 2,  v 82. 

R. — Do  not  the  people  of  other  faiths  call  you  infidels  as  you 
call  them  so,  and  bring  curse  from  their  God  on  you  ? Which  of  you 
is  false,  and  which  true  ? If  we  think,  we  shall  find  falsehood  in  all 
faiths,  and  what  is  truth,  is  alike  in  all,  and  all  contention  originates 
in  ignorance. 


514 


Satyarth  Prakash 


21.  — Good  tidings  to  the  faithful.  Whoever  is  an  enemy  to 
God,  or  his  angels,  or  his  apostles,  or  to  Gabriel,  or  Michael,  verily 
God  is  an  enemy  to  the  unbelievers. — M 1,  S 1,  S 2,  v 90. 

R, — As  the  Mussulmans  say  that  God  is  without  a partner — 
la  sharik,  whence  is  this  whole  host  of  partners  (shariks)  ? Is  he  who 
is  an  enemy  to  others,  an  enemy  to  God  ? If  it  is  so,  it  is  not  right. 
For,  God  cannot  be  an  enemy  to  anybody. 

Forgiveness 

22.  — Say,  forgiveness  ! We  will  pardon  you  your  sins,  and 
give  increase  unto  the  well-doers. — M 1,  S 1,  S 2,  v 54. 

jR. — Will  or  will  not  this  teaching  of  God  turn  all  sinners  ? 
When  the  people  have  hope  of  forgiveness,  they  do  not  fear  sins. 
Hence  the  being  who  says  so,  cannot  be  God,  nor  can  this  be  the 
book  made  by  God.  For  God  is  just,  He  never  does  injustice.  For- 
giveness will  make  him  unjust.  He  can  be  just  only  when  he  punishes 
the  people  according  to  their  sins. 

Moses’  Miracle 

23.  — When  Moses  asked  drink  for  his  people;  we  said,  Strike 
the  rock  with  thy  rod;  and  there  gushed  out  of  it  twelve  fountains. — 
M 1,  S 1,  S 2,  V 56. 

i?.— Now  see,  will  anybody  say  such  impossible  things  ? It  is 
altogether  impossible  that  twelve  fountains  should  gush  out  by  strik- 
ing a rock  with  a rod.  Well,  it  may  be  possible,  if  it  was  hollow  and 
filled  with  water  and  then  broached,  but  not  otherwise. 

24.  — God  sendeth  down  his  mercy  to  such  of  his  servants  as  he 
pleaseth.— M 1,  S I,  S 2,  v 97. 

R. — Does  he  show  his  mercy  or  favour  to  such  as  are  not  fit 
for  it  ? If  he  does  so,  he  utterly  disregards  the  law.  For,  who  will 
then  do  good  works  ? and  who  will  desist  from  evil  ? For,  they  will 
depend  upon  the  pleasure  of  God,  and  not  on  the  consequences  of 
works.  It  will  establish  uncertainty  and  the  futility  of  the  value  of 
works. 

25.  — See  lest  the  unbelievers  render  you  unbelievers  out  of  envy, 
for  there  are  many  friends  among  them  of  the  believers. — M 1,  S 1, 
S 2,  V 101. 

R. — Now  see  God  himself  gives  them  a hint  that  the  infidels 
may  not  shake  them  of  their  belief.  Is  he  not  omniscient  ? It  can- 
not be  said  of  God. 

Praying  Side 

26.  — Wheresoever  ye  turn  yourselves  to  pray,  there  is  the  face 
of  God.— M 1,  S 1,  S 2,  V 107. 

/{.—If  it  is  true,  why  do  the  Mussulmans  turn  their  face  to 
Mecca  (Kibla)  ? If  they  say  they  have  an  order  to  turn  their  face  to 
Mecca  it  is  also  an  order  here  to  turn  wheresoever  they  like.  Will  one 


The  Religion  of  Moslems 


515 


of  them  be  true  and  the  other  false  ? Also,  if  God  has  a face,  it  can- 
not be  towards  all  sides.  For  one  face  must  be  towards  one  side. 
How  can  it  be  towards  all  sides  ? Therefore,  it  is  inconsistent. 

27.  — (All  is  possessed  by  him),  the  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth; 
and  when  he  decreeth  a thing,  he  only  saith  unto  it.  Be,  and  it  is. — 
M 1,  S 1,  S 2,  V 109. 

R, — Well,  when  God  gives  the  order  Be,  who  hears  it  ? Whom 
did  he  give  it  ? What  was  formed  ? What  cause  was  it  made  from  ? 
As  they  say  there  was  nothing  but  God  before  the  creation,  whence 
has  this  world  come  ? No  effect  takes  place  without  its  cause. 
Whence  has  come  such  a big  world  without  its  cause  ? The  assertion 
is  merely  childish. 

Affirmer. — Not  so.  It  came  out  of  God’s  desire. 

Denier. — Can  a leg  of  the  fly  be  made  out  of  your  desire,  since 
you  say  all  this  world  is  made  out  of  God’s  desire  ? 

A. — God  is  almighty.  So  he  does  what  he  likes. 

D, — What  is  the  meaning  of  the  word  almighty  ? 

A. — He  can  do  what  he  likes. 

D. — Can  God  create  another  God  ? Can  he  die  of  his  own 
accord  ? Can  he  be  ignorant,  sick  and  foolish  ? 

A. — No,  he  can  not  be  so. 

D. — Therefore,  God  cannot  do  anything  against  his  own  and 
others’  qualities,  actions  and  nature.  In  the  world  three  things  are 
required  in  the  construction  of  an  object.  1.  The  maker,  as  a potter; 
2.  Clay  to  form  a pitcher;  3.  Its  means  or  instruments  with  which 
the  pitcher  is  made.  As  a potter  makes  a pitcher  out  of  clay  with 
instruments,  and  as  clay  and  instruments  exist  before  the  construction 
of  a pitcher;  so  before  the  creation  of  the  world  there  existed  the  cause 
of  the  world,  namely,  Prakriti : nature  or  matter,  qualities,  actions  and 
nature,  which  are  unbeginning.  Hence  this  doctrine  of  the  Koran  is 
altogether  impossible. 

Kaaba  or  Temple  of  Mecca 

28.  — When  we  appointed  the  holy  house  of  Mecca  to  be  the 
place  of  resort  for  mankind,  and  a place  of  security;  and  said,  Take 
the  station  of  Abraham  for  a place  of  prayer. — M 1,  S 1,  S 2,  v 117, 

R.'—Dkl  not  God  make  or  appoint  any  holy  place  before  the 
existence  of  the  Kaaba  or  the  house  of  Mecca  ? If  he  did,  there  was 
no  necessity  of  making  the  house  or  temple  of  Mecca.  If  he  did  not, 
he  deprived  the  previous  generations  of  a holy  place  for  resort.  God 
might  perhaps  not  have  remembered  before  to  make  a holy  place. 

29. — Who  will  be  averse  to  the  religion  of  Abraham,  but  he 
whose  mind  is  infatuated  ? Surely  we  have  chosen  him  in  this  world, 
and  in  that  which  is  to  come  he  shall  be  one  of  the  righteous. — M 1, 
S 1,S2,  V 122. 

How  is  it  possible  that  all  that  do  not  believe  in  the  religion 
of  Abraham,  are  foolish  ? What  is  the  cause  that  God  chose  Abraham 


516 


Satyarth  Prakash 


only  ? If  he  chose  him  because  of  his  being  righteous,  there  can  be 
many  other  righteous  people.  If  he  chose  him  without  his  being 
righteous,  he  did  injustice.  Verily,  it  is  right  that  whoever  is  righteous, 
is  dear  to  God,  but  not  unrighteous. 

Keblah 

30. — We  have  seen  thee  turn  about  thy  face  towards  heaven 
with  uncertainty,  but  we  will  cause  thee  to  turn  thyself  towards  a 
Keblah  that  will  please  thee.  Turn  therefore,  thy  face  towards  the 
holy  temple  of  Mecca;  and  wherever  ye  be,  turn  your  faces  towards 
that  place—M  1,  S 1,  S 2,  v 135. 

R — Is  it  a small  idolatry  ? No,  it  is  a big  one. 

Affirmer. — We  the  Mussulmans  are  not  idolaters  but  rather  wc 
are  inconoclasts  or  idol-breakers;  for  we  do  not  regard  Keblah  to  be 
God. 


Denier. — They  whom  you  regard  to  be  idolaters,  do  not  regard 
the  idols  to  be  God;  but  they  pray  to  God  before  them.  If  you  are 
iconoclasts,  why  do  you  not  break  the  Keblah^  a great  idol  ? (The 
Block  Stone  of  Abraham). 

Why  so,  there  is  an  order  in  the  Koran  that  we  should  turn 
our  face  towards  the  Keblah.  But  they  have  no  such  order  in  the 
Veda,  so  how  can  they  not  be  idolaters?  How  can  we  be  so  ? For,  it 
is  incumbent  upon  us  to  obey  God’s  command. 

/).— They  have  got  an  order  in  their  Purana  as  you  have  in  your 
Koran.  They  believe  the  Purana  to  be  the  word  of  Vyasa,  the  incar- 
nation of  God,  as  you  believe  the  Koran  to  be  the  word  of  God.  With 
regard  to  idolatry,  there  is  no  ditference  between  them  and  you.  On 
the  contrary,  you  are  great  idolaters,  and  they  are  small.  The  case  of 
the  Mussulmans  is  like  that  a man  was  to  turn  a cat  got  in  before  him 
out  of  the  house,  but,  lo,  a camel  got  in  to  boot.  In  like  manner, 
the  Mussulmans  turned  small  idols  out  of  their  religion,  but  the  great 
idol  like  the  mountain  which  the  mosque  of  Mecca  is  with  its  Black 
Stone  is  thrust  upon  Islam.  Is  it  a small  idolatry  ? Verily,  if  you 
accept  the  Vedic  religion  as  we  d6,  you  will  be  free  from  idolatry  and 
other  evils,  but  not  otherwise.  So  long  as  you  do  not  abjure  your 
great  idolatry,  you  should  feel  ashamed  of  refuting  small  idolaters  and 
desist  from  it.  You  should  make  yourselves  sanctified  by  being  away 
from  idolatry. 

31.  —Say  not  of  those  who  are  slain  in  fight  for  the  religion  of 
God,  that  they  are  dead;  yea  they  are  living.— M 1,  S 2,  S 2,  v 144. 

i?.— Well,  what  is  the  necessity  of  dying  or  killing  in  fight  for 
the  religion  of  God?  Why  don’t  you  say  that  it  is  for  your  selfish 
purpose  ? For,  with  this  bate,  the  people  will  fight  hard.  You  will 
win.  They  will  not  fear  to  die.  Plunder  will  bring  much  wealth  to 
you.  Afterwards  ypu  will  indulge  in  sensuality.  It  is  for  such  and 
similar  purposes  that  this  extraordinary  teaching  is  given  out 

32. — And  that  he  is  severe  in  punishing.  Follow  not  the  steps  of 
Satan,  for  he  is  your  open  enemy.  Verily  he  commandeth  you  evil  and 


The  Religion  of  Moslems 


517 


wickedness,  and  that  ye  should  say  that  of  God  which  ye  know  not.*— 
M J,  S 2,  S 2,  V 151,  154,  155, 

/?.— Is  God  merciful  to  the  virtuous  and  severe  in  punishing  the 
vicious;  or  is  he  merciful  to  the  Mussulmans  and  cruel  to  others  ? If 
he  is  so,  he  cannot  be  God.  If  he  is  not  partial,  he  will  be  merciful  to 
him  who  is  virtuous  be  he  anywhere,  and  punish  him  who  commits 
vice.  In  such  a case,  it  is  not  necessary  to  believe  in  Prophet  Mahomed 
and  the  Koran.  As  regards  Satan,  who  tempts  people  to  sin  and  who 
is  the  open  enemy  of  mankind,  why  has  God  created  him  ? Did  he 
not  know  what  would  happen  in  the  future  ? If  it  be  said  that  he  knew 
the  future;  but  he  made  the  devil  for  trying  people;  it  is  not  tenable; 
for,  it  is  the  work  of  the  finite  to  make  a trial;  the  infinite  knows  the 
good  and  evil  works  of  all  souls  thoroughly  from  eternity.  As  Satan 
tempts  all  to  sin,  who  has  tempted  him  to  it?  If  it  be  said  that  Satan 
is  misled  by  himself,  the  others  can  also  be  misled  in  the  same  way. 
Then  what  is  the  use  of  Satan?  ,If  God  himself  misled  Satan,  he 
would  be  the  devil  of  devils.  It  cannot  be  the  work  of  God.  Whoever 
mislead  others,  is  corrupted  by  evil  company  and  utter  ignorance. 

33.  — Verily  he  hath  forbidden  you  to  eat  that  which  dieth  of 
itself  and  blood,  and  swine’s  flesh,  and  that  on  which  any  other  name 
but  God’s  hath  been  invocated. — M 1,  S 1,  S 2,  v 159. 

R. — It  is  worth  while  to  think  that  what  death  of  itself  or  is 
slaughtered,  is  all  the  same.  There  may  be  a little  difference  in  other 
respects  yet  there  is  no  difference  whatever  in  the  fact  of  dying.  As 
the  swine’s  flesh  is  particularly  mentioned  as  being  forbidden,  can  it 
be  supposed  that  it  is  proper  to  eat  man’s  flesh  ? Can  it  be  a good 
thing  to  kill  animals  and  enemies  in  the  name  of  God  with  extreme 
pain  ? It  throws  a blot  on  the  name  of  God.  Is  not  God  merciful  to 
them,  that  he  has  given  them  extreme  pain  at  the  hands  of  the  Mus- 
sulmans without  the  sins  of  their  previous  existence  ? He  does  not 
regard  them  as  his  children.  Inasmuch  as  God  does  not  forbid  the 
killing  of  cows  and  other  animals  highly  beneficial  to  the  world,  he 
causes  their  murder,  as  it  were,  and  thus  becomes  the  author  of  harm 
to  it.  He  stands  charged  with  the  sin  of  murder.  Such  teachings  can- 
not be  of  God  or  of  the  book  of  God. 

Women  and  Fast 

34.  — It  is  lawful  for  you  on  the  night  of  the  fast  to  go  in  unto 
your  wives,  they  are  a garment  unto  you,  and  ye  are  a garment  unto 
them.  God  knoweth  that  ye  defraud  yourselves  (herein,  wherefore 
he  turneth  unto  you,  and  forgiveth  you.  Now  therefore  go  in  unto 
them;  and  earnestly  desire  that  which  God  ordaineth  you,  and  eat 
and  drink,  until  ye  can  plainly  distinguish  a white  thread  from  a 
black  thread  by  the  daybreak. — M 1,  S 1,  S 2,  v 172 

It  seems  here  certain  that  when  Islam  was  preached  or 
before  it,  somebody  might  have  asked  a believer  in  the  Purana  about 
the  detail  of  the  lunar  fast,  called  the  Chandrayan  in  Sanscrit.  The 
process  given  in  the  Sanscrit  scriptures  is  to  decrease  and  increase 
the  number  of  morsels  in  accordance  with  the  waning  and  waxing  of 
the  digits  of  the  moon,  and  to  take  food  at  midday.  Is  his  ignorance 


518 


Satyarth  Prakash 


of  this  scriptural  injunction  he  might  have  said  in  reply  that  food 
should  be  taken  on  seeing  the  moon.  So  the  Mussulmans  have  modi- 
fied it  according  to  their  circumstances.  But  it  is  forbidden  to  go  to 
women  on  the  fast  day.  So  God  has  added  to  it  that  they  can  go 
in  to  their  wives,  and  eat  during  the  night  as  many  time  as  they  like. 
Well,  what  kind  of  fast  is  it  ? Food  is  not  taken  in  the  day,  it  is 
taken  in  the  night.  It  is  contrary  to  the  laws  of  nature  to  abstain 
from  food  in  day  and  to  take  it  in  night. 

Crecentade 

35. — Fight  for  the  religion  of  God  against  those  who  fight 
against  you.  And  kill  them  wherever  ye  find  them;  for  temptation  to 
idolatry  is  more  grievous  than  slaughter.  Fight  therefore  against 
them,  until  there  be  no  temptation  to  idolatry,  and  the  religion  be 
God’s.  Whoever  transgresseth  against  you  by  so  doing  (/.e.,  by 
attacking  you  within  the  limits  of  Mecca)  do  ye  transgress  against 
him  in  like  manner  as  he  hath  transgressed  against  you. — M 1,  S 2, 
S 2,  V 174—176,  178,  179. 

jR. — If  the  Koran  had  no  such  injunctions  as  above,  the  Mus- 
sulmans would  not  have  transgressed  so  much  against  the  people  of 
other  faiths  as  they  have  done.  It  is  a great  sin  on  their  neck  to 
murder  innocent  people.  Non-belief  in  the  religion  of  the  Mussul- 
mans is  called  infidelity.  The  Mussulmans  regard  slaughter  or  mur- 
der to  be  better  than  infidelity.  They  murder  those  who  do  not  believe 
in  their  faith,  as  they  have  been  doing  all  along.  They  have  fought 
for  religion  till  they  have  lost  their  empire  and  power.  They  are 
very  cruel  to  the  people  of  other  faiths.  Is  theft  to  be  returned  for 
theft  ? Shall  we  commit  theft  to  retaliate  for  the  harm  the  thieves  do 
us?  It  shall  ever  be  an  act  of  injustice.  When  an  ignorant  person 
call  us  names,  shall  we  abuse  him  ? It  can  never  be  the  teaching  of 
God,  of  his  learned  servants,  or  of  his  book.  It  belongs  to  the  selfish 
and  ignorant  person. 

36.  — God  loveth  not  corrupt  doing.  O true  believers,  enter 
into  the  true  religion  wholly. — M 1,  S 2,  S 2,  v 190,  193.  (God 
does  not  love  quarrel.) 

R. — If  God  does  not  love  quarrel,  why  does  he  induce  the 
Mussulmans  to  pick  quarrels  with  other  people?  Why  does  he  love 
the  quarrelling  Mussulmans  ? Is  God  pleased  with  those  who  believe 
in  the  religion  of  the  Mussulmans  ? Then  he  is  partial  to  the  Mussul- 
mans. He  is  not  the  God  of  the  whole  world.  Hence  it  is  apparent 
that  the  Koran  cannot  be  made  by  God,  nor  its  god  the  God  of  all. 

37.  — God  is  bountiful  unto  whom  he  pleaseth  without  measure. 
— M 1,S2,  S2,v  197. 

R. — Does  not  God  give  his  bounty  without  regard  to  persons’ 
good  and  evil  deeds  ? Then  to  do  good  or  evil  is  all  alike.  For  the 
bounty  of  joy  or  sorrow  depends  upon  his  will.  Hence  the  Mussul- 
mans do  what  they  like,  being  averse  to  religion,  and  there  arc  others 
who  not  believing  in  the  Koran  arc  righteous  in  their  life. 

38.  — ^They  will  ask  thee  also  concerning  the  courses  of  women. 
Answer.  They  are  a pollution:  therefore  separate  yourselves  from 


The  Religion  of  Moslems 


519 


women  in  their  courses,  and  go  not  near  them  until  they  be  cleansed. 
But  when  they  are  cleansed,  go  in  unto  them,  as  God  path  command- 
ed you.  Your  wives  are  your  tillage;  go  in  therefore  unto  your  till- 
age in  what  manner  soever  ye  will.  God  will  not  punish  you  for  an 
inconsiderate  work  in  your  oaths.— M 1,  S 2,  S 2,  v 205,  206,  208. 

R, — What  is  written  here  with  respect  to  not  approaching 
women  in  their  monthly  course,  is  right.  But  the  direction  to  men 
to  go  in  to  their  wives,  who  are  their  tillage,  as  they  please,  is  a 
cause  to  make  them  cupidinous.  God  does  not  punish  men  for  an 
inconsiderate  oath,  they  will  tell  lies  and  break  oaths.  It  will  make 
God  an  encourager  of  falsehood. 

Loan  to  God 

39. — Who  is  he  that  will  lend  unto  God  on  good  usury,  verily 
he  will  double  at  unto  him  manifold. — M 1,  S 2,  S 2,  v 227. 

R. — What  has  he  to  do  with  borrowing  ? Will  he  borrow  from 
man,  who  has  made  the  whole  world  ? No,  never.  It  is  said  without 
thinking.  Was  his  treasury  run  empty  ? Was  he  involved  in  loss  by 
going  rashly  into  business  and  being  run  upon  by  drafts  and  cheques, 
so  that  he  now  borrows  money  to  meet  demands,  and  consents  to 
give  double  of  the  loan  ? Is  it  the  work  of  honest  dealer  and  bankers? 
It  is  the  bankrupts  or  those  whose  expense  exceeds  their  income  that 
have  recourse  to  such  measures,  but  never  God  the  almighty. 

40.  — Some  of  them  believed,  and  some  of  them  believed  not; 
and  if  God  had  so  pleased,  they  would  not  have  contended  among 
themselves,  but  God  doth  what  he  will. — M 1,  S 2,  s 2,  v 234. 

R. — Do  all  the  wars  take  place  by  the  will  of  God?  Can  he  do 
evil  or  sin  if  he  will?  If  it  is  so,  he  is  God  no  long;  for,  it  is  not  the 
duty  of  good  people  to  break  peace  and  provoke  war.  Hence  it  is 
plain  that  the  Koran  is  not  made  by  God,  nor  is  it  written  by  a 
virtuous  learned  man. 

41.  — To  him  belongeth  whatsoever  is  in  heaven,  and  on  earth. 
His  throne  is  extended  over  heaven  and  earth. — M 1,  S 3,  s 2,  v 
237.  (Whatever  is  in  heaven  and  earth  is  for  God.) 

R. — Whatever  is  in  heaven  and  earth  is  made  by  God  for  man- 
kind, and  not  for  himself.  For  he  is  perfectly  content,  he  has  no 
desire  for  any  object.  If  there  is  a throne  of  God,  he  is  finite.  He 
who  is  finite,  is  not  called  God.  For,  God  is  infinite  and  all- 
pervading. 

42. — Verily  God  bringeth  the  sun  from  the  east,  now  do  thou 
bring  it  from  the  west.  Whereupon  the  infidel  was  confounded;  for 
God  directeth  not  the  ungodly  people.— M 1,  S 3,  S 2,  A 240. 

See,  it  is  the  talk  of  ignorance.  The  sun  never  comes  from 
the  east  and  goes  to  west  or  vice  versa.  It  rotates  on  its  own  axis.  It 
is  evident  therefrom  that  the  author  of  the  Koran  did  not  know 
either  geography  or  astronomy.  If  God  does  not  direct  the  sinners 
to  the  right  path,  the  righteous  have  no  need  of  the  God  of  the 
Mussulmans;  for  they  are  already, on  the  right  path.  They  are  to  be 


520 


Satyarth  Prakash 


shown  the  right  way  who  are  gone  astray.  Therefore,  it  is  a great 
mistake  of  the  author  of  the  Koran  not  to  do  his  duty  of  showing 
the  right  way  to  the  benighted. 

43.  — (God  said,  to  Abraham)  Take  therefore,  four  birds,  and 
divide  them;  then  lay  a part  of  them  on  every  mountain;  then  call 
them,  and  they  shall  come  swiftly  unto  thee. — M 1,  S 3,  S 2,  v 242. 

R, — Bravo!  See  the  God  of  the  Mussulmans  makes  performances 
like  a juggler.  Is  the  greatness  of  God  founded  on  such  performances? 
The  learned  will  repudiate  such  an  idea  of  God.  The  ignorant  will 
certainly  be  cheated  into  it.  So,  God  w'ill  be  disgraced  rather  than 
glorified. 

44.  — He  giveth  wisdom  unto  whom  he  pleaseth. — M 1,  S 3,  S 2, 
V.  251. 

R. — As  he  giveth  wisdom  to  those  he  is  pleased  with,  he  pro- 
bably gives  unwisdom  to  those  he  is  displeased  with.  It  is  not  god- 
liness. God  preaches  wisdom  to  all  irrespective  of  persons,  and  he 
alone  is  absolute  but  not  others. 

God’s  Arbitrary  Will 

45. — God  will  forgive  whom  he  pleaseth,  and  will  punish  whom 
he  pleaseth;  for  God  is  almighty. 

R. — Is  it  not  like  the  act  of  an  unjust  ruler  to  forgive  the  un- 
deserving and  not  to  forgive  the  deserving?  If  God  makes  virtuous 
or  vicious  persons  of  those  whom  he  pleaseth,  the  charge  of  virtue  and 
vice  should  not  be  laid  at  the  door  of  souls.  If  God  made  souls 
virtuous  and  vicious,  they  should  have  neither  weal  nor  woe;  as  a 
soldier  kills  a man  by  the  order  of  his  commandant,  and  is  not  punish- 
ed for  the  murder.  So  the  souls  should  not  be  punished. 

46.  — Say,  shall  I declare  unto  you  better  things  than  this?  For 
those  who  are  devout  are  prepared  with  their  Lord,  gardens  through 
which  rivers  flow;  therein  shall  they  continue  for  ever;  and  they  shall 
enjoy  wives  free  from  impurity,  and  the  favour  of  God;  for  God 
regardeth  his  servants. — M 1,  S 3,  S 3,  v 12. 

R. — Well,  is  it  a heaven  or  a brother?  Is  he  God  or  a procurer? 
Can  any  sensible  man  take  for  God's  book  what  contains  such  things? 
Why  is  he  partial?  Did  the  women  who  live  in  paradise  for  ever,  go 
there  after  their  existence  on  earth,  or  are  they  born  there?  If  they 
are  gone  there  after  their  earthly  life,  and  are  called  away  before  the 
day  of  resurrection,  why  are  their  husbands  also  not  called  away? 
Why  did  he  break  his  own  law  that  all  will  be  judged  on  the  day  of 
judgment?  If  they  are  born  there,  how  do  they  pass  their  time  there? 
If  they  have  husbands  there,  whence  will  God  provide  the  Mussul- 
mans gone  there  hence  with  wives?  Why  has  not  God  made  men 
dwell  in  paradise  for  ever,  as  he  has  done  women?  Hence  the  God 
of  the  Mussulmans  is  unjust  and  unwise. 

Praise  of  Islam 

47.  — Verily  the  true  religion  in  the  sight  of  God,  is  Islam.— 
M 1,  53,  53,  V 16. 


The  Religion  of  Moslems 


521 


R, — Does  God  belong  to  the  Mussulmans  only,  or  also  to  others? 
Was  there  no  divine  religion  before  1300  years  ago  when  Islam  came 
into  being?  Hence  the  Koran  is  not  made  by  God,  but  by  some 
unjust  man. 

48. — Every  soul  shall  be  paid  which  it  hath  gained,  neither  shall 
they  be  treated  unjustly.  Say,  O God,  thou  possessest  the  kingdom; 
thou  givest  the  kingdom  unto  whom  thou  wilt;  thou  takest  away  the 
kingdom  from  whom  thou  wilt;  thou  exalteth  whom  thou  wilt,  and 
thou  humblest  whom  thou  wilt;  in  thy  hand  is  good,  for  thou  art 
almighty.  Thou  makest  the  night  to  succeed  the  day;  thou  bringest 
forth  the  living  out  of  the  dead,  and  thou  bringest  forth  the  dead  out 
of  living;  and  providest  food  for  whom  thou  wilt  without  measure. 
Let  not  the  faithful  take  the  infidels  for  their  protectors,  rather  than 
the  faithful;  he  who  doth  this  shall  not  be  protected  of  God  at  all. 
Say,  if  ye  love  God,  follow  me : then  God  shall  love  you,  and  forgive 
you  your  sins;  for  God  is  gracious  and  merciful. — M 1,  S 3,  S 3, 
v 21—24,  27. 

R—\f  every  soul  is  to  be  paid  what  it  has  gained,  there  will  be 
no  forgiveness.  If  it  be  forgiven,  there  will  be  no  full  reward,  and 
there  will  be  injustice.  If  God  giveth  kingdoms  without  good  deeds, 
he  will  be  unjust.  Can  it  be  possible  to  bring  forth  the  dead  from 
the  living,  and  vice  versa?  For,  God’s  law  is  inviolate  and  inexorable. 
It  cannot  be  changed.  Now  look  at  the  teachings  of  partiality. 
Those  who  are  not  in  the  fold  of  Moslem  religion,  are  stigmatised 
with  the  epithet  of  infidels.  It  is  here  commanded  not  to  make  friends 
with  the  best  of  them,  but  to  enter  into  friendship  with  wicked 
Mussulmans!  Such  a teaching  ousts  God  from  Godhead.  Hence,  it  is 
plain  that  ignorance  and  partiality  dominate  over  the  Koran,  its  God 
and  the  Mussulmans.  Wherefore  the  Mussulmans  are  in  the  dark  as 
to  truth.  Look  at  Mahomed’s  boast  that  if  they  believed  in  him,  God 
would  love  them,  and  if  they  did  the  sin  of  partiality  for  him,  he  would 
forgive  them  their  sins.  Hence  it  is  certain  that  Mahomed’s  heart 
was  not  pure  and  that  accordingly  he  made  the  Koran  or  got  it  made 
for  him. 


St  Mary 

49. — Angels  said,  O Mary,  the  Lord  hath  chosen  thee  and  exal- 
teth thee  above  all  the  women  of  the  world. — M 1,  S 3,  S 3,  v 35. 

As  God  and  his  angels  do  not  now  come  to  talk  with  any- 
body, how  is  it  they  came  before  for  the  purpose?  If  it  be  said  that 
the  former  generations  were  righteous,  and  the  present  ones  are  not, 
it  is  not  true;  for  there  were  more  people  ignorant  and  barbarian  in 
those  countries  when  the  religions  of  the  Christians  and  the  Mussul- 
mans were  preached  than  now-a-days,  and  so  such  religions  opposed 
to  knowledge  were  accepted  by  them.  Now  there  are  more  enlightened 
people,  and  so  they  do  not  spread;  nay,  such  sham  religions  are  sink- 
ing below  the  horizon  of  knowledge,  much  less  they  make  any  progress 
at  all. 


522 


\ Satyarth  Prakash 


God’s  Stratagem 

50.  — When  he  decreeth  a thing,  he  only  saith  unto  it,  Be,  and  it 
is.  The  infidels  (Jews)  devised  a stratagem  against  him  (Christ);  but 
God  devised  a stratagem  against  them;  and  God  is  the  best  deviser  of 
stratagems.— M 1,  S 3,  S 3,  v 39,  46. 

R.—As  the  Mussulmans  do  not  believe  that  there  existed  any 
other  things  but  God  in  the  beginning,  to  whom  did  God  say.  Be? 
What  was  it  that  came  into  existence?  The  Mussulmans  will  never  be 
able  in  their  whole  life  to  answer  this  question.  For,  an  object  can- 
not come  into  being  without  its  natural  causes.  To  say  that  an  effect 
takes  place  without  its  cause,  is  tantamount  to  saying  that  one’s  body 
came  into  being  without  his  parents.  He  who  is  duped,  or  who 
deceives  and  devises  stratagems,  can  never  be  even  a good  man,  much 
less  the  Deity. 

51.  — Is  it  not  enough  for  you,  that  your  Lord  should  assist  you 
with  3,000  angels. — M 1,  S 4,  S 3,  v 110. 

R. — If  God  assisted  the  Mussulmans  with  3,000  angels,  why 
does  he  not  assist  them  now  when  their  many  kingdoms  are  ruined 
and  are  being  ruined?  Hence  this  assertion  is  to  catch  people  in  their 
snare  and  is  very  revolting  to  the  sense  of  justice. 

52. — And  help  us  against  the  unbelieving  people.  He  is  the 
best  helper  and  benefactor.  If  ye  die  or  be  slain  in  the  cause  of  God, 
ye  shall  rejoice  for  the  favour  of  God. — M 1,  S 4,  S 3,  v 130,  133,  140. 

R, — Look  at  the  error  of  the  Mussulmans,  who  pray  to  God 
for  killing  those  who  don’t  profess  their  religion.  Is  God  so  simple 
as  to  accept  their  prayer  ? If  God  is  the  doer  of  the  Mussulmans’ 
work,  how  is  it  that  they  are  destroyed  or  meet  with  no  success  ? 
God  appears  to  be  attached  to  the  Mussulmans  out  of  his  fondness. 
If  God  is  so  partial  to  one  sect,  he  cannot  be  worthy  of  adoration 
by  the  righteous. 

Belief  in  Apostles 

53.  — Nor  is  God  disposed  to  make  you  acquainted  with  what 
is  a hidden  secret,  but  God  chooseth  such  of  his  apostles  as  he 
pleaseth;  believe  therefore,  in  God,  and  his  apostles. — M 1,  S 4,  S 3, 
V 159 

R. — When  the  Mussulmans  do  not  believe  in  any  other  person 
but  in  God,  nor  do  they  associate  anyone  with  God,  why  have  they 
associated  the  Prophet  with  God  in  their  belief  ? The  Prophet  has 
become  associated  with  God,  since  God  has  so  commanded  in  the 
Koran.  So  it  is  inconsistent  to  call  God  without  an  associate — la 
sharik.  If  it  be  interpreted  to  mean  a belief  in  the  mission  of  Maho- 
med, it  is  asked  what  the  necessity  is  of  his  being  a prophet.  If  God 
cannot  do  his  work  without  making  him  his  prophet,  he  certainly 
becomes  dependent  and  powerless. 

54.  — O true  believers,  be  patient,  support  one  another,  be  en- 
gaged in  war,  fear  God,  that  ye  be  happy. — M 1,  S 4,  S 3,  v 178. 

R. — The  God  of  the  Koran  and  his  prophet  were  both  fond  of 
war.  He  who  sanctions  war,  breaks  peace.  Does  a nominal  fear 


The  Religion  of  Moslems 


523 


of  God  bring  happiness  ? Or  does  it  come  from  the  dread  of  un- 
righteous war  ? If  the  fear  of  God  in  name  will  do,  to  fear  or  not 
to  fear  him  is  alike.  But  if  the  dread  of  bloodshed  destroys  happi- 
ness, it  is  right. 

Belief  in  Mahomed 

55.  — These  are  the  statutes  of  God.  And  whoso  obeyeth  God 
and  his  apostle,  God  shall  lead  him  into  gardens,  wherein  rivers  flow, 
they  shall  continue  therein  for  ever;  and  this  shall  be  great  happiness. 
But  whoso  disobeyeth  God,  and  his  apostle,  and  transgresseth  his 
statutes,  God  shall  cast  him  into  hell  fire;  he  shall  remain  therein  for 
ever,  and  he  shall  suffer  a shameful  punishment. — M 1,  S 4,  S 4,  v 
13,  14. 

God  himself  has  made  Mahomed  his  associate.  It  is  written 
in  the  Koran  itself.  See  how  God  fondles  with  the  Prophet  ! He 
has  made  the  Prophet  the  co-sharer  in  the  paradise.  Not  in  one 
single  thing  is  the  God  of  the  Mussulmans  independent.  It  is  then 
useless  to  call  him  without  the  second  or  associateless.  Such  doctri- 
nes cannot  form  the  subject  of  the  word  of  God. 

56.  — Verily  God  will  not  wrong  any  one  even  the  weight  of  an 
ant  or  mite,  and  if  it  be  a good  action,  he  will  double  it. — M 1,  S 5, 
S 4,  V 37. 

If  God  does  not  do  even  a mite  of  injustice,  why  does  he 
double  a good  deed  ? Why  is  he  very  partial  to  the  Mussulmans  ? 
In  fact,  doubling  or  diminishing  a reward  makes  God  unjust. 

57. — When  they  go  forth  from  thee,  they  meditate  by  night  a 
matter  different  from  what  thou  speakest.  But  God  shall  write  down 
what  they  meditate  by  night,  God  hath  overturned  them  for  what 
they  have  committed.  Will  ye  direct  him  whom  God  hath  led  astray; 
since  for  him  whom  God  shall  lead  astray;  thou  shalt  find  no  true 
path  ?— M 1,  S 5,  S 4,  v 80,  87. 

R. — If  God  writes  all  events  in  books  and  ledgers,  he  is  not 
omniscient.  If  he  is  omniscient,  he  has  no  manner  of  use  of  writing. 
The  Mussulmans  say  that  Satan  has  become  the  devil  by  deceiving 
and  misleading  all;  but  when  God  also  leads  men  astray,  what  is  the 
difference  between  God  and  Satan  ? The  only  difference  seems  to 
be  that  God  is  a great  devil  and  Satan  is  a small  devil.  For  the 
Mussulmans  say  that  whoever  misleads  is  a devil.  This  assertion  has 
made  a devil  of  God. 

Kill  Infidels 

58.  — If  they  (infidels)  not  restrain  their  hands  from  warring 
against  you,  take  them  and  kill  them  wherever  ye  find  them;  it  is  not 
lawful  for  a believer  to  kill  a believer,  whoso  killeih  a believer  by 
mistake,  the  penalty  shall  be  the  freeing  of  a believer  from  slavery, 
and  a fine  to  be  paid  to  the  family  of  the  deceased,  unless  they  remit 
it  as  alms;  and  if  the  slain  person  be  of  a people  at  enmity  with  you, 
and  be  a true  believer,  the  penalty  shall  be  the  freeing  of  a believer. 
But  whoso  killeth  a believer  designedly,  his  reward  shall  be  hell,  be 


524  Satyarth  Prakash 

shall  remain  therein  for  ever,  and  God* shall  be  angry  with  him,  and 
shall  curse  him, — M 1,  S 5,  s 4,  v 90-92. 

R — Now  look  at  the  great  partiality  of  the  Koran,  which 
allows  the  Mussulmans  to  kill  infidels  wherever  they  find  them.  But 
they  are  not  to  kill  their  own  co-religionists.  Killing  a Mussulman 
by  mistake  entails  atonement  only  upon  the  murderer,  but  killing  an 
unbeliever  gives  him  a right  to  enter  paradise.  Such  a direction 
should  be  thrown  into  a well.  Such  a book,  such  a prophet,  such 
a God,  and  such  a religion  do  no  good  but  a positive  harm  to  the 
world.  It  is  better  such  religions  should  not  exist.  Wise  men  should 
shun  such  infatuated  religions,  and  act  on  the  directions  of  the  Veda 
wherein  there  is  not  an  iota  of  falsehood.  They  say  that  hell  is  the 
penalty  for  the  murder  of  a Mussulman:  but  their  opponents  say  that 
heaven  is  the  reward  for  the  murder  of  a Mussulman.  Now  which 
of  them  is  true  ? They  both  should  be  rejected,  being  fanciful  reli- 
gions, and  all  persons  should  believe  in  the  Vedic  religion,  which 
shows  them  the  right  way  of  the  noble-minded,  and  warns  them 
against  the  wrong  way  of  the  wicked,  and  which  consequently  is  the 
best  religion  in  the  world. 

59. — But  whoso  separateth  himself  from  the  apostle,  after  true 
direction  hath  been  manifested  unto  him,  and  followeth  any  other 
way  than  that  of  the  true  believers,  we  will  cause  him  to  obtain  that 
to  which  he  is  inclined,  and  will  cast  him  to  be  burned  in  hell.—M  I , 
S5,  S4,  V 113. 

R. — Now  look  at  the  partiality  of  God  and  this  apostle. 
Mahomed  and  other  apostles  thought  that  if  they  did  not  promulgate 
such  doctrines  in  the  name  of  God,  they  were  not  to  be  accepted  by 
the  people  at  large,  nor  will  they  get  wealth  wherewith  to  live  in  ease. 
Hence  it  is  evident  that  they  were  astute  enough  to  accomplish  their 
sordid  purposes  at  the  expense  of  others.  Wherefore  these  apostles 
were  not  good  people,  and  their  teachings  can  have  no  weight’  with 
the  learned  good  people. 


God’s  Associates 

60.  — And  whosoever  believeth  not  in  God,  and  his  angels,  and 
his  scriptures,  and  and  his  apostles,  and  the  last  day,  he  surely 
erreth  in  a wide  mistake.  Moreover  they  who  believed,  and  after- 
wards became  infidels,  and  then  believed  again,  and  after  that 
disbelieved,  and  increased  in  infidelity,  God  will  by  no  means  forgive 
them,  nor  direct  them  into  the  right  way— M 1,  S 5,  S 4,  v 134,  135. 

/?.— Can  God  still  be  without  an  associate  ? Is  it  not  a con- 
tradiction to  call  God  associateless  and  at  the  same  time  to  associate 
a number  of  beings  with  him  in  the  belief  ? Does  not  God  give  for- 
giveness after  three  times  ! Does  he  show  the  way  after  disbelieving 
three  times  ! Does  he  not  direct  into  the  right  way  after  the  fourth 
time  ! If  all  persons  disbelieve  four  times  each,  infidelity  will  increase 
very  much. 

61.  — God  will  surely  gather  the  ungodly  and  the  unbelievers 
together  in  hell.  The  hypocrites  act  deceitfully  with  God,  but  he 


The  Religion  of  Moslems 


525 


will  deceive  them.  O true  believers,  take  not  the  unbelievers  for  your 
protectors  or  friends. — M 1,  S 5,  s 4,  v 138,  141,  143. 

R. — What  is  the  proof  of  the  Mussulmans  going  to  the  paradise 
and  others  to  the  Gehena  ? Bravo!  Away  with  such  a god  as  is  de- 
ceived hypocrites,  and' deceives  others  1 Let  him  go  and  make  terms 
with  deceivers  on  mutul  understanding. 

— As  is  the  goddess  of  small  pox  so  is  her  ursine  wain.  When 
like  is  associated  with  like,  they  pull  on  well.  How  can  they  be  not 
deceivers  whose  God  is  a deceiver  ? Can  it  be  proper  for  any  one  to 
enter  into  friendship  with  a wicked  Mussulman  and  not  with  a non- 
Mussulman  good  man  ? 

Belief  in  Mahomed 

62.  — O men,  now  is  the  apostle  come  unto  you,  with  truth  from 
your  Lord;  believe  therefore,  it  will  be  better  for  you.  God  is  but 
one  God. — M 1,  S 6,  s 4,  v 167,  168. 

R — When  it  is  written  in  the  Koran  to  believe  in  the  apostle, 
is  or  is  not  the  apostle,  an  associate  of  God  in  belief  ? God  is  cer- 
tainly in  one  locality,  since  apostles  come  from  and  go  to  him.  He 
can  never  be  God  infinite.  As  the  Koran  sometimes  states  God  is 
at  one  place  and  at  other  times  states  that  he  is  everywhere,  it  appears 
hence  that  it  is  written  not  by  one  but  by  many  persons. 

Forbiddden  Flesh 

63.  — Ye  are  forbidden  to  eat  that  which  dieth  of  itself,  and 
blood,  and  swine’s  flesh,  and  that  on  which  the  name  of  any  besides 
God  hath  been  invocated;  and  that  which  hath  been  strangled,  or 
killed  by  a blow,  or  by  a fall,  or  by  the  horns  of  another  beast,  and 
that  which  hath  been  eaten  by  a wild  beast. — M 2,  S 6,  S 5,  v 3. 

R. — Are  these  objects  alone  forbidden  ? Are  other  animals, 
insects,  and  the  like  living  creatures  allowed  to  the  Mussulmans  for 
food  ? Hence,  this  teaching  is  a human  imagination,  but  not  a 
divine  direction.  So  it  carries  no  authority  with  it. 

64.  — And  lend  unto  God  on  good  usury,  I will  surely  expiate 
your  evil  deeds  from  you,  and  I will  lead  you  into  gardens.—M  2, 
S 6,  s 5,  A 10. 

R, — Hello!  There  will  be  no  money  in  the  house  of  the  God  of 
the  Mussulmans,  else  why  does  he  ask  for  loans  ? Why  does  he  de- 
fraud them  with  expiation  of  sins  and  admission  into  paradise  ? Here 
it  is  plain  enough  that  Mahomed  achieves  his  end  in  the  name  of  God. 

65.  — He  forgiveth  whom  he  pleaseth,  and  punisheth  whom  he 
pleaseth.  He  bestowed  on  }Ou  what  he  hath  given  to  no  other  nation 
in  the  world.— M 2,  S 6,  s 5,  v 16,  18. 

R, — The  God  of  the  Mussulmans  acts  like  Satan,  who  makes 
sinners  of  them  whom  he  pleaseth.  If  forgiveness  depends  on  the 
will  of  God,  God  may  go  to  the  paradise  and  Gehena;  for  he  is  the 


526 


Satyarth  Prakash 


author  of  good  and  evil  deeds,  and  the  soul  is  dependent  on  him.  An 
army  protects  and  kills  according  as  its  commander  directs.  The 
commander,  and  not  the  army,  is  responsible  for  the  good  and  evil 
of  its  deeds. 

66. — -Obey  God,  and  obey  the  prophet.— M 2,  S 7,  S 5,  v 89. 

R. — See  God  is  here  associated.  It  is  now  useless  to  believe  God 
without  an  associate. 

67.  God  hath  forgiven  what  is  past  but  whoever  returneth  to 
transgress,  God  will  take  vengeance  on  him.— M 2,  S 7,  s 5,  v 92. 

R. — To  forgive  the  evil  deeds  done  is,  as  it  were,  to  give  per- 
mission to  do  them  and  thus  to  increase  evil.  The  book  which  con- 
tains the  doctrine  of  forgiveness  is  made  neither  by  God  nor  by  a 
learned  man.  It  is  a promoter  of  sin.  It  is  proper  to  pray  to  some 
body  for  the  expiation  of  future  sins,  or  to  resolve  to  give  them  up 
by  one’s  effort,  or  to  repent  for  them.  But  nothing  can  be  gained  if 
a man  merely  repents  but  desists  not  from  committing  them. 

Praise  of  Koran 

68.  — Who  is  more  wicked  than  he  who  forgeth  a lie  concerning 
God,  or  saith,  this  was  revealed  unto  me,  when  nothing  has  been  re- 
vealed unto  him,  and  who  saith,  I will  produce  a revelation  like  unto 
that  which  God  hath  sent  down  ? — M 2,  S 7,  s 6,  v 94. 

R. — It  appears  herefrom  that  when  Mahomed  gave  out  that 
God  had  sent  down  a revelation  to  him,  somebody  else  also  wished 
to  play  the  same  trick,  namely,  verses  were  revealed  to  him,  and  he 
should  also  be  regarded  as  a prophet.  To  confute  him  and  to  aug- 
ment his  reputation,  Mahomed  might  have  taken  this  step. 

Parley  between  God  and  Satan 

69.  — We  created  you,  and  afterwards  formed  you;  and  then  said 
unto  the  angels,  Worship  Adam;  and  they  all  worshipped  him,  except 
Satan,  who  was  not  one  of  those  who  worshipped.  God  said  unto 
him,  What  hinderest  thee  from  worshipping  Adam,  since  I had  com- 
manded thee  ? He  answered,  I am  more  excellent  than  he;  thou  hast 
created  me  of  fire,  and  hast  created  him  of  clay.  God  said,  Get  thee 
down  therefore,  from  paradise;  for  it  is  not  fit  that  thou  behave  thy- 
self proudly  therein;  get  thee  hence;  thou  shalt  be  one  of  the  contemp- 
tible. He  answered,  Give  me  respite  until  the  day  of  resurrection. 
God  said,  Verily  thou  shalt  be  one  of  those  who  are  respited.  The 
devil  said.  Because  thou  hast  depraved  me  I will  lay  wait  for  men  in 
thy  strait  way;  then  will  I come  upon  them  from  before  and  from  be- 
hind, and  from  their  right  hands,  and  from  their  left;  and  thou  shalt 
not  find  the  greater  part  of  them  thankful.  God  said  unto  him.  Get 
thee  hence  despised,  and  driven  far  away;  verily  whoever  of  them 
shall  follow  thee,  I will  surely  fill  hell  with  you  all. — M 2,  S 8,  s 7, 
V 10-17. 

R, — Now  listen  with  great  attention  to  the  dispute  between  God 
and  Satan.  It  is  strange  that  an  angel  who  is  like  a peon,  could  not 


The  Religion  of  Moslems 


527 


be  controlled  by  God,  nor  could  God  sanctify  his  soul,  and  then  God 
let  him  go  scot-free  in  spite  of  his  rebellion  and  wickedness!  It  is  a 
great  mistake  of  God.  As  Satan  misleads  all,  and  God  misleads 
Satan,  it  is  evident  that  God  is  the  Satan  of  Satan.  For  Satan  openly 
accuses  God  of  depraving  and  misleading  him.  It  does  not  prove 
the  holiness  of  God;  rather  he  has  become  the  prime  cause  of  the  in- 
troduction of  all  evils  into  the  world.  Such  a God  can  become  of  the 
Mussulmans  only,  but  not  of  other  good  learned  people.  His  talk  with 
angels  after  the  manner  of  men  makes  the  God  of  the  Mussulmans  one 
of  physical  body,  of  finite  knowledge,  unjust.  It  is  on  this  account 
that  the  learned  do  not  like  the  religion  of  Islam.  (Satan  was  right  in 
refusing  to  worship  man.  It  is  past  our  understanding  why  God,  as 
here  represented,  enforced  the  worship  of  man,  which  is  now  admitted 
on  all  hands  as  a downright  sin  ! This  fable  also  teaches  the  lesson  of 
rational  obedience  even  when  God  commands,  much  less  when  a man 
orders.  It  is  now  generally  believed  that  the  Devil  is  dead,  leaving 
the  above  fable  as  his  monument  in  the  Koran. — Ed) 

70.  — Verily  your  Lord  is  God,  who  created  the  heaven  and  .the 
earth  in  six  days;  and  then  ascended  his  throne  (in  the  7th  heaven). 
Call  upon  your  Lord  humbly  and  in  secret. — M 2,  S 8,  s 7,  v 53,  54. 

— Can  that  God  be  infinite  and  almighty,  who  makes  the 
world  in  6 days  and  also  then  rests  on  a throne  in  the  upper  region  ? 
As  it  cannot  be,  he  cannot  also  be  called  God.  Is  your  God  dead  that 
he  hears  when  called  ? All  this  teaching  is  not  from  God.  Hence  the 
Koran  cannot  be  made  by  God.  When  he  made  the  world  in  six  days 
and  rested  in  the  heaven  on  the  seventh,  he  must  have  been  tired.  Is 
he  now  asleep  or  awake  ? If  awake,  does  he  do  any  work  ? Or  is  he 
sauntering  about  and  lounging  at  ease  for  no  purpose  ? 

71.  — Commit  not  violence  in  the  earth,  acting  corruptly. — M 2, 
S 8,  s 7,  v 73. 

R. — This  is  all  right;  but  in  opposition  to  this  in  other  places  in 
the  Koran  war  and  killing  infidels  are  repeatedly  admonished.  Is  not 
this  a plain  contradition  ? It  appears  that  when  Mahomed  was  weak 
he  preached  peace,  and  when  strong,  he  declared  war.  Both  being 
contrary,  directions  cannot  be  true. 

Moses’  Miracle 

72.  — He  (Moses)  cast  down  his  rod;  and  behold,  it  became  a 
visible  serpent. — M 2,  S 9,  s 7,  v 105. 

R, — This  writing  shows  that  God  and  Mahomed  both  believed 
in  such  false  things.  If  it  is  so,  they  were  both  unlearned.  As  none 
can  deny  seeing  with  the  eyes  and  hearing  with  the  ears,  these  are 
performances  of  jugglery. 

Plagues  in  Egypt 

73.  — Wherefore  we  sent  upon  them  (the  Egyptians)  a flood,  and 
locusts,  and  lic6,  and  frogs,  and  blood;  (Still  the  Egyptians  did  not 
believe  in  Moses)  Wherefore  we  took  vengeance  on  them,  and  drowned 
them  in  the  Red  Sea.  And  we  caused  the  children  of  Israel  to  pass 
through  the  sea. 


528 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Verily  the  religion  which  these  (people  Moses  met  after  his  flight 
from  Egypt)  follow,  is  false,  and  that  which  they  do  is  vain. — M 2, 
S9,  s7,  V 130,  133,  137,  138. 

R, — Now  look  at  this  dodge  of  hypocrisy  ! It  is  like  man  threat- 
ening another  that  he  would  send  serpents  to  kill  him.  Is  not  that 
God  unrighteous  who  is  unjust  enough  to  drown  one  people  and  to 
ferry  another.  What  religion  can  be  more  falsely  audacious  than  one 
which  claims  to  be  true,  and  calls  others  false  which  contain  millions 
of  men  ? For,  no  religion  can  have  all  its  followers  as  good  or  bad. 
It  is  like  a court’s  ex  parte  decree  and  so  it  is  the  religion  of  very 
ignorant  people.  Was  the  religion  of  the  Pentateuch  and  Psalms 
which  they  professed  become  false?  Or  was  theirs  a different  religion 
which  is  here  called  false  ? If  it  was  a different  religion,  what  was  it  ? 
Say  if  its  name  is  given  in  the  Koran. 

Sight  of  God 

74.  — Thou  shall  thou  (Moses)  see  me.  When  his  Lord  appeared 
with  glory  in  the  mount,  he  reduced  it  to  dust.  And  Moses  fell  down 
in  a swoon. — M 2,  S 9.  s 7,  v 142. 

R. — What  is  visible  cannot  be  all-pervading.  When  God  per- 
formed such  miracles  before,  why  does  he  not  do  them  now  before 
anybody  ? Being  entirely  opposed  to  the  teaching  of  knowledge,  it  is 
not  worth  of  credence. 

75.  — And  meditate  on  thy  Lord  in  thine  own  mind,  with  humi- 
lity and  fear,  and  without  loud  speaking,  evening  and  morning. — M 2, 
S 9,  s 7,  V 204. 

R, — The  Koran  sometimes  says,  call  upon  thy  Lord  with  a loud 
voice,  and  at  other  times  says.  Meditate  on  God  in  the  mind.  Now 
which  of  these  admonitions  is  true,  and  which  is  false.  When  one 
assertion  contradicts  another,  it  is  like  a mad  song.  If  a thing  is  said 
by  mistake  it  does  not  matter.  (Meditation  is  preferable). 

Allotment  of  Plunder 

76.  — They  will  ask  thee  concerning  spoils  : Answer,  The  division 
of  the  spoils  belongeth  unto  God  and  the  apostles.  Therefore  fear  God. 
—M  2,  S9,  s8,  V 1. 

R. — It  is  exceedingly  strange  that  they  spoil,  act  like  robbers  and 
excite  others  to  do  the  same,  and  still  they  remain  as  God,  a prophet 
and  believers.  They  uphold  the  fear  of  God  and  commit  robbery  and 
other  evil  deeds.  They  are  not  ashamed  to  say,  our  religion  is  the 
best  of  all.  Will  there  be  any  other  evil  greater  than  bigotry  in  re- 
jecting the  religion  of  the  Veda  ? 

77.  — (God  proposed  to  make  known  the  truth  in  his  words)  and 
to  cut  off  the  uttermost  part  of  the  unbelievers,  Verily  I will  assist  you 
with  a thousand  angles,  following  one  another  in  order.  I will  cast  a 
dread  into  hearts  of  the  unbelievers.  Therefore,  strike  off  their  heads 
and  strike  off  all  the  ends  of  their  fingers— M 2,  S 9,  s 8,  v 7,  9,  12. 

R. — Splendid  ! How  cruel  are  God  and  his  prophet,  who  extir- 
pate the  people  not  believing  in  the  Moslem  religion  ? Strange,  God 


The  Religion  of  Moslems 


529 


orders  them  to  strike  off  their  heads  and  fingers,  and  gives  them 
assistance  in  this  ungodly  work  ! Is  he  inferior  to  the  king  of  Lanka 
(the  enemy  of  Rama)  ? All  this  horrible  work  is  of  the  author  of  the 
Koran,  and  not  of  God.  If  it  is  of  God,  let  him  be  far  from  us  and 
let  us  avoid  him. 

78.  — God  \s  with  the  faithful.  O true  believers,  answer  God  and 
his  apostle.  O true  believers,  deceive  not  God  and  his  apostle,  neither 
violate  your  faith.  They  plotted  against  thee;  but  God  laid  a plot 
against  them;  and  God  is  the  best  layer  of  plots. — M 2,  S 9,  s 8,  v 19, 
24,  27,  30. 

R. — Is  God  partial  to  the  Mussulmans  ? If  he  is,  he  is  unjust? 
If  not,  he  is  the  lord  of  all  creation.  Cannot  God  hear  without  calling  ? 
If  he  deaf?  Is  it  not  a bad  thing  to  associate  the  apostle  with  God  ? 
Where  is  God’s  treasure  to  steal  from  ? Is  it  proper  to  steal  other 
people’s  property  except  that  of  God  and  his  prophet  ? Such  a teaching 
can  come  from  the  ignorant  and  the  unrighteous.  Is  not  that  God 
deceitful,  artful,  and  vicious,  who  lays  plots  and  abets  others  in 
plotting?  Hence  the  Koran  is  not  made  by  God.  It  must  have  been 
made  by  some  impostor  and  deceiver,  else  why  does  it  contain  such 
things  contrary  to  reason  ? 

War  Against  Idolatry 

79. — Fight  against  them  until  there  be  no  opposition  in  favour  of 
idolatry,  and  the  religion  be  wholly  God’s.  And  know  that  whenever 
ye  gain  any  spoils,  a fifth  part  thereof  belongeth  unto  God,  and  to  the 
apostle;  and  his  kindred. — M 2,  S 9,  s 8,  v 39,  41. 

R. — Who  can  be  else  than  the  God  of  the  Mussulmans,  who 
fights  and  causes  others  to  fight  so  unjustly  and  who  breaks  peace  of 
the  country  ? See,  if  it  is  not  the  work  of  robbers  to  plunder  the 
world  and  to  set  others  to  plunder  for  God  and  his  apostle  ? God’s 
being  a sharer  of  spoils  is  like  his  turning  a robber  himself.  To  be 
partial  to  such  robbers,  God  disgraces  his  godhead  It  is  a great 
astonishment,  how  such  a great  calamity  destructive  of  peace  and 
grievous  to  mankind  has  got  up  in  the  world  in  the  shape  of  a religion 
with  such  a god  and  such  a prophet,  and  such  a book  as  under  re- 
view ! Had  such  religions  been  not  prevalent,  the  world  would  have 
been  in  ease  and  felicity. 

Special  Providence 

80. — And  if  thou  didst  behold  when  the  angels  cause  the  un- 
believers to  die  : they  strike  their  faces  and  their  backs  and  say  unto 
them,  Taste  ye  the  pain  of  burning.  We  destroyed  them  in  their 
sins  and  we  drowned  the  people  of  Pharaoh.  Therefore,  prepare 
against  them  with  what  force  ye  are  able. — M 2,  S 9,  S 8,  v 50,  54,  59. 

R. — Where  are  the  angels  asleep  now  when  Russia  has  over- 
powered Turkey  and  England  Egypt  ? Formerly  God  killed  the 
enemies  of  his  servants,  and  drowned  them.  Had  it  been  true,  he 
should  do  it  now-a-days.  But  as  he  never  does  it,  it  is  false  and  not 
worth  believing  in.  See  how  bad  is  the  direction  that  they  should  do 


530 


Satyarth  Prakash 


all  they  can  to  afflict  the  people  of  different  religions.  Such  an 
advice  cannot  come  from  a learned,  virtuous  and  kind-hearted  man. 
Still  they  write  that  God  is  kind  and  just.  Such  teachings  deprive  the 
God  of  the  Mussulmans  of  justice,  mercy  and  other  good  attributes. 

Crescentade 

81.  — O Prophet,  God  is  thy  support,  and  such  of  the  true  be- 
lievers who  follow  thee.  O Prophet,  stir  up  the  faithful  to  war:  if 
twenty  of  you  persevere  with  constancy,  they  shall  overcome  two 
hundred.  Eat  therefore,  of  what  ye  have  acquired  (out  of  the  ransom 
from  the  captives  of  the  battle  of  Beder),  that  which  is  lawful  and 
good;  for  God  is  gracious  and  merciful. — M 2,  S 10,  S 8,  v 63,  64,  68. 

R. — Well,  what  sort  of  justice,  knowledge,  or  religion  is  this, 
which  is  partial  and  beneficial  to  its  own  followers,  though  they  may 
be  in  the  wrong  ? Directions  to  break  peace,  to  go  to  war  and  to 
incite  others  to  fight,  to  plunder  people  and  regard  spoil  as  lawful, 
cannot  be  even  from  a good  man,  much  less  from  God  who  is  graci- 
ous and  merciful.  In  the  face  of  these  doctrines,  the  Koran  cannot 
be  the  world  of  God. 

Troops  of  Angels 

82.  — They  shall  continue  therein  for  ever;  for  God  is  a great  re- 
ward. O true  believers,  take  not  your  fathers  or  your  brethren  for 
your  friends,  if  they  love  irifidelity  above  faith.  Afterwards  God  sent 
down  his  security  upon  his  apostle  and  upon  the  faithful,  and  sent 
down  troops  of  angels  which  ye  saw  not;  and  he  punished  those  who 
disbelieved,  and  this  was  the  reward  of  the  unbelievers.  Nevertheless 
God  will  hereafter  be  turned  unto  whom  he  pleaseth.  Fight  against 
them  who  believe  not  in  God. — M 2,  S 10,  S 9,  v 21,  22,  25,  26,  28. 

/?.-~How  God  can  be  all-pervading  if  he  lives  with  the  dwellers 
in  paradise  ? If  he  is  not  all-pervading,  he  cannot  be  the  creator 
and  judge  of  all.  It  is  unjust  to  teach  the  people  to  give  up  their 
fathers,  mothers,  brethren,  and  friends.  Verily  their  evil  teaching 
should  not  be  accepted.  But  they  should  always  be  served.  If  God 
was  content  with  the  Mussulmans  and  sent  them  troops  of  angels  for 
their  assistance  before,  why  does  he  not  do  so  now  ? If  he  punished 
infidels  and  then  fell  upon  them  before,  where  is  he  gone  now  ? Can- 
not God  spread  faith  without  war  ? We  heartily  wish  to  have  noth- 
ing to  do  with  such  a God.  He  is  not  a God  but  a jockey. 

Police  of  God 

83.  — We  expect  concerning  you,  that  God  inflicts  a punishment 
on  you,  either  from  himself,  or  by  our  hands. — M 2,  S 10,  S 9,  v 52. 

R. — Well,  are  the  Mussulmans  the  people  of  God,  so  that  they 
arrest  the  people  of  other  faiths  ? Are  billions  of  other  men  not  dear 
to  God  ? Is  a sinner  among  the  Mussulmans  dear  to  God  ? It  if  is 
so,  it  looks  like  anarchy  in  a country  wherein  the  ruler  is  an  idiot. 
The  wonder  is  that  the  sensible  Mussulmans  also  believe  in  this  un- 
reasonable and  baseless  religion  I 


531 


The  Religion  of  Moslems 

Paradise 

84. — God  promiseth  unto  the  true  believers,  both  men  and  wo- 
men, gardens  through  which  rivers  flow,  wherein  they  shall  remain 
for  ever;  and  delicious  dwellings  in  gardens  of  perpetual  abode;  but 
good-will  from  God  shall  be  their  most  excellent  reward.  Scoff  at 
them  : God  shall  scoff  at  them.— M 2,  S 10,  S 9,  v 72,  80. 

R. — It  is  an  allurement  for  the  selfish  purpose  of  the  Koran  to 
men  and  women  in  God’s  name,  for,  had  Mahomed  not  allured  them 
in  this  way,  nobody  would  have  been  caught  in  his  snare.  So  is  also 
done  by  the  people  of  other  religions.  The  people,  no  doubt,  scoff 
at  one  another;  but  God  should  not  scoff  at  them.  Is  the  Koran  a 
religious  book,  or  a play  book  ? 


For  Moselms  Alone 

85.  — But  the  apostle,  and  those  who  have  believed  with  him, 
expose  their  fortunes  and  their  lives  for  God’s  service;  they  shall  en- 
joy the  good  things  of  either  life;  and  God  hath  sealed  up  their  hearts; 
wherefore  they  do  not  understand. — M 2,  S 10,  S 9,  v 89,  92. 

R. — Now  look  at  the  selfish  purpose.  Those  alone  are  good 
who  believe  in  Moslem  faith  with  Mahomed;  and  others  who  never 
believe  so,  are  bad.  When  God  hath  sealed  their  hearts,  they  are  not 
to  blame  in  committing  sins;  but  it  is  the  fault  of  God,  he  has  pre- 
vented them  from  good  by  sealing  their  hearts.  How  great  an  injustice 
is  it  ? 

86.  — Take  alms  of  their  substance,  that  thou  mayest  cleanse 
them,  and  purify  them  thereby.  Verily  God  hath  purchased  of  the 
true  believers  their  souls  and  their  substance,  promising  them  tjie 
enjoyment  of  paradise,  on  condition  that  they  fight  for  the  cause  of 
God;  whether  they  slay  or  be  slain. — M 2,  S 11,  S 9,  v 102,  110. 

R, — Well  done  ! Prophet  Mahomed  you  have  successfully  vied 
with  the  Gosains  of  Gokul  (Indian  priests);  for,  it  is  the  chief  object 
of  these  high  priests  of  India  to  take  the  substance  of  the  lay  people 
and  to  cleanse  them  thereby.  Good  God  1 What  a nice  mercantile 
jobbery  you  have  started  up  that  you  think  it  to  be  a profit  to  take 
the  lives  of  poor  people  by  the  hands  of  the  Mussulmans  ! The  God 
of  the  Mussulmans  has  washed  his  hands  with  mercy  and  justice  by 
causing  the  murder  of  the  defenceless  people  through  the  Mussulmans 
and  promising  heaven  to  the  latter  for  it.  He  has  blotted  the  sacred 
name  of  godhead.  He  has  become  despised  in  the  sight  of  the  wise 
and  virtuous. 

87.  — O true  believers,  wage  war  against  such  of  the  infidels  as 
are  near  you;  and  let  them  find  severity  in  you.  Do  they  not  see  that 
they  are  tried  every  year  once  or  twice  ? Yet  they  repent  not,  neither 
are  they  warned. — M 2,  S 11,  S 9,  v 122,  125. 

See  it  is  an  admonition  God  gives  to  the  Mussulmans 
to  practice  treachery,  inasmuch  as  they  should  wage  war  or  commit 
murder  whenever  they  find  an  opportunity  whether  tjiey  be  in  the 
neighbourhood  or  service  of  anybody  not  of  their  faith.  Consequently 


532 


Satyarth  Prakash 


they  have  done  many  such  things  on  account  of  this  teaching  of  the 
Koran.  If  the  Mussulmans  see  these  evils  mentioned  in  the  Koran 
and  give  them  up,  they  will  do  well. 

88.  — Verily  your  Lord  is  God,  who  hath  created  the  heavens 
and  the  earth  in  six  days;  and  then  ascended  his  throne,  to  take  on 
himself  the  government  of  all  things. — M 3,  S 11,  S 10,  v 3. 

R. — The  sky  is  simple  and  unmade  or  uncreated  and  unbegin- 
ning. To  write  that  it  was  created,  shows  that  the  author  of  the 
Koran  was  innocent  of  the  knowledge  of  physics.  Did  God  make  the 
world  in  six  days?  It  cannot  be  six  days,  since  it  has  already  been 
said  in  the  Koran  that  God  said,  Be,  and  it  is.  Thus  the  period  of 
six  days  spent  in  creation  here  mentioned  is  not  true.  If  God  had 
been  infinite,  why  should  he  stay  on  the  roof  of  the  heavens?  Also, 
as  he  takes  the  government  of  things  on  himself,  he  acts  like  man;  for, 
what  plans  will  he  concoct  in  sitting  on  his  throne,  who  is  omniscient? 
Hence,  it  is  plain  enough  that  savages  in  their  ignorance  of  the  true 
nature  of  God  must  have  made  this  book,  called  the  Koran. 

God's  Partiality 

89.  — Now  hath  an  admonition  come  unto  you  from  your  Lord; 
and  a direction,  and  mercy  unto  the  true  believers. — M 3,  S 11,  s 10, 
V 55. 

R. — Does  this  God  belong  to  the  Mussulmans  only,  and  not  to 
others?  Is  he  partial  to  them,  since  he  shows  mercy  to  them  only, 
and  not  to  others?  If  the  Mussulmans  arc  the  true  believers,  they 
need  no  direction.  If  God  does  not  send  admonition  and  direction  to 
other  people  than  the  Mussulmans,  his  knowledge  is  of  no  use  to  men. 

90.  — He  might  prove  you,  and  see  which  of  you  would  excel  in 
works.  If  thou  say,  ye  shall  surely  be  raised  again  after  death. — M 3, 
S 1 1,  s 1 1,  V 7. 

R. — If  God  tries  to  see  the  works,  he  cannot  be  omniscient  If 
he  raises  persons  after  death,  he  delays  judgment  or  as  it  is  called 
committed  to  sessions  in  the  court  language.  He  violates  his  own 
law,  that  the  dead  shall  not  live.  It  is  a blot  on  God’s  name. 

Apostrophe 

91.  — O Earth,  swallow  up  thy  waters,  and  thou,  O heaven, 
withhold  thy  rain.  And  immediately  the  water  abated.  O my  people, 
this  she-camel  of  God  is  a sign  unto  you;  therefore,  dismiss  her  freely 
that  she  may  feed  in  God’s  earth. — M 3,  S 11,  s 1 1,  v 43,  63. 

R. — What  childishness  is  it?  Can  the  heaven  and  earth  ever 
hear  voice?  Good  Gracious,  if  God  has  a she-camel,  he  must  also 
have  a he-camel.  Also  he  must  have  elephants,  horses,  asses,  and 
other  quadrupeds.  What  a nice  thing  it  is  that  God  allows  a she- 
camel  to  feed  in  the  fields!  Does  he  ever  ride  on  her?  If  these  things 
are  true,  there  must  be  disorder  like  that  of  the  house  of  a Nabob  in 
the  house  of  God. 

92. — And  they  who  shall  be  miserable,  shall  be  thrown  into  hell 

hre;  they  s\\a\\  remain  therein  so  long  as  the  heavens  and  the  earth 


The  Religion  of  Moslems 


533 


shall  endure.  But  they  who  shall  be  happy,  shall  be  admitted  into 
paradise;  they  shall  remain  therein  so  long  as  the  heavens  and  the 
earth  endure. — M 3,  S 11,  s 11,  v 105,  106. 

Eternal  Hell 

R. — When  all  shall  go  to  heaven  and  hell  after  the  last  day, 
what  will  the  heaven  and  earth  remain  for?  If  the  limit  of  the  period 
of  abode  in  heaven  and  hell  lasts  till  the  heavens  and  the  earth  exist, 
it  is  a fragrant  contradiction  to  say  that  abode  in  paradise  will  be 
ever-lasting.  It  is  the  ignorant  who  talk  so  carelessly,  but  not  God 
or  learned  people. 

93.  _ When  Joseph  said  unto  his  father,  O my  father,  verily  I saw 
in  my  dream  eleven  stars,  &c. — M 3,  S 12,  s 12,  A 4-59. 

^.._This  dialogue  between  the  father  and  the  son  contains  the 
story  of  Joseph  and  his  brethren,  which  fills  the  whole  of  the  12th 
chapter.  Since  it  contains  stories  already  prevalent  among  the  people, 
the  Koran  cannot  be  called  a revelation  from  God,  or  can  be  made 
by  him.  Somebody  has  written  an  account  of  men. 

94.  -It  is  God  who  hath  raised  the  heavens  without  visible 
pillars;  and  then  ascended  his  throne,  and  compelled  the  sun  and  the 
moon  to  perform  their  services.  It  is  he  who  hath  stretched  lorth  the 
earth.  He  causeth  water  to  descend  from  heaven,  and  the  brooks 
flow  according  to  their  respective  measure.  God  giveth  provision  in 
abundance  unto  whom  he  pleaseth,  and  is  sparing  unto  whom  he 
pleaseth.— M 3,  S 13,  S 13,  A 2,  3,  17,  26. 

The  God  of  the  Mussulmans  did  not  know  science  at  all; 
else  he  would  not  have  written  the  story  that  the  heavens  having  no 
weight  need  no  support  of  pillars.  If  God  lives  in  a locality  called 
Arsh,  he  cannot  be  almighty,  and  all-pervading.  It  God  had  the 
knowledge  of  clouds,  he  would  not  have  written  that  he  caused  water 
to  descend  from  heaven;  rather  he  should  have  written  that  he  caused 
water  to  ascend  from  the  earth.  Hence  it  is  clear  that  the  author  or 
the  Koran  had  no  knowledge  of  the  clouds.  As  he  gives  the  people 
felicity  and  misery  without  regard  ot  their  good  and  evil  works,  he  is 
an  unjust,  partial,  and  illiterate  sot. 

95.  Verily  God  will  lead  into  error  whom  he  pleaseth,  and  will 

direct  unto  himself  him  who  repenteth. — M 3,  S 13,  s 13,  A 27. 

R —What  is  the  difference  between  God  and  Satan,  when  God 
leads  men  into  error?  Since  Satan  is  regarded  wicked  for  he  misleads, 
why  should  not  God  be  wicked  on  account  of  his  doing  the  same  kind 
of  work?  Why  should  he  not  be  fit  for  hell  from  his  sin  of  misleading/ 

96. _To  this  purpose  have  we  sent  down  the  Koran  in  the  Arabic 

language.  And  verily  if  thou  follow  their  desires  after  the  knowledge 
which  hath  been  given  thee.  Verily  unto  thee  preaching 

only,  but  unto  us  inquisition. — M 3,  S 13,  s 13,  v 37,  40. 

R, — From  what  direction  was  the  Koran  sent  down?  Was  it 
from  above?  If  it  is  true,  God,  being  finite  dwelling  in  a locality,  can- 
not be  the  Lord  of  all.  For  God  is  uniformly  present  everywhere. 


534 


Satyarth  Prakash 


To  deliver  an  errand  is  the  duty  of  an  errand  boy  or  a messenger.  He 
has  the  need  of  a messenger,  who  is  finite,  dwelling  in  a locality.  Also, 
to  receive  an  account  in  inquisition  belongs  to  man,  and  not  to  God; 
for  he  is  omniscient.  It  appears  that  the  Korkin  is  the  work  of  some 
man  of  limited  knowledge. 

97.  — He  compelleth  the  sun  and  the  moon,  which  ever  deligently 
perform  their  courses,  to  serve  you.  Surely  man  is  unjust,  sinful  and 
ungrateful— M 3,  S 13,  s 14,  v 33,  34. 

R. — Do  the  sun  and  the  moon  ever  revolve,  and  not  the  earth? 
If  the  earth  do  not  revolve,  there  will  be  days  and  nights  of  many 
years.  It  man  is  surely  unjust  and  sinful,  it  is  useless  to  give  him  the 
direction  of  the  Koran.  For,  they  who  are  by  nature  depraved,  will 
never  be  righteous.  But  the  righteous  and  the  sinful  are  always  seen 
in  the  world.  Therefore,  a book  made  by  God  cannot  teach  such  a 
doctrine. 

98.  — When  I shall  have  completely  formed  him  (Adam),  and 
shall  have  breathed  by  my  spirit  into  him;  do  ye  fall  down  and  wor- 
ship him.  The  devil  (being  condemned  for  refusing  to  worship  Adam) 
said,  O Lord,  because  thou  hast  reduced  me,  I will  surely  tempt  them 
(men)  to  disobedience  in  the  earth. — M 3,  S 14,  s 15.  v 29,  39-46. 

R. — If  God  breathed  of  his  spirit  unto  Adam,  the  latter  will  also 
be  a god.  If  he  was  not  a god,  why  did  God  make  him  his  com- 
panion in  worship  by  angels?  Why  should  not  God  be  regarded  as 
the  Satan  of  Satans,  or  his  elder  brother,  or  his  teacher?  For,  you 
the  Mussulmans  consider  a deceiver  to  be  Satan.  God  deceived  Satan 
who  accused  God  in  his  face  of  deception  and  said  he  would  tempt 
men  to  disobey  him.  Still  God  did  not  punish  and  imprison  him  ! 
Why  did  he  not  put  him  to  death  ? 

Prophets  of  Nations 

99.  — We  have  therefore  raised  up  in  every  nation  an  apostle  to 
admonish  them.  When  we  will  the  same  is,  that  we  only  say  unto 
it.  Be;  and  it  is.— M 3,  S 14,  s 16,  v 35,  39. 

R. — If  God  sent  his  apostles  to  all  nations,  why  should  they  be 
infidels,  when  following  their  own  prophets.  Are  not  other  prophets 
than  yours  worthy  of  reverence  ? It  is  unjust.  If  apostles  are  sent 
to  all  countries,  who  was  sent  to  Aryavaria  (India)  ? Therefore  this 
doctrine  is  not  proper  to  be  believed.  As  regards  God  saying  to  the 
earth,  Be,  it  being  inanimate  cannot  understand  it.  How  can  God’s 
order  be  executed  ? As  you  don’t  believe  the  existence  of  any  other 
thing  in  beginning  but  God,  who  heard  his  order  ? Who  or  what 
was  it  that  turned  as  God  ordered  ? These  teaching  are  of  ignorance 
which  ignorant  people  readily  believe. 

100.  — They  attribute  daughters  unto  God;  (far  be  it  from  him.) 
By  God  we  have  heretofore  sent  messengers  unto  the  nations  before 
thee.— M 3,  S 14,  s 16,  v 56,  62. 

R. — What  will  God  do  with  daughters  ? It  is  man  that  has 
daughters.  Why  are  daughters  and  not  sons  attributed  to  God  ? 
What  is  the  cause  of  attributing  daughters  to  God  1 Tell  it  if  you 


The  Religion  of  Moslems 


535 


know.  To  swear  is  characteristic  of  liars,  and  not  of  God.  For  such 
is  generally  seen  in  the  world.  Liars  swear,  why  should 'The  truthful 
take  an  oath  ? 

Note.— It  is  unintelligible  that  God  swears  by  God.  In  the 
verse,  God  and  we  are  two  persons. 

101.  — These  are  they  whose  hearts,  hearing,  and  sight  God  hath 
sealed  up;  and  these  are  the  negligent.  On  a certain  day  shall  every 
soul  come  to  plead  for  itself,  and  every  soul  shall  be  repaid  that  which 
it  shall  have  wrought;  and  they  shall  not  be  treated  unjustly. — M 3, 
S 14,  s 16,  V 115,  118. 

Injustice  and  Inconsistency 

7?.— When  God  himself  has  sealed  their  hearts,  they  are  punished 
without  fault  on  their  part.  They  are  not  made  free.  How  great  a 
defects  is  this  in  God’s  plan  ? In  the  teeth  of  the  assertion,  it 
is  said  in  the  Koran  that  every  soul  shall  be  repaid  what  it  has  ac- 
quired, neither  more  nor  less.  They  have  done  no  sins  out  of  their 
free-will;  but  they  were  so  made  by  God  to  do  them.  So  they  are 
not  to  blame,  and  consequently  they  should  not  suffer;  rather  God 
should  take  upon  himself  the  consequences  of  their  sins.  If  what  is 
done  shall  be  repaid,  for  what  will  forgiveness  be  given  to  soul  ? If 
forgiveness  be  given,  it  will  dispense  with  justice.  Such  confusion  of 
plans  cannot  be  ascribed  to  God.  It  is  the  work  of  raw  youths. 

Book  of  Deeds 

102.  — And  we  have  appointed  hell  to  be  the  prison  of  the  un- 
believers. The  fate  of  every  man  have  we  bound  about  his  neck;  and 
we  will  produce  unto  him,  on  the  day  of  resurrection,  a book 
wherein  his  actions  shall  be  recorded  : it  shall  be  offered  to  him  open. 
And  how  many  generations  have  we  consumed  since  Noah  ? — M 4, 
S 15,  s 17,  V.  7 12,  16. 

/?.“If  it  is  right  that  they  are  infidels  who  do  not  believe  in  the 
Koran,  Prophet,  God  of  the  Koran,  dwelling  in  the  seventh  heaven, 
and  their  prayer,  &c.,  and  that  hell  is  made  for  them  only,  it  will 
be  an  act  of  their  partiality;  for,  all  of  them  who  believe  in  the  Koran 
cannot  be  righteous,  and  all  others  who  do  not  so  believe,  sinful. 
It  is  merely  childish  to  say  that  a book  of  man’s  deeds  has  been  tied 
to  his  neck.  We  do  not  see  it  about  anybody’s  neck.  If  it  is  for  the 
purpose  of  rewarding  the  deeds  of  people,  it  looks  like  an  urchin’s 
play  to  talk  of  sealing  their  hearts  and  eyes,  and  forgiving  their  sins. 
Where  is  the  book  now  which  God  will  produce  unto  every  one  on 
the  day  of  resurrection  ? Does  God  write  in  it  like  a merchant  cast- 
ing his  account  ? How  can  fate  be  written  of  persons,  where  there 
is  no  previous  existence,  and  no  deeds  done  to  form  fate  ? If  God 
has  made  their  fate  without  regard  to  their  deeds,  he  has  done  them 
injustice;  for,  why  has  he  given  them  pleasure  and  pain  without  do- 
ing good  and  evil  deeds  to  be  entitled  for  any  reward  ? If  it  be  said 
it  is  God’s  will,  he  has  done  injustice  in  that  case  also.  For  injustice 
is  to  award  persons  pleasure  or  pain  more  or  less  without  the  consider- 
ation of  their  doing  good  or  evil  deeds.  Will  God^himself  read  the 


536 


Satyarth  Prakash 


book  of  deeds,  or  will  a reader  assist  him  ? If  God  punishes  the 
souls  of  ancient  time  without  faults  he  will  be  unjust,  and  he  who  is 
unjust,  cannot  be  God. 

Miracle  of  Camel 

103. — We  gave  unto  the  tribe  of  Thamud,  at  their  demand,  the 
she-camel  visible  to  their  sight.  (God  said  to  Satan  who  threatened 
to  deceive  men  on  his  expulsion  from  paradise  :)  Entice  to  vanity 
such  of  them  as  thou  canst,  by  they  voice.  On  a certain  day  we  will 
call  all  men  to  judgement  with  their  respective  leaders;  and  whosoever 
shall  have  his  book  of  deeds  given  him  into  his  right  hand. — M 4, 
S 15,  S 17,  A 57,  62,  69. 

R. — Admirable  ! Whatever  wonderful  signs  there  are,  there  is 
a she-camel  among  them  to  prove  his  existence,  or  she  is  a means  of 
trying  the  faith  of  men  ! If  God  gave  an  order  to  Satan  to  entice 
men  to  sin,  he  would  be  the  commander  of  the  devil  and  be  respon- 
sible for  all  the  sins  committed  by  men.  It  is  the  men  of  low  under- 
standing who  call  such  a being  God.  As  God  summons  all  men  with 
their  apostles  to  judge  on  the  day  of  destruction,  will  they  wait  for 
judgement  till  then,  as  if  committed  to  sessions  ? It  is  grievous  to 
all  to  be  committed  to  session,  till  judgement  is  given  Hence  it  is 
the  first  duty  of  a judge  to  decide  cases  quickly.  It  is  the  justice  of 
“Popan  Bye.”  Suppose  a judge  says  until  thieves  and  their  accusers 
of  fifty  years  be  brought  for  trial,  no  judgement  of  acquital  or  punish- 
ment should  be  given  in  their  cases  Such  an  instance  would  resem- 
ble the  judgement  of  the  day  of  resurrection.  In  this  case  a criminal 
remains  under  arrest  for  fifty  years  and  another  who  is  caught  on  the 
day  of  judgement  gets  his  sentence  at  once  Such  cannot  be  an  act 
of  justice.  For  justice,  consult  the  Veda  and  Manu’s  Code,  wherein 
there  is  not  a moment’s  delay  of  judgement,  and  every  one  gets  re- 
ward or  punishment  according  to  his  deeds.  Also,  the  accompani- 
ment of  prophets  by  way  of  witnesses  with  criminals  depreciate  the 
value  of  omniscience  of  God.  Well,  can  such  a book  be  ever  consi- 
dered as  made  by  God,  and  the  giver  of  its  commandments,  God  ? 
No,  never. 

Salvation 

104.  — (As  to  those  who  believe),  for  them  are  prepared  gardens 
of  eternal  abode,  which  shall  be  watered  by  rivers;  they  shall  be 
adorned  therein  with  bracelets  of  gold,  and  shall  be  clothed  in  green 
garments  of  fine  silk,  and  brocades:  reposing  themselves  therein  on 
thrones.  O how  happy  a reward,  and  how  easy  a couch. — M 4,  S 15, 
s 18,  V 30. 

/?.— Excellent  ! What  a nice  heaven  is  depicted  by  the  Koran, 
wherein  there  are  gardens,  ornaments,  pillows,  bostlers  for  repose  ! 
If  an  intelligent  person  thinks,  he  will  find  nothing  more  in  the  heaven 
of  the  Mussulmans  than  in  the  earth,  except  injustice,  for  their  works 
were  finite  and  their  rewards  infinite.  If  sweet  be  always  taken,  it 
tastes  like  sour  in  a few  days.  When  the  people  in  the  paradise 
always  enjoy  pleasure,  it  will  become  painful  to  them.  Hence,  the 


The  Religion  of  Moslems 


537 


true  doctrine  of  salvation  is  to  enjoy  happiness  for  a great  cycle  of 
eons  fMahakalpa)  and  then  to  return  to  incarnation. 

105.  — And  those  former  cities  did  we  destroy  when  they  acted 
unjustly;  and  we  gave  them  previous  warning  of  their  destruction. — 
M 4,  S 15,  s 18,  A 57. 

Mercilessness 

R. — Can  the  whole  of  a town  be  sinful  ? His  determination  to 
destroy  it  after  its  iniquity  takes  off  his  omniscience.  For  he  resolved 
when  he  saw  its  iniquity.  He  did  not  know  it  before.  He  is  also 
merciless  thereby. 

106.  — As  to  the  youth,  his  parents  were  true  believers,  and  we 
feared  lest  he,  being  an  unbeliever,  should  oblige  them  to  suffer  his 
perverseness  and  ingratitude.  And  he  followed  his  way,  until  he 
came  to  the  place  where  the  sun  setteth;  and  he  found  it  to  set  in  a 
spring  of  black  mud.  And  they  said,  O Dhulkarnein,  verily  Gog  and 
Magog  waste  the  land. — M 4,  S 16,  s 18,  A 78,  84,  92. 

Sun  sets  in  mud 

R. — Well,  what  a great  misapprehension  is  it  on  the  part  of 
God  ? He  feared  lest  the  parents  of  the  youth  should  be  misled  and 
turned  away  from  his  path  ! It  cannot  be  said  of  God.  Then  see 
another  instance  of  ignorance.  The  author  of  the  Koran  understands 
that  the  sun  sets  into  the  spring  of  black  mud  at  night  and  rises  in 
the  morning.  Well,  the  sun  is  much  larger  than  the  earth.  How  can 
it  sink  into  a spring  or  lake  or  even  a sea  of  it  ? Hence,  it  is  apparent 
that  the  author  of  the  Koran  had  no  knowledge  of  geography  or 
astronomy  If  he  had  it,  why  should  he  write  such  a thing  against 
the  known  facts  of  knowledge  ? Also,  the  believers  in  the  Koran 
have  no  such  knowledge.  If  they  have  it,  why  do  they  believe  in  a 
book  which  is  so  full  of  fiction?  Now  see  the  injustice  of  God.  He 
is  himself  the  maker,  king  and  judge  of  the  world,  and  he  allows 
Gog  and  Magog  to  waste  land  and  create  disturbance.  It  is  contrary 
to  the  dignity  of  Godhead.  Therefore  barbarians,  and  not  literati, 
believe  in  such  a book  as  the  Koran. 

Immaculate  Conception 

107.  — And  remember  in  the  book  of  the  Koran  the  story  of 
Mary;  when  she  retired  from  her  family  to  a place  towards  the  east, 
and  took  a veil  to  conceal  herself  from  them;  and  we  sent  our  spirit 
Gabriel  unto  her,  and  he  appeared  unto  her  in  the  shape  of  a perfect 
man.  She  said,  I fly  for  refuge  unto  the  merciful  God,  that  he  may 
defend  me  from  thee;  if  thou  fearest  him,  thou  wilt  not  approach  me. 
He  answered,  verily  I am  the  messenger  of  thy  Lord,  and  am  sent  to 
give  thee  a holy  son.  She  said,  how  shall  I have  a son,  seeing  a man 
hath  not  touched  me,  and  I am  no  harlot  ? Wherefore  she  conceived 
him;  and  she  retired  aside  with  him  in  her  womb  to  a distant  place, 

in  the  forest. — M 4,  S 16,  s 9,  A 15-19,  21. 

R, — Now  let  wise  men  think  that,  if  all  the  angels  are  the  spirits 
of  God,  they  cannot  be  separate  from  God.  Secondly,  it  is  injustice 


538 


Satyarth  Prakash 


that  Mary,  a virgin,  gave  birth  to  a son,  without  her  desire  to  see  a 
man.  But  an  angel  made  her  pregnant  by  the  order  of  God*.  It  is 
opposed  to  justice.  There  are  many  other  things  unbecoming  men- 
tioned here,  which  are  not  proper  to  touch  upon. 

God  tempts  to  sin 

108.  — Dost  thou  not  see  that  we  send  the  devils  against  the 
infidels  to  incite  them  to  sin  by  their  instigation  ? — M 4,  S 16,  S 
19,  V 81. 

R. — There  can  be  no  blame  on  them,  who  are  tempted  to  sins, 
when  God  himself  sends  devils  to  deceive  them.  They  cannot  be 
punished  for  it,  nor  the  devils,  for  it  is  done  by  the  order  of  God, 
who  should  bear  the  consequences  thereof.  If  he  is  just,  he  should 
suffer  the  punishment  of  sin,  which  is  hell.  If  he  does  not  care  for 
justice,  he  will  be  unjust,  and  an  unjust  man  is  called  a sinner. 

109.  — I shall  be  gracious  unto  him  who  shall  repent  and  believe, 
and  shall  do  that  which  is  right;  and  who  shall  be  rightly  directed. — 
M 4,  S 1,  S 20,  V 78. 

R. — The  doctrine  of  forgiveness  on  repentance  advocated  by 
the  Koran  encourages  all  people  to  be  sinful;  for,  it  inspires  sinners 
with  great  courage  lo  do  sin.  Hence  this  book,  called  the  Koran, 
and  its  author  are  the  encouragers  of  sinners  to  continue  their  course 
of  iniquities.  Hence  this  book  cannot  be  made  by  God,  nor  the 
being  described  can  be  God. 

Mountains  steady  the  earth 

110.  — And  we  placed  stable  mountains  on  the  earth,  lest  it 
should  move. — M 4,  S 17,  s 21,  v 30. 

If  the  author  of  the  Koran  knew  anything  of  the  revolu- 
tion of  the  earth  and  other  motions  related  thereto,  he  would  not  say 
that  the  earth  did  not  move  from  the  placing  of  mountains  upon  it. 
It  may  be  doubted  that  it  will  move  but  for  the  weight  of  mountains. 
But  why  does  it  move  in  an  earthquake  in  spite  of  the  weight  of 
mountains  ? 

111.  — And  remember  her  who  preserved  her  virginity,  and  into 
whom  we  breathed  of  our  spirit. — M 4,  S 17,  s 21,  v 88. 

R, — No  enlightened  man  will  write  such  an  obscenity  in  his 
book,  much  less  in  the  book  of  God  and  said  therein  by  God.  When 
such  indecorous  things  are  not  fit  to  be  told  before  men,  how  can 
they  be  good  before  God.  Such  things  disgrace  the  sacredness  of 
the  Koran.  Had  they  been  good,  they  would  be  commendable  as 
those  of  the  Veda. 

112.  — Dost  thou  not  perceive  that  all  creatures  both  in  heaven 
and  on  earth  adore  God,  and  the  sun,  and  the  moon,  and  the  stars, 
and  the  mountain  and  the  trees,  and  the  beasts,  and  many  men  ? They 
(believers)  shall  be  adorned  therein  with  bracelets  of  gold,  and  pearls; 
and  their  vestures  therein  shaW  be  silk.  And  cleanse  tny  house  for 


The  Religion  of  Moslems 


539 


those  who  compass  it,  and  who  stand  up.  Afterwards  let  them 
(pilgrims  to  the  Caaba)  cleanse  their  persons;  and  let  them  pay  their 
vows;  and  compass  the  ancient  house  that  ye  might  magnify  God. — 
M 4,  S 17,  S 22,  V 19,  23,  25,  28,  33. 

Idolatry  of  Cabba 

R. — Well,  material  objects  cannot  know  God.  How  can  they 
adore  him  ? Hence  this  book,  called  the  Koran,  cannot  be  made  by 
God;  it  appears  to  have  been  written  by  a man  of  bewildered  mind. 
What  a nice  heaven  it  is  where  ornaments  of ' gold  and  pearls  and 
garments  of  silk  are  got  to  wear.  This  paradise  does  not  appear  to 
be  more  gorgeous  than  the  palaces  of  kings.  If  God  has  a house, 
he  must  dwell  in  it.  Then  how  is  it  no  idolatry  ? Why  do  the  Tylus- 
sulmans  refute  the  idolatry  of  others  ? When  God  receives  offerings, 
orders  pilgrims  to  compass  his  house  and  allows  the  slaughter  of 
cattle  for  them  to  eat;  he  is  like  the  Bacchus  of  temples  and  Goddess 
Durga.  He  is  the  great  instigator  of  idolatry.  For  the  mosque  of 
the  Caaba  is  greater  than  idols.  Hence  the  Mussulmans  and  their 
God  are  great  idolaters,  and  the  believers  in  the  Puranas  and  the 
Jainis  are  small  idolaters. 

113.  — Afterwards  shall  ye  be  restored  to  life  on  the  day  of 
resurrection. — M 4,  S 18,  S 23,  v 16. 

R. — Will  the  dead  remain  in  the  grave  till  the  day  of  resurrec- 
tion, or  will  they  be  put  up  somewhere  else  ? If  they  stay  in  tombs, 
the  righteous,  too,  will  suffer  much  pain  from  their  living  in  a rotten 
and  stinking  corpse.  It  is  no  justice  at  all.  Stench  being  increased, 
will  generate  diseases  and  make  God  and  the  Mussulmans  responsible 
for  the  sin  and  suffering  thereof. 

Evidence  of  organs 

114. — One  day  their  own  tongues  shall  bear  witness  against 
them,  and  their  hands,  ^ind  their  feet,  concerning  that  which  they 
have  done.  God  is  the  light  of  heaven  and  earth  : the  similitude  of 
his  light  is  as  a niche  in  a wall,  wherein  a lamp  is  placed,  and  the 
lamp  enclosed  in  a case  of  glass  : the  glass  appears  as  it  were  a shin- 
ing star.  It  is  lighted  with  the  oil  of  a blessed  tree,  an  olive  neither 
of  the  east,  nor  of  the  west : it  wanted  little  but  that  the  oil  thereof 
would  give  light,  although  no  fire  touched  it.  God  will  direct  unto 
his  light  whom  he  pleaseth. — M 4,  S IS*,  S 24,  v 23,  34. 

i?.— The  hands,  feet  and  other  organs  being  material,  cannot 
give  evidence  at  all.  Being  against  the  laws  of  nature,  this  teaching 
is  a myth.  Is  God  fire  or  lightning  ? The  example  given  above  is 
not  applicable  to  God.  It  can  be  applied  to  a material  object. 

115.  — And  God  hath  created  every  animal  of  water,  one  of 
them  goeth  on  his  belly.  Whoever  shall  obey  God  and  his  apostle, 
(shall  enjoy  great  felicity).  Say,  Obey  God,  and  obey  the  apostle. 
And  if  ye  obey  him,  ye  shall  be  directed.— M 4,  S 18,  S 24,  v 44, 
51,  53,  55. 

R. — As  the  text  also  means  that  God  created  all  animals  out  of 
water,  now  what  philosophy  is  it,  seeing  that  all  elements  are  found 


540 


Satyarth  Prakash 


in  their  body  ? It  shows  but  ignorance  of  facts.  When  it  is  neces- 
sary to  obey  the  Prophet  along  with  God,  is  or  is  not  the  apostle  the 
companion  of  God  ? If  it  is  so,  why  is  God  mentioned  in  the  Koran 
and  called  by  the  Mussulmans  as  one  without  a companion  ? 

Cleaving  of  Heaven 

1 16.  —On  that  day  the  heaven  shall  be  cloven  asunder  by  the 
clouds  and  the  angels  shall  be  sent  down.  Do  not  thou  obey  the 
unbelievers  but  oppose  them  herewith,  with  a strong  opposition. 
Unto  them  (believers)  will  God  change  their  former  evils  into  good. 
And  whoever  repenteth,  and  doth  that  which  is  right;  verily  he  turneth 
unto  God.— M 4,  S 19,  S 25,  v 24,  49,  67,  68. 

R — It  can  never  be  true  that  the  heaven  shall  be  cloven  as- 
under with  clouds.  If  the  heaven  be  a material  object,  it  can  be 
rent  in  twain.  The  Koran  of  the  Mussulmans  tends  to  break  peace 
and  ferments  quarrel.  It  is  hence  that  the  learned  and  righteous  do 
not  believe  in  it.  What  a nice  justice  is  it  which  changes  evils  into 
good  ? Is  it  like  sesame  and  legume  which  are  converted  into  a 
different  product  ? If  repentance  obtains  salvation  and  God  for 
people,  none  will  be  afraid  of  doing  evil.  Hence  such  teachings  are 
opposed  to  the  truth  of  knowledge. 

117.  — And  we  spake  by  revelation  unto  Moses,  saying,  March 
forth  with  my  servants  by  night;  for  ye  shall  be  pursued.  And 
Pharaoh  sent  officers  through  the  cities  to  assemble  forces.  The  Lord 
of  all  creatures,  who  hath  created  me  and  directeth  me;  and  who 
will  cause  me  to  die,  and  will  afterwards  restore  me  to  life,  who,  I 
hope,  will  forgive  my  sins  on  the  day  of  judgment.— M 5,  S 19,  s 26, 
A 50,  51,  76,  77,  80. 

R. — When  God  sent  revelation  to  Moses,  why  did  he  again  send 
his  books  to  David,  Jesus,  and  Mahomed  ? For,  the  teaching  of  an 
apostle  is  always  uniform  and  infallible.  The  sending  down  of  books 
upto  the  time  of  the  Koran  will  indicate  the  fallibility  and  imperfec- 
tion of  the  books  coming  first  in  the  order  of  precedence.  If  the 
three  books,  namely,  the  Penteteuch,  Psalms,  and  Gospel  be  true,  the 
fourth,  called  the  Koran,  will  be  untrue;  for,  they  are  generally  con- 
tradictory to  one  another.  They  cannot  be  entirely  true.  If  God 
created  souls,  they  will  die  also;  i.e.,  they  will  undergo  sometimes 
destruction  and  at  other  time  annihilation.  If  God  alone  gives  man 
and  other  sentient  creatures  to  eat  and  drink,  they  should  not  be  sick. 
All  should  receive  equal  provisions.  It  should  not  be  as  is  the  case 
that  one  gets  the  best  food,  and  the  other  the  worst  out  of  partiality 
as  the  king  and  the  pauper.  When  God  alone  provides  food  and 
drink  and  regulates  regimen,  there  should  be  no  disease.  But  even 
the  Mussulmans  and  others  get  sick.  If  God  alone  cures  and  heals, 
the  bodies  of  the  Mussulmans  should  be  free  from  disease.  If  they 
have  sickness,  God  is  not  a perfect  physician.  If  he  is  a perfect 
physician,  why  are  these  diseases  found  in  the  bodies  of  the  Mussul- 
mans ? If  God  alone  kills  and  revives,  he  must  be  responsible  for 
good  and  evil  works.  If  he  governs  according  to  the  works  of  pre- 
vious existences,  he  incurs  no  blame.  If  God  forgives  sins  and  udgesj 
on  the  day  of  resurrection,  he  encourages  the  perpetration  of  sins,  and 


The  Religion  of  Mosilems 


541 


becomes  sinful.  If  he  does  not  forgive  sins,  this  doctrine  of  the 
Koran  cannot  but  be  false, 

118.  — Thou  (Saleh)  art  no  other  than  a man  like  unto  us;  pro- 
duce now  some  sign,  if  thou  speakest  truth.  Saleh  said,  This  she- 
camel  shall  be  a sign  unto  you;  she  shall  have  her  portion  of  water. — 
M 5,  S 19,  s 26,  A 150,  151. 

Miracle  of  she-camel 

R. — [See  page  560  for  the  story  of  the  she-camel].  Well,  can 
anybody  believe  that  a she-camel  may  come  out  of  a rock  7 They 
were  barbarians  who  believed  it.  It  is  a barbarous  custom  to  pro- 
duce a she-camel  for  a sign.  It  cannot  be  from  God.  Had  this 
book,  called  the  Koran,  been  made  by  God,  it  would  not  have  con- 
tained such  wild  things. 

1 19.  — O Moses,  verily  I am  God,  the  mighty.  Cast  down  thy 
rod.  And  when  he  saw  it,  that  it  moved,  as  though  it  had  been  a 
serpent,  (he  retreated  and  fled).  And  God  said,  O Moses,  fear  not;  for 
my  messengers  are  not  disturbed  with  fear  in  my  sight.  God,  there  is 
no  God  but  he,  the  Lord  of  the  magnificent  throne.  (Solomon  said 
to  the  queen  of  Sheba)  Rise  not  up  against  me;  but  come  unto  me  a 
Mussulman  (and  resign  yourselves  unto  the  divine  direction  and  profess 
the  true  religion  which  I preach). — M 5,  S 19,  s 27,  A 9,  10,  26,  31. 

R. — Also  see  Gold  declares  himself  as  the  mighty  with  his  own 
tongue  ! Not  even  good  human  beings  sing  their  own  pean. 
How  can  then  God  do  it  ? By  showing  sleights  of  hand  to  barbar- 
ians, he  has  set  up  himself  as  God  in  the  wilderness.  A divine  book 
cannot  contain  such  thoughts.  If  God  is  the  Lord  of  the  magnificent 
throne  in  the  seventh  heaven,  he  cannot  be  the  true  God,  being  finite 
and  confined  to  a locality.  If  egotism  is  bad,  why  have  God  and 
Prophet  Mahomed  filled  their  book  with  their  own  encomiums  and 
panegyrics.  Is  it  not  a rebellion  that  Mahomed  killed  many  men  ? 
This  book,  called  the  Koran,  is  replete  with  repetitions  and  self- 
contradictions. 

Passing  of  mountains 

120. — And  thou  shalt  see  the  mountains,  and  shalt  think  them 
firmly  fixed;  but  they  shall  pass  away,  even  as  the  clouds  pass  away. 
This  will  be  the  work  of  God;  who  hath  rightly  disposed  all  things; 
and  he  is  well  acquainted  with  that  which  ye  do. — M 5,  S 20,  s 27,  A 88. 

R, — The  passing  away  of  mountains  like  the  clouds  must  be  a 
phenomenon  of  the  country  of  the  author  of  the  Koran;  but  it  is  seen 
nowhere  else.  The  vigilance  of  God  is  seen  in  neither  apprehending 
Satan  nor  punishing  him  for  his  mischief.  What  negligence  will  be 
greater  than  that  he  has  not  yet  caught  one  single  rebel  against  him, 
nor  punished  him  for  his  rebellion. 

Murder  forgiven 

121.  — Moses  struck  him  with  his  fist,  and  slew  him.  And  said, 
O Lord,  verily  I have  injured  my  own  soul;  wherefore  forgive  me.  So 
Lord  forgave  him;  for  he  is  ready  to  forgive  and  merciful.  Thy  Lord 


542  Satyarth  Prakash 

createth  what  he  pleaseth;  and  chooseth  freely. — M 5,  S 20,  s 28, 
A 14,  15,  68. 

R. — Further,  look  at  the  God  and  apostles  of  the  Christians  and 
Moslems.  Prophet  Moses  slays  a man  and  God  forgives  the  murder  ! 
Are  they  not  both  unjust  ? Does  he  create  what  he  pleaseth  ? Has  he 
cut  of  his  sweet  will  and  pleasure  made  somebody  a king,  another  a 
pauper,  one  a learned  man,  and  another  ignorant  ? If  it  is  so  neither 
the  Koran  is  true,  nor  can  God  being  unjust  be  the  Lord  of  all. 

Noah  lived  950  years 

122.  — We  have  commanded  man  to  show  kindness  towards  his 
parents;  but  if  they  endeavour  to  prevail  with  thee  to  associate  with 
me  that  concerning  which  thou  hast  no  knowledge,  obey  them  not. 
We  heretofore  sent  Noah  unto  his  people;  and  he  tarried  among  them 
one  thousand  years,  save  fifty  years.— M 5,  S 20,  21,  s 29,  A 7,  13. 

R, — It  is  well  to  serve  parents.  It  is  also  right  not  to  obey  those 
who  advise  to  associate  other  beings  with  God.  But  if  the  parents 
command  to  speak  falsehood  and  to  do  other  evils,  should  they  be 
obeyed  ? Hence  of  this  admonition  half  is  good  and  the  other  bad. 
Does  God  send  Noah  and  other  prophets  alone,  who  sends  other  living 
beings  to  earth  ? If  he  sends  all,  why  should  not  all  be  prophets  ? If 
at  first  men  lived  a thousand  years,  why  do  they  not  live  so  long  now  ? 
Hence  it  is  not  true. 

Second  creation 

123.  — God  produceth  creatures,  and  will  hereafter  restore  them 
to  life;  then  shall  ye  return  unto  him.  And  on  the  day  whereon  the 
hour  shall  come,  the  wicked  shall  be  struck  dumb  for  despair.  And 
they  who  shall  have  believed,  and  wrought  righteousness,  shall  take 
their  pleasure  in  a delightful  meadow.  Yet  if  we  should  send  a blasting 
wind,  and  they  should  see  their  corn  yellow  and  burnt  up  (they  would 
surely  become  ungrateful).  Thus  hath  God  sealed  up  the  hearts  of 
those  who  believe  not.  — M 5,  521,  530,  v 10,  11,  14,  50,  58. 

R — If  God  creates  two  times  and  not  three,  he  must  sit  idle 
before  the  first  and  at  end  of  the  second  time.  His  power  will  be 
spoiled  and  useless  after  one  or  two  times  of  creation.  If  the  sinners 
be  struck  with  despair  on  the  day  of  judgment,  it  is  good.  Is  it  not 
the  object  of  the  day  of  judgment  that  all  men  except  the  Mussulmans 
be  regarded  as  sinful  and  disappointed?  For,  it  is  known  from  many 
passages  of  the  Koran  that  by  sinners  are  meant  other  people  than  the 
Moslems.  If  dwelling  in  a garden  and  wearing  jewels  is  the  heaven 
of  the  Mussulmans,  it  is  like  this  world.  There  must  be  gardeners  and 
goldsmiths  in  paradise,  or  God  himself  must  be  doing  the  work  of 
both  these  artisans.  If  a person  got  fewer  ornaments  than  others, 
there  must  be  theft  committed  in  consequence  and  the  thieves  of  para- 
dise will  have  to  be  sent  to  hell.  If  this  be  the  case,  it  is  a contradiction 
to  say  that  abode  in  paradise  will  be  eternal.  As  regards  God’s  eye 
upon  the  cultivation  of  corns,  its  knowledge  can  be  had  from  the 
experience  of  peasants.  But  suppose  God  has  known  all  things  from 
his  knowledge  such  a threatening  will  be  indicative  of  pride.  If  God 


The  Religion  of  Moslems 


543 


sealed  the  hearts  of  people  and  so  made  them  do  sin,  he  will  himself 
be  responsible  for  it,  and  not  the  people.  As  a commander  gets  victory 
or  defeat,  so  are  all  the  sins  credited  to  God’s  account. 

Wonders  of  Koran 

124. — These  are  the  signs  of  the  wise  book.  He  hath  created  the 
heavens  without  visible  pillars  to  sustain  them,  and  hath  thrown  on 
the  earth  mountains  firmly  rooted  lest,  it  should  move  with  you.  Dost 
thou  not  see  that  God  causeth  the  night  to  succeed  the  day,  and 
causeth  the  day  to  succeed  the  night  ? Dost  thou  not  sec  that  the 
ships  run  on  the  sea,  through  the  favour  of  God,  that  he  may  show 
you  of  his  signs  ? — M 5,  S 21,  S 31  v 1,  9,  28,  30. 

R, — Bravo  ! Wise  book  indeed  ! It  contains  assertions  against 
the  teachings  of  knowledge,  as  the  creation  of  heaven,  the  idea  of 
setting  pillars  to  it,  and  the  placing  of  mountains  on  the  earth  for  its 
stability.  A man  of  little  learning  would  never  write  such  things,  nor 
believe  them.  See  the  wisdom  of  the  book  that  it  makes  the  night 
enter  the  day  and  vice  versa,  altho*  they  exclude  each  other.  It  shows 
great  ignorance.  Hence  the  Koran  cannot  be  called  a book  of  wis- 
dom. Is  it  not  against  knowledge  that  a ship  which  sails  by  means  of 
men  and  machinery,  runs  on  the  sea  by  the  favour  of  God  ? Will  not 
a boat  of  stone  or  iron  sink  as  a sign  of  God?  Hence  this  book  called 
the  Koran,  cannot  be  made  by  a learned  man,  much  less  by  God. 

Allah  not  omnipresent 

125. — He  governeth  all  things  from  heaven  even  to  the  earth: 
hereafter  shall  they  return  unto  him,  on  the  day  whose  length  shall 
be  a thousand  years  of  those  which  ye  compute.  This  is  he  who 
knoweth  the  future  and  present;  the  mighty,  the  merciful.  And  then 
formed  him  unto  proper  shape,  and  breath  of  his  spirit  into  him.  Say, 
the  angel  of  death  who  is  set  over  you,  shall  cause  you  to  die.  If  we 
had  pleased,  we  had  certainly  given  unto  every  soul  its  direction  : but 
the  word  which  hath  proceeded  from  me,  must  necessarily  be  fulfilled 
when  I said,  verily  I will  fill  hell  with  genii  and  men,  altogether. — M 5, 
S 21,  S 32,  V 4,  5,  7,  9,  II. 

R. — Now  it  is  indubitably  proved  that  the  God  of  the  Mussul- 
mans is  finite,  his  governing  from  a place,  descending  and  ascending 
cannot  take  place.  If  God  sends  angels,  he  will  still  be  limited  to  a 
locality.  He  sits  pending  in  heaven  and  sends  forth  angels  running. 
If  angels  spoil  a case  by  taking  bribery,  or  release  a dead  person,  how 
can  God  know  it  ? He  can  know  all,  if  he  is  omniscient  and  omni- 
present. But  he  is  not  so.  Had  he  been  so,  what  was  the  use  of 
deputing  angles  or  trying  several  persons  by  several  different  ways  ? 
He  is  also  not  omnipotent  from  taking  one  thousand  years  to  try  and 
arranging  the  mission  of  angels.  If  there  be  an  angel  of  death,  what 
kind  of  death  will  kill  that  angel  ? If  he  is  eternal,  he  will  be  a partner 
of  God  in  immortality.  One  angel  cannot  direct  souls  at  one  time  to 
fill  hell.  God  looks  at  the  spectacle  of  suffering  of  souls  filling  hell  at 
the  will  of  God  without  doing  sins.  Such  a God  is  wicked,  unjust, 
and  merciless.  The  book  containing  such  doctrines  cannot  be  the 
work  of  a learned  man  or  God,  nor  can  a merciless  being  be  God. 


544 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Prophet’s  wives 

126.  — Say,  flight  shall  not  profit  you,  if  ye  fly  from  death  or 
from  slaughter.  O wives  of  the  Prophet,  whosoever  of  you  commit  a 
manifest  wickedness,  the  punishment  thereof  shall  be  doubled  unto 
her  two-fold;  and  this  is  easy  with  God. — M 5,  S 21,  S 33,  v 16,  30. 

R. — Mahomed  might  have  written  or  got  it  written  that  none 
should  run  away  from  battle,  and  he  might  be  victorious.  He  should 
not  fear  slaughter.  His  power  might  be  increased  and  religion, 
spread.  If  his  wives  don’t  come  out  of  shame,  will  the  Prophet  do 
so  himself?  The  wives  should  suffer  infliction  and  the  Prophet  should 
not!  Of  what  house  is  this  rule? 

Mahomed  marries  Zeinab 

127.  — And  sit  still  in  the  houses,  and  obey  God  and  his  apostle. 
But  when  Zeid  had  determined  the  matter  concerning  her,  and  had 
resolved  to  divorce  her,  we  joined  her  in  marriage  unto  thee;  lest  a 
crime  should  be  charged  on  the  true  believers  in  marrying  the  wives 
of  their  adopted  sons,  when  they  have  determined  the  matter  concern- 
ing them  and  the  command  of  God  is  to  be  performed.  No  crime  is 
to  be  charged  on  the  Prophet.  Mahomed  is  not  the  father  of  any 
man  among  you.  O prophet,  we  have  allowed  thee  thy  wives. ..and 
any  other  believing  woman,  if  she  gives  herself  unto  the  Prophet... 
Thou  mayest  postpone  the  turn  of  such  of  the  wives  as  thou  shalt 
please,  in  being  called  to  thy  bed,  and  thou  mayest  take  unto  thee  her 
whom  thou  shalt  please;  and  it  should  be  no  crime  in  thee.  O true 
believers,  enter  not  the  house  of  the  Prophet.— M 5,  S 22,  33,  S 33,  37 
38,  40,  47,  48,  50. 

R. — It  is  great  injustice,  that  women  should  sit  in  the  house  like 
prisoners  and  men  go  abroad  with  freedom!  Does  not  the  mind  of 
women  desire  to  walk  in  the  open  pure  air,  in  the  pleasant  country, 
and  to  enjoy  the  pleasure  of  seeing  the  various  objects  of  nature?  It 
is  on  account  of  this  defect  that  the  boys  of  the  Mussulmans  are 
chiefly  fond  of  rambling  and  sensuousness.  Are  the  orders  of  God 
and  his  apostle  separate  or  are  they  one  and  the  same?  If  they  are 
one,  it  is  useless  to  say  that  the  orders  of  both  should  be  obeyed. 
But  if  they  are  separate  and  opposed,  one  of  them  will  be  true  and  the 
other  false.  One  will  be  God  and  the  other  Satan.  They  will  also  be 
companions.  Glory  be  to  the  God  of  the  Koran,  the  Prophet  and  the 
Koran!  He  necessarily  devises  such  plans  who  achieves  his  end  at 
the  expense  of  others.  It  also  proves  that  Prophet  Mahomed  was  very 
voluptuous.  Had  he  not  been  so,  why  should  he  have  married  his 
adopted  son’s  wife,  who  was  equal  to  his  daughter-in-law?  Then 
God  also  sided  with  him  who  behaved  so,  and  legalised  injustice.  He 
who  is  a savage  among  men,  abominates  to  take  his  daughter-in-law  to 
wife.  Wiiat  a great  injustice  is  it  that  there  is  no  impediment  in  the 
way  of  the  Prophet's  amorous  sport?  If  the  Prophet  was  not  the 
father  of  anybody,  whose  adopted  son  was  Zeid?  Why  is  his  men- 
tion made  in  the  Koran?  It  is  dictated  by  that  ardent  desire  under 
whose  effect  the  Prophet  could  not  help  taking  his  own  daughter-in- 
law  to  wife.  How  could  he  have  avoided  amorous  connection  with 


The  Religion  of  Moslems 


545 


others?  No  ingenuity  whatever  can  expulcate  him  from  the  blame  of 
such  a foul  act  of  heinous  sin.  Is  it  legal  that  a man’s  wife  should 
marry  the  Prophet  out  of  her  amour?  It  is  an  act  of  great  iniquity 
that  the  Prophet  may  put  away  any  of  his  women  whom  he  pleaseth, 
and  his  wife  can  never  leave  him  in  spite  of  his  failing?  As  none  was 
to  enter  his  house  with  an  adulterous  desire,  he  should  not  have  gone 
likewise  to  others’  houses.  Can  the  Prophet  enter  anybody’s  house 
without  any  interdiction,  and  still  be  regarded  with  esteem?  Well, 
who  will  be  so  purblind  mentally  as  to  believe  the  4Coran  to  be  the 
word  of  God,  Mahomed  to  be  the  prophet,  and  the  God  of  the  Koran 
to  be  the  Lord  almighty?  It  is  a great  wonder  that  the  Arabs  and 
other  people  have  embraced  this  faith,  which  is  filled  with  teachings 
void  of  reason  and  opposed  to  righteousness! 

Prophet’s  widows  not  to  remarry 

128.  — Neither  is  it  fit  for  you  to  give  any  uneasiness  to  the 
apostle  of  God,  or  to  marry  his  wives  after  him  for  ever;  for  this 
would  be  a grievous  thing  in  the  sight  of  God.  As  to  those  who 
offend  God  and  his  apostle,  God  shall  curse  them  (in  this  world,  and 
in  the  next).  And  they  who  shall  injure  the  true  believers  of  either 
sex,  without  their  deserving  it,  shall  surely  bear  the  guilt  of  calamity 
and  a manifest  injustice.  Hypocrites  being  accursed,  wherever  they 
are  found  they  shall  be  taken,  and  killed  with  a general  slaughter, 
(according  to  the  sentence  of  God,)  O Lord,  give  them  the  double  of 
our  punishment;  and  curse  them  with  a heavy  curse.— M 5,  S 22,  s 33, 
A 50,  54,  55,  58,  65. 

i?.— Good  gracious!  Does  God  use  his  godhead  righteously? 
It  is  right  to  forbid  others  from  offending  the  apostle.  But  it  was 
proper  to  forbid  the  apostle  from  offending  others.  Why  did  he  not 
do  so?  Does  other’s  offending  affect  God?  If  he  is  aggrieved  thereby, 
he  cannot  be  God.  Does  not  the  prohibition  of  offending  God  and 
the  apostle  prove  that  they  may  offend  whomsoever  they  please?  Is 
it  proper  to  oppress  all  others?  If  it  is  bad  to  injure  the  believers 
and  their  women,  it  is  equally  bad  to  injure  others  through  them.  If 
this  truth  is  not  admitted  by  him,  his  admonition  is  the  result  of 
partiality.  There  will  be  few  such  creators  of  disturbance  in  the  peace 
of  the  world  as  the  cruel  God  of  the  Mussulmans  and  his  apostle. 
Will  or  will  not  the  Mussulmans  be  offended  if  it  be  ordered  that  they 
should  be  taken,  caught,  and  killed  wherever  found  as  it  is  ordered 
in  the  text  above  with  regard  to  unbelievers?  Well,  how  murderous 
are  God  and  others  in  the  Koran,  who  have  written  there-in  to  pray 
to  God  to  double  the  punishment  of  their  opponents  in  religion?  It 
is  a teaching  of  partiality,  selfishness,  and  tremendous  iniquity.  It  is 
on  the  incitement  of  such  directions  that  many  of  the  Mussulman 
roughs  feel  no  horror  at  the  commission  of  such  deeds  even  unto  this 
day.  It  is  an  indubitable  truth  that  man  remains  like  a brute  without 
the  blessing  of  education. 

Instability  of  paradisial  life 

129. — It  is  God  who  sendeth  the  winds,  and  raiseth  a cloud;  and 


546 


Satyarth  Prakash 


we  drive  the  same  unto  a dead  country,  and  hereby  quicken  the  earth 
after  it  has  been  dead;  so  shall  the  resurrection  be.  (Our  Lord  is  ready 
to  forgive  the  sinners);  who  hath  caused  us  to  take  up  our  rest  in  a 
dwelling  of  eternal  stability,  through  his  bounty,  wherein  no  labour 
shall  touch  us,  neither  shall  any  weariness  affect  us. — M 5,  S 22,  35, 
A 9,  35. 

R, — What  a magnificent  philosophy  is  shown  by  God?  He  sends 
the  winds  which  raise  the  clouds,  and  God  quickens  the  dead  therewith! 
This  teaching  can  never  appertain  to  God.  For  God’s  work  is  always 
uniform  in  operation.  The  dwellings  mentioned  above  cannot  be 
without  construction,  and  what  is  constructed,  cannot  last  for  ever. 
He  who  has  body  suffers  pain  without  labour  or  exercise.  He  cannot 
escape  being  sick.  When  a man  who  lives  with  one  wife,  cannot  be  free 
from  illness,  what  must  be  the  misery  of  one  who  is  given  to  sexual 
pleasure  in  the  company  of  great  many  women?  Hence  the  residence 
of  the  Mussulmans  in  paradise  cannot  be  happy  for  ever. 

130.—I  swear  by  the  instructive  Koran,  that  thou  art  one  of  the 
messengers  of  God,  sent  to  show  the  right  way.  This  is  a revelation 
of  the  most  mighty,  merciful  God. — M 5,  S 23,  S 36,  v 1,  2. 

i?.— Now  see,  if  the  Koran  had  been  made  by  God,  why  would 
he  swear  by  it?  If  the  Prophet  had  been  sent  by  God,  how  could  he 
be  enamoured  of  his  own  adopted  son’s  wife?  It  is  a mere  assertion 
that  the  believers  in  the  Koran  are  on  the  right  path;  for,  the  right 
path  is  that  which  requires  the  speaking  of  truth,  a belief  in  truth,  and 
acting  on  truth,  justice  without  the  least  alloy  of  partiality,  the  prac- 
tice of  virtue,  and  other  similar  righteous  acts;  and  the  abandon- 
ment of  their  opposites.  But  this  nature  of  righteousness  is  not  found 
cither  in  the  Koran,  the  Mussulmans,  or  in  their  God.  If  Prophet 
Mahomed  had  been  the  most  powerful  of  all,  how  could  he  not  be 
the  most  learned  and  endued  with  most  auspicious  qualities.  The 
praise  of  the  Koran  is  like  the  talk  of  that  female  green  grocer,  who 
never  tells  her  plums  to  be  sour. 

Resurrection 

' 131. — And  the  trumpet  shall  be  sounded  again;  and  behold  they 
shall  come  forth  from  their  graves,  and  hasten  unto  their  Lord.  And 
their  feet  shall  bear  witness  of  that  which  they  have  committed.  His 
command,  when  he  willeth  a thing,  is  only  that  he  saith  unto  it.  Be, 
and  it  is. — M 5,  S 23,  S 36,  v 48,  61,  78. 

R, — Now  hearken  to  the  hobble-de-hoy’s  tittle  tattle  ! Can  the 
feet  ever  bear  witness  ? Who  was  else  that  was  ordered  there  in  the 
beginning  than  Cxod  ? Who  heard  the  order  ? What  was  it  that 
became  something  ? If  there  was  nothing,  this  assertion  that  God 
saith.  Be,  and  it  is,  is  false.  If  there  was  something,  the  assertion 
that  there  was  nothing  but  God  who  formed  all  things,  is  false. 

Wine  and  women 

132.— A cup  shall  be  carried  round  unto  them,  filled  from  a 
limpid  fountain  (of  wine),  for  the  delight  of  those  who  drink  ; (it  shall 
not  oppress  the  understanding).  And  near  them  shall  be  the  virgins 


The  Religion  of  Moslems 


547 


of  paradise,  refraining  their  looks  from  beholding  any  besides  their 
spouses,  having  large  black  eyes,  and  resembling  the  eggs  of  an  ostrich 
covered  with  feathers  from  the  dust. .....Shall  we  die  any  other  than 

our  first  death  ? And  Lot  was  also  one  of  those  who  were  sent 

by  us.  When  we  delivered  him,  and  his  whole  family  except  an  old 
woman,  his  wife,  who  perished  among  those  that  remained  behind, 
afterwards  we  destroyed  the  others. — M 6,  S 23,  s 37,  v 43,  44,  46, 
47,  56,  126-129. 

R, — Well,  the  Mussulmans  condemn  wine  on  earth,  but  in  their 
heaven  rivers  flow  of  it.  The  good  is  that  drinking  is  prohibited 
among  them  here.  But  there  is  a great  deal  of  excess  of  it  in  their 
heaven  instead  of  it  on  earth.  The  superabundance  of  women  must 
distract  their  mind  there.  They  must  be  subjected  to  great  diseases. 
If  they  had  the  body  there,  they  must  surely  die.  But  if  they  had  no 
body,  they  would  be  unable  to  indulge  in  sexual  pleasure.  Then  their 
going  to  heaven  would  be  of  no  avail  to  them.  If  you  regard  Lot 
to  be  an  apostle,  do  you  or  do  you  not  believe  what  is  written  in  the 
Bible  that  his  two  daughters  cohabited  with  him  and  begot  two  sons 
for  him.  If  you  do,  it  is  absurd  to  regard  him  to  be  a prophet.  If 
God  gives  salvation  to  him  and  to  his  family,  he  must  be  like  him. 
For,  the  teller  of  an  old  women’s  tale  and  murderer  of  others  out  of 
partiality  can  never  be  God.  Such  a God  can  dwell  in  the  houses  of 
the  Mussulmans  only,  but  not  elsewhere. 

133. — Verily  the  pious  shall  have  an  excellent  place  to  return 
unto,  namely,  gardens  of  perpetual  abode,  the  gates  whereof  shall 
stand  open  unto  them.  As  they  lie  down  therein,  they  shall  there 
ask  for  many  sorts  of  fruits,  and  for  drink;  and  near  them  shall  sit  the 
virgins  of  paradise,  refraining  their  looks  from  beholding  any  beside 
their  spouses,  and  of  equal  age  with  them.  And  all, the  angels  wor- 
shipped him  (Adam)  in  general,  except  Satan,  who  was  puffed  up 
with  pride,  and  became  our  unbeliever,  God  said  unto  him,  O Eblis, 
what  hinderest  thee  from  worshipping  that  which  I have  created  with 
my  hand  ? Art  thou  elated  with  vain  pride  ? Or  art  thou  really  one 
of  exalted  merit  ? He  answered,  I am  more  excellent  than  he  ; thou 
hast  created  me  of  fire,  and  thou  hast  created  him  of  clay.  God  said 
unto  him.  Get  thee  hence,  therefore,  for  thou  shalt  be  driven  away 
from  mercy  : and  my  curse  shall  be  upon  thee,  until  the  day  of  judg- 
ment. He  replied,  O Lord,  respite  me,  therefore,  until  the  day  of 
resurrection. , God  said  verily  thou  shalt  be  one  of  those  who  are 
respited  until  the  day  of  determined  time.  Eblis  said,  By  thy  might  do 
I swear,  I will  surely  seduce  them  all. — M 6,  S 23,  s 38,  A 43-45,  63-72. 

R, — If  there  are  in  heaven  gardens,  orchards,  rivers,  springs, 
dwellings  and  other  things,  as  mentioned  by  the  Koran,  they  have 
never  been  ever  since  there,  nor  will  they  last  for  ever;  for,  whatever 
object  comes  into  being  from  the  union  of  two  substances,  it  never 
existed  before  that  union;  nor  will  it  remain  after  the  inevitable  con- 
tingent separation  thereof.  When  the  paradise  itself  shall  pass  away, 
how  then  can  its  inhabitants  reside  therein  for  ever  ? For,  it  is 
written  that  couches,  pillows,  fruits,  and  drinks  will  be  freely  supplied 
there.  It  is  proved  herefrom  that  at  the  commencement  of  the 
religion  of  the  Mussulmans,  the  country  of  Arabia  was  not  very  rich. 


548 


Satyarth  Prakash 


Therefore  Prophet  Mahomed  related  the  stories  of  gardens,  couches 
and  other  objects  of  luxury  and  secured  the  poor  inhabitants  in  his 
faith.  Again,  how  can  there  be  perpetual  ease  where  there  are  women 
to  sport  with  ? Whence  have  those  virgins  come  into  paradise  ? Are 
they  the  inhabitants  of  paradise  ? If  they  have  come  from  outside, 
they  must  go  away.  If  they  resided  there,  what  had  they  been  doing 
before  the  last  day  ? Were  they  wasting  their  life  in  idleness  ? Now 
look  at  the  influence  of  God  ? All  the  angels  obeyed  his  order  and 
saluted  Adam;  but  Satan  did  not  obey  it.  God  said  to  Satan  that  he 
had  made  Adam  with  his  two  hands  and  he  should  not  be  elated  with 
pride.  It  is  evident  from  this  account  that  the  God  of  the  Koran  had 
two  hands  like  man.  Hence  he  can  never  be  infinite  and  omnipotent. 
Satan  spoke  the  truth  when  he  said  he  was  better  than  Adam.  Why 
was  God  angry  there  at  ? Has  God  his  house  in  heaven  only  ? And 
not  in  the  earth  ? Why  then  is  it  written  at  first  that  the  Caaba  is 
the  house  of  God  ? How  can  God  be  separated  from  the  creation, 
or  separate  it  from  himself  ? That  all  the  creation  belongeth  to  God, 
shows  that  the  God  of  the  Koran  was  responsible  for  paradise.  God 
hurled  his  execration  at  him,  and  imprisoned  him.  Satan  said,  O 
Lord,  give  me  respite  till  the  day  of  account.  God  released  him  till 
that  day  out  of  his  love  for  flattery.  When  he  got  his  respite,  he  told 
God  he  would  much  exert  himself  in  seducing  all  mankind  to  disobe- 
dience, and  raise  the  standard  of  rebellion.  In  reply  thereto  God  said 
that  he  would  throw  them  unto  hell  whom  he  seduced,  and  him  in 
addition.  O good  people,  now  ponder  whether  the  tempter  of  Satan 
is  God  himself  or  he  was  tempted  to  evil  of  his  own  accord.  If  God 
depraved  him,  he  becomes  the  Satan  of  Satans.  If  he  was  tempted 
by  himself,  the  souls  pari  passu  will  be  tempted  to  sin  by  themselves 
without  the  necessity  of  Satan’s  instrumentality.  Since  he  set  Satan 
at  liberty,  it  seems  that  he  shares  with  Satan  in  seducing  mankind  to 
the  commission  of  sins.  There  can  be  no  thinking  of  his  injustice  who 
punishes  a thief  after  setting  him  to  stealing. 

Injustice 

134. — God  forgiveth  all  sins;  for  he  is  gracious  and  merciful. 
The  whole  earth  shall  be  but  his  handful,  on  the  day  of  resurrection; 
and  the  heavens  shall  be  rolled  together  in  his  right  hand.  And  the 
earth  shall  shine  by  the  light  of  its  Lord  : and  the  book  shall  be  laid 
upon  and  the  prophets  and  the  martyrs  shall  be  brought  as  witnesses; 
and  judgment  shall  be  given,  between  them  with  truth  and  they  shall 
not  be  treated  unjustly. — M 6,  S 24,  s 39,  A 54,  68,  70. 

/?. — If  God  forgives  all  sins,  he  makes  all  the  world  sinners,  so 
to  speak,  and  he  is  merciless;  for,  receiving  mercy  and  forgiveness  a 
wicked  man  will  perpetrate  more  wickedness  and  cause  more  pain  to 
many  righteous  persons.  If  a jot  of  sin  be  forgiven,  the  world  will 
be  deluged  with  sins.  Is  God  luminous  like  fire  ? Where  are  the 
books  of  deeds  of  persons  kept  ? Who  writes  them  ? If  God  judges 
on  the  evidence  of  prophets  and  martyrs,  he  is  not  omniscient  and 
omnipotent.  If  he  does  no  injustice,  but  does  justice  only,  he  must 
be  doing  so  according  to  the  deeds  of  persons.  Those  deeds  must 
have  been  done  in  past,  present  and  future  existences.  Under  such 


The  Religion  of  Moslems 


549 


circumstances  the  forgiving  of  sins,  the  sealing  of  hearts,  the  with- 
holding of  directions,  the  seducing  of  people  through  Satan,  and  the 
postponing  of  judgment  till  the  last  day,  are  so  many  forms  of 
injustice. 

Bate  to  Proselytes 

135.  — The  revelation  of  this  book  is  from  the  mighty,  the  wise 
God;  the  forgiver  of  sin,  and  the  acceptor  of  repentance. — M 6, 
S 24,  s 40,  A 1,  2. 

R. — This  declaration  is  for  the  purpose  that  simple  people  may 
in  the  name  of  God  accept  the  book,  called  the  Koran,  which  is  filled 
with  untruth  except  a little  truth  Even  that  little  truth  appears  very 
much  disfigured  by  mixing  with  untruth.  Hence  the  Koran,  its  God, 
and  its  believers  are  promoters  of  sins  and  perpetrators  of  sins;  for 
the  forgiveness  of  sins  is  the  enormity  of  vice.  It  is  on  this  account 
that  the  Mussulmans  are  little  afraid  of  committing  sins  and  creating 
disturbance. 

136. — And  he  formed  them  into  seven  heaven,  in  two  days;  and 
revealed  unto  every  heaven  its  office.  When  they  shall  arrive  there  at, 
their  ears,  and  their  eyes  and  their  skins  shall  bear  witness  against 
them  of  that  which  they  shall  have  wrought.  And  they  shall  say  unto 
their  skins,  wherefore  do  ye  bear  witness  against  us  ? They  shall 
answer,  God  hath  caused  us  to  speak  who  giveth  speech  unto  all 
things.  He  who  quickens  the  earth  will  surely  quicken  the  dead. — 
M6,  S 24,  S 41,  V 12,  20,  21,  39. 

R, — Bravo,  Moslems ! Your  God  whom  you  believe  to  be  omni- 
potent, could  only  make  seven  heavens  in  two  days  ! In  reality,  he 
who  is  omnipotent,  can  make  all  things  in  a moment.  Well,  God 
has  made  the  ears,  eyes  and  skin  unconscious,  how  can  they  bear 
witness  ? If  they  have  to  bear  witness,  why  has  he  made  them  uncon- 
scious at  first  ? Why  has  he  set  his  own  prior  against  posterior  laws. 
One  more  mendacious  thing  is  that  when  evidence  was  given  against 
souls,  they  asked  their  respective  skins,  why  they  bore  witness 
against  them.  The  skin  will  say,  God  hath  caused  it  to  speak,  it  is 
helpless.  Well,  can  it  be  ever  possible  of  occurrence?  It  is  tanta- 
mount to  saying  : I have  seen  the  face  of  a barren  woman’s  son.  If 
she  has  a son,  how  can  she  be  barren  ? If  she  is  barren,  it  is  impos- 
sible for  her  to  bear  a son.  The  above  false  assertion  is  of  the  like 
sort.  If  he  quickens  the  dead,  why  did  he  kill  at  first  ? Can  he  or 
can  he  not  become  dead  himself?  If  not,  why  does  he  regard  the 
dead  to  be  bad  ? In  what  Mussalman’s  house  do  the  dead  dwell  till 
the  last  day?  Why  does  God  put  off  justice  till  the  day  of  resur- 
rection as  if  committed  to  session  ? Why  did  he  not  judge  at  once  ? 
Such  acts  blot  his  godhead. 

137. — -His  are  the  keys  of  heaven  and  earth  : he  bestoweth  pro- 
vision abundantly  on  whom  he  pleaseth,  and  he  is  sparing  unto  whom 
he  pleaseth.  He  createth  that  which  he  pleaseth;  he  giveth  females 
unto  whom  he  pleaseth,  and  he  giveth  males  unto  whom  he  pleaseth; 
or  he  giveth  them  males  and  females  jointly  : and  he  maketh  whom 
he  pleaseth  to  be  childless.  It  is  not  fit  for  man  that  God  should 


550 


Satyarth  Prakash 


speak  unto  him  otherwise  than  by  private  revelation,  or  from  behind 
a veil,  or  by  his  sending  of  a messenger  to  reveal,  by  his  permission 
that  which  he  pleaseth.— M 6,  S 25,  S 42,  v 10,  47-49. 

R. — God  may  have  a store  of  keys;  for,  he  has  to  open  the 
locks  of  all  places.  It  is  a child’s  prattle.  Does  he  give  provision 
unto  whom  he  pleaseth  and  is  he  sparing  unto  whom  he  pleaseth 
without  any  regard  to  his  good  or  evil  deeds  ? If  he  is  so,  he  is 
very  unjust.  Now  look  at  the  ingenuity  of  the  author  of  the  Koran, 
which  bewitches  women  to  fall  into  his  trap  ! If  he  creates  what  he 
pleases,  can  he  create  another  God  ? If  he  cannot  do  so,  his  almight 
is  shipwrecked  at  this  point.  Well  God  may  give  sons  and  daughters 
to  men,  he’s  pleased  with,  but  who  gives  males  and  females  to  hens, 
fish,  sows  and  other  animals  which  bring  forth  many  of  them?  Why 
does  he  not  give  children  without  cohabitation  ? Why  does  he  afflict 
a woman  by  making  her  childless  at  his  will?  Hollo  ! how  majestic 
is  God  that  no  he  can  speak  before  him  ? But  he  has  said  before 
that  he  can  talk  from  behind  a veil,  or  angels  talk  with  him  or  pro- 
phets. If  it  is  so,  angels  and  prophets  must  achieve  their  own  ends 
to  their  heart’s  content.  It  be  said  that  God  is  omniscient  and 
omnipresent,  it  is  nonsensical  to  say  that  he  talks  from  behind  a veil, 
knows  through  messengers  as  if  by  mail,  or  writes  in  the  book  of 
fate.  If  he  does  so,  he  is  no  longer  God,  but  be  must  be  some 
shrewd  man.  Hence  this  book  called  the  Koran,  cannot  be  made 
by  God. 

Koran  Contradicts  Bible 

138.  — And  when  Jesus  came  with  evident  miracles. — M 6,  S 25, 
S 43,  V 62. 

R, — If  Jesus  was  sent  by  God,  why  did  God  make  the  Koran 
contrary  to  the  teachings  of  Jesus  ? The  gospel  is  opposed  to  the 
Koran.  Hence  these  books  are  not  made  by  God. 

139.  — Take  him,  and  drag  him  into  the  midst  of  hell.  Thus 
shall  it  be  : and  we  will  espouse  them  to  fair  damsels,  having  large 
black  eyes. — M 6,  S 25,  S 44,  v 44,  51. 

R. — Strange  ! Being  kind  and  just,  God  causes  the  people  to 
be  taken  and  dragged  into  hell  1 When  the  God  of  the  Mussulmans 
is  so,  what  wonder  can  there  be  if  his  votaries  the  Mussulmans  catch 
and  drag  defenceless  and  weak  persons  to  oppress  them  ? God  per- 
forms marriages  like  the  men  of  this  world.  He  is,  as  it  were,  the 
priest  of  the  Mussulmans. 

Massacre 

140.  — When  ye  encounter  the  unbelievers,  strike  of  their  heads, 
until  ye  have  made  a great  slaughter  among  them  and  bound  them  in 
bounds.  How  many  cities  were  more  mighty  in  strength  than  they 
city  which  hath  expelled  thee;  yet  have  we  destroyed  them,  and  there 
was  none  to  help  them.  The  description  of  paradise,  which  is  promis- 
ed unto  the  pious;  therein  are  rivers  of  incorruptible  water;  and  rivers 
of  milk,  the  taste  whereof  changeth  not;  and  rivers  of  wine,  pleasant 


The  Religion  of  Moslems 


551 


unto  those  who  drink;  and  rivers  of  clarified  honey;  and  therein  shall 
they  have  plenty  of  all  kinds  of  fruits;  and  pardon  from  their  Lord.— 
M 6,  S2,  S47,  v4,  13,  15. 

R, — Hence  the  Koran,  its  God,  and  the  Mussulmans  are  the 
disturbers  of  peace,  the  oppressors  of  all,  and  the  cruel  servers  of  their 
own  purposes.  Will  not  the  Mussulmans  feel  the  same  kind  of  pain 
as  they  cause  to  others,  if  the  professors  of  other  religions  oppress 
them  as  written  in  the  above  text  of  the  Koran?  God  is  very  unjust 
that  be  punished  those  who  expelled  Prophet  Mahomed.  Can  the 
paradise  in  which  the  rivers  of  pure  water,  wine  and  milk  flow,  be 
better  than  the  world?  Can  there  be  rivers  of  milk?  For  it  is  spoiled 
after  a short  time.  It  is  on  this  account  that  intelligent  persons  don’t 
believe  in  the  religion  of  the  Koran. 

Life  in  Paradise 

141. — When  the  earth  shall  be  shaken  with  a violent  shock;  and 
the  mountains  shall  be  dashed  in  pieces  and  shall  become  as  dust 
scattered  abroad:  (and  ye  shall  be  separated  into  three  distinct  classes); 
the  companions  of  the  right  hand  (how  happy  shall  the  companions 
of  the  right  hand  be),  and  the  companions  of  the  left  hand  (how  mis- 
erable shall  the  companions  of  the  left  hand  be),  (and  those  who  have 
preceded  others  in  the  faith,  shall  precede  them  to  paradise).  Repos- 
ing on  couches  adorned  with  gold  and  precious  stones;  sitting  oppo- 
site to  one  another  thereon.  Youths  which  shall  continue  in  their 
bloom  for  ever,  shall  go  round  about  to  attend  them,  with  goblets, 
and  beakers,  and  a cup  of  flowing  wine;  their  heads  shall  not  ache  by 
drinking  the  same,  neither  shall  their  reason  be  disturbed;  and  with 
fruits  of  the  sorts  which  they  shall  choose,  and  the  flesh  of  birds  of 
the  kind  which  they  shall  desire.  And  there  shall  accompany  them 
fair  damsels  having  large  black  eyes;  resembling  pearls  hidden  in  their 
shells;  and  they  shall  repose  themselves  on  lofty  beds.  Verily  we  have 
created  the  damsels  of  paradise  by  a peculiar  creation;  and  we  have 
made  them  virgins,  beloved  by  their  husbands,  of  equal  age  with  them. 
Ye  shall  fill  your  bellies  therewith.  Moreover  I swear  by  the  setting  of 
the  stars.— M 7,  S 27,  s 56,  A 4-6,  8,  9,  15-24,  35-38,  54,  75. 

R. — Now  look  at  the  imposture  (lila)  of  the  author  of  the  Koran. 
Well,  the  earth  moves,  it  will  move  at  that  time.  It  shows  that  the 
author  of  the  Koran  thought  the  earth  to  be  fixed.  But  will  God 
dash  or  let  the  mountains  fly  like  birds?  If  they  be  reduced  to  pieces, 
they  will  retain  their  existence  as  atoms  of  subtle  bodies.  They  may 
be  said  to  have  their  second  birth.  Well,  if  God  have  no  body,  how 
can  they  stand  on  the  right  and  on  the  left  hand?  As  there  are 
couches  adorned  with  gold  and  precious  stones  in  paradise,  there 
must  be  carpenters  and  goldsmiths  living. there,  and  bugs  biting  them. 
Then  the  dwellers  will  get  no  sleep  at  night.  Do  they  repose  away 
their  time  on  couches  and  pillows  in  indolence  in  paradise?  Do  they 
do  any  work  there?  If  they  remain  seated,  they  must  fall  sick  from 
want  of  motion  and  soon  die  away.  If  they  work  there,  they  must  be 
living  by  labour  on  wages  as  they  do  here  below.  Then  what  is  the 
difference  between  the  world  below  and  the  paradise  above?  There 
is  nothing  what  ever.  If  there  are  youths  or  boys  always  living  there, 


552 


Satyarth  Prakash 


there  must  be  their  fathers  and  mothers  also  living  there.  They  must 
have  their  fathers-in-law  and  mothers-in-law  also  living  there.  It 
must  be  a very  large  city  teeming  with  people.  Then  there  must  be 
many  diseases  produced  from  the  increase  of  filth,  urine  and  other 
kinds  of  faecal  matter;  for,  they  will  eat  fruits,  drink  water  with  glasses, 
drink  wine  in  cups  which  will  not  ache  their  head  or  disturb  their 
reason  to  rave  like  drunkards,  eat  fruits  to  their  heart’s  content,  and 
eat  the  flesh  of  animals  and  birds.  This  gluttony  will  produce  many 
kinds  of  ailments.  There  must  be  a great  slaughter  of  animals  and 
birds,  whose  bones  will  lie  scattered  all  around.  Also  there  must  be 
the  shops  of  butchers.  Splendid!  The  praise  of  their  paradise  is  past 
all  description.  It  appears  to  surpass  the  country  of  Arabia.  As 
they  get  inebriated  and  exhilarated  by  quaffing  off  cups  of  wine  and 
devouring  mutton  chops,  they,  must  require  fair  women  and  sodomite 
boys  living  there,  otherwise  the  brains  of  these  inebriates  will  be  heated 
and  they  will  get  dead  drunk.  No  doubt  lofty  beds  are  required  for 
the  repose  of  many  men  and  women.  As  God  creates  virgins,  so  also 
be  creates  bachelors  in  paradise. 

Well,  the  virgins  are  married  to  the  Mussulman  candidates  who 
go  there  from  the  world  as  is  written  in  the  verse  of  the  Koran  quoted 
above;  but  God  has  not  mentioned  with  whom  the  marriages  of  the 
bachelors  ever  living  there  will  be  performed.  Will  they,  too,  be  given 
away  like  the  virgins  to  those  Moslem  candidates  of  Paradise?  Noth- 
ing is  written  in  the  Koran  with  regard  to  this  matter.  Why  has  God 
made  this  great  mistake?  As  the  paradisial  nymphs  loved  by  and 
equal  in  age  with  their  husbands,  it  is  not  proper;  for  the  age  of  the 
husband  should  be  double  of  or  twice  as  much  again  as  the  age  of  the 
wife.  So  much  of  the  discription  of  the  paradise  of  the  Mussulmans. 
The  damned  will  fill  their  bellies  with  the  fruits  of  alzakum  {thohar  : 
a prickly  shurb)  in  hell.  Hence  there  must  be  thorny  shrubs  in  hell. 
Their  brambles  must  prick  their  feet.  Th^y  will  be  given  boiling  water 
to  drink.  Such  are  the  torments  of  hell,  which  will  be  given  to  the 
damned.  Swearing  is  the  custom  of  liars,  and  not  of  the  veracious. 
If  God  swears,  he  cannot  be  free  from  the  charge  of  untruthfulness. 

War 


142.  — Verily  God  loveth  those  who  fight  for  his  religion  in 
battle  array. — M 7,  S 8,  s 61,  A 4. 

R. — Certainly  indeed!  Preaching  such  doctrines,  God  has  made 
the  inhabitants  of  Arabia  wage  war  with  all  other  people  and  thus 
become  their  enemies,  causing  mutual  suffering.  Hoisting  the  banner 
of  religion,  he  has  introduced  war  into  the  human  society.  No  wise 
man  can  ever  acknowledge  such  a being  as  God.  He  who  sows  the 
seed  of  quarrel  in  a community,  is  the  oppressor  of  all. 

143.  — O prophet,  why  boldest  thou  that  to  be  prohibited  which 
God  hath  allowed  thee  seeking  to  please  the  wives;  since  God  is 
inclined  to  forgive  and  merciful?  Verily  God  is  his  patron.  If  he 
divorce  you,  his  Lord  can  easily  give  him  in  exchange  other  wives 
better  than  you,  women  resigned  unto  God,  true  believers,  devout, 
penitent,  obedient,  given  to  fasting,  both  such  as  have  been  known  by 
other  men,  and  virgins. — M 7,  S 28,  S 66,  V 1,  5. 


The  Religion  of  Moslems 


553 


R, — Attentively  see,  is  he  God,  or  is  he  the  major  domo  and 
factorum  of  Mahomed’s  house-hold  for  internal  and  external  affairs? 
Two  stories  are  told  in  connection  with  the  first  verse.  One  of  them 
runs  thus  : Prophet  Mahomed  loved  to  drink  the  beverage  of  honey. 
He  had  several  wives.  He  was  delayed  in  drinking  it  at  the  house. of 
one  of  them,  which  was  unbearable  to  others.  On  their  expostula- 
tion the  Prophet  took  an  oath  never  to  drink  it.  Another  story  says 
that  once  upon  a time  one  of  the  wives  of  the  Prophet  got  her  turn. 
So  he  went  to  her  at  night;  but  she  was  not  there,  being  gone  to  her 
father’s  house.  Thereupon  Prophet  Mahomed  called  a hand-maid  to 
him,  and  sanctified  her.  When  his  wife  came  to  know  it,  she  was 
displeased  at  it.  Thereupon  Prophet  Mahomed  swore  by  an  oath  that 
he  would  not  do  so  again,  and  begged  his  wife  not  to  tell  it  to 
anybody.  She  agreed  not  to  disclose  it.  But  he  told  it  to  another 
wife,  whereupon  God  sent  down  this  verse,  namely,  why  dost  thou 
hold  that  to  be  prohibited  which  we  have  allowed  thee.  Now  intelli- 
gent people  may  consider  if  God  goes  about  deciding  the  domestic 
broils  of  householders.  Such  occurrences  discover  the  character  of 
Prophet  Mahomed;  for  how  can  he  be  the  servant  or  prophet  of  God 
who  keeps  many  women?  How  can  he  be  not  unjust  and  unrighteous 
who  dishonours  one  wife  out  of  partiality  and  honours  another?  How 
can  he  have  shame,  fear,  and  piety,  who  being  not  content  even  with 
many  wives,  goes  to  handmaids?  Says  a poet : 

— Whoever  is  lewd,  is  not  ashamed  or  afraid  of  impiety.  The  God  of 
the  Mussulmans  plays  the  umpire  to  give  his  decision  in  the  quarrel 
between  the  prophet  and  his  wives.  Now  thinking  persons  should 
determine  whether  this  book,  called  the  Koran,  is  written  by  a learn- 
ed man  or  God,  or  by  an  ignorant  and  selfish  person.  They  will 
clearly  see  it  belies  its  claim.  The  second  verse  suggests  that  when 
a wife  of  Prophet  Mahomed  got  displeased  with  him,  God  brow- 
beat her  by  sending  down  the  verse  in  question,  purporting  to  say 
that,  if  she  kicked  up  dust,  and  Prophet  Mahomed  would  put  her 
away,  his  Lord  God  would  give  him  better  wives  than  her  in  exchange 
such  as  knew  no  man.  A man  with  a little  sense  about  him  will  at 
once  know  whether  it  is  the  work  of  God  or  it  is  a device  to  accom- 
plish his  own  selfish  object.  Such  incidents  go  to  prove  to  conviction 
that  it  was  not  God  that  gave  direction,  but  it  was  Prophet  Mahomed 
alone  who  gave  commands  in  the  name  of  God  to  suit  his  purpose 
in  accordance  with  the  circumstances  of  time  and  place.  To  those 
who  attribute  these  acts  to  God,  not  only  we  but  all  the  enlightened 
people  should  say  that  he  was  not  God,  but  the  procurer  of  wives  to 
Prophet  Mahomed  (Nayi : barber). 

War  against  Infidels 

144. — O prophet,  attack  infidels  with  arms,  and  the  hypocrites 
with  arguments;  and  treat  them  with  severity.— M 7,  S 28,  S 66,  v 9. 

R. — Now  look  at  the  humbug  of  the  God  of  the  Mussulmans ! 
He  incites  the  Prophet  and  the  Mussulmans  to  make  war  upon  the 
people  of  other  faiths.  Hence  the  Mussulmans  arc  engaged  in  bring- 
ing about  a state  of  war.  May  God  look  upon  the  Mussulmans  with 


554  Satyarth  Prakash 

the  eye  of  grace  that  they  desist  from  creating  hostility  and  behave 
themselves  towards  all  with  amity  ! 

8 Angels  bear  God’s  throne 

145. ~~The  heavens  shall  cleave  in  sunder,  and  shall  fall  in  pieces 
on  that  day;  and  the  angels  shall  be  on  the  sides  thereof;  and  eight 
shall  bear  the  throne  of  thy  Lord  above  them  on  that  day;  on  that  day 
ye  shall  be  presented  before  the  judgment  seat  of  God : and  none  of 
your  secret  actions  shall  be  hidden.  And  he  who  shall  have  his  book 
delievered  unto  his  right  hand,  shall  say.  Take  ye,  read  this  my  book  : 
But  he  who  shall  have  his  book  delivered  unto  his  left  hand  shall  say, 
O that  I had  not  received  this  my  book;— M 7,  S 29,  S 69,  A 16-19, 
25. 

R, — What  a wonderful  philosophy  and  a nice  justice  are  here 
displayed  ! Well,  can  the  ethereal  sky  be  rent  asunder  ? Is  it  like 
cloth  so  as  to  be  torn  in  pieces  ? If  the  upper  regions  are  here  called 
the  heavens,  it  is  opposed  to  the  facts  of  knowledge.  Now  there  is 
not  the  least  doubt  at  all  in  the  God  of  the  Koran  being  finite  and 
corporeal,  or  possessing  a body;  for,  his  sitting  upon  a throne  born 
by  eight  bearers  cannot  be  possible  without  his  having  a material 
body.  Presenting  before  him  or  going  behind  him  can  be  said  of  a 
person  endued  with  a material  body.  Having  a material  form,  he  is 
finite,  existing  at  one  place,  and  therefore  he  cannot  be  all-knowing, 
all-pervading  and  all-powerful.  He  cannot  know  the  deeds  of  all 
souls.  What  is  wonderfully  amusing,  is  the  delivery  of  the  book  of 
deeds  into  the  right  hand  of  the  pious,  its  reading  by  the  holder, 
their  transfer  to  paradise,  judging  on  reading  the  book  of  fate,  giving 
the  book  unto  the  left  hand  of  the  wicked,  their  transportation  to 
hell.  Can  all  this  procedure  be  adopted  by  the  omniscient  ? No, 
never.  All  this  imposition  is  characteristic  of  hobble-de-hoyhood. 

146. — 'Angels  ascend  unto  him,  and  the  spirit  Gabriel  also,  in  a 
day,  whose  space  is  50,000  years.  Whereon  they  shall  come  forth 
hastely  from  their  graves,  as  though  they  were  hastening  to  their 
deities.— M 7,  S 29,  S 70,  A 41,  42. 

Judgement  day  50,000  Years  Long ! 

R, — If  the  duration  of  the  day  of  judgment  be  50,000  years, 
why  should  there  not  be  the  night  of  the  same  proportion  ? If  the 
night  be  not  so  long,  the  day,  too,  cannot  as  a matter  of  course  be 
of  the  same  length.  Will  God,  angels,  and  the  holders  of  the  book 
of  deeds,  be  standing,  sitting  or  waking  for  those  50,000  long  years  ? 
If  it  be  so,  all  will  be  naturally  attacked  by  disease  and  carried  away 
by  death.  Will  the  dead  run  out  of  the  graves  towards  the  tribunal 
of  God?  How  will  they  be  served  with  summons  in  the  sepulchres? 
Why  were  they  all,  both  the  pious  and  the  impious,  kept  confined  in 
the  graves  as  if  committed  to  sessions  ? The  Court  of  God  must  be 
closed  now-a-days.  God  and  angels  must  be  idling  their  time.  If 
not,  what  work  may  they  be  doing  now  ? May  they  not  be  sitting  in 
their  respective  places,  rambling  about,  sleeping,  seeing  sights  and 
balls,  or  indulging  in  luxury  ? Such  a disorder  will  never  be  found  in 
any  rule.  Who  can  believe  such  tales  except  barbarians  ? 


555 


The  Religion  of  Moslems 

Seven  Heavens 

147.  — Since  he  hath  created  you  variously.  Do  ye  not  see  how 
God  hath  created  the  seven  heavens,  one  above  another,  and  hath 
placed  the  moon  therein  for  a light,  and  hath  appointed  the  sun  for 
a taper  ?—M  7,  S 29,  S 71,  A 14-16. 

R. — If  God  has  created  souls,  they  can  never  be  eternal  and 
immortal.  How  can  they  live  for  ever  in  paradise?  What  is  born 
must  needs  die.  How  can  God  create  heavens  one  above  another? 
For  the  sky  is  a formless  and  all-pervading  substance.  If  something 
else  be  called  the  sky  or  heaven,  that  name  is  not  appropriate.  If 
the  heavens  are  made  one  above  another,  the  sun  and  moon  can 
never  be  placed  in  the  midst  of  them  all.  If  placed  in  the  midst  of 
them  all,  the  object  of  only  two  heavens,  one  above  and  the  other 
below,  will  receive  light;  and  all  the  others  beginning  from  the  second 
will  be  in  darkness.  But  it  is  not  so;  therefore  this  hypothesis  of  the 
Koran  is  absolutely  false 

148.  — Verily  the  places  of  worship  are  set  apart  unto  God  : 
wherefore  invoke  not  any  other  therein  together  with  God. — M 7, 
S 29,  S 72,  A 18. 

R. — If  it  be  right,  why  Mussulmans  invoke  Prophet  Mahomed 
with  God  in  mosques  when  calling  the  faithful  to  prayer  by  shouting 
their  creed;  Lailah  illillah,  Mohammad  Rasul  illah — There  is  no 
other  God  but  God,  and  Mahomed  is  the  prophet  of  God  ! It  is 
against  the  injunction  of  the  Koran.  If  they  don’t  regard  it  to  be 
contrary  to  the  Koran,  they  belie  this  verse  of  it.  If  the  mosques  be 
the  houses  of  God.  the  Mussulmans  will  be  very  great  idolaters.  For, 
as  the  believers  in  the  Puranas  and  the  Jainis  are  called  idolaters  on 
account  of  their  believing  the  small  idols  to  be  the  houses  of  God, 
why  are  the  Mussulmans  not  so  from  believing  the  mosques  to  be  the 
houses  of  God  ? 

149.  — The  sun  and  the  moon  shall  be  joined. — M 7,  S 29, 
s 75,  A 9. 

R, — Well,  can  the  sun  and  moon  be  ever  united  ? See  how  great 
a misapprehension  of  facts  it  is ! What  purpose  will,  be  served  by 
joining  the  sun  and  moon  ? What  wisdom  is  there  in  joining  all  other 
worlds  ? Even  no  learned  man  will  think  of  them,  except  the  ignorant. 

150.  — And  youths  which  shall  continue  for  ever  in  their  bloom, 
shall  go  round  to  attend  them;  when  thou  seest  them,  thou  shalt 
think  them  to  be  scattered  pearls;  and  they  shall  be  adorned  with 
bracelets  of  silver  and  their  Lord  shall  give  them  to  drink  of  a most 
pure  liquor.—M  7,  S 29,  s 76,  A 19,  21. 

Sodomy 

R, — Well,  for  what  purpose  are  the  boys  of  the  colour  of  pearls 
kept  there  ? Cannot  the  paradisial  virgins  and  sumptuous  dinners 
satisfy  them  ? It  is  surprising  to  find  that  the  unnatural  and  most 
heinous  crime  these  wicked  people  commit  upon  boys,  is  based  upon 
this  verse  of  the  Koran  ! The  existence  of  the  relation  of  master  and 


556 


Satyarth  Prakash 


servant  and  the  consequent  ease  of  the  master  and  the  assiduity  of 
the  servant  must  give  rise  to  suffering  in  the  paradise  and  it  is  a flag- 
rant instance  of  partiality.  When  God  himself  serves  them  with 
wine,  he  will  be  like  their  servant.  Then  how  can  God’s  supremacy 
be  maintained  ? Do  or  do  not  the  cohabitation  of  men  and  women, 
the  conception  of  women,  and  the  procreation  of  children  take  place 
in  paradise  ? If  not,  their  indulgence  in  sexuality  will  be  a waste  of 
labour.  If  they  do  take  place,  whence  do  those  souls  come?  Why 
are  they  born  in  paradise  without  worshipping  God?  If  they  are 
born  there,  they  get  admission  into  paradise  gratuitously  without 
believing  in  Islam,  and  worshipping  God  I What  can  be  a greater 
injustice  than  that  some  are  rewarded  with  happiness  on  account  of 
their  belief,  and  others  without  it  ? 

151.  — A fit  recompense  for  their  deeds.  A full  cup.  Angels  shall 
stand  in  order.— -M  7,  S 30,  s 78,  A 26,  34,  38. 

^ R. — If  deeds  are  to  be  recompensed,  what  are  the  deeds  of  the 
houris  or  nymphs  ever  living  in  paradise,  angels,  and  pearly  boys, 
which  secured  them  perpetual  abode  in  paradise?  When  they  will 
drink  cupfuls  of  wine,  how  can  they  not  be  intoxicated  and  come  to 
blows  ? Here  the  word  spirit  is  the  name  of  one  angel,  namely, 
Gabriel,  who  is  greater  than  all  other  angels.  Will  God  draw  up  the 
troops  of  angels  by  making  them  and  Gabriel  fall  in  order?  Will  he 
inflict  punishment  upon  all  souls  by  means  of  the  army  of  angels  ? 
Will  God  be  standing  or  sitting  at  that  time  ? If  by  the  day  of  resur- 
rection God  collect  all  the  army  and  catch  Satan,  his  kingdom  will 
be  freed  from  rebels;  and  it  will  establish  his  supremacy  of  Godhead. 

152.  When  the  sun  shall  be  folded  up;  and  when  the  stars 
shall  fall  or  be  dimmed;  and  when  the  mountains  shall  be  made  a 
pass  away  and  when  the  heaven  shall  be  flayed.— M 7,  S 30,  S 81, 
A 1-8,  11. 

Flaying  of  Heaven 

R.—li  is  a great  deal  of  misapprehension  of  facts  that  the  sphere 
of  the  sun  shall  be  folded  up.  How  can  the  stars  fall  or  be  dimmed? 
How  can  the  mountains  being  immovable  be  made  to  move  or  pass 
away  ? Is  the  sky  supposed  to  be  an  animal  that  it  will  be  flayed, 
or  its  skin  be  taken  oflf?  These  expressions  betray  utter  misunder- 
standing of  natural  phenomena  and  grotesque  barbarism. 

153.  — When  the  heaven  shall  be  cloven  in  sunder;  and  when 
the  stars  shall  be  scatterred;  and  when  the  seas  shall  be  suffered  to 
join  their  waters;  and  when  the  graves  shall  be  turned  upside  down. — 
M 7,  S 30,  s 82,  A 1-4. 

Scatterring  of  Stars 

R* — Bravo!  How  can  the  philosophic  author  of  the  Koran  cleave 
the  heaven  ? How  can  he  brush  away  the  stars  ? Are  the  seas  made 
of  wood  that  they  will  be  scraped  away  ? Are  the  graves  like  the 
dead  that  will  be  raised  ? All  these  expressions  are  like  the  babblings 
of  the  baby. 


The  Religion  of  Moslems 


557 


Original  Koran 

154.  — By  the  heaven  adorned  with  towers  or  the  signs  of  the 
Zodiac.  Verily  that  which  they  reject  is  a glorious  Koran;  the  origi- 
nal whereof  is  written  in  a table  kept  in  heaven.-- -M  7,  S 30,  s 85, 
vl,21. 

R, — The  author  of  the  Koran  never  studied  either  geography  or 
astronomy;  else  he  would  not  have  thought  the  sky  to  be  adorned 
with  towers  like  a castle.  If  he  calls  the  twelve  signs  of  the  Zodiac 
by  the  name  of  towers,  why  should  not  other  stars  be  called  towers  ? 

Note, — It  is  said  that  the  Arabians  thought  them  to  be  real 
towers  on  which  the  angels  ascended  to  keep  watch. 

Properly  speaking,  they  are  not  towers,  but  they  are  all  worlds 
looking  like  stars.  Is  the  original  copy  of  the  Koran  with  God  ? If 
this  Koran  is  made  by  him,  its  original  must  also  he  full  of  ignorance, 
and  thoughts  contrary  to  knowledge  and  reason. 

155.  — Verily  the  infidels  are  laying  a plot  to  frustrate  my  designs; 
but  I will  lay  a plot  for  their  ruin. — M 7,  S 30,  S 86,  v 15,  16. 

R. — Laying  plots  is  fraudulence.  Is  God  fraudulent  ? Is  theft 
to  be  returned  with  theft,  and  falsehood  with  falsehood  ? If  a thief 
breaks  in  the  house  of  an  honest  man  to  steal,  is  it  proper  for  the 
honest  man  to  commit  burglary  upon  the  house  of  the  thief  ? What  a 
splendid  thinker  is  the  author  of  the  Koran  ? 

Bringing  of  Hell 

156.  — When  thy  Lord  shall  come,  and  the  angels  rank  by  rank; 
and  hell,  on  that  day,  shall  be  brought  nigh. — M 7,  S 30,  S 89, 
v21,22. 

R, — Well,  the  God  of  the  Mussulmans  is  like  the  commander 
of  a garrison  or  a commandant  of  an  army  who  patrols  or  reconnoi- 
tres with  a squadron  of  troops.  Is  hell  supposed  to  be  like  a pitcher, 
that  can  be  carried  about  wherever  he  pleaseth  ? If  it  is  so  small, 
how  can  it  accommodate  innumerable  sinners  of  the  world  ? 

157.  — The  apostle  of  God  (Saleh)  said  unto  them  (Thamudites), 
Let  alone  the  camel  of  God;  and  hinder  not  her  drinking.  But  they 
charged  him  with  imposture;  and  they  slew  her.  Wherefore  their 
Lord  destroyed  them. — M 7,  S 30,  S 91,  v 13,  14. 

R, — Does  God  ride  on  a she-camel  for  a pleasure  trip  ? Else, 
why  did  he  keep  her  ? Why  did  he  break  his  own  rule  by  sending 
plague  unto  them  for  their  destruction  before  the  last  day  ? If  he 
punished  them  by  visiting  them  with  a plague,  then  the  necessity  of 
the  day  of  judgment  and  resurrection  vanishes  away.  The  inference 
from  the  repeated  mention  of  this  she-camel  is  that  there  is  scarcely 
any  other  mode  of  conveyance  in  Arabia  than  camels  and  drome- 
daries, Hence  it  is  plain  enough  that  some  Arab  has  written  the  Koran. 

158. — Verily,  if  he  forbear  not,  we  will  drag  him  by  the  fore- 
lock, the  lying,  sinful  forelock.  We  also  will  call  infernal  guards  to 
cast  him  into  hell.— M 7,  S 30,  s 96,  A 15,  16,  18. 


558 


Satyarth  Prakash 


R. — God  is  not  above  the  mean  work  of  dragging  which  belongs 
to  peons!  Well,  can  a forelock  be  ever  a lying  and  sinful  one?  Well, 
he  cannot  but  be  a human  being  and  not  God,  acting  like  a jailor. 

Descent  of  Koran 

159. — Verily  we  have  sent  down  the  Koran  in  the  night  of  al 
Kadr.  And  what  shall  make  thee  understand  how  excellent  the  night 
of  al  Kadr  is?  Therein  do  the  angels  descend,  and  the  spirit  Gabriel 
also,  by  the  permission  of  their  Lord,  with  his  decrees  concerning  every 
matter. —M  7,  S 30,  S 97,  A 1,  2,  4. 

R. — If  the  whole  Koran  was  sent  down  in  one  night,  the  verse 
is  not  right  wherein  it  is  said  that  it  was  sent  down  piece-meal  at  differ- 
ent times,  and  that  a certain  verse  was  sent  down  when  wanted.  Also, 
night  is  dark,  and  so  utmost  licence  can  be  practiced  in  writing  above 
and  below  the  text,  and  nothing  can  be  detected.  It  is  here  mentioned 
that  angels  descend  with  holiness  to  regulate  the  affairs  of  the  world. 
It  is  therefore  plain  that  God  is  finite  like  man.  Heretofore  we  have 
been  reading  the  stories  of  God,  angels  and  the  apostle.  Now  a fourth 
being,  called  the  spirit,  namely,  Gabriel  has  cropped  up.  It  is  not 
known  what  this  fourth  holy  spirit  is.  It  has  surpassed  the  religion 
of  the  Christians  who  believe  in  the  trinity  of  the  Father,  the  Son, 
and  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  adding  a fourth  person  of  holy  spirit.  If  the 
Mussulmans  say  that  they  do  not  regard  all  the  three  as  Gods,  will 
they  or  will  they  not  call  God,  angels,  and  the  prophet  holy  spirits, 
seeing  that  the  holy  spirit  is  a separate  being?  If  they  do  call  them  so, 
why  then  do  they  call  one  only  by  the  name  of  holy  spirit?  Also,  it 
is  surprising  that  God  swears  by  horses,  nights,  days,  the  Koran,  and 
other  objects.  It  is  not  the  custom  of  good  people  to  take  oaths. 

Having  thus  given  a cursory  view  of  the  Koran,  I lay  it  before 
the  sensible  persons  with  the  purpose  that  they  should  know  what 
kind  of  book  the  Koran  is.  If  they  ask  me,  I have  no  hesitation  to 
say  that  it  cannot  be  the  work  either  of  God  or  of  a learned  man,  nor 
can  it  be  called  a book  of  knowledge.  Here  its  very  little  defect  has 
been  exposed  with  the  object  that  the  people  may  not  waste  their  life 
falling  into  its  imposition. 

Conclusion 

Whatever  little  truth  it  contains,  being  in  accord  with  the  pur- 
port of  the  Vedas  and  other  philosophical  scriptures,  is  acceptable  to 
me  as  it  is  to  the  learned  and  wise  men  of  other  faiths  free  from  the 
taint  of  bigotry  and  partiality.  With  the  exception  of  that  truth, 
whatever  is  in  this  book,  called  the  Koran,  is  the  result  of  ignorance, 
the  source  of  animalisation  of  human  beings,  a fruitful  cause  of 
destroying  peace,  an  incentive  to  war,  a propagator  of  hostility  among 
men,  and  a promoter  of  suffering  in  society.  As  to  the  defect  of  repe- 
tition, the  Koran  is,  as  it  were,  its  store-house.  May  the  Supreme 
Being  be  gracious  to  all  people  that  they  love  one  another  and  unite 
in  promoting  their  mutual  happiness!  I point  out  the  defects  of 
other’s  faiths  as  well  as  mine  own  without  partiality.  If  all  the  learned 
people  do  the  same  likewise,  will  it  be  hard  for  the  people  at  large  to 


The  Religion  of  Moslems 


559 


cast  off  mutual  hatred  and  to  shake  hands  with  one  another  in  friend- 
ship so  as  to  enjoy  peace  and  the  blessing  of  one  religion,  which  seeks 
after  the  realisation  of  Truth.  So  much  in  brief  for  the  burthen  of 
the  Koran.  It  is  trusted  that  the  wise  and  the  righteous  will  take  it  in 
good  faith  to  their  benefit.  If  they  find  anything  wrong  therein  from 
human  frailty,  they  will  do  me  favour  to  correct  it  for  right  under- 
standing. 

In  conclusion,  one  point  remains  to  be  touched  upon.  The 
Mussulmans  in  general  say  in  public  or  in  print  that  their  religion  is 
mentioned  in  the  Atharva  Veda.  It  is  replied  that  there  is  no  whisper 
of  it  at  all  in  the  Atharva  Veda. 

Islam  in  Veda 

Q, — Have  you  seen  all  the  Atharva  Veda?  If  you  have,  consult 
the  Allopanishat.  It  is  distinctly  given  there.  Why  then  do  you  say 
that  there  is  not  the  least  trace  of  the  Mussulmans  in  the  Atharva  Veda? 

Allopanishat 

(I  m2m 

{\3\\  1 \\4\\ 

n ^ w n5ii  %{^j 

n6n  qf^T  ii7n 

nSii 

g ^ f ^ ii9n 

lllOu 

It  distinctly  contains  the  word  Mahammed  Rasul  Allah  : Maho- 
med is  the  prophet  of  God.  Hence  it  is  proved  that  the  religion  of 
the  Mussulmans  is  based  upon  the  Vedas. 

A, — If  you  have  not  seen  the  Atharva  Veda,  you  should  come 
to  me  and  see  it  from  beginning  to  end;  or  you  may  go  to  any  person 
versed  in  the  Atharva  Veda  containing  20  chapters  and  consult  it. 
You  will  find  nowhere  in  it  the  name  of  your  prophet  or  a trace  of 
your  religion.  As  regards  the  Allopanishat  in  question,  it  is  not  given 
either  in  the  Atharva  Veda,  or  in  its  Gopatha  Brahmana,  or  in  any 
branch  of  its  commentary.  It  appears  to  have  been  made  by  some 
man  in  the  time  of  Akbar.  Its  author  seems  to  be  slightly  acquainted 
with  Arabic  and  Sanscrit;  for  it  contains  Arabic  and  Sanscrit  words. 
For  instance,  see  : Asmallam  ille  and  so  on.  The  Arabic  words  are 
Asmallam  and  ille  and  Sanscrit  words  are  Mitra  varuna  divyani  dhatte. 
Thus  taking  the  whole  into  account,  we  find  it  is  composed  by  some- 
body acquainted  with  Arabic  and  Sanscrit.  If  its  sense  be  considered, 
it  is  artificial,  disjointed,  and  opposed  to  the  rules  of  the  Veda  and 
grammar.  Like  it,  the  sectarians  of  various  denominations  have  made 


560 


Satyarth  Prakash 


many  similar  Upanishats;  for  instance,  the  Swaropanishat,  Nrisinhata- 
pni,  RamatapnU  Gapalatapni,  and  others  of  the  like  sort. 


Forgery 

Q. — Nobody  has  said  so  upto  now  as  you  say.  You  alone  say 
it.  How  can  then  we  believe  you? 

A, — What  we  say,  cannot  be  false,  whether  you  may  or  you 
may  not  believe  it.  The  Upanishat  can  be  proved  to  be  true  if  you  try, 
as  I have  done  in  establishing  its  spuriousness^  to  prove  its  genuine- 
ness by  showing  it  to  be  given  exactly  as  it  is  in  the  Atharva  Veda, 
Gopath,  in  its  branches  or  in  their  ancient  manuscripts  and  by  ex- 
plaining its  context  on  intelligent  grounds  of  its  consistency  of 
signification. 

Q, — See  how  excellent  is  our  religion  wherein  there  is  all  kinds 
of  ease  and  comfort  and  there  is  salvation  in  the  end? 

A. — All  the  sectarians  say  so,  namely,  their  religion  alone  is 
good,  and  the  other  faiths  are  all  bad.  There  can  be  no  salvation  in 
any  other  religion  but  theirs  own.  Now,  whose  assertion  should  we 
believe  to  be  true,  yours  or  theirs?  Wc  believe  that  veracity,  com- 
passion, harmlessness,  benevolence,  and  other  like  qualities  are  good 
in  all  religions.  As  to  controversy,  contention,  envy,  hatred,  false- 
hood and  other  evil  actions  are  bad  in  all  faiths.  If  you  wish  to  adopt 
the  true  religion,  you  should  embrace  the  religion  of  the  Veda. 

Miracle  of  She-Camel  (Vide  page  541) 

The  Thamudites,  insisting  on  a miracle,  proposed  to  Saleh  that 
he  should  go  with  them  to  their  festival,  and  that  they  should  call  on 
their  gods,  and  he  on  his,  promising  to  follow  that  deity  which  should 
answer.  But  after  they  had  called  on  their  idols  a long  time  to  no 
purpose,  Jonda  Ebn  Amru,  their  prince,  pointed  to  a rock  standing 
by  itself,  and  bade  Saleh  cause  a she-camel  big  with  young  to  come 
forth  from  it,  solemnly  engaging  that,  if  he  did,  he  would  believe,  and 
his  people  promised  the  same.  Whereupon  Saleh  asked  it  of  God, 
and  presently  the  rock,  after  several  throes  as  if  in  labour,  was  deli- 
vered of  a she-camel  answering  the  description  of  Jonda,  which  imme- 
diately brought  forth  a young  one  ready  weaned,  and  as  some  say,  as 
big  as  herself.  Jonda,  seeing  this  miracle,  believed  on  the  prophet, 
and  some  few  with  him;  but  the  greater  part  of  the  Thamudites 
remained,  notwithstanding,  incredulous.  Of  this  camel  the  commen- 
tators tell  several  very  absurd  stories : as  that  when  she  went  to  drink, 
she  never  raised  her  head  from  the  well  or  river  till  she  had  drunk  up 
all  the  water  in  it,  and  then  she  offered  herself  to  be  milked,  the  people 
drawing  from  her  as  much  milk  as  they  pleased;  and  some  say  that 
she  went  about  the  town  crying  aloud  : If  any  want  milk  let  him  come 
forth. 


End  of  Part  II 


The  Religion  of  Moslems 


561 


Summary 

The  Koran  begins  with  the  phrase  '‘in  the  name  of  the  most  merciful  God.” 

It  ^hows  that  its  author  is  not  God.  Also,  he  is  not  merciful,  as  he  ordains  the 
killing  of  animals  for  food.  The  God  of  Alkoran  is  not  the  Lord  of  all  creatures, 
for  he  commands  the  Moslems  to  kill  the  people  of  other  faiths.  God  is  said  to 
judge  all  people  on  a certain  day.  It  is  unjust,  for  the  sinners  of  the  beginning  of 
the  world  will  have  to  wait  till  the  end,  and  the  sinners  of  the  end  of  the  world 
will  receive  their  sentence  at  once . 

The  Koran  does  not  explain  the  unequal  distribution  of  happiness  in  the 
world,  which  is  ascribed  to  the  arbitrary  will  of  Allah,  who  is  thus  unjust,  as  he 
has  made  some  happy  and  others  miserable  without  any  cause. 

God’s  praising  the  Koran  shows  his  egotism.  (S.  2,  vl,6). — He  seals  the 
hearts  of  unbelievers  and  yet  punishes  them  for  not  believing  in  Alkoran!  His 
talking  of  the  earth  as  a bed  and  the  heaven  as  a covering  betrays  the  ignorance  of 
facts.  The  heaven  is  space  and  the  earth  is  a planet. 

In  the  Surat  2,  verse  22,  23,  it  is  asked  to  produce  a chapter  like  that  of  the 
Koran.  Fezi,  the  preceptor  of  Akbar,  wrote  a Koran  without  a dot,  a literary  per- 
formance almost  superhuman.  It  says  an  eternal  hell  is  prepared  for  unbelievers. 
But  the  progress  of  knowledge  proves  it  to  be  an  aggrcgious  mistake  of  Islam.  The 
Koran  holds  out  to  believers  the  prospect  of  heaven  or  paradise,  having  gardens 
watered  by  rivers  and  peopled  by  their  holy  wives  (Ch.  2,  v 24).  This  carnal 
paradise  of  the  Prophet  is  like  the  Goloke  of  the  Gosains  (priests)  of  India,  who 
peopled  their  heaven  with  a host  of  heavenly  harlots.  To  the  lusty  Arab  living  in  a 
dreary  sandy  waste,  it  was  no  doubt  the  summum  bonum, 

God  created  Adam  who  made  a nomenclature  of  all  things.  God  ordered 
all  the  angels  to  worship  Adam.  But  Satan  refused  to  obey.  So  he  was  expelled 
from  heaven.  He  asked  respite  till  the  day  of  judgment,  which  was  given.  He 
vowed  to  mislead  all  people.— Ch.  2,  v 32.  Adam  and  Eve  (his  wife)  were  the 
first  victims  of  Satan.  With  all  his  mischief  among  the  people  who  are  helpless 
before  his  might,  God  does  not  punish  Satan.  As  God  has  let  him  loose  in  the 
world,  God  is  the  commander  of  the  Deceiver. 

The  Koran  mentions  former  revelations.  God  gave  Moses  the  book  of  the 
law.  Then  what  was  the  use  of  the  Koran?  If  he  learnt  more  by  that  time,  he  is 
not  omniscient  and  so  is  no  God.  It  is  said,  Ch.  2,  v 50-61,  that  Sabbath 
breakers  were  changed  into  monkeys.  As  no  Sabbath  breaker  is  now  changed 
into  a monkey,  it  is  a mere  myth  which  the  faithful  alone  can  believe. 

The  verse  107,  Ch.  2,  says  a man  can  turn  to  any  side  to  pray.  Afterwards 
Mecca  is  appointed  Ch.  2,  135.  It  shows  the  change  of  mind  in  Allah  like  a 
human  being.  In  verse  109  it  is  mentioned  God  said.  Be  and  it  is,  when  creating 
the  world.  As  there  was  nothing  but  God  at  first,  to  whom  did  God  say  and  who 
heard  it?  Hence  it  is  proved  that  the  cause  of  the  world  was  present  at  first  to 
execute  God’s  command. 

The  temple  of  Mecca  is  the  resort  of  all  faithful  pilgrims.  It  contains  the 
Black  Stone  (Mecca  Eshwara  Mahadeva  of  the  Hindus)  which  is  kissed  in  worship. 
Pilgrims  compass  the  temple,  XXII.  19-33.  Is  it  not  idolatry? 

Flesh -eating  is  ordained  in  verse  159,  Ch.  2.  Pork  and  all  flesh  on  which  the 
name  of  Allah  is  not  invocated  are  forbidden.  The  directions  are  dogmatically 
copied  from  Moses’  book.  It  is  commendable  that  strong  drink  is  forbidden  on 
earth. 

O Prophet,  stir  up  the  faithful  to  war. — Ch.  VIII,  64.  63.  God  asks  loan. — 
Ch.  II.  22.  This  teaching  of  the  Koran  has  made  the  Moslems  very  dangerous 
neighbours  to  other  faiths.  It  is  the  most  intolerant  religion.  The  Koran  says 
the  true  religion  is  Islam.— Ch.  III.  16.  Of  course  with  the  Bedouins  it  is.  God 
legatises  plunder  and  its  division. — Ch.  8.  v 1. 

In  the  verse  39.  46,  Ch.  3 we  are  told  that  God  is  the  best  deviser  of  strata- 
gems. A stratagem  is  deception.  This  idea  of  Godhead  is  blasphemous. 


562 


Satyarth  Prakash 


It  is  essential  to  Islam  to  believe  in  Mahomed,  Gabriel,  last  day,  angels,  as 
well  as  in  God.— Ch.  IV,  13,  14.  So  these  beings  are  the  associates  of  God,  which 
demolishes  the  claim  of  Islam  that  there  is  no  other  God  but  Allah. 

On  judgment  day  which  is  50,000  years  long  the  dead  will  rise  from  graves 
at  an  angel’s  trumpet  call.  The  heaven  shall  be  cloven  in  sunder  (Ch.  25.  v 24- 
68).  But  these  things  are  against  Nature  which  is  God’s  law. 

God  composes  the  quarrels  between  the  Prophet  and  his  many  wives  and 
concubines.— Ch.  33,  V 16-50.  The  Prophet  stained  his  character  by  marrying 
the  wife  of  Zeid,  his  adopted  son- 

The  book  which  contains  such  things  told  repeatedly  cannot  be  the  work  of 
a learned  man,  much  less  of  God.  Hence  the  Koran  is  not  the  word  of  God. 


MAHARSHI  SWAMI  DAYANAND  SARASWATFS 
BELIEFS 

M — Mundakopanishat,  III. 

— Truth  alone  triumphs,  but  not  fiction. 

The  final  conclusion  of  philosophy,  acquiesced  in  by  mankind  in 
all  times,  is  the  only  true,  eternal  and  universal  doctrine,  which 
readily  obtains  the  implicit  assent  of  common  sense.  If  the  folly 
of  ignorance  or  the  snare  of  priestcraft  misleads  some  persons  to 
contrary  belief,  the  good  sense  of  people  in  general  does  not  volun- 
tarily comply  with  them.  But  the  doctrine  which  commands  venera- 
tion for  teaching  righteousness,  generosity,  honesty,  and  justice,  and 
which  is  stamped  with  the  sanction  and  example  of  the  learned, 
receives  the  general  approval;  for,  the  mind  revolts  to  follow  what  is 
unsupported  by  the  sound  judgment  of  reason  and  the  invariable 
practice  of  sages.  The  outline,  therefore,  of  what  was  believed  by 
the  refined  reason  of  all  the  oriental  sages  of  antiquity  from  Brahma 
down  to  Jaimini,  versed  in  the  sacred  lore  of  the  Vedas,  is  hereto 
subjoined  for  general  information.  The  truth,  which  they  have 
taught,  and  which  I sincerely  acknowledge,  is  entitled  to  universal 
acceptation  in  all  times.  Hence,  it  is  not  my  object  to  institute  a 
new  system  of  religion  in  any  manner  whatever.  I love  to  follow 
truth,  nay,  I have  made  it  my  duty  to  persuade  others  to  act  on  truth 
and  abjure  falsehood  for  the  sake  of  their  own  good.  So,  the  era- 
dication of  iniquities  is  the  end  of  my  life.  Had  I been  a dupe  to 
prejudice,  I would  have  joined  any  one  of  the  religious  sects  of  India. 
But  since  I neither  accept  what  is  vicious,  nor  reject  what  is  virtuous 
in  the  institutions  either  of  this,  or  of  any  foreign  country,  I am 
incapable  of  dissimulation;  for,  it  is  contrary  to  the  duty  of  man.  The 
dignity  of  man  is  justified  by  his  sympathy  for  the  pleasure  and  pain, 
profit  and  loss  of  his  fellow  creatures,  by  his  undaunted  attitude 
towards  the  powers  of  vice,  and  by  his  respect  for  the  merits  of  virtue 
and  learning,  although  associated  with  the  feebleness  of  constitution. 
Man  asserts  his  dignity,  when,  to  the  best  of  his  power,  he  loves 
virtue,  although  exhibited  in  a state  of  poverty,  helplessness,  weak- 
ness, and  unacquaintance  with  the  knowledge  of  the  world.  The 
grave  responsibility  and  true  nature  of  man  are  best  exhibited  by  his 
affording  protection,  comfort,  and  honour  to  the  children  of  virtue. 
Man’s  sense  of  virtue  ever  prompts  him  to  dishonour,  discourage, 
diminish,  and  destroy  vice,  although  guarded  by  supremacy,  strength, 
and  considerable  skill  in  the  arts  of  the  world.  In  fine,  a man,  true 
to  his  name,  should  by  all  possible  means,  encourage  virtue  and  dis- 
courage vice.  The  most  excruciating  pain,  nay,  death  itself  should 
not  deter  him  from  his  pursuit  of  the  course  of  virtue;  for,  the  least 
deflection  from  righteousness  would  belie  his  human  nature.  Such  a 


564 


Satyarth  Prakash 


moral  discipline  has  received  the  recommendation  of  Maharajah 
Bhartri  Hari  and  other  moralists  in  the  following  translation  of  their 
verses : — 

iroq  «rT  qt, 

sifq^r^rf^  qpgr  q n 

— The  wise  do  not  swerve  from  the  path  of  rectitude,  caring  nei- 
ther for  the  praise  or  blame  of  the  so  called  politicians,  nor  for 
riches  or  poverty,  although  they  were  to  die  in  a day  or  after  the  lapse 
of  a millennium.— 5/iflrtri  Hari. 

?T  5n5 

II 

— Never  sacrifice  virtue  for  fear,  base  desire,  avarice  or  pain  of 
death  itself;  for,  virtue,  which  gives  happiness  to  the  mind,  is  ever- 
lasting, but  pleasure  and  pain  which  originate  from  the  circumstances 
of  the  body,  are  transitory. — Mahabharat . 

^ q:  I 

^vsii  q^sfcT  II 

— There  is  only  one  true  companion  of  man  on  earth,  and  that 
is  virtue.  It  accompanies  him  even  after  death;  but  everything  else 
perishes  with  the  body. — Manu, 

frr'^nfmr  tnr  qw  fqmqq  ii 

— It  is  not  falsehood  but  truth,  that  ultimately  prevails.  It  leads 
us  to  heaven  by  the  royal  road  trodden  by  the  ancient  sages  of  sub- 
dued passion  and  curtailed  desires.  It  lands  us  on  the  brilliant  shore, 
and  lodges  us  safe  in  the  heaven  of  happiness  — Upanishad. 

xT?qT?qT  5nq  ?rwcT  ii 

— There  is  no  virtue  higher  than  truth,  there  is  no  vice  baser 
than  falsehood,  there  is  no  knowledge  greater  than  truth.  Truth, 
therefore,  and  truth  alone,  all  must  follow. — Upanishad. 

All  men  should  act  upon  the  disinterested  advice  of  these  truly 
great  sages. 

Now,  to  mention  briefly  those  simple  truths  with  their  proper 
meanings,  which  I have  always  believed  in,  and  which  have  served 
me,  as  it  were,  for  the  beam  of  light  in  crossing  the  tempestuous  ocean 
of  life  upon  the  earth.  They  are  described  at  large  in  my  works. 

1.  The  Supreme  Being  is  called  by  the  names  of  Brahma  the 
Most  High  Paramatma  (the  Soul  of  the  universe)  the  Almighty  Lord, 
and  the  like.  His  chief  attributes  are  denoted  by  the  Sanscrit  for* 


Maharshi  Swamt  Dayanand  SaraswatVs  Beliefs 


565 


mula  of  Sat  chid  anand,  which  literally  signifies  that  God  is  truth, 
intelligence,  and  happiness.  God  is  absolutely  holy  and  wise.  His 
nature,  attributes,  and  power  are  all  holy.  He  is  omnipresent,  incor- 
poreal, unborn,  immense,  omniscient,  omnipotent,  merciful  and  just. 
He  is  the  maker,  protector  and  destroyer  of  worlds.  He  judges  the 
actions  of  souls  according  to  His  immutable  laws  of  justice  and 
equity.  Him  I consider  and  believe  from  the  core  of  my  heart  to  be 
the  Lord  of  the  universe. 

2.  The  Vedas,  the  treasury  of  science  and  morals,  are  revealed 
by  God.  I regard  their  textual  portion  as  self-evident  truth,  admit- 
ting of  no  doubt  and  depending  on  the  authority  of  no  other  book, 
being  represented  in  nature,  the  kingdom  of  God.  It  is  the  condition 
of  all  kinds  of  proof,  and  is,  therefore,  capable  of  being  proved  by  no 
other  demonstration  than  by  reductio  ad  absurdum.  As  for  example, 
the  sun  or  the  lamp,  being  a self  luminous  body,  requires  no  light 
from  without  to  be  seen. 

The  authenticity  of  commentaries  on  the  Vedas,  called  in  Sanscrit 
the  Brahmanas,  viz.,  6 Upangas,  4 Upavedas,  and  1127  Shakhas,  all 
composed  by  Brahma  and  other  sages,  lies  in  their  adherence  to  the 
text,  the  least  departure  from  which  annihilates  their  authority. 

3.  Religion  consists  in  the  maintenance  of  impartiality  and 
justice,  the  speaking  of  truth  and  the  similar  acts  of  virtue,  which  are 
the  commandments  of  God  and  are,  therefore,  consistent  with  the 
import  of  the  Vedas.  Irreligion  is  the  commission  of  partiality  and 
injustice,  the  telling  of  lies  and  the  like  acts  of  vice,  which  are  the 
violation  of  God’s  laws  and  are,  therefore,  opposed  to  the  sense  of  the 
Vedas. 

4.  The  soul  is  an  immortal,  invisible  principle,  which  is  en- 
dowed with  thought  and  judgment,  desire  and  passion,  pleasure  and 
pain,  and  so  forth. 

5.  God  and  soul  are  incorporeal  and  unchangeable,  and  are 
related  to  each  other  as  the  pervader  and  the  pervaded.  The  distinc- 
tion of  their  respective  individualities  is  constant,  in  other  words, 
their  physical  natures  are  not  identical.  For  instance,  the  material 
objects  are  always  distinct  from  the  space  they  exist  in;  both  of  them, 
viz.  objects  and  space,  can  never  be  converted,  either  in  thought  or  in 
reality,  into  one  homogeneus  whole.  Hence,  the  relation  between 
God  and  man  is  the  same  as  between  the  container  and  the  contained, 
the  contemplator  and  the  contemplated,  the  father  and  the  son,  and 
the  like. 

6.  The  eternal  substances  are  1.  God,  2.  Soul,  3.  Prakriti  ox 
the  material  cause  of  the  universe.  The  primary  properties,  the 
physical  nature,  and  the  modes  of  action  of  the  eternal  substances  arc 
also  ever  the  same. 

7.  The  manifestations  of  their  secondary  qualities,  accidents 
and  energies  constantly  occur  on  their  coalition  and  disappear  on  their 
separation;  but  their  inherent  power,  which  produces  their  union  and 
disunion  is  invariable  in  their  nature.  They  again  and  again  unite  and 


566  Satyarth  Prakash 

disunite  in  eternity.  Thus  the  secondary  qualities  are  also  eternal  in 
regularity  of  succession. 

8.  The  creation  is  the  vast  empire  of  the  visible  objects,  the  com- 
pounds of  elements,  constructed  with  all  perfection  of  design  by  the 
inOnite  wisdom  of  the  Divine  Architect. 

9.  The  final  causes  of  creation  are  the  Divine  powers,  the  equi- 
table bestowal  of  rewards  and  punishments  on  the  actions  of  souls, 
and  the  like.  The  eyes,  for  example,  are  to  see  with;  so  the  attributes 
of  God  exist  to  be  revealed  for  general  weal  by  the  wonderful  spec- 
tacle of  nature. 

10.  The  creation  points  to  its  Creator;  and  He  is  no  other  than 
the  aforesaid  Deity;  for,  the  display  of  design  in  the  structure  of  the 
universe,  and  the  inability  of  matter  to  form,  say,  the  seed,  and  the 
like  preliminaries  of  existence  conclusively  demonstrate  the  certainty 
of  the  existence  of  a creator. 

11.  The  phenomenon  of  birth  and  death,  like  all  other  things, 
is  not  without  a final  cause.  That  cause  in  Sanscrit  is  called  “bond” 
a trapdoor,  so  to  speak,  in  the  march  of  mind.  It  springs  from  igno- 
rance, which  consists  in  the  perpetration  of  vicious  acts,  the  worship 
of  objects  in  place  of  God,  and  the  obscurity  of  the  intellect.  As  they 
are  all  the  various  sources  of  pain,  which  nobody  likes,  but  which 
everybody  is  constrained  to  suffer,  their  cause  is  called  “bond”  or 
captivity, 

12.  Salvation  is  the  state  of  emancipation  from  the  endurance 
of  pain,  and  subjection  to  birth  and  death,  and  of  the  life  of  liberty 
and  happiness  in  the  immensity  of  God.  After  the  cyclic  enjoyment 
of  the  stupendous  universe,  the  soul  resumes  the  course  of  the  native 
activity. 

13.  The  means  of  salvation  are  the  contemplation  of  God,  the 
abstraction  of  mind,  the  practice  of  virtue,  the  vow  of  celibacy  in  the 
time  of  education,  the  company  of  sages  and  philosophers,  the  love  of 
knowledge,  the  purity  of  thought,  the  firmness  of  courage,  and  the 
like  qualifications,  which  are  the  ornaments  of  humanity. 

14.  Wealth  is  a thing  earned  with  honesty  and  justice.  Its 
opposite  is  the  Mammon  of  unrighteousness. 

15.  Innocent  pleasures  are  got  by  virtue  and  well-earned  wealth. 

16.  The  system  of  caste  should  be  based  on  the  merits  of  indi- 
viduals. 

17.  The  excellence  of  royalty  is  derived  from  the  honesty  of 
intentions,  the  superiority  of  qualities,  the  justness  of  acts,  freedom 
from  partiality,  the  maintenance  of  justice,  the  ardour  of  paternal 
affection  for  subjects,  and  the  perseverance  in  studying  their  ease  and 
improvement. 

18.  The  loyalty  of  subjects  is  known  in  the  sublimity  of  thou- 
ghts, the  excellence  of  accomplishments,  the  practice  of  virtue,  the 


Maharshi  Swami  Dayanand  SaraswatVs  Beliefs 


567 


sincerity  of  intentions,  the  absence  of  prejudice,  the  obedience  of  the 
laws  of  justice,  the  sense  of  duty,  the  readiness  of  devotion  to  the 
cause  of  the  rulers  and  the  fellow-subjects,  love  for  government,  hatred 
for  intrigues,  and  the  abhorrence  of  licentiousness. 

19.  That  person  is  just,  who,  on  due  consideration  of  things, 
adopts  truth  and  relinquishes  falsehood,  protects  the  just  and  expels 
the  unjust,  sympathises  with  all  and  joins  in  undertakings  for  the 
promotion  of  ease  and  comfort  of  the  general  public. 

20.  The  learned  are  called  devas  (gods),  the  ignorant  asuras 
(devils),  the  vicious  rakshasas  (fiends),  and  the  hypocrites  pisharhas 
(monsters). 

21.  The  worship  of  God  consists  in  the  respect  and  service  of 
learned  and  virtuous  men,  parents,  sages,  philosophers,  preachers  and 
kings;  in  the  fidelity  of  marriage  contract;  and  in  the  devotion  of 
women  to  their  husbands.  The  contrary  acts  constitute  the  worship 
of  the  demons.  All  worship  is  due  to  their  living  images,  and  not  to 
the  useless  idols  of  lifeless  stone. 

22.  The  perfection  of  education  is  attested  by  the  competency 
of  knowledge,  the  adoption  of  civilized  manners,  the  performance  of 
meritorious  works,  the  subjection  of  senses,  the  control  of  passions 
and  wicked  desires,  the  improvement  of  character,  and  the  absence  of 
barbarism. 

23.  The  proper  Puranas  (ancient  books)  are  the  works  of  the 
Brahma  and  other  sages  of  antiquity,  called  the  Aitareya  and  the  other 
three  Brahmanas,  The  genuine  history  is  found  in  the  books  called 
Kalpa  (chronicles),  Gatha  (story),  Narashansi  (biographies  of  men).  But 
the  Bhagawat  and  the  other  seventeen  Puranas  are  mythology,  reli- 
gious comedies,  novels,  mysteries,  or  miracles. 

24.  The  Tirtha  (religious  ferry)  is  the  spiritual  ark,  by  which 
the  sea  of  sorrow  or  the  abyss  of  pain  is  crossed.  Hence,  the  Tirathas 
are  the  speaking  of  truth,  the  attainment  of  knowledge,  the  friendship 
of  savants,  the  practice  of  morality,  dominion  over  the  self,  the  dis- 
cipline of  mind,  the  magnanimity  of  heart,  the  instruction  of  science, 
and  the  habit  of  beneficence.  These  are  recognized  ferries  of  the 
happy  land;  but  cities,  rivers  and  tanks,  which  ignorance  calls  the  holy 
of  places  of  pilgrimage,  are  only  the  pools  of  woe  or  the  sloughs  of 
despondence. 

25.  The  spirit  of  enterprise  is  perferable  to  resignation  to 
decrees  of  fate  which  are  no  more  than  mere  consequences  of  the  acts 
of  previous  lives;  because  it  modifies  and  amends  the  entire  series  of 
antecedent  acts  in  the  next  life.  The  slackness  of  exertion  spoils  all 
of  them.  Hence  the  works  of  present  life  are  more  important  than 
the  whole  and  entire  reliance  on  the  wholesale  blind  fate. 

26.  The  commendable  conduct  of  man  is  shown  by  his  discri- 
minate treatment  of  merits,  and  sympathetic  regard  for  pleasure  and 
pain,  profit  and  loss  of  others.  The  contrary  course  is  reprehen- 
sible. 


568 


Satyarth  Prakash 


27.  The  observance  of  ceremonial  should  contribute  to  the 
improvement  of  body,  mind  and  spirit.  There  are  16  ceremonies  from 
conception  to  cremation.  These  purificatory  rites  are  binding  on  man. 
After  cremation  nothing  should  be  done  for  the  dead. 

28.  The  Yajna  (worship)  is  the  entertainment  of  the  learned 
in  proportion  to  their  worth,  the  business  of  manufacture,  the  experi- 
ment and  application  of  chemistry,  physics,  and  the  like  arts  of  peace, 
the  instruction  of  people,  the  purification  of  air,  the  nourishment  of 
vegetable  kingdom  by  the  employment  of  the  principles  of  meteorology, 
called  Agnihotra  in  Sanscrit,  which  showers  blessings  all  around.  It 
is  the  most  important  duty  of  man. 

29.  The  ancient  usage  demands  attribution  of  the  appellation, 
called  ‘Arya’  to  the  best,  and  ‘Dasyu’  to  the  vicious  portion  of 
humankind. 

30.  India  is  called  Aryavarta,  because  the  Aryan  branch  of  the 
human  race  has  dwelt  there  since  creation.  It  is  bounded  on  the 
south  by  the  Vindhya  (the  barrier  of  barbarians),  on  the  west  by  the 
Attock  (obstruction)  or  Indus  (Luna),  and  on  the  east  by  the  Brahma- 
putra (the  son  of  Neptune).  The  country  within  these  confines  is 
called  Aryavarta  Proper,  and  its  permanent  inhabitants,  the  Aryas. 

31.  The  competency  of  the  teacher  is  proved  by  his  power  to 
explain  the  Vedas  and  their  commentaries,  and  to  reform  the  character 
of  pupils  through  the  salutary  medium  of  the  instruction  of  morality 
and  the  prohibition  of  immorality. 

32.  The  fitness  of  the  pupil  is  shown  in  his  love  for  the  acquisi- 
tion of  knowledge,  his  willingness  to  receive  instruction,  his  reverence 
for  learned  and  virtuous  men,  his  attendance  upon  the  teacher,  and 
his  execution  of  orders. 

33.  The  Guru  (initiator)  is  the  father,  the  teacher  of  truth,  and 
the  corrector  of  misconduct. 

34.  The  proper  Purohita  (prophet  or  priest)  is  one  who  cordia- 
lly loves  the  good  of  his  spiritual  flock  and  preaches  them  virtue  and 
truth. 


35.  The  Upadhyaya  (professor)  should  be  able  to  teach  certain 
sort  of  the  Vedic  lore  or  should  be  the  teacher  of  one  science. 

36.  The  Shishtachar  (etiquette)  is  amiable  behaviour  with  readi- 
ness to  accept  truth  and  to  reject  untruth,  after  the  careful  examina- 
tion of  the  octave  or  eight-fold  evidence  of  logic,  attentiveness  to 
study  in  the  bachelor  life  of  school  and  the  general  politeness  of  con- 
duct. These  are  the  characteristics  of  the  truly  civilized  man. 

37.  The  validity  of  the  octave  evidence  of  logic  is  unques- 
tionable. 

38.  He  is  good  and  wise,  who  always  speaks  truth,  acts  on  the 
dictates  of  virtue,  and  tries  to  make  others  good  and  happy. 


Maharshi  Swami  Dayanand  SaraswatVs  Beliefs 


569 


39.  The  five  tests  of  knowledge  are  relative  to  the  attributes  of 
God,  1st,  the  philosophy  of  the  absolute  and  the  theories  of  the  Vedas, 
2nd,  the  maxims  of  the  octave  evidence  of  logic,  3rd,  the  laws  of 
nature,  4th,  the  rules  of  morality,  and  5th,  the  principles  of  meta- 
physics. By  these  criteria  distinguish  between  truth  and  falsehood. 
Then,  abide  by  truth  and  give  up  falsehood. 

40.  Beneficence  removes  evils,  introduces  the  practice  of  virtue, 
and  adds  to  general  welfare  and  civilization. 

41.  The  soul  is  free  to  act,  but  subject  to  the  justice  of  God 
in  reaping  the  fruits  of  its  works.  God  is  the  executor  of  justice  and 
the  like  laws  of  nature. 

42.  Swarga  (heaven)  is  the  uninterrupted  enjoyment  of  pleasures 
and  the  possession  of  means  thereof. 

43.  The  Narka  (hell)  is  the  excessive  sufferance  of  pain  the 
surroundings  of  tormenting  circumstances. 

44.  The  Janma  (birth)  is  the  entry  of  soul  into  the  world  in 
conjunction  with  the  body.  In  relation  to  time,  its  existence  is  viewed 
as  past,  present,  and  future. 

45.  The  union  of  body  and  soul  is  called  birth,  and  their  sepa- 
ration, death. 

46.  Marriage  (clasping  of  hand)  should  be  perfomed  in  accor- 
dance with  the  precepts  of  the  law  in  the  public  manner  and  on  the 
mutual  consent. 

47.  The  Niyoga  (widow  re-marriage)  is  the  temporary  union  of 
spouseless  persons  for  the  purpose  of  raising  issue  in  the  superior  or 
one’s  own  tribe,  on  the  death  of  the  consort,  or  the  sterility  of  energy 
in  case  of  a prolonged  disease,  or  on  the  like  natural  mishaps  to 
humanity. 

48.  The  Stuti  (definition)  is  the  description  of  qualities  from 
remembrance.  It  inspires  love  and  the  like  generous  feelings  and 
sentiments. 

49.  The  Prarthana  (prayer)  is  the  asking  of  God  the  gift  of 
knowledge  and  the  like  boons,  on  the  incompetency  of  one’s  own  exer- 
tions. It  results  in  the  humility  of  temper  and  the  tranquility  of 
passions. 

50.  The  Upasana  (meditation)  is  the  realization  of  the  idea  of 
God  through  the  confirmation  of  conviction,  that  God  is  omnipresent 
and  fills  all,  that  I am  filled  by  Him,  and  that  He  is  in  me  and  I in 
Him;  and  the  imitation  of  God’s  attributes  in  practice.  The  good  of 
it  is  attested  by  the  enlargement  of  mental  capacity  for  knowledge. 

51.  The  Saguna  Stuti  is  the  assertion  or  recital  of»  attributes 
predicable  of  God.  The  Nirguna  Stuti  (negative  definition)  is  the 
negation  or  denial  of  properties  inconsistent  with  the  nature  of 
Godhead.  The  Saguna  (positive  prayer)  is  the  supplication  of  God’s 
grace  for  the  obtainment  of  virtuous  qualities.  The  Nirguna  Prarthana 


570 


Satyarth  Prakash 


(negative  prayer)  is  the  asking  of  God’s  power  in  the  elimination  of 
vicious  qualities.  The  Saguna  Upasana  (positive  meditation)  is  the 
unshaken  belief  of  God’s  holiness.  The  Nirguna  Upasana  (negative 
meditation)  is  the  total  resignation  of  self  to  God’s  justice  and  pro- 
vidence. Such  is  the  summary  of  my  beliefs  fully  explained  in  their 
appropriate  places  in  my  books,  called  the  Satyarth  Prakash  (expose 
of  right  sense),  Bhumika  (introduction  to  the  Vedas),  and  Bhashya 
(commentary  on  the  Vedas).  I accept  such  universal  maxims  as  the 
speaking  of  truth  and  the  condemnation  of  falsehood.  But  I detest 
the  religious  warfare  of  sects;  for,  they  give  vent  to  their  angry  pas- 
sions and  crude  notions  in  the  form  of  religion.  Therefore,  the  pur- 
pose of  my  life  is  the  extirpation  of  evils;  introduction  of  truth  in 
thought,  speech,  and  deeds;  the  preservation  of  unity  of  religion;  the 
expulsion  of  mutual  enmity;  the  extension  of  friendly  intercourse;  and 
the  advancement  of  public  happiness  by  reciprocal  subservience  of 
the  human  family.  May  the  grace  of  the  Almighty  God  and  the  con- 
sent and  co-operation  of  the  learned  soon  spread  these  doctrines  all 
over  the  world,  to  facilitate  everybody’s  endeavour  in  the  advancement 
of  virtue,  wealth,  godly  pleasure,  and  salvation,  so  that  peace,  pros- 
perity, and  happiness  may  ever  reign  in  the  world!  — Amen! 


5ri?r  jRrnR 

L.B»S.  National  Academy  of  Administration,  Library 
MUSS(^RIE  / W ^ ^ 


Iff  5^^  mft??  I I 

This  book  is  to  be  returned  on  the  date  last  stamped 


F?JTiT> 

Date 

# ?T^T 
Borrower’s 
No. 

f??rTTr 

Date 

^ ^TWT 
Borrower’s 
No. 

! ^ ,■■  ■ r/ 

1 f/*-. 

- 

1 

— 

— 

J 

1 

- 

GL  294.66e>3 
DUR2EDED 


ioia9i_ 


loin/ 

ar^rrcfT  #0 

ACC. 

sr»f  ff.  ?T. 

C I ass  No . .f;  ;^. . I f P Book  No 

Author.. St/ 

5ftqqt  ^ 

^-34  Tr/..  ■■  

M , 

^Kcut.  , *‘*BRapv 

j i«i 

*■  over-dua  ,i.  "'•"gen. 

‘"'ted  oV?„  tt2T"""**a"y  ®b  ‘’®®''» 

‘‘onower."''"*  •’••'I  K 

>>y  tha 


