===== Internet Archive OCR: E01584_Light_of_truth__djvu.txt =====

LIGHT OF TRUTH 


OR 


AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION 


OF THE 


SATYARTH PRAKASH 


THE WELL-KNOWN WORK OF 


SWAMI DAYANANDA SARASWATI, 


Feunder af the Arya Samaj ; Author of a Commentary on the Vedas and 
various other Works, 


BY 
Dr. CHIRANJIVA BHARADWAJA, 

Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons (EDIN.); Diplomate in Public 
Heatth (EDIN.); Licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians axd 
Surgeons (EDIN.); Licentiate of the Faculty of Physicians 
and Surgeons (GLAS.); Certificated (with first class 
honours} in Tropical diseases (EDIN. UNIV.). 


Price—Rs. 8 or 48. Net. 


[Ad Rights Reserved} 


PUBLISHED BY 
THE ARYA PRATINIDHI SABHA, UNITED PROVINCES OF 
. AGRA AND OvDH (INDIA). : 


‘Sesend Edition.) 1918. [5,000 Copies, 


TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE. 


I undertook to translate Swami Dayanand Saraswati’s 
Magnum Opus called the Satyérth Prakdsh—a 
book which has revolutionized modern religious thought 
—because no abler man would take this duty upon himself. 
While in England, I was often asked by some of my 
English friends, who had freed themselves from the 
shackles of Christian tradition, to tell them of some English 
book giving a compendium of the principal doctrines 
of the religion of the Veda, It was these enquiries which 
led me to attempt the task of translating this work. 
Every effort has been made to give a literal rendering ; 
but in no case has the spirit been sacrificed to the latter. 
Foot-notes have been added to elucidate obscure points 
and to explain terms unfamiliar to the European mind. 

In translating the first chapter, I have explained the 
etymological meanings of only the most important terms, 
and have omitted from the third chapter the author's 
method of teaching Panint’s Ashiddhydy: (the most ancient 
work on Sanskrit Grammar), because the En,lish-know- 
ing public, for whose benefit the translation is principally 
intended, cannot be expected to follow the labyrinthic 
maze of the intricacies and niceties of Sanskrit Grammar. 

In the fourteenth chapter the translation of the texts 
from the Qoran is chiefly taken from “The Koran trans- 
lated into English, by Rev. J. M. Rodwell, u. a.” 

If this translation helps in the spread of the Vedic reli- 
gion among the English-speaking people, and directs the 
attention of the more thougthful among them, to the recon- 
dite truths treasured up in the Veda and the immortal 
works of the sages of ancient India, I shall have been 
amply repaid for my labours. 


[2] 

‘Iam fully conscious of the fact that there are many 
imperfections in the translation. I shall be grateful for 
for sugestions, and, if I receive encouragement from the 
public, I hope to introduce many improvements in the 
second edition as well as to bring out an Introduction to 
this book (in a separate volume), as I am fully convinced 
that an exhaustive introduction written from the Western 
point of view is absolutely necessary to help the Western 
reader to comprehend the grandeur of Vedic Philosophy., 


Lauore, Vovember, 1906. C. BHARADWAJA. 


INTRODUCTION TO THE SECOND EDITION. 

This edition has been brought out at the instance 
of the A. P. Sabha, U, P. and in response to the public 
demand. The work has been thoroughly revised, new 
footnotes have been added, marginal paragraph headings 
have been given, and many other improvements have been 
introduced by Professor Rama Deva, 8. A., M. R.A. S, Of 
the Gurukula Hardwar. A melancholy interest attaches 
to the work; as the learned trans!ator died In the prime. 
of life on the 8th of May, 1915. 


BULANDSHAHR, U.P. } MADAN MOHAN SETH, 


8rd June, 1915 Secretary, A. P. S. 


OM 


We repeatedly bow unto God Who is a tre personification of 
Existence, Consciousness, and Bliss. 


—— 


INTRODUCTION. 


At the time when the first edition of this book, called the Saz- 
garth Prakdsh, was published and before that, we spoke 
How the se- Sanskrit and made use of the same in reading and 
cond edition writing, while our mother-tongue was Gujrati. For 
eorante this reason we had a poor knowledge of the Janguage 
first, (t. ¢. Aiya Bhasha) in which this book is written, 
Consequently the language of the first edition was very defective, 
Now that we have acquired fair practice in speaking and writing 
Bhaska, we have corrected the language in accordance with the 
rules of grammar and brought out this (second) edition. Emenda- 
tions in words, idioms and the construction of sentences have been 
made here and there because it was found absolutely necessary to 
do so, It was difficult to improve the literary style without making 
these changes. But no alteration has been made in the subject 
matter, though some new matter has been added, The book has 
been carefully revised, all misprints, which had crept into the first 
edition, having been carefully corrected. 

This book is divided into 14 Chapters, Out of these the first 
ten constitute the first Part, while the remaining four 
form the second Part, But ths last two Chapters 
and "A Statement of my Beliefs” were, through some cause, ‘ft 
out in the first edition and have been incorporated into this edition, 


Chapter I is an exposition of “Om” and other names of God, 

Chapter 17 treats of the up-bringing of children, 

Chapter III treats of Brakmacharya, the duties and qualifica- 
tions of scholars and teachers, good and bad books and the scheme 
of studies, 

Chapter IV treats of marriage and married life, 

Chapter V treats of Vanaprastha (the Order of Asectisism), 
and of Sanayas Ashrama (the Order of Renunciation). 


Contents. 


it INTRODUCTION, 


Chapter VI treats of Raj Dharma (Science of Government). 

Chapter VII treats of the Veda and God. _ 

Chapter VIII treats of the Creation, Sustenance and Dissolu- 
tion of the Universe. 

Chapter IX treats of knowledge and ignorance, and emancipa- 
tion and bondage, 

Chapter X treats of Conduct—desirable and undesirable, and of 
Diet—permissible and forbidden, 


Chapter XI contains a criticism of the various religins and 
sects prevailing in India. 

Chapter XII tieats of the Charvaka, Baudha (Buddhist) and 
Jain religions. 

Chapter XI1 treats of Christianity, 

Chapter XIV treats of Muhammadanism. 

At the end of the book we have given a summary of the 
teachings of the sternal Vedic religion which we profess. 


May chief aim in writing this book is to unfold truth. I have 
The aimofthe expounded truth as truth and error as error. The 
auth In exposition of error in place of truth and of truth in 
book. place of error does not constitute the unfolding of 
truth, 

To speak of, write about, and believe ina thing as it is consti- 
tutestruth. He that is prejudiced tries to prove that even his 
error is truth, while the truth of his religious opponent is error 
He cannot, therefore, know what the true religion is, Hence it 
is the bounden duty of truthful and learned men to unfold this 
right nature of truth and error before all men in their writings. 
and speeches and then to leave them free to judge what 
prtinotes their welfare and what is prejudicial to their interests, 
and to embrace what is true and reject what is false. This 
will lead to the Happiness of the people at large, Though 
the human soul fossesses the capacity for ascertaining truth, 
yet through self-interest, obstinacy, wrong-headedness, ignorance 
and the like, it is led to renounce truth and incline towards 
untruth. We have freed ourselves from these influences while 
writing this book. It is not our object to hurt any one’s 
susceptibilities or to injure anyone. On the other hand, our aim 
itis to further the advancement and advance the well-being of 


INTRODUCTION. ili 


mankind, to help (all) men in the ascertainment of what is right, 
and fo enable them to accept truth and reject falsehood, In our 
opinion there is no other way of elevating the human race. 

All errors or omissions, typographical or otherwise, on being 
pointed out to us, will be rectified, but no heed willbe paid to 
anything that is said or written through prejudice with the object 
of unnecessarily criticising this book. Of course, any suggestions 
made by persons actuated with the spirit of furthering the welfare 
of humanity, on being found good, will be mest acceptable. There 
are undoubtedly many learned men among the followers of every 
religion. Should they free themselves fram prejudice, accept 
the universal truths—that is those truths that-are to be found alike 
in all religions and are of universal application—, reject all 
things in which the vatiovs religions differ and treat cach other 
lovingly, it will be greatly to the advantage of the world, for it can- 
not be denied that differences among the learned create bad 
blood among the ignorant masses, This leads to the multipli- 
cation of all sorts of sorrows at:d sufferings and destroys human 
happiness. This evil, which is so dear to the heart ‘of the selfish, 
has hurled mankind into the deepest depths of misery, Whoever 
tries to do anything with the object of bencfitting mankind is 
opposed by the selfish people and various kinds of obstacles are 
thrown in his way. But finding solace in the belief that ultimately 
truth must conquer and not error and that it is the path of rectitude 
alone that men of learning and piety have always trodden, true 
teachers never become indifferent to the promotion of public good 
and never give up the promulgation of truth. 

It is our firm belief that everything calculated to the advance- 
ment of knowledge and righteousness is like poison to begin 
with but like nectar in the end. We have kept all this in :jcw 
while writing this book. Let all those who read or hear it being 
read keep an open mind, enter into the spirit of the author and 
form an independent opinion. 

We have incorporated into this book whatever is true in all 
‘The anthor religions and in harmony with their highest teachings 
pas hen. nS but have refuted whatever is false in them. We 
way of jarring have exposed to the view of men—learned or 

creeds, otherwise—ail evil practices whether resorted to 
secretly or openly. This will help our readers to discuss re- 


INTRODUCTION, 


Psa questions in a spirit of love and embrace the one true 
igion. Though we were born in Aryavarta (India) and still 
live in it, yet just as we do not defend the evil doctrines and prac- 
tices of the religions prevailing in our own country—on the other 
hand expose them properly—in like manner we deal with alien 
religions, We treat the foreigners in the same way as we treat our 
own countrymen in recognition of our common humanity. It be- 
hoves all the rest to act likewise. Had we taken the side of one 
of the prevailing religions of India; we would have but followed 
(blindly) the example of sectarians who extol, defend and preach 
their own religion and decry, refute and check the progress of other 
creeds. In our opinion, however, such things are beneath the 
dignity of man. 


Should a man act like an animal, which if strong oppresses the 
weak and even puts them to death, he is more an animal than a 
man. He alone can fitly be called a man who being strong protects 
the weak. He that injures others in order to gain his selfish ends 
can only be called a big animal. 


Inthe first eleven chapters we have chiefly dealt with the 
5 Besciink religions of the people of Aryavarta (India), We 
piers believe in the religion that has been expounded in 
atement of 
the contents the first 10 chapters as it is in harmony with the 
of chapters a ‘ ‘i 7 * 
dealing with Vedic teachings, but we disbelieve in the false teach- 
religions other ings of the Puranas (which are of a recent origin), the 
Tantras and the like books which we have con- 
demned (in the 11th chapter). 


In the twelfth chapter we have discussed the Charaveka faith 
as well as the Jain and Buddhist religions, The Charavaka greatly 
resrmbles the Jain and the Buddhist religions in being an atheistic 
cred and in many other respects, 

It bas g.eatly declined in our day but it is the most atheistic 
of all; hence it is absolutely necessary to check its activity. If 
nothing be done to eradicate false ideas and practices, disastrous 
consequences are sure to follow. The Buddhist and the Jain re- 
ligions are also dealt with along with the Charavaka in the twelfth 
Chapter and we have set forth their points of agreement and of 
difference with one other, The reader should consult that Chapter 
for further information on the subject. In our criticism of the 


INTRODUCTION, 


Buddhist religion we have quoted the most ancient and auth 
book of the Buddhists, such as Dipavansha, Bandhamata Sangrai 
and Sarvadarskana Sangraka, etc. 
The following are the authentic books on the Jain religion :— 
F—Four Sutra books :— 
(1) | Avdrshya Sutra, (25 Visheshitvashyaka Sutra, (3) Dhisha 
Vaikdlikes Stitra, (4) Pdkspika Sutra, 
41,—Eleven Angas (Limbs) :— 
(1) Achardnga Sttra, (2) Sugadanga Sitsa, (3) Thdnaga, 
Stitra, (4) Somavdnza Stitrz, (5) Bhagavati Sitra, 
(6) dndtddharma Stitra, (7) Upasakadasht Siitra, 


(8) Antagadé Stitra, (9) Anuttarovavai Sutra, (lo) 
Kapabadisayd Sttra, (11) Puppyd Sitra, 
411—Twelve Updngas (Sublims) :— 

(1) Upavdys Siitra, (2) Rdyapasent Sitra, (3) Jiwabhigama, 
(2) Rayapasens, Siitra, (3) Jiwabhigamn Siitra, 
(4) =Pannavana  Sittra, (5) Jambudirnapannati 
Sttra, (6) Chandapannati Stitra, (7) Surdpan- 
nti Sutra, (8) Nivayavali Sutra, (9) Kupydyd 
Sutra, (10) Kayabadi Sayd Sutra, (11) Pupyd 
Sutra, (12) Pupyichulyd Sutra, 


1V.—Five Kalpa Sittras :-— 


(1) Uttradtujana Siitra, (2) Nishitha Sitva, (3) Vya- 
vakdra Stitra, (5) Jatikalpa Stra. 


V.—Six Chhedas :— 
(1) Mahdnishitha V1 thadvachachana Sutra, (2) Mahdnishi 
thala ghubdchand Stitra, (3) Madiyamavdchand Sttra, 
(4) Pindanirukts Stitra, (5) Oghanirukta Siti: Ais) 
Parytshand Stitra, 
Vi—Ten payannd Siitra:— 
(t) Chaiussarawa Siitra, (2) Pachchakhatia Sttra, (3) 
Tadulvaizalika Siitra, (4) Bhaktiparigndua Sutra, (5; 
w+» (6) Chandavigaya Siitra,(7) Ganivijaya Siitra, (8) 
Marana Samadhi Sitra,(9) Devendrastavana Sitra, 
(10) Sansara Sutra, Nandi Sutra and Yogadhira 
Stitra are also regarded as authentic, 


vi INTRODUCTION. 


Five Panchdnga :— 
a1) Translations of the above books, (2) (Etymological 
explanations) of the above-mentioned books, (3) 
Charni Poetical expositions), (4) Bhdsya (Commen- 
taries). 


These four constitute what are called Avayasas (parts), 

5. All the books (mentioned under the above headings) 
are original. 

The Dhundia sect does not believe inthe Avayavas, There 
are many other books besides the above that are believed in by the 
Jainis. Their religion is discussed in detail in the twelfth 
Chapter. There are millions of repetitions in the Jain books, It 
should be borne in mind that some of the /amnés are in the habit 
of disavowing books that fall into the hands ofthe #on-Jarais or 
are published, They are, not at all, justified in doing so since 
books that are believed in by some, though repudiated by others, 
cannot be said to be unauthentic. Of course a book that is not 
believed in by any Jaini nor has even been is unauthentic, but 
there is not a single book (referred to by us in our criticism) which 
is not believed in by some Jains at least; hence our criticism of 
a Jain book will hold good for him who believes in that particular 
book. But there are many Jainis who though they really believe 
in a book repudiate it in public controvesy. The Jaimis hide their 
books from non-Jainés and do not let others see them, because 
they are full of absurdities to such an extent that no aint 
could ever answer any objections urged aganist them, The best 
answer, however, that one could give to an objection raised against 
a false belief is to give it up. 

the thirteenth chapter we have discussed Christianity. 

Its followers believe the Bible to be their Holy 

Bow bet ‘of Book, For further information the reader is request- 
an author's ed to consult the said chapter. Muhammadanism has 
teachings been dealt with in the fourteenth chapter. Its 
followers hold the Qoran to be their sacred book, The reader is 
advised to consult this chapter for detailed information on the sub- 
ject. Then we have given a brief summary of the teachings of the 
Vedic religion. Whosoever will read this book with a biassed mind 
will fail to understand what the author's aim (in writing this book) is, 


INTRODUCTION. 


There are four elements necessary to convey a complete 
a passage, viz, (1) Akankashd, (2) Vogyatu, (3) Asatti, ( 
parya— 

Akankasha consists in entering into the spirit of the speaker or 

the author. 

Yogyata in the fitness or compatability of sense. For instance, 
when it is said “ water irrigates" there is nothing absurd 
in the mutual connection between the objects signified 
by the words, 

Asatti consists in reading or speaking words in proper se- 
quence, #. ¢,, without detaching them from their context. 

Tatparya is to give the same meaning to the words ofa 
writer or a speaker which he intended that they should 
convey, 

There are many people who, through bigotry and wrong- 
headedness, misconstrue the meaning of the author, The 
sectaries are the greatest sinners in this respect because their 
intellect is warped by bigotry. Just as we have studied the Jain 
and Buddhist scriptures, the Puranas, the Bible and the Qoran 
with an unbiassed mind and have accepted what is good in them 
and rejected what is false and endeavour for the betterment 
of all mankind, it behoves all good men to do likewise. We have 
but very briefly pointed out the defects of these religions, The 
perusal of this book will help men to sift truth from error and to 
embrace the former and renounce the latter. It does not become 
wise men to mislead people. ‘he ignorant are sure to misinter- 
pret what we say, but if the wise will realize what our aim is in writ- 
ing this book, we ehall consider our labour amply rewarded. We 
place this work before all men in the hepe that they will embrace 
the truth and make our labour fruitful. We consider it eer 
and the foremost duty of every man to publish the truth waAtipa 
fear or favour, May the Omniscient, Omnipresent, Supreme Spirit 
Who is the true personification of Existence, Consciousness and 
Bliss through His grace diffuse this spirit and give it permanency, 

A word to the wise, 
(Swam1) DAYANANDA SARASWATI, 

UDEvruR, 1939 Vebrum, 

BUADARPAD SHUKUL PAKSH 
(A. D. 1882). 


CONTENTS. 


PaGE. 
PREFACE ae on we wed 
INTRODUCTION... on toe a oa 
CHAPTER 1.—A HOLy PRAYER... oe fort 
» IL—THE UPBRINGING OF CHILDREN «20 
” ILL.—EDUCATION toe oss a 

” IV.—RETURN HOME FROM SCHOOL (Samavartan) 
ANB MARRIED LIFE (Grishasta) 6 
a ‘V.—VANAPRASTHA AND SARYAS... we 146 

” VL—RAJA DHARMA OR SCIENCE OF GOVERN- 
MENT... es wi vv 161 
” ‘VIi.—Gobd AND THE VEDA ve vee 203 


VLI.—CosMecony (THE CREATION, SUSTENANCE 
ANB DISSOLUTION OF THE UNIVERSE) ... 246 


IX.--KNOWLEDGE AND IGNORANCE, EMANCIPA- 
TION AND BONDAGE oo 


X.—CONDUCT—DESIRABLE AND UNDESIRABLE 
AND DIST—PERMISGIBLE AND FORBIDDEN 307 








We repeatedly bow unto the Great Lord, the Supremely Conscious 
and Blissful Being. 





CHAPTER I. 


A HOLY PRAYER. 


*MAYEST Thou (AOM)! O God, Who art (Mitra), Friend of 

all, (Varuna) Holiest of all, and (Azyama) Controller of the 
Universe, be merciful unto us. Mayest thou (/ndra) 
O Lord Almighty, (Bréhaspati) the Lord of the 
Universe, the Support of all, endow us with knowledge and power, 
Mayest Thou (Vishnu) O Omnipresent and (Uréramd) Omnipotent 
Being, shower Thy blessings all around us.” 

“We bow unto Thee (Brahma), O most Powerful Supreme 
Being. Thou alone art our Omniscient God whom we feel in the 
interior of our hearts. I will call Thee, Thee alone, my true God. 
Thy Will, as truly revealed in the Vedas, will 1 obey and preach, 
I will be truthful in word, deed and thought, Thou art my shelter. 
Mayest Thou protect me—Thy servant—who speaketh nought but 
truth, so that my understanding be firm in Thy Will, and never 
turn away from it. Thy Will is Truth and Righteousness. That 
which is contrary to it is Untruth and Unrighteousness, Mayest 
Thou again shelter and protect me? O Lord, be merciful and 


Rig Veda 


[Bag ATATTTHNA | HY Maarten: | 
1 Generally written and pronounced as‘OM', I have, for brevity, trans- 

lated it inta God, the detailed exposition of this word will follow later on —Tr, 
2 This repetition is meant to emphasize the prayer for protection and shel- 
ter. Just as one, in ordinary language, says to another: “Go to the village 
By the repetition the word ‘go’, he means to say—" go at once.” 
Similarly, the devotee, by repeating this prayer for shelter and protection, 
wishes to emphasise that he prays for immediate protection at His Hands, so 


that be may have firm faith in truth and righteousness and hate untruth aod 
unrighteousness, 


172 LuGuT oF TRUTH. (Cutar. Vi. 


Assembly. It is the Ambassador alone who can make peace 
between enemies, or war between friends. He should so strive as 
to divide enemies united against-his country. 

Thus having learnt the designs of his enemy let a king— the 
President of the Assembly (as well as members of the Assembly, 
Ambassadors and others)—endeavour to guard himself against all 
danger from him. 

In a thickly wooded country, where the soil is rich, let him build 
himself a town surrounded by a fortress of earth, or one protected 
by water, or one surrounded by a thick wood on all sides, or a 
fortress of armed men, or one surrounded by a mountain. Let him 
build a wall round the city, because one brave, well armed soldier 
placed inside it is a match fora hundred, and a hundred for 
thousands, It is, therefore, extremely necessary to build a fort. Let 
the fort be well-supplied with arms and ammunition, with various 
kinds of grain and other food stuffs, with conveyances and beasts of 
burden, etc., with teachers and preachers, artisans, various kinds of 
machines, with grass and grain, etc., for animals, and with water, etc. 
In the centre of the town let him build for himself a Government 
house, well-protected from wind, etc., suited to all weathers, with 


gece fe aere frreta @ dati 
qerenagedt ert ftrerd Se are art 
Zo 91 WV—KE Ul 

Sacer eer recreate | 
wen aeennfesacrenst a fret 
wag't aetgieegt erie a 
aqaet fifa at eranftrar waATT I 
ten wet Arcafe srercet wade: | 
ae quercenty werrggt fitted 0 
erearegTercae warned ered: | 
are: farfecfiniethereiter ta & 
wet ret grat eretgyentars: | 
get catches at sequentfiwer, « 


i Vij Liout or Tauts. 173 


well-provided parks and gardens round it and well-supplied with 
water. It should be big for all the state functions, 

Having done so far, that is, having completed his studies In the 
order of Brakmdcharya and settled the affairs of the State, let him 
chose a consort of Kshatriya Class, born of a high family, endowed 
with beauty and other excellent qualities, dearest to his heart, blessed 
with charming manners, etc., and equal to him in knowledge, aequisi-- 
tions, accomplishments and of like temperament, Let him take one 
wife and one only, and consider all other women as unapproachable, 
therefore let him not even look at another woman (with the eye of 
lust). 

Lethim retain a chaplain and a spiritual teacher to perform 
Homa and Yajnas suitable for different seasons and other religious 
duties for him in the palace, and lethim always devote himself to 
the business of the State. To devote himselfday and night to the 
affairs of the State without allowing anything to go out of order is 
the highest duty of a king, aye, this is his worship, this is his 
communion.” 

REVENUE. 


“ Let the king collect his revenue through honourable, trust- 

Manu worthy and accomplished men possessed of excellent 
wit &o—82, character, Let him, whois the President of the 
718) 93-9 Assembly, his ministers and other officials, and the 
Assembly observe the eternal principles taught by the Vedas, and 
let them act like fathers to the people, 

Let the Assembly appoint officials of various kinds whose sole 
duty’ it should be! to see that the State officints i in alt ! departments do 


ptr frt nti 
8 
gett sgetter equity aftteny | 
ser qerfty entity ged Serhan we 
FY oc 9 1 GY) REE RE 1 G0 | R—E Il 
Streaftemiar cegrererctaftrr | 
arrorrorreedt she eae frqeeys tl 
srorers feftreren guter ox ew firafteer: 1 
Seer auigetdoqeyt Creffe geerg wTge wl es at 4 





194 Licut oF Truts. [Ciar. V1, 


their duties faithfully aceording to the regulations. Let them, who 
discharge their duties satisfactorily, be honoured, whilst those who 
do not, be punished properly. 

In order to disseminate the knowledge of the Veda which is 
truly called the imperishable treasure of the kings, let the king and 
the Assembly show due respect to students, who return from their 
sctuinatics aiier having studied the Vedas and Shdstvas in the 
Order of Brahmdcharya as well as their teachers, This helps 
forward the spread of education and the progress of a country. 

Ifa king, devoted to the welfare of his people, be defied by 
an enemy of equal, greater, or less strength, let him remember the 
duty of a Xshkatriyaand never shrink from going to battle. Let 
him fight with such skill as may ensure his victory. 

Those kings who, with the object of defeating their enemies, 
fight fearlessly to their utmost and never turn away from the field 
of battle shall obtain happiness, They must never turn their 
backs upon the field of battle, but it is sometimes necessary to hide 
away from the enemy in order to obtain victory over him, Let 
them employ ali kinds of tactics to ensure their success in battle, 
but let them not perish foolishly like a tiger who, when his temper 
is roused, exposes himself foolishly to the fire and is thereby killed, 


In the field of battle let soldiers bear in mind the duty of men 
of honour, and, therefore, never strike a man who is standing near 
the field of battle—a non-combatant—nor one who is a eunuch, nor 
one who with folded palms begs for peace, nor one whose hair is 
dishevelled or scattered (over his eyes), nor one who is sitting at 
ease, nor one who says ‘I am at your mercy’, nor one who is 
asleep, nor one who is unconscious or in a fit, nor one who is dis- 
armed, nor one who is naked, nor one who is a mere apectator, nor 
one who is only a camp-follower, nor one who is in agony of pain 





ergerat qeguriearet Geet zee 
qaverrear ate farftratert freted 1 
Sitrearad con aE TEL ATT | 

8 free eerare are welergerer Ht 
wredy fretsraredt firateret aeitfiya: | 
Derr: Te geTT CR? CTHRTACTEGUT | 


2 Licut or Truts. [Cuar. 1. 
grant this, my prayer, for which I shall feel grateful unto Thee 
for ever and ever. Peace! Peace !! Peace !1!"", : 


(In other words) Mayest Thou free us from all pain and grief, 
and always guide us to the path of rectitude which leads to true 
happiness, because Thou alone art true Bliss, Thou showerth 
blessings on all and bestoweth beatitude on the truly righteous 
seekers after Emancipation.2 Mayest Thou, O Lord! Thyself of 
Thy grace, reveal Thyself in the hearts ofall men whereby all 
may avoid sin and vice, and follow truth and virtue, and conse- 
quently, be freed from pain and sorrow, and enjoy supreme bliss. 

THE HIGHEST NAME OF GOD AND OTHER NAMES. 


*AOM’is the highest name of God; it is composed of three 
letters, A,O, M. This one name comprises many other names of 
God, Thus, briefly— 

A stands for Vird?, Agni and Vishwa, etc. 
fe) » » Hiranyagarbha, Vdyu and Tajas, etc. 
M4 » Pshwara, A’ditya and Prajnd, etc. 

{tis clearly explained in the Vedas and other true Shastras, 
that wherever they treat of God ; all these names stand for Him. 

There are no gods, The multitude of names like Indra signify 
not different Divine beings but different aspects of one Absolute 
Existence, 

0.8 Why not take them to stand for other objects? Do they 
not also mean earth, heaven, devids as Jndra and, in the Medical 
Science drugs such as green ginger. 

A, Yes, they do, but they also mean Gods, 

O. We believe that they only mean gods. Why do you not 
believe the same ? 


. ‘The word fea-e is repeated three times because the devotee prays unto 
‘God to rid him of all kinds of pain und sorrow which is threefold ais, -— 

5 Ae pansioes ant to bay and soul a: ignorance, vas bl true know- 

¢, passions and hatred, physical pain and disease (as fever) 

Adhbhautiba—Arising from the outside vorid, animate or inasienate ; as 
from one’s en » tigers and snakes, etc. 

Adkidaivikd —Arising from natural causes, such as excessive rains, ex- 
tremes of heat or cold, or from mental worry or disquietude and dis- 
traction of the senses 

2 The words Emancipation, Literation, Sulvation, Final Beatitudes and 
Supreme bliss are all used synonymously in this book.—7r. 

3 Throughout this book wherever any subject is treated in the form of ques- 
tions and answers, 1 have, for various reasons, used the letters O and A instead. 
of the customary Zand 4. Qin such places stands for Imaginary Objector 
while A for the Author,— 77, 












Char, VE] LIGHT oF Trurs. 175 


from his wounds, nor one who is an invalid, nor one who is seri- 
ously wounded, nor one who is terrified, nor one who is running 
away (from the field of battle), 

They should make them prisoners and provide them with food, 
drink and other necessaries of life. The wounded should be me- 
dicaily attended to. They should never be teased or made to 
sufer in any way. They should be employed in the kind of work 
that suits their station, etc. The king should especially see that 
no one strikes a woman, a child, an old man, a wounded man and 
one who is diseased or afflicted with sorrow, Let him protect and 
bring up their children as if they were his own, and let their 
women be also well looked after. He should look upon them as he 
would upon his own daughters or sisters. Nor should he ever 
look upon them with the eye of lust. After the country has set- 
tled down, let him send all those, from whom he does not fear a 
fresh revolt, away to their own homes; but let him keep in prison 
al! others who, he fears, may possibly raise the standard of revolt, 

The soldier, who cowardly turns his back on afield of battle 
and is slain (by the enemy), is thus rightly punished for his dis- 
loyalty to his master who shall take unto himvelf all the honour 
due to the deceased on account of his past good conduct which 
begets happiness in this world and in the next, The soldier, who 
is killed whilst running away from the field of battle, shall never 
obtain happiness, All his good work is nullified by this act of 
cowardice, He alone wins laurels who fights faithfully, 

Let the king never violate this law that carriages, horses, ele- 
phants, tents, umbrellas, grain, silver and gold, cattle such as cows, 
women, cases of oil and butter, and various other articles are lawful 


we Warerared © ste WEaTafer | 
a qed arett 9 aereffrenited t 
® gt a fered a rea of frageT! 
amegeanre weaned a Ry eTTTTENT W 
magaecent ant ret arfraftgery | 
w sft m verge gat wingerce t 
Fay sen Tengen |fereet Gat ats i 
artdgyred fefreeed afreat a 





196 Lrewr or Trora. [Crar. ‘V1. 


prize of the soldier or of the officer who takes them in war. The 
captors should give the sixteenth part of their loot to the king, and 
so should the latter distribute among the whole army the sixteenth 
part of what was taken by them collectively.” 


Let his wife and children have the share of the man who [s 
killed in war. The wife and children of that man should be well 
looked after till the children are grown up when the king should 
offer them suitable state appointments. 

Let no one, who is desirous of augmenting the prosperity of his 
State and of gaining fame, victory, and happiness, transgress this 
law. 

“What the king and the Assembly have not let them strive 

Manu hard to get, what they have acquired, let them pre- 
Phe} toly_ serve with care, what they have preserved let them 
117, 120-124. augment, and let them spend the augmented wealth 
in the diffusion of the knowledge of the Vedas, the spread of the 
principles of true religion, in helping scholars and preachers of the 
Vedic religion, and bringing up orphans. Having learnt the 
fourfold object of activity let him shun stoth and live an active life, 
Let him obtain what he has not got by the observance of the law, 
and what he has acquired let him protect with diligent attention, 
what he has protected let him augment by investing profitably, and 
tet him always spend his augmented wealth in the furtherance of 
the aferesaid cause, 

Let him on all occasions act without guile and never without 
sincerity, but, keeping himself well on his guard let him discover 
and ward off the evil designs of his enemy. 





qouret upd féefrqmignitted | 
wer oater? Gearers| 
cares uftert gut wet aret any fore: | 
adqearfy ged w Ot waraft wee ot 
erwar qeearehreter Sf gfe | 
erat w endetitedt qrereerqefterny s 
Wy oO | momma 1 BSI BE | E(—ho 


wed Ser fre wed CRs: | 
chart walttette gat crits finfpte a 


Cuar, V1.) LicuT oF Taurs. 197 


Let him ponder over the acquisition of wealth like a heron that 
pretends to be as if in meditative attitude just before catching fish, 
Having obtained the necessary material and augmented his 
power, let him put forth his strength likea lion to vanquish his 
foe ; like a tiger let him stealthily creep towards his enemy and 
catch him, When a powerful enemy has come close by, let 
him run away from him like a hare and then overtake him by 
strategem. 

Let not his foe discover his weak points but the vulnerable 
points of his foe let him himself well discren. Let him hide his 
vulnerable points from his enemy just as a tortoise draws in his 
limbs and keeps them concealed from view. 

Lel such a victorious sovereign reduce all dacoits, robbers and 
the like to submission by conciliating them, by giving them presents 
or by turning them against each other, Af he fails to restrain them 
by those means let him do so dy inflicting heavy punishment on them, 

Asa farmer separates the husk from the corn without injuring 
the latter, so should aking exterminate dacoits and burglars, and 
thus protect his people, 

The king, who through neglect of duty and lack of understand- 
ing oppresses his people, soon loses his kingdom and perishes with 
his family before his time. 


srevufregqade erect cage | 
eft walt eqerat gat rte Fafa 
srarate eee a ater ATT | 





178 Licut oF TRUTH. {Cuap, VI. 





Just as living beings lose their lives through the failure of their 
bodily strength, so do kings as well as their families lose their power, 
and even their lives by oppressing their subjects, 

‘Therefore, in order to conduct the government property let the 
king and the assembly so strive as to fully accomplish this object, 
The king who is always devoted to the welfare of his people obtains 
perpetual happiness. 

Let him, therefore, have an administrative office in the midst of 
two, three, five and a hundred villages, wherein he should keep the 
required number of officials to carry on government business. Let 
him appoint an official at the head of one village, a second one over 
ten such villages, a third one over twenty, a fourth one over one 
hundred villages, and a fifth one over a thousand such villages.* 

Let the Lord (£ ¢, the Administrator) of one town daily apprise 
the Lord of Ten Towns privately of all crimes committed within 
his jurisdicton and the Lord of Ten submit his report to the Lord of 
Twenty, Let the Lord of Tzenty notify all such matters to the Lord 
ofone Hundred every day and the Lord of one Hundred, to the Lord 
of one Thousand, in other words, five Lords of Twenty, toa Lord of 
one Hundred, ten Lords of a Hundred, to a Lord of Ten Thousand, 
and the Lord of Ten Thous.nd to an Assembly which governs the 
affairs of a hundred thousand townships and all such Assemblie: to 
the Supreme International Assembly representing the whole world, 

Over every ten thousand villages let him appoint two presiding 
officials, one of whom should preside over the Assembly, whilst the 

anttontararra: etare stftet eet | 

aren camry sarge: ated crerentary Il : 

Tees dnt fret frerafirearata | 

wetunttercregy ft iftie: gested 

wererareat caqrat ret aerate | 

ann samara @ geuigrged awe7 Il 

sorenftraf gatgerarat aa | 

fiariist wag @ ereeafite & 1 


In other words, the presnt 5; stem of having 8 Surveyor (Patwari)in one 
village, a brasch Police Station for every ten villages and a Head Police Station 
over two branch stations, a Tadst! over five such Police stations, a district over 
ten such Tudsi/s, and so on, has been borrowed from our ancient system of 
Government as taught by *4-~~ 








Cuar, VE] Licut or Trura. 199 


other should tour all over the country and diligently inspect the 
work and conduct of ail the magistrates and other officials. 

For the purpose of holding the meetings of town councils let 
him erect a 7ows Hall in every big town. It should be lofty, 
capacious, and beautiful like the moon, wherein let the members of 
the town council, who should be men of vast learning and experi- 
ence, deliberate over the affairs of their town, and make such laws 
as will promote the welfare of the people and advance the cause of 
education and enlightenment. 

Let the inspecting governor have detectives under him—who 
should come from Kshatriya as well as other C/asses —and through 
them let him secretly know perfectly the conduct—good or bad—of 
the Government servant as well as that of the people. Let him 
punish those who do not faithfully discharge their duties, and honour 
those whose conduct is praiseworthy. 

Let the king appoint such men guardians of his people as are 
virtuous, well-experienced, learned and of good lineage ; under such 
learned officials let him also place men who are very wicked ? as 
burglars and robbers, # ¢., who live by seizing what belongs to 
others, It will help to keep those men from the pursuit of their 
wicked ways, as well as, to protect the people properly, 

Let the king punish properly the magistrate who accepts bribe 
either from the plaintiff or the defendant in a case and, therefore, 
gives an unjust decision, confiscate all his possessions, and 





On the principle that the best keeper is an old poacher.-7Zy. 


io Licut oF TRUTH. [Cnap, VI. 


banish him to a place from which he can never return, Were that 
man to go unpunished, it would encourage other officials to commit 
similar wicked crimes, whilst the infliction of punishment would serve 
to check them. But let those officials’be paid handsomely for their 
services—either by gifts of land or in lump sums of money, paid 
anoually or monthly—enough to keep them in comfort and even 
to make them rich, Let an old official in consideration of his 
services be granted a pension equal to half his pay. This pension 
must last only so long as he lives, not after. But let his children be 
properly honoured or given Government appointments according 
to their qualifications. Let his wife and children! be given an 
allowance by the State enough for their subsistence which should be 
stopped if they turn wicked. Let the king constantly follow this 
policy.” 
TAXES, 
“ Let the king in conjunction with the Assembly, after full consi- 
Manu deration, so levy taxes in his dcminions as to ensure 
vi, sah, 128: the happiness of both the rulers and ruled. Let the 
PrAaleyee king draw an annual revenue from his people little 
by little just as the leech, the suckling calfand the bee take their 
food? little by little. Let him not, through extreme covetousnese, 
destroy the very roots of his own and others’ happiness, since 
& enfitetsdte qegig: wetae: | 
dat erederargra crar Gateraremnay yy Axo ONS! Rt 
Row—Lo | RLo— LV | LRO— NAW Hl 


way Het BIAS Cat Gat wx etary | 
eater qt ag Keaicard wert AT oo | tke 


qapeTerrEnssd aeainecaTe Tg: | 
ererserret sreftereett Crergreriteres: we: WF O91 URE Hl 


oftarqaarent: qenrenr air dete 
await egyar erent ater aratehe: | 
dregite agate crn waft ere: u 
ae ad firortafrirernerareet: | 
afecgftan: svar: 
1. Till they are able to earn their own living. 
2 J. ¢y the blood, the milk and the honey respectively.—J¥. 











Cuar, VL) Licur or Trurti. sr 


he, who cuts off the roots of happiness and temporal prosperity, 
brings nothing but misery on himself as well as on others. 

The king who can be both gentle and stern as occasion de- 
mands is highly honoured if he be gentle to the good and stern 
towards the wicked, . 

Having thus arranged the affairs of the State, let him devote 
himself to the protection and welfare of his people with diligent 
attention, Know that king as well as his ministers to be dead, 
not alive, the lives and property of whose subjects are violently 
taken away by ruffians whilst they lament and cry aloud for help, 
Great shall be his suffering. To promote the happiness of their 
subjects, therefore, is the highest duty of kings, The king who 
discharges this duty faithfully, levies taxes and governs the country 
with the help of the Assembly? enjoys happiness, but he who does 
otherwise is afflicated with misery and suffering.” 

“Let the king rise in the last watch of the night, have a wash, 

meditate on God with his whole attention, perform 

rah Homa, pay his respects to the devoutly learned men, 

take his meal and enter the audience chamber. Let 

him standing there show respect to the people present. Having 

dismissed them, let him take counsel with his Prime Minister on 

state affairs. Thereafter Ict him go out for a walk or a ride, seek 

the top of a mountain wilderness, where there is not even the tiniest 

tree (to hide a person), or a sequestered bouse and discuss (state 
affairs) with him in all sincerity, 





PRewagreT TET TATA ETA: SAT: | 
qaqa: ae: a ag site b 
eftrrer ott wih cere creer! 
fafeaertrent fi crt wifey eed bry o 91 2281 We! 
VeR—Wwe 
ne 
qeittaatqretrecet afetes gat raz 
are fury: srr: Guts efor frerafte | 
feqre wma Gat aorteerg afore: fi 
feltys caren sree ot caren | 
eret froyeré at aentefiranfieen 1 


Je As described in Mfanw in the 7th Chapter—Zr. 





182 Licut or TRuti 


(Cuar, V1. 





“ That king, whose profound thoughts other men even though 
combined cannot unravel in other words, whose thought are deep, 
plire, centred in public good, and hidden shall rule the whole earth, 
even though poor, Let him never do even a single thing without 


the approvat of the Assembly.” 


“The king and other persons in authority should keep it in 
view that it is their duty to adopt after due delibera- 
Manu VIIL, tion one of the following six measures as occasion 


16176 
demands :— 


1. Remaining fassive, 
2. Marching to action. 
3. Making peace with the enemy. 


4. Declaring war against wicked encmies, 
§. Gaining victory by dividing Ais forces. 


6 Seeking the protection of or alliance with a powerful king 


when a ruler is weak, 


Let the king thoroughly acquaint himself with the twofold 


nature of each of these measures :— 


The two kinds of peace with the enemy are :—(1), the contract- 


ing parties act i conjunction, and (2), they act apart. 


But let the 





are atest oF OTe SATET TAT: | 
8 wret oferet zee Srndiarshs cfr 


Wyo © | Lei—Cec il 


Cuap. VI.) Licur oF TRUTH. 183 


king always go on doing whatever is necessary for the present or 
will be required for the future. 

War is of two kinds :—{1) When it is waged on account of an 
injury to Aimsel/, and (2) when it is waged on account ofan injury 
to a friendly power or an ally in season or out of season. 

Remaining quiet is of two kinds—firstly, when it is done when 
the king's own power ts weakened through some cause, and secondly, 
when he remains quiet on the advice of his ally. 


To divide one’s force—rank and file—into two sections in order 
to gain victory is called the Divusion of the force, 

Seeking the protection of or alliance with a powerful ruler or the 
advice of a great man #n self defence when threatened by an enemy 
or when on the offensive is the twofold Protection 01 Alliance. 

When a king ascertains that by going to war at the present 
time he will suffer, whilst by waiting and going to war at some future 
time he will certainly gain in power and vanquish his enemy, let 
him, then, make peace with him and patienty wait for that favourable 
opportunitly. 

When he finds his people and the army considerable happy, 
prosperous and full of spirits and himself the same, let him then 
declare war agaiust his foe. 

When he knows his own troops to be contented, cheerful and fit 

—well fed, well-nourished and well-clothed, etc.—and those of his 
enemy the reverse, let him then attack or march against his foe. 





Wea: | 





184 Licut oF TRUTH. {Caar. VI. 








When he finds his foe much stronger than himself, let him 
accomplish his object by doubling or dividing hts forces. 

When it becomes clear to him that his enemies will soon march 
against him, let him then seek speedily she protection of or alliance 
with, a just and powerful king, 

Let a king servehim who would help him in restoring order 
among his people or in keeping his army under control or his enemy 
in check, as he would, his teacher—temporal and spiritual. But ifhe 
finds his protector or ally full of evil designs, Jet him then fight bim 
too fearlessly, 


Let him never be hostile to a king who is just and virtuous, 
On the other hand, let him always be on friendly terms with him. 
All the aforesaid measures are to be adopted in order to vanquish 
a wicked man who is in power.” 


“Let a king who is a true statesman, adopt such measures that 

Manu neither his allies, neutral powers, nor his foes may 
VH, 177-18. —_ grow in power or gain any great advantage over him. 

Let him thoroughly deliberate over the advantages and dis- 
advantages of his past actions, his present and future duties, Then 
Jet him strive to ward off evils and promote good results, That king 
shall never be vanquished by his enemies who can foresee the good 
and evil results likely to follow from the measures that he would 
adopt in the future, who acts according to his convictions in the 
present without delay and knows his failings in the past. 





atenft aq cen enfant wera | 
er fire ee weet retenrdarert: fi . 


aftetaftr: | 
ararerrcaftnet + eyfivitqretreare: i gq oot tosh 


To o 1 WAL— Loe 
guistfaw: 


Cuar. LJ Licht OF TRUTH. 


A. What proofs have you in support of this assertion ?* 

O. They signify devtas' because the .devtas are manifest and 
also good, 

A. Is not God also Manifest? Is there any one holier than, 
or superior to, Him? Why do you not believe that these names 
signify God as well? When God is Manifest and Incomparable, 
how can there be any one superior to Him? There are many 
objections against your belief. Suppose, a man placed food before 
another and requested him to cat. Now, if that man were to reject 
that food and look for it elsewhere, he would not be considered 
wise ; because he rejects what he has and runs after what he has 
not, The same is true of your statement, because you refuse to 
accept that names like Vérat, signify God—Who is Real and 
Whose existence is proved by every possible evidence—as well as 
the real tangible universe, etc. ; whilst you readily believe that they 
mean gods—who are neither real nor can possibly exist. You 
can neither substantiate your statement by authority nor by argu- 
ment. The subject-matter should determine the meanings of these 
words, For instance, a man said to his servant ; Get me saind- 
hava.” Now that man, in order to find out what his master wants, 
ought to take time and place into consideration ; because saind- 
hava means salt as well asa horse, Ifit be meal time, he ought 
to bring salt ; while, if it be time for going out, he should bring 
the horse, If, however, he brings the horse at meal time and salt 
when his master wants to go out, his master wil! get angry and 
will, most likely, say: “O you ignorant fellov! What was the 
object of your bringing the horse at meal time, and salt when I 
was going out; you are ignorant of the fitness of things, You 
ought to have taken time and place into consideration, and done 
what suited the occasion. You have failed to do that, you are, 
therefore, senseless, Get away from me”, It is clear, therefore, 
that a word ought to be taken to mean what fits in with the occa- 
sion, circumstances, and the subject under discussion, 

VEDIC AND OTHER HOLY TEXTS IN SUPPORT OF THIS VIEW. 

We quote the following authorities from the Vedas and the Up- 
anishadas in support of the statement that AOM and such other 
words, as Virdt, are the names of God, 


1. Generally, h translated into the orthodox Pundits 
and the European a he ante weds bye = 


Cuar. V1j LicuT oF TRUTH. 185 





Let a statesman, especially the king, v#s., the President of the 
Assembly, so endeavour that the power of his allies, neutral powers 
and foes may be kept within limits and not otherwise. Never should 
he be negligent of this. This alone is, in brief, true statesman- 
ship.” 

“ Before a king begins his march against his enemy, let him 

Manu secure the safety of his dominions, provide himself 
bh aa with all that is necessary for the expedition, take 
204. + the necessary number of troops, carriages and other 
conveyances. weapons, fire-arms, etc. and despatch his spies in all 
quarters, Having seen that all the thee ways—by land, on water, 
and through air—are clear and well-secured, let him travel on /aad 
by means of cars, on foot, on horseback, or on elephants, on 
water by boats, and through air by air-ships and the like, well- 
provide himself with infantry, cavalry, elephants, cars, weapons of 
war, provisions and other necessary things, and proceed gradually 
towards the chief city of the enemy having first given out some 
reason for his march. 

In his conversation let him be well on his guard against, and 
keep a strict watch on the movements of a man who is inwardly a 
friend of the enemy and privately gives him information, whilst out- 
wordly keeps with him also on friendly terms ; because he who is 
inwardly an enemy and outwardly a friend must be looked upon 
as the most dangerous foe. 

Let the king see that all officers learn the science and art of 
war, as well as he himself and other people. It is only those 


wafer ederatat aed @ frarcta nt 
srfterat wertat seygrdt x cere: 
erred w yatraweneres fexfirera: | 
wad qredgre: eyfmeifirgat 
wae mPreiqghtitqrdtarre: | 
aur ae etfeperte refered aa: I 
AZ o.9 | We—tro Il 
Set fleet qa g anfine w curiae | 


sryererd &e ere qatar & 
24 





186 Licut or Trurs. (Cuae, VI. 





warriors who are well-experienced in the art of war that can fight 
well on the field of battle. Let them be well drilled in the follow. 
ing various dispositions :— 

1. Marching troops in fie. 

2 Marching troops in cofsas, 

3. Marching troops in square. 

4 Marching troops at the doxd/e.* 

§. Marching troops in Ecklon? 

6, Advancing in skirmishing order. 

Let him extend his troops to the flank from which he appre- 
hends danger like a lotus flower. 

Let him keep his troops with their Commanders on four sides 
and himself in the centre. Let him place his Generals, and Com- 
manding Officers with their brave troops in all the eight directions‘. 
Let him turn his front towards the fighting. He must also have 
his flanks and rear well guarded, otherwive, the enemy may attack 
him on these positions. On all sides Jet him station those soldiers 
who are well-trained in the art of war, firm in their places like the 
pillars ofa roof, virtuous, clever in charging and sustaining a 
charge, fearless and faithful. 

When he has to fight an enemy superior to himself in num- 
bers, let him then arrange his troops in close formation or quickly 
deploy as occasion demands, When be has to fight his way into a 
city, a fort or the ranks of his enemy, let him arrange his troops in 
various forms of military array, such as marching them in Ecklon 
or in the form of a double edged sword that cuts both ways ; let 





eaitrer Refit ait wafirst wz wet ere 
aiverfinwmate araaftge git 
wetter Prt wae geet wae 
arora ey & ft weet fey: 
queegin cert aay WES TT! 
Wereretreat At ECT aT eee AT 


ty Just as boars run after one another and then form one close formation. 
% Pornted at che ond and thicker at the base—like a needle or a wedge 

‘ornt at a at —hke a va be 
& NS, E, W & NE, NW, SE, SW, 





Caap, V1] Licut oF Trutu. 187 





them fight as well as advance. Before artillery or musketry fire 
let him order his troops to craw! like snakes till they get near the 
guns, shoot or capture the gunners and turn those very guns on 
the enemy or shoot him with his rifles, Or let him make old 
soldiers run on horses before the guns, keep good soldiers in the 
middle and thus attack the enemy. Let him shoot the enemy, 
scatter his forces or capture them by a vigorous assault, 

On devel ground let him fight on foot, on horseback, or in cars, 
on sea in men-of-war, in shallow water on elephants, among trees 
and bushes with arrows, and in sandy places with swords and shields. 


When his troops are engaged in fighting, let bim cheer and 
encourage them. At the close of a battle tet him gladden the 
hearts of those, who have distinguished themselves, by making nice 
speeches, providing them with everything they need, looking after 
their comforts, and helping them in every other way, Let him 
never engage in a fight without forming his troops into the neces- 
sary array of battle. Let him always watch the behaviour of his 
troops and see whether they discharge their duties faithfully or not, 

Let him, if occasion arises surround the enemy and detain him, 
harass his country, and cut off his supply of grass, water, food and 
fuel. 

Let him destroy the reservoirs, city walls, and trenches of his 
enemy, alatm him by night, and adopt other measures to vanquish 
him. 





188 Licut oF Truts. [Cuar, Vi 





Having conquered his foe let him have @ a treaty signed by him, 
Let him, ifnecessary, depose him from the throne and appoint 
another righteous man from the same dynasty as king, and have 
a document signed by him to the effect that he would carry out his 
orders, in other words that he would adopt a just system of Govern- 
ment, serve his people and protect them, Let him give bim 
the aforesaid advice and leave such men with him as would prevent 
any further disturbance, 

Let him honour his vanquished foe with the gifts of gems and 
other valuable presents. Let him not behave so meanly as to 
deprive him even of his subsistence. Even if he were to keep him 
as his prisoner, let him show him such respect as may free him from 
the sorrow consequent on his defeat and make his life happy ; 
because the seizure of others’ property in this world gives rise 
to hatred, whilst the bestowal of gifts on others is the cause of 
love, Let him especially do the right thing for him at the right 
moment, it is a laudable thing to give the vanquished foe what is 
his heart's desire. 

Let him never taunt him, nor laugh at him, nor poke fun at him, 
nor even remind him of his defeat. Instead let him always show 
him respect by addressing him as his own brother. ” 

THE QUALIFICATIONS OF A FRIEND. 
“ A king does not gain in power so much by the acquisition of 
gold and territory as by securing a friend who is 
Mano VII, firm, loving and far-seeing. Such a friend is valu- 
: able no matter whether he is powerful enough to 





wetftceeralat wre gal gent Way 9 tey—ter! 
REU—LER | ROA | Rew Il 
anfétatr a etter | 


Sent ar cen cenentan 


‘aay. V1) Licat or Trors. 189 








help him in the. attainment of his wishes or is even weak, It is 
laudable for a king to secure a friend—feeble though he be—who 
knows what is right, remembers gratefully any kindness shown to 
him, is cheerful in temper, affectionate and persevering. Let him bear 
in mind that it is not proper to make a foe of aman who is eminently 
wise, comes from an excellent family, and is brave, courageous, 
clever, liberal-minded, grateful, firm, and patient. Whosoever makes 
such a man his foe is sure to suffer. 


He is called neutral, (7.¢., neither an avowed friend nor a declar- 
ed foe) who is possessed of good qualities, knowledge, of man- 
kind, valour, kindness of heart, and who never discloses the secret 
of his heart. 


Let a king get up early in the morning, attend to his toilet, 
worship God, perform /Yome himself or have it done by his chaplain, 
consult with his ministers, inspect and review his troops, cheer their 
spirits, inspect stables of horses and elephants, cow-houses, etc., 
stores of arms and ammunition, hospitals and the treasury, in short, 
inspect everything with his own eyes and point out shortcomings, 
Let him then go to the gymnasium, take physical exercise and, 
thereafter, in the middle of the day enter his private apartments to 
dine with his wife, His food should be well-tested and be such 
as will promote health, strength, energy and intellect, It should 
consist of various kinds of eatables, drinks, and sweets, juicy and 
fragrant dishes as well as condiments, sauce, etc, that may keep 
him free from disease,” 


Let him thus promote the welfare of his people. 


aig & pad w qurpfeite e 

ages feacresd agin ree | 

ae gett ot «qd qencte « 

ead yftereray wearget get: il 

sreater qavart xital weqtfter | 

ether! © crareqereieg ange: WAZ o 9 | Yor — NAL H 
ant edie! cra ere etatesr aftafir: | 

SaTTTERTTART eaTEA Arg ge Fey i Ty © 91 Wk 





190 Licnt or TRUTH. (Crap. VI. 





RATE OF TAXES. 
“ Let the king take from trades-people and artisans one-fifticth 
part of their profits in silver and gold, and one-sixth, 
vier. one-eighth, or one-twelfth of agricultural produce 
such as rice.” If he takes it in cash instead of in 
kind, then too let him take it in such a way that the farmers and 
others would not sufter from poverty or from want of necessaries 
of life such as, food, drink and so on. Because when the people 
are rich, healthy and have abundance of necessaries of life, the king 
flourishes, Let him therefore make his subject happy as he would 
his own children, and let the people regard the king, his ministers 
and other officials as their natural protectors, since it is a fact that 
the farmers and other wealth producers are the real source of kingly 
power. The king is their guardian. If there were no subjects 
whose king would he be? Or on the other hand if there were no 
king whose subjects will they be called? Let both—the rulers and 
the ruled—be independent of each other in the performance of their 
respective duties, but let them subordinate themselves to each 
other in all those matters that require mutual harmony and co- 
operation. Let not the rulers go against the voice of the people, 
nor let the people and ministers do anything against the wish of 
the sovereign. 

The political duties of kings have thus been briefly described, 
Let those who want to study this subject in detail consult the four 
Vedas, the Mann Smriti,the Skukraniti, the Mahdbhdrt and other 
books, The method of administering justice may be studied from 
the eighth and ninth chapters of Manu, but they are also described 
briefly below :— 

THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE. 


“ Let the king, the Court and the Judges daily decide justly law- 
Manu suits—which are classified under eighteen heads— 
VIII,3—8, according to the laws of the land and the teachings 
1H 13-19% ofthe Dharm Shdstrd.' (fit be found necessary 
to undertake fresh legislation—in respect of matters about which 


GMTERTT ered Cray TEACITT: | 


WNTTTER Her: WR PTT TT AT HAY O91 thet 
the Yoke aa the principles of justice written by Rishis in conformity with 





Cuar. VI) Licut or Trurs. 191 





no laws are to be found in the Law books of Riskés—let such 
laws be framed as will promote the welfare of the rulers and the 
ruled, 

These are the following eighteen causes of disputes :— 

(1). Debs, 

(2). Deposit—the dispute arises when a man deposits an 
article with another and is refused its return on 
demand, 

(3). Sale by one person of a thing that is owned by another, 

(4). Association of some persons against a particular indivi- 
dual for a criminal purpose. 

(5). Refusal to return a loan. 

(6). Non-payment or inadequate payment of one’s wages, 

(8). Disputes with regard to sale or purchase. 

(9). Disputes between the owner of an animal and the 
man who looks after it, 

(10). Boundary disputes, 

(11) Assault. 

(12). Slander, 

(13). Larceny, burglary, and dacoity, 

(14). Violence. 

(15). Adultery. 

(16). Disregard of conjugal duties. 

(17). Disputes about inheritance, 

(18). Gambling—with animate as well as inanimate things. 
These are the eighteen causes of disputes among men. 


Let the judge observe the eternal law of justice and decide all 
these cases of disputes among men justly, that is, without partiality, 





192 Licat or TRUTH. [Cxar. V1. 





Where Justice, having been wounded by Injustice, approaches 
the Court, and no one extracts the dart, shot by Injustice, from the 
wound," all the judges who constitute the bench deserve also to be 
counted as wounded, 


Either a just and virtuous man should not enter an Assembly 
{or a Court of justice), or, when he does enter it, should invariably 
speak the truth. He who looks on injustice perpetrated before his 
very eyes and still remains mute, or says what is false or unjust, is 
the greatest sinner, 

Where justice is destroyed by Injustice and Truth by Untruth 
under the very nose of the Judges who simply look on, all those 
who preside over that Court are as if dead, not one of them is alive. 
Justice being destroyed shall destroy the destroyer, Justice being 
protected shall protect the protector. Let no man, therefore, violate 
the laws of justice, lest justice, being destroyed, destroy him. He 
who violates the laws of justice—justice that gives power and pros- 
perity, and showers happiness like rain from heaven—is consi- 
dered as lowest of the low by the wise. Let noone, therefore, 
violate the laws of justice. Justice alone, in this world, is the true 
friend that accompanies a man even after death; all other com- 
pPanions become extinct with the extinction of the body. Justice 
never forsakes a man. 





wert areq 4 wetter fare saree: Wt 
wat or a Raver qest erectwery | 
wer avert finfeeret 0 


erred Shearerat Carers Serene: 1 
ad ow qatratia wat cele efirer: | 
erent a everett srr ar watt eareweltey i 


i f Le ate the iniquitous go unpunished and the good, unrearded and 


Cuar. VI] Licut or Truts. 163 





When injustice is perpetrated in a Court of Justice (or an as- 
sembly) by partiality being shown to one party, the justice [4 
divided into four equal parts. One quarter falls to the share of the 
party in the cause, one quarter of his witnesses, one quarter of all 
the judges (or members of the assembly), and one quarter of the 
presiding judge (or President of the Assembly). Where he, who 
deserves condemnation, is condemned ; he, who is worthy of praise, 
is praised ; he, who merits punishment, is punished; and he, who 
deserves honour, is honoured, in that court (or assembly) the Presid. 
ing Judge and other Judges (or the President and the members of 
the Assembly) are guileless and innocent, and the evil deed recoils 
on him alone who committed it.” 

WITNESSES AND THEIR QUALIFICATIONS, Etc, 

“ Among all classes those persons.alone are eligible as witnesses 

Manu who are men of character, learned, straightforward, 
oa pte g1, who know their duty properly, and are truthful and 
83, 84,96, 91- free from covetousness, Never should men of 
opposite character be considered as eligible to bear witness. 

Let women be witnesses for women, the swice-bora for the fwice- 
born, Shsidras for Shudras, and outcasts for outcasts. 


Let a judge never deem it extremely necessary to examine too 
strictly, the competence of witnesses ‘in cases of violence, theft, 
adultry, the use of abusive language and assault, all these things 


being done in the private, witnesses are not easily available in such 
cases. 





why engi uke Powat we Real ging’san caren 
diceteuns werdg erfing: | 
wat 3 g 
adwifttrsgeat firrcatey waite 
35 


1” Licnr oF TautH. {Cuar, Vi. 


Tf there be contradictory evidence let him accept as true the 
evidence of the majority; if the conflicting parties are equal in 
Number, that of those distinguished by good qualities; on a differ. 
@nce between equally distinguished witnesses, that of the hest 
among the Avice-born, vis. sages, seers and Sduyasis—altruistic 
teachers of humanity. 

Two kinds of evidence is admissible, (1) what has been seen and 
(a) what bas been heard by the witnesses. A witness who speaks 
the truth in a court of law neither deviates from righteousness nor 
deserves to be punished, but he, who does otherwise, should be 
properly punished, 

A witness, who says anything in a court of law or in an assem- 
bly of good men, different from what he had seen or heard, should 
have his tongue cut-off. He will consequently live in misery and 
pain for the rest of his life and will have no happiness after death 
in consequence of having perjured himself, 


hat ered fern: gdittoret cent fier: | 

Grey w way Gewenety «| ‘ 
bel ~ 

arequetiar oredt @ vee enfeg: 1 





4 Licut oF TRUTH. {Cuap, 1, 





Yajur Veda, " AOM is the Great God Who is Omnipresent (like 
‘L—17. ether).” 

Chhandogya =“ He alone, Whose name is AOM, Who is Immor- 

Upanishad. tal, is worthy of our adoration and none other", 

“ All the Vedas and the Shastras declare AOM as the primary 

Manduk and natural name of God, All others are His secon- 
Upnishad,1 1. dary names.” 
“He, Whom all the Vedas declare worthy of homage, Whom all 
a Kath ee devotion and righteous actions lead to, and for Whose 
1,15 * realization, the life of Bratmacharya (chastity) is led, 
is called AOM”. 

“ He, Who is the Teacher of all, subtler than the subtle, Res- 
plendent, Who can be known through understanding begotten of 
Samadhi, ie, ‘superior condition ’ of the soul, when the mind is per- 
fectly concentrated by means of psychical practices, is the Great 
Being.” 

“ Being All-glorious, some call Him Agni, Being Embodiment 

Manu, cf all true knowledge, others call Him Afans, Others 
XM, 122, 123. call Him Jndva, being All-powerful and Protector of 
all, Others Prand, as the source of all-life, Others, again, call 
Him Brahma,’ the Greatest of all beings”. 





Stray WING | TY: © Ho Vo | Fo WN 

siftretaqacantag rete ti qrqiee Sq o to 8 Hi 

siiratengefinges ot aetrrerreany | ATTEN oe Ul 

aed ig aerqaraaies agit araifty @ eater 

afteqer mpeed eefta ated aety meters 
werafrera eat 2 to TR 

soonftrert eterreftaterrarcte | 

weard eandhred fare” geé qe 

ete eefarfia naaet scerefiry | 

CHAS at erat oar ATT, NAT © Wo Ril RAT ec 

RRL UVa 


1, None of God's names are meaningless. They are all connotative, alike 
bier eae in the world, where 2 poor man is very often named Dkanpati-— 
lord of riches, 


CAnE, V1) LIGHT oF Trota. 195 








‘Lat only that which a witness declares naturally be recelved as 
evidence, but what he says on being tutored by others be considered 
useless for the purposes of evidence by a judge. 

The witnesses being assembled in the court, let the judge or the 
counsels in the presence of the plaintiffs and defendants address 
them in the following way :— 

"O ye witnesses! Whatever you know with regard to the 
matter before us in relation to both parties declare truthfully, for, 
your evidence is needed in this case. A witness who speaks the 
truth shall hereafter—in future rebirths—attain to exalted regions 
and states, and enjoy happiness ; he wil] obtain glory in this life as 
well as in the next, because the power of speech has been declarod in 
the Vedas as the cause of honour and disgrace. He who invariably 
speaks the truth is worthy of honour, while he who falsifies his 
speech is disgraced. By truthfulness in speech is the cause of 
Justice and Righteousness advanced. It behoves witnesses of 
all classes, therefore, to speak the truth and nothing but the 
truth, Verily, the soul. itself is its own witness, the soul itself is 
its own motive power. O man! Thou who art the chief witness 
on behalf of others destroy not the purity of thy own soul ; in 
other words do thou know what is in thy own mind and to which 
thy speech corresponds as truth and the reverse as untruth, The 
wise consider no man greater than one whose discerning soul 
feels no misgivings when he speaks. 

O man! If thou desirest to obtain happiness by uttering a 
falsehood when thou art alone, thou art mistaken, for the Supreme 
spirit that resideth in thy soul seeth whatever thou doest—good 
orbad. Fear Him O man | And live constantly a truthful life.” 





wena tay: valet arsed gee fry: 1 
eqmiousrentterreerrt cee eaTey ARE | 
ret fered - queravafver qf: h age cH 8A OR 


WE | Were et— aR | oe 1 Rt SRE 


196 Licat or Truru. [Cuar. VI. 








“ Evidence given through covetousness, through love, through 
Manu fear, through friendship, through lust, through 
VII 118122, hunger, through anger, through ignorance and 
135-779 through childishness, must be held false. Should a 
witness give false evidence from either of these motives, let fitting 
punishment be inflicted on him. If a man give false evidence 
through covefousness he shail be fined one thousand pases’ or one 
pound ten pence, if through /ove’ four shillings three pence, if 
through /ear eight shillings four pence, if through friendship sixteen 
shillings eight pence, if through lus# one pound thirteen shillings 
four pence, if through eager, three pounds two shillings six pence, if 
through sgnorance eight shillings, and if through chzldishness two 
shillings one pence. Punishment may be inflicted, through property, 
the penis, the back, the tongue, hands, feet, eyes, ears, the nose, and 
the whole body, The amount of various punishments (with 
regard to fines) that have been described above or shall be done 
hereafter, should vary with the pecuniary circumstances of the 
offender,? with the time and place and nature of the offence, 
and with the general character and position (social and the like) 
of the offender. 

The infliction of unjust punishment destroys reputation and 
honour—past, present and future—in this world as well as the glory 
tocome, It causes great misery and intense suffering even after 
death ; let a judge, therefore, avoid infliction of unjust punishment, 





Sie cove wricenye? 


1, A pans is equal to a farthing.— 7. 
2. For instance if he be very ry let the fine be lighter than the ordinary 
‘ate, while if be be rich, let st be triple or even quadruple of it.— Tr. 


Cuap. VI} Licnt or Trura. 197 





A king who inflicts punishment on such as deserve it not, and 
inflicta no punishment on such as deserve it, brings infamy on 
himself in this life and shall sink to great depths of misery in the 
next. Let the guilty, therefore, be invariably punished, and the 
innocent never punished. 

For the first offence let the offender be punished by gentle 
admonitéon, for the second by harsh reproof, for the third by a fine, 
and for the fourth by corporal chastisement, such as flogging and 
caning, or by imprisonment or death penalty.” 

“With whatever limb a man commits an offence, even that limb 

Manu shall the king remove or destroy in order to set an 

VIL, 334— | example to others and prevent the repetition of the 

a eg same crime. Whosoever—be he father, tutor, friend, 

. wife, son, or spiritual teacher—deviates from the 

path of duty, becomes liable to punishment ; in other words, when a 

judge sits on the seat of justice, let him show partiality to no one 
and punish all justly. 

Where an ordinary man is fined one penny, a king shall be 
fined a thousand, ¢ ¢, punishment inflicted on aking should be a 
thousand times heavier than that on an ordinary man, the king’s 
minister eight hundred times, the official lower than him seven 





wegeed aftara tyerat  aeem | 
resent erates eee reety gree Il 
sratquad tre cant Sifter | 
srartay qenrft cerrecaftestag 
RACCU TTT TMT Twat TTT AT, | 
sreait acer ereat Sher cre ft i 
eeqay sod gaifreye agency! 
adtd waged q waqueaT: TE Bent Ro— BRA I 
Ror er rei eae Ty FATT 

sete eter seaityre Tite: i 
fraverch: querer areal ge: gerfte: 1 
arqredt ater onitsfta a: erect or fergie n 
eereing waqaadt qa: spat gt: | 

am CT ANRC: egefafe aTeT ht 


198 Licut or Truta. (Chas, Vi. 


hundred, and one still lower six hundred and so on ; even the lowest 
official such as a constable, should be punished not less than eight 
times as heavily as an ordinary man would be, for if the govern- 
ment officials or servants be not punished more severely than 
ordinary people, they would tyrannise over them. As a lion requires 
mseverer punishment than a goat to be well-broken, similarly do 
the rulers (from the highest officials—the king—to the meanest 
servant of the State), require heavier punishment than ordinary 
people, If a person possess the power of discrimination, and yet 
commit theft, let his punishment be eightfeld—i, ¢., eight times the 
amount of the theft—if he be a Shudra; sisteen-fold, if a Vaishya 
thirty-two fold, if a Kshatriya, sixty-four or a hundred-fold, ot even 
one Aundved and twenty-eight-fold if he be a Brahman, :. ¢., the more 
knowledge a man possesses and the greater his reputation and influ. 
ence, the heavier his punishment should be. 


Let not the king and other persons in authority, who desire 
wealth and prosperity, and love justice and righteousness, delay 
even for a single moment the punishment of aman who has com- 
mitted atrocious violence as dacoity, robbery, etc. A man who 
eormmits violence is more wicked and a more grievous offender than 
a slanderer, a thief, and even one who assaults another without 
provocation. A king, who suffers a man that perpetrates such 





sraTeTery eer A arate feeers | 
ade g deren cfr afraer & 
srereyer wre fe: oe Tee wet AAT 
i pohal acer a 
errafiqginengeeny | 


arate ques cea arefers wey 
argerecucite quate & frac: | 
enqaerat: wef fea: qe I 
ence etary at artafer atitie: | 
ST wary naerry fret erfrreg i ot 
8 fovercenmprant fegenat wearetary | 
eneftreverdyererarrers, i 


are ar erage or rere OT EEL 
srererorrard qrurterfirereers t 


Guar. V1) LIGHT or Truta. 1” 





atracities to go unpunished, incurs public displeasure and shall soon 
perish. Neither through friendship, nor even at the offer of im- 
mense wealth should aking let a criminal, who cummits violent 
acts, go unpunished. On a criminal who is a terror to the people, 
let the king inflict just punishment, such as imprisonment or death. 
Let him pot a man, who is convicted of the murder of another (but 
not in self-defence, etc.) to death without a moment's hesitation, 
be he his tutor, his child, his father or some other elderly person, 
a Brakman, or a great scholar. He commits no sin who passes the 
sentence of death on a criminal convicted of murder and such 
other highly heinous crimes, whether he be executed publicly or 
privately, It is like opposing anger to anger.! 

Moat excellent is the king in whose realm there is neither a thief 
nor an adulterer, nor a slanderer, nor a perpetrator of atrocious 
violence such as a dacoit nor a transgressor of the law.” 


“ Should a wife out of her family pride desert her husband and 
Mano VII, 38. misconduct herself, let the king condemn her to 
bad ba 4% be devoured by dogs before all men and women, 
Similarly should a husband forsake bis wife and misconduct himself 
with other women, let the king cause that sinner to be burnt alive 
publicly on a red hot iron-bed.”. 


arererrferwat ett wreptefe arr | 

sepa at Sora or HEMT CR I 

wer at: ge afta aerattit a grag 

wr araftreqaest & tit UMaTeATE I wy o = | WEN 
Qae— Wo | We 1 WIE Ach 

arate darter aft eanitepeafiiar | 

at safte: errqtnran eferrt wgelitet 8 

gate qrqaerrt get oe sae | 

STATE Hey ae THT TWTGT f 

Kraterhy qertat qerereger weer | 

dtefehity atraregt anferree t. 


1. 6, Gghting the criminal with his own weapon.—7Z?. 





200 Licut or Trutu. [CHay, VI. 





@.—Who shall punish the king or the queen, the Lord Chief 
Justice ot his wife, if any one of them commit such wicked crimes 
as adultery ?* 

A.—The Assembly (or the court of justice), They should be 
punished even more severely than other people. 

O—Why will the king and other high personages suffer the 
Assembly (or the court of justice) to punish them ? 

A,—What is a king but a man endowed with virtue and favour- 
ed by fortune. Were he to go unpunished, why would others obey 
the law? Besides if the people and other persons in authority 
and the Assembly would deem it just and necessary to punish the 
king, how can he single-handed refuse to suffer punishment ? Were 
king and other high personages to go free, the king, ministers, and 
other men of influence and power would simply set justice and 
righteousness at naught, sink into the depths of injustice and ruin 
the people as well as themselves. 

Remember ye the teaching of the Vedic text that says “ Verily 
the just Law alone is the true king, yes, the just Law is the true 
religion,” Whosoever violates it is towest of the low. 

O—How can it be right to inflict such severe punishments, since 
man has no power to make a limb or bring the dead to life again ? 

A,—Whosoever calls it severe punishment is ignorant of the true 
principles of Right Government, The infliction of a heavy punish- 
ment on one man prevents others from committing similar crimes, 
and tends to keep them steadfast in righteousness, Truly speak- 
ing this so-called heavy punishment is no heavier than the weight 
ofa mustard seed when distributed among all the members of a 


SETETaes enbereccents wt 
poeyeahdanadalnatieeseilialy 
FOE SAAT CAT TTT | 
Cans Gal ofan wed anc xg c etl! 
Bok 1 URI URED 


* According to the Roman Law which holds sway in the occident at the present 
time " The king can do no wrong,” and no court is competent to trya sovereign 
for ali the conrts derive their av! from a Tke ancient Aryan Judges 
derived their authority from God because had to administer ji dpstice accord 
ing to principles sanctioned the Veda-—Divine Law The king, therefore, 
like his meanest subject, was su) to judicial trials. Unlike modern states the 
ancient state had means of legal redress against the sovereign, now the only 
redress is rebellion. In this as inso many other respect the ancient Aryan saga 
was ahead of the modero jurist-—{ Zema Deva.) 


Cuap. VJ Licst or Trurn. 201 





community, whilst so-called /ight punishment, by its failure to check 
crime, is really a thousand times heavier than the first, as it is 
multiplied a thousand times by the proportional increase of crime, 
Now take for an illustration a community of one thousand persons, 
If every one of them be punished, say, one pound each, the total 
punishment will be one thousand pounds, whilst if one man in this 
community of one thousand persons be punished, say, one hundred 
pounds and should that punishmbnt succeed in preventing the re- 
petition of similar crimes, the total punishment will not be more 
than a hundred pounds, which is ten times less than one thousand 
pounds, Thus the seemingly light punishment in the long run turns 
out to be the heavier one. 

“Let the king impose toll on all the ships and boats passing up 

Manu vit, nd down sea-canals (or bays) and rivers—-big and 
572, 406, 419, small—proportionate to the length of the country 

480. that they traverse; at sea no settled duty can be 
imposed, hence let him do what best suits the occasion, Let him 
in such cases make laws that may prove beneficial both to the state 
and the proprietors of ships?.” 

Let him always potect his subjects, who go to different foreign 
lands by means of these ships, wherever they are. Let them never 
suffer in any awy. 

“Let the king daily watch the results of various measures 
{adopted for the good of the state, etc.), inspect elephants, horses 
and other conveyances, inquire into his income and expenditure, 
inspect his mines of precious gems, and his treasury. 

A king who discharges all these duties most faithfully is freed 
from all taint of sin, and shall attain to the Supreme State,” 

O.—Iis the ancient Aryan system of Government perfect or 
imperfect ? 

4.—Perfect ; because all other systems of Government, that 
prevail at present or shall pevail, have and will have for their basis 
the Aryan system of Government, The Jaws that have not been de- 
clared expressly have been provided for by the text. “Let the Par- 

Manu liament composed of scholars, frame such laws as are 

VAL, 3. just and beneficial to the rulers and the ruled.” 


sea Grenier gremtar tar ago ct 8 


1. Here it must be borne in mind that those le who say that 
were no ships ins ancient times are absolutely in the wl ong yee hes 


26 





ot Lienr or Truri. (cmap. Vi, 








Let the king as well 2s his advisers bear in mind that early 
marriage must not, so far as possible, be allowed, nor the marriage 
of grown up people without mutual consent. Let the king encour- 
age the practice of Brakudcharya ; let him put a stop to prostitu- 
tion and the custom of plurality of wives (as polygyny, etc.) so 
that both body and soul may attain perfect strength and power, 
For if only mental powers and knowledge be dveloped, but not 
physical strength, one man of great physical strength may van- 
quish hundreds of scholars, On the other hand if physical strength 
alone be sought after and not mental, the high duties of Govern. 
ment can never be rightly discharged. Without proper training 
and requisite knowledge and without the proper discharge of these 
duties, there can be no harmony, All will be discord, division, 
mutual disputes, quarrels and feuds that ultimately ruin all, Let, 
therefore, both mind and body be developed. There is nothing 
more prejudicial to the growth of physical and mental powers than 
prostitution and excessive sexual indulgence. Ashatriyds should, 
in particular, be physically strong and possess well developed 
bodies, because if they be lascivious, the government of the country 
is irrevocably ruined, The proverb “As is the king, so shall the 
people be” should never be lost sight of. It, therefore, behoves the 
king and other high personages never to misconduct themselves, 
Instead, let them always set a good example to others in the matter 
of just and righteous living. 

Thus have the duties of Rulers been briefly described. Those, 
who want to study them in detail, are referred tothe Vedas, the 
seventh, cighth and ninth chapters of Manu, the Shukraniti, Vidur- 
prajdgar, Rajadhatma, and Apatadharma, chapters of Shantiparva 
of the Makabharata. They should perfectly master the science and 
art of government, and rule one country or Empire or the whole 
earth, Let all understand “We are the subjects of the Lord of the 
Universe—the king of kings, He is true king and 
we are all His humble servants.” May we in this 
world, through His mercy, be privileged to occupy kingly and 
other high offices and may He make us the means of advancing 
His Eternal Justice. 

In the next Chapter we shail discourse on God aad the Veda. 
THE END oF CHAPTER VI, 


get Sra G8: SUT WRT A WEP OW 


Yajur Veda. 





CHAPTER VII. 
ON 
GOD AND THE VEDA. 


“pH EY are atheists and of weak intellect, and continually remain 
sunk in the depths of misery and pain who do not believe in, 
know, and commune with, Him who is Resplendent, All-glorious, 
All-Holy, All-knowledge, sustainer of the sun, the earth and other 
Rig Voda planets, Who pervades all like ether, is the Lord 
1, 164, 39+ of all and is above all devatas. It is by the know- 
ledge and contemplation of God alone that all men attain true 
happines.” 

O.—-There are more gods than one mentioned in the Vedas. Do 
you believe this or not? 

A.—No, we do not ; as nowhere in all the four Vedas there is 
written anything that could goto show that there are more gods 
than one. On the other hand, it is clearly said in many places that 
there is only one God, 

O.—What is meant by the mention of various devatas' in the 
Vedas then? 

A.—Whatsoever or whosoever possesses useful and brilliant 
qualities is called a devafd,? as the earth for instance ; but it is no- 
where said that it is God or is the object of our adoration. Even in 
the above mantra it is said that He, who is the sustainer of all 
devatds, is the adorable God, and is worthy of being sought after, 
They are greatly mistaken who take the word devaté to mean God. 


ght ae? wed ot grafts Fen aA PAA: | dew 
Be ferger afteafy o cefkger EH aatret UT oto 81 
qo tty Rao RBH 


1. The word Devaid is erroneously translated into god by the orthodox 


Pandits and European scholars —7r . 
2. I gubjoin the definition of the word devas from Nirubéa (vii, 15), 08 trans- 
lated by the late Pandit Gero Dattu Vidyarlhi, u a. “Whateosver or whoso- 
erica of cotarng soe acento tpn op ape Una oe 
or rf 
thoes are the fit whee to be i devata's."— Tre lights 





204 Licht or TRUTH. {Crap. VII, 





He is called devatd of devatds,—greatest of all devatds,—because He 
alone is the author of Creation, Sustenance and Dissolution of the 
Universe, the Great Judge and Lord of alt. The Vedic text “ The 
Lord of all, the Ruler of the universe, the Sustainer of all holds all 
things by means of thirty-three devafds” has been explained as 
follows in the fourteenth chapter of the Shatpatka Brakman :—(1) 
Heated cosmic bodies ; (2) planets ; (3) atmosphere ; (4) super-ter- 
restrial space, (5) suns, (6) Rays of ethereal space, (7) satellities, (8) 
stars; these eight are called Vasws, because they are the abode of 
all that lives, moves or exists. The eleven Rudras are the ten 
Pranas'—nervauric forces—enlivening the human body and the 
eleventh is the Auman spirit. These are called Rwdras, becavse 
when they desert the body, it becomes dead and the relations of the 
deceased, consequently, begin to weep. The twelve months of a 
year are called Adityas, as they cause the lapse of the term of exist- 
ence of each object or being. The (all-pervading) electricity is 
called Jndra, as it is productive of great force. Yajna® is called 
Prajdpati because it benefits mankind by the purification of air, 
water, rain and vegetables and because it aids the development of 
various arts, and because in it the honour is accorded to the 
learned and the wise. 


These thirty-three aforesaid entities are called devatds by virtue 
of possessing usefu) properties and qualities. Being Lord of all and 
greater than all, the Supreme Being is called the thirty-fourth 
Devatd who alone is to be worshipped. The same thing is 
written in the other Shdstras, Had people consulted these books, 
they would not have fallen into this error, véz,, the belief that there 
are more gods than one mentioned in the Vedas, 

“By One Supreme Ruler is this universe petvaded, even every 

Vajur Veda _—s world in the whole circle of nature. He is the true 

xL, He God, Fear Him,O man! and covet not unjustly 

the wealth of any creature existing. Renounce all that is unjust 


torrentrre ot cheer stearate! 
ae eae guitar at g's: wet feretz 
TT Wo sor Holy 
See Ch: EX fora description of the Prdxas. 
a A Yojana is an active solontary association of objects on the part of man 
for the purpose of advancing art and assembling together of men for purposes of 
teaching and learning —7¢. 





Cuar, 1} Licut oF TRutit 5 





“ He {s called Brakind—the Creator! of the Universe; Vishuu— 
Kaivalya All-pervading; Rudra—Punisher of the wicked, 
Upanishad whom He causes to weep; SAiva-~Blissful and 
Benefactor of all ; Aéshara—Immortal, Omnipresent ; Swardt— 
Self.eftulgent ; Kd/dgsi—Cause of the dissolution® of the world and 
Regulator of time ; Chandramd—the true Source of Happiness,” 


“ He is One, but the wise call Him by different names ; such as, 

Indra, Mitra, Varuna, Agni, Divya—One who 

Reva pervades all the luminous bodies, the source of light ; 

ane Suparnd—the Protector and Preserver of the Uni- 

verse, Whose works are perfect ; Matrishwd—Powerful like wind; 
Garutman—Mighty by nature*”, 


Yee Veda, “ He is Baumi—the abode of all, etc.” 
TH, 18. 

Atharva “He is Indra, etc.” 
Veda, XI, 2, 





@ mete fey: & oer feng vor: ene! 

eres Serene eT: | Rae See 

wet fit ee'qufnigen' fetes g'vat renter 

we afte eee dereafin ast are eerstcire: 
MIOMLI WAZ Vio Miao Ws 


afore ait vex ee ey war | 
rag: oe Sheet ares efter ekaT whe ee 


woRqosinors 
1, The word Creatur is used in the sense of Make~. as according to the 
Vedic philosophy there is no such thing ss creation or the evolution of some- 
thing out of nothing—Zr. 


2. He reluces all this visible and invisible world into its primary elementary 
condition at the end of creation, or one cycle of evolutionary existence — 7+. 


3. The meanings of these names have been explained on the first page — 


4+ Other names we shal! explain later on — 77. 


Cuap, VIL] Licht oF TRUTH. 20§ 





and enjoy pure delight—true spiritual happiness—by the practice 
of justice and righteousness which is another name for true reli- 
gion. 

God teaches in the Veda“ I, O men, lived before the whole uni- 
Rig Veda verse came into being. I am Lord of all, I am the 

X, 48. eternal cause of the whole creation. I am the source 

and giver of all wealth. Let all men look up to me alone as child- 
ren do to their parents. I have appointed different foods and 
drinks for all creatures to give them sustenance so that they may 
live in happiness,” 

“Tam God Almighty, I am the Light of the world like the sun, 
Rig Veda Neither defeat, nor death, can ever approach me, 
Xs 48 5. Iam the controller of the universe, know me 

alone as the Creator of all. Strive ye diligently for the acquisition 
of power and wealth such (as true knowledge), Ask ye of me, 
May ye never lose my friendship. I give true knowledge, which is 
real wealth, unto men who are truthful. I am the revealer of 
Vedas which declare my true nature, It is through the Vedas that 
T advance the knowledge of all. I am the prompter of the good 
andtrue. I reward those who devote themselves to the good of 
humanity. I am the cause, I am the support of all that exists in 
this aniverse. May ye never turn away from me. May ye never 
accept another God in my place, nor worship him.” 

" God, O men existed in the beginning of the Creation. He is 

4 the Creator, Support and Sustainer of the sun and 

¥9 we other luminous worlds, He was the Lord of the 

past Creation. He is the Lord of the present. He 
will be the Lord of the unborn universe, He created the whole 
world, and He sustains it, He is Eternal Bliss. May ye all praise 
and adore Him as we do.” 


Seog’ ca'a: qotenhtice aaitix teterfts sede: | at eee 
Ayer, ow rrerettsee cree frederrtey Srsteray_u suerftestt ot reef 
wae & qeesqaet, Kare | Ste fieetrgeret! arent ta 1 
# Gen qetflarem ne wo Il Fo Lo Go we tao VIN 

feceawera’ Aig rari baci tae 

e drare oftrdt argqaat wet! & erat efit friar a 

TB orwo Mivh 





206 LicuT or TRUTH. [Crtap. VII. 





O—You talk about God, but how can you prove His exist- 
ence? 

A.—By the evidence of direct cognition and other evidences,' 

O.—But there can be no evidence of direct cognition, with 
tegard to God. 

_ A" The knowledge which is the result of the direct contact 

ne of the five senses—optic, auditory, olfactory, gusta- 

Shastan4 tory and tactile—and of the mind, with light, sound, 

smell, taste and touch, with feelings of pleasure and 

pain, truth and untrath is called diect cognition. But this know- 
ledge must be free from error and doubt.” 

On reflection it will be clear that it is only attributes that can 
be known through the senses and the mind, not substances, in 
which those qualities inhere. As for example, we are cognisant of 
a solid substance when it gives rise to the sensations of touch, 
smell, etc, by coming in contact with our four senses, such as the 
tactile sense, and the senses with the mind, and the latter with the 
soul; similarly we are cognisant of the existence of God by observ- 
ing such qualities as design and intelligence in this world, Be- 
sides, instantly the soul directs the mind and the latter directs the 
senses to the pursuit of a certain object either good—such as acts 
that promote public welfare—or bad such as theft, they all incline 
to the desired object, and at that very moment, feelings of fear, 
shame, and distrust arise the soul if the action be sinful, and those 
of fearlessness, courage, and satisfaction or felicity, if it be good ; 
these feelings are prompted not by the human soul, but by the 
Divine Spirit. Lastly when the soul, freed from all impurities, 
devotes itself to the contemplation and realization of God through 
yoga, it becomes cognisant of both—itself and the Divine Spirit. 
When we can be directly cognisant of the existence of God how 
can there be any doubt aout His existence by iuference and other 
evidence, because the cause is inferred from its effects, 

O0.—-Is God All-pervading or does He reside in some particular 
locality 2 

afrrercberfiret foreet ererererrterereaftrerrit eqererrerrere | 

FOUL AMT oiWol oul 

1. See Chapter I1f, page 52. 





Cuap, Vit] Lact or Tauri, doy 











A—He is all-pervading. If He were localised to some 
particular place, He could never be Omniscient, Inward Regular of 
all, Universal Controlier, Creator of all, Sustainer of all and the 
Cuuse of resolution of ali things into their elements, as it is impos- 
sible for the doer to do anything in a place where he is not. 

O—1s God Just as well as Merciful? 

A.—Yes, he is both, 

O.—These two attributes are opposed to each other, since Justice 
consists in giving a person the just amount of pleasure or pain,— 
neither more nor less—according to the uature of his deeds, while 
sercy consists in letting the offender go unpunished, Flow could 
He be both merciful and just at the same time. 

A—Justice and mercy differ only in name. The object served 
by justice is the same us accomplished by mercy, Now the object 
of inflicting punishment through justice is to prevent people from 
committing crimes and thereby enable them to be freed from pain 
and misery. What is the object of mercy but to rid people of misery ? 
Your definitions of justice and mercy are not correct, because the 
infliction of just punishment in exact accordance with the amount 
of crime is called justice. If the offender be not punished, mercy will 
be destroyed, for suffering one such criminal, as a robber, to go un- 
punished amounts to giving pain to thousands of righteous and 
law-abiding people, What mercy can there be, then, in allowing 
one man to go unpunished and making others suffer? {t will be 
an act of mercy indeed to that robber to keep him in prison and 
thereby prevent him from further commission ot crimes, It will 
also be an act of mery to thousands of other people to rid them 
of that robber or dacoit by putting him to death or keeping him 
in prison. 

O.—What is then the object of having two terms—smercy and 
dustice—both having the same meaning? It is useless to have 
two terms, it would have been far better to have only one. This 
shows that they do not mean the same, 

4.—Is not an idea expressed by more than one word, and 
cannot one word be expressive of more than one idea ? 

0.—Yes, it is so, 

4.—Why did you doubt it then ? 


408 Liciit or Trutu. [CHar. Vil. 





O,—Because we hear it said in the world. 

-f.-We hear both true and false statements being made in 
this world, but it is our duty to discriminate between them after 
due reflection. Behold the infinite mercy of God that He has 
¢reated all things in this world for the good of all, and given them 
all freely! What mercy can be greater than this? On the other 
hand, the inequality in the condition of men—some are in a state 
of misery, while others in a state of happiness—is a clear proof of 
the operation of His Law of justice. They—mercy and justice— 
only differ in the fact that the intense desire in one’s mind to 
bestow happiness on all and accordingly is mercy, whilst the out. 
ward action—such as the just infliction of punishment on an 
offender by imprisoning him or putting him to death is—justice. 
The one object served by both is to rescue all from sin and conse- 
quent suffering. 

O.—Has God a form or is He formless ? 

4.—He is formless, because if He possess a form He could 
never be Omnipresent, nor, therefore Omniscient, since a finite 
substance can possess only finite attributes, actions and nature, 
Besides, He could never be free from hunger and thirst, heat and 
cold, disease, imperfections and injuries. This proves, therefore, 
that God is formless. If He were to possess a body, another 
person would be required to make the different organs of His 
body, such as eyes, ears and the like, for, He, who is the product 
of the combination of the different parts, must have an intelligent 
formless maker. Here if it be urged that God Himself made His 
own body simply by willing it, this too goes to prove that He was 
formless before He made His body. It is clear, therefore, that 
God is never embodied. Being without a body He is able to 
make the visible universe out of invisible causes. 


O.—Is God All-powerful or not ? 

4.—Yes, He is, but what you understand by the word All- 
powerful is not right. It really means that God does not require 
the least assistance from any person in all His works such as 
Creation, Sustenance and Dissolution of the Universe, and adminis- 
tration of Divine Justice. In other words, He does all His works 
with His own infinite power. . 


Chat, VIL] Licit or ‘Trott. 405 


O.—But we believe that God can do whatever He likes, There 
is no one above Him. 

A.—What does He like? If you say that He likes and can do 
all things, we ask “Can God kill Himself?" Or “Can He make 
other Gods like Himself, become ignorant, commit sins such as theft, 
adultery and the like? Or Can He be unhappy?” Your answer 
can only be in the negative, as these things are opposed to the 
nature and attribute of God ; hence your contention, that God can 
do all things, does not hold good. Our meaning only, therefore, of 
the word All-powerful is true. 

O.—1s God Anddt' or Sddi!? 

A.—He is Anddi, that is, He has no cause or beginning. 

O.~—What does God desire? 

A.—The good of all, and the happiness of all, but He does not, 
by the caprice of His Own Will, subordinate one person to another 
without an offence. 

O.—Should we glorify God, pray tu Him and commune with 
Him? 

A—Yes, 

O.—Wili Ged by one’s doing so suspend His laws, and forgive 
the sins of His devotees? 

4—No, 


O.—-Why should we then worship God ? 
A.—Its object is altogether different from the one you mentioned, 
O.—What is it ? 


4.— Glorification gives rise to love of the Supreme Being, refor- 
mation of one’s nature, character and attributes in accordance with 
the nature, attributes, and character of God. 


Prayer creates humility, courage, and obtains divine help. 


Communion results in union with the Great Being and in direct 
cognition of him. 


O.—Will you please explain it in detail ? 
A.—Glorification is of two kinds :—Positive and Negative. 





t» These terms have been explained in the first Chapter, 
7 


410 Liaur or Trutn. [Cnar. Vil. 


Positive glorification consists in praising God as possessed of 
fositive attributes in the following manner :— 
“That Supreme Being overspreads all, He is entirely spirit, 
Yajur Veda - Alll-energy, All-powerful, Pure, Perfect, Omniscient 
L, 8. Inward Controller of all, Ruter of all, Eternal and 
self-existent. He has from all eternity been teaching uncreated 
immortal human souls, the true knowledge of things through the 
revelation of the Vede—His eternal knowledge.” 
Negative glorification consists in praising God as devoid of such 
ungodly qualities as passion and malice in the following way :— 
“He is never embodied, is never born, is never liable to impres- 
Yajur Veda sion or organization, never commits a sin, is never 
L, 8 subject to pain, grief and ignorance and the like,” 
The object of Glorification is to reform one’s nature, attributes 
and character after the nature, attributes and character of God, 
for instance let him be just as God is and so on, He who praises 
God like a flunkey, but does not reform his character does himself 
no good, 
ii, Prayer to God is to be addressed in-the following way :— 
“ Endow us, O Lord, who art All-glorious, through thy mercy, 
jur Veda at this very instant with that wisdom which the wise, 
‘XII, 14- the learned, and yogis pray for.” 
“Thou art Light, be merciful and shed that light into my heart, 
Yajur Veda § Thou art Infinite energy, through Thy grace endow 
X, 9. me with unfailing energy. Thou art Infinite strength, 
endow me with strength. Thou art Infinite power, endow me with 
great power. Thou art wrathful with the wicked, make me also 


eqtogmigaiggrentace garirefirad i afta. 
ahh doy: etangat areeatrsaty erqaregnerttem: qeirew: # 


ayonmovelworn 

st Lat tame: feeders | ag are Reese’ a 
arfatet Ge eter WT: oH wo BVI HO eH 

aan’ ser Sait ate Sf t etedaftr fed, ah aft 1 wetafer 
wet, afr Sf 1 etrsetralt aft Bf) aegeftr wer afte Ate 1 
erey'sfty erat air WE NE eNO TOA EN 


Yaj 
x 





Citar. Vit) Licut oF Trut. au 





wrathful, Thou ‘art moved neither by slander, nor, by praise. 
Thou art forbearing towards those who offend against Thee, make 
me also forbearing.” 


“ May,O Ocean of Mercy, through thy grace my mind—the 
Yajur Veda ‘mind that in the wakeful state travels long distances, 
XIV, 1+ and, possesses brilliant qualities, which self-same 
mind—the light of the senses—in sleep attains to the state of 
profound slumber and in dreams wanders over different 
places—always entertain pure thoughts for the good of the self as 
well as for that of all other living beings. May it never desire to 
injure any one.” 
“ May, O Ominiscient God, my mind—-which is the source of all 
activity and which, thereby, enables men of learning, 
pte piety and courage to perform acts of great public 
good and heroic deeds on the field of battle and 
other occasions, which possesses wonderful powers and adniirable 
qualities and rules the senses—harbour only righteous desires and 
completely renounce sin and vice.” 
“May, O Lord, my mind—the mind which is the repository of 
the highest form of knowledge, is the faculty for 
yeprvee consciousness and judgment, is the light of the 
senses, and is immortal, the mind without which a 
man is powerless to do even the most insignificant thing—aspire for 
purity and shun wickedness.” 
“May, O Lord of the Universe, my mind—the mind which is 
: the medium through which all yoges acquire know- 
eaves ledge of the past, the present and the future, which 
becomes the means of the union of the immortal 
an soul with the Supreme Spirit and thereby makes it cogni- 


wa bf tewg' g ver rahe | 
pp Rat at A at: figeretgeasregy it 
Sy epteredl naar st eet forty wien 





aia LIGHT oF TRUTH. {Cuar. VIL. 


sant of the, three periods of time (the past, the present and the 
future), the mind which is capable of conscious exertion and is 
closely united with the five senses, the faculty of discernment and 
the soul, and is the means of the advancement of that great Yasna 
called yoga—be endowed with true knowledge and yoga and thereby 
be freed from all kinds of pain and ignorance,” 


“ May, O Great God, Wisest of the wise, through Thy grace, my 
Yajur Veda 4 Mind—which like the hub of a wheel into which all 
XXXIV, & the spokes are inserted, is the repository of the Rig 
Veda, the Yajur Veda, the Sama Veda and also the Atherva Veda, 

the mind in which Omniscient, Omnipresent conscious Being—the 
Witness of all—-makes Himself known—be freed from of all ignor- 
ance and be endowed with the love of knowledge.” 


“ May, O Lord, the Controller of the Universe, my mind—which 
Yajur Veda _—i8 like a driver who can swing the horses round in 
XRXIV, 6 all direction, sways men higher and thither, is seated 

in the heart, possessed of great activity and extreme energy— 
restrain all the senses from treading the path of wickedness and 
always direct them in the path of righteousness. Mayest, Thou O 
Lord, of Thy kindness grant this my prayer.” 


“Lead us, O Bestower of all happiness, Omniscient, Supreme 

Yajur Veda Spirit, into the path of rectitude and thereby inspire 

4, 16. us with all kinds of knowledge and wisdom, rid us 

of all that is false and sinful in our conduct, and make us pure, To 
this end, we in all humility repeatedly praise and adore Thee,” 


Remmreraaeggrn say i 
weirga: ory dyefk aftrnfelfger camrarfitgren | 
afetfirers oa'ttrel xenat eet sal: fiyregerreg 8 GUE 
ftrostfirg antg cawteitad sity’ frxtfie! Seal genfars'ay- 
fat afiiss’ ant, od: fregerrey 0 ayo | wo Ww 

MWoiVeaiaissser aa 
ora, ad qaet catssrerre farrdie fe qf figere! 
qiwengquaett aftet & afsie! faite n ag on 


Meera ty 





Crap. VIL] LicHT oF TruTH. 213 


“Mayest not, Thou, O Punisher of the wicked, destroy our 
Yajur Veda Young ones, nor our old ones, foetuses, mothers, and 

VI, 156 fathers, nor those who are dear to us, nor our rela- 
tions, nor our bodies. Direct us to that path by following which 
we may not be liable to punishment by Thy Law.” 


“ Lead us, OQ Supreme Spirit, Teacher of teachers, from false- 

tha hood unto rectitude, from darkness into light of 

XIV, 31530 knowledge, from death and disease to Immortality 
and Eternal Happiness.” 


Prayer is said to be Positive or Negative according as the Deity 
is looked upon as possessed of good attributes or as free from bad 
qualities, faults and imperfections. 


Aman should act in accordance with what he prays for, For 
example, if he prays for the attainment of highest wisdom, let him 
do his utmost to attain it. In other words, prayer should be 
addressed to God for the attainment of an object after one has 
strenuously endeavoured to attain it. No one should pray in the 
following manner, nor does God ever answer such a prayer :— 


*O Lord! destroy my enemies, make me superior to all, Let 
me alone be honoured by all, make all others subordinate to me, 
etc.’ For, if both enemies were to pray for each other's destruction, 
should God destroy both of them? If some one were to say that 
of the two let that man's prayer be granted who bears more love to 
God, we answer that the enemy of the man whose love is less, should 
also suffer destruction ina lesserdegree. If people began to address 
such foolish prayers, the next thing they will do, will be to pray in this 
manner, “O God ! Cook our food for us, put it on the table for us, 
scrub our houses, do our washing, till our land, and do a bit of 
gardening as well for us.” The greatest fools are they who, trusting 
to God in this wise, remain slothful and indolent ; because whoso- 


ar at revenge at aiseae ara swega ata efi | 

ar ey! eats frat, are aret, at at: revere en fRftes 0 
Wonwe iso Ws 

wear at ey sere seer at Ra Reias aerate rather 4 
waTTMTe Wl Li Ren .- 





at4 Lrout oF TruTH. (Car. VI. 





ever will disobey God's commandment to work assiduovsty will 
never be happy. God commands thus :— 


“Leta man aspire to live by doing work for a hundred years, 
i. 4, as long as he lives, Let him never be lary.” 
Yajur Veda = Behold ! all the animats and the inanimate objects in 


XL, 2. this universe perform their respective functions, The 
ants and other creatures are always active, the carth 


and other planets are always in motion, the trees are always growing 
or decaying. Man should take a lesson from these. As men help 
him who helps himself, so does God help him who works righte- 
ously, just as servants do their work only if the master himself is 
active and not lazy. Only a man with eyes and with a desire to see 
can be made to see and not a blind man, likewise God lends his help 
in answer to those prayers only that aim at the good of all, and not 
those that are meant to injure any one, He who only keeps on 
saying ‘ sugar is sweet, sugar is sweet’ can never taste the sweet- 
ness of sugar, nor obtain it but he, who tries for it, sooner or later 
ia sure to get it. 

iii, Comsmunion (updsand). On this subject the Upnishad 
says :—“No tongue can express that bliss which flows, from com. 
munion with the Supreme Spirit, into the soul of that man whose 
impurities are washed off by the practice of yoga, whose mind being 
abstracted from the outside world is centred in the Supreme Spirit; 
because that happiness is felt by the human soul in its inner 
self alone.” = 


The word updsand literally means fo come close to, All that is 
required in order to come close to God by the practice of the Octa- 
partite’ yoge and directly see the Omnipresent, Omniscient Ged 
should be accomplished. For him who desires to begin Updsana 
this alone is the beginning (1) “ Let him cease to bear malice to any 
living being, let him aways love all, (2) Let him always speak the 
éruth, never an untruth. (3) Let him vever commit theft, and let 





Errtae entity fashiqteqy adn n woh weve! 
ton 


3. That which has eight pasts or stages.-7y, 


6 Licut oF TauTu. (Crap. 1. 





“We bow unto Thee,O Préxc,—who controls and governs 
Sama Veda, the whole universe, just as the vital forces in 
VIT,3 8,%6 the body control and govern the whole physical 

32 system, etc.” 

From the consideration of the meanings of these quotations it 
must have become clear to the reader that AOM and such other 
names, as Agai, primarily only signify God as is evidenced by the ex- 
positions of the grammarians, philologists, etymologists, and with 
one of the primary, secondary and tertiary Brakamnds,' Sutrakras,* 
and other great teachers, sages and seers. It, therefore, behoves us 
all to believe the same. But it should be borne in mind that AOM 
is the name of God only (and of no other object —material 
or spiritual), whilst the application of such names as Agni 
to God is determined by two factors, vis. the subject under 
treatment and the adjectives that qualify them. In other words, 

these names signify God in przyers, meditations, 
Sigaifcance of communions, or where such adjectives as Omnis- 
cient, Omnipresent, Holy, Eternal and Creator of 
the Universe qualify them, Whilst, where the things under discus- 
sion are mentioned as created, protected or sustained, disintegrated 
or where such qualifying words as finite, visible are used, they 
cannot be taken to signify God ; because He is neither subject to 
such changes as evolution or dissolution, nor is He finite or visible, 
‘Therefore such names as Virat, Agni (as in the following quota- 
tions) signify material objects of the universe :— 
“Then was created Verat, etc.” 
Yajur Veda . 
Chap XXXI “ Thereafter was created Bhusmi—earth.” 





Sat seer Sepeh cee Ge: edt | 

eRe Roa gear Bre waares SI fas o oe y 
Mor GolMwMoVM@oR {oR Fol 

azz aaficeafafectts fierce freter gurer wet 1 

ofa tog deat © aftret ar fir'°eft: nog o Wo Lato 
RI Ho on 


gurghyrat' gu lag: o eo 81 


1. Conmentane othe Vedas by ancient sages.—TZr. 
2 Books on morals and domestic duties of man, eje.—-7r, 


Car, VIL Leont or Trotii. anh 





him be Aomest ix Ais dealings. (4) Let him practise seif-contvo/, never 
be lustful. (5) Let him be Axmdie, never vain.” “These 

solnctat se five together comprise the first stage of Updsand and 
are caljed Yamas. Next come the Miyamas which : re 

also five: — (1) “ Let a man be clean internally by 

‘oe spate renouncing aJl passions and vicious desires, external- 
* dy by the free use of water etc, (2) Let him work 
hard righteously but neither rejoice in the resulting profit nor be 
sorrowful in case of loss, Let him renounce sloth and be always 
cheerful and active. (3) Let him keep his mind unruffted no matter 
whether he is happy or miserable, and do righteous deeds, (4) Let 
him always study the books of trwe knowledge, and teach them as 
well, and associate with good and pious men, and let him contem- 
plate and mentally recite OM which is the highest name of the 
Supreme Spirit. (5) Let him resign bis soul to the Will of God.” 
These five together constitute the second stage of Upasand Yogs, 
The remaining six stages can be studied from the yaga shdstra or our 
book called “An introduction to the exposition of the Four Vedas.” 


When a man desires to engage in Updsand, let him resort to a 
solitary, clean place and get comfortably seated, practise Prawdydma 
(control of breath) restrain the senses from the pursuit of outward 
objects, fix his mind on one of the following places :—the navel, 
the heart, the throat, eyes, the top of the head or the spine. Let 
him, then, discriminate between his own sou! and the Supreme 
Spirit, get absorbed in contemplation of the latter and commune 
with Him, 22, become a Saxyami, Whena man follows these 
practices his mind as well as the soul becomes pure and imbued 
with righteousness, His knowledge and wisdom advance day by 
day till he obtains salvation. He who contemplates the Deity in 
this way foreven one hour out of the twenty-four hours always 
continues to advance spiritually. 


Saar friferarafe wee ata! 


dyed ad Latha ewan hy 
wan: W Bera of 


tees Greveh es kes 





ar6 Licut or Trura. [Cuar. Vii, 





Upasand is positive when Godis contemplated as possessed of 
such attributes as Omniscience, and it is said to be segative when 
the human soul being deeply absorbed in the Supreme Spirit—-who 
even pervades such a subtle thing as the human soul—contem- 
plates Him as free from such qualities as malice, colour, taste, smell 
and touch, Its result is that the soul, by coming close to God, is rid 
of all its impurities, sorrows and griefs, its nature, attributes and 
character become pure like those of God Himself, just as a man 
shivering from cold ceases to suffer from it by coming close to a 
fire. Therefore it behoves all to worship God—praise Him, pray 
to Him and commune with Him, Leaving out other results that 
accrue from Divine Worship the gain in spiritual strength is such 
that even the approach of pain or sorrow of the greatest magni- 
tude cannot disturb the mental tranquility of ‘the devotee. He is 
able to bear it most patiently. Is this a trifling thing? Besides, 
he who does not worship God is ungrateful as well as most foolish, 
because it is nothing but extreme ingratitude and foolishness to 
forget the kindness of that Supreme Spirit who has freely given 
away all things of this world to his creatures to cease to believe in 
Bis very existence. 


O0.—How can God do the work which can only be done through 
organs of sense when He is devoid of them ? 


A.—"God has no hands but grasps and moulds all things by 


Shweta virtue of His Omnipotence. He has no feet but 
Upaniehad, transcends all in speed by virtue of His Omnipotence. 
319 He has no eyes but sees all perfectly, no ears but 


hears all, no internal organ of thought but knows all. No one can 
know His limits, has been eternally existing. He is the Sup- 
reme Spirit that pervades all.” In other words, though devoid of 
senses and mind, He does all His work by virtue of His Omnipo- 
tence, 


O,—Many persons say that He is ‘void of all activity and 
attributes.’ Is this true? - 


srrfterrén seat ere weer: w areered: | 
@ Ofer dd aw wenfta er sarge, Fes aeTER 
stareqac saftey il Wo Bato 2S 


Cuap. VIL] Licht or truth. a7 





4.—" The Great Eternal Spirit undergoes no modifications, 


Shweta requires no instruments to work with, has ro equal 
ee; nor any superior. He is the Supermely Powerful 
oe. * Being, exdowed with innate Omniscience, Omnipre- 


sence and Infinite activity.” Had God been destitute 
of activity, He could never create the world, sustain 
it and reduce it to its elementary form. He, therefore, being 
Omnipresent and Omniscient, also possesses activity, 

O.—When He acts, is His action finite or infinite? 

A,—In whatsoever space and time He wants to act, in the same 
He does, neither in less nor in more ; because He is All-wise. 


O.~ Does God know His own limits or not? 


Upanivhad. 


A.—The Supreme Spirit is all-knowledge. For what is know- 
ledge but the cognisance of things just as they are. God is 
Infinite, therefore His knowledge of Himself as Infinite is srue 
hnowledge—the reverse is ignorance, To conceive a thing as 
infinite when it is really finite or vice versa is called ignorance, 
The conception of the nature, attributes and character of things as 
they are is called true knowledge. Therefore the Yoga Shdstra 
defines God thus :—“ The All-pervading spirit, who is free from 

all pain and grief (such as ignorance), and from 
Yoga Shastra desire for all those deeds which are productive of 
Samadkipad, results that are good or bad, pleasant or unpleasant, 

or of a mixed character and who is distinct from and 
superior to all souls, is called God. 

O.—“The existence of God cannot be proved owing to want of 

evidence of direct cognisance, and “in the absence 
sess of evidence of direct cognisance, there can be no 
fnferential and other evidences” ; besides “from 
the absence of the relation of Vyapti (mthe relation of the 


Wr rer red eee w rad a arorerratirar Te | 
aera afesfelfadte sae erenfiret eerreficar es | 
wana saftey Ho RI Hore 
bargain  ohaae aRTy oH 
aanfirnt | © BW Ii 
fowcrfers: Wat o To L1G WRI 
28 








a8 Licnt of Trutu. " [Cuar. vil. 





pervader to the pervaded) there can be no inference.” Both 
sasknee these kinds of evidence—Direct Cognisance and 
ShastraV 10 11, /#/¢rence— being unavailable, other kinds of evidence, 
such as Testimony of a truthful witness are out of 

question. Therefore the existence of God cannot be proved. 


4.—No, what the above aphorisms really mean is that the evi- 
dence of direct cognisance is wanting not in order to prove the exist- 
ence of God but to prove him as the Material cause of the 
universe, for in the same chapter occur the following aphorisms :— 
“Ifthe Ad-pervading Spirit be the Material Cause of the uni- 
verse, He would be transformed into various mate- 
Pees is g. Hal objects just as the prémordsal matter by the 
combination of invisible and minute atoms becomes 
metamorphosed into Various visible and tangible objects. He is, 
therefore, not the material cause of the universe but the efficient 
cause.” ; 
“If the Conscious Being—God—be the material cause of the 
universe, He being possessed of infinite power, the 
Pima he world also should possess infinite power. But such 
is not the case, Therefore, God is not the material 
but the efficient cause of the world.” 
“The Upniskad aiso describes the primordial matter alone as 
Sankhya the material cause of the world” as in the following 
Shastra V, 12. Verse :—“the primordial matter i» transformed into 
the diverse objects of this world.” Matter being 
subject to change is transformable, whereas Gud—the All-pervad. 
: ing spirit—-being unchangeable is not metamor- 
Sipenhad as phosed into any other form or shape. He is un- 
changeable and always resides in the interior of the 
heart. Therefore, whosoever calls the sage Keps/—the author of 
the above aphorism—an athiest, is himself an athiest. Similarly 


marararare aftafr: i ato we LI go ton 
Searararaenrgara ti ato so Vl To We 
sapraftsterretcegrafe: 1 ererawretcateweter u wie 
eft rarrerctwer Wate WOU Gon sr tes 
wartet aiteggeeal eet sar: quem eer & 
stopeac watieg te ido eK 





Cuap. VII.) LIGHT oF Truru. 219 





the authors of the other Ssdstrds, for instance, Mimdnsd from the: 
mention of the words Dharma and Dharms, Vaisheshaka from that 
of the word Jshwar (God) and Miydya trom that of Atimd—All- 
pervading spirit, are not atheists, He, who is Omnipresent, Omni- 
scient and even pervades the human soul, is believed in by all of 
them —Mimdusd, Vatsheshaka, etc.—to be God, 

O.—Does God incarnate or not? 

A—No ; because it is said in the Yajur Veda. “He is unborn”, 
again “ He overspreads all. He is pure,is never born and never 
takes on a human form.” It is clear from these quotations that 
God is never born. 

O.—But Krishna says in the Gita, “ Whenever there is decay 
of virtue, [ take on a human form.” What is your 
answer to this ? 


4,—~Being opposed to the Vedd, it cannot be held to be an 
authority. Though it is possible that Krishna, being very virtuous 
and being extremely anxious to further the cause of righteousness, 
might have wished that he would like to be born again and again 
at different times to protect the good and punish the wicked. If 
such was the case, there isno harm in it; because ‘whatever the 
good and the great possess—their wealth, their bodies, aye even 
their hearts—is at the service of humanity’? Inspite of all this 
Krishna could never be God. 

O.—If thia be the case, why do people then believe in the 
twenty-four incarnations of God ? 

4.—From want of knowledge of the Vedas, from being led 
astray by the sectarians and being themselves uneducated, people 
are involved in ignorance and, therefore, no wonder, believe in and 
say such false things. 

O.--How could such wicked men as Rdvana and Kawsa be 
destroyed if God did not incarnate ? 

A—Firstly, whosoever is born, is sure to die, Secondly, what 
are Kansa and Rdvana, when compared with the Almighty God, 


aa aay ft eter canfirdafe airce | 
pee wert qaerwey i ae fo qe ¥) 
eos 


Gita IV, 7. 





220 Licut oF TRUTH. [Crap. VIL 





who without being incarnated has created this world, is sustaining 
it and can resolve it into its component elements? He being 
Omnipresent also pervaded the bodies of Xansa and Rdvana and 
could at His will cut their vitals and instantancously kill them, 
What shall we then cal] sucha man but a fool who says that the 
Supreme Spirit possessed of Infinite power, attributes and activity ° 
takes on a human form and becomes subject to births and deaths 
in order to kill an insignificant creature. Were anyone to say that 
God incarnates for the salvation of his devotees, then too it could 
not be true, for, if the devotees conduct themselves according to the 
Wil of God, He is powerful enough to save them. What! Is the 
destruction cf a Xansa or a Révana or the lifting of a mountain, 
such as Govardhan, even more difficult than the creation, sustainence 
and dissolution of the sun, the moon and the earth and other 
planets? Whosoever ponders over the great things that God has 
done in this universe, can not but come to the conclusion that 
“ There is no one like Him, nor shall ever be.” Nor can the incar- 
nation of God be demonstrated by reason, just as the saying of a 
man, that space entered a womb or was put in a close hand, can 
never be true, for space being Infinite and Omnipresent can neither 
go in, nor come out ; similarly, God, being Infinite and All-pervad- 
ing, it can never be predicated of him that He can go in or come 
out, Coming and going can be possible only if it be believed that 
there are places where Fle is not. Then was not God already 
present in the womb and was not He already present outside that 
He is said to have gone into and come out of it? \Who but men 
devoid of intelligence, can believe in and say such things about 
God? Therefore, it should be understood that Christ and others 
were also not incarnations of the Deity. Being subject to passions 
and desires, hunger and thirst, fear and grief, births and deaths, 
they were all men, 


O.—Does God forgive the sins of His devotees or not ? 


A—No ; for, were He to forgive their sins, His Law of Justice 
would be destroyed, and all men would become most sinful. Knowing 
that their sins will be forgiven, they will become fearless and will be 
greatly encouraged to cummit sins. For example, if the ruler of a 
country were to pardon the criminals, they would be encouraged 
to commit crimes greater still, For knowing well that the king 


Cap. VIE] Licnt or Trurs, 2at 
will not punish them, they will be confident in their minds that 
they will get the king’s pardon by folding their palms and doing 
other acts of humility. Even those who are not criminals, being 
no longer deterred by any fear of punishment, will begin to commit 
crimes. Therefore it is but meet that God should give souls the 
just fruits of their deeds and not to forgive their sins, 

O,—Is the human soul a free-agent or otherwise ? 





A.—It is a free-agent in the matter of performing deeds but it 
is subject to the laws of God in the matter of reap‘ng the fruits 
thereof ; He alone is said to be a doer who is free to act ? 

0.— What is a free-agent ? 

A—He is called a /iee-agent who bas the body, the vital forces, 
the senses and the mind subordinate to his wiil, Ifthe soul were 
not a free-agent it would not reap the fruits of its deeds—good or 
bad. Just as soldiers acting under the direction of their command- 
ing officer are not held guilty of murder even on killing many 
aman on the field of battle ; similarly, if God were to influence the 
course of human conduct or if human actions were subordinate to 
His Will, it would not then be the human souls that would have 
to bear the consequences of those actions but God Himself. Being 
the prompter He alone would suffer pain or enjoy happiness, Just 
as that man alone who murders another with some kind of weapon 
is arrested and punished for the crime and not the weapon; like- 
wise, the souls subordinate to the Will of God could not justly be 
made to reap the fruits of their deeds—sinful or virtuous. It fol- 
lows, therefore, that the soul is free to act according to its capacity, 
but once it has committed a sinful act, it becomes subject to the 
operation of the laws of God, and thereby reaps the consequence 
of its sin. In other words, the soul is a /7ee-agent in so far as the 
performance of deeds is concerned but it has to submit to Divine 
laws in the matter of suffering pain and misery for its sins, 


O.—Had not God c:eated the sou! and endowed it with energy, 
it could never have been able todo anything; hence whatever a 
human sou! does is done solely through Divine impulse? 

A—The soul was never created. It is beginningless like God 
and the material cause of the universe—primordial matter, The 
body and the bodily organs were made by God, but they are all 
under the control ofthe soul, Now whoever performs an act—good 


27a Licur oF Tauts. (Car, Vil. 





orevil—reaps the fruit thereof and not God—the Maker of his 
body and bodily organs, This we can illustrate thus:—A man 
dug iron out ofa mountain, a merchant bought it of him; a black- 
smith bought it from the Jatter’s shop, made a sword out of it and 
sold it toa soldier who kilied a man -with it. It is not the miner, 
nor the iron merchant, nor the blacksmith, nor the sword that are 
held responsible by the king for the crime of murder and punished, 
It is the soldier alone, who killed another with the sword, that is 
apprehended, In the same way, it is not God—the Maker of the 
body and bodily organs—Who reaps the fruits of the deeds done by 
the soul. On the other hand, He itis Who makes the s.u) bear the 
consequences ofits acts. Had God been the actual doer, no sou} 
would ever have committed a sin, because being Pure and Righteous, 
He could never have prompted any soul to commita sin. It, 
therefore, follows that the soul is a free-agent in doing deeds and 
the same may be predicated of God. 

O.—What are God and the soul in essence, and what are their 
natures, attributes and action ? 

A.—In essence they are both conscious entities, By satwre both 
are pure, immortal and virtuous, etc., but the creation of the universe, 
its sustenance and dissolution into elementary form and its control, 
the awarding of the fruits of their deeds—good or evil—to souls 
are the righteouse actions of God; whilst the reproduction and 
rearing of children, the distribution of knowledge and arts, etc., are 
acts of the soul which may be virtuous or sinful, Eternal know- 
ledge, Eternal bliss and Omnipotence, &c., are the attysbutes of 
God whilst those of the soul are :— 

Desire for the acquisition of things ; repulsion, activity, /zelings 
of plessure, feelings of pain, sorrow, displeasure ; consciousness, ' 
inspiration and expiration, nictitiation—closing and opening of the 
eyes, organic growth, discernment, memory and individuality, 
movement, regulation of the senses, internal changes and disorders, 
such as hunger and thirst, joy or sorrow, etc., are the attributes of 
the soul which distinguish it from God. ‘The existence of the soul 
is known only by these attributes, as it is not material nor percepti- 
ble by the senses. These attributes manifest themselves only so 
long as the soul is present in the body, ba but cease to do 50 as s00n 


1. These six attributes are common both to ‘w the Vas. and Noys'va 
Shalsfres ; but the attributes that follow are only found in the teres 











Cuap. VIL Licut or Trott. 424 
as the soul leaves it. Those qualities that manifest themselves in 
the presence of a substance and cease to do so in its absence belong 
to that substance alone ; as for example, light is the property of the 
sun and ofthe lamp, because it is absent in their absence and 
present in their presence. Similarly, God and the sou) are known 
by their attributes. 

O.—God being cognisant of the three periods of time’, knows 
all things about the future, and as God knows so has the soul to 
act, consequently the soul ceases to be a free-agent. God there- 
fore, can not be justified in punishing it for its misdeeds, because 
it acts in accordance with what God before knew. 

A.—It is foolishness to speak of God as being cognisant of the 
three periods of time, because what ceases to exist is called the 
Past, and what does not exist now but will come énéo existence is 
called the Fuésre. Now isthere any kind of knowledge that 
ceases to exist with God or that He does not possess in the present 
but wd possess in the future? Hence God’s knowledge is always 
uniform and uninterrupted, He always lives in the Present, The 
past and the future relate to the human sou! only, It is true though 
that the knowledge of three periods of times can be said to exist 
in God when it is spoken of in relation to the actions of the 
soul, but not absolutely, As the soul acts by virtue of its 
free will, so does God know, what it does, by virtue of His 
Omniscience, and as God knows, so the soul acts. I[n other 
words, God possesses the knowledge of the past, the present, 
and the future and gives souls their deserts ; whilst the soul 
is a free-agent in whatever it does and in possessing a 
limited knowledge of the present. Just as God's knowledge of 
actions of human souls is beginningless, so is His knowledge of 
awarding just punishment. Both kinds of knowledge in Him are 
true. Can itever be possible that the Axowledge of actions be 
true while that of doing justice be false? Hence your obje-tion 
does not hold good. 


O.—Are the souls in diflerent bodies distinct or is there only 
one soul pervading them all ? 


4.—Distinct, Had there been only one soul pervading them 
all, wakeful state, slumber, deep sleep, birth and death, union and 


1. Ze. the past the present and the fature. 





224 Licut oF Trutu. (Crap, Vil. 





disunion (with the body and the senses) could never take place ; the 
nature of the soul, therefore, is Anite, and so is sts knowledge ; it is 
also suéte, whilst God is still more subtle, Infinite, Omnipresent, 
Omniscient by sefsre, Hence God and the human sou! stand in 
the relation of the ervader! to the pervaded. 

O.—One thing can mot contain another at the same time; 
therefore, God and the soul can only ke in the relation of close 
union but not in that of the pervader to the pervaded, 

A—This law holds good in the case of things of the same con- 
dition but not in that of different conditions ; just as iron is grass 
while electricity is subtle, the latter pervades the former and resides 
in the same space with it. Similarly, the human soul is less subtle 
than God, whilst the latter more subtle than the former, therefore, 
it is that God pervades the human soul while the latter is pervaded 
by the former, 

Just as God and the soul stand to each other in the relation of 
the pervader and the pervaded, so do they do in the relations of one 
who és served and the servitor, the supportcr and the supported, the 
Master and the servant, the Ruler and the ruled, the Hather and the 
son, 

O.—If God and the human soul be different, how will you inter. 
pret the following mighty texts of the Vedas?:—"I am God", 
Thou art God” and “ The soul is God.” 

A.—These arc not Vedic texts at all, but quotations from the 
Brdhmans, They are nowhere called ‘mighty texts’ in the true 
Shdstras. Their true meanings are as follow :—We take the first 
quotation which does not mean “I am God” but “1 live in God.” 


ROGUE era TraTTAT Fore faahe 
aTToWORI MTOM Toten 
qraiitaaerrtgaraier: gTQeat 
samara fermi u Raftery oN Wo RI BTO VI Gowy 
Sugreiorar li srefmrerrfeer i ereaaftr i serarerice tt 

ate aretqaa srefiteaaraetd mw i 
eae Sees srefigeaanfcetat ti 
atowotiaoxrsto til 


1, 4.4, one why pervades, I am constrained to coin this yor as there is 
no single word in the English tanguage tc express this idez.— 


Cuar. £4] Licut or Trurit. > 





“Then did the Supreme Spirit manifest Akdsha.) 
Taitreys From Aékdsha proceeded Vdyu, and Agni from 
Upanishad. gyn, ote.” 


Thus it is clear that these words ought to be understood 
to mean God where they have such qualifying words as Omnis- 
cient, etc, ; but, where desires, passions, feelings of pleasure or pain, 
finite knowledge and activity are spoken of, these words signify 
the soul; where such words, as created, dissolved material, dead, 
inert, are found, they mean material objects as the sun, the earth. 
Now, we shall give the ctymology of such words as Virat and 
show how they signify God :— 


AN ETYMOLOGICAL EXPOSITION OF THE VARIOUS 
NAMES OF GOD, 
1, Verat (from the root Rajré to illuminate, with the prefix 


viand the suffix Awip added to it) signifies God, because 
He illuminates this multiform universe, 


2, Agni (from the root ancku which sigrifies ga/é and wor- 
ship. Ga/# means to know, to move or go, to realize) 
A connctes God, because Heis all-knowledge, Omniscient 
and worthy of adoration, fit subject to be known, sought 

after and realized. 


3. Vishwa (from vish to reside) means God, because all the 
world and worldly objects dwell in Him and He resides 
L in all of them. 


SMA TASHA AVY: THT: | TET: | 

eqrenre ter: | eer: | see TAeret | ghee siterera: | 

srafretrswry | werter | tre: ger | 

eer ae getswcana:  aferde safrg © muriquelt 
SAATE Ctl 





1. See Chapter VILI, where this quotation is fully translated. - 7p. 


Cuar, VIL] Licat oF Truts. 235 





Here is used what is called’ ‘substitution of the thing that con- 
tains or supports for the thing which is contained therein or sup- 
ported thereby’; just as we say “watch-platforms® are shouting.” 
.Now the platforms, being iuanimate, do not possess the power of 
shouting ; hence it means that the men on those platforms shout, 
Thus the platforms, that suffort the watchmen, are substituted for 
the men who are supported by.? Similarly it should be understood 
in the above text that God the support is substituted for the soul 
which is supported thereby or contained therein. If you say that 
all things exists in God what is then the special object of saying 
that the sou/ exists in God? We answer that though it is true 
that all things exist in God, nothing is so close to God as the 
human soul. Being possessed of similar attributes, it is only the 
human soul that can know God, and during the time of salvation 
lives in the very presence of God, having dérect cognisance of Him 
all the time. Hence the relation of God to the soul is that of a com- 
tainer or supporter to the thing contained therein or supported 
thereby and that of one companion to another, It is clear, therefore, 
that God and the sou! are not one. Just as a person says in re- 
ference to another ‘He and I are one’, #.¢. in complete harmony 
with each other, in the same way, the human soul, being irresis- 
tably drawn towards God by its extreme love for Him and there- 
by completely immersed in Him during Samddhi* can say “God 
and J are one”, that is, In harmony with each other as well as 
eccupying the same space. - That soul alone can declare its unity 
or harmony with God by virtue of similarities of attributes that be- 
comes like God in its nature, attributes and character, 


O.—Well, what meaning will you give to the second text “(faf) 
God (Avan) thou (as#) art ¢. ¢., O soul ! thou art God.” 

4.—What do you understand by the word (éef)? 

0.—Brakma (God). 

A.—How do you know that the word (#2/)§ refers to Brakma? 





1. Tatasthyopadhi. 


2. Platforms erected in the fields of corn in India on which watchmen sit 
es shout to scare away ‘nimals, etc.— Zr 


just as in the English language Watl Street is used for the American 
Stodk Market, White Hours, far the President uf US A —Tr 
A slaxe of yoga wherein the concentration of mind of the devotee is 
Se i ss (coun and ocans hadTH! 












226 Licht oF Truts. [Cuar, Vil. 





O.—Because there is mention of the word Brekma in the 
sentence preceding the above quotation, (Zadeva......ddvitiyan). 


A,—It seems that you have never read the Chhdudogya Upa- 
nishad (the book from which the qu-tation is taken.)—Had you 
read you would not have made the wrong statement that the word 
Brahma occurs in the said text. The true text runs as. (Zadeva 
ssuddvitiyam), There is no such word as Brakma there. 


0,—What do you understand by the word za then? 


A,—That Supreme Spirit should be sought after. Heis infinitely 
subject, He is the Soul of the whole material uni- 
See verse as well as of the human soul: The Self-same 
% 867 Spirit is the Great Reality, He Himselfis His Own 
soul, O my dear son Swethefo! ! (Zat) “that Omniscient, Supreme 
Spirit is within thee.” This interpretation alone is in harmony with 
the Upnishadas. For instance the great sage Yajnavalkya says to 
his wife in the Brikaddranyak Upnishad “ O Mattreyi, the Great 
God reside within the soul and is yet distinct from it. The ignor- 
ant soul does not know that that Supreme Spirit pervades it. The 
soul is a body unto Him, In other words, just as the soul resides 
in the body, so does God reside within the soul, and yet He is 
distinct from it. He witnesses the deeds—good or evil—of the 
soul and gives it its deserts and thereby keeps it under control, Do 
thou know O Maztreyi, that the very same Immortal, Omniscient 
Being resides within ¢Ay soul,” : 


Can any one give a different meaning to texts like these? 


Ba eal 8 Tea at aceerk a Set Sefer 
wearer ted gre om oR WorliHoki on 
erqrermeerqrerarat eaerfer & 

a anata feerntratranan 9 &e Teren mh! 
sremtretrarafa & a arenaateage: Il 


1, The last sentence in brackets is the very quotation under discussion 
which occurs in the verse quoted by the author who wolds that the text quoted 
by the objector does not mean ‘thatart thou” bat that is within thee ’ because 
the that refers to the Omnipresent, Omniscient, Supreme Spirit, Who is 
spoken of in the Verse as the soul of all inciuding the human soul, hence it 
means that “ that Supreme Spiril, is ai.4-# thee." 





Cuap, VIL) LIGHT OF TRUTH. 237 





Now about the thirdso-called ‘ mighty text’ “ This (soul is God 
(Brakma).” Its true sense is that when during the state of trance 
(samadhs) a yogi gets direct cognition of God, é. ¢., sees God, he says : 
“This (the very God who resides within me) is Brakma, #. ¢, per- 
vades the whole universe.” It is clear, therefore, that the Veddntists 
of to-day, who declare that the human soul and God are one and 
the same, do not understand the Vedént Shdsitra, 

O.—In the Chhdndogya Upanishada God says' “ Having created 

the universe and different bodies, I enter the body 

Chhandogya as a soul and manifest myself under different names 
ee and forms,” Again says the Tastreya Upnishad 
yuieys, “Having created the universe and different bodies 
Brabmanand, God Himself entered them.” How can you give 

11,6. different meanings to these texts ? 

A—Had you understood the construction and meanings of 
words and sentences you would not have so perverted the sense of 
the original in translation, You must understand that here there are 
two entities, one is the pervader and the other post-pervader*, Now 
God is like the post-pervader who enters after the soul has already 
entered the body and reveals the science of names and forms through 
the Veda. He caused the soul to enter the body and He Himself 
entered the soul thereafter. Had you understood the meaning of 
the word ans (post or after), you would not have mistranslated it, 


O.—Suppose a man were to say that the same Deva Datt who 
was seen at XdsAi in the hot season, is here now-a-days at Mathura 
in the wet season. Now if you disregard the differences of time 
and locality (as hot and wet season, Kashi and Mathura) and take 
only the individual into consideration, the fact of the existence of 
the man Deva Datt only isestablished. Similarly on the ‘ principle 
of partial rejection and partial acceptance’ * if the unknown time, 


win attereratgatirey earet errecaretiy | gto To &1 
Weortor 


aegyt aturgmivag | Aferta o mart ong 8h 
The orthodox Upnishadas, such as Chhdudogya, 
pookg 5 the author foes wort He eccguioes the four Vedat only ae revealed 


a 4 ¢y One who pervades after the first one. 
44. the principle of rejection of the diffentiating qualities and acceptance 
ot by common qualines.— 77, 





228 Licer or Truru. (Citar. Vi. 


locality and illusion—the opddAi i. ¢., the obstructing medium—in 
the case of P'skwara (God in the active state), and of the known time 
and locality, ignorance, and finiteness in the case of the Auman soul 
be disregarded, and-only the property of consciousness common to 
both be taken into account, the existence of Brahma (God) in 
both is established. On the same principle by the rejection of 
Omniscience and similar other attributes of God, and of the 
finiteness of knowledge in the case of the soul, and the acceptance 
of consciousness alone which is common to both, the unity of God 
and the soul is established. What answer can you give to this 
objection ? 

A-~—-Would you first please tell us whether you hold /shwara 
and the soul to be e¢erna/ or son-eternal ? 

O.—Both being the product of Opddhs, we regard them as mon. 
eternal. 

A—Do you hold Opddhé to be eternal or non-eternal ? 

0.—Our belief on this subject is summed up in the following 
verses :— 

“ We Vedantis hold the following six entities as beginningless:— 
(1) the sous, (2) ’shwara~—God in the active state, (3) Brukma— 
God in passive condition, (4) the déstinctive difference between 
Pshwara and the soul, (5) Ignorance, (6) the unton of ignorance with 
a conscious entity. Of these six, Brahma alone is degsnningless and 
endless, while the other five are deginningless but termrnable like 
that kind of son-existence ‘ which though, existing in the present 
shall cease toexist inthe future, These five continue to exist as 
long as ignorance lasts ; and because their beginning is not known, 
they are called deginningless, but as they cease to exist when the 
soul attains true knowledge they are called terminable or non-eternal.” 

A.—Both these verses of yours are wrong. As there can be no 
soul without the conjunction of igxorance with Pshqwar, and no 


staat © fgarfeinteey enki 
ufeer ufewerate: eeerreneres: 1 
erataritved afte: ercQrerfirdtare: | 
eroterceen facet atratisufiren’ t adios art 


1. See Chapter third, page 66. 








Cuar, VI] Ltoat oF TRUTH. a9 











Pshwara, without the conjunction of saydé—illusion or ignorance— 
with Brahma, the sixth-entity of your verse—s.e, the conjunction 
of ignorance with @ conscious entity as a separate entity becomes 
superfluous ; because the ignorance or illusion is absorbed into the 
soul and /’shtvara, and forms part and parcel of them. For the 
game reason it is useless to count J’shwara and the soul as begin- 
ningless entities distinct from Brahma, Hence according to your 
view only two entities—Brakma and ignorance—are demonstrable 
and not six. Besides your idea of I’skwava and the soul as two 
entities born of wpddAd or ignorance can only be true if you could 
demonstrate the existence of ignorance or illusion in Brahma Who 
is Infinite, Eternal, Holy, All-knowledge, Immortal and Omnipre- 
sent, Were you to believe that the ignorance (depending upon 
and relating to self) in Brahma is restricted to one place at a time 
and exists from eternity, the whole Brakma can not entirely be 
pure, Besides when you admit the presence of igorance in one 
place, it being moveable will keep shifting from place to place ; 
hence whichever part of Brakwma it goes to, that will become 
ignorant and whichever part it leaves, will become enlightened. 
This being the case, you could call no part of Brakma as eternally 
pure and enlightened. Moreover ignorance on account of its 
presence and consequent pleasure and pain, etc. in one part of 
Brahma, will affect the whole, like a wound which though confined 
to one part of the body causes pain to be felt throughout the 
system, Again, that part of Brakma which isin the pale of ignor- 
ance will know that it is so, whilst the part of Brakma that is outside 
the pale of ignorance will know itself free from it. Hence, Brakma 
will be divided into parts, one inside, the other outside the pale of 
igaorance, If you reply ‘Let Him be divided, it would be of no 
consequence to Him.’ He would then no longer remain indivisible. 
He could not be ignorant, Besides ignorance or incorrect knowledge 
being only an attribute must necessarily reside in some sudstance 


in permanent relation to it, Hence it could not temporarily 
reisde in Brahma, 


{f you believe that Brakma becomes the soul through the in- 
tervention of an obstructing medium (opddht) called Antakkavan 
(internal organ of thought), we ask whether Brahma is All-pervad- 
ing or circumscribed, If you answer that He is All-pervading but 
the obstructing medium is circumscribed, ¢. ¢, linsited as regards 


ago Licut or TRutH. CHar, VIL, 





space, and is separate in each man, does that medium then move 
about or not? 


0.—It moves about. 

A.—Does Brahma as well move with it or does it remain 
stationary ? 

O.—He remains stationary. 


A.—Then whichever past the obstructing medium—the anteh- 
Aaran—leaves, that must become free from ignorance, whilst 
whichever part it goes to, that part of the pure enlightened 
Brakma must necessarily become ignorant, In other words, 
Brakma would in one moment become ignorant and in the next 
enlightened. Hence salvation and bondage will also become of 
momentary duration, and just as one can not remember what an- 
other has seen or heard, similarly what Bradma has seen or heard 
yesterday he could not possibly remember today; because the 
time and place of his observation are totally different from those of 
his rememberance. 


But Brahma is the same in all you say. We ask, therefore, 
why Brakma is not All-knowing? Ifyou say that the obstructing 
media—antakkaranas—are different or distinct from each other in 
different people, the resulting knowledge will, therefore, also be 
different. Our answer is that the medium being material, it can- 
not be the seat of consciousness. And if you say that itis neither 
Brahma not the astahkkaran, (the obstructing medium)—internal 
organ of thought—but the ‘image of Brahma'—chiddbhds—that is, 
the seat of knowledge, then too it is a conscious entity that pos- 
sesses knowledge. Why it is then Amite in knowledge and power ? 


It is clear, therefore, that you can not establish /’skwara and 
the soul as products of the influence of the ‘obstructive medium, 
ignorance or illusion’, on Brakma, I'shwara ia really another 
name for Brakma—the All-pervading God, while the other conscious, 
eternal, uncreated and immortal entity is called the soué, 


Ifyou say that the soul is nothing but the image of Brahma 
(chiddbhds), we answer that the image being of momentry duration 
will soon perish. Who will then enjoy the bliss of salvation? Hence 
God and the soul were never one, nor are they at present, nor 
shall they ever be. 


Cuap, Vil] Licut or Trurs. aj1 





O.—How can you then establish the doctrine of son-duality 
which is clearly inculcated in the: Upsiskadas as shown by the 
following quotation from the ChAdndogya? “O my dear son, in 
the beginning there was but One (God) and no other.” Accord- 
ing to our belief the existence of every thing else—whether of the 
same kind as, Brakma or of a different kind from, or as diflerenti- 
ated parts of, the same Brakma—besides Brakma, being negatived, 
the existence of Brakwa alone is established. How could the 
doctrine of son-duality hold good when you believe that Brakma 
(God) ia distinct from the soul ? 


4.—Why have you fallen into this error? Fear not and try to 
understand the relation of an adjectiveto a substantive. Now 
what is the function of an adjective? 


O.—Its function is to differentiate. 


A.—Then why not also admit that it serves to elucidate and 
explain the character of the substantive, You should, therefore, 
understand that in the verse quoted above the word advast (s. «., 
and no other) is an adjective, qualifying the noun Arahma; its 
differentiating function is that it differentiates Brakma from in- 
numerable soul and atoms, whilst its explanatory function is that 
it serves to elucidate that there is one God and one only. As 
when you say “In this town Deva Datta isthe one rich man. 
There is no other”, or “ In this regiment Vikram Singh is the one 
brave man and there is no other”, you mean that in this town there 
is no one so rich as Deva Datta and there is none in the 
regiment so brave as Vikram Singh, but it does not negative 
the existence of other men less rich and less brave than Deva 
Datta and Vikram Singh respectively, nor of animate (as 
plants and animals) and inanimate (as land and water, etc.,) 
things in the town and the regiment. Similarly, in the text, ‘In 
the beginning there was one God and no other ’, it is implied that 
there was nothing besides God equal to Him, but it does not exclude 
the existence of other things such as the souls and the primordial 
elementary matter which are inferior to God. Itis clear, then, that 
it means that there is but oe God whilst the soul and the material 
atoms are more than one, and the adjective advetiya (mo other) 
serves to differentiate other existences from God as well as to eluci- 
date the oneness of God. Therefore, it does not mean that the 


ag2 Laowt oF Tavra. [Cwar, Vil. 





soul and matter—in atomic or the present visible condition—do 
not exist, On the other hand, they all exist but they are not equal 
to God. The explanation neither disproves the doctrine of sen- 
duality nor that dwaltty. Do not be perplexed, think over it and 
try to understand it. 

O.—God and the soul possess the attributes of Existence, Con- 
sciousness and Blissfulness common to each other and are, therefore, 
one, Why do you then refute this belief? 

A—The fact of two things possessing a few attributes common 
to each other does not make them one. Take for instance, solids 
and liquids and fire, all these are inanimate and visible but that 
does not make them one. The dissimilar attributes differentiate 
them. The hardness, ete., found in solids, fluidity, ete. in liquids, 
and heat and light in the fire differentiate them from one another 
and prevent them from being considered as one, Or take another 
illustration. Both a man and an ant see with their eyes, eat with 
their mouths and walk with their feet, yet they are not one and the” 
same, having their bodily forms different from each other, a man 
having two feet whilst an ant many, and soon, Similarly, God’s 
attributes of Omniscience, Omnipresence, Omnipotence, Infinite 
Bliss and Infinite activity, being different from those of the soul’s, 
and the attributes of the soul, such as finite knowledge, finite power, 
finite nature, liability to error and circumscription, being different 
from God's, God and the sou! can never be one, Even in essence, 
they are different, God being most subtle, and the soul less subtle 
than God. 

O— He who makes even the slightest distinction between God 

‘ and the soul is subject to fear, as fear Is possible only 
yoeUenhed, from a second person (¢, ¢., not from one’s own self).” 

Does not this inculcate the unity of the soul with 
Brakma? 

4.—Your translation of this verse is wrong. The correct mean- 
ing is, that the soul that denies the existence of the Supreme Being 
or believes Him to be limited to some particular time or place, or 
conducts itself against the will, nature, character and attributes of 
God or bears malice to another, becomes subject to fear, Because 


warccaerd gee | era wer we aefe Geieh set weft 





Cuar. Vii] Licgut. or TrutH. 283 





that person alone is afraid of God or of man who believes that God 
has nothing to do with him or says to another man “ What do I 
care for you? What can you do against me?” or does others harm 
or gives them pain. Those who are in harmony with each other 
in all things are called one, as the following expression is very 
often used, “Deva Datta, Yajna Datta and Vishnu Datt are all 
one”, meaning thereby that they are allof one mind, Harmony is 
the cause of happiness, whilst want of harmony begets misery and 
pain. 


O-—Do God and the soul always remain distinc? from each other 
or do they ever become one ? 


A.—We have already partly answered this question but we will 
add here that on account of similarity in attributes and close rela- 
tionship they are one, Just as material solid substance is one with 
space in being lifeless and inseparably associated with it; whilst 
they are distinct from each other on account of dissimilarity of such 
attributes, as omnipresence, subtlety, formless and endiessness, 
ete, of space and limitation visibility and such other attributes 
ofa solid object ; in other words, a solid object can never be 
separate from space, as it must have space to exist in, whilst on 
account of dissimilitude in nature they are always distinct from 
each other, In the same way, the soul and the material objects 
can never be separate from God as He pervades them nor, all, can 
they be ome with Him as they are in nature different from Him, 
Bore a house is built, the earth, water, iron and other building ma- 
terials are found to exist in space ; after a house is built they still 
exist in space, and continue todo so even after é& is demolished 
and the material composing it scattered broad-cast ;in short, the 
building material can never be separate from space, nor, can it, being 
different in nature, ever be one with it. Similarly, both the sou/ and 
the material cause of this universe, being pervaded by God, never 
were, mor are, nor shall ever be separate from Him, and being in 
their natures déstixct from Him can ever be one with Him, The 
Vedantists of to-day are like one-eyed men who see only one side 
of the street they pass through and are bent on giving such a great 
importance to the close connection or relationship between God and 
the soul that they completely ignore the adssimilitudes between the 
two. There is not a single substance in this world that de devoid of 

xe 


234 Licut oF TRutH, [Cear. Vil 


gesitiveness—the property of possessing some qualities—and 
negotiveness—the property of being devoid of some qualitics—~of 
close relationship and its reverse, similitude and dissimilitude, etc. 


O—Iis God a positive—possessed of attributes (Saguna) entity 
or a segative—destitute of attribute of (Nizgwxa) one? 
4,—He is both, 


O.—How can two swords be put in one scabbard ? How can 
one thing be both posttsve and wegative ? 

A—A thing that is possessed of certain qualites is called 
Saguna or Positive, whilst, one devoid of certain qualities is called 
Nérguna or Negative, Hence ai) things are both positive and 
negative, being possessed of certain qualities and destitute of 
others, as the material objects being possessed of visibility and 
other properties are positive, whilst being devoid of intelligence 
and other attributes of conscious beings, they are megative, In the 
same way, conscious beings (as souls) are positive, as they possess 
intelligence, whilst they are negative, as they are devoid of visibi- 
lity and other properties of the material objects, All things, there- 
fore, are positive (Saguna) and negative (Nirguna) by virtue of being 
possessed for certain natural qualities, and devoid of those that 
are antithetic tothem. There is not a single substance that is 
only positive or only negative. Both positiveness and negativeness 
always reside in the same object. In the same way, God is positive 
being possessed of certain natural attributes, such as Omniscience, 
Onnnipresence, etc. He is also negative being free from the attri- 
butes of visibility and other properties of material objects, and 
from feelings of pleasure and pain, and other attributes of the soul. 


O.—People generally speak of a thing as Virguna (negative) 
when it is formless and as Saguna (positive) when it is possessed of 
aform, In other words, God is called Saguxa (positive) when He 
incarnates, and WVirgune (negative) when He is not emboided. Is 
this view of the terms positive and segative right ? 


. A—No, it is a false conception entertained by ignorant minds 
that are destitute of true knowledge. The ignorant always make 
senseless noise like the lowing of cattle. Their utteranees should 
be looked rpon as valueless as the ravings of a man in delirium 
from high fever, 


Liciit of Trivrit. [Cuapr, L. 





Hiranyagarbha (Hiranya—light and garbha—source) 

means One who is the source and support of 

Yajur Veda all light and luminous bodies such as the sun, 

”* ‘This is also substantiated by the Yajur Veda, 
which says :— 

“In the beginning was Hiranyagarbha—the One 
Lord of the creation. He sustains the 
sun and the earth, We adore Him— 
the all Blissful Being.” 

Vdyu (from the root Va to move, to kill} means One 
who is the life and support of the Universe, the cause 
of its dissolution, mightier than the mightiest. 


Yajur Veda, 
XU, 4. 


Tasjas (from Tea to shine or enlighten) is One who is 
Resplendent and gives light to the sun and other lumi- 
nous bodies, 


L'skwar (from ['sk—power, knowledge) is One whose 
knowledge and power are infinite. 

A'ditya (from a—not, do—to break, decay) is One who 
never dies or decays—is Immortal, 

Prajna (from Pra—perfectly and Jaa—to know) One 

whose knowledge is perfect, Who is Omniscient. 

Aom. (See above). 
Thus we have briefly described the meanings of the 
three letters A,O, M of the word AOM. Besides 
those already mentioned it also covers other names of 
God. Similarly Mitra, Varuna, and other names 
occurring in the mantra quoted at the head of this 
chapter are all names of God, because He alone is 
worthy of homage and adoration, who is Varuna (good, 
pure and holy), 4. ¢., Superior to others, in nature, 
attributes, power and good works. But God is called 
Varuna, because he is greatest among the great ; Holi- 
est among the holy, and purest among the pure, There 
js no one equal to Him, nor shall any one ever be, 
How can then any one be greater than Him? Neither 





Feces coreg art egret are: efter wee | er gree 


feet crregtert weet! & errer eqftrer freer ray © Bio Elsie BA 


Cnap, VII] Licnt oF TRuTH. 235 





O—Is God Rdgi—one possessed of feelings and passions, 
etc.—or Vairakta—one who has renonunced all things? 

A—He is neither the one nor the other. For, you desire for 
the possession of a thing that exists wrthout you, or is detier than 
you ; but as there is nothing that is oxtside or separate from God or 
better than He, He could not possibly be Rdgi. Asa Vairakia is 
one who renounces what he has, God being All-pervading can not 
renounce anything ; therefore He is not Vasretia either. 

O—Does God possess desire (Ichchhd)? 

A—No, not that kind of desire which is another name fora 
passion excited by the love of an object from which pleasure is ex- 
pected, because, you only desire to obtain a thing which you do not 
already possess, which is of a superior quality and is productive of 
pleasure. Now there is nothing that God does not possess or fr 
superior to Him, and being All-Bliss He can also have no desire for 
further happiness, ‘Therefore, there is no possibility of the presence 
of desire in God, But there is no God what is called J’4shan, that in 
true knowledge and creative power, 

We have treated this subject very briefly but it is hoped 
that it will suffice for the wise. Now we proceed to the treatment 
of the subject of the Veda, 

The Atharva Veda say “ Who is that Great Being who reveal. 
Atharva Vets ed the Rig Veda, the Yajur Veda, the Sdma Veda 

X, 23,4, 10, and the Atharva Veda? Heis the Supreme Spirit 
Who created the universe and sustains it.” Again, 
says the Yajur Veda “The Great Ruler of the Universe, Who is 
vue dais Self-existent, All-pervading, Holy, Eternal and 
“KL, a Formless, has been eternally instructing His subjects 
—the immoratal souls—in all kinds of knowledge 

for their good through the Veda.” 

O.—Do you believe God to be Formless or Embodied ? 

4.—Formless, 


were sade agteierier! aif ver ait 
ererntfgeetr qelaz | casa wife weer: fae a: | rd o 
to fo | MIT ORI MT OUl He ton 


eroqiiarreatisdi erqureqpedten aren a ag: « 
Woveidteuy 


236 Licut oF TRUTH. [Caar, VIL 





O.-—-Being formless how could He reveal the Veda without the 
use of the organs of speech, as in the pronunciation of words the 
use of such organs as the palate and ofa certain amount of effort 
with the tongue are indispensible. 

A.—Being Omnipotent and Omnipresent, He does not stand 
in need of the organs of speech in order to reveal the Veda to the 
human souls ; because the organs of speech, such as the mouth, the 
tongue, etc,, are needed in pronouncing words only when you want 
to speak to another person, and not when you are speaking to your- 
self. It is our daily experience that various kind of mental 
Processes and the formation of words are continually going on in 
oar mind without the use of the organs of speech, Even an shut- 
ting your ears with the fingers you can notice that many different 
varieties of sound are audible that are not produced by the use 
of the organs of speech, In the same way, God instructed human 
souls by virtue of his Omniscience and Omnipresence without the 
use of the organs of speech, After the Incorporeal God has 
revealed the perfect knowledge of the Veda in the heart of a human 
being by virtue of His presence within it, he teaches it to 
others through speech. Hence, this objection does not hold good 
in the case of God. 

O,—Whose hearts did God reveal the Vedas in? 


ao A.—“iIn the beginning, God revealed the four 
‘Brahman Vedas, Rig, Yaju, Sdma and Athava, to Agni, 
XI, 4 25 3. Vayu, A'ditya and Angird, respectively.” 
0.~—But it is written in the Shwetdshwetar Upnishad “In 
the beginning God created Brakmd and revealed 
amines the Vedas in his heart.” Why do you say that they 
zh 18. were revealed to Agné, and other sages? 
A.—Brakmé was instructed in the knowledge of the Veda through 
the medium of the four sages, such as Aga, Mark what Jfanx 


tara - 


weevil aiaa 


Sr mere frepenfr qe & Qetee aftwnfe eet a 
Ware e Wolkite ten 





Cuar, vial] Licut or Truts. 237 





says: “In the beginaing after human beings had been created, the 
Supreme Spirit made the Vedes known to Bradmd 
through Agn’, etc, £ ¢, Brekmd learnt the four 
Vedas feom Agni, Vayu, A’ditya and Agnrd.” 

0.—Why should He have revealed the Vedas to those four men 
alone and not to others as well? That imputes favouritism to 
God, 

A-~Among all men those four alone were purest in heart 
therefore, God revealed the true knowledge to them only, 


0.—Why did He reveal the Veda in Sanskrit instead of in the 
fanguage of some particular country? 

A,—Had He revealed the Veda in the language of some parti- 
cular country, He would have been partial to that country, because 
it would have been easier for the people of that country to learn 
and teach the Veda than for the foreigners, therefore it is that He 
did it in Sanskrt that belongs to no country, and is the mother of 
all other languages, Just as He has ordained the material creation 
such as the earth, etc., which is also the source of all the useful arts, 
for the equal good of all, so should the language of the Divine re- 
velation be accessible to all countries and nations with the same 
amount of labour, Hence the revelation of the Veda in Sanskrit 
does not make God partial to any nation. 


0.—What evidence have you to prove that the Veda is of Divine 
origin and not the work of man? 

A.—The book in which God is described as He is, vs., Holy, 
Omniscient, Pure in nature, character and attributes, Just, Merciful, 
etc, and in which nothing is said that is opposed to the laws of 
nature, reason, the evidence of direct cognisance, etc,, the teachings 
of the highly learned altruistic teachers of humanity (A’ptas), and 
the intuition of pure souls, and in which the laws, nature, and pro- 
pertics of matter and the soul are propounded as they are to 
be inferred from the order of nature as fixed by God, is the book of 
Divine revelation. Now the Vedas alone fulfil ali the above con- 
ditions, hence they are the revealed books and not books, like the 
Bible and the Qordn which we shall discuss fully in the thirteenth 
and fourteenth chapters (of this book) respectively. 


emnreny | 
t TEWST NTO LIRA 


Manu 1—23- 





238 Licut or TRUTH. {Cnar, VIL. 


O.—There is no necessity for the Veda to be revealed by God. 
Men can by themselves by degrees augment their knowledge and 
thereafter make books as well. 7 


4,—No, they cannot do that, because there can be no effect 

without acause. Look at savages such as the Bhéls. Do they 
ever become enlightened by themselves without being instructed 
by others? The same is true of men in civilized communities, they 
need to be taught before they become educated. Similarly, had 
not God instructed the primitive sages in the knowledge of the 
Veda and had not they in their turn taught other men, all men 
would have remained ignorant. Ifa child were kept in a sé¢ques- 
tered place from its very birth with no other company but that of 
illiterate persons or animals, on attaining maturity he would be no 
better than one of his company, Take for example the case of 
Egypt, Greece, or the Continent of Europe. The people of all 
these countries were without a trace of learning before the spread 
of knowledge from India. In the same way before Columbus and 
other Europeans went to America, the natives had been without 
any learning for hundreds and thousands of years. Now some of 
them have become enlightened after receiving education from the 
Europeans, Similarly, in the beginning of the world men received 
knowledge from God and since then there have been various 
learned men in different periods. Says Pdtanjalf in his Yoga 
Shastra. . 

“Asin the present time we become enlightened only after be- 

Noge Shastra ing taught by our teachers, so were in the begin- 

26. ning of the world, 4gns and the other three Rishés 
(sages), taught by the Greatest of all teachers—God.” His 
knowledge is eterna). He is quite unlike the human soul that be- 
comes devoid of consciousness in profound sleep and during the 
period of dissolution. It is certain, therefore, that no effect can be 
produced without a cause. 

O.—The Vedas were revealed in the Sawskrit language. Those 
Rishss were ignorant of that language. How did they then under- 
stand the Vedas? 

A-—They were made known to them by God, and whenever great 
sages, who were yogis, imbued with piety, and with the desire to 


er Geant ger eraererTederey a Merge warfeTry Ge BH 





Cuap, VIL] Licut or Trurs. 239 





understand the meanings of certain mantras and whose minds pos- 
sessed the power of perfect concentration, entered the superior 
condition, called Samddh, in contemplation of the Deity. He made 
known unto them the meaning of the desired mantras. When the 
Vedas were thus revealed to many Rishis, they made expositions 
with historical illustrations of the Vedic mantras and embodied 
them in books called the Ardkmanas which literally mean a exposi- 
tion of the Veda, “The names of the Réshis, who were seers of 
certain manévas and for the first time published and taught the 
exposition of those manéras, are written along with 
those mantras as a token of rememberance.” Those 
who fook upon those Azshis as the authors of the 
mantras should be considered absolutely in the wrong. They were 
simply seers of those mantras, 
O.—Which books are called the Vedas? 


A.—The books called the Rig Veda, the Yajur Veda,the Sama 
Veda andthe Asharva Veda—the Mantras Sanhitds only and no 
other. 

O.—But the sage Katyayana says. The mantras Sanhitds to- 
getber with the Brdismanas constitute the Veda. 


A—You must have noticed that in the beginning of every 
Mantra Sanhitd and at the end of each of its chapters it has always 
been the practice from time immemorial to write the word Veda, 
but it is never done so inthe case of Brdhmanas. We readin the 

Nirukt “This is in the Veda, this is in the Brith. 


Nirukt 
120, 


Viauae smtanas ;” in the same way we read in Panini, “In the 
“Ashtadhyayi Chhanda (Veda) and Bréhman, etc.” It is clear 
iV, 3 from these quotations that the Veda isthe name of 


books distinct from the Brahmands, The Veda is 
what is called the Mantra Sandttd ora collection of mantras, 
whilst the Brdkmanas ace the expositions of those mantras, Those 
who want to know more about this subject can consult our book 
called “ An Introduction to the exposition of the Vedas", wherein 
it is proved on the authority of various kinds of evidence that the 


quar aereeT: AeIrETaNTE: 1 FZ & 1 2H 
weate firerity seh i argey a fro ws kl Se Riey 
etorea rie w afkeariy a rarer 22 1 AR 





ao Lice or Trur#. {Cuar, VIt. 





above quotation quoted as Xatayan's could never be his, Because 
if we believe that, the Vede could never be eternal, for inthe 
Brdéhmanas there are to be found biographies of various Réshis and 
sages, kings and princes ; but since biographies of persons can only 
be written after their birth, the Badkmands that contain those bio- 
graphies must have been written after the birth of those Réshzs and 
kings, etc. and, therefore, can not be eternal. The Veda does not 
contain the biography of any person, on the other hand in it only 
those words are used by which knowledge is made known. There 
is no mention of any proper names or stories of any particular 
event or individual in the Veda, 

O.--How many shdkbds (branches) are there of the Veda? 

A.—Eleven hundred and twenty-seven. 

O.—What are shdkhds (branches) ? 

A.—The expositions are called shdzhds. 

O.—We, hear of learned people speaking of the different parts 
of the Veda as shdkhds. Are they in the wrong ? 


A—If you think over it a little, you will understand that they 
are in the wrong, because all the shdehds are attributed to Rishes 
such as Ashwaldyani and others, whilst the authorship of the Veda 
is ascribed to God. It other words, as the author of the four Vedas 
is believed to be God, so are Rishis held to be the authors of the 
shdkhds, such as Askwaldyani, And besides, all the shdkhds take 
Veda texts' and expound them, while in the Veda texts only are 
given. Therefore, the four Vedas—the books of Divine revela- 
ton—are like the trunk of a tree whose branches (shdkhds) are the 
books, such as Askwaldyani, written by Rishis and not revealed. by 
God.* As the parents are kind to their children and wish for their 
welfare, so has the Supreme Spirit, out of kindness to all men, 
revealed the Veda by whose study men are freed from ignorance 
and error, and may attain the light of true knowledge and thereby 
enjoy extreme happiness as well as advance knowledge and promote 
their welfare. 


1. Just as the Tadéreyshabha begins with the mestre," isha fearye tweli, 
etc.", and then follows the exposition of the sentra. 


2. For further elacidation of this subject, please ses our book “An 
Introduction to the Exposition of the Medes.” 





Cuar, VIE] Licut or Tuts, gt 





O.—Are the Vedas eternal or non-eternal ? 

4.—They are eternal. God being eternal, His knowledge and 
attributes must necessarily be eternal, because the nature attributes 
and character of an eternal substance are also eternal and vice versa, 

0,—lIs this book, called the Veda, also eternal, 

4A.—Oh no, because the book consists only of paper and ink, it 
can never be eternal, but the words, the ideas expressed by 


those words and the relationship between the words and what they 
express are eternal. 


O—Oh, I see. God must have given knowledge to those Rishis 
who afterwards composed the Vedas, Is that what you mean ? 

A.—There can be no ideas without words. No one but an All. 
knowing Being has the power to make such compositions as are full 
of all kinds of knowledge, and require the perfect knowledge of music 
and peetry, meters, such as chhkandas and notes, etc. True, after 
having studied the Veda, the Xishés, in order to elucidate the various 
branches of learning, made books on Grammar, Philology, Music 
and Poetry, etc, Had not God revealed the Veda, no man would 
have been able to write anything. The Vedas, therefore, are 
revealed books. All men should conduct themselves according to 
their teachings, and when questioned as to his religion let every 
one answer that his religion is Vedic, ¢. ¢., he brtieves in whatever is 
said in the Veda. 


‘The subjects of God and the Veda have thus briefly been 
treated. In the next Chapter we shal{ discourse on the 
Creation of the World or Cosmogony. 


THE END oF CHAPTER VII. 


3t 


CHAPTER VIII 
on 
COSMOGONY 
(THE CREATION, SUSTENANCE AND 
DISSOLUTION OF THE UNIVERSE) 





“ HE Who has created this multiform universe, and is the assse 
of its sustenance as well as dissolution, the Lord of the 
universe in whom the whole world exists, is sustained and then 
resolved into elementary condition, is the Supreme Spirit. Know 
Big Veda Him, O man, to be your God and believe in no other 
X, 126, 8 as the Creator of the universe," 

“In the beginning the whole was enveloped in utter darkness. 
Rig Veda Nothing was discernible. St was like a dark night, 
Xp 139, 3 Matter was in its very elementary form. It was 

like ether, The whole universe, completely overspread by darkness, 
was insignificantly small compared with the Infinite God who, 
thereafter, by His Omnipotence, evolved this cosmic world—the 
effect—out of the elementary matter—the cause.” * 

“Love and worship that Supreme Spirit, O men, Who is the 
Rig Veda support ofall the luminous bodies (such as the sun), 
X, 124, 1 the one Incomparable Lord of the present as well 





xa frgtedd wreqa att ra dit ar a tr gearety: 

TER wtaterreete wee Sg af ar or Ae Ho Lo 1 Ho NR Il 

at oritdrartgan what die ad'at Lay | eRe. 

avenftfed, varaterraerciften strate iret te to | 
Howl Aon 

feccarhdard ae qeet gre ata weft! © 

arene fart ory dat wet ard efirdr ferter i ago Nate 
forge Mie 


® It is remarkable that mocern science is slowly but surely coming round to 
what the Vedas teach. The atomic theory is losing ground and the Vedic 
docnine gaining ground day by day. Mark what one of the modern most 
scientists, M. Bernard Brunlhes says :—" Matter which seems to give us the 
image of stability and repose only exists, then, by reason of the rotatry 
Biovement of its particles so that when atoms heve radiated all their energy 
in the form of luminous, calorific, electric and other forms of vibrations, they 
return to the primtive ether."—Bawa DEvaAe 


Cuar, VIL] Licut oF Truta, 243 








as of the future worlds, Who existed even before the world came 
into being, and has created all things that exist in space between 
the earth and the heaven.? 


“OMen, that All-pervading Being alone is the Lord of the 
Yajor Veda imperishable pretriti—the material cause of the 

‘Xr, 3 world—and of the sou! and fs yet distinct from 
both. He is the Creator of the universe—the past, the present 
and the future.” 

“That Supreme Spirit, from Whom all things proceed and in 

Taineya Whom they live and perish, is the All-pervading 


y malshad God. Aspire, O men, to know Him,” 


“That Great God should be sought after, Who is the cause of 
Vedant Shés- the creation, the sustenance and the dissolution of 

tra 1, 1, 2 the universe.” 

O.—Has this universe proceeded from God or from something 
else ? 

A.—God is the efficient cause of this universe, but the material 
cause is prakriti—the primordial elementary matter. 

O.—Has not the prakriti emanated from God ? 

A—No, it is beginningless. 

O.—How many entities are eternal or beginningless ? 

A.—Three—God, the soul, and the praérits, 

O.—What are your authorities for this statement ? 

A.“ Both God and the soul are eternal, they are alike in con- 
sciousness and such other attributes, They are 
associated together—God pervading the soul—and 
are mutual companions. The prakriti, which 


gee qaek oe pay ced greta | semdeeetatir 
aq erred aso HO BIA OT 


oat myers Gor mrrerrfiy ofterfter | 
pla laf lea wane 4 dferetarefer 


Rig Veda. 
I, 164, 20. 





Bom Ci ge te lto wy 
t. Literally the san.—7r. 


244 Lisnt oF Troru. [Cuar, VII1, 





Hkened to the trunk of a tree whose branches are the multiform 
universe which is resolved into its elementary condition at the time 
of di'ssoluéion is also eternal. The natures, attributes and characters 
of these three are also eternal. Of the two—God and the soul—the 
latter alone reaps the fruits of this tree of the universe—good or 
evil— whilst the former does not. He is the All-Glorious Being 
who shines within, without and all around. God, the soul and the 
prakriti, all these are distinct from one another being different in 
thelr natures, but they are all ¢sernai.” 

“The Great God—the King—revealed ali kinds of knowledge 
to the human soul—His eternal subjects—through 


Yajur Veda, 

L, 8 the Veda,” 
“The prakriti, the soul and God, all of them, are uncreated, 
Shweta They are the cause of the whole universe. They 

Pibteradt have no cause and have been existing eternally. 
iv, 5 The eternal soul enjoys the eternal matter and is 


wrapped up in it whilst God neither enjoys it, nor, is He wrapped 
up in it.” 
The attributes of God and the soul have beeen described in the 
Jast chapter. Here we shall treat of the properties of prakriti. 
“That condition of matter in which the intellect-promoting 
Sankhya (satva), passion-exciting (rajss) and stupidity pro- 
Shastra ducing (famas) qualities are found combined in 
Non equal proportions is called prakriti. From prakriti 
emanated the principle of wisdom (Mahdtutva), and from the latter 
proceeded the principle of Individuality (Ahankara) from which 
emanated the five subtle entities and the ten principles of sensation 
and actiow, and the manas, i.e, the principle of attention. From 
the five subtle entities issued forth the five gross entities, such as 





wreadtea: Garena: 1 ayo Wo ve lon 

Seu Geet aces rar Swaret AE: | 
wear wert qerterrasrsras I 
wMaveatrafieft imo gi woul 

SeRCwesTat ETertrent safe: wetter aetregErers- 

Ugg wraerengaatat cqeeanter  eeqerft- 

Ger cle wafeaface: « ergrg io 81 Go Mt 


Cuap. L} LicuT oF Trutu, ry 








matter nor soul possesses such infinite pawerg and 

attributes as Truth, Justice, Mercy, Omnlpotence, 

Omniscience. A thing’ that is true and real, has 

nature, attributes and characteristics also true and 

teal, It behoves, therefore, all men to worahip and 
adore God and God only, none besides Him, because, 
even the men of yore, saints or sinners as Braéma, 

Vishnu, Mahddeva, Daitya, Ddnava, believed in and 

worshipped Him and Him only. They adored no 

other God. We shall take up this subject in detail in 
the chapters on ‘Divine Worship’ and ‘Emancipation’! 
O. The Words such like Mitra should be taken to mean 

Srisnd, etc., and the words like Judra, ¢é., the well- 

known devas? of this visible universe, 

A, No, not here (#. ¢., in the verses such as above, where- 
in prayers are addressed), A man, who is friend to one, 
is an enemy of another and indiflerent toa third person, 
Hence Mitra bere cannot be taken to signify an 
ordinary friend, but it here means God, because He 
is One who is an absolute Friend of all, unfriendly 
or indifferent to none, No man can ever be like 
Him, This is the primary meaning of the word, But 
its secondary meaning is an ordinary friend, 

11, Mitra (from umida to love) means God, because He 
loves all and is worthy of being loved by all, 

12, Varuna (from vurix—good or vara—to desire) is One 
who is best, holiest of all and desired and sought 
after by all righteous, pious and learned men who are 

3 seekers after truth and salvation. 
whet 13. dryama (from re to obtain, to go and mang to res- 
pect) is One who respects or rewards the good and, 
the just, and punishes the wicked—The Great Judge 
who gives souls the fruits of their deeds, good or evil. 
14. Indra (from /di—power) is One who is all-powerful. 
15. Vrthaspati (pa—to protect or govern, Vrthat—great) 
is One who is greatest among the great, and governs 
the entire universe. 


% See Chapters VII and 1X. 


2__ Generally, though wrongly, translated into gads by the orthodox Pyndii 
aad European ‘bolara—7re ” sd Melee 





Cuap. VIII] Licnut or Trurs. 245 





solids, tiquids, etc. These twenty-four entities and the purweA, é.¢., 
the spirit—human and Divine—form a group of twenty-five 
noumena.” Of alt these twenty-four, the sratriti is uncreated, the 
principle of wisdom, the principle of Individuality, and the five subtle 
entities are the products of the praéritf and are in their turn the 
cause of the ten principles of sensation, and action and of the princt- 
ple of attention. The purush—i, ¢., the spirit—is neither the cause 
(material) nor the effect of anything. 
O.—But it is said in the Chtdudogya Upnishad, “ Before Creation 
this universe was existent”; whilst the Tativeya 
Chhandogya Upanishad says, “It was non-existent or nothing.” 
Upnishad, Again the Vritaddranyaka Upnishad (Chapt.1, 4, 
1,) says “It was all spirit”; and lastly the Shatapatha 
Brdkimaya (Chapt, XI, 1, 11, 1,) say's “It was all God (Brakma)" 
and again “by His Own Will the Great God transformed Himself 
into this multiform universe.” In another Upasshad it is written 
‘Taitre “Sarvam khalu, ete”, which means “Verily this whole 
ply ri universe is God, all other things are nothing but God,” 
A.—Why do you pervert the meanings of these quotations ? 
For in those very Upnishads it is said“O Shawetketo, proceed thou 
from effects to causes and learn that préthus' (solids) proceed from 
liquids, d/dh (/iguids) from teya—that condition of matter whose 
properties are heat and light, etc,—-and ¢7a from-the uncreated 
prakriti, This prakriti—the true existence—is the source, abode 
and support of the whole universe.” What you have translated 


eae Qetqay sreiagn Stole RIS ORT 

wear cra wreftey ny ferdarafe o | METTETTS Wye 9H 

erdaqan seit ig cwe imouto til 

wer wr eee erratum MUU L 

attga wg: eat seradier  Srserraa ey: eat rate 4 
Afertarafr o merrqwat | sy o 8H 

oe ace 

qete wy Seat ube Bhagat horelimat 
aver Grea git asa paar ca 

Qretar eek: wer: ererram: Gerfiat it Gwar o 1,0 41 

wWeoniweun 





246 Lica? or TRUTH. (Cuap. VILL 





as “This universe was non-existent” means that it was non- 
existent as universe in this gross physical and visible form, 
But it existed in essence or in elementary from as the eter- 
nal prakrite. It was not nothing, God and the soul also 
were existent, Your quotation which begins with Sarvam shale 
is nothing but a pot-pourrt, for, you have taken parts of two 
verses from two different Upnishads and put them together and 
formed them into one sentence. Sarvam khalu, etc. is taken from 
the Chhdndogya Upmishad (Chapt. Ill, 14, 1) and Nehandnd, 
from the Katha Upnishad (Chap, U1, 4,11). Just as the limbs of 
the body are of use only so long as they from part of it, but become 
useless as soon as they are separated or cut off from it, similarly 
you can get sense out of words or sentences when read in their 
proper places in conjunction with what has gone before and what 
follows them, but they become meaningless as soon as they are 
dislocated from their proper places and joined to others, Now 
mark carefully the true meaning of the above quotation. “ Worship, 
thou, O soul, that Great Being Who is the Creator, the Support, 
and the Life of the universe. It is by His power that the whole 
universe came into being and is sustained, and it is in Him that it 
exists, Worship Him alone and no other. He is an Indivisible, 
Immutable, Conscious Being. There is no admixture ofdifferent 
things in Hin, though all things with their distinct individual 
existence have their being in Him and are sustained by Him.” 

O.—How many causes are there of the Universe ? 

Av~Three—The efficient, the material and the common, The 
efficient cause is one by whose directed activity a thing is made, 
and by the absence of whose directed activity nothing is made. It 
does not change itself, though it works changes in other things. 
The material cause 1s one without which nothing can be made. 
It undergoes changes, is made and un-made. 

‘The common cause is one that is an instrument in the making 
of athing, and is common to many things. The sficent cause is 
of two kinds:— 

The primary efficient cause is the Supreme spirit—the Gover- 


ae efeeg aw he arti el VT SUT A AVATO TORI 


Seite ti ste 
ine wonfts fees | strait ome Ru agte visto (8 


Citar. VEIL] Licut or Trurs. 247 





nor of all, Who creates the universe out of the pratrité, sustains it, 
and then resolves it into its elementary form, 


The secondary efficient cause is the soul, It takes different 
materials out of the universe created by God and moulds them 
into different shapes. 


The material cause is the prakriti which is the materia/ used in 
the making of the universe, Being devoid of intelligence it can 
neither make nor unmake itself, but is always made or unmade by 
a conscious intelligent being; though here and there even one 
kind of dead inert matter is seen to produce changes in another 
kind of dead matter (but those changes are never ordered). Let us 
take an illustration. God made seeds (of different kinds), when 
they fall into a suitable soil and get the proper amount of water 
and nourishment, they develop into trees; but if they come in 
contact with fire they perish. All ordered changes in material things 
depend for their occurrence on God and the soul, 


All such means as knowledge, strength and hands, and instru- 
ments, time and space, that are required for the making of a thing, 
constitute its common cause, 


Now take for illustration a pot. The potter is its efreiené cause, 
clay its saterial cause, whilst the rod, the wheel and other instru- 
ments, time, space, fight, eyes, hands (of the potter), knowledge and 
the necessary labour, etc,, constitute its common cause, Nothing 
can be made or unmade without these three causes, 


The Neo-Vedant sts’ look upon God as the efficient as well as 
the material cause of the universe, but they are absolutely in the 
wrong, 

.—“ Just asa spider does not take in anything from outside, 
Mandaka but draws out filaments from its hody with which it 
‘Upnishad, spins its web and sports about in it, so does God 

Pn 7 evolve the world out of His Own self, becomes 
metamorphosed into it, and enjoys Himself.” 


wereerfar: qt rege W ll AUTeTaPY o Ho 81 
Wotitesll 
1. & #, the modern exponents of the Vede'at Philosophy.—7v. 





248 Licut of TauTH. (Cuar, VIb1. 





“So Barkma desired and willed ‘ Let me assume diverse forms, 
‘The ‘Taitreya in other words, become metamorphosed into the 
ished universe’ and by the mere act of willing He became 

9 transformed into the universe.” 

It is said in the Metrical Commentary of Gaurpdda (on the 
Vedant Apkhorisins), “Whatever did not exist in the beginning 
The G _ and will cease to exist in the end, does not exist in 
dheya Kasika. the present either.” In the beginning the worid did 

- 3 not exist but Brakma did, After the dissolution 
the world will no lenger exist, but Srahua will, Therefore the 
world does not exist even in the present, it is all Brakma. Why is 
not the univese Brahma then? 

A-—I\f, as you say, Brakma (God) were the material cause of 
the universe, He would become transformable, conditioned aud 
changeable, Besides, the natures, attributes and characteristics of 
a material cause are always transmitted to its effect. Says the 

; ; Vaisheshika Darshna, “The effect only reveals 
‘Veishesbik whatsover pre-existed in the (material) cause.” How 

ae could then Bradma and the material world be re- 
lated as :materia:) cause and effect? They are so dissimilar in their 
natures, attributes and characteristics, Why ! Brd4ma is the Personi- 
fication of true existence, consciousness and bliss, whilst the 
materia) universe is ephemeral, inanimate and devoid of bliss, 
Brakma is Uncreated, Invisible, whilst the material world is 
created, divisible and visible. Had the material objects, such 
as solids, been evolved out of Brahma He would possess the same 
attributes asthe material objects, Just as solids and other material 
things are dead and inert, so would Brahma be, or the material 
objects would possess consciousness just as Brahua does, Moreover 
the illustration of a spider and its web does not prove your conten- 
tion. Instead it disproves it, because the material body of 
the spider is the material cause of the filaments, whilst the soul 
within is the efficient cause.1 In the same way, the All-pervading 


amrqrerett Ree See se 0 Sreantte efter 





war o 28 Il 
ereegeyie: qredgar ce: &8ften ok) wet 
te It also Rlustrates the wonde sere ita of Gea had tt seal oo 


not draw out filaments from the bodies of other creatures. 


Car. VIILJ LickT or Truts. 249 








God has evolved this gross visible universe out of the subtle, 
visible prakrit? that resided in Him. He pervades the universe 
and witnesses all, and is perfect Bliss. The text you have translat- 
ed into “God desired and willed ‘Let me assume diverse forms, 
ete,’” really means that God mentally saw, contemplated and willed 
‘Let me create the multiform universe and become revealed’; 
because it is only after the world has been created that God be- 
comes contemporaneous with the various gross physical objects and 
is revealed to the human souls in their meditations, thoughts, 
knowledge, preachings and hearings. At the time of Déssolution 
fo one except Himself and the emancipated souls know Him, The 
aphorism, you have quoted, is erroneous ; because, though it is 
true that before Creation, the universe did not exist in this gross 
visible condition, nor will it exist in this form from the Déssolutéon 
onwards till the beginning of the next Creation, yet it was not n0- 
thing, nor will it be, Before Creation it existed ina subtle invisible 
elementary form, so will it be after Dissolution, Says the Rig Veda 
“In the beginning it was all darkness”, the whole universe was 
enveloped in utter darkness.” Again says Mane “In 
Reyes the beginning this universe was enshrouded in 
% Maso darkness. It was neither definable, nor discoverable 
15 by reason, Neither did it possess any physical 
signs, nor was it, therefore, perceptible by the senses,” 
Nor shall it be after the beginning of, or, during the period of 
Dissolution. But at the present time it is definable, posscased of 
visible signs and characteristics, and therefore perfectly discernable 
by the senses, and yet that commentator declared the non-existence 
of the world in the present, which is absolutely invalid. Because 
whatever a person knows on the authority of direct cogmifion and 
other evidences cannot be nothing, 
O.—What object had God in creating the world ? 
A.—What object cold He have in not creating it? 


0.—Had He not created it, He would have lived in happiness ? 
besides, the souls would have remained free from pleasure and pain 
and the like, 


wreiftg 1 
smreretnfved mguitre ade: 4 u aye ty u 
32 


250 Licut oF Trurs. (Cuap, VIH. 








4.—These are the ideas of the lazy and the indolent, but not of 
men of energetic and active habits, What happiness could the 
souls enjoy during the period of Dissolution? if the happiness and 
misery of this world were compared, it will be found that the 
happiness is many times greater then the misery, Besides, many 
@ pure soul that adopts the means of obtaining salvation attains 
final beatitude; whilst during the period of Dissolwtron the souls 
simply remain idle as in deep sleep. Moreover had He not created 
this world, how could He have been able to award souls 
their deserts, and how could they have reaped the fruits of thelr 
deeds—good and evil—done in the previous cycle of Creation? ? 
If you were asked what is the function of the eyes, you can only 
say‘sight of course’ In the same way, of what use could the 
knowledge, activity, and power of creating the world be in God 
other than that of creating? Nothing else. The attributes of God, 
such as justice, mercy, the power of sustaining the world, can have 
significance only when He makes the world. His Infinite power 
bears fruit only when it is applied to the creation, sustenance, 
government and dissolution of the universe, Just as sight is the 
natural function of the eye, so are the creation of the world, the 
free gift of all things to the souls and promoting the well-being of 
all the natural attributes of God. 


O.—Was the seed made first or the tree? 

A.—The seed ; because, the seed, cause 9 Hetu (source), Niddna 
Nimesta (origin), etc., are all synonymous terms, The cause, being 
also called the seed, must precede the effect. 

Q.—God being Omnipotent, He can also create prakréti—the 
primordial matter—and the soul, IfHe can not, He cannot be 
called Omnipotent. 


A,—We have explained the meaning of the word Omnipotent 
before, But does Onenipotest mean one who can work even impos- 
sibilities. If there be one who can do even such impossible things 
as the production of an effect without a cause, then can He make 
another God, Himself die, suffer pain, become dead and Inert, 
inanimate, unjust, impure and immoral or not? Even God can- 
not change the natural properties of things. as heat of the fire, 





1. That is, one preceding the last Creation, 


Car. VIIL] Licat or Trura. 251 





fluidity of liquids and inertness ofearth, etc. His laws being true 
and perfect, He cannot alter them. Omipotence, therefore, only 
means that He possesses the power of doing all his works without 
any help. 

O.—Is God formless or embodied? If he be formless, how 
could He create the world without bodily organs? Of course an 
objection like this cannot be urged if He be embodied, 

A.—God is formless. He cannot be God who possesses a body; 
because he would then have finite powers, be limited by time and 
space, be subject to hunger and thirst, heat and cold, wounds and 
injuries, pain and disease. Such a being may possess the arributes 
or powers of the soul, but no Divine attributes could be ascribed to 
him ; since incarnate God could never grasp and control the 
primordial elementary matter—the pratriti—atoms and molecules, 
nor could he create the world out of those subtie elements, just as 
we, being embodied in flesh, cannot grasp or control them. God 
does not possess a physical body or bodily organs, such as hands 
and fect, though he does possess Infinite power, Infinite energy and 
Infinite activity, by virtue of which He does all those works that 
neither matter, nor the soul cando. It is only because He is 
even more subtle than the soul and the prakrité, and pervades them, 
that He can grasp them and transform them into this visible 
universe, 

O.~if God be formless, this world created by Him should also 
be formless, just as in the case of other living beings, such as men, 
—the children have bodies like their parents. Had they been form- 
less, their children would have been the same. 


A.—What a childish question! We have already stated that 
God is not the material cause of the universe. He is only its efficient 
cause. It is prakrit? and paramanus—the premordial clementry 
matter and atoms,—which are less subtle than God, that are the 
material cause of the world. They are not altogether formless 
but are subtler than other material objects, while less subtle as 
compared with God. 


0,—Cannot God create an effect without a cause ? 


A-—No ; because that which does not exist (in any form) can- 
not be cailed into existence. It is absolutely impossible. It is as 


as Licut or Truts. [Crar. Vitl. 





touch impossible for an effect to be produced without its cause as 
the story of a man, who would brag in the following way, to be 
true, “I saw amananda woman being married whose mothers 
never bore any children. They had boys made of human-horns, 
and wore garlands of ethereal flowers, They bathed in the water 
of mirage and lived in a éown of angels where it rained without 
clouds, and cereals and vegetables grew without any soil, etc,” or 
“1 bad neither father nor mother and yet came into being. I have 
no tongue in my month and lo! I can speak, There was no 
snake in the hole and yet one came out of it. 1 was nowhere, 
Nor were these people, and yet we are all here.” Only lunatics 
can believe and say such things. 
O.—If there can be no effect without a cause, what is the cause 
of the first cause ther. 
dA.—Whatsoever is an adsoiuse cause, can never be an effect of 
another, but that which is the cause of one and the effect of another 
is called a relative cause, Take an example. The earth is the cause 
of a house but an effect of liquids’, but the first cause, prukrit’ has 
no other cause, vés., it is beginningless or eternal. Says the Sdnthye 
Darshang, “The first canse having no cause is the 
Statiye cause of ail effects.” Every effect must have three 
causes before it comes into existence ; just as before 
a piece of cloth can be made, it must have three things—the weaver, 
the thread and the machinery, in the same way the creation of the 
world pre-supposes the existence of God, the prakrits, the souls, 
time and space which are all uncreated and eternal. There would 
be no world if even one of them were absent, 


The various objections of atheists are answered below. 


(i) O.—Shsinya (nought or nothing) is the one true reality, in 
the beginning there was nothing but shinya, and shinya will suc- 
vive in the end ; because whatever now exists will cease to exist 
and become shdnya, 


qe qaraenrget qe i Gfewg ol wo tio wil 
sm onftesr wig—ort met sri freref wey. 
earfinnaer § ateug oo fi ge tes 


+ Liquids are the causes of solids as they precede them in the order of 
formation.” ‘The earth is a solid. — TP, ~~ : 








Crap, VIIL} Lidar of Tavis. 233 

A—The ether, an invisible substance (such as prehrifi), the 
space and a point are also called skséaye, It is inanimate and all 
things invisibly exist in it. Lines are made up of points, while 
circles, aquares, etc., are made up of lines. Thus has God, by the 
might of His creative power, evolved the earth, mountains and 
objects of all other shapes and forms out of a point or nebula— 
shinya, Besides, he who knows skéaya cannot be shuaye 
(nothing). [Hence shunya docs not here mean nothing but a point or 
a nebula.) 

(ii) O.—Something can come out of nothing, just as a seed 
does not germinate and send forth a sprout until it is split, but 
when you break a seed and look into it, you do not find any sprout 
in it, It is clear then that the sprout comes out of nothing, 

A—That which splits a seed before it germinates, must have 
already been present in the seed, otherwise what causes the seed 
to split? Nor would it have come out had it not been there, 

(ili) O.—It is not true ‘As you sow so shall you reap” Many 
an act is seen that does not bear fruit ; therefore it is right to infer 
that it entirely rests with God to punish or reward a man for his 
deeds, it absolutely depends upon His wish. 

A—If it were so, why does not God reward or punish a man 
for deeds he has never done? It follows, therefore, that God gives 
every man his due according to the nature of his deeds, God does 
not reward or punish men according to the caprice of bis Will. On 
the other hand, He makes a man reap only what he has sown, 

(iv) O.—Effects can be produced without a cause just as the 
sharp thorns of Acacia Arsbica-spring out of branches that are not 
at allsbarp and pointed but are soft and smooth, It is clear from 
this illustration, therefore, that in the beginning of Creation all 
material objects and bodies of living beings come into being with- 
out a (first) cause. 


deere: ere gewerrinerqsrre 
afirireat artrafr: eqoetwrnfiggders 
entafeengeafefterestecrry i 





ag4 Lieny or Trure. [Cuap. Vii. 





4.--Whatever a thing springs from, is its cause. Thorns do 
not come out of nothing. They come out of a thorny tree, therefore, 
that tree is their cause. Hence the world was not created without 
a cause. 

(v; O.—All things have been created and are liable to decay. 
They are all ephemeral. The Veo-vedentists put forward objections 
like this, because they say “Thousands of books support the 
doctrine that Brahma alone is the true reality, the world is a 
delusion and the soul is not distinct from Brahma (God) All else 
is unreal.” 

A Ali can not be unreal if the fact of their being unreal is real, 


Q.—Even the fact of their being unreal is unreal, Just as fire 
not only burns other things and thus ‘destroys them, but is itself 
destroyed after others have been destroyed. 

A.—That which is perceptible by the senses cannot be unreal or 
nothing, nor can the extremely subtle matter—the material cause of 
the world—be unreal or perishable. The A’eo-Vedantists hold 
Brahma as the (material) cause of the universe ; He—the cause— 
being real, the world—the effect—can not be unreal. Ifit were 
said that the material world is only a material conception and, 
therefore, unreal like the objects seen in a dream or like a piece of 
rope seen in the dark and mistaken for a snake, it cannot be true; 
because a conception or an ideais something abstract which can- 
not remain apart from the noumenon wherein it resides, When 
one that conceives (vis, the soul) is real, the conception cannot be 
unreal, otherwise you will have to admit that the sou! is also unreal. 
You cannot see a thing in a dream unless you have seen or heard 
of it in the wakeful state, in other words, when the various objects 
of this world come in contract wlth our senses, they give rise to 
percepts called knowledge by direct cognstion—which leave smpres- 
sions on our souls, it is these impressions which are recalled by, and 
become vivid to the soul in dreams, If it be possible for a man to 
dream of things of which he has had no impressions in his mind, a 
man born blind, should dream of colours which is not the case, It 








Rarerda xweritr age wertritin | 
me wet wera, treat aftr mie rec: a 


LIGHT OF TRUTH. (Cuar. L 





16, 


17. 


18, 


19 
20. 


21, 


: af 


25. 


26, 


Vishnu (Vishri—to pervade) is One who pervades all 
the universe, animate and inanimate. 

Urukramd (u1u—great, krama—energy) is One who pos- 
sesses infinite energy. 

Brahma (uriha or vriki—to lord) is One who lords over 
all, 

Bhumi is One who is the abode of all and greater than all, 

Surya is One who is the life and light of the universe, 
animate or inanimate. 

A’tma (ata—to pervade) is One who pervades the soul as 
well as the material universe, 

Paramdimd (para—great, dimd see above) is One who is 
holier than the soul, subtler and more powerful than the 
soul and matter, who pervades and controls the soul, 


Parameshwar (Param—great, I’shwara—powerful, see 
No, 7) is One who is All-powerful among the powerful, 
Almighty, 

Savitd (shun—to create) is One who isthe Creator of the 
universe, 

Deva (from the root diva, which means to operate, desire 
to win, work, illuminate, praise, please, punish, sleep, 
desire and know) is One who operates in the universe 
and governs it and does all His works by His Own 
powers without help from others; Who desires or helps 
the good and the righteous to win and is Himself in- 
vincible, gives all power and means to work; Who 
knows everything and is just and glorious, illuminates 
and enlightens all, is worthy of praise, All-btissful, 
bestows happiness on others, punishes the wicked and 
gladdens the hearts of the good and Himself enjoys 
perpetual bliss ; Who has ordained night for all to sleep 
and rest, and is the cause of dissolutron, when He causes 
souls to rest in the indefinable, imperceptible, primeval 
elementary matter—prakrati; Whose willis holy and 
Who is desired and sought after by the good, and Who 
pervades all and knows all. 

Kuvera (kuvi—to cover or spread) is One who covers all 
of overspreads all, 


Cuap, VIL) Lice? or Trurs. 255 





follows, therefore, that in the mind are retained impressions and 
ideas of external things that exist in the outside world. And just 
as external things continue to exist even after a man ceases to have 
any consciousness of them as in sound seep, so does prakrits—the 
material cause of the world—continue to exist ever after Dissolution. 

O,—~As the external objects pass out of our consciousness in 
shumber and those seen in a dream in the state of profound sleep, 
&¢, perish as far as we are concerned, in the same way why not 
believe that the external things seen in the wakeful state are also 
unreal ? 

4A—No, we cannot believe that ; because both in s/wmder and 
profound sleep the external objects only pass out of our concious- 
ness. They do not cease to exist, just as different things lying 
behind us are simply invisible to us but are there, and have not 
ceased toexist, Therefore, what we have said before, that God, the 
soul and the prakriti—the material cause—are three real entities, 
is alone true, 

(vi) O.—The five b4¢s—the five states of matter as Pritu! Apah, 
ete,—being eternal, the whole world is eternal or imperishable. 

A.—No it is not true ; because if all those objects, the cause of 
whose formation or disintegration is seen every day, be eternal, the 
whole material visible world with all such perishable things as the 
bodies of men and animals, houses, and their furniture and the like 
would be eternal, which is absurd. Therefore, the effects can 
never be eternal. 

(vil) O.—AND things are distinct from each other. There is no 
unity in them. Whatever we see precludes another. 


A.— The whole exists in its parts. Time, ether, space, God, and 
Order and Genus, though separate entities, are yet common to all, 
There is nothing that can exist separate from or without them. 
Hence all these are not separate from each other, though they are 
different by nature. Thus there is unity in variety, 


xk Fred wearer fers I 
ee Gey rTPA TRATT t 
caterer araftweterermreftrat: 1 PeTAG © Neto Wire ta 








256 Licur oF Truts. (Crap, VIE. 


. (viii) O—Al things exclude each other, and are therefore son- 
existent, just as a cow Is wot a horse, sor is a horse a cow. There- 
fore, both the horse and the cow are son-ertstent. Similarly, all 
things are as if won-existent, 


A—Though it is true that the ‘relation of one thing excluding 
others does exist in all things, but a thing does sot exclude séseif, 
For example, a cow is not a horse, nor is a horse a cow ; but a cow 
as a cow and a horse asa horse do exist. li things were non- 
existent, how could you ever speak of this /éretardbhdva relation of 
things, #. ¢., ‘the relation of one thing excluding others from itself.’ 
[Hence the world and things contained therein do exist. They 
are not non-existent}, 


{ix) 0.--The world comes into being by virtue of the fact that 
it is in the nature of things to combine together and produce differ- 
ent things, Just as maggots are produced by the coming together 
of food, moisture and by decomposition setting in ; or as vegetables 
begin to grow when the seed, water, and soil are brought together 
under favourable conditions ; or as the wind blowing on the sea is 
the cause of waves that in turn produce merchaum, which mixed 
with turmeric, lime ane lemon juice forms what is called conerete, 
$0 does this world come into being by virtue of the natural pro- 
petties of the elements. There is no Creator. 


A.—~If formation be the natural property of master, there would 
be no dissolution or disintegration , and if you say that disintegration 
is also a natural property of matter, there could then be no /orma- 
tion, But if you say that both formation and disintegration are the 
natural properties of matter, there could then be neither /ormation 
nor dis-integvation, If you say that an efficient agent is the cause of 
the creation and dissolution of the world, it must be other than 
and distinct from the objects that are subject to formation and 
disintegration, { formation and disintegration be the natural pro- 
perties of matter, they may happen at any and every moment. 
Besides, if there is no Maker and the world came into being by 
virtue of the natural properties inherent in matter, why do not 
other earths, suns and moons come into existence near our earth? 
Moreover, whatever now grows or comes into being, does so by 
virtue of the combination of different substances—made by God, 
Just ax plants grow wherever the water, the soil and the seed come 


Chap. VL] Licitr or Trott. aby 





in contact under favourable conditions, and not otherwise ; in the 
6ame way in the manufacture of concrete, its components such as 
turmeric, lime, lemon juice and merchaum do not come together 
by themselves, but are mixed together by some one, nor do they 
produce concrete unless mixed in the right proportion. Similarly, 
the prabriti and atoms, until they are properly combined by God 
with the requisite knowledge and skill, cannot by themselves pro- 
duce anything. It follows, therefore, that the world did’not come 
into being by itself, # ¢, by virtue of the natural properties of 
matter, but was created by God. 


O.—This world has had no Creater, nor is there one at present, 
nor, small there ever be one. It has been eternally existing as 
such. It was never created nor shall it ever perish. 


A.—No action or thing—which is the product of an action—can 
ever come into existence without an ageut. All objects of this 
world such as the-earth, are subject to the processes of formation, 
that is, are the product of definite combination, They can never 
be eternal, because a thing which is the product of combination 
can never exist after its component parts come asunder, If you 
do not believe it, take the hardest rock or a diamond or a piece of 
steel and smash it into pieces, melt or roast it and see for your. 
self if it is composed of separate particles, called molecules and 
atoms, or not, If it is, then surely a time will come when those 
molecules will come apart. 

O.—There is no Eternal God, on the other hand a highly exalt- 
ed soul, that by the practice of yoga attains such powers as the 
control of atoms, etc., and omniscience, becomes God. 

4A,—Had there been no Eternal God, the Creator of the universe, 
Who would have made the bodies, the sense organs and all other 
objects of this world, the very support and means of subsistence of 
the yagi, by means of which he comes to possess such wonderful 
powers? Without their help no one can endeavour to accomplish 
anything. The endeavour being impossible how could he bave 
acquired those wonderful powers? Whatsoever efforts a man may 
make, whatsoever means he may employ, whatsoever powers he may 
acquire, be can never equal God in His safural—in contradistine- 
tion to the soul’s acguired—Everlasting or Eternal powers which 
are infinite and manifold; because, the knowledge of the soul, 

33 


258 Lucat oF Trutn. [(Cuav. VIL. 





even if it were to goon improving till eternity, will still remain 
futte and his powers dimited, Its power and knowledge can never 
become infinite, Mark, no yogi has ever been able to subvert the 
Jawa of nature as ordained by God, nor ever shall, God-—the 
Eternal Seer—possessed of wonderful powers has ordained that 
eyes shall be the organs of sight, and ears the organs of hearing. 
No yogs can ever alter this order, The human soul can never 
become God. 

O.—In different cycles of Creation does God make the universe 
of a uniform or of a different character? 

A.—Just as it is now, so was it in the past, so will it be in the 
future. Itis said in the Veda“ Just as God created the sun, the 
earth, the moon, the electricity, the atmosphere in the previous 

Rig Veda cycles, so has He done in the present and so will 

%, 160, 5 He do in the future.” God’s works, being free from 
error or flaw, are always ofa uniform character, Jt is only the 
works of one who is finiteand whose knowledge is subject to 
increase or decrease that can be erroneous or faulty, not those 
of God, 

O.—Do the Veda and the Sidstras harmonize with or contra. 
dict one another on the subject of Creation? 

A—They harmonize. 

O.—Ifthey harmonize, why is it that in the Zustreya Upanishad 
Creation is described in the follwing manner? “Out of prabrité 

. —the elementary material cause of the world-——God 

BL acer first created Addsk.? Then was evolved Vdyu— 
Brahmanand, gaseous or vaporous condition of matter; out of 
: Vdyu preceeded Agni—matter which gives out 


Aautergaet arr dargideerag! fea! qfirtt qve- 

fogadt or konto fol qo tolHo 8 

SRT TATE SSI: AT: | BREA: | wT 

cfte: | were | fs erat trea site: | sireftr- 

‘serSeT | rete: | gen 1S arae getswcena a 
dherdarefre marMET o wy oth 

he borne pans ail w be io a ao wll se space tacos matt 


Tn reality bet js never created, becatese if there ware 0 A'kosh and space, 
wherein cou'd the predritd exist ¥ ‘ 


Cnar. VIII} Licnt oF True. 259 





heat, light and electricity—Out of Agni proceeded Liguids ; and 
out of Légaids came solids (such as the earth) ; out of solids issued 
forth vegetables which yielded food. Food produced the reproductive 
dement which is the cause of physical body and bcde’y orgons.” In 
the Chhdadogya itis written that Creation begins with Age, in 
the Attreya Upnishad that it begins with Liguids. In the Veda 
itself in some places Purush, while in others Hiranya garbh bas 
been described as the cause of the universe; whilst in the Mfimdnsd 
action or application, in Vaiskeshtka time, i Niydya paramanus— 
atoms, in Yoga conscious exertion, in Sankhya praksiti—the primos- 
dia) clementery matter,—in Vedent, God. Now out of all these 
which is right and which wrong ? 

A.—They are all right, not one of them is wrong. He is in the 
wrong who misunderstands them. God is the efficient cause and 
prakriti the material cause of the universe. After Mahdpralaya— 
Grand dissolution—the next Creation starts with Aédsh, In Sfinor 
Dissolution when disintegration does not reach the stage of Vayu 
and Akdsh but reaches only that of Agni, the next Creation begins 
with Agai, But when after Dissolution in which even Agni—elec- 
tricity—is not disintegrated, the next creation begins with Liguéds. 
In other words the next Creation starts at where the previ- 
ous Dessolution ends. Purush and Hiranyagrabka, as we have 
described in the first chapter, are the names of God. Nor is there 
contraricty in the description of creation given in the six Shdstras, 
because what is contrariety but contradiction of statements 
when the subject under discussion is the same. Now mark 
how the descriptions of six Sédsfras harmonize with each 
other, The SMimdnsa says “Nothing in this world can be produced 
without proper application.” The Varskeshika says"Nothing can 
be done or made without the expenditure of time." The Nipdya 
says “Nothing can be produced without the material cause.” The 
Yoga says “ Nothing can be made without the requisite s#s//, Anow- 
ledge and thought.” The Sdukhya says “Nothing can be made with- 
out the definite combination of atoms.” The Veddxt suys “Nothing 
can be made without a Meter.” This shows that the Creation of 
the world requires six different causes which have been described 
separately one by each separate Sédstra, There is no contradic- 
tion in these descriptions, The six Sédsfras together serve to ex- 
plain the phenomenon of Creation in the same way as six men 


260 . Ligut or TRurTH. (Cua. VIN 





would help each other to put a thatch on the roof of a house. A 
man took six men—five of them blind and the sixth possessed of 
dim sight—and showed them each a different part of the body of 
an elephant, and then asked them whai they thought the animal 
was like. The first one answered ‘ike a pillar’, the second ‘dite a 
Jan’, the third ‘dike a big pestid, the fourth ‘ like a broomstick’, the 
fifth ‘dike something flat; and the sixth one said‘ something dark 
dike four pillars supporting the body of a buffalo’ Similar to these 
six men is the condition of those men who, instead of studying the 
books of sishis—the true seers of nature—,read the current Sass- 
&rit or vernacular books written by narrow-minded men of little 
understanding who malign each other and wrangle over triflings, 
Why should they not suffer who are the blind followers of the 
blind? The tives of half-educated, selfish, sensual and case-loving 
men of to-day help to ruin and debase the world, 

O.—Why should acause not have a cause, if there can be no 
effect without a cause? 

A.—O ye simple brethren! Why do you not use your common 
sense a little? Mark, there are only two things in this world, a 
cause and an effect. Whatsoever is a cause (absolute) can never 
be an effect; and whatsoever is an effect can never be a cause at 
the same time. As long as a man does not thoroughly understand 
the science of Creation, he can never have a true conception of the 
universe. 7 

“The condition of matter in which intellect-promoting (satva) 
passion-existing (rajas) and stupidity-producting (temas) qualities 
are found combined in equa! proportions is the uncreated, imperish- 
able prakriti, The first combination of the highly subtle, indivis- 
ible separately-existing particles called fa: amanss (atoms)! derived 
from the prakrits, is called the Beginning (of Creation). The various 
combinations of atoms in different proportions and way's give 
rise to various grades and condition—subtle and gross—of 
matter till it reaches the gross visible multiform stage called 
Srishti—the universe.” 





a, I have translated the word Jarama'ny’s i toms, it 
be more correct to translate the word inelectrone Tr, bi as 


Cuap. VIIL) * Licut oF TRUTH. +268 








Now that which enters into the first combination and brings it 
about, existed before the combination, and shall exist after the 
component parts are pushed asunder is called the cawse, Whilst 
that which comes into existence after the combination, and ceases 
to exist after it has come to an end is called the effect, He who 
wants to know the cause of a cause, the effect of an effect, the 
maker of a maker, the agent of an agent, and the act of an act, is 
blind though he sees, is deaf though he hears, and is ignorant 
though well-read, Can there ever be the eye of an eye, the lamp 
of a Jamp, and the sun of a sun? That out of which something Is 
made is called a cawse, Whatever is made from another is called 
an effect. Whoever produces an effect out of a cause is called the 
maker, 


Nothing can ever become something, nor can something ever 

B Gita become sothing, These two principles have been 

iI, 16. rightly ascertained by the true seers of nature,” How 
can prejudiced, sophisticated, insincere, and ignorant minds under- 
stand them so easily? He who is neither well-read nor associate 
with the good and the learned, nor meditates on these abstruse 
subjects with profound attention, remains immersed in doubt and 
ignovance, Blessed are they who studiously endeavour to under. 
stand the principles of all sciences and having mastered them, 
teach others honestly. 


It is clear, therefore, that he who believes this world to have 
been created without a cause really knows nothing. 


When the time of Creation comes, God gathers those extremely 
subtle particles (called Paramdnus). The first principle that is pro- 
duced out of the highly subtle elementary prehriti, is called Mahd- 
tatva—the principle of wisdom—which is one degree less subtle than 
the prakriti, Out of Makdtatua is evolved Ahankdra—the principle 
of individuality—which is stil! less subtie and in its turn gives rise 
to the five subcle principles, called Bhuts, besides the five principles 
of sensation’ and the five prices oh actien’ and the principle of 


wera freed arte erent Fred ee: | 
watreft evverenrritrerereftiftn u wereg ste we 21 88h 


i, # ¢, 0f Hearing, seeing, smell, taste and touch. i 
2. #4: Of Speech, grasp, locomstian, reproduction and excretion. 





a2 Liout or Trurs. (Cuar. VITL 








attention, which are alla little less subtle than the principle of in- 
dividuality? The five subtle déués, by passing through various 
stage of less subtle conditions of matter, are finally transformed 
into five least subtle states of matter, such as solids, liquids, ete, 
From the latter spring op various kinds of trees, plants, ete, which 
are the source of food, and out of food is produced the reproductive 
lament which is the cause of the body. But the first creation (of 
bodies) was not the result of sexual intercourse ; because it is only 
after the male and female bodies have been created by God and 
souls put into them that the Masthund (/.¢.,by sexual intercourse) 
creation begins. Behold the Wonderful organization of the body ! 
How the learned are wonderstruck with it? First there is the 
oaseous frame-work girt with a net-work of vessels—veins, arteries 
and nerves, etc,—invested with flesh, and the whole covered by 
skin with its appendages—nails and hairs. Then how beautifully are 
the diflerent organs, such as the heart, the liver, the spleen and the 
jungs—the ventilating apparatus—laid out. The formation of the 
brain, of the optic nerve with the most reticulate formation of the 
retina, the demarking of the paths of sedryas—the principles of 
sensation and action—, the linking of the goul with the body, the 
assigning of definite places to it for wakeful state, slumber and deep 
sleep, the formation of different kinds of dkdtts—tiswes and secre- 
tions, such as muscle, bone-marrow, blood, reproductive elements— 
and the construction of various other wonderful structures and me+ 
chanisms in the body who but God could have caused? The earth 
studded with various kinds of precious stones and metals, the seeds 
of trees of a thousand different kinds' with their wonderfully ex- 
quisite structures, leaves with myriads of different colours® and 
shades, flowers, fruits, roots, rhizomes and cereals with various 
scents and flavours® none but God could create, Nor could any 
one except God create myriads of earths, suns, moons and other 
heavenly bodies, and sustain, revolve and regulate them, 

An object when perceived produces two kinds of knowledge in 
the mind of the observer, vis,, of the sature of the object itself and 
of its waker. For example, a man found a beautiful ornament in a 
jungle. On examination he saw that it was made of gold and that 

t. Such as Banysn tree, etc as 


a, Such as green, white, yellow, dart, be-spotted and other mized colours, 
5: Soch ass dwest, alkane, ealsh, Lister, astringent, sharp ead ack’, 


Crap, VILE] Licut oF TRUTH. 263 





it must have been made by a clever goldsmith. Inthe same way, 
the wonderful workmanship and execution of this wonderful 
universe prove the existence of its Maker. 


O.—What was first created, man or earth, etc.? 


A.—The earth, etc, because without them where could man 
live and how could he maintain his life? 

O—Was one man created in the beginning of Creation or 
more than one? 

A,—More than one ; because souls, that on account of their pre- 
vious good actions deserve to be born in the Aishwari—not the 
result of sexual intercourse—Creation, are born in the beginning 
of the world, It is said in the Veda “(in the beginning) there 
were born many men as well as réshis, &, ¢., learned 
seers of nature, They were progenitors of the 
human race.” On the authority of this Vedic text it is certain 
then that in the beginning of Creation hundreds and thousands 
of men were born. By observing nature vith the aid of reason 
we come to the same conclusion, vss., that men are descended from 
many fathers and mothers (#¢., not from one father and one 
mother), 


O.~In the beginning of Creation were men created as children, 
adults or old people or in all these condition ? 


A.—They were all adults, because had God created them as 
children they would have required adults to bring them up, and 
had he created them as old men, they would not have been able 
to propagate the race, therefore He created them adults. 


O,—Has Creation ever had a beginning ? 


A—No ; just asthe night follows the day and the day follows 
the night, the night precedes the day and the day precedes the night, 
so does Creation follow Dissoluticn and Dissolution follow Crea- 
tion, Dissolution precede Creation, and Creation precede Dissolution. 
This alternate process has been eternally going on. it has neither a 
beginning, nor an end, but just as the beginning and end of a day 
or of a night are seen, so do Creations and Dissolutions have 
beginnings aswell asends, God, the soul and sradviti—the 
primordial elementary matter—are eternal by. nature, whilst Crom 
tion, and Dissclution are-eiernal by pravdh— 4. 6, they follow each 


Yajur Veda, 


64 Licst or TRUTH. [Cwap, VII 





other in alternate succession—like the flow of a river which is not 
continuous throughout the whole year. It dries up and disappears 
in summer, and reappears in the rainy season. Just as the nature, 
attributes, and character of God are eternal, so are His works--the 
Creation, Sustenance, and Dissolution (of the world), 

O—God put some souls in human bodies, while others he 
clothed with the bodies of ferocious animals such as tigers, others 
with those of cattle, such as cows, others with those of birds and 
insects, others stil! with those of plants. Does not this belief 
impute partiality to God ? 

A,—No, it does not impute any partiality, because He put 
those souls into the bodies they deserved according to deeds done 
in the previous birth. Had He done so without any consideration 
as to the nature of their deeds, He would have been unjust indeed. 


O,—Where was man first created ? 
A—la Trivishtap otherwise called Tibet. 


O.—Were all men of one class or divided into different classes 
at the time of Creation ? 


A.—They all belonged to one class, o#s., that of man, but later on 
they were divided into two main classes,—the good and the wiched, 
The good were called Avyas and the wicked Dasyus, Says the Rig 
Veda," Do ye know (thére are) two classes of men—Aryas and 
Dasyus” The good and learned were also called Devas, while the 
ignorant and wicked, such as dacoits, were called Asura, The 
Aryas were again divided into four Classes, vis., Brdkmana, Kshatriya, 
Vaiskya and Skudra, Those who belonged to the first three CVasses 
being well-educated and bearing good character, were called Dztias 
=<the twice-born ; whilst the fourth Class was so named because of 
being composed of ignorant and illiterate persons, They were also 
called Asaryas—not good. This division into Aryas and Shudres 
is supported by the Atharva Vede wherein it is said “Some are 
Aryas, others Shudras." 

O.—How did they bappen to come here (to India) then ? 


A—-When the relations between the Azyas and Dasyus, or 
between Devas and Asuras, ( 1.2, between the good and learned, and 
the ignorant and wicked) developed into a constant state of warfare, 


Cuap, 1] LicuT oF Truru. c mu 





27. Prithsvf (pratk~to spread) One who has spread this 
extensive universe, 

28. Jala (jala—to beat) One who beats or punishes the 
wicked and beats the atoms into shape, or beats them 
asunder in the Creation or Dissulution of the universe, 
respectively, 

29. Abkdsk (kaskri—to illuminate or enlighten) is One who 
illuminates or enlighter.s the whole world, 

30. Anna and atta (from adw to eat) is One who eats or 

Taitreya absorbs into Himself or contains the universe, ani. 


Upnishad, uf mate an‘J inanimate. As grubs are born in the in- 

Vedant Shas Side of the fruit of a Fig tree, live and die in the 

tral, 29 same, so is the universe born, lives and perishes? in 
God. 


31. Vast (vasa—to abide or dwell) is One who dwells in all 
things, and is the abode of all. 

32. Rudra (Rudri—to shed tears), is One who makes the 
wicked and the unjust shed tears. It is said in the 
Skatapatha Brakmana “Whatever a man thinks, he 
speaks ; whatever he speaks, the same he acts ; whatever 
he acts, he reaps”. In other words, a man reaps what- 
ever he sows. When the wicked suffer pain in conse- 
quence of their sins at the hand of Divine Justice, they 
wail and weep. He is, therefore, called Rudva. 

33. Ndrdyana (Nard—water and souls, dyana—abode) sig- 

nifies, God, because He is the abode of souls and 
Mant, 1) 10, pervades them. 

34. Chandra (chadi—to please)is One who is All-bliss, and 

gives pleasure and happiness to others. 


eraser a aenfy aerTqw’ AEST Hf It 
t On 


Whe o seh ol ANTE RI tod 


HOTWUTACH ARTS ATT 1 Wo LITORIG Sh 
arearrert wares ware eehe waret TTA ae SAT SUEY 
weqeatgr Sift aq hracrat b VTTIRTEy ft 

sara rer ef sitet erat & arcqerer: | 


ar aeenrael qe Ser rere ST HAZ oN of RAT o toy 
Ie 8.x reduced to its elementary condition.—-77- 


Cuar, VIL] Licrt or Truf#.. a6s 





and serious troubles arose, the A’syas regarding this country as the 
best on the whole earth emigrated here and colonized it, For this 
reason it is called A'ryavarta—the abode of Aryas, 

O.—What are the boundaries of A'ryavarta ? 

4.— It is bounded on the North by the Himalayas, on the 

Manu South by the Vindhyachal mountains, on the Zasé 

iI, 22,17, and West by the sea, It has also on its West the 
Sarasvati river (the Sindh or Attock) and on the Zast the Dirish- 
watt river also called the Brahmaputra which rises form the moun- 
tains east of Nepal, and passing down to the cast of Assam and 
the west of Burma, falls into the Bay of Bengal in the Southern Sea 
{Indian Ocean), All the countries included between the Himalaya 
on the north and the Vindhyachal mountains on the south as far as 
Rameshwar are called Aryavarta, because they were colonized and 
inhabited by Devas (the learned) and Aryas—the good or noble.” 

O.—What was the name of this country before that, and who 
were its aboriginal inhabitants ? 

A.—It had no name, nor was it inhabited by any other people 
before the Azyas (settled in it) who sometime after Creation came 
straight down here from Tibet and colonized this country. 

O.~Some people say that they came from Iran (Persia) and 
hence they were called Aryas, Before the Aryes came to this 
country it was inhabited by savages whom the Aryas called Asuras 
and Rdkshas as (demons), while they called themselves Devatas 
(gods). The wars between the two were called by the name Devdsura 
Sangr dm as in the historical romances, Is this true? 

A.—It is absolutely wrong, The Veda declares what we have 
already repeated, ¢.«, “The virtuous, learned, unselfish, and pious 

Rig Veda =—«s en are called Aryas, while the men of opposite 

4, Sta 8 character such as dacoits, wicked, unrighteous and 


sreqary & quiqregare efter 
cutwret freiceeted Reqger 
erconeftvegearteneiiqrrey | 
at Qefattte Qaareted wees 1 eye Ti RVI toh 
fweheterebt q qevat afield cemar greens ago 
HociqoeiwUstout. 
34 





266 Laeut or Truth. fCwar. VIL 





ignorant persons are called Dasyws." Besides," The Dwiyas (the 
Atharva Veda twice-born)— Bréhmanas, Kshatriyas, Voishyas—are 
‘XIX, 62 called Aryas, while the Skudras are called Andryas, 
or Non-Aryas.” In the face of these Vedic authorities how can 
sensible people believe in the imaginary tales of the foreigners, In 
the Devdsura wars, Prince Arjuna and Xing Dashrath and others 
of Aryavarta used to go to the assistance of the Aryas in crder to 
crush the Aswras, This shows that the people living outside 
Aryaverta were called Dasyus and Malechhas; because whenever 
those people attacked Asyas living on the Himalayas, the kings 
and rulers of Aryavarta, went to help the Aryas of the north, etc, 
But the war which Ram Chandra waged in the south against 
Ravan—the king of Ceylon—is called not by the name of 
Devdsura war but by that of Rdwa-Rdvana war or the war between 
the Aryas and Rdkshasas. In no Sanskrit book—historical or 
otherwise—it is recorded that the Aryas emigrated here from Iran, 
fought with and conquered the aborigines, drove them out, and be- 
came the rulers of the country. How can then these statements of 
the foreigners be true? Besides, Manu also corroborates our 
position, He says,“ The countries other than Aryavarta are called 
Manu X, 45,  Dasys and Maleckha countries." The people living 
II, 23. in the ‘north-east, north, north-west and west of 
Aryaverta were called Dasyus, Aswras and Malechhas, while 
those living in the south, south-east and south-west were called 
Rdkshasas, You can still see that the description of Rdishasas 
given therein tallies with the ugly appearance of the negroes of 
to-day. The people living in the entipodes of Aryavarta were 
called Nagas, and their country Patdla because of being situated 
under the feet (of those living in Aryavarta). Their kings belong- 
ed to the Ndga dynasty taking their name from that of the founder 
who was called A’dge. His daughter Usupi was married to Prince 
Arjuna, From the time of /éshudke to that of Kasrsvas and 
Pandavas, the Aryas were the sovereign rulers of the whole earth, 
and the Vedas were preached and taught more or less even in 
countries other than Aryavarta, 


To G8 cart need wetgiweml 
seqerenrriare: ed & quem eqer | wg e tei wil 


SST ETE 


Caar. VIE) Liont or TRUTH. ay 


Brahmd was the first of the literati. His son was called Virat 
whose son was Manx who had ten sons, Marichi, etc, who were 
progenitors of seven kings beginning with Swayambkava whose 
offsprings were the kings beginning with /éshudty. This Jéshodku 
colonized Aryavata and was its first king. At the present moment, 
let alone governing foreign countries, the Azyas through indolence, 
negligence and mutual discord and ill-luck do not possess a free, 
independent, uninterrupted and fearless rule even over their own 
country. Whatsoever rule is left to them, is being crushed under 
the heel of the foreigner. There are only a few independent states 
left, When a country falls upon evil days, the natives have to 
bear untold misery and suffering. Say what you will, the indigenous 
native rule is by far the best. A foreign government, perfectly 
free from religious prejudices, impartial towards all—the natives 
and the foreigners—kind, beneficent and just to the natives like 
their parents though it may be, can never render the people per- 
fectly happy. It is extremely difficult to do away with differences 
in language, religion, education, customs and manners, but without 
doing that the people can never fully effect mutual good and 
accomplish their object. It behaves all good people to hold in due 
respect the teachings of the Veda and Sédstras and ancient history. 

@.—How much time has elapsed since the creation of the 
world ? 

4,—One billion, nine hundred sixty millions and some hundred 
thousand years have passed since the creation of the world and the 
revelation of the Veda, For detailed exposition of this subject the 
readers should consult our book called ‘An Introduction to the 
Exposition of the Vedas,’ 

The minutest particle of matter that cannot be divided any 
farther is called a Pardwand. 

60 Paramdsds make one Ann, 

2 Anus make one Duyanak, which enters into the composition 

of the ordinary physical Vdys (air). 

3 Doyanaks make one Trasarenu that forms Agei—that con. 

dition of matter whose property is light, and heat. 

4 Doyanaks form Jala (Liquids). 

5 Duyanaks form Prithvi (Solids). 


-268 Liaur oF TauTH. (Cuap, VIL 





Three Duyanaks make one trasarenss, by doubling which earth 
and visible objects are formed. It is in this way—s¢, by the 
process of combining Paramdaxs and Asus and so on till the 
visible things are produced—that the earth and other planets have 
been made by God. 

O.—What supports this earth ? One man says that it rests on 
the head of shesha—a thousand-hooded snake, another says that it 
is supported on the horns of a bull, a third says that it rests on 
nothing, a fourth one says that it is supported on air, a fifth one 
says that it is kept in position by the solar attraction, and sixth one 
saya that being heavy, the earth is going down and down in space. 
Out of all these different theories which shall we believe to be 
tre? 

A.—Those, who say that it rests on the head of shesha (a snake) 
or on the horns of a bull, should be asked, on what the earth 
tested in the time of the parents of the sheska or of the bull before 
it was born and what supported it. The followers of the bull theory 
(Muhammadans) will be at once silenced. But the advocates of the 
sheshe theory will say that the shesha rests on kurma (a tortoise) 
which rests on water, and the water on Agni and the Agni? on air 
and the air rests on A'kdsha, They should be asked on what all of 
them rested. They will have to say “on God.” If you ask them 
again whose children the skesha and the bull were. They will tell 
you that the bull was the son of a cow and the shesha that of Aurma 
(a tortoise), the son of Masnick’ who was the son of Afanx, the son 
of Vérat, who was the son of Bratmd. This Brakimd was born in 
the beginning of Creation. Six generations had thus passed before 
the shesha was born, who had sustained the earth till then? What 
did it reat on at the time of the birth of Kashyapa (the tor- 
toise)? They will have nothing further to say’ and will, therefore, 
begin to quarrel, What it really means is that shesha {s another 
name for the remainder (that is, what is left behind in subtracting 
one sum from another), Some poet said: “The earth rests 
on sheska.” Some ignorant man, not understanding the poet, 

“invested this tale of the snake. What the poet really meant 
was that the earth was supported by God—the one Unchange- 
able Being in the midst of Creation and Dissolution, the 
One permanent element that undergoes no change during Creation 


1. Literally * thy silence and my silence. It is an Indian proverb—7? 


Cwar, VIEL) Licnt oF TRuTH. + 269 





or Dissolution, In the whole world He is the only one that remains 
unchanged. He stands aloof from change. “That 
ae va God who is unaffected by time, and is imperishable 
sustains the sun and the earth and all other planets.” 


There is a passage in the Rig Veda which means “ Uéshd sus- 
tains the moon and the earth.” Some ignorant person seeing the 
word whkskd invented the story of the bull supporting the earth, 
because skshd does also mean a boll, but it never entered the head 
Of that idiot as to how a bull could be powerful enough to support 
auch a big planet. Uéskd here means the sun, because he waters 
the earth through rain. He sustains this earth by solar attraction. 
But there is none besides God Who sustains the sun. 


O.—How could God sustain such big planets as the sun and 
the earth, 


4A.—Just as these big planets are nothing compared to the infi- 
nite (in which they exist)—(they are not even as big as adrop in 
the ocean),—similarly compared with the Infinite, Almighty God, 
these myriads of planets are not even as big asanatom. He 
pervades‘everything within and without. “ He is the Supreme Spirit 
who created all things and sustains them.” Had 
He not been an All-pervading God (just as the 
Puranics, the Muhammadans and the Christians say) He could 
never sustain this world, because no one can support a thing with- 
out being present there. If some one says“ All these planets are 
supporting each other by mutual attraction, where then is the 
necessity for God to sustain them?” He should be asked if the 
universe is finite or infinite, If he answers that it is infinite, it can- 
not be true—since a thing possessing a form can never be infinite ; 
and if he says that it is finite, we ask whose attraction supports 
what is beyond or outside its limits. Things when spoken of collec. 
tively are-called smashsi and individnally Vyashti.’ If all the 
worlds were collectively called the universe, there is no one but God 


qetitrettrar gi: nore co wte eR1 we Lite ti 
SOT Tree efter eT A TH 


. For example, a group of trees would be called Swenskti, while each tree 
wodividuglly: Myarkal, 


Yajur Veda. 





a0 Liowr or Trure. (Cuar, VET. 





Who attracts and sustains it as it is said in the Yajur Veda “God 
Yajar Veda —=«s't 38. Whoo creates and sustains /wwsfnows bodies, (such 
TK, @ as the sun) as welt the won-deminons (such as the 
earth)” He pervades all. He is the Creator and Sustainer of the 
universe. 
0.—Do the earth and other planets revolve or are they sta- 
tionary ? 


A.—They revolve, 

O.—Some say that it is the sun that moves, not the earth, while 

others say jast the reverse, Now who are right ? 
4,—They are both half grown ; because it is written in the Veda 
Yajur Veda “This earth with all its waters revolves round the sun.” 
Ys ‘ajur veda This shows that the earth revolves. Again says the 
XXXIIL4% — Yeda “The glorious, resplendent sun, that gives 
life and energy to all the world—animate and inanimate—through 
sain and solar rays, and makes all physical objects visible, attracts 
all other planets and rotates in his own orbit, but does not move 
round other planets.” In each solar system there is one sun that 
gives light to ail ths planets (such as the earth). Says the Veda 
“As the moon is illuminated by the sun, so are other planets (such 
as the earth) illuminated by the light of the sun.” 
eek hae But the day, and the night are constantly present, 
It is day inv that part of the earth which in its revolu- 
tions round the sun confronts him, whilst it is night in the other 
half which is hidden from him. In other words, the sunrise, the 
sunset, the twlight, the midday and the mid-night, etc., are always 
present in different countries at the same time ; thus when it {s sun. 
rise in India, it is sunset in America and vice versa; when it is mid- 
day or mid-night in India, it is midnight or mid-day in America and 
vice versa, Those, who say that the sun moves round the earth 


Shee fade ft WeMewowistour 
Seine dn inies bei 
apewmevidtets 
ergeay colqn wel ‘attr fiLaniege wel! wi 
erceter efigert cat or & Br hfe qari, weve 8 
Tomo wrdevwey 
fafa Gap of Am nwa oats telegetinte. 


Cttar. Vill) Laonr or Txorn. aps 











which is stationary are all ignorant; because, had it been so, one 
day and one night would have lasted thousands of years, since the 
sun is called Bradkna, which means that it is a hundred thousand 
times bigger than the earth, and millions of miles distant from it; 
consequently it would require much longer time for the sun to go 
round the earth than for the latter to go round the former. Just as 
if a mountain were to go round a mustard seed, it would take 
much longer time than when the Jatter would go round the former, 
Those who say that the sun is stationary are ignorant of Astro- 
nomy ; because had it been so, how could be move from one zodiac 
to another; besides, a heavy body like the sun could never remain 
in space without rotating constantly. The Jainees, who say that 
the earth does not move, but on the other hand is going down and 
down in space, and that in one Jamboo island alone there are two 
suns and two moons, are like one suffering from Delirium Tremens— 
the result cf over-intoxcation with cannabis Indica. If the earth 
were going down and down, it would smash into pieces from want 
of support of the air which could no longer encircle it, The people 
living on the top (uppermost) should have more air than those 
below, it being unequally distributed. Had there been two suns 
and two moons there would have been no night and no dark half of 
the month. Therefore, there is only one moon for our planet and 
one sun amidst many planets. 

O.—Whiat are the sun, the moon and the stars. Are they inha. 
bited by man and other living creatures or not? 

A.—They are worlds inhabited by men and other living beings. 
Shatapatha The Shaipatha Srdhman says “ The earth, the water, 

‘Brahman the heated bodies, the space, the moon, the sun and 

XIV, 6.714 — other planets are all called Vasus or abodes, because 
they are abodes of living beings as well as of inanimate objects. 
When the sun, the moon and other planets are abodes like our 
earth, what doubt can there be in their being inhabited? When 
this little earth of God is full of men and other living beings, can 
it ever be possible that all other worlds are vold? Nothing that 
God has made is useless. How can myriads of other worlds be of 
any use unless they are inhabited by man and other beings? It 
follows, therefore, that they are inhabited. 


Ray MinKat eg Rede Creed cue’ ewhre ot 


- ered werere er i wee ade ty we trees 84 


272° Licut or TauTH. (Crap. VIit. 





O.—Wonld men and other living beings in the other worlds 
have the same kind of bodies and bodily organs as they have here 
or different ? 

A.—Most likely there is some difference in their form and the 
like, just as you see some difference in form, countenance, appear- 
ance and complexion among people of different countries as the 
Ethiopeons, the Chinese, the Indians and the Europeans. But the 
creation of the same class or species on this earth and other planets 
{a identical, The class or species that has its sense organs (as eyes) 
in some definite place in the body here (on this planet), will have 
them in the same place in other planets ; for it is said in the Veda 

Ri “ Just as God created the sun, the moon, the earth, 

Ne 190. and other planets and the objects therein jn the 

previous cycles of Creation, the same has He done in the present 
Creation.” He does not make any alteration, 

O.—Are the same Vedas revealed in the other worlds as in this? 

A.~-Yes, Just as the policy of a king is the same in all the 
countries undec his rule, so is the Vedic system of Government of 
the King of kings identically the same in all the worlds over which 
He rules, 

O.—When you hold that the sov/ and the Prakrits are eternal 
and were never created by God, why should He have any control 
over them, as they are independent ? 

A,—Just as a king and his subjects live contemporaneously and 
yet they are subject to him, so are the sow/ and the prakrité under 
the contro! of God. Why should not the soul, with its finite powers 
and the dead inert matter be subject to His powers when He 
creates the whole universe, awards souls the fruits of their deeds, 
protects and sustains all, and possesses infinite powers. It ia clear, 
therefore, that the soul is free to act, but is subject to the Jaws of 
God in reaping the fruits of its acts, while the Almighty God is the 
Creater, Protector and Sustainer of, the universe. , 

In the next Chapter we shall treat of Ignorance and 
Knaowledge; Bondage and Emancipation. 

Tag Enp oF CHAPTER VIII. 


qafeariet grt dargifeered 
fea! qf wreftgaeh eb te ste torqe ten 








OHAPTER IX 
on 


KNOWLEDGE AND IGNORANCE, EMANCIPATION 
AND BONDAGE, 
“AE who realizes the nature of Vidyd—true knowledge—and 
of Avidyd—good moral life and Divine contempla- 
Yajur Veda, 40 tion—simultaneously conquers death by virtue of 
Avidyd and obtains Immortality by virtue of Vsdyd.” 
Characteristics of Avsdyd :— 


1. “The false notion that the transcient world and world- 
: ly things (such as bodies) are eternal 
Sess or in seh words prenat world of 
effects, that we see and feel, has 
always been existing and will continue to exist for 
ever, and that by virtue of the powers of yogd the 
physical bodies of godly men become imperishable, 

is the first kind of (Avidyd) Ignorance. 

2, To regard impure things, such as lustfulness! and un- 
truthfulness, as pure is the second kind of (Avidyd) 
Ignorance, 

3. To believe that excessive sexual indulgence is a source 
of happiness, whilst it really causes pain and suffer. 
ing, constitutes the third variety of (Avidyd) igno- 
fance. 

4. To consider dead material things as possessed of soul 
is the fourth kind of (Avsdyd) Ignorance, ” 

This fourfold incorrect knowledge is called Avusdyd or 
Ignorance, The reverse of it, vis. to look upon 
what is teinporal, what is eternal as eternal, what is 

é Pure as pure, what is impure as impure, pain as pain, 

feat wsftat = cettiadran! affeat get ghet 
rerarsegesreg’ li way: oR se Wo lwe te 
Bfrenrgheag rang frenghrgerreatfiretirer ti tre © | 
Wo arent qouh 


1, (Literally) the female body which is fall of a multitude of foul secretions 
and secretions. fs 





35 


aya LiguT oF TruTH. [Crar. IX, 





pleasure as pleasure, what is soul-less as soul-less, 
what is soul-possessing as soul-possessing, is called 
Vidyd or Knowledge. 

That by which the true vature of things is known is called 
Knowledge, Whilst that by which the true nature of things is not 
revealed and, instead, a false conception of things is formed, is 
called Jgnensnce. 

Virtuous life and contemplation of God are called Avidyd (or 
not-knowledge), because they are only bodily acts and mental pro- 
cesses, They are not knowledge. Therefore, it is said in the 
above manira that without pure life and contemplation of God no 
one can ever conquer death. Virtuous acts, the worship of one 
true God and correct knowledge lead to Emancipation, whilst an 
immoral life, the worship of idols (or other things or persons in 
place of God), and false knowledge are the cause of the Bondage 
of the soul, No man can ever, for a single moment be, free from 
actions, thoughts and knowledge, The doing of righteous acts, as 
truthfulness in speech, and the renunciation of sinful acts, as un- 
truthfulness, alone are the means of Salvation. 

O.—Who cannot obtain Emancipation? 

A-One whois in Bondage. 

O.—Who is in Bondage. 

A.—One who is sunk in sin and ignorance, 

O.—Are Bondage and Emancipation natural to souls or acquired ? 

A.— Acquired, because if they be natural they would be perma- 
nent. 

O.— The soul being Brakma (God) is really neither ever veiled 

Gaurpediya  y ignorance, nor born. It is neither in bondage nor 

Karika need it devise any means for its emancipation, 
neither it desires to be emancipated nor is it ever 
emancipated. How can it be emancipated when it was never in 
Gondage 2” What is your answer to this? 


wr fatret w Siedterd 8 wat Fw cram | 
Tage & ger ter serdar 1 
dhewiewiter we Rise RA 


4, 33 





Ya 


Licut or TRUTH. iCnat. 1 





35- 


36. 


37. 


38. 


39. 


4. 


42. 


43- 


Mangala (magi—bas the same meanings as gaff, see 
No. 2) is One who is All-blissful, and showers bliss 
oa the soul, 

Budha (budha—to know) is One who is Ail-knowledge 
and endows souls with knowledge. 

Shukra (shuckya—to purify) is One who is All-boly, 
and by Whose contact souls are also purified. 

Shanaishchara (shanais—with ease, chara—to go, eat) 
is One who reaches or gains access to al! with ease, 
and possesses great fortitude. 

Ratu 'vaka—to avoid, reject) is He Who is one without 
admixture of anything else, Who rejects the wicked, 
and frees others from the haads of the wicked. 

Kelu (kita—to abide or reside and cure disease) is One 
Wha is the abode of the universe, free from death 
and disease, He frees the emancipated souls from 
disease and suffering during the period of Salvation, 

Yajna (yaja—to shine, worship, combine, devise and 
give) is One who combines the different elements 
together and evolves this world and its objects out of 
them, Who is worthy of being worshipped by the 
wise, was worshipped by all the sages and seers from 
Brakma downwards and will always be. He is the 
Omnipresent God. “ Yayna is the Omnipresent 
God”, says the Shatapatha Brahmana, 

Hotd (hn—to give or take) is One who gives all that 
is worth giving to souls and takes from them whet is 
worth taking. . 

Bandhu (bandha—to bind, connect) is One who Keeps 
all the worlds bound by Jawa to Himself, end helps 
to keep them in order so that they cannot move out 
of thei: orbit or the laws of their constitution. He 
is like a brother unto ali the world and supports, 
protects, and gives happiness to all, 

Pité (pd—to protect, rear) One who protects all, Just 
as a father, throtigh paternal love and kindness always 

” ‘desifes the good of His childreh, even s0'Sder' Gdd— 
the Father of afl—desite happiness for ati. 


Cuap, IX] LyGut oF TRuts. 275 


A.—Thig statement of the Neo-Vedandists is not true, becquse 
the sou! being finite by nature is veiled and takes on a body which 
is popularly called its birth. It is also in bondage, because it suffers 
from the consequences of its sins and thinks out means to escape 
from sin and suffering and consequent bondage, and desires to free 
itself from pain. Being emancipated it“ sees” the All-blissful God 
and thereby attains final beatitude (#.¢., obtains salvation), 

O.—These are all the properties of the body and mind—the inter- 
nal organ of thought—not of the soul. The soul is free from sin and 
virtue, Itis merely a witness of what the body and the mind do. 
Heat and cold are felt by the body. The soul is pure and untainted. 

4.—The body and mind—the interna} organ of thought-—are 
material, hence dead and inert. They can never feel heat or cold, 
nor therefore the consequent pain or pleasure, It is conscious beings 
(who possess souls) such as men, who feel heat and cold when a 
hot or a cold substance comes in contact with their bodies, Even 
the prdnas—the nervauric forces—are devoid of consciousness. 
They can feel neither hunger nor thirst. It is the soul possessed 
of nervauric forces that feels the sensationsof hunger or thirst. 
Similarly, the maxas—the internal organ of thought—is also devoid 
of consciousness, It can feel neither sorrow nor joy, but it is 
through the maxas that the soul feels pleasure or pain, and joy 
or sorrow. Similarly, through the organs of sensation, such as 
the ears, the soul receives different sensations, such as of hearing, 
and consequently feels pleasure or pain, just according to the nature 
of those sensations. It is the soul that thinks, knows, remembers 
and feels its individuality through the organs of thought, discern- 
ment, memory and individuality. It is, therefore, the soul that 
enjoys or suffers, Just as it is the man that uses his sword to kill 
another who is punished and not the sword, similarly, it is the soul 
that, by the use of such instruments as the body, the bodily senses, 
the organs of thought, and nervauric forces, does acts—good or 
evil—and consequently it isthe soul alone that reaps the fruits 
thereof—joy or sorrow. The soul is nota witness of acta, Itis 
the actual doer that reaps the fruits of deedsdone. The One 
Incomparable Supreme Spirit alone is the Witness. It is the soul 
that does acts and is, therefore, naturally engrossed by them. The 
soul is not God and, consequently, it is not the seer of acts (but 
the actual doer), 


276 LicHt oF TRUTH. [Cuap. 1X, 





O—The soul is the image of God, and just as when a mirror 
gets broken, the image (in it) ceases to exist but it does in no way 
affect the object (whose image it was), similarly, the soul as the 
image of God lasts only so Jong as the (astakkaran)! mind—the 
veflecting medium—endures, once that disappears, the sou) no 
longer in bondage is emancipated—lIs it not 20? 

A.—It is a childish idea, because before you can have an image, 
you must have two things that possess form—an object and a 
reflecting mediom—distinct from each other. Take an example, 
The face and the looking glass are both essential to the formation 
of the image of the face. Both have form and are visible. They 
are ajso separate from each other. Had they not been so, there 
would have been no image. God being All-pervading and Form. 
less it is impossible for Him to have an image. 

O—But do you not see the all-pervading, formless ether reflect- 
ed in clear deep water? Similarly, God can be reflected in a pure 
mind, Therefore it is that the soul is called chiddbhds—the image 
of God, 

A.—This is again childish babble ; ether being invisible no one 
can ever see it, How can any one see ether with his eyes when 
he can not even see a#r which ia grosser than efher ? 

O.—Is it not ether, then, that you see in the sky above, blue and 
dusty? 

A.—No. 

0.—-What is it then ? 

A—It is the fine particles of earth, water and Agas (in the 
atmosphere). The blue colour is mainly due to the particles of 
water in the atomsphere that come down as rain, while the dusty 
appearance is due to the particles of dust which iscarried up from 
the earth and floats about in the air, I[t is these things that are 
seen and reflected in water or in a mirror, and not ether. 


O—Just as we find such terms as Ghatdkdsha—the ether 
enclosed by a pot—Matdkdsha—the ether enclosed by a house— 
Meghdkdsha—the ether enclosed by a cloud—, used to denote 
various parts of ether; and after the pot, etc, are broken, the 
particular parts of ether cease to exist, only the universal ether is 


1. Antahkavan weans the internal organ of thought, 


Cuar, IX.] Licut oF TRUTH. 277 





left; in the same way Brahma (God in Passive state) is J‘shtoara 
(God in active state) or the soul according as He is spoken of in 
relation to the universe or to the axtahsaran—the intemal organ of 
thought. 

A.—This is also a foolish argument, The ether (of the pot or 
of the house, etc.) never perishes, nor is it ever shattered into 
pieces, It isthe pot or the house that is broken or pulled down 
and comes into pieces, You never hear of a person saying to an- 
other “ Bring me the ether of a pot.” He always says" Bring me 
a pot,” Your argument, therefore, is not valid. 

O.—As the fish and other marine creatures swim about in the 
sea ot as birds fly about in air, so do all antakkaraxas move 
about in Brakma—the traly conscious Being Who is All-pervading 
like ether. They are by themselves devoid of consciousness, but 
by virtue of Divine presence in them they become conscious, just 
as a piece of iron becomes hot by coming in contact with fire. The 
antahkaranas \ike the fish and birds move about, whilst Brakma 
is stationary like space, There can, therefore, be no harm in believ- 
ing that the soul in fact is Brahma (God). 

A,—Even this illustration of yours is not right, because if the 
soul be the image or reflection of the All-pervading Brahma in the 
antakkaran, why does it not possess such attributes as omniscience ? 
If you say that it is not omniscient because of the limitations im- 
posed upon the soul by the Améting medtum, is Brakma then subject 
to obstruction, limitation and division or is He Indivisible? If you 
say that He is Indivisible, no limiting medium or veil can stand in 
His way. Why should not the soul then be omniscient? On the 
other band, if you say that the soul—which is really no other than 
Brakma,—forgets its divine nature and seemingly but not really 
moves about with the awfekkaran, then the part of Brakma which 
the antahharan—the veiling medium—gets to, will tecome subject 
to doubt, and distrust, and destitute of true knowledge, whilst 
that part, which it leaves behind, will become omniscient, pure and 
blissful. Thus this amtakkaran will disturb the whole universal 
Brahma, and consequently bondage’ and emancipation would 
become of momentary duration. Besides, if your assertion be true, 
no one should be able to remem ber whatever one had seen or heard 
in the past, because that Bradma who had seen or heard it had 


1 Ignorance being dendage and knowledge, Emancipation —Tr, 





278 LicuT oF Tautu. (Crap. 1X. 





ceased to exist (on account of the asiasharan being ina state of 
constant motion and thus shifting from place to place), It follows, 
therefore, that God (Bradma) can never become the soul, nor can 
the soul become God. They can never be one. They are always 
distinct from each other. 

O.—This is all adkyatopa', in other words, the aubstitution of 
one thing for another, The substitution of the world and worldly 
objects fur Brahma, that is, to speak of them as if they were differ- 
ent from Brahma, is simply meant to help a secker after truth to 
understand the subject with ease, In reality everything is Brahma, 


A—Who is it that makes this substitution ? 

O.—The soul, 

A.—What is this soul ? 

O.—The conscious entity limited by estakkarana, 

A.—Is it the same Brahma or something diferent ? 

O.—-The same Brahma, 

A.—Was it Brahma Himself then Who formed an erroneous 
conception of the world. ? 

0.-~Even if it be Brakma who did it, it can do Him no harm, 

A,~Why is not he who forms an erroneous conception of things 
wrong then ? - 

O—No, because whatsoever is conceived in mind or spoken 
with the tongue is all false. 

A.—Is not Brakma, then—the author of false ideas and false 
speech—false and fallible ? 

O.——Never mind that, let him be so. Our object is simply to 
Prove our position, 


4.—Oh, ye false Vedantists! You have made Brakma (God), 
whose all desires and conceptions are truth, the author of falsehood. 
Is it not the cause of your degradation? In which Upanishad, 
Aphorism or Veda is it written that Brakma is untruthful in thought 


or speech ? Your conduct 





like that of the burglar in the proverb 


3 Erroseously attributing the properties of one thing to another is called 
adhyai ex considering BrvAma (which is not really thi i 
te arePes _ i. theme (\ is not really the material world) to 


2+ According tn the beliofs of the Vedenfats, there i P 
only'a detanco "Als Geter Bp Eaaee os ea Po -aelas Is 





Cnap, 1X] Ligut oF Trout. * 279 





which says“ A thief sitting in judgment on the magistrate,” It 
is right for the magistrate to punish a burglar but it is unnatural 
and wrong if a burglar tries to punish the magistrate. Similarly, 
you, who are untruthful both in mind and speech, try in vain to lay 
your faults on God. Ifa part of Arakma be untruthful in word, 
deed of thought, the whole Brakma would be the same, because 
He is uniform. His nature, knowledge and ection are all true, 
Untruthfulness in word, deed or thought is your failing but not of 
Brakwa, What you call knowledge is really ignorance, and what 
you call your adhyaropa is also false, because you call yourselves 
Brahma, when you are not Brakma, and regard the soul as Brahma 
what is not Brakwa. Now what are these if not false ideas ? He 
who is Omnipresent, can never become subject to limitations, 
ignorance and dondage, It is the soul that is limited by time and 
space, finite in nature, knowledge and power, but not the Omnis- 
cient, Omnipresent Brahma, 


BONDAGE AND EMANCIPATION. 

O.—What is Emancipation? 

A.—-That condition in which the souls are freed. 

O.—Freed from what ? 

A-—What they desire to to be freed from, 

O.—What do they desire to be freed from ? 

A,—Whiat they need to be freed from. 

O,—What do they need to be freed from ? 

A.—From pain (or misery). 

O—Being freed from pain what do they attain and where do 
they live ? 

4.—They attain happiness and live in God. 

O.—What are the causes of Bondage and Emancipation. 

4.—Obedience to the Will of God, dissociation from sin, ignor- 
ance, bad company, evil influences and bad habits, the practice of 
truthfulness in speech, the promotion of public good, even-handed 
justice, righteousness and the advancement of knowledge, worship 
of God—Glorification, Prayer and Commaunion'—in other words, 


ee 
1, These have already been described in the Seventh Chapter of this 
book.—-77%s f 


280 Licut oF TRUTH. [Cuar. 1X. 


the practice of yoga, study and tuition or instruction of others, and 
the advancement of knowledge by righteous efforts, the employ- 
ment of best means towards the accomplishment of one’s object, 
the regulation of one’s conduct in strict accordance with the 
dictates of even-handed justice which is righteousness, and so on 
are the means of obtaining Emancipation, whilst the reverse of 
these, disobedience to the Divine Will and the like lead to 
Bondage, 

O—-Does the soul in the state of Emancipation keep its 
individuality or is it absorbed (into God) ? 

A.—It lives and keeps its individuality. 

O.—-Where does it live ? 

4.—in God. 


O.—Where is God? And does an emancipated soul remain in 
some definite place or go about just as it desires ? 

A.—God is everywhere and permeates everything. An emanc#- 
pated sout well-endowed with perfect knowledge and bliss is free 
to go about in Him unobstructed, 

O.—Does an emancipated soul possess a physical body ? 

A~No. 

0.—How does it enjoy the bliss of Emancipation ? 


A-—It retains its innate power, activity and attributes but no 
physical body, It is said in the Shatapatha Brahmana, 


“An emancipated soul bas no physical body or bodily 
organs but it retains its pure natural attributes and 

Shatapatha powers. By virtue of its innate powers, an emanci- 
Rates, pated soul has the principle of hearing when it wants 
to hear, the principe of touch when it wants to feel, 

principle of sight when it wishes to see, the principle of taste when 
it desires to taste, the principle of smell when it wants to smell, the 
principla of thought for thinking, the principle of judgment for 


wera wiht aah, eqjex rae, cer ng ae 

coum com waft, fey wre refer, aearar air aafa, 

gftnief | Saafreereengeivisegrs safe 1 caves 
ete wn ; 








Crap. [XJ Ltckr or Truri. 261 





ascertaining truth, the principle of memory for remembering, fhe prin- 
tiple of individuality for feeling its individuality. It can possess this 
so-called body—composed of the principles of sensation and thought, 
etc,—at its will, Just ss when the soul is embodied, it depends 
upon its physical body and bodily organs to carry out its will, so 
does it enjoy the bliss of Emancipation through the use of its 
innate power. 

O.—What is the nature of this power, and of how many 
kinds is it ? 


A.—Really it is of one kind, but it may be said to consist of the 
following 24 varieties :— 

(1) Strength ; (z) energy; (3) attraction ; (4) suggestion ; (5) 
motion ; (6) intimidation ; (7) analytic power ; (8) skill ; (9) courage ; 
(10) memory ; (1F) discernment ; (12) desire ; (13) love ;(14) hatred ; 
(1§) association ; (16) dissociation ; (17) dividing power ; (18) com- 
bining power; (19) power of sight ; (20) hearing ; (21) touch ; (22) 
taste ; (23) smell ; and (24) knowledge, 

By the help of these very powers the soul attains and enjoys 
happiness even in Emancipation, If the soul, when emancipated, 
were to be absorbed into Brakma, who would then enjoy the bliss 
of ewancipation, Those who regard the dissolution of soul as 
emancipation are no doubt immersed in ignorance, because the 
Emancipation of the soul consists in its exemption from all sin and 
suffering and in the enjoyment of perfect bliss in the All-pervad- 
ing, All-blissful, Infinite, Omnipotent God, Mark! What the 
Veddnt Shdstra says on the subject :— 

“ According to Bddrs the soul as well as the mind—the principle 

Vane of thought—is present in Emancipation.” in other 

Stastra words, Bddri, otherwise known as Pardshar, the 
IV, 4; 10. father of Vydsa, does not believe in the absorption 
of the soul (into God) nor in its dissolution, nor in that of the princs- 
Veiant ble of thought in the state of Emancitation. Similarly 
the great teacher Jasméns holds that “an emancipated 
soul possesses the principle of thought as well as the 


patsy be ahead real ORINERON 
care Sfirfnheecrerrare, 


Wiener o Biel ton 
bia ay aqreq eo si vita 


TV, 4 11. 





282 Licut or Truri. (CHar. 1X, 





spiritual or subtle body—the principles of sensation, and the nsrvau- 
wieforces, The soul and the principle of thought, etc, are not absent 
during exsancipation.” Again the sage Vydsa believes “ both in the 
Presence and absence of these powers in the state of emancipation, in 
Vedant other words, he holds that the sou! exists and retains 
all its powers that are fure, whilst unholiness, sinful- 
TVs 4 13, ness, pain and ignorance and the like are absent.” 
“ That condition of the soul in which it possesses a pure manas— 
. the principle of thought—the five principles of sensa- 
Kuthopanishad soy, and in which the deliberations of the principle 
of discernment are true and constant, is called the 

supreme state ot Emancipation,” 
“ That Supreme Spirit, Who is free from sin, decay and death, 
pain and sorrow, hunger and thirst, Whose thoughts 


Chhandogys 7 
9 manishad, and desires are the very essence of truth, should be 
bint sought after. It is by contact with the Divine Spirit 


that an emancipated soul attains to all the conditions it wishes for, 
and realizes all its desires, and it is through the knowledge of the 
Supreme Soul that it learns the means of salvation and the ways 
of self-purification.” 

“So this emancipated soul sees all through pure spiritual eyes 
anda pure manas and thereby enjoys extreme bliss, The Soul 
that rests in the All-Glorious, Supreme Being—the Omnipresent, 
Omniscient Spirit, the Inward Controller of all—Whom all men of 

ar waqrafierd srenft arent ee | 

face & freae erg: seat afer Sato Wo eH 
Woe Ho ton 





grPeotorciWvoelsotl 

wee ate Rae eer ander, Srey TR CHE ET 
ae meee of ar cel der eared serdart ate 
rer wren at eo een calea erent eater 


wraraernrerragied ftrerredtfy a grt owe ntato 
RiweRiVn 


Cnar, IX] Licut or Trurs, 283 











learning, imbued with piety and desirous of obtaining salvation, wor- 
ship and adore (by the practice of yoga), enjoys the beatitude of 
emancipation. Verily it obtains all its heart’s desiresand whatsoever 
worlds and states it wishes to attain to, The emancipated soul leaves 
off its mortal coil and roams about in space in the All-pervading God 
by the help of the Spiritual body, As long as the soul is embodied, 
it can never be free from worldly pains and sorrows, Prajapat; 
said to Zwdra, ‘ Listen, O thou who art wealthy and worthy of great 
respect! This physical body is mortal. It is in the jaws of death 
very much like a goat under the jaws of a lion.t It is the dwelling 
place of the formless and immoral soul, which is, therefore. con- 
stantly afflicted with pain or engrossed in pleasure, because an 
embodied soul can never be free from worldly joys or sorrows. On 
the othes hand, the un-embodied, emancipated soul, that lives in God, 
can neither be affected by joys nor by sorrows, It continually 
enjoys perfect bliss.” 


O.—Does the soul, once being émancipated, ever become subject 
Chhandogya to birth and death again? It is said in the Chhan- 
‘Viti, 15 dogya Upanishad, “The soul after being emancifa- 
éed never comes back again into this world.” Again it is written 


Vedant in the Vedent Shastra. “The Veda declares there 
fare is no coming back, no coming back declares the 


Veda.” Gita also says “That Supreme State 
from which it—the soul—never falls back {into 
this world) is mine.” 

It is clear from these quotations that that alone is called (the 
state of) Emancipation from which the soul never returns into this 
world, What is your view ? 


SUNT CHA TAT TYME HTT 

frgrraret & eo avte: Renftrereat « earices eer: fir: 

fretrerefrceatiterrrest a fireftt equa: | qrete 
qraweda seaede dulachs meniese a 

i a ‘ Tou F 
corgi werenafen erect Repay owe vate 
RR 
ey aS ee TT 


te Meaning thereby that death may overtake this body at any moment fy. 


Giu. 





284 LIGHT OF TRUTH. [Cuap. 1X. 





A —it is not true that the emancipated soul never returns to 
this world because the Veda contradicts this view. * Whose name 
should we hold sacred; Who is that All-glorious, Resplendent 
Being Who is imperishable among all the perishable things; Who 
having made us enjoy the bliss of emancipation again invests us with 
bodies and thereby gives us the pleasure of seeing 
our parents? It is the All-glorious, Eternal, Im- 
mortal, All-pervading, Supreme Being Whose name we should hold 
adcred. He, it is, Who helps us to enjoy the bliss of Emancipation 
and then bring us back into this world, clothes us with bodies, and 
thereby gives us the pleasure of secing our parents. The same 
Divine Spirit it is Who regulates the period of Emancipation and 
lords over all.” 

Again says the Sankhya Shastra, “Souls live in Bondage and 

Sankhya emanci ption as they are at the present time. There 

1159 is no everlasting (Atyanta) Bondage or emanciption.” 

O.—But the Miyaya Shastra says, “(Atyanta) Everlasting 

freedom from pain alone is called Ssmancipation, be- 

Tn cause it is only freedom from false ideas, ignorance, 

vices (such as covetousness) and from engrossment 

in sensual gratification and contraction of evil habits, and consequent 

immunity from birth and pain, that bring about Emancipation which 
is everlasting."* = 

A.—The word adyanta does not necessarily always mean ever- 
lasting, because we very often say that such and such a man is 


paiva tea aareny card Qqeq ara ¢ Sear’ wa 
after, gare’ free! @ ead’ ae! @ 1 
sada” dawergerat aera ere rex ard: 
Oy wer erftert_ geigtey free’ we ede! geet! wy 
mo ol gowitolRi 


cqrefifirr aed mrenatege: f Sled o Wo 81 Zo 2S I 
aqerafearensrart 


Rig. I, 245 2 





y AqATCTTTATE- 
aud: eaTeg oo RTO RIAN 


© Even the word Averlasting in English does not always mean unending, 
it is sometimes used to express the same idea as ediyenfe, %. 2, extreme—TP. 





Cuat. 1j Licut or True. 1g. 
45: Pitdmaka—The Father of fathers. 
46. Prapitdmaka—The Great-Grandfather. 
47. Médid—God is named mata (mother), because He has 


48. 


49 


50. 


51. 
52, 


53 


54 


55. 
56. 


happiness and prosperity of all souls at heart just as 
an earthly mother, out of extreme love and kindness, 
desires happiness and prosperity for her offspring. 

A'charya (chura—to conduct, move, go and eat) God is 
called so because He is the source of all true know- 
ledge and righteousness, It is through Him we 
receive knowledge, and live virtuous lives, 

Guru (Gree-—to speak) the Teacher of all true know- 
ledge and learning Who revealed th: Word of 
Salvation (Vedas) in the beginning of the world, the 
Teacher of even all the easly teachers such as Agni, 
Vayu, A’ditya, Angira and Brakina. He is Immor- 
Yogushastra tal, says the Vogashastra, “He is the 
Samadhi 26. Teacher of even the most ancient teach- 
ers, Heis Immortal. Time cannot influence Him,” 

Aja (aj2—to combine, join, manifest or evolve) is One 
who combines the elements and atoms properly, and 
evolves the word out of them ; unites bodies with 
souls, and brings them out into the world, which is 
called their birth. He is Himself never born, 

Brahma (brik¢—to develop, multiply) is One who has 
created the world and multiplies it, 

Satya (sat—to exist) is One who is the true emodib- 
ment of existence among all existences. 

Jndna is One who knows all the world, animate and 
inanimate, “The Great God is Satya, Jnana and 
Ananta."—~Treyteya Upanishad, 

Ananta is One who has no limitations, boundaries, 
end or dimensions, 

Anddé is One who bas no beginning, nor a first cause, 

Ananda is One who is All-blissful and endows the 
emancipated souls with bliss and bestows happiness 
on the good and the righteous, 





@ leat ge sraoreegere u Ferg © ante Te 


qos 








Cuar, IX.] LicHT oF TRUTH. 285 





in afyanta pain or enjoys atyanta pleasure. Now here atyania 
means ¢streme. What we, therefore, mean is that that man is in 
extreme pain or enjoys extreme pleasure, Similarly the word 
@tyanta in the above quotations means extreme, not everlasting 
or eternal, 
O—If the soul returns to this world from the state of Hwan- 
efpation, what is the duration of Emancipation then ? 
4A.—" The emancipated soul enjoys the bliss of emancipation in 
the Omnipresent God til! after the end of the 
fk, Grand-Dissolution (Mahkdkalpa) and, thereafter, 
1h, 2.6. parts with that bliss and is again born into this 
world.” The period covered by Grand Dissolution 
is calculated thus :— 


Time is first divided into four yugas or cycles, vi's,,— 





Satyuga eee ads +s. 17,28,000 years, 
Dodparyuga ae ate ss 1296000 
Tretdyugn is a8 ss 864,000 4 
Katyuga we oe ws 32,000, 
Total «++ 43,20,000 


Thus 43,20,000 years make one Chaturyugi. 
2,000 Chaturyugis (6,640,000,000 years)an Ahomtra 
(Day and night). 
30 Ahoratras=one Médsa (month). 
12 Mdsas=one Varsha (year), 
100 Varshas=one Prantakal (Grand-Dissolution), 
Thus, the duration of Emancipation 100 x I2 x 30 X 2000X 
43,20,000= 3,1 1,040,000,000,000 years, 

O.,—All other writers teach and all the world believes that 


the Emancipation is that condition from which no soul returns to 
this world and becomes subject to births and deaths. 





S wedrey cere wager wtqeatiea at | qews 8! 
Fegtoekn 


286 LiGHT OF TRUTH. (Citar. 1X. 
A.—This view can never betrue. Firstly, when the powers 
of the soul, its instruments (such as body and bodily organs), and 
its means are all finite, how could the reward extend over an infinite 
"period ? Secondly, the soul does not possess infinite capacity 
infinite means and infinite activity to enjoy infinite bliss, how could 
it then enjay Zves-Jasting happiners ? How could the end be eter- 
nal when the means to accomplish it are non-cternal? Thirdly, 
if no souls came back from the state of emancipation, the world 
should become bereft of them. 
O,—No, there can be no dearth of souls, because the emanct. 
pated souls are replaced by new ones that God creates, 


A.—F:rstly, if that be the case, the soul would become non-eter- 
nal (moral), because a thing that is created must perish. Therefore, 
according to your own view the soul even on obtaining emancipa- 
tion would perish, hence emancipation becomes non-eternal, 
Secondly,in the place wherein emancipated souls live—otherwise 
called Heaven—there will be a great deal of hustling, crowding 
and jostling, as there will be no end of increase in the population 
for the simple reason that immigration will be so great, whilst 
emigration will be nil, Thirdly, there can be no perception 
of pain, For example, you would not know sweet taste from 
bitter or bitter from sweet, if you would only taste one of them— 
sweet or bitter—all your life-time, because it Is only by comparing 
the flavours of things possessing opposite tastes that we form an 
idea of both. Ifa man were always to eat and drink sweet things 
only, he would not enjoy them so much as one who tastes al! kinds 
of food. Fosrthly, if God were to give the soul unlimited happi- 
ness as the fruit of its actions that are limited (finite), His 
justice would be destroyed. A wise man does not put on 
his man's shoulders a load heavier than he can carry. If 
& man can only carry a load of eighty pounds and his master 
puts a weight of eight hundred pounds on his head, he is 
certainly worthy of censure, Similarly, it would not be right for 
God to load the soul, possessed of finite power and finite kriow- 
ledge, with everlasting happiness. Fifthly, if you say that God 
creates new souls, the material out of which He creates them will 
eventually run short ; because a bank, however wealthy it may be 
that has a constant drain on it, but has no income, is sure to become 
bankrupt sooner of later. {t follows, therefore, that this arrange- 





Cmar. 1X] Licut or Trurs. aby 





ment alone—vis., Emancipation and then return from it—is the 
right one. Sixthly, there isno man who would prefer life-imprison- 
ment (or hanging) to imprisonment for a shorter term. There 
being no return from Zmanespation, it differs from life-imprisonment 
only in this respect that one has not to work there. 


With regard to Emancipation as absorption into God* it is like 
death by drawing one-self into the sea. 

Q.—Tke soul can enjoy eternal bliss and be emancipated ever- 
lastingly just as God lives in enjoyment of Perfect and Everlasting 
Bliss and is Eternally free from worldly joy and sorrow, pleasure 
and pain. 

4A.—God is infinite by nature, His essence, powers, attributes 
are all infinite, He can, therefore, never be subject to ignorance, 
pain and bondage, etc. The soul, even when emancipated, remains, 
finite in knowledge, though pure in nature. Its attributes, powers 
and activity all remain finite, It can, therefore, never be like God, 

O.—This being the case, Emancipation is no better than birth 
and death. It is useless, therefore, to endavour to obtain it. 

A.—It is not Jike birth and death, The bliss of Ewanscipation 
extends over the period of Creations and Dissolutions for thirty- 
six thousand times. Is uninterrupted happiness with perfect 
absence of pain extending over such a long period trifling? 
You eat and drink to-day, though you know you will be hungry 
again before the day is out. Why do you try to appease your 
hunger and quench your thirst then? If it is considered necessary 
to endeavour to appease hunger and quench thirst, acquire worldly 
possessions, and temporal power and fame, have wife and children 
and the like, why is it not the same for emancipation? Though death 
is certain, yet we work in order to live, In like manner, though 
the return from emancipation is certain, still it is extremely desir- 
able that we should do our best to obtain it. 

O.—Whiat are the means of obtaining Emancipation? 

A.—Some of them have already been mentioned but the special 
means are the following ? 


(1) 1.—Let him who desires emancipation be emancipated now in 
this life. In other words, let bim renounce all those evi! or sinful 





© Which is the plea of salvation according to some people—7y, 


288 Lieut or Truru. (Crap, 1X, 


actions, such as untruthfulness in speech, that lead to misery and 
pain. Let him, instead, always live a virtuous life and do such 
good deeds (e., veracity in speech) as lead to happiness. Let bim, 
who wants to escape from pain and enjoy happiness, abandon sin 
and practice righteousness ; because sin is the cause of pain and 
suffering, whilst righteousness begets happiness, 


Il—Let him always associate with men of great learning and 
piety, and thereby studiously know truth from untruth, virtue from 
vice, and right from wrong. 


I11—Let him ascertain that the body comprises five systems 
(hoshas") :— 

(i). The Physical system which comprises all the tissues and 
fluids of the body from bone to skin. It is the gross 
physical body or system. 

(ii), The Vital system which comprises the five gy cat vital or 

nervauric forces :— 

(1) Prdna or the Expéiratory force which helps to draw 
the air out, 

(2) Apdna or the Inspiratory force that helps to draw 
the air into the lungs. 

(3) Sanidna or the Solar-sympathetic force which is 
situated in the centre of the abdomen, and serves 
to carry vasa, fe, chyle—the essence of food— 
and blood to all parts of the body. 

(4) Uddna or the Glosso-pharyngeal force which helps 
to draw the food down the throat into the 
stomach, efc., and gives rise to strength and 
energy. 

(5) Vydna or the Motor-muscular force which helps the 
soul to move or do anything—the cause of 
motion, 

(iii), The Mento-motor system which comprises the principle 
of volition, the principle of indtviduality, and the five 
principles of action, vis., articulation, grasp, locomo- 
tion, reproduction and excretion, 


1. Keskas are aleo translated into Shestis by some writers. 77. 


Cnap, IX] LIGHT OF TRUTH. 289 


(iv), The Menio-sensory system which comprises the principle 
of judgment, the principle of memory, and the five 
principles of sensation, vis., sight, hearing, taste, smell 
and touch, It is through these that the soul carries 
on such processes, as thinking and the like. 

(v). The Spirituo-emotional system which comprises love, 
cheerfulness, happiness—great or little. The cle- 

mentary matter called graériéé is the medium through 
which the sou! entertains these feelings. 


The above-mentioned five systems are the media through which 
the soul acquires all kinds of knowledge, carries on all the mental 
processes, and performs all its actions, 

IV.-~Let him realize that there are three states or phases of the 
soul :-— 

(1) Wakeful phase. 

(2) Dreaming phase. ; 

(3) Slumbering phase, sound sleep ot sushupti in which there is 
no consciousness of the ovtside world, nor are there any 
dreams. 

V.—Let him know that there are four kinds of fades -— 

(1) The gross physical body which is seen and felt. 

(2) The subtle body* which comprises seventeen principles :— 

Five nervauric or vital principles, five principles of sensa- 
tion, and five physical principles such as Prithivi A’pah, 
Agni, etc. in subtle form, and the principles of voliation 
and discernment, It also accompanies the soul in all 
its births and deaths, It is of two kinds :-— 

(@) Material which is derived from the fine particles 
of subtle matter. 

(6) Sprstual or naixral which comprises the natural 
powers and attributes of the soul 

Both these remain with the soul in the state of 
Emancipation, and it is through them that the 
soul enjoys the bliss of emancipation. 
@ Sometimes also called Séarttual or Astral body.—7r. 
37 


Licut or TRUTH. (Crap, 1X. 





(3) The Cansal body (kdrana shrira) which consists of the 
elementary matter—gresrité. It is all-pervading and 
therefore, common to all souls. It is through this that 
the soul enters into the state called sovsd dreamless 
sleep, 

(4) The 7xsya body is that through which the soul is absorb- 
ed in the contemplation of the All-blissful Supreme 
Spirit in the state of samddhi (superior condition) de- 
veloped by the practice of yoga and perfect concentra- 
tion. The energy born of this pure body—the product 
of the pure influence of the superior conditron—is of great 
service to the soul in Zmancipation, 


The soul itself is distinct from all the above-mentioned 
systems, states,and bodies. That the soul is distinct 
from states is evident from the fact that when a man 
dies, everyone says that the soul has passed out of the 
body. The soul alone is the prompter, the possessor, 
the seer, the doer, and the reaper of the fruits of its ac- 
tions, Know him, who says that the soul is not the doer 
nor the reaper, to be ignorant and destitute of reason ; 
because all these odes, e#., are by themselves dead 
and inert. They can never feel any pain nor pleasure, 
nor can they do anything—good or evil—, though it 
is true that the soul in conjunction with them does sinful 
or virtuous deeds and reaps the fruits thereof—pain or 
pleasure. When the senses come in contact with the 
external objects, and the manas—the principle of atten- 
#on-—acts in conjunction with the senses, and the son! 
with the manas, it incites the mervanric forces into 
action—good or evil—,thesou! is then said te be 
directed ontwardly, and at that very moment feelings 
of happiness, cheerfulness and fearlessness spring up 
inthe mind from within when the act is good, while 
those of fear, shame and distrust when it is evil. It is 
the voice of the Omniscient Divine spirit—the Inward 
Controller of all from within. Verily he alone who 
follows this voice and acts accordingly—enjoys the 
bliss of Emancipation. Whosoever goes against the 


Cuar. 1X.] Licht or Tru?u. : aot 





- dictates of this voice suffers from misery and pain— 
the result of dosdage. 


The above constitutes the first means of salvation. 


{2). Vatrdgya is next. It consists in the practice of truth and 
renunciation of untruth after carefully discriminating right from 
wrong, In other words, it consists in acquiring the knowledge of 
the nature, properties and characteristics of all things from earth to 
Heaven (literally God), in assiduously obeying God's com- 
mandments and worshipping Him, in never going against His 
Will and in making nature subservient to oneself. 

(3) Shatak Sawpatti—the performance y six kinds of acts -— 
(a). Skama consists in restraining one's sou) and manas from 
sin and temptation, and in always practising righteous- 
ness, 


{b). Dama consists in keeping the body and the senses aloof 
from the doing of evil deeds, such as adultery, and in 
practising self-control and living a chaste life, 

(c). Uprat: consists in never associating oneself with the 
wicked. 

(4). Titihshe consists in becoming deaf to all wordly applause 
or censure, and indifferent to profit or loss, joy or sorrow 
and in throwing oneself heart and soul into the pursuit 
ofthe waysand means of Emancipation. 


(¢) Skradha consists in having faith inthe Vedas and Shdstras 
and iu the teachings of those altruistic teachers of truth 
who are profound scholars by virtue of having studied 
the above, and are men of great piety and high ideals, 

(f). Samddhdna is the concentration of mind. 


(4) Mumukshatwa is perfect devotion to and unflinching love 
for nothing but emancipation and the means of obtaining it like 
a hungry or thirsty man who desires nothing else but food and 
drink, These are the four sedkaxas or means of attaining Emancipa- 
tion, Next come what arecalled Anwbandkas (subsidiary means) 
#0 called because they come after the sddkans or means. 

Anubhandas (subsidiary means) are four in nvmber :~ 
(i). Adhikdrtis the worthiness to become a recepticle unto the 
Divine spirit. 


aga Licut or Traut. [CHap. IX, 


{i}, Sambandha is the thorough knowledge of the Veda and 
the Shdstra and of (the means of) emancipation—an. 
other name for seeing God—explained therein, and the 
realization thereof. 


(iii) =~ Vishayce is making the realization of God—the subject 
matter of all the Shdstras—as the one object of one's 
life. 

(iv). Prayojana is the exemption from all misery and pain, 
and the perfect enjoyment of the great bliss of Emanci= 
pation. 

After anubandhas (subsidiary means) comes Skravana Chatush- 
thayd, It is of four kinds :— 

{i). Shkravane \s to listen most attentively with acalm mind 
to the discourse or the speech of a learned man and 
more so if the subject be Divine sctence, because it is 
the most abstruse and the subtlest of all the sciences, 


(ii), AZanana is thinking over what one has heard in retire- 
ment, and in removing doubts if there be any by ques- 
tioning the speaker, Questions may sometimes be asked 
even in the middle of a discourse if the speaker and the 
audience think proper. 

(ili), Midhidhydsana. When all doubts are cleared after hear. 
ing a discourse and thinking over it, let the enquirer 
enter into the superior condition and see for himself by 
the help of yoga whether it is the same as he had heard 
and reasoned out or not. This is called Widhidhydsana, 

(iv), Sdéhshdta Karana is the resulting correct knowledge of 
tht nature, properties and characteristics of the desired 
object. 

Let him (6.¢. the seeker after Salvation) always retounce quali- 
ties and habits that are the result of the darkness of mind (Zame- 
gna), such as anger, uncleanliness—both physical and mental—in. 
dolence, and infatuation. Let him also hold himself aloof from 
Rajoguna, ¢. ¢., passions, such as jealousy, hatred, lust, conceit end 
restlessness of spirit, and instead, acquire Satogus, se, good quaii- 
ties, such as tranquility of mind, gentle disposition, purity, know- 
dedge and ideas. 


Cuap, IX] Lieut or Tauri. 293 








Let him be friends with the happy, kind to those who are in pain 
and distress, love those who are good and virtuous, but neither love 
nor hate those who are wicked. Let the seeker after ssivation al- 
ways devote at least two hours daily to meditation of devotional 
exercises and mentally see ail the subtle principles within the body, 
such as the principle of thoughi, etc. We are conscious beings. 
Therefore, it is that we can acquire and possess knowledge, and see 
exactly whatever state the mind—the manas—is in, as for instance 
tranquil or restless, happy or sorrowful, Similarly, we are conscious 
of the doings of the senses, can remember what we have seen before, 
are cognizant of different ideas and objects at different times ; attract 
and sustain others and yet we are dsitinct from all of them ; other- 
wise the soul could never be a free-agent, nor the prompter and 
sustainer of the principle of thought, the senses, the body and the 
bodily organs, 

In this world there are five kinds of Kéesha (pain) :-~ 

(i). Ignorance, St has already been described (in the begin- 
ning of this Chapter’. 


(ii), Asmitd is to regard the principle of discernment and the 
soul as one and the same thing. 


(iii). Rdga is the love of pleasure. 

iv). Dvesha is aversion to pain. 

(v) Adhénivesha is the fear of death. All living beings have 
continually the desire to live for ever and do not wish 
to die, 

Let every man free himself from these five kinds of d/esha 
(pain) by means of the practice of yoga and the acquisition of 


spisitual knowledge, the realization of God, and enjoy the supreme 
bliss of Emancipation, 


O—The kind of salvation you believe in is quite different from 
that of the rest of the world, Now the Jainees hold that salvation 
consists In going to Séivapuri and sitting there quietly on a platform 
called Moksha Shilla (the stone of salvation) ; the salvation of the 
Christians consists in going to the fourth Heaven wherein they 


aftrarsferercerterfifiriter: 97 get: | 
Rrra TH VIG RH 





294 Licet or TRUTH. [Cuar, IX 





enjoy themselves by singing, playing and putting on fine dresses, 
and marrying and fighting ; whilst thc Mahomedans believe that 
salvation consists in going to the seventh Heaven, Vdua Mdrgis to 
Shinpur, Bhaivites to Kasldsh, Vaishnavites to Batkunth, and Go- 
sdeens to Goloka and enjoying life by means of beautiful wives, 
pretty dresses and houses, nice foods and drinks. The Pourantks 
(the followers of the Pwrduas) believe in five kinds of salvation :— 


(1) Residence in the same world with God. 

(2) Living with God as His younger brother. 

(3) Becoming like God in nature. 

(4) Living near God as a servant lives near his master. 
(5) Intimate union with God. 


Last of all, the Veddntists hold that salvation consists in the 
absorption of the soul into God. 


A.—We shall discuss the different kinds of salvation which the 
Jainees, the Mahomedans, and the Christians believe in the twelfth, 
thirteenth and fourteenth Chapters, respectively, of this book. The 
salvation of Vdma Mérgis, which consist in nothing else but eating 
meat and drinking wine, hearing love songs and enjoying them- 
selves with women, is no better than what you get in this world, 
They look upon al] men as Mahkddevd or Vishnu, and all women 
as Pdéravati or Lakshmi and enjoy themselves with each other, 
Now this is no better than what the princes and other wealthy 
people do in this world except that they say that there will be no 
disease in Heaven and that you will always remain young, which 
can never be true ; because wherever there is enjoyment of sensual 
pleasures, there is disease, and wherever there is desease, there is 
old age. The Posraniks should be told that their five kinds of 
salvation are attainable even to animals, insects and worms without 
any effort on their part, 


Take for example, the first kind of their salvation. All 
these worlds wherein afl living beings exist are God’s Who 
lives in all of them, hence they live in the same world with God, 
Salvation number (2) is also possessed by the soul without any 
effort on its part; because being smaller than God and both 
being conscious entity it is Hke a younger brother to God. 
(3) As regards the third kind of salvation, being a spirit and pos- 
sessing consciousness and being pure in nature the soul is like 


14 


Licut oF Truti. {Cuar. 1. 





57 


58. 


59 


6, 
61, 


62, 


67. 
68. 


7 
7 


73 


Sata (asi—to be) is One who exists in all times, the past, 
the present and the future, and is not limited by time, 

Chit (chitié—to know) is one whois a truly conscious 
Being and endows souls with true knowledge of 
right and wrong. 

Sachidjnanda (sata+chit+anande)is One who isa 
truly conscious, blissful Being. 

Nitya—Firm, Immortal, Eternal, 

Shadha (skudi—to purify) is One who is Himself pure 
and purifies others, 

Mukta (mucklari—to free) is One who is always free 
from all sin aud impurity, and frees souls from sin 
and suffering, 

Nitya shudha budha mukia subhdva is One who is 
Eternal, Holy, Omniscient and Free, 

Nirdkdra (nir—no, akér—form) is One who has no 
form nor body nor is ever embodied, 

Niranjana (Nir—no,—anju—form, colour, immorality, 
disorder) is One who is free from immoral conduct, 
disorders, etc., nor is He the object of senses such as 
the eyes, 

Ganapati (Gaxa—host, pati—Lord) is One who is the 
Lord of host, #. ¢, of all the Material and Spiritual 
world, which He also protects, 

Ganesha (Gana—host, [’ska—Lord), Lord of Hosts, 

Vishoeshwara (Vishwa—universe, 'skwora—Lord), 
Lord of the Universe, 

Kutestha, is One who pervades all, supports all, and 
yet Himself undergoes no transformatior.. 

Devi has the same meanings as the word Deva, which 
is of Masculine gender, whilst Devi is of feminine 
gender. God has names in all the three genders. 

Shakts (shatri—power) is One who {s powerful enough 
to create the world. 

Shri (shrinya—to serve) is One who is served by all 
saints, sages and seers. 

Lakshmi (Laksh—to see and mark) is One who sees 
all the universe and endows it with distinguishing 


ent araaary ag fh Salts caf o 


Cuap, 1X] Lrext oF Trura. 295 








God, but it can never be like Him in possessing infinite power, 
infinite activity and infinite attributes. As regards salvation 
number (4), God being Omnipresent all souls are near Him, hence 
all of them already possess this kind of salvation. The same may 
be said of salvation number (5). God being All-pervading. He 
also resides in the soul. Hence the latter is in intimate union with 
God. 

The disintegration of the body and the soul into their compo- 
ment parts, which is called salvation (##rvena) by some atheists 
(Budhists), is attainable even to dogs and donkeys, 

All these kinds of salvation are no salvation at all. They are 
really prisons, because all those people believe their respective 
Heavens, such as SAivpuri, the fourth Heaven, or the seventh 
Heaven, Shripur, Kailash, Vaikunth and Goloka, to be definite worlds 
or places (of residence), Were their inmates to leave those places, 
they would lose their salvation, They are, therefore, rather like 
prisoners imprisoned in dark cells out of which they dare not go, 
The true salvation or emancipation consists in this that the sou! 
should go about wherever it likes without any let or hinderance, 
and should have no fears, doubts, or sorrows. 


The union of the soul with the body is called its dirth, while 
the severance of this link is called death or dissolution, 

The emancipated souls are born again in the due course of time, 

0.-——Do you believe in the unity or the plurality of birth (of the 
soul)? 

A.—In the plurality of births, 

O.—Why can the soul then remember what happened in its pre- 
vious births and deaths ? 

A.—The soul is finite in knowledge and powers, Itis not the 
seer of the three periods of time—the past, the present and future— 
it can not therefore recall its past. Besides, the manas—the principle 
of thought and attention—by means of which the soul knows can 
not have two ideas, é#, of the past as well as the present—at one 
andthe same time, Let alone things that happened in the previous 
life of the soul, can a man remember ali that happens in this very life 
from the time of conception till, say, the age of five. We see and 
hear so many different things while we are awake, and dream of 
so many different things while inslumber, way can we not recall 








296 LIGHT OF TRUTH. (Cuap, IX. 








all those things when we are in deep sfeep? You could never tell, 
if you wereasked, for example, what you were doing on the ninth 
day of the fifth month of the thirteenth year of your life exactly at 
ten In the morning ; which way you were looking ; what the posi- 
tion of your head and hands was; whether your mouth was open 
or shut ; and what you were then thinking of? When such is the 
caseeven in this life, how absurd then to question the validity of 
the previous existence of the sou! simply because it cannot recall 
what happened in that life? It isa good thing too that the soul 
cannot remember its past, otherwise there would have been no 
happiness for it. It would have died of sheer pain and mental 
anguish brought on by brooding over the terrible sufferings and 
sorrows of its past lives, No man can ever know what happened 
in his past lives even if he were to try to do so ; because the soul's 
power and knowledge are limited. God alone can know that, 


O.~How can the punishment, that God inflicts on the soul, 
teform it when it cannot remember its past ; because the punish- 
ment could prevent it from committing any further sins only if 
it were to know that such and such a punishment was meted out 
to it for such and such a sin. “ 


A.—How many kinds of knowledge do you believe in ? 

O.—Eight kinds, such as knowledge through dsrect cognition 
through /xference, through analogy, etc. 

4,—Wby can you not then infer the existence of the previous 
life of the soul from seeing different people born and brought up 
under different conditions in this world such as affluence and pover- 
ty, happiness and misery, talent and idiocy, etc. Suppose a physi- 
cian and a layman are taken ill. The physician at once finds out 
the cause that brought on the disease on him, while the layman can- 
not ; because the former has studied Medical Science while the 
latter has not. But even the layman knows this much that he 
must have violated some law of nature—dictetic or sanitary, etc, 
—to bring on the disease, such as fever. Similarly, why can you 
not infer the pre-existence of the soul by observing people afflicted 
with pain and suffering, or endowed with pleasures or joys of this 
world in unequal proportions—the result of their actions in the not 
present life ? If you refuse to believe in the pre-existence of the 
soul, how do you thiok it te be consistent with the justice of God 





Cuap. IX,] LicHr or TRUTH. 297 





to bless some with riches, power, and talent, etc. while afflict 
others with poverty, suffering, idiocy and the like without there 
having done anything—good or evil—in their previous lives to 
deserve them? God can be just only when He gives the soul 
pleasure or pain according to its good or evil deeds done in its 
previous lives, 


O.~The belief in the unity of birth is not inconsistsnt with the 
justice of God. He is like a Sovereign Ruler, whatsoever he does 
is just. He may also be likened to a gardener who implants trees 
big and small in his grove, some he trims, others he cuts down, others 
still he protects (from wind, and cattle, ete.), improves and multi- 
plies. One can do whatever one likes with one’s own, In like man- 
ner, God can do whatever He likes (with this world). There is no 
one above Him who could punish Him or whom He should fear, 


A.-—-God always desires justice and acts justly, therefore it is 
that he is Great and worthy of our homage and adoration, He 
would not be God if He acted unjustly. A gardener who plants 
trees aimlessly on promenades or other places, cuts down trees that 
do not require cutting, multiplies those that are fit to be multiplied, 
and does not multiply those that are suitable for multiplying, is 
worthy of blame, In like manner would God be blameable were 
He to act without a reasonable cause, It is absolutely necessary 
for God to act justly, because He is pure and just by nature, 
Should He act like a madman? He would even be beneath a good 
judge of this world, and would no longer be honoured. Does not 
a judge, in this world, who punishes the innocent and awards 
honour to those who have done nothing to deserve it, merit blame 
and forfeit hishonour? God never does anything that is unjust. 
He, therefore, fears none. 

Ov—God has pre-ordained all. He gives one or acts by one what- 
soever He had determined before-hand to give or do, 

4.—His determination is always in accordance with the actions 
of the soul, Should it be otherwise, He would be unjust and 
guilty. 

O.—All men have the same amount of misery and happiness, 
The great have great cares, whilst the small have smail troubles 
and cares, A rich merchant, for instance, bas a law suit, of say Rs, 
3,009,000, in a Court of Jaw, He leaves bis house in a palanquin 

38 


298 LicHT or TRUTH, {Cuap, 1X, 





(borne on the shoulders of men) for the Court on a very hot day. 
The ignorant, when they see him thus passing through a street, cry 
out “Behold the might of virtue and vice. One is comfortably 
sitting in the palanquin, whilst the others are bearing him on their 
shoulders bare-footed with a burning ground underneath and a 
scorching sun over head.” But the wise know that as the Court fs 
drawing nigh, the anxiety of the merchant, his doubts and fears 
are increasing, while the palanquin bearers are getting easier at the 
prospect of being soon relieved from thelr burden. When at 
last they get to the Court, the merchant thinks of going hither and 
thither, He soliloquizes thus “Shall I go to see my counsel or 
shall [ see the clerk of the Court first? Shall I win or lose to-day? 
Ob! 1 wish I knew what was going to happen” and soon, The 
palanguin bearers, on the other hand, chat together, smoke, feel 
happy, and enjoy their siesta, If the merchant wins, he feels a bit 
happy, if he loses, he sinks into the depths of misery, whilst the 
palanquin bearers are affected neither one way nor the other, They 
remain just as they were before the case was decided. Similarly, 
when a king lays himself down on his beautiful and soft bed, he 
does not go to sleep quicker than a labourer who falls asleep as 
soon as he stretches himself on uneven earth covered with stones 
and pebbles, The same is true of all other conditions seemingly 
unequal, $ 

4.—Only the ignorant can believe that all are equally happy 
or miserable, If a rich merchant and a palanquin bearer were 
asked to change their places with one another, the merchant would 
never like to become a palanquin bearer, while the latter would 
simply jump at the offer. Had they been equally happy or miser- 
able, the merchant would never have refused to change his place 
with the palaquin bearer, nor, would the latter have liked to be- 
come a rich merchant. 


Behold the difference between the happiness and misery of 
different people ! One soul comes into the womb of the queen of a 
great righteous and learned king, whilst another in that of the wife 
of a poor miserable grass-cutter. One is happy and well-cared for 
in every way since the day of its conception, whilst the other suffers 
in a hundred different ways. When oncis born, heis bathed with 
pure fragrant water, and his cord is carefully cut. He is properly 
fed and cared for, When he is hungry, he is given milk mixed 


Cuar. 1X.) Licht or Troris. 295 





with sugar and other necessary ingredients in proper proportions. 
There are servants to wait upon him, toys for him to play with, 
conveyances to take him out to pretty and healthy places. He is 
well-loved, and is happy. The other is born in a jungle, where not 
even water is to be had to wash him. When he is hungry and wants 
milk, he is slapped on the face instead, cries most pitifully, but no 
one attends to him and so on, 

The infliction of suffering or the awarding of happiness to 
souls, without their having previously done acts—sinful or virtuous 
—to deserve it, would disgrace God, Besides, if we suffer or enjoy 
here in this world without having previously done anything—sinful 
or virtuous—our going to Hellor Heaven after death ought not to 
be dependent on our deeds done in this life, because just as God 
has given us pleasure or pain here without our having previously 
done sinful or virtuous deeds, so would He send some of usto Hell, 
others to Heaven just according to His pleasure, Why should 
men then practise virtue. (If this logic be accepted) all would be- 
come wicked and lead sinful lives; because it is doubtful if virtue 
will bear any fruit. It all rests with God, He would do just as it 
would please Him, No one will thus fear sin which will conse- 
quently multiply, whilst virtue will decay. It follows therefore that 
the present birth ofthe soulis in accordance with its deeds—sinful 
ot virtuous—in the past, whilst the future will be determined by ita 
present and past modes of life—righteous or unrighteous. 

O.—Are souls in the bodies of men and animals of the same 
nature or different? 

A,—They are all of the same nature, but are pure or impure 
according as they are virtuous or sinful, 

O.—Do the souls of men go into the bodies of animals and 
pice versa ; and do the souls of men go into the souls of women and 
vice versa? 

A.—Yes, they do. When sin predominates over virtue in a 
man, his soul goes into the bodies of lower animals and the like 
when virtue predominates over sin in a soul, it is born as a good and 
learned person. When sin and virtue are equal, the soul is born as 
an ordinary man, Sin and virtue being of three different grades— 
superior, medium and inferior—men can be divided into three classes 
according as they are possessed of superior, medium and inferior 


joo Licur or Trurs. [Cuap. IX. 





kind of material (s¢., bodies, bodily powers, mental capacities and 
talents. etc.) When sin preponderates over virtue, the soul suffers 
the consequences of its sin in the bodies of lower animals and the 
like, till its sins and virtues are equalised when it is invested with a 
human body. Similarly, when it has enjoyed the excess of virtue 
over sin, it is born as an ordinary man. 

The separation of the soul from the body is called death, whilst 
its union with the body is called dirtk, When the sou! leaves the 
body, it lives inthe atmosphere (yama)!, because it is said in the 
Veda “ Yama is another name for air.” Thereafter the Great Judge 
—God—embodies that soul according to the nature of its deeds 
done inthe previous life, Guided by God it enters the body of 
some living creature with air, water, food, drink or through any one 
of the openings of the body. Having entered it, it gradually 
reaches the reproductive element, and thereby establishes itself in 
the womb, and is thus invested with a body and eventually born, It 
is clothed with a male or a female body, just as it merits a male or 
a female one ; whilst a hermaphrodite is formed by the union of the 
male and the female reproductive elements in equal proportions at 
the time of conception. The soul is continually chained down to 
this wheel of births and deaths till by the practice of the highest 
virtue and complete absorption into Divine ;contemplation and the 
acquisition of the highest knowledge it obtains Emancipation. By 
the practice of deeds of the highest virtue, etc, it is born as a good 
and great personage among men ; and being freed from births and 
deaths and the consequent pain and suffering, it enjoys perfect blisa 
in Emanciption till the end of the Grand-Dissolution, 

O—Can Emancipation be obtained in one life or in more than 
one? 

,—In more than one; because it is said in the Upnishad 

“ Verily it is only when all the knots of its heart— 
os darkness, and ingnorance—are severed, all its doubts 
dispelled, and when it sins no longer that the soul 


free qranfaftgqad adeza: | 
dat aver anti afer ct nein TWH VI Wo 
RlHecak 


1 “tt is not the fictitious yema=the death angel of the Garay Purana 
(—one of the mythological books—7Zy.) We shall treat of this subject more 
fully in the eleventh chapters) 





Cap, 1X] : Licut or TRruTu. 361 





finds rest in that Supreme Spirit Who pervades it both within and 
without.” 


O—Is the soul in Emancipation absorbed into God or does it 
retain its individuality ? 

A.—It retains its separate individuality, for should it get 
absorbed into the Divine Spirit, who would then enjoy the bliss of 
Bmancipation. Besides, all the hardships borne, all the efforts made 
and all the means employed to obtain Emancipation would become 
useless, Absortion of the soul into the Divine Spirit is not Hianci- 
pation but its death or anshilation, It is only the soul that obeys 
the Will of God, follows the highest virtue, associates with the good 
and the great practises yoga and employs all the aforesaid means, 
that obtains emancipation, Says the Upnishad :— 

« The soul that knows the Supreme Spirit Who is All-truth, All 

F knowledge and All-Bliss and resides in the very in- 
annie 1. terior of the soul and in the principle of discernment, 

finds rest in the Omnipresent Great God and there- 
by, being in harmony with the Indefinite Omniscient Supreme 
Being all its (righteous) desires are gratified. In other words, 
whatever happiness it wishes for it obtains.” 

O.—When the soul can not enjoy worldly bappiness without a 
body, how could it then enjoy the bliss of Zmancépation without a 
physical body? 

A.—We have answered this objection before, but will add that 
the soul enjoys the bliss of emancipation through God in the same 
way as it enjoys the worldly pleasures through the body. The 
emancipated soul roams about in the Infinite All-pervading God as 
it desires, sees all nature through pure knowledge, meets other 
emancipated souls, sees all the laws of nature in operation, goes about 
in all the worlds visible and invisible, sees all objects that it comes 
across, the more its knowledge increases the happier it feels. Being 
altogether pure, the soul acquires perfect knowledge of all hidden 
things in the state of Emancipation, This extreme bliss alone is 
called Heaven (swarga), while the pursuit of worldly desires and 


aal erat me tt aqrafet ger? ye 2 eters at 
See erertey wre ere meray ferafera he i Bere 
sequal 1 saz o 8 





yon Lient or Trora. (Cmap, 1X, 





consequent pain and suffering are called Hell (waraks). Swarga 
literally means Aappiness, The ordinary happiness is called worldly 
Aappiness, Whilst the extreme happiness born of the realization of 
God is called Extraordinary happiness or Heaven (Swaryga). All 
men naturally desire to obtain happiness and escape from pain and 
misery. But as long they do not practise righteousness and re- 
nounce sin, so long they cannot obtain happiness and be freed from 
pain and suffering ; because the effect cannot perish as long as the 
cause exists. It is said “ All pain and suffering cease as soon as sin 
is destroyed just as a tree perishes when its root is cut away.” 


Mark, how fans describes the manifold course of sin and 
virtue :— 

“ Let a man thus know this three-fold nature (of mind)—the 

Manu highest, the mean, and the lowest degree—cultivate 
Xil, 89,35 the disposition of the highest kind and reject the 

33538. ther two. Let him also bear in mind that the soul 
has a 1eward—happiness—or a punishment—pain and suffering— 
for his acts—menta/ through mind, verbal through its organs of 
‘speech, and corporeal through its physical body, 

“ For corporeal sinful acts (such as theft, adultery and killing 
or injuring the good) aman shall assume a vegetable form ; for 
verbal sinful acts, the form of a bird or an animal ; and for sinful 
acts mostly mental, the lowest of human conditions.” 

“The quality that predominates in physical body renders the 
embodied soul eminently distinguished for that quality.” 

“The possession of true ideas by the soul is declared to be an 
indication of Saftva. Ignorance betokens Jamas, Passion of 
love and hatred signify Xayas. These three attributes, 4.2, Sativa, 
Rajas and Tamas of the Prakrité are to found in all things,” 


ee eee 
aoe antares 





Cuap. EX. ] LIGHT oF TRUTH. 303 








“When a man feels that there is tranquility, peacefulness, and 
contentment in his mind, and also his soul is pure as the purest 
light, let him know then that the sativa predominates ; whilst 
the Rayes and Tamas occupy a subordinate position.” 


“ When the soul is unhappy, has no peace of mind, is restlessly 
engaged in the pursuit of sensual objects, let him then know that 
it is the Rajas that predominates, whilst the Sativa and Tamas are 
suppressed,” 

“When the soul and the manas—the principle of thoughi—are 
engaged in the headlong pursuit of worldly things, lose all sense of 
right and wrong, are thcroughly infatuated with sensual gratification 
and absolutely incapable of discussing a subject, and are extremely 
dul! of understanding, let him understand that it is the 7amas that 
predominates in him.” 

“Now we shall describe at large, the various results in the 
highest, mean and lowest degrees that proceed from those three 
qualities.” 

“The study of the Veda—the source of all true knowledge—, 
strict devotion to duty, the advancement of knowledge, the desire 
for purity-—corporeal and spiritual—, self-control, the practice of 
righteousness and Divine contemplation verily betoken Sastua,” 

“Spasmodic zeal, impatience, practice of unrighteous act, 
and habitual indulgence in sensual gratification are the signs of 


Bee ort Thsert conte c 





304 Liant or TRUTH. [CHar. IX. 





the preponderance of Rajas and of the comparative suppression of 
the Zamas and Sativa, 


“Extreme covetousness—the root of ali evils—extreme indo- 
lence, stupidity and sleepiness, discontentedness, cruelty, atheism, 
ie, want of faith in God and the Veda, distraction of mind, want 
of mental concentration, and contraction of evil habits should be 
looked upon by a wise man as indications of Tamas, It is the 
Tamas, then, that predominates whilst the Rayzs and Sativa are 
not markedly manifest.” 

“ Besides, whenever a man’s soul feels shame, doubt and fear in 
having done, in doing or in going to do an act, let him know that the 
Tamas greatly preponderates in him,” 

“When a man seeks great fame in this world, and does not 
cease giving money to flatterers, flunkeys and parasites, poor though 
he be, let him understand that the Rayas preponderates in him.” 

“ When a man’s soul thirsts after knowledge, no matter where 
it comes from, cultivates good qualities, feels no shame in doing good 
actions at which it greatly rejoices, in other words is always desirous 
of practising righteousuess, let him know then that the Sativa 
predominates,” 


“ The craving for sensual gratification is an index of Tamas, the 
desire for the acquisition of worldly possession, of Rajas and the 


— 





sreerefarnsteiracertafing | 

faba raw crud gendet i 

wher: eat gfe: whe after freefere | 

afr sagan ateret seer Ii 

arenes wear gar wftetater qrarftr 1 

avde fager at nad qqweeT | 

Ferftarenter ae earfahreg gerenz | 

ae gtewearyet afed g cwET Hi 

seadqegie wrt aw warfe arrest! 

Qn graft arores eereeqqaw ger it 

wera wae eat careers werd 1 

eeaer eqerath sigtet qrereg a wy o wo %2 1 Rte 
BLS t WR Be— Ae 


Cuap, I] Licut oF Truts, uy 


74 


75 


76. 


77 


78. 





marks or features, as bodies with eyes, ears, etc. ; 
trees with leaves, fruits and flowers; liquids and 
solids with diflerent colours as black, white, red, etc. ; 
earth with dust and rock, etc.; and sees them all. 
He is the most beautiful among the beautiful. The 
chief aim of the Pedasisto teach, of the Yogis and 
wisemen to realize Him. 

Saraswats (sri, to achieve and know) is One who is 
possessed of infinite knowledge of the universe, of 
words, their objects and their relations. 

Sarvashaktimdx, one who does not require the assistance 
of another in accomplishing His works, Who by His 
Own innate power does all His work. 

Niyaydkdri, Niydya is what is proved to be true by all 
the eight kinds of evidence such as, Direct Cognition, 
Inference, Analogy. It is the dispensing of justice 
witBout favour or partiality. Niydydkari is One who 
practices Viydya, i.¢., truth, justice and righteousness, 

Daydiu (Daya—to give, take, go, know, protect injure) 
is One who makes you fearless, knows all, protects the 
good, and punishes the wicked. 

Adwaita is One who is only one, and indivisible without 
any admixture, either of the same kind (as, man and 
man are of the same kind), or of a different kind (as 
trees and rocks are of different kinds from man), or made 
up of different parts. Consequently there is no relation of 
whole to its parts, as of body with its parts such as, 
eyes, ears. 

Nirguna is One who is free from the (distinguishing) 
properties of matter such as, Satwa, Rajas, Tama,' colour, 
taste, touch, smell and of the soxé, such as finite power 
and knowledge, ignorance, passions and desires, and pain 
of all kinds. This definition is substantiated by the 
authority of Upasishada, “He is free from sound, 
touch, colour, and such other qualities,” 


80, Saguna’ is One who possesses such attributes, as perfect 
knowledge, perfect bliss, purity, inflnite power. 


1, See Chapter VIII, for their meanings.—77. 
of certain specific ibutes 


Possessed attributes, 


Cuar..1X.] LicHT oF TRUTH. cs] 





Practice of righteousness, of Sasfva, The last mentioned is superior 
to Rajas, and that in its turn ia superior to Tamas. Now we shall 
describe the conditions that each of these qualities—Sattva, Rojas 
and Zamas—leads to :— 


* Those endowed with Saéfva attain to the state of the learned, 
godly men. Those, who are possessed of Rajas, become men, while 
those immersed in Zamas fall Into the condition of lower orders.” 

“ Vegetables (as trees) worms and insects, fish, snakes, tortoise, 
cattle, and deer, and the like, are the forms which the lowest degree 
of Jamas leads to.” . 

“Elephant, horses, extremely stupid and dull persons, men of 
dirty habits and uncouth speech and manners, ferocious animals, 
such as lions, wolves and boars, are the forms that proceed from 
the mean degree of Zamas.” 

“ Flatterers,' beautiful birds, braggarts, cruel bloodthirsty men, 
and those who drink wine and othe intoxicants habitually and are 
dirty in their habits, are the conditions which proceed from the 
highest degree of Tamas.” 

“ Fencers (cudgel players, etc.), gardeners, sailors, acrobats, 
armed servants and those who are addicted to drinking and gamb- 
ling result from the Rayas of the lowest degree.” 


“ Rulers, men of the governing class (statesmen, soldiers, etc.) 





Reee enfterer atts aqereesy CTE | 
firefepeet exrcrerr ftreaftretten firfirerr wrfer: 11 
err Gfireizrr ae: eater WeETT | 


“ aire she make poetical compositions, etc, in praise of others in erder 


$06. Liou? oF Taura, .  (Cetar. 1%, 





heads of the army and the like are occasioned by the Rajas of the 
medium degree.” 

“Singers, musicians, men of great wealth and resource, compan- 
ions or associates of the great and good men of vast learning or 
those who wait upon them, and women of great beauty and 
physical charms are caused by the Rajas of the highest quality.” 

“Those who are strictly devoted to their duties, truth and 
righteousness, masters of their passions, altruistic teachers of 
humanity—Sanydsis, teachers of the Veda, aeronauts, astronomers, 
physicians or hygienists, s, 4, those who devote themselves to the 
science and art of the perfect development of the human body, pro- 
ceed from the Sativa of the lowest degree,” 

“ Philanthrophists, seers of the Veda, godly learned men, great 
scholars of the Veda, professors of the science, of electricity, astro- 
nomy, geology, etc. (literally, the science of time), those who 
possesss true knowledge and power which they use for the good 
of others, and great Teachers result from the Sastva of the medium 
degree." 

“ Masters of all the four Vedas, masters of al! the sciences and 
arts, who invent (or construct) air ships and such other machines, 
those who are embodiments of righteousness and wisdom, those 
who acquire control over the elementary matter! result from the 
Sattva of the highest degree. ” 

“The ignorant, the basest among men who indulge their 
sensual appetites, renounce the practice of righteousness and the 
performance of their duties and lead sinful lives assume the basest 
forms and thereby suffer various afflictions.” 





enrert wear feet we arfirer eres | . : 
agurfy w teraz sem arfteret oft: i 

ewer Sreatt ey etree eran | 

frrercaite errevear ficettet enfers? orf: a 


ty Literally ofoms and the first stage after their combination-<=2?, 


Cnar, IX] Licut of Taurn ww 





Thus whatsoever act a man sows by virtue of the Sativa, Rajur 
and Jamas, the same shall he reap. Those who are emancipated 
are beyond the pale of these three qualities, Let every man, there- 
fore, endeavour to become a great yog# by the practice of yoga, aid 
employ himself in the pursuit of those means that lead to Amancipe- 
tion, Leta man restrain his mind from the doing of acts that pro- 
ceed from Rajas and Tamas and thereafter even from those that 
result from Sattva, and become imbued with purity and such other 
good qualities, Let him then withdraw his mind from the’ 

senses, aim it at righteousness, and concentrate it on 
ioe God. “ This withdrawal ofthe mind from all things 
: and concentrating it on one point is called yoga." 

“ After the mind is withdrawn and concentrated, the soul is 
centred in God—the Seer of all—and finds rest in Him.” 

Let a man practise all the above described means of Emawnsipa- 

4éon and understand that “Exemption from pain 
sheen {which is of three kinds—that from physical disorders, 

hunger and thirst, etc. that from other living beings, 
and that from natural causes such as excessive heat or cold, or 
excessive or deficient rain, or from the restlessness of mind and 
the senses—and the consequent attalnment of Emancipation is the 
highest work.” 


In the next Chapter we shail discourse on Conduct—Desir- 
able and Undesirable, and on Diet—Permissible and Forbidden, 


Tue END OF CHAPTER IX. 





nen fewqat eat neeereite © | 
swat arieretitat wferergeettirg: W 
afqarat weltta weterraeir «| 
araretarite efercfirftratar were: 
FY © BT o 82 Ra © wo | UR— Yo 1 4R Ht 


Arofewergferftrtren Ware CER 
OE AG Netware LI RE 
srafirfragrerenafirgferceargerrdh: | aie? ste tige t 8 


CHAPTER X 
on 


CONDUCT—DESIRABLE anp UNDESIRABLE, 
DIET—PERMISSIBLE AND FORBIDDEN. 





OW we shall treat of desirable conduct—the performance of 
righteous actions, refinement of (character) speech and manners, 
association with men of learning and piety, and love of all true 
knowledge, etc.-and ssdestvable conduct—the reverse of all these 
things :— 

“People should always bear in mind that whatsoever is done by 
learned men—good and true—, who are free from 
inordinate affection and hatred, or whatsoever is 
known to be true by the testimony of the inner monitor is the 
true conduct of life, That alone should be followed.” 

“In this world, neither inordinate desire nor its total absence is 

conducive to a man’s happiness, because it would be 

Manu ll, 2 i cypossible either to lead a virtuous life as enjoined 

by the Veda or to acquire true (Vedic) knowledge withovt desir. 
ing the same.” 

“It is impossible for any man to be altogether free from desire, 

because all our actions—philanthrophic works, truth- 
fe fulness in speech, the practice of Vamast and 
ve Niyamas,* and other duties—proceed from desire 


Manu Il, t 


for the same,” 

fra: fee: afarhterritrertirfi: | 

weqdureargerat at enterftetrere n argo 81 hi 

werereren sareet a &tgreererrn | 

evett fic Garters: eatteras Afipe: urge 218 

won & qen agevaert: | ; 

wean froecter ot cergen Gye WAT VIB 

1. Yamas are Give :—(1) dindness to all. (2) truthfulness in word, deed, and 
thought, (3} Aomesty in dealings, (4) chastity, (5) freedom fromconcert—To.. 

ze Nivemer are also five : Parity of mind and body, (2) mental tranquility, 


3) femiplation of the Deity: (Go Resigeation to the Will of Ged 7. 





Cuap, X.} LIGHT OF TRUTH. ~ 3° 





“Even the most insignificant action (¢,g., nictitation) in this 
world is impossible without a desire on the part of - 
Hana the doer, Therefore, whatever a man does (¢.g., the 
movements of his hands, feet, eyes, and mental 
activity) is the outcome of his will.” 
“Let a man regulate his conduct according to what is sanctioned 
by the Vedaes taught by Smeritis and otber books of 
Lar the Rishis—seers of the Vede—, practised by all men. 
i —good andtrue and approved by his own sowl.” In 
other words, let him perform such actions in the doing of which no 
such feelings, as fear, distrust and shame, arise in the soul, Behold, 
when a man desires to tell a lie or steal anything, his soul is filled 
with feelings of fear, shame and doubt, it is, therefore, a proof of 
the fact that it is wrong to do such an act, 
“ Let a man, therefore, carefully view all these—the Veda, the 
teachings of the Vedic seers, practices of good men 
Mann and true, and the approval of his own soul— with the 
a eye of wisdom, and do his duty in obedience to what 
is sanctioned by the Veda and approved by his own soul,” 
“Verily that man, who follows rules of the righteous conduct 
as taught by Veda and by the Smrstis in conformity 
Lars with the Veda, shall acquire fame in this life and the 
ae highest bliss in the next.” 
“The Veda is cailed the shrufi and the system of conduct of 
life as taught by the Vedic seers aud teachers is em- 
jiana’ bodied in the Smriz, It is by the help of these that 
f the trne conduct of iifeas well as the false is ascer. 
tained. He who holds them—the Vedas and the works of true 


senrrer firey fafirg cave he wfefere | 

pra rylrseyhoenrtehe-wal ape 
Rirsferet eokeret epferete w afieret, 

sree ergemegttt eag = <1 





eatery ffir errergqer | 
A Cars ort eee te 8 
i Naan, 
Rernget ger kaye US s 


torte Ryererrerg fire: | 
pest ak arkara ra ae 


g10 Licnt or TRuTs. [Caar. X, 





teachers in conformity with the Veda—to contempt should be 
excluded from all good society, as an athiest and a slanderer of 
the Veda. 
= Therefore, the Veda, the Sm riti, the practice of good men and 
true and the approval of one's soul—these are un- 
Hee doubtedly the four criteria of the True conduct of life, 
In other words, it is by these alone that the true reli- 
gion is ascertained.” 
“It is only those who stand aloof from the headlong pursuit of 
both—wealth and carnal desires—that can ever attain 
ie: a knowledge of true religion. It is the duty of every 
Z one, who aspires to gain this object, to determine 
what true religion is by the help of the Veda, for, a clear and per- 
fect ascertainment of true religion is not attained without the help 
of the Veda.” 
“ Therefore it behoves all men to practise all those righteous 
deeds that are enjoined by the Veda. Dwiyas— 
ee Brdhmans, Kshatriyds and Vaishyas—should per- 
form all Sasskdvs' for their own good as well as for 
that of their children, They lead to purity (ental and corporeal) 
in this life as well as in the next.” 
“ Let the Zonsure Sanskar be performed in the sixteenth year 
of a Brakman, inthe twenty-second of a Kshatriya, 
ies in the twenty-fourth of a Vatshya.” (In other words, 
it should not be delayed beyond those periods). 
Thereafter they should keep a tuft of bairon the top of the head 


fe: qf: eqrere: eer w ferret: | 

HY STATET WHT AY 21 WH 
srdwriarerart watert firdtae | 
wat frnrarcrerent sorrel gest arf: Wry © 81 RRM 
Reds eatfie: qelhideriefeerTT | 
wre anteetarere: are cer Se Wi yo 81 EH 
Save Cay et wrerqer five’ | 
crepqwrdtatting Sever maftne een arg 2 21 8 


1, A sonske’r is anything done to improve, refine and purify body and 
she tool, ‘Thee aeahogethes seen soneha the at be i the mara te 
course object children, as has been descr 

ee oer eas : 





Citar, XJ Lacut or Tautn. git: 





and always cut or shave the hair of the head, mustache and beard. 
That isto say, they should never grow them afterwards. Ina very 
cold climate they can please themselves as to cutting the hair or 
allowing it to grow. On the other hand, in a very hot climate they 
should have all thé hair, not even barring the tuft of hair on the 
top of the head, cut or shaved ; because too much hair on the head 
is productive of heat which causes dulness of intellect. The 
tmaustache and beard cause inconvenience in eating and drinking ; 
because the particles of food adhere to them.” 


“ As a skillful driver keeps his horses well under contro) and 

directs them in the right path, so should a man 

fared strive to keep his senses—that are apt to lead one's 

mind to the pursuit of wicked objects and tempt- 

ations—under thorough control, restrain them from the path of sin 

and temptation, and always guide them in the path of righteous- 
ness, This alone is the true conduct of life.” 


“Verily that man alone can achieve his heart's desire who is 

master of his senses and directs them in the path of 

iene righteousness, But he who allows them to get 

engrossed in sensual gratification and sin, and thus 

becomes their slave, soon contracts evil habits, loses his character 
and suffers the evil consequences thereof." 


“Sensual desires are never fully gratified if they are indulged. 
They are only inflamed still more fiercely like fire 
which blazes more vehemently when fuel (and 
butter) are added to it, Let a man, therefore, never indulge in 
sensual gratification.” 


Manu II, 94 





cfhrarat firecat freterrerfty | 

eat qerenfed fart were after ay © 8) aay 
cferavel rerta treqeqrrdgey | 

eaten oy ened we: fRrfir Pree ug © RIAN 
rg Son Srrengarants oreae | ae 
afew poqeete qa quiftwat tage rian 


gis Licut or Tavts. . [Caan X. 





“ A man who is the slave of his passions can never aucceed in 

acquiring knowledge of the Veda, in keeping up his 

Manulls 97% vows of chastity, truthfulness and the like, nor in 

fulfilling his duties towards man and God, practising righteousness 

and.doing good works, They are only attainable to the good and 
pdous man who is the master of his senses,” 


“Let a man, therefore, have thorough control over his five 
organs of sense and five organs of action and the 
eleventh organ of thought,—the mind,—protect his 
body by proper dieting and by observing the laws of health, and, 
thereby achieve the object of his life.” 


Mana, 21, 100. 


“He is’ verily the master of his senses who rejoices not when 
applauded, nor grieves when censured, is neither 
Mana If, 98. pleased by the sensation of nice soft things (such 
as soft comfortable bed and clothes), nor displeased by that of 
hard and coarse things, neither delighted with the sight of beauti- 
fal things nor vexed with that of ugly hideous things, neither 
pleased with a good dinner nor angered with a bad one, nelther 
gladdened with the smell of perfumes, nor disgusted with that of 
disagreeable odours.” 


“Let a wise man never speak unless spoken to, nor answer a 
question when unjustly and hypocritically asked. 
Among hypocrites let him remain as if he were 
dumb ; but to the honest truth-seeker let him preach even though 
unasked,” 


Qqreeers ware frerrar aifer w 

a fiorgearwer ferf& cregfta wfffirg ¥ ayo 81 80H 
we peaenrdt caer @ FreraT | 

quia, e erattqaferfigaery rrerergy 8 ay © & | too 1 
geet CTT | Cyr eee wea wy oe 

we geen fey vuererftr wt er free Fae hege: yey no Rae A 
ange: weeftrg gate wererte qe | 

eeprafiy fatereft erawgite eerweg bg e 81 tke kt 


Manu, I, 110. 





Cuar.-X] Licat oF Tauts. 53 





“ Wealth, nobility of blood, age, professional skill, and honesty 
Magy 11, 196 industry (or character) and true knowledge, these 
: are the five things to be respected but the one 
following more than the one preceding it. In other words, a man 
of noble lineage or one’s relation ought to command more respect 
than a man, who is only wealthy, an aged man should be respected 
more than the first two, a man possessing some professional skill 
or good character more than the first three ; again true knowledge 
and wisdom (the wealth of mind) should command more respect 
than professional skill or character.” 


“ An ignorant man destitute of true knowledge, four bundred 
years old though he be, is in truth a child; whilst a 
teacher of secular knowledge and of spiritual science, 
though he be a child, should be respected as an old man; because 
all the Shdstras and wise sages have declared an ignorant man to 
be like unto a child and a learned man like unto a father.” 


“ A man does not become old (great) by years, nor by gray hair, 
Mazo, {t,t nor by wealth, nor by powerful kindreds and 

11,354 friends, The wise and holy sages have declared,— 
‘ He among us is old (great) who is most learned in knowledge— 
material and spiritual.’” 


Manu, II, 153. 


“ A Brdhman is entitled to distinction according to the extent 
of his knowledge ; a Kshatriga is judged by his 
physical power, a | Vaiskya by material wealth in 
his possession, and a Shudra by years.” 

fret weageier: wat fiver stefte caret | 

renfiy arerernnty rant TEST W Ayo 2A TRE 

writ arf & are: free weft ae t 

ort fic waftrerng: fee oy sere Hag 0 21 RE 

wr erat afta freter ot argh: | 

cerinink wah lnsgeiaias te cera daass tue 

fire? errat olga’ eftirrery efter | 

dheamat wreianer: ghittartiet snstet: tg o 21 CNN 

ee 


Manu II, 155. 





314 Licut or Trute. _ [Cnar. X. 


“A man fs not, therefore, old (venerable), because bis head is 
Mana If, 156. gray, but he, who has acquired wisdom though tender 
i in years, is considered old (venerable) by the wise.” 
“As an elephant made of wood or as a deer made of leather, 
Manu 80 is a man destitute of knowledge. He isa man 
A, 157. only in name.” 

“Let a man, therefore, gain knowledge and acquire wisdom, 

Manu lead a virtuous life, bear malice to none and show 
+ Uy 159 all men the path that leads to true happiness. Let 
his speech be sweet and kindly.” Blessed are they who always 
preach the truth and thereby promote righteousness and destroy 
sin and wickedness, 

Let a man always bathe regularly, keep his clothes clean, his 
food and drink clean and pure, and his house clean and tidy. The 
cleanliness and purity of these things lead to health and purity of 
mind, which in their turn increase strength and capacity for work, 

Cleanliness should be sufficient to remove all traces of dirt and 
disagreeable odours, 

“ The practice of such virtues as veracity, and the doing of good 

Manu works verily constitute the true condnct of life enjoin- 

1, 108, ed by the Veda and taught by the Sardtis.” 


Ya) aa “ The service of father, mother, tutor and ##ithss, 


xi, or £¢, the altruistic teachers of humanity, is called Deva- 


ales puja or the worship of godly persons,” 
‘Al, 11. ‘i 
itRean Ses 
qaraviareret TW ATOR WAH 
war Sree Cet cen acted aT | 
war fisitsreftarrerres area first nary o 21 tis UI 
afgate quai eriwinsqurea | 
arg, Se srger eer ter waiftreqer: hg o 81 CUE 
wmrere weet ooh yege: erred cy el go Wet! ton 
are te welts fed, after srrerdag hogy: oto CRI WH 
srartt mqude mgarfterfregd x wad o gfe {ti wo 
Witte WwH 


Fraga ererdgir ww | erferfic tar we a 
arate | awl wel 7 





Uzevlwmme th 


8 


Liguy or Tayrs. [Caap, I. 





81, 


83, 


Bs, 


87. 


88, 


Everything in this universe is saguna (positive) and 
sirguna’ (negative.) For instance, the material objects 
are called sirguna, because they are void of the proper- 
ties and powers of conscious beings, as will and feelings, 
Whilst they are also saguna (positive), because they 
possess their own material properties, The same is true 
of God. He is saguaa, when He is looked upon as pos- 
sessed of His own attributes, as Omniscience, Omnipot- 
ence, but He is also Nirguna, being free from the pro- 
perties of matter and sou), 

Antarydmi is One who pervades the animate as well as 
the inanimate universe, and controls it. 

Dharma Raja is one who is free from sin and evil, and 
rejoices in truth, justice and righteousness—The Great 
Judge. : 

Yama is One who governs all, administers justice to all 
and is the personification of Justice, 

Bhagwan (Bhaga-to serve) is One who is possessed of 
all might and power, and is worthy of being served and 
worshipped. 

Manu (mana—to know) is He Who is the true embodiment 
of knowledge, and worthy of being known and believed, 
Purusha (Pree—to fill, sustain) is One who fills the whole 

universe. 

Vaishwambhara is One who sustains and preserves the 
world. 

Kédla (kala—to count) is One who counts and classifies 
the material objects and souls, 

Shesha is One who undergoes no change during Creation 
or Dissolution, He'is the one Unchangeable Eternal 
Being. 

A’pta (dpiri—to pervade) is One who pervades the 
universe, is filled with all true knowledge and righteous- 
nes*, is the true Teacher of all, accessible only to the 
good and the righteous, and free from such bad attri- 
butes, as dishonesty, fraud, etc, 





}. Devoid of certain specific attributes. 


Cnap, X,] ; LIGHT oF TRUTH. $i 





Devotion to whatever promotes the good of the world as well as 
abstinence from all harmful acts are the chief duties of man. Let a 
man never associate with those who are atheists, and liars, nor with 
those who are indolent, guilty of breach of faith, hypocritical, selfish 
and deceitful. Let him always move in the society of men who are 
learned, truthful, pious and have public good at heart. This, in 
truth, constitutes goed conduct, 

O,—Is not the character of the people of Aryavarta (India) lost 
by going abroad ? 

A—No, it is not; because a man can retain a good character 
‘and is hot polluted, no matter where he goes, as long as he is pure 
in mind and body and practises such virtues as truthfulness, Who- 
ever is addicted to a sinful life and immoral practices, even though 
he lives in India, loses his character and is polluted. Had it not 
been so, why should the ancients have travelled abroad, Mark 

what is written in the Mdhébkarat. “Once upon a 

Mahabharat time the sage Vyasa lived in Pattla (America) with 

Mokshdbama his son and pupil Shwéa, The son asked his father 
ce if spiritual science was only what he had taught him 

or something more. Vydsa intentionally did not answer that ques- 
tion. He had lectured on that subject before. So in order to have 
his teaching confirmed by the testimony of another man, he address- 
ed Skuka thus, ‘O my son, you go to Mitk/apurd and ask this very 
question of Kipg /anak. He would give you the right answer’ 
Having heard what his father said, Skuke left America for Mithla- 
pac, He first visited the continent that lay to the North and 
North-West of the Himalayas and was called Hartvarsha* 
{now called Europe), then the countries of the Jews called 
Hoon (Asia Minor, etc.), thence he came to China, from China he 
proceeded towards the Himalyas and thence to Mithlapuri. It is 





Rindter & ot of derwa ar | 
wate eqfinees aredt wearer i 
@ dare fefrers gedewtagefreftert, s wErare © qrfie © 


Sree olsre Won - 


1, Hari a monkey, Vershe an abode, HarisVarsha therefore literal) 
means abode of monkeys, so-called because its inhabitants have rad lips ang 
brown eyes like those of a monkey. 


16 Licnt oF TRUTH. (CHap. X, 





recorded inthe same book that Avishna and Arjuna went to 
America in an Ashwatars vessel (i.¢., one propelled by electricity) 
and brought the sage Uddalata back with them on tha occasion of 
the Rajasuye Yajua of Emperor Yudhishtira, Again Prince 
Dharvitrdshtra was married to a princess of Gandhdr (Kandhar). 
Madri, The wife of King Pdéadw was the daughter of the King of 
Iran (Persia). Prince Arjuna was married to Princess Ulopi of 
Patala (America). Now how could they have done all those things 
that they not gone abroad! ? 

Again there is mention of a tax in the Manu Smit’ which was 
Jevied on all vessels leaving Indian ports. 

When Emperor Yudhssthira performed his Rajasuya Yajna, he 
sent his brothers, prince BAsma, prince Arjuna, prince Nakula and 
prince Sakadeva with invitations to all the kings of the four quar- 
ters of the globe to join the Yayxa. Had they considered it debas- 
ing to one’s character to travel abroad, they would not have done 
all those things, 


The ancient Indians used to go abroad to all parts of the world 
for the purposes of trade, travel, or on political business. The pre- 
sent day bug-bear of loss of one’s character and faith through tra- 
velling abroad is simply due to the false teachings of the wise-acr:s 
and the growth of dense igrorance, Those who do not hesitate to 
go abroad, and thereby associate with peoples of various foreign 
countries, study their customs and manners, increase their trade, 
and augment their political power, become fearless and bold, and 
attain great power and prosperity by studiously imbibing the good 
qualities, and adopting the good customs and manners of the 
foreigners, and rejecting their faults and evil habits, and bad 
manners, O ye foolish people! Your character and faith are not 
lost by having sexual intercourse with a low, despicable prostitute, 
but you consider it harmful and debasing to associate with geod men 
of other countries! What is it, if not foolishness ? It is true though 
that those who live on flesh-diet and take intoxicating drinks, have 
their bodies, bodily organs and secretions (as the reproductive ele- 
ment) saturated with the fine particles of those malodorous sub- 
stances, The aryas (natives of India) should, therefore, be careful 
that they do not get infected with these evel habits, But there can 

ett 


1 Literally to different countries, peniasulas and islands. —7>. 


Cuap. X.] Licut oF TRUTH. 317 





be no harm or sin in learning trade, arts and other good qualities 
from the foreigners. When these foolish people consider it a ain 
even to see or touch them, they can never fight against them, as 
they must see and touch them in fighting, Let all good men 
remember that good conduct consists only in the avoidance of 
untrutbfulness, injustice, inordinate affection or harted and other 
evil habits, and in the practice of love and kindness towards all, in 
the cultivation of gentle disposition and in the promotion of public 
good, etc, Let them also understand that religion has reference to 
one’s soul and good life. When we live righteous lives, foreign 
travel can dous no harm. The evil consequences flow only from 
the commission of sins, It is right though that we should 
thoroughly understand what the true Vedic religion is, and also 
learn to refute false religions, so that no one may be able to mislead 
us, Can a country ever make any progress unless its people trade 
with or extend their rule over other countries? What can you 
expect but misery and poverty, when the people of a country trade 
only among themselves, whilst the foreigners control their trade 
and rule over them? These hypocrites—the so-called priests and 
other religious teachers perfectly understand that if they educated 
the people, and let them travel abroad, they would get enlightened, 
and consequently would no longer be ensnared in the net of fraud 
and hypocrisy spread by them, They would thus lose their liveli- 
hood and respect. This is the reason that they make so much fuss 
in the matter of eating and drinking, Their object is to prevent 
people from going abroad, It is quite true though that not even 
by mistake should they ever use meat or drink. 


Have all sensible men not ascertained that in time of war the 
cooking of food and its eating, or drinking (milk or water, etc.) 
under such absurd restrictions as those of Chaka’ by soldiers have 
invariably been the cause of their defeat? The dwép of a soldier— 
whether on foot, mounted on a horse oron an elephant, or seated 
iaa car—consists (if necessary) in eating.and drinking with one 
hand whilst fighting the enemy with the other, and in winning the 
battle ; while it is wrong on his part tolet himself be defeated, 
By observing such absurd restrictions as of Chauka in the matter of 





1 The kitchen should be plastered with athin coating of mud mixed with 
abltofcowdang. The food shoald be cooked by n0 one else but a high caste 
Brakman and served by the same within a marked ares, etc,—Zy. 





gis LicHT or TRUTH. [Crap. X. 


eating and drinking, and other foolish practices, These stupid people 
have lost all independence, hapginess, wealth, political power, learn- 
ing and activity, in short, everything. Now they are sitting idle 
with empty hands, praying for some one to come and relieve their 
distress, and give them something in charity wherewith they could 
get some food and ease the pangs of hunger. But that help is 
never forthcoming. They have thus completely ruined Aryavaria 
(India). It is quite true though that no pains should be spared 
in washing, plastering, sweeping, cleaning and tidying up the 
kitchen, It should never be allowed to get dirty like that of 
the Mahomedans and Christians.* 


O.—What are Sakhares and Nikhares ? 


A.—The food that is cooked in water is called Sakharee, while 
what is cooked in milk or fried in butter is called Nikharee (i. ¢., 
nice), This is another fraud invented by these rogues. The food 
cooked in milk and butter is always pleasing to the taste; they 
have originated these fraudulent practices (in the matter of food) 
in order to fill their stomachs with delicious, greasy articles of food, 
otherwise, whatever has been ripened by heat and time is called 
vige (another name for mikharee), and whatever has not been 
cooked or ripened is called raw (another name for sakharee). 
Even the permissibility of all ripe or cooked food and the prohibition 
of raw food is not applicable to all cases, for instance, fried grams 
and other cereals, though ws-cooked, are still eaten and their use is 
not forbidden. 


O—Should the Dwijas cook their food with their own hands 
or is it permissible to eat food cooked by the Shsdras ? 


A.—They can eat what has been cooked by the Shudras; because 
itistheduty of the Dwijas—Brahmans, Kshatriyasand Vaishyas 
(both men and women) to devote themselves to the dissemination 
of knowledge, the service of the state, the breeding of cattle, and 
to agriculture, trade and arts (and not to waste their time in cook- 
ing, etc), But they should not eat or drink out of a Skudras' 
utensils or what has been cooked in hisown house except in case 





t In India the kitchens of the Mabomedane and Christians are not 
generally clean. Among the ropes residents in India it is chiefly dne 
to the fact that the kitchens are entirely left in the hands of low caste Indian 
servants who do not possess any great sense of cleanliness.}=-77. 


Cuap. X.] Licut or Trutu. 319, 





of emergency. Here isan authority for this statement :—“ In the 
: houses of the twice-born, Skudras—i. ¢, ignorant 
4 eee men and women incapable of following any higher 
ni3&  Sursuit—should do the cooking and other domestic 
service,” But they should keep their bodies and clothes, etc., clean, 
While engaged ia cooking in the houses of the Aryas—the #wice.' 
born—-they should have their mouths covered (with a piece of cloth) 
£0 that their breath may not contaminate the food, and their saliva 
may not fall into it; they should shave and have their nails pared 
regularly once a week. They should wash before cooking. They 
should take their food after the Avyas have been served, 
O,—How can it be permissible to eat food cooked by a Shudras 
when it is held to be wrong to partake of food even touched by him ? 


A—It is a mere fabrication, and therefore, absolutely wrong. 
Bear you well in mind that whosoever has partaken of sugar 
(brown or white), butter, milk, flour, vegetables, fruits and roots 
has in fact eaten what has been prepared by men of all sorts and 
conditions, and their leavings, When the Skudras, leather-workers,* 
scavengers, Mahomedans, Christians and others gather sugar-canes 
from the fields, peel them, and press juice out of them, they handle 
them with their soiled hands, as they do not wash them even after 
micturating or defecating. They suck one-half of a cane, and shove 
the remaining half into the press, fill a jug out of a vessel containing 
cane juice, drink as much as they care, and pour the remainder 
back into it. While evaporating the juice, they sometimes make 
cakes in the same pan and never clean it afterwards. In the manu- 
facture of white sugar, they rub the brown sugar with their shoes, 
the soles of which are soiled with all kinds of dirt, offal, and dust, 
Milkmen adulterate milk with water kept in their dirty cans, and 
keep butter in the same, Similarly, in the manufacture of flour 
they—the labourers—handle it with their dirty hands, and even 
their perspiration trickles down into it, The same’ kind of un- 
desirable practices are to be seen in the careless handling of fruits, 
roots and tubers. Whoever has, therefore, eaten these things hag 
in fact eaten of the hands of men of all sorts and conditions, 


aratftfye et ag dewefoe: a srrennnign | 
MUSH RITE) WEE U1 gw 
1. Leather-workers in India are of very dirty habits —7Zr. 


34 Licut or Trot. [Cuar. X. 





O.—There is nothing wrong in partaking of foods and drinks 
that have been prepared and handled behind your back, such as 
fruits, roots and tubers, etc, (by undesirable persons). 

A.—Indeed ! what else would you have eaten? Dust or ashes? 
Sugar is sweet, milk and butter are nourishing, you could not 
forego the use of these articles. No wonder, therefore, that you 
extremely selfish people have invented such false doctrines and 
practices, Well, if there be no harm in eating or drinking what 
has not been prepared before your eyes by some undesirable per- 
son, would you eat food out of the hands of ascavenger or a Maho- 
medan’ who cooked it with his own hands in some place out of 
your sight? Ifyou say no, then there is harm even in eating 
things that have been prepared out of your sight, It is true that 
in eating and drinking out of the hands of fiesh-eaters and wine- 
drinkers, such as the Mahomedans and the Christians, there is 
some danger of even the Aryas—followers of the Veda—contract- 
ing these evil habits, ¢. g., eating flesh and drinking intoxicants, 
But there can be no harm if the Asyes dine together. It is ex- 
tremely difficult for people to make any progress as long as their 
religion and their interests are not the same. Again, they can- 
not progress when they do not rejoice in each other's joys, nor 
sympathize in each other's afflictions. But mere dining together 
can never lead to any real progress, As along as they do not 
avoid evil things—manners, customs, etc—and embrace good 
things, instead of making any progress they will go from bad to 
worse, The causes of foreign rule in India are:—mutual feud, 
differences in religion, want of purity in life, lack of education, 
child-marriage, marriage in which the contracting parties have no 
voice in the selection of their life-partners, indulgence {a carnal 
gratification, untruthfulness and other evil habits, the neglect of 
the study of the Veda, and other mal-practices. It is only when 
brothers fight among themselves that an outsider poses as an 
arbiter. Have you people even forgotten the practices that were 
in vogue at the time of the Mahdbhdrat War, a little over five 
thousand years ago? In the war they—the soldiers—-ate and 
drank even while riding or driving in cars, Matual feud ruined 
the Xawraves, the Pandavas and the Yedavas in the past, The 


—— 
1. The Pour anits do not partake of food touched by a Mahomedan or a 
Christian.—7y. : 


Cuap. XJ Licut or Trur#, gar 





same fatal disease is still clinging to us. None knows whether 
this dreadful fiend wil! ever leave us, or rob us of all our happiness 
and plunge us in the depths of misery. The Aryas are still tread- 


ing the wicked path of the despicable low Duryodhana, the des- 
troyer of his race and the enemy of his country. May God irons 
His mercy rid us, Aryds, of this dreadful disease. 


ON DIET—-PERMISSIBLE anp FORBIDDEN. 


Permissibility or prohibition in diet is based on two factors— 
one determined by the Science of morals and religion, and the 
other by the Science of Health. 

“The swice-born—Brdhmans, Kshatriyas, and Vaishyss—must 

not eat such vegetables, fruits and roots as are 
Mana Vi 5. saised in night soil and other kinds of refuse.” 

“ They should abstain from flesh diet and intoxicants", such 
Manu as wine, Ganja, Cannabis Indica, and opium, etc, 
1,177- 

Let them never use those articles that are prejudicial to the 

growth of intellect.” They should also avoid the 
Shurgngdhar se of all those articles of food that are decomposed, 

fermented, unclean or foul smelling, etc. and those 
that are not properly cooked as well as those prepared and handled 
by such men as live on flesh—diet and intoxicating drinks whose 
very bodies are saturated with the fine particles of meat and alcohol, 
The Aryas should neither themselves kill such useful animals as 
cows, nor let others do the same. One cow in one generation 
benefits 475,600 men through her milk, butter and offspring—male 
and female. Thus, some cows give thirty-two pints of milk, others 
not more than three pints daily, say for twelve months (some give 
milk for eighteen months, others for six, hence we have taken the 
mean of the two.) Calculating on this basis, we find that 24,960 
persons can be fed at one meal with the milk given by one cow in 
her whole life-time. On an average a cow calves about twelve times 
during her whole life. Supposing two of them die, of the remaining 


ssrerennfty ficenrefterrereroudravatig w Ny OTL R 

waltverg atery 0 aye 8) 199! 

gficqeafts og at erqenft eget | UTP TT we v1 Rae 2E I 
41 





a2 Licut of Tauri. (Cuar, X. 





ten calves, say, there are five males and five females, The latter 
during their lives will together giveenough miik to satisfy 124,800 
Persons at one meal. The remaining five males calves can produce 
at least 180 tons of corn,! and supposing we allow 1341b of corn per 
head, 180 tons will do on a rough estimate for 250,000 persons as 
food for one meal. Putting milk and corn together a cow in one 
generation can supply one good meal to 475,600 people. Similarly 
if we go on calculating the amount of corn and milk yielded by one 
cow in al! her generations, it will be found that they would be suffi- 
cient to feed millions upon millions of people. Besides, bullucks are 
very useful to man for tilling the ground, riding, pulling carts 
and waggons, and carrying heavy loads, etc., but the chief use of 
cows is that they yield good milk, Buffaloes are also useful like 
cows and bullocks. But a buffaloe’s milk is not so useful in pro- 
moting the growth of intellect as a cow's, Therefore, it is that the 
Aryas have always regarded the cow as the most useful animal, 
Other enlightened people will do the same. One guat yields 
enough milk to satisfy 25,920 peuple at one meal. Similarly, horses, 
elephants, camel, donkeys and sheep are of great service to man in 
various ways. Those who slaughter these animals should be luoked 
upon as enemies of the whole human race. When the Asyas were 
in power, these most useful animals were never allowed to be killed. 
Consequently, man and other living beings lived in great peace and 
happiness, Because, milk and butter, and such animals as bultocks 
being plentiful, there was abundance of food and drink (as milk, ete.), 
But since the meat-eating, and wine-drinking foreigners—the slayers 
of kine and other animals—have come into this country and become 
Vridba the ruling power, the troubles and sufferings of the 
Chanatya Aryas have ever been on the increase ; because, it is 
X13 said, “ How can you get fruits and flowers of a tree 
when its root is cut off?” 

O.—Were all people to live on non-flesh diet, lions and other 
carnivorous animals would multiply in such large numbers that 
they will kill all such useful animals as cows, Your attempt to 
prevent their slaughter would come to nothing. 


wt age Ae cre we gory | GawTgwT aro 201 Cai 
1. Bullocks are used in India for tilling the ground and other agricultural 
purposes.—7>. . 








Cuar. X.J Licut oF Trot. “323 





A—lIt is the business of the State to punish or even kill all 
those men and animals that are injurious (to the community) ? 


O—Should their flesh, ¢¢, (of the animals thus killed) be 
thrown away ? 

4.—It would do no harm to the world whether it be thrown 
away, given to dogs or such other carnivorous animals, cremated or 
even eaten by some meat-eater. But if eaten by a man, it will 
tend to change his disposition and make him cruel, 

The use of all such food and drinks as are obtained through 
injuring or killing others or through theft, dishonesty, breach of 
faith, fraud or hypocrisy is forbidden, in other words they all come 
under the heading of forbidden articles of diet ; while the acquisi- 
tion of foods and drinks through righteous means without injuring 
or killing any living creature falls in the category of permissible 
articles of diet. This also includes all those articles that give 
health, and strength, destroy disease, promote intellectual power 
and energy and prolong life, such as rice, wheat, sugar, milk, 
butter, fruits, tubers and roots, when properly mixed in due pro- 
portion and cooked, and eaten in moderation at proper meal times. 
Abstinance from the use of all those things that do not agree with 
one’s constitution and are apt to produce disease or other evil 
effects, and the use of those that are prescribed for one (by his 
medica] attendant) also constitute adherence to what is called 
the permissible diet, 

4 Onl there any harm in eating together, #. ¢, out of the same 
ish? 

A—Yes, it is harmful, because people differ in their nature 
and constitutions, &c,, from each other, Just asone in eating out 
of. the same dish with a leper is apt to catch disease, likewise eating 
with other people is always liable to produce evil results, It can 
never do any good. Therefore it is said in the Manu Smriti :— 

“ Let no man give the leaving of his food to another, nor cat 

out of the same dish with another, nor eat too much, 





Mange ner after finishing his meal leave his seat without 
: washing his hands and rinsing out his mouth,” 
infeg? weaftrqermrarend gave | 


wy &enecaet qutearfegge: wftrer wate argc 2148 9 


324 Licut or Traut. (Cuap, X, 





0,—How will you then interpret the text“ Let a pupil cat 
Uckhistha (the leavings of) his preceptor”? 

4.—It means that a pupil should serve his tutor first and after 
he has finished his meal, let the pupil himself eat of what is left 
behind—not as leavings but what has not been used by the teacher 
and is still kept separately. This only implies that the teacher 
should have his meal before his pupil. 

O.—If the use of all kinds of /avings is forbidden, honey—the 
leavings of bees, milk—the leavings of calves, and one’s own 
leavings—the food left after one has taken one morsel out of it— 
should also be forbidden. 


4,—Honey comes under this description only nominally. It is 
really the essence of many a medicinal plant, hence it is acceptable. 
The calfcan only drink the milk that comes out of the teats of 
its mother, but not what is inside, Therefore the milk, that is ob- 
tained by milking a cow after the calf has sucked it off the teats, can 
not be called savings, But it is proper that the udder and teats 
should be carefully washed and cleansed with pure water after the 
calf has had its share, before the cow is milked, and the milking 
vease! should also be kept perfectly clean, One's own leavings 
can dono harm to oneself, Even nature clearly teaches us that 
it is wrong to eat another man’s Jeavings, No one feels any great 
repugnance in touching the secretions from one’s own nose, mouth, 
ears and organs of reproduction, micturition and defecation, but 
one does so in the case of others. It proves, therefore, that 
this practice is not against the laws of nature. No one, therefore, 
should eat the leavings of ur in the same dish with another. 

O-~—Should not even husband and wife eat each other's 
leavings? 

A.—No, even their natures and constitutions differ ? 

O.—Weil, Sir! What harm is there in eating what has been 
prepared by any one as long as he is a man ; because the bodies of 
all men, from a Srakman to the lowest of human beings, are made 
of flesh and bones? The same blood runs in the veins of all. 

A.—Yes, there is harm, A Spdhman and a Brdhmané are fed 
on the very best of foods, hence their bodies are formed out of the 
reproductive elements that are free from impurities and other dete- 

terious elements, which is not true of the bodies of the extremely 


Cua. 14 Licut or Trutit. y 





91. Shankara (sham—good, karaim—from dukram—to do) is 
one who is the Benefactor of all, and Giver of happiness, 

92. Makddeva (makd—great+deva) is One who is greatest 
among the great, the good, and the learned, and is the 
Light of the world, 

93. Priya (Preen—to please and desire) is One who gladdens 
the good, the righteous and the true seekers of salvation, 
and is worthy of being sought after—The embodiment 
of Love. 

94. Swayambku (Swayam—sell and Shu, to be) is One who 
is Self-existent, Uncreated. 

95. Xaveé(ku=word) is One who is all-knowledge and reveals 
true knowledge through His Word (The Veda). 

96. Shiva is One who is ail Bliss and the Giver of happiness 
to all, 

97. Swardi—Self effulgent. 

98, Suparnd—the Protector and Preserver of the Universe, 

99. Matrishwd—Powerful like wind, 

100. Garstmdn—Mighty by nature. 

We have here explained the meanings of only one hundred 
names, but there are millions of other names of God besides these. 
His names are without number, because His nature, attributes and 
activities are infinite. One name stands for each of them, These 
hundred names are like a drop in the ocean. In the Veda and 
the Shasfras, the iufinite attributes, powers, characteristics of God, 
are described, and can be learnt by the study of those books. A 
perfect knowledge of even other subjects can only te gained by 
those who study them, 

Why has this work not been commenced with a benedictory and 
auspicious porolgue ? = 

O.—How is it that you have set down nothing in the way of 
manglacharana’, like other authors, who do it in the beginning, thi 
middle and the end of a book ? . 


eaeecererernfes esertfty enrfit St frererther At eererhy 
&ferdt oo zz01 tf 


1, The custom of writing set words and phrases, indicative of susplcious- 
ess in the beginning, middie and end of a book 7, way of Prologue, Interlouge. 
(1 awe the reader an apology for coining this word) and Epilogue.—7>. 


3 





Cap. X} LIGHT oF TRuTs. 325 





degraded men and women that are simply laden with dirt and other 

_foul matter. It is, therefore, right that we should eat and drink with 
Brdkmons and other higher classes and not with scavengers and 
workers in leather.) N ow what would you say if you were asked 
“Would you look upon all other women, such as your 
mother, sister, mother-in-law, sister-in-law, daughter-in-law, with 
the same eye as your wife, because all of hem are made of the same 
kind of flesh and blood?” You will simply be filled with shame 
and make no answer. Again, as good, clean food is eaten with 
hands and the mouth, so can the bad, unclean and decomposed 
food be eaten, would you then eat dirt, etc.? Can this ever be 
right ? 

O.— As you plaster the kitchen floor with cow-dung (and mud), 
why do you not then also use humau excrement for the same pur- 
pose? Why is not the kitchen polluted when the dung is used 
in it? 

A.—The dung is not so foul-smelling as the human excrement. 
The cow-dung being greasy does not so easily come off the floor, 
nor does it soil the dress, nor does it look dirty. Dirt does not 
come off the dry dung so easily as off the mud. The place that has 
been plastered with a thin coating of mud and dung properly 
mixed together looks nice, If the kitchen, wherein food is cooked 
and sometimes also eaten, and naturally therefore particles of food, 
such as bread-crumbs, sugar and butter, drop down on the floor 
which being thus made dirty attracts flies, insects and other such 
creatures be not swept, plastered and properly cleaned every day, 
it would be as dirty as a privy, The kitchen, therefore, should be 
properly plastered with mud and dung, swept and kept thoroughly 
clean. This applies to the floor that is made of bricks and mud or 
of the latter only. But if it he cemented, it should be kept clean by 
washing it thoroughly with water. The kitchen should never 
be allowed to get dirty and untidy like that of a Mahomedan 
wherein there is a pile of charcoal in one place, a heap of ashes in 
another, and a bundie of sticks in the third, here a broken kettle, 
aad there an unwashed plate, here some bones, there some joints, 
and as about flies their number is legion Ii! That place is, 
asa rule, so dirty that if a respectable man were to go and sit there 
See ee Se 


hi ohn ee and women who do this work in India are extremely dirty in their 


326 LicuTt oF TRUTH. {Cuap, X. 





for a little while, it would soon possibly bring up his food, It looks 
more like a latrine.* Well, if you think that plastering with mud 
and dung pollutes your kitchen, why do you plaster the walls of the 
rest of your house with them? Why do you burn dried cowdung 
in your fire-place and use that fire to light your pipe (hubble- 
hubble)? Do not” these things pollute your kitchen? What 
nonsense | 
O.—Should one take his meals in the chauda or outside it ? 


A—One may take his meals wherever the place is clean and 
tidy, But in times of war and other cases of emergency it is 
quite proper to eat and drink in all positions and places—sitting on 
horse-back, driving in cars, or standing. 

O.—Should cne eat only what has been cooked by one’s own 
hands and not that which has been done by another ? 

A—Among the Aryas as long as food has been prepared in a 
clean manner, no matter who has done it, there is no harm in eat- 
ing it in company with ail other Aryas. If Brdhmans (men and 
women) and persons of other higher Classes were to devote their 
time to cooking, washing the utensil, sweeping and dusting, and 
observing such embarrasing restrictions as that of the chawka, who 
would then attend to higher pursuits, such as the advancement of 
science and arts. Behold! On the occasion of the Raysuya Yajna 
of Emperor Yudkisthra, kings and princes, sages and wise teachers 
had gathered from ail parts of the world. They all ate and drank 
together, It is only since the Mahomedan, the Christian and other 
religions have come into existence, and the Aryas begun to quarrel 
and fight among themselves, and the Mahomedans and the 
Christians taken to eating beef and drinking wine that these 
troublesome restrictions in eating and drinking have come into 
vogue in this country, 

The kings, princes and other 4eyas of ancient India had even 
marriage relations with the foreigners, as we read in the Maka- 
bkdvid that Gdudharee, Madri, Ulopee and other princessees, 
of Gdndkdr (Kandhar), Persia, America and Europe were married 
to some of the Indian princes. Shetwsi and others dined with 
the Xawravas and the Pandvas. They never quarrelled with 
each other, because then only one religion prevailed in the whole 


* Which is generally kept extremely dirty especially among the poor.—7¥. 


Cuap. X.] Licnr oF Trauts. 5337 





world, And that was Vedsc. They all firmly believed in it, They 
looked upon other's sorrows and joys, gains and losses as if they 
were their own. It was only then that peace and happiness 
reigned throughout the whole world. But alas! Now it is 
different. The religions are various and so are their followers. 
‘Their mutual hatred and strife have greatly increased, and con- 
sequently their sufferings and sorrows have immensely multiplied. 
It is the duty of all wise mento do away with all these evils and 
relieve this suffering. May the Omniscient Ruler of ali sow the 
seed of true religion in all hearts, whereby al) false religions and 
false doctrines may soon perish. Let all wise men ponder over it 
impartially, leave off all mutual hatred and malice, and promote 
the happiness of all. 

We have briefly discoursed in this chapter on Conduct—desivable 
and sndestradle,and on Diet—perwissible and forbidden. 

The first part of this book is here finished. In the first ten 
chapters we have not criticised other religions and sects to any 
great extent for the simple reason that people can never grasp the 
spirit of criticism—abstruse or otherwise—as long as their reasoning 
powers are not sufficiently developed to enable them to judge bet- 
ween right and wrong, We have, therefore, preached the gospel 
of truth in this first part of the book. Now in the second part 
(comprising the last four chapters) we shall mainly examine the 
chief religions of the world vés., of the religions and sects of India 
in the eleventh chapter, of Jainism and Buddhist in the twelvth, of 
Christianity in the thirteenth, and of Mahomedanism in the 
fourteenth, At the and of the book we have also given our own 
beliefs and désbeliefs. Let those, who want to see chiefly the 
criticism of different sects and religions, consult these four chapters, 
though in a general way criticism ig to be found also in the first 
ten chapters. Whosoever will read these fourteen chapters with 
an impartial eye and without any prejudice, the light of truth will 
undoubtedly shine in bis heart and he shall enjoy happiness ; but 
he who reads them or hears them read in the spirit of jealousy, 
stubborness and sophisty, will hardly be able to grasp the spirit 
of this book. Whosoever will read it without due care and re- 
flection, will fail to understand its purport and be lost in confusion, 
It behoves all wise men first to ascertain what the truth is, and 
then to embrace what is true and reject what is false, and thereby 


328 Lieut oF True. {Cuar. X. 





enjoy supreme bliss, This and this alone is the highest duty. It 
is only such learned men as readily embrace good qualities that 
reap the four-fold fruits of this life, vis, the practice of righteous- 
neas, acquisition of wealth, realization of legitimate desires, and 
attainment of salvation. 


Tue Enp or CHAPTER X. 


THE END OF PART |. 


INDEX. 





~ a 
of Justice “Iga. 9 
ice 


ot distant iastriages 83, § 





Admini 
Advantages 
Adwaita 











Aghmarshana % 
Agni 1 4. 50 7. 28, 19 
Aguihatra 122, 118 
Agnishwata 

kara 
Abaratras 
Abuti 


Astreya Brakman : 
aa Upanisha 





Alva 
Akasha 
Abshara 
Alcraistic teachers of bumanity 








Pack. 
2665, 
104 
174-76, 77, 182-188 
a on 57 


Arjuna 
Archa 
Art and Policy of 


Ashladhyadi 
Ashwatari Vessel 

| Astrology 
Astronomy 





Atharva Veda. 19, 5 ate 79s 1125135, 
162, 235 266, 269, 270, 314 
Atithis 4s 49; 76. 117, 118 




















Atithi yajna urd, 117-118, Ae 
Attributes of God rn ‘Sts & 
Atyantabhava 
Avaya (dened) LG 
ya (defined). 5 27% me 
| Ayurveda sta _ 
B. 
Badri, father of Vyasa 
Bahyabbyantarakshepi 
Bahya Vishaya —.. 
Bandhu 
Barhishad 
Bathinj 
un of purification 
an 
Bhagwat _ 
Bl tgita 
rave, 
Bhumi 
Bhuta 
Bhutastha 0 
Bliss (supreme). 
Bodies, kinds of 
foe ol oe 
Book of prefzes and suffixes... 
Books on ven Vocabulary and =? 
Philosophy o oe 70 
Books on Politics a 302 
Boundaries of Aryavarta ae 965 
Bradhna oe ae 27K 


ii INDEX, 














Hen Pace PacE 
mk «Ty dy Sy 10,13 Deva 104, 10 
Brahma 267, 268, 104 Deva Asura Sangram ’ 
Brahma (persoo) i...) gram 265, 266 
Deva Tarpana see we 
Brahaman...45, 46, an 6, 98, rn tot Deva Yajna 412, 118, 37 
Brabmanas (four) 71,74 Devar we 13 
Beskioan. Granth 139 a7 Devi a we 4 
1 Pod 
pakaer 32, 1 Dewata pa 2 3, 2 
rya 27, 40- 8 
Brahma Yajna’ ee y 0, "9 
Brahma Purana 331 
Brihaspati 6 
Budha 150 
70 
c. on ae 
Cases in shes Niyoga on 105 
sanctions 141, 8 ue 33 337 
Causes of day and night a “ } Dilerence between re-1 iia : 
Cause, of disputes... pay 191 | and Niyoga 130 
Direction: ate west, ‘ete. defined” 61 


Cause of creation common 246, 24; 
Cause of creation efficient 246, 247 | Direct cognizance ... 











Canse ofmaterial ... 2 Dissimilitude 
Chandra ie 46s 247 | Dissolution 
Chandrama we v5 | Divya 
Charak ‘21, 72; Dravyas gd xa 
Sharactriaica of inpostares oe aar | wig of ioe and oth 
tH te offici 
ea system sana ry of Brahwans ... 
cas Ctamten Fs Bute of Shugra 
Chhadmika at 1 Duties of Vaishya -_ 
Chiondogy a Onat “7 7° | Dempar Y Yoga a 14ty 285 
a a A 
shad... 4, an 7t, 1s, 226, 227, 245 | 1 Dwija 4. 28, 38 471 78, 112, 264 
Child (his Giet after birth) —«.. E. 
Child (his Metraction, by mother 





during infancy) Educat 

Child’s birth oe Io}, 108 Eighth of i 

+ 79 | Emancipation 2, 148; 274, 273, 300 301 

bi Emancipation, ‘pew. Vetaniet se 

doctrine: about it criticize 
06374°750 27g, ao 










Emancipated soul a 80-285 
Emancipation, its duration = «285 
Emancipation not eternal 283 
pemential stages of Sandhya & 
a (67 
Creation of man 263 | Ether 5% 60 
Evidences of human ‘spirit we 54 
Criteria between right ‘andwrong. 50 Evils of marrage between of 
D, Pe pe 2 of kindred parents 83, 84 
Daitya aes re- marriage. 129°130 
Dama vee F. 
Danava 
Dasbaraths Five daily duties of life 45, praiat, 45 
D Five systems of which human 
Dayalu 18 COM 288 
luction Five tests examination ‘of 
Delective police truth oe $t, 52 






































INDEX. iii 
Pace. Pack, 
Flesh diet criticised 322-23 | Ishwara and the soul one 228 
Four stages of human body =... 43 | It Sen ie 9 
Foreign travels proved from an- Itihas. 
cient history oe BU5-17 
cot loca'y Sai; oe 72 sacuivica 
‘ree compul lucation fT 
From causes to effects : a 67 [ope hana 
From effects to causes 68 | Jaimini 
fala 
G. la 
jana 
Ganapah javal Rishi aS 96 
[nana . AZ 
astice 191~93 
Sanchar Vee By a jyotisha Shastra oo 73 
Ganesha (Fod) rod) ave a K. 
arbhi nee 2 . . 
Garbhedhan Saoskar” ‘o6.t07 | Kaivalya Upanishad 
(woman) oo 79 159 mals. ni 
Carsten pe ane 5p 17 i 
ats x. 5g | Kaliyuga 
Gata Sica estat o-  74| OR arora we pen} 
Gay Maza Kath Upaiahad vy 7 AT 
Gita Kauravas te 7 
Gopatha Brabmana Foxi one hd te 
Gade ct ¥ Bealmachary Kenn Upanishad ae on n 
en 2 % may perorn"boma asd 
Guna defined a ijna by proxy wt 173, 
Gur ral 13 Bing have one wife only 
Kiet (pain), its 6ve kinds 
Know! je ee 
Ranoman Knowledge, i its greatness 
Hari Aom Roshas, 
Hari Varsha 
Havirbhuja 
Heaven, 
Hell 
Hinsra 
Hiranyagarbha 
History 
Holy prayer 
Homa 
Horoscope 
Hota 
Eira 266, 
0 
Indra La Fa 
Indriya a a 62 
Jofuence | o 52. Sty 55 
ihe ‘relation ay 59 
inter dining criticis j2: 
Ish ‘Upanishad sone =e cH 
Ishwara on we 2, 8 oe 





INDEX. 





Mahasamanya 
Maha Tatwa 
bhus 





Manana 
Manas 
Manasa Prakrima: 
Manduk Upani- 
shad 4 715 144—48, 247, 300 
Mangala ww (12 
Mangalacharan 
Manorama 
Manu ” 
%; 971 99) 1 





01, 102, 103, 108, 
109, 150, UtTy £12 113, t16—125, 
T1g—124, 128—29, 135—139, 142— 
143-144-146, 149-154, 156—57, 


162, 364—167, 170173, 176, 178, 

180—182, 184, 185, 188—190, 193 

Manu (author)... 4, 21, 23, 30, 33, 

34 35r 36, 40, 45, 46, 47. 48, 
50, Ry 81, 83, 82, 55, 





Marching of troops 185—B86 
Marichi a 

Marjana on we 
Marriage ies 82, 83, 105 


Marriage and_disea: 
(Book S, A. Strahan), 84,86, 87, 88, 89 































Pace, 

Merasbansi ee 4 
Naray ; : 
Nastil 
Necessity of Sanyas explained 1 14, 1 @ 

8 os 
Nees ion or non-existence 

idhyasna 


Nighanta 








Nit ase voll 
Nitys, Shudha, Buda, Mukta; “7 
Bow ve ” ow 16 
‘iyayakari on ae E: 
Nowe Shastra ve 52°58 71, 28 
iyoga. ave see 132 
Non-existence we 66 
Nonmenon . 58, 59, 24) 
Nyamas (five) oo 455 


Oo. 
Object of Mantra while 


performing Hava 
Oimsipotence, explained 

















Marriage between whom fro: Omni a 
hibited Omnipr react 
Marri S between whom advocated 90 Omniscient 
Marri life eee 82, 543 | Oordhva pundra 
Mata (god, one += 13] Opadhi 
mee s+ 125 | Opasana oe 
Naiaoga Order of Ashrams 4. 
Matriman Pitriman™ ‘Acharyavan 
ian Veda Pp. 
jatrishwa ane 5 
Means of salvation ... \ ceri oa 
Mento-motor system ae 288 Her shikha on 
Mento-sensary system oo oie | Paniavas Sgn 
Method of Agnihotra | ie ini ae 
a itary part of the science of Gare; 73! Seaman 
ie 1589 rienced 
Mithta Viniti a on 122 Farameehws wae 
aoe treatment a Paramount duty of a  Sanyasi » 1st 
were Medics | aie i 
at H 
PES cha Puramenary Comamest "1 i 
‘al a ” asa 
Monarchy and its evils Pauastil 28, 35) 70 
Maka ee - Paurs niks 19 
jumukshatwa Peace ver 
Munduki Upanishad Period of idclecence 
N. loss 
Naishkritika we 322 o» Maturity 
Names of husbands by Niyoga 136 i 
Narad Sanhitta 73 | Philosophy 





Narka 








Phonetics 


INDEX. v 


Pack. 








Physical system 
Pie (God), 12 ; (father} Fe 
¥ita Mal Lor (God) 133 ‘grand. 

1 
Piawalt te 





Pitri we 1G 
Pitni; yal 122, 003, 116, 118 
Police oo 177, 78 
Possibility §2, §75 $8 
Practice and teachings of Aptas 52 
Pradhioan fahhaya ... 
Pragahhava 
Prachara 
Prajapatya 
Prajna ae 
Prakrite s+, 69, 243, 244; 253 
Prana... 4, 6, 42, 5 (vital force) 288 
Pranayama Mp 35s 150 
Pranta Kala on 285 
Prapitamal 
Prapitamahi 
Prashna 











Pratab Pramanu 
Pratiahar 
Pratyaksha 
Prathava 
Prayojoh 
Presidential Government 
recedents of Ni: 





8, % 
137; 
Preliminary accessories of San? ‘ 


chya oe 4 35 
Principle of individuality 69, saat 
Principle of thought and atten- 

tion we 59s 284, 245 
Principle of wisdom 69, 244, 245 
Principles undeslying the Guru- 

kula system of education 3h 3 3 
Priya 
Prithioi 
Proncunciation 
Prosod: 








child marriage criticised _...91, 
Purity and conviction of one’s own Ae 
foul 52 
1 
‘hn 
“4 





ualifications of a friend 188, 89 
jualifications of students 127 
jualifications of the head of rd 

state 164 


Qualifications of members of 
political assembly ... 167, 169 


Qualifications of Toembers and 
170, 70 
193 196 


ministers of assemblies 
Qualifications of witnesses 











Rajdharm 

R: sa 104 
Ramdeva 20, 24, 28, 31, 200, 242 
Rate of taxes ae 190 
Reasons for Homa we 38 
Renunciation 146, 160 
Return home ceremony vee is 
Revenue 


Rigveda 1, 18, 5, 71y 72, 94-96, Gh 
132-134, 135°371 161, 163, 203, 205, 
242) 243, 249 











kishi Tarpana ng 
Ritugami 108 
Rudra Sy Thy 42 
Rules for pupils and ‘teachers 44, 50 
Ss. 
Sactidananda 
Badalabdha 
Sadbana 
Sadtya 
ya 
Sai on 
t Karam... 
Salvation criticized ... 
Samabrahmcharya ... 
Samadhan on 
Samadhi . 
Samana oe 
Samaveda ae 6, 
Samanya ” 
Samanya to Drishta on 55 
Samavertana eee Bi, 82, 143 
Sambheva - 0057s 58 
Sambandhi 106 
Ss i on 68 
ya 34: 36, 11 
aro oo» 68, 69, ee 2 
244, 252, 2! a 307 
106 
os Praticheda 






pad Ashram, 146, 
Sanyas allowed to women 2 
Sanyas open to Brahmans only... 
Sanyasi can stay for more thi 
a night 
Sanyas. from Brahmcbarya 
asi superior es ing 

Saranwat Chandi 


Saraswat 
Sarvabhisandhak 
Sarvamkhalo 





vi INDEX. 









































Servashaktiman emotional system 
Sata 
Pe de = a . EY 
tva, Rajas, Tamas, 244, 2 ‘ consti 
jatya. : sr07 tion vee 170-71 
Satyuga 3 Study of Vedas open to alt 51, 78-79 
Saubhagya Shuntri Stuti 36, 118 
Savita Sukalina ve TS 
Sckeme of studies... Supamna eon Be I7 
Science of Government Surya we 18 
° ” Sushrot 31 74,93 
» of mechanical art we 73 is “ 8 
» Ofmoralsand duties ... 74 Sutra Sthava oe 40 
music... Th 74 ‘Sutrakras w «66 
Second great daily duty i z Swarat be 17 
Shabda 57, 60, 62 Swarga ‘joa 
Shadha 34 Swartha Sadbantatpara 122 
Shadninsha Brahman 112, Swashti 269 
Shakti | ‘Swatahpramana 74 
Shent ' Swayambho : 7 
Shankara ‘Swayamwara marriage 40, 91 
Shanti... T. 
Sharangdhar 
Shatak Sampatti «.. Taijas Pon 
Shatapatha 71, 79, 83 114, 144 14 Taitrya Upnishad ...7 29, 
162) 213 236, 271, 245. 280. 24 3375 243, 245. 248, eff, Stay sor 
ae ck on oe 122 Tan ce 9 
waishchara oo a 12 Tapers ava: 
Shesha we oe 16 
Bheshawat Lae on 
Te rules of conduct” 15a—53, 
% ‘Testimony rl, <a 7 
1 creation compromis 
Shi vidya in THe ctor tothe difterent 
Shitala Shastras 975, 76 
Shiva Theory of creation’ explained 
Shade. a et Sanysy | OME 
Shrawt Sutia Three ways of Senyes 
Shri Time 
Shudra Time for marriage 
Shukra_ Titiksha 
Shonthipess oe Tonsure Sanskar 
unya 252) 353 
Shwetashwtar, 216, 217, 218, 236, 244 Trasarence 7 
Significance of terme 6,7 Trishtup Chband 42 
Site sutatte for Sandhya “sf Recon 141, 285 
Six kinds of inficential knowledge 67,08 TNIshiaP- 264 
Six Shastras v. 
Smrities 
Solids Udena on ae 288 
Soma Sadh Universe, controversy about ena- 
Somapa tion among Shastra’s compro: 
a mised vee 359 
a ‘Univeree, creation, 2434 its mate 
sa its being an image of God ria] cause 245 
denied we 376) 277, 278 Universe, itsage ny 
Soul, the actual doer of Karma... 375 Universe, itscauses... 246, 261, 262 
Soul, of «. 289 Universe, a theory of 
Space on 10059 61 creation criticized... ae 247 


18 : Licut or Truts. (Crap. f. 


4.~ Because it is not right to do so. He who only writes good 
things in the beginning, the middle and the erd of his book, would 
write bad things in the intervening parts of the book, Says 
the Sdakhya Stdsira “ Mangldcharana consists in constantly obey- 
ing the Will of God by the practice of truth, and justice, without 
prejudice or partiality, as enjoined by the Vedes, under all condi- 
tions and circumstances, * Throughout his book, from beginning 
to end, an author s‘ould write honestly and justly, what is true and 
only that. This is mangidcharana, It is not mangidcharana to 
write what are true things at one place, and those that are false at 
another, This practice of mang/dcharana is nowhere to be found 
in the Vedas or the Shastras—the books of sages and seers, They 
either begin with the word ata (Now) or AOM. We quote the 
following as corroborative of our position :— 
“ (Atha), Now we shall discourse on the ‘ Science of langu- 
age’” Mukdbhashya, 
* Now we shall discuss the ‘Science of morals’”, i ¢, after 
the study of the Vedas. Purva Maimdnsd, 
“Now we shall describe In detail the chief features of 
religion”, and so on. Vatsheshika Shdstra, 


“ Now we shall teach the science of Yoga,”"—Yoga Shdstra. 
The Rig Veda begins with the word ‘Agni’, 
“wa wargurann,” sted peisiirercrd: myrat | 
FS capeceETATet | 





INDEX, 









PAGE 
Universe, parpore of its creation 

explaine: ove 249, 250 
Universe, theory of creation ied 

and all doubts removed 277, 260 
Universe order of creation ex- 

plained 238, 260 
Upangas as we 78 
Upamana a = 56 
{pnayan + 38, 3le 33: 47 
Uparati ue a 

na eee 
Upastoana pee 
pba ‘ing of children 

Is (ten) 

Hine Veda (four) 
Urkrama 
Utapi 
Vaidharma a 64 
Vairagya ra 
Vaisheshika Shashtra... 18, &. "39. 60, 

61 62, 63, Ss 65, 66, 67, 68, 72 348 
Vaishwam! on oe 
Valivaishwadeva 
Vali Uta, 116, 175 ume 
Valmiki Ramayana ... - 
ae Marga o 9 

ranaprast as 144-46, 1 
Vanaprasth and Sanyas sb 


Varna Vijaovastha not by birth, By 100 
Varuna 1 r8 9 








Vasu we UE 
Vasus woe Bt 
Vayu we 2,8 
Vayu os 59 60 
Veda and nature of God ae 5 
Vedanta oo 71, 281, 283 
Vedant criticized 274, 279 
Vedas (four) on oeTly 74 
Vedantis + 228 
Vedi * 37, 106 
Vessels for Agnihot - 37 
Vices of students... . 137 











Vidor oo 
Vidya 
Vigan, supreme toe 
Vudu a 
Vibaritia 
Vishoa on 
Vishnu (person) 
Vishwa Mitra 
Vishwa 
vishveshwara 
Vishesa 
Vital Bystem 
Vinah Sanskar 
Vribadaranyak Up: 
Vridha Chanakya 
Vribasy 
Vrihae vapyka 
Vritratnakar on 
Vyana 
Vyapti a 
Vyasthi oon 
w. 
Who is entitled to invest students 
with th esacred thread " ste 
Wife one see NS 
Women «orshii s+ 508, 109, 110 
Woman domestic duties oe 110 
Y. 
Yajna 12, 79, 101, 182, 121, 45 
9 jurveda ... 8) 195 6y 5» 4s 33) 7h 


1» 98, 146, 163, 202 204. 205, 210-14, 
ake 243, 244, 263 269, 270, 273, 314 


one 16, 115 
Yama ” on 300 
Yamas (five) ow 44, 30 
Yaska : oe A 
Yetrishapte vee 
Yoga Shastras oo 185 355 7 mh 


217, 23%, 273, 307 


Cuar. 1) Licut oF Tuts. 19 


The Yajur Veda begins with the word ‘J’, 
The Sdua Veda ‘a . ‘Agni’. 
The Atharva Veda » 5 * Ye trishapta'. 


In no case do the Vedas and the Shastras begin with “I bow 
unto the god Ganesha," etc, Wherever even Vedic scholars start 
with Hari Aom, they have contracted this pernicious habit from 
the Pawraniks' and the Tantrizs.? Nowhere in the the Vedas and 
Shastras is the word ‘ Hari’ written in the beginning, Hence a 
book ought to start either with Azsd (Now), or AOM. F 

We have, in this Chapter, briefly discoursed on the different 


names of God. In the next, we shall treat of the ‘ UPBRINGING . 
OF CHILDREN,’ 


Tue Enp OF CHAPTER I. 


1 Believers in the Parands—books on Indian Mythology.—fy, 
2 Followers of Tawfras—books on Vam Sarg, religions sect whose 
tenets are discussed in the 17th chapter of this book 


CHAPTER II. 


THE UPBRINGING OF CHILDREN, 


Métrundn Pitrimdn A'charyavdn Purusho Veda—Shatapatha 
Brakmana, 


a PERILy, that man alone can become a great scholar who has 

had the advantage of three good teachers, viz, father, 
mother, and preceptor.” Blessed is the family, most fortunate is 
the child whose parents are godly and learned, The mother’s 
healthy influence on her children surpasses that of everyone 
else. No other person can equal a mother in her love for her 
ebildren, or in her anxiety for their welfare. This explains the use 
of the word Matrimdn in the above quotation, meaning thereby :— 
“ He alone is said to have a mother whose mother is devout and 
learned.” Blessed is the mother who never ceases to impart a 
religious tone to the mind of her child from the time of conception 
till his knowledge is perfected. 

It behoves both parents before, during, and after conception to 
avoid the use of such foods and drinks as are intoxicating, decom- 
posed (Lit, foul-smelling), non-nutritious (Lit. dry), and prejudi- 
cial to the growth of the intellect; and to use those articles that are 
productive of mental tranquility, health, strength, intellect, energy, 
and good temper—qualities that go to make a man refined. Such 
foods are milk, butter, sugar, cereals, etc.,~-foods and drinks that 
help to make the reproductive element (both male and female) of 
the highest quality, free from all faults and imperfections. They 
should follow the rules of sexual intercourse, which are as follow :-~ 

From the time of menstruation to the 16th day following is the 
Proper time for (sexual intercourse) barring the first four days and 


In the text the word mats, e, mother preceeds the word gila, f «, 
father. In the Sexrhrif language 2ad sil vernaculars. derived from Ait fet 
invariable practice to use the word mags before the word site whenever they 
bappen to come together —77, 

jot only this but the word wife comes before the word husband and the namo 
of the wife before that of the husband, We speak of Sitaram and not Ramtita. 
‘This shows in, what veneration the female sex was held by the ancient 





Cnap. I.) Licnt oF Truta. a1 





the 11th and 53th of the (lunar) mouth ; so that there are alto- 
gether left ten nights out of which it is best to chose one for sexual 
Intercourse. 

After the 16th day there should be no sexual intercourse till 
the return of the aforesaid period, or, in case of pregnancy for 
one year, At the time of sexual intercourse husband and wile 
should be perfectly healthy, mutually happy, and free from sorrow, 
In the matter of diet and dress they should follow the rules laid 
down by Charak and Suskru?,' and in the matter of keeping each 
other happy they ought to practice the system taught by Mans, 
During the time of conception the mother ought to be very care- 
ful as to her diet and dress. Till the birth of the child those 
articles only should be used as are productive of intellect, strength, 
beauty, health, energy and mental tranquility, and such other good 
qualities, 

After the child is born and its cord has been tied, it ought to 
be bathed with scented water, and Homa* performed with scented 
clarified butter. The mother should also be well looked after in 
the matter of bath, diet, etc. so that both mother and child may 
gradually gain in health and strength, The child’s mother or 
wet-nurse should take such foods and drinks as are productive of 
good qualities in the milk. The mother should suckle the child 
only for the first six days, thereafter the wet-nurse; but the 
parents should see that the wet-nurse gets good food and drink, 
If the parents be too poor to afford a wet-nurse, cow’s or goat's 
milk diluted with an equal quantity of water should be used ; and 
such drugs as are productive of intellect, energy, and health should 
be added to the milk after being well soaked in pure water boiled, 
and strained, After confinement the mother and the child should 
be removed to another room, where the air is pure, and which is 
well furnished with scented and beautiful things. They should 
move about in a pure atmosphere, When neither the wet-ourse 
nor milk {cow’s or goat’s) can be procured, the parents should 
do what they think best at the time; but they must remember 
the child’s body is made up of the elements derived from the body 
of the mother, which fact accounts for the mother getting weaker 
after each confinement. It is best, therefore, for the mother not 





1. Two great authorities on Medical Science in Sansdvif, 
3 See Chapter 111, 


22 Licut oF Trurts. (Cuap, IL 


to suckle her child, Plasters should be applied to the breast 
that will soon dry up the milk, By following this system the. 
woman becomes strong again in about two months, Till then the 
husband should have thorough control over his passions, and thus 
preserve the reproductive element. Those that will follow this. 
plan will have children of a superior order, enjoy long life, and 
continually gain in strength and energy so that all their children 
will be of a high mental calibre, strong, energetic, and devout. 
The woman should have her reproductive organs properly scen to, 
and the husband should practice continence, 


A mother should so instruct her children as to make them 
refined in character and manners, and they should never be allow- 
ed to misconduct themselves in any way. Whenthe child begins 
to speak, his mother should see that he uses his tongue properly, 
80 a8 to pronounce letters distinctly in the right place and with the 
right amount of effort, For pronouncing the letter ‘p’ for ex- 
ample, the right place is the lips and the amount of ‘effort" requir- 
ed is what is called Fu/Z In speaking, vowels should be exactly 
timed—short, long, or prolonged as the case may be, She should try 
to cultivate a sweet, subdued and pretty voice in her child. In his 
speech, letters, syllables, words, conjoined words, and stops should be 
distinctly discernible, When he begins to talk and understand a 
little, he should be taught how to address his superiors and inferiors, 
father, mother, king and a learned man, and how to conduct himself 
in their presence ; so that he may never be slighted in company, but 
be always treated with respect. Parents should endeavour to incul- 
cate in the minds of their children an intense desire for the love of 
knowledge, elevating company, and control of the senses, 


Children should avoid useless playing, crying, laughing and 
wrangling. They should not give way to excess of pleasures and 
sorrows, nor become completely engrossed in a thing. Jealousy and 
malice they should not harbour. They should never handle or rub 
the reproductive organs, as it causes the loss of the reproductive 
element and, consequently besides soiling the hand, leads to impo- 
tence. The parents should try, in every possible way, to develop in 
their children such sterling qualities as truthfulness, heroism, 
patience, cheerfulness, etc, When children attain to the age of 5 
years, they should be taught the Sansérit Alphabet, as well as that 
of foreign languages; thereafter the parents should make them 


Citar. {1.] Licut or Tavis. 4 


understand and learn by rote such verses (Vedic), poetical pieces, 
aphorisms, prose passages, etc. as are full of good precepts, inculcate 
- truth and virtue, love of knowledge and God ; and give advice as to 
the general behaviour towards father, mother, sister and other 
relatives, friends, teachers and other learned men, guests, king, 
fellow-subjects and servants, so that they may not,as they grow 
up, be duped by any anprincipled person, They should also counsel 
them against all things that lead to superstition, and are opposed 
to true religion and science, so that thay may never give credence 
to such imaginary things as ghosts (BAwts) and spirits {Preta), 
Freta (in Sanskrit) really means a dead body, and Bhuta 
means who is deceased. 
In support of this contention we quote Afanu— 
“ After his death, the pupil who helps in cremating his teacher's 
Manu V, 65. Preta is purified in ten days together with other 
people who carry the prefa to the crematorium.”* _ 
Ttis clear, then, that Prefa in the above quotation cannot 
mean anything else but the dead body. After the body has been 
cremated, the dead person is spoken of as Bhuéa, §. ¢., deceased— 
‘one who lived but does not live now. All those that are born and 
cease to breathe after having lived in the present are spoken of as 
Bhutasth, i.e. deceased. Such has been the belief of ail learned men 
from Brakama to the present day. But we do not wonder that one, 
who is ignorance-ridden, superstitious, and associates with low people, 
is constantly troubled by all sorts of ghosts, spirits, and devils, in 
the shape of fear and doubt, When a person dies, his soul, by 
Divine laws, takes on a new body—to reap the fruit of his deeds, 
according to their nature, in pleasure and pain. Breathes there a 
man who ¢an undo this eternal law of God ? tS Su 
People ignorant of the principles of Medical and Physical 
Sciences look upon persons afflicted with physical and mental dis- 
teases, such as high fever and lunacy, as possessed of devils (Béwi and 
Preta). But. instead of having such persons treated medically, 


1. This verse from dams has been quoted by the author for the sole object 
of supporting hia statement regarding the meaning of the word Prefa, But it 
does not follow that the author believes in the superstition inculcated by the versg 
which is clearly an interpolation in 4fanw.—7r, 


4 Licttt or Trurit. (Cuar, tt 





dieted properly, otherwise cared for, they trust them to such 
fogues, scoundrels, cheats, idiots, profligates and extremely low, sel. 
fish, despicable and dirty charlatans as victimize them by their 
trickery, quackery, so-called charms, and magic incantations, They 
waste their money and bring misery and suffering on their children 
by the increase of disease, When these people who really have 
‘more money than brains’ go to those ignorant, wicked and mean 
rascals and say to them “ Sirs, would you kindly tell us what is 
wrong with such and such a person or child” ? they are answered 
this:—" He is possessed with a big devil or ghost, Bhairava (god 
of -drink) or SAét/a (goddess of small-pox), It will never leave him 
unless you adopt proper means for its removal, It may even take 
his life, byt if you offer us a round sum, or give us a present, we 
will exercise the devil out of him by incantations, recitation of 
magical formulae and prayers, etc.” Then those ignoramuses 
and their friends say “ Please, Sirs, cure him though it may cost 
us our last penny”, On this the rogues feel triumphant and say 
“ Well, bring us such and such material, our fee, offerings to the 
god, and presents to ward off the influence of unlucky stars, ” 
Then, they sing, beat upon drums, play on castanels, cymbals, etc,, in 
front of the man who is supposed to be possessed of a devil ; by and 
by, one of those scoundrels begins to dance and skip about as if ina 
fit of madness and says “ I will even take his life”. and the ignora- 
muses fall at the feet of that mean rascal, saying " O ! save him Sir! 
save him, You shall have anything you like ”. Upon this the rogue 
says “1 am Hanuman? ; bring me my offerings—sweets, oil, a basket 
of loaves and a red dress." Or“ I am god, or Bhaérava, bring me 
five bottles of liquor, twenty fouls, five goats, sweets, and clothes ", 
and when these dupes answer ‘You shall have anything you like"— 
the rogue begins to skip about and dance still more. But ifa 
sensible man were to give them an offering of a good thrashing 
or shoe-beating, kicking or smacking on the face instead, their 
Hanuman, god, or Bkairava is at once propitiated, and they imme- 
diately take their heels as all this quackery is simply meant for 
robbing the simpletons of their money. 








1. In Panranic Mythology the monkey-god who helped Rama=the incar- 
ation of Vishnu to defeat Ravana—the Rakshash king of Celyon. He was @ 
historic person who was afterwards defied. He was a brave and learned man—= 
well read in the Vedas—who was commander-in-chief of Rama's forces.—Aame 
Deva 


Cuagr. 11] * Licur or Trurs, ag 





Similarly, when these ignorant people go to an astrologer 
and say “ O Sir ! what is wrong with this person”? He replies 
“The sun and other stars are maleficent tohim. If you were to 
perform a propitiatory ceremony, or have magic formule chanted, 
or prayers said, or specific acts of charity done, he will recaver. 
Otherwise I should not be surprised, even if he were to lose his 
life after a long period of suffering.” 


Inquirer —“ Well, Mr. Astrologer, you know, the sun and 
other stars are but inanimate thing like this earth of ours, They 
can do nothing but give light, heat, etc, Do you take them 
for conscious being possessed of human passions, of pleasure and 
anger, that when offended, bring on pain and misery, and when 
propitiated, bestow happiness on human beings ?” 

Astrologer—"\s it not through the influence of stars, then, that 


some people are rich and others poor, some are rulers, whilst others 
are their subjects 7” 


Jng.—" No, it is all the result of their deeds—good or bad.” 
Ast,—" Is the Science of stars untrue then ?” 


dng.—* No, that part of it which comprises Arithmetic, 
Algebra, Geometry, etc. and which goes by the name of Astro- 
nomy is true ; but the other part that treats of the influence of stars 
on human beings and their actions and goes by the name of 
Astrology is all false.” 


Ast—" Is then the Aoroscope of no value?” 


Jng.—* No, and it should be named not Aoroscope, but death- 
Anell of happiness ; because the birth of a child gladdens every 
heart in the family, but this happiness lasts only so long as the 
horoscope is not cast, and the aspect of the planets is not read out 
to the parents,” 

When the priest, after the birth of the child, suggests the cast- 
ing of a horoscope, his parents say to him. “Ob, Sir! Cast 2 very 
good horoscope." Then the astrologer brings the horoscope, well 
bespangled with red and yellow lines if they be rich, or a plain one 
if they be poor. They ask him if the aspect is beneficient. He 
answers “T will read it out to you as it is; his stars of nativity are 
good, and so are the stars that govern the relation of social inter- 
course, consequently he will be a rich man and will make a name for 
himself ; he will command respect among his associates ; will have 

4 





26 Licut or Trutit. {Cuar, th 





good health ; and be a ruler among men.” Upon hearing this, the 
parents say “ Well done Sir! Well done! You are a very nice man.” 
The astrologer thinks it would not pay him to say nice things 
only, so he adds “ These are all his lucky stars, but there are others 
that are mateficent, On account of the position of such and such 
stars he will meet with his death in his 8th year.” On hearing 
this, all their happiness is converted into great distress, and they 
say to the astrologer “ Oh Sir! What shall we do? What shall we 
do now?" The astrologer answers “ Propitiate the stars", They 
ask “How can we do it”? He says “Do such and such an act of 
charity, have the hymns relating to the stars chanted, feed the 
Priests, and it is very /ikely that the maleficence of the stars will be 
warded off." The qualifying words very likely have been used by 
way of precaution, because, ifthe childdied he could say “How 
could [ help it? I cannot override the wilt of God. I did my 
utmost and so did you, but it was so ordained from the first on 
account of his mis-deeds in the previous life.” But, if the child 
lived he could say “Behold the power of our incantations, gods 
and priests; I have saved the life of your child.” But teally, if 
their incantations and prayers fail, and the child die, these rogues 
should be made to pay double or treble the money given them, 
and if the child lives, they should still be made to pay be- 
cause, as they themselves say, there is no soul living that can 
undo the law of God or evade the consequence of one's deeds, 
The parents can say to them “This child has survived in conse- 
quence of his deeds, and according to the laws of God, and not 
through your help.” The same answer should be given to Gurus 
(so-called spiritual fathers or teachers), who prescribe certain acts of 
charity to their dupes and then appropriate the gifts themselves, as 
has been given to the astrologers above, Lastly, a word about 
Shitla’ and Charms, These are nothing but downright frauds 
and quackery. Should any one say : “If 1 were to give a charmed 
bangle or locket to any person, my god or saint would ward off 
all evils from him through the power of the charm or of incanta- 
tions”, To such a person the following questions should be put; 
“Can you by your charms evade death, or the laws of God, or the 
consequences of your deeds? Many a child dies in spite of your 
charms and incantations ; ay, even your own children die; why 
wee Smail-pox,—iIt is looked upon as a goddess by the superstitious people in 
ia 





Cnap. 11] Licnt or TruTH. ay 





can’t you save them? Will you be able to save yourself from 
death?” These questions, that rascal and his fraternity can never 
answer, and they soon find that the game is not worth the candle. 

Therefore, it behaves all to do away with all kinds of false and 
superstitious practices and do all in their power to promote, in 
return for their services, the welfare of those pious, learned men, 
who are devoted to their country and are altruistic teachers of 
humanity, teaching and preaching to all without the least amount 
of hypocrisy, ; 

All alchemists, magicians, sorcerers, wizards, spiritists, etc., are 
cheats and all their practices should be looked upon as nothing but 
downright fraud, Young people should be well counselled against 
all these frauds, in their very childhood, so that they may not suffer 
through being duped by any unprincipled person. They should 
also be taught that the preservation of the reproductive element 
begets happiness and its loss the reverse. He, tw whose boly, of is 
well preserved, gains in health, strength, energy and intellect; and, 
consequently feels happy. The ouly way to preserve it is to keep 
aloof from hearing and reading obscene literature ; associating with 
libidinous people, indulging in lascivious thoughts ; looking upon 
women (with an eye of lust); engaging in conversation with them ; 
embracing or having sexual intercourse with them. Children 
should be taught to lead a pure and virtuous life ; and devote them- 
selves to the acquisition of perfect knowledge and culture, 

He, in whose body the reproducirve clement is not preserved, 

* becomes impotent, vord of good qualities, and suffers from spermatoria 
and such luke diseases. He is, in fact, a ruined man, through loss of 
health, strength, intellect, courage, pluck, energy, patience and such 
other good qualities, Parents sh uld not neglect to impress upon 
their children that, if they fail to acquire knowledge and wisdom, 
and preserve the reproductive element when young, they will never 
have again another chance like this in this life, They must bear 
in mind that it is only so long as the parents are alive, and able to 
look after the household, that they can prosecute their studies, and 
perfect their bodies, Both the father and the mother should also 
advise them regarding other necessary matters. This is the reason 
the words, Matriman and Pitriman, appear in the quotation head- 
ing this chapter, The mother should instruct them from birth to 
the 5th year, and the father from the Gthto the 8th. In the 


28 Licut or TRUTH. [Cuap IL 





beginning of the 9th year Dutyas! should, after their Upnayan*® 
caremony has been performed, send them to school (Acharyakui),§ 
where the teachers are thorough scholars, imbued with piety and 
well versed in all the sciences, SAudvas should also send their 
children to school, but without performing their Upnayan, 


Those children alone become well-behaved, refined, and 
scholarly, whose parents do not indulge them; but on the other 
hand, always reprimand them when necessary, Says Patanjili, in 
his Mahabhashya :— 


“Those parents and tutors who are not slow to reprimand their 
Mahabhashy® Children and pupils (when needed) are as if giving 
VIM, 3.8 them a drink of immortality; but those who indulge 
them are, in fact, giving them poison, and are thus the cause of 
their ruin, because indulgence spoils children, whilst (occasional) 
reproof develops good qualities in them”. Children should also feel 
pleased when reprimanded, and feel uneasy when fondled. But- 
parents and teachers should never reprimand them out of malice 
or spite. Outwardly they should keep them in awe; whilst in- 
wardly they should be tender hearted and kind tothem. Likewise 
they should advise them to abstain from stealing, sexual abuse, 
contracting habits of indolence, arrogance, drunkenness untruthful- 
ness, malevolence, wickedness, malice, jealousy, blind passion; and 
to cultivate good qualities, such as, truthfulness, virtue. 


ered: afyftreter wear a frarhya: | 
wrerarranferate Srarearearerfeae spe: il TRtATET | Bo GI LICH 


1. Persons of the three upper classes are called Dwijas or the éwice-born, 
because of their rebirth through the acquisition of knowledge and culture, First 
is the physical birth, whilst the 2nd is their spiritual birth, The three upper 
classes aré: Brahkwant, Kshatryis and Vaithayas The reader is referred 
to the 4th Chapter, for detailed ini tion regarding this subject—7Zr, 

2. The ceremony of initiation into knowledge ; it is performed just before a 
student leaves home for the seminary ; in this ceremony he has to take vows of 
living a chaste life, of truthfuiness, of devotion to studies, etc —Z¥. 

3. A’charyakula is the academy for the education of the children of all 
Classes In this institution the teacher is not a mere tutor, he is also /oce faren- 
is (See Appendix). 

‘This system of education has been revived after the author's death by his 
followers. There are at _preent three Gurukulas or residential colleges for 
teaching the Vedas conducted on these lines, The biggest is at Kangri, 
Hardwar. It teaches up to the degree-standard and has trained oot many 
graduates. The second one is at Bindraban. At present it teaches up to the Mat- 
riculation, The third one isat Deolaliin the Bombay Presidency—fam Dep 





Cuar, II] Licnt oF TRurs, 29 





Once a person has committed theft or sexual abuse or has 
spoken an untruth in your presence you can never respect or trust 
him any more. A broken pledge injures a man’s character more 
than anytbing else. Therefore, once you make a promise, keep it ; 
#uppose, you say to a man ; “I will meet you at such and such a 
place and time ” or “I will give you such and such a thing, at such 
and such atime”; but always keep your promise; otherwise no 
one will ever trust you, All should, therefore, speak the truth and 
keep their word, One should never be vain, Deceitfulness, hypo- 
crisy, and ingratitude are: painful even to the soul that harbours 
them, How much more so then to others? It is Aypocrisy to be- 
Heve one thing and say another, and thus mislead people in order to 
gain selfish ends, Zagratitude is that condition of mind in which you 
do not feel thankful to one who has been good and kind to you, 


A child should not lose bis temper, or say a rude word; he 
should rather cultivate a speech that is pacific and sweet, He 
should avoid useless talk, and speak only as much as is necessary, 
heither more nor less. He should respect his superiors. At their 
approach, a child should stand and salute them, and offer them the 
best seat available, In an assembly, each person should occupy a 
seat in accordance with his rank and position, so that he may never 
have to suffer the indignity of having to yield his seat to another 
He should never bear malice towards any one, He should try to 
acquire virtues and shun vices ; associate with the good and avoid 
the wicked. Father, mother and tutor, a child should serve with 
all his capabilities and resources, all his heart, and all his souls, 
Says Taitseya Upanishad— 

“ Fathers, mothers, and tutors should always give their children 
Taitrya Up- aad students good counsel and they should also 
nishad, vit, advise them to imbibe their virtues but avoid 

7 their vices.” Children should always speak the 
truth, and should never trust a hypocrite or a man of low 
character, They should obey their parents and tutors in all 
things that are good, Tutors should help their pupils to 
revise all that their parents had taught them at home— 
the Vedic mantras, aphorisms, poetical pieces and prose 
passages, inculeating the love of righteousness, knowledge, and 


ATTEN wetter ache aratrrenft at ceraty a Sere 
HUTo 9 Wyo UE 








40 Licut oF Trutu, (Crap. 11 





good character. They should understand the nature and attri- 
butes of God! and worship Him accordingly. In the matter of 
dress and diet, they should so conduct themselves as to gain in 
health, strength and general behaviour, and knowledge. They 
should eat a little short of their appetite, and abstain from animal 
diet and spirituous liquors, They should never enter deep water 
lest they be attacked by dangerous creatures (such as, crocodiles), 
or even be drowned, if they be unable to swim. Therefore, says 
Manu—" Never bathe in water of unknown depth”. 

On the general conduct of life the same sage has said ;—* Look 
down while you walk, Filter your water before 
you drink it. Speak in accordance with truth, 
Think well before you act.” 

Says another poet :-—“ Parents who neglect the education of 
their chitd are his veritable enemies. In company, he is like a 
goose among swans.” To give their children the highest education 
possible, to instruct them in the ways of truth, to- make them 
tefined in character and manners, in short to devote all their 
resources, body and mind, to accomplish this object is the para- 
mount duty, the highest virtue, and the glory of parents, 

‘We have thus briefly discoursed on the ‘Upbringing 
of Children’ In the hope that ‘a word tothe wise’ will 
prove sufficient. 


efeqet reece qarqe wet FRA! 

Gerqat qtare ar Ya AATaR H yo Bo G1 UA It 

arrert ary Frere et Ber erat at Vf | 

a grad corret Canet eet Ta ereErttfe ware 
QL yale Ut 


1. As taught in the first chapter, 


Manu VI, 46. 





a 


THE END OF CuaPrex II, 


CHAPTER II. 





EDUCATION. 

HIGHEST DUTY OF PARENTS TO EDUCATE THEIR CHILDREN, 

v is the highest duty of parents, preceptors and relatives to 
adorn children with good sound education, nobility of character, 
refinement of manners, and amiability of temper. 

The wearing of jewellery (gold, silver, pearls, rubies, diamonds, 
etc.) adds no beauty to the soul. It only arouses vanity and other 
lower passions, gives rise to fear of robbery, and may even be the 
cause of death. Many a child has been known to lose its life at the 
hands of cut-throats because of wearing jewellery, 

* Blessed are the men and women whose minds are centred on 
the acquisition of knowledge ; who possess sweet and amiable 
tempers ; who cultivate truthfulness and other similar virtues; who 
are free from vanity and uncleanliness ; who enlighten the minds of 
those who are in ignorance ; whose chief delight consists in promot. 
ing the happiness of others by the preaching of truth, by generous 
distribution of knowledge without fee or reward; and who are 
engaged in altruistic work as prescribed by the Vedas,” 
Sagnopivila to be performed at the age of 8, both im the case of beys 

and girls. 

Boys and girls, when they attain.to the age of 8 years, should 
be sent to their respective schools. In no instance, should they be 
placed under the tuition of teachers of low character. Only those 
persons are qualified to teach who are masters of their art and 
are imbued with piety. Dwéijds should have the Upmayan® of their 
children (both sons and daughters), done at home, before sending 


frrarftrererrratr geraiterfarer: 
RTT CRTATHTATTETTT | 
careqeaquaa agit & 
wear act fefteestatrrerer: & 


© Initiation inte student life of which the outward symbol is the sacred thread. 
—Fama Deva. 





32 Licnt oF Trutu. {Cuap, Itt. 





them to their respective schools, The seminary should be situated 
in a sequestered place. The Boys’ school should beat least 3 miles 
distant from that for Girls. The preceptors and employees, such 
as servants, should, in the Boys’ school, be all of the male sex, and 
in the Girls’ school of the female sex. Not even a child of § years 
of the opposite sex should be allowed to enter the school. As long 
as they are Brahmchdris (students) they should abstain from the 
following eight kinds of sexual excitement in relation to persons of 
the opposite sex :— 


The students of both sexes to be guarded from sexual excitement of 
all sorts, 
1, Looking upon them with an eye of lust ; 
2, Embracing them; 
3. Having sexual intercourse with them ; 
4. Intimately conversing with them ; 
5. Playing with them ; 
6, Associating with them ; 
7. © Reading or talking of libidinous subjects ; 
8 © Indulging in lascivious thoughts, 


The Principles underlying the Gurukula system of Education, 


Teachers should see that they keep aloof from the above things, 
and thus perfect their knowledge, cultivate amiable dispositions and 
manners, gain in strength both of body and mind, and thereby 
grow in happiness. The school must not be nearer than § miles to 
atown or a village. All the scholars should be treated alike in 
the matter of food, drink, dress, seats, etc. Be they princes and 
princesses or the children of beggars, all should practice asceticism,! 
They should not be allowed to see the parents, or hold any com. 
munication whatever with them, Being thus freed from all worldly 
worries and cares, they should devote themselves heart and sou! to 
their studies. Their teachers should accompany them in all their 
recreations, so that they may not fall into any mischief, get indolent 





*The last two constitute a sort of mental intercourse with perscns of the 
opposite sex.— 7. 


1. By asceticism is here meant severe bodily and mental discipline=in other 
words simpte living and high thinking should be the motto of the students. 
They should not sclicit bodily comfort instead bear all Kinds of hardships in 
order to wholly and solely devote themseives to the acquisition of knowledge, 
culture, etc.—7?, 2 


Cnap, IILJ Licut oF Trurs. 3 








or naughty. Manx says:—“Both state and society should make it 
compulsory upon all to send their children (both male 
Manu Vth and female) to school after the sth or 8th year. It 
Free compul- should be made a penal offence to keep a child at 
sory education ome after that age.” 
THE GAYATRI MANTRA—A PRAYER FOR ILLUMINATION OF 
THE UNDERSTANDING. 

The first Upnayan ceremony should be performed at home, and 
the second in the school. Parents as well as teachers should teach 
Gayatri Mantra*to the children with its meetings, thus:—"'O Lord! 
O Personification of True Existence, Intelligence and Bliss! 
Everlasting, Holy, All-wise, Immortal, Thou art Unborn, without 
any symbolical distinction and organization, Omniscient, Sustainer 

and Ruler of the Universe, Creator of all, Eternal, 
Protector and Preserver of the Universe, O All- 
pervading Spirit! O Ocean of mercy! Thou art the 
Life of the Creation, Thou art an All-blissful Being, the very 
contemplation of Whom wipes off all our pains and sorrows; Thou 


werarat GeNgTet @ HTL WAT OWS RATT WRN 


saa ate w hedge’ wat Cwet daft 0 fear 
a ae erate tl Tayo Bo RE Ul sto 2H 
* The word—meanings of the Gajetri mantra arc— 
Oum—See Chapter 1, page 2. 


Bhu—One Who is Life and Support of the whole Universe, is dearer 
than life itself and is Self-existent, 

Bhuvak—One Who Himself is free from all sorrows and pains, and 
‘Whase contemplation wipes off all over, pains and sorrows. 

Seah One who pervades this multiform universe and is the Support 


Yajar Veda 
xxxvi, 3. 





Tat—Him. 


Savitwh—Of One Who is the maker of the Whole World and tron. 
whom all power proceeds. 


3 Var neyust—One Who is All-holy and worthy of our adoration. 


Bhargo—is One Who is Himself pure by nature and purifies others 
‘and Who is Albintelligence. Paez i 


ager One Who bestows happiness on all and is sought after 
al 


Dhinahi—May we contemplate, 
Dhiyoh—Understandings. 
Yeh—Who, 


Nak—Our. 
Prathodaydt—May guide. 


uM LicHT oF TRUTH. [Cuap. Iff. 





art the Sustainer of the Universe, Father of all; may we contem- 
plate Thy holy adorable nature so that Thou mayest guide our 
understanding Thou art our God, who alone art to be adored and 
worshipped. There is none beside Thee, who is equal to Thee or 
above Thee. Thou alone art our Father, Ruler, and Judge, Thou 
alone bestoweth happiness.” 


After they have learnt the above mantra with its meanings, 
they should be taught the method of ‘ Divine Worship’ (Sandhya- 
opdsand)* with its preliminaries and accessories as Bathing. Ach- 
mana and Prdéndydma, 


PRELIMINARY ACCESSORIES OF SANDHYA OR 
Divine MEDITATION. 


The preparatory, non-essential stages of worship are :-— 


(i) Bathing, which effects bodily cleanliness, and ensures 
health, Manx says,—“ Water washes off the impurities 

of the body. Truth exalts the mind. 

Mi 1 * 
ant: 199 Knowledge and strict devotion to duty 
elevate the soul. Possession of ideas refines the intel- 


lect.” Every man should, therefore, bathe before his 
first meal, 


Gi) Ackamana—This consists in taking in as much water as 
can be held in the palm of one's hand by applying the 
lips to the root and centre of it. The quantity of water 
should be just sufficient to reach the lower part of the 
throat, Its object is to relieve irriration of the throat or 
dryness thereof if present, 


iii) Médzyana isto sprinkle water, with the points of the 
middie and index fingers, on the face and other parts of 
one’s body. Its object isto remove drowsiness. Ifa 
person be not drowsy, or if water be not obtainable, it 
can be dispensed with. 





afartarfty gerrite sen eet gerft | 
feareriteat sgarent gftretftter geri ago Wo YI RT © tod I 


* Only the stages of ‘Divine Worship‘ are here given. The author bas 
treated this subject in ¢etai) in his book called = “ The Five Great Daily Duties." 


Cuae. ith) Licut or Trutu. 38 


THE ESSENTIAL STAGES oF DivinE MEDITATION. 
The essential stages of Sand&yopdsnd are as follows :—— 

(i).  Prdndydina, or control of the breath. Says Patanjalt, 

in his Yoga Shdstra :—“ The practice of Préndydma 

Yoga Shdstra, gradually burns off all impurities 

Sddhauapdds, Jd exalts the soul, The light of 

knowledge in the soul goes on continually increas- 

ing till the soul is emancipated.” Manu says :— 

“ Just as a goldsmith, by blowing strongly against a 

piece of impure gold, removes its 

impurities by oxidation, so does 

Prdndydima burn off all impurities of the mind and 

senses.” 

Method of Prdxdydma—“ As in the act of vomiting all 

Pi tt the contents of the stomach arc 

xxviii violently expelled, so should the 

breath be expired forcibly, and held out as long as 

possible by drawing up the pelvic viscera.” When 

Giscomfort is felt, the air should be gently inspired, 

This process should be repeated according to one’s 

desire and strength. While practising Prdndydma, 

AOM should be contemplated, This exalts and 

purifies the soul and develops concentration of mind, 
Préndydmd is of four kinds :— 

(a) Bdhya Vishaya—lt is the process described 
above in whichthe breath is held owfas 
long as possible. 

()  A’bhyantara—in which the breath is hold 
# as long as possible. 

(6) Stambha Vritti—In whieh the breathing is 
suddenly stopped at any stage of respira- 


tion. 
Teretgernqgegt eitra yawns: «Fro anw- 
aut Go RH 
gent creed oret fe cer ver: | 
autaqarat qurd ater: reper fray # ge re & Noe 
septafirarcarcat ar arqTed 1 ire erTftrt Ge = h 


Manu vi, 71. 


“36 Lirent or Tautrs. {Caar. til. 
{d) Béhydbhyantardkshepi—in which the ordi. 
nary course of breathing is reversed, ex- 
Piration is forcibly begun when inspiration 
is going on, and wice versa. By thus re- 
versing the course of respiration, both ex- 
piration and inspiration aré in tum stopped, 
and thus the processes of respiration, and 
consequently the mind and senses come 
under the direct control of the Will. 

By the increase of bodily strength and activity, the in- 
tellect becomes so subtle that it can easily grasp the 
most abstruse and profound subjects. It also helps to 
preserve and perfect the reproductive clement in the 
human body, which, in its turn, produces self-control, 
firmness of mind, strength, energy, and acuteness of 
intellect. 

Girls, as well as boys, should practice Prdndydma, 

(ii) Aghamarshana—Repentance and intense desire to keep 
aloof from even the thought of sin. 

(ii) Manasd Prakrimana—Mental Rotation, 4 ¢, turning 
one’s mind in all the six different directions of space 
~-North, South, East and West, Above and Below— 
and feeling in each the presence of God, 

(iv) Upasthdna—Realization of God as the source of ail 

"Light, Life, Knowledge, ete. 

{v) Stuti—Glorification ; Prdthand—Prayer; Updsand— 
Communion. 

THE SITE SUITABLE FoR DIVINE MEDITATION, 


This Sandhyopdsna should be performed in some lonely spot, 
with a concentrated mind. Many says—“ Seek some lonely spot, 
by the side of the water, concentrate your mind and perform your 

Sandhyopdsana. Never forget to recite! the Gayatrd 








Mans it Mantra and contemplate its manifoki meaning, Act 
_accordingly.” . 

wat Gait raat Aire fatter | enfetterqertteter 
wencad anfte: W tgo Wo 8 ll toe A 


1, It is best to recite Gayair# mentally. 


Cua, LIL] Lieut or Tauri. » 





Teachers should also teach all that is necessary regarding diet, 

resa and proper behaviour towards superiors and inferiors. 
THe SECOND GREAT DalLy Durty. 

Devayagna, the second Great Daily Duty, comprises dens- 
hotra—the feeding of fire with clarified butter and aromatic sub- 
stances for sanitary purposes—and associating witb, and serving 
devout and learned persons. 

These two duties—Sandhya and Aguthotra—are to be per- 
formed twice daily —morning and evening—it is only twice during 
24 hours that day and night meet. 

One hour, at least, should be devoted to Divine Contemplation, 
which should be practised with perfect co:centration of mind, as 
Yogés practice Yoga. 

The time for Agnihotra is twice daily, 4, just after Sunrise 
and just before Sunset, 

The vessels to be used are :— 


1. Vedi—a vessel (earthen or mettalic), hav- 
ing the shape of an inverted truncated pryramid, 
for making fire in. It should have the following 
dimensions :—Depth and each side of the base 
being 9 to 12 inches, and each side of the apex 
2% to 3 inches, #,¢, each side of the base being 
four times the side of the apex. 





eo 


2, Two vessels (see Figs. 2 and 3,) for con- 
Fig 2 


taining water, which may be required for washing 


| 7 hands, etc. 


Fig. 5 


[sy 3. A Butter dish, to keep the clarified butter 
z n (Fig. 4) 


Fig 4 

— Pp 4 Aspoon, made of wood, silver or gold, 
Fig. 5). 

¥ig 5 


Method Lat a few sticks of wood (Sandal, Butea Frondosa ot 
Mango) in sound condition be laid at the bottom of the Vedi, fire 


38 Licnt oF Truth. (Citar. tit, 





be placed in the middie and similar pieces of wood on this again. 
Let the clarified butter be properly warmed, mixed with odoriferous 
substances and then poured over the fire in the Ved#, the Homa 
saxtvas being recited the while, one spoonful each time a mantra 
is recited. 

Reasons for performing Homa are given below in Question 
and Answer form :— 

Q.—What is the good of doing /Yoma? 

4A—It is a well-known fact that impure air and impure water 
are productive of disease, which, in turn, causes so much pain and 
misery, whilst pure air and pure water are productive of health, and 
consequently of happiness. 

Q—I should think it would do people more good to apply 
Sandal locally as a plaster, and to eat butter instead, Is it wise 
to waste these things by destroying them in fire ? 

A.—That only shows your ignorance of Physical Science, for it 
is one of its cardinal principles that nothing is really lost in this 
world. You must have noticed that, even when you are standing 
at some distance from the place where Homa is being performed, 
you can smell a sweet fragrant odour in the afr. That alone proves 
that an odoriferous substance put into the fire is not destroyed, but, 
on the other hand, being rarified, fills the room, and is carried by 
the air to distant places where it rids the air of its foulness, 

Q.—If this be the case, the keeping of such odoriferous things, 
as saffron, musk, camphor, scented flowers and aféar,in the house 
will serve the same purpose, 

A,—That scent has not the distintegrating power to rid the 
house of its impure air, and replace it by the fresh pure air, It is fire 
alone which possesses that power, whereby it breaks up the impu- 
tities of the air, and reduces them to their component parts, which, 
getting lighter, are expelled from the house and replaced by fresh 
air from outside. 


_ Stiqer’ ange erat qeafaascera ener | werftere 
Sarre ear 1 ype eacheaereeT TT: ATTA AT: TET Wl 
feetrit tu afreriitente car ge laa ow TET 

WHoworye 








Cuap. HL) Licnt oF Trutu. 39 
Q—What is the object of reciting wantras whilst performing 
Homa? 


A.—The objects are three :-— 
(i) The Mantras explain the uses of Homa, 
(ii) In this way Vedic texts are learnt by heart. 


(iii) It helps the study of the Vedeand preservation 
thereof, 
Q.—Is the omission of Homa a sin? 
4.—Yes, the amount of suffering, 8 man inflicts on his fellow- 
beings by polluting the air and water with the waste products of 
his system and consequently bringing on disease, becomes the 
measure of his sin, to atone for which it becomes incumbent on 
him to perform Homa and thereby purify air and water toan ex- 
tent, equal to, or greater than the mischief he has done, As re- 
gards the internal use of these things, that are used in Homa, such 
as butter, that would benefit only the individual who takes them ; 
but the same amount of material, used as directed above, benefits 
hundreds of people. If people were not to eat and drink such 
nutritious substances as butter and milk, they could never gain in 
strength, physical or mental, Therefore, it is orly right, that they 
should do so, but more materia) should be used in Homa than as 
food and drink. It is, therefore, our bounden duty to perform 
Homa daily. 


Q.—How many déd#tis * (spoonfuls) should a man pour, and 
how much clarified butter should each d4### contain ? 


A.—Sixteen dhdtis and a drachm and a half clarified of 
butter in each dhsits at the least ; but it is permissible to put more 
butter in each spoonful. 


In the‘ Golden Days’ of India, saints and seers, princes and 
princesses, kings and queens, and other people used to spend 
a large amount of time and money in performing and helping others 
to perform Homa ; and so long as this system lasted, India was 
free from disease and its people were happy. It can become so 
again, if the same system were revised. 





© At the end ofeach Homa mantra a definite quantity of clarified butter 
is poured over the fre This is called an wSfti,—7>, 


40 Licat or Trurs. [Crar. lil. 





We have described these two Yaynds which, alone, are enjoin- 
ed upon students (Bradmchdris). 


Who is entitled to invest students with the sacred thread ? 


“ A person can perform Yaynopavita of his own class, and of 

the classes below his own. These he can also teach, 

ue Thus a Brakmona can perform it for Brdkmans, 

Kshatriyds and Vaishyds. A Kshatriya, for 

Kshatriyds and Vaishyds only ; and a Vaishya, for Vaishyds only. 

An intelligent, respectable Sxdra, should also be taught all the 

Shdstrds barring the Veda, but without performing his Upnayana. 
This view is held by many authorities,” 


Period for Brakinchdrya— Maximum and minimum. 


Says Manu :—“ A student should observe Brakmchdrya and 
study the Vedas with their subsidiary subjects for 9, 
18, 36 years, or until they are completely mastered ".* 

“ Brakmachdrya is of three grades :—The lowest, the inter. 
mediate and the highest :— 


The lowest,“ Man, who is composed of a body—formed out of 
the elements derived f'om foods and drinks—and a soul that resides 
in the body, is verily a yayua. He should be endowed with the 
most excellent qualities ; and in order to accomplish gain, longevity, 
Brabmachér- Strength (physicat and mental), and the like 

me qualities, the shortest period for which a student 
should observe is 24 years, just asthere are 24 letters in the 
Gayatri metre (Chhanda), He should, during this period, keep 


smpeerarat catered wer weft 
cravat were ett dered i aaft 
Suyqecra aera gettarerrwAe h gy NeL Wt 
wefedqritgy wed gh 82fqe me 


weftie crite ar amettrete ark geo RI 8h 


* | ‘Thus after joiniog the school at the age of 8 years, if a student studies 
the Vedds with their subsidiary subjects for 36 years, (¢ ¢., he devotes 12 years 
to the study of each of the three Vedas), he completes his education at the age 
of 364-8=44, if for 1B years, at the age of 8+ 18=26 years, if for 9 years, at the 

‘of 849-17 years. (The last period of Braksachdsya is meant for a gitl 
who Wants to marry at the age of 17 years,—7Z¥.) 


Mano, iii, 2. 





Crap. III] Licut uF Trots. 4t 





perfect control over his passionst and devote himself to the 

Chhéndogya acquisition of the knowledge of the Vedas and of 
Upanie ac+ culture, etc. By virtue of this Brakmachkarya, vital 
forces, called Vasus, are fully developed and matured. These 
help to produce the noblest qualities in his body, maxes? and the 
soul, Should anyone advise a Bvakmacharé to marry or have 
sensual enjoyment before the age of 25, let the Mrahmacharé 
auswer him thus: “ Look you here, my dear fellow! If my vital 
forces, mental faculti s and physical organs were not fully develop- 
ed and strong, I should not be able te observe Brakmacharya of the 
next grade (which lasts till one is 44 years old), as the observance 
of the lowest grade helps one to keep Brahkmacharya of the smiter- 
mediate gra Am I a fool like you that I should ruin my 
body, my vital forces, my mental faculties and even my soul— 
which, if properly looked after, endow one with a noble nature 
and produce sterling qualities and help one to perform great deeds 
—waste my precious life, deprive myself of the fourfold fruit of 
human life, destroy my Brahmacharya which is the main spring 
of all Ashramas or Orders,? the best of all good works and the 
source of all that is good and noble in life, and consequently sink 
to the lowest depths of misery and degradation ?" 





“ Since he that observe. nis Brahmacharya properly during the 
first period of his life, by virtue of this Br akmackatya, acquires 


ORT TTT Tet are aed aTET TEATS: 
TET are Were A whet areca Hl tl 

wottaftas waft fafiggueter gatesrarras et 2 are: 

art safqraungeagae an set wart wet wit 
Prarqettagts ve cera © ae tn 


4, And even after marriage should not give a free license to his passions.— 





Tr, 


2. Under the term manas are included the pe incé} tention, th 
memory and indiviauatty —T>. a feces er one 


3 Life is divided into 4 stages or Orders—1. Srzhusuharye Or the peri 
of student life a Grsé dshvame or married life, 3 Vemaprussha or the Period 
of Ascetic life devoted to the perfection of character, the study of Spiritual 
Soieace, St divine conta ene 4 Sany.ts dthr im or the period of Renan. 
ciation w ar hin; iruth and right Il ovey 

abandoning all worldly connection tye Piehsomamees a bs es id 


42 Licnt oF Truta. {Crap. 111 





knowledge and grows in health and strength, remains free from 
disease and attains to the age of 7o or 80 years, I will never, 
therefore, listen to the advice of such fools, as you, and destroy my 
Brakmacharya.” 


The intermedi te—He, that observes Brakmacharya for 44 years, 
—thers are 44 letters in 7rishtup Chhanda (metre)—by virtue of this 
Brahmach aya, attains to that degree of prands or vital forces 
called Rudras, in other wor.ts, he becomes a terror to the wicked 
and an asylum for the good. No rascal dare practise his rascality 
before him. Should any one advise such a Brakmachd:d to abandon 
his life of Bruhmacharya, marry and enjoy himself, let him answer 
such a man, thus: “ The happiness that results from the observance 
of Brahimnacharya of a higher degree, cannot even be dreamt of by 
one who has not ledalife of Brakmacharya and even sensuous 
pleasures are more keenly enjoy d by the former than by the latter. 
Since it isa Badmachari alone, who attains to success in worldly 
affairs, enjoys perfect sensuous pleasures and spiritual happiness, | 
will never destroy my Brahuacharya—the source of the highest 
happiness, on the other hand by virtue of thorough observance of 
this Brakmcharya become learned, virtuous, strong in body and 
mind and enjoy longevity and perfect happiness, | will never 
listen to the advice of such senseless creatures as you are, marry 
early, and bring ruin on myself and my family.” 

The highest.—He that remains a Brakmachdri, till he is 48 
years of age,—there are 48 letters in the Jagati Chhanda (metre)}—by 
virtue of this highest bind of Brakmacharya acquires perfect know- 
Ee perfect seis strength,' perfect wisdom,’ perfect develop- 





Rafcrgpeon woaretfte eat egurentt 
weea aR fed aniftelert ager a warren sr 
wre ant eo Ghent tree 8H 

a Rafesnehe Ferg reter ETATET aA et 2 and 
fetert aivermgecaafe are argencenrat vet wt 
ferarcehitegale we cert e AUP 8 

wa apqeraentt easy ae, ctrerrarcenht ese H- 
soit mei abel Sacaeen awereat aval each Ot 
Qeletareqa a Xn 


1% And enjoys the full span of life which is 4oo years, 


Cap. UL) Licht or Truti. 43 





ment of good qualities, nature and characteristics, shines like the 
sun, enlightening all, and is enabled to master all kinds of know- 
ledge. Should any one tempt such a Brahmuchd-i to destroy bis 
Brakmachdrya— which is really the highest virtue—let him answer 
thus: “O you, foolish wretch} Get away from me, your foul smelft- 
ing, filthy words cannot affect me. I will never destroy this 
Brahiuncharya of the highest order. May the Supreme Spirit, 
through His grace, help me to keep this holy vow so that I may be 
able to enlighten such fools as you and teach you and particularly 
your children, and thereby help you all to lead happy lives.” 


There are four stages of the human body :-— 
(i) Period of Adolescence—from the 16th to 


Sushi 
Sutra Sthana, the 2sth year, 
Rea (ii; Period of Manhood,—from the asth to the 


qoth year 
(iii) Period of Maturity—about the goth year, when the tissues, 
organs and secretions of the body reach their highest 
state of perfection, Thereafter comes the 
(iv) Period of Loss—in which excess of such secretions, as the 
reproductive element, begins to be lost, in sleep or 
through perspiration, etc. 
The best time for marriage, therefore, is the goth, or rather the 
48th year, 
Does this law of marriage apply equally to both sexes ? 
No. Ifa man were to remain celebate (Grukmachart) for 25, 
30, 36, 40, 44, or 48 years, a woman should do su only for 16, 17, 18, 
20 or 24 years, respectively. 


& Sefer waft fefergaarte sare stat sufzen oe 2 
aitrerarrgageteg ate ane sremrantirenat wer owt fret. 
quitegite ae corey Rec oefe h pegenefeT tA 


eratisren: dices gfadiet eeqaer fiefigertcerttyatttr | 
ertwon fe | arcaiatdier 1 arcenfooe: agen | 
arent fsfigeafterfenahe a 

qaafid eet et garat gq ed! 

errermreettel dt erettareperet frees WaT | TST 





“4 Licut or Trutit. [Cuar. ttt. 





This rule applies only to those people who intznd to marry; but 
those who intend not to do so, are welcome to remain celchates till 
death, if they can. But they must bear in.mind that this is possible 
for those persons alone whose knowledge is perfect, who have full 
control over their mind and senses, and who are perfect Yogés, free 
from all vices. It is a most difficult task to be master of the senses, 
and restrain the flood of carnal desires. The following rules should 
be observed both by.pupils and teachers ~— 


“Let them condact themselves properly, and study and teach, 
he truthful in wort, dezd, and thought and study and teach, 
be indifferent to joy or sorrow, worldly applause or censure, walk in 
the path of righteousness, and study and teach (the Vedas and the 
other true sciences), keep their senses under perfect control, and 
study and teach, restrain their minds from evil pursuits (such as the 
practice of injustice), ard study and teach, learn the properties of 
heat, light, electricity, and other natural forces, and study and teach, 

perform Home daily, and study and teach, serve 

Tesaey poe atithés, and study and teach, fulfil their duties and 

‘ obligations towards other men, and study and teach, 

protect their subjects and children, and sludy and teach, preserve 

and perfect the reproductive element, and study and teach, protect 
and educate their children and pupils, and study and teach.” 

"A wise man would dowell to practise both Yamds' and 


at w= arama w= 1 wet tT area 7) awa 
SANTI | TAT RATHI TT ST ANTAT waTATT- 
eee | se eee | afateryg ener: 
wat &) vias aaa @) Aat sz een 
STW er AT eT RTOS | TAT KATATE 
| merftar earerremrat wu dferdarehfrg | 


1. Fasa's are § in number :— 
(«) Harmlessness ; (6) Strict devotion to veracity ; (c) 
Yoya Shastra Honesty in word, deed, and thought; (@) Abstinence from 
Sadhanapada sexual indulgence; and (e Abstinence from the headlong 
XXX, Pursuit of worldly things and freedom from the pride of one’s 
possessions “such as wealth and power —7>. 


onfterearaemgsateftegr war a dr o ape 
qr oh 





Cuar. IL} Licut or Trurii. 45 
Nyamdst an! He and practises one without the other, never 
Nyands makes any progress,on the contrary he simply de- 
Manu iv, 204. generates, in other words, leads a degraded life in this 
world”. 
“Neither inordinate desire nor its total absence is conducive to 
a man’s happiness, since it would be simply impossi- 
Manu II, 2 ble, either to lead a virtuous life, or to acquire 
(Vedie) knowledge without desiring for the same”, 
“The study and teaching of all true sciences ; observance of the 
vows at Brahkmecharya, and truthfulness; perform. 
ance of Homma, as well as the acceptance of truth and 
the rejection of untruth ; disseminatio.: of true knowledge ; leadiug 
a virtuous life, as enjoined by the Veda, communion with God, and 
acquisition of the knowledge of the Veda; performance of seasonal 
Homa,* reproduction of good children, performance of the Five 
Great Daily Duties,» and doing such other good actions as are 
productive of beneficial results to the community such as develop. 
ing technical arts ; all the eight things go to make a Sruksnan, in 





Manu ii, 27 


amet Ste Gere & raat See Te | 

warereenpatay frente Sree eo oY | 2a 

sinc anne pei 

wretr fe Ser ftrrra: eetterar Vf: Wo We VA 
ndatiefraatcran 3 


eer \ 
areraiter waiter mrefte flere ag: lye 81 RH 
1, Myama's are wlso § in number :— 
(a) Cleantiness (physical and mental) ; (4) Contentment— 
which does not mean contentedness with physical inertia, but 
Yoga Shastra which does mean that you do your utmost to attain your abject, 
Sadban-pada but are not carried away by the resulting profit or loss, joy of 
xxxii, worrow ; (<) Devotion to duty regardless of conseyuences ; 
ne (# Acquisition and dissemination of true knowledge ; (¢) 
Resignation to the Will ot God through extreme devotion to Him 


hveeitvad: erreatbarcafgerante fiream: it ar? o area 
TR Fo Wl 








2. Specials Hamas are performed at the chai f 

oaerate Fedele e perf change of season, as well as on the 
3 The Five Great Dui y Dut es are, (1) Worship of God, 

duty towards the lea ned, (3) Bervice of ove's perents and othe: ome a2) 

righteous persons, (q) Vuty towards animals and the poor and helpless, and 

(5) Duty towards the altruistic teachers of bumanity and ordinary guests, ¢ 


to show them proper respect and serving thems to the utmost of one‘ a 
fo show es spect uw one’s power and 





46 Licut oF [rttiz. [Cuap. lil 





other words, his mind ought to be the repository of Vedic learning 
and devotion to God”. Without the practice of these an indivi- 
dual is never entitled to be called a Brdsman. 

“As skilful driver keeps his horses under control, even so 
should a wise man keep his senses—which are apt 
to lead both mind and soul into the pursuit of 
wicked objects—under complete control”. 

“ Verily, that man alone can achieve his heart's desire who is a 

master of his senses; he who allows himself to 
become their slave snon loses! his character". 
“ A ian of low character can never succeed in acquiring know- 
ledge of the Vedu ; in keeping up his vows of 
celibacy, truthfulness, etc, ; nor in fulfiling his duties 
towards man and God, keeping control over his passions and desires, 
being steadfast in his devotion to truth and righteousness, and 
performing good deeds. 

“There should be no omission in the study of the Vedas and 

performance of the Five Great Daily Duties and 

Manu i, other good works even on holidays, as there is no 

105 106 Suce “ eae . 

omission in the act of respiration without risk to 
life, so there can be no omission of one’s daily duties; a good 
deed done even on an Anadhydra—so-called day of exemption 
from study, etc., cannot but bear good fruit”. 

As it is always a sin to tell a lie, and always a virtue to speak 
the truth, a man should on all days shun vice and Practice virtue. 


aaa fact ietarntgi 
tat qerarferd ficors, weer erfterey tl ty o BI ce Hl 
pstnane ities 

aftrqrr gy arte ae: fate Prvegit iyo 81820 
see ea 
frrgearret aregitesr GA Fre n Tyo VIS 
Rare Oe ere ty Het _oo 
argtratseerrent Chraty a 
Rea’ ayererearat meres fe aeeey | 
werrghnget qerrrearareTTaRey tl AT oF 1 Loy | 10% 11 


1, Lit. hecomes addicted to great vices —7r 


Manu ii 88 


Manu ii, 93 


Manu ii, 97. 





Cuap, M1] Licut or Truta. 47 





“He who has a sweet and amiable disposition and serves the 
, wise and old with all his heart, continually gains in 
Mane thr knowledge, reputation and strength and enjoys a 
lorg life”, Whilst he that is otherwise, never ad- 
vances in knowledge, etc., 
“ Let a wise man bear malice to no living soul and Jet him show 
all men the path that leads to true happiness, let his 
Manuiiy speech be sweet and kindly, let him be truthful 
in word, deed, and thought. This alone can lead 
to the spread of truth and righteousness, Verily, he alone can 
have a true conception of the teachings of the Vedas whose mind 
and speach are pure and well under control.” 
“That Brakmana alone is said to possess true kaowledge of 
Mona ii, the Veda and God, who shuns the world’s applause 
162. like poison and courts its censure like immortality.” 
“Thus let the twicc-born students (male and female) who had 
7 their Upnayana performed go on gradually acquir- 
ar i" i g knowledge of the Vedas, which is their highest 
duty”, 
“A Dwiya as well as his children who, instead of studying the 
* Veda, wastes his time in doing other things soon 
Mane. bites: goes down to the level of a Séudra”. 


aftrarqaatwes fret qatretint: | 
went wer qatrar srrgfferretreeny ii myx o 81 888 Ui 
algats sarat wed sgureny y 

arg Se ager eee etree weiftreqar i 

BE MENA FS TeTETY T TTT | 

et adcanitits Seqrtrrra Herr Ayo Rs WE 1 Lo Ul 
eaterrerrg rere Frere tater Freeh | 

weet areretrramey eee ayo Ts WRU 
iv aaTante ceperen fan wh: | 

gh vex afiggargrenfiirfis at wage 31 thet 
Rrswrefter fiat egreae get eA! 

fe shwte qacasrg rege eam: 0 Ago 8 1 {hE 





48 Licut or TRUTH. [CHar. HL 





“A Brikmichdri (male or female) should abstain from meat 
and alcohol, perfumes, garlands of flowers, tasty foods and 
drinks, the conipany of the opposite sex, sour articles, and injury 
to all living things, from anointing the body and handling the 
reproductive organ unnecessarily, from the use of collyrium, from 
the use of boots and shoes and of an umbrella, or a sunshade, from 
harbouring low passions such as anger, avarice, carnal passion, 
infatuation, fear, sorrow, jealousy, malice, frum singing, dancing, 
playing, gambling, gossiping, laying and back-biting, from looking 
upon women (with the eye of lust), and embracing them, and 
from doing harm to other people, and indulging in such other 

" evil habits. Let every student sleep alone and 
Manv ii.177 never lose his reproductive element. He who loses 
it through passion breaks his vow of Brakmavharya”. 


Teachers should instruct their pupils in the following way :~- 

“My children! Always speak the truth, lead a virtuous life, 
abstain from sexual indulgence, never be negligent in learning and 
teaching, devote yourselves to sciences (physical and spiritual), till 
your knowledge is perfect, then procure for your preceptor any- 
thing that he needs, thereafter go and get married. Never be 
indifferent to truth and religion, Never neglect your bealth or the 


antteang atesy wed aret cara fert: | 
genta arte etfs seftert Ser fiery 
TAA ATRUTTTC HTT | 

aut ite aot wrest eftererery 





werarefar eure fterfds merarrETA: Ul Yo V1 YHI=keo Ul 
santos | ge ae) wiecl 
TONY Sear: | TMC Fret aTTTRRT SUTTER AT eaTERreht: 
eeare sahteeny | wate sarftaeny | Grane tag 
a cafe, | ererenrrerarat 7 rafereny | 
az srarfterensy | arreqt ar aren i fete wrens srreredear ae | eter 
Rat ae i aererenfrentfy arf Sfraeari At ercrfty | are 
ermay geftentiy erftr eqdrarenfi ay crate 1 TS ererey- 


Cray. 111] Liou? or Trutu. & 





cultivation of any skill or talent you may possess. Never be 
indifferent to the acquisition of wealth, power, etc. Never neglect 

Taitreya your studies, Never neglect to serve your father, 

Upnishad mother, teacher, and all preachers of the true reli- 
‘VEY, xi, 14 gion (atitki.) Love virtue and shun vice. Imbibe 
our virtues, not our faults and imperfections, Always keep the 
company of those Brahmans amongst us who are learned and 
imbued with piety ; pat your trust in them and them only. Be 
charitable, | Give—in faith or without faith. For fame, or through 
shame, give. Give—Whether through fear of public opinion, or 
simply for keeping your word, Always give. If you are ever 
in doubt as to the truth of any practice of religion, or any doctrine, 
or mode of divine worship, follow the practice of those highly 
virtuous Brahmans, whether Yogis or not, who are free from 
prejudice, charitable in disposition, and well versed in philo- 
sophy and science (physical and spiritual,, and extremely desirous 
of furthering the cause of righteousness. This is the advice. This 
is the commandment. This is the mandate of the Vedas, Ay, this 
is the Law. Follow this advice, Obey this law.” 

Let all bear in mind that “ even the most insignificant action, 
in this world, is impossible without a desire on the 
part of the doer. Therefore whatever aman does 
is the outcome of his will.” 

“Character or righteous living as taught by the Vedas, as well 
as, Smritis! in conformity with the Vedas, is the highest virtue, 





Mana Il, 4. 





eer Oe wrereredat arava sre frereray raat Hey | ereTCAT 


ex aden 1a sete ioe Sarefere | carguren | ce: 
quftrreny | aay Saqarenyy aferdige © sige tt wot) 
RIRIVD 
wrecren firat wafirg ceed ae wht hr 
waft get fafa aecenrer Site 4 
RTRs 


1. Writings of Aptas in conformity with the Veda. 
{An Apta is a pious, truthful, unprejudiced, honest and learned man.—7?,) 


7 


50 Licut or TrutTs. (Cuar. 11h 





This is the end-all! and be-all of all reading and reciting, studying, 
teaching and preaching. Let a man, therefore, always walk in the 
path of righteousness, He that swerves from it can never enjoy 
true happiness—which is born of strict adherence to the conduct 
of life enjoined by the Veda. He alone enjoys, all 
true happiness, who acquires, knowledge and leads a 
righteous life.” 

He is an atheist, and a slanderer of the Vedas, who disparages 
their teachings, as well as the writings of true 
teachers in conformity with the Vedas, He should be 
excluded from good society, aye, even expelled out of the country, 
(if necessary).” 

“The Vedas, the Smritis, the practice of men, good and true, in 
conformity with the Vedas—the Word of God, and 
the satisfaction of one's own soul—these undoubted- 
ly, are the four criteria of true religion, which enable one to dis- 
tinguish between Right and Wrong.” 

Equitable dealings, the acceptance of truth and the rejection of 
untruth, under all circumstances, constitute the true conduct of 
life ; or Religion,’ and the reverse of this is Irreligion. 

It is on’y those, who stand aloof from the headlong parsuit of 
both wealth and carnal pleasures, that can ever 
attain a knowledge of true religion, It is the duty 
of everyone, who aspires aiter this object to determine, what true 


Mann i, 108 
109 


Mann ij, 12. 


Magu jj, 13- 





araTe: watt we: Ye: Grd oye | 
ee ee 
wratcfireget weaqneegt 
arate F pj. Jngiaia bondi al Jacek 
Soret Fx tree 
@ ongfintfonrat arfterst chins: CRHLALERS 
aq: agit: aqrent: erex a frase: | 

ing Srevabee eoat veces (ici 
sniqgrtererenrat utert firdtat 1 
veeht farrerareorent scored Test af: TT VV 
1. ‘The word used in the text is Désrms which is a very comprehensive 


term If translated into the guiding principle | cs sll heman activities, it may 
give some idea to the reader as to its meaning." Zr, 


Cuap. IIL] LIGHT OF TRUTH. st 





religion is by the help of the Vedas, for a clear and perfect ascer- 
tainment of true religion is not attained fully, without the help of 
the Vedas.” 

Teachers should instill the aforesaid teachings into the minds 
of their pupils, They should take care that they do not neglect the 
education of Classes other than Brdhmans, vis.—Princes and other 
Kshatvriyds, Vaishyds, and intelligent Skudras. Because, if Brdh- 
sans only were to acquire knowledge, there could be no advance 
in knowledge, religion and government, nor increase in wealth, 
for Brdéhmaxs, whose sole duty is to acquire knowledge and disse- 
tinate it, depend for their living on Ashatri ds, etc. to whom they 
are law-givers. Brdhmans would be relieved of all restraint and 
fear from Kshatriyds, who, being uneducated, would be quite in- 
capable of judging the soundness or unsoundness of their teachings, 
They would thus gradually vse their power for their own selfish 
ends, drift into hypocrisy and do whatever they liked and their 
example would be followed by other Classes. But when Xshatri- 
yds and other Classes are also well educated, Brdkmans study 
stilt harder to keep ahead of the other Classes and walk in the 
path of righteousness. They could never then falsely teach ad 
lead selfish, hypocritical lives. It follows, therefore, that it is in 
their own interest, as well as that of the community at large, to 
try to their best to teach the Veda and other true sciences and 
philosophies to the Ashatrtyds, etc, It is Kshatriyds and other 
Céasses, that are the real cause of advance in knowledge, religion, and 
government, and of increase in wealth, etc. They sever live on 
alms, and, therefore, can have no reason to be partial in religious 
or scientific matters, When all the Classes are well educated and 
cultured, no one can set up any false, fraudulent, and irreligious 
practices, 


All this goes to prove that it is the Brdémans and the Sanpisis, 
who keep Xshatriyds and others in propsr order and vice versa, 
Therefore all persons of all Classes should be given good and sound 
education and be well instructed in the principle of true religion, 

The truth of everything that is learnt or taught should be care- 
fully examined by the following five tests :— 

(@) The Veda and nature of God.—All that conforms to the 
teachings of the Vedds, nature and attributes and 
characteristics of God is right, the reverse is wrong, 


2 Licut or TRUTH. (Crap. (11. 





(ii) Laws of Nature —A\i that tallies with the laws of nature 
is true, the reverse untrue; eg. the statement that a 
child is born without the sexual union of its parents, 
being opposed to the laws of nature can never be 
true. 

(iti) The practice and teachings of A'ptds, i.e, pious, truthful, 
unprejudiced, honest, and learned men, All that is un- 
opposed to their practice and teachings is acceptable 
and the reverse is unacceptable. 

(iv) The furity and conviction of one's own soul—What Is 
good for you is good for the world. What is painful 
to you ix painful to others. This ought to be the 
Quiding principle of one’s conduct towards others, 

(v) Eight kinds of Evidence, wiz, (1) Direct Cognizance, 
(2) Inference, (3) Analogy, (4) Testimony, (5) 
History, (6) Deduction, (7) Possibility, (8) Non-exist- 
ence or Negation. 

(3) Direct Cognisance (Pratyaksha) is that kind of 
Niydya Shés- knowledge, which is the result of 
tra 1, iy 4 direct contact of the five senses 
with their objects, of the mind (faculty or 
organ of attention) with the senses, and of 
the soul with the mind, 

{a) But this knowledge must not be that of 
the relation of words with the things 
signified, as of the word Water with the 
fluid called water, For example, you ask 
your servant to bring you some water, 
He brings water, puts it before you, and 
says: ‘Here is water, Sir’, Now, what 
you and your servant see is not the word 
water but the object signified by it. So 
you have the dsrect keowledge of the 

2 object called water. But the knowledge 

wirantafweticst wrrmarterreatentt cowerae- 

GMT Il AMT We Li WoC Teo vil 
1. As of eyes with Ligdt, of ears with sound, of olfactory sense with colours, 


Of tongue ot guestion xense with firvours, of tactile sente with objects that give 
2tge to the sensation of fouck, 





Cuap, IIL] 


Licut oF TRUTH. 53 








of the redation of an object with its same 
comes under the fourth kind of evidence 
called Testimony. 


(4) This knowledge must not be of a semporary 


or franscient character, ¢, not the pro- 
duct of observation under uufavourable 
circumstances ; for example, a person saw 
something at night and took it for a man, 
but when it was daylight he found out 
his mistake and knew that it was not a 
man, but a pillar. Now, his first impres- 
sion of the thing was of a semporary or 
tanscient mature, which gave place to 
permanent knowledge later on, when the 
true nature of the thing was revealed 
in the light, 


( It should be free from all elements of 


doubt, and be certain in character, For 
example, you see a river from a distance 
and say: “Js it water there or white 
clothes spread todry”. Or take another 
example, you see a man from a distance 
and say: “Is it Deva Datta standing 
there or Yajna Datta”. Now, as long 
as you are in doubt and consequently not 
svre about a thing you observe, your 
knowledge cannot be called Pratyaksha 
(Direct cognizance). To be that the 
element of doubt must be absolutely 
eliminated from it. 


Briefly, therefore, that knowledge alone is said 


to be Pratyakshka, which is not the out- 
come of the relation of a name with the 
object signified by it, nor gained under 
circumstances unfavourable for observa- 
tion or experiment (hence éranscient in 
character), nor into which any element 
of doubt enters, 


4 Licut or Truts. (Cuap, Et. 





(2) Aaumdna= Inference, Literally it means that 

Naydya Shéetra 2, which follows direct cogns- 

As zance. Two things have 

been observed to exist together at some time 

and place, when on some other occasion, one 

of the two is observed, the other, #.¢., the 

“unknown can be inferred.* For instance, 

you see a child and yon at once infer that he 

must have had parents, Again, seeing the 

smoke issuing from behind a hill you infer 

the existence of fire there. Or, to take an- 

other example, You infer the previous in- 

carnation of the soul from observing unequal 

joy and sorrow in this world at the present 

moment. 

Inference is of three kinds :—~ 


. (a) Purvavet is one, in which you reason 
from cause to effect, ¢.g., the inference 
of coming rain from the sight of clouds ; 
or, again, you see a wedding and natur- 
ally infer that some day the wedded 
couple will have children, Or, again, 
you sce students engaged in the pursuit 
of knowledge and you infer that some 
day they will become men of learning. 





* NorE.—In order to make this point clear I subyoin the following quotation 
from ‘ Evidences of Human Spirit’, the late Pundit Guru Date Vidyarchi, 
M. dm bearing on the su-ject of 1 —T 

“The known dafwm or defs, from which the unknown something is 
inferred its called in San-4eé¢ Logic, the Lenea and the something 
inferred is called the Aawseye. With reference to this question of 
Inference, says Xashyag the logician :—That alone isa valid datum 
Jor inferen e (linge) which bas, firstly, een known to co-exist with 
the thing to be‘inferred at some ‘ime or place, secondly, is also known 
tobe it wherever the like of the thing. tn be inferred exists, aod 
thirdly, to be absent wherever the unlike of the thing to be inferred 
exists. Totake, for instance, a concrete example, From the fall 
of the barometer is inferred the decrease of the pressure of air. Let 
us see if ha her Inference can bes valid pron a The fall ame 
is known, we know, from a sfecific experiment, ¢ ¢., 

&n ¢.periment conducted at a particular time and place, that the 


wre gents feftengart qiwepercararatrces 1 Teo 


WoLismoliqeys 





Cnap, 111] Licut or Trurs. $$ 





(6) Sheshavat inference is one,in which you 
reason from effects to causes, Exam- 
ples:—You see a flood in the river, and 
infer that it must have rained on the 
mountain from which the river issues, 
Again, you see a child and at once infer 
that the child must have had a father, 
Again, you see this world and infer the 
existence of the Spiritual cause—the 
Creator, as well as of a Material cause— 
the elementary maner. Or, again, take 
another example. When you see a man 
in pleasure or pain, you at once infer 
that he must have done a virtuous or 
sinful deed before, since you have no- 
ticed that the consequence of a sinful act 
is pain, and that of a virtuous deed 
pleasure, 

(¢) Sdindnyatodrishata is that kind of snfer- 
ence, in which there is no relation of 
cause and effect between the known 
datum and the thing to be inferred, but 
there is some kind of similarity between 
the two, For example, you know that 
no one can get to another place without 
moving from the first, and hence, if you 
find a person at a certain place, you can 
easily infer that he must have come to 
the latter place by moving from the first, 


decrease of pressure produces the fall of barometer This fulfi's the 
first condition. Secondly, similar cases of the decrease of pressure, 
by whatsoevor cause, are attended with the fail of baromater, bat the 
third condition is not fulfilled. It is not true that wherever there 
is no fall in the barometer, there is no decrease of pressure, for, there 
may be no fall of barometer, although, the pressure may have been 
decreased The mercury, through Tise of temperature expands and 
becomes lighter. Hd the same pressure continued, the co'nmn of 
mercury would bave risen higher wp but the fall of pressure compen 
sated for the rise, and left the mercury spparently where it was. The 
three coucns of Aushya/, t' erefore, coactstvely peored, that the fall 
of the barometer is not the fringe of the decrease of pressure. Similar 
reasoning will show that the decrease in the weight of the super- 
incombent column of mercury is the /éage (inference) of the decrease 


of pressure.” 4 


56 _ Lront or Taurs. {Cuar 1, 





(3)--Upamdna—Analogy—is the knowledge 
Niyéya Shéstra 1, Of a thing from its like, 
66 ness to another, The 
thing which is required to be known is 
called Sddhya, and that which becomes 
the means of this knowledge from some 
kind of likeness between the two is 
called Sddkana, 


Examples :—A man says to his servant: “Go 
and fetch Vishnu Mittra.” The latter an- 
swers that he does not know him, as he has 
never seen him before. Thereupon the mas- 
ter says: “You know Deva Datta, don't 
you?” Upon the servant's answering in the 
affirmative, his master continues: “ Well, 
Vishnu Mittra is just like Deva Datta.” So 
the servant went out to find Vishnu Mittra, 
As he was passing through a street, he saw 
a man very much like Deva Datta, and 
thought that, that man must be Vishnu 
Mittra, and forthwith brought him to his 
master. Or, take another example. You 
want to know what a Yes is, Well, some 
one tells you, it is just like an ox. Next 
time you go to a jungle and happen to see 
an animal very much like an ox, you at once 
know that it is the Yas you asked your 
friend about. Now this kind of knowledge, 
#.¢, knowledge of Vishnu Mittra from his 
likeness to Deva Datta and of a Yué from 
its likeness to an ox is called Uapmdna or 
knowledge by Axalogy. The words Vishnu 
Mittra and Yak are called Sddkya, whilst 
Deva Datta and ox Sddhana, in the above 
two instances. 


aferaresaiearerarengyarrl t FaTTo ROL Te Ut 


week 





Cwar, HL] Licur or Teur, : LJ 





(4)—-Shabdd—Testimony (literally, word). 
Niydys Shastra The word of an A’pt is called 
nh 7 Shabda, s 
An A'p# is a person who is a thorough scholar, 
well-versed in all the sciences and philoso- 
phies, physical and spiritual, is virtuous, 
truthful, active, free from passions and desires, 
imbued with love for others, and who is an 
altruistic teacher of humanity solely actuated 
with the desire of benefiting the world by 
his knowledge, experience and convictions, 
God being the truest and greatest of all 
A'ptas, HIS Word the Veda is also included 
in shabda (Testimony), 
(5)—Jtthds is that which tells us that such and 
Nyéya Shéstra, Such @ person was so and so, 
11,2, he did such and such a thing, 
In other words, /titds is the history of a 
country or the biography of a person. [The 
experience of the past recorded in history 
can be applied to solve many a difficolt 
question of the day.—7,.} 
(6)—Arthdpatti—Concluston or deduction. 
It is a conclusion which naturally follows 
from the statement of a fact; for instance, 
one saysto another: “ Rain falls from clouds” 
or “an effect flows from a cause.” The 
natural conclusion that can be drawn from 
the above statement is: “There can be no 
rain when there are no clouds,” or “no 
effects follow when a cause does not exist.” 
(7)}—-Sambhava—possibility. 
When you hear a thing, the first thing that 
enters your mind is whether such and such a 
thing is possib/e, Anything that runs counter 


mite: wey WAT OUTS LI BTS LI TOON 
oc equadtiiraratafererrsrererenTareare Ul FIT © & Be 3 | 
wre RT 








38 Lich or Trvti. . (Citar. inf, 





to the laws of nature is not possible, and hence 
it can never be true; for example, if you ars 
told that a child was born without parents, 
such and such a person raised the dead to life 
again, or made stones float on the sea, lifted 
mountains, broke the moon into pieces, was 
God incarnate, or saw horns on the head of a 
man, or solemnised the marriage of a couple 
born of sterile mothers. You could at once 
know that it could not have possibly hap- 
pened, being opposed to the laws of Nature. 
That alone is possid/e which is in conformity 
with the laws of Nature, 

(8)—-Abhdva—Absence or Negation. Vou infer the 
existence of a thing in some other place from 
its absence from the place where you were 
told you would find it ; for instance, a gentle- 
man said to his man: “Goand bring the 
elephant from the elephant-house.” He went 
there but found that the elephant was not 
there, He naturally concluded that he must 
be somewhere near about. So he went out 
and looked about for the elephant and found 
him not very far from its proper place and 
brought him to his master. 

These eight kinds of evidence have been briefly described, 
Their number can be reduced to four if //¢sfory be included under 
Testimony, and Deduction, Possibility and Negation under Infer- 
ence,' 

It is only by means of these five criteria that a man can ascer- 
tain what is right or wrong and not otherwise. 

Supreme Bliss (Moksha) is obtained by living a truly righteous 
Vaisheshika _life and thereby getting the soul purified and exalted, 

arse and gaining a true conception of the six entities, vvs., 
ue Noumenon, Attribute, Action, Commonness, Disst- 


witgergery renqedamrafaderaramt wratat 
sraaiteateat cxewernfiatrery 1 Bon wo 81 wre 81 Go wi 


They can even be reduced to three. viz, Direct Ci y 
und Tesntooog if dmalogy be included under fajeremec Trent laverencee 





Cuap, HL] : LicHT OF TRUTH. so 





militude, and Inherent relation, (as of cause and 
effect, of whole with its parts). 

Dravyds (Noumena), are nine in number :—Prithéo? (Solids), 
Vaisheshika  4’pdh (Liquids), Zeya (Luminous matter), Vdyw 
Shdstra, l,i (Gases) and Abdsha, Time, Space, Soul (human 

5 and Divine), and Manas (Principle of thought and 
attention). 

Characteristics (Lakshana)" of a Dravya (Noumenon) :—It is 
Vaisheshika something in which attributes and actions or attri- 
Shdstra,1,i, — butes only reside, and which is capable of becoming 

a a coinherent® cause of an effect. A cause always 
preceeds its effect. Out of the nine Noumene, Solids, Liguids, 
Luminous matter (Ether), Gases, Manas and Soul possess both 
attributes and actions; whilst A’kdsha, Time and Space possess 
attributes only but no action. 

“ Prithivi (Solids) is something, which excites the optic, gusta- 
Vaisheshika tory, olfactory and tactile impulses, Colour,® taste 

Shastra, and touch are derived from Liquids, Luminiferous, 

ner matter or Ether, and Gases, respectively.” 

“The power of exciting olfactory impulses is the natural 
Vaisheshika inherent attribute of solids”, similarly taste is the 

sl attribute of Liquids, Light of Luminiferous matter 
(Ether), touch of Gases and Shabda,* of Akdsh. 








ftrerrretsttrenezeresrat weretr farvesee seer fe sreTAy KB o I 


WoliwmoLiGqoun 
freepererrenfrercetts yore a@ en we tt 
sro LiZeowil 
WRonmMoRViMo®wsgqgols 
equfter: gfireat wa: nono ViMTOV! Towa 


1. A Lakshana, is that by means of which, an object (to be known) is known, 
for peample, colour is seen with eyes, Eyes are therefore called a Lekshana. 

2 Co-inherent means capable af combining 

3 4-4, the power of exciting visual, gustatory, and tactile impulses. These 
terms are used in this sense throughout this chapter — 77. 

4. Shabde vs erroncnously translated into sound Now shabda is not sound, 
though it is true that s4 dda is accompanied by sound, when it is spoken. itis 
ik a ta soavay to the reader what the Acre shabda & je Sanskeit 
il y signifies. The Sasréri# phil old that man being incapable 
of inventing language, the root-tang pee mast be inherent in nature Seoelt Phe 
root language, which is the mother of human speech. is called shedds, and is 
supposed to inhere ia a noumenon calied A’kv'she This root-lenguage is 
revealed to man by God in the beginning of each creation.— ZY. 





bo Licur oF Tuts. [Cuapr, Ill, 





“A'pd& (Liquids) is something which excites the optic, gustatory, 
Vaisheshika 274 olfactory impulses, and in which fluidity and 

Shéstra, Moisture are to be found. The attribute of exciting 

Misa Gustatory sensation is naturally inherent in Ligusds, 
whilst colows and towch are derived from Erher and Gases.” 


Vaisheshika 
‘Shira " Coldness is also a natural attribute of Liguids", 
hy My 
“ Teja is something which excites the optic and tactile impul- 
Vaisheshika ses,” The former is its own inherent attribute, whilst 


Fried the latter is derived from Gases, 


“ Vdyu (gases) is something which excites tactile impulses.” 
Vaisheshika © Though heat and cold are also to be found in it but 
Shietra, they are derived from Teja and (4'pdA) Liquids. 
“ Akdsha has not the attribute of exciting these impulses,” 4, ¢., 
Vaisheshika —of light, touch, taste and smell. Shaéda alone is the 
oh Tih attribute of Akdsha, 


Isheshit : 
“Silt “ Egress and Ingress are the /inga' of Akdsha." 

i, 20. 

“ Shabda, not being observed to be produced by solids and 
Valeheshika other substances, is not their attribute.” It resides 


ite only in Abdsha, 
“ Time is that of which nearness, futurity, simultaneity, slowness 


Vaisheshika = and quickness are predicated.” 
a: 
. 6s 


wrcerersherer wre met: feta: tt Bo Wao Ri wef go RH 

aye tier sR onwoRi meow 

aM ereniaq ate nwo wi motiqo ze 

extern wa: Wouwe Qi wToUl gee 

waren a fret a onwoiatetiqews 

Propane) sriterrftrerrererer fear Ro I He 2 | Te L1 Zo RON 

wen enjrmne: phen wert 

TOL Ro Wil 

wrreforenre gerefeedt fieafirit craft n&e awe 21 
wewiqgeks 

Ws dtu the datum from which the existence of A'hask is inkgrred.— 7h, 





Cuap, HL] Licut oF Trurs. 6 





“Jt is an essential element in the production of effects, whilst 
Veisheshita causes are independent of it. Time is, therefore, 

Il, ii, 9- spoken of as @ cause”, 

“That to which “this side” or that side (#¢. North, South, 
Vaisheshika © East and West), above and below are applicable, is 

es called Space.” 


“That direction of space where the sun is first seen to rise is 
called Has?, where he sets, is West. A man facing 
the East has South, on his right and Worth on his 
left.” 

“The other directions are South-East, South-West, North- 
East and North-West.” 





Vaishesika 
Shdstra IT, ii, 16. 
“That substratum, in which desire, repulsion, feelings of 
Niydya Shastra, pleasure, feeling of pain, conscious exertion (will), 
i, 10. and consciousness,’ are found is called Atmd (soul).” 
The Vaisheshika philosophy defines soul thus :— 
“That substance, in which respiration, nictitation, physical 
building and animation, movement, sensation, acti- 
faabevnina vity of the senses, organic feelings (such as hunger 
‘ha and thirst, fever, pain, etc.),” desire, repulsion, feeling 
of pleasure, feeling of pain, conscious exertion, and 
consciousness are found, is called sow/.” 
Prterarergikatg arereercy stwrenfe kG on wok) 
mroRgeogl 
we efits ererenfteed few Be nto RI sto AIG ton 
wnfteretaremy aerqaty aftrerat sere sre # @onwei 
wero Rigo Wil 
acter fereerererfir exrearenfir W Bo i wo Ri Wo Vig Wl 
Cea ereergergererererrennat firwferfer a rare two 81 
qoton 





srerscrafitestienntrre terrain qe te 
Rercenaren few nu FomoRiaTe Ve wn 
3 Here only the voluntary functions of the soul are enumerated.—7>, 
2. So far the involuntary attributes and functions are mentioned, then 
fellow the voluntary functions which are the same ax in the foregoing definj- 
ton—77, 


62 Licut or Tavuts. (Caap. HL 





“The existence of Manas (the mind or the organ of attention) 


. is established from the fact that one is only capable 
Nirty y Shastra, of attending to one thing at a time,”! 





“ The powers of exciting impulses,* of colour, taste, smell, touch ; 

Pi number, measure, separableness, property of com- 
Vasheshika ae eet ss . 5 

Shastra. 1,i,6. dining, divisibility, proximity, distance, conscious- 

ness, pleasures, pain, desire, aversion, conscious exer- 


qgererqereregeafertaer ferme ll Fatzo Hl ro f Isto Go BAW 
secerrerat: dearaftarari geet firerfrarcht rears 


Tet SUT THe cogat srwrar gar who nee 1 
mro<lqogen 


1, To give the reader a clearer idea of this substratum called amas, I cull 
the following from Evideaces of Hamin Spirtt:—" \t is said of a Greek Philo- 
sopher that he was engaged ta solving a mithematical problem when an army 

ssed by and he was altogether unconscious of it till a soldier effaced the circle, 
the philosopher had drawn on the earth, a fact which alone disturbed the atten- 
tion of the Philosopher. What followed may be left to history. Was the 
movement of an army entirely noiseless? Were no sound waves propagated 
when the philosopher was solving his mathematica! problem? Did aot the 
waves enter the cavity of his ear and put to vibration the tympanic membrane, 
the delicately placed stapes and the gtain.filled liquid in the internal labyrinths 
of the ear, in fact the invisible medium of sensation upon the nerves the tadrd. 

f All this did take place but the philosopher was not athending to it, 

‘here was in the philosopher a something which when en; in thinking 
(io., solving the problem. was not in contact with the internal ear, a something 
whose contact with one indriya or faculty precluded its contact simultaneous: 
with another. Its contact with an ésdriy2 and therefore with an organ is call 
what is called Aftentio: 3 separation from this cuts the cords of connec- 
tion and the result is what we call Aésent-miniedyess. Nor is this Wana the 
conscious faculty, for who does not know that all the idea-, that our experience 
has acquired for us, lie for the most part in a latent state in the brain or more 
correctly in the measzs but each and any of them is remembered whenever it is 
vecaited" —Tr. 

‘What is eived by the is called colour What is perceived by th 
tongue Js called Yaste, which is of different Kinds such as sweet, Salt, ete. id 

‘What is perceived through the nose is called sme/. 

‘What is perceived through the skin is called fouch. 

‘What conveys the idea of one, two, etc , is called sumer 

‘What conveys the idea of lightuess and heaviness is called (measure) 

Seperableness is the quality of Leing separate from others, 

Sanyoga= power of combining, explains itself. 

Divisibitly is the quality of being divisible, 

Proximity is immediate nearness either in place, time or relationship 

Distance (in time or place) explains itself. 

Virtue = just conduct. 

Sinfoluess = unjust conduct 


Other terms explain themselyes,—7h, 








Enar. 111] . Lrett or Traut. 63 





tion, gravity, fluidity, oiliness, and love, impressibility, virtue and 
roughness, sinfulness and smoothness or laxity and stabda (sound 
and language) are twenty-four attributes or qualities ( Gunds)." 
“An Attribute (Guna) is that which is dependent upon or 
Vasheshika resides in a substratum which cannot itself possess 
I, ii, 16 an attribute, is not the cause of combination or of 
division into parts, and is axdpekske, i.e, independent of another 
attribute.” 
“ Skabda is that, which is received through the ears, grasped by 


the intellect, sxpressed through speech, and resides 
Mabdbhdshya in A’kaska.” 





“ Ascent, descent, contraction, expansion, coming, going, and 
rotation, etc., are the different kinds of Karma, (motion or actzon).” 
“That which resides in a substratum, possesses no attributes, 
Valsbeshika and is an absolute cause of a combination or a divi- 
Ii, 17% sion, is called Karma (smotion).” 

“ Among effects :—Substrata, attributes, motions (or actions), 
Vaisheshika that which is the cause of all and is, therefore, com- 
1, i, 18. mon to all, is called Sdimduya (common-element).” 

“ Among effects of the same Dravyd (Substratum), the Sdmd- 
Vaisheshika #4 (common-element), is the fact of their being 
ay iy 32 all effects.” 





rorya Saurfatererceyraty Kf TET Ht 
RonwmoliwMoRigqe ee 

sricatteyfahte: stritysfreefeer seers: ep 
FETATES Ul ; 

equrertcqargadt wary rantiis enifyr@ on 
Wolimrol’l Gok 

ererny Sfranterrteercaite entereeez ti to & 

; WoC BTo Vigo won 

rerpeetat ret ered SHEL Fo hol 1 BO kT 
qeotri 

arated werd’. eravay, neo lee tistexige ti 


64 Licut or Trutit. (Car. Ii. 





Among drauyds (Substances), dravydship, ' among gunds (attri. 
Vaisheshika butes), Gumdship ; among darmds (actions) £arma- 
bas ship* are Sdmdnya (common-ciement), as well as 
Vishesha (distinctive element), For example—dravydship, i, ¢., the 
fact of being a dravyd (substance), is common to all substances 
(dratyds), but it also distinguishes them from attributes (guads), 
Therefore it (dravydship) is Sdmdnya (common-element), as well as 
Vishesha (distinctive element).? 
“Commonness and Dissimilitude are relative terms”; for in- 
- . stance, among Auman kumanship,) 7. ¢., the fact of 
Varehoshits being Amman, is the Coumon-element (Sdmanjd), 
hii, whilst it also distinguishes Asman beings from ani- 
mals, thus in this sense it is also the distinguishing -element (Vishesd); 
similarly, masculinity or femininity is Common to all men and 
women respectively, but Srdhmanism, Kshatryism and Vatshyism 
are the distinguishing-element among men and women, whilst 
Brdkmanism is the common-element among all Brdkmans, Ksha- 
trytsm is the common-element among all Kshatriyds and so on. 


Samdvdya (Inherent relation) is the inseparable and eternal 
Vaishesbika ‘élation between the whole and its parts, between 
Vil, 2526 an action and its agent, between an attribute and 

its substratum, between genius and its species, and between a cause 
and its effect. 

The mutual relation of substrate with one another being in the 

nature of a combination (Physical or Chemical—7r,), is of a tempo- 
rary character. 


qed qed Gilera Seared fae Ronee f1 
mo geoul 

pai hyearhinl ate bah ith Sie 

sain Srthlroncra erent d WS ial tiiarcdi 

1, 1 apologise to my eee ey such terms as theses For want 


of equivalent words in English 1 have been compelled to do so in order to make 
the text intelligible, — 77 


Fs 
2. We take for example a cow >—~ 
All that is common ‘oat cows is called the Common-clement (Sa’manya). 
Now this comvon-element di uishes every cow from the rest of the creations 


hence it is also the d:ferenitating-eiement (Vishesha) 














Cuap, t1Lj Licur oF Trutit. és 





The relation between substances, that they possess some attri- 
butes in common and can also be converted into different forms 
which are always essentially of the same nature as the substances 
out of which they were made, is called Sddharmya For example, 
take carth and water. Both are inanimate substances, both can 
be converted into different forms, as earth can be moulded into a 
pot, etc, and water into a lump of ice, etc. Therefore, earth and 
water are Sédkarmya (similar) in this respect. 

The reverse of Sddharmya is Vaidharma (dissimiliar), when the 
attributes are dissimilar, as in the case of carth and water, earth is 
hard, @rz and excities' olfactory impulses, whilst water possesses 
moisture, fluidity and the power of exciting gustatory impulses,*" 
These attributes are quite different from each other, hence earth and 
toater (Vaidkarmd) in this respect. 


‘Vedshechiba “ An effect presupposes a cause.” 

is 3 

Vaisteobibe “ Where there is no cause, there can be no effect.” 
sly 2 

Vaisheshika “ Absence of an effect does not prove the non- 
Lik existence of the cause.” 


“ The effect only reveals whatsoever pre-existed in the cause, 
No new attribute can spring up." “ Smad! and Great 
Veishesbita are relative terms” asa tetratomic molecule is smaller 
than a /zkshd* but greater than a diatomic molecule ; 
or as a mountain is swaMer than the earth, but greater than a tree. 
Vaisheshika “ Satt (existence) is the state of deing whether 
Lii?z of a substratum, an attribute or an action.” 





wercqarareertarn: @ o # CaP tat apa eee) 
ay sratarercercqrne: A GokwoCisTORI ge z 
qreqrararepremare: Go wo timo Rl Zo lH 


ercageate: erigat ce uno Risto tige we 
ETE aftaPedernoerarnes 


neo rwoy) 
srotiqge we 
afte att genet oT er tReet so time) 
goon 
ind of Prithvi, 
kind of A’pdd. 





3 & 2,8 mote. 


68 Licut oF Trurs. (Crap. TL, 





2. When we proceed from effects to causes, Example. A person 

Vaisheshika hears the sound (peculiar to the clapping of hands) 

1X, ii, 1 and at once infers that there has been clapping of 
hands close by, 


3. Sageyogé (concurrent) knowledge is that which is obtained 
from the concurrence of one thing with another. 
Example, The mention of the word dody at once sug- 
gests the existence of séix along with it. 

4. Sampdys' (Inherent) knowledge is that which is obtained 
from the inherence of something (¢. ¢.,an attribute sub- 
stance or an action) in another. Ezample. We know 
Extension inheres in Ether, therefore, from the mere 
mention of the word Ether, Extension is at once in- 
ferred, 

5. Ehkdrtha Samvdyi knowledge. When two things (such as 

: attributes) reside in a substance, the knowledge of one 
at once suggests the other, This kind of inferential 
knowledge is called Edrtha Samudyi, For example. 
We see the orange colour of an orange and at once infer 
that it must be smooth to fowch or sweetish in taste, 

6. Veradhi (Antethetic) knowledge ; is that which is gained 
from the natural opposition of ideas or things. Wate 
colour will suggest d/ack colour ; sweet taste suggests 
bitter taste ; hissing of a snake at once will suggest that 
its natural foe, the mungoose, must be close by. 


Hydpti is the relation of two things (one of which is a Anown 
‘datum and the other not énowa) which are related 

Prong ere to each other in a definite, fixed relation so that 
i either of them always accompanies the other, or 

only one accompanies the other ; as an example of the latter we 


equrequfterny a ongo8l mo ligon 
weet wre eres efaefr Hrerhtr rarer VA Alper A ho 1 
WoSiwMoRigqota 


Prracadenftengatrteacen ar exit: arias ed 14.1 ea 


3. Samvs'yl is the inseparable, inherent relation of a substance, an attribute 
on an action with another substance, just as the relation of fuidity with fuids, 
whole with its parts, genus with its species, etc , see page 73. . F 





Cnap. 111] Licnt oF Trots. 9 





take fire and smoke, Now in this case smoke is the datum 
(Sddhona) by means of which fire (Sddkya, £¢., the thing inferred, 
is kaown. Whenever you see swoke, you naturally conclude that 
there is five somewhere. The relation between the two is not an 
arbitrary one, but a natural, definite and universal one. You can 
nowhere find smoke without fire. 

“The Sddhana (sign) sometimes exists temporarily by its own 
Sackyh = power", as smoke, caused by the disintegrating Power 
Pravachan of fire (from wood, ete.) when carried to distant 

“s 3t places, is seen hanging by itself without the fire 
being found near it. This is also called Vydpis. 

“The relation of one pervading he other is also called 
Sankyhya Vydpati just as the primeval matter (Prakrits) 1 
Pravachan pervades the principle of wisdom, whilst the latter 

“3. is said to be pervaded by the former, e, the higher 
Pervades the lower whilst the latter is pervaded by the former, 
In other words, the relation of the thing pervaded with the thing 
pervading it is called Vydpti. 

Teachers should examine everything they teach to their'students 
with the help of the above criteria ; so should the students. Other. 
wine they can never be profound scholars. They will only be mere 
crammers, Teachers before teaching a book should thoroughly 
study it themselves and teat the truth of its contents by the appli- 
cation of the aforesaid test. On finding it true they should teach 
it to their scholars, otherwise not, 

“It is only by their properties and the application of (the 

aforesaid) tests that the true nature of things is ascertained.” 
THE SCHEME OF STUDIES. 

4, First of all comes Phonetics (shikshd) by Panini. Parents 
and teachers should teach their children and pupils how to pro- 
nounce different letters in their right g/aces, with the right amount 
of effort and the right agent, For example, take the letter P. The 


u 
eaedene  eeaiiasriaivinel inc 


3. Svakritt is held to be the subtlest form of matter, out of which all the 
visible and invisible objects of the world are evolved, /akréti being subtest 
and the cause, next in the stage of evolution—a little less subtie than 1t--comes 
what is called Maha’'tatwa (rhe of wisdom), & stage lower still comes 
Ahanke'ra (the principte of Individuality) a06 00 Oa—Tr, 











70 Licnt or Trot. [CHap, 11. 


right place to pronounce it is the Ags, the proper amount of effort 
is what is called fi and the right agent is the tongue, 

2, Then comes Grammar. It includes Ashtddhyayt; Dhdtu- 
pdth (Book of roots), Gaxapath (Book of groups), Undditesh (Book 
of prefixes and suffixes, &c). Last of all comes Mahdbdshya 
(Exposition of the above four books of Panini by Patanjili), 

If the teachers and their scholars be intelligent, energetic, 
honest and extremely anxious to advante their knowledge, the 
pupils can master the Science of Grammar in three years, and thus 
become profound Grammarians thoroughly acquainted with the 
construction of every word-—~Vedic or Lawkika (s.¢, of ordinary 
Sanskrit literature) Other sciences are easier to leara, The 
amount of labour that is required to learn the Science of Grammar 
is greater than that required to master any other subject; and the 
amount of knowledge acquired by the study of the above books 
on Grammar in three years cannot be gained by the study of 
such books as Sérswate Chandrikd, Kaumadi, and Manormd, in 
fifty years. The reason is that the great-sages have expounded the 
most abstruse subjects in their books in such an easy way that it 
is‘entirely impossible of ordinary men to approach it. The aim 
of those great souls in writing their books was to make the subject 
so easy asto be readily grasped in the shortest possible time; 
whilst the object of little minds has always been to clothe their 
subject with such a difficult-round-about style as would necessitate 
great labour and waste of time, on the part of the student, to com- 
prehend it, whilst he would profit but very little. We can liken 
this to digging up a whole mountain and finding a penny-worth 
of gold ; whilst the study of the books of the great sages can be 
well likened to the diving of a man into the sea and finding most 
valuable pearls in one plunge. 

3. Then let them read Mighanti and Nirukts (Books on Vedic 
Vocabulary and Philology) by Yaska in six to eight months, but 
not waste years of their valuable time over Amarkosha and other 
such books written by atheists, 


4. Thereafter they.should study Chhandograntha (Prosody), 
by Pingala, so that they may thoroughly master the rules that 
“govern versification— Vedic and Sanskrit ~and be able to compose 
poems of their own, This can be done in four months. They. 


Citar. 11) Licut oF Trut. mn 





should not waste their time over Vritraindkar and the like books 
written by mean scholars 


5. Then they should study the Manz Smriti, the Vile 
Rdmdyana, the Vidurnits and other selections like this from the 
Mahdbhdrat, The tutor should teach these as poetry ought to be 
taught. The study of these books tends to eradicate evil habits and 
bring culture. It should not take the students more than a year to 
finish them. 


6, Then they should study the six Sédstrds' (commonly called 
the six schools of philosophy) with the expositions of Rishis— 
the enlightened great souls, the true seers of nature—as far as 
possible, or in the absence of these, with the help of the true com- 
mentaries of other honest scholars, But before taking up Veddat 
Shdstra they should learn the ten Upanishads.? All these books 
should be finished in two years, 


7. Thereafter, they should study the four Vedas* with their 
four Brdhimands* with proper accent, meanings, (and finish this 
course in six years). The Vedds should be both taught by example 
and precept. 

Says Mirukta on this subject :— 


“ He, who reads the Vedas even with proper accents, but does 
not know their meanings, is like a tree weighed 
down by its fruit, branches, leaves and flowers, or 
like a beast of burden carrying on its back grain which it cannot 
eat, But he, who understands their meanings and acts up to their 
teachings by avoiding sin and leading a virtuous life, enjoys perfect 
happiness in this world, and efernal bliss hereafter in consequence 
thereof.” 


eget vircere: figenziceter St a febrenft ase | 
asda cecrnet ancteg 8 arena erafirqerercar i free 
R1kh 


1. Parva mimansd, Vatthaishike, Nigdya, Yoxa, Sinkhya and Vedints, 


2. Pah, Kena, Kath, Prashna, Mun luka, Mdwndika, Aiteeys, Ta'treya, 
Chddndogre and. Vrihaddranysa, cece 


3 Rig, Yaju, Sama and Atkarva Veda 
4 © Aifreya, Shatapathe, Sma and Gopetha. 


Nirukta 1, 18. 


34 Licut or Trutit. fCuar, ttt, 





Says the Rig Veda :— 
“An ignorant man has eyes to see but sees nothing, has eara 
to hear but hears nothing, has a tongue to speak but 
speaks nothing. The ignorant can never under- 
stand the hidden mysteries of knowledge. But it 
is to the learned alone that knowledge reveals its true nature, just 
as a woman Jonging to meet her husband, dresses in her best and 
puts on her finest jewellery, so as to display her charms to him.” 
“What good can the Vedas do unto him who does not know 
that Great Being, who is All-pervading and Eternal, 
Pig Wigs Holiest_of all, Who sustains the Sun and the Earth, 
‘ and is the support of the leamed, the method of 
Whose realization is the chief aim of Vedic teaching? But they 
alone enjoy efernal 6/#ss who study the Vedas, live a righteous life, 
become perfect yogis and realize God. 
8 After the study of the Vedes they should leam the 
Upavedds (or sub- Vedas) which are four in number :— 
1.—A'yurveda (Medical Science) Herein are included the 
works of Chavak and Swskrut, and other sages. They 
should learn both theory and practice, including Medicine, 

Therapeutics, Materia,Physiology and Pathology, Hygiene 

with Dietetics and Climatology and the sciences of Tem- 

peraments, Anatomy and Surgery with the proper use of 
instruments in different operations, &c., in four years. 
fi —Science of Government (Dhanur Veda). 

It consists of two parts :— Civil and Military. 

Civil part, is the art of governing people, protecting their 
lives and property. developing the wealth and re- 
sources of the country, making the people happy and 
contented by the right administration of justice— 
protecting the good and punishing the = wicked, etc, 


gaa wurde) aga ad: ocqew retary! xi 
ated aed theta arte get aut gare oe ec 
qo teiten 


wate See Ce era after eefehiree! fig: ere 
ag feger efter o cuftger et area goad tl 
Bo twwito wa 


Rig Veda. 
17.4 








Cuar, tL] Licut oF Tautn, rE) 





Military part, comprises organization of the army, use of 
fire-arms and the knowledge of different kinds of 
drill, tactics and strategy, etc, They should learn both 
branches of the Science of Government in two years, 

fi—Science of Music (Gandharva Veda). They should learn 

all the different parts of music, such as tunes, modes, 
modifications of mode:, time, harmony, refrain, They 
should also learn singing, playing, and dancing, etc, 
properly, but chiefly singing and playing of the Sama 
Veda Mantrds on musical instruments. But they should 
never sing amorous songs like Nauch-girls nor bray like 
sensual Vairdgees.! 

The books on this subject are Wdrad Sanhitd, etc, com- 

posed by Réshis. 

iv.i—Artha Veda (Science and practice of mechanical arts), also 

called Shilpa Vidyd. They should study the laws of 
matter and motion. They should also know how to 
make various kinds of machines, ete. 

In short, they should learn theoretically and practically, the 
nature and properties of all substances from solids to A’édska, This 
is the science that helps to increase the wealth and prosperity of a 
country. 

Thereafter, they should thoroughly study the /yotisha Shdsira— 
which includes Arithmetic, Algebra, Geometry, Geography, Geology 
and Astronomy—in two years, They should also have practical 
training in these Sciences, learn the proper handling of instruments, 
master their mechanism, and know how to use them. But they 
should regard Astrology—which treats of the influence of stars and 
constellations on the destinies of man, of auspiciousness and non- 
auspiciousness of time, of horoscopes, etc.—as a fraud, and never 
learn or teach any books on this subject. 

Both the teachers and their scholars should so endeavour as to 
be able to master all the sciences and arts, and become highly cul- 
tured in twenty or twenty-one years, and thus accomplish the object 
of their lives and live in happiness. 

The knowledge that can be acquired by following the aforesaid 
schemes in twenty or twenty-one years cannot be gained in any 
other way even in one hundred years. 


1. A sect of mendicants —7>, 





” Licut or Trurtt. (Crap. iti. 





We have recommended only the books of Xishi's for students to 
study, because they were men of great learning, masters of all the 
sciences, and also imbued with piety. But the books of mean 
scholars we have condemned, because they had only a smattering 
of knowledge, afid were not free from prejudice either. How could 
their writings, then, be free from the faults of their authors? 

Out of all the above-mentioned books (we have recommended 
the student to study),—the Vedas, Angds (Limbs),' Upanagds,® 
(sub-limbs), Brékidns* and Upvedds* (sub- Vedds)—the Vedds alone 
ate held to be Divine in origin, the rest were made by Rishis—seers 
of the Veda and Nature. Should anything be found even in their 
writings contrary to the teachings of the Vedas, it is to be rejected, 
for the Vedas alone, bring Divine in origin, are free from error and 
aximatic (Swatdk Pramdna\, in other words the Vedas are their 
own authority; whilst other books such as the Srdkmands are 
Pratdipramdna, é, e., dependent upon the Vedas for their authority, 
They stand or fall according to their conformity or conflict with the 
Vedas.* 

The books to be avoided are enumerated in the Appendix, 
They ought to be looked upon as snares; once caught in them a 
student can never know the truth, 

O.—Is there no truth to be found in these books? 

A.—There is a sprinkling of truth mixed with a large amount 
of rubbish, myths and fabrications ; but as even th best food mixed 
with poison is to be avoided, so should these books, 

O—Do you not believe in the Purunds, Jtihdsa, ete, ? 

A.—Ycs, we do; but only in the true ones, not in the forged 
ones. 

O.—Which of them ar true and which forged or false? 

Grihya A." /tthdsa, Purdna, Kalpa, Gdthd and Ndrdshansi 

eee are five names given to Brdhmands ‘that have been 

mentioned before). The Bhagvat and the like books are not the 
real Purdnds. 


sreryrttfrerare, Tergtte weary errr acre ht were 


1. _They are six in number : —Péomectes Scsence -f moral: ond duties, Gram- 
mur, Philology, Music and. Astronomy. 
33 2 They are six in number. They are the so-called six Schools of Philoso- 
ye see page 7U. 
Lr ey are four in number, and have been enumerated before see 
For further elucidation of this subject see Chapter VII of thie Foes 
wih as our book called ‘- An [ntroductios to the Exposition of the four Vesas"s 





Cuap. IIT.] Licut oF Trutu. 3 








O.—Why do you not accept whatever truth there is to be found 
in the condemned books? 

A.—Whatever fruth is to be found in them is of the Vedas and 
other true SAdstnds, whilst whatever is false in them is of their own 
invention. With the acceptance of the Veda and other Shdstrds 
the whole truth is accepted. He, who tries to extract truth from 
these false books, will have to unavoidably swallow untruth as 
wel], Therefore even truth, which is adulterated with untruth, 
should be avoided like food adulterated with poison. 

O.—What is your faith ? 

Ax Vedic, We believe that the Vedas alone are the supreme 
authority in the ascertainment of true religion—the true conduct 
of life. Whatever is enjoined by the Vedes we hold to be right ; 
whilst whatever is condemned by them we believe tobe wrong, 
Therefore we say that our religion is Vedic All men, especially 
the Aryas, should believe in the Vedas and thereby cultivate unity 
in religion, 


O.—Even the Shdstrds written by Rishis—contain truth mixed 
with untruth, and contradict one another like other books, Take 
for example, the subject of Creation, Now all the six Sédstnds con- 
tradict one another on this subject, The MMimdnsd for instance, 
gives applivation as the cause of the world ; the Vaisheshika, time; 
the Niydya, atoms; the Yoga, activity; the Sdukhya, primeval 
matter, and the Veddnt, God. Are not their teachings mutually 
contradictory ? 

4.—Firstly, barring the Veddnt and the Sdnkhya, these -Adstrds 
do not treat of the subject of Creation directly. It is only indirectly 
mentioned. Secondly, there is no contradiction in their teachings, 
It only shows that you have no knowledge of contrarfety and com- 
formity, Now tell me pray, do you call it a contradiction when 
different statements are madeon the same subject or when made 
on different subjects ? : 

O.—When different statements are made on the same subject, 
Here, too, the subject is the same, vis. Creation, 

A.—Is knowledge one thing or more than one? 

O—One, 


A.—IC it be one, why then are there so many div‘sions of this 
knowledge, such as Grammar, Medicine and Astronomy. As in the 


76 Licut oF TRUTH. [CHar, HL 





case of one science, its different branches are treated of separately, so 
are the six branches of the Science of Creation treated of separately 
in the six Skdstrds. You can never call it a contradiction, can 
you? Just as six different causes take part in the fo-mation of a 
pot, v#s., application, time, clay, intellect, labour (required for mix- 
ing cr separating different materials), the properties of matter, and 
the potter, similarly six different causes of the world have been 
discussed by the six Sédstrds, thus application by the Afimdnsd, 
Time by the Vaisha'shik, material cause by the Niydya, Divine 
activity by Yoga, atoms and the gradual formation of the different sub- 
stances of the world out of them by the Sankdya and the efficient 
cause God by the Meddnta, There is no contradiction in it, Or take 
for illustration the Medical Science. Its six different branches, 
Pathology,! Medicine and Therapeutics, Materia Medica, Hygiene 
and Surgery! are separately treated, but all these aim at curing 
disease. Likewise six different causes have operated in the for- 
mation of this world; one cause having been discussed by each 
Shdstra there is no contradiction in them. 

Both the teachers and their scholars should avoid all those 
things that act as hindrances in the way of the acquisition of 
knowledge, ‘ch as the company of the wicked and lascivious 
people, contraction of bad habits (such as the use of intoxicants), 
fornication, child-marriage,* want of perfect Brakmackarya, want 
of love on the part of the rulers, parents and learned men for the 
dissemination of knowledge of the Veda and other Sédstrds, over- 
eating, keeping late hours, sloth in learning, teaching, examining 
or being examined, or performing these duties with dishonesty, not 
regarding knowledge as the highest thing in the world, want of 
faith in Brahmacharya as the source of health, strength. intellect, 
courage, political power and wealth, leaving off the worship of one 
true God, and wasting time in going about from place to place for 
the purpose of seeing and worshipping images made of stone, and 
other inanimate objects, absence of the worship of the five true 
living gods—father, mother, teacher, altruistic teachers of humanity 
(atithis) and other great men,—neglect in the performance of the 





1 Physiology is included under Pathology, and Anatomy under Surgery,—~ 


Th | We shall discuss this subject more fally in the Chapter on Crsmegoay, 
ge, marriage under 16 years in the case of a girl, and under 25 years 
in the case of a man 


Cuap, UL] LicuT oF TRoTH. 7 





duties of their Class and Order, and instead, wearing different 
marks of sectarian distinction on the forehead and other parts of 
the body,’ chaplets and rosaries, etc., observance of fasting days 
as the 11th and 13th of each month, having faith in the forgiveness. 
of sins by pilgrimage to such sacred places, as Benares, and by 
constant recitation of the names of gods and godesses such as 
Rama, Kristua, Naryana, Shiva, Bhdgwati and Ganesha, indiffer- 
ence towards the acquisition of knowledge through the wicked 
advice of hypocrites, belief in the possibilities of obtaining salvation 
simply through hearing such books as Purdads the (Bhagwat and 
the like) read, and thus neglecting the study of the true philosophies 
and sciences, the living of good and righteous lives, the practice 
of Yogn, and communion with God—which alone can lead to eternal 
biiss—want of love for knowledge i greed of gold, and loafing 
about, etc. 


~ People (of India), at the present day, who are involved in the 
aforesaid false practices, remain destitute of the advantages of 
Brakmacharya and education, are consequently sunk in ignorance, 
and afflicted with diverse diseases. 

The sectarian and selfish Brdkmans of the present time prevent 
other people, through their false teachings, from acquiring know. 
ledge and associating with men of learning, en-snare them in their 
own nets and thus ruin them physically, mentally, and materially, 
They want to keep the Xshatriyds and other Classes illiterate, since 
they are afraid that if they acquired knowledge and become enligh- 
tened, they would expose their hypocrity, get out of their selfish 
grip, and become disrespectful towards them. 

Both the rulers and the ruled should see that these obstacles are 
removed from the path of the students (male and female, of ali 
Classes. \n order to give their children sound education, they 
should exert themselves to their utmost with all their hearts, ail 
their souls and all their wealth. 

O.~Are even women and Sésdras allowed to study the Vedas? 
What shall we do if they take to reading? Besides, there is no 
authority for their doing so. On the other hand, it is condemned 
by the Vedas thus— 

1. S.ch as Oordhva pumira=a single icu'ar tine on the forehead ; 


ndra-—chere lines made. acrossjthe and other parts of the body ; 
Tilat=a coloyred mark 29 the forehead made with ashes, etc 





bi] Licut oF Truta. {Cuar. 111. 








Shruti, “ Never should women and the Skudras study. 


4.—All men and women (4. ¢, the whole mankind) have a right 
to study. You may go and hang yourselves. As for the text you 
have quoted, it is of your own fabrication, and is nowhere to be 
found either in the Vedas or any other authoritative book, On the 
other hand, here is a verse from the Vayur Veda that authorises all 
men to study the Veda and hear it read :— 

God says: “As I have given this Word (s,¢, the four Vedas) 

Yajur Veda which is the word of salvation’ for all making [Here 
XXVI 2 some one might say that by the word Jana, which 
we have translated into af mankind, only Dwijds are meant, as in 
the Swerités* \so-called) they alone are allowed to study the Veda 
but not women and Sémdra’s, the other half of this verse answers 
this objection by adding]—Ardhmans, Kshatriyds, Vashyads, Shud- 
rds, women, servants, aye, even the lowest of the low, so should you 
all do, # ¢, teach and preach the Veda. Let al! men therefore read 
and recite, teach and preach the Veda and thereby acquire true 
knowledge, practise virtue, shun vice, and consequently being freed 
from ail sorrow and pain, enjoy true happiness,” 

Now, sir, shall we believe your word or God’s? God's, certainly. 
He who will still refuse to believe, (that women and Shudras 
are entitled to Veda learning) shal! be called a Nastika (an infidel) 
because Manu has said, “He is an infidel who is a reviler 
and disbeliever of the Veda.” Does not God desire the welfare of 
the Shitdrds? Is God prejudiced that he should allow the study 
of the Veda to Dwyds and disallow it to Shddrds. Had God meant 
that the S4ddrds should not study the Veda or hear it read, why 
should He have created the organs of speech and hearing in their 
bodies? As He has created the sun, the moon, the earth, the water, 
the fire, the air, various food and drinks, etc., for all, so has He 
revealed the Veda for all, Wherever it is declared (in the books of 
Rishis) that the Sk#drds sre debarred from the study of the Veda, 


aofteraft errefterrerefivftt aga 1 
atat ere exerting! etd: | mECTTITR TY 
wate © arg arta ago we RI 


1. /.@_ Happiness here and hereafier,—7> 
2 Books written by Xishés on the conduct of lifer~ Zr. 





Cua, 11) Licut or Trutti. ” 


rr 
the prohibition simply amounts to this that he, that does not learn 
anything even after a good deal of teaching, being ignorant and 
destitute of understanding, is called a Shudrd. It is useless for 
him to learn, and for others to teach him any longer. As for your 
debarring women from education, that only shows your ignorance, 
selfishness and stupidity, Here is an authority from the Veda 
entitling girls to study :— 

“Just as boys acquire sound knowledge and culture by the 
practice of Brakmacharya and then marry girls of their own choice, 

Arthava who are young, well educated, loving and of like 
XI, xvi, 3,18 temperament, ao should a girl practice Brakmacharya, 
study the Veda and other sciences and thersby perfect her know- 
ledge, refine her character, give her hand toa man of her own choice, 
who is young, learned and loving.” 

It follows therefore that girls should also practice Brakmacharya 
and receive education, 

O.—Should even women read the Veda? 

A.—Certainly, Here is an authority from the Shrant Sutra: 

“(In the Yajna) let the wife recite this n:natra," 

Were she not a scholar of the Veda as well as of other Shasfras, 
how could she in the Yajna receive the Vedic mantrds, with proper 
pronounciation and accent, as well as speak Sanskrit? 

In ancient India, Gdrgi and other ladies,—jewels among women 
—were highly educated and perfect scholars of the Veda, This is 
clearly written in the Shaipatha Brahmana. 

Now if the husband be well-educated and the wife ignorant or 
vice versa, there will be a constant state of warfare in the house, 
Besides if women were not to study, where will the teachers, for 
Girls’ schools come from ? Nor could ever the affairs of the state, 
the administration of justice, and the duties of marcied life, that are 
required of both husband and wife [such as keeping each other 
happy, the wife having the supreme control over all household 
matters] be carried on properly without thorough educa ion (of men 
and women). 


mwedd sere gird fleet oft toed on eto te 
WoWMMRia toa 





bo Licht or TrutH. || [Cuap. LIL 





The Kshatriyds women in ancient India, used to be well- 
acquainted even with the military science, or how could they have 
gone with their male relations and fought side by side with them 
in battle fields, as Kekat did with her royal husband Dasharatha, 
Therefore it behoves Brdsman and Kskairyyd women to acquire all 
kinds of knowledge, and Vaishyd women to learn trade, and the 
mechanical arts and the like, and Skudrd women, the art of cooking, 
etc. As men should, at the very least, learn the Scie ce of Gram- 
mar, Dkarmd and their profession or trade, likewise should women 
learn Grammar, Dharma‘, Medical Science, Mathematics and the 
mechanical and fine arts at the least, for without a knowledge 
of these, ascertainment of truth, proper behaviour towards their 
husbands and other people, bearing of good children, their proper 
up-bringing and instruction, proper management of the house- 
hold affairs, preparation of foods and drinks in accordance with 
the requirements of Medical Science, (so that they may act 
onthe system like good medicine and keep the whole family 
free from disease and thereby make them happy), can never be 
effected. Without a knowledge of arts, they cannot properly attend 
to such matters as making proper dresses and ornaments, etc., 
or having them made, nor can tkey supervise the construction of 
their houses. Without a knowledge of mathematics, they can never 
keep accounts of their household properly ; and without a know- 
ledge of true te igion, as taught by the Vedsand other Shdstras, 
they cannot know what God and Déarma are, and can never, 
therefore, escape going astray from the path of rectitude. 

Verily, those parents have done their duty and, therefore, a 
thousand thanks to them, who have done their best to make their 
children practise Brakmacharya, acquire knowledge, and perfect 
their character, which all help to develop both their bodies and 
minds to the fullest extent, so that they may accord a just and 
righteous treatment to all—parents, husbands, wives, fathers-in. 
law, mothers-in-law, their king and fellow-subjects, neighbours, 
friends and offspring, etc. 

Knowledge alone is the inexhaustible treasure; the more you 
spend it, the more it grows, All other treasures run out by spend- 
ing, and the claimants inherit their shares as well, Thieves can- 


1 comprises righteousness, justice. honesty, proper discharge of one’s duties, 
ete she “ 


Cuap. 111.) Licut or Traut, 81 





not steal this treasure, nor, can anyone inherit it. It ia the chief 
duty of the rulers, as well as of the ruled, to protect and augment 
this treasure. 

Manu says :—“ The State should make it compulsory for all to 
send their children of both sexes to school at the 
said? period and keep them there for the said* 
period till they are thoroughly well-educated, It should be made 
a penal offence to break this law. In other words, let no child— 
whether a girl or a boy—be allowed to stay in the house® after the 
Sth year; let him remain in the seminary till his Samdvartana 
time, [2 ¢, the period of Return Home*] and let no one be allowed 
to marry before that.” 


Again says Manu :—" Of all gifts (that one can bestow on 
another)—water, food, animals (as cows, and buffa- 
Joes), sesamum seeds, land, clothes, gold, and butter, 
etc,—that of the knowledge of the Veda is the best and the noblest.” 


Let all, therefore, try their utmost to disseminate knowledge 
with all their heart, with all their soul, and with all the material 
resources at their command, 


That country alone prospers where Brakmacharya is properly 


practised, knowledge is keenly sought after, and the teachings of 
the Vedic religion followed, 


Manu VIL, 152. 


Mant IV, 233. 


In this Chapter we have briefly discoursed op Frahm 
acharya, We shall treat of Samdvartana (return home) and 
Grihastha (married life) in the next Chapter. 


THE END OF CHAPTER III, 





worat cage @ Sacred et THUR NATO 8 1 RH 
ailerate arerrat merera fefirers | 
ardwitrendiereafterermapreattersy il mz o 8 1 RRA 


1. In the sth or the 8th year. 


.2. Minimum the 16th year ar for girls and the 25th for boys» 
3 de., his father's house, 
4. After the completion of his education: 


ir 


CHAPTER IV. 





RETURN HOME FROM SCHOOL (Samdvartana) 
AND 
MARRIED LIFE (Grihastha). 


$y ET a student’ who has not violated his vows of Brahma- 
nchdrya, and has conducted himself, righteously according 
to the advice of his preceptor, enter married life after he 
& has studied with their subsidiary sciences, the four 

Mano iti,» 7edas, three vedas, two Vedas, or one Veda only.” 


“Let him, who has faithfully discharged his duties towards 
we his preceptor and received from his father,—natural 
Manu tih3 oe spiritual (ie, the teacher), the gift of the know- 
ledge of the Veda, sit on an elegant bed, decked with a garland of 
flowers ; and Jet his father (natural or spiritual) honour him with the 
present of acow”. A female student possessed of the aforesaid 
qualifications should also be honoured in the same way by her 
father. 


“ Let a twice-born man (Srdhman, Kshatriya, and Vatsh) after 
having obtained the consent of his teacher and taken 
the datk (prescribed for the ceremony of Returx 
Home from the seminary), return home and espouse a maid, of his 
own Class, endowed with excellent qualities.” 


Manu iii, 4. 





Reqerwter Ahr ay Re arfe qe! 
safrrgemgarat recreate azo 812 I 
a aefte erat merqrerat fog: | - 
wafteat wer sreftermiternt rear i yo 81 Vil 
RAAT: Enea sanget Taree 1 


Sate fier arat eat weeqriareny li ago 8) vil 


te Male or female. 


Cuap. [V.j Licut oF Trutu. 83 





** A girl, who fs not descended on his mother’s side within the 
Mann iii, sixth degree and does not bear the same family name 
S (Gotra) as his father’s, is eligible for marriage.” 
It is a fact that “ we do not love or value a thing, that we are 
Shathapatha familiar with, so much as one that is hidden from our 
view.” For instance, if a person has heard a great 
deal about the sweetness of sugar, but never tasted it, his mind is 
taken up with the desire of tasting it. Or when we hear a person, 
who is not known to us, highly extolled for his excellent qualities, 
it makes us very eager to make his acquaintance. For the same 
reason, a man should marry a girl, who comes from a distant coun- 
try and is not a near relative either on his mother’s or father’s side,* 
The advantages and disadvantages of distant and near marriages 
respectively are :— 
(1). Any two persons who have, in their childhood, lived near 
each other, played and quarrelled together, loved one another, 
noticed each other's faults, imperfections, ebullitions of temper 


weafteer @ at aracatter @ at fxg: | 
ar srareert fRereftert erewattty SyH Wargo BVA 


"At Washington city before the National Medica! Association long 
since in the sesison there, Dr S M. Bewis made the following shocking state. 
ment; "My researches give me authority to say that over ten per cent of the 
deaf a dumb, and over five per cent. of the blind, and nearly fifteen per cent, 
of the idiotic in our State instituitions for subject of these effects, are the 
offspring of kindred parents. 

* Aside from the facts which I have gained by corresponding with gentle. 
men who have given close attention to these points, a curious but perfect'y 
legitimate process of computation confirms we in the opinion that these estimates 
are very nearly correct Five c'asses in the schedules prepared given 787 
marriages of cousins, 246 of which have given issue to deaf and dumb, blind, 
idietic, or insane children. Admitting the same ratio to prevail to the Ohio 
report, which contain 15t marriages of cousins, followed by deaf and dumb, 
blind, idiotic, or insane oftspring, would indicate the existence of 332 other 
marriages of cou: in the same population not followed by such defects. The 
counties which furnish these 151 marriages, as above, are Supposed to comprise 
in their limits of 332 unre; d marriages ; making a total of 483, contained in 
1850, in a pormlaion 1,528,238, ff the same ratio be supposed to exist 
throughout union, there would be found to the twenty millions of white 
inhabitants, six thousand three hundred and twenty-one marriages of cousins, 
ia bet to 3,909 deaf and dumb, blind, idiotic, and insane children, distri- 

ied as lows i= 


















“Then if the figures of ‘the United States census still applied 
sion, there would now be found in the Union. “Nine 





4 Liar of TRuTs. [Cuar, IV. 





and misbehaviours, and perhaps sometimes, even each other un- 
dressed, if married to each other, can never love each other to the 
extent desired, 

(2) The marriage of near relatives does not improve the race 
from want of interchange of fluids and essences (such as blood) of 
the body, it rather deteriorates it. This is analgous to the addition 
of water to water, no new quality being produced, 


(3) As the addition of sugar and such medicines aa ginger, 
improves the taste and quality of milk, so does the marriage of 
people, who are not related to each other (either on father's or on 
mother’s side), improve the race. 

(4) Asin the case of an invalid, change of climate and diet 
very often effects a cure, 80 does marriage with foreigners or distant 
people improve the health ofthe parties and prove beneficial in 
every other respect. 

(5) When the parties are nearly related to each other and 
live amongst their people, the sorrows and joys of one family will 


and thirty-six deaf and dumb, of whom 1,116, or 12°8 per cent. are the children 
cousins. 

"Seven thousaud nine hundred and seventy-eight b'ind, of whom 648, or 8 1 
percent, are children of cousins 

“ Fourteen thousand and fifty-seven idiotic, of whom 1,834, or 1°29 per cent. 
are the children of cousins 


“Fourteen thousand nine hundred and seventy-one insane, of whom 299, or 
ovap per cent., are children of cousins" Hereends the medical testimony.— 
¢ History and Philosophy of Evil by Andrew Jackson Davis, pp. U6—118 ) 

Nevertheless, the frequency of imperfec'ion in the children of such mar. 
riages has been noticed from the time of Moses, or earlier, as is proved by the 
fact that all the great moral codes—Hindu, Mosaic, Roman, Christian, and 
Mussulman, have alike forbidden such unions, All these laws were evidently 
founded on the belief, which is still generally accepted by those who have not 
atudied the matter, that the unhappy results so frequently following consan- 
guineous marriages, depended upon the mere fact that the parents were of the 
game blood. This, however, has upon inquiry proved to be erroneous; yet this 
discovery has in no way lessened ical utility of the law forbidding the 
marriage ofblood relations. In fact, tl is much more need of a stiict obser- 
vance of this law nowadays among our highly civilised communities, than there 
Was among the primitive peoplesto whom it was first given.—AMarriage and 
Dissase, by S. A. Strahan, . 268.) 

‘The laws of natural life have been so strained and perverted by our civilisa- 
tion, that almost every family now-a-days has got a taint or twist of some kind, 
and as all such imperfections are transmitted and rapidly deepened and fixed 
in the family by the intermarriage of its members, it is best that such unions 
oat) in all cases be forbidden —{ Marriage and Disease, by S. A. Strahan, 
6 ah 

it is certain, then, that consanguineous marriages must be extremely 

dangerous in communities like our own. Where the laws of natural life are 20 

gavel interfered with, ey should rarely, indeed, be entered into, ifat all 
larriage and Dissase, by 5. A. Straka, p.275-) 


Cap, IV.] Licat oF Trors. 85 





affect the other and there will be many occasions for family dis- 
putes to arise ; while marriages among distant people and conse- 
quent separation from relatives lengthen the thread of mutual love. 
This is not the case when they live near their people. 


(6). When marriages are contracted with people of foreign or 
distant countries, things and news from those countries can be 
easily obtained (and consequently relations between different 
countries become more closely established) This is not possible 
when people marry near relatives or persons living near their 
homes, or, in their own country. 


In Sanskrit a “ daughter is called duhitri (from Dx =distant, 

. Hit= good), because the marriage of a girl to a man 

Nirukta 11h 4- who comes from a distant country or dlstant part of 
the same country is productive of good, 


(7) Ifthe bride’s people do not live very far from her hus- 
band's home, there is a possibility of her parents becoming poor, 
as whenever she visits her parents, they will have to give her 
something or other by way of a present. 

(8). If their people live near at hand, on any slight friction 
taking place between the husband and the wife, she, feeling assured 
that her people will support her, will at once leave her husband 
and go to her parents. That may become the cause of mutual 
reviling and wrangling, for, women, as a rule, are so easily effend- 
ed.and pleased. 


“In connecting himself with a wife, let a man studiously avoid 
the following ten families, be they ever so great in 
political power or rank, or ever so rich in cows, 
goats, horses, elephants, gold or grain,”? 


atrafrar ow ft ter: nerefis: | aro 

After gfttear geiten dresat y free Bet 
aeverts agar arswrfreraera: 1 
aterowrs qlherft ganftr ofterakte i qo 21k 


1. Similarly, while choosing a husband, {et a girl avoid a man from the 
sforesaid familigs. 


Manu III, 6. 





86 LicuT oF TRUTH. [Cuap, IV, 





© The family which is not religious, that which is destitute of 
hack HE} men of charactor, that in which the study of the 
aes Veda is neglected, that the members whereof have 

long and thick hair on the body and that which is subject to such 
diseases as Piles, Consumption, Asthma, Bronchitis, Dyspepsia, 
Epilepsy, Leprosy and Albinism ; because all these faults and 
diseases are transmitted to the offspring.* Therefore both husband 


tafe froget firgedt terete | 
wanrarearrenttiteanginget wi AZo R19 


* A good example is given by Sir Alfred Garrod, who writes :—"' A few years 
since, 1 was consulted by a gentleman labouring under a severe form of gout 
with chalk-stones, and although not more than fifty years old, he had suffered 
from the disease for a long period. On inquiry, ascertained that for wpwurds 
Of four centuries the eldest son of the family had invariably beea afflicted with 

t when he came into possession of the family estate” (Gout and Rheumatic 

t, by H. A Garrod, M.D. F R S.).—(darriage and Disease, by S. A. 
Strahan, 220.) 

There is no disease the hereditary character of which is more fully and 

enerally recognised than gout ; in many families it is looked upon as an heir- 
looms Sir Alfred Garrod said he could trace direct heredity in 50 per cent of 
all cases ; Sir Dyce Duckworth gives 50 to 75 as the percentage of cases he 
found hereditary; while SirC Scudamore (even the medical men who make a 
speciality of the treatment of gout become aristocratic) traced direct heredity 
in 6 per cent of all his cases, Many observers put the influence of family taint 
eta Rgore even higher than any o the above, while some have gone so far 
as to declare the disease purely hereditary~(CULLEN).--(Ma riage and Disrase, 
by S. A Strahan p. 219) 

As to advice respecting marriage, it may at once be said that those alread; 
suffering from any form of tubercular disease should not marry Neither shout 
anyone marry a memer of a family in which consumption or other form of 
tubercolar disease is common —~(Wurriage and Disease, by 5. A. Strahan, 
(po 212s) 

Recently Dr, Pauline Tarnowsky has been very closely studying the prosti- 
tute, who may be taken as the analogue of the male instinctive criminal of the 
petty class, and of 150 women of this class whose family history she was able 
to get, she found phthisical parentage in ny less than 44 per cent —~ “ Etude 
Anthropométrique sur les Prostituées et les Voleuses "—{ Marriuge and Diserte, 
y S. 2 Straka, #.208 ) 

Dr B. Ward Richardson says:—‘The intermarriage of cancer and con- 
sumption is a combination specially frought with danger.” He gives the 
following case :—‘A young man of marked cancerous proclivity married a 
woman whose parents had bath died of pulmonary consumption. This married 
coup ¢ had a family of five children, all of whom grew up to adolescence, sus- 
taining at their best but delicate and feeble existences. The first of the children 
died of a disease allied to cancer called /wfus ; the second, of simple pulmonary 
consumption; the third, owing to tubercular deposit in the brain, succumbed from 
epileptiform convalsions ; the fourth, with symptoms of tubercular brain disease, 
savk from diabetes, the result of nervous injury; and the iast, living longer 
than any ofthe rest, viz, to thirty six years, died of cancer The parents in 
this instance survived three of the children, but they both died comparatively 
early in life—the father from cancerous disease of the liver. the mother leart 
disease and bronchitis.—(' Diseases of Modern Life"\—{Marriage and Disease, 
dy S. 4, Strahan, $. 185.) 














Cuar, iV] Lici? or Trvts. 7 








and wife should come from good (physically, morally and in- 
tellectually) families.” 


It will be noticed that these figures closely agree with those of Ribot, who 
found 2 to i children afflicted with deaf-mutism in the families of 23 cent. 
of the pupils of the London Deaf and Dumb Institution —-{ Marriage and Disease, 
by S. A Strahan, p. 165) 

This writer states that ‘‘In the Irish Census for 1871, 3,297 persons 
were returned as deaf-mutes, and in 393 cases the previous or collate.al 
branches of the family were also mute, In 211 of these the condition was 
transmitted through the father, in 182 through the mother.’ Here we have 
almost exactly 12 per cent. of direct transmission through one or other parent. 
But;this writer does not stop here ; he gives other important figures He says :— 
“In 379 instances there were 2 deaf-mutesin the family in 191 families 3, in 53 
famities 4, in 21 families 5, in 5 families 6, and in each of 2 families no fewer 
than 7 denf mutes were born to the same parents" (Sir William Turner in his 
address before the Anthropological Section of the British Association in 1899).— 
Marriogsand Disease, by S. A, Strakzn, pp. 164—165. 

Of its terrible effect upon the children we have. nevertheless ample, if 
fragmentary, evidences. The best that can at present lay my band upon is that 
published by Dr. B Tarnowsky, (Der Kéaderarst, October, 1890. This dis- 
tinguished observer takes a most gloomy view of the effects of syphilis upon 
succeeding generations. According to his experience 71 per cent of women 
suffering from syphilis either give birth to dead children, or bear children which 
die within a year of birth. This high percentage closely agrees with that of 
Professor Fournier, which I shall give presently. In his interesting and abje 
papers Dr, Tarnowsky records the terrible history of three families, whose 

ers had contracted syphlis six, five, and four years, respectively, before 
marriage. All these men appeared to be cured when married, and all their 
children were born healtby, that is, they showed no symptoms of syphilis. In 
these three families there were twenty.two children, and of these only one grew 
up to healthy maturity. Five were premature, three died of inflammation of the 
membranes of the brain before attaining their second year, two were imbecile, 
two were idiotic, one had numerous signs of degeneration, one was weak in 
intellect, ane insane, two hysterical, one epileptic, ane a deaf-mute, and two had 
water on the brain, Of the 13 still alive when these statitsics were taken, eight 
were incapable of earning their living, the remaining five being sickly and 
nervous. All three families, he points out, were of the respectable commercial 
classes ; none of the children were exposed to the hardships which, in the case 
of peasants and artisans, may cause infantile diseases falsely attributed to 
syphilis (Marriage and Disease, by S. A. Strahan, fp. 151—152). 

_ Epilepsy is, in fact, one of the most strongly hereditary of all diseases. In 
this respect, it is ona footing with the suicidal impulse, melancholia, drunken- 
ness, and gout. Dr Russell Renolds found heredity well marked in 31 per cent. 
of his cases, and ssys,“I am therefore led to believe that an hereditary ten- 
dency to epilepsy is much more common than it is  Fenerally represented to be 
by recent writers on the subject.” Echeverria said 28 per cent. of all the cases 
coming under his notice were hereditary. Webster in England, and Esquirol 
in France, declared that a third of all cases of epileppsy Sapended on mily 
taint, while Dr. Gowers, one of the authorities on the subject, asserts 
that no less than 36 per cent. of all epilepsy has hereditary transmitted predis- 
Pontion ae foundation. ‘ : . they appeared 

mysel we records of 143 consecutive cases of epile , as they ay 

for admission into an asylum for the insane. There were’; 3 males and $0 
females. Of the males, 344 per cent. were members of families in which either 
epilepsy or insanity of some description had already appeared ; of the females, 
§0 per cent, belonged to the same classes; while in 39 8 of the total of both 
sexes there was positive evidence of hereditary taint. "f would also remark that 
in a considerable number of ray cases, no history of any kind could be obtained. 
—( Marriage and Disease, by S.A. Strahan, pp» 136-135.) 











88 Licur or Frutii. {Cuar, IV. 





“Let a man never marry one who is pale and anemic, nor one 





The people should be taught that Epilepsy is far excetience, an heredita 
affiction, that it is nearly related to idiocy. madness, and lysis, ane 
deaf mutism, and that no member of any family in which it is known to be 
should be considered a person who can with safety Become 8 parent —Maerriage 
and Disease, by S. A. Strahan, $ 134 

In insanity this" heredity at corresponding age” is frequently met with, as 
it is also in cancer, gout, and rheumatism. A case in point comes to my mind, 
4t is this :—A father (of whom [ could get but little information) was addicted to 
drink and became insane at abont forly years of age. He bad four sons. The 
eldest became insant the age of forty-one, te second at the same age also 
became insane, while the third and foutth sons were in‘turn cercified insane on 
reaching the age of thirty eight. They were all, like the father, given to habits 
of intemperance, and not one of them ever showed any sign of mental im] 
ment after the first mental. failure Each sank from bad to worse, and soon 
arrived at hopless dementia. The eldest of those brothers is at present 
murderer in Broadmoor criminal asylum, and the other three are, as I have sai 
hopeless reo ts in a country asylum.—Afarrioge ond Disease, by S. 

B Bo. 














Anata Flint, in his excellent * Practice of Medicine”, when speatiog on this 
int, says :—' jis congential pre-disposition may remain completely latent 
Entil the period of life in which the deseave is most apt t0 be developed, and 





we sometimes see a whole famiiy of children, one after the other, fal Victims 
to this disease (phthisis), when they generally reach a certain age.” Of 
course our recently acquired knowledge of the character of this disease will 
modify largely the views once held as to the hereditary transmission of phthisis, 
‘but for the present we shall not comment on the above,—, Marriage and Disease, 
by S. A. Strahan p 79) 


Cases ate by no means rare in which a temporarily drunken parent bas 
begotten an idiot child. Indeed, several observers have collected statistics which 
go to prove that the vast majority of idiots and imbeciles, who are not the 
result of the family degeneration, are the children of drunken and otherwise 
vicious parents and it would not be to infer that much of the mental and moral 
obliquity and degradation met with in the poorer classes, from which springs 
the instinctive criminal, has its origin in vicious initial heredity—Marriage and 
Disease, by S A. Strahan, ~. 76—77- 

A re drunkennes, Dr. Mandsley say “ Here, as elsewere in nature, 
tke produces tke and the parent who s himself a temporary lunatic or 
idiot by his degrading vice, pi his kind in procreation, and entuils on 
his children the course of the most fate."— Marriage and Disease, by 
S. A. Strahan, 9 76. 

Reversional Heredity or Atavim.—This is a very common form of heredity. 
To recognise some peculiar character in the grand.child which is absent in the 
parent, yet strongly marked in the grandparent, may be said to be an almost 

y occurrence. In some diseases oligical variations—this mode of 
transmission i+ #0 regularly followed that diseases have come to be looked 
upon as only attacking every other generation. Gout thus frequently attaches 
only alternate generations, and there are several other diseases which at times 
follow the same rule, therefore it should be understood that the absence of a 
“ family disease” in one generation is no evidence that the taint has been 
shaken offand got rid of, and will not in the next generation Sir 
‘William Aitkin states his opinion that “a family history extending over less 
thao éhvee geaerations is almost worthless, and may be misleading "—AMarriege 
and Disease, by S A Strahan, $. 72. 

Dr. Savage, in a paper which he read before the Medical Society of London 
ia November 1890, said, that after 2 study of forty patients in Bethlehen Hospital 
for the insane who had diabetic relations, and ten patients who were at ence 
diabetic and insane, be came tothe conclusion that diabetes and insanity were 











Cuar, IV] Licut or Truts. 89 





who is altogether a bigger and stronger person than 
himself or has a redundant member,® nor one who 
is an invalid, nor one either with no hair or too much hair,f nor 


one immoderately talkative, nor one with red? eyes.” 


Manu 11], 8 





Aratenfret seat arsfrargt + Uftreftey Hi 
aranftnet orfeatrat a arerers fryer i age #15 Il 


e 
closely related, and that in such families the form of mental disorder most 
common was melancholia, (Society's Transanctions, 1890).~—-Marriage and 
Disease, by S.A Strahan, $- 311) 
+ %# All families in which diabetes occurs should he looled upon with suspicion, 
and should epilepsy, idiocy, insanity, or deaf-mutism also have appeaced in 
the family itis a very grave question whether marriage should be ventured 
upon.—.Wurriage and Disease, by S A. Strohan, p. 411. 


+ Here we do at times find cases to sup| the theory, but it ia amongst those 
less grave characters which, while unmistakebly marked, do not so rapidly go 
to the extinction of the family that we must find our strongest proof, among 
such characters are hore-lip, cleft palate, club-foot, squint, cataract supernume- 
rary fingers or toes, colour-blindness, premature baldness or greyness, feaf-mut- 
jam, stammering, plurality of births, the hwmorrhagic diathesis (bleeders', spina 
bifida, and the like ; or on the other hand, where the character is physiological. 
Instances of repeated tranamission of any or all of the above-mentioned charac- 
ters can be found everywhere around, and, doubtless, cases will present to the 
mind of the reader.—Afurriage and Disease, by Dr. S. A Strahan, p. 63. 


Astill_ more peculiar case was that of Edward Lambart, * the human porcu- 
pine”, as he was called ; this man’s skin was covered by warty proje 3 which 
were periodically moulted. He had six sons ana two grandsons slmilarly affect 
ed, while the females of the family escaped; the two grandsons mentioned 


having seven sisters who were [ree from the peculiarity.—(Dr. S. de Struhan's 
Marrioge and Disease, 71) 





“In the village of Koshilove (Grodno Government) there are over 50 pea 
sants who have more than usual number of finzers- According to interesting 
particulars published in the Mace Vremy, they are all descendants of a pea- 
sant who murried in the first half of the last century, and who had extra fingers 
on one of his bands. In the present generation this abnormality is reported to 
the extent of 2, 3, 4. and 5 even additional fingers. Some cases simply show a 
thumb duplicated from the first joint. As the result of intermarriage the defor. 
mity is spreading to neighbouring villages It dispenses the young men from 
military service, however sound they may be constitutionalty "—( 7#e Zugenics 
Review, London.) 





1. The weed in the text is Aéurd or brown. But I think this is not 
right. Very likely there has been a slip ofthe pen bere. The word in the 
verse Which has been translated into Skurd (brown) is Pinya’a which bas been 
rendered into Pi/4 or yellow in the Author's toot called Sumskd- Vidke. Here, 
however, it seea s that the word means red—7?, 


9 Licitt or Truts. {Cuap, IV, 





“Nor one with the name ofa star',of a tree*, or of a river®, 
or of a mountain®, nor one bearing 2 name denoting low origin®, 
Manu IIE, or servility®, nor one named after a bird’, a snake®, 
nor one whose name inspires terror”. These names are despicable 
and belong to other things as well.® 

“Let him chose for his wife, a girl who has a graceful figure 
without any deformity, who basa pretty name, who walks grace- 
Mapu ltl, 10. fully like a swan or an elephant, who has fine hair 
and lovely teeth, and whose body is exquisitely soft.” 

O.—What is the best time for marifage and which is the best 
form? 

4.—The best time for marriage, for a- girl, is from the sixteenth 
to the twenty-fourth year of her life and for a man, from the twenty- 
fifth to the forty-eighth year. The marriage of a girl of sixteen 
with a man of twenty-five years is called Jxferior marriage. Of a 
girt of eighteen or twenty with a man of thirty-five or forty is called 
medium marriage, 

Of a gid of twenty-four with a man of forty-eight is called 
superior marriage. 

The best form of marriage is that by choice (Swayamvams), after 
the education of the contracting parties is finished and their Brakmd- 
charya for the aforesaid periods completed. Happy is the country 
wherein the people devote themselves to the pursuit of knowledge, 
live chaste lives, and adopt the aforesaid form of marriage. Down 
into the depths of misery sinks that country wherein the people 
do not practise Brakmcharya, nor acquire knowledge, where early 


adqenettercdt arercdaanfirent | 
Geehaunh as meaabeantines sia 


svorgtaft Great Karearcamfrtty | 
agarreaqaat qawkyee heey | Ye 21 tol 


As Ash: ini, Roknt, ett. 
oe ape 
uch as Ganges, etc 
imdiyd. 
Ké't (Black ) etc. 
Chdaddli ian outcast,) etc 
Mend, Parrot, etc 
As Nagi isnake,, etc. = 
‘The idea of the sage Manx seems to be that the people should not give 
ugly name to their children — 77. 





Poy onse yo 


Cuap. IV.) Licet oF TRrutH. gr 





marriage and marriage between the unsuitable, are prevalent, for, 
marriage preceded by the practice of Brakmdcharya and perfection 
of knowledge is the basis of all true reform and the source of all 
true happiness; the reverse of it brings on the absolute ruin of 
people who follow it. 

O,—Says Prdshara, the Lawgiver :— 

“A girl at the age of eight is called Gauree', at nine, Rohinee?, 
Parasar Simriti t ten, kanyd?, thereafter she is called Rajaswald‘, 
and Shigra- Ifshe is not married before she becomes Rajaswald 

ne (i. ¢, till the tenth year), her father, mother and elder 
brother, all of them shall go to hell, 

A.—Say's the Brahma Purdna (that has just been composed by 
us)“In one second after birth, a girl is called Gasree, in two 
seconds she becomes RoAinee, in three, Aanyd, and thereafter Rayas- 
wald, If she be not married till she become Rajaszald, her father, 
mother, brother, sister and maternal uncle, one and all shail go to 
hell.” 

O.—The verses, you have quoted, are not authoritative. 

A.—Why are not they authoritative? If Brakma’s verses are 
not authoritative how could yours be ? 

O,—Well! well! Do you not hold even Prdsara and Kashi 
Nath as authorities ? 


auret and aaeret ow fat H 
iceue ied aeerti 
aren &e frat ser Faet arent ate 
wered mew after yy eat CRETE HR Il 


mereat aitg fret Ufa? 0 
freer ar wa Het crea HL 
aren frat eer siren ara aferelt eer 8 
ee & orca orf eye Wat CreTeTET II Ht 
1 Gasri means fair and is also the name of the wife of MuAddeva one of 
the incarnations of the Deity mentioned in the Purdna. 
2, Rokinee means red, it is alsa the name of the wife of Vaswdeu, a Pours 
sic god. 
3 Xanyd, a maid. 


4 One that menstruates. 
‘That has just been composed by us. 








92 Licut or Truta. [CHap. iV. 





4.—Do you not hold Brakmd an authority ? 

1s Brahkmd not greater than Prdshara and Kashi Nath? 

If you do not believe in Brahma, we reject your /rdsara and 
Kashi Nath. . 

O—Your quotation cannot be held authoritative, because it 
teaches an impossibility, One thousand seconds are taken in child- 
birth alone, how could a girls, then, be married when she is only 
one, two or three seconds old; nor can any good result from a 
marriage at such an impossible age, 

A.-—If our verses convey an impossible meaning, so do yours; 
because a marriage even at the age of eight, nine, or ten years is 
useless, for it is only at the age of twenty-five year, that a man's body 
is properly develoved and the reproductive element perfected, and it 
is at the age of sixteen, that a woman's body is strong-enough and 
her reproductive organs sufficiently developed to bear good, healthy 
children’, The reproduction of children in a girl of eight years is an 
impossibility, Besides naming girls, as, Gauree (fair) and Rohinee 
(red), is simply absurd, because a girl may be dark as well as fair 
(gauree) Again Gauree was the wife of Makddeva and Kokinee of 
Vasudeva, whom you Paurinks regard as mothers, You imagine 
your girls as representing Gauree and Rohkinee, how could you then 
be justified in marrying them todo so? Howcould it ever be in 
confirmity with the dictates of true religion? It follows, therefore, 
that both your verses and ours are absolutely wrong and devoid of 
authority. Just as we composed a few verses and palmed them off 
as Brahksma's, so have other people forged those verses and in order 
to stamp them with authority have passed them off as the 


gariteaeatanmme: tarferg fee ti 
qa gart 9a efren e fred i tear! aE Ht 


1, Inhis book Swshruta, the great surgeon Dianwustri forbids sexual 
connection Between persoal who are under the aforesaid ages 
Sushruta thus :—“ If a girl a sixteen conceive of a man under twenty- 
Sutra five years. she very often miscarries but if she do not miscarry 
Sthana X, and the child is born at full time he does not live long, but if he 
47,48, does live long, he is nothing but a weakling ; never should, there- 
fore, a man have sexual intercourse with a girl of a very tender 
age" The perusal of the principles of Sexual Physiology) laid down in sc enti- 
fic books observation of the laws of nature and reasoning on this subject cannot 
‘put lead one to the irresistible epee shat gusa ced @ wornan, under twenty 
five and sixteen years, respectively, are not fit for discharging reproduc: ives func- 
tions. All those who violate the above principles come to.grief. 


\ 











Cuap, IV\} LicuT oF TRUTH. 93 





writings of Pardsara and other sages. It is best, therefore, to reject 
all these so-calied authorities and recognise the Veda alone as the 
proper authority in all matters and act accordingly, 


“Says Manu: “Let a maid wait for three years after she has 

Manu begun to menstruate and then let her choose for 

IX, 90. herself a husband, who is her equal.” A girl mens- 
truates once a month and, therefore, it is after she has menstruated 
thirty-six times in three years that she becomes marriageable but 
not before. 


“It is better that men and women should remain single till 

Manu death rather than marry unsuitables ; 1 ¢,, persons of 

(X, 89 mutually unsuitable qualities, characteristics and 
temperaments should never marry each other." 


All this goes to prove that it is not right or proper that marri- 
“ages before aforesaid period, or of unsuitables, should ever take 
place. 


O,--Should marriage be under the control of parents or of the 
contracting parties themselves ? 


A,—It isbest that it should be under the control of the con- 
tracting parties. Even if parents ever think of arranging a match, 
it should, under no circumstances, ever be done without the consent 
of the parties for when people choose their partners for life them- 
selves, there is less likelihood of mutual disagreement and the 
children born of such a union are also of a superior order, There 
is nothing but trouble in store for those whose marriage is not of 
their own choice—they having been simply forced intuit, The 
veal factorsin marriage are the bride and the bridegroom, and 
not their parents, [tis they who will be happy if they agree well 
together and they alone will suffer if they disagree. 


sift wefegeite garigaet cet | 
wet gy erendrentite ered afer i age £1 80 1 
eUTTACEway Te Herre | 
a Shai aega qaelorg wit n ago gi c2 y 





Lieut or Taurs. (Crap, Iv, 


“In whatsoever family the husband is contented with his wile, 
and the wife with her husband, it is there and there 
only that happiness, wealth and honour dwell per- 
manently." And wheresoever the husband and the 
wife disagree and squabble, there is nothing but misery, poverty, 
and disgrace. 


The Szvaymvara marriage, #, ¢., marriage by choice—the most 
ancient form of marriage in India~is the best form of marriage. 
Before a man and a maid think of marrying, they should see that 
they suit each other in point of knowledge, disposition, character, 
beauty, age, strength, family,’ stature, and build of body and the 
like, Until they suit each other in all these things, no happiness 
can result from marriage, Nor can marriage in early life ever lead 
to any beneficial result, 


Manu, 111, 
bo. 


“That man alone, who, after having taken the vows of Brahma- 
; charya at the time of his initiation (Upnayana) into 
ne wae. it and observed them strictly in student Ilfe, has 
perfected his knowledge, refined his character, and 
who is well-dressed and enters married life in the full bloom of 
youth is as if born again (in knowledge and wisdom). He makes 
a name for himself and enjoys happiness, He is firm aud 
courageous; his mind is centred on the increase of knowledge and 
attainment of wisdom. Men of learning and piety give him their 
helping hand to elevate him. He is thus honoured amongst them, 
Those who marry without having previously practised Brahma. 
charya and acquired knowledge and culture, or who do so at an 
early life, are absolutely ruined, nor are they ever respected by the 
wise and the learned.” 


erget antat wet arcat aat atte et 
ufoter g@ fret serra ox & gear ge UI fe Il 
at gear otitis seer = stteaafy wrdaen i * 
site: gag twats ered | av'at Same: ff Il qo Re 
Rigoniaevl 


1. Viéde page 85 where the list of families with whom no marriage con- 
Rections shoyld be farmed is given -- Zr. 





Cuar. [V.] Licut or Truts. 9! 
ee 

“ Let girls, who are virgins, resembling cows that have never beer 
milked before, who have passed the period of child. 
hood and are about to teave single lives, are well- 
educated and cultured, fit to bear all the responsibil- 
ities of married life, and are in the full bloom of youth, who, by the 
practice of Brakmacharya, have reached a state of excellence and 
wisdom, which only those of great learning and high virtues can 
attain, marry husbands of mature age and bear children by 
them." Never should they think of men even in their dreams in 
early life. This alone can give them happiness in this world and 
hereafter. Early marriage is even more harmful to a woman than 
to a man. 


Rig Veda 
U1, 55, 16 


“ Just as men, quick of perception and action, energetic, in full 
Rig Veda youth, strong in body and capable of discharging 
4128 t- — reproductive functions, marry maidens, who are 

young, dear to their hearts, and enjoy life toa good old age (a 
hundred years or more), and are well-blessed with children and 
grand-children, so should allmen and women do. Since seasons, 
mornings and evenings, days and nights, all tend to take away the 
beauty and strength of the body and bring onold age, I (whether 
a man or a woman), should practise Sratmacharya, acquire know- 
ledge, perfect my character. gain in strength of body and soul and 
attain full youth before I get married.” All those who violate these 
principles of marriage do so against the teachings of the Vedas, 
hence they never can be happy. 

As long asin this country (India), sages and seers, emperors 
and kings and other people followed the aforesaid system of marriage 
by choice (Swamvarvivah) preceded by a life of Brakmacharya 
devoted to the acquisition of knowledge and culture and perfection 
of the body, it continually progressed and prospered, Since its 
inhabitants have neglected Brahmdcharya and the pursuit of know- 


srd Migregrigbat: seg de eget sige: | cedrreat 
ect areeeltet at ret rerg Testa 8 We Ite RG WI 
wo 8k 
Wetee aree: aware Hereetr'e re’ Tevet: | enh 
Rel San aS La aa At eee WRN MO Hate ty 
Go Wa lwo lh 





96 Licut or Truts. [CHap. 1V, 


ledge, and have, instead, taken to child-marriage—and that too 
under the control of the parents,—India has becn steadily declining, 
It, therefore,- behoves all good and sensiblé men to do away with 
this pernicious system, and introduce instead, mtrriage by choice in 
accordance with the drvssion into Classes, (Varna Vyavesthd) which 
should be based on the qualifications, accomplishments and charac- 
ter of the individuals, 





0.—He, whose parents are Brahmans, is a Brahman indeed. 
But can a person, whose parents are not Brahmans ever become a 
Brakman? 

4A—Yes, Many, in the past, have become Srakmans, many in 
the present do and many in future, will Here are some of the 
historical proofs. Inthe Chhdudogya Gpnishad we read that the 
sage Javdl of an unknown Class became a Brahman, In the 
Méahdbhavata, it is written that Vish:edutitra, Kshatrayd by birth, 
became a Brahman, so did the sage Ifdtang an oxt-cast by birth, 
Even at the present day, he who possesses the qualifications, char- 
acter and knowledge of a Brahman is respected as such and the 
ignorant are treated as Shudras. Swill it be in the future, 

O.—How can the body formed out of the reproductive elements 
male and female—change in character avd assume a new form 
suitable for another Class ? 


A,—A man does not become a Brahman because his body was 
the product of the repropuctive elements derived from the bodies of 
Brahman parents. Says Mann," The study of the true sciences, 
the practise of Brahmacharya, the performance of Homa, the accept- 
ance of truth and rejection of untruth, the diss:mination of true 
knowledge leading a virtuous life as enjoined by the 
Veda, the performance of seasonal Homa, the repro- 
duction of good children, faithful discharge of the 
Five Great Datly Duties, and doing such other good works as aré 
productive of beneficial results to the com-nunity, such as developing 
technical arts, association with the good and the learned, truthful- 
ness in word, deed and thought, and devotion to publc good and 
the like, all these things go to make a Bradman.” 


ereraa wtetidifratera at: | 
areraiter wrefiered ficad ag: t Ayo Vi Ro 





Cuar. IV.] LIGHT oF TRUTH. oo 





Now do you not believe in this ver-e? 

0.—Yes, I do. 

A.—Weil, then, why do you believe that the division tuto Classes 
is based on the accident of birth. 

O.—It is not I alone who think so, There are many others 
who believe with me, it being the most an-ient usage from times 
immemorial, Do you oppose even the most ancient customs ? 

A.—No! But on account of your perverted understanding we 
do, 

O,—How is it that our understanding you call perverted, whilst 
you think yours is rightly directed ? 

A—Simply because you call a usage, which is only six or seven 
generations old, as the most ancient custom, whilst we cali that 
custom ancient which has been in vogue from the time of the 
revelation of the Veda or that of Creation of the world to the 
present day, Do younot see in this world that good parents some- 
time get wicked children, and good children have wicked parents, 
at other times both are good or bad. Why cannot the Brahman 
children then become Shudrds or vice versa? You people are sunk 
in doubt and ignorance. See, what the great sage Manu saya :— 

“ Let children walk in the footsteps of their forefathers, but only 

Menu if they be good, not otherwise ; since by treading the 

IV, 178 path of good and pious men no one ever comes to 
grief.” 

A.—Do you believe this or not ? 

O—Yes, I do, 

A.—Besides, whatever hai been revealed in the Veda by God 
is ancient, but whatsoever is opposed to it can never be called 
ancient, Should all peopie believe like this or not ? 

O.—Certainly they should, 

A—He who refuses to believe in it should be asked. “Ifa 
person's father be poor and he grow rich, should he, therefore, 
through the pride of his father’s poverty, throw away his wealth ? 
Ifa man’s father be blind, should his son also pluck his eyes out ? 


Saver fratr aren Seratar: freer: | 
Qe araregat ant Ser crea Read 8 aye V1 Yor 8 
13 





98 Licut or TRUTH. [Crap, IV. 





la man's father be of low character, should his son also do wicked 
deeds"? No,never. On the other hand, it behoves all men to im- 
bibe their parents’ virtues only, not their vices. He who believes 
that one’s Ciass is determined by the accident of his birth, not by 
his own character, accomplishments and acquisitions, should be asked 
how it is that he does not recognise aman a Brdkman, even when 
he has !eft his C/ass and become an outcast, or, has turned a Christian 
or a Muhammadan. The only answer he can give is that he has 
left off the performance of the duties required of a Brdkman, and is, 
therefore, no longer a Brdkman. It proves, therefore, that only 
those, who faithfully discharge the high duties of a Brahman, can 
be called Brdhmans, Even if alow-born man were to possess 
qualifications, accomplishments and character of a superior C/ass, 
he should be recognised as such ; and if a man, high-born though 
he be, were to act like a man of an inferior Class, he should be 
relegated to it. 
O.—The Yajur Veda says “ Brdhmans were born of His— 
eaves God’s—-mouth, Kshatriyds, out of His arms, Vatsh- 
XXX, I ayds, out of his thighs, and Shudrds, out of His 
feet.” Now just as the mouth can never become 
an arin, nor can an arm become the mouth, so can never a Brdhman 
become a Kshatriyd, etc., nor, can the latter become the former. 
A—Your translation of the aforesaid mantra is wrong, The 
word His has reference to the word Puruska, the Formless All-per- 
vading Being, in the preceding mantra, Being Formless He could 
not have such organs as the mouth. Were He to possess these 
organs, He could never be Omnipresent, nor therefore Omnipotent, 
nor could He then create and sustain this universe and resolve it into 
the elementary conditon, nor dispense justice to the souls accord- 
ing to their deeds good or bad, nor could He be Omniscient, Unborn, 
Immortal and the like. The true meaning, therefore, of this mantra _ 
is that in this universe created and sustained by the Omni-present 
God, he who isthe (sukk) head, leader among men, is called a 
Brahman, he in whom power and strength (Baks ') reside pre- 
eminently is a Kshatriya, He who travels about from place to place 





meager qeareigag tres: Er: 
eerter chet: gear eat aren ndtc its wei 


oo RHou 
1. Baha, verily is strength, verity Bdkw is power." —Shaffate Brakmon. 





Cuar, IV.) Licut or Truts. C) 





for the purposes of trade, etc., and obtains all things (for the com- 
munity) on the strength of his shigks (i.e. is the support of'the 
community just as the thighs are that of the human body) is called 
a Vaiskya, and lastly a Veishya a Shudra is like feet, the 
lowermost part of the body, because he is ignorant.!. Other autho- 
tities translate this mantra in the same way ; as for instances, the 
Shatapatha Brahman says, “These (Brakmans) are said to be 
born out of the head as they are the Aeads—leaders.” Just as the 
head is the highest organ in the body, so isthat man the noblest 
and the best in the body politic whose knowledge is perfect and 
whose acquisitions, accomplishments and character are of the 
highest order amongst men. He is, therefore, called a Bratman, 
Besides, it is as impossible for anything to be born out of the 
mouth of God (Since being without a body, He has no mouth nor 
any other organ) as the marriage of the son of a barren woman, 
Had Brakmans been born out of the mouth of God, it being their 
material cause, their bodies ought to have been round, like the 
mouth, in shape. Likewise the bodies of Kshatriyds, Vaishyds, 
and SAudérds ought to have been like arms, thighs and feet respec. 
tively in shape, but they are not so. Besides, even supposing some 
were bornin the manner you speak of, those who were born out of 
the mouth and other organs might have justly been entitled to be 
called Brahmans, etc., but not you who were born, like other men, 
out of your mothers’ wombs, Why should you then pride yourselves 
on being Brdhmans when you did not come out ofthe mouth of 
God? Wehave proved, therefore, that your translation of the 
aforesaid antra is wrong, whilst ours is right. 
The sage Mans holds the same view. Says he“ As the son 
of a Shidra may attain the rank of a Brdkman if he 
ars * were to possess his qualifications, character and 
accomplishments, and as the son of a Brdkman may 


TENT Terenrywa THT Catt TITTY 

AAR mraregerrst fee eae, TETTRAT 8 

pcbnlesaat Spt r par ytotabe seen 

wbwedar net ach ye qt edarret lesan i 

srentweat gat cat amet werd aufararad arftaftye} 
ercehe WR 

1, And therefore fit for menial service only.—Z7. 


10d Licut or Truts: (Crap. IV. 





become a Séddra, if he sinks to his level in his character, inclina- 
tions and manners, even so must it be with him who springs from 
a Kshatriya;even so with him who is born of a Vasshya. In 
other words, a person should be ranked with the Class whose 
qualifications, accomplishments, and character he possesses. It is 
written in the A’pastambhka Sutras that “ A low Class man may, by 

leading a virtuous life, rise to the level of a higher 
Apastharabha Class man and should bz ranked as such. In like 

manner a high Class man can by leading a sinful 
life, sink down to the level of a Céass lower than his, and should be 
considered as such,” 

The same law applies to women in determining their C/ass, 

By the application of this law, each C/ass, being comprised of 
individuals who possess all the qualifications that are necessary for 
admission into it, is kept in a stage of unadulterated purity, that is 
to say, no Kshatriyd, Vaishyd ot Shitdra is allowed to enter into 
or remain in the Brdimana Class. Similarly, Kashtriyd, Vaishyd 
and Skidsa Classes also remain unadulterated. In short, there 
can be no admixture of Classes, hence no Class will be disgraced or 
become the subject of reproach in the public eye, 

O.—Supposing a family has only one child and that enters into 
a different Class, who will then look after the old folks ? Besides, the 
family line will die out. How would you provide for such cases ? 

A.—Neither will the old people be neglected nor will the family 
line come to an end, because the State—the Political and Educa- 
tional Assemblies'—will provide them with children of their own 
Class in exchange for their own children, hence, there will be no 
confusion or chaos in the society, 

Classes of all persons should be determined according to their 
qualifications, accomplishments and character in the twenty-fifth or 
the sixteenth year, according as they are males or females. They 
should also marry persons of their own Class, namely, a SrdAéman, a 
Brdhmni woman ; Kstatriya, a Kshitriyd woman; a Vaishyd, a 

Vaishyé woman, and a Shédra a Shidrd woman. I[t is then and 
then only that the people will faithfully discharge the duties of their 
respective Classes and secure, thereby, perfect harmony. 





1 See Chapter VI of this book for the composition and powera of these 
sssemblies.—7Z7. 


Cuar. IV] Licat oF Trovit. 161 





QUALIFICATIONS AND DUTIES OF THE FOUR 
CLASSES. 


“Studying and teaching, performing, Yayaa! and assisting 
Masu J, otters in doing it, giving alms, and receiving gifts— 
88. these six are duties of a Brdfman.” But it should 

be borne its mind that “ The receiving of gifts isa mean thing.” 


(1) “ Restraining the mind from entertaining sinful thoughts ; 
(2) keeping the senses from the pursuit of unright- 
eousness and directing them, instead, in the path of 
rectitude ; (3) Living a pure, chaste life by the practice of Brakma- 
chraya; (4) attaining purity (of mind and body) ?; (5) Having firm 
faith in the power oftruth and righteousness and being perfectly 
indifferent to the applause or censure of the world, pleasure or pain, 
heat or cold, hunger or thirst, profit or loss, honour or disgrace, and 
sorrow or joy, in the discharge of one's duties ; (6) cultivating ten- 
der heartedness, humility, straightforwardness and simplicity of char- 
acter ; (7) acquiring a profound knowledge of the Veda and other 
Shdstras, attaining the ability to teach others, the power to dis- 
criminate between right and wrong, and the knowledge of all things 
(animate or inanimate) as they really are ; (8) possessing a perfect 
knowledge of al! entities—from earthly things tc God—and the proper 


Bhagvat Gita, 





mare ww aT TUT | 

ret srftroretter arerraTTeTReTay ATO LSE A 

ant greene: gre enfrasteas & | 

ert freremnfteed qarest erareany t 2 two ato 
SUNT We RATS BR Il 


1. Yajna is the pplication of the knowledge of the physical, chemical and 
physiological and the like properties of material sutstances and of psychological 
ones of mental substances. “Te therefore, generally requires the association of 
men and objects.“ The word yujna which originally indicates any action requir- 
ing association of men and objects, productive of beneficial results is always 
translated by Zuropean Schulars, as sacrifice. The notion of sacrifice is a purely 
Christian notion and has no place in the Vedic philosophy It is foreign to the 
yenuine religion of India, Hence all translations in which the sucrifice 
occurs are to be rejected as fallacious.” “ The Terminology of the Vedas and 
European Scholars,” 


2. dfanu says: Water washes off the impurities of the body, truth exalts 
the mind, knowledge and strict devotion to duty elevate the soul and posses: 
sion of ideas refines the intellects” 


102 Licut or Trurtu. {Cuar. 1¥, 





application thereof; (9) Having perfect faith in the Veda, God, and 
salvation, belief in the past and future life of the soul, love of 
righteousness and knowledge and associating with the good and 
the learned, always cheerfully serving the father, mother, tutor, 
and the altruistic teachers of humanity and never maligning these, 
These fifteen characteristics and accomplishments must be found 
in a person, before he or she can be called a Brdhmuan or a Brdh- 


i™ 
mani, 


(1) “To protect people by the administration of perfect justice 

Manu without fear or favour, # ¢, by showing due respect 

1, 89. to the good and punishing the wicked. (2) To 

spend money in furthering the cause of truth and justice and in 

advancing knowledge and serving the deserving. (3) To perform 

Homa and other Yaynas. (4) To study the Veda and other SAastras, 

(5) To shun the allurements of sensual gratification by perfect 

control of the senses and thereby constantly augment the powers 
of the body and the soul." 

(6), To be fearless in fighting with enemies though they be in 

thousands and he be single handed, (7) To be bold, 

Gita. and dignified and free from all weakness, (8) To 

be firm of resolution and cool under difficulties, (9) 

To be clever in the discharge of public duties and in the pursuit of 

studies and never to run away from a field of battle, ¢, «, to fight in 

such a way as to ensure victory. (10) To be liberal-minded. 

(11) To be just in dealings with all and always to keep his word,” 


These eleven are the duties and qualifications of a Kshatriyd, 


wafacriarfty geafter Gra: eet gata | 
fwreratreat aarenr grater weaker a ro ¥ 1 08 tl 
srt cee qrarhrrarerertter eT | 
fawtensreafinar efirrer eareer: a8 Aye 1 58 
att aon yftqiet ga arervarenz | 
qenfpercerens wrt et erarreny ft 2 il 

Wo tio Sears LS | Keo wR Hl 


1. Ifthe field could be won by ing away or putting th 
false track of through strategems, be should do so” Pune ‘he enemy ona 








Cuap, IV.) LIGHT oF TRUTH. 103 





(1) To keep herds of cattle, breed, improve and multiply them. 
(2) To spend money, etc, in the advancement of 

~ 5 knowledge and truth. (3) To perform Yaynds, such 
as, Homa. (4) To study the Veda and other 

Shastrds. (5) To lend money on interest.! (6) To cultivate land, 

These are the duties and qualification of a Vdishya. 

“It behoves a Sé#dva to earn his living by faithfully serving 
Bréhman:, Kshatriyds and Vaishyds, witbout show- 
ing any disrespect, jealousy and conceit. This one 
thing alone is a Skudra's duty and qualification.” 


Manu 1,91. 


The duties and qualifications of all the four C/asses have thus 
briefly been described. All individuals should be placed in different 
Classes according to their qualifications, accomplishments and 
character. By adopting this system all will advance in every res- 
pect, because the higher Classes will be in constant fear of their 
children being degraded to the Sésidra Class, if they are not pro- 
perly educated. The same fear will also make the children acquire 
knowledge and culture. Whilst the lower Classes will be stimulated 
to exert themselves for admission into the C/asses above them, 


To recapitulate, the education of the com munity and the preach- 
ing of religion should be entrusted to Brdkmans, because they, 
being men of profound learning and exemplary character, can 
discharge those duties most satisfactorily. By entrusting the affairs 
of the State to Xshatriyds, a country never suffers through misrule 
or mismanagement. Tending the cattle, etc., should be entrusted 
to Vasshyds, as they can do this work properly. A Shidra is to do 
menial service, because being ignorant through lack of education, 
he is fitted for nothing higher, but can minister to the physical re- 
quirements of the community. 





pedbo a kolpardanaga led 
afrerd gefte w Qeveq eftatr wt ago t 1 fet 
pel te rf dtl ae 
aderte wefat geerrregaar it Ayo 1 stl 
1 The rate of interest should from 3 3 t0 16 per cent. | annum and 
should never exceed this. When the debtor has paid le of what was 


lent him, even the principal must be considered as paid off. “te debtor should 
never pay at rates exceeding the aboye limit. Nora should any one lend money 
ata higher rate, 


104 Licat or Tauts. [Crap. IV, 


It is the duty of the ruler and other responsible persons to see 
that all the four Classes discharge their duties faithfully, 


(CHARACTERISTICS OF MARRIAGE) 
“ Marriage is of 8 kinds :— 
1. Brakma, 
Manu Il, 2. Deva, 
* A'rsha 

Prijdpatya 
A’sura. 
Gdndharva. 
Rékhsasa, 
Paishdcha, 


1. Brakhma,—The marriage, by mutual consent, of two such 
persons as have, through the regular practice of Brakma- 
charpa acquired perfect knowledge, righteousness, and 
culture, is called Braéma, 

2, Deva.—The giving away of a beautifully dressed daughter 
(by her father) to one, who officiates at a great Yayna, 
is called Deva. 

3. A'rsha is that kind of marriage, solemnised in lieu of con- 
sideration received from the bridegroom. 


yoyee 


4. Prajapatya is the marriage relation into which both parties 
enter with the sole object of furthering the cause of righte- 
ousness. 

5. ’sera is a form of marriage solemnised after both the bride 
and the bridegroom have been bribed. 

6, Gandharva is the reciprocal (sexual) congress of a youth 
and a maiden with a mutual desire proceeding from lust, in 

. which (all social) laws have been utterly disregarded, 5 

7. Rdkshasa is the forcible or fraudulent abduction of a maiden 
from her home. 

8. Paishdcha is the forcible seduction of a girl, while she is 
sleeping, intoxicated or disordered in intellect, 


mat rendart srerearerassyc: 
spat cryuade Qyreeeremsemn # age A120 4 


Cuar, IV} Licut or Truts, 10g 


Ofall these 8 kinds of marriage, Brakma is the dest, Deva and: 
Prajapatya are of middling quality, A'rsha, A’sura and Gandharva 
of inferior quality, Rakshesa is base, whilst Parskacha is the lowest 
and the most wicked, 

It should be borne in mind that the bride and the bridegroom 
should not before marriage be allowed to meet each other in retire- 
ment, since, such a meeting of young people may lead to bad con- 
sequences, 

When boys and girls become of 2 marriageable age,’ in other 
words, when only 6 or 12 months are left in the completion of their 
Brahmacharya and education, let the photographs or pictures of 
boys be sent to the teachers of Girls’ schools, and those of girls, to 
those of Boys’ schools, 

Let the teachers then send for the diaries? of those who are 
alike in outward appearance, and study them carefully. When they 
find any two students (one male and the other female), resemble 
each other in disposition, temperament, character, and accomplish- 
ments, and consider them suited to each other for marriage, let 
them place the photo and the diary of one in the hands of the 
other, and ask them to inform them of their intention (é ¢. whether 
they would care to marry each other or not). Ifthey be quite will- 
ing to marry each other, let the Refus# home ceremony of both be 
performed simultaneously. They should be allowed to converse with 
each other or hold a discussion (on any subject to test each other’s 
knowledge and ability) in the presence of their tutors, parents and 
other respectable people, Whatever qu.stions or answers, oa any 
confidential subjects, one would like to put, or give to the other, 
Should be done in writing before the assembly. As soon as they 
feel that their love tor each other is strong enough to entitle them to 
masry and have, consequently, made up their minds todo so, the 
very best arrangement should be made with regard to their diet so 

that their bodies, that had weakened through the practice of rigid 
1. Minimum marriageable age for a git! is 16 years, while that for a boy 25 
yeats.—Tr. 


2- These diaries should be kept even since childre: first by parent 
and thes {ators whea pedir) poy Irene left home aud joined ther schocls. by parents ad 


stever the ad tutors hi ed 
children or i with regard to their Tiepostions, tem am peraments genwal tr 
haviour, babits, character, physical ailments, as manifested in ape in spor Aidit 
in connection _ development of of their bodies and gr. 


106 Licut or Truts. (Cuap. IV. 


discipline and hard life of Brakamcharya, and strict devotion to 
studies, may soor, gain in muscles and strength jist as the new 
moon grows into the full moon. Afterwards, on the day, the bride 
has ceased to menstruate and taken her dath of purification, let a 
Vedi be made and a pavillion erected 1 and Homa performed with 
clarified butter and odoriferous substances, etc. Let the bride and 
the bridegroom invite learned men and women on this occasion and 
honour them properly, Let them then do all that is necessary, for 
the occasion in accordance with the directions given in our book 
called the Sansakara Vidhi,on the day which has been previously 
decided upon for the purpose of generating a new life and most 
cheertully go through the ceremony of joining hands before all, and 
finish the whole marriage ceremony by 10?. M. or 12 P. M. and 
then retire. [Let the husband follow the proper method of discharg- 
ing semen and the wife that of drawing it wp. As far as possible, 
they should never waste their reproductive elements perfected and 
preserved by the practice of Bahmacharya, because, the children 
‘born of the union of such reproductive elements (male and female) 
are of a very superior order, When during the act of sexual inter- 
course the semen is about to discharged, let them be quite still, let 
the nose of one be quite opposite to that of the other, and the eyes 
of one to those of the other and s9 on ; in other words, their bodies 
should be quite straight, and their minds perfectly happy. Their 
bodies should not bend one way or the other. Let the husband 
relax his body, and the wife, as soon as the semen enters her vagina, 
draw up her breath, pull together her genitals and draw up the 
semen, so that it finally rests in the uterus* An enlightened 
woman will know at that very moment if she has conceived, In 
any case non-appearance of menses at the end of the month will 
make it clear to all if conception has taken place, Let them both 
then havea bath in clean water, Let them take as much milk as 
they desire,? and go to sleep in their respective beds. This plan’ 
should be followed whenever they wish to generate a new life. When 
after one month the menses do not appexs, and they are consequently 











1, Should the beige s and the bri careto have their ge cele~ 
brated in the presence of their tutors, let it be done there(Ze., in the seminary), 
otherwise the house of the bride’s parents is the proper place for It. 

2. This is a very delicate sul It would not be proper to dwell on it any 

. These few remarks shi suffice to suggest all that may be necessary 
“Te should be first boiled with ary ginger, saffon, cardamom and then 
cocked down down before it is taken. 


Chap. IV.] Licut oF TRUTH. 107 





convinced that conception has taken place, the Ausband should not 
approack his wife for one year, for, by following this advice, a child 
of a very superior order is born and the children that follow are also 
as good as the first-born ; whilst on the other hand, by violating this 
jaw the reproductive element is uselessly lost, the lives of the hus- 
band and the wife are shortened and they are afflicted with diverse 
diseases, But they should, by no means, cease to treat each other 
most lovingly. Let the husband preserve his reproductive element 
and the wife take care of her child és utero, They should conduct 
themselves in the matter of diet and dress in such a manner that the 
husband may not lose his reproductive element even in sleep, while 
the body of the child s utero is well nourished and grows in beauty, 
loveliness, strength and energy, and the child is born during the roth 
(lunar) month (of pregnancy). The wife should particularly take 
care of herself from the 4th month but more particularly from the 
8th. She should never use purgatives, dry, non-nutritious articles, 
intoxicants and other substances that are prejudical to the growth 
of intellect and physical strength, On the other hand she should 
use such articles of food and drink as good rice, wheat, lentils and 
other pulses, clarified butter, and milk. She should also vary her 
diet intelligently 2ccording to the climate of the locality (she 
lives in) and the season of the year! There are two Sanskdrs to 
be performed during conception, vis, onein the 4th month called 
Pansavana® and the other in the 8th called Simantonayana’, 
These should be performed in a fitting manner, After confinement 
the mother and her child should be most carefully looked after, 
About 2 inches from the navel the cord should be tied with a stout 
but soft ligature, and then cut off in front of it. It should be tied 
in such a manner that not a drop of blood escapes from the child’s 
body, The mother and the child should then be given a bath with 
fuke warm and scented water. The room should be well cleansed 
and Homa performed with clarified butter and odoriferous substan- 
ces, The father should, then, utter “Thy name is Veda" in the right 
ear ofthe child and dip a gold pencil ina mixture of honey and 


1. Shunthipaks and Saubhagya Shunthipdke should be kept ready belore 
hand for use (These preparations are considered as highly fovigorating: to the 
system Such nutritious substances as milk and butter, and condizents and 
medicine as ginger enter into their composition.—7> 

2,3. The object of these Samskdva is to influence the physica! and mental 
development of the child zu xfero by publicly charging the enviente woman to 


carry out certain instructions relating to ber ical and intellectual well-being. 
Be it noted that this is the most impressionable period during preguancy.—Tr> 


108 Licet or Trurs, Cnar.. 1V, 





clarified butter and write (the syllable) Om on its tongue, and let 
it also lick a litttle of this mixture off the pencil, and then hand 
over the child to its mother. Let her suckle it if it be inclined to 
take the breast. If there be no milk in its mother’s breasts let it 
be suckled by some other woman who has been thoroughly examin- 
ed (asto her general health, the quality aud quantity of her milk 
etc), Let the child and its mother be then removed to an- 
other clean, capacious and well-ventilated room wherein they should 
be kept, and Homa performed with clarified butter and odoriferous 
aubstances daily, morning and evening. Let the child be suckled 
for the first six-days by its mother who should be fed on a variety 
of light and nourishing foods. She should also have her private 
parts seen to. On the sixth day let the lying-in-woman leave her 
room and engage a wet-nurse for her child, The wet-nurse should 
be fed on good and wholesome foods and drinks. She should 
suckle the child as well as nurse it, The mother should keepa 
watchful eye over her child so that itis not neglected in any way, 
Let her also apply some plaster over her breasts in order to check 
the flow of milk. She should also diet herself properly. Let the 
parents of the child perform the Naming ceremony (on the tith-day 
of its birth) and other Sanskdrs in due course of time. When the 
wife menstruates again and takes her bath of purification, let them 
both (1. ¢, her husband as weil as herself) follow the plan of generat- 
inga new life that has been set forth above. The sage Mans says on 
baa the subject :—“ He that is contented with his own 
IH, 50, wife and avoids conjugal embraces on the eight 
forbidden nights and is Ritugam#! is a Brakmachdri 

a married man though he be.” 


“ Wherever the husband is quite contented with his wife, and the 

wife with her husband, in that family alone all prosperity, fortune 

and happiness perpetually dwell. Aod wherever 

mee. they disagree and squabble there poverty, ill-fortune 
and misery are assuredly permanent.” 


Reavers rng Fr ify wet | 
rabiliriherentharal by alas 

niapohaapeli lie enharcbly 

afatiete ga fred weed ew & ue Age RIAA 

1. f.6, follows rhe $/an of generaing a mew lif: as has been laid down—T> 





Cuar, IV] © Licut oF Truts. 109 





." Certainly if the wife do not love and please her husband, being 

Manu unhappy he will not be sexually excited, and, conse- 

UI, 61. quently, no offspring will be produced. But even if 
children are born, they are very wicked and of a low type.” 


“If the husband do not please his wife, she being unhappy, the 

Mans whole family is unhappy and miserable; but if 

111, €3. the wife be quite contended with her husband, the 
whole family enjoys felicity.” 


“Let women be always propitiated (worshipped) by their 

fathers and brothers, by their husbands and the 

(Hin, brothers of their husbands, in other words, they 

should speak sweetly to them and provide them with 

good food, nice clothes and ornaments, and thereby keep them 

happy. Those who seek great prosperity and happiness should 
never inflict pain on women.” 


* Where women are honoured (worshipped), in that family great 
men are born ; but where they are not honoured, there all acts are 
fruitless, Where women pass their days in misery and sorrow be- 

niaxi cause of the misdeed such as adultery) of their hus- 

1LT, 56, 67. bands, that family soon entirely perishes, but where 
they are happy because of the g-od conduct of their 
husbands, the family continually prospers.” 








afy f& oft a trae qaiae witqaa i 

spree: Ta: sat at wea ti Aa a1 EL 

ferat g treat at agret Fer! 

went cqtranrarat aeite 7 Urva 1 3 Il 
Ayo Rt Ro Bil 

frafratgfrater: afafiitaterer | 

wen qehtreras ywetieeieg hr ta 

aw aedeg Grae caret Os eat: | 

artery, 1 greet Guterntsner: fiver: 12H 

Qrefte sat an frerreng Gey i 

a Quefie g ater wate afer tay 8M yO V1 WINS yf 


tI0 LIGRT OF TRUTH. [Cuap, IV, 





“ Let women, therefore, be always honoured by being given 
presents of clothes and ornaments, and supplied 
ne with good food at festivals, jubilees and the like 
eg occasions, and thereby made happy by those men who 
are desirous of wea'th and prosperity.” In these quotations the word 
worshipped, of course, means duly honoured, Let the husband and 
the wife whenever they separate from or meet each other for the 
first time during the day or the night, greet each other with 
Namastey which means, J respect you. 

“ Let a woman attend to her household work most cheerfully 
and with great dexterity keep her utensils and apparel clean, her 
house tidy, her furniture free from dust, all eatables pure, clean, 
and free from dirt. Let her never be lavish in expenditure, Let 

her cooking be done so nicely that the food may 
vine. act on the system like a good medicine and keep 

i away disease (bodily and mental). Let her keep a 
proper account of her (income and) expenditure, and show it to 
her husband (if necessary), use her servants properly and see that 
nothing goes wrong in the house.” 

“Leta man accept (the hand of) a good woman, precious 

stone of different kinds, knowledge, truth, purity, 

Manu gentle speech and various technical arts from all 

Tl, 240 : 

men and from all countries.” 
“Let a man utter what is true; but let him say what is pleas 
ing, #2. good for others. Let Aitm not speak a disagree- 
ie9 able truth (e, g., \et_ him never call a one-eyed man, 
cach " one-eyed). Nor let him speak an agreeable falsehood, 
This is the Eternal Dharm: (true conduct f U3 fe). Let him speak 


TeAtat: STAT Feat PeCreREATTR: | 
agfrertatiied ceartyeaag oi age 21 RAT YS 
eat agen wet Geary Tea | 
QeeparreNcay a MT TCLAAT A Ae vt We Il 
fertr ceneaeh fire Get ate sari 
farftrarfr w ftrearfr aartariy ada: ll wqzo 21 2e0 W 
eet ary et ere sare ecrafirery i 

fret & age gearte wef: are: UI 





Cuar. fV.] Licut oF Trutn. aay 





kindly, ¢. ¢., what Is good for others, but let him not maintain fruitless 
enmity and altercation with any." Let him say what is good for another, 
even though it may offend kim. \n the Makdbhdrat the sage Vidur 
says: “In this world, O Déritrashtsa, there are plenty of people who 
would say sweet things to please and flatter others ; 
tren al but rare isthe man who would say or heara truth 
vaVidur Niti. which is unpleasant to his ears but really conducive 
to his good.” It behoves all good men to point out one’s faults and 
shortcomings to one’s face and hear their own (from others), but 
the way with the wicked is that they talk of one's merits to one's face, 
whilst they speak of his demerits behind his back, So long as a man 
does not reveal his defects to another, he can not get rid of them, nor 
can he acquire good qualities, Let a man never speak ill of another. 
Detracting from one’s merits or speaking of one’s demerits as his 
merits constitutes Vindd or misrepresentation ; whilst speaking of 
a man’s merits as his merits, and of his demerits as demerits 
constitutes Stwéts (truthful speech), In other words, truthfulness in 
speech constitutes S¢w#i, whilst untruthfulness in speech constitutes 
Ninda. 


“Let the husband and the wife daily read and recite the Veda 
and other Skdstras that give increase of wisdom, 
Wea > teach the means of acquiring wealth, and promote 
acs their welfare. Let them also carefully revise what 
they had studied during their student life and teach the same. 
Since as far as a man thoroughly understands the SAdstras,so far 
can his knowledge and wisdom advance, and so far may his love 
for them grow.” 





vat afi garg amftrte at ate! 

gence firret or gafetafereeta ii argo 8 C8 1 URE 
qent waar cr aad Rrrerite: | 

wirerer gy qeaer gent sitar a getlae: sere fegutifire t 
gfiyfirccreag aeatt & fteni we 

fired qreraatwa fireratate Bert it 

war Ta fe gee: gre aafinregtt | 

erat wey frarecfe freee wred Grad a ye 8 181 Re 


114 Licu? oF Truth. (Cnar. 1V 








“Let him constantly perform the Five Great Daily Duties, vis. 

Manu Brahmayajna, Devayajna, Valiveishwadevayajua, 

IV, 21. Pitriyajua and Atithsyajna, to the best of his power. 

Out of these five Yajynds we have already described the first 
two in the preceding chapter. To recapitulate: 

1. Brahma Yajna, \t comprises studying and teaching the 
Veda and other Shdstras, morning and evening devotions and the 
practice of Yoga. 

2. Devayajna. \t comprises the feeding of fire with clarified 
butter and cdoriforous substances, association with the learned and 
the good, cultivation of purity, truthfulness and similar other good 
qualities, and the advancement of knowledge. These two Yaynds 
should be performed daily (during the twilights). 


It is said in the Atharva Veda, “The Homa substances (such 


A as clarified butter, musk, camphor, saffron) used in 
tharva 6 

Veda XIX, the merning Homa keep the air pure and whole- 
vii, 3) 4 


some till the next morning, while those burnt in 
the morning Homa keep the air pure till the evening and thereby 
promote health, strength and inte'lect.” 


“A Dwa should, therefore, perform his Sandhyd spdsand 
Shidvinsha (devotions) and Agnthotra (Homa), daily at sunrise 


Brabmana, and sunset,” 
TV, 5 


stead feed te ag aerae we eter! 

ayer Reger ee rerragftes or ereerey it Mo G1 VL 

srearrd marae: fewer cote | 

Rete Rite ached spears ffergaerT W aTMe B 1 Ve H 

exreartarederdiey traiteree TenfeAT | 

Reepe arate ae fey forester it argo Ree 

exreterret qqerafevaf efter: seret: srrer: Strerereret Weert WW 

sen seep eateat afte: event Qrerrer grat WAR Tet 
eto tei mgoodeoziva 

wengtrarer itt query erengquiedt | 


warned araiiterfrenrns i Tgfirergre | 10 wl 
woul 


Cuar. IV] Liouv or Tauri. its 





“ He who neglects these two duties daily in the morning and in 
Maou the evening, should be excluded from the society of 
Il. 103 Dwijds, (the three upper classes of regenerates,) in 

other words, he should be treated as a Shiédra.” 


O.—Why should not Sandhyd’ be performed three times a day ? 


A—Day and night do not meet three times a day. Light and 
darkness meet but twice in 24 hours, #. ¢, in the morning and in 
the evening. Shoulda man refuse to believe this and persist in 
holding that the SandAyd should also be performed third time at 
midday, he should be asked to perform his Sandhyd at midnight, 
Should he be willing to do so, let him also do it at the union of a 
prahara* with a prakara, otan hour with an hour, of a minute 
with a minute, of a second with a second. This be would find im- 
possible to do. 

Besides, not a single authority of any Sdastra is to be found in 
support of this practice, Hence, itis right to perform Sandhyd 
and Homa only twice a day, not three times, Time is no doubt 
divided into three periods—the past, the present, and the future, 
but Saudhyd has nothing to do with this (division), 


3. Pitryajna consists in serving learned men, great teachers, 
scholars, one’s father, mother, old people, great men, and great 
yogis. 

This Yajna is divided into 2 parts :— 

i, Shrd tha is derived from skrat—truth. That by which 

truth is accepted is called Shradhd ; whilst that which is 


done with Skradid, 2. ¢., with the object of embracing truth, 
is called Shrddha. 


aw fete og a: qt areret weg ofa! 
@ uqraftencd: edenrg fgwmiq: Wry o 21 to8 a 








te Literally means the meeting of day and night but also the morning and 

evening devotion which rf st A} hi i 

resins cans are performed during the hours of the morning and 
a. A Prekara is equal to 3 hours.--7¢. 


the Lireat of Trutit. {Citar, 1. 





ii, TarPanais anything done to please one’s father, mother 
and other elders (who are alive), and make them bappy.* 

Tarpana is again sub-divided into three parts :—- 

A.—-Deva tarpana, “Weserve Brakmd ‘and the like Devds. 
We serve Brahmds wife and the like Devis, We serve 
Brahmd's sons, disciples and the like. We serve Brahmd's 
companions and assistants.” 

The Shatapatha Brdhmana says : “Verily, the learned are Deuds.” 


*A.—A Brakmd is one who has mastered the four Vedas, as 
their subsidiary sciences. Even those who are a little 
less learned than a Brahmd are called Devds. The wives, 
of a Brakmd and other Devds, who are also learned like 
their husbands, are called Devis, 

B,—Rishi Turpana, This consists in serving and honouring 
learned men like Marichi—the great grandson of Brdkwd 
who teach boys, arned women, like the wives of Mavricht 
and other great teachers, who teach girls, their /earned 
sons, duughters and pupsls, companions and assistants (who 
are also teachers). 

C.—Pits? Terpana consists in thoroughly satisfying Prtars 
by offering them most regularly good food, clothes, 
beautiful conveyances, etc.; in other words, it consists 
in lovingly serving them and doing everything in one’s 
power to keep their bodies healthy and their souls happy, 

The following are the different kinds of Pitars :—~ 

1. A Somasada is one who is well-versed in the spiritual and 
physical sciences, 

2. An Agnishwdta is one wko is well-versed in the science of 
Agni, i. €, heat light, electricity and the like (forces). 


st ateaqa serena adteargfinreqenny | 
artroary fterqregeaeerey, | tf safteroter Ht 
at Qrree: fracerwam, Usfarer: ftaceqoran| 


te Itshould be bornein mind that this yo/na is meant for the diving and 
not for the dead, (The author condemns the practice of offering oblations to 
the manes, which is in vogue at present throughont India—Zr) * 

*. Since Bradmd was the first wan to master all the four Vedas, this word 
has come to mean master of the four Vedas Itis title like Vyasa—literally 
diameter aad therefore, one whose intellect has penetrated the subtle meaning 
of the Vedas Tr, 


Cuap, IV] Licut oF TRUTH. 115 





Es 


4 


5 


10, 
i, 
12, 


13 
14. 
15. 


A Barkishadis one who is engaged in advancing knowledge 
and doing other useful works, 

A Somapd is one who is the guardian of health and strength, 
who uses essences of powerful herbs, etc, and thus 
frees himself as well as others from disease. In other 
words he is a doctor. 

A Havirbhaja is a \earned man who lives on foods and drinks 
other than meat and spirituous liquors, 

An A’yapa is one who protects highly useful objects, and 
eats and drinks butter, milk, and the like articles, 

Sukalina is one who employs his time in furthering the 
cause of truth and righteousness, 

A Yama, (a judge) is one who administers justice and 
thereby protects the good and punishes the wicked. 

A Pita (father) is one who provides food for his children, 
honours and protects them, He is also the author of 
their being. 

Pitdmahd—Grandfather. 

Prapité-maha—Great-grandfather, 

Mdié (mother) is one who honours her children by 
giving them food and doing other useful things for them, 

Pitdmahi—the mother of one’s father, 

Prapitd mahi—the grsndmother of one's father. 

Wife. 





wfteq: tercegrmny 1 Sarr Rreeeqarary | efepe: 
fraceqerang leq: freceqavery | garter: fire 
eaorang | aarteatr ar: aarttertarfr) fr era am 
fret antarfir | frererera eer arr: Rerent edarfir t aftr 
Ree ea ame after adit) artera watt aret 
antanttr | frend erat arn: feared ederfirs 

afternt erat aa: afternt adarit i ert evar ar: 
exalt atarity | crafter: erat am avefioorentartir | 
aitnten exer enn arivatertarttr 1 of fender 0 


116 Licut or TRUTH. [Cuar, IV. 





16, Sister and other relations. 

17. People of the same stock or bearing the same surname, 
and other old men and women. 

4. Vatshwadeva Yajna, consists of three parts :— 

A.—When the meal is ready, fet the householder 
take all kinds of cooked food other than sour, 
salt and alkaline, such as contain sugar, butter 
and milk, fetch fire out of the hearth, and throw 
oblations of the food into it reciting the munirds 
beginning with Om Agnaye Swaka' alt the 
while. The sage Many holds the same view. 

Manu Says he. “Let a Dwiya per- 

111,84. form Homa in the (kitchen) fire 
with whatever has been cooked in kitchen for 
the purpose of purifying its air in the following 
manner,” 

B—Let him place some food on a (ordinary) plate or 
leaf-plate after reciting each of the specific 
mantrds in all directions of the compass begin- 
ning with the east. Let this food be offered to 
an afithi, and in his absence thrown into the fire, 

C.—Then let him place salt food, such as pulses, rice, 
vegetables and bread in 6 parts (on a plate) on 
the ground reciting the specific mantrds at the 
time. Here is an authority from Manu for this 
act, 

Soaterer feracer qe SA fags | 

waren geatgeatean great Rrrrney tage Vi eH 

tt erat eae | Seater SET | sree erreat arret | Ros etty 
Adan ere | Trach TET SR VTE) WA ere | 
swore’ carrey | ere eeerraferefteat eran | erewe SATE Ut 
sit ergnmaenes at: | Sgr sag AT: | STAM THETT 
wa) ergaer Starr am | wey ae | EA wT 
qwerfeet a Reta) ae ee qeat me | 
erga am: | feted Rat om: 1 rvatan weet wa: | 


memaiftedt opie wr: crete at 





Cuar, IV.] _ Licut or Trotn. wy 





“ Let him gently place on the ground some food for dogs, fallen 


Manu wretches, outcasts, those afflicted with terrible dis- 
IH, 92. eases (such as lepers), birds (as crows), insects (as 
ants”), 


Let him then give this food to one who is hungry, di.tressed, 
diseased, or to dogs, crows and other such creatures, 

The object of performing Homa is to purify the kitchen air, 
whilst that of offering food is to atone for the unintentional injury 
done to various living creatures. 

5. Atithi Yajna, An atithi is one whose date of coming is not 
certain or fixed. Whenever a Sanydsi, who is virtuous and a 
preacher of truth, itinerates for the good of all, is a perfect scholar, is 
a Yogs of the highest order, happens to visit a house-holder let him 
offer him water to wash his feet and face, and to sip, and then offer 
acomfortable seat respectfully, give him good food and drink 
and other good things (such as clothes), and thus serve him most 
diligently and make him quite comfortable. Then fet him benefit 
himself by his good company by learning such things in Physical 
and Spiritual Sciences, as would help him in acquiring virtue, wealth 
(worldly possessions), in gratifying legitimate desires, and obtaining 
salvation, Let him conduct himself in accordance with his good 
advice. On suitable occasions, even a house-holder and a king can 
be honoured as atithis, but “Let him never honour even by a greet- 
ing those that revile the Vedds or conduct themselves against 
their teaching, those that lead anti-Vedsc lives, tell lies, practise 

Maou frauds and live /ke cats, [Just as cats hide themselves 

TV, 30. and keep staring at rats and then in a moment 
pounce upon them, kill them and fill their stomachs ; likewise are 
such men as gain their selfish ends by lying, cheating and acting in 
other ways like cats. They are, therefore, called cat-/ike] those that 
are obstinate, stubborn and vain, do not know anything themselves 
nor would they follow the advice of another, (¢. ¢., those who follow 
the dog-in-the manger policy, ) those that are sophists and talk 


gat © afeerat w eevet rretiftrgry | 
errant waited © qabitittgie a age 8 1 €8 Il 


afte fester &eragfrert var! 
Seyere weyeltew erage areal tage v1 toy 





118 Licet oF TRUTH. [(Cuap, IV. 





nonsense like the Veddatists of the present day who deciare that 
they are Brahma, the world is a delusion, the Vedas and Shdstras 
and even God are fictitious and spin similar other yarns, those that 
live dike herons (Just as a heron stands quietly on one Jeg asif in 
deep meditation but really keeps a watchful eye on some fish all 
the time to whose life it soon puts an end, and thereby accom- 
plishes its selfish end, so do the Vairdgees and Kidéis of today who 
are very stubborn, obstinate and enemies of the Vedd, such men 
are, therefore, called 4eron-/:£e).” Such men if honoured multiply, 
increase sin and unrighteonsness in th? world, they not only 
themselves do such works as bring about their degradation but also 
sink there followers to the lowest depths of ignorance and misery. 

The uses of these § Great Daily Duties ( Yajnds) are :-— 

Brakmayajna is the cause of advancement in knowledge, culture, 
righteousness and refinement of manners, etc. 

Agnihotra causes the purification of air, rain, and water, and 
thereby conduces t> the happiness of the world. The use 
of puse aic for respiration, pure water, and pure food pro- 
motes health, strength, energy and intellect, which in their 
turn help men to acquire virtue, wealth, gratify (righteous) 
desires, and attain salvation. Since Aguthofra purifies the 
air, water, etc., it is also called Devayajna. 

Pitri-yajna.—-1, The service of father, mother, other learned 
persons and great souls, leads to the increase of knowledge 
and wisdom which help 2 man to discriminate between 
Right and Wrong. The acceptance of what is right and 
the rejection of what is wrong makes him happy, 

2. Itisalso right to serve our father, mother and tutor, 
in seturn for the services they rendered us while we 
were young. The faithful performance of this Yayna 
saves us from the charge of ingratitude, 

Valivaishwadeva Yajna. Its uses are the same as have been 
mentioned before. [Briefly speaking, they are as follows : 
1. Purification of the kitchen air. 

2, The discharge of our obligations towards the sick, the 
needy, the fallen and towards those faithful and useful 
animals and bird, etc, which are dependent on ua for 
suatenance, 


Crap, IV] Licut or Truts. 119 





3. It is alsoa kind of atonement for the pain and suffer- 
ing we unknowingly inflict on the lower creation in 
the daily routine of our lives —TZ+r.] 

Anthi Yajna— 

(a). As long as there are no a/tthis of the highest order 
in this world, progress cannot be made. 

(8). As they go about in all conntries (of the world), 
teaching and preaching truth, no hypocritical 
and fraudulent practices can flourish, 

(c) The house-holders can also easily attain true 
spiritual knowledge in ail places. 

(d), One religion prevails among all men, 

(e). Unless there are aéithis, doubts cannot be dispell-d, 
and without the removal of doubts, there can be 
no firm faith, How can then there be any 
happiness without firm faith ? 

“ Let a man wake up early in the morning at (about 4 A.M), 
having relieved the necessities of nature (and taken a 
Won bath), let him think upon the means of acquiring 
virtue and wealth, and upon the causation of his 

bodily diseases (if any) and contemplate God," 
He should never lead an unrighteous life. “ Unrighteousness 
Manu practised in this world does not go unpunished, nor 
IV, 174. does it immediately produce its fruit (like a cow). 
This is the reason why the ignorant do not fear sin, but it must be 
borne in mind that the practice of unrighteousness advancing slowly 

cuts off the very root of your happiness.” 

“The worker of iniquity crosses the bounds of righteousness just 
as water in a tank breaks asunder its banks and runs in all directions, 


wre ys Sere watet argh | 

wranivian angers tqeendite a ii Tyo wl 82 
arecigaftet ate Ger: certs Arfte | 
atone weaieniy erate aay o wt toe A 
sradiat erred anfy ceafk 1 

ae: Sweaty aerereg ferret uty o wt toe W 








140 Licht or Tauri. [Cuar. 1¥, 


ee ee ee ee 


w does he, through the practice of untruthfutness, deceit, aud fraud, 
in other words through transgressing the commandments of the 
Vedas that are t ue guardians (of human happiness), and through 
hypocracy, take possession of other people’s wealth and property, 
and prospers for a whi’e, next with this wealth he obtains nice 
foods and drinks, good clothes, jewellery, houses and carriages, and 
wins social position and fame, even conquers his enemies through 
foul means, but at last he soon perishes like a tree whose root has 
been cut off.” 


“Let a learned man always honestly instruct his pupils in the 
ways of truthfulness and righteousness, as taught by 
the Veda (vis. freedom from prejudice and partial- 
ity, the practice of truth and justice, and the rejec- 
tion of untruth) and in nobility of character and purity,” 


Manu 
VV, 175+ 


“ Let him never quarrel or wrangle with one who officiates at a 
Yajna, with a teacher of truth and unighteousness, 
1, Mane with a maternal uncle, an aéit#hi and a dependent, 
NT with children, aged and sickmen, with a doctor of 
medicine, with people springing from the same paternal stock or 
belonging to the same C/ass as he, connections by marriage (such 
as a father-in-law) and friends, with his father and mother, witha 
sister and a brother, with his wife, and his daughter, and with his 
servants,” 


“A Dwija, who does not practice tapds, such as the practice of 
eae, Brahamcharya, trathfulness, one who does not study 
19. | {the Veda), one who is eager to accept gifts ; these 
three sink into the greatest depths of misery and 

pain on account of their wicked deeds, just as he who attempts to 


—s =— 
fireaiger fircoratty arargaceae: i A ow 1 LOI 
waftrngoftararctatqenfafrefira: | 
mragargttawtfrasaPanvat: 
senhceal eau ater 
after qreratty frag + earate t 
AZ ORM WUE REL 


saurereitart: sfaneetete ar: | 
wrereruraaae oe She asufe y rz ow i tgo W 





CHa, IV} Licut oF Trurs. 121 





cross an ocean in a boat made of stone sinks down.” They no doubt 
sink but they also carry the donors down with them, for, “ Wealth 
Manu although earned by righteous means, given to the 
TV, 193. aforesaid three, ruins the donor in this very life, and 

the recipient in the next.” 
“As he who attempts to cross the water in a boat of stone, 
-sinks to the bottom, even so an ignorant donor and 
yee an ignorant donee sink low; in other words are 

‘ afflicted with misery and pain.” 


CHARACTERISTICS OF IMPOSTERS, 
Imposters should neither be trusted nor served. They are of 
the following 8 types :-— 

1, Dharmadwaji, (Literally one who displays the flag of virtue), 
Manu is one who does not practise any virtue, but defrauds 
IVs 195 others in the name of virtue. 

2, Saddiubdha—a covetous wretch, 

3. Chhddmika is a deceitful person, 


4. Lokadambhaka is one who brags of his greatness before 
others, 


§. Hinsra is one who does injury to living creatures or bears 
malice to others. 

6. Sasvdbhisandhaka is one who mixes with all kinds of men— 
good or bad—such a person should be considered a rogue and a mean 
fellow like a cat, 


7. Adhodrishtiis one who always looks down (whilst walking) 
in order to be considered a very virtuous person, . 





froeeteg qe’ ft ritencafa'd wr! 
wrateerrata comrrgte wil Tyo 8 | LER I 
aar aetna Prrengre Act | 
Se Rserrereree Semen ore sae 
oralt wargqrang igen GETRTE: 1 
Serenfer 82t fer: qaffreawes: nyo 81 U9 Ml 
16 


138 Licut oF Trutii. [Cuar. rv. 





8. Naiskkritika is one who is of a cruel, vindictive nature, even 


Manu ready to take one’s life, if one has happened todo 
TV, 196 him a slight injury in order to revenge himself. 


9. Stwdrtha Sddhantatpara is ove who is solely intent on attain- 
ing his selfish end, even through fraud, injustice, and hypocrisy. 
9. Shatha is one who persists in his obstinacy even though he 
knows he is in the wrong. 
to. MMithia Vintti is one who is falsely demure and puts ona 
saintly appearance (to deceive others). He should be considered 
a low wretch like a heron, 
It, therefore, behoves all men and women “ to accumulate virtue 
by degrees for obtaining bappinessin the next world 
Manu ne . 5g 7 a 
lv, 238-240, by giving pain to no living creature, just as the white 
ant gradually raises its hill.” For, “in the next world, 
neither father, nor mother nor wife, nor sons nor relations, can be- 
filend anyone. Virtue alone helps him there.” “Single is each sou! 
born ; single it dies ; single it enjoys the reward ofits virtus—happi- 
ness ; single it suffers the consequence of its sin—pain.” 
It should be borne in mind. “A man commits a sin and there- 
Mahabharat by obtains something which he brings home, where 
Prajagar alf his family members enjoy it, but they do not 
Pera suffer the consequences of his sin, it is he alone, 
who committed the sin, that reaps the consequences thereof.” 


mitefetepfen: eardararacge | a 
wer frente aeerereret fir: 8 





FAGZosn Wei 
at wh: gftret: 1 
ebqaredters tt 
ange f& eared fire are @ ferea: | 


a nae 7 erfirdsifeester Gere | 
OR: TTS WAL eer Halts | 
AZT Feats TF se FT Il 
FT o 8 il Ra— wo Ht 
om: wrariy See Get Ges AEA: | 
Brand ferd wat ate feed 0 
RETA | SAT TONAMTTTS Ul Wo 82 


Cuap, IV] LIGHT oF TRUTH 123 





“When a man dies, his relations leave has corpse like (a log or) 

- a Jump of clay on the ground, and retire with avert- 

1V, 241. ed faces. No one accompanies him. It is (his) 
virtue alone that bears his company.” 


“Let aman, therefore, continually practise virtue for the sake 
of securing happiness in the next world, since it is through the help 
of virtue’ alone that the soul can cross the ocean of misery and 
sorrow so hard to cross, A man who regards, virtue alone as the 

Manu highest thing (in the world), and whose sins have 
IV, 242,243. been destroyed through the practice of righteousness, 
attains to that All-glorious Being whose body is A’édsh,—the most 
Beautiful Supreme Spirit—by virtue of Dharma alone.” 

“He who is persevering, gentle in disposition, subjugates 

passions, shuns the company of cruel and wicked 
wi. men, injures no sentient creature, lives a virtuous life, 
keeps his mind under thorough control, bestows on 

others the gift of knowledge, etc., attains happiness.” 


aad attcarepeay erecta fret | 

Rergqert arora arfte enberregrreg he WY Wyo 8 1 BURR 

wena aerant fret’ afgareg?: | 

wreatey fe erent erverche TTT NUN AT © & 1 BWV 

ebrart qgev evar wafaferns | 

Teale NAT ArVre wat t 

TY oN WU 

eyed agate: aqerentcetaers | 

after — WRETT TUTE: It 

arerat raat: of aregger Uftafrganr: | 

ateg @: eter @ adtagec: ti 

1, The rord which I have translated info virtue, is Dkarme. | have alread 

noted that this word is most difficult to translate. No single word in the Engli: 
language cau express its manifold meaning Sometimes, 1 have translated it into 
virtue, sometimes into yestice, at other times into truth etc. Briefly, it is the 
practice of truth. justice and righteousness, devotion to duty, freedom from hatred 


malice, and anger, etc , and love towards all living creatures Its ten characier- 
tstica will be described in the next Chapter.—7Zr. 








124 Licut or TRUTH. [Cuap. IV, 





But it should also be borne in mind that “All thing have their 
nature ascertained by speech; in specch they have 
their basis and from speech they proceed; conse- 
_ quently he that falsifies his speech is guilty of theft 
and the like sins,” 


Manu 
TV, 256. 


“Let a man, therefore, always avoid sins, such as untruthfulness 

in speech, and practise virtue, since through virtuous 

wie - conduct, in other words, the practice of Brakmd- 

charyd and subjugation of passion, etc. he obtains 

long life, through virtuous conduct good offspring, through virtuous 

conduct imperishable wealth, virtuous conduct destroys all vices. 

For aman of bad character sinks to contempt in the eyes of all 

good men, is afflicted with misery, suffers from diverse diseases, 
and is shortlived.” 

“ Whatever act depends on another, that let him studiously avoid 

Mana but whatever act depends upon himself, that let him 

IV, 159. diligently pursue.” 

Because “ Dependence is pain, whilst indpendence is happy- 
Maou ness, Let him know this to be the brief definition 
TV, 160, of happiness and pain.” 

But whatever is (in its very nature) dependent upon both 
should be done with each other’s approval, b-cause the relation 
between the husband and his wife is such that they cannot be 
independent of each other, in other words, they should treat each 
other most lovingly and live harmoniously, They should never 
quarrel with each other, nor commit adultery. The wife, subject 
to her husbard’s control, should be supreme in the house, whilst all 


SUTTSMAT HTT: HT: | 

MARAT TA CATT Il 
Toe Nh WHIRL URN 

Heras fe geet arsareahe ffx: | 

Bewarht ¢ aed anfiarsengee F ll Ty © vi Lys It 

qereacent eat aerersier qofitey | 

tae 

edacey ger adnerad gery 

CHRRUREMeN wed quarts ty s v8 WWE NEON 





Cuar. IV.] LIGHT OF TRUTH. 138 





affairs other than those relating to the household should be under 
the control of the husband. They should prevent each other from 
contracting vices,in other words, it should be borne in mind that 
after marriage, the husband and the wife entirely belong to each 
other, that is, their hearts, their feelings and their bodies from top 
to toe, (reproductive-elements and all included), become subject to 
each other's control. Let them n:ver do anything against each 
other's wish. Of all things likely to upset their bappy relations, 
the worst are adu'tery and fornication, ete. Let them avoid these, 
Let the husband always remain contented with his wife, and the 
wife with her husband, If they belong to the Brdfman Class, 
let the husband teach boys, and his wife, if she be well-educated, 
teach girls, Let them make them learned by preaching and lectur- 
ing to them on various subjects. The husband is the adorable 
god for the wife, and the wife is the adorable goddess for the hus- 
band. As long as boys and girls remain in their respective se- 
minaries, let them look upon their teachers as their parents, whilst 
the teachers should consider their pupils as their children. 

Qualifications of Teachers (male and female) :— 

“ He alone is a wise man, who is never idle nor lazy, nor affected 
Mahdbharat by pleasure or pain, profit or loss, honour or dis- 
Viduepedit honour, public applause or censure, has alwaysa 

gar, XXXL firm faith in Diarma, and cannot be tempted by 
sensual objects.” To practice virtue and avoid sin, abstain from 
speaking ill of God, of the Veda,and of righteous living, have 
unbounded faith in God, verily these are the duties of a wise man. 
The first qualification of a wise man is that he should be able to 
grasp the most abstruse subject ia a very short time, should devote 
years of his life to the study of the Shdstras (true sciences) and 
thinking over them, apply his knowledge for the good of others, 
never do anything for his selfish gain, should not give his opinion 
unasked or interrupt another in his speech, 


srerert carceafteafiren welfarcaen | 

aaraf arcade: @ & after seat 

frawa sopeerfe firftcenfr ot Sea 

serftern: sent ceerirererryy 

fet fermen re eh, firwre ated ext or Srey, 

MeeTRNTe.S werd, cereal wed aiteees Ut 
"RATAN | FEKETE | re AR 





126 Licut or Trurs. [Crap, IV. 








“ He alone is a wise scholar who does not desire for the unattain- 
able, nor broods over his losses, nor Ioses his head in misfortune. © 


He alone is a wise scholar who is well-versed in all kinds of 
knowledge, is avery clever debator, can speak on any subject, is 
a good logician, has a good memory, can easily give a true exposi- 
tion of the meanings of the Sédsirds, 


Verily he alone is entitled to be called a wise man whose in- 
tellectual upbuilding is in comformity with truth (as he knows it), 
who hears the Shdsfrds read that are in harmony with reason, who 
never steps beyond the bounds of good, righteous men,” 


Wherever such teachers (male and female) exist, knowledge, 
righteousness, and good conduct advance and thereby continually 
increases, 

Characteristics of undesirable teachers and fools;—~ 


“He who has neither read a Skdstra, nor heard it read, is 
Mahdbhérat extremely vain, builds castles in the air though 
Vidurprayd- poor, wishes to obtain things without any exertion 

ar, xxv. on his part, is called a fool by the wise,” 

“He who enters an assembly or another man’s house uninvited 
and occupies a seat above his rank, jabbers a great dea! without 
being asked (to speak), is very credulous—se,, trusts the untrust- 
worthy or believes that ought not to be believed, is verily a foo? 
and the lowest of the low.” 


mrrqaframgtta ace toate Braz | 
wrreg & 8 gure rer: oftware: 
arqurang Rrrent KRETEL ARATTATT | 
erg aeder Ter To:  aftwa seTe 
ye setget cer set Se gage i 
wafrerdrate: cwareat wae * 
sreqear Sawat efter AETTAT: | 
sufersetan iqais reaert gh t 
serge: afta get wy ATee 1 
waftrered Apart aqetet vera: i 
Reraree | seipreed firgeorere 1 eyo By I 





Crap. IV. Licut or Truth. a7 











Wherever such men occupy the positions of teachers, preachers, 
and preceptors, and are honoured, there ignorance, unrighteousness, 
bad manners, discord, strife and disunion grow and thereby misery 
and sorrow increase. 

VICES OF STUDENTS, 


“Physical mental inertia, use of intoxicants, infatuation, idle 
Mahdbhérat 8 0SSIp, neglect of studies, vanity, and want of 
Vidur prajigar Brahkmacharya, these seven vices are to be found 
XIX. among students." Such students can never acquire 
knowledge, 

“How can a pleasure-hunter acquire knowledge? And how 
can a student enjoy sensuous pleasures (and yet acquire learning)? 
Let a pleasure-hunter bid farewell to knowledge, and let a seeker 
after knowledge bid farewell to sensuous pleasure”; since without 
doing this, no maa can ever acquire knowledge. 


QUALIFICATIONS OF GOOD STUDENTS, 


“ They alone who practise virtue, subjugate their passions and 
Mahibhirat never lose theis reproductive element, are true 
Viduraiti, Brakmachdrts and become learned men.” 


It follows, therefore, that the teachers and students should 
possess excellent qualities. The teachers should so endeavour as 
to produce in their scholars such good qualities as truthfulness in 
word, deed and thought, culture, self-control, gentleness of disposi- 
tion, perfect development of mind and body, so that they may be- 
come well-versed in the Vedas and Shdstras. The teachers should 
always be diligent in eradicating the evil habits of their scholars 
and in imparting knowledge, The scholars should always culti- 


wrmed weit w are aieee 

erorer safeties: aursenfireate 1 

aa & aa tren: ea: ear frenfiat war: 8 

uiflle Gar Oui gM Reeminwee | 

gerd ot aatitut ard a antegery t fegernc i 
oR Nl 

eet carat See qreengedtrent | 

mega Rests erderanegqaeftresy WHEAT A 





138 LicHt or Tauti. {Cuar. IV, 





vate self-control, mental tranquility, love for their tutors, thought- 
fulness and habits of diligence. They should so exert themselves 
as to acquire perfect knowledge, perfect dharma, perfect develop- 
ment of body (to enable them to live to the fullest age allotted to 
man), and learn to labour. Such are the duties of Brahmans, 


The duties of Kshatriyds will be described in the chapter on 
Government, 

The duties of Vasshyds are :—to learn the languages of various 
countries, the methods of different trades, the (current) prices or 
rates (o' different articles), the art of buying and selling, to travel 
in different countries (for the purposes of trade, etc.), engage in 
profitable business, rear cattle and other animals, improve agricul- 
ture, augment wealth and spend it for the advancement of know- 
ledge and dharma, to be truthful in speech and free from hypocrisy, 
conduct business with honesty, and look after all things in such a 
way that nothing is wasted or lost, 

The duties of a Sézdra are to be clever in all kinds of manual! 
service, expert in cooking, to serve the twice-born with love, and 
make his livelihood by it. The twice-born should provide him 
with board and lodging, clothes, and pay all the expenses of his 
marriage, ctc., or pay him a monthly salary. All the four Classes 
should work harmoniously and be of one mind in doing public 
good and promoting righteousness, and share each other's joys and 
sorrows, pleasure and pain and further the good of their country 
and of their people with all their heart, with all their sou}, and 
with all the material resources at their command, 

The husband and the wife should never live apart from each 
others, since the “ use of animal food and intoxicants such as spri- 
tuous liquors, association with the wicked, separation from the hus- 
band, wandering about uselessly by herself from place to place with 

the object of visiting so-called saintly persons (who 

Fares are all really imposters), sleeping and dwelling in 

i another man’s house (through wantonness) are the 
six vices that are apt to contaminate a woman’s character.” These 
very vices contaminate a man’s character as well, 





ort qetweterh: gear w farceiszey | 
eaivatiqareance anterqeah Wz § AYo 81 Wt 


8, This is what is erroneously called septal service—Zr. 


cuap, IV.) Licut or Truts. 149 





Separation between the husband and the wife is of two kinds: 
firstly, that caused by one of the parties going abroad on business ; 
and, secondly, that caused by the death of one of them. Separa- 
tion of the first kind can be avoided if the husband takes his wife 
along with him whenever he goes abroad, The object of this in- 
junction is that the husband and the wife should not live apart 
from each other for long. 

O,—Should a man or a woman marry more than once? 

A.—Not when the other party is alive, 

O.—Can one party re-marry when the other is dead ? 


A—Yes, Saysthe sage Maxx on this subject. “A man ora 

Manu woman, who has simply gone through the ceremony 

1X. 179 of joining hands * but whose marriage has not been 
consummated, is entitled to re-marry.” 

But re-marriage is absolutely prohibited in the case of a twice 
born man or woman (é. ¢, one belonging to a Brahman, Kshatriya 


or Vatshya Class) who has had sexual intercourse with his or her 
consort, 





O.—What are the evils of re-marriage 2 (in the case of such 
persons)? 
A.—(The following are the principal evils) :— 

(1) Diminution of love between’ the husband and the wife, 
since either of them can desert the other whenever he 
or she so desires, and marry another person.* 

(2) On the death of one party, the other will take away the 
property of his or ber deceased consort when he or she 
marries again, This will give rise to family disputes. 

(3). Ifa widow re-marries, many a noble family will be blotted 


out of existence, and its property destroyed (by cons. 
tant alienation), 


et Seger fit: exrgererrerrerertfe et | 
Sheri arat et gon tewrendfe a myo F120 UN 


1. Joining hands is the chief element in the Vedic ceremony of mar- 
riage.— 7. 





2, Remarriage includes Polygamy and Polyandry —7y. 
+ This argument seems to apply to marriage after divorce Zr. 


tgo Ltcitt or Tutu. (Cuar. LV, 





(4). Re-marriage involves loss of trac conjugal love and 
infraction of duty towards the departed husband or 
wife, 

A For these reasons, re-marriage, polygamy and polyandry 
are prohibited in the case of the twice-born. 

O.—If one of the parties die leaving no male issue, even then 
the family line will become extinct, Besides, if re-marriage be not 
allowed, the widows and widowers will resort to adultery and fornica- 
tion, procure abortion, and will commit wicked deeds of a kindred 
nature. For these reasons re-marriage is desirable. 


A.-—No. If the widows and widowers desire to practice Brakma- 
charya, no such evil consequences will accrue. Again, if the widow 
or the widower ado pt a boy of her and his C/ass, the family line will 
be continued and there will be no danger of adultery being resorted 
to, Those, however, who cannot control their passions may beget 
children by having recource to Niyoga. 


O,~-What ase the differences between re-tnarriage and Niyoga? 


A,~-{1). After marriage the bride leaves her paternal roof, 
lives with her husband, and her relations with ber 
father’s family cease to be very close; on the con- 
trary, the widow (in case she contract Wsyoga) con- 
tinues to live in her deceased husband’s house, 


(2). The children begotten of marriage inherit the pro- 
perty of their mother’s husband, whereas, offspring 
begotten of Veyoga on a widow are not regarded as 
children of the begetter and consequently they don't 
take his surname, nor can they be claimed by him, 
They are spoken of as the children of their mother's 
deceased husband, take his surname, inherit his pro- 
perty and live in his house. 


(3). Married people are required to serve and help each 
other, while those that contract Miyoga have to 
abandon ail relations (after the stipulated period). 


(4). The relation of marriage is life-long, while the con- 
tract of Wiyoga ceases to be operative after the 
desired object has been attained, 


Cuap, IV.] Licst oF Truta. 131 





(5) The husband and the wife help each other in the 
performance of their household duties, while those 
that have contracted Wsyoga discharge the duties of 
their respective households, 

O,—Do the same laws apply to Néyoge and marriage, or are 
they different in each case ? 


4A.—They are a little different, A few differences have already 
been enumerated, and here are some more :— 


(2) A married couple can produce children up to the limit 
of ten, while that connected by Wsyoga cannot produce 
more than two or four. 

(4) Just as marriage is allowed only in the case of a bache- 
lor and a maid, likewise only a widow and a widower 
can enter into the relation of Wiyoga, but never a 
bachelor and a maid. 

(¢). A married couple always lives together but not that 
connected by MNiyoga. Such persons should come 
together only when they intend to generate a new life, 
Whether Viyoga is contracted for the benefit of the 
widow or of the widower, the relation is dissolved after 
the second conception. Let the widow rear the child- 
ren for two or three years and hand them to her 
husband by Niyoga, in case it has been entered into 
for his behoof. In this way a widow can give birth 
to two children for herself and two for each of the 
four husbands by Msyoga. Similarly a widower can 
beget two children for himself and two for each of the 
four wives by Niyoga. Thus ten children in all can 
be produced by means of Mzyoga—this is what the 
Veda declares :— 

“© thou who are fit to procreate and art strong, do thou raise 
upon the married wife or upon these widows, with 

Rig, Vode % whom thou hast contracted Niyoga, good children, 
and make them happy. Do thou beget on thy 

married wife ten children, and consider her the eleventh (member 


waftier, 3 1 
arhiryachie vert 
Wontoloigomidewy 





132 Licur oF TRuTH. [Cuap. IV, 





of thy family). Oweman! Let ten children be raised on thee 
by thy married husband or thy husbands by Wiyoga and do thou 
consider thy husband as the eleventh (member of thy family).” 

The Vedic injunction requires that among Brdhmanas, 
Kshatriyds and Vasshyds a couple should in no case produce more 
than ten children, otherwise the offspring are sure to be weak, both 
physically and intellectually, and short-lived, Even such parents 
grow feeble, do not live long, are afflicted with disease and conse- 
quently endure untold sufferings, 

0.—But Niyoga looks like adultery. 

4A,—Just as sexual connection between persons that are not 
married is called adultery, so is sexual congress between widows 
and widowers not connected by Vsyoga is an adulterous relation, 
From this it follows that just as marriage solemnized according to 
the law is not fornication, even so Vizoga contracted according to 
the law cannot be termed fornication. If one's virgin daughter 
co-habits with a bachelor after the marriage ceremony, enjoined by 
the Shasisds, has been duly performed, this act is not regarded as 
adulterous or sinful, nor does it inspire shame, for the same seasons, 
Niyoga performed according to the Vedée injunction should not 
be regarded sinful, nor should it inspire a feeling of shame. 

O,—This is alright but it looks like prostitution. 

A—No. A prostitute sticks to no particular man, nor is she 
governed in her sexual relation by any specific laws, while Niyoga 
marriage is governed by definite laws, Just as one does not feel 
any shame in giving away his daughter in marriage to another 
person, in like manner there ought to be no shame in contracting 
Niyoga, People who are given to illicit intercourse do not give 
up this wicked habit even after marriage. 

O,—To us it seems that Niyoga is a sinful practice. 

A—If you think that Miyoga is sinful, why don’t you regard 
marriage also as sinful? The sin rather consists in preventing 
people from contracting Miyoga, for according to the Divine laws 
of Nature, natural! appetites cannot be controlled unless one be self- 
abnegating, profoundly iearned, and a yogi of the highest order, 
Don't you consider it a sin to procure abortion, destroy the fetus 
and inflict great mentai suffering on widows and widowera (by pre- 
venting them from contracting Msyega). For, s0 long as they are 


Cuap. IV.} LIGHT oF TRUTH. 133 


young, desire for children aud sexual enjoyment will drive people 
to the necessity of forming secret relations, if the laws of State or 
Society disallow lawful gratification, The only proper way of pre- 
venting adultery and illicit intimacies is to let those, who can 
control their passions, do without Mésyoga or even marriage, but 
those who do not possess so much self-restraint must marry, and in 
case of emergency contract Néyoge, so that the chances of illicit 
intercourse may be greatly minimised, love between the husband 
and the wife enhanced, and consequently good children born, the 
human race improved, and the practice of fticide put a stop to, 
Marriage and Néyoge will do away with such wicked practices as 
illicit intimacy between a low C/ass man and a High class woman, 
or between a High class man and a low C/ass woman (such as a 
public woman), contamination of noble families, extinction of the 
family line, mental anguish of bachelors and maids, of widows and 
widowers, freticide and the like crimes, For these reasons, con- 
traction of Méyoga is desirable. 

O.—What conditions should be observed in the performance of 
the Nsyoga ceremony ? 

A—1. Néyoga is solemnized publicly even as marriage is, 


2. Just as in marriage, the consent of the bride and the bride- 
groom and approval of good men are essential, even so it is in 
Néyoga, in other words, when a man and a woman have agreed to 
contract Viyoga, they should declare before an assembly of their 
male and female relations that thsy enter into the relation of 
Niyoga for begetting children, they will have sexual congress for 
generating a new fe once @ month, in cas> conception takes place 
they will not co-habit for one year, if they should go against that 
declaration they should be considered as sinners and should be 
liable to punishment by the State and the Society, 


O,—Should the relation of Viyoga be entered into with a member 
of one’s own Ciass or with that of a different C/ass as well ? 


A.—A woman should contract MNzyega with a member of one's 
own Class or with that of a higher C/ass, that is, a Vasshya woman 
with a Brdhman;a Kshatriya or a Vaishya ; 2 Kshatriya woman 
with a Kshatriya or a Brdkman; a Brdhmon woman with a 
Brdhman, The object of this is that the spermatic fluid should 
always:be of a man of the same Céass as the woman or of a higher 


134 LicuT or TRUTH. [Cuar. IV. 





Class, never of a lower one. The object (of God) in creating man 
and woman is that they should produce children in accordance 
with the dictates of true religion as enjoined by the Veda, 
O.—Why should a man contract Vévyoge when he can marry again? 
A,—We have already said that according to the injunctions of 
the Veda and the Shdéstras among the twice-born a man or a 
woman may marry only Once, never a second time. Justice 
demands that a bachelor should be married toavirgin. It is un- 
just and therefore wrong for a widower to marry a virgin, aod for a 
widow to marry a bachelor. Just as a bachelor does not like to 
marry a widow, so no virgin would like to marry a widower. If no 
virgin will marry a widower, and no bachelor will marry a widow, 
men and women will feel the necessity of contracting Niyoga, 
Moreover, dharma consists in mating likes alone, 
O—Are there any Vedic and Shastric authorities in favour of 
Neyoga, as there are in support of the marriage institution ? 
A—There are many authorities in support of this doctrine. 
Here are some of them :— 
“Q man and woman (connected by Miyoga), just as a widow, 
co-habits with her husband by Wiyoga and produces 
Rie we Veda children for him, and a wife co-habits with her hus- 
band by marriage and produces children for him, 
likewise (it may be asked) where both of you were during the day 
and during the night, and where you got your things (necessaries 
of life, etc.), where you lived, where you slept, who you are, and 
what your native place is.” This indicates that man and wife 
should always live together whether at home or abroad, and that 
a widow may also take unto herself a husband by Neyoga and 
obtain children, even as a virgin takes unto herself, a husband by 
marriage, who raises issue upon her.® 


gefeetin ge weircftanr serftfied ecg: gitr'eg | 

at ager frets hee we wait UGE Swe eT aU 
lol GeovolwHoxrs 

with shots Mhosld'she contact Nijoga Ft "dow had no younger brother 


4—With her devar, but the word devar does not mean what you think. 
For the Virwéta says “The second husband by Wéyogs of a widow, be he the 
younger brother of her deceased husband or his elder brother, or of a man of her 
own CZesr or of a higher C/ass, it called Devar 


Que worry fest ec seat i fre oo RIE he 





Cuap, IV, Licut or TRovtH. 13! 





“Owidow! Do thou give up thinking of thy deceased hus- 

band and choose another from among living men. 

Rig, Vode But thou must understand and remember that if 

thou contractest Miyoga for the benefit of thy second 

husband with whom thou art united by performing the ceremony 

of joining hands, the child resulting from this union shall belong 

to him ; but if thou enterest into the relation of Viyoga for thy be- 

nefit, the child shall be thine. Do thou bear this in mind, Let 
thy husband by Miyoga also follow this law.” 

“Do thou O woman that givest no pain to thy husband or devar 
Atharva Veda (husband by Msyoga), art kind to animals in this 

XIV, 2,18. Order of house-holders, walk assiduously in the path 
of righteousness and justice, art well-versed in all the Shastrds, 
hast children and grandchildren, givest birth to valiant and brave 
boys, desirest a second husband (by MVéyoga), and bestowest hap- 
piness on all, accept a man of thy choice as thy husband or devay 
(busband by Miyoga), and always perform the Homa which is the 
duty of every householder.” 

The sage Manu also sanctions the marriage of virgin widows, 
Says he “ A virgin widow may marry the younger 
or the elder brother of her deceased husband,” 

O.—How many times can a man or woman enter into the rela- 
tion of Nsyoga? What are the husbands, by marriage or by Niyoga, 
of 2 woman, called? 


add afst defeats cera ttegt Os afk) cermrret 
feftrertt vey'ifrernfr & hy We It Ho go 
gotcitorr 
Seq wadfiret fe fret aged gait: geet: | 
nordret Sieg gern ettearha sided eed 
wrard ol Sto te 1 yo 81 Ho Ril 
arrariter firerrten fate fea ee: hago F145 
art: sree fhe creat fire wet: | 
attr’ afae cig cet agawe Wwe do tol 
Tomitows 


Mano. 





136 Licut or TRuTu. [Cuar, IV. 

A—"Qwoman! Thy first husband with whom thou art 
united by marriage is named Soma, called so because he was a 
chaste bachelor (before marriage). Thy second husband with 
whom thou art connected by Miyoga is named Gdndharva, called 
so because he had already lived with another woman (to whom he 
had been united by marriage), Thy third husband, (by Miyoga) 
is named Agin (fire), called so because he is so very passionate, 
All thy other husbands from the fourth to the eleventh are called 
men.” 





A man may also contract Miyoga with eleven women (one after 
the other), just as a woman may enter into the relation of Miyoga 
with eleven men (one after the other), as sanctioned by the Veda in 
the following text :— 

Rig Veda “9. . take unto thyself the eleventh husband by 
%X, 85, 45- Niyoga.” 


O.—Why should not the word eleven be taken to refer to ten 
sons and the husband as the eleventh (member of the family). 


A—Such an interpretation will not even sanction a second 
husband and therefore go against such Skestric injunctions as 
have been quoted above (We reproduce some of them there), 


« Just as a widow takes unto herself a devar, ete.” “The second 
husband by Miyoga of a widow, etc.” “Do thou O woman that 
givest no pain to devar (husband by Méyoga)”, etc. “Thy 
second husband...... ..is named Gdndharva.” 


The sage Maru also declares— 






“On failure of issue (by her deceased husband), a widow may 

contract Miyoga with a widower (if both of them be 

Manu IX.5% desirous of getting children), who may be her de- 

ceased husband’s younger or elder brother or his cousin within the 
sixth degree or a man of her C/ass or of a higher Class.” 





Cateaftier.. afar efx no te tol 
Comisewa 

Qeour efieeur fort aera, figerT | 

sraqferenfteereeay Geerant THREE il 


Cnap, IV] LIGHT OF TRUTH. 137 


An elder brother, who approaches the wife ofthe younger, and 
Manu 1X, 58 ayounger brother, who approaches the wife of the 
. elder, when the necessity of getting children has 
ceased to operate, even though united by WVsyoga, shall be degraded 
(from their C/ass), In other words, Néyoga lasts only so long as 
two or four children are not born according as it has been contract- 
ed for the benefit of one of the parties, or of both, They should 
not approach each other after this. In this way ten children may 
be produced by successive Miyogas. Sexual congress after this 
is regarded as proceeding from lust. Hence, those who resort to 
it are degraded (from their C/ass). Even if married people co- 
habit with each other after they have produced ten children, they 
are considered lustful and held in great contempt, because marriage 
and syoga ate entered into for the object of getting children but 
not for the gratification of passions like animals. 

O.-Can a woman contract Nsyoga only after the death of her 
husband or even when he is alive ? 

A—This relation can be entered into even in the lifetime of 
the husband (or of the wife) Here is a Vedic text in support of 
this view. 

“When a man is incapable of producing children, let him 

4 address his wife as follows:—O Thou that art 
ae eda Xs desirous of getting children do not expect me to 
raise offspring upon thee. Do thou, therefore, seek 
another husband.” The woman seeking to contract Méyoga, should, 
however, continue to serve her husband by marriage; similarly 
when a woman on account of some chronic disease is rendered 
incapable of bearing children, let her address the following words 
to her husband, “ My Lord! Do not expect me to bear any children, 
Do thou, therefore, contract Néyoga with a widow.” Here are 
some historical proofs as well in support of this doctrine :— 

Kunté and Méddré, wives of king Pdndu had recourse to Veyoga, 

Vyas, on the death of his brothers, Céidrdngad and Vickitravirya 


bn Spsah ol Soaspabance aes 

Seas Wessee haae ginir us aie 

srafttoge gait, oft seu We Ho 1 Ge Ro I sto toy 
18 








138 Licut oF TeoTs. [Cuap, IV, 





contracted Wéyoga with their wives and begot Dériindshins on 
Ambikd, Pdnadu on Ambditkd and Vidur on a Shudrd woman, 
The sage Mans declares -— 


“If a husband has gone abroad in furtherance of some righteous 

ata cause, let his wife wait for eight years ; if for the 

IX, 76. acquisition of knowledge and glory, for six years ; if 

for the pursuit of material ends, for three years, If 
after the expiry of the prescribed periods he does not turn up, she 
may contract Viyoga and obtain children.” Should the husband (by 
marriage) return, the contract of Neyoga shall become null and void, 
Similarly it is enjoined in case of the husband that “ifthe wife be 
sterile, let the husband wait for eight years after marriage ; if ali of 
her children die, for ten years, if she bears only daughters and 
no sons, for eleven years, if she be a termagant, let him forsake 
wide her immediately, and enter into Wiyoga with another 
5X, 81. lady and beget children upon her.” Likewise if the 
husband be very cruel, let bis wife forsake him, and 
bear children by yoga who will succeed tothe property of her 
husband by marriage, 

All these authorities and argument goto prove that it is the 
duty of each man to preseve and perpetuate his family line and 
thereby improve the race by means of Swayumvur Vivah—marriage 
by choice—and Miyoga, 

“Just as an Aurasa~a son born of marriage—is entitled to 
inherit the property ofhis father, so isa Kshestrajna 
—a son born of Niyoga.” 

Men and women should always bear in mind that the (male or 
female) reproductive element is invaluable. Whosoever wastes this 
invaluable fluid in illicit intercourse with other people's wives, prosti- 
tutes, or lewd men, is the greatest fool, because even a farmer or a 
gardener, ignorant though he be, does not sow the seed in a field ora 
garden that is not his own but belongs to another man, When it is 
true in the case of an ordinary seed and ofan ignorant peasant, why 


Manu 





inftar weteraied setters re: Gat: | 

ford ox ciedat ered efteq cerert 
wRRTERShataesy TU FT FEAT | 

Tere at sat cueafieatet nage su ek lat 


Cuar. IV.] Licur oF TRutH. 139 
should not he that wastes the human seed—thc best of all seeda—in 
an undesirable soil, be regarded as the greatest fool, since he does 
not reap the fruit thereof. It is written in the Brdhiman Granth, 
“ A son is part of his father’s self.” The Sema Veda also declares :— 


“Qson[thou art sprung out of my spermatic fluid which is 
drawn from all the bodily organs and from the heart, 


Thou art, therefore, my own self. Mayest thou never 
die before me, Mayest thou live for a hundred years.” It is a sin 


of the deepest dye to sow the seed, out of which great souls and 
distinguished men have sprung, in a bad soil (such as a prostitute) 
or to let a good soil be impregnated with a bad seed. 


Sama Veda 


O.—What is the good of the institution of marriage? This 
relation restricts the liberty of people and entails great suffering on 
them, Therefore it is desirable that a couple should continue to live 
as man and wife as long as they love each other; and separate 
when they are tired of each other, 


A.—This is what beasts and birds do. It does not become men 
to act like this. Ifthe institution of marriage did not exist, all 
the amneties of domestic life would come to an end. None will serve 
another. Downright adultery and illicit connections will increase, 
al] men and women will be afflicted with disease, physically and 
mentally weakened, and will consequently die young, no one will 
fear another or be controlled by public opinion, Families upon 
families will be blotted out of existence in consequence of disease, 
physical and mental degeneration and premature death due to down- 
right adultery and fornication, No one will have a title to succeed 
to another's property, nor will any person be able to retain posses- 
sion of anything for any great length of time. All these evils can 
be best avoided by marriage. 


O.—Monogamy being the rule (7. ¢., if one man be allowed to 
have only one wife, and one woman only one husband) what will a 
person do, if the wife be emciente or afflicted with some chronic 
disease, or if the husband be 2 valetudinarian and either of them 
cannot control himself or herself on account of extreme youth? 


walraureerssiaftr ndgrefttaree | 
rem & gq sper er afte reds err a ara 8 





146 Lieut of Trutu. [Crar. 1V, 





4A.—We have answered this objection while treating of Viyoga. 
Ifa man be not able to control his passions while his wife is preg- 
nant, he may contract Miyoga with (a widow) and beget offspring 
on her, but fet him never misconduct himself with a prostitute or 
commit adultery. Let a man, as far as possible, desire for what he 
has not got, preserve what he has got, try to increase what he has 
preserved, and spend it in doing good to his country, Let every 
man perform the duties of his Class and Order, as set forth above, 
most faithfuily, assiduously and zealously, and apply himself heart 
and soul so the attainment of righteous ends, and expend his wealth 
in the pursuit thereof. Let him diligently serve his father, mother, 
father-in-law, and mother-in-law, and maintain loving relations with 
friends, neighbours, the king, learned men and holy men. Let him 
treat the unrighteous and the wicked with non-chalance, in other 
words, bear them no malice and endeavour to reform them. Let 
him ungrudgingly spend his wealth in securing for bis children the 
benefits of wide culture and liberal education, and try his best to 
make them perfect scholars and men of culture. Let him do right- 
cous deeds, and thereby try to attain salvation so that he may enjoy 
eternal bliss, 
Verses like the following should never be regarded as authorita- 
tive, 
{“ Even a degraded twice-born man is superior to a Shidra who 
Pardshar has conquered his lower self, just as a cow that does 
Smriti. not yield milk is worthy of worship, a she-donkey is 
not worshipped even though she yields milk. The following prac- 
tices are prohibited in the Kaltyuga (iron age) :— 
1. Horse sacrifice, 
2. Cow sacrifice, 
3. Initiation into Sanyds (the Order of renunciation), 
4. Offering flesh balls in a ceremony relating to the manes. 
5. Raising of issue on 2 widow by her husband (by Néyega). 


afeatrf face: tat at @ amt frat | 
fig ver enfe ft: gear aw oad 
saree wereedt crave 

aii earfal opel nie try 

wet get sere git @ fea aah 

aera archat oftear frre’ u 





Cuar. IV.] Licut or Tuts, 141 





The scriptures enjoin that a widow may take anto herself a 

second husband in the following cases :-— 

1, If the husband has gone abroad and cannot be traced. 

2, Ifhe be dead, 

3. Ifhe has turned a Sanydsé. 
If he be impotent, 

5. If he be excommunicated."] 

The above verses are from the apocryphal Pardshar Smriti, 

It is downright prejudice, sheer injustice, and a great sin to regard 
a wicked twice-born man better than a virtuous Sidra, Ifa cow, 
whether it yield milk or not, is cared for by the milkman, the she- 
donkey is equally an object of care for the potter.t Even the illus- 
tration is defective, since the twice-born man and the Shédva belong 
to the human species, whilst the cow and the she-donkey belong to 
two different species—bovine and asinine. Should even an illustration 
from the animal kingdom be partly applicable to human beings, this 
verse cannot be regarded as true by learned men, it being opposed 
to reason, Hiorse-sacrifice and cow-sacrifice not being enjoined by 
the Vedas, their condemnation in the Kaliyuga (iron Yuga) alone 
must surely be regarded as opposed to the Vedas, Ifit is thought 
necessary to condemn these wicked practicesin the Kaliyuga, it 
follows that they are premissible in the other three Vagas (viz, 
Golden, Silver, Bronze ages); but is absolutely impossible that 
such wicked practices should prevail duriag ages * when righteous- 
ness reigned supreme, Again initation into the Order of Sanyds 
finds sanction in the Vedd and other Shdséras, therefore it is foolish 
to interdict it, If indulgence in flesh foods is interdicted (which it 
undoubtedly is), then the prohibition should apply equally to all 
ages. Why should the author of these verses be barking like adog 


> 





1, Donkeys are very often used by potters in India for carryin; ter 
from place to place 7. ote oe 
2, The period covered py Creation is called Brakmadina (God's day), while 
the period covered by Dissoultion is called Brahmaratré (God's night}; Brak- 
mei (God's day) is divided into 1,000 Chafuryugés, each of which is again 
divided into 4 Vagas or ages, these are:— 
n Sat Yuga =1,728,000 years. 
a Dwdfar Yuga=1,296,000 years, 
je Tretd Yaga. = 864,000 years. 
ge Kali Yuga — =4,32;000 years. 
‘The orthodox believe that these Vugas influence the conduct of the human 
race for good or for evil, hence th have gives these Yugas the names of Golden, 
Silver, Bronze and fron respectively. author does not share this view.—Zre 


142 Licut oF TrutTs. [Cuar. IV. 





(é. ¢, indulging in puerile nonsense), when Miyoga is clearly allowed 
by the Veda, If the husband has gone abroad and during his 
absence the wife contracts Viyoge, whose wife will she be regarded 
if the husband (by marriage) return? It may be replied that she 
would belong by right to him who married her. This is perfectly 
right, but this provision is not laid down in the Pardshar Smeriti, 
Are there only five occasions of emergencies on which » woman 
may find it necessary to have recourse to Miyoga ? These occasions 
are more than five in number. Here are some others :— 


1, Prolonged illness of the husband, 
2, Serious differences with the husband, etc., etc. 
The verses like these are, unworthy of belief, 


O.—Well sir! Have you no faith even in what Pardshar says? 

A.—Nothing that is opposed to the Vedas ought to be believed 
in, no matter who has taught it, Moreover, these are not the words 
of Pardshar People write books in the name of eminent men like 
Brahmd, Vasishthd, Rdina, Shiva, Vishnu and Devi so that these 
books, being stamped with the authority of universally esteemed 
great men and women, may be acceptable to the whole world, and 
the real authors (and their successors) may be pecuniarily benefitted 
to a great extent. It is for this reason that they write books replete 
with foolish and mythical stories. Among the Srerities, the Manu 
Smrité alone is authentic, the interpolated verses being excepted. 
What has been said about the Smrities applies with equal force to 
all apocryphal books, 


O.—Is the Order of householders the highest or the lowest of 
Orders ? 
A.—Each of the orders is noble in its own place. Says Manu :— 


« Just as all rivers and rivulets meander till they finda resting 
place in the ocean, so do men of all Orders find pro- 
Manu tection with Aomseholders, The men of no Order can 





Vi 9% properly discharge their duties without the help of 
householders.” 
seat angtrgr: oe arte aries etfeafing | 


a terpeaiice: ere eet after etfeftar nage & | 80H 


Cuap. IV.] Licnt oF TRUTH. 143 





“Asall living creatures subsist by receiving support from air, 
Manu I1!, 77, even so do the men of all Orders subsist by receiving 
support from the householder. Because men of the three 
other Orders—Brakmacharya, Vdnaprastha and Sanyds—are daily 

Hess supported by the householder with gifts of food, &c., 

IH, 78. the Order of honseholders is the most exellent Order, 
in other words it is the pivot upon which the entire A'shsams (Order) 
system turns.” 

The duties of this Order, which cannot be practised by men who 

Manu are cowardly and possess a poor physique, must be 

TIL, 79 faithfully discharged by those who desire uninter- 
rupted happiness in this world and imperishable bliss hereafter.” 

All the concerns of life are, therefore, dependent on the Order of 
householders. \f{ this Order did not exist, the human specics would 
not be propagated, and consequently the Orders of Brahmacharya, 
Vdnaprasth and Sanyds could not be called into existence. Who- 
soever speaks ill of this Order is himself worthy of contempt, but 
whosoever speaks well of it deserves all praise. But be it remem- 
bered that this Order can be fruitful of happiness only when both 
the husband and the wife are contented with each other, are learned 
and energetic, and fully know their duties, The chief causes which 
contribute to the happiness of householders are Brakmacharya and 
marriage by choice of which we have already treated. 


We have thus briefly discoursed on Refurn Home, Marriage 
and Marriage Life inthtsChapter We shall treat of the orders 
of Vdnaprasth and Sanyds in the next. 


THE END OF CHAPTER IV. 





wer ery ennftrer weet ersten: | 

wet queentire geet ee wrtan: ft Ago 1 99 # 

errer terrae qT TET | 

quedity qrokg agrertgncat Tt | 

@ dareah: marver eatengafireeger | 

GW Adega fer Atsarat gdafiad: nage ¥ | wx—w8 b_ 


CHAPTER V. 
oN 


VANAPRASTH AND SANYAS. 


“FIAVING completed his Brahmackaraya, let a man enter 
Grihastha (married life), and thereafter, Vdnaprasth', 
seapele and last of all become a Sanydsi,” This is the 
xiv. consecutive order of the different stages of life. 
“Having thus remained in the Order of householders, \et a 
Manu twice-born man, who had before completed his 
VI, te Brahmacharya, live in a forest with his faith firm aud 
his senses well under control.” . 
“When a house-holder perceives that his muscles have become 
Manu flaccid and his hair gray and even his son has 
VI, a become a father, let him then repair to a forest.” 
“Let him renounce all the good things of towns such as tasty 
Mano dishes, fine clothes, commit his wife to the care of 
Vi, 3 his sons, or take her with him and dwell in a forest.” 


neecahert comer yet ate Tet aT eat ae yee 
sete i were ti te Let 

oe rere? feceer feftrrrereth fier | 

at wet raat corefaxfwafega: it 

Teorey ayr wet gwalaf werner: | 

sraccetey arret aerced srMATAT Hye 1 2, 2a 

eee erate ee’ Sey oftepery | 

gag arat’ Prfger ad weate an 


1, The third stage of life, in which a man leaves off hom is relations, 
etc” lives in a forest or some other such secluded place, cagaged in compl 
tion of Gad and io <7 pereee ee se study of higher subject q 

a a ife wi man begins to 
truth from place to place.— 77. Hagias to preach the gospel of 





Cuap. V.jJ Licut oF Truta. 145 





“Let him take with him all the materials, utensils, etc, of 


Manu Homa, depart from the town, and live in a lonely 
V4 wood with his senses perfectly subjugated.” 

“Let him discharge his Five Great Daily Duties with various 
Manu kinds of food {such as Soma, etc.), green herbs, 
VL roots, flowers, fruits and tubers, and offer the same 


to atithis® and himself subsist on the same.” 

“Let him constantly devote himself to studying and teaching, 

Manu retain a calm mind, be a friend to all, conquer his 

Vi, 8. passion, bestow upon others such gifts as knowledge, 
and be kind to all living beings. Let him not receive gifts from 
others, Thus should he conduct himself.” 

“Let him not be very solicitous for bodily comfort, let him be a 

Mano Brahamchari, that is, abstain from sexual indulgence 

Vi, 26, even if his own wife be with him, sleep on the 
ground, have no inordinate love for his dependents and for his 
belongings, and dwell under a tree.” 

“ Learned men of calm minds, living righteous lives in retire- 
Mundkopa- ment, imbued with the keen desire of knowing and 
nishad, 1--2, embracing the truth, free from all impurities, sub- 

i. sisting on alms, realize the Unchangeable, [mmortal, 
Omnipresent Spirit by the practice of yoga and thereby enjoy true 
happiness.” 

afnitrt amare yet arRaTteqg | 
srerent Pea eH 

graekffertatel: quecqerneet oT 1 

Uenriter Ferner aha i Tyo 1 IY 

wearer reagan: errqreat stor: erarrfte: | 

ere Prerratgren eedyeraerrs: ll Azo ee Hl 

sore gery meraret Werwa: | 

artvernarette Gee hare: tt Jo & 1 RE 

sree a crararere? ore faa: derereal qe 1 
qeaarty 2 flrcom: seria conse: Geel EUOTATET Hl yee 

: baila ota 


1. As described in the iast Chapter — 
2. Missionary guesis—the altruistic teachers of humanity.— Zr, 








146 Lint oF TRUTH. {Cnap. V. 





Thus should a Vénaprasthi pray “ May I, O Lord of Truth! 
¢ having been initiated (into this Order) with the per- 
vane, Min formance of Homa, be able to keep my vows, i.e, be 
truthful in word, deed and thought, and have firm 

faith in Thee.” 

It behoves a Vdmaprasthi, therefore, to be truthful in speech and 
to cultivate other virtues, associate with devout, learned men, and 
thereby acquire knowledge, particularly dfoine—and attain purity 
of mind by the practice of yoga and meditation. 

Thereafter, when he feels desirous of entering the fourth Order, 
i+, 0f Renunciation (Sanyds Ashram), \et him send his wife ? 
back to his sons and become a Sanyds#, 

The subject of Mdnprasth has thus been briefly described, we 
shall now discourse on Saagds or the Order of Renunciation. 

SANYAS ASHRAM 
OR 
THE ORDER OF RENUNCIATION, 

ci Having thus passed the third stage of life—/e., from the fiftieth 
to the seventy-fifth year—as a Vdnuprastis in a forest, 
Jet a man in the fourth stage renounce all connections 
and become a Sanyds#.” 

O.—Is it a sin to become a Saaydsé without going though the 
intermediate stages of Grikasth and Vdnaprasths? 

A.—It is and it is not, 

O.—How can it be both ? 

A.—-Because he who enters into Sanyds in early life, 1 ¢., disect 
from Brakmacharya, and then falls into sensuality, is the greatest 
sinner; but he that falls not is the greatest saint. 


| weartafir fire! wre’ crf 1 
ayaa wad Srtated ate Ahr ae eT 
erate n serra 20 Ho 2 Ii 
ferecctey AERA: 
tic adh lalate 


1. Uf she does not want to enter the Order of Hemunctation— Tr. 


M .nu VI, 33. 


Car. V.j iicut or Trutn. 147 





* Let a man become a Sanydsi on the day he feels free from all 
Brahman worldly desires and affections, no matter whether he 
Granth. is a Vdaprasthi, a Grikasthi or even a Brakmachari.” 
Thus there are three ways of becoming a Sanydsi. The first is the 
consecutive order that has been described before, (¢. ¢, by passing 
througit the first three stages successively). The second is that of 
becoming a Senydsi from Grikasth. The third alternative is that 
of entering Sanrds directly from Brahmcharya, and should be tesort- 
ed to only if the man be one of perfect knowledge with his senses 
and mind under thorough control, free from all sensual desires and 
imbued with extreme desire for doing public good. 
In the Vedes also, the practice of Sansds is allowed in the 
following words—* Let a Srdiman become a Sunaydsi, etc” 
“ But he whose character is low, who is not free from passions, is 
Kath Upani- nota yog? and whose mind is not contented, can never 
shad H, 23 = know God and commune with Him, a Seasdsé 
though he be.” 
Therefore, “let a wise Sanydsi restrain his mind and speech 
_ froin all that is sinful, and apply them to the ac- 
Koy mens quisition of knowledge and the realization of his inner 
Self. Let him use his knowledge, and then devote, 
his enlightened soul to the realization of the All-Calm Supreme 
Being, and find rest in Him.” 
“Let a Brdhman, who is a Sanaydsi, seeing that all the enjoy- 
Moudak ments of this world depend upon deeds, and that the 
U ar et Supreme Spirit being unattainable by deeds, mere 
ar deeds can never lead to His realization, abandon 
love of the world and repair with some kind of present ir, his hand 





Solent sence ox 
wer srrerfer | 
errant weft fresgeasdeqre seri it 
eso | Geet Bi ate 22 It 
woe trent wife, seat fridges Gari 
afierrd’ a qeteiiregy aftentt: sift sgfire 
two [WER i ao WR 


148 Licut o¥ TRUTH. [Crar. V. 





to a preceptor well-versed in the Vedas and wholly devoted to God 
for the acquisition of divine knowledge and the removal of all 
doubts,” 
But let him shun the company of “those ignorance-ridden people 
Mundak who arrogantly consider themselves to be wise and 
Upanishad learned, and being puffed up with vain knowledge 
1,8, go about the world as the blind to the great misery 
of others and themselves,” and of others again who being ignorant 
Mundak believe themselves to have attained the object of 
Upsniahad 11,9. their lives by mere deeds. But since, mere acts or 
deeds do not lead to the realization of God, such 
People immersed in worldliness are afflicted with pain and sorrow, 
and suffer from misery consequent on continual births and deaths.” 
Therefore, “those Sanayasis who are fully convinced of the 
existence of God by the knowledge of the Vedic 
vpn Mantrds velating to Him, and live godly lives, whose 
6, intellects are pure by virtue of the renunciation of 
all worldy enjoyments, who are perfect yog#s with 
thorough control over their senses and minds, enjoy immortality 
and resume the concatenation of births and deaths after a fandat 
cycle? (¢, ¢, when the period of salvation expires).” 
“The embodied soul can never be free from pleasure or pain, 
but when the disembodied soul, being purged of all 
Chhandogya its impurities, lives in the All-pervading God in the 
brane state of Emancipation, pleasures or pains of this 
world can affect it no longer.” 
afrarraret edaen: at dtc: trae: | 
aapuaan: oftatee yar sae ater eae: ht 
Folate xaocy 
after sg vdarn gd earat rafts ere: | 
weafiat a s@qafa come sarge: etyetrengerart 
Fwolseiaocisn 
aqvefierrahiaarat: searetrace: gran: | & 
meray ToTETe Tera aeageafier we t 
Alwo | WE 21 Ho kl 
a &§ ander oa: frofatioeeeeectkt graced 4 
ftrarfiee eywer: h BPto 1 Wo = 1 wo 82 


1, Pardai cycle—311,040,000,000,000 years 


Cuar. V.] Licut or Truti. 149 





“Let a Saayds# renounce all love of fame, love of wealth and 

power and the enjoyments thereof, and love of his 

Shatapath ith and &in, live on alms, and devote himself, day 

ne and night, to all those things that lead to Eternal 
Bliss,” 


“ Let a Brdhman, who has mastered the Vea, perform Prajdpatt 
Yajna—the object of which is the realization of God 
shaararh! —let him abandon all signs of his Ciéess.1 Let his 
Manu VI, 38. vital forces be in place cf the five fires, and Jet him 
renounce all his wealth, and possessions, and there- 

after, leave his home and Lecome a Sanyusi.” 

“Te, who grants exemption from fear to -!l living beings, leaves 
his home and becomes a Senyds/, and thereafter 
devotes himself to the dissemination and preaching 
ofthe divine religion of the Vedds and of other 
Shastrds attains to the state of Eternal Bliss called /wéti.” 

O,—What is the Dharma—duties—of Sanydsis ? 


4.—Dharma, i.e, the practice of righteousness, devotion to 
justice, the acceptance of truth, and the rejection of untruth, obedi- 
ence to the Will of God as revealed in the Veda, and promotion of 
public good, is the same for all Classes and Orders, that is, for all 
mankind ; but the following are the special duties of Sanaydsis :— 


Manu 
VI, 39 


gavqrana faders arheqra egreraa Preraf 
acfPa II Wate | Hfo Wi Mo Y 1 Flo 2 aio LH 

orate frecafe wert adage geet | 

RIG: TINK TT TATETE 

srenvat frecdfr adeerghraty i 
STATA TY! NFAT TET! 

a qeat aehqaer. cqwertd Tere 

ver Siena arnt aah neraTa: Wl Tye & Bet BL Hl 


1, Such asa tuft of hair on the top of his head, and Vajzupfavita—the sacred 
thread, worn across one shoulder aud under the opposite arm-pit. These are 
the two external distinctive signs of a /w/ce-torm man to show that he has been 
born second time through know'edge and spirituality, the first birth being the 
Vhysical birth, Séwdrds—the people belonging to the fourth Class are destitute 
of these two signs, particularly the second. —7?. 





tg0 Licnt or Truts. {Citar. V. 








“Let a Sasydsi keep his eyes to the ground and never look 

Manu hither and thither while he walks ; let him filter! his 

Vi, 46 water before he drinks it ; let him always speak the 
truth, and let him think well before be acts, and thus embrace truth 
and reject falsehood.” 

“If in the course of a discourse or a discussion a man be angry 
with him, let him not in his turn be angry, Even 
though abused, let him say kindly what is goud for 
him ; Jet bim never falsify his speech—which pervades the seven 
openings in the human system, ¢.¢., of the mouth, the nostrils, the 
eyes and the ears”? 


Manu VI, 4p 


“ With his soul composed and centred on the supreme Spirit, 
let him be indifferent to pain and pleasure, abstain 
from meat and intoxicants, seek only spiritual bappi- 
ness,and go about preaching the gospel of truth and enlightening 
the world with the light of knowledge.” 

With his hair, nails, beard and moustache clipped, carrying a 
suitable water-jar and a staff, wearing uchre-coloured 
garments, let him go about with a tranquil mind, 
harming no living soul.” 

“Let him restrain his senses from wicked pursuits, renounce 
affection and hatred, bear no malice to any living 
creature, and work for /semortality.” 


Mana VI, 49 


Manu V1, 52. 


Manu VI, 60, 


Adateten ah 
eS 
sgaerett aftegetqnge: ‘ 

Serremrdet ow a aneerqatlarte i mge 181 ve 8 
sreqrarchercrefiar farcaee Prarfirs: 1 

saresitter erent erarrelt feretfine Wyo 1% Ew! 
quekorereng: ait sara! 

hak ie tacerten rev ta wi 
sPrarat ftrte omarety a! 

sifwerat @ soraraereerrs WEIS | Ae | G1 Go Hf 


1, Literally strain it through a piece of cloth.—7r. 

2. All sensuous impressions reach the sensorium through these seven gate 
ways of knowledge, and whenever it is intended to express to uthers anything 
about these impressions, it is done through the organ of speech. For this reason 
the speech is said to pervade these seven openings.—7r. 





Cuar. VJ Licut oF Trutn. 181 





* Whether “maligned or praised, let a Sanydsé be impartial 
towards all, practise virtue himself and strive to make 
others virtuous. He must bear in mind that the staff, 
the water-jar and the ochre-coloured garments—signs of his Order— 
do not by any means constitute an effective discharge of his duty. 
To elevate the human race by the preaching of truth and the im- 
parting of knowledge and wisdom is the paramount duty of a 
Sanydsi” 

“Though the seeds of a clearing-nut clear muddy water when 
well-powdered and mixed with it, the mere pro- 
nouncing or hearing the name of that nut can never 
do so.” This shows that professions without practice are useless, 

“Let a Sanydsi, therefore, practise systematically, as many 

prdndydmas 1 as he can, meditating on Om—the 
Manu V1, 70. highest name of God—and the védarit#s,2 all the 

while, but let him never practise less than three 
prindydmas, This alone is his highest devotion.” 

“Just as a goldsmith, blowing strongly against a piece of 

impure yold, removes its impurities by oxidation, so 
Maou VI, 71- does prdndydma the blowing of the lungs—remove 
all the impurities of the body and bedily organs by oxidation.” 

“ Let a Sanydsi, therefore, burn away impurities of his senses, 

Manu mind, and soul by the practice of prdadydma, des- 

Vi, 72. troy sin by Déydna, sensual attachments by praty- 
dhdra, and qualities contrary to the nature of God, as joy and 

y, and ignorance by Dhydna, 
qfrarstr atest ow art cat: | 
aan eet aay a fret eretenrcapy u Ayo 1% | RE I 

a SARPTST AUTH TSTT AT | 
as arancie Got ark aati i S18 SO 
srrayraren srereper sari: farftrarceen: 
fate qerea: i rae | 81 90 HI 
gems ora are fe ger we: | 
vafrarat cers Fer: eee ne 


bsastirapltarchesr-dardiaahpa a tLe 

|e ther, Dhé nt Dh " 
tion of ind and 7 meditation ere we Sentes ie Jore=-a system of cuscesira 

2 Vihdritis have been explained in the Grst Chapter.—7>, 


Manu V1, 66. 


Manu VI, 67. 











152 Licst or Trutas. [Caap. V. 





“ By the practice of yoga let him then observe the workings of 
Mann the Omnipresent Omniscient Spirit in all things 
VL73. (low and high), and also df his own soul—which are 
hard to be discerned by the ignorant and by those who are not 
yogis.” 
“It is Sanydsis alone who can attain final beatitude in this 
world, by abstinence from malice towards all senti- 
vote ent creatures, and renunciation of all sensual enjoy- 
ments, by doing righteous deeds ordained by the 
Vedas, and by devotion, and none others.” 
“ Only when a Sdaydsé gives up all desire for earthly things, 
Manu and is pure in thoughts and feelings towards alt 
VI, 80. things, subjective and objective, he obtains true 
happiness that endures after death.” 
“ It therefore, behoves, all—Bruhmachdris, Grihasthis, Vdnapras- 
Manu this and Sanydsis—to follow assiduously the right 
VI, ot conduct of life which has ten chief characteristics :— 
“1, The cultivation of firmness of mind and contentment, 
2, The cultivation of the spirit of forgiveness under all circum- 
Manu stances— whether one be censured or praised, honour- 
VI, 92, ed or dishonoured, etc, 
3. Devotion of mind to virtue and abstinence from sin and vice, 
that is, refraining from the entertainment of sinful thoughts even 
for one moment. 


serray qag gwarparcrfit: | 

sarrtette ctrety oferrenracram: il qo 1k 1 RN 
afcatPrrreatt tte eatin | 
auaaretaiiteararedte tere ft AZo 1&1 94. I 
ore are wate eeareg Peeqe: | 

BA ere Fer Ge ee ETAT | Hye 1%) co | 
seer firetty SRA Gererrerf PRED: | 

qerereye wal: Qfterer: srerwrer: il Ao 1 & | 82 1 
gfe: wan qitsetd SraftrPxatiere: | 

ifthe cermin que alee W Aye (41 88 1 











Cuap, V.] Licut or Tuts. 1$3 


4. Honesty——The acquisition of a thing without the permission 
of its owner, or through fraud, hypocrisy, or breach of faith, or by 
teaching falsely, or in any other way that is condemned by the 
Vedas, is called dishonesty or theft ; the reverse of it is called honesty. 


3. Purity or cleanliness—bodily and mental, Mental purity 
consists in freedom from inordinate love or hatred, from prejudice 
or injustice, etc, Bodily cleanliness consists in keeping the body 
clean with water, earth, etc. ? 

6. Direction of the senses in the path of rectitude and freedom 
from sin. 

7. Development of one's intellect by abstaining from” intoxicants 
and other articles that are prejudicial to its growth, from the 
company of the wicked and from sloth, negligence, etc, and 
by using things possessing healthful properties, associating with 
men of noble character, and by the practice of yoga, 

8. The acquisition of correct knowledge of all things—from 
earth® to God—and its proper application. In other words, to 
know a thing as it is, to speak of it as it is in the mind, and to act 
upon what is spoken, constitutes correct knowledge; the reverse 
of it is ignorance. 

9. Truthfulness is the harmony of thought, word and deed, 

10. Freedom from wrath and other evil habits, and the cultivation 
of calmness of mind and other good qualities, 

Let all follow this ten-fold right conduct of life justly and im- 
partially, It is the duty of Sanydsés in particular, to follow this 
right conduct of life, as enjoined by the Vedas, and help others to do 
the same through teaching and preaching.” 

“Thus having freeed himself, by degrees from all evil associa- 





Manu tions, and from joy and sorrow and the like, a 
Vi, 81 Sanydsé rests in the All-pervading God.” 
seater Firftcen: eeticerreert etereer wih gt: | 


entarattefing’ et meraterefied Wyo 1&1 ct 


x. Dry earth is a very popular disinfectant with the Indians of all classes —7¥, 


2. The earth the grossest form of matter, while God is the subtlest of all; 
therefore, the expression ‘ross carth fo God is used to include all entities 
material and spiritual.—7Zy. 


$54 Lionr oF fruti. [Cuas. ¥, 








Let all Saxydsss, therefore, enlighten minds of Gréhesthis and 
others on all questions, remove their doubts, free them from (the 
fetters of) all kinds cf unrighteous conduct, and help them to 
follow the path of rectitude, This alone is the bounden duty of 
Sanydses, 

O.—Have Brdhmans the exclusive right of entering into Saqpdsa, 
ox can ather Classes Kashatriyds and others a)so do the same? 

A.—Brdhmans alone bave this privilege. He alone among all 
the four Classes is called a Brdkman whose knowledge is perfect, 
who is most virtuous, and who is bent on doing public good. To 
enter into Sanydsa, without the acquisition of perfect knowledge 
and firm faith in Truth and God, and without the renunciation of 
all earthly things, cannot be productive of any good to the world, 

Hence it is that it is a common saying that a Brdhwen alone 

‘Mand enjoys the privilege of entering into Sesaydsa and 

VI, 97. not others, Here is the testimony of the sage Manu 
on this point. Says he “O 2éshis (sages) ! this fourfold duty' of a 
Brdhman has been made known to you. It leads to true happiness 
in this life and to eternal bliss in the next. Next hear fram me the 
duties of Kshastriyds—the governing class.” Itis clear then that 
to enter into Sanydsais the chief privilege of Brdkmands, whilst 
entering into Brakwmacharya and other Orders that of Kskatriya and 
other Classes as well. 

O.—Where is the necessity of Sanydsa ? 

4—As the head is necessary for the body, so is Senydsa for 
other Orders, since without it there can be no advancement in 
knowledge and righteousness. Persons belonging to other Orders, 
being engaged in house-hold work and in devotional practices can- 
not have much leisure. Besides it is very difficult for people be- 
longing to other Orders to be altogether !mpartial in their 
dealings, nor can they equal a Senpdst, he being free from all 
worldly ties, in doing public geod. Men of other Orders eannot 
get so much time as a Sonydsi who possnmes a true knowledge of 
all things to clevate the people by enlightening them an all subjects, 
But the amount of good that those who enter into Sanyds directly 

ach Ne il a 


ee ahsfifich wat srgrqer wqfta: | 
getrswenan fer create, Mittens ayo 8100 
1e—That is of Brakmcharja, Grikasth, Vanoprasth and Sanyds. 


Cuar. Y.} Licar oF Tauts, 155 





from Brakmacharya can do by the teaching and preaching of truth 
can never be done by those who enter into it from Gréhasth or 
Vduaprasth. 


O.—Is not Saxyds against the design of God, because He in- 
tended men to multiply. If people never married, there would be 
no progeny, Sanydsa being the Chief Order were all men to enter 
into it, the whole human race would become extinct, 


A—Well, do you not see many people childless ‘even though 
married? Are not children lost through death? This would also 
be against the intention of God. But if you say ‘A man is not to 
blame if he does not achieve his end even after trying his best,’ 
we answer that many young men in Grihasth fight with each other 
and get killed. What a heavy loss is this to the community ? 
The pervertion of intellect is the cause of many a quarrel. When 
a Sanydsi, by the preaching of the right conduct of life as enjoined 
by the Vedas, will create harmony ard love among people 
and nations hostile to one another, he will be the saviour of hund- 
reds and thousands of lives, and thus will, like thousands of Gri- 
Aasthis, be the cause of the increase of population. Resides, at] men 
can never enter into Seayds, because all can never be free from 
sensual desires, The people, converted by a Sanydsi from wicked. 
ness into living righteous lives, may justly be considered his 
children. 


O.—Sanydsis say that they have no duties to perform, They 
accept necessaries of life as food, clothes, etc., from house-holders 
and enjoy the pleasures of the world. Why should they ‘ bother 
their heads’ with this world of ignorance? They believe themselves 
to be Brakma (God) and are contented. If another perton ask a 
question on the subject, they tell him the same thing, # ¢, that he 
also is God, that sin and virtue cannot influence the soul, because, 
the perception of heat and cold is the function of the body, hunger 
and thirst that of the nervauric forces, and pleasure or pain that of 
the mitid. The world is but an illusion and so are the aflairs of 
the world. Therefore it is not wise to be entangled in them, Vir- 
tue and vice are the functions of the senses and mind, uot of the 
soul, They teach these and similar other things, whilst you have 
taught differently on the duties of Senydsis, Which ofthese shall 
we belicve to be true and which false? 


156 LIGHT OF TRUTH. [Cuap. V. 





4.—Is it not their duty to do even good deeds? Mark! what 
Mann says, “By doing virtuous deeds, ordained by the Vede, 
Sanydsis enjoy Eternal Bliss.” It is clear then that according to 
Mans, the Vedic deeds—the practice of righteous conduct—are 
indispensible even by Sanydsis, Can they do without food and 
clothing (and such other necessaties of life)? If they cannot, why 
is it not a degrading and sinful act on their part to leave off the 
practice of virtuous deeds? They accept food and dress and other 
necessaries of life from house-holders, while they do them no good 
in return, Are they not the greatest sinners then? Just as it is 
useless to have eyes and ears, if you cannot see or hear with them, 
likewise those Sanydsis who do not preach the truth, nor study nor 
teach the Vedas and other Shdstras are a mere burden to the com- 
munity, Those who say and write, that they cannot be troubled 
with this world of ignorance, are themselves mendacious and ignor- 
ant. They are the cause of the increase of sin and are therefore 
the greatest sinners. Whatever act is done by the body and the 
bodily organs, is prompted by the soul which alone, therefore, 
sufiers or enjoys the fruits thereof, Those, who declare that the 
human soul is one with God, are sleeping the heavy sleep of ignor- 
ance, because the human soul is finite, and possesses limited know- 
lege, whilst God is Infinite, Omnipresent and Ominiscient. Again, 
God is Eternal, Holy, All-intelligent and Free by nature, whilst the 
human soul is sometimes free, at other times not. God, being 
Omni-present and Omniscient, cannot be subject to doubt or ignor- 
ance, whilst the human soul is sometimes ignorant, at other times 
wise, God, again, does not suffer from birth and death, whilst the 
human soul does, Their teachings are, therefore, false. 


O.—Sanydsis are those who bave renounced all deeds, they are 
never to touch fire and precious metals. Is this true or not? 


4A—No. He, who is in communion with God and possesses 
that holy nature by which all wicked deeds are renounced is called 
a Sanydss, in other words, he who practises good deeds and eradi- 
cates sin and vice is a Sanydsi, 


O.—Teaching and preaching are done by ponse;bolders where 
then is the necessity for Sanyds. 

A.—Let all men and women in all Orders or stages of life 

teach and preach as much as they. can, but house-holders cannot 


Cuap. V.j Licnt or TRoTH, 157 





get as much time nor be as impartial as Senpdsis, It is true that 
it is the duty of Brdsmans to teach and preach—men to teach men, 
and women to teach women. It is simply impossible for a Grihashti 
to get the time a Sanydsz can, to travel about. Besides it is Sanyds? 
who restrain Bradmans from deviating from the path of rectitude as 
declared by the Vedas, Sanydsis, therefore, are a necessity. 


O—A Sanydsi should not stay more than one night at one 
place, Is this true? 


A.—It is true in one sense; because by staying altogether in 
one place, a Saaydsi cannot do much public good. He is liable 
to get attached toa place and begin to love and hate (things and 
persons therein). But if a Sanydsé cando more good by staying 
at one place, let him do so, as in the past, such Sampdsis as Panch- 
shikka stopped with the king Janak for even four months, and 
others for years. As about this rule of not staying long in one 
place, it has also been framed by hypocritical sectarians, for (they 
are afraid that), if a Sazydsé would stay long at one place, he would 
expose their fraud, and thus put a stop to its further increase, 

O.—* Whosoever gives gold to a Sanyasi shall go to hell.” 
Now what do you say to this? 

A.—This again is the invention of extremely selfish, orthodox, 
sectarians—the enemies of Clas es and Orders. They know that 
were a Sanydsi to get money, it would greatly help him to expose 
their fraud. They would thus suffer and consequently no longer 
be able to keep him under their jurisdiction, Should charity 
remain under their control, Sanydsis would naturally fear them. 
When it is considered good to give gifts to the ignorant and selfish 
people, how can there be any harm in giving them to the learned 

wis altruistic Sanydsis? Says Mans,“ Let a man give 

11,6 Sanydsis present of precious stones and gold,” 

Besides, the verse quoted above by you is absurd, 
because, if by giving gifts of gold to a Sanydsi the donor goes to 
hell, by giving silver, diamonds and precious stones, he may go to 
heaven, 





adtat eral qurersqat merenfteer | 
drerquret qaree at areal gate 


Fecfrerrfic er cerrfy fry Sqraratey a ayo NTR) O LE 


198 Liout or Trurs. (Cuar,-V, 





O.~The aforesaid verse was wrongly quoted by mistake, it 
runs like this that “by putting gifts in the Aands of a Sanpdsi, the 
donor goes to hell. 

A—This is again the invention of at ignorant mind. “Ifa 
man goes to hell by placing gifts in the hands of a Sasydsi, should 
he put them on his fect or offer in a bag, he may go to heaven, 
Let no man, therefore, believe in such fabrications, It is true 
though that if a Senydsi? keep more money than he needs, he will 
be troubled by the fear of thieves and be liable to get greedy 
and so on. But whosoever is learned and wise would do nothing 
objectionable, nor would he get engrossed in worldly possessions, 
because, whilst in married life or in student Ilfe, he has enjoyed all 
these pleasures or has observed them, and found them of no sub- 
stantial good, If he has become a Saapds? directly from student 
life and is free from all worldly desires, he would never allow him- 
self to be infatuated by these things. 

O—lIt is said that if a Saxydst be invited to a Skdrdka,* the 
spirits of the forefathers of the host run away from the place and 
fall into hell, Is this true? 

A.—In the first place, the coming of the spirits of the dead to 
a Shdrdka or receiving the foods and drinks that are offered to the 
priests, is an impossibility, being opposed to the teachings of the 
Vedas, as wellas to reason, Who will run away then when they 
do not come to the Sérddka? How can the coming back of the 
manes be possible when all souls after death are reborn according to 
the nature of their deeds and the laws of God? This false doctrine 
again is the invention of selfish orthodox priests and Vatrdgees.* 
It is true though that wherever Sanydsés will go, this fraud of the 
Shradh of the dead, which is opposed to the Veda, will immediatley 
disappear. 

O—He who enters Sanyds directly from Brakmacharya will 
never be able to contol himself as it is a very difficult thing to keep 
the sensual desires under restraint. Therefore, it is best to enter 
the Order of Sanyds in old age when a man has passed through ths 
Onder of householders and of Vandprastha. 


1, Iisa feast tothe ho claim that the spirite of 
the freaters of are nt canals of what is cdored wo them threcgk thet 
iaa—Zr, 
1% A sect of religions mendicasin—7hr 





Cuay, V¥) Licut or Taurs. 199 








- A-—Let him not, who cannot contro} his passions, enter into 
Sanjds from Brakwackarya, But why should not he who can 
restrain them? He, who has thoroughly realized the evils of sen- 
sual gratification and the advantage of the preservation of the 
reproductive clement, can never be lascivious. His reproductive 
element serves as fuel to the fire of thought. In other words, it is 
used up in carrying on intellectual processes. As the healthy can 
dispense with doctors and drugs, so should a man or woman, 
whose one object in life is to disseminate knowledge, advance true 
religion and do good to tht world’at large, dispense with marriage 
life like Kanchshikha and Gdrgi of yore, 

Therefore, those alone are entitled to become Sawydsis who are 
fit for this high office, and no others, If an unfit person were to 
enter Sanyasa, he would sink himself and drag others down with 
him. 

As a Sdwrdd Raja is a universal sovereign, soisa Sanydsi 
Pavivird?, ¢.¢.,a universal teacher or the teacher of humanity, But 
a sovereign is only respected in his own country and amongst his 
own kinsmen, while a Sanyasi is honoured everywhere. Says 
Bridk Chanik, “ There can be no comparison between a king and 
man of learning, since the one is respected in his own country, 
whilst the other is respected everywhere,” 

To recapitulate briefly the duties of the four Orders — 

Brakmacharya (or the 1st stage of life) is meant for perfecting 
one’s body and acquiring knowledge and culture, 

Grikastha (or the 2nd stage of life) is for the pursuit of useful 
occupation and professions, etc, 

Vdprasth (or the 3rd stage of life) for meditation, concentra- 
tion of mind on obtruse subjects, perfection of character 
and acquisition of divine knowledge. 

Sanydsa (or the 4th stage of life) is meant for disseminating 
knowledge of the Veda and the Skastras, practising virtue 
and renouncing vice, preaching the gospel of truth and 
dispelling doubts and ignarance of the people, But all 
those who do not discharge the most important duties of 








aged  aaed  de ged qe | 
etd Was cen rare ole Gea 


160 Licet or TRUTH. [Cuap. Vv. 





Sanydsa, such as the preaching of truth and righteousness, 
are the most degraded wretches, and will go to hell, 
Therefore, it behoves Sanyasis to devote themselves assi- 
duously to the preaching of truth and enlightening the 
minds of the people who are in doubt, to the studies of the 
Vedas and the Sanydsis and the propagation of the Vedic 
religion, thereby promote the good (physical, social, mental 
and spiritual) of the whole world. 

O.~ Should mendicants other than Sanpdsis such as Vasrdgees, 
Khakees, etc., be ranked as Sanyds# or not ? 

A.—No ; they do not possess even one characteristic of a 
Sanydsi. They follow anti-Vedic creeds, respect the words of the 
exponents of their sects more than the Vedas, sing the praises of 
their own creed, are involved in false practices, further their selfish 
ends, and ensnare others into their respective creeds and cults, Let 
alone doing any good to the world, they, instead, mislead people and 
bring about their fall and accomplish their own selfish ends, They 
have, therefore, no right to be ranked in the Order of Sanydsa but 
on the other hand, their Order can justly be entitled the Onder of 
selfish creatures, This admits of no doubt. 

O.—Those alone deserve to be called Sanydsis and great souls 
who walk in the path of rectitude and help others to do the 
same, promote their own happiness as well as that of the whole 
world here and hereafter. 


Thus we have briefly discoursed on the Order of Sanyas, 
In the next Chapter we shall treat of the Science of Govern- 
ment, 


THE END oF CHAPTER V. 


OHAPTER VI 
ON 
RAJA DHARAMA 


OK 


THE SCIENCE OF GOVERNMENT. 


(THE great Mans says to the Rsshis', “ After discoursing on the 
duties of the four Classes and the four Orders, we shall now 
describe Rdja Dharama or the duties and qualifications, etc, of 
Rulers, in other words, we shall discuss as to who 
viens: is fit to be a king, how he is to be selected, and how 
uy he can attain the Aighest diéss---salvation. Let a 
Kshairiya, whose knowledge, culture and piety are as perfect as 
those of a Brdhman, govern the country with perfect justice”, in 
the following way :— 


(God teaches), “Let there be for the benefit of the rulers and 
the ruled three Assemblies—1. Religious. 2. Legislative. 3. 
. Educational. Let each discuss and decide subjects 
iE we that concern it, and adorn all men with knowledge, 
culture, righteousness, independence, and wealth, 

and.thereby make them happy.” 


cranrait xquanfir carget wteye: | 

etaaz cut wen ferfaer gor cat t 

wrah ariterefernre afiritey qerrfefie | 

aderer corerd weet otcgay Ago 91 81 8H 
SHY cromen fate gefy TE floehie EeT: 


“ eaatits Wao RoR qe Rclweo Ril 


te The Rishés of sages who. went to Mase to beg him to discourse upon 
the duties of man, etc., for their beneit—Z>. 





162 Lictit of Trurit. (Crar.-VE 





“Let the three Assemblies, Military Councils, and the Army 
Atharva harmoniously work together to carry on the govern- 
XV, 259 2 ment of a country.” 


“Aking should address the Assembly thus :—Let the leader 
‘Acharya Of the Assembly abide by the just laws passed by 
XIX, 7.55.6. the Assembly, and Jet other members do the same.” 
it means that no single individual should be invested with 
absolute power. The king, who is the president of the Assembly, 
and the Assembly itself should be inter-dependent on each other. 
Both should be controlled by the people, who in their turn should 
be governed by the Assembly, 

If this system be not followed and the king be independent of 

the people and have absolute power, “ He would impoverish the 

Shatpatha people,—being despotic and hence arrogant ~and 
oppress them, aye, even eat them up, just as a tiger or 
any other carnivorous animal pounces upon a robust 
animal and eats it up, A despotic ruler does not let any one else 
grow in power, robs the rich, usurps their property by unjust punish- 
ment, and accomplishes his selfish end, One man should, therefore, 
never be given despotic power.” 

“Omen! Let that man alone among you be made a king—the 
Atharva President of the Assembly—who is a very powerful 
Veda |, conqueror of foes, is never beaten by them, has the 

capacity to become the paramount sovereign, is 
most enlightened, is worthy of being made a President, who pos- 
sesses most noble qualities, accomplishments, character and dispo- 


af qa a after Gert nl wat onwto Winge 
RimslHoR 
eat gai? aft & = aan egret 1 on ate 
wto t21mgoelTowilto ki 
rede frxarefier ceraret fed eas: | firgte crerarat 
entafes crermrett fiegarfer a ge cay seer ef u ere wife 2) 
WoRIMTOAPovlan 
eaten aed sat frat og cant i ada 
ted evdeargeet age! aden wed ol we 81 
wgote|Totcitoz 


Brabman 
XU, 2 3 78. 





Cuap, V1) Licut oF TRUTH. 163 





sition ; who ia thoroughly worthy of the homage, trust and respect 
of all,” 

“Oye learned men! Proclaim that man with one voice your 
king—the President and Head of the State—who is 
just, impartial, well-educated, cultured and friend 
of all, In this way alone shall ye attain universal 
sovereignity, be greater than all, manage the affairs of the State, 
obtain political eminence, acquire wealth, and rid the world of its 
enemies.” 

God teaches in the Veda, “Rulers! your implements of war- 
fare, (such as, guns, rifles, bows, arrows, etc.) and 
war-materials (such as, gunpowder) be werthy of 
praise, strong and durable to repel and conquer your 
enemies, Let your army be a glorious one, so that you may always 
be victorious, But the aforesaid things shall not be attainable to the 
contemptible, the despicable, and the unjust.” In other words, it 
is only as long as men remain honourable, just and virtuous that 
they are politically great, When they become wicked and unjust, 
they are absolutely ruined. 

Let a nation, therefore, elect the most /earned men, as members of 
the Educational Assembly, the most devout men, as members of the 
Religious Assembly and men of the most praiseworthy character, as 
members of the Legislative Assembly ; and let that great man in it, 
who possesses most excellent qualities, is highly accomplished, and 
bears most honourable character, be made the Head or President 
of the Political Assembly. 

Let the three Assembires harmoniously work together, and make 
good laws, and let all abide by those laws, Let them all be of one 
mind in affairs that promote the happiness of all. All men should 
subordinate themselves to the laws that are calculated to promote 
general well-being; they should be free in matters relating to 
individual well-being. 


crea wageegred aad ward weet sted aga 
wotererrtetentrard fay © ll Wo & | to vo 
feo qrerg'ar cert’ ete, ga afte?’ gore 


ee a ae Wonsoti go rey 
og 


Yajur Veda 
|X, 40. 


Rig Veda I, 
2 


164 Licut oF TRUTH. (Cuar, VI. 


QUALIFICATIONS OF THE HEAD OF THE STATE. 


“ He should be as powerful as electyicity ; a3 dear to his people's 
hearts as their very drrath, able to read the inmost 
wee 7. _ thoughts of others, and just in his dealings as a 
fudge, He should enlighten people's minds by the 
spread of knowledge, justice, and righteousness, and dispel ignorance 
and injustice as the s#n illuminates the world. He should be like 
one who consumes wickedness like fire, keeps the wicked and the 
criminal under control like a jailer, gladdens the hearts of the good 
like the moon; makes the country rich and prosperous, as a éres- 
suver keep his treasury full; is powerful and majestic like the sxw, 
keeps the people in fear and awe; and on whom no one in the 
whole world dares to look with a stem eye, He alone is then fit 
to be the Head of the State who is like jive, air, the swx, the moon, 
ajudge, a treasurer, a gaoler in keeping the wicked under control, 
and like electricity in power.” 
THE TRUE KING. 
“The Law alone is the real king, the dispenser of justice, the 
Manu disciplinarian. The Law is considered as the surety 
antl, 19, for the four Classes and Orders to discharge properly 


3h their respective duties. The Law alone is the true 
Govemor that maintains order among the people. The Law alone 





arsfintafe anger Ste: Aer o witez | 

STR TIS Taw waren kh AFoousles on 
@ cle Jet qaee der eiftrat  &: | 
equianrargt © ter sftrq: era: Zo OH tol 
wan afte aw: eat que cerfircefe | 

qee: gay aries que wt feggan nyo ol ten 
edhe: & gen arg cet cafe ar | 

srerefter sefereg ferergefe eater tl yo Ow RE Ht 

yg ateqie fricadgen | 

edgitesrtranr atqueer frag Way © 01 WH 


Onap, V1J Lieut or Taura. 865 








is their Protector. The Zaw keeps awake whilst all the people are 
fast asleep, The wise, therefore, look upon the Zaw alone as 
Dharma or Right. When rightly administered the Lew makes alt 
men happy but when administered wrongly, «, ¢, without due regard 
for the requirements of justice, it ruins the king. All the four 
Classes would become corrupt, all order would come to an end, 
there would be nothing but chaos and corruption if the Law were 
not properly enforced. Where the Law—which is likened unto a 
fear-inspiring man, black in colour and with red eyes—striking fear 
into the hearts of the people and preventing them from committing 
crimes, rules supreme, there the people never go astray, and conse- 
quently live in happiness if it be administered by a just and learned 
man, Healone is considered a fit person to administer the Zaw 
by the wise, who invariably speaks the truth, is thoughtful, highly 
intellectual and very clever in the attainment of virtue, wealth and 
righteous desires, The Law rightly administered by the king greatly 
promotes the practice of virtue, acquisition of wealth and secures 
the attainment of the heart-felt desires ofhis people, But the same 
Law destroys the king who is sensual, indolent, crafty, malevolent, 
mean and low-minded. 

Great is the power and majesty of the Zew. It cannot be 
administered by a man who is ignorant and unjust, It surely 
brings the downfall of the king who deviates from the path of 
rectitude, 


am eearatt Sirfceret qewarehe areer i 

arene + Hufts tat Qeang weal Wyo 8) WI 
weary: agate cart qereanftery | 

i ee 
drt syqrerg, freter Prete 

maa hen Ghanhe ahr eaitel 
quar ft greed gdcangarafn | 

waitfirefert afta Serer tag oo 1 28 
Pinkehetaph a ranthtate 

Wr peat saree Agere Aatty wi wy 0-8} Rot 
after aecavia eer arergerfter | 

Sod arene eee: gear fret aay 0:9.1 20a 








166 Licut or Truru. [Cnap. VI, 





The Law can never be justly administered by a man who ie 
destitute of learning and culture, has no wise and good men to 
assist him, and is sunk in sensualism. He alone is fit to administer 
the Law—which is another name for justiceo—who is wise, pure in 
heart, of truthful character, associates with the good, conducts 
himself according to the law and is assisted by the truly good and 
great men in the discharge of his duties.” 


CHIEF OFFICES, 


“The four chief Offices—Commander-in-Chief of the forces, 
Manu Head of the Civil Government, Minister of Justice, 
XI, 100, and the Supreme Head of all—the king—should be 
HO-H15- held only by those persons who are well-versed in 
all the four Vedas and the Shdstras, are conversant with all the 
sciences and philosophies, devout, and have perfect control over 
their desires, passions, and possess a noble character. 

Let no man transgress that law which has been passed by an 
Assembly of ten men learned and wise, or at the very least of three 
such men. This Assembly must consist of members who are well- 
versed in the four Vedas, keen logicians, masters of language, and 
men conversant with the science of religion, they must belong to 
the first three Orders—Brahmdcharya, Grihastha and Vdnaprastha, 

Let no man transgress what has been decided by even an 
Assembly of three men who are scholars of the Aig Veda, the 
Yajur Veda and the Sama Veda respectively, 


Sereed @ cet we qeehqeete | 
endaverfrred w Sepurefircete u 

qerecr at aftwet wt cfteerte y 

owarcr aft great & eat a firerete o 

Rfet taneret teat wefares: | 

smexarrertre: Te TEL TTMTTET aye Ii Loo 1Llo 1 WA 
seeqfregiter eraqftte 71 

sare efteagtar wsteheraiiede k ary © 1.288 

warfare finest ¢ exwetty figdtves: | 

& fate: cer wat armrmegftaesgh: bye 181 UA 





Char, Vij Licut or Trutit. 167 








Even the decision of one Sanydss, who is fully conversant with 
all the four Vedas and is superior to all the twice-born (Dwéjas) 
should be considered of the highest authority. But let no man 
abide by the decision of myriads of ignorant men, 


Even a mecting-of thousands of men cannot be designated an 
Assembly, \f they be destitute of such high virtues as self-control 
or truthful character, be ignorant of the Vedas and be men of ‘no 
understanding like the Skudrds, 

Let no man abide by the law laid down by men who are alto- 
gether ignorant, and destitute of the knowledge ‘of the Veda, for 
whosoever obeys the law propounded by ignorant fools falls into 
hundreds of kinds of sin and vice." Therefore, let not ignorant 
fools be ever made members of the aforesaid three Assemblies— 
Political, Educational and Religious, On the other hand let learned 
and devout persons only be elected to such high offices. 


QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS OF THE POLITICAL 
ASSEMBLY. 

“Those men alone are fit to fill such high offices, as of the 

President or a member of the Political Assembly, 

Vil ass. who have learnt the three kinds of knowledge, of 

good deeds and their practice, of elevation of mind 

by meditation, and contemplation of abstruse subjects, and of that 

superior wisdom that results from the first two—from the scholars 

of the four Vedas,—the true system of Government, the science of 

Logic, the Divine science which consists of the knowledge of the 

nature, character and attributes of God and the arts ofelocution and 

debate, Let all members and leaders always walk in the path of 








sqererrrrenret wefearitret eens, | 

EET: Gite oftwrest at fra by © 21 Le Hl 

at aghe stra get winete: | 

areard Mee aeet amTo Wi WN 
indeed aa cocci 

srefiteet erafiat erefcraiar are i ayo» 1 v2 t 
fqatet a Stet ernie eerie! 

feet fe erect way errefied aT: Wage v | ve A 


1@ Lioat or Trure. {Cuar, Wi. 


rectitude, keep the senses under perfect control and keep aloof from 
sin, Let them always practise yoga, and meditate on God morning 
and evening, for, he who cannot control his mind and senses~-which 
are subjects of the soul—can never keep the people under control. 

Let a man, therefore, most diligently shun (and help others to.do 
the same) eighteen vices—vices from which a man once entangled 
into them can hardly escape—ten of which proceed from /ovs of 
Pleasure and eight from anger, 

A king addicted to vices arising /rom the love of pleasure \pses 
his kingdom, wealth and power and even his character. Whilst 
one who is addicted to vices arising from anger may even lose his 
life, The fen vices proceeding from /ove of pleasure are :— 

(1) Hunting, (2) gaming—playing with dices, gambling, etc,, (3) 
sleeping by day, (4) gossiping or talking of sensual subjects, (5) 
excess with women, (6) use of intoxicants such as alcohol, opium, 
cannabis Indica and its products, etc., (7) excessive indulgence in 
singing, playing and dancing or hearing and seeing other people do 
80, (8) and useless wandering about from place to place. 

The vices that proceed from anger are -— 

(t) Tale-bearing, (2) violence, such as outraging another man’s 
wife, (3) Malevolence, (4) Envy i. ¢., mortification excited by the sight 
of another person's superiority or success, (5) detraction from one's 
character, (6) expenditure of money, etc., for sinful purposes, (7) 
saying unkind or hard words, (8) infliction of punishment without 
any offence. 

Let him assiduously shun se//-/ove that all wise men hold to be 
the root of all evils that are born of the Jove of pleasure and anger, 
Mt is through the /ove of se/f that a man contracts all these vices. 





a Sverre arenes mnie et 

ererarfiy qevernfic srreter fireaitey argo 8 | UY 
wareaty meet FE exerttg aeftete: 1 

faqurdsdaatvat stesterreathr gu myo 8 | 4h 
aqraret fqren: efterg: fextt aq | 
ee ee 
Qype ene’ ste 

qrequeel @ erent chee yeast 


Cuar, VI) Lsornt or TaurTe. 169 





The use of intoxicants, gaming, excess with women, and hunt- 
ing—these four are the most pernicious vices that arise from the 
love of pleasure. 

infliction of punishment without offence, the use of slanderous 
language, the expenditure of money for unrighteous purposes— 
these three are the great vices born of anager that bring extreme 
suffering on the possessor thereof. 

Out of these seven vices proceeding from the dove of pleasure 
and anger the one preceding is worse than the one following, 
In other words, the use of slanderous language worse than the 
abuse of money, punishing the innocent worse than the use of 
slanderous language. Hunting is worse than punishing the inno- 
cent, excess with women worse than hunting, and the use of intoxt- 
cants worse still. 

Tt is certain that it is better to die than to be addicted to vices, 
since the longer a wicked man lives, the more sins he will commit 
and consequently lower and Jower will he sink and thereby the 
more will hesuffer. Whilst he who is free from vices enjoys hap- 
piness even if he dies.” 

Therefore, it behoves all men, especially the king, to keep 
aloof from hunting, drinking, and other vices, and, instead, to 
develop a good character and a noble disposition, and to devote 
themselves to the practice of virtuous deeds, 


atretatriet ¢ ort swat firg: | 

at wate witetret rartanget ret 0 argo 9 188 

werner: fragke qe = gener | 

qerneedt ravers ert Te Haye 91 0k 

qewes rea de erqareerdged t 

wreath re fraremetafees eat HATO 81 ¥L 
aawenrer qheq eittergefier: | 

Week gerd feergwerqrerert HAG oo 1 Ue H 

ererey @ qetrar erent qyqead | 

exerts quate erglecewerdt qe A Tyz-° 81 UR 





yo Licut or TRUTH. (Citar. Vi, 





THE QUALIFICATIONS OF MINISTERS AND MEMBERS 
OF ASSEMBLIES. 

“Let a king appoint seven or eight good, righteous and 

pao clever ministers who are natives of the country, are 

S457, 60~62, thoroughly conversant with the Vedes and the 

64. Shkastrds, are very brave and courageous, whose 

judgment seldom errs, who come from good families and are well- 
tried men, 

Even an act easy in itself becomes difficult to be accomplished 
by a man when single-handed. How much more so then, is the 
great work of the government of a country by a man single- 
handed. It is, therefore, a most dangerous thing to make one 
man a despotic ruler, or entrust a single man with the sole manage- 
ment of the affairs of the State. 

Let the Head of a State, then, constantly consult with his 
clever and learned ministers on the aftairs of the State, such as 
(1) Peace, (2) War, (3) Defence—quietly protecting his own country 
against a foreign attack and waiting for an opportunity, (4) Offence, 
&¢, attacking a wicked enemy when he finds himself strong 
enongh to do, (5) proper management of the internal affairs of the 
State, the exchequer and the Army ; (6) Pacification of the newly 

Srareqrefeg: ucteerecerary GergTaTT | 

efwrarrerr erat or scgeiter wether il rz o 8 1 Ue A 

safe caged wal eqctty gency | 

fedetiseerta fry cet ere ayo 81 WY It 

&: ent Rewtivet sere afar | 

erat eeged aff wean & Margo 81 YE I 

at ef aaftonaquaes ug TE! 

arenrate sretg frpenfxermrara: i 

arraft ogee gett orerrefteas | 

i 


eqourderareg rarer Tether 
firdsteres overghrftfrecter argftr: | 
devad Prgwte ure diosa 

EPL TUL 
getrrecante sfterafitat i mg ec 91 191 to—82 & 
vt &e ngdia atoraftrrery: 
fevered gfe qu gergranr fag oot We 8 





Cuap. VI.) LIGHT oF TruTH. 178 


conquered countries by freeing them from all kinds of disturbance. 
Let him daily reflect on the six subjects, 

Having ascertained the individual opinion of each of his 
ministers and other members of the Assembly, let him abide by 
the decision of the majority and do what is beneficial for him as 
well as for others, 

Let him likewise appoint other ministers who are men of groat 
integrity, highly intellectual, of resolute minds, of great organising 
power and of vast experience. 

Let him appoint good, energetic, strong, aad clever officers, as 
many as he requires, for the due transaction of the business of the 
State. Under them Jet brave, courageous, strong men of great 
integrity and of noble lineage fill positions involving great respon- 
sibility and risk, whilst let timid and faint-hearted men be em- 
ployed for the administration of internal affairs. 

Let him also appoint an Ambassador who comes from a good 
family, is very clever, perfectly honest, able to read the inmost 
thoughts of others and to foretell future developments and events 
by observing the expression of faces and other significant signs 
and acts, and is well versed in ail the SAdstras—branches of know- 
ledge. 

He alone is a fit person to be appointed an Ambassador who 
is very much devoted to politics, loves his country with all his 
heart, is of irreproachable character, pure in hearts, highly intel- 
ligent and endowed with an excellent memory, who can adapt 
himself to the manners and customs of different countries and 
different times, is good looking, fearless and a master of elocution.” 


DUTIES OF MINISTERS AND OTHER HIGH OFFICIALS, 
“ The power to enforce the law should be vested ina minister 
Mani who should see that the law is administered justly, 

VII, 65, 66. treasury and other affairs of the State should be 
§8,70,74—78. under the control of the king, peace and war under 
that of the Ambassador, and everything under the control of the 





